================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Holy Scriptures of the Olde and Newe Testamente, with the Apocripha (Coverdale Bible)
Creator: Miles Coverdale (1488-1569)
Translator: Miles Coverdale
Edition: Second modern edition (London: Samuel Bagster and Sons, 1847), reprinting the 1535/1536 Coverdale text in original spelling
Source: Internet Archive (coverdale-miles-bible-1847-the-holy-scriptures-of-the-old-and-new-testament-with-the-apocripha), scan of the 1847 Bagster reprint
Public domain: Original edition published 1535; reprint 1847; public domain.
Artifact ID: coverdale-bible-1535-bagster-1847
================================================================================

HOLY SCRIPTURES 

THE OLDE AND NEWE TESTAMENTE ; 
WITH THE APOCRIPHA : 

FAITHFULLY TRANSLATED FROM THE HEBRUE AND GREKE 

Miles Coverdale, 
SOMETIME LORD BISHOP OF EXETER. 
M.DCCC.XLVII. 

SECOND MODERN EDITION. 

London : 
SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS, 15, PATERNOSTER ROW; 

WAREHOUSE FOR BIBLES, NEW TESTAMENTS, PRAYER BOOKS, LEXICONS, GRAMMARS, CONCORDANCES, AND PSALTERS, 
IN ANCIENT AND MODERN LANGUAGES. 

IIOAAAI pev vyrais TAQTTAI, pra O'Afavarownw. 

PREFACE. 

CCUSTOMED in the present day to the highest degree of civil and religious liberty that 

man perhaps ean ever expect to enjoy, free to express our opinions without the terrors of the stake or the tortures of the rack, to awe us into silence, or foree us into dissimulation, it is with a mixture of curiosity and indignant surprise that we cast back our glanee over a space of centuries, and see our ancestors struggling in all the mazes of ignorance and the labyrinths of superstition, alike passive under the mental tyranny of their monkish rulers and the bodily servitude of their despotic lords.

But every thing in this world ehanges, and excessive tyranny only more effectually prepares the way for perfect freedom. The minds of men in some degree indueed to reason by the measures of Henry the Eighth, were no longer to be blinded by false pretences or intimidated by impotent threats; and the commencement of the Reformation dawned steadily and beauti- fully through the mists of papistie eraft that the mental sloth of ages had permitted to

accumulate. 

It is difficult for us to imagine the despotie control at that time exercised over the whole faculties, whether physical or mental, of our ancestors; and it requires some effort to picture to ourselves the revivifying effect that must have attended the spreading of the reformed doctrines. Men, who had seldom exerted their reasoning powers, were at once invited to discuss theological difficulties, and to solve the deepest mysteries of religion: and as by the reformed tenets every matter was open for discussion, there were few bounds set to inquiry; but various tenets and various opinions were as quickly spread, as eagerly adopted.

At this critical moment a translation of that Book, by all allowed to be the only proper guide of conduet, the only safe chart by whose aid man could hope to steer through the stormy seas and dangerous shoals with which his course is surrounded, was published and set forth:

vi P 38 18; J AO IB 

and its effect in hushing controversy and silencing factious clamour, may not unaptly be com- pared to that of the sun, when he breaks through the fast flitting clouds, and shining forth, dispels them by his brightness; and day, beautiful day, reigns in all its splendour.

The light that thus broke through the mental darkness of the reign of Henry the Eighth, fed as it was by the Holy Word of God, burnt purely and steadily; and although adverse winds and hostile gusts shook its flame for a time during the reign of Mary, they could not extinguish it, but left it to throw its calm and heavenly rays on our own and future ages.

That translation of the Bible is now for the second time reprinted,* and words of ours are not necessary either to point out its worth or to extol its merit, to cite it for its interest or celebrate it for its rarity—but it goes forth once again into the world as the labour of a man eminent for his piety and learning, as a faithful version of the original Scriptures, and as one of those means to which we may gratefully ascribe the establishment of our present

national religion. 

* Sc. in modern days. 

MEMOIR 

OF 

MYLES COVERDALE. 

THE name of our venerable translator seems to have been derived, not from his parents, but from his birthplace. Yorkshire, according to the best authorities, was his native county; and there can be no reasonable doubt that he was born in the parish of Coverham, in the district of Coverdale, in the
North Riding. The year 1488 is given as the date of his birth, but the month and day cannot be ascertained. An obscurity, which no research has been sufficient to dispel, rests on his parentage and early education: we may presume that he spent his boyish days among the tranquil scenes of his native place, familiar with its sloping hills, verdant meadows, and cheerful trout streams, which, as they spread before the eyes of this active minded lad, would arouse many a beautiful thought, and inspire many a happy feeling. Coverham Abbey was situated in the neighbourhood of his birth- place, and perhaps it was by some of the brotherhood of that establishment that young Miles of Coverdale was mstrueted in the elements of learning. *

At what period he left Yorkshire we are not informed, but m early hfe he entered the Mon- astery of the Augustines at Cambridge, of which he afterwards became a brother. Previous to the visit of Erasmus in the year 1511, learning appears to have been at a low cbb at Cambridge; after- wards it revived, having received an impulse from the influence of that extraordinary man: great hostility, however, was manifested by many in the university towards his efforts for the revival of literature, for when the Greek Testament, which he had edited, first appeared 1n Cambridge, it was absolutely forbidden by the heads of one of the colleges. ‘* They object to us,” said Erasmus, “ the feigned authority of synods, and magnify the great peril of the Christian faith, and the danger of the church, which they pretend to support with their shonlders, which are much fitter to prop a waggon.” Among the scholars who mainly contributed to the restoration of sound learning in the university, Dr. Robert Barnes, who entered the Augustine Monastery in 1514, and became prior and master in 1523, stands preeminent. He cultivated a taste for classic literature, devoted himself to the study of the Scriptures, and after his conversion, became a leading champion of the Refor- mation. Coverdale, being one of the order of the Augustine friars, was associated with this distinguished individual, and probably derived great advantage from his friendship and instructions.

The priory of the Augustines rapidly advanced in hterary reputation under the presidency of 
Barnes. Foxe says “ he caused the house shortly to flourish with good letters, and made a great part of the house learned (who before were drowned in barbarous rudeness), as Master Cambridge,
Master Field, Master Coleman, Master Burley, Master Coverdale, with divers others of the university that sojonrned there for learning's sake.” t Divine Providence was thus preparing our translator, by

* “ He was born in the north country, and from his ehildhood given to learning, wherein he profited much."— Catalogue of the Bishops of Exeter, by John Vowell, alias Hoker.
+ Foxe’s Acts and Monuments, Vol. V. p.415. Townsend’s edition. 

vill MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

his habits of study and his distinguished attainments in scholarship, for the great work which has immortalized his name. :

The prineiples of evangelical truth which were embraced by Darnes gradually spread, and many in the university began to rally round him and adopt his views. Drawn together by devout sympathies, they were accustomed to assemble for study, conference, and prayer; and that they might do this as much as possible unnoticed by their enemies, they chose as their place of resort, a house called ** the White Horse," which had a private back entrance, convenient for the men of St.
John's and King's College, who appear to have formed a considerable part of the assembly. One’s imaginatiou lingers over that old ** White Horse," with its antiquated apartments, as a kind of infant sehool, where those babes in Christ were trained up under the care of the Great Teacher, for subsequent usefulness and honour. These meetings, however private, could not fail to attract attention; the house was contemptuously called ** Germany,” on account of its being thus associated with the principles of Luther; and circumstances at length required that the friends of truth should publicly declare themselves. Hence, on Christmas eve, Sunday 24th December, 1525,* Barnes preached at St. Edmund’s Church, Trinity Hall, and boldly avowed his dissent from the supersti- tions and despotism of Rome. He took occasion in his discourse to make an attack on Cardinal
Wolsey, and, if we are to believe what was said by his accusers, to ridicule his golden shoes, his pole-axes, pillars, golden cushions, crosses and red gloves. A vein of humour, and a habit of satirical and witty allusion to the manners of the times, and the abuses in the church, were in those days regarded as by no means unseemly in the pulpit, and were frequently indulged in with great effect by the advocates of the Reformation. The playful salhes, and the hard arguments of Barnes were offensive to the friends of Popery and to the proud cardinal, and very shortly after the delivery of this famous sermon we find the preacher in trouble. He was apprehended, conveyed to London, aud brought before Wolsey: convicted of heresy, the alternative was offered—to abjure or burn— poor human nature shrunk from the fiery ordeal, and in an evil moment Barnes signed his recantation.

* Master Coverdale” is mentioned by Foxe as one of the friends who accompanied the prior of the Augustines to London, stood by him in his trials, and assisted in the preparation for his defence the night before he met the cardinal. Such conduct indicates his faithful attachment to Barnes, and shows that he felt a strong sympathy with him in his rehgious views: but neither his master nor himself, at that time, saw the whole of the truth upon the grand points of the popish con- troversy. Coverdale was only feeling his way by degrees out of those paths of theological error in which he had been accustomed to walk. So far as he perceived the hght, he was prepared to follow it.

Another name of a far different character here becomes connected with Coverdale’s history. 
He was introduced to Cromwell, and the friendship of that extraordinary person led to very im- portant consequences. The patronage of one who was then a favourite with Wolsey, and afterwards so distinguished a favourite with Henry VIII, must have greatly contributed to Coverdale's personal safety amidst the dangers that threatened the advocates of the Reformation; and, moreover, the pecuniary assistance, which there is no doubt that he received from the same quarter in his literary studies, and in his work of translation, were of great value; but though we are disposed to give
Coverdale credit for honesty and courage, we admit that it is possible he was for awhile somewhat fettered by his connection with this remarkable man. There is a letter from Coverdale to Cromwell, preserved among the State Papers, without date, which evidently belongs to the commencement of their acquaintance; perhaps 1t was written in the year 1527, or somewhat earlier. f

* See Foxe’s Acts and Monuments. Townsend’s edition, Vol. 1V. Note 751. The eorreetness of this date is there established. 

+ The eommissiouers date it 1532, but they observe very justly, that it helongs to the eommeneement of Cromwell’s patron. age of Coverdale. Mr. Anderson, in his * Annals of the Bible,’ dates it 1531, but Cromwell’s patronage had commenced mueh earlier, for we have a letter to him in August, 1527, from which it appears that Coverdale was then well known to Cromwell, if not in his employ. At the time this letter was written Coverdale was an Augustine Friar, hut in 1528 he had thrown off the
Augustine habit, and become a secular priest—a eireumstance inconsistent with the late date assigned to this letter, unless as 
Mr. A. supposes, Coverdale afterwards resumed his friar’s habit, which is a perfectly gratuitous and very improbable supposition, 
There seems no reason for referring the expression, “ beginning to taste of Holy Seriptures,” to the eommeneement of Coverdale's translation, hut simply to his early studies of the sacred volume.

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE, ix 

LO 
* Most SINGULAR GOOD MasTER, 

** With due humility, I beseech unto your Mastership all godly comfort, grace, and prosperous health. For so much as your goodness is so great toward me, your poor child, only through the plenteousness of your favour and benevolence, I am the bolder of your goodness, in this my rude style, if it like your favour, to revocate to your memory the godly communication which your Mastership had with me, your orator, in Master Moor's house upon Easter Eve, amongst many and divers fruitful exhorta- tions, specially of your singular favour, and by your most comfortable words, I perceive your gracious mind towards me.

* Wherefore, most honourable Master, for the tender love of God, and for the fervent zeal that you have to virtue and godly study, (cordis genibus provolutus,) I humbly desire and beseech your goodness, of your gracious help. Now I begin to taste of Holy Scriptures ; now, honour be to God I am set to the most sweet smell of holy letters, with the godly savour of holy and ancient doctors, unto whose knowledge
I cannot attain, without diversity of books, as is not unknown to your most excellent wisdom. Nothing in the world I desire, but books as concerning my learning. They once had, I do not doubt but Almighty
God shall perform that in me, which He, of his most plentiful favour and grace, hath begun. Moreover, as touching my behaviour, your Mastership's mind once known, with all lowliness I offer myself, not only to be ordered in all things as shall please your wisdom, but also as concerning the education and instruc- tion of others, alonly to ensue your prudent counsel; for whatever there is in you of counsel, nothing is impolitic, nothing but what is divine; for whatever you do, you do nothing inconsiderately, and you never boast that you are a chief philosopher: of the dew of heaven (after the manner of Jacob) you have obtained the chief blessing. From your mighty stream I long to drink, because, in your presence, I would not speak in a common manner. Farewell, thou ornament of literature, of councils, and of all virtues !

** From the Augustine’s this May-day. Your child and beedman in Jesu Christ, 

* FRERE MYLES Cov pane.” * 

From this letter it appears, that Coverdale had recently been introduced to the rising favourite, and had received from him tokens of kindness which mspired his gratitude and confidence. Crom- well was favourable to the Reformation, and had devoted himself in early life to the reading of the
New Testament. Coverdale wanted books to assist him in the study of the Scriptures, and the drift of the letter seems to be a delicate application for Cromwell’s aid in that respect. The tone of submission and flattery adopted by Coverdale, was one of the vices of the age, in which he was too prone to indulge; and when comparing him with his great contemporary Tyndale, in this point of view, it is remarkable how superior the latter appears. The house in which the interview took place is supposed by Mr. Andersonf to have been Sir T. More's, and this connection between Cover- dale and Sir Thomas, suggests another reason for the security which our translator enjoyed in those perilous times. He was still at Cambridge in the Augustine Priory, on the 25th of August of the same year, when he wrote the following letter to his patron :—

* RIGHT HONOURABLE MASTER, 

* In my most lowly manner, I commend me unto you, evermore desiring to hear of the preservation of your prosperity. So it is, I was required by Mr. George Lawson to deliver this writing to your Mastership mine ownself; notwithstanding, such an impediment hath chanced, that I must desire favour on your behalf for my excusation. For Master Moor's kinsman is not all well at ease, for he labours, it is certainly thought under fever, the fever being of that species that in regard to food, he foolishly turns away from it like a lunatic, but now it is discovered that he is almost rid of it. Wherefore, I beseech you to have me excused, and if I knew that my coming to London might stand with your favour, truly the bird was never gladder of day than I would be to come. But briefily, I am ready at your commandment, for it remains with you to command as you will the abilities of your Miles.

** As for the rest, there is nothing divulged with us that is new, except the rumour among our order that one of our masters is accused of homicide, another is dilated for heresy, and a third is reported of the

* State Papers, Cromwell Correspondence, Vol. VII. No. 62. The last few lines of the original are in Latin. 
+ ‘ Annals, Vol.I. p. 557. It may be added here that in the * Remains’ the foregoing letter is dated 1527. b

x MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

crime of theft, namely Master Stocks, junior; of which affair I will certify you afterwards, on its being made manifest. I have nothing more to say, every blessing attend you and yours. This may Christ the mighty grant, to whom be honour and dominion for ever.
* From Cambridge 27th August, 1527. 
* Yours Mrro CovreRDALUs."* 

This letter would scem to show that Coverdale was at that time in Cromwell’s employ, and it expresses a readiness to obey his commands, which would have been more to the writer's credit had it been somewhat qualified. But in Coverdale's mind the truth through “ the sweet smell of holy letters" was progressing: the superstitions and errors of popery were seen with increased vivid- ness, and the mental exercises and conflicts of our translator led, eventually, to the renunciation of the friar’s cowl, and the bold and warm-hearted preaching of the reformed faith. In the blood- stained register of the Bishop of London, we find the following confession by Thomas Topley, an Augustine Friar, which throws hght on the course adopted by Coverdale at this crisis in his history. “ My mind,” says the confessor, * was much troubled with the said book * Wicliff's
Wicket,’ which did make the sacrament of Christ's body, in form of bread, but a remembrance of 
Christ's passion, till J heard Sir Myles Coverdale preach, and then my mind was sore withdrawn from the blessed sacrament, insomuch that I took it then for the remembrance of Christ’s body.
- Furthermore he said and confessed, that in the Lent last past, as he was walking in the field at 
Bumstead, with Sir Myles Coverdale, late friar of the same order, going 1n the habit of a secular priest, who had preached the fourth Sunday in Lent at Bumsicad (29th March, 1528), they did commune together of Erasmus’ works, and also upon confession. This Sir Miles said, and did hold that it was suflicient for a man to be contrite for his sins betwixt God and his conscience, without confession made to a priest, which opinion this respondent thought to be true, and did affirm and hold the same at that time. Also he saith, that at the said sermon made by the said Sir Myles Coverdale at Bumstead, he heard him preach against worshipping of images in the church, saying, that men in no wise should honour or worship them, which likewise he thought to be true, because he had no learning to defend it." f Coverdale had now taken a decided step:—faithful to his convictions, he confessed his Saviour before men. Perhaps it was with a hvely remembrance of the treatment he had received in the early part of his history as an avowed reformer, that he wrote the following passage in his preface to a work entitled, ‘ The Old Faith! “ Alas! and woe to this unthankful world, for Hke asa great number that be in prison of Satan, will not come forth when they are called, and the door set open, but go on still stumbling in darkness when the lantern of light is offered them ; even so if any man play a wise man’s part, and do as he 1s warned by God’s word, he shall have a sort of apish people, a number of dizzards, and scornful mockers; which because the man will not dance in the devil’s morrice with them, nor keep their company in the bondage of sin and vice; neither run with them into like confusion, as St. Peter calleth it, laugh him to scorn, and blear out their tongues at him, even like fools and coxcombs of the world. And lke as when a poor wretch cometh out of prison, he shall have more to stand gazing and gaping upon him, than to do him good, or to help him to his fees: even so now that God of his mercy hath called us out of Satan's prison, and from the school of false doctrine, my lord's fool, with his companions, standeth staring upon us, and mocketh us because we sit not still with other prisoners. There goeth a fellow of the new learning, saith one; there is one of these new-fangled gospellers, saith another; that is one of the new brethren, saith a third, he followeth the new faith."

The bold step taken by Coverdale, and the confession made by Topley, belong to the year 1528; and the next year we find the former on the continent in company with the illustrious Tyndale; according to Foxe’s statement, meeting there by appointment, and assisting him in preparing the translation of the Pentateuch forthe press; for which his recent studies in Holy Soripture, and his well known acquaintance with the original languages, which must surely have been commenced before this period, had in a good degree qualificd him. The immediate cause of his leaving

* State Papers, Cromwell Correspondence, Vol. VII. No. 67. Some passages in the original are in Latin. 
+ Foxe's Acts and Monuments, Vol. V. p. 40. t Works of Coverdale, Parker Society, Vol. I. p. 4.

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. xi 

England, does not appear; but coupling the fact of his departure early in 1529, with the decided course he was pursuing in 1528, the common supposition that it was with a view to his personal safety, seems by no means improbable. *

In the year 1526, copies of Tyndale's version were stealthily brought over from the continent, and were scattered throughout England. The priest, the layman, the scholar, and the peasant, sought and obtained the blessed book, and many and touching are the tales related respecting its circulation and its use. Sometimes it was read in the secret chamber by the midnight lamp, or in the fields and forests far away from the haunts of men; and sometimes it was concealed from the prying search of enemics in warehouses, under heaps of flax; in cottages under the boarding of the floor; and in many other ways which pious ingenuity devised. The portion of God’s word which the people now possessed, quickened their desire for the rest of the sacred volume; and the influence of Anne Boleyn, who for a time reigned supreme in the king’s affection, disposed Henry to relax somewhat his severe opposition to the circulation of the Seriptures in English. Cranmer, who was raised to the primacy in 1533, publicly expressed his earnest desire to see the Bible in the hands of his fellow countrymen, and in the winter of 1534, four days before Christmas, stood up in the Chapter House of Old St. Paul’s, amidst a convocation of the clergy, and moved that the king should be petitioned to grant a translation of the entire Scriptures into the Enghsh language.t The year 1535 may therefore be regarded as a critical era in the religious history of our country; when the people were waiting for the word of hfe, and some of the obstacles in the path of its progress were melting away.

Coverdale was the first to meet the existing spiritual want of his country. Where he went after he left Tyndale cannot now be shown; there is a chasm in his history from that time to the year
1535: but his publication then of the whole Bible, shows that during the interval, Providence had been preparing him for the performance of a great work. Judging from the result of his toil given to the world, we may fairly infer that he had been spending some years in study; which, whether it had direct reference or not to such an undertaking, certainly fitted him for it, and provided him with materials for its execution. The history of the origin and progress of his translation is involved in great obseurity. Three or four points only can be satisfactorily ascertained, the rest are left to probable conjecture. He states himself, in his prologue to the edition of the Bible published in
1550, that he undertook, as he was desired in the year 1534, to set forth this special translation. 
And he also states in his prologue to the translation the following particulars:—‘ Considering how excellent knowledge and learning an interpreter of Scripture ought to have in the tongues, and pondering also mine own insufficiency therein, and how weak I am to perform the office of a translator, I was the more loath to meddle with this work. Notwithstanding, when I con- sidered how great pity it was that we should want it so long, and called to my remembrance that adversity of them, which were not only of ripe knowledge, but would also with all their hearts have performed that they began, if they had not had impediment; considering, I say, that by reason of their adversity it could not so soon have been brought to an end as our most prosperous nation would fam have had it; these, and other reasonable causes considered, I was the more bold to take it in hand, and to help me herein J have had sundry translations, not only in Latin, but also of the Dutch interpreters, whom (because of their singular gifts and special diligence in the Bible) I have been the more glad to follow for the most part according as was required. But, to say the truth before
God, it was neither my labour nor desire to have this work put in my hand; nevertheless, it grieved me that other nations should be more plenteously provided for with the Scripture in their mother tongue than we; therefore, when I was instantly required, though I could not do so well as 1 would,
I thought it yet my duty to do my best, and that with a good will.” He also observes in his dedication, ** as the Holy Ghost moved other men to do the cost hereof, so was I emboldened in God

* Mr. Anderson in his * Annals,’ &e., Vol. I. p. 239, supposes that Coverdale was sent over “ to sound Tyndale,” to sce “ whether he was a practicahle man,” and * to induce him to return to England,” suppositions which reflect greatly on Coverdale’s character, and for which there is not the shadow of proof. At this time Coverdale, according to our view of his history, had begun the study of Holy Seripture, and eertainly was qualified from his attainmeuts as a scholar to help Tyndale. We see no reason to dis- credit altogether Foxe’s statement on this subject.

+ Strype’s Cranmer, Vol. I. p. 34. 

xu MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

to labour in the same.” From this then it appears, that he was desired by others to perform this work; that they supphed him with the pecuniary means; that the desire was expressed to him in the year 1534; that the adversity of some better qualified for the undertaking induced him to attempt it; and that he availed himself of other translations in completing his own. It is generally conjectured, and with much probability, that his patron Cromwell was the chief person who prompted him to the undertaking, and supplied him with funds. It seems almost equally probable that the party alluded to as better quahfied than himself was Tyndale, whose adversity, by which his imprisonment most likely is intended, synchronises with the date 1534, when the desire was expressed to Coverdale that he should set forth a translation. This brings down the preparation of the work for the press to a very late period, and leaves but a very short time for its completion; for it plainly appears from the colophon to the book, that it was finished 4th October, 1535. Yet, after a very attentive con- sideration of the matter, we cannot see how, with Coverdale’s own statement before us, we can suppose that the translator previously to that period was engaged on a version with an express view to its publication. We are fully aware of the difficulty which presses on this view of the case, arising from the very limited space of time assigned to Coverdale for completing so great a work ; but that difficulty is considerably diminished by the following considerations: that according to our view of his history he had been for some time engaged in the study of the Holy Seriptures in the original; that most likely for his own private purposes, or with some general view to future usefulness, he had previously made and preserved translations of some parts of the Bible, a supposition by no means inconsistent with the modest terms in which he speaks of his attainments;* that by his own acknowledgment he availed himself of the aid afforded by existing versions; and especially that he would avail himself of Tyndale’s translation in those portions of the sacred volume which that noble veteran had already pubhshed. Though we have somewhat modified our views as to the actual amount of Coverdale’s labour during the space in question, since we wrote some years ago the sketch of English Translations and Translators, we are still of opinion that he accomplished a herculean task.
He looked at immortal souls and felt that their welfare waited on his labours; he looked into eternity and saw that the Bible was the only star which enhghtened its gloom; he looked up to God and found in Him an all-sufficient helper in the task he had undertaken.

Coverdale mentions in his prologue sundry translations in Latin and Dutch, from which he had derived assistance, and in another place he limits the number to five—what translations he referred to by this acknowledgment it is very natural to inquire, but very difficult to determine. The Vulgate of course was included ; the three versions executed by Paguinus, Leo Juda, and Luther are probably to be added, but as to the fifth, whether it were the Bible of Rudehus, or the Dutch version of
1526, or the Lower Saxon one of 1533, we are at a loss to decide;f perhaps his reason for passing over in silence his large obligations to Tyndale’s pubhshed versions, was that he felt any acknow- ledgment of assistance derived from that quarter would be prejudicial to the success of his work, as Tyndale and his translations had been denounced by the ruling powers in England. As to the place where our translator printed the volume, the question, hke so many others connected with the origin of the version, can only be answered by conjecture. From a resemblance which the wood- cuts bear to those found in Egenolph’s books printed at Frankfort, it has been supposed by some that it was executed there; while others again, from the similarity of the type to that which is used in books printed by Forschover at Zurich, have concluded that he was the printer. Cologne also has been mentioned. Of these Zurich seems to have the best clann to the disputed honour; and to that city it is generally conceded. Could we ascertain that there was the place both of the preparation and printing of the book, the imagination would fondly linger over that cheerful and animated city,
* embosomed among vine-clad knolls, meadows and orchards, and surmounted by forests, above and beyond which appear the loftier summits of the Albis,” with our translator working in some little room, through the live-long day till after the sun had set behind those alpine heights, and then rising to his task again before the same sun gilded the opposite horizon.

* Mr. Anderson in his * Annals of the Bible,’ Vol. I. p. 553, supposes that the translation was commenced with a view to pub- lication some time before, and that the setting forth relates to the printing of what was previously prepared. For the reasons

stated above, we cannot adopt that view. 
T See Anderson’s ‘ Annals of the Bible,’ Vol. I. p. 565. 

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. xii 

The competency of Coverdale to his task has been satisfactorily proved by Mr. Whitaker in his 
‘Critical Enquiry.” His learning, for the age in whieh he lived, was very eonsiderable—it was acknowledged by his contemporaries, it is evidenced by his works. The author of the interesting
History of Richmondshire, attributes to Coverdale a very curious epitaph, written in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, supposed to belong to the year 1538; which, if it were certainly his production, would confirm his claims to be considered a superior scholar, but most persons, it is apprehended, will feel a little sceptical about the date, on looking at the curious relie, and will be inehned to assign it to a later period.* But while the scholarship of Coverdale is placed beyond dispute, it must be acknow- ledged that there are many renderings in his version so peculiar, that onc is at a loss to find his authority for them; and what is still more remarkable, and deeply to be regretted, he differed from
Tyndale in using the word penance and amendment, instead of repentance. Highly as we value the labours of Coverdale, we must greatly prefer, not only in this respect but as a whole, the version of his truly illustrious, though by the men of his generation, dishonoured contemporary. Nor ean we help aiso deeply lamenting the style of extravagant subserviency and fulsome flattery adopted by Coverdale in he dedication to King Henry VIII; a style of address, which, though eharacteristie of the age, received no sanction from anything which proceeded from the pen of Tyndale. It should, however, in justice to Coverdale be added, that if his dedieation be objectionable on account of its flattery, his prologue to the reader is worthy of the highest praise, and abounds in beautiful and profitable thought.

The reception which Coverdale's version met with on its arrival in England, is deseribed by 
Fulke, in a report which he gives of part of a sermon which he heard the venerable father deliver in that famous old preaching place, St. Paul’s Cross. The story related by Coverdale has been referred by Mr. Anderson to the history of the Bible printed in 1539 at Paris, under his superin- tendence: but that Bible was not Coverdale’s translation, nor was it ever called by his name. It was a revision of Rogers’ edition; Coverdale could not have referred to it as his own. The edition of 1535 always went by his name, and would certainly be understood to be meant by the audience who listened to his story. “ I myself,” says Fulke, ** and so did many hundreds beside, hear that reverend father, M. Doctor Coverdale of holy and learned memory, in a sermon at Paul's Cross, upon occasion of some slanderous reports that then were raised against Ais translation, declare his faithful purpose in doing the same; which, after it was finished and presented to King Henry VIII, of famous memory, and by him committed to divers bishops of that time to peruse, of which I remember Stephen Gardiner was one: after they had kept it long in their hands, and the king was divers times sued unto for the publication thereof; at the last being called for by the king himselt they redelivered the book; and being demanded by the king what was their judgment of the trans- lation, they answered that there were many faults therein. * Well,’ said the king, * but are there any heresies maintained thereby. They answered ‘ that there was no heresies that they could find maintained thereby?’ * If there be no heresies,’ said the king, ‘ then in God's name let 1t go abroad among our people.’ According to this judgment of the king and the bishops, M. Coverdale defended his translation, confessing that he did now himself espy some faults which, if he might review it once over again, as he had done twice before, he doubted not but to amend: but for any heresy he was sure there was none maintained by his translation.” t

Foxe inserts, in his ‘ Acts and Monuments,’ certain injunctions bearing date 1536, in one of which ‘‘ every parson or proprietary of any parish church" was required to provide a book of the whole Bible in Latin, and also in English, before the 1st of August, to be laid in the choir. This injunction is not found in Cranmer’s ‘ Register,’ in Wilkins’ ‘ Coneilia,’ nor in Burnet’s * Collection of Records, i whence it has been concluded that the clause given by Foxe is an interpolation ; but it is far more probable that the clause was copied by the martyrologist from a dratt of the

* Whitaker's History of Richmondshire, Vol. I. p. 107. 

+ It is very astonishing that Mr. A. should misquote this in the following manner—'* M. Coverdale (who had been corrector of the press) defended the translation.” This gives countenance to Mr. A.’s theory; but the passage correctly quoted is opposed to it.

+ The clause is not inserted in the folio edition of Burnet, but it is inserted in the 8vo. edition, which is likely to mislcad the historical inquirer.

xiv MEMOIL OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

injunctions which, before they were issued and inserted in the * Register, underwent alteration. The clause in question, 1f inserted in the injunctions of 1536, must have referred to Coverdale's version, as no other version of the whole Dible was then published; and hence, according to the view just taken of the document, it would appear that the king's patronage of the book had been obtained, and that Cromwell prepared an order in favour of its circulation, but that some circumstance occurred to prevent the issue of the injunction. That circumstance probably was the death of
Anne Boleyn, who perished on the scaffold in May, 1536, deplored by the friends of the English 
Reformation, which had been advanced by her influence, and was now checked by her removal. 
Lewis mentions a MS. book of devotions in the family of Francis West, Boxley, Kent, which once belonged to Anne Boleyn, containing a note in the queen's hand, referring to the “ glad tidings of salvation being promulgated, published, and set at hberty by the grace poured into the heart of our prince," which note corroborates the idea of Henry having regarded Coverdale's translation with favour before the queen’s death ; and what more fully confirms and further explains the view we have taken of the case, isa passage contained in a contemporary writer, who informs us that “ through the intercession of Queen Anne, the king at last granted that English Bibles might be printed, and placed in every church where the people might read them. Which concession of the king did not then take effect, because shortly after Queen Anne was beheaded.”* But though Coverdale's trans- lation never enjoyed the regal patronage of which there was once the promise, it was allowed for awhile to be circulated without hindrance; and if it never attained the popularity so justly acquired by subsequent versions, it enjoyed the honour of taking the lead in the goodly procession of English
Bibles which have been so long, and of late in such gloriously augmented numbers, issuing from the press. Nor can we doubt that the reading of it, in multitudes of instances, proved the means of enlightening and regenerating the human mind.

Probably Coverdale was in England in the year 1537, when two works of his were published by Nicholson a printer in Southwark. But the important undertaking to which he devoted himself at this period, and which now claims our particular atteution, was the superintendence of the printing of the great Bible.

Matthew’s Bible appeared in 1537 ; it contained the whole of the version which had been prepared by Tyndale. That great man had laboured at the work in obscurity and exile, and then sealed the truth with his blood, the victim of treachery and malice. The book was edited by his friend Rogers, who soon after followed him, through the fires of martyrdom, to the rewards of heaven. A copy of this translation was conveyed to Cranmer, and filled his soul with joy: he forwarded the version to
Cromwell, pronouncing it better than any other translation previously made. Cromwell recom- mended it to the king, who sanctioned it, authorising it ** to be bought and read within this realm;” thus patronising at last, though unwittingly, the labours of that very man, the honoured Tyndale, whom he had persecuted with relentless cruelty. The Bible became extremely popular, and sur-

assed in the public estimatiou the translation by Coverdale. But the clergy were not satisfied with it; the prologue and notes were charged with the taint of heresy, and a new translation was desired.
Cromwell projected a new translation, which proved in fact a revison of Tyndale’s work, the prologues and notes bemg omitted. This was the great Bible, the preparation of which he committed to
Coverdale. The place selected for the printing of this book was Paris, which was ehgible on account of the superior workmen and materials to be obtained there. In June, 1538, Coverdale, and Grafton the printer, who had accompanied him to Paris, were hard at work with their men, as the following letter testifies :—

A Letter from COVERDALE and GRAFTON to CROMWELL. 

* After most humble and hearty commendations to your good lordship. Pleaseth the same to understand, that we be entered into your work of the Bible, whereof (according to our most bounden duty) we have here sent unto your lordship two ensamples; one in parchment, whercin we intend to print one for the king's grace, and another for your lordship; and the second, in paper, whercof all the rest shall be

* Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 385. 

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. XV 

made ; trusting, that it shall be not only to the glory of God, but a singular pleasure also to your good lordship the causer thereof, and a general edifying of the king’s subjects, according to your lordship’s most godly request. For we follow not only a standing text of the Hebrew, with the interpretation of the
Chaldee and the Greek, but we set also, ina private table, the diversity of readings of all texts, with such annotations, in another table, as shall doubtless elucidate and clear the same, as well without any singu- larity of opinions, as all checkings and reproofs. The print, no doubt, shall please your good lordship ; the paper is of the best sort in France. The charge certainly is great, wherein, as we most humbly require your favourable help at this present, with whatsoever it shall please your good lordship to let us have, so trust we, if need require, in our just business to be defended from the papists by your lordship's favourable letters, which we most humbly desire to lave (by this bearer, William Graye), either to the bishop of
Winchester, or tosome other whom your lordship shall think most expedient. We be daily threatened, and look ever to be spoken withal, as this bearer can farther inform your lordship; but how they will use us, as yet we know not. Nevertheless, for our farther assurance, where through we may be the abler to perform this your lordship's work, we are so much the bolder of your good lordship ; for other refuge have we none, under God and our king, whom, with noble Prince Edward, and all you, their most honourable council, God Almighty preserve now and ever. Amen.
** Written at Paris the 23rd day of June, by your lordship’s assured and daily orators, 

* MYLES COVERDALE. 
* RICHARD GRAFTON.” * 

The Bishop of Winchester was at that time ambassador in France; but he was soon succeeded by Bonner, then archdeacon of Leicester, who was directed by Cromwell, agreeably to Coverdale’s request, to aid the enterprise. An application was also made by King Henry to his royal brother of
France to permit the printing of the English Bible in Paris, to which consent was given, and the royal license was duly issued,

In the autumn the work was going on, as appears from the following letters:— 

A Letter from COVERDALE, GRAFTON, and GREY to CROMWELL. 

** After most humble and due salutation to your good lordship. Pleaseth the same to understand that your work going forward, we thought it our most bounden duty to send unto your lordship certain leaves thereof, specially seeing we had so good occasion, by the returning of your beloved servant Sebastian.
And as they are done so will we send your lordship the residue from time to time. As touching the manner and order that we keep in the same work, pleaseth your good lordship to be advertised, that the mark (5 in the text signifieth, that upon the same (in the latter end of the book) there is some notable anno- tations, which we have written without any private opinion, only after the best interpreters of. the Hebrews, for the more clearness ofthe text. This mark ? betokeneth, that upon the same text there is diversity of reading among the Hebrews, Chaldees, and Greeks, and Latinists, as in a table at the end of the book shall bedeclared. "This mark * showeth that the sentence, written in small letters, is notin the Hebrew or
Chaldee, but in the Latin, and seldom in the Greck, and that we nevertheless, would not have it extinct, but highly accept it for the more explanation of the text. This token f in the Old Testament giveth to understand, that the same text which followeth it, is also alleged of Christ or of some apostle in the New
Testament. This (among other, our necessary labours) is the way that we take in this work; trusting verily, that as God Almighty moved your lordship to set us unto it, so shall it be to His glory, and right welcome to all them that love to serve Him and their prince, in true faithful obedience. As is only known to the Lord of Heaven, to whom we most heartily pray for your lordship's preservation.

** At Paris, 9th day of August, 1538, by your faithful orators, T 
* MYLES COVERDALE. 

* RICHARD GRAFTON. 
* WILLIAM GREY.” 

In the preparation of this edition, Coverdale was cvidently influenced very much by the prin- ciple of cxpediency, to which he was wont to pay too great regard; and perhaps Cromwell had also

* State Papers, Cromwell Correspondence, Vol. I. No. 107. + Ibid. Vol.1. No.108. 

xvi MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

ae! him directions respecting the course he pursued, with a view to meet the prejudices of the ay. Passages from the Vulgate, unauthorised by the original, were introduced mto the version, with a distinguishing mark. It gives the great Bible a peculiar character, and without Coverdale’s statement in the foregoing correspondence, the supplementary matter with the curious marks pre- fixed, is calculated to puzzle the mere English reader.

Bonner, though raised to the see of Hercford, continued in his diplomatic appointment at Paris, and to all who are acquainted with the subsequent history of this notorious persecutor, it will appear somewhat surprising, when they are informed by Foxe, that the ambassador encouraged the printing of the Enghsh Scriptures, invited the printers to his house, visited them in return, dined with them at home, and ET paid the cost of the entertainment. But the bishop was willing at this price to seeure the good opinion of Cromwell, who, as the speeial favourite of his prince, had it in his power amply to repay the services of his friends.

The house of ‘ Francis Regnault," some quaint looking building, in the Paris of the sixteenth century, in all probability long since fallen to decay, was the scene of the honoured toils of our translator, and the industrious printers. To this worthy we are introduced by the letter annexed, in which Coverdale and Grafton soheit a favour on his behalf, in acknowledgment of his former kindness, and in the hope of his future service.

A Letter from COVERDALE and GRAFTON to CROMWELL. 

** After most humble and due salutations to your most honourable lordship. Pleaseth the same to understand, that we are instantly desired of our host (whose name is Francis Regnault, a Frenchman) to make supplication for him, unto your lordship. Whereas of long time he hath been an occupier into
England more than forty years, he hath always provided such books for England as they most occupied; so that he hath a great number at this present, in his hands, as Primers in English, Missals, with other such like, whereof now (by the Company of the Booksellers in London) he is utterly forbidden to make sale, te the utter undoing of the man. Wherefore most humbly we beseech your lordship to be gracious and favourable unto him, that he may have licence to sell those which he hath done already; so that hereafter, he print no more in the English tongue, unless he have an English man that is learned, to be his corrector, and that is the man well contented withal. He is also contented and hath promised before my lord elect of Hereford, that if there be found any notable fault in his books, he will put the same out, and print the leaf again. Thus are we bold to write unto your lordship in his cause (as doth also my lord elect of Here- ford), beseeching your lordship to pardon our boldness and to be good lord unto this honest man, whose servant shall give attendance upon your lordship’s most favourable answer. If your lordship show him this benefit, we shall not fare the worse in the readiness and due expedition of this your lordship’s work of the
Bible, which gocth well forward, and within few months will draw to an end, by the grace of Almighty 
God, who preserve your good lordship, now and cvermore. 

** From Paris, the 12th day of September. 

* MYLES COVERDALE. 
* RICHARD GRAFTON.” * 

The year was drawing to a close,f and with it the noble work in which Coverdale felt so deep an interest. The printers were probably engaged on the last sheet or two, and the superintendent of the press was anxious to ascertain his patron’s pleasure, concerning the annotations proposed to be introduced, a circumstance, by the way, which shows how completely the preparation of this volume was under Cromwell's control; so much so, that it ought in justice to bear his name.

A Letter from COVERDALE to CROMWELL. 

‘RIGHT MNONOURABLE AND MY SINGULAR GOOD LORD, 
“« After all due salutations I humbly beseech your lordship that by my lord elect of 
Hertford I may know your pleasure concerning the annotations of this Bible, whether I shall procecd therein 

* State Papers, Cromwell Correspondenee, Vol I. No. 115. 

T A letter to Cromwell dated 30th October, is preserved among the State Papers. lt relates entirely to a charge of disloyalty against a Mr. Beckynsall, whom Coverdale knew, and whose eharacter he vindicates. ‘ Neither," he says, “do I understand otherwise but at this present hour all we that be here of the king’s nation are even of one heart and humble mind toward God and our sovereign.”

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. xvii 

or no. Pity it were that the dark places of the text, (upon the which I have always set a hand), should so pass undeclared. As for any private opinion or contentious words, as I will utterly avoid all such, so will I offer the annotations first to my said lord of Hereford, to the intent that he shall so examine the same, afore they be put in print, if it be your lordship's good pleasure that I shall so do. As concerning the New Testa- ments in English and Latin, whereof your good lordship received lately a book by your servant Sebastian, the cook, I beseech your lordship to consider the greenness thereof, which (for lack of time) cannot as yet be so apt to be bound as it should be: and whereas my said lord of Hereford is so good unto us to convey this much of the Bible to your good lordship, I humbly beseech the same to be defender and keeper thereof; to the intent that if these men proceed in their cruelness against us and confiscate the rest, yet this at the least may be safe by the means of your lordship, whom God the Almighty evermore preserve to his good pleasure. Amen. .
** Written somewhat hastily, at Paris the 13th day of December. Your humble and faithful servitor. 
* MYLES CovERDALE."* 

The English and Latin Testaments referred to were of an edition which we shall hereafter notice; itis more to our present purpose to mark the indications which the letter gives of rising troubles.
The work had proceeded smoothly—it wasnow to be interrupted. Clouds were gathering, dark and portentous, and soon the tempest burst. Before the letter could reach its destination, there came forth, in the name of the Inquisitor-General in Paris, an instrument, dated 17th December, 1538, prohibiting poor Francis Regnault, and all others whom it might concern, from completing the said
Bible in the vulgar Britannic tongue, and from making away with or concealing the sheets already printed, unless they were seen by this same inquisitor. The Englishmen were summoned to attend before this ecclesiastical tribunal, which had thus dared to raise itself in opposition to the royal prerogatives: but stricken with terror, they made a hasty retreat, leaving behind them the unfin- ished sheets, which were seized by the inquisitors and doomed to the flames; but the heutenant- dee whose horror of heresy was surpassed by his love of gain, preferred to sell a quantity of them

or waste paper; and they became the property of a haberdasher, who bought them, says Foxe, “ to lap caps in." But they were destined to a nobler use: Grafton providentially recovered them, and thus completed many of the copies of the Bible which had previously been sent over to England.
The repurchase of the haberdasher's sheets appears, from what Foxe says, not to have been effected till the latter part of the year 1539; but we find from existing copies that the book was “ finyshed in April, anno 1539," whence we are to conclude that the part which was wanting to complete the work was printed in London, and that some copies were perfected before the recovery of such part of the edition as had fallen into the haberdasher's hands. It may be added, that it seems a much smaller portion of the work was destroyed than is generally supposed; inasmuch, as the recovered sheets were sufficient to fill ** four great dry fats." :

Cranmer's name has generally been connected with this ** great Bible,” but without reason. He wrote a preface for the new edition of it published in 1540,f but he does not appear to have had any thing to do with its original preparation. Cromwell and Coverdale were the persons to whom the credit and honour of the work must be assigned, the former having projected, and the latter having executed the undertaking. The volume exhibits a revision of Matthew's Bible, and though the renderings often differ very considerably from those in Coverdale's version, it is not improbable that he was the reviser. :

The patron of this great work, who, with his manifold infirmities of character, evinced a deep regard for the word of God, and a warm desire for its circulation, took steps to secure that import- ant object as soon as the great Bible was complete, by issuing injunctions to the clergy, enjoming upon them to provide the whole Bible of the largest volume in Enghsh, and sct up the same in some convenient place within their churches, that their parishioners might commodiously resort to the same and read it. f , " .

Great was the delight diffused through the community, by this concession of a spiritual right of which they had been long iniquitously debarred. ‘‘ It was wonderful,” says Strype, ‘ to sce with

* The three foregoing letters are printed in the Appendix to the Memorials of Coverdale, 1838. Bagster. . 
+ This prefaee sometimes occurs in the edition of 1539, but it was no doubt afterwards inserted in some of the copies. 
+ Burnet’s History of the Reformation, Vol. 1. p. 178, fol. 

e 

eee 

xvn MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

what joy this book of God was received, not only among the learneder sort, and those that were noted for lovers of the Reformation, but ce all England over by the vulgar and common people, and with what greediness God's word was read, and what resort to places where the reading of it was. Every body that could, bought the book, or busily read it, or got others to read it to them, if they could not themselves; and divers more elderly people learned to read on purpose; and even little boys flocked among the rest to hear prom of the Holy Seriptures read.” Both the eye of the poet, and the heart of the saint, must love to linger over the scene of the grey-headed sire, and the child with his curly locks, gathering round the well-spring of divine truth, id slaking their thirst at the living waters. The reading of the Bible in Old St. Paul's, * and in the aisles of many a cathedral and parish church, in the England of the sixteenth century, is one of those beau- tiful associations with the history of the olden time which an English protestant must fondly cherish.

The following letter to Cromwell by our translator refers to the license which had been granted to Nicholson to sell Bibles and Testaments, and solicits a similar license for the same person to print certain sermonst which Coverdale had prepared for the press, and which had been revised by the
Archbishop of Canterbury. It probably belongs to the early part of the year 1539. t 

** After due consideration to your good lordship, I heartily and in most humble wise beseech the same, that inasmuch as the king’s most excellent majesty, of his singular grace (by the means of your good lordship as God’s instrument in that behalf) hath granted unto this bearer, James Nycolson, his gracious license and privilege, for the sale of his Bibles and New Testaments already printed; and forasmuch as his grace is also informed, and hath seen a part of our postils, or ordinary sermons, which the lord arch- bishop of Canterbury hath corrected, your lordship, according to your most loving and favourable manner of old, will help and further the said James Nycolson, to the king’s most gracious privilege for certain years to print the same, considering the cost and charge that he hath had, not only for drawing of the said sermons out of Scripture, but also in preparing now of his letters and print for the setting forth of the same. This I most humbly require of your lordship, whom God preserve now and ever. Amen.

** Your lordship's humble and daily orator, MYLES COVERDALE.” 

Before Coverdale left London for Paris, it seems that he arranged the plan of a Diglot Testament in Latin and English, which he left his friend Nicholson to publish. He wrote the dedication, and permitted the use of his name in connection with the book. But when the volume reached him, he found it had been most carelessly edited aud printed, and was ** both base, insensible, and clean contrary not only to the phrase of our language, but also from the understanding of the text in
Latin.” He therefore repudiated the work, and prepared another edition himself, which was printed in Paris, and published with the special approval of Bishop Bouner. The book was dedicated to
Cromwell, and Coverdale explains in that dedication the history of Nicholson’s incorrect edition. 
The English printer, however, was bent on securing his own profit, and therefore published himself a new edition of the Diglot, and gave the name of ** Johan Hollybushe” on the title-page.

It was probably in the year 1539 § that Coverdale was employed in Berkshire, in the service of his early friend and patron Thomas Cromwell, who had now attained to the dignity of Lord
Privy Seal. The subjoined letters, while they prove Coverdale’s zeal aud activity in searching for popish publications, and in suppressing the worship of one of England's most popular saints, Thomas of Canterbury, also shed a very interesting light upon the character and proceedings of those times.

* Bonner, however, did not set up the Bibles till 1541. 

+ Are these the “ Fruitful Lessons” included in his works published by the Parker Society ? 

ł This is the date to which it is assigned in the ‘ Remains,’ p. 498. 

§ These letters have been considered by Anderson aud others, to belong to the year 1538; but the transactions to which 
Coverdale's letters refer, are described by Strype as taking place in 1539.—(Mem. 1. 549,) and the first of the letters is indorsed “ Ao 
XXX,” which probably means the year of the king’s reign, which would be from April 22, 1538, to April 22, 1539. That Cover- dale returned to England after the interruption at Paris, and did not leave till 1540, appears from a letter just published in the volume of Coverdale's * Remains,’ dated Frankfort, March 26th, 1548, in which he says ** I am now on my return to England after an exile of eight years." Twenty-two letters written by him during this period are published in the * Remains.’ Most of these were written at Bergzabern, his stated place of residence. The eorrespondence is very interesting, and illustrates the piety and the zeal of this good man. They afford scarcely any particulars immediately relating to himself, but they evince much disinte- rested kindness towards others, and great anxiety for the promotion of religion.

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. Xix 

* After my most humble and due salutation to your right honourable lordship, this is to advertise the same, that for lack of diligent inquisition and through overmuch sufferance there are in these countries
(and so I fear me in many more) an innumerable sort of such popish books, as not only be incorrect, but are also great occasion to keep the king’s subjects still in error, and to make them fall into such like inconvenience as did lately one John Cowper, whose accusation I trust your lordship hath received (or shall do) this week by the justice, in consideration of the premises I have (under your lordship’s favour- able correction) required the curate of Newbury to call for all such books as were either incorrect or against the king’s most lawful act concerning Thomas à Becket, or the Bishop of Rome, by the means of the which request there are brought unto me in these two or three days a great number of such books; wherefore inasmuch as I perceive that this doth turn to the glory of God and to the honour of our most noble king, I humbly require your lordship to grant me authority, and to give me a charge and command- ment by your letters, that wheresoever I understand any such unlawful books to be, I may correct them or cause them to be corrected. In the executing whereof I do not doubt but to win the parties, and to make them not only more fervent towards God and his word, but also to increase in due obedience towards the king’s highness, whom with noble prince Edward, and you all of their most honourable council the mighty arm of God evermore preserve. From Newbury the vii day of February. Your favourable answer
I most humbly require by this bearer my poor servant. 

** Your lordship's humble and faithful servant, 
* MYLES COVERDALE. 
** To the right honourable my singular good lord, the Lord Privy Seal." 

* My right humble salutation. Considering my most bounden duty in seeking the honour of the king our sovereign lord, I am constrained to write again unto your good lordship for none other cause so much as to signify unto the same, that as me thinketh (I speak under correction) a great number of the priests of this realm are run in premunire unto the king, inasmuch as they have not utterly extinct all such ecclesiastical service as is against his grace’s most lawful supremacy and prerogative, for in the feast called
Cathedra St. Peter a great part of their matins is plainly a maintenance of the Bishop of Rome’s usurped power. This is evident in all the great matin books of the church of Newbury, and I doubt not but it is so likewise in many churches more. I found it the 7th day of this month, and I wonder at it, considering that it is so long since the act was made for the abolishing of all such usurped authority. This, my very dear and singular good lord, do I open and show only unto your lordship, neither doth any man else in the world know that I have uttered this thing, no, not this bearer, good Mr. Wynchcombe, unto whom
(for his true heart towards the king’s highness, and love towards your lordship) I might utter right secret things. The ever living God that never failed your good lordship guide the same in doing the thing that is to his glory, and to the honour of our most gracious king. Amen. If it be your lordship’s good pleasure I shall do aught further herein, I humbly beseech you to know the same by writing, or other- wise by the mouth of Mr. Wynchcombe.

** From Newbury the viii day of February. Your lordship's humble and faithful servant, 
* MYLES COVERDALE. 

“ To the right honourable and my very singular good lord, the Lord Privy Seal. This to be delivered, ad manus.”

“ In my most humble wise with like salutation to your right honourable lordship, this is to signify unto the same that, this 4th day of March, one Nicolas Hyde, and one John Gryese, of Henley-upon-
Thames, came to me unto Newbury, reporting that in a glass window of our Lady Chapel, in the Church of the said Henley, the image of Thomas à Becket, with the whole feigned story of his death, is suffered to stand still: not only this, but that all the beams, irons, and candlesticks (whereupon tapers and lights were wont to be set up unto images) remain still untaken down, whereby the poor simple, unlearned people believe that they shall have liberty to set up their candles again unto images, and that the old fashion shall shortly return. Item, that one Thomas Woolley, of Henley, did forbid five of his neighbours his house for holding with the gospel, and said that he had evil will for receiving such men of the new learning. So that, in the said town of Henley, poor men are not only discouraged from the truth of God, but it appeareth also that the king’s most gracious commandment is not put in exccution. Now though Sir Walter Stoner,* knight, be the king’s justice of peace at Henley, yet (under your lordship’s correction) I reckon great and

* Probably an ancestor of Lord Camoys, whose family name is Stoner, and who is a Roman Catholic. His seat is near Henley. 

XX MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

notable negligence in the Bishop of Lincoln, who being so nigh thereby doth not weed out such faults; yea, I fear it be as evil or worse in many more places of his diocese.

“It is my duty also to signify unto your good lordship, the great oversight of the stationers of 
London, who for their lucre and gains are not ashamed to sell still such primers as corrupt the king’s subjects. 
A great number of them have my neighbours brought unto me, and a great sort of other most ungracious popish books (both contrary to God and the king’s highness) have I taken up within the precincts of
Newbury, and will do more, if your good lordship will give me authority, or bid me doit. Whereof I humbly beseech you (my most dear and singular good lord), to have your loving answer by the mouth of this bearer, young Mr. Wynchcombe, and to know your good pleasure what I shall do with these popish books that I have already, whether I shall burn them at the Market Cross or no. Thus the everlasting God preserve your good lordship long to endure. Amen.

** From Newbury, 5th day of March. Your humble and faithful servant, 

* MyzEs COVERDALE. 

* To the right honourable and my very singular especial good lord, the Lord Privy Seal. This to be presented, ad manus.” *

In the course of 1540, probably about the time that he lost his patron Cromwell, he went to 
Germany, where for some time he resided. Tubingen became the place of his abode, and from the university of that city he received a diploma conferring on him the distinction of doctor of divinity.
He was now chiefly dependent for support on hterary labour, and the education of the young. During the lifetime of Cromwell, his resources probably had been supplied by the bounty of that extra- ordinary man. When the latter fell a victim to the resentment of his capricious master, our translator lost a friend to whom he was under many temporal obhgations, and a patron whose influence somewhat affected the independence of his character, and guided his proceedings to a greater extent than was desirable. Coverdale seems to have leaned too much on Cromwell, to have submitted too implieitly to his directions: to have deferred too humbly to the judgment of that politic minister. He certainly did not possess that bold independence of mind which marked the course of his distinguished contemporary, Tyndale. The latter had the self-erectness of the oak, the former, like the vine, appeared to need some outward prop. After Coverdale left Tubingen he went to reside in the dominions of the duke of Deux-ponts, and being well skilled in the
German language, and a man of literary and theological reputation, he was favourably noticed by the duke, and appointed to the benefice of Bergzabern. During his stay on the continent, but at what time or place cannot be ascertained, he married a pious woman, the sister of a lady, the wife of Macchabeus Alpinus, a distinguished Scotchman, who held a high appointment under the king of Denmark. Coverdale thus took a step which thoroughly identified him with the reformers who had abjured the celibacy of the priesthood, as one of the great evils of the church of Rome. About this time, probably, he wrote and published his translation of Calvin’s treatise on the Sacrament, to which he subjoined “ the order that the church and congregation of Christ in Denmark doth use.”
At the close of which tract he remarks, ** Let no man be slack in his duty ; but give God that which is his, and to the king the things that belongeth unto him.” ‘ This I say to stop the mouths and the blasphemous tongues of such as will not cease to rail on men, and to slander me (yea, even to the king’s majesty), as though I were a perverter of common order, or took upon me to change the laws and to make new statutes. Nay, ye ungodly hypocrites, not so, but as I am sure that there is heavy damnation laid up for all such subjects as rebel or make sedition against the prince, or disobey the least commandment of God in their sovereign, even so I am assured that there is no less damnation prepared for those rulers or heads that make unjust laws and cruel statutes, to maintain their own lusts and oppress the poor.”

In 1547 he was again in England, holding the appointment of almoner to Queen Catherine. At this time he enjoyed a high reputation for his learnmg and piety, and was one of the persons employed in the preparation of Erasmus’s paraphrase of the New Testament for the use of English readers. lle wrote the dedication of the second volume to Edward VI, and prefixed Tyndale’s

* Cottonian MS. Cleopatra, C. V. 57, 58, 59, 61—63. These letters are printed in the State Papers, Cromwell Corres- pondence.

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. XXi 

Bere to the epistle to the Romans, thus evincing the estimation in which he held the labours of is departed fellow exile. Probably he translated the former part of the volume as far as the end of the epistle to the Galatians.

Coverdale continued in the service of Catherine till her death, which happened in September, 
1548. After the decease of Henry she married Lord Seymour, and went to reside at Sudley Castle, 
Gloucestershire, whither Coverdale accompanied his royal mistress. He officiated at her funeral, and carefully guarded the persons who were present against supposing that he gave his sanction to the popish ceremonies performed for the dead, some remains of which lingered in the service at these royal obsequies. The preacher requested “that none there should think, say, or spread abroad that the offering which was there done, was done any thing to profit the dead, but for the poor only: and also the lights which were carried and stood about the corpse were for the honour of the person, and for none other intent nor purpose.”

After the death of the queen dowager, Coverdale was variously employed. He preached at 
St. Paul's Cross, on the 27th of April, 1549, when some Anabaptists did penance. In the summer of 1550, when Lord Russel went down into Devonshire, to quell the disturbances which arose from both civil and religious disaffection to the existing government, Coverdale accompanied the army, with the view of subduing the popular mind to obedience and loyalty, by the gentle influence of argument and expostulation. After the victory of Exeter, he celebrated the event in a thanks- giving sermon. For these services, according to an entry in the council book of Edward VI,
20th of June, 1550, Coverdale received the sum of forty pounds. In this year also two new editions of our translator's Testament were printed, and one of the Bible. On the 18th of January,
1551, he was put upon a commission for the seizure and trial of hereties ; a commission which was the renewal of a former one, unhappily distinguished by its intolerant proceedings against the unfortunate Joan of Kent. The new commission proceeded in the footsteps of the old one, and doomed to the stake a Dutch Arian. What part Coverdale took in the proceedings of the com- mission, or whether he took any part in them at all, we cannot determine. For the honour of his character, we hope that no considerations induced the reformer to implicate his name in the performance of deeds which must have been revolting to his benevolent heart; yet we cannot forget that men as kind as he, were so warped by the intolerant spirit of their age that, under the influence of a stern but most mistaken sense of duty, they refused all merey to those whom they had convicted of heretical opinions.

The next glimpse we have of Coverdale is at Westminster, where, on the 7th of March, 1550 
(0.8.), we find him preaching a funeral sermon for Lord Wentworth, who had been lord chamber- lain, and at whose funeral special honour was done to his memory. Coverdale was on the road to high preferment. His office in the queen dowager's houschold, and the services he had performed for government, recommended him no doubt to the patronage of those who were in power, while his learning, active habits, and tried zeal in the cause of the Reformation, qualified him for some distinguished post in the English church. As early as the June of the preceding year mention is made in a letter from Peter Martyr then at Cambridge, of the probable promotion of Coverdale to the see of Exeter, in the room of Vesey, who from age and infirmity was unable to perform his episcopal duties. On the 14th of August, 1551, King Edward nomimated Coverdale to the bishopric,
Vesey having been indueed to resign. But though by this appointment he was exalted to honour, and became possessed of influence, his pecuniary advantage was of small amount, as Vesey had alienated the revenues of the sce to a very large extent. Indeed, such were the straitened cirenm- stances of Coverdale, that he felt himself compelled to petition the king to reheve him from the payment of the first-fruits. Nor was it without considerable delay that he was able to proceed to his diocese; “such,” says Strype, “ were at that time the urgent affairs of state, or the seerct hinderers of the gospel.” Through Cranmer’s influence matters were at length arranged; and on the 30th of August, Coverdale was consecrated at Croydon, bishop of Exeter. In the following
September he was licensed to preach; a form which seems to have been necessary even for bishops in those days: and in the same month another and very curious license was granted him, allowing him and his wife Elizabeth, and five or six guests at their table, to eat meat on fast days."

* Rymer's Federa, Part V. Ed. VI. p. 2. No. 35. 

xxii MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

On the 6th of October a commission was addressed to eight bishops, of whom Coverdale was one, together with cight civil and eight common lawyers, directing them to undertake a revision of the ecclesiastical laws of the realm. Strype states* that the commissioners diligently pursued their task, and completed it; but in consequence of the king’s early death the contemplated measure of reform was never carried into effect. In the discharge of the secular duties of his episcopal office
Coverdale was very diligent, for it appears from the Lords’ Journals, in 1552 and 1553, that he was not absent from the sittings of the House more than three times altogether. But as the whole of the two sessions did not occupy quite four months, these engagements would not detain the bishop very long from his diocese, where in the discharge of his spiritual functions he was most exemplary.

The following character of Coverdale, during his residence at Exeter, is given by Hoker his contemporary, who was chamberlain of the city. ‘‘ He preached continually upon every holy day, and did read most commonly twice in the week in some one church or other within this city. He was after the rate of his hvings a great keeper of hospitality, very sober in diet, godly in life, ina to the godly, liberal to the poor, and courteous to all men, void of pride, full of humility, abhorring covetousness, and an enemy to all wickedness and wicked men, whose company he shunned, and whom he would in no wise shroud or have in his house and company. His wife, a most sober, chaste, and ‘godly matron, his house and household another church in which was exercised all godliness and virtue. No one person being in his house which did not from time to time give an account of his faith and religion, and also did live accordingly; and as he had a care for the good success in religion, so had he also for the direction of the government in ecclesiastical causes, and because he was not skilful therein, neither would be hindered from his godly studies, and be encum- bered with such worldly matters, which, nevertheless, he would have be done in all uprightness, justice, and equity; he sent to Oxford for a learned man to be his chancellor, and by the ministry of the writer hereof, he procured and obtamed one Master Robert Weston, doctor of the civil law, and afterwards lord chancellor of Ireland, unto whom he committed his consistory, and the whole charge of his ecclesiastical jurisdiction, allowing unto him not only all the fees thereunto apper- taining, but also lodged and found him, his wife, family, horse and man, within his own house, and gave him a yearly pension of forty pounds. And surely the bishop was no more godly and careful of his part concerning preaching, but this man also was as dihgent and severe in doing of his office without reproach of being affectioned or corrupted. And notwithstanding this good man was a blameless bishop, and lived most godly and virtuous, yet the common people, those old bottles, would receive no wine, could not brook or digest him, for no other cause but because he was a preacher of the gospel, an enemy to papistry, and a married man. Many devices were accounted against him for his confusion, sometimes by false suggestions, sometimes by open railing, and false libels, sometimes by secret backbitings, and in the end io his death by impoisonmg, but by the providence of (iod, the snares were broken, and he delivered.” f

In 1550 a new edition of Coverdale’s Bible was printed at Zurich, which was the last previous to the first edition in the present form pubhshed in 1835. It was reissued with a new title-page in 1533, and “set forth with the king’s most gracious license." It must have been one of the last instances in which that license was given, for Edward, after a short and anxious reign, was removed to another world on the 6th of July of the same year. It proved a mournful day for the protestantism of England, and her faithful sons were soon made to feel the weight of papal intolerance.

On the 22nd August Coverdale was summoned to appear before the privy council at Richmond, and on the lst of September he made his appearance, when he was odes to await the council's further pleasure. On the 28th of the same month Vezey was reinstated in the see of Exeter, on the pretence that his previous resignation had been extorted from him by terror. Coverdale, how- ever, though cjected from his bishoprie, was not hke the rest of the distinguished reformers com- mitted to prison, but was suffered to remain at large, only giving sureties to appear before the council whenever summoned to do so. Yet the fear of persecution did not induce him to swerve from his steadfastness in the reformed faith, for we discover that when, after the famous public

* Life of Cranmer, p. 271. T Catalogue of the Bishops of Exeter, by John Vowel, alias Hoker. No. 43. 

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. xxiii 

disputation at Oxford between the popish divines and Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, the other imprisoned brethren signed a declaration, stating their views of truth, and avowing their resolution,
“ when they cannot obey, but must disobey God, then to submit themselves with all patience and humility, to suffer as the will and pleasure of the higher powers shall adjudge,” the foithfal Coverdale shrunk not from signing the document in the following manner, * To these things above said, I,
Myles Coverdale, late of Exon, consent and agree with these mine afflicted brethren, being prisoners, with mine own hand.” The heroes of the protestant faith just named nobly perished at the stake, but Coverdale, through the merey of Divine Providence, was permitted to escape.

On the 4th February, 1555, Rogers was led to Smithfield, the first of the illustrious band who there ascended in “ chariots of fire" to heaven. Fourteen days after Rogers’s execution, Mary gave her permission to Coverdale to leave the country,—a very remarkable circumstance which requires explanation. He had married a lady who was sister to the wife of Macchabaus Alpinus, at that time chaplain to Christian IJ, king of Denmark, and professor of theology in the university of
Copenhagen. He was a man of influence, and a favourite with the Danish sovereign, and through his intercession his royal master was induced to write to Mary on behalf of Coverdale. The king wrote on the 25th of April, 1554, soliciting the reformer's liberation and pardon, to which Mary replied, that Coverdale was under restraint simply on account of certain debts which he owed to the crown. The king rejoined, in a letter dated the 24th of September, that he was glad it was only a debt that occasioned difficulty, and added that, as the bishopric had not been enjoyed long enough to afford Coverdale the means of paying any thing, his majesty hoped that he would shortly be per- mitted to visit Denmark, and to “ make declaration concerning the benefit of his welfare.” Some months passed; Mary seemed unwilling to comply, but it would not do for her to disturb the friendly understanding which existed between the Enghsh and Danish courts, and therefore she tardily granted in the following February the king’s request.

Mr. Anderson, in his valuable work on the Annals of the Bible, suggests that there was another circumstance which contributed to Coverdale’s escape.* During the trial of Rogers, Gardiner, who presided over the miquitous tribunal, on hearing the protomartyr’s observation, that the queen
“ would have done well enough but for Gardiner’s council,” declared * the queen went before me, and it was her own motion;” of the truth of which we have no doubt, for it is well known that
Mary afterwards stimulated Bonner to his deeds of blood.f Mr. A. remarks, that Gardiner’s assertion placed the queen before the country in one of the most critical of all positions as the sole and imperative persecutor; and he adds, “there can be no doubt from what followed, had made her tremble not only for herself, but the husband on whom she at this time doated.” He alludes to the well known circumstance of a Spanish divine being appointed to preach against religious persecution as a miserable artifice to lull the public mind; and then connects the permission given for Coverdale to leave the country with the examination of Rogers, as if it were mtended by Mary to counteract the impression produced by Gardiner’s remark. It certainly appears very inconsistent with this that the queen should, a few weeks afterwards, permit the work of persecution to be resumed, and doom more victims to the stake;{ and, as to the sermon of the Spanish friar, it seems to have been entirely a device of Philip's to remove odium from himself, who was suspected of intending to in- troduce the inquisition to England. There is no evidence of Mary’s interfering m any way at this time to check the persecution, and soothe the minds of her subjects; and, as to the latter object, the release of Coverdale was too inconsiderable a circumstance to be likely to aid in its accomphshment.
The interference of his Danish majesty was no doubt the main, if not the only, cause of the trans- lator’s hberation.

On the 19th of February, 1555, Coverdale obtained his passport, and embarked, no doubt with great joy, for the shores of Denmark. Soon after he was gone the lurid flames of persecution blazed over his native land, and sympathy with the sufferers for the truth, many of whom were doubtless well known to him, and well beloved, must have been mingled with his devout gratitude for the interposition of the Almighty in his escape. He was kindly received by the Danish king, through whose instrumentality he had escaped the ** mouth of the hon;” and it is said that his majesty otlered

* Anderson’s Annals, Vol. II. pp. 287-294. + See letter in Burnet, Vol. II. fol. ed., p 311. 
+ On the 16th of March, Tomkins was burnt at Smithfield. 

xxiv MEMOIR OF MXLES COVERDALE. 

him a benefice in the church of Denmark: but Coverdale, unacquainted with the Danish tongue, and anxious to be employed in preaching the gospel, preferred to cast in his lot among some English exiles at Wesel in Friesland. After remaining there a short time, he returned to the former scene of his labours; and on the 15th of September arrived at Bergzabern, at the request of his old friend,
Wolfgang, duke of Deux-ponts. On the 15th of December, 1558, we find him at Geneva, where he joined in writing* a letter to the church at Frankfort, congratulating them on the accession of
Elizabeth to the Enghsh throne, and entreating them to lay aside their present dissensions respecting ceremonial matters, the continuance of which would give so much joy to their enemies. The churches of the English exiles on the continent were at the time much distracted by controversies on pomts of ceremony and discipline; but there is no evidence of Coverdale having had any connection with them, save in the way indicated by the letter above noticed. It was in accordance with his gentle spirit to inculcate lessons of peace, though his well known attachment to the cause of scriptural truth evinced that he regarded the wisdom which cometh from above as “ pure,” and not permitting him to sacrifice principle in order to be ** peaceable.”

The name of Coverdale has sometimes been associated with the Genevan New Testament, pub- lished in 1557, but it is highly improbable that he was at Geneva so soon. The Genevan Testament, as appears from the preface, was the work of one person, a fact strangely overlooked by many authors, and this person there is good reason to believe was William Whittingham. That he had some share in assisting the preparation of the Genevan Bible is not altogether improbable, as he was there a few months while the work was going on; but the principal part of the undertaking certainly rested with others, probably Whittingham, Gilby, and Sampson.{

The accession of Ehzabeth to the throne of England was a signal for the return of the protestant exiles, and among the rest, Coverdale soon found his way to his native land. On the 12th of
November, 1559, Coverdale again took his place in the old pulpit of St. Paul’s Churchyard, where the friends of the Reformation now once more gladly assembled to hear the faithful and warm- hearted instructions of their favourite teachers. The next notice of our reformer is discovered in connection with Archbishop Parker’s consecration, in which ceremony Coverdale, with Barlow,
Scory, Dale, and the suffragans of Bedford and Thetford, took a part. From this it would appear that Coverdale was still regarded as a bishop of the church of England, his deprivation in the reign of Mary being treated as illegal. It seems probable that the intention was to restore this old veteran to his diocese at Exeter, but that his conscientious scruples in reference to certain ceremonial matters enforced in the Enghsh church under Elizabeth, prevented him from enjoying his former dignity.
At the consecration of Parker he appeared in a plain black gown, while his episcopal brethren were arrayed in surplices; and to the the end of his life it is well known that he retained his dislike to what he considered popish vestments. But though his conscience would not allow him fully to conform to the established order of things in the church, and he was thereby excluded from his former sce, yet he docs not seem to have relinquished his title to the episcopal character, for he signed himself throughout the rest of life, ** Myles Coverdale, quondam Exoniensis."

Grindall, the bishop of London, was a friend to Coverdale. He sought to obtain for him the bishopric of Llandaff, looking upon him as a neglected man, and thinking perhaps that conformity to ecclesiastical laws about vestments might in his case be very well dispensed with. On the failure of other plans for his promotion and comfort, Grindall at length sueceeded in making some provision for him by giving him the living of St. Magnus, near London-bridge. He was collated to the rectory on the 3rd of March, 1563; but poverty still clung to him, for he could not pay the first- fruits due to the queen. He wrote to Archbishop Parker the following letter on the subject.

** My duty considered in right humble and faithful wise. These are in like manner to beseech your grace, most reverend father, and my singular good lord, that as my good lord of London, tendering as well my weak and feeble age, as also my poor travail in God’s husbandry within his diocese, hath most gently conferred upon me the henefice of St. Magnus in London, being in value an hundred marks or thereabouts

* Troubles at Frankfort, p. 187. T See Introduetion to English Hexapla, p. 84. 
X This is Mr. Anderson’s view, * Annals,’ Vol. II. p. 320, but he almost entirely excludes Coverdale from a share in the work. 
It is most likely that while in Geneva, he would be consulted about it, and would lend his valuable assistance. 

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. XXV 

so it may please your grace to join with his lordship in suit for me to the queen's most excellent majesty, that in favourable consideration how destitute I have been of a competent living in the realm ever since my bishopric was violently taken away from me. I being compelled to resign, and how I never had pension, annuity, or stipend of it, these ten years: how unable also I am either to pay the first-fruits, or long to enjoy the said benefice, going upon my grave, as they say, and not like to live a year. Her ma- jesty, at the contemplation of such reverend, honourable, and worthy suitors, will most graciously grant me her warrant and discharge for the first-fruits of the said benefice. And as I am bold most humbly to crave your grace’s help herein, so am I fully persuaded, God willing, to show myself again as thankful, and in my vocation, during my short time, as faithful and as quiet as I can. Thus having uttered my boldness,
I most humbly commit your grace and all yours to the mighty protection of God. From London, Jan. 29. 
* Myr. Cov. quond. Exon.” 

The following letter relates to the same subject, and forms another affecting memorial of the poverty and sorrow of this eminent servant of Christ.

BisHor COVERDALE to SIR WILLIAM CECIL. 

** My duty considered in right humble wise unto your honour. These are in like manner to beseech the same, that whereas my lord of London, tendering as well mine age as my simple labours in the Lord's harvest, hath very gently offered me the pastoral office and benefice of St. Magnus in London; even so it may please your honour to be means for me to the Queen’s most excellent Majesty, that in favourable con- sideration, not only how destitute I have been ever sith my bishopric was taken from me, and that I never had pension, annuity, or stipend of it these ten years and upward; but also how unable I am, either to pay the first-fruits, or long to enjoy the said living, I going upon my grave, not able to live over a year, her Majesty at the contemplation hereof may most graciously grant me the first-fruits of the said benefice, which her highness must needs have again anew, when I am gone.

“ Heretofore (I praise God for it!) your honour hath ever been my special help and succour in all my rightful suits. If now, that poor old Myles may be provided for, it please your honour to obtain this for me, I shall think this enough to he unto me as good as a feast. Thus most humbly beseeching your honour to take my boldness in good part, I commit you, and all yours, to the gracious protection of the
Almighty. * From London, February 6th, [1564]. 

* MYrEs COVERDALE, quond. Exon." 

Poor Coverdale! His Divine Master, for wise and gracious purposes permitted him to struggle with many trials in his old age, for in the same year m which he was so teazed by poverty, he was smitten with the plague, from which, through the goodness of God, he was restored and was permitted to resume his ministerial labours. It might have been expected that the remainder of his days would be spent in the enjoyment of peace and honour. He was now settled in his rectory, beloved by his parishioners, and highly esteemed by the friends of the Reformation. The University of
Glee, in the year 1563, had conferred on him the degree of Doctor of Divimty; and in the following year, had commissioned him as a deputy to confer a similar honour on Bishop Grindall; but despite of his piety, labours, usefulness, honour, and old age, this devoted servant of God was soon involved in difficulties again, owing to the stringent enforcement, by the ruling powers, of the ecclesiastical regulations relating to habits and ceremonies. A letter written on the 25th March,
1566, indicates that the veteran reformer was in trouble through his conscientious scruples about conformity to these regulations, and gives us some idea of his increasing infirmities.

BisHor COVERDALE to the Rev. Mr. ROBINSON, CHAPLAIN fo ARCHBISHOP PARKER. 

** My duty considered in right humble and most hasty wise. Whereas, I am summoned to appear, with others, to-morrow afore my lord’s grace, at Lambeth, I beseech your worthiness to be means for me unto his grace, that at this present I may be dispensed with ; not only for that I am unwieldy, and could neither well travel by land, nor altogether safely by boat, but also for other considerations which this bearer, my dear friend, shall signify unto you by mouth. Thus heing desirous of your gentle answer, I commend you and all yours to the gracious protection of God. March 25th, 1566.

* Your own in the Lord, 
* Mxrzs COVERDALE, quond. Exon." d

xxvi MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. 

In the July of the same year he united with Humphrey and Sampson, two distinguished Puritans, in writing a letter to Farrell, Viret, Deza, and other divines on the continent, respecting the vest- mena controversy, E as it exhibits the opinions of Coverdale on the subject, and throws light upon his position at this time, we shall venture to insert, though it be rather long.

MYLES COVERDALE, LAURENCE HUMPHREY, and THOMAS SAMPSON, to WILLIAM FARRELL, 
PETER VIRET, THEODORE BEZA, and others. 

** We must not only, honoured masters and brethren, appear troublesome to your revereuces by so frequently addressing you by our friends and our letters, but must seem also very regardless of our duty to the church, by disturbing you, who are occupied in matters of far greater importance, with the relation of our trifles. But yet the unhappy condition of our times, and fresh troubles, compel us to have recourse to you, not only that you may be informed more fully of the state of our affairs, and our own opinions respect- ing them, but that we also may more fully understand your sentiments. Ouraffairs are not altered for the better, but alas! are sadly deteriorated. For it is now settled and determined, that an unleavened cake must be used in place of common bread; that the communion must be received by the people on their bended knees; that out of doors must be worn the square cap, bands, a long gown, and tippet; while the white surplice and cope are to he retained in divine service. And those who refuse to comply with these requirements, are deprived of their estates, dignities, and every ecclesiastical office; namely, brethren, by brethren and bishops, whose houses are at this time the prisons of some preachers; who are now raging against their own bowels; who are now imposing these burdens not only on their own persons, but also on the shoulders of others ; and this too at a time when in the judgment of all learned men they ought to have been removed and abolished altogether. Thus you have the image and representation, such as it is, of our church. Now then, hear our opinion upon this state of things. We think that it must be assumed in this question, that the Jewish, Turkish, Christian, and Popish religions have each their own peculiar sacraments and signs ; and that external profession ought to be the test and badge of any one's doctrine; and that we are to seek our pattern not out of the cisterns and puddles of our enemies, but from the fountain of the
Scriptures, and of the churches of God ; so as not to be connected by any similarity of rites with those from whose religion we are altogether abhorrent; which rule we read, was diligently observed by our forefathers in respect to the sabbath and passover of the Jews, the fastings of the Manichees, and the trine immersion of heretics. Nor, indeed, can we regard these things as altogether indifferent, when compulsion is made use of, and when too, they are branded with the mark of superstition; nor ought anything to be obtruded
(on the church) by the authority of the sovereign, without its having been lawfully discussed in a Christian synod: nor ought agreement in ceremonies everywhere to be required of necessity, especially when it is in common with the enemies of the faith: nor is there any occasion in the church of Christ either for the
Aaronic priesthood, or pharisaical ambition, that sacred garments should be worn now-a-days in the Chris- tian temple, or that a dress not common, but distinct and peculiar, should be prescribed for ordinary use.
But we think with Celestine, that the clergy should be distinguished from the people by their doctrine, not their garments; their conversation, not their dress; their purity of mind, not their adornment of person; lest we begin to hanker after novelties, tread under foot the order received from our forefathers, impose upon the minds and eyes of the simple, and make room for vain and unprofitable superstitions. Besides, as many of us as have cast out these things from the churches committed to our trust, cannot restore them without grievous offence and abominable impiety: and since a door would also be opened to other myste- ries of iniquity, and the love of the godly be offended, and the pride and boldness of the wicked be encou- raged, without even any pretence of edification; and since it is not lawful, according to St. Paul's rule respecting things indifferent, for every onc to rest in his own persuasion, but that that should be regarded as lawful which is not displeasing to certain men ; we considered it more for the good of the church to stand fast in our liberty with an accession of godly men on our side, than to depart from the opinion we have taken up, and the custom we have received, to the scandal of many, and the downfall of purer doctrine. This is our opinion, and also that of a most cxecllent personage. We now, most illustrious and very dear masters and brethren, request you by our most intimate communion in Christ, to point out the cynosure to us who are tossed about on the waves; and cither to show us a better way if we are in error, or confirm us, when doubting, in our holy purpose. "The question, we confess, is nice and difficult, whether it is better to yield to circumstanees, or to depart; to admit the relics of the Amorites, or to desert our post? Either alternative is harsh, grievous, and productive of mischicf both to ourselves and the church.
Which is the better do you with your wonted wisdom declare, because we are lingering in suspense as in the last extremity. We also request of you and your brother ministers to put forth at the earliest

MEMOIR OF MYLES COVERDALE. xxvii 

opportunity some treatise on the nature of things indifferent, on ceremonies, on the sacerdotal habit; by which both our church and those of Saxony may be instructed, and the zeal of our sovereigns inspirited to the demolition of all the distinctive marks of antichrist. We make it, lastly, our request, that you would admonish our bishops by letter not to persecute Joseph on account of a garment; nor to rend the church with such a schism for so slight a cause; but that even in the dissimilarity of rites they may preserve the sweetest harmony of spirit and brotherly love. For far be it from us to think of them otherwise than as becomes friends and brethren. The sum is this. We request these three things; your reply to the questions here proposed by us, and some treatise to all the churches generally; a letter to the bishops privately, and, if you please, to such of her majesty’s councillors as you may be acquainted with, so that this whole controversy may issue in a christian reconciliation, and not in a cruel separation. Communicate this letter to all your brethren, that we may hear what the Lord may speak out of the mouth of two or three witnesses. May the Lord Jesus preserve his church pure and inviolate even to the day of his just judgment! Your most devoted,
** July, 1566. * MYLES COVERDALE, formerly bishop of Exeter, 
* LAURENCE HUMPHREY, 
“'THomas Sampson.” * 

Coverdale forfeited his benefice by conscientiously refusing to obey the act of uniformity, but he still continued to preach. “ Many of the people,” says Strype, “ ran after Father Coverdale, who took that occasion to preach the more constantly, but yet with much fear, so that he would not be known where he preached, though many came to his house to ask where he would preach the next
Lord's day." He continued his labours till within a few months of his departure to a better world, which happened the 20th of May, 1567, in the 81st year of his age. He was buried in the church of St. Bartholomew, behind the Royal Exchange, and his funeral was attended by multitudes who revered his memory and bewailed his loss.

When the Church of St. Bartholomew was pulled down in 1840, careful search was made for 
Coverdale’s remains: they were discovered in a grave within the chancel. A particular account of the exhumation was drawn up, from which it appears that the skeleton was perfect, the skull alone bemg decomposed. The coffin was removed to the church of St. Mary Magnus, and now the bones of the translator repose within the walls which one echoed with his voice.

* Parker Society publications :— Zurich Letters,’ Second Series, p. 121. Accurate copies of all the letters of Coverdale which have beeu discovered, are giveu in his ‘Remains,’ published by the Parker Society, and the places where the originals are preserved are there referred to.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION 

OF 

THE ORIGINAL EDITION OF THIS BIBLE. 

PRINTED IN 1535. 

py HILE the reprint of this Bible cannot fail to 

be welcome to the publie generally, there are many who, we feel certain, will not be dissatisfied to have some bibliographical details concerning so

curious and valuable a work. 

The book itself is printed in a very peculiar angular Swiss or German type. Its size is a small

folio, and there is no name of place or printer in it. 

The copies of this Bible known to exist, are those in the Libraries of the British Museum.—Bodleian.
—Public Library, Cambridge. —King's College, Cam- bridge.— Sion College.—All Souls’ College.— Trinity
College, Dublin. Lambeth Library.—Bapt. Mus. 
Bristol.—Dvxx of SussEex.—Earl of Leicester.— 
Earl Jersey.—Earl Spencer.—Dr. Coombe.—The late William Coombes, Esq.—George Offor, Esq.—
B. Harrison, Esq.—Rev. R. Daley.—Lea Wilson, 
Esq.; and Mr. Reed.* 

“Of seven copies of this edition,’ says Mr. Cot- | ton, ** which I have seen, that in the British Museum | is the only one that has the title-page, and even that

is made up from two copies. Of the others, the 

* Two copies, besides those above enumerated, are in public libraries at Cambridge.

Bodleian copy is by far the finest.” Not only is the title-page of the one in the Museum made up from two copies, but it is even made up from two separate wood-cuts of the same design; for in the one, the texts in the scrolls are in English, in the other,

in Latin. 

One perfect title-page, however, is in existence. and is found in the beautiful copy of this edition in the Earl of Leicester's library at Holkham. follows :—

It is as 

55: T8: E 183 Tho EA 
The Bible, that 

is, the bolo Scripture of the 
Olde and Neto Testament, faith fully translated out pf Douche and Latyn in to Englishe.
M.D.XXX V. 
S. Paul. 11. Tessa, IIl. 
Prale for bs, that the worde of God mate baut ttt passage, and be glorified Sc.
Š. Paul ol. 111. 
Let the worde a£ Christ dwell (n pou plen teousip in all wysdome &t.
Josue 1. det not the boke of this latwe departe put of thy mouth, but exercpse tbpsrite therin dape and nighte &c."

The mention of its being translated “out of 

Bibliographical Description. 

Douche and Latyn," was no doubt a bookselling’ 

artifice of the time, to make the work circulate better, as being intimately connected with the re- formed doctrines, which were then equally well known by the term of German or Dutch doctrines.

Nay, we are even told that the early reformers of 

that day were commonly called Germans, on account | 

of their adoption of those reformed opinions which first sprung up in Germany. That Coverdale did not follow Luther’s version, it only requires a very slight comparison of texts to prove; but he no doubt availed himself, where there occurred any difficult reading, of all the different means of assistance within his power, as indeed he himself intimates in

his prologue to the reader. 

The wood-cuts surrounding the title are the same as in the title-page of 1536, of which a facsimile is prefixed to the present reprint.

On the reverse of the title is, ** The bokes of the whole Byble, how they are named in Englysh and
Latyn, how longe they are wrytten in the allega- cions, how many chapters euery boke hath, and in what leafe every one begynneth.” It contains, how- ever, only references to the first four parts; those to the Apocrypha and the New Testament were pro- bably on another leaf, which is missing in this copy

(the Museum one). 

Then comes the dedication, «Vnto the most vic- torious Prynce and oure most gracyous soueraigne
Lorde, kynge Henry the eyght, kynge of Englonde and of Fraunce, lorde of Irlonde, &c.” signed ** Youre graces humble subiecte and daylye oratour, Myles
Couerdale.”’ 5 pages. The Museum copy has **Quene 
Anne” in the dedication; Sion College has ** Quene 
Jane;" Lambeth Library has a copy with each; the 
Bodleian has * Quene Anne;”? All Souls’ College 

has neither; Dr. Coombe's has neither; the late 
Mr. Coombes's has ** Quene Anne.” 

Then “A prologe. Myles Couerdale Unto the 

Christen reader.” 6 pages. 

Then “‘ The bokes of the hole Byble" &c., 2 pages. 
This is evidently part of another edition inserted in this copy (the Museum one), or rather this set of preliminary pieces do not belong to this title-page ; since a portion of the same information is to be found

printed on the reverse of the title-page. 
The contents of “The first boke of Moses,” 1 page. 

‘<The first boke of Moses, called Genesis." Then should come, according to Herbert, a map of the
Holy land. The four other books of Moses follow, with tables of contents prefixed to each: in all, fol.i—xc. Signature ai, to p vi, in sixes. The first leaf appears not to have any signature, or else it has been rubbed out in this copy (the Museum one), the

second leaf being marked a ii. 

Then comes a title-page: ** The seconde parte of the olde Testament." with the names of the books contained underneath. This in a compartment of
On the reverse “The boke of Josua. 
What this boke conteyneth.” 

fol. ii—exx (the reverse of). Tables of contents at 

wood-cuts. 

Joshua to Hester, 

the commencement of each book. Signature a a ij, 

to v v Vi, in sixes. 

* The boke of Job,” table of contents. ‘“‘ The 
Psalter.” ‘The Prouerbes of Salomon,” table of contents. “Ecclesiastes,” table of contents. ‘ Sa-

lomons Ballettes." From Job to Salomons Balettes, 

fol. i—lii. Signature A a, to Ji iiij, in sixes. 

Then comes another title-page: “AU the Pro- 

Bibliographical Description. 

phetes in Englishe.” with the names of the books con- tained, underneath. This in a comparment of wood- cuts. On the reverse, the contents of “the Prophet
Esay." The contents prefixed to each Prophet. In all, fol. ii—cii, (the reverse of). Signature A a a ij,

to R rr vi, in sixes. 

Another title-page: ‘‘Apocripha The bokes and treatises which amonge the fathers of olde are not rekened to he of like authorite with the other bokes of the byble, neither are they fotide in the Canon of the Hebrue.” Then follow the names of the books.
At the bottom, **Vnto these also belongeth Baruc, whom we haue set amoge the prophetes next vnto
Jeremy, because he was his scrybe, and in his tyme." 
This in a compartment of wood-cuts. On the reverse, 
** The translatoure vnto the reader." containing some observations on the nature of these books. Under- neath the contents of the first book. The contents are prefixed to each book, except to ** Certayne chapters of Hester.” “The songe of the iij children.”
“The story of Susanna" and “The story of Bel,” 
In all, fol. ti—lxxxiii (the reverse of), falsely num- hered Ixxxi.

leaf blank. 

Signature A ij to O v, in sixes, the last 

Then the title-page: “ The new testament.” under- neath, the books named. Also in a compartment of wood-cuts. On the reverse, the contents of ** The gospell of S. Mathew." The contents before each hook.

nature AA ij, to TT v, in sixes. 

In all, fol. ii—cxiii (the reverse of). Sig- 

On the reverse of the last leaf; ** Prynted in the yeare of oure LORDE M.D.X XXV. and fynished the fourth daye of October.”

At the beginning of Genesis are six cuts in wood, 

describing the six days’ work of the creation; and in 

different parts of the work are other cuts, also in wood, some of them very spirited and well executed, representing the history therein mentioned, and most probably done, as before stated, by Sehald Behem of
Nuremhergh. There are also some initial letters of 

a very elegant character, from designs of Holbein. 

This Bible, as will be seen by the above descrip- tion, is divided into six parts, of which four have
That there should be no sepa- 

rate title-page to the first part is not strange, as it 

separate title-pages. 

scarcely seemed to want one: but it is rather curious that there should be none to the third part; and that there never was any printed, and that it is not miss- ing from the present copies, is clear, since the first leaf is numbered fol. i, which would not otherwise have been the case. The type, as before mentioned, is an angular Swiss or German. The title-page and its reverse are in the same letter as the body of the text. But the dedication, the prologue. the names of “ the bokes of the whole Byble,” and the contents of Genesis, are in a different character, and were most probably printed after the arrival of the volume in England. There are a few marginal
On fol. xli. 

of part I. is a large wood-cut of the Tabernacle and 

references, which are in Roman letters. 

its contents; this 1s repeated on the reverse of fol. lvi. The initial letter of Genesis is a large flourished

text capital. A full page contains fifty-seven lines. 

Whether this edition ever had a table of the 
Epistles and Gospels for the Sundays, Ke. at the end, is not known. No copy has yet been found,

that we are aware of, containing any such table; but 

lit seems not improbable that it had, since we find 

one in the reprints in quarto and in folio, hy Nichol- son, in 1537; and also in the edition of 1550.

It is not known how many copies of this edition 

Bibliographical Description, 

were issued from the press, but the number must | have been very great, when we consider that it was the first edition of the whole Bible in English ever offered to the public, at a time, when, excited by the writings daily put forth by the reformers, they were most eager to peruse it; and that Grafton, when he published Matthew’s Bible in 1587, although of a

much larger size, and consequently more expensive, 

ventured to print as many as 1500 copies. 

This Bible was reprinted in folio and in quarto in 
1537, by Nicholson, in Southwark, with a very few slight and trifling alterations. It was printed again in 1550, after which, what remained of the edition was issued in 1558, with a reprinted title-page and pre-
The edition of 1535 had a new title- page in 1536, of which, as before stated, a facsimile is prefixed to this edition.

liminary pieces. 

VNTO THE MOST VICTORIOUS PRYNCE AND OURE MOST GRACYOUS SOUERAIGNE LORDE, 

KYNGE HENRY THE EYGHT, 

KYNGE OF ENGLONDE AND OF FRAUNCE, LORDE OF IRLONDE. €¢- DEFENDOUR OF THE FAYTH, AND 
VNDER GOD THE CHEFE AND SUPPREME HEADE OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLONDE. 

« The ryght q iust administracyon of the lawes that God gaue vnto Moses and vnto Iosua: the testimonye of faythfulnes that God gaue of Dauid : the plenteous abundaunce of wysdome that God gaue ento Salomon: the lucky and prosperous age with the multiplicacyon of sede whiche God gaue vnto
Abraham and Sara his wyfe, be geué vnto you most gracyous Prynce, with your dearest iust wyfe, and 

most vertuous Pryncesse, Quene Anne, Amen. 

AIPHAS beynge bysshope of that yeare, lyke a blynde prophete (not vuderstandyng what he sayd) prophecied,” that it was better to put Christ vnto death, then that all the people shulde perysshe: he meanyng, that Christ was an heretike, a deceauer of the people, q a destroyer of the lawe, and that it was better therfore to put Christ vnto death, tha to suffre hym for to lyue, and to deceaue the people. tc. where in very dede Christ was the true prophete, the true
Messias, and the onely true Sauiour of the worlde, sent of his heauenly father to suffre the moste cruell, most shamefull, and most necessary death for our redemp- cyon: accordyng to y* meanynge of the prophecie truely vnderstonde.

Euen after the same maner y* blynde bysshoppe of 
Rome, (that blynde Baalam I saye) not vnderstond- ynge what he dyd, gaue vnto your grace this tytle:
Defendour of the fayth, onely bycause your hyghnes suffred your bysshoppes to burne Gods worde the rote of fayth, and to persecute the louers and mynisters of y* same. where in very dede the blynde bysshoppe
(though he knewe not what he dyd) prophecied, that by the ryghteous admynistracyon and contynuall dili- gence of youre grace, the fayth shulde so be defended, that Gods worde the mother of Fayth with the frutes therof, shulde haue his fre course thorowe out all
Christendome, but specyally in your realme. 

* Jo, i1. e. 

Yf your hyghnesse now of your pryncely benignite wyll pardon me to compare these two bysshoppes (I meane bysshoppe Caiphas and the bysshoppe of
Rome) q theyr prophecies together, I doute not but we shal fynde them agree lyke brethren, though the one be a Iewe and the other a counterfayte Christian.
Fyrst, Caiphas prophecied that it was better to put 
Christ vnto death, then that the people shulde perysshe. 
The bysshoppe of Rome also, not knowynge what he prophecied, gaue youre grace this tytle: Defendour of the fayth. The trueth of both these prophecies is of the holy goost (as was Baalams prophecie) though they that spake the, knewe not what they sayd. The trueth of Caiphas prophecie is, that it was necessary for mans saluacyon, that Christ by his death shulde
And the trueth of oure Baalams prophecie is, ^y* your grace in very dede shulde defende the Fayth, Yee euen the true fayth of Christ, no dreames, no fables, no heresie, no papisticall inuencions, but the vncorrupte fayth of
Gods most holy worde, which to set forth (praysed be the goodnes of God, and increace youre gracyous

ouercome death, and redeme vs. 

purpose) your hyghnes with youre most honorable councell, applyeth all his studye and endeuoure.
These two blynde bysshopes now agree in y* vnder- stadyng of theyr prophecies: for Caiphas taketh
Christ for an heretike, Oure Balaa taketh the worde 

? Nume, 24. c. 

an Epistle 

of Christ for heresie. Caiphas iudgeth it to be a good dede to put Christ vnto death, that he shulde not deceaue the people. Oure Balaam calleth defendynge of the fayth, the suppressyng, kepyng secrete, and burnyng of the worde of fayth : lest the lyght thereof shulde vtter his darknes: lest his owne Decretales ¢
Decrees, his owne lawes and constitucions, his owne statutes and inuencions shulde come to none effecte: lest his intollerable exactions and vsurpacions shulde lose theyr strengthe : lest it shulde be knowen what a thefe and murtherer he is in the cause of Christ, and how haynous a traytoure to God and man in defraud- ynge all Christen kynges q prynces of theyr due obedi- ence: lest we youre graces subiectes shulde haue eyes in the worde of God, at the last to spye out his crafty conueyauce and iuglynges: and lest men shulde se, how sore he and his false Apostles haue deceaued all Christendome, specyally youre noble realme of
Englonde. 

Thus your grace seyth how brotherly the Iewysh bysshoppe and oure Balaam agree together, not onely in myter and outwarde appearaunce: but as the one persecuted the Lorde Iesus in his owne persone, so doth the other persecute his worde and resysteth his holy ordynaunce in the auctorite of his anoynted kynges. For so moche nowe as the worde of God is the onely trueth that dryueth awaye all lyes, and dis- closeth all iuglyng and disceate, therfore is oure Ba- laam of Rome so lothe that the scripture shulde be knowe in the mother tonge: lest yf kynges and prynces (specially aboue all other) were exercysed therin, they shulde reclame and chalenge agayne theyr due auctorite, which he falsely hath vsurped so many yeres, and so to tye hym shorter: and lest the people beyng taught by the worde of God, shulde fall from y* false fayned obediece of hym and his disguysed
Apostles, vnto the true obedience commaunded by Gods owne mouthe: as namely, to obey theyr prynce, to obey father and inother. qc. and not to steppe ouer father and mothers bely to enter in to his paynted religions, as his ypocrites teache: For he knoweth well ynough, that yf the cleare Sonne of Gods worde come ones to the heate of the daye, it shal dryue awaye all the foule myst of his deuelysh doctrines. Therfore

? Ro. 13, a. è Math, 17, d.. Tit. 3.8. 

were it more to the mayntenaunce of Antichristes kyngdome, that the worlde were styll in ignoraunce and blyndnes, and that the scripture shulde neuer come tolyghte. For the scripture (both in the olde testament and in the new) declareth most aboütdauntly that the office, auctorite and power geuen of God vnto kynges, is in earth aboue all other powers: let them call the selues Popes, Cardynalles, or what so euer they will, ^the worde of god declareth them (yee and commaundeth them vnder payne of dampnacion) to be obedient vnto the temporal] swerde: As in the olde
Testament all the Prophetes, Prestes and Leuites were. 
And in the new Testament ^ Christ q his Apostles both were obedient them selues, and taught obedience of all men vnto theyr prynces ad temporall rulers: which here vnto vs in the worlde present the persone of God, and are called “Goddes in the scripture, by- cause of tbe excellecy of theyr office. And though there were no mo auctorities but the same, to proue the peminence of the temporall swerde, Yet by this the scripture declareth playnly, that as there is nothyng aboue God, so is there no man aboue the kynge in his realme but that he onely vnder God is the chefe heade of all the cogregacyon and church of the same, And in token that this is true, there hath ben of olde antiquite (and is yet vnto this daye) a louynge cere- monye vsed in your realme of Englonde, y* wha your graces subiectes reade your letters, or begynne to talke or come of your hyghnes, they moue theyr bonettes fora signe q token of reuerence vnto your grace, as to their most soueraigne lorde t heade vnder God. which thyng no man vseth to do to eny bysshoppe. wherby (yf oure vnderstondyng were nat blynded) we myght euydently perceaue, that euen very nature teacheth vs the same, that scripture comaüdeth vs: and that lyke as it is agaynst Gods worde that a kynge shulde not be the chefe heade of his people, euen so (I saye) is it agaynst kynde that we shulde knowe any other heade aboue hym vnder God.

And that no prest nor bysshoppe is exempte (nor can be lawfully) from the obedience of his prynce, the scripture is full both of strayte comaundemetes, q practises of the holyest men. *Aaron was obedient vnto Moses, and called hym his lorde, though he was

e Exod. 22,d. Psal.81, a, * Nume. 12, b. 

bnto the Rpnges hHpghuesse. 

his owne brother. ^Eleasar and Phineas were vnder the obediece of Iosua. *Nathan the prophete fell downe to the grounde before kynge Dauid, he had his Prynce in such reuerence (He made not the kynge for to kysse his fote as the bysshoppe of Rome maketh Emperours to do) Notwithstondynge he spared not to rebuke hym, and that ryght sharply whan he fell from the worde of God to adultery ¢ manslaughter. For he was not afrayed to reproue hym of his sinnes, nomore than Helyas the prophete stode in feare to saye vnto kynge Achab: +It is thou and thy fathers house that trouble Israel, because ye haue forsaken y* commaundementes of the Lorde, and walke after Baal. And as Johan Baptyste durst saye vnto Kynge Herode: ^It is not lawful for the to take thy brothers wyfe. But to my purpose I passe ouer innumerable mo ensaples both of the olde Testament and of the new, for feare lest I be to tedyous vnto your grace. Sima, in all godly regimentes of olde tyme the kynge and teporall iudge was obeyed of euery man, and was alwaye vnder God the chefe and suppreme heade of the whole congregacyon, ^and de- posed euen prestes whan he sawe an vrgent cause, as
Salomon dyd vnto Abiathar. agaynst the godly obedience of his prynce (excepte he wolde be at defyaunce with God and all his holy ordinaunces) that were well acquaynted with the holy scripture, which so earnestly comendeth vnto euery one

who coulde than stonde 

of vs the anctorite and power geuen of God vnto kynges and temporall rulers? Therfore doth Moses so strately ¢forbyde the Israelites to speake so moche as an euell worde agaynst the prynce of y* people, moche lesse than to disobeye hym, or to withstonde hym. Doth not 'Ieremy the prophete and / Baruc also exhorte the people in captiuite, to praye for the prosperous welfare of the kynge of Babilon, and to obeye hym, though he was an infidele? In the new
Testament wha oure sauioure Christ (beyng yet fre q 
Lorde of al kynges q prynces) shewed his obedience in payenge the trybute to oure eusample, tdyd he not a miracle there in puttynge the pece of money in the fysshes mouth (that Peter myght paye the customer therwith) and all to stablysshe the obedience due vnto

? los. 4. c. * 3 Reg. 1. c. 

g.18.b. Leuit. 18.b. 
> Math. 14. a. 

eg. 2. d, 

a+ 
C5 Go mu
© 

prynces? § Dyd not Ioseph and Mary the mother of our sauiour Christ departe fro Nazareth vnto Bethlee, so farre from home, to showe theyr obedience in payenge the taxe to the prynce?

uioure be borne in the same obedience ? 

And wolde not oure Sa- 
|| Doth not 
Paule pronounce hym to resyste God hym selfe, that 
And (to be shorte) the Apostle Peter 5 dothe not onely stablysshe the obedience vnto prynces and temporall rnlers but

resysteth the auctorite of his prynce? 

affirmeth playnly the kynge (and no bysshoppe) to be the chefe heade. scripture, which bynde vs to the obedience of oure

Innumerable places mo are there in 

prynce, and declare vnto vs, that no man is nor can be lawfully excepte from the same: but that all the mynisters of Goddes worde are vnder the t&porall swerde: q Prynces onely to owe obedience vnto God q his worde. di

And where as Anthichrist vnto youre graces tyme dyd thrust his heade into y* imperiall crowne of your hyghnes (as he doth yet with other noble prynces mo) that lerned he of Satha the authour of pryde, and therin doth he both agaynst the doctryne q also agaynst y* ensample of Christe: whiche because his kyngdome was not of this worlde, medled with no tem- porall matters, as it is euydent both by his wordes and practyse: Luc. xii. Math. xxvi. Ioh. vi. Ioh. xviii, where he y* hath eyes to se, maye se: q he y* hath eares to heare, maye heare, y* Christes admynistra- cion was nothyng teporall, but playne spiritual, as he hym selfe affirmeth q proueth in the fourth chapter of saynt Luke out of the prophete Esay: where all bysshoppes and prestes maye se, how farre theyr bynd-

ge and lowsynge extendeth, and where in theyr office consisteth, namely in preachynge the Gospell. qc.

wherfore (most gracyous prynce) there is no tonge 
I thynke, that cau fully expresse and declare the vntollerable iniuries, which haue bene done vnto God, to al prynces and to the comynalties of all christen realmes, sence they which shulde be onely the minis- ters of Gods worde, became lordes of the worlde, and thrust y* true and iust prynces out of theyr rowmes. whose herte wolde not pitie it (yee eue with lament- acyon) to remember but onely the vntollerable wronge

4 Exod.22.d. < Ierem.29, b. 
$ Lu. 2. a. 

J Bar. 2.c. 

ik 1 Math. 17. d o. 13. a.

€ 1 Petr, 2. b. : 

An Epistle 

done by that Antychrist of Rome vnto youre graces most noble predecessoure kynge Iohn? I passe ouer his pestilent pykynge of Peter pens out of youre realme : his stealynge awaye of youre money for par- dons: benefices and bysshoprykes : his disceanyng of youre subiectes soules with his denelyshe doctrynes and sectes of his false religions: his blondsheddyng of so many of your graces people, for bokes of the scripture. whose herte wolde not be greued (yee and that out of measure) to call to remeébrauce, how obstinate and disobedient, how presumptuous ¢ stub- burne that Antychrist made the bysshoppes of youre realme agaynst your graces noble predecessours in tymes past, as it is manyfest in y* Cronicles? I trust verely there be no suche now within youre realme :
Yf there be, let them remembre these wordes of scrip- ture: “Presumptuousnes goeth before destruccio, U after a proude stomacke there foloweth a fall.

what is now the cause of all these vntollerable and nomore to be suffred abhominacions? Truely enen the ignoraunce of the scripture of God. For how had it els ben possyble, that such blyndnes shulde haue come in to y* worlde, had not y* lyghte of Gods worde bene extyncte ? How coulde men (I saye) haue bene so farre from the true seruyce of God, and from the due obedience of theyr prynce, had not the lawe of God bene clene shut vp, depressed, cast asyde, and put out of remembraunce? As it was afore the tyme of that noble kynge Iosias, and as it hath bene also amonge vs vnto youre graces tyme: by whose most ryghteous

admynistracyon (thorowe the mercyfull goodnes of 

God) it is now founde agayne, *as it was in the dayes of that most vertnons kynge Iosias. And praysed be the father, the sonne, and the holy goost worlde without ende, which so excellently hath endewed youre
Pryncely hert with such feruentnes to his honoure, and to the welth of youre louyng snbiectes, that I maye ryghtuously (by inst occasyons in youre persone) cópare youre hyghnes vnto that noble and gracyons kynge, y' lanterne of lyghte amonge prynces, that fer- uent protectour and defender of the lawes of God: which cómaunded straytly (as youre grace doth) that the lawe of God shulde be redde and taught vnto all y* people: set the prestes to theyr office in the worde

2Proue, 16.c. *4Re.29.b. 2 Par.24. c, © Torem, 44. d. 

of god: destroyed Idolatry and false ydols: put downe all euell customes and abusyons: set vp the true honoure of God: applyed all his studye and ende- uoure to the ryghtuous admynistracyon of the most vncorrupte lawe of God. tc. O what felicite was amonge y* people of Ierusalem in his dayes? And what prosperous health both of soule t body foloweth the lyke mynistracion in youre hyghnes, we begyune now (praysed be God) to haue experience. * For as false doctryne is the origenall cause of all euell plages and destruccyon, so is y* true executynge of the lawe of God ad the preachyng of the same, the mother of all godly prosperite. The onely worde of god (I save) is the cause of all felicite, “it bryngeth all goodnes with it, it bryngeth lernynge, it gedreth vnderstond- ynge, it causeth good workes, it maketh chyldren of obedience, brenely, it teacheth all estates theyr office and duety. Seynge then that the scripture of God teacheth vs euery thynge sufficiently, both what we onghte to do, and what we oughte to leane vndone : whome we are bounde to obey, and whome we shulde not obeye: therfore (I saye) it causeth all prosperite, and setteth euery thyng in frame: and where it fs taught and knowen, it lyghteneth all darkenesses, co- forteth all sory hertes, leaueth no poore man vnhelped, suffreth nothynge amysse vnamended, letteth no prynce be disobeyed, permytteth no heresie to be preached : but refourmeth all thinges, amedeth that is amysse, and setteth euery thynge in order. And why ? because it is genen by the inspiracyon of God, therfore is it euer bryngynge profyte and frute, by teachynge, by improuynge, by amendynge and refourmyng all thé y! wyl receaue it, ^to make them parfecte ¢ mete vnto all good workes.

Considerynge now (most gracyous prynce) the in- estimable treasure, frute œ prosperite euerlastynge, that God geueth with his worde, and trustynge in his infynite goodnes that he wolde brynge my symple and rnde laboure herin to good effecte, therfore as the holy goost moued other mé to do the cost herof, so was I boldened in God, to laboure in the same.
Agayne, consyderynge youre Imperial! maiestye not onely to be my naturall soneraigne liege Lorde q chefe heade of y* chureh of Englode, but also the true

*Sapie. 7. b. — 41 Tim. 3. b. 

bnto the Bpnges hpghnesse. 

defender and maynteyner of Gods lawes, I thought it my dutye and to belonge vnto my allegiannce, whan
I had translated this Bible, not onely to dedicate this translacyon vnto youre hyghnesse, but wholy to com- mytte it vnto the same: to the intent that yf any thynge therin be translated amysse (for in many thynges we fayle, euen whan we thynke to be sure) it may stode in youre graces handes, to correcte it, to amende it, to improue it, yee q cleane to reiecte it, yf youre godly wysdome shall thynke it necessary.
And as I do with all humblenes submitte myne vnder- stondynge and my poore translacyon vnto y* spirite of trueth in your grace, so make I this protestacyon
(hauyng God to recorde in my coscience) that I haue nether wrested nor altered so moch as one worde for the mayntenaüce of any maner of secte: but haue with a cleare conscience purely q faythfully trans- lated this out of fyue sundry interpreters, hauyng onely the manyfest trueth of the scripture before myne eyes:
Trustynge in the goodnes of God, that it shalbe vnto his worshippe: quietnes and tranquilite vnto your hyghnes: a perfecte stablyshment of all Gods ordy-

naunces within youre graces domynion: a generall comforte to all Christen hertes, and a continual] thank- fnlnesse both of olde and youge vnto god, and to youre grace, for beynge oure Moses, and for bringynge vs out of this olde Egypte from the cruell handes of our spiritual Pharao. For where were the Iewes (by ten thonsande partes) so moch bounde vnto ^ Kynge
Dauid, for subduynge of greate Goliath and all theyr enemyes, as we are to your grace, for delyuerynge vs out of oure olde Babylonycall captiuyte? For y* which delyueraunce and victory 1 beseke oure onely medyatoure Iesus Christ, to make soch meanes for vs vnto his heauenly father, y' we neuer be vnthankfull vnto him ner vnto youre grace: but that we euer inereace in the feare of him, in obedience vnto your hyghnesse, in loue vnfayned vnto oure neghbours: and in all vertue that comineth of God. To whom for y* defendynge of his blessed worde (by your graces most rightfull administracyon) be honoure and thankes, glory and dominyon, worlde without ende, Amen.

* 1 Reg. 17. g. 

youre graces humble subiecte and daylye oratour, 
MYLES COUERDALE. 

A PROLOGE. 

MYLES COUERDALE VNTO THE CHRISTEN READER. 

ONSIDERYNGE how excellent knowlege and lernynge an interpreter of scripture oughte to haue in the tongues, and ponderyng also myne owne insufficiency therin, t how weake I am to perfourme y* office of a translatoure, I was the more lothe to medle with this worke. Notwithstondynge whan I cosydered how greate pytie it was that we shulde wante it so longe, q called to my remembraunce y* adnersite of them, which were not onely of rype knowlege, but wolde also with all theyr hertes haue perfourmed y' they beganne, yf they had not had impediment: considerynge (I saye) that by reason of theyr aduersyte it coulde not so soone haue bene broughte to an ende, as oure most prosperous nacyon wolde fayne haue had it: these and other reasonable causes consydered, I was the more bolde to take it in hande. And to helpe me herin, I haue had sondrye translacions, not onely in latyn, but also of the Douche interpreters : whom (because of theyr synguler gyftes q speciall diligence in the Bible) I haue ben the more glad to folowe for the most parte, accordynge as
Iwas requyred. But to saye the trueth before God, it was nether my laboure ner desyre, to haue this worke put in my hande: neuertheles it greued me y' other nacyos shulde be more plenteously prouyded for with y* scripture in theyr mother tongue, then we: therfore whan I was instantly requyred, though
I coulde not do so well as I wolde, I thought it yet my dewtye to do my best, and that with a good wyll. where as some men thynke now y° many trans- lacyons make diuisyon in y* fayth and in the people of God, y' is not so: for it was neuer better with the congregacion of god, then whan euery church allmost had y* Byble of a sondrye traslacion. Amonge the
Grekes had not Origen a specyall translacyon ? Had not Vulgarius one peculyar, ¢ lykewyse Chrysostom ?
Besyde the seuentye interpreters, is there not the trans- lacyon of Aquila, of Theodotio, of Symachus, and of sondrye other? Agayne amonge the Latyn men, thou findest y' euery one allmost vsed a specyall

q sondrye translacyon: for in so moch as euery bys- shoppe had the knowlege of y* tongues, he gaue his diligence to haue the Byble of his awne translacion.
The doctours, as Hireneus, Cyprianus, Tertullian, 
S. Iherom, S. Augustine, Hylarius ¢ S. Ambrose vpon dyuerse places of the scripture, reade not y* texte all alyke.

Therfore oughte it not to be taken as euel, y* soch men as haue vnderstondynge now in oure tyme, exer- cyse them selues in y* tongues, t geue their diligence to translate ont of one language in to another. Yee we ought ratherto geue god hye thankes therfore, which thorow his sprete stereth vp mes myndes, so to exercise them selues therin. wolde god it had neuer bene left of after y* tyme of S. Augustine, then shulde we neuer haue come in to soch blindnes q ignorauce, in to soch erroures q delusyons. For as soone as the Byble was cast asyde, & nomore put in exercyse, then beganne euery one of his awne heade to wryte what so euer came in to his brayne and y' semed to be good in his awne eyes: and so grewe y* darknes of més tradicios. And this same is y* cause y! we haue had so many wryters, which seldome made mécyon of y* scripture of the Byble: q though they some tyme aleged it, yet was it done so farre out of season
& so wyde from y* purpose, that a ma maye well per- ceaue, how that they neuer sawe the oryginall.

Seynge then y' this diligent exercyse of trans- latynge doth so moch good q edifyeth in other lan- guages, why shulde it do euell in oures? Doutles lyke as all nacyons in y* dyuersite of speaches maye knowe one God in the vnyte of faith, and be one in loue: euen so maye dyuerse translacyons vnderstonde one another, v that in the head articles qt grounde of oure most blessed faith, though they vse sondrye wordes. wherfore me thynke we haue greate occasyon to geue thankes vnto God, that he hath opened vnto his church the gyfte of interpretacyon q of prynt- yng,and that there are now at this tyme so many, which with soch diligece and faithfulnes interprete y* scripture to the honoure of god and edifyenge of

To the Reader, 

his people, where as (lyke as whan many are shut- ynge together) euery one doth his best to be nyest the marke. And though they can not all attayne therto, yet shuteth one nyer then another, and hytteth it better then another, yee one can do it better thé another. who is now then so vnreasonable, so despytefull, or enuyous, as to abhorre him y* doth all his diligence to hytte y* prycke, and to shute nyest it, though he mysse q come not nyest the mark ?
Ought not soch one rather to be commeded, and to be helped forwarde, that he maye exercyse himselfe the more therin ?

For the which cause (acordyng as I was desyred) 
I toke the more vpon me to set forth this speciall translacyon, not as a checker, not as a reprouer, or despyser of other mens translacyons (for amonge many as yet J haue founde none without occasyon of greate thankesgeuynge vnio god) but lowly ¢ fayth- fully haue I folowed myne interpreters, t that vnder correccyon. And though I haue fayled eny where
(as there is noman but he mysseth in some thynge) loue shall constyrre all to y* best without eny peruerse iudgment. There is noman lyuynge y' can se all thynges, nether hath god geuen eny man to knowe euery thynge. One seyth more clearly then another, one hath more vnderstondyng then another, one can vtter a thynge better then another, but noman ought to enuye, or dispyse another. He that can do better then another, shulde not set him at naught y* vnder- stondeth lesse: Yee he that hath y* more vnderstond- yng, ought to remembre that the same gyfte is not his but Gods, and y* God hath geue it him to teach
& enfourme the ignoraunt. Yf thou hast knowlege therfore to iudge where eny faute is made, I doute not but thou wilt helpe to amende it, yf loue be ioyned with thy knowlege. Howbeit wherin so euer
I can perceaue by my selfe, or by the informacyon of other, that I haue fayled (as it is no wonder) I shall now by the helpe of God ouerloke it better q amende it.

Now wil I exhorte the (who so euer thou be yt readest scripture) yf thou fynde oughte therin y‘ thou vnderstondest not, or that apeareth to be repugnaunt, geue no temerarious ner haystye iudgmet therof: but ascrybe it to thyne awne ignoraunce, not to the scryp- ture, thynke y* thou vnderstondest it not, or y* it hath some other meanynge, or y' it is happlye onersene of y“ interpreters, or wronge prynted. Agayne, it shall greately helpe y* to vnderstonde scripture, yf thou marke not onely what is spoken or wrytten, but of

whom, ¢ vnto whom, with what wordes, at what tyme, where, to what intent, with what circumstaunce, 'con- syderynge what goeth before, and what foloweth after,
For there be some thynges which are done q wrytte, to the intente y* we shulde do lykewyse: as whan
Abraham beleueth God, is obedient vnto his worde, q defendeth Loth his kynsman from violent wronge.
There be some thynges also which are wrytté, to the intente y* we shulde eschue soch lyke. As whan Dauid lyeth with Vrias wyfe, t causeth him to be slayne.
Therfore (I saye) whan thou readest scripture, be wyse { circumspecte: q whan thou commest to soch straunge maners of speakynge q darke sentences, to soch parables q similitudes, to soch dreames or vysions as are hyd from thy vnderstondynge, comytte them vnto God or to the gyfte of his holy sprete in them y‘ are better lerned then thou.

As for the commendacyon of Gods holy scripture, 
I wolde fayne magnifye it as it is worthy, but I am farre vnsufficiet therto. q therfore I thoughte it better for me to holde my tonge, then with few wordes to prayse or commede it: exhortynge y* (most deare reader) so to loue it, so to cleue vnto it, © so to folowe it in thy daylye conuersacyon, y' other men seynge thy good workes q the frutes of y* holy goost in the, maye prayse the father of heauen, q geue his worde a good reporte: for to lyue after the lawe of
God, q to leade a vertuous conuersacyon, is the great- est prayse y* thou canst geue vnto his doctryne.

But as touchynge the euell reporte and disprayse that the good worde of God hath by the corrupte and euell conuersacyon of some, y* daylye heare it and professe it outwardly with theyr mouthes, I exhorte y° (most deare reader) let not y* offende the ner withdrawe thy mynde fro the loue of y* trueth, nether moue y* to be partaker in lyke vnthankfulnes : but seynge y* lighte is come in to the worlde, loue no- more the workes of darknes, receaue not the grace of god in vayne. Call to thy remembraunce how lou- ynge q merciful] God is vnto the, how kyndly and fatherly he helpeth the in all trouble, teacheth thyne ignoraunce, healeth the in all thy sycknesse, for- geueth the all thy synnes, fedeth y*, geueth the drynke, helpeth y* out of preson, norysheth the in straunge countrees, careth for the, q seyeth y* thou wante nothynge. Call this to mynde (I saye) q that earnestly, and consydre how thou hast receaned of god all these benefites (yee and many mo then thou canst desyre) how thou art bounde lykewise to shewe

A Prologe. 

thy selfe vnto thy neghboure as larre as thou canst, to teach him yf he be ignoraunt, to helpe him in all his trouble, to heale his sycknes, to forgene him his offences, and that hartely, to fede him, to cherish him, to care for him, and to se y* he wante nothyng.
And on this behalfe I beseke the (thou y' hast y* ryches of this worlde, and louest God with thy harte) to lyfte vp thyne eyes, and se how greate a multitude of poore people renue thorow euery towne: haue pitie on thyne awne flesh, helpe them with a good harte, and do with thy councell all that euer thou canst, that this vnshamefast beggynge maye be put downe, that these ydle folkes maye be set to laboure, q that soch as are not able to get theyr lyuynge, maye be pro- uyded for. At the leest thou y* art of councell with soch as are in auctoryte, geue them some occasyon to cast theyr heades together, and to make pronysyon for the poore. Put the in remembrannuce of those noble cityes in other countrees, that by the auctoryte of theyr prynces haue so rychely ad well prouided for theyr poore people, to the greate shame q des- honestye of vs, yf we lykewyse receauynge y* worde of God, shewe not soch lyke frutes therof. wolde
God y' those men (whose office is to maynteyne y* comon welth) were as diligent in this cause as they are in other. Let vs bewarre by tymes, for after ynthankfulnes there foloweth ener a plage: the mer- cyful hande of God be with vs, q defende vs that we be not partakers therof.

Go to now (most deare reader) t syt the downe at the Lordes fete and reade his wordes, € (^as
Moses teacheth the Iewes) take them in to theyr herte, q let thy talkynge q communicacion be of them whan thou syttest in thyne house, or goest by y* waye, whan thon lyest downe, t whan thou ryseth vp. And aboue all thynges fasshyon thy lyfe, & co- uersacion acordyng to the doctryne of the holy goost therin, that thou mayest be partaker of y* good pro- myses of god in the Byble, q be heyre of his blessynge in Christ. In whom yf thou put thy trust, x be an vnfayned reader or hearer of hys worde with thy hert, thou shalt fynde swetenesse theryn, Œ spye woderous thynges, to thy vnderstondynge, to the auoydynge of all sedicyous sectes, to the abhorrynge of thy olde synfull lyfe, q to the stablyshynge of thy godly conuersacyon.

In the first boke of Moses (called Genesis) thon 

? Deute, 6. a. 

mayest lerne to knowe the almightye power of god in creatynge all of naught, his infinite wysdome in ordryng the same, his ryghteousnes in punyshynge y* vngodly, his loue q fatherly mercy in comfortynge the righteous with his promes. tc.

In the seconde boke (called Exodus) we se the myghtye arme of god, in delyuerynge his people from so greate bondage out of Egypte, and what prouysyon he maketh for them in the wildernes, how he teacheth them with his wholsome worde and how the Taberna- cle was made and set vp.

In the thyrde boke (called Leuiticus) is declared what sacrifices the prestes t Leuites vsed, and what theyr office q ministracyon was.

In the fourth boke (called Numerus) is declared how the people are nombred and mustred, how the captaynes are chosen after y* trybes ¢ kynreds, how they wete forth to y* battayll, how they pitched theyr tentes, q how they brake vp.

The fyfth boke (called Deuteronomium) sheweth how that Moses now beynge olde, rehearseth the lawe of god vnto y* people, putteth them in remembraunce agayne of all the wonders q benefites that god had shewed for them, and exhorteth them earnestly to loue y* Lorde theyr god, to cleue vnto him, to put their trust in him and to herken vnto his voyce.

After the death of Moses doth Iosue brynge the people in to the lode of promes where God doth wonderous thynges for his people by Iosue, which distributeth y* londe vnto them, vnto euery trybe theyr possession. But in theyr wealth they forgat the goodnes of God, so that oft tymes he gaue the ouer in to the hande of theyr enemies. Neuerthe- les whan so euer they called faithfully vpon him, and conuerted, he delyuered them agayne, as the boke of
Iudges declareth. 

In the bokes of the kynges, is descrybed the regi- ment of good and euell prynces, and how the decaye of all nacions commeth by enel kynges. For in leroboam thou seyst what myschefe, what ydolatrye
& soch like abhominacyon foloweth, wha the kynge is a maynteyner of false doctryne, ad causeth the people to synne agaynst God, which fallinge awaye from gods worde, increased so sore amonge them, that it was the cause of all theyr sorowe and misery,
& the very occasion why Israel first and then Inda, were caryed awaye in to captyuite. *Agayne, in Fosa-

62 Bar 17b? 

To the Reader. 

phat, in Ezechias and in Iosias thou seyst the nature ofavertuous kynge. He putteth downe the houses of ydolatrye, seyth that his prestes teach nothynge but y* lawe of God, comaundeth his lordes to go with them, and to se that they teach the people. In these kynges (I saye) thou seyst the codicyon of a true defender of y* fayth, for he spareth nether cost ner laboure, to manteyne the lawes of God, to seke the welth t prosperite of his people, and to rote out the wicked. And where soch a prince is, thou seyst agayne, how God defendeth him and his people, though he haue neuer so many enemyes. Thus wente it with the in the olde tyme, and euen after y* same maner goeth it now with vs: God be praysed therfore, ad graunte vs of his fatherly mercy, that we be not vnthankfull: lest where he now geueth vs a losaphat, an Ezechias, yee a very Iosias, he sende vs a Pharao, a Ieroboam, or an Achab.

In the two first bokes of Esdras q in Hester thou seyst the delyueraunce of the people, which though they were but fewe, yet is it vnto vs all a speciall co- forte, for so moch as God is not forgetfull of his promes, but bryngeth them out of captiuite, acord- ynge as he had tolde them hefore.

In the boke of Iob we lerne comforte and pacience, in that God not onely punysheth the wicked, but proueth q tryeth the iust and righteous (howbeit there is noman innocent in his sighte) by dyuerse troubles in this lyfe, declaryng therby, y* they are not his bastardes, but his deare sonnes, and that he loueth them.

In the Psalmes we lerne how to resorte onely vnto 
God in all oure troubles, to seke helpe at him, to call onely vpon him, to satle oure myndes by paciece, t how we ought in prosperite to be thankfull vnto him.

The Prouerbes and the Preacher of Salomon teach vs wysdome, to knowe God, oure owne selues, and the worlde, and how vayne all thynges are, saue onely to cleue vnto God.

As for the doctryne of the Prophetes, what is it els, but an earnest exhortacion to eschue synne, q to turnc vnto God? a faythfull promes of the mercy 4d par- don of God, vnto all them y* turne vnto him, and a threatenyng of his wrath to the vngodly ? sauynge that here and there they prophecye also manifestly of
Christ, of y* expulsion of the Lewes, and callynge of the Heythen.

Thus moch thought I to speake of y* olde Testa- ment, wherin almyghtie God openeth vuto vs his

myghtye power, his wysdome, his louynge mercy q righteousnesse ; for the which cause it oughte of no man to be abhorred, despysed, or lyghtly regarded, as though it were an olde scripture y' nothyng beloged vnto vs, or y* now were to be refused. For it is Gods true scripture Œ testimony, which the Lorde Iesus
“commaundeth the Iewes to search. who so euer be- leueth not the scripture, beleueth not Christ, and who so refuseth it, refuseth God also.

The New Testament or Gospell, is a manyfest and cleare testymony of Christ how God perfourmeth his ooth and promes made in the olde Testament, how the
New is declared and included in the Olde, and the 
Olde fulfylled and verifyed in the New. 

Now where as the most famous interpreters of all geue sondrye iudgmentes of the texte (so farre as it is done by y* sprete of knowlege in the holy goost) me thynke noman shulde be offended there at, for they referre theyr doinges in mekenes to the sprete of trueth in the congregacyon of god: q sure I am, that there commeth more knowlege and vnderstondinge of the scripture by theyr sondrie translacyons, then by all the gloses of oure sophisticall doctours. For that one interpreteth somthynge obscurely in one place, the same translateth another (or els he him selfe) more manifestly by a more playne vocable of the same meanyng in another place. Be not thou offended therfore (good Reader) though one call a serybe, that another calleth a lawyer: or elders, that another calleth father q mother: or repentaunce, that another calleth pennaunce or amendment. For yf thou be not disceaued by mens tradicios, thou shalt fynde no- more dyuersite betwene these termes then betwene foure pens and a grote. And this maner haue I vsed in my translacyon, callyng it in some place pen- naunce, that in another place I call repentaunce, and that not onely because the interpreters haue done so before me, but that the aduersaries of the trueth maye se, how that we abhorre not this worde pe- naunce (as they vntruly reporte of vs) no more then the interpreters of latyn abhorre penitere, whan they reade resipiscere. Onely our hertes desyre vnto God, is, that his people be not blynded iu theyr vnder- stondyng, lest they beleue pennaunce to be ought saue a very repetaunce, amedment, or conuersyon vuto
God, and to be an vufayned new creature iu Christ, and to lyue acordyng to his lawe. For els shall they

Q Prologe. 

fal in to the olde blasphemy of Christes bloude, and beleue, that they thé selues are able to make satis- faccion vnto God for theyr awne synnes, from the which erroure god of his mercy and pleteous goodnes preserue all his. ;

Now to conclude: for so moch as all the scripture is wrytten for thy doctryne Œœ ensample, it shalbe necessary for the, to take holde vpon it, whyle it is offred the, yee and with ten handes thankfully to receaue it. And though it be not worthely ministred vnto the in this translacyon (by reason of my rudnes)
Yet yf thou be feruet in thy prayer, God shal not onely sende it the in a better shappe, by the mynis- tracyon of other that beganne it afore, but shall also moue the hertes of them, which as yet medled not withall, to take it in hande, and to bestowe the gifte of theyr vnderstondynge theron, as well in oure language as other famous interpreters do in other languages.
And I praye God, that thorow my poore ministracyon here in, I maye geue them that can do better, some occasyon so to do: exhortyng the (most deare reader) in the meane whyle on Gods behalfe, yf thou be a heade, a Judge, or ruler of y* people, that thou ^ let not the boke of this lawe departe out of thy mouth, but exercise thyselfe therin both daye and nyghte, and be euer readyng in it as longe as thou lyuest: that thou mayest lerne to feare the Lorde thy God, t not to turne asyde from the commaundement, ne- ther to the right hande ner to the lefte: lest thou be a knower of personnes in iudgmet, ^and wrest the righte of the straunger, of the fatherles or of the wedowe, aud so y^ curse to come vpon the. But what office so euer thou hast ° wayte vpon it, and execute it, to the mayntenaunce of peace, to the welth of thy people, defendynge the lawes of God, and the louers therof, and to the destruccyon of the wicked.

d Yf thou be a preacher, and hast the ouersighte of the flocke of Christ, awake and fede Christes shepe with a good herte, œ spare no laboure to do them good, seke not thy selfe, t bewarre of fylthy lucre, but “he vnto y* flocke an ensample, in y* worde, in couersacyon, in loue, in feruentnes of y* sprete, and be euer readynge, exhortynge, q teachynge in Gods worde, that the people of God renne not vnto other doctrynes and lest thou thy selfe (whan thou shuldest teach other) be founde ignoraunt therin. And rather

è Deut. 94. © Roma. 12. b. 
* 1 Tim. 4. b. Ti.2.a. 

Deute. 17. d. 
4 Actu. 20. d. 1Petr.5. a. 

a Tos. 1. a. 
1Pet.4.b. 

then thou woldest teach the people eny other thynge then Gods worde take the boke in thyne hande, q reade the wordes eue as they stonde therin (for it is no shame so to do, it is more shame to make a lye)
This I saye for soch, as are not yet experte in the 
Scripture, for I reproue no preachyng without the boke as longe as they saye the trueth.

Yf thou be a man that hast wyfe and childre, first floue thy wyfe, acordynge to the ensample of the loue, wherwith Christ loued the cogregacion, and remembre that so doynge, thou louest euen thyselfe : yf thou hate her, thou hatest thine awne flesh: yf thou cherishe her and make moch of her, thou cheri- sest t makest moch of thyselfe, for she is bone of thy bones, q flesh of thy flesh. And who so euer thou be that hast children, 5bryng them vp in the nurtour and informacion of the Lorde. And yf thou be ignoraunt, or art otherwyse occupied laufully that thou canst not teach them thy selfe, then be euen as diligent to seke a good master for thy childré, as thou wast to seke a mother to beare them: for there lieth as great weight in the one as in y* other. Yee better it were for the to be vnborne, then not to feare God, or to be euel brought vp. which thynge (I meane bryngynge vp well of children) yf it be diligently loked to, it is the vpholdinge of all comon welthes : and the negligence of the same, the very decaye of all realmes.

Fynally, who so euer thou be, take these wordes of scripture in to thy herte, and be not onely an out- warde hearer, but a doer therafter, and practyse thy- selfe therin: that thou mayest fele in thine hert, the swete promyses therof for thy consolacion in all
‘trouble, t for the sure stablyshinge of thy hope in 
Christ, and haue euer an eye to y* wordes of serip- ture, that yf thou be a teacher of other thou mayest be within the boundes of the trueth, or at the leest though thou be but an hearer or reader of another mans doynges, thou mayest yet haue knowlege to iudge all spretes, and be fre from euery erroure, to the vtter destruccion of all sedicious sectes q straunge doctrynes, that the holy scrypture maye haue fre passage, and he had in reputacion, to the worshippe of the author
Itherof, which is euen God himselfe: to whom for his most blessed worde be glory q domynion now q euer.
Amen. 

J Eple. 3. c. 8 Ephe. 6. a. 

| 

Abbreuiacion. Boke. Chapters. 
Gen. Genesis, the fyrst boke of Moses, ll 
Exo. Exodus, the seconde boke of Moses. xl. 
Leui. Leuiticus, the thyrde boke of Moses. xxvii. 
Num. Numerus, the fourthe boke of Moses. xxxvi. 
Deut. Deuteronomion,thefyfth boke of Moses. xxxiii. 

T The bokes of the seconde parte. 

Abbreulacion. Boke. Chapters. 
Ios. Tosue, the boke of Iosua. xxiiii. 
Tud. Iudicum, the boke of the Iudges. xxi. 
Ruth. Ruth, the boke of Ruth. iii. 

I. Reg. Regum, the fyrst boke ofthe kynges. xxxi. 
II. Reg. Regum, theseconde boke of the kynges. xxiii. 
HI. Reg. Regum, the thyrde boke of the kynges. xxii. 

The bokes of the hole Byble, 

HOW THEY ARE NAMED IN ENGLYSH AND LATYN, HOW LONGE THEY ARE WRYTTEN IN THE 
ALLEGACIONS, AND HOW MANY CHAPTERS EUERY BOKE HATH. 

T The bokes of the fprst parte. 

III. Reg. Regum, the fourth boke of the kynges. xxv. 

I. Par. Paralipomenon, y' I. boke of y'Cronicles xxx. 
II. Par. —Paralipomenon,y'II.bokeof y'Cronicles xxxvi. 
I. Esd. Esdre, the fyrst boke of Esdras. x 
II. Esd. ^ Esdre,the seconde boke of Esdras. xiii. 
Hester. Hester, the boke of Hester. x. 
T The bokes of the thyrve parte. 

Abbreulacion. Boke. Chapters 
Tob. Tob, the boke of Iob. xlii. 
Psal. Psalterium, the Psalter. cl. 
Pro. Prouerbia, the prouerbes of Salomon. xxxi. 
Eccle. Ecclesiastes, the preacher of Salomon. xii. 
Cant. Cantica Canticorü, Salomons balettes. viii. 

T The Prophetes. 

Abbreuiacion. Boke. Chapters. 
Esa. Esaias, Esay the prophete. Ixvi. 
Tere. Teremias, Ieremy the prophete. lii. 
Tren. Treni, the lamentacions of Ieremy. — v. 
Bar. Baruc, Baruc the prophete. vi. 
Eze Ezechiel, Ezechiel the prophete. xlviii. 
Dan Daniel, Daniel the prophete. xii. 
Ose Oseas, Oseas tlie prophete. xiii. 
Toel. Ioel, Ioel the prophete. iii. 
Amo. Amos, Amos the prophete. ix. 
Abd. Abdias, Abdy tbe prophete. i. 
Ion. Ionas, Ionas the prophete. iii. 
Mich. Micheas, Micheas the prophete. vii. 
Na. Naum, Naum the prophete. iii. 
Aba. Abacue, Abacuc the prophete. iii. 
Soph. Sophonias, Sophony the prophete. iii. 
Agg. Aggeus, Aggeus the prophete. ii. 
Zach. Zacharias, Zachary the prophete. xiii. 
Mal. Malachias, Malachy the prophete. iii. 

The Apocrppha. 

Abbreuiacion. Boke. Chapters 
ITI. Esdre. Esdre, the thyrde boke of Esdras. EH 
IIII.Esdre. Esdre. the fourth boke of Esdras. xvi. 
Tob. Tobias. the boke of Tobias. xiiii. 
Iudith. Iudith. the boke of Iudith. xvi. 

Certayne Chapiters of Hester. vi. 
Sap. Sapientia. the boke of wysdome. xix. 
Eccli. Ecclesiasticus, Iesus Syrac. li. 
Sus. Susanna, the storye of Susanna. i 
Bel. Bel, the storye of Bell. i. 
I. Mac. Machabeorum, the fyrst boke of the 

Mach. xvi. 

IL. Mac. — Machabeorü,the secóde bokeoftheMac. xv. 

Abbreniacion. 

Math. 
Mar. 
Luc. 
Ioh. 
Act. 
Rom. 
I. Cor. 
II. Cor. 
Gal. 
Ephe. 
Phil. 
Col. 

I. Tess. 
II. Tess. 

The bokes of the hole 3pble. 

The new Testament, 

Boke. 
Mathew the Euangelist. 
Marke the Euangelist. 
Luke the Evangelist. 
{hon the Euangelist. 
The Actes of the Apostles. 
The Epistle to the Romaynes. 
The fyrst epistle to the Corinthians. 

The seconde epistle to the Corinthians. 

The epistle to the Galathians. 
The Epistle to the Ephesians. 
The epistle to the Philippians. 
The epistle to the Collossians. 
The first Epistle to the Tessalonians. 

Chapters. 

xxviii. 

nii. 
We 

Theseconde Epistle to the Tessalonians, iii. 

Abbreulacion. 
I. Timo. 
II. Tim. 
Tit. 
Phile. 

I. Pe 
II. Pe 

I. Ioh. 
II. Ioh. 
III. Ioh. 
Heb. 
Tac. 
Iud. 
Apo. 

Boke: 

The fyrst Epistle vnto Timothy. 

The seconde Epistle vnto Timothy. 

The epistle vnto Tytus. 

The epistle vnto Philemon. 
The fyrst epistle of S. Peter. 
The seconde epistle of S. Peter. 
The fyrst epistle of S. Ihon. 
The seconde epistle of S. Ihon. 
The thirde epistle of S. Ihon. 
The epistle vnto the Hebrues. 
The epistle of S. lames. 

The epistle of S. Iude. 

The Reuelacion of S. Ihon. 

er MÀ 

called Genesis. 

Chat this boke contepneth. 

man. 

Chap. II. 

The rest of the seuenth daye. 

lege of good q euell is forbydde ac. creation of Eua.

The tre of know- 
Of the 

Chap. III. 
The serpent deceaueth the woman : they trans- gresse and are dryuen out of paradyse. ,

Chap. HII. 

Abels offerynge pleaseth God: therfore doth his brother Cayn hate hym: murthureth hym : q is cursed. Of the chyldren of Cayn.

Chap. V. 
Of the generacion, age q death of Ada: Seth and his sonnes vnto Noe.

Chap. I. 
The creacion of the worlde in sixe dayes, and of 
Chap. VI 
The occasion of the floude: and of the pre- parynge of the arcke.
Chap. VII. 

Noe with his housholde is preserued in the arcke: cee as all the worlde perisheth thorowe the oude.

Chap. VIII. 
The floude abateth. Noe goeth out of arcke. tc. 

Che first boke of Moses, 

Chap. IX. 

God blesseth Noe and his sonnes : forbyddeth to eate the bloude of beestes, and to shed mas bloude: maketh a conuenaunt (and geueth the raynbowe for a token of the same) that he wyll destroye the worlde no more by water.
Noe is dronken. Ham vncouereth hym, and getteth his curse.

Chap. X. æ 

The increace of mas generacio by Noes thre sonnes: which go abrode and begynne to buylde

Chap. XI. 

The buyldynge of the towre of Babel is hyndreth thorowe the confusyon’ of the tonges. The generacion of Sem vntyll Abram: whiche goeth with Loth vnto Haran.

Chap. XII. 

Abram goeth with Loth into a straunge londe at the worde of the Lord: which appeareth vnto hym in Canaan: and promiseth to geue the same londe vnto his sede: Afterwarde goeth
Abram into Egypte and fayneth Saray to be his syster.

Chap. XIII. 
Abram and Loth departe agayne out of Egypte: 

i and haue so many cattell that they can not dwell together. Abram receaueth the HE

ynge and promes. | 

4 

The i. boke of Moses. 

Chap. XIII. 

Loth is taken presoner : Abram deliuereth hym : 
Melchisedech fedeth Abram at his returnynge : 
Abram geueth hym tythes of the spoyles : and holdeth nothinge of the kynge of Sodoms goodes.

Chap. XV. 

God conforteth Abram and promyseth hym sede : 
He beleueth and is iustified. 
Chap. XVI. 

Sarai geueth Abram leue to take hyr mayde whiche beareth hym Ismaell.

Chap. XVII. 

The couenaunt of cireumcisyon. Cc. 

Chap. XVIII. 
Thre mé appeare vnto Abraha to whom the de- struction of Sodome is declared.

Chap. XIX. 

Loth receaueth the two angels: the men of 
Sodome go aboute to abuse them: Loth is delyuered: Sodome is destroyed : Loths wyfe is turned to a pyler of salt: and his doughters beare chyldren vnto hym.

Chap. XX. 
Abraham departeth as a straunger in to Gerar : and fayneth Sarai to be his syster: the kynge taketh her and geueth hym her agayne.

Chap. XXI. 

The byrth of Isaac: Agar is put out with hyr sonne. Abraham and Abimelech are sworne frendes.

Chap. XXII. 

God tryeth Abraham whiche at his word wolde offre his owne sonne. The promes is confirmed vnto hym with an ooth.

Chap. XXIII. 

The death of Sara: for whom Abraham byeth a pece of londe to burye her in.

Chap. XXIII. 

who Isaac taketh to wyfe, 

Abraham wyll haue his sonne to mary in his owne kynred: the seruaunt bryngeth Rebecca :

Chap. XXV. 

Abraham begetteth mo chyldren by another wyfe : geueth his good vnto Isaac and dyeth.
Isaac begynneth to growe: Esau selleth his byrth righte.

Chap. XXVI. 

Isaac goeth iuto Gerar: fayneth Rebecca to be his syster: increasseth in ryches: The Philis- tines stoppe his welles. Abimelech q he are sworne frendes.

Chap. XXVII. 

Iacob is blessed before Esau: and Esau threat- eneth hym: but he flyeth into Haram to
Laban his mothers brother. 

Chap. XXVIII. 

Isaac sendeth Iacob awaye to mary amonge 
Labans doughters, lacob seyth a vision, God confirmeth hym the promes madevnto Abraha : wher vpon Jacob maketh a vowe.

Chap. XXIX. 

Iacob geueth Labans shepe to dryuke : serueth seuen yeare for Rachell: Lea is geuen hym: t yet serueth he seuen yeare mo for Rachell.

Chap. XXX. 

Rachel geueth Iacob hyr mayden and so doeth 
Lea: they beare hym chyldren : his reward is appoynted with a condicion: wherby he is made ryche.

Chap. XXXI. 

Iacob goeth home ward. Rachell stealeth hyr fathers ymages. Laban ouertaketh them and fyndeth not his ymages : they sweare together: the angell meteth Iacob.

Chap. XXXII. 

Iacob sendeth presentes vnto Esau : Putteth God in remenibraunce of his promes: and wresteleth with the angell : whiche chaungeth his name and blesseth hym.

Chap. XXXIII. 

Iacob and Esau are agreed. tc 

Chap. XXXIII. 

Dyna lacobs doughter is foreed by Sychem: wherof there commeth great bloud sheddynge.

The i. boke of Moses. 

Chap. XXXV 

Rachell dyeth at the byrth of Beniamin. Ruben lyeth with his fathers concubyne.

Chap. XXXVI. 

Of the princes that came of Esau: and how 
Esau departeth from his brother. 

Chap. XXXVII. 
Ioseph is hated of his brethren : and solde in to 
Egypte. 
Chap. XXXVIII. 

Iuda lyeth with his doughter in lawe which beareth hym two sonnes.

Chap. XXXIX. 

loseph is beloned : q because he wyll not con- sente to the inordinate desyre of his mastresse, he is put in pryson.

Chap. XL. 

loseph expoudeth the dreames of the two pre- soners.

Chap. XLI. 
Ioseph declareth Pharaos dreame : and is made a 
Lorde of Egypte. The derth begynneth. 

Chap. XLII. 

Iosephs brethren come in to Egypte to bye corne: and are troubled of hym.

Chap. XLIII. 

They come agayne for corne: brynge Ben-Iamyn with them : and are put to more trouble.

Chap. XLIII. 

As they go home he causeth thé be brought agayne: and put to more feare.

Chap. XLV. 

loseph vttereth hym selfe to his brethren : and sendeth for his father.

Chap. XLVI. 

lacob commeth in to Egypte with all his people : 
Ioseph receaueth hym. 

Chap. XLVII. 

Pharao geueth them the londe of Gosen: the derth is great, in Egypte. ac.

Chap. XLVII. 
Iacob is sycke : q blesseth Tosephs sonnes. 

Chap. XLIX. 

Iacob before his death telleth his sonnes what shall happen vnto them, and dyeth

Chap. L. loseph burieth his father: and chargeth his brethren concernynge his bones: and dyeth in
Egypte. 

The first boke of Moses, called Genesis.

The first Chapter. 

a T. y begynnynge God created heauen q 

earth: and y earth was voyde and emptie, and darcknes was vpon the depe, v Y sprete of God moued vpo the water.

And God sayde: let there be light, ¢ there was light. And God sawe the light that it was good. Then God deuyded $ light from the darcknes, and called the light, Daye: and the darcknes, Night. Then of the euenynge and mornynge was made the first daye.

And God sayde: let there be a. firmament betwene the waters, and let it deuyde y waters asunder. ‘Then God made y firmamét, and parted the waters vnder the firmamét, from the waters aboue the firmament: And so it came to passe. And God called y firmament,
Heauen. Then of the euenyuge a mornynge was made the seconde daye.

^ And God sayde: let the waters vnder heauen gather thé selues vnto one place, y the drye londe maye appeare. And so it came to passe. And God called y drye londe, Earth: and the gatheringe together of waters called he, $ See. And God sawe y it was good.

And God sayde: let y earth bringe forth grene grasse and herbe, that beareth sede: q frutefull trees, that maye beare frute, euery one after his kynde, hauynge their owne sede in them selues vpon the earth. And so it came to passe. And the earth brought forth grene grasse and herbe, y beareth sede euery one after his kynde, q trees bearinge frute, q hauynge their owne sede in them selues, euery one after his kynde. And God sawe that it was good. Then of the euenynge x mornynge was made the thirde daye.

a Iob 26. b. Pro. 8. c. 

And God sayde: let there be lightes in y firmament of heauen, to deuyde the daye fro the night, that they maye be vnto tokés, seasons, dayes, and yeares. And let them be lightes in y firmament of heauen, to shyne vpon the earth: And so it came to passe.
And God made two greate lightes: one greater light to rule the daye, and a lesse light to rule the night, and (he made) starres also. And God set them in the firmament of heauen, y they might shyne vpó earth, and to rule the daye and the night, and to deuyde the light from darcknes. And God sawe that it was good. Then of the euenynge and mornynge was made the fourth daye.

? And God sayde: let the waters brynge forth creatures that moue and haue life, q foules for to flye aboue the earth vnder the firmamét of heauen. And God created greate whalles, and all maner of creatures that lyue and moue, which the waters brought forth euery one after his kynde: and all maner of

|fethered foules, euery one after his kynde. 

And God sawe that it was good, and blessed 

ithem, sayenge: Growe, and multiplie, and 

fyll the waters of the sees, and let the foules 

| multiplie vpon the earth. Then of the euen- 

ynge and mornynge was made the fifth daye. 

And God sayde: let $ earth brynge forth lyuynge soules, euery one after his kynde: catell, wormes q what as hath life vpon earth, euery one after his kynde. And so it came to passe. And God made y beastes of the earth euery one after his kynde, and catell after their kynde, and all maner wormes of the earth after their kynde. And God sawe that it was good.

And God sayde: let vs make man in oure|33 

^ 4 Esd. 6. c. 

Chap, fj. similitude after oure licknesse, that he maye haue rule ouer the fysh of the see, aud ouer the foules vnder $ heauen, and ouer catell, and ouer all the earth, and ouer all wormes that crepe on $ earth. “And God created man after his k after y licknesse of
God created he him, male q female created he them.

And God blessed them, and sayde vnto them: ^Growe, and multiplie, and fyll the earth, and subdue it, « haue domynion ouer the fish of the see, and ouer the foules of the ayre, and ouer all the beastes that crepe vpo the earth.

* And God sayde: lo, I haue geuen you all maner herbes that beare sede vpon the whole earth, and all maner frutefull trees that beare sede, to be meate for you. And to all beastes of the earth, and to all foules vnder the heauen, and to euery worme that hath life
(vpon earth) all maner grene herbes to eate. 
And so it came to passe. "And God behelde all y he had made, and lo, they were exceed- inge good. "Then of the euenynge and morn- ynge was made the sixte day.

The ij. Chapter. a HUS was heaué and earth fynished with all their hoost, and thus in the seuenth daye God ended his worke, which he had made, q rested in the seuenth daye from all his workes which he had made: And blessed the seuenth daye, q sanctified it, be- cause y in it he rested from all his workes, which God created and made.

These are the generacions of heaué and earth whan they were created, in the tyme whan the LORDE God made heauen and earth: before there was eny twygg vpon earth, and or euer there grew eny grene herbe vpon the felde. For the LORDE God had yet sent no rayne vpon y earth, nether was there eny man to tylle the earth. But there arose a myst from the earth, q watered all the londe. And y LORDE God shope man euc of the moulde of the earth, q brethed in to his face y breth of life. / And so was man made a lyuynge soule.

The LORDE God also planted a gardé of pleasure in Eden, towarde j east, and set

Mar. 10. a. 
* Gene. 9. a. 
* Exo. 90. b. 

1 Cor. 15. 

? Sap. 2. d, and 10, a. Eccli. 17. a. b Iere. 29. b. Sap. 9. a. Psal.8.b. *
Psal. 103.6. 4 Deut. 32. a. Eccli. 59. a. leb. 4. a. f Sap.10. a. Tob. 8. b.

The i. boke of loses, 

fo. b. 

man therin whom he had made. And the 
LORDE God caused to sprynge out of the earth all maner trees, pleasañt to loke vpo, and good to eate: and the tre of life in the myddest of the garden, and the tre of know- lege of good and euell.

And out of Eden there wente a ryuer, to water the garden, and there deuyded it selfe in to foure heade waters. The first is called
Phison, which renneth aboute all the londe of 
Heuyla. ^And there is founde golde, ( the golde of that countre is precious,) and there is founde Bedellion, and the precious stone
* Onix. The second water is called Gihon,|@ which runneth aboute the whole londe of y
Morias. The thirde water is called Hydec- kell, which runneth towarde the east syde of y Assirias. The fourth water is Euphrates.

And the LORDE God toke man, q set him in the pleasaunt garden of Eden, to dresse it q to kepe it. And the LORDE God com- maunded man, sayége: ‘Thou shalt eate of all maner trees in ¥ garden: But of ¥ tre of knowlege of good and euell, shalt thou not eate. For loke in what daye so euer thou eatest therof, thou shalt dye the death.

And the LORDE God sayde: It is not good y mà shulde be alone. I wil make him an helpe,t to beare him cópany. And whan
God the LORDE had made of the earth all maner beastes of the felde, q all maner foules vnder the heaué, he brought them vnto man, to se what he wolde call thé: For as ma called all maner of liuinge soules, so are their names. And man gaue names vnto all maner| B catell, x vnto the foules vnder the heaue, and vnto all maner beastes of ý felde. But vnto man there was founde no helpe, to beare him company.

'Then the LORDE God caused an herde slepe to fall vpon man, and he slepte. And he toke out one of his rybbes, and (in steade therof) he fylled vp y place with flesh. And the LORDE God made a woman,‘ of y rybbe that he toke out of man, and brought her vnto him. Then sayde man: This is once bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.
She shalbe called woman, because she was také of man. ‘For this cause shal a man leaue father and mother, and cleue vnto his wife, q

£ Pro. 3. b. Apo. 2. a. ^ Ecel. 24. a. * Some call it Schoham. i Eccli. 15. c. + Some reade: To stode nexte by bim. Coria. ! Matt. 19. a.

Mar. 10.a. Ephe.5.c. 1 Cor.6.c. Gen.3.b. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

they two shalbe one flesh, And they were both naked, the man and his wife and were not ashamed.

The iij. Chapter 

Bu the serpent was sotyller then all the 

beastes of the felde^ (which y LORDE 
God had made) and sayde vnto ^the woman: 
Yee, hath God sayde in dede: Ye shall not eate of all maner trees in the garden? Then sayde the woman vnto the serpent: We eate of the frute of the trees in the garden: But as for the frute of the tre that is in the myddes of the garden, God hath sayde: Eate not ye of it, and touch it not, lest ye dye.

Then saide the serpent vnto the woman: 
*Tush, ye shall not dye the death. For God doth knowe, that in what daye so euer ye eate of it, youre eyes shalbe opened, and ye shal be as God, and knowe both good and euell.
And the woman sawe that y tre was good to eate of, and lustye vnto the eyes, and a pleasaunt tre t to make wyse, and toke of the frute of it, and ate, and gaue vnto hir hus- bande also therof, and he ate. Then were the eyes of them both opened, and they per- ceaued that they were naked,^ and sowed fygge leaues together, and made them apurns.

And they herde the voyce of the LORDE 
God, which walked in the garden in the coole of the daye. And Adam hyd him self with his wyfe, from the presence of y LORDE
God amonge the trees of the garden. And y 
LORDE God called Adam, and sayde vnto him: Where art thou? And he saide: | herde thy voyce in the garden, and was afrayed, because I am naked, and therfore I hyd my self. And he sayde: who tolde the, that thou art naked? Hast thou not eaten of the tre, wherof I commaunded the, y thou shuldest not eate ?

Then sayde Adam: The woman which thou gauest me (to beare me company) gaue me of the tre, and I ate. And the LORDE
God sayde vnto the woman: wherfore hast thou done this? The woman sayde: the serpent disceaued me so, that I ate.^ ‘Then sayde the LORDE God vnto the serpent:
Because thou hast done this, cursed be thou aboue all catell and aboue all beastes of the

a Eccli. 25.d. ^2 Cor.11.a. *Iere. 14. b. and 23. c. t Some reade: whyle it made wyse, ° Gene. 2. d.

a Apo. 12, c. — * Matt. 4. a. t Col. 2. b. $ Some 

Chap. (ij. felde. Vpon thy bely shalt thou go, q earth shalt thou eate all the dayes of thy life. And
I wyll put enemyte betwene the and the woman, and betwene thy sedef and hir sede.t
'The same shal treade downe thy heade, and thou shalt treade him on the hele.

And vnto the woman he sayde: I will increase thy sorow, whan thou art with childe : with payne shalt thou beare thy childre, and
$ thy lust shal pertayne vnto thy huszbande, and he shal rule the.

And vnto Adam he sayde: For so moch as thou hast herkened vnto the voyce of thy wyfe, and hast eaten of the tre, wherof I commaunded the, sayenge: thou shalt not eate of it. Cursed be y earth for thy sake.
With sorowe shalt thou eate therof, all the dayes of thy life. ‘Thornes and thistles shalt it beare vnto the, and thou shalt eate the herbes of the felde. In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate thy bred, tyll thou be turned agayne vnto earth, whéce thou art take: /for earth thou art, and vnto earth shalt thou be turned agayne.

And Adam called his wyfe Heua, because she is the mother of all lyuynge. And the
LORDE God made Adam q his wyfe gar- mentes of skynnes, q those he put on them.
And the LORDE God sayde: lo, Adam is become as it were one of vs, q knoweth good q euell. But now lest he stretch his hande, and take also of the tre of life, and eate, and lyue for euer. ‘Then the LORDE God put him out of the garden of Eden, to tyll y earth, whéce he was take. And he cast Adam out. And before the garden of Eden he set
Cheruhes, and a naked fyrie swerde, to kepe 
$ waye vnto the tre of life. 

The iij. Chapter. 

OROUER Adam laye with Heua his 
M wyfe, which cóceaued q bare Cain, and sayde, I haue opteyned y man of the
LORDE. And she proceaded forth, a bare his brother Abell. And Abell became a shepherde, but Cain became an huszbande man.

And it fortuned after certaine daies, that 
Cain brought of the frute of the earth, an ofirynge vuto LORDE. And Abell brought

reade: Thou shalt bowe downe thy self before thy bus- bande. f Eccl. 40. b. lob 34. b.

Chap. b. 

also of the firstlinges of his shepe, and of y fat of them. “And the LORDE had respecte vnto Abell and to his offerynge: but vnto
Cain and his offerynge he loked not. Then was Cain exceadinge wroth, and his coun- tenaunce chaunged. And the LORDE sayde vnto Cain: Why art thou angrie? and why doth thy countenaunce chaunge? Is it not so? that yf thou do well, thou shalt receaue it: but and yf thou do euell, thy synne lyeth open in the dore? *Shal he then be subdued vnto the? and wilt thou rule him? And Cain talked with Abell his brother.

And it happened, that whan they were in the felde, Cain arose agaynst Abell his brother, andslewhim. Then sayde the LORDE vnto
Cain: Where is Abell thy brother? He sayde: J can not tell. ^Am I my brothers keper? And he sayde: What hast thou done?
“The voyce of thy brothers bloude crieth vnto me out of the earth. And now shalt thou be cursed vpon the earth, which hath opened hir mouth, and receaued thy brothers bloude of thine hande. Whan thou tyllest ý grounde, she shall henszforth not geue hir power vnto the. ^A vagabunde and a rennagate shalt thou be vpon $ earth. And Cain sayde vnto y LORDE: ‘my synne is greater, then that it maye be forgeuen me. Beholde, thou castest me out this daye from out of y londe, and from thy sight must I hyde my self, and must be a vagabunde and a rennagate vpon y earth.
And thus shal it go with me: that who so fyndeth me, shal slaye me.

But the LORDE sayde thus vnto him: 
/ Who so euer slayeth Cain, it shalbe auenged seuenfolde. And the LORDE put a marck vpon Cain, that no man which founde him, shulde kyll him. So Cain wente out from $ face of the LORDE, and dwelt in the lande
Nod, vpon the east syde of Eden. 

And Cain laye with his wyfe, which con- ceaued and bare Henoch. And he buylded a cite, and called it after the name of his sonne
Henoch. And Henoch begat Irad, Irad begat 
. Mahuiael begat Mathusael. Ma- thusael begat Lamech.

And Lamech toke him two wyues: y one was called Ada, q the other Zilla. And Ada bare label, of whom came they that dwelt in tentes and had catell. And his brothers name

* Some reade: Let it be subdued vnto 
Sap. 10. a. 1 Ioh. 3. b. 

^ Heb. 11. a. the, and rule thou it.

The í. boke of Moses, 

was Iuball: Of him came they that occupied 

Fo. bij. 

harpes q pypes. And Zilla she also bare| 3 
Tubaleain, a worker in all connynge poyntes of metall q yron. And Tubaleains sister was called Naema.

And Lamech sayde vnto his wyues Ada and Zilla: Heare my voyce (ye wyues of La- mech) and herken vnto my wordes: for I haue slayne a man, and wounded my selfe: and (haue kylled) a yonge man, and gotte my self strypes. Cain shalbe auéged seué tymes: but Lamech seuen and seuentie tymes.

Adam laye yet with his wyfe agayne, q she bare a sonne, and called him Seth. For God
(sayde she) hath apoynted me another sede, for Abell, whom Cain slew. And Seth begat a sonne also, and called him Enos. At the

same tyme beganne meu to call vpon the name of the LORDE.

The b. Chapter. 
HIS is the boke of the generacion of/@ man, in the tyme whan God created man, and made him after the symilitude of
God. Male and female made he them, and blessed the, q called their names Man, in the tyme whan they were created. * And Adam was an hundreth and thirtie yeare olde, and begat a sonne, which was like his owne ymage, and called his name Seth: q lyued therafter eight hüdreth yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters. And his whole age was nyne hundreth and thirtie yeares, and so he dyed.

Seth was an hundreth and fyue yeare olde, and begat Enos: qœ lyued therafter eight hundreth and seuen yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters. And his whole age was nyene hüdreth and twolue yeares, and so he dyed.

Enos was nyentie yeare olde, and begat 
Kenan: and lyned therafter eight hundreth q fyftene yeare, and begat sonnes ¢ daughters.
And his whole age was nyene hüdreth and fyue yeares, and so he dyed.

Kenan was seuétie yeare olde, and begat 
Mahalaliel: and lyued therafter eight hun- dreth and fourtie yeare, and begat sonnes q doughters. And his whole age was nyene hundreth and ten yeares, and so he dyed.

Mahalaliel was thre score yeare olde q fyue, and begat lared: and lyued therafter eight

4 Pro.98. c. *Iobi15.c. J Gen.4.d. 

£ 1 Par. 1. a. 

* Heb. 12. d. 

So. hit. hundreth and thirtie yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters. And his whole age was eight hundreth, nyentie and fyue yeares, and so he dyed.

lared was an hundreth and two q sixtie yeare olde, and begat Henoch: « lyued ther- after eight hudreth yeare, and begat sonnes t doughters. And his whole age was nyene hundreth and two and sixtie yeare, and so he dyed.

a Henoch was fyue and thre score yeare olde, and begat Mathnsalah : and led a godly conuersacion thre hundreth yeares therafter, and begat sonnes q doughters. And his whole age was thre hundreth and fyue and thre score yeares. *And for so moch as he lyued a godly life, God toke him awaye, q he was nomore sene.

Mathusalah was an hudreth q seué and foure score yeare olde, q begat Lamech: and lyued therafter seuen hundreth and two and foure score yeare, and begat sonnes q doughters. And his whole age was nyene hundreth and nyene and tre score yeares, and so he dyed.

Lamech was an hundreth and two and foure score yeare olde, and begat a sonne, i called him Noe, and sayde: This same shall cóforte vs in oure workes, and in the sorowe of oure hondes vpon the earth, ^which the LORDE hath cursed. After this he lyued fyue hüdreth and fyue q nyentie yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters. And his whole age was seuen hnndreth seuen and seuentie yeares, and so he dyed.

Noe was fyue hundreth yeare olde, and begat Sem, Ham and Iaphet.

The bi. Chapter. 

O whan men beganne to multiplie vpon 

the earth, and had begot them doughters, the children of God sawe the doughters of men, that they were fayre, and toke vnto the wyues soch as they liked. ‘Then sayde $
LORDE: My sprete shal not allwaye stryue with man, for he is but flesh also. *I wil yet geue him respyte an hundreth and twéty yeares. There were giauntes also in the worlde at that tyme. For whan the children of God had lyen with the daughters of men, and begotten them children, y same (children)

Heb. 11. a, 

? Eccli. 44. b. 
^ Gen. 3. d. 

* Sap. 4. b. 4 Re. 2. a. 
* 1 Pet. 3. c. 

The i. boke of loses. 

Chap. bi. 

became mightie in the worlde, and men of renowne.

But whan the LORDE sawe y the wick-|B ednes of man was increased vpon y earth, aud that all $ thought and imaginacion of their hert was but onely euell contynually, 4it repented him, that he had made man vpon the earth, and he sorowed in his hert, and sayde: I wyll destroye man kynde which I haue made, from the earth: both man, beest, worme, and foule vnder the heauen: for it repenteth me, that I haue made them.
* Neuertheles Noe founde grace in the sight of the LORDE.

This is generacion of Noe. Noe was a righteous and parfecte ma, /and led a godly life in his tyme, and begat thre sonnes: Sem,
Ham and Japhet. Notwithstondinge y earth was corrupte in y sight of God, and full of myschefe. Then God loked vpon y earth: and lo, it was corrupte (for all flesh had cor- rupte his waye vpon the earth.)

Then sayde God vnto Noe: The ende of|€ 

all flesh is come before me, for the earth is full of myschefe before them. And lo, I wyll destroye them with the earth. Make the an
Arcke of Pyne tre, and make chambers in it, and pitch it within and without with pitch and make it after this fashion: The length shal be thre hundreth cubites, the bredth fiftie cubites, and the heyght thirtie cubites.
A wyndow shalt thou make aboue of a cubyte greate: but the dore shalt thou set in the myddest in the syde of it: And the Arke shalt thou make with thre loftes one aboue another. For lo, I wyll bringe a floude of water vpou the earth, to destroye all flesh
(wherin the breth of life is) vnder the heaué: 
All that is vpon earth, shal perishe. 

But with the wyll I make a couenaunt, and thou shalt go iu to the Arcke with thy sonnes, with thy wyfe, and with thy sonnes wyues. And of all creatures what so euer flesh it be, thou shalt bringe in to the Arcke, euen a payre: the male and the female, that they maye lyue with the: Of foules after their kynde, of beastes after their kynde, and of all maner wormes of the earth after their kinde. Of euery one of these shal there a payre go in vnto the, that they maye lyue.
And thou shalt take vnto the all maner of 

di Re 15.0. 

* Esa. 42, c. I Eccl. 44. b. 

Chap, bij. The boke of Moses, fv. dp. biij. 

meate that maye be eaten, and shalt laye it vp in stoare by the, that it maye be meate for the and them. And Noe dyd acordinge to all that God commaunded him.

A’ 

The bij. Chapter. 

ND y LORDE sayde vnto Noe: Go in to the Arcke thou q thy whole house: “for the haue I sene righteous before me at this tyme. ^ Of all cleane beastes take vuto the seuen and seuen, the male and his female. And of vneleane beastes a payre, the male and his female. Like wyse of the foules vnder the heauen, seuen and seuen, the male and his female, that there maye be sede left a lyue vpon the whole earth.

For yet after seuen dayes, I wil sende raine vpon the earth fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes, and wyll destroye all maner of thinges that I haue made, from of the face of the earth.

And Noe dyd all that the LORDE com- maunded him. Sixe hüdreth yeare olde was he, whan the water floude came vpon earth.
*And he wente in to the Arcke, with his sonnes, his wyfe, and his sonnes wyues, for the waters of the floude. Of cleane beastes and of vncleane, of all fethered foules, t of all that crepeth vpon earth, wente in vnto him to the Arcke by pares, a male and a female, as LORDE comaunded him. And whan the seuen dayes were past, the water floude came vpon the earth.

In the sixe hundreth yeare of Noes age, vpon tne seuentene daye of the seconde moneth, that same daye were all y foun- taynes of the greate depe broken vp, and the wyndowes of heauen were opened, and there came a rayne vpon y earth fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes.

Vpon the selfe same daye wéte Noe in to the Arcke, with Sem, Ham and laphet his sonnes, and with his wyfe, and the thre wyues of his sonnes, and all maner of beastes after their kynde, all maner of catell after their kynde, all maner of crepynge thinges (that crepe vpo the earth) after their kynde, and all maner of foules (what so euer coude flye q what so euer had fethers) after their kynde:
‘These wente all vnto Noe in to the Arcke by cooples, of all flesh in whom was the breth of

22 Pet. 2. b. * Mat. 24. d. Luc. 17. c. 

G | . ^CJmensmo DOT VS 10. a. 

è Leuit, 11. a. 
4 Eccli. 39. d. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

life. And these were the male t the female of all maner of flesh, and wente in, acordinge as God commauded him. And the LORDE shut (the dore) vpon him.

“Then came the water floude fourtie dayes vpon the earth, and the water increased, and bare vp the Arcke, and lift it vp ouer y earth. ‘Thus the water preuayled, and
Increased sore vpon the earth, so that the 
Arcke wente vpon the waters. Yee the waters preuayled and increased so sore vpon earth, that all the hye mountaynes vnder the whole heauen were couered. Fyftene cubytes hye preuayled y waters ouer the mountaynes, which were couered.

Then all flesh that crepte vpon earth, erished, both foules, catell, beastes, and all y moued vpon earth, and all men. What so euer had the breth of life vpon the drye londe, dyed. e Thus was destroyed all that was vpon the earth, both man and beast, both wormes and foules vnder y heaué: all these were destroyed from the earth, Saue Noe onely remayned, and they that were with him in the Arcke. And the waters preuayled vpon the earth, an hundreth and fiftie dayes.

The bit}. Chapter. 

HEN God remembred Noe and all the 

beastes, and all the catell that were with him in the Arcke, and caused a wynde to come vpon the earth: and y waters ceassed, and the fountaynes of the depe and the wyn- dowes of heauen were stopte, and the rayne of heaué was forbydden, and the waters ranne styll awaye from y earth, and decreased after an hundreth and fiftye dayes.
Vpon the seuentene daye of the seuenth moneth rested the Arcke vpon the mountaynes of Ararat. And the waters wcte awaye and decreased vntyll the tenth moneth: for the first daye of the tenth moneth, the toppes of the mountaynes appeared.
After fourtie dayes Noe opened y wyndow of the Arcke which he had made, q sent forth a rauen, which flew out, and * came agayne, vntyll the waters were dryed vp vpo the earth.
Then sent he forth a doue from him, to wete, whether the waters were fallé vpon the earth. But when y doue coude fynde no

* Some reade: came not agayne. 

BENE NNE S a |— 

So. Chap, bij. The boke of Moses, fv. dp. 

D 

a 

3 

The i. boke of Hoses. 

tiplye, and fyll the earth. ‘The feare also and drede of yon be vpon all beastes of the earth, vpon all foules vnder the heauen, and vpon all that erepeth on the earth, and all fyshes

restynge place for hir fete, she came agayne vnto him in to the Arcke, for the waters were yet vpon the face of all the earth. And he put out his hande, and toke her to him in to the Arke.

Then he abode yet seuen dayes mo, q sent out the doue agayne out of the Arke: q she returned ynto him aboute the euen tyde: and beholde, she had broken of a leaf of an olyue tre, q bare it in hir nebb. Then Noe per- ceaued, that the waters were abated vpon the earth. Nenertheles he taried yet seuen other dayes, and sent forth the doue, which eame nomore to him agayne.

In the sixte hundreth and one yeare of 
Noes age, vpon the first daye of ¥ first moneth, the waters were dryed vp vpon the earth. Then
Noe toke of the hatches of the Arke, and sawe y the face of the earth was drye. So vpon the seuen and twentye daye of the seconde moneth the whole earth was drye. ,

Then spake God vnto Noe, and sayde: 
Go out of the Arke, thon and thy wyfe, and thy sonnes, and thy sonnes wyues with the.
As for all the beastes that are with the, what so ener flesh it be (both foule q catell and all maner of wormes that crepe vpon the earth) let them go out with the, and be ye occupied vpon the earth, “growe and multiplye vpon the earth.

So Noe wente out, with his sonnes, and with his wife, and with his sonnes wyues. All the beastes also and all the wormes, and all the foules, and all that crepte vpon the earth, wente out of the Arke, euery one vnto his like.

And Noe buylded an altare vnto y LORDE, 
^and toke of all maner of cleane beastes q of all maner of cleane foules, and offred brét sacrifices vpon $ altare. And y LORDE smelled the swete sauoure, a sayde in his hert:
I wyl hence forth curse the earth nomore for mas sake, for the ymaginacion of mans hert is euell, euen from the very youth of him. Ther- fore from héce forth I wil nomore smyte all that lyueth, as I haue done. Nether shall sowynge tyme and haruest, colde and heate
Sommer and wynter, daye and night ceasse so longe as the earth endureth.

The ir. Chapter. 
ND God blessed Noe and his sonnes, and sayde vnto them: increace q mul-

4 Leui. 
Mat. 

* Gen. 1. d. 
J Tren, 4. b. 

^ Leui. 11. a. 
A Exo 2i e. 

a Gene. 1.d. 
7. c. and 17. d. 

of the see be geuen in to youre hades. All that moueth and hath life, be youre meate.
“Enen as the grene herbe, so haue I geué you all, *Onely eate not the flesh with the bloude, wherin the soule is: For the bloude of you wherin youre soule is, wyll I requyre of the hande of all beastes: and the soule of mà wyll I requyre of mans hande, .‘ yee every mans soule of anothers hande.

f He that sheddeth mas bloude, his blonde shal be shed by man agayne, for God made man after his owne licknesse. As for you, be ye fmtefull, and increase, f and be occupied vpon the earth, that ye maye multiplye therin.

Farthermore, God sayde vnto Noe and to his sonnes with him: ^ Beholde, I make my couenaunt with yon, and with youre sede after you, and with euery lyuynge creature that is with you, both foule, catell, and all beastes vpon the earth with you, of all that is gone out of the Arke, what so euer beast of the earth it be: ‘And thus I make my couenaunt with you, that hence forth all flesh shal not be destroyed with the waters of eny floude, and from hence forth there shall come no floude to destroye the earth.

And God sayde: This is the token of my couenannt which I haue made betwene me and you, and all lyuynge creatures amonge yon for enermore: My bowe will I set in the clondes, and it shal be the token of my coue- naunt betwene me and y earth: so that wha
I brynge cloudes vpon the earth, the bowe shal appeare in the cloudes. And then wyll I thynke vpon my conenaunt betwixte me and you and all lyuynge creatures in all maner of flesh: so that from hence forth there shall no- more come eny floude of water to destroye all flesh. Therfore shall my bowe be in the cloudes, that I maye loke vpon it, and remem- bre the euerlastynge couenaunt, betwixte God and all linynge creatures in all flesh that is vpon earth. God sayde also vnto Noe: This is the toké of the couenaunt, which I haue made betwene me and all flesh vpon earth.

The sonnes of Noe which wente out of the 
Arke, are these: Sem, Ham and laphet. 
* Esa. 54. a. 

26.e. Apo. 13. b. £ Gen. 1. d. 

3 Ecclesiastici 44. b. 

Chap. tx. 

B 

€ 

Chap. rt. 
As for Ham, heis the father of Canaa. These are Noes thre sonnes, of whom all londes were ouerspred.

Noe beganne to take hede vnto y tyllinge of the grounde, q planted a vyniarde. "And dranke of the wyne, and was dronken, and laye vncouered in his tente. Now when Ha the father of Canaan sawe his fathers preuities, he tolde his two brethren without. ‘The toke
Sem and laphet a mantell and put it vpò both their shulders, and wente backwarde, and couered their fathers secretes: q their faces were turned asyde, y they shulde not se their fathers preuyties.

So whan Noe awaked from his wyne, and perceaued what his yonger sonne had done vnto him, he sayde: Cursed be Canaan, and a seruaunt of seruauntes be he vnto his brethren. He sayde morouer: Praysed be the LORDE God of Sem, and Canaan be his seruaunt. God increase laphet, and let him dwell in the tentes of Sem, and Canaan be his seruaunt.

And Noe lyued after the floude thre hun- dreth q fiftie yeare, so y his whole age was ix. hudreth and fyftie yeare, and so he dyed.

The y. Chapter. ai! | YHIS is the generacion of the childré of

Noe, Sem, Ham, and laphet, « they begat children after the floude.

* The children of Iaphet are these: Gomer, 
Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, Mesech, and 
Thyras The childré of Gomer are these: 
Ascenas, Riphat and 'l'ogarma. ‘The children of Iauan are these: Elisa, Tharsis, Cithim and Dodanim: Of these are deuided the Iles of y Heithen in their countrees, euery one after his speach, kynred and people.

'Ihe childre of Ham are these: Chus, 
Misraim, Phut and Canaan. The children of Chus are these: Seba, Heuila Sabtha,
Reyma and Sabthecha. 

The children of Reyma are these: Sheba and Deda. Chus also begat Nemrod, which beganne to be mightie in the earth, and was a mightie hunter in the sight of the LORDE.
Therof commeth the prouerbe: This is a mightie hunter before the LORDE like as
Nemrod. And the origenall of his kyngdome was “ Babel, Erech, Acad « Chalne in y londe of Synear. Out of that lode came Assur,
* Gen. 11. b. 

"? Esa. 5.2. Matt.91.a. ° 1 Par. l. a. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

and buylded Niniue, and y stretes of y cite, and Calah, and Ressen betwene Ninyue q
Calah: This isa greate cite.^ Mizraim begat 
Ludim, Enamim, Leabim, Naphtuhim, Pa- thrusim « Casluhim, from whence came the
Philistynes and Capthorims. Canaā also be- gat Zidon his eldest sonne, ¢ Heth, Iebusi,
Emori, Girgosi, Hiui, Arki, Sini, Aruadi, 
Zemari x Hamati: fro whence y kynreds of y Cananites are dispersed abrode. And

Coastes of y Cananites were fro Sido forth thorow Gerar vnto Gasa, tyll thou comest vnto Sodoma, Gomorra, Adama, Zeboim, a vnto Lasa. These are the children of Ham in their kynreds, tunges, londes a people.
And Sem which is y father of all the children of Eber, q the elder brother of Iaphet, begat childré also. And theseare his children: Ela,
Assur, Arphachad, Lud q Aram. ‘The childré of Aram are these: Vz, Hul, Gether a Mas.

And Arphachsad begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber. Eber begat two sonnes: the name of the one was Peleg, because that in his tyme the worlde was deuyded, and his brothers name was laketan, And laketan begat Almodad, Saleph, Hazarmaphet, Iarah,
Hadoram, Vsal, Dikela, Obal, Abimael, Seba, 
Ophir, Heuila « Iobab: All these are y childré of Jaketan. And their dwellynge was from Mesa, tyll thou come vnto Sephar a mountayne of y east. ‘These are y children of Sem in thetr generacions, tunges, londes and people.

This is now y generacion of ¥ children of 
Noe in their kynredes q people. Of these were y people vpon earth spred a brode after y floude.

The yi. Chapter. 

OROUER all the worlde had one 

tonge ¢ language. Now as they wente 
*towarde the East, they founde a playne in y londe of Synear, q there they dwelt, q saide one to another: Come on, let vs make bryck q burne it. And they toke bryck for stone, q slyme for morter, And sayde: Come, let vs buylde a cite x a tower, whose toppe maye reach vnto heaue, y we maye make vs a name, afore we be scatred abrode in all londes.
Then came y LORDE downe, to se ¥ cite a tower, y Y childre of mē had buylded. And j LORDE saide: Deholde, the people is one,

7 Tone 1. a. * Some reade: frö the east. 

So. ri 

& 

Fo. rij. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

t haue one maner of language amoge thé all, a this haue they begonne to do, q wil not leaue of from all y they haue purposed to do.
Come on, let vs go downe, q cofounde their tonge euc there, y one vnderstonde not what another saieth. ^ Thus y LORDE scatred the fro théce in all lodes, so y they left of to buylde the cite. Therfore is it called Babell, because the LORDE cofounded there the language of all the: worlde, and from théce scatred them abrode in to all londes.

These are y generacions of Sem. Sem was an hundreth yeare olde, and begat Ar- phachsad two yeare after the floude, and lyued therafter fyue hudreth yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters.

Arphachsad was fiue q thirtie yeare olde, and begat Salah, and lyued therafter foure hundreth and thre yeare, and begat sonnes q doughters.

Salah was thirtie yeare olde, and begat 
Eber, q lyued therafter foure hndreth q thre yeare, q begat sonnes and doughters.

Eber was foure and thirtie yeare olde, q begat Peleg, and lyued therafter foure hun- dreth and thirtie yeare, and begat sonnes q doughters.

Peleg was thirtie yeare olde, and begat 
Regu, and lyued therafter two hüdreth and nyene yeare, and begat sonnes q doughters.

Regu was two and thirtie yeare olde, and begat Serug, and lyued therafter two hun- dreth and seuen yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters.

Serug was thirtie yeare olde, and begat 
Nahor, and lyued therafter two hundreth yeare, and begat sonnes q doughters.

Nahor was nyene and twentye yeare olde, and begat Terah, and lyued therafter an hundreth and nyentene yeare, and begat sonnes and doughters.

'Terah was seuentie yeare olde, and begat 
Abram, Nahor and Haran. 

These are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. ^And Haran begat Lot, but Hara dyed before 'l'erah his father in y londe where he was borne, at Vr in Chaldea.

Then Abram and Nahor toke them wyues. 
Abrams wife was called Sarai, q Nahors wyfe 

a Deu. 32, a. " losu. 24. a. 1 Par. 1. b. 

2 Esd. 9. b. 

* Gen. 20. c. 
Tudit. 5. b. 

d losu, 24. a, 

Chap. rij. 
Milea the doughter of Haran, which was father of Milca and lisca. But Sarai was baren, and had no childe.

7Then toke Terah Abra his sonne, q Lot his sonne Harans sonne, q Sarai his doughter in lawe, his sonne Abrams wife, q caried them with him from Vr in Chaldea, to go in to the lande of Canaan. And they came to Haran, q dwelt there. And Terah was two hundreth q fyue yeare olde, and dyed in Haran.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND y LORDE sayde vnto Abram: * Get 
A the out of thy countre, and from thy kynred, and out of thy fathers house, in to a londe which I wil shew the. And I wil make of the a mightie people, and wyll blesse the, and make the a greate name, yee thou shalt be a very blessynge. ^I wil blesse them that blesse the, and curse them that curse the: and in the shal all the generacions of the earth be blessed.

Then wente Abram out, as the LORDE commaunded him, and Lot wente with him.
Fyue a seuentie yeare olde was Abrà, whan he wente out of Haran. So Abram toke Sarai his wife, and Lot his brothers sonne, with all their goodes which they had gotten, and soules which they begat in Hara, and departed to go in to y londe of Canaan. And whe they were come in to the same londe, he wente thorow, tyll he came vnto the place of Sichem, and|X: vnto the Okegroue of More: ^for Y Cananites dwelt in y lode at y same time.

Then the LORDE appeared vnto Abra, q sayde: ‘This londe wil Í geue vnto thy sede.
And there he buylded an aulter vnto y 
LORDE, which appeared vnto him. ‘The brake he vp fro théce, vnto a mountayne y laye on y east syde of the cite of Bethel, q pitched ie tent: so y he had Bethel on the west side, and Ay on y east syde: q there buylded he an altare also vnto the LORDE, q called vpon the name of the LORDE.
Afterwarde departed Abram farther, q toke his iourneye southwarde. But there came a derth in the londe.

Then wente Abram downe in to Egipte to kepe himself there as a straunger, for the derth was sore in the londe. And whan he

Acto. 3, d. £ Gen. 14. c. ^ Gen. 10. d. and 13. a. 

* Gen. 17. a. 

J Gen. 27. d. Gene. 18. c. 

Gen. 22. c. 

The i. boke of loses, 

was come nye for to entre in to Egipte, he sayde vnto Sarai his wife: Beholde, 1 knowe y thou art a fayre woman to loke vpon. Now whan the Egipcians se the," they wil saye:
She is his wife, and so shal they slaye me, and saue the alyue. Therfore (I pray y) saye thou art my sister, that I maye fare the better by reason of the, and that my sonle maye lyue for thy sake.

2| Now whan he came in to Egipte, y Egip- 

clans sawe y woman, y she was very faire: q 
Pharaos prynces sawe her also, q praysed her before him. ‘Then was she brought in to Pha- raos house, and Abram was well intreated for hir sake: and he had shepe, oxé, and he Asses, seruauntes, maydes, she Asses and Camels.
‘But ý LORDE plaged Pharao q his house with greate plages, because of Sarai Abras wife. Then Pharao called Abra vnto him, and sayde: Why hast thou dealt thus with me? Wherfore toldest thou not me at the first, y she was thy wife? Why saydest thou then, that she was thy sister? Wherfore 1 toke her to my wife. And now lo, there is thy wife, take her, and go thy waye. He gaue his officers also a charge ouer him, to conveye him out, and his wife, and all that he had.

The pit}. Chapter. a S Abra departed out ot Egipte, with his wife, q with all y he had, « Lot with him also, towarde y south. Abram was very rich in catell, siluer q golde. And he wente on forth from the south vnto Bethel, vnto the place where his tent was at y first, betwene
* Bethel and Ay: euen vnto y place where he had made the altare before, q where he called vpon the name of the LORDE. Lot also which wente with him, had shepe, greate catell q tentes: so y the londe was not able to receaue them, that they might dwell together: for ^the substaunce of their riches was so greate, that they coude not dwell together.
And there fell a strife betwene the hirdmen of Abrams catell, and the hirdmen of Lots catell. The Cananites also and the Pheresites dwelt at that tyme in the londe.‘

Then sayde Abram vnto Lot: O let there be no strife betwene me and the, and betwene my hyrdmen and thine, for we are brethré.
Is not all the whole londe open before the? 

a Gen. 20, a. and 26. a. 

^ Esa. 43. a. * Gen. 12. b. 

Departe fro me, I praye the. Yf thou wilt go to the left hande, I wil take the right: Or yf thou wilt go to the right hande, I wil take the left. 'Then Lot lift vp his eyes, and behelde all the countre rounde aboute lorda, that it was a plenteous countre of water. For before the
LORDE destroyed Sodoma and Gomorra, it was rounde aboute Zoar, euen as the pleasaunt garden of the LORDE, and as the londe of
Egipte. 

Then Lot chose all the coastes of lorda, and toke his journey towarde y East. ‘And so the one brother departed from the other.
Abram dwelt in the lande of Canaan, and 
Lot in the cities of the same coastes, and pitched his tent towarde Sodome. But y men of Sodome were wicked, and “synned exceadingly agaynst the LORDE.

Now whan Lot was departed from Abram, the LORDE saide vnto Abram: Lift vp thine eyes, and loke from the place where thou dwellest, northwarde, southwarde, eastwarde, and westwarde: for all the londe that thou seist, wyll I geue vnto the ‘and to thy sede for euer, and wyll make thy sede as the dust of the earth: so that yf a man can nombre the dust of the earth, he shall nombre thy sede also. Arise, and go thorow the londe, in the length and bredth, for 1 wyl geue it vnto the.

So Abram remoued his tent, and ‘wente and dwelt in ¥ Okegroue of Mamre, which is in Ebron, Bad buylded there an altare vnto the LORDE.

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND it chaunsed in the tyme of Amra- phel the kynge of Synear, Arioch

the kynge of Ellasar, Kedorlaomer the kinge of Elam, q Thydeal the kynge of y Heithen,
That they made warre with Bera y kynge of 
Sodome, and with Birsa the kynge of Gomorra, q with Sineab the kynge of Adama, q with
Semeaber the kynge of Zeboim, and with the kynge of Bela, which is called Zoar. ‘These came all together in to the brode valley, where now the salt see is: for twolue yeares were they subiectes vnto kinge Kedorlaomer,
& in the thirtenth yeare they fell from him. 
Therfore in the fourtenth yeare came Kedor- laomer, and the kynges y were with him, q

smote the Giauntes in Astaroth Karnaim, q 
€ Dent. 2. b. ^ Eze. 16. e. * Acto. 7. a. a * Gen. 14. e.

d Gen. 36. a. © Gen.19. b. / Eccli.25.a. Tere. 40. a. | 

So. rii. 

i 

So. riiij. 
Susim at Ham, q Emim in the felde of Ki- riathaim, and ¥ Horites in their owne mount
Seir vnto the playne of Pharan, which bor- dreth vpo the wildernes. And then they turned, ¢ came to the well of iudgment (which is Cades) q smote all the countre of the Ama- lechites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in
Hazezon Thamar. 

Then wente out the kynge of Sodome, q the kynge of Gomorra, q the kynge of Adama, and the kynge of Zeboim, and the kynge of
Bela (called Zoar) a prepared them selues to fight 1n the- brode valley with Kedorlaomer the kynge of Elam, q with Thideal y kynge of the Heithen, q with Amraphel y kynge of
Synear, q with Arioch the kynge of Ellasar : foure kynges with fyue. And y brode valley had many slyme pyttes. But the kynge of
Sodoma and Gomorra were put to flight, q fell there, q the residue fled vnto y moun- taynes. Then toke they all the goodes at
Sodoma and Gomorra, « all their vytales, q wente their waye. They toke Lot also Abrams brothers sonne, ¢ his good (for he dwelt at
Sodome) and departed. 

Then came one that had escaped, and tolde 
Abram the Aleaunt, which dwelt in the Oke- groue of ^ Mamre the Amoryte, which was the brother of Escol ¢ Aner: for these were con- federate with Abram.

* Now whan Abram herde y his brother was taken, he harnessed his bonde seruauntes borne in his owne house, thre hundreth q eightene, q folowed after them vntill Dan, a deuyded thé, q fell vpo them by night with his seruauntes, and smote the, and chased them awaye vnto Hoba, which lieth on y left hande of the cite of Damascos, “and brought agayne all the goodes, and also his brother
Lot, and his goodes, y wemen also and the people. And as he came agayne from the slaughter of Kedorlaomer ¢ of the kinges that were with him, the kynge of Sodome wente to mete him in to the playne felde, “which is called kynges dale.

p| But Melchisedech the kynge of Salem 

brought forth bred and wyne. And he beynge the prest of the most hye God, *blessed him and sayde: Blessed be thou Abram vnto the most hye God possessor of heauen and earth.

a Gen. 13. d. b Iosu. 10. b. 1Re.30.b. Iere.41.c. 

4 Num. 31. b. * Hebr, 7. a. f Deu. 
* Ro. 4. d. £ Psal. 

* Iob 39. b. 
10. d. Esa.49.d. Iere. 33. d. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

Chap, rb. 

And praysed be God the Hyest, which hath delyuered thine enemies in to thy handes.
And Abram gaue him tythes of all. 

Then sayde the kynge of Sodome vnto 
Abram: Geue me the soules, and take y goodes vnto thy self. But Abram sayde vnto the kinge of Sodome: I lift vp my honde vnto the LORDE the most hye God, possessor of heauen and earth, that I wyll not take of all that 1s thyne, so moch as a threde or a shue lachet, lest thou shuldest saye: I haue made Abram ryche: Saue onely that which the yonge men haue spent, and the men Aner
Escol and Mamre, that wente with me, let them take their parte.

The ro. Chapter. 

T happened after these actes, y the worde of y LORDE came vnto Abra in a vysion, and sayde: Feare not Abram, I am thy shylde and thy exceadinge greate rewarde.
But Abram sayde: LORDE LORDE, what wilt thou geue me? I go childles, and the seruaunt of my house (this Eleasar of Da- mascos) hath a sonne. And Abram sayde morouer: Beholde, vnto me hast thou geuen no sede: and lo, the sonne of my housholde shal be myne heyre. And beholde, the worde of the LORDE spake vnto him, and saide:
He shal not be thine heyre, but one that shal come out of thine owne body, he shal be thine heyre. And he bad him go forth, and sayde: Loke vp vnto heaven, Sand tell y starres: Canst thou nombre them? And he sayde vnto him: * Euen so shal thy sede be.
Abram beleued the LORDE, and y was counted vnto him for righteousnes.¢ And he sayde vnto him: Iam y LORDE, t y brought the from Vr out of Chaldea, to geue y this londe to possesse it. But Abram sayde:
LORDE LORDE, Wherby shall 1 knowe, that I shall possesse it? And he sayde vnto him: Take a cow of thre yeare olde, ‘and a she goate of thre yeare olde, and a ramme of thre yeare olde, and a turtyll doue, and a yonge pigeon. And he toke all these, and deuyded them in the myddes, and layde the one parte ouer agaynst the other, but the foules deuyded he not. And the foules fell vpo the flesh, but Abram droue them awaye.

105. d. Rom. 4.a. Gala.3.a. laco.2.c. t Gen. 11. d. 

^ fere. 34. d. 

Chap. rbij. 

€| Now whan the Sonne beganne to go downe, 

D 

there fell an heuy slepe vpo Abram. And lo, feare and greate darcknes fell vpon him.
And he sayde vnto Abram: knowe this of a suertye, that “thy sede shalbe a straüger, in a londe that is not theirs. And they shall make bonde men of them, and intreate them euell foure hundreth yeares. But the people who they shal serue, wyl I iudge. Afterwarde shall they ‘go forth with greate substaunce : and thou shalt departe vnto thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buried in a good age.
And after the fourth generacion? they shall come hither agayne, for the wickednes of y
Amorites is not yet full. 

So whan the Sonne was downe, and it was waxed darcke: Beholde, there smoked a fornace, and a fyre brande wente betwene y partes. ‘The same daye made the LORDE a couenaüt with Abram, and sayde: Vnto thy sede wil I geue this lode, from the water of
Egipte, vnto the greate water Euphrates: the Kenytes, the Kenizites, the Kydmonites, the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Giauntes, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Gergesites, and the Iebusites.

The rot. Chapter. 

a ARAI Abrams wife bare him no children: 

3 

but she had an handmayde an Egipcian, whose name was Agar, and sayde vnto Abram:
/ Beholde, the LORDE hath closed me, that 
I can not beare. *Go in (I praye the) vnto my mayde: peraduenture J shalbe multiplied by her, more then by myself. And Abram herkened vnto the voyce of Sarai. Than
Sarai Abrams wife toke Agar hir mayde y 
Egipcian (after they had dwelt ten yeare in the londe of Canaan) and gaue her vnto hir huszbande Abra, to be his wife. And he wente in vnto Agar, and she conceaued. Now whan she sawe y she had conceyued, she despysed hir mastresse.

Then sayde Sarai vnto Abram: I must suffre wronge for thy sake. I layde my mayde by the: but now because she seyth, that she hath conceaned, I must be despysed in hir sight: the LORDE be iudge betwene me and the. And Abram sayde vnto Sarai: Be-

a Act. 7. a. Exod. 12. f. Iudit. 5. b. Gala. 3. c. 
> Exo. 12. e. * Gene. 25.a. 4 Deut, 20.c. *Gen. 
24.a. 3 Re. 4. b. J Esa. 66. b. E Gen. 30. a. 

The í. boke of Hoses. 

holde, thy mayde is vnder thine auctorite, do with her, as it pleaseth the.

Now whan Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her. But the angell of the
LORDE founde her besyde a well of water in the wildernesse (euen by the well in the waye to Sur) and sayde vnto her: Agar Sarais maide, whence commest thou? q whyther wylt thou go? She sayde: I fle fro my mastresse
Sarai. And the angel of the LORDE sayde vnto her: Returne to thy mastresse agayne, and snbmitte thyself vnder hir hande.

And the angel of the LORDE sayde vnto 

|her: Beholde, I wil so encreace thy sede, that 

it shall not be nombred for multitude. And the angel of the LORDE sayde further vnto her: Beholde, thou art with childe,^ q shalt bringe forth a sonne, and shalt call his name
Ismael, because the LORDE hath herde thy trouble. He shal be a wylde man. His hande agaynst euery man, and euery maus hande agaynst him: and he shal dwel ouer agaynst all his brethren.

And she called the name of the LORDE y spake vnto her: 'Thou art the God that seist me. Forshe sayde: Ofasuertye I haue sene the back partes of him that sawe me. Ther- fore called she the well: The well of the liuinge that sawe me. Which (well) is be- twene Cades and Bared.

And Agar bare Abram a sonne, ‘and Abram called his sonnes name which Agar bare him,
Ismael. And Abram was foure score yeare olde and sixe, whan Agar bare him Ismael.

The rbij. Chapter. 

OW whan Abram was nyentye yeare 

olde and nyene, the LOR. DE appeared 

vnto him, q sayde vnto him: * I am the all- mightie God, walke before me, q be vncor- rupte. And I wyll make my couenaunt betwene me q the, and wyl multiplye the exceadyngly. ‘Then fell Abram vpon his face.
And God talked furthur with him, and sayde: Beholde, It is I, and haue my coue- naüt with the, and thou shalt be a father of many people. Therfore shalt thou nomore be called Abram, but thy name shal be
Abraham: *For I haue made the a father of many nacions, q I wil multiplye the excead-
Iudi. 13. b. * Some 

^ Gen. 17. c. i Gal. 4. c. 

reade I am tbe God Schadai (that is: plenteous in power, abundaunt, sufficiet, and full of all good.)

* Rom, 4. c. 

€ 

Dn 

a 

Fo. rot. ingly, and wil make people of ¥, *yee and kynges also shal come out of the. Morouer I wil make my couenatit betwene me and the, q to thy sede after the thorow out their pos- terities, that it maye be an euerlastinge coue- naunt, so that I wyll be the God of the, and of thy sede after the. And vnto the and to thy sede after the, will I geue the lande, wherin thou art a straunger: euen all the lande of Canaan for an euerlastinge pos- session, and will be their God.

And God sayde morouer vnto Abraham: 
Kepe my couenaunt then, thou and thy sede after the. This is my couenaunt which ye shal kepe betwene me and you, and thy sede after $ thorow out their posterites. Euery manchilde that is amonge you, shalbe circum- cyded: and ye shall cireumcyde the fore skynne of youre flesh. "This same shalbe a token of the couenaunt betwene me and you.
Euery manchilde whan it is eight dayes olde," shalbe circucyded thorow out youre posterities:
In like maner all houszholde folkes borne at home, or bought, or eny other also that is a straüger and not of thy sede. Thus shall my couenaunt be in youre flesh for an euer- lastinge couenaunt. And yf there shalbe any manchilde vneireumcided in the fore skinne of his flesh, his soule shalbe roted out from his people, because he hath broken my couenaunt.

And God sayde vnto Abraham : Sarai thy wyfe shall nomore be called Sarai, but Sara shalbe hir name: for I will blesse her, and geue the a sonne of her. ^l wil blesse her, and people shall come of her, yee and kynges of many people. Then fell Abraha vpo his face, and laughed, and sayde in his hert:
Shal a childe be borne vnto me that am an hundreth yeare olde? And shall Sara y is nyentie yeare olde, beare? And Abraha sayde vnto God: O that Ismael might lyue in thy sight. Then sayde God : “Yee euen Sara thy wyfe shall beare the a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Isaac: for with him wil I make my euerlastinge couenaunt, and with his sede after him. And as concernynge
Ismael also, I haue herde thy request: Be- holde, I haue blessed him, and will increase him, and multiplye him exceadingly. “Twolue

* Mat, i.a * Leni. 12.a. Gen, 21.a. ^ Matt. 1. a. 
* Gen. 16. c. Iudi.13.b. 4Re. 13. a4. Luc.1.c. "Gen. 
25. b. * Gen. 19. a. f | Re. 28. c. £ ludi. 19. b, 

Cbr i. boke of Hoses, 

Chap. rbit. prynees shal he beget, and I wyll make a greate nacion of him.

But my couenaunt wyll I make with Isaac, whom Sara shal beare vnto the, eué this tyme twolue moneth. And he left of talkynge with him, and God wente vp from Abraham.
'Than toke Abraham his sonne Ismael, and all the seruauntes borne in his house, and all that were bought, (as many as were men children in his house,) and circumcyded the foreskynne of their flesh, euen the same daye, as God had sayde vnto him. And Abraham was nyentie yeare olde and nyne, whan he cut of the foreskynne of his flesh. As for
Ismael, he was thirtene yeare olde, whan the foreskynne of his flesh was cireumcyded. Euen vpon one daye were they all cireumcyded :
Abraham, and Ismael his sonne, and all the men in his house, (whether they were borne at home, bought, or eny other straunger :) they were all circumcyded with him.

The rit}. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE apeared vnto him in the ‘Okegroue of Mamre, as he sat in his tent dore in the heate of y daie. And as he lift vp his eyes, and loked, beholde, there stode thre men ouer agaynst him. And whan he sawe them, he ranne to mete them from his tent dore, and bowed him self downe vpon the grounde, and sayde: /LORDE, yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, go not by thy seruaüt. There shalbe brought you a litle water, q ye shall wash youre fete, q rest youre selues vnder the tre. ^ And I wyll fet you a morsell of bred, to comforte youre hertes withall, and then shall ye go youre wayes, for therfore are ye come to youre seruaunt. ‘They

sayde : do euen so as thou hast spoken. 
Abraham wente a pace in to the tent to 
Sara, and sayde: ^Make haist, ¢ mengle thre peckes of fyne meele, knede it, and bake cakes.
And he ranne to the beastes, q fet a calf that was tender and good, and gaue it vnto a yonge man, which made it ready at once.
And he toke butter and mylke and of the calfe that he had prepared, and set it before thé, ‘stode him self by them vnder the tre, q they ate. Then saide they vnto him: where is Sara thy wyfe? He answered:

Psal. 103. b. ^ Matt. 13. e. Luc. 13. b. 

12.b. Iud. 13. c. 

' Tob. 

Chap. rip. 

B {within in y tent. Then sayde he: aboute this tyme twolue moneth, *(yf I lyue) I will come to the agayne, and Sara thy wyfe shal haue a sonne. And Sara herde that out of the tent dore, which was behynde his backe.
And Abraham and Sara were both olde, a well stryken in age: so that it wente nomore with Sara after y maner of wemen: therfore laughed she with in hir self, and sayde: Now that I am olde q my tlorde olde also, shal I yet geue my self to lust ?

Then sayde $ LORDE vnto Abraham: 
Wherfore doth Sara laugh, and saye: Is this true in dede, that I shal beare, and yet am olde? Shulde eny soch thinge be to harde for the LORDE? *Aboute this tyme (yf I lyue) I wil come to the agayne, a Sara shal haue a sonne. Then Sara denyed it, and sayde: I laughed not, for she was afrayed. But he sayde: It is not so, thou dyddest laughe.
Then the men stode vpfrom thence, and turned them towarde Sodome: and Abraham wente with them, to brynge them on their waye.

Then sayde the LORDE: How can I hyde from Abraham, y thinge that I wil do? seynge he shal be a greate and mightie peo- ple, and all people vp earth shalbe blessed inhim? For I knowe him that he wil co- maunde his children and his housholde after him, to kepe the waye of y LORDE, and to do after right and conscience, that the LORDE maye bringe vpo Abraham what he hath promised him. And the LORDE sayde:
There is a crie at Sodome and Gomorra, which is greate, ^a their synnes are exceadinge greuous: therfore will I go downe q se, whether they haue done all together, acordinge to that crye, “which is come before me, or not, that
I maye knowe. And the men turned their face, and wete towarde Sodome. But Abra- ham stode still before ý LORDE, and stepte vnto him, and sayde :

Wilt thou then destroye the righteous with the vngodly? ^ Peradueture there maye be fiftie righteous within $ cite: wilt thou de- stroye those, and not spare the place, for fiftie righteous sake that are therin? That be farre fro the, y thou shuldest do this, and to slaye the righteous with the vngodly, and that the righteous shulde be as the vngodly. That be farre from the. Shulde not the indge of all

t 1 Pet. 

* Some reade: As aoone as the frute cà lyue, 
* 4Re.4.b. Ro. 9.a. 

3,2. Eccli. 25. a. 

The t. boke of Hoses, 

LORDE sayde: Yf I fynde fiftie righteous at Sodome in the cite, I wil spare all: the place for their sakes.

Abraham answered, and sayde: O se, I haue taken vpon me to speake vnto the
LORDE, howbeit I am but ^dust and aszhes. 
Peraduenture there maye be fyue lesse then fiftie righteous therin: Wilt thou then de- stroye the whole cite because of those fyue?
He sayde: yf I fynde fyue and fourtie therin, 
I will not destroye them. 

And he proceded further to speake vnto him, and sayde: Peraduenture there might be fourtie founde therin. And he sayde:
I wil do nothinge vnto them for those fourtyes sake. Abraham sayde: Oh let not my
LORDE be angrie, that I speake yet more. 
Peradueture there might be thirtie founde therin. And he sayde: Yf I fynde thirtie therin, I will do nothinge vnto them. And he sayde: O se, I haue taken vpon me to speake vnto my LORDE.

Peraduéture there might be twétie founde therin. He answered: I wyll not destroye them for those twentyes sake. And he sayde:
O let not my LORDE be angrie, that I speake yet once more. Peraduenture there might be ten founde therin. He saide: I wil not destroye them for those ten sake.

And the LORDE wente his waye, whan he had left talkyage with Abraham. And
Abraham returned vnto his place. 

The riy. Chapter. 

N the euenynge came the two angels vnto 
I Sodome. And Lot sat vnder the gate of the cite. And whé he sawe them, he rose vp for to mete them, and bowed him self downe to the grounde vpon his face, q sayde: Se lordes, turne in (I praye you) in to youre seruauntes house, and tarye all night: let youre fete be waszshen, so maye ye ryse to- morow by tymes, and go youre waye. Neuer- theles they sayde: Nay, but we wyll byde in the stretes all night. “Then compelled he them sore: and they turned in vnto him, and came in to his house. And he made them a feast, and baked swete cakes, and they ate.

But before they wente to rest, the men of the cite of Sodome came and compased the

4 Gen. 2. b. t Tob. 12. d.

6 

© Ton. 1.a. * Luc.14. c. 

and 24. c. 

? Eze, 16. e. 

Fo. roy. 

the worlde do acordinge to right? And the|B 

Fo. rbi. house rounde aboute, yonge and olde, all the people from all quarters, and called Lot, and sayde vnto him: Where are the mé that came vnto the to night? Dringe them out here vnto vs, *that we maye knowe them.

And Lot wente out at the dore vnto the, and shut the dore after him, and sayde: “O brethren, do not so wickedly. Beholde, I haue two doughters, which yet haue knowne no man: them will I brynge out vnto you, do with them as it liketh you. Onely do nothinge vnto these men of God, for therfore are they come vnder the shadowe of my rofe.
But they sayde: Come thou hither. Then sayde they: Camest not thou onely herin as a straunger, and wilt thou now be a iudge?
Wel, we wil deale worse with the the with them.

And they pressed sore vpon y man Lot. 
‘And whan they ranne to, and wolde haue broken vp the dore, the men put out their hondes, and pulled Lot vnto them in to the house, and shut to the dore. And the men at ý dore of the house were “smytté with blyndnesse both small and greate, so that they coude not fynde the dore.

And y men saide vnto Lot: Hast thou yet here eny sonne in lawe, or sonnes or doughters? Who so euer belongeth vnto the in the cite, brynge him out of this place: for we must destroye this place, because the crye of them is greate before the LORDE, which hath sent vs to destroye them. Then wente
Lot forth, and spake to his sonnes in lawe, which shulde hane maried his doughters, and sayde: O stonde vp, and get you out of this place, for the LORDE wyll destroye this cite.
Neuertheles they toke it but for a sporte. 

Now whan the mornynge arose, the angels caused Lot to spede him, and sayde: ^Stonde vp, take thy wife q thy two doughters which are at hande, that thou also perishe not in the synne of this cite. But whyle he prolonged the tyme, the men caught him and his wife, and his two doughters by the hande (because the LORDE was mercifull «nto him,) and brought him forth, x set him without the cite.

And whé they had brought him out, they sayde: Saue thy soule, and loke not behynde the, nether stonde thou in all this countre:
Saue thy self vpon the mountayne, that thou 

* Iudic, 19. b. * 2 Bet.u2-e; 

| 

| 
* Leui. 18. c. 
4Sap.10.b, © Esa.13.d. lere. 50. g. 

* 4 Re. 6. d. 

The i. boke of loses. 

perish not. Then sayde Lot vnto thé: Oh no my LORDE, beholde, in as moch as thy seruaut hath founde grace in thy sight, now make thy mercy greate, which thou hast shewed vnto me, in that thou sauest my soule alyue. 1 can not saue my self vpon the mountayne. There might some mysfortune fall vpon me, that I shulde dye. Beholde, here is a cite by, that I maye flye vnto, and it is a litle one: let me saue myself there in. Is it not a litle one, that my soule maye lyue?

'Then sayde he vnto him: Beholde, I haue loked vpon the in this poynte also, that I will not ouerthrowe the cite, wherof thou hast spoken. Haist the, and saue thy self there: for I can do nothinge tyll thou be come thither. Therfore is the cite called Zoar.
And the Sonne was vp vpon the earth, whan 
Lot came in to Zoar. 

“Then the LORDE caused brymstone and fyre to rayne downe from the LORDE out of heauen vpon Sodoma and Gomorra, and ouerthrew those cities, the whole region, and all that dwelt in the cities, and that that grew vpon the earth. / And his wife loked behynde her, and was turned in to a pillar of salt.

Abraham rose vp early in the mornynge, and gat him vnto the place, *where he had stonde before the LORDE, and turned his face towarde Sodoma and Gomorra, and all M londe of that countre, and loked. And be- holde, there rose vp a smoke from y countre, as it had bene y smoke of a fornace. For whan God destroyed y cities of the region, he thought vpon Abraham, and conueyed Lot out of the cities which he ouerthrew, wherin
Lot dwelt. 

And Lot departed out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountaynes with both his daughters
(for he was afrayed to tary at Zoar) and so re- mayned he in a caue with both his daughters.

‘Then sayde Y elder vnto the yonger: Oure father is olde, and there is not a man more vpon earth, that can come in vnto vs after the maner of all the worlde. Come therfore, let vs geue oure father wyne to drynke, and lye with hnn, that we maye saue sede of oure father. So they gaue their father wyne to drynke that same night. And the elder doughter wente in, ^and laye with hir father :

f Lu. 17. d. Sap. 10. b. 
^ Leui. 18. 8. 

Ose, 11. b. Amos 4. c, 
€ Gen. 18. c. 

Chap. rir. 

Chap. rri and he perceaued it not, nether when she laye downe, ner when she rose vp.

On the morow the elder sayde vnto the yonger: Beholde, yesternight laye I with my father: let vs geue him wyne to drynke this night also: that thou mayest go in and lye with him, that we maye saue sede of oure father. So they gaue their father wyne to drynke that night also: And the yonger arose like wyse, and laye with him: q he perceaued it not, nether when she laye downe, ner when she rose vp.

Thus were both the doughters of Lot with childe by their father. And the elder bare a sonne, and called him Moab, of whom come y Moabytes vnto this daye. And y yonger bare a sonne also, and called him the sonne
Ammi, of whom come the children of Ammon vnto this daye.

The rr. Chapter. 

a S for Abraham, he departed thence, in to the south countre, and dwelt betwixte

Cades and Sur, and was a straunger at Gerar, 

and sayde of Sara his wife: " She is my sister. 

Then Abimelech the kinge of Gerar sent for 

her, and caused her be fett awaye. 

But God came to Abimelech by night in a dreame, q sayde vnto him: Beholde, thou art but a deed man, for the womans sake which thou hast taken, for she is a mans wife.
Neuertheles Abimelech had not yet touched her, and sayde: LORDE, wilt thou sley a righteous people? Sayde not he vnto me: she is my sister? Yee and sayde not she her self also: he is my brother? With a pure hert ¢ with innocent handes haue I done this.

And God sayde vnto him in a dreame: I knowe that thou dyddest it with a pure hert, and therfore I kepte the, that thou shuldest not synne agaynst me, nether haue I suffred the to touch her. Now therfore delyuer the man his wife ageyne, for he is a prophet: and let him pray for y, and thou shalt lyue. But and yf thou delyuer her not ageyne, be sure, that thou shalt dye the death, and all that is thine.

Then Abimelech rose vp by tymes in the mornynge, and called all his seruauntes, and tolde all these thinges in their eares, and the men were sore afrayed, and Abimelech called

^ Gen, 12. c. and 26.a. — ^ Gen. 19, c. — * Gen. 18. b. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

Sara Abrahams wife. 

Fo. rir. 
Abraham, and sayde vnto him: Wherfore hast thou done this vnto vs? And what haue
I offended y, that thou shuldest brynge on me and on my kyngdome so greate a synne?
Thou hast not dealt with vs, as a man shulde deale. And Abimelech saide morouer vnto
Abraham: What sawest thou, y thou hast done this thinge ?

Abraham sayde: I thought: Peraduenture there is no feare of God in this place, « they shall sleye me for my wifes sake, And of a trueth she is my sister, for she is my fathers doughter, bnt not my mothers doughter, and is become my wife. So whan God charged me to wadre out of my fathers house, I sayde vnto her: Shew this kyndnes vpon me, that, where so ener we come, thou saye of me, *that
I am thy brother. 

Then toke Abimelech shepe and oxen, seruauntes and maydens, and gaue them vnto
Abraham, and delyuered him Sara his wife agayne, and sayde: Beholde, my londe stondeth open before the, dwell where it liketh the. And vnto Sara he sayde: Be- holde, I haue geuen thy brother a thousande syluer pens: lo, he shalbe vnto the a couer- ynge of the eyes, for all that are with the, and euery where, and a sure excuse.

As for Abraham, he prayed vnto God: 
Then God healed Abimelech, and his wyfe, and his maydens, so that they bare childre.
For afore the LORDE had closed all the matrices of Abimelechs house, because of

The yri. Chapter. 

7 | *HE LORDE also vysited Sara, acord- 

inge *as he had promysed: q dealt with her, euen as he had sayde. “And Sara was with childe, and bare Abraham a sonne in his olde age, euen in the tyme appoynted, like as God had spoken vnto him afore. And
Abraham called his sonne which was borne vnto him (who Sara bare him) Isaac, “and cireumcided him the eight daye, t like as God commaunded him. An hundreth yeare olde was Abraha, whan his sonne Isaac was borne vnto him.

And Sara sayde: God hath prepared a ioye for me, for who so ener heareth of it, wyll reioyse with me. She sayde morouer :
Who wolde haue saide vnto Abraham, that 

c Heb. 11. c. — 4 Mat. i.a. Josu.24.a. + Gen. 17. b. 

So. rx. The í. boke 

Sara shulde geue children sucke, and beare him a sonne in his olde age? And the childe grew, and was weened. And Abraham made a greate feast, in y daye whan Isaac was weened.

And Sara sawe the sonne of Agar the 
Egipeian (whom she had borne vnto Abra- ham) that he was a mocker, and sayde vnto
Abraham : ^ Cast out this bonde mayden and hir sonne, for this bonde maydés sonne shall not be heyre with my sonne Isaac. This worde displeased Abraham sore, because of his sonne.

Neuertheles God sayde vnto him: let it not displease the because of the childe and the hand mayde: What so euer Sara hath sayde vnto the, folowe it, ^for in Isaac shall the sede be called vnto the. “As for the bonde maydens sonne, I wyll make a people of him also, because he is of thy sede.

Then Abraham rose vp early in the morn- ynge, and toke bred and a botell with water, and put it vpon Agars shulders, and gaue her the childe, and sent her awaye. Then de- parted she, and wandred out of the waye in y wyldernes beside Berseba. Now whan the water in the botell was out, she layed the childe vnder a bush, and wente, and sat hir downe ouer on ¥ other syde, a bowe shote of.
For she sayde: I can not se the childe dye. 
And she sat hir downe ouer on y other syde, and lifte vp hir voyce, and wepte.

Then God herde the voyce of the childe, and the angell of God called vnto Agar out of heauen, and sayde vnto her: What ayleth the, Agar? Feare not, for God hath herde y voyce of the childe, where he lyeth. Aryse and take the childe, and holde him by the hande, ^for I wyll make a greate people of him. *And God opened hir eyes, that she sawe a well of water.

'Then wente she and fylled y botell with water, and gaue $ childe drynke. And God was with the childe, which grew vp, and dwelt in y wildernes, and became a connynge archer, and dwelt in y wildernes of Pharan, aud his mother toke him a wyfe out of the londe of Egipte.

^ At the same tyme talked Abimelech and 
Phicol his chefe captayne with Abraham, and sayde: God is with the in all that thou doest.

? ludic. 11. à. 
17.0. 4 

Galat, 4. c. 
Gen. 17. c. * Esa. 41. c. 

^ Rom. 9. a. * Gen. f Gen. 926. d.

of {Hoses 

Therfore sweare now vnto me by God, that thou wilt not hurt me, ner my children, ner my childers children: but that thou shalt shewe vnto me (and to the londe wherin thou art a straunger) *the same kyndnesse that I haue done vnto the.

Then sayde Abraham: I wyll sweare. And 
Abraham rebuked Abimelech for the well of water, “which Abimelechs seruauntes had taken awaye by violence. ‘Then answered
Abimelech: I knewe not who dyd it, nether dyddest thou tell me, and I haue not herde of it but this daye.

Thé toke Abraham shepe and oxen, andi Ð 

gaue them vnto Abimelech, and they both made a bonde together. And Abraham set seuen lambes by them selues. ‘Then sayde
Abimelech vnto Abraha: What meane those seuen lambes, which thou hast set by them selues? He answered: seué lambes shalt thou take of my hande, that they maye be wytnes vnto me, that I haue dygged this well.
Therfore is the place called Berseba, because they sware there both together. And so they made the bonde at. Berseba.

Then rose Abimelech and Phicol his chefe captayne, and departed agayne in to the londe of ý Philistynes. And Abraham planted trees at Berseba, and called vpon the name of the LORDE ý euerlastinge God, and was a straunger in y londe of the Philistynes a longe season.

The rrij. Chapter. 
FTER these actes God tempted Abra- ham, ‘and sayde vnto him: Abraham.
And he answered: I amhere. And he sayde: 
Take thy sonne, this onely sonne of thine, eué Isaac whom thou louest, and go thy waye in to the londe of Moria, œ offre him there for a burntofferynge, vpon a mountayne that
I shal shew the. Then Abraham stode vp by tymes in the mornynge, and sadled his
Asse, and toke with him two yonge men, and his sonne Isaac, and cloue wodd for the brent offerynge, gat him vp, and wente on ynto the place, wherof the LORDE had sayde vnto him.
Vpon the thirde daye Abraham lift vp his eyes, and sawe the place a farre of, and sayde vnto his yonge me: Tary ye here with the

^ Gen. 26, b. 
44. c. Heb. 11. d. 

8 Gen. 20. d. ‘Tudit. 8. d. Eccl. 

Chap. rrij. 

a 

Chap. rritje 

5 

D 

The t. boke 

Asse: as for me and the childe, we wyl go yonder: and whan we haue worshipped, we wyll come to you againe. And Abraha toke the wodd to the brentofferynge, and layed it vpon Isaac his sonne. As for him self, he toke the fyre and a knyfe in his hande, and wente on both together.

Then sayde Isaac vnto his father Abraham: 
My father. Abraham answered: here I am, my sonne. And he sayde: lo, here is fyre and wodd, but where is the shepe for the brentofferynge? Abraham answered: My sonne, God shall prouyde him a shepe for the brentofferynge. And they wente both together.

And whan they came to the place which 
God shewed him, Abraham buylded there an altare, and layed the wodd vpon it, and bande his sonne Isaac, layed him on the altare, aboue vpo the wodd, and stretched out his hande, and toke the knyfe, to haue slayne his sonne.

Then the angell of the LORDE called from heauen vnto him, and sayde: Abraham
Abraham. He answered: Here am I. He sayde: Laye not thy handes vpon the childe,
& do nothinge vnto him: “for now I knowe that thou fearest God, and hast not *spared thine onely sonne for my sake. ‘Then Abra- ham lift vp his eyes, and sawe behynde him a ramme, holdé fast by the hornes in the breres, and wente, and toke the ramme, and offred him for a brent sacrifice, in steade of his sonne. And Abraham called the place: The
LORDE shall prouyde. "Therfore it is a comon sayenge yet this daye: Vpon the mountayne shal the LORDE prouyde.

And the angell of the LORDE cryed vnto 
Abraham from heauen the seconde tyme, and sayde: ^I haue sworen by myne owme self
(sayeth the LORDE) that for so moch as thou hast done this, and hast not spared thine onely sonne, I wyll prospere and multiplye thy sede as the starres of heauen, and as the sonde vpon the see shore. “And thy sede shall possesse the gates of his enemies: and tin thy sede shal all the nacions of the earth be blessed, because thou hast herkened vnto my voyce.

So Abraham turned ageyne to the yonge men, and they gat vp, and wente together vnto Berseba, and dwelt there.

^ Heb. 6. b. Ecclesiastici 

^] Mac.2.f. * Ro. 8. d. 
Ca t Gen. 12.a. Galat. 3. b. 

* Gen. 24. g. 

of Moses, So. rri. 

After these actes it fortuned, that it was tolde Abraham: Beholde, Milca hath borne children also vnto thy brother Nahor: namely, t Hus y eldest, and $ Bus his brother, and
Kemnel, of whom came the Syrians: and 
Cesed, and Haso, and Pildas, and Iedlaph and Bethuel. And Bethuel begat Rebecca.
These eight dyd Milca beare vnto Nahor 
Abrahams brother. And his concubyne called 
Rehuma, bare also: namely, Theba, Sahan, 
Thahas, and Maacha. 

The rrij. Chapter. 

ARA was an hundreth and seué and 

twentye yeare olde: so longe lyued she, and dyed in the head cite which is called
Hebron, in the lande of Canaan. ?' Then wente Abraham, to mourne and wepe for her.
Afterwarde he stode vp from his coarse, and talked with the Hethites, q sayde: I am a straüger and an indweller amonge you, geue me a possession to bury in with you, that I maye bury || my coarse by me.

Then the Hethites answered Abraham, and sayde vnto him: O heare lorde, thou art a prynce of God amonge vs: bury thy dead in the best of oure sepulcres, there shall none of vs forbyd » that thou shuldest not bury thy deed in his sepulcre. Then Abraham stode vp, and thanked the people of ŷ londe: namely the Hethites.

And he talked with them, and sayde: Yf|133 

it be youre wyll that I burye my coarse by me, heare me the, q speake for me to Ephron the sonne of Zoar, that he maye geue me the dubble caue, which he hath in y ende of his felde. For a reasonable money let him geue it me, for a possession to burye in amoge you.
For Ephron dwelt amonge the Hethites. 

'Then answered Ephron the Hethite vnto 
Abraham, that the Hethites might heare, before all that wente out and in at the gates of his cite, and sayde: No my lorde, but heare me: As for the felde, and the caue also that is therin, I geue it the: and in the sight of my people I geue it the, to burye thy deed in.

'Then Abraham thanked the people of the londe, and talked with Ephron, that the people of the londe might heare, and sayde: Heare me then, Receaue of me the money that I

Act. 3. d. 1 Iob 1. a. $ Iob 32, a. 4 Act. B. a. 
|| Some reade : my coarse that lyeth before me. 

Fo. rrij. 

€ 

a 

The i, boke 

geue the for the felde, and so wyll I burye my deed there.

Ephron answered Abraham, and sayde vnto him: Heare me my lorde : The felde is worth foure hundreth Sycles of syluer: but what is that betwixte me and the? Burye thy deed. Abraham herkened vnto Ephron, and weyed him the money which he had sayde, that the Hethites might heare: namely foure hundreth syluer syeles of currant money amonge marchauntes.

Thus Ephrons felde (where in the dubble caue is) which lyeth ouer before Mamre, euen the felde and the caue, was made sure for Abrahams owne good, with all the trees of the felde also rounde aboute, in the sight of the Hethites, and of all that go out and in at the gates of his cite. Then Abraham buried
Sara his wife in the dubble caue of the felde, that lyeth oner before Mamre (thatis, Hebron) in the londe of Canaan. So the felde and

the eaue therin was made sure of the Hethites vnto Abraham, for a possession to bury in.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

BRAHAM was olde and well stricken in 

age, and the LORDE had blessed him in all thinges. And he sayde vnto his eldest seruaunt of his house, which had the rule of all his goodes: “Laye thine hade vnder my thye, that I maye make the sweare by y
LORDE the God of heauen and earth, that thon ‘take no wife vnto my sonne amonge y doughters of ý Cananites, (amonge whom dwell) but that thou go in to my countre, and * to myne owne kynred, and brynge my sonne Isaac a wife.

The seruaunt sayde: What and the woman wyl not folowe me in to this countre? shal I then cary thy sonne agayne in to yonder londe, where thou camest out of? Abraham sayde vnto him: Beware of that, that thon brynge not my sonne thither agayne. The LORDE, the God of heauen, which toke me fro my fathers house and from the londe of my kynred, and that talked with me, and sware also vnto me, and sayde: “Vnto thy sede wyll I geue this londe: Euen he shall sende his angell before the, that thou maiest brynge my sonne a wife from thence. But yi the woman wyll not folowe the, thou art dis- eharged of this ooth: onely brynge not my

a Gen. 47. g. 

t Gen.98.2. Deut.7.a. *Gen. 11.d. 

of Moses. Chap. rrt. 

sonne thither agayne. ‘Then y sernaunt layed his hide vnder his master Abrahams thye, and sware the same vnto him.

So the seruaunt toke ten Camels of the 
Camels of his master and departed, and had with him of all maner of goodes of his master, and gat him vp, and departed vnto Mesopo- tamia, to the cite of Nahor. Then let he the
Camels lye downe without before the cite besyde a well of water in the enenynge, aboute the tyme that the wemen vsed to go forth, and to drawe water. And he sayde:

O LORDE, thou God of my master Abra- ham, mete me to daye, and shew merey vnto my master Abraham. Lo, I stonde here besyde the well of water, q the mens doughters of this eite wyll come forth to drawe water:
Now yf there come a damsell, to whom I saye: bowe downe thy pytcher, q let me drynke, and yf she saye: drynke, and I wyll geue thy Camels drynke also: That y same be she, whom thon hast prouyded for thy seruaunt Isaac: q that I maye knowe by y same that thou hast shewed merey vpon my master.

And or euer he had left of speakynge, be- holde, Rebecca the doughter of Bethuel
(which was the sonne of Milca, that was the wyfe of Nahor Abrahams brother) eame forth, and bare a pytcher vpon hir shulder, and she was a very fayre damsell of face, and yet a virgin, and vnknowne of eny man: She wente downe to the well, and fylled hir pitcher, and came vp agayne. Then ranne the sernaunt to mete her, and sayde: Let me drynke a litle water out of thy pitcher. And she sayde: drynke syr.

And haistely let she downe the piteher in hir hande, and gaue him drynke. And whan she had geuen him drynke, she sayde: I wyll drawe for thy Camels also, tyll they hane dronke ynough. And she made haist, and poured out hir piteher in to the trough, and ranne agayne to the well to drawe, and drew for all his Camels. The ma marueyled at her, and helde his tonge, tyll he knewe whether the LOR DE had prospered his iourney or not.

Now whan the Camels had all dronken, he toke a goldé earynge of half a Sycle weight, and two braeelettes for hir handes, weynge ten Sycles of golde, and sayde: Doughter, whose art thou? tell me. Is there rowme for

© Gen, 15. d. 

Chap. rrtttj. 

vs in thy fathers house to lodge in? She sayde vnto him: I am the doughter of Bethuel, the sonne of Mylea, “whom she bare vnto Nahor.
And sayde morouer vnto him: We haue plentye of litter and prouender, and rowme ynough to lodge in.

'Then the man bowed himself, and thanked the LORDE, and sayde: Praysed be the
LORDE the God of my master Abraham, which hath not withdrawen his mercy and his trueth fro my master, for the LORDE hath brought me the waye to my masters brothers house. And the damsell ranne and tolde all this in hir mothers house. And Rebecca had a brother ealled Laban.

And Laban ranne to the man without by the well syde: and that came by the reason that he sawe the earynges, and the bracelettes vpon his sisters handes, and herde the wordes of Rebecca his syster, that she sayde: thus spake the man vnto me.

And whan he came to the man, beholde, he stode by the Camels at the well syde.
And he sayde: Come in * thou blessed of the 
LORDE, wherfore stondest thon withont? I hane dressed the house, and made rowme for
$ Camels. So he brought the man in to y house, and vnbridled the Camels, and gaue them litter and prouender, and water to wash his fete, and the mens that were with him, and set meate before him.

Neuertheles he sayde: I wil not eate, tyll 
I haue fyrst tolde myne earade.^ They an- swered: Tell on. He sayde: I am Abra- hams seruaunt, and the LORDE hath pros- pered my master richely, so y he is become greate: and he hath geuen 6m shepe and oxe, syluer and golde, sernauntes and maidens,
Camels and Asses: yee and ^Sara my masters wife hath borne my master a sonne in hir olde age: vnto him hath he genen all that he hath.

And my master hath taken an ooth of me and saide: Thou shalt not take a wife for my sonne amonge the doughters of the Cananites, in whose lande I dwell, but go thy waye to my fathers house and to myne owne kynred, aud there take a wyfe for my sonne. But I sayde vnto my master: What and the woman wyl not folowe me? Then sayde he vnto me:
The LORDE (before whom I walke) shall sende his angell with the, and prospere thy lourney, that thou mayest take a wife for my

a Gen, 22, d. 

*Some reade thou beloued. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

sonne of myne owne kynred, and of iy fathers house. And so whan thou commest to my kynred, yf they gene her not vnto y, thou shalt be discharged of myne oothe.

So I came this daye vnto the well of water, and sayde: O LORDE thou God of my master Abraham, Yf thou hast prospered my iourney that I go: Beholde, I stonde here by the well of water: Now yf there come forth a virgin to draw water, and I saye vnto her: geue me a litle water to drinke out of thy pitcher, and she saye vnto me: Drynke thon, and | wyll drawe water for thy Camels also: that the same be the woma, which the LORDE hath prouyded for my masters sonne. Now or euer I had spoken out these wordes in my hert, beholde, Rebecca commeth forth with a pitcher vpon hir shulder, and goeth downe to the well, and draweth.

Then sayde 1: geue me a drynke. And immediatly she toke downe the pitcher fro hir shulder, and sayde: drynke, and I wyll geue thy Camels drynke also. So I dranke, and she gaue the Camels also to drynke.
And I axed her, and sayde: Doughter, whose art thou? She answered: Iam y doughter of Bethuel the sonne of Nahor, whom Milea bare vnto him. Then layed I the earinge vpon hir face, and the bracelettes vpon hir handes, and bowed myself, and thanked the
LORDE, and praysed the God of my master 
Abraham, which had brought me y right waye, to take my masters brothers doughter vnto his sonne.

Yf ye be they then that shew mercy and faithfulues vnto my master, tell me: Yf not, yet tell me, that I maye turne me to y right hande or to the left.

Then answered Laban and Bethuel, and sayde: This is come of the LORDE, ther- fore can we saye nothinge agaynst the, nether euell ner good. There is Rebecca before the, take her, and go thy waye, that she maye be thy masters sonnes wife, as the LORDE hath sayde. When Abrahams sernaunt herde these wordes, he bawed him self vnto the LORDE flat vpon the earth, and toke forth Iewels of syluer and golde, and rayment, and gaue them vnto Rebecca. But vnto hir brethren and the mother, he gaue spyces. Then he ate and dronke, and the men also that were with him, and taried there all night.

61 Re. 16. c. * Gen. 21. a. 

Fo. rrii. 

Fo. rritij. 

6| But in the mornynge he arose, and sayde: 

Let me departe vnto my master. Neuer- thelesse hir brother and hir mother sayde:
Let the damsell tary with vs at the leest ten dayes, and then shall she go. Then sayde he vnto them: holde me not, for the LORDE hath prospered my iourney: let me go, that I maye departe vnto my master. ‘Then sayde they: let vs call the damsell, and axe her, what she sayeth therto. And they called
Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: Wilt thou go with this man?

And she answered: Yee I wyll go with him. So they let Rebecca their syster go with hir norse and Abrahams seruaunt, and his men. And they blessed Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: ‘Thou art oure syster, growe in to many thousande tymes thousandes, and
“thy sede possesse the gates of his enemies. 

So Rebecca gat hir vp with hir damsels, and satt them vpon the Camels, and wente their waye after the man. And the seruaunt toke Rebecca, and departed.

As for Isaac, he was commynge from * the well of y liuynge q seynge, for he dwelt in the south countre, and was gone forth to his meditacions in the felde aboute the euen tyde. And he lift vp his eyes, and sawe, that there were Camels commynge. And Rebecca lift vp hir eyes, and sawe Isaac. ‘Then lighted she of the Camell, and sayde vnto y seruaunt:
What man is this, that commeth agaynst vs in the felde? ‘The seruaüt sayde: T'he same is my master.

Then toke she hir cloke, and put it aboute her. And the seruaunt tolde Isaac all the earande that he had done. Then Isaac brought her in to his mother Saras tent, and toke Rebecca, and she became his wife, and he loued her. So Isaac was comforted ouer his mother.

The rro. Chapter. 

a BRAHAM toke another wife called 
Ketura, which bare him Simram q 

laksan, Medan q Midian, Jeszbak and Suah. 
Iaksan begat Seba and Dedan. The children 

of Dedan were Assurim, Latusim, and Leu- mim. The children of Midian were Epha,
Epher, Hanoch, Abida and Eldaa. All these are the children of Ketura. And Abraham gaue all his goodes vnto Isaac: As for the

* Gen. 10. a. 

a Gen. 24, c. b Gen. 13. c. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

children that he had of the concubynes, he gaue them giftes, and (whyle he yet lyued) he sent thé awaye from his sonne Isaac, east- warde in to the east countre.

This is the age of Abraham which he lyued: euen an hundreth and fyue and seuentye yeare, and fell sicke and dyed in a good age, whan he was olde, ^x had lyued ynough and was gathered vnto his people. And his sonnes
Isaac and Jsmael buried him in the dubble caue in the felde of Ephron the sonne of
Zoar the Hethite, which lyeth ouer before 
Mamre, ^in the felde that Abraham bought of the Hethites. There was Abraham buried with Sara his wife. And after the death of
Abraham God blessed his sonne Isaac. And he dwelt by the well of the lyuynge and seynge.

This is the generacion of Ismael Abrahams sonne, whom Agar Saras mayde the Egipcian bare vnto him. And these are the names of
Ismaels children, of whom their kynredes are named. 'The eldest sonne of Ismael, Nebaioth,
Cedar, Abdeel, Mibsan, Misma, Duma, Masa, 
Hadar, Thema, lethur, Naphis, and Kedma. 
These are the childré of Ismael with their names in their courtes and cities ttwolue londeprynees. And this is the age of Ismael, euen an hundreth and seuen and thirtie yeare, and he fell sicke and dyed, and was gathered vnto his people. He dwelt from Heuila vnto
Sur towarde Egipte, as men go to the Assi- i And he dyed in the presence of all his brethren.

This is the generacion of Isaac the sonne of Abraha. Abraham begat Isaac. Isaac was fourtye yeare olde, whan he toke to wyfe
Rebecca the doughter of Bethuel y Syrian of 
Mesopotamia, q Sister of Laban the Syrian. 

Isaac besought the LORDE for his wyfe 
(because she was baren) and the LORDE was intreated, and Rebecca his wyfe con- ceaued. And the children stroue together in hir wombe. Then sayde she: Yf it shulde go so with me, why am I then with childe?
And she wente for to axe the LORDE. 
And the LORDE sayde vnto her: Two maner of folke are in thy wombe, and two maner of people shall be deuyded out of thy body, and the one nacion shall ouercome the other, ^and the greater shall serue the lesse.

* Gen. 32. c. t Gen. 17. c. 12 Re. 8.c. Rom, 9. b. 

Chap. yb. 

€ 

Chap. rrot. 

Now whan the tyme came that she shulde be delyuered, * beholde, there were two twyns

n 

in hir wombe. The first that came forth, was reed, all rough as an hyde, and they called him Esau. Anone therafter came his brother forth, which helde the hele of Esau with his hade,’ and they called him lacob. Thre score yeare olde was Isaac, whan they were borne. And whan the boies were growne vp,
Esau became an hunter, q an huszbande man. 
As for Iacob, he was a symple man, and dwelt in the tentes. And Isaac loued Esau, because he ate of his venison. But Rebecca loued
Iacob. 

And lacob dight a meace of meate. "The came Esau from the felde, and was weery, and sayde vnto Iacob: Let me proue of y reed meace of meate, for I am fayntie (therfore is he called Edom.) But Iacob sayde: Sell me this daye thy byrthright. Esau answered:
Lo, I must dye nenerthelesse, what good then shall my byrthright do me? Jacob sayde:
Then sweare vnto me euen this same daye. 
And he sware vnto him, and so he solde his byrthright vnto lacob. ‘Then lacob gaue him bred and that meace of ryse. And he ate and dronke, and stode vp, and wente his

waye. And so Esau regarded not his byrth- right.
The rrbi. Chapter. 
HERE came a derth in the londe, pass- 

ynge the other ^that was in Abrahams tyme. And Isaac wente to Gerar, vnto
Abimelech the kynge of y Philistynes. ‘Then the LORDE appeared vnto him, and sayde :
* Go not downe in to Egipte, but tary in the lande that I shall saye vnto the. Be thou a strauger in this lande, and I wil be with the and blesse the. For vnto the and thy sede wyll I geue all this londe, and wyll perfourme myne ooth that I sware to thy father Abra- ham. And I wyll multiplye thy sede as the starres of heauen, ‘and vnto thy sede wyll I geue all this londe, and thorow thy sede shall all nacions be blessed, because Abraham was obedient vnto my voyce, and kepte myne ordinaunces, my cómaundementes, my sta- tutes, and my lawes.
So Isaac dwelt at Gerar. And whan the men of the same place axed him of his wife,

* Heb. 12. c. 4 Gen. f Gen. 15. c. and 22. c.

? Tosu. 24, a. 
TL 

^ Ose, 12. a. 
© Ecclesiastici 44. d. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

Fo. reb. he sayde: she is my sister. For he was afrayed to saye: she is my wife, (thinkinge thus:) they might slaye me for Rebeccas sake, for she was beutifull to loke vnto. Now whan he had bene there a longe season, Abi- melech the kynge of the Phylistynes loked ont at a wyndow, and sawe Isaac sportinge with Rebecca his wife.

Then Abimelech called Isaac, and sayde: 
Beholde, she is thy wyfe, why saydest thou then: She is mysister? Isaac answered him:
I thonght, I might peraduenture haue died because of her. Abimelech saide: Why hast thou then done this vnto vs? It coude lightly haue come to passe, that some of the people might haue lyen with thy wyfe, and so haddest thou broughte synne vpo vs. Thé Abimelech commaunded all the people, and sayde: Who so toucheth this man or his wyfe, shal dye the death.

And Isaac sowed in that londe, and foüde the same yeare an hundreth buszshels, for the
LORDE blessed him. And he became a greate man, wente forth, and grew, tyll he was exceadinge greate, so that he had moch good in shepe and greate catell, and a greate housholde. ‘Therfore had the Philistynes envye at him, ^and stopped all the welles, that his fathers seruauntes had dygged in the tyme of Abraham his father, and fylled them with earth, In so moch that Abimelech also himself sayde vnto him: Departe from vs, for thou art farre mightier then we.

Then departed Isaac from thence, and|¢€ 

pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there. And whan he was satled, he caused to dygge vp the welles agayne, that they had dygged vp in his father Abrahas tyme, which the Philistynes had stopte after the death of Abraham, and he called the after y same names that his father had named them withall.

Isaacs seruauntes also dygged in the valley, and there they founde a well of lyuinge water.
‘ But the hyrdmen of Gerar stroue with Isaacs hyrdmen, and saide: The water is oures.
Then called he the well Eseck, because they had done him wronge.

Then dygged they another well, and stroue for that also: therfore called he it Sytena.
So he gatt him from thence, and dygged i Gen. 13. a.

£ Gen. 12. c. and 20. a. ^ Gen. 21. c. 

7 

fo. rrbi. 

another well, for the which they stroue not: therfore he called it Rehoboth, and sayde:
Now hath the LORDE made vs rowme, and letten vs growe in the londe. Afterwarde he departed thence vnto Berseba.

D| And the LORDE appeared vnto him the 

same night, and sayde: Í am the God of thy father Abraham, feare thou not, for I am with the, and wyll blesse the, and multiplye thy sede for my seruaunt Abrahams sake. Then buylded he an altare there, and called vpon the name of the LORDE, and pitched his tent there, and there his seruauntes dygged a well."

And Abimelech wente vnto him from Gerar, and Ahusath his frende, and Phicol his chefe captayne. But Isaac sayde vnto them:
Wherfore come ye to me? seynge ye hate me, and haue put me awaye from you? They sayde: We se with open eyes, that the LORDE is with the, therfore we deuysed that there shulde be an ooth betwixte vs and the, and that we wolde make a bonde with the, that thou do vs no harme, like as we haue not hnrte the, and as we haue done nothinge vnto the, but all good, and let the departe in peace.

As for the, thou art $ blessed of the 
LORDE. ‘Then Isaac made them a feast, and they ate and dronke. And on the morow they arose, and sware one to the other. And
Isaac let them go, and they departed from him in peace.

The same daye came Isaacs seruauntes, and tolde him of the well that they had digged, and sayde vnto him: We haue founde water.
And he called it Saba. Therfore is y cite 

called Bersaba vnto this daye. 
HAN Esau was fourtye yeare olde, he 
\ toke wyues: Iudith the doughter of 
Beri the Hethite, and Basmath the doughter of Elon the Hethite: both these were disho- bedient vnto the sprete of Isaac and Rebecca.
And it came to passe when Isaac was olde, his eyes waxed dymme of sight, and he called
Esau his greater sonne, and sayde vnto him: 
My sonne. He answered him: Here am I. 
And he sayde: Beholde, I am olde, and knowe not whan I shal dye. Now therfore take thy geer, thy quyuer and thy bowe, and get the forth to the felde, and take me some

The rrbij. Chapter. 

a Gen. 21. c. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

venyson, and make me meate (soch as I loue and brynge it me herein, that I may eate, y my soule maye blesse the, before I dye.

But Rebecca herde these wordes, that 
Isaac sayde vnto his sonne. And Esau wente his waye in to the felde, to hunte venyson, and to brynge it home. Then sayde Re- becea vnto Iacob hir sonne: beholde, I haue herde thy father talkinge with Esau thy brother, and sayenge: Brynge me venyson, and make me meate, that I maye eate, and blesse the before LORDE, yer I dye. Now therfore my sonne, heare my voyce, what I commaunde the: Go thy waye to the flocke, and fetch me two good kyddes, that I maye make meate of them for thy father, soch as he loueth: this shalt thou brynge in vnto thy father, that he maye eate, that he maye blesse the before his death.

Neuertheles Iacob sayde vnto Rebecca his mother: Beholde, my brother Esau is rough, and I am smooth: then might my father per- aduenture fele me, and I shulde seme vnto him as though I begyled him, and so brynge a curse vpon me and not a blessynge. ‘Then sayde his mother vnto him: That curse be vpon me my sonne, folowe thou my voyce: go thy waye and fetch it me. So he wente his waye, and fetched it, and brought it vnto his mother.

Then his mother made meate, acordinge as his father loued, and toke Esaus hir elder sonnes costly rayment (whieh she had with her in y house) and put them vpon Iacob hir yonger sonne. But the kyddes skynnes put she aboute his handes, and where he was smooth aboute the neck: and so she put the meate with bred (as she had made it) in hir sonne Iacobs hande.

And he brought it in vnto his father, and sayde: My father. He answered: here am
I, who art thou my sonne? Iacob sayde: I am Esau thy firstborne sonne, I haue done as thou saydest vnto me: aryse, syt vp, and eate of my venyson, that thy soule maye blesse me. But Isaac sayde vnto his sonne:
My sonne, how hast thou founde it so soone ? 
He answered: The LORDE thy God brought it to my hande.

Thé sayde Isaac vnto Iacob: Come neare my sonne, that J maye fele the, whether thou be my sonne Esan or not. So Jacob wéte

> Iudic. 11. a. 

Chap. rrbij. 

5 

€ 

Chap. rrbttj. The t. boke of Moses, 

vnto Isaac his father. And whan he had felt him, he sayde: The voyce is Jacobs voyce, but the handes are the handes of Esau. And he knew him not, for his handes were rough like as ¥ handes of his brother Esau. And he blessed him.

J| And he sayde vnto him: art thou my sonne 
Esau? He answered: Yee I am. Then sayde he: Bringe me here then to eate of thy venyson my sonne,* that my soule maye blesse the. 'Then he brought it him, and he ate: and he brought him wyne also, and he dranke.
And Isaac his father sayde vnto him: Come nye, and kysse me my sonne. So he came nye, and he kyssed him.

Then smelled he the sauoure of his clothes, and blessed him, and sayde: Beholde, the smell of my sonne is as ¥ smell of the felde, which ý LORDE hath blessed. God geue the of the dew of heauen, and of the fatnesse of the earth, and plenteousnes of corne and wyne. Nacions be thy seruauntes, and people fall downe at thy fote. Be thou lorde ouer thy brethren, and thy mothers children fall downe at thy fote. ^ Cursed be he, that curseth the: and blessed be he, that blesseth the.

£| Now whan Isaac had made an ende of blessynge, and lacob was scace gone out from his father Isaac, his brother Esau came from his huntinge, and made meate also, and brought it vnto his father, and sayde vuto him: Aryse my father, and eate of thy sonnes venyson, that thy soule maye blesse me. Then answered him Isaac his father: Who art thou? He sayde: I am Esau thy firstborne soune. Then was Isaac exceadingly amased aboue measure, and saide: Who? Where is then the hunter that brought me, and I haue eaten of all afore thou camest, and haue blessed him? And he shall be blessed still.

Whan Esau herde these wordes of his father, he cried loude, and was exceadynge sory, and sayde vnto his father: O blesse me also my father. But he sayde: Thy brother came with sotyltie, and hath taken thy bless- inge awaye. Then sayde he: He maye well be called Iacob, for he hath vndermined me now two tymes. My byrth right hath he awaye, and beholde, now taketh he awaye my blessynge also.

J| And he sayde: Hast thou not kepte one 

* tbat my hert maye wysh the good. a Heb. 11. d. 

Eccli. 3. b. è Gen.12.a. © Heb.12.c. 4 Heb. 11. d.' 

blessynge for me? Isaac answered, and sayde vnto him: [haue made him lorde ouer y, and all his brethren haue I made his seruantes.
With corne q wine haue I prouyded him. What shal I do vnto the now my sonne? Esau sayde vnto his father? Hast thou not one blessynge more my father? O blesse me also my father.

And he lift vp his voyce, q wepte." Then 
Isaac his father answered and sayde vnto him: 
*Beholde, thou shalt haue a fat dwellinge vpon earth, q of ¥ dew of heauen from aboue: with thy swerde shalt thou get thy lyuynge, and shalt serue thy brother. And it shall come to passe, y thou shalt put of his yock,t and plucke it from thy neck.

And Esau bare euell wyll vnto Iacob, because of the blessynge that his father had blessed him withall, and sayde in his herte:
The tyme wyll come shortly, that my father shal mourne, for I wil slaye my brother Iacob.
Thé was it tolde Rebecca of these wordes of hir elder sonne, and she sent, and bad call for
Iacob hir yonger sonne, and saide vnto him: 
Beholde, thy brother Esau threateneth the, that he wil slaye the. And now my sonne heare my voyce: Get the vp, and flye vnto my brother Laban in Haran, and tary there with him a whyle, ttyll the furiousnes of thy brother be swaged, and till his wrath agaynst
V be turned from the, and he forget what thou bu done vnto him. So wyll I then sende for the, and cause the be fetched from théce.
Why shulde I be robbed of you both in one daye ?

And Rebecca sayde vnto Isaac: I am weery of my life, because of the doughters of Heth:
Yf lacob take a wife of the doughters of 
Heth, $ which are as the doughters of this londe, what shall this life then profit me?

The rrdiij. Chapter. 

HEN called Isaac his sonne Iacob and 

ll blessed him, and charged him, q sayde 

vnto him: Take not a wife of the doughters of Canaan, but get the vp, and go in to
Mesopotamia vnto the house of Bethuel thy mothers father, and take y there a wife of y doughters of Laban thy mothers brother. And the Allmightie God blesse the, and make the frutefull, and multiplye the, (that thou mayest be a multitude of people) and geue the the

+4Re8.c. *Abd.1.a. $¢Gen.33.a. § Gen. 10. c. 
|| Some reade : talked louigly with bim. 

Fo. rroi, 

a 

Fo. rrbitj. 

GB 

blessynge of Abraham vnto $ q thy sede with the, that thou mayest possesse the lande, wherin thou art a straunger,* which God gaue vnto Abraham. So Isaac let Iacob departe, that he might go in to Mesopotamia vnto
Laban the sonne of Dethuel of Siria, y brother of Rebecca, his and Esaus mother.

Now when Esau sawe that Isaac had blessed 
Iacob, and let him departe in to Mesopotamia, that he might take a wife there: and y, as he blessed him, he charged him, q sayde: Thou shalt not take a wife of the doughters of
Canaan, and that Iacob obeyed his father and his mother, aud was gone vnto Mesopotamia: seynge also that Isaac his father loked not gladly vpon the doughters of Canaan, he wente his waye vnto Ismael, and besyde the wyues that he had afore, he toke “Mahaloth the doughter of Ismael ( Abrahàs sonne) the sister of Nebaioth, to wife.

As for Iacob, he departed from Bersaba, and wente vnto Haran and came to a place, where he taried all night: for the Sonne was downe. And he toke a stone of y place, a put it vnder his heade, and layed him downe in y same place to slepe. And he dreamed, and beholde, there stode vpon y earth, a ladder, whose toppe reached vnto the heauen.
And beholde, the angels of God ^wente vp and downe vpon it, and the LORDE stode vpon it, and sayde:

^] am the LORDE God of thy father 
Abraham, and the God of Isaac: The londe y thou lyest vpon, wyl I geue vnto the," and to thy sede: and thy sede shal be as y dust of y earth. And thou shalt sprede forth towarde the west, east, north, and south: and 'thorow the and thy sede shall all the kynreds vpon earth be blessed. And beholde, Í am with y, and wyll kepe the where so euer thou goest, a wyl brynge the hither agayne in to this lande: for I wil not leaue the, tyll I haue made good, all that I hane promysed the.

Now whan Iacob awaked from his slepe, he saide: Surely the LORDE is in this place, and I knew not. And he was afraied, and sayde: How fearfull is this place? here is no thinge els but an house of God, q a gate vnto heané. And Jacob arose early in the morn- ynge, and toke the stone’ that he had layed vnder his heade, and set it vp, and poured oyle

* Gen. 15. d. and 24. a. * Gen. 36. * Toh. 1. c. 

* Eccli. 44. d 1 Par. 17. c. 

Che i. boke of Moses. 

* Gen. 12.a, | 

vpon it. And he called the place Bethel, but afore the cite was called Lus. And lacob made a vowe, and sayde: *Yf God wyll be with me, and kepe me in this iourney y I go
;& geue me bred to eate, and clothinge to put on, and brynge me peaceably home agayne vnto my father: The shall the LORDE be my God, and this stone that 1 haue set vp, shal be an house of God: and all that thou geuest me, I wyl geue the the tenth therof.

The rrír. Chapter. 

HEN Iacob gat him vp vpon his fete: and wente in to the east countre, q loked aboute him, and beholde, there was a well in the felde, and y flockes of shepe therby, for the flockes e of the well.
And there laye a greate stone at the welles mouth, and thyther they vsed to brynge the flockes, and to ronle the stone from y mouth of the well, and to gene the shepe drynke, q so they put the stone agayne vpon the welles

mouth in to his place. 

And lacob sayde vnto them: Brethren, whéce be ye? ‘They answered: we are of
Haran. He sayde vnto them: Knowe ye 
Laban the sonne of Nahor? ‘They answered: 
We knowe him well. He sayde: “Is he in good health? ‘They answered: he is in good ihealth. And lo, there commeth his doughter
Rachel with the shepe. He sayde: It is yet hye daye, q is not yet tyme to dryue in the
,catell: gene the shepe to drynke, ¢ go youre waye, t fede them. ‘They answered: We can
‘not, tyll all the flockes be brought together, land tyll we roule the stone from the welles mouth, q so geue the shepe drynke.

came with hir fathers shepe, for she kepte y shepe. Whan lacob sawe Rachel $ doughter of Laban his mothers brother, RU the shepe of Laban his mothers brother, he wéte, q ronled the stone from the welles mouth, and gaue his mothers brother shepe to drynke, and kyssed Rachel, lift vp his voyce, and wepte, and tolde her, y he was hir fathers brother, and $ sonne of Rebecca. Then ranne she, and tolde her father.

Wha Laban herde of Iacob his sisters sonne, he ranne to mete him, and enbraced him, and kyssed him, and brought him in to his house.

VK Gen. 31. b. € 1 Par. 4. b. ^ Gen. 43. e. 

Chap. reir. 

Whyle he yet talked with them, Rachel|33 

a 

CERT 

The i. boke of Hoses. 

Fo. xrir. 

And so he tolde him all this matter. The sayde Laban vnto him: Wel, thou art my bone and my flesh. Abyde with me a moneth longe. But after that saide he vnto lacob:
Because thou art my brother, shalt thou ther- fore serue me for nought? Tell me, what shall thy wages be. Laban had two doughters, the eldest was called Lea, « the yongest
Rachel. And Lea was tender eyed, but 
Rachel was beutyfull q well fauoured of face, and lacob loued her well, and sayde: I will serue the seuen yeare, for Rachel thy yongest doughter. Laban answered: It is better that
I geue her the, then vnto another: tary thou with me.

So lacob serued seuen yeare for Rachel, and they semed vnto him but few dayes, he loued her so well. And lacob saide vnto
Laban: geue me my wyfe, for the tyme is come that I shulde lye with her. Thé Laban bad all the people of that place, and made a mariage. But at eué he toke his doughter
Lea, and brought her in vnto him, and he laye with her. And Laban gaue Zilpa his mayde vnto his doughter Lea to be hir mayde.

But on the morow, beholde, it was Lea. 
And he sayde vnto Laban: Why hast thou done this vnto me? Haue not I serued ¥ for
Rachel? Why hast thou then begyled me? 
Laban answered: It is not the maner in oure countre, to mary the yongest before the eldest.
Holde out this weke, q I will geue the this also, for the seruyce y thou shalt do me yet seuen yeares more. lacob dyd so, q helde out y weke. Then gaue he him Rachel his doughter to wyfe. And Laban gaue Bilha his mayden vnto Rachel his doughter to be hir mayden. So he laye with Rachel also, a loued Rachel more the Lea, and serued him yet seuen yeares more.

But when the LORDE sawe, that Lea was nothinge regarded, he made her frutefull, and
Rachel baren. And Lea céceaued, and bare a sonne, whom she called Ruben, and sayde :
“The LORDE hath loked vpon my aduersite. 
Now wyll my huszbande loue me. And she conceaued agayue, and bare a sonne, and sayde: The LORDE hath herde that I am despysed, and hath gene me this also, and she called him Symeon. She céceaned yet agayne, and bare a sonne, and sayde: Now wyll iy huszbande kepe me company agayne,

#4) Par. 9.8. 

for I haue borne him thre sonnes, therfore called she his name Leui. She conceaued y fourth tyme, and bare a sonne, and sayde:
Now wyll I geue thankes vnto the LORDE, therfore called she him Iuda, and left bearynge.

The rrr. Chapter. 

HEN Rachel sawe that she bare no 

children vnto Iacob, she had ennye at hir sister, q saide vnto Iacob: Geue me childré also, or els I am but deed. But Iacob was very wroth at Rachel, q sayde: Am I then in
Gods steade, which kepeth y frute of thy wombe from $? Neuertheles she sayde: |
Beholde, there is Bilha my mayden, lye with her, y she maye beare vpon my lappe, q that
I maye be increased by her. And so she gaue him Bilha hir mayden to wyfe.

And lacob laye with her. So Bilha con- ceaned, and bare Jacob a sonne. ‘Then sayde
Rachel: God hath geuen sentence on my syde, and herde my voyce, and geué me a sonne, therfore called she him Dan. Bilha
Rachels mayde coceaued agayne, and bare another sonne vnto lacob. Then sayde
Rachel: God hath turned it with me, and my sister, and I hane gotte the vpper hande.
And she called him Nephthali. 

Now whan Lea sawe that she had left bearynge, she toke Silpa hir mayde, and gaue her vnto Iacob to wyfe. So Silpa Leas mayde bare Jacob a sonne. Then saide Lea: This is good lucke, q she called him Gad. After this Silpa Leas mayde bare lacob another sonne. ‘Then sayde Lea: Well is me, for the doughters will call me blessed, and she called him Asser.

Ruben wente out in the tyme of y wheate haruest, and founde Mandragoras in the felde, and brought them home vnto his mother Lea.
Then sayde Rachel vnto Lea: Geue me some of thy sonnes Madragoras. She answered :
Hast thou not ynough that’ thou hast taken awaye my huszbande, but wilt take awaye my sonnes Mandragoras also? Rachel saide:
Wel, let him lye with the this night for thy sonnes Mandragoras. Now whan Iacob came home at euen from the felde, Lea wente forth to mete him, and sayde: Thou shalt lye with me, for I haue bought the for my sonnes
Mandragoras. 

And he slepte with her that night. And 
God herde Lea, and she conceaued, and bare 

35 for my sake. 

So. rr. 
Iacob the fifth sonne, q sayde: God hath re- warded me, because I gaue my mayden vnto my huszbande, and she called him Isachar.
Lea conceaued yet agayne, and bare lacob the sixte sonne, and sayde: God hath endewed me with a good dowry. Now wyll my husz- bande dwell with me agayne, for I haue borne him sixe sonnes, q she called him Zabulon.
After that she bare a doughter, whom she called * Dina.

3| Neuertheles God thought vpo Rachel, and 

herde her, and made her frutefull. Then she conceaned, and bare a sonne, and sayde:
God hath taken awaye my rebuke, and she called him Ioseph," and sayde: God gene me yet another sonne.

Now whan Rachel had borne Ioseph, Iacob 
. |sayde vnto Laban: ^ Let me go, q departe in to my place and vnto myne owne lande: geue me my wyues and my children, (for the which I haue serued the) y I maye go: for thou knowest, what seruyce I haue done the.
Laban sayde vnto him: Can I not fynde fauoure in thy sight? I perceaue, that God
"hath blessed me for thy sake. Appoynte thou the rewarde, y I shal geue the. But he saide vnto him: Thou knowest how I haue serued the, and what maner of catell thou hast vnder me. Thou haddest but litle afore
I came hither, but now is it growne in to a multitude, and the LORDE hath blessed y
And now whan shall I loke to myne owne house also? He saide: What shal I then geue the ?

Iacob sayde : Thou shalt geue me nothinge at all, but yf thou wilt do this for me y I saye, then wyll I fede and kepe thy shepe agayne. I wyll go thorow all thy flockes to daye, and separate thou from amonge them all the shepe that be spotted and partye coloured, and all blacke shepe amonge the lambes. Now loke what shalbe partie coloured and spotted amóge the kyddes, the same shal be my rewarde: so shal my righteousnes testifie with me to daye or tomorow, whan it cometh vnto my rewarde before the, so that, what so ener is not spotted and partye coloured amonge the kyddes, and blacke amoge the lambes, let that be theft with me.

J^| ‘Then sayde Laban: Beholde, let it be so 

as thou hast sayde. sundered out the speckled and partye coloured

And that same daye he 

* Ge. 34. a. * 1 Par. 2. a. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

goates, and all the spotted and partye coloured kyddes (where there was eny whyte vpon them) and all that was black amonge the lambes, and put them vnder the hande of his children, and made rowme of thre dayes iourney wyde betwixte him and Iacob. So
Iacob kepte the residue of Labans flocke. 

But lacob toke staues of grene wyllies, hasell and of chestnottrees, and pylled whyte strekes in them, and layed the staues that he had pylled, in the drynkinge troughes before the flocke, which came there to drynke, that they shulde conceaue, whan they came to drynke. So the flockes conceaued ouer ¥ staues, and brought forth speckelde, spotted and partye coloured.

Then Iacob parted y lambes, and put them to the flocke vnto the spotted: and all that was blacke in Labans flocke, that put he vnto the spotted. And he made him a flocke of his owne, which he put not vnto Labans flocke. — Neuertheles in the first buckynge tyme of the flockes, he layed the staues in the drynkinge troughes before the eyes of the flockes, that they shulde conceaue ouer the staues. But in the latter buckynge tyme he layed them not in. So the later were Laken but the firstlinges were Iacobs. Thus the man became exceadinge riche, so that he had many shepe, maydens q seruauntes, Camels and Asses.

The rrrt. Chapter. 

E herde also of y wordes of Labans 
| | children, that they sayde: Iacob hath brought all oure fathers good vnto him self, q of onre fathers good hath he gotten these riches. And Jacob behelde Labans counte- naunce, q beholde, it was not towarde him as yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye.

And the LORDE sayde vnto him: ^ De- parte agayne to thy fatherlade, and to thy kynred, I wyll be with the. Then sent Jacob and bad call Rachel and Lea in to the felde to his flockes, and sayde vnto them: I se youre fathers countenaunce, that it is not towarde me like as yesterdaye and yeryester- daye: but the God of my father hath bene with me. And ye knowe, that I haue serued youre father with all my power.

And he hath disceaued me, and chaunged my wages now ten tymes. But God hath not
4 Gen. 32. b. 

^ 3 Re. 11. d. * Gen. 39, a. 

Chap. rrr. 

6 

5 

Chap. rrri suffred him, todo me harme. Yf he sayde:
The partye coloured shalbe thy rewarde, then the whole flocke bare partye coloured. Yf he sayde: The speckelde shalbe thy rewarde, the the whole flocke bare speckelde. Thus hath God withdrawen youre fathers goodes from him, and geuen them vnto me. For whan the buckynge tyme came, I lift vp myne eyes and sawe in a dreame, and beholde, the rammes leapte vpon the flocke that was speckelde, spotted, q partye coloured.

And the angel of God sayde vnto me in a 

dreame: lacob. And I answered: here am}: 

I. He sayde: lift vp thine eyes, and be- holde, the rammes leape vpon the speckelde, spotted, and partie coloured flocke: for I haue sene all y Laban doth vnto the. I am y God at * Bethel, where thou dyddest anoynte the stone, q maydest a vowe there vnto me.
Get the vp now, q departe out of this londe, q go agayne in to the londe of thy kynred.

'Then answered Rachel and Lea, and sayde vnto him: As for vs, we haue no porcion ner inheritaüce more in oure fathers house, q he hath coüted vs as straugers, for he hath solde vs, vt spent vp oure wages. "lherfore hath
God withdrawe oure fathers riches from him vnto vs q oure children. What so ener now
God hath sayde vnto the, that do. 

So Iacob gat vp, and set his children and wyues vpon Camels, and caried awaye all his catell and all his substaunce, that he had gotten at Mesopotamia, y he might come vnto Isaac his father in the lande of Canaan.
Labà was gone to clyppe his flocke, “and Rachel stale hir fathers tymages. ‘Thus dyd lacob steale awaie y hert of Laban y Syrian, in y he tolde him not that he fled. So he fled, q all that was his, gat vp, and passed ouer the water, q wente straight towarde the mount Gilead.

B| Vpon the thirde daye it was tolde Laban, 

that lacob fled. And he toke his brethre vnto him, and folowed after him seuen dayes iourney, and ouertoke him vpon the mount
Gilead. But God came vnto Laban the 
Syrian in a dreame by night, v sayde vnto him: Bewarre, that thou speake nothinge to
Iacob but good. And Laba drew nye vnto 
Iacob. As for Iacob, he had pytched his tente vpon the mount. And Laban with his brethré pytched his tent also vpon the same mount

Gilead. 

* Gen. 28. d. “a Gen.38.b. 2 Re.13.e. + Gen.35.a. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

Then sayde Laban vnto Iacob: What hast thou done, that thou hast stollen awaie my hert, and caried awaye my doughters, as though they had bene taken captyue with y swerde? Wherfore keptest thou that secrete, that thou woldest flye, and hast stollen awaye fro me, and toldest me not, that I might haue brought the on the waye with myrth, with synginge, with tabrettes and harpes ? and hast not suffred me to kysse my children and doughters? ‘Thou hast done foolishly, and so moch might I haue made, that I coude haue done you euell: but youre fathers God saide yesterdaye vnto me: Bewarre, that thou speake nothinge vnto lacob but good. And for so moch then as thou woldest nedes de- parte, and longedest sore after thy fathers house, why hast thou stollen away my goddes?

lacob answered and sayde vnto Laban: I was afrayed, that thou shuldest haue taken away thy donghters fro me: but loke by whom thou fyndest thy goddes, let the same dye here before oure brethren. Seke that thine is by me, and take it awaye. (But he knew not, that Rachel had stollen them.) ‘Then wente Laban in to Jacobs tent and in to Leas tent, and in to both the maydens tétes, and founde nothinge: and out of Leas tente he wente in to Rachels tent. ‘Then toke Rachel the ymages, and layed them vnder the Camels strawe, and sat downe vpon them. But Laban searched the whole tent, and founde nothinge.
Then sayde she vnto hir father: Be not angrie my lorde, that I can not ryse vp vnto the: for it goeth with me after the maner of wemen. So he songht, and founde not the ymages.

And Jacob was wroth, and chode with 
Laban, answered q sayde vnto him: What haue J trespased or offended, y thou art so whote vpon me? Thou hast searched all my housholde stuff, q what hast thou founde of thy housholde stuff? Laye it here before my brethren q thyne, y they maye iudge betwene vs both. ‘Twentye yeare haue I bene with the: thy shepe « goates haue not bene vn- frutefull, the rammes of thy flocke haue I not eaten: Loke what was ttorne of beastes, I brought it not vnto y, I was fayue to paie it my self: thou requyredest it of my hande, whether it were stollen fro me by daye or by night. On the daye tyme the heate cosumed

1 Ex. 22. b. 

So. ryrt. 

fo. rrrü. me, and the frost on the night, and my slepe departed fro myne eyes.

Thus haue I serued twentye yeare in thy house, fourtene yeares for thy doughters, q sixe for thy flocke, and ten tymes hast thou chaunged my rewarde: q yf the God of my father the God of Abraham, and the feare of
Isaac had not bene on my syde, thou had- dest latten me go awaye emptye. But God hath loked vpon myne aduersite and laboure, and rebuked the yesterdaye.

Laban answered and sayde: The dough- ters are my doughters, q the children are my childre, and the flockes are my flockes, q all that thou seist is myne. What can I do this daye vnto these my doughters, or to their children whom they hane borne? Now ther- fore come on, let vs make a couenaunt (I a thou) which maye be a wytnesse betwene me and the. Then toke Iacob a stone, q set it vp (for a piler or markstone) and sayde vnto his brethren: Gather stones. And they toke the stones, and made an heape, q ate vpon the same heape. And Laba called it Iegar
Sahadutha, but Iacob called it Gilead: (either of them after the properte of his language.)

@| Then sayde Laban: * This heape be wyt- nesse betwene me and the this daye (therfore is it called Gilead) and a testimony, for he sayde: The LORDE loke betwene me and yf whan we are departed y one from y other: y, thou vexe my doughters, or take other wyues vnto them. ‘There is no mā with vs, but lo, God is the wytnesse betwene me and the. And Laban sayde morouer vnto Iacob:
Beholde, this is the heape, and this is the marckstone that I haue set vp betwixte me and the : the same heape be wytnesse, and the same marckstone also be wytnesse, yf 1 passe ouer vnto the, or yf thou passe ouer this heape q marckstone vnto me, to do eny harme. The
God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and the God of their fathers, be iudge betwene vs.

And lacob sware vnto him by the feare of his father Isaac. And Jacob offred an offerynge vpon the mount, and called his brethré to eate bred. And whan they had eaten, they taried vpon the mount all night. But vpon the morow Laban rose vp early, kyssed his childré x doughters, q blessed the, q departed, and came agayne vnto his place. As for
Iacob, he wente on his journey, q the angels 

F 

* Iosu. 22. f. & 24. f. + Iosu. 24. a. 

The i. boke of loses. 

l 

Chap. rrrý. of God met him. And whan he sawe them,

he sayde: It is Gods hoost, q called the same place Mahanaim.

The rrr. Chapter. 

ACOB sent messaungers before him to his 

brother Esau tin to the lande of Seir, of the felde of Edom, q commaunded the, a sayde: Saye thus vnto my lorde Esau: Thy sernaunt lacob sendeth y this worde: I haue bene out with Laban, q haue bene hither to amonge straungers, q haue oxen a Asses, shepe, seruauntes q maydés, and haue sent forth to shewe it the my lorde, y I might fynde fauoure in thy sight.

'The messaungers came agayne vnto lacob, and sayde: We came vnto thy brother Esau, t he commeth forth also agaynst the with foure hundreth men. Then was lacob sore afrayed, and wyst not what waye to turne him self, x deuyded the people that was with him, and the shepe, and the oxen, q the Camels in to two droues, q sayde: Yf Esau come vpon the one droue, and smyte it, the other shal escape.

Iacob sayde morouer: O God of my father 
Abraha, God of my father Isaac, LORDE thou that saydest vnto me: t Departe agayne to thine owne londe and to thy kynred, and I wyl do the good: I am to litle for all the mercies and all the trueth that thou hast shewed vnto thy seruaunt (for I had nomore but this staff whan I wente ouer this Iordan, and now am I become two droues) delyuer me from y hande of my brother, fro the hade of Esau, for I am afrayed of him, lest he come and smyte me the mother with the children.
"Thou saydest: I wyll do the good, and wyll make thy sede as the sonde of y see, which can not be nombred for multitude.

And there he taried that night, and toke of soch as came to hande, ^a present vnto his brother Esau, two hüdreth she goates, twen- tye he goates, two hundreth shepe, twentye rammes and thirtie mylck camels with their foales, fourtye kyne, ten bullockes, twentye she Asses with ten foales, and put them in the handes of his sernauntes, euery flock by them selues, a sayde vnto them: Go ye forth before me, q put a space betwixte one flocke after the other, and commaunded the first and sayde:

When my brother Esau meteth the, and 

d 1 Gen. 31. b. ? 1 Re. 25. c. 

Chap. rrrifj. 

axeth the: Whose art thou? q whyther goest thou? and whose are these that thou dryuest before the? Thou shalt saye: They be thy seruaunt Iacobs, which sendeth a present vnto his lorde Esau, and commeth behynde vs him self.

B| Thus commaunded he the seconde also, 

ia 

a 

and the thirde, and all them that folowed the flockes, and sayde: Like as I haue tolde you, so speake ye vnto Esau, whan ye mete him, and saye vnto him also: Beholde, thy seruaüt
Iacob is behynde vs. For he thought: I wyll reconcyle him with the present that goeth be- fore me, after warde wyll I se him my self, peraduenture he shall receaue me to grace.

So the present wente before him, but he taried in the tente the same night, and rose vp in y night, and toke his two wyues and the two maydens and his eleuen sonnes, and wente vnto the foorde of lacob, toke them and caried them ouer the water, so that all that he had came ouer, and taried him self alone on this syde.

“Then wrestled there a man with him vntyll the breake of y daye. And whan he sawe y he might not ouercome him, he touched the senowe of his thye, and y senowe of his thye shrancke in wrestlinge with him. And he sayde: Let me go, for y daye breaketh on.
But he answered: I will not let y go, excepte thou blesse me. He sayde: What is thy name? He answered: lacob. He sayde:
^'lhou shalt nomore be called Iacob, but 
Israel, for thou hast stryuen with God and with men, and hast prenayled. And lacob axed him, q sayde: Tell me, what is thy name? But he sayde: ‘Why axest thou what my name is? And he blessed him there.
And Iacob called the place Peniel, for I haue sene God face to face, t my soule is recouered.
And as he came ouer fro Peniel, y Sonne rose vpo him, q he halted vpon his thye.
Therfore eate the children of Israel no vane vpon the senow of y thye vnto this daye, because y vane vpon the senow of Iacobs thye was touched.

The yrritj. Chapter. esp lift vp his eyes, q sawe his brother
Esau cómynge with foure hundreth men: and he deuyded his children vnto Lea vnto
Rachel, and to both the maydés, and set the a Ose. 12. a.

> Gen. 35. b. 3 Re.18.d. — * Iudic. 13.c. 

The i. boke of Hoses, 

maydens with their children before, and Lea with hir childré after, aud Rachel with Ioseph hynder most. And he wente before them, and bowed him self to the grounde seuen tymes, tyll he came to his brother. * But
Esau ranne to mete him, and enbraced him, and fell aboute his neck, q kyssed him, and wepte, and lift vp his eyes, and sawe the wyues with the children, and sayde: What are these with the? He answered: They are the children, which God hath geuen vnto thy seruaunt. And the maydens came forth with um children, and dyd their obeysaunce vnto im.

Lea came forth also with hir childré, and kneled vnto him. Afterwarde came loseph and Rachel forth, and kneled vnto him like- wyse. And he sayde: What meanest thou with all the droue that I met? He answered: that I might fynde grace in the sight of my lorde. Esau sayde: I haue ynongh my brother, kepe that thou hast. Iacob answered:
Oh nay, but yf I haue founde grace in thy sight, receaue my present of my hande (for I sawe thy face, ^as though I had sene the face of God) and be at one with me. Take this present in good worth, that I hane brought y, for God hath geuen it me, x I haue ynough of all thinges. So he compelled him to take it.

And he sayde: Let vs go on and take oure iourney, I wyll go in thy company. But he sayde vnto him: My lorde, thou knowest that
I haue tender children by me, and small and greate catell also, which are yet bnt yonge: yf they shulde be dryué ouer in one daye, the whole flocke wolde dye. Let my lorde go on before his seruaüt. I wyll dryue after fayre and softly, (there after as the catell q the children can go,) tyll I come to my lorde in Seir. Esau sayde: Yet wil I leaue some of my people with the. He answered: What nede is it? Let me but onely fynde grace in the sight of my lorde.

So Esau departed againe the same daye towarde Seir, and lacob toke his iourney to- warde Sucoth, and buylded him an house, and made tétes for his catell. Therfore is the place called Sucoth.

Afterwarde came Iacob peaceably vnto the cite of Sichem, which lyeth in y lande of
Canaan, after that he was come agayne out of Mesopotamia, and pitched before the cite,

4 2 Re. 19. e, Hest. 15. b. 
8 

* Ge. 27. g. © Gen. 28. d. 

So. revit. 

5 

€ 

Fo. xt. 

The i. boke of sHoses, 

“and bought a pece of londe of the children of 
Hemor y father of Sichem for * an hundreth pens. ‘There pitched he his tent, and there he set vp an altare, and called vpon the name of the mightie God of Israel.

The rrytitj. Chapter. 

INA y doughter of Lea, which she bare 
D vnto lacob, wente out to beholde the doughters of the londe. Whan Sichem the sonne of Hemor the Heuite (which was lorde of the lode) sawe her, he toke her, and laye with her, and forced ber, and his hert hanged vpon her, and he loued y damsell, and talked louyngly with her, and spake to his father
Hemor: Get me this mayden to wife. 

And Jacob vnderstode, that Dina his doughter was defyled, and his sonnes were with the catell in the felde, and Iacob helde his tonge tyll they came. Then Hemor the father of Sichem wente forth vnto lacob to comen with him. In the meane season came lacobs sonnes from y felde. And whan they herde it, it greued the men, and they were very wroth, that he had wrought foly in Israel,

land lyen with Iacobs doughter: for so was 

not the vse to do. 

Then comened Hemor with thé, and sayde: 
My sonne Sichems hert longeth for youre doughter, O geue hir him to wife: make frendshipe with vs, geue vs youre doughters, and take ye oure donghters, and dwell with vs, the londe shall be open vnto you, dwell and occupie, and haue youre possessions therin. And Sichem sayde vnto hir father and brethren: Let me fynde grace with you: loke what ye appoynte me, I will geue it: requyre the dowrye and gift of me hardely, I wyll geue it acordinge as ye wyll axe, onely

eue me the damsell to wife. 

Then Jacobs sonnes answered Sichem and 
Hemor his father (and spake disceatfullv, because their sister Dina was defyled) q sayde vnto them: That can we not do, to geue oure

‘sister to an vncireumcided man: for that were 

a shame vnto vs. 

Neuertheles we wyll consente vnto you, yf ye wylbe like vnto vs, and be cireumcided as many as are males amonge you: then will we geue you oure doughters aud take youre doughters vnto vs, and dwell with you, and be one people. But yf ye wyll not herken vnto

* Some reade : an hüdreth labes. 

a Josu. 24. f. 

vs, to be cireumcided, then wyl we take oure doughter, and go oure waye.

"These wordes pleased Hemor and his sonne wel, and the yonge man deferde not to do the same, for he had lust to Iacobs doughter: and he was holden in honoure aboue all in his fathers house. ‘Then came Hemor and
Sichem his sonne vnder y gate of cite, and comened with the citisens of the cite, and saide: These men are peaceable with vs, and will dwell in the lande and occupye: now is the londe brode of both the sydes, we wyl take their doughters vnto vs, and geue them oure doughters.

But then wyll they consent vnto vs, to dwell by vs, and to be one people with vs, yf we cireumeyse all the men children amonge vs, like as they are circumcysed: their catell and goodes, and all that they haue, shal be ours, yf we consent vnto them, that they maye dwel with vs.

And they herkened vnto Hemor and Sichem his sonne, as many as wente out and in at y gate of his cite, and circumcided all the males, that wente out and in at his cite. And vpon the thirde daye (whan it was panefull to them)
^the two sonnes of lacob Simeon and Leui 
Dinas brethren, toke euery man his swerde, and wente boldly in to the cite, tand slew all the males, and slew Hemor also and Sichem his sonne with the edge of the swerde, and toke their sister Dina out of Sichems house, and wente their waye.

Then came Iacobs sonnes ouer the slayne, and spoyled the cite (because they had defyled their sister) and toke their shepe, oxen, Asses, and what so euer was in the cite and in the londe, and all maner of goodes: All their children aud wyues toke they captyue, and spoyled all y was in the houses.

And lacob sayde vnto Symeon and. Leui: 
Ye haue brought it so to passe, y I stynke be- fore the inhabiters of this lande, y Cananites and Pheresites, q I am but a small nombre:
Yf they gather them selues now together against me, they shal slaye me, so shal I be destroyed with my honse. But they answered:
Shulde they thé deale with oure sister as with an whoore ?

The pyyb. Chapter. 
ND God sayde vnto Iacob: Get the vp, 
A aud go vnto Bethel, q dwell there, and 

? Iudith 9. a. * Ge. 49. a. 

Chap. rrriii. 

Chap. rrrbt. make there an altare vnto the God, that appared ynto the, *whan thou fleddest from thy brother Esau. Then sayde lacob vnto his housholde and to all y were with him:
Put awaye from you y straunge tgoddes, that are amonge you, and clense youre selues, and

! chaunge youre clothes, and let vs get vp, and 

‘go vnto Bethel, that I maye there make an altare vnto the God, ^which herde me in the tyme of my trouble, and hath bene with me in the waye that I haue gone.

33, Then gaue they him all the straunge goddes that were vnder their handes, and their earynges, and he buried them vnder an Oke that stode besyde Sichem, q departed. And there came a feare of God vpon the cities that; laye ronde aboute, so that they folowed not after Y sonnes of Iacob. So came lacob vnto
Lus m y lande of Canaan (which is called 

| Bethel) and all the people that were with him, and there he buylded an altare, and called y place Bethel, because the LORDE appeared vnto him there, whan he fled from his brother. Then dyed +Debora Rebeccas norse, and was buried beneth Bethel vnder the
Oke, and it was called the Oke of lamentacion. 

? And God appeared agayne vnto Iacob, after that he was come out of Mesopotamia, and blessed him, qœ saide vnto him: ¢Thon art called Iacob, neuertheles thou shalt nomore be called lacob, but Israel shal be thy name.
And so was he called Israel. 

€| And God sayde vnto him: $I am the All 

mightie God, be frutefull and multiplye: peo- 

ple and a multitude of people shal come of the, and llkynges shall come out of thy loynes: and the lande that I gaue vnto Abraham and

Isaac, wyll I geue vnto the, q wyl gene it vnto 

thy sede after the. So God departed from 

him, from ¥ place where he talked with him. 

And Iacob set vp a piler of stone, in the place 

where he talked with him, q poured drynk- 

offerynges theron, and poured oyle vpon it. 

And Iacob called y place where God talked 

with him, Bethel. 

33| And he departed from Bethel: and whan 

he was yet a felde brode from Ephrath, Rachel 

traueyled, q the byrth came harde vpon hir. 

But whan she had soch payne in trauelynge, 

y myd wife sayde vnto her: ^feare not, for thou 

* Ge. 28. b. t Ge. 31. e. a Ge. 28. d. 1 Gen. 
24. g. è Ose 12. a. * Gen. 32. e. 3 Re. 18. d. 
$ Ge. 17. a. ]| Mat. 1. a. 4 1 Re, 4. d. * Gen. 

The í. boke of Moses, 

shalt haue this sonne also. But as hir soule was departynge, y she must dye, she called him Ben Oni: neuertheles his father called hi Bē Iamin. *So Rachel died, q was buried in the waye towarde Ephrath, which now is called Bethlehé. And lacob set vp a piller vpon hir graue, there is Rachels grauestone vnto this daye. And Israel departed, and pitched his tent beyonde the tower of T Eder.

And it chaunsed, that when Israel dwelt in that londe, Ruben wente **and laye with Bilha his fathers concubyne, and that came to Israels cares.

And Iacob had twolue sonnes. The sonnes of Lea were these: Ruben Iacobs first borne! sonne, Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, t Zabulo.
The sonnes of Rachel, were loseph and Ben 
Iamin. The sonnes of Bilha Rachels mayde: 
Dan, and Nepthali. The sonnes of Silpa 
Leas mayde: Gad and Aser. ‘These are y sonnes of lacob, which were borne vnto him in Mesopotamia. And he came to his father
Isaac to Mamre in to the head cite which is called Hebron, where in Abrahà q Isaac were strangers. And Isaac was an hundreth a foure score yeare olde, ¢ fell sicke, and dyed, q was gathered vnto his people, whan he-was olde, t had lyued ynough: and his sonnes Esau a
Iacob buried him. 

The rrrbt. Chapter. 

HIS is the generacio of Esau, which is 

called Edom. Esau toke wyues of the doughters of Canaan. tt Ada the doughter of
Elo the Hethite: x Ahalibama the doughter of Ana, the childes childe of Zibeon the
Heuyte: And Basmath #+Ismaels doughter, the sister of Nebaioth. And Ada bare Eliphas vnto Esau. Basmath bare Reguel. Ahali- bama bare leus, laelam, « Korah. These are the childré of Esau, y were borne vnto him in the lande of Canaan.

And Esan toke his wiues sonnes q dough- ters, and all the soules of his house, his sub- staunce, and all the catell with all the goodes that he had gotten in the lande of Canaan, and wente in to a countre awaye fró his bro- ther Iacob: for their substaunce was so greate, that they coude not dwell together: and the londe wherin they were straungers, might not |

48. b. T Mich. 4. b. ** Ge. 49. a. tt Ge. 27. a. 

tt Ge. 28. b. 

So. rrrb. 

£ 

a 

To moi T 

€ 

holde them because of their goodes. So Esau dwelt vpon mount Seir. And Esau is Edom.

This is y generacio of Esau, of who are come y Edomites vpon y mount Seir. And these are y names of the childré of Esau:
Eliphas y sonne of Ada Esaus wife: Reguel y sonne of Basmath Esaus wife: The sonnes of
Eliphas were these: Theman, Omar, Zepho, 
Gaetham q Kenas. And *Thimna was a concubyne of Elyphas $ sonne of Esau, and bare him Amaleck. ‘These are y children of
Ada Esaus wyfe. 

The children of Reguel are these: Nahath, 
Serah, Samma, Misa. These are the children of Basmath Esaus wife.

The children of Ahalibama Esaus wife, the doughter of Ana, that was the childes childe of Zibeon (which she bare vnto Esau) are these: Ieus, Iaelam and Korah.

These are the prynces amoge the childré of 
Esau. The children of Eliphas the first sonne of Esau, were these: The prynce Theman, y prynce Omar, the prynce Zepho, the prynce
Kenas, the prynce Korah, the prynce Gaethan, the prynce Ainaleck. ‘These are the prynces of Eliphas in the lade of Edo, and are the children of Ada.

And these are the children of Reguel Esaus sonne: y prynce Nahath, ý prynce Serah, y prynce Sama, y prynce Misa. These are y prynces of Reguel in y londe of ý Edomites, they are y children of Basmath Esaus wife.
These are the children of Ahalibama Esaus wife: The prynce Ieus, y prince Taelam, the prynce Korah. These are the prynces of
Ahalibama, y doughter of Ana Ksaus wife. 
These are y childré of Esau and their princes. 
He is Edom. ‘The children of Seir ý Horite y dwelt in the londe, are these: Lothan, Sobal,
Zibeon, Ana, Dison, Ezer q Disan. ‘These are the prynces of the Horites, all children of
|Seir in the londe of Idumea. But Y childre 
‘of Lothan were these: Hori q Hema, q 
Lothas sister was called t Thimna. 

The children of Sobal were these: Alua, 
Manahat, Ebal, Sepho « Ona. The childré of Zibeo were: Aia q Ana. ‘This is the same
' Ana y foude + Mules in ¥ wyldernes, wha he 
‘kepte his fathers Zibeons Asses. ‘The children of Ana were: Dison: q Ahalibama, y is y doughter of Ana. ‘The childré of Dison were:
Hemdan, Eszban, lethri q Charan. The 

* Ge. 36. d. t Ge. 36. b. 

. The i. boke 

of oses, Chap. rrrbij, 

children of Ezer were: Bilhan, Seaua, q Ackan. 
The children of Disan were: Vz q Aran. 

These are y prices of y Horites : The prince 
Lothan, y prynce Sobal, j prynce Zibeo, ý prynce Ana, y prynce Dison, y prince Ezer, y prynce Disan. These are the prynces of the Horites, which ruled in y londe of Seir.

^'The kynges that reigned in the londe of 
Edumea (before the childré of Israel had eny kynge) are these: Bela y sonne of Beor was kynge in Edumea, ¢ y name of his cite was
Dinhaba. And whà Ds died, Iobab y sonne of Serah of Bosra was kinge in his steade.
When Iobab dyed, Husam out of $ lode of the Themanites was kynge in his steade.
Whan Husam dyed, Hadad $ sonne of Bedad 
(which slewe y Madianites in y Moabites felde) was kinge in his steade, q the name of his cite was Auith. Whan Hadad dyed, Samla of
Masreck was kinge in his steade. Wha Samla died, Saul of Rehoboth by y water syde, was kinge in his steade. Whan Saul dyed, Baal
Hana the sonne of Achbor was kynge in his steade. Wha Baal Hana the sonne of Achbor dyed, Hadad was kinge in his steade, q the name of his cite was Pagu, « his wifes name was Mehet Abeel, the doughter of Matred, the doughter of Mesahab. Thus are the princes of Esau called in their kynreds, places q names: The prynce Thymna, $ prynce
Alua, y prynce Ietheth, the prynce Ahali- bama, the prynce Ela, the prynce Pynon, the prynce Kenas, y prynce Theman, y prince
Mibzar, the prince Magdiel, y prynce Ira. 
'These are the prynces in Edumea, like as they dwelt in y lade of their possessions. And
Esau is y father of y Edomites. 

The rrrbij. Chapter. 

ACOB dwelt in y lande, wherin his father was a straunger, namely in the lade of
Canaa. And these are y generacids of Iacob. loseph was senetene yeare olde, wha he be- came a keper of the catell with his brethren, q the lad was with the children of Bilha q
Silpa his fathers wyues, and tolde their father of ¥ euell reporte y was of the. Israel loned loseph more thé all his childré because he had begotté him in his olde age, and he made

him a cote of many coloures. 
Now wha his brethré sawe, y his father loued him more thé all his brethré, they had

1 Leu. 19. e. G eim die Gh 

B 

Chap. rxrbitj. euell wyll at him, q coude not speake a frédly worde vnto hi. *loseph also had once a dreame, and tolde his brethre therof. "Thé hated they him y more, for he sayde: Heare
I praye you what I dreamed. Me thought we were byndinge sheeues vpo y felde, t my shefe arose, and stode vp, and youre sheeues rounde aboute made obeysaunce vnto my shefe.

Then sayde his brethré vnto him: Shalt thou be oure kinge, and hane domynió ouer vs? And they hated him yet y more, be- cause of his dreame, q his wordes. And he had yet another dreame, which he tolde his brethré, q saide: Beholde, I had yet another dreame: Me thought y Sonne q y Moone q eleuen starres made obeisaiice to me. And wha this was tolde his father and his brethré, his father reproued him, q sayde vnto him:
What maner of dreame is this, y thou hast dreamed? Shall I q thy mother, q thy bre- thren come q fall before y vpon the groude ?
And his brethré had envie at him. But his father marcked this sayenge.

Now wha his brethren were gone forth to kepe their fathers catell in Siché, Israel sayde vnto loseph: Do not thy brethren kepe the catell in Sichem? Come, 1 wil sende the vnto the. He answered: tHere am I. And he sayde: Go thy waye, and loke whether it be well with thy brethren and with y catell, and brynge me worde agayne how itis. And he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, to go vnto Sichem.

Then a certayne man founde him, wan- dringe out of his waye in the felde, which axed him, and sayde: Whom sekest thon? He answered: [seke my brethren: tell me I pray the where they kepe. The man sayde: They are gone from hence, for I herde them saye: let vs go vnto Dothan. Then folowed Ioseph after his brethren, and founde them at Dothan.

Now whan they sawe him a farre of, afore he came at thé, they denysed to sleye him, and sayde one to another: Lo, there cometh the dreamer, t come on, and let vs sley him, q cast him in a pytt, and saye: a wicked beast hath deuoured him: the shal it be sene, what his dreames are.

When Ruben herde that, he wolde haue delyuered him out of their handes, q sayde:
$O let vs not sley a soule. Ruben sayde 

* Gen. 42. a, 

t 1 Reg. 3. d. t Matt. 21, d. Mar. 
19.a. Luc.20. b. 

$ Gen. 42. c. 9 Act. 7. b. 

The í. boke of Moses. 

morouer vnto him: Shed no bloude, but cast him in to this pytt y is in the wyldernes, q laye ye no hādes vpon him. (He wolde haue delyuered him out of their hādes, ý he might haue brought him agayne vnto his father.)

Whan loseph now came to his brethrē, they stryped him out of his cote, that partye coloured cote which he had vpon him, ¢ toke him and cast him in to a pytt. But the same pytt was emptye, and no water in it, q they sat them downe toeate. Inthe meane season they lift vp their eyes, and sawe a copany of
Ismaelites comynge from Gilead, with their camels, which bare spyces, balme, and myrre, and were goinge downe in to Egipte.

Then saide luda vnto his brethré: what helpeth it vs, that we sleye onre brother, and hyde his bloude ? Come, let vs sell him vnto the Ismaelites, that oure handes be not de- fyled vpon him, for he is oure brother, oure flesh and bloude. And they herkened vnto him.

And as the Madianites marchaunt men wente by, they drew loseph ont of the pytt,
“and solde him vnto the Ismaelites (for twetye syluer pens) which brought him in to Egipte.

Now whan Kuben came agayne vnto the pytt, ¢ founde not loseph therin, he rent his clothes, and came agayne to his brethré and sayde: The lad is not yonder, whyther shal 1 go? Then toke they losephs cote q slewe a goate, and dypped the cote in Y bloude, and sent awaye that partie coloured cote, and caused it be brought vnto their father and sayde: This haue we founde, loke, whether it be thy sonnes coate, or no.

But he knewe it, and sayde: It is my sonnes coate, lla wicked beast hath deuoured him, a rauyshinge beast hath rauyshed loseph. And lacob réte his clothes, and put a sack cloth aboute his loynes, q mourned for his sonne a longe season. And all his sonnes q doughters came vnto him to coforte him. But he wolde not be cóforted, q saide: With sorowe wil I go downe in to the graue vnto my sonne.
And his father wepte for him. But the Ma- dianites ^solde him in Egipte vnto Potiphar
Pharaos chefe Marshall. 

The rrrbtij. Chapter. 
T fortuned at the same time, Iuda wente downe fro his brethren, x gat him to a man

|| Ge. 44. d. > Psa. 104. c. 

So. rrrbij. 

£ 

Fo. rbi, — — ^ ^ 0 1 &Cbr i boke of fH 
[called Hyra at Odollam. And there luda| [sende i Hyra at Odollam. And there Iuda sawe a mā of Canaüs doughter called Sua, and toke her. And whé he had lyen with her, she conceaued and bare a sonne, whom she called Er.

And she conceaued agayne, ¢ bare a sonne who she called Ona. ‘She proceaded yet further, q bare a sonne, who she called Sela.
And wha she had borne him, she left of bearinge.

And luda gaue his first sonne Er a wife, whose name was Thamar. But he was wicked before the LORDE, therfore the LORDE slew him. ‘Then sayde Iuda vnto his sonne
Onan: Go lie with thy brothers wife, and marye thyself with her, that thou mayest rayse vp sede vnto thy brother. But when Onan knewe that the sede ^ shulde not be his owne, whan he laye with his brothers wife, he let it fall vpon the earth and destroyed it, y he shulde not geue sede vnto his brother. ‘This thinge that he dyd displeased the LORDE sore, and he slewe him also.

Then sayde Iudas vnto Thamar his sonnes wyfe. Remayne a wyddow in thy fathers house, tyll my sonne Sela be growne: for he thought: peraduenture he might dye also like as his brethren. So Thamar wente hir waye, and remained in hir fathers house. Now wha many dayes were past, y doughter of Sua
Iudas wife dyed. And whan luda had left mournynge, he wente vp vnto Thimnath * to clyppe his shepe with his shepherde Hyra of
Odollam. 

Then was it tolde Thamar: beholde, thy father in lawe goeth vp vnto Thimnath, to clyppe his shepe. Theu put she of y wyd- dowes garmentes that she had vpon her, couered and dysgysed hir self, q sat hir downe withont the porte by the waye syde towarde
Thymnath. For she sawe that Sela was growne, and she was not geuen vnto him to wife.

Now whan luda sawe her, he thought it had bene an whoore, for she had couered hir face: and he gat him to her in the waye, and saide: I praye the let me lye with the, for he knewe not that it was his doughter in lawe.
She answered: What wilt thou geue me, that thou mayest lie with me? He sayde: I wil sende the a kydd from the flocke. She answered: Geue me a pledge then, tyll thou

2 Deut. 25. a. *Ge.31.c. 2 Re. 13. e. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

sende it me. He sayde: 

What pledge wilt thou that I geue the ?

She answered : Thy signet, and thy brace-!B 

let, and thy staff that thou hast in thy hade. 
Then he gaue it her, and laye with her, and she was with childe of him. And she gat hir vp, and wente hir waye, and layed of hir cloke, and put on hir wyddowes garmétes agayne.

Juda sent the kydd by his shepherde of 
Odolla, to fetch the pledge agayne from the woman, and he founde her not. "Then axed he the men of the same place, q sayde : Where is the whoore y sat without in the waye?
They answered: There hath no whoore bene here. And he came agayne vnto Tuda, and saide: I haue not fonnde her, morouer ¥ men of the same place saide: that there hath no whoore bene there. Iuda sayde: Let her take it vnto her, lest we happly be shamed, for I haue sent the kydd, and thou hast not founde her.

After thre monethes it was tolde Iuda: 
Thamar thy doughter in lawe hath plaied Er whoore: and beholde, by whordome is she gotten with childe. Juda sayde: brynge her forth, that she maye be brent. And whan she was brought forth, she sent vnto hir father in lawe, and sayde: By the man y oweth these, am I with childe. And she sayde: Knowest thou whose is this signet, this bracelet q this staff? Juda keve thé, q sayde: She is more righteous thé I, for I gaue hir not my sonne Sela: But he laye nomore with her.

Whan the tyme came that she shulde be delyuered, there were two twyns founde in hir wombe. And as she was now in trauelynge, the one put out his hande. Then the mydwife toke and boüde a reed threde aboute it, and saide: This shal come out first. But whan he pluckte in his hande agayne, his brother came forth. And she sayde: Wherfore is there a rent mayde for thy sake? And he was called t Phares. Afterwarde came his brother forth, which had y reed threde aboute his ccmss and he was called Zarah.

The rrriy. Chapter. 
OSEPH was brought downe in to Egipte, 
& Potiphar an Écipcià : Pharaos chefe marshall bought him of y Ismaelites, y brought him downe. And $ LORDE was with loseph, li so moch y he [Ex E a luckye mà, q was
Matt. 1. a. 

t 1 Para. 2, a. > Gen. 37. f. 

Chap. rrrir. 

Chap. pl TE, boke of Moses, fl. mri, rl. in his master M Egipcians house. master sawe ý the LORDE was with him: for what so euer he dyd, the LORDE made it to prospere m his hade: so y he founde fauoure in his masters sight, a was his ser-

L—Hn his master $ Egipcians house. And his| {his garment here by me, and fled out. Whan| - 

He made him ruler di his house, and 
And 

uaunt. put all that he had, vnder his hande. from the tyme forth that he had made hin ruler of his house and all his goodes, y
LORDE blessed the Egipcians house for 
Iosephs sake: and there was nothynge but the very blessynge of the LORDE in all y he had 1 in house t, in the felde, therfore left he all ý te had, in losephs hande. And medled with nothinge himself, saue onely the bred that he ate. And Ioseph was fayre of bewtye, and well fauoured of face.

And it fortuned after these actes, that his masters wife cast hir eyes vpon loseph, and sayde: Slepe with me. But he denyed, and saide vnto her: Beholde, my master Jove not what is in $ house, and all that he hath, that hath he put vnder my hande. And there is no man so greate in the house as I, and he hath kepte nothinge fro me, excepte ee for thou art his wife. How shulde I then do so greate euell, and synne agaynst God? But she spake soch wordes vnto loseph daylie.
Neuertheles he herkened not vnto her, to slepe by her, or to be in her company.

It Segna vpon a tyme, that loseph wente in to the house to do his busynesse, and there was none of ¥ folkes of the house thereby.
And she caught him by his garment, q sayde: 
Slepe with me. But he left the garment in hir hande, and fled, and gat him ‘out of the house.

Now whà she sawe that he had left his garmét in hir hande, and fled out, she called te folkes in the house, and sayde vnto thé:
Lo, he hath brought vs in the Hebrue, to do vs shame. He came in here vnto me, to slepe by me: but I eried with loude voyce.
And whan he herde that I made a noyse q cried, he left his garmét here by me, and fled, and ranne out.

And she layed vp his garmet by her, tyll his master eame home, and tolde him euen the same wordes, and sayde: 'The Hebrue seruaunt whom thou broughtest here vnto vs, came in here to me, for to do me shame.
But whan I made a noyse and cried, he left 

a Psal. 104. c. 

hay. r. — Thei boke of Moses, — fo.rnm. í. boke of oses, 

his garment here by me, and fled out. Whan his master herde the wordes of his wyfe which she tolde him, and sayde: Thus hath the Hebrue seruaunt done vnto me, he was very wroth.

Then his master toke him, and put him in the preson, “wherin the kinges presoners laie. |
And there he laye in preson. But the 
LORDE was with him, and had mercy vpon him, q caused him to fynde fauoure in the sight of the officer of ¥ preson, so that he committed all the presoners of the preson vnto his hades: that what so euer were done, | might be done by him. For the officer of the preson sawe, ý the LORDE was with him in all y was vnder his handes, and that what so euer he dyd, the LORDE made it to come prosperously to passe.

The rl. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned after this, that $ y kynge 

of Egiptes chefe butlar and y chefe baker offended their lorde the kynge of Egipte.
And Pharao was angrie with them, a caused them be put in preson in y chefe marshals house, where Ioseph laye presoner. And the chefe marshall put loseph vnto them, y he might serue them. And so they were in preson for a season.

And they dreamed, both the butlar q the baker in one night, euery mà his owne dreame, and euery dreame had his i interpretacio. Now in the mornynge whan loseph came in vnto them, and sawe that they loked sadly, he axed them and sayde: Why loke ye so sadly to daye? They answered: We haue dreamed, and haue no man to declare it vnto vs. Ioseph sayde: Interpretinge belongeth vnto God, but tell it me yet.

Then the chefe butlar tolde loseph his dreame, and saide vnto him: I dreamed that there was a vyne before me, which had thre braunches, and it budded, grewe and bare blossoms, and the grapes therof were rype.
And I had Pharaos euppe in my hande, t toke (the grapes) and wronge thé in to y cuppe, and gaue Pharao the euppe in his hade.

loseph sayde: This is the interpretacio : 
The thre braunches are thre dayes, and ouer thre dayes shall Pharao take the, and putt. the in thine office agayne, that thou mayest geue him the euppe in his hande after the olde maner, wha thou wast his butlar. But,

Fo. ry. 

£ 

i 

| fo. rl. 

€ 

whan thou art in thy prosperite, thynke vpon me, and shewe me kyndnesse, that thou mayest certifie Pharao of me, y he maie bringe me out of this house: for Í was preuely caried out of the lande of the Hebrues, and here also haue I done nothinge, that they shulde haue put me in this dongeon.

Whan the chefe baker sawe, that the in- terpretacion was good, he sayde vnto Ioseph:
I dreamed, that I bare thre wyker baskettes vpon my heade, and in ¥ vppermost baszket all maner of bake meates vnto Pharao, and the foules ate out of the baszket vpon my heade.

loseph answered, and sayde: This is the interpretacion: The thre baszkettes are thre dayes, and after thre dayes shall Pharao take the, and hange the vpon the galowe, and the foules sha] eate thy flesh from of y.

And vpon the thirde daye it came to passe, that Pharao helde his * byrth daye, and made a feast vnto all his seruauntes, and toke the chefe butlar and the chefe baker before all his seruauntes, and restored the chefe butlar to his butlarshipe agayne, so that he reached the cuppe in to Pharaos hande. As for the chefe baker, he caused him be hanged like as loseph had interpretated vnto him. Neuer- thelesse the chefe butlar thought uot on Ioseph, but forgat him.

The rli. Chapter. 

ND after two yeares Pharao had a 

dreame, how that he stode by a water syde: and beholde, out of the water there came seuen goodly kyne, and fatfleshed, and wente fedinge in the medowe. After these he sawe other seuen kyne come out of the water, which were euell fauoured and leane fleshed, and wente by the kyne vpon y water syde: aud the enell fauoured leene kyne ate vp the seuen goodly and fatt kyne. Then
Pharao awaked. 

And he slepte agayne, and dreamed the seconde tyme. And he sawe that seuen eares of corne grewe vpon one stalke, full and good.
Afterwarde he sawe seué thynne and blasted eares come vp, and the senen thynue eares deuoured the seuen greate and full eares.
Then Pharao awaked, and sawe that it was a dreame. And whan it was daye, his sprete was troubled, and he sente out, q caused to

* Mat. 14, a. 

Thr i. boke of 3Hosrs. 

call all the soythsayers in Egipte q all the wyse men, and tolde them his dreame. But there was none, that coude tell Pharao the inter- pretacion of it.

Then spake the chefe butlar vnto Pharao, and saide: This daye do I remembre my fawte. Whan Pharao was angrie with his seruauntes, and put me in preson with y chefe baker in ¥ chefe marshals house, we dreamed both in one night euery ma his dreame, hau- inge his owne interpretacion. Then was there with vs a youge man an Hebrue, the chefe marshals seruaunt, vnto whom we tolde it, and he declared oure dreames vnto vs, vnto euery mà acordinge to his dreame. And as he declared it vnto vs, so came it to passe.
For I was restored vnto myne office, and he was hanged.

Then Pharao sent and called for Ioseph and they let him out of the dongeon. And he let himself be shauen, and chaunged his clothes, and came in vnto Pharao. Then saide Pharao vnto him: I haue dreamed a dreame, and there is no man that can inter- prete it: but I haue herde tell of the, that wha thou hearest a dreame, thou declarest it. loseph answered Pharao, and sayde: God shall geue Pharao a prosperous answere, yee well without me.

Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I dreamed that 
I stode by a water syde, and beholde, out of the water there came seuen kyne, fatfleshed and goodly, and wente fedinge in y medowe.
And after them I sawe other seué ios come out, thynne, euell fauoured, and leenfleshed.
So euell fauoured sawe I neuer in all the lande of Egipte. And the seuen leene and euell fauoured kyne, ate vp the seuen first fat kyne. And whan they had eaté them vp, a man coude not perceaue that they had eaten them, q were as euell fauoured as they were afore. Then I awaked.

And I sawe agayne in my dreame seuen eares of corne, growinge vpo one stalke, full and good. Afterwarde there spronge vp seuen wythred eares, thynne and blasted, and the senen thynne eares deuoured the seuen good eares. And I haue shewed it vnto my soith- sayers, but they can tell me nothinge therof.

Ioseph answered Pharao: Both Pharaos dreames are one. God sheweth Pharao what he wil do. ‘The seuen good kyne are seuen yeares, and the seuen good eares are seuen

Chap. rli. 

Chap. rli. The í. boke of Moses. — fo. rli. 

yeares also. It is one dreame. The senen leene and enell fauonred kyne, that came vp after them, are seuen yeares. And the seuen thynne and blasted eares, shalbe seuen yeares of derth. his is now the thinge which I tolde Pharao, that God sheweth Pharao, what he wyll do.

Beholde, there shal come seuen yeares with greate plenteousnes in y whole lande of Egipte, and after the same there shall come seuen yeares of derth, so that all this plenteousnes shalbe forgotten in y lande of Egipte: and the derth shall consume the lande, so that the plenteousnes shal not be perceaued in the lande, because of the derth that commeth therafter, for it shall be very greate. Where as Pharao dreamed the seconde tyme, it signifieth that this thinge is surely prepared of God, and that God wil shortly brynge the same to passe.

Let Pharao now prouyde for a man of vnderstondinge q wyszdome, whom he maye set ouer the lande of Egipte, and se that he ordene officers in the londe, and take y fifth
(parte) of the lande of Egipte in the seuen plenteous yeares, and gather all y foode y shal come of the plenteous yeares, that they maye laye vp corne vnder Pharaos power for sustenaunce in the cities, and kepe it, y there maye be foode founde prepared for the lande in the seuen deare yeares, which shall come vpon the lande of Egipte, that the lande be not destroyed of honger. ‘The sayenge pleased
Pharao well and all his seruantes. And 
Pharao sayde vnuto his seruauntes: How might we fynde soch a man, in whom is the sprete of God? And sayde vnto Iosep: For so moch as God hath shewed y all this, there is none of soch vnderstondinge q wyszdome as thou.

F| Thou shalt be ouer my house, and acordinge vnto thy worde^ shall all my people obeye: onely in the kynges seate wyll I be more then thou. And he sayde: Beholde, I haue set the oner the whole lande of Egipte. And he toke of his ringe from his hade, and gaue it loseph in his hade, and clothed him with whyte sylke, and honge a cheyne of golde aboute his neck, and made him ryde vpo the seconde charet: and caused it be proclamed before him, that men shulde bowe their knees

vnto him, as to him who Pharao had set ouer | the whole lande of Egipte.

And Pharao sayde vnto loseph: I am 
Pharao: without thy wyll shall no man moue his hande or his fote in all the lade Egipte.
And he called him * Zaphnath Paena, q gaue him a wife, euen Asnath the doughter of Potiphar the prest of On. So Ioseph wente out, for to vyset the lande of Egipte.
(And he was thirtie yeare olde, whan he stode before Pharao.) And he departed from Pharao, and wente thorow all the lande of Egipte.

And the londe dyd so those seuen plente- ous yeares, and they gathered all the foode of the seuen yeares that were iu the lande of
Egipte, q layed it in the cities. Loke what oode grewe in the felde rounde aboute euery cite, they put it therin. So Ioseph layed vp the corne in stoare, and that moch aboue measure, as the sonde of the see: in so moch y he left of nombrynge of it, for it conde not be nombred.

^ And vnto loseph there were borne two! @ sonnes (before y derth came) whom Asnath the doughter of Potiphar prest of On bare, vnto him. And the first called he Manasses: | for God (sayde he) hath caused me to forget all my laboure, and all my fathers house. The}: seconde called he Ephraim: for God (sayde he) hath caused me to growe in y lande of my trouble.

Now whan y seuen plenteous yeares were ended in Egipte, then beganne the seuen deare yeares to come, “wherof loseph had sayde. And there was derth in all landes, but in all the lade of Egipte there was foode.
Now whan the lande of Egipte begaune to suffre honger also, the people cryed vnto
Pharao for bred. But Pharao sayde vnto all 
ý Egipcians: Go vnto foseph, what he sayeth vnto you, y doo. So whan there was derth in all y lade, Ioseph opened all y was by him, q solde vnto the Egipcians. Thus y derth preuayled in the lande, q all countrees came to Egipte to bye at Ioseph: for the derth was mightie in all landes. — -

e 

The rlij. Chapter. 
HAN Iacob sawe that there was moch| & corne in Egipte, he sayde vnto his sonnes: Why gape ye? Beholde, I heare that

"? Psal 104. c. Act. 7. b. * Zaphnath Paena, that is 

secrete thiges are opened. > Gen. 46. c. G ANGUS tha Ws to saye: An expoüder of secrete thinges, or a man to who

fo. rli. 

€ 

there is moch corne in Egipte, go downe gq bye vs corne, y we maie lyue, q not dye. So
Iosephs ten brethré wente downe to bye corne in Egipte. Asfor Ben Iamyn Iosephs brother,
Iacob wolde not let him go with his brethré, for he sayde: Some mysfortune might happen vnto him. So $ childré of Israel came to bye corne, amonge other y came with them: for there was derth also in y lande of Canaan.
But Ioseph was gouernoure in the lande, and solde corne vnto all the people in the lande.

Now whi his brethré came to him, they fell downe to the grounde before him vpon their faces. And he sawe them, q knewe the, and helde him self straunge towarde them, and talked roughly with them, and saide vnto them: Whence come ye? "They sayde: Out of the lande of Canaan to bye vytayle. Neuer- theles though he knewe them, yet knewe they not him. And loseph thought vpon y dreames that he had dreamed of them," and sayde vnto them: Ye are spyes, and are come to se where the lande is open.

They answered him: No my lorde, thy seruauntes are come to bye vytayle: we are all one mans sonnes, we are vnfayned, and thy seruauntes were neuer spyes. He sayde vnto the: No, but ye are come to se where the lande is open. They answered him: We thy seruauntes are twolue brethren, the sonnes of one man in the lade of Canaan, and the yongest is with oure father: as for one, he is awaye.

Ioseph sayde vnto them: This is it that 
I sayde vnto you: spyes are ye. Here by wyll I proue you: By the life of Pharao ye shall not get hence, excepte youre yongest brother come hither. Sende awaye one of you to feteh youre brother, but ye shalbe in preson. Thus wyll I trye out youre wordes, whether ye go aboute with trueth or not: for els, by the life of Pharao ye are spyes.
And he put thé together in warde thre dayes longe.

Vpon the thirde daye he sayde vnto thé: 
Yf ye wil lyue, the do thus, for I feare God: 
Yf ye be vnfayned, let one of youre brethren lye bounde in youre preson: but go ye youre waye, and cary home the necessary foode, q brynge me youre yongest brother, so wyll I beleue youre wordes, that ye shall not dye.
And so they dyd. 

* Gen. 37, a. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

Chap. rli. 

And they sayde one to another: This haue we deserued against oure brother, in that we sawe the anguysh of his soule, whan he be- sought vs, and we wolde not heare him: therfore cometh now this trouble vpon vs.
Ruben answered them, and saide: Tolde not 
I you ý same, whan I sayde:* O synne not agaynst ¥ lad, but ye wolde not heare. Now is his bloude requyred. But they knew not that Ioseph vnderstode it, for he spake vnto thë by an interpreter. And he turned him from them, and wepte. Now whan he had turned him to them agayne, and talked with them, he toke Symon from amonge them, q bounde him before their eyes, and com- maunded to fyll their sackes with corne, and to put euery mans money in his sack, and to geue euery one his expenses by the waye.
And so was it done vnto them. 

And they laded their corne vpon their/3 

Asses, and departed thence. But whan one opened his sacke to geue his Asse prouender in the Inne, he spyed his money in his sack mouth, and sayde vnto his brethren: My money is restored me agayne: lo, it is in my sack. Then their hertes fayled them, and they were afrayed amonge them selues, and sayde: Wherfore hath God done this vnto vs?

Now whan they came home to Iacob their father in the lade of Canaan, they tolde him all that had happened vnto them, q sayde:
The man that is lorde of the londe, spake roughly to vs, and toke vs for spyes of the countre. And whan we answered: we are vnfayned, q were neuer spyes, but are twolue brethren the sonnes of oure father: one is awaye, and the yongest is yet this daye with oure father in the lande of Canaan, He sayde:
Hereby wyl I marke, that ye are vnfayned: 
Leaue one of youre brethren with me, q take foode necessary for youre houses, q go youre waye, and brynge youre yongest brother vnto me: so shal I knowe that ye are no spyes, but vnfayned: thé shal I delyuer you youre brother also, and ye maye occupie in the lande.

And whan they opened their sackes, euery | 35 

man founde his boundell of money in his sacke. And wha they and their father sawe, that it was the bundels of their money, they were afrayed.

Then sayde lacob their father: Ye haue robbed me of my children. loseph is awaye,

* Ge, 37. d. 

a 

3 

Chap. rlii. 

Simeon is awaye, and ye will take Ben Jamin awaye: It goeth all ouer me. Ruben an- swered his father q sayde: Yf I brynge him not to the againe, then slaye my two sonnes: delyuer him but in to my hande, I wyl brynge him agayne vnto the. He sayde: my sonne shal not go downe with you: for his brother is deed, and he is left alone. Yf eny mysfortune shulde happen vnto him by the waye y ye go, ye shulde bringe my graye hayre with sorowe downe vnto the graue.

The pliij. Chapter. 
UT the derth oppressed y lande. And 
Å ) whanall the vytales that they had brought out of Egipte were spent, Iacob their father sayde vnto them: Go agayne, and bye vs a litle foode.

Thé Iuda answered him, and sayde: The man sware vnto vs, and sayde: ye shal not se my face, excepte youre brother be with you.
Yf so benow that thou wilt sende oure brother with vs, we wil go downe, and bye the foode.
But yf thou wilt not sende him, we wyl not go downe. For the man sayde vnto vs: Ye shal not se my face, excepte youre brother be with you.

Israel sayde: Wherfore haue ye done this euell vnto me, to tell ¥ man, that ye had yet a brother? They answered: The man en- quered so strately of vs and of oure kynrede, q sayde: Is youre father yet alyue? Haue ye yet a brother? 'Then tolde we him, as he axed vs. How coulde we knowe, that he wolde saye: brynge youre brother downe with you ?
Then sayde Iuda vnto Israel his father: Let the lad go with me, that we maye get vs vp and take oure journey, and lyue, and not dye, both we and thou, and oure childre. * I wyll be suertye for him, of my handes shalt thou requyre him. Yf I brynge him not vnto the agayne, q set him before thine eyes, I wil beare ¥ blame my life longe. For yf we had not made this tarienge, we had now bene come agayne twyse.

Then sayde Israel their father vnto the: 
Yf it must nedes be so, then do this: take of the best frutes of the lande in youre sackes, and brynge the man a present: a curtesy balme, and hony, and spyces, and myrre, and dates, and almondes. Take other money with you also, and the money that was brought

* Gen. 44, e. 

The í. boke of Moses, 

agayne in your sacke mouthes, cary it agayne with you: peraduenture it was an ouersight.
And take youre brother, get you vp, q go agayne vnto the man. The Allmightie God geue you mercy in the sight of y man, that he maye let you haue youre other brother, and
Ben Iamin. As for me, I must be as one, that is robbed of his children.

Then they toke the present, and other money with them, and Ben lamin, gat thé vp, and wente in to Egipte, and stode before loseph.
Then Ioseph behelde them with Ben Iamin, and sayde vnto the ruler of his house: Bringe these men in, and sley, q make ready, for they shal dyne with me at noone. And the man dyd as Ioseph bad him, q brought the men in to Iosephs house.

Whan they were brought in to Josephs house, they were afrayed, and sayde: We are bronght hither because of the money, that came agayne in oure sackes at the first, to pyke a quarell with vs, and to laye somethinge to oure charge, and to take vs for bonde ser- nauntes with oure Asses.

Therfore came they to y man, that was ruler of Iosephs house, and talked with him at the doore, and sayde: Syr, + we came downe at the first to bye foode, and whan we came in the Inne, and opened oure sackes, beholde, euery mans money was in his sack mouth with full weight: therfore haue we brought it with vs agayne, q haue brought other money with vs also, to bye foode: but we can not tell, who put oure money in oure sackes.

He sayde: Be content, feare you not, youre 
God euen y God of youre fathers hath geue you y treasure in youre sackes, I had youre money. And he brought forth Simeon vnto them, and led them in to Iosephs house, and gaue them water to wash their fete, q gaue their Asses prouender.

And they made readye y present, ageynst loseph came at nooue: for they herde, y they shulde dyne there. Now whan o h wente in to the house, they brought him home y present that they had, and fell downe to the grounde before him. But he welcomed them curteously, and sayde: Is youre father (that olde man which ye tolde me of,) in good health? Is he yet alyue? They answered :
Thy seruaunt oure father is in good health, 

t Gen. 42. e. 

Fo. rity. 

Fo. xlii. 

and is yet alyue. And they bowed them 

selues, and fell downe before him. 

And he lift vp his eyes, and sawe his bro- ther Ben Iamin his mothers sonne, and saide:
* [s this youre yongest brother, that ye tolde me of? And he sayde morouer: God be mer- cifull vnto the my sonne. And loseph made haist (for “the grounde of his hert was kyndled towarde his brother) and sought how he might wepe, q wente in to his chamber, and wepte

there. 

J'| And whan he had washed his face, he wente out, and refrayned him self, and sayde: set bred (on the table.) And they brought vnto him by him self, and vnto them by the selues, and to the Egipcians also that ate with them, by them selues. (For the Egipcians darre not eate bred with the Ebrues, that is an abhominacion vnto them.) And they were set ouer agaynst him, the first borne acord- inge to his first byrth, and the yongest after his youth. They marueled at it amonge them selues, and there were brought them sundrye meates from his table. But Ben
Iamins parte was fyue tymes more then the ud And they dronke, and were mery with

im. 

The rliij. Chapter. 

a ND Ioseph commaunded the ruler of 
A his house, and sayde: Fyll the mens sackes with foode, as moch as they maye carye, and put euery mans money in his sacke mouth, q put my syluer cuppe in the sack mouth of the yongest with the money for y vytayles. He dyd as Ioseph had sayde. And on the morow whan it was daye, they let y men go with their Asses.

But whan they were out of the cite, and not come farre, loseph sayde to the ruler of his house: Vp, and folowe after the mé, and whan thou ouertakest them, sale vnto them :
Wherfore haue ye rewarded euell for good ? 
Is not that it, that my lorde drynketh out of? 
‘and that he prophecieth withall? It is euell done of you, that ye haue done.

B| And whan he had ouertaken them, he sayde the same wordes vnto them. They answered him: Wherfore saieth my lorde soch wordes?
God forbyd, that thy seruauntes shulde do eny soch thinge? Beholde, the money that we foüde in oure sackes mouthes, that brought

? 3 Re. 3. d. 

* Gen. 42. b. 

The i. boke of doses, 

Chap. pitty. we vnto the agayne, out of the lande of
Canaan: how shulde we then haue stollen either syluer or golde out of thy lordes house ?
Loke by whom it shall be founde amonge thy seruauntes, let him dye: yee and we also wyll be my lordes bondmen. He sayde: let it so be, as ye haue spoken. Loke by whom it shall be founde, let him be my sernaunt, but ye shalbe harmlesse.

And they made haist, and toke downe euery man his sack to the grounde, and euery man opened his sack: And he searched q beganne at the greatest vnto the yongest, and the euppe was founde in Ben Iamins sacke. Then rente they their clothes, and euery man lade the burthen vpon his Asse, t wente agayne vnto the cite. And luda wente with his brethren vnto Iosephs house (for he was there yet) and thev fell before him on the groüde.
Ioseph sayde vnto them: What maner of dede is this, that ye haue done? Knewe ye not, that soch a man as I am, can prophecy ?

Iuda sayde: What shall we saye vnto my|€ lorde? or how shal we speake? and what excuse shal we make? God hath founde out y wickednesse of thy seruauntes. Beholde, we and he, by whom the cuppe is founde, are my lordes seruauntes. But he sayde: God forbyd that I shulde do so. The man by whom the cuppe is founde, shall be my ser- uaunt, but go ye vp in peace vnto youre father.

The stepte Iuda vnto him, and sayde: 
My lorde, let thy seruaunt speake one worde in thine eares my lorde, be not displesed at thy seruaunt also, for thou art eué as Pharao.
My lorde axed his seruauntes, and sayde: 
Haue ye yet a father or brother? Then answered we: We haue a father, which is olde, and a yonge lad begotten in his age, and his brother is deed, q he is left alone of his mother, and his father loueth him.

Then saydest thou: Brynge him downe vnto me, and I wil sehim. But we answered my lorde: The lad can not come from his father, yf he shulde come from him, he were but a deed man. "Then saydest thou vnto thy seruauntes: ^ Yf youre yongest brother come not hither with you, ye shall se my face no- more. ‘Then wente we vp vnto thy seruaunt my father, and tolde him my lordes wordes.
Then sayde oure father: Go youre waye agayne, and bye vs a litle foode. But we

> Gen. 43. a. 

Chap. rib. 

sayde: We can not go downe, excepte oure yongest brother be with vs, then wyll we go downe: for we darre not loke the man in the face, yf oure yongest brother be not with vs.
Then sayde thy seruaunt my father vnto vs: 
Ye knowe that my wife bare me two sonnes, one wente out fro me, and I sayde: he is torne in peces. “Yf ye take this fro me also, and eny mysfortune happé him, then shal ye
^brynge my gray heer with sorowe downe, vnto the graue.

Yf I now come home vnto my father, q the lad be not with me (seynge his soule hangeth by the soule of this) then shall it come to passe, that yf he se not the lad there, he shal dye. So shal we thy seruauntes brynge the gray heer of thy seruaunt onre father with sorowe downe to the graue. For I thy ser- uaunt “became snertye for the lad vnto my father, and sayde: yf I brynge him not) agayne, I will beare the blame all my lyfe longe. Therfore let thy seruaunt byde here in steade of y lad, to be my lordes bonde man, and let the lad go vp with his brethren.
For how can I go vp vnto my father, yf the lad be not with me? Then shulde I se the mysery that shulde happen vnto my father.

The plo. Chapter. 
HEN coude not Joseph refrayne him. self before all them that stode aboute him: and he cómaunded euery man to go out from him, and there stode no man by him, whan loseph vttred him self vnto his bre-| thren. And he wepte loude, so that y Egip- cians and Pharaos housholde herde it. he sayde vnto his brethren: I am loseph, is my father yet alyue? And his brethren coulde not answere him, they were so abashed before his face. But he sayde: Come nye vnto me. And they came nye. And he sayde: I am loseph youre brother, * whom ye solde in to Egipte. And now vexe not youre selues, q thinke not y there is eny wrath, because ye solde me hither. + For
God sent me hither before you, for youre lyues sake. For these are now two yeares, that y derth hath bene in the lande, and there are yet fyue yeares behynde, wherin there shalbe no plowinge ner haruest.
But God sent me hither before you, y he might let you remayne vpon earth, and to

a Gen. Sho it > Gen. 42. e. © Gen. 43. b. 

? And; 

The i. Boke of dfHlosrs. 

Fo. rig. saue youre lyues by a greate delyueraunce.
And now, it was not ye then that sent me hither, but God which hath made me a father vnto Pharao, q lorde ouer all his house, and a prynce in the whole lande of Egipte. Haist you therfore, and go vp vnto my father, and saye vnto him: Thy sonne Joseph sendeth the this worde: God hath made me lorde in all
Egipte, come downe vnto me, tarye not, thou shalt dwel in the lande of Gosen, and be with me: thou and thy children, and thy childers childre, thy small and greate catell, and all that thou hast. There wyll I make prouysion for the (for there are yet fyue yeares of derth) that thou perishe not with thine house, and all that is thyne. Beholde, youre eyes and the eyes of my brother Ben Iamin se, that I myne owne self speake vnto you by mouth.
Shewe my father all my worshipe in Egipte, and all that ye haue sene: haist you, and come downe hither with my father.

And he fell abonte his brother Ben Iamyns neck, and wepte, and Ben Jamin wepte vpon his neck also. And he kyssed all his brethren, and wepte vpon them. And afterwarde talked his brethren with him. And this tydinges came in to Pharaos house: Iosephs brethren are come, which pleased Pharao well, and all his seruauntes.

And Pharao spake vnto loseph: Saye vnto thy brethren: Do thus, lade youre beastes, go youre waye, and whan ye come in to the lande of Canaan, take youre father and youre housholdes, and come vnto me, I wyl geue you of the goodes in the lade of Egipte, so that ye shall eate the fatt in the lande. And he commaunded them, Do thus, Take you charettes out of ¥ lande of Egipte for youre children and wyues, and brynge youre father, and come, and regarde not youre housholde stuff: for the goodes of all the lade of Egipte shalbe yours.

The children of Israel dyd so, and Ioseph B gaue thé charettes acordynge to Pharaos commaundement, and expenses by the waye, and gaue them all, vnto euery one a chaunge of rayment: but vnto Ben Iamin he gaue thre hundreth syluer pens, and fyue chaunge of rayment. As for his father, he sent him ten
Asses laden with goodes out of Egipte, and ten Asses with cornue and bred, and vytayles for his father by ý waye. So he sent awaye

€ 

4 Act. 7. b. * Gen. 37. c. + Gen. 50. c. 

Fo. ribi. 

"m 

a 

his brethren, and sayde vnto them: Stryue not by the waye.

Thus they departed out of Egipte, and came to the lande of Canaan vnto lacob their father, and tolde him, and sayde: Thy sonne loseph is yet alyue, and is a lorde in all the lande of Egipte. But his hert wauered, for he beleued them not. 'Yhe tolde they him all the wordes of Ioseph, which he had sayde vnto them. And whan he sawe y charettes that loseph had sent to fetch him, his sprete reuyued, q he sayde: I haue ynough, that my sonne loseph is yet a hue I wil go, and se him, before I dye.

Che ribi. Chapter. 

E toke his journey with all that he 

had. “And whan he came to Berseba, he offred offerynges vnto ¥ God of his father
Isaac. And God spake vnto him in a vision by night: Iacob Iacob. He sayde: here am I.
And he saide: I am y mightie God of thy father, be not afrayed to go in to Egipte, for there wyl I make a greate people of the. I wyll go downe with the, q wil brynge the vp jalso. And Ioseph shal laye his hande vpon thine eyes.

Then lacob gat him vp from Berseba, and y children of Israel caried Iacob their father with their children and wyues vpon the charettes that Pharao had sent to cary him.
And they toke their catell q substaunce which 
|they had gotten in the lande of Canaan, and so came in to Egipte: * Iacob q all his sede with him, his children q his childers children with him, his doughters, and the doughters of his children, ¢ all his sede.

These are y names of the children of Israel, which came in to Egipte, Jacob q his sonnes.
'; The first borne sonne of Iacob: Ruben. 
"The children of Ruben: Hanoch, Palu, 
„Hezron and Charmi. ^ The children of 
‘Simeon: lemuel Iamin, Ohad, lachim, 
| Zohar and Saul the sonne of the Cananitish 
,woman. The childré of Leui: Gerson, 
|Cahath q Merari. The childré of Iuda: Er, 
Onan, Sela, Phares q Serah. But Er and 
Onan dyed in the lande of Canaan. The childré of Phares: Hesron and Hamul. The children of Isachar: ‘Thola, Phua, Iob «
Semron. The children of Zabulon: Sered, 

a Iosu. 24, a. Act. 7. b. et Por.5. 8.

* Esa. 52, a. t Nu. 26. a. 

Got Par 82a 

The t. boke of Moses. 

Elon and Iahleel. These are the childré of 
Lea, which she bare vnto lacob in Mesopo- tamia with his doughter Dina. These all together with sonnes q doughters make thre q thirtie soules.

The childré of Gad: Zipheon, Haggi, Suni, 
Ezbon, Eri, Arodi and Areli. The children of Asser: lemna, lesua, lesui, Bria q Sera their sister. The children of Bria: Heber and
Malchiel. These are the children of Silpa, 
*whom Laban gaue vnto Lea his doughter, and she bare vnto lacob these sixtene soules.

'The childré of Rachel Iacobs wife: Ioseph and Ben lamin. And vnto Ioseph in y lande of Egipte $were borne Manasses and Ephraim, whom Asnath the doughter of Potiphar prest of On bare vnto him. The children of Ben
Jamin: Bela, Becher, Asber, Gera, Naama, 
Ehi, Ros, Mupim, Hupim and Ard. These are the children of Rachel, which were borne vnto Iacob, fourtene soules alltogether.

The children of Dan: Husim. The childre of Nephtali: lahzeel, Guni, Iezer, Sillem.
These are the children of Bilha, whom Laban gaue vnto his doughter Rachel, q she bare lacob these seuen soules. All the soules y came with lacob in to Egipte, ^which pro- ceaded out of his loynes (besyde the wyues of his childré) are alltogether sixe q sixtie soules.
And losephs childre which were borne vnto him in Egipte, were two soules: so that all the soules of the house of Iacob which came in to Egipte, were seuentye.

And he sent Iuda before him vnto Ioseph, to shew him the waye to Gosen, q they came in to the lande of Gosen. Then loseph bended his charett fast, and wente vp to mete
Israel his father vnto Gosen. And whan he sawe him, he fell aboute his neck, q wepte sore vpon his neck. ‘Then sayde Israel vnto
Ioseph: Now am I content to dye, for so moch as I haue sene thy face, that thou art yet alyue.

Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren, q to his fathers house: I will go vp, q tell Pharao, q saye vnto him: My brethré and my fathers house are come vnto me out of the lande of
Canaan, and are kepers of catell (for they are men that deale with catell:) their small q greate catell, and all that they haue, haue they brought with them. Now yf Pharao call

4 Deut. 10. d. 

t Ge. 29. d. $ Ge. 41. g. 

Chap. ribi, 

€ 

B 

Chap. rlbtj. you, and saye: what is youre occupacio? then ye shal saye: Thy seruauntes are men y haue dealt with catell from oure youth vp hytherto, both we ¢ oure fathers, that ye maye dwell in the lande of Gosen : for the Egipcians abhorre all kepers of catell.

The rloij. Chapter. a HEN eame Ioseph, and tolde Pharao q sayde: My father and my brethren, their small q greate catell, q all y they haue, are come out of y lande of Canaan: q beholde, they are in the fade of Gosen. And he toke fyue of his brethren, q presented them vnto
Pharao. Then sayde Pharao vnto his brethren: 
| {What is youre occupacion? They answered: 
Thy seruauntes are kepers of catell, we and oure fathers also. And they sayde morouer vnto Pharao: We are come to dwell with you in the lande, for thy seruañtes haue no pasture for their catell, so sore doth the derth oppresse the lande of Canaan. Now therfore let thy seruauntes dwell in the lande of Gosen.
3| Pharaosayde vnto Ioseph: Thy father and thy brethren are come vnto the: the lande of
Egipte is open before the, let them dwell in the best place of the lande, ¢ se y they dwell euen in the lande of Gosen. And yf thou knowest that there be men of actiuyte amoge the, make thé rulers of my catell.

Ioseph brought in Iacob his father also, q set him before Pharao. And Iacob thanked
Pharao. But Pharao axed Iacob: How olde 

| jart thou? Jacob sayde: The tyme of my 
*pylgremage is an hüdreth and thirtie yeares: litle and euell is the tyme of my pileremage, and attayneth not vnto the tyme of my fathers in their pylgremages. And lacob thanked
Pharao, and wéte out from him. 

€| So loseph prepared dwellinges for his father and his brethren, « gaue them a possession in the lande of Egipte, euen in the best place of the lande, namely, in the laude of Raemses, as Pharao cómaunded. And he made pro- uysion for his father and his brethren, and all his fathers house with bred, euen as yonge children.

"There was no bred in all the londe, for the derth was very sore : so y the lande of Egipte t the lande of Canaan were fameshed by ¥ reason of the derth. And Ioseph brought

| * [ob 14. c. Psal. 118. c. 

The í. boke of Moses., 

Fo. rly. | together all the money that was founde in
Egipte and Canaan, for ¥ corne that they bought. And he layed vp all the money in
Pharaos house. 

Now whan money fayled in the lande of 
Egipte and Canaan, all the Egipcians came vnto loseph, q saide: Geue vs bred. Why suffrest thou vs to dye before y, because we are without money? Joseph saide: Brynge hither youre catell, so wil I geue you for youre catell, seynge ye are without money. Then brought they their catell vnto Ioseph. And he gaue thé bred for their horses, shepe, oxen and Asses. So he fed them with bred y yeare, for all their catell.

Whan y yeare was ended, they came vnto him the next yeare, q sayde vnto him: We wil not hyde it from oure lorde, y not onely the money, but all the catell also is spent vnto oure lorde: « there is nothinge left more for oure lorde, but onely oure body q oure lande.
Wherfore suffrest thou both vs to dye, and oure londe? ‘Take vs and oure lade for bred,| £ that we and oure lande maye be bonde vnto
Pharao: geue vs sede, that we maye lyue and not dye, q ý the lande become not a wildernesse.

So loseph toke all the lande of Egipte in for Pharao: for the Egipcians solde euery man his lande, because y derth was so mightie vpon them: and so the lode became Pharaos, with the people that wente out and in at his cities, from one syde of Egipte vnto the other, excepte the prestes londe, that toke he not in:
For it was ordened of Pharao for the prestes, that they shulde eate that which was appoynted them, which he gaue them, therfore they neded not to sell their londes.

Then sayde Ioseph vnto the people: Be-|4f holde, I haue taken possession of you and youre lande this daye for Pharao, Beholde, there haue ye sede, sowe the londe, and of the corne ye shall gene the fifth parte vnto
Pharao: foure partes shalbe youres, to sowe the londe for youre sustenaunce, and for youre houses and children.

They sayde: Let vs but lyue, q fynde| | grace before the oure lorde, we wyl gladly be| |
Pharaos seruauntes: So loseph made thé a| | lawe vnto this daye ouer the Egipciaus londe, to geue Pharao the fifth parte, excepte the prestes londe, which was not bonde vnto
Pharao. 

Fo. plot. 

| 

6| 

EN 

B 

| 

So Isracl dwelt in Egipte in the londe of 
Gosen, and had it in possession, and grew and multiplied exeeadingly. And Iacob lyued seuentene yeare in the lande of Egipte, so that his whole age was an hudreth and seuen and fourtye yeares.

Now whan the tyme came that Israel shulde dye, he called loseph his sonne, and sayde vnto him: Yf I haue founde grace in thy sight,
*then laye thine honde vnder my thye, y thon shalt shewe mercy and faithfulnes vpon me, and not burye me in Egipte, but I will lye by my fathers, and thou shalt earye me out of
Egipte, q burye me in their buryall. He sayde: I wil do as thou hast sayde. But he sayde: t Then sweare vntome. And he sware vnto him. "Thé Israel bowed himself towarde the bed heade.

The rlotij. Chapter. 

FTER this it was tolde loseph: Be- holde, thy father is sicke. And he toke

with him his twosonnes Manassesand Ephraim, 
Then was it tolde Iacob: beholde, thy sonne loseph cómeth vnto ý. And Israel toke a corage vnto him, q sat vp vpo y bed, q sayde vnto loseph: The Allmightye God appeared vnto me tat Lus in ¥ lade of Canaan, q blessed me, q saide vnto me: Beholde, I wil cause y to growe q increase q wyll make a multitude of people of f, « wil geue this lade vnto thy sede after ¥ for an euerlastinge possession.
Therfore shal now thy two sonnes " Manasses q Ephraim (which were borne vnto the in
Egipte, before I came hither vnto the) be myne, like as Ruben q Simeon. As for those that thou begettest after the, they shal be thine owne. But these shalbe named with the names of their brethren in their inheritaunce.

And wha I came out of Mesopotamia, 
Rachel dyed by me in the ^lande of Canaan, by the waye, whan there was yet but a feldes brede vnto Eprath: and 1 buryed her in the waye towarde Ephrath, which now is called
Bethleem. 

And Israel loked vpon losephs sonnes, q sayde: What are these? loseph answered:
They are my sonnes, which God hath geuen me here. He sayde: Brynge thé hither to me, y I maye blesse thé. (For Israels eyes were heuy br age, t he coude not well se.)

*Ge.24.a. +Ge. 25. d. 
|41. g. * Gen. 25. d. * Iosu. 17. a. 

1 Ge. 28. c. * Gen. 
§ Heb. 11. d. 

The i. boke of Moses. 

Chap. rlbííj. 
And he brought thé vnto him. So he kyssed them, q enbraced thé, q saide vnto loseph:
Beholde, I haue sene thy face, which I thought not : q lo, God hath caused me to se thy sede also. And loseph toke them from his lappe, and they fell downe to the grounde vpon their face.

Then loseph toke them both, Ephraim in his right hande towarde Israels left hade, and
Manasses in his left hande towarde Israels right hade, q brought thé vnto him. But
Israel stretched out his right hande, q layed it vpo y heade of Ephraim y yogest q his left hande vpó Manasses heade, q did so wyttingly with his handes, for * Manasses was y firstborne.
And She blessed loseph, q saide: The God before who my fathers Abraha q Isaac haue walked: $ God y hath fed me my lyfe longe vnto this daye: the angell which hath dely- uered me fro all euell, blesse these laddes, y they maye be called after my name, « after ý name of my fathers Abraha q Isaac, y they maye growe q multiplye vpon earth. wha loseph sawe y his father layed y right hade vpo Ephraims heade, it displeased him, a he lift vp his fathers hande, to remoue it fro Ephraims heade vnto y heade of Manasses, q sayde vnto him: Not so my father, this is y firstborne, laye thy right hade vpo his heade.
Neuertheles his father wolde not, q saide: I knowe it well my sonne, I knowe it well, this shall be a people also, a shal be greate: but his yonger brother shal be greater thé he, q his sede shal be full of people. So he blessed them the same daye ¢ saide: In y shal Israel blesse, so y it shal be sayde: God set the as
Ephraim q Manasses. ^ And so he set Ephraim aboue Manasses.

And Israel saide vnto Ioseph: Beholde, I dye, ¢ God shall be with you, q brynge you agayne in to y lande of youre fathers. |I haue geuen the a pece of londe, without thy brethren, which I gat with my swerde and my bowe out of the hande of the Amorites.

The rliy. Chapter. 

ND lacob called his sonnes, q sayde:|& 

Gather you, y I maie tell you, what 

shal happen vnto you in y last times: Come 

together, and heare ye childré of Iacob: 
Herken vnto Israel youre father. 

4 Tere. 31. b. || Iob. 4. a. 

Buti B 

Chap. I. The i. boke of Moses. Fo. rli. 

Rubé my first sonne, *thou art my power | "Nepthali is a swift hynde, and geneth and the begynnynge of my strength, chefe| |goodly wordes. tin gouernaunce, q chefe in auctorite. ‘Thou The fruteful sonne Ioseph, that florishinge |J passest forth swiftly as y water. Thou shalt; sonne to loke vpon, the doughters go vpo the not be the chefest: For tthou hast clymmed| wall. And though the shoters angered him, vp vpon thy fathers bed, enen than delyledest| |stroue with him, and hated him, yet his bowe thou my couch with goynge vp. bode fast, and the armes of his hüdes were
Symeon and Leni brethren, their deedly| |made stroge by the handes of $ Mightie in weapens are perlons instrumentes. In to| |lacob. Of him are come herdmen q stones their secretes come not my soule, and my| jin Israel. Ofthy fathers God art thou helped, worshipe be not ioyned with their congre-| |q of the Allmightie art thou blessed, with gacion: $for in their wrath they slew a man,| |blessynges of heauen from aboue, with bless- and in their self wyll they houghed an oxe.| |inges of ý depe y lyeth vnder, with blessynges
Cursed be their wrath, because it is so fearce:| |of brestes q wombes. The blessinges pro- and their indignacion, because it is so rigorous.| |mised vuto thy father and my fore elders go
I wil denyde them in Iacob, and scater them, |mightely, after the desyre of the hyest in the in Israel. worlde: these shal light on losephs heade,
33| liIuda, thou art he. Thy brethren shall| jand on the toppe of his heade, that was se- prayse the: for thy hade shal be in thine ene-| parate from his brethren. mies neck: thy fathers children shall stoupe Ben lamin, a rauyshinge wolfe. In the vnto the. f Iuda is a yonge lyon, thou art; |mornynge shal he deuoure the praye, but in come vp hye my sonne, fro the spoyle. **He| |the euenynge he shal deuyde the spoyle. kneled downe and couched himself as a lyon All these are the twolue trybes of Israel : q as a lionesse: who wil rayse him vp? Thej |and this is it that their father spake vnto them, cepter shal not be remoued frō luda, ner a| |whan he blessed them, euery one with a sun- master fro his fete, tyll the Worthye come, and} |drye blessynge. vnto him shal the people fall. He shall bynde And he commaunded them, and sayde vnto his foale vnto the vyne, and his Asses colte to} them: I shal be gathered vnto my people, y noble braunch. He shal wash his garment| |ttburye me with my fathers in $ cane which is in wyne, and his mantell in the bloude of! fin the felde of Ephron the Hethite, in the grapes. His eyes are roudier then wyne, and| |dubble caue that lyeth ouer against Mamre in his teth whyter then mylck. y lande of Canaa, which Abraha bought with
€ | "Zabulon shal dwell in the hauen of thesee,| |the felde, of Ephron the Hethite for a pos- and in the porte of shippes, and shal border| session to burye in. "There buryed they vpon Sydon. Abraha q Sara his wife, there buried they
Isachar shal be a stronge Asse, q laye him| |Isaac also q Rebecca his wife: q there buried downe betwixte y borders. And he saw rest,| |l Lea, in the good of the felde q of the caue that it was good, and the lande, that it was| |therin, which was bought of the Hethites. pleasaunt. And bowed downe his shulder to And whan Iacob had ended this commaun- beare, and became a seruaüt vnto trybute. dement vnto his children, *he pluckte his fete
? Dan shal be iudge in his people, as wellas| |together vpon the bed, and died, and was a trybe in Israel. Dan shalbe a serpent in| |gathered vnto his people. Thé fell Ioseph vpon the waye, and an edder in the path, and byte| |his fathers face, and wepte, and kyssed him. the horse in the heles, that his ryder maye fall backwarde. LORDE 1 loke for thy Che l. Chapter. .
ND loseph comaüded his sernaütes 

saluacion. 
As for Gad, a wapened hoost of men shal Phisicias, to embawme his father. And fall violently vpon him, but he shall hurte| [the Phisicians embawmed Israel, tyll fourtye dayes were ended (for so longe endured the

them in the hele. 
Of Asser cometh his fat bred, and he shal| |dayes of embawminge) q the Egipcians be- wayled him seuentye dayes.

geue delicates vnto kynges. 

23. d. * Tos. 19. a. è Jud. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. c Iud. 4. 5., tt Gen. 98. c. 4 Gen. 25. c. ¢ Act. 7. b.

* Gen.29.f. — tDeu.21.c. tGen.35.c. 1 Par. 6.a. 
$ Gen. 34. d. || 1 Pa. 6. a. q Mich. 5. b. ** Nu. 

Fo. I. E 

Now whan the mournynge dayes were ended, Ioseph spake vnto Pharaos housholde, x sayde: Yf I haue founde fauoure in youre sight, the speake vnto Pharao and saie: My father hath taken an ooth of me, q sayde:
Beholde, I dye, “burye me in myne owne graue, whieh I dygged for myself in the lade of Canaan. Therfore wyl I now go vp, and burye my father, and come agayne. Pharao saide: Go thy waye vp, and burye thy father, acordinge as thou hast sworne vnto him.

So Ioseph wéte vp, to burye hisfather. And there wéte with him all Pharaos sernaütes y were the elders of his courte, and all y elders of the lande of Egipte, œ all Iosephs hous- holde, and his brethren, and his fathers hous- holde. Onely their children, shepe q oxen left they in y lade of Gosen, q toke their iour- ney vp with him, vpo eharettes and horses, and the company was exeeadinge greate.

Now whan these came to the playne of 
Atad y lyeth beyonde lordane, they made there a very greate and bytter lamentacion, t *he mourned for his father seué dayes. And wha the people in the lande (the Cananites)
[sawe the mournynge in the playne of Atad, they sayde: The Egipcias make there greate lamétaeion. 'Therfore is the place called:
The lamentaeion of the Egipeians, which lyeth beyonde Iordane.

And his children dyd as he had cómaunded them, ^and caried him to y lande of Canaan, and buried him in y TE caue, that
Abraham ‘bought with the felde for a pos- session to bury in, of Ephron ¥ Hethite ouer ageynst Mamre. So Ioseph toke his iourney agayne in to Egipte with his brethren, and with all those that wente vp with him to burye his father, whan they had buried him.

b Gen. 49, e. Act. 
€ Tob. 14. a. 

Sefer Tikes I, 

* Gen. 47. g. ie los 4 Gen. 37. d.

* Gen. 23. c. 

Che í. boke of loses, 

But Iosephs brethre were afrayed, wha their| 

father was deed, and sayde: loseph might happly hane indignaeion at vs, and recompense vs all the euell that we dyd vnto him, “therfore let they saye vnto him: Thy father com- maunded before his death, and sayde: Thus shal ye saye vnto loseph: O forgene thy brethren the offenee and their synne, that they dyd so euell vnto the. O forgeue now this trespaee of vs the seruauntes of thy fathers God. But Ioseph wepte, whan they spake so vnto him.

And his brethren wente, and fell downe before him, and sayde: Deholde, here are we thy seruauntes. loseph sayde vntothe: Feare ye not, for I am vnder God. Ye thought euell ouer me, but God hath turned it vnto good, to do as it is come to passe this daye, for the sanynge of moeh people. "Therfore be not ye now afrayed, I wyl care for you and youre children. And he comforted them, and spake louyngly vnto them.

Thus dwelt Ioseph in Egipte with his fathers house, and lyued an hüdreth and ten yeare, ‘and sawe Ephrayms children, vnto y thirde generacion: In like maner the children of Machir the sonne of Manasses, begat chil- dren also vpon Iosephs lappe.

And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren: /I dye, and God wyl vyset you, and brynge you out of this lande, to the lande that he sware vnto
Abraham, Isaac and lacob. ‘Therfore toke he an ooth of the ehildre of Israel, and sayde:
Whan God shal vyset you, tthé eary my bones fró hence. So Ioseph dyed, wha he was an hudreth and ten yeare olde, and they embawmed him, q layed him in a ehest in
Egipte. 

f Hebr. 11. d. losu, 24. f.

Iob 42.c. Psal. 127. a. t Exo. 13. d. 

The enne of the first boke of Moses, rallry Genesis, 

Chap, 1. 

D 

called, rodus. 

That this boke rontrepnetb. 

Chay. I. 

The childré of Israel increase in Egipte. The kynge commaundeth to slaye the, and to drowne them.

Chap. Il. 

| The byrth of Moses, which is layed vpo the water. 
Pharaos doughter taketh him and bringeth him vp. He slayeth one of the Egipcians, and fly- eth his waye in to Madian, where he marieth.
The children of Israel erye vuto the LORDE. 

Chap. III. 

God appeareth vnto Moses in the bush, and sendeth him vnto the kynge and the people.

Chap. INI. 

Moses is loth to go, q excuseth himself. But the LORDE enfourmeth him, maketh him stronge, and comforteth him. Moses taketh leue of his father in lawe, to go vnto his people.

Chap. V. 

Moses and Aaron go vnto the kynge, which oppresseth the people the more.

Chap. VI. 

God geueth Moses more instruccio and sendeth him vnto the people. The trybes are nombred.

Chap. VII. 

| Moses and Aaron go vnto the kynge, and shewe we before him: but the kynge waxeth hard harted.

Cr seconde boke of Moses, 

Chap. VII. 

After many tokens Pharao graunteth to let the people go: but assone as the plage ceaseth, he is as vngodly as afore.

Chap. IX. 

There commeth a death amoge all the catell: the commeth the sores, blaynes, and the hayle.

Chap. X. 

The greshoppers and darcknes in Egipte. Pharao forbyddeth Moses to come eny more in his sight.

Chap. XI. 

The LORDE promiseth to brynge yet another plage vpon Egipte, and comaundeth the Is- raelites to borowe Jewels of syluer and golde of the Egipcians.

Chap. XII. 

The vse of the Easterlambe. God slayeth all the firstborne. Pharao dryueth all the people out of the lande.

Chap. XIII. 

God commaundeth to sanctifie all the firstborne vnto him, and carieth them towarde the lande of promyse, not the next waye but thorow the) | wyldernes, by a clonde in the daye tyme, and , a pyler of fyre in the night.

Chap. XIII. 

Pharao foloweth vpo the people of God, which delyuereth his owne, carieth them thorow the: reed see, t drowneth the enemies therin. |

Chap. XV. 

Moses and the people synge a songe of thankes- geuynge vato the LORDE, and come to Ma- rath, where the bytter water is made swete.

Chap. XVI. 

The LORDE sendeth quayles and the Manna to the vnpacient people.

Chap. XVII. 

Water cometh out of the stonye rocke. fight agaynst Amaleck.

They 

Chap. XVIII. 

lethro bryngeth Moses his wife and children. and geueth him a good councell.

Chap. XIX. 

The LORDE appeareth vnto Moses vpon mount 
Sinai. Moses sheweth the people. 

Chap. XX. 

The LORDE geueth Moses the two tables of the commaundementes vnto the people.

Chap. XXI. 

Lawes and statutes concernynge bodely thinges. 
Of murthur, theft and other mo. 

Chap. XXII. 

Of theft. Of hurte that is done with wyll or vnawarres. Of thinges geué to kepe. Of borowynge and pledges.

Chap. XXIII. 

Many dyuerse lawes q statutes. 

Chap. XXIII. 
Of the boke and bloude of the couenaunt. 

Chap. XXV. XXVI. 
The LORDE comaundeth Moses to make the 
Sanctuary, and the thinges belonginge therto. 
Chap. XXVII. 

Of the altare and the apparell therof. Of the courte of the habitacio. Of the oyle and lampes.

= The ij. boke of Moses. | 

Chap. XXVIII. 

How the prestes were arayed and consecrated. 

Chap. XXIX. 

The consecratinge of Aaron, of his sonnes, and of the altare.

Chap. XXX. 
Of the altare of incense, and the brasen lauer, the anoyntinge oyle and incense.

Chap. XXXI. 

The workmen are called. The kepynge of the 
Sabbath. The two tables of wytnes are geuen 
Moses. 

Chap. XXXII. 

They make the golden calf, Moses in his dis- pleasure breaketh the tables, and punysheth the transgressours

Chap. XXXIII. 

The people mourne. Moses pitcheth the taber- 

nacle, and the LORDE talketh with him. 
Chap. XXXIII. 

Moses receaueth other tables of the LORDE with certaine lawes. The people are afrayed at the brightnes of his face.

Chap. XXXV. 

Certaine statutes cocerninge the Tabernacle. The workemen are appoynted.

Chap. XXXVI. 

What the thinges be that they made, 

Chap. XXXVII. 

The tabernacle of witnesse with the staues, Che- 

rubins, the table, candelsticke. 
Chap. XXXVIII. 

The altare of bretofferiges with the thinges be- longinge therto.

Chap. XXXIX. 

Of the prestes garmentes. 

€ hap. XL. 

The LORDE commaundeth Moses to set vp the tabernacle, & to order the apparell therof.

Chap. tj. 

The first Chapter. 
A HESE are y names of the *childré of 

"D Israel, that came with Iacob in to Egipte: euery one came in with his house, Ruben,
Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Zabulo, Ben 
Iamin, Dan, Nephtali, Gad and Aser. And of all the soules that came out of the loynes of Iacob, there were seuentie.

As for Ioseph, he was in Egipte all ready. 
Now wha loseph was deed, and all his brethren, and all they that lyued at that tyme, the children of Israel grewe,’ and increased, and multiplied, and became exceadinge mightie, so y the lande was full of them.

The came there a new kynge ouer Egipte, which knewe nothinge of loseph, and sayde vnto his people: Beholde, the people of the children of Israel are many, q mightier then we: Vp, let vs deale wysely with them, y there be not so many of them. For yf there shulde ryse vp eny warre agaynst vs, they might 3oyne them selues also vnto oure ene- mies, and ouercome vs, q so get them out of the lande.

And he set worke masters ouer them, to kepe them vnder with burthens. (For they buylded the cities Phiton and Raemses, for treasuries vnto Pharao.) But the more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grew.

Therfore had they indignacio at the children of Israel, and the Egipcians compelled the children of Israel without mercy to do sernyce, and made their lyues bytter vnto them with greuous laboure in claye and brycke, and with allmaner of bondage in y felde, and with all- maner of laboure, which they layed vpon them without mercy.

And the kynge of Egipte sayde vnto the mydwyues of the Hebrueswemen. (Of the which one was called Siphra, and the other
Pua:) Whan ye helpe the wemen of the 
Hebrues, and se vpon the stole, that it is a sonne, then slaye him: but yf it bea doughter, let her lyue. Neuertheles the mydwyues feared God, q dyd not as the kinge of Egipte commaunded them, but let the children lyue.

Then the kynge of Egipte called the myd- wyues, and sayde vnto them: Wherfore do ye this, that ye let the children lyue? The mydwyues answered Pharao: The wemen of
(the Hebrues are not as the wemen of Egipte, 

? Gen. 46. b. 

^ Psal. 104. c. Act. 7. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

* Psalmo 126. a. 

for they are sturdy wemen: or euer the myd- wyues come at them, they are delyuered.

Therfore God dealt well with the myd- wyues. And the people multiplied, and be- came exceadinge mightie. And for so moch as the mydwyues feared God, *he made them houses. Then Pharao commanded all his people and sayde: All the sonnes that are borne, cast in to the water, but let all the doughters lyne.

The ij. Chapter. 
ND there wente forth a man of the house of Leui,” and toke a doughter of
Leui. + And the wife conceaued and bare a sonne. And whan she sawe y it was a proper childe, she hyd him thre monethes. Aud whan she coude hyde him no longer, she toke an Arke of redes, and dawbed it ouer with slyme and pitch, and layed the childe therin, and set it amonge the redes by the waters brynke. But his sister stode a farre of, to

wete what wolde come of him. 
And Pharaos doughter came downe, to 

wash herself in the water: And hir maydens' 

walked by the water syde: and whan she sawe the Arke amonge the redes, she sent one of hir maydens, and caused it to be fett.
And whan she opened it, she sawe y childe: and beholde the babe wepte. ‘Then had she pytie vpon it, and sayde: It is one of the
Hebrues children. 

Then sayde his syster vnto Pharaos dough- ter: Shal I go, and call the a nurse of the
Hebrues wemen, to nurse y the childe? 
Pharaos doughter sayde vnto her: Go thy waye. The mayde wente, and called the childes mother. ‘Then sayde Pharaos doughter vnto her: Take this childe, and nurse it for me, I wyll geue ý thy rewarde. The woman toke the ehilde, and nursed it.

And whan the childe was growne, she brought it vnto Pharaos doughter, and it became hir sonne, and she called him Moses.
For she sayde: I toke him ont of the water. 

Vpon a tyme whan Moses was greate, he wente forth vnto his brethren, and loked vpon their burthens, and sawe, that an Egipcia smote one of his brethren y Hebrues. And he loked rounde aboute him: and whan he sawe that there was no man, he slew the
Egipeian, and buried him in the sonde. 

* Exod. o. c. + Act. 7. c. Heb. 11. d. 

Fo. liij. 

35 

Ffo. liiij. 

The next daye he wente forth also, and sawe two men of the Hebrues stryuynge to- gether, and sayde to the vngodly: Wherfore smytest thou thy neghboure? But he sayde : *
Who made the a ruler or iudge ouer vs? 
Wilt thou slaye me also, as thou slewest the 
Egipeian? Thé was Moses afrayed, and sayde: 
How is this knowne? And Pharao herde of; it, and sought for Moses, to slaye him. But
Moses fled from Pharao, and kepte him in the lande of Madian, and sat him downe by a wells syde.

The prest Madian had seuen doughters, which came to drawe water, and fylled the troughes, to geue their fathers shepe to drinke.
Then came the shepherdes, and droue thé awaye. Dut Moses gat him vp, and helped them, and gaue their shepe to drynke. And whan they came to Reguel their father, he saide: How came ye so soone to daie? They sayde: A man of Egipte delyuered vs from y shepherdes, and drew vnto vs, and gaue the shepe to drynke. He sayde vnto his doughters:
Where is he? Wherfore let ye the man go, that ye called him not to eate with vs?

p| And Moses was content to dwell with the 

a 

man. And he gaue Moses his donghter 
Zipora, which bare him a sonne, and het called him Gerson, for he sayde: I am become a straunger in a straunge lande. And she bare him yet a sonne, whom he called Elieser, and sayde: The God of my father is my helper, and hath delyuered me from Pharaos hade.

But after this in processe of tyme, the kynge of Egipte dyed. And the childre of Israel sighed ouer their laboure, and cried. And their crye ouer their laboure, came before
God. And God herde their coplaynte, q remébred his couenaunt t with Abraham Isaac and lacob. And God loked vpon the childré of Israel, and God knew it.

The iij. Chapter. 

OSES kepte the shepe of lethro his father in lawe prest of Madian, q droue

the shepe on the backsyde of the wyldernes, and came to the mountayne of God, Horeb.
“And the angell of y LORDE appeared vnto him in a flame of fyre out of the bush. And he sawe that $ bush brent with fyre, and yet

* Ge. 19. b. Mat.21. c. Act. 7. c. t Nu. 12. a. 
Exo 18.a. i Iudic. 2. c. Gen. 15. c. a 4 Es. 14,4. 
Act. ad: b Iosu. 5. d. € Matt. 220d. Mar. 12. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. iij. was not consumed, and saide: I wil go hence, and se this greate sight, why ý bush is not brent.

Whan the LORDE sawe, that he wente his waye to se, God called vnto him out of the bush, and sayde: Moses, Moses. He answered: Here am 1. He sayde: Come not hither, put thy shues of thy fete,’ for the place where vpon thou stondest, is an wholy groüde. And he sayde morouer:z lam the
God of thy father, the God of Abraham, y 
God of Isaac, and the God of lacob. And 
Moses couered his face, for he was afrayed to loke vpon God.

And the LORDE sayde: I haue sene the trouble of my people in Egipte$ q haue herde their crye ouer those that oppresse them. I knowe their sorowe, and am come downe to delyuer them from the power of the Egipcians, and to carye them out of that lode, in to a good and wyde londe, euen in to a londe that floweth with mylke and hony: namely, vnto the place of the Cananites, Hethites, Amor- ites, Pheresites, Heuytes q lebusites. For so moch now as the complaynte of the children of Israel is come before me, a I haue sene their oppression wherwith the Egipcians op- presse them: Go now thy waye therfore,’ I wil sende the vnto Pharao, that thou mayest brynge my people the children of Israel out of Egipte. Moses sayde vnto God: Who am
I, *y I shulde go vnto Pharao, and brynge the children of Israel out of Egipte ?

He sayde: I wyll be with the: q this shall qr 

be the token, y 1 haue sent the. Whan thou hast brought my people out of Egipte, ye shal serue God vpon this mountayne. Moses sayde vnto God: Beholde, whan I come to the childré of Israel, and saye vnto them:
'The God of youre fathers hath sent me vnto you, q they saye vnto me: What is his name? what shal I saye vnto them? God saide vnto
Moses: I wyl be what I wyll be. And he sayde: Thus shalt thou saye vnto y children of Israel:|| 1 wyl be hath sent me vnto you.
And God sayde morouer vnto Moses: /'I'hus shalt thou saye vnto the children of Israel:
The LORDE God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, y God of
Iacob hath sent me vnto you, this is my name 

Luc. 20. c. 

$ Exo. 22. c. Eccli. 21. a. 
* Judi. 6 c. 

|| Ioh. 8. c. 

4 Act. 7. e. 
* Heb. 11. c. 

Chap. tty. for euer, and my memorial] from childe to
D|childes childe. Go thy waye therfore, and gather the elders of Israel together, and saye vnto them: The LORDE God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, the God of Iacob hath appeared vnto me, and sayde: I haue vysited you, and sene what is done vnto you in Egipte, and haue sayde: I wil brynge you out of the trouble of
Egipte, in to y lande of Y Cananites, Hethites, 
Amorites, Pheresites, Henites q lebusites: in to a lode y floweth with mylke and hony.
And yf they heare thy voyce, then shalt thou and the elders of Israel go in to the kynge of
Egipte, and saye vnto him: * The LORDE 
God of y Hebrues hath called vs. ^ Let vs go now therfore thre dayes iourney in the wyl- dernes, ý we maye do sacrifice vuto the
LORDE oure God. 

But I knowe, that the kynge of Egipte wil not let you go, but thorow a mightie hāde.
For I will stretch out myne hande, a. smyte 
Egipte with all maner of wonders which I will do therin: after y shal he let you go. ‘And
I wil geue this people fauonre in the sight of the Egipcians: so that whan ye go forth, ye shal not go forth emptie: but euery wife shall borowe of hir neghbouresse « of her that sogeourneth in hir house, Iewels of syluer and golde and rayment: those shal ye put vpon youre sonnes and doughters, and spoyle the
Egipcians. 

The iiij. Chapter. 

OSES answered, q sayde: Beholde, i they shall not beleue me, ner heare my voyce, but shal saye: The LORDE hath not appeared vnto the. The LORDE sayde vnto him: What is y, that thou hast in thine hande?
He saide a stall He sayde: Cast it from the vpon the grounde. And he cast it fro him: then was it turned to a serpent. And Moses fled fro it. But y LORDE saide vnto him:
Stretch forth thine hande, q take it by the tayle. Then stretched he forth his hande, and toke it, and it became a staff agayne in his hande. "Therfore shal they beleue that y
LORDE God of their fathers, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac y God of Iacob 

hath appeared vnto the. 
And the LORDE sayde furthermore vnto him: Thrust thine hàde in to thy bosome.
COE ro. B 

ETa 8. f. * Exo. 11. a. and 12. e. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

And he thrust it in to his bosome, a toke it out: beholde, thé was it leper like snowe.
And he saide: Put it into thy bosome agayne. 
And he put it agayne in to his bosome, q toke it out: beholde, thé was it turned againe as his flesh. Yf they wil not beleue the, ner heare y voyce of the first token, yet shal they beleue the voyce of the seconde token. But yf they wil not beleue these two tokens ner heare thy voyce, then take of the water of the ryner, and poure it vpon the drye londe: so shall the same water y thou hast take out of y ryuer, be turned vnto bloude vpo y drye londe.

But Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: *^Oh my LORDE, I am a man that is not eloquét, from yesterdaye q yeryesterdaye, q sence the tyme y thou hast spoken vnto thy seruaunt: for I e a slowe speach, q a slowe tunge.
The LORDE sayde vnto him: Who hath made the mouth of man? Or who hath made the domme, or the deaf, or the seynge or y blynde? Haue not I the LORDE done it?
Go now thy waye therfore, I wil be with thy mouth, « teach the what thou shalt saye.

But Moses sayde: My LORDE, sende whom thou wilt sende. Then was the
LORDE very angrie at Moses, and saide: 
Do not I knowe then, y thy brother Aaron the Leuite is well spoken? And beholde, he shal go forth to mete y: “q whan he seyth the, he shal reioyse from his hert. Thou shalt speake vnto him, x pnt the wordes in his mouth: q I wil be with thy mouth x his, and teach you what ye shall doo: x he shall speake vnto the people for the. He shal be thy mouth, q thou shalt be his God. And take in thine hande this staff, wherwith thou shalt do tokens.

Moses wéte, and came agayne vnto Iethro his father in lawe, and sayde vnto him: Let me go (I praye the) that I maye turne agayne vnto my brethré, which are in Egipte, and se whether they be yet alyue. Iethro sayde vnto him: Go thy wayein peace. The LORDE sayde also vnto him in Madian: Go thy waye, turne againe in to Egipte, for $ mé are deed, that sought after thy life. So Moses toke his wife, and his sonnes, and caried them vpon an Asse, t wente againe in to the lande of
Egipte, a toke the staff of God in his hande. 
And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: When thou comest agayne in to Egipte, se y thou do

4 Jere. 1. a. Acto. 8. b. * Exod. 4. e. 

Jo. Ib. 

B 

(TTC IEEE TP 
Fo., fbi. all the wonders (before Pharao) which I hane

ut in thy hade. “But 1 wil harde his hert, y he shall not let the people go. And thou shalt saie vnto Pharao: Thus sayeth y
LORDE: Israel is my firstborne sonne, q I saye vuto the: Let my sonne go, y he maye serue me: Yf thon wilt not let him go, ^ then, wil I slaye thy firstborne sonne.

And as he was by the waye in the Inne, the LORDE met him, and wolde haue slayne him. "Then toke Zipora *a stone, and cir-| cumcyded the foreskynne of hir sonne, and touched his fete, and sayde: A bloudy bryde- grome art thou vnto me. ‘Thé let he him go.
But she sayde: A bloudy brydegrome, because of the circumcision.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: Go mete Moses in the wildernes. And he wéte, it met him on the mount of God, and kyssed
‘him. And Moses tolde Aaron all the wordes of the LORDE, which had sent him: ¢ all the tokens y he had charged him withall.
And they wēte, q gathered all the elders of 
'the childré of Israel. And Aaron tolde all y wordes, y the LORDE had spoke vnto
Moses: q dyd the tokens before the people, q the people belened. And whan they herde y
‘the LORDE vysited the children of Israel, and loked vpon their trouble, they bowed them selues, and worshipped.

a 

The b. Chapter. 

FTERWARDE wente Moses q Aaron, q spake vnto Pharao: Thus sayeth the
LORDE the God of Israel: let my people go, y they maye kepe holy daye vnto me in the wildernes. Pharao answered: t What felowe is the LORDE, that I must heare his voyce, and let Israel go? I knowe not the
LORDE, nether wil 1 let Israel go. 
They sayde: 'The God of the Hebrues hath called vs. Let vs go now therfore thre dayes iourney in the wildernes, ¢ do sacrifice ivnto the LORDE onre God, y there happen not vnto vs pestiléce or swerde. Thé sayde y kynge of Egipte vnto the: Why make ye y people (thou Moses q Aaron) to leaue their worke? Get you héce to youre laboure.
„Pharao saide moroner: Beholde, y people are to many in y lande, and yet wil ye byd them
|ceasse from their laboure. 
3 The same daye therfore dyd Pharao 

* Exod. 7. à. 

5 Exod. 12. e. 

The ij. boke of Moses. . 

Chap. f. 

comaunde the workmasters of the people, and their officers, and sayde: Ye shal not gather and geue the people eny more strawe, to burne bryck, as yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye.
Let them go, and gather them strawe them selues. And the nombre of the brycke which they made yesterdaye q yeryesterdaye, shall ye laye vpon them neuertheles, and mynish nothinge therof: for they are ydle. Therfore crye they and saye: We wil go, and do sacri- fice vnto oure God. Let the men be kepte downe with laboure, y they maye hane to do,
& not to turne them selues to false wordes. 

Then wente the workmasters of the people q their officers out, q spake vnto the people:
Thus sayeth Pharao: There shall no strawe be geuen you, go youre waye youre selues, and get you strawe, where ye can fynde it.
But of youre laboure there shall nothinge be mynished. Then were the people scatred in all ¥ lande of Egipte, to gather stubble, that they might haue strawe.

And the workmasters haistied them for- warde, q sayde: Fulfill youre daye worke, like as whan ye had strawe. And the officers of y children of Israel, whom Pharaos worck- masters had set ouer them, were beaten, q it was saide vnto them: Wherfore haue ye not pale’ youre appoynted daye worke to daye and yesterdaye, like as in tymes past ?

Than wente the officers of the children of 
Israel, ¢ coplayned vnto Pharao: Wherfore wilt thou deale thus with thy seruauntes?
Thy seruauntes haue no strawe geuen thé, ¢ yet must we make the brycke that are ap- poynted vs. And beholde, thy seruauntes are beaten, q thy people are euell intreated.
Pharao sayde: Ye are ydle, ydle are ye, ther- fore saye ye: we will go, and do sacrifice vnto the LORDE. Go now youre waye therfore,
|t worke : there shall no strawe be geuen you, but the nombre of brycke shal ye delyuer.

Israel, y it was not amended, for it was sayde : ye shal mynish nothinge of the daye worke of the brycke. And whan Moses q Aaron wente from Pharao, they came forth to mete them,
(t sayde vnto them: The LORDE loke vpon 
‘you, q iudge it, for ye haue made the sauoure iof vs to stynke before Pharao and his ser- uauntes, and haue geuen them a swerde in their handes, to slaye vs.

* [osu. 5. a. t lob 21. b. 

Then sawe the officers of the children of| B 

Chap. bí. 

a 

But Moses came agayne vnto the LORDE, and sayde: LORDE, wherfore dealest thou so euell with this people? Wherfore hast thou sent me? For sence the tyme that I wente in vnto Pharao, to speake vnto him in thy name, he hath dealt euell with this people, and thou hast not delyuered thy people. ‘The
LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Now shalt thou se, what I will do vnto Pharao, for thorow a mightie hande must he let them go, thorow a mightie hande “must he dryue them from him out of his londe.

The bi. Chapter. 
ND God spake vnto Moses, q sayde vnto him: I am y LORDE, a I appeared

;vnto Abraham, Isaac q Jacob, an Allmightie 

God: but *my name, LORDE, haue Í not shewed vnto them: My couenaunt also haue
I made with them, ^ that I wil geue them the londe of Canaan, the londe of their pilgremage, wherin they haue bene straungers. Mor-

‘ouer I haue herde the complaynte of the children of Israel, whom ¥ Egipcians oppresse

with laboure, and haue remembred my coue- naunt.

Therfore saye vnto the childré of Israel: 
I am the LORDE, a wil brynge you out from 

‚youre burthens in Egipte, q wil rydd you from 

youre laboure, and wil delyuer you thorow a stretched out arme a greate iudgmétes, and will receaue you for my people, q will be youre God: so that ye shal knowe, that

|I the LORDE am youre God, which brynge 

you out from the burthen of Egipte, and will brynge you in to the lande, ouer the which I haue lift vp my hande, to geue it vnto Abraham, Isaac and lacob, ý same wil
I geue vnto you for a possession. I the 
LORDE. 

Moses tolde this vnto the childré of Israel. 
But they herkened not vnto him, for very anguysh of sprete, q for sore laboure. "The spake the LORDE vnto Moses, t sayde: Go thy waye, q speake vnto Pharao the kynge of
Egypte, y he let the childré of Israel go out of his lande. But Moses spake before $
LORDE, ¢ saide: Beholde, y childré of Israel herké not vnto me, how shulde Pharao the heare me? ‘And I am also of vneircumcised lyppes.

* Exo. 14. b. *Ge. 32. e. 

5 Gen. 17. a. 
* Ge, 46. b. Nu. 26. a, 

1 Par. 6. a. 

* Exo. 4. c. 
* Num. 3. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

So the LORDE spake vnto Moses t Aaron, q gaue thé a commaundemet vnto the childré of Israel, q vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte, y they shulde brynge the childré of Israel out of Kgipte.

? These are y heades of the house of their fathers. The children of Ruben the first sonne of Israel, are these: Hanoch, Pallu,
Hezron, Charmi: These are the generacions of Ruben.

The children of Simeon are these: Jemuel, lamin, Ohad, laehin, Zophar, and Saul the sonne of the Cananitish woman: ‘These are the generacions of Symeon.

These are the names of the childré of Leui in their generaciés: “Gerson, Kahath and
Merari: Leui was an hundreth and seuen q thirtie yeare olde. The children of Gerson are these: Libni and Semei in their genera- cions. The childré of Kahath are these:
Amram, lezear, Hebron, Vsiel. /Kahath was an hundreth a thre q thirtie yeare olde. The children of Merari are these: Maheli and
Musi. These are $ generacions of Leui in their kynreds.

And Amram toke^ his vneles donghter t lochebed to wife, which bare him Aaron a
Moses. Amram was an C. q vij q thirtie yeare olde. The childré of Iezear are these:
Korah, Nepheg, Sichri. The children of 
Vsiel are these: Misael, Elzaphan, Sithri. 

Aaron toke Elizaba y doughter of Aminadab 
Nahassons sister to wife, which bare him 
Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar, Ithamar. 

The childré of Korah are these: Assir, 
Elkana, q Abiassaph. ‘These are y gene- racids of y Korahites. Eleasar Aarons sonne toke one of the doughters of Putiel to wife, which bare him Phineas. These are the heades amonge the fathers of the generacions of the Leuites.

This is y Aaron ¢ Moses, vnto whom y 
LORDE sayde: Bringe y childré of Israel out of the lande of Egipte with their armies.
It is they (namely Moses q Aaron) y spake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte, y they might brynge the children of Israel out of
Egipte. The same daie spake y LORDE vnto Moses in y lande of Egipte, q sayde: I am y LORDE, speake thou vnto Pharao $ kynge of Egipte, all y I saye vnto y. And

f 1 Par. 24. b. 

£ Exod. 2. a. t Nu. 26. g. 

ll 

Fo. lbi. 

€ 

ffo. loii. 

he answered before y LORDE: Beholde, I am of yneircumcised lippes,^ how shall Pharao the heare me?

The bij. Chapter. 

a HE LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Be- 

holde, I haue made the a God ouer 
Pharao, q Aaro thy brother shal be thy prophet. Thon shalt speake all y I cómaüde y: but Aaron thy brother shal speake vnto
Distan, y he maye let the childré of Israel go out of n lande. ^Neuertheles I wil harden
Pharaos hert, y I maye multiplye my tokens 
& wonders in the londe of Egipte. And 
Pharao shal not heare you, y I maye shewe my hande in Egipte, q brynge myne armyes, euen my people the childré of Israel out of y lande of Egipte, by greate iudgmetes. And y Egipeians shal knowe, y lam the LORDE, whan I shal stretch out my hande vpon Egipte, and brynge the children of Israel out from amonge them.

Moses and Aaron dyd as the LORDE comaüded them. And Moses was foure score yeare olde, q Aaron thre q foure score yeare olde, whan they spake vnto Pharao. And y
LORDE sayde vnto Moses q Aaron: Whan 
Pharao sayeth vnto you: Shew youre wonders, then shalt thou saye vnto Aaron: Take thy staff, and cast it before Pharao, q it shal turne to a serpent.

Then wéte Moses q Aaron in vnto Pharao, t dyd as the LORDE coémaunded them.
And Aaron cast his staff before Pharao q before his seruauntes, q it turned to a serpét.
Then Pharao called for y wyse men q Sor- cerers, And the Sorcerers of Egipte also dyd like wyse with their Sorceries, and euery one cast his staff before him, « they turned vnto serpentes. But Aarons staff deuoured their staues. So Pharaos hert was hardened, and he herkened not vnto them, euen as the
LORDE had sayde. 

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: The hert of Pharao is hardened, he refuseth to let Y people go. Get ¥ vnto Pharao in the mornynge, beholde, he shal come vnto y water, mete thou him vpo the waters brynke, « take i staff which turned to a serpēt, in thine

ande, q saye vnto him: The LORDE God of the Hebrues hath sent me vnto the, « sendeth y worde: “Let my people go, that they maye

| * Exod.6.b. ^^ Exo.4.d. * Exod.8.a. 4 Psal.77.c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. Chap. bij 

serne me in the wyldernesse: but hither to thon woldest not heare.

Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: Hereby shalt thou knowe, y Iam y LORDE. Be- holde, with the staff y I haue in my hande, wil I smyte the water which is in y ryuer, a it shal be turned in to bloude: so that the fishes in the ryuer shall dye, q the ryuer shall stynke: q it shall greue the Egipcians to drynke of y water of the ryuer.

Aud y LORDE spake vnto Moses: Saye vnto Aaron: Take thy staff, q stretch out thine hàde ouer ¥ waters of Egipte, ouer their ryuers t brokes q pondes, q ouer all water poles, y they maye be turned to bloude, a that there maye be bloude in all ¥ lande of
Egipte, both in vessels of wodd and stone. 

“Moses q Aaron dyd as LORDE co- maunded them, q lift vp the staff, t smote the water y was in the ryuer, before Pharao q his seruauntes, v all the water in the ryuer was turned in to bloude, q the fysh in the ryuer dyed, q the ryuer stanke, so y the Egipcians coulde not drynke of the water of y ryuer, q there was bloude in all the lande of Egipte.
And the Sorcerers also of Egipte, dyd like- wyse with their Sorceries. But Pharaos hert was hardened, q he herkened not vnto the, like as the LORDE had sayde. And Pharao turned him self, x wente home, q set not his hert there on. All the Egipciās dygged roude aboute y ryuer, for water to drinke: for they coude not drynke of y water out of the ryuer.
And this endured seuen dayes longe, that the 
LORDE smote the ryuer. 

The biij. Chapter. 

go, y they maye serne me: let thé go, beholde, I wil smyte all borders of thy lode with frogges, so y the ryuer shal scraule with frogges: these bes clymme vp,
& come in to thine house, in to thy chamber, where thou slepest, vpon thy bed, and in to the houses of thy sernauntes, amonge thy people, in to thine ouens, and vpon thy dowe: and the frogges shall come vp vpon the, and vpon thy people, and vpon all thy seruauntes.

“And the LORDE spake vnto Moses: Saie 35 vnto Aaron: Stretch forth thine hande with

* Psal. 77. c. and 104. d. 

Chap. tr. 

thy staff ouer the streames, q ryuers, a pondes, and let frogges come vpou the londe of Egipte.
And Aaron stretched his hade ouer the waters in Egipte, q there came vp frogges, so y the londe of Egipte was couered.

'The Sorcerers also dyd likewyse, with their 
Sorcerirs, q caused frogges to come vpo y lode of Egipte. Thé called Pharao for Moses q Aaron, q sayde: *Praye the LORDE for me, y he maye take awaye the frogges fro me q fro my people, x I will let $ people go, y they maye do sacrifice vnto the LORDE.

Moses sayde: Haue thou the honoure be- fore me, q appoynte me, wha I shal praye for
¥, for thy seruauntes aud for thy people: y the frogges maye be dryuen awaye fro the q fro thy house, q remayne onely iu the ryuer. He sayde: ‘Tomorow. He sayde: Euen as thou hast sayde, ¥ thou mayest knowe, y there is none like vnto the LORDE oure God: And the frogges shal be takë from the, q from thy house, from thy seruauntes, q from thy people, q remayne onely in the ryuer.

So Moses q Aarou wete from Pharao, q 
Moses cried vnto the LORDE for the ap- poyntment ouer the frogges, which he had promysed vnto Pharao. And$ LORDE dyd as Moses sayde. And the frogges dyed in $ houses, in $ courtes, q vpon ¥ felde: q they gathered thé together, here an heape, q there an heape, q the lande stanke of them. But whan Pharao sawe y he had gotten breth, his hert was hardened, and he herkened not vnto the, eueu as the LORDE had sayde.

D| And the LORDE spake vnto Moses: Saie 

vnto Aaron: Stretch out thy staff, q smyte the dust vpon the earth, ý there maye be lyse in the whole lóde of Egipte. They dyd so.
And Aaron stretched out his hande with his staff, q smote the dust vpon the earth, q there were lyse vpon men and vpon catell: All the dust of the lande was turned vnto lyse in all the lande of Egipte.

The Sorcerers also assayde likewyse with their Sorcerirs y they might brynge forth lyse, but they coude not. And y lyse were vpon men çq catell. ‘Then sayde ¥ Sorcerers vnto
Pharao: It isthe fynger of God. But Pharaos hert was hardened, q he herkened not vnto s the, euen as the LORDE had sayde.

É| And y LORDE saide vnto Moses: Get y vp tomorow by tymes, q stonde before Pharao:

* 3 Re. 13. b. Exod. 9, f. and 10. c. Acto. 8. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

beholde, he wil go vnto the water, q speake thou vnto him: Thus saieth $ LORDE: let my people go, y they maye serue me: yf not, beholde, I wil cause cruell wormes (or flyes) to come vpon the, thy seruauntes, thy people, q thy house, so y all the Egipcians houses, a the felde, and what theron is shall be full of cruell wormes: q the same daye wil I separate the londe of t Gosen, wherin my people are, so ý no cruell worme shalbe there, that thou mayest knowe, that I am $ LORDE in the myddest of the earth. And I wil set a de- lyueraunce betweue my people and thyne.
‘Tomorow shal this token come to passe. 

And the LORDE dyd so. And there came perlous cruell wormes in to Pharaos house, iu to his seruauntes houses, q vpon all the londe of Egipte: and the londe was marred with noysome wormes.

Thē called Pharao for Moses q Aaron, q sayde: Go youre waye, a do sacrifice vnto youre God in $ londe. Moses sayde: It is not mete, y we shulde so do, so shulde we offer $ abhominaciou of $ Egipcians vnto the
LORDE oure God. Beholde, yf we shulde offer the abhominacion of y Egipcians before their eyes, shulde they not stone vs? Thre dayes iourney will we go iu the wyldernes, and do sacrifice vnto the LORDE oure God tlike as he hath sayde vnto vs.

Pharao sayde: I wil let you go, ý ye maie do sacrifice vnto the LORDE youre God in the wylderues (ouely ý ye go no farther) q praye for me. Moses sayde: Beholde, whan
I am come forth from ¥, I wil praye vnto y 
LORDE, ¥ the cruell wormes maye be taken from Pharao, q from his seruaiütes, q fro his people, euen tomorow: onely disceaue me nomore, that thou woldest not let the people go to do sacrifice vnto the LORDE.

And Moses wéte out from Pharao, and prayed vnto the LORDE. And the LORDE dyd as Moses sayde, q toke awaye the cruell wormes from Pharao, from his seruauntes, and from his people, so y there remayned not one. But Pharao hardened his hert eué then also, and let not $ people go.

The iy. Chapter. 
HE LORDE sayde vuto Moses: Go in to Pharao, and speake vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE God of ¥ Hebrues:

t Ge. 47. g. 1 Exod. 3. c. 

Fo. lir. 

F 

| fo. Ir. 

à 

let my people go, y they maye serue me. Yf thou wilt not, but holde them longer, beholde, the hande of the LORDE shal be vpon thy catell in the felde, vpon horses, vpon Asses, vpon Camels, vpon oxen, vpon shepe with a very sore pestilence. And y LORDE shall make a diuysion betwene the catell of the
Israelites q the Egipcians, so y there shal nothinge dye of all that the children of Israel haue. And y LORDE appoynted a tyme, and sayde: '"l'omorow shal the LORDE do this vpon earth.

And the LORDE dyd the same on the morow. And there dyed of all maner of eatell of the Egipcians: but of y catell of y childre of Israel there dyed not one. And
Pharao sent thither, q beholde, there was not one of the catell of Israel deed. But Pharaos hert was hardened, so y he let not ¥ people go. Then sayde y LORDE vnto Moses q
Aaron: Take youre handes full of aszshes out of the fornace, q let Moses sprenkle it towarde hcauen before Pharao, that 1t maye be dust in all the lande of Egipte, ¢ that there maye be sores q blaynes vpon men q vpon catell in all the lande of Egipte.

And they toke aszshes out of y fornace, q stode before Pharao, ¢ Moses sprenkled it towarde heaué. ‘Then were there sores and blaynes vpon men q vpon catell, so that the
Sorcerers might not stode before Moses by reason of the sores. For there were sores vpo the Sorcerers as well as vpon all the
Egipcians. But the LORDE hardened Pha- raos hert, so that he herkened not vnto them, eué as the LORDE had sayde vnto Moses.

Then sayde the LORDE vnto Moses: 
Get the vp tomorow by tymes, q stonde be- fore Pharao, q speake vnto him : Thus sayeth y LORDE God of the Hebrues: let my people go, y they maye serue me, els wyll I at this tyme sende all my plages in to thine hert, q vpon thy seruaütes q vpon thy people: that thou mayest knowe, y there is none like me in all londes. For I will now stretch out my haude, q smyte the q thy people with pesti- lence, so y thou shalt be roted out from the earth. Yet hane I *stered ¥ vp for this cause, euen to shew my power vpon y, and that my name might be declared in all londes.

Thou holdest my people yet, q wilt not let them go, beholde, tomorow aboute this tyme

* Some reade: I hane holden the vp. 

The ý. boke of Hosts. 

Chap, tr. 

wyll I cause a mightie greate hayle to rayne, soch as hath not bene in the londe of Egipte, sence the tyme that it was groüded, hither to.
And now sende thou, q saue thy catell, q all y thou hast in the felde: for all men çq catell that shalbe founde in the felde, q not brought in to the houses, yf the hayle fall vpon them, they shall dye. Now who so feared the worde of the LORDE amonge Pharaos ser- nauntes, caused his seruauntes q catell to flye in to the houses: but loke whose hertes re- garded not the worde of y LORDE, left their seruauntes and catell in the felde.

Then sayde the LORDE «nto Moses :|% 

Strech out thy hande towarde heaue, that it maye hayle vpon all the lande of Egipte, vpon men, vpon catell, q vpon all herbes of the felde in the lande of Egipte. *So Moses stretched out his staff towarde heauen, and the LORDE caused it to thonder ç hayle, so y the fyre ranne alonge vpon the earth. Thus the LORDE hayled ¢ rayned vpon the londe of Egipte, so that the hayle q fyre wente so horrybly together, as neuer was in all the lade of Egipte, sens the tyme that there were people therin. And the hayle smote the whole land of Egipte, all that was vpon y felde, both men ç catell, q smote all the herbes vpon the felde, q brake all the trees vpon y felde, saue onely in the lande of Gosen, where the childre of Israel were, there it hayled not. ‘Chen sent Pharao q called for Moses q Aaron, q sayde vnto them: Now haue I synned, ¥
LORDE is righteous, but I q my people are vngodly. Yet praye ye vnto the LORDE, that the thonder q hayle of God maye ceasse, then wyl I let you go, that ye shal tary here nolonger. Moses sayde vnto him: Whan 1 am come out of the cite, I wyll stretch out myne handes vnto the LORDE, so shal the thonder ceasse, q there shal be nomore hayle: that thou mayest knowe, that the earth is the
LORDES. But I knowe, y both thou q thy seruauntes feare not yet the LORDE God.
Thus the flax and the barlye were smytten : for the barlye was shot vp, a y flax was boulled: but the wheate and y rye were not smytten, for they were late sowen.

So Moses wente from Pharao out of ¥ cite, q stretched out his hades vnto ý LORDE.
And y thoder ¢ the hayle ceassed, q the rayne dropped not vpo the earth. But wha Pharao

? Psal, 77. e. and 104. d, 

Chap. y. 

B 

sawe y the rayne q thonder « hayle ceassed, he synned agayne, and herdened his hert, he q his seruauntes. So Pharaos hert was hard- ened, ý he let not the childrē of Israel go, eué as the LORDE had sayde by Moses.

The y. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE saide vnto Moses: Go in vnto Pharao, for I haue hardened his hert « the hertes of his seruaütes, y I might do these my tokés amonge thé, « that thou mightest shewe it in the eares of thy children q of thy childers children, what I haue done in Egipte, and how I haue shewed my tokens amoge the, that ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.
So Moses q Aaron wente in vnto Pharao, q spake vnto him: Thus sayeth LORDE
God of the Hebrues: How longe refusest thou to submyt thy self vnto me, to let my people go, y they maye serue me? Yf thou wilt not let my people go, beholde, tomorow wil I cause greshoppers to come vpon all places, y they maye couer the lande, so y the lande can not be sene, q they shal eate vp y is left you q was delynered fro the hayle: a shal eate vp all youre grene trees vpon the felde, q shal fyll thy house, all thy seruaütes houses, q all the Eu houses: soch as thy fathers « thy fathers fathers haue not sene, seus the tyme y they were vpon earth vnto this daye. And he turned him, a wente out from Pharao. "Then saide Pharaos ser- uauntes ynto him: How longe shall we be snared after this maner? Let the men go, that they may serue ¥ LORDE their God.
Knowest thou not yet, y Egipte is destroyed? 
Moses q Aaron were brought agayne to Pha- rao, which saide vuto them: Go youre waye, q serue y LORDE youre God. But who are they y shall go? Moses sayde: We wil go with yonge q olde, with sonnes and doughters, with shepe and oxé: for we haue a feast of the LORDE. — Hesayde vnto thé: Let it be so, the LORDE be with you: Shulde 1 let you go q youre childré also? loke that ye haue not some myschefe in hade. Not so, but go ye that are men, and serue the
LORDE, for that was youre desyre. And they thrust them out from Pharao.
The saide y LORDE vnto Moses: Stretch out thine hande ouer $ londe of Egipte, for

* Psal. 104.d. Sap.16.b. Ioeli.a. Apo. 9. a. 

The i. boke of Moses, 

the *greshoppers, y they maye come vpó y londe of Egipte, x eate vp all the herbes in the londe, with all y escaped the hayle. Moses stretched out his staff ouer y lande of Egipte, q the LORDE brought an east wynde in to the londe all y daye q all y night, q in the mornynge, the east wynde brought the gres- hoppers. And they came ouer the whole lande of Egipte, and lighted in all places of
Egipte, so exceadinge many, that before tyme there were neuer soch, nether shalbe here after: for they couered the londe, and made it darcke. And they ate vp all the herbes in y londe, q all the frutes vpon the trees which remayned from y hayle, q left no grene thinge behinde in the trees q herbes vpon the felde in all the lande of Egipte.

Then Pharao called for Moses « Aaron in all y haist, q saide: I haue synned against the LORDE youre God, q agaynst you : for- geue me my synne this once also, q pray the
LORDE youre God, ý he maye take awaye fro me this death one And he wete out from Pharao, q prayed vnto the LORDE.
Thé the LORDE turned a maruelous stroge west wynde, and toke vp the greshoppers, q cast them in to the reed see, so that there was not one left in all the quarters of Egipte.
But the LORDE hardened Pharaos hert, that he let not the childré of Israel go. The
LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Stretch out thine hade towarde heauen, that it be so darek in the londe of Egipte, y it maye be felt. And Moses stretched out his hade to- warde heauen, thé was there a thicke darck- nesse “in all the londe of Egipte thre dayes, so y in thre dayes no mà sawe another, nor rose vp from ¥ place where he was. But with the childré of Israel there was light in their dwellinges. ‘Then Pharao called for Moses, asayde: Go youre waye q serue the LORDE: onely leaue youre shepe q youre oxen here: let yonre childré go with you also. Moses sayde: ‘Thou must geue vs offringes and brent offerynges, that we maye do sacrifice vnto the
LORDE oure God. Oure catell shal go with vs, and there shal not one hooffe be left behynde: for we must take therof for the seruyce of the LORDE oure God. Morouer we knowe not wherwithall we shal serue y
LORDE, tyll we come thither. But the 
LORDE hardened Pharaos hert, y he wolde 

a Sap. 17. a. 

So. ri 

E 

Fo. Iri. not let them go. And Pharao sayde vnto him: Get the hence fro me, q bewarre, that thou come nomore in my sight: For loke what daie so euer thou comest in my sight, thou shalt dye. Moses answered: [ue as thou hast sayde, I wil come no more in thy sight.

The ri. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I 
A wil yet brynge a plage vpon Pharao and Egipte: after y shal he let you go from hence, q shal not onely let all go, but also dryue you hence. ‘Therfore saye now vnto the people, y euery man borowe of his negh- boure, q euery woman of hir neghbouresse, lewels of syluer « golde: “for the LORDE shal geue the people fauoure in the sight of y Egipeiis. ^And Moses was a very greate man in the lande of Egipte, in Y sight of Pha- raos seruauntes, q in the sight of the people.

And Mosessayde: Thussayeththe LORDE: 
At mydnight wil I go ont in the lande of 
Egipte, q all y first borne in the lande of 
Egipte shall dye: from Pharaos first sonne 
(Y sytteth vpon his seate) vnto the first sonne of the mayde seruaunte which is behynde $ myll: q all the first borne amonge the catell: a there shalbe a greate crie in all the lande of
Egipte, soch as neuer was, ner shalbe. But amonge all the childré of Israel there shall not a dogg quatch with his tonge, fro men vnto catell y ye maye knowe, how y the
LORDE hath put a differéce betwixte Egipte a Israel. Thē shal all these thy seruauntes come downe vnto me, q fal at my fote, q saye:
Get the out, thou q all the people that are vnder the. After that wyl I departe. And he weéte fro Pharao with a wroth full dis- pleasure. The LORDE saide vnto Moses:
Pharao herkeneth not vnto you, y many woders maye be done in y lade of Egipte.
And Moses q Aaron dyd all these woders before Pharao: but y LORDE hardened his hert, y he wolde not let y childre of Israel go out of his londe.

The rij. Chapter. 
HE LORDE sayde vnto Moses q Aaron 
| in the londe of Egipte: This moneth 

shal be. with you $ first moneth qat it ye shall 

begynne the monethes of the yeare. Speake 

a Exo. 3. e. and 12. e. 
* Eze. 9. a. 

* Ioh. 1. d. 
4 Heb. 11. e. 

^ Eccli. 45. a. t Psa. 135. a.

The ij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. ri. 

ye vnto all the congregacion of Israel, q saye: 
Vpon i tenth daye of this moneth let euery one take a * labe (or a kydd) where a hous- holder is, to euery house a labe. But yf the honsholde be to few for a lambe, the let him q his neghboure y is next vnto his house, take it acordinge to the nombre of y soules, and counte to the lambe, what euery man maye eate. But it shal be a lambe without blemish, a male, q of a yeare olde. From amonge the lambes q goates shal ye take it.

And ye shal kepe it vnto y fourtene daye of the moneth. And euery man of the con- gregacion of Israel shal slaye it aboute the eneninge. “And they shal take of his bloude, and stryke it on both the syde postes of the dore, and on the vpperdore post of the house, that they eate it in. And so shal they eate flesh y same night, rosted at the fyre, q vnleuended bred, and shal eate it with sowre sawse. Ye shal not eate it rawe, ner sodden with water, but onely rosted at the fyre, his heade with his fete and pertenaunce. And ye shal leaue nothynge of it ouer vntyll the mornynge: but yf eny thinge be left ouer vn- tyll the mornynge, ye shal burne it with fyre.

Of this maner shal ye eate it: Ye shal be gyrded aboute youre loynes, and haue youre shues vpon youre fete, and staues in youre handes, and ye shal eate it with haist: for it is ý LORDES Passeouer. ! For in the same night wil I go thorow the londe of Egipte, q smyte all the firstborne in the lande of Egipte, from men vnto catell, q vpon all the goddes of
Egipte wyll I do execucion. Euen I the 
LORDE. "And the bloude shal be youre token, vpon the houses wherin ye are: y whan
Ise the bloude, I maye passe ouer, and that the plage happen not vnto you, to destroye you, whan I smyte the londe of Egipte.

And this daye shall ye haue for a remem- braunce, and ye shall kepe it holy for a feast vnto the LORDE, ye q all youre posterities, for a perpetuall custome. ‘Seuen dayes shall lye eate vnleuended bred: namely, vpon the first daie shal ye leaue of with leuended bred in youre houses. Who so euer eateth leuended bred from the first daye vnto ¥ seuenth that soule shall be roted out from Israel. The first daye shall be called holy amonge you, and the seuenth also. No maner of worke

* Exo. 23. b. and 34. c. 

Chap. rij. shall ye do therin, sane what belongeth to the meate for all maner of soules, that onely maye ye do for you. And kepe you to lenended bred.

For enen vpon that same daye wil I brynge youre armies out of the londe of Egipte, therfore shall ye and all youre posterities kepe this daye fora perpetuall custome. Vpon the fourtene daye of the first moneth, ^at euen, shall ye eate vnleuended bred, vnto the one and twentye daye of the moneth, at euen: so that there be no lenended bred founde in youre houses seuen dayes. For who so euer eateth leuended bred, that soule shall be roted out from the congregacion of Israel, whether it be a straunger or bome in the londe.
Therfore eate no leuended bred, but onely vnleuended bred in all youre dwellynges.

And Moses called all the Elders of Israel, and sayde vnto them: Chose out, and take to euery housholde a shepe, and kyll Passeoner vnto the LORDE; and take a bunch of ysope, and dyppe it in the blonde in the basen, and stryke it vpon the vpperposte and vpon the two syde postes, and none of yon go out at the dore of his house vntyll ý mornynge, for the LORDE wyll go aboute and plage the
Egipcians. And whan he seyth the blonde vpo the vpperposte, and vpon the two syde postes, he wy! passe ouer by the dore, and not suffre the destroyer to come in to youre houses to plage. ‘Therfore kepe this custome for the and thy children for euer.

And whan ye be come in to y londe that the LORDE shal geue you, (as he hath sayde) then kepe this seruyce.* And whan youre children saye vnto you: What seruyce
1s this, that ye hane? Ye shal saye: It is the sacrifice of the LORDES Passeouer, which passed ouer by the children of Israel in Egipte, whan he plaged the Egipcians, and saued oure houses. ‘Then the people bowed them selues, and worshipped. And the children of Israel wente and dyd, as the LORDE had com- maunded Moses and Aaron.

‘And at mydnight the LORDE smote all the firstborne in the lande of Egipte: from
Pharaos first sonne (which sat vpon his seate) vntyll the first sonne of the presoner that was in the preson, and all the firstborne of the catell. Then Pharao arose ¥ same night, and all his seruauntes, and all the Egipcians, ¢

? Leui.23. a. Nu. 28. c. 
Psal. ?7. e. and 134. c. 

> Exo. 11. b. 
& 1 Reg. 6. b. 

* Tos. 4. d. 
Sap. 18. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

Fo. Irii. 

there was a greate crye in Egipte : for there was no house wherin there was not one deed.

And he called for Moses and Aaron in y night, and sayde: Get you vp, and departe out fro my people, ye and the children of Israel : go youre waye, and serue the LORDE, as ye haue sayde: and take youre shepe and youre oxen with you, tas ye haue sayde, and de- parte, and blesse me also. And the Egip- cians were fearce vpon the people, to dryue them haistely out of the londe, for they saide: we are all but deed.

And the people toke the rawe dowe, before it was leuended (for their foode) bounde in their clothes vpon their shulders. And the children of Israel had done + as Moses sayde, and borowed lewels of syluer and golde, and clothes of the Egipcians: the LORDE also had geuen the people fauoure in the sight of the Egipcians, that they lent them, and so they spoyled the Egipcians.

Thus y children of Israel toke their iourney | P from Raemses^ to Suchoth, $sixe hundreth thousande men of fote, besyde childre. There wente with them also moch comó people, and shepe, and oxen, and exceadinge many catell.

And of the rawe dowe that they brought out of Egipte, they baked vnleuéded cakes: for it was not leuended, in so moch as they were thrust out of Egipte, and coude not tary: nether had they prepared them eny other meate.

The tyme y the children of Israel dwelt in 
Egipte, is fonre hondreth and thirtie yeares. 
Whan the same were ended, the whole hoost of the LORDE wente out of the londe of
Egipte in one daye. Therfore shall this night be kepte vnto the LORDE, because he bronght them ont of the londe of Egipte:
And the children of Israel shall kepe it vnto the LORDE, they and their posterities.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses and|& 
Aaron: This is the maner of the kepynge of 
Passeouer: There shal no straüger eate of it. 
But who so is a bought sernaunt let him be circumcysed, q then eate therof. A straunger and an hyred seruaüt shal not eate of it. In one house shal it be eate. Ye shal cary none of his flesh out of the house, and liye shal not breake a bone of him. The whole congre- gacion of Israel shal do it.

t Exo. 3. e. and 11. a. 4 Num. 33. a. 
$ Nu. 11. e. || Nu. 9. b. Iob. 19. d. 

t Exo. 10. f. 
Hebr. 11. e. 

Fo. lritij. 
But yf there dwel a strannger with the, « wil holde l'asseouer vnto the LORDE, let him cireumcyse euery one that is male, and then let hini first come, and do it, and be as one that 1s borne in the londe : for there shal no vncireumeysed eate therof. One maner of lawe be vnto him y is borne in the londe, q vnto the straüger y dwelleth amóge you. And all the childre Ha Israel dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses q Aaron. So vpo one daye the LORDE bronght the childré of Israel out of the lode of Egipte with their armyes.

The riij. Chapter. 

a ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q saide: “Sanctifie vnto me euery first-

borne, y breaketh all maner of Matrices 

amonge the childré of Israel, both of men q 

catell: for they are myne. Then saide Moses 

vnto y people: Thinke vpo this daye, in the which ye are gone ont of Egipte from the house of bódage, how y Y LORDE bronght you out fro thence with a mightie hide. Ther- fore shall ye eate no sowre dowe. This daye are ye gone ont, eué in y moneth of Abib.

^ Now wha y LORDE hath brought $ in to 

y lande of ¥ Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, 

Hedi v lebusites, which *he sware vnto thy fathers to gene ¥ (euen a londe that floweth with mylke q hony) then shalt thou kepe this seruyce in this moneth. Seue dayes shalt thou eate vnlenended bred, q vpon the seuenth daye is the LORDES feast: therfore shalt thou eate vnleuended bred seue dayes, that there be no sowre dowe, ner sowred bred sene in all thy quarters.

B| And thon shalt tell thy sonne at the same tyme, q saye: Because of that, which y
LORDE dyd for me, whan I departed ont of 
Egipte. ‘Therfore shalt it be a signe vnto y in thine hande, and a token of remembraunce before thine eyes, that the lawe of y LORDE maye be in thy month, how that y LORDE brought the ont of Egipte with a mightie hande:
Therfore kepe this maner yearly in his tyme. 

Whan the LORDE now hath brought y in to Y lande of the Cananites (as he hath sworne vnto the and thy fathers) “and hath geuen it the, then shalt thou sunder out vnto the
LORDE all that breaketh the Matrice, and firstborne amonge thy catell, soch as is male.

1 Re. 1. d. Luc. 

a Exo. 22. d. and 34. c. Num. 8. c. 
2.d * Ge. 15. d. Exod. 

* Exo. 23. c. 32. g. 33. a. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. rii. 
The firstborne of the Asse shalt thou bye out with a shepe : but yf thou redeme it not, then breake his neck. All the firstborne of men amonge thy children shalt thou redeme.

And whan thy childe axeth the to daie or] € tomorow: What is this? Thou shalt saye vnto him: The LORDE bronght vs out of
Egipte from the house of bondage with a mightie hande: for whan Pharao was loth to let vs go, the LORDE slew all the firstborne in the lande of Egipte, from the firstborne of men vnto y firstborne of the catell: therfore offer I vnto the LORDE all that breaketh ý
Matrice, beynge a male, and y firstborne of my children I redeme. And this shal be a signe vnto the in thine hande, and a token to thinke vpon before thine eyes, how that the
LORDE bronght vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande.

Now whan Pharao had let y people go,|/B 
God led them not the waye thorow the lode of the Philistynes, which was y nexte : for he thonghte: The people might repét, wha they se warre, and so turne in agayne in to Egipte.
Therfore led he the people aboute, euen the waye thorow the wyldernes by y reed see.
And the childré of Israel wente harnessed ont of the londe of Egipte. And Moses toke
Iosephs bones with him, tfor he toke an ooth of the children of Israel, and sayde: God wyll surely vyset you, therfore cary awaye my bones with you from hence.

So they toke their journey fro Suchoth, q pitched their tétes in Ethà in y edge of the wildernes. ^And y LORDE wete before the by daye in a piler of a cloude, to lede the ý right waye: and by night in a piler of fyre, that he might shewe thé light to walke both by daie and night. The piler of the clonde departed neuer from the people by daye, and the pyler of fyre departed not from thé by night.

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses,|@ 

and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, and ‘byd them that they turne abonte, « pitch their tentes before the valley of Hyroth, betwixte Migdol ¢ the see towarde
Baal Zepho, and there pitch $ tentes right ouer by the see. For Pharao shall saye of

3.d. * Gen. 15. d. 
14.b. Neem.9.c. 1 Cor. 10.a. Esaiz 4. b. 

tGe.50.d. Iosu.24.f, 2 Nu. 
* Num.33.b. 

Chap. riii. the children of Israel: They can not tell how to get out of the londe, the wyldernesse hath shut them in. And I wyll harden his hert, y he shal folowe after them, q I wil get me honoure vpon Pharao, and vpon all his power.
And $ Egipcias shal knowe, y I am the 
LORDE. And they dyd so. 

And whan it was tolde y kinge of Egipte, y y people fled, his hert « his seruauntes were turned agaynst i people, q saide: Why haue we done this, that we haue let Israel go, y they shulde not serue vs? And he bounde his charettes fast, and toke his people with him, and toke sixe hüdreth chosen charettes, and the other charettes besyde that were in
Egipte, and the captaynes ouer all his: for the LORDE hardened y hert of Pharao kynge of Egipte, that he folowed after the children of Israel. And the children of Israel wente out with an hye hande.

And the Egipcians folowed after thé, q| 

ouertoke them (where they had pitched by y see) with horses and charettes, and horsme, and with his power, in the valley of Hyrath towarde Baal Zephon. And whan Pharao came nye them, ‘the children of Israel lift vp their eyes, and beholde, y Egipcians wente behinde thé, and they were sore afrayed, and cried vnto the LORDE.

And sayde vnto Moses: Were there no graues in Egipte, ^y thou hast brought vs awaye to dye in the wyldernes? Wherfore hast thou done this vnto vs, that thou hast caried vs out of Egipte? Is not this it, that we sayde vnto the in Egipte? Leaue of, q let vs serue the Egipcians: for it were better for vs to serue the Egipcians, then to dye in the wyldernes? Moses sayde vnto the people:
"Feare you not, stonde styll, and beholde, what a saluacion the LORDE shall shewe vpon you this daye: *for these Egipcians whom ye se this daye, shall ye neuer se more for euer: the LORDE shal fight for you, onely oo youre selues.

The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Wher- fore criest thou vnto me? Speake vnto y children of Israel, y they go forwarde. But lift thou vp thy staff, a stretch out thine hade ouer ¥ see, "^q parte it asunder, y the children of Israel maye go in thorow y middest of

a Tosu. 24, b. > Psal. 105. a. ¢9 Pa. 20. c. Esa. 
30. c. * Deu. 28. g. 2 Sap. 14, a. — * Psal. 104. c. f Neem. 9. b. € Iosu. 2. b. and 4. d. Iudith 5. c.

The ij. boke of Moses, Fo. Irb. 

it vpon the drye grounde. Beholde, I wyll harden y hert of the Egipcians, y they shall folowe after you. Thus wyl I get me honoure vpon Pharao, v vpon all his power, vpo his charettes and horsmen: and the Egipcians shal knowe, that I am y LORDE, whan I haue gotten me honoure vpon Pharao, vpon his charettes, and vpon his horsmen.

*'Then the angell of God y wente before the armies of Israel, remo and gat him behynde them : and the cloudy piler remoued also from before them, and stode behinde thē and came betwixte the armies of the Egip- cians and the armies of Israel. It was a darcke cloude, and gaue light that night, so that all the nìght longe these and they coude not come together,

Wha Moses now stretched forth his hade |Æ ouer y see, /the LORDE caused it to passe awaye thorow a mightie eastwynde all that night, and made the see drye, *and y water deuyded it self a sunder. And the children of Israel wente in thorow the middest of y see vpon the drye grounde: and ¥ water was vnto them as a wall, vpon their right hande q vpo their lefte. And y Egipcias folowed, q wente in after the, all Pharaos horses, q charettes, q horsme, eue in to y middest of y see.

Now whan the mornynge watch came, the 
LORDE "loked vpo the armies of the Egip- cians out the piler of fire and y cloude, q troubled their armies, and smote the wheles from their charettes, q ouerthrew them with a storme. Then sayde the Egipcians: t Let vs flye from Israel, the LORDE fighteth for thé agaynst the Egipcians.

But y LORDE saide vnto Moses: Stretch | Jf. out thyne hande ouer the see, that y water maye come agayne vpon the Egipcians, vpon their charettes, and horsmen. ‘Then Moses stretched out his hande ouer the see, and the see came agayne before daye in his course and strength, and the Egipcians fled agaynst it. Thus the LORDE ouerthrew them in the myddest of the see, 'so that the water came agayne, and couered y charettes and horsmen, and all Pharaos power which folowed after them in to the see, so that there re- mayned not one of them. But the children |, of Israel ^wente drye thorow y myddest of the

Psal. 77. b. ^ Iudith 9, a. t Deu. 32. d. ` Sap. | 
10.d. — * Esa. 11. f. 

12 

a 

So. Irii see, and the water was vuto thei as a wall vpon their right hande and vpon their lefte.

"Thus the LORDE delyuered Israel in y daye from the hande of the Egipcians. And they sawe the Egipcians deed vpon ¥ see syde, and the greate hande y the LORDE had shewed vpon the Egipcians. And y people feared y LORDE, and beleued him, and his seruaunt Moses.

The rb. Chapter. q HEN sange Moses and the childré of
Israel this songe vnto the LORDE, and sayde:

I will ^synge vnto y LORDE, for he hath done glorionsly, horse q charet hath he ouer throwne in the see.

*The LORDE is my strength, and my songe, and is become my saluacion.

This is my God, I wil magnifie him: He is my fathers God, I wil exalte him.

The LORDE is the right man of warre, 
LORDE is his name. The charettes of 
Pharao q his power, hath he cast in to the see. 

His chosen captaynes are drowned in the reed see, y depe hath conered them: they fell to the grounde as a stone.

Thy right hande (O LORDE) is glorious in power: thy right hade (O LORDE) hath
,smytten the enemies. 
| And with thy greate glory thou hast de- 
|stroyed thine aduersaries: thou sentest out 
;thy wrath, a it cosumed them, enen as stobble. 

In the breth of thy wrath the waters fell together, the floudes wente vpon a heape:
The depes plomped together in ý myddest of the see.

B| The enemie thought: I will folowe vpon them, and ouertake them, and deuyde y spoyle, and coole my mynde vpon them.

I wil drawe ont my swerde, and my hande shal destroye them. .

'Thou blewest with thy wynde, the see conered them, and they sancke downe as leed in the mightie waters.

LORDE, who is like vnto the amonge ¥ goddes? Who is so glorious in holynes, fear full, landable, and doinge wonders ?

Whan thon stretchedest ont thy right hande, the earth swalowed them vp.
| Thou of thy very mercy hast led this people, 

^1 Ma. 4. a. 
| Esa. 12. a. 

* Psal. 117. b. 
* Num. 33. b. 

^ Exod. 15. c. 
SEXOS a 

Che ij. boke of Moses, 

whom thon hast delyuered, and with thy strength thon hast brought them vnto the dwellynge of thy Sanctuary.

Whan ¥ nacions herde this, they raged, sorowe came vpon the Philistynes.

Then were ¥ prynces of Edom afrayed, tremblynge came vpo y mightie of Moab, all the indwellers of Canaan waxed faynte harted.

Let feare and drede fall vpon them thorow thy greate arme, that they maye be as styll as a stone, tyll thy people (O LORDE) be gone thorow, tyll thy people whom thon hast gotten, be gone thorow.

Brynge them in, and plante them vpon the mountayne of thy enheritaunce, vnto y place that thou hast made for thyne owne dwellynge: euen to thy teple (O LORDE) which thy handes hane prepared.

The LORDE shal be kynge for euer a euer. For Pharao wente in to the see with horses, and charettes, and horsmen, and the
LORDE made the see fall agayne vpon them. 

But the children of Israel wete drye thorow the myddest of the see.

And Miriam the prophetisse, Aarons sister, toke a tymbrell in hir hande, and all the women folowed out after her with timbrels in a daunse. And Miriam sange before the:
O let vs synge vnto the LORDE, “for he hath done glorionsly, man and horse hath he ouer throwne in the see.

* Moses cansed the children of Israel to de- parte out from the reed see, vnto the wyldernes of Sur, q they wente thre dayes in y wildernes, y they founde no water. ‘Then came they to
MUN but they conde not drinke y water for bytternes, for it was very bytter. Ther- fore was it called Marah, (y is bytternes.)
Then $ people murmured against Moses, q sayde: What shal we drynke? /And Moses cried vnto y LORDE, which shewed him a tre: this he put in y water, the was it swete.

There he made thé a statute, and a lawe, and tempted them, and sayde: Yf thou wylt herken vnto the voyce of y LORDE thy God, q do that which is right in his sighte, and geue eare vnto his commaundementes, q * kepe all his statutes, then wyl I laye vpon y none of the sicknesses, that I layed vpon EM for
Iam the LORDE thy surgione. 

4 Re. 4. f. 

J Iudith 5. d. Ecchi. 38. a, € Deut. 28, f. 

Chap. rb. 

Chap. rbi. 

The ror. Chapter. a ND they came vnto Elim, where there

A were twolue welles of water, and seuentie palme trees, and there they pitched by $ water syde. From Elim they toke their iourney, and the whole congregacion of the children of Israel came in to the wyldernesse of Sin (which lyeth betwene Elim and Sinai) vpon the fyftene daye of the seconde moneth, after that they were departed out of the londe of Egipte. And ý whole multitude of the children of Israel * murmured agaynst Moses and Aaron in y wildernes, and saide vnto them: Wolde God we had dyed in the londe of Egipte by the hande of the LORDE, whan we sat by ¥ flesh pottes, and had bred ynough to eate: for ye haue brought vs out in to this wyldernes, to cause this whole multitude dye of honger.

Thé sayde y LORDE vnto Moses: beholde 
I wyl rayne you bred from heauen, and let the people go out, and gather daylie, what they nede, that I maye proue whether they walke in my lawe or not. But vpon the sixte daye they shal prepare the selues, that they maye brynge in twyse as moch as they gather daylie.

Moses and Aaron saide vnto all the children of Israel: At euen ye shall knowe, that the
LORDE hath brought you out of the lode of 
Egipte, and in the mornynge shall ye se the glory of the LORDE: for he hath herde youre grudginges agaynst the LORDE. For what are we, that ye grudge agaynst vs?

"Moses sayde morouer: At euen shall the 
LORDE geue you flesh to eate, and in the mornynge bred ynough: because y LORDE hath herde youre grudginges, that ye haue grudged agaynst him. For what are we?
Youre murmuringe is not agaynst vs, but against the LORDE. And Moses sayde vnto
Aaron: Speake vnto the whole multitude of pum of Israel: Come forth before the
LORDE, for he hath herde youre murmur- inges.

And whyle Aaron spake thus vnto the whole congregacion of the childr& of Israel, they turned them towarde the wyldernes: and beholde, the glory of the LORDE ap- peared in a cloude, and the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I haue herde the murmuringe

The tj. boke of Hoses. 

of y children of Israel. Tell them: At euen shall ye haue flesh to eate, and in the morn- ynge shal ye be fylled with bred, « ye shall knowe, that I am the LORDE youre God.

And at euen the quayles came vp, and couered the tentes: and in the mornynge the dewe laye rounde aboute the tentes. And whan the dew was falle, beholde, there laye a thinge in the wildernes, thynne and small, as the horefrost vpon the grounde.

And whan the children of Israel sawe it, they saide one to another:t Thisis Ma. For they wyst not what it was. But Moses sayde vnto them: It is the bred that y LORDE hath geue you to eate. This is it that y
LORDE hath commaüded: Euery one gather for himself as moch as he eateth, and take a
Gomor for euery heade, acordinge to the nombre of the soules in his tente.

And the children of Israel dyd so, and gathered some more, some lesse. But whan it was measured out with ¥ Gomor, ^be that gathered moch, had not the more: and he y gathered litle, wanted nothinge, but euery one gathered for himself, as moch as he ate.
And Moses sayde vnto them: Let no mà leaue ought therof vntyll the mornynge. But they harkened not vnto Moses. And some left of it vntill the morninge. ‘Then waxed it full of wormes and stanke. And Moses was angrie at them.

And euery mornynge they gathered for them selues, as moch as euery one ate: but as soone as it was whote of the Sonne, it melted awaye. And vpon the sixte daye they gathered twyse as moch of bred, two Gomors for one. And all the rulers of the congre- gacio came in, and tolde Moses. And he

Fo. Irbij. 

B 

sayde vnto them: This isit, that the LORDE|3 

hath sayde: ‘Tomorow is the Sabbath of the holy rest of the LORDE: loke what ye wil bake, that bake: and what ye wyll seeth, that seeth and that remayneth ouer, let it remayne, y it maye be kepte vntyll the mornynge.
And they let it remayne tyll the morow, as 
Moses commaunded. Then stanke it not, nether was there eny worme therin. "Thé sayde Moses: Eate that to daye, for to daye is ¥ Sabbath of the LORDE, to daye shal ye fynde none in the felde. Sixe dayes shall ye gather it, but the seuenth daye is the Sabbath, wherin there shal be none.

t Some reade: What is this? ^ 2 Cor. 8. b. 

———ÀM—— —————————————————————————— 

Fo. Irbi, 

But vpon the seuenth daye there wente out some of the people to gather, and founde nothinge. Then sayde ý LORDE vnto
Moses: “How longe refuse ye to kepe my commaundementes and lawes? Beholde, ý
LORDE hath geuen you the Sabbath, ther- fore vpon the sixte daye he geueth you bred for two dayes: therfore let euery man now byde at home, and noman go forth of his place vpon the seuenth daye.

So the people rested vpo i seuenth daye. 
And the house of Israel called it Man, and it was like Coriander sede, and whyte,’ q had a taist like symnels with hony.

And Moses sayde: This is it that y 
LORDE hath commaunded: Fill a Gomor therof to be kepte for youre posterities, y they maye se the bred, wherwith I fed you, whan I brought you out of y lande of Egipte. And
Moses sayde vnto Aaron: ‘Take a cruse, and put a Gomor full of Man therin, ^and laye it vp before the LORDE, to be kepte for youre posterities, as the LORDE com- maunded Moses. So Aaron layed it vp there for a testimony to be kepte.

? And the children of Israel ate man fourtye yeares, tyll they came vnto a lande, where people dwelt: euen vntyll they came to y borders of the lande of Canaan ate they Man.
A Gomor is the tenth parte of an Epha. 

The ybíj. Chapter. 

ND the whole multitude of the children of Israel wéte on their iourneys out of the wyldernes of Sin (as the LORDE co- maunded thé) x pitched in Raphidim. ‘Then had the people no water to drynke. And they chode with Moses, t sayde: Geue vs water, y we maye drynke. Moses sayde vnto thé:
Why chyde ye with me? Wherfore tépte ye 
ý LORDE? But whan the people thyrsted there for water, they murmured agaynst
Moses, q sayde: / Wherfore hast thou caused vs to come out of Egipte? to let vs, oure

children, and oure catell dye of honger? 
Moses cried vnto the LORDE, and sayde: 
What shal I do with this people? ‘They are all most ready to stone me. The LORDE saide vnto him: Go before the people, q take some of the elders of Israel with ý, and take

a Eze, 20. h. ^ Num. 11.b. ^*^ Heb.9.a. ^ TIudit.5, d. 
Neem, 9. d. Iosu. 5. c. ANT SiN. f Nu. 20. a. 
Judit. 7. d. € Psal. 77. b. 1 Cor. 10. a. ^ Nu. 20. h. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rbi, 

in thine hande thy staff, wherwith thou smotest the water, and go thy waye: Beholde, * I wyl stonde there before the vpon a rock in Horeb, there shalt thou smyte the rocke, so shall there water runne out, that the people maye drynke. Moses dyd so before the elders of
Israel. “Then was that place called Massa 
Meriba, because of the chydinge of the children of Israel, and because they tempted y LORDE, and sayde: Is the LORDE amonge vs, or not?

Then came Ameleck, q fought agaynst 
Israel in Raphidim. And Moses sayde vnto 
Iosua: Chose vs out men, go out, q fight against Amaleck, tomorow wil I stode vpo the toppe of the hyll, q haue ¥ staff of God in my hande. And Josua dyd as Moses bade him, q fought agaynst Amalek. Moses q
Aaron « Hur wente vp E toppe of the hyll. 
And whà Moses helde vp his hade, Israel had the victory: ‘but whan he let downe his hande, Amalek had the victory.

But Moses hàdes were heuy, therfore toke they a stone, x layed it vnder him, that he might syt vpon it. And Aaron q Hur stayed vp his hàdes, the one vpon the one syde, and the other vpon y other syde. So his handes were stedfasi vnto y Sonne wente downe.
And Iosua discomfited Amalek, q his people thorow the edge of the swerde.

And $ LOR DE sayde vnto Moses: Wryte this for a remébraunce in a boke, q comytte it vnto y eares of losua: *for I wyll rote out
Amalek from vnder heauen, so that he shall nomore be remembred. And Moses buylded an altare vnto the LORDE, and called it:
+The LORDE Nissi, for he sayde: The battayll of the LORDE shalbe agaynst
Amalek thorow an hande vnder the defence of God from childe to childes childe.

The rbiij. Chapter. 

ND whan lethro ¥ prest in Madian 
A Moses father in lawe herde of all y God had done with Moses q his people of In how y the LORDE had brought Israel out of
Egipte, he toke Zipora Moses wife, whom he had sent backe, with her two sonnes. "The one was called Gerson, for he saide: *I am become a straunger in a straunge londe.

Deu. 9. d. * Judit. 4. c. * Nu. 24. d. 1 Re. 15. e. t That is: The LORDE is he that lifteth me vp.
* Exod. 2. d. 

Chap. rir. 

And the other was called Eliaser, for he sayde: 
The God of my fathers hath bene my helpe, and hath delyuered me from Pharaos swerde.

Now wha lethro Moses father in lawe, and his sonnes and his wife eame vnto him in the wyldernes by the mount of God, where he had pitched his tent, he sent worde vnto
Moses: I Iethro thy father in lawe am come vnto the, and thy wife and both hir children with her. ‘Then wente Moses forth to mete him, and dyd obeysaüce vnto him, and kyssed him. And whan they had saluted ech other, they wente in to the tente.

‘Then Moses tolde his father in lawe all 

that the LORDE had done vnto Pharao and the Egipcians for Israels sake, and all the trauayle that had happened them by ¥ waye, and how the LORDE had delyuered them. lethro reioysed ouer all $ good that the
LORDE had done for Israel, yý he had de- lyuered them from the hade of the Egipcians.
And Iethro sayde: Praysed be the LORDE, which hath delyuered you from the hande of the Egipcians and of Pharao, (and) that knoweth how to delyuer his people from the
Egipcians hande. Now I knowe, that the 
LORDE is greater thé all goddes, because they dealt proudly with them. And Iethro toke brentofferynges, and offered vnto God.
Then came Aaron and all $ elders of Israel to cum bred with Moses father in lawe before
God. 
C| On the next morow sat Moses to iudge the people, and the people stode roüde aboute
Moses from the mornynge vntyl $ euen. 
But whan his father in lawe sawe all that he dyd with the people, he sayde: What is this, that thou doest with the people? Wherfore syttest thou alone, and all y people stonde rounde aboute from the morniuge vutyll the euen? Moses answered him: The people come to me, ¢ axe councell at God: for whan they haue eny thiuge to do, they come vnto me, that I maye iudge betwixte euery one q his neghboure, and shewe them the statutes of
God, and his lawes. 

His father in lawe sayde vnto him: It is not well that thou doest. Thou weeriest thy self, and the people that is with the. This busyuesse is to sore for the, thou canst not per- fourme it alone. But herken vnto my voyce,
I will geue the councell, aud God shall be 

? Deut. 4. c. 

? Num. 11. d. * Nu, 33. b. 

The tj. boke of Moses. 

|with the. 

Be thou vnto the people to God warde, and brynge the causes before God, and prouide them with statutes and lawes, that thou mayest shewe the the waie wherin they shulde walke, and the workes that they shulde do.

But loke out amonge all the people, for honest men, that feare God, soch as are true, t hate couetousnes: make these rulers ouer them, some ouer thousandes, ouer hundredes, ouer fiftie, and ouer ten, that they maye all- waye judge the people. But where there is eny greate matter, “that they brynge the same vnto the, and iudge the small causes them selues: so shall it be lighter for the, yf they beare the burthen with the. Yf thou shalt do this, then mayest thou endure the thinge that
God chargeth the withall, and all this people maie go peaceably vnto their place.

? Moses herkened vnto the voyce of his father in lawe, and dyd all that he sayde.
And he chose honest men out of all Israel, and made them heades ouer the people, some ouer thousandes, ouer hnndredes, ouer fiftie, and ouer ten, that they might allwaye iudge the people. As for soch causes as were herde, they brought them vnto Moses, and iudged the small matters them selues. So Moses let his father in lawe departe in to his owne londe.

The riy. Chapter. 

N the thirde moneth after that the children 

of Israel were gone out of the londe of 
Egipte, they came the same daye in to the wyldernes of Sinai (for they were departed from Raphidim, and wolde in to the wyl- dernes of Sinai) “aud there they pitched iu the wyldernes ouer against the mounte. And
Moses wente vp vnto God. 

“And the LORDE called vnto him out of the mount, and sayde: Thus shalt thou saye vnto the house of Iacob, and tell the children of Israel: Ye haue sene what I haue doue vnto the Egipcians, and how I haue borne you vpon Aegles wynges, q brought you vnto my self. *Yf ye wyll harken now vnto my voyce, and kepe my couenaunt, ye shal be myne owne before all people: for the whole earth is myne: and ye shall be vnto me *a presterly kingdome, and an holy people.
These are the wordes that thou shalt saye vnto the children of Israel.

* 1 Pet. 2. b. 

4 Exo. 94. a. * Deu. 14. a. 

So. Iri. 

a 

Fo. Irv. 

33| Moses came aud called for the elders of 

the people, and layed before them all these wordes, that the LORDE had commaunded.
And all the people answered together, and 
: *All that the LORDE hath sayde, 

vnto the LORDE agayne. And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, I wyll come vnto the in a thicke cloude, that the people maye heare my wordes, which I speake vnto the, and beleue the for euer. And Moses shewed the wordes of the people vnto the LORDE.
The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go vnto the people, and sanctifie thé to daye and to- morow, y they maye wash their clothes, and be ready agaynst the thirde daye: for vpon the thirde daye shall the LORDE come downe vpon mount Sinai before all the people.
And set markes rounde aboute the people, and saye vnto them: Bewarre, that ye go not vp in to ý mount, ner touch ¥ border of it. t For who so euer toucheth ¥ moüt, shal dye mu There shal no hade touch it, but e shall either be stoned, or shot thorow: whether it be beest or man, it shal not lyue.
Whan the horne bloweth, then shal they come vp vnto the mounte.
Moses wente downe from the mount vnto 

the people, and sanctified them. And they 

waszshed their clothes. And he sayde vnto them: Be ready agaynst the thirde daye, and no man come at his wife.

Now whan the thirde daye came (and it was early) it beganne to thonder and lighten, and there wasa thicke cloude vpon the mount, and a noyse of a trompet exceadinge mightie.
And the people that were in the tentes, were afrayde. “And Moses brought the people out of the tentes to mete with God, and they stode vnder the mount.

But all mount Sinai smoked, because Y 
LORDE came downe vpo it with fyre. And the smoke therof wente vp as the smoke of a fornace, so that the whole mount was excead- inge terrible. And the noyse of the trompet wéte out, and was mightie. Moses spake, q
God answered him loude. Now whan the 
LORDE was come downe vpon mount Sinai, euen vpon the toppe of it, he called Moses

* Exo. 24. a. Deut. 5. d. and 26. d. 

è Deut. 5.a. t Exo. 14. c. 
|| Naŭ. 1. 2. Exo. 34 a. 

t Heb. 12. c. 
$ Deu. 4. c. 
Deu. 7. b. 

The ü. boke of fHosts. 

vp vnto y toppe of the mount. And Moses 

wente vp. 

Then sayde the LORDE vnto him: Go/B 

downe, and charge the people, y they preasse not vnto the LORDE to se him, and so many of them perishe. The rulers also that come nye vnto ý LORDE, shal sanctifie them selues, lest the LORDE smyte the. But
Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: 'The people can not come vp vpon mount Sinai, for thou hast charged vs, q sayde: Set markes aboute the mount, and sanctifie 1t.

'The LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, get y downe. ‘Thou and Aaron with the shalt come vp: but the rulers and ¥ people shal not preasse to come vp vnto y LORDE, lest he smyte the. And Moses wente downe to the people, and tolde them.

The ry. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE spake all these wordes, and sayde: ^I am the LORDE thy God, which thaue brought the out of the londe of
Egipte from y house of bondage. 

Thou shalt haue none other Goddes in my sight.§ Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage ner eny symilitude, nether of it that is aboue in heauen, ner of it that is beneth vpon earth, ner of it that is in the water vnder the earth. Worshipe them not, and serue them not: for I the LORDE thy God am a || gelouse God, vysitinge y synne of the fathers vpon the children, vnto y thirde and fourth generacion, of them that hate me:
And do mercye vpo many thousandes, that loue me, and kepe my commaundementes.

Thou shalt not take the name of y LORDE|S 

thy God in vayne^ TFor the LORDE shal not holde him vngiltie, that taketh his name in vayne.

Remembre the Sabbath daie, that thou sanctifie it. ^Sixe dayes shalt thou laboure and do all thy worke: But vpon the seuenth daye is the Sabbath of the LORDE thy
God: thou shalt do no maner worke in it, nether thou, ner thy sonne, ner thy doughter, ner thy seruaunt, ner thy mayde, ner thy catell ner thy straunger that is within thy gates. For in sixe dayes' the LORDE made heauen and earth, and the see, and all that

e Leui. 19. c. Eccli. 23.b. T Le. 24. b. — 4 Exo. 23. b. 
34. c. 35. a, Eze. 20. b. c Gene. 2, a. 

Chap. ry.! 

a 

Chap. rri. therin is, and rested vpon the seuenth daye:| therfore the LORDE blessed the seuenth daye, q halowed it.

*Honoure thy father and thy mother, that thou mayest lyue longe in the londe, which the LORDE thy God shal geue the.
€| Thou shalt not kyll. 

Thou shalt not breake wedlocke. 

Thou shalt not steale. 

Thou shalt beare no false wytnesse agaynst thy neghboure.

Thou shalt not *lust after thy neghbours house.

Thou shalt not lust after thy neghbours wife, ner his seruaiit, ner his mayde, ner his oxe, ner his Asse, ner all that thy neghboure hath.

And all the people sawe the thonder and the lightenynge, and the noyse of the trompet, and how that the mountayne smoked, and were afrayed, and stackerd, q stode afarre of, and sayde vnto Moses: t Talke thou with vs, we wil heare: and let not God talke with vs, we might els dye. And Moses sayde vnto the people: Be not afrayed, for God is come to proue you, and that his feare maye be before youre eyes, X ye synne not.
3| And the people stode afarre of. But Moses gat him in to the darcke cloude, where in
God was. And the LORDE spake vnto him: Thus shalt thou saye vnto-the children of Israel: Ye haue sene, that I haue talked with you from heauen: therfore shal ye make nothinge with me: goddes of syluer and golde shal ye not make you.

Make me an altare of earth, wher vpon thou mayest offer thy burntofferynges, q peaceofferynges, thy shepe and thine oxen.
For loke in what place so ener I make y remembraunce of my name, there wil I come ynto the, and blesse the.

’And yf thou wilt make me an altare of stone, thou shalt not make it of hewen stone:
For yf thou lift vp thy tole vpon it, thou shalt 
Silidlove it Morouer thou shalt not go vp vpon steppes vnto myne altare, that thy shame be not discouered before 1t.

The rri. Chapter. 
HESE are the lawes, that thou shalt laye before them. “Yf thou bye a ser-

* Matt. 15. a. Ephe. 6. a. * Ro. 7. b. and 13. b. t Deu. 18. c. Heb. 12. c. ^ Deu. 27. a. Iosu. 8. g.
1 Mac. 4. f. * Leuit. 25. f. Deu. 15. b. fere. 34. b. 

Che ij. boke of Moses. 

Fo. Irri. uaunt that is an Hebrue, he shal serue the sixe yeares, in the seuenth yeare shall he go out fre and lowse. Yf he came alone, then shal he go out alone also: but yf he came maried, then shall his wife go out with him. Yf his master haue geué him a wife, q she haue borne him sonnes or doughters, thë shal the wife and ¥ children be the masters, but he shall go out alone. Neuerthelest yf the seruaunt saye: I loue my master, and my wife and children, I wil not go out fre: then let his master brynge him before the Goddes, and holde him to the dore or post, and bore him thorow the eare with a botkin, and let him be his seruaunt for euer.

Yf a man sell his doughter to be an hand mayde, then shal she not go out as the men seruauntes. But yf she please not hir master, and he haue not maried her, then shal he let her go fre: but to sell her vnto a strange people he hath no auctorite, for so moch as he hath despysed her. Yf he promyse her vnto his sonne, then shal he do vnto her after the lawe of doughters. But yf he geue him another wife, then shall he mynishe nothinge of hir foode, rayment, and dewtye of mariage.
Yf he do not these thre, then shal she go out fre, and paye nothinge.

He that smyteth a man that he dye,’ shall|33 dye the death. §Yf he haue not layed wayte for him, but God let him fall in his hande vnawares, then wil I appoynte the a place, where he shal flye vnto. But yf a man pre- sume vpon his neghboure, and slaye him with disceate, lthen shalt thou take the same fro myne altare, that he maye be slayne. Who so smyteth his father or mother, shall dye the death.

He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, so that he be founde by him,’ the same shall dye the death.

{ Who so curseth father and mother, shal dye the death. Yf men stryue together and one smyte another with a stone, or with his fist, so that he dye not, but lyeth in bedd :
Yf he ryse, and go forth vpon his staff, thé shall he that smote him, be vngiltie: sane that he shal paye the losse of his tyme, and geue $ money for healynge him.

He that smyteth his seruaunt or mayde 

t Deu. 15. c. 4 Leu. 14. d. Mattb. 5. c. — $ Nu. 35. b. 
Deut. 19.a. || 3Re.1.g. ^*Deu.24.b. $ Deu.21.d. and 27. c. Leu. 20.b. Pro.20.c. Mar.7. b.

[ffo. Irr. The tj. boke of Moses, Chap. rrj, 

with a staff, that he dye vnder his handes, the same shall suffre vengeaunce therfore. But yf he endure a daye or two, then shall he suffre no vegeaunce therfore, for it is his money.

Yf men stryue, and hytt a woman with childe, so that Y frute departe from her, and no harme happen vnto her, then shall he be punyshed for money, as moch as the womans huszbande layeth to his charge, and he shall geue it, acordinge to the appoyntement of the dayes men. But yf there come harme vnto her there thorow, *then shal he paye soule for soule, eye for eye, toth for toth, hande for hande, fote for fote, burnynge for burnynge, wonnde for wounde, strype for strype.

Yf a man smyte his seruaunt or his mayde in the eye, and destroye it, he shal let them go fre and lowse for the eye sake. In like maner yf he smyte out a tothe of his seruaunt or mayde, he shall let them go fre and lowse for the tothes sake.

+Yf an oxe gorre a man or a woman, that he dye, then shall that oxe be stoned, and his flesh not eaten: so is the master of the oxe vngilie. But yf the oxe haue bene vsed to push in tymes past, q it hath bene tolde his master, and he hath not kepte him, and besydes that slayeth a man or a woman, then shal y oxe be stoned, and his master shal

3|dye. But yf there be money set vpon him, 

then, loke what is put vpon him, that shall he geue, to delyuer his soule. Likewyse shall he be dealte withall, yf he gorre a sonne or a doughter. But yf he gorre a sernaunt or a mayde, then shall he geue their master thirtie syluer Sycles: and the oxe shalbe stoned.

Yf a man open a well or dygge a pytt, and couer it not, and there fall an oxe or Asse therin, then shall the owner of the pytt make it good with money, and restore it vnto his master: but the deed carcase shalbe his owne.

Yf one mans oxe gorre another, that he dye, then shall they sell the lyuynge oxe, and deuyde the money, and the deed carcase shal they deuyde also. But yf it be knowne, that the oxe haue bene vsed to gorre afore, then shal he paye his oxe for the other, q the deed carcase shal be his owne.

* Deu. 19. d. Matt. 5. e. t Gen. 9. a. a Pro. 6. d. 
1 2 Re. 12. b. $ 2 Re. 14. c. || 2 Mac. 3. c. 

The rrij. Chapter. be a man steale an oxe or shepe, and|@ slaye it, or sell it, * he shall restore fyue oxen for an oxe, and t fonre shepe for a shepe.

Yf a thefe be taken breakinge in, q vpon that be smytten that he dye, then shall not he that smote him, bc giltie of his bloude.
But yf the sonne be gone vp vpo him, then hath he committed manslaughter, and he shal dye.

A thefe shall make restitucion. Yf he haue nothige, the let him be solde for his theft.
But yf y theft be founde by him alyue (from the oxe vnto the Asse or shepe) then shall he restore dubble.

Yf a man hurte a felde or vynyarde, so y he let his catell do harme in another mans felde, the same shall make restitucion euen of the best of his owne felde and vynyarde.

$ Yf a fyre come out, and take holde of ý thornes, so that the sheeues be consumed, or the corne that stondeth yet vpon the felde, he that kyndled the fyre shall make restitucion.

| Yf a man delyuer his neghboure money |33 or vessels to kepe, and it,be stollen from him out of his house: yf the thefe be founde, he shal restore dubble. But yf the thefe be not founde, then shal the good man of the house be brought before the * Goddes (and shal sweare) that he hath not put his hande vnto his neghbours good.

Yf one accuse another in eny maner of trespace, whether it be for oxe, or Asse, or shepe, or rayment, what so euer it be that is lost: then shall both their causes come before the Goddes: Loke whom the Goddes con- dempne, the same shal restore dubble vnto his neghboure.

Yf a man delyuer vnto his neghboure an 
Asse, or oxe or shepe, or eny maner of catell to kepe, and it dye, or be hurte, or dryuen awaye that no man se 3t, then shall there an ooth of the LORDE go betwene them, that he hath not put his hande vnto his neghbours good: and the owner of y good shal accepte it, so that the other shall not make it good.
Yf a thefe steale it from him, then shal he make restitució vnto the owner therof. But yf it be rauyshed (of beastes) then shal he brynge recorde therof, and not make it good.

T Psal. 81. a. Toh. 10. d. 

Chap. xri. 

and it be hurte, or dye, so that the owner therof be not by, then shall he make it good.
But yf the owner therof be by, then shal he not make it good, yf he hyred it for his money.

“Yf a man begile a mayde, that is not yet spoused, and lye with her, the same shal gene her hir dowry, and take her to his wife. But yf hir father refuse to geue her vnto him, the shall he weye there the money, acordinge to the dowry of virgins.

"Thou shalt not suffre a witch to lyue. 
* Who so lyeth with a beest, shal dye the death. Who so offreth to eny goddes, saue vnto the LORDE onely, let him dye without redempcion.

“Thou shalt not vexe ner oppresse a straun- ger, for ye youre selues were straungers also in the londe of Egipte.

¢ Ye shall truble no wyddowe ner fatherlesse childe. Yf thou shalt trouble them, they shall crie vnto me, and I shall heare their crye: then shal my wrath waxe whote, so y I shal sley you with the swerde, and youre wyues shalbe wedowes, and youre children father- lesse.

t Yf thou lende money vnto my people that is poore by the, thou shalt not behaue thy self as an vsurer vnto him, nether shalt thou oppresse him with vsury.

B| Yf thou take a garment of thy neghboure 

to pledge, thon shalt geue it him agayne be- fore the Sonne go downe: *for his raymét is his onely conerynge of his skynne: wherin he slepeth. But yf he shall crie vnto me, I wyll heare him: for I am mercifull.

f Thou shalt not speake euell of the Goddes, tand the ruler of thy people shall thou not blaspheme.

Thy drie and moist frutes shalt thou not kepe backe. Thy first sonne shalt thou geue vnto me. So shalt thou do also with thine oxen and shepe. Seuen dayes let it be with the dame: Vpon the eight daye shalt thou geue it vnto me. Ye shalbe holy people before me. Therfore shal ye eate no flesh,
€ that is torne of beestes in the felde, but cast it vnto the dogges.

* Gen. 34. a. Deu. 22. d. 5 1 Re. 28. a. 
DUNS € Leui, 19.g. Zach. 7. b. t Leu. 25. f. Deut. 23. c. Eze. 22. b.
I 9 Re. 16. b. t Act. 23, a. 

* Deu. 
4 Tob 24. a. 
* Deu. 24. b. 
£ Leui. 22.a. Eze. 44. d. 

Che ij. boke of Moses. 

€| Yfa man borowe ought of his neghboure, 

The rrij. Chapter. 
HOU shalt not accepte a vayne tale, that thou woldest manteyne the vngodly, and be a false wytnesse.

Thou shalt not folowe the multitude vnto euell, ner answere at the lawe that thou woldest (to folowe the multitude) turne a syde from the right.

Thou shalt not paynte a poore mās cause. 
^Yf thou mete thine enemies oxe or Asse, goinge astraye, thou shalt brynge the same vnto him agayne.

i Yf thou se the Asse of him that hateth the, lye vnder his burthen, thou shalt not let him lye, but shalt helpe him vp.

Thou shalt not wraist the righte of thy poore in his cause. Kepe the farre from false mat- ters. * The innocent and righteous shalt thou not sley, for I iustifie not ý vngodly.

‘Thou shalt not take giftes: for giftes blinde euen them ý are sharpe of sight, q wraist the righteous causes.

Ye shall not oppresse a straunger, for ye knowe the hert of straungers, $ for so moch as ye youre selues also haue bene straungers in the londe of Egipte.

Sixe yeares shalt thou sowe thy londe, and |38 

gather in the frute therof: ” In the seuenth yeare shalt thou let it rest and lye still, that the poore amonge thy people maye eate therof: and loke what remayneth ouer, let y beestes of the felde eate it. Thus shalt thou do also with thy vynyarde and olyue trees.

"Sixe dayes shalt thou do thy worke, but vpon the senenth daye thou shalt kepe holy daye, that thine oxe and Asse maye rest, and that the sonne of thy handmayden and the straunger maye refresh them selnes.

All that I haue sayde vnto you, that kepe. 
And as for the names of other goddes, ye shall not remembre them, and out of youre mouthes shal they not be herde.

Thre tymes in the yeare shalt thou kepe feast vnto me: namely the feast of vnleuended bred shalt thou kepe, that thou eate vnlenen- ded bred seuen dayes (l like as I commaunded f) in the tyme of y moneth Abib, for in the same wentest thou ont of Egipte. (But

^ Deu. 22. a. * Deu. 22, a. l Deu. 17. a. Eccl. 20. d.
^ Exo. 20. b. 34. c. 35. a. 

Lue. 14. 2. 
$ Ge. 46. a. 
Deut. 5. b. 

* Susan. g. m Leui. 25. a.
|| Exo. 12. a. 

Fo. rri. 

| fo. Irii. appeare not emptye before me.) And ¥ feast
“whan thou first reapest thy labours, M thon hast sowen vpon the felde. And the feast of ingatherynge in the ende of $ yeare, whan thou hast gathered in thy laboures out of the felde. * Thre tymes in the yeare shal euery male that thou hast, appeare before the
LORDE the Gouernoure. 

L| Thou shalt not offre the bloude of my sa- crifice with sowre dowe, and the fat of my feast shal not remayne till the mornynge.

*'The first of the first frutes of thy felde shalt thon brynge in to the house of the
LORDE thy God. *And shalt not seeth a kydd, whyle it is in his mothers mylke.

d Beholde, I sende an angell before the, to kepe the in the waye, and to brynge the vnto the place, that I haue prepared. ‘Therfore bewarre of his face, and herken vnto his voyce, and anger him not, for he shall not spare youre myszdedes, q my name is in him.
But yf thou shalt herken vnto his voyce, ‘and do all that I shal tell the, then wyl I be enemie vnto thy enemyes, and aduersary vnto thy aduersaries.

Now whà myne angell goeth before the, q bryngeth the vuto ¥ Amorites, Hethites, Phe- resites, Cananites, Henites q Iebusites, q I shall haue destroyed them: then * shalt thou not worshipe their goddes, ner serue them, nether shalt thon do as they do, but shalt ouerthrowe their goddes, q breake thé downe.
/ But $ LORDE youre God shal ye serue, so shal he blesse thy bred q thy water, and I wyl remoue all sicknesse from the.

D "There shalbe nothinge baren ner vnfrute- full in thy londe, and I wil fulfill the nombre of thy dayes. I wil sende my feare before the, and sley all the people where thou comest, a will make all thine enemies to turne their backes vpó the. ^I wyll sende hornettes be- fore ¥, and dryue out the Heuytes, Cananites and Hethytes before the.

^ [n one yeare wyl I not cast the out before the, y the londe become not waist, t wylde beastes multiply agaynst $: By litle q litle wyll I dryue them out before the, tyll thon growe, q haue the londe in possession. And

I wil set the borders of thy londe, euen from the reed see vnto $ see of the Philistynes, q

? Deu. 16. b. è Deu. 16. c. e Exo.34. c. Deut. 
* Deu. 14. b. Exo. 34. c. 4 Exo. 13. a. 52. g. e Gen. 12. a. 4 Re. 19. d. Acto. 9. a. t Nu.

J Deut. 7. c. £ Deut. 7. d. ^ Iosu. 11. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. Chap. rrt. | 

39. d. 

from the wyldernes vnto the * water. For I wil delyuer the indwellers of the londe in to thine hande, y thou shalt dryue them ont before the. *'Thou shalt make no couenaunt with them ner with their goddes, but let thé not dwell in thy lande, that they make the not synne ageynst me. $ For yf thou serue their goddes, it wil surely be thy decaye.

The rrüij. Chapter. 

ND he sayde vuto Moses: Come vp 
A vnto the LORDE thou q Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seuētie elders of Israel, q worshipe afarre of. But let Moses onely come nye vnto the LORDE, and let not them come nye, and let not the people also come vp with him.

Moses came and tolde the people all the wordes of the LORDE, g all the lawes. Then answered all the people with one voyce, and sayde: il All $ wordes that the LORDE hath sayde, wyl we do.

Then wrote Moses all the wordes of ¥/% 
LORDE, « gat him vp by tymes in the mornynge, q buylded an altare vnder y mount with twolue pilers, acordinge to the twolue trybes of Israel: q sent twolue yonge me of the children of Israel, to offre burntofferynges, and peace offerynges theron of bullockes vnto the
LORDE. 

And Moses toke the half parte of the bloude, and pnt it in a basen, the other half sprenkled he vpon the altare: q toke the boke of y couenaunt, a cried in the eares of the people. And whan they had sayde: All y the LORDE hath sayde, wil we do, q herken vnto him: * Moses toke the bloude, a sprenkled it vpon the people, q sayde: Beholde, this is y bloude of the couenaunt that the LORDE maketh with you vpon all these wordes.

Then wente Moses q Aaron, Nadab a 
Abihu, *a the seuentye elders of Israel vp, a sawe y God of Israel. "Vnder his fete it was like a stone worke of Saphyre, q as the fashion of heaue, wha it is eleare, q he put not his hade vpo the pryneipall of Israel. And whan they had sene God, they ate q dronke.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: ‘Come vp vnto me vpon the mount, q remayne there, y I maye geue the tables of stone, 1 y lawe a

t Ge. 15. d. 3 Re. 4. b. ! Exo. 34. b. Deut. 7. a. 
$3 Re. 11. a. || Exo. 19. b. € 1 Pet. 1.a. Heb. 
9. c, and 10. c. * Exo. 19. d. ! Exo. 31. d. and 

Chap. rrb. 

commaundemétes y I haue wrytten, which thon shalt teach the. Then Moses gat him vp q his mynister Iosua, q wente vp in to the mount of God, q sayde vnto the elders: "ary ye here, tyll we come to you agayne: be- holde, Aaron and Hur are with you, yf eny mà haue a matter to do, let him brynge it vnto them.

Now wha Moses came vp in to ¥ moüt, a cloude couered $ mount: q the glory of y
LORDE abode vpon mount Sinai, q couered it with the cloude sixe dayes, q vpon the seuéth daye he called Moses out of ¥ cloude.
And y fashion of y glory of y LORDE was like a cosumynge fyre vpon the toppe of y mount in the sight of the children of Israel.
And Moses wente in to the myddest of the cloude, and ascéded vp in to the mount, and abode vpon the mount fourtye dayes « fourtye nightes. "

The prb. Chapter. 

ND y LORDE talked with Moses q sayde: ^Speake vnto y childre of Israel,

y they geue me an Heue offerynge, q take the some of euery man, that hath a fre wyll- ynge hert therto. And this is the Heue- offerynge that ye shal take of them: Golde, syluer, brasse, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, whyte twyned sylke, goates hayre, reed skynnes of rammes, doo skynnes, Fyrre tre, oyle for lampes, spyces for the anoyntynge oyle, and for swete incense. Onix stones and set stones for the ouerbody cote and for the brestlappe.
And they shall make me a Sanctuary, that 

I maie dwell amonge them. Like as I shal shewe y a patrone of the Habitacion, and of all the ornamentes therof, so shall ye make it.
Make an Arke of Fyrre tre two cubytes q 

a half longe, “a cubyte q a half brode, and a cubyte q an half hye: this shalt thon ouer leye with pure golde within and without, « make an hye vpo it a crowne of golde rounde aboute, and cast foure rynges of golde, q put them in the foure corners of it, so that two rynges be vpon the one syde, and two vpon the other syde. And make staues of Fyrre tre, and ouer laye them with golde, and put them in the rynges alonge by the sydes of the
Arke, to beare it withall: and they shal abyde styll in the rynges, q not be take out. And

a Exo. 34. d. ve

^ Exo.35.a. — * Exo. 37.a. 4 Num. 
* Ro.3.c. Heb. 5.a. * Exo. 37. b. 

The i. boke of Hosts. 

in ¥ Arke thou shalt laye the wytnesse, that 
I wyl geue the. ‘Thou shalt make a Mercy- seate also of pure golde, two cubytes and a half longe, and a cubyte ¢ a half brode.

And thou shalt make two Cherubyns of beaten golde vpo both ý endes of the Mercy- seate, y the one Cherub maye be vpon the one ende, a the other vpon the other ende, q so to be two Chernbyns vpon the endes of the Mercyseate. And the Cherubyns shall sprede out their wynges ouer an hye, y they maye couer $ Mercyseate with their wynges: x y either of their faces maye be right ouer one agaynst another, and their faces shal loke vnto the Mercyseate.

And thou shalt set ý Mercyseate aboue vpon the Arke. And in the Arke thou shalt laye the wytnesse, y I shal geue the. ?From y place wyll I testifie vnto y, and talke with the, namely, from y * Mercyseate (betwixte the two Cherubyns) which is vpon the Arke of wytnesse, of all that I wyl comaunde y vnto the children of Israel.

*'Thou shalt make a table also of Fyrre tre, two cubites longe, and one cubyte brode, and a cubyte and a half hye, and ouerlaye it with pure golde, and make a crowne of golde rounde aboute it, and an whope of an hade brede hye, and a crowne of golde vnto y whope rounde aboute.

And vnto it thou shalt make foure rynges of golde, on the foure corners in the foure fete of it: harde vnder the whope shall $ rynges be, to put in staues and to beare the table with all: and thou shalt make the staues of Fyrre tre, q ouerlaye them with golde, y the table maye be borne therwith.

Thou shalt make also his diszshes, spones, pottes, and flat peces of pure golde, to poure out and in. ‘And vpon the table thou shalt all waye set shewbred before me.

Morouer thou shalt make a candelsticke of|33 

fyne beaten golde, ‘where vpon shall be the shaft with braunches, cuppes, knoppes, and floures. Sixe braunches shall proceade out of the sydes of the candelsticke, out of euery syde thre braunches. | Kuery braunch shal haue thre cuppes, (like allmondes) thre knoppes, and thre floures. These shalbe the sixe braunches of the candilsticke. But the shaft of the candilsticke it self shal haue foure

f Leu. 24. b. 

5$ Exo. 37.c. Num.8.a. 

Fo. Irrb. 

€ 

Fo. trot. cuppes, knoppes and floures, and allwaie a knoppe vnder two braunches, of the sixe that proceade out of the candilsticke. For both the knoppes and braunches shall proceade out of the shaft, all one pece of fyne beaten golde.

And thou shalt make seuen lampes aboue there on, that they maye geue light one ouer agaynst another, and snoffers and out quench- ers of pure golde. Out of an hundreth pounde weight of pure golde shalt thou make it, with all this apparell. * And se that thou make it after the patrone that thou hast sene in the mount,

The rroi. Chapter. 

HE habitacion shalt thou make of ten 

curteynes, of whyte twyned sylke, of yalowe sylke, of scarlet and purple. Cheru- byms shalt thou make theron of broderd worke. The length of one curteyue shalbe eight and twentye cubytes y bredth foure cubytes: and all the ten shalbe like, and shalbe coupled fyue and fyue together, one vnto the other. And thou shalt make loupes of yalowe sylke by the edge of euery curtayne, where they shalbe coupled together, that there maye be euer two and two fastened together vpon their edges: fiftie loupes vpon euery curteyne, that one maye fasten the other together. And thou shalt make fiftie buttons of golde, wherwith the curteynes maye be coupled together, one to the other, that it maye be one couerynge.

Thou shalt make a coueringe also of goates heyer for a tente ouer the habitacion, “of eleuen curteynes. The length of one curteyne shalbe thirtie cubytes, the bredth foure cu- bytes. Andall the eleuen shalbe alike greate: fyue shalt thon couple together by thé selues, v sixe also by them selues, y thou mayest dubble the sixte curteyne in the fore front of the Tabernacle. And vpon euery curteyne thou shalt make fiftie loupes vpo the edges of them, that they maie be coupled together by the edges. And fiftie buttons of brasse shalt thou make, aud put the buttons in to the loupes, that the tent maye be coupled together, and be one couerynge.

As for the remnaunt of the curteynes of the teute, thon shalt let the halfe parte hange ouer behynde y téte, vpon both the sydes a

* Heb. 8.a. Acto. 7. f. 

The ij. boke of Hoses, 

cubyte longe, y the resydue maye be vpou the sydes of A Taben t uer it e both the sydes.

Besydes this couerynge thou shalt make a couerynge of reed skynnes of rammes. And aboue this a coueringe of doo skinnes.

Thou shalt make bordes also for the habi- tacion, of Fyrre tre, which shall stonde: one borde shalbe ten cubytes longe, q a cubyte q a half brode. Two fete shal oue borde haue, that one maye be set by the other.

Thus shalt thou make all the bordes for y 
Tabernacle: Twentye of them shal stode towarde the south, which shal haue fourtye sokettes of syluer vnder them, two sokettes vnder euery borde for his two fete.

Likewyse vpon the other syde towarde the north there shall stonde twentye bordes also, and fourtye sokettes of syluer, two sokettes vnder euery borde.

But behynde the habitacion towarde y west thou shalt make sixe bordes, and two bordes mo for the two corners of the habi- tacion, that euery one of them both maye be coupled from vnder vp with his corner borde, and aboue vpon the heade to come eauen together with a clape: so that there be eight bordes with their syluer sokettes, wherof there shalbe sixtene, two vnder euery borde.

And thou shalt make barres of fyrre tre, fyue for the bordes vpon the one syde of the
Tabernacle, and fyue for the bordes vpon the other syde of the Tabernacle, and fyue for the bordes behinde y ‘Tabernacle towarde the west. And the barres shalt thou shute thorow $ myddest of the bordes, and faste alltogether from y one corner to y other.
And thou shalt ouerlaye the bordes with golde, and make their rynges of golde, that the barres maye be put therin. And the barres shalt thou ouerlaye with golde, and so shalt thou set vp the Tabernacle, acordinge to y fashion as thou hast sene vpon y mount.

And thou shalt make a vayle of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, q whyte twyned sylke.
And Cherubyns shalt thou make theron of broderd worke, and shalt hange it vpon foure pilers of Fyrre tre which are ouerlayed with golde, hauynge knoppes of golde, and foure sokettes of syluer. And the vayle shalt thou festen with buttons, and set the Arke of wyt- nesse within the vayle, that it maye be vnto

o Exo. 36. c. 

Chap. rroi. 

€ 

E 

F 

Chap. rrbttj. 

you a difference betwixte the holy and the 
Most holy. 

And thou shalt set the Mercy seate vpon the Arke of wytnesse in the Most holy. But set the table without the vayle, and the can- dilsticke ouer agaynst y table vpon M south

e 

syde of the Tabernacle, that the table maie stonde on the north syde.

And iu the dore of the Tabernacle thou shalt make an hanginge, of yalow sylke, purple, scarlet and whyte twyned sylke. And for the same hangiuge thou shalt make fyue pilers of
Fyrre tre, ouerlayed with golde, with knoppes of golde. And shalt cast fyue sokettes of brasse for them.

The rrbij. Chapter. 

ND thou shalt make an altare of Firre 

tre, ^fyue cubytes longe q brode, y it maye be foure square, q thre cubytes hye: thou shalt make hornes vpon the foure corners of it, q shalt ouer laye it with brasse. Make ashpánes, shouels, basens, fleshokes, cole panes. All y apparell therof shalt thou make of brasse. ‘Thou shalt make a gredyron also like a nett, of brase, q foure brasen rynges vpon the foure corners of it: from vnder vp aboute the altare shalt thou make it, so that the gredyron reach vnto y myddest of the altare. ‘Thou shalt make staues also for the altare, of Fyrre tre, ouer layed with golde, and shalt put the staues in the rynges, that the staues maye be on both the sydes of y altare, to beare it withall. And holowe wit bordes shalt thou make it, like as it is shewed the in the mount.

And to y habitacion thou shalt make a courte, an a of whyte twyned sylke : vpo y one syde au C. cubytes loge towarde the south, ¢ xx. pilers vpon xx. brasen sokettes,
& the knoppes with their whopes of syluer. 
Likewyse vpon y north syde there shal be an hanginge of an C. eubytes loge, twenty pilers vpon twenty brasen sokettes, and their knoppes with their whopes of syluer.

But vpon the west syde the bredth of y courte shal haue an hanginge of fiftie cubites longe, q ten pilers vpon ten sokettes. Vpo the east syde also shal the bredth of the courte haue fiftie cubytes, so that the hangynge haue vpon one syde fyftene cubites, and thre pilers vpo thre sokettes: And vpon y other syde

* Exo. 38. a. Eze, 43. d. 

The tj. boke of Moses. 

fiftene cubytes also, and thre pilers vpo thre sokettes.

And in the courte gate there shalbe an hangynge twenty cubytes brode, of yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte twyned sylke, wrought with nedle worke, and foure pilers vpon their foure sokettes. All the pilers rounde aboute the courte shall haue syluer whopes, q syluer knoppes, ¢ sokettes of brasse.
And the length of ¥ courte shal be an hüdreth cubytes, the bredth fiftie cubytes, the heygth fyue cubytes, of whyte twyned sylke and y sokettes therof shalbe of brasse. All y md also of the habitacion to all maner seruyce, and all the nales of it, and all the nales of the courte shalbe of brasse.

Commaunde ý children of Israel, ^y they bringe vnto ¥ the most cleare & pure oyle oliue beaten, to geue lighte, y it maye all waye be put in the lapes in the Tabernacle of wytnes without the vayle, that hangeth before the wytnesse. And Aarō and his sonnes shal dresse it from the euenynge vntyll ý mornynge before the LORDE. This shalbe vnto you a perpetuall custome for youre posterities amonge the children of Israel.

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

ND thou shalt take vnto the Aaron thy 
A brother and his sonnes fro amonge the childré of Israel, that he maye be my prest : namely Aaron q his sonnes Nadab, Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar: q thou shalt make holy clothes for Aarō thy brother, honorable and glorious, ¢ shalt speake vnto all them that are wise of hert, whom I haue fylled with the sprete of wiszdome, that they make garmentes to Aaron for his consecracion, that he maye be my prest.

These are y garmentes which they shal make: a brestlappe, an ouerbody cote, a tunycle, an albe, a myter and a girdell. Thus shal they make holy garmentes for thy brother
Aaro and his sonnes, that he maye be my prest. They shal take therto golde, yalow silke, scarlet, purple, and whyte sylke.

The ouerbody cote shal they make of golde, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, a whyte twyned sylke of broderd worke, that it maye be festened together vpon beth the sydes by y edges therof. And his gyrdell vpo it shall be of y same workmashippe q stuff, euen of golde

^ Leu. 24. a. 

Fo. Irrbfj. 

€ 

a 

x 
So. Irrbttj. yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, x whyte twyned sylke. And thou shalt take two Onix stones, and graue in them the names of the children of Israel. Syxe names vpon the one stone, and the sixe other names vpon the other stone acordinge to the order of their age.
This shalt thou do by the stonegrauers that graue signettes, so that y stones with the names of the children of Israel to be set rounde aboute with golde: and thou shalt put them vpon the two shulders of the ouer body cote, that they maye be stones of remem- braunce for the children of Israel, that Aaron maye beare their names vpon both his shulders before the LORDE for a remembraunce.

Thou shalt make hokes of golde also, and two wrethé cheynes of pure golde, and shalt fasten them vnto the hokes.

'The brestlappe of iudgment shalt thou make of broderd worke, euen after the worke of the ouerbody cote: of golde, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte twyned sylke.
Foure square shall it be and dubble, an hande bredth longe, and an handebredth brode. And thou shalt fill it with foure rowes full of stones. Let the first rowe be a Sardis, a Topas, and a Smaragde. The seconde: a
Ruby, a Saphyre, and a Dyamonde. The thirde: a Ligurios, an Achatt, and an Ametyst.
The fourth: a Turcas, an Onix, and a Iaspis. 
In golde shall they be sett in all the rowes, and shal stonde acordinge to y twolue names of the children of Israel, grauen of the stone- graners, euery one with his name acordinge to the twolue trybes.

3| And vpon the brestlappe thou shalt make 

wrethen cheynes by y corners of pure golde, and two golde rynges, so, that thou faste the same two rynges vnto two edges of the brest- lappe, and put the two wrethé cheynes of golde in the same two rynges, that are in two edges of the brestlappe. But the two endes of y two wrethen cheynes shalt thou fasten in the two hokes vpon the ouerbody cote one ouer agaynst another.

And thou shalt make two other rynges of golde, and fasten them vnto y other two edges of $ brestlappe, namely to M borders therof, wherwith it maye hange on the ynsyde vpon the onerbody cote. And yet shalt thou make two rynges of golde, and -fasten them vpon the two edges beneth to the ouerbody

* Deu. 33. b. 

Che y. boke of Hoses, 

cote, vpon the outsyde one ouer agaynst another, where the ouerbody cote ioyneth to- gether. And the brestlappe shall be fastened by his rynges vnto the rynges of the ouerbody cote with a yalow lace, that it maye lye close vpon the onerbody cote, and that the brest- lappe be not lowsed from the onerbody cote.

'Thus shall Aarou beare the names of the children of Israel in ¥ brestlappe of iudgment vpon his hert, whan he goeth in to the Sanc- tuary,for aremembraunce before the LORDE allwaye. And in the brestlappe of iudgment thou shalt put * light and perfectnesse, that they be vpon Aaros hert, whan he goeth in before the LORDE, and that he maye beare the iudgment of the children of Israel vpon his hert before the LORDE allwaye.

Thou shalt make the tunykle also to the ouerbody cote all of yalow sylke, and aboue in the myddest there shal be an hole, and a bonde folden together rounde aboute the hole, that it rente not. And beneth vpon the hemme thou shalt make pomgranates of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple rounde aboute, and belles of golde betwixte the same rounde aboute: that there be euer a golden bell and a pomgranate, a golden bell and a pomgranate^ rounde aboute the hemme of the same tunycle. And Aaron shall haue it vpon him wha he mynistreth, that the soüde therof maye be herde, whan he goeth out and in at the Sanctuary before the LORDE, that he dye not.

Thou shalt make a foreheade plate also of pure golde, and graue therin (after the work- manshipe of the stone grauer): the holynes of the LORDE, « with a yalow lace shalt thou fasten it vnto the fore front of the myter vpon Aarons fore heade, y Aaron maie so beare $ synne of the holy thinges, which the childré of Israel halowe in all their giftes and
Sanctuary. And it shall be allwaye vpon his fore heade, that he maye reconcyle them before the LORDE.

'Thou shalt make an albe also of whyte sylke, and a myter of whyte sylke, and a gyrdle of nedle worke.

And for Aarons sonnes thou shalt make cotes, gyrdles and bonetes, honorable and glorious, and shalt put them vpon thy brother
Aaron and his sonnes, and shalt anoynte them, and fyll their handes, and consecrate them, that they maye be my prestes. And

* Eccli. 45. b. 

Chap. rrbitj. 

An 

[4 

Chap. rrir. 

couer the flesh of their preuities, from the loynes vnto the thyes. And Aaron and his sonnes shall haue them on, whan they go in to the ‘Tabernacle of wytnesse, or go vuto the altare to mynister in the Holy, that they beare not their synne, and dye. This shalbe a perpetual custome for him, and his sede after him.
Che rriy. Chapter. 

HIS is it also, that thou shalt do vnto 

them, that they maye be consecrated prestes vnto me. “Take a yonge bullocke, and two rammes without blemish, vnlenended bred, q vnleuended cakes myxte with oyle, and wafers of swete bred tempered with oyle:
Of wheate floure shalt thou make them all, and put them in a maunde, q brynge them in the maunde, with the bullocke q two rammes.

And thou shalt brynge Aaron ¢ his sonnes vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse, q wash them with water, q take the garmentes, and put vpon Aaron the albe and the tunycle, t the ouer body cote, « the brestlappe to ¥ ouer body cote, ¢ shalt gyrde him on the out syde vpon the ouer body cote, and set the myter vpon his heade, and the holy crowne vpon the myter: and shalt take the anoyntinge oyle, and poure it vpon his heade, and anoynte him.

Thou shalt brynge forth his sonnes also, q put the albes vpon them, and gyrde both
Aaron q them with gyrdles, q set the bonettes vpon their heades, that they maye haue the presthode for a perpetuall custome.

And thou shalt fyll the hades of Aaron and his sonnes, and brynge forth the bullocke before the Tabernacle of wytnesse. * And
Aaron and his sonnes shall laye their hades vpon the heade of the bullocke, and thou shalt sley the bullocke before the LORDE, at the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and shalt take of his bloude, and put it vpon the hornes of the altare with thy fynger, and poure all the other bloude vpon the botome of the altare.

^And thou shalt take all the fat that couereth the bowels and the nett vpon the leuer, and the two kydneys with the fat that is aboute them, and burne them vpon the altare. But the bullockes flesh, skynne and donge, shalt thou burne with fyre without the hoost: for it is a synneofferynge.

?Leuit.8.a. * Leuit. 1.2. 
4 Leu. 8. c. 

è Leuit. 3.a. ° Leuiti. 8.d. t Exo. 25. c. * Leui. 8. f.

The ij. boke 

thou shalt make them lynnen breches, .to 

of fHosts. 

Aaron with his somes shall laye their handes vpon his heade. Then shalt thou sleye him, and take of his blonde, and sprenkle it vpon the altare rounde aboute. But the ramme shalt thou deuyde in peces, and wash his bowels and his legges, and laye them vpon the peces and the heade, and burne the whole ramme vpon the altare: for it is a burnt- offerynge, and a swete sauoure of the sacrifice vnto the LORDE.

*As for the other ramme, thou shalt take him, and Aaron with his sonnes shall laye their handes vpon his heade, and thou shalt slaye him, and take of his blonde, and put it vpon the typpe of the right eare of Aaron and his sonnes, and vpon y thombe of their right handes, and vpon the greate too of their right fete, and thou shalt sprenkle the bloude vpon the altare rounde aboute, and shalt take of the bloude vpon the altare and the anoynt- inge oyle, and sprenckle it vpon Aaron and his vestymentes, vpon his sonnes and their vestymentes. So shall he and his clothes, his sonnes and their clothes be consecrated.

?'Then shalt thou take the fat of the ramme, the rompe, and the fatt that couereth ¥ bowels, the net vpon the leuer, and the two kydneys with the fatt that is aboute them, and the right shulder (for it isa ramme of cosecracion) and a symnel of bred, and an oyled cake, and a wafer out of the maunde of the ynleuended bred +that stondeth before y LORDE, and put all in to the handes of Aaron and of his sonnes, and waue it vnto the LORDE. The take it out of their handes, and burne it vpon the altare for a burnt offeringe, to be a swete sauoure vnto y LORDE. For it is the
LORDES sacrifice. 

* And thou shalt take the brest of the ramme of Aarés consecracio, q shalt waue it before y LORDE, y shal be his parte. And thus shalt thou halowe y Wauebrest q y Heue- shulder (y are waued q heaued) of y ramme of the consecracion of Aaron q his sonnes:
And it shalbe a perpetuall custome for Aard and his sonnes of y children of Israel: for it is an Heue offrynge, and the Heue offrynge shalbe the LORDES dewtye of the children of Israel, in their tdeade offrynges and Heue offrynges which they do vnto the LORDE.

ł Some call the peace offeringes. 

Fo. Irrír. 

The one ramme shalt thou take also, and | 

n 

£ 

So. Urry. 

And the holy garmentes of Aaron shall his sonnes hane after him, that they maie be anoynted therin, q y their handes maye be fylled. “Loke which of his sonnes shalbe prest in his steade, the same shal pnt them on sené dayes, that he maye go in to the Taber- nacle of wytnesse, to mynister in the Sanctuary.

J| But the ramme of consecracion shalt thou 

take, ^and seeth his flesh in an holy place. 
And Aaron with his sonnes shal eate the flesh of the same ramme with the bred in the maunde, at the dore of the Tabernacle of

ytnesse: for there is an attonement made therwith, to fyll their handes, that they maye be consecrated. A straüger shal not eate therof, for it is holy.

But yf eny of the flesh of the consecracion, and of the bred remaine vntyll the mornynge, thou shalt burne it with fyre, and not let it be eaten, for it is holy. And thus shalt thou do with Aaron and his sonnes all that I haue commaunded y. Senen dayes shalt thou fyll their handes, and offer a bullocke daylie for a synne offeringe, because of them y shalbe| reconciled. And thon shalt halowe the aie whan thou reconcylest it: q shalt anoynte it, that it maye be consecrated. Senen dayes shalt thou reconcyle the altare, œ consecrate it, that it maye be an altare of the Most holy.
Who so wyll touch the altare, must be con- secrated.

@| And this shalt thou do with the altare: 
"Two lambes of one yeare olde shalt thou 
[offer euery daye vpon it: the one lambe in| the mornynge, and the other at euen. And to one lambe a tenth deale of wheate floure, megled with y fourth parte of an Hin of beaten oyle, and y fourth parte of an Hin of wine for a drynk offerynge. With the other lambe at euen shalt thou do like as with y meate offerynge and drynk offerynge in the mornynge, for a swete sanoure of sacrifice vnto y LORDE. This is the daylie burnt- offerynge amonge youre posterities, at the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the
LORDE, *where I will proteste vnto you, and 
[elke with the. There wil I proteste vnto the 
Gen of Israel, and be sanctified in my glory, and wyl halowe the Tabernacle of
“wytnes and the altare, and consecrate Aaró 

and his sonnes, to be my prestes. ^Ánd I 

a Nu. 20.d. > Leui. 8. g. 
* Laui. 1. 3. Num. 12. a. 

c Nu. 28. a. 1 Par. 17.e. 
4 Leu. 26. b. 2 Cor. 6. b. 

Cbr i. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rrr. wyl dwell amonge the children of Israel, q wyll be their God: so y they shal knowe, how that I am the LORDE their God, which brought them out of the londe of Egipte, that

I might dwell amonge them, euen I the 
LORDE their God. 

The rrr. Chapter. 
HOU shalt make also an incense altare to burne incense, of Fyrre tre, a cubyte longe q brode, eauen foure squared, and two cubytes hye with his hornes, œ shalt ouerlaye it with pure golde, the rofe ¢ the walles of it rounde aboute, and the hornes therof, q a crowne of golde shalt thou make rounde aboute it, and two golde rynges on ether syde vnder the crowne, that there maie be staues put therin, to beare it with all.

The staues shalt thon make of Fyrre tre also, and ouerlaye thé with golde: and shalt set it before the vayle, that hangeth before the Arke of wytnesse, and before the Mercy seate y is vpon the wytnesse, from whence I wyl proteste vnto the. And Aaron shal burne swete incense theron enery morninge, wha he dresseth the lampes. In like maner whan he lighteth the lampes at euen, he shall burne soch incense also. ‘This shal be the daylie incense before the LORDE amonge youre posterities.

“Ye shall put no straunge incense therin, q offer no burntofferynge, ner meatofferynge, nether drynkofferynge theron. And tvpon $ hornes of it shall Aaron reconcyle once in a yeare, with y bloude of the synneofferynge, which they shall offer that are reconcyled.
This shal be done amonge youre posterities for this is the most holy vnto the LORDE.

‘And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: Whan thou nombrest the heades of the children of Israel, then shal euery one geue vnto the LORDE the reconcylinge of his soule, y there happé not a plage vnto them, whan they are nombred. Enery one that is tolde in the nombre, shall geue half a
Sycle, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary: tone 
Sycle is worth twentye Geras. This half 
Sycle shal be $ LORDES Heue offerynge. 
Whoso is in the nombre from twenty yeare and aboue, shal geue this Heue offerynge vnto y LORDE. The riche shal not geue more,

* Leui. 10.8. 
26. a. 2 Re. 24. a. 

f Leu.16.g. Heb.9.a. J Num. 1. a. and 
1 Leui. 27. d. Num.3.g. Eze.45. b. 

Chap. rrt. and the poore shal not gene lesse in the half
Sycle, which is geuen vnto the LORDE to be an Heue offerynge for the reconcylinge of their soules.

And this money of recocilinge shalt thou take of the children of Israel, ¢ put it to the
Gods seruyce of the Tabernacle of wytnes, that it maye be a remembraunce vnto the children of Israel before the LORDE, that he maye let himself be reconcyled ouer their soules.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde : ^ Thou shalt make a brasen lauer also with a fote of brasse to wash, and shalt set it betwixte the Tabernacle of witnesse and y altare, and put water therin, that Aarō and his sonnes maye wash their handes and fete therout, whan they go in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse, or to the altare, to mynistre vnto the LORDE with offerynge incense, y they dye not. ‘This shalbe a perpetuall custome for him and his sede amonge their posterities.

And $ LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: ^'l'ake vnto the spyces of the best, fyue hundreth Sycles of Myrre, and of Cynamo half so moch, euen two hundreth and fyftie, and of Kalmus two hundreth and fiftye, and of Cassia fyue hundreth (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) q an Hin of oyle olyue, and make an holy anoyntinge oyle, after the craft of the Apotecary.

And there with shalt thou anoynte the 
Tabernacle of wytnesse, “¢ the Arke of wyt- nes, the table with all his apparell, y candil- sticke with his apparell, the altare of incense, the altare of burntofferynges with all his apparell ¢ the lauer with his fote: and thus shalt thou consecrate them, that they maye be most holy: for who so wil touch the, must be consecrated. Thou shalt anaynte
Aaron also, and his sonnes, and consecrate them to be my prestes.

And thou shalt speake vnto the childré of 
Israel, and saye: This oyle shalbe an holy oyntment vnto me amonge youre posterities :
It shal not be poured vpon mans body, nether shalt thou make eny soch like it, for it is holy: therfore shal it be holy vnto you. Who so maketh eny soch like, or geueth a straüger

his people. 

* Exo.40. d. ^ Exo. 40. b. 

1 Par. 2. b. 

* Leui. 8. b. 
* 3 Re. 7. b. 

4 Exo. 35. d. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

therof, the same shalbe roted out from amonge | 

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: 
Take vnto the spyces: Balme, Stacte, Gal- ban, and pure franckencense, of one as moch as of another, and make incense therof (after the eraft of the Apotecary) myngled together, that it maye be pure q holy. And thou shalt beate it to poulder, and shalt put of the same before the wytnesse in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, from whence I wyll proteste vnto the, but it shalbe holy vnto the for the LORDE.
Who so maketh soch to cense therwith, shalbe roted out from amdge his people.

The rrri. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q 

saide : ^I haue called by name Bezaleel the sonne of Vri $ sonne of Hur, of y trybe of Iuda, *and haue fylled him with y sprete of God, with wyszdome and vnderstodynge and knowlege, and to worke with all maner of connynge worke, in golde, syluer, brasse, to graue stones connyngly, and to set them, to earue well in tymbre, and to make all maner worke. And beholde, I haue geuen him Ahaliab the sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, to be his companyon, and haue geuen wyszdome in to the hertes of all that are wyse, that they shall make all that I haue commaunded the: the Tabernacle of wyt- nesse, ‘the Arke of wytnesse, the Mercyseate theron, and all the ornamentes of ý Taber- nacle: the table and his apparell, the can- dilsticke and all his apparell, the altare of incense, the altare of burntofferynges with all his apparell, the lauer with his fote, the my- nistrynge vestimentes of Aaron y prest, and the garmentes of his sonnes to serue like prestes, the anoyntinge oyle, and the incese of spyces for $ Sactuary. All that 1 haue commaunded the, shal they make.

And the LORDE talked vnto Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: / Kepe my Sabbath, for it is a token betwene me and you, and youre pos- terities, that ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE which haloweth you: therfore kepe my Sabbath, for it shalbe holy vnto you. t Who so vnhaloweth it, shall dye the death:
For who so doth eny worke therin, shalbe roted out from amonge his people.

So. lrrri. 

a 

5 

€ 

Sixe dayes shall men worke, but vpon the) 

* Exo. 25. 26. 27. 28. 30. f Exo. 20. b. t Nu. 15. d. 

14 

Che ij. boke of Mosrs. Chap. ririj. 

are thy goddes (O Israel) that brought the out of the lande of Egipte.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I se, 
‘that it is a styffnecked people, and now suffre me, that my wrath maye waxe whote ouer them, q that I maye consume them, so wil I make a greate people of the.

But Moses be sought the LORDE his 
God, q sayde: Oh LORDE, wherfore wil thy wrath waxe whote ouer thy people, whom thou hast brought out of the lode of Egipte with greate power q a mightie hade? Wherfore shulde the Egipcians speake, q saye: He hath brought thé for their myschefe, to slaye them in the mountaynes, and to destroye thé vtterly from the earth? O turne the from the fearcenesse of thy wrath, q be gracious ouer the wickednesse of thy people. Remem- bre thy seruaites Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, vnto who tthou swarest by thyne owne self, and saydest: I wil multiplye youre sede as the starres of heauen, and all the londe that
I haue promysed you, wil I geue vnto youre sede, q they shall inheret it for euer. Thus the LORDE repented of the euell, which he sayde he wolde do vnto his people.

Moses turned him, q wente downe from the mount, and in his hande he had the two tables of wytnesse, which were wrytte vpon both the sydes, and were Gods worke, « the wrytinge was the wrytinge of God therin. Now whan losua herde the noyse of M people, as they shouted, he sayde vnto Moses: This is a noyse of warre in the hoost. He answered:
It is not a noyse of them that haue the vic- tory, and of them that haue the worse, but I heare a noyse of synginge at a daunse.

Fo. lrrrü. seuenth daye is the Sabbath *the holy rest of the LORDE. Who so doth eny worke vpon the Sabbath daye, shall dye the death.

Therfore shal the children of Israel kepe the Sabbath, that they maye kepe it also amonge their posterities for an euerlastynge couenaunt. An euerlastynge token is it be- twixte me and the children of Israel. For in sixe dayes made the LORDE heaué q earth, but vpon y seuenth daye he rested, and was refreshed.

^ And whan the LORDE had made an ende of talkinge with Moses vpon the mount
Sinai, he gaue him two tables of witnesse, which were of stone, and wrytten with the fynger of God.

The rrrij. Chapter. 

a UT whan the people sawe that Moses made loge taryenge to come downe fro the mount, they gathered thé together agaynst
Aaron, q sayde vnto him: ^ Vp, and make vs goddes, to go before vs, for we can not tell what is become of this man Moses, that brought vs out of Egipte. Aaron sayde vnto them: ^ Plucke of the golden earynges from the eares of youre wyues, of youre sonnes, q of youre doughters, q brynge them vnto me.
Then all the people pluckte of their golden earynges from their eares, q brought them vnto Aaron. And he toke them of their handes, x fashioned it with a grauer. ^ And they made a molten calfe, and sayde: These are thy goddes (O Israel) that brought the out

of the londe of Egipte. 
33| Whan Aaron sawe that, he buylded an altare before him, and caused it be proclamed, and sayde: Tomorow is the LORDES feast. Whan he came nye vnto the hoost, and|3
And they arose vp early in the mornynge,| |sawe the calfe, and the daunsynge, "he was and offred burntofferynges, and brought dead- moued with wrath, and east the tables out of offerynges also: ‘Then the people sat them| |his hande, and brake them beneth the mount. downe to eate and drynke, q rose vp to| |‘ Aud he toke the calfe that they had made, laye. and brent it with fyre, and stamped it vnto
/Butthe LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go| |poulder, and strowed it in the water, q gaue get the downe, for thy people whom thou| jit vnto the children of Israel to drynke, q broughtest out of the londe of Egipte, haue| |sayde vnto Aaron; What dyd this people vnto marred all: they are soone gone out of the| |the, that thou hast brought so greate a synne

waie, which I commaunded them. They haue| |vpon them? 

made them a molten calfe, and haue wor- Aaron sayde: Let not the wrath of my shipped it, q offred vnto it, q sayde: + These| |lorde waxe fearce: thou knowest, that this is

£ Exo, 53. a. Nu. 14. b. 1 Ge. 22. c. ^ Deut. 10.2. 

* Gene, 2. a, * Exo. 24. c. and 32.d. Deut. 5. c. 
! Deut. 9. d. 

and9.b. ^4Acto.7.e. © Iudic.8. e. — 7 Psal. 105. c. 
* 1 Cor. 10. a. f Deut. 9. c. t 3 Reg. 12. e. 

Chap. revit. a wicked people. They sayde vnto me: Make vs goddes to go before vs, for we can not tell what is become of this man Moses, y brought vs out of the londe of Egipte. I sayde vnto them: Who so hath golde, let him plucke it of, and geue it me: and I cast it in the fyre, therof came this calfe.

F| Now whan Moses sawe, that the people 

were naked (for Aaron, whan he set them vp, made them naked to their shame) he wéte in to the gate of the hoost, and sayde: who so belongeth vnto the LORDE, let him come hither vnto me. "Then all the children of
Leui gathered them selues vnto him, and he sayde vnto them: ‘Thns sayeth the LORDE the God of Israel: Euery man put his swerde by his syde, and go thorow in and out from one gate to another in the hoost, and slaye euery man his brother, frende, q neghboure.

The children of Leui dyd, as Moses sayde vnto them. And there fell of the people the same daye thre thousande men. The sayde
Moses: Cosecrate youre handes this daie vnto the LORDE, euery man vpon his sonne and brother, that the prayse maye be geuen ouer yon this daye.

On the morow Moses sayde vnto the people: 
Ye haue done a greate synne. Now I wil go vp vnto the LORDE, yf peradnenture I maye make an attonement for youre synnes.

Now whà Moses came agayne vnto y 
LORDE, he saide: Oh this people haue done a greate synne, q haue made them goddes of golde. * Now for geue them their synne: yf not, the wype me out of thy boke, that thou hast wrytten. The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: What? Him that synneth against me, wil I wype out of tmy boke. Go thou thy waye therfore, and brynge y people thither as I haue sayde vnto the, "Beholde, myne angell shall go before the. But in the daye of my visitacion I wyll vyset their synnes vpon them. So the LORDE plaged the people, because they made y calfe which
Aaron made. 

The rrriij. Chapter. 
: | 'HE LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Go, departe hence, thou and the people, whom thou hast bronght out of the lande of
Egipte, vnto ¥ londe that I sware vnto Abra- 

* Ro. 9, a. 
è Gene. 22. c. 

f Psal. 68. d. a Exo. 13. a. and 23. c. t Exo. 23. d. Deut.7.d. Tosu. 24. c.

The ý. boke of Moses. 

ham, Isaac and Iacob, and sayde: ^vnto thy sede wil I geue it, tand I wyl sende an angell before the (and cast out the Cananites, Amor- ites, Hethites, Pheresites, Heuites and Jebus- ites) in to the londe that floweth with mylke and hony, for I wyll not go vp with the:
§for thou art an hardnecked people, I might consume the by the waye. Whan the people herde this enell tydinges, they sorowed, and no man put on his best rayment.

And y LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Speake vnto the children of Isracl: Ye are a styf- necked people, I must once come sodenly vpon the, and make an ende of the. And now put of thy goodly araye from the, y I male knowe what to do vnto the. So the children of Israel laied their goodly araye from the, euen before the mount Horeb.

Moses toke the Tabernacle, « pitched it withont afarre of from Ẹ hoost, and called it the Tabernacle of wytnesse, And who so euer wolde axe eny question at the LORDE, wente out vnto the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the hoost. And whan Moses wente out vuto the Tabernacle, all the people rose vp, and stode euery one in his tent dore, and loked after Moses, tyll he was gone in to the
Tabernacle. ||And whan Moses entred in to the ‘Tabernacle, the cloudy pyler came downe, and stode in the dore of the Taber- nacle, and he talked with Moses. And all the people sawe the cloudy piler stonde in the dore of the Tabernacle, and rose vp, and worshiped, euery one in his tent dore.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses face to face,” as a man speaketh vnto his frende.
And whan he turned agayne to the hoost, y yonge ma Josua y sonne of Nnn his minister, departed not out of y Tabernacle. And
Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: Beholde, thou saydest vnto me: Brynge ¥ people vp, and lettest me not knowe, whom thou wilt sende with me, « yet hast thon sayde: I knowe the by name, and thou hast founde grace in my sight. Let me knowe thy waye therfore, wherby I maye be certified, y I fynde grace in thy sight: And consydre yet, that this people is thy people.

He sayde: My presence shal go before the, there with wyll I lede the. But he sayde vnto him: Yf thy presence go not, then cary

§ Exo. 32. c. || Deut. 31. d. 

4 1 Par. 8. c. 

© Nu, 12, a. 

Fo. Irrrítj. 

iE 

Fo. Irrriiij. 

vs not vp from hence: for wherby shal it be knowne, y I and thy people haue founde fauoure in thy sight, but in y thou goest with vs? that I q thy people maye haue some preemynence before all people that are vpon the face of the earth. The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: I wyll do this also that thou hast sayde, for thou hast foüde grace in my sight, and I knowe the by name.

He sayde: Oh let me the se thy glory. 
And he sayde: I wyl cause all my good go ouer before thy face, and wyl let the name of y LORDE be called vpon before the. *And
| m mercy, to whom I shewe mercy: and haue compassion, on whom I haue compassion.
And he sayde morouer: ‘Thou mayest not se my face,* for there shall no mà lyue, y seyth me. And y LORDE sayde farthermore: beholde, there is a place by me, there shalt thou stode vpon the rocke. Now whan my glory goeth forth, I wil put y in a clyfte of y rocke, q my hande shal holde styll vpo the, tyll I be passed by. And whan I take awaye myne hande from the, thou shalt se my back partes, but 1ny face shal not be sene.

The prritij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: 

Hew the two tables of stone,’ like as y 

first were, that I maye wryte in them the 

wordes, y were in the first tables, which thou 

brakest: and be ready in the mornynge, that 

thou mayest come vp early vnto mout Sinai, 

and stonde me vpon the toppe of the mount. 

And let no man come vp with the, that there 

be no man sene thorow out all y mount: 

and let nether shepe ner oxen fede before the mount.

And Moses hewed two tables of stone, like as the first were, q arose early in the mornynge, q wente vp vnto mount Sinai, as y LORDE comaunded him, ç toke ý two tables of stone in his hade. "Thé came the LORDE downe in a cloude. And there he stepte vnto him, t called vpo y name of LORDE. And whan y LORDE passed by before his face, he eryed: LORDE LORDE, God, mercifull q gracious, q longe sufferinge, and of greate mercy and trueth, thou that kepest mercy in stoare for thousandes, and forgeuest wickednes,

* Deu. 4 b. Iudic. 6. e. and 13.d. 

b. 
^ Deu. 10. a. e Psal, 85. c. and 102. a. f Exo.

- lere. 32. c. and 30. b. Nati 1. a. 

The ij. boke of roses, 

Chap. rrr. trespace and synne (before whom there is no man innocent) t thou that visitest the wick- ednesse of the fathers vpon y children and childers children, vnto the thirde and fourth generacion.

And Moses bowed him self downe vnto the earth, and worshiped him, and saide:
LORDE, yf I haue founde grace in thy sight, the let the LORDE go with vs (for it is an hard necked people) that thou mayest haue mercy vpon oure wickednesses and synnes, and let vs be thyne inheritaunce.

And he sayde: Beholde, I make a coue- naunt before all thy people, ¢ wil do wonders, soch as haue not bene done in all londes, and amonge all people. And all y people amoge whom thou art, shal se ¥ worke of $ LORDE, for a terryble thinge iii it be, y I wyl do with the. Kepe that I commaunde y this daye. Beholde, I wyl cast out before de y
Amorites, Cananites, Hethites, Pheresites, 
Heuytes and Iebusites. i Bewarre, that thou make no couenaunt with the indwellers of the lande ý thou commest in to, lest they be cause of thy ruyne in the myddest of the: but their alters shalt thou ouerthrowe, q breake downe their goddes, and rote out their groaues: for thou shalt worshipe no other god. For y
LORDE is called gelous, because he is a gelous God: lest (yf thou make any agrement with the indwellers of the londe, and whan they go a whoringe after their goddes, and do sacrifice vnto their goddes) they $call y, and thou eate of their sacrifice, and lest thou take of their doughters vnto thy sonnes to wyues, and the same go a whoringe after their goddes, t make thy sonnes go a whoringe after their goddes also.

Thou shalt make y no goddes of metall. 
|'DThe feast of swete bred shalt thou kepe. 
Seuen daies shalt thou eate vnleuéded bred, like as I cOmaunded the in the tyme of the moneth Abib: for in the moneth Abib thou wentest out of Egipte. All y first breaketh the Matrix, is myne, soch as shalbe male amoge thy catell y breaketh the Matrix, whether it be oxe or shepe. But the first of thyne Asse shalt thou bye out with a shepe: yf thou redeme it not, then breake his necke. All the first borne of thy children shalt thou redeme.

Deut. 7. b. 
§ Nu. 25. a. 

20, a. 
11. a. 

i Exo. 23. d. Deut. 7. a. 3 Re. 
|| Exo. 12. c. and 23. b. 

| Chap. rrr. 

^And se that no man appeare before me emptye.

*Sixe dayes shalt thou laboure, vpon y seuéth daye shalt thou rest both from plowinge and reapynge. The feast of wekes shalt thou kepe with the firstlinges of the wheate haruest: and the feast of yngaderynge at ý yeares ende.
Thryse in a yeare shal all youre men children appeare before the Gouernoure, enen the
LORDE and God of Israel. 

Whan I shal cast out the Heithen before the, q enlarge thy borders, there shal no man desyre thy lode: for so moch as thou goest vp thre tymes in the yeare, to appeare before y
LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not offer the bloude of my sacrifice with leueded bred.
And the offerynge of the Easterfeast shal not remayne ouer night vntill the mornynge. The firstlinges’ of ¥ first frutes of thy lode shalt thon brynge in to the house of the LORDE thy God. t' Thou shalt not seith a kydd, whyle it is yet in his mothers mylke.
3| And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: wryte these wordes, for because of these wordes haue
I made a couenaunt with the q with Israel. 
And ‘he was there with the LORDE fourtye dayes and fourtye nightes, and ate no bred, and dranke no water. And the wrote in the tables the wordes of the couenaüt, enen ten verses.

Now wha Moses came downe fro moüt 
Sinai, he had the two tables of wytnesse in his hande, q wyst not y the skynne of his face shyned, because he had talked with him.
And wha Aaron ç all the childré of Israel sawe y the skynne of his face shyned, they were afrayed to come nye him. ‘The Moses called them. And they returned vnto him, both Aaron ¢ all the chefest of the cogrega- cion. Andhe talked with them. Afterwarde came all the children of Israel vnto him. And he cOmaunded thé, all y the LORDE had sayde vnto him vpon the mount Sinai. Now whan he had made an ende of talkynge with thé,$ he put a conerynge vpo his face. And whan he wéte in before y LORDE to talke with him, he toke y couerynge of, till he wéte out agayne. And whan he came forth q spake with the childré of Israel what was comaunded him, thé the childré of Israel sawe his face, how y the skynne of his face shyned: so he

a Eccli. 35. a. 
23.c. Deut. 26. a. 

SUE*3903b393. b. 33 ES t Exo. 25. c.

^ Exo. 
Deut. 14. b. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

The rrrb. Chapter. 

ND Moses gathered all the cogregacion|@ 

of y childré of Israel together, and sayde 

vnto them: This is it, y the LORDE hath 

commaunded you to do: ¢Sixe dayes shall ye 

worke, but the senenth daye shall ye kepe 

holy: a Sabbath ofthe LORDES rest. Who 

so euer doeth eny worke therin, shall dye. 

Ye shal kyndle no fyre vpon the Sabbath daye in all youre dwellynges.

And Moses sayde vnto y whole congregacion of the children of Israel: This is it, that the
LORDE hath commaunded: “Geue from amonge you Heue offerynges vnto y LORDE, so that euery one brynge the LORDES Heue offerynge with a fre hert : golde, syluer, brasse, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, whyte sylke, and goates hayre, reed skynnes of rammes, doo skynnes, and Fyrre tre, oyle for the lampes, and spyces for the anoyntinge oyle and for swete incense. Onix stones, and stones to be set in y ouerbody cote, and for the brestlappe.

And who so is wyse of hert amonge you, let him come, q make what the LORDE hath commaunded: namely, the Habitacion with the tent q couerynge therof, the rynges, bordes, barres, pilers a. sokettes: The Arke with the staues therof, the Mercyseate q the vayle: the table with his staues q all his apparell: q the shewbred: The cádilsticke of light and his apparell, and his lampes, q the oyle for the lightes: The altare of incense with his staues: The anoyntynge oyle and spyces for incense: The hangynge before ý Tabernacle dore: The alter of burntofferynges with his brasen gredyron, staues and all his apparell :
The lauer with his fote: The hanginges of the courte, with the pilers and sokettes therof, q the hangynge of the courte dore : ‘The nales of the habitacion and of $ courte with their coardes: The mynistringe garmentes for the seruyce in the Holy, ý holy vestimentes of
Aaron the prest with the vestimentes of his sonnes for y prestes office.

Then wente all the congregacion of the childré of Israel out fro Moses, q euery one brought the gift of his hert: q all that they

* Exo. 24. d. t Deut. 10. a. 
4 Exo. 20. b. 33. b. 34. c. 

$ 2 Co. 3. b. c. 
* Exo. 25. a. 

Fo. Ierrb. put the couerynge vpo his face agayne, tyll he wente in agayne to talke with him.

Fo. Irt. wolde of fre will, the same brought they for an Heue offerynge vnto the LORDE for y worke of the Tabernacle of witnesse, q for all the seruyce therof, q for the holy vestimétes.
Both men q wemen that were of a wyllynge hert, brought bracelettes, earynges, rynges q gyrdels, and all maner Iewels of golde:
Kuery man also brought golde for Waue offerynges vnto the LORDE.

And who so euer foude by him yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, whyte sylke, goates hayre, reed skynnes of rames, and Doo skynnes, brought it. And who so euer houe up syluer t brasse, brought it for y Heue offerynge vnto the LORDE. And who so euer founde
Fyrre tre by him, brought it for all maner of worke of the Gods seruyce. And soch wemen as were wyse herted, spanne with their hades, and brought their sponne worke of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte sylke. And soch wemen as had hye vnderstondinge in wyszdome, spanne goates hayre.

As for y prynces, they brought Onix stones, and set stones, for y ouerbody coate, and for the brestlappe, and spyces, and oyle for y lightes, and for the anoyntinge oyle, and for swete incense. ‘Thus the children of Israel brought fre wyllynge offerynges, both man and weme, for all maner of worke, that the LORDE had commaunded by Moses, to be made.

And Moses saide vnto the childré of Israel: 
“Beholde, LORDE hath called by name 
Bezaleel $ sonne of Vri, y sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda, « hath fylled him with the sprete of God, that he maye haue wyszdome, vnderstondinge, q knowlege for all maner of worke, to worke connyngly in golde, syluer q brasse, to graue precious stones q to set them, to carue in wodd, to make all maner of con- nynge workes, and hath geué instruccion in his hert, both him and Ahaliab the sonne of
Ahisamach of ¥ trybe of Dan. ‘These hath he fylled with wyszdome of hert, to make all maner of worke, to carue, to broder, to worke with nedle worke, with yalow sylke, scarlet, purple and whyte sylke, and with weeuynge to make all maner of worke, and to deuyse connynge workes.

The ryybt. Chapter. 
HEN wrought Bezaleel q Ahaliab q all the wyse herted men, vnto whom the
LORDE had geuen wyszdome q vnderstond- inge to knowe, how they shulde make all

Cbr ij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. rrrvi. maner worke for the seruyce of the Sanctuary, acordinge vnto all y the LORDE com- maunded, And Moses called for Bezaleel q
Ahaliab, q all the wyse herted men, vnto whom the LORDE had geuen wyszdome in their hertes, namely, all soch as wyllingly offred them selues there, q came to laboure in the worke. And they receaued of Moses all the Heue offerynges, that the children of
Israel had brought for the worke of the ser- uyce of the Sanctuary, that it might be made: q euery morninge brought they their willinge offerynges vnto him.

Then came all the wyse men y wrought in the worke of the Sanctuary, euery one fro his worke that he made, q sayde vnto Moses:
The people bryngeth to moch, more thé nede is for the worke of this seruice, which the
LORDE hath comaunded to make. ‘The commaunded Moses, that it shulde be pro- clamed thorow out the hoost: No man brynge more to the Heue offerynge of the Sanctuary.
Then were the people forbydden to brynge: for there was stuff ynough for all maner of worke, that was to be made, and to moch.

So all ý wyse herted men amonge thé y 
^wronght in y worke of the Habitacion, made ten curtaynes of whyte twyned sylke, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, with Cherubyns of broderd worke. The legth of one curtayne was eight and twentye cubites, and the bredth foure cubites, q were all of one measure: q he coupled the curtaynes fyue q fyue together one to the other.

And made yalow loupes a longe by y edge of euery curtayne, where they shulde be cou- pled together: fiftie loupes vpo euery curtayne, wherby one might be coupled to another.
And made fiftie buttons of golde, and with the buttons he coupled the curtaynes together one to the other, that it might be one couerynge.

* And he made xj. curtaynes of goates hayre 
(for the tent ouer the habitacion) of thirtie eubytes longe, q foure cubytes brode, all of one measure, q coupled fyue together by them selues, and sixe by them selues, q made fiftie loupes a longe by y edge of euery curtayne, wherby they might be coupled together, q made fiftie buttons of brasse, to couple y tent together withall. And made ouer y tent a couerynge of reed skynnes of rammes, and ouer that a couerynge of Doo skynnes

4 Exo. 31. a. * Exo. 26. a. * Exo. 26. b. 

Chap. rrroij. 

tacion, “of Fyrre tre, euery one ten cubytes longe, and a eubyte and a half brode, q two fete vnto euery one, wherby one might be ioyned to another: that on the south syde there stode twentye of the same bordes: and made fourtye syluer sokettes there vnder, vnder euery borde two sokettes for his two fete. In like maner for the other syde of the Habi- tacion towarde the north, he made twentye bordes also with fourtye syluer sokettes, vnder enery borde two sokettes: But behynde the
Habitacion vpon the west syde, he made sixe bordes, and two other for the corners of the
Habitacion behynde, that either of them both might be ioyned with his corner borde from vnder vp, and aboue vpon the heade to come together with a clampe: so that there were eight bordes, and sixtene sokettes of syluer, vnder euery one two sokettes.

£| And he made barres of Fyrre tre, fyue for 

the bordes vpon the one syde of the Ha- bitacion, and fyue vpon the other syde, and fyne behynde towarde the west: and made the barres to shute thorow the bordes, from the one ende to the other, and ouerlayde the bordes with golde. But their rynges made he of golde for the barres, and ouerlayde ¥ barres with golde.

And made Cherubyns vpon the hangynge with broderd worke, of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, t whyte twyned sylke. And made for the same, foure pilers of Fyrre tre, and ouer- layed them with golde, and their knoppes of golde, and cast foure sokettes of syluer for them.

And made an hanginge in the Tabernacle dore, of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and whyte twyned sylke, of nedle worke, and fyne pilers therto with their knoppes (t onerlayed their knoppes and whopes with golde) and fyue sokettes of brasse there to.

The rrrbij. Chapter. 
ND Bezaleel made the Arke of Fyrre tre, ‘two cubites and a half loge, a cubyte and a half brode, and a cubyte q a half hye, and ouerlayed it with fyne golde within and without, and made a crowne of golde vnto it rounde aboute, and cast for it foure rynges of golde to the foure corners of it, vpon euery syde two. And made staues of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed thé with golde, and put them in the rynges a longe by y sydes of the Arke, to beare it withall.

The ij. boke of stHoses. p| And made stondinge bordes for the Habi-

So. Irrrbt. 
And he made y Mercyseate of pure golde two cubytes and a half longe, and a cubite and a half brode, q made two Cherubyns of fyne beaten golde vpon the two endes of the
Mercyseate : One Cherub vpon the one ende, and the other Cherub vpon the other ende: and the Cherubyns spredde out their wynges aboue an hye, and couered y Mercyseate ther with: and their faces stode one ouer agaynst the other, and loked vnto the Mercyseate.

And he made y table, of Fyrre tre, two cubytes longe, “a cubyte brode, and a cubyte q a half hye, and ouerlayed it with fyne golde, and made therto a crowne of golde rounde aboute, and made vnto it an whoope of an hande bredth hye, and made a crowne of golde rounde aboute the whoope. And for it he cast foure golde rynges, q put them in the foure corners by the fete harde by the whoope, that the staues might be therin, to beare the table withall: t made the staues of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed thé with golde, to beare the staues withall And the vessels vpon the table made he also of fyne golde : the disshes, spones, flat peces and pottes, to poure in and out withall.

And he made the candilsticke of fyne beat- en golde, ^where vpon was the shaft with braüches, enppes, knoppes, t floures. Sixe braunches proceaded out of y sydes therof, vpon either syde thre brauches: vpō enery braüch were thre cuppes like allmodes, with knoppes and floures. Vpon the candilsticke self were foure cuppes with knoppes and floures, vnder euery two braüches a knoppe.
The knoppes q braunches therof proceaded out of it, and were all one pece of fyne beaten golde. And he made the seuen lampes with their snoffers q outquenchers of pure golde. Of an hndreth weight of golde made he it, and all the apparell thereof.

He made also the altare of incense, of Fyrre tre, a cubyte longe and brode, eauen foure squared, and two cubytes hye with the hornes of it, and ouerlayed it with fyne golde, the toppe and the sydes of it rounde aboute, and the hornes therof, and made a crowne vnto it rounde aboute of pure golde, a two golde rynges vnder the crowne on both the sydes, to put the staues therin, and to beare it withall: but the stanes made he of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed them with golde.

a Exo.26. c. ^ Exo. 25. b. * Exo.25.c. 4 Exo. 25. a. 

So. Ixrrbitij. 

And he made the holy anoyntinge oyle, ¢ the incense of pure spyces, after y craft of the
Apotecary. 

Che ryrbiij. Chapter. 

a ND the altare of burntoffrynges made 

he of Fyrre tre, “fyue cubytes loge q brode, eauen foure squared, q thre cubites hye. And made foure hornes, which pro- ceaded out of the foure corners therof, and ouerlaied it with brasse. And he made all maner of vessels for the altare, cauldrons, shonels, basens, fleshokes, and colepannes all of brasse. And vnto the altare he made a brasen gredyron of net worke rounde aboute, from vnder vp vnto the myddest of the altare, t cast foure rynges in the foure corners of the brasen gredyron, for the staues: which he made of Fyrre tre, and ouerlayed them with brasse, and put them in the rynges by the sydes of the altare, to beare it withall, and made it holowe with bordes.

And he made the Lauer of brasse, ¢ his fote also of brasse vpon the place of y hoost, that laye before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.

And he made the courte on y south syde: hangynges an hundreth cubytes longe, of whyte twyned sylke, with the twétye pilers therof, and twentye sokettes of brasse: but the knoppes and whopes of syluer. In like maner vpon the north syde an hundreth cu- bytes with tweutye pilers, and twentye sokettes of brasse, but their knoppes q whoopes of syluer. Vpon the west syde fiftie cubytes with ten pilers and té sokettes, but their knoppes and whoopes of syluer. Vpon the
East syde fiftie cubytes. Fiftene cubytes vpon either syde of the courte dore, with thre pilers and thre sokettes: So that all the hanginges of the courte were of whyte twyned sylke, and the sokettes of the pilers were of brasse, q their knoppes and whoopes of syluer: their heades were ouerlayed with syluer, q all the pilers of the courte were whooped aboute with syluer.

And the hangynge in y courte gate made he with nedle worke, of yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, a whyte twyned sylke, twentye cubytes longe, q fyue cubytes hye, after the measure of the hanginges of the courte: foure pilers also therto, q foure sokettes of brasse, and their knoppes of syluer, and their heades ouerlayed, and their whoopes of syluer. And

all the nales of the Habitacion and of the courte rounde aboute, were of brasse.

Cbr ij. boke of Moses. 

This is now the summe of the Habitacion of wytnesse (which was counted at the có- maundemét of Moses to ¥ Gods seruice of the Leuites vnder the hade of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the prest) which Bezaleel the sonne of Vri, the sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda made, all as the LORDE com- maunded Moses. And with him Ahaliab y sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, a connynge grauer, to worke nedle worke, with yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, q whyte sylke.

All the golde y was wrought in all this worke of the Sanctuary (which was geuen to the Waue offerynge) is nyne q twenty hudreth weight, seuen hundreth q thirtie Sycles, after y Sycle of $ Sanctuary. * The syluer y came of the congregacion, was fyue score hundreth weight, a thousande, seuen hundreth, fyue and seuentye Sycles, after y Sycle of the Sanc- tuary: so many heades so many half Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, of all that were nombred from twentye yeare olde and aboue, euen sixe hundreth thousande, thre thousande, fyue hundreth and fiftye.

Of the fyue score hundreth weight of syluer, were cast the sokettes of the Sanctuary, and the sokettes of the vayle, an hudreth sokettes of the fyue score hundreth weight, an hundreth weight to euery sokett. Of the thousande, seuen hundreth and fyue and seuentye Sycles were made the knoppes of the pilers (and their heades ouerlayed) and their whoopes.

As for the Waue offerynge of brasse, it was seuentye hundreth weight, two thousande and foure hundreth Sycles: Wherof were made the sokettes in the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the brasen altare, and the
| brasen gredyron therto, and all the vessels of 
|the altare, and the sokettes of ¥ courte rounde aboute, and the sokettes of ¥ courte gate, all y nales of the Habitacion, q all y nales of y courte rounde aboute.

The yrrir. Chapter. 

F the yalowe sylke, scarlet, ¢ purple, they 

O * made Aarons mynistringe vestimentes, 

to do seruyce in the Sanctuary, asy LORDE cómaunded Moses.

And he made the ouer body cote, of golde, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, x whyte twyned sylke, and bett the golde in to thinne plates, and cut it in to wyres, that it might be
* Exo. 30. b. 

5 Exo. 27. a. 2 Par. 1. a. + Exo. 28. a. 

Chap. rrrbíj. 

a 

Chap. rrrir. 

purple and whyte sylke, q made it so, that $ ouerbody cote came together by the edges on both the sydes. And his gyrdel was after the same craft q worke: eue of golde, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple and whyte twyned sylke, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

And they wrought two Onix stones, set rounde aboute with golde, grauen by the stone grauer with the names of the childre of Israel: and fastened them vpo the shulders of the ouerbody cote, that they might be stones of remébraunce vnto the children of Israel, as the LORDE comaunded Moses.

And they made the brestlappe after the craft q worke of the ouerbody cote: of golde, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, a whyte twyned sylke, so that it was foure square q dubble, an hande bredth longe and brode, and fylled it with foure rowes of stones. The first rowe was: a Sardis, a Topas, and a Smaragde.
The secode: a Ruby, a Saphyre, and a Dya- monde. The thirde: a Ligurios, an Achat, and an Amatist. The fourth: a Turcas, an
Onix q a laspis: closed rounde aboute with golde in all the rowes. And the stones stode after the twolue names of the children of
Israel, grauen by the stone grauer, euery one with his name, acordinge to the twolue trybes.

And vpon the brestlappe they made wrythen cheynes of pure golde, and two hokes of golde, q two golde rynges, and fastened the two rynges vpon the two edges of the brest- lappe: and y two wrythen cheynes put they in the two rynges vpon the corners of the brestlappe. But the two endes of y wrethen cheynes put they to the two hokes, q fastened them vpon the corners of the ouer body cote, one ouer agaynst another.
€| And they made two other rynges of golde, a fastened them to the other two corners of the brestlappe by the edge of it, that it might hange vpon the out syde of the ouerbody cote.
And they made yet two other golde rynges, which they put beneth vpon the two corners of the ouerbody cote, one ouer agaynst another, where the ouerbody cote ioyneth together, that the brestlappe might be festened by his rynges vnto y rynges of the ouerbody cote with a yalowe lace, that it might lye close vpon $ ouerbody cote, and not be lowsed from ¥ ouer- body cote, asthe LORDE commaunded Moses.

And he made the tunycle vnto the ouer- 

The i. boke of Moses, 

wrought amonge the yalowe sylke, scarlet, | 

hole therof aboue in the myddest, q a bonde folde together rounde aboute the hole, that it shulde not rente. And beneth vpon ¥ hemme of it, they made pomgranates of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, q whyte twyned sylke: q they made belles of pure golde, which they put be- twixte y pomgranates rounde aboute vpon the hemme of the tunycle, a bell t a pomgranate, a bella a pomgranate rounde aboute, to do ser- uyce in, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

And they made albes also wrought of whyte sylke for Aaron q his sonnes, q ¥ myter of whyte sylke, and the goodly bonettes of whyte sylke, and breches of twyned whyte lynnen, and the girdle of nedle worke euen of whyte twyned sylke, yalow sylke, scarlet, and purple, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

They made the fore heade plate also to y holy erowne, of pure golde, and wrote therin with grauen worke: theholynesofthe LORDE, and festened a yalowe lace theron, to tye it vnto the myter aboue, as the LORDE co- maunded Moses.

Thus the whole worke of $ Habitacion of y 
Tabernacle of wytnesse, was fynished. And the childre of Israel dyd all that the LORDE comaunded Moses, q brought the Habitacion vnto Moses: the Tabernacle ¢ all the apparell therof, the buttons, bordes, barres, pilers, sokettes, y couerynge of reed skynnes of rammes, the couerynge of doo skynnes, ¢ the vayle, $ Arke of wytnesse with the staues therof, the Mercyseate, the table q all his apparel, q the shewbred, the candilsticke, with the lampes prepared, and all his apparell, q oyle for the lightes, the golden altare, the anoyntinge oyle q incense, the hanginge in the
Tabernacle dore, the brasen altare, ¢ his brasen gredyron with his staues, œ all his apparell, ¥ lauer with his foote, the hangynges of ý courte with the pilers q sokettes therof, y hanginge in the courte gate with his pilers q nales, q all the ordynaunce for the seruyce of the Habitacion of y ‘Tabernacle of wytnesse,
¥ mynistringe vestimétes of Aaro y prest, to do seruyce in y Sanctuary, q the garmétes of his sonnes, y they might execute ¥ prestes office. Acordinge to all that y LÓRDE comaunded Moses, eu& so dyd tli childre of
Israel in all this sernyce. And Moses sawe all ý worke, y they dyd it eué as ¥ LORDE i commaunded, and he blessed them.

Fo. lrrrir. body cote, wrought all of yalow sylke, « the

n 

£ 

(Ffo. 

a 

ye, 

The yl. Chapter. 

ND $ LORDE spake vnto Moses, ¢ 

ja dd In the fyrst daye of the first moneth shalt thou set vp y Habitacio of y
Tabernacle of wytnesse, and shal put the 
Arke of wytnes therin, and hange the vayle before ý Arke. And thou shalt bringe in the table, and garnish it, and brynge in the cadil- sticke, and put the lampes theron. And y goldé altare of incense shalt thou set bees y
Arke of wytnesse, q hange vp the hanginge in the dore of the Habitacio. But the altare of burntofferinges shalt thou set before the dore of the Habitacion of the Tabernacle of wyt- nesse: q the lauer betwixte the Tabernacle of wytnesse and the altare, and put water therin, « set the courte rounde aboute, and hange vp the hanginge in the courte gate.

And thou shalt take the anoyntynge oyle, and anoynte the Habitacion and all that is there in, *and shalt consecrate it, and all y apparell therof, that it maye be holy. And thou shalt anoynte the altare of burntoffer- ynges and all his vessels, and consecrate it, that it maye be most holy. The lauer also q his fote shalt thou anoynte ¢ consecrate.

“And thou shalt brynge Aaron q his sonnes vnto the dore of the ‘Tabernacle of wytnesse, and wash them with water, q put the holy vestimentes vpon Aaron, and anoynte him, and consecrate him, that he maye be my prest.
And thou shalt brynge his sonnes also, and put the albes vpon them, and anoynte them, as thou hast anoynted their father, y they maye be my prestes. And this anoyntinge shall they haue for an euerlastinge presthode amonge their posterities. t And Moses dyd all as the LORDE comaunded him.

? Thus was the Tabernacle set vp in the seconde yeare vpon the first daye of the first moneth. And whan Moses reared it vp, he fastened y sokettes and the bordes, and barres, and set vp the pilers, and spred out the tent ouer the Habitacion, and put the couerynge of the tent abone an hye, as the LORDE com- maunded him. And he toke the wytnesse, and layed it in the Arke, and put y staues in the
Arke, and set the Mercyseate aboue vpon the 

* Exo. 30. c. a Exo. 29, a. t Nu. 7. a. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

“PTT Arke, and brought the Arke in to the Habita-| and brought the Arke in to the Habita- cion, and hanged the vayle before the Arke of wytnesse, as the LORDE commaunded him.

And he set the table in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, in the corner of the Habitacion vpon the north syde without the vayle, and prepared bred theron before y LORDE tas the LORDE commaunded him.

And he set in the candilsticke also, euen ouer agaynst the table, in the corner of the
Habitacion vpon the south syde, and put the lampes theron before y LORDE, as the
LORDE commaunded him. And the golden altare set he in also before the vayle, and brent swete incense theron, as the LORDE commaunded him. And hanged vp the hangynge in the Tabernacle dore. As for the altare of burntofferynges, he set it before the dore of the Habitacion of ¥ Tabernacle of wytnesse, and offred burntofferynges and meate offerynges theron, as the LORDE commaunded him.

“And the Lauer set he betwixte the Taber- nacle of wytnesse and y altare, and put water therin to wash withall. And Moses, Aaron and his sonnes washed their hades and fete ther at: for they ought to wash the, whan they wente in to the T abernacle of wytnesse, or whan they wente vnto the altare, as the
LORDE commaunded him. 

And he set vp the courte rounde aboute the Habitacion and the altare, and hanged vp
ý hanginge in y courte gate. Thus Moses fynished the whole worke.

Then a cloude couered ¥ Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the glory of the LORDE fylled the Habitacion. And Moses coulde not go in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse, whyle the clonde abode theron, and the glory of y
LORDE fylled the Habitacion. 

And whan the cloude remoued from the 
Habitacion, then wente the children of Israel forth, as oft as they toke their iourney. But yf the cloude remoued not, then toke not they their iourney, tyll the daie that it remoued: for in the daye tyme was the cloude of the
LORDE vpon the Habitacion, a in the night 
|season was fyre therin, in Ý sight of all y house of Israel, in all their iourneis.

è Num. 9. c, f Exo. 25. c. ¢ Exo. 30. c. 

Cbr ende of the seconde boke of Moses, called Crodus, 

Foye eC. boke of Moses, Chay. pl rl, 

The thivde Hoke of Moses, 

called Beuiticus. 

Ghat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
The ordre and vse of burntofferynges, whether it be of small or greate catell, or of foules.

Chap. Il. 
Of meatofferynges with fyne floure, qc. 

Chap. II. 

Of deedofferynges, otherwyse called health- offrynges, peace offrynges, or thakofferynges, and of the fatt.

Chap. HII. 

The offringe for the sinne of a prest, of the whole congregacion, of the ruler, or of eny other meane man.

Chap. V. 

The offerynge for swearmge, for an erroure or ignoraunce.

Chap. Vl. 

Of daylie burntofferynges q other oblacions : 
The offerynge of the prest in the daye of his anoyntinge.

Chap. VII. 

Of thankofferynges. Of the fat œ bloude, and 

of the anoyntinge of the prestes. 

Chap. VIII. 
Of the anoyntinge and consecratynge of Aaron and of his sonnes.

Chap. IX. 
| How Aaron and his sonnes offred for synne, q how the fyre of God consumed the burnt- offerynge.
Chap. X. 
The death of Nadab q Abihu. The prestes were forbydden to drynke wyne, and their porcion of the offerynges appoynted them.

Chap. XI. 

Of cleane and vncleane beastes ¢ foules. 

Chap. XII. 
Of the vnclennesse of a woman in childe bedd, of hir clensynge or purificacion q of hir offerynge.

Chap. XIII. 
Of Leprosy or Mezell. 
Chap. XIII. 

The clesynge of lepers, and of their offerynge. 

Chap. XV. 
Of all maner of vncleane fluxes or yssues, both of men and wemen.

Chap. XVI. 

Aaro might not allwaie go in to the Sanctuary. 
Of the two goates. Of fastinge in the seuenth moneth. `

Chap. XVII. 

All offrynges were first brought to the Taber- nacle dore, No bloude ner deed caryon was to be eaten. |

Chap. XVIII. 

The degrees of consanguynite and affynite: And what wemen men ought not to marye.

Chap. XIX. 
Dyuerse and many commaundemetes and statutes. 
Chap. XX. 
To gene sede vnto Moloch, œ other vnlaufull thinges are forbydden.
CAM ——————— — — | 

‘fo. rej. 
Chap. XXI. 
How cleane and vndefyled the prestes ought to lyue.

Chap. XXII. 
| How the prestes and their housholdes ought to 
| be: q how the offerynges ought to be vsed. 

Chap. XXIII. 

Of the holy dayes and hye feastes : namely, the 
Sabbath, Easter, Whyt sondaye (otherwise called the feast of wekes) the feast of Taber-

nacles, «c. 
Chap. XXIII. 
Of the oyle for the lampes and lightes. Of the shewbred. Punyshment for cursynge and blasphemy.

The first Chapter. a ND the LORDE called Moses,* and spake vnto him out of ý Tabernacle of wytnesse, and sayde: Speake vnto y childre of Israel, q sale vnto them: Who so euer amóge you wyl brynge an offerynge vnto the

LORDE, let him brynge it of y catell, euen 

of the oxen, q of the shepe. 

Yf he wyl brynge a burntofferynge of y oxen (or greate catell) the let him offre a male without blemysh, before $ dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse, to reconcyle him self before the LORDE,: let him laye his hande vpon the heade of the burntofferynge, then shal he be reconcyled, so y God shalbe mer-

cifull vnto him. 

And he shall kyll the yonge oxe before y 
LORDE: and ¥ prestes Aarons sonnes shal brynge the bloude, and sprenkle it rounde abonte vpon the altare, that is before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the skynne shalbe flayne from of the burntofferynge, and it shalbe hewen in peces. And the sonnes of
Aaron the prest shal make a fyre vpon the altare, and laye wod aboue theron: and y peces, the heade, and the fatt shal they laye vpon the wodd that lyeth vpon y fyre on the altare. But y bowels q legges sales waszshen with water, and the prest shal burne allto- gether vpon the altare for a burntsacrifice :

* Exo. 29. g. t Exo. 29. b. Leui. 3.a. 

The tj. boke of Moses. 

Chap. XXV. 

Of the rest of the seuenth yeare, q libertye of 

the Fiftieth yeare, otherwyse called the yeare 

of lubylie, the yeare of hornes blowinge, or the trompet yeare.

Chap. XXVI 
Swete t louynge promyses of God for all soch as wyl kepe his commaundemetes : Agayne,
Maruelous sore plages are threatened vnto them, that wyll not harken to his worde.

Chap. XXVII. 
Of vowes, and of the fre yeare. Of redemynge or lowsynge out agayne of catell or londe,

that a man promyseth, voweth or dedicateth vnto the LORDE.

this is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.

Yf he wyl offre a burntsaerifice of the small | € catell, that is, of the lambes or goates, then let him offre a male without a blemysh. And he shall kyll it before the LORDE, euen at the corner of the altare on the north syde before ý LORDE. And (the prestes) Aarons sonnes shal sprenkle his bloude rounde aboute vpon y altare, and it shal be hewen in peces.
And the prest shall laye them with the heade and the fatt, vpon the wodd that lyeth vpon the fyre on the altare. But the bowels and y legges shal be waszshen with water. And y prest shal offre it alltogether, and burne it vpon ¥ altare for a burntsacrifice. ‘This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.

But yf he wil offre a burntsaerifice of y foules vnto the LORDE, then let him offre it of the turtill doues or of y yonge pigeons.
And the prest shal brynge it vnto the altare, and wrynge the neck of it a sunder, that it maye be burnt vpon the altare, and let the bloude of it runne out vpon the sydes of the altare, and the croppe of it with the fethers shalbe cast vpon the heape of aszshes besyde the altare towarde the east, and he shall denyde the wynges of it, but not breake the cleane of. And thus shall the prest burne it vpon the altare, euen vpon the wodd that lyeth vpo the fyre, for a burntsacrifice. This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the

LORDE. 

The ij. Chapter. a WA) oo a soule wyll offre a meatoffer- ynge vato the LORDE,” then shal it be of fyne floure, and he shal poure oyle vpon it, and put frankencense theron, q so brynge it vnto Aarons sonnes the prestes. ‘Then shal one of them take his handefull of the same floure, and oyle with all the frankécense, and burne it for a remembraunce vpon the altare. ‘This is an offeringe of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE. *As for j remnaunt of the meatofferynge, it shalbe Aarons and his sonnes. This shalbe ¥ most holy of the offerynges of the LORDE.

But yf he wyll brynge a meatofferynge of that which is baken in the ouen, then let him take swete cakes of wheate, mixte with oyle, and vnleuended wafers anoynted with oyle.
Neuertheles yf thy meatofferynge be eny thinge of that which is fryed in|the panne, then shal it be of fyne swete floure myxte with oyle: And thou shalt cut it in peces, ¢ poure oyle theron: so is it a meatofferynge.
But yf thy meatofferinge be ought broyled on the gredyron, then shalt thou make it of fyne floure with oyle. And the meatofferynge that thou wilt make of soch thinges for the
LORDE, shalt thou brynge vnto ¥ prest, which shal brynge it vnto the altare, q shal
Heue vp the same meatofferynge for a remé-j braunce, and burne it vpon the altare. This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the
LORDE. As for the remnaunt, it shal be 
Aarons and his sonnes. ‘This shall be the most holy of the offerynges of the LORDE.

All the meatofferynges that ye wil offre vnto the LORDE, shal ye make without leué.
For there shal no leué nor hony be burnt for an offerynge vnto the LORDE. But for the offerynge of the firstlinges shal ye offer thé vnto the LORDE. Neuertheles they shal come vpon no altare for a swete sauoure.

All thy meatofferynges shalt thou * salt. 
And _thy meatofferynge shal neuer be with- out y salt of the couenaunt of thy God: for in all thy offerynges shalt thou offre salt.

But yf thou wilt offre a meatofferynge of the first frutes vnto y LORDE, then shalt thou drye that which ‘is grene, by the fyre, q beate it small, and so offre the meatofferynge of thy first frutes. And thou shalt put oyle a Leui, 6. b. and 9, c.

INE ale chy * Leui, 10. d. 

Che ij. boke of Moses, 

vpon it, and laye frankécense theron, so is it a meatofferynge. And then shall the prest beate it, and burne of the oyle with all the frankecense for a remembraunce. This isan offerynge vnto the LORDE.

The iij. Chapter. 
Bir yf his offerynge be a deedofferinge 

of greate catell (whether it be oxe or cowe) then shal he offre soch as is without blemysh before the LORDE, a shal laie his hande vpon the heade of it, and kyll it before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the prestes Aarons sonnes, shall sprenkle the bloude rounde aboute vpou the altare, and shal offre of ¥ deadofferynge vnto the LORDE: namely, all the fat that is within, and the two kydneyes with the fat that is theron vpon the loynes, and the nett ou the leuer vpo the kydneyes also. And Aarons sonnes shal burue it vpon the altare for a burntofferynge, euen vpon the wod that lyeth on the fyre. This is an M of a swete sauoure vnto the
LORDE 

Yf his deadofferynge be of small catell, whether it be male or female, it shal be cde out blemish: Yf it be a lambe, then shall he brynge it before the LORDE, a shal Jaye his hande vpon the heade of it, and sleye it before the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And Aarons sonnes shal sprenkle his bloude rounde aboute vpon the altare, and so offre of the dead- offerynge vnto the LORDE: namely, the fat of it, all the rompe with the backe, and the fat that couereth the bowels, with all y fat that is within, and the two kydneys with the fat that is theron vpon the loynes, q the nett on the leuer vpon the kydneys also. And the prest shal burne it vpon the altare, for y meate of the offerynge vnto y LORDE.

Bnt yf his offeringe bea goate, and bringeth it before the LORDE, he shal laye his hande vpon the heade of it, and kyll it before the
Tabernacle of wytnesse. And Aarons sonnes shal sprekle the bloude rounde aboute vpo the altare, q shal offer therof a sacrifice vnto the LORDE: namely, the fat ý couereth the bowels, and all the fat y is within, the two kydneys with the fat that is theron vpon the loynes, ¢ the net on the leuer vpon the kydneys. And the prest shal burne it vpo

a 

B 

€ 

vi, 6. b. and 9,c. Nu.15.2, — — * Leui 10.d. | | — t Matt. 5b. Mare.9.c. Col.ta | 5.b. Mare.9.c. Col. 4. a. 

Fo. ret. 

Fo. reiii. 

€ 

the altare, for the meate of the sacrifice to a swete sauoure.

* All the fatt is the LORDES. Let this be a perpetuall lawe amonge youre posterities in all youre dwellynges, that ye eate no fatt,
*ner bloude. 

The iiij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q 
A sayde: Speake vnto the childré of Israel, and saye: Whan a soule synneth thorow ignoraunce in any commaundemét of the
LORDE, which he ought not to do: As namely, yf a prest which is anoynted, synne, that he make the people do amysse, he shall brynge for ¥ synne that he hath done, a yonge bullocke without blemysh vnto the LORDE for a synofferynge. ^And the bullocke shal

The th. bake of Hoses. 

he brynge to the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the LORDE, q laie his hade vpo his heade, q kyll him before y LORDE.
“And y prest y is anoynted, shal take of his bloude, q brynge it in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And he shall dyppe his fynger in to the bloude, q sprenkle therwith seue tymes before the LORDE, towarde the vayle of y
Holy. And he shal put of the same bloude vpon the hornes of the altare of incense, y stondeth before y LORDE in the Tabernacle of wytnesse: q all the bloude of the bullocke shal he poure vpon the botome of the altare of burntofferinges, y stondeth at the entringe in of ¥ Tabernacle of wytnesse. And all the fat of the synofferynge shal he Heue vp: namely, the fat y couereth the bowels, q all the fat y is within, y two kydneys with the fatt that is theron vpon the loynes, and the net on the leuer vpon the kydneys also (like as he Heueth it from the oxe in the dead- offerynge) and shall burne it vpon the altare of burntofferynges. But the skynne of the bullocke, ^and all the flesh, with the heade q legges, q the bowels and the donge, shal he cary alltogether out of the hoost, in toa cleane place, where y aszshes are poured out, & shal burne it vpon wodd with fyre.

Whan the whole cogregacion of Israel syn- neth thorow ignoraüce, q the dede be hyd from théir eyes, so y they do ought agaynst eny of the comaundementes of the LORDE, which they shulde not do, q come afterwarde to the knowlege of the synne that they haue
Leuit. 17. d. and 19. f. 

| « Leuit. 7. e. * Gen. 9. a. 

Chap. iiij. done, they shal bringe a yonge bullocke for a synofferynge, and set him before y dore of
Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the Elders of the congregacion shall laye their handes vpon his heade before the LORDE, q kyll ý bul- locke before the LORDE. And y prest y is anoynted shal brynge of y bullockes bloude in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse, q dyppe ther in with his fynger, and sprenkle therwith seuen tymes before the LORDE, eue before the vayle of the Holy. And shall put of the bloude vpon the hornes of the altare, y stondeth before the LORD Ein the Tabernacle of wytnesse: q all y other bloude shal he poure vpo the botome of y altare of burnt- offerynges, y stondeth before the dore of $
Tabernacle of wytnesse. But all his fatt shal he Heue vp, q burne it vpó the altare: q shal do with this bullocke, as he dyd with y bullocke of the synofferinge: ‘Thus the prest shal make an attonement for them, ¢ it shall be forgenen them. And the bullocke shall he brynge without the hoost, and burne him, as he brent y first bullocke. This shalbe y synofferynge of the congregacion.

Whan a prynce synneth, q doth agaynst the comaundement of the LORDE his God, y he ought not to do, « offendeth ignorauntly, q commeth to the knowlege of his synne y he hath done, he shal bringe for his offeringe an he goate without blemysh, q laye his hande vpo the goates heade, q slaye him in y place where ¥ burntofferinges are slayne before y
LORDE. Thē shal ¥ prest take of y bloude of y synofferinge with his fynger, and put it vpon the altare of burntofferynges, q poure the other blonde vpon the botome of the altare of burntofferynges. But all the fat of it shal he burne vpo the altare, like as the fat of the healthofferynge. And so the prest shal make an attonement for his synne, and it shal be forgeuen hin. : |

Wha a soule of ¥ comon people synneth |f ignorauntly, doinge eny thinge agaynst the comaundement of the LORDE, y he ought not to do, q so offendeth, a cómeth to y know- lege of the synne y he hath done, he shal bringe for his offerynge a she goate without blemysh, for the synne y he hath done, and shal laye his hande vpon the heade of the synofferynge, q slaye it in the place of the burntoflerynges. And the prest shall take of

t Leuit. 9, b. * Leui. 16. c. d Exo.29. b. Nu.19.a. 

The th. boke of Moses. 

the bloude with his fynger, q put it vpon the hornes of y altare of burntofferynges, a poure all the bloude vpon the botome of the altare.
But all the fat of it shal he take awaye, like as he taketh awaye the fat of the dead- offerynge, and shal burne it vpon the altare for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE. And so shal the prest make an attonemet for him, and it shal be forgeuen him.

But yf he brynge a lambe for a synofferynge, then let him brynge a female without blemysh, and laye his hande vpon the heade of the synofferynge, q kyll it for a synofferynge, in the place where the burntofferynges are slayne.
And the prest shal take of ¥ bloude with his fynger, q put it vpon the hornes of the altare of burntofferynges, q poure all the bloude vpon the botome of the altare. But all y fatt therof shall he take fro it, like as he dyd the fat of the lambe of the healthofferynge, q shal burne it vpon y altare for the LORDES sacrifice. And so y prest shal make an at- tonement for the synne that he hath done, and it shalbe forgeuen him.

The b. Chapter. 

HAN a soule synneth,^ y he heare a cursynge, and is wytnesse therof, or hath sene it, or knowne it, x telleth it not,’ he is giltie of a trespace. Or whan a soule * toucheth eny vncleane thige, whether it be ¥ carion of an vneleane beast, or catell or worme, x was not awarre of it, he is vneleane, and hath offended. Or whan he toucheth an vncleane man (what vn clennesse so euer a man is defyled withall) t was not awarre of it,
« afterwarde cometh to y knowlege therof, y same hath offended. Or whan a soule sweareth, so y he pronounceth with his mouth to do euell or good (what so euer it be that a man pronounceth with an ooth) q was not awarre of it, q afterwarde cometh to the know- lege therof, he hath offended in one of these.
Now whan itso is, y he hath offended in one of these, q is enfourmed therof, what he hath synned, he shal bringe vnto LORDE for his trespace of this his synne y he hath done, a female from the flocke, either a yewe or à she goate for a synofferynge: so shal the prest make an attonement for him concernynge his synne. +But yf he be not able to brynge a shepe, then let him brynge vnto $ LORDE io ord6dc.

* Leui, 24. c. * Agg. 9. b. 

for his offence that he hath done, two turtill doues or two yonge pigeons: one for a syn- offerynge, the other for a burntofferynge, and brynge them to the prest: Which shall make the first a synofferynge, and fyrst wringe the neck of it, so that he plucke it not cleane of, and sprenkle with the bloude vpo the sydes of the altare, and let the resydue of the bloude blede out vpon the botome of the altare:
This is the synofferynge. As for the other, he shal make it a burntofferynge, after the maner therof. And thus shall the prest make an attonement for him concernynge the synne that he hath done, « it shalbe forgeuen him.
But yf he be not able to brynge two turtill doues or two yonge pigeons, then let him brynge his offerynge for his synne, a tenth deale of an Epha of fyne floure for a syn- offerynge. But he shall put no oyle theron, ner laye frankécense vpon it, for it is a syn- offerynge. And he shal brynge it vnto the prest, q y prest shal take his had full of it for a remembraunce, and burne it vpon the altare for an offerynge vnto the LORDE. This is a synofferinge. And so shal the prest make an attonement for him, concernynge his synne that he hath done, q it shalbe forgeuen him.
And the remnaunt shall be the prestes, like a meatofferynge.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q sayde: Yf a soule trespace, so y thorow ignoraüce he offendeth in any thinge y is halowed vnto the LORDE, he shal brynge his trespaceofferinge vnto the LORDE, euen a ramme from y flocke without blemysh, worth two Syeles of syluer,+ after the Sycle of the
Sanctuary, for a trespace offerynge: and loke what he hath offended in the halowed thinge, he shall make restitucion, q geue the fifth parte more therto. And he shal delyuer it vnto y prest, which shall make an attonement for him with the ramme of the trespace- offeringe, q it shalbe forgeuen him.

Whan a soule synneth, and doth ought agaynst eny cOmaundement of the LORDE, y he shulde not do, q is infourmed therof, he ath trespased, q is giltie of the synne. And he shall brynge from the flocke a ramme with out blemysh (that is worth a trespaceofferinge) vnto the prest, which shal make an attone- ment for him concernynge his ignoraunce which he dyd, and was not awarre, and it

t Leui. 12. d. i Exo. 30. b. 

So. red. 

Fo. rebi. 

i 

a 

B 

shalbe forgeuen him. This is the trespace- offerynge, because he trespaced agaynst the
LORDE. 

And $ LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Whan a soule synneth, q trespaceth agaynst the LORDE, so that he denyeth vnto his neghboure that which he gaue him to kepe, or that was put vnder his hande, or that he hath violently taken awaye, or gotten vnrighteously, or founde that was lost, and denyeth it with a false ooth, what so euer it be, wherin a man synneth agaynst his neghboure. Now whan it commeth so to passe, “that he syuneth after this maner, q trespaceth, he shal restore agayne that he toke violently awaye, or gat wrongeously, or that was geuen him to kepe, or that he hath
|founde, or what so euer it be aboute y which he hath sworne falsely, he shal restore it againe whole alltogether, and geue the fifth parte more therto, euen to him that it belonged vnto, the same daye that he geueth his tres- pace offerynge. But for his trespace he shall brynge for the LORDE (euen vnto the prest) a ramme from the flocke without blemysh, that is worth a trespace offerynge. Then shall the prest make an attonement for him before the LORDE, and all that he hath synned in, shalbe forgeuen him.

The bi, Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: Commaunde Aaron and his sonnes, and saye: This is the lawe of the burntofferynge. The burntofferynge shall burne vpon the altare all night vntyll the mornynge. But the fyre of the altare onely shal burne theron. ^And y prest shal put on his lynen albe, and his lynen breches vpon his flesh, and shal take vp the aszshes, that the fyre of the burntofferynge vpon the altare hath made, and shall poure them besyde the altare. Then shall he put of his rayment, and put on other rayment, and cary out the aszshes without the hoost, in to a cleane place.
The fyre vpon the altare shal burne, and neuer go out. The prest shal kyndle wod theron euery mornynge, and dresse the burnt- offerynge vpon it, and burne the fat of the deed offerynges theron. The fyre shall euer

burne vpon the altare, and neuer go out. 
*And this is the lawe of the meatofferynge, a Num. 5. a.

? Exo. 28. g. — * Num. 15. a. Leui. 2. a. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

which Aarons sonnes shall offre before the 
LORDE vpon the altare. One of them shall Heue his handfull of fyne floure of ý meatofferynge, and of the oyle, and all the frankencense that lyeth vpon the meatoffer- ge, and shall burne it vpon the altare for a swete sauoure a remembraunce vnto the
LORDE. As forthe remnaunt, Aaron and his sonnes shal eate it, and vnleuended shal they eate it in the holy place, namely, in the courte of the Tabernacle of witnesse. With leue shal they not bake their porcion, which I haue geuen them of my offerynges. It shalbe vnto them most holy, as the synofferynge and trespace offerynge. All the males amonge the children of Aaron shall eate of it. Let this be a perpetuall lawe for youre posterities in the sacrifices of the LORDE. No man shall touch it, excepte he be consecrated.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: This shalbe the offerynge of Aaron and of his sonnes, which they shall offre vnto the LORDE in the daie of their anoyntinge.
The tenth parte of an Epha of fyne floure for a meatotterynge daylie, the one half parte in the mornynge, the other half parte at euen.
In the panne with oyle shall thou make it, and brynge it fryed, and in peces shalt thou offer it for the swete sanoure of the LORDE.
And the prest which amonge his sonnes shalbe anoynted in his steade, shall do this. This is a perpetuall dewtye vnto the LORDE. It shal be burnt alltogether: for all the meat- offerynges of the prest shalbe consumed with the fyre, and not be eaten.

And y. LORDE talked with Moses, and| Ð sayde: Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, andsaye: This is the lawe of the synofferynge:
In the place where thou slayest y burntoffer- ynge, shalt thou slaye the synofferynge also before the LORDE. This is most holy.
*The prest that offereth the synofferynge, shal eate it in the holy place, in the courte of
ý Tabernacle of wytnesse. No man shal touch y flesh therof, excepte he be halowed.
And yf eny garment be sprenkled with the bloude of it, it shalbe washe in the holy place.
And tthe earthé pot that it is sodden in, shalbe broken. But yf it be a brasen pot, it shalbe scoured, and résed with water. Ally males amonge the prestes shall eate therof, for it is most holy. Notwithstondinge all $

* Ose. 4. b. t Leui. 11. e. and 15. b. 

Chap. bi, 

Chap. bij. 

synofferynge whose blonde is brought in to the 
Tabernacle of wytuesse to make an attone- ment, shall not be eaten, but burnt with fyre.

The bij. Chapter. 
ND this is the lawe of the trespace- offerynge, and it shal be most holy. In the place where the burntofferynge is slayne, shall the trespaceofferynge be slayne also, q there shall of his bloude be sprenkled rounde aboute vpon the altare. And all his fat shalbe offered: the rompe and the fat y couereth the bowels, the two kydneys with the fat is theron vpon the loynes, and the net on the leuer vpon the kydneys also. And the prest shal burne it vpon the altare for an offerynge vnto the LORDE. This is a trespace- offerynge.

it in the holy place, for it is most holy: euen as the synofferynge, so shall the trespace- offerynge be also, they shall both haue one lawe: and it shal be the prestes, that recon- cyleth ther with. Loke which prest offereth eny mans burntofferynge, the skynne of the same burntoffrynge that he hath offered, shalbe his. And euery meatofferynge that is baken in the ouen, rosted vpon the gredyron, or fryed in the panne, shal be the prestes y offereth it. And enery meatofferynge y is myngled with oyle, or drye, shal belonge vnto all Aaron sonnes, vnto one as well as another.
3| And this is $ lawe of the healthofferinge, that is offered vnto the LORDE, * Yf they wyll offre a sacrifice of thankesgeuynge, then shal they offre vnlenéded cakes mégled with oyle, and swete wafers straked ouer with oyle, and fryed cakes of fyne floure mengled with oyle. This offerynge also shall they brynge vpon a cake of leuended bred, to the thank- offerynge of his healthofferynge: and of them all he shall offre one for an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE. And it shalbe the prestes, that sprenkleth the bloude of the health- offerynge. And the flesh of the thankofferynge in his healthofferynges, shalbe eaten the same daye that it is offred, and there shall nothinge be left ouer vntyll the mornynge.

And whether it be a vowe or a fre wyl- offerynge, tit shalbe eaten the same daye that it is offred: yf onght be left ouer vntyll the mornynge, yet maye it be eaten. But loke

* Psal.115.2. tLeui.19.b. ^ Leui.3.c. tGen.9.a. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

All the males amonge the prestes shal eate |. 

what remayneth vnto y thirde daye of the flesh that is offred, it shalbe brent with the fyre. And yf eny man vpon the thirde daie eate of y offred flesh of his healthofferynge, he shall not be accepted that offred it. Nether shall it be rekened vnto him, but it shalbe refused. And loke which soule eateth therof, the same is giltie of a mysdede.

And the flesh that toucheth eny vncleane thinge, shal not be eaten, but burnt with the fyre. But who so euer is cleane of body, shal eate of the flesh: and the soule that eateth of y flesh of ¥ healthofferynge which belongeth vnto the LORDE, his vnclennes be vpon him, and he shalbe roted out from amonge his people.

And whan a soule toucheth eny vneleane thinge, whether it be an vncleane man, catell, or eny other abhominacion that is, and eateth of the flesh of the burntofferynge, that be- longeth vnto the LORDE, the same shalbe roted out from amonge his people.

And the LORDE talketh with Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, ¢ saye: “Ye shall eate no fat of oxen, lambes, and goates: neuerthelesse the fat of it that dyeth alone, and of soch as is torne of wylde beastes, that maye ye occupye to all maner of vses, but ye shall not eate it. .

For who so ener eateth the fat of y beest that is geuen vnto the LORDE for an offer- ynge, the same soule shalbe roted out from his people. Morouer, t ye shall eate no bloude, nether of catell, ner of foules, where so ener ye dwell. What soule eateth eny bloude, the same shall be roted out from his people.

And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: Who so wyll offre his healthofferynge vnto the LORDE, the same shall also brynge with all, that belongeth vnto y healthofferynge for the LORDE. But he shall brynge it with his hande for the offerynge of the
LORDE: namely the fat vpon the brest shall he brynge, with the brest, to be a Waueoffer- ynge before the LORDE. And the prest shall burne the fat vpon the altare, and the brest shalbe Aarons and his sonnes.

And the right shulder shal they geue vnto the prest for a gift of their healthofferynges.
And loke which of Aarons sonnes offreth the bloude of the healthofferynges, and the fat,

Leui. 3. c. 17. c. 19, £. Deut. 19. b. 1 Re. 14. e. 

Fo. rby. 

€ 

D 

So. rhii. the same shall hane the right shnlder for his parte. *For the Wauebrest and the Heue- shulder haue I taken of the children of Israel, and of their healthofferynges, and haue geuen them vnto Aaron the prest and vnto his sonnes for a perpetuall dewtye.

This is the anoyntinge of Aaron and of his sonnes, of the offerynges of the LORDE, in the daye wha Moses presented them to be prestes vnto the LORDE, what tyme as the
LORDE commaunded (in the daye whan he anoynted them) to be geuen them of the children of Israel for a perpetual] dewtye, and vnto all their posterities. And this is the lawe of the burntofferynge, of the meatoffer- ynge, of the synofferynge, of the trespace offerynge, of the offerynge of consecracion, and of the healthofferynges, which the
LORDE commaunded Moses vpon mount 
Sinai, in the daye whan he gaue him in commauüdement vnto the children of Israel, to offre their offerynges vnto y LORDE in the wyldernesse of Sinai.

The biij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q sayde: Take Aaron and his sonnes with him, q their vestimentes, t the anoyntinge oyle, tand a bullocke for a synofferynge, two rammes, and a maunde with vnleuended bred, and call the whole congregacion together, before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
Moses dyd as the LORDE commaunded him, and gathered the congregacion together vnto the dore of $ Tabernacle of wytnesse, and sayde vnto them : This is it, that the LORDE

hath commaunded to do. 

And he toke Aaron and his sonnes, and waszshed them with water, and put the albe vpo him, and girde him with the girdell, and put vpon him the yalowe tunycle, and put the ouerbody cote vpon him, and girde him vpon the ouerbody cote, q put the brestlappe theron, and in ¥ brestlappe light and perfectnesse :
And set the myter vpon his heade. And vpon the myter euen aboue his foreheade, put he a plate of golde on the holy crowne: as y
LORDE comaunded Moses. 

And Moses toke the tanoyntinge oyle, q anoynted the Habitacion, and all that was therin, and consecrated it, and sprenkled ther- with seue tymes vpon the altare, and anoynted

* Num. 18. c. + Exo. 29. a. 

1 Exo. 30. d. $ Psal. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

the altare with all his vessels, the laner with his fote, that it might be consecrated: Sand poured the anoyntinge oyle vpon Aarons heade, and anoynted him, y he might be consecrated.

And he brought Aarons sonnes, and put albes vpon them, and girde them with the girdle, and put bonettes vpon their heades, as the LORDE commaunded him.

And he caused bringe a bullocke for a syn offrynge. And Aaron with his sonnes layed their handes vpon his heade, and then was he slayne. And Moses toke of the bloude, q put it vpon the hornes of the altare rounde aboute with his fynger, and purified the altare, and poured the bloude vpon the botome of the altare, and consecrated it, that he might reconcyle it. And toke all the fat vpo the bowels, the nett vpon the leuer, and the two kydneys with the fat theron, and burned it vpon the altare. But the bullocke with his skynne, flesh, q donge, burned he with fyre without the hoost, las the LORDE com- maunded him.

And he brought a ramme for a burnt- 

offerynge. And Aaron with his sonnes layed their handes vpon his heade, q then was he slayne. And Moses sprenkled of y bloude vpon the altare rounde aboute, hewed the ramme in peces, and burnt the heade, the peces, and the fatt. And waszshed the bowels and the legges with water, and so burnt y whole ramme vpo the altare. ‘This was a burnt offerynge for a swete sauoure, euen a sacrifice vnto the LORDE, fas the LORDE commaunded him.
He brought also the other ramme of the offerynge of the cousecracion. And Aaron with his sonnes layed their hades vpon his heade, and then was it slayne. And Moses toke of his bloude, and put it vpon the typpe of Aarons right eare, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, and vpon the greate too of his right fote.

And he brought Aarons sonnes, and put of the bloude vpon the typpe of the right eare of them, and vpon y thombes of their righte handes, and vpon the greate toes of their righte fete, and ponred the resydue of the bloude vpon the altare rounde aboute. And he toke the fat and the rompe, “and all the fat vpon the bowels, and the nett vpon the

132.0. ||Exo.99. b. T Exo.29.c. ° Exo, 29. d. 

Chap. bii. 

€ 

Chap. ir. 

leuer, the two kydneys with the fat theron, and the righte shulder. And out of the maunde of vnleuended bred before the LORDE, he toke an vnleuéded cake, and a cake of oyled bred, and a wafer, and layed them vpo the fat, and vpon the right shulder, and put allto- gether vpon the handes of Aaron and of his sonnes, and waned it for a Waueofferynge before the LORDE.

d| And afterwarde toke he all agayne from 

their hondes, and burned them on the altare, euen vpon the burntofferinge: for it is an offerynge of consecracion for a swete sauoure, euen a sacrifice vnto y LORDE. And Moses toke the brest, and “waned it a Waneofferynge before the LORDE, of the ramme of the offerynge of consecracion: the same was Moses parte, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
And Moses toke of y anoyntinge oyle, q of the bloude vpon the altare, q sprenkled it vpon Aaron q his vestimentes, vpon his sonnes q vpon their vestimentes, and so cosecrated
Aaron ç his vestimentes, his sonnes and their vestimentes with him.

And he sayde vnto Aaron ¢ his sonnes: 
Seeth y flesh before the dore of the Taber- nacle of wytnesse, q there eate it, q the bred in y maunde of the cosecracion offeringes, as it is cómaunded me, q sayde: Aaron q his sonnes shall eate it. As for y which re- mayneth of the flesh q bred, ye shal burne it with fyre. And in seue dayes shall ye not departe from y dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, vntyll the daye, y the dayes of youre consecracion offeryuges be at an ende: for seuc dayes must youre handes be conse- crated, as it is come to passe this daye: The
LORDE hath comaunded to do it, that ye might be reconcyled. And ye shal tary before the Tabernacle of wytnesse daye and night seuen dayes longe, q shal kepe y watch of y
LORDE, that ye dye not, for thus am comaunded. And Aaron with his sonnes dyd all, that y LORDE commaunded by Moses.

The ir. Chapter. 
ND vpon the eight daye Moses called 
Aaron and his sonnes, and the Elders in Israel, and sayde vnto Aaron: Take vnto the a yonge calfe for a synofferinge, and a ramme for a burntofferynge, both without blemysh, and brynge them before the LORDE,

4 Exo. 29. e. * Heb. 5. b. and 7. d. b Leui. 4. a. 

The iij. boke of Moses. 

and speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye: Take an he goate for a synofferynge: and a calf, and a shepe, both of a yeare olde, and without blemysh for a burntofferynge : and an oxe and a ramme for an health- offerynge, that we maye offre before the
LORDE: and a meatofferynge myngled with oyle. For to daye shal the LORDE appeare vnto you.

And they toke what Moses commaunded before ¥ dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the whole cdgregacion came nye, and stode before the LORDE. Then sayde
Moses: This is it, which the LORDE com- maunded that ye shulde do, and then shall the glory of y LORDE appeare vnto you.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: Go vnto y altare, and *offre thy synofferynge and thy burntofferynge, and make an attonemét for the and for the people. Then offre the peoples offerynge, and reconcyle them also, as the
LORDE hath commannded. 

^ And Aaron wente vnto the altare, and slewe y calfe for his synofferynge, q his sonnes
Bronght the bloude vnto him. And he dypte his fynger in the bloude, and put it vpon the hornes of the altare, and poured ¥ bloude vpon y botome of the altare. As for the fat and the kydneys q the net vpon the leuer of the synofferynge, he burnt the vpon the altare, as the LORDE cómaunded Moses. The flesh also and the hyde burnt he with fyre without the hoost.

Afterwarde he slewe the burntofferinge, and Aarons sonnes brought the bloude vnto him, q he sprenkled it rounde abonte vpon the altare. And they brought him the burnt- offerynge in peces, q the heade : q he burnt it vpon the altare. And he washed the bowels and the legges, and burnt them aboue vpon the burntofferynge on the altare.

‘Then brought he the offerynge of the people, and toke the goate, that synofferynge of the people, and slewe it, and made a syn- offerynge therof, as of the fyrst. And bronght the burntofferynge, and dyd as the lawe is: and bronght the meatofferynge, and toke his handfull, ^and burnt it vpon the altare, besyde ithe burntofferinge of the mornynge.

Afterwarde slewe he the oxe and the ramme for the healthofferynge of the people. And his sonnes brought him the bloude, which he

* Leui. 4. c. 

d Leuit. 2. a. 

So. reir. 

B 

fo. t. 

sprenkled vpon the altare roundeaboute. But| the fat of the oxe a of the ramme, the rompe, and the fat that couereth the bowels, v the kydneyes, q the net vpon the leuer, all soch fat laied they vpon the brest, and burnt the fat vpon the altare. But the brest and the
"right shulder waued Aaron for a Waue- offerynge before the LORDE, asthe LORDE commaunded Moses.

And Aaron lift vp his hade ouer the people, and blessed them, and came downe from the worke of the synofferynge, burntofferynge, and healthofferynge. And Moses and Aaron wente in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And whan they came out agayne, they blessed the peo- ple. Then appeared the glory of the LORDE vnto all the people. For there came *a fyre from the LORDE, and vpon the altare it consumed the burutofferynge and the fat.
Whan all the people sawe that, they reioysed, and fell vpon their faces.

The r. Chapter. 

ND jy sonnes of Aaron, Nadab and 
Abihu, ^toke ether of the his censoure, q put fyre therin, q layed incense vpon it, and brought straunge fyre before the LORDE, t which he commaüded them not. Then wente there out a fyre from y LORDE, and con- sumed them, so that they dyed before the
LORDE. ‘Then sayde Moses vnto Aaron: 
This is it, that the LORDE sayde: I wil be sanctified vpoó them that come nye me, and before all the people wil I be glorified. And
Aaron helde his peace. 

Moses called Misael and Elzaphan the sonnes of Vsiel Aarons vncle, and sayde vnto them: Go to, and cary youre brethren out of the Sanctuary, without the hoost. And they wente, and caried them forth in their albes without the hoost, as Moses sayde.

Then sayde Moses vnto Aaron q to his sonnes Eleasar and Ithamar: + Ye shall not vneouer youre heades, ner rente youre clothes, that ye dye not, and the wrath come vpon the whole congregacion: Let youre brethré of the whole house of Israel bewepe this burnynge, which the LORDE hath done. As for you, ye shall not go out from the dore of the Taber- nacle of wytnesse, lest ye dye : forthe anoynt-

*1 Par. 7.a. 2 Mac, 2. b. ^ Leui, t Exo. 30. b. 1 Deut. 14. a.

a Leuit. 7. d. 
16.3. Num. 26. g. 

The tj. boke of Moses, 

Chap. 

inge oyle of the LORDE is vpon you. And they dyd as Moses sayde.

The LORDE spake vnto Aaron, q sayde: 
‘Thou q thy sonnes with the shal drynke no wyne ner stronge drynke, whan ye go in to the Tabernacle of wytnesse: that ye dye not.
Let this be a perpetuall lawe vnto all youre posterities: y ye maye haue knowlege to discerne, what is holy and vnholy, what is cleane q vncleane: q that ye maye teach the children of Israel all the lawes, which the LORDE hath spoken vnto you by
Moses. 

And Moses sayde vnto Aaron, and vnto 
Eleasar and Ithamar his sonnes that were left: Take the remnaunt of the meatofferynge in the sacrifices of LORDE, and eate it without leuen besyde the altare, for it is most holy, euen in the holy place shal ye eate it.
For it is thy dutye and thy sonnes dutye in the sacrifices of the LORDE: for thus am I commaunded. But the Wauebrest and the
Heueshulder shalt thou eate, and thy sonnes and thy doughters with the in a cleane place.
For this dutye is geuen vnto the and thy children in the deedofferynges of the children of Israel. For the Heueshulder and the
Wanebrest to the offerynges of the fat, shalbe brought in, that they maye be waued for a
Waueofferinge before the LORDE. Ther- fore is it thine and thy childrens for a perpe- tuall dutye, as the LORDE commaunded.

And Moses sought for the goate of the synofferynge, and founde it burnt. And he was angrie at Eleasar and Ithamar y sonnes of Aaron, which were left alyne, and sayde:
Wherfore haue ye not eaten the synofferynge in the holy place? for it is most holy, « he hath geuen it you, that ye might beare y synne of the cogregacion, to make agremet for them before the LORDE. Beholde, the bloude of it came not in to the Sanctuary:
Ye shulde haue eaten it in the Sanctuary, as 
I was commaunded. 

Aaron sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, this daye haue they offred their synofferynge q their burntofferynge before y LORDE. And itis chaunsed me after this maner. And shulde
I eate of the synofferynge to daye, q be mery before the LORDE? Whan Moses herde that, he was content.

* Eze. 44. d. Tit. I. b. 

Tere. 16. a. 4 Leui. 2. 8, 

p 

Ed 

Chap. rt. 

The ri. Chapter. 

ND $ LORDE talked with Moses q 
A Aaron q sayde: Speake vnto y childré of Israel, and saye: ° These are the beestes which ye shal eate amoge all y beestes vpo earth: What so euer hath hoffe, q deuydeth it in to two clawes, q cheweth cud amonge the beestes, that shal ye eate. But loke what cheweth cud gq hath hoffe, t deuydeth it not, as the Camell, the same 1s vncleane vnto you, q ye shal not eate it. The Conyes chewe cud, but they deuyde not the hoffe in to two clawes, therfore are they vncleane vnto you.
The Hare cheweth cud also, but deuydeth not $ hoffe in to two clawes, therfore is he vncleane vnto you. And the Swyne deuydeth y hoffe in to two clawes, but cheweth not the cud, therfore is it vncleane vnto you. Of the flesh of these sliall ye not eate, ner touch their carcases, for they are vncleane vnto you.

These shall ye eate of all that are in the waters: What so euer hath fynnes and scales in the waters, sees q ryuers, that shal ye eate.
But what so euer hath not fynnes and scales in the sees aud ryuers, amonge all y moue in the waters, q of all that lyue in the waters, it shalbe an abhominacion vnto you, so that ye eate not of their flesh, and that ye abhorre their earcases. For all that haue not fynnes q scales in the waters, shall ye abhorre.
€| And these shal ye abhorre amonge y foules, so that ye eate them not: The Aegle, the
Goshauke, the Cormoraunte, the Vultur, ¥ 
Kyte, and all his kynde, and all Rauens wit their kynde: the Estrich, y Nighterow, the
Cocow, the Sparow hauke with his kynde, the litle Oule, the Storke, the greate Oule, y
Backe, the Pellycane, the Swanne, the Pye, the Heron, ¥ Iaye with his kynde, the Lap- wynge, and y Swalowe. And what so euer crepeth amonge the foules, and goeth vpon foure fete, shalbe an abhominacio vnto you.
Yet these shal ye eate of the foules that crepe and go vpon foure fete: euen those that haue no knyes aboue vpon y legges, to hoppe withall vpon earth. Of these maye ye eate, as there is the Arbe with his kynde, and the
Selaam with his kynde, q the Hargol with his kynde, q the Hagab with his kynde. But what so euer els hath foure fete amonge the foules, it shalbe an abhomiuacion vnto you,

a Deu. 14.a. Áct. 10. b. è Leui. 5. a. Agg. 2. b. 

The iij. boke of Moses. 

and ye shal take it for vncleane. ^ Who so euer toucheth the carcase of soch, shall be vncleane vntill $ euen: and who so euer beareth the carcase of eny of these, shall wash his clothes, and shalbe vneleane vntyll the euen.

Therfore euery beest that hath hoffe, and deuydeth it not in to two clawes, q cheweth not cud, shalbe vncleane vnto you. Who so euer toucheth soch, shalbe vncleane. And what so euer goeth vpon handes amonge jy beestes that go vpon foure fete, shalbe vn- cleane vnto you. Who so euer toucheth the carcases of the, shalbe vncleane vntyll euen.
And he y beareth their carcase, shall wash his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the eu:
For soch are vncleane vnto you. 

These shalbe vncleane vnto you also, amonge the beestes that crepe vpon earth:
ý Wesell the Mouse, the "Tode, euery one with his kynde, the Hedgehogge, the Stellio, the Lacerte, the Snale, and the Moule, these are vncleane vnto you amonge all that crepe.
Who so euer toucheth the deed carcase of the, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen. And what so euer eny soch deed carcase falleth vpon, it shalbe vncleane, what so euer vessell of wodd it be, or rayment, or skynne, or bagge. And euery vessell that eny thinge is occupyed withall, shalbe put in the water, and is vncleane vntyll the euen, and then shal it be cleane. “All maner of earthen vessell that eny soch carcase falleth in to, shal all be vncleane that therin is, q ye shal breake it.
All meate which is eate, that eny soch water commeth in to, is vneleane: q all maner of drynke that is dronké in all maner of soch vessell is vncleane. And what so euer eny soch carcase falleth vpo, it shalbe vneleane, whether it be ouen or kettell, so shal it be broke, for it is vneleane, and shalbe vncleane vnto you. Neuertheles the fountaynes, welles, t poundes of water are cleane. But who so euer toucheth their carcases, is vncleane.

So. rt, 

E 

And though the deed carcase of eny soch|dF 

fell vpon the sede that is sowne, yet is it cleane. Dut whan there is water poured vpon the sede, and afterwarde eny soch deed car- case falleth theron, then shall it be vncleane vnto you.

Whan a beest dyeth that ye maye eate, he that toucheth the deed carcase therof, is

* Leui. 6. d. and 15. b. 

| ffo. tij. vucleane vntyll euen. Who so eateth of eny soch carcase, shall wash his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. Likewyse he that beareth eny soch carcase, shal wash his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.

What so euer erepeth vpon earth, shall be an abhominaeion vnto you, and shall not be eaten. And what so euer crepeth vpon y bely, or all that goeth vpon foure or mo fete, amoge all that crepeth vpon earth, shall ye not eate, for it shalbe an abhominacion vnto you. Make not youre soules abhominable, and defyle you not in them, to stayne youre selues: for I am the LORDE youre God. " Ther- fore shal ye sanctifie youre selues, that ye maye be holy, for I am holy. And ye shal not defyle youre selues on eny maner of crepynge beest, that crepeth vpon earth: for
Iam the LORDE, which brought you out of the londe of Egipte, that I might be youre
God : therfore shal ye be holy, for I am holy. 

This is the lawe ouer y beestes and foules, q all maner of soules of crepynge beestes in the waters, and all maner of soules y crepe vpon earth: that ye maie knowe to discerne what is vncleane q cleane, and what maner of beestes are to be eaten, and which are not to be eaten.

The rij. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto the children of
Israel, and saye: Whan a woman hath con- ceaued, and beareth a manchilde, she shalbe vneleane seuen dayes, so longe as she suffreth hir disease, * and in y eight daye shal y flesh of his foreskynne be cut awaie. And she shal byde at home thre and thirtie dayes in $ bloude of hir purifienge: she shal touch no holy thinge, ner come in to y Sactuary, tyll the daies of hir purifienge be out. But yf she beare a maydechilde, thé shal she be vn- cleane two wekes, so longe as she suffreth hir disease, and sixe and thre score daies shall she byde at home in the bloude of hir purifienge. t And whan the dayes of hir purifienge are out, for the sonne or for the doughter, she shal brynge a lambe of one yeare olde for a burntofferynge, and a yonge pigeon or a tur- till doue for a synofferynge to the dore of y
Tabernacle of wytnesse vnto y prest, which shal offre it before the LORDE, and make

"Leui.19.2. 1 Pet. 1. c. * Gene. 17, b. 

The (ij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. rij. an attonemét for her, and so shal she be clensed from her blondyssue. This is the lawe for her that beareth a manchilde or mayde childe.

* But yf she be not able to bringe a shepe, then let hir take two turtill doues, or two yonge pigeons, the one for a burntofferynge, the other for a synofferynge, then shall the prest make an attonement for her, so that she shal be cleane.

The rit}. Chapter. 

Ae y LORDE spake vnto Moses a 

Aaron, q sayde: Whan there ryseth vp eny thinge in the skynne of a mans flesh, whether it be a scabbe or a glistrynge whyte
(as though there wolde be a leprosy in y szkynne of his flesh) he shal be brought vnto
Aaron the prest, or to one of his sonnes amonge y prestes. And whan the prest seyth the plage vpon the szkynne of the flesh, that the hayres are turned to whyte, and it seme deper in that place then the other szkynne of his flesh, then is it surely a leprosy, therfore shal the prest loke vpon him, and iudge him vncleane.

But whan there is eny whyte plecke in the szkynne of his flesh, and yet seme no deper then the other szkynne of the flesh, and the hayres be not turned to whyte, the shal the prest shut him vp seuen dayes, and on y seuenth daye loke vpon him: yf the plage seme vnto him as afore, x hath frett no deper in the szkynue, then shall the prest shut him vp yet seuen dayes mo. And whan he loketh on him agayne vpon the seuenth daye, and fyndeth, that the plage be darkish, and hath frett no deper in the szkynne, thé shal he iudge him cleane, for it is but a szkyrfe, and he shal wash his clothes, q then is he cleane.

But whan the scabbe fretteth farther in the szkynne (after that he is sene of the prest, and iudged cleane) and he be now sene of the prest agayne: whan the prest seyth thé, y the scabbe hath frett farther in the szkynne, he shal iudge him vncleane, for it is surely a leprosy.

Whan a plage of leprosy is vp6 a man, he shalbe brought vnto the prest. Whan he seyth and fyndeth, that there is whyte rysen vp in the szkynne, and the hayre turned vnto whyte, and there be rawe flesh in the sore,

b Leuit. 5. b. 

t Luc. 2. d. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

thé is it surely an olde leprosy in ¥ szkynne of his flesh, therfore shal the prest iudge him vneleane, and not shut him vp, for he is vneleane allready.

But whan the leprosy breaketh out in the szkynne, and couereth the whole szkynne, from the heade vnto the fote, all that the prest can se, So whan the prest loketh vpon it, and fyndeth, that $ leprosy hath couered all the flesh, he shal iudge him cleane, for so moch as it is turned all in to whyte vpon him, for he is cleane.

Notwithstodinge yf there be rawe flesh there, in the daye whan he is loked vpon, the is he vneleane. And whan the prest seyth y rawe flesh, he shall iudge him vncleane, for he is vncleane, q it is surely a leprosye. But yf the rawe flesh chaunge agayne, and be turned in to whyte, then shall he come vnto the prest. And whan the prest loketh vpon him, and fyndeth, that the plage is turned to whyte, he shall iudge him cleane, for he is cleane.

Whan there is a byle in the szkynne of eny mans flesh, and healeth agayne, and after- warde in the same place there aryse vp eny whyte thinge, or a glisterynge whyte somwhat reedish, he shal be sene of the prest. So whan the prest, seyeth, that it appeareth to be lower then the other szkynne, and the hayre turned to whyte, then shall he iudge him vncleane, for it is surely a plage of leprosye broken out of the byle. But yf the prest se and fynde, that the hayres are not whyte, andit not lower then the other szkynne, and is darkysh, he shal shut him vp seuen dayes.

D| Yf it hath frett farther in the szkynne, then 

shal he iudge him vncleane, for it is surely a plage of leprosye. But yf the glysterynge whyte abyde styll, and freate no farther, thé is it but a prynte of the byle, and the prest shal iudge him cleane.

Whan the szkynne of eny mans flesh is hurt with fyre, and the prynte of the burninge be reedysh or whyte, and the prest loketh vpon him, and fyndeth the hayre turned to whyte vpon the mark of the burnynge, q it apeare deper then the other szkynne, thé is there surely a leprosy broke out of y prynte of ¥ burnynge: therfore shal $ prest iudge hi vncleane, for it is a plage of leprosye. But

yf the prest se and fynde, that hayre vpon the prynte of the burninge is not turned vnto

whyte, v is no lower then the other skynne, and is darkish also, he shall shut him vp seuen dayes.

Vind vpon the seuenth daye he shall loke vpon him: yf it hath frett farther in $ skynne, then shal he iudge him vneleane, for it is a leprosy. But yf it stode styll vp6 the mark of the burnynge, and frett no farther in the szkynne, and is darkysh, then is it a sore in y mark of the burnynge, q the prest shal iudge him cleane, for it is but the prynte of the burnynge.

Whan a man or woman is skyruye vpon the heade or beerd, and the prest seyth the mark, and fyndeth that it appeareth deper then the other skynne, and the hayre be there goldé and thynne, then shal he iudge him vncleane: for it 1s a skyrfe of leprosy of the heade or of the beerde. But yf the prest se that y skyrfe apeare no deper the the skynne, and that the hayre is not of a pale coloure, he shall shut him vp seué dayes. And vpo the seuenth daye whan he loketh, and fyndeth, that the skyrfe hath frett no farther, and there be no golden hayre there, and that the skyrfe appeare no deper then the other skynne, then let him be shauen: but so that he shaue not of the scabbe, and the prest shall shut him vp yet seuen dayes moo. And vpon the seuéth daye wha he loketh, and fyndeth that the skyrfe hath frett no farther in the skynne, and that it apeareth no deper then the other skynne, then shall the prest iudge him cleane.
And he shall wash his clothes, for he is cleane. 
But yf the scabbe freate farther in the skynne 
(after y he is iudged cleane) and the prest loketh, and fyndeth, that $ scabbe hath frett farther in the skynne, then shal he seke nomore for golden hayres, for he is vncleane.
Neuerthelesse yf he se that the scabbe stond- eth styll q that pale hayres are there rysen vp, then is y scabbe hole, and he is cleane, therfore shall ¥ prest iudge him to be cleane.

Wha there is eny glisteringe whyte vpo y skynne of the flesh of a man or woman, and the prest seyth there that the glisterynge whyte vanysheth: then is it but a whyte scabbe rysen vp in y skynne, q he is cleane.

Whan the hayres fall out of the heade of a man or a woman, so that he is balde, the same is cleane. Yf they fall out of his fore heade, then is he fore heade balde q cleane. But yf there be a whyte reedish sore in the balde

Fo. cit. 

ffo. riti. The iij. boke of Hoses. 

heade, or balde fore heade, then is there a leprosy rysen vp in the balde heade or balde foreheade: therfore shal ¥ prest loke vpon him.
And whan he fyndeth the whyte reedysh sore rysen vp in his balde heade or balde fore heade, then shal y skynne of the flesh be as leporous, therfore is he a leporous man and vneleane. And the prest shall iudge him vn- cleane, because of y same sore vpo his heade.
&| Who so now is leporous, his clothes shal be rent, and the heade bare, a the lippes moftled, and shall in eny wyse be called vncleane.
^And as longe as the sore is vpon him, he shal be vncleane, dwell alone, and haue his dwellinge without the hoost.

Whan the plage of leprosy is in a cloth, whether it be wollen or lynnen, in the warpe or weft, whether it be lynnen or wollen, or in a skynne, or in eny maner thynge that is made of skynne. And whan y plage is pale or reedish in the cloth or skynne, either in the warpe or weft, or in eny maner thinge that is made of skynne, the same is surely the plage of leprosy, therfore shall the prest loke vpon it. And whan he seyth the plage, he shal shut it vp seuen dayes. And vpon the seuéth daye whan he seyth that y plage hath frett farther in the cloth, in the warpe or weft, in a skynne or in eny maner thinge that is made of skynne, then is it a fretinge plage of leprosye, and is vneleane. And the cloth shal be burnt, either warpe or weft, whether it be wollen or lynné, or eny thynge made of skynne, wherin is eny soch plage. For it is a plage of leprosy, and shal be burnt with fyre.

But yf the prest se that the plage hath frete no farther in y cloth, either in the warpe or weft, or eny thinge made of skynne, then shal he commaunde to wash the thinge that the plage is in, and shall shut 3t vp other seuen dayes. And whan the prest seyth (after that the plage is waszshen) y the plage is not chaüged before his eyes, and hath frett no farther also, yet is it vncleane, a shal be burnt with fyre: for it is depe frete inwarde, and hath made skyrfes. Neuertheles whan the prest seyth that the prynte is vanyshed after the washinge of it, then shall he rente it out of the clothe, and of the skynne, out of the warpe or weft. But yf it appeare eny more in the clothe (either in the warpe, or in the weft) or eny maner thinge made of skynne,

Chap. riiij. then is it a waxinge plage: and with fyre shal it be burnt that eny soch plage is in. As for the cloth, either warpe or weft, or eny maner thynge made of skynne that is waszshé, and the plage be departed from it, it shalbe waszshen once agayne, q then is it cleane.

This is the lawe ouer the plage of leprosy in clothes, whether they be wollen or lynne
(ether in the warpe or in the weft) and in eny maner of thinge made of skynne, to iudge them cleane or vncleane.

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, 

and sayde: This is the lawe ouer y leper, whan he shalbe clensed. ^ * He stall come vnto y prest, and the prest shal go out of the hoost, and loke how the plage of le- prosye is healed vpon the leper. And he shal commaunde him that is to be clensed, to take two lyuinge byrdes, which are cleane, and
Ceder wodd, and purple woll, and ysope: and shall commaunde the one byrde to be kylled in an earthen vessell ouer sprynginge water.
And he shall take the lyuynge byrde with the 
Ceder wodd, the purple woll, and ysope, and dyppe them in the bloude of the slaine byrde vpon the springynge water, and sprenkle it seuen tymes vpon him that must be clensed from ¥ leprosy. And so clense him, and let the lyuynge byrde flye at libertye in tothe felde.

But he that is clensed, shal wash his clothes, and shaue of all his hayre, and bathe him self with water, so is he cleane. Afterwarde let him go in to the hoost, yet shall he tarye without his tent seuen dayes. And vpon the seuenth daye shal he shaue of all y hayre vpon his heade, vpo his beerde, vpon his browes, so that all the hayre be shauen of, and he shall wash his clothes and bathe his flesh in water, then is he cleane.

And vpo the eight daye shal he take two lambes without blemysh, and a shepe of a yeare olde without blemysh, and thre tenth deales of fyne floure for a meatofferynge, myngled with oyle, ¢ a Logg of oyle. "The shall the prest presente him that is clensed and these thinges before the LORDE, before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and shal take ¥ one lambe, and offre it for trespace offerynge, with the Logg of oyle, q shall waue them, before y LORDE, and afterwarde

* Num. 5. a. 4 Re. 15. a. * Mat.8.a. Mar. 1.d. Luc. 5. b. and 17. b. 

Chap. riiij. slaye the lambe, where the synofferynge and burntofferynge are slayne, namely, in the holy place. For as the synofferynge, so is the trespace offerynge the prestes also, for it is most holy.

And the prest shall take of the bloude of 

the trespace offerynge, and put it vpon the typpe of ¥ right eare of him that is clésed, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, and vpon the greate too of his right fote. After- warde shall he take of the oyle out of the
Logg, and poure it in to his awne left hande, and dyppe his right fynger in the oyle that is in his left hande, and sprenkle the oyle with his fynger seuen tymes before the LORDE.
As for the remnaunt of the oyle in his hande, he shall put it vpon the typpe of the right eare of him that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, q vpon the greate too of his right fote, euen aboue vpon the bloude of the trespace offerynge. But the remnaunt of the oyle in his hande, shall he poure vpon the heade of him that is clensed, and make an attonement for him before the
LORDE. And he shall make the syn- offerynge, and reconcyle him that is clésed, because of his vnelennesse. And afterwarde shall he sleye the burntofferynge, and shal offre it vpon the altare with the meatofferynge, and make an attonement for him, q than is he cleane. ,
B| But yf he be poore, and getteth not so moch with his hande, then let him take one lambe for a trespaceofferynge to waue it, to make an attonement for him, and a tenth deale of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge, and a Logg of oyle, « two turtyll doues, or two yonge pigeons which he is able to get with his hande, let the one be a synofferynge, the other a burntofferynge: and let him brynge them vpon the eight daye of his clensynge vnto the prest before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse before the
LORDE. 

Then shall the prest take the lambe for the synofferynge, and the Logg of oyle, and shall waue them all before the LORDE, and sley the lambe of the trespace offerynge : and take of i bloude of the same trespaceofferynge, and put it vpon the typpe of the righte eare of him that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, and vpon the greate too of his righte fote, and poure of the oyle in to his

The (ij. boke of Hoses. 

Ffo. rb.] 

awne lefte hande, and with his right fynger sprenkle the oyle that is in his left hande, seuen tymes before the LORDE.

As for the remnaunt of the oyle in his hande, he shal put it vpon the typpe of the right eare of him that 1s clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right hande, q vpon the greate too of his right fote, euen abone vpo ¥ bloude of ý trespaceofferynge. The other oyle in his hade shal he poure vpo ý heade of him y is clensed, to make an attonement for him before the LORDE. And afterwarde of the one of the turtill doues or yonge pigeons
(acordinge as his handes are able to get) he shal make a synofferynge, of $ other a burnt- offerynge, with the meatofferynge: and so shal the prest make an attonemét for him that is clensed before the LORDE.

Let this be the lawe for the leper, which is not able with his hande to get, that belongeth vnto his clensynge.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses and| JF 
Aaron, and sayde: Whan ye are come in to the lande of Canaan, which I geue you to possesse: and yf there happen a plage of le- prosy in any house of youre possession, then shal he that owneth the house, come and tell the prest, and saye: Me thynke there is as it were a plage of leprosy in my house. Then shal the prest commaunde to rydde all thynge out of the house or euer the prest go in to se y plage, lest all that is in the house be made vneleane. — Afterwarde shall ¥ prest go in, to se the plage.

Now whan he loketh, and fyndeth, y there be holowe strakes yalowe or reedish in the walles of the house, q they seme to be lower then the wall besyde, then shall he go out at the dore of the house, and shut vp the house for senen dayes. And vpon the seuenth daye whan he commeth, and seyth that the plage hath fretten farther in the walles of the house, thé shall he commaunde to breake out the stones wherin the plage is, q to cast thé in a foule place without the cite, a the house to be scraped within rounde aboute, and the dust y is scraped of, to be poured without y cite in an vncleane place, q to take other stones, and put them in the place of the other, and to take other playster, and playster the house.

Whan the plage then commeth agayne, and breaketh forth in the house, after y the stones are broke out, the playster eed. of, and the

17 

fo. rot. 

house playsterd of the new, thé shal the prest go in: and whan he seyth that the plage hath fretten farther in the house, then is there surely a fretinge leprosy in the house, and it is vncleane : therfore shal the house be broken downe, both the stones, and ¥ tymber and all the dnst of the house, and Ta be caried out of the cite in to an vneleane place. And who so goeth in to the house, whyle it is shut vp, is vneleane vntyll y euen. And he y lyeth therin, or eateth therin, shal wash his clothes.

But yf the prest se (wha he goeth in) that this plage hath frett no farther in the house, after that the house is new playsterd, the shal he iudge it to be cleane, for the plage is healed. And to a synofferinge for the house, he shal take two byrdes, Ceder wodd, ¢ purple woll, and ysope, and slaye the one byrde in an erthen vessell vpon sprynginge water, and shall take the Ceder wodd, the purple woll, the ysope, and the lyuinge byrde, œ dyppe them in the bloude of the slayne byrde vpon the sprynginge water, and sprenkle the house with all seue tymes: and so shal he purifie the house with the bloude of the byrde, with the springingc water, with the lyuinge byrde, with the Ceder wodd, with the ysope, aud with the purple woll. And the lyuynge byrde shall he let flye at libertye out of the towne in to the felde, v make an attonement for the house, and then is it cleane.

'This is the lawe ouer all maner plage of leprosye q skyrfe, ouer y leprosye of clothes and of houses, ouer sores, scabbes, and glis- terynge whyte, that it maye be knowne, whan eny thinge is vncleane or cleane. This is y lawe of leprosy.

The yb. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE talked with Moses and 
Aaron, and sayde: Speake to the children of Israel, and saie vnto him: Whan a man hath a runnynge yssue from out of his flesh, ¥ same is vncleane: but thé is he vn- cleane by the reason of this yssue, whan his flesh is fretten of ý yssue or wounde. Euery hed where on he lyeth, ¢ what so euer he

sytteth vpon, shalbe vneleane. 

And he that toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.

And he y sytteth where he sat, shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euc. Who so

The tj. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rb. 

toucheth his flesh, shall wash his clothes, q bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the even. Whan he spytteth vpon him that is cleane, $ same shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, zt be vncleane vntyll the euen.

And the saddell and what so euer he rydeth| 35 vpo, shalbe vncleane. And who so euer toucheth eny thinge that hath bene vnder him, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen. And who so beareth eny soch, shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. And whom so euer he touch- eth, and washeth not his handes first, the same shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. *Whan he toucheth an erthen vessell, it shal be broken: but the treen vessell shal be rensed with water. And wha he is cleane of his yssue, he shal nombre vij. dayes, after y he is made cleane, « wash his clothes, q bathe him self with sprynginge water, thé is he cleane. And vpon the eight daye shal he take two turtill doues or two yonge pigeos, and brynge them before the LORDE before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and geue them vnto the prest. And the prest shal make of the one a synofferinge, of the other a burntofferynge, and make an attone- ment for him before the LORDE, as con- cernynge his yssue.

Whan a mans sede departeth from him in slepe, the same shal bathe all his flesh with| water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. And; all clothes, and euery skynne that is stained with soch sede, shall he wash with water, q be vneleane vntyll the euen. A woman, by whom soch one lyeth, shall bathe hir self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.

Whan a woman hath the bloude yssue of hir flesh, she shalbe put a parte vij. daies in to a sundrie place. Who so euer toucheth her, shal be vncleane vntyll the euc. And all that she lyeth vpon (as longe as she is put aparte) shalbe vncleane. And that she syt- teth vpo, shalbe vncleane. And who so euer toucheth hir bed, shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. And who so euer toucheth eny maner thinge that she hath sytten vpo, shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be vncleane vntyll the eué.

* Leuit. 6. d. and 11. c. 

X 

Chap. rbi. 
“And yf a man lye with her (whyle she is put a parte) he shalbe vneleane seuen dayes,' and the bed that he laye vpon, shalhe vncleane.
? But whan a woman hath hir blonde yssue a longe season, not onely at the tyme of hir natural course, but also out of the tyme of hir naturall course, then shall she be vneleane so longe as she hath the yssue: eué as she is at the tyme whan she is put aparte, so shall she be vncleane here also. What so euer she lyeth vpon all the tyme of hir yssue, shalbe as hir bed, whan she is put aparte. And all that she sytteth vpon, shalbe vncleane, as is hir vnelennesse, whan she is put aparte. Who so euer toucheth eny of them, shal be vncleane, and shal wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, t be vncleane vntyll the euen.
But yf she be cleane of hir yssue, thé shal she nombre seuen dayes, afterwarde shall she be cleane : and vpon the eight daye shall she take two turtill doues, or two yonge pigeons, and brynge them vnto the prest before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the prest shall make of the one a synofferynge, of the other a burntofferynge, and make an attonement for her before the LORDE, as concernynge the yssue of hir vnclennesse.
Thus shal ye se that the childre of Israel kepe them selues from their vnelénesse, that they dye not in their vnclennesse, whan they defyle my habitacion, which is amoge you.
This is the lawe ouer him that hath a run- nynge sore, q him whose sede departeth from him in slepe, so that he is vncleane therof.
And ouer her that hath hir bloude yssue, and who so euer hath a runnynge sore, whether it be man or woman, and whan a man lyeth with her that is vncleane.

The ybi. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses 
(after that Aarons two sonnes were deed, * whan they offered beforethe LORDE q sayde: Speake vnto Aaron thy brother, y he go not at all tymes in to the ynnermer
Sanctuary, within the vale before the Mercy- seate, which is vpon the Arke, y he dye not: tfor I wyll appeare in a cloude vpon y
Mercyseate. But herewithall shal he go in, euen with a yonge bullocke for a synofferynge, and with a ramme for a burntofferynge, and shal put on the holy lynnen albe, and haue

a Leui, 18. c. > Matt. 9. c. * Leu. 10. a. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

lynnen breches vpon his flesh, and gyrde him with a lynné girdell, and haue the lynnen myter vpon his heade.

For these are y holy garmentes: q he shal bathe his flesh with water, q put them on: q of the cogregacion of the childré of Israel he shal take two he goates for a synofferynge, and a ramme for a burntofferyuge.

And Aaron shal brynge the bullocke his owne synofferynge, tand make an attonemet for himself and his house: and afterwarde shall he take the two goates, and present them before the LORDE, euen before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse, and shall cast lottes ouer the two goates: the lot of the one goate for the LORDE, and the other for the fre goate. And the goate that y
LORDES lot fell vpon, shal he offre for a synofferynge. But the goate, that the fre goates lot fell vpon, shal he present alyue before y LORDE, to make an attonement for him, and to let the fre goate go in to y wyldernes. And so shal he brynge the m locke of his synofferynge, and make an attonement for him and his housholde, and shal kyll him.

And he shall take a censor full of coales from the altare that stondeth before the
LORDE, and his handfull of beaten incense, and brynge them in within y vayle, and put the incense vpon the fyre before y LORDE, that the cloude of the incense maye couer the
Mercyseate, which is vpon the witnesse, that he dye not. ‘And he shall take of the bloude of the bullocke, and sprenkle it with his fynger towarde the Mercyseate on the fore- syde. Seuen tymes shall he sprenkle of the bloude thus with his fynger before the Mercy- seate. Thē shal he kyll the goate which is the peoples synofferynge, q brynge in of his bloude within the vayle, q shall do with his bloude, as he dyd with the bloude of the bullocke, and sprenkle therwith also on the foresyde towarde the Mercyseate, and so shal he reconcyle the Sictuary from the vnclen- nesse of the childré of Israel, and fro their trespaces in all their synnes. Thus shal he do vnto the Tabernacle of wytnesse, which is the habitacion with them amoge their vn- clennesses.

No man shalbe in the ‘Tabernacle of wit- nesse, whan he goeth in to make an attone-
© Leui. 4.a. 

t Exo. 40. e. 3 Re. 8. b. i Heb. 9. b. 

Fo. cbij.. 

Fo. rbi. ment in the Sáetuary, vntyll he go out: -and so shall he make an attonement for him self and his house, and for the whole congregaeion of Israel. And wha he goeth forth vnto the altare that stondeth before the LORDE, he shal reeoneyle it, and shal take of $ bulloekes bloude, and of the goates bloude, q put it vpon the hornes of the altare rounde aboute.
And with his fynger shal he sprékle of the bloude theron seuen tymes, and halowe it, and conseerate it from the vnclennesse of the children of Israel.

E| And whan he hath made an ende of reeon- 

cylinge the Sanctuary, and the ‘Tabernacle of witnesse, and the altare, he shal bringe the lyuynge goate.

Thé shal Aaron laie both his hades vpó y heade of him, a confesse ouer him all the myszdedes of y childré of Israel, q all their trespaces in their synnes, q shal laye thé vpo
Y heade of the goate, t by some man y is at 
I de, shal he let him runne in tó the wilder- nes: y the goate maye so beare all their mysdedes vpon him in to y wyldernesse, and he shal leaue him in the wyldernesse.

And Aaron shal go in to the Tabernaele of witnesse, and put of the lynnen clothes, whieh he put on wha he wente in to y Sactuary, and shal leaue them there, and bathe his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his awne rayment.

F| . And he shal go forth, and make his burnt- 

offeringe, and the burntofferinge of the people, and make an attonement both for himself and for the people, and burne the fat of the syn- offerynge vpon the altare. But he y earied out the fre goate, shal wash his elothes, and bathe him self with water, q then come in to the hoost.

The hullocke of the synofferynge, and y goate of the synofferynge (whose bloude was brought in to the Sanctuary to make an attonemet) shalbe caried out of y hoost, q brent with fyre, both their skynnes, flesh, and donge. And he that burneth them, shal wash his elothes, and bathe him self with water, land then come in to the hoost.
6| And this shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto you: 
* Vpon the tenth daye of the seuenth moneth shal ye humble yonre soules, and do no worke, whether it be one of youre selues, or a straunger amonge you. For in this daye is

? Leui. 23. c. 

The iij, boke of oses. 

youre attonemét made, that ye maye be elensed from all youre synnes before the
LORDE: therfore shall it be a fre Sabbath vnto you, and ye shal humble youre soules.
Let this be a perpetuall lawe. 

But the prest that is anoynted, and whose hande was fylled to be prest in his fathers steade, shal make this attonement, and shal put on the lynnen clothes, namely the holy vestimétes, so shal he reedeyle the holy
Sactuary, and the ‘Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the altare, and y prestes, and all the people of the congregacion. * This shal be a perpetuall lawe vnto you, that ye reeoneyle y children of Israel from all their synnes onee a yeare. And Moses dyd, as the LORDE eommaunded him.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND y LORDE talked with Moses, q sayde: Speake vnto Aaron q his sonnes, q to all y ehildre of Israel, q saye vnto them:
This is it that y LORDE hath commaunded : 
What so euer he be of y house of Israel, y kylleth an oxe, or labe, or goate in the hoost, or out of the hoost, and bryngeth it not before the dore of the 'l'abernaele of wytnesse, that it maye be brought vnto the LORDE for an offerynge before the Habitaeion of y LORDE, the same shal be giltie of bloude, as though he had shed bloude, and soch a man shal be

roted out from amonge his people. 

Therfore shall the children of Israel brynge their offerynges (that they wyll offre vpon the wyde felde) before the LORDE, euen before the dore of the ''abernacle of witnesse, vnto the prest, q there offre their health- offerynges vnto the LORDE. And the prest shal sprenkle the bloude vpon the altare of the LORDE before the dore of the 'l'aber- nacle of wytnesse, and burne the fat for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE: and they shall offre their offerynges nomore vnto deuels, with whom they go a whorynge. ‘This shal be a perpetual! lawe vnto them amonge their posterities.

Therfore shalt thou saie vnto the: What man so euer he be of the house of Israel, or a straunger also that is amonge you, which offereth a burntofferynge or eny other offer- ynge, and bringeth it not before the dore of the ‘Tabernacle of wytnesse to offre it vnto the

* Exo. 30. b. Heb. 9. a. 

Chap. rbi, 

B 

Chap. rbitj. 
LORDE, he shal be roted out from amoge his people.

“And what man so euer it be (either of the house of Israel, or a straunger amonge you) that eateth eny maner of bloude, agayust him wyll I set my face, aud wil rote him out from amonge his people: for the soule of y body is in the bloude, and I haue geueu it you for the altare, that youre soules maye be recon- cyled ther with: For the bloude that is in the soule maketh attouement. Therfore haue I sayde vnto the children of Israel: No soule amonge you shall eate bloude, no ner eny straunger that dwelleth amonge you.

And what man so euer it be amonge you 
(whether he be-of the house of Israel, or a strannger amoge you) that at the huntynge taketh a beest or foule which maye be eaten, he shall poure out the bloude of the same, q couer it with earth: for all flesh lyueth in the bloude.

And I haue sayde vnto the children of 
Israel: "Ye shall eate the bloude of no body: for the life of all flesh is iu his bloude. Who so euer eateth it, shalbe roted out. And what so euer soule eateth that which dyed alone, or y was torne of wylde beestes (whether he be one of youre selues or a straunger) the same shal wash his elothes, and bathe himself with water, and be vneleane vntyll the euen, aud then is he cleane. But yf he wash not his clothes, nor bathe him self, then shal he beare his synne.

The roiij. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE talked with Moses, q saide: Speake vnto the childré of Is- rael, q saye vnto them: I am the LORDE youre God, Ye shall not do after y workes of the lande of Egipte, wherin ye dwelt : nether after the doynges of the lande of Canaan, in to the which I will brynge you. Ye shal not walke after their customes, but after my lawes shall ye do, œ my statutes shall ye kepe, that ye maye walke therin: for I am the LORDE youre God. Therfore shal ye kepe my statutes and my lawes. *For the man that doth the same, shal liue therin, for Iam the LORDE.
No mā shal come at his nexte kinszwomā, to vncouer hir preuytie: for I am y LORDE.

a Leui. 7. c. t Gen. 9.a. Leui. 3. c. 7. c. 19. f. 
* Ro. 10. a. *Gen.14.g. Eze. 22, b. 4 Deu. 22.d. and 2?7.¢. 1 Cor, 5.a. * Deu. 27. c. 2 Re. 13. c.

The (ij. boke of Moses, 

father ¢ of thy mother. is thy mother, therfore shalt thou not vncouer hir preuytie.

* Thou shalt not vncouer y preuytie of thy fathers wife, for it is thy fathers preuytie.

Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy sister, which is the doughter of thy father or of thy mother, whether she be borne at home or without.

“Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy sonues doughter, or of thy doughters doughter, for it is thine awne preuytie.

Thou shalt not vncouer y preuytie of thy fathers wiues doughter, which is borne vnto him, and is thy sister.

Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy fathers sister, for it is thy fatbers nexte kynszwoman.

‘Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy mothers sister, for it is thy mothers nexte kynszwoman.

Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy fathers brother, to take his wife, for she is thine awnte.

*'Thou shalt not vncouer y preuytie of thy doughter in lawe, for she is thy sounes wife, therfore shalt thou not vncouer hir preuitie.

*Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy brothers wife, for it is thy brothers pre- uytie.

Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy wife and of hir doughter also, nether shalt thou take hir sonnes donghter or hir doughters doughter, to vncouer their preuyties, for they are hir nexte kynszwomen. And it is wicked- nesse.

* Thou shalt not take a wife and hir sister also, to vncouer hir preuytie, whyle she is yet alyue.

t Thou shalt not go vnto a woman to vncouer hir preuytie, so longe as she hath hir disease in hir vnclennesse.

''Thon shalt not lye with thy neghbours wife to medle with her, for to defyle thy self withall.

” Thou shalt not geue of thy sede also, to be burnt vnto Moloch, lest thou vnhalowe the name of thy God, for I am the LORDE.

t Thou shalt uot lye with mankynde as with womankynde, for y is abhominacion.

f Leui. 20.c. £ Gen. 38.d. Deu.27.c. ^ Leui. 20. c. 
Mat. 14. a. ' Gen. 29. e. k Leu. 15. d. Eze. 22. b. 
13 Re. 11.a. ™ Leu. 20. a. t Rom. 1. d. Leu. 20. b. 

So. tiy, 
“Thou shalt not vncouer M preuytie of thy t

B 

€ 

The tj. boke of Moses, 

“Thou shalt lye with no maner of beest, to defyle thy self therwith. And no woman shal haue to do with a beest, for it is abhomi- nacion.

Ye shal defyle youre selues in none of these thinges. For y Heithen (whom I wil cast out before you) haue stayned them selues im all these, and the londe is defyled there thorow.
And their wickednesse wyl I vyset vpo them, so that the londe shal spue out the indwellers therof. 'Therfore kepe ye my statutes and lawes, and do not one of these abhominacions, nether one of youre awne selues ner the straunger amonge you (for all soch abhomi- nacions haue y people of this lode done which were before you, q haue defyled the lande) that the lande spue not you out also, whan ye haue defyled it, as it spewed out the Heythe, that were there before you. For who so euer commytte these abhominacios, the same soules shalbe roted out from amonge their people.
Therfore kepe ye my statutes, that ye do not after Y abhominable customes, which were before you, that ye be not defyled therwith:
For Í am the LORDE youre God. 

The rir. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE talked with Moses, 

and sayde: Speake to the whole con- gregacion of the children of Israel, and saye vnto them:* Ye shall be holy, for I am holy, euen the LORDE youre God. Euery one feare his father and his mother. Kepe my holy dayes: for I am the LORDE youre
God. Ye shal not turne youre selues vnto 
Idols, ų ye shal make you no goddes of metall: for I am the LORDE youre God.

And whan ye wyll offre healthofferynges vnto the LORDE, then shal ye offre the, that he maye be mercifull vnto you, tand ye shal eate them the same daye that ye offre them, and on the morow: what so euer is left on the thirde daye, shalbe burnt with fyre. But yf eny man eate therof vpon the thirde daye, then is he vnholy, and shall not be accepted, and the same eater shal beare his synne, because he hath vnhalowed the Sanctuary of the LORDE: and soch a soule shalbe roted out from amonge his people.

? Whan thou reapest thy londe, thou shalt 

a Deu. 27, c. * Leui. 11. g. and 20. c. t Leuit, 7. b. ? Leui. 23. d. Deu. 24. d.
| Matt. 5. d. 

1i Deut. 24. b. Tob. 4. c. 

aporte: 
* Exo. 20. b. 
$ Deu. 27. c. 

Chap. rir. not reape downe the vttemost borders of it rounde aboute, ner gather it all cleane vp.
Euen so likewyse thou shalt not plucke thy vynyarde cleane also, ner gather vp the grapes that are fallen downe, but shalt leaue them for y poore and straungers: for I am the
LORDE youre God. 

Ye shal not steale, nether lye, ner deale falsely one with another.

“Ye shal not sweare falsely by my name, a soto vnhalowe the name of thy God: for I am the LORDE.

Thou shalt do thy neghboure no wronge, ner robbe him ‘The workmas laboure shal not byde with the vntyll the mornynge.

Thou shalt not curse the deaf. “Thou shalt put no stomblynge blocke before y blinde, but shalt feare thy God: for I am the LORDE.

Ye shall not deale wrongeously in iudgment, nether shal ye accepte the personne of the poore, ner honoure the parsonne of the greate, but thou shalt iudge thy neghboure righte- ously.

Thou shalt let no preuy accuser go amoge thy people. Nether shalt thou stonde agaynst thy neghbours bloude: for I am ý LORDE.

'Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine hert, ll but shalt tell thy neghboure his faute, that thou beare not synne for his sake.

'Thou shalt not auenge thy self, ner beare euell will agaynst the childré of thy people.

‘Thou shalt loue thy neghboure, as thy|35 

self: for I am the LORDE. 

My statutes shal ye kepe, that thon ** let not thy catell gendre with beestes of another kynde: nether sowe thy felde with myngled sede. And let no‘garment come vpon the, y is mixte with wollen and lynnen.

Whan a man lyeth with a woman, and hath to do with her, which is a bonde woman, and hath bene medled withall of another man, but not lowsed out, ner hath optayned fredome, it shalbe punyshed, but they shal not suffre death, because she was not fre. But he shal brynge for his trespace vnto y LORDE
(euen before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse) a ramme for a trespace offerynge: and the prest shal make an attonement for him with the trespace offerynge before the
LORDE, concernynge the synne that he hath 

Eccli. 19. b. T Mat. 22. b. 

** Gen. 36. d. 

|| Mat. 18. b. 

Rom. 13. b. 

Chap. rr. 

The ij. boke of Moses, 

done: *so shall God be mercifull vnto him, as concernynge his synne which he hath done.

df| What tyme as ye are come in to the londe, 

and plante all maner trees wherof men eate, ye shall circumcise the foreskynne of the same with their frutes: thre yeares shall ye holde them for vncircumcysed, so that ye eate them not: but in the fourth yeare shall all their frutes be holy and praysed vnto y
LORDE. In the fifth yeare shall ye eate the frutes, and gather them in: for I am y
LORDE youre God. 

^Ye shal eate nothinge with bloude. Ye shall not regarde ¥ foules cryenge, ner chose out dayes.

? Ye shal shaue no crownes vpo youre heade, nether shalt thou clyppe thy beerde cleane off.

Ye shal rente out no markes in youre body 
(for eny that is deed) ner make lettres vpo you: for I am the LORDE.

Thou shalt not holde thy doughter to whordome, that the londe fall not to whor- dome, and waxe full of wickednesse.

@} Kepe my holy dayes, and stonde in awe of 

my Sanctuary: for I am the LORDE. 

t Ye shal not turne youre selues to y Soyth sayers, and axe nothinge at the expounders of tokes, that ye be not defyled by them: for I am the LORDE youre God.

‘Thou shalt ryse vp before a graye heade, and shalt geue reuerence vnto the aged. For thou shalt feare God: for lam y LORDE.

? Whan there dwelleth a straunger amonge you in youre londe, ye shall not vexe him.
He shal dwell with you, euen as one that is at home amonge you, q thou shalt loue him as thy self: for ye youre selues also were straungers in the lande of Egipte. Iam the
LORDE youre God. 

Ye shal not deale wrogeously in iudgmet, with meteyarde, with weight, with measure:
A true balaunce, a true weight, a true Epha, a true Hin shalbe amoge you. For I am the
LORDE youre God, which brought you out of the londe of Egipte, that ye shulde kepe « do all my statutes and lawes: for I am the

LORDE. 
The ry. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE talked with Moses, and saide: Tell the children of Israel:

* Heb. 10.a. ? Leui, 3.c. Deu. 18.b. ® Leui. 21.a. 
Eze. 44. c. t 1 Reg. 28. b. * Eccli.8. a. 1 Tim. 5.a. d Exo, 22.c. tLeui.18.c. Deut. 27.a. § Leui. 19.a.
Nu. 11. d. Tosu. 3. b. Ezo ibA Ero- 20. c- 

* 

1 Who so euer he be amonge the children of 
Israel, (or eny straunger that dwelleth in 
Israel) which geueth of his sede vnto Moloch, the same shall dye the death: the people of the lande shal stone him, « I wyll set my face agaynst that man, and wyll rote him out from amoge his people, because he hath geuen of his sede vnto Moloch, and defyled my Sanc- tuary, q vnhalowed my holy name. And though the people of the londe loke thorow the fyngers vpon that man, which hath geuen of his sede vnto Moloch, so that they put him not to death, yet wyl I set my face agaynst the same man, c agaynst his generacion: And him, and all that go a whorynge with him after Moloch, wyll I rote out from amonge their people.

Yf eny soule turne him to y soythsayers and expounders of tokens, so that he goeth a whorynge after them, I wyl set my face agaynst the same soule, and wyl rote him out from amonge his people. $Sanctifie youre selues therfore, q be holy: for Iam holy euen youre
God. And kepe ye my statutes, and do them: for lam y LORDEthat sanctifieth you.

Who so euer curseth his father or his mother, shall dye the death: ‘his bloude be vpon him, because he hath cursed his father or mother.

‘He that breaketh wedlocke with eny mas wife, shal dye the death (both the aduouterer and y aduouteresse) because he hath broken wedlocke with his neghbours wife.

* Yf eny man lye with his fathers wife, so y he vncouer his fathers preuyte, they shal both dye the death: their bloude be vpo the.

^Yfeny man lye with his doughter in lawe, they shall dye both of them, for they haue wrought abhominacion: their bloude be vpon them.

i Yf eny man lye with the mankynde, as with womankynde, they haue wrought abhomina- cion, q shal both dye the death: their bloude be vpon them.

*Yf eny man take a wyfe, and hir mother therto, the same hath wrought wickednes: he shalbe burnt with fyre, and so shal they also, that there be no wickednes amóge you.

' Yf eny man lye with a beest, he shall dye the death, and the beest shal be slavne.

Matt. 15. a. f Deu. 22. c. € Leuit. 18.2. Deu. 27.0. 
^ Leui. 18. b. ' Leui.18,c. Rom.i.d. * Leui. 18. b. t Leui. 18. c. Deu. 27. a.

Fo. crt. 

Fo. rý. 

Yf a woman medle with a beest, so y she haue to do with it, thou shalt put her to death, and the beest also, they shall dye the death : their bloude be vpon them.

Yf eny man take his sister, his fathers doughter, or his mothers doughter, and se hir preuyte, and she agayne se his secretes, it is a wicked thinge. They shalbe roted out in the sight of their people. For he hath vncouered his sisters preuyte, he shal beare his synne.

-Yf a man lye with a woman in the tyme of hir sicknesse, and vncouer hir secretes, q open vp hir founteyne, aud she vncouer the fountayne of hir bloude, they shall both be roted out from amonge their people.

*'Thou shalt not vncouer the preuytie of thy mothers sister, and of thy fathers sister: for soch one hath vncouered his nexte kynswoman, and they shal beare their synne.

Yf eny man lye with his vncles wyfe, the same hath vncouered the preuytie of his vncle: they shal beare their synne, without children shal they dye.

*Yf eny man take his brothers wyfe, y is an vn cleane thinge: they shalbe without children, because he hath vncouered his bro- thers secretes.

So kepe now all my statutes t my lawes, q do them, y the lode whither I brynge you to dwell therm, spewe you not out. And walke uot ye in ¥ statutes of the Heithen, which I shal cast out before you. t For all soch thinges haue they done, ¢ I haue abhorred the.

But I saye vnto you: Ye shall possesse their londe. For I wyll geue you to en- heritaunce a lode, that floweth with mylke and hony. I am the LORDE youre God, which haue separated you from the nacions, that ye also shulde separate the cleane beestes fro the vn cleane, and the vn cleane foules from the cleane: ¢ not to defyle youre soules vpon beestes, vpon fonles q vpon all that crepeth on the grounde: “which I haue se- parated vuto you, that they shulde be vncleane.
Therfore shall ye be holy vnto me: for I the 
LORDE am holy, which haue separated you fro the nacions, that ye shulde be myne.

^Yf a man or woman be a soythsayer or an expounder of tokeus, the same shall dye the death: they shalbe stoned, their bloude be vpon them.

* Leu. 18. b. 
€ Leui. 11.a. Deut.14.a. 

a Leui. 15. d. and 18.c. è Leui. 18. b. 

Matt. 14. a. t Deut. 9, a. 

The tj. boke of Moses, 

The rri. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE sayde vnto Moses:/@ 
A Speake to y prestes y sonnes of Aaron, q saye vnto thé: tA prest shal defyle him self vpo no soule of his people, but vpon his nexte kyune y belongeth vnto him: as vpon his mother, vpo his father, vpo his sonne, vpo his doughter, vpou his brother, q vpon his sister, which is yet a virgin, q hath beue no mans wife (which belongeth vnto him) vpon her maie he defyle himself. Morouer he shal not defyle him self vpo eny ruler iu his people, to vn halowe him self.

$He shall make no crowne also vpon his heade, ner shaue of his beerd, nether shall they cut out eny markes 1their fleshe. They shalbe holy vnto their God, and not vnhalowe y name of their God: for they offre the sacrifice of the LORDE, the bred of their
God, therfore shal they be holy. 

"They shal take no whore, ner one that is defyled, *or y is put awaye from hir huszbande, for he is holy vnto his God: therfore shal he sanctifie him self, for he offreth the bred of thy God. He shal be holy vnto the, for
I am holy, euen the LORDE that sancti- fieth you.

Yf a prestes donghter fall to whoringe, she shalbe burnt with fyre, for she hath shamed hir father. He that is hye prest amonge his brethren, vpo whose heade the anoyntinge oyle is poured, and his hande fylled (y he might be arayed with the vestimentes) shal not vucouer his heade, ner cut his clothes, q shal come at no deed, Il a shal defyle him self nether vpon father ner mother. He shall not go ont of the Sanctuary, that he vnhalowe not the Sanctuary of his God. For y crowne of the anoyntinge oyle of his God is vpon him, for I am the LORDE.

A virgin shal he take to wife, but ‘no wedowe, ner deuorsed, ner defyled, ner whore, but a virgin of his awne people shal he take to wife, y he vnhalowe not his sede amonge his people. For I am y LORDE, which sanctifie him.

And LORDE talked with Moses, q sayde: 
Speake vnto Aaron, q saie: Yf there be a blemysh vpó eny of thy sede in youre genera- cions, the same shal not preasse to offre the

4Deu.18.b. 1 Re. 28. b. t Eze.44.d. §Leui.19.f. Eze. dtc, ¢1Tim.2.a. ||Luc.9.f. / Eze.44.d. Mal.2.b.

Chap. rri. | 

bred of his God: *For who so euer hath a blemysh vpon him, shal not come nere, whether he be blynde, lame, with an euell fauoured nose, with eny myszshappen membre, or y hath a broken fote or hande, or is croke backed, or hath eny blemysh in the eye, or is gleyd, or is skyrvye or scaulde, or hath his stones broken.

Who so euer now of the sede of Aaron y prest hath eny blemysh vpó him, shal not come nye to offre y sacrifice of the LORDE,
For he hath a deformyte. Therfore shall he not preasse vnto the bred of his God, to offre it. Notwithstondinge he shal eate of the bred of his God, both of the holy, ¢ of y most holy: but he shal not go in to y vayle, ner come nye the altare (for so moch as he hath a blemysh vpo him) y he vnhalowe not my
Sactuary. For Iam ý LORDE y sanctifieth the. And Moses pale this vnto Aaron q to his sonnes, and to all the children of Israel.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE talked with Moses, q 

sayde: Speake vnto Aaron, ¢ his sonnes, y they absteyne from ý halowed thinges of the childré of Israel, which they haue halowed vnto me, v y they vnhalowe not my holy name: for I am $ LORDE. Saie now vnto them « their posterities: Who so euer he be of youre sede, ý commeth nye vnto the holy thinges, which the childré of Israel halowe vnto the LORDE, q so defyleth him self vpon the same, his soule shal perishe before my face: for I am the LORDE.

Who so euer of the sede of Aaron is a leper, or hath a runnynge yssue, shall not eate of the holy thinges, tyll he be clensed. Who so toncheth eny vncleane thinge, or whose sede departeth from him by night, or who so toucheth eny worme that is vncleane vnto him, or a mà y is vncleane vnto him, v what so euer defyleth hi, loke what soule toucheth eny soch, is vncleane vntyll the euen, q shall not eate of the holy thinges, but shall first bath his flesh with water. And wha y Sonne is gone downe, and he cleane, then maye he eate therof, for it is his foode. Loke what dyeth alone, or is rent of wylde beestes, shall he not eate, ý he be not vncleane theron: for
I am $ LORDE. Therfore shal they kepe my lawe, y they lade not synne vpon them, q

* 2 Re. 5, b. 

The iij. boke of Moses. 

So. erty. dye therin, whan they vnhalowe them selues init. For Iam $ LORDE, ¥ halowe them.

A straunger shal not eate of the holy thinges, |33 ner an housholde gest of the prestes, ner an hyred seruaüt. But yf ý prest bye a soule for his money, y same maye eate therof. And loke who is borne in his house, maye eate of his bred also. Neuertheles yf the prestes doughter be a straungers wife, she shal not eate of the Heneofferinges of holynes. But yf she be a wedowe, or deuorced, or haue no sede, q commeth agayne to hir fathers house as afore (whan she was yet a mayden in hir fathers house) then shall she eate of hir fathers bred. But no straüger shal eate therof.

Who so els eateth of the halowed thynges, vnwyttingly, shal put y fifth parte there vnto, and gene it vnto the prest with the halowed thinge, that they vnhalowe not y halowed thinges of the children of eal which they Heue vp vnto the LORDE, lest they lade them selues with myszdoinge and trespace, wha they eate their halowed thynges, for I am Y LORDE which halowe the.

And ¥ LORDE talked with Moses, q saide: | € 
Speake vnto Aaron q his sonnes, q to all y childre of Israel: tWhat so euer Israelite or straunger in Israel wyll do his offerynge, whether it be their vowe, or of fre wyl, that they wyll offre a burntofferynge vnto the
LORDE, to reconcyle them selues, it shal be a male, and without blemysh, of the oxen, or lambes or goates. t What so euer hath eny blemish, shal they not offre, for they shal fynde no fauoure therwith.

And who so wyl offre an healthofferinge vnto the LORDE to separate out a vowe, or of fre wyl, oxen or shepe, it shalbe without blemysh, y it maye be accepted. It shal haue no deformite. Yf it be blynde, or broke, or wounded, or haue a wen, or skyrvye, or scabbed, they shal offre none soch vnto the
LORDE, ner put an offerynge of eny soch vpo the altare of the LORDE.

An oxe or shepe ý hath myszshappé mem- bres, or no rompe, mayest thou offre of a fre wyll: but to a vowe it maye not be accepted.
'Thou shalt offre also vnto the LORDE no- thinge y is brused, or broken, or rent, or cutt out, « ye shal do no soch in youre londe.
Morouer ye shall offre no bred vnto youre 
God of a straungers hande: for it is marred 

t Deut. 15. c. and 17. a. 
18 

t Mal. 1. b. 

Fo. crity. of him, and he hath a deformite, therfore shal it not be accepted for you. p| And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, t sayde: Whā an oxe, or libe, or goate is brought forth, it shal be seuen dayes with the dame, and vpon the eight daye q therafter it maie be offered vnto the LORDE, the is it accepted. Whether it be oxe or lambe, it shall not be slayne with his yonge in one daye.

But wha ye wil offre a thikoffringe vuto the LORDE y it maye be accepted, ye shal eate it the same daye, q kepe nothinge ouer vntyll the mornynge: for I am the LORDE.
Therfore kepe now my commaundementes, and do them: for I am the LORDE, y ye vnhalowe not my holy name, t that I maye be halowed amonge the children of Israel.
| |For Iam he that halowe you, enë ý LORDE, 
| [which brought you out of $ lode of Egipte, 
| | Imight be youre God: Euen I$ LORDE. 

The rrij. Chapter. 

a ND the LORDE talked with Moses, q 

sayde: Speake vnto ¥ children of Is- 

rael, and saye vnto them: These are y feastes 

of the LORDE, which ye shal call holy dayes. 

Sixe dayes shalt thou worke, “but the seuenth 

daie is the rest of the Sabbath, and shalbe 

called holy. Ye shal do no worke therin, for 

it is the Sabbath of the LORDE, where so euer ye dwell.

These are the feastes of the LORDE, y are called holy, which ye shal call youre feastes :
* Vpon ¥ fourtene daye of ¥ first moneth at euen, is the LORDES Easter. And vpon y fiftene daye of the same moneth is the feast of vnleueded bred of the LORDE. Then shall ye eate vnleuended bred seuen dayes.

33| The first daie shalbe called holy amonge yon,’ ye shal do no worke of bodage therin, q seué daies shal ye offre vnto$ LORDE. The seuéth daie shalbe called holy likewise, wherin ye shal do no worke of bondage also.

And $ LORDE talked with Moses, qt sayde: Speake to the childré of Israel, q saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the lande y I shall gene you, and reape downe youre haruest, ye shal brynge a shefe of the first frutes of youre haruest vnto the prest, thé shall the shefe be waued before the LOR DE,

* Exo. 23. b. 
Eze. 45. c. 

Deu. 5. b. 
5 Nu. 98. c. 

* Exo. 12.c. Nu. 98. c. e Iosu. 5. c. 4 Deu. 16. b.

The iij. boke of Mosrs. 

Chap. rrii. that ye maye be accepted: but this shal the prest do the nexte daye after the Sabbath.
And y same daie that youre shefe is waued, shalye offre a burntofferinge vnto the LORDE, of a lambe which is without blemysh and of one yeare olde, with the meatofferynge, two tenth deales of fyne floure mengled with oyle, for an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the
LORDE: ¢ the drynkofferynge also, enë the fourth parte of an Hin of wyne.

* And ye shall eate nether bred, nor cakes, ner furmentye (of new corne) tyll the same daye that ye brynge an offerynge vnto youre
God. "This shalbe a lawe vnto youre posteri- ties, where so ener ye dwell.

“Then shal ye nombre (from the nexte daye after the Sabbath, whan ye brought ¥
Waueshefe) seuen whole wekes, vntyll the nexte daie after y seueth weke, namely, fiftie daies, shal ye nombre, and offre new meat- offerynges vnto the LORDE. And out of all youre dwellinges shal ye offre, namely, two
Waue loaues of two tenth deales of fyne floure leueded, and baken for the first frutes vnto y
LORDE. ‘And with youre bred ye shal brynge seuen lambes of one yeare olde with- out blemysh, and a yonge bullocke, and two rammes: this shalbe the LORDES burnt- offerynge, meatofferynge, and drynkoffrynge.
This is a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the 
LORDE. 

Morouer ye shal offre an he goate for a synofferynge, and two lambes of a yeare olde for an healthofferynge. And y prest shal waue it vpon the bred of the first frntes before the LORDE with the two lambes.
And they shalbe holy vnto the LORDE, and shal be the prestes. And this daye shal ye proclame, for it shalbe called holy amonge you: no seruyle worke shal ye do therin. A perpetuall lawe shall it be amonge youre posterities, where so euer ye dwell.

J Whan ye reape downe y harnest of youre londe, ye shal not cut it cleane downe vpo the felde, ner gather vp all, but shal leaue it for the poore and straungers. Iam the LORDE youre God.

And ¥ LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, q saye:t Vpon the first daye of the seuenth moneth shal ye haue the holy rest of the

* Nu. 28. d. 

J Leu. 19. c. Deu. 24. d. t Nu. 29. a. 

fo. rbi 

of Dibri, of the trybe of Dan. * And they 

put him in preson, tyll they were infourmed 

by the mouth of the LORDE. 

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: Brynge him that cursed, out of the hoost, and let all the that herde it, laye their handes vpon his heade, and let the whole congregacion stone him. And saye vnto the childré of Israel: + Who so euer blasphemeth his God, shal? beare his synne: and he that blasphemeth the name of the LORDE, shal dye the death. ‘The whole congregacio shal stone him. As the straunger, so shal he of the housholde be also. Yf he blaspheme the name, he shal dye.

J| He that slayeth a man, shall dye y death, but “he that slayeth a beest, shall paye for it.
Soule for soule. And he that maymeth his neghboure, it shall be done vnto him, euen as he hath done: broke for broke, t eye for eye, tothe for tothe: euen as he hath maymed a man, so shal it be done vnto him agayne, so that, who so slayeth a beest, shall paye for it:
But he that slayeth a man, shal dye. ‘There shal be one maner of lawe amonge you, to y straunger as to one of youre selues: for I am the LORDE youre God.

Moses tolde the children of Israel. And they brought him that had cursed, out of y hoost, and stoned him. "Thus dyd the childre of Israel as the LORDE comaunded Moses.

The rr. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE talked with Moses 

vpon mount Sinai, and sayde: Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them:
+ Whan ye come in to the londe, y I shal geue you, the londe shal rest vnto the LORDE, so that thou sowe thy felde sixe yeares, and sixe yeares cut thy vynes, and gather in the frutes. But in the seuenth yeare the lode shal haue his Sabbath of rest for a Sabbath vnto the LORDE, wherin thou shalt not sowe thy felde ner cut thy vynes.

Loke what groweth of it self after thy har- uest, thou shalt not reape it. And the grapes that growe without thy laboure, shalt thou not gather, for so moch as it is the yeare of the londes rest: * But the rest of the londe shalt thou kepe for this intent, that thou mayest eate therof, thy seruaunte, thy mayde, thy

* Nu. 15. d. + Mat. 26. g. loh. 19.a. 2 Exo. 21. b. 
Deut. 19. a. Iudice. 1.b. Math. 5. c. 

The ij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. rrb. 

hyrelinge, thy gest, thy strauger with the, thy catell, and the beestes in thy londe. All the increase shal be meate.

And thou shalt nombre seuen of these|33 yeare Sabbathes, that seuen yeares maye be tolde seuen tymes, and so the tyme of the seuen yeare Sabbathes make nyne and fourtye yeares. Then shalt thou let the blast of the horne go thorow all youre londe, vpon the tenth daye of the seuenth moneth, euen in ¥ daye of attonement. And ye shal halowe the|* fiftieth yeare, and shall call it a fre yeare in y londe, for all them that dwell therin: for it is the yeare of Iubilye. §’Then shall euery one amonge you come agayne to his possession and to his kynred : for the fiftieth yeare is y yeare of lubilye. Ye shal not sowe ner reape it that groweth of it self, ner gather the grapes, that growe without labour. For the yeare of lubilye shall be holy amonge you. But loke what the felde beareth, that shall ye eate.
This is the yeare of lubilye, wherin ye shal come againe euery man to his owne.

Now whan thou sellest ought vnto thy|qr neghboure, or byest eny thinge of him, there shal none of you oppresse his brother: but acordinge to the nombre of the yeare of
Iubilye shalt thou bye it of him: and acord- inge to the nombre of the yeares of increase shall he sell it vnto the. Acordinge to the multitude of the yeares shalt thou rayse the pryce, and acordynge to the fewnesse of the yeares shalt thou mynish the pryce: for he shall sell it vnto the acordinge to the nombre of the increase. "lherfore let no man de- fraude his neghboure, but feare thy God.
For I am the LORDE youre God. Wher- fore do after my statutes, and kepe my lawes, so y ye do them that ye maye dwell safe in the londe. For the londe shal geue you hir frute, so that ye shal haue ynough to eate, and dwell safe therin.

And yf ye wolde saye: What shall we eate in the seuenth yeare, in as moch as we shal not sowe, ner gather in oure increase ? I wyll sende my blessynge vpon you in the sixte yeare, that it shal brynge forth frute for thre yeare: so that ye shal sowe in ý eight yeare, |Ð and eate of the olde frute vntyll the nyenth yeare, that ye maye eate of the olde tyll new frutes come agayne. Therfore shall ye not

è Exo. 23. b. 
§ Eze. 46. c. 

iMath.5.c.. * Deut. 15. a. 

Chap. rrii. sell the londe for euer, *for the lode is myne.
And ye are straungers and indwellers before me. And in all youre lande shall ye geue the londe to lowse.

"^ Whan thy brother waxeth poore, and sell- eth ¥ his possession, and his nexte kynszmà commeth to him, y he maye redeme it: then shall he redeme that his brother solde. But whan a man hath none to redeme it, and cà get so moch with his hande as to redeme one parte, then shall it be rekened how many yeares it hath bene solde, and the remnaunt shal be restored vnto him to whom he solde it, y he maie come agayne to his possession.
But yf his hande can not get so moch, as to haue one parte agayne, the shal it y he solde be styll in the hande of the byer vntyll y yeare of Iubilye: In ¥ same shal it go out, and returne to his owner agayne.

Æ| He that selleth a dwellinge house within 

the walles of the cite, hath an whole yeare respyte to lowse it out agayne: that shall be the tyme, wherin he maye redeme it. But yf he redeme it not afore the whole yeare be out, then shal he that bought it, and his suc- cessours kepe it for euer, and it shall not go out lowse in the yeare of Iubylie. Neuer- theles yf it be an house in a vyllage that hath no wall aboute it, it shall be counted like vnto the felde of the contre, and maye be redemed and shal go out fre in the yeare of
Iubilye. 

'The cities of the Leuites, and the houses in the cities that their possession is in, maye allwaye be redemed. Who so purchaceth ought of the Leuites, shal leaue it in the yeare of Iubilye, whether it be house or cite that he hath had in possession. For the houses in the cities of the Leuites are their possession amonge the children of Israel.
But the felde before their cities shal not be solde, for it is their awne for euer.

Whan thy brother waxeth poore, and falleth in decaye besyde the, thou shalt receaue him as a straunger, or gest, that he maye lyue by the: and thou shalt take no t vsury of him, ner more then thou hast geue, but shalt feare thy God, that thy brother maye lyue besydes the. For thon shalt not lende him thy money vpon vsury, ner delyuer him thy meate vpon vauntage. For I am the LORDE youre God,

2 JE mb; eR ce t Exo. 22, c.

lere. 32. a. Ruth 4. a. 
Eze. 18. a. and 22. b. 

2 Nu. 36. c. 
Deut. 23. c. 

The ii. boke of Moses, 

Fo. rrbij. which haue brought you out of the lode of
Egipte, to geue you the lande of Canaan, and to be youre God. :

* Whan thy brother waxeth poore besyde the, and selleth himself vnto the, thou shalt not holde him as a bode mà: but as an hyred seruaunte and as a soiourner shal he be with the, and serue the vntyll ¥ yeare of Iubilye.
Then shal he departe lowse from the, q his childré with him, q shal returne to his awne kinred, and to his fathers possession: for they are my seruauntes whom I brought out of the londe of Egipte. Therfore shal they not be solde like bondmen. And thou shalt not raigne oner them with crueltie, but shalt feare thy God. But yf thon wylt haue bode ser- uauntes and maydens, thou shalt bye them of the Heithen, that are rounde aboute you: of the children of the soiourners and straungers amonge you, and of their generacions with you, and that are borne in youre londe, the same shal ye haue for bonde seruanütes, q shal possesse them, q youre children after you for an euerlastinge possession, these shalbe youre bondmen. ł But ouer youre brethren the children of Israel, there shall none of you raigne ouer another with crueltie.

Whan a straunger or soiourner waxeth ryche by the, and thy brother waxeth poore besyde him, q selleth him self vnto y straunger or soiourner by the, or to eny of his kynne, then shall he haue right (after that he is solde) to be redemed agayne. And eny of his brethren maye lowse him out: or his vnele or his vncles sonne, or eny other kynszman of his kynred:
Or yf his awne hande getteth so moch, he shal lowse him self out, and shal reken with him that bought him, from y yeare that he solde him self, vntyll the yeare of Iubilye.
And $ money shal be counted acordinge to the nombre of the yeares that he was solde, and his wages of the whole tyme shalbe rekened withall.

Yf there be yet many yeares vnto y yeare of Iubilye, then shal he (acordinge to the same) gene the more for his delyueraunce, therafter as he is solde. Yf there remayne but few yeares vnto the yeare of Iubilye, then shall he geue agayne therafter for his redemp- cion. And his wages from yeare to yeare shall he reken withall, and thou shalt not let

> Exo.21. a. Deut. 15. b. Iere. 34. b. 

1 3 Reg. 9. d. 

ffo. rrbiij. the other raigne cruelly ouer him in thy sight.
But yf he bye not hin self out after this maner, then shal he go out fre in the yeare of
Iubilye, and his childré with him: for the childre of Israel are my seruauntes, which I haue brought out of the londe of Egipte. I am the LORDE youre God.

* Ye shall make you no Idols ner ymage, and ye shal reare you vp no piler, ner set vp eny markstone in youre londe, to bowe youre selues therto. For I am the LORDE youre
God. Kepe my Sabbathes, and stonde in awe of my Sanctuary. I am the LORDE.

The rrot. Chapter. 

F ye wyll walke now in my statutes, “and kepe my commaundementes and do them, the wyl I geue you rayne in due season, and y londe shal geue hir increase, and the trees of y felde shal brynge forth their frute.
And the threszshinge tyme shall reache vnto the wyne haruest, and the wyne haruest shal reache vnto the sowynge tyme. And ye shall eate youre bred in plenteousnes, and shal dwell safe in youre londe. I wil geue peace in youre londe, so that ye shall slepe, and no man shall make you afrayed. I wyl ryd euell beestes out of youre londe, and there shall no

swerde go thorow youre londe. 

Ye shal chace youre enemies, q they shal fall in to Y swerde before you. *Fyue of you shal chace an hundreth: and an hundreth of you shal chace ten thousande. For youre enemies shall fall in to the swerde before you.
And I wyl turne me vnto you, and wyl cause you to growe and increase, and wyl set vp my couenaunt with you. And ye shal eate of the olde stoare, and shall let go the olde for plenteousnesse of the new. łI will haue my dwellynge amonge you, and my soule shall not refuse you. And I wyll walke amonge you, and wyl be youre God, and ye shalbe my people. For [ am the LORDE youre
God, which brought you out of the londe of 
Egipte, that ye shulde uot be their bondmen. 
And I haue broke the cepter of youre yocke, and caused you to go vp right.

? But yf ye wil not harken vnto me, ner do all these commaundementes, and wyl despyse my statutes, and yf youre soules refuse my lawes, y ye wyll not do all my commaunde-

* Deu. 5.a. *? Deut. 98. a. t Iosu. 23. c. Esa. 30. c. 

f Exo.99.g. 2 Cor. 6. c. 

The tj. boke of Moses. 

| 

mentes, q shal let my couenaunt stonde, then wyll I do this agayne vnto you. I wyl vyset you shortly with swellynges and feuers, which shal destroye y eyes, q consume awaie y hert.
Ye shal sowe youre sede in vayne, and youre enemies shal eate it vp.

And I wyl set my face agaynst you, and ye shal be slayne before youre enemies. And theythat hate you, shal haue dominion ouer you.
$ And ye shall flye, whà no man chaseth you. 

But yf ye wyll not herken vnto me for all this, then wyl I make it yet seuen tymes more, to punysh you for youre synnes, that I maye breake $ pryde of youre strength, and wyl make youre heauen lyke yron, and youre earth as brasse: and youre trauaile and laboure shal be but lost, so that youre londe shall not geue hir increase, and the trees in the londe shal not brynge forth their frute.

Yf ye walke yet agaynst me, and wyll not harken vnto me, then wyl I make it yet seuen tymes more, to punysh you because of youre synnes: q wyl sende wylde beestes amoge you, which shal robbe you, and destroie youre catell, and make you fewer, and youre hye waye shal become waist.

But yf ye wyl not yet be refourmed here withall, and wyll walke contrary vnto me, then wyl I walke contrary vnto you also, q wyll punysh you yet seuen tymes for youre synnes. And I wyl brynge vpon you a swerde of vengeaunce, which shall auenge my Testa- ment. And though ye gather you together in to youre cities, yet wyll I sende the pesti- lence amonge you, and wyll delyuer you in to the handes of youre enemies. For I wil destroye youre prouysion of bred, so y ten wemen shall bake youre bred in one ouen, and youre bred shal be delyuered out by weight. lAnd whan ye eate, ye shall not haue ynough.

Yf ye wyl not yet for all this harken vnto me, v wyl walke contrary vnto me, then wyll
I also walke cóotrary vnto you in wrathfull displeasure, and wyll punysh you seuenfolde because of youre synnes, so that ye shal eate the flesh of youre sonnes and doughters. And

youre ymages, and wyll cast youre bodies vpon the bodies of youre Idols, and my soule shall abhorre you. And youre cities wyll I make

^ Deut. 28. b. Mala. 2. a. 
Micb. 6. c. 

§ Pro. 28. a. q 4 Re. 6. f.

|| Ose. 4. b. 

I wyl destroye youre hye altares, and rote out: 

Chap. rrii, 

€ 

5 

Chap. rrboij. The tj. boke of Moses. So. erty. 

waist, and brynge youre churches to naught,; |for I am y LORDE their God. And for and wyll not smell youre swete odoures. their sake I wyl remébre *my first couenaüt,
Thus wyll I make the londe desolate, so} {wha I brought them out of y londe of Egipte that youre enemies shall dwell therin, and] jin the sight of the Heythen, y I might be make it waist: but you will I scater amonge| |their God. Euen I the LORDE. the Heythen, and drawe out the swerde after These are the ordinaunces, statutes and you, so that youre londe shal be waist, q} |lawes, which y LORDE made betwixte him youre cities desolate. and the children of Israel ypon mount Sinai,
JF| Then shall the londe reioyse in hir Sab-| |by the hande of Moses. bathes, as longe as it lyeth wayst, and ye be

in the enemies londe. Yee then shal the The rybij. Chapter. londe kepe holy daye, and reioyse in hir rest, ND the LORDE talked with Moses, «| A as longe as it lieth wayst, because it coude not sayde: Speake to y children of Israel,

rest in youre Sabbathes, whan ye dwelt therin.| |q saye vnto them: Yf eny man make a speciall 
And as for them that remayne of you, I| |vowe vnto y LORDE, so y he pryse a soule, wyll make them faynte harted in the londe of| |then shal this be the valuacion: A ma of their enemies, so that a shakynge leaf shall| |twentye yeare olde vnto the thre score yeare, chace them. And they shall flye from it, as! |shalt thou set at fiftie syluer Sycles, after the though a swerde persecuted them, and shal] |Syele of the Sanctuary: but a woman at fall noman folowynge vpon them. And they| |thirtie Sycles. Yf it be fyue yeare olde vnto shall fall one vpon another (as it were before| |twentye yeare, thou shalt set it at twentye the swerde) and noman yet chacynge them.| |Sycles, whan it is a man childe: "but a
And ye shall not be so bolde, as to withstonde| |woman at ten Sycles. Yf it bea moneth olde youre enemies, and shal perishe amonge the| |vnto fiue yeare, thou shalt set it at fyue Sycles
Heithen, and the londe of youre enemies shal} |of syluer, whan it is a machilde: but a woman eate you vp. at thre Syluer Sycles. Yf he be thre score
And they that are left of you, shall pyne| |yeare olde and aboue, thé shalt thou set him awaye in their myszdede, euen in the enemies] |at fiftene Sicles wha it is a ma: a woma at te londe, and in the myszdedes of their fathers| |Sicles. Yf he be to poore so to be set, thé shall they consume awaye. ‘Then shall they| |let him present himself to y prest, q y prest knowlege their myszdedes, and the myszdedes| |shal value him. Neuere he shal value of their fathers in the trespace, wherwith they| |him, acordinge as ¥ hade of him that vowed, haue trespaced agaynst me, and walked con-| |isable to get. But yf it be a beest y maye trary vnto me. ‘Therfore wyll I also walke] |be offred vnto $ LORDE, all ý is offred vnto contrary vnto thé, and wyll brynge them in| | LORDE of soch, is holy: it shal not be to the enemies londe. altered ner chaunged, a good for a bad, or a
Then shal their vncircumeysed herte bej |bad for a good. Yf eny man chaunge it, one tamed. And then shall they ende their mysz-| |beest for another, then shal they both be holy dedes. “And I shal thinke vpo my couenaüt| |vnto LORDE. But yf ý beest be vncleane with Iacob, and vpon my couenaunt with} |which maye not be Tu vnto y LORDE,
Isaac, and vpon my couenaunt with Abraham,| |thē shal it be set, before ¥ prest, and y prest and wyl thynke vpon the lode. As for the| |shal value it, whether it be good or bad, q it londe, whan it shalbe left of them, it shal re-| |shal stonde at the prestes valuynge. But yf ioyse in hir Sabbathes, euen then, whan it| |eny man wil bye it out, he shal geue the fifth lyeth waist, and they tylle it not. And they| |parte more, to that it was set at. shall make attonement for their myszdedes, Whan eny ma sanctifieth his house vnto because they despysed my lawes, q their soules} |the LORDE for y Sanctuary, the prest shall refused my statutes. Morouer I haue not so| |value it, whether it be good or bad. And as refused them, that they shulde be in thej |the prest valueth it, so shal it stonde. But yf enemies londe: nether haue I so vtterly| |he y sanctified it, wyl redeme it, he shal geue abhorred them, that I wolde brynge them to| |y ich parte of syluer therto, aboue that it naught, and breake my couenaunt with them:| |was set at: So shal it be his.

a Deut. 4. e. * Exo. 19. a. ? Num. 3. g. 

fo. rr. 
€| Yf eny man halowe a pece of lode of his 

heretage vnto the LORDE, it shalbe set acordinge to y it beareth. Yf it beare an
Homer of barlye, it shalbe valued at fiftye 
Sycles of syluer. But yf he halowe his londe immediatly from the yeare of Iubilye forth, then shal it be set acordinge to y value therof.
Yf he haue halowed it after the yeare of 
Iubilye, then shal the prest reké it, acordinge to ý yeares y remayne vnto y yeare of Iu- bilye, q therafter shal he set it the lower.

But yf he y sanctified the londe, wil redeme it agayne, then shal he geue the fifth parte of syluer therto, aboue that it was set at: So shal it be his. Yf he wil not lowse it out, but selleth it vnto another, then shal he redeme it nomore: but the same londe whan it goeth out fre in ¥ yeare of Iubilye, shal be holy vnto the LOR DE, as a dedicated felde, and shalbe the prestes inheritaunce.

Yf eny man halowe vnto the LORDE a felde, which he hath bought, and is not his inheritaunce, then shal $ prest reken it, what it is worth vnto the yeare of Iubilye, q the same daye shall he geue the pryce that it is| set at, vnto the LORDE for the Sanctuary.
But in y yeare of Iubilye it shal returne vnto him that bought it, y 1t maye be his inherit- aunce in the londe. All maner of prysinge shalbe made acordinge to the Sycle of the
Sactuary.* One Sycle maketh xx. Geras. 

a Exo. 30. b. Nu. 3. g. Eze. 45. b. 

The (ij. boke of Moses. 

*'lhe first borne amonge y catell (which belongeth vnto the LORDE) shall no man
Sanctifie vnto the LORDE, whether it be oxe or shepe, for it is the LORDES all ready.
But yf there be eny vncleane thinge vpon the beest, the shal it be lowsed out therafter as it is worth, and the fifth parte shalbe geuen more therto. Yf he wil not redeme it, the let it be solde, as it is worth.

There shall no dedicated thinge be solde ner bought out, y eny man dedicateth vnto y
LORDE, of all y is his good, whether it be mé, catell or lode. For euery dedicated thige, is most holy vnto y LORDE. There shal no dedicated thige of mà be bought out, but shal dye the death. All the tythes in the londe, both of the sedé of the londe, q of y frutes of the trees, are the LORDES, q shal be holy vnto the LORDE. But yf eny man wil redeme his tithes, he shall geue the fifth parte more therto. And all the tithes of oxen q shepe, q that goeth vnder the rod, the same is an holy tythe vnto the
LORDE. It shall not be axed whether it be good or bad, nether shall it be chaunged.
But yf eny man chaunge it, then both it q that it was chaunged withall, shal be holy, « not redemed.

These are the comaundementes, which $ 
LORDE gaue Moses in charge vnto childré of Israel vpon mount Sinai.

* Deu. 15. c. 

The ende of the thirde boke of Moses, called 3 euítírus. 

Chap. rroi. 

Chap. I. 

The children of Israel are nombred and «nusterd out, aS many as are mete for the batayll: The captaynes are ordeyned, and Leui appoynted to the seruyce of the Tabernacle.

Chap. II. 

The ordre and maner how the tétes were pitched, and how the children of Israel laye aboute the Tabernacle of wytnes.

Chap. II. 

The office of Leui, q of the sonnes of Aaron. 

Chap. III. 
The office of the sonnes of Kahath, Gerson and 

Merari. 
Chap. V. 

What maner of people were dryuen out of the hoost. The lawe of Gelousy of the man towarde the wife

Chap. VI. 
The lawe and ordinaunce concerninge the Naza- 

rees or absteyners. The blessynge of the 
Israelites. 

Chap. VII. 
The offerynges of the captaynes at the dedicacié 

of the altare, after that the Tabernacle was set vp

Chap. VIH. 
Of the candilsticke, offerynges, purifienge, and altare of the Leuites.
Chap. IX. 

Of the feast of Easter, q how the vncleane shulde kepe it. Of the cloude vpon the Tabernacle.

The fourth boke of Moses, 

called Numerus. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chap. X. 
The vse of the syluer trompettes, q how the 

children of Israel brake vp, and toke their iourney with Hobab Moses brother in lawe.

Chap. XI. 

The people are weery and vnpaciet by the waye, murmur agaynst Moses, desyre flesh, and abhorre the Manna. The LORDE geueth them after their lust, but punisheth them sore.

Chap. XII. 

Miriam and Aaron grudge agaynst Moses, q 
Miriam is smytten with Leprosy. 

Chap. XIII. 

The spyes that were sent in to the lande of 
Canaan, come agayne, and put the people in feare.

Chap. XINI. 

The people are vnpacient, wepe, and murmur agaynst Moses, losue q Caleb geue the Ionde a good worde, q coforte them. The LORDE is angrie, t punysheth the people.

Chap. XV. 

Of dyuerse offerynges, and how he was punyshed, that gathered stickes vpon the Sabbath. The people are commaiided to make gardes of remembraunce vpon their garmentes, to thinke vpon the commaundementes of the LORDE.

Chap. XVI. 

Of the vproure and insurreccion of Corah, Dathan and Abyram, q their punyshment. The peo- ple murmur. — Fourtene thousande and seuen hundreth dye in the plage.

19 

|fo. tyrüj. 

| Chap. XVII. 
By the florishinge staff of Aaron, it is declared, that the trybe of Leui and the presthode of
Aaron is chosen of God. 

Chap. XVIII. 
The office x mynistracion of Aaron, of the prestes q Leuites, ¢ their dewtye.

Chap. XIX. 

Of the reed cowe that was brent, and how the sprynklinge water was made of the aszshes of her.

Chap. XX. 

Miriam dyeth at Cades. The people chyde with 
Moses and Aaron for faute of water, the 
LORDE geueth it them out of the hard stonye rocke. Moses desyreth the kynge of Edom, to let them go thorow his londe. Aaron dyeth vpon mount Hor.

Chap. XXI. 
The battaill betwene Israel and Arad the kynge 
The people murmur, and 
They wynne 

of the Cananites. are plaged with the serpentes. the victory of Og and Sihon.

Chap. XXII. 
Of Balac the kynge of the Moabites, and of 
Balaam the Soythsayer. 

Chap. XXIII. 
Balaam is brought to curse the people of God. 

Chap. XXIII. 

The LORDE turneth Balaams curse in to a blessynge and prayse.

Chap. XXV. 

The people fall to whordome and Idolatrye with the wemen of Moab, and ioyne them selues to the seruice of Ball Peor. Foure and twen- tye thousande are destroyed. Phineas in his feruent zele slayeth a man and woman in their synne.

| 
| 

The first Chapter. a A ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses in y wyldernesse of Sinai, in the Tabernacle of witnesse, the first daye of the secode moneth in the seconde yeare, whà they were gone out of the lade of Egipte, and sayde:

* Exo. 30. b. Nu. 26. a. 

The iiij. boke of Moses, 

Chap. f. 

Chap. XXVI. 
The people are nombred agayne and musterd. 

Chap. XXVII. 

What inheritatice the doughters haue, where there is no sonne, Iosua is made captayne of the people in Moses steade.

Chap. XXVIII. 
Offeringes apoynted for euery tyme. 

Chap. XXIX. 
The feast of the seuenth moneth and the offer- ynges therof.
Chap. XXX. 
Of vowes made by mé or women. 

Chap. XXXI. 

Israel wynneth the victory of the Madianites, and deuydeth the spoyle.

Chap. XXXII. 

Ruben, Gad, and the half trybe of Manasse haue their inheritatice apoynted them on this syde of Iordan.

Chap. XXXIII. 

The iourneys of the children of Israel are nom- bred. The people are commaunded (whan they come in to the londe of Canaan) to de- stroye all vtterly.

Chap. XXXIII. 

The deuydinge of the londe of Canaan with the borders therof, and what they be that deuyde it.

Chap. XXXV. 

The porcion of the Leuites. Fredome for soch as commytte slanghter vnawares. Dyuerse slaughters.

Chap. XXXVI. 

The inheritaüce of the tribe maie not be mixte 

nor chaunged. 

* Take y summe of the whole congregacion of the METERS of Israel, after their kynredes q their fathers houses, with the nombre of the names, all that are males, heade by heade, fro twentye yeare and aboue, as many as are able to go forth in to y warre in Israel. And ye shal nombre them acordinge to their armyes thou and Aaron, and of euery trybe ye shal

take vnto you one captayne ouer his fathers house.

These are the names of the captaynes that shal stonde with you. Of Ruben, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur. Of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai. Of Iuda, Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab. Of Isachar, Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar. Of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helon. Amonge the children of loseph: Of Ephraim, Elisama 1 sonne of
Amihud. Of Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur. Of Ben Iamin, Abidam y sonne of Gedeoni. Of Dan, Ahieser the sonne of
Ammi Sadai. Of Asser, Pagiel the sonne of Ochram. Of Gad, Eliasaph y sonne of
Deguel Of Nephthali, Ahira the sonne ot 
Enan. 

These are the awncient men of the congre- gacion, the captaynes amonge the trybes of their fathers, which were heades and prynces in Israel.

And Moses q Aaron toke them (like as they are there named by name) and gathered the whole cogregacion together also, y first; daye of the secode moneth, and rekened thé, after their byrth, acordinge to their kynreds and fathers houses by their names, fro twétye yeare and aboue, heade by heade, as the
LORDE commaunded Moses, and nombred them in the wyldernes of Sinai.

The children of Ruben Israels first sonne, their kynreds « generacions after their fathers houses, in » nombre of their names heade by heade, all y were males, from twentye yeare t aboue, and were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Ruben, sixe and fourtye thousande, and fyue hundreth.

The children of Simeon their kynreds t generacions after their fathers houses in the nombre of the names heade by heade, all that were males from twétye yeare and aboue, and were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Symeon, nyne and fiftye thousande and thre hundreth.

The children of Gad their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in y nombre of the names, from twentye yeare and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Gad, fyue and fourtye thousande, sixe hundreth and fiftie.

The children of Iuda their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in y

The iij. boke of Moses. 

Fo. erry. nombre of the names, from twentye yeare and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Iuda, foure and seuentye thousande, q sixe hundreth.

The children of Isachar their kynreds t generacions, after their fathers houses in $ nombre of the names from twentye yeare q aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to y trybe of Isachar, foure and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.

The children of Zabulon their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in the nombre of the names from twentye yeare q aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Zabulon, seuen and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.

Iosephs children of Ephraim, their kynreds 
« generacions after their fathers houses in y nombre of the names, from twétye yeare q aboue, all y were able to go forth to $ warre, were nobred to the trybe of Ephraim, fourtye thousande q fyue hundreth.

The children of Manasse their kynreds q generacions, after their fathers honses in y nombre of the names from twentye yeare q aboue, all y were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Manasse, two q thirtie thousande ¢ two hundreth.

The childré of Ben Iamin their kynreds and generacions, after their fathers houses, in the nombre of the names from twentye yeare q aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Ben
Iamin, fyue and thirtie thousande and foure hundreth.

The children of Dan their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses, in the nombre of the names, from twentye yeares and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Dan, two and thre score thousande, and seuen hundreth.

The children of Asser their kynreds g/d generacions, after their fathers houses in the} nombre of the names, from twentye yeare q aboue, all y were able to go forth to ¥ warre, were nombred to the trybe of Asser, one q fourtye thousande and fyue hundreth.

The childré of Nephthali, their kynreds and generaeions after their fathers houses in | the nombre of the names, from twentye yeare q aboue, all that were able to go forth vnto the warre, were nombred to the peer dna m REB — ee tbe of of|

£ 

fo. riiij. 

The iiij. boke of Moses. 

Chap. ij. 

Nephthali, thre and fiftie thousande and foure hundreth.

These are they whom Moses and Aaron nombred with $ twolue prynces of Israel, wherof euery one was ouer y house of their fathers. *And the summe of the children of
Israel after their fathers houses, from twentye yeare and aboue (what so euer was able to go forth to the warre in Israel) was sixe C. thousande, thre thousande, fyue C. « fiftie.
But the Leuites after the trybe of their fathers, were not nombred amonge them.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and saide: The trybe of Leui shalt thou not nombre, ner take the summe of them amonge y children of Israel: bnt shalt appoynte them to the Habitacion of wytnesse, and to all apparell therof, and to all that belonget therto. tAnd they shall beare the Tabernacle
& all the ordinaunce therof, and shal wayte vpon it, and shal pitch their tentes ronnde aboute it. And whan men shal go on their iourney, the Leuites shal take downe $ Ta- bernacle. And whan the hoost pitch their tetes, they shal set vp the Tabernacle. And yf a straunger preasse nye vnto it, he shall dye. The children of Israel shal pitch their tentes, euery one in his awne armye, and by the baner of his awne companye. But the
Leuites shall pitch rounde aboute the Ta- bernacle of wytnesse, that there come no wrath vpon ¥ congregacion of the children of
Israel: therfore shal the Leuites wayte vpon the Habitacion of wytnesse. And the children of Israel dyd all, as the LORDE commaunded
Moses. 

The ij. Chapter. 

ND $ LORDE spake vnto Moses and 
A Aaron, q sayde: The childré of Israel shal pitch rounde aboute y Tabernacle of wytnesse, euery one vnder his bauner q tokens, after their fathers houses.

On the East syde shall Iuda pitch with his banner q hoost, their captayne Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab. And his armie in the summe, foure q seuentie thousande and sixe hundreth. Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of
Isachar pitch, their captayne Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar: and his armye in the summe, fonre and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
The trybe of Zabulon also, their captayne 

SS xOg12 TEN milies 

Eliab the sonne of Helon: his armye in the summe, seuen and fiftie thousande and foure hundreth.

So y all they which beloge to $ hoost of 
Iuda, be m the summe an C. sixe and foure score thousande, q foure hundreth be longinge to their armye, q they shall go before.

On the South side shall lye the pauylions q baner of Ruben with their hoost, their cap- taine Elizur y sonne of Sedeur: q his armie in the summe, sixe q fourtie thousande, q fyue
C. Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Simeon pitch, their captayne Selumiel y sonne of
Zuri Sadai: q his armie in y summe, nyne and fiftie thousande, and thre hundreth. The trybe of Gad also, their captayne Eliasaph y sonne of Deguel: q his armye in the summe, fyue q fourtye thousande, sixe hundreth q fiftie. So that all they which belonge to the hoost of Ruben, be in the summe, an hun- dreth, one q fiftie thousande, foure hüdreth and fiftye, belonginge to their armye. And they shall be the seconde in the iourney.

After that shall the Tabernacle of wytnesse go with the hoost of the Leuites eue in y myddes amoge the hoostes: q as they lye in their tentes, so shal they go forth also, euery one in his place vnder his baner.

On the West syde shall lye ¥ pauylions a baner of Ephraim with their hoost: their cap- tayne shalbe Elisama sonne of Amihud, and his armye in the summe, fourtye thousande and fyue hundreth. Nexte vnto him shal y trybe of Manasse pitch, their captayne Ga- maliel the sonne of Pedazur: his armye in the summe, two and thirtie thousande q two hüdreth. The trybe of Ben Iamin also, their captayne Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni: his armye in the summe, fyue and thirtie thou- sande q foure hundreth. So y all they which belonge to the hoost of Ephraim, be in the summe, an hundreth thousande, eight thou- sande, q an hudreth, belonginge to his armie.
And they shal be the thirde in the ionrney. 

On the North syde shal lye ¥ pauylions ¢ baner of Dan with their hoost : ‘ee captayne
Ahieser y sonne of Ammi Sadai, his armye in the summe, two and sixtye thousande and seué hundreth. Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Asser pitche: their captayne Pagiel y sonne of Ochran, his army in the summe, one and fourtie thousande, and fyue hundreth.

t 1 Par. 14. d. 

5 

€ 

D 

Chap. ii. 
The trybe of Nephthali also, their captayne 
Ahira the sonne of Enan: his armye in the summe, thre ¢ fiftye thousande ¢ foure hüdreth.
So y all they which belonge to the hoost of 
Dan, be in the summe, an hüdreth thousande, senen q fiftie thousande, q sixe hundreth.
And they shalbe the last in the iourney with their baners.

This is the summe of the children of Israel, after their fathers houses and armyes with their hoostes: euen sixe hundreth thousande, q thre thousande, fyue hudreth ç fiftie. But y Leuites were not nombred in y summe amonge the childré of Israel, * as LORDE comaunded Moses. And y childré of Israel dyd all as the LORDE cómaunded Moses.
And so they pitched vnder their baners, q toke their iourney, euery one in his kynred, acordinge to the house of their fathers.

The iij. Chapter. 

HESE are the generacions of Aaron q 
Moses, whan $ LORDE spake vnto 
Moses at $ same tyme vpon mount Sinai. 
And these are ¥ names of the sonnes of Aron. 
“The firstborne, Nadab: then Abihu, Eleasar t Ithamar. These are ý names of the sonnes of Aaron,+ which were anoynted to be prestes, q their handes fylled for y presthode. * But
Nadab q Abihu dyed before y LORDE, wha they offred straŭge fyre before y LORDE, in
Y wildernesse of Sinai, q had no sonnes. But leasar and Ithamar executed y prestes office

with their father Aaron. 

"And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q sayde: Bringe hither the trybe of Leui, and set them before Aaron the prest, y they maye serue with him, q wayte vpon him ç vpo the whole congregacion before ¥ Tabernacle of witnesse, and execute the seruyce of the habitacion, and kepe all the apparell of the
‘Tabernacle of wytnesse, and wayte vpon the children of Israel, to mynistre in the seruyce of the habitacion.

And thon shalt gene ¥ Leuites vnto Aaron and his sonnes for a gift, vnto euery one his awne, from amonge the children of Israel.
As for Aaron q his sonnes, thou shalt appoynte them to wayte on their prestes office. +Yf another preasse therto, he shal dye.

$ And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and 

t Levi. 8. a. 
1 Par. 10. b. 

* Num. 1. g. 

?Leui.10.a, Nu.96.g. 
? Leui. 10. a. 

* Nu. 16. b. and 18. a. 

The (iij. boke of Moses. 

saide: Beholde, I hane také the Leuites fro amonge the childré of Israel, for all the first borne that open the Matrix amonge the children of Israel, so that the Leuites shalbe myne. || For the firstborne are myne, sence y tyme that I smote all the first borne in i lande of Egipte, wha I sanctified vnto me all the first borne in Israel, from mē vnto catell, that they shulde be myne. I the LORDE.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the wyldernesse of Sinai, and sayde: Nombre the children of Leni after their fathers houses and kynreds, all that are males of a moneth olde and aboue.

So Moses nombred them acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, as he had commaunded.
And these were the children of Leui with their names: ^ Gerson, Kahath, Merari. The names of the children of Gerson in their kynreds, were: Libni and Semei.

The childré of Kahath in their kynreds were, Amram, lezehar, Hebron and Vsiel.

The children of Merari in their kynreds, were Maheli and Musi. These are the kynreds of Leui after their fathers houses.

These are y kynreds of Gerson: The Lib- nites and Semeites, the summe was founde in nombre, seuen thousande and fyue hundreth, of all that were males of a moneth olde and aboue. And the same kynreds of the Ger- sonites shal pitche behinde the Habitacion on the west syde: Let Eliasaph the sonne of
Lael be their ruler. And they shal waite vpon the Tabernacle of wytnesse, of the habitacion, and of the tent, and couerynges therof, and the hangynge in the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse, the hangynge aboute the courte, q the hangynge in y courtedore, which (courte) goeth aboute the habitacion and the altare, and the cordes of it, ¢ all that belongeth to the seruyce therof.

'These are the kynreds of Kahath: 'The 
Amramites, the lezeharites, the Hebronites, and Vsielites, all that were males of a moneth olde q aboue, in nombre eight thousande and sixe hnndreth, waytinge vpon the Tabernacle of the Sanctuary, q shal pitch on the south syde of y Habitacion: Let Elisaphan the sonne of Vsiel be their ruler. kepe the Arke, the table, the candilsticke, the altare and all the vessels of the Sanctuary,

t Num. 3. f. and 16.2. & Num, 3. f.and8.b. || Exod. 
13.a. 4 Exod. 6. c. 

And they shal} £ 

fo. errbi. 

to do seruyce in, and the vayle, and all that belongeth to the seruice therof. But the chefe of all the rulers of the Leuites, shalbe Eleasar the sonne of Aron the prest, ouer them that are apoynted to kepe the watch of the Sanc- tuary.

These are X kynreds of Merari: The Ma- helites and Musites, which were in nombre sixe thousande and two hüudreth, all that were males of a moneth olde and aboue: Let Zuriel j sonne of Abihail be their ruler, and they shall pitche vpon the north syde of the Ha- bitacion. And their office shalbe to kepe the bordes, and barres, and pilers, and sokettes
‘of the Habitacion, and all the apparell therof 
‘and that serueth therto: y pilers also aboute y courte, with the sokettes, and nales, and cordes.

J^, But before the Habitacion and before y 

Tabernacle on the East syde shal Moses q 
Aaron q his sonnes pytche, that they maye wayte vpon the Sanctuary, q the children of
Israel. *Yf eny other preasse therto, he shal dye.

“ All the Leuites in the summe, whom Moses and Aaron nombred after their kynreds, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, all that were males, of a moneth olde and aboue, were two and twentye thousande.

And$ LORDE saide vnto Moses: Nombre all the first borne, that are males amonge the children of Israel, of a moneth olde and aboue, and take the nombre of their names. ^And y
Leuites shalt thou take out vnto me the 
LORDE, for all ¥ first borne of y childré of 
Israel, q the catell of the Leuites for all the first borne amonge the catell of y children of
Israel. And Moses nombred all the first borne amoge the childré of Israel, as the
LORDE commaunded him. And in the 
‘nombre of the names of all the first borne, 
Ithat were males of a moneth olde q aboue, in their summe, there were foüde two and twentye thousande, two hundreth, and thre and seuentye.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde: 'Take the Leuites for all y first borne amonge the childré of Israel, q the catell of ý
Leuites for their catell, y the Leuites maye be myne the LORDES. “But the redemp- cion money of the two hundreth thre q seuentye y remayne of the first borne of the children

* Num. 3, b. and 16. a. and 8. b.

> Num. 3. b. 

a Nu. 26. g. 
* Leui. 27, a. 

The iiij. boke of Moses. 

of Israel, aboue the nombre of the Leuites, shalt thou take, euen fyue Sycles of euery heade, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary t (one
Sycle is worth twentye Geras) q the money y remayneth ouer their nobre, shalt thou geue vnto Áaron and his sonnes.

Then toke Moses ý redempcion money 
(that remayned ouer aboue the nombre of the Leuites) from ¥ first borne of the childré of Israel, euen a thousande, thre hundreth, and fyue and thre score Sycles, after y Sycle of the Sanctuary, q gaue it vnto Aaron and his sonnes, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

The itij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses q 

Aaron, q sayde: Take y summe of the childre of Kahath from amonge the childré of
Leui, after their kynreds q fathers houses; from thirtie yeare and aboue vntill fiftye yeare, all that are mete for the warre, that they maye do the worke in the ‘Tabernacle of witnesse. This shal be the office of the children of Kahath in the Tabernacle of wyt- nesse, which is most holy.

Whan the hoost breaketh vp, Aaron and his sonnes shall go in, and take downe the vayle, and couer the Arke of wytnesse ther- with, and laye the couerynge of doo skynnes vpon it, and sprede a whole yalowe clothe aboue theron, and put his staues therin. And vpon the shewe table they shal sprede a yalowe clothe also, and set theron the disshes, spones, flatpeces and pottes to poure out and in, and the daylie bred shal lye vpon it, and they shall sprede a purple clothe therouer, and couer it with a coueryuge of doo skynnes, and put the staues of 3t therin.

And they shal take a yalowe clothe, and couer the cadilsticke of light therwith, and his lampes, with his snoffers and outquenchers, and all the oyle vessels that belonge to the seruyce, and aboute all this shal they put a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put ıt vpon staues.

So shal they sprede a yalowe clothe ouer the golden altare also, and couer the same with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put it vponstaues. All the vessels that they occupye in the Sanctuary, shal they take, and put a

+ Exo. 30. b. Leui. 26.d. Eze. 45. b. 1 1 Par. 24, a. 

Chap. (ij. 

B 

Chap. tty. yalowe clothe ther ouer, q couer them with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put them vpon staues. They shal swepe the asshes also from the altare, and sprede a clothe of scarlet ouer it, and set all his vessels theron, that they occupye vpon it: colepannes, fleshokes, shouels, basens, with all the apparell of the altare, and they shal sprede a couerynge of doo skynnes theron, and put his staues therto.

Now whan Aaron and his sonnes haue done this, and haue couered the Sanctuary q all the ornamétes therof, whan the hoost breaketh vp. ^then shal the children of Kahath go in, that they maye beare it, and the Sanctuary shall they not touche, * lest they dye. This is the charge of the childré of Kahath in the
Tabernacle of wytnesse. 

And Eleasar the sonne of Aaron y prest, shal haue the office, to prepare the oyle for the light, and the spyces for the incense, and the daylie meat offerynge, and the anoyntinge oyle, to order the whole habitacion, q all that therin is, in the Sanctuary and the ornamentes therof.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses and 
Aaron, q sayde: Ye shal not destroye the trybe of the kynred of the Kahathites amoge the Leuites, but this shal ye do with them, y they maye lyue « not dye, yf they touche the most holy. Aaron and his sonnes shal go in, and appoynte euery one vnto his office q charge. But they shal not go in, presump- tuously to loke vpo y Sanctuary, lest they die.
And y LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron q sayde: Take the summe of the children of
Gerson also, ‘after their fathers house q kynred, from thirtye yeare q aboue, vntyll fiftye yeare, x appoynte them all y are mete for the warre, to haue an office in the Taber- nacle of wytnesse.

2. ‘This shalbe the office of the kynred of the 
Gersonites, eué to serue q to beare. They shal beare the curtaynes of the habitacion and of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and his couerynge and the coueringe of doo skynnes, that is aboue theron, and the hanginge m the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the hanginge aboute the courte, which goeth aboute the habitacion and the altare, and their cordes, and all the instrumentes y serue for thé, and all that belongeth to their occu- pienge. Acordinge vnto the worde of Aaron

j 2 Num. 7. b. *2 Re. 6. b. 

The iiij. boke of Moses, 

and of his sonnes, shal all the office of the children of Gerson be done, what so euer they shall beare and occupye. And ye shal se, that they wayte vpon all their charge. This shal be y office of y kinred of y childré of ý
Gersonites in ý Tabernacle of witnes. And their waytinge shal be vnder y hade of Ithamar, the sonne of Aaro the prest.

The children of Merari after their kynred and fathers house, shalt thou appoynte also, from thirtie yeare and aboue, vnto fiftie yeare, all that are mete for the warre, y they maye haue an office in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
But vpon this charge shall they wayte acord- inge to all their office in ¥ Tabernacle of witnesse, that they beare the bordes of the
Habitacion, and the barres, and pilers, and sokettes: the pilers of the courte also rounde aboute, and the sokettes and nales and cordes, with all their apparell, acordynge to all their sernyce. And vnto euery one shall ye ap- poynte his porcion of charge to waite vpon the apparell. Let this be the office of the kynred of the children of Merari, all that they shall do in the Tabernacle of wytnesse vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of
Aaron the prest. 

And Moses and Aaron with the captaynes of the congregacion, nombred the children of y Kahathites, acordinge to their kynreds and dena of their fathers, from thirtie yeare and aboue, vntyll fyftye, all that were mete for.the warre, to haue offyce in the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the summe was, two thou- sande, seuen hundreth and fyftie. "This is the summe of the kynred of the Kahathites
(which all had seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnesse) whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE by
Moses. 

'The children of Gerson were nombred also in their kynreds and fathers houses from thirtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftie, all that were mete for the warre, to haue office in y
Tabernacle of witnesse, and the summe was two thousande, syxe hundreth and thirtie.
This is $ summe of the kinred of the childré of Gerson, which all had to do in the Taber- nacle of wytnesse, whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordinge to y worde of y LORDE.

'The children of Merari were nombred also acordinge to their kynreds and fathers houses,

> Num. 8. d. 

So. erbi. 

F 

6 

‘Fo. orbit. 

from thirtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftye, all that were mete for the warre, to haue office in the Tabernacle of witnesse, q the summe was thre thousande, and two hundreth. ‘This is the summe of the kynred of the childré of
Merari, whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by
Moses. 

The summe of all the Leuites, whom 
Moses and Aaron with the captaynes of 
Israel tolde, after their kinreds and fathers houses, from thyrtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftye, all that wente in to do euery one his office, and to beare the burthen in y Taber- nacle of wytnesse, was eight thousande fyue hundreth and foure score, which were nombred acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by
Moses, euery one to his office q charge, as the 
LORDE commaunded Moses. 

The b. Chapter. 

ND ý LORDE spake vnto Moses, and 

sayde: Commaunde the children of 
Israel y they put out of the hoost *all y lepers, and all that haue yssues, and that are defyled vpon the deed, both men and wome shall they putt out of the hoost, that they defyle not their tentes, wherin I dwell amonge them. And y children of Israel dyd so, and put them out of the hoost, as y LORDE had sayde vnto Moses.

And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel q saye vnto them: Whan a man or woman doth a synne to eny body, and offendeth therwith agaynst the LORDE, then hath that soule a trespace vpon it. t Ánd they shall knowlege their synne, that they haue done, and shall make amendes for their trespace, euen with the whole summe, and put y fifth parte more therto, and geue it vnto him, agaynst whom they haue trespaced. But yf there be noman to make the amendes vnto for the offence y he hath trespaced agaynst him, then shal the reconcylynge be made vnto the LORDE for the prest, besydes the ramme of the attonemét, wherwith he shalbe reconcyled.

Likewyse all the Heueofferynges of all that the children of Israel halowe vnto the
LORDE, and offre vnto the prest, shall be his. And whoso haloweth eny thinge, it shalbe

* Leu. 13. g. t Leui. 5.e. 

The iiij, boke of Moses. 

his. And who so geueth the prest eny thinge, it shal be his also.

And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan eny mans wife goth asyde, and trespaceth agaynst him, q eny ma lye with her fleshlye, and the thinge be yet hyd from his eyes, and is not come to light that she is defiled, and he can brynge no wit- nesse agaynst her (for she was not take therin) and the sprete of gelousye kyndleth him, so that he is gelous ouer his wife: whether she be vneleane or not vneleane, then shal he brynge her vnto the prest, and brynge an offerynge for her, euen the tenth parte of an
Epha of barlye meele, and shal poure no oyle theron, ner put frankensence vpon it : for it 1s an offerynge of gelousy, and an offeringe of remembraunce, that remembreth synne.

Then shall the prest brynge her, and sett her before the LORDE, and take of the t holy water in an earthen vessell, and put of y dust that is on the floore of the habitacion, in to the water. And he shal set the wife before $ LORDE, and vncouer hir heade, and the offeringe of remembraunce which is an offeringe of gelousy, shall he laye vpon hir handes. And the prest shal haue in his hande bytter cursinge water, and shal coniure the wife, q saye vnto her: Yf no man haue lyé with the, and thou hast not gone asyde from thy huszbande, to defyle thy self, then shall not these bytter cursinge waters hurte the. But yf thou hast gone asyde from thy huszbande, so that thou art defyled, and some other man hath lyen with the besyde thy huszbande, then shall the prest coniure the wife with this curse, and shal saye vnto her:
The LORDE sett the to a curse and a con- iuracion amonge thy people, so that the
LORDE make thy thye rotte, and thy wombe to berst. So go this cursed water in to thy body, that thy wombe berst, and thy thye rotte. And the wife shal saye: Amen Amen.

So the prest shall wryte this curse in a byll, and wash it out with the water, and shall geue the wife of the bytter cursinge waters to drynke. And wha the cursinge water is gone in her, so y it is bytter vnto her then shal the prest take the gelousy offerynge out of the wyues hande, and waue it for a meatofferynge before the LORDE, and offre it vpon the

t Num. 19. b. 

€ 

——————Á—Á»—À—À———————!ÁÉÁ'Ááá,,aaCEEN —— ———————————————— | 

I Chap. bí. altare: namely, he shall take an handfull of the meatofferynge for hir remébraunce, q burne it vpo the altare, a then gene the wife the water to drinke. And wha she hath dronken the water, yf she be defyled and haue trespaced agaynst hir huszbande, then shal the cursinge water go in to her, and be so bytter, that hir wombe shal berst, and hir thye shall rotte, and the wife shal be a curse amonge hir people. But yf the same wife be not defyled, but is cleane, then shall it do her no harme, so that she maye be with childe.

'This is the lawe of gelousy, whan a wyfe goeth asyde from hir huszbande, and is de- fyled: Or whan $ sprete of gelousy kyndleth a man, so that he is gelous ouer his wyfe, y he brynge her before the LORDE, and that y prest do all with her acordinge vnto this lawe.
And ¥ man shalbe giltlesse of the synne, but the wife shall beare hir myszdede.

The bi. Chapter. 

a ND the LORDE talked with Moses, 

and sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan a man or woman separateth them selues, to vowe a vowe of abstinence vnto the LORDE, he shal absteyne from wyne and stroge drynke.
* Vyneger of wyne q of stronge drynke shal he not drynke, ner that is pressed out of grapes: he shall nether eate fresh ner drye grapes, so longe as his abstinence endureth.
Morouer he shall eate nothinge that is made of the vyne tre, from the wyne cornels vnto the hulle.

As longe as the vowe of his abstynence endureth, there shall no rasoure come vpon his heade, tyll the tyme be out which he ab- steyneth vnto the LORDE, for he is holy.

And he shall let the heer of his heade growe, and stonde bare openly. All the tyme ouer y he absteyneth vnto the LORDE, shal he goto no deed. Nether shal he defyle him self at y death of his father, of his mother, of his brother, or of his sister. For the abstinence of his God is vpon his heade, and
M whole tyme of his abstinence shall he be 

oly vnto the LORDE. 

And yf it chaunce eny man to dye sodenly before him, then shal heade of his absty- nence be defyled. "Pherfore shal he shaue his heade in the daye of his clensynge, that is vpon the seuenth daye: and vpon y eight

The iiij. boke of Moses, 

Fo. cric. daye shall he brynge two turtill doues, or two yonge pigeons, vnto the prest before ý dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And the prest shall make the one a synofferynge, and the other a burntofferynge, and make an attonement for him, because he defyled him self vpon $ deed, and so shal he halowe his heade the same daye, that he maye holde out the tyme of his abstinence vnto the LORDE, and he shall brynge a lambe of a yeare olde for a trespaceofferynge. But y daies afore shal be but lost, because his aec was defyled.

This is the lawe of the absteyner. Whan the tyme of his abstinence is out, he shal be brought before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse. And he shal brynge his offeringe vnto the LORDE, euen an he lambe of a yeare olde without blemysh for a burntoffer- inge, q a she lambe of a yeare olde without blemysh for a synofferynge, and a ramme with out blemish for an healthofferynge, q a maiide with vnleuended cakes of fyne floure myngled with oyle, and swete wafers anoynted with oyle, q their meatofferinges q drynkofferynges.

And the prest shall brynge it before the 
LORDE, and shal make his synofferynge and his burntofferynge, and ¥ ramme shal he make an healthofferynge vnto the LORDE, with y maunde of the vnleuended bred. His meatofferynge and drinkofferinge shal he make also. And he shall shaue the heade of the absteyners abstinence before the dore of the
Tabernacle of wytnesse, and shall take the heade heer of his abstinence, and cast it vpon the fyre that is vnder ¥ healthofferynge.

And the sodden shulder of the ramme shall| 39 he take, and an vnleuended cake out of the maunde, and a swete wafer, and laye them vpon the handes of the absteyner: (after that he hath shauen of his abstinence.) And he shal Waue them before the LORDE. This is holy for the prest with the Waue brest, and
Heue shulder. After that, maye the absteyner drynke wyne. This is the lawe of the ab- steyner, which voweth his offeringe vnto the
LORDE for his abstynence, besydes that, which his hande can get. As he hath vowed, so shall he do acordinge to the lawe of his abstinence.

And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes,

* Tudi. 13. a. 
20 

Amos 2, c, 

Jo. cry. 

and saye: Thus shal ye saye vnto the childré of Israel, whan ye blesse them.

* The LORDE blesse the, and kepe the. 

The LORDE make his face to shyne vpo the, and be mercifull vnto the.

'The LORDE lift vp his countenaunce vpon the, and geue the peace.

For they shal put my name vpo the children of Israel, that I maye blesse them.

The bij. Chapter. 

ND whan Moses had set vp the Habita- 

cion and anoynted it," and sanctifyed it 

with all the apparell therof: and had anoynted 

and halowed the altare also with all his vessels, 

'Then offred the captaynes of Israel, which were the rulers in their fathers houses.

For they were the captaynes amonge y kynreds, and stode ouer the that were nom- bred. And they brought their offerynges before the LORDE, sixe couered charettes, and twolue oxen, for euery two captaynes a charett, and an oxe for euery one, and brought them before the habitacion.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Take it of them, that it maye serue for the mynis- tracion of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and geue it vnto the Leuites, vnto euery one acordinge to his office. Then toke Moses the charettes and oxen, and gaue them vnto the
Leuites. 

Two charettes and foure oxen gaue he vnto $ children of Gerson acordinge to their office: and foure charettes and eight oxen gaue he vnto the children of Merari acordinge to their office, vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the prest.

But vnto the children of Kahath he gaue nothynge, because fthey had an holy office vpon them, and must beare vpo their shulders.
And the captaines offred to the dedicacion of the altare, in the daye whan it was anoynted, and offred their giftes before the altare.

And $ LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Let euery captayne brynge his offerynge vpon his daye to the dedicacion of the altare.

On the first daye, Nahasson the sonne of 
Aminadab, of the trybe of Iuda, offred his gifte. And his gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thyrtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the
Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferinge :

The iiij. boke of Moses. 

Chap, bij. 
And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge, an he goate for a synofferynge: And for an health offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Naliasson the sonne of Amina- dab.

On the seconde daye offred Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar, the captayne of Isachar. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanc- tuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oile for a meatofferinge: And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a rame, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burnt- offerynge, an he goate for a synofferynge:
Nu for an healthofferynge ivo oS rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar.

On the thirde daye, the captayne of the children of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of He- lon. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And|® a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge, an he goate for a syn- offerynge: And for an healthofferinge two oxen, fyue rammes, fiue he goates, and fiue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte
Eliab the sonne of Helon. 

On the fourth daye, the captayne of the children of Ruben, Elizur the sonne of Se- deur. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And a goldé spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge, an he goate for a synofferynge: And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, q fyue

* Eccli. 36.b. ^% Exo. 40. b. t Num. 4.b. 2 Re. 6. b. 

Chap. by. 

The iij. boke of Moses. 

lambes of a yeare olde. ‘This is the gifte of 
Elizur the sonne of Sedeur. 
£| On the fifth daye, the captayne of y children of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of
Zuri Sadai. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirüe Sycles: A siluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the
Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferinge:
And a goldé spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incése: A bullocke from amoge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge, q an he goate for a synofferynge: And for an healthofferynge two oxé, fyue rammes, fyne he goates, and fiue lambes of a yeare olde. ‘This is the gifte of
Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai. 

On the sixte daye, the captayne of y children of Gad, Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel. His gifte was a siluer charger, worth an hüdreth q thirtie Sicles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye
Sycles (after the Sycle of ¥ Sanctuary) both full of fine floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bul- locke from amonge y greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge, an he goate for a synnofferynge: And for an health offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde.
'This is the gifte of Eliasaph the sonne of 
Deguel. 

JF| On the seuenth daye the captayne of the 

children of Ephraim, Elisama, the sonne of 
Amihud. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after y
Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a rame, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge, an he goate for a syn- offerynge: And for an healthofferynge two oxé, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is y gifte of
Elisama the sonne of Amihud. 

On the eight daye, the captayne of the children of Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of
Pedazur. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the
Sycle of y Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure 

myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles E full ofincése. A bullocke from amoge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge, an he goate for a synofferynge.
And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, q fyne lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.

On the nyenth daye, the captayne of the children of Ben Iamin, Abidan the sonne of
Gedeoni. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the
Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incése: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge: And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. ‘This is the gifte of Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.

On the tenth daye, the captayne of the children of Dan, Ahieser the sonne of Ammi
Sadai. His gifte was a siluer charger, worth an hundreth q thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentie Sycles (after the Sycle of the
Sactuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge : And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of in- cense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge, an he goate for a synofferynge:
And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, q fyue lambes of a yeare olde. "This is the gifte of Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai.

On the eleuenth daye, the captayne of y childré of Asser, Pagiel the sonne of Ochra :
His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentie Sycles (after the Sycle of the
Sactuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incése:
A bullocke from the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge, an he goate for a synofferynge: And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde.
This is the gifte of Pagiel the sonne of 
Ochran. 

Fo. terri 

Fo. erri. 

a 

On the twolfte daye, the captayne of the children of Nephtal, Ahira the sonne of
Enan. His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge: And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense: A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge, an he goate for a synnofferinge: And for an health offeringe two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. ‘This is the gifte of
Ahira the sonne of Enan. 

This is y dedicacion of the altare, what tyme as it was anoynted, vnto the which y captaynes of Israel offered these twolue syluer chargers, twolue syluer boules, twolue spones of golde: euery charger conteynynge an hü- dreth and thirtie Sycles of syluer, and euery boule seuentye Sycles. So that y summe of all the syluer in the vessels, was two thousande and foure hundreth Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary). And the twolue spones of golde full of incense, conteyned euery one ten
Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary: So that the summe of the golde in the spones, was an hundreth and twentye Sycles.

The summe of the catell for the burntoffer- inges, was twolue bullockes, twolue rammes, twolue labes of a yeare olde with their meat- offeringes: And twolue he goates for synn- offeringes. And the summe of the catell for the healthofferinges, was foure and twétye oxen, thre score rammes, and thre score he goates, thre score labes of a yeare olde. "This is the dedicacion of the altare, after that it was anoynted.

“And whan Moses wente in to the Taber- naclé of wytnes, y he might be commoned withall, he herde the voyce speakynge vnto him fro of the Mercy seate, which was vpo the Arke of witnes betwixte the two Cherubins, from thence was he comoned withall.

The biij. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE talked with Moses, q sayde: Speake to Aaron, q saye vnto him: *Whan thou settest vp y lapes, thou shalt set thé so, that they maye all seué geue light aboue vpo y condicio And Aaron

* Exo. 25. c. * Exo. 25. d. 

The iiij. boke of Moses. 

dyd so, q set Y lampes vpo y candilsticke, as y LORDE comaunded Moses. The worke of y cadilsticke was of beate golde, both y shaft q floures therof: Acordynge to y visio that the LORDE had shewed Moses, euen so made he the candelsticke.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: Take the Leuites frō amonge the children of Israel, q clense them. But thus shalt thou do with them, that thou mayest clense them. Thou shalt sprenkle purifienge water vpon them, and lett a rasure go ouer their whole body, and washe their clothes, and then are they cleane. ‘Then shall they take a yonge bullocke, and his meatofferynge of fyne floure myngled with oyle. And another yonge bullocke shalt thou take for a syn- offeringe.

And thou shalt brynge the Leuites before the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and gather to- gether the whole congregacion of y children of Israel, and brynge the Leuytes before the LORDE. And the children of Israel shall laye their handes vpon the Leuites.
And Aaron shal waue y Leuites before the 
LORDE for the children of Israel, that they maye mynistre in the seruyce of the LORDE.

And the Leuites shall laye their handes vpon the heedes of the bullockes, and the one shalbe made a synnofferynge, the other a burntofferinge vnto the LORDE, to make an attonement for the Leuites. And thou shalt set the Leuites before Aaron and his sonnes, and waue them before the LORDE, and so shalt thou separate them from y children of
Israel, that they maye be myne. ‘Thé shall they go in, that they maye do seruyce in the
Tabernacle of witnesse. Thus shalt thou clense the, q waue them: for they are my gifte of the children of Israel, tand I haue taken them vnto me for all that openeth the
Matrix, namely for the first borne of all the children of Israel.

For euery first borne amonge the children of Israel is myne, both of men and of catell,’ sens the tyme that I smote all the first borne in the lande of Egipte, and sanctified them vnto myself, and toke the Leuites for all the first borne amonge the childré of Israel, and gaue them for a gifte vnto Aaro and his sonnes from amonge the children of Israel, y they shulde do the seruyce of the children of Israel

1 Num. 3. b. > Exo. 13.8. Luc. 2. d. 

Chap. bíij. 

B 

€ 

Kap. ir. in the Tabernacle of witnesse, to make at- tonemet for the children of Israel, that there be not a plage amonge the children of Israel, yf they wyll come nye y Sanctuary.

And Moses with Aaron and the whole con- gregacio of the childré of Israel, dyd with the
Leuites all as the LORDE had commaüded 
Moses. And they purified the Leuites, and waszshed their clothes. And Aaron waued them before the LORDE, and made attone- ment for them, that they might be cleane.

| After that wente they in, to do their office 

in the Tabernacle of witnesse before Aaron and his sonnes: as the LORDE commanded
Moses concernynge the Leuites, euen so dyd they with them.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses q sayde: This is it that belongeth vnto the
Leuites: * From fyue and twentye yeare and aboue, shal they go in to the office of the
Tabernacle of witnesse. But fro fyftie yeare forth, they shal ceasse from the waitinge of the seruyce therof, and shall mynister nomore, but shal appoynte their brethren to waite and to serue in the Tabernacle of wytnesse: but the office shal not they execute. ‘Thus shalt thou do with the Leuites in their seruyces, that enery one maye wayte vpon his awne charge.

The tr. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinai, in y first moneth of the seconde yeare that they were departed out of the lande of Egipte, a sayde:
*Let the children of Israel kepe Easter in his season, euen vpon the fourtene daye of this moneth at euen, in his season shall they kepe it, acordynge to all the statutes q lawes therof.
And Moses spake to ý childré of Israel, y they shulde kepe Easter. And they kep
Easter vpo the fourtene daye of the first moneth at euen in the wildernes of Sinai.
Acordinge to all that the LORDE comaunded 

Moses, euen so dyd the children of Israel. 
Then were there certayne men defyled of a deed man, so that they coulde not kepe
Easter vpon that daye: these came before 
Moses and Aaron the same daye, and sayde vnto him: We are defiled of a deed mà: wherfore shulde we be despysed, that we must uot bringe oure giftes in his season amonge

* Num. 4. c. 
Deu. 16. a. 

* Exo. 12.a. 
è 2 Par, 30. a. 

Leui. 23.a. Num. 28. c. t Exo. 12. g. Ioh. 19. d.

The iiij. boke of Moses, 

the children of Israel? Moses sayde vnto them: Stonde styll, I wil heare what the
LORDE commaundeth you. à 

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and|33 

sayde: Speake vnto the children of Israel, q saie: Wha eny man is defyled of a deed coarse, or is gone farre from you ouer the felde, ^or is amonge youre kynszfolkes, yet shall he kepe
Easter, but in the seconde moneth vpo fourtene daye at euen, and they shal eate it with vnleuended bred and sowre sawse, and shall leaue none of it vntyll the mornynge, t ner breake eny bone therof, and shal kepe it acordinge to all ý maner of ¥ Easter.

But he that is cleane, and not gone in a iourney, and is negligent to kepe the Easter, the same soule shal be roted ont from amoge his people: because he brought not his gifte to the LORDE in his season, he shal beare his synne. And whan there dwelleth a straunger amonge you, he shal kepe Easter also vnto the LORDE, q shal holde it acordinge to y ordimaunce and lawe of y Easter. This sta- tute shal be vnto you alike, to the straunger as to him that is borne in the londe.

Aud y same daye y the Habitacion was set vp, ‘a cloude couered it vpo the Taber- nacle of witnesse, q at euen there was a symi- litude of fyre vpon the Habitacion vntill the mornynge. So came it to passe allwaye, y the cloude couered it by daye, ¢ the symilitude of fyre by night. And whan the clonde was take vp from the Habitacion, then the children of Israel wente on their iourney. And loke in what place the cloude abode, there the childré of Israel pitched their tentes. Acor- dinge to the worde of the LORDE toke the children of Israel their iourney, and acordinge to his worde pitched they their tentes. So longe as the cloude abode vpon the Habi- tacion, they laye styll. And whan the cloude taried many dayes vpon the Habitacion, the childré of Israel wayted vpon the LORDE, q wente not on their iourney.

And whan it chaunced that the cloude abode vpo ¥ Habitacion eny space of dayes, then pitched they acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, q after the worde ofthe LORDE wente they on their iourney. Whan the cloude was there from the euenynge vntyll the mor- nynge, and so was taken vp, then wéte they

* Exo. 40. c. e. 3 Re. 8. b. Eze, 9. a. 

Fo. crrriij. 

€ 

D 

Fo. trrriiij. on their iourney: and whether it was také vp by daye or by night, they iourneyed. But whan it taried vpon the habitacion two dayes, or a moneth, or a longe season, then laye the children of Israel, and iourneyed not: and so whan it was taken vp, they wente on their iourney. For acordinge to the mouth of the
LORDE they laye, and after the mouth of the LORDE they iourneyed, so y they kepte the LORDES watch, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.

The y. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: Make the two trompettes of beaten syluer, that thou mayest vse them, to call the cogregacion together, and whan the hoost shal breake vp. Whan they blowe with both, then shall the whole congregacion gather them selues together vnto the before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse. Whan they blowe but with one, then the captaynes, the rulers ouer the thousandes in Israel shal gather them selues together vnto the. Whan ye trompe, then shal the hoostes that lye on the East syde, breake yp. And whan ye trompe the seconde tyme, the hoostes that lye on the South syde, shal breake vp. For ye shall trompe, whan they shal take their iour- neys. *But whan y congregacion is to be gathered together, ye shal blowe, and not trompe. ‘This blowinge with the trompettes shal the sonnes of Aaron the prest do. And it shall be youre lawe for euer amonge youre posterities.

Whan ye go to a battayll in youre londe agaynst youre enemies y vexe you, ye shall trompe with the trompettes, that ye maye be remembred before the LORDE youre God, and delyuered from youre enemies.

Like wyse whan ye are mery, and in youre feast dayes, q in youre new Monethes, ye shal blowe with the trompettes ouer youre burnt- sacrifices q healthofferinges, y it maie be a remembraunce vnto you before youre God.
I am the LORDE youre God. 

Vpon the twentye daye in the seconde moneth of the seconde yeare, arose the cloude from the habitacion of witnesse. And the childré of Israel wente on their journey out of the wyldernesse of Sinai, ^and the cloude abode in the wyldernesse of Paran, First brake

* Iudic. 3. d. a Num. 33. e. Deut. 1. a. 

The iiij. boke of loses, 

vp (acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.) Namely, the baner of the hoost of Iuda wente forth first with their armies,
’and ouer their hoost was Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab. And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Isachar was Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar. And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Zabulon was
Eliab the sonne of Elon. ‘And the habi- tacion was taken downe, and the children of
Gerson and Merari bare the habitacion. 

After that wente the baner of the hoost of, 

Ruben with their armies, and ouer their hoost was Elizur the sonne of Sedeur. And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of
Simeon was Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai. 
And Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Gad.
Then wente the Kahathites forwarde also, and bare the Sanctuary, and caused $ habitacion be set vp agaynst they came.

After that wente the baner of the hoost of the children of Ephraim with their armies, and ouer their hoost was Elisama the sonne of
Amihud. And Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of
Manasse. And Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of
Ben Iamin. 

After that wente the baner of the hoost of the children of Dan with their Armyes, (and so were all the hoostes vp) and Alhieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai was ouer their hoost.
And Pagiel y sonne of Ochran, ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Asser. And
Ahira the sonne of Enan ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Nephthali. Thus the childré of Israel wéte forth with their armyes.

And Moses spake vnto his brother in lawe, 
Hobab the sonne of Raguel of Madian: We go vnto the place, of the which LORDE sayde: I wil geue it you: Come now with vs therfore, and we wil do y best with the, for the LORDE hath promysed good vnto Israel.
But he answered: I wil not go with you, but wil go in to myne awne londe vnto my kynred.
He sayde: Oh nay, leaue vs not: for thou knowest where is best for vs to pytche in the wyldernesse, and thou shalt be oure eye. And yf thou goest with vs, loke what good the
LORDE doth vnto vs, the same wil we do vnto the. So they departed from the mount

è? Num. 1. a. * Num. 4. a. 

n 

of the LORDE thre dayes iourney, q the 
Arke of the LORDES couenaunt wente before them those thre dayes iourney, to shewe thé where they shulde rest. And y cloude of the LORDE was ouer them in the daye tyme, whan they wéte out of y tétes.

And whan the Arke wente forth, Moses sayde: *Aryse LORDE, let thine enemies be scatered, and let them that hate the, flye before the. And whan it rested, he sayde:
Come agayne O LORDE vnto the multitude of the thousandes of Israel.

The ri. Chapter. a ND whan $ people waxed vnpaciét, "it displeased sore Y eares of ý LORDE.
And whan the LORDE herde it, his wrath waxed whote, q the fyre of LORDE burnt amóge them, so y it cosumed the vttemost of y hoost. Thé cryed the people vnto Moses.
And Moses prayed vnto the LORDE. So y fyre quenched. And the place was called
Tabera, because the fyre of the LORDE burnt amonge them.

Then the comon sorte of people y was amoge them, fell a lustinge, and sat q wepte with the children of Israel, and sayde: Who wyll geue vs flesh to eate? We remembre the fish, the we ate in Egipte for naught, q
Cucumbers, Melouns, lekes, onyons, q gar- leke: But now is oure soule dryed awaye, oure eyes se nothinge then the Manna.

The Manna was like Coriader sede, and to loke vpon, like Bedellion. ^And the people ranne here and there, q gathered it, & grounde it in Milles, and beate it in morters, and baked it in panes, and made cakes of it, and it had a taist like an oyle cake. And whan y dew fell vpon the tétes in the night, ý Manna fell therwith.

Now whan Moses herde the people wepe jamoge their kynreds, euery one in his tet dore, then the wrath of the LORDE waxed ex- ceadinge whote. And it greued Moses also.
And Moses sayde vnto the LORDE: Why 
€ vexest thou thy seruaunte? And why fynde not I fauoure in thy sight, y thou layest $ burthen of all this people vpo me? Haue I thé coeeaued all this people, or begotten them, that thou shuldest saye vnto me: Cary them in thine armes (as a nurse beareth a childe)

* Psal. 67, a. 
16.f. tEze.8.b. 

a Exo.16.a. Deut. 9, d. > Exod. 
© Leui. 20.2. Iosu.3. b. 1 Re. 16.a. 

The iiij. boke of Moses. 

Fo. errr. 

vnto the londe, that thou hast sworne vnto their fathers? Where shal I get flesh, to geue all this people? They wepe before me, and saye: Geue vs flesh, that we maye eate. I am not able to beare all this people alone, for it is to heuy for me. And yf thou wylt deale thus with me: O kyll me then, yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, that I se not my wrechednesse.

And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: Ga- ther vnto me tseuentye men amonge the El- ders of Israel, whom thou knowest y they are the Elders in ¥ people and officers ouer them, and brynge them before the Tabernacle of witnesse, aud set them there with the: then wil I come downe, and talke with the euen there, q take of thy sprete that is vpon the, and putt it vpon them, that they maye beare the burthen of the people with the, y thou beare not all alone.

And vnto y people thou shalt saye: Sáctifye youre selues agaynst tomorow, “y ye maye eate flesh: for youre wepynge is come in to the eares of the LORDE, 75 that saye: Who shal geue vs flesh to eate? for we were well at ease in Egipte. ^Therfore shal the LORDE geue you flesh to eate, not one daye, not two, not fyue, not ten, not twentye dayes longe, but a moneth longe, tyll it go out at youre noses, and tyll ye lothe it: euen because ye haue refused the LORDE, which is amonge you, and haue wepte before him, q sayde:*
Wherfore wente we out of Egipte? 

And Moses sayde: Sixe hundreth thou- sande /fote men are there of the people amoge whom I am, and thou sayest: I wyll geue you flesh to eate a moneth loge. Shal the shepe and oxen be slayne to be ynough for them ? Or shal all the fishes of the see be gathered together, to be sufficient for them? The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: t Is the LORDES hande shortened then ?
But now shalt thou se, whether my wordes shall be fulfilled in dede, or no?

And Moses wéte out, and tolde the people 
¥ worde of the LORDE, and gathered the seuentye men amonge the Eldest of the peo- ple, q set them rounde aboute the Tabernacle.
Then came the LORDE downe in a cloude, q spake vnto him, q toke of the sprete V was vpon him, q put it vpon the seuentie Elders.

3 Exo. 16. b. * Nu. 21. a. f Exo.12.f. Num. 

1. f. and 33. a. 

1 Esa. 50. a. and 59. a. 

KANN 

And whan the sprete rested vpon them, they prophecied, and ceassed not.

JF| But in the hoost there remayned yet two 

men, of whom the one was called Eldad, y other Medad, q the sprete rested vpo them.
For they were wrytten vp also, q yet were they not gone out vnto the Tabernacle, and they prophecied in the hoost. "Then ran there a lad, q tolde Moses, q sayde: Eldad and
Medad prophecie in the hoost. Then an- swered losua ¥ sonne of Nun Moses ser- uaunte (whom he had chosen) and sayde:
My lorde Moses for bydde them. But Moses sayde vnto him: Art thou gelous for my sake?
* wolde God, ý all the people of y LORDE coulde prophecie, and that y LORDE wolde geue them his sprete. So Moses and the
Elders of Israel gat them to the hoost. 

Then wente out the wynde from y LORDE, 
“a caused quayles to come from the see, a scatred thé ouer the hoost, here a dayes iour- ney, there a dayes iourney rounde aboute y hoost, two cubytes hye aboue y earth. Then the people stode vp all that daye and all y night, and all the nexte daye, and gathered quayles: and he that gathered the leest, gathered ten Homers, q they kylled them rounde aboute the hoost.

? But whyle y flesh was yet betwene their tethe, q or euer it was vp, the wrath of the
LORDE waxed whote amonge the people, tand slewe them with an exceadinge greate slaughter. Therfore is the same place called the graues of lust, because the voluptuons people were buried there. From the lust- graues ^toke the people their iourney vnto
Hazeroth, and abode at Hazeroth. 

The rij. Chapter. 

ND Miriam q Aaron spake agaynst 

d Moses because of his wife the Mo- rian ¢which he had taken, because he had také a Morian to wife, and they sayde: Doth the LORDE speake onely thorow Moses?
Speaketh he not also by vs? And the LORDE herde it. & But Moses was a very meke man, aboue all men vpon earth. And haistely spake the LORDE vnto Moses, and to
Aaron, and to Miriam: Go out ye thre vnto 

* Foel 2. f. 1 Cor. 14. a. * Exo. 16. c. ? Psal. noc. t 1 Cor. 10. a, * Num. 33. c. — ^ Deu. 24. b. f Exo.2.d. $ Eccli. 45.a. ° Psal. 98.b. JS Heb. 3.a.

Che tj. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rij. 

ý Tabernacle of wytnesse. And they wente| - 

out all thre. 

e Then came the LORDE downe in the cloudy piler, q stode in the dore of the Taber- nacle, q called Aaron q Miriam, q they both wete ont. Andhesayde: Heare my wordes:
Yf eny man be a prophet of the LORDE, vnto him wil I shewe my self in a vision, or wil speake vnto him in a dreame. But not so with my seruaunt Moses, ^ which is faithfull in all my house. | Mouth to mouth speake I vnto him, q he seyth the LORDE in his fashion, not thorow darke wordes or licknesses:
Wherfore were ye not afrayed then to speake agaynst my seruaunt Moses ?

And y wrath of the LORDE waxed whote ouer them, q he turned him awaye, and y cloude also departed from the Tabernacle.
* And beholde, then was Miriam become leporus, as it were snowe. And Aaron turned him vnto Miriam, and sawe that she was leporous, and sayde vnto Moses: Oh my lorde, put not the synne vpon vs, which we haue foolishly committed and synned, that she be not as one that commeth deed out of his mothers wombe: It hath eaten vp half hir flesh allready.

But Moses cried vnto the LORDE, « sayde: Oh God, heale her. The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Yf hir father had spytte in hir face, shulde she not be ashamed seuen dayes? ‘Let her be shut out of y hoost seué dayes, after y let her be receaued agayne.
So Miriam was shut out of the hoost seué dayes, t the people wente no farther, tyll
Miriam was receaued againe. Afterwarde departed the people from Hazeroth, ^and pitched in y wildernesse of Paran.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q 

sayde: 'Sende forth men to spye out 
$ lande of Canaan (which I wil geue vnto children of Israel) of euery trybe of their fathers a man, and let them all be soch as are captaynes amonge them. Moses sent the out of the wildernes of Paran, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, soch as were all heades amonge the children of Israel, and these are their names:

|| Exo. 33. c. € 9 Pa, 26. d q Leu. 13. 14. h d

Num. 33. c. i Deut. 2. : 

B 

a 

Chap. riiij, 

Samma the sonne of Zacur, of the trybe of Ruben. Saphat the sonne of Hori, of the trybe of Simeon. Caleb M sonne of Iephune, of the trybe of Iuda. Igeal the sonne of loseph, of the trybe of Isachar. Hosea the sonne of Nun, of ¥ trybe of Ephraim. — Palti the sonne of Raphu, ofthe trybe of Ben
Iamin. Gadiel the sonne of Sodi, of $ trybe of Zabulon. Gaddi the sonne of Susi, of the trybe of Ioseph of Manasse. Ammiel the sonne of Gemalli, of the trybe of Dan. Se- thur y sonne of Michael, of the trybe of Asser.
Nahebi the sonne of Vaphsi, of the trybe of 
Nephtali. Guel the sonne of Machi, of the trybe of Gad. These are the names of the men, whom Moses sent forth to spye out the lande. As for Hosea the sonne of Nun,
Moses called him Iosua. 

Now whan Moses sent thé forth to spye out the lande of Canaan, he sayde vnto thé:
Go vp southwarde, and get you vp to the mountaynes, and loke vpon the londe how it is: and the people that dwell therin, whether they be stronge or weake, fewe or many: and what maner of lande it is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad: q what maner of cities they be that they dwell in, whether they be fenced with walles, or not: and what maner of lande it is, whether it be fatt or leane, and whether there be trees therin, or not. Be of a good corage, and bringe of the frutes of the londe. It was euen aboute the tyme, that grapes are first rype.

They wente vp, x spyed the lande, from y wildernes of Zin, vntyll Rehob, as mé go vnto Hemath. They wente vp also towarde the south, and came vnto Hebron, where
Ahiman was, and Sesai and 'Thalmai, the children of Enack (Hebron was buylded seuen yeare before Zoan in Egipte.)

And they came to the ryner of Escol, and 
“there they cut downe a cluster of grapes, and caused two to beare it vpon a staffe, pom- granates also and fygges. ‘The place is called the ryuer of Escol, because of the cluster of grapes, which the children of Israel cut downe there.

And whan they had spyed out the lande, they turned bake againe after fourtye daies, and wente, and came to Moses and Aaron, q to the whole congregacion of y children of
Israel in to $ wyldernesse of Paran, eué vnto 

? Deut. 1. d, 

^ Nu. 14. f, * Deut. 1. a. Psal. 105. c. 

The ii. boke of Moses, 

Cades, and brought them worde agayne, and to the whole congregacion, how it stode, and let them se the frute of the lande, and tolde them, and sayde: We came in to ¥ lande, whither ye sent vs, where it floweth with mylke and hony, and this is the frnte therof: sauynge that stronge people dwell therin, and the cities are exceadinge stronge and greate.
And we sawe the children of Enack there also. 
The Amalechites dwell in the south countre, the Hethites, and lebnusites and Amorites dwell vpon the mountaynes, but the Cananites dwell by the see, and aboute Iordane.

Howbeit Caleb stylled y people that was agaynst Moses, and sayde vnto them: Let vs go vp, and conquere the lande, for we are able to ouercome it. But the men that wente vp with him, sayde: ^ We are not able to go vp agaynst that people, for they are to stronge for vs. And of the lande that they had searched, they bronght vp an euell reporte amonge the childré of Israel, and saide: The lide that we haue gone thorow to spye out, eateth vp the indwellers therof: and all the people that we sawe therin, are men of greate stature. We sawe giauntes there also, yee giauntes as the children of Enack: and we semed in oure sighte as ¥ greshoppers, and so dyd we in their sighte.

The riiij. Chapter. 

HEN the whole cdgregacion toke on, 

and cryed, ‘and the people wepte y night. And all the childré of Israel mur- mured agaynst Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregacion sayde vnto them: Oh that we had dyed in the lande of Egipte, or that we might dye yet in this wyldernesse.
Wherfore bryngeth the LORDE vs in to this lande, that onre wyues shulde fall thorow the swerde, and oure children be a praye? Is it not better, that we go agayne in to Egipte?
And they sayde one to another: Let vs make a captayne, and go in to Egipte agayne.

But Moses ¢ Aaron fell vpó their faces before ¥ whole cogregacion of the multitude of the childré of Israel. *And Iosua sonne of Nun, « Caleb y sonne of Iephune (which also had spyed out the lande) rente their clothes, « spake to the whole cogregacion of the children of Israel; The londe y we haue walked thorow to spye it out, is a very good

* Eccli. 46. b. 1 Mach. 2. f. 

So. errr. 

| Fo. errrbitj. The iiij. boke of sloses, 

€ 

lande. Yf the LORDE haue lust vnto vs, he shal brynge vs in to the same londe, q geue it vs, which is a lade that floweth with mylke q hony. But in anye wyse rebell not ye agaynst the LORDE, « * feare not y people of this lande, for we wil eate the vp as bred. Their defence is departed fro them, tbut the LORDE is with vs, be not ye afrayed of them.

And all the people, bad stone them with stones. ‘Then appeared the glory of the
LORDE in the Tabernacle of witnesse vnto all the children of Israel, a the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: How longe shal this people blaspheme me? And how longe wil it be, or they beleue me, for all the tokés that I haue shewed amouge them? I wil smyte them with pestilence q destroye the, “q wil make of the a greater q mightier people then this is.

*But Moses sayde vnto y LORDE: Then shal ¥ Egipcians heare it (for with thy power hast thou brought this people from amoge thé) so shal it be tolde the inhabiters of this lande also, which haue herde, y thou O
LORDE art amonge this people, y thou art sene from face to face, q that dy cloude stondeth ouer them, “and that thou goest before them in the cloudy piler on the daye tyme, and in the fyrie piler on the night season. Yf thou shuldest now slaye this people as one man, then the Heythen that haue herde so good reporte of the, shulde saye: “The LORDE was not able to brynge the people in to the londe, that he sware vnto them, therfore hath he slayne them in the wyldernes.

So let the power of the LORDE now be greate, acordinge as thou hast spoken and sayde: 'The LORDE is of longe sufferaunce and of greate mercy, and forgeueth syune and trespace, and leaueth no man innocent, v vysiteth the myszdede of the fathers vpon the children in to the thirde and fourth gene- racion. O be gracious now vnto the synne of this people acordinge to thy greate mercy, like as thou hast forborne this people also, euer from Egipte vnto this place. And the
'LORDE sayde: I haue forgeue it, as thou hast saide. But as truly as I lyue, all y rx shal be full of my glory. *For of all

> Deu. 
* Nu. 26. g. 

a Exo. 32. C. 
4 Exo. 32. c. 

| * Deut. 20.a. t Rom. 8. d. 
,9. d. € Exo. 13. d. 

Chap. riii. y men that haue sene my glory q my tokens, which I dyd in Egipte and in the wildernesse, and tempted me now ten tymes, q haue not herkened vnto my voyce, there shall not one se the londe that I sware vnto their fathers: nether shal eny of them that haue blasphemed me, seit. But my seruaüt Caleb, because there is another maner sprete with him, a because he hath folowed me, him wil I brynge in to the lande, which he hath gone thorow, œ his sede shal conquere it, and y Amalechites also and the Cananites, that dwell in the lowe countrees. ‘Tomorow turne you, and get you to the wyldernesse, in the waye towarde the reed see.

Aud y LORDE spake vnto Moses q Aaron, q sayde: How loge shal this euell multitude murmur agaynst me? For I haue herde the murmuringe of the childré of Israel, y they haue murmured agaynst me. "Tell them ther- fore: $ As trulye as I lyue (sayeth y LORDE)
I wil do vnto you, euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares: Youre carcases shallye in this wildernesse. And all ye that || were nombred from twentye yeare and aboue, which haue murmured agaynst me, shall not come in to the lande (cocernynge the which I lift vp my hade, y I wolde let you dwell therin) saue
Caleb ¥ sonne of lephune, and losua the sonne of Nun.

Youre children, of whom ye sayde: / They shalbe a spoyle, them wyll 1 brynge in, so y they shal knowe the lande, which ye haue refused. But ye with youre carcases shall lye in this wildernésse, and youre children shal wander in this wildernesse fourtye yeares, q beare youre whordome, tyll youre carcases be waisted in the wildernesse, acordinge to the nombre of ‘y fourtye dayes, wherin ye spyed out the londe. TA daye for a yeare, so y fourtye yeares ye shall beare youre myszdede, that ye maye knowe what itis, whan I with- drawe my hande. Euen I the LORDE haue sayde it, x wil do it in dede vnto all this euell congregacion, that haue lift vp them selues agaynst me: In this wildernesse shal they be consumed, and there shal they dye.

£ So there dyed and were plaged before the 
LORDE all the me, whom Moses sent to spye out the lade, ¢ came agayne, and made the whole cogregacion to murmur agaynst it,

Deut. 1. c. and 2. c. 1 Iosu. 14. b. 

§ Nu. 32. b. 
| Num. 1.a. f Deut.1.f. § Eze.4.a. 

€ 1 Cor. 10. a. 

Chap. rb. 

because they brought vp a myszreporte of the| 

lande, that it was euell. But Iosua the sonne of Nun, aud Caleb y sonne of lephune were left alyue, of the men that wente to spye out the lande. And Moses spake these wordes vnto all the children of Israel. The toke the people greate sorowe.

J| And they arose early in y mornynge, and wente vp to the toppe of ¥ mountayne, and sayde: “Lo, here are we, and will go vp to the place, wherof the LORDE hath sayde: for we hauesynned. But Moses sayde: wherfore go ye on this maner beyonde y worde of the
LORDE? It shall not prospere with you: go not vp (for ý LORDE is not amoge you) y ye be not slayne before youre enemies. For the Amalechites and Cananites are there before you, a ye shal fall thorow y swerde, because ye haue turned youre selues from the LORDE, and the LORDE shal not be with you.

But they were blynded to go vp to the toppe ofthe mountaine: neuertheles the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt q Moses came not out of the hooste. Then came downe ¥

Amalechites ¢ Cananites which dwelt vpon that mountayne, and smote them and hewed them, euen vnto Horma.

The rb. Chapter 

ND the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde: Speake to the childré of
Israel, q saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the lande of youre dwellinge, which I shal geue you, and wil do sacrifice vnto the
LORDE, whether it be a burntofferynge, or an offrynge for a speciall vowe, or a frewyll offerynge, or youre feast offerynges, that ye maye make a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE,

of oxen or of shepe. 

ô He y wil offre now his gifte vnto LORDE, shal brynge for the meatofferinge a teth deale of fyne floure myngled with oyle of the fourth parte ofan Hin, and wyne for y drynkofferynge the fourth part of an Hin also: to the burnt- offeringe, or eny other offeringe, whan a lambe is offred. But wha there is aramme offred, thou shalt make the meatofferynge two téth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle, of the thirde parte of an Hin, and y thirde parte of an Hin of wyne also for a drynkofferinge : this shalt thou offre for a swete sauoure vnto

the LORDE. 

" Deut. 1. f. 

? Leuit. 2. a. and 6. b. * Exo. 23. c. 

Cbr (ij. boke of Moses: 

offerynge, or for a speciall vowe offerynge, or for an healthofferinge vnto the LORDE, thou shalt brynge to the oxe, the meatoffrynge, euen thre tenth deales of fyne floure mingled with half an Hin of oyle, q half an Hin of wyne for a drynkoffrynge. This is an of- ferynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.
Thus shalt thou do with an oxe, with a ramme, with a lambe, and with a goate. Acordinge as the nombre of the offerynges is, therafter shall the nombre of the meatofferynges and drynkofferynges be also.

He that is one of youre selues, shall do this, that he maye offre a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE. And yf there dwell a straunger with you, or is amoge youre kynszfolkes, and wil do an offerynge vnto the
LORDE for a swete sauoure, the same shal doas yedo. Let there be one statute for the whole cogregacion, both vnto you and to the straungers. A perpetuall statute shal it be vnto youre posterities, that the straunger be euc as ye before ý LORDE. One lawe, and one ordinaunce shalbe vnto you and to the straunger that dwelleth with you.

And the LORDE talked with Moses, q sayde: Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the lande, in to y which I shal brynge you, ‘so that ye eate the bred of the londe, ye shal heue vp an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE, namely, a cake of the firstlinges of youre dowe shall ye geue for an Heueofferynge : * as the Heueofferynge of the barne, euen so shal ye geue the firstlinges of youre dowe also vnto the LORDE, for an Heueofferynge amonge youre posterities.

And whan ye thorow ignoraunce ouer se eny of these commaundementes, ^which the
LORDE hath spoken by Moses, and all y the LORDE hath commaunded you by Moses
(from the daye that the LORDE beganne to commaunde for youre posterities) and the cogregacion do ought ignorauntly, the shal the whole congregacion offre a yonge bullocke from amonge the greate catell to a burnt- offerynge, for a swete sauoure vnto the
LORDE, with his meatofferynge and drynk- offerynge as the maner is, and an hegoate for a synofferynge. And so shal the prest make an attonement for the whole congregacion

Deut 8. c. *Leui.23.b. 4 Leui. 4. c. 

So. trix. 

But yf thou wilt offre an oxe for a burnt-|33 

of the children of Israel, and it shalbe for- genen them: for it is au ignoraunce. And they shal brynge these their giftes for an offerynge vnto the LORDE, and their syn- offerynge before the LORDE for their ig- noraunce, and it shalbe forgeuen the whole congregacion of the childré of Israel, « the straunger also y dwelleth amonge you, for so moch as all the people is in soch ignoraunce.

Yf one soule synne thorow ignoraunce,’ the same shal brynge a she goate of a yeare olde for a synofferynge. And the prest shall make an attonement for soch an ignoraunt soule with the synofferinge for the ignoraunce be- fore the LORDE, that he maye reconcyle him, and it shal be forgeuen him. And it shal be one lawe, (that ye shal do for ¥ igno- raunce) both vnto him that is borne amonge the children of Israel and to the straunger that dwelleth amonge you.

? But yf a soule do ought presumptuously, whether he be one of youre selues or a straunger, he hath despysed the LORDE: y same soule shalbe roted out from amoge his people: because he hath despysed the worde of the LORDE, and hath left his com- maundement vndone: that soule shall vtterly perishe, his synne shalbe vpon him.
3| Now whyle the children of Israel were in the wyldernesse, they founde a man gather- ynge stickes vpon the Sabbath daye. And they that founde him gatherynge stickes, brought him vnto Moses and Aaron, and be- fore the whole congregacion. *And they put him in preson, for it was not declared what shulde be done vnto him. The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: 'The man shall dye the death, the whole congregacion shal stone him without the hoost. Then the whole cogrega- cion brought him out of y hoost, and stoned him that he dyed. as y LORDE commaunded
Moses. 

Aud $ LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Speake to the childré of Israel, q saye vnto the, ^y they make them gardes vpon y quarters of their garmentes amonge all youre posterities, and put yalowe rybandes vpon the gardes in y quarters, And ¥ gardes shal serue you, y ye maye loke vpon thé, and remembre all the comaundementes of the LOR DE, q do them: that ye order not youre selues after y mean- ynge of youre awne hert, ner go a whorynge

fo. crl. The iiij. boke of Moses. 

after youre awne eyes. ‘Therfore shal ye re- membre and do all my commaundementes, and be holy vnto youre God. I am the
LORDE youre God, which brought you out of the lande of Egipte, to be youre God.
Euen I the LORDE youre God. 

The rbi. Chapter. 

ND Corah the sonne of lezehar the 

sonne of Kahath, ?the sonne of Leui, with Dathan and Abiram the sonne of Eliab, and On the sonne of Peleth, y sonnes of
Rube, stode vp agaynst Moses, with certayne men amonge the childre of Israel, two hundreth q fyfüe captaynes of the congregacion, coun- celers, x famous men. And they gathered them selues agaynst Moses q Aaro q sayde vnto them: Ye make to moch a doo, tfor all the congregacion is holy euery one, and the
LORDE is amonge them: Why lifte ye youre selues vp then aboue the congregacion of the LORDE?

Whan Moses herde y, he fell vpo his face, q saide vnto Corah, q to all his company:
'Tomorow shal ý LORDE shewe who is his, 
& who is holy to come vnto him. Who so euer he choseth, y same shal come vnto him.
This do: Take y censors, thou Corah q all thy cOpanye, q do fyre therin, q put incense theron tomorow before the LORDE: then whom so euer the LORDE choseth, the same shal be holy. Ye make to moch a doo, ye children of Leui.

And Moses sayde vnto Corah: Heare ye childré of Leui, Is it not ynough vnto you, ty " God of Israel hath separated you fro y multitude of Israel, y ye shulde come nye him, to do the seruyce of the dwellynge place of the LORDE, and stonde before the people to mynister vnto them? He hath caused the and all thy brethren the childré of Leui with the, to come nye vnto him: and now ye seke the presthode also. Thou and all thy copany conspyre agaynst the LORDE. What is
Aaron, that ye shulde murmur against him ? 

And Moses sent to call Datha q Abira y sonnes of Eliab. But they saide: We wil not come vp. Is it to litle y thou hast brought vs out of y lande of Egipte (y floweth with mylke q hony) to kyll vs in y wildernesse: but thou must raigue ouer vs also? How goodly well hast thou brought vs in to a londe,

a Leui.4.f. È Ileb. 10. c. * Leui. 24. c. € Deut. 22. b. 

4 Eccli. 45. d. + Exo. 19. a. t Num.3.a. 

Chap. rbi! 

B 

Chap. rbi. 

feldes and vyniardes in possession? Wilt thou put out these mens eyes? We will not come vp.

Then was Moses very wrath, q saide vnto y 
LORDE: Turne y not vnto their meatoffer- inges. I haue not také so moch as an Asse fro thé, nether haue I hurte eny of the. And
Moses sayde vnto Corah: Tomorow be thou q all thy companye before ý LORDE, thon, and they, q Aaron. And take euery one his censer, and put incense therin, and come be- fore the LORDE, euery one with his censer
(that is two hundreth and fiftye censers) and both thou and Aaron take either his censer.

And euery one toke his censer, and put fyre therin, and layed incense theron, and came before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnes, and Moses and Aaron also. And
Corah gathered y whole congregacio agaynst the before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnes.

But y glory of the LORDE appeared be- fore ý whole congregacion. And y LORDE spake vnto Moses q Aaron, q sayde: Separate youre selues fro this congregacio, y I maye shortly consume them. And they fell vpon their faces, q sayde: O God, thou God of the spretes of all flesh, yf one man haue synned, wilt thou therfore be wroth ouer the whole congregacion? And the LORDE spake vnto
Moses, ¢ saide: Speake to the congregacio, and saye: Come vp from y dwellynge of
Corah, and Dathan, and Abiram. 

Bİ And Moses stode vp, q wente vnto Dathan 

q Abiram, q the Elders of Israel folowed him, q he spake to y cogregacio, q saide: Departe frō ý tentes of these vngodly mē q touche nothinge yis theirs, y ye perishe not in eny of their sinnes. And they gat them vp from the dwellynge of Corah, Dathan, ¢ Abiram.
But Dathan and Abira came out, and stode in the dore of their tentes, with their wyues, and sonnes and children.

And Moses sayde: Hereby shal ye knowe that the LORDE hath sent me, to do all these workes, and that I haue not done them of myne awne hert. Yf these men dye the comon death of all men, or be vysited as all men are vysited, then hath not the LORDE sent me. But yf the LORDE make a new thinge, and the earth open hir mouth, and swalowe them with all that they haue, so y they go downe quycke in to hell, the shal ye

The tt. boke of Moses. that floweth with milke and hony, ¢ geué vs|

knowe, that these men haue blasphemed the 
LORDE. 

And whà he had spoke ont all these wordes, y groüde cloue asunder vnder the, “q the earth opened hir month, ¢ swalowed thé, with their houses, q all the me y were with Corah, q all their substaiice, and they wente downe quycke in to the hell, with all that they had.

And the earth closed vpo them, q so they perished from amonge y congregacio. And all Israel y were aboute thé, fled at y crye of thé, for they sayde: That y earth swalowe not vs also. Morouer the fyre came out fro the LORDE, and consumed the two hundreth and fyftye men, that offred the incense.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q sayde: Speake to Eleasar y sonne of Aaron y prest, y he take vp y censers ont of y burninge, q seater y fyre here q there (For the censers of these synners are halowed thorow their soules) y they maye be beaté in to thinne plates, q fastened vpon $ altare. For they are offred before y LORDE, « halowed: and they shalbe a token vnto y childré of Israel.

And Eleasar the prest toke y brasen censers which they y were burnt, had offred, q bet thé to plates, to fasten the vpon y altare for a remébraunce vnto y children of Israel M no straunger (and he that is not of i sede of
Aaron) come nye to offre incense before the 
LORDE, y it happé not vnto him as vnto 
Corah and his companye, acordynge as the 
LORDE sayde vnto him by Moses. 

On the nexte morow murmured y whole congregacion of y childré of Israel against
Moses « Aard, q saide: Ye haue slayne y people of $ LORDE. And whan the cogre- gacio was gathered agaynst Moses q Aaro, they turned thé towarde y Tabernacle of witnes. And beholde, thé ¥ cloude couered i
Tabernacle, q ¥ glory of y LORDE appeared. 
And Moses q Aaro wéte in before y Taber- nacle of witnes. And y LORDE spake vnto
Moses q sayde: Get you out of this cogrega- cion, I wil shortly consume thc. And they fell vpon their faces. And Moses sayde vnto
Aaron: Take the céser q put fyre therin frö of the altare, q laye incése theron, q go soone to the cogregacion, x make an attonement for them. For the wrath is gone out from the
LORDE, and the plage is begóne amonge the people.

? Deu. 11. a. Nu. 26. b. Psal. 105. b. 

Fo. erti 

So. rli. The iiij. boke of Moses. Chap. roi, | 

And Aaron dyd as Moses sayde, q ranne in the myddest amonge ý congregacio. And beholde, y plage was begone. And he burnt incése q made an attonemét for the people,
*q stode betwene the deed q the lyuynge, and the plage ceassed. But there were fourtene thousande, and seué hundreth deed in the plage, besydes them that dyed aboute the busynesse of Corah. And Aaron came agayne vnto Moses before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse. And the plage ceassed.

The yoij. Chapter. 

ND $ LORDE spake vnto Moses, q 

sayde: Speake to the children of Israel, q take of thé twolue staues, of euery captayne of his fathers house one, and wryte euery mans name vpon his staffe. But Aarons name shalt thou wryte vpon the staffe of Leui. For euery heade of their fathers house shal haue a staffe. And laye thé in the Tabernacle of witnesse, before the witnesse where I testifie vnto you. And loke whom I shall chose, his staffe shal florishe, y I maye stylle the grudg- inges of the children of Israel, which they grudge agaynst you.
" And Moes spake vnto the childré of Is- rael, q all their captaynes gaue him twolue staues, euery captayne a staffe, after ¥ house of their fathers. And Aarons staffe was amonge their staues also. And Moses layed the staues before the LORDE in the Tabernacle of witnesse.

On the morow wha Moses wéte in to y 
Tabernacle of witnesse, he foüde y + Aaros rodde of the house of Leui florished, and brought forth blossoms, q bare allmondes.
And Moses brought forth all y staues fro y 
LORDE before all y childre of Israel, that they might se it. And they toke euery mà his staffe.

The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Bringe 
Aarós staffe againe before the wytnesse, y it maye be kepte for a toké to the children of rebellion, that their murmuringes maye ceasse fro me, lest they dye.

Moses dyd as ý LORDE comaunded him. 
And ¥ childré of Israel sayde vnto Moses: 
E holie, we cósume awaie, we are destroied, q perishe. Who so cómeth nye y dwellynge place of ý LORDE, he dyeth. Shal we thé vtterly cosume awaie ?

Heb. 9. a. 

* Sap. 18. d. t Eccli. 45. e. 

A 

The ybiij. Chapter. 

Thou ¢ thy sonnes, a thy fathers house with the shal beare the myszdede of ý
Sactuary: q thou çq thy sonnes with the, shall beare the myszdede of youre presthode. But tliy brethren of the trybe of Leui thy father, shal come nye the, q be ioyned vnto the, that they maye mynistre vnto y. But thou a thy sonnes with the, shal mynistre before ¥ Taber- nacle of witnesse. And they shal wayte vpo thy seruyce q vpon y seruyce of the whole
Tabernacle. But nye vnto the vessels of y 
Sactuary q to the altare, shall they not come, y both they a ye dye not: howbeit they shal be ioyned vnto the, to wayte vpo the mynis- tracion in the Tabernacle of witnesse, in all the seruice of the Tabernacle. And there shal no straunger come nye vnto you.

Therfore wayte now vpon the seruyce of the Sanctuary, and vpon the seruyce of the altare, that there come no more wrath vpon the children of Israel. For lo, I haue take youre brethre the Leuites fro amonge the children of Israel, to be youre gifte, for a presente vnto y LORDE, to do y seruyce in y Tabernacle of witnes. sonnes with the, ye shal waite vpon youre prestes office, that ye maye ministre in all maner busynes of the altare, and within the vayle: for youre prestes office geue I vnto you for a gifte to do seruyce. Yf a straunger come nye, he shall dye.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: be- holde, I haue geuen the my Heueofferynges :
And all that the children of Israel halowe, haue I geuen vnto the, and to thy sonnes for a perpetuall dewtye. ‘This shalt thou haue of the most holy thinges that they offer. All their giftes with all their meatotferinges, and with all their synofferynges, and with all their trespace offerynges, that they geue me, the same shal be most holy vnto the and thy sonnes. In the most holy place shalt thou eate it. All that are males shall eate therof:
For it shal be holy vnto the. 

The Heue offerynge of their giftes in all the Waueofferynges of the children of Israel," haue I geuen vnto the also, and to thy sonnes, and to thy doughters for a perpetuall dewtye.
Who so is cleane in thy house, shal eate 

i Num. 3. a. * Leu. 7. d. 

ND the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron:/q 

As for y, and thy|33 

| 

33!dren of Israel. 

Chap. rir. 

therof. All the fat of the oyle, and all ¥ fat 

of the wyne and corne of their firstlinges, that they geue vnto the LORDE, haue I geuen vnto$. The first frutes of all that is in their londe, which they bringe vnto the LORDE, shal be thine. Who so euer is cleane in thine house, shal eate therof.

All dedicate thinges in Israel shal be thine. 
All that breaketh the Matrix amonge all flesh, which they brynge vnto the LORDE, whether it be man or beest, shalbe thine. But so, that thou cause the firstborne of ma to be redemed, and that thou cause the first borne of vncleane beestes to be redemed also (‘They shal redeme it whan it is a moneth olde, and shall geue it lowse for money, euen for fyue
Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, 
* which Sycle is worth twentye Geras.) 

But the first frutes of an oxe, or lambe, or goate shalt thou not cause to be redemed for they are holy. Their bloude shalt thou sprenkle vpon the altare, and their fat shalt thou burne for an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto y LORDE. Their flesh shalbe thine, like as y Wauebrest and $ right shulder is thine also. All the Heueofferinges that ý childré of Israel halowe vnto y LORDE, haue
I geuen vnto the, ¢ to thy sonnes, q to thy doughters with the for a perpetuall dewtie.
This shalbe a salted couenaüt for euer before 
ý LORDE, vnto the and thy sede with the. 

And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaro: Thou shalt inheret nothinge in their londe," ner haue eny porcio amonge them: for I am thy por- cion, and thine enheritaunce amoge the chil-
Vnto the children of Leui haue I geuen all the tithes in Israel to inherit- aunce, for $ seruyce which they do vnto me in the Tabernacle of witnesse, that from héce forth the children of Israel come not nye the
Tabernacle of witnes, to lade them selues with synne, and to dye: But the Leuites shal do the seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnes, ¢ shal beare their synne, for a perpetual] lawe amonge youre posterities. t And they shall inheret none inheritaunce amonge the children of Is- rael. For ¥ tithes of the childré of Israel, which they Heue vnto LORDE, haue I geuen vnto the Leuites for an heretage. Therfore haue I sayde vnto them, that they shall inheret no inheritaunce amonge the children of Israel.

* Exo. 30. b. Leu. 27. d. Eze.45. b. 
Eze. 44. d. 

5 Deut. 18. a. 
} Tos. 13. b. 

The iiij. boke of Moses, 

And y LORDE talked with Moses, q saide: 
Speake to the Leuites, q saye vnto them: 
Wha ye take of $ childré of Israel ý tithes, y I haue geuen you of thé for youre inherit- atice, ye shal take an Heueofferinge of the same vnto the LORDE, euen the tenth of the tithe. And the same youre Heueoffer- ynge shall ye reken, as though ye gaue corne out of the barne, and fullnesse out of the wynepresse.

Thus shal ye geue an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE of all youre tithes, which ye take of the children of Israel, Y ye maie geue the same Heueofferynge of $ LORDE, vnto
Aaro y prest. And all y ye geue of y tythes, q halowe vnto y LORDE for a gifte, 7 same shall be his of the best. And saye thou vnto them: Whan ye thus Heue vp y fat therof, it shal be rekened vnto the Leuites as the in- creace of the barne, and as the increace of the wine presse. And ye maye eate it in all places, ye q youre children: for it is youre rewarde for youre seruyce in the Tabernacle of wit- nesse: and ye shal not lade synne vpon you in the same, whan ye Heue the fat therof, and vnhalowe not the halowed thinges of the children of Israel, and ye shal not dye.

The yiy. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto: Moses q 

Aarō q sayde: This custome shall be a 

lawe, which the LORDE hath comaunded, q 

sayde: Speake vnto y children of Israel, y 

they brynge vnto $ a reed cow without spot, 

wherin is no blemysh, q vpon whó there came 

neuer yock: and ye shal geue her vnto Eleasar 

the prest,t which shall brynge her without the 

hooste, and cause her to be slayne there before him.

And Eleasar $ prest shal take of hir bloude with his fynger, and sprenckle it seuen tymes straight towarde the dore of the ‘Tabernacle of witnesse, and ^cause the cow to be burnt before him, both hir szkynne and hir flesh, and hir bloude also with hir donge. And the prest shal take Ceder wodd and ysope, and purple woll, and cast it vpo the cow as she burneth, « he shal washe his clothes, and bathe his body with water, and thé go in to the hoost, and be vncleane vntyll ý eue.

Fo. tii. 

£ 

a 

And he that burnt her, shal wash his clothes | 33 

t Heb. 13. b. è Exo. 29. b. Leui. 4. c. 

Fo. crltig. 

€ 

also with water, and bathe his body in water, t be vncleane vntyll $ euen. And one y is cleane, shal gather vp the * aszshes of ¥ cow, and poure them without the hoost in a cleane place, that they maye be kepte there, for sprenk- linge water to the congregacion of the childré of Israel, for it is a synofferinge. And he that gathered vp the aszshes of the cow, shall wash his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
This shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto y chil- dren of Israel, and to the straungers that dwell amonge you.

^Who so now toucheth a deed mà, shal be vncleane seuen dayes: the same shall purifie himself here with, on the thirde daye and on the seuenth daie, and then shall he be cleane.
And yf he puryfye not himself on the thirde daye, q on the seuenth daye, thé shall he not be cleane. But wha eny mà toucheth a deed personne, and wil not purifie himself, he defy- leth the dwellynge of the LORDE, and the same soule shal be roted out of Israel, because the sprenklinge water is not sprenkled vpon him: and he is vncleane, as longe as he let- teth not himself be pourged therof.

This is the lawe. Whan a mà dyeth in y tente, who so euer goeth in to the tente, and all y is in the tente, shal be vncleane seué daies. And euery open vessel that hath no lydd nor couerynge, is vncleane. And who so euer toucheth one y is slayne with the swerde vpon ý felde, or eny other deed, or a deed mans bone, or a graue, y same is vn- cleane seué dayes.

So now for the vncleane personne, they shal take of Y aszshes of this burnt synofferinge, a put springinge water theron in to a vessell, and a cleane man shall take t ysope, q dyppe it in the water, and sprenkle it vpon the tente, and vpon all the vessels, and all the soules that are therin. Likewyse also vpon him, y hath touched a deed mans bone, or a slayne per- sonne, or a deed body, or a graue.

And he that is cleane, shal sprenkle vpon the vneleane, y thirde daye, ¢ the seuéth daie, t purifye him on y seueth daye. And he shal washe his clothes, « bathe him self with water, and so at euen he shalbe cleane.

| But he y is vucleane, and wil not purifye 

him self, y same soule shal be roted out of ¥ cogregacion. For he hath defyled the Sanc-

* Heb. 9. b. 

^Num.31.c. Eccli.34.d. Agg.2.b. f Psal. 50. a.

1 Leui. 17. d. + Nu. 33. d. 

The (iij. boke of Moses, 

tuary of the LORDE, ç is not sprékled with spreklinge water, therfore is he vn cleane.
And this shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto thé. 
And he y sprenkled with the spréklinge water, shall wash his clothes also. And who so euer toucheth the spréklinge water, shal be vn cleane yntill the euen. ft And what so euer he toucheth, shalbe vn cleane: q loke what soule he toucheth, shalbe vn cleane vntill the euen.

The rr. Chapter. 

ND the childré of Israel came with the 

whole cogregacion in to the wildernesse of Zin in the first moneth,’ $q the people abode at Cades. And there dyed Miriam, q was buried there. And the congregacion had no water, q they gathered them selues toge- ther agaynst Moses q Aaron, q the people chode with Moses, q sayde: Wolde God y we had perished, lwhan oure brethré perished before the LORDE. Wherfore haue ye brought the congregacion of the LORDE in to this wildernesse, y we shulde dye here with oure catell? And wherfore haue ye brought vs out of Egipte in to this place, where men can not sowe, where are nether fygges, ner vynes, ner pomgranates, t where there is no water to drynke ?

And Moses ¢ Aaron wéte fro the congre- gacion vnto y dore of y Tabernacle of wit- nesse, q fell vpon their ren And the glory of the LORDE appeared vnto them. And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde :
“Take the staffe, t gather the cógregacion together, thou ¢ thy brother Aaron, q speake vnto the rocke before their eyes, q it shall geue his water. And thus shalt thou prouyde the water out of the rocke, q geue the con- gregacion drynke, and their catell also.

Thé toke Moses the staffe before y LORDE, as he commaunded him, q Moses q Aaron gathered the congregacion together before the rocke, q sayde vnto thé: Heare ye rebellions:
Shal we prouyde you water out of this rocke ? 
And Moses lift vp his hande, t smote y rocke with the staffe two tymes. “Then came y water out abüdantly, so y the cogregacion dranke, and their catell also.

But the LORDE sayde vnto Moses q 
Aaron: “Because ye beleued me not, to 

* Exo. 17. b. 1 Cor. 10. a. 

§ Deut. 1.f. || Nu. 16. e. d P Deut. 1. f. and 31. a.

sal. 77. b. 

Chap. rr, 

Chap. rrí. sanctifye me before y childré of Israel, ye shal not bringe this congregacion in to the londe that I shal geue the. This is $ water of strife, where the children of Israel stroue with the LORDE and he was sanctified vpon them.

^ And Moses sent messaungers fro Cades vnto y kynge of $ Edomites: This worde sendeth the thy * brother Israel : ‘Thou know- est all y trauayle that happened vnto vs, how that oure fathers wente downe in to Egipte, a how we haue dwelt in Egipte a longe tyme, ¢ how the Egipcians dealte euell with vs q oure fathers. And we cryed vnto ¥ LORDE which herde oure voyce, and sent his angell, q hath brought vs out of Egipte: And beholde, we are at Cades in y cite without the borders of thy londe. + O let vs go thorow thy londe, we wyl not go thorow y feldes ner vynyardes, ner drynke the water out of the foutaynes.
We wyl go the hye strete, and turne nether to y right hande ner to y lefte, tyll we be come past y borders of thy countre.

But the Edomite answered him: Thou shal not go by me, ^or I wyl come agaynst y with y swerde. The children of Israel saide vnto s. We wil go ý como hye waye, ‘a yf we or oure catell drynke of thy water, we wil paye for it: we wil do nothinge, but passe thorow on fote only. But he sayde: ‘Thou shalt not go thorow, And the Edomites came out against them with a mightie people aa stroge hande. Thus y Edomites denied to graüte Israel passage thorow the borders of the lande. And Israel turned awaye from them.

“And the children of Israel brake vp {ro 
Cades, and came with the whole congregacion vnto mount Hor. And the LORDE spake vnto Moses q Aaron at mount Hor harde vpon the coastes of y lande of y Edomites, ¢ sayde: Let Aaro be gathered vnto his people: for he shal not come in to $ lande y I haue geuen vnto y children of Israel, because ye were dishobedient vnto my mouth at the water of strife. Take Aaron and Eleasar and his sonne, and brynge them vp vnto mount Hor, and strype Aaron out of his vestimentes, and put the vpon Eleasar his sonne and there shall Aaron be gathered (vnto his people) and dye.

a Iudic. 11. c. 

* Gen. 25. c. t Num. 21. c. 
è Eze. 55.a, Abd. 1.b. * Deut. 2. a. 
€ Deut. 10. b. and 33.g. — / Nu. 33. d. 

Che iiij. boke of sHoses. 

Then dyd Moses as the LORDE cö- maunded him, and they wente vp vnto Mount
Hor in y sight of the whole congregacion. 
And Moses toke Aarons clothes, q put thé vpon Eleasar his sonne. * And Aaron dyed there, euen aboue vpon the mount. And
Moses q Eleasar came downe from the mount. 
And whan the whole congregacion sawe that 
Aaron was awaye, they mourned for him thirtie daies thorow out the whole house of
Israel. 

The rri. Chapter. 

m whan Arad’ the kynge of the Ca- 

nanites (which dwelt towarde the south) herde, that Israel came in by y waie y the spyes had founde out, he fought agaynst
Israel, and toke some of them presoners. 
Then vowed Israel a vowe vnto y LORDE, and sayde: Yf thou wylt geue this people vnder my hande, I wyll vtterly destroye their cities. And the LORDE herde $ voyce of
Israel, and delyuered them the Cananites, and they vtterly destroyed them with their cities also. © And he called the place Horma.

* Then departed they fro mount Hor on y waye towarde the reed see, that they might go aboute the lande of the Edomites. And the soules of the people faynted by the waie
'and they spake agaynst God and agaynst 
Moses: Wherfore hast thou brought vs out of the lande of Egipte, to slaye vs in the wilder- nesse? For here is nether bred ner water, and oure soule lotheth this lighte meate.

'Than sent the LORDE fyrie serpentes amonge the people, which bote the peple, so that there dyed moch people in Israel. "Phe came they vnto Moses, and sayde: We haue syuned, because we haue spoken agaynst the
LORDE and agaynst the. + Praye thou vnto the LORDE, that he take awaye the ser- pentes from vs. And Moses prayed for the people.

Then sayde the LORDE vnto Moses: 
Make the a brasen serpente, and set it vp for atoken. Who so euer is bytten, aud loketh vpon it, shal lyue. ‘Then made Moses a serpent of brasse, and set it vp for a token: and whan a serpent had bytten eny man, he ibehelde the brasen serpente, and recouered.

€ Iudic. 1. d. ^ Deut. 2. a. 3 Num. 11.d. f Exo.8.b. 3 Re.13.b. Act.8.c. k Ioh. 3. b. |
4 Re. 18. a. 

22 
22 

fo. crib. 

f 

B 

So. cribit. 

C| Amorites. 

* And the children of Israel departed, and pitched in Oboth. And from Oboth they wente on, and pitched in Igim by Abarim in the wyldernesse ouer agaynst Moab, on the
Eastsyde. From thence departed they, a pitched by the ryuer of Sared. From thence departed they, and pitched on this syde Arnon, which is in the wyldernesse, and commeth out of the coastes of the Amorites. For
Aruon is the border betwixte Moab and y 
Wherfore it is spoken in the boke| of the warres of the LORDE: And go with violence both on the ryuer of Arnon, q on the founteyne of the riuer, which boweth downe- warde to dwell at Ar, q leaneth theron, to be the border of Moab.

And from thence they came to the well. 
This is the well, wherof the LORDE spake vnto Moses: gather the people together, I wil geue them water. "Then sange Israel this songe, and they sange one after another ouer the well: This is the well, that the prynces dygged: the nobles amonge the people haue digged it thorow y teacher and their staues.

And from this wildernes they wente vnto 
Mathana, q from Mathana vnto Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, and fro Bamoth vnto the valley that lieth in y felde of Moab at the toppe of Pisga, and turneth towarde the wyldernesse.

And Israel sent messaungers vnto Siho the kynge of the Amorrites, q caused to saye vnto him: Let me go thorow thy lande, we wyl not turne in to y feldes ner in to the vynyardes: nether will we drynke the water of the welles, y hye strete wil we go, till we be past the borders of thy countre.

B| Howbeit Sihon wolde not geue the children 

of Israel licence to go thorow the coastes of his londe, but gathered all his people together, and wente out agaynst Israel in the wylder- nesse, And whan he came to Iaheza, he fought agaynst Israel Neuerthelesse Israel smote him with the edge of the swerde, and con- quered his lande from Arnon vnto labock, and vuto the children of Ammon. For the borders of the children of Ammon were stroge. So Israel toke all these cities, and dwelt in all the cities of ¥ Amorites, namely at Heszbon, and in the townes belonginge therto. For Heszbon the cite was Sihons the kynge of the Amorites, and he had

a Num. 33. e. 

^ Deu. 3. 3. 

The yj. boke of Moses. 

foughten before with the kynge of the Moab- ites, and conquered all his londe from him vntyll Arnon.

Wherfore it is sayde in the prouerbe: Come vnto Heszbon, let vs buylde and prepare y cite of Sihon. For there is a fyre gone out of Heszbon, and a flamme from the cite of
Sihon, which hath consumed Ar of $ Moabites, and the citisens of y toppe of Arnon. Wo vnto the Moab, thou people of Camos art vndone. His sonnes are put to flighte, q his doughters brought captyue vnto Sihon the kynge of the Amorites. Their glory is come to naught from Heszbon vnto Dibon : waisted are they vuto Nopha, which reacheth vnto
Mediba. Thus dwelt Israel in the lande of the Amorites.

And Moses sent out spyes vnto Jahesar, ¢ they toke the townes belongynge therto, a coquered the Amorites y were therin. And they turned, *q wente vp the waye towarde
Basan. ‘Then Og the kynge of Basan wéte out agaynst them with all his people, to fight in Edrei. And $ LORDE sayde vnto Moses:
Feare him not, br I haue geuen him with his lande q people in to thy hande, q thou shalt do with him, as thou dyddest with Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which dwelt at Hesz- bon. And they smote him, q his sonnes, q all his people (so y there remayned none) q coquered the londe. Afterwarde wete y chil- dren of Israel, q pitched in y felde of Moab beyonde Iordane by Iericho.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND whan Balac y sonne of Ziphor sawe 
A all that Israel had done vnto the Amo- rites, and that the Moabites were sore afrayed of the people (y was so greate) and that the
Moabites stode in feare of the children of 
Israel, he sayde vnto y Elders of the Madian- ites: Now shal this heape licke vp all that is abonte vs, eue as an oxe licketh vp the grasse in the felde. (And Balac y sonne of Ziphor was kynge of the Moabites at that tyme.)

And he sent out messaungers vnto * Balaam the sonne of Beor, which was an interpreter.
(The same dwelt by the water of the lande of y children of his people) that they shulde call f. and he caused to saye vnto him: Be- holde, there is come out of Egipte, a people, which couereth y face of y earth, and lyeth

* Num. 23. b. Deu. 23. a. 

Chap. rr. 

£ 

fo. erlbtt. 
Balac herde y Balaam came, he wente out to mete him (in the cite of the Moabites y lieth on the coaste of Arnon, which is on y vttemost border) œ sayde vnto him: Dyd not I sende for y to call the? Wherfore camest thou not then vnto me? Thinkest thou y I am not able to promote y vnto honoure? Balaam answered him: Lo, I am come vnto y. * But how can I saye eny thinge els, the y God putteth in my mouth? y I must speake.

So Balaam wente with Balac, and they came vnto the cite on the vttemost border of his lande. And Balac slewe oxen and shepe, and sent for Balaam, and for the prynces that were with him.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND in the mornynge, Balac toke Ba- laam, and they wéte vp to the hye place of Baal, that from théce he might se vnto the vttemost parte of ¥ people. And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Buylde me here seuen altares, and prouyde me here seuen bullockes, and seué rammes. Balac dyd as Balaam sayde. And both Balac and Balaam offred, on euery altare a bullocke q a ramme. And
Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Stonde thou by thy burntofferynge, I wil go, yf happlythe LORDE wil mete me, q call me, y I maye tell the, what so euer he sheweth me. And he wente

his waye, as he sayde. 

And ¥ LORDE mett Balaam. And Ba- laam saide vnto him: Seuen altares haue I prepared, and offred on euery altare a bul- locke and a ramme. The LORDE put y worde in Balaams mouth, and sayde: Go agayne vnto Balac, and saye on this wise. And whan he came agayne vnto him, beholde, he stode by his burntofferynge, with all y prynces of the Moabites.

Then toke he vp his parable, q sayde: Balac the kynge of the Moabites hath caused to fet me out of Syria from the moütaynes towarde the East, (x sayde:) Come, curse me Iacob : come, defye me Israel. How shall 1 curse, whom God curseth not? How shal I defye, whom $ LORDE defyeth not? For fro y toppe of y stonye rockes I se him, q from the hilles I beholde him. Beholde, ¥ people shal dwell by thé selues, q shal not be rekened amoge the Heithé. Who can tell the dust of
Iacob, œ the nombre of the fourth parte of 

* Num. 23. c. + Nu. 22, f. 

Che iij. boke of loses, 

Chap. rríij. 
Israel? My soule die y death of y righteous, and my ende be as the ende of these.

The saide Balac vnto Balaam: What doest thou vnto me? I caused to fet ¥ for to curse myne enemies, q beholde, thou blessest the.
He answered q saide: : Must I not kepe q speake y, which the LORDE putteth in to me mouth? Balac saide vnto him: Come with me yet vnto another place, fro whence thou mayest se y vttemost parte of them, q not se them all, and eurse me them there.

And he toke him vp to a fre place, eué vnto the toppe of Pisga, q buylded seuen altares, and offered on enery altare a bullocke q a
And he sayde vnto Balac: Stonde so by thy burntoffrynge, whyle I go yonder.
And the LORDE mett Balaam, q put the worde in his mouth, ¢ sayde: Go agayne vnto
Balac, x saye on this wyse. And whan he came to him agayne, beholde, he stode by his burntofferynge with the prynces of the
Moabites. And Balac sayde vnto him: What hath the LORDE sayde ?

And he toke vp his parable, q sayde: Ryse vp Balac q heare, marke my testimony with thine eares thou sonne of Ziphor. ft God is not a man y he shulde lye, ner a mans childe y eny thinge shulde repente him. Shulde he saye and not do? Shulde he speake q not make it good? Beholde, I am brought hither to blesse, I blesse, t can not go back there fro.
There is no weerynesse sene in Iacob, nether eny laboure in Israel. The LORDE his
God is with him, q the kynges trompet is amoge thé. “God hath brought thé out of
Egipte, his strégth is as of an Vnicorne. For there is no Sorcerye in Jacob, q no Soyth sayer in Israel. Whan the tyme cometh, it shal be saide vnto lacob, ¢ to Israel, what
God doth. Beholde, the people shall ryse vp as a Lyonesse, x heue vp him self as a Lyon.
He shal not lye downe, tyll he eate of the pray. and drynke the bloude of the slayne.

Then sayde Balac vnto Balaam : Thou shalt nether curse him ner blesse him. Balaam answered, q sayde vnto Balac: Haue I not tolde the: All y the LORDE speaketh, y must I do? Balac saide vnto him: O come, I wil brynge y to another place, yf it maye happly please God, y thou mayest curse the there. And he brought him vp to the toppe of mount Peor, y boweth towarde the

1 1 Cor. 1. a. and 10. b. 2 Nu. 24, b. 

Chap. rrt, 

! wyldernesse. And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: 

Buylde me here seuen altares, and prouyde me seuen bullockes and seuen rammes.
Balac dyd as Balaam sayde, and offered on euery altare a bullocke and a ramme.

The rrütj. Chapter. 

a OW whan Balaam sawe y it pleased the 

LORDE, that he shulde blesse Israel, he wente not (as he dyd before) to seke witches, but set his face straight towarde the wyldernesse, lifte vp his eyes, and sawe Israel,
*how they laye acordinge to their trybes, and the sprete of God came vpon him, and he toke vp his parable, and sayde : ^ Thus sayeth
Balaam the sonne of Beor: Thus sayeth the man whose eyes are opened: Thus sayeth he which heareth the wordes 6f God, which sawe the vision of $ Allmightie : which fell downe, and his eyes were opened.

How goodly ave thy tétes O Iacob, and thy habitacions O Israel? Euen as the brode valleys, as the gardens by the waters syde, as y tentes which the LORDE hath plated, q as the Ceder trees vpon ¥ water. The water shal flowe out of his boket, and his sede shalbe
B a greate water. His kynge shal be hyer then 

Agag, q his kyngdome shalbe exalted. God 

hath broughte hi out of Egipte,’ his strength 
| jis as of an vnicorne. He shal eate vp the 

Heithen his enemies, and grynde their bones to poulder, and shute thorow them with his arowes. +He hath layed him downe as a
Lyon and as a Lyonesse. Who wyll rayse him vp? Blessed be he, y blesseth the: and

‘cursed, that curseth the. 

| Thé was Balac furious i wrath against 

| Balaam, « smote his hades together, q sayde 

vnto him: I haue called the, ý thou shuldest curse myne enemies, and beholde, thou hast blessed the now thre tymes: q now get the héce to thy place. I thoughte y I wolde promote the vnto honoure, but the LORDE hath kepte the backe from that worshipe.
€, Balaam answered him: Tolde not I thy 
| messaungers (whom thou sendedst vnto me) q 
| sayde: +Yf Balac wolde geue me his house 

1 

| full of syluer and golde, yet coulde I not go 
, |beyonde the worde of the LORDE, to do 
, jeither euell or good after myne awne hert: but what $ LORDE speaketh, that must I

SENUIIMO S 

a Nu. 24. c. iNu.922.c. ° Nu. 24. a.

ISTE 28), Gly 
4 Matt. 2. a. 

t Ge. 49. b. 
$2 Re. 8. a. 

The tj. boke of Moses, 

Fo. clin. speake also. And now beholde, for so moch as I go to my people, come therfore, I wyll shewe the what this people shall do vnto thy people after this tyme.

And he toke vp his parable, and sayde: 
“Thus sayeth Balaam the sonne of Beor: 
Thus sayeth ¥ man, whose eyes are opened: 
Thus sayeth he which heareth the wordes of 
God, q y hath the knowlege of $ hyest, eue he y sawe ý visio of ý Allmightie, q fell downe, ¢ his eyes were opened: I shal se him, but not now: I shal beholde him, but not nie at hide. ?'There shal a starre come out of Iacob, q a cepter shall come vp out of
Israel, $and shal smyte y rulers of the Moab-' ites, and ouercome all the children of Seth. |

| Edom shalbe his possession, and Seir, Ð shalbe his enemies possessio, but Israel shal do manfully. Out of Iacob shal come he y hath dominion, and shall destroye the rem- naunt of the cities.

And wha he sawe y Amalechites, he toke vp his parable, q sayde: * Amalec the first amoge the Heithe, 1 but at y last thou shalt perishe vtterly. And whan he sawe the
Kenites, he toke vp his parable, q sayde: 
Stroge is thy dwellinge, and on a rocke hast thou put thy nest, neuertheles thou shalt be a burninge vnto Kain, tyll Assur take y presoner.

And he toke vp his parable agayne, q sayde: 
Alas, who shal lyue, wha God doth this? And shippes out of Citim shall subdue Assur and
Eber. He him self also shal perishe vtterly. 
And Balaam gat him vp, and departed, and came againe vnto his place, and Balac wente his waye also. B

The rrb. Chapter. 

— ND Israel dwelt in Sittim, Sand the! q 

people beganne to commytte whordome| | with the doughters of the Moabites, which called the people vnto the sacrifice of their goddes. And the people ate and worshipped their goddes,* ** and Israel submytted him self vnto Baal Peor. Then the wrath of the
LORDE waxed whote vpon Israel, and he sayde vnto Moses: "lake all the rulers of the people, and hange them vp vnto the LORDE agaynst ¥ Sonne, that the terryble wrath of the LORDE maye be turned awaye from
Israel. And Moses sayde vnto the iudges of 

* Exo. 17. c. 

9 1 Re. 15.a. f Num. 
£ Psal. 105. d. 

** Ios, 22. d. | 

| 

anan, 

fo. rl. 

E 

a 

Israel: Euery man slaye his captayne, that haue submytted them selues vnto Baal Peor.

And beholde, one of the childre of Israel wéte in against his brethré,* q ioyned him self to a Madianitish woma, in $ sighte of Moses t of the whole cógregacion of y childre of
Israel, which weped before the dore of y 
Tabernacle of wytnesse. ^Whan Phineas y sonne of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron y prest sawe y, he rose vp out of the congregacion, q toke a swerde in his hande, q wente after the man of Israel in to the whore house, ¢ thrust’ the thorow, both the man of Israel and the woman, eué thorow the bely of her. Then ceassed the plage from the children of Israel,
*and there were slayne in the plage foure and twentye thousande.

And $ LORDE spake vnto Moses, q saide : 
“Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the sonne of 
Aaron y prest, hath turned my wrath awaie from the childré of Israel thorow his gelousy for my sake amonge them, y I shulde not cosume the childré of Israel in my gelousy.
Wherfore saye: beholde, I geue him my tcouenaunt of peace, and he shal haue it, q his sede after him, eue the couenaunt of an euer lastinge presthode, because he was gelous for his Gods sake, and made an attonement for the children of Israel.

The man of Israel that was slayne with the Madianitish woman, was called Simri the sonne of Salu, a captayne of the house of the father of the Simeonites. The Madianitish woman also that was slayne, was called Coszbi, y doughter of Zur, which was a ruler of the people of a kynred amonge the Madianites.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q sayde: ^ Vexe the Madianites, q smyte them, for they haue vexed you with their wyles, wherby they haue bigyled you thorow Peor, and thorow their sister Coszbi the doughter of a captayne of $ Madianites, which was slayne in the daye of the plage, for Peors sake, and the plage came after.

The rrbi. Chapter 
ND whan the giltye bloude was shed, the LORDE sayde vnto Moses ¢ vnto
Eleasar Y sonne of Aaron y prest : * Take the summe of the whole cogregacion of the childre of Israel from twentye yeare q aboue, after

* Deut. 23. c. ^ 1 Mac. 2. c. e Eccli. 45. c. 1 Mac. 2. f. + Mal. 2. a.

* 1 Cor. 10. a. 
4 Num. 31. a. 

The (itj. boke of Moses. 

y Nemuelites. 

Chap. rrbt. their fathers houses, all y are able to go forth | to the warre in Israel. And Moses x Eleasar the prest spake vnto them (in the felde of the
Moabites besyde Iordane ouer against Iericho) namely vnto all thé that were twentye yeare olde q abone, as the LORDE comannded |
Moses. And these are y childré of Israel, that came out of Egipte.

/ Ruben y first borne sonne of Israel. The childré of Ruben were, Hanoch: of whom cometh y kynred of the Hanochites. Pallu: of whom cometh the kynred of the Palluites.
Hesron: of whom cometh the kynred of the 
Hesronites. Carmi: of whom cometh y kynred of the Carmites. These are the kynreds of the Rubenites. And the nombre of thé was, thre q fourtye thousande, senen hundreth q thirtye. But the childre of Pallu

were, Eliab. And the children of Eliab were 

Nemuel, and Dathan and Abiram. 
This is y Dathan q Abira, those famous! 3$ 

men in the congregacion, ë which stode vp agaynst Moses and Aaron in the copany of

Corah, whan they rose vp agaynst the 
LORDE, q the earth opened hir mouth, and swalowed thé with Corah, wha the cópany dyed, what tyme as the fyre consumed two hundreth q fiftye men, q they became a toke.
But the children of Corah dyed not. 

“The childré of Simeon in their kynreds were, Nemuel: of who cometh the kynred of
Iamin: of whom cometh y kynred of y laminites. Jachin: of who co- meth the kynred of the Iachinites. Sera: of whom cometh y kynred of the Sarahites.
Saul: of whom commeth the kynred of the 
Saulites. These are the kynreds of the 
Simeonites, two q xx. M. q two hundreth. 

The childré of Gad in their kynreds were 
Zephon: of whom cometh $ kynred of 
Zephonites. Haggi: of whom cometh the kynred of y Haggites. Suni: of whom! cometh y kynred of y Sunites. Aseni: of whom commeth y kynred of the Asenites.
Eri: of who cdmeth the kynred of the Eri-. nites. Arod: of whom cometh the kynred of the Arodites. Ariel: of whom cometh y kynred of $ Arielites. These are the children of Gad, in their nombre fourtye thousande and fyue C.

f'The children of Iuda, Er q Onan, which qt 

e Exo. 30. b. Num. 1. a. 

f Gen. 46. b. 1 Par. 6. a. 
€ Num. 16. a. 

BSParo5 da: í Gen. 38. a. 

Chap. rrii. both dyed in the lade of Canaan. But y children of Iuda in their kynreds, were, Sela: of whom cometh the kynred of the Selanites.
Phares: of whom cómeth the kynred of the 
Pharesites. Serah: of whom cometh y kynred of ¥ Serahites, The childré of Phares, were
Hesron: of whom commeth the kynred of the Hesronites. Hamul: of whom cometh the kynred of the Hamulites. These are the kyureds of Iuda, in their nombre, sixe and seuentye thousande and fyue hundreth.

The children of Isachar in their kynreds were, Thola: of whom commeth the kynred of the Tholaites. Phuua: of whom cometh y kynred of the Phuuaites. lasub: of who commeth the kynred of the Iasubites. Sim- ron: of whom cómeth the kynred of y Sim- ronites. These are the kynreds of Isachar, in nombre, foure and thre score thousande, q thre hundreth.

The children of Zabulon in their kynreds were, Sered, of whom cómeth the kynred of y Seredites. Elon: of whom cometh y kynred of y Elonites. Iahelel: of whom cómeth the kynred of the Iahelelites. These are y kyn- reds of Zabulon, in their nōbre, thre score thousande, and fyue hundreth.

B| The children of Ioseph in their kynreds were, Manasses q Ephraim. The childré of
Manasse were, Machir: “of whom commeth the kynred of the Machirites. And Machir begat Gilead: of whom cometh $ kynred of y Gileadites.

of y Hieserites. Helech: of whom cometh 
ý kynred of the Helechites. Asriel: of whom commeth the kynred of the Asrielites. Siché: of whom cometh the kynred of ý Sichemites.
Simida: of who cómeth ý kynred of y Si- midites. Hepher: of whom cometh y kynred of y Hepherites. And Zelaphead was y sonne of Hepher, ^x had no sonnes, but doughters, whose names were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla,
Milca and Thyrza. These are the kynreds of Manasse, in their nombre, two and fiftye thousande and seuen hundreth.

The childré of Ephraim in their kynreds were, Suthelah: of whom cometh y kynred of the Suthelahites. Becher: of whom cometh
ý kynred of the Becherites. Thahan: of whom cometh the kynred of the Thahanites.
The childré of Suthelah were, Eran: of whom 
1 Par. 8. b. 

? Tosu. 17. a. HINU 27. a. 

Che iij. boke of Moses. 

And these are y childré of 
Gilead, Hieser: of whom cometh the kynred. 

Fo. cli. cometh y kynred of ¥ Eranites. These are y kynreds of the childré of Ephraim, in their nombre, two and thirtie thousande and fyue hundreth. These are the childré of Ioseph in their kynreds,

The childré of Ben Jamin in their kynreds were, Bela: of whom cometh y kynred of the Belaites. Aszbel: of whom cometh y kynred of the Aszbelites. Ahiram: of whom cometh the kynred of the Ahiramites. Su- pham: of whom cómeth the kynred of the
Suphamites. Hupham: of whom commeth the kynred of the Huphamites. And the childre of Bela were, Ard q Naeman: of whom commeth the kynred of the Ardites q
Naemanites. These are the children of Ben lamin in their kynreds, in nombre, fyue q fourtye thousande and sixe hundreth.

The childré of Dan in their kynreds were, 
Suham: of whom cémeth the childré of y 
Suhamites. These are y kynreds of Dan in their generacions, q they were all together in nombre, foure and thre score thousande q foure hundreth.

The childre of Asser in their kynreds were, 
Iemna: of whom cometh the kynred of the lemnites. lesui: of whom commeth the kynred of the Ilesuites. Bria: of whom cometh the kynred of the Bryites. And y childré of Bria, were Heber: of whom com- meth the kynred of the Hebrites. Melchiel: of who commeth the kynred of the Melchiel- ites. And the doughter of Asser was called
Sarah. These are the kynreds of the children of Asser, in their nombre, thre and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.

The childré of Nephtali in their kynreds were, Iaheziel: of whom cómeth the kynred of the Iahezielites. Guni: of whom cometh ý kynred of y Gunites. Iezer: of whom co- meth ¥ kynred of the Iezerites. Sillem: of who cometh $ kynred of y Sillemites. are ¥ kynreds of the childré of Nephtali in their generacions, in their nombre, fyue q fourtye thousande and foure hundreth.

This is the summe of the children of Israel: 
*sixe hundreth thousande, a thousande seuen hundreth and thirtye.

And y LORDE spake vnto Moses, q sayde: 
Vnto these shalt thou deuyde the lode to enheritaunce, acordinge to the nombre of y names. ^'l'o many shalt thou geue the more

* Eccli. 16. b. 4 Num. 32. f. Iosu. 11. d. 

Fo. dij. 

@&| Kahath begat Amram. 

enheritaunce, and to few the lesse, vnto euery one shall be geué acordinge to their nombre :
‘yet shall the londe be deuyded by lott. 
Acordinge to ¥ names of the trybes of their fathers shal they enheret it: for after the lot shalt thou deuyde their enheritaunce, both betwixte many and fewe. :
| And this is the summe of the Leuites in their kynreds. Gerson: of whom cometh the kynred of the Gersonites. Kahath: of who cometh the kynred of the Kahathites. Merari: of whom cometh y kynred of $ Merarites.
These are ý kynreds of Leui, the kyured of y Libnites, y kynred of y Hebronites, ibo of the VEMM y kynred of the Musites, the kynred of the Corahites.

^ And Amrams 
‘wife was called Iochebed a doughter of Leui, which was borne him in Egipte: And vnto
Amram she bare Aaron q Moses, ¢ Miriam their sister. And vnto Aaron were borne
Nadab, Abihu,’ Eleasar q Ithamar. As for 
‘Nadab q Abihu, they dyed, whan they offred straunge fyre before ý LORDE. “And the
‘summe of thé was thre q twentye thousande, all males fro fyue monethes q aboue. For they were not nombred amoge the childrē of
‘Israel, for there was no enheritaunce geuen 
|thé amonge the children of Israel. 

This is $ summe of ý childré of Israel, who Moses q Eleasar the prest nombred in the felde of the Moabites besyde lordane ouer agaynst Jericho: Amonge whom there was not one of the summe of those children of Israel,* whom Moses t Aaron the prest nombred in the wildernesse of Sinai. For ý
LORDE sayde vnto thé,t y they shulde dye in the wildernesse. And there was not one of
'them lefte, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune and Iosua the sonne of Nun.

The rrbij. Chapter. 

ND the doughters of *Zelaphead y 
A sonne of Hepher ý sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasse, amonge the kynreds of Manasse the sonne loseph (whose names were, Mahela, Noa,
Hagla, Milca, q Thirza) came q stode before 
Moses q Eleasar the prest, q before the rulers q the whole congregacion, euen before the idore of ý Tabernacle of witnesse, q sayde:

| a Exod. 6. c. 
* Num. 1. f. 

c Num. 3. f. 
1 Nu. 26.d. Nu. 56.a. 

* Leui. 10.a. Nume. 3. a. 
+ Nu. 14. c. 

The iij. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rrbíj. 
Oure father is deed in the wildernesse, q was not in the company of them y rose vp agaynst y LORDE” in the cogregacion of Corah: but dyed in his awne synne, and had no sonnes.
Wherfore shulde oure fathers name perishe then amonge his kynred, though he haue no sonne? Geue vs a possession also amonge oure fathers brethren.

Moses broughte their cause before ¥ 
LORDE. And the LORDE sayde vnto him: The doughters of Zelaphead haue spoke righte. ‘Thou shalt geue thé a possession to inheret amonge their fathers brethren, q shalt turne their fathers enheritaunce vnto them.
And saye vnto the childré of Israel: Whan a mà dyeth q hath no sonne, ye shall turne his enheritaunce vnto his doughter. Yf he haue no doughter, ye shal geue it vnto his brethre.
Yf he haue no brethren, ye shal geue it vnto his fathers brethren. Yf he haue no fathers brethré, ye shal geue it vnto his nexte kynsz- folke which belóge vnto him in his kynred, y they maye possesse it. This shalbe an ordy- naunce and a perpetuall lawe vnto the chil- dren of Israel, as the LORDE cómaunded
Moses. 

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Get the vp in to this mount Abarim, q beholde the lode, which I shal geue vnto the childre of Israel. And whan thou hast sene it, thou shalt be gathered vnto thy people$ as Aaron thy brother was gathered: for ye were disho- bedient vnto my worde in the wyldernesse of
Zin, in ¥ strife of the cogregacion, whan ye shulde haue sanctified me, thorow the water before them. ‘This is the water of stryfe at
Cades in the wyldernesse of Zin. 

And Moses spake vnto the LORDE qsayde: 
O let the LORDE God of the spretes of all flesh set a ma ouer the congregacion, which maye go in a out before them, q to leade thé out q in, y the congregacion of the LORDE be not as the shepe without a shepherde.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Take vnto the Iosua the sonne of Nun,’ which is a man in whom is the sprete, and put thine handes vpon him, q set him before Eleasar the prest, and before the whole congregacion, and geue him a charge in their sighte, q beutyfye him with thy bewty, that the whole congregacion of the children of Israel maye

4 Nu. 16. a. * Deut. 1. f. 3. d. e. 34. a. f Exo.17. b. Nu. 20. b. €1 Mac. 2. f.

Iosu. 17. a. 
§ Nu. 20. d. 

Chap. rrbtij. be obediét vnto him. And he shal stonde before Eleasar the prest, which shall axe councell for him after the maner of the * lighte, before the LORDE. At the mouth of him shall both he and all the children of Israel with him, and the whole congregacion go in and out.

Moses dyd as the LORDE comaunded him, q toke Iosua, and set him before Eleasar the prest, and before all the congregacion, and tlayed his handes vpon him, and gaue him a charge, as the LORDE sayde vnto Moses.

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, q 

sayde: Comaunde y childré of Israel, q saye vnto the: The offerynge of my bred which is my offerynge of the swete sauoure, shal ye kepe in his due season, that ye maie offre vnto me. And saye vnto the: “These are the offerynges that ye shal offre vnto the
LORDE: Lambes of a yeare olde which are without blemysh, euery daye two for a daylie burntofferynge: the one lambe in the morn- ynge, the other at euen. And therto a tenth deale^ of an Epha of fyne floure for a meat- offerynge, myngled with beate oyle of the fourth parte of an Hin, this is a daylie burnt- offerynge, which ye offred vpon mout Sinai, for a swete sauoure of a sacrifice vnto the
LORDE: And the drynkofferinge of the same, y fourth parte of an Hin to a lambe, and this shalbe poured in the Sanctuary for a gifte vnto the LORDE. The other lambe shalt thou prepare at eue (like as the meat- offerynge in the mornynge) q the drynk- offeringe therof, for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE.

On the Sabbath daye, two lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, q two téth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle, ¢ the drynk- offerynge therof. ‘This is the burntofferynge of euery Sabbath, besyde the daylie burnt- offerynge, with his drynkofferinge.

And on the first daye of youre monethes ye shal offre a burntofferynge vnto ý LORDE: two yonge bullockes, a ramme, seue lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, and allwaye thre tenth deales of fyne floure for a meat- offerynge myngled with oyle vnto euery bul- locke: two tenth deales of fyne floure for a

* Exo. 28. a. 
1 Par. 17. e. 

+ Acto. 1, d. and 6. a. 

? Exo.29.g. 
1 Esd. 3.a. Heb. 9. a. 

^ Nu. 15. a. 

The iiij. boke of Moses, 

meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto the ramme: and a tenth deale of fyne floure for a meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto euery lambe. This is the burntofferynge of a swete sauoure, a sacrifice vnto y LORDE.

And their drynkofferynges shalbe, half an 
Hin of wyne vnto euery bullocke, the thirde parte of an Hin to the ramme, ý fourth parte of an Hin to euery lambe. This is the burnt- offerynge of euery moneth in the yeare.
There shalbe offered an he goate also for a synofferynge vnto the LORDE, to the daylie burntofferynge with his drynkofferynge.

"And on the fourtene daye of the first moneth is the Easter vnto the LORDE, and on the fyftene daye of the same moneth is the feast. Seué dayes shal vnleuended bred be eaten. The first daye shalbe an holy con- uocacion: No seruile worke shal ye do therin, and ye shal offre a burntofferynge vnto the
LORDE: ^two yonge bullockes, one ramme, seuen làbes of a yeare olde without blemysh, with their meatofferynge: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oile to either bullocke, and two tenth deales to the ramme, and one tenth deale to euery lambe amonge the seuen lambes. And an he goate for a synofferinge, to make an attonement for you.
And these shal ye offre in the mornynge, besydes the burntofferynge, which is a daylie burntofferynge. After this maner shal ye offre y bred euery daye seuen dayes longe for an Stone of a swete sauoure vnto the
LORDE, to the daylie burntofferynge, and drynkofferynge also. And the seuenth daye shal be called an holy conuocacion with you: no seruyle worke shal ye do therin.

And the daye of the fyrst frutes (wha ye offre the meatofferynge of the moneth vnto ý
LORDE in youre wekes) shal be an holy cóuocacion also: No worke of bondage shal ye do therin. And ye shal offre a burnt- offeryngefora swetesauoure vntothe LORDE:
"two yonge bullockes, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde, with their meatofferynges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle to euery bullocke, two tenth deales to the ramme, and one tent deale to euery lambe of the seuen lambes. And an he goate to make an attonement for you. This shal ye do, besydes y daylie burntofferynge with his meat
4 Leui. 23. b. 

* Exo. 12. c. Leui.23.a. Deut. 16, a. 

© Leui. 23. b, 
23 

Fo. rlii. 

fo. clit. offerynge and his drynkofferinge. blemysh shal they be all.

Without 

The rri. Chapter. 

a ND the fyrst daye of the seuenth moneth 

*shal be with you an holy couocacion. 
No seruyle worke shal ye do therin, for it is the daye of youre trompet blowinge. And ye shal offre a burntofferinge for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE: a yonge bullocke, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde without blemish. And their meatofferinges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle to the bullocke, two tenth deales to y rame, and one tenth deale vnto euery lambe of y seuen labes.
An he goate also for a syuofferinge, to make an attonement for you, beside y burntofferinge of y moneth q his meatofferinge, q besyde y daylie burntofferynge with his meatofferynge a with their drinkofferinges, acordinge to the maner of the for a swete sauoure. ‘This is a sacrifice vnto the LORDE.

"The tenth daye of this seuenth moneth shalbe an holy conuocacion with you also, and ye shal humble youre soules, and do no seruyle worke therin, but offre a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE for a swete sauoure: a yonge bullocke, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde without blemish, with their meatoffer- inges: thre tenth deales of fine floure myngled with oyle to the bullocke, two tenth deales to the rame, q one tenth deale to euery one of the seuen lambes. And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the synofferinge of the attonemet, and y daylie burntofferige with his meatofferinge, and with his drynkofferinge.

“The fiftenth daye of the seuenth moneth shal be an holy couocacion with you, no seruyle worke shal ye do therm, and seué dayes shal ye kepe a feast vnto the LORDE. And ye ishal offre the LORDE a burntofferinge for a
‘sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE: 
|thirtene yonge bullockes, two rames, fourtene 
|làbes of a yeare olde without blemish, with 
€ their meatofferyuges: thre tenth deales of 
| |fyne floure myngled with oyle to euery one of 

the thirtene bullockes, two tenth deales to ether of the two rammes, q one tenth deale to euery one of the fourtene lambes: q an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde y daylye burntofferynge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.

| 

* Leui. 23. d. * Leu. 16. g. 

The (itj. boke of Moses. 

On the seconde daye, twolue yonge bul- lockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes ofa yeare olde without blemysh with their meatoffer- inges and drinkofferynges to the bullockes, to the rammes and to the lambes in y nombre of them acordinge to the maner. And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge with his meatofferinge, and with his drynkofferynge.

On the thirde daye, eleuen bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde with- out blemish, with their meatofferinges, and drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the rammes and to the lambes in their nombre acordinge to the maner. And an he goate for a syn- offerynge, besyde the daylye burntofferinge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.

On the fourth daye, ten bullockes, two rames, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde with- out blemysh, with their meatofferynges and drynkofferynges, to the bullockes, to the rames, and to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner. And an he goate for a syn- offerynge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge with his meatofferinge, ¢ his drynkofferinge.
On the fifth daye, nyne bullockes, two rames, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, with their meatofferynges q drink- offerynges to the bullockes, to ý rammes çq to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner. And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde y daylie burntofferynge with his meat- offerynge and his drynkofferynge.

On the sixte daye, eight bullockes, two rames, fourtene labes of a yeare olde without blemysh, with their meatofferynges q drynk- offeringes to the bullockes, to the rammes, q to the lambes in their nombre acordinge to the maner. And an he goate for a syn- offeringe, beside the daylie burntofferinge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.

On the seuenth daye, seuen bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, with their meatofferinges and drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the rammes, and to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner. And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylie burnt- offeringe with his meatotierynge and his drynk- offerynge.

On the eight daye shal ye gather the people together, No seruyle worke shall ye do therin.

* Leu. 23. f. 

Chap. rri. 

B 

Chap, rrrt. The iii. boke of Moses. fo. elb. 

And ye shall offre a burntofferynge for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto y LORDE.
A bullocke, a ramme, seuē lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, with s eo

ges and drynkofferynges to y bullocke to m ramme, P d to aen [M in their nobre acordinge to the maner. And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the daylie burnt- offerynge with his meatofferynge « his drink- offerynge.

"These thinges shal ye do vnto y LORDE in youre feastes, besyde that ye vowe and geue of a frewyll for burntofferinges, meat- offerynges, drynkofferynges and healthoffer- inges. And Moses tolde the children of Israel all that the LORDE commaunded him.

The rrr. Chapter. 

ND Moses spake vnto the rulers of the trybes of the children of Israel, and saide: This is it that the LORDE hath com- maüded : * Yf eny man make a vowe vnto the
LORDE, or sweare an ooth, so that he binde his soule, he shal not breake his worde, but do

all that is proceaded out of his mouth. 

Yf a damsell make a vowe vnto $ LORDE, and bynde hirself, whyle she is in hir fathers house, and vnmaried, and hir vowe or bonde that she maketh ouer hir soule, commeth to hir fathers eares, q he holde his peace therto, thé all hir vowes q bondes y she hath boūde hir self withall ouer hir soule, shal stéde in effecte. But yf her father forbyd her $ same daye that he heareth it, the shal no vowe ner bonde that she hath bounde hir self withall ouer hir soule, be of vayle. And the LORDE
‘shalbe mercifull vnto her, for so moch as hir father forbad her.

Yf she haue an huszbande, q hath a vowe vpon her, or yf she haue letten go out of hir lippes a bode ouer hir soule, q hir huszbande heare it, q holdeth his peace therat, the same daye that he heareth it, then hir vowe q bonde wherwith she hath boüde hir self ouer hir soule, shal stonde in effecte. But yf hir huszbande forbyd her the same daye that he heareth it, thé is the vowe lowse y she hath vpo hir, q the bonde also that she hath letten go out of hir lippes ouer hir soule, and the
LORDE shalbe gracious vnto her. 

The vowe of a wyddowe, q of her Y is deuorced, all y she byndeth hir self with-

a Deut. 23. d. 

all ouer hir soule, shal stonde in effecte vpé her

Yf she vowe in hir huszhades house, or) binde hir self with an ooth ouer hir soule, œ hir husbande heare it, œ holde his peace therto, and for byddeth it not, thé shal all y same vowe, q all y she hath boude hir self with all ouer hir soule, stode 1 effecte. But yf hir huszbade disanulle it, $ same daye y he heareth it, thé is it of no value y is pro- ceaded out of hir lippes, which she hath vowed or bonde ouer hir soule: for hir husz- bade hath made it lowse, x the LORDE shalbe gracious vnto her. And all vowes «| oothes y bynde to humble $ soule, maie hir huszbade stablish or breake, thus: Yf he holde his peace therto fro one daie to another, then stablisheth he all hir vowes q bondes, Y she hath vpon her, because he helde his peace, the same daye y he herde th&. But yf he disanulle the after y he hath herde the, then shal he take awaie hir miszdede.

These are the statutes y the LORDE co- maunded Moses betwene a man çq his wife, q betwene the father q his doughter, whyle she is yet a damsell in hir fathers house.

The rrri. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, ti g sayde: ^Auenge the childré of Israel of the Madianites, y thou mayest afterwarde be gathered vnte thy people. ‘Thé spake Moses vnto the people, q sayde: Harnesse some men amonge you to the warre agaynst the Ma- dianites (Y they maye auenge LORDE vpon the Madianites) out of euery trybe a thousande, y out of euery trybe of Israel ye maye sende some to the battayll. And from amonge the thousandes of Israel they toke one thousande ont of euery tribe, euen twolue thousande prepared vnto the battayll And
Moses sent them with Phineas the sonne of 
Eleasar the prest in to the battayll, aud the holy vessels and y trompettes to blowe in his hande.

And they fought agaynst ý Madianites as y 
LORDE eomaunded Moses, q slew all y males, q the kynge of the Madianites slew they also amonge the other that were slaine namely, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the fyue kynges of the Madianites. And they|% slew * Balaam the sonne of Beor with the

è Nu. 25. c. 

ZIE? 6. 

3| And Eleasar the 

Fo. clot. 

swerde. And ? children of Israel toke the wemen of the Madianites presoners, q their childre: all their catell, all their substaunce, and all their goodes spoiled they, and all their cities of their dwellynges q castels burnt they with fyre. And they toke all y spoyles, q all ý they coulde catche men q catell, and brought thé vnto Moses q to
Eleasar the prest, and to ¥ congregacion of the children of Israel (namely y presoners, and the catell y were take, and the good that was spoyled) in to the hoost in the felde of the Moabites, which lyeth besyde Iordane ouer against Jericho.

And Moses and Eleasar the prest and all the captaines of ý congregacion, * wéte out of the hoost to mete thé. And Moses was angrie at the officers of the hoost, which were cap- taynes ouer thousandes and hüdreds, y came from the battayll, and sayde vnto thé: Haue ye saued all y wemen alyue? Beholde, t haue not they (thorow Balaams busynes) turned awaye y childré of Israel to synne agaynst the LORDE vpó Peor, q there came a plage ouer the whole cogregacion of y LORDE?
“Now therfore slaie all the males amoge y childré, q kyll all wemen y haue knowne men ç lyen with dic But all the wemen children y haue knowne no mé ner lien with them, kepe those alyue for youre selues. And lodge ye without the hoost, t all y haue slayne any man, or tonched the slayne, that on the thirde and seuenth daie ye maie purifie youre selues and those whom ye haue taken pre- soners. And all the clothes, and all stuffe that is made of szkynnes, and all maner furres, and all vessels of wod shal ye purifie. prest sayde vnto y cap- taynes of the hoost, y wente out to the bat- tayll: This is the statute of the lawe, which the LORDE cdmaunded Moses: Golde, siluer, brasse, yron, tynne and leed, and all that suffreth the fyre, shall ye cause to go thorow the fyre, and clense it, that it maye be purified with ¥ sprencklynge water. As for all soch as suffreth not the fyre, he shal cause it to go thorow y water, and shal washe youre clothes vpon the seuenth daye, and the shall ye be cleane. After that shall ye come in to the hooste.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: "'lake the summe of the spoyle of

i: Gen. 14. c. t Num. 25. a, Apo. 2. c. a Jud. 21. b. 

Che iiij. boke of Moses, 

those that are taken, both of wemen and of catell, thou and Eleasar the prest, and the chefe fathers of the congregacion, and geue y halfe vnto those that toke the warre vpon them, and wente out to the battayll, and y other halfe to the congregacion. And of the men of warre that wente out to y battayll, thou shalt heue vnto the LORDE one soule of fyue hundreth, both of the wemen, oxen,
Asses and shepe: Of their halfe parte shalt thou take it, and gene it vnto Eleasar the prest for an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE.
But of the children of Israels halfe parte, thou shalt take one heade of fyftie, both of the wemen, oxen, Asses and shepe, and of all the catel, and shalt geue them vnto the
Leuites, that wayte vpon the habitacio of the 
LORDE. 

And Moses and Eleasar the prest dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses. And the spoyle and praye which y men of warre had spoyled, was sixe hundreth thousande and fyue and seuentye thousande shepe, two and seuentye thousande oxen, one q thre score thousande Asses: and the wemen y had knowne no men ner lyen with them, were two and thirtie thousande soules.

And the halfe parte which belonged vnto them that wente to the warre, was in nobre thre hundreth thousande, and seuen and thirtie thousande, and fyue hundreth shepe : of the which the LORDE had sixe hundreth,
& fyue and seuentye shepe. Item sixe and thirtie thousande oxen: wherof the LORDE had two q seuentye. Item thirtie thousande q fyue hundreth Asses: wherof the LORDE had one ¢ thre score. Item sixtene thousande soules of wemen: wherof the LORDE had two q thirtie. And Moses gaue this heue- offerynge of the LORDE vnto Eleasar the prest, as the LORDE commaunded him.

As for the other halfe which Moses deuyded vnto the children of Israel fro y men of warre
(namely y halfe that fell to the congregacion) it was As thre hundreth thousande, and seuen and thyrtie thousande, a fyue hundreth shepe, sixe and thirtie thousande oxen, thyrtie thousande q fyue hundreth Asses, and sixtene thousande wemen soules. And of this halfe of the childre of Israel toke Moses one of euery fyftie, both of the catell x of the wemen, and gaue them vnto y Leuites, that waited

tNu.19.b. è Deu, 90. b. and 22. b. Ios. 8. f. 2 Mac. 8. e. 

Chap. rrri. 

F 

(Chap. rrrij. 

The iij. boke of Moses. 

vpon the habitacié of the LORDE, as y 
LORDE eomauded Moses. 

And the captaynes ouer y thousandes of the| 

hoost, namely they that were ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, came forth vnto Moses,

Aland sayde vnto him: Thy seruauntes haue 

a 

taken y summe of $ men of warre, that were vnder oure hande, and there lacked not one: therfore brynge we a present vnto the
LORDE, what euery one hath foude of Iewels of golde, cheynes, bracelettes, rynges, earinges, and taches, that oure soules maye be recon- cyled before the LORDE.

And Moses and Eleasar $ prest toke of them y golde of all maner ornamentes. And all the golde of the Heueofferynge that they
Heued vnto the LORDE, was sixtene thou- sande and seuen hundreth and fyftye Sycles, of the captaynes ouer thousandes and hun- dreds. For loke what euery one had spoyled, that was his awne. And Moses with Eleasar the prest toke the golde of the captaynes ouer thousandes and hundreds, and broughte it in to the Tabernacle of witnesse for a remembraunce of the children of Israel before the LORDE.

The rrrij. Chapter. 

HE children of Ruben and the children 
| of Gad had an exceadinge greate mul- ititude of catell, and sawe the londe of Iaeser jand Gilead y it was a mete place for catell, and came çq spake vnto Moses and to Eleasar the prest, and to the captaynes of the con- gregacion: The londe of Atroth, Dibon, laesar, Nimra, Heszbō, Eleale, Seban, Nebo, q Beon, which the LORDE smote before y congregacion of Israel, is a mete londe for catell, and thy seruauntes haue many catell.
And they sayde morouer: Yf we haue founde fauoure before the, thé geue thy seruauntes this londe in possession, and we wyl not go ouer lordane.

Moses sayde vnto them: Youre brethren shall go to the warre, and wyll ye tary here?
Wherfore turne ye y hertes of the children of 
Israel, that they shulde not go ouer in to the londe that the LORDE shall geue them?

%3|* Thus dyd youre fathers also, whan I sent 

them out from Cades Bemea, to spye out y londe. And whan they were come vp to y ryuer of Escol, and sawe y londe, they turned

* Num. 13. d. a Nu. 14. d. 

il 

the hertes of the children of Tsrael, so y they wolde not in to the londe which y LORDE wolde haue geuen them.

And the LORDE was wroth at the same tyme, q sware, v sayde: “These men y are come out of Egipte, from twétye yeare olde q aboue, shall not se the lande which I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, because they haue not wholy folowed me: saue Caleb ¥ soune of Iephune y Kenisite, x losua y sonne of Nun: for they haue wholy folowed $
LORDE. So the LORDE was wroth eu 
Israel, q let thé wander in the wildernesse fourtye yeares, tyll all ¥ generacion y had done euell before the LORDE, was consumed.

And beholde, ye are rysen vp in youre fathers steade, to increase the nombre of syn- full men, q to augmente yet the wrath q indig- nacion of the LORDE agaynst Israel. For yf ye turne you backe from folowinge him, he shal yet leaue them more in the wildernes, q so shal ye destroye all this people.

Then stepte they to him, q sayde: we wyll; but buylde shepefoldes here for oure shepe q' catell, q cities for oure children: As for oure| selues, we will go ready armed before the children of Israel, tyll we haue broughte them vnto their place: Oure childré shal remayne in the fenced cities, because of y indwellers of the londe. We will not turne home agayne, tyll the children of Israel haue taken euery one his inheritaunce in possession : for we wyll not inheret with them beyonde Iordane: for oure inheritaunce shal fall vnto vs vpon this syde Iordane Eastwarde.

Moses sayde vnto them: t Yf ye wil do this, that ye wil harnesse youre selues to the warre before the LORDE, then go ouer Iordane before the LORDE, who so euer is harnessed amonge you, tyll he haue dryuen out his ene- mies before his face, and vntyll the londe be subdued before the LORDE, then shal ye returne, q be vngiltye before the LORDE, and before Israel, q so shal ye haue this londe in possession before the LORDE. But yf ye will not do so, beholde, ye shal offende agaynst the LORDE, and be sure, that youre synne shal fynde you out. Buylde cities now ther- fore for youre children, and shepefoldes and stalles for youre shepe and catell, and do as ye haue spoken.

The childré of Gad, q the childre of Ruben 

t Iosu. 1. c. and 4. c. 

Fo. chí. 

acl 

(Fo. Moi, 

sayde vnto Moses: Thy seruauntes shal do as my lorde hath cõmaunded. Oure children, wyues, substaunce, q all oure catell, shal be in y cities of Gilead. But we thy seruauntes will go all harnessed for the warre vnto bat- taill before y LORDE, as my lorde hath saide.

The Moses comaunded Eleasar y prest q 
Iosua the sonne of Nun, q the chefe fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, and saide vnto them: Yf the children of Gad q the children of ^ Ruben go ouer Iordane with you, all prepared to fight before the LORDE, q whan the londe is subdued vnto yon, thé geue them the londe of Gilead in possessio. But yf they go not ouer with you in harnes, then shal they inheret with you in y lode of Canaa.

'The children of Gad and the children of 
Rubé answered, q sayde: As LORDE hath spoken vnto thy seruauntes, so wyll we do: we wil go harnessed before the LORDE in to
¥ lide of Canaan, and possesse oure enherit- aunce on this syde Iordane.

So Moses gaue vnto y children of Gad and to the children of Ruben, “and to the halfe trybe of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, y kyngdome of Sihon kynge of the Amorites and the kyngdome of Og the kynge of Dasan, the londe with the cities therof in all y coastes of ý countre rounde aboute. "The i children of Gad buylded Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer,
Atroth, Sophan, laeser, « legabeha, Beth- nimra, a Betharan, stronge fenced cities, q shepe foldes. "The children of Ruben buylded
Heszbo, Eleale, Kiriathaim, Nebo, Baal 
Meon, q turned ¥ names, q Sibamas q gaue names vnto y cities which they buylded. And y children of Machir the sonne of Manasse wente in to Gilead, q conquered it, and droue out the Amorites y were therin. ‘Then Moses gaue Gilead vnto UR y sonne of Manasse, q he dwelt therin. Jair $ sonne of Manasse wente and conquered the vyllagies therof, and called them Hauoth Iair. Nobah wente, and cóquered Kenath, with the townes belonginge therto, and called it Nobah, after his awne name.

The rrritj. Chapter. 
HESE are ¥ iourneys of the childré of 
Israel, which wéte out of y lande of 
Egipte acordinge to their armies, by Moses q Áaro. And Moses wrote their gorge out as

* Exod. 
* Exo. 14. e. 

a Tos. 4. c. b Deut. 3. b. Ios. 22. a. d. 
12. f. * Exod. 13. d. 4 Exo. 14. a. 

The uj. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rrriý. they iourneyed, after y comaundement of y
LORDE. And these (namely) are the yourneyes of their outgoinge. *They de- parted fro Raemses vpon y fiftene daye of the first moneth (euen the morow after the Easter) thorow an hye hande, so that all the Egipcians sawe, and buried then their firstborne, whom the LORDE had slayne amonge them: for the LORDE executed iudgment also vpon their goddes. When they were departed from
Raemses, they pitched in Sucoth. And fro 
Sucoth they departed, q pitched their tentes in Etha, which lyeth in y edge of y wildernes.
“Fro Etham they departed, and abode in the valley of Hiroth? (which lyeth towarde Baal
Zephon) a pitched ouer agaynst Migdol. 
From Hyroth they departed, ‘q wente in thorow y middes of the see in to y wyldernes, and wente thre dayes yourney in M wildernes of Etham, /a pitched in Marah. From Marah they departed, and came vnto Elim, where there were twolue welles of water, and seuen- tye palme trees, £q there they pitched. From
Elim they departed, and pitched by the reed see. From y reed see they departed, and pitched in the wildernesse of Sin. From the wildernes of Sin they departed, and pitched in Daphka. Fro Daphka they departed, and pitched in Alus. “From Alus they departed, and pitched in Raphidim, where the people had no water to drynke. ‘ From Raphidim they departed and pitched in the wildernes of Sinai.
From Sinai they departed, and pitched at the Lustgraues. ‘Fré the Lustgraues they departed, and pitched in Hazeroth. t From
Hazeroth they departed, q pitched in Rithma. 
From Rithma they departed, and pitched in 
Rimon Parez. From Rimon Parez they de- parted, and pitched in Libna. From Libna they departed, and pitched in Rissa. Fro
Rissa they departed, q pitched in Kehelatha. 
Fro Kehelatha they departed, q pitched in moüt Sapher. From moüt Sapher they de- parted, q pitched in Harada. Fré Harada they departed, pitched in Makeheloth. From
Makeheloth they departed, q pitched in Ta- hath. From Tahath they departed, and pitehed lin Tharah. From 'Tharah they departed, and pitched in Mitka. From Mitka they depart- ed, and pitchedin Hasmona. From Hasmona they departed, and pitched in Mosseroth.

g Exo. 16. a. ^ Exo. 17. a. i Exo. k Num. 10. b. Num. 11. g. t Nu. 12. b.

f Exo. 15. d. 
19. a. 

Chap. revit. 

*From Mosseroth they departed, and pitched in Bne Iackon. From Bne Iaekon they de- parted, and pitched in Horgadgad. From
Horgadgad they departed, q pitched in Iath- batha. From Iathbatha they departed, and pitehed in Abrona. From Abrona they de- parted, and pitched in Ezeon gaber. From
Ezeon gaber they departed, and pitched in $ wildernes of Zin, which is Cades.*

From Cades they departed, and pitched at 

mount Hor, *on the border of the londe of 
Edom. ‘Then Aaron the prest wente vp vnto mount Hor (acordynge to the commannde- ment of the LORDE) and died there in the fourtyeth yeare, after y the children of Israel departed out of the londe of Egipte, in the first daie of the fifte moneth, wha he was an hundreth and thre and twentye yeare olde.
And Arad the kynge of the Cananites, which dwelt in the south countre of Canaa herde y the children of Israel came.
3;| And from mount Hor they departed, and pitched in Zalmona. From Zalmona they departed, and pitched in Phimon. From
Phimon they departed, t and pitched in Oboth. 
From Oboth they departed, and pitched in 
Igim by Abarim vpon the border of the lode of y Moabites. From Igim they departed, and pitched in Dibon Gad. From Dibo Gad they departed, and pitched in Almon Dibla- thama. Fro Almon Diblathama they de- parted and pitched in the mountaynes of
Abarim oner agaynst Nebo. From the moü- taynes of Abarim they departed, and pitched
.|in ¥ felde of the Moabites besyde lordane oner agaynst Jericho. Fro Beth haiesmoth vnto the playne of Sitim* laye they in the felde of the Moabites.
F| And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the felde of the Moabites, by Iordane ouer agaynst lericho, and sayde: Speake to the children of
Israel, and saie vnto them: Wha ye are come ouer “lordane in the lande of Canaan, ye shal dryue out all the inhabiters before youre face, and plucke downe all their pilers, and all their ymages of metall, and destroye all their thye places: that ye maye so take the londe in possession and dwell therin. For I haue geue you the londe to enioye it.

And the londe shall ye deuyde ont by lott amonge youre kynreds. Vnto those that are

* Deut. 10. b. ^ Nu. 20, d. Deu. 10. b. t Num. 21. b. 4 Deut. 7.a. Iosu. 16. b.

a Nu. 20.2. 
* Num. 25. a. 

The (ij. boke of Moses. 

So. clr. 

many, shall ye denyde the more: And vnto them that are fewe, shall ye denyde the lesse.
Euen as the lott falleth there vnto euery one, so shal he hane it, acordinge to the trybes of their fathers.

But yf ye wyll not dryue out the inhabiters of y lande before youre face, ‘then they who ye suffre to remayue, shall become thornes in youre eyes, and dartes in youre sydes, « shall vexe you in the londe where ye dwell. Then wil it come to passe, that I shal do vnto yon euen as I thonght to do vnto them.

The yyritj. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde: Commaunde the childré of
Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan ye come in to the londe of Canaan, the londe y falleth to youre inheritaunce, shall haue hir borders in the londe of Canaan. The South quarter shall begynne at the wyldernesse of Zin by
Edom, so that youre South quarter be from the edge of the Salt see, which lyeth towarde the South: and that y same quarter fet a compasse from the South vp to Acrabim, q go thorow Zimma: gq that his ont goinge be from the South vnto Cades Barnea, q reache vnto Hazor Adar, and go thorow Azmona, and stretch out from Azmona vnto the ryuer of Egipte, and that the ende therof be at the greate see.

But the West quarter shal be this: namely the greate see, let y be youre border towarde the West. |

The North quarter shalbe this: Ye shall|33 compasse from the greate see vnto mount
Hor. And fro mount Hor ye shall compasse tyll a man come vnto Hemath, that the out goynge therof be the coast of Zedada, and that
‘the border of the same go out vnto Siphron, and that the goynge out of it be at Hazor
Enan. Let this be yonre North quarter. 

And youre East quarter shall ye copasse from Hazor Enan vnto Sephan, q let the coaste go downe from Sephan and Ribla on the East syde of Ain. "Thé let it go downe, q reache vnto the syde of the see of Chinereth
East warde, and come downe by Iordane, so y the goynge out of it be the Salt see. Let this be youre londe with the borders therof rounde aboute.

1 Hill chapels, or altares builded vpon billes. * Iudi. 
1. e. f. g. 

ER S l — 

| ffo. clr. 

€| And Moses commaunded the children of 

B 

Israel, and sayde: This is youre londe that ye shal deuyde out amonge you by lott, which the LORDE hath commaunded to geue vnto the nyne trybes, and to the halfe trybe. *For the trybe of the children of Ruben after their fathers house, and the trybe of the children of
Gad acordinge to their fathers house, and the half trybe of Manasse haue receaued their porcion. Thus the two trybes and the halfe trybe haue their enheritaunce allready, on this syde Iordane, ouer agaynst Iericho, Eastwarde.

And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde : ^ These are y names of the men, which shal deuyde the londe amonge you. Eleasar the prest, and Iosua the sonne of Nun. And the captayne of enery trybe shal ye take, to deuyde the londe.

And these are the names of the men: 
Caleb the sonne of Iephune of the trybe of 
Iuda. Semuel the sonne of Ammihud of the trybe of Simeon. Elidad y sonne of Cislon of the trybe of Ben Iamin. Buki the sonne of lagli of the trybe of the childré of Dan.
Hamuel the sonne of Ephod, of the trybe of the children of Manasse amonge the children of Ioseph. Kemuel the sonne of Siphthan, of the trybe of the children of Ephraim.
Elizaphan the sonne of Parnach, of the trybe of the childré of Zabulon. Palthiel the sonne of Asan, of the trybe of the childré of Isachar.
Abihud the sonne of Selomi, of ¥ trybe of the children of Asser. Pedahel the sonne of
Ammihud, of the trybe of the children of 
Nephtali. These are they whom y LORDE commaunded, that they shulde deuyde the inheritaunce vnto the children of Israel in the londe of Canaan.

The rrr. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Moses in 
A the felde of the Moabites by Iordane ouer agaynst lericho, q sayde: Commaunde the childré of Israel, ^that they geue vnto y
Leuites of the inheritauce of their possession, cities to dwell in. The suburbes also aboute

the cities shal ye geue vnto the Leuites, that they maye dwell in the cities, and in the suburbes to hane their catell, and substaunce, and all their beestes.

The suburbes which ye geue vnto ¥ Leuites, shal reache fro the wall of y cite outwarde, a

* Num. 32. f. ^ Deut. 3. e. Iosu. 14. a. — ^ Iosu. 21. a. 

The iiij. boke of Moses. 

M. cubites rounde aboute. Thus ye shal measure without the cite on y East syde, two

thousande cubites: q on y South syde, two thousande cubites: q on y West syde, two thousande cubites: q on y North syde, two

thousande cubites, so y the cite be in the myddes. This shal be their suburbes.

tAnd amoge the.cities which ye shal geue vnto the Leuites, ye shall geue thé sixe fre cities, that he which comitteth a slaughter, male flye thither. Besydes the same ye shal geue thé yet two q fourtie cities: so y all y cities which ye geue vnto y Leuites, be eight q fourtye with their suburbes. And of y same ye shal geue the more, from thé y haue moch
In possession amonge the children of Israel: q the lesse from them, that haue litle in possession. Euery one (acordinge to his en- heritaunce that is deuyded vnto him) shall geue of his cities vnto the Leuites.

And the LORDE talked with Moses q saide: Speake to the childré of Israel, t saye vnto thé: * Whan ye come ouer Jordane in to y londe of Canaan, ye shall chose out cities to be fre cities, y who so comytteth slaughter vnawarres, maye flye thither. And soch fre cities shalbe amonge you because of the auenger of bloude, that he which hath com- mytted slanghter, dye not, tyll he stonde in iudgment before the congregacion. And of these cities which ye shall geue, there shalbe sixe fre cites. Thre shal ye geue on this side
Iordane, and thre in the londe of Canaan. 

These are the sixe fre cities, both for y childré of Israel œ for the straungers, a for soch as dwell amóge you, y who so euer hath slaine eny soule vnawarres, maye flye thither.

“He y smyteth eny man with an yron weapo, y he dye, the same is a murthurer, q shal dye the death. Yf he cast at him with a stone
(wherwith eny man maye be slayne) y he dye therof, then is he a murthurer, and shal dye the death. Yf he smyte him with an hand- weapon of wodd (wherwith eny man maie be slayne) that he dye, then is he a murthurer, and shal dye the death. The auenger of blonde shal bringe $ murthurer to death.
Whan he fyndeth him, he shal slaye him. Yf he thrust at him of hate, or cast ought at him with laienge of wayte, or smyte him of envye with his hande, that he dye, then shal he that hath slayne him, dye the death: for he is a mur-
4 Exo. 21. b. 

t Iosu. 20, a, ° Exo. 21. b. Deut. 19. a. 

Chap. rrrb. 

5 

Chap. rrrbt. thurer. The auenger of bloude shal brynge him to death, as soone as he fyndeth him.

“ But yf he thrust him by chaunce, q not of envye, or hurle ought at him without eny layenge of wayte, or cast at him with a stone
(wherof a man maye dye, q sawe it not) so y he dye, ¢ is not his enemie, nether thought him eny euell, thé shal the cogregacion iudge betwene him y hath cémytted y slaughter, and the auenger of bloude, in soch cases.
And the cogregacion shal delyuer the deed slayer from the hande of y auenger of bloude, a shal let him come agayne to the fre cite, whither he was fled: q there shall he abyde vnto y death of the hye prest, which was anoynted with $ holy oyle. But yf the deed sleyer go out of the borders of his fre cite, that he was fled vnto, and the auenger of bloude fynde him without y borders of his fre cite, and kyll him, he shall not be gyltye of bloude. For he shulde haue bydden im his fre cite vntyll y death of the hye prest, q after y hye prestes death to come agayne vnto the
ER of his enheritaunce. ‘This shalbe a statute of the lawe vnto you amoge youre posterities in all youre dwellinges.

£| The deed slayer shal be slayne at y mouth 

of witnesses. *One witnesse shal not answere ouer a soule to death. And ye shal receaue none attonement ouer the soule of the deed- slayer (for he is giltye of death) but he shal dye the death. And ye shal receaue none attonement of him, which is fled to the fre cite, y he shulde come agayne to dwell in the londe, tyll the hye prest dye. And defyle not ye y londe wherin ye dwell. For who so is giltye of bloude, defyleth the londe: and the londe can not be reconcyled from the bloude that is shed therin, but onely thorow the bloude of him that shed it. Defyle not ye the londe that ye dwell in, wherin 1 dwell also. For I am the LORDE, which dwell amoge y children of Israel.

The rrrbi. Chapter. 
ND y chefe fathers of the kynred of the childré of Gilead y sonne of Machir
(which was the sonne of Manasse of the kynred of the children of Ioseph) came forth, and spake before Moses, and before the cap-

a Deu. 19, a. * Deu. 17. b. and 19. c. + Nu. 26. f. 
> Nu. 27. a. t Tob. 1. b. and 7. c. 

The (ij. boke of Roseg, 

taynes amonge the chefe fathers of the children of Israel, and saide: Syr, the LORDE hath tcommaunded, that ye shulde geue the londe by lott vnto the childré of Israel to inheret.
And thou my lorde hast commaunded thorow the LORDE, ’ that the enheritauuce of oure brother Zelaphead shulde be geué vnto his doughters. Now yf eny men out of the trybes of Israel take them to wyues, then shal oure fathers enheritaunce be lesse: and as moch as they haue, shal come to y enheritaunce of the trybe that they come vnto. Thus shal the lott of oure inheritaunce be mynished.
So whan the yeare of Iubilye commeth vnto the childré of Israel, then shal their enherit- aunce come to y enheritaunce of the trybe, where they are. Thus shal oure fathers en- heritaunce be mynished, as moch as they haue.

Moses charged the childré of Israel (acord- inge to the commaundement of the LORDE) and sayde: The trybe of the children of
Ioseph hath sayde righte. This is it that y 
LORDE commaundeth the doughters of 
Zelaphead, and sayeth: t Let them mary as they like best, onely that they mary in y kynred of the trybe of their father, that the enheritaunce of the children of Israel fall not fro one trybe to another. For euery one amonge the children of Israel shall cleue to the enheritaunce of the trybe of his father: q euery doughter that possesseth eny enherit- aunce amonge the trybes of the children of
Israel, shal be maryed vnto one of the kynred of the trybe of hir father: “ý euery one amonge the children of Israel maye enioye his fathers enheritaunce, and that the enheritaunce fall not from one trybe to another: but that euery one maye cleue to his awne enheritaunce amonge the trybes of the children of Israel.

As the LORDE comaunded Moses, euc so dyd y doughters of Zelaphead, Mahela,
Thirza, Hagla, Milca « Noa a were maried vnto their fathers brothers sonnes, of y kynred of the children of Manasse the sonne of loseph. So their enheritaüce remayned in the trybe of the kynred of their father.

These are the commaundemetes q lawes, which $ LORDE commaunded by Moses vnto the childre of Israel, in the felde of the
Moabites by Iordane ouer agaynst lericho. 

€ Leni. 25. d. Iere. 32. b. Ruth 4. b. 

The ende of the fourth boke of Moses, called Humerus. 

Fo. riri 

€ 

Chap. I. 

Moses putteth the childré of Israel in remem- braunce of the greate benefites that they haue receaued of God, and rebuketh them for their vnthankfulnesse and myszbeleue.

Chap. Ul. 
They are commaunded not to fighte agaynst 
Seir, the Moabites and Ammonites. But Sihon the kynge of the Amorrites is delyuered vnto

them. 
Chap. III. 

Og the kynge of Basan is slayne, the londe taken in, and destroyed. Ruben, Gad, and the halfe trybe of Manasse haue their enheritaunce on this syde Iordane, Iosua is ordeyned in Moses

steade. 
Chap. II. 

After he hath rehearsed vnto them the benefites of 
God, he exorteth them to kepe his commaunde- mentes, that they forget them not. Fredome for soch as committe slaughter vnawarres.

Chap. V. 

He rehearseth the commaundementes of God vnto them agayne, q exorteth them earnestly to kepe them.

Chap. VI. 

He telleth them of the statutes q ordinauces of 
God, exortinge them to kepe them, and to teache their children the same.

Chap. VIL. 

They are commaunded (whan they come in the lode of Canaan) to make no frendshipe ner to kepe company with the people therof, but vtterly to rote them out, and not to be afrayed of them.

The fpft) boke of Moses, 

called Beuteronomion. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chap. VIII. 

He exorteth them, not to forget the commaunde- mentes of God, but to remembre what singuler kindnes God hath shewed them, q from what troubles he hath delyuered them. And geueth the londe that they are to go vnto, a good reporte.

Chap. IX. 
He warneth them that they ascrybe not the goodnes that God hath done for them, to their awne power: for yf he had serued them after

their awne deseruinge, he had destroyed them euerychone.

Chap. X. 
He proceadeth forth in tellinge them their wicked- nes, q how they departed from Beroth.

Chap. XI. 

Consyderinge the multitude of the benefites of 
God that they had receaued and the pleasaunt londe that they were to receaue, he exorteth them againe to kepe Gods commaundementes.

Chap. XII. 
He descrybeth vnto them againe the statutes q ordinaunces of the LORDE.

Chap. XIII. 

How men shal knowe false prophetes and how they ought to be punished.

Chap. XIII. 

For so moch as they are a cleane people of God, they are commaunded to avoyde the customes of the Heythen, as in shauynge their heades, in eatinge certayne meates, qc.

p The b. boke of Moses. 

Chap. XV. 

Of the seventh yeare (wherof thou readest also in the XXV. chapter of the thirde boke of
Moses) x how the poore folkes and bonde men oughte to be intreated.

Chap. XVI. 
The feaste of Easter, Whytsondaye, and of tabernacles.
Chap. XVII. 

Certayne statutes. The office of kynges and 

iudges. 
Chap. XVIII. 

The porciou of the Leuites. Of the prophete that is promised vnto the people, and how the false prophetes maye be knowne.

Chap. XIX. 

Of the fre cities for the deedslayers. How many witnesses are to be accepted in a matter, and how the false oughte to be punished.

Chap. XX. 

A godly ordinaunce concernynge warre and strykinge of battayll.

Chap. XXI. 

What ought to be done with one that is founde slaine in the felde, and with a woman which is taken presoner. Children that wil not obeye father and mother, are to be stoned to death.
The deed bodies maye not hange styll vpon the tre.

Chap. XXII. 
Of loue towarde a mans neghboure, with dyuerse other commaundemetes. How a man shal

ordre him self with his wife, whom he founde no mayden.

Chap. XXII. 

What they are, that maye not come in to the congregacion of the LORDE, and other com- maundementes.

Chap. XXIII. 

Of deuorcement, of the fredome of him that is new maried, with other commaundementes concernynge loue towarde a mans neghboure.

Chap. XXV. 
How the iudge ought to punyshe, q how one brother shulde rayse vp sede to another. Of

true weightes and measures, and destroyenge of Amaleck.

Chap. XXVI. 

Of the first frutes and tythes, how they are to be broughte with prayse and thankesgeuynge vnto
God. 

Chap. XXVII. 

Of the stones to be set vp beyonde lordane, and the commaundementes of God to be wrytten theron. Of the blessinge and cursinge vpon the two mountaynes.

Chap. XXVIII. 

Swete and gracious promyses for all soch as loue the commaundementes of God to do them.
Agayne, Maruelous sore and fearfull plages, threatened vnto all thé that regarde not Gods worde.

Chap. XXIX. 

The couenaunt is renewed in the londe of Moab. 
Moses putteth them iu mynde of the louynge benefites of God, that they maie be stedfast in the LORDE.

Chap. XXX. 

Of the merciful kyndnesse of God, yf men wil herken vnto his voyce, and conuerte fro their awne euell wayes. Of his sore punyshment, yf they wil not obeye.

Chap. XXXI losua is gene vnto the people, to be their captayne in Moses steade. A prophecie that they wyl forsake the waye of God, q be punyshed therfore.

Chap. XXXII. 

The songe of Moses, which goeth vp to the mount, œ seyth the londe of promesse, but commeth not in to it.

Chap. XXXIII, 

A swete blessinge, wherwith Moses blesseth the people before his death.

Chap. XXXIII. 

Moses goeth vp to the mount, where he dyeth. 
The children of Israel make lamentacion for him.

Fo. elit. 

The b. boke of Hoses. 

Chap. f. 

The first Chapter. 

a HESE are the wordes that Moses spake vnto all Israel on the other syde Iordane in the wildernesse, in the playne felde towarde the reed see, betwene Paran, Thophel, Laban,
Hazeroth, and Disahab, elenen daies iourney from Horeb, by the waye of mount Seir vnto
Cades Bernea. And it fortuned the first daye of the eleuenth moneth in the fortieth yeare, that Moses spake vnto y children of Israel acordinge vnto all as ¥ LÓ RDE commaunded him, *after he had smytten Sihon y kynge of the Amorites which dwelt at Heszbon: and
Og the kynge of Basan, that dwelt at Asta- 

roth, and at Edrei. 

On the other syde Iordane in y lande of the Moabites, beganne Moses to declare this lawe, and sayde: The LORDE oure God spake vnto vs vpon mount Horeb, q sayde:
Ye haue bene loge ynough vpon this moun- tayne, turne you, q departe hence, that ye maye come to the mouutaynes of the Amor- ites, and to all their neghbours in y feldes, vpon mountaynes, and in the valleys towarde the South and towarde the see syde, of the lande of Canaan: and to mount Libanus,

Bleuen vnto the greate water Euphrates. Be- holde, I haue delyuered you the londe, go in, and take it in possession, which the LORDE sware vnto youre fathers, Abraham, Isaac and
Iacob,t that he wolde geue it vnto the, and their sede after them.

Then saide I vnto you at the same tyme: 
“I am not able to beare you my self alone, for the LORDE youre God hath increased you, so that this daye ye are as y starres of heauen in multitude. (The LORDE God of youre fathers make yon yet many thousande tymes mo, q blesse you, as he hath promysed you.)
How can I alone beare soche cobraunce, q charge, q stryfe amoge you? Prouyde here men of wyszdone q vnderstondinge, soch as are knowne amonge youre trybes, thé wil I set to be heades vnto you.

Then answered ye me, and sayde: It is a good thinge, that thou sayest thou wilt do.
‘Then toke I ý heades of youre trybes, wyse and famous mé, and set them ouer you to be heades, ouer thousandes, ouer hundreds, ouer fiftye and onerten: and officers amonge youre trybes.

* Num. 21. d. 
1 Ioh. 7. b. 

* Gene. 15. d. and 17. b. 
? Deu. 17, b. Exo. 18. d. 

? Exod. 18. c. 
$ Deu. 20. a. 

And I charged youre iudges at y same tyme, q sayde: Heare youre brethré, q tiudge righteously betwene euery man and his brother, and the straunger. Ye shall knowe no per-|€ sonne in iudgment, but shall heare the small as well as the greate, and be afrayed of no man: for the Iudgment is Gods. But yf eny cause be to harde for you, ‘let it be broughte vnto me, y I maye heare it. Thus com- maunded l you at the same tyme, all y ye shulde doo.

Then departed we from Horeb, and walked thorow the whole wyldernesse (which is greate and terryble as ye haue sene) by the waye to y mountaynes of the Amorites, as the LORDE oure God commaided vs, and came vnto
Cades Bernea. "Then sayde I vnto you: Ye are come to y monuntaynes of y Amorites, which the LORDE oure God shal gene vs.
Beholde, there the londe before the, which the LORDE thy God hath geué vnto the:
Go vp, « conquere it, as y LORDE God of thy fathers hath sayde vnto the: $feare not, and be not discoraged.

Then came ye all vnto me, and sayde:|B 
Let vs sende men before vs, “to spye vs ont the londe, and to brynge vs worde agayne, by what waye we shal go vp, and to what cities we shal come. That pleased me well, and I toke twolue men from amonge you, of euery trybe one. Which whan they were departed, and wente vp to hye countre, and came to the ryuer Escol, they spyed it out, and toke of the frute of y londe with the," and broughte it downe vnto vs, and broughte vs worde agayne, and sayde: It is a good londe, that the LORDE oure God hath geuen vs.

But ye wolde not go vp, and were disho- bedient vnto the mouth of the LOR DE youre
God, and murmured in youre tentes, and sayde: Because the LORDE hateth vs, ther- fore hath he bronghte vs out of the londe of
Egipte, to delyuer vs in to the handes of the 
Amorites, to destroye vs. Whither shal we go vp? Oure brethren haue discoraged oure hertes, q saide: ‘The people is greater q of hyer stature thé we, y cities are greate, q walled euen vp to heauen. Morouer we haue sene there the children of Enakim.

But I sayde vnto you: Feare not, and be|# not afrayed of them: for the LORDE youre
4 Nu. 13. c. 

* Nu. 13. a. * Nu. 13. d. 

Chap. i. 

God goeth before you, and shall fighte for you, like as he dealte with you in Egipte before youre eyes, and in the wyldernesse: where thou sawest, that the LORDE thy
God bare the (euen as a man beareth his sonne) thorow out all the waye that ye haue walked, tyll ye came to this place. And yet for all this ye haue not beleued on the LORDE youre God, which wente before you, to searche you out a place, where ye shulde pitch youre tentes: by night iu the fyre (to shewe you the waye, wherin ye shulde go)? q on the daye tyme in the cloude.

Whan the LORDE herde y voyce of youre wordes, he was wroth, and swore, and saide:
There shall none of this euell generacion se that good londe, which I sware to geue vnto youre fathers, excepte Caleb the sonne of
Iephune, he shal se it. “And vnto him wyl I geue the londe that he hath troddé vpon, « to his children, because he hath perfectly folowed the LORDE.

J| The LORDE was angrye with me also for youre sakes, and sayde: “Thou also shalt not go in thither. But Iosua y sonne of Nun, which stondeth before the, he shal go in thither: Corage him, for he shal deuyde the enheritaunce out vnto Israel And youre childré, “of who ye sayde they shulde be a praye, and youre sonnes which this daie vnderstonde nether good ner bad, they shal go in thither, vnto them wil I geue it, and they shall enioye it. But as for you, turne you, and take youre iourney to the wylder- nesse, euen the waye to the reed see.

/Then answered ye, q sayde vnto me: We haue synned agaynst y LORDE, we wil go vp, and fighte, acordinge to all that the
LORDE hath commaunded vs. Now whan ye had prepared youre selues, euery one in his harnesse, q were at the poynte to go vp to the mountaynes, y LORDE sayde vnto me:
Speake vnto them, y they go not vp, q that they fighte not (for I am not amoge you) that ye be not smytten before youre enemies.
Whan I tolde you this, ye wolde not heare, q were dishobedient vnto the worde of the
LORDE, and were presumptuous, and wente vp toy mountaines. Then the Amorites that dwelt vpon the moiitaynes, came out against you, and chaced you, as Bees do, and smote

2 Neem. 9. c, Exod. 13. d. 
26.g. * Iosu. 14. b. 

> Psal. 94, b. Nu. 14. c. and 
á Nu. 20.b, 27. 0.34, a. © Nu. 14. d. 

The b. boke of Hoses. 

Fo. cirb. 

you at Seir, euen vnto Horma. Now whan ye came againe, and wepte before the LORDE, he wolde not heare youre voyce, and enclyned not his eares vnto you. * So ye abode in

Cades a longe season. | 

The ij. Chapter. 

HEN turned we vs, and toke oure iourney | A to the wildernesse, *euen the waye to the reed see (as the LORDE sayde vnto me) and compassed mount Seir a longe season. And y LORDE saide vnto me: Ye haue cópassed this mountayne now loge ynough, turne you
Northwarde, and commaüde the people, and saye: Ye shal go thorow y coastes of youre brethren the children of Esau, which dwell at
Seir: q they shal be afrayed of you. But take diligente hede to youre selues, that ye prouoke them not: for I wyl not geue you one fote bredth of their londe. t For mount
Seir haue I geuen to the children of Esau to possesse. Ye shal bye meate of them for moneye, that ye maye eate. And water shal ye bye of them for money, that ye maye drynke. For the LORDE thy God hath blessed the in all the workes of thy hondes.
He hath considered thy iourneyes thorow this greate wyldernesse: and this fortye yeares hath the LORDE thy God bene with the, so' that thou hast wanted nothinge. |
Now whan we were departed from oure brethren the children of Esau, that dwelt vpon mount Seir, by the waye of the felde from
Elath t Ezeon gaber, we turned vs, q wente by the waye of the wyldernesse of y Moabites.
Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: t Thou shalt not vexe the Moabites, ner prouoke the vnto battayll, for I wil not geue the of their londe to possesse. For Ar haue I geuen vnto the children of Lot in possession. § The
Emims dwelt there before tyme, which were a greate stronge people, q hye of stature, as the Enakims: and were taken for giauntes, like as $ Enakims. And y Moabites called them Emims. ll The Horites also dwelt in
Seir afore tyme, q y children of Esau droue them out, and destroyed them before them, q dwelt in their steade: like as Israel dyd in y lode of his possession, that the LORDE gaue

them. à 
Get you vp now, ¢ go ouer the ryuer Sared.| ¢ 

/ Nu. 14. f. 
Mal. 1. a. 

=No 20na. 
1 Iudic. 3. d. 

€ Nu. 21.2. 
§ Gen. 14. a. 

t Gen. 36. a. 
|| Gen. 36. d. 

| fo. rirhi. 

Drs 

* Num. 21. c. 

And we wente ouer. The tyme that we were goinge fro Cades Barnea, tyll we came ouer the ryuer Sared, was eight q thirtye yeares: tyll all the men of warre were waysted out of the hoost, *as the LORDE sware vnto them.
The hande of the LORDE also was agaynst them, to destroye thé out of the hoost, tyll they were consumed.

And whan all the men of warre were có- sumed, so y they were deed amonge the people, the LORDE spake vnto me, and sayde: This daie shalt thou go thorow the coast of ý Moabites by Ar, q shalt come nye vnto ¥ a of Ammon,t whom thou shalt not vexe ner prouoke. For I wyll not geue the of the lode of the childrē of Ammon to possesse, for I haue geué it vnto the childre of Lot in possession. It was take for a lode of giauntes also, q giauntes dwelt therin afore tyme. And ¥ Ammonites calle the Sam- sumims, which was a people that was greate, many, and of hye stature, as the Enakims.

And these y LORDE destroyed before thé, and let them possesse the same, so that they dwelt in their steade. + Like as he dyd with the childré of Esau, which dwell vpo mount
Seir, whan he destroyed the Horites before them: and let them possesse the same, so that they haue dwelt in their steade vnto this daye.
And the Caphthorims came out of Caphther, and destroyed $ Auims (y dwelt at Hazarim euen vnto Gaza) « there dwelt they in their steade.

Get you vp now, and departe, and go ouer the ryuer Arnon. Beholde, I haue gene
Sihon y kynge of the Amorites at Heszbon in to thy hande: go to and conquere, and prouoke him vnto battayll. This daye wyll I begynne, so that all nacios vnder all the heauen, shal feare q drede y: In so moch y whà they heare of the, they shal tremble and quake for thy commynge.

Then sent I messaungers from y wylder- nesse of the East vnto ^Sihon the kynge at
Heszbon $ with peaceble wordes, and caused to saye vnto him: I wil go but thorow thy lode, I wil go a longe by the hye waye, I wil nether turne to the righte hade ner to y lefte.
"Thou shalt sell me meate for money, that I maye eate: q water shalt thou sell me for money, that I maye drinke. Onely let me

* Nu. 14. c. and 26. g, 
$ Deu. 20. b. 

t Iudic. 11. f. 
^ Nu. 20. c. 

1 Gen. 36. d. 
* Nu. 21. d. 

The b. boke of Moses., 

go thorow by fote, ^as the children of Esau 
(which dwell at Seir) dyd vnto me: and the 
Moabites that dwell at Ar: vntyll I be come ouer lordane, in to the londe which the
LORDE oure God shal geue vnto vs. 

But Sihon the kynge at Heszbon wolde not let vs go by him: for the LORDE thy God herdened his mynde, q made his hert tough that he mighte delyuer him in to thy hades, as it is come to passe this daye.

And y LORDE sayde vnto me: Beholde, 
I haue begonne to delyuer Sihon with his londe before the: go to and cóquere, and possesse his lóde. “And Siho came out with all his people to fight agaynst vs at Iahza.
But the LORDE oure God delyuered him in to oure handes, so that we smote him with his children and all his people.

Then toke we all his cities at the same tyme, and destroyed vtterly all the cities, men, wemen, and children, and let none remayne: saue the catell, which we caught to oure selues,
& the spoyle of the cities that we wanne from 
Aroer, which lyeth vpon the ryuer syde of 
Arnon, and from the cite on the ryuer vnto 
Gilead. ‘There was no cite that coulde de- fende it selfe from vs: the LORDE oure
God delyuered vs all before vs. | But vnto the londe of the children of Ammon thou camest not, ner to all that was on the ryuer labok, ner to $ cities vpo ¥ mountaines, ner vnto what so euer the LORDE oure God forbad vs.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND we turned vs, țq wente vp Los vnto Basan. And Og y kynge of Basan, came out? with all his people to fight agaynst vs at Edrei. But the LORDE sayde vnto me: Be not afrayed of him, for I haue delyuered him ç all his people with his londe in to thy hande: q thou shalt do with him, as thou dyddest with Sihon kynge of ¥ Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon. Thus y LORDE oure God delyuered Og y kynge of Basan in to oure handes also with all his people: so that we smote him, tyll there was nothinge

left oner vnto him. 

Then wanne we at the same tyme all his cities, q there was not one cite that we toke not from him, euen thre score cities, the
Deu. 29. b. 

Deu. 29. b. || Nu. 21. d. d Nu. 21. e. 

* Deut. 1. f. 

Chap. iij. 

Chap. iiij. whole region of Argob in the kyngdome of
Og at Basan. All these cities were stroge, with hye walles, gates, and barres, besyde many other vnwalled townes.

And we vtterly destroyed them, as we dyd with Sihon the kynge at Heszbon.* All the cities destroyed we vtterly, and the men, wemen, and children. But all the catell and spoyle of the cities caughte we for oure selues.

Thus toke we at the same tyme the londe out of the honde of the two kynges of the
Amorites beyonde Iordane, from the ryuer of 
Arnon vnto mount Hermon (which the Sidons call Sirion, bnt the Amorites call it Senir) all the cities vpon the playne, and all Gilead, and all Basan vnto Salcha and Edrei, the cities of the kyngdome of Og at Basan. For onely Og the kynge of Basan remayned oner of the giauntes. Beholde, his yron bed is here at Rabath amonge the children of Am- mon, nyne cubites longe, and foure cubites brode, after the cubite of a man.

This londe conquered we at the same tyme, from Aroer that lyeth on y ryuer of Arnon.
“And vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue halfe mount Gilead with the cities therof: but $ remnaunt of Gilead, ¢ all Basan the kyngdome of Og, gaue I vnto the halfe trybe of Manasse. The whole region of Argob with all Basan was called the giauntes londe.

lair the sonne of Manasse toke all the region of Argob vnto the coastes of Gessuri and Maachati, and Basan called he Hauoth lair after his awne name, vnto this daye: But vnto Machir I gaue Gilead. And vnto the
Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue one parte of 
Gilead vnto the ryuer of Arnon (at the myd- des of the ryuer is ¥ border) and vnto the ryuer Iabok, which is the border of the chil- dren of Ammon: the felde also, and Iordane
(which is the coaste) from Cinereth vnto the see in the felde, namely, ¥ Salt see vnder mount Pisga, Eastwarde.

? And I commaunded you at the same tyme, and sayde: The LORDE youre God hath geuen yon this londe to take possession of it,
Go youre waye forth therfore harnessed before youre brethren the children of Israel, all ye that be mete for the warre. As for youre wyues, and children and catell (for I knowe that ye haue moch catell) let them remayne

* Deu. 20. b. 
PENES? NUS 

a Num. 32. f. Deu. 29. b, Iosu. 12. a. 
ANU 27. ce d Deu. 1. f. and 4. c. 

The b, boke of Hoses. 

in youre cities, which I haue geuen you, vntyl the LORDE youre God haue broughte youre brethren to rest also as well as you, that they also maye take possession of the londe, which
1 LORDE youre God shal gene thé beyonde 

ordane: and then shal ye turne agayne to youre awne possession, which I haue geuen you.

‘And I warned Iosua at the same tyme, and sayde: Thine eyes haue sene all that the
LORDE youre God hath done vnto these two kynges: eue so shal the LORDE do also vnto all $ kyngdomes whither thon goest.
Feare them not, for the LORDE youre God shal fighte for you.

And I besoughte the LORDE at the same tyme, q sayde: O LORDE LORDE, thou hast begonne to shewe thy seruannte thy greatnesse and thy mightie hāde. For where is there a God in heauen q earth, that can do after thy workes and after thy power? O let me go q se y good londe beyonde Iordane, y goodly hye countre, and Libanus.

But the LORDE was angrie with me for youre sakes, and wolde not heare me,’ but sayde vnto me: Be content, speake nomore to me of this matter. ‘Get the vp to the toppe of mount Pisga, and lifte vp thine eyes to- warde the west, and towarde the north, and towarde the south, and towarde y east: and beholde it with thine eies, for thou shalt not go ouer this Iordane. And gene Iosua his charge, and corage him, and bolde him, for he shal go ouer Iordane before the people,’ and shal deuyde vnto them the londe, that thon shalt se.t And so we abode in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor.

The iiij. Chapter. 

ND now herken Israel vnto the ordi- naüces and lawes, which I teach you

that ye do them, y ye maye lyue, and come in, q take possession of the londe, which the
LORDE God of youre fathers geneth vnto you. +Ye shal put nothinge vnto the worde which 1 commaunde you, nether do oughte there from, that ye maye kepe the commaunde- mentes of the LORDE youre God, which I commaunde you. Youre eyes hane sene what the LORDE hath done with Baal Peor: all them that walked after Baal Peor, hath the e Nu. 27. c.

f Nu. 94. c. Iosu. 14. a. t Nu. 25. a. 

Iosu. 23. b. Pro. 30, a. 

1 Deut, 12. d. 

Fo. clrdtj. 

a 

Fo. clybuyj. The b. boke of loses. 

LORDE thy God destroied from amonge you." 
But ye that cleue vnto the LORDE youre 
God, are all aliue this daye. Beholde I haue taughte you ordinaiices and lawes, soch as the
LORDE my God commaunded me, that ye shulde do eué so in the londe, in to y which ye shal come, to possesse it.

Kepe them now therfore and do them:* for that is youre wyszdome and vnderstondinge in the sight of all nacions, which wha they haue herde all these ordinaunces, shall saye: O what a wyse and vnderstondinge folke is this? and how excellent a people? For where is there so excellent a nacion, that hath goddes so nye him, as the LORDE onre God is nye vnto ys,t as oft as we call vpon him? And where is there so excellent a nacion, that hath so righteous ordinaunces and lawes, as all this lawe which I laye before you this daye.

Take hede to thy selfe now, and kepe well thy soule, that thou forget not the thinges which thine eyes haue sene, and that they departe not out of thy hert all the dayes of thy life. ^And thou shalt teach them thy chil- dren and thy childers children, the daye wha thou stodest before the LORDE thy God by mount Horeb, whan the LORDE sayde vnto me: Gather me the people together, that I maye make them heare my wordes, which they shal lerne, that they maye feare me all the dayes of their life vpon earth, q that they also maye teach their children.

And ye came nye, q stode vnder ý mount. 
But the mount burnt euen vnto the myddes of heauen, and there was darknesse, cloudes, and myst. And y LORDE spake vnto you out of the myddes of the fyre. The voyce of his wordes ye herde, neuerthelesse ye sawe no ymage," but herde the voyce onely. $And he declared vnto you his couenaunt, which he comaunded you to do, namely, the ten verses, and wrote them vpon two tables of stone.
And the LORDE commanded me at the same time, to teach you ordinaunces ¢ lawes that ye might do therafter in the londe, in to the which ye go to possesse it.

Kepe well youre soules therfore, for ye sawe no maner of ymage, in the daye wha the
LORDE spake vnto you out of the fyre vpon mount Horeb, that ye destroye not youre

Chap, iiij. selues, and make you eny ymage, that is like a man, or woman, or beest vpon earth, or fethered foule vnder the heauen, or worme vpon the grounde, or fyszshe in the water vnder y earth : ^ y thou lifte not vp thine eyes towarde heauen, and se the Sonne and the
Moone q the starres, and the whole hoost of heaué, and be disceaued, and worshippe, and serue them: which the LORDE thy God hath made to serue all nacios vnder y whole heaué.

“But you hath the LORDE taken, and 
| broughte you out of the yron fornace, namely, out of Egipte, that ye shulde be the people of his enheritaunce, as it is come to passe this daye. And the LORDE was angrie with me for youre sakes,’ so that he sware, y I shulde not go ouer Iordane, ner come in to that good londe, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the to enheritaunce. As for me,** I must dye in this londe, and shal not go ouer Iordane:
But ye shal go ouer, and shall haue that good lode in possession.

Take hede therfore vnto youre selues, that |38 ye forget not the couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, and that ye make no ymages of eny maner of faszhiontt as the LORDE thy
God hath commaunded. For the LORDE thy 
God is a consumynge fyre* and a gelous God. 

Yf whan ye haue begotten children, and childers children, and haue dwelt in the londe, ye marre youre selues, ttu make you ymages of eny maner of faszhion, and do euell in the sighte of y LORDE youre God, to prouoke him: $$I call heauen and earth to recorde ouer you this daie, that ye shall shortly perishe fro the londe, in to $ which ye go ouer Iordane to possesse it. Ye shal not dwell longe therin, but shal vtterly be destroyed. And y LORDE shal scater you amonge y nacions^ and ye shall be left a small people amoge y Heythen, whyther the LORDE shall brynge you.
There shal ye serue goddes, which are ¥ workes of mens handes, euen wodd ¢ stone, which nether se ner heare, ner eate ner smell.

But yf thou seke the LORDE thy God|% there thou shalt finde him, ‘yee yf thou seke him with thy whole hert and with all thy soule.
Whan thou shalt be strately troubled, a wha all these thinges shal come vpo the in y latter

* Num. 25, a, and 31. c. Exo. 32, f. * Psal. 18. b. t Psa. 144. c. ^ Deut. 6.d. t Ephe.6.a. ^1 Ioh.4. b.
§ Exo. 20.a. || Deut. 5.a. 4 Deut. 17. b. Sap. 13. a. 
Iob 31. c. T Gen. 1. b. 4 Esd. 6. e. Mat. 5. c. 

¢ Deut. 6. c. and 32. b. f Nu, 27. c. Deut. 1. f. and 3. c. 
** Deu. 34. a. tt Exo. 20. a. € Heb. 12. d. tt Deut. 8. d. Tere. 16. b. $$ Deut, 30. d. and 31. g.
^ Deut. 28. d. ! Deut. 30. a. Tere. 29. c. I 

Chap. b. 

dayes, then shalt thon turne agayne to y 
LORDE thy God, and be obedient vnto his voice. For y LORDE thy God is a mercifull
God, he shal not forsake the, ner destroye the: nether shall he forget the couenaunt with thy fathers, * which he sware vnto them.

For axe after the tymes past, which haue bene before the, sens the daie y God created man vpon earth, from one ende of the heaué vnto the other, whether there was euer eny soch greate thinge done, or eny soch like herde, that a people hath herde y voyce of God speake out of the fyre (as thou hast herde) a yet liued. Or whether God assaied to go ¢ take vnto him a people out of ý myddes of a nacion, thorow tentacions, thorow tokens, thorow wonders, thorow warre, q thorow a mightie hande, q thorow a stretched out arme, and thorow greate visios, acordinge vnto all as the LORDE youre God hath done with you in Egipte before thine eyes.

“Thou hast sene it, y thou mightest knowe that the LORDE is God, and that there 1s none other but he onely. + Out of heauen made he the to heare his voyce, that he might nurtonre the: and vpon earth he shewed the his greate feare, q out of y fyre thou herdest his wordes: because he jos thy fathers, q chose their sede after the. And he brought y out with his presence thorow his mightie power out of Egipte, to dryue ont (before the) nacions greater and mightier then thou, and to bringe y in, y he might geue the their lode to enheritaunce, as it is come to passe this daye.

Therfore shalt thou knowe this daye, q turne it in to thine herte, $that the LORDE is God aboue in heauen, and beneth vpon earth, and that there is no mo. Kepe his ordinaunces therfore and commaundementes, which I com- maunde the this daie, thé shal it go well with the and thy children after the, so that thy life shal longe endure in y londe, which the
LORDE the God geneth the thy life longe. 

‘Then separated Moses thre cities beyonde 
Iordane, ^towarde the Sonne rysinge, y he might flye thither, which had slayne his negh- boure vnawarres, q hated him not a fore tyme, i he might fiye in to one of these cities, q yue. Bezer in M wildernes in the playne countre amonge the Rubenites, q Ramoth in

* Gen. 12. a. ? Deut. 6. b, and 32. f. f Ephe. 1.a. Deut. 10. c.
è Exo. 21.b. Nu. 33. b. Deut. 19. a. 

t Exo. 19. b. 
$ 3 Reg. 10. d. 
|| Nu. 21. d. 

The b. boke of Hoses. 

Gilead amoge y Gaddites, q Golan in Basan amonge the Manassites.

This is the lawe which Moses layed before the children of Israel: these are the testi- monies, ordinaunces, q lawes, y Moses spake vnto the children of Israel (after they were departed out of Egipte) beyonde Iordane in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor, in y londe of Sion kynge of $ Amorites which dwelt at Heszbon, ll whom Moses q the childré of Israel smote after they were departed out of Egipte, q conquered his lade, q the londe of Og kynge of Basan, two kynges of the
Amorites which were beyonde Iordane to- warde the Sonne rysinge fro Aroer (which lyeth vpon y ryuer syde of Arnon) vnto mount
Sion, which is Hermon: a all y playne felde beyonde Iordane eastwarde vnto the see in ¥ plaine felde vnder mount Pisga.

The d. Chapter. 

ND Moses called all Israel, q sayde vnto thé: Heare Israel the ordinaunces q lawes which I speake in youre eares this daye : lerne them, q kepe thé so, that ye do therafter.
"i The LORDE oure God made a conenaunt with vs at Horeb: he made not this cone- naunt with oure fathers, but with vs, that are here this daie, and lyne euery one. He talked with vs face to face out of the fyre vpo the mount. I stode at the same tyme be- twixte the LORDE and yon, that I mighte shewe you the worde of the LORDE. For ye were afrayed of the fyre, q wente not vp to

the mount, and he sayde: 

“Yam the LORDE thy God, which haue brought the out of the londe of Egipte, out of the house of bondage. ‘Thou shalt haue none other goddes in my sighte. ** Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage of eny maner

of licknesse of the thinges y are aboue in| 

heauen, q beneth vpon earth, q in the water vnder the earth. ‘Thou shalt not honoure them, ner serue thé. ^For I y LORDE thy God am a gelous God, vysitinge the synne of the fathers vpo the children, vnto the thirde and fourth generacion, of thé y hate me: q shewe mercye vpon many thou- sandes y loue me, and kepe my commaunde- mentes.

{T Exo. 19. a. * Exo. 20. a. 

d Deu. 34. a. Naŭ. 1. a. 

** Deu. 4. c. 

25 

So. clriy. 

33 

Jo. cry. 

Thou shalt not take ¥ name of y LORDE thy God in vayne: *for y LORDE shal not holde him vngiltie, y taketh his name in vaine.

"^ Kepe M Sabbath daye, that thou sanctifye it, as the LORDE thy God hath commaiided the. Sixe daies shalt thou laboure, and do all thy worke, but vpon the seuenth daye it is the Sabbath of the LORDE thy God: No maner worke shalt thou do in it, thou, and thy sonne, and thy doughter, and thy seruaunt, and thy mayde, and thine oxe, aud thine Asse, and all thy catell, and the straunger which is within thy gates, that thy seruaunt and thy mayde maye rest as well as thou. For thou shalt remebre, that thou thyself also wast a seruaunte in the londe of Egipte, and how that the LORDE thy God brought the out from thence with a mightye hande, aud a stretched out arme. 'Therfore hath the
LORDE thy God commaunded y to kepe the 
Sabbath daye. 

* Honoure thy father and thy mother, as the 
LORDE thy God hath commaunded the that thou mayest lyue longe vpo earth, and that it maye go well with the in the londe, which the
LORDE thy God shall geue the. 

Thou shalt not kyll. t 

Thou shalt not breake wedlocke. 

Thou shalt not steale. 

Thou shalt beare no false witnes against thy neghboure.

Thou shalt not tlust after thy neghbours wyfe.

Thou shalt not lust after thy neghbours house, londe, seruaunt, mayde, oxe, Asse, or what so euer he hath.

These are the wordes that the LORDE spake to all youre congregacion, vpon the mount out of the fyre of the cloude and dark- nesse with a greate voyce, and added nothinge therto. § And he wrote them vpon two tables of stone, and delyuered thé vnto me.

Dut whan ye herde the voyce out of the darknes, and sawe the mount burne with fyre, ye came vnto me all ye rulers amonge youre trybes, and youre Elders and sayde: Beholde, the LORDE oure God hath shewed vs his glory q his greatnes, and we haue herde his voyce out of y fyre. This daye haue we sene, that God maie talke with a man, and he yet

* Leu. 24. b. 

* Exo. 29. b. è Exo. 21. b. Mat. 15.a. 
Epbe. 6. a. 

t Math.5. c. Rom. 13. b. t Rom. 7. b. 

Thr b. boke of Moses. 

lyue. And now wherfore shulde we dye, that this fire shulde cosume vs? Yf we shulde heare the voyce of the LORDE oure God eny more, we shulde dye. For what is all fleshe, that it shulde be able to heare ¥ voyce of the lyuynge God speakynge out of ¥ fyre, as we haue done, and yet lyne? Go thou and heare all y the LORDE oure God sayeth, and tellus. ^ All y the LORDE sayeth vnto the, that will we ee and do. Whan the
LORDE herde the voyce of youre wordes which ye spake vnto me, he sayde vnto me:
I haue herde y voyce of the wordes of this people, which they haue spoken vnto y. It is all good that they haue spoken. li But who shal geue them soch an herte, y they maye feare me, q kepe all my eomaundementes as longe as they lyue, y it maye go well with them, and with their childre for euer? Gog saye vnto them: Get you iu to youre tentes agayne. But thou shalt stonde here before me, that I maye tell the all the commaunde- mentes, and ordinances and lawes which thou shalt teach them y they maye do therafter in the lode, which I shal geue thé to possesse.
Take hede now therfore that ye do, as the 
LORDE youre God hath commaunded you, 
T and turne not asyde nether to y right hande ner to the lefte: but walke in all $ wayes which the LORDE youre God hath com- maunded you, that ye maie lyue, and that it maie go well with you, and y ye maye lyue longe in ¥ londe which ye shall haue in pos- session.

The bi. Chapter. 

HESE are the commaundementes, ordi- 

naunces q lawes which y LORDE youre 
God hath comaunded, y ye shale lerne them, 
& do them, in the londe whyther ye go to possesse it, **that thou mayest feare the
LORDE thy God, q kepe all his ordinaüces 
& commaundementes, which I commaunde the, thou and thy children, and thy childers children all ý dayes of youre life, that ye maye lyue loge. Thou shalt heare (O Israel) q take hede, y thou do therafter, y it maye go well with y, q that thou mayest multiplye greatly, as ý LORDE God of thy fathers hath promysed the a londe y floweth with mylke q hony. Heare O Israel, the LORDE} 33

and 13. b. § Exo.31.d. ° Exo. 19. b. f.

|| Ier. 24. b. and 31. f. G Deut. 17. c.

** Deut. 10. c. 

Chap. bij. oure God is one LORDE onely. “And thou shalt loue the LORDE thy God with all thy hart, with all thy soule, q with all thy mighte.
* And these wordes, which I commatde the this daie, shalt thou take to hert, q shalt whet them vpon thy children, and shalt talke of them, wha thou syttest in thyne house, ¢ whan thou walkest by the waie: whan thou lyest downe, q wha thou rysest vp. And thou shalt bynde them for a signe vpon thine hande, and they shall be a token of remé- braunce before thine eyes, and thou shalt wryte them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates.

Now whan y LORDE thy God shal bringe the in to y londe wherof he sware vnto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac, q lacob, and shal geue the greate q goodly cities, which thou hast not buylded: and houses full of all goodes, which thou hast not filled: q digged welles which thou hast not digged: and vyn- yardes and olyue trees, which thou hast not plated, so y thou eatest and art full: then bewarre that thou forget not the LORDE, which brought the out of the londe of Egipte, fro the house of bondage: ^but thou shalt feare the LORDE thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue, and sweare by his name. t And ye shal not folowe the other goddes of the nacions which are aboute you (for the
LORDE thy God is a gelous God in the myddest of the) that the wrath of the
LORDE thy God waxe not whote ouer the, and destroye the from the earth.

“Ye shal not tempte LORDE youre God, tas ye tempted him at Massa: but kepe the eommaundementes of the LORDE youre
God, and his witnesses, œ his ordinaunces, which he hath commaunded the, that thou mayest do that which is right q good in y sighte of the LORDE, y thou mayest pros- pere, and y thou mayest go in q conquere that good londe: which the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers, that he maye chace out all thine enemies before the, as the LORDE hath sayde.

D| Now whan thy sonne axeth the todaye or tomorow, and sayeth: “What meane these witnesses, ordinaunces and lawes, that the
LORDE oure God hath comaunded you? 

? Mat. 22. d. Mar. 12. c. Luc. 10. c. * Deut. 11. c. 
^ Deut. 10. d. Mat.4.b. Luc.4. b. t Exo. 32. f. 
Num. 25. a. € Mat.4.a. Luc. 4. b. i Exo. 17. a. 
Num. 20. a. d Deut. 4, b. $ Exo. 23. c. and 34. b. 

The b. boke of Moses. 

Then shalt thou saye vnto thy sonne: We were Pharaos bondmen in Egipte, and the
LORDE brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande, and the LORDE did greate q euell tokens q wonders in Egipte vpo Pharao and all his house before oure eyes, and brought vs from thence, to bringe vs in and to geue vs ¥ londe, that he sware vnto oure fathers.
And therfore hath the LORDE commaunded vs to do acordinge vnto all these ordinaunces, that we might feare the LORDE oure God, that we might prospere all the dayes of oure life, as it is come to passe this daye. And it shall be righteousnes vnto vs before the
LORDE oure God, yf we kepe and do all these commaundementes, as he hath com- maunded vs.

The bij. Chapter. 

So. chri. 

HAN $ LORDE thy God bringeth|@ 

the in to y londe where in to thou shalt come to possesse it, t roteth out many nacions before the: the Hethites, Girgosites
Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, and 
Tebusites, seué nacions which are greater and mightier then thou: § and whan the LORDE thy God delyuereth thé before ¥, that thou mayest smyte them, thou shalt vtterly destroye them, so that thou make no couenaunt with them, nor shewe them fauoure, and shalt make no mariages with them: Ye shall not geue youre doughters vnto their sonnes, ner take their doughters vnto youre sonnes. |l For they will make youre sonnes departe fro me, to serue straunge goddes : then shall the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote vpon you, and destroye you shortly.

But thus shal ye do with them: ‘Ye shal ouerthrowe their altares, breake downe their pilers, cut downe their groues, q burne their ymages with fyre. /For thou art an holy peo- ple vnto the LORDE thy God. {The hath the LORDE thy God chosen, that thou shuldest be his awne peculier people, from amonge all nacions that are vpon the earth.

It was not because of the multitude of you aboue all nacions, that y LORDE had lust vnto you and chose you. (For ye were the leest amonge all nacions) but because he loued you, and that he mighte kepe the ooth,** which

losu. 23.e. 2 Cor.6.c. 2 Esd. 13. a. 3 Re.3.a. || Nu. 
25. a. * Exo. 34. b. Num. 33. f. f Deu. 14. a. and 26. d. 1 Pet.2.b. {f Exo.19,a2. ** Gen. 22. c.

3 

So. clyrij. he sware ynto youre fathers, he broughte you out with a mightie hade, and delyuered you

Pharao kynge of Egipte. 

Thou shalt vnderstonde now therfore, that the LORDE thy God is a mightie and true
God, which kepeth couenaunt and mercy vnto them that loue him, ‘and kepe his comaunde- mentes, euen thorow out a thousande gene- racions: And rewardeth them that hate him, before his face, that he maye destroye them: and wyll not be longe in tarienge to rewarde them (before his face) that hate him. Kepe now therfore the commaundementes, and ordinaunces and lawes, which I commaunde the this daye, that thou do therafter.

€| And yf ye shall heare these lawes and kepe them, and do therafter, then shal the LORDE thy God ^also kepe the couenaunt and mercy with the, which he sware vnto thy fathers: and shal loue the, blesse the, and multiplye the: he shal blesse the frute of thy wombe, and the frute of thy londe, thy corne, wyne and oyle, the frute of thy kyne, and the frute of thy shepe, in the londe that he sware vnto thy fathers to geue the. Blessed shalt thou be aboue all nacions, there shal no vnfrutefull personne be in the, ner amonge thy catell.
The LORDE shall put from the all maner of dysease, and shal brynge vpon the none of y euell sicknesses of Egipte, *which thou hast sene, but shall put them vpon all those that hate the.
33| Thou shalt brynge to naught all the nacions, which the LORDE thy God shal delyuer the.
Thine eye shall not spare them, and their goddes shalt thou not serue, for that shalbe thy decaye. Yf thou shalt saye in thyne hert: These nacios are mo then I, how ca I dryue them out? ^Feare them not. Re- membre what the LORDE thy God did vnto
Pharao and to all the Egipcians, thorow greate tentacions (which thou hast sene with thine eyes) thorow tokens and woders, thorow a mightie hande and a stretched out arme, wher- with the LORDE thy God brought the out.
Euen so shall the LORDE thy God do vnto all y nacions of who thou art afrayed.
“The LORDE thy God also shal sende hornettes amonge them, vntyll they that re-

* Exo. 20. a, and $4, a, > Exo. 23. c. Leui, 26. a. 
Deu. 28. a. * Exo. 9. a. © Deu. 20. a. Iosu. 8. a. d Exo. 23. d. and 33. a. Ios. 24. c. * Exo. 23. d.

Che b. boke of doses. 

Iro the house of bondage, out of the hande of 

mayne and hyde them selues from the, be destroyed. the LORDE thy God is in the myddes of the, euen the mightie and fearfull God. He (euen the LORDE thy God) shall rote out the nacions before the by litle and litle. Thou canst not consume them at one time, “ý the beestes of the felde increase not vpon the.
The LORDE thy God shall delyuer them before the, and shall smite them with a greate slaughter, tyll they be destroyed. And he shal delyuer their kynges in to thine hade,
Jand thou shalt destroie their names from vnder heauen. "There shal noman make the resist- aunce before the, vntyll thou haue destroyed them.

^ The ymages of their goddes shalt thou burne with fyre, ‘q shalt not desyre the syluer or golde that is on them tor to take it vnto the, that thou snare not thy self therin : for it is abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy God.
"Therfore shalt thou not brynge the abhomi- nacion in to thine house, y thou be not damned as it is, but shalt vtterly defye it, and abhorre it, for it is damned.

The biij. Chapter. 
LL the commaundementes which I com- maunde y this daye, shal ye kepe, so y ye do therafter, that ye maye lyue and multi- plye, and come in, and take possession of the lande, which LORDE sware vnto youre fathers: and thynke vpon all ¥ waie thorow the which the LORDE thy God hath led the this fortye yeares in the wyldernesse, ‘that he mighte chasten the, and proue the, to wete what were in thyne herte, whether thou woldest kepe his comaundemétes or no. He chastened the, and let the hunger, ^and fed the with Manna (which thou and thy fathers knewe not) to make the knowe, that
$man lyueth not by bred onely, but by all that proceadeth out of the mouth of the
LORDE. ‘Thy clothes are not waxed olde vpon the, and thy fete are not swollé this fortye yeare.
Vnderstonde therfore 1n thine hert, that as a man nurtoureth his sonne, euen so hath the
LORDE thy God nurtured the. Kepe ther- fore the commaundementes of the LORDE

f Jos. 10.11.12. — & Deut. 13. c. t Ios. 7.2. 2 Ma. 12. f. t Deut.13.a, lud.2,d.and 3.a, — ^ Exo.16.d. Num.11.b.
$ Mat. 4. a. Luc. 4.a. i Deut. 29, a. 

Chap. biij, 

Be not thou afrayed of them: for] £ 

a 

3 

Chap. tr. 

thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and feare him. For the LORDE thy God bryng- eth the in to a good londe: ^A londe where in are ryuers of water, fountaynes and sprynges, which flowe by the hilles and valleys: A londe wherin is wheate, barlye, vines, fygge trees, and pomgranates: A londe wherin growe
Olyue trees and honye: A londe where thou shalt not eate bred in searcenes, and where thou shalt lacke nothinge: ^A lode where y stones are yron, where thou shalt dygge brasse out of hilles: *'l'hat wha thou hast eaten and art fylled, thou mayest praise the LORDE thy God, for that good londe, which he hath geuen the.

Bewarre now therfore, that thou forget not the LORDE thy God, that thou woldest not kepe his commaundementes, and his ordi- naunces, and lawes, which I commaunde the this daye: that (whan thou hast eaten q art
.|fylled, and hast buylded goodly houses, q dwellest therin, and whan thy beestes and shepe, and syluer, and golde, and all y thou hast, increaseth) thine hert ryse not then, and
‘thou forget the LORDE thy God (which brought the out of the londe of Egipte, fro y house of bondage, and led y thorow this greate
€ terrible wyldernes, “where were serpentes that spouted fyre, and Scorpions, q drouth, and where there was no water, and brought the water out of the hard flynte, and fed the in the wyldernesse with Manna wherof thy fathers knewe not, that he might chasten the, and proue the (to do the good afterwarde) and

33 lest thou saye in thine hert: tMy power and 

the mighte of myne awne hande hath done me all this good: But that thou thynke vpon the
LORDE thy God. ‘For it is HE, which geueth the power to exercyse strength, that he maye perfourme the couenaunt, which he sware vnto thy fathers, as it is come to passe this daye.

But yf thou shalt forget the LORDE thy 
God, tand folowe other goddes, and serue them, and worshipe the, I testifye ouer you this daye, that ye shal vtterly perishe. Euen as the Heythen whom ¥ LORDE destroyeth before youre face, so shall ye perishe also, be- cause ye are not obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE youre God.

a Deut. 11.b. °Ioh28.a. *Nu.15.b. 1 Co. 10. a. 
1 Tim. 4. a. *Deut.31.e. Prou.30.a. 4Num. 21.3. tiReg.2.b. e Eze.36.e. Phil2.b. t Deut. 4. d.

The b. boke of Moses. Fo. cirri.. 
E 

The iy. Chapter. 
EARE O Israel, This daie shalt thou! @ go ouer Iordane, that thou maiest come! | in to conquere the nacions, which are greater and mightier then thou, / greate cities, walled vp vnto heauen, a greate people and of an hye stature, namely the childré of Enakim, whom thou hast knowne, and of whom thou! : hast herde saye: Who is able to stonde agaynst the children of Enakim? Therfore shalt thou knowe this daye, that the LORDE thy God goeth before the, $a cosumynge fyre. He shal destroye thé, and shall subdue them be-| ; fore the, and shal driue them out, q shortly shall he brynge thé to naught, as the LORDE hath promysed the.

“Now whan the LORDE thy God hath expelled them out before the, saye not thon! thé in thine hert: The LORDE hath brought! | me in to take possession of this lande for myne , awne righteousnes sake, where as y LORDE | yet dryueth out the Heithen before the, be- | cause of their vngodlynes.^ |

For thou commest not in to take their londe in possession, for thine awne righteousnes sake, and because of thy right hert: but the LORDE dryueth out these Heythen, for their awne vngodlynesse sake, and that he maye s fourme the worde, which the LORDE hath sworne vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaae, and
Iacob. 

Vnderstonde now therfore, that the LORDE thy God geueth not the this londe to possesse it, for thine awne righteousnes sake. For thou art a styffnecked people.

Remembre and forget not, how thou dis- pleasedest the LORDE thy God in the wil- dernesse. Sence y daye that thou departedst out of the londe of Egipte, tyl! ye came vnto this place, haue ye bene dishobedient vnto the LORDE.

' For in Horeb ye angred the LORDE, so 

3 

'|that of wrath he wolde haue destroyed you, 

whan I was gone vp to Y mount, to receaue. the tables of stone, namely the tables of the couenaunt lwhich the LORDE made with you, and I abode fortye dayes q fortye nightes vpon the mount, and ate no bred, q dranke no water: and the LORDE gaue me ¥ two

f Num. 13.0. Deut. 1.c. 6$ Deut.4.d. *3Re.90.e. 
^ Leu. 30. d. — * Exo. 32. c. || Deut. 5. a. 

fo. clrrity. 

Dn 

The b. boke of Foses. 

tables of stone, wrytten with the fynger of! 

God, and in them was acordinge to all the wordes, which the LORDE sayde vnto you vpon the mount out of the fyre, “in the daye of the gatheringe together.

è And after the fortye dayes and fortye nighte ý LORDE gaue me y two tables of stone, namely y tables of the couenaunt, and sayde vnto me: *vp, a get y downe quyckly from hence, for thy people whom thou broughtest out of Egipte, haue marred thé selues, they are soone gone out of the waye, which I commaunded them, and haue made them a molten ymage.

And the LORDE saide vnto me: I se this people, that it is a styffnecked people: let me alone, that I maye destroye them, and put out their name from vnder heaué.. I wyl make of the a people mightier and greater thé this is.

? And as I turned me, q wente downe fro the mount which brent with fyre, ¢ had y two tables of the couenaunt in both iny hades, I loked, q beholde, ye had synned agaynst y
LORDE youre God, so y ye had made you a molten calfe, q were soone turned out of y waie which the LORDE had commaunded you. Then toke I the two tables, q cast them out of both my handes, ‘q brake thé before youre eyes, q I fell before the LORDE *(euen as at the first tyme) fortye dayes q fortye nightes, q nether ate bred, ner drake water, because of all youre synnes which ye had synned, whan ye dyd soch euell in the sighte of the LORDE, to prouoke him vnto wrath.
For I was afrayed of the wrath and indigna- cion, wherwith the LORDE was angrie with you, euen to haue destroyed you. And the
LORDE herde me at that tyme also.^ 

Morouer the LORDE was very angrie with Aaron, so that he wolde haue destroyed him, but I made intercession for Aaron also at y same tyme. As for youre synne (namely, the calfe that ye had made) £I toke it, and burnt it with the fyre, and smote it a sunder,
& grynde it in peces, euen vnto dust, and cast the dust in to the broke that descended from the mount.

Ye displeased the LORDE also, tat Tabera, tand at Massa, $and at the lustgraues, lland

a Exo. 19, c. and 24. a. Deut. 4. b. + Exod. 31. d. 
* Exo. 32. b. 4 Exo. 32. d. * Exo. 34. d. * Exo. 
24. d. J Deu. 10. b. € Exo. 32. e. t Nu. 11. a. fExo.17.b. $Nu.11.g. (Nu.13.d. 4 Act. 7. f.

| 

wha he sent you from Cades Barnea, and sayde: Go vp, and conquere the londe which
I haue geuen you. And ye were disobedient vnto the mouth of the LORDE youre God, and beleued not on him, and herkened not vnto his voyce: {for ye haue bene disobediét vnto the LORDE, as longe as I haue knowne

ou. i Thë fell I before y LORDE fortye daies and fortye nightes, which I laye there. For y LORDE sayde, he wolde destroye you.
But I made intercession vnto the LORDE, and sayde: ^O LORDE LORDE, destroye not thy people and thine enheritaunce, which thou thorow thy greate power hast delyuered, and broughte out of Egipte with a mightie hāde. Remembre thy seruauntes Abraham,
Isaac and Iacob. Loke not vpon the stub- burnesse, and vngodlynesse and synne of this people (that the londe wherout thou hast broughte vs, saye not: The LORDE was not able to bringe them in to the lande, that he promysed them, and because he hated them, therfore hath he broughte them out, to de- stroye thé in the wyldernesse:) For they are thy people q thine enheritaunce, which thou hast broughte out with thy greate power, and with thy stretched out arme.

The y. Chapter. 

Chap. r.| 

£ 

T the same tyme sayde the LORDE|@ 

vnto me: ‘ Hew y two tables of stone like vnto the first, and come vp vnto me in to the mount, and make y an Arke of wod, and in the tables I wyll wryte the wordes, that were in the first, **which thou brakest, and thou shalt laye them in the Arke. So I made an Arke of Fyrre tre, and hewed two tables of stone (like as the first were) a wente vp into the mount, and y two tables were in my hande.
*'Then wrote he in y tables (acordinge as the first wrytinge was) the ten verses, which the LORDE spake vnto you out of the fyre vpon the mountayne, at the tyme of the gatheringe together. And the LORDE gaue the vnto me. And I turned me, q wente downe from the mount, and layed the tables in the Arke which I had made, "that they mighte be there, as the LORDE commaunded me.
"And the childré of Israel departed from 
^ Exo. 34. a, Nu. 14, b. Iosu. 7. b. t Exo. 34. a. 

** Exo. 32, e, Deut. 9. c. * Exo. 34. d. and 24. c. 
! Deu. 31. f. PON 33. d: 

35 

Chap. rt. 
Beroth q Bune Iaekan vnto Mosera (there 
*dyed Aaron, q there was he buried: q Eleasar his sonne became prest in his steade.) Fro thence they departed from Gadgad. From
Gadgad to lathbath, a londe of ryuers of water. ^At the same season the LORDE separated out the trybe of Leui, to beare the
Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, and to stonde before the LORDE, to mynister vnto him, and to prayse his name vnto this daye.
*'Therfore shal the Leuites haue no porcion ner enheritaunce with their brethren: for the
LORDE is their enheritaunce,as the LORDE thy God hath promysed them.

° But I taried vpo the mount (like as afore) euen fortye dayes and fortye nightes, and the
LORDE herde me at that tyme also, and wolde not destroye the. But he sayde vnto me: Vp, q get the forth, y thou mayest go before the people, y they maye come 1n, and eoquere the lode, which I sware vnto their fathers to geue them.

Now Israel, what requyreth the LORDE thy God of the, "but y thou feare the LORDE thy God, and that thou walke in all his wayes, q loue him, q serue the LORDE thy God with all thy hert, ¢ with all thy soule: and y thou kepe the comaundementes of y LORDE, a his ordinaunces, which I comaunde the this daye, y thou mayest prospere? * Beholde, the heanen q the heauen of all heaués and the earth, and all y is therin, is y LORDES thy
God. +Yet hath he had a pleasure vnto thy fathers, to loue thé: and hath chosen their sede after thé, namely you, aboue all nacions, as it is come to passe this daye.

B| Cireumcyse therfore y foreszkynne of youre 

hert, t be nomore styffnecked. For the 
LORDE youre God is God of all goddes, « 
LORDE ouer all lordes, a greate God, mightie q terryble, which regardeth no personne, q taketh no giftes, and doeth righte vnto the fatherlesse and wedowe, and loueth the straunger, to geue him fode q rayment.
“ Therfore shal ye loue a straüger, for ye youre selues also were straungers in the londe of Egipte.

* Thou shalt feare the LORDE thy God, him onely shalt thou serue, vnto him shalt thou cleue tq sweare by his name. He is thy

è Nu. 18. a. Iosu. 13. d. 
* Psal. 25.a. 
€ Exod. 22. c. 

* Nu. 20. d. 
* Deut. 9. d. ere. 27. a.

? Nu. 3. 4. 18. 
4 Deut. 6. a. Iosu. 22.a. t Deu.4.f. J Deu. 30. b.

The b. boke of Moses, 

prayse ¢ thy God, which hath done for y these greate q terryble thinges, y thine eyes haue sene. ‘Thy fathers wete downe in to Egipte with seuentye soules, but now hath y LORDE thy God made the $as y starres of heauen in multitude.

The ri. Chapter. 

HERFORE shalt thou loue the LORDE thy God, q kepe his comaundemétes, his ordinaunces, his lawes, q his preceptes all thy life loge. And vnderstode this daye, that which youre childré knowe not: Which haue not sene the nurtoure of the LORDE youre
God, q his greatnesse, q his mightie hande, q his stretched out arme, q his tokens and actes which he dyd amonge the Egipcias, vnto
Pharao the kynge of Egipte, ¢ to all his loude, 
€ what he dyd to the power of y Egipcians, t vnto their horses q charettes, ‘whan he broughte the waters of the reed see vpō them, as they folowed after you, q how y LORDE hath broughte them to naught vnto this daye:
& what he dyd vnto you in the wildernesse, vntyll ye came vnto this place: ll what he dyd vnto Dathan and Abiram the children of Eliab the sonne of Ruben, how the earth opened hir mouth and swalowed them with their housholdes q tétes all their good that they

had in the myddes amonge all Israel. 

For youre eyes haue sene the greate workes of Y LORDE, which he hath done. Ther- fore shal ye kepe all the commaundementes which I commaunde you this daye, that ye maye be stronge to come in, and to conquere the londe, whither ye go to possesse it, q that ye maye lyue longe in the londe, ‘which the
LORDE sware vnto youre fathers, to geue vnto them and to their sede, eue a londe that floweth with mylke and hony: For the londe whither thou commest in, to possesse it, is not as the londe of Egipte, whence ye came out, where thou sowedest thy sede, and waterdest it at thy fote as a garden of herbes: " but it hath hiles and valleys, which drynke water of the rayne of heauen, a londe that the
LORDE thy God careth for. And the eyes of the LORDE thy God are allwaye therin from the begynnynge of the yeare vnto the ende.

^ Deut. 6. c. $ Matth. 5.d. * Gen. 46. d. $ Gene. 
15.a. Deut. 98. g. ^ * Exo. 14. f. || Num. 16. c. and 
26. b. ! Exo. 23. d. 7 Deut. 8. b. 

Fo. rlryb. 

5 

| Ffo. cirri. 

- 

maundementes, which I eommaunde you this daye, y ye loue the LORDE youre God, and serue him, with all youre hert and with all youre soule *then wyl I geue rayne vnto youre lode in due season, early and late, that thou mayest gather in thy eorne, thy wyne and thine oyle: and I wyll geue grasse vpon thy felde for thy catell, that ye maye eate q be fylled.

But bewarre, y youre hert be not disceaued, that ye go asyde, rc serue other goddes, q worshipe them, and then the wrath of the
LORDE waxe whote vpo you, *and he shut vp the heaué, that there eome no rayne, and the earth gene not hir inerease, q ye perishe shortly from the good lode, whieh the LORDE hath geuen you.

^ Put vp therfore these my wordes in youre hertes and in youre soules, and bynde thé for a sigue vpon youre handes, y they maye be a token of remembraunce before youre eyes: and teaeh them youre children, so that thou talke therof, whan thou syttest in thine house, or walkest by the waye: whan thou lyest downe, and whan thou rysest vp: and wryte them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates, that thou and thy ehildren maye lyue longe in the londe, whieh the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers to geue them, as longe as the dayes of heauen endure vpon earth.

For yf ye shal kepe all these eommaunde- mentes whieh I eommaunde you, so that ye do therafter, that ye loue the LORDE youre
God, and walke in all his wayes, and eleue vuto him, then shall the LORDE dryue out all these naeions before you, so that ye shall coquere greater and mightier nacions then ye youre selues are.

All the places that the soles of youre fete treade vpon, shalbe yours, from the wyldernes, and fro mount Libanus, and from the water
Euphrates vnto $ vttemost see shal youre coastes be. Noman shal be able to with- stoude you. The LORDE youre God shal let the feare and drede of you eome vpon all
Y londes wherin ye go, like as he hath pro- mysed you.

° Beholde, I laye before you this daye the blessynge and thé curse. t'The blessynge, yf

* Deut. 28. b. Ioel 9. c. Amos 4. b. 
3 Re. 17. a. and 18, a. 
30. c. t Deu. 28. a. 

a Deu. 28. c. 
^ Deut. 6. b. Pro. 3.a, * Deu. 

t Deu. 27. b. $ Deu. 7. a. 

The b. boke of Moses. 

Yf ye shal herken therfore vnto my eom- 

ye be obedient vnto the commaundementes 

of the LORDE youre God, which I com- maunde you this daye. ‘The eurse, yf ye wyl not be obedient to the commaundementes of the LORDE youre God, but turne out of the waye, which I eomaunde you this daye, so that ye walke after other goddes, whom ye knowe not.

Whan $ LORDE thy God hath broughte the in to the londe, whither thou eommest in to possesse it, then shalt thou geue the blessynge vpon mount Grisim, and the curse vpon mount Ebal, which are beyonde Iordane the waye towarde the goinge downe of the
Sonne, in the lode of the Cananites, whieh dwell in ¥ playne felde ouer agaynst Gilgal, besyde the Oke groue of More. For ye shal go ouer Iordane, that ye maye eome in to take possession of the londe, whieh the LORDE youre God hath geuen you, to eonquere it, and to dwell therin. Take hede now therfore, that ye do aeordinge vnto all the ordinaunces and lawes, whieh J laye before you this daye.

The rij. Chapter. 

HESE are the ordinaunces and lawes 

which ye shal kepe, that ye do therafter in the londe, which the LORDE God of thy fathers hath geuen the to possesse, as longe as ye lyue vpon earth. $Destroye all the plaees, wherin y Heithen (who ye shal con- quere) haue serued their goddes, whether it be vpo hye mountaynes, vpo hilles, or amonge grene trees. And ouerthrowe their altares, and breake downe their pilers, and burne their groues with fyre, and hewe downe the ymages of their goddes, q brynge the names of them to naught out of the same plaee. Ye shal not do so vnto the LORDE youre God: but the place || which Y LORDE youre God shal ehose out of all youre trybes (that he maye let his name dwell there) shal ye seke, and come thither, fand thither shal ye brynge youre burntsaerifices, q youre other offerynges, and youre tithes and the Heueofferynges of youre handes, and youre vowes, and youre fre wyll offerynges, and the firstborne of youre oxen and shepe: and there shall ye eate before the LORDE youre God, and **reioyse ouer all that ye and youre houses haue geué

I 3 Reg. 9. a. 2 Par. 7. c. T Deu. 14. b. 15. c. 16.8. 
** 1 Reg. 1. a. aud 16. a. 

Chap. ríj. with youre handes, because the LORDE thy
God hath blessed the. *Ye shall do none of the thinges, y we do here this daye, euery man what semeth him good in his awne eyes.
For ye are not yet come to rest, ner to y enheritaüce which the LORDE thy God shal geue the.
3| But ye shal go ouer Iordane, and dwell in the londe ¥ the LORDE youre God shall deuyde out vnto you, ¢ he shal geue you rest from all youre enemies rounde aboute, and ye shal dwell safe. Now whan the LORDE thy God hath chosen a place, to make his name dwell there, ye shall brynge thither all y I haue commaunded you, namely, youre burnt sacrifices, youre other offerynges, youre tythes, the Heueofferynges of youre handes, q all youre fre vowes, which ye shall vowe vnto ý LORDE: and there shal ye eate, and reioyse before the LORDE youre God, ye and youre sonnes, and youre doughters, and youre seruauntes, and youre maydes, and the
Leuites that are within youre gates, t for they haue no porcion ner inheritaiice with you.
Take hede vnto thy selfe, that thou offer not thy burntofferynges in what so euer place thou seyst: but in the place which $ LORDE shall haue chosen in one of thy trybes, there shalt thou offer thy burntofferynges, and do all that I commaunde the. Not withstondinge thou mayest kyll and eate flesh within all thy gates, after all the desyre of thy soule, acordynge to the blessynge of the LORDE thy God, which he hath geué the: +both the cleane and vncleane maye eate it, as of the Roo and herte, onely the bloude shalt thou not eate, but poure it out as water vpon the earth.
€| But within thy gates mayest thou not eate of the tythes of thy corne, “of thy wyne, q of thy oyle, ner of y first borne of thine oxen and of thy shepe, or of eny of thy vowes which thou hast vowed, or of thy frewyl- offeringes, or Heueofferinges of thy handes: but before the LORDE thy God shalt thou eate them, in the place which the LORDE thy God choseth, thou « thy sonne, and thy doughter, thy seruaunt, thy mayde, and the
Leuite that is within thy gates, q thou shalt reioyse before LORDE thy God, ouer all

y thou puttest thine hande vnto.§ And be- 
* Deu. 99. c. + Deut. 10. b. t Deut. 15. c. a Deut. 14.c. $Eccli.7.d. ^ Deut.15.c. || 1 Re. 14.¢.

The b. boke of Hoses. 

Fo. rlyrbij. warre, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as longe as thou lyuest vpon the earth.

But whan the LORDE thy God shal en- large thy bordes of thy londe (as he hath promysed the) and thou saye: I wil eate flesh
(for so moch as thy soule longeth to eate flesh) then eate flesh acordinge to all the desyre of thy soule. But yf the place that the LORDE thy God hath chosen (to let his name be there) be farre from the, then kyll of thy oxen and of thy shepe, which the
LORDE hath geuen the, as he hath com- maunded the, and eate it within thy gates acordinge to all ý desyre of thy soule. ^luen asa Roo or Hert is eaten, maiest thou eate it: both the cleane and vncleane maie eate it indifferently. || Onely bewarre, that thou eate not the bloude: for the bloude is the life.
Therfore shalt thou not eate the life with the flesh, but shalt poure it out like water vpon the earth, y thou mayest prospere, and thy children after the, whan thou hast done that which is righte in the sighte of the LORDE.

But whan thou halowest oughte that is thine, or makest a vowe,^ thou shalt take it, and bryuge it vnto the place, that the LORDE hath chosen, and do thy burntofferynges with the flesh and bloude vpon the altare of the
LORDE thy God. The bloude of thine offrynge shalt thou poure vpon the altare of the LORDE thy God, and eate the flesh.
Take hede, and heare all these wordes, which 
I commaunde the, y it maye go well with the, and thy children after y for euer, whan thou hast done y which is righte and acceptable in the sighte of the LORDE thy God.

2 Whan the LORDE thy God hath roted out the Heithen before the, whither thou commest in to conquere them, q whan thou hast coquered them, q dwelt in their londe, bewarre then, ¥ thou fall not in the snare after thé, whan they are destroyed before the: q that thou axe not after their goddes, q saye: Eué as these nacions haue serued their goddes, so wil I do also. Thou shalt not do so vnto the LORDE thy God. For all that is abho- minacion vnto the LORDE, aq that he hateth, y same haue they done vnto their goddes. i. they haue burnt euen their sonnes and their doughters with fyre vnto their goddes.
All that I commaunde you, shal ye kepe, 

4 Deu. 18, b. Iosu. 23. c. 
Terr. 19.a. Esa. 65. a. 

26 "n 

* Deu. 14. b. and 15. c. 
T Deut. 18. b. 

So. clrrbdiij. that ye do therafter, * Ye shal put nothinge therto, ner take ought there from.

The rij. Chapter. 

a F there ryse vp a t prophet or dreamer 

amonge you, and geue the a token or a wonder, and that token or wonder which he spake of, come to passe, and then saye: Let vs go after other goddes (whom thou knowest not) and let vs serue the: Thou shalt not herken vnto the wordes of soch a prophet or dreamer. .

“For y LORDE youre God proueth you, to wete whether ye loue him with all youre hert, q with all youre soule. For ye shall walke after the LORDE youre God, and feare him, and kepe his commaundementes,
& herken vnto his voyce, and serue him, and cleue vnto him. ?As for that prophet or dreamer, he shal dye: because he hath spoken to turne you awaye from the LORDE youre
God (which broughte you out of the londe of 
Egipte, and delyuered you from the house of bondage) to thrust the out of the waye, which the LORDE thy God commaunded the to walke in, and so shalt thou put awaie the euell from the.

Yf thy brother, the sonne of thy mother, or thine awne sonne, ^or thy doughter, or the wyfe in thy bosome, or thy frende which is vnto the as thine owne soule, entyse the secretly, and saye: Let vs go and serue other goddes (whom thou knowest not, ner yet thy father) which are amonge the nacions rounde aboute you, whether they be nye vnto the or farre from the, from the one ende of the earth vnto the other: consente not vnto him, and herké not vnto him. “Thine eye also shal not pytie him, and thou shalt haue no compassion vpon him, ner kepe him secrete, but shalt cause him to be slayne: thine hade shal be first vpon him, to cause him to be slayne, and then the handes of all the people. He shalbe stoned to death, because he wente aboute to thrust the awaye from the LORDE thy God, which broughte the out of the londe of Egipte from the house of bodage:$ y all
Israel maye heare, and feare him, and do 

nomore soch euell amonge you. 
Yf thou hearest in eny citewhich y LORDE 

* Deu. 4. a. Iosu. 1. b. + Mat.7.b. ° Deut. 8.a. t Iere. 28. c. and 29, d. > Zach. 13.a. Mat. 18. a.
Luc. 17.a. * Deut. 17.b. § Deu.19.d. || Deu. 17. b. 

The b. boke of Moses, 

thy God hath geué the to dwell in, that it is sayde: There are certayne men, the children of Belial, gone out from amonge you, and haue disceaued the inhabiters of their cite, and sayde: let vs go, and serue other goddes, whom ye knowe not. Il Then shalt thou seke, make search, and enquere diligently.

And yf it be founde of a trueth, that it is so in dede, y soch abhominacion is wroughte amonge you, then shalt thou smyte the in- dwellers of the same cite and their catell, with the edge of the swerde, and damne the cite with all that is therin: and all the spoyle therof shalt thou gather together in the myddes of the stretes of it, and burne with fyre, both the cite and all the spoyle therof together vnto the LORDE thy God, that it maye lye vpon a heape for euer, and neuer be buylded eny more. 4 And let nothinge of the damned thinge cleue vnto thy hande, that the
LORDE maye be turned from the indig- nacion of his wrath, and graunte the mercy, and haue compassion on the, and multiplye the (as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers) be- cause thou hast herkened vnto y voyce of the
LORDE thy God, to kepe all his com- maundementes, which I commaunde the this daye, so that thou doest the thinge which is righte in the sighte of the LORDE thy God.

Che riiij. Chapter. 

a are the children of the LORDE youre 
God, ^ Cut not youre selues therfore, q make you no baldnesse betwene youre eyes ouer eny deed. “For thou art an holy people vnto the LORDE thy God. ** And the
LORDE hath chosen the to be his awne peculier people, from amoge all the nacions

that are vpon the earth. f'lhou shalt eate no abhominacion. These are the beestes which ye shal eate: Oxen, shepe, Goates, Hert, Roo, Bugle, wylde goate, Vnicorne, Origen, and Camelion. And euery beest that deuydeth his clawe, q cheweth cudd, shal ye eate. Neuertheles these shal ye not eate of them that chewe cudd, and deuyde not the hoffe in to two clawes: The Camell, the hayre, q the conye, for though they chewe eudd, yet deuyde they not the hoffe, therfore

shal they be vncleane vnto you. "The swyne, 
*Ó| Deut. 7, e. losu.7.a. 2 Ma. 12.c. 4 Leui. 10. b. 
* Deut. 7. a. and 26. d. ** Exo. 19. a. f Leui. 11. a, 

Chap. rii, 

€ 

Chap. rb. The b. boke of Mosrs. Fo. clyrir. 

though he deuyde the hoffe, yet cheweth he| |him, § for he hath no porcion nor inheritaunce 

not cudd, he shall be vneleane vnto you: ye} |with the. 

shall not eate of the flesh of the, and their *In the thirde yeare shalt thou brynge forth 

deed carcases shal ye not touche. all the tithes of thine increase of the same 
* This is it that ye shall eate of all that is} |yeare, and shalt laye it within thy gates. "The 

in the waters: All that hath fynnes and scales,| |shal the Leuite (which hath no porcion ner 

shall ye eate. But what so euer hath no} |enheritaunce with the) and y straunger, and 

fynnes ner scales, that shal ye not eate, for it| |the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, which are 

is vncleane vnto you. within thy gates, come and eate, and fyll 
Eate of all cleane foules. But these are| |them selues, that the LORDE thy God maye 

they, wherof ye shal not eate: The Aegle, $| |blesse the in all the workes of thy handes 

Goshauke, the Cormoraunte, the Ixion, the} |which thou doest. 

Vultur, the Kyte with his kynde, q all Rauens 

in their kynde, the Estriche, the Night crowe, The yb. Chapter. 

the Cocow, the Sparow hauke with his kynde, N the seuéth yeare shalt thou make a Fre 

the litle Oule, the greate Oule, y Backe, the yeare. ° This is y maner of the Fre yeare. 

Bytture, the Swanne, the Pellicane, the Pye,| |! Who so euer lédeth oughte with his hande 

vnto his neghboure, shal not requyre it of his 

the Storke, the Heron, the laye with his 

kynde, the Lapwynge, y Swalowe: And all} {neghboure or his brother: for it is called the 

foules y crepe, shal be vn cleane vnto you,| | Fre yeare vnto the LORDE. Of a straüger mayest thou requyre it: but vnto him that is

and ye shal not eate them. 

Ye shall eate of nothinge y dyeth alone:| |thy brother, shalt thou remytte it. ‘ There thou mayest geue it vnto y straunger with in| [shall be no begger amoge you: for the thy gate, that he eate it, or sell it toastraunger.{ | LORDE shal blesse y in the lode which the
For thou art an holy people vnto ¥ LORDE| |LORDE thy God shal geue ¥ to inheritaunce thy God. * Thou shalt not seeth a kydd,| |to take it in possession, onely y thou herké whyle it yet sucketh his mother. vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God, «

Thou shalt separate out the tythe of all the} |kepe all these cOmaundemétes which I co- 

maunde the this daye, that thou maiest do 

increase of thy sede,’ y cometh out of thy felde euery yeare: q shalt eate it before y| |therafter. For the LORDE thy God shal blesse the, as he hath promysed the. The

LORDE thy God (tin $ place which He 

choseth, y his name maye dwell there) namely| |shalt thou lende vnto many nacions, q ‘shalt 

of y tythes of thy corne, of thy wyne, of thy| |borowe of noman. ‘Thou shalt raigne ouer many nacions, q noman shal reigne ouer y.

oyle, q the first borne of thine oxen, and of 

thy shepe, y thou mayest lerne to feare the ** Whan one of thy brethré is waxed poore 

LORDE thy God, all thy life longe. in eny cite within thy londe, which y LORDE thy God shal geue $, thou shalt not harden

t But yf the waye be to moch for y, and the place, which y LORDE thy God hath} |thine hert, ner withdrawe thine hande from thy poore brother: but shalt open thine hande

chosen to set his name there, be to farre from the: q thou canst not cary it that Y LORDE| |vnto him, and lende him, acordinge as he thy God hath blessed the withall, Then geue| |hath nede. it for money, « take ¥ money in thyne hande, Bewarre, that there be not a poynte of and go vnto the place which the LORDE] |Belial in thine hert, that thou woldest saye : thy God hath chosen, and geue the money for| | The seuenth yeare, the yeare of Fredome is all that thy soule desyreth, whether it be oxé,| jat honde. For yf thou lokest not frédly vpo thy poore brother, and geuest him nothinge

shepe, wyne, stronge drynke, or for what so euer thy soule desyreth, and eate there before| |then shall he crye ouer the vnto the LORDE, and it shall be synne vnto the: tt But thou

the LORDE thy God, aud be mery, thou shalt geue him, and let it not greue thine hert

and thine housholde, and ¥ Leuite that is within thy gates. Thou shalt not forsake| |that thou geuest him. For because of it, shall

? Leui. 11. b. * Exod. 23. c. and 34. c. + Exo. 
34. c. 1 Esa. 65. c. t Deut. 12.c. Baruc. 1. c. 
$ Leui, 18. c. * Deu. 26. c. * Leui. 25. a. 

| Exo. 22. c. Esa. 58. b. — '| Eccli, 4. a. — * Exo. 28. b. 
Vivi LM Ss Go tt Ro. 12. b. 

fo. clyrr. 

The b. boke of Moses, 

Chap, rbi.) 

the LORDE thy God blesse the in all thy workes, and in all that thou puttest thine hande vnto. “The londe shal neuer be with- out poore, therfore commaunde I the and saye, that thou open thine hande vnto thy brother, which is neady and poore in thy londe.

*Yf thy brother an Hebrue or Hebruesse be solde vnto the, he shal serue the sixe yeare, in the seuenth yeare shalt thou let him go
Fre. And wha thou deliuerest him fre, thou shalt not let him go from the emptye, but shalt geue him of thy shepe, of thy corne, and of thy wyne, so that thou geue him of that, which the LORDE thy God hath blessed the withall And remembre that thou also wast a seruaunte in the lode of Egipte, and how that the LORDE thy God delyuered the, therfore commaunde I the this thinge to daye.

€| But yf he saye vnto the: I wyll not go out awaye from the, “for I loue y and thine house
(in so moch as he is well at ease with the) then take a botkyn, and bore him thorow his eare to the dore, and let him be thy seruaunt for euer. And with thy mayde shalt thou do likewyse. And let it not seme greuous vnto the, to let him go fre from the (for he hath serued the sixe yeares as a dubble hyred ser- uaunt) then shall the LORDE thy God blesse the in all that thou doest.

? All the first borne that come of thine oxen and shepe, y are males, shalt thou halowe vnto the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not plowe with the firstborne of thine oxé, and shalt not clyppe the firstborne of thy shepe :
Before the LORDE thy God shalt thou eate thé euery yeare, *in the place that the
LORDE choseth, thou and thine housholde. 

thou eate not of the bloude therof, but poure it out as water vpon the grounde.

The poi. Chapter. fel BSERUE the moneth Abib, y thou offre Easter vnto the LORDE thy
God: * for in the moneth Abib the LORDE 

Leui. 25. f. Ter. 34. b. c. 
Leui. 27. d. Num. 3. b. 
+ Leu. 22. c. Deut. 17. a. 

a Mat. 26.a. Exo, 2na 
¢ Exo, 21. a. 4 Exod. 13. a. 
* Deu. 12. a. d. 14. b. 16. a. 

thy God broughte y out of Egipte by nighte. 
And for the Easter vnto y LORDE thy God, thou shalt offre oxen q shepe, in y $place which y LORDE shal chose, y his name maye dwell there. Thou shalt eate no leuended bred in y feast. Seuen dayes shalt thou eate the vnleuended bred of thy tribulacion: For with soroufull haist camest thou out of the londe of Egipte, that thou mayest remebre the daye of thy departinge out of y londe of
Egipte, all thy life longe. In sene dayes shal there no leuéded bred be sene within all thy coastes: q of the flesh that is offred y first daye at euen, there shal nothinge be lefte ouer night vntyll the mornynge.

Thou mayest not offre Easter with in en of thy gates, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the: but llin the place which the
LORDE thy God hath chosen, that his name maye dwell there, there shalt thou offre this
Faster, at euen whan the Sonne is gone downe, euen in the same season that thou camest out of Egipte: and thou shalt dighte it, and eate it in the place that the LORDE thy God hath chosen, and then turne the on the morowe, q go home in to thy tente. Sixe dayes shalt thou eate vnleuended bred, and on the seuenth daye is the gatheringe together of the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt do no worke therin.

^Seuen wekes shalt thou nombre vnto y, and begynne to nombre whan the syccle be- gynneth in the corne, and thou shalt kepe the T Feast of wekes vnto the LORDE thy
God, that thou geue a frewyllofferynge of thine hande, acordinge as the LORDE thy
God hath blessed the, and shalt reioyse before the LORDE thy God, thou and thy sonne, thy doughter, thy seruaunt, thy mayde, and the Leuite that is within thy gates, y straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, that are amonge you, in the place which y LORDE thy God hath chosen, that his name maye dwell there. And remembre, ý thou wast a seruaunte in Egipte, so that thou kepe and do these ordynaunces.

The feast of ‘Tabernacles shalt thou kepe seuen dayes, whan thou hast gathered in the frutes of thy barne a of thy wyne presse, and thou shalt reioyse in thy feast, thou and thy

t Deu. 12. b. * Exod. 12. a.and 23. b. Leui. 23. a. 
Num. 9. a. and 28. c. Deut. 12. a. 14, b. 15. e. 
|| 2 Par. 35. a. f Exo. 25. b. Leu. 95. c. T Act. 2.a. 

Chap. rbi. sonne, thy donghter, thy seruaunte, thy mayde, the Leuite, the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe that are within thy gates. *Seuen dayes shalt thou kepe y feast vnto the LORDE thy God, in the place that he hath chosen.
For the LORDE thy God shal blesse the in all thy frutes and in all the workes of thine hades. Therfore shalt thou be glad.

“Thre tymes in the yeare shal all thy males appeare before the LORDE thy God (in the place that he shall chase) namely, in the feast of vnleuended bred, in the feast of wekes, and in the feast of Tabernacles. He shal not appeare emptie before the LORDE, but euery one after the gifte of his hande, acor- dinge to the blessinge that the LORDE thy
God hath geuen the. 

The yoij. Chapter. 

UDGES a officers shalt thou ordeyne 

within all thy gates, which y LORDE thy 
God geueth the amége thy trybes, y they maye judge the people with righteous iudg- ment. Thou shalt not wrest the lawe. * Thon shalt knowe no personne also, ner take giftes.
For *giftes blynde the eyes of ý wyse, q per- uerte y righteous causes. Loke what righte is, ¥ c thou folowe, that thon mayest lyue q possesse the londe, which the LORDE thy
God shal geue the. 

Thon shalt plante no groue (of what so euer trees it be) nye vnto the altare of the LORDE thy God, which thou makest the. “Thou shalt set the vp no piler, which $ LORDE thy God hateth. t'lhon shalt offre vnto the
LORDE thy God no oxe or shepe, that hath a blemish or eny euell fauourednesse on it : for that is abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy God.

*Yf there be founde amonge you (within eny of thy gates which the LORDE thy God shal geue y) a man or woman, that worketh wickednesse in y sighte of the LORDE thy
God, so that he transgresseth his couenante and goeth, and serueth other goddes, q wor- shippeth them, $whether it be Sone or Mone, or eny of the hooste of heauen, which I haue not commaunded, and it is tolde the, ¢ thou hearest of it, ‘Then shalt thou make diligent search therfore. And yf thou fyndest that it

* 3Re. 8.1. ^ Exo.93.b. ^Deut.24.c. 1 Re. 8.a. t Exo. 23. a. Eccli. 20. d. ¢1 Reg. 15. c. 2 Re. 18. d. t Leu. 22. c. Deu. 15. c. 4 Exo. 32. f. 3 Re. 18. e.

§ Deut. 4. c. * Deut. 13. b. and 19. d. 

The b. boke of Hoses. 

is so of a trueth, that soch abhominacion is wroughte in Israel, then shalt thou brynge forth the same man or ¥ same woma (which haue done soch enell) vnto thy gates and shalt stone them to death. 7At the mouth of two or thre witnesses shal he dye, that is worthy of death. At the mouth of one witnes shal he not dye. The handes of the witnesses shal be the first to kyll him, and thé $ handes of all the people, that thon mayest put awaye the enell from the.

Yf a matter be to harde for the in indgmét betwixte bloude and blonde, betwixte plee and plee, betwixte stroke and stroke, and yf there be matters of stryfe within thy gates l then shalt thon ryse, and go vp vnto y place that ý LORDE thy God hath chosen: and shalt come to the prestes the Leuites, q to the iudge which shalbe at that tyme, and shalt axe. They shal shewe the how to iudge, and thou shalt do therafter, as they saye vnto the, in y place which the LORDE hath chosen: and thou shalt take hede that thou do acor- dinge vnto all y they teach the. Acordinge to the lawe y they teach the, q after the iudg- ment that they tell y, shalt thou do Tso that thon turne not asyde from $ same, nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte.

And yf eny man deale presumptuously, so that he herkeneth not vnto the prest (which stondeth to do seruyce vnto the LORDE thy
God) or to the Iudge, the same shal dye: and thou shalt put awaye the euell from Israel, that all $ people maye heare, and feare, and be nomore presumptuous.

Whan thon art come in to y londe which the LORDE thy God shal geue the, « takest it in possession, and dwellest therin, and shalt sale: **I wil set a kinge ouer me, as all the nacions haue aboute me, the shalt thou set him to be kynge ouer the, whom the LORDE thy God shal chose.

One of thy brethren shalt thon sett to be kynge ouer the. Thou mayest not set a strauger ouer the, which is not thy brother.
Onely let him not hane many horses, ^y he brynge not y people againe in to Egipte thorow $ multitude of horses, for as moch as y
LORDE hath sayde vnto you, that from hence forth ye shulde come nomore this waye agayne.
Iosu.7. d. |f Num. 35.c. Deut. 19. c. 

Eccli.45.d. £ Eze.44.d. *| Deut. 5. d. 
^ 3 Reg. 4. c. 2 Par. 9. e. 

|| Deut. 21. a. 
** 1 Reg. 8. a. 

So. clyrri. 

€ 

pe 

| fo. elerrij. 

a 

B 

| “He shall not haue many wyues also, that his hert be not turned awaye. * Nether shal he gather him syluer and golde to moch.
And whan he is set vpon the seate of his kingdome, he shal take of the prestes the
Leuites this seconde lawe, and cause it be wrytten in a boke, and that shall he haue by him, tand he shall rede therin all the dayes of his life, that he maye lerne to feare y LORDE his God, to kepe all the wordes of this lawe, all these ordinaüces, so that he do therafter.
He shall not lifte vp his herte aboue his bre- thren, and shall not turne asyde from the commaundement, nether to the right hade ner to the lefte, that he maye prologe his dayes in his kyngdome, he and his children in Israel.

The rbítj. Chapter. 
HE prestes, ^the Leuites, all the trybe 
| of Leui shal haue no parte ner enhe- ritaunce with Israel. The offerynges of y
LORDE « his enheritaunce shal they eate. 
Therfore shal they haue no inheritaunce jamonge their brethren, because the LORDE is their enheritauce, as he hath saide vnto the.
This shalbe Y prestes dutye of the people, q of thé that offre, whether it be oxe or shepe, so that they geue vnto the prest the shulder and both the chekes, and the brest. And the first frutes of thy corne, of thy wyne and of thy oyle, and the first of thy shepe sheringe. tiFor the LORDE thy God hath chosen him out of all thy trybes, to stonde and mynyster in the name of the LORDE, he and his

sonnes all the dayes of their life. 
| Yf a Leuite come out of eny of thy gates lor out of eny place of all Israel, where he is a gest, and cometh with all the desyre of his soule (vnto the place which the LORDE hath chosen) to mynister in the name of the
LORDE his God, like as all his brethren 
Y Sue which stonde there before the 

ORDE, thé shal he haue like porcion of meate with the other: besydes that which he hath of the solde good of his fathers.

Whan thou commest in to y londe which the LORDE thy God shal geue y, ‘thou shalt not lerne to do ¥ abhominacions of these nacions, that there be not founde amonge you, y maketh his sonne or doughter go thorow

^3Re.11.a. *3Re.10.c. Esa. 2.b. 
5 Num. 18. c. Deu. 10. b. 12. b. 14. c. i Num. 3. b. and 18. a.
12. d. aud 17. b. 

+ Iosu. 1. b. 
Eze. 44. d. 
© Leu. 18. a. and 20. d. Deut. lere. 7. a. and 19. a.

4 Re. 21. a. 

The b. boke of Hoses. 

the fyre, or a prophecier, or a choser out of dayes, or that regardeth the foules cryenge, or a witch, or a coniurer, or soythsayer, or an expounder of tokens, or y axeth eny thinge of the deed.

For who so euer doth soch, is abhominacion vnto the LORDE: and because of soch abho- minacions doth the LORDE thy God dryue thé out before the. But thou shalt be per- fecte with the LORDE thy God. For these naciós whom thou shalt conquere, whom the
LORDE thy God hath geuen the, herken to the chosers out of dayes, and to the soyth- sayers: but so shalt not thou do vnto the
LORDE thy God. 

4 A prophet, like vnto me, shall the LORDE € thy God raise the vp euen out of the, q from amouge thy brethren, $vnto him shal ye herke, acordinge as thou desyredest before the LORDE thy God in Horeb, (in the daye of y gatheringe together) q saydest: “Let me heare the voyce of the LORDE my God no- more, and se nomore this greate fyre, that I dye not. Aud y LORDE saide vnto me:
They haue well spoken. I wil rayse them vp a prophet from amouge their brethren like vnto the, and wyl put my wordes in his mouth, t he shal speake vnto them all that I shal comaunde him. Il Aud who so euer wyl not herken vnto my wordes, which he shal speake in my name, of him wil I requyre it.

‘But yf a prophete presume to speake ought in my name, which I haue not co- matded him to speake: and he that speaketh in y name of other goddes, y same prophete shal dye. But yf thou saye in thine hert:
How can I knowe what worde the LORDE hath not spoken? Euen whan the prophete speaketh in the name of y LORDE, and the thinge foloweth not, and commeth not to passe, Y same is the worde, y the LORDE hath not spoke, "The prophet hath spoke it presumtuously, therfore be not afrayed of him.

The ri. Chapter. 
WIS y LORDE thy God shall haue roted out y nacios, whose londe y
LORDE thy God shal geue the, so y thou hast conquered them, and dwellest in their cities and houses, f thou shalt appoynte the

4 Act. 3. d. and 7. e. $ Mat. 17. a. * Exo. 20. c. 
Deut. 5. c. || Iob. 12. f. Heb.2. a. Í Num. 16. a. 
Deut. 13. a. Tere. 28.a. Eze. 14. a. 1T Deut. 4. g. 
Num. 35. b. Iosu, 20. a. 

Chap. rr. 

out thre cities in the myddes of the lóde, y' 

t 

the LORDE thy God shal geue $ to pos- sesse. Thou shalt prepare the waye, and parte the coastes of thy londe (which y LORDE thy God shal deuyde out vnto the) in to thre partes, that whosoeuer hath commytted a slaughter, maye flie thither. And this shalbe the cause, “that whosoeuer hath committed a slaughter, maye flye thyther, and lyue.
^Yf eny man smyte his neghboure vna- warres, and hath not hated him in tyme passed (as whan a man goeth vnto the wod with his neghboure to hew downe tymber, and he turneth his hande with the axe to hewe downe the wod, and the yron slyppeth from the helue, and hytteth his neghboure, that he dyeth) the same shal flye in to one of these cities, that he maye lyue, lest the auenger of bloude folowe after the deedsleyer, whyle his hert is whote, and ouertake him, whyle the waye is so farre, and slaye him, where as yet no cause of death is in hi, for so moch as he hated him not in tyme passed. Therfore commaunde
I the, that thou appoynte out thre cities. 
And whau the LORDE thy God enlargeth thy borders, as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers, q geueth the all the lode which he promysed thy fathers to geue (so that thou kepe all these cómaundementes, and do y I commaunde the this daye, ¥ thou loue the LORDE thy God, and walke in his wayes all thy life longe) thé shalt thou adde yet thre cities vnto these thre, that innocent bloude be not shed in thy londe
(which the LORDE thy God geueth the to enheritaunce) and so bloude come vpon the.
* But yf eny man beare hate agaynst his neghboure, and layeth waite for him, and ryseth agaynst him, and smyteth him that he dye, and flyeth in to one of these cities, then shall the Elders of the same cite sende thither, and cause him to be fetched from thence, and delyuer him in to the handes of the auenger of bloude, that he maye dye: thine eye shal not pitie him, and the giltye bloude shalt thou put awaye fro Israel, that thou mayest prospere.
“Thou shalt not remoue thy neghbours marck, which they of olde tyme haue set in thine enheritaunce, that thou enheretest in the londe, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the to possesse it.

* Exo. 21. b. è? Num.35.d. Deut. 27.c. *2Re.14.a. 
*Deu.27. c. Iob 24. a, 4 Nu. 35. d. Mat. 18. b. 
Ioh. 8.b. 2 Cor. 13.a. + Susan, 1. t Deut. 15. b. 

The b. boke of ffloses. 

“One witnesse shal not stonde vp alone agaynst a man, ouer eny trespace or synne, what maner of synne so euer it be, y a man can do, but in the mouth of two or thre wit- nesses shal euery matter be stablished.

t But yf an vnrighteous wytnesse stonde vp| B 

agayust eny man, to testifye eny trespace vpon hun, then shall both the men that stryue together, stonde before the LORDE, before the prestes and Iudges, which shall be at the same tyme. +And the iudges shall make dili- gent inquisicion : q yf the wituesse be founde false, and hath geué false witnesse agaynst his brother, then shall ye do vnto him, euen as he thoughte to do vnto his brother: that thou mayest put awaye the euell from the$ that other maye heare and feare, and take nomore vpon them to do soch wicked poyntes amonge you. ‘Thine eye shall not pitie him. li Soule for soule, eye for eye, tothe for tothe, hande

for hande, fote for fote. 

HAN thou goest out to battayll agaynst 
\ thine enemies, and ‘seyst horses and charettes of the people more then thou, be not afrayed of them: for the LORDE thy
God which brought ý out of the londe of 
Egipte, is with the. Now wha ye are come nye vnto the battayl, the prest shal steppe forth, t speake to the people, and saye vnto thé: Heare Israel: Ye go this daye in to the battayll agaynst youre enemies, let not youre hert faynte. /Feare not, be not afrayed, ner a drede of them. * For the LORDE youre
God goeth with you, to fyghte for you agaynst youre enemies, y he maye saue you.

And the captaynes shal speake to $ people, and saye: Who so hath buylded a new house, and hath not dedicate it, let him go, and byde in his house, that he dye not in y battayll, and another dedicate it. **Who so hath planted a vynyarde, and hath not yet made it comen, lett him go, and byde at home, that he dye not in the battayll, and another make it comen. ttWho so hath sponsed a wyfe, and hath not yet brought her home, let him go, and byde at home, y he die not in the battayll, q another brynge her home.

And the captaines shal speake further vnto 

The rr. Chapter. 

$ Deu. 13. b. || Exod. 21. c. Leui. 24.d. Matb. 5. e. 
* Deut. 7. d, f Deut. 1, c. Num. 14.3. 1 Mac. 4. a. 
T Deu. 28. a. ** 1 Mac. 3. g. tt Deu. 24. a. 

Fo. clerrtt. 

35 

Fo. elyrritij. 

€ 

the people, and saye: * He that feareth and hath a faynte hert, lett him go, and byde at home, that he fake not his brethrens hert fainte also, like as his hert is. And whan the captaynes haue made an ende of speakinge vnto the people, they shall set the rulers of the hoost before the people in the forefronte.

“Whan thou commest nye vnto a cite to fight against it, thou shalt offre them peace.
Yt they answere the peaceably, and open vnto the, then shal all ¥ people Y is founde therin, be tributaries vnto the, and serue But yf they wyl not deale peaceably x the, aid wyll warre with the, then besege it: and whan the LORDE thy God delyuereth it in to thy hande, thou Bor smyte all the males that are therin, with the edge of the swerde: saue the wemen and the children. t As for the catell, and all that is in the cite, and all the spoyle, thou shalt take them vnto thy selfe, and eate the spoyle of thine enemies, whichthe LORDE thy God hath geuen the. Thus shalt thou do vnto all the cities, that are very farre from the, and are not of the cities of these nacions.

But in the cities of these nacions, which the 
LORDE thy God shall ’geue the to euherit- aüce, thou shalt leaue nothinge alyue that hath breth, but shalt vtterly destroye thé, namely t the Hewes Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites,
Heuites, q Iebusites, as the LORDE thy God hath commaunded the, y they teache you not to do all $ abhominacions, which they do vnto their goddes, q so ye to synne agaynst the LORDE youre God.

Whan thou must lye a longe season before a cite, against the which thou makest warre to take it, thou shalt not destroye y trees therof that thou woldest hew them downe with the axe, for thou mayest eate therof: and ther- fore shalt thou not hew them downe. For it is but wodd vpon the felde, and no man, and can not come q be bullworkes agaynst the.
But the trees which thou knowest y me eate not of, those shalt thou destroye, e rote out, and make bullworkes therof, agaynst the cite that warreth with the, tyll thou haue ouer- come it.

The rri. Chapter. 

HAN there is one slayne founde in i 
Y \ londe which $ LORDE thy God shall 

* Iudic, 7. a. aud 11. c.

* Num, 21. c. Deut. 2. e. t Iosu.8. a. 
* Deut. 31. a. Iosu. 6. c. 8 f. 10. e. andic ^ Deut-3l«a- losu.6.c:8f 10:e. Iud onn a SOT 0 NN 

The b. boke of oses. 

geue y to possesse it, a lyeth im y felde, q it is not knowne who hath slaine him, then shal thy Elders q iudges go forth, and meet from the slayne vnto the cities that lye rounde aboute. Loke which cite is the nexte, y
Elders of the same shal take a yoge cowe, which hath not bene laboured, ner hath drawe in the yocke, q they shal brynge her in to a valley, where as is nether earinge nor sowinge, and strike of hir heade there iu the valley.

Then shal the prestes y children of Leui come forth. ($For the LORDE thy God hath chosen them, to serue him, and to prayse his name: and at their mouth shal all plees and strypes be tryed.) And all the Elders of the same cite shall come forth vnto the slayne, q wash their handes ouer y yonge cowe, whose heade is stricken of in the valley, and shal answere and saie: Oure hades haue not shed this bloude, nether haue oure eyes sene it.
Be mercifull (O LORDE) vnto thy people of 
Israel, who thou hast delyuered, ||laye no innocent bloude vnto thy people of Israels charge: then shall they be reconeyled from the bloude. "Thus shalt thou put awaye the innocent bloude from the, in that thou doest the thinge which is righte in the sighte of y
LORDE. 

Wha thou goest forth to warre against thine enemies, x the LORDE thy God delyuereth them in to thine handes, so that thou cariest awaye their presoners, and seist amoge the

Chap. prf. | 

captyues a bewtyfull woman, q hast a desyre|. 

vnto her to take her to thy wife, the brynge her home to thine house, and let her shaue hir heade, and pare hir nayles, and put of hir clothes that she was taken presoner in, and let her sit in thine house, and mourne for hir father and mother a moneth longe after that lye with her, and mary her, and let her be thy wife. But yf thou haue no fauoure vnto her, then shalt thou let her go whither she wyll, and not to sell her, ner to make cheuesaunce of her, because thou hast dishonoured her.
“Yf a man haue two wyues, one that he loueth, and one that he hateth, and they beare him Bl aldren, both the Sls and the hated, so that the firstborne be hirs that is hated, and the tyme commeth that he dealeth out the inheritaunce vuto his children, then can he not make the sonne of y beloued first

$ Deut. 17. b. Eccli. 45. d. 
* Gen. 29. 30. 

t Deut. 7. a. || Ionz 1. c. 

€ 

Chap. rríj. 

5 

borne before the firstborne sonne of the hated, but he shall knowe the sonne of the hated for y first sonne, so that he geue him dubble of all that is at hande: *for the same is y begyn- nynge of his strength, ¢ the first byrth righte is his.

t Yf eny man haue a stubbome and disho- bedient sonne, which herkeneth not vnto the voyce of his father, and mother, and whan they teach him nurtonre, wyll not folowe them, then shall his father and mother take him, and brynge him to y Elders of their cite, and to the gate of the same place, and saye vnto the Elders of the cite: This oure sonne is stobburne and dishobediét, and herkeneth not vnto oure voyce, and is a ryoter and a dronkarde. ‘Then shal all the men of y same cite stone him to death: and thus shalt thou put awaye the enuell fro the, that all Israel maye heare and feare.

^Yf a man haue commytted a synne y is worthy of death, and is put to death, so that he is hanged on tre, then shal not his body remayne all night on tre, but thou shalt burye him the same daye (* For cursed is he of God that is hanged) that thou defyle not thy londe, which the LORDE thy God geueth the to enheritaunce.

The rrij. Chapter. 

a F thou se thy brothers oxe or shepe, go 

B 

astraie, ^thou shalt not withdrawe thy selfe from them, but shalt brynge thé againe vnto thy brother. But yf thy brother be not nye vnto the, q thou knowest him not, then shalt thou take thé in to thine house, y they maye be with the, tyll thy brother axe after them, q then delyuer him thé agayne. In like maner shalt thou do with his Asse, with his rayment, q with euery lost thinge of thy brother, which he hath lost, q thou hast founde it: thou mayest not withdrawe thy selfe.

* Yf thou se thy brothers oxe or Asse fallen downe by the waye, thou shalt not withdrawe thy selfe from him, but shalt helpe him vp.

§A woman shall not weere y which per- tayneth to a man, nether shal a man put on womans raymet. For who so euer doth soch, is abhominacion vnto Y LORDE thy God.

Yf thou ehaunce vpon a byrdes nest by y waye in a tre, or on the grounde, with yonge

a Iosu. 8. f. and 10. c. 
* Mat, 12. b. Luc. 13. b. 

* Gen. 49, a. 
1 Gala. 3. b. 

[IUE xoSe fob. 
? Exod. 23. a. 

The b. boke of Hoses, 

$ 1 Cor. 11. a. 4 Leu 
| L 

or with egges, and the dame syttinge vpon the yonge or vpon the egges, thou shalt not take the dame with the yonge, but shalt let the dame flye, and take the yonge, that thou mayest prospere and lyue longe.

Whan thou buyldest a new house, make a battelment aboute thy rofe, that thou lade not bloude vpon thine house, yf eny man fall therof.

^'Thou shalt not sowe thy vynyarde with dyuerse sedes, that thou halowe not (to the fullofferynge) the sede which thou hast sowne, with the increase of the vynyarde.

Thou shalt not plowe with an oxe and an 
Asse together at one tyme. 

* Thou shalt not weere a garmét, y is mixte with wollen and lynnen together.

Thou shalt make gardes vpon the foure quarters of thy garment, wherwith thou couerest thy selfe.

Yfaman take a wife, and hate her whan he hath lyen with her, and layeth eny shame- full thinge vnto hir charge, and bryngeth vp an euell name vpon her, and sayeth: I toke this wife, t whan I came to her, I founde her not a mayde. ‘Then shall the father and mother of the damsell take her, and brynge forth the tokens of the damsels virginite be- fore the Elders of the cite, euen vnto the gate.
And y damsels father shal saie vnto y Elders :| € 
I gaue this man my doughter to wyfe. Now hateth he her, and layeth a shamefull thinge to hir charge, and sayeth: I founde not thy doughter a mayde. And lo, these are the tokens of my doughters virginite. And they shal sprede out the clothe before the Elders of the cite. So shal the Elders of the cite take that man, and chastice him, and put a pen- naunce vpon him of an hundreth Sycles of syluer, and geue the same vnto the father of the damsell, because he hath broughte vp an euell name of a mayde in Israel, and he shall haue her to wyfe, so pue maye not forsake her all his life longe. But yf it be of a trueth, that the damsell is not founde a virgin, the shal she be brought forth vnto the dore of hir fathers house, and the mé of the cite shal stone her to death, f because she hath wrought foly in Israel, and played the whore in hir fathers house. And so shalt thou put awaye the euell from the.

i. 19. e e Leui. 19, e. 

Nu. 15. d. i q Deu. Zoe 

- 

Fo. clyrrb. 

Fo. rlryrbt. 
^ Yf a man be founde lienge with a woma that hath a maried huszbande, they shal dye both the man, q the woma that he hath lien withall And so shalt thou put awaye euell from Israel.

Yf a mayde be handfested to eny man, ¢ another man getteth her in the cite, q lyeth with her, ye shal brynge them both ont vnto the gate of the cite, and stone them both, y they dye. The damsell, because she cryed not, beynge in the cite. The man, because he hath brought his neghbours wife to shame.
And thou shalt put awaye the euell from the. 

But yf a man get an handfested damsell vpon the felde, and take her, and lye with her, then the man that laye with her, shal dye alone, and vnto the damsell thou shalt do nothinge: for she hath done no synne worthy of death. It is like as yf a man rose against his neghboure, and slewe him, euen so is this also. For he founde her in the felde, and the handfested damsell eryed, and there was no man to helpe her.

? Yf a man fynde a mayde that is not had- fested, and take her, and lye with her, and be founde, then shal he that laye with her, geue hir father fyftie Sycles of syluer, and shall haue her to wyfe, because he hath shamed her: he maye not forsake her all his life loge.

“Nomi shal take his fathers wife, ner vn- couer his fathers couerynge.

The rriij. Chapter. 

HERE shal none that hath his stones broken or y is gelded, ^ come in to the cogregacion of the LORDE. ‘There shal no whores childe also come in to the cogregacion of y LORDE, no not after ý tenth generacio, but shal neuer come in to y cogregacio of y
LORDE. *The Ammonites q Moabites shal not come in to ¥ cogregació of y LORDE, no not after y tenth generacion, but shall neuer come in, because they met you not with bred q water in y waye, wha ye came out of Egipte. t And besides y, they hired agaynst you Balaa y sonne of Beor, y inter- preter out of Mesopotamia, to curse y. But y LORDE thy God wolde not heare Balaam, and turned the curse to a blessynge vnto the: because the LORDE thy God loued the.

* Leui. 20. b. > Exo. 22. c. * Leui. 18. a. Deu. 
26. c. 4 Esa. 56. a. * 9 Esd. 13. a. t Num. 22. a. losu. 24. h. 1 Gen. 25. c. $ 2 Co. 10. a. Ephe. 6. b.

The b. boke of fHosrs. 

Chap. rrii, 
Thou shalt wysh him nether prosperite ner health all thy life longe for euer. Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite: tfor he is thy brother.

An Egipcian shalt thou not abhorre, for|33 thon wast a straunger in his londe. The children whom they beget in the thirde gene- racion, shal come in to the congregacion of y
LORDE. 

§Wha thou goest out to fighte agaynst thine enemies, kepe the from all wickednesse.

Yf there be eny man amonge you which is vncleane, so that eny thinge 1s chaunced to him by nighte, the same shal go out of ¥ hoost vntyll he haue bathed himselfe with water before euen: and whan the Sonne is gone downe, he shall come in to the hoost agayne.

And without the hoost thou shalt haue place to resorte vnto for necessyte, q thou shalt haue a shouell vnder the gyrdle: and whan thou wilt set downe without, thou shalt dygge therwith: and whan thou hast done thine easement, thou shalt couer that which is departed from the. For the LORDE thy God walketh in thine hooste, to delyuer the, and to geue thine enemies before the.
Therfore shall thy hooste be holy, that he se no vncleane thinge in the, and so turne him- selfe from the.

Thou shalt not delyuer vnto his master the! € seruaunt, which is escaped fro him vnto the.
He shall dwell with the in the place that he choseth within eny of thy gates, for his wealth, and thou shalt not vexe him.

‘There shal be no whore amonge y doughters of Israel, nether whorekeper amonge the sonnes of Israel. || Thou shalt not bringe y hyre of an whoore ner the price of a dogg in to the honse of the LORDE thy God for eny maner of vowe: for they both are abho- minacion vnto the LORDE thy God.

J Thou shalt occupye no vsury vnto thy brother, nether with money, ner with fode, ner with eny maner thinge that vsury maye be vsed withall. (Vnto a stranger thou maiest lende vpo vsury, but not vnto thy brother) y the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in y thou takest in hade, in the lode whither thou commest in to possesse it.

£Whan thou makest a vowe vnto y LORDE|33 

* Num. 25. b. Deut. 22. c. 
Leuit. 25. f. 2 Esd. 5. a. 

|| Mich. 1. b. f Exo. 22. c. 
€ Num. 30. a. Eccls. 5. a. 

Baruc 6. e. Act. 5. a. | 

Chap. rritíj. ithy God, thou shalt not be slacke to per- fourme it: for the LORDE thy God shal requyre it of the, and it shal be synne vnto the. Yf thou leaue vowinge, then is it no synne vnto the. But that which is proceaded out of thy lyppes shalt thou kepe, and do ther- after, acordinge as thou hast vowed vnto the
LORDE of a frewyll, which thou hast spoken with thy mouth.

Whan thou goest in to thy neghbours vyniarde, thou mayest eate of the grapes acordinge to thy desyre, tyll thou haue ynough.
But thou shalt put none in to thy vessell. 

*Whan thou goest in thy neghbours corne- felde, thou mayest plucke the eares with thine hande, but with a syccle mayest thou not reape therin.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

HAN a man taketh a wife, “and marieth her, and she findeth no fa- uoure in his eyes because of eny vnclennesse, the shal he wryte a byll of deuorcemet, and geue it her in hir hade, and sende her out of his house. Yf whan she is gone out of his house, she go, and be another mans wyfe, and the same seconde man hate her also, q wryte a byll of deuorcement, and geue it her in hir hande, and sende her out of his house: Or yf the same seconde man dye, which toke her to wife, then hir first huszbande that put hir awale, male not take hir againe to be his wife, in so moch as she is defyled, for that is abho- minacion before the LORDE: that thou make not the londe to synne, which the LORDE

thy God hath geuen the to enheritaüce.^ 

Whan a man hath newly taken a wyfe, he shall not go a warrefare, nether shall he be charged withall. He shal be fre in his house one yeare longe, that he maye be mery with his wife which he hath taken.

Thou shalt no take ¥ nethermost and vp- permost mylstone to pledge, for he hath set y his lyuynge to pledge.

Yf eny man be founde that stealeth one of his brethren, from amonge the childré of
Israel, and setteth him to pledge, or selleth him soch a thefe shal dye, that thou maiest put awaye the euell from the.

Kepe the from the plage of leprosie, that 

*Mat. 12.a. *1ere.3.a. Mal. 2. c. Mat. 19.a. and 5.d. 
è? Deut. 20.a. t Deut. 17. c. Mat.23.a. t Num. 12. a. 
€ Leu. 19. c. Eccli.7.c. Tob. 4.c. 4 Tere. 31. d. 

The b., boke of Hoses. 

thou tobserue diligently and do acordynge vnto all that the prestes the Leuites teach the, as I haue commaunded them, ý shal ye ob- serue and do therafter. Remembre what the
LORDE thy God dyd vnto Miriamt by the waye, whan ye were come out of Egipte.

Yf thou lendest thy brother eny dett, thou shalt not go in to his house, and take a pledge, but shalt stonde without: and he, to who thou lendest, shal brynge out his pledge vnto the.
But yf it be a poore body, thou shalt not lye downe to slepe, with his pledge, but shalt delyuer him his pledge agayne, whan the
Sonne goeth downe, that he maye slepe in his awne rayment, and blesse the, so shall the same be rekened vnto the for righteousnes before the LORDE thy God.

“Thou shalt not withdrawe the hyre of y nedye and poore amonge thy brethren, or straunger that is in thy londe, or within thy gates, but shalt geue him his hyre the same daye, that the Sonne go not downe theron, for so moch as he is nedye, and his life susteyned therwith: that he call not vpon the
LORDE agaynst the, and it be synne vnto the. 

?'l'he fathers shal not dye for the children, ner the childré for the fathers, but euery one shal dye for his awne synne.

§ Thou shalt not wrest the righte of the straunger and of the fatherlesse. And y wedowes rayment shalt thou not take to pledge: For thou shalt remembre, that thou

|wast a seruaunte in Egipte, and how that y 

LORDE thy God delyuered the from thence, therfore commaunde 1 the to do this. *

Whan thou hast reaped downe thine haruest in the felde, and hast forgotten a shefe in the felde, thou shalt not turne agayne to fetch it, but it shal be for the straunger, y fatherlesse and the wedowe, that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in all the workes of thy handes.

Whan thou hast plucked thine Olyue trees, thou shalt not plucke them vp cleane after- warde: it shal be for the straunger, the father- lesse and the wedowe. Whan thou hast gathered thy vynyarde, thou shalt not gather it vp cleane afterwarde: it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
And thou shalt remembre, that thou wast a 

2 Para. 25. a. and 27.c.

4 Re. 14. a. 

Ezec. 18. c. 
© Leuit, 19. c. 

§ Deut. 17. a. 

Fo. clyrrby. 

| 

€ 

D 

Fo. rirrrbtig. seruaunt in the londe of Egipte: therfore comaunde I the to do this.

The yro. Chapter. 

\ A | HAN there is a stryfe betwene men, 

they shalbe brought before y lawe and iudged: and the iudges shall iustifye the righteous, and condemne the vngodly. And yf the vngodly haue deserued strypes, the ludge shall ceommaunde to take him downe, and they shall beate him before him, acordynge to the measure and nombre of his trespace.
* Whan they haue geué him fortye strypes, they shall beate him nomore, lest (yf there be mo strypes geuen him) he be beaten to moch, and thy brother be horrible before thine eyes.

“Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the oxe, that treadeth out the corne.

? Whan brethren dwell together, and one of them dye without children, then shall not y wife of the deed take a straunge man without,
“but hir kynsman shal go in vnto her, and take her to wyfe: and the first sonne that she beareth, shal he set vp after the name of his brother which is deed, that his name be not put out of Israel.

But yf the man wyl not take his kynswoman, then shal his kinszwoman go vp vnder the gate to the Elders, and saye: My kynsman refuseth to stere vp a name vnto his brother in Israel, and wyl not marye me. ‘Then shal the Elders of the cite call him, and comen with him. Yf he stonde then and saye: I wyl not take her, then shal his kynszwoman steppe forth vnto him before the Elders, and lowse a shue fro his fote, and spyt in his face, and shal answere, and saye: ‘Thus shal it be done vnto euery man, that wyl not builde his brothers house. And his name shalbe called in Israel, the vnshodd house.

Yf two men stryue together, and the wyfe 

|of one renne to, to delyuer hir huszbande from the hande of him that smyteth him, a put forth hir hande, and take him by the secretes, then shalt thou cut of hir hande, and thine eye shal not pitie her.

Thou shalt not haue in thy bagg two maner of weightes, a greate and a small. ^Nether shalt thou haue in thyne house dyuerse mea- sures, a greate and a small. Thou shalt haue a perfecte and iust weighte, and a perfecte

*2Cor.11.a. ?1 Cor.9.b. 1 Timo.5.c. è? Rut. t.b. © Mat.22.b. Luc.20.d. 4 Leui.19.g. Mich.6. b.

The b. boke of Moses. 

§ Gen. 46. a. 

and iust measure, that thy life maye be longe in the londe, which the LORDE thy God shal geue the. For who so euer doth soch (yee all they that do euell) are abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy God. t Remebre what the
Amalechites did vnto the by the waye, wha ye were departed out of Egipte, how they buckled with the by the waye, and smote thy hynmost, euen all that were feble, which came after the whan thou wast weerye and fainte, and they feared not God. Now wha the
LORDE thy God bryngeth the, to rest fro all thine enemies rounde aboute in the londe which the LORDE thy God geueth the for inheritaunce to possesse, then shalt thou put out the remembraunce of the Amalechites from vnder heauen. Forget not this.

The rroi. Chapter. 

HAN thou commest in to the londe that the LORDE thy God shal geue the to inheritaunce, and enioyest it, and dwellest therin, thou shalt take of all maner : first frutes of the londe, that come out of thy grounde, which the LORDE thy God geueth the, q shalt put them in a maunde, and go vnto the place which the LORDE thy God shal chose (y his name maye dwell there) and thou shalt come vnto the prest which shalbe at that tyme, and saye vnto him: I knowlege this daye vnto the LORDE thy God, that I am come in to the londe, which y LORDE sware vnto oure fathers to geue vs. And the prest shal take the maunde out of thine hande, and set it downe before the altare of the

LORDE thy God. 

Then shalt thou answere and saye before the LORDE thy God: The Syrians wolde haue destroyed my father, $ which wéte downe in to Egipte, and was a straüger there with a small folke, and became there a nació greate, mightie q full of people. | But the Egipceias intreated vs euell, and troubled vs, and layed an harde bondage vpo vs. Then cried we vnto ¥ LORDE, the God of oure fathers.
And the LORDE herde oure cryenge,* and loked on oure aduersite, laboure, and op- pressio,T q brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande, and a stretched out arme, and with greate terryblenesse thorow tokens and woders, and hath broughte vs vnto this place

Prou. 3. b. 
€ Exo.14. e. 

t Exo. 17. c. 1 Exo. 23. c. and 34. c. 

|| Exod. i.b. © Exod. 3. b. 

Chap. rrb. 

Chap. rrbij, 

and hath geuen vs this londe, that floweth with mylke and hony. ‘Therfore brynge 1 now the first frutes of the londe, which the
LORDE hath geuen vs. And thou shalt leaue them before the LORDE thy God, and geue thankes before the LORDEthy God, and reioyse ouer all the good, that the LORDE thy God hath geueu the, and thyne house: thou and the Leuite, and the straunger that is with the.

Whan thou hast brought together all y tythes of thine increase in the thirde yeare," which is a yeare of tithes, thou shalt geue it vnto the Leuite, to the straunger, to the fatherlesse, and to the wedowe, that they maie eate within thy gates, and be filled. And thou shalt saye before the LORDE thy God:
* ] haue broughte that halowed is, out of my house, and haue geuen it vnto the Leuyte, the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, acordinge to all thy commaundement which thou hast cómauuded me. 1 haue not trans- gressed thy commaundementes, ner forgotten them. I haue not eaten therof in my heuy- nesse, ner taken awaye therof in vnclennesse.
I haue not geue therof vuto the deed. 1 haue bene obedient vnto the voyce of the
LORDE my God, and haue done all as he hath commaunded me. t Loke downe from thy holy habitacion, from heauen, and blesse thy people of Israel, and y londe that thou hast geuen vs, as thou swarest vnto oure fathers, a londe that floweth with mylke and hony.

In the daye whan the LORDE thy God commaunded the, to do acordynge vnto all these ordinaüces and lawes, that thou shuldest kepe them and do therafter with all thy hert and with all thy soule. +The same daye maydest thou a promysse vnto the LORDE, that he shulde be thy God, and y thou woldest walke in all his wayes, and kepe his ordy- naunces, his commaundementes, and his lawes, and to herken vnto his voyce. $ And the
LORDE promysed the vpo the same daye, that thou shuldest be his awne peculier people, like as he hath sayde vnto the (so y thou kepe all his commaundementes) and that he wolde make the hye in prayse name and honoure aboue all nacions which he hath made ly thou mayest be an holy people vnto y LORDE thy God, as he hath sayde vnto the.

* Deu. 14. c. *Luc.18. b. t Bar. 2. c. 

The b. boke of Moses. 

1 Exo. 19. b. 

and 24. a. Deut.5. d. $ Exo. 19. a. Deut. 7. a. and 14, a. tt Deut. 11. d. Iosu. 8. g. 

Fo. clxyrir. 

The rrbij. Chapter. 
ND Moses with y Elders of Israel, com-|@ pA maunded the people, « sayde: Kepe all the commaundementes which 1 commaunde you this daye. ‘And what time as ye go ouer lordane, in to the londe y y LORDE thy God shal geue the, thou shalt set vp greate stones, and playster them with playster, and wryte vpon them all the wordes of this lawe:
(whan thou art come ouer) y thou mayest come in to the londe, which the LORDE thy
God shall geue the, a londe y floweth with milke and hony, as y LORDE God of thy fathers hath promysed the.

Now whan ye go ouer Iordane, ye shall set vp these stones (wherof I cOmaunde you this daye) vpon mount Eball, and playster them with playster: **and there shalt thou buylde vnto the LORDE thy God an altare of stone, whervpon thou shalt lifte no yron. tt Of whole stones shalt thou builde this altare vnto the
LORDE thy God, and offre burntofferinges theron vnto the LORDE thy God: and thou shalt offre healthofferinges, and eate there, and reioyse before the LORDE thy God: and vpon the stones thou shalt wryte all the wordes of this lawe manyfestly and well.

And Moses with the prestes and Leuites spake vnto all Israel, and sayde: Take hede aud heare O Israel: 'This daye art thou be- come the people of the LORDE thy God, that thou mayest be obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God, and do acordinge vnto all his commaundementes and ordi- naunces, which I comaunde the this daye.

tt And Moses charged the people the same daye, and sayde: These shal stonde vpon mount Grisin to blesse the people, whan ye are gone ouer lordane: Simeon, Leui, Iuda,
Isachar, loseph, and Ben lamin. And these shal stonde vpon mount Eball to curse: Ru- ben, Gad, Asser, Zabulon, Dan a Nephtali.
And the Leuites shal begynne, and saye vnto euery man of Israel, with a loude voyce:

? Cursed be he, that maketh eny carued 
Idoll or molten ymage (an abhominacion of the LORDE, a worke of the handes of y craftesman) and putteth it in a secrete place.
And all the people shal answere and saye, 
Amen. 
|| Tere. 13. b. 

q Iosu. 4.a. ** Iosu. 3.g. tt Exo. 20. d. 

> Exo. 20.a. Esa. 57. a. 

| fo. 
€ 

Es] 

oye. 
* Cursed be he, that curseth his father and mother. And all the people shall saye, Amen.

"^ Cursed be he, y remoueth his neghbours mark. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

? Cursed be he, that maketh a blynde man go out of his waye. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

* Cursed be he, that wresteth ¥ righte of y straunger, of the fatherlesse, q wedowe. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

? Cursed be he, that lyeth with his fathers wife, to vncouer his fathers conerynge. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

“Cursed be he, y lyeth with eny maner beest. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

t Cursed be he, y lyeth with his sister, which is the doughter ofi his father or of his mother.
And all the people shal saye, Amen. 

/ Cursed be he, y lyeth with his mother in lawe. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

£ Cursed be he that slayeth his neghboure secretly. Aud all the people shal saye, Amen.

+ Cursed be he, that receaueth giftes to slaye the soule of innocent bloude. And all the people shal saye, Amen.

å Cursed be he, that contynueth not in all y wordes of this lawe, to do them. And all y people shal saye, Amen.

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

ND yf thou shalt herken vnto y voyce 

of the LORDE thy God, ' to obserne and do all his commaundementes which I có-
'maunde ¥ this daye, then shall the LORDE 
¡thy God set. $ an hye aboue all nacions vpó 
,earth, and all these blessynges shal come vpon 
'the, and ouertake the, because thou hast bene obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy
God. Blessed shalt thou be in the towne, and blessed in the felde. Blessed shalbe the frute of thy body, the frute of thy grounde, and the frute of thy catell, and the frute of thine oxen, and the frute of thy shepe. Blessed shal be thy baszkett, q thy stoare. Blessed shalt thou be wha thou goest in, and blessed whan thou goest out. $ And thine enemies that ryse vp agaynst the, shal $ LORDE cause to be smytten before thy face. ‘They shal come out agaynst the one waye, q flye

before the seuen wayes. 

| * Exo. 21. b. ? Deut. 19. c. > Leui. 19. d. 
|* Deu. 24. c. 4 Leui. 18. a. and 20. b. Deut. 22. d. 
\€ Exo. 92. c. Leui. 20. b. + Leui. 18. a. 2 Re. 13. d. 
J Leui. 18. c. ë Exo. 21. b. Leui.94. d. Deu. 19.a 

Che b. boke of Moses. 

The LORDE shal commaunde the bless- ynge to be with $ in thy cellers, and in all that thou takest in hande, and shal blesse the in ¥ londe that the LORDE thy God hath geué the. The LORDE shal set the vp to be an holy people vnto himselfe (as he hath sworne vnto the) yf thou kepe the com- maundementes of the LORDE thy God: so that all nacions vpon earth shal se, that thou art called after the name of the LORDE: q they shal be afrayed of you. And y LORDE shal make y plenteous in goodes, in the frute of thy wombe, in the frunte of thy catell, q in the frute of thy grounde, in the londe that the
LORDE sware vnto thy fathers, to geue the. 

| And the LORDE shal open vnto $ his good treasure, euen the heauen, to geue rayne vnto thy londe in due season, and to prospere all the workes of thine handes. T And thou shalt lede vnto many nacios, but thou shalt borowe of no man. And y LORDE shal set the before, and not behynde: « thou shalt be aboue onely, and not benethe, yf thou be obedient vnto the commaundementes of Y
LORDE thy God, which 1 commaunde the this daye to kepe and to do them: q yf thou
** bowe not asyde from eny of these wordes, which I commaunde y this daye, either to the
'righte hande or to the lefte, y thou woldest 
| walke after other goddes to serue them. 
| * But yf thou wylt not herken vnto the 
| voyce of the LORDE thy God, to kepe and ito do all his commaundementes and ordi- naunces, which I commaunde y this daie, tt then shall all these curses come vpon the, and ouertake the. Cursed shalt thou be in the towne, and cursed in y felde: cursed shal thy
'baszket be, and thy stoare. Cursed shall be the frute of thy body, the frute of thy londe, the frute of thine oxen, and the frute of thy shepe. Cursed shalt thou be whan thou goest in, and cursed wha thou goest out. The
LORDE shal sende in to the, consuminge, and complayninge, and cursynge, in all that thou takest in hande to do, tyll he haue de- stroyed the q shortly broughte the to naughte, because of thy wicked inuencions, in that thou hast forsaken me.

The LORDE shall make the pestylence to byde longe with the, tyll he haue consumed

i Eze. 22.b. Mich. 3.c. ħ Gal. 3. b. * Leu. 26.a. 
§ Deu. 20. a. || Deut. 11. b. € Deu. 15.a. ** Deu. 
4, a. and 17. c. * Leu. 26. b. tt Bar. 1. b. Dan. 9. b. 

Se a ee ee 

Chap. rpbitj. 

€ 

Chap. rrbítj. the out of the londe, in to the which thou commest to possesse it. The LORDE shall smyte the with swellynge, feuers, heate, burn- ynge, venome, dronth, and palenesse, q shall persecute the, tyll he hane destroyed the.
* Thy heanen, that is ouer thy heade, shalbe of brasse, and the earth vnder the, of yron.
The LORDE shall geue thy londe dust for rayne, and aszshes from heauen vpon the, vntyll thou be broughte to naught. ‘The
LORDE shall cause the be smytten before thine enemyes. Thou shalt come out one waye agaynst them, and seuen wayes shalt thou flye before them, and shalt be scatered amoge all the kyngdomes vpon earth. Thy carcase shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the ayre, and to all the beestes vpon earth, and there shalbe no man to fraye them awaye.

The LORDE shal smyte the with y botches of Egipte, with the Emorodes, with scalle, and maungynesse, that thou shalt not be healed therof. t The LORDE shall smyte the with madnesse, blyndnesse and dasynge of hert.
And thou shalt grope at the noone daye, as y blynde gropeth in darknesse, and shalt not prospere in thy waye. And thon shalt suffre vyolence and wronge all thy life longe, q no man shal helpe y. +Thou shalt spouse a wife, but another shal lye with her. § Thou shalt bnylde an honse, but another shall dwell therin. Thou shalt plante a vynyarde, bnt shalt not make it comen.

| Thine oxe shalbe slayne before thine eyes, 

but thon shalt not eate therof. Thine asse shalbe violently taken awaye (euen before thy face) and shal not be restored $ againe. Thy shepe shalbe genen vnto thine enemies, and no man shal helpe the. Thy sonnes and thy doughters shalbe geuen vnto another nacion, and thine eyes shal se it, and dase vpon them all the daye longe, and thy hande shal not be able to delyuer them. ‘The frute of thy londe and all thy laboure, shall a nacion eate, which thou knowest not: and thou shalt but onely be he that shalbe oppressed and suffre wronge, all the dayes of thy life. And thou shalt be cleane besyde thy selfe for the sighte, which thine eyes shal se.

The LORDE shal smyte the with a mys- cheuous botch in y knees q legges, so that

* Deut. 10. c. t Mich. 3. b. 
12. c. § Deu. 20. a. a 

Rom. 1. c. t2 Re. 
Deu.4.d. 4 Re. 24. d. 

The b, boke of Moses, 

thou canst not be healed, euen from the sole of thy fote vnto the crowne of thy heade.

“The LORDE shal brynge the and thy kynge (which thou hast set ouer the) vnto a nacion, whom thou knowest not, nether thy fathers: and there shalt thou serue other goddes, euen wodd and stone: and thou shalt go to waist, and become a byworde, q a laugh- inge stocke amoge all nacions, whither y
LORDE hath caryed the. 

’ Thon shalt cary out moch sede in to y felde, and shalt gather but litle in: for the greshoppers shal destroye it. Thou shalt plante vynyardes and dresse thé, but thou shalt nether drynke of the wyne, ner gather of y grapes: for $ wormes shal consume it.
Thou shalt haue Olyue trees in all thy coastes, but shalt not be anoynted with the oyle: for thyne Oliue trees shalbe roted out. Thou shalt get sounes and doughters, and yet not haue them: for they shal be caried awaye captiue. All thy trees and frutes of thy londe shall be marred with blastinge.

The straunger that is with y, shal clymme vp ouer the, and be allwaye abone the: but thou shalt come downe alowe, and lye euer beneth. He shal lende vnto the, but thou shalt not lende him. He shalbe before, bnt thou shalt be behynde.

And all these curses shall come vpon the, and folowe the, and onertake y, tyll thou be destroyed, because thou herkenest not vnto y voyce of the LORDE thy God, to kepe his commaundemétes and ordinaunces, which he hath commaunded the. Therfore shal there he tokens and wonders vpon the, qœ vpon thy sede for euer, because thon hast not serued y
LORDE thy God with a ioyfull and good hert, whan thou haddest abundaunce of all thinges. And therfore shalt thon serne thine enemye, which the LORDE shal sende vpon the, in hunger and thyrst, in nakednesse, and neade of all thinge: « he shal put a yocke of yron vpon thy necke, vntyll he haue broughte the to naughte.

“The LORDE shal brynge a nacion vpon the from farre, enen from the ende of y worlde, as a flyenge Aegle: a people, whose speache thon canst not vnderstonde, an harde fanoured people, which regarde not the personne of the olde, ner haue compassion on the yonge. And

2 Par. 33. c. Iere. 24. a. ? Mich. 6. c. 

Bar. 4. c. 

e Iere. 5. c. 

Fo. irri 

E 

fo. erri. they shal eate vp ý frute of thy catell, q the frute of thy londe, tyll they haue destroyed the, and shall leaue the nothinge in corne, wyne, oyle, in the frute of thy oxen and shepe, vntyll they hauc broughte the to naughte: and shal laye sege vnto the with in all thy gates, tyll they cast downe thy hye and stronge walles, wherin thou trustest thorow out all thy londe. And thou shalt be beseged within all thy portes, thorow out all thy londe which the

LORDE thy God hath geuen the. 

* Thou shalt eate the frute of thine awne body, the flesh of thy sonnes and of thy donghters, which the LORDE thy God hath

Fjgeuë the, in that straytnesse and sege, wher- with thine enemye shall besege the: so that it shal greue the man ý afore hath lyued ten- derly and in voluptuousnes amonge yon, to

loke vpon his brother and vpon his wife y 

lyeth in his bosome, and on the sonne that is 

left ouer of his sonnes, lest he shulde geue eny of them of the flesh of his children that he eateth, in as moch as there is nothinge left him in that straytnesse and sege, wherwith thine enemye shal besege y within all thy gates. And the woman that afore hath lyued

[so tenderly and voluptuously amonge yon, that 

she durste not set the sole of hir fote vpon the 

grounde for tendernes and voluptuousnes, shal 

be greued to loke vpon hir huszbande that 

lieth in hir bosome, and on hir sonne, and on 

hir donghter: euen because of hir doughters 

| which she hath norished betwixte hir legges in hir lappe, and because of hir sonnes that she hath borne: For she shall eate them secretly for very scarcenesse of all thinges, in the straytnesse and sege, wherwith thine enemye shal besege y within thy gates.

Yf thon wilt not be diligent to do all the wordes of this lawe which are wrytten in this boke, that thou mayest feare this glorious and fearfull name, euen the LORDE thy God, then shal the LORDE entreate y wonderously, with plages vpon y and thy sede, yee with greate and continuall plages, with euell and contynuall sicknesses, and shal brynge vpo ¥ all y sicknesses of Egipte (wherof thou wast afrayed) and they shal cleue vnto the. Therto all maner sicknesses and all maner plages, which are not wrytten in the boke of this lawe, shal the LORDE thy God cause to come

* 4 Re.6. f. Tren. 4. b. Bar. 9. a, t Deut. 10. d. 
* Tere. 31. c. j Exo. 14. c. 

The b. boke of Hoses, 

there shal be left but a fewe people of you, t which afore were as the starres of heauen in multitude: because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God.

“And as y LORDE reioysed ouer you afore, to do you good, and to multiplye you, eue so shall he reioyse ouer you, to destroye you, and to brynge you to naughte, and ye shalbe waysted from of the londe, whither thou goest now to possesse it. For the LORDE shal seater the amonge all nacions, from the one ende of the worlde vnto another, aud there shalt thou serue other goddes, whom thou knowest not, ner yet thy fathers, euen wodd and stone.

And amonge those same nacions shalt thou haue no quyetnesse, nether shal the sole of thy fote haue eny rest: for the LORDE shal geue the there a fearful! hert, and dasynge of eyes, and a troubled soule, so that thy life shal hage before the: Night and daye shalt thou feare, and shalt haue no trust in thy life.
In the mornynge thou shalt saye: Who shall geue me the euenynge? And at euen shalt thou saye: Who shal geue me the mornynge?
For the very greate feare of thine hert, which shal make the afrayed: and for the sighte of thine eyes which thou shalt se.

And the LORDE shal brynge the agayne in to Egipte by shippe fulles, enen thorow the waye wherof I sayde vnto the: +Thou shalt se it nomore: and there shal ye be solde vnto youre enemies for bonde seruauntes and bonde maidens, and there shalbe no man to bye you.

The yríy. Chapter. 

HESE are ¥ wordes of the couenaunt, which the LORDE comaunded Moses to make with the children of Israel ^m the londe of the Moabites, $besyde y conenaunt which he made with them in Horeb. And
Moses called all Israel, and sayde vnto them: 
Ye haue sene all that the LORDE dyd before youre eyes in the londe of Egipte, vnto Pharao with all his seruaütes, and all his londe, the greate tentacions which thine eyes haue sene, that they were greate tokes and wonders.
“And yet vnto this daye hath not the LORDE geuen you an hert that vnderstondeth, eyes

that se, q eares that heare. 
5 Nu. 21. c. 

$ Exo. 19. a. * Deu. 30. b. Iere. 31. d. 

Mo Chap. rrr. vpon the, vntyll he haue destroyed the. And

a 

Chap. rrr. 

He hath caused you to walke fortye yeares in the wyldernesse. * Youre clothes are not waxed olde vpon you, nether is thy shue waxed olde on thy fote. Ye haue eaten no bred, and dronken no wyne, ner stronge drynke, that ye mighte knowe, that he is y LORDE youre
God. 

*And whan ye came vnto this place, Sihon the kynge of Heszbon, and Og y kynge of
Basan, “came out agaynst vs vnto battayll, and we smote them, and toke their londe, and gaue it to enheritaunce vnto Y Rubenites and
Gaddites, and to the halfe trybe of the Manas- sites. *Kepe now therfore the wordes of this couenaunt, and do therafter, that ye maye haue vnderstondinge in all that ye do.

Ye stonde this daye all before the LORDE youre God, the chefe rulers of youre trybes, youre Elders, youre officers, euery man in Is- rael, youre children, youre wyues, y straungers that are in thine hoost, tfrom the hewer of thy wodd vnto y drawer of thy water: that thou shuldest enter in to the couenaunt of the
LORDE thy God, and in to the ooth which the LORDE thy God maketh with the this daye, that he mighte set the vp this daye to be a people vnto himself, and that he mighte be thy God, as he hath sayde vnto the, t and as he sware vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.

For I make not this couenaunt and this ooth with you onely, but both with you y are here this daye, and stonde with vs before the
LORDE oure God, and also with them that are not here with vs this daye. For ye knowe how we haue dwelt in the londe of Egipte, and how we came thorow the myddes of the
Heythen, whom ye passed by, and sawe their abhominacions and their Ydols, wodd and stone, syluer and golde, which were with them:
Lest there be amoge you man or woman, or an housholde, or a trybe, which turneth awaye his hert this daye dex the LORDE oure
God, to go and to serue y goddes of these nacions: and lest there be amonge you some rote, that beareth gall q wormwodd: so that though he heare the wordes of this curse, he blesse him selfe yet in his hert, and saye:
$ Tush, it shal not be so euell. I wil walke after the ll meanynge of myne awne hert, that the dronken maye perishe with the thyrstie.

2 Deu. 8. a. 
* Deu. 4. a. 

? Nu. 21. d. e. t Iosu. 9. d.

* Deu. 2. f. and 3. a. 
ł Gen. 17.a. $Iere.5. b. | 

The b. boke of Moses. 

Then shall not the LORDE be mercifull vnto him, but his wrath and gelousy shall smoke ouer soch a man, and all the curses that are wrytten in this boke, shall lighte vpon him: and the LORDE shal put out his name from vnder heauen, and shall separate him vnto euell out of all the trybes of Israel, acordinge vnto all the curses of the couenaunt, that is wrytten in the boke of this lawe.

So the posterities of youre childré which |33 

shal ryse vp after you, and the straungers that come out of farre countrees, shall saye (whan they se the plages of this londe, and the dis- eases wherwith the LORDE hath smytten it) that he hath brent vp all their londe with brymstone and salt, so y it can not be sowne, ner is frutefull, nether groweth there eny grasse therin, " Like as Sodom, Gomor,
Adamaand Zeboim are ouerthrowne, which the 
LORDE ouerthrewe in his wrath and anger. 

Then shall all nacions saye: ** Wherfore hath the LORDE done thus vnto this londe ?
What greate wrothfull displeasure is this? 
Then shalt it be sayde: Euen because they haue forsaken the couenaunt of y LORDE
God of their fathers (which he made with them whan he broughte them out of the londe of Egipte) and they wéte, and serued other goddes, and worshipped thé, euen soch goddes as they knewe not, and whom he had not deuyded vnto them. Therfore the wrath of the LORDE waxed whote ouer this londe, to brynge vpon it all the curses that are wrytten in this boke. And the LORDE thrust them out of their londe with greate wrath, indigna- cion q displeasoure q hath cast them in to another londe, as it 1s come to passe this daye.

These are the ttsecretes of the LORDE oure God, which are opened vnto vs and oure children for euer, y we shulde do all the wordes of this lawe.

The rrr. Chapter. 

OW whan all this commeth vpon the, 
N whether it be the blessinge or $ curse which I haue layed before the, and thou goest in to thine hert, beynge amoge the Heithen, whither the LORDE thy God hath thrust the, and thou turnest vnto the LORDE thy God, so that thou herkenest vnto his voyce, thou and thy children with all thy hert and with

Soph. 1. c. 
3 Re. 9. b. 

|| Deu. 12. a. tt 1 Cor. 4. a.

T Gen. 19. e. ** Iere. 22. b. 
4 3 Re. 8. e. 2 Par. 33. c. 

So. creii. 

Fo. crit. all thy soule, in all that I commaunde the this daye, *then shal the LORDE thy God turne thy captiuyte, and haue compassion vpon the, and shal gather thy congregacion agayne from amonge all the nacions, whither the LORDE thy God hath scatered the.

And though thou werest thrust out vnto the vttemost partes of the heauen, yet shall the
LORDE thy God gather the from thence, and from thece shal he fetch the, and shal brynge the in to the londe, which thy fathers haue possessed, and thou shalt enioye it, and he shal do the good, and multiplye the aboue thy fathers.

t And the LORDE thy God shall cireum- cyse thine hert, and the hert of thy sede, that thou mayest loue the LORDE thy God with all thy hert and with all thy soule, that thou mayestlyue. But all these curses shall the
LORDE thy God laye vpon thine enemyes, and vpon them that hate the and persecute the. But thou shalt turne, and herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE, to do all his com- maundementes, which I commaunde the this daye. And the LORDE thy God shal make the plenteous in all the workes of thine hades, in the frute of thy body, in the frute of thy catell, in the frute of thy londe to good.

t For the LORDE shall turne, to reioyse ouer the to good, as he reioysed ouer thy fathers, so that thou herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God (to kepe his com- maundementes and ordinaunces, which are wrytten in the boke of this lawe) and turne vnto the LORDE thy God with all thy hert and with all thy soule.

$For the commaundement which I com- maunde y this daye, is not to wonderfull for the, ner to farre, ner yet in heauen, that thou neadest to saye: Who wil go vp for vs in to heauen, and brynge it vnto vs, that we maie heare it and do it? Nether is it beyonde the see, that thou neadest to saye: Who wyll go ouer the see for vs, and fetch it vs, that we maye heare it, and do it? For the worde is very nye vnto the, eue in thy mouth and in thine hert, that thou do it.

^Deholde, I haue layed before you this daye, life and good, death and euell. For I comaunde the this daye, to loue the LORDE

* Tere. 32. e. t Deut. 10. d. t1 Iere. 32. e. 
§ Rom. 10. a. 7 Deut. 11. d. Iere. 21. b. || Deu. 4. d. and 3t. g. T Nu. 20.b. **Nu.927.d. ^Num. 21.d.

The b, boke of loses. 

thy God, and to walke in his wayes, and to kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunces, and lawes, that thou mayest lyne and multiplye, and that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in the londe, whither thou goest to pos- sesse 1t.

But yf thou turnest awaye thine hert, so that thon wilt not heare, but fall a waye, to worshipe other goddes and to serue them, I certifye you this daye, that ye shal perishe,
& not lyue longe in the londe, whither thou goest ouer Iordane to possesse it.

lI take heauen and earth this daye to recorde ouer you: l haue layed before yon life and death, blessinge and cursinge, that thou mayest chose life, and that thon and th sede maye lyue, y ye maye loue the LORD youre God, and herken vnto his voyce, and cleue vnto him: (For he is thy life and thy loge age) that thou mayest dwell in the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers
Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to geue them. 

Che rrri. Chapter. 
ND Moses wente, ¢ spake these wordes to all Israel, and saide vnto them: I am this daye an hundreth and twétye yeare olde, I can nomore go out and in: the LORDE also hath sayde vnto me: {Thon shalt not go ouer this Iordane. The LORDE thy God himselfe shall go before the ouer Iordane: and
HE himselfe shal destroye these nacions before the, that thou mayest conquere them: and
Iosua he shall go ouer before the, ** as the 
LORDE hath sayde. And the LORDE shal do vnto them, as he dyd vnto Sihon and
Og the kynges of the Amorites and vnto 

their lode,’ which he destroyed. tt Now whan the LORDE shal deliner thé before you, ye shal do vnto them acordynge vnto all the commanndementes which I haue commaunded you. Be manly and stroge, feare not, and be not afrayed of them. For the LORDE thy God hnnselfe shal go with the, tt and shal not fayle the, ner forsake the.
And Moses called losua, and sayde vnto him before all Israel: Be stronge and bolde, for thou shalt brynge this people in to the londe, which ‘the LORDE hath sworne vnto their fathers to geue them, and thou shalt
Ileb. 13. a. 

t+ Deu. 7. a. and 20. c. tt Iosu. 1. a. 

*losu.1. b. 3 Reg. 2. a. 

Chap. rreri 

q 

B| And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Be- 

Chap, riri parte it amonge them by lott. But the
LORDE himselfe that goeth before you, euen 
HE shal be with the, and shal not fayle the, ner forsake the: Feare not, and be not afrayed.

And Moses wrote this lawe, and delyuered it vnto the prestes the children of Leni (*whieh barethe Arkeof theconenaunt ofthe LOR DE) and vnto all the Elders of Israel.

And he commaunded them, and sayde: 
+ At the ende of seuen yeares, in the tyme of the Fre yeare, in the feast of Tabernacles whan all Israel come to appeare before the
LORDE thy God, in the place that he shall chose, thou shalt cause this lawe to be pro- clamed before all Israel in their eares, namely, before the congregacion of the people, both of men, wemen, children, and thy straungers which are within thy gates: that they maye heare and lerne to feare the LORDE their
God, and be diligent to do all the wordes of this lawe : and that their children also which kuowe nothinge, maye heare and lerne to feare the LORDE youre God, all youre lyue dayes which ye lyue in the londe, whither ye go ouer Iordane to possesse it.

holde, thy tyme is come that thou must die, call Iosua, and stonde in the Tabernacle of witnesse, that I maye geue him a charge.
Moses wente with losua, and stode in the 
Tabernacle of witnesse. And the LORDE appeared in the Tabernacle in a cloudy pyler tand the same cloudy pyler stode in the dore of the Tabernacle.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Be- holde, thou shalt slepe with thy fathers, and this people wyll ryse vp, and go a whoringe after straunge goddes of the londe in to the which they come, $ and wyll forsake me, and breake the couenaunt which I haue made with them. And then shall my wrath waxe whote agaynst them, at the same tyme, ¢ I shal forsake thé, and hyde my face fro them, that they maye be consumed. || And so whan moch aduersite q trouble commeth vpo the, they shal saye: Is not all this euell come vpo me, because God is not with me? But I shal hyde my face at the same tyme because of all the euell that they haue done, in that they haue turned vnto other goddes.

* Num. 3. 4, 
§ 1 Reg. 8. b. 

f 2 Esdr. 8. a. 
|| Iere. 2. d. 

t Exo. 33. b. 
T Deut. 32. a. 

The b. boke of Moses. 

Wryte now therfore this songe, q teach it] 32 the children of Israel, and put it in their mouth, that this Tsonge maye be a witnesse vnto me amonge the children of Israel. For
I wil brynge them in to the londe whieh I sware vnto their fathers, that floweth with mylke andhony. **And whan they eate, and are full and fatt, they shal turne vnto other goddes, and serue them, and blaspheme me, and breake my couenaunt.

And so whan moch myschefe and tribu- lacion is come vpon them, this songe shall answere before them for a witnesse. It shall not be forgotten out of the mouth of their sede: for I knowe their ymaginacion, that they go aboute euen now, before I brynge them in to the londe, which I sware vnto them.

So Moses wrote this songe at the same tyme, and taughte it the children of Israel.
And the LORDE gaue Iosua the sonne of 
Nun a charge, and sayde: tt Be stronge and bolde, for thou shalt brynge the children of
Israel in to the londe, which I sware vnto them, and I wil be with the.

Now whan Moses had wrytten out all the wordes of this lawe in a boke, he com- maunded the Leuites (which bare the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt) and sayde: Take the boke of this lawe, and laye it by the syde of the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, that it maye be there a wytnesse agaynst the: for I knowe thy stubburnesse and thy harde neck. “Beholde, whyle I am yet alyue with you this daye, ye haue bene disobedient vnto the LORDE: how moch more after my death?

Gather now vnto me all the Elders of youre trybes, and youre officers, y I maye speake these wordes in their eares, *tand take heauen and earth to recorde agaynst them. For I am sure that after my death ye shall marre youre selues, and turne asyde out of the waye, which I-haue commaunded you: and so shall mysfortune happen vnto you herafter, be- cause ye haue done euell in the sighte of the
LORDE, in prouokynge him thorow the workes of youre handes.

So Moses spake out the wordes of this songe euen to the ende, in the eares of all the congregacion of Israel.

** Deut. 8. c. a 4 Reg. 17. c.

++ Iosu. 1. b. and 23. c. 3 Reg. 2.a. tt Deut, 4. d. and 30. d.

Mala. 3. b. 

Fo. cred. 

Fo. erebi, 

The rrrij. Chapter. 

a ERKEN (O ye heauens) I wyll speake: 
"and let the earth heare the wordes of 

my mouth. 

*My doctryne droppe as doth the raine, and my speach flowe as doth the dew.

Euen as the rayne vpon the grasse, and as the droppes vpon the herbe.

For I wyl call vpon the name of the LORDE, geue ye the glory vnto oure God.

t Perfecte are the workes of the Stone, for all his wayes are righteous.

God is true, and no wickednes 1s there in him, righteous and iust is he.

The frowarde and ouerthwarte generacion hath marred them selues to himwarde and are not his children, because of their deformyte.

Thankest thou the LORDE thy God so, thou foolish and vnwyse people ? :

Is not he thy father? and thy LORDE ?? 
Hath he not made the, and prepared the ? 

Remembre the dayes that are past, considre the yeares of the generacions afore tyme.

Axe thy father, he shall shewe the: thine elders, they shal tell the.

$Whan the most Hyghest deuyded y na- cions and scatred the children of men.

Then set he the borders of the nacions acordinge to the nombre of the children of
Israel. 

|| For the LORDES parte is his folke, 
Iacob is the meetlyne of his enheritaunce. 

He founde him 1n the wyldernesse, euen in the drye deserte where he roared.

He led him aboute, and gaue him vnder- stondinge: He kepte him as the aple of his eye.

As an Aegle stereth vp hir nest, and floter- eth ouer hir yonge: Euen so stretched he out his fethers, and toke him f and bare him on his wynges.

The LORDE onely was his gyde, a there was no straunge God with him.

He caried him ouer y heigth of the earth, and fed him with the increase of the felde.

* He caused him sucke hony out of the rocke, and oyle out of the harde stone.

Butter of the kyne, and mylke of the shepe, with the fat of the lambes, and rammes of the sonnes of Basan, and hegoates with the fat of

a Esa. 1.8. Mich.1.a. * Esa.55.c. | tGen.1.d. 
Eccl. 49. d. è Mala. 1.a. iGen.1.d. $Gen.11.b. 
Act.17.d. || Deut.4.c. € Exo.19.a. ° Psal. 80. b. 

The b. boke of Moses, 

Chap. rri. the kydneys, and wheate: And gaue him drynke of the very bloude of grapes.

** And whan he was fat and had ynough, he waxed wanton.

He is fat, and thicke, and smothe, q hath letten God go, that made him, and despysed the rocke of his saluacion.

He hath prouoked him to indignacion, thorow straunge goddes, and thorow abhomi- nacion hath he angred him.

“They offred vnto felde deuels, q not vnto their God.

Vnto goddes whom they knewe not, eué vnto new goddes, y came newly vp, whom their fathers honoured not.

Thy rocke that begat y, hast thou despysed: and hast forgotten God that made the.

And whan the LORDE sawe it, he was moued vnto wrath ouer his sonnes and his doughters.

And he sayde: I wyll hyde my face from them, I wyll se what their ende shal be: for it is a frowarde generacion, they are childré in whom is no fayth.

They haue prouoked me in it that is not 
God: with their vanites haue they angred me. 

tt And I agayne wil prouoke them, by those that are no people: by a foolish nacion wil I anger them.

For the fyre is kyndled in my wrath, and shal burne vnto y nethermost hell, and shal consume the londe with the increase therof, and set the foundacions of y mountaynes on

fyre. 

I wil heape myscheues vpo them, I wil|5 

spende all myne arowes at them. 

They sha] pyne awaye thorow honger, q be consumed of the feuers, and of bytter sick- nesses.

‘I wil sende amonge them y tethe of beestes, and furious serpentes.

Without shall the swearde robbe them, q feare in the chambers, both the yonge man and yonge woman, the suckynge children with the gray headed man.

I wyll saye: Where are they? I shall make their remembraunce to ceasse from amonge men.

Yf the wrath of the enemies were not gathered, lest their enemies shulde be proude,
** Den. 6. c. 

4Psal.105.e. tt Rom.10. c. Iere.15.c. 

e Iere. 5. b. Ioel 1. a. 

Chap. rrritj. q might saie: Oure hande is hye, and: The
LORDE hath not done all this. 

For it is a people, wherin is no councell, and there is no vnderstondinge in them.

O that they were wyse q vnderstode this, that they wolde césidre what shulde happe vnto them herafter.

How cometh it, ¥ one shall chace a thou- sande of them, and y two shal put ten thou- sande to flyghte ?

Is it not so, euen because their rocke hath solde them, and because the LORDE hath geuen them ouer?
£| For oure rocke is not as their rocke, *of this are oure enemies iudges them selues.

Their vyne is of the vyne of Sodom, and of the feldes of Gomorra: their grapes are the grapes of gall, they haue bytter clusters.

Their wyne is the poyson of Dragons, œ the furious gall of Adders.

ls not this hid with me, and sealed vp in my treasures ?

“Vengeaunce is myne, and I wyll rewarde in due season. "Their fote shall slyde, for the tyme of their destruecio is at honde, and the thinge that is to come vpon them, maketh haiste.

For the LORDE shall iudge his people, tand shal haue compassion on his seruauntes.
For he shal considre that their power is awaie, aud that it is gone with them, which were shut vp and remayned ouer.

And he shal saye: t Where are their goddes, their rocke wherin they trusted ?

Of whose sacrifices they ate y fatt, and dranke the wyne of: their diyalofinnges?
Let them ryse vp and helpe you, and be youre proteccion.

Se now that I I am, and that there is none other God but I.

I can kyll and make alyue:^ what I haue smytten, that can I heale : $and there is noman able to delyuer out of my hande.

For I wil lifte vp my hande to heauen, q wyl saye: I lyue euer.

Yf I whet y edge of my swerde, and my hande take holde of iudgment, then wyll I auenge me on myne enemies, and rewarde them that hate me.

I wil make myne arowes dronken with 

* Exo. 14.c. 1 Reg. 5. b. ^ Rom. 12.c. Heb. 10. d, t? Ma.7. b. flere.2.d. + Deut. 4. f. 1 Reg. 2. b.

The b. boke of Moses, 

Fo. cycbtj. bloude, and my swerde shal eate flesh ouer y bloude of the done and ouer the captyuite, and in that the enemies heade shall be dis- couered.

“Reioyse ye Heythen with his people: for he wil auenge the bloude of his seruauntes, and wyl auenge him on his enemies, q wil be mercifull vnto the londe of his people.

And Moses came and spake all the wordes of this songe in the eares of the people, he and Iosua the sonne of Nun. Now wha Moses had made an ende of speakinge all these wordes vnto all Israel, he sayde vnto thé: |l Take to hert all $ wordes, which I testifye vnto you this daye, that ye commaunde youre children, to obserue and do all the wordes of this lawe.
For it is no vaine worde vnto you, but it is youre life: q this worde shal prolonge youre life in y londe, whither ye go ouer Iordane to conquere it.

And y LORDE spake vnto Moses f same daie, q sayde: Get the vp to this mount Aba- rim, vpon mount Nebo, which lyeth in y londe of the Moabites ouer agaynst lericho, q be- holde the londe of Canaan, which I shall geue vnto the children of Israel in possessio. And dye thou vpon the mount, whan thou art come vp, and be gathered vnto thy people,
‘like as Aaron thy brother dyed vpon mount 
Hor, and was gathered vnto his people: Be- cause ye trespaced agaynst me amonge the children of Israel by the ** water of stryfe at
Cades in the wildernesse of Zin, and sancti- fied me not amonge the children of Israel.
For thou shalt se the londe ouer against the, which I geue vnto y children of Israel but thou shalt not come in to it.

The writ}. Chapter. 

HIS is the blessynge, wherwith Moses ca the man of God blessed ý childre of
Israel before his death, and saide: “The 
LORDE came from Sinai, ttand rose vp vnto thé from Seir. He appeared fro mount Paran, and came with many thousande sayntes. At his righte hande is there a lawe of fyre for them: O how loued he the people? All his sayntes are in his hande, ttthey shall set them selues downe at thy fete, and receaue of thy

|wordes. Moses commaunded vs the lawe, 

| 

q Nu.20.d. **Nu.20.a. 4 Exo.3.a. tt Exo.19.a. it Luc. 10. d. Sap. 3. a.

$ Iob 10. a. * Rom. 15, a. || Deut. 6. b. and 11. c. 

So. ered). which is the enheritaunce of the congregacion of lacob. And he was in the fulnesse of the kynge, q helde ¥ rulers of y people together, with the trybes of Israel.

Let Ruben lyue, and not dye, and his peo- ple be fewe in nombre.

This is the blessynge of Iuda. And he sayde: LORDE heare the voyce of Iuda, and brynge him vnto his people: Let his hades multiplye him, and let him be helped fro his enemies.
33| And vnto Leui he sayde: Thy perfectnes and thy lighte be aeordinge vnto the man of thy mercy, *who thon hast tempted at Massa, whan ye stroue by the water of stryfe. tHe that sayeth vnto his father and to his mother:
Ise him not: and to his brother, I knowe him not: and to his sonne, I wote not of him, those haue obserued thy wordes, and kepte thy couenaunt: they shal teach laeob thy indgmentes, and Israel thy lawe: they shal laie incense before thy nose, q burnt offer- inges vpon thine altare. LORDE, blesse thou his power q aeeepte the workes of his handes: smyte the loynes of them y ryse vp agayust him, « of them that hate him, that they lifte not vp them selues.

And to Ben Iamin he saide: The beloued of the LORDE shal dwell in hope on him:
All the daye longe shal he wayte vpon him, and shal dwell betwene his shulders.

And to Ioseph he sayde: + His londe lieth in the blessynge of the LORDE, there are noble frutes of heauen, of the dew, and of the depe that lyeth beneth: There are noble frutes of the inerease of the Sonne, and noble rype frutes of ý monethes: And of ¥ toppes of the mountaynes of olde, and of the hilles allwaye, and of the noble frutes of $ earth, and of the fulnesse therof. The good will of him Sthat dwelleth in the buszshe, come vpon the heade of Ioseph, and lvpon ý toppe of his heade that was separated fro amonge his brethren.

His bewtye is as a firstborne oxe, and his hornes are as $ hornes of an Vnieorne: with the same shal he puszshe the naeions together, euen vnto the endes of the worlde. These are the thousandes of Ephraim, and the thou- sandes of Manasse.

B| And vnto Zabulon he sayde: Reioyse Za- bulon of thy outgoynge: but reioyse thou

* Deut.33. b. Mala. 2. b. Num. 20.a. t Math. 19. d. 
$ Exod.3.a. || Gen. 49. d. 

The b. boke of Moses. 

Isachar of thy tentes. They shall call the people vnto y hyll, and there shal they offre y offeringes of righteousnes. For they shal sueke the abundaunce of the see, and the trea- sures hyd in the sonde.

And to Gad he sayde: Blessynge haue Gad, which maketh rowme. He dwelleth as a lyon, and spoyleth the arme and the toppe of the heade. And he sawe his begyunynge, that ý heape of the teachers laye hydd there, and came with the rulers of the people, and exe- cuted the righteousnesse of the LORDE, and his iudgment on Israel.

And to Dan he sayde: Dan a yonge lyon, he shal flowe from Basan.

And to Nephtali he saide: Nephtali shal haue abundaunee of pleasure, q shalbe full of the blessynge of the LORDE: his possession shalbe towarde the west and south. And to
Asser he sayde: Asser be blessed with sonnes, aeeepted be he with his brethren, and dyppe his fote in oyle. Yron and brasse be on thy shues. Thyne age be as thy youth.

There is no God as the God of the iust. 
He that sytteth vpon heauen, be thy helpe. 
And his glory is in the eloudes, that is the dwellynge of God from the beginnynge, and vnder the armes of the worlde. And he shal dryue out thyne enemye before the, and saye:
Be destroyed. {And Israel shall dwell safe alone. ‘The eye of Iaeob shalbe vpon ¥ londe where eorne and wine is, heauen also -shal droppe with dewe. Happye art thou Israel, who is lyke vnto the? © thon people y art saued by the LORDE, whieh is thy helpe, shylde, and the swerde of thy glorye. Thyne enemies shal pyne awaye, and thou shalt treade vpon the height of them.

The ririitj. Chapter. 

ND Moses wente from the felde of y 
Moabites vp vnto mount Nebo, "vpo y 

toppe of moüt Pisga ouer agaynst lerieho. 
And the LORDE shewed him all the londe of Gilead vnto Dan, and all Nephtali, and the londe of Ephraim and Manasse, and all the londe of Iuda, vnto $ vttemost see, and towarde the south, and the region of the playne of lerieho the cite of the palme trees euen vnto Zoar. And the LORDE sayde vnto him: This is the londe that I sware vnto q Ierem. 23. b.

a Num. 17, c. 2 Ma. 7. 8. 

Chap. rrritij. 

a 

Chap. rrrítj. 

3 

Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and sayde: I wyll geue it vnto thy sede. Thou hast sene it with thine eyes, *but thou shalt not go ouer thither.

So Moses y seruaunt of the LORDE died there in the londe of the Moabites, acordinge vntothe wordeofy LORDE. And he buried him in a valley, in the londe of the Moabites ouer agaynst the house of Peor. And noman knewe of his graue vnto this daye. And
Moses was an hundreth and twentye yeare olde whan he dyed: hiseyes were not dymme, and his chekes were not fallen. And the children of Israel weped for Moses in y felde of the Moabites thirtie daies, and the dayes

* Nu. 10. b. 

The b. boke of Moses. 

of the wepynge and mournynge for Moses were fulfilled.

So. creir. 

And Iosua the sonne of Nun was filled with | € sprete of wyszdome (tfor Moses had layed

is hande vpon him) and the children of Israel herkened vnto him, and dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses. prophet more in Israel, like vnto Moses, whom the LORDE knewe face to face in all tokens and wonders (which the LORDE sent him to do in y londe of Egipte, vnto Pharao, and to all his seruaütes, and his londe) and in all this mightie hande and greate visions which
Moses dyd in the sighte of all Israel. 

And there arose no 

+ Nu. 27. d. 

Che ende of the (tte boke of Moses, called Xaeuteronomíor. 

The seconde parte 

of the 

olde Testament. 

The boke of Josua. 

The boke of the Judges, 

The boke of Ruth. 

The first boke of tbe Xapnats. 
The seconde boke of the 3apnars. 
The thirde boke of the Apnges. 
The fourth boke of the kpnges. 
The first boke of the Cronicles. 
The seconde boke of the Cronirles, 
The first boke of Esdras. 

Thr seconde boke of Essaras. 
Thr boke of Hester. 

THe boke of Josua. 

hat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
After the death of Moses, God comaudeth Iosua to get him vp, and to go with the people ouer
Iordane in to the londe of promes. 

Chap. Il. 
Two spyes are sent vnto lericho, and Rahab lodgeth them.
Chap. III. 
Iosua goeth forth with the people vnto Iordane : 
The Leuites are ordeyned to go before with the 
Arke. The one parte of Iordane stondeth styll, 

the other renneth downe, and the people go thorow it drye shodd.

Chap. HII. 

Twolue stones doth Iosua cause to be taken out of Iordane, and setteth them vp at Gilgall for a remembraunce.

Chap. V. 
The kynges beyonde Iordane are afrayed. The 

people in Gilgall are circumcysed. They eate the Passeouer and vnleuended bred.

Chap. VI. 

How Iericho is wonne and taken. 

Chap. VII. 

The Israelites are put to flight before their ene- mies, because one of thé had stollen of it that shulde haue bene damned and vtterly de- stroyed. The trespacer is stoned vnto death.

Chap. VIII. 

The cite of Hai is wonne, the people slayne, the kynge taken alyue and hanged, the cite brent.
Iosua buyldeth an altare vnto the LORDE. 
The blessynges and curses are red. 

Chap. IX. 
The Heythen kynges prepare the selues agaynst 
Israel. The Gabaonites saue their lyues by crafte and suttyltie.

Chap. X. 

The Heythen laye sege to Gabaon, but Iosua helpeth them, and wynneth a greate felde, commaundeth the Sonne to stonde styll, hang- eth vp fyue kynges, and taketh the cities.

Chap. XI. 
The Heythe kynges gather the selues together agaynst Israel : but they are discomfited, and their cities wonne.

Chap. XII. 

The names of the kynges whom Iosua and the 
Israelites slewe, are here rehearsed, euen one and thirtye.

Chap. XIII. 
The remnaunt of the londe on this syde Iordane. 

Chap. XIIII. 

The dealinge ont of the londe. 
Chap. XV. 

The londe that fell vnto Iuda by lott. 

Chap. XVI. 
The lot of Ephraim. 

Chap. XVII. 
The lot and porcion of Manasse. 

Chap. XVIII. 

Men are sent out of the seuen trybes, to consyder the londe, and to deale it out. The porcion of Ben Jamin.

Chap. XIX. 

The porcion of Simeon, Zabulon, Isachar, Aser, 

Nephtali and Dan. 

Chap. ij. 

Chap. XX. 
The partinge out of the fre cities. 

Chap. XXI. 
Of the cities and suburbes of the Leuites. 

Chap. XXII. 
The two tribes and a halfe are sent home agayne, with a charge to be diligent in kepynge Gods commaundement. Of the altare of witnesse.

The first Chapter. 

FTER the death of Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE, spake the LORDE vnto Iosua ¥ sonne of Nun Moses mynister:
My sernaunt Moses is deed, vp now, and go ouer this Iordane, thou and all this people in to the londe that I haue geuen the children of
Israel. * All the places that the soles of youre fete shal treade vpon, haue I geuen vnto you, as I sayde vnto Moses: From the wyldernesse and this Libanus vnto the greate water Eu- phrates: all the londe of the Hethites vnto the greate see towarde the west, shal be youre border. ‘There shall noman be able to with- stonde y all thy life longe. *And like as I was with Moses, so wil I be with the also.
+I will not fayle the nether forsake the. Be stronge and bolde: for vnto this people shalt thou deuyde y londe, which I sware vnto their fathers, to geue it them. tBe stroge therfore and very bolde, that thou mayest kepe and do euery thynge acord- inge to the lawe, that Moses my seruaunt commaunded the. ‘Turne not asyde from it, nether to the righte hande ner tothe lefte, ^y thou mayest deale wysely whither so euer thon goest. §And let not the boke of this lawe departe out of thy month, but exercyse thy selfe therin daie and nighte, that thou mayest kepe and do euery thinge acordinge to it that is wrytte therin: ‘Then shalt thou prospere in thy waies, and deale wysely. Lo, I hane com- maunded the to be stronge and bolde. Feare not, and be not afrayed: forthe LORDE thy
God is with $, whither so euer thou goest. 
Then commaunded losua the officers of the people, and sayde: Go thorow the hoost,

* Deut. 11. d. 
Heb. 13. a. 

a Tosu. 3. d. 
1 Deu. 31. b. 

+ Deut. 31. b. 
? Deut. 5. d. 

The boke of Josua, 

= a 
Fò. reii. 
Chap. XXIII. | 
Tosua calleth the people together before his death, 

q exorteth them to cleue fast to the commaun- dementes of the LORDE.

Chap. XXIII. 

He calleth the people together in Sichem, and rehearceth the benefites of God vnto the. The couenaüt with God is renewed. Iosua dyeth, and so doth Eleasar.

and charge ¥ people, and saye: Prepare you vytayles, for ouer thre dayes shal ye go ouer this Iordane, that ye maye come in and take possession of the londe, which the LORDE youre God shal geue you.

And to the Rubenites, Gaddites, and to the| € halfe trybe of Manasse, sayde Iosua: Thynke

on the worde, lthat Moses the seruaunt of y LORDE spake vnto you, and sayde: The
LORDE youre God hath brought you to rest, | | and geuen you this londe. Let youre wyues| | and children and catell remayne in $ londe, that Moses gaue you on this syde Iordane:
But ye youre selues (as many as be fightinge men) shal go forth before youre brethren in harnesse, and helpe them, tyll the LORDE haue broughte youre brethren to rest also as well as you: that they also maye take posses- sion of the londe, which the LORDE youre
God shal geue them: Then shal ye turne agayne in to the londe of youre possession, that ye maye enioye it, which Moses the ser- uaunt of the LORDE hath geuen you on this syde Iordane towarde y Easte. And they answered Iosua and sayde: * All that thon hast commaunded vs, wyll we do: and whither so euer thou sendest vs, we wyl go thither.
Like as we haue obeyed Moses, so wyl we be obedient also vnto the: Onely that the
LORDE thy God be with y, like as he was with Moses. Who so euer disobeyeth thy
| mouth, and herkeneth not vnto thy wordes in 
|all that thou hast commaunded vs, shal dye: 
| Onely be thou stronge and bolde. | 

The ij. Chapter. | 
OSUA the sonne of Nun sent out two|a. spyes preuely from Setim, and sayde vnto| |

| l

Nu. 32. d. 

| q Deu. 5. d. 
1 Mac. 2.d. Tere. 42. a. 

| § Deut. 17. d. 

fo. cei. them : Go youre waye, loke vpon the londe and Jericho. They wente forth, *and came in to Y house of an harlot, called Rahab, and laye then Then was it tolde the kynge of
Iericho: Lo, there are men come in this nighte from the childre of Israel, to spye the londe.
Then sent the kynge of Iericho vnto Rahab, saynge: Delyuer the men forth that are come vnto the in to thy house, for they are come to spye out the whole londe. Now as for the two men, the woman had hyd them, and sayde:
There came men in vnto me in dede, but I knewe not whence they were. And at the shuttinge in of the gate whan it was darcke, they wente out, so y I can not tell whither they be gone: folowe soone after them, for ye shal ouertake them. But she had caused them to clymme vp vnto the house toppe, and hyd them vnder the stalkes of flaxe, that she had prepared her vpo the toppe of the house.
Howbeit the men folowed after them in y waye towarde Iordane, euen vnto the ferye: and whan they that folowed vpon them were gone forth, the gate was shut.

And or euer the men layed them downe to slepe, she wente vp to them vnto the house toppe, and sayde vnto the: I knowe that the
LORDE shal delyuer you the londe, tfor the feare of you is fallen vpon vs, and all the inhabiters of the londe are discoraged at youre commynge. For we haue herde, how the
LORDE <dryed vp the water in the reed see before you, wha ye departed out of Egipte :+ and what ye dyd vnto the two kynges of the
Amorites, Sihon and Og beyonde Iordane, how ye roted them out, and destroyed them.
And sence we herde therof, oure hert hath failed vs, nether is there a good stomacke more in eny man, by the reason of youre com- mynge. For the LORDE youre Gad is both the God aboue in heaué and beneth ypon earth.

Sweare now then vnto me$ euen by the 
LORDE (for so moch as I haue dealte mer- cifully with you) that ye wyl also shewe mercy vpon my fathers house: and geue mea true token, that ye wyl let my father lyue, and my mother, my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they haue, and delyuer oure soules from death. The men sayde vnto her: Yf we shewe not mercy and faithfulnesse vpon the.' whan the LORDE geueth vs the londe, then, let oure soule dye for you, so farre as thou

* ]feb. 11. e. Iac. 2. c. t Deu. 28.a. Tosu. 5.a. 

Che boke of Josua. 

betrayest not oure deuyce. Then let she them downe thorow the wyndowe by a coarde: for hir house was in the wall of the cite, and in the wall was hir dwellynge. And she sayde vnto them: Go youre waye vp to the moun- taynes, lest they mete you that folowe vpon you: and hyde youre selues there thre dayes, tyll they be come againe y folowe after you: and then get you youre waye.

But the men sayde vnto her: As for this ooth that thou hast taken of vs, we wyll be discharged of it whan we come in to y londe, excepte thou knyttest in the wyndowe y lyne of this rosecoloured rope (y thou hast letté vs downe with all) q gatherest vnto y in to the house, thy father, thy mother, thy brethren q all thy fathers house. And loke who so euer goeth out at the dore of thy house, his bloude be vpon his owne heade, and we giltlesse.
But of all those y are in thy house, yf a hande be layed vpon thé, their bloude shalbe vpo oure heade. And yf thou bewrayest eny of this deuyce of ours, thé wil we be discharged of the ooth y thou hast také of vs. She sayde: Let it be so as ye saye, and she let jthé go. And they wente their waye. And she knyt the rose coloured lyne in the wyndowe.

They wente on their waye, and came to the mountaynes, and remayned there thre dayes, tyll they that folowed vpon them were come agayne : for they soughte them thorow euery strete, q yet they founde them not. So the two men turned agayne, and departed from the mountaynes, and passed ouer (Iordane) and came to losna the sonne of Nun, and tolde him euery thinge, as they had founde it, q they sayde vnto Iosua: The LORDE hath geue vs all the londe in to oure handes, and all they that dwell in the londe, are sore afrayed of vs.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND Iosua rose vp early, and they de- 
A parted from Setim, q came vnto Iordane, he and all the children of Israel, and re- mayned there all night, afore they wéte ouer.
But after thre dayes wente the oflicers thorow y hoost, and commaunded the people, and sayde: Whan ye se the Arke of y couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, and the prestes from amoge the Leuites bearinge it, departe ye then out of youre place, and folowe after

* Exo. 14. e. t Nu.21.d. §Deu.10.d. ||Iosu.6.d. 

Chap. (ij. 

ES] 

a 

(but so, that there be rowme betwene you and it by two thousande cubites, t that ye come not nye it) ý ye maye knowe what waye ye shulde go: for ye neuer wente that waye afore.

* And Iosua sayde vnto the people: Halowe youre selnes, for tomorow shal thy LORDE bringe wonderous thinges to passe amoge you.
And vnto the prestes he sayde: Beare. ye the 
Arke of y couenaitt, and go before the people. 
Then *bare they the Arke, and wente before the people. And the LORDE sayde vnto
Iosua: This daye wyl I begynne to make the greate in the sighte of all Israel, that they maie knowe, how that like as I was with
Moses, so am I with the also. And com- maunde thou the prestes that beare the Arke, and saye: Whan ye come before in the water|. of Iordane, stonde styll.

And losua sayde vnto the children of Israel: 
Come hither, q heare the worde ofthe LORDE youre God. He sayde morouer: By this shal ye perceaue, that the lyuynge God is amonge you, and that he shall dryue ont before you y Cananites, Hethites, Heuites, Pheresites,
Girgosites, Amorites and Iebusites. Beholde, the Arke of the couenaunt of him y hath domynion ouer all londes, shall go before you in Iordane. ‘Take now therfore twolue men ont of ¥ trybes of Israel, ont of euery trybe one. And whan the soles of the fete of the prestes that beare $ Arke of the LORDE the gouernoure of all londes, are set in the water of Iordane, then shal ¥ water of Iordane withdrawe it selfe from the water that floweth from aboue, that it maye stonde on a heape.

| Now whan the people departed out of their 

tentes, to go oner Iordane, q the prestes bare the Arke of the couenaunt before the people, and came in to Iordane, q dypte their fete before in the water (as for Iordane on all his banckes it was full of all maner waters t of the londe) then the water that came downe fro aboue, stode straight vp vpon one heape, very farre from the cite of Adom, that lyeth on the syde of Zarthan: But the water that ranne downe to the see (euen to the salt see) fell awaye, and decreased.

*So y people wente thorow ouer agaynst lenit And the prestes that bare the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, stode drye in myddes of Iordane, readye prepared: q a Ri

`a Levi. 90, a. Nu. 11. d. t Some reade : ofthe haruest.

» Nn. 7. b. 
Mons S GEISER) 0 IEA 1655 f Den. 27-a |" DR 

1 Re. 16. a. 
è Psal. 65. a. 

Che boke of Josua. x 

Fo. ccb. 

Israel wēte thorow drye shod, vntyll whole people were all come ouer Iordane.

The iiij. Chapter. 
ND y LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Take|&à you twolne men, out of euery trybe one, q comaunde them, q saye: t Take vp twolue stones ont of Jordane, from the place where the fete of the prestes | stode in their araye: q cary them with you, y ye maie leaue them in y lodginge, where ye shal lodge this night.
The Iosua called twolue mē which were pre- pared of the children of Israel, out of euery trybe one, q sayde vnto the: Go youre waye ouer before the Arke of the LORDE youre
God in the myddes of Iordane, q take euery man a stone vpon his shulder, after the nombre of the trybes of ¥ children of Israel, y they maye be a token amonge you. And whan youre children axe their fathers here after, and saye: What do these stones there ? That ye maye then saye vnto them, how that the water of Iordane claue in sunder before the
Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, whan it wente thorow Iordane, q that these stones are set for a perpetuall remembraunce vnto the children of Israel.

Then dyd the children of Israel as Iosua commaunded them, and bare twolue stones out of the myddes of Iordane (as the LORDE had sayde vnto losua)$ acordinge to the nombre of the trybes of the children of Israel, and broughte the same with them in to ‘lhe lodginge, “and lefte them there. And losua set vp "twolue stones in y myddes of Iordane, where $ fete of the prestes stode, that bare y
Arke of the couenaunt: and there they be yet vnto this daye. As for y prestes that bare + y
Arke, they stode in the myddes of Iordane, vntyll all was perfonrmed - that the LORDE charged Iosua to saye vnto y people || acordinge as Moses gaue [osua in commaundemét. The people also made haist, and wente ouer. Now whan all the people was gone ouer, the Arke of the LORDE wente ouer also, and the prestes wente before the people.

* And the Rubenites, q Gaddites, and ¥ halfe trybe of Manasse wente harnessed before the childré of Israel, like as Moses had sayde vnto the: Aboute a fortye thousande men ready harnessed to the warre, wente before q Num. 32. c. Iosu. 1. c.

$3 Re. 18. d. || Deu. 27. a. 

jo. revi 

a 

|| Exod. 4. e. 

the LORDE to the battayll, vpon $ felde of lericho. *In that daye the LORDE made
Tosua greate in the sighte of all Israel: and like as they feared Moses, so stode they in awe of him, all his life longe.

And the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Com- maunde the prestes which beare the Arke of witnesse, that they come vp out of Iordane.
So losua cómaunded the prestes, q sayde: 
Come vp out of Iordane. And whan the prestes y bare the Arke of the couenaŭt of y
LORDE were come out of lordane, and trode with the soles of their fete vpon the drye londe, y water of lordane came agayne in to his place, and flowed (like as afore tyme) vpon all his banckes.

It was ¥ tenth daye of the first moneth, whan the people came vp out of Iordane: q they pitched their tentes in Gilgall vpon y
East syde of $ cite of Iericho. And y twolue stones which they had taken out of Iordane, dyd losua set vp at Gilgall, q saide vnto the children of Israel: +Whan youre children axe their fathers herafter, q saie: What meane these stones? Ye shall tell thé, q saye: Israel wete drye thorow lordane, what tyme as y
LORDE youre God dryed vp y water of 
Iordane before you, vntyll ye were ouer: like as the LORDE youre God dyd in the reed see, t which he dryed vp before vs, y we mighte go thorow: that all the people vpon earth mighte knowe the hade of the LORDE, how mightie it is, to the intent that ye shulde allwaye feare the LORDE youre God.

The b. Chapter. 

OW whan all the kynges of Y Amorites 

that dwelt beyonde Iordane westwarde, 

and all the kynges of ¥ Cananites by the see syde herde, how ŷ LORDE had dryed vp the water of Iordane before the children of Israel, tyll they were come ouer $ their hert fayled them, nether was there eny more corage in them at the presence of the children of Israel.
At the same tyme sayde y LORDE vnto 
Iosua: Make the knyues ll of stone, and cir- eumeyse the children of Israel agayne the seconde tyme. Then Iosua made him knyues of stone, and cireumcysed the childre of Israel vpon the toppe of the foreszkynnes. And the cause why losua circumcysed all the males of

* [osu.3.c. tł Exo.19.d. i Exo.14.e. §Iosu.2.b. 
T Nu. 14. d. 

** Exod. 12. a. 

The boke of Josua. 

Chap, b. 

the people y were come out of Egipte, is this: for all the men of warre dyed in y wildernesse by the waye, after they were departed out of
Egipte: for all the people that came forth, were circumcysed.

But all the people that were borne in ý wyldernesse by the waye (after they departed out of Egipte) were not cireumceysed: for the children of Israel walked fortye yeares in the wyldernesse, vntyll all the people of the men of warre that came out of Egipte, were con- sumed, because they herkened not vnto the voyce of the LORDE, like as the LORDE sware vnto them, f that they shulde not se the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto their fathers to geue vnto vs, euen a londe that floweth with mylke q honye: their children which were come vp in their steade, dyd Iosua eireumcyse: for they had the foreszkynne, and were not cireumcysed by the waye.

And whan all the people were cireumcysed, they abode in their place, eué in y tétes, tyll they were whole. And y LORDE saide vnto losua: To daie haue Í turned y shame of
Egipte awaye from you, ¢ the same place was called Gilgall vnto this daye. And whyle the children of Israel laye thus at Gilgall, they kepte Easter ** the fourtenth daye of the moneth at eué in the felde of Iericho. And they ate of the corne of the lode the seconde daye of the Easter: namely, vnleuended bred, q fyrmentye of y yeare, eué the same daye.
And vpon the morow, the tt Manna fayled, whan they ate of the corne of y londe, so that the children of Israel had nomore Manna, but ate of the corne of the londe of Canaan the same yeare.

And it fortuned that wha Iosua was by|33 lericho, he lifte vp his eyes, q was awarre, that there stode a ma agaynst him, and had a naked swerde in his hande. And Iosua wéte to him, a sayde vnto him: Art thou one of vs, or of oure enemies? He sayde: No, but 1 am i! the prynce of the LORDES hoost, and now am I come. Then fell Iosua downe to the earth vpon his face, q worshipped him, and sayde vnto him: What sayeth my LORDE vnto his seruaunt? And the prynce ouer the!
LORDES hoost sayde vnto him: $$ Put thy shues of thy fete, for the place whervpo thou stondest, is holy. And Iosua dyd so.

tt Exod. 16. f. tt Dan.10. b. 6$ Exod.3.a. Acto.7.d. 

ee bí. 

The ti. Chapter. 

a S for Iericho, it was shut ¢ kepte because 

of the childré of Israel, so that no man mighte gooutner in. But the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua: Beholde, I haue geuen Iericho with ý kynge and men of warre therof, in to thy hande. Let all the men of warre go once rounde aboute y cite, and do so sixe dayes.
But vpon the seuenth daye let the prestes take the seuen trompettes of the yeare of
Iubilye before the Arke, and go the same seuenth dayc seuen tymes aboute the cite, and let the prestes blowe the trompettes. And whan the horne of the yeare of Iubilye bloweth and maketh a sounde, so that ye heare the trompettes, all the people shal make a greate shoute, then shal the walles of the cite fall downe, and y people shal fall in, euery one straight before him.

Then losua the sonne of Nun called y prestes, and sayde vnto them: Beare ye the
Arke of the couenaunt, and let seuen prestes take the seuen trompettes of the yeare of
Iubilye before the Arke of the LORDE. 
But vnto the people he sayde: Get you hence, and go roude aboute the cite: and let him that is harnessed, go before the Arke of the LORDE. Whan Iosua had spoken this vnto the people, the seuen prestes bare the seuen trompettes of the yeare Iubilye before the Arke of the LORDE, and wente q blew the trompettes, and the Arke ofthe LORDES couenaüt folowed after them: and who so was harnessed, wente before the prestes that blewe the trompettes, and the multitude folowed the Arke. And all was full of $ noyse of the trompettes. But Iosua commaunded the people, and sayde: Ye shall make no shoute, ner let youre voyce be herde, nether shall ye geue one worde out of youre mouth, vntyll the daye y I saye vnto you: Make a shoute, then make a shoute.

So the Arke of the LORDE wente once rounde aboute the cite, and came agayne in to Y hooste, q remayned therin: for Iosua vsed to ryse vp early in the mornynge. And the prestes bare the Arke of the LORDE: so dyd the seuen prestes beare the seuen trom- pettes of the yeare of Iubilye before $ Arke of the LORDE, and wente and blewe the trompettes: and who so was harnessed, wente

* Iosu. 2. c. 

t Iosu. 7. a. ł Heb. 11. e. 

The boke of Josua, 

before thé, but ¥ multitude folowed ý Arke of the LORDE. And all was full of the noyse of the trompettes.

The seconde daye wente they once aboute the cite also, and came agayne in to the hoost.
Thus dyd they sixe dayes. But vpon the seucth daye whan the moruynge sprynge arose, | they gat them vp early, and wente after the. same maner seuen tymes aboute y cite, so that vpon the same one seuenth daye they wente seuen tymes aboute the cite.

And at the seuéth tyme whan the prestes blewe the trompettes, Iosua sayde vnto the people: Make a shoute, for ý LORDE hath delyuered you the cite: Howbeit this cite, q all that is therin, shalbe damned vnto the
LORDE: *onely the harlot Rahab shal lyue, q all that are with her in y house, for she hyd the messaungers, whom we sent forth. t Onely bewarre of it that is damned, lest ye damne youre selues (yf ye take ought of it which is damned) and make the hoost of
Israel to be damned, and brynge it in to mys- fortune. But all the syluer and golde, with the ornamétes of brasse q yron, shalbe sanc- tified vnto the LORDE, that it maye come to the LORDES treasure.

Then made the people a greate shoute, and the prestes blewe the trompettes (for whan the people herde the noyse of the trompettes, they made a greate shoute) fand the walles fell, and the people clymmed vp in to the cite, euery onestraight before him. Thus they wanne y cite, and $ destroyed all that was in the cite with the edge of the swerde, both man and woman, yonge and olde, oxe, shepe, and Asse.

Fo. rbi. 

D 

But losua sayde vnto y two men which|3g 

had spyed out the londe: Go in to the house of the harlot, and bringe out the woman fro thence with all that she hath, acordynge as ye haue sworne vnto her. Then y yonge men
(the spyes) wente in, and brought forth Rahab with hir father and mother, a brethren, and all that she had, and all hir kynred, and caused her to dwell without the hoost of
Israel. As for the cite, they brent it with fyre, q all that was therin: onely the syluer and golde, and the ornamentes of brasse and rō put they vnto the treasure in the house of y LORDE: but Iosua let | the harlot
Rahab lyue, with hir fathers house, and all that she had: q she dwelt in Israel vnto this

§ Deut. 20. c. || Heb. 11. e. Iacob. 2. c. 

Fo. eebity. 

daie, because she had hyd the messaungers who Iosua sent vnto lericho to spye.

At the same tyme sware Iosua, and sayde: 
* Cursed be that man before the LORDE, which setteth vp this cite of lericho q buyldeth it: Whan he laieth y foundacio therof, let it cost him his first sonne: And wha he setteth vp the gates of it, let it cost him his yogest sonne. Thus the LORDE was with Iosua, so that he was spoken of in all londes.

The bij. Chapter. 

UT the children of Israel had comytted 

a sinne in the ^thinge y was damned: for Achan the sonne of Charmi the sonne of
Sabdi the sonne of Serah, of y trybe of Iuda, toke some of it y was daned. Then was the wrath of the LORDE fearce ouer the children of Israel.

Now whan Iosua sent out men from lericho vnto Hai, which lyeth besyde Bethaué on y east syde of Bethel, he sayde vnto the: Go vp, and spye the londe. And whan they had gone vp, and spyed out Hai, they came agayne to Iosua, and sayde vnto him: Let not all the people go vp, but vpon a two or thre thou- sande, that they maye go vp and smyte Hai, lest all the people weerye them selues there, for they are but fewe.

So there wente vp, of the people vpon a thre thousande men, and they fled before the men of Hai, and they of Hai smote vpon a syxe and thyrtie men of them, and chaced them from the porte vnto Sebarim, and smote them downe the waye. Then was the hert of the people discoraged, t and became like water. As for Iosua he rente his clothes, and fell vpon his face vnto the earth before the
Arke of the LORDE, vntill the eueninge, with the Elders of Israel, and cast dust vpon their heades.

And Tosua sayde: Oh LORDE LORDE, wherfore hast thou broughte this people ouer
Iordane, to delyuer vs in to the handes of the 
Amorites to destroye vs? O that we had taried beionde Iordane, as we begane. Oh my LORDE, what shal I saye, whyle Israel turneth his backe vpon his enemies? Wha the Cananites heare of this, they shal com- passe vs ronnde aboute, yee and rote out oure names from of the earth. What wylt thou do then vnto thy greate name?

* 3 Re. 16. d. 

^ Deut. 7, e. losu.6.d. 2 Ma, 12. f. 

Cbr boke of Josua. 

Then sayde the LORDE vnto Iosua: 
Stode vp, why lyest thou so vpon thy face? 
Israel hath offended, and trüsgressed oner my couenaunt, which I commaunded the. They haue taken also of the thinge that was damned, and haue stollen, and dyssembled, and layed it amonge their ornamentes. The children of Israel are not able to stonde before their

Chap. bij. 

aduersaries, but must turne their backes vpon |: 

their enemies: for they are acursed. I wyll no more be with you from héce forth yf ye put not out the damned from amonge you.

Stonde vp, and sanctifie the people, and saye: ^Sanctifie youre selues agaynst tomorow for thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel:
ł There is a damned thinge in the O Israel, therfore canst thou not stonde before thine enemies, tyll ye put awaye the damned from amonge you. And ye shall ryse vp early, one trybe after another: and loke which trybe so euer the LORDE taketh, the same shall come forth, one kynred after another: and loke which kynred the LORDE taketh, the same shall come forth, one house after another.
And loke what house the LORDE taketh, the same shal come forth, one housholder after another. And who so euer is founde in y curse, the same shalbe burnt in the fyre with all that he hath: because he hath gone beyonde the couenaunt of the LORDE, and committed folye in Israel.

Then losua gat him vp by tymes in the mornynge, and brought forth Israel, one trybe after another, and ¥ trybe of Iuda was taken.
And whan he had brought forth the kynreds in Iuda, y kinred of the Serahites was taken.
And whan he had brought forth the kynred of the Serahites, one housholde after another,
Sabdi was taken. And whà he had brought forth his house, one housholder after another,
Achan the sonne of Charmi ý sonne of Sabdi the sonne of Serah of the trybe of Iuda, was taken.

And Iosua sayde vnto Achan: My sonne, geue the glory vnto the LORDE the God of
Israel, and geue him the prayse, and tell me, what thou hast done, and hide nothinge fro me.

Then answered Achan vnto losua, and sayde: Verely I haue synned agaynst y
LORDE God of Israel, thus q thus haue I done: I sawe amoge y spoiles a costly Babi- lonish garment, and two hüdreth Sycles of
? 1 Re. 16. a. 

t Psa. 21. b. t Deut. 13. c. and 17. b. 

€ 

B 

Chap. biij. syluer and a tunge of golde, worth fiftye
Sycles in weight, vnto the which I had a lust, and toke it: and beholde, it is hyd in the grounde in my tente, and the syluer vnder it.

"Then Iosua sent messaungers thither, which ranne to the tente, and beholde, it was hyd in his tente, and the siluer vnder it. And they toke it out of the tente, and broughte it vnto losua, and to all the children of Israel and poured it before the LORDE. Then
Iosua and all Israel with him, toke Achan the sonne of Serah with the siluer, the garment and goldé tunge, his sonnes and doughters, his oxen and asses, and shepe, and all that he had broughte they in to y valley of Achor.

And losua sayde: For so moch as thou hast troubled vs, the LORDE trouble the this daye. And all Israel stoned him, and burned him with fyre with all that he had.
And whan they had stoned him, they made ouer him a greate heape of stones, which remayneth vnto this daye. (So the LORDE turned from the rigorousnes of his wrath.)
Therfore is the same place called y valley of 
Achor vnto this daye. 

The biij. Chapter. 

ND $ LORDE saide vnto Iosua: Feare 
A not, and be not afrayed. “Take all the men of warre with the, and ryse, and get the vp vnto Hai. Beholde, I haue geuen in to thy hande, the kynge of Hai with his people in his cite t countre. And thou shalt do with
Hai and the kynge of it, *as thou dyddest with lericho and the kynge therof, sauynge that ye shal deale amoge you their spoyle q catel!: but set thou a t preuy watch behynde the cite.

Then Iosua arose, and all y men of warre, to go vp vnto Hai: and Iosua chose thirtie thousande fightinge men, and sent them out by night, and commaunded them, and sayde:
Take hede, ye shal be y preuye watch behynde the cite, but go not to farre from the cite, and se that ye be redye alltogether. As for me and all the people that is with me, we wyll make vs to the cite. And whan they come forth agaynst vs (tas afore) we wyll flye before them, that they maye folowe out after vs, tyll we haue prouoked them forth of the cite: for they shal thinke that we flye before them, like as at f first. And whyle we flye before them,

a Deut. 7. d. 

* [osu. 6. c. t Iosu. 8. c. 

The boke of Josua. 

ye shal get you vp out of the preuy watch, and wynne the cite. For y LORDE youre God shal delyuer it in to youre handes. But whan ye haue wonne the cite, set fyre vpon it, doinge
Sacordinge vnto the worde of the LORDE. 
Beholde, I haue commaunded you. 

So Iosua sent them awaye, q they wente vnto the place of the preuy watch, and laye betwixte Bethel and Hai, on the west syde of
Hai. But Iosua abode that night amoge the people. And in the mornynge he arose early, and set the people in order, and wente vp with the Elders of Israel before the people towarde Hai: and all the men of warre that were with him, wente vp, a gat them forth, and came ouer agaynst the cite, and pitched their tentes on the north syde of Hai, so y there was but a valley betwene him and Hai.

He had taken aboute a fyue thousande men, and set them in the hynder watch betwene
Bethel and Hai, on the west syde of the cite, and they ordred the people of the whole hoost that was on the north syde of the cite, so that the vttemost of the people reached vnto the west ende of the cite. So Iosua wente the same nighte in to the myddes of the valley.

But whan the kynge of Hai sawe that, he made haist, and gat him vp early, and the men out of the cite, to mete Israel to y bat- tayll, with all his people, euen righte before the felde: for he wyst not that there was a preuy watch behynde him on the backe syde of the cite. But Iosua and all Israel were feble before them, and fled by the waye to $ wyldernesse. Then cried all the people in the cite, that they shulde folowe vpon them, and they folowed after Iosua and ruszshed out of the cite, so that there remayned not one man in Hai and Bethel, which wente not out to folowe vpon Israel, and they lefte the cite stondinge open, that they mighte persecute
Israel. 

Thé sayde y LORDE vnto Iosua: Reach out the speare that thou hast in thine hande, towarde Hai: for I wyll delyuer it in to thy hande. And whan Iosua reached out the speare that was in his hande, towarde y cite, y hinder watch brake vp out of their place, and ranne (whan he had stretched out his hande) and came in to the cite, and wanne it, and made haist, q set fyre vpon it. And the men of Hai turned them, and loked

1 losu. 7. a. $ Deu. 20. c. 

30 

So. reir. 

B 

| do. cer. 

imn 

The boke of Josua. 

behynde them, and the smoke of the cite wente vp towarde heauen, and they had no place to flie ynto, nether hither ner thither: and the people that fled towarde the wyldernes turned aboute, to folowe vpon them.

And whan Iosua and all Israel sawe, 2 the hynder wateh had wonne the cite (lor y smoke of the cite ascended) they turned againe, and smote the men of Hai. And they in the cite came forth also agaynst them, so y they came in the myddes amonge Israel on both the sydes, and they slewe them, so that there was not one man of them left ouer or escaped: and they toke the kynge of Hai alyue, and broughte him vnto Iosua. And wha
Israel had slayne all the inhabiters of Hai, which had folowed vpon them in the felde and in the wildernesse: and whan they were all fallen thorow the edge of the swerde, tyll they were destroied, thé turned all Israel vnto
Hai, and smote it with the edge of ý swerde. 
And of all them which fell that daye fro man vnto woma, there were twolue thousande, all men of Hai.

JF| But Iosua withdrue not his hande (wher- 

with he reached out the speare) tyll all the inhabiters of Hai were vtterly destroyed,
* sauynge the catell and the spoyle of y cite, dyd Israel parte amonge them selues, acord- inge vuto the worde of the LORDE, which he cómaunded Iosua. And Iosua burned vp
Hai and made an heape therof for euer, which is there yet vnto this daye. And the kynge of Hai caused he to be hanged on a tre vntyll the euen.

* But wha the Sonne was gone downe, he commaunded to take his body from the tre, and to cast it vnder the gate of the cite, and made vpon him a greate heape of stones, which is there yet vnto this daye.

?'Then buylded Iosua an altare vnto the 
LORDE God of Israel vpon mount Ebal acordinge as Moses the seruaunt of y LORDE commaunded the children of Israel, as it is wrytten in the boke of the lawe of Moses euen an altare of whole stone, whervpon there was no yron lifted: and he offred burntofferinges and healthofferinges, and there vpon the stones he wrote the seconde lawe of Moses, which he wrote before the childré of Israel.

And all Israel with their Elders and officers and iudges, stode on both the sydes of the

* Num. 31. d. Deut. 20. c. Iosu. 8. a. and 22. b. ^ Deut. 
[ouo cce aaa ete DENDO UE ole Go 

Arke, right ouer agaynst the prestes y bare the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE, the straunger as well as one of them selues, the one halfe besyde mount Grysim, and the other halfe beside mount Ebal, t as Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE commaunded afore, to blesse the people of Israel. Afterwarde caused he to proclame all the wordes of the lawe of the blessynge and cursynge, as it is wrytten in the boke of the lawe. There was not one worde that Moses commaunded, but
Iosua caused it to be proclamed before all the congregacion of Israel, and before the wemé, and children, and straugers which walked amonge them.

The iy. Chapter. 

OW whan all the kynges that were be- 

yonde lordane vpon the mountaynes, and in the lowe countrees, q in all the hauens of the greate see, and besyde mount Libanus, herde this (namely, y Hethites, Amorites,
Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusytes) they gathered thé selues together with one acorde, to fighte agaynst Iosua, and agaynst
Israel. 

But whan the inhabiters of Gibeon herde, what losua had done with Jericho and Hai, they dealte craftely, wēte on their waie, and made a message, and toke olde sackes vpon their asses, and olde rente wyne botels, aud olde mended shues vpon their fete, and put on olde and peced garmentes, and all y bred of their vytayles was harde and mote and they wente vnto Iosua in to y hoost at Gilgall, and sayde vnto him, and to euery man in
Israel: We are come out of a farre countre, therfore make now a couenaunt with vs. Then sayde euery man in Israel vnto y Heuyte:
Peraduenture thou dwellest amonge vs, how can I then make a couenaunt with the ?

They saide vnto losua: We are thy ser- uautes. Josua sayde vnto them: What are ye q whence come ye? They sayde: Thy seruauntes are come out of a very farre countre, because of the name of the LORDE thy God: for we haue herde the reporte of him, and all that he dyd in Egipte, and all that he dyd vnto the two kynges of the

. | Amorites beyóde Iordane, Sihon the kynge at 

Heszbo, and Og the kynge of Basan, which dwelt at Astaroth. ‘Therfore sayde oure

20. c. losu. 10. e. ^ Deu. 27. a. Exo. 20.d. t Deu. 27. b. 

Chap. ir. 

a 

B 

Chap. r. 

€ 

Elders and all the inhabiters of oure countre : 
Take fode with you for youre iourney, and go mete them, and saye vnto them: We are youre seruaütes, therfore make now a bonde with vs: This onre bred that we toke out of oure houses for oure foode, was new whan we toke oure iourney towarde you: but now lo, it is harde t moulde. And these bottels fylled we new, and lo, they are réte. And these oure clothes and shues are waxed olde, by y reason of the sore longe iourney.

Then the captaynes toke their vytayles, and axed not the mouth of the LORDE. *And losua made peace with them, and set vp a couenaunt with them, that they shulde be saued alyue, and the rulers of the congregacion sware vnto them. But thre dayes after that they had made a couenaunt with them, they herde, that they were their neghbours, and dwelte amonge them: For as the children of
Israel wente forth on their iourney, they came on the thirde daye vnto their cities, which are called Gibeon, Caphira, Beeroth, and Cirath learim, and smote thé not, because that the rulers of the congregacion had sworne vnto them by the name of the LORDE the God of Israel.

But whan all the congregacion murmured agaynst the rulers, all the rulers sayde vnto the whole congregacion: We haue sworne vnto them by the LORDE the God of Israel, therfore maye we not touch them. But this wil we do vnto them: Let them lyue, that there come no wrath vpon vs, because of the ooth that we haue made vnto them.

J| And the rulers sayde vnto them: Let them 

lyue, that they maye be thewers of wodd and bearers of water for the whole congregacion, as the rulers haue sayde vnto them. ‘Then
Iosua called them, and commened with them, and sayde: Wherfore haue ye disceaued ys, and sayde, that ye were farre from ys, where as ye dwell amonge vs? Therfore shall ye be cursed, so that of you there shall not ceasse seruauntes to hew wodd and to beare water for the house of my God.

They answered Iosua, q sayde: It was tolde thy seruauntes, that the LORDE thy God commaunded Moses his seruaunt, that he shulde geue you the whole lode, and that he wolde destroye all the inhabiters of the londe before you: therfore were we sore afrayed of

* 2 Reg. 21. a. t Deu. 29. b. 

« The boke of Josua. 

that they shulde not slaye them. So vpo the same daye Iosua made them hewers of wodd and water bearers for the congregacion, and for the altare of the LORDE vnto this daye,

in the place that he shall chose. 
\ HAN Adonisedech the kynge of Ieru- salem herde, that Iosua had wonne
Hai, and damned it, and done vnto Hai and y kynge of it, like as he dyd vnto Iericho and to the kynge therof, tand that they of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were come vnder them, they were sore afrayed. For
Gibeon was a greate cite, like as one of the kynges cities, and greater then Hai, and all the citesyns therof were men of armes. Ther- fore sent he vnto Hoham the kynge of Hebron, and to Pirea the kynge of Iarmuth, and to
Taphia the kynge of Lachis, and to Debir the kynge of Eglon, and caused to saie vnto them:
Come vp vnto me, and helpe me, that we maie smyte Gibeon, for they haue made peace with Iosua and the children of Israel. ‘Then came the fyue kynges of the Amorites to- gether, and wente vp, the kynge of Ierusalem, the kynge of Hebron, y kyuge of Iarmuth, the kynge of Lachis, the kynge of Eglon, with all their armies, q layed sege vnto Gibeon, and fonghte agaynst it.

Howbeit they of Gibeon sent vnto Iosua to 
Gilgall, and caused to saye vnto him: With- drawe not thine hande from thy seruauntes, come vp soone vnto vs: delyuer and helpe vs, for all the kynges of the Amorites that dwell vpon the mountaynes, are gathered together agaynst vs. [Iosua wente vp from Gilgall, and all the warryers and all the men armes with him. And the LORDE sayde vnto
Iosua: $Feare them not, for 1 haue gene them in to thy hande. There shall not one of them be able to stonde before the. So losua came sodenly vpon them, for all that night wente he vp from Gilgall. lAnd the
LORDE discomfyted the before Israel, and smote them with a greate slanghter at Gibeon:

The r. Chapter. 

ł Iosu. 9.c. § Iosu. 8.a. || Esa. 28. d. 

Fo. ceri, oure lyues before you, and thus haue we done.
But now lo, we are in thy handes: loke what thou thinkest good and righte to do vnto vs, that do.

And he dyd euen so vnto them, and dely- uered them from the children of Israels hade,

fo. Fo. eere The boke of Josua» CL r. 

vnto Aseka, so that they dyed: q many mo of them dyed of the hayle, then the children of
Israel slewe with the swerde. 

Then spake Iosua vnto the LORDE (the same daye that the LORDE gaue ouer the
Amorites before the children of Israel) and sayde in the presence of Israel: *Sonne, holde styll at Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon.

Then the Sonne helde styll, and ¥ Moone stode, vntyll the people had auenged thé selues on their enemies. Is not this wrytten in the boke of the righteous? Thus the Sonne stode styll in the "myddes of heauen, and dyfferred to go downe for the space of a whole daye after. And there was no daye like vnto this (nether before ner after) whan the
LORDE herkened vnto the voyce of one man: forthe LORDE fought for Israel. And
Iosua wente agayue to Gilgall i in to the tetes, and all Israel with him. As for the fyue kynges, they were fled, and had hyd thé selues in the caue at Makeda.

Then was it tolde Iosua: We haue foude the fyue kynges hyd in the caue at Makeda.
Iosua sayde: Rolle greate stones then before the hole of the caue, and set men there to kepe them.

As for you, stonde not ye styll, but folowe after youre enemies, and smyte them behynde, and let them not come in their cities, for the
LORDE youre God hath delyuered the in to youre hande. And whan Iosua and ¥ children of Israel had ended the sore greate slaughter vpo them, so y they were brought to naught, the remnaunt of them came in to the stronge cities.

So all the people came agayne to the hoost vnto losua to Makeda in peace, and no man durst moue his tunge agaynst the children of
Israel. {osua sayde : Open the mouth of the caue, and brynge the fyue kynges forth vnto me. They dyd so, and broughte the kynges vnto him out of the caue: the kinge of Ieru- salem, the kynge of Hebro, the kynge of Iar- muth, the kynge of Lachis, the kinge of Eglon.

* Eccli. 46. a. 

t Deut. 21. d. 

The boke of Josua. » 

q they chaced them the waie downe to Beth 
Horon, and smote them vnto Aseka and 
Makeda. 

And whan they fled before Israel, the waye downe to Bethoron, the LORDE caused a greate hayle from heauen to fall vpon them,

Chap. r, 

Whan these Ya they chaced them the waie downe to Beth| | Whan these fyue kynges were broughte| - kynges were broughte forth vnto him, losua called euery man of
Israel, and sayde vnto the rulers of the men of warre that wente with him: Come forth
‘and treade vpon the neckes of these kynges 
|vith youre fete. And they came forth, and hee vpon their neckes with their fete. And
Iosua saide vnto them: Be not afrayed, and |35 feare not: be stronge and bolde, for thus shal the LORDE do vnto all youre enemies, agaynst whom ye fighte.

And Tosua smote them afterwarde, and put them to death, and hanged them vpon fyue trees. And they hanged styll vpon the trees vntyll the euenynge. + But whan the Sonne was gone downe, he commaunded to take them of from the trees: and they cast them in the caue, wherin they had hyd them selues, q before the hole of the caue they layed greate stones, which are there yet vnto this daye.
The same daye wanne losua Makeda also, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and the kynge therof, and t damned it, and all the soules that were therin, and let none remayne escaped : and dyd vnto the kynge of Makeda fas he dyd vnto the kynge of Iericho.

Then Iosua and all Israel with him de- parted fro Makeda vnto Lybna, q foughte agaynst it. (And the LORDE gaue it with y kynge therof in to the hande of Israel) and smote it and all the soules that were therin, with the edge of the swerde, and let not one remayne in it: and dyd vnto the kinge therof as he had done vnto the kynge of
Tericho. 

Afterwarde wente Iosua and all Israel with| dF 

him from Lybna vnto Lachis, and layed sege vnto it, and fought agaynst it. And the
LORDE delyuered Lachis also in to the hande of Israel, so that they wanne it vpon the seconde daye, and smote it with y edge of the swerde, and all the soules that were therin, acordinge to all as he had done vnto
Lybna. At the same tyme Horam ¥ kynge of Gazer wente vp, to helpe Lachis. But
Iosua smote him with all his people, tyll there remayned not one.

And Iosua wente with all Israel from Lachis, vnto Eglon, and layed sege vnto it, and fought agaynst it, and' wanne it the same daye, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and damned all the soules that were therin the

1 Deut. 20. c. | m * Eecli 46.0. t Deut. 21. ds ee Det 90 c looo 6. e. 

Chap. rt. 

~|same daye, acordynge vnto all as he had done| [them not, for tomorow aboute this tyme wil I| - vnto Lachis.

After that wente Iosua with all Israel from 
Eglou vnto Hebron, and foughte agaynst it, and wanne it, and smote it with $ y edge of the swerde, and the kynge of it, and all the cities therof, and all the soules that were therin, and let not one remayne, acordynge vnto all as he had done vnto Eglon: and damned it, and all the soules that were therin.

@| Then turned Iosua agayne with all Israel 

towarde Debir, and fought agaynst it, and waune it, with the kinge ati it, and all y cities therof, and smote them with the edge of the swerde, and damned all y soules that were therin, and let not one remayne ouer. Kuen as he had doue vnto Hebro and Lybna with their kynges, so dyd he also vnto Debir, and the kynge therof.

Thus Iosua smote all the londe vpon the mountaynes, and towarde the south, and in the lowe countrees, and by the ryuers, with all their kynges, and let not one remaine ouer and damned all that had breth, *as the
LORDE God of Israel had commaunded. 
Aud losua smote them from Cades Bernea vuto Gaza, and all the londe of Gosen vnto
Gibeon, and toke all these kynges with their lode at one tyme: for the LORDE God of
Israel foughte for Israel. And Iosua wente agayne with all Israel to the tentes vnto Gilgal.

The yi. Chapter 

Aa Iabin the kynge of Asor herde 

this, he sent vnto Iabob the kynge of 
Madon and to the kynge of Samron, “and to the kynge of Achsaph, and to the kynges that dwelt towarde the north vpon the mountaynes, and in the playne on the southsyde of Cineroth, aud in the lowe countrees, and in the aub shippes of Dor by the see syde: and to the
Cananites towarde east and west, to y 
Amorites, Hethites, Puedes and Tebusites, vpon the mountaynes and to the Heuites, vnder mount Hermon in the londe of Mispa.
These wete out with all their armies, a greate people, as many as ¥ sonde of the see, and exceadinge many horses and charettes. All these kinges gathered the selues, and came, and pitched together by $ water of Meram, to fighte with Israel.
B| And the LORDE sayde vnto Iosua : Feare 
* Deut. 20. c. 

t Iosu. 10. b. rewedans. — rst Deut. 20. c. 

Cbr boke of Josua. 

them not, for tomorow aboute this tyme wil I delyuer them all slayne, before the children of Israel: thou shalt lame their horses, and burne their charettes with fire. * And Iosua came sodenly vpon them, and all the men of warre with him by the water of Merom, q fell vpon them. And the LORDE delyuered them in to y handes of Israel, and they smote them, and chaced them vnto greate Sido and to the warme water, and to the playne of
Mispa towarde y east: and smote them, vntyll there reniayned not one.

Then dealte Iosua with them as $ LORDE had saide vnto him, q lamed their horses, q brent their charettes. And he turned backe at the same tyme, q wanne Hasor, q smote y kynge of it with the swerde (for Hasor was afore tyme y head cite of all these kyngdomes) and smote all the soules that were therin with the edge of the swerde, and damned it, q let nothinge remayne that had breth, q damned
Hasor with fyre. All the cities of these kyng- domes wane losua also, and smote the with the edge of the swerde, and damned them,
* acordinge as Moses the seruaunt of the 
LORDE commaunded. 

Howbeit the cities that stode vpon the hilles, dyd not the children of Israel burue with fyre: but Hasor onely dyd Iosua burne.
§ And all the spoyles of these cities and the catell, dyd the children of Israel deale amonge them, but smote all the men with the edge of the swerde, tyll they had destroyed them, and let nothinge remayne that had breth. As the
LORDE commaunded his seruaunt Moses, and as Moses commaunded Iosua, euen so dyd Iosua, so that there was nothinge vndone of all that the LORDE comaunded Moses.

So Iosua toke all this lóde vpon y moü- taynes, q all y lyeth towarde the south, q all the londe of Gosen, and the lowe countre, q the playne felde, and the mountayne of Israel with the valley therof, from the mountayne that parteth the londe vp towarde Seir, vnto
Baalgad, in the playne of mont Libanus beneth mount Hermon. All their kynges toke he, and smote them, and put thé to death. l Howbeit he warred a longe season with these kynges.

Yet was there not one cite, that yelded it selfe peaceably vnto the children of Israel

* (excepte the Heuites, which dwelt at Gibeon) 
$ Num. 31. d. 

| — $Num.31.d. — |Exo.23.d. — S Iosu.9.2. — Exo. 23. d. T Iosu. 9. a. 

Chap. tL. — — ORE of Sosua.—— Hl. mrih. 

€ 

0 

Fo. eeri. but they wanne them all with battayll. And this was done so of the LORDE that their hert was so hardened, to come against the children of Israel with battayll, y they mighte be daned, q no fauoure to be shewed vnto them, but to be destroyed, *as the LORDE commaunded Moses.

At the same tyme came Iosua, and roted out the Enakims from ¥ mountayne, from
Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, from euery mountayne of Iuda, and from euery mountayne of Israel, and damned thé with their cities, and let none of the Enakims remayne in the londe of the children of Israel, saue at Gasa, tat Gath, at Asdod, there remayned of them.

Thus Iosua conquered all the londe acord- inge vnto all as the LORDE sayde vnto
Moses, q gaue it vnto Israel to enheritaunce, t vnto euery trybe his porcion, and y londe rested from warre.

The rij. Chapter. 

HESE are $ kynges of the tonde, who 

the childré of Israel smote, q conquered their lode, beyonde Iordane, eastwarde, fro the water of Arnon, vnto mount Hermon, and vnto all $ playne felde towarde the east:
'&Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon, and had dominion from
Aroer that lieth by the water syde of Arnon, and vnto the myddes of ¥ water: and ouer halfe Gilead, vnto the water of labok, which is the border of the childré of Ammon: and ouer the playne felde, vnto the see of Cynneroth eastwarde, and vnto the see of the playne felde, namely the Salt see towarde the east, the waye vnto Beth Iesimoth: and from the south beneth by the ryuers of mount Pisga.

And the border of Og the kynge of Basan, which remayned yet of Raphaim, “and dwelt at
|Astaroth and Edrei, and had the dominion ouer moiit Hermon, ouer Salcha, and ouer all
Basan vnto the border of Gessuri q Maachati, a of halfe Gilead, which was the border of
Sihon the kynge at Hesbon. Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE and the childre of
Israel smote them. || And Moses the seruaunt of § LORDE gaue it vnto the Rubenites,
Gaddites and to the halfe trybe of Manasse in possession.

These are the kynges of the léde, whom 

* Deu. 20. c. t 1 Re. 17. a. 

* Nu. 21. e. 

t Nu. 26. f. 
Deut. 3. a. 

$ Nu.21.d. Deut. 2. f. 

The boke of Josua, 

Chap. rij. 
Iosua œ the children of Israel smote on this syde Iordane westwarde, fro Baalgad vpo the playne of mount Libanus, vnto ý moüt that parteth the londe vp towarde Seir, q that
Josua gaue vnto the trybes of Israel in pos- session, vnto enery one his parte, what so euer was in ý moiitaynes, valleyes, playne feldes, by the ryuers, in y wyldernesses a towarde the south, the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites,
Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusites. 

The kynge of lericho, ^the kynge of Hai, which lyeth besyde Bethel, «the kynge of lerusalem, the kynge of Hebron, the kynge of
Jarmoth, the kynge of Lachis, the kynge of 
Eglon, the kynge of Geser, the kynge of Debir, the kynge of Geder, the kynge of Horma, the kynge of Arad, y kynge of Libna, the kynge of Adulla, the kynge of Makeda, the kynge of
Bethel, the kynge of Tapnah, the kynge of 
Hepher, the kynge of Aphek, the kynge of 
Lasaron, the kynge of Madan, the kynge of 
Hasor, the kynge of Simron Meron, the kynge of Achsaph, the kynge of Tahenah, the kynge of Megido, the kynge of Cades, the kynge of lakneam by Carmel, the kynge in the lord- shippes of Dor, the kynge of the Heithen at
Gilgall, the kynge of Thirza. These are one and thirtie kynges.

The rit}. Chapter. 

OW whan Iosua was olde and wel stricken in age, the LORDE sayde vnto him:
Thou art olde q well aged, and there remayneth 
‘yet moch of the londe to conquere, namely all 
| Galile of the Philistynes, and all Gessuri, from 
Sihor which floweth before Egipte, vnto the border of Ekron, northwarde, which is rekened vnto the Cananites: fyue lordes of the Phi- listynes, namely, the Gasites, the Aszdodites, the Ascalonites, the Gethites, the Ekronites q the Hauites. But from the north it is all y londe of the Cananites, and Maara of the
Sidonians vnto Aphek, euen vnto the border of the Amorites. Morouer the londe of the
Giblites eastwarde, from Baalgad vnder mount 
Hermon, tyll a mà come vnto Hamath. All they that dwell vpon the mount, from Libanus vnto the warme waters, and all the Sidonians.
I wyl dryue them out before the children of 
Israel: Onely let them be dealte out amonge 

Israel, as I haue commaunded the. 

|| Nu. 32. d. and 34. c. Deut.3.b. Iosu.13.b. ^ Iosu, 

6. a. and 8. a. *| Iosu. 10. a. 

Chap. riii. 

33| Deuyde thou this lode now to enheritatice 

amonge the nyne trybes and y halfe trybe of 
Manasse. *For the Rubenites t Gaddites with y halfe trybe of Manasse, haue receaued their enheritaüce, which Moses gaue thé be- yonde Iordane Eastwarde, t acordinge as Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE gaue them the same, from Aroer which lieth vp by the water syde of Arnon, and the cite in the myddes of the water, q all the coastes of Medba vnto
Dibon, and all the cities of Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which, dwelt at Heszbon, tvnto the border of the children of Ammon: and Gilead and y border of Gessuri and
Maachati, and all mont Hermon, and all Basan vnto Salcha: all ¥ kyngdome of Og at Basan, which dwelt at Astaroth and Edrei, that re- mained yet ouer of Raphaim. But Moses smote them and droue them out.

The children of Israel droue not out the 
Gessurites t Maachathites, but both Gessur and Maachat dwelt amonge the childré of
Israel vnto this daye. § But vnto y trybe of the Leuites he gaue no enheritaunce: for the offeringe of the LORDE God of Israel is their enheritaunce, acordinge as he hath promysed them.

So Moses gaue vnto the trybe of ý children of "Ruben after their kynreds, so that their border was Aroer, which lyeth vpon the water syde of Arnon, and the cite in the myddes of the same water, with all the playne felde vnto
Medba: Heszbon, and all the cities therof which lye in the playne felde: Dibon, Bamoth
Baal, v Beth Baal Meon, Iahza, Kedemoth, 
Mephaath, Kiriathaim, Sibama, Zeretha Sahar, vpon mount Emek, Beth Peor: the ryuers by
Pisga, and Beth Iesimoth, and all the cities vpon the playne, and all the realme of Sihon kynge of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon, l whom Moses smote with the prynces of
Madian, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur, q Reba, the mightie men of kynge Sihon, which were inhabiters of the londe. And Balaam the sonne of Beor the prophecier, dyd the children of Israel kyll with the swerde amonge the other that were slayne: and the border of ý childré of Ruben was Iordane. "This is the enheritaunce of the children of Ruben amonge their kynreds, cities and vyllages.

* Iosu, 12. b. 
Tosu. 14. a. 
^ Iosu. 17. a. 

t Nu. 32. d, 
5 Nu, 33. f. 
1 Par. 6. d. 

¢ Iosu.12.a. § Nu.18.d. 
|| Nu. 21. d. and 31. a. 
*| Iosu. 13, b. and 18. a. 

Che boke of Josua, 
Vnto the trybe of the children of Gad|Ð 

Ho. rerb. 

amonge their kynreds gaue Moses, so that their border was, Iahesar and all the cities in
Gilead, and the halfe londe of the children of Ammon, vnto Aroer, which lyeth before
Rabbath: and from Heszbon vnto Ramath 
Mispe q Betomim: and fro Mahanaim vnto the border of Debir. But in the valley, Beth
Haram, Beth Nimra, Suchoth and Zaphon 
(which remayned yet of the realme of Sihon kynge of Heszbon) and was by Iordane, vnto the edge of the see of Cyneroth, on this syde
Iordane eastwarde. ‘This is the inheritaunce of the children of Gad in their kynreds, cities a vyllagyes.

^Vnto the halfe trybe of the children of 
Manasse after their kynreds, gaue Moses, so that their border was fro Mahanaim, all Basan, all the kyngdome of Og kynge of Basan, and all the townes of fair which lye in Basan, namely thre score cities. And halfe Gilead,
Astaroth, Edrei, the cities of the kyngdome of 
Og at Basan, vnto the children of Machir the sonne of Manasse. ‘This is the halfe porcion of the children of Machir after their kynreds.

This is it that Moses dealte out vpon the felde of Moab beyonde Iordane ouer agaynst lericho eastwarde. f But vnto y trybe of
Leui gaue Moses no enheritaunce: for the 
LORDE God of Israel is their enheritaunce, as he hath promysed them.

The riiij. Chapter. 

HIS is it that the children of Israel haue 

enhereted in the londe of Canaan, ** which 
Eleasar the prest, and Iosua the sonne of Nun, and the chefe of the fathers amonge the trybes of the children of Israel parted out amonge them. tt But by lot dyd they deuyde it out amoge them, acordinge as the LORDE co- maunded Moses to geue vnto the nyne trybes and y halfe: for vnto the two trybes and the halfe dyd Moses geue enheritaunce beyonde
Iordane. + But vnto the Leuites he gaue no enheritaunce amonge them. §§For of the childré of loseph there were two trybes,
Manasses and Ephraim. — Therfore gaue they the Leuites no porcion in the londe, but cities, to dwell therin, and suburbes for their catell and goodes. ll|Euen as the LORDE

** Nu. 34, c. tt Nu. 26. f. and 33. f. 
$$ Gen. 48. c. 

tł Iosu. 13. b. 
I| Num. 35. a. 

So. cerbt. 

comaunded Moses, so dyd the childré of 
Israel, and deuyded the londe. 

Then eame forth the children of Iuda to 
Iosua at Gilgall: and Caleb $ sonne of Ie- phuune the Kenisite sayde vnto him: ‘Thou knowest what Y LORDE *sayde vnto Moses the man of God, concerninge me and the in
Cades Bernea. I was fortye yeare olde, whan 
Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE tsent me out from Cades Bernea, to spye out the londe, and I broughte him worde agayne, euen as I had it in my hert. Howbeit my brethren that wente vp with me, discoraged the hert of the people: but I folowed y LORDE my God vnto the vttemost.

'Then sware Moses vnto me the same daye, and sayde: The londe whervpon thou hast troden with thy fote, shalbe thine enheritaunce and thy childrens for euer, because thou hast folowed the LORDE my God vnto the vtte- most. And now hath the LORDE letten me lyue, facordinge as he sayde. It is now fyue and fortie yeare sence y LORDE spake this vuto Moses, wha Israel walked in the wilder- nesse. And now lo, this daie am I fyue and foure score yeare olde$ and am yet as stronge to daye, as I was in that daye whan Moses sent me out: euen as my strength was then, so is it now also to fighte, and to go out and in.

B| Geue me now therfore this mountayne, wherof the LORDE spake in that daye, and thou herdest it the same daye: for now the
Enakims dwell theron, and it hath greate and stronge cities: yf happly the LORDE wyl be with me, that I maye dryue thé out, as he hath sayde. ‘Then Iosua blessed him, jand so gaue Hebron vnto Caleb the sonne of lephune. Therfore was Hebron the enherit- aunce of Caleb the sonne of lephune the kenisite, vnto this daye, because he folowed the LORDE God of Israel vnto the vttemost.
* But afore tyme was Hebron called Kiriath- arba, q greate people were there amonge the
Enakims. And the lode ceassed from warre. 

The rb. Chapter. 

a HE lot of the trybe of the children of 
| luda amonge their kynreds, was y 

coaste of Edom by the wyldernesse of Zin, 

which borderth southwarde on the edge of 

* Nu. 14. c. 

i Nu. 14, c. 
$ Eccl. 46. b. 

t Nu. 13. a. 
[1 Par.7.d. losu. 21. b. € Iosu. 15. c. 

Thr boke of Josua. 

Chap. rb. 

the south coŭtrees. Their south borders were from the vttemost syde of the salt see, that is, from the coast that goeth southwarde, and commeth out from thece towarde y eastsyde of Acrabbim, and goeth forth thorow Zinna, and yet goeth vp from the south towarde
Cades Bernea, and goeth thorow Hesron, and goeth vp to Adara, q fetcheth a compase aboute Carcaa, « goeth thorow Asmona, and

‘commeth forth to the ryuer of Egipte, so that 

the see is the ende of y border. Let this be youre border B vare.

But the east border is from the salt see to the vttemost parte of Iordane.

The border northwarde, is from the see coast which is on ¥ edge of Iordane, and goeth vp vnto Beth Hagla, and stretcheth out from the north vnto Betharaba, and commeth vp vnto the stone of Bohen the sonne of Ruben, and goeth vp vnto Debir from y valley of
Achor, and from the north coaste that is towarde Gilgall, which lyeth ouer agaynst
Adumim vpwarde, which is on the north syde of the water. Then goeth it vnto y water of
Ensemes, and commeth out vnto the ** well of 
Rogell. ‘Then goeth it vp to the valley of the sonne of Hinnam, a longe besyde the lebusite that dwelleth from y southwarde, that is Ierusalem : and commeth vp vnto the toppe of the mount which lyeth before the valley of Hinnam from the westwarde, that borderth on the edge of the valley of Raphaim towarde the north.

Then commeth it from the toppe of the same mount vnto the water well of Nephtoah, and commeth out vnto the cities of mount
Ephron, and boweth towarde Baala, that is 
Kiriath Jarim, and fetcheth a copasse aboute from Baala westwarde vnto mount Seir, and goeth by the north syde of the mount Iarim,

‘that is Chessalon: and eómeth downe to Beth- 

semes, and goeth thorow Thimna, and breaketh out on the north syde of Acron, and stretcheth forth towarde Sicron, and goeth ouer mount
Baala, and eommeth out vnto labueel: so that their vttemost border is the see.

The weste border is the greate see. This is the border of the children of Iuda rounde aboute in their kynreds. Caleb the sonne of
Iephune had his porcion geué him amoge the children of Iuda (as the LORDE eomaunded

** 3 Reg.:1. b. 

Chap. rbi. 

D 

Iosua) namely * Kiriatharba of the father of 
Enak, that is Hebron. 

tAnd Caleb droue from thence the thre sonnes of Enak, Sesai, Ahiman, and Thalmas begotten of Enak. And from théce he wente vp tothe inhabiters of Debir. (As for Debir, it was called Kiriath Sepher afore tyme.)
And Caleb sayde: +Who so smyteth Kiriath 
Sepher and wynneth it, I wyll geue him my doughter Achsa to wyfe. ‘Then Athniel the sonne of Kenas the brother of Caleb wanne it: and he gaue him his doughter Achsa to wife.

And it fortuned whan they wente in, that she was counceled of hir houszbande, to axe a pece of londe of hir father. And she fell downe from theasse. ‘Then sayde Caleb vnto her: What ayleth the? She sayde: Geue me a blessynge, for thou hast geué me a south (and drye) londe: geue me welles of water also.
Then gaue he her welles abone and beneth. 

This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of 
Iuda amonge their kynreds. And the cities of the trybe of the children of Iuda, from one to another by the coastes of the Edomites towarde the south, were these: Cabzeel, Eder, lagur, Kina, Dimona, Adada, Kedes, Hazor, lethnam, Siph, Telem, Bealot, Hazor Hada- tha, Kirioth Hezron that is Hasor: Ama,
Sema, Molada, Hazor Gadda, Hesmon, Beth palet, Hazer Sual, Beer Seba, Bisziothia,
Baala, lim, Azem, Eltholad, Chesil, Harma, 
Ziklag, Madmanna, San Sana, Lebaoth, Sil- him, Ain, Rimo. § These are nyne and twentye cities ¢ their vyllages.

But in the lowe countrees was Esthaol, 
Zaren, Asna, Saroah, Engannim, Thapua, 
Enam, Iarmoth, Adullam, Socho, Aseka, 
Saaraim, Adithaim, Gedera, Giderotliim. 
These are fourtene cities q their vyllages. 

JF| Zena Hadasa, Migdal Gad, Dilean, Mispa, 

Iakthiel, Lachis, Bazekath, Eglo, Chabon, 
Lachma, Chithlis, Gedoroth, Beth Dagon, 
Naama, Makeda. These are sixtene cities and their vyllages.

Libna, Ether, Asen, Iephthah, Asua, Nezib, 
Keila, Achsib, Maresa. These are nyne cities and their vyllages. Ekron with hir doughters and vyllages. From Ekron vnto the see, all that reacheth vnto Asdod and the vyllages therof. Asdod with the doughters and vyllages therof. Gasa with hir doughters

* Iosu. 14. d. 

t Iudic. 1. b. £ Iud. 1. c. 1 Re. 17. c. 

The boke of Josua. 

Fo. ceri. 
And| 

and vyllages vnto the water of Egipte. the greate see is his border.

But vpon the mount was Samir, [atir, 
Socho, Danna, Kiriath Sanna, that is Debir: 
Anab, Esthemo, Annim, Gosen, Holon, Gilo. 
These are eleuen cities and their vyllagies. 
Maon, Carmel, Siph, Iuta, lesrael, lakdea, 
Sanoah, Kain, Gibea, Thimna. ‘These are ten cities and their vyllages. Halhul, Beth- zur, Gedor, Maarath, Beth Anoth, Elthekon.
These are sixe cities and their vyllages. 
Kiriath Baal (that ig Kiriath learim) Harabba, two cities q their vyllages. And in tlie wylder- nesse was Betharaba, Middin, Sechacha, Nib- san, and the Salt cite, and Engaddi. ‘These are sixe cities and their vyllagies. | But the lebusites dwelt at Ierusalem, and the children of Juda coude not dryue them awaye. So the lebusites remayne with the children of
Iuda at Ierusalem vnto this daye. 

The roi. Chapter. 

ND the lot fell vnto the children of| A 

Ephraim frö lordane ouer agaynst lericho, vnto the water on the east syde of
Iericho, and the wyldernesse, y goeth vp from lericho thorow the mountayne of Bethel, and commeth out from Bethel vnto Lus, and goeth thorow the coast of Arciataroth, and stretcheth downe westwarde vnto y coaste of Japhleti to y border of the lower Bethoron, and vnto Gaser: and the ende therof is by the greate see. This the children of Joseph
(Manasses q Ephraim) receaued to enherit- aunce,

The Border of the children of Ephraim amonge their kynreds of their enheritaunce from the east, was Ataroth Adar vnto the vpper Bethoron, q goeth out westwarde by
Michmethath that lyeth towarde the north, there fetcheth it a compasse towarde the east syde of the cite Thaenath Silo, and goeth|33 there thorow from the east vnto Ianoha, and commeth downe from lanoha vnto Ataroth and Naaratha, and bordreth on Jericho, and goeth out at Iordane. From Thapuah goeth it westwarde vnto Naalkama, and the out goinge of it is at the see.

This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Ephraim amonge their kyn- reds. And all the borders, cities with their vyllages of the childré of Ephraim laye scatred

1 Par. 12. a. $ Iosu. 19. a. 

31 

J| Iud. 1. d. 

Fo. erbij, 

a 

- 

B 

amonge the enheritaunce of the children of 
Manasse. And they droue not out y Cananites, which dwelt at Gaser. So y Cananites re- mayned amoge Ephraim vnto this daye, and became tribntaries.

The roij. Chapter. 

ND the lot fell vpo the trybe of Ma- 

nasse (for * he is Iosephs first sonne) and it fell vpon Machir the first sonne of
Manasse ¥ father of Gilead: for he was a mà of armes, therfore had he Gilead and
Basan. [t fell also vnto the other children of 
Manasse, namely vnto y childré of Abieser, the children of Helek, the children of Asriel, the children of Sechem, the children of
Hepher, and the children of Semida: These are the childré of Manasse the sonne of
Ioseph, males, amonge their kynreds. 

“But Zelaphead the sonne of Hepher the sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasse, had no sonnes, but doughters, and their names are these: Mahala, Noa,
Hagla, Milca, Tirza, and they came before 
Eleasar the prest, and before Iosua the sonne of Nun, and before the rulers, and sayde:
The LORDE commaunded Moses, to geue vs enheritaunce amonge oure brethren. And so they had enheritaunce geuen them amonge their fathers brethren, acordinge to the com- maundement of the LORDE.

There fell vpon Manasse ten meetlynes without the londe of Gilead and Basan, which lyeth beyode Iordane. For $ doughters of
Manasse receaued enheritaunce amonge his sonnes: but the other children of Manasse had the londe of Gilead. And the border of
Manasse was fro Asser forth vnto Michmeth- ath, that lyeth before Sichem, and reacheth vnto the righte syde of them of En Tapuah: for the londe of Tapuah fell vnto Manasse, and the border of Manasse is vnto the childré of Ephraim. Then commeth it downe to
Nahelkana towarde the south syde of the ryuer cities, which are Ephraims amonge the cities of Manasse. But from the north is the border of Manasse by the ryuer, and goeth forth by the see syde, south warde vnto
Ephraim, and to Manasse northwarde, and the see is his coaste. And it shal border on
Aser from the north, and on Isachar from the easte.

* Gen. 48. c. 

Cbr boke of Josua. 

Chap. roy. 

So (amoge Isachar aud Asser) Manasses|& 

had Beth Sean and the townes therof, and leblaam and the townes therof, and them of
Dor and their townes, and them of En Dor and their townes, q them of Taanach and their townes, and them of Mageddo and their townes, and the thirde parte of (the cite)
Nophet. And the children of Manasse conde not dryue awaye the inhabiters of these cities, but the Cananites beganne to dwell in the same londe. Howbeit whan the children of
Israel were able, they made the Cananites tributaries, and drone them not out.

Then spake the children of loseph vnto 
Iosua, and sayde: Wherfore hast thou geué me but one porcion and one meetlyne of en- heritaunce, and I am yet a greate people, as the LORDE hath blessed me so largely ?
Then sayde Iosua vnto them: For so moch as thou art a greate people, go vp therfore in to y wodd, and make thy selfe rowme there in the londe of the Pheresites and Raphaim, seynge moüt Ephraim is to narowe for the.

Then sayde the children of Ioseph: We shal not be able to attayne vnto the moun- taynes, for there are yron charettes amonge all the Cananites, that dwell in the londe of
Emek, by whom lyeth Beth Sean and the vyllages therof, and Jesrael in Emek. Tosua sayde vnto the house of loseph, euen to
Ephraim and Manasses: Thon art a greate people, q for so moch as thon art so greate, thou must not haue one lot, but the moun- tayne where y wod is, shal be thine: rote y out for y, so shall it be the outgoinge of thy porcion, whan thou drynest out the Cananites, which haue yro charettes, q are mightie.

The rbiij. Chapter. 

ND all the multitude of the children of 

Israel gathered them selues together vnto Silo, and they set vp $ Tabernacle of witnesse, and the londe was subdued vnto them. But there were yet seuen trybes of the childré of Israel, vnto whom they had not deuyded theirenheritaunce. And Iosua sayde vnto the children of Israel: How longe are ye so slowe, to go and coquere the londe, which the LORDE God of youre fathers hath genen you? Chose you thre men out of euery trybe, y I maye sende them, and that they maye get them vp and go thorow the

a Nu. 27.a. and 36. d. 

l E 

B 

Chap. rir. 

heritaunces therof, and come vnto me. 

Deuyde the londe in seuen partes. Iudas shal remayne vpon his borders of the south syde, and the house of loseph shal remayne vpon his borders of the north parte: but de- serybe ye the londe in seuen partes, and brynge them vnto me, then shal I cast ¥ lot for you before the LORDE oure God. * For the
Leuites haue no porcion amonge you, but the presthode of the LORDE is their enherit- aunce. “As for Gad q Ruben and y halfe trybe of Manasse, they haue receaued their enheritaunce beyonde Iordane eastwarde, which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE gaue them. s

Then the men gat vp, to go their waye. 
And whan they were aboute to go for to de- serybe the londe, Iosua commaunded them, and sayde: Go youre waye, and walke thorow the londe, and descrybe it, and come agayne vnto me, that I maye cast y lot for you before the LORDE at Silo. So the men departed, and wente thorow the londe, and descrybed it in seuen partes vpon a letter acordinge to the cities, and came to Iosua in to the hoost at
Silo. Then Iosua cast the lot ouer them at 
Silo before the LORDE, and there distributed the londe amonge the children of Israel, vnto euery one his parte.

And the lot of the trybe of the children of 
Ben Iamin fell acordinge to their kynreds, and the border of their lot wente out betwene the children of Iuda q the children of Ioseph.
And their border was on y north quarter of 
Iordane, and goeth vp from the north syde of lericho, and commeth vp to the mountayne westwarde, and goeth out by the wyldernesse of Dethauen, and goeth from théce towarde
Lus, euen by the south syde of Lus (that is 
Bethel) and commeth downe vnto Ataroth 
Adar by the mountayne which lyeth on $ south syde of the lower Bethoron. Then boweth it downe, and fetcheth a compasse vnto the south west quarter from the mount that lyeth ouer agaynst Bethoron towarde the south, and goeth out vnto Kiriath Baal, y is
Kiriath Iearim, a cite of the children of Iuda. 
This is the west border. 
€| But the south border is from Kiriath-Iearim forth, and goeth ont towarde the west, and commeth forth vnto y water well of Nepthoah:

* [osu. 13. d. and 14. a. 

The boke of Josua. 

londe, and descrybe it acordinge to the en- 

Fo. cerir, and goeth downe by the edge of the mount, that lyeth before the valley of the sonne of
Hinnam : and goeth downe thorow the valley of Hinnam on ý south syde of the Iebusites, and commeth downe to the well of Rogell, and stretcheth from the northwarde, and commeth out vnto En Semes, and commeth forth to the heapes that lye vp towarde Adu- mim, and cometh downe vnto the stone of
Bohen the sonne of Ruben, and goeth a longe besyde y playne felde which lyeth north warde, and commeth downe vnto y playne felde, and goeth besyde Beth Hagla that lyeth towarde the north, and his ende is at the north border
[of the Salt see, vnto y edge of Iordane south warde. ‘This is the south border.

But Iordane shal be the ende of the east quarter. This is the enheritannce of y children of Ben Jamin in their borders rounde aboute, amonge their kynreds.

'The cities of the trybe of the children of 
Ben Jamin amoge their kynreds are these: 
Tericho, Beth Hagla, Emek Kezitz, Betharaba, 
'Zemaraim, Bethel, Auim, Haphar, Aphra, 
Caphar Amonai, Aphni, Gaba: these are twolue cities and their vyllages.

Gibeon, Rama, Beeroth, Mispa, Caphira, 
Moza, Rekem, Ieerpeel, Thareala, Zela, 
Eleph, and the Iebusites, that is Ierusalem, 
Gibeath, Kiriath: these are fourtene cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of the children of Ben Jamin in their kynreds.

The ry. Chapter. 

HEN fell the seconde lot of the trybe of /@ 

the children of Simeon acordinge to 

their kynreds, and their enheritaunce was amonge the enheritaunce of y children of
Iuda. + And to their enheritaunce they had 
Beer Seba, Molada, Hazar Sual, Baala, 
Azem, El Tholad, Bethul, Harma, Ziklag, 
Betha Markaboth, Hazar Sussa, Beth Lebaoth, and Saruhen: these are thirtene cities q their vyllages. Ain, Rimon, Ether, Asan: these are foure cities and their vyllages. And all ¥ vyllages that lye aboute the cities vnto Balath
Beer Ramath towarde the south. This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of
Simeon in their kynreds: for the enheritaunce of the children of Simeon is vnder the porcion of the children of Iuda. For so moch as the enheritaunce of the children of Iuda was to

? [osu. 12. b. t 1 Pars. a. 

jo. cere. 

greate for them, therfore inhereted the children | 

| 
| 

€ |Sidon. 

| | * Iud. 18. g. 

of Simeon amonge their enheritaunce. 

The thirde lot fell vpon the childré of 
Zabulon after their kynreds. And the border of their enheritaüce was vnto Sarid, q goeth vp westwarde to Mareala, q bordreth vpon
Dabaseth, and reacheth vnto the ryuer that floweth ouer agaynst Iakneam : q turneth from
Sarid eastwarde vnto the border of Cisloth 
Thabor, and cometh out vnto Dabrath, and reacheth vp to Iapia, and from théce goeth it westwarde thorow Githa llepher, and Itha
Kazim, and commeth out towarde Rimon, 
Hamthoar Hanea, q fetcheth a compasse 

33|aboute from the north vnto Nathon, q the 

goynge out of it is in y valley Iephtha El, 
Katath, Nahalal, Simron, ledeala, « Beth- lehem: These are twolue cities and their

llges. This is the enheritauce of the childré of Zabulon in their kynreds: these are their cities and vyllages.

'The fourth lot fell vpo the childre of 
Isachar after their kynreds, q their border was lesraela, Chessulloth, Sunem, Hapharaim,
Sion, Anaharath, Raabith, Kision, Abez, 
Kemeth, En Gànim, Enhada, Beth Pazez, a bordreth vpon Thabor, Sahazima, Beth
Semes, and Y outgoinge of it was at Iordane. 
These are sixtene cities and their vyllages. 
This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Isachar in their kynreds, cities and vyllages.

The fifth lot fell vpon the trybe of the children of Asser, after their kynreds. And their border was Helkath, Hali, Beten, Ach- saph, Alamelech, Amead, Miseal; and borderth on Carmel vnto the see, and on Sihor, and
Libnath, and turneth towarde the east vnto 
Beth Dagon, and bordreth on Zabulon, and on the valley of Iephtael, and towarde the north syde of Beth Emek and Negiel: q commeth out vnto Cabul on the lefte syde of
Ebron, Rehob, Hamon and Cana, vnto greate 
And turneth towarde Rama, vnto the stronge cite of Zor, and turneth towarde Hossa, and goeth out vnto the see, after y meetlyne towarde Achsib, Vma, Aphek, ps

"These are two and twentye cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of the
'trybe of the children of Asser in their kinreds cities and vyllages.
| The syxte lot fell vpon the children of 

t Iosu. 24. f. 

Che boke of Josua. 

Chap. rr. 

Nephtali in their kynreds. And their border was fro Heleph Elon thorow Zaanaim, Adai
Nekeb, Iabne El vnto Lakum, and goeth out vnto Iordane, and turneth westwarde to Asnoth
Thabor, and cómeth out from thence vnto 
Hukok, and bordreth on Zabulon towarde the south, and on Asser towarde the west, and on
Iuda by Iordane towarde the east: and hath jstronge cities, Zidimzer, Hamath Rakath,
Chinnaret, Adama, Rama, Hazor, Kedes, 
Edrei, En Hazor, lereon, Migdal Elharé, 
Beth Anath, Beth Sames. These are nyen- tene cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of y trybe of the children of
Nephtali in their band, cities, and vyllages. 

"The seuenth lot fell vpon the trybe of the children of Dan after their kynreds. And the border of their enheritaunce was Zarea,
Esthaol, Irsames, Saalabin, Aialon, Iethla, 
Elon, Thimnata, Ekron, Eltheke, Gibetho 
Baalath, Iehud, Bnerbarak, Gat Rimon, Me 
Iarkon, Rakon with the border by Iapho, and on the same goeth the border of the children of Dan out. And the children of Da wente vp, and foughte agaynst Lesem, and wanne it, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and toke it in possession, q dwelt therm, and
* called it Dan, after ¥ name of their father. 
'This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Dan in their kynreds, cities, and vyllages.

And wha y lode was all parted out with the borders therof, the children of Israel gaue losua the sonne of Nun, an enheritaunce amonge them, and (acordynge to the com- maundement of the LORDE) they gaue him y cite that he requyred, namely, t ''himnath
Serah, vpon moüt DS there buylded he the cite, and dwelt therin.

These are the enheritaunces which Eleasar the prest and Iosua y sonne of Nun, and the chefest of the fathers amonge y tribes, deuided out by lot vnto the childre of Israel at Silo before the LORDE, euen before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnes, and so they ended the deuydinge out of the londe.

The rr. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE spake vnto Iosua, and|q 
A sayde: Speake to the children of Israel : 
Geue amonge you fre cities, t wherof I spake vnto you by Moses, that a deedsleyer which

£ Exo. 21. b. Deut. 19. c. 

Chap. rri. 

B 

sleyeth a soule vnawarres and vnwittingly, maye flye thither, y they maye be fre amoge you from the avenger of bloude. And he that flyeth to one of those cities, shal stonde without before the porte of the cite, and shewe his cause before the Elders of the cite, then shall they take him to them in to the cite, and geue him place to dwell with them.

And yf the auenger of bloude folowe vpou him, they shall not delyuer the deedslayer in to his handes, for so moch as he hath slayne his ueghboure vnawarres, aud was not his enemye afore: but he shall dwell in y cite, tyll he stonde before the congregaciou in iudgment, vntyll the hye prest dye, which shall be at that tyme. ‘Then shall the deed- sleyer returne, and go vnto his awne cite, and vnto his house to the cite, from whence he was fled.

Then appoynted they Kedes in Galile vpon mount Nepthali, and Sechem vpon mount
Ephraim, and Kiriatharba, that is Hebron vpon moüt Iuda. And beyode Iordane on the east syde of lericho, they gaue Beser in the wildernes vpon the playne out of the trybe of Ruben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the trybe of Gad, and Golan in Basan out of the trybe of Manasse.

These were the cities appoynted for all 1 children of Israel, and for the straungers whic dwelt amonge them, that whosoeuer had slayne a soule vnawarres, might flye thither, that he shulde not be put to death by the auenger of bloude, tyll he had stonde before the con- gregacion.

The rri. Chapter. 

HEN the chefe fathers amonge the 

Leuites came forth vuto Eleasar the prest and to Iosua the sonne of Nun, and to y awncient fathers amoge the trybes of the children of Israel, and spake vnto them at
Silo in the londe of Canaan, and sayde: *The 
LORDE commaunded by Moses, that we shulde haue cities geuen vs to dwell in, and the suburbes of the same for oure catell.
Then the children of Israel gaue of their enheritaunce these cities and the suburbes

therof, vnto the Leuites, acordynge to the commaundement of the LORDE.

And the lot fell vpon the kynred of the 
Kahathites, and the children of Aaron the 

* Num. 35. a. 

The boke of Josua. 

prest amonge the Leuites, had by the lott thyrtene cities of the trybe of Iuda, of the trybe of Simeon, and of the trybe of Ben lamin. The other childré of Kahath of the same kynred, had by the lot ten cities, of the trybe of Ephraim, of the trybe of Dan, and of the halfe trybe of Manasse.

But the children of Gerson of the same kynred had by the lot thyrtene cities, of the trybe of Isachar, of the trybe of Asser, of y trybe of Nepthali, and of the halfe trybe of
Manasse at Basan. 

The children of Merari of their kyured had twolue cities, of the trybe of Ruben, of the trybe of Gad, aud of the trybe of Zabulon.
So the children of Israel gaue these cities and their suburbes vnto the Leuites by lott, as the
LORDE commaunded by Moses. 

Of the trybe of the children of Iuda, aud of the trybe of the children of Simeon, they gaue these cities (which they named by name) vnto the children of Aaron of the kynred of the Kahathites amonge the children of Leui: for the first lot was theyrs.

So they gaue them Kiriatharba, which was the fathers of Enak, that is Hebron vpor the mount Iuda, and the suburbes therof rounde aboute. f But the felde of the cite and the vyllages therof, gaue they vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune for his possession.

Thus gaue they vnto the children of Aaron the prest, the fre cite of the deed sleyers,
Hebron and the suburbes therof, Libna aud the suburbes therof, Iathir and the suburbes therof, Esthuma and the suburbes therof,
Holon and the suburbes therof, Debir and the suburbes therof, Ain and the suburbes therof, Iuta and the suburbes therof, Beth
Semes and the suburbes therof, euen nyne cities of these two trybes.

But of the trybe of Beu Iamin they gaue foure cities, Gibeon and ¥ suburbes therof,
Gaba, and the suburbes therof, Anathot and the suburbes therof, Almon and the suburbes therof: so that all the cities of the children of Aaron the prest were thirtene with their suburbes.

The kynreds of the other children of Kahath the Lenites, had by their lott foure cities, of the trybe of Ephraim, and they gaue thé the fre cite of the deedsleiers, Seché and the suburbes therof vpon mount Ephraim Gaser

t Iosu. 14. d. 1 Par. 7. d. 

Fo. errrt. 

LU 

c 

lik iLLSií1tí— a ———————————————— PHÓ recie M e | 

So. Cerys. and the suburbes therof, Kibzaim and the sub- urbes therof, Bethron and the suburbes therof.
B| Of the trybe of Dan foure cities, Eltheke and ¥ suburbes therof, Gibthon and the suburbes therof, Aialon and the suburbes therof, Gath Rimon and the suburbes therof.
Of the halfe trybe of Manasses two cities, 
Thaenach and the suburbes therof, Gath 
Rimon and the suburbes therof: so that all the cities of the other children of y kynred of
Kahath, were ten with their suburbes. 

But vnto the children of Gerson amonge the kynreds of the Leuites were geuen, Of the halfe trybe of Manasse two cities, the fre cite for the deedslayer, Gola in Basan and the suburbes therof, Beasthra, and the suburbes therof Of the trybe of Isachar foure cities,
Kision and the suburbes therof, Dabrach and 
‘the suburbes therof, Iarmuth and the suburbes therof, Engannim and the suburbes therof.
‘Of the trybe of Asser foure cities, Miseal, 
Abdon, Helkath and Rehob with the suburbes therof. Of the trybe of Nephtali thre cities, the fre cite Kedes (for the deedsleyer) in
Galile, Hamoth, Dor, and Karthan with the 
'suburbes therof: so that all the cities of the kynred of the Gersonites were thirtene with their suburbes.

Vnto the kynreds of Merari the other 
Leuites were geuen, Of the trybe of Zabulon foure cities, lakneam, Kartha, Dimna and
Nahalal with ¥ suburbes therof. Of the trybe of Ruben foure cities, Bezer, Iahza, Kedemoth and Mephaat with their suburbes. Of the trybe of Gad foure cities, the fre cite for the deedsleyer, Ramoth in Gilead, Mahanaim,
Heszbon and laeser with their suburbes: so that all the cities of the children of Merari amonge their kynreds of ¥ other Leuites, were twolue. Thus all the cities of the Leuites amonge ¥ possession of the children of Israel, were eight and fortye with their suburbes.
And these cities were so dealte out, that euery one had their suburbes rounde aboute, the one as the other.

Thus the LORDE gaue the children of 
Israel all the londe, which he had sworne vnto their fathers to geue: q they toke possession of it, and dwelt therin. And the LORDE gaue thé rest before all those y were aboute them *like as he sware vnto their fathers, ¢

none of their enemies stode agaynst the, but 

hrs] 

*Gen.17.a. tNum.32.f. Deut. 3. b. Iosu. 12. 3. 1 Deut. 

The boke of Josua. 

Chap. rrij. all their enemies delyuered he in to their hande. And their myssed nothinge of all the good that the LORDE had promysed vnto the house of Israel, it came euery whyt.

The rrij. Chapter. 
HEN Iosua called ¥ Rubenites and|& 
Gaddites, and y halfe trybe of Manasse, and sayde vnto them: Ye haue kepte all, tthat Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE commaunded you, and haue herkened vnto my voyce in all ý I haue commatded you.
Ye haue not forsaken youre brethre a longe season, vnto this daye, and haue wayted vpon the commaundement of the LORDE youre
God. For so moch now as the LORDE youre God hath broughte youre brethré to rest, as he promysed them, turne you now, and go youre waye to youre tentes in to the londe of youre possession, which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE gaue you beyode Iordane.

But take diligent hede now, that ye do acordinge to the commaundement and lawe which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE hath commaunded: + That ye loue the
LORDE youre God, and walke in all his wayes, and kepe his commaundementes, and cleue vnto him, and serue him with all youre hert and with all youre soule. So [osua blessed them, and let them go. And they wente vnto their tentes.

Vnto the halfe trybe of Manasse had Moses geuen possession at Basan: vnto the other halfe gaue Iosua amonge their brethren on this syde Iordane westwarde. And whan he let them go to their tentes and blessed them, he sayde vnto them: Ye come home agayne with greate good vnto youre tétes, with ex- ceadynge moch catell, syluer, golde, brasse, yron and rayment, $distribute therfore the spoyle of youre enemyes amonge youre brethren.

So the Rubenites, Gaddites, and the halfe trybe of Manasse returned, and wente from the children of Israel out of Silo (which lyeth in the londe of Canaan) to go in to the countre of Gilead to the londe of their posses- ston, that they mighte possesse it, acordynge to thecommaundementof the LORDE by Moses.

And whan they came vnto the heapes by 
Iordane, which lye in the londe of Canaan, the same Rubenites, Gaddites, and the halfe trybe of Manasses buylded there besyde Ior-

10.c. § Deut.20.b. Num.31.d. Iosu.8.f. 1 Re.30.e. 

Chap. rrj. The boke of Josua. Fo. rii. dane, a fayre greate altare. But whan the| {offerynges or meatofferinges theron, or to

children of Israel herde saye: Beholde, the children of Ruben, the children of Gad, and the halfe trybe of Manasse haue buylded an altare ouer agaynst the londe of Canaan vpon the heapes by Iordane on this syde the children of Israel, they gathered them selues together with the whole congregacion at Silo, to go vp agaynst thë with an armye. And (in the meane season) they sent to them in to the londe of Gilead, Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest, and with him ten chefe prynces amonge the houses of their fathers, out of euery tribe in Israel one. And they came to the children of Ruben, to the children of Gad, and to the halfe trybe of Manasse in the londe of Gilead, and sayde :

Thus sayeth the whole congregacion of the 
LORDE vnto you: * What trespace is this, y ye haue trespaced agaynst the God of feral that ye shulde turne backe from y LORDE this daye, to builde you an altare, for to fall awaye from the LORDE?

t Haue we not ynough of the wickednesse of 
Peor? from the which we are not yet clensed this daye, and there came a plage amonge the congregacion of the LORDE: and ye turne you backe this daye from the LORDE, and this dayeare ye fallen awayefromthe LORDE, that he maye be wroth to daye or tomorow at the whole congregacion of the LORDE.

Yf the londe of youre possession be vncleane, then come ouer in to the londe that the
LORDE possesseth, where the dwellynge of the LORDE is, and take possessions amonge vs, and fall not awaye from the LORDE and from vs, to builde you an altare without the altare of the LORDE oure God. 1 Did not
Achan the sonne of Serah trespace in the thinge that was damned, and the wrath came ouer y whole congregacion of Israel and he wente not downe alone for his myszdede ?

É| Then answered the children of Ruben, and 

the children of Gad, and the halfe trybe of 
Manasse, and sayde vnto the heades and prynces of Israel: The mightie God} LORDE, the mightie God the LORDE knoweth, and
Israel knoweth also, yf this be a trangressynge or trespacynge agaynst the LORDE, then let it not helpe vs this daye: Yf we haue buylded the altare, because we wolde turne awaye backe from the LORDE, to offre burnt-

* Judi. 20. b. t Num. 25. a. 

1 Iosu. 7. a. 

make eny deedofferynges vpon it, then let the 
LORDE requyre it: And yf we haue not done it rather for very feare of this thinge, and sayde: To daye or tomorow mighte youre children saye vnto oure children:

What haue ye to do with the LORDE the 
God of Israel? The LORDE hath set Iordane for a border betwene vs and you ye children of Ruben and Gad, ye haue no porcion in the
LORDE: By this shulde youre children make oure children to turne awaye from the feare of the LORDE.

Therfore sayde we: Let vs make oure children an altare, not for sacrifice, ner for burntofferinge, $but that it maye be a toke betwene vs and you, and oure posterities, that we maye serue the LORDE in his sighte with oure burntofferinges, deedofferinges, and other offeringes: and y youre children to daye or tomorow neade not to saye vnto oure children :
Ye haue no parte in the LORDE. 

And we sayde: But yf they shulde speake so vnto vs, or to oure posterities to daye or to- morow, then maye wesaye: Beholde the symi- litude of y altare of the LORDE, which oure fathers made, not for sacrifyce, ner for burnt- offerynge, butfor a wytnesse betwene vsand you.

God forbydde, that we shulde fall awaye from the LORDE, to turne backe from him this daye, and to buylde an altare for sacrifice, for burntofferinge and for eny presente, with- out y altare of the LORDE oure God, that stondeth before his Habitacion.

But whan Phineas the prest, and the chefe of the congregacion, the prynces of Israel which were with him, herde these wordes, that the children of Ruben, Gad, and Manasse had spoken, they pleased them well. And Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest sayde vnto the children of Rubé, Gad and Manasse: This daye we knowe, that y LORDE is amonge vs, in that ye haue not trespaced agaynst the
LORDE in this dede. Now haue ye de- lyuered the children of Israel out of the hande of the LORDE.

Then Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest, and the rulers returned out of the londe of Gilead, from the children of Ruben and Gad vnto y londe of Canaã to the children of Israel, and bronght them worde agayne of the matter.

Then were the children of Israel well 

§ Gen. 31. g. Deu. 30. d. Josu. 24. f. 

F 

6 

So. eerriiý. edtente with the thinge. And they praysed the God of Israel, and sayde nomore that they wolde go vp agaynst them with an armye, to destroye the londe that the childré of Ruben and Gad dwelt in. And y childre of Ruben and Gad called the name of the altare: This

altare be witnesse betwene vs, that the 
LORDE is God. 

The rriij. Chapter. 

ND after a longe season, whan the 
LORDE had bronghte Israel to rest from all their enemies rounde aboute: and
Iosna was now olde and well stricken in age, he called all Israel and their Elders, heades, iudges, and officers, and sayde vnto them: I am olde and well aged, and ye haue sene all that the LORDE youre God hath done vnto all these nacions in youre sighte. For the
LORDE youre God himself hath foughte for yon. Beholde, I haue parted amonge yon y rénaunt of the nacions by lot, vnto euery trybe his enheritaunce from lordane forth, and all the nacions whom I haue roted out

vnto the greate see westwarde. 

And the LORDE youre God shal thrust them out before you, and dryue them awaye from you, that ye maye haue their londe in possession, as the LORDE youre God hath promysed you. Be stroge now therfore, that ye maye obserue and do all that is wrytten in the boke of the lawe of Moses: *so that ye turne not asyde from it, nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte: that ye come not amonge y remnaunt of these naciós, which are with you: And se that ye make no men- cion ner t sweare by the names of their goddes, nether serue them, ner bowe youre selnes vnto them: But cleue vnto the LORDE youre
God, as ye haue done vnto this daye: the shal the LORDE dryue awaye greate and mightie nacions before you, like as there hath no man bene able to stonde before you vnto this daye. +One of you shall chace a thou- sande: for the LORDE youre God fighteth for yon, acordinge as he promysed yon. Take diligent hede therfore vnto youre soules, that ye loue the LORDE youre God.

"But yf ye turne backe, and clene vnto these other nacions, and make mariages with them, so that ye come amoge them, and they amonge

* Deu. 4. a. and 6. d, 
Esa. 30. c. 

t Deu. 10. d. 
* Deu. 7. a. and 12. d. 

t Leui. 26.2. 
$ Nu. 33. g. 

||3Re.2.a. * Deut.28.b. **Gen.11.d. tt Gen. 12... 

Che boke of Josua. 

pols be ye sure then, that the LORDE youre} 
God shall nomore dryue out all these nacions before you, $but they shall be vnto you a snare and net, and prickes in youre sydes, and thornesin youre eyes, vntyll he haue destroyed you from the good lóde, which the LORDE youre God hath genen you.

Beholde, lthis daye do I go the waye of|B 

all the worlde, and ye shal knowe euen from all youre hert and from all youre soule, that there hath not fayled one worde of all the good that the LORDE youre God promysed you.
Now like as all the good is come that the 
LORDE youre God promised you: feuen so shal the LORDE cause all euell to come vpon you, tyll he haue destroied you from this good londe, which the LORDE yonre God hath geuen you: yf ye transgresse y couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, which he hath com- maunded you. And yf ye go youre waye and serue other goddes, and worshipe thé, then shall the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote ouer you, q shall shortly destroye you out of the good londe, y he hath genen you.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

OSUA gathered all the trybes of Israel 
I together vnto Sichem, and called the 
Elders of Israel, the heades, iudges and officers. 
And wha they were come before God, he sayde vnto all the people: Thus sayeth the
LORDE the God of Israel: ** Youre fathers dwelt afore time beyode y water, Abraha «|
Nahor with Tarah their father q serued other goddes. tt Then toke I youre father Abraham beyonde the water, q caused him to walke in the londe of Canaan, q multiplied his sede, and gaue him Isaac,’ and vnto Isaac I gane
Iacob and Esau, and gane Esau mout Seir to possesse. łł As for lacob, q his childré, they wente downe in to Egipte.

Then sent I Moses and Aaron, and plaged 33 

Egipte* as I haue done amonge the. After y $$ brought I yon and youre fathers out of
D ipto. And whan ye came to ¥ see, and the 
Egipcians folowed vpon youre fathers with charettes and horse men vnto the reed see, then eryed they vnto the LORDE, which put a darcknesse betwene you and the Egipcians, and broughte the see vpon them, and ouer- whelmed them. And youre eyes haue sene

b Gen. 21.a. Gen. 25. c. 
* Exod. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 

Gen. 32. a. 11 Ge. 46. a. 
$$ Exod. 14. 

Chap. rij. 

t 

Chap. rrt. 

Che boke of Josua. 

Fo. corr. 

what I dyd to y Egipcians, q ye dwelt in y wildernes a loge season. * And I broughte you in to y 9 londe of the Amorites, which dwelt onde lordane: q wha they fought agaynst you, I delyuered them in to youre hande, that ye mighte haue their countre in possession, and I destroyed them before you. t Then Balac the sonne of Ziphor the kynge of the Moabites gat him vp, and foughte agaynst Israel: and he sente and bad “call
Balaam the sonne of Beor, to curse you, neuer- theles I wolde not heare him, but I blessed you, and delyuered you out of his hande.

€| And whan ye wente ouer Iordane, and 

came vnto lericho, the citesyns of Jericho foughte agaynst you, the Amorites, Pheresites,
Cananites, Hethites, Girgosites, Heuites, q lebusites: howbeit I delyuered the in to youre hande. £AÀnd I sent hornettes before you, which droue them out before you, namely the two kynges of y Amorites: not thorow thy swerde, ner thorow thy bowe. “And I haue geuen you a londe whervpon ye bestowed no laboure, and cities which ye haue not buylded, that ye might dwell therin, and that ye might eate 'of the vynyardes and olyue trees which ye haue not planted. Feare the LORDE now therfore,’ and serue him perfectly and in the trueth, and let go the goddes, whom youre fathers serued beyonde the water and in
Egipte, and serue ye y LORDE. 

But yf ye like not to serue the LORDE, thé chose you this daye whom ye wyll serue: the God whom youre fathers serued beionde y water, or y goddes of the Amorites, in whose lode ye dwell. As for me and my house, we wyll serue the LORDE. Then answered the people, and saide: God forbidde, that we shulde forsake the LORDE, a serue other goddes.
For the LORDE oure God brought ' vs and oure fathers out of the londe of Egipte fro the house of bondage, and did soch greate tokens before oure eyes, and preserued vs all ý waye that we wente, and amonge all the nacions, whom we trauayled by. "And the LORDE thrust out before vs all the people of the Amo- rites that dwelt in the londe. Therfore wyll we also serue the LORDE, for he is oure God.

Tosua sayde vnto the people : Ye can not 

+*+ Num. 21. d. t Num. 22. a. Deut. 23. a. 
1 Exo. 33. a. Deu. 7. d. a Deut. ô. b. * 1 Reg. 7. a. 
* Iosu. 23. d. $4 Re. "93. a. 

Tob. 14. c. 

serue the LORDE: for he is an holy € God, mightie, and gelous, which spareth not youre trangressions and synnes. But yf ye forsake the LORD E, and serue a straunge god, then shall the LORDE turne him, ‘and qe you euell, and consume you, after that he hath done you good. The people sayde vnto Iosua:
Not so, but we will serue the LORDE. Then sayde losua vnto the people: Ye are wit- nesses ouer youre selues, that ye haue chosen you the LORDE, to serue him. And they sayde: Yee. Then put awaye from you (sayde he) the straunge goddes y are amonge you, and enclyne youre hert vnto the LORDE the’
God of Israel. And the people sayde vnto Io- sua: We wyll serue the LORDE oure God, and be obedient vnto his voyce. §So Iosua made a couenaunt with the people y same daye, and laied statutes q lawes before them at Sichem.

And losua wrote this acte in the boke ofi 4f 

the lawe of God, and toke a greate stone, q set it vp there vnder an oke, which was in y
Sanctuary of Y LORDE, and sayde vnto all the people: Beholde, aba stone shall be wit-| nesse ouer you: For it hath herde all the, wordes of the LORDE, which he hath spoken| vnto vs, and shall be a witnesse ouer you, that ye denye not youre God. So Iosua let the people go euery one to his euheritaüce.

And it fortuned after these actes, y Iosua the sonne of Nun y seruaüt of the LORDE dyed, whan he was an hundreth and ten yeare olde, and was buried in the border || of his enheritaüce at Thimnath Serah, which lyeth| on the mount Ephraim, on the ‘north side of

|. 2 ,/ t tnürt ot The boke Di Hosta, O Z — — — — — | 

mount Gaas. And the children of Israel serued the LORDE as longe as Iosua lyuedy and the Elders (that lyued ‘longe after Josua) which knewe all the workes of $ y LORDE, that he had done vnto Israel. {The ese: of loseph, which the children of Israel had broughte out of Egipte, buried they at Sichem, in the pece of the londe,** j y Iacob boughte of the children of Hemor y father of Sichem for an hundreth pens, and was the enheritaunce of the children of Ioseph. Eleasar the sonne of
Aaron died also, and they buried him at 
Gibeath, which was Phineas his sonnes, that was geuen him vpon mount Ephraim.

41 Reg. 7 f 2 Par. See

e Iudic, 2. b. 
€ Gen. 50. d. 

** Gen.3. 

|| Iosu. 19. d. 
Exo. 13. d. Acto. 7. b. 
3. d. 

The ende of the boke of Josua. 

synne, and are punyshed. 

The boke of the Judges 

called, Judicum. 

Wihat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. 1. 

Iudasis made captayne of the people, subdueth the Cananytes, and wynneth Ierusalem. Israel roteth not out the Cananites as God com- maunded them

Chap. II. 

The angcll of God punysheth them, because they cosente to their enemies. The childre of
Israel serue Baal, for the which cause God geueth them ouer in to captiuyte.

Chap. I1. 
God punysheth Israel, and yet delyuereth them wonderously.

Chap. Ill. 

|Debbora. the prophetisse with Barach ouercó- 

meth Sissara, and delyuereth the people of the 
LORDE 
Chap. V. 
The songe of prayse which Debbora and Barach songe because of the victory.

Chap. VI. 
For their synnes God geueth them ouer in to the handes of the Madianites, from the which
Gedeon delyuereth them. 

Chap. VII. 
How Gedeon parteth his hoost, œ discomfiteth the Madianites.

Chap. VII. 
Gedeon punysheth the at Suchoth, dyeth, and is buried.
Chap. IX. 

Abimelech seketh the superiorite, slayeth his 

seuentye brethren, wynneth Siche and Thebes. 
€bap. X. 

Thola q lair rule the people. The Israelites 

Chap. XI. 

lepthe is made ruler of the people, and ouer- cometh Ammon in Maspha.
Chap. XII. 

The Ephraites rise vp against lepthe, and there 

are slayne of them two and fortye thousande. 
Chap. XIII. 

The byrth of Samson is shewed vnto his father and mother by an angell.

Chap. XIII. 

Samson taketh a wife ï Timnath, renteth a yonge 
Lyon in peces, and putteth forth a dark sen- tence vnto his companyons.

Chap. XV. 

How Samson hurteth the Philistynes with the foxes. He slayeth a thousande me with the cheke bone of an asse.

Chap. XVI. 

Samson taketh both the portes of the gate of the cite vpon his backe, q beareth them vp to the mount. Dalila the harlot bryngeth him in dotage, so that he telleth her his secretes, and is blynded of his enemies,

Chap. XVII. 

Of Micha and his ymage ac. 

Chap. XVIII. 
Dan sendeth out men to spye the lode, which take 
Michas ymage, q carie awaye the prest. 
Chap. XIX. 
How shamefully the Gabeonites deale with the 
Leuites wife. 
Chap. XX. 
How the same synne is punyshed. 
Chap. XXI. 
The Ben Iamites optayne wyues in Israel, who the Israelites had sworne not to geue them.

‘Chap. í 

The first Chapter. a FTER the death of Iosua the children of Israel axed the LORDE, and sayde:
Who shall go vp q be oure captayne of warre against y Cananites? The LORDE sayde:
Iuda shall go vp. * Beholde, I haue delyuered the londe in to his hande. Then sayde Iuda vnto his brother Simeon: Go vp with me in to my lot, and let vs fighte against the Ca- nanites, then wyl I go agayne with the in to thy lot: So Simeon wente with him.

Now whan luda wente vp the LORDE delyuered the Cananites and Pheresites in to their hides, q they slewe tē thousande me at
Besek : q they foude Adoni Besek at Besek, t foughte agaynst him, and slewe the Ca- nanites and Pheresites. But Adoni Besek fled, and they folowed after him: and whan they had ouertaken him, they cut of the thobes of his handes and fete.

Then sayde Adoni Besek : Thre score and ten kynges with the thombes of their hades q fete cut of, gathered vp the meate y was lefte vnder my table. * Now as I haue done, so hath God rewarded me agayne. And he was broughte vnto Ierusalé, where he dyed.

But y childré of Iuda foughte agaynst lerusalem, and wane it, tand smote it with the edge of the swerde, and set fyre vpon the cite. Then wente the children of Israel downe, ito fighte agaynst ý Cananites, y dwelt vpon the mount, and towarde the south, and in the valleys. §And Iuda wente agaynst the Ca- nanites, which dwelt at Hebron. (As for
Hebron, it was called Kiriatharba afore tyme) and they smote Sesai, q Achiman, and
Thalmai. 

And from thence he wente agaynst y inha- biters of Debir (but Debir was called Kiriath
Sepher aforetyme.) And Caleb sayde: I| He y smyteth Kiriath Sepher, q wynneth it, I wyl geue him my doughter Achsa to wife. ‘Then
Athniel the sonne of Kenas, Calebs yongest brother wane it. And he gaue him his dough- ter Achsa to wife. And it fortuned y whan they wéte in, she was counceled of hir housz- bande, to axe a pece of londe of hir father.
And she fell from the asse. Thé sayde Caleb vnto her: What ayleth $? She sayde: Geue

> osu.23.a. tLeu.24.d. Iudic.15.c. + Deu. 20. c. 
§ Iosu. 15. d. || Iosu. 15. d. 2 Par. 12. a. 1 Re. 17. c.| 

Ai Deu. 54.a. ** Nu.10.d. 1 Re.15.d. ° Num. 21. a| 

The boke of the Junges. So. ceproij.| 

me a blessynge, for thou hast geuen me a south q drye londe, geue me also a watery londe. Then gaue he her a londe that was watery a boue and beneth.

And the childré of ý Kenyte Moses brother| Ð in lawe, wente vp out of the f palme cite, with the children of Iuda in to the wylder- nesse of luda, that lyeth on y south syde of the eite Arad: **and wente their waye, q dwelt amonge the people. And Iuda wente with his brother Simeon, q they smote the
Cananites at Zephath, q damned them, q called the name of the cite Horma.” ++ Iuda also wanne Gasa with the borders therof, a
Ascalon with hir borders, q Accaron with the coastes therof. And the LORDE was with
Tuda, so that he conquered the mountaynes: but them that dwelt in the valley coulde he not conquere, because they had yron charettes.
And acordinge as Moses had sayde, they gaue 
Hebron vnto Caleb, which droue out the thre sonnes of Enak.’ tiHowbeit y children of
Ben lamin droue not out $ Iebusites which dwelt at lerusalem, but y lebusites dwelt amonge the children of Ben Iamin at Ieru- salem vnto this daye.

Likewyse the children of Ioseph wéte vpl% also vnto Bethel, *& the LORDE was with thé. And the house of loseph spyed out
Bethel (which afore tyme was called Lus) and the watch men sawe a man goinge out of the cite, and saide vnto him: Shewe vs where we maye come in to the cite, Sq we wyll shewe mercy vpon the. And whan he had shewed them where they mighte come in to the cite, they smote y cite with the edge of the swerde: but they let the man go « all his frendes.

Then wéte the same man vp in to y coun- tre of the Hethites, q buylded a cite, and called it Lus, q so is the name of it yet vnto this daye. And Manasses |llldroue not out
Beth Sean with the vyllages therof, ner 
Thaenah with the vyllages therof, ner the in- | Jf habiters of Dor with the vyllages therof: ner the inhabiters of Iebleam with the vyllages therof, ner the inhabiters of Mageddo with | the vyllages therof, and y Cananites beganne | to dwell in the same lonia But whan Israel

was mightie, he made the Cananites tribu- taries, and droue them not out.

tt Iosu. 15.a. ^losu.14.d. $jIosu.15.g. ¢Iosu. 16. a. 
$$ Iosu. 2. c. II] Nu. 33. g. Iosu. 17.c. 

M .———— M — —— ÀÀM——— E 0 

| ifo. cerroitj. 

(5| Asser droue not ont 

^In like maner Ephraim droue not out y 
Cananites that dwelt at Gaser, but the Ca- nanites dwelt amonge them at Gaser.

Zabulon also drone not out the inhabiters 

of Kitron and Nahalol, but y Cananites dwelt amonge them, q were tributaries. y inhabiters of Aco, q Y inhabiters of Sidon, of Ahelab, of Achsib, of Helba, of Aphik a of Rehob, but ¥ Asser- ites dwelt amoge the Cananites that dwelt in the lode, for they droue thé not out.

Nephtali droue not ont y inhabiters of Beth 
Semes, ner of Beth Anath, but dwelt amonge the Cananites which dwelt in the londe: how- beit they of Beth Semes and of Beth Anath were tributaries.

And the Amorites subdued the childré of 
Dan vpon the mountaine, and suffred them not to come downe in to the valley. And the
Amorites beganne to dwell vpo mount Heres at Aiolon and at Saalbim. Howbeit y hande of y house of Ioseph was to sore for them, and they became tributaries. And the border of the Amorites was, as a mà goeth vp towarde
Acrabim. and from the rocke, q from the toppe. 

The ij. Chapter. 

UT there came vp a messatiger of y 
B LORDE from Gilgall vnto Bochim, pee sayde: I haue caried you vp hither out of
Egipte, and broughte you in to the londe that I sware vnto youre fathers, q saide: *1 wyl neuer breake my couenaunt with yon, that ye shulde make no couenaunt with the indwellers of this londe, but breake downe their altares: Neuertheles ye haue not herk- ened vnto my voyce. Wherfore haue ye done this? Then saide I morouer: I wil not dryue them out before you, that they maye be a fall vnto you, and their goddes a snare. And whan $ messaunger of the LORDE had spoken these wordes vnto all the children of
Israel, the people lifte vp their voyce, a wepte, and called j y name of the place Bochim, and offred there vnto the LORDE.

For whan Iosua had sente awaye ý people, and the childré of Israel were gone, euery one to his enheritance, for to take possession of the londe, tthe people serued the LORDE as longe as Iosna lyued and y Elders, which lyued ‘Tonge after Iosua, and y sawe all the

a Iosu, 16. b. t Iosu. 94. f.

* Deut. 7. a. and 12. a. 
E losu- ae t t Judy Sint ay Geass Deu 528 11 | eee 8, 4. a. G. B. 

t Iosu. 24. f. 
4 Deu. 28 

The boke of the Judges, 

greate workes of the LORDE, which he dyd for Israel.

Now whan Iosua the sonne of Nun, the} 33 

seruaunt of the LORDE, "was deed (whan he was an hndreth and ten yeare olde) they buried him in $ border of his inheritaunce at
Timnath Heres vpon mount Ephraim on ithe north syde of mount Gaas. And whan all the same generacion was gathered ynto their fathers, there came vp after them another generacion, which knew not the
LORDE, ner the workes that he had done for Israel.

“Then wroughte the children of Israel euell before the LORDE, and serued Baalim, and forsoke ý LORDE the God of their fathers
(which broughte them out of the londe of 
Egipte) and folowed other goddes q the goddes of the nacions that dwelt rounde aboute them, q worshipped them, a displeased the LORDE: for they forsoke ¥ LORDE euer more and more, and serued Baal and Astaroth.

Then y wrath of the LORDE waxed whote vpo Israel, q he delyuered thé in to y handes of those y spoyled the, that they mighte spoyle them, a solde thé in to the handes of their enemies roüde aboute, q they were not able to withstonde their enemies eny more, but what waye so euer they wolde out, y hàde of the LORDE was agaynst thé to their hurte
(euen as the LORDE “sayde and sware vnto them) and they were sore oppressed.

Now whan the LORDE raysed them vp iudges, which helped them out of the hande of soch as spoyled the, they folowed not the iudges nether, but wente a whoringe after other goddes, q worshipped them, and were soone gone out of j waye y their fathers walked in, to heare the coómaundementes of the LORDE, a dyd not as they dyd.

But whan y LORDE raysed vp iudges vnto them, the LORDE was with y iudge, and helped them out of the hande of their enemies, as longe as the indge lyued. + For the LORDE had pitie of their complaynte, which they made ouer those y subdued thé and oppressed them.

Neuertheles whan the iudge dyed, they|3 

turned backe, “and marred alli more thé their fathers, so that they folowed other goddes to serne them and to bowe them selues vnto

t Exod. 2. d. e Iud. 3, b. 

Chap. ij. 

€ 

Chap. iij. them: they wolde not fall from their pur- poses, ner from their obstinate waye.
Therfore waxed the wrath of the LORDE allwaie so whote ouer Israel, that he sayde:
For so moch as the people haue transgressed my couenaunt, which I commaunded their fathers, « folowe not my voyce, I wil from hence forth dryue out none of the Heythen, who Iosua lefte behynde him, wha he dyed,
* that by them 1 maye proue Israel, whether they wil kepe the waye of the LORDE, to walke therin, as thetr fathers dyd, or not.
Thus the LORDE suffred all these nacions, so that in a shorte tyme he droue them not

out, whom he had not geuen ouer in to Tosuas hande.

The dj. Chapter. | 
HESE are the nacions, whom the 
LORDE suffred to remayne, y by them he mighte proue Israel, which had no vnderstondinge in the warres of Canaan: onely because y the trybes of the childré of
Israel might knowe q lerne to warre, which afore had no knowlege therof, namely: The fyue lordes of y Philistynes, q all the Ca- nanites, t Sidonians, q the Hethites y dwelt vpon mount Libanus, fro mount Baal Her- mon, vntyll a man come vnto Hemath. ‘The same remayned, that Israel mighte be proued by them, that it mighte be knowne whether they wolde herken to the commaundementes of the LORDE, which he commaunded their fathers by Moses.

Now whan the children of Israel dwelt thus amoge the Cananites, Hethites, Amo- rites, Pheresites, Heuites q lebusites, t they toke their donghters to wyues, and gaue their doughters vnto their sonnes, q serued their goddes, and wroughte wickednes before the
LORDE, q forgat the LORDE their God, q serued Baalim q Astaroth. Then $ wrath of y LORDE waxed whote ouer Israel, ¢ he solde thé vnder the hade of Cusan Risathaim kynge of Mesopotamia, « so y childre of Israel serued Cusan Risathaim viij. yeare.

The cried the childré of Israel vnto the 
LORDE, « the LORDE raysed thé vp a sauioure which delyuered thé, namely, + Ath- niel y sonne of Kenas, Calebs yongest brother.
And the sprete of the LORDE came vpon him, t he was iudge in Israel, t wente out a

* Deut. 8. a. and 13. a. t Deut. 7. a. and 12. a. 

The boke of the Judges. 

warre fare. And y LORDE delyuered Cusan 
Risathaim the kynge of Syria in to his hāde, so y his hande was to stroge for him. §' Then was the londe in rest fortye yeares. And
Athniel the sonne of Kenas dyed. 

But the children of Israel dyd yet more euell before the LORDE. Then the LORDE strengthed Eglon the kynge of ý Moabites agaynst y childr of Israel, because they wrought wickednesse before $ LORDE. And he gathered vnto him y childré of Ammon, t€ the Amalechites, q wete and smote Israel, and conquered the || cite of the palme trees.
And the children of Israel serued Eglon y kynge of y Moabites eightene yeare. "The cried they vnto the LORDE. And the
LORDE raysed thé vp a sauionre, namely 
Ehud the sonne of Gera y sonne of lemini, which was a man that mighte do nothinge with his righte hande.

And wha the childré of Israel sent a pre- sent by him vnto Eglon the kynge of the
Moabites, Ehud made him a two edged dagger of a spanne longe, q gyrded it vnder his gar- met vpo his righte thye, q broughte ¥ present vnto Eglon the kynge of Moabites. As for
Eglon, he was a very fat man. 

And whan he had delyuered the presente, he let the people go that had caried the pre- sent, and he himselfe turned backe from the
Idols at Gilgall, ¢ caused to saye thus (vnto the kynge:) I haue a secrete thinge to tell the O kynge. And he commaunded to kepe sylence, q all they that stode aboute him, wente out from him.

And Ehud came in vnto him. He sat in a syled Sommer perler, which was for him selfe alone. And Ehud saide: I haue somwhat to saye vnto the of God. ‘Thé rose he vp fro his seate. But Ehud put forth his lefte hande, q toke the dagger from his righte thye, q thrust it in to his bely, so y the hefte wente in also after the blade, q the fatt closed the hefte: for he drue not ¥ dagger out of his bely, q y fylthines departed fro him. But Ehud gat him out at the backe dore, q put to y dore after him, and lockte it.

Now whan he was gone, his seruauntes came in, and sawe that the dore of the Som- mer perler was lockte, and they sayde: per- aduenture he is gone to the prenye in the syled Sommer perler.

t Iud. 1. c. 

$2 Par. 15. d. || Deut. 30. a. 

\ 

So. cerrir. 

€ 

JO. cover. 

But whan they had wayted so loge tyll they were ashamed (for no man opened the perler dore) they toke the keye, and opened it.
Beholde, then laye their lorde deed vpon the earth. As for hud, he was gotten awaye, whyle they made so longe tariége, q he wente ouer by the Idols, and ranne his waye vnto
Seirath. 

And whan he came in * he blewe y trompet vpo mount Ephraim, and the children of
Israel wente with him from the mount, and he before them, and he saide vnto them:
Folowe me, for the LORDE hath delyuered the Moabites youre enemies in to youre hande. And they folowed him, q wanne y ferye of Iordane, y goeth towarde Moab, q suffred no man to go ouer, and at y same tyme they smote of the Moabites vpo a ten thousande men, all nobles and men of armes, so that there escaped not one. "Thus were the Moabites broughte vnder the hande of the children of Israel at that tyme, and the londe was in rest foure score yeares.

Afterwarde was t Samgar y sonne of Anath, which slewe sixe hundreth Philistynes with an oxes gadd, and delyuered Israel also.

The iiij. Chapter. 

UT the children of Israel dyd yet more 
B euell before LORDE, whan Ehud was deed. And the LORDE solde thé in to the hande of Iabin the kynge of the Cananites, which dwelt at Hazor, q the chefe captayne of his hooste was Sissera, and he dwelt at Haro- seth of the Heythen. And the childre of
Israel cried vnto the LORDE: for he had nyne hüdreth yron charettes, and subdued the children of Israel by violence twentye yeare.

At Ẹ same tyme was Iudgesse in Israel the prophetisse Debbora, the wyfe of Lapidoth, and she dwelt vnder y palme of Debbora be- twene Rama q Bethel, vpon mount Ephraim, and the children of Israel came vp vnto her to the lawe. She sent forth, tq called for
Barak the sonne of Abi Noam of Kedes 
Nephtali, and sayde vnto him: Hath not y 
LORDE the God of Israel comaunded the: 
Go thy waye, and get the vp vnto mount 
Thabor, x take with the ten thousande men of the children of Nephtali q Zabulon? For
I wil make Sissera the chefe captayne of 
Iabins hoost to come to the vnto ¥ $ water of 

* Nu. 10. a. t Iud. 5. a. 1 Iud. 5. b. 

Che boke of tbe Judges. 

Cyson, with his charettes and with his multi- tude, and I wyll delyuer him in to thy hande.
Barak sayde vnto her: Yf thou wilt come with me, I wil go: but yf thou wilt not come with me, I wil not go.

She sayde: I wyll go with the: neuerthe- lesse the prayse shal not be thine in this iourney that thou goest, but $ LORDE shal delyuer Sissera in to a womas hande. So
Debbora gat hir vp, and wente with Barak vnto Kedes. Then Barak called Zabulon and
Nephtali vnto Kedes, and wéte on fote with ten thousande men. And Debbora wente with him also. As for Heber the Kenyte he was departed from the Kenytes from the children of || Hobab Moses brother in lawe, and had pitched his tent by ý Oke of Zaanaim besyde Kedes.

Then was it tolde Sissera, y Barak the sonne of Abi Noa, was gone vp vnto mont
"Thabor: «x he gathered all his charettes together, nyne C. yron charettes, q all the people y was with him from Haroseth of the
Heythé, vnto the water Cyson. Debbora sayde vnto Barak: Vp, this is the daie wherin the LORDE hath delyuered Sissera in to thy hande: for ý LORDE shal go forth before y.
So Barak wente fro mount Thabor, and y ten thousande men after him.

But the LORDE discomfited Sissera with all his charettes q hoost, q made the afrayed of the edge of the swerde before Barak, so y
Sissera leapte of his charet, q fled on fote. 
Neuerthelesse Barak folowed vpon the cha- rettes q the hoost vnto Haroseth of the Hey- then, q all Sisseras hoost fell thorow ¥ edge of the swerde, so y not one escaped. As for
Sissera, he fled on fote vnto the tente of ael, 
$ wife of Heber y Kenite. For there was peace betwene kynge Iabin at Hasor, q the house of Heber the Kenite.

Iael wéte forth to mete Sissera, q sayde vnto him: Turne in my lorde, turne in to me, q be not afrayed. And he turned in vnto her in to the tente, a she conered him with a gar- mét. He sayde vnto her: I praye y geue me a litle water to drynke, for I am a thyrst.
{ The opened she a mylke pot, q gaue him to drynke, and couered him. And he sayde vnto her: Stöde in the tente dore, q yf one come q axe, is there eny man here? saye
Noman. 

$ Psal. 82. a. || Nu. 10. d. €| Iud. 5. d. 

Chap. iiij. 

Chap. b. 

of the tente, and an hammer in hir hande, q wente in preuely vnto him, q smote the nale in thorow the temples of his heade, so y he sancke to y earth. As for him, he was fallen on a slomber, and weery, and so he dyed.

But wha Barak folowed after Sissera, Iael wente for to mete him, and sayde vnto him:
Come hither, I wil shewe the the man, whom thou sekest. And whan he came in vnto her, he sawe Sissera deed, q the nale stickinge in his temples. Thus God broughte downe
Iabin the kynge of the Cananites before the children of Israel at that tyme, x the hande of the children of Israel wente q subdued
Iabin ¥ kynge of the Cananites, tyll they had roted him out. Then Debbora and Barac the sonne of Abi Noam, sange at the same tyme, and sayde :

The d. Chapter. 

OW that ye are come to rest, ye quyete 
N men in Israel, prayse ý LORDE, amonge soch of the people as be fre wyllinge.

Heare ye kynges, q herken to ye prynces: 
I wyl, I wyl synge to the LORDE, euen vnto the LORDE $ God of Israel wil I playe.

* LORDE, whan thou wentest out from 
Seir, ¢ camest in from the felde of Edom, y earth quaked, the heanen dropped, and the cloudes dropped with water.

t The hilles melted before the LORDE, 
Sinai before the LORDE the God of Israel. 

In the tyme of t Sanger the sonne of Anath: 
In the tyme of $1Iael the wayes fayled: and they that shulde haue gone in pathes, walked thorow croked wayes.

There was scarcenesse, there was scarce- nesse of houszbande men in Israel, vntyll I
Debbora came vp, vntyll I came vp a mother in Israel.

God hath chosen a new thinge. He hath ouercome y portes in battayll: and yet was there sene nether shylde ner speare amonge fortye thousande in Israel.

My hert loueth y teachers of Israel: ye y are frewyllinge amonge the people, prayse the
LORDE. 

Ye that ryde vpo fayre Asses, ye that syt in iudgment and geue sentence, ye that go by the waye, prayse the LORDE.

Wha $ archers cried betwene $ drawers of 

* Exo, 19. c. Deut. 4. b. t Psal. 96. a. 1 Iud. 3. d. 

Che boke of tbe Judges. 
3| Then Jael the wife of Heber toke a nale 

Fo. cepyyt. water, then was it spoke of y righteousnes of the LORDE, of the righteousnes of his husz- bande men in Israel: then ruled the people of the LORDE vnder the gates.

Vp Debbora vp, get the vp, get the vp, a rehearse a songe. ll Arise Barak, q catch him y catched the, thou sonne of Abinoam.

Then had the desolate the rule with the mightie of the people. The LORDE had $ dominion thorow the giauntes.

1 Out of Ephraim was their rote against 
Amalek, and after him Ben Jamin in thy people.

Out of Machir haue teachers ruled, and out of Zabuló are there become gouernours thorow the wrytinge penne.

And out of Isachar there were prynces with Debbora, and Isachar was as Barak in y valley, sent with his people on fote: As for
Ruben, he stode hye in his awne consayte, and separated him selfe from vs.

Why abodest thou betwixte the borders, |€ whan thou herdest the noyse of the flockes ? because Ruben stode hye in his awne cosayte, and separated him selfe from vs.

Gilead abode beyonde Jordane, and why dwelt Dan amonge the shippes? Asser sat in the hauen of the see, and taried in his porcions.

But Zabulons people ioperde their life vnto death: Nephtali also in the toppe of 3 felde of Merom.

The kynges came a foughte, then foughte 
$ kynges of the Cananites at Thaanah by the water of Megiddo, but spoyle of money broughte they not there from.

From heaué were they foughté agaynst, the starres in their courses foughte with Sissera.

The broke Cyson ouerwhelmed them, the broke Kedumim, yee the broke Cyson. My soule treade thou vpon the mightie.

'Then made the horse fete a ruszshinge to- gether, for the greate violence of their mightie horse men.

Curse the cite of Meros (sayde ¥ angell of| D the LORDE) curse the citesyns therof, be- cause they come not to helpe y LORDE, to helpe the LORDE to the giauntes.

Blessynge amonge wemen haue lael the wife of Heber the Kenite: blessinge haue she in the tente amonge the wemen.

** Whan he axed water, she gaue him mylke, q broughte forth butter in a lordly diszshe.

$1ud.4.c. — ||Iud.4.a. — *Iud.3.d. —**Iud.4. c. 

Fo. cereey. 

She toke holde of the nale with hir hande, q the smyth hammer with hir righte hande, and smote Sissera, cut of his heade q pearsed and bored thorow his temples.

He bowed him selfe downe at hir fete, he fell downe, and laye there. He sanke downe, and fell at hir fete: whan he had soncke downe, he laye there destroyed.

His mother loked out at the wyndowe, a cried piteously thorow the trallace: Why tarieth his charet out so loge, that he cometh not? Wherfore do the wheles of his charet make so longe tarienge ?

The wysest amoge his ladies answered, « sayde vnto her: Shulde they not finde « de- uide the spoyle, vnto euery man a fayre mayde or two for a pray, a. partye coloured garmetes of nedle worke to Sissera for a spoyle, partye coloured garmentes of nedle worke aboute the necke for a pray?

Thus all thine enemies must perishe O 
LORDE: but they that loue the, shal be euen as the Sonne rysinge vp in his mighte.

And the londe had peace fortye yeares. 

The bi. Chapter. 
ND whan the children of Israel dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, the
LORDE delyuered them vnder the hande of the Madianites vij. yeares. And wha the hande of the Madianites was to mightie oner the children of Israel, the children of Israel made them clyffes in ý mountaynes, and caues and holdes, to defende them selues from y
Madianites. And whan Israel sowed eny thinge, ¥ Madianites and Amalechites, and the children towarde the south came vp vpon them, and pitched their tétes agaynst them, and destroyed the increase of the londe downe vnto Gasa, q let nothinge remayne ouer of the beestes in Israel, nether shepe, ner oxen, ner asses. For they came vp with their catell and tentes, as it had bene a greate multitude of greshoppers (so that nether they ner their camels mighte be nombred) and fell in to the londe, that they mighte destroye it. Thus was
Israel exceadinge small before the Madianites. 
Then cried the children of Israel vnto the 
LORDE. 
But whan they eried vnto the LORDE because of $ Madianites, ý LORDE sent thé a prophet, which sayde vnto thé: Thus saieth

* 4 Re. 17. g. Tere, 10. a. 

The boke of the Judars, 

the LORDE the God of Israel: I caried you out of Egipte, q broughte you out of ý house of bondage, q delyuered you from the hande of the Egipcians, q from the hāde of all them that oppressed you, and I haue thrust them out before you, q geuen you their lode and sayde vnto you: I am the LORDE youre
God. *Feare not ye the goddes of the 
Amorites, in whose londe ye dwell: neuer- theles ye haue not herkened vnto my voyce.

And there came an angell of the LORDE, q sat him downe vnder an Oke at Aphra, which belonged vnto loas the father of y
Esrites, and his sonne Gedeon was throsshinge wheate in the barne, that he mighte flye awaye before the Madianites.

Chap. bí. 

Then appeared vnto him the angell of M € 

LORDE, and sayde vnto him: The LORD 

with y thou mightie giaunte. But Gedeon sayde vnto him: Syr, yf the LORDE be with vs, wherfore is all this then happened vnto vs?
And where are all the wonders, which oure fathers tolde vs, q sayde: The LORDE brought vs out of Egipte? But now hath the LORDE forsaken vs, and delyuered vs in

‘Ito the hande of the Madianites. 

The LORDE turned him vnto him, a sayde: Go thy waye in this thy strength, thou shalt delyuer Israel out of the hande of y
Madianites. I haue sent the. But he sayde : 
My LORDE, wherwithall shal I delyuer 
Israel? Beholde, my kynred is the smallest in Manasse, t I am the leest in my fathers house? The LORDE sayde vnto him: I will be with the, so y thou shalt smyte the
Madianites, euen as though they were but one man.

He sayde vnto him: Yf I haue foiide grace in thy sighte, then make me a token, that it is thou, which speakest with me: go not awaye, tyll I come to y, and brynge a meat- offerynge, to set before the. He sayde: I wyll tary, tyll thou comest agayne. And
Gedeon wéte, and made ready a kydd, and an 
Epha of vnleuended floure, and layed the flesh in a maunde, and pnt the broth in a pot, and broughte it forth vnto him vnder the Oke, and came nye. But the angell of God sayde vnto him: * Take the flesh and the vnleuended bred, q set it vpon the stonye rocke that is here, and poure the broth theron. And he dyd so. Then the angell of the LORDE

t Iud. 13. d. 

D 

Chap. bij. 

stretched out the staffe that he had in his hande, and with the ende of it he touched the flesh aud the vnleuended floure: *and the fyre came out of the rocke, and consumed the flesh and the vnleuended floure. And the angell of the LORDE vanyshed out of his sighte.

Now wha Gedeon sawe that it was an angell of LORDE, he sayde: ^O LORDE
LORDE, haue I thus sene an angell of y 
LORDE face to face? The LORDE sayde vnto him: Peace be with the, feare not, thou shalt not dye. "The Gedeon buylded an altare there vnto LORDE, « ealled it: The
LORDE of peace. The same stondeth yet vnto this daye at Apra, ý belogeth vnto the father of ¥ Esrites.

And in y same night sayde LORDE vnto him: Take a fedd bullocke fro amoge thy fathers oxen, q another bullocke of seuen yeare olde, and breake downe the altare of Baal] which is thy fathers, and cut downe the groue that stondeth by it, and buylde thou an altare vnto the LORDE thy God aboue vpon the toppe of this rocke, and make it ready, and take the other bullocke, and offre a burnt- offerynge with the wodd of the groue that thou hast hewen downe. "Then toke Gedeon ten men of his seruauntes, and dyd as y
LORDE sayde vnto him: but he was afrayed to do this by daye tyme, for his fathers house and the people in ¥ cite, and so he dyd it by nighte.

J| Now whan the people in the cite rose vp. 

early in the mornynge, beholde, Baals altare was broken, and the groue hewen downe by it, and the other bullocke a burntofferynge vpon the altare that was buylded, q one sayde vnto another: Who hath done this? And whan they soughte q made searche, it was sayde: Gedeon the sonne of Ioas hath done it. The sayde the people of y cite vnto Ioas:
Brynge forth thy sonne, He must dye, because he hath broken Baals altare, and hewen downe the groue therby. But Ioas sayde vnto all them that stode by him: Wyl ye stryue for
Baal? Wilyedelyuerhim? He y stryueth for him, shal dye this mornynge. Yf he be
God, let him auége him selfe, because his altare is broken downe. From y daye forth was he called Ierubaal, because it was sayde :

* Gen. 15. d. 3 Re. 18. c. 
1 Iud. 8. a. 

a Exo. 33. d. Iud. 13. d. t Gen. 18. d.

The boke of the Judges. 

Fo. cevertij. 
Let Baal auenge him selfe, that his altare is broken downe.

Whan y Madianites now q y Amalechites, | & q the childrē towarde the A had gathered the selues together, q were passed thorow
(Iordane) ¢ had pitched their tentes in the valley of lesrael, the sprete of the LORDE endued Gedeon, q he caused the trompet to be blowne, q called (the house of) + Abieser, that they shulde folowe him: q he sent mes- saungers vnto all Manasse, q called them, y they shulde folowe him also: and he sent messaungers likewyse vnto Asser q Zabulon q
Nephtali, which came vp to mete him. 

And Gedeon sayde vnto God: Yf thou wilt delyuer Israel thorow my hande, as thou hast saide, thé wil I laye a flese of woll in the courte: yf ; dew be onely vpon y flese, q drye vpon all the grounde, then wyll I perceaue, that thou shalt delyuer Israel thorow my hande, as thou hast sayde. And it came so to passe. And whan he rose vp early on the morow, he wrage y dew out of the flese, and fylled a dyszshe full of water. And Gedeon sayde vnto God: :Be not wroth at me, that
I speake yet this one tyme, I wyl proue yet but once with the flese, let it be drye onely vpou the flese, and dew vpon all the grounde.
And God dyd so the same nighte: so that it was drye onely vpon the flese, aud dew vpon all the grounde.

The bij. Chapter. 
HEN Ierubaal (that is Gedeon) gat him|@ vp early, "and all the people that was with him, and pitched their tentes besyde the well of Harod, so that he had the hoost of the
Madianites on the north side behynde the hyll of More in the valley. But the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon : The people that be with y are to many for me to delyner Madian in to their hande, lest Israel boost them selues agaynst me, and saye: My hande hath dely- uered me. Cause a proclamacion now to be made in the eares of the people, and saye:
$He that feareth, and is afrayed, let him turne backe, and get him soone fro mount
Gilead. "Then returned there of the people aboute a two and twenty thousande so that there was left but ten thousande.
And the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon.|# 

^ Tud. 6. f. $ Deu. 20. b. 1 Mac. 3. g. 

33 

Fo. terri. 
The people are yet to many: brynge them downe to the water, there wyl I proue them for y: and of whom I saye that he shal go with the, the same shal go with the: but of who I saie that he shal not go with the, the

G 

E 

same shall not go. And he broughte the people vnto ¥ water. And the LORDEsayde vnto Gedeon: Whosoener licketh of the water with his tüge, as a dogg licketh, make him stonde asyde and lykewyse who soeuer falleth downe vpo his knees to drynke. "Then was the nombre of them that had licked ont of the hande to the mouth, thre hundreth men.
And the LORDE sayde vnto Gedeon: 
'Thorow the thre hidreth which haue licked, wyl I delyuer you, and geue ouer the Ma- dianites in to thy hade: As for the other peo- ple, let them go euery one vnto his place.
And they toke vytayles with them for y people, and their trompettes: but the other
Israelites let he go, euery one vnto his tente. 
And he strengthed himselfe with the thre hun- dreth men, and the Madianites hoost laye before him beneth in the valley. And the same night sayde the LORDE vnto him:
Vp, and go downe in to the hoost, for I haue geuen them ouer in to thy hande. But yf thou be afrayed to go downe, then let thy ser- uaunt Pura go downe with the vnto the hoost, y thou maiest heare what they saie: after that shalt thou be bolde, and thy honde stronge, that thou mayest go downe in to the hoost.
'Than wente Gedeon downe with his ser- uaunt vnto y vttemost parte of y watchmé of armes y were in $ hoost. And y Madianites and Amalechites, and all the children of the south, had layed them selues beneth in the valley, as a multitude of greshoppers, and their Camels were not to be nombred for mul- | titude, eué as the sonde on y see shore. Now whan Gedeon came, beholde, one tolde ano- ther his dreame, q sayde: Beholde, I haue, dreamed a dreame: Me thonghte a bake barlye lofe came rollinge downe to y hoost of
ý Madianites : and whan it came to the tente, it smote it, and ouerthrew it, and turned it vpsyde downe, so that the tente fell. Then answered the other: That is nothinge els then $ swerde of Gedeon the sonne of Ioas
ý Israelite: God hath geue ouer the Ma- dianites with all the hoost in to his hande.
Whan Gedeon herde this dreame tolde, q 

* [ud. 9. g. 

Che boke of the Judges. 

Chap. biij. the interpretacion of it, he worshipped, and came agayne in to the hoost of Israel, and sayde: Vp, for the LORDE hath delyuered y hoost of the Madianites in to youre hade.
And he deuyded the thre hundreth men in to thre partes, and gaue enery one a trompet in his hande, and emptye pytchers, and lampes therin, and sayde vnto them: “Loke vnto me, and do ye eué so, and beholde, wha 1 come to the vttemost parte of the hoost, euen as I do, so do ye also. Whan I blowe y trompet, and all that are with me, then shal ye blowe y tropettes also rounde aboute all the hoost, and saye: Here the LORDE q Gedeon. ‘Thus came Gedeon and the thre hundreth men with him vnto the vttemost parte of y hoost
(aboute the tyme whan the mydwatch begyn- neth) and waked vp the watchmé, and blewe with the trompettes, and smote asunder the pitchers in their handes.

So all the thre companies blewe with y trompettes, and brake the pitchers. But the lampes helde they in their lefte hande, and the trompettes in their righte hàde, so that they blewe, and cried: Here the swerde of the LORDE and Gedeon. And euery one stode in his place aboute the hoost. 'Then ranne all the hoost, and cried and fled. And whyle the thre hundreth men blewe the trom- pettes, LORDE broughte it so to passe, that *enery mans swerde in all y hoost was agaynst another, and the hoost fled vnto Beth- sitha Zereratha, and vnto the border of the playne of Mehohab besyde labath. And y men of Israel of Nephtali, of Asser, q of Ma- nasse cried, and folowed vpon the Madianites.

And Gedeon sent messaungers vp vnto all mount Ephraim, sayenge: Come downe against the Madianites, and stoppe the water from them vnto Beth Bara and Jordane. And then cryed all they that were of Ephraim, and stopped the water from them vnto Bethbara and lordane, and toke two prynces of the
Madianites Oreb and Zeb, and slewe Oreb vpon the rocke of Oreb, and Zeb in the wyne- presse of Zeb, and folowed vpon the Ma- dianites, and broughte the heades of Oreb and Zeb, vnto Gideon oner Jordane.

The bij. Chapter. 

ND the men of Ephraim sayde vnto him: Wherfore hast thou done this vnto

* 1 Re ii. c. 2sPa 20nd. 

Chap. biij. 

Che boke of the Judges. 

vs, that thou hast not called vs, wha thou wentest forth to fight agaynst Y Madianites? and they chode sore with him. But he sayde vnto them: What haue I done now that is like youre acte? Is not the aftergadderynge of Ephraim better then the whole haruest of
Abieser? “God hath delyuered y prynces of the Madianites Oreb and Zeb in to youre hande, how coulde I do that ye haue done?
Wha he had sayde this, their blast was swaged from him.

Now whan Gedeon came vnto Iordane, he weute ouer with the thre hundreth mé that were with him, and they were weery, and folowed vpon their chace. And he sayde vnto the men of Sucoth: I praye you gene the people that are with me, some loaues of bred (for they are weery) that I maye folowe vpon Zebea and Salmana the kinges of the
Madianites. 

But the rulers of Sucoth sayde: Are the handes of Zebea and Salmana in thy handes allready, that we must geue bred vnto thy men of warre? Gedeon sayde: Well, whan the LORDE delynereth Zebea and Salmana in to my hade, I wyll threszshe youre flesh with thornes of the wyldernesse and with breares. And from thence he wente vp vuto
Penuel, and spake euen so vnto them. And the me of Penuel gaue him like answere as they of Sucoth. And he sayde also vnto the men of Penuel: Yf I come peaceably agayne,
I wil breake downe this tower. 

As for Zebea aud Salmana, they were at 
Karkar, and their hoost with them vpon a fyftene thousande, which were all that were lefte of the whole hoost of the children of the
Easte: for there were fallen an hundreth and twentye thousande, that coulde drawe the swerde.

And Gedeon wente vp by the waye, where they dwell in the tentes on the east side of
Nobah and lakbeha, x smote the hoost, for the hoost was carelesse, and mystrusted no- thinge. And Zebea and Salmana fled, but he folowed after them, and toke Y two kynges of the Madianites Zebea and Salmana, and put all the hoost in feare.

Now whan Gedeon y sonne of Ioas came agayne fro the battayll out of $ east, he toke a lad of the men of Sucoth, x examyned him, which wrote him vp the names of the rulers of

* Iudi, 6. g. 

Sucoth, and their Elders, eué thre score and seuentene men.

And he came to the men of Sucoth, a|3) 

sayde: Beholde, here is Zebea q Salmana, cocernynge who ye laughed me to scorne, a sayde: Are the handes of Zebea aud Salmaua in thy hades all ready, that we must geue bred vnto thy men which are weery? And he toke the Elders of the cite, and thornes out of the wildernes, and breres, and caused y men of
Sucoth to be torne therwith. * And the tower of Penuel brake he downe, and slewe the men of the cite.

And he saide vnto Zebea and Salmana: 
What maner of mé were they who ye slewe at Thabor? They sayde: They were euen like the, « goodly men, as yf they had bene a kynges childré. He sayde: They were my brethren, euen my mother sonnes: Ás truly as the LORDE lyueth, yf ye had lette them lyue, I wolde not slaye you.

And he saide vnto his first borne sonne lether: Stonde vp, q slaye them. Howbeit the lad drue not out his swerde, for he was afrayed, for so moch as he was yet but a lad.
Zebea q Salmana sayde: Stoude thou vp, q slaye vs, for as the man is, soch is also his stregth. So Gedeon arose, and slewe Zebea and Salmana, and toke the ornamentes that were aboute their Camels neckes.

Then sayde certayue in Israel vnto Gedeon: 
Be thou lorde ouer vs, thou and thy soune, and thy sonnes sonne, for so moch as thou hast delyuered vs from $ hande of y Ma- dianites. Neuertheles Gedeon saide vnto them: I wil not be lorde ouer you, nether shal my sonne be lorde ouer you, but the
LORDE shalbe lorde ouer you. 

Gedeon sayde vnto them: One thinge I|4f 

desyre of you, Euery man geue me the earinge that he hath spoyled. (For in so moch as y men were Ismaelites, they had earinges.)
They sayde: Them wyll we geue the. And they spred out a cloth, and euery man cast the earinge theron that he had spoyled. And the golden earynges which he requyred, had in weight, a thousande and seuen hundreth
Sycles of Golde, besyde the spanges and cheynes, and scarlet rayment which the kynges of the Madianites dyd weere, and besyde the neckbandes of their Camels. And Gideon made a cote armoure therof, and set it in his

* 8 Re. 12. d. 

Fo. corre. 

Ed 

Fo. ccryrbt. cite at Aphra. And all Israel wente there a whoringe after it, and it turned to an occasion of fallinge vnto Gedeon and his house.

Thus were y Madianites brought downe before the children of Israel, and lifte vp their heade nomore: and the londe was in rest fortye yeares, as loge as Gedeon lyued.

And Ierubaal the sonne of Ioas wéte q dwelt in his house. “And Gedeon Had thre score x ten sonnes, which were come out of his thye: for he had many wyues. And his concubyne which he had at Siché, bare him a sonne also, whom he called Abimelech. And Gideon the sonne of Ioas dyed in a good age, q was buried at Aphra in $ sepulcre of his father Ioas the father of the Esrites.

But whan Gedeon was deed, the childre of 
Israel turned backe, and wente awhoringe after 
Baalim, and made a couenaunt with Baal 
Berith, y he shulde be their God. And M childré of Israel thoughte not on y LORD their God, which had delyuered them fro the hande of their enemies rounde aboute: and they shewed not mercy vnto the house of lerubaal Gedeon, acordinge to all the good that he had done vnto Israel.

The ir. Chapter 
BIMELECH the sonne of Ierubaal, wente vnto Siche to his mothers brethren,

q spake vnto them, ¢ to all the kynred of his mothers fathers house, and sayde: I praye you speake in the eares of all the men at Sichem:
What is better for you, that thre score and ten men all children of Ierubaal shulde be lordes ouer you, or that one man shulde be lorde ouer you? Remembre also that I am youre bone and youre flesh.

Then spake his mothers brethré all these wordes for him, in ý eares of all y men at
Sichem. And their hert enclyned to Abime- lech, for they thoughte: He is oure brother: and gaue him thre score and ten syluerlinges out of ý house of Baal Berith. And with them Abimelech hyred men that were vaga- bundes and of light condicions, which folowed him. And he came to his fathers house vnto
Aphra, and slew his brethren the children of lerubaal, enen thre score men and të vpon one stone. But Iotham the yongest sonne of lerubaal remayned ouer, for he was hydd.
And all the men of Sichem, and all the house 

* 4 Re. 10, a, GO Weave ile Ob 

Che boke of the Judges. 

of Millo gathered them selues together, and wente and made Abimelech kynge by the Oke that stondeth at Sichem.

Whan this was tolde Iotham, he wente, and |133 

stode vpon the toppe of mount Grisim, and lifte vp his voyce, cried, and sayde: Heare me ye men of Sichem, that God maye heare you also. *The trees wente to anointe a kinge ouer them, and sayde vnto the Olyue tre:
Be thou oure kynge. But the Olyue tre answered them: Shall I go and leaue my fatnesse (which both God and men commende in me) and go to be puft vp aboue the trees?
Then sayde the trees vnto the fygge tre: 
Come thou and be kynge ouer vs. But the fygge tre sayde vnto the: Shal I leaue my swetnes and my good frute, and go to be puft vp aboue the trees? "Then sayde the trees vnto the vyne: Come thou and be oure kinge.
But the vyne sayde vnto them: Shal I leaue my swete wyne, which reioyseth God and men, and go to be puft vp aboue the trees? The sayde all the trees vnto the thorne buszshe:
Come thou, and be kynge ouer vs. And the thorne buszshe sayde vnto the trees: Yf it be true, y ye anoynte me to be kynge ouer you, thé come, and put youre trust vnder my shadowe. Yf no, then go fyre out of the thorne buszshe, q cosume y Ceder trees of
Libano. 

Yf ye haue done right now and iustly, y ye haue made Abimelech to be kynge: and yf ye haue done well vnto lerubaal and to his house, and haue done vnto him as he deserued vnto yon. Which (euen my father) foughte for youre sakes, and ioperde his lyfe, to delyuer out of the Madianites hade, euc you, which are rysen vp this daye agaynst my fathers house, q haue slaine his childré, thre score personnes q ten vpon one stone, and haue made you a kynge (euen Abimelech the sonne of his handmaide) ouer the men at Sichem, for so moch as he is youre brother.

Yf ye haue done right now and tustly vnto 
Ierubaal and his house this daye, then reioyse ouer Abimelech, and let him reioyse ouer you.
Yf no, then go fyre out from Abimelech, and cosume the men of Sichem and the house of
Mille: And fyre go out also fro the men of 
Sichem, and from the house of Millo, and consume Abimelech. And lothà (whan he had spoken this out) fled, and gat him out of

* 2 Par, 25. c. 4 Esd. 4. b. 

Chap. tr. 

€ 

C 

B 

bap. tr. the waye, and wente vnto Ber, and dwelt there because of his brother Abimelech.

Now whan Abimelech had reigned thre yeare ouer Israel, *God sent an euell mynde betwene Abimelech and the men of Sichem
(for the men of Sichem despysed Abimelech), and rehearsed the wronge done to the sonnes of Ierubaal, and their bloude, and layed it vpon Abimelech their brother which slewe them, and vpon the men of Sichem that strengthed his hande therto, that he mighte slaye his brethren.

And the men of Sichem set an hynder watch vpon the toppes of the mountaynes, and spoyled all them that walked nye them by the waye, and it was tolde Abimelech.
But there came Gaal the sonne of Ebed and his brethren, and entred in to Sichem, and the men of Sichem put their trust in him, and wéte out in to the felde, and gathered their vynyardes, and pressed them, and made a daunse, and wente in to their gods house, and ate and dranke, and cursed Abimelech.

E| And Gaal y sonne of Ebed sayde: Who is 

F 

Abimelech? and what is Sichem, that we shulde serue him? Is he not the sonne of
Jerubaal, and hath set Sebul his seruaŭt ouer the men of tHemor the father of Sichem?
Wherfore shulde we serue him? Wolde, God the people were vnder my hāde, y I mighte put downe Abimelech.

And it was tolde Abimelech: Increace thine hooste, and departe. For Sebul the ichefe ruler of the cite, whan he herde the wordes of Gaal y sonne of Ebed, he was wroth fully displeased, and sente message secretly to
Abimelech, and caused to saye vnto him: 
Beholde, Gaal the sonne of Ebed and his brethren are come to Sichem, and make the cite to be agaynst the.

Arise therfore by nyght, thou and thy people that is with the, and laye wayte for the in the felde: and tomorow whan the Sonne aryseth, get the vp soone, and fall vpon the cite: and yf he and the people that 1s with him come out vnto the, the deale with him, as thyne hande fyndeth.

Abimelech stode vp by night, and all the people that was with him, and layed wayte for Sichem with foure companies of men of warre. And Gaal the sonne of Ebed wéte out and stode at the dore of the gate of the cite.

* Esa, 45. a. t Gen. 34. a. 

The boke of the Judges. 

But Abimelech gat him vp out of the hinder watch, and the people that was with him.
Now whan Gaal sawe the people, he sayde vnto Sebul: Beholde, there commeth a people downe from the toppe of ¥ mount. Sebul saide vnto him: Thou seist y shadowe of the mountaines as though they were me. Gaal spake yet more and sayde: Beholde, there commeth a people downe from y myddes of the londe, q one bonde of men cometh by the waye to y witch Oke. 'Thé sayde Sebul:
Where is now thy mouth y sayde: Who is 
Abimelech, that we shulde serue him? Is not this y people, whom thou hast refused? Go forth now, and fighte with him.

Gaal wente forth before the citesyns of 
Sichem, and foughte with Abimelech. But 
Abimelech chaced him, so that he fled, and there fell many slayne euen vnto the gate of the cite. And Abimelech abode at Aruma.
But Sebul droue awaye Gaal and his brethren, so that they must not remayne at Sichem.
Vpon the morowe wente the people forth in to ¥felde. Wha this was tolde Abimelech, he toke the people, and parted them in to thre bodes of men, and wayted for thé in the felde.
Now whan he sawe y the people wéte out of the eite, he rose agaynst the, and smote them.

Abimelech and y company of men that was with him, fell vpon them, and stepte vnto the dore of the porte: but the other two com- panies fell vpon all them that were in the felde, and slewe them. The foughte Abimelech agaynst the cite all y same daye, and wanne it, and slewe the people that was there in, and brake downe y cite, and sowed salt theron.

Whan all the men of the tower of Sichem herde this, they wente in toa stronge holde of y house of their God Berith. But whan Abi- melech herde, that all the men of the tower of
Sichem had gathered thé selues together, he wente vp vnto mount Zelmon, and all the people that was with him, and toke an axe in his hade, and hewed downe a braunch of a tre, and toke it vp, « layed it vpon his shulder, and sayde vnto all the people that was with him :t As ye haue sene me do, make ye haist, and do euen so as J. Then all the people hewed downe euery one a braüch, and folowed
Abimelech: and they layed them to the holde, and set fyre vpon them agayust them and the holde: and all the men of the tower of Sichem

t Iud. 7. c. 

Fo. tryyrbd. 

6 

fo. texit. dyed thorow the smoke and fyre, vpon a thou- sande men and wemen.

As for Abimelech, he wéte vnto 'lhebetz, 

and layed sege vnto it, and wanne it. But in the myddes of the cite, there was a stronge tower, vnto the which all the men and wemen, and all the citesyns of the cite fled, and shutt it after them, and clymmed vp to the toppe of the tower. Then came Abimelech vnto the tower, and foughte agaynst it, and came nye vnto the dore of the tower, that he might burne it with fyre. *But a woman cast a pece of a mylstone vpon Abimelechs heade, and brake his brane panne. Then Abimelech in all the haist, called the seruaunt that bare his wapen, aud sayde vnto him: Drawe out thy swerde,” and kyll me, that it be not sayde of me: A woman hath slayne him. Then his seruaunt thrust him thorow, and he dyed.
Whan the Israelites which were with him, sawe, y Abimelech was deed, they gatt them awaye euery one vnto his awne place.

Thus God recompenced Abimelech the euell that he had done vnto his father, wha he slewe his thre score and ten brethren: like wyse all the euell of the men of Sichem, dyd
God rewarde them vpon their heade: and so the +curse of Iotham y sonne of Jerubaal came vpon them.

The r. Chapter. 

FTER Abimelech there rose vp another 

sauioure in Israel, Thola a man of 

Isachar, and the sonne of Pua, the sonne of 

Dodo. And he dwelt at Samir vpo the 

mount Ephraim, and iudged Israel thre and 

twentye yeare, and died, and was buried at 
Samir. 

After him stode vp one Jair a Gileadite, and iudged Israel two and twentye yeare, and had thirtie sonnes,t rydinge vpon thirtie asses foales: and had thirtie cities, whose names are Hauoth Iair (that is, the cities of Jair) vnto this daye, and lye in Gilead. And Iair dyed, and was buried at Camon.

But the children of Israel wrought wicked- nes in the sighte of the LORDE, and serued
Baalim and Astaroth, and the goddes of Siria, and the goddes of Sidon, and the goddes of
Moab, and the goddes of y children of Am- mon, and the goddes of 15 Philistines, and forsoke Y LORDE, and serued him not. Then

*2Re.ll.c. ^*"1Reg.31.a. t Par. 11. a. t Iud. 9. c. 

na"""""——————————M———Ó— M ——MÀ—Ó—MÓ————————————————————————————————— 

The boke of the Judges. 

was y wrath of $ LORDE fearce vpon Israel, and he gaue thé ouer vnder the hade of the
Philistynes, and of the children of Ammo. 
And they vexed and oppressed ¥ children of 
Israel eightene yeare longe, all the children of 
Israel that were beyonde Iordane in the londe of the Moabites, which lyeth in Gilead. The children of Ammon also wente ouer Iordane, and fought agaynst Iuda, Ben Jamin, and agaynst the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was very sore troubled.

Then eryed the children of Israel vnto the 
LORDE, and sayde: We haue synned agaynst the, for we haue forsaken oure God, « serued
Baalim. But the LORDE sayde vnto the childré of Israel: Did not the Egipcias, the
Amorites, the children of Ammon, $ Phili- stines, the Sidonians, the Amalechites and
Maonites oppresse you, and I helped you out of their hande, whan ye cryed vnto me? Yet haue ye forsaken me, and serued other goddes?
"'Therfore wyll I helpe you nomore. $Go youre waye, and crye vpon the goddes whom ye haue chosen, let them helpe you in the tyme of youre trouble.

But the childré of Israel sayde vnto the 
LORDE: We haue synned, do thou vnto vs what pleaseth the, onely delyuer vs at this tyme. And they put the straunge goddes fro them, and serued the LORDE, And his soule had pytie on the mysery of Israel.

And the children of Ammon called them selues together, and pitched in Gilead: But the children of Israel gathered them selues together also, and pitched at Mispa. And ¥ people of the chefest of Gilead sayde amoge them selues: Who so euer begynneth to fight agaynst the childreu of Ammon, shalbe heade ouer all them that dwell in Gilead.

The ri. Chapter. 

EPHTHAE a Gileadite was a valeaŭt 

man of armes, but an harlottes childe. 
Gilead begat lephthae. But whan the wyfe had borne children vnto Gilead, and the same wyues childré were waxé greate, they thrust out lephtae, and sayde vnto him: Thou shalt not be heire in oure fathers house, for thou art another womas sonne. The fled he from his brethre, and dwelt in the londe of Tob.
And there resorted vnto him vagabüdes, and wete out with him. And after a certayne
Tere. 2. a. 

t Iud. 12. c. § Deut. 32. e. 

€ 

D 

LC Eee U eee 

Chap. rt. 

The boke of the Judges. 

tyme foughte the children of Ammon with 
Israel. 

Now wha the childré of Ammon foughte thus with Israel, the Elders wente from Gilead to fetch Iephthae out of the londe of Tob, and sayde vnto him: Come, and be oure cap- tayne, and fight agaynst the children of Am- mon. But Iephthae sayde vnto the Elders of
Gilead: Are not ye they that hate me and haue thrust me out of my fathers house, and now come ye to me whan ye are in trouble?
B| The Elders of Gilead sayde: Therfore come we now againe vnto the, that thou mayest go with vs, and fighte agaynst the children of
Ammon, and be oure captayne ouer all that dwell in Gilead. lephthae sayde vnto the
Elders of Gilead: Yf ye fetch me agayne to fighte agaynst the childré of Ammon, and the
LORDE delyuer them before me shal J then be youre heade? The Elders of Gilead saide vnto lephthae: The LORDE be hearer betwene vs, yf we do not as thou hast sayde.
So lephthae wéte with the Elders of Gilead. 
And the people made him heade and duke ouer them. And lephthae spake all this before the LORDE at Mispa.

Then sente lephthae messaungers to the kynge of the children of Ammon, and caused to saye vnto him: What hast thon to do with me, that thon comest vnto me to fight agaynst my londe? ‘The kynge of the childré of
Ammo answered Iephthaes messaungers Be- cause that Israel toke awaye my londe (whan they departed out of Egipte) from Arnon vnto Iabock, and vnto Iordane: geue it me agayne now therfore peaceably.
€| But Iephthae sent yet mo messaungers to y kynge of the children of Ammon, which sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth Iephthae:*
Israel hath taken no londe, nether from the 
Moabites ner from the children of Ammon: for when they departed out of Egipte, Israel walked thorow the wyldernes vnto the reed see, and eame to Cades, and + sent messaungers to the kynge of the Edomites, and sayde: Let me go thorow thy londe. But the kynge of j Edomites wolde not heare thé. They sent lykewyse vnto the kynge of the Moabites, which wolde not also. Thus Israel abode in
Cades, and compased the lode of the Edom- ites and Moabites, and came on the eastsyde of the londe of the Moabites and pitched

* Deu. 2, a. 

t Num. 20. b. i Num. 21. ¢. 

lbeyonde Arnon, and came not within the coaste of the Moabites. tFor Arnon is the border of the Moabites.

And Israel sent messaungers vnto Sihon the kynge of the Amorites at Heszbon, “and caused to saye vnto him: Let me go thorow thy londe vnto my place. Neuertheles Sihon wolde not trust Israel to go thorow the border

pitched at Iahza, and foughte with Israel. 
Howbeit the LORDE God of Israel gaue 
Sihon with all his people in to Israels hade, so that they slewe them. Thus Israel con- quered all the londe of the Amorites that dwelt in $ same countre. And they toke possessio of all the borders of the Amorites, from Arnon vnto labok, q from y wyldernesse vnto lordane. So y LORDE God of Israel drone awaye the Amorites before his people of Israel, and wilt thon coquere them? Is it not so, yf thy God Camos gaue the onghte to possesse, woldest thou not possesse it? What so ener the LORDE oure God hath geué vs before vs to possesse, that shal we conquere and take in possession.

Hast thou better right (thinkest thou) thé 
$ Balac the sonne of Ziphor, the kynge of y 
Moabites ? T he euer go to lawe or fighte agaynst Israel? ‘Though Israel haue dwelt now vpo a thre hūdreth yeare in Hesbon, and in the vyllages therof, in Aroer and in the vyllages therof, and in all the cities that lye by Arnon. Why dyd not ye rescue it at the same tyme? I haue not offended the, ¢ thou doest me euell to fighte agaynst me. The
LORDE gene sentence this daie betwene 
Israel and the children of Ammon. 

Neuertheles the kynge of the children of 
Ammon wolde not heare y wordes of Iephthae, which he sent vnto him. ‘Then came y sprete of the LORDE vpon Iephthae, and he wente thorow Gilead and Manasse, and thorow Mispa which lieth in Gilead, and fro Mispa that lieth in Gilead, vnto y children of Ammon.

And lephthae vowed a vowe vnto the 
LORDE, and sayde: || Yf thou wilt delyuer the childré of Aminon in to my hande, what so euer commeth (first) out at the dore of my house in my waye, whan I returne agayne peaceably from the childré of Ammon, that same shalbe the LORDES, and I wy] offre it for a burntofferynge.

a Deut. 2. d. § Nu. 22.a. Deut. 23.a. || Mar. 6.c. 

Fo. cervi. 

of his londe, but gathered all his people, and |33 

fo. ceri. 

So lephthae wente vpon the children of 
Ammon, to fighte against them. And y 
LORDE gaue them in to his hande, and he smote the from Aroer tyll thou comest vnto
Minnith, euen twentye cities, and vnto the playne of $ vynyardes a very greate slaughter, and thus were the children of Ammon sub- idued before the children of Israel.

Now whan Jephthae came to Mispa vnto his house, beholde, his doughter wente out to mete him with tabrettes and daunces: and she was his onely childe, t he had els nether sonne ner doughter. And whan he sawe her, he rente his clothes, q sayde: Alas my doughter, thou makest my hert soroufull, and discomfortest me: for J haue opened my mouth vnto the LORDE, and can not call it agayne.

She sayde: My father, yf thou hast opened thy mouth vnto the LORDE, then do vnto me as it is proceaded out of thy mouth, acord- inge as the LORDE hath anéged the of thyne enemies the children of Ammon. And she sayde vnto hir father: Do this for me, gene me leue to go downe vpó the mountaynes two monethes, that I maye bewepe my virginite with my playfeeres. He sayde: Go thy waye.
And he let her go two monethes. ‘Then wente she with her playefeeres, and bewayled hir mayden heade vpon the mountaynes. And after two monethes she came agayne vnto hir father. And he dyd vnto her acordinge as he had vowed. And she had neuer bene in daunger of eny man. And it was a custome in Israel, that the doughters of Israel shulde go euery yeare, and mourne for the doughter of Iephthae the Gileadite, foure dayes in the yeare.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND they of Ephraim made insurrec- 

cion, a wente northwarde, q sayde vnto lephthae: * Wherfore wétest thou to the bat- tayll agaynst the children of Ammon, q hast not called vs, that we mighte go with the?
We wil burne thy house and the with fyre. 
Iephthae sayde vnto thé: I and my people had a greate matter with y children of Ammon, and I cried vpon you, but ye helped me not out of their handes. Now whan I sawe y there was no helper, I put t my soule in my honde, and wente agaynst the children of

* Tud, 8, a. t Psal. 118. o. 

The boke of the Judges, 

Ammon, and the LORDE delyuered them in to my hande. Wherfore come ye vp to me, to fighte agaynst me?

And lephthae gathered all the men in| 

Gilead, q foughte agaynst Ephraim. And the men in Gilead smote Ephraim, because they sayde: Ye Gileadites are as they y fle awaye before Ephraim, (and dwell) amoge
Ephraim q Manasse. And the Gileadites toke ¥ ferye of Iordane from Ephraim. Now wha one of y fugityue Ephraites dyd saye:
Let me go ouer, y men of Gilead sayde: Art thou an Ephraite? yf he answered: No, they bad him saye: Schiboleth, q he sayde: Sibo- leth, x coulde not speake it righte: then they toke him, q slew him at y ferye of Iordane, so y the same tyme there fell of Ephraim two t fortye M. lephthae iudged Israel sixe yeares. And Iephthae $ Gileadite dyed, q was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

Chap. ríj.| 

After him iudged Israel one Ebzan ofi 

Bethleem, which had thirtie sonnes and as many doughters: and his thirtie doughters gaue he forth to mariage, and thirtie doughters toke he from without for his sonnes, and ludged Israel seuen yeare, and died, and was buried at Bethleem.

After him indged Israel one Elon a Zabu- lonite, q he iudged Israel ten yeare, q was buried at Aialon in the londe of Zabulon.

After him indged Israel one Abdo a sonne of Hillel, a Pirgathonite, which had fortye sonnes, ¢ thirtie nenies (+which rode vpo seuentye Asses foales) and he iudged Israel eighte yeare, and dyed, x was buried at Pir- gathon in the londe of Ephraim vpon the mount of the Amalechites.

The riij. Chapter. 
ND the children of Israel wroughte more euell before the LORDE, $« the
LORDE gaue them ouer in to the hades of the Philistynes fortye yeares.

But there was a man at Zarga, of one of y kynreds of the Danites, named Manoah, and his wife was vnfrutefull q bare him no children.
And the angell of the LORDE appeared vnto 

woman, q sayde vnto her: Beholde, thou art baren, q bearest not: but thou shalt con- ceaue, q beare a sonne. ‘Take hede therfore, y thou drynke no wyne ner stronge drynke, and y thou eate no vncleane thinge, for thou

+ Iud. 10. a. § Iud. 10. b. 

a 

Chap. riiij. shalt conceaue, and beare a sonne, *vpó whose heade there shal come mo rasoure: for y childe shal be a Nazaree of God, euen from his mother wombe, and shall begynne to de- lyuer Israel out of the hande of the Philistynes.

Then came ¥ woman and tolde hir husbande, q sayde: There came a ma of God vnto me, q his proporcion was to loke vpon as an angell of God, very terrible, so y I axed him not whence he came, q whither he wolde: nether tolde he me his name. But he sayde vnto me: beholde, thou shalt conceaue q beare a sonne: drynke no wyne therfore ner stroge drynke, q eate no vncleane thinge: + for the childe shal be called a Nazaree of God, euen fro his mother wombe vnto his death.

Then Manoah prayed the LORDE, ¢ sayde: Oh LORDE, let ¥ man of God whom thou hast sent, come to vs agayne, y he maye enfourme vs what we shall do vnto the childe which shalbe borne. And God herde the voyce of Manoah, q the angell of God came to his wife agayne. But she sat in y felde, and hir huszbade Manoah was not with her.
Thé ranne she in all the haist, x tolde hir huszbande, q saide vnto him: beholde, y man hath appeared vnto me, y came to me to daye.

Manoah gat him vp, ¢ wente after his wife, and came to the man, and sayde vnto him:
Art thou ¥ man that spake to the woman? 
He sayde: Yee. And Manoah sayde: wha it commeth to passe that thou hast sayde, what shal be the maner and worke of y childe?
The angell of the LORDE sayde vnto Ma- noah: He shal kepe him from all that I tolde the woman: he shal not eate that which com- meth of the vyne, and shal drynke no wyne ner stronge drynke, and eate no vncleane thinge : q all that I haue cómaunded her, shal he kepe.

Manoah sayde vnto y angell of the 
LORDE: let vs holde the here (1 praye the) we will prepare a kydd for the. Neuertheles y angell of the LORDE answered Manoah:
+ Though thou kepest me here, yet wyll I not eate of thy bred. But yf thou wilt make a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE, thou mayest offre it. (For Manoah wist not that it was an angell of the LORDE.) And Ma- noah sayde vnto the angell of the LORDE:
What is thy name, that we maye prayse y, 

+ Matt. 2. d. 
$ Gen. 52. e. Exo. 3. c. 

* 1 Reg. 1. b. t Tob. 12. d. 

The boke of the Judges. 

whan it commeth now to passe, that thou hast 

| Manoah and his wife behelde it. 

sayde? But the angell of the LORDE sayde vnto him: $ Why axest thou after my name, which is wonderfull ?

Then toke Manoah a kyd and a meatoffer- yuge, q layed it vp6 a rocke vnto the LORDE, l| which doth ¥ wonders him selfe. But
And wha the flamme wente vp from y altare towarde heauen, the angell of the LORDE ascéded vp in the flamme of the altare. Whan Ma- noah a his wife sawe y, they fell downe to y earth vpo their faces. And the angell of y
LORDE appeared nomore vnto Manoah q his wife. Thé knewe Manoah, that it was an angell of the LORDE, and he sayde vnto his wife: T We must dye the death, because we haue sene God. But his wife answered him:
Yf the LORDE wolde haue slaine vs, he had not receaued the burntofferynge and meat- offerynge of oure handes: nether had he shewed vs all these thinges, ner letten vs heare soch as is now come to passe.

And the woman broughte forth a sonne, and called his name Samson. And the childe grewe, and the LORDE blessed him. And the sprete of the LORDE begane to be with him im the tentes of Dan, betwene Zarga and
Esthaol. 

The riiij. Chapter. 

AMSON wente downe vnto Thimnath, 

q there he sawe a woman amoge the doughters of y Philistynes. And whan he came vp, he tolde his father q his mother, q sayde: l haue sene a woman amoge the doughters of the Philistynes, I praye you geue me the same to wife. His father q his mother sayde vnto him: Is there not a woman amonge the doughters of thy brethren, q in all thy people, but thou must go q take a wife amoge the Philistynes, which are vncireum- cised ?

Samson sayde vnto his father: Geue me this woma, for she pleaseth myne eyes. But his father q his mother knewe not yit came of the LORDE, q that he soughte an occasion agaynst the Philistynes. For the Philistynes reigned ouer Israel at y same tyme. So
Samson wente downe with his father and with his mother vnto ‘Thimnath.

|| Peal. 71. e. and 135. a. 4| Exo. 33. d. Iud. 6. e. 

34 

fo. cert. 

a 

Fo. cert. 

3| And whan they came to the vynyardes of 

Thimnath, beholde, there came a yonge roar- inge lyon against him. And the sprete of the
LORDE came vpon him, and he rente him in peces, euen as a kydd is parted a sunder, and yet had he nothinge at all in his hade, and he tolde it not vnto his father q his mother.

Now whan he came downe, he spake with the woman, and she pleased Samsons eyes.
And after certayne dayes he came agayne, to receaue her, q wente out of y waye, that he mighte se ¥ deed carcas of the lyon: and be- holde, in ¥ lyons carcas there was a swarme of beyes, and hony: and he toke of it in his hande, and ate therof by the waye: and wéte vnto his father and to his mother, and gaue them to eate also. But he tolde them not, that he had taken the hony out of the lyons carcas.

And whan his father came downe to the woman, Samson made a feast there, as the yonge men vsed to do. And whan they sawe him, they gaue him thirtie companyons to be with him. Samson sayde vnto them: I wil expresse a darke sentence vnto you, yf ye expounde me the same with in these seuen dayes of the feast, I wyll geue you thirtye shertes, and thirtie chaunge of raymente.
But yf ye can not expounde it, then shall ye geue me thirtie shertes, q thirtie chaunge of rayment. And they sayde vnto him: Shewe forth thy ryddle, let vs heare it. He sayde vnto them: Meate wente out from the de- uourer, and swetenesse from the mightie.
And in thre dayes they coulde not expounde the ryddle.

Vpon the seuenth daye they sayde vnto 
Samsons wife: Persuade thy huszbade, that he tell vs what the ryddle meaneth, or els we shal burne the and thy fathers house with fyre.
Haue ye called vs hither, to brynge vs to pouerte? Then wepte Samsons wife before him, and sayde: Thou art displeased at me, and louest me not: thou hast expressed a darke sentence vnto the children of my people, and hast not tolde it me.

But he sayde vnto her: Beholde, * I haue not tolde it vnto my father and mother, and shulde I tell it the? And she wepte before him those seuen dayes, whyle they had y feast.
But on the seucth daye he tolde it her, for she was so importune vpon him. And she ex-

* Iud. 14. b. 

The boke of the Judges. 

pounded the darke sentence vnto the children of her people. 'Fhen sayde the men of the cite vnto him vpon the senenth daye or euer the Sonne wente downe: What is sweter then hony? What is stronger then the lyon? But he sayde vnto thé: Yf ye had not plowed with my calfe, ye shulde not haue founde out my ryddle. And the sprete of y LORDE came vpon him, and he wente downe vnto Ascalon, and slewe thirtie men of them, q toke their spoyles, and gaue chaunge of rayment vnto thé, ý had expounded the ryddle. And he was wrothfully displeased, q wente vp vnto his fathers house. As for Samsons wife, she was geuen vnto one of his companyons, which belonged vnto him.

The rh. Chapter. 

T fortuned after certaine daies aboute the 

wheate haruest tyme, y Samson visited his wife with a kydd. And wha he thoughte,
I wyl go to my wife in to the chamber, hir father wolde not let him in, and sayde: I thoughte thou wast displeased at her, and I gaue her vnto thy frende. But she hath a yonger sister which is more beutyfull then she, let ¥ same be thine for her. ‘Thé sayde
Samson vnto thé: I haue once gotté a righte occasion agaynst the Philistynes, I wyl do you displeasure.

And Samson wéte and catched thre hun- dreth foxes, and toke fyre brandes, and festened one tayle to another, and put euer a fyre brande betwene two tayles, and kynled the same with fyre, and let them go amonge the Philistynes corne, and thus he brent y stoukes and the stondinge corne, and $ vyn- yardes, and the olyue trees.

Then sayde the Philistynes: Who hath|% 

done this? And they sayde: Samson the husbande of the Thimnites doughter, because he toke awaye his wife from him, and gaue hir vnto his frende. Then wente the Philis- tynes vp, and brent her and hir father also with fyre.

But Samson sayde vnto them: I can suffre you to do this, neuertheles I wyl be auéged vpon you my selfe, and then wyl I leaue of.
And he smote them sore both vpo the shulders q loynes: and wéte downe, q dwelt in the stone clyffe at Etam. ‘Then wente the Philistynes vp, and layed sege vnto luda, q pitched at
Lechi. But they of Iuda sayde: Wherfore 

Chap. rb. 

Chap. rbi. are ye come vp against vs? They answered: we are come vp to bynde Samson, y we maye do vnto him, as he hath done vnto vs.

Then wéte there thre M. men of Iuda downe to the stone clyffe of Etam, q sayde vnto Samson: Knowest thou not that the
Philistynes raigne ouer vs? Wherfore hast thou done this then vnto vs? He sayde: As they dyd vnto me, so haue I done vnto thé agayne. They sayde vnto him: We are come downe to bynde the, q to delyner y in to the hade of the Philistynes. Samson sayde vnto thé: Then sweare q promyse me, y ye wyll not slaye me. They answered him: We wyll not kyll the, we wil but bynde the, q delyuer the in to their hande, q wyl not slaye y. And they bounde him with two new coardes a caried him from the stone. And whan he came vnto Lechi, the Philistynes shouted, and rane vnto him. But y sprete of y LORDE came vpon him, q the coardes abonte his armes were like thredes burnt in the fyre, so ý the bondes were lowsed from his hondes.

B| And he founde the cheke bone of a deed 

asse: then put he forth his hande, and toke it, a slewe a thousande men therwith: And Sam- son sayde: With an olde asses cheke bone, yee eue with the cheke bone of an asse haue
I slayne a thousande men. And whan he had sayde y he cast y cheke bone ont of his hande, « called the place Ramath Lechi. But whà he was sore a thyrst, he called vpo the
LORDE, a saide: Soch greate health hast thou geué by the hade of thy seruaunt, but now must I dye a thyrst, q fall in to ý hande of y vncircücised. ‘Thé God opened a gome tothe in Y chekebone, so y water wéte ont: q whan he dranke, his sprete came agayne, q he was refreszshed. ‘Therfore vnto this daye it is yet called ¥ well of $ cheke bone of him y made intercession. And he iudged Israel in the tyme of the Philistynes twétye yeare.

The roi. Chapter. 
AMSON wente vnto Gasa, q there he sawe an harlot, a laye with her. The was it saide vnto the Gasites: Samson is come hither. And they compased him aboute,
« caused to laye wayte for him prenely, a watched all the nighte in the gate of y cite, q all that nighte they helde them styll, q sayde :
Abyde, tomorow whan it is lighte, we wyll, 

i 

The boke of the Judges. 

‘out of his slepe, q drue out 

slaye him. But Samson laye vnto mydnighte, then rose he at mydnighte, q toke holde on both y syde portes of y gate of the cite, with both the postes, q litte them out with the barres, q layed them vpon his shulders, q bare them vp to y toppe of $ mount oner agaynst
Hebron. 

After this he fell in to the loue of a woman by y broke of Sorek, whose name was Dalila, vnto whom the prynces of the Philistynes came vp, and sayde vnto her: Persuade him, and loke wherin he hath soch greate strégth, q how we maye ouercome him, y we mighte bynde him g subdue him, so wyll we geve the euery man a M. and an C. syluerlinges. And
Dalila sayde vnto Samson: I praye the tell me, wherm thy greate stregth is, a how thou mightest be bounde to be subdued. Samson sayde vnto her: Yf I were bounde with sene roapes of fresh senowes, which are not yet dryed vp, I shulde be weake, and as another man. 'fhé the prynces of the Philistynes broughte vp vnto her senen new roapes, which were not yet dryed vp. And she bounde him therwith. (But there was wayte layed for him besyde her in the chamber) and she sayde vnto him: 'The Philistynes vpon the Samson.
Neuertheles he brake the roapes in sunder, ené as a twyned threde breaketh, whan it hath catched the heate of the fyre. And it was not knowne wherin his strength was.

'Then sayde Dalila vnto Samson : beholde, thon hast begyled me q dyssembled with me: tell me yet, wherwithall mayest thou be bounde? He answered her: Yf they bounde me with new coardes, wherwith no laboure hath bene done, I shulde be feble, ¢ as another man. Then toke Dalila new coardes, q bounde him withall, and sayde: The Philis- tynes vpo the Samson (but there was wayte layed for him in the chamber.) And he brake them from his armes, euen as it had bene a threde.

Dalila sayde vnto him: Yet hast thou be- gyled me « dessembled with me: O tell me yet, wherwithall mightest thou be bounde?

|He answered her: Yf thou playtest seue 

hayrie lockes of my heade together in a fyllet, and fastenest them in with a nayle (I shulde be weake.) And she saide vnto him: The
Philistynes vpo the Samson. But he awaked playted hayrie lockes with the nale and the tyllet.

Fo. ceri. 

5 

€ 

| fo. cevitttj. The boke of the Judges. 

Chap. rbij.| 

3| The sayde she vnto him: How cast thou saye y thou louest me, where as thine hert is not yet with me? ‘Thre tymes hast thou disceaued me, and not tolde me wherin thy greate strength is. So whan she was euery daye importune vpon him with her wordes, & wolde not let him haue rest, his soule was faynte euen vnto the death, q he shewed her his whole hert, q sayde vnto her:* There came neuer rasoure vpon my heade, for I am la Nazaree of God fro my mothers wombe.
Yf I were shauen, my strength shulde departe fro me, so that I shulde be weake, and as all other men. Now whan Dalila sawe that he had opened all his hert vnto her, she sent q
‘ealled for the prynces of the Philistynes, q sayde: Come yet once vp, for he hath opened his whole hert vnto me.
£| "Thé came the prynces of the Philistynes vp vnto her, a broughte the money with them in their handes. And she made him to slepe vpon hir lappe, q called one which shoue of the seué hayrie lockes of his heade. And she beganne to vexe him. The was his strength departed fro him. And she sayde vnto him:
The Philistynes vpon the Samson. Now wha he awoke out of his slepe, he thoughte: I wil go forth as I haue done afore tyme, ¢ ease my selfe, q knewe not y the LORDE was de- parted from him. But the Philistynes toke him, q put out his eyes, and broughte him downe to Gasa, ¢ bounde him with fetters, and made him to grynde in the preson. But the heer of his heade beganne to growe agayne, where it was shauen of.
IF| Whan ¥ prynces of the Philistynes were 
| [gathered together, to make a greate sacrifice vnto Dagon their god, and to be ioyfull, they
| |sayde: Oure god hath delyuered Samson oure 
| jenemye in to oure hande. Like wyse whan y 
| |people sawe him, they praysed their god, a sayde: Oure god hath delyuered in to oure handes oure enemye, y destroyed oure londe, q slewe many of vs. Now whan their hert
| [was ioyfull, they sayde: Let vs fetch Samson, 
| |that he maye make some pastyme before vs. 
Then fetched they Samson ont of the preson, 
; |t he made pastyme before them. And they set him betwene two pilers. But Samson isayde vnto the lad ý led him by the hande:
Let me touche the pilers wher vpon the house stondeth, y I maye leane ther vnto. As for

* Num. 6. a, Iud. 13.a. 

y house, it was full of men a wemen. All the prynces of the Philistynes were there also, and vpon the rofe were aboute a thre thousande men and wemen, which behelde what pas- tyme Samson made.

But Samson called vpon the LORDE, « sayde: O LORDE LORDE, thynke vpon me, q strength me but this once O God I beseke the, y for both myne eyes I maye auége me on the Philistynes. And he toke holde of ¥ two mydpilers, that the house stode vpon q was holden by, the one in his righte hade, œ y other in his lefte, q saide: My soule dye with the Philistynes, a he bowed him selfe mightely. Then fell the house vpon the prynces q vpon all the people that were therin, so that there were mo of y slayne which dyed in his death, the he slewe whyle he lyued.
'Then came his brethren downe and all his fathers house, and toke him, and caried him vp, and buried him in the graue of his father
Manoah betwene Zarga and Esthaol. He iudged Israel twentye yeare.

The yoíj. Chapter. 

HERE was a man vpó mount Ephraim, named Micha, which sayde ynto his mother: The thousande and hundreth syluer- linges which thon hast taken vnto the, ¢ sworne, and spoken of before myne eares: beholde, y same money is by me, I haue taken it vnto me. Then sayde his mother: The blessinge of the LORDE haue thou my sonne. So he gaue his mother the thousande q hundreth syluerlinges agayne. And his mother saide:
That money haue I sanctified vnto the 
LORDE with my hande for my sonne, to make a molten ymage: therfore I gene it the agayne. Neuertheles he delyuered y money

agayne vnto his mother. 

Then toke his mother two hundreth syluer- linges, q put them forth to y goldsmyth, which made a molten ymage, y was after- warde in Michas house. And thus the man
Micha had a gods house, q made an ouerbody cote, t Idols, and fylled ¥ handes of one of his sonnes, y he mighte be his prest. + At y tyme was there no kynge in Israel, ¢ euery man dyd the thinge y was righte in his awne eyes. There was a yoge man of Bethleem
Iuda, amóge the kynreds of Iuda, and he was a Leuite, and was a straunger there. The

t Iud. 18. a. and 21. d. 

Chap. rbit. 

€ 

same wente out of the cite of Bethleem Iuda, to walke whither he coulde.

And wha he came vp to mount Ephraim vnto the house of Micha, to go on his iourney,
Micha axed him: Whence comest thou? He answered him: I am a Leuite of Bethleem
Iuda, and am walkynge where I can. Micha sayde vnto him: Tary with me, thou shalt be my father and my prest, I will geue the euery yeare ten syluerlinges and thy appoynted raymét, and meate and drynke: and the
Leuite wete on. And the Leuite agreed to abyde with the man: and he helde the yonge ma, as one of his owne sonnes. And Micha fylled the Leuites hande, that he mighte be his prest, and so he was in Michas house.
And Micha sayde: I am sure the LORDE wyll do me good now, that I haue a Leuite to my prest.

The rotij. Chapter. 

T that tyme was there no kynge in Israel. 
And y trybe of $ Danites soughte them an enheritaunce to dwell in, * for vnto that daie there was no enheritaunce fallen vnto them amonge the trybes of Israel. And the childré of Dan sent out of their kynreds fyue captaynes (which were meu of armes) from Zarga and Esthaol, to spye and search out the londe. And they sayde vnto them:
Go youre waie, and search out the londe. 
And they came vp to mount Ephraim in to y house of Micha, and taried there all nighte.
And whyle they were there with Michas huszsholde, they knewe ¥ voyce of the yonge man the Leuite, and sayde vnto him: Who broughte y hither? What makest thou here?

and why woldest thou come hither ? 

He answered thé: Thus ¢ thus hath Micha done vnto me, « hath hyred me to be his prest. They sayde vnto him: O axe at God, y we maye perceaue, whether oure iourney which we go, shal prospere well or not. ‘The prest answered them: Go youre waye in peace, youre iourney y ye go, is before the LORDE.
Then the fyue men wente their waye, q came vnto Lais, and sawe that the people which was therin, dwelt sure, euen as y Sidonians, at rest, and carelesse, and that there was no lorde in the londe to vexe them, and were farre from the Sidonids, and had nothinge to do with eny man.

* Iosu. 19. d. 

The boke of the Judges. 

fo. cerlb. 

And they came to their brethré to Zarga|€ and Esthaol. And their brethren saide vnto them: How is it with you? They sayde:
Arise, let vs go vp vnto them, for we haue sene the londe, y it is a very good londe: make haist therfore, q be not slacke to go, that ye maye come to take possession of the londe.
Whan ye come, ye shall come to a carelesse people, and the londe is wyde: for God hath delyuered this place in to youre hande, where nothinge wanteth of all y 1s vpon earth.

Then wente there thence out of the kynreds of Dan from Zarga and Esthaol, sixe hundreth men ready wapened to y battayll, and wente vp, aud pitched at Kiriath learim in Iuda: therfore called they the same place, y hoost of Dan, vnto this daye, which is behinde
Kirtath Iearim. 

And frö thence they wéte vp vnto moüt 
Ephraim, and came to the house of Micha. 
'Then answered the fyue men that wete out to spye the londe of Lais, ¢ sayde vnto their brethren: Knowe ye not that in these houses there is an ouerbody cote, Idols, q molten ymages? Now maye ye loke what ye haue to do. ‘They departed thence, and came to the house of the yonge man the Leuite in Michas house, and saluted him fredly. But the sixe hundreth men, which were of y children of
Dan, stode ready harnessed before y gate. 
And the fyue men that were gone out to spye y londe, wéte vp, and eame thither, and toke the ymage, the ouerbody cote, t the molten
Idols. In the meane whyle stode y prest at the gate, with the sixe hundreth readye harnessed.

Now wha these were come in to Michas house, and toke the ymage, the ouerbody cote, and the molten Idols, the prest sayde vnto them: What do ye? They answered him:
Holde thy peace, and laye thine hande vpon thy mouth, and go with vs, y thou mayest be oure father q prest. Is it better for the to be prest in one mans house, then amonge a whole trybe q kynred in Israel? This pleased the prest well, ¢ he toke both the ouerbody cote, and the Idols, and the ymage, and came in amonge the people. And whan they turned them and wente thence, they sent their chil- dren, and catell, and soch precious thynges as they had, before them.

Whan they were come farre now from the house of Micha, the men y were in Michas

| ffo. elbi. 

a 

houses gathered th& together by Michas house, i folowed y childré of Dan, and cried vpon the childré of Dan. They turned their faces aboute, and sayde vnto Micha: What ayleth the, y thou makest soch a crienge? He answered: Ye haue taken awaye my goddes, and the prest, q are goinge youre waie, and what haue I behynde? What is here? And yet ye saye vnto me: What ayleth the? But the childré of Dan saide vnto him: Let not thy voyce be herde amoge vs, that some wroth- full mé thrust not at the, and so thy soule and the soule of thy house be destroyed. So the childré of Dan wéte on their waye.
Micha, whan he sawe y they were to stronge for him, turned backe, and came agayne to his house.

Bnt they toke that Micha had made, q the prest whom he had, q came vnto Lais, to a quyete carelesse people, and slewe them with the edge of the swerde, and burnt the cite with fyre, and there was no man to delyuer them: for they laye farre fro Sidon, and had to do with no man. And they laye in the valley, which is besyde Beth Rehob. ‘Then buylded they the cite, q dwelt therin, *q called it Dan, after the name of their father Dan, whom Israel begat. And y cite was called
Lais afore tyme. 

And the children of Dan set vp the ymage for them, and Ionathan $ sonne of Gerson the sonne of Manasse, q his sonnes were prestes amoge the trybe of y Danites, * vnto the tyme
ý they were led awaye captyue out of the londe. And thus they set amonge thé the ymage of Micha, which he had made, as loge as ¥ house of God was at Silo.

The riy. Chapter. 

T the same tyme was there no kynge in 
A Israel, and there was a man of Leui, which was a straiger besyde moüt Ephraim, and had taken him a cocnbine of Bethleem
Iuda to wife. And wha she had played the harlot besyde him, she ranne fro him to hir fathers house vnto Bethleem Iuda, q was there foure monethes longe. And hir husz- bade gat him vp, q wente after her, to speake fredly with her, q to fetch her againe, q had a seruaunt q a couple of asses with him. And she led him in to hir fathers house. But whan the damsels father sawe him, he was

~ losu. 19, d. t 4 Re. 17. a. 

The boke of the Judges. 

And |} 

glad, q receaued him : q his father in lawe, y damsels father kepte him, so y he taried thre dayes with him: thus they ate and droke, and remayned there all nighte.

But on ¥ fourth daye he gat him vp early, q wolde go his waye. ‘Then sayde y dami father vnto his sonne in lawe : t Refresh thine hert first with a morsell of bred, and then shal ye go. And they sat them downe, « ate and dronke both together: Then sayde the damsels father vnto the man: Oh tarye all nighte, y we maie refresh thine hert. But $ mā arose, q wolde nedes go. And his father in lawe constrayned him to tarye all nighte.
On the fifth daye in the mornynge he gat him vp, and wolde be gone. ‘Then sayde the damsels father: I praye the comforte thine hert, q let vs tary tyll y daye be farther past, and so they ate both together.

And the man gat him vp, and wolde go with his concubyne and with his seruaunt.
But his father in lawe the damsels father, saide vnto him agayne: Lo, the daye is spente, q it begynneth to be euen, tary all night: beholde, here is lodginge yet this daye, abyde here this night, it shal refresh thine hert: to- morow by times get you vp, and go youre waye vnto thy tent. Neuertheles the man wolde not tary, but gat him vp, a wéte his
|waye, and came ouer agaynst Jebus (that is 
|lernsalem) and his couple of asses ladé, and 
‘his concubyne with him. 
| Now whan they were come nye vnto Jebus, the daye fell fast awaye. And y sernaüt saide vnto his master: Í praie you go on, and let vs turne in to this cite of the Iebusites, and tarye therin alluight. Notwithstondinge his master sayde vnto him: I wil not turne in to Y cite of the aleauntes, that are not of the children of Israel, bnt I wyl go ouer vnto
Gibea. And he sayde vnto his seruant: Go thon before, that we maye come to some place, jand tarye at Gibea or at Ramah allnight.
‘And they wente on and walked, and the 
, Sonne wente downe vpon the harde by Gibea, which lyeth in the trybe of Ben Jamin: and they turned in there, y they mighte come in, and tarye at Gibea all nighte. But whan he
‘came in, he sat him downe in ¥ strete of the cite: for there was noman that wolde lodge them in his house that night.

t Gen. 18. a. Psal. 105. b. 

Chap. rir. 

B 

And beholde, then came there an olde ma} 3 

Chap. rr. from his worke out of the felde in the euen- inge: and he was also of mount Ephraim, and a straüger at Gibea: but y me of that place were y childré of Iemini. And whan he lifte vp his eies, q sawe the straunger in the strete he sayde vnto him: Whither wilt thou go? q whence comest thou? He answered him:
We are goinge on oure iourney from Bethlec 
Iuda, vntyll we come besyde mount Ephraim, whece I am, and wente vnto Bethleem Iuda, and now I go vnto $ house of y LORDE q no ma wil harbarow me. We haue strawe and prouéder for oure asses, and bred and wyne for me and thy handmayden, and for the yonge man which is with thy seruaunt, so y we wante nothinge.

JF| The olde man sayde: Peace be with the: 

what soeuer thou wantest, thou findest it with me, onely tarye not in the strete all nighte.
And he broughte him in to his house, and gaue the asses prouender: and they washed their fete, and ate q dronke. And wha their hert was now ioyfull, the men of the cyte, the children of Belial, came, and compased the house rounde aboute, and ruszshed at y dore, and sayde vnto y olde man, which was the good man of y house: Bringe out the ma which is come in to thy house, that we maye knowe him.

*But the good man of the house wente forth to them, and sayde vnto them: Oh no my brethren, do not so wickedly, consideringe this man is come in to my house: Oh do not soch folye. Beholde, I haue a doughter yet a virgin, and this man hath a coeubie, those wil I brynge forth vnto you, that ye maye humble them, and do with them as ye lyke: but do not soch foly vnto this man. Neuer- theles the men wolde not herken vnto him.
"Then toke $ man his concubine and broughte her forth vnto them: and they knewe her, and dealte shamefully with her all y night vntill the mornynge. And whan the mornynge brake on, they let her go.

&| ‘Then came the woman early in the morn- 

ge, and fell downe at the dore of the màs 

ouse that her lorde was in, and laye there tyll it was light. Now whan hir lorde rose vp in the mornynge, and opened the dore of the house, and wente forth to go on his iour- ney, beholde, his concubyne laye at the dore of the house, and hir handes vpon the thres-

* Gen. 19. b. 

Che boke of tbe Judges. 

holde. He saide vnto her: stonde vp, let vs go. Neuertheles she gaue him no answere.
Thé toke he her vp vpon his asse, gat him vp, and wente vnto his place.

Fo. reribij. 

Now whan he came home, he toke a swerde, | * 

and helde his concubyne, and eut her with the bones and all in to twolue peces, and sent them in to all the coastes of Israel. "Who so euer sawe it, sayde: Soch a thinge hath not bene done ner sene, sence the tyme that y children of Israel departed out of the loude of Egipte, vnto this daye. Now as concern- ynge this, take youre advysement, and geue youre councell, and shew it forth.

Che rr. Chapter. 

HEN wente the children of Israel out 

and gathered a congregacion together as one man, fro Dan vntill Bersaba, and from the londe of Gilead vnto the LORDE to
Mispa: and there came together of all the quarters of the people, and of all the trybes of Israel in to the congregacion of the people of God, foure hundreth thousande fote men that drue out y swerde. But the children of
Ben lamin herde, how that ¥ children of 
Israel were gone vp vnto Mispa. And the children of Israel sayde: Tell vs, how hap- pened this euell ?

'Then answered the Leuite the huszbande of the woman that was slayne, and sayde : I came to Gibea in Ben [amin with my concu- byne, to tary there allnight, then the cytesins of Gibea gat them vp agaynst me, and com- pased me aboute in the house by night, and thoughte to slaye me, and defyled my cócu- byne, so that she dyed: then toke I my cócu- byne, and eut her in peces, and sent the peces in to euery countre of the inheritaunce of
Israel: for they haue done an abhominacion and folye in lsrael. Beholde, here are ye children of Israel: aduyse you well, and take this matter in hande.

So all the people gat them vp as one ma, and sayde: Noma shal go in to his tente, ner departe to his house, but this wil we do now agaynst Gibea: Let vs cast lot, and take ten men of an hundreth, and an hundreth of a thousande, and a thousande of ten thousande, out of all y trybes of Israel, y they maie take fode for ý people, to come q do with Gibea
Ben lamin, acordynge to their folye which they haue done in Israel. Thus all the men

a 

B 

Fo. cerlbtty. 

of Israel beynge confederate, gathered them selues together as one man vnto the cite: and the trybes of Israel sent men vuto all the kin- reds of Ben Iamin, and caused to saye vnto them: What maner of wickydnes is this, that is done amonge you? — Delyuer here therfore the men the children of Delial at Gibea, that we maye put them to death, and do awaye the euell out of Israel. Neuertheles the children of Ben Tamim wolde not folowe the voyce of their brethren the children of Israel, but gathered them selues out of y cities vnto
Gibea, to go forth in battayll agaynst the children of Israel.

(| And the same daye were there nombred of 

the children of Ben Iamin out of the cities, sixe and twentye thousande men, that drue the swerde, beside the citesyns of Gibea of whom there were tolde seue jen chosen men. And amoge all this people there were chosen out seuen hundreth men, which vsed not the right hande but the lefte, and yet with the slynge coulde they touch an heer, and not mysse. But the men of Israel, beside them of Bé lamin, were nobred foure hüdreth thou- sande, which drue the swerde, q were all men of armes. And the children of Israel arose, and wente vp to the house of God (iu Silo) and axed at God, and sayde: Who shall go vp for vs to beginne the battayll with ¥ children of Ben lamin? The LORDE saide: Iuda shall begynne.

So the children of Israel gat thé vp in y moruige, q pitched oner agaist Gibea, q euery man of Israel wéte out to fighte with Ben lamin, aud set them selues in araye to fighte agaynst Gibea. Then fell the children of Ben
Iamin out of Gibea, and slewe the same daye amonge Israel two q twentye thousande to the grounde.

B| But the people of the men of Israel com- 

forted them selues, and made them ready to fighte yet more in the same place, after they had prepared them selues the daye afore.
And the children of Israel wente vp, and wepte before the LORDE vntyll the euenynge, and axed at the LORDE, a sayde: Shall we go eny uiore to fighte with oure brethren the children of Ben lamin? ‘The LORDE sayde:
Go vp vnto them. And whan the children of Israel gat them vp to the childré of Ben lamin on y next daye, the Ben Iamites fell out of Gibea agaynst thein the same daye, and

The boke of the Judges. 

slewe yet eightene thousande of y children of Israel to the grounde, which all drue the swerde.

Then wente all the children of Israel vp, and all the people, and came to the house of
God, and wepte, and taried there before the 
LORDE, « fasted that daye vntyll the euen, and offred burntofferynges and deedofferinges before the LORDE. And the children of
Israel axed at the LORDE (the Arke of the couenaunt of God was there at that tyme, and
Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the sonne of 
Aaron stode before him at the same tyme) a they sayde: Shal we go forth eny more to fighte with oure brethren the childré of Ben
Jamin, or shal we leaue of? The LORDE sayde: Go vp, tomorow wyll I delyuer them in to youre handes.

Chap. rr. 

And the children of Israel set a preuy watch |35 

agaynst Gibea rounde aboute, and so the 

‚children of Israel wente vp to the children of 

Ben Iamin on the thirde daye, and set them selues in araye agaynst Gibea like as the other two tymes afore. The came the children of
Ben [amin out agaynst the people, q brake out of the cite, q beganne to slaye certayne wounded of the people (like as the other two times afore) in the felde vpon two stretes: wherof one goeth towarde Bethel, the other vnto Gilead vpon a thirtye men in Israel.
Then thought the childré of Ben lamin: 
They are smytten before vs like as afore. But the childré of Israel sayde: Let vs flye, that we maie prouoke them out of the cite in to the hye stretes.

Then all the men of Israel gat them vp from their place, and prepared them selues vnto Baal Thamar. And the hinder watch of Israel brake out of their place, from y caue of Gaba, and came vnto Gibea, twentye thousande chosen men out of all Israel, so that it was a sore battayll: but they knewe not that the euel] shulde happen vnto them.
Thus the LORDE smote Ben Iamin before the children of Israel, so that the same daye the children of Israel destroyed fyue q twentye thousande and an hundreth men in Ben Jamin, which all drue the swerde.

For whan the childré of Ben Iamin sawe that they were smitten, the men of Israel gaue them rowme (to flye). For they trusted to the watch, which they had sett by Gibea.
Aud the watch made haist also, q brake forth 

F 

‘Chap. rri, vnto Gibea, and wente vpon it, and smote all the cite with the edge of y swerde. They were appoynted betwene them selues the men of Israel and the hynder watch, to fall vpon them with the swerde, whan the smoke of the cite arose. Now whan the men of Israel turned them in the battayll, and Ben Jamin beganne to smyte the wounded in Israel vpon a thirtie men, and thoughte, they are smytten before vs, like as in the battayl! afore, then beganne there a piler of smoke to arise vp from the cite. And Ben Iamin loked behinde them: and beholde, the flamme of y cite wente vp vnto heanen. And the men of Israel turned them, and were fearce vpon ¥ men of
Ben Jamin: for they sawe that the euell wolde happen vnto them.

And they turned them before the men of 
Israel in the waye to the wyldernesse, but the battayll folowed vpon them. And them of the cite destroyed they amoge them. And they compased Ben Iamin rounde aboute, and folowed vpon them vnto Menuah, and trode them downe tyll afore Gibea eastwarde. And there fell of Ben lamin eightene thousande men, which were all men of armes.

Whan the remnaunt of Ben Jamin sawe that, they turned them and fled towarde the wildernesse vnto the stonye rocke of Rimon.
But in the same strete they slewe fyue thou- sande men, and folowed vpon them vnto
Gideom, and slewe two thousande of the: and so there fell the same daye of Ben Iamin fyue and twenty thousande men which drue y swerde, and were all mē of armes. Onely sixe hundreth men turned backe, and fled towarde the wyldernesse vnto the stonye rocke of Rimon, and abode in the rocke of Rimon foure monethes. And the men of Israel came agayne to the children of Ben Iamin, and smote them that were in the cite with y edge of the swerde, both mé and catell and all that was founde: and what soeuer was foüde in the cite, they cast it in to the fyre.

The pré. Chapter. 
é men of [srael had sworé at Mispa, and sayde: Noman shal geue his doughter to the Ben Iamites to wife. And the people came to the house of God (in Silo) q abode there before God vntill the euenynge, and lifte vp their voyce, and wepte sore, and sayde:

* Num. 31. c. 

The boke of tbe Junges. 

O LORDE God of Israel, wherfore is this come to passe in Israel this daye? But on the morow the people gat thé vp early, and builded there an altare, and offred burnt- offeringes and deedofferynges.

And the children of Israel sayde: Where is there eny ma of the trybes of Israel, that is not come vp with the congregacion vnto the
LORDE? For there was a greate ooth made, that who so came not vp to Mispa vnto the
LORDE, shulde dye the deeth. And the children of Israel were sory for Ben Jamin their brother, and sayde: ‘This daye is there one trybe lesse in Israel. How wyll we do that the remnaunt maye haue wyues? For

Fo. cerltr. 

we haue sworne by the LORDE, that we wyl|13 

not gene thé wyues of oure donghters. And they saide: Where is there eny ma of the trybes of Israel, that is not come vp to the
LORDE vnto Mispa? And beholde, there was not one man of the citesyns of labes in
Gilead. 

Then sent the congregacion twolue thou- sande men of armes thither, and commaunded them, and sayde: Go youre waye, and smite the citesyns of Iabes in Gilead with the swerde, the wemen also and the children, but so that ye do after this maner: *Se that ye damne all them that are males, and all the wemen that haue lyen with men. And amonge the citesins of [abes in Gilead they foude foure hundreth damsels, which were virgins, and had lyen with noman: those they broughte in to the hoost vnto Silo, which lyeth in the londe of Canaan.

Then sent the whole congregacion, *and caused to talke with the children of Ben Jamin, which were in the stonie rocke of Himo and called vnto them frendly. So the children of
Ben lamin came agayne at the same tyme, and they gaue them wemen which they had of the wemen of Iabes in Gilead, and founde no mo after that maner. Then were the people sory for Ben Iamin, that ý LORDE had made a gappe in the trybes of Israel. And the
Elders of the congregacio sayde: What wil we do, that the remnaunt maye haue wyues also? for the wemé in Ben Iamin are destroied, and they sayde: The enheritaunce of them of Ben lamin that are escaped, must nedes remayne, that there be not a trybe destroyed out of Israel: q we can not geue them oure

Judi. 20. g. 

€ 

| do. cel. 

doughters to wiues. For the children of Israel haue sworne and sayde: Cursed be he that geueth a wyfe to the Ben Iamites.

And they sayde: Beholde there is a yearly feast of the LORDE at Silo, which lieth on the northsyde of the Gods house, and on the eastside of the strete as a mà goeth from Bethel

* | vnto Sichem, and lieth on the south side of 

Libona. And they commaunded the children of Ben Iamin, q sayde: Go youre waye, and wayte in the vynyardes. And whan ye se that the doughters of Silo go forth by copanyes to daunse, get you out of the vynyardes, and euery man take him a wyfe of the doughters of Silo, and go youre waye in to the lode of
Benlamin. Asfortheir fathers and brethren, whan they come to lawe with vs, we wyll saye

The ende of the boke of the Judges, called Judicum. 

Che boke of Ruth. 

Chat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

Elimelech departeth from Bethleem with his wife and two sonnes in to the Jonde of the Moabites, where the father dyeth and both the sonnes.
Ruth the wife of the one sonne goeth home with hir mother in lawe.

Chap. I. 

Ruth gathereth vp eares of corne in the felde of 

Boos hir houszbandes kynsma. 

The first Chapter. a E y tyme whan the Indges ruled, there was a derth in the londe. And there wente a ma from Bethleé Iuda to take his lourney in to the londe of the Moabites with his wife and two sonnes, which man was called
Eli Melech, and his wife Naemi, q his two isonnes, the one Mahelon, and the other
Chilion: these were Ephrates of Bethleem 
Iuda. And whan they came in to the londe 

The boke 

of Ruth. Chap. í. 

vnto them: Be fauourable to them, for they haue not taken thé in battaill: but ye gaue thé not vnto them by time, and it is youre faute.
The children of Ben lamin did so, and acordinge to their nombre toke them wyues from the daunse, whom they caught by vio- lence, and wente their waye, q dwelt in their awne inheritaunce, and buylded cities and dwelt therin. The children of Israel also gat them vp from thence at the same time, euery one to his trybe and to his kinred, and departed théce, euery man to his awne inheritaunce.
* At y time was there no kynge in Israel, and enery man dyd j thinge y was right in his awne ejes.

* Iud. 17. b. and 18, a 

Chap. HI. 
Ruth Iyeth her downe in the barne at Boos fete, and he geueth her good wordes, and ladeth her with sixe measures of barlye.

Chap. III. 
Boos marieth Ruth, which beareth him Obed 
Dauids graundfather. 

of ý Moabites, they dwelt there. And Eli 
Melech Naemis huszbande dyed, q she was left behinde with hir two sonnes, which toke
Moabitish wyues: the one was called Arpa, the other Ruth. And whan they had dwelt there ten yeare, they dyed both, Mahelon and
Chilion, so that the woman remayned desolate of both hir sonnes and hir huszbande.

Then gat she her vp with both hir sonnes wyues, t wente agavne out of the lode of y
| Moabites (for she had herde in the londe of 

Chap. fj. 
B |the Moabites, y the LORDE had visited his people q geuen them bred) q so she departed from y place where she was, q both hir sonnes wyues with her. And as they wéte by the waye to come agayne in to the londe of [uda, she sayde vnto both hir sonnes wyues: Go youre waye, q turne backe ether of you to hir mothers house: the LORDE shewe mercy vpon you, as ye haue done on thé y are deed ton me. The LORDE graunte you, y ye maie fynde rest ether of you in hir huszbades house (whom ye shal get) and she kyssed them.

Then lift they vp their voyce, and wepte, 
& sayde vnto her: We wil go with the vnto thy people. But Naemi sayde: Turne agayne my doughters, why wolde ye go with me?
How can I haue children eny more in my body, to be youre huszbandes? Turne agayne my doughters, and go youre waye, for I am now to olde to take an huszbande.

And though I shulde saye: I hope this night to take an huszbande q to brynge forth children, yet coulde ye not tary till they were growne vp: for ye shulde be to olde, so that ye coulde haue no huszbandes. No my doughters, therfore am I sory for you, for y hàde of the LORDE is gone forth ouer me.

Then lifte they vp their voyce, and wepte yet more, and Arpa kyssed hir mother in lawe
(and turned backe againe) but Ruth abode styll by her. Neuertheles she sayde: Be- holde, thy syster in lawe is turned backe vnto hir people and to hir god, turne thou againe also after thy sister in lawe. Ruth answered:
Speake not to me therof, that I shulde forsake the, and turne backe from the: whither so euer thou goest, thither wil I go also: and loke where thou abydest, there wil I abide also: Thy people is my people, q thy God is my God. Loke where thou diest, there wil
I dye, and euen there wil I also be buried. 
The LORDE do this and that vnto me, death onely shal departe vs.

D| Now whan she sawe, that she was stedfastly 

mynded to go with her, she spake nomore to her therof. So they wente on both together, till they came vnto Bethleem. And whan they were come in to Bethleem, the whole cite was moued ouer them, and sayde: Is not this Naemi? Neuerthelesse she sayde vnto

them : call me not Naemi, but Mara: for the 
Allmightie hath made me very sory. I de- parted full, but the LORDE hath brought

The boke of Ruth. 

Fo. reli. 

me home agayne emptye. Why call ye me then Naemi? whā the LORDE hath broughte me lowe, and the Allmightie hath made me sory ?

lt was aboute the tyme of the begynninge of the barlye haruest, whan Naemi and hir sonnes wife Ruth ¥ Moabitysse, came agayne from the londe of the Moabites vnto Bethleem.
There was a kinsman also of ¥ kynred of Eli 
Melech Naemis huszbande, whose name was 
Boos, which was an honest man. 

The tj. Chapter. 
ND Ruth the Moabitisse saide vnto 
Naemi: Let me go in to y felde, ¢ gather eares of corne, after him, in whose sight I shal finde fauoure. She sayde vnto her: Go thy waie my doughter. She wete on, q came q gathered after y reapers in y feld. And it fortuned that the same felde was the enheritaunce of Boos, which was of the kynred of Elimelech, and beholde, Boos came from Bethleem, and sayde vnto the reapers: The LORDE be with you. answered: The LORDE blesse the.
Boos sayde vnto his yongman which had the ouersight of y reapers: Whose damsell is this? The yonge man that was set ouer y reapers, answered and sayde: It is the damsell the Moabitisse, which came agayne with
Naemi from the londe of the Moabites. And she sayde: Let me plucke vp and gather (I praie the) betwene the sheues after the reapers: and thus is she come, and hath stonde here euer sence the mornynge, and within a litle whyle she wolde haue bene gone home agayne.
Then sayde Boos vnto Ruth: Hearest thou my doughter? Thou shalt not come vpon another mans londe to gather, and go not awaye from hence, but tary with my dasels, and loke where they reape in $ felde, go thou after them: for I haue comaunded my ser- uauntes that no man touch the. And yf thou be a thyrst, go thy waye to the vessell ¢ drynke, where my seruauntes drawe. Then fell she downe vpon hir face, and bowed hir self downe to the earth, and sayde vnto him: How haue I founde this fauoure in thy sighte, that thou woldest knowe me, which am yet a straunger ?
Boos answered and sayde vnto her: It is tolde me alltogether, what thou hast done vnto thy mother in lawe after thy huszbades death,

Fo. cel. 

how that thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and thy natiue countre, and art come to a people, whom thon hast not knowne afore.
The LORDE recompence the thy doinge, and thy rewarde be parfecte with the LORDE
God of Israel, vnto whom thou art come to put thy trust vnder his wynges. She sayde: let me fynde fauoure (syr) before thyne eyes, for thou hast comforted me, and spoken frendly vnto thy handmaydé, where as I am not yet like one of thy handmaydes. .

Boos sayde vnto her: Whan it is eatinge tyme, come hither, and eate of the bred, and dyppe thy morsell in the vyneger. And she sat hir downe besyde the reapers. And he set parched corne before her, and she ate, q was satisfyed, and lefte ouer. And wha she rose to gather, Boos commaunded his seruauntes, and sayde: Let her gather betwene the sheues also, and do her no dishonestye: and cast of the sheues vnto her, and let it lye that she maye gather it vp, and se that noman reproue her for it.

So she gathered in the felde vntyll euen and she shaked out what she had gathered, and it was allmost an Epha of barlye: and she toke it vp, and came in to the cite, and shewed hir mother in lawe what she had gathered. She toke forth also, and gaue her of that which was left, wherof she was satys- fyed. "The sayde hir mother in lawe vnto her:
Blessinge haue the man that hath knowne the, where thou hast gathered and laboured this daye.

She tolde hir mother in lawe by whom she had laboured, and sayde: The mans name, by whom I haue wroughte to daye, is Boos.
Naemi sayde vnto hir doughter in lawe: The blessynge of the LORDE haue he, for he hath not lefte of to be mercifull vnto the lyuynge *and to the deed. And Naemi sayde vnto her: 'The same man belongeth vnto vs, and is oure nye kynsman. Ruth the
Moabitisse saide: He saide morouer vnto me: 
Thou shalt resorte vnto my seruauntes, tyll they haue made an ende of all my haruest.
Naemi sayde vnto Ruth hir doughter in lawe : 
It is better my doughter, that thou go forth with his damsels, lest eny man withstode the in another felde. Thus she kepte herselfe with Boos damsels, so that she gathered vntill the barlye haruest and the wheate haruest was out, and came againe to hir mother in lawe.

* Tobi. 2. a. 

Che boke of Ruth, Chap. if. 

The ij. Chapter. 

ND Naemi hir mother in lawe sayde|@ 

vnto her: My doughter, I wyll prouyde 

rest for the, that thou maiest prospere. Boos 

oure kynsman, by whose damsels thou hast 

bene, casteth vp barlye now this night in his 

barne. Bathe thyselfe therfore, and tmoffell 

the, and put on thy clothes, and go downe 

vnto the barne, so y noma knowe the, tyll they haue all eaten and dronken.

Whan he layeth him downe then to sleape, mark y place where he lyeth downe, and come thou, and take vp the couerynge at his fete, and laye the downe, so shall he tell the what thou shalt do. She sayde vnto her: what so euer thou saiest vnto me, I wil do it.

She wente downe to the barne, q dyd all as hir mother in lawe had cOmaunded her.
And wha Boos had eaté q dronké, his hert was mery, t he came and layed him downe behynde a heape of sheues. And she came secretly, and toke vp the coueringe at his fete, and layed hir downe. Now wha it was mid- night, the man was afrayed, and groped aboute him, and beholde, a woman laye at his fete.
And he sayde: Who art thou? She answered: 
I am Ruth thy handmayden, sprede thy wynges ouer thy hadmayden: for thou art the nexte kynsman.

He sayde: The LORDES blessinge haue thou my doughter. Thou hast done a better mercy here after then before, y thou art not gone after yonge men, nether riche ner poore.
Feare not now my doughter: All y thou hast sayde, will I do for the: for all the cite of my people knoweth, y thou art a vertuous woma.
Trueth it is now, y I am a nye kynsma, but there is one nyer then I. ‘Tarye thou all- nighte. ‘Tomorow yf he take the, well: yf he like not to take y, then wil I take y my selfe, as truly as LORDE lyneth. Slepe thou tyll ¥ mornynge. And she slepte at his fete vntyll ¥ morow. And she rose vp or euer one coulde knowe another. And he thoughte thus: That no mà knowe now y there hath come a woman in to the barne, and he sayde:
Reach me the cloke y thou hast on the, q holde it forth. And she helde it forth. And he meet her sixe measures of barlye, and layed it vpon her, q she wente in to the cite, q came to hir mother in lawe, which sayde:

t Some reade: Anoynte the. 

Chap. uij. 

B 

How is it with the my doughter? And she tolde her all ý the mā had done vnto her, q sayde: These sixe measures of barlye gaue he me, for he sayde: Thou shalt not come emptye vnto thy mother in lawe. She sayde:
Abyde my donghter, tyll thou se what y mat- ter wil growe to: for the man wilt not ceasse, tyll he brynge it to an ende this daye.

The iij. Chapter. 

OOS wente vp to y gate, and sat him 
B downe there: q beholde, whan y nye kynsman wente by, Boos spake vnto him, q sayde: Come ç syt the downe here (and called him by his name.) And he came ¢ sat him downe, ¢ he toke ten men of the Elders of y cite, q sayde: Syt you downe here. And they sat thé downe. Thē sayde he to the nye kynszman: Naemi which is come againe fro the lode of the Moabites *offreth to sell y pece of londe, y was oure brothers Eli
Mech, therfore thoughte I to shewe it be- fore thine eares, q to tell the: Yf thou wilt redeme it, then bye it before the citesyns q before the Elders of my people : but yf thou wylt not redeme it, then tell me, ý I maie knowe: for there is no nye kynsma excepte thou, and I nexte after the.

He sayde: I wil redeme it. Boos saide : 
In the daye ý thou byest the lode out of $ hande of Naemi, thou must take Ruth also the Moabitisse the wife of the deed, that thou mayest rayse vp a name to y deed in his in- heritaunce. "The sayde he: I can not re- deme it, lest I happlye destroye myne awne enheritaunce. Redeme thou ý I shulde redeme, for I can not redeme it. But this was an olde custome in Israel concernynge the redemynge q chaüginge, i all matters mighte be stable, the one put of his shue, q gane it vnto y other: y was the testimony in Israel.

And the nye kynsman sayde vnto Boos: 
Bye thou it, ¢ he put of his shue. And Boos 
* Leui. 25. d. Iere, 32. b. 

t Deut, 25.2. t Ge. 29.30. 

The boke of Ruth. 

sayde vnto the Elders and to all the people : 
Ye are witnesses this daie, y I haue boughte out of the hande of Naemi, all that belonged to Eli Melech, and all that was Chilions and
Mahelons: And Ruth the Moabitisse Mahe- lons wife, take I to wife, t that I maye rayse vp a name vnto y deed in his inheritaunce, and that his name be not roted out from amonge his brethren, and out of the gate of his place: Of this are ye witnesses. And all the people that was in the gate with the Elders, saide: We are witnesses. The LORDE make the woman that commeth in to thy house, as Rachel and Lea (t which both haue buylded vp the house of Israel) that she maye be an ensample of vertue in Ephrata, and haue an honorable name in Bethleem. And thy house be as y house of Phares (5 who
Thamar bare vnto tude} thorow the sede, that the LORDE shall geue the of this damsell.
So Boos toke Ruth, and she became his wife. And whan he laye with her, the
LORDE graunted her y she conceaued, and bare a sonne. "The sayde the wemen vnto

fo. clit. 

€ 

Naemi: Praysed be the LORDE, which hath|33 

not suffred a kynsman to ceasse from the at this tyme, that his name maye contynue in
Israel: he shal restore thy life agayne, and prouyde for thine age. For thy sonnes wife which hath loued the, hath borne him that is better vnto the, then seuen sonnes.

And Naemi toke the childe, and layde it vpon hir lappe, and became the norse of it, and hir neghbours gaue him a name ç sayde:
There is a childe borne vnto Naemi, and they called his name Obed. The same is the father of Isai, which is y father of Dauid.

This is ¥ generacion of Phares. | Phares begat Hesrom. Hesrom begat Aram. Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begatt Naasson.
Naasson begat Salmon. Salmo begat Boos. 
Boos begat Obed. Obed begat Isai. Isai begat Danid.

§ Gen. 38. e. | 1 Par. 2.a. Matth. 1. a. 

The ende of the boke of Ruth. 

The first boke of the Kynges, 

otherwypse called the first boke of Samuel. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chay. I. 
Of Elcana and his two wyues. Vnto Anna geueth 
God Samuel which is appropriated vnto the 
LORDE. 

Chap. l. 
The thankfull songe of Anna. The sonnes of 
Eli do wickedly, their father refourmeth them 
. not, therfore is the presthode take from him and his sonnes.

Chap. I. 

The reuelacion shewed vnto Samuel, and vnto Eli. 

Chap. II. 

Israel fighteth agaynst the Philistynes, loseth the victory, and is smytten the seconde tyme. The
Philistynes wynne the Arke of the LORDE: 
The two sonnes of Eli perishe, the father falleth downe and breaketh his necke.

Chap. V. 
The Philistynes bringe the Arke of the LORDE in to the temple of Dagon, which falleth downe before it.

Chap. VI. 
The Philistynes sende the Arke agayne vnto the people of God, with certayne giftes and offer-

ynges. 
Chap. VII. 

The Arke is broughte in to Aminadabs house. 
Samuel exhorteth the people to amendment. 

Chap. VIII. 

Samuels sonnes rule not well. 

The people de- syre to haue a kynge.

Chap. IX. X. 

Saul seketh his fathers asses, and cometh vnto 
Samuel, which (at the comaundement of the 
LORDE) anoynteth him kinge, and sheweth him vnto the people

Chap. XI. 
Saul defendeth Iabes from Nahas the Ammonite. 

Chap. XII. 

Samuel sheweth his innocency vnto the people, and geueth them a godly exhortacion.

Chap. XII. 

The Philistynes gather them selues agaynst Israel. 
Saul is disobedient vnto the LORDE. Samuel reproueth him.

Chap. XIII. 

Ionathas discofiteth the enemies by sotyltie, Saul helpeth him : the father wolde slaye the sonne, the people delyuer him.

Chap. XV. 
Samuel comaundeth Saul to damne Amalek and 

vtterly to destroye him. Saul is dishobedient, 
& therfore is he deposed from the kyngdome. 
Chap. XVI. 

Dauid is anoynted kynge. The euell sprete vexeth Saul, Dauid easeth him with playenge at the harpe.

Chap. XVII. 

Dauid destroyeth Goliath the giaute. The Phi- listynes fle.

Chap. XVIII. 

lonathas and Dauid are sworne louers. Dauid behaueth himselfe wysely in all thinges. The people loue him. Saul geueth him his doughter of purpose, that the Philistynes mighte de- stroye him.

Chap. f. 

Chap. XIX. 
Saul commatdeth to kyll Dauid. Ionathas geueth him warnynge. Danid flyeth his waye. His wife delyuereth him.

Chap. XX. 

Dauid auoydeth from the kynges displeasure. 
Ionathas warneth him. 

Chap. XXI. 
Dauid flieth vnto Noba to the prest Ahimelech, and eateth of the shewbred.

Chap. XXII. 

Dauids fredes helpe him. Doeg the Edomite slayeth Ahimelech q the other prestes of the
LORDE. 

Chap. XXIII. 

Saul layeth wayte for Dauid. He getteth him out of the waye, and the LORDE defendeth him.

Chap. XXIII. 

Saul commeth in to Dauids hande, which wil not slaye him, but cutteth of a pece of his gar- ment, tc.

Chap. XXV. 

Samuel dyeth. Nabal displeaseth Dauid. Abi- 

gail pacifieth him. 

The first Chapter. 

HERE was a man of Ramathaim Sophim 
T of mount Ephraim, * whose name was 
Elcana $ sonne of Ieroham, y sonne of Elihu, 
Y sonne of Tohu, y sonne d Zuph, y was an 

phrate. And he had two wyues, y one was called Anna, ¥ other Peninna. As for Pe- ninna, she had children, but Anna had no childré. And y same man wéte vp fro his cite tat his tyme, to worshippe and to offer vnto the LORDE Zebaoth at Silo. There were the prestes of the LORDE Ophni and
Phineas, the two sonnes of Eli. Now whan it came vpon a daye that Elcana offred, he gaue partes vnto his wife Peninna, and to all his sonnes and doughters. But vnto Anna he gaue one deale heuely, for he loned Anna.
Neuertheles tthe LORDE had closed hir 

A Var, ahs 

f Exo. 23. b. Deut. 16. a. 

The first boke of the kpynaes. 

Chap. XXVI. 

Dauid fyndeth Saul slepynge, and where as Abisai wolde slaye him, he wil not suffre him, but taketh awaye his speare and the cuppe of water.

Chap. XXVII. 
Dauid flyeth vnto Achis the kynge at Geth. 

Chap. XXVIII. 

Dauid is made Achis captayne. Saul axeth councell at the Sothsayer. Samuel appeareth vnto him and rebuketh him.

Chap. XXIX. 

The Philistynes are not contente, that Dauid shulde be their captayne. The kynge sendeth him home agayne.

Chap. XXX. 

The Amalechites fall vpo Sicelek. Dauid foloweth vpon them, and recouereth the spoyle agayne.

Chap. XXXI. 

The Philistynes fighte agayust Israel. Sauls sonnes are slayne, q he wounded, and slayeth him selfe.

wombe, q hir aduersary cast her in the tethe with hir vnfrutefulnes, because the LORDE had closed hir wombe: thus dyd she euery yeare, whan they wente vp to the house of the LORDE, and thus she prouoked her.
So she wepte, and ate nothinge. But Elcana hir huszbande sayde vnto her: Wherfore wepest thou ? and why eatest thou not? And wherfore is thine hert so greued? Am not I better vnto the then ten sonnes ?

Then stode Anna vp, whan she had eaten and dronken at Silo. But Eli the prest sat vpon a stole by the poste of the temple of the
LORDE. And she was full of heuynes in hir herte, and prayed vnto the LORDE, and wepte, and vowed a vowe, and sayde: O
LORDE Zebaoth, yf thou wilt loke vpon the aduersite of thy handmayden, and thynke vpon me, and not forget thy handmayden, and wilt

t Gen. 29. d. and 30. a. 

Fo. rib. 

B 

fo. ribi, 

geue thy handmayden a sonne, I wil geue him vnto the LORDE all his life longe, *and there shal no rasoure come vpon his heade.

And wha she had prayed longe before y 
LORDE, Eli toke hede to hir mouth, for 
Anna spake in hir hert, hir lippes onely moued, but hir voyce was not herde. ‘Then thoughte
Eli she had bene dronken, and sayde vnto her: How longe wilt thou be dronken? Let come from the the wyne that thou hast by the. Neuertheles Anna answered and sayde:
No my lorde, I am a soroufull woman, wyne and stronge drynke haue I not dronken tbut haue poured out my hert before y LORDE.
Counte not thy handmayden a doughter of 
Belial : for out of my heuy thoughte and sorow haue I spoken hitherto.

Eli answered her, and sayde: Go thy waye in peace, the God of Israel shal graunte y thy peticion that thou hast desyred of him.
She sayde: Let thy handmayden fynde fa- uoure in thy sighte. So the woman wente hir waye and ate, and loked nomore so sorou- fully: and on y morow they gat them vp by tymes. And whan they had worshipped be- fore LORDE, they returned, and came home vnto Ramatha.

And Elcana laye with Anna his wife, and the LORDE remembred her. And after certayne dayes, she coceaued and bare a sonne, and called his name Samuel, for I haue de- syred him (sayde she) of the LORDE. And whan the man Elcana wente vp with all his houszholde to offre sacrifice and his vowe vnto the LORDE at soch tyme as y custome was,
Anna wente not vp, but sayde vnto hir husz- bande: (I wil not go vp) tyll y childe be weened : then will I brynge him, that he maye appeare before the LORDE, and cotynue

there tfor euer. 

B| Elcana hir huszbande sayde vnto her: Thé 

do as thou thynkest best, tary tyll thou haue weened him: but the LORDE perfourme that he hath spoken. So the woman abode, and gaue hir sonne sucke, tyll she weened him. And whan she had weened him, she broughte him vp with her, with thre bullockes, with an Ephi of fyne floure, and a bottell of wyne, and broughte him in to y house of the
LORDE at Silo. 

Neuertheles the childe was yet but yonge. 

t Psal. 41. a. t Num.8. d. 
Sap. 16. c. Tob. 13. a. 

* Iud. 13. a. Num. 6. a. 
$ Deut. 32. f. 

The i. boke of the kpnaes. 

And they slewe a bullocke, and broughte the childe vnto Eli. And she sayde: O my lorde, as truly as thy soule lyueth my lorde, I am the woman that stode here by y, and made intercession vnto the LORDE, whan I prayed for this childe. Now hath y LORDE graunted me my peticion, which I desyred of him, ther- fore haue I geuen him ouer vnto the LORDE, as longe as he is lent vnto the LORDE. And they worshipped y LORDE there.

The ij. Chapter. 
ND Anna prayed, and sayde: 
A My hert reioyseth in the LORDE, q my horne is exalted in the LORDE.

My mouth is opened wyde vpo myne ene- mies, for I am glad of thy saluacion.

There is no man holy as the LORDE, for without the is nothinge, and there is no có- forte like vnto oure God. .

. Let go youre greate boostinge of hye thynges, let go out of youre mouth that olde byworde : for the LORDE is a God y know- eth all thinges, q he hath set all workes in order.

The bowe of the mightie is broken, and the weake are gyrded aboute with strength.

They that were fylled afore, are solde for bred: and they that were hongrie, are satis- fied : vntyll the baren bare seuen, and tyll she that had many childrc, was become weake.

$ The LORDE slayeth, and geueth life: he ledeth vnto hell, and bryngeth out agayne.

The LORDE maketh poore and maketh riche: He bryngeth lowe and exalteth.

ll He taketh vp the neady out of the dust, and lifteth vp y poore out of the myre, that he maye set them amonge the prynces, and to let them inheret the seate of honoure: for the foundacions and corners of the worlde are the LORDES, and he hath set the compase of the earth theron.

He shall preserue the fete of his sayntes, but $ vngodly shal be put to syléce in darc- nesse. T For there is no ma that can do oughte of his owne power.

The LORDES enemies shal be put in feare before him, he shal thoder vpo the in heaue.

'The LORDE shall iudge the endes of the worlde, « shal geue strégth vnto his kynge, « shall exalte the horne of his anoynted.

5 

Elcana wente his waye to Ramath vnto his |t 

|] Psal. 112. a. € Deut. 8. d. 

Chap. Ü. UE í, Doke ot fj. 
~ [house And the childe became the LORDES]| | mynister before Eli the prest. But Elis sonnes were the childré of Belial, and knewe not the
LORDE, ner the dutye of the prestes vnto the people: but whan eny man wolde offre oughte, the prestes boye came, whyle the flesh was seethinge, and had a thre forked fleshoke in his hande, and thrust it in to the cauldron, or ketell, or panne, or pot: and loke what he drue disi with the fleshoke, that toke the prest therof. "Thus dyd they vnto all Israel, which came thither vnto Silo.

Like wyse, or euer they burned the fatt, the prestes lad came, and sayde vuto him that broughte the offerynge: Geue me the flesh, that I maye roste it for the prest, for he wyl receaue no sodden flesh of y, but rawe. Yf eny man sayde then vnto [o Let the fat burne as it oughte to do this daye, and after- warde take what thine hert desyreth, then sayde he vnto him: Thou shalt geue it me euen now: yf no, I wyll take it from the by violece. "Dlherfore was the synne of y y childre very greate before the LORDE, for y people spake euell of y meatofferynge of $ y LORDE.
But Samuel was a mynister before the 
LORDE, and the childe was gyrded with an ouer body cote of lynnen. His mother also made him a litle cote of sylke, and broughte it vp vnto him at couenient tymes, wha she wente vp with hir huszbande to offer y offer-

ge in due season. 

And Eli blessed Elcana q his wife, and sayde: The LORDE geue the sede of this woman, for this good that thou hast lent vnto the LORDE. And they wéte vnto their place. And the LORDE vysited Anna, so that she coceaued and bare thre sonnes and two doughters: but the childe Samuel grewe vp with the LORDE.
£i As for Eli, he was very olde, and herde of all that his sonnes dyd vnto all Israel, and how they laye with the wemen that serued
God before the dore of the tabernacle of wit- nesse, and he sayde vnto them: wherfore do ye this? For I heare of youre euell conuer- sacion of all this people. Not so my childré, this is no good reporte that I heare, ye cause the people of the LORDE to offende. *Yf eny ma synne agaynst a man, the iudge ca redresse it. But yf eny ma synne agaynst y
LORDE, who can redresse it? Neuertheles 

* Matt. 12. c. 

tLeu.10.d. Deut. 12.b. t3Re.2.d. 

Tbe i. boke of tbe kpnars. 

they herkened not vnto the voyce of their father, for tte LORDES wyll was to slaye them. But the childe Samuel wente and grewe vp, q was accepted of the LORDE q

of me. 

There came a man of God to Eli, and|d 

sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE: 
I shewed my selfe vnto thy fathers house, whan they were yet in Egipte vnder ¥ house of Pharao, and chose him there vnto my selfe before all the trybes of Israel, for the prest- hode, that he shulde offer vpon myne altare, and burne incense, and weere the ouerbody cote before me, tand vnto thy fathers house J gaue all the offeringes of the children of
Israel. Why layest thou thy selfe then agaynst my sacrifices and meatofferinges, which I com- maunded (to offer) in the habitacion: and thou honourest thy sonnes more then me, that ye mighte fede youre selues with the firstlinges of all the meatofferynges of my people of
Israel? 

Therfore sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: 
I haue spoken, that thy house and thy fathers house shulde walke before me for euer. But now sayeth the LORDE: That be farre fro me. But who so euer honoureth me, him wil
I honoure also: as for those y despyse me, they shal not be regarded. Benali- tthe tyme shal come, that 1 wyll breake thyne arme in two, and the arme of thy fathers house, so that there shal no oldeman be in thy house.
And thou shalt se thine aduersaries in the habitacion, in all the good of Israel, and there shal neuer be olde man in thy fathers house.
Yet wyll I not rote out euery man of the fro myne altare, but ý thyne eyes maye be con- sumed, q that thy soule maye be sory: $1 a greate "multitude of thy house shal dye, whan they are come to be men.

And this shalbe a token vnto the, that shal come vpon thy two sonnes Ophni and Phineas:

“They shall both dye in one daye. Il But vnto my selfe I wyll rayse vp a faithfull prest, which shal do acordinge as it is in my hert q in my soule: vnto him. wyll I buylde a sure house, that he maye allwaye walke before myne anoynted. And whoso euer remayneth of thy house, shall come and worshipe him for a syluer peny and for a pece of bred, and shall saye: I praye the leaue me to one prestes parte, that I maye eate a morsell of bred.

*1Re.4.c. . 
36 

$ 1 Re. 22. d. || Jere. 33. c. 

Fo. rrlbij. 

@ 

Jo. rrlbiij. 

a 

The iij. Chapter. 
ND whan the childe Samuel mynistred' vnto the LORDE vnder Eli, the worde of y LORDE was deare at the same tyme, nether was there eny sure q manifest vision. |
And it fortuned at the same tyme, that Eli laye in his place, *and his eyes beganne to be dymme, so that he coulde not se. And Samuel had layed him downe in y temple of the
LORDE (where the Arke of God was) before y lampe of God was put out. And the LORDE called Samuel. He answered: Beholde, here am I. And he ranne vnto Eli, ¢ sayde: Be- holde, here am I, thou hast called me. But he saide: I haue not called the, go thy waye agayne, and laye the downe to slepe.
And he wente his waye, and layed him downe to slepe.

The LORDE called againe: Samuel. And 
Samuel arose, q wente vnto Eli, q sayde: 
Beholde, here am I, thou hast called me. 
Neuertheles he sayde: My sonne, I haue not called the. Go thy waye agayne, and laye the downe to slepe. As for Samuel, he knewe not the LORDE as yet, q the worde of y LORDE was not yet shewed vntohim. And y LORDE called Samuel y thirde tyme. And he arose, x wente vnto Eli, q sayde: Beholde, here am
I, thou hast called me. ‘Then perceaued Eli y the LORDE called y childe, q he sayde vnto him: Go thy waye agayne, q laye the downe to slepe: and yf the LORDE call the eny more, then saye: Speake LORDE, for thy seruaunt heareth. Samuel wéte his waye, and layed him downe in his place. "Phe came y
LORDE, « stode, and called like as afore: 
Samuel, Samuel. And Samuel sayde: Speake 
(LORDE) for thy seruaunt heareth. And the LORDE saide vnto Samuel: Beholde, 1 do a thinge in Israel, y who so euer shall heare it, both his eares shal glowe. In y daie will I rayse vp vpon Eli t all y I haue spoke cécernynge his honse. I will take it in hande, x perfourme it: for I haue tolde him, y I wilbe Iudge ouer his house for euer, because of the wickednes, y he knewe how shamefully his childré behaued thé selues, and hath not once loked sowerly therto. Therfore haue I sworne vnto y house of Eli, y this wickednes of y house of Eli shall not be recocyled nether with sacrifice ner with meatoffringe for euer.

* 1 Re.4. c. t1 Re. 2. g. 

The í, boke of the kynges. 

And Samuel laye vnto y morow, q opened the| dores of the house of the LORDE.

But Samuel was afrayed to tell the vysion vnto Eli. Then Eli called him q sayde :
Samuel my sonne. He answered: Beholde, here am I. He sayde: What is ý worde y the LORDE hath spoké vnto the? hyde it not fro me. God do this q that vnto y: yt thou hyde oughte fro me, of all that he hath talked with the. Then Samuel tolde him all- together, q hyd nothinge from him. He sayde: It is the LORDE, let him do what pleaseth him.

Samuel grewe vp, a the LORDE was with him, q there fell none of all his wordes vpo the earth. And all Israel fro Dan vnto Ber- saba, knewe y Samuel was faithfull to be a prophet of the LORDE. And the LORDE appeared agayne at Silo: for the LORDE shewed him selfe vnto Samuel at Silo, thorow the worde of the LORDE.

The iiij. Chapter. 

<A ND all Israel spake of Samuel. And 

Israel wente forth to the battayll against the Philistynes, q pitched besyde the +Helpe stone: As for the Philistynes, they pitched at
Aphek, and prepared them selues agaynst 
Israel. And whan the battayll beganne, the hoost was deuyded, so that Israel was smytté before the enemies, q in the edge in the felde they slewe aboute a foure thousande men.
And whan the people came in to the hoost, the Elders of Israel sayde: Wherfore hath the
LORDE caused vs to be smytten this daie before the Philistynes? Let vs take vnto vs the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt from
Silo, q let it come amóge vs, that it maye helpe vs from the hande of oure enemies.
And the people sent vnto Silo, q caused to fet théce the Arke of $ couenaunt of the
LORDE Zebaoth, that sytteth vpon the 
Cherubins. And with the Arke of the co- uenaunt of God there were the two sonnes of
Eli, Ophni and Phineas. 

And whan the Arke of the couenaunt of the 
LORDE came in to the hoost, all Israel shouted with a greate shoute, so that the earth sounded withal. But whan the Philistynes herde ¥ noyse of y shoute, they sayde: what noyse 1s this of soch greate shoutinge in the tentes of the Hebrues? And whan they per-

t 1 Reg. 7. c. 

Chap. (ij. 

5 

a 

5 

Chap. b. 

ceaued y the Arke of the LORDE was come in to the hoost, they were afrayed q sayde:
God is come in to the hoost. And they sayde morouer: Wo vnto vs, for it hath not bene thus afore tyme. Wo vnto vs. Who wil de- lyuer vs fro the hande of these hye goddes ?
These are the goddes that smote Egipte with all maner of plages in the wyldernesse. Be stronge now and manly ye Philistynes, that ye serue not the Hebrues *as they haue serued you. Be manly and fighte.

Then foughte the Philistynes, q Israel was smytten, q euery one fled vnto his téte, q there was a very greate slaughter, so that there fell of Israel thirtye thousande fotemé, ¢ the Arke of God was take, tq the two sonnes of Eli,
Ophni and Phineas dyed. 

Then rane there one of Ben Iamin out of the fore fronte of the battayl, q came vnto
Silo the same daye, q had his clothes rente, and had earth vpo his heade. And whan he came in, Heli sat vpon the seate, that he mighte loke towarde the waye: for his herte was fearfull aboute y Arke of God. And whan the man came in to the cite, he tolde it forth: and all the cite cried. And whan Eli herde y noyse of the cryége, he axed: What noyse of busynes is this? ‘The man came haistely, and tolde Eli. (As for Eli, he was fourescore and eightene yeare olde, tand his eyes were dymme, so that he coulde not se.)
The man sayde vnto Eli: I come and am fled this daye out of the hoost. He sayde: How is it my sonne?

Then answered the tydinge bringer, q sayde: 
Israel is fled before the Philistynes, and a greate slaughter hath there bene amonge the people, q thy two sonnes Ophni Phineas are deed, yee q the Arke of God is take awaye.
Whan he had made mencion of the Arke of 
God, he fell downe bacwarde from the seate by the gate, and brake his neck, and dyed: for he was olde, q an heuy man. He iudged
Israel fortie yeares. The wife of his sonne 
Phineas was with childe, q shulde shortly be delyuered, whan she herde the tydinges y the
Arke of God was taken, and y hir brother in lawe and hir huszbade were d she bowed hir selfe and trauayled: for hir payne came vpon her. And whan she was now at the poynte of death, the wemen that stode by her, sayde: Feare not, thou hast a yoge sonne.

* Iud. 13. a. Re 2 g 

The (, boke of the kpnges. 

But she gaue no answere, nether regarded it, and she called the childe Icabod, and sayde:
The glory is gone from Israel, because the 
Arke of God was taken awaye, and hir brother in lawe and hir huszbande. And she sayde morouer: The glory is gone from Israel, for the Arke of God is takē awaye.

The b. Chapter. 

S for the Arke of God, the Philistynes toke it and broughte it from the stone of helpe vnto Aszdod in to the house of Dagon, and set it besyde Dagon. And whan they of
Aszdod rose vp early on the morowe, they founde Dagon lyenge on his face vpon the earth, before the Arke of the LORDE. But they toke vp Dagon, and set him agayne in his place. Neuertheles whan they rose vp early on the nexte morowe, they founde Dagon lyenge on his face agayne vpon the earth before the Arke of the LORDE: but his heade and both his hādes hewen of vpon the threszholde, so that the block laie there onely.
Therfore the prestes of Dagon, and all they that go in to his house, treade not vpo the threszsholde of Dagon at Aszdod vnto this daye.
But the hande of the LORDE was heuy vpon them of Aszdod, and destroyed them, and smote Aszdod and all the borders therof in secrete places. Whan the men of Aszdod sawe that they were so plaged, they sayde:
$Let not the Arke of the God of Israel tary with vs, for his hande is to harde vpo vs q vpon oure god Dagon. And they sent forth and gathered all the prynces of the Philistynes vnto them, and sayde: What shal we do with the Arke of the God of Israel? Then an- swered they of Geth: Letthe Arke of the God of Israel be borne aboute. And they caried the Arke of the God of Israel rounde aboute.
But wha they bare it aboute, there was a very greate rumoure in the cite thorow the hande of the LORDE, and smote the people of the cite, from the smallest vnto the greatest, and destroyed them in the secrete places.
Then sent they the Arke of the LORDE vnto 
Ekron. But wha the Arke of the LORDE came vnto Ekron, they of Ekron cried: They haue caried the Arke of God aboute vnto me,

to slaye me and my people. 

So. eelir. 

B 

Then sente they forth, and gathered all y! 

prynees of the Philistynes together, and sayde: 

ł 1 Reg. 5.a. § Deut. 32. e. 

Fo. ccr. 

Sende awaye the Arke of the God of Israel agayne vnto hir place, that it slaye not me q my people: for there is a very greate rumoure with the deed in all the cite, and the hande of God is there. And the people that dyed not, were smytten in secrete places, so that the noyse of the cite wete vp vnto heauen.

The vi. Chapter. 

HUS was the Arke of the LORDE in the londe of the Philistynes seuen monethes. And the Philistynes called their prestes and soythsayers, and sayde: What shal we do with the Arke of the LORDE?
Shewe vs, wher with shal we sende it vnto hir place ? They sayde: Yf ye wyll sende awaye the Arke of the God of Israel, sende it not awaye emptye, but geue a trespace offerynge: so shal ye be made whole, and ye shal knowe,

why his hande departeth not from you. 

‘They sayde: What is the trespace offeringe that we shall geue him? They answered:
Fyue hynder partes of golde, and fyue golden myce, acordinge to the nombre of the fyue prynces of y Philistynes. For there hath bene one maner of plage vpon you all, and vpon youre prynces. Therfore must ye make youre hynder partes of one faszshion and youre myce, which haue destroyed youre londe, that ye maye geue the God of Israel the honoure: peraduenture his hade shal be the lighter vpon you and vpon youre God, and vpon youre londe. Why harden ye youre hert, as the
Egipcians and Pharao hardened their hert? 
Whan he shewed him selfe vpon them * dyd not they let them departe to go their waye?

Go to now therfore, and make a new cart, and take two mylke kyne, vpon y which there neuer came yock, and yocke them to y cart, and let their calues tary behynde them at home: and take ye the Arke of the LORDE and laye it vpon the cart: and the lewels of golde that ye geue him for a trespace offeringe put in a coffer beside it, q sende it awaye and let it go. And loke well: yf it go the waie of hir awne coaste Beth Semes, the hath he done vs all this greate euell: Yf no, then shal ye knowe that his hande hath not touched vs, but y it is happened vnto vs by chaüce.

The men dyd so, and toke two yonge mylke kyne, and yocked them to a cart, and helde their ealues at home, and layed the Arke of the

* Exo. 12. e. 

The i. boke of the kpnaes. 

| 

Chap. bí. 
LORDE vpon the cart, and the coffer with the golden myce, and with the ymages of their disease. And the kyne wente straight waye vnto Beth Semes vpon one hye strete, and wente on blearynge, and turned nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte. And the prynces of the Philistynes wente after them vnto y coast of Beth Semes.

The Beth Samites were euen reapynge downe their wheate haruest in the valley, and lyfte vp their eyes, and sawe the Arke, and reioysed to se it. The cart came in to the felde of Iosua the Beth Semite, and there it stode styll. And there was a greate stone, and they claue the tymber of the cart, and offred the kyne vnto the LORDE for a burntofferynge.

But the Leuites toke downe the Arke of the LORDE, and the coffer that was by it, wherin the lewels of golde were, and set thé vpon the greate stone. The men of Beth
Semes offred burntofferynges, and other offer- ynges also vnto the LORDE the same daye.
And whan the fyue prynces of the Philistynes had sene it, they departed agayne the same daye towarde Ekron.

These are the golden diseases, that the|£ 
Philistynes offred for a trespace offerynge vnto the LORDE: Aszdod one, Gasa one:
Ascalon one, Gath one, and Ekron one: and golden myce, acordynge to the nombre of all the cities of the Philistynes amonge the fyue prynces, from the walled cite vnto the vyllage, and vnto the greate playne felde, wher vpon they set the Arke of the LORDE (which was) vnto this daye vpon the felde of Iosua the Beth Semite.

And certaine of Beth Sames were slaine because they had sene $ Arke of the LORDE, and he slewe fyftye thousande and seuentye men of the people. Then mourned the people, because the LORDE had done so greate a slaughter in the people. And the men at
Beth Semes sayde: Who maye stode before the LORDE so holy a God? And to who shal he go fro vs? And they sent messaungers to y inhabiters of Kiriath learim, saiege:
The Philistynes haue brought the Arke of God agayne, come downe, q fetch it vp vnto you.

The bij. Chapter. 
O the men of Kiriath learim came downe, 

q fetched vp ý Arke of ý LORDE, a 

Chap. biij. 

brought it in to ¥ house of *Abinadab at 
Gibea, q they consecrated Eleasar his sonne, y he might kepe $ Arke. And fro y daye that the Arke of $ LORDE abode at
Kiriath Iearim, y tyme extended forth so longe tyll it came to twentye yeares: and all the house of Israel wepte after the LORDE.

But Samuel sayde vnto all the house of 
Israel :* Yf ye turne you withall youre hert vnto the LORDE, then put awaye from you the straunge goddes and Astaroth, and directe youre hert vnto the LORDE and tserue him onely, so shall he delyuer you out of the hande of the Philistynes. Then the childré of Israel put awaye Baalim and Astaroth from them, and serued the LORDE onely.

Samuel saide: Gather all Israel together vnto Mispa, that I maye praye for you vnto the LORDE. And they came together vnto
Mispa, and drue water, q poured it out before the LORDE, and fasted the same daye, and there they sayde: We haue synned vnto the
LORDE. So Samuel iudged the children of 
Israel at Mispa. 

But whan the Philistynes herde that y children of Israel were come together vnto
Mispa, the prynces of the Philistynes wéte vp against Israel. Whan y childré of Israel herde that, they were afrayed of y Philistynes, q sayde vnto Samuel: Ceasse not to crye vnto the LORDE oure God for vs, y he maie helpe vs out of the hande of y Philistynes.$
Samuel toke a fat lambe, q offred an whole burntofferynge vnto the LORDE, q cried vnto the LORDE for Israel, and the LORDE herde him. And whyle Samuel was offerynge y burnt sacrifice, y Philistines came to fight agaynst Israel. But the LORDE thondred a thonder vpon the Philistynes the same daye q discofyted the, so y they were smytté before
Israel. Thē wente y men of Israel forth, q chaced y Philistynes, x smote them till vnder
Beth Car. Then toke Samuel a stone, « set it vp betwene Mispa q Sen, q called it y Help stone, q sayde: “Hither to hath the LORDE helped vs. ‘Thus were the Philistynes brought downe, x came nomore within the border of
Israel. And ¥ hade of ý LORDE was against the Philistynes, as longe as Samuel lyued.

So Israel gat the cities agayne, that the 
Philistynes had conquered, frō Ekron vnto 

*2 Re. 6. a. 
Mat. 4. b. 

t Iosu. 24. c. Tob. 14. c. 
$ Eccli. 46. c. 41 Re. 4. a. 

1 Dent. 6. c. 
|| Deut. 17.2. 

Gath, with the borders therof, those did Israel rescue out of the hande of the Philistynes: q
Israel had peace with the Amorites. Samuel iudged Israel as loge as he liued, q wéte aboute euery yeare vnto Bethel q Gilgal q
Mispa: q wha he had judged Israel in ail these places, he came agayne vnto Ramath for there was his house, « there he iudged Israel, q builded an altare there vnto y LORDE.

The biij. Chapter. 

UT whan Samuel waxed olde, he set his 

sonnes to be iudges ouer Israel. His firstborne sonne was called Ioel q the secode
Abia, t they were iudges at Bersaba. Ne- uertheles his sonnes walked not in his wayes, but enclyned vnto couetousnes, q ltoke giftes, q wraysted the lawe. Then all y Elders in
Israel gathered thé selues together, q came to Ramath vnto Samuel, q saide vnto him:
Beholde, thou art waxen olde, q thy sonnes walke not in thy wayes, set a kynge now ouer vs therfore, to iudge vs, as all y Heithe haue. Thé was Samuel displeased wha they sayde: Geue vs a kynge, to iudge vs. And
Samuel prayed before the LORDE. 

'The LORDE saide vnto Samuel: Herken vnto the voice of the people in all y they haue sayde vnto the. **For they haue not refused the, but me, y I shulde not be kinge ouer them. "They do vnto the as they haue done euer, sence the daie y I brought them out of the londe of Egipte vnto this daye, and haue forsaken me, and serued other goddes. Herké now therfore vnto their voyce. Yet testifye vnto them, and shewe them «the lawe of the kynge that shall raigne ouer them.

And Samuel tolde all the wordes of the 
LORDE vuto y people, that requyred a kinge of him. This shal be the lawe of the kynge y shal raigne ouer you:it Youre sonnes shall he take for his charettes, and for horsmen to runne before his charettes, and to be rulers q captaynes, to be plowemen to tyll his londe and to be reapers in his haruest, and to make his harnesse, and soch thinges as belonge to his charettes. As for youre doughters, he shall take thé, to be Apotecaries, cokes and bakers. ^Youre best londe and vynyardes, and oyle-gardens shall he take, and geue vnto his seruauntes: Of youre sedes also and viniardes

q 1 Re. 12. c. tt Deut. 17. d.

Ose. 13. b. Act. 13. b. tt 3 Re. 9. d.

** 1 Re, 10. d. 
è 3 Re. 21. a. 

Che i. boke of the kpnges. fo. celpt, 

a 

a 

€ 

So. celptj. shal he take the Tithes, q geue vnto his chà- berlaynes and seruauntes. And youre ser- uaütes and youre maydes, and youre best yonge men, and youre asses shal he take, and do his busynes withall. Of youre flockes shal he take the Tithes, and ye shal be his ser- uaütes. Whan ye shal crye then at the same tyme ouer youre kynge, whom ye haue chosen you, the LORDE shall not heare yon at the
Ð |same tyme. Neuerthelesse the people refused to heare the voyce of Samuel, and sayde:
Not so, but there shall be a kynge ouer vs, y we maye be as all other Heithe, y oure kynge maie iudge vs, q go forth before vs, and go- uerne oure warres. "Thé herkened Samuel vnto all y y people sayde, « tolde it before y eares of the LORDE. The LORDE sayde vnto thé: Herken thou vnto their voyce, and make them a kynge. And Samuel sayde vnto the men of Israel: Go youre wave euery one vnto his cite.

The iy. Chapter. 

q HERE was a man of Ben Iamin named 

* Cis, the sonne of Abiel, the sonne of 
Zeor, the sonne of Bethorah, y sonne of 
Apiah, the sonne of a man A lemini, a valeaunt man, which had a sonne named
Saul, which was so goodly a yonge man, that there was not a goodlier amonge the children of Israel, higher by the heade then all the people. Cis the father of Saul had lost his asses, and he sayde vnto Saul his sonne:
Take one of the children with the, get the vp, go thy waye, and seke the asses. And he wente his waye thorow mount Ephraim, and thorow the lode of Solisa, and fonnde them not. 'They wente thorow the lode of Saalim, q there they were not. They passed thorow y lode of Iemini, q foüde the not. But wha
'they came in to the londe of Zuph, Sanl sayde vnto the childe that was with him:
Come, let vs go home agayne, lest my father let go the asses, and take care for vs. He sayde: Beholde, here is an honorable man of
God in this cite, all that he sayeth, commeth to passe. Let vs go thither now, peraduenture he maye shewe vs oure waye which we go.
But Saul saide vnto his childe: "Though we shulde go, what brynge we the man? For the bred is gone out of oure walet, and els haue we no gifte to brynge the man of God,

* Parva: 

Che í. boke of the kynges. 

Chap. tr. what haue we? The childe answered agayne, and sayde: Beholde, I hane the fourth parte of a syluer Sycle by me, y same wyll we geue the man of God, that he maye shewe vs oure waye.

(Afore tyme in Israel, whan a man wente to axe councell at the LORDE, he sayde:
Come, let vs go to the Seer: for they that now are called prophetes, were called Seers afore tyme.) Saul sayde vnto his childe: Thou hast well spoken, come let vs go. And whan they wente vnto the cite where the man of
God was, and came vp to the cite, they founde damsels which were gone forth to drawe water, vnto them they sayde: Is the
Seer here? They answered them and sayde: 
Yee. Beholde, he is there, make haist, for he came in to the cite this daye, because the people haue a sacrifice to do to daye in the hye place. Whan ye come in the cite, ye shal fynde him, afore he go vp to the hye place for to eate: for the people wyll not eate tyll he come. Forhe shall blesse the offerynge, then shal they eate that are called. Therfore go youre waie vp, for eué now shal ye finde him.

And whan they came vp to the cite, and were euen in the myddes of the cite, beholde,
Samuel came forth in their waye, and wolde go vp to the hye place. (t But the LORDE had opened Samuels eare the daye afore, or euer Saul came, and sayde: ‘Tomorow aboute this tyme wyll I sende a man vnto the out of the lode of Ben Iamin, him shalt thou anoynte to be prynce ouer my people of Israel, that he maye delyuer my people from the hande of the Philistynes: for I haue loked vpon my people, and their erye is come before moe.)
Now whan Samuel behelde Saul, the LORDE answered him: lo, y is the man of whom I tolde the, that he shulde raigne ouer my people.

Then came Sanl vnto Samuel vnder ¥ gate, and sayde: Tell me (I praye the) where is the Seers house? Samuelanswered Saul, and sayde: I am the Seer. Go vp before me vnto the hye place: for ye shall eate with me to daye, tomorow wyll I lett the go, and all that is in thyne hert, wyll I tell the: and as for the
Asses which were lost thre dayes agoo, care not thou for them, for they are fonnde. And to whom shall belonge all that is pleasaunt in
Israel? Shall it not belonge vnto the and to all 

t 1 Reg. 15. a. 

Chap. r. 

D 

a | 'HEN toke Samuel a glasse of oyle, and 

thy fathers house? Saul answered: Am not 
I a sonne of Iemini, *and of the smallest trybe, and my kynred the leest amonge all the kynreds of y trybe of Ben Iamin? Why speakest thou so thc vnto me? Samuel toke
Saul q his childe q brought them in to the perler where they shulde eate, and satt them aboue those that were called, of whom there were aboute a thirtie men. And Samuel sayde vnto the coke: Geue me the porcion that I gaue the, and bad the kepe it by the.
Then the coke toke vp a shulder, and bare it forth, and set it before Saul. And (Samuel) sayde: Beholde, this is left, laye it before the, and eate: for it was kepte for the agaynst this tyme, whan I called the people. Thus Saul ate with Samuel the same daye.

And whan they were gone downe from the hye place vnto the cite, he talked with Saul in the chamber. And they rose vp early on the morow. And whan the mornynge sprynge arose, Samuel called Saul in the chamber, and sayde: Vp, y I maye sende the thy waye.
And Saul gat him vp: q they both wete forth together, he and Samuel. And whan they came downe to the ende of the cite, Samuel sayde vnto Saul: Speake vnto y childe, that he go on forth before vs, bnt stode thou styll now, that I maie shewe the what God hath sayde :

The y. Chapter. 

poured it vpo his heade, and kissed him, and sayde: Seist thou that the LORDE hath anoynted the, to be the prince ouer this enhe- ritaüce? — Whan thou goest now fro me, thou
‘shalt fynde two men besyde + Rachels graue jin the coast of Ben Jamin at Zelzah, which shal saie vnto the: The asses are founde, whom thou wentest to seke: and beholde, thy father hath put the asses out of his mynde, and taketh thoughte for the, and sayeth:
What shall I do for my sonne? 

And whan thou goest on forth from thence, thou shalt come to the Oke of "Thabor, there shall thre men fynde the, which go vp vnto
God towarde Bethel: one beareth thre kiddes, another thre loaues of bred the thyrde a bottel with wyne: and they shall salute the, and geue the two loaues, which thou shalt take of

* Tudi. 20. e. wo. d.

1 Re. 15. d. 

t Deut. 9. e. i Gen. 
$ 1 Reg. 13. a. 

|| 2 Re. 7.a. 1 Par. 18.a. 

The i. boke of the kpnaes. 

their hande. the hyll of God, $ where the Philistynes watch is: and wha thou comest there in to the cite, there shall mete the a company of prophetes commynge downe from the hye place, and before them a Psaltery, and tabret, a pype and a harpe, and they them selues prophecienge.
And the sprete of the LORDE shall come vpon the, and thou shalt prophecye with them, and shalt be chaunged in to another man.

Whan these tokens now come vnto the, 
| then do what so euer commeth vnder thyne hande: for God is with the. Thou shalt go downe before me vnto Gilgall: Beholde, thither wyl I come downe vnto the, that thou mayest offre burntofferynges and deedoffer- ynges. “Seuen dayes shalt thou tarye till I come tothe, and shewe the what thou shuldest do. And whan he turned his shulder to go from Samnel, God chaunged him another hert, and all these tokés came the same daye.

And whan they came vnto the hill, beholde, there met him a company of prophetes 1 and the sprete of God came vpon him, so that he prophecyed amonge them. But wha they which knewe him before, sawe him that he prophecied with the prophetes, they sayde all amonge them selues: What is happened vnto the sonne of Cis? Is Saul also amonge the prophetes? And one y was there, answered and sayde: Who is their father? ** Hereof came the prouerbe: Is Saul also amonge the prophetes? And wha he had left of pro- phecienge, he came vp to the hyll.

Sauls vnele sayde vnto him and to his childe: Whither wente ye? "They answered :
To seke the asses. And whan we sawe that they were awaye, we came vnto Samuel.
Then sayde Sauls vncle: Tell me, what sayde 
Samuel vnto you ? Saul answered his vncle: 
He tolde vs, y the asses were foüde. But of 
¥ kyngdome he tolde him nothinge what 
Samuel had sayde. 

Samuel called the people together vnto the LORDE to Mispa, and spake vnto the children of Israel: ‘Thus saieth y LORDE the God of Israel: I broughte Israel out of
Egipte, and delyuered you from the hande of y Egipcians, and from the hande of all the kyngdomes that oppressed you. tt But now haue ye refused youre God, which hath helped

? | Re. 13. b. T 1 Re. 11. b. 

tt 1 Re. 8. b. 

** 1 Re. 19. d. 

So. celyíti. 

After that shalt thou come to|23 

€ 

D 

Fo. celritt). you out of all youre sorowes and troubles, q ye haue saide vnto him: Set a kinge ouer vs.
Well, stonde ye now before y LORDE acord- inge to youre trybes and kynreds.

Now whan Samuel had brought forth all the trybes of Israel, the trybe of Ben Jamin was taken. And whan he had broughte forth the trybe of Ben Jamin with his kynreds, the kyured of Matri was take, ¢ Saul the sonne of
Cis was take. And they sought him, but they founde him not.
£| Then axed they further at the LORDE, whether he was for to come thither. The
LORDE auswered: Beholde, he hath hyd him selfe amonge y vessels. ‘Then ranne they thither, and fetched him. And whan he stode amonge the people, he was hygher by the heade then all the people. And Samuel sayde vnto all the people: There se ye him whom the LORDE hath chosen, for in all the people there is none like him. ‘Then gaue all the people a shoute, and sayde : *God saue the new kynge.

Samuel tolde the people all the *lawe of the kyngdome, and wrote it in a boke, and layed it before the LORDE. And Samuel let all the people go, euery one to his awne house. And Saul wente home also vnto Gibea, and there wente with him one parte of the hoost, whose hertes God had touched. But the childré of Belial sayde: What shal this felowe helpe vs, tand despysed him, q broughte him no presente. But he made him as though he herde it not.

The yi. Chapter. 

AHAS y Ammonite wéte vp q layed sege vnto labes in Gilead. And all

the men of Iabes sayde vnto Nahas: Be at one with vs, x we wyll serue the. But Nahas y Ammonite answered them: I wil make a conenaunt with you, of this condicion, that I maye thrust out all youre right eyes, and put you to shame amonge all Israel. ‘Then sayde all the Elders of labes vnto him: Geue vs seuen dayes respyte, that we maye sende mes- saungers in to all y coastes of Israel: Yf there be then no sauioure, we wyl go forth vnto the.
So the messaungers came vnto Gibea of 
Saul, and spake this before the eares of the people. Then all $ people lifte vp their voyce, and wepte. Rad beholde, Saul came

: 3 Reg.t.d. tDeu.17.d. {iud.8.b. $1Re.10.c. 

The i. boke of tbe kynges. 

Chap, ri. 

after the oxen out of the felde, and sayde: 
What ayleth the people that they wepe? So they tolde him the earande of the men of
Iabes. §'Then came the sprete of God vpon him, whan he had herde these wordes, and his wrath was sore moued, and he toke a couple of oxen, and hewed them in sunder, and sent them in to all the coastes of Israel by the messaungers, sayenge: Who so euer goeth not forth after Saul and Samuel, his oxen shalbe thus dealte withall.

Then fell the feare of the LORDE vpon the people, so that they wente forth like as one man, land they were tolde at Basek, and of the childré of Israel there were thre hun- dreth thousande men, and thirtie thousande of the children of Iuda. And they spake vnto the messaungers that were come: Saye thus to the men of Tabes in Gilead: Tomorow shal ye haue helpe, whan ¥ Sonne is at the whotest. Whan ý messaungers came and tolde this to the men of Tabes, they were glad. And the men of labes sayde: ‘Tomorow wyll we come forth vnto you, that ye maye do vnto vs, what so euer it pleaseth you. And on y nexte morow Saul set the people in thre partes, and came in to the hoost aboute the mornynge watch, and smote the Ammonites tyll the daye was at the whotest. As for those y remayned, they were so scatred, that two of them abode not together.

Then sayde the people vnto Samuel:|5 
Where are they that sayde: T Shulde Saul raigne ouer vs? Delyuer vs here the men, that we maye put them to death. But Saul sayde: There shal noman dye this daye, for| : to daye hath the LORDE geuen health in
Israel. Samuel sayde vnto the people: Come, let vs go vnto Gilgall, and renue the kyng- dome there. 'Then wente all the people vnto
Gilgall, and there they made Saul kinge be- fore the LORDE at Gilgal, and offred deed- offeringes before the LORDE. And Saul with all themen of Israel reioysed there greatly.

The rij. Chapter. 
AMUEL sayde vnto all Israel: Beholde, 
I haue herkened vnto youre voyce in all that ye sayde vnto me, and haue made a kynge ouer you. And now lo, there goeth youre kynge before you. As for me, I am waxen olde and graye heered, and my sonnes

T 1 Re. 10. c. 

|| 1 Re. 13. c. and 15. a. 

Chap. rii. are with you: and I haue gone before you fro my youth vp vnto this daye. Beholde, here am I: answere ye agaynst me before the
LORDE and his anoynted, *yf I haue taken eny mans oxe or asse, yf I haue done eny man violence or wronge, If I haue oppressed eny mà, yf I haue receaued a gifte of eny mans hande, and kepte it secretly, I wil restore it you agayne.

They saide: Thou hast done vs nether vio- lence ner wronge, nether oppressed, ner taken ought of eny mans hande. He sayde: The
LORDE be witnesse agaynst you, and so be his anoynted this daye, that ye haue founde nothinge in my hade. "They saide: Yee they shalbe witnesses. And Samuel sayde vnto the people: The LORDE which made Moses and Aaron, and broughte youre fathers out of the londe of Egipte (is here present.) Stode forth now therfore, that I maye iudge you before the LORDE ouer the righteousnes of the LORDE, which he hath done for you and youre fathers.

t Whan Iacob was come in to Egipte, youre fathers cryed vnto the LORDE. + And he sent Moses and Aaron to brynge youre fathers out of Egipte, and to cause them for to dwell in this place.

§But whan they forgat the LORDE their 
God, he solde them vnder the power of Sis- sera, the captayne at Hazor lland vnder the power of the Philistynes f and vnder the power of the kinge of the Moabites, which foughte agaynst them. But they cried vnto the
LORDE, and sayde: We haue synned, in that we haue forsaken the LORDE, and serued Baalim and Astaroth. But now de- liuer vs from the hande of oure enemies, and we wyl serue the. **Then the LORDE sent
Ierubaal, tt Bedan, it Iephthae, Sand Samuel, q delyuered you from youre enemies rounde aboute, and caused you to dwell safe. |

But whan ye sawe that Nahas the kynge of the children of Ammon came agaynst you llye sayde vnto me: Not thou, but a kynge shal raigne ouer vs, where as notwithstodinge youre God was youre kynge. Now, there haue ye youre kynge, whō ye haue chosen and desyred: for lo, the LORDE hath set a| kinge ouer you. Yf ye shal feare the LORDE now, and serue him, and herken vnto his voice,

* Eccli. 46. d. Act. 20. d. t Gen. 46.a. Exod. 2. d. i Exo. 3. b. $ Iud. 4. a. || Iud. 13. a. q Iud. 3. b. |

The i. boke of the kpnaes. ffo. ceirh. 

and not be dishobedient vnto the mouth of the LORDE, then shall both ye and youre kynge that raigneth ouer you, folowe ¥
LORDE youre God. But yf ye herken not vnto Y voyce of the LORDE, but be disho- bedient vnto his mouth, then shal the hande of the LORDE be agaynst you, and agaynst youre fathers.

Stonde forth now also, and beholde this greate thinge, that the LORDE shal do be- fore youre eyes. Is not now the wheate har- uest? Yet wyll I call vpo the LORDE, so that he shal cause it thonder and rayne, that ye shall knowe and se the greate euell, which ye haue done in the sight of the LORDE, in that ye haue desyred to haue a kynge.

And whan Samuel called vpon the LORDE, the LORDE caused it to thoder and raine the same daye.

Then all the people feared the LORDE|D greatly and Samuel, and they sayde all vnto
Samuel: Praie thou vnto the LORDE thy 
God for thy seruauntes, that we dye not: for beside oure sinnes we haue done this euell also, that we haue desyred vnto vs a kinge.
Samuel sayde vnto the people: Feare not, ye haue done all this euell in dede. Neuertheles departe not backe from the LORDE, but serue the LORDE with all youre hert, and go not asyde after vanite, for it profyteth you nothinge, and can not delyuer you, in so moch as it is but a vayne thinge. <44 For the
LORDE shall not forsake his people because of his greate names sake: for the LORDE hath begonne to make you a people vnto him selfe. But God forbyd that I shulde synne so vnto the LORDE, to ceasse from prayenge for you, and from teachinge you the good q righteous waye. Feare ye the LORDE ther- fore, and serue him faithfully with all youre hert: for ye haue sene, how greate thinges he doth vnto you. But yf ye do wickedly, both ye q youre kynge shal perishe.

The rij. Chapter. 

AUL had bene kynge one yeare, and wha|@ 
S he had raigned ouer Israel two yeares, he chose him thre thousande më out of Israel: two thousande were with Saul at Michmas vpon the mount of Bethel, and one thousande with Ionathas at Gibea of Ben Iamin. As

** Iud. 6.c. ttludi.13.d. łłIud.11.a. §§1 Reg.7. a. 
Il 1 Reg. 8. a. {T Exo. 34. b. Deut.9.e. Iosu.7.b. 

37 

fo. celrbt. 

3 

for the other people, he let them go euery one vnto his tente. But Ionathas smote y Phi- listynes in their awne *watch, which was at
Gibea. That came to $ Philistynes eares. 
And Saul caused to blowe the trompes in all the londe, ¢ to saye: Let the Hebrues heare.
And all Israel herde saye: Saul hath smytten the Philistynes watch, for Israel stanke before the Philistynes. And all the people cried after Saul vnto Gilgal.

Then the Philistynes gathered them selues together to fighte with Israel, thirtie thou- saude charettes, sixe thousande horsmen, and other people besyde, in nombre as the sonde by the See shore, and wente vp, and pitched at Michmas on the eastsyde of Bethauen.
Whan the men of Israel sawe that mysfortune laye vpon the neckes of thé (for the people was come therto) they crope in to caues and dennes, in to rockes, and holes and welles.
But the Hebrues wente ouer Iordane in to y lande of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul he was yet at Gilgal, and all the people were fayntharted after him. t+ Then taried he seuen dayes acordinge to the tyme apoynted of Sa- muel And whan Samuel came not vnto
Gilgal, the people were scatered abrode from him. Then sayde Saul: Brynge me hither a burntofferinge and deedofferinges. And he offred a burntofferynge. But whan he had made an ende of the burntofferynge beholde,
Samuel came. Then wente Saul forth to mete him, that he might salute him.

But Samuel sayde: What hast thou done? 
Saul answered: I sawe that the people was scatered abrode fro me, and thou camest not in due season: and the Philistynes were ga- thered together at Michmas. ‘Then sayde I:
Now shall the Philistynes come downe to me vnto Gilgal, and I haue not besonghte the face of the LORDE: « so I boldened my selfe, q offred a burntofferynge.

Samuel sayde vnto Saul: Thou hast done foolishly, and not kepte the commaundement of the LORDE thy God, which he com- maunded the. For (yf thou haddest not done this) he had prospered thy kyngdome vpo
Israel for euer: but now shall not thy kyng- dome contynue. +The LORDE hath soughte him out a man after his owne hert: him hath the LORDE commaunded to be prynce ouer his people, for thou hast not kepte y the

* 1 Re. 10. b. t 1 Re. 10. b. 

The i. boke of the kynges. 

LORDE commaunded ¥. And Samuel arose, and wente vp from Gilgal vnto Gibea Ben
Iamin. 

And Saul nombred the people that was founde with him, vpon a sixe hundreth men.
Saul q his sonne Ionathas, and $ people that was with them, taried at Gibea Ben lamin: but $ Philistynes had pitched their tentes at
Michmas. And out of the hoost of the Phi- listynes there wente thre bondes of men to destroye: one turned the waye towarde Ephra in to the londe of Sual: another turned to- warde the waye of Bethoron: the thirde turned towarde the waye, that reacheth to the valley of Zeboim vnto the wyldernes.

But there was not a smyth founde in all the lode of Israel: for y Philistynes thoughte:
The Hebrues mighte happly make swerdes and speares. And all Israel were fayne to go downe to the Philistynes, whan eny man had a plowshare, a mattock, an axe, or a sythe to sharpe : and the edges of the plowshares, and mattockes, q forckes, and axes, were laboured, and the poyntes blont. Now whan the daye of the battayll came, there was nether swerde ner speare founde in the hande of all the people, that was with Saul and Ionathas: but for Saul and lonathas his sonne there was somwhat founde. And y Philistynes watch wéte out ouer by Michmas.

The riiij. Chapter. 

T fortuned at y same tyme, y lonathas sayde vnto his lad which was his wapen bearer: Come, let vs go ouer to the Philistynes watch y lyeth aboue, q he tolde not his father.
Saul dwelt at y ende of Gibea vnder a Pom- granate tre, which was in the suburbe. § And the people y were by him, were vpon a sixe hundreth men. And Ahia the sonne of
Achitob the brother of Icabod, the sonne of 
Phineas ¥ sonne of Eli y prest of the LORDE at Silo, wayre the ouerbody cote. But the

people knewe not that Ionathas was gone. 
Betwene the passages where lonathas soughte to go ouer vnto the Phylistynes watch, there were two hye rockes, the one on the one syde, the other on the other: the one was called Bozez, the other Senne. And y one laye on the north syde towarde Michmas, and the other on the south syde towarde Gaba.
And lonathas sayde vnto his wapen bearer: 

1 1 Re. 16.c. $ 1 Re. 13. d. 

Chap. riii. 

B 

a 

€ 

5 

€ 

bap. riiij. 
| Come, let vs go ouer to $ watch of these vn- circumcised, peraduenture the LORDE shall worke with vs, * For it is no harde matter for the LORDE to helpe by many or by fewe.
Then answered him his wapen bearer: Do all that is in thine hert, go on thy waie, beholde,
I am with the, euen as thine hert wyll. 

Ionathas sayde: Well than, Whan we are gone ouer to the men, and come within the sighte of them, yf they saye: stonde styll, tyll we come to you, then wyll we stonde styll in oure place, and not go vp to them. But yf they saye: Come vp to vs, we wyll go vp to them, thé hath the LORDE delyuered them in to oure hande, and this shalbe a token for vs. Now whan they came both in the sighte of the Philistynes watch, the Philistynes sayde:
Se, t Y Hebrues are gone out of their holes, that they were erepte in to. And the men in the watch answered Ionathas and his wapé bearer, and sayde: Come vp to vs, and we wyll teach you what the matter is. Then sayde Ionathas to his weapen bearer. +Come vp after me, the LORDE hath delyuered them into Israels hande. And Ionathas clamme vp with handes and fete, and his wapen bearer after him. And Jonathas smote them downe before him, and his wapé bearer slewe behynde him, so that the first slaughter that Ionathas and his wapen bearer dyd, was vpo a twentye men, with in the length of halue an aker of londe, which a pare of oxen maye tyll in one daye.

§ And there came a fearfulnes and flight in the hoost vpon the felde, and amonge all the people of the watch: and vpon the || destroyers there came a fearfulnes also and flight, so that the londe was in a rumoure, and ‘there came a flight thorow God. And Sauls watchmé at
Gibea Be Jamin sawe, that ¥ multitude gat them awaye, and ranne to and fro.

Saul sayde vnto the people that was with him: Tell and se which of vs is gone awaye.
And whan they nombred, beholde, Ionathas « his wapen bearer was not there. Then saide
Saul vnto Ahia: Brynge hither the Arke of 
God (for at that tyme was the Arke of God with the children of Israel.) And whyle Saul was yet speakynge to the prest, the multitude in the Philistynes hoost gat vp, ranne, and was greate. And Saul sayde vnto the prest:

mo Par. 14. c, t Iudit. 14. b. 
$ Iudi. 14. c. 

t 1 Mac. 4. d. 
|| 1 Re. 13. d. 

Cbr 1. boke of the kpnges. 

Withdrawe thine hande. And Saul cried, and all the people that was with him, and came to the battayll. And beholde, **euery mans swerde was agaynst another, and there was a very greate rumoure.

The Hebrues also that were with y Philis- tynes afore, and had gone vp with them in the hoost on euery syde, ioyned them selues vnto
Israel which were with Saul and Ionathas. 
And all the men of Israel which tthad hyd the selues vpon mount Ephraim, whan they herde that the Philistynes fled, folowed after them in the battayl. Thus ý LORDE helped Israel at that tyme, and y battayll lasted vnto Bethauen.

And whan the men of Israel came forth, 
Saul charged all the people the same daye, and sayde: Cursed be euery man, which eateth bred vntyll euen, that I maye auenge me on myne enemies. ‘Then all the people taisted no bred. And all the people of the londe came in to the wodd. But there laye hony vpon the felde: and whan the people came in to the wodd, beholde, the hony flowed, but no man put of it to his mouth with his hade: for the people were afraied because of the ooth. As for Ionathas he had not herde, that his father had charged the people, and he put forth his staff that he had in his hande, and dypped the ende of it in y hony combe, and turned his hande to his mouth, and his eyes were lighted.

'Then answered one of the people, and sayde: Thy father hath charged the people, and sayde: Cursed be euery mà that eateth oughte this daye. Neuertheles the people were faynte. Then sayde lonathas: My father hath troubled the londe: Se how lighte myne eyes are become, because I haue taisted a litle of this hony. Yf the people this daie had eaté of the spoyle of their enemies that they founde, the slaughter shulde haue bene greater agaynst the Philistynes. Yet smote theythe Philistynes the same daye fro Michmas vnto Aialon, and the people were very weery.

Fo. cdrd. 

D 

And y people turned to the spoyles, and|3 

toke shepe and oxen, and calues, and slewe them vpon the earth, ttand ate them with the bloude. Then was it tolde Saul: Beholde, the people synne agaynst the LORDE, in that they eate bloude. He sayde: Ye haue done

** Tud. 7. f. 2 Pa. 20. d. tt Leui. 7. c. and 19. f.

§ Iosu. 10. b. Iud. 4. c. tt 1 Re. 13. b.

Fo. celybiyj. 

'euell: roll vnto me now a greate stone. And 
Saul sayde moroner: Go abrode amoge the 
‘people, and saye vnto them, that enery one 
| brynge me his oxe and his shepe, and slaye them here, that ye maye eate, and not to synne agaynst the LORDE with eatynge of

bloude. Then broughte all the people euery one his oxe with his hade the same nighte, and slewe them there. And Saul buylded an altare vnto $ LORDE. This is the first altare that he buylded vnto the LORDE.
| And Saul sayde: Let vs go downe after the Philistynes, by nighte, and spoyle them tyll it be cleare mornynge, that we let none escape. ‘They answered: Do what so euer pleaseth the. But the prest sayde: Let vs igo nye here vnto God. And Saul axed at God.
Shal I go downe here after y Philistines? q wilt thou delyuer the in to Israels hande?
Neuertheles he answered him not at that tyme. df} Then sayde Saul: Let all the armyes of
| |the people come hither, and make search and se, in whom is this synne at this tyme. For as truly as God the Sauioure of Israel lyueth,
ít though it be in my sonne Ionathas, he shal dye. And no man answered him of all the
| people. And he sayde vnto all Israel: Be ye on the one syde, I a my sonne Ionathas wyl be on this syde. The people sayde vnto Saul:
Do as it pleaseth the. And Saul sayde vnto the LORDE the God of Israel: Do thou that right is. "The was lonathas and Saul taken: but the people wente forth fre. Saul
| sayde: Cast the lot ouer me and my sonne lonathas. So Ionathas was take. And Sanl sayde vnto lonathas: Tell me, what hast thou done? Ionathas tolde him, q sayde: I taisted ia litle hony with the staff that I had in my hande, and beholde, must I dye therfore ?
Thé sayde Saul: God do this and that vnto me, Ionathas thou must dye the death.
(5| But the people sayde vnto Saul: Shulde 
| |Ionathas dye, that hath done so greate health in Israel this night? God forbyd. *As truly as the LORDE lyueth, there shal not one heer of his heade fall vpon $ earth: for with God hath he wroughte at this tyme. So the people delyuered Ionathas, that he dyed jnot. Then wente Saul vp from the Philistynes: and the Philistynes wente vnto their place.
But whan Saul had cóquered the kyngdome 

* 2 Re. 14. b. + Deut. 25, c. 
1 Par. 9. a. $1 Re. 9. c. 

11 Re. 9. a. 

The i. boke of tbe kpnaes. 

Chap. rb. 

ouer Israel, he foughte against all his enemyes rounde aboute, against the Moabites, agaynst the childre of Ammon, agaynst the Edomites, agaynst the kynge of Zoba, agaynst y Philis- tynes: and whither so euer he R him, he gat y victory. And he made an hoost, and smote y + Amalechites, and delyuered Israel from the hande of all those that spoyled them.

Saul had these sonnes: lonathas, Isui, and 
Malchisua. And these were y names of his two doughters: the firstborne Merob, q y yogest Michol And Sauls wife was called
Ahinoam, the doughter of Ahimaas. And his chefe captaynes name was Abner, the sonne of Ner, Sauls vncle. t Cis was y father of
Saul But Ner ¥ father of Abner was the sonne of Abiel.

There was a mightie sore warre against the 
Philistynes, as loge as Saullyued. And where 
Saul sawe a man that was stronge and mete for y warre, he toke him to him.

The rb. Chapter. 
AMUEL sayde vnto Saul: ¢ The LORDE|& 

sent me to anoynte the for to be kynge ouer his people of Israel: heare now therfore ithe voyce of the wordes of the LORDE.
Thus sayeth y LORDE Zebaoth: I haue remembred what Amaleck dyd vnto Israel, lla how he layed wayte for him in y waye, whan he wente out of Egipte: Go thy waye now therfore, and smyte the Amalechites, q damne them with all that they haue, q spare him not:
|but slaye both man and woman, children q sucklynges, oxen q shepe, Camels and asses.
Saul commaunded the people the same, and nombred them at Talaim, two hüdreth thou- sande fote men, q ten thousande men of Iuda.

And whan Saul came to the cite of the 
Amalechites, he set an hynder watch by the 
‘ryuer, and sayde vnto y Kenites: Get you|% hence, departe, and go dote from y Amale- chites, y | smyte you not with them, T for ye shewed mercy vnto all the children of Israel, whà they departed out of Egipte. So the
Kenites gat them awaye from amonge the 
Amalechites. 

Then smote Saul the Amalechites from 
Heuila vnto Sur (which lyeth ouer against 
Egipte) q toke Agag the kynge of ¥ Amale- chites alyue, ¢ damned all ¥ people with the

| Exo. 17. c. Nu. 24.d. Deut. 25. c. 
. d. 

Iud. 1 

$ Nu. 10, 4 

Chap. rbi, 

The i. boke of the kpnges. 

edge of the swerde. Nenertheles Saul and the people spared Agag, and the shepe and oxen y were good and fat, and the lambes, and all that was good, and wolde not damne thé: but loke what was foule and nothinge worth, that they damned.

Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto 
Samuel, and sayde: It repenteth me that I made Saul kynge, for he hath turned him selfe backe fro me, and not cofirmed my wordes. Therfore was Samuel angrye, q cried vnto the LORDE all that nighte. And
Samuel gat him vp early, that he might mete 
Saul in y mornynge. And it was tolde him, that Saul was come vnto Carmel, * q had set him vp a piler, and was gone aboute, and come downe to Gilgall.

Now wha Samuel came to Saul, Saul sayde vnto him: Blessed be thou vnto y LORDE,
I hane perfourmed the worde of y LORDE. 
Samuel answered: What crye is this then of shepe in myne eares, and the crye of oxen which I heare ?

Saul sayde: They haue broughte them from the Amalechites: for the people spared the best shepe q oxen for the offerynge of y
LORDE thy God, the other haue we damned. 
Neuertheles Samuel answered Saul: Let me tell the what y LORDE hath sayde vnto me this nighte. He sayde: Saye on. Samuel sayde: t Whan thou wast but small in thine awne eyes, wast thou not y heade amóge the trybes of Israel? q the LORDE anoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel? and y LORDE sent y in to the waye, a sayde: Go thy waie
€ damne the synners the Amalechites, and fighte agaynst them, tyll thou haue vtterly destroyed the? Wherfore hast thou not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE, but hast turned thy selfe to the spoyle, and done euell in the sighte of the LORDE?

Saul answered Samuel: Yee I haue herk- ened vnto the voyce of the LORDE, « haue gone the waye that y LORDE sent me, and broughte Agag the kynge of the Amalechites, q damned the Amalechites: but y people haue také of the spoyle, shepe q oxen, and $ best amoge the damned, to offer vnto y LORDE thy God in Gilgall. Samuel saide: Hath the LORDE pleasure in saerifices and burnt offerynges, as in obeynge the voyce of the

* Deu. 17. a. t 1 Re. 9, c, and 10, a. 

$Exo.22.c. Deut. 18. b. 

1 Eccls. 4. c. 

LORDE? Beholde, t obedience is better then offerynge, and to herken is better then the fat of rammes. For disobedience is as y synne of $witcherafte, and rebellion is as the blasphemy of Idolatrye. In so moch now as thou hast refused the worde of the
LORDE, he hath refused the also, that thou shuldest not be kynge.

Then sayde Saul vnto Samuel: I haue synned, y I haue transgressed the commaun- dement of the LORDE and thy worde: for
I was afrayed of the people, and herkened vnto their voyce. And now forgeue me my synne, q returne with me, that I maye wor- shippe y LORDE. Samuel saide vnto Saul: lwil not turne backe with y, for thou hast refused the worde of the LORDE, and the
LORDE hath refused the also, y thou shuldest not be kynge in Israel. And whan Samuel turned him backe to go his waye, he gat him by y edge of his garment, q rete it. Then de Samuel vnto him: The LORDE hath rente the kyngdome of Israel from y this daye,
& geuen it vnto thy neghboure, which is better then thou. The ouerwynner in Israel also shal not lye, nether shal he repente: for he is no man, that he shulde repente.

He sayde: I haue synned, yet honoure me now before the Elders of my people and before
Israel, and turne backe with me, that I maye worshippe the LORDE thy God. So Samuel turned agayne after Saul, that Saul mighte worshippe the LORDE. But Samuel sayde:
Bringe me hither Agag the kynge of the 
Amalechites. And Agag wente vnto him, tederly. And Agag saide: Thus departeth the bytternesse of death. Samuel sayde :ll
Like as thy swerde hath made wemen child- lesse, so shal thy mother also be with out children amonge wemen. So Samuel hewed
Agag in peces before y LORDE in Gilgall. 

« And Samuel departed vnto Ramath. But 
Saul wente vp to his house at Gibea Saul. 
And Samuel sawe Saul nomore vnto the daye of his death. Neuertheles Samuel mourned for Saul, because it repented the LORDE, that he had made Saul kynge ouer Israel.

The poi. Chapter. 
A ND $ LORDE sayde vnto Samuel: 

How longe mournest thou for Saul, 

|| Exo. 17. c. Nu. 14. g. 9 1 Re. 17. d. 

Fo. relrir. 

F 

6 

Fo. celrr. 

whom I haue refused, that he shulde not be 

13 

kynge ouer Israel? Fyll thine horne with oyle, go thy waye, I wyll sende the to Isai the
Bethleemite: for amonge his sonnes hane I pronyded me a kynge. But Samuel sayde:
How shal I go? Saul shal perceaue it, and shal slaye me. The LORDE sayde: Take the a calfe from the droue, q saye: I am come to do sacrifice vnto ý LORDE. And thou shalt call Isai to ¥ sacrifice, so shall I tell the what thou shalt d, that thou mayest anoynte me him, whom I shall shewe the. Samuel dyd as the LORDE sayde, and came to
Bethleem. Then were the Elders of the cite astonnyed, and wente forth to mete him, and sayde: *Is thy commynge peaceable? He sayde: Yee. I am come to do sacrifice vnto the LORDE. Sanctifye youre selues, q come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified

The i. boke of the kpnges. 

Isai and his sonnes, and called them to the sacrifice.

Now wha they came in, he behelde Eliab, q thoughte, whether he shulde be his anoynted before the LORDE. But y LORDE sayde vnto Samuel: loke not vpon his conntenaunce, ner vpon the tallnesse of his person, For I iudge not after the sighte of man. A man hath respecte vnto the thinge that is before his eyes, but the LORDE loketh vpon the | hert. Then Isai called Abinadab, q broughte | him before Samuel. And he sayde: T his | hath not the LORDE chosen. Then Isai broughte Samma. But he sayde: This also hath not the LORDE chosen. ‘Then broughte
Isai his seuen sonnes before Samuel. Neuer- theles Samuel saide vnto Isai: The LORDE hath chosen none of these.

And Samuel sayde vnto Isai: Are here all the childré? He sayde: There is yet one y leest of all, and beholde, he kepeth the shepe. `
Thé sayde Samuel vnto Isai: Sende q cause | him to be fetched, for we will not syt downe | at the table, vntyll he come. Then sent he, |
1 eaused him be broughte. And he was well coloured with fayre eyes q of a beutyfull coun- tenaunce. And the LORDE saide: Aryse, and anoynte him, that is he.

Thé toke Samuel his oyle horne, ¢ anoynted him amonge his brethré. And the sprete of the LORDE came vpo Dauid fro y daye forth. As for Samuel, he gat him vp, a wente vnto Ramath.

* 3 Re. 2. b. 

But the sprete of the LORDE departed from Saul, and an euell sprete from y LORDE vexed him. Then sayde Sauls seruauntes vnto him: Beholde, an euell sprete from God vexeth the. Let oure lorde saie vnto his seruauntes which stonde before him, y they seke a man which can playe vpon the tag and instrumente, that whan the euell sprete of God cometh vpon the, he maye playe with his hande, to ease the withall. Then sayde
Saul vnto his sernaütes: Pronyde me a ma, that can playe well vpon the instrumente, q brynge him vnto me.

Then answered one of the children, q sayde: |B 

Beholde, I sawe a sonne of Isai y Bethleemite, which can playe vpon the instruméte, an honest q valeaüt man, and one y hath vnder- stodinge in matters, q is welfauoured. "The
Saul sent messaungers vnto Isai, sayege: 
Sende me Dauid thy sonne, which is with the shepe. ‘Then toke Isai an asse with bred, q a bottell with wyne, and a kyd, and sent it vnto
Saul by Danid his sonne. So Danid came to Saul, q stode before him, q he loued him well, and he became his wapen bearer. And
Saul sente vnto Isai, sayége: Let Dauid re- mayne before me, for he hath founde fauoure in my sighte. Now whan the sprete of God came vpo Saul, Dauid toke y harpe, q played with his hande: so was Saul refreszshed, « eased, q the euell sprete departed from him.

The roij. Chapter. 

HE Philistynes gathered their hoost to 

& fe y battayl, and came together to Socho in Iuda, « pitched their tentes betwene Socho a Aseka, at the ende of Damin. But Saul ¢ the mē of Israel came together, q pitched in the Oke valley, q prepared them selues to the battayll agaynst the Philistynes. And the
Philistynes stode vpon a hyll on the one syde, and the Israelites vpon a hyll on the other syde, so that there was a valley betwene them.
'Then stepte there forth from amoge the 
Philistynes a stoute bolde man, named Goliath of t Gath, sixe cubites and an hande breth hye, and had an helmet of stele on his heade, and a fast habergion vpon him, and the weight of his habergion was fyue thousande Sicles of stele, and harnesse of stele had he vpon his legges, and a shylde of stele vpon his shulders : and the shaft of his speare was like a weners

tIud. 11. d. 

Chap. rbij. 

| 

Chap. rbi. The i. boke of the kpnges. Fo. terri. 

with the keper of the stuffe, and ranne to the hoost, and wente in, and saluted his brethren.
And whyle he was yet talkynge with them, beholde, then came vp the stoute bolde man, whose name was Goliath, the Philistine of
Gath, out of the Philistynes hoost, and spake like as afore, and Dauid herde it. But euery man of Israel, whan he sawe the man, fled from him, and was sore afrayed of him.

And euery man in Israel sayde: Haue ye sene the man commynge vp hither? For he is come vp hither, to speake diszdanedly vnto
Israel. And who so euer smyteth him, him wyll the kynge make ryche, and geue him his doughter, and make his fathers house fre in Israel.

Then sayde Dauid vnto the men that stode |3 by him: What shalbe done to the man, that smyteth this Philistyne, and turneth this shame awaye from Israel? For what is he this
Philistyne this vncircūcysed, that defyeth the hoost of y lyuynge God? Then the people tolde him as afore: Thus shall it be done vnto y man that smyteth him. And Eliab his greater brother herde him talke with the] | men, and was very wroth agaynst Dauid, and| | sayde: Wherfore art thou come downe? and| | why hast thou left a fewe shepe in the wyl-| | dernesse? I knowe thy presumptuousnesse | well ynough, and the wickednesse of thine hert: for thou art come downe to se the battayll Dauid answered: What haue I downe now? Is there not an occasion? And he turned him selfe from him vnto another, and spake acordinge as he had sayde before.
'Then the people answered him like as afore. 

And whan they herde the wordes which 
Dauid sayde, they tolde them in the presence of Saul, and he caused him be fetched. And
Dauid sayde vnto Saul: Let no mans hert be discoraged because of him. Thy seruaunt| shall go, and fighte with the Philistyne. Ne- uertheles Sanl sayde vnto Dauid: Thou art not able to go agaynst this Phylistyne to fighte with him, for thou art but a childe: but this is a man of warre from his youth vp.

Dauid sayde vnto Saul: Thy seruaunt kepte |32 his fathers shepe, and there came a lyon and a Bere, and caried awaye a shepe from the flocke, then wente I forth after him, and smote him, and delyuered it out of his mouth. * And whan he wolde haue bene vpon me, ] toke

* Iud. 14. b. Heb. 11. f. 

lome, and the yron of his speare had sixe hundreth Sicles of yron, and his wapen bearer wente before him.

33| And he stode and called vnto the hoost of 
Israel, and sayde vnto them: Wherfore are ye come forth to prepare youre selues to the battayll? Am not I a Philistyne, and ye the seruauntes of Saul? Chose one amonge yon to come downe vnto me: yf he can fighte agaynst me and slaye me, then wil we be youre seruauntes: but yf I can ouercome him and slaye him, then shal ye be oure seruauntes, to do vs seruyce. And the Philistyne sayde:
I haue spoke diszdanedly vnto the hoost of 
Israel this daye. Geue me one, and let vs fighte together. Whan Saul and all Israel herde these wordes of y Philistyne, they were astonnyed, and sore aie el

But Dauid was the sonne of a man of 
Ephrata of Bethleem Iuda, whose name was 
Isai, which had eight sonnes, and was an olde 

man in Sauls tyme, and was well strycken in age amonge men. And the thre eldest sonnes of Isai were gone with Saul to the battayll.
And there names were these: Eliab the first borne, Abinadab the seconde, and Samma the thirde. But Dauid was the yongest of all.
So whan the thre eldest were gone with Saul to the battayll Dauid wente agayne from
Saul to kepe his fathers shepe at Bethleem. 
But the Philistyne stepte forth early in the mornynge and at euen, and stode there fortye dayes.

€ bs sayde vnto Dauid his sonne: Take this 
Epha of firmentye for thy brethren, and these ten loaues of bred (and runne to the hoost vnto thy brethren) q these ten new cheses, and brynge them to y captayne, and loke how thy brethren do, whether it go well with them or no, and take what they byd the. But Saul and they, and all the men of Israel were in the Oke valley, and foughte agaynst the
Philistynes. 

Then Dauid gat him vp early in the morn- ynge, and commytted the shepe to ý keper, and toke his burthen, wente his waye, as Isai commaunded him, and came to the tét. And the hoost was gone forth, and had prepared them selues, and eried in the battayl: For
Israel had set them selues in araye, and the! 
Philistynes were agaynst their hoost in their araye also.

'Then lefte Dauid the vessell that he bare, 

! ffa. celrrtj. hee by his beerde, and smote him, and slewe shim. So thy seruaunt smote both the Lyon and y Bere. "Therfore shall this Philistyne this vncireumeysed be euen as one of them:

| \for he hath detyed the hoost of the lyuynge 
God. And Dauid sayde: The LORDE that delyuered me from y Lyon and Beer, shall

| delyuer me also from this Philistyne. 

i And Saul sayde vuto Dauid: Go thy waye, 

| ithe LORDE be withthe. And Saul clothed 

' | Dauid with his clothes, and set an helmet of 

| [stele vpou his heade, and put an habergion 

vpo him. And Dauid girded his swerde aboue ihis clothes, and beganne to go, for he had neuer bene vsed to it afore. ‘Then sayde

Dauid vnto Saul: I can not go thus, for I 

haue not bene vsed to it, and so he laied it 

from him, and toke his staff in his hande, and chose fyue slighte stones out of the ryuer, and put them in the shepardes bagge which he had by him, and toke a slynge in his hande, and made him to the Philistyne. And the

Philistyne wente forth, and made him to Dauid, 

! fand his wapen bearer before him. 

df, Now whan the Philistyne loked q sawe 

|Danid, he thoughte scorne of him: for he 

toloke vpou. And the Philistyne sayde vnto 
Dauid: Am La dogg then, that thou commest vnto me with a staffe? And he cursed Dauid
|by his God, and sayde vnto Dauid: Come hither to me, I wil geue thy flesh to the foules vnder the heauen, and to the beastes in the felde. Neuertheles Dauid sayde vnto the
Philistyne: Thou commest vnto me with swerde, speare and shylde. But I come vnto the in the name of the LORDE Zebaoth the
God of the hoost of Israel, whom thou hast despysed. This daye shall the LORDE de- lyuer the in to my hàde, that I maye smyte the, and take thy heade from the, and geue the bodies of the hoost of the Philistynes this daye vnto the foules vnder the heauen, and
|to the wylde beestes vpon the earth, that all the londe maye knowe y Israel hath a God.
And all this congregacion shal knowe, that the 
, |LORDE saueth nether thorow swerde ner 
| |speare: for the battayll is the LORDES, q he shal delyuer yon in to oure handes.

Now whan the Philistyne gat him vp, and 
| |wente forth and drue nye vnto Dauid, Dauid made haiste, and ranne from y hoost vnto the

* Eccli. 47. a. t 1 Par. 12. d. 

Che i. boke of the hpuges. 

was but a childe, well coloured, and beutyfull 

Philistyne. And Dauid put his hade in his! bagg, and toke out a stone, q thrue it with the slynge, *and hytt the Philistyne euen in the fore heade, so that the stone stacke in his fore heade, and he fell downe to the grounde vpon his face.

So Dauid ouercame y Philistyne with the slynge and with $ stone, and smote him, and slewe him. And for so moch as Dauid had no swerde in his hande, he ranne and stode ouer y Philistyne, tand. toke his swerde, and drue it out of the sheeth, and slewe him, and smote of his heade withall. Whan the Phi- listynes sawe that the strongest of them was deed, t they fled. And the men of Israel and
Iuda gat thé vp, and cryed and folowed vpon the Philistynes, tyll they came vnto the valley, and to the Portes of Ekron. And the
Philistynes fell downe slayne vnto Gath and to Ekron. And the children of Israel turned agayne from chasynge of the Philistynes, and spoyled their tentes. But Danid toke the heade of the Philistyne, and broughte it vnto lerusalem, as for his armoure, he layed it in his tente.

Whan Saul sawe Dauid go forth agaynst the Philistyne, he saide vnto $ Abner his chefe captayne: Abner, whose sonne is this childe? Abner sayde: As truly as thy soule lyueth O kynge, I wote not. The kynge sayde: Axe thé whose sonne the yonge mà is.
Now whan Dauid came agayne from the slaughter of the Philistyne, Abner toke him, and broughte him before Saul, and he had the
Philistynes heade in his hande. And Saul sayde vnto him: Whose sonne art thou, thou yonge man? Dauid sayde: I am a sonne of thy seruaunt Isai the Bethleemite.

The rbiij. Chapter. 

ND whan he had made an ende of talk- 

ynge with Saul, the soule of Ionathas was bounde with the soule of Dauid, and lonathas loued him as his owne soule. And
Saul toke him the same daye, and let him not go agayne to his fathers house. And Ionathas and Dauid made a couenaunt together, for he loued him as his owne soule. And Ionathas put of his owne cote that he had vpon him, | and gaue it vnto Dauid: yee aud his cloke, his swerde, his bowe, and his girdell. And
Dauid wente forth whither so euer Saul sent. 

t Iudic. 7. f. 

$1Re. 14. g 

Chap. rbi. 

& 

| pap. rir. 

him, and behaued him selfe wysely. And 
Sanl set him ouer the men of warre, and he pleased all the people well, and all the ser- uauntes of Saul.

It fortuned, that whan Dauid was come agayne from the slaughter of the Philistyne, the wemen wente out of all the cities of Israel with songes q daunses, to mete kynge Saul, with tymbrels, with myrth, and with fyddels.
And the wemen sange one to another, and played q sayde: * Saul hath smytten his thousande : but Dauid his ten thousande.

Then was Saul very wroth, and y worde displeased him sore, and he sayde: They hane ascrybed ten thousande vnto Dauid, and but one thousande vnto me: what shal he hane more but the kyngdome? And from that daye.forth, Saul loked sowerly vpo Dauid.

The nexte daye after came the euell sprete of God vpon Saul, and prophecyed in y myddes of the house. But Dauid played on the instrumente with his hande, as he was wonte daylie. And Saul had a iauelynge in his hande, and cast it, and thoughte: I wyll stycke Dauid fast to the wall. Neuerthelesse
Dauid turned hnnselfe twyse awaye from him. 
And Saul was afrayed of Dauid: for the 
LORDE was with him, and was departed from Saul Then Sanl put him from him, and set him to be prynce ouer a thousande men, and he went out and in before the peo- ple. And Danid behaued himselfe wysely in all his doynges, and the LORDE was with him.

3| Now whan Saul sawe that he was so excead- 

yuge wyse, he stode in feare of him. But all 
Israel and Iuda loued Dauid, for he wente ont and in before them. And Saul sayde vnto Dauid: Beholde, my greatest doughter
Merob t wyl I geue the to wyfe: be stronge now, q gouerne the warres of the LORDE.
For Saul thought: my hade shal not be vpon him, but the hande of y Philistynes. Neuer-

` |theles Dauid answered Saul: Who am I? q 

what is my life q the kyüred of my father in 
Israel, that I shulde mary the kinges doughter? 

But whan the tyme came, that Merob y doughter of Sanl shulde haue bene geué vnto
Dauid, she was geuen vnto Adriel $ Meho- lathite to wyfe. Nenerthelesse Michol Sauls doughter loued Dauid. Whan this was tolde
Sanl, y matter pleased him well, q he sayde : 
I wyl geue him her, y she maye be a snare 

* 1 Re. 21. d. and 29. b. $1 Re. 17. c. 

The i. boke of tbe khpnars. 

vnto him, g that the handes of y Philistynes maye come vpon him. And he sayde vnto
Dauid: ‘This daye shalt thou be my doughters huszbade ý secode time. And Saul spake vnto his seruaütes: "lalke with Dauid secretly q saye: Beholde, the kinge hath pleasure in the, and all his seruauntes loue the, mary thou therfore the kynges doughter.

And Sauls seruauntes spake these wordes in the eares of Dauid. But Dauid saide:
Thynke ye it but a small matter, to mary the kynges doughter? As for me, 1 am but a poore symple man. And Sauls seruauntes tolde hin agayne, and sayde: Soch wordes hath Dauid spoken. Saul sayde: Then saye ye vnto Danid: 'The kynge desyreth no dowry, but onely an hundreth foreszkynnes of the
Philistynes, that vengeaunce maye be taken of the kinges enemies. Howbeit Saul thought to cause Danid be slayue by the hàdes of the
Philistynes. ‘Then his seruauntes tolde Dauid these wordes, and Dauid was contente with the matter, to mary the kynges doughter.

And after a fewe dayes Dauid gatt him vp, and wente with his men, and smote two hundreth men amonge the Philistynes. And
Dauid broughte their foreszkynnes, and made their nombre sufficient vnto the kynge, y he mighte mary the kynges doughter. Thē Saul gaue him his doughter Michol to wyfe. And
Saul sawe and perceaued, that the LORDE was with Dauid. And Michol Sauls doughter loued him. Then was Saul the more afrayed, and became his enemye as loge as he lyued.
And whan the prynces of the Philistynes wete forth, Dauid behaued him selfe more wysely then all the seruauntes of Saul in their outgoynge: so that his name was in greate reputacion.

The riy. Chapter. 

AUL spake to lonathas his sonne, and to 
& ) all his seruanntes, that they shulde kyll 
Dauid. t Neuerthelesse lonathas the sonne of Saul loued Dauid exceadiugly, and tolde him, and sayde: Saul my father goeth abonte to slaye the. Kepe the therfore (I praye the) in the mornynge and abyde in secrete, and hyde the. But I wyll go forth, and stonde besyde my father in the felde where thon art, and wyll speake of the vnto my father: and what soeuer I se I shal brynge the worde.

1 1 Re. 18. a. 
38 

Fo. ceiprtt. 

F 

& 

a 

fo. celrriiij. 

B 

And lonathas reported ý best of Dauid vnto Saul his father, and sayde vnto him: Oh let not the kynge synne agaynst his seruaunt, for he hath not synned agaynst the, and his doynge is very necessary for the, * he put his lyfe in his hande also, and smote the Phi- listyne, q the LORDE dyd a greate health vnto all Israel: this hast thou sene, and re- ioysed therof. Wherfore wylt thon then offende agaynst innocent bloude, that thou woldest kyll Dauid without a cause? Then herkened
Saul vnto the voice of Ionathas and sware : 
As truly as the LORDE lyneth, he shal not dye. Then Ionathas called Dauid, and tolde him all these wordes, and brought him to Saul, so that he was in presence like as afore tyme.

But there arose a battayll agayne, and 
Dauid wente forth, and fought agaynst the 
Philistynes, and smote a greate slaughter, so that they fled before him. Neuertheles M euell sprete of the LORDE came vpon Saul, and he sat in his house, and had a iauelynge in his hande. strument with his hāde. And Saul thought with the iauelinge to sticke Danid fast to the wall. Howbeit, he wente asyde fro Saul and the iauelynge smote in the wall. And Dauid fled, and escaped that night.

Notwithstondinge Saul sent his messaungers to Dauids house, that they shulde laye wayte for him, and kyll him in the mornynge. Mi- chol Dauids wyfe tolde him this, and sayde :
Yf thou saue not thy soule this night, thou shalt dye tomorow. t Then Michol let him downe thorow the wyndow, so that he wente his waye, fled, and escaped. And Michol toke an ymage, and layed it in the bed, and laied a goates szkinne at the heade of it, and couered it with clothes. Then Saul sent messaügers, to fetch Dauid. But she sayde :
He is sicke. Neuerthelesse Saul sent mes- saungers to se Danid, q sayde: Bringe him vp to me with the bed, that he maye be slayne.

Now whan the messaungers came, beholde, the ymage laye in the bed, and a goates szkynne at the heade of it. ‘Then sayde Saul vnto Michol: Why hast thou begyled me, and let myne enemye go, that he mighte escape ?
Michol sayde vnto Saul: He sayde vnto me: 
Let me go, or I wyl kyll the. As for Dauid, he fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel vnto Ramath, and tolde him all y Saul had

* Iud. 12. a. 

Psal. 118. o. t Iosu. 2. c. 

The i. boke of the kpnges. 

But Dauid plaied vpon the in-! 

FAG tom s | 

Chap. rr. done vnto him. And he wente with Samuel, and they abode at Naioth.

And it was tolde Saul: Beholde, Dauid is| 3 at Naioth in Ramath. Then Saul sente messaungers to fetch Dauid. And they sawe a company of prophetes prophecienge, and
Samuel had the ouersight of them. Then came the sprete of God vpon the messaungers of Saul, so that they prophecyed also.

Whan this was tolde Saul, he sent other mes- saungers, which prophecied likewyse. "Then sente he messaungers the thyrde tyme, and they in like maner prophecyed. "Then wente he himselfe also vnto Ramath, and whan he came to the greate well which is at Secho, he axed and sayde: Where is Samuel and
Dauid? Then was it tolde him: beholde, at Naioth in Ramath. And he wente thither, euen vnto Naioth in Ramath. And y sprete of God came vpon him also, and he wete q prophecied till he came vnto Naioth in Ra- math. And he put of his clothes, q pro- phecied likewise before Samuel, q fell downe naked all that daye and all that nighte. + Here of came the prouerbe: Is Saul also amonge the prophetes ? i

The rr. Chapter. 

AUID fled frō Naioth in Ramath, and came, q spake before Ionathas: What

haue I done? What trespace haue I made? 
What haue I synned in y sighte of thy father, y he seketh to kyll me? He sayde vnto him:
God forbyd, thou shalt not dye. Beholde, my father doth nothinge, nether greate ner small, but he sheweth it before myne eares.
Wherfore shulde my father the hyde this fro me? It shal not be so. The sware Dauid agayne, and sayde: Thy father knoweth well, y I haue founde fauoure in thy sighte, therfore shal he thynke: Ionathas shal not knowe of this, lest it greue him. Verely, as truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, there is but one steppe betwene me q death. Ionathas sayde vnto Dauid: I wil do for the what so euer thy hert desyreth. Dauid sayde vnto him: Beholde, tomorow is the new
Mone, that I shulde syt at the table with the kynge. Let me hyde my selfe therfore in the felde vnto the thirde daye at euen. Yf thy|33 father then axe after me, saye: Dauid prayed me, y he mighte runne to Bethleem vnto his

11 Re. 10. c. 

Chap. rr. 

The i. boke of the kpnges. 

cite, for all his kynred haue there a yearly sacrifice. Yf he saye then: It is good, the stondeth it well with thy seruaunt. But yf he be wroth, thou shalt perceaue that he in- tendeth euell Do mercy therfore vpon thy seruaunt: *for with me thy seruaunt hast thou made a couenaunt in the LORDE. But yf there be eny trespace in me, then slaye me thy selfe, for why woldest thou brynge me vnto thy father?

lonathas sayde: That be farre from the, that I shulde perceaue my father to intende eny euell agaynst the, and shulde not tell the.
Dauid sayde: Who shal brynge me worde, yf thy father geue the an harde answere? Iona- thas sayde vnto Dauid: Come, let vs go forth in to the felde. And they wente out both in to ý felde. And Ionathas sayde vnto Dauid:

LORDE God of Israel, yf I perceaue by my father tomorow or on the thirde daye, that it goeth well with Dauid, q sende not vnto the, and shewe the before thine eares, then let the
LORDE do this and that vnto Ionathas. But yf my father delyte in euell agaynst the, I wil shewe it before thine eares also, and let y go, that thou mayest departe in peace.

And the LORDE be with the, as he hath bene with my father. Yf I do it not, then do thou no mercy of the LORDE on me, while
I lyue, no not whan I dye, and plucke thy mercy fro my house for euer. And whan the
LORDE roteth out y enemies of Dauid, euery one out of the lord then let Danid rote out Ionathas also with his house, and the
LORDE requyre it of the hande of Dauids enemies.

And Ionathas proceaded further, and sware vnto Dauid (he loued him so well: for he loued him euen as his owne soule) and Iona- thas sayde vnto him: Tomorow is y new
Mone, and thou shalt be axed after: for thou shalt be wanted where thou wast wonte to sit.
But on the thirde daye come downe soone, q go in to ¥ place where thou hydest the on the worckdaye, q set the downe by the stone of Asel: then wyl I shute thre arowes on y side, as though I wolde shute at a marck: and beholde, I wil sende the boye, and saye vnto him, Go seke ý arowes. Yf I saye now vnto the lad: Lo, the arowes lye hitherwarde be- hynde y, fetch them, then come thou, for it is peace, and there is no parell, as truly as the

* 1 Re. 18. a. and 23. d. 

LORDE lyueth. But yf I saye vnto the lad: beholde, the arowes lye yonderwarde before the, then go thou thy waye, for the LORDE hath let the go. t As for that which thou and
I haue spoke together, the LORDE is be- twene me and the for euer.

Dauid hid himself in the felde. And wha the new Mone came, the kynge sat him downe at the table to eate. Whan the kynge had set him downe in his place as he was wonte by the wall, Ionathas stode vp, but Abner sat him downe besyde Saul. And Dauid was myssed in his place. And Saul spake no- thinge that daye, for he thoughte: There is somwhat happend vnto him, that he is not cleane. On the seconde daye of the new
Mone, whan Dauid was myssed in his place, 
Saulsaide vnto Ionathas his sonne: Wherfore is not the sonne of Isai come to the table nether yesterdaye ner to daye?

Ionathas answered Saul: He prayed me that he mighte go vnto Bethleem, and sayde:
Let me go, for oure kynred hath a sacrifyce to do in the cyte, and my brother hath sent for me himselfe: yf I haue founde fauoure now in thy syghte, I wyll go, and se my bre- thren: therfore is he not come to the kynges table. Then was the kynge wroth at Jona- thas, and sayde vnto him: Thou wicked and vnthrifte, I knowe how that thou hast chosen the sonne of Isai, to the shame of thy selfe and of thy shamefull mother. For as longe as y sonne of Isai lyueth vpo earth nether thou ner thy kingdome shal prospere. Sende now therfore, and cause him to be fetched vnto me, ifor he is a childe of death.

Ionathas answered his father Saul and sayde vnto him: Wherfore shal he dye? what hath he done? Then shot Saul the iauelynge at him, that he might smite him. The per- ceaued Ionathas, that his father was vtterly determed to kyll Dauid, and he rose vp from y table in a wrothfull displeasure, and ate no bred y same seconde daye of the new Mone: for he was vexed because of Dauid, that his father had done him soch dishonoure.

On the morow wente lonathas forth in to the felde, at the tyme appoynted of Dauid, and a litle boy with him, and sayde vnto y boy: Runne and seke me the arowes which I shute. Whan the boy ranne, he shot an arowe ouer him. And whan the boy came to the

t 1 Re. 20. f. 

11 Re. 26. c. 

Fo. celrrb. 

The i. boke of the hpuges. 

[d 

y arowe, 
Ionathas eryed after him, and sayde: The 

Fo. celycbt. Chap. rri. 

other freshbredes set therin the daye wha he! toke them awaye.

| {place whither Ionathas had shot 

| 

[ove lyeth yonderwarde before the. And he cryed after him agayne : haist the, and stonde not styll Then the boy gathered vp Iona- thas arowes, and brought them to his lorde.
And the boy knewe nothinge, onely Ionathas and Dauid knewe of y matter.

Then Ionathas gaue his boy his wapés and sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, and cary them in to the cite. And whan the boy was gone,
Dauid arose from the place towarde the south, and fell vpon his face to the groüde, and wor- shipped thre tymes, and they kissed one ano- ther, and wepte together. But Dauid most specially. And Ionathas saide vnto Dauid:
| Go thy waye in peace: *What soeuer we both haue sworne q spoké together in the name of ithe LORDE, the LORDE be witnesse be-
'twene me and the, betwene my sede and thy 
[sede for euer. And Ionathas gat him vp, and came in to the cite.

The rri. Chapter. 
AUID came to Nobe to ¥ prest Ahi- melech. And Ahimelech was aston-
‘nyed, whan he sawe Dauid comminge, and sayde vnto him: Why commest thou alone,
‘and noman is with the? Dauid sayde vnto tAhimelech the prest: The kinge hath co- mytted a matter vnto me, and sayde: Let
‘noma knowe wherfore I haue sent the, and what I haue commaunded the: for I haue appoynted my seruaütes to mete me here q there. +Yf thou haue now ought vnder thy hande, a loafe of bred or fyue, geue me the same in my hande, or what so euer thou findest.
| The prest answered Dauid, and sayde: I haue no comen bred vnder my hande, but the holy bred, yf the yonge men haue onely re- frained them selues from wemen. Danid answered the prest, and sayde vnto him: The
.wemen were kepte thre dayes from vs whan 
|we departed forth, and the yonge mens vessels were holy. But this waye is vnholy, neuer- thelesse 1t shalbe sanctifyed to daye in the instrumentes. § Then the prest gaue him of holy, in so moch as there was none other bred but the shewbredes, which were taken vp before the LORDE, that there might be

| 
| 

*]Re.20.d. +1 Re. 14.a. £1 Re. 25. b. Iud. 8. b. 
| $ Exod. 25. e. Leui. 24. b. Matb. 12. a. Mar. 2. c. 

But the same daye was there a man sparred | C 

in before the LORDE, one of Sauls ser- uauntes, named Doeg an Edomite, ¥ might- lest amonge Sauls hyrdmen. And Dauid sayde vnto Ahimelech: Is there not a speare or a swerde here vnder thine hande? I haue not taken my swerde and weapens with me: for the kynges matter requyred haist. The prest sayde: The swerde of Goliath the Phi- listyne l whom thou smotest in the Oke valley, is here wrapped in a cloth behynde the ouer- body cote. Yf thou wylt haue it, take it, for here is els none but it. Dauid sayde: There is not soch another, geue me it.

And Dauid gat him vp, and fled from Saul, and came to Achis y kynge of Gath. But
Achis seruauntes sayde vnto him: This is 
Dauid the kynge of the londe, of whom they sunge in the daunse, and sayde: T Saul hath
‘smytten his thousande, but Dauid his ten thousande. And Dauid toke these wordes to hert, and was sore afrayed of Achis the kynge of Gath, and altered his countenaunce before them, and shewed himselfe as he had bene imadd in their handes, and stackered towarde the dores of the gate, and his slauerynges ranne downe his beerd. "Then sayde Achis vnto his seruauntes: Beholde, ye se that the man is out of his wyt, why haue ye brought him vnto me? Haue I to fewe madd men, that ye haue brought this hither to be madd before me? Shulde he come in to my house?

The rrij. Chapter. 

AUID wente fro thence, q fled vnto the caue of Adullam. Whan his brethren and all his fathers house herde that, they came downe thither vnto him. And there gathered vnto him all men that were in trouble and det, and sory of hert, and he became their heade, so that there were with him vpon a

foure hundreth men. 

And Dauid wente from thence towarde 
¿Mispa in the londe of the Moabites, and j|sayde vnto the kynge of the Moabites: Let my father and my mother go out and in amonge you, tyll 1 se what God wil do with me. And he lefte them before the kynge of y Moabites, so that they remayned by him, as

| 1 Reg. 17. f. T 1 Reg. 18. b. and 29. b. 

Chap. rrii. longe as Dauid was in the castell. Neuer- theles the prophet Gad sayde vnto Dauid:
Abyde not in the castell, but go thy waye, and come in to the londe of luda. Then departed Dauid, and came in to the wodd of
Hareth. And Saul herde that Dauid and the men which were with him, were come forth.

Now whyle Saul dwelt at Gibea vnder a groue in Rama, he had a lauelinge in his hande, and all his seruauntes stode by him.
Then sayde Saul vnto his seruauntes that stode by him: Heare ye children of Iemini:
Shal the sonne of Isai geue lodes and vyn- yardes vnto you all, q make you all captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hüdreds, that ye haue all conspyred agaynst me, and there is no ma that sheweth it before myne eares, *for so moch as my sonne also hath made a coue- naunt with the sonne of Isai? "There is no
‘man amonge you that letteth it for my sake, or y openeth it vnto myne eares: for my sonne hath stered vp my seruauntes against me, that he maye laye wayte for me, as it is manifest.

Then answered Doeg y Edomite which stode besyde Sauls seruauntes, and sayde: tI sawe the sonne of Isai, that he came vnto
Nobe, to Ahimelech y sonne of Achitob, which axed eouncell at the LORDE for hiin, and gaue him fode, q the swerde of Goliath the Philistyne.

Then sent the kynge, and caused to call 
Ahimelech the prest the sonne of Achitob, and all his fathers house, the prestes that were at Nobe, and they came all to the kynge.
And Saul sayde: Heare thou sonne of Achitob. 
He saide: Here am I my lorde. And Saul sayde vnto him: Wherfore haue ye cdspyred agaynst me, thou q the sonne of Isai, that thou hast geuen him bred and a swerde, and axed councell at God for him, to stere him ivp, that he mighte laye awayte for me, as it
‘is manifest ? 
~ Ahimelech answered the kynge and saide: 
‘And who is amonge all thy seruauntes like 
Dauid, which is faithfull, and hath maried the kynges doughter, and goeth in thine obedience, q is honorably taken in thine house? Haue
I begonne then first this daye to axe councell at God for him? That be farre frome. Let not the kinge laie soch to his seruaütes charge in all my fathers house: for thy seruaunt knewe not of all these thinges nether small

* 1 Re.18.a, 20. d. 23.d. t 1 Re. 21. c. 

The í. boke of tbe pues. 

ner greate. Neuertheles the kynge saide: 
Ahimelech thou must dye ¥ death, thou and all thy fathers house. And the kynge sayde to his fote men that stode by him: Turne you, and slaye the prestes of the LORDE, for their hande is with Dauid also.

Not withstondinge the kynges seruauntes wolde not laye their handes vpon y prestes of the LORDE, to slaye them. The saide y kynge vnto Doeg: Turne the, and slaye the prestes. +t Doeg the Edomite turned him, and slewe the prestes, so that the same daye there dyed fyue and foure score men, which wayre ouerbody cotes of lynnen. And Nob the cite of the prestes smote he with the edge of the swerde, both men and wemen, children and sucklynges, oxen and asses, and shepe.

Neuerthelesse there escaped a sonne of 
Ahimelech (the sonne of Achitob) whose name was Abiathar, and fled after Dauid, and tolde him, that Saul had slayne y prestes of the
LORDE. Dauid sayde vnto Abiathar: I knewe well the same daye that Doeg the
Edomite was there, that he wolde tell Saul. 
I am giltye of the soules of thy fathers house. 
Abyde thou with me, and feare not. He that layeth wayte for my lyfe, shall laye wayte for thyne also, and thou shalt bepreserued with me.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND it was tolde Dauid: Beholde, the 
Philistynes fight against Cegila, and spoyle the barnes. ‘Then Dauid axed at the
LORDE, and sayde: Shal I go, a smyte these Philistynes? And the LORDE sayde vnto Dauid: Go thy waye, thou shalt smyte the Philistynes, and delyuer Cegila. But y men that were with Dauid, sayde vnto him:
Beholde, we are here in feare in lewry, and shall we go to Cegila vnto the hoost of the
Philistynes? "The Dauid axed at the LORDE agayne. And the LORDE answered him, and sayde: Vp, get the downe to Cegila, for
I wil delyuer the Philistynes in to thy hande. 
So Dauid wente with his men vnto Cegila, and foughte agaynst the Philistynes, q droue awaye their catell, and smote them with a greate slaughter. ‘Thus Dauid delyuered them of Cegila. For whan Abiathar the sonne of
Ahimelech fled vnto Dauid at Cegila, he bare 

downe the ouerbody cote with him. 
Thé was it tolde Saul, that Dauid was come 

t1 Reg.2. g. 2 Re. 21. a. 

So. celyybü. 

n 

B 

Fo. eelyybtyj. to Cegila, and he sayde: God hath deliuered him in to my hade, for he is shut fast in, now that he is come in to a cite which is kepte
‘with gates and barres. And Saul caused for to call all the people downe to ¥ battaill vnto
Cegila, y they might besege Dauid and his men. But whan Dauid perceaued y Saul intéded euell against him, he saide vnto
Abiathar y prest: Brynge me hither the ouer- body cote. And Dauid sayde: O LORDE
God of Israel, thy seruaunt hath herde, that 
Saul goeth aboute to come for to destroye the cite of Cegila for my sake. Shal the citysens of Cegila delyuer me ouer in to his handes ?
And shal Saul come downe, as thy seruaunt hath herde? Tell thy seruaunt this, O
LORDE God of Israel. And the LORDE saide: He shal come downe.

Dauid sayde: Shall the citysens of Cegila delyuer me and my men in to Sauls handes?
The LORDE sayde: Yee. The Dauid gat him vp with his me, of whom there were vpon a sixe hundreth, q walked whither they coulde.
Now whan it was tolde Saul that Dauid was escaped from Cegila, he let his iourney stonde.
As for Dauid, he remayned in the wildernes in the castell, and abode vpon the mount in the wildernes of Siph. But Saul soughte him as Jonge as he lyued. Neuertheles God gaue him not in to his handes. And Dauid sawe, that Saul was gone forth to seke after his life.
But Dauid was in the wildernes of Siph, in the wodd.

Then Ionathas the sonne of Saul gat him vp, and wéte vnto Dauid in to the wod, and strengthed his hande in God, and sayde vnto him: Feare not, my father Sauls hande shal not finde y: and thou shalt be kynge ouer
Israel, so will I be the nexte vnto the. And y my father knoweth right well. *And they made a couenaunt both together before the
LORDE. And Dauid remayned in the wodd. 
As for Ionathas, he wente home agayne. 

But the tSiphites wente vp to Saul vnto 
Gibeath, and sayde: Is not Dauid hyd with vs in the castell in y wodd, vpon molt
Hachila, which lyeth on the righte hande of the wildernesse? Let the kynge come downe now therfore acordinge to all the desyre of his hert, and we wyll delyuer him in to the kynges hande. Then sayde Saul: Blessed be ye of

| 

* 1 Re. 18. à. and 20. b. t1 Par. 2. c. 

+ Esa. 37. b. 
$ The rocke of partinge asunder. 

The i. boke of the kpnars. 

Chap. rrt. the LORDE, that ye haue had pytie vpon me: Go youre waye now therfore, and be sure, that ye maye knowe and se in what place his fete haue bene, and who hath sene him there: for it is tolde me, that he is full of sotiltye. Loke well and spye out all the places, where he hydeth him, and come agayne to me, whan ye are sure, and I will go with you. Yf he be in the londe, I wyl enquere after him amonge all the thousandes in Juda.

Then gat they them vp, and wente their |35 

waye vnto Siph before Saul. But Dauid and his men were in the wyldernes of Mao, euen in the felde on the righte hande of the wil- dernes. Now whan Saul wente thither with his men to seke him, it was tolde Dauid and he gat him downe to the rocke, and abode in the wildernesse of Mahon. Whan Saul herde that, he folowed after Dauid in the wildernesse of Mahon. And Saul with his men wente on the one syde of the hyll: Dauid with his men on y other syde of y hill. But whan Dauid made haist to escape from Saul, Saul with his men compased aboute Dauid and his men, that he might take thé. + Neuertheles there came a messaüger vnto Saul, and sayde: Make haist and come, for the Philistynes are falle in to the londe. Thé Saul turned him from chacynge of Dauid, and wente agaynst the
Philistynes. Therfore is ¥ place called $ Sela 
Mahelkoth. And Dauid wente vp from thence, and abode in the castell at En Gaddi.

The rri. Chapter. 

OW whan Saul came agayne from the 
Philistines, it was tolde him: Beholde, 
Dauid is in the wyldernes of Engaddi. And 
Saul toke thre thousande chosen men out of all Israel, and wente to seke Dauid with his men vpon the stony rockes of the wylde goates.
And whan he came to the shepe foldes by y waye, there was a caue, and Saul wente in to
| coner his fete. But Dauid and his men sat 

behinde within the caue. 

Then sayde Dauids men vnto him: Lo, this is the daye, wherof the LORDE thy God hath sayde vnto the: Beholde, I wyll delyuer thyne enemye in to thy hande, that thou mayest do with him what it pleaseth the.
And Dauid stode vp, q cut of the typpe of 
Sauls garment quyetly. Neuertheles it smote 

|| To couer his fete: that is, to do his necessary easment. 

Chap. rrb. 

B 

him afterwarde in his hert, because he had cut of the typpe of Sauls garment, and sayde vnto his men: The LORDE let that be farre fro me, that I shulde do it, a laye my hande vpo my lorde the LORDES anoynted: for he is y anoynted of the LORDE. And Dauid withelde his seruaütes with wordes, q suffred thé not to ryse vp agaynst Saul.

But whan Saul gat him vp out of the caue, and was goinge his waye, Dauid rose vp also after him, and wente out of the caue, and cried behynde Saul, q sayde: My lorde the kynge. And Saulloked behynde him. And
Dauid bowed downe his face to the earth, and worshipped, and sayde vnto Saul: Why herkenest thou vnto the wordes of men, that saye: Dauid seketh thy mysfortune? Beholde, thine eyes se this daye that the LORDE gaue the in to my hande in the caue, and I was counceled toslaye the: Neuertheles thou wast fauoured, for I sayde: I wil not laye my hande vpon my lorde, for he is the LORDES anoynted. Beholde, my father the typpe of thy garment in my hande, that I wolde not slaye the, whan I cut of the typpe of thy garment. Knowe and se, y there is no euell ner trespace in my hande: nether haue I offended the, and thou folowest after my soule, to take it awaye. The LORDE shal be iudge betwene me and the, and auenge me on the, but my hade shal not be vpon the, acordinge as it is sayde after the olde prouerbe: Vn- godlynes commeth of the vngodly: but my hande shal not be vpon the. Whom per- secutest thou O kynge of Israel, whom per- secutest thou? a deed dogg? a flee? ‘The
LORDE be iudge, and geue sentence betwene me and the, and césidre it, and defende my cause, and delyuer me from thy hande.

3| Now whan Dauid had spoken out these 

wordes vnto Saul, Saulsaide: *Is not this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? And Saul lifte vp his voyce, and wepte, and saide vnto Dauid:
Thou art more righteous then I: for thou hast recompesed me good, but I haue rewarded the euell. And this daye hast thou shewed me how thou hast done me good, for so moch as y LORDE hath delyuered me in to thy hande, and thou neuertheles hast not slame me.
What is he, which yf he fynde his enemye, wy! let him goina good waye? ‘The LORDE rewarde the good for y thou hast done vnto

* 1 Re, 26. c. 

Che i. boke of tbe kpnges. 

me this daye. Beholde now, I knowe that thou shalt be kynge, q the kyngdome of Israel stondeth in thy hande: sweare now therfore vnto me by the LORDE, y thou shalt not rote out my sede after me, nether destroie my name out of my fathers house. And Dauid sware vnto Saul. Then wente Saul home, but Dauid gat him vp with his men vnto the castell.

The rro. Chapter. 
A ND Samuel dyed, and all Israel gathered 

them selues together, mourned for him, t buried him in his house at Ramath. As for
Dauid, he rose, and wente downe in to the wyldernesse of Paran. And there was a man at Maon, and his possession at Carmel, and the man was of greate power, and had thre thousande shepe, and a thousande goates.
And it fortuned that he clypped his shepe at 
Carmel, and his name was Nabal, but his wyues name was Abigail and she was a woman of good vnderstondinge, q bewtyfull of face. But the man was harde, and wicked in his doynges, and was one of Caleb.

Now whan Dauid herde in the wyldernes y 
Nabal clypped his shepe, he sent out ten yonge men, q saide vnto them: Go vp vnto Carmel, q whan ye come to Nabal, salute him frendly on my behalfe, q saye: Good lucke, peace be with the q thine house, q with all y thou hast.
Ihaue herde saye that thou hast shepe clyppers. 
Now thy shepherdes whom thou hast, haue bene with vs, we haue done them no dis- honoure, and they wated nothinge of their nombre, as longe as they were at Carmel:
Axe thy yonge men, they shal tell the, and let thy yonge men fynde fauoure in thy sighte: for we are come in a good daye, geue thy seruauntes q thy sonne Dauid what thy hande fyndeth.

And wha Dauids yonge men came, and spake all these wordes on Dauids behalfe vnto
Nabal, they lefte of. But Nabal answered 
Dauids seruauntes, q sayde: What is he y 
Dauid? « who is the sonne of Isai? There are many seruauntes now y runne awaye from their masters. Shulde I take my bred, water

and flesh, that I haue slayne for my clyppers, q geue it vnto mé whom I knowe not whence they are?

‘The Dauids yonge mé turned their waye agayne.

And whan they came agayne vnto 

Fo. crlrxiy. 

So. celery. 
|him, they tolde him all these wordes. "Thé sayde Dauid vnto his men: Euery man gyrde

his swerde aboute him. And euery one gyrde 

his swerde aboute him. And Dautd gyrde his swerde aboute him also, and there wete vp after him vpon a foure hundreth men, but two

hundreth remayned with the stuffe. i 
Neuertheles one of the yonge men tolde Abi- 

gail Nabals wife, and sayde: Beholde, Dauid 

sent messaungers out of the wyldernes to blesse oure lorde, Notwithstondinge he was fearce vpó them, and yet haue they bene very pro- fitable men vnto vs, and haue done vs no dishonoure, and we wanted none of the nombre as loge as we walked with them, whan we were in the felde: but they haue bene oure wall daye and nighte, as longe as we kepte the shepe by them. Take hede now therfore, and loke well what thou doest, for there is surely

a mysfortune at hande agaynst oure lorde, q 

agaynst all his house. And he is a man of 

Belial, to whom no man darre saye eny thinge. 

Then Abigail made haist, and toke two hun- 

dred loaues of bred, and two botels of wyne, 

and fyue shepe ready dighte, and fyue mea- sures of firmentye, and an hundreth frayles of

rasens, and two hundreth fravles of fygges, q 

layed them vpo asses, and sayde to hir yonge 

men: Go ye youre waye before me, beholde, 

I wyl come after. And she tolde Nabal hir 

housbade nothinge therof. And as she rode 
ō the asse, and wente downe in the shadowe 

of ¥ hill, beholde, Dauid q his me met hir downe, so that she came vpon them.

D, But Dauid sayde: Wel, all that this man 

had in y wyldernes, haue I kepte for naughte, 

so that there wanted nothinge of all that he had, and he rewardeth me euell for good.

God do this and yet more vnto the enemies 

of Dauid, yf vntyll tomorow in the mornynge 

I leaue this man (of all that he hath) so moch 

as one that maketh water phe wall. Now 

whan Abigail sawe Dauid, she lighte downe from the asse in all the haist, and fell vpo hir face before Danid, and worshiped him to the grounde, and fell at his fete, and sayde: Oh my lorde, let this trespace be myne, and let thy handmayde speake before thine eares, and heare the wordes of thy handmayden: Let not my lorde set his hert agaynst this Nabal the man of Belial, for he is a foole, acordinge as his name is called: his name is foole, and foolishnes is with him. As for me thy hand-

e 

The í. boke of the kpnges. 

mayde, I sawe not my lordes yonge men, whom thou dyddest sende.

But now my lorde, as truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, the
LORDEhath kepte the backe, y thou shuldest not come agaynst bloude, and he hath de- lyuered thine hande.

Thine enemyes be now as Nabal, and so be they that wolde my lorde euell. Here is y blessynge, y thy handmayde hath brought my lorde, take it, and geue it vnto the yonge men, that walke vnder my lorde. Fora sure house shal LORDE make my lorde, which fighteth the flahte of the LORDE, and no euell shall be founde in the all thy life longe. And yf eny man ryse vp to persecute y, and to laye wayte for thy soule, then shal the soule of my lorde be bounde in the bundell of y lynynge, euen with the LORDE thy God. But y soule of thine enemies shalbe turned backe with the slynge. Whan the LORDE therfore doth all this good for my lorde (which he hath promysed the) and commaundeth y to be his
Duke ouer Israel, then shal it be no stomblinge blocke ner occasion of fallynge vnto my lordes hert, that thou hast not shed bloude without a cause, and auenged thy selfe, then shal y
LORDE do good vnto my lorde, and thou shalt thynke vpon thy handmayden.

ES 

Chap. rro. 

Then saide Dauid vnto Abigail: Dlessed| gf | 

be the LORDE God of Israel, which hath sent the to mete me this daye: and blessed be thy speach, and blessed be thou, which hast kepte me backe this daye, that I am not come agaynst bloude, to auenge me with myne awne hande. Verely (as truly as the LORDE the
God of Israel lyueth, which hath hyndred me that I shulde do the no euell) Yf thou haddest not met me in all the haist, Nabal shulde not hane had lefte him vntyll y lighte mornynge, so moch as one that maketh water agaynst the wall. So Dauid toke of hir hade what she had broughte him, and sayde vnto her: Go vpin peace vnto thy house: beholde,
I haue herkened vnto thy voyce, and accepted thy personne.

But whan Abigail came to Nabal, beholde, he had prepared a feast in his house like a kynges feast, and his hert was mery, for he was very dronken. And she tolde him nothinge, nether small ner greate vntyll $ cleare morn- ynge. But whanit was daye,athe wyne wascome from Nabal, his wife tolde him these thinges.

Chap. rrbi, 

The i, boke of the konges. 

&| Then was his hert deed in his body, so that 

he became euen as a stone: and ouer ten dayes the LORDE smote him, so y he dyed.
Whan Dauid herde that Nabal was deed, he sayde: Blessed be LORDE which hath auenged my rebuke on Nabal, and preserued his seruaunt from euell. And the LORDE hath rewarded Nabal that euell vpon his heade.

And Dauid sent, and caused to talke with 
Abigail, y he mighte take her to wife. And whan Dauids seruauntes came to Abigail vnto
Carmel, they spake vnto her, and saide: 
Dauid hath sent vs vnto the, that he maye take y to wife. She rose vp, and worshipped vpon hir face vnto the earth, and sayde: be- holde, here is thy handmayde, that she maie do seruyce vnto the seruauntes of my lorde, and to waszshe their fete. And Abigail made haist, and gat her vp, and rode vpó an asse, and fyue maydens that were vnder her, aud wente after Dauids messaungers, and became his wife. Dauid toke Ahinoam of Iesrael also, and they both became his wyues. But Saul gaue Michol his doughter the wife of Dauid vnto Phalti y sonne of Lais of Gallim.

The rrt. Chapter. 

HEY of Siph came to Saul vnto Gibe- ath, x sayde: *Is not Dauid hyd vpo the hill of Hachila, which lyeth ouer agaynst the wyldernesse? Then Saul gat him vp, and wente downe to the wildernes of Siph, and thre thousande chosen men of Israel with him, to seke Dauid in the wildernes of Siph, and pitched vpon the hill of Hachila, which lyeth by the waye before the wildernes. But
Dauid remayned in the wyldernes, and whan he sawe that Saul came after him in to the wildernes, he sent out spyes, and knewe of a

suertie, that he was come in dede. 

And Dauid gat him vp, and came to the place where Saul had pitched his tet, and sawe the place where Saul laye with his chefe captayne +Abner y sonne of Ner: for Saul laye in the tent, and the hoost aboute him.
"Then auswered Dauid, and sayde vnto Ahime- lech the Hethite, and to Abisai the sonne of
Ieru Ia y brother of Ioab: Who wil go downe with me to Saul in to the hoost? Abisai sayde: I wil go downe with the.

So Dauid and Abisai came to the people in the night season, q beholde, Saul Jaye and

* 1 Re. 23. d. 

11 Re. 14. g. 

slepte in the tent, and his speare stacke in y grounde at his heade. But Abner and the people laye rounde aboute him. Thé sayde
Abisai vnto Dauid: God hath closed thine enemye in thyne hande this daye. Therfore will I now thrust him thorow once with the speare euen in to the grounde, y he shall haue ynough of it. Neuertheles Dauid sayde vnto Abisai: Destroye him not, for who wil laye hande vpon the anoynted of $ LORDE, q remayne vngiltye? Danid sayde morouer:
As truly as the LORDE lyueth, yf ý LORDE him selfe smyte him not, or excepte his tyme come that he dye, or that he go in to the bat- tayll and perishe, the LORDE let it be farre
[fro me, that I shulde laye my hande on the 
| LORDES anoynted. Take y speare now therfore at his heade, q the cuppe of water, q let vs go. So Dauid toke y speare q the cuppe of water at Sauls heade, q they wente
|their waye. And there was no man y sawe it, ner perceaued it, nether awaked, bnt they slepte euery one, for there was a depe slepe fallen vpon them from the LORDE.

Now whan Dauid was come ouer on y other syde, he stode vpon the toppe of the mount a farre of (so that there was a wyde space be- twene them) and eried vpon y people, and vpo Abner the sonne of Ner, q sayde: Hear- est thou not Abner? And Abner answered and sayde: Who art thou that cryest so, and diseasest the kynge? And Dauid sayde vnto
Abner: Art thou not a man? And where is there soch one as thou in Israel? Why hast thou not then kepte thy lorde y kynge? for there is one of y people come in to destroye thy lorde y kynge. [t is not well that thou hast done. As truly as the LORDE lyueth tye are the children of death, because ye haue not kepte youre lorde the LORDES anoynted.
Beholde now, where is y kynges speare, and the euppe of water that was at his heade.

"Then knewe Saul the voyce of Dauid, and saide : $ Is not that thy voyce my sonne Dauid?
Dauid sayde: lt is my voyce my lorde the kynge. And he sayde morouer: Why doth my lorde so persecute his seruaunt? What haue I done? and what euell is there in my hande? Yet let my lorde the kynge heare but

the wordes of his seruaunt? Yf y LORDE|D 

prouoke the against me, let there be smelled a meatofferynge : but yf the childré of men do

11 Re. 20. e. $ 1 Re. 24. d. 

So. eelyrrt. 

D. celrrry. it, cursed be they before the LORDE, be-| cause they haue thrust me out this daye (that
I shulde not dwell in the LORDES inherit- aunce) and saye: Go thy waye, and serue other goddes. So fall not now my bloude vpon the earth from the face of the LORDE.
For the kynge of Israel is gone forth to seke a flee, as a partriche is folowed on vpo the mountaynes.

And Saul sayde: I haue synned: Come agayne Dauid my sonne, I wil do the nomore hurte, because my soule hath bene deare in thy sighte this daye. Beholde, I haue done foolishly and very vnwysely. Dauid answered and sayde: Beholde, here is the kynges speare, let one of the yongemen come ouer here and fetch it. But the LORDE shal rewarde euery one acordinge to his righteousnes and faith, for y LORDE delyuered y this daye in to my hande: neuertheles I wolde not laie my hande vpó the LORDES anoynted. And as thy soule hath bene greatly reputed in my
'sighte this daye, so let y LORDE repute my soule in his sighte, q delyuer me from all trouble. Saul saide vnto Dauid: Blessed be thou Dauid my sonne, thou shalt do it, ¢ be able. But Dauid wente his waye, and Saul turned agayne vnto his place.

The rroij. Chapter. 

AUID thoughte in his hert: One of these dayes shal I fall in to the handes of Saul: It is better that I get me my waye in to y londe of y Philistynes, that Saul maye leaue of from sekynge me in all the coastes of
|Israel, so shall I escape his handes. And he igat him vp, and wente ouer (with the sixe
‘hundreth men that were with him) vnto Achis 
Ithe sonne of Maoch kynge of Gath. So 
| Dauid remayned by Achis at Gath, with his mé, euery one with his housholde, and Dauid with his two wyues, Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse, and Abigail Nabals wife of Carmel. And whan worde came to Saul that Dauid was fled

vnto Gath, he soughte him nomore. 

And Dauid sayde vnto Achis: Yf I haue founde grace in thy sighte, then let there be geuen me a place in one of the cities of the londe, that I maye dwell therin. Wherfore shulde thy seruaunt dwell in the kynges cite with the? Then Achis gaue him Siclag the same daye. Therfore belongeth Siclag to

* 1 Re. 15. b. + Deu. 20. c. 

The i. boke of the Rpnars. 

Chap. rrbij. the kynges of Iuda vnto this daye. ‘The tyme that Dauid dwelt in the londe of the Philis- tynes, is foure monethes.

Dauid wente vp with his men, and fell in] 3 to the londe of the Gessurites and Girsites, and *Amalechites: for these were the inha- biters of this londe of olde, as thou commest to Sur vnto the lode of Egipte. But wha
Dauid smote ¥ londe, the let nether man ner woman lyue, and toke the shepe, oxen, asses,
Camels and rayment, and returned and came to Achis. So whan Achis spake: Whither fell ye in to daye? Dauid sayde: Towarde the south parte of Iuda, towarde y south parte of the Ierahmielites, ¢ towarde the south parte of the Kenites. But Dauid let nether man ner woman come lyuynge vnto Geth, and thoughte: They mighte peraduéture speake a reporte agaynst vs: thus dyd Dauid, and this was his maner as longe as he dwelt in y londe of the Philistynes. Therfore Achis gaue credence vnto Dauid, and thoughte: he hath made him selfe stynke before his people of
Israel therfore shal he be myseruaunt for euer. 

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

IE fortuned at ¥ same tyme, that the Phi-!q 

listynes gathered their hoost together to the battayll, to go agaynst Israel. And Achis sayde vnto Dauid: Thou shalt knowe, that thou and thy men shal go forth with me in the hoost. Dauid sayde vnto Achis: Well, thou shalt se what thy seruant shal do. Achis saide vnto Dauid: Therfore wyll I ordene the to be the keper of my heade as longe as I lyue. As for Samuel, he was deed, and all y people had mourned for him, q buried him in his cite Ramath. $So Saul had dryuen the soythsayers and expounders of tokens out of $ londe. Now whan the Philistynes ga- thered them selues together, and came and pitched their tentes at Sunem, Saul gathered all the people together, q they pitched at
Gilboa. But whan Saul sawe the hoost of the Philistynes, he was afrayed, and his hert was discoraged, and he axed councell at the
LORDE. Buty LORDE gaue him no an- swere, nether by dreames, ner by the lllighte, ner by prophetes.

The sayde Saul vnto his seruauntes: Seke|%3 me a woma which hath a sprete of soyth- sayege, that I maye go vnto her, and axe at
|| Deu. 33. b. 

$1Re.25.a, § Exo. 22. c. 

Chap. rrir. lher. His seruauntes sayde vnto him: Be- holde, at Endor is there a woman, which hath a sprete of soythsayenge. And Saul chaunged his clothes, and put on other, and wente his waye and two men with him, and came by nighte vnto the woman, and sayde: Prophecye vnto me (I pray the) thorow the sprete of soythsayenge, and brynge me him vp whom I shal name vnto the. ‘The woma saide vnto him: Beholde, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath roted out the soythsayers ¢ witches from the londe, wherfore wilt thou brynge my soule then in to y nett, that I maye be slayne? But Saul sware vnto her by $ LORDE, and sayde: As truly as the
LORDE lyueth, there shall no harme happen vnto the for this. Then sayde ý woman:
Whom shal I brynge vp vnto the? He sayde: 
Brynge me vp Samuel. 

Now whan ¥ woman sawe Samuel, she cryed loude, and sayde vnto Saul: Wherfore hast thou begyled me? Thou art Saul. And the kynge sayde vnto her: Feare not, what seist thou? ‘The woman sayde vnto Saul: I se goddes comynge vp out of ý earth? He sayde: How is he shapened? She sayde:
There commeth vp an olde man, and is clothed with a longe garment. Then per- ceaued Saul that it was Samuel, q bowed him selfe downe with his face to the grounde, and worshiped him.

Samuel saide vnto Saul: Why hast thou disquyeted me, to cause me be broughte vp?
Saul sayde: I am sore troubled, the Phi- listynes fighte against me, q God is departed fro me, q geueth me no answere, nether by prophetes ner by dreames: therfore haue I called the, y thou mightest shewe me, what I shal do. Samuel sayde: What wilt thou axe at me, seynge the LORDE is departed from the, and is become thine enemye? ‘The
LORDE shal do vnto the euen as he spake by me, “and shall plucke the kyngdome out of thy hande, and geue it vnto Dauid thy neghboure, because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE, ner per- fourmed the displeasure of his wrath agaynst
Amalek. Therfore hath the LORDE done this now vnto the. Morouer the LORDE shal delyuer Israel with the also in to the handes of the Philistynes: ttomorow shalt thou and thy sonnes be with me. And the

* 1 Re. 15. f. +1 Re. 31. a. ti Par. 137c. 

The t. boke of tbe kpnars. 

hoost of Israel shal the LORDE delyuer in to the handes of the Philistynes. Then feil
Saul immediatly vnto the earth, for he coulde not stonde, and was sore afrayed at these wordes of Samuel, so that there was nomore strength in him: for he had eaten no bred all that daye and all that night.

And the woman wente in to Saul, q sawe that he was sore vexed, and sayde vnto him:
Beholde, thy handmayde hath herkened vnto thy voyce, and I haue put my soule in my hande, so that I haue herkened vnto thy wordes which thou spakest vnto me. "T herfore folowe thou also the voyce of thy handmayde.
I wil set a morsell of bred before the to eate, that thou mayest come to thy strength, q go thy waye. But he refused, and sayde, I wil not eate. Then his seruauntes q the woman copelled him, so that he herkened vnto their voyce.

And he rose vp from $ grounde, and sat vpon the bed. ‘The woman had a fat calfe at home, so she made haist, and kylled it, and toke meell and dyd kneet it, and baked swete cakes, qœ broughte them forth before Saul, q before his seruauntes. And whan they had eaten, they stode vp, and wéte their waye ý nighte.

The priy. Chapter. 

NHE Philistynes gathered all their armies fi together at Aphek. But Israel pitched at Ain in lesrael. And the prynces of the
Philistynes wéte forth with hundreds and with thousandes, but Dauid and his men wéte be- hynde with Achis. Thé sayde the prynces of the Philistynes: What shal these Hebrues do?
Achis saide vnto the: Is not this Dauid y seruaunt of Saul kynge of Israel, which md bene with me now yeares and dayes, ¢ I haue founde no euell in him sence the tyme that he fell to me vnto this daye? + Neuertheles the prynces of y Philistynes were wroth at him, q sayde vnto him: Let the man turne backe agayne, q abyde in his place, $ which thou hast appoynted him, that he go not downe with vs to y batayll, and become oure aduersary in y felde. For wherin coulde he better do his lorde a pleasure, the in the heades of these men? Is not this Dauid, of whom they sunge in the daunce: || Saul hath smytté his thousande, but Dauid his ten

$1Re.27.a. || 1 Re. 18. b. and 21. d. 

Fo. celyrritj. 

Fo. celyrrity. thousande? Then Achis called Dauid, and sayde vnto him: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, I take the for an honest man, and thy out goynge and ingoynge with me in y hoost pleaseth me well, and no euell haue I marked in the, sence y tyme that thou camest to me vnto this daye. But thou pleasest not the prynces. Returne now therfore, and go thy waye in peace, that thon do no cuell in the sighte of the prynces of ý Philistynes.

Dauid sayde: What haue I done, q what hast thou marked in thy seruaunt, sence y tyme that 1 haue bene in thy presence vnto this daye, that I shulde not come and fighte agaynst the enemies of my lorde the kynge ?
Achis answered and sayde vnto Dauid: I knowe well that thou pleasest myne eyes eue as an angell of God. But the prynces of y
Philistynes haue sayde: Let him not go vp with vs vnto the batayll. Get the vp therfore tomorow by tymes, and thy lordes sernauntes which are come with the. And whan ye haue gotten you vp early in the mornynge, whan it is lighte, go youre waye. So Dauid q his men gat them vp early, to go their waye in the mornynge, and to come agayne in to the londe ofthe Philistynes. But the Philis- tynes wente vp towarde lesrael.

The rrr. Chapter. 

OW whan Dauid came to Siclag on the thirde daie with his men, the Amalech- ites had falle in on Y south parte and at Siclag, and had smytten Siclag, and burned it with fyre, and had caried awaye the wemé out of it, both small ¢ greate. Neuertheles they had slayne no man, but dryuen thé thence, and were goynge on their waye. Now whan Dauid with his men came to the cite, and sawe that it was brent with fyre, and that their wyues, sonnes t doughters were led awaye captyue,
Dauid and the people that was with him lefte vp their voyce, and wepte so longe tyll they coulde wepe nomore. For Dauids two wyues also were caried awaye captyue, Ahinoam y lesraelitisse, and Abigail Nabals wife of Car- mel. And Dauid was very soroufull, for the people wolde haue stoned him: for y soule of all the people was in greate heuynes, euery

one ouer his sonnes and doughters. 
Neuertheles Dauid strengthed him selfe in the LORDE his God, q sayde vnto Abiathar

*1 Re: Zan. 

The t. boke of the kynges. 

n 

prest the sonne of Ahimelech: *Bringe me hither the ouerbody cote. And whan Abiathar had broughte the ouerbody cote vnto Dauid,
Dauid axed at the LORDE, and sayde: Shal 
I folowe vpon the men of warre, and shal I ouertake them? He sayde: Yee, folowe vpo them thou shalt ouertake them, and shalt rescue the pray. ‘Then wente Dauid his waye, and the sixe hudreth men that were with him.
And whan they came to the ryuer of Besor, some stode styll. But Dauid and the foure hundreth men folowed after: As for the two hüdreth men that stode styll, they had bene slowe to go ouer the ryuer of Besor.

And they founde a man of Egipte vpon the felde, him they broughte vnto Dauid, tq gaue him bred to eate, and water to drynke, and gaue him a quantite of fygges, q two quantities of rasyns. And whan he had eaten, his sprete came to him againe: for in thre dayes and thre nightes he had eate no bred, and dronke no water.

Dauid sayde vnto him: Whose art thou? q whence art thou? He sayde: Iam a childe of Egipte, an Amalechites seruaunt, ¢ my master hath forsaken me, because I was sicke thre dayes a goo. We fell here in towarde y south syde of Chrethus, and vpon Iuda, and towarde y south parte of Caleb, q haue burned
Siclag with fyre. 

Dauid sayde vnto him: Wilt thou bringe ine downe to these men of warre? He sayde:
Sweare vnto me by God, y thou shalt not slaye me, ner delyner me in to my masters hade, and I wil brynge the downe to these mé of warre. And he broughte thé downe, and beholde, they were scatred vpon all y grounde, eatinge and drynkynge, and kepynge holy daye, and were makinge mery chere, be- cause of all the greate spoyles that they had taken out of the londe of the Philistynes and of Iuda.

And Dauid smote them from ¥ morow tyll| B 

the euen, agaynst the nexte daye, so that there escaped none, excepte foure hundreth yonge men, which rode vpon camels, q fled.
So Dauid rescued all that the Amalechites had taken, and his two wyues, q there myssed nothinge, nether small ner greate, nether sonnes ner doughters, ner spoyles: and what so euer they had taken, Dauid broughte all agayne. And Dauid toke the shepe and oxé,

t Prou. 25. d. 

Chap. rr. 

a 

Chap. rrri and droue y catell before him. And they sayde: This is Dauids spoyle.

And whan Dauid came to the two hundreth men, which had bene slowe to folowe after
Dauid, and abode at the ryuer of Besor, they wente forth to mete Dauid, and the people y was with him. And Dauid came to the people, and saluted them frendly.

E| Then answered soch men as were euell q 
Belials men (amonge them that had gone with 
Dauid) and sayde: Seynge they wente not with vs, they shal haue none of the spoyles that we haue rescued: but let euery ma take his wife q his children and be goynge.

Then sayde Dauid: Ye shall not do so (my brethren) with that which y LORDE hath geuen vs, and hath preserned vs, and delyuered these men of warre (which were come agaynst vs) in to oure hàdes. Who shulde cosente vnto you herin? like as the porcion is of them that wente downe to the battayll, so shal y porcion be of them also that a bode with the stuffe, q shalbe deuyded a lyke.

J| From that tyme forth hath this bene an ordinaunce q lawe in Israel vnto this daye.
And whan Dauid came to Siclag, he sent of the spoyle vnto the Elders in luda his negh- bours, and sayde: Beholde, there haue ye the blessynge out of the spoyle of the enemies of the LORDE, namely vnto them of Bethel, vnto them at Ramath in the south, vnto them at lathir, vnto them at Aroer, vnto them at
Siphamoth, vnto them at Eschemoa, vnto them at Rachal, vnto them in the cities of the
Ierahmielites, vnto them in the cities of the 
Kenites, vnto them at Horma, vnto thé at 
Borasan, vnto thé at Atach, vnto them at 
Hebron, and vnto all the places where Dauid had walked with his men.

The rrr. Chapter. a UT y *Philistynes foughte against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before the

* 1 Par. 11.a. 

The ende of the first boke of the kynaes, otherwpse called the first boke of Samuel.

The i, boke of the kynges. 

fo. celyrrd. 

Philistynes, and fell downe smytten vpon the mount Gilboa. And the Philistynes preassed vpon Saul and his sonnes, and slewe Ionathas, a Abinadab and Malchisua the sonnes of Saul.
And the battayll was sore agaynst Saul, q the archers fell vpon him with bowes, and he was sore wounded of the archers,

Then sayde Saul vnto his wapébearer : 
Drawe out thy swerde, and thrust it thorow me, that these vncireumcised come not and slaie me, and make a langhinge stocke of me.
Neuertheles his wapenbearer wolde not, for he was sore afrayed. Then toke Saul y swerde, and fell therin. Now whan his wapen- bearer sawe that Sanl was deed, he fell also vpon his swerde, and dyed with him. Thus dyed Saul and his thre sonnes, q his wapen- bearer, and all his men together the same daye.

Whan y men of Israel which were beyonde the valley, and beyonde Iordane, sawe, y the men of Israel were fled, and that EU and his sonnes were deed, they lefte $ cities, and fled also. Then came the Philistynes, « dwelt therin.

+On the nexte daye came the Philistynes to spoyle ¥ slayne, and founde Saul and his thre sonnes lyenge vpon mount Gilboa, and smote of his heade, and toke of his harnesse, and sent it in to the lande of the Philistynes rounde aboute, to shewe it in the house of their Idols, and amonge the people, q layed his harnesse in y house of Astaroth: but his body hanged they vp vpo the wall of Bethsan.

Whan they of labes in Gilead herde, what the Philistynes had done vnto Sanl, they gat them vp, as many as were men of armes, and wente all the nighte, and toke y body of Saul, and the bodies of his sonnes from y wall of
Bethsan, broughte the to labes, fand brent them there, and toke their bones, and buried them vnder y tre at labes, q fasted seuc dayes.

+1 Par. 11. b. t Iere. 34. a. 

a a E 
| 

| 

The seconde boke of the Kpunges, otherwyse, called the seconde boke of Samuel.

Chat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. Chap. X. 
The death of Saul is shewed vnto Dauid, which | Dauid sendeth messaungers to the kynge of the mourneth for him. Ammonites, which putteth the to shame: wherfore Dauid goeth agaynst them, and wyn-
Chap. IH. neth the victory of them two tymes. 
Dauid is anoynted kynge of the men of Iuda. Chap. XI. 

Abner goeth aboute to make Iszboseth Sauls 

sonne kynge of Israel. Dauid comitteth aduoutry with Bethseba, and 

| causeth hir huszbade be slayne. 
| iscorde betwi Me E Sal Mia 
| Discorde Betwte o a | The prophet Nathan rebuketh Dauid, which knowlegeth his synne, and requyreth mercy.
His sonne dyeth. 

Chap. XIII. 

Chap. HII. 
‘Iszboseth is stickte of traitours whom Dauid quc Thamar, therfore Absniouise 

putteth to death. 

| Abner lyeth with Sauls concubyne, is reproued therfore, and falleth vnto Dauid. Ioab stycketh
| Abner. 

Chap. XIII. 

Chap. V. Ioab reconcyleth Absalom vnto his father with 
Dauid taketh iu all the kyngdome, and ouer- suttyltie. Absalom sendeth for Ioab, and be- commeth the Philistynes on euery syde. cause he cometh not to him, he burneth vp his
Chap. VI. corne. 
Dauid causeth the Arke of the LORDE to be Chap. XV. 

caried out of Abinadabs house in to the house | Absalo seketh his fathers kyngdome. Dauid of Obed Edo. Vsa is punyshed for touchinge flyeth with his men.

it. Dauid carieth it iu to his cite. Chap. XVI. 

Chap. VII. Dauid geueth Siba all the good of Mephiboseth : 
|Dauid is forbydde to buylde an house vnto the Semei curseth and blasphemeth Dauid. Ab- 
| LORDE, vnto whom he geueth thankes. salom lyeth with his fathers concubynes. 

Chap. VIIL Chap. XVII. 

Dauid subdueth the Philistynes and other mo The LORDE turueth the councell of Achitophel. aboute him The councell of Chusai goeth forth.
| Chap. IX. Chap. XVIII. 

Dauid sheweth fauoure to Sauls kinred, and doth | Dauids hoost wyuneth the victory. Absalom is the good for Ionathas sake. slayne. Dauid his father is soroufull.

Chap. f. 

d 

Chap. XIX. 

Joab rebuketh the kinge for his mournynge. 
Israel flyeth in to their tetes. Juda cleueth vnto Dauid. Semei and Mephiboseth optayne fauoure. Barsillai sheweth the kynge greate frendshippe.

Chap. XX. 

Seba maketh an vproure, and deuydeth Israel from Dauid. Joab stycketh Amasa. Joab foloweth vpon Seba, and laieth sege vnto him in Abela.

Chap. XXI. 

A greate honger. Sauls childre are geue vnto the 
Gibeonites. Dauid fighteth agaynst the Phi- listynes.

The first Chapter. 

FTER ý death of Saul whan Dauid 
A was come agayne from the “slaughter of y Amalechites, and had remayned two dayes at Siclag, beholde, on the thirde daye there came a man out of Sauls hoost, with his clothes rente, and earth vpon his heade. And whan he came vnto Dauid, he fell downe to the grounde, and worshipped. Dauid sayde vnto him: Whence commest thon? He sayde vnto him: Out of the hoost of Israel am I fled. Dauid sayde vnto him: Tell me, what is the matter? He sayde: the people is fled from the battayll, and many of the people are fallen: Yee and Saul also is deed and his sonne Ionathas. Dauid sayde vnto the yonge ma that brought him this worde: How know- est thou that Saul and Ionathas his sonne are deed? The yonge man y tolde him this, sayde: I came by chaunce vnto mount Gel- boa, and beholde, Saul leaned vpon his speare, a the charettes and horsmé folowed harde after him: and he turned him aboute, and sawe me, and called me. And I sayde:
Here, am I. And he sayde vnto me: What art thou? I sayde vnto him: I am an Ama- lechite. And he saide vnto me: Come to me, and kyll me, for anguysh hath gotten holde of me: for my life is yet whole within me. ‘Then stepte I to him and slewe him, for I knowe well that he coulde not lyue after his fall. And I toke the crowne from his

a 1 Re. 30. d. * 2 Reg. 3. f. and 13. f. 

The ij. boke of the kynges. | 

Chap. XXII. 

Dauid prayseth the LORDE with a songe of thankesgeuynge, because he delyuered him out of the hande of Saul and other enemies.

Chap. XXIII. 

The last wordes of Dauid. The names of the 
Worthies are rehearsed. 

Chap. XXIII. 

Dauid nobreth the people, and displeaseth the 
LORDE, which plageth his londe with the pestilence.

heade, and the armelet fro his arme, and haue broughte it here vnto $ my lorde. Then toke Dauid holde of his clothes, * and rente them, and so dyd all the mé that were with him, ¢ mourned, and wepte, and fasted vntyll the euen, ouer Saul ¢ Ionathas his sonne, and ouer the people of the LORDE, and ouer the house of Israel, because they were fallen thorow the swerde.

And Dauid sayde to the yonge man that broughte him worde: What art thou? He sayde: I am y sonne of a straunger an Ama- lechite. Dauid sayde: How happeneth it that thou wast not afrayed to laye thine hade vpon the LORDES anointed to destroye him? And Dauid sayde vnto one of his yonge men: Come hither, and slaye him. And he smote him that he dyed. Then sayde
Dauid vnto him: Thy bloude be vpon thyne owne heade. t For thy mouth hath spoken against thyselfe and sayde: I haue slayne the anoynted of the LORDE. And Dauid mourned this lamentacion ouer Saul and Io- nathas his sonne, and commaunded to teach the childré of Iuda the bowe. Beholde, it is wrytten in the boke of the righteous.

The Eldest in Israel are slayne vpon the heigth of the. How are the Worthies fallé ?

t Tell it not at Gath: speake not of it in y stretes at Ascalon: lest the doughters of y
EU reloyse, lest the doughters of y vncircumeysed tryumphe.

Ye mountaynes of Gelboa, nether dew ner| Ð 

t Mat. 12.d. Luc, 19. b. 1 Mich. 1. b. 

€ 

Fo. criyyrbij.. 

fo. celerrbtt. 

Cbr ij. boke of the kpnaes. 

Chap. tj. 

rayne come vpo you, nether lode be wherof commeth Heueofferynges: for there is y shylde of the Worthies smytten downe, the shylde of Saul, as though he had not bene anoynted with oyle.

*The bowe of Ionathas fayled not, and tthe swerde of Saul eame not agayne voyde from the bloude of the slayne, and fro the fat of the giauntes.

Saul and Ionathas louely and pleasaüt in their lyfe, and in their deeth were not parted asunder: lighter then Aegles, and stronger then lyons.

Ye doughters of Israel wepe ouer Saul whieh clothed you with purple in pleasures, and decked you with Iewels of golde on youre garmentes.

How are the Worthies fallen so in the bat- tayll? Ionathas is slayne vpon ¥ heigth of the.

I am sory for the my brother Ionathas : thou hast bene very louely vnto me: Thy loue hath bene more speeiall vnto me, then the loue of wemen.

How are the Worthies fallen, and y wea- pens destroyed?

The tj. Chapter. a FTER these actes Dauid taxed at the
LORDE, and sayde: Shall I go vp in to one of the cities of Iuda? And the
LORDE sayde vnto him: Go vp. Dauid sayde: Whither? He sayde: Vnto Hebron.
So Dauid wente thither with his two wyues, 
Ahinoam the lesraelitisse, and Abigail Na- bals wyfe of Carmel. And Dauid broughte vp the men that were with him also, euery one with his housholde, and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron. And ¥ men of Iuda came, and there they anointed him kynge ouer the house of Iuda.

Iabes in Gilead had buried Saul, he sent messaungers vnto them, sayenge: Blessed be ye of the LORDE, that ye haue done soch mercy vpon youre lorde Saul, and haue buried him. The LORDE therfore shewe mercy now and faithfulnes vpon you. And because ye haue done this, I also wyll do you good.
Let youre hade now therfore be comforted, and be ye stronge: for though Saul youre lorde be deed, yet hath the house of Iuda chosen me to be kynge ouer them.

* 1 Re. 13, a. and 14. b. t 1 Re. 15. b. 

And whà it was tolde Dauid, $that they of l 

But Abner the sonne of Ner, which was|B 
Sauls chefe captayne, toke Iszboseth the sonne of Saul, and broughte him thorow the hoost, and made him kynge ouer Gilead, Assuri,
Iesrael, Ephraim, Ben Jamin and ouer all 
Israel. And Iszboseth the sonne of Saul was fourtye yeare olde, whan he was made kynge of Israel, q he raigned two yeares. But the house of Iuda helde with Dauid: lIl The tyme y Dauid was kynge at Hebron ouer the house of Iuda, was seuen yeare aud sixe monethes longe.

And Abner the sonne of Ner wéte forth with the seruauntes of Iszboseth the sonne of
Saul, out of ¥ hoost vnto Gibeon. And Ioab the sonne of Zeru la wéte forth with Dauids seruauntes, and they met together by the pole at Gibeon, and these laye on the one syde of the pole, the other on the other syde. And
Abner sayde vnto loab: Let the yonge mé get them vp, and playe before vs. Ioab sayde:
Let them aryse. "Then gat they them vp, a wente in nombre twolue of Ben lamin on
Iszboseth Sauls sonnes syde, and twolue of 
Dauids seruauntes. And euery one gat another by the heade, and thrust his swerde in his syde, and fell together: therfore is the place ealled Helkath hazurim (that is, the felde of the Worthies) which is at Gibeon.

And there arose a sore harde battayll ther same daye. But Abner and the men of Israel were put to flighte of Dauids seruauntes.
Thre sonnes of Zeru la were there, Ioab, 
Abisaiq Asahel. As for Asahel, he was lighte of fete as a Roo in y felde, q folowed after
Abner, and turned not asyde nether to the righte hande ner to ¥ lefte from Abner.
Then Abner turned him aboute, and sayde: 
Art thou Asahel? He sayde: Yee. Abner sayde vnto him: Go thy waye ether to the righte hande or to the lefte, and get the one of ¥ yonge men, and take his harnesse from him. Nenertheles he wolde not leaue of fro him. Then sayde Abner agayne to Asahel:
Get the awaye fro me, why wilt thou that I smyte the to the grounde? and how darre I lite vp my face before thy brother loab?
Howbeit he wolde not go his waye. 

Then Abner thrust him in with a speare in to his bely, so that the speare wéte out behynde him. And there he fell and dyed before him: and who so eame to the place

t1Re.23.a. 2 Re. 5.c. 

$1 Reg.31.c. ||2 Re.5.a. 

Chap. fij. where Asahel laye deed, stode styll there.
But Ioab and Abisai folowed vpon Abner, till the sonne wente downe. And whan they came to y hyll of Amma, which lieth before
Giah, by y waye to the wildernes of Gibeon, the children of Ben lamin gathered them selues together behynde Abner, and grewe to a multitude, and stode vpon the toppe of an hyll.

3| And Abner called vnto Joab, and sayde: 
Shal the swerde thé deuoure without ende? 
Knowest thou not, that it wyll be bytter at the last? How longe wil it be or thou saie vnto the people, that they leaue of from their brethré? Ioab sayde: As truly as God lyueth yf thou haddest sayde thus daye in the morn- inge, the people had ceassed euery one from his brother. And Ioab blewe the trompet, q all the people stode still, and folowed nomore vpon Israel, nether foughte they eny more.

Abner aud his men wente all that same night ouer the playne felde, and passed ouer lordane, q walked thorow all Bithron, and came to the tentes. loab turned him from
Abner, and gathered all y people together. 
And of Dauids seruauntes there myssed nyne- tene men, and Asahel. But Dauids seruaütes had smytten so amonge Ben lamin and the men of Abner, that thre hundreth and thre score men were deed. And they toke vp
Asahel, and buried him in his fathers graue at Bethleem. And Joab with his men wéte all that nighte: and at the breake of the daie they came vnto Hebron.

The iij. Chapter. a ND there was a longe battayll betwene the house of Saul and the house of
Dauid. But Dauid wente and increased, and the house of Saul wente and mynished. And vnto Dauid were children borne at Hebron.
His firstborne sonne Ammon of Ahinoam the lesraelitisse: the seconde Chileab of Abigail the wyfe of Nabal of Carmel: the thirde
Absalon the.sonne of Maacha the doughter of 
Thalmai kynge of Gessur: the fourth Adonia the sonne of Hagith: the fyfth Saphatia the sonne of Abital: y sixte lethream of Egla
Dauids wife. These were borne vnto Dauid 
; |at Hebron. 
| Now whan it was warre betwene the house of Saul t the house of Dauid, Abner strengthed
Sauls house. And Saul had had a concubyne, 
| 

* 1 Reg. 15. f. and 16. c. 

Che ij. boke of the kpnges, 

whose name was Rispa the doughter of Aia. 

So. celrrrir. 

And Iszboseth sayde vnto Abner: Wherfore| 33 

liest thou with my fathers concubyne ? 

Then was Abner very wroth at these wordes of Iszboseth, and sayde: Am I a dogges heade then, that I agaynst Iuda do mercy vnto the house of Saul thy father, and vnto his brethren and kynsfolkes? and haue not delyuered the in to ý hande of Dauid, and thou layest a trespace to my charge this daye for a womans sake? God do Abner this and that, yf I do not *as the LORDE hath sworne vnto Dauid, that the kyngdome maye be taken fro the house of Saul, and y seate of Dauid set vp ouer Israel and Iuda, from Dan vnto Berseba.
Then coulde he not answere him one worde agayne, he feared him so.

And Abner sent messaungers vnto Dauid, sayenge: Whose is the londe? And sayde:
Make thy couenaunt with me. Beholde, my hande shall be with the, to turne all Israel vnto the.

He sayde: Wel, I wyll make a couenaunt with the, but one thynge I desyre of the, that thou se not my face, excepte thou brynge me first Michol Sauls doughter, whan thou commest to se my face. Dauid sent mes- saungers also vnto Iszboseth the sonne of
Saul sayenge: tGeue me my wyfe Michol, whom I maried with an hundreth foreszkinnes ofthe Philistynes. Iszboseth sent, and caused for to take her from the man iPalthiel the sonne of Lais. And hir huszbande wente with her, and wepte behynde her vuto Bahurim.
Then sayde Abner vnto him: Turne backe agayne, and go thy waye. And he turned backe agayne.

And Abner talked with the Elders in Israel, and sayde: Youre myndes haue bene set afore tyme and longe a goo vpon Dauid, that he mighte be kynge ouer you, do it now therfore, for y LORDE hath sayde of Dauid: I wil delyuer my people of Israel by the hade of
Dauid my seruaunt, from the hande of the 
Philistynes, and from the hande of all their enemies.

Abner spake also before the eares of Ben 
Iamin, and wente to speake before the eares of Dauid at Hebron all that Israel and the whole house of Ben Iamin was contente withall.
Now whan Abner came to Hebron vnto Dauid, 

| and twéty men with him, Dauid made them a 

t 1 Re. 18, g. t1 Re. 25. g. 

40 

€ 

B 

po. cere. 

feast. And Abner sayde vnto Dauid: I wyll get me vp, and go gather all Israel together to my lorde the kynge, and that they maye make a couenaunt with the, that thou mayest be kynge, at thy soules desyre.

So Dauid let Abner go from him in peace. 
And beholde, Dauid seruatites and Ioab came from the men of warre, and broughte a greate spoyle with them. And Abner was not now with Dauid at Hebron, for he had sent him from him, so that he was gone his waye in peace.

£| But whan Ioab and all the hoost with him 

was come, it was tolde him that Abner the sonne of Ner came to the kynge, and how he had sent him fro him, so that he was gone his waye in peace. ‘Then wente Ioab in to the kynge, and sayde: What hast thou done?
Beholde, Abner came to the, why hast thou sent him from the, that he is gone his waye ?
Knowest thou not Abner the sonne of Ner? 
For he came to the to disceaue the, that he mighte knowe thy ontgoynge, and ingoynge, and to spie out all that thou doest. And whan
Ioab wente out from Dauid, he sent messaügers after Abner, to fetch him agayne from Bohar- sira, and Dauid knewe not therof. Now whan
Abner came agayne vnto Hebron, Ioab brought him in to ¥ middes vnder y gate, to talke with him secretly, and thrust him there iu to bely that he dyed, becanse of his brother
Asahels bloude. 

#| Whan Dauid knewe of it therafter, he sayde: 

I am vngiltye, and so is my kyngdome for ener before the LORDE concernynge the bloude of Abner ¥ sonne of Ner: but vpon the heade of Ioab fall it, and vpon all his fathers house, and in the house of Joab there ceasse not one to haue a renninge yssue and a leprosy, and to go vpon a staffe, and fall thorow the swerde, and to haue scarnesse of bred. ‘Thus Ioab and his brother Abisai slewe Abner, * because he had slayne their brother Asahel in the battaill at Gibeon.

Dauid sayde vnto Ioab and to all $ people y was with him: Rente youre clothes, and gyrde sack cloth aboute yon, and make la- mentacion for Abner. And the kynge wente after the Bere. And whan they buryed Abner at Hebron, the kynge lifte vp his voyce, and wepte besyde Abners graue, and all the people wepte also.
6| And the kynge mourned for Abner, and 

CH ED Ro PA E 

The tt. boke of the kpnars. 

sayde: Abner is not deed as a foole dyeth. 
Thy handes were not bounde, thy fete were not vexed with fetters, thou art fallen as a man falleth before wicked vnthriftes. Then all the people bewayled him yet more.

Now whan all the people came in to eate with Dauid, whyle it was yet hye daye, Dauid sware, and sayde: God do this and that vnto me, yf Í taist ether bred or oughte els afore the Sone go downe. Andall $ people knewe it, and it pleased them well all that ¥ kynge dyd in the sighte of all the people. And all the people and all Israel perceaned the same daye, that it came not of the kynge, that
Abner the sonne of Ner was slayne. And the kynge sayde vnto his seruauntes: Knowe ye not that this daye a prynce and a greate man is fallen in Israel? As for me, I am yet but tender and anoynted kynge. But the men the children of Zeru Ia are to harde for me.
The LORDE recompence him that doth euell, acordinge to his wickednes.

The iij. Chapter. 

1 Ñ THAN Sauls sonne herde y Abner was deed at Hebron, his hades were feble,

t all Israell was sory. But there were two men captaynes ouer the soudyers vuder the sonne of Saul, the one was called Baena, the other Rehob, sonnes of Rimon y Berothite, of the childre of Ben Iamin: for Beroth was conted also in Ben Jamin. And the Be- rothites were fled vnto Gethaim, q were straugers there vnto this daye. Jonathas also the sonne of Saul had a sonne which was lame on his fete, x was fyue yeare olde whan the rumoure of Saul and Ionathas came from lesrael. And his norse toke him, and fled.
And whyle she made haist and fled, he fell, andwaslame: And his name was Mephiboseth.
'Then wente the sonnes of Rimon $ Be- rothite, Rehob x Baena, q came to the house of Iszboseth, in the heate of the daye, a he laye vpo his bed at the noone daie. And they came in to the house to fetch wheate, q thrust him in the bely, x gat them awaye.
For wha they came in to ý house, he laye vpo his bed in his chamber, a they stickte him to death, x smote of his heade, and toke his heade, and departed by the waye of the playne felde all that nighte, and broughte the heade of Isboseth to Dauid vnto Hebron, and sayde

vnto the kynge: Beholde, there is the heade 

Chap. iiij, 

a 

Chap. b. 

of Iszboseth the sonne of Saul thine enemye, which layed wayte for thy soule. This daye hath the LORDE auenged my lorde the kynge of Saul and his sede.

Then answered Dauid vnto Rehob and 
Baena his brother, y sonnes of Rimon y Be- rothite, t sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, which hath deliuered my soule out of all trouble, *1 toke him y brought me worde and sayde: Saul is deed, and he thoughte he had bene a good messannger, and at Siclag I put him to death, vnto whom I shulde haue geuen a rewarde for his message. And these vngodly personnes haue slayne a righteous man iu his owne house vpon his bed. Yee shulde not I requyre his bleude of youre handes, and take you awaye from y earth?
And Dauid commaunded his yonge men, which slewe them, and smote of their handes and fete, and hanged them vp by y pole at
Hebron. But the heade of Iszboseth toke they, and buried it tin Abners graue at Hebron.

The b. Chapter. 

ND all the trybes of Israel came to 
Dauid vnto Hebron, and sayde: t Be- holde, we are thy bone and thy flesh. And afore tyme wha Saul was kynge ouer vs, thou leddest Israel out and in. So the LORDE hath sayde: Thou shalt kepe my people of
Israel, and shalt be the duke ouer Israel. 
And all the Elders in Israel came to y kynge vnto Hebron. And kynge Dauid made a eonenaunt with them at Hebron before y
LORDE. And they anoynted Dauid to be kynge ouer Israel. Thyrtie yeare olde was
Dauid whan he was made kynge, and reigned fortye yeares. §At Hebron raigned he seué yeares and sixe monethes ouer Juda: but at
Ierusalem he reigned thre and thirtie yeares ouer all Israel and Inda.

And the kynge wente with his men to 
Ierusalem, agaynst the lebusites, which dwelt in the londe. Neuertheles they sayde vnto
Dauid: Thou shalt not come hither but the blynde and lame shal dryue y awaie. (They thoughte planely, that Dauid shulde not come in) Howbeit Dauid wanne the castell of
Sion, which is the cite of Dauid. Then sayde 
Dauid the same daye: || Who so euer smyteth the Iebusites, and optayneth the perquellies,

* 2 Re. 1. c. t 2 Reg. 3. f. f1 Par. 12. a. 

IP as eh eas 

§ 2 Re. 2. b. 

Che ije boke of the kpnges. 

the lame q the blynde, which (lebusites) 
Dauids soule hateth. Herof cometh the pro- uerbe: “Let no blynde ner lame come in to the house. So Dauid dwelt in ¥ castell, and called it the cite of Dauid. And Dauid builded ronde aboute fro Millo and within.
And Dauid grewe, q the LORDE the God 
Zebaoth was with him. 

And Hiram the kynge of Tyre sent mes- saungers vnto Dauid, ^and Ceder trees for walles, and Carpenters, and Masons, to builde
Dauid an house. And Dauid knewe, that the LORDE had confyrmed him kynge ouer
Israel, and exalted his kingdome for his peo- ple of Israels sake. And Dauid toke yet mo wyues and concubynes at Ierusalem, after he was come from Ilebron, and there were yet mo sonnes q doughters borne vnto him. 1 And these are the names of them that were borne vnto him at lerusalem: Samma, Sobab, Na- than, Salomon, Jebehar, Elisua, Nepheg,
Japhia, Elisama, Eliada, Eliphalet. 

And whan the Philistines herde that Dauid was anoynted kinge ouer Israel, they wéte vp all to seke Dauid. Whan Dauid perceaued that, he wete downe in to a castell. But the
Philistynes came and scatered them selues beneth in the valley of Rephaim. ** And
Dauid axed at the LORDE, and sayde: Shal 
I go vp agaynst the Philistynes? and wylt thou delyuer them in to my hande? The
LORDE sayde vnto Dauid: Go vp, I wyll delyuer the Philistynes in to thy hande.

Fo. etyrt. 

c 

And Dauid came vnto Baal Prazim, and|33 

smote the there, and sayde: The LORDE hath deuyded myne enemies, euen as the wa- ters parte asunder : therfore is the same place called Baal Prazim. And they lefte their ymages there, but Dauid and his men caried the awaye.

Neuerthelesse the Philistynes wente vp agayne, and scatered them selues beneth in

the valley of Rephaim. And Dauid axed atj 

the LORDE. ‘The LORDE sayde: Thou shalt go vp, but compase them behinde, that thou mayest be vpon them ouer agaynst the
Peer trees: and whan thou hearest vpon the toppe of the Peertrees, the sounde of the goinge be bolde, for then is the LORDE gone forth before the, to smyte the hoost of the Philistines. Dauid dyd as the LORDE

? Leui. 21. c. * 1 Par. 15. a. 
** 1 Re. 23. a, 

41 Par. 3. a. 
2 Re. 2. a. and 5. d. 

fo. rcr. commaunded him and smote the Philistynes from Geba, tyll thou commest vuto Gaser.

The bi. Chapter. 
ND Dauid gathered agayne all the yonge chosen men in Israel, “euen thre thou- sande, and gat him vp, and wente with all the people that was with him of the citesins of luda, to fetch vp the Arke of God from thence: whose name is: The name of the
LORDE Zebaoth dwelleth theron betwene the Cherubins. * And they caused the arke of God to be caried vpo a new cart, tand fetched it out of y house of Abinadab, which dwelt at Gibea. Vsa and Ahio the sonnes of
Abinadab drouc y new cart. And whan they broughte it with the Arke from the house of
Abinadab which dwelt at Gibea, Ahio wente before the Arke: and Dauid and all the house of Israel played before the LORDE, with all maner of instrumentes of Pine tre, with harpes, and Psalteries, and tabrettes, and belles, and
Cymbals. 

+ And whan they came to the barnefloore of 
Nahon, Vsa stretched out his hande, $and helde the Arke of God, for the oxen wéte out asyde. Then waxedthe wrath ofthe LORDE fearce agaynst Vsa, and God smote him there because of his presumpcio, so that he dyed there besyde the Arke of God. "Then was
Dauid sory, because the LORDE had made soch a rente vpon Vsa, and he called the same place Perez Vsa vnto this daye. And Dauid feared the LORDE the same daie, and sayde:
How shall the Arke of the LORDE come vnto me? And he wolde not let it be bronghte to him in to the cite of Dauid, but caused it be brought in to ¥ house of Obed Edom the
Gathite. And whan the Arke ofthe LORDE had contynued thre monethes in the house of
Obed Edom the Gathite, the LORDE blessed him and all his house.

And it was tolde kynge Dauid, that the 
LORDE had blessed the house of Obed Edo and all that he had because of the Arke of
God. | Then wente he, and fetched vp the 
Arke of God ont of y house of Obed Edom in to the cite of Dauid with ioye. And whà they were gone sixe steppes in with the Arke of the LORDE, they offered an oxe and a fat shepe. And Dauid daunsed with all his mighte before the LORDE, and was girded with an

41Par.ida. *1Reg.é.c. +1 Reg.7.a. +1 Pa.ld.b. 

Cbr dj. boke of the kpynages. 

ouerbody cote of lynné. And Dauid with all 
Israel brought vp y Arke of the LORDE with tabrettes and trompettes.

Chap. bi! 

And whan the Arke of the LORDE came|33 

in to the cite of Dauid, Michol the doughter of Saul loked out at a window, and sawe kynge
Dauid leapynge, sprynginge and daüsynge before the LORDE, and despysed him in hir hert. But whan they brought in y Arke of the LORDE, they set it in hir place in the myddes of the Tabernacle, which Dauid had pitched for it. And Dauid offred burnt offer- ynges and deed offerynges before y LORDE.
And whan Dauid had made an ende of offer- ynge the burntofferynges and deedofferynges, he blessed the people in the name of the
LORDE Zebaoth, and dealte out vnto all the people, and to the multitude of Israel, both to man q woma, vnto euery one a cake of bred, and a pece of flesh, and a meece of potage. Then wente all the people their waye, euery one vnto his house.

Whan Dauid came agayne to blesse his house, Michol the doughter of Saul wente forth to mete him, and sayde: How glorious hath the kynge of Israel bene to daye, which hath vneouered himselfe before the maydes of his seruauntes, like as the rascall people discouer them selues. But Dauid saide vnto
Michol: I wil playe before y LORDE, which hath chosen me afore thy father, and afore all his house, because he hath commaunded me to be the pryuce ouer the people of the
LORDE, euen ouer Israel, and yet wyl I be vyler then so, and wyll be lowe in myne owne sighte: and with the maydens wherof thou hast spoken, wyll I be honoured. As for
Michol the donghter of Saul, she had no childe vnto the daye of hir death.

The bij. Chapter. , 

Ns whan the kynge sat in his house, 

* and the LORDE had genen him rest from all his enemies on euery syde, he sayde vnto the prophet Nathan: Beholde, I dwell in a house of Cedre, and the Arke of God dwelleth amonge the curtaynes. Nathan sayde ynto the kynge: Go thy waye, what so euer thou hast in thine hert, y do: for the
LORDE is with the. But the same nighte came ¥ worde of the LORDE vnto Nathan, q sayde: Go q speake to my seruañt Dauid :
§ Num. 4. b. and 7. b. 

|| 1 Pa. 16. a. q 1 Par. 18. a. 

a 

B 

Chap. büj. 

Thus sayeth y LORDE: Shalt thou buylde me an house to dwell in? I haue dwelt in no house sence the daye that 1 broughte the children of Israel vnto this daye, but haue walked in the Tabernacle and Habitacion, whither so euer I wente with the children of
Israel. Dyd I euer speake to eny of the trybes of Israel (whom I commaunded to kepe my people of Israel) q sayde: Wherfore do ye not buylde me an house of Ceder wodd ?

So shalt thou speake now vnto my seruaunt 
Dauid: Thus sayeth the LORDE Zebaoth : 
*] toke the from the pasture whan thou wentest behynde the shepe, ý thou shuldest be y prynce ouer my people of Israel, q haue bene with the whither so euer thou wentest, q haue roted out all thine enemies before the, q haue made the a greate name, acordinge to the name of the greate men vpon earth. And for my people of Israel I wyll appoynte a place, and wyll plante them, that they maye remayne there, nomore to be remoued, and y the ehildré of wickednes oppresse them no- more, like as afore, and seuce the tyme that I ordeyned Iudges ouer my people of Israel.
And I wyll geue the rest from all thine enemies. And the LORDE sheweth the, that the LORDE wyl make the a house.

t Now whan thy tyme is fulfylled y thou shalt slepe with thy fathers, I wil after y rayse vp thy sede, which shal come of thy body : his kyngdome wyl I stablishe, he shal buylde an house for my name, tand I wyll stablyshe y seate of his kyngdome for euer. $1 wyll be his father, and he shall be my sonne. l| Whan he doth a trespace, I wyll reproue him with the rodd of men and with the plages of y ehildré of men: But my mercy shal not be withdrawen fro him, as I haue withdrawé it fro Saul, who I haue take awaye before the.
As for thy house q thy kyngdome, it shal be stablished for euer before the, ¢ thy seate shal endure fast for euermore.

Whan Nathan had tolde all these wordes q all this vision vnto Dauid, kynge Dauid came and sat him downe before the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE God, who am I? and what is my house, y thou hast broughte me thus farre? This O LORDE God hast thou thoughte to litle also, but hast spoken of the house of thy seruaunt yet loge for to

* 1 Re. 16. c. 
1 Iere. 33. c. 

+3 Re. 5. a. 4 Re. 8. c. Psal. 131. b. 
§ Heb. 1. b. || 3 Re. 11. c. Psal. 88. d. 

Che B. boke of tbe kpuges, 

Fo. cereit, come. O LORDE God, is that the lawe of men?

And what shall Dauid speake vnto the?|33 thou knowest thy seruaunt O LORDE God, for thy wordes sake and acordinge to thy hert hast thou done all these greate thinges, y thou mightest shewe thé vnto thy seruaunt. Ther- fore art thou greatly magnified O LORDE
God: ffor there is none like the, v there is no God but thou, acordinge vnto all that we haue herde with oure eares. ** For where is there a people vpon earth as thy people of
Israel? For whose sake God wente to delyuer him a people, and to make him selfe a name, and to do them soeh greate and terrible thinges in thy lode before thy people, ttwhom thou hast delyuered vnto thy selfe fro Egipte, from the people, and from their goddes. And thy people of Israel hast thou prepared the to be a people vnto thyne owne selfe for euer, and thou O LORDE art become their God.

Stablish now Y worde therfore for euer (O85 
LORDE God) which thou hast spoké ouer thy seruaunt q ouer his house, q do acordinge as thou hast sayde. So shall thy name be greate for euer, so that it shal be sayde: The
LORDE Zebaoth is the God ouer Israel, q the house of thy seruaunt Dauid shal be made sure before the. For thon LORDE Zebaoth, thou God of Israel hast opened the eare of thy seruaunt, and sayde: I wil buylde the an house. Therfore hath thy seruaunt founde his hert, to praye this prayer vnto the. tiNow
LORDE God thou thy selfe art God, q thy wordes shal be the trueth. ‘Thou hast spoken soch good ouer thy seruaunt. Begynne now therfore, and blesse thy seruauntes house, that it maye be before the for euer, for thou
LORDE God thine awne selfe hast spoken it: and with thy blessynge shal thy seruauntes house be blessed for euer.

The biij. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned after this, y Dauid smote y Philistynes,* and discomfited them, and toke the brydell of bondage out of the
Philistynes hande. $$He smote the Moabites also to the grounde, so that he broughte two artes of them to death, and let one parte lyue.
‘Thus the Moabites were subdued vnto Dauid, 

so y they broughte him giftes. 

q Deu. 32. f. 
39. f. 

** Deu. 4, a. 
* | Par. 19, d. 

tt Exo. 14. a. 
$8 Nu. 24. d. 

1t Deu. 

Fo. crrcitij. 
Dauid smote Hadad Eser also the sonne of 
Rehob kynge of Zoba, whan he wéte to fetch his power agayne at y water Euphrates. And of them toke Dauid a thousande q seuen hundreth horsmen, and twenty thousande fote men, and lamed all the charettes, saue an hundreth which he kepte behynde. But the
Siryans came from Damascon to helpe Hadad 
Eser kynge of Zoba. And Dauid smote two and twentye thousande men of the Syrians, and layed people vnto Damascus in Syria.

Thus was Syria subdued vnto Dauid, so that they broughte him giftes: for y LORDE helped Dauid whither so euer he wente. And
Dauid toke y shyldes of golde, which Hadad 
Esers seruauntes had, and broughte them to Ie- rusalem. But from Bethah q Berothai y cities of Hadad Eser toke Dauid very moch Dem

* Whan Thoi the kynge of Hemath herde, that Dauid had smytten all the power of
Hadad Eser, he sent his sonne Ioram vnto 
Dauid to salute him frendly, q to blesse him, because he had foughten with Adad Eser and smytten him (for Thoi had warre with Hadad
Eser) and had Iewels with him of syluer, of golde, and of brasse: which kynge Dauid halowed also vnto y LORDE, with the syluer and golde which he sanctified vnto the
LORDE from all the Heythe, whom he sub- dued, from Siria, fro Moab, from the childré of Ammon, from the Philistynes, fro Amalek, from the spoyle of Hadad Eser y sonne of
Rehob kynge of Zoba. 

Dauid gat him selfe a name also whan he came, tand smote eightene thousande of y
Sirians in $ Salt valley. And he layed people in all Edomea, tand all Edom was subdued vnto Dauid: for the LORDE helped Dauid, whither so euer he wente. Thus was Dauid kynge ouer all Israel. And he executed iudgmente and righteousnes vnto all ¥ people.
$ Ioab y sonne of Zeru Ia was captayne ouer the hoost. Iosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was
Chaunceler. Zadok the sonne of Achitob, a 
Ahimelech the sonne of Abiathar were prestes. 
Seraia was Serybe. Benaia the sonne of loiada was ouer y Chrethians œ Plethians.
And the sonnes of, Dauid were ll prestes. 

The ir. Chapter. 
ND Dauid sayde: Remayneth there yet eny man of Sauls house, that I maye

* 1 Par. 19. b. t 1 Par. 19. c. 1 Gen. 25. c. 
Nu. 24. d, § 2 Re. 20. d. || Some reado : rulers. 

The ij. boke of the kpnges. 

do mercy vpon him for Ionathas sake? ‘There was a seruaunt of Sauls house, named { Siba, whom they called vnto Danid, q the kynge sayde vnto him: Art thou Siba? He sayde:
Yee thy seruaunt. The kynge sayde: Is there yet eny man of Sauls house, y I maye do the mercy of God vpon him? Siba sayde vnto the kynge: ** There is yet a sonne of
Ionathas, lame on his fete. The kynge sayde vnto him: Where is he? Siba sayde vnto y kynge: Beholde, he is at Ladober in $; house of tt Machir y sonne of Ammuel. "Thé sent kynge Dauid thither, & caused for to fetch him from Lodaber out of $ house of Machir the sonne of Ammuel.

Chap. tr. 

Now whan Mephiboseth the sonne of|33 

Ionathas the sonne of Saul came vnto Dauid, he fell vpon his face, q worshiped him. Dauid sayde: Mephiboseth. He sayde: Here am
I thy seruaunt. Dauid sayde vnto him: 
Feare not, for I wyll do mercy vpon the for thy father Ionathas sake, and wil restore vnto the all the londe of thy father Saul: but thou shalt eate bred daylie at my table. He wor- shiped and sayde: Who am I thy seruaunt, that thon turnest the to a deed dogg as I am?
Then the kynge called Siba y seruaunt of 
Saul, and sayde vnto him: All $ hath be- longed vnto Saul q to all his house, haue I geuen to thy lordes sonne. Tyll his londe for him therfore, thou ¢ thy children q seruauntes,
& brynge it in, y it maye be bred for thy lordes sonne, and y he maye enioye it: but Mephi- boseth thy lordes sonne shal eate bred daylie at my table. Siba had fyftene sonnes q twentye seruauntes. And Siba sayde vnto y kynge:
Acordinge vnto all as my lorde the kynge hath commaunded his seruaunt, so shal his seruaunt do. And let Mephiboseth (sayde Dauid) eate at my table, as one of the kynges owne children. And Mephiboseth had a yoge sonne, whose name was Micha. But all y dwelt in the house of Siba, serued Mephibo- seth. As for Mephiboseth him selfe, he dwelt at Ierusalem: for he ate daylie at the kynges table tand was lame on both his fete.
The r. Chapter. 
ND it fortuned after this, that ¥ kynge of the children of Ammon dyed,’ q his sonne Hanun was kynge in his steade. Then sayde Dauid: I wyll do mercy vpon Hanun

** 9 Re. 4. a, tt 2 Re. 17. c. 

Ear: 9. C. 
*1 Par" 90r 

it 2 Reg. 4. a. 

€ 

a 

Chap, rt. The ij. boke of the kpnars. So. rereb, 

wente in to the cite. So Ioab turned agayne from the children of Ammon, q came to lerusalem. And whan the Syrians sawe y they were smytten before Israel, they came together.

And Hadad Eser sent q broughte out y 
Syrians beyonde the water, and conueyed their power in, t Sobath the chefe captayne of
Hadad Eser wente before the. Whan this was tolde Dauid, he gathered all Israel together, q wente ouer Iordane, and came to Helam, a the Syrians prepared them selues against Dauid to fighte with him, howbeit the Syrians fled before Israel. And Dauid slewe of the Syrians seué hundreth charettes, q fortye thousande horsmé, ¢ Sobath the chefe captayne smote he also, so that he dyedthere. Whan the kynges which were vnder Adad Eser, sawe, that they were smytten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and were subdued vnto them.
And the Syrians were afrayed to helpe the children of Ammon eny more.

the sonne of Nahas, as his father dyd mercy vpon me. And so he sent, and comforted him by his seruaŭtes ouer his fathers death.
Now whan Dauids seruaütes came in to the londe of the children of Ammon, the mightie men of the children of Ammon sayde vnto
Hanun their lorde: 'Phynkest thou it is for the honoure of thy father in thy sighte, ý
Dauid hath sent comforters vnto the? Hath he not sent his seruauntes vnto y (thynkest thou) to spye and search out the cite and to ouerthrowe it?

Then toke Hanun the seruauntes of Dauid, and shoue of the one halue of their beerdes, and cut of the halfe of their garmétes euen by the girdell, and so let them go. Wha this was tolde Dauid, he sent to mete them : for the men were put to greate shame. And the kynge caused to saye vnto them: Abyde at
Iericho, tyll youre beerdes be growne, q then come agayne.

Whan the childré of Ammon sawe that they stynked in the sighte of Dauid, they sent and hyred the Sirians of the house of Rehob, and the Sirians at Zoba euen twentye thousande fote men, and from the kynge of Maecha a thousande men, and from Istob twolue thou- sande men. Whan Dauid herde that, he sent
Ioab with all the hoost of $ men of warre. 
And the children of Ammon wente forth, and prepared them selues to y battayll before the intraunce of the gate. But the Siryans of
Soba, of Rehob, of Istob and of Maecha were alone in the felde.

Now whan Joab sawe that the battayll was set vpo him before and behynde, he chose of all the best yonge men in Israel, « prepared him selfe agaynst the Syrians. And the resydue of the people put he vnder the hande of his brother Abisai, that he mighte prepare him agaynst the childré of Ammon. And sayde:
Yf y Syrians be to mightie for me, helpe thou me: but yf the children of Ammon be to mightie for the, I shal helpe the. Take a good corage vnto the, and let ys be stronge for oure people, and for $ cite of oure God: neuertheles the LORDE do what pleaseth him.

And Ioab made him forth with the people that was with him, to fighte agaynst the
Syrians: and they fled before him. And whan the children of Ammon sawe that the
Syrians fled, they fled also before Abisai, q 

The yi. Chapter. 
ND whan $ yeare came aboute what tyme as y kynges vse to go forth, Dauid sent Ioab “and his seruantes with him, and all
Israel, to destroye the children of Ammon, and to laye sege vnto Rabba: but Dauid abode at lerusalem.

And aboute the euétyde it fortuned that 
Dauid arose from his restinge place, q wente vp to ¥ toppe of the kynges palace, and from y toppe he sawe a woman *waszshinge hir selfe, and the woman was of a very fayre bewtye. And Dauid sent, and caused to axe what woman it was, and sayde: Is not that
Bethseba the doughter of Eliam the wife of 
Vrias the Hethite? And Dauid sent mes- saügers, and caused for to fetch her. And whà she was come in vnto him, he laye with her. Neuertheles she halowed hir selfe from hir vnclennes, and turned agayne vnto hir house. And the woma was with childe, and sent, and caused to tell Dauid and to saye: I am with childe. Dauid sent vnto Ioab (say-
ége:) Sende me Vrias $ Hethite. And Ioab sent Vrias vnto Dauid. And whan Vrias came to him, Dauid axed him yf it stode well with Ioab, and with the people and with the battayll.

And Dauid sayde to Vrias: Go downe in|33| 

A Parian * Exo. 2.a. Susan, c. 

ffo. cerchi, 

to thy house, and wash thy fete. And whan 
Vrias wente out of the kynges palace, the kynges gifte folowed him. And Vrias layed him downe to slepe before the kynges palace gate, where all his lordes seruauntes laye, q wente not downe in to his house. Whan worde came to Dauid: Vrias is not gone downe in to his house, Dauid sayde vnto him: Camest thou not ouer the felde? Why wentest thou not downe in to thy house? Vrias sayde vnto
Dauid: The Arke and Israel q Iuda abyde in the tentes: And Ioab my lorde and my lordes seruauntes lye in y felde, and shal I go in to my house to eate and drynke, and to lye with my wife? As truly as thou lyuest, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, 1 wyll not do this thinge. Dauid sayde vnto Vria: Abyde here then to daye, tomorow wil I let the go. So
Vrias abode at Ierusalem the same daye, and the nexte also. And Dauid called him to eate
& drynke before him, q made him dronken. 
And at euen he wente to lye him downe for to slepe vpon his couche with his lordes ser- uauntes, and wente not downe in to his house.

On the morow wrote Dauid a letter vnto 
Ioab, q sent it by Vrias. After this maner wrote he in the letter: Set Vrias in y sorest

arte of y batayll, q turne you behynde him, y he maye be slayne. Now wha Ioab layed sege to the cite, he set Vrias in y place, where he knewe y the mightiest men of Armes were.
And whan the men of the cite fell out and foughte agaynst Ioab, there fell certayne of y people of Dauids seruauntes. And Vrias the
Hethite dyed also. 

Then sent Ioab, and caused to tell ý kynge all the matter concernynge the battayll, and comaunded the messaunger, and sayde: Whan thou hast tolde y kynge all the matter con- cernynge the batayll and seist that he is wroth, and yf the kynge saye vnto the: Wher- fore came ye so nye the cite with the batayll?
Knowe ye not how they vse to shute from the wall? * Who smote Abimelech the sonne of lerubaall? Dyd not a womā cast a pece of a mylstone vpo him from the wall, so that he dyed at Thebez? Why came ye so nye the wall? ‘Then shalt thou saye: Thy seruaunt
Vrias the Hethite is deed also. 

Ð| The messaunger wente his waye, and came and tolde Dauid all together, wherfore Ioab had sent him. And the messaunger sayde

* [ud. 9. h 

The i. boke of the kpnges. 

3 

Chap. rij. 

vnto Dauid: The men preuayled against vs, and fell out vnto vs in to y felde: and we were vpon them harde at the dore of ¥ porte. And the archers shot from the wall vpou thy ser- uauntes, and slewe certayne of the kynges seruauntes: and thy seruaunt Vrias the Hethite is deed also.

Dauid sayde vnto the messaunger: Thus shalt thou saye vnto Ioab: Let not y vexe the, for the swerde consumeth now one now another. Go forth with the battayll against the cite, that thou mayest destroye it, and coforte the men. And whan Vrias wife herde that Vrias was deed, she mourned for hir huszbande. But wha she had made an ende of mournynge, Dauid sent, and caused her be fetched vnto his palace, and she became his wyfe, and bare himasonne. Neuertheles this dede y Dauid dyd, displeased the LORDE.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND the LORDE sent Nathan vnto 
, Dauid. Whan he came to him, he tolde him: There were two men in one cite, the one riche, the other poore. "The riche man had very many shepe and oxen: but the poore man had nothinge saue one litle shepe, which he had boughte, and norished it, so that it grewe vp with him and his children together.
It ate of his bred, and dranke of his cuppe, and slepte in his lappe, and he helde it as a doughter. But whan there came a straunger vnto the riche man, he spared to take of his awne shepe ¢ oxen (to prepare oughte for the straunger that was come vnto him) and toke the poore mans shepe, and prepared it for the man that was come vnto him.

Thé was Dauid wroth with greate displeasure agaynst that man, and sayde vnto Nathan:
As truly as the LORDE lyueth, the man that hath done this, is the childe of death.
+The shepe also shal he make good foure folde, because he hath done soch a thinge, and not spared it.

Then sayde Nathan vnto Dauid: Thou art euen the man. Thus sayeth the LORDE the God of Israel: +I haue anoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel, and delyuered the out of the hande of Saul, and haue geuen the thy lordes house, and his wyues in to thy lappe, and the house of Israel and Iuda haue
I geuen the: and yf that be to litle, I wyl 

t Exo. 22. a. 11 Re. 16. c. 

Chap, rif. The ij. boke of the konges. 

yet do this and that for the also. Wherfore hast thou then despysed the worde of the
LORDE, to do soch euell in his sighte? 
Vrias the Hethite hast thou slayne with the swerde: His wife hast thou taken to be thy wyfe, but him hast thou slayne with y swerde of the children of Ammon.

€| Now therfore shal not y swerde departe from thy house for euer, because thou hast despysed me, and taken the wife of Vrias the
Hithite, to be thy wife. Thus sayeth the| 
LORDE: Beholde, * I wyll rayse vp euell of | thyne awne house, and wyll take thy wyues before thyne eyes, and wyl geue them vnto! thy neghboure, so that he shall lye with thy wyues by Sonne lighte. For thou hast done it secretly, but I wyl do this in the sighte of all
Israel, and by Sonne lighte. 

Then sayde Dauid vnto Nathan tI haue synned vnto the LORDE. Nathan sayde vnto Dauid: So hath the LORDE also taken | awaye thy synne, thou shalt not dye. But for so moch as thou thorow this dede hast! caused the enemies of the LORDE to blas-| pheme, ¥ sonne that is borne vnto the, shall dye the death. And Nathan wente home.
As for the childe which Vrias wife bare vnto 
Dauid, the LORDE smote it, so that it was deedsicke.

B| And Dauid besoughte God for the childe, and fasted, and wente in, and laie all nighte vpon the earth. ‘Then rose the Elders of his house, and wolde haue taken him vp fro the grounde: neuertheles he wolde not, nether ate he with them. Vpon the seuenth daye y childe dyed. And Dauids seruauntes durst not tell him that the childe was deed. For they thoughte: Beholde, whan the childe was yet alyue, we spake vnto him, and he herkened not vnto oure voyce, How moch more shall it greue him, yf we saye: ‘The childe is deed? And Dauid sawe that his seruauntes made a whisperinge together, and perceaued that the childe was deed, and sayde vnto his seruauntes: Is the childe deed? 'They sayde: Yee. ‘Then rose Dauid vp from the earth, and waszshed him selfe, and anoynted him, and put on other garmentes, q wente in to the house of the LORDE, and worshipped.

E| And whan he came agayne, he commaunded to set bred before him, and ate. Then sayde his seruauntes vnto him: What mauer of

* Deut. 28. c. 1 Re. 16. d. + Eccli. 47. c. Psal. 50. a. 

thinge is this that thou doest? Whan the childe was alyue, thou fastedst and weptest : but now that it is deed, thou stodest vp and eatest? He sayde: I fasted and wepte for the childe whan it was yet a lyue, for I thoughte: Who knoweth, peraduenture the
LORDE maye be gracious vnto me, that the childe maye lyue. + But now that it is deed, wherfore shulde I fast? Can I fetch it agayne? I shal go vnto it, but it shall not

come agayne vnto me. And whan Dauid had, 

comforted Bethseba his wife, he wente in vnto her, and laye with her. $ And she bare a sonne, whom he called Salomon. And the
LORDE loued him. Aud he put him vnder the hade of Nathan y prophet, which called him ledidia because of the LORDE.

So Ioab foughte agaynst Rabba of y children of Ammon, and wanne the kynges cite, q sent messangers vnto Dauid, q caused to saye vnto him: |I haue foughte against Rabba, and haue wonne the water cite also. Gather thou therfore the residue of the people together, and laye sege to y cite, and wynne it, that I wynne it not, and haue the name therof. So
Dauid gathered all $ people together, and wente, q foughte agaynst Rabba, and wanne it, and toke their kynges crowne frō his heade
(which in weight had a talente of golde, and precious stones) and was set vpon Dauids heade, and very moch spoyle caried he out of the cite. As for the people that was therin, he broughte thé forth, and layed them vnder yron sawes and hokes and wedges of yron, and burned thé in tyle ouens. Thus dyd he vnto all the cities of the children of Ammon.
Then returned Dauid and all the people vnto 
Ierusalem agayne. 

The rij. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned after this, that Absalom 

y sonne of Dauid had a fayre sister, whose name was Thamar, q Ammon the sonue of Dauid loned her. And Ammon was in greate combraunce, in so moch that he was euen sicke, because of Thamar his sister.
For she was a virgin, and Ammon thoughte it shulde be harde for him to do eny thinge vnto her. But Ammon had a fréde, whose name was lonadab the sonne of Simea Dauids brother. And the same lonadab was a very wyse man, which sayde vnto him: Why art

t Eccli. 38.c. $1 Par.3.a. Matt. 1.8. || 1 Par. 21. a. 

4] 

ffo. crrebíj 

a 

| fo. cerebitj. The ij. boke of the kpnaes, Chap. rt. 

that serued him, and sayde: Put awaye this woman fro me, and locke the dore after her.
And she had a partye garment on: for soch garmentes wayre y kynges doughters whyle they were virgins.

And wha his seruaunt had put hir forth, q lockte the dore after her, Thamar strowed aszshes vpon hir heade, and rente the partye garment which she had vpon her, and layed hir hande vpon hir heade, and wente on, and eryed. And hir brother Absalom sayde vnto her: Hath thy brother Ammon bene with the? Now holde thy peace my sister, it is thy brother, and take not the matter so to hert.

So Thamar remayned a wyddowe in her brother Absaloms house. And whan kynge
Dauid herde of all this, he was very sory. As for Absalom, he spake nether euell ner good to Ammon: but Absalom hated Ammon, because he had forced his sister ‘Thamar.

After two yeares had Absalom shepe clyp- pers at Baal Hazor, which lyeth by Ephraim.
And Absalom called all the kynges children, and came to the kynge, and sayde: Beholde, thy seruaunt hath shepe clyppers, let it please y kynge with his seruauntes to go with his seruaunte. But the kynge sayde vnto Absa- lom: No my sonne, let vs not all go, lest we be to chargeable vnto the.

And he wolde nedes haue had him to go, howbeit he wolde not, but blessed him. Ab- salom sayde: Shall my brother Ammon go with vs then? The kynge sayde vnto him:
Wherfore shall he go with the? "Then was 
Absalom so importune vpon him, that he let 
Ammon and all the kynges childre go with him.

But Absalom commaunded his yonge men, and sayde: Take hede whan Ammon is mery with wyue (and I saye vnto you: Smyte Am- mon, and slaye him) that ye be not afrayed: for I haue commaunded yon, be stronge, and playe the men. So Absaloms yonge men dyd vnto Ammon, as Absalom had com- maunded them. Then stode all the kynges children vp, and euery one gat him vp vpo his Mule, and fled. And whyle they were yet on their waye, the rumoure came to kynge
Dauid, that Absalom had slayne all the kynges children, so that not one of them was lette.

Then stode the kynge vp, and rente his clothes, q layed him downe vpon the earth, and all his seruaütes that stode aboute him,

thon so leane (thou kynges sonne) from daye 

to daye? Mayest thou not tell me? Then sayde Ammon vnto him: I loue Thamar my brother Absaloms sister exceadingly.

33! Ilonadab sayde vnto him: laye the downe vpon thy bedd, and make the sicke. And whan thy father commeth to loke how thou doest, saye vnto him: Oh let my sister Tha- mar come, that she maye fede me, and make a meece of meate before me, that I maye se it, q eate it of hir hande. So Ammon layed him downe, and made him sicke. Now wha the kynge came in to loke how he dyd, Ammon sayde vnto the kynge: Oh let my sister Tha- mar come, and make me a syppynge or two, and that I maye eate it of hir hande. Then sent Dauid for Thamar in to the house, and sayde vnto her: Go thy waye to thy brother
Ammons house, q make him a meece of meate. Thamar wente vnto hir brother

| |Amons house, but he laye in his bed. And she toke floure, and mixte it, and dighte it before his eyes, and made him a syppynge.
And she toke the meece of meate, and poured it out before him: but he wolde not eate.

C| And Ammon saide: Put forth euery man fro me. And euery man wéte forth from him.
Then sayde Ammon vnto Thamar: Brynge 

| |me that meece of meate in to the chamber, 

that I maye eate it of thy hande. Then toke 

Thamar y syppynge that she had made, and 

broughte it vnto Ammon hir brother in to the 

chamber. 

And whan she broughte it vnto him y he mighte eate, he toke holde of her, q sayde

vnto her: Come my sister, lye with me. Ne- 
| uertheles she saide: Oh no my brother, force me not: forso do they not in Israel, do not thou soch foly. Whither shal I go with my shame? And thou shalt be as one of the vn- wyse in Israel. But speake vnto the kynge,
| he shal not withholde me from the. 

3| Howbeit he wolde not herken vnto her, 

| jand onereame her, *and forced her, and laye 

with her. And Ammon hated her excead- ingly, so that the hate was greater then the loue was before. And Ammon sayde vnto

, |her: Vp, and get the hence. 

| She saide vnto him: This euell that thon 

| |thrustest me out, is greater then the other, 

| |that thou hast done vnto me. Neuertheles 
| he herkened not vnto her, but called his boye 

| * Gen. 34. a. Leui. 18, a. 

Chap. riiij. rente their clothes. Then answered Ionadab
Y sonne of Simea Dauids brother, and sayde: 
Js not my lorde thynke that all the yonge men the kynges children are deed, but y Am- mon is deed onely: for Absalom hath kepte it in him selfe sence the daie that he forced his sister Thamar. Therfore let not my lorde the kynge take it so to hert, that all the kynges children shulde be deed, but that Am- mon is deed onely.

@| As for Absalom, he fled. And the yonge 

man that kepte the watch, lifte vp his eyes, and loked, and beholde, A greate people came in the waye one after another by the hill syde.
Then sayde Ionadab vnto the kynge: Beholde, the kynges children come. — Euen as thy ser- uaunt sayde, so is it happened. And whan he had ended his talkynge, the kynges children came, and lifte vp their voyce, and wepte.

The kynge and all his seruauntes wepte also very sore. But Absalom fled, and wente vnto Thalmai the sonne of Ammihud kynge of Gesur. As for Dauid he mourned for his sonne euery daye. Whan Absalom was fled and gone vnto Gesur, he was there thre yeare.
And kynge Dauid ceassed from goinge out agaynst Absalom, for he had comforted him selfe ouer Ammon that he was deed.

The riiij. Chapter. 
OAB the sonne of Ieru Ia perceaued y the kynges hert was agaynst Absalom, and sent vnto 'Thecoa, and caused to fetch from thence a prudent woman and saide vnto her:
Make lamétacion, and weere mournynge gar- mentes, q anoynte the not with oyle: but fayne thy selfe as a woman which hath mourned longe ouer a deed, and thou shalt goin to the kynge, and speake so q so vnto him. And Ioab tolde her what she shulde saye. un whan the woman of 'Thecoa wolde speake with the kynge, she fell vpon hir face to the grounde, and worshipped, and sayde:
Helpe me O kynge. The kynge sayde vnto her: What ayleth the? She sayde: Iam a wedowe, a woman that mourneth, and my huszbade is deed. And thy handmayde had two sonnes, which stroue together in the felde: and whyle there was noman to parte the a sunder, the one smote the other, and slewe him.

* Deu. 19. c. t 1 Re.14. g. 

The ij. boke of the kpnges, 

And beholde, all the whole kynred ryseth vp agaynst thy handmayden, and saye: *De- lyuer him. which hath smytten his brother, that we maye kyll him, for the soule of his brother whom he hath slayne, and that we maye destroye the heyre also. And thus are they mynded to put out my sparke, which yet is lefte, that there shulde no name ner eny thinge els remayne ouer vnto my huszbàde vpon earth.

The kynge sayde vnto the woman: Go thy|33 waye home, I wil geue a comaundemét for y. And the woman of 'Thecoa saide vnto y kynge: The trespace be vpon me (my lorde y kynge) and vpon my fathers house: but the kynge and his seate be vngiltye. The kynge sayde: He that speaketh agaynst the, brynge him vnto me, so shall he touch’ the nomore.
She sayde: Let the kynge thynke vpon the 
LORDE his God, that there be not to many auengers of bloude to destroye, and that they brynge not my sonne to naught. He sayde:
+ As truly as the LORDE lyueth, there shall not one heer of thy sonne fall vpon the earth.
And the woman sayde: Let thy handmayde speake somwhat to my lorde the kynge. He sayde: speake on. ‘The woman sayde: Wher- fore hast thou deuised soch a thinge agaynst the people of God? And how happeneth it that the kynge speaketh soch, to make him- selfe giltie, and causeth not his out lawe to be broughte agayne? For we all dye the death, and as the water that sinkcth in to the earth, which is not taken vp. t And God will not take awaye the lyfe, but vnbethynketh him- selfe, y euen the very outlawe be not cleane thrust out from him.

Thus am I come also to speake this to my |t lorde the kyngein the presence of the people, for thy handmayden thoughte: I wyll speake to the kynge, peraduenture he shall do that his handmayden sayeth, for he shall heare his handmayden, to delyuer me from the hande of all them, that wolde destroye me with my sonne from the enheritannce of God. And thy handmayden thoughte, y worde of my lorde the kynge shall be as a meatofferynge,
$for my lorde the kinge is as an angell of 
God, so that he can heare good and euell, therfore shall the LORDE thy God be with the.

The kynge answered and sayde vnto the 

1 Eze. 18. d. $ 2 Re. 19. e. 

Fo. cercir. | 

Fo. rer. 

woman: Kepe nothynge fro me that I axe the. 'The woman sayde: Let my lorde the kinge speake on. ‘The kynge sayde: Is not the hande of Ioab with the in all this? The woman answered and sayde: As truly as thy soule lyueth (my lorde O kynge.) there is els noman nether at the righte hande ner at y lefte, but euen as my LORDE the kynge hath sayde, for thy seruaunt Ioab hath com- maunded me, and he himselfe hath taughte thy handmayden all these wordes, that I shulde turne this matter of this faszshio, this hath Ioab thy seruaunt done. But my lorde is wyse, as the wyszdome of an angell of God, so that he knoweth all thynges vpon earth.

Then sayde the kynge vnto Ioab: Beholde, 
I haue done this: go thy waye therfore and brynge the childe Absalom agayne. r

Then fell Ioab vpon his face vnto the grounde, and worshipped, and thanked the kynge, and sayde: This daye doth thy ser- uaunt perceaue, that I haue founde grace in thy syghte my lorde the kynge, in that the kynge doth as his seruaunt hath sayde. So
Ioab gat him vp, and wente vnto Gesur, and broughte Absalom to lerusalem. But the kinge sayde: Let him go againe in to his house, and not se my face. Thus Absalom came agayne to his house, and sawe not y kynges face.

But in all Israel there was not so fayre, and so maruelous goodly a man, as Absalom. From the sole of his fote vnto the toppe of his heade there was not one blemysh in him. And whan his heade was rounded (that was comonly euery yeare, for it was to heuy for him, so that it must nedes haue bene rounded) the heer of his heade weyed two hüdreth Sicles after y kynges weight. And vnto Absalom there were borne thre sonnes and one doughter, whose name was Thamar, and she was a woman of a fayre bewtye: So Absalom abode two yeare at lerusalem, and sawe not the kynges face.

And Absalom sent for Ioab, that he mighte sende him to the kynge. And he wolde not come to him. But he sent the seconde tyme, yet wolde he not come. Then sayde he vnto his sernauntes: Ye knowe Ioabs pece of londe that lyeth by myne, and he hath barlye theron: go youre waye therfore and set fyre vpon it. So Absaloms seruauntes sett fyre vpon loabs pece of londe.

The ij. boke of the kpnges. 

Then Ioab gat him vp, and came to Absa- lom in to the house, and sayde vnto him:
Wherfore haue thy seruauntes set fire vpon my pece of londe? — Absalo sayde vnto Ioab:
Beholde, I sent for the, and caused to saye vnto the: Come hither, that I maye sende the to the kynge, and tosaye: Wherfore came
I from Gesur? It were better for me that I were there yet. Let me therfore se the kynges face. But yf there be eny trespace in me, then put me to death. And loab wente in to the kynge, and tolde him. And he ealled Absalom, to come in to the kynge, and he worshipped vpon his face to the grounde before the kynge. And the kynge kyssed Absalom.

The rb. Chapter. 

ND after this it fortuned that Absalom caused to prepare himselfe chearettes and horses, and fyftye men, which were his fote mé. And Absalo gat him vp allwaye early in the mornynge, and stode in the waye by the porte: and whan eny man had a mat- ter which shulde come to the kynge for iudg- ment, Absalom called vnto him and sayde:
Of what cite art thou? Yf he sayde then: thy seruaunt is of one of the trybes of Israel, then sayde Absalom vnto him: Beholde, thy matter is righte and plaine: but there is no-

man appoynted y of the kynge to heare the. 

And Absalom sayde: O who setteth me to be judge in $ londe, that euery man which hath a plee or matter to do in y lawe, might come to me, that I might helpe him to right.
And whan eny man came to him to do wor- shippe q to do him obeisaunce, he put forth his hade, and helde him ç kyssed him. After this maner dyd Absalom vnto all Israel whan they came to the lawe vnto the kynge, and so dyd he steale awaye the hert of y men of
Israel. 

After fortye yeares sayde Absalom vnto the kynge: I wil go and perfourme my vowe at
Hebron, whieh I made vnto the LORDE. 
For thy seruaunt made a vowe, * whan I dwelt at Gesur in Siria, and saide: Whan y
LORDE bryngeth me agayne to Ierusalem, 
I shal do a Gods seruyce vnto the LORDE. 
The kynge sayde vnto him: Go thy waye in peace. And he gat him vp, and wente vnto
Hebron. 

* 2 Re. 13. g. 

Chap. ro. 

3 

Chap. rb. 

But Absalom had sent out spyes in all the trybes of Israel, sayenge: Whan ye heare the noyse of the trompe, saye: Absalom is made kynge at Hebron. There wente with Absa- lom two hundreth men called from Jerusalem, but they wente on symply, and knewe not of the matter. Absalom sent also for Achito- phel (the Gilonyte) Danids counceler, out of his cite Gilo. Now whan he did the sacrifice, the conspiracion was mightie and the people ranne together, and multyplied with Absalom.

Then came one which tolde Dauid, and sayde, that the hert of euery man in Israel folowed Absalom. Dauid sayde vnto all his seruauntes that were with him at lerusalem:
Vp, let vs fle, for here shall be no escapynge for vs before Absalom.

Make haist that we maye be goynge, lest he ouertake vs and catch vs, and dryue some mysfortune vpon vs, and smyte the cyte with the edge of the swerde. Then sayde the kynges seruauntes vnto him: Loke what my lorde y kinge choseth, beholde, here are thy seruauntes. And the kynge wente forth on fote with all his housholde. *But ten concu- bynes lefte he to kepe the house.

And whan the kynge and all the people came forth on fote, they wéte farre from home, and all his seruauntes wente by him, and all the Chrethians and Plethians, and all the
Gethites (euen sixe hundreth men) which were come on fote from Gath, wente before the kynge.

And the kyuge sayde vnto tIthai ý Geth- ite: Why goest thou also with vs? — Turne backe, and byde with the kynge, for thou art a straunger: get the hence agayne vnto thy place. Thou camest yesterdaye, and to daye thou iuperdest to go with vs: As for me, I wyl go whither I can: turne thou backe agayne, and mercy and faithfulnes happen vnto thy brethren with the. Ithai answered, and sayde, t As truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as my lorde the kynge lyueth, loke in what place my lorde the kynge shalbe, (whether it chaunce to life or death) there shal thy seruaunt be also.

3:| Dauid sayde vnto Ithai: Then come, and 

go with vs. So wente Ithai the Gethite and all his men, and the whole multitude of the children that were with him. And all the lande wepte with loude voyce, and all the

* 2 Re. 16. d. and 20. a. t 2 Re. 18. a. t Ruth 1. c. 

Cbr ij. boke of the kynges. fo. erri.) 

people with them. And the kynge wéte ouer the broke Cedron, and all the people wente ouer by the waye that goeth to the wyldernes.

And beholde, Sadoc was there also, and all the Leuites that were with them, q they bare y Arke of the couenatit of God, and set it there. And Abiathar wente vp, tyll all the people came out of the cite. But the kynge sayde ynto Sadoc: Brynge the Arke of God in to the cite agayne. Yf I shal fynde grace before the LORDE, he shall fetch me agayne, and shall let me se it, and the house of it.
But yf he saye thus: I haue no pleasure to y, beholde, here am I, let him do with me as it pleaseth him.

And the kynge saide vnto Sadoc y prest: | Jf. 
O thou $Seer, turne agayne to y cite with peace, and Ahimaas thy sonne with the and lonathas the sonne of Abiathar: beholde, I wyl tary in the playne of the wyldernes, tyll the message come from you, and tell me. So
Sadoc and Abiathar broughte the Arke of 
God agayne to lerusalem, and remayned there.

But Dauid wente vp to mount Olynete and wepte, q his heade was couered. And all the people that was with him, had euery man his heade couered and wente on and wepte. And whan it was tolde Dauid, that Achitophel was in the eofederacy with Absalom, he sayde:
LORDE turne thou Achitophels councell to foolishnes.

And whan Dauid came vp to the toppe of| 65 the mount, where the vse was to worshippe
God, Chusai the Arachite met him with his cote rent, and earth vpon his heade. And!
Dauid sayde vnto him: Yf thou go with me, thou shalt be chargeable vnto me : but yf thou goest agayne in to the cite, and sayest vnto
Absalom: I am thy seruaunt O kynge euen as I was thy fathers seruaunt, so wyll I now be thy seruaunt, Then shalt thou brynge
Achitophels councell to naughte. So is Sadoc and Abiathar y prestes with the, aud all that thou hearest out of the kynges house, tell it vnto Sadoc and Abiathar the prestes. Be- holde, their two sonnes are with thé: Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc, and Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar, by them mayest thon sende me worde what thou hearest. So Chusai Dauids! |

| 

frende came in to the cite. And Absalom came to lerusalem.

$1 Re. 9. d. || 2 Re. 17. a. and b. c. 

fo. erei. 

The roi. Chapter. a ND whan Dauid was gone a lytle by from the toppe of the mount, beholde,
Siba the seruaüt of Mephiboseth met him with a couple of asses sadled, wheron were two hundreth loaues of bred, and an hundreth quantities of rasyns and an hüdreth quantities of fygges, and a bottell of wyne. Then sayde the kynge vnto Siba: What wilt thou do herewith? Siba sayde: The asses shalbe for the kynges housholde to ryde vpon, and the loaues and fygges for the yonge men to eate, and the wyne shallbe for them to drynke whan they are weery in the wyldernes. The kynge sayde: Where is thy lordes sonne? Siba sayde vnto the kynge: Beholde, he abydeth at lerusale, for he saide: To daye shal y house of Israel restore my fathers kigdome vnto me. The kynge saide vnto Siba: Be- holde, *all that Mephiboseth hath, shalbe thine. Siba sayde with reuerence, Let me finde grace in thy sight my lorde O kynge.
3| But whan kynge Dauid came to Bahurim, beholde, there wente out a man of the kynred of the house of Saul, twhose name was Semei the sonne of Gera, which wente forth and tcursed, and cast stones at Dauid, and at all! kynge Dauids seruauntes and all the people | and all the mightie men were at his righte| hande and at his lefte. Thus sayde Semei| whan he cursed: Get the forth, get the forth thou bloudy hounde, thou man of Belial.
The LORDE hath rewarded the for all the bloude of the house of Saul, y thou becamest kynge in his steade. Now hath the LORDE geuen the kyngdome in to y hande of Absa- lom thy sonne, and beholde, now stickest thou in thine owne myschefe, for thou art a bloudy hounde.

But Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia sayde vnto the kynge: Shall this deed dogg curse my lorde the kynge? I wyl go and take the heade awaye from him. The kynge saide:
Ye children of Zeru Ia, what haue I to do with you? Let him curse on, for the LORDE hath commaunded him: Curse Dauid. Who can saye now: Why doest thou so?

C) And Dauid sayde vnto Abisai and to all his seruauntes: Beholde, my sonne which came of my body, seketh after my lyfe, how

* 2 Re. 9. b. 
$3 Re. 2. g. 

t 2 Ke. 19. b. t Exo. 22. d. 
|| 2 Re. 12. c. and 15. c. 

The i. boke of the kynges. 

moch more now the sonne of Iemini? him curse on, for the LORDE hath com- maunded him: $peraduenture the LORDE shall consydre my aduersyte, and recompence me good for his cursynge this daye. So Dauid wente on his waye with his men. But Semei wente on by the mount besyde him, and cursed, and cast stones at him, q threwe clottes of earth.

And the kynge came in and all the people that was with him, weery, and refreshed him- selfe there. But Absalom and all the people of the men of Israel came to Ierusalem and
Achitophel with him. Whan Chusai the 
Arachite Dauids frende came in to Absalom, he sayde vnto Absalom: God saue the kynge
God saue the kyuge. 

Absalom sayde vnto Chusai: Is this thy|38 mercy vnto thy frende? Why art thou not gone with thy frende? ^ Chusai sayde vnto
Absalom: Not so, but loke whom the LORDE choseth, and this people, and all the men in
Israel, his wyl 1 be, and byde with him. Se- condly, whom shulde I serue? Shulde I not do seruyce before his sonne? Like as I haue serued in the presence of thy father, so wyll I do seruyce before the also.

And Absalom sayde vnto Achitophel: Geue vs youre councell what we shal do? Achi- tophel sayde vnto Absalom: ll Go lye with thy fathers concubynes, whom he hath lefte to kepe the house, so shall all Israel heare that thou hast made thy father to stynke, and the hande of all them that are with y, shal be the bolder. ‘Then made they a tente vnto Absa- lom "ivpon the house toppe. And Absalom laye with his fathers concubynes in the sighte of all Israel.

At that tyme whan Achitophel gaue a coun- cell, that was euen as yf a man axed councell at God: So were all the councels of Achi- tophel both with Dauid and with Absalom.

The rbij. Chapter. 

ND Achitophel sayde vnto Absalom: I 

wil chose out twolue thousande mē, and 

wyl get me vp, and persue Dauid by nighte, and fall vpo him whan he is feble and weery:
When I vexe him thé, so that all the people which is by him, flieth, I wil smite the kynge onely, and brynge all the people vnto the

The houses were flat in those partes at that tyme, 

Chap. rbi. agayne. So whan enery man is brought vnto the as thou desyrest, then shal all the people be in peace. Absalom thought that good, and so dyd all the Elders in Israel. But Absalom sayde: I praye you call Chusai the Arachite also, and let vs heare what he sayeth therto.
And wha Chnsai came in to Absalom, Absa- lom saide vnto him: Thus hath Achitophel spoken, Saye thou now, shal we do it or not?

Then sayde Chusai vnto Absalom: It is no good councell y Achitophel hath geuen at this tyme. And Chusai sayde morouer:
Thou knowest thy father well and his men, that they are stronge and of a wrothfull sto- mack, euen *as a Beer that is robbed of hir yonge ones in the felde. "Thy father also is a man of warre, and wyl not be necliget with the people. Beholde, he hath now peraduen- ture hyd hymselfe in some caue or in some place. Yf it came to passe then that it chauneed euell at the first, q there shulde come a rumoure and saye : There is a slaugh- ter done in the people that folowed Absalo: thé shulde euery man be discoraged, which els is valeaunt, q hath a hert like a lyo: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is stronge, and that all they which be with him, are mightie men.

But this is my coücell, that thou gather to- gether all Israel from Dan vnto Berseba in nombre as the sonde of the See, and go thou thine owne person amonge them, then wil we fall vpon him in what place we finde him, and wyll ouerwhelme him euen as the des falleth vpon the earth, so that we shal not leaue one of him and of all his men. But yf he resorte in to a cite, then shal all Israel cast roapes aboute the same cite, and drawe it in to the riuer, so that there shal not one stone of it be founde.

Then sayde Absalom and euery man in 
Israel: The councell of Chusai the Arachite is better then Achitophels councell.

t But the LORDE broughte it so to passe, that y good councell of Achitophel was hyndred, that the LORDE mighte brynge euell vpon
Absalom. 

t And Chusai sayde vnto Sadoc q Abiathar the prestes: ‘Thus and thus hath Achitophel counceled Absalom and the Elders in Israel: but so and so haue I counceled. Sende now therfore in all the haist, and tell Dauid, and

* Prou. 17. b. t Esa. 8. c, and 19. c. t2 Re. 15. g. 

The fj. boke of tbe kynges. 

Fo. recit, saye: Abyde not all nighte in the playne felde of the wyldernes, but get the ouer, that the kynge be not swalowed vp, and all the people that is with him. As for Ionathas and Ahi- maaz, they stode by the well of Rogel, and a damsell wente thither and tolde them. They wente on their waye, and tolde kynge Dauid, for they durst not be sene to come in to the cite.

But a lad sawe them, and tolde Absalom. 
Neuertheles they wente on their waye, and came to a mans house at Bahurim, which had a well in his courte, and they wēte downe in to it. And the woman toke and spred a couerynge ouer the welles mouth, q strowed firmentye corne theron, that it was not per- ceaued, Now whan Absaloms seruauntes came to the woman in to the house, they sayde: where is Ahimaaz and Ionathas? The woma sayde vnto them: They are gone oner the litle water.

And whā they soughte and founde them not, they wente agayne to lerusalem. And whan they were gone, they clymmed vp out of the well, and wente their waye, and tolde
Dauid ¥ kynge, and sayde vnto Dauid: Get you vp, and go soone ouer ¥ water, for thus and thus hath Achitophel geuen councell agaynst you.

Then Dauid gat him vp, and all the people that was with him, and passed oner lordane tyll it was cleare mornynge. And there was not one, but he wente ouer lordane.

Whan Achitophel sawe that his coücell wente not forth, he sadled his asse, gat him vp, and wéte home in to his cite and put his house to poynte, and hanged him selfe, and dyed, and was buried in his fathers graue.

And Dauid came to Mahanaim, and Ab- salom wente ouer lordane, q all the men of
Israel with him. And Absalom had set 
Amasa ouer the hoost in Ioabs steade. Amasa was the sonne of a man, whose name was
Jethra a lesraelite, which laye with Abigail the doughter of Nahas the sister of Zeru Ia loabs mother. But Israel and Absalom pitched in Gilead.

Whan Dauid was come to Mahanaim, 
§ Nahas of Rabbath of the childré of Ammon, and I! Machir the sonne of Ammiel of Lodebar, and {Barsillai a Gileadite of Roglim broughte bedstuffe, tapestrie worke, basens, earthen vessell, whete, barly, meel, parched corne,

§1 Re.11.a. 2 Reg. 8.a. ||? Re. 19. f. € 3 Reg. 2. b. 

Fo. cce. beenes, otemeell, ryse, hony, butter, shepe and fat oxen vnto Dauid, and to y people that was with him, for to eate: for they thought,
The people shall be hongrie, weerye and thirstye in the wyldernes.

The rhtij. Chapter. 

ND Dauid mustred the people y was 

with him, and set captaynes ouer thé, ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds. And sent out of the people one thirde parte vnder
Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ja Toabs brother, and one thirde parte vnder * Ithai the Gethite.
And the kynge sayde vnto the people: I wyll go forth with you also. Neuertheles the people sayde: Thou shalt not go forth, for though we fle, or die halfe of vs they shal not regarde vs. For thou art as ten thousande of vs. Therfore is this better that thou mayest helpe vs out of the cite. The kynge sayde:
Loke what ye are content withall, that wyl I do. And the kynge stode in the gate, and all the people wente forth by hundreds and by thousandes. And y kinge cémaunded Ioab and Abisai, and Ithai, and sayde: Intreate me the yonge man Absalom gently. And all the people herde it, wha the kynge comaunded all the captaynes concernynge Absalom. And whan the people were come forth in to the felde agaynst Israel, the battayll beganne in the wod of Ephraim. And the peoplé of
Israel were smitten there before Dauids ser- uauntes, so that there was a greate slaughter the same daye, of twentye thousande men.
And the battaill was scatred abrode there in the londe. And the wod consumed moch more people the same daye, then the swerde consumed.

And Absalom met Dauids seruauntes, and rode vpon a Mule. And whan the Mule came vnder a greate thicke Oke tre, his heade toke holde on the Oke, and so hanged he be- twene heauen and earth, but the Mule ranne awaye from vnder him. Whan a certayne man sawe that, he tolde Ioab, and saide:
Beholde, I sawe Absalom hange vpo an Oke tre. And Ioab saide vnto the mà y tolde it him: Beholde, sawest thou that, why smotest thou him not there to the groüde? so wolde I haue geuen the of myne awne behalfe ten syluerlynges and a gyrdell.
£| The man sayde vnto Ioab: Yf thou haddest 
* 3 Re, 2, b. 

The ij. boke of the kpnges. 

Chap. rbiij. weyed me a thousande syluorlynges in my handes, yet wolde I not haue layed my handes on the kynges sonne. For the kynge com- maunded the and Abisai and Ithai before oure eares, and sayde: Kepe me the yonge man
Absalom. Or yf I had dyssembled vpon the ioperdy of myne owne soule (for so moch as nothinge shulde be hyd from ¥ kinge) thou thy selfe shuldest haue stode against me.
Ioab sayde: Not so, I wil vpon him before thy face.

Then toke Ioab thre speares in his hande, and thrust Absalom thorow y hert, while he was yet alyue vpon the Oke. And ten yoge men loabs weapenbearers, came aboute him, and smote him to death. Then blewe Ioab the trompe, and broughte the people agayne, that they shulde folowe nomore vpon lsrael.
For Ioab wolde fauoure the people. And they toke Absalom, and cast him in the wod in to a greate pytt, and layed a greate heape of stones vpon him. And all Israel fled, euery one vnto his tente.

Absalom had set him vp a piler whyle he) 8 was yet alyue, which stode in the kynges valley, for he sayde: I haue no sonne, ther- fore shall this be a remembraunce of my name: and he called the piler after his owne name. And vnto this daie it is yet called
Absaloms place. 

Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc sayde: Let me runne now, and brynge the kynge worde, that the LORDE hath gotten him righte fro the hande of his enemies. But loab sayde:
Thou shalt bringe no good tidinges to daie another daye shalt thou brynge him worde, and not to daye, for the kynges sonne is deed.
But vnto Chusi sayde Joab: Go thou thy waye, and tell the kynge what thou hast sene.
And Chusi did his obeysauce vnto Ioab, and ranne. Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc saide agayne vnto Toab: What and I ranne also?
Ioab sayde: What wilt thou runne my sonne? 
Come hither, thou shalt brynge no good tydinges. (He answered:) What and I ranne yet. He saide vnto him: Renne on thy waye then. So Ahimaas ranne the straight waye, and came before Chusi.

As for Dauid, he sat betwene the two gates.| £ 
And the watchman wente vp to ¥ toppe of the porte vpon the wall, and lifte vp his eyes, and sawe a man renninge alone, and cryed, and tolde the kinge. ‘The kynge sayde: Yf he

Chap. rir. 

The tj. boke of the praes. 

Fo. urb. 

be alone, then is there good tydinges in his mouth. And as the same wente and came forth, the watehman sawe another man ren- nynge, and cryed in the porte and sayde:
Beholde, there renneth a man alone. The kinge sayde: ‘The same is a good messaunger also. The watchman sayde: I se the ren- nynge of the first as it were the rennynge of
Ahimaas the sonne of Sadoc. And the kynge sayde: He is a good man, and bryngeth good tidinges. Ahimaas cryed, and sayde vnto y kinge: Peace, and worshipped before the kynge vpon his face to the grounde, and sayde: Praised be the LORDE thy God, which hath geuen ouer y men that lifte vp their handes agaynst my lorde the kynge.

F| The kynge sayde: Goeth it well with the 

yonge man Absalom? Ahimaas sayde: I sawe a greate vproure, whan Ioab the kynges seruaunt sent me thy seruaunt, and I wote not what it was. ‘The kynge sayde: Go aboute, and stonde here. And he wente aboute and stode there. Beholde, then came
Chusi and sayde: I brynge good tydinges my lorde the kynge: The LORDE hath executed righte for the this daye, from the hande of all them that rose vp agaynst the. But the kynge sayde vnto Chusi: Goeth it well with the yonge man Absalom? Chusi sayde: Euen so go it with all the enemyes of my lorde the kynge, and with all them that ryse vp agaynst the to do euell, as it goeth with the yonge man. Then was the kynge soroufull, and wente vp in to the perler vpon the gate, and wepte, and as he wente, he sayde thus: O my sonne Absalo, my sonne, my sonne Absalom, wolde God y I shulde dye for the. O Ab- salom my sonne, my sonne.

The rir. Chapter. 
ND it was tolde Ioab: beholde, ¥ kinge wepeth q mourneth for Absalom. And so out of y victory of y daye there came a mourninge amonge all the people. For the people had herde the same daye, y the kynge toke on heuely because of his sonne. And y people stale awaye the same daye, so that they came not in to the cite: as a people that is put to shame, pycketh them selues awaye, whan they are fled in a battayll. As for the kynge, he had couered his face, and cryed loude, and sayde: Oh my sonne Absalom,

Absalom my sonne, my sonne. 

But Ioab came to the kynge in to the house, and sayde: This daye hast thou shamed all thy seruauntes (which haue delynered thy soule this daye, and the soules of thy sonnes, of thy doughters, of thy wyues, and of thy coeubynes) in that thou louest them that hate the, and hatest those that loue y. For to daye thou shewest thyselfe, that thou carest not for the captaynes and seruauntes: For perceaue this daye, that yf Absalom onely were alyne, and we all deed this daye, thou woldest thynke it were well.

Get the vp now therfore, and go forth, and speake louyngly vnto thy seruauntes. For I sweare vnto the by LORDE, yf thou go not forth, there shall not be lefte the one man this nighte: this shalbe worse vnto y, then all the euell that happened the sence thy youth vp hither to. The the kynge gat him vp, and satin the gate. And it was sayde vnto the people: beholde, the kynge sytteth in the gate.
Then came all the people before y kynge. 
But Israel was fled euery one vnto his tent. 

And all the people stroue in all the trybes of Israel, and sayde: The kynge ryd vs from the hande of oure enemies, and delyuered vs from the hande of the Philistynes, and was fayne to fle out of the lode for Absalom. So
Absalom whom we had anoynted ouer vs, is deed in the battayll. Why are ye so styll now, that ye fetch not the kynge agayne ?

The kynge sent vnto Sadoc q Abiathar the prestes, q caused to saye vnto thé: Speake to the Elders of Iuda, q saye: Why wyl ye be the last to fetch the kynge agayne vnto his house? (for y sayenge of all Israel was come before the kynge in to his house) ye are my brethren, my bone, and my flesh. Wherfore wyl ye then be the last to brynge the kynge agayne? And saye vnto Amasa: Art not thou my bone and my flesh? God do this q that vnto me, yf thou shalt not be the chefe captayne before me in Ioabs steade, as longe as thou lyuest.

And he bowed the hert of all the men of 
Iuda as of one man. And they sent vnto y kynge: Come agayne, thou and all thy ser- uauntes: So the kynge came agayne. And whan he came vnto lordane, y men of Iuda were come to Gilgal, for to go downe to mete the kynge, that they mighte brynge y kynge ouer lordane. And Semei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini, which dwelt at Bahurim,

42 

ffo. rechi, 

made haist, and wente downe with y men of 
Iuda to mete kynge Dauid, and there were with him a thousande mē of Ben lamin.
* Siba also the seruaunt of the house of Saul with his fyftene sonnes and twenty seruauntes, q gat them thorow Iordane and passed ouer y fery, that they mighte brynge ouer the kynges housholde, and to do him pleasure.

3| But Semei the sonne of Gera fell downe 

before the kynge, whan he passed ouer lor- dane, and sayde vnto the kynge: O my lorde, laye not the trespace vnto my charge, q thynke not vpon it that thy seruaunt vexed the, tin the daye whan my lorde the kynge wente out of lerüsalem: aud let not y kynge take it to hert, for thy seruaunt knoweth that he hath synned. And beholde, this daye am I come the first amonge all the house of Ioseph, for to go downe to mete my lorde the kynge.
Neuertheles Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ia answered and sayde: And shulde not Semei dye therfore, seynge he hath cursed y anoynted of LORDE? But Dauid sayde: * What haue I to do with you ye children of Zeru Ia, that ye wyll become Sathan vnto me this daye? Shulde eny man dye this daye in
Israel? Thynkest thou that 1 knowe not, y 
I am become kynge ouer Israel this daye ? 
And y kynge sayde vnto Simei: Thou shalt not dye. And the kynge sware vnto him.
Mephiboseth the sonne of Saul came downe also to mete the kynge. And he had not made cleane his fete ner combde his beerde, nether had he waszshed his clothes from the daye that the kynge was gone awaye, vntyll the daye that he came agayne in peace. Now wha he came to lerusalem for to mete the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him: Mephiboseth, wherfore wentest thou not with me? And he sayde:
My lorde O kynge, my seruaut hath dealte vnrighteously with me: for thy seruaunt thoughte: 1 wil saddell an asse and ryde theron, and go vnto the kynge: for thy ser- uaunt is lame, and he hath accused thy ser- uaunt before my lorde y kynge. § But my lorde kynge is an angell of God, and thou mayest do what pleaseth the. For all my fathers house was nothinge, but people of death before my lorde ý kynge. {And yet hast thou set thy seruaunt amouge them that eate at thy table. What other righteousnes

* 2 Re. 16. a. 
Mat. 16. c. 

t 2 Re. 16. b. t2 Re. 16. b. 
$ Gen. 33. b. 2 Re. 14. a. Hest. 15. b. 

The tj. boke of the kpnges. 

haue I, that I shulde crye eny more vnto the kynge? The kynge sayde vnto him: What speakest thou yet more of thy matter? I haue sayde: Thou and Siba parte the londe betwene you. Mephiboseth sayde vnto the kynge:
Let him take it all, in as moch as my lorde y kynge is come home in peace.

And Barsillai the Gileadite came downe from Roglim, and broughte the kynge ouer
Iordane, that he mighte coueye him in Ior- dane. And Barsillai was very olde, so good as foure score yeare olde, "the same had pro- uyded y kynge of fode whyle he was at Ma- hanaim, for he was a very noble man. And the kynge sayde vnto Barsillai: Thou shalt go ouer with me, I wyll take care for the with myne awne selfe at Ierusalem. But Barsillai sayde vnto the kynge: What haue l yet to lyue, that I shulde go vp to Ierusalem with the kynge? ‘This daye am I foure score yeare olde. How shulde I knowe what is good or euell, or taist what 1 eate or drynke, or heare what the Musicians do synge? Why shulde thy seruaunt be chargeable first vnto my lorde the kynge? thy seruaunt shall go a litle with the kynge ouer Iordane. Why wil the kynge recompence me after this maner? Let thy seruaunt turne backe agayne, that I maye dye in my cite besyde my father and my mothers graue. Beholde, there is thy seruaunt Chi- meam, let him go ouer with my lorde the kynge, and do vnto him what pleaseth the.

The kynge sayde: Chimeam shal go ouer with me, and I wyll do for him what liketh the: and what so euer thou desyrest of me, that wyll I do for the also. And whan all y people was gone ouer Iordane and the kynge likewyse, the kynge kyssed Barsillai and blessed him, and he turned vnto his place. And y kynge passed ouer vnto Gilgal, and Chimeam wente with him. And all the people of Iuda broughte the kynge ouer, howbeit there was but halfe of the people of Israel there.

And beholde, thé came all the men of Israel vnto the kynge, q sayde vnto him: Why haue oure brethren the men of luda stollen the awaye, and haue conueyed y kynge and his housholde ouer Iordane, 2M all Dauids men with him? Then answered they of Iuda vnto them of Israel: The kynge is of oure nye kynred, why are ye augrie therfore? Thynke

|| 2 Re. 9. b. q 2 Re. 17. e. 

Chap. it, 

F 

6 

Chap. rr. 

ye that we haue receaued eny fode or giftes of the kynge? Then answered they of Israel vnto them of Iuda, q sayde: We haue ten tymes more with the kynge and with Dauid, thé thou, why hast thou regarded me then so lightly, that oures were not the first to fetch oure kynge agayne? But they of Iuda spake harder then they of Israel.

The rr. Chapter. 

a HERE was a famous man of Belial there, 

whose name was Seba y sonne of Bichri, a mà of Iemini, which blewe the trompe, and sayde: * We haue no porcion in Dauid, ner inheritaunce in y sonne of Isai: let euery one get him to histent, O Israel. Then fell euery man in Israel from Dauid, and folowed Seba the sonne of Bichri. But the men of Iuda cleued vnto their kynge from lordane vnto
Terusalé. Whan Dauid came home to Ieru- salem, he toke the ten concubynes (twhom he had lefte to kepe the house) and put them in a holde to be kepte, and made prouysion for them: but he laye not with them, and so were they shut vp vnto their death, and iyued wedowes.

And ý kynge sayde vnto Amasa: Call me all the men of Iuda together agaynst the thirde daye, q be thou here present also. And
Amasa wéte to call Iuda together. And he was slacke to come at y tyme which he had appoynted him. And Dauid sayde vnto Abisai:
Now shall Seba the sonne of Bichri do vs 

33|more harme then Absalom. Take thou th 

lordes seruauntes, and folowe vpon him, y he fynde not some stroge cities for him, and so escape out of oure sighte. Then wente
Ioabs mé forth after him, and the Chrethians and Plethians, and all the mightie më: and they wéte out of lerusalem to folowe vpon
Seba the sonne of Bichri. 

But whan they were by the greate stone at 
Gibeon, Amasa came before them. As for 
Ioab, he was gyrded aboue his garment which he had on, and vpon it he had a swerde gyrded, which hanged by his thye in the sheeth, and wente easely out and in, and fell fro him.
And Ioab sayde vnto Amasa: Peace be with the my brother. And Ioab toke Amasa by the beerde with his righte hade, to kysse him.
And Amasa toke no hede vnto y swerde in 
Ioabs hande, and he thrust him therwith in to 

SS Re oc 

The ij. boke of the kpnaes. 

the bely, y his bowels ranne out vpon the earth, and he thrust at him no more. And so he dyed.

Ioab q his brother Abisai folowed vpon 
Seba y sonne of Bichri. And one of Ioabs seruauntes stode by him, and sayde: What is he this ý wolde be agaynst Ioab to please
Dauid, and to be with Dauid in Ioabs steade? 
As for Amasa, he laye rolled in the bloude in y myddes of the strete. But whā one sawe that all the people stode there still, he remoned
Amasa from the strete vnto the felde, and cast a clothe vpon him, for so moch as he sawe, that who so euer came by him, stode styll.
Now whan he was put out of the waye, euery man wéte after Ioab, to folowe vpon Seba the sonne of Bichri.

And he wente thorow all y trybes of Israel vnto Abel Beth Maacha, and all the best chosen men gathered them selues together, q folowed after him, and came and beseged him at Abel Beth Maacha, and made a banke aboute the cite harde on y wall. And all the people that was with Ioab, layed to their ordynaunce, and wolde haue cast downe the wall.

Then cried there a wyse womà out of y cite: Heare, heare, saye vnto loab that he come hither, I wyl speake with him. And wha he came to her, the woman sayde: Art thou Ioab? He sayde: Yee. She sayde vnto him: Heare the wordes of thy hand- mayden. He sayde: I heare. She sayde:
The comon sayenge was somtyme: Who so wyll axe, let him axe at Abel, and so came it to a good ende. cite in Israel, and wilt thou destroye the cite and the mother in Israel? Why wilt thou swalowe vp the enheritaunce of the LORDE?

Ioab answered and sayde: That be farre, that be farre fro me, that I shulde swalowe vp and destroye. The matter is not so, but a certayne man of mount Ephraim named Seba the sonne of Bichri, hath lifte vp him selfe agaynst kynge Dauid, delyuer him onely, and
I wyl departe from the cite. "The woman sayde vnto loab: Beholde, his heade shal be cast vnto the ouer the wall And the woman came in to all the people with hir wyszdome. And they smote of the heade of
Seba the sonne of Bichri, and cast it vnto| 
Ioab. ‘Then blewe he the trompe, and they. 

+ 2 Re. 15. c. 

This is y noble and faithfull| B 

fo. rrrbij. 

€ 

| 

Fo. rrbíj. Te. boke of the kynges, Cap. rri. rrebítj. 

departed from the cite, euery one vnto his tent. But loab came agayne to lerusalem vnto the kynge.

* Ioab was captayne ouer all the hoost of 
Israel: Benaia y sonne of loiada was ouer the Chrethians and Plethians: Adoram was rent gatherer: Iosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was Chaunceler: Seia was the serybe : Sadoc and Abiathar were the prestes: lra also y
Tairite was Dauids prest. 

The rri. Chapter. 
HERE was a derth also in Dauids tyme thre yeares together. And Dauid soughte the face of ý LORDE. And the
LORDE sayde: Because of Saul and be- cause of that bloudy housholde tý he slewe the Gibeonites. Then the kynge caused for to call the Gibeonites, and spake vnto them.
(As for the Gibeonites, they were not of y children of Israel, but a remnaunt of the
Amorites : essen tthe children of Israel had sworne vnto the, and Saul soughte for to smyte them in his gelousy, for the childre of
Israel and Iuda.) ‘Then sayde Dauid to the 
Gibeonites: What shal I do vnto you? And where withall shal I make the attonement, that ye maye blesse $ enheritaunce of ý
LORDE? The Gibeonites sayde vnto him: 
It is not for golde and syluer that we haue to do with Saul and his house, nether haue we oughte to do for to slaye eny mà in Israel.

He sayde: What saye ye then, that I shal do vnto you? They sayde vnto y kynge:
The man that hath destroyed vs and broughte vs to naughte, shulde we destroye, that no- thinge be lefte him in all the coastes of Israel.
Let there be geuen vs seuen men of his sonnes, that we maye hange them vp vnto the LORDE at Gibea of Saul the chosen of the LORDE. The kynge sayde: 1 wyll geue them. Howbeit the kynge spared Mephi- boseth $ sonne of Ionathas $ sonne of Saul, because of the ooth of the LORDE y was betwene them: $namely, betwene Dauid q lonathas the sonne of Saul. But the two sounes of Rispa y doughter of Aia, whom she had borne vnto Saul, Armoni « Mephi- boseth, And the fyue sonnes of Michol the doughter of Saul, whom she bare vnto Adriel the sonne of Bareilles the Mahalothite, dyd

* 2 Re.8.c. t 1 Re. 22. d. 

$ 1 Re. 18. a. 20. b. 23. d. 

t Iosu. 9. c. 

The ij. boke of the kynges. 

Chap. rri 

the kynge | take, and gaue 7 |departed from the cite, euery one vnto his| [the kynge take, and gaue them in to the| _ handes of ¥ Gibeonites, which hanged thé vp vpo the mount before the LORDE.

So these seuen fell at one tyme, and dyed|¢ in the tyme of the first haruest, whan y barly haruest begynneth. Then toke Rispa the doughter of Aia a sack cloth, q spred it vpon the rock in the begynnynge of the haruest, tyll the water from the heauen dropped vpo them, and suffred not the foules of the heauen to rest on them on the daye tyme, nether the wylde beestes of the felde on the nighte sea- son. And it was tolde Dauid what Rispa the doughter of Aia Sauls concubyne had done.

And Dauid wente and toke the bones of 
Saul and the bones of lonathas his sonne from $ citesens at labes in Gilead (which they llhad stollen from y strete at Bethsan, where y Philistynes ed hanged the, what tyme as the Philistynes had smytten Saul vpon mount Gilboa) and broughte them vp from thence, and gathered them together with

the bones of them that were hanged. And|D 

the bones of Saul and of his sonne lonathas buried they in y londe of Ben lamin, besyde y graue of his father Cis. So after this was
God at one with the londe. 

But there arose warre agayne of y Philis- tynes agaynst Israel And Dauid wente downe q his seruauntes with him, q foughte agaynst the Philistynes. And Dauid was weery, q leszbi of Nob (which was one of the children of Rapha, and the weight of his speare was thre C. weight of brasse, and had a new harnesse vpon him) thoughte to smyte
Dauid. Neuertheles Abisai the sonne of 
Zeru Ia helped him, q smote the Philistyne to death. Then sware Dauids men vnto him, q sayde : 1 Thou shalt nomore go forth with vs vnto the warre, that the lanterne in Israel be not put out.

** Afterwarde there arose yet warre at Nob|3 

with the Philistynes. Then Sibechai the 
Husathite smote Saph, which also was one of the childré of Rapha.

And there arose yet warre at Gob with the 
Philistynes. Then Elhanan the sonne of laere Orgim a Bethleemite smote Goliath the
Gethite, which had a speare, whose shaft was like a weeuers lome.

And there arose yet warre at Gath, where 

q 2 Re.18. a. ** 1 Par, 21, a. 

| 1 Re. 31. c. 

Chap. rrij. there was a cótencious man, which had sixe fyngers on his handes, and sixe toes on his fete, that is foure and twety in the nombre, and he was borne also of Rapha. And whan he spake despitefully vnto Israel, Ionathas y sonne of Simea Dauids brother smote him.
These foure were borne vnto Rapha at Gath, and fell thorow the hande of Dauid and of his seruauntes

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND Dauid spake the wordes of this 
A songe before the LORDE, what tyme as the LORDE had delyuered him fro the hande of all his enemies, and from the hande of Saul, and he sayde.

The LORDE is my stony rock, a my cas- tell, and my delyuerer.

God is my strength, in him wyl I put my trust: my shylde q the horne of my saluacion, my defence q my refuge, my Sauioure, thou shalt helpe me from violent wronge.

*I wil call vpon the LORDE with prayse, so shal I be delyuered fro myne enemies.

For the sorowes of death cópased me, and the brokes of Belial made me afrayed.

The paynes of hell came aboute me, and the snares of death had ouertaken me.

Wha I was in trouble, I called vpo the 
LORDE, yee euen my God called I vpon, a so he herde my voyce fro his holy temple, a my cóplaynte (came) in to his eares.

The earth trembled and quaked, the foun- dacions of the heauen shoke and moued, be- eause he was wroth.

Smoke wente vp from his nose, and con- sumynge fyre out of his mouth, coles were kyndled therof.

He bowed the heauens and came downe, and it was darke vnder his fete.

He sat vpon Cherub and dyd flye, and ap- peared vpon the fethers of the wynde.

He made darknes his pauylion rounde aboute him, thicke water in the cloudes of y ayre.

At the brightnesse of him were the fyre coles kyndled.

The LORDE thondered from heaue, and the Hyest put forth his voyce.

He shot his arowes, and scatered them: he lightened, and discomfited them.

The pourynges out of the See were sene, 

* Psal. 17. a. 

Cbr ij. boke of tbe kynges. 

and the foundacions of the earth were dis- conered at the chydinge of the LORDE, q at the breth of the sprete of his wrath.

He sent downe from aboue, and receaued me, and drue me out of many waters.

He delyuered me fro my stronge enemye, from them that hated me, for they were to mightie for me.

'They ouertoke me in the tyme of my trou- ble, but the LORDE was my succoure.

He broughte me forth in to liberty: he de- lyuered me, because he had a fauoure vnto me.

The LORDE shal rewarde me after my righteousnes, and acordinge to the clennes of my handes shal he recompence me.

For I haue kepte y waye of the LORDE, q haue not bene vn godly agaynst my God.

For I haue an eye vnto all his lawes, and/B 

haue not put his ordinaunces fro me. 

Therfore wil I be perfecte vnto him, and wyl eshue myne awne wickednes.

So shal y LORDE rewarde me after my righteousnes, acordinge to the clenes of my handes in his eye sighte.

With the holy shalt thou be holy, and with the perfecte thou shalt be perfecte.

With the cleane thou shalt be cleane, and with the frowarde thou shalt be frowarde.

For thou shalt saue the poore oppressed people, and shalt set thine eyes agaynst the proude to brynge them downe.

For thou O LORDE art my lanterne. The 
LORDE shal lighte my darknesse. 

For in i I shal discofite an hoost of men, « in my God I shal leape ouer the wall.

The waye of God is perfecte: y wordes of| £ the LORDE are tryed in the fyre: he is a shylde for all thé that put their trust in him.

For where is there a God, excepte y 
LORDE? Or who hath eny strength with- out oure God ?

God hath strégthed me with power, and made playne a perfecte waye for me.

He hath made my fete like hartes fete, q hath set me vp an hye.

He teacheth my handes to fighte, and bendeth the stele bowe with myne armes.

And thou hast geuen me the shylde of th health, and with thy louynge correccion shalt thou multiplye me.

Thou hast enlarged my goinge vnder me, and myne ankles haue not slyded.

I wyl folowe vpon myne enemies, and 

ffo. reri, 

| ffo. ctr. 

F 

destroye the: and wyl not turne backe agayne, tyll I haue broughte them to naught.

I wil edsume them and thrust them thorow, that they come not vp: they shal fall vnder my fete.

Thou hast girded me with strength to y battayll, and hast subdued them vnder me y rose vp agaynst me.

Thou hast made myne enemies to turne their backes vpo me, that I might destroye them that hate me.

They shal erye, but there shalbe no 
Sanioure: yee euen vnto the LORDE, but he answereth them not.

I wil beate them as small as the dust of the earth: euen as y elaye of the stretes wil I make them thynne, and sprede them out abrode.

But me shalt thou delyuer from the stryu- ynges of the people, and shalt kepe me to be
ý heade of the Heythen: A people whom I m. not knowne, shal serue me.

&| The straunge children haue denyed me: 

at the hearynge of the eare shal they herké vnto me.

'The straunge children are waxen olde, a are shut vp in their presons.

The LORDE lyueth, and blessed be my 
God, and magnified be the strength of my health.

God seyth that I be anenged, and subdueth the people vnto me.

He bryngeth me out fro myne enemies: q from them y ryse vp agaynst me, shalt thou exalte me, and from y cruell man shalt thou delyuer me.

* For this cause wyl I geue thankes vnto the amonge the Heythen, and synge prayses vnto thy name.

Which doth greate health for his kynge, ¢ sheweth merey vnto Dauid his anoynted, and to his sede for euermore.

The rrij. Chapter. 
HESE are the last wordes of Dauid: 
Dauid the sonne of Isai sayde. The man, that was set vp to be ¥ anoynted of the
God of Iacob, q a pleasaunt dyter of songes of Israel, sayde: The sprete of the LORDE hath spoken by me, and the vtteraunce therof is done thorow my tunge. He sayde: The
God of Israel hath spoké vnto me, the strength 

* Rom. 15. a. E2 Reme: 

The y. boke of the kpnges. 

Chap. rrttj. of Israel, the gouernoure amonge men, the righteous gouernoure in the feare of God. As the lighte is in y mornynge whan the Sonne aryseth, so that for the brightnesse therof no cloude remayneth: and as the grasse loketh vpon the earth thorow the rayne, euen so shal my house be with God. +For he hath made an euerlastinge couenaunt with me, well ap- poynted on euery syde and sure. For this is all my health q pleasure, that it shal growe.
But the Belial shal be vtterly q cleane roted out as the thornes, which mé take not in their hades. And they y touch them, shal destroye them with yrons q speares: c in the fyre shal they be brent, that they maye be broughte to naught.

These are the names of Dauids Worthies :|39 

lasabeam y sonne of Hachmoni, “the chefest amonge thre, which lifte vp his speare, q slewe eight hundreth at one tyme.

After him was Eleasar the sonne of Dodi the sonne of Ahohi amonge the thre Worthies with Dauid, whan they spake despytefully to the Philistynes, and were gathered together to the battayll, and the men of Israel wente vp. ‘Then stode he vp and smote the Philis- tynes, tyll his hande was so weery that it erompled with the swerde, And the LORDE gaue a greate victory at the same tyme, so that the people turned after him to spoyle.
After him was Samma the sonne of Age 
Hararite. Wha the Philistynes had gathered them selues in a company, and in the same place there was a pece of lode full of small corne, and the people fled before the Philis- tynes, the stode he in the myddes of y pece of londe, q delyuered it, q smote ¥ Philistynes.
And God gaue a greate victory. 

And these thre pryncipall amonge thirtie, came downe in the haruest vnto Dauid, ^in to the caue of Adullam, ¢ the hoost of y Philis- tynes laye in $ valley of Rephaim. But
Dauid was at the same tyme in the castell, and y Philistynes people laye at Bethleem.
And Dauid was desyrous, and sayde: Wolde 
God y some man wolde fetch me a drynke of water out of the well at Bethleem vnder the gate. ‘The brake the thre Worthies in to the hoost of the Philistynes, and drue of the water out of the well at Bethleem vnder y gate, q caried it q broughte it vnto Dauid: neuertheles he wolde not drynke it, but offred it vnto the

San 19. b. *43 Par: 12:6: 

Chap. xrttíj. 

LORDE, q sayde: The LORDE let this be farre fro me, that I shulde do it. Is it not the bloude of the men that ioperded their lyues, and wente thither? And he wolde not drynke it. This'dyd the thre Worthies.
*Abisai y brother of Ioab the sonne of 
Zeru Ia was one also chefe amoge thre. He lifte vp his speare q smote thre hundreth, q was an awncient man amoge thre, q the noblest amonge thre, q was their ruler. But he came not vnto the thre. t And Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, the sonne of Ishail (a man of greate actes of Cabzeell) smote two mightie giaütes of $ Moabites, x wéte downe, q slewe a lyon at a well in the snowe tyme. He smote also a fayre goodly man of Egipte, which had a speare in his hande. But he wéte downe to him with a staffe, and toke the speare out of the Egipcians hande by violence, and slewe him with his owne speare. "This dyd Benaia the sonne of loiada, and was a famous man amóge thre Worthies, and more honorable then the thirtie, but he came not vnto the thre.
And Dauid made him of his secrete coucell. 
Asahel the brother of Ioab is amonge y thirtie: Elham his vncles sonne at Bethleem.
Samma the Haradite, Elika the Haradite, 
Helez the Paltite, Ira the sonne of Ikes the 
Tekoite, Abiser the Anthothite, Mebunai the 
Husathite, Zalmon the Ahohite, Maherai the 
Netophatite, Ithai the sonne of Ribai of 
Gibea of the childre of Ben lamin, Benaia the Pirgathonite, Hidai of the broke of
Gaas, Abialbon the Arbathite, Asmaueth the 
Bahumite, Eliaheba the Baalbonite. The children of Jasen and Ionathas: Samma the
Hararite, Eliphelet the sonne of Ahaszbai y sonne of Maechathi Eliam the sonne of
Achitophel $ Gilonite, Hesrai of Carmel, 
Paerai the Arbite, Iegael the sonne of Nathan of Soba, Bani the Gadite, Zeleg the Am- monite, Naharai the Beerothite, the weapen bearer of Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia, Ira the
Iethrite, Gareb the Iethrite, Vrias the Hethite. 
These are alltogether seuen and thirtie. 

The rritij. Chapter. 
ND the LORDE was wrothfully dis- 
A pleased of $ new agaynst Israel, “and moued Dauid amonge them, because he saide:
Go, nombre Israel and Iuda. And the kynge sayde vnto Ioab y chefe captayne of his hoost:

* 1 Par. 12. c. 2 Re. 21. d. f 1 Par. 12. d. 

The ij. boke of the kynges. 

Go aboute in all the trybes of Israel, from 
Dan vnto Berseba, and nombre the people, that I maye knowe how many they be. Ioab sayde vnto the kynge: The LORDE thy
God adde vnto this people an hundreth tymes as moch as it is now, that my lorde the kynge maye se his eyes lust theron. But why hath my lorde the kynge a desyre to this thinge ?
Neuertheles the kynges worde preuayled agaynst Ioab and the captaynes of the hoost.

So Ioab and ¥ captaynes of the hoost wente forth from the kynge, to nombre the people of Israel, and passed ouer Iordane, and pitched at Aroer, at the righte hande of the cite which lyeth in ¥ ryuer of Gad, and at Iaseer, x came to Gilead, and in the lowe countre of Hadsi, and came vnto Dan Jaan, and aboute Sidon, and came to the stronge cite of Tyrus, and all the cities of the Heuites and Cananites, and came forth to the south parte of Iuda vnto Berseba, and wéte rounde aboute that countre, and after nyne monethes and twenty daies they came to lerusalem. And Ioab de- lyuered vnto $ kynge the summe of the people that was nombred. And in Israel there were eight C. thousande stronge men, that drue out the swerde: and in luda fyue hundreth thousande men. And after that the people was nombred, Dauids hert smote him selfe.
And Dauid sayde vnto ý LORDE: I hane synned sore, that I haue done this. And now
LORDE take awaie the trespace of thy ser- uaunt. For I haue done very vnwysely.

And whan Dauid rose vp in the mornynge, the worde of the LORDE came vnto the prophet God, Dauids Seer, q sayde: Go a speake vnto Dauid. Thus sayeth the LORDE:
I brynge the thre thinges, chose the one of them, that I maye do it vnto the. Gad came vnto Dauid, and tolde him, and sayde vnto him: Wilt thou that seuen yeare derth shall come in to thy londe? Or that thou be fayne to flye before thine aduersaries thre monethes, and they to persecute the? Or that there be pestilence thre dayes in the londe? ‘Take aduysement therfore and se, what answere I shal bringe agayne vnto him y sent me.

Dauid sayde vnto Gad: I am in extreme trouble. t Neuertheles (yf it maye be) let me rather fall in to handes of the LORDE (for his mercy is greate) I wyll not fall in to the handes of men.

414 Par, 29, a. i Eccli. 2. c. Susan. d. 

7 fo. eari. 

€ 

Ffo. ceert. 

So the LORDE sent pestiléce in to Israel from the morow vnto the tyme appoynted, so that there dyed of the people from Dan vnto
Berseba, thre score and ten thousande men. 
And whan the angel stretched his hande ouer lerusalem to destroye it, the LORDE re- pented ouer the euell, and sayde vnto the angell: It is ynough, holde now thy hande.
The angell of the LORDE was besyde the barne of Arafna the lebusite. But whan
Dauid sawe the angell that smote the people, he sayde vnto the LORDE: beholde, It is I that haue synned, I haue done the trespace:
As for these shepe, what haue they done? 
Oh let thy hade be agaynst me and agaynst my fathers house.

And Gad came to Dauid at the same tyme, and saide vnto him: Go vp, and set vp an altare vnto the LORDE in y barne of Arafna the Iebusite. So Dauid wete vp as Gad sayde, and as the LORDE had commaunded. And

3: whà Arafna loked aboute him, he sawe the 

kynge with his seruauntes goinge vnto him, 

The ij. boke of the Rpnaes. 

and he worshipped vpon his face to the grounde, and sayde: Wherfore commeth my lorde y kynge vnto his seruaunt? Dauid sayde: To bye the barne of the, and to buylde an altare vnto the LORDE, that the plage maye ceasse from the people.

But Arafna sayde vnto Dauid: Let my lorde the kynge take it, and offre what pleaseth him. Beholde, there is an oxe for a burnt offerynge, and sleddes, and vessels of oxen to the wodd. All this gaue Arafna vnto the kynge. And Arafna sayde vnto $ kynge:
The LORDE thy God make the accepted vnto him. Neuertheles ¥ kynge sayde vnto
Arafna: Not so, but I wyll bye it of the for as moch as it is worth. For I wyl not offre burntofferynges vnto ý LORDE, of y which
I haue for naughte. So Dauid boughte the barne and the oxe for fiftye Sicles of syluer, and buylded an altare there vnto the LORDE, and offred burntofferynges « deedofferynges.
And the LORDE was mercifull vnto y londe, and ¥ plage ceassed from the people of Israel.

The ende of the seconde boke of the kynges, otbertopse called the seronne boke of Samuel.

I c OL ——— A npn n 

Chap. rrtig. 

The thprde boke of the Kynges. 

Chat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
Adonias seketh his fathers kyngdome, Salomon is ordeyned kynge.
Chap. 1I. 
Danid before his death exhorteth Salomo to god- lynes. Adonias, Ioab and Semei are put to death. Abiathar is deposed from the presthode.

Chay. III. 
Salomo optayneth wyszdome of God. The wise sentence of Salomon betwene the two wemen that stroue for the childe.

Chap. III. 
The descripcion of Salomons kyngdome, and of his wyszdome.
Chap. V. 
Hiram the kinge of Tyre sendeth Salomon con- nynge craftesmen to buylde the Temple.

Chap. VI. 

The descripcion of the time wha Salomon be- ganne to buylde the Temple, and how it was buylded.

Chap. VII. 

Salomon buyldeth himselfe an house of the tym- 

ber of mount Libanus. 

Chap. VIII. 

The Arke of the LORDE is brought in to Salo- mons temple. The thankesgenynge and prayer of Salomon.

Chap. IX. 

The LORDE appeareth vnto Salomon, which 

geueth Hiram twenty cities tc. 

Chap. X. 
Quene Saba hearynge of Salomons wyszdome, commeth to Ierusalem.

Chap. XI. 

Salomon displeaseth God with the loue of Hey- thenysh wemen. God deuydeth his kyngdome, he dyeth.

Chap. XII. 

Roboam foloweth yonge conneell, and maketh the people to cleue to Ieroboam, which setteth vp Idolatry with the two golden calues.

Chap. XIII. 

Ieroboam despiseth the prophet of the LORDE, is punyshed, q receaucd to grace agayne. A
Lyon slayeth the dishobedient prophet. 

Chap. XIII. 

leroboam dyeth, his sonne Nadab is kynge. Of 
Roboams dominion. 

Chap. XV. 

Abia reigneth in Iuda, after hi reigneth Asa, which hath warre with Baasa the kynge of
Israel. After him reigneth Iosaphath : and 
Baesa dyeth. 

Chap. XVI. 

Ella reigneth in steade of his father Baesa. 
Simri slayeth him, and taketh the kyngdome. 
The people are deuided. Achab is kynge. 

Chap. XVII. 

A greate drouth œ derth in Elias tyme. The 
LORDE fedeth him thorow the Rauens, and by the wedowe at Sarepta.

Chap. XVIII. 
Elias commeth agayne vnto Achab. prestes are slayne.

Chap. XIX. 

lesebel threateneth Elias, he flieth, and is fed and strengthed by the angell. The LORDE talketh with him vpon mount Horeb. Eliseus is called.

All Baals 

Chap. XX. 

Benadab the kynge of Siria fighteth agaynst 
Samaria and Israel is ouercome and dis- comfited.

Chap. XXI. 

Achab oppresseth Naboth for his vynyarde. 

Elias rebuketh him. 

Chap. XXII. 

losaphat ande Achab helpe one another to fighte. 
The prophet Micheas warneth them. 

43 

strycké in age, he coulde not be warme, though he was couered with clothes. Then sayde his seruauntes vnto him: Let vs seke a yonge damsell a virgin for oure lorde the kynge, to stonde before the kynge, and to norish him, q to slepe in his armes, and to warme oure lorde the kynge. And they sought a fayre dasell in all the coastes of
Israel, and founde Abisag of Sunem, and brought her vnto ¥ kynge. And she was a very fayre un and noryshed y kynge, and serued him. Howbeit the kynge knewe her not.

Adonias $ sonne of Hagith lifte vp him- selfe, and sayde: I wyl be kynge. And he pre- pared him charettes and horsmen, and fyftie men to be renners on fote before him. And his father reproued hi not therfore, so moch as to saye: Wherfore doest thou so? And he was a man of a very fayre bewtye *and he had begotten him nexte after Absalo. And his matter stode by Ioab $ sonne of Zeru Ia and by Abiathar the prest, which helped
Adonias. But Sadoc the prest, and Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, and Nathan the prest and Semei and Rei, and Dauids Worthies were not with Adonias.

And wha Adonias offred shepe and oxé, and fat catell besyde the stone of Soheleth, which lyeth by the *well of Rogel, he called all his brethre the kynges sonnes, and all the men of Iuda the kynges seruaütes. But the prophet Nathan and Benaia, and the Worthies, and his brother Salomon called he not. Then sayde Nathan vnto Bethseba Salomons mo- ther: Hast thou not herde y Adonias is kynge, and oure lorde Dauid knoweth not therof?
Come now therfore, I wyll geue the councell, that thou mayest delyuer thy soule and the soule of thy sonne Salomon. Come now and go in to kinge Dauid and saye vnto him:
Hast not thou my lorde the kynge sworne and sayde vnto thy handmayden: Salomon thy sonne shall be kynge after me, and he shall sytt vpon my seate? Why is then Adonias made kynge? Beholde, while thou art yet there, and talkest with the kynge, I wyll come in after the, and tell forth thy tayle. And
Bethseba wente in to the kynge to y chamber. 

SE EIOS Sb 6 

The kynge sayde: What wilt thou? She sayde vnto him: My lorde, Thou hast sworne vnto thy handmayde by the LORDE thy God:
Thy sonne Salomon shall be kynge after me and syt vpon my seate. But now lo, Adonias is kynge, and my lorde the kynge knoweth it not. He hath offred oxen and fat catell, and many shepe, and hath called all the kynges sonnes, and Abiathar the prest, and Ioab the chefe captayne. But thy seruaunt Salomon hath he not bydden. Neuertheles thou m lorde art kynge, the eyes of all Israel loke vnto the, that thou shuldest shewe them who shall syt vpon the seate of my lorde the kynge after the. And wha my lorde the kynge slepeth with his fathers then shal I and my sonne Salomon be fayne to be synners.

But whyle she yet spake to the kynge, the prophet Nathan came, and she tolde y kinge: beholde, there is the prophet Nathan. And whan he came in before the kynge, he wor- shipped the kynge vpon his face to the grounde, and sayde My lorde O kynge, hast thou saide:
Adonias shal be kinge after me, q syt vpó my seate ? For he is gone downe this daye, and hath offred oxen, and fat catell, q hath called all the kynges sonnes, and the captaynes, and the prest Abiathar. And beholde, they eate and drynke before him, and saye: God saue the kynge Adonias. But me thy seruaunt, and Sadoc the prest, and Benaia the sonne of
Toiada, and thy seruaunt Salomon hath he not called. Hath my lorde the kynge com- maunded this, and not certifyed his seruauntes who shall sytt vpon the seate of my lorde the kynge after him ?

The kinge answered and saide: Call Beth- seba vnto me. And she came in before the kinge. And whan she stode before the kynge, the kynge sware and sayde: As truly as the
LORDE lyueth (which hath delyuered my soule out of trouble,) I wyl do vnto the this daye, euen as I sware vnto the by the LORDE the God of Israel, so that Salomon thy sonne shalbe kynge after me, and he shal sit vpon my seate in my steade.

Then Bethseba bowed hir selfe with hir face to the grounde, and thanked the kynge and sayde: God saue my lorde kynge Dauid

t Iosu. 15. b. and 18. c. 

So. retri(ij. The (ij. boke of the kynaes. Chap. f. 
And the kynge was very olde. And Abisag 
The first Chapter. of Sunem serued the kynge. And Bethseba a ND wha kinge Dauid was olde q well! |bowed hirselfe, and worshipped the kynge.

€ 

Dn 

Chap. ij. for euermore. And the kynge sayde: Call me the prest Sadoc q the prophet Nathan, and Benaia the sonne of Ioiada.

£| And whan they came in before the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto them: Take youre lordes sernauntes with yon, and set my sonne
Salomon vpon my Mule, and cary him downe to Gihon: and let Sadoc y prest and the pro- phet Nathan, anoynte him there to be kynge ouer Israel, and blowe the trompe, and saye :
God saue kynge Salomon, and go ye vp atter him: and whan he commeth, he shal syt vpo my seate, and be kynge in my steade: for I haue ordeyned him to be prynce ouer Israel and
Iuda. ‘Then answered Benaia the sonne of loiada vnto the kynge, q sayde: Amen.
The LORDE God of my lorde the kynge saye thus also. As the LORDE hath bene with my lorde the kynge, so be he with Salo- mon also, that his seate maye be greater then the seate of my lorde kynge Dauid.

Then wente they downe, the prest Sadoc and the prophet Nathan, and Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, and the Chrethians, q Plethians, a set Salomon vpon kynge Dauids Mule, q bronghte him to Gihon. And Sadoc the prest toke the oyle horne out of the Taber- nacle, and anoynted Salomon. And they blewe the trompe: And all people sayde :
God saue kynge Salomon. 

d| And all the people wente vp after him, and 

the people pyped with pypes, and was very ioyfull, so that the earth range at the noyse of them. And Adonias herde it, and all they whom he had called, which were with him, and they had new eaten. And whan Ioab herde the noyse of the trompe, he sayde :
What meaneth this noyse of the cite and this busynes? But whyle he yet spake, beholde,
Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar y prest came.

And Adonias sayde: Come in, for thou art a valeaunt man, and bryngest good tydinges.
Ionathas answered and sayde vnto Adonias : 
Alas, oure lorde kynge Dauid hath made 
Salomon kynge, and hath sent with him Sadoc the prest, and the prophet Nathan, and Be- naia the sonne of Ioiada, and the Chrethians and Plethians, and they haue set him vpon the kyuges Mule: and Sadoc ¥ prest with the prophet Nathan hath Eel him kynge at
Gihon, and from théce are they gone vp with 

* Exo. 21. b. a Iosu. 23. d. 

Cbr tj. boke of tbe kpnaes. 

loye, that the cite range with all: that is the noyse that ye haue herde.

Salomon also sytteth vpo the kynges seate, and the kynges seruauntes are gone in to wysh good lucke vnto oure lorde kynge Dauid, and haue sayde: Thy God make Salomon a better name then thy name is, and make his seate greater then thy seate. And they haue wyszshed the kynge good Iucke vpon the bed.
Morouer ¥ kynge hath sayde thus: Praysed be y LORDE God of Israel, which this daye hath made one to syt vpon my seate, that myne eyes haue sene it.

Then were they afrayed, and gatt them vp all that were called by Adonias, and so they departed euery man his waye. But Adonias was afrayed of Salomon, and gat him vp, and wéte his waye, a toke holde of y hornes of y altare. And it was tolde Salomon: beholde,
Adonias feareth kynge Salomo, q beholde, he taketh holde of the hornes of y altare, sayeth:
Let kige Salomo sweare vnto me this daye, that he shall not slaye his seruaunt with the swerde. Salomon sayde: Yf he wil be an honest man, there shall not one heer fall from him vpon the earth: but yf there be euell founde in him, he shall dye. And kinge
Salomo sent, and caused him to be fetched 
* from the altare. And whan he came, he fell downe before kynge Salomon. But Salomon sayde vnto him: Go thy waye in to thy house.

The tj. Chapter. 

So. ceerh. 

6 

OW whan the tyme came that Dauid|d 

shulde dye, he commaunded Salomon his sonne, and sayde: “I go the waye of all the worlde, Be thou stroge therfore, and shewe thyselfe a man, and kepe the watch of the
LORDE thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and holde his ordinaunces, his com- maundementes, his lawes, and his testimonies, tas it is written in the lawe of Moses, that thou mayest be wyse in all that thou doest, and whither so euer thou turnest the: that the
LORDE maye rayse vp his worde, which he hath spoké ouer me, and saide: Yf thy chil- dren kepe their waye and walke before me faithfully and truly and with all their hert and with all their soule, thé shal there neuer fayle the a man vpon the seate of Israel.
Thou knowest well also what Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia hath done vnto me, what he dyd

t Deut. 17. d. 

Fo. eecyot. 

vnto the two chefe captaynes of Israel, * Abner the sonne of Ner, and t Amasa the sonne of
Iether, whom he slewe and shed the bloude of warre wha it was peace, q put the bloude of warre vpon his girdel y was aboute his loynes, and in his shues that were vpon his fete: Do thou acordynge to thy wyszdome, that thou brynge not his graye heer downe to the graue in peaee.

And to the ehildren of Darsyllai the Gi- leadite, thou shalt shewe merey, that they maye eate at thy table. For so ioined they thé selues vnto me, whan I fled before thy brother Absalom. And beholde, thou hast with the t Semel the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini of Bahurin, which cursed me with very bytter and shamefull eursynges, what tyme as I wente to Mahanaim. Yet $ came he downe to mete me at [ordan, where I sware vnto him by the LORDE, and sayde: I wyll not slaye the with the swerde. But suffre not thou him to be vngiltye, for thou art a wyse man, and shalt wel knowe what thou oughtest to do vnto him, that thou mayest brynge his graye heer downe to the graue with bloude.

| So Dauid slepte with his fathers, and was buried in the eite of Dauid. The tyme that
Dauid was kynge ouer Israel, is fortie yeare. 
"Seuen yeares was he kynge at Hebro and thre and thirtie yeare at lerusalem. ^And Salomon sat vpon the seate of Dauid his father, and his kyngdome was made very sure.

But Adonias the sonne of Hagith eame in to Bethseba Salomons mother. And she sayde: Is thy commynge peaceable? He spake: Yee, and sayde: I haue somwhat to saye to the. She sayde: Saye on. He sayde:
Thou knowest that the kyngdome was myne, and that all Israel had sett them selues vpon me, that I shulde be kynge, but now is the kyngdome turned, and become my brothers: for he hath it of the LORDE.

Now desyre I one petieion of the, Make not my face ashamed. She sayde vnto him:
Saye on. He sayde: Speake vnto kynge 
Salomon (for The shall not shame thy face) that he maye geue me Abisag to wyfe. Bethseba sayde: Wel, I wil speake to the kynge for the.

And Bethseba eame in to kynge Salomon to speake with him. And the kynge stode vp, and wente to mete her, and worshipped her,

* 9 e. 3. e, 
$2 Re. 19. d. 

+ 2 Re. 20. b. 
|| Act. 2. c. and 13. d. 

Che dj. boke of the kynges. 

and sat him downe vpon his seate. And there was a chayre set for the kynges mother, so that she sat at his righte hande. And she sayde: One peticion desyre I of the make not my face ashamed. The kynge sayde: Axe
O my mother, I wyl not shame thy face. She saide: Let Abisag of Sunem be geuen thy brother Adonias to wyfe.

Then answered kynge Salomon, and saide vnto his mother: Why desyrest thou Abisag of Sunem for Adonias? Axe the kyngdome for him also, for he is my greater brother, ** and hath Abiathar the prest, and Ioab the sonne of Zeru la. And the kynge sware by the
LORDE, and sayde: God do this and that vnto me, Adonias shall haue spoken this agaynst his lyfe. And now as truly as the
LORDE lyueth which hath ordeyned me, and made me to syt vpon the seate of my father
Dauid, and hath made me a house (ttacord- ynge as he sayde) this daye shal Adonias dye.

And kynge Salomon sent thither by Benaia the sonne of Ioiada, which smote him that he dyed. And to the prest Abiathar sayde y kynge: Go thy waye vnto Anathot to thy londe, for thou art a man of deeth. Neuer- thelesse I wyl not slaye the this daye for thou hast borne the Arke of the LORDE God before my father Dauid, and hast suffred also where my father suffred.

Thus Salomo put forth Abiathar, that he must nomore be the prest of the LORDE, that the worde of the LORDE mighte be fulfilled, tł which he spake ouer the house of
Eli at Silo. 

And this rumoure came before Ioab: for 
Ioab cleued vnto Adonias, and not vnto Salo- mon. Then fled Ioab in to the Tabernacle of the LORDE, and toke holde of the hornes of the altare. And it was tolde kynge Salo- mon, that Ioab was fled in to the Tabernacle of the LORDE, and beholde, he stondeth at the altare.

'Then sent Salomon Benaia the sonne of loiada, and sayde: Go slaye him. And whan Benaia eame to the Tabernacle of the
LORDE, he sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the kynge: Come forth. He sayde: No, I wyl dye here. And Benaia tolde this vnto the kynge agayne, and sayde: Thus hath loab spoken, and thus hath he answered me.

^1 Pa. 30. e. 4 that is: He shal! not denye the thy peticion, **3 Reg.1.a. ++2Reg.7.c. tti Reg. 2.f

—— €bap. ye 

D 

£ 

Chap. th. 

The kinge saide vnto him: Do as he hath spoken, and slaye him, and bury him, that thou mayest put fro me and my fathers house the bloude which Ioab hath shed with out a cause, and that the LORDE maye recom- pence him his blonde vpon his heade, because he smote two men, which were more righteous and better then he, and slewe them with y swerde that my father Dauid knewe not a namely, * Abner y sonne of Ner the chefe captaine ouer Israel, q Amasa the sonne of lether $ chefe captaine ouer luda ^y their bloude maye be recompensed vpo ý heade of
Ioab and of his sede for euer: but Dauid and his sede, his house and his seate haue peace for euermore of the LORDE.

JF| And Benaia the sonne of Ioiada wente vp, 

and smote him, and slewe him: « he was buried in his house in the wyldernes. And y kynge set Benaia y sonne of Ioiada in his steade ouer the hoost. And tSadoc y prest dyd the kynge set in the steade of Abiathar.

And the kynge sent, aud caused for to call 
Semei, and sayde vnto him: Buylde the an house at lerusalem, and dwell there, and departe not from thence, nether hither ner thither. In what daye so euer thou departest forth, and goest ouer y broke Cedron, be thou sure, that thou shalt dye the deeth: thy bloude be vpon thy heade. Semei sayde vnto the kynge: ‘This is a good meanynge, as my lorde the kynge hath sayde, so shal thy seruaunt do.
So Semel dwelt at lerusalem a longe season. 
But after thre yeare it fortuned that two sernauntes ranne awaye from Semei vnto Achis the sonne of Maecha kynge of Gath.

And it was tolde Semei: beholde, thy ser- uauntes are at Gath. hen Semei gat him vp, and sadled his asse, and wéte vnto Gath to Achis, for to seke his seruautes. And wha he came thither, he broughte his sernauntes from Gath.

@| And it was tolde Salomon, that Semei 

wente from lerusalem vnto Gath, and was come agayne. ‘Then sent the kynge, and caused for to call Semei, and sayde vnto him:
Sware not I to the by the LORDE, and assured the, and sayde: Loke what daye so ener thou departest out and goest hither or thither, be sure that thou shalt dye the death?
And thou saydest vnto me: I haue herde a good meanynge. Why hast thou not kepte
* 2 Re. 3. c. 

a 2 Reg. 20.b. + Eze.44. b. 

The ii. boke of the kynges. 

1 2 Re. 16. c.| 

the then acordinge to the ooth of the LORDE, and commanndement that I commaunded the?

And the kynge sayde vnto Semei: Thou remembrest all y wickednes, which thy hert knoweth tthat thou dyddest vnto: my father
Dauid. The LORDE hath recompenced $ thy wickednes vpon thy heade. And kynge
Salomon is blessed, and the seate of Dauid shalbe stablished before ¥ LORDE for euer.
And the kynge commaunded Benaia y sonne of Ioiada, which wente forth, and smote him that he dyed. And the kyngdome was sta- blished by Salomons hande.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND Salomon made mariage with Pharao 

the kynge of Egipte, « toke Pharaos donghter, and broughte her in to the cite of
Dauid, tyll he had buylded his house, and the LORDES house, and the walles rounde aboute lerusalem. But the people offred yet vpon the hye places: for as yet there was no house buylded vnto the name of the LORDE vnto that tyme. But Salomon loued the
LORDE, and walked after the ordinaunces of Dauid his father: excepte onely that he offred and brent incense vpou the hye places.
$And the kynge wente vnto Gibeon, to do sacrifice there: for that was a goodly hye place. And Salomon offred a thousande burntofferyuges vpon the same altare. || And the LOR DE appeared vnto Salomon at Gibeon in a dreame of the nighte, and God sayde:
Axe what I shal geue y. Salomo saide: 
Thou hast done greate mercy vnto my father 
Dauid thy seruaunt. Like as he walked be- fore the in faithfulnes and righteousnes, and in a true hert with the, q this greate mercy hast thou layed vp for him, and geuen him a sonne to syt vpon his seate, as it is now come to passe.
"i Now LORDE my God, thou hast made thy seruaunt kynge in my father Dauids steade: As for me, I am but a small yonge man, knowynge nether my outgoynge ner ingoynge. And thy seruaunt is amonge the people whom thou hast chosen: which is so greate, that no man can nombre them ner descrybe them for multitude. Geue thy ser- uaunt therfore an obedient hert, that he maye indge thy people, « vnderstonde what is good t bad: for who is able to iudge this thy mightie people?

§ 2 Parika: 

|| 3 Reg. 9. a. q Sap. 9. a. 

Fo. eerti. 

| fo. ceerbitj. 

This pleased the LORDE well, that Sa- lomon axed soch a peticion. And God sayde vnto him: For so moch as thou axest this, and desyrest not longe lyfe, nether riches, nether y soules of thine enemies, but vnder- stodinge to heare iudgment, beholde, therfore haue I done acordynge to thy wordes. * Be- holde, I haue geuen the an hert of wyszdome and vnderstondynge, so that soch one as thou hath not bene before the, nether shall ryse vp after the.

Yee and that thou hast not prayed for, haue 
I geuen the also, namely, ryches, and honoure, so that amonge the kynges in thy tyme there is not soch one as thou. And yf thou wilt walke in my wayes, so that thou kepe myue ordinaunces and lawes, as Dauid thy father hath walked, then wyll I geue the a longe lyfe.

And whan Salomon awaked, beholde, it was a dreame, tand he came to lerusale, and stode before the Arke of the LORDES co- uenaunt, and offred burntofferynges, and healthofferinges, and made a greate feast vnto his seruauntes.

At the same tyme came there two harlottes vnto y kynge, and stode before him. And the one woman sayde: Oh my lorde, I and this woman dwelt in one house, and I was delyuered of a childe in the house with her: ¢ on the thirde daye after that I was delyuered, she was delyuered of a childe also. And we were together, so y there was no straunger in y house, but we two: q this womans sonne died in the nighte (for she smoored him in the slepe) and she rose vp in the nighte, and toke my sonne fro my syde (where thy handmayde slepte,) and layed it in hir arme, and hir deed sonne layed she in myne arme. And whan I rose vp in the mornynge to geue my sonne sucke, beholde, he was deed. But in the mornynge I loked well, and beholde, it was not my sonne, whom I had borne.

B| The other woman sayde: Not so, my sonne 

lyueth, and thy sonne is deed. But she sayde: 
Not so, thy sonne is deed, and my sonne liueth. And thusspake they before the kynge.
And the kynge sayde: This womà saieth: my sonne lyueth and thy sonne is deed: Yonder woman sayeth: Not so, thy sonne is deed, q my sonne lyueth. And the kynge saide:
Fetch me a swerde. And whan the swerde was brought before the kynge, the kynge

* Ecels. 1. c. 4 35 Re. 15. a. 

The iij. boke of the Rpnars. 

sayde: Parte the lyuynge childe in two partes, and geue this woman the one halfe, and yonder woman the other halfe.

Then sayde the woman whose sonne lyued, vnto y kinge: (for hir motherly hert was kyndled with pite ouer hir sonne) Oh my lorde, geue hir the childe alyue, and kyll it not. But the other sayde: Let it nether be myne ner thine, but let it be parted. Then answered the kynge, and sayde: Geue this woman the lyuynge childe, and slaye it not, for she is his mother. And all Israel herde of this iudgment that the kynge had genen: and they feared the kynge, for they sawe that
ý wysdome of God was in him to kepe indgmét. 

The (iij. Chapter. 

HUS was Salomon kynge ouer all Israel. 
And these were his prynces: Asaria the sonne of Sadoc the prest: Elihoreph, and Ahi
Ia the sonnes of Sisa, were prestes: losaphat the sonne of Ahilud was chaunceler: Benaia y sonne of Ioiada was the chefe captayne:
Sadoc and Abiathar were prestes: Asaria the sonne of Nathan was ouer the officers: Sabud the sonne of Nathan the prest was the kynges frende: Ahisar was stewarde: Adoniram the

soune of Abda was rent gatherer. 

And Salomon had twolue offycers ouer all 
Israel, which made prouysion of fode for the kynge and his house: One had a moneth longe in y yeare to make prouysion: The sonne of
Hur vpon mount Ephraim. The sonne of 
Deber at Macaz and at Saalbaim, q at Beth- sames, and at Elon, and Beth Hana. The sonne of Hased at Aruboth, and had therto
Socho and all the londe of Hepher. The sonne of Abinadab all y lordshippe at Dor: t had Taphat Salomés doughter to wife.
Baena y sonne of Ahilud at Thaenach q at 
Magiddo, q ouer all Beth Sean, which lyeth besyde Zarthana vnder Iesrael from Beth Seau vnto the playne of Mehelo, tyll the other syde of Iakmeam. in Gilead: he had the townes of lair the sonne of Manasse in Gilead, and had y coastes of Argob which lyeth in Basan, enen thre score greate walled cities, and with brasen barres. Ahinadab y sonne of Iddo at Maha- naim. Ahimaas in Nephtali: and he also toke Basmath Salomons doughter to wife.
Baena the sonne of Husai in Asser and at 

+2 Par. 1. b. 

Chap. iii. 

a 

The sonne of Geber at Ramoth |33 

Chap. b. 

Aloth. Iosaphat the sonne of Paruha in 
Isachar. Semei the sonne of Ela in Ben 
Tamin. Geber the sonne of Vri in the londe 

of Gilead, in the londe of Sihon kynge of the 
Amorites, and of Og the kynge in Basan. 
One officer was in the same londe. As for 
Iuda and Israel, they were in nombre as the sonde of the see, and ate and dronke, and were mery. *Thus was Salomo lorde ouer all the kyngdomes (from the water of the londe of the Philistynes, vnto the border of
Egipte) which broughte him giftes, and serued him as longe as he lyued.

And Salomon had daylie to his vytayles thirtye quarters of fyne meel, thre score quarters of other meel, ten fat oxen, and twéty small catell, and an hundreth shepe, beside hartes and Roes, and wilde goates, and fat capons, and foules. For he had the lordshippe of all the londe on this syde the water, fro
Tiphsa vnto Gasa, and ouer all ¥ kynges on this syde y water: q had peace of all his sub- iectes rounde aboute, so that Iuda and Israel dwelt safe, euery one vnder his vyne, and vnder his figge tre, from Dan vnto Berseba, as longe as Salomon lyued.

And Salomó had fortye thousande cart horses, and twolue thousande horsmen. And the officers prouyded the kynge Salomon with vytayles: and what soeuer belonged to the kynges table, that brought euery man in his moneth, and myssed not: Barlye also q strawe for the horses and coursers, q broughte them vnto the place where y kynge was, euery one after his charge.

t And God gaue Salomon maruelous greate wyszdome and vnderstondinge, and a large hert, as the sonde that lyeth vpon y See shore: so that the wyszdome of Salomon was greater then the wyszdome of all the children towarde the south and of all y Egipcians.
And he was wyser then all men, yee wyser then Ethan the Esrahite, Heman, Chalcal, and Darda, the sonnes of Mahol: and had a greate name amonge all the Heythé on euery syde. And he spake thre thousande t pro- uerbes, q his $songes were a thousande q fyue. And he spake of trees, from ¥ Ceder of Libanus vnto the Isope y groweth out of y wall: he talked also of catell, of foules, of wormes, of fiszshes. And there came of all

* Gen. 15. d. Exo.23.d. Psal.71.b. 

+ Eccls. 1. c. 
Ci A eit ee, Bs 

The iij, boke of the kpnaes. 

Fo. reeriy, nacions to heare ý wyszdome of Salomon, and there came of all the kynges of y earth, which had herde of his wyszdome.

The b: Chapter. 
ND Hiram ý kynge of Tyre sent his/@ 
A seruauntes ynto Salomon, for he had herde, y they had anoynted him kynge in his fathers steade: for Hiram lloued Dauid as loge as he lyued. {And Salomon sent vnto
Hiram, sayenge: **' Thou knowest that my father might not buylde an house vnto the name of the LORDE his God, because of the warre that was aboute him, vntyll the
LORDE delyuered them vnder the soles of his fete: But now hath the LORDE my God geuen me rest on euery syde, so that there is no aduersary ner euell hynderaunce: Beholde,
I am therfore aduysed to buylde an house vnto the name of the LORDE my God, acordinge as the LORDE spake vnto Dauid my father, and sayde: ttThy sonne, whom I shal set vpon thy seate in thy steade, shal buylde an house vnto my name. Commaunde therfore that they hewe me downe Ceders out of Libanus, and that thy seruauntes be with my seruauntes, q the rewarde of thy ser- uauntes wyll I geue the, what so euer thou shalt axe: for thou knowest, y with vs there is no mà which can hewe tymber as the Sido- nians.

Whan Hiram herde the wordes of Salomon, he was very glad, and sayde: Praysed be the
LORDE this daye, which hath geuen Dauid a wyse sonne ouer this greate people. And
Hiram sent vnto Salomon, sayenge: I haue herde what thou hast sent vnto me: I wyl do acordinge vnto all thy desyre with Ceders and
Pyne trees. My seruaiites shall brynge them downe from Libanus vnto y See, and I wyl make them to flote vpo the See, vnto the place which thou shalt shewe me, and there wyl I cause them to aryue, q thou shalt make thé to be fetched. But thou shalt fulfyll my desyre also, and geue fode vnto my housholde folkes. So Hira gaue Salomon Ceders and
Pyne trees acordinge to all his desyre. But 
Salomon gaue Hiram twentye thousande quarters of wheate to eate for his housholde, and twétye quarters of beaten oyle. This gaue Salomon yearly vnto Hiram.

** 1 Par, 23. b. and 29. a. tt 2 Reg. 7. c. 

1 Prouer. $ Cant. | 2 Reg. 5. c. 

So. ceery. The th. boke of the kpnges. 

€| And the LORDE gaue Salomon wyszdome, acordynge as he had sayde vnto him, q there was peace betwene Hiram and Salomon, and they made a couenaunt both together. And
Salomon made an outchosynge (of workmen) thorow out all Israel And y outchosynge was thirtie thousande mé, and he sent thé to mount Libanus euery two monethes ten thou- sande, so that they were one moneth vpon
Libanus, and two monethes at home. And 
* Adoniram was ouer the outchosynge. 

And Salomon had thre score thousande q ten that bare burthens, « foure score thou- sande that hewed tymber vpon the mount, besyde Salomons chefe officers, which were ordeyned ouer the worke: namely thre thou- sande and thre hundreth, which ruled y peo- ple that laboured there in the worke. And y kynge commaunded, that they shulde breake out greate and costly stones, namely fre stone, for the foundacion of the house. And Salo- mons masons, and Hirams, and they that were in those coastes, hewed out q prepared tymbre and stones to the buyldinge of the house.

The bí. Chapter. 

& | TN the foure hundreth and foure score yeare after the “departinge of the children of
Israel out of the londe of Egipte, in the fourth yeare of the raigne of Salomon ouer
Israel in the moneth Sif (y is the seconde moneth) was the house buylded vnto the
LORDE. This house that kynge Salomon buylded vnto y LORDE, was thre score cubytes loge, twenty cubytes brode, q thirtie cubites hye. And he buylded a + Porche before the temple of twentye cubytes longe after the bredth of the house, t ten cubites brode before the house. And in y house he made wyndowes, which might be opened and

shut with lyddes. 

And rounde aboute by the wall of y house he buylded a compase, so y it wente both aboute the temple and the quere, and made his outwarde wall roüde aboute. The nether most stacion was fyue cubytes wyde, and y myddest sixe enbites wyde, and the thirde seuen eubites wyde. For he layed balkes rounde aboute the house, that they touched not y wall of the house.

B| And whan y house was buylded, it was 

' * 3 Re, 4. 2. and 12. c. a 9Par.3.a. Act. 7. f. t Ioh. 10. c, Act. 3. b. and 5. b.

m 

Chap. bi. buylded of whole and outbroken stones, so y there was herde nether hammer ner axe, ner eny other instrument of yron, whan the house was a buyldinge.

But on the righte syde of the myddes of the house there was a dore, so y they might go vp to the myddest stacion by a turne grese, t from the myddest stacion vnto y thirde.
Thus buylded he the house, q fynished it, q syled ý house both aboue q by the walles with
Ceder wodd. He buylded a galery also aboue vpou the whole house fyue cubytes hye, and couered the house with Ceder tymber.

And the worde of the LORDE came vnto 
Salomon, q sayde: Let this be the house y thou buyldest. Yf thou shalt walke in myne ordinaunces, t do acordinge to my lawes, q kepe all my comaundementes, to walke therin, then wyl I stablyszshe my worde with y, (tas
Isayde vnto Dauid thy father) a wyll dwell amonge the childre of Israel, and wil not for- sake my people of Israel.

Thus Salomon buylded the house, q fy- nished it, q buylded the walles on the insyde with Ceder tymber, from the grounde of y house vuto the rofe, and syled it with tymbre on the ynsyde, and ouerlayed the floore of y house with bordes of Pyne tre.

And behynde in the house he buylded a wall of Ceder tymber twentye cubytes longe, from the floore vnto the rofe. And there on the ynsyde buylded he the quere for the most holy. But the house of the temple before the quere was fortye cubites longe: on the ynsyde was the whole house of Ceder with throwne knoppes and floures, so that there was no stone sene. As for the quere, he pre- pared it on the ynsyde of the house, that the
Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE might be set therin. And before the quere (which was twentye cubites longe, twentye cubytes brode, and twentye cubytes hye, and ouer- layed with pure golde) he syled the altare with Ceder.

And Salomon ouerlayed the house on ¥ ynsyde with pure golde, q shot barres of golde before the quere, which he had ouerlayed with golde, so that y whole house was layed ouer with golde. And all the altare also before y quere ouerlayed he with golde.

$ He made also in the quere two Cherubins 

t 2 Re.7. b. § Exo. 25. b. 

Chap. bij. ten cubites hye of Olyue tre. One wynge of ether of the Cherubs had fyue cubytes, so that from the edge of his one wynge to the edge of his other wynge there were ten cubytes.
Euen so had the other Cherub ten cubites also, and both the Cherubs were of one measure and of one quantitie so y ether Cherub was ten cubites hye. And he put the Cherubins within in the house. And the Cherubins spred forth their wynges, so that the wynge of the one touched the one wall, and the other
Cherubs wynge touched the other wall. But in the myddes of ¥ house the one wynge touched another. And he ouerlayed the
Cherubins with golde. 

aboute,. he caused to make carued worke, with carued Cherubins, palme trees, and floures.
And the pauement of the house ouerlayed he also with goldé plates. And at the intraunce of the quere he made two dores of olyue tre with fyue squared postes, and caused carued worke to be made therof with Cherubins, palme trees and floures, q ouerlayed them with plates of golde. So made he also at the intraunce of the temple, foure squared postes of Olyue tre, and two dores of Pyne tre (so that ether dore had two syde dores one haginge to another) and made carued worke therof, palme trees and floures, right as it was appoynted.

And he buylded a courte also within with thre rowes of fre stone, and with one rowe of playne Ceder tymber.

In the fourth yeare in the moneth Sif, was the foundacion of the LORDES house layed: and in the eleuenth yeare in the moneth Bul
(that is the eight moneth) was the house fynished as it shulde be, so that they were seuen yeare a buyldinge of it.

The bij. Chapter. 

a UT Salomon was a buyldinge his awne 
B house thirtene yeare, q fynished it, namely, he buylded an house of the wodd of
Libanus, an hundreth cubites longe, fiftye cubites wyde, q thirtie cubites hye, foure- squared with rowes of pilers, and with carued
Ceders. And the rofe aboue syled he also with Ceder wodd vpon the fyue çq fortie pilers, for one rowe had fyftene pilers, so y there stode euer thre pilers one right ouer agayust

* 3 Re. 3. a. 

+ 2 Par. 2. c. t Exo. 31. a. 

The th. boke of tbe kpnaes. 

And on all the walles of the house rounde | 

another: so that euery space betwixte the pilers was one ouer agaynst another foure squared with the pilers.

And he made a porche with pilers which was fiftye cubites longe, and thirtie cubites brode, q yet a porche before it with pilers ¢ with a greate poste. He made a porche also vnto y kynges seate (wherin Y iudgment was kepte) and made it to be the porche of iudg- ment, and syled it with Ceder from the paue- ment vnto the pauement agayne, and his owne house wherin he dwelt, in y back courte made betwene y house and the porche like the other.
And like vnto the porche made he a house for 
Pharaos doughter, *whom Salomon had taken to wife.

All these were costly stone hewen after y measure, cut with sawes on euery syde, from the grounde vnto the rofe: and without the greate courte also. As for the foundacions, they were costly and greate stones, ten and eighte cubites greate: and costly fre stones theron acordinge to y measure, and Ceders.
But the greate courte rounde aboute had thre rowes of fre stone, q one rowe of playne Ce- ders: Éuen so also the courte by y house of the LORDE within, and the porch by the house.

And kynge Salomon sent to feteh one t Hiram of Tyre a wedowes sonne, of the trybe of Nephtali, and his father had bene a man of Tyre, t which was a connynge ma in metall, full of wyszdome, vnderstondinge and knowlege to worke all maner of metall worke.;
Whan he came to kynge Salomon, he made all his worke, $and made two brasen pilers, ether of them eightene cubites hye: and a threde of xij. eubites was the measure aboute both y pilers: and he made two knoppes of brasse molten, to set aboue vpon the pilers: and euery knoppe was fyue cubytes hye: and on euery knoppe aboue vpon y pilers seué wrythen ropes like cheynes. And vpon euery knoppe he made two rowes of pomgranates rounde aboute on one rope, wherwith y knoppe was couered. And the knoppes were like roses before y porche foure cubites greate.
And the pomgranates in the rowes rounde aboute were two hüdreth aboue and beneth vpon the rope, which wéte rounde aboute the thicknes of the knoppe, on euery knoppe vpon both the pilers. And set vp the pilers before

1 Par. 19, b. 
44 

$ Iere. 52. e. 4 Re. 25. b. 

Fo. retxríé. 

B 

Fo. cerry. 

5 

E| And the soket vpon the stole was a cubyte 

the porche of the temple. And that which he set on the right hande, called he Iachin : and that which he set on the lefte hande, called he Boos. And so stode it aboue vpon the pilers euen like roses. Thus was the worke of y pilers fynished.

And he made a molten lauer ten cubytes wyde from the one syde to the other rounde aboute, and fyue cubites hye, and a threde of thirtie cubites lage was y measure rounde aboute: and aboute the same lauer that was ten cubites wyde, there wente knoppes on the edge therof rounde aboute the lauer. Two rowes were there of the knoppes molten with the lauer.

And it stode vpon twolue bullockes, wherof thre were turned towarde the north, thre towarde the west, thre towarde the south, and thre towarde the east, and the lauer aboue theron, so that all their hynder partes were within vnder the laner: wherof the thicknesse was an handbreth: and the edge of it was like the edge of a cuppe, and as a floured rose, and it conteyned two thousande *Battes.

And he made ten brasen seates, euery one foure cubites longe and brode, and thre cu- biteshye. The seate was made so, that it had sydes betwene the ledges. And on the sydes betwene the ledges there were lyons, bullockes and Cherubins. And on y ledges which were aboue and beneth the lyons and bullockes, were the sydes made so, that they were set downwardes. And enery stole had foure brasen wheles with brasen axeltrees. And vpon the foure corners there were proppes molten, euery one ouer agaynst another, vn- derset vnto the kettell.

hye and rounde, a cubyte and an halfe wyde: and on the soket there were knoppes in foldes, which were foure squared q not rounde. The foure wheles stode beneth by the sydes, q the axeltrees of the wheles were harde on ¥ seate.
Euery whele was a cubite and a halfe hye, and they were wheles like cart wheles. And their axeltrees, spokes, nales, q shaftes were all molten. And the foure proppes vpo the foure corners of enery seate were harde on the seate.

And on the soket aboue vpon the seate a cubyte and an halfe rounde aboute, there were ledges and sydes harde on the seate. And

* À Bat, was a certayne measure of liquore. 

The (ij. boke of tbe Rpnars. 

Chap. bij. 

on the plat of the same sydes and ledges, he caused to carue Cherubins, lyons and palme trees, one by another rounde abonte theron.
After this maner made he ten molté seates, one maner of measure q widenes was in all

And he made ten copper kettels, so that one kettell coteyned fortye Battes, and was foure cubites greate, and vpon euery seate was a kettell And fyue seates set he on the righte syde of the house, and the other fyue on the lefte syde. But the lauer set he before on the righte hande towarde the south.

And Hiram made pottes also and shouels and basens, q so fynished he all the worke, that kynge Salomon caused to be made in the house of the LORDE: namely y two pilers, and the rounde knoppes aboue vpon the two pilers, and the two wrythen ropes to couer the two rounde knoppes vpon the pilers. And the foure hüdreth pomgranates ou the two wrythen ropes, euer two rowes of pomgranates vnto euery rope, to couer the two rounde knoppes vpon the pilers. And the ten seates, and ten kettels theron, and the lauer, and twolue bullockes vnder y laner. And the pottes, shouels and basens. And all the orna- mentes which Hiram made vnto kynge Salo- mon for the house of the LORDE, were of pure metall. In the countre by Iordane, caused the kynge them to be molten in thicke earth, betwene Sucoth and Zarthan. And
Salomon let all the apparell be vnweyed, because the metall was so moch.

Morouer Salomon made all the apperell that belonged vnto the house of the LORDE: namely a golden altare, a golden table that the shewbred laye on, fyne candelstickes on the righte hande, and fyue candelstickes on the lefte (before the quere) of pure golde, with flonres, lampes and snoffers of golde therto, flat peces, charges, basens, spones and cen- sours of pure golde. And the hokes of y dores on the insyde of the house in the most holy, and in the dores of the house of the téple of the LORDE were of golde.

Thus all the worke that kynge Salomon made in y house of the LORDE, was fynis- shed. t And Salomon brought in that his father Dauid had sanctified, of sylner and golde and omamentes, and layed it amonge the treasures of the house of the LORDE.

t2 Bar oda 

Chap. biij. The tj. boke 
The biij. Chapter. a HEN gathered kynge Salomon all y

T Elders in Israel together, all the rulers of the trybes and prynces of the fathers amonge the children of Israel, vnto Ierusalem, to brynge vp the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE, *out of the cite of Dauid, that is Sion. And there resorted vnto kynge
Salomon all the men in Israel, at the feast in the moneth Ethanim, that is y seuenth moneth. And whan all ¥ Elders of Israel came, the prestes toke the Arke of the LORDE, and broughte it vp, and the Tabernacle of witnesse, and all the ornamentes of the Sanc- tuary that were in the Tabernacle. ‘This dyd the prestes and the Leuites. And kynge
Salomon and all the congregacion of Israel ¥ were gathered vnto him, wente with him before the Arke, and offred shepe and bul- lockes, so many, that they coulde not be nombred ner tolde.

So the prestes broughte the Arke of the 
LORDES couenaunt vnte hir place, euen in to y Quere of the house in the most holy vnder y wynges of the Cherubins. For ý Cherubins spred out their wynges in the place where the
Arke stode, and couered the Arke and the staues therof from aboue. And the staues were so loge, that y knoppes of them were sene from the Sanctuary before ý quere, but on the out syde were they not sene, and they were there vnto this daye.

And in the Arke there was nothinge, but onely the two tables of stone, t which Moses had layed therin at Horeb, whan LORDE made a couenaunt with the children of Israel, what tyme as they were departed out of the londe of Egipte.

But whan the prestes wente out of the 
Sanctuary, a cloude fylled the house of the 
LORDE, so y the prestes coulde not stonde q execute the office for the cloude: for the glory of the LORDE fylled the LORDES house.
Then sayde Salomon: +t The LORDE sayde, that he wolde dwell in a darke cloude. I haue buylded an house, to be an habitacion vnto the: a seate, y thou mayest dwell there for euer. And jy kynge turned his face, q blessed all the congregacion of Israel. And all the cogregacion of Israel stode, q he sayde:

* 2 Re. 6. d. t Deut. 10. a. 1 Leuit. 16. a. 
$2 Re. 7. a. 1 Par.23.b. 2 Par. 6. a. 

of tbe kpnges, 

So. creryitg. 

Praysed be the LORDE God of Israel, which promised by his mouth vnto my father
Dauid, and by his hade hath fulfylled it, and sayde: $Sence the daye y I broughte my people of Israel out of Egipte, haue I chosen no cite amoge all the trybes of Israel, to buylde me an house, that my name might be there.
| But Dauid haue I chosen, to be ouer my people of Israel :

And in dede my father Dauid was mynded |g to buylde an house vnto the name of the
LORDE God of Israel: neuertheles the 
LORDE sayde vnto my father Dauid: Where as thou wast mynded to buylde an house vnto my name, thou hast done well, that thou art so aduysed. Howbeit thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne which shal come out of thy loynes, he shal buylde an house vnto my name. And the LORDE hath per- fourmed his worde that he spake: For I am come vp in my father Dauids steade, and syt vpon the seate of Israel as the LORDE sayde: and haue buylded an house vnto the name of the LORDE God of Israel: and there haue I ordeyned a place for the Arke, wherin is the LORDES couenaunt, which he made with oure fathers, whan he broughte them out of y londe of Egipte.

And Salomon stode before the altare of the 
LORDE in the presence of the whole congre- gacion of Israel, and helde out his handes towarde heauen, and sayde : 10 LORDE God of Israel, there is no god like the, nether aboue in heauen, ner beneth vpó earth, thou that kepest couenaüt and mercy for all thy seruauntes that walke before y with all their hert, thou that hast kepte promes with my father Dauid thy seruaunt : With thy mouth thou saydest it, and with thy hande hast thou fulfylled it, as it is come to passe this daye.
Now LORDE God of Israel make good vnto|33 my father Dauid thy seruaunt, that which thou hast promysed him, and sayde: ** Thou shalt not wante a man before me to syt vpon the seate of Israel, yf thy childré kepe their waye, so y they walke before me like as thou hast walked before me. Now thou God of Israel, let thy worde be verified, which thou hast promysed vnto my father Dauid thy seruaunt.

For thynkest thou y God dwelleth vpon earth? +tBeholde the heauens and the heauens

{ 2 Par. 6. c. 
++ Esa. 66.a. Act. 7. f. 

|| 1 Re. 16. a. ** 3 Reg. 2. a. 

Fo. ceerrtiij. 

of all heauens maye not contayne the: how shulde then this house do it, that I haue buylded? But turne the vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to his supplicacion (O
LORDE my God) that thou mayest heare the thaukesgeuynge and prayer, which thy seruaunt maketh before the this daye, so that thine eyes be open ouer this house night and daye, euen ouer this place (wherof thou saydest: *My name shall dwell there.) That thou mayest heare the prayer which thy ser- uaüt maketh in this place, q heare the inter- cession of thy seruaunt q of thy people of
Israel, which they shall make here in this place of thy habitacion in heauen: and whan thou hearest it, be gracious.

Whan eny ma synneth agaynst his negh- boure, "and taketh vpon him an ooth wherwith he byndeth him selfe, and y ooth commeth before thine altare in this house, then heare thou in heaué, and se that thy seruauntes haue right, to condemne the vngodly, and to bryuge his waye vpon his owne heade, and to iustifie the righteous, to geue him acordinge to his righteousnes.

t Whan thy people of Israel is smytten be- fore their enemies (whyle they haue synned agaynst the) and yf they turne vnto the and knowlege thy name, q make their prayer and intercession vnto the in this house, the heare thou them in heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synne of thy people of Israel, and brynge them agayne in to the londe, y thou hast geuen vnto their fathers.

t Whan the heauen is shut vp, so y it rayneth not (for so moch, as they haue synned agaynst the) aud yf they make their prayer in this place, and knowlege thy name, and turne from their synnes whà thou troublest them, heare thou them then in heauen, and be mer- cifull vnto the synnes of thy seruauntes, and of thy people of Israel, that thou mayest shewe them the good waye, wherin they shulde walke, and let it rayne vpon the londe that thou hast geuen thy people to inheritaunce.

Whan a derth, or pestilence, or drouth, or burnynge, or greshopper or catirpiller, is in their londe, or whan his enemye layeth sege to his portes in the londe, or whau eny other plage or disease happeneth, who so euer then maketh his prayer and peticion, $ whether it

* Deu. 12.a. 22 Par. 6. d. Exo, 22, b. 

t3 Re. 17. a. 

t Deu, 30. a. 
§ Esa. 56. b. 

Cbr ii. boke of tbe kpnges. 

Chap. biij. 

be eny other men or thy people of Israel 
(which thé are aware of their plage) euery one in his hert, and spredeth out his handes vnto this house: Heare thou then in heauen in the seate where thou dwellest, and be mercifull, q se that thou geue euery one acordinge as he hath walked, like as thou knowest his hert (for thou onely knowest the hert of all the children of men) that they maye allwaye feare the, as longe as they lyne in the lande, which thou hast geuen vnto oure fathers.

l And whan eny straunger, that is not of thy people of Israel, commeth out of a farre countre for thy names sake (for they shall heare of thy greate name, and of thy mightie hade, and of thy outstretched arme) and commeth to make his prayer in this house, heare thou him then in heauen, euen in the seate of thy dwellynge, and do all for the which that straunger calleth vpon the, that all the nacions vpon earth maye knowe thy name, and that they maye feare the, as thy people of
Israel do: and that they maye knowe, how that this house which I haue buylded, is named after thy name.

Whan thy people go forth to the battayll agaynst their enemyes, the waye that thou shalt sende them fand shall praye vnto the
LORDE towarde the waye of the cite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that
I haue buylded vnto thy name, heare thou then their prayer and peticion in heauen, and execute iudgment for them.

Whan they synne agaynst the (for **there is no mà that synneth not) q thou be wroth, and delyuer thé vnto their enemyes, so that they cary them awaye captyue in to the enemyes londe farre or nye, and yf they remembre them selues in the londe where they are cap- tyue, and turne, and make their intercession vnto the in the londe of their captyuite, and saye: We haue synned, q done amysse, and haue bene vngodly, and so turne vnto y with all their hert, and with all their soule in the lode of their enemies (which led them awaye captyue) and make their prayer vnto the to- warde the waye of their londe, that thou hast geuen vnto their fathers, euen towarde the cite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that I haue buylded vnto thy name: then heare thou their prayer and supplicacion

|| Joh. 12: c. Acto.8.e. T Dan.6.b. ** Eccle.7. c. 

1 Ioh. 1. b. 

Chap. tr. 

in heauen, * from the seate of thy dwellynge, and execute iudgment for them, and be mer- cifull vnto thy people that haue synned agaynst the, and vnto all their trespaces, wherwith they haue transgressed agaynst the, tand graunte thé mercy in the sighte of them which led them awaye presonners, that their enemyes maye be mercyfull vnto them: for they are thy people, and thyne enheritaunce, whom thou broughtest out of Egipte, from the yron fornace: that thine eyes maye be open vnto the peticion of thy seruauut, and of thy people of Israel, that thou maiest heare them in all thinges for the which they shall call vpon thet
(for thou O LORDE LORDE) hast sun- dered them out to be an inheritaunce vnto thy selfe, from amdge all the nacions vpon earth, acordinge as thou saydest by Moses thy seruaunt, whan thou broughtest oure fathers out of Egipte.

§And wha Salomon had ended all this prayer and peticion before the LORDE, he rose vp from the altare of the LORDE, and lefte of from knelynge and holdynge out of handes towarde heauen, aud stode and blessed all the congregacion of Israel with loude voyce, and sayde: Praysed be the LORDE which hath geuen rest vnto his people, acordinge as he sayde. There hath not one fayled of all his good wordes, which he spake by his ser- uaunt Moses. The LORDE oure God be with vs, as he hath bene with oure fathers, and forsake vs not, nether withdrawe his hande from vs, but bowe oure hertes vnto him, that we maye walke in all his wayes, and kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunces and lawes, which he comimaunded oure fathers.
And these wordes wherwith I haue made my peticion before the LORDE, come nye vnto the LORDE oure God daye and nighte, that he maye execute iudgmenut for his seruaunt and for his people of Israel, euery oue at his tyme: that all nacions vpon earth maye knowe, that the LORDE is God, q that there is none other. And let youre hert be perfecte with the LORDE oure God, to walke in his sta- tutes, and to kepe his commaundementes, as it is this daye.

And the kynge with all Israel his people offred sacrifice before the LORDE. And
Salomon offred deed offerynges (which he 

* Amos 9. b. t 1 Esd. 1. a. 

s2 Par Ta. CD Eau fo C 

+ Exo. 19.8. 

The if. boke of the kpnges. 

offred vnto the LORDE) two and twenty thousande oxen, and an hundreth q twenty thousande shepe. So the kynge and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the
LORDE. The same daye dyd the kynge dedi- cate the myddelimost courte, which was before thehouseof the LORDE: that he mightethere perfourmethe burntofferynges, meatofferynges, and the fat of the deedofferynges: for the brasen altare that stode before y LORDE, was to litle for the burntofferynges, meatoffer- ynges, and for the fat of the deedofferynges.

And at the same tyme made Salomon a solempne feast, and all Israel a greate con- gregacion with him, from the border of
Hemath vnto the ryuer of Egipte, before the 
LORDE oure God, seuen dayes, and yet seuen dayes, that were fourtene daies. And on the eight daye he let the people go. And they blessed the kynge, and wente vnto their tentes reloysinge and with a mery hert, be- cause of all the good that the LORDE had done vnto Dauid his seruaunt, ¢ to his people of Israel.

The ir. Chapter. 
ND whan Salomon had fynished* 

buyldinge of the house of the LORDE, and the kyuges house, and all that his desyre and pleasure was to make, y LORDE ap- peared vnto him the seconde tyme, leuen as he appeared vnto him at Gibeon. And the
LORDE sayde vnto him: I haue herde thy prayer and peticion, that thou hast made be- fore me, and haue sanctified this house which thou hast buylded, that I maye set my name there for euer: and myne eyes and my hert shalbe there allwaye. And yf thou walke be- fore me (as thy father Dauid walked) with a perfecte and a true hert, so that thou do all that I haue commauuded the, and kepe myne ordinaunces and lawes, then wyll I stablish the seate of thy kyngdome ouer Israel for euer, acordinge as [ promysed thy father Dauid, and sayde: {Thou shalt not wante a man from the seate of Israel.

But yf ye turne back fro me, ye and youre childré, and kepe not my commaundementes and ordinaunces which I haue layed before you, but go and serue other goddes, and wor- shipe them, then wyll I rote Israel out of the londe that I haue geuen them. **And the
|| 5 Re. 3. a. 

T 3Re.2.a. ** 4 Re. 25. b. Tere. 7. a. 

So. rrcyrb. 

29 

B 

fo. cecrybt. 

house that I haue halowed vnto my name, wyll I put awaye fro my face. And Israel shall be come a byworde and fabell amoge all nacions, and so shal this hye house: so that euery one y goeth by, shall be astonyed, and make an hyssyuge, and saye: *Whertore hath the LORDE done thus vnto this londe and to this house? Then shal it be answered:
Because they forsoke ý LORDE their God, 
(which brought their fathers out of the londe of Egipte) and haue receaued other goddes, and worshipped them, and serued them. Ther- fore hath ý LORDE brought all this euell vpon them.

Now whan the twentye yeares were ended, 
*wherin Salomon buylded the two houses, the 
LORDES house and the kynges house, t where vnto Hiram the kynge of Tyre brought Salo- mo Ceder trees q Pyne trees, and golde after all his desyre, then gaue kynge Salomon vnto
Hiram twentye cities in the countre of Galile. 
And Hiram departed from Tyre to vyset the cities which Salomon had geuen him, q they pleased him not, and he sayde: What maner of cities are these (my brother) that thou hast geue me? And he called them the londe of
Cabul vnto this daye. And Hiram sent vnto the kynge, sixe score hundreth weight of
Golde. And the same is the summe of the taxe, that kynge Salomon raysed to the buyldinge of the house of the LORDE, and his awne house, x Millo, and the walles of lerusalem, and Hasor, and Megiddo, and
Gaser. 

For Pharao ¥ kynge of Egipte came vp, and wane Gaser, q brent it with fyre, ¢ slewe the Cananites y dwelt in the cite, q gaue it for a gifte vnto his doughter Salomos wife.
So Salomon buylded Gaser, ¢ the lower 
Bethoron, and Baelath and Thamar, in y wyldernes, in the londe, q all the cities of the corne houses that Salomon had, and all the cities of the charettes, q all the cities of the horsmen, and what it pleased him to buylde at lerusalem, in Libanus, q in éuery countre of his domynion.

And all the remnaunt of the people of the 
Amorytes, Hethites, Pheresites, Heuites and 
Iebusites, which were not of the children of 
Israel, their children which they lefte behynde them in the londe (whom the children of

* Deu. 29. d. Iere. 22. b. 
1 Leui. 25. f. 

? 2 Par. 8. a. 
$ 3 Re. 7. b. 

t 2 Re. 5. b. 

The iij. boke of the kpnars. 

Chap. r. 

Israel coulde not vtterly destroye) those dyd 
Salomon make tributaries vnto this daye. 

t But of the children of Israel he made no bondmen, but let them be men of warre, and his seruauntes, and prynces, and knightes, and ouer his charettes and horsmé. And the officers which were ouer Salomons busynesse, were fyue hundreth and fyftye, which ruled the people, and perfourmed the worke.

And Pharaos doughter wente vp from the cite of Dauid, in to hir house $which he had buylded for her. || Then buylded he Millo likewyse. And thre tymes in the yeare dyd
Salomon offre burntofferynges and deed offer- ynges vpon the altare "that he had buylded vnto the LORDE, and burnt incense vpon it before the LORDE, and so was the house ended and fynished.

** And Salomon made shippes also at Ezeon 
Geber, which lyeth by Eloth besyde the Reed 
See shore in y londe of the Edomites. And 
Hiram sent his seruauntes by shippe, which were shipmen, and had experience of the See, with Salomons seruauntes; and they came vnto ttOphir, and fetched from thence one ¢ twenty score hundreth weight of golde, and brought it vnto Salomon.

Che y. Chapter. 
A ND whan kynge Salomons fame of the|A 

m 

name of the LORDE came to the eares of the *Quene of riche Arabia, she came to proue him with darke sentences. And she came to lerusalem with a maruelons greate trayne, with camels which bare spyces, and moch golde, and precious stones. And whan she came in to kynge Salomon, she spake vnto him all that was in hir hert. And Salo- mon tolde her euerythinge, and the kynge had nothinge in seerete, but he tolde it her.
But whan the Quene of riche Arabia sawe all the wyszdome of Salomon, and the house that he had buylded, and the meates of his table, and the dwellinges of' his seruauntes, q the offyces of his ministers, and their gar- mentes, and his butlers and the burntoffer- ynges which he offred in the house of the
LORDE, she wondred exceadingly, and coulde no longer refrayne, but sayde vuto the kynge: It is true that I haue herde in my londe of thy behauoure and of thy wyszdome.

|| 2 Reg. 5. b. 

€ 2Par.4.a. **3 Re.22.g. 2 Par.8.d. tt Iere. 10, b.

* 9 Par. 9. a. Mat. 12.d. 

Chap. rt. 

sawe it with myne eyes: and beholde, the halfe hath not bene tolde me.

Thou hast more wyszdome and good, thé the fame is that I haue herde. Happye are thy people and thy seruauntes, that allwaie stonde before the, and heare thy wyszdome.
Praysed be the LORDE thy God, which had soch a pleasure vnto the, that he set the vpon the seate of Israel: because he hath allwaye loued Israel, and hath set the to be kynge, that thou shuldest mantayne iustyce and equyte.

And she gaue the kynge syxe score hun- dreth weighte of golde, and very moch spyce, and precious stones. ‘There came neuer so moch spyce thyther, as the Quene of riche
Arabia gaue vnto kynge Salomon. And 
Hirams shippes, *which caried golde out of 
Ophir, broughte maruelous moch costly tym- ber and precious stones from Ophir. And of that costly tymber the kynge caused to make pilers in the house of the LORDE, and in y kinges house, and harpes and Psalteries for the Musicians. There came nomore soch costly tymber, nether was it sene ynto this daye. And kynge Salomon gaue the quene of riche Arabia, all that she desyred and axed, besydes that which he gaue her of a frye hande. And she returned, and departed in to hir lande with hir seruauntes.

'The golde that came to Salomon in one yeare, was nyne and thyrtie score hundreth weighte, besydes that which came of chapmen, marchauntes and Apotecaries, and of the nexte kynges, and of the mightie men in the londe. And kynge Salomon caused to make two hundreth speares of beaten golde, sixe hundreth peces of golde put he to euery speare: and thre hundreth shyldes of y best golde, euen thre pounde of golde vpon euery shylde.
And the kynge put them in the * house of the wod of Libanus.

B| And the kynge made a greate seate of 

Yuery, and ouerlayed it with y most precious golde. And the seate had sixe steppes, and y heade of the seate was roūde behynde. And there were two postes to leane vpó on both the sydes of the seate, and two lyons stode vpon the leanynge postes, and twolue lyons stode vpon the sixe steppes on both the sydes.
Soch one hath not bene made in eny kyng- dome. All kynge Salomos drynkynge vessels

* 3 Re. 9. e. 

t 3 Re. 7. a. 1 2 Par. 9. d. 

The iij. boke of the kpnges. 
33! And I wolde not beleue it, tyll I came and 

were of golde, and all the vessels in the house of ý wod of Libanus were of pure golde also: for syluer was not regarded in Salomons tyme.
For the kynges Seeshippe y sayled vpon the 
See with y shippe of Hiram, came once in thre yeare, and broughte golde, syluer, Yuery,
Apes, and Pecockes. 

t'Thus was kynge Salomon greater in riches and wyszdome, then all the kynges vpo earth:
And all the worlde desyred to se Salomon, that they mighte heare the wyszdome which
God gaue him in his hert. And they broughte him yearly euery man his present, vessels of syluer and golde, rayment and harnesse, spyces, horses and Mules. And Salomon broughte charettes and horsmen together, so that he had a thousande and foure hundreth charettes, and twolue thousande horsmen: and those he put in y charet cities, and with the kynge at Ierusalem.

And the kynge broughte it to passe, that there was as moch syluer at Ierusalé as stones: and as many Ceders as there were wylde figge trees in the valleys. And Salomos horses were broughte out of Egipte, and fro Keua: for the kynges marchauntes fetched them from Keua for money. And a charet came vp out of Egipte for sixe hüdreth Sycles of
Syluer, and an horse for an hüdreth and fyftye. Thus were they brought also vnto all the kynges of the Hethites and to the kynges of Siria by their handes.

The ri. Chapter. 

UT kynge Salomon loued many out- landish wemen, § Pharaos doughter, and wemen of Moab, of Ammo, of Edom, of
Sidon, and of Heth, euen of those nacions, that the LORDE spake of vnto the children of Israel: “Go not ye vnto them, and let not them come vnto you: they shal surely bowe youre hertes after their goddes: Vnto these dyd Salomon enclyne with affeccion. And he had seuen hundreth wemen to wyues, and thre hundreth concubynes, and his wyues turned his hert asyde. And whan he was now olde, his wyues bowed his hert after straunge goddes, so that his hert was not whole with the LORDE his God, as was the hert of

Dauid his father. 
So Salomon walked after Astaroth the god of the Sidonians, and after Malcom the

$3 Re. 3. a. a Exo. 34. b. Deut. 7. a. and 17. d. 

Fo. ceeprhij. 

a 

Fo. reryrbítg. abhominacion of the Ammonites. And Salo- mon dyd y which displeased the LORDE, and

|folowed not y LORDE to y vttemost as dyd his father Dauid. The buylded Salomo an hie place vnto Chamos the abhominacio of y
Moabites (vpon the mount that lyeth before 
Terusalé) and vnto Moloch the abhominacion of the Ammonites.

Thus dyd Salomon for all his outladish wyues, which brent inceuse, aud offred vnto their goddes. But the LORDE was wroth at Salomon, because his hert was turned asyde from y LORDE God of Israel, *which had two tymes appeared vnto him, and comaunded him, that he shulde not walke after other goddes: and yet kepte he not that the
LORDE commaunded him. Therfore sayde the LORDE vnto Salomon: For so moch as this is done with the, and hast not kepte my couenaunt and myne ordinaunces, which I commaunded the, therfore wyll I also plucke thy kyngdome from the, and geue it vnto thy seruaunt: Neuertheles in thy tyme will I not do it, for thy father Dauids sake, but from the hande of thy sonne wyl I plucke it. Howbeit
I wyl not plucke ý kyngdome cleane awaye. 
One trybe wyll I geue vnto thy sonne, for 
Dauid my seruauntes sake, and for Ierusalems sake which I haue chosen.

And the LORDE raysed vp an aduersary vnto Salomon, euen Hadad the Edomite of the kynges sede, which was in Edom. For whan Dauid was in Edom, and Ioab the chefe captayne wente vp to bury the slayne, he smote all the males in Edom. (For Ioab remayned there sixe monethes and all Israel, tyll he had roted out all ¥ males that were in
Edom.) Then fled Hadad, and certayne men of $ Moabites with him, of his fathers ser- uauntes. As for Hadad, he was a yonge man.

And they gat them vp fro Madian, aud came vnto Paran, and toke men with them out of Paran, and came in to Egipte vnto
Pharao the kynge of Egipte: which gaue him an house and certayne vytales appoynted, t gaue him a countre. And Adad founde greate fauoure in the sighte of Pharao, so that he gaue him to wife euen the sister of his owne wife Thaphenes the Quene. And Tha- phenes sister bare him Genubath his sonue, and Thaphenes norished him vp in Pharaos

e 3 Re. 3. a. and 9. a, 

The (ij. boke of tbe kpnges. 

Chap. rt. house, in so moch that Genubath was in Pha- raos house amonge Pharaos children.

Now wha Hadad herde iu Egipte, that|:3 
Dauid was fallé on slepe with his fathers, and y loab the chefe captayne was deed, he sayde vnto Pharao: Let me go in to my countre.
Pharao sayde vnto him: What lackest thou with me, that thou wilt go in to thy countre?
He sayde: Nothynge, but yet let me go. 

God raysed him vp another aduersary also, one Reson the sonne of El Jada, which fled from his lorde Hadad Eser kynge of Zeba, and gathered men agaynst him, and was a captayne of the men of warre whan Dauid slewe them: and they wente vnto Damascus and dwelt there, and reigned at Damasceus,| © and he was Israels aduersary as loge as Salo- mon lyued. ‘This is the harme y Hadad suffred: therfore had he euell will at Israel, and was kynge ouer Siria.

Morouer leroboam the sonne of Nebat an 
Ephraite Salomons seruaunt (and his mothers name was Zeruga, a wedowe) lifte vp his hande also agaynst the kynge. And this is the cause wherfore he hfte vp his hande agaynst the kynge: Whan Salomon buylded
Millo, he shut vp a gappe in the cite of Dauid his father. And Ieroboam was a mà of armes.
And whan Salomon sawe that it was a mete youge man, he set him ouer all the burthens of the house of Ioseph.

But at the same tyme it fortuned, that 
Ieroboam wente out from lerusalem, and the prophet Ahias of Silo founde him by the waye, and he had a new cloke vpon him, and they two were alone in the felde. And Ahia toke holde of the new cloke y he had on, and rente the same in to twolue peces, and sayde vnto leroboam: Take thou ten peces vnto the.

For thus sayeth the LORDE God of Is- rael: Beholde, euen thus wyll I rente the kyngdome from the hande of Salomo, and wyll geue the ten trybes. One trybe shall he haue for my seruaunt Dauids sake, and be- cause of the cyte of lerusalem, t which I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel: for they haue forsaken me, and worshipped Astaroth the god of the Sidonians, Chamos the god of the Moabites, and Malco the god of the children of Ammon, and haue not walked in my wayes, to fulfill my pleasure, myne ordi- naunces, and lawes, as dyd Dauid his father.

+2 Par.7. c. 

Chap. rij. 

6 

Notwithstondynge I wyll not take the whole kyngdome from out of his hande, but wil make him a prynce as longe as he lyueth for my seruaunt Dauids sake, whom I dyd chose, which kepte my commaundementes q ordi- naunces. * From out of the hande of his sonne wyl I take the kyngdome, and wyl geue ten trybes vnto the, and one vnto his sonne, that Dauid my seruaunt maye allwaye haue a lanterne before me in the cite of Ierusalem, which I haue chosen, that I maye set my name there. Therfore wyl I take the now, to raygne ouer all that thine hert desyreth, and thou shalt be kynge ouer Israel. Yf thou folowe now all that I shall commaunde the,

' [and walke in my wayes, and fulfill my plea- 

sure to kepe myne ordinaunces and com- maundementes, as dyd my seruaut Dauid, then wyll I be with the, and buylde the a sure house, as I buylded vnto Dauid, and wy! geue
Israel vnto the and therwith wyll I subdue the sede of Dauid, but not for euermore.
But Salomon soughte to kyll Ieroboam. Then leroboam gat him vp, and fled in to Egipte to Sisak the kynge of Egipte, and remayned in Egipte, tyll Salomon dyed.

What more there is to saye of Salomon, and all that he dyd, and his wyszdome, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of Salomon. The tyme that
Salomon was kynge at lerusalem ouer all Is- rael is fortye yeare. And Salomon fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buryed in the cite of Dauid his father, and Roboam his sonne was kynge in his steade.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND Roboam wete vnto Sichem, for all 
Israel “was come to Sichem to make him kynge. And whan leroboam y sonne of
Nebat herde that, while he was yet in Egipte 
( whither he was fled for Salomon) he came agayne out of Egipte. And they sent for him, and called him. And Ieroboam with all the congregacion of Israel came and spake to
Roboam, and sayde: Thy father made oure yock to harde: therfore make thou now the harde bondage and the sore yock lighter, and we wyll submytte oure selues vnto the. He sayde vnto them: Go youre waye vnto the thirde daye, and then come to me agayne.

And the people wéte their waye. 
And Roboam the kynge helde a councell 
* 3 Re. 12. c. 

t 3 Re. 15. a. Psal. 131. b. ^ 2 Pa. 10. a. 

The tj. boke of the kpnars. 

So. eeerriy, with the Elders that stode before Salomo his father whyle he lyued, x he sayde: What is youre councell, that we maye geue this people an answere? They sayde vnto him: Yf thou do this people a pleasure to daye, and folowe their mynde, and heare them, and geue them good wordes, then shal they be obedient vnto the as longe as thou liuest. Neuertheles he forsoke the councell that ¥ Elders had geuen him, and axed councell at the yonge men which were growne vp with him, and stode before him.

And he sayde vnto them: What is youre councell that we maye answere this people which haue sayde vnto me: Make the yock lighter, that thy father hath layed vpó vs.
And the yonge men that were growne vp with him, sayde vnto him: Where as the people haue sayde vnto the: Thy father hath made oure yock to sore, make thou it easyer for vs,
Thus shalt thou saye vnto them: My litle fynger shall be thicker then my fathers loynes.
Now, my father layed a sore yock vpon you, but I wyl yet laye more theron: My father correcte you with scourges, but I wyl nourtoure you with scorpions.

So vpon the thyrde daye came Ieroboam with all the people vnto Roboam, as y kynge had appoynted and saide, come to me agayne on the thyrde daye. And the kynge gaue the people an harde rough answere, and forsoke the concell that the Elders had geuen him, and talked with them after the couneell of the yonge men, and sayde: My father made youre yock sore, but I wyll make it vet sorer vpon you. My father correcte you with scourges, but I wil nourtoure you with scor- pios. "Thus the kynge folowed not the peoples mynde, for he was turned so fro the LORDE, that he mighte stablish his worde $ which he spake by Ahias of Silo vnto leroboam the sonne of Nebat.

But whan all Israel sawe that the kynge wolde not heare them, the people gaue y kynge an answere and sayde : || What porcion haue we then in Dauid or inheritaunce in the sonne of Isai? Get the to thy tentes O Israel.
Loke thou now to thy house thou Dauid. So 
Israel wente vnto their tentes. As for Robo- am, he raigned but ouer y children of Israel, which dwelt in the cities of Iuda. And whan kynge Roboam sent thither Adoram the

t3 Re. 11. g. $ 3 Re. 11. e. 

45 

|| 2 Re. 20.2. 

Fo. ceerry. 

lrentgatherer, all Israel stoned him to death. 
| But kynge Roboam strengthed himselfe, and gat him vp in to a charet, to fle vnto Ierusalem.
‘Thus departed Israel from the house of Dauid vnto this daye.

Now whan all Isracl herde, that Ieroboam was come againe, they sent for to call him to the whole congregacion, and made him kynge ouer all Israel. And no man folowed the house of Dauid, saue onely the tribe of Iuda.
* And whan Roboam came to lerusalem, all the house of Iuda and the trybe of Ben
Iamin (euen an hundreth and foure score thousande chosen men of armes) gathered themselues together to fight against ¥ house of Israel, q to brynge the kyngdome agayne vnto Roboam Y sonne of Salomo.

Bnt the worde of God came to Semeia the man of God, and sayde: Speake thou to Ro- boam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, and to all ¥ house of Iuda and Ben Iamin, and to the other people, and saye: ‘Thus sayeth the LORDE: Ye shall not go vp and fighte agaynst youre brethren the children of Israel.
Let euery man go home agayne, for this is my dede. And they herkened vnto the worde of the LORDE, and turned back, to go their waye, as the LORDE sayde. But Roboam buylded Sichem vpon mount Ephraim, and dwelt therin, and departed thence, and buylded t Penuel,

Ieroboā thoughte in his hert: The king- dome shall fall agayne now vnto the house of
Danid, yf this people go vp to offre in the 
LORDES house at lerusalem, and so shall the hert of this people turne to their lorde
Roboam kynge of luda, and thē shal they slaye me, and fall agayne to Roboam kynge of luda. And the kynge helde a councell + and made two golden calues, and sayde vnto them: It is to moch for you to go to lerusale: beholde, $there is thy God (O Israel) which bronghte y out of Egipte. And the one set he at Bethel, x the other in Dan. And this dede turned to syune, for the people wente before the one vnto Dan.

He made an house also in the hye places, land made prestes of the smallest in the people, which were not of the childré of Leui. And vpon the fiftene daye of the eighte moneth he made an holy daye, like as the solempne feast

* 9 Par. 11. a. 
321b; 

t Iud. 8. d. 

t Tob. 1.a. § Exo. 
|| Num, 3.a. 4 Re. 17.g. 

T 4 Re. 23. e. 

The iij. boke of the kpnges. 

Chap. rii, in Inda, and offered vpon the altare. Thus dyd he at Bethel, in doynge sacrifice vnto the calues which he had made, and at Bethel he ordeyned the prestes of the hye places that he had made: and offred vpon the altar (which he had made) at Bethel, the fiftene daye of the eight moneth, which he inuented of his owne hert. And he made the children of
Israel an holy daye, q wente vp to the altare to burne incense.

The rij. Chapter. 
ND beholde, there came a mà of God|@ 

from Iuda (thorow the worde of the 
LORDE) vnto Bethel, and lercboam stode by the altar to burne incense. And he cried agaynst the altare thorow the worde of the
LORDE, and sayde: O altar, altar, thus sayeth the LORDE: Beholde, there shal be borne vnto y house of Danid a sonne, Iosias by name f which on the shal offer the prestes of the hye places, that burne incense vpon the, and mens bones shal he burne on the.
And he gaue a wonder token the same daye, and sayde: ‘This is the token, that the LORDE hath spoken it, beholde, the altar shall ryue, and the aszshes, that are theron, shall be poured ont.

But whan the kynge herde the worde of the man of God, that cried agaynst the altare at
Bethel, he stretched out his hande by y altare, and sayde: Laye hondes on him. And his hande that he stretched ont, wythered, and he coulde not drawe it vnto him agayne. And i altare roue, and the aszshes were poured out rom the altare, acordinge to the wonder token that the man of God had geuen by the worde of the LORDE.

And the kynge answered, and sayde vnto|33 the man of God: **O praye the face of the
LORDE thy God, and make intercession for me, that my hande maie be restored vnto me agayne. ‘Then prayed the man of God vnto the face of the LORDE. And the kynges hande was restored him agayne, and became asit was afore. And the kynge sayde vnto the man of God: Come home with me, and dyne, and I vil geue the a rewarde.

Bnt the man of God sayde vnto the kynge: 
Yf thon geuest me halfe thy house, I wil not come with the: forin this place wyll I nether

** Exod. 8. b. 9. f, 10. c, Num. 21.b. Act. 8. c. 

Chap. riiij. 

eate bred, ner drynke water. commaunded, and thus is it sayde vnto me by the worde of the LORDE: Thou shalt eate no bred, and drynke no water, nether returne the waye that thou wentest.

And he departed another waye, and re- turned not agayne the waye that he came to
Bethel. But at Bethel there dwelt an olde prophet vnto whō his sonnes came, q tolde him all the workes y the ma of God had done that daye at Bethel, a the wordes that he had spoken vnto the kynge. And their father sayde vnto them: Which waye is he gone?
And his sonnes shewed him the waye that the man of God was gone: which came from Iuda.
He sayde vnto his sonnes: Saddell me the asse. And wha they had sadled him the asse, he rode theron, and wente after the man of
God, and founde him syttinge vnder an Oke tre, and sayde vnto him: Art thou the man of God that came from Iuda? Hesayde: Yee.

D| He sayde vnto him: Come home with me, 

rex 

and eate bred. He sayde: I maye not turne backe with the, and come with the. Nether wyll I eate bred, ner drynke water with the in this place: for it is spoken vnto me by the worde of the LORDE: Thou shalt nether eate bred there, ner yet drynke water, nether shalt thou go agayne by the waye which thou wentest. He sayde vnto him: I myselfe am a prophet as well as thou, and an angell hath spoken with me by i worde of the LORDE, and saide: Bringe him againe with the, that he maye eate bred, and drynke water. But he lyed vnto him, and broughte him agayne, so that he ate bred, and dranke water in his house.

And whan they sat at the table, the worde of the LORDE came to the prophet that had broughte him agayne, and cryed vnto the man which was come fro Iuda, and sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Because thou hast bene dishobedient vnto the mouth of ý LORDE, and hast not kepte the commaundement that the LORDE thy God commaunded the, but hast turned backe, and hast eaten bred, and dronke water in y place, wherof he saide vnto the: Thou shalt nether eate bred ner drynke water, therfore shall not thy body come in to thy fathers graue.

And whan he had eaten bred and dronké the asse was sadled vnto the prophet whom

* 3 Re, 20. f. t 4 Re. 24. d. 

Che ih. boke of the kpnars. 

For thus am [| 

he had brought agayne. *And wha he was gone, a lyon founde him by the waye, a slewe him, and his body was cast in ý waye. And the asse stode by him, and the lyon stode by the body. And whà men wente by, they sawe the body cast in the waye, and the lyon stond- ynge besyde the body, and came and tolde it in the cite, where the olde prophet dwelt.

Whan the prophet which had broughte him agayne, herde that, he sayde: It is the man of God, that hath bene dishobediét vnto the mouth of the LORDE, therfore hath ¥
LORDE delyuered him vnto the Lyon, hich hath rente him, and slayne him, acordynge to the worde that the LORDE spake vnto him. And he sayde vnto his sonnes: Saddell me the asse. And whan they had sadled it, he wente, and founde his body cast in the waie and the asse and the lyon stondynge beside y body. The lyon had eate nothinge of the body, nether had he torne the asse. Then toke the prophet the deed coarse of the man of
God, and layed it vpo the asse, and broughte it agayne in to the cite of the olde prophet, to mourne, and to burye him.

And he layed the coarse in his awne graue, and they mourned for him: Alas my brother.
And whan they had buryed him, he saide vnto his sonnes: Whan I dye, burye me in the graue where the mà of God is buried, and laye my bones besyde his bones. + For it shal come to passe, that he cried (thorow the worde of the LORDE) against Bethel, and agaynst all y houses of the hye places, which are in the cities of Samaria.

Howbeit after this acte dyd not leroboa turne from his euell waye, but was peruerted, and made prestes of the hye places, eue of the smallest of the people: Loke whom it pleased him, his handes he fylled, q he was prest of the hye places. And this turned to synne vnto the house of leroboa, to destroye him and to brynge him to naughte.

The riiij. Chapter. 

T the same tyme was Abia the sonne of 
Jeroboam sicke, and leroboam saide 

vnto his wyfe: Get the vp, and disguise the, so that no man perceaue that thou art Iero- boams wyfe, and go vnto Silo: beholde, there is the prophet Ahias, t which promysed me y
I shulde be kynge ouer this people: and take 

13 Re. 11. c. 

Fo. cerrrri, 

Fo. ceevryt. 

€ 

with the ten loaues of bred and cakes, and a cuppe with hony, q go to him, that he maye | tell the how it shal go with the childe. And) leroboams wyfe did so, and gat hir vp, and wente vnto Silo, and came in to the house of
Ahias. But Ahias coulde not se, for his eyes were dymme for age. Neuerthelesse the
LORDE sayde vnto Ahias: Beholde, lero- boams wyfe commeth, to axe a matter at the for hir sonne, for he is sycke. Speake thou therfore vnto her thus x thus. Now whan she came in, she shewed hirselfe straunge. But whan Ahias herde the noyse of hir fete goynge in at the dore, he saide: Come in thou wyfe of Ieroboa. Why shewest thou thy selfe so straunge? I am sent vnto y an harde mes- saunger.

Go thy waye and tell Ieroboam: Thus sayeth LORDE God of Israel: «I haue exalted the from amonge the people, and set the to be prynce ouer my people of Israel, and haue rente the kyngdome from the house of
Dauid, and geuen it the. But thou hast not bene as my seruaunt Dauid, which kepte my commaundemetes, and walked after me with all his hert, so that he did onely y thinge that was righte in my sighte: and thou hast done worse then all they that haue bene before the: thou hast gone thy waye and made the other goddes, and molten ymages, to prouoke me vnto wrath, and hast cast me behynde thy backe.

Beholde therfore, I wil brynge mysfortune vpon the house of leroboam, and wyl rote out from leroboam eué him that maketh water agaynst the wall, the presoner and for- saken in Israel: and the posterite of y house of leroboam wyll I swepe out, as donge is swepte out, tyll he be cleane broughte to naught. * He that dieth (of Ieroboam) in the cite, the dogges shal eate him vp. But him y dyeth in the felde, shall the foules of the aire eat vp, for the LORDE hath spoken it.

Get the vp therfore, and go home, « whan thy fete enter in to y cite, the childe shal dye.
And all Israel shal bewayle him, and burye him. For he onely of Ieroboam shal come to the graue, because there is some good founde in him before the LORDE God of Is- rael, in leroboams house. t But the LORDE shall rayse him vp a kynge, which shal rote

3 8 Re. 12. c. 
13Re.1 

* 8 Re. 15. g. +3 Re. 15. e. 
4. c. $ 2 Par. 15. a. 

The iij. boke of the kpnars. 

Chap. pity. out y house of leroboam in that daie. And what is it, y is now in hande all ready? And the LORDE shal smyte Israel, like as a rede is moued in the water: q shal rote out Israel from this good londe, that he gaue vnto their fathers, q shal scater them beyonde the water, because they haue made their groues to pro- uoke the LORDE vnto wrath. And Israel shall be geuen ouer because of the synne of leroboam, which hath synned him selfe, q made Israel to synne.

And leroboams wife gat her vp, wente hir waye, q came vnto Thirza. And whan she came vpo the thresholde of the house, y childe dyed, x they buried him, q all Israel made lamentacion for him, t acordinge to y worde of the LORDE, which he spake by his ser- uaunt Ahia y prophet. $ What more there is to saye of Ieroboam, how he foughte q raigned, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel. The tyme that leroboam raigned, was two q twentye yeare. And he slepte with his fathers. And Nadab his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Roboam y sonne of Salomon was kynge iu 
Iuda. || One and fortye yeare olde was 
Roboam wha he was made kynge, q seuentene yeare raigned he at lerusalem, in the cite y the LORDE had chosen out of all y trybes of
Israel, to set his name there. His mothers name was Naema an Ammonitisse. And
Iuda dyd y which displeased the LORDE, « prouoked Tun to indignacion more thé all y their fathers had done with their synnes which they dyd: for they hkewyse buylded them hye places, pilers, and groues vpo euery hye hill, and amonge all grene trees. There were whoremogers also, q they dyd all M abho- minacids of ý Heythé, whom ý LORDE droue out before the children of Israel.

‘But in $ fifth yeare of kynge Roboam wéte Sisack ý kynge of Egipte vp agaynst lerusalem, q toke the treasure out of y house of the LORDE, q out of the kynges ue t all that mighte be gotten, q toke all the shyldes of golde, **which Salomon caused to be made.
In steade wherof y kynge Roboam caused for to make shyldes of stele, & commytted them vnder the handes of the chefe fotemen, which kepte the dore of the kynges house. And as oft as the kynge wente in to y house of the

T 2 Par. 12. a. ** 3 Re. 10. c. 

|2 Partie: 
Wy Mane, @ Ins 

Chap. rb. 

LORDE, the fote men bare them, and brought them agayne in to the fote mens chamber.

What more there is to saye of Roboam, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda. But betwene Roboam gq Ieroboam there was warre as longe as they lyued. And * Roboam slepte-with his fathers, q was buried with his fathers in the cite of Dauid. And his mothers name was Naema an Ammonitisse. And his sonne Abia was kynge in his steade.

The yb. Chapter. 

Te the eightenth yeare of kynge leroboà the sonne of Nebat, “was Abia kynge in
Iuda, and reigned thre yeare at lerusalem. 
His mothers name was t Maecha, the doughter of Abisalom, and he walked in all the synnes of his father, which he had done before him, and his hert was not perfecte with the LORDE his God, as was the hert of Dauid his father. t For because of Dauids sake dyd the LORDE his God geue him a lanterne at Ierusalem, so i he raysed his sonne after him, q manteyned im at Ierusalem, because Dauid dyd the thinge y was righte in y sighte of the LORDE, and departed not from all that he commaunded him as longe as he lyued (sanynge in the matter with $ Vrias y Hethite). But there was warre betwene Roboam and Ieroboam, as

longe as he lyued. 

What more there is to saye of Abia, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the
Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda. "There was warre also betwene Abia and Jeroboam. And
Abia slepte with his fathers, and they buried him in the cite of Dauid. And Asa his sonne was kynge in his steade. |lIn y twentyeth yeare of kynge Ieroboam ouer Israel, was Asa kynge in Iuda, and reigned one ¢ fortye yeare at lerusalem. His graundmothers name was
Maecha the doughter of Abisalom. And Asa dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the
LORDE, as dyd his father Dauid. And he remoued ¥ 1 whoremongers out of the londe, and put downe all the Idols that his fathers had made. **He put his mother from the mynistracion, that she had made vnto Miple- zeth in y groue. And Asa roted out hir
Miplezeth, and brent it in the broke Cedron: 

= 2) Par. 19.6. 
13 Reg. 11. f. 

a? Par, 13.a. 
§ 2 Re. 11. a. 

H2 Ear. 11.0: 
|| 2 Par. 14. a. 

The iij. boke of tbe kpuges. 

but the hye places put he not downe. Yet was the hert of Asa perfecte with the LORDE as longe as he lyued. And the syluer and golde, and vessels that his father had halowed,
€ soch as was sanctified vnto y house of the 
LORDE, that broughte he in. And there was warre betwene Asa q Baesa the kynge of
Israel, as longe as they lyued. 

Fo. ceererty.| 

Baesa the kynge of Israel wente vp agaynst |€ 

Iuda, and buylded Rama, ’ that no man shulde go out and in of Asas syde the kynge of Iuda.
‘Then toke Asa all the syluer and golde that was lefte in the treasure of the house of the
LORDE, and in the treasure of the kynges house, and delyuered it in to his seruauntes handes, q sent it vnto t! Benadab the sonne of
Tabrimon the sonne of Hesion kynge of Siria, which dwelt at Damascon, and let saye vuto him: There is a couenaunt betwene me and the, and betwene my father and thy father: therfore sende I the a present of syluer and golde, that thou shuldest breake the couenaunt which thou hast with Daesa the kyuge of
Israel, that he maye departe fro me. 

Benadab agreed vnto kynge Asa, and sent his captaynes agaynst the cities of Israel, and smote lion and Dan, q Abel Beth Maecha, and all Cineroth with the whole londe of|
Nephtali. Wha Baesa herde that, he left of. from buyldinge Rama, and wente agayne vnto |

Thirza. 

Kynge Asa caused it be proclamed in all|3 

Iuda: Here be no man excepte. And they toke awaye the stones and tymber from Rama, wherwith Baesa had buylded. And kynge
Asa buylded Geba Ben lamin q Mispa ther- with.

What more there is to saye of Asa, and of all his power, and all that he dyd, and of y cities which he buylded, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of luda: sauynge that in his olde age he was diseased in his fete. And Asa slepte with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the cite of
Dauid his father. itAnd Iosaphat his sonne was kynge in his steade.

But Nadab the sonne of leroboam was kynge ouer Israel in the secode yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, q raigned ouer Israel two yeare, and dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the waye of his father, and in

T 3 Re. 22. g. ** 9 Par. 15. d. è 2 Par. 16. a. | tt 3 Re. 20.a. 1t 2 Par. 17, a. |

EZ 

‘So. ceri. 

F 

6 

his synnes, wherwith he made Israel to synne. 
Howbeit Baesa the sonne of Ahia of the house of Isachar conspired agaynst him, q smote him at Gibbethon, which was the Philistynes : for Nadab and all Israel layed sege to Gib- bethon. So Baesa slewe him in the thirde yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, q was kynge in his steade. * Now whan he was kynge, he smote all the house of Ieroboam, and let nothinge of Ieroboam remayne that had breth, tyll he had destroyed it, acordynge to y worde of the LORDE, which he spake by his sernaunt Ahia of Silo, because of Jeroboams synnes which he dyd, q made Israel synne withall: euen with y prouokynge wherwith he displeased the LORDE God of Israel.

What more there is to saye of Nadab, q all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the
Cronicles of the kynges of Israel, and there was warre betwene Asa q Baesa the kynge of
Israel, as longe as they lyued. 

In the thirde yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda was Daesa y sonne of Ahia kynge ouer all
Israel at Thirza foure and twentye yeare, and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the
LORDE, and walked in the waye of Ieroboam, and in his synnes, wherwith he made Israel to synne.

Neuertheles the worde of the LORDE came vnto Iehu the sonne of Hanani agaynst
Baesa, and sayde: For so moch as I lifted the out of the dust, and made the prynce ouer my people of Israel, and thou walkest in the waye of Ieroboam, and makest my people ouer Israel for to synne, to pronoke me vnto wrath thorow their synnes, beholde, therfore wyll I take awaye the posterite of Baesa, and the posterite of his house, and wyll set thine house euen as the house of leroboam the sonne of Nebat. tHe that of Baesa dyeth in the cite, the dogges shal deuoure him: and who so beynge of him dyeth in the felde, the foules of the ayre shall eate him vp.

What more there is to saye of Baesa, q what he dyd, q of his power, beholde, it is wrytten in y Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
And Baesa slepte with his fathers, q was buried at 'Thirza: « his sonne Ella was kynge in his steade. And the worde of LORDE came by the prophet Iehu the sonne of
Hanani, ouer Baesa, and ouer his house, and agaynst all the euell that he dyd in the sighte

* 5 Re. 14. c. t3 Re. 14. b. and 16.a. 1 The prophet. 

The ty. boke of the kynaes. 

Chap. rbi, of y LORDE, to prouoke him vnto wrath thorow the workes of his handes: so that he became as the house of Ieroboam, and be- cause he slewe tthis man.

The roi. Chapter. 

N the sixe q twentieth yeare of Asa kynge|@ | 

of Iuda, was Ella the sonne of Baesa kynge ouer Israel at Thirza two yeare.
Neuertheles his sernannt Simri, y principall man ouer the halfe of y charettes cospyred | against him. As for Ella, he was at Thirza, | dranke q was dronke in y house of Arza the. ruler of Thirza. And Simri came in, and slewe him in the seuen g twentieth yeare of
Asa kynge of luda, and was kynge in his steade. $ And whan he was kynge, and sat vpon his seate, he smote all the house of
Baesa, q lefte not so moch as one to make water agaynst ý wall: his bloud auengers also q his frendes. || Thus dyd Simri destroye all the house of Baesa, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, which he spake ouer Baesa by the prophet Iehu, because of all the synnes of Baesa and of Ella his sonne, which they dyd, and made Israel for to synne, to prouoke the LORDE God of Israel vato wrath thorow their vanities. What more there is to saye of
Ella, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.

In the seueu and twentieth yeare of Asa|18 kynge of Iuda, was Simri kynge vij. dayes at
Thirza, and the people laye before Gibbethon of the Philistynes. But whan the people in the hoost herde saye y Simri had conspired and slayne the kynge, then all Israel the same daye made Amri the chefe captayne kynge ouer all in the hoost. And Amri wente vp and all Israel with him from Gibbethon, and| layed sege vnto Thirza. {But whan Simri sawe y the cite shulde be wonne, he wente in to the palace in the kynges house, q brent it with y kynges house, q dyed because of his synnes which he had committed, in that he dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the waye of Ieroboam, and in his synnes which he dyd, wherwith he made Israel to synne.

What more there is to saye of Simri, and how he conspired, beholde, it is wrytten in $
Cronicles of the kynges of Israel. At the same tyme were y people deuyded in two partes:

$3 Re.14. b. and 21, d. || Re.15.g. T 4 Re. 9. f. 

Chap. roi, the one parte helde with Thibni the sonne of
Ginath, that they might make him kynge: the other halfe helde with Amri. But the people that helde with Amri, were mightier then the people which helde with Thibni y sonne of Gi- nath. And Thibni dyed, and Amri was kynge.

In ¥ one and thirtieth yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, was Amri kynge ouer Israel twolue yeares, q raigned at Thirza sixe yeares. He boughte the mount of Samaria of Semer for two hundreth weight of syluer, ¢ buylded vpon the mount, and called the cite which he buylded, after ý name of Semer ý owner of mount of Samaria. And Amri dyd that whic was euell in y sighte of the LORDE, and was worse then all they that were before him, and walked in all y wayes of leroboam ý soune of Nebat, and in his synnes, wherwith he made Israel to synne, so that they pro- uoked the LORDE God of Israel vnto wrath in their vanities. What more there is to saye of Amri, ¢ all that he dyd, and his power that he exercysed, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cro- nicles of the kynges of Israel. And Amri slepte with his fathers, t was buried in Samaria, and Achab his sonne was kynge in his steade.

In the eight « thirtieth yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, was Achab the sonne of Amri kynge ouer Israel, q raigned ouer Israel at Samaria two q twentie yeare, q dyd euell in the > sighte of the LORDE, more thé all they ý were before him. And he thoughte it but a small matter to walke in the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat: *and toke lesabel the doughter of Eth Baal kynge of Sidon to wife, and wente and serued Baal, and worshiped him. And vnto Baal he set vp an altare in
Baals house, which he buylded him in Sa- maria, and made a groue: so that Achab dyd more to prouoke the God of Israel vnto wrath, then all the kynges y were before him in Israel.

At ¥ same tyme dyd Hiel of Bethel buylde 
Iericho : t It cost him his first sonne Abiram, y he layed j y foundacion: « his yongest sonne
Segub, y he set vp the portes: Acordinge to the e. of the LORDE, which he spake by
Iosua the sonne of Nun. 

The rbij. Chapter. 
ND Elias y Theszbite one of the inha- biters of Gilead, saide vnto Achab: tAs truly as the LO RDE God of Israel lyueth, |

* Deut. 7, a. | DE MOS Gace 

The ij. boke of the kpnges. 

fo. ceerrrd. 

whose seruaunt I am, there shal nether rayne ner dew come this yeare, excepte I speake it.

And the worde of the LORDE came vnto him, and sayde: Get the hence, and turne the towarde the east, and hyde the by the ryuer
Crith, which is ouer agaynst Iordane, and thou shalt drynke of the ryuer: and I haue com- maunded the rauens, that they shal fede the there. He departed, and dyd acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, and wente his waye, and sat him downe by the ryuer Crith, which is ouer agaynst Iordane. And the raués broughte him bred and flesh in the mornynge and in the euenynge, and he dranke of the ryuer.

And it fortuned after certayne dayes, that the riuer was dryed yp: for there was no rayne in the lode. Then came y worde of y lr vnto him, and sayde: $Get y vp, bee go vnto Sarepta, which lieth by Sido: for there haue I commaunded a wedowe to make prouysion for the.

And he gat him vp, and wente vnto Sa-|33 repta. And whan he came to the gate of y cite, beholde, the wedowe was there, and gathered stickes. And he called her, and sayde: Fetch me a litle water in a vessell, y
I maye drinke. And as she was goinge to fetch it, he cried vnto her, q sayde: Brynge me a morsell of bred also in thine hande.
She sayde: As truly as the LORDE thy God lyueth, I haue no ‘bred, but an handfull of floure in a pitcher, q a curtesy oyle in a cruse: and beholde, I haue gathered vp one or two stickes, q wyll go and prepare it for me and my sonne, that we maye eate and dye.

Elias sayde vnto her: Feare not, go thy waye, ¢ do as thou hast sayde: yet make me first a morsell of bred therof, x brynge it me forth: « afterwarde shalt in make it for y athysonne. For thus sayeth y LORDE God of Israel: The meell in the pitcher shall not be spent, q the „oyle i in y cruse shall not fayll, vnto the daye y y the LORDE shal cause it for to rayne vpo earth. She wente q dyd as Elias sayde. And he ate, q she also, and hir house a certayne season. The meel in the pitcher was not mynished, and the oyle in the cruse fayled not, acordinge to the worde of y
LORDE which he spake by Elias. 

And after these actes the sonne of the wife |C of $ house was sicke: and his sicknes was so

13 Re. 18. f. 4 Re. 3. c. Iacob. 5. c. Luc. 4. c. $ Luc. 4. c. 

Fo. ceerprbt. exceadinge sore, that there remayned no breth in him. And she sayde vnto Elias: What haue I to do with the, thou man of God? Art thou eome in vnto me, y my synne shulde be kepte in remembraunce, q that my sonne shulde be slayne ? He sayde vnto her: Geue me thy sonne. And he toke him fro hir lappe, t caried him vp in to ¥ chamber where he him selfe dwelt, and layed him vpo his bed, a called vpon the LORDE, and sayde: O
LORDE my God, hast thou dealt so euell with the wedow with whom I dwell, y thou woldest slaye hir sonne? And *he stretched out him selfe ouer the childe thre tymes, a called vpon the LORDE, and saide: O
LORDE my God, let the soule of this childe come agayne in to him. And the LORDE herde the voyce of Elias. And the soule of the childe came agayne vnto him, q he re- uyued. And Elias toke the childe and broughte him downe from the chamber in to the house and delyuered him vnto his mother, and sayde: Beholde, thy sonne lyueth. And the woman sayde vnto Elias: Now knowe I, that thou art a man of God, q that the worde of the LORDE is in thy mouth of a trueth.

The pit}. Chapter. 

ND after a longe season came y worde yat of the LORDE vnto Elias in the thirde yeare, q sayde: t Go thy waye, q shewe thy selfe vnto Achab, y I maye cause it for to rayne vpon earth. And Elias wente to shewe| him selfe vnto Achab. But there was a greate derth i Samaria. And Achab called Abdia his chefe officer: (As for Abdia, he feared y
LORDE greatly: for wha Iesabel roted out y prophetes of y LORDE, Abdia toke an C. prophetes, and hyd them in caues, here fiftye, q there fiftye, q prouyded for them with bred and water. Achab now sayde vnto Abdia:
Go thorow the londe vnto all the welles of water q ryuers, yf happlye we maye finde hay,
X to saue j horses q mules, y all the catell perishe not. And they parted thé selues in to the londe, to go thorow it. Achab departed the one waye alone, and Abdia y other waye alone.

_ Now whan Abdia was on ¥ waye, Elias met him. And whan he knewe him, he fell downe vpon his face, q sayde: Art not thou my lorde
Elias? He sayde: yee, go thy waye, and tell thy lorde: beholde. Elias is here. But he

* Eccli. 48. a. t Iacob. 5. c. 

The (ij, boke of the kpnaes. 
| sayde: What haue I offended, that thou wilt 

Chap. rbi. 

delyuer thy seruaunt in to the handes of 
Achab, that he maye slaye me? As truly as the LORDE thy God lyueth, there is no people ner kingdome, but my lorde hath sent thither to seke the. And whan they sayde:|33
He is not here, he toke an ooth of the same kyngdome and nacion, that they had not founde the. And now thou sayest: Go tell thy lorde: beholde, Elias is here. Now whan I were gone from the, the sprete of the
LORDE shulde take awaye, I cannot tell whither: and yf I then came and tolde Achab, and founde the not, he shulde slaye me: But thy seruaunt feareth the LORDE from his youth vp. Hath it not bene tolde my lorde what I dyd, whan lesabel slewe the prophetes of the LORDE, how that I hyd an hundreth of the LORDES prophetes, here fiftye, and there fiftye in the caues, and prouyded for them with bred and water? And thou sayest now: Go thy waye, tell thy lorde: Elias is here, that he maye slaye me. Elias saide: As truly as y LORDE Zebaoth lyueth, before whom I stode, I wil shewe my selfe vnto him this daye. Then wéte Abdia to mete Achab, a tolde him. And Achab wéte for to mete
Elias. 

And whan Achab sawe Elias, Achab sayde vnto him: Art thou he that troublest Israel?
He sayde : I trouble not Israel, tbut it is thou and thy fathers house, because ye haue for- saken the commaundementes of the LORDE, and walke after Baal. Go to, sende forth |: now, and gather me all Israel together vnto mount Carmell, and the foure hundreth and fiftye prophetes of Baal, and the foure hun- dreth prophetes of $ groue, which eate of lesabels table. So Achab sent vnto all the children of Israel, q gathered the prophetes together vnto mount Carmell.

Then stepte Elias vnto all the people, « sayde: How longe halte ye on both N sydes ?
Yf the LOR DE be God, thé walke after him: but yf Baal be he, thé folowe him. And the people gaue him no answere. Thé sayde
Elias vnto the people: I onely am lefte a prophet of y LORDE: but Baals prophetes are foure C. and fiftie më. Geue vs now two bullockes, « let them chose one bullocke, q hewe him in peces, q laye him vpo the wod,
« put no fyre theron: so wil I take y other 

lere. 4. c. 

Chap. rir. bullock, q laye him vpo the wod, t put no fyre theron also: call ye then vpo the name of youre god, q I wil call vpo the name of the
LORDE: loke which God now answereth with fyre, let the same be God. And all the people answered œ sayde: That is righte.
And Elias sayde vnto Baals prophetes: Chose ye one bullock, and do ye it first (for ye are many) and call ye vpon the name of youre god, q laye no fyre theron.

And they toke the bullock which he gaue them, q prepared it, q called vpon the name of Baal from the mornynge vntyll the noone daye, and sayde: O Baal heare vs. But there was nether voyce ner answere. And they hopped aboute the altare, as their vse was to do. Now whan it was noone daye,
Elias mocked them, and sayde: Crye loude. 
For he is a god, peraduéture he is musynge, or hath somwhat to do, or is gone some iour- neye, or happlye he slepeth, so that he wolde be waked vp. And they cried loude, and pro- uoked thé selues with knyues œ botkens, (as their maner was) tyll y bloude folowed. But whan ¥ noone daye was past, they propheeied vntyll the tyme that the meatofferynge shulde be offered, q there was nether voyce ner an- swere, ner one to regarde them.

Then sayde Elias vnto all the people: Come hither all ye people vnto me. And whan all
ý people came to him, he repayred y *altare of the LORDE y was broken, q ttoke twolue stones acordinge to the nombre of ¥ trybes of the childré of Iacob (vnto whom the worde of the LORDE spake, and sayde: tThy name shal be Israel) and of ¥ stones he buylded an altare in the aame of the LORDE, q made a pytt rounde aboute the altare, like two forowes in the corne londe, q prepared the wod, q hewed ¥ bullock in peces, and layed him vpon the ey q sayde : Fetch foure pitchers full of water, and poured it vpo the burntofferynge, and vpon the wod. And he sayde: Do it yet once. And they dyd it once agayne. And he sayde: Do it y thirde tyme. And they dyd it the thirde tyme. And y water ranne aboute the altare, and ¥ pytt was full of water also.

And whan the tyme was to offer $ meat- offerynge, Elias stepte forth, and sayde: O
LORDE God of Abraham, of Isaac and of 
Israel, let it be knowne this daye, that thou 

art God in Israel, and I thy seruaunt, and t Iosu. 4. b.

* 1 Re. 14. c. t Gen. 32. c. and 35. b. 

The ij. boke of the kynges. 

Fo. ereyyrbij, that I haue done all this acordinge vnto thy worde. Heare me O LORDE, O heare me, y this people maye knowe, how that thou art the LORDE God, that thou mayest after- warde turne their hertes. §Then fell downe the fyre of the LORDE, and consumed the burntofferinge, the wodd, the stones and the earth, and licked vp the water that was in the pytt. Whan all the people sawe that, they fell vpon their faces, and sayde: The LORDE is God, y LORDE is God. — Elias sayde vnto them: {| Laye handes vpon Baals pro- phetes, y none of them escape. And they toke them. And Elias broughte them downe vnto y broke Cyson, q slewe thé there.

And Elias sayde vnto Achab: Go vp, eate t drynke, for it soundeth as though it wolde rayne sore. And whan Achab wéte vp to eate q drinke, Elias ascéded vp to the toppe of Carmel, q bowed him selfe downe to the earth, ¢ put his heade betwene his knees, q sayde vnto his lad: Go vp, and loke towarde the See. He wente vp q loked, q sayde:
There is nothinge. He sayde: Go agayne seuen tymes. And at the seucth tyme he sayde: Beholde, there goeth vp a litle cloude out of the see, like a mans hande. He sayde:
Go vp, and saie vnto Achab: Bynde thy charet, ¢ go downe, y the rayne onertake the not. And or a mà coulde turne him, the heauen was blacke with cloudes q wynde, q there came a greate rayne. But Achab rode his waie, ¢ departed vnto lesrael. And the hade of y LORDE came vpo Elias, and he gyrde his loynes, ¢ ranne before Achab, tyll he came vnto Iesrael.

Che rir. Chapter. 

ND Achab tolde Iesabel all ý Elias had A done, « how he had slayne all Baals prophetes with the swerde. ‘Thé sent Iesabel a messaunger vnto Elias, sayenge : The goddes do this q that vnto me, yf I tomorow aboute this tyme, make not thy soule as one of these.
Then was he afrayed, q gat him vp, a wente where he wolde, q came vnto Berseba in
Iuda, and lefte his lad there. But he him selfe wente a daies iourney in to y wyldernes, q came in, ¢ sat him downe vnder a Tuniper tre, q wyszshed vnto his soule y he mighte dye, t sayde: It is now ynough LORDE, take my soule, for I am no better then my

§Iud.6.d. Eccli.48.a. 2Mac.1.d. ||Deut.13.a.and 17. b. 
46 pr: 

Fo. [fo. ccerrrbij. The új, boke of the kpnges, Chap, pr. 

fathers. And he layed him downe q slepte vnder the Tuniper tre.

Aud beholde, 3 angell touched him, q sayde vnto him: Stonde vp, and eate. And he loked aboute him, q beholde, at his heade there was a bred baken on the coles, q a cruse with water. And whan he had eaten and dronke, he layed him downe agayne to slepe.

And y angell of the LORDE, came agayne the seconde tyme, q touched him, q sayde:
Stonde vp, and eate, for thou hast a greate waye to go. And he arose, and ate and drake, and wente on thorow the strength of that meate *fortye dayes and fortye nightes, eue vnto Horeb y mount of God: and there he came to a caue, and abode there allnighte.
And beholde the worde of the LORDE came to him, and sayde vnto him: What doest thou here Elias? He sayde: I haue bene zelous for the LORDE God Zebaoth: for the children of Israel haue forsaken thy coue- naunt, and broken downe thine altares, and slayne thy prophetes with the swerde, and I am lefte onely, q jud seke to take awaye my life. He sayde: Go forth, and stonde vpon the mount before the LORDE. And be- holde, the LORDE weéte ouer: and a greate mightie wynde, which roue the mountaynes, el brake the harde stones, came before the
LORDE, but the LORDE was not in the wynde. After the wynde came there an earthquake, but the LORDE was not in the earthquake.

And after the earth quake there came a fyre, but the LORDE was not in the fyre.
And after the fyre came there a styll softe hyssinge. Whan Elias herde that, he couered his face with his cloke, and wente forth, and stode in the dore of the caue. And beholde, there came a voyce vnto him, and sayde:
What hast thou here to do Elias? 

He sayde: I haue bene zelous for the 
LORDE. God Zebaoth: tfor the children of 
Israel haue forsaké thy couenaunt, broken downe thine altares, slayne thy prophetes with the swerde, q I onely am lefte, and they seke to take awaye my life. But the LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye agayne thorow the wyldernes vnto Damascon, q go in, tq anoynte Hasael kynge ouer Siria, $q Iehu the sonne of Nimsi kynge ouer Israel, q Eliseus
¥ sonne of Saphat of Abel Mehola to be 

* Exo. 34. d. Matt. 4. a. t Rom. 11.a. t 4 Re. 8. b. 

The ij. boke of tbe kpnaes. Chap. Fr. IT. | 

LEX -—A X ——— in thy steade. And it shal come to | passe, y, who so escapeth the swerde of Hasael,
Iehu shall slaye him, q who so escapeth swerde of Jehu, Eliseus shal slaye him. I| And: D
I wil reserue vnto me vij. M. men in Israel: namely, all knees which haue not bowed thë selues vnto Baal, and euery mouth ý hath not kyssed him.

And he departed thence, q founde Eliseus y sonne of Saphat, plowinge with twolue yocke of oxen before him, q he him selfe was amóoge the twolue. And Elias wéte vnto him, « cast his cloke vpon him. And he lefte the oxen, q ranne after Elias, q sayde: 1 Let me kysse my father q my mother, and so wil I folowe the. And he sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, q come agayne, for I haue some what to do with the. And he ranne agayne from him, and toke a yock of oxen, and offred it, and sod y flesh with the wod of the oxen plowes, and gaue it vnto the people to eate, and gat him vp, a folowed Elias, and mynistred vnto » him.

The rr. Chapter. 

ND **Benadab y kynge of Siria gathered) A 

all his power, q there were two q thirtie kynges with him, q horses a charettes, and he wente vp, and layed sege vnto Samaria, q foughte agaynst it. And he sent messaungers vnto Achab y kynge of Israel in to y cite, q caused to saye vnto him: ‘Thus sayeth Bos
(dab : Thy syluer q thy golde is myne, and thy wyues q thy best children are myne also. The kynge of Israel answered, q sayde: My lorde
O kynge, euen as thou hast sayde, I am thine, and all that I haue.

And the messaungers came agayne, q sayde: 
Thus sayeth Benadab: For so moch as I haue sent vnto the, sayenge: Thy syluer ¢ thy golde, thy wyues q thy childré shalt thou geue me, tomorow aboute this tyme wil I sende my seruaiites vnto the, y they maye serch thyne house and the houses of thy subiectes : q loke what pleasaunt thinge thou hast, y shal they take in their handes, and cary it awaye. So/3 the kynge of Israel called all y Elders of the} | lode, q sayde: Mark well q se, what myschefe this ma seketh: He sent vnto me for my wyues
& children, for syluer q golde, ¢ I haue not) | sayde him naye. ‘Then sayde all the Elders and all the people vnto him: Thou shalt not

§4Re.9.a. ||Rom.11.a. Q Luc.9.f. **3Reg.15.c. 

Chap. rr. 

3 

| 

cosente ner agree vnto him. And he spake vnto Benadabs messatigers, Saye vnto my lorde y kynge: All ý thynges wherfore thou dyddest sende vnto me thy seruaunt at y first, wil 1 do, but this can I not do. And y mes- saungers wéte, and tolde this againe. Thé sent Benadab vnto him sayége: The goddes do this and y vnto me, yf the dust of Samaria shalbe ynough, for euery one of my people to brynge me an handfull therof. But y kynge of Israel answered, q sayde: Tell him, Let not him y putteth on y harnes, make his boast like him ý hath put it of. Wha Bena- dab herde ý (eué as he was drynkinge with the kynges in $ pauylion) he sayde vnto his seruautes: Set youre selues in araye. And they set thé selues in araie against y cite.

And beholde, there came a prophet vnto 
Achab y kynge of Israel, q saide: ‘Thus sayeth the LORDE: Hast thou sene all this greate multitude? Beholde, this daie wil I delyuer thé in to thy hande, so y thou shalt knowe, how y Iam ý LORDE. Achab sayde: By whom? Hesayde: Thussayeth the LORDE:
Euen by the yonge men of the rulers of the londe. He sayde: Who shal order the bat- tay]? Hesayde: Thou. Then mustered he the yonge men of the rulers of the londe, « there were two hūdreth and two and thirtie of them: q after thé mustured he of the whole people of all the childré of Israel, seue thou- sande men, and they wente out in the noone daye. As for Benadab, he dranke and was dronken in the pauylion with the two ¢ thirtie kynges which were come to helpe him. And the yonge men of the rulers of the londe wente forth first.

Benadab sent forth, q they bronght him worde, q sayde: There come men out of Sa- maria. Hesayde: Take them alyue, whether they be come forth for peace, or for warre.
But whan the londe rulers yonge men were gone forth, and the hoost behyude them, euery one smote hhn y came in his waye.
And the Sirians fled, and Israel folowed after them. And Benadab the kynge of Syria escaped with horses and horsme. And the kynge of Israel wente forth, and smote horses and charettes, and dyd a greate slaughter on the Syrians.

Then came there a prophet vnto the kynge of Israel, and sayde vnto him: Go thy waye

| and strength the, and take hede, and loke| 

The iij. boke of the kpnars. 

well what thou doest: for whan the yeare is aboute, the kynge of Syria shall come agaynst the of the new. For the kynge of ¥ Syrians seruauntes sayde vnto him: Their goddes are goddes of the mountaynes, therfore haue they gotten the victory.

But let vs fyghte with them on the playne, and thou shalt se that we shal ouercome them.
Do thus, put awaye the kynges euery one from his place, and set dukes in their steades, and appoynte the an hoost as was that which thou hast lost, q horses q charettes as the other were, and let vs fight agaynst the in the plaine, and thou shalt se that we shal haue the victory. He cosented vnto their voyce, and dyd so.

Now whan the yeare was gone aboute, 
Benadab appoynted the Siriaus, and wente vp towarde Aphek, to fighte agaynst Israel, and the childre of Israel mustured, and pro- uyded them selues with vytailes, and wéte to mete them, and pitched their tétes ouer against them, like two litle flockes of goates but the londe was full of the Syrians.

So. ceerrrir. 

| 

| 

| 

! 

| 

And there came a man of God, and sayde Ed 

vnto the kynge of Israel: Thus sayeth the 
LORDE: Because the Syrians haue sayde, that the LORDE is a God of the moütaynes and not a God of the valleys, therfore haue I geuen all this greate heape in to thy handes, that ye maye knowe how that I am y LORDE.
And they pitched their tentes right ouer agayust them seuen dayes. But vpon y seueuth daye they wente together in to the battayll: and the children of Israel smote of the Sirians an hundreth thousande fote men in one daye, and the remnaunt fled to Aphek in to the cite, and the wall fell vpon the other seuen and twenty thousande men. And
Benadab fled also vnto the cite in to a litle chamber.

Then sayde his seruauntes vnto him: Be- holde, we haue herde that the kynges of the house of Israel are mercifull kinges, Let vs therfore put sack eloth aboute oure loynes, and halters aboute oure neckes, q go forth to the kynge of Israel, peraduenture he shal let thy soule lyue.

And they put sack cloth aboute their loynes, | 4F 

and halters aboute their neckes, and came to the kynge of Israel, and sayde: Benadab thy seruaunt sayeth vnto the: O let my soule

lyue. He sayde: yf he be yet alyue, he is 

| 

i 
| 
| 

| fo. ecrrl. 

(my brother. And the men toke him shortly 

at his worde, and expounded it for them selues and sayde: Yee Benadab is thy bro- ther. He sayde: Come and brynge him.
Thé wente Benadab forth vnto him, and he caused him to syt vpon the charet, and sayde vnto him: The cities that my father toke from thy father, wyl I geue the agayne. And make thou stretes for thyselfe at Damasco, as my father did at Samaria, so wyl I let the go with a bonde of peace. And he made a couenaunt with him, and let him go.

Then spake there a man amonge the child- ren of the prophetes vnto his neghboure by the worde of the LORDE: I praye the smite me. But he refused to smite him. Then saide he vnto him, because thou hast not herkened vuto the voyce of the LORDE, beholde, therfore shall there a lyon smyte the, whan thou goest frome. *And whan he wente frö him, a lyon founde him, and slewe him.

And he founde another man, and sayde: 1 praye the smyte me. And the man smote jhim, and wounded him. Then wente the
|prophet, and stepte vnto the kynge by the waye syde, and altered his face with aszshes.
And whan the kynge wente by, he cried vpon y kynge, and sayde: Thy seruaunt wente forth in to the battayll and beholde, there wente one asyde, and broughte a man vnto me, and sayde: Kepe this ma: yf he be myssed, thy soule shall be in steade of his soule, or els thou shalt weye downe an hun- dreth weighte of syluer. And whyle thy ser- uaunt had here q there to do, he was awaye.
The kynge of Israel sayde vnto him: It is thine owne iudgment, thou hast geuen it thy- selfe.

Then put he the aszshes from his face in 
(all the haist. And the kynge of Israel knewe him, that he was one of the prophetes. And he sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE:
Because thou hast let the damned man go, therfore shall thy soule be for his soule, and thy people for his people. And the kynge of

Israel departed vnto his house, beinge troubled 
| m his mynde and full indignacion, and came 

| 

The pri. Chapter. 

to Samaria. a | F'TER these actes it fortuned, that Na- both the lesraelite had a vyniarde at

* 3 Re. 13. e. 

The th. boke of the kpnges. 

lesreel besyde the palace of Achab kynge of 
Samaria. And Achab spake to Naboth, and sayde: Geue me thy vynyarde, 1 wyll make me an herbgarden therof, because it is so nye my house: 1 wyl geue the a better vynyarde for it: or yf it please the, I wyll geue the syluer for it, as moch as it is worth. But
Naboth sayde vnto Achab: tThe LORDE let that be farre fro me, that I shulde geue y my fathers heretage. Then came Achab home, beinge moued and full of indignacion, because of the worde that Naboth the les- raelite had spoken vnto him, q sayde: I wyl not geue the my fathers inheritaunce. And he laied him downe vpon his bed, and turned his face asyde, and ate no bred. Then lesabel his wyfe came in to him and sayde vnto him :
What is y matter, that thy sprete is so cóbred, and that thou eatestno bred? He sayde vnto her: I haue spoké vnto Naboth the Iesraelite, and sayde: Geue me thy vynyarde for money: or yf it please y, 1 wyl geue the another for it. But he sayde: I wyll not geue the my vynyarde.

Then sayde lesabel his wyfe vuto him: 
What kingdome were in Israel, yf thou diddest it? Stonde vp, and eate bred, I wyl get the the vynyarde of Naboth the lesraelite. And she wrote a letter vnder Achabs name, and sealed it with his signet, and sent it vnto y
Elders and rulers in his cite, which dwelt aboute Naboth, and wrote thus in y letter:
Proclame a fast, and set Naboth aboue in the people, and set two men of Belial before him, to testifye and saye: Thou hast blasphemed
God and the kynge. And brynge him forth, and stone him to death.

And the Elders and rulers of his cyte, which dwelt in his cite, dyd as lesabel had

jcommaunded them, acordynge as she had 

wrytten in the letter that she sent vnto them and they proclamed a fast, and caused Naboth to syt aboue amonge the people. ‘Then came the two men of Belial, and stode before him, and testyfyed agaynst Naboth in ¥ presence of the people, and sayde: Naboth hath blas- phemed God and the kynge.

'Then broughte they him out of the cite, and stoned him to death. And they sent lesabel worde, sayenge: Naboth is stoned q put to death. Wha Iesabel herde that Naboth was stoned and deed, she sayde vnto Achab:

t Leui. 25. d. Num. 36. c. 

Chap. rri. 

5 

fo. ceri | 

Theszbite, q sayde: Hast thow not sene how 

Chap. rrij. The tj. boke of the kpnges. 
€|Vp, and take possession of the vynyarde of 

Naboth the lesraelite, which he denyed to geue the for money: for Naboth lyueth no more but is deed. And whan Achab herde y Naboth was deed, he rose to go downe vnto the vyniarde of Naboth the Iesraelite, and to take possession of it.

But the worde of the LORDE came to 
Elias the Theszbite, and sayde: Get the vp, and go downe to mete Achab the kynge of
Israel, which is at Samaria: beholde, he is in 
Naboths vynyarde, in to the which he is gone downe to take possession of it, and talke thou with him, and speake: 'Thus sayeth the
LORDE: Thou hast slayne, and taken in possession. And thou shalt talke morouer vnto him, and saye: Thus sayeth the LORDE:
* Éuen in the place where the dogges licked vp Naboths bloude, shall the dogges licke thy bloude also. And Achab sayde vnto Elias:
Hast thou euer founde me thine enemye? 
He saide: Yee, I haue founde the, because thou art euen solde to do euell in the sighte of the LORDE. Beholde, tI wyll brynge mysfortune vpon the, and take awaye thy posterite, and wil rote out from Achab, euen him that maketh water agaynst the wall, and him that is shut vp and lefte behynde in
Israel: and thy house wyll I make as the house of Jeroboam y sonne of Nebat, and as the house of Baesa the sonne of Ahia, because of y prouocacion wherwith thou hast prouoked me vnto wrath, aud made Israel to synne.

| And ouer Iesabel spake the LORDE also 

and sayde: +The dogges shal deuoure Iesabel in y felde of Iesrael. § Who so of Achab dyeth in y cite, him shal the dogges eate vp: and who so dyeth in the felde, the foules vnder the heauen shall eate him vp. So cleane isolde to do myschefe in y sighte of the
LORDE hath no man bene, as Achab: for his lesabel hath so disceaued him, and he maketh him selfe a greate abhominacion, that he goeth after Idols, acordige vnto all as dyd the Amorites, ‘whom the LORDE expelled before the children of Israel.

But whan Achab herde these wordes, he réte his clothes, ¢ put a sack cloth on his body, q fasted, and slepte in sack cloth, and wente aboute hanginge downe his heade. And the worde of the LORDE came to Elias the

+3 Re.22.f. +4 Re.9.b. Osee 1. a. 
§3 Re. 14. b. 15. f. 16. a. 

t4 Re. 9. b. 
|| 1 Mac. 1. b. 

Achab humbleth him selfe before me? For so moch now as he hubleth him selfe in my sighte, I wil not brynge that plage whyle he lyueth: but by his sonnes life wil I brynge mysfortune vpon his house.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND there passed ouer thre yeares, that 

there was no warre betwene the Sirians a Israel. **But in the thirde yeare wente losaphat the kynge of Iuda downe to the kynge of Israel. And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto his seruauntes: Knowe ye not Ý
Ramoth in Gilead is oures? and we syt styll, and take it not out of the hande of the kynge of Syria. And he sayde vnto Iosaphat: Wilt thou go with me to the battaill vnto Ramoth in Gilead? Iosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: I wyll be as thou, my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.
And Iosaphat sayde vnto y kynge of Israel: ttAxe this daye at the worde of the LORDE.
Then the kynge of Israel gathered the pro- phetes aboute a tifonre hundreth men, and sayde vnto them: Shal I go vnto Ramoth in
Gilead to fighte, or shal I let it alone? "They sayde: Go vp, y LORDE shal delyuer it in to y kinges hande. But Iosaphat sayde: Is there not one prophet here more of y LORDE, that we maye axe at him?

The kinge of Israel saide vnto Iosaphat :|33 

Here is yet a man, one Micheas the sonne of 
Iemla, at whom we maye axe of the LORDE: but I hate him, for he prophecieth me no good, but euell. Iosaphat sayde: Let not the kynge saye so. "Then called the kynge of Israel a chamberlayne, and sayde: Brynge hither soone Micheas the sonne of lemla. As for the kynge of Israel and Iosaphat y kinge of
Iuda, they sat ether of them vpon his seate, arayed in their garmentes in the place at y dore of the porte of Samaria, and all y pro- phetes prophecied before the. And Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena had made him hornes of yron, and sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE:
With these shalt thou puszshe at y Syrians, tyll thou brynge them to naughte. And all the prophetes prophecied likewyse, and sayde:
Go vp vnto Ramoth in Gilead, thou shalt prospere right well, q the LORDE shal

q Nu. 21. d. ** 2 Par, 18. a, 
2 Re. 2. a. and 21.a. 

tt 3 Re. 23. a. 
11 3 Re. 18. c. 

So. ceerlij. 

D 

£|saye: Thus sayeth the kynge: Put this man 

| 

delyuer it in to the kynges hande. And the | messaunger that wente to call Micheas sayde vntohim: Beholde, The wordes of prophetes are with one acorde good before the kynge, | let thy worde therfore be as their worde, and speake thou good also.

Micheas sayde: As truly as the LORDE liueth, loke what the LORDE sayeth vnto me, ly wyl I speake. And whan he came to the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him: Micheas, shal we go vnto Ramoth in Gilead to fight or shall we let it alone? He sayde vnto him:
| Yee, go vp, thou shalt prospere righte well, the LORDE shall geue it in to the kynges hande. But the kynge sayde vnto him agayne:
|I charge y that thou saye no other thinge vnto me but the trueth, in the name of y LORDE.
He sayde: I sawe all Israel scatred abrode vpon the mountaynes, as the shepe that haue no shepherde. And the LORDE saide:
Hane these no lorde? Let euery one turne home agayne in peace. "Then sayde y kinge of Israel vnto Iosaphat: ‘Tolde not I ¥ that he wolde prophecye me no good, but euell ?

He sayde: Heare now therfore the worde 
[of the LORDE: *I sawe the LORDE syt vpon his seate, and all the hoost of heauen
| stodinge by him at his righte hande « at his lefte. And the LORDE saide: Who wil disceaue Achab to go vp, q fall at Ramoth in
Gilead. And one sayde this, another that. 
Then wéte there forth a sprete, q stode before the LORDE, and sayde: I wyl disceaue him.
The LORDE sayde vnto him: Wherwith ? 
He sayde vnto him: I wyll go forth, and be a false sprete in the mouth of all his prophetes.
He saide: Thou shalt disceaue him, and shalt be able: go forth and do so. Beholde now, tthe LORDE hath geué a false sprete in y mouth of all these thy prophetes, and the
LORDE hath spoken euell ouer the. Then stepte forth Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena, and smote Micheas vpon the cheke, and sayde:
What, is the sprete of the LORDE departed fro me, to speake with the? Micheas sayde:
Beholde, thou shalt se it in y daye, whan thou shalt go fro oue chamberto another to hyde the.

The kynge of Israel sayde: Take Micheas, and let him remayne with Amon the ruler of

the cite, and with Ioas the kynges sonne, and 

iu preson, and fede him with bred and water 

* 2 Pa. 18. c. t Eze. 14, b. 

The iij. boke of the kpnars. 

ibattayll was sore the same daie. 
|kinge stode vpo his charet, agaynst the Syrias 

Chap. rrij. 

of trouble, tyll I come agayne in peace. 
Micheas sayde: Yf thou commest agayne in peace, then hath not the LORDE spoken thorow me. And he sayde: herken to all ye people.

So the kynge of Israel and Iosaphat y kynge of luda wente vp vnto Ramoth in
Gilead. And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto losaphat: Chaunge thy clothes, and come in to y battayll in thine araie. The kinge of
Israel chaunged his cléthes also, and wéte in to the battayll. But the kynge of Siria com- maunded the rulers of his charettes (of whom there were two and thirtie) and saide: Ye shal fight nether agaynst small ner greate, but onely agaynst the kynge of Israel. And whan the rulers of the charettes sawe Iosaphat, they thought it had bene the kynge of Israel, and fell vpon him with fightinge. But Iosaphat cried. So whan the rulers of the charettes sawe that it was not y kinge of Israel, they turned back fro him.

A certayne man bended his bowe harde, and shott the kynge of Israel betwene the mawe and ¥ longes. And he sayde vnto his, charetman: Turne thine hàde, and cary me. out of the hoost, for 1 am wounded. And y.
And the’ 

F 

and dyed in the eueninge, and the bloude ranne from the wounde in to the myddes of the charet. And whan the Sonne wente downe there was a proclamacion made in the hoost, and sayde: Euery one gett him in to his cite, and to his countre. Thus the kynge dyed, and was broughte vnto Samaria, and they buryed him in Samaria. And whan they waszshed the charet in the pole of Samaria, t y dogges licked his bloude (but the harlottes waszshed him) acordinge- to the worde of y
LORDE which he spake. 

What more there is to saye of Achab, q all y he dyd, and of the Yuery house which he dad beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel. So Achab slepte with his fathers, and his sonne Ahasia was kynge in his steade. i

$ And Iosaphat the sonne of Asa was kynge ouer [uda in the fourth yeare of Achab kynge of [srael, and was fyue and thirtie yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and raigned fyue, and twentye yeare at lerusale. His mothers

6 

1 3 Reg. 21. c. $ 2 Par. 20. c. 

Chap. í. The iij. boke of the kpnars. So. ceerliy. 

name was Asuba y doughter of Silhi, and he| |londe also the whoremongers that yet were walked in all the waye of his father Asa, q| | lefte, which remayned ouer in the tyme of his departed not there from. And he dyd that, |father Asa. And at that tyme there were no which was right in y sighte of the LORDE,, |kynges in Edom. And Iosaphat had caused yet put he not awaye y hie places, and y| |to make shippes vpon the See, which shulde people offred and brent incése yet vpon the| |go to fetch golde in Ophir, but they wente hye places, and he had peace with the kynge| |not: for they were broken at Ezeon Gaber. of Israel. At that tyme sayde Ahasia the sonne of Achab

What more there is to saye of Iosaphat and| |vnto Iosaphat: Let my seruauntes passe with the mighte that he exercised, and how he| |thy seruauntes in the shippes. But Iosaphat fought, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles| |wolde not. And Iosaphat slepte with his| | of the kynges of Iuda. * He put out of the| |fathers, and was buried in y cite of Dauid.

* 3 Reg. 15. b. And Ioram his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

The ende of the thirde boke of the kynges. 

The fourth boke of the Kynges. 

| What this boke rontepnetb. 

| Chap. I. j Chap. VI. 
Of the reigne of Ochosias (otherwyse called | The yron swymmeth in the water. The kynge of 
Ahasia) and of Ioram his brother and how the Siria fighteth agaynst Israel. His seruauntes 

which go aboute to take Eliseus, are smytten 

fyre cosumed the two captaynes with their men. with blyndnes. A greate honger in Samaria.

Chap. Il. 
Elias is taken vp in a fyrie charet. Eliseus re- Chap. VII. ceaueth the sprete of Elias, maketh the bytter | Of the foure lepers which came in to the tentes water swete, and curseth the mysnurtoured of the Syrians, and how vytayles beganne to children. be good chepe
Chap. III. Chap. VIII. 
Of Ioram and losaphat, and of their warre, © | Of the sewen yeare derth. Benadab is sick, and what Eliseus saide vnto them. axeth coücell at Eliseus. Of Ochosias the
Chap. II. sonne of loram. 

Eliseus helpeth the woma that was in dett, and Chap. IX. for another woman which had no children, he | Of Iehu, how he was anoynted kinge ouer Israel,

optayneth one of God: which childe beynge and how he roted out the house of Achab and deed he rayseth vp agayne. of lesabel.
: Chap. V. Chap. X. 
Naaman the chefe captayne of Siria is clensed | The heades of Achabs seuentie sonnes are from his leprosy, and Gehasi Eliseus sernaunt broughte vnto lehu. Of Ochosias brethren.

is made leporous. Iehu slayeth Baal prestes. 

Fo. ceepltttj. 
Chap. XI. 

Atalia destroyeth all the kynges sede, saue loas which escapeth, aud is made kynge by Ioiada the prest.

Chap. XII. 

Ioas ruleth well whyle Ioiada is alyue, but euell after his death.

Chap. XIII. 

Of the kvnges lIoachias, loas q leroboam, and how the deed that was layed in Eliseus graue, reuyued.

Chap. XIII. 
Of Ioas, Amasias, leroboam and Azarias. 

Chap. XV. 

Of Azarias the Leper, and of his sonne Ionathas. 
Of Zacharias the kynge of Israel. Of Sellum, 
Manahem, Pacea, Romelia. And how Teglat- phalasser coquereth the cities of Iuda.

Chap. XVI. 
Of Achas, Resin, and Ezechias. 

Chap. XVII. 

Of Osea, how Salmanasar came vpon him, and conquered, and caried the people awaye cap- tyue. And how God punyshed those that came in their steade.

Chap. XVIII. 

Of the good kynge Ezechias, q how Sennacherib troubleth him.

The fprst Chapter. 

a HASIA the sonne off Achab was kynge ouer Israel at Samaria in y seuententh yeare of Iosaphat kige of Iuda, q reigned ouer
Israel two yeares, a dyd v which was euell in y sight of the LORDE, and walked in the waye of his father and of his mother, q in the wale of leroboam ¥ sonne of Nebat, which made Israel for to synne. And serued Baal, and worshipped him, and displeased the
LORDE God of Israel, eué as his father dyd. The Moabites also fell awaye from

Israel, whan Achab was deed. 

And Ochosias fell thorow ¥ grate in his chaber at Samaria, and was deed sicke, and sent messauugers, and sayde vnto them: Go youre waye, and axe councell at Beelzebub

A ——À——— E rer eei 

The iiij. boke of the kpnats. 

Chap. f. 

Chap. XIX. 

Ezechias sendeth vnto Esay, which comforteth him. God defendeth Ezechias, q delyuereth him.

Chap. XX. 

Ezechias is deed sick, but Esay at the commaun- dement of the LORDE, promyseth bim to lyue yet fyftene yeare.

Chap. XXI. 

Of the reigne of the vngodly kynge Manasses, how he lyued and how he dyed. Of his sonne
Amon. 

Chap. XXII. 

Of the reigne of that noble q vertuous kynge 
Iosias, and of his goodly actes. 

Chap. XXIII. 

How Iosias caused the boke of the couenaut to be red vnto all the people, and setteth vp the true honoure of God againe. Of Ioachas his sonne.

Chap. XXIII. 

How Nabuchodonosor cometh vpon kynge Ioach- im, and carieth awaye loachim his sonne vnto
Babilon. 

Chap. XXV. 
Nabuchodonosor layeth sege to Ierusale, wynneth 

it, setteth fyre on it, and caryeth awaye the kynge and the people presoners vnto Babilon.

the god of Ekron, whether I shall recouer from this sicknesse. But the angell of y.
LORDE sayde vnto Elias the "Theszbite : 
Vp, a go mete the messaungers of the kynge 33 of Samaria, and saie vnto them: Is there no
God in Israel, that ye go to axe councellat ý, | god of Ekron? ‘Therfore thus sayeth the |
LORDE: Thou shalt not come from the bed wheron thou lyest, but shalt dye the death.
And Elias wente his waye. And wha y messaungers came to Ochosias agayne, he sayde vnto the: Why come yeagayne? They sayde vnto him: ‘There came vp a man in oure waye, and sayde vnto vs: Go againe to the kinge that hath sent you, and saye vnto him: Thus saieth the LORDE: Is there 3o)
God in Israel, y thou sendest to axe coücel at Beelzebub y god of Ekro? Therfore shalt’

Chap. fj. thou not come from y bed wheron thou lyest, but shalt dye the death. He sayde vnto them: What maner of man was it that mett you, and sayde this vnto you? They sayde vnto him: He had a rough heer vpon him, and a letheren gyrdell aboute his loynes. He sayde: It is Elias the Theszbite.

And he sent vnto him a captaine ouer fiftye, with the same fyftye. And whan he came vnto him, beholde, he sat aboue vpon the moit. He sayde vnto him: Thou ina of God, the kynge sayeth: Thou shalt come downe.
Elias answered the captayne ouer fyftye, and sayde vnto him: Yf I be a man of God, the fyre fall downe then from heauen, and cosume the and thy fyftie. *Then fell there fire from heauen, and consumed him and his fyftye.
And agayne he sent another captayne ouer fyftye vnto him, with his fyftye, which an- swered, and sayde vnto him: Thou man of
God, thus sayeth the kynge: Come downe in all the haist. Elias answered, and saide: Yf
I be a ma of God, y fire fall downe from hea- uen, and consume the and thy fyftye. Then fell the fyre of God from heauen, q consumed him, and his fyftye. Agayne, he sent vnto him the thirde captayne ouer fyftye, with his fyftie.

3| Now whan he eame to him, he kneled to 

Elias, and besoughte him, and sayde vnto him: Thou man of God, let my soule and y sonles of thy seruauntes these fyftye, be som- what worth in thy syghte. Beholde, the fyre fell downe from heauen, and hath consumed the fyrst two captaynes ouer fyftye with their fyftyes. But now let my soule be somwhat worth in thy sighte. ‘Then saide the angel of the LORDE vnto Elias: Go downe with him, and feare him not. And he gatt him vp, and wente downe with him vnto y kynge.
And he sayde vnto him: Thus saieth the 
LORDE: Because thou hast sent forth mes- saügers, and caused to axe councell at Beelze- bub the god of Ekron, as though there were uo God in Israel to axe coiicell at his worde, therfore shalt thou not come from the bed wheron thou hast layed the, but shalt dye y death. So he dyed, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE which Elias sayde. And
Ioram (his brother) was kynge in his steade in the seconde yeare of Ioram the sonne of Iosa- phat kynge of Iuda: for he had no sonne.
What more there is to saye of Ochosias, 

* Luc 9. f. 

The iiij. boke of the kynges. 

what he dyd, beholde, it is wrytté in the Cro- nicles of the kynges of Israel.

The tj. Chapter. 

Fo. crerlb. | 

HAN the LORDE was mynded to'a 

take vp Elias in the tempest, Elias and Eliseus wente from Gilgall. And Elias sayde to Eliseus: Tary thou here I praye the, for the LORDE hath sent me vnto Bethel.
But Eliseus sayde: As truly as the LORDE liueth, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, I wyll not forsake the. And whan they came downe vnto Bethel, the prophetes children that were at Bethel, wéte forth to Eliseus, and sayde vnto him: Knowest thou not, that the LORDE wyl take thy lorde awaye from thy heade this daye? He saide: I knowe it well, holde ye youre peace.

And Elias sayde vnto him: Eliseus, tary thou here I praye the, for the LORDE hath sent me vnto Iericho. Neuerthelesse he sayde: as truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, I wyl not forsake the.

And whan they came vnto lericho, the prophetes children which were at lericho, stepte forth to Eliseus and sayde vnto him:
Knowest thou not that the LORDE wyll take thy lorde awaye from thy heade this daie?
He sayde: I knowe it well, holde ye youre peace. And Elias sayde vnto him: I praie the tary here, for ý LORDE hath sent me vnto Iordane. But he sayde: As truly as the
LORDE lyueth, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, I wil not forsake the. And they wente both together. But fyftye men of ¥ prophetes children wéte forth, and stode ouer agaynst thé a farre of: but they both stode by lor- dane. Then toke Elias his cloke, and wrapped it together, and smote the water, which de- nyded it selfe on both the sydes, so that they wéte dry shod thorow it. And whan they were come ouer, Elias sayde vnto Eliseus:
Axe what I shall do for the, afore I be taken awaye froin the. Eliseus saide: That thy sprete maye be vpo me to speake twyse as moch.

He sayde: Thou hast desyred an harde thinge: neuertheles yf thou shalt se me wha
Iam taken awaye from the, it shal be so: Vf no, the shal it not be. And as they were goinge together, and he talked, there came a fyrie charet with horses of fyre, and parted the both asunder. * And so wente Elias vp

t Eccli. 48. a. 

B 

€ 

Fo. ceerlot. 

to heauen in the storme. But Elisens sawe it, q eryed: My father, my father, the charet- man of Israel and his horsmé. And he sawe him nomore.

And he toke holde of his clothes, and rente them in two peces, and toke vp Elias cloke that was fallen from him, and turned backe, and stode by the shore of Iordane, and toke the same cloke of Elias which was fallen from him, and smote it in the water, and saide:
Where is now the LORDE God of Elias? 
And he smote it in to the water, and then parted it asunder on both the sydes, and Eh- seus wente thorow.

And whan the prophetes children which were at Jericho ouer agaynst him, sawe him, they sayde: The sprete of Elias resteth vpo
Eliseus, and so they wete forth to mete him, and worshipped him to the groiide, and sayde vnto him: Beholde, there are fiftye valeaunt mé amonge thy seruauntes, let them go and seke thy lorde, peraduenture the sprete of the
LORDE hath taken him, and cast him vpon some mountaine or in some valley. But he saide: Sende them not. Neuertheles they constrayned him, tyll he was ashamed, and sayde: Let them go. And they sent fiftye men, which soughte him thre dayes: but they founde him not, and came agayne vnto him.
And he abode at Iericho, and sayde vnto them: Tolde not I you, that ye shulde not go? And the men of the cite sayde vnto
Eliseus: Beholde, there is good dwellynge in this cite, as my lorde seyth, but the water is euell, and the londe vnfrutefull.

£| He sayde: Bringe me hither a new vessell, 

q put salt in it. And they broughte it him. 
Then wate he forth vnto the well of water, and cast the salt therin, qsayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE: I haue healed this water: from hence forth shal there no deed ner vnfrute- fulnes come of it. So the water was healed vnto this daye, acordinge to the worde of
Eliseus which he spake. 

And he wéte vp towarde Bethel. And as he was goynge vp by the waye, there came litle boyes out of the cite, and mocked him, ¢ sayde: Come vp here thou balde heade, come vp here thou balde heade. And he turned him aboute. And wha he sawe them, he cursed them in the name of the LORDE.
Then came there two Beeres out of the wod, 

* 4 Re. 1. a. t 3 Re. 22. a 

The iiij. boke of the kpnars. 

and rente two and fortye of the children. 
From thence wete he vp vnto mount Carmel, and from it turned he backe to Samaria.

The (ij. Chapter. 

Chap. iij. 

E the sonne of Achab was kynge|& 

ouer Israel at Samaria in $ eightenth yeare of Iosaphat kynge of Iuda, q raigned xij. yeares, ¢ dyd y which was euell m y sighte of y LORDE, but not as his father q his mother: for he put awaye y pilers of Baal, which his father caused to make. Neuertheles he clened vnto y synnes of Ieroboa y sonne of
Nebat, which made Israel for to synne, q departed not there fro.

Mesa y kynge of the Moabites had many shepe, q payed tribute vnto the kynge of
Israel with the woll of an hundreth thousande labes, t of an hüdreth thousanderames. * But whan Achab was deed, the kynge of $ Moabites fell awaye fro the kynge of Israel. At y same tyme wete kynge Ioram fro Samaria, q mus- tered all Israel, ¢ sent vnto Iosaphat kynge of
Iuda, sayenge: ‘The kynge of the Moabites is fallen awaye fro me, come thou with me to fighte agaynst y Moabites. He sayde: I wil come vp, tI am euen as thou, and my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.
And sayde morouer: Which waye wil we go vp? He sayde: by the waye in the wylder- nesse of Edom.

So the kynge of Israel, the kynge of Iuda, q the kynge of Edom wente forth. And whan they had gone aboute seué dayes iourney, y hoost q the catell y were amonge thé had no water. Then sayde the kynge of Israel:
Alas, the LORDE hath called these thre kynges, to delyuer thé in to the hande of the
Moabites. But Iosaphat sayde: Is here no prophet of ý LORDE, ý we maye axe coücell at.y LORDE by him? Then answered one of y kynge of Israels seruauntes, q saide: Here is Eliseus y sonne of Saphat, which poured water vpon Elias handes. Iosaphat sayde:
The worde of y LORDE is with him. So the kynge of Israel q Iosaphat, and y kynge of
Edom wente downe vnto him. 

5 

But Eliseus sayde vnto the kynge of Israel:| € 

What hast thou to do with me? go to the prophetes of thy father q to thy mothers pro- phetes. ‘The kinge of Israel saide vnto him:
No, for ý LORDE hath called these thre 

1 3 Re. 22. a. 

Chap. tty. kynges, to delyuer them in to the handes of the Moabites. Eliseus sayde: As truly as the
LORDE Zebaoth lyueth, before whom I stéde, yf I regarded not Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda,
I wolde not regarde the, ner set oughte by y. 
So bringe me now a mynstrell. And whan the mynstrell played vpo the instrument, the hande of the LORDE came vpo him. And he sayde: 'Thus sayeth the LORDE: Make pittes by this broke. For thus sayeth the
LORDE: Ye shal se nether wynde ner rayne, yet shall the broke be full of water, that ye and youre housholdes q youre catell maie drynke. Yee and that is but a small thinge in the sighte of the LORDE. And the
Moabites shal he delyuer in to youre handes, so y ye shal smyte all the stronge cities, and all y chosen cities * q shal fell downe all the good trees, and stoppe all the welles of water and all the good feldes shall ye make waist with stones.

On the morow, whan the meatofferynge is offered, beholde, there came water y waye from Edom, and fylled y londe with water.
But whan the Moabites herde, y the kynges came vp to fighte agaynst the, they called all y harnessed men, q their rulers, q stode on y border. And whan they rose early in y morn- ynge, q the Sonne wete vp vpon y water, the
Moabites thoughte the water ouer agaynst thé to be eue as reed as bloude, q they sayde: It is bloude, y kynges haue destroyed them selues with the swerde, q one hath smytten another.
Now Moab get the vp to the spoyles. But whan they came to the tentes of Israel, the
Israelites gat vp, t smote the Moabites, q they fled before them.

£! Neuertheles they came in, q smote Moab, q 

brake downe the cities, q euery one east his stone vpon all the good feldes, and made them full, and stopped all y welles of water, and felled downe all the good trees, tyll there remayned but the stones iu the brickwall, and they compased them aboute with slynges, and smote them.

But wha the kynge of $ Moabites sawe y the battayll was to stroge i him, he toke to him seuen C. men, which drue y swerde, to fall vpon the kynge of Edom: neuertheles they were not able. Then toke he his first sonne, which shulde haue bene kynge in his steade, and offred him for a burntofferynge

* Deu. 20. c. 

Che iiij. boke of the kpnaes. 

vpon the wall. Then came there a greate wrath ouer Israel, that they departed from him, and turned agayne in to their londe.

The (ij. Chapter. 

ND there cried a woman amoge the wyues of the prophetes children vnto
Eliseus, and sayde: Thy seruaunt my husz- bade is deed, and thou knowest that thy seruaunt feared the LORDE. Now commeth the man that he was detter vnto, and wyll take awaye both my children to be bonde ser- uauntes. Eliseus sayde vnto her: What shal
I do forthe? Tell me, what hast thou in the house? She sayde: Thy handmayden hath nothinge in the house but a pitcher with oyle.
He sayde: Go thy waye, borowe without of all thy neghboures emptye vessels, q that not a fewe, and go in, and shut ¥ dore behynde the with thy sonnes, and poure of it in to all
M vessels: q whan thou hast fylled them, de- yuer them forth.

She wente, and shut the dore vnto her with hir sonnes, which broughte her the vessels, and so she poured in. And whan the vessels were full, she sayde vnto hir sonne: Brynge me yet one vessell. He sayde vnto her: There is not one vessell more here. ‘Then stode y oyle styll. And she sent, and tolde the man of
God. He sayde: Go thy waye, sell the oyle, and paye the creditour: but lyue thou and thy sonnes of the resydue.

And it fortuned at ¥ same tyme, that Eli- seus wente vnto Sunem, And there was a riche woman, which helde him to eate with her: qas he passed oft thorow y waye, he wéte in vnto her: q ate with her. And she sayde vnto hir huszbande: Beholde, I perceaue that this-is an holy man of God, which goeth euer thorow this waye, let vs make hia litle chamber of boordes, q set a bed, a table, a stole q a candelsticke therin, that whan he commeth ynto vs, he maye resorte thither.

And it fortuned vpon a tyme, that he came in, q layed him downe in the chamber, a slepte therin. And he saide ynto Gehasi his childe:
Call this woma of Sunem. And wha he had called her, she stode before him. He sayde vnto him: Speake thou vnto her, beholde, thou hast mynistred vnto vs in all these thinges, what shal I do for the? Hast thou eny matter to be spoken for to the kynge, or to the chefe captayne of the hoost? She sayde: I dwell

Fo. tecylbí. 

Fo. ceerloiy. amonge my people. He sayde: What hast thou then to do? Gehasi sayde: Alas, she hath no sonne, and hir huszbade is olde. He sayde: Call her. And wha he had called her, she stode at the dore. And he sayde:
*Aboute this tyme yf y frute can lyue, thou shalt enbrace a sonne. She sayde: Alas, no my lorde, thon man of God, lye not vnto thy handmayden. And the woman conceaned, and bare a sonne aboute the same tyme, wha the frute coulde lyue, acordynge as Eliseus had sayde vnto her.

But whan y childe was growne, it fortuned, y he wente forth to his father vnto the reapers, q sayde vnto his father: Oh my heade, my heade. He saide vnto his seruatt: Bringe him to his mother. And he toke him, and broughte him to his mother: and she set him vpon hir lappe vntyll ¥ noone daye, q thé he dyed. And she wente vp, and layed him vpo the bed of the man of God, q shut the dore, and wéte forth, q called hir huszbande, a sayde vnto him: Sende me one of the seruattes, and an Asse, I wyl go quyckly vnto the man of God, and come agayne. He sayde: Why wilt thou go vnto him? To daye is it nether new moone ner Sabbath. She sayde: Well.
And she sadled the asse, q sayde to the yong- man: dryue forth, and kepe me not bak with rydinge, and do as I byd the.

So she wente, and came to the man of God vnto mount Carmell. Wha the man of God sawe her ouer agaynst him, he sayde vnto his childe Gehasi: Beholde, the Sunamitisse is there, runne now q mete her, and axe her yf it go well with her, and hir huszbande q hir sonne. She sayde: Well. But whan she came to the man of God vpon ¥ mount, she helde him by his fete. And Gehasi stepte to her, to put her awaye. But y man of God sayde: Let her alone, for hir soule is in heuynes, and the LORDE hath hyd it fro me, and not shewed it me. She sayde: Whan desyred I a sonne of my lorde? Sayde I not, y thou shuldest not mocke me?

He sayde vnto Gehasi: Girde vp thy loynes, and take my staffe in thy hande, and go thy waye. t Yf eny man mete the, salute him not: and yf eny man salute the, thanke him not, and laye thou my staffe vpon y childes face. But the childes mother sayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, and as truly as

* Gen. 18. b. 

t Luc. 10. a. 

The uj. boke of the Rpnqes. 

thy soule lyneth, I wyll not leane the. gat he vp, and wente after her. As for Ge- hasi, he wente before them, and layed the staffe vpon the childes face, but there was nether voyce ner felynge. And he wente agayne to mete him, and shewed him, and sayde: 'The childe is not rysen vp.

And whan Eliseus came in to the house, beholde, y childe laye deed vpo his bed. And he wéte in, v shut the dore on thé both, q made his prayer vnto the LORDE, q wente vp, q layed him selfe vpon the childe, q layed his mouth vpon the childes mouth, and his eyes vpon his eyes, and his handes vpon his handes, q so stretched him selfe forth vpon him, so y the childes body was warme. And he rose vp, a wente in to the house once hither and thither, q wente vp, a layed him selfe a longe vpon him. Then nesed the childe seué tymes, and afterwarde the childe opened his
And he cried vpon Gehasi, and sayde: 
Sunamitisse. And whan he had called her, she eame in vnto him. He sayde:
Take there thy sonne. Then came she, and fell at his fete, and worshipped vnto the grounde, and toke hir sonne, and wente forth.

But wha Eliseus came againe vnto Gilgal, there was a derth in the londe, ¢ the pro- phetes children dwelt before him, q he sayde vnto his sernaunt: Set on a greate pot, and make potage for the children of the prophetes.
'Then wente there one in to the felde, to gather herbes, and founde a Cucumbers stalke, q gathered wylde Cucumbers therof his cotefull.
And whan he came, he chopped it small for potage to the pott, for they knewe it not.
And wha they poured it forth for the mé to eate, q they ate of y potage, they cried and sayde: O thou man of God, death is in the
E for they mighte noteate it. Neuertheles 

e sayde: Brynge meel hither. And he put it in the pot, q sayde: Poure it out for the people, that they maye eate. And then was it not bytter in the pot.

There came a man from Baal Salisa, q broughte the man of God bred of the first frutes, namely twentye barlye loaues, q new corne in his garment. But hesayde: Geue it vnto y people, that they maye eate. His mynister sayde: + How shall I geue an hüdreth men of this? He sayde: Gene it vnto the people, that they maye eate. For thus sayeth

t Ioh. 6. a. 

Chap. iiij. 

Chap. b. 

the LORDE: They shal eate, and there shall be lefte ouer. And he set it before them, so that they ate, and there lefte ouer, acordinge to ¥ worde of the LORDE.

The b. Chapter. a AAMAN the chefe captayne of the kynge of Syria, was an excellēt ma in the sighte of his lorde, and moch set by (for thorow him the LORDE gaue health vnto
Syria) and he was a mightie man, but a leper. 
And there had men of warre fallen out of 
Syria, and caried awaye a litle damsel out of the londe of Israel: the same was in seruyce with Naamas wife, and sayde vnto hir mas- tresse: O that my master were with the pro- phet at Samaria, he wolde heale him from his leprosy.

Then wente he in to his lorde, and tolde him, and sayde: 'Thus and thus hath the damsel of the londe of Israel spoken. "The kynge of Syria sayde: Go thy waye then, ¢ I wyl wrytte a letter vnto the kynge of Israel.

And he wente, and toke with him ten hun- dreth weighte of syluer, and sixe thousande guldens, q ten chaunge of rayment, q broughte the letter vnto the kynge of Israel, with these wordes :

Whan this letter commeth vnto the, be- holde, thou shalt vnderstonde y I haue sent my seruaunt Naaman vnto the, that thou mayest heale him of his leprosy.

And whan the kynge of Israel red the letter, he rente his clothes, t sayde: Am I God then, that I can kyll and quycké agayne, y he sendeth vnto me, to heale the man fro his leprosy ? Considre and se, how he seketh an occasion vnto me.

Whan Eliseus the man of God herde, y the kynge of Israel had rente his clothes, he sent vnto him, sayenge: Why hast thou rente thy clothes? Let him come to me, that he maye knowe, y there is a prophet in Israel.

So Naaman came with horses and charettes, and helde still at the dore of Eliseus house.
Then sent Eliseus a messaunger vnto him, sayenge: Go thy waye, and waszshe the seuen tymes in Iordane, so shal thy flesh be restored the agayne, q be clensed. Then was Naaman wroth, q wente his waye, q sayde: I thoughte he shulde haue come forth vnto me, q to haue stode here q to haue called vpo the name of

* Luc. 4. c. 

The iiij. boke of the kpnaes. 

Fo. cecrlig. the LORDE his God, x to haue touched the place with his hande, ¢ so to haue put awaye the leprosy. Are not y waters of Amana and
Pharphar at Damascon better then all the waters in Israel, y I might waszshe me therin t be clésed? and he turned him, and wéte his waye in displeasure. Then his seruauntes gat thé to him, and sayde: Father, yf the prophet had eomaunded the eny greate thinge, shuldest thou not haue done it? moch more thé yf he saye vnto the: Wasshe the, q thou shalt be cleane. Then wéte he downe, q waszshed him selfe in Iordane seué tymes (as the man of God sayde) q his flesh was restored him agayne, euen as the flesh of a yonge childe
* and he was clensed. 

And he turned agayne to $ man of God/D with all his armye. And whan he came in, he stode before him, and sayde: Beholde, I knowe that in all londes there is no God, but in Israel. ‘Take now therfore this blessynge
I praye the of thy seruaunt. Neuertheles he sayde: tAs truly as the LORDE lyueth, before whom I stonde, I wil not take 1t. And he wolde nedes haue him to take it, but he wolde not. Then sayde Naaman: Mighte there not a burthé of this earth be gené vnto thy ser- uaunt, as moch as two Mules maye beare?
For thy seruaunt wyll nomore do sacrifice and offer burntofferynges vnto other goddes, but vnto the LORDE, That the LORDE maye be gracious vnto thy seruaunt, yf I worshippe in the house of Rimmon, wha my lorde goeth there in to y house to worshippe, q leaneth vpon my hande. He sayde vnto him: Go thy waye in peace.

And as he was gone from him a felde bredth in the londe, Gehasi the seruaunt of Eliseus y man of God thoughte: beholde, my lorde
Dorm spared Naamā this Syrian, so that he hath not taken from him y which he broughte:
As trulyas $ LORDE lyueth, I wil rüne after him, q take somthinge of him.

So Gehasi folowed Naaman. And wha 
Naaman sawe y he ranne after him, he lighte downe from the charet to mete him, « sayde:
Are all thinges well? He sayde: Yee. But my lorde hath sent me, q caused to saye vnto the: Beholde, there are now come to me fro mount Ephraim two yonge men of the pro- phetes childré, geue them a taléte of siluer (I praye the) q two chaunge of rayment. Naama

t3 Re. 13.b. Dan. 5. d. 

fo. cect. 

salde: Go to, take two taletes. And he copelled him, q bande two talentes in two bagges, and two chaunge of rayment, and delyuered it vnto two of his seruauntes, which bare it before him. And whan he came in y darcke, he toke it from their handes, q layed it a syde in the house, ¢ let the men go.

Aud whan they were gone their waye, he stode before his lorde. And Eliseus sayde vnto him: Whence commest thou Gehasi?
He sayde: Thy sernaunt wente nether hither ner thither. But he sayde vnto him : Wente not my hert with the, whan the man turned backe from his charet to mete the? Now thou hast také the syluer q the rayment, olyue trees, vynyardes, shepe, oxen, sernauntes q maydens.
But the leprosy of Naaman shal cleue vnto the c to thy sede for euer. *Then wéte he forth from him leporous as snowe.

The bi. Chapter. 

HE children of y prophetes sayde vnto 
Eliseus: Beholde, the place where we dwell before y, is to narow for vs, let vs go vnto Iordane, q euery one fetch tymbre there, y we maye there buylde vs a place to dwell in. He saide: Go youre waye. And one sayde: Go to then, q come with thy sernauntes.
He sayde: I wil go with you. And he wete with them. And whan they came to Iordane, they hewed downe tymber, And as one was fellynge downe a tre, the yron fell in to the water, and he cried and sayde: Alas my lorde, q it is burowed. But the man of God sayde:
Where fell it in? And whan he had shewed him the place, he cut downe a sticke, and thrust it in there. ‘Then swame the yron.
And he sayde: Take it vp. So he put forth 

his hande, aud toke it. 

And the kynge of Syria warred agaynst 
Israel, and toke councell at his seruauntes, and sayde: There x there will we lye. But the man of God sent to y kynge of Israel, sayenge: Bewarre y thou go not vnto that place, for the Syrians rest there. So the kynge of Israel sent vnto y place wherof y man of
God tolde him, ¢ kepte it, x helde watch there, q dyd that not once or twyse onely.

Thé was y kynge of Syrias herte vexed therfore, and called his seruauntes, and sayde vnto them: Wyll ye not tell me, which of oure men is fled vnto the kynge of Israel?

* 9 Par. 926. d. 

The ij. boke of tbe Rpnars. 

Chap. bi. 

Then sayde one of his seruauntes: Not so my lorde O kynge, but Eliseus the prophet in Israel telleth the kynge of Israel all that thou speakest in thy chamber where thou lyest. He sayde: Go youre waye thé and loke where he is, that I maye sende, and cause him be fetched. And they shewed him and sayde: Beholde, he is at Dothan. "Thé sent he thither horses q charetes, q a greate power.
And wha they came thither by nighte, they compased the cite aboute. And the mynister of the ma of God arose early to get him vp.
And as he wete forth, beholde, there laye an hoost of men aboute y cite with horses and charettes.

Then saide his childe vnto him: Alas syr, how wyll we now do? He sayde: t Feare not, for there are mo of them y are with vs, then of those that are with them. And
Eliseus prayed a sayde: LORDE open his eyes, y he maye se. Then the LORDE opened ¥ childes eyes, y he sawe, q beholde, y mount was full of fyrie horses q charettes roüde aboute Eliseus. And wha they came downe vnto him, Eliseus made his prayer, a sayde: LORDE smyte this people with blynd- nes. t And he smote thé with blyndnes acord- inge to the worde of Eliseus. And Eliseus saide vnto them: This is not y waye nor the cite, folowe me, I wil brynge you to the man whom yeseke. And he broughte them vnto
Samaria. 

And whan they came to Samaria, Eliseus sayde: LORDE open these mens eyes, y they maye se. And the LORDE opened their eyes, y they sawe, q beholde, they were in the myddes of Samaria. And whan the kyuge of Israel sawe them, he saide vnto
Eliseus: My father, shal I smyte the? He saide: Thou shalt not smyte thé: loke whom thou takest with thy swerde and bowe, smyte those. Set bred and water before them, that they maye eate and drynke, and let them departe vnto their lorde. ‘Thé was there a greate dyner prepared. And whan they had eaten and dronken, he let them go to departe vnto their lorde. From that tyme forth came the men of warre of the Syrians nomore in to the londe of Israel.

After this it fortuned, that Benadab the kynge of Syria gathered all his hoost, and wéte vp, ¢ layed sege vnto Samaria: q there

t 2 Par. 32. b. 

1 Gen. 19. c. 

Chap. bi. was a greate derth at Samaria. But they layed sege to the cite so longe, tyll an Asses heade was worth foure score syluer pes, and the fourth parte of a *Cab of doues donge worth fyue sylner pens. And whan the kynge of Israel wente vnto the wall, a woman cried vnto him and sayde: Helpe me my lorde O kynge. He sayde: Yf the LORDE helpe the not, wherwith shal I helpe the? with Y barne or with the wyne presse? And the kynge sayde vnto her: What ayleth y? She sayde: This woman sayde vnto me: Geue vs thy sonne, that we maye eate him, tomorow wyll we eate my sonne. So we sod my sonne, q haue eaten him, and I sayde vnto her on y thirde daye: Geue vs thy sonne and let vs eate him, but she hath hyd him awaye.

d£ | Whan the kynge herde the womans wordes, 

he rente his clothes, whyle he was goynge to the wall. "Thé sawe all the people, that he had a sack cloth vnder vpon his body. And he sayde: t God do this and that vnto me, yf the heade of Eliseus the sonne of Saphat shal this daye stonde vpon him. As for Eliseus, he sat in his house, q the Elders sat by him.
And he sent a man before him, but or euer the messaunger came to him, he sayde vnto y
Elders: Haue ye not sene how this childe of murthure hath sent hither, to take awaye my heade? ‘Take hede, whan the messaunger cometh, y ye holde him at the dore. Be- holde, y noyse of his lordes fete foloweth him.
Whyle he was thus talkynge with them, be- holde, y messaunger came to him, q sayde:
Beholde, this euell cometh of Y LORDE, and what more shal I loke for of the LORDE?

The bij. Chapter. 

LISEUS sayde: Heare the worde of the 
E LORDE. Thus sayeth the LORDE : t Tomorow aboute this tyme shal a buszshel of fyne meel be solde for one Sycle, and two buszshels of barly for one Sycle vnder the porte of Samaria. Then a knyghte (vpon whose hande the kynge leaned) answered the ma of God, and sayde: And though the
LORDE made wyndowes in heaue, how coulde soch a thinge come to passe? He saide: Beholde, thou shalt se it with thine eyes, q shalt not eate therof.

And there were foure leporous men at y dore before the porte, and one sayde vnto

* A Cab isa certayne measure. + 3 Re. 19. a. and 20. b. | 

The iý. boke of tbe kynaes. 

another: Why tary we here whyle we dye? 
Though we thoughte to come in to the cite, yet is there derth in y cite, and there shulde we be fayne to dye. And yf we tary here, we must dye also. Let vs go now, and flye vnto the hoost of the Syrians. Yf they let vs lyue, we shall lyue: yf they slaye vs, then are we deed. And so they gat them vp early, to come vnto the hoost of the Syrians. And whan they came to the vttemost ende of y tentes, beholde, there was no body.

$ For the LORDE had made the Syrians |33 

to heare a noyse of horses, charettes, and of a mightie greate hoost, so that they sayde one to another amonge the selues: Beholde, the kynge of Israel hath hyred the kynge of the
Hethites, and the kynge of the Egipcians agaynst vs, to come vpo vs. And they gat them vp, and fled early in the twylight, and lefte their bothes, and horses and Asses in the tentes as they stode, q fled euery man where he mighte saue his life.

Now whan the lepers came to the place of| ¢ 

the tentes, they wente in to the tentes, ate and dronke, and toke syluer, golde and rayment, and wente and hyd it: q came agayne q entred in to another tent, and toke therout, and wente and hyd it. But one of them saide vnto another: Let vs not do thus, this daye is a daye of good tidynges. Yf we kepe this secrete and byde tyll the lighte mornynge, oure trespace wy] be founde out. Let vs go now therfore, that we maye come, ¢ tell the kynges house.

And whan they came, they cried at the porte of the cite, and tolde them, and sayde :
We came to the tentes of the Sirians, and beholde, there is no mà there, nether yet eny mans voyce, but horses and asses bounde, and the bothes as they stonde. Then cried ¥ porters and tolde it within in y kynges house.
And the kynge arose in the nighte, q sayde vnto his seruauntes: I will tell you how y
Syrians deale with vs: they knowe y we suffer honger, and are gone out of the tétes, to hyde them selues in the felde, and thynke thus: whan they go out of the cite, we wyll take them alyue, q come in to the cite. Then answered one of his seruauntes, and sayde:
Let vs take the fyue horses that remayne, which yet are lefte in the cite (beholde, these are left therin for all y multitude in

t 4 Re. 7. d. $2 Mac.5.a, Esa. 13. a. 

Fo. cect. 

Ffo. ceeltj, 

Israel, which is destroyed) let vs sende these| and se. 'Thé toke they two charettes with y horses. And the kynge sent them vnto the, tentes of the Syrians, and sayde: Go youre waye and se.

D| And whan they wente after thé vnto Ior- dane, beholde, the waye laye full of gar- mentes and vessels, which the Syrians had cast from thé, whyle they made haist. And whan the messaungers came agayne, and tolde the kynge, the people wente forth, aud spoyled the tentes of the Syrians. And a buszshel of fyne meell'was solde for a Sycle, and two buszshels of barlye for a Sycle also, *acord- inge to the worde of the LORDE. But the kynge appoynted the knyghte (vpon whose hande he leened) to be at the gate, q the people trode vpon him, so that he dyed, euen as the man of God sayde, whan the kynge came downe vnto him. And it came to passe euen as y man of God tolde the kynge, wha he sayde: Tomorow aboute this tyme shall two buszshels of barlye be solde for one Sycle, and a buszshel of fyne meel for one Sycle vnder the gate at Samaria. And the knyghte answered the mau of God, and sayde: Be- holde, though LORDE made wyndowes in heauen, how coulde soch a thinge come to passe? Neuertheles hesayde: Beholde, with thine eyes shalt thou se it, and shalt not eate therof. And euen so fortuned it vnto him, for the people trode vpon him in the gate, y he dyed.

The iij. Chapter. 

LISEUS spake vnto the womá, t whose 
E sonne he had restored vnto life againe, and saide: Get the vp, q go with thine hous- holde, and be a straunger where thou canst : for the LORDE shall call for a derth, which shal come in to the londe seuen yeare loge.
The woman gat her vp, and dyd as the man of God sayde, q wente with hir housholde, and was a straunger in the londe of the Phi- listynes seuen yeare. But whan the seuen yeares were ended, the woman came agayne out of the Philistynes lode, and wente forth to crye vpon the kynge for hir house and londe. The kynge spake vnto Gehasi the seruaunt of the man of God, q sayde: Tell me all the greate actes that Eliseus hath done.
And whyle he was tellynge the kynge how he 

* 4 He. 7. a. t 4 Re. 4. d. 

The iij. boke of the kpnages. 

had made one that was deed, to lyue agayne, beholde, the woman whose sonne he had caused to reuyue, came euen in the meane season, and cried vnto the kynge for hir house and londe. ‘Then sayde Gehasi: My lorde O kynge, this same is the woma, and this is hir sonne, whom Eliseus restored vnto life agayne.
And the kynge axed y woman, and she tolde him. Then the kynge delyuered her a cham- berlayne, ¢ saide: Restore her agayne all that is hirs, and all the increase of the londe, sence the tyme that she lefte the londe vntyll now.

t And Eliseus came to Damascon, q Be- nadab the kynge of Syria laye sicke. And it was tolde him, and sayde: The man of God is come hither. Then sayde the kynge vnto
Hasael: Take giftes with the, q go mete the man of God, and axe councell at y LORDE by him, and saye: Maye I recouer from this sicknesse? Hasael wente for to mete him, and toke rewardes with him, and of all the goodes at Damasco, as moch as fortye Camels mighte beare. And whan he came, he stode before him, and sayde: Thy sonne Benadab the kynge of Syria hath sent me vnto the, sayenge: Maye I recouer from this sicknes ?

Eliseus sayde vnto him: Go thy waye and tell him: ‘Thou shalt recouer. But the
LORDE hath shewed me, y he shal dye y death. And the man of God loked earnestly, qt made a troublous countenaunce, q wepte.
Thé sayde Hasael: Wherfore wepeth my lorde? He sayde: I knowe what euell thou shalt do vnto the children of Israel. Thou shalt burne their stronge cities with fyre, and slaye their yonge men with the swerde, and kyll their yonge children, and ryppe vp their wemen with childe.

Hasael sayde: How so, is thy seruauut a dogg, that he shulde do soch a greate thynge?
Eliseus saide: The LORDE hath shewed me, y thou shalt be kynge of Syria. And he wete his waye from Eliseus, q came to his lorde, which saide vnto him: What saieth
Eliseus vnto the? He sayde: He tolde me, 
Thou shalt recouer. But on the nexte daye he toke y bed couerynge, and dypte it in water, and spred it ouer him, and he dyed, q
Hasael was kynge in his steade. 

In the fyfth yeare of loram the sonne of 
Achab kynge of Israel, was Ioram y sonne of 
Iosaphat kynge of Iuda. Two œ thirtie 

13 Re. 19. c. 

$3 Re. 19. c. 

|| 2 Par. 21. a. 

Chap. brije! 

€ 

Chap. ir. The tj. boke 

yeare olde was he wha he was made kynge, q reigned eighte yeare at lerusalem, q walked in the waye of the kynges of Israel, as the house of Achab dyd (for Achabs doughter was his wife) t he dyd ý which was euell in ý sighte of the LORDE. Neuertheles the
LORDE wolde not destroye Iuda for his ser- uaunt Dauids sake, *as he promysed him, to geue him euer a lanterne amoge his childre.
Bİ At y same tyme fell y Edomites awaye from Iuda, q made a kynge ouer them selues : y cause was this, Ioram had gone thorow
Seira, and all the charettes with him, a had gotten him vp by nighte, and smytten the
Edomites that were aboute him, and y rulers ouer the charettes, so that the people fled vnto their tentes: therfore fell the Edomites awaye from Iuda vnto this daye. At the same tyme fell Libna awaye also.

What more there is to saye of Ioram, q all y he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cro- nicles of the kynges of Iuda. And Ioram fell on slepe with his fathers, q was buried with his fathers in ¥ cite of Dauid, tq Ochosias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

In the twolueth yeare of Ioram the sonne of Achab kynge of Israel, was Ochosias y sonne of Ioram kynge in luda. ‘Two and twentye yeare olde was Ochosias whan he was made kynge, and reigned one yeare at leru- salem. His mothers name was Atalia the doughter of Amri kynge of Israel, q he walked in the waye of the house of Achab, a dyd that which was euell in the syght of y LORDE, euen as dyd the house of Achab: for he was sonne in lawe in the house of Achab. And he wente with Ioram the sonne of Achab in to the battayll agaynst Hasael y kinge of
Syria vnto Ramoth in Gilead, but ý Syrians smote loram. “Then Ioram the kinge turned backe, to be healed at Iesreel of ¥ woundes, wherwith the Syrians had wounded him at
Ramoth, wha he foughte with Hasael kinge of 
Syria. And Ochosyas y sonne of lora kinge of Iuda, came downe to viset Ioram the sonne of Achab at Iesreel, for he laye sicke.

The ir. Chapter. 

LISEUS the prophet called one of the, 

“4 prophetes childré, q sayde vnto him: 

^ Girde vp thy loynes, and take this cruse of, 

*9He,7.c. t2Par.22.a. 74Re.9.c. °4Re.4.d. 

* 3 Re. 19. c. 

| 

of the kpnges. Fo. ceclitj. 

oyle with the, and go vnto Ramoth in Gilead: and wha thou cémest thither, thou shalt se there one Iehu, y sonne of Iosaphat the sonne of Nimsi, and go in, and byd him stonde vp amonge his brethren, and brynge him in to the ynmost chamber, q ‘take thou y cruse of oyle, and poure it vpon his heade, q saye:
Thus sayeth the LORDE: I haue anointed the to be kynge ouer Israel: ¢ thou shalt open the dore, and flye, and not tary. And the prophetes yonge man, the childe wente his waye vnto Ramoth in Gilead. And whan he came in, beholde, the captaynes of the hoost sat there, and he sayde: I haue somwhat to saye vnto the O captayne. Iehu saide: Vnto whom amonge vs all? He sayde: Euen vnto the o captayne.

Then stode he vp, and wente in. So he poured the oyle vpon his heade, and sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth the LORDE God of
Israel: I haue anoynted ¥ to be kynge ouer the LORDES people of Israel, ^and thou shalt smyte thy lorde Achabs house, that I maye auenge the bloude of my seruauntes the prophetes, and the bloude of all the LORDES seruauntes, from the hande of Iesabel, that all the house of Achab maye periszshe. And
I wyl rote out from Achab, *euen him that maketh water agaynst the wall, aud the closed vp and the desolate in Israel: and the house of Achab wyll I make euen as the house of
Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, and as the house of Baesa the sonne of Ahia, and ¥ dogges shall eate vp Iesabel vpon the felde at Iesrael, and noman shall burye her. And he opened the dore, and fled.

And wha lehu came forth to his lordes seruauntes, they saide vnto him: Are all thinges well? ^ Wherfore came this madd felowe vnto the? He saide vnto them: Ye knowe the man well, ¢ what he hath spoken.
They sayde: That is not true, but tell thou vs. He sayde: Thus and thus hath he spoken ynto me, and sayde: Thus sayeth the LORDE:
I haue anoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel. 
Then made they haist, and euery one toke his garment and laied them vnder him in maner of a iudges seate, and blewe the trompet, and sayde: lehu is made kinge. So Iehu the sonne of Iosaphat the sonne of Nimsi, made a confederacion agaynst Ioram. As for Iorā

*3Re.21.c. *1Re.25.d. 3Re.14.b. f3 Re.21.d. 

48 

So. rerit. he laye before Ramoth in Gilead with all
Israel agaynst Hasael the kynge of Syria. 
*But loram the kynge was turned backe, y he might be healed of the woundes wherwith the Syrians had wounded him, wha he foughte with Hasacl the kynge of the Syrians.

3! And lehu sayde: Yf it be youre mynde, there shall noman escape out of the cite, to go and tell it at Iesreel. And he rode, and departed vnto lesrael: for Ioram laye there, and Ochosias the kinge of Iuda was come downe to vyset Ioram. But the watchman that stode vpon the tower at Iesrael, sawe the company of Iehu commynge, and sayde: I se a company. Then sayde Ioram: ‘Take a charet, and sende to mete thé, and saye: Is it peace? And the charetman rode to mete them, and sayde: Thus sayeth the kynge: Is it peace? Iehu sayde: What hast thou to do with peace? Tume the behynde me. The watchman tolde it, and sayde: The mes- saunger is come vnto them, and cometh not agayne. Then sent he another charetman, which whan he came to them, saide: Thus sayeth the kynge: Is it peace? Iehu sayde:
What hast thou to do with peace? Turne y behynde me.

And the watchman tolde it, aud sayde: 
He is come to them: and commeth not agayne, and the goynge is as it were the goynge of
Iehu the sonne of Nimsi : for. he dryueth on as he were mad. Then sayde Ioram: Binde the charet fast. And they bounde the charet, and so they wente forth, Ioram the kynge of
Israel, and Ochosias the kynge of Iuda, euery one vpon his charet, to mete Iehu. And they fonnde him vpon the felde of Naboth the lesraelite. And whan Ioram sawe Iehu, he sayde: Iehu, is it peace? But he sayde:
What peace? "The whordome and witchcraft of thy mother Iesabel is not yet come toan ende.

Then turned Ioram his hande and fled, and sayde vnto Ochosias: There is treason Ocho- sias. But Iehu toke his bowe, q shot Ioram betwene the armes, that the arowe wente thorow his hert, and he fell downe in his charet. And Iehn sayde vnto Bidekar the knyghte: Take and cast him in the pece of londe of Naboth the Iesraelite : for I remem- bre sence thou rodest with me in a charet after Achab his father, that the LORDE
#F}wolde laye this heuy burthen vpon him. I 

* 4 Re. 8. d. t 3 Reg. 21. c. 1 3 Reg. 16. b. 

The iy. boke of the kpugrs. 

holde (sayde the LORDE) I wyl recompence the y bloude of Naboth and of his childré, euen in this pece of londe. Take him now and cast him in to that pece of londe, tacor- dynge to the worde of the LORDE.

Whan Ochosias the kinge of Iuda sawe this, he fled by the waie vnto y garden house.
But Iehu folowed after him, and commaunded to smyte him also vpon his charet in the goynge vp towarde Gur, which lieth by
Ieblaam: and he fled vnto Megiddo, and dyed there. And his sernauntes caused him to be earied vnto lerusalem, and there they buryed him in his awne grane with his fathers in the cite of Dauid. Ochosias reigned ouer
Iuda in ¥ eleuenth yeare of Iorà M sonne of 
Achab. And whan Iehu came to Iesrael, and lesabel herde therof, she coloured hir face, and decked hir heade, and leked out at the wyndowe. And whan Iehu came vnder the gate, she sayde: t Prospered Symri well that slewe his lorde?

And he lifte vp his face to the wyndow, and sayde: Who is with me? Then resorted
|there two or thre chamberlaynes vnto him. 
He sayde: Cast her downe headlinges. And 
|they cast her downe headlynges, so that y wall and the horses were sprenkled with hir bloude, and she was troddé vnder fete, And whan he came in, and had eaten and dronken, he sayde: Loke vpon yonder cursed woman,
€ burye her, $for she is a kynges doughter. 
Neuertheles whan they wente in to burye her, they founde nothmge of her, but the szkull and the fete, and the palmes of her handes. And they came agayne and broughte him worde. He saide: This is euen it that the LORDE spake by his seruaunt Elias the
Theszbite, and sayde: “In the felde of Iesrael shal the dogges eate lesabels flesh. So the deed carcase of Iesabel became euen as donge in the felde of Iesrael, so y a man coulde not saye: This is Iesabel.

The y. Chapter. 

CHAB had thre score and ten sonnes 

at Samaria. ^And Iehu wrote a letter, 

and sent it to Samaria, vnto the rulers of the cite lesrael, euen vnto the Elders, « to
Achabs tuters, sayenge these wordes: Whan this letter commeth vnto you with whom are youre lordes sonnes, charetes, horses, stronge
$ 3 Reg. 16. d. 

“3 Reg.21.d. — ^ Iudi. 8. g. 

Chap. r. 

Chap. r. cities, x ordynaunce, loke which is the best | and most righteous amonge youre lordes sonnes, q set him vpon his fathers seate, and fighte for youre lordes house.

Neuertheles they were sore afrayed, and 
,sayde: Beholde, two kynges were not able to stonde before him, how wyl we then endure?

And they that were ouer the house and ouer 

the eite, and the Elders and tuters sent vnto 

Iehu, sayege: We are thy seruauntes, we wyll 

do all that thou sayest vnto vs: We wil make 

no man kynge, do thou what pleaseth the. 

Then wrote he the seconde letter vnto them 

with these wordes: Yf ye be myne, and herken 

vnto my voyce, then take the heades of the men youre lordes sonnes, and brynge me them tomorow by this tyme vnto lesrael.

33, The kynges sonnes were thre score men 

and ten, and y chefe men of the cite broughte 

thé vp. Now whan this letter came they toke the kynges sonnes, and slewe them euen thre score men and ten, and layed their heades in baszkettes, and sent them to him vnto Iesrael.

And whan the messaunger came, ¢ tolde him, 

and sayde: They haue broughte the heades 

of the kynges children, he sayde: Laye them vpon two heapes at the dore of the porte tyll tomorow.

And on the morow whan he wente forth, he stode, and sayde vnto all the people: Are ye righteous? Beholde, I haue made an ap- poyntmét against my lorde, and slayne him, who hath slayne all these then? Vnderstonde ye now therfore, that there is not fallen vpon the earth one worde of the LORDE, which he spake agaynst the house of Achab: and the
LORDE hath done, euen *as he sayde by his seruaunt Elias. So Iehu smote all the remnaunt of the house of Achab at Iesrael, all his greate men, his kynsfolkes, and his prestes, tyll there was not one lefte ouer. And he gat him vp, wente his waye, and came to Samaria.
€| By the waye there was a shepherdes house, 

where Iehu founde the brethren of Ochosias 

kynge of Iuda, and sayde: Whence are ye? 

They sayde: We are Ochosias brethren, and 

are goynge downe to salute the kyngeschildren, 

and the quenes children. He sayde: Take 

j |them alyue. And they toke them alyue, and 

slewe them by the welles syde at the shep- 

herdes house, euen two and fortye men, and let not one of them remayne.

* 3 Re. 21. c. t Ier. 35. a. 

The iij. boke of the Rpnqes. 

And whan he wente from thence, he foude 
Ionadab y sonne of t Rechab, which met him, q saluted him. And he sayde vnto him: Is thyne hert righte, as myne hert is with thyne hert? lonadab sayde: Yee. Yf it be so
(sayde he) then geue me thy hande. And he gaue him his hande. And so he caused him to syt besyde him in the charet, and saide:
Come with me, and se my zele for the LORDE. 
And they caryed him with him vpon his charet. 
And whan he eame to Samaria, he smote all that remayned of Achab at Samaria, tyll he had destroyed him, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE, + which he spake vnto Elias.

And Iehu gathered all the people together, and saide vnto them: $Achab did Baal but litle seruyce, Iehu wyll serue him better. Call vnto me now therfore all Baals prophetes, all his seruaites and all his prestes, that there be none wantynge, for I haue a greate sacrifyce to do vnto Baal. Who so euer is myssed, shal notlyue. But Iehu dyd it craftely, that he mighte destroye all the mynisters of Baal.
And Iehu sayde: Sanctifie y feast vnto Baal, and proclame it. And Iehu sent in to all
Israel, and caused all Baals ministers to come, so that there was noma lefte behynde, which came not. And they came in to Baals house, so that the house of Baal was full from one corner to another.

Then sayde he vnto him that had the rule of the vestrye: Brynge forth rayment for all
Baals mynisters. And he broughte forth the rayment. And Jehu wente in to Baals house with Ionadab the sonne of Rechab, and sayde vnto Baals mynisters: Search and se that there be not here ainoge you eny mynyster of the
LORDE, but onely Baals mynisters. 

And whan they came in to offer sacrifyces and burntofferynges, Iehu appoynted him foure score men without, q sayde: Yf eny of these men escape whom I delyuer vnder youre handes, then shal the same mans soule be for his soule. Now whā he had made an ende of the burntofferynge, Iehu sayde vnto the fote- men and knyghtes: Go in, ¢ smyte euery man, let noman go forth. And they smote the with the edge of the swerde. And the fote men and knightes threw the awaie and wete vnto the cite of Baals house, and brought forth the piler in y house of Baal, and brent it, and brake downe Baals pyler with the

ESRe.21.c. — $3 Re. 16.4. 

Fo. cerlb. 

TT 

D 

£ D 

Fo. ceelbt. 

house of Baal, and made a preuy house therof vnto this daie. Thus Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel. But Iehu lefte not of from the sinnes of Ieroboain the sonne of Nebat (which caused Israel to synne) namely, from the golden ealues at Bethel and at Dan. And the LORDE sayde vnto Iehu: Because thou hast bene wyllinge to do that which was righte in my sighte, q hast done vnto Achabs house all that was in my hert, *therfore shall thy children syt vpon y seate of Israel vnto the fourth generacion.

J| Neuerthelesse Iehu was not diligent to walke in the lawe of the LORDE God of Israel with all his hert: for he lefte not of fro the synnes of Ieroboam which made Israel to synne. At the same time beganne the LORDE to be greued at Israel. tFor Hasael smote them in all the borders of Israel from Iordane East- warde, and all the londe Gilead of the Gaddites,
Rubenites and Manassytes, from Aroer that lyeth on the ryuer by Arnon, and Gilead and
Dasan. 

What more there is to saye of Iehu, and all that he dyd, and all his power, beholde, it is wryten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
And Iehu fell on slepe with his fathers, q they buryed him in Samaria. And Ioahas his sonne was kynge in his steade. The tyme that Iehu reigned ouer Israel, is eight and twentye yeares at Samaria.

The ri. Chapter. 
THALIA the mother of Ochosias, wha she sawe that hir sonne was deed, ¢ gat her vp, and destroyed all the kynges sede.
But Joseba kynge Jorams doughter the syster of Ochosias, toke Ioas the sonne of Ochosias and stale him awaye with his norse in the chamber from amonge the kynges children which were slayne, and she hyd him from
Athalia, so that he was not slayne. And he was hyd with her in the house of the LORDE sixe yeares. But Athalia was quene in the londe.
^Neuerthelesin the seuenth yeare sent Ioiada, and toke the rulers ouer hndreds with the captaynes and fote men, and caused thé to come to him in to the house of the LORDE and made a conenaunt with them, and toke an ooth of them in the house of the LORDE, and shewed them the kynges sonne, and

*4Re.15.b. t4Re.8.a. «42 Pa. 99.d. ^92 Pa.924.a. 

Che iij. boke of the kynges, 

Chap. rt. comaunded them, and sayde: This is it that ye shall do: One thirde parte of you which enter on the Sabbath, shall kepe the watch in the kynges house, and one thyrde parte shal be at the porte of Sur, and one thirde parte shal be at y porte which is behynde the fote men, and ye shal kepe the watch at the house of Massa. But two partes of you all that go of on the Sabbath, shal kepe the watch in the house of the LORDE aboute the kinge and ye shall get you rounde aboute y kynge and euery one with his weapen in his hande: and who so ener cometh within y wall, let him die, so that ye be with the kinge, wha he goeth out and in.

* And the rulers ouer the hundreds dyd all as loiada the prest had commaiided them, and toke vnto them their men which entred vpon the Sabbath, with those that wente of on the Sabbath, and came to Ioiada y prest. And the prest gaue the captaynes speares and shyldes which had bene kynge Dauids, and were in the house of the LORDE. And the fote men stode aboute the kynge, euery one with his weapen in his hande, fro the corner on the righte syde of the house vnto the corner of the lefte syde, enen vnto the altare and to the house. And he broughte forth the kynges sonne, and set a erowne vpon his heade, and toke the t witnes, and made him kynge, and they were glad, and clapped their handes together, and sayde: God saue the kynge.

$ And whan Athalia herde the noyse of the people that ranne together, she came to the people in to the house of the LORDE, and loked, and beholde, the kynge stode by the piler, as the vse was, and the syngers and tropettes by the kynge: and all the people of
T were glad, and blewe with trompettes. 

ut Athalia rente hir clothes, q sayde: Vp- roure, vproure. Nenertheles Ioiada y prest commaunded ¥ rulers ouer hundreds, which were appointed ouer the hoost, and saide vnto them: Brynge her without the wall, and whosoeuer foloweth hir, let him dye of the swerde (for the prest had sayde, that she shulde not dye in the house of the LORDE.) And they layde handes vpo her, and she wente in by the waye where the horses go in to y kynges house, and there was she slayne.

Then made Ioiada? a conenaunt betwene|3 the LORDE and the kynge, and the people, y

*2Par.24.c. fDeut.17.d. $2 Par.93.a. 42 Par.93.e. 

Chap. rij. 

5 

they shulde be the people of the LORDE. 
Likewyse also betwixte the kynge and y people. Then wente all the people of the londe in to the house of Baal, and brake downe his altares, and destroyed his ymages right well. And Mathan the prest of Baal slewe they before the altare: And the prest appoynted the officers in the house of the
LORDE, and toke the rulers ouer hundreds, and the captaynes, and the fote men, and all y people of the londe, q broughte the kynge downe from the house of the LORDE, and eame the waye from the porte of the fote men vnto the kynges house, and he sat vpon the kynges seate. And all the people of the lode were glad, and the cite was at rest. As for
Athalia, they slewe her with the swerde in y kynges house. And loas was senen yeare olde, whan he was made kynge.

The rij. Chapter. 

N the seuéth yeare of Iehn, was [oas made 
I kynge,* and reigned fortye yeare at Iern- salem. His mothers name was Zibea of
Bersaba. And Joas dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, as longe as
Ioiada ¥ prest taught him. But they put not downe y hye places: for the people offred q brent incense yet vpon the hye places.

And loas sayde vnto the prestes: All the money that is sanctified to be bestowed vpo y house of the LORDE, namely the money y euery man geneth vnto the treasury, and y money that euery man geueth for his soule, and all the money that euery man geueth of a fre hert, to be bestowed on the house of the
LORDE, let the prestes take it vnto them, enery one his porcion: with that shall they repayre the decaye in the house of the
LORDE, where they fynde that there is eny decaye.

But whan ¥ prestes repayred not the decaye in the house vnto the thre and twétieth yeare of kynge loas, Ioas the kynge called Joiada the prest with the other prestes, and sayde vnto them: Wherfore do ye not repayre the decaye in the house ?

Therfore shall ye not take the money vnto you now euery one his porcion, but shall gene it to the decaye of the house. And the prestes agreed to take no money of the people, and to repayre the decaye of the house.

a 2 Par, 24. a. 

The iiij. boke of the kynges. 

Fo. reribij, 

Then [oiada the prest toke a chest, and bored an hole aboue therin, and set it on the righte hande besyde the altare, at the entrynge in to the house of the LORDE. And the prestes that kepte the thresholde, put all the money therin that was broughte vnto the house of the LORDE. Whan they sawe then that there was moch money in the chest, *y kynges serybe came vp with the hye prest, and bounde the money together, and tolde it as moch as was fonnde in the house of the
LORDE. And so the ready money was geuen vnto them that wrought and were appoynted to the house of the LORDE, and they gane it forth to the carpenters and to thé that buylded and wroughte in the honse of the
LORDE, namely, to the dawbers and masons, and to them that boughte tymber and fre stone, to repayre the decaye in the house of the LORDE and all that they founde to haue nede of repayringe in the house.

Howbeit there were no syluer chargers, flat peces, basens, trompettes, ner eny other vessell of golde and syluer made on the honse of the LORDE, of the money that was bronght vnto the LORDES honse: but it was genen vnto the workmen to repayre the decaye in the honse of the LORDE therwith.
The men also that the money was delyuered vnto, for to geue the workmen, neded not to make eny acomptes, but did their busynes vpon credence. But the money of trespace of- ferynges and synneofferynges was not broughte vnto the house of the LORDE: for it was the prestes.

At the same tyme wente Hasael the kynge of Syria vp, and foughte agaynst Gath, and wanne it. And whan Hasael set his face to go vp to Ierusalem, kynge loas toke all that was sanetifyed, which his fathers Iosaphat, loram and Ochosias the kynges of Iuda had halowed, and what he himselfe had sanctifyed, and all the golde that was founde in the trea- sures of the house of the LORDE, and in the kynges house, and sent it vnto Hasael the kynge of Syria. And so he departed from
Ierusalem. 

What more there is to saye of Ioas, and all that he dyd, it is written in the Cronicles of the kynges of Inda. And his sernauntes made insurreccion and conspyred, and smote him in the house of Millo, at the goynge

* 4 He. 22. a. 

| fo. reli. 

downe vnto Silla. 

The ty. boke 
For Iosebar the sonne of 

of the hpngrs. 

wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of 

Simeath, and Josabad the sonne of Somer his seruauntes smote him to death: and he was buried with his fathers in the cite of Dauid.
And Amasias his sonne was kynge in his 

steade. 
N $ XXIII. yeare of Ioas the sonne of 
Ochosias kynge of Iuda, was Ioahas the 
| sonne of Jehu kynge ouer Israel at Samaria, 

The pit}. Chapter. 

seuentene yeare: q dyd ¥ which was euell in 

the sighte of the LORDE, and walked after 
| |the sinnes of leroboam y sonne of Nebat 
| |(which caused Israel to synne) and lefte not 
| [of from them. And y wrath of the LORDE 
| jwaxed whote vpon Israel, « he delyuered them ouer vnder the hande of Hasael kynge of

Syria, and vnder the hande of Benadad the 

sonne of Hasael, as longe as they lyued. 

And Joahas besoughte the face of the 
LORDE. And the LORDE herde hin, for he consydered the myserie of Israel, how the kynge of Syria oppressed them. And ¥
LORDE gaue Israel a sauioure, which broughte them out of the power of the Syrians, so y the children of Israel dwelt iu their
|tentes, like as afore tyme. 

B, Yet lefte they not from the synnes of the 
‘house of leroboam, which caused Israel to 
'synne, but walked in them. The groue at 

| Samaria stode styll also. For of the people 

‘of Ioahas there were no mo lefte, but fyftye 

i horsmen, ten charettes, and ten thousande fote 

men: * for the kynge of Syria had destroyed 

them, and made them as the dust in the barne. 

What more there is to saye of Ioahas, and all that he dyd, and his power, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Israel. And Ioahas fell on slepe with his 
|fathers, and was buried in Samaria, q Ioas his 

‘sonne was kinge in his steade. 

€: In the seuen and thirtieth yeare of Ioas 
_kynge of Iuda, was Ioas the sonne of Ioahas ikynge ouer Israel at Samaria sixtene yeare.
And he dyd that which was euell in the sighte 
‘of the LORDE, and departed not from all the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel for to synne, but walked in them. What more there is to saye of Ioas, cand what he dyd, « his power, how he foughte with Amasias kynge of Iuda, beholde, it is

| * 4 Re. 8. b. 

t 4 Re. 2. c. 

Israel. And Ioas fell on slepe with his fathers, jand Ieroboam sat vpo his seate. And loas was
‘buried in Samaria with the kynges of Israel. 
| As for Eliseus, he fell in to a sicknes, wherof he dyed. And Ioas the kynge of
Israel came downe vnto him, and wepte for him, and saide: + My father, my father, the charet man of Israel, and his horsmen. Eliseus sayde vnto him: Take the bowe and the arowes. And whan he had taken the bowe and the arowes, he sayde vnto the kynge of
Israel: Bende the bowe with thine hande. 
And he bent it with his hade. And Eliseus layed his hande vpon the kynges hande, and sayde: Open that wyndowe towarde the East.
And he opened it. And Eliseus saide: Shute. 
And he shot. He sayde: one arowe of the saluacion of the LORDE, one arowe of sal- uaci6 agaynst the Syrians: and thou shalt smyte the Syrians at Aphek, tyll they be brought to naughte.

| And he sayde: Take y arowes. And wha he had taken them, he sayde vnto the kynge
‘of Israel: Smyte the earth. And he smote 
‘thre tymes and stode still. Then was the ma 
‘of God wroth at him, and sayde: Yf thou 
‘haddest smytten fyue or sixe times, thou ishuldest haue smytten y Syrians, tyll thou
|haddest vtterly brought them to naughte. 
But now shalt thou smyte them thre tymes. 

i Whan Eliseus was deed and buried, the men of warre of the Moabites fell in to the londe the same yeare. And it fortuned y they buryed a certaine man. But wha they sawe the men of warre, they cast the man in to Eliseus graue. t And whan he was therin, and touched Eliseus bones, he reuyued, and stode vpon his fete.

So Hasael the kynge of Syria oppressed 
Israel, as longe as loahas lyued. But the 
LORDE was gracious vnto them, and had mercy vpon them, and turned him to them for his couenauntes sake, with Abraham, Isaac and lacob, and wolde not destroye the $nether dyd he cast them out from his presence vnto this houre.

And Hasael the kinge of Syria dyed, and 
Benadad his sonne was kynge in his steade. 
But Ioas turned backe, and toke out of the hande of Benadad the sonne of Hasael the
-cyties which he had takë in battaill out of the 

1 Eccli. 48. b. §at Reg. 14. e 

Chap. riij. 

Chap. rii, «The tit}. boke hande of his father loahas: Thre tymes dyd

Ioas smyte him, and broughte the cities of 
Israel agayne. 

The rüij. Chapter. a| T N the seconde yeare of Ioas y sonne of

I Toahas kynge of Israel, was Amasias the sonne of loas kynge of Inda made kynge:
*fyue and twenty yeare olde was he, whan he was made kynge, q reigned nyne and twentye yeare at lerusale. His mothers name was
Ioadan of lerusalem. And he dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE: yet not as his father Dauid, but euen as his father
Ioas did so dyd he also: for ¥ hye places were not put downe, but the people offred and brent incĉse yet vpon the hye places. Now whan he had gotten the power of the kyngdome, he smote his seruauntes t which had smytte the kynge his father: but the children of ý deed slayers slewe he not, acordinge to y which is wrytte in the boke of the lawe 3d Moses, where the LORDE hath comaunded q sayde: t The fathers shal not dye for the children, q the children shal not dye for the fathers: but euery one shal dye for his awne synne.

Ten thonsande of the Edomites smote he also in the Salt valley, and wanne Sela in battayll, and called it latheel vnto this daye.
§Then sent Amasias messaungers vnto loas the sonne of Ioahas the sonne of Iehu kynge| of Israel, sayenge : Come hither, let vs se one another. But loas y kynge of Israel sent. vnto Amasias the kynge of [uda, sayenge:
The hawthorne that is in Libanus, sent to the 
Ceder tre in Libanus, sayenge: Gene thy doughter vnto my sonne to wife. But a wylde beest of the felde ranne ouer y hawthorne, and trode it downe. Thou hast smytté the
Edomites, therfore is thine hert waxen proude: 
Take the prayse, and byde at home: why stryuest thou for mysfortune, y thou mayest fall, and Iuda with the? Howbeit Amasias consented not.

Then wete Ioas the kynge of Israel vp, and they sawe one another, he and Amasias the kynge of Iuda at Beth Semes which lyeth in
Iuda. But Iuda was smytten before Israel, so that euery one fled in to his tente. And Ioas the kynge of Israel toke Amasias the kynge of

Iuda, the sonne of Ioas the sonne of Ochosias: 
| 

*2 Par. 95.2. lere. 31. d. Eze. 18.c.

1 Deu. 24. e. 
|| 2 Par. 26. a. | 

t 4 Re. 12. d. 
$ 2 Par. 25. c. 

of the kpnges. 

at Beth Semes, and came to Ierusalem, and brake downe y wall of Ierusalem from ¥ porte of Ephraim vnto the corner porte, euen foure hundreth cubites loge : and toke all the golde and syluer, and ornamentes that were founde in the house of the LORDE, and in $ trea- sures of the kynges house, ¢ the children also to pledge, a departed agayne to Samaria.

What more there is to saie of loas, what he dyd, and of his power, q how he foughte with Amasias the kynge of Iuda, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Israel. And Ioas fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried at Samaria amonge y kynges of Israel. And Ieroboam his sonne was kynge in his steade.

But Amasias the sonne of Ioas kynge of |B 
Iuda, lyued after the death of Ioas the sonne of Ioahas kynge of Israel, fiftene yeare. What more there is to saye of Amasias, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda. And they conspyred agaynst him at lerusalem, but he fled vnto Lachis. And they sent after him vnto Lachis, and slewe him there. And they broughte him vpon horses, q he was bnried at
Ierusalem with his fathers in y cite of Danid. l| And all the people of Iuda toke Asarias in his sixtenth yeare, and made him kynge in steade of Amasias his father. He buylded
* Eloth, and broughte it agayne vnto Inda, after that the kynge was fallen on slepe with his fathers.

In the fyftenth yeare of Amasias the sonne of loas kynge of luda, was leroboam the sonne of loas kynge ouer Israel at Samaria, one and fortye yeare. And he dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, and departed not from all the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which caused Israel for to synne.

But the borders of Israel bronghte he agayne from Hemath vnto y see that lyeth in the playne felde, acordinge to the worde of the
LORDE God of Israel, which he spake by his seruaunt ** Ionas y sonne of Amithai the prophete, which was of tt Gath Epher. For the LORDE considered the myserable afflic- cion of Israel, how that euen they which were shut vp and desolate, were awaye, and that there was no helper in Israel. +##And the
LORDE sayde not that he wolde destroye the 

«| 4 Re. 16. a. ** Ton. 1. a, 

tt 4 Re. 13. e. Ose, 1. a. 

tt Iosu. 19. a. 

So. ceetir. 

jfo. cerir. The (ij. boke of the kynges. Chap. rb. 

Iuda, ¢ reigned one moneth at Samaria. For 
Menahem the sonne of Gadi wéte vp from 
Thirza, t came to Samaria, and smote Sellum the sonne of labes at Samaria, q slewe him, and was kynge in his steade.

What more there is to saye of Sellum, q of his sedicion which he stered vp, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kyuges of
Israel. At the same tyme dyd Manahem smyte Tiphsa, x all y were therin, q the coastes therof from Thirza, because they wolde not let him in, and smote all their wemen with childe, and rypte them vp.

In the nyne ¢ thirtieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Juda, beganne Manahem the sonne of Gad to reigne ouer [Israel ten yeares at
Samaria, and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE. As longe as he lyued, departed he not from y synnes of leroboam the sonne of Nebat, which caused Israel for to synne. And Phul the kynge of Assiria came in to the lode. And Manahem gaue vnto
Phul a thousande talentes of syluer to holde with him, and to cofirme him in the kyug- dome. And Manahem raysed vp a taxe in
Israel vpon the richest, fiftye Sycles of syluer vpon euery man, to geue vnto y kynge of
Assiria So the kynge of Assiria wéte home agayne, and taried not in the londe.

What more there is to saye of Manahem, q all y he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the
Cronicles of the kynges of Israel. And 
Manahem fell on slepe with his fathers. And 
Pecahia his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

In the fiftieth yeare of Asarias kynge of/45 luda, beganne Pecahia the sonne of Mana- hem to reigne ouer Israel at Samaria two yeare, and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE: for he departed not fro the synnes of Jeroboam y sonne of Nebat, which caused Israel for to synne. And Pecah the sonne of Romelia his knyghte conspyred agaynst him, q smote him at Samaria in y palace of the kynges house with Argob and
Ariah, and fiftye men with him of ¥ childré of 
Gilead, « slewe him, ¢ was kynge in his steade. 
What more there is to saye of Pecahia, q all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cro- nicles of the kynges of Israel.

In the two and fiftieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Iuda, beganne Pecah the sonne of
Romelia to reigne ouer Israel at Samaria, 

name of Israel from vnder heaué. And he helped thé by Jeroboam the sonne of Ioas.
What more there is to saye of Ieroboam, and all that he dyd, and of his power, how he foughte, and how broughte Damascon and
Hemath agayne vnto Iuda in Israel, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Israel. And Ieroboam fell on slepe with his fathers, with the kynges of Israel And
Zacharias his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

The ro. Chapter. 

A| JN the seuen q twentieth yeare of Iero- boam kynge of Israel, reigned Asarias the sonne of Amasias kynge of luda: and *was sixtene yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned two and fyftye yeare at lerusalem.

His mothers name was lechalia of Ierusalé. 

And he dyd righte in the sighte of the 

LORDE, acordinge to all as dyd Amasias his 

father, sauynge that they put not downe the 

hye places. For the people dyd sacryfice and brent incense yet vpon the hye places. How- beit the LORDE smote the kynge, so that he was leper vnto his death, t and dwelt in a frye house. But lotham the kynges sonne ruled the house, and iudged the people in the londe.
What more there is to saye of Asarias, q all Y he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cro- icles of the kynges of luda. And Asarias
{fell on slepe with his fathers, q was buried with his fathers in the cite of Dauid, x Iotham his sonne was kynge in his steade. .

In the eight and thirtieth yeare of Asarias kynge of Iuda, was Zacharias the sonne of leroboam kynge ouer Israel at Samaria sixe monethes. And he dyd y which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, euen as his fathers dyd. He departed not from $ synnes of leroboam the sonne of Nebat, which caused
Israel for to synne. And Sellum the sonne of labes conspyred agaynst him, and smote him in the presence of ¥ people, and slewe him, q was kynge in his steade. What more there is to saie of Zacharias, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Israel. + And this is it, y the LORDE sayde vuto Iehu: Thy children shall syt vpo the seate of Israel vntyll the fourth generacion.
And euen so came it to passe. 

Sellum the sonne of labes reigned in $ nyue ¢ thirtieth yeare of $ Asarias kynge of

$ Some reade: Vsia. 

* 2 Por. 26. a. t Leui. 13. g. $4 Re. 10. e. 

The iiij. boke of the kynges. 

twentye yeare, q dyd that which was euell in|. 

bap. rbi. 

the sighte of ý LORDE: for he departed not from the synnes of leroboam the sonne of
Nebat, which caused Israel for to synne. 

In the tyme of Pecah the kynge of Israel, came Teglatphalasser the kynge of Assiria, q toke Eion, Abel Beth Maecha, Ianoha, Kedes,
Hasor, Gilead, Galile, and all the londe of 
Nephtali, q caried thé awaye in to Assiria. 

And Osea the sonne of Ela conspyred agaynst Pecah the sonne of Romelia, q slue him, and was kynge in his steade in the twé- tieth yeare of Iotham the sonne of * Osias.
What more there is to saye of Pecah, q all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cro- nicles of the kynges of Israel.

In the seconde yeare of Pecah the sonne of Romelia kynge of Israel, was lotham the sonne of Osias kynge of Iuda, ¢ was fyue and twentye yeare olde whan he was made kynge, and reigned sixtene yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was lerusa the doughter of
Sadok. And he dyd y which was righte in ¥ sighte of the LORDE, acordinge vnto all as dyd Osias his father, sauynge that he put not downe the hye places: for the people offred q brent incense yet vpon the hye places. He huylded the hye porte of the house of the
LORDE. What more there is to saye of lotham, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytte in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.

At y same tyme beganne y LORDE to sende Rezin $ kynge of Syria, v Pecah $ sonne of Romelia in to Iuda. And Iotham fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the cite of Dauid his father.
And Achas his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

The rbi. Chapter. 

N the seuententh yeare of Pecah $ sonne 

of Romelia, was^Achas the sonne of Iotham kynge of Iuda. Twētye yeare olde was Achas wha he was made kynge, q reigned sixtene yeare at lerusalem, ¢ dyd not y which was righte in the sighte of LORDE his God, as dyd Dauid his father: for he walked in the waye of the kyngesof Israel, t Yee and caused his sonne to go thorow the fyre, after the maner of the abhominacions of the Heythen, whom the LORDE droue awaye before the childré of Israel. And he dyd sacrifice, and

* Thatis Asarias whom some call Vsia, t Deu. 18.b. 4Re.21.a.

* 2 Par, 2B. a. i Esa. 7. a.

brent incense vpon the hye places, « vpon all hilles, and amonge all grene trees. + Then wente Rezin the kynge of Syria, and Pecha the sonne of Romelia kynge of Israel vp to
Ierusalem to fighte agaynst it, and layed sege to Achas: but they coulde not wynne it. At the same tyme dyd Rezin the kynge of Syria, brynge $ Eloth agayne vnto Syria, and thrust y lewes out of Eloth. But the Syrians came q dwelt therin vnto this daye.

Neuertheles Achas sent messaungers vnto 
Teglatphalasser y kynge of Assiria, sayége : 
I am thy seruaunt ¢ thy sonne, come vp q helpe me out of ¥ hande of the kynge of
Syria, q of the kynge ot Israel, which are rysen vp agaynst me. And Achas toke the syluer q golde y was founde in y house of y
LORDE, ¢ in the treasures of $ kynges house, q sent a present to ¥ kynge of Assiria.
| And y kinge of Assiria cosented vnto him, q wente vp to Damascon, q wanne it, q caried them awaye vnto Cira, q slewe Rezin. And kynge Achas wéte to Damascon for to mete
Teglatphalasser y kynge of Assiria. And wha he sawe an altare y was at Damascon, kyuge Achas sent a patrone q symilitude of ¥ same altare vnto the prest Vrias, euen as it was made. And Vrias the prest buylded an altare, and made it acordinge as kynge Achas had sent vnto him from Damascon, tyll Achas y kynge came from Damascon.

And whan y kynge came from Damascon, and sawe the altare, he offred theron, q kyndled his burntofferynges and meatofferynges vpon it, and poured his drynkofferinges theron, x caused the bloude of y deedofferynges which he offred, to be sprenkled vpon the altare.
But the brasen altare that stode before the 
LORDE, put he awaye, so that it stode uot betwene the altare and the house of the
LORDE, but set it in the corner on the north syde of the altare.

And Achas the kynge comaunded Vrias y prest, q sayde: Vpo the greate altare shalt thou kyndle y burntoffrynge in the mornynge, a the meatoffrynge in the euenynge, q the kynges burntoflrynge q his meatoffrynge, q the burntoffrynge of all the people in the londe, with their meatoffrynge q drynkoffrynge. And all the bloude of the burntofferynges, q all the bloude of the other offrynges, shalt thou

$4 Re. 14.d. — || Esa. 8. a. 

49 

Fo. cceli. 

35 

€ 

So. ceelrij. 

sprenkle theron: but with the brasen altare wyll I deuyse what I can. Vrias the prest dyd all acordinge as Achas the kynge com- maunded him.

And kynge Achas brake downe the seates, and put awaye the *ketell from abone, and toke the lauer from the brasen bullockes that were there vnder, and set it vpon y pauement of stone. And the pulpit for the Sabbath which they had buylded in the house, and y entrye of the kynges house turned he vnto the house of the LORDE, for the kynge of
Assirias sake. 

What more there is to saye of Achas, what he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in y Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda. And Achas fell on slepe with his fathers, q was buried with his fathers in the cite of Dauid. And Ezechias his sonne was kyuge iu his steade.

The rej. Chapter. 

N the twolueth yeare of Achas the kynge 

of Inda, begane Oseas ¥ sonne of Ela to reigne ouer Israel at Samaria nyne yeare, and dyd ¥ which was euell in y sighte of the
LORDE, but not as y kynges of Israel y were before him. Agaynst him dyd Salma- nasar y kynge of Assiria come vp. And
Oseas was subiecte vnto him, q gaue him try- butes. But wha y kynge of Assiria perceaued y Oseas had conspyred q sent messaungers to
Sua y kynge of Egipte, q payed not trybute yearly to y kynge of y Assirians, he beseged him q put him in preson. t And the kynge of
Assiria wente vp in to all the londe and to 
Samaria, and layed sege vnto it thre yeare. 
+ And in the nyenth yeare of Oseas dyd y kynge of Assiria wynne Samaria, $ and caried
Israel awaye in to Assiria, and set them at 
Halah and at Habor by the water Gosan, and in the cities of the Meedes.

For whan the childré of Israel synned agaynst $ LORDE their God (y broughte the out of ¥ londe of Egipte, from the hade of Pharao kynge of Egipte) and serued other goddes: and walked after the customes of the
Heythe, whom the LORDE had dryuen out before the children of Israel, and dyd as the kynges of Israel, and pronoked LORDE their God, and dyd secretly the thinges that were not righte in the sighte of LORDE

* 3 Re. 7. c. d. t4 
6 4 Es, 13. e. 

Re. 18. p. 
|| Deut. 4. c. 

1 Esa. 8. a. 

The tj. boke of the kpynages. 
.|their God: namely in that they buylded them | 

hye places in all cities, both in castels and stronge cities, and set vp pilers and groues, vpon all hye hilles, and amonge all grene trees, and brent incense there m all y hye places, euen as dyd the Heythen, whom the
LORDE had cast out before them, q wroughte wicked thinges, wherwith they prouoked the
LORDE vnto wrath, œ serued the Idols, wherof the LORDE sayde vnto them: || Ye shal not do soch a thynge.

Chap. rbíj. 

And whan the LORDE testified in Israel! ¢ 

and luda by all the prophetes and Seers, sayenge: TO turne agayne from youre euell wayes, and kepe my commaundemétes and ordynaunces, acordinge to all y lawe which
I gaue vnto youre fathers, and that I sent vnto you by my sernauntes the prophetes : they wolde not herken, ** bnt herdened their neckes, acordinge to the hardneck of their fathers, which beleued not on the LORDE their God. Yee they despysed his ordinaunces and his couenaunt which he made with their fathers, and his testimonies which he witnessed amonge them, and walked in their awne vanities, and became vayne folowinge the
Heythen, which dwelt rounde aboute them, concernynge whom the LORDE had com- maunded them, that they shulde not do as they dyd. Neuertheles they forsoke all the commaundementes of the LORDE their God ttand made them two molten calues aud groues, and worshipped all the hoost of hea- uen, q serued Baal, and ti caused their sonnes and doughters to go thorow the fyre, and medled with soythsayers and witches, and gaue them selues ouer to do that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE, to prenoke him vnto wrath.

Then was the LORDE very wroth at Is- rael, and put them awaye fro his presence, so
ý there remayned nomo S$but onely y trybe of 

uda. Nether dyd Iuda kepe the commaunde- metes of the LORDE their God, but walked after the custemes of Israel, which they dyd.
Therfore dyd ý LORDE cast awaye all $ sede of Ísrael, and troubled them, and de- lyuered them in to the handes of the spoylers, tyll he had cast them out of his presence: for Israel was deuyded from the house of
Dauid. And they made thé a kynge, one 

** Deut. 31. f. Mal.3. b. tt 3 Re. 12. a. 
$$ 3 Re. 12. c. 

€ Tere. 25. a. it Deu. 18. b.

B 

Chap. rhii. 

E 

@| And whyle they feared 

leroboam the sonne of Nebat, which turned 
Israel back from y LORDE, ¢ caused thc to synne so sore. ‘Thus walked the childré of
Israel in all $ synnes of Ieroboam, which he had done, « departed not fro them, vntyll $
LORDE put Israel out of his presence, acordinge as he had spoké by all his ser- uauntes y prophetes. *So Israel was caried awaye out of their awne londe to Assiria vnto this daye.

The kynge of Assiria caused men to come fro Babilon, from Cutha, fro Aua, from He- math q Sepharuaim, « caused the to inhabite y cities in Samaria in steade of the children of Israel. And they toke possession of Sa- maria, q dwelt in y same cities. But wha they begine to dwell there, q feared not y
LORDE, the LORDE sent lyons amoge thé, which slewe them. And they caused it be sayde vnto y kynge of Assiria: The Heythe whom thou hast broughte hither, ¢ caused them to inhabite the cities of Samaria, knowe not the lawe of ¥ God of the londe. "Ther- fore hath he sent lyons amége them, q be- holde, they slaye the, because they knowe not the ordinaunee of the God of the londe.

#| The kinge of Assiria comaunded q saide: 

Bringe thither one of ¥ prestes y were caried awaye fro thence ¢ let him go thither, ¢ dwell there, q teach the the ordinaiice of the God of ylonde. Then came one of ¥ prestes which were caried awaye from Samaria, ¢ dwelt at
Bethel, q taughte them how they shulde feare 
ý LORDE. But euery people made the goddes, « put thé in the houses vpon y hye places, which the Samaritanes had made, euery people 7 their cities wherin they dwelt.
They of Babilo made Sochoth Benoth. They of Chut made Nergel. They of Hemath made
Asima. They of Aua made Nibehas q Thar- thak. They of Sepharuaim burnt their sonnes vnto Adramelech and Anamelech $ goddes of the of Sepharuaim.

y LORDE, they made prestes in y hye iles of y lowest amonge them, q put them in ý houses of y hye places: thus they feared ý LORDE, q serued y goddes also, acordinge to y cus- tome of euery nacion, from whence they were broughte. And vnto this daye do they after y olde fashion, so y they nether feare y

ORDE, ner yet lage their awne ordi- 
* Tere, 25. a. 

t Gen. 32. e. ilIud.6.b. Iere.10.a. 

The (ij. boke of the kynges. 

Fo. rrelríij. naunces and lawes, after the lawe and com- maundement that the LORDE cómaunded the childré of Iacob, * vnto whom he gaue $ name of Israel, and made a couenaunt wit them, and commaunded them, and sayde:
* Feare none other goddes, and worshipe them not, and serne them not, and offer not vnto them: but the LORDE which broughte you out of the lode of Egipte, with greate power and outstretched arme, Him feare, him wor- shippe, q vnto him do sacrifice: and the statutes, ordinaunces, lawe q comaundement which he hath caused to be wrytten vnto you, those se that ye kepe, that ye allwaye do therafter, and feare none other goddes. And forget not the couenaunt which he hath made with you, lest ye feare other goddes. But feare ¥ LORDE youre God, he shall delyuer you from all youre enemies. Neuertheles they wolde not herken, but dyd after their olde custome.

Thus these Heythen feared the LORDE, and serued their Idols also, and so dyd their children and childers childre likewyse. Eué as their fathers haue done before them, so do they vnto this daye.

Che roíij. Chapter. 

N the thirde yeare of Oseas ¥ sonne of Ela 
I kynge of Israel, $reigned Ezechias y sonne of Achas kynge of Inda. And he was fyue and twentie yeare olde whan he was made kynge, q reigned nyne q twentye yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was Abi the doughter of Zachary. And he dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, acordinge vnto all as dyd Dauid his father.
|He put awaye the hye places, and brake downe the pilers, q roted out the groues, and brake the brasen serpente " which Moses had made. For vnto that tyme had the children of Israel brent ineese vnto it. And it was called Nehusthan. He put his trust in the
LORDE God of Israel, so that after him there was not his like amoge all the kynges of Inda nether had bene before him. He cleued vnto the LORDE, and departed not backe from him, and kepte bis commaunde- mentes, which the LORDE had cémaunded
Moses. And the LORDE was with him. 
And whither so euer he wete forth, he behaued him selfe wysely. of Assiria, and was not subdued vnto him.
$2 Par. 29. a. 

|| Deut. 7. a. 4 Re. 23. a. T Num. 21. a. 

He resisted the kynge|33 

So. ceelrttt. 
*He smote the Philistynes also vnto Gasa, and their borders, from the castels vnto the stronge cities.

In the fourth yeare of Ezechias kynge of 
Iuda* (y was the seuenth yeare of Oseas the sonne of Ela kynge of Israel) came Salmanasar the kynge of Assiria vp agaynst Samaria, and layed sege vnto it, and wanne it after thre yeares in the sixte yeare of Ezechias, that is in the nyenth yeare of Oseas kynge of Israel, the was Samaria wonne. And the kynge of
Assiria caried Israel awaye vnto Assiria, and set them at Halah and Habor by the water
Gosan, and in the cities of the Meedes. And all because they herkened not vnto the voyce of the LORDE their God, and had trans- gressed his couenaunt: And as for all that
Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE had com- maunded thé, they had nether herkened vnto eny of those, ner done them.

In the fourtéth yeare of kynge Ezechias dyd Sennacherib } kynge of Assiria * come vp agaynst all the stronge cities of luda, q coquered thé. Then sent Ezechias the kynge of Iuda to ¥ kynge of Assiria vnto Lachis, sayenge: I haue offended, turne back fro me: loke what thou layest vnto me, I wi! beare it.
The the kynge of Assiria layed vnto Ezechias the kynge of Iuda, thre hundreth talentes of syluer, q thirtie talentes of golde. tSo Eze- chias gaue all ý syluer y was foüde in ¥ house of the LORDE, q in the treasures of y kynges house. At y same tyme brake Ezechias the kynge of Iuda the dores of the téple of $
LORDE, « the plates of golde which he him selfe had caused to laye ouer thé, q gaue thé vnto the kynge of Assiria.

‘And the kynge of Assiria sent ‘Chartan, and the chefe chamberlayne, q the chefe butler from Lachis to kynge Ezechias with a greate power vnto lerusalem. And they wéte vp: and whan they came there, they stode styll at the condyte by the ouer pole, which lyeth in the waye vpo the fullers londe, and called vnto the kynge. "Thé came there forth vnto them
Eliachim the sonne of Helchias the stewarde, and Sobna the scrybe, q loah the sonne of
Assaph the Secretary. 

D| And the chefe butler sayde vnto thé: Tell kynge Ezechias: Thus sayeth y greate kynge, eué the kynge of Assiria: What presumpcion is this y thou trustest vnto? Thinkest thou, Y

* Esa. 14. e. a 4 Re. 17. a. è 2 Par. 32. a. 

The iii. boke of the kpnges. 

thou hast yet councell and power to fighte? 
Where vnto trustest thou then, that thou art fallen of fro me? Beholde, puttest thou thy trust in this broken staffe of rede, in Egipte? which who leaneth vpon, it shall go in to his hande, q pearse it thorow. Euen so is Pharao the kynge of Egipte vnto all them that put their trust in him. But yf ye wolde saye vnto me: We put oure trust in y LORDE oure
God. Is not that he, whose hye places and altares Ezechias hath také downe, and sayde vnto luda and Ierusalé: Before this altare which is at Ierusalé, shal ye worshippe ?

Make a multitude now therfore vnto my lorde the kynge of Assiria, and I wil geue y two thousande horses, let se yf thou be able to man them: how wilt thou then endure be- fore the smallest prynce of my lordes subiectes?
And trustest thou vnto Egipte because of the charettes and horsmen? But thinkest thou that I came vp hither without y destroye these cities? "The commaunded me: Go vp in to that londe and destroye it.

'Then sayde Eliachim the sonne of Helchia q Sobna and Joah vnto the chefe butler:
Speake to thy seruauntes in the Syrias lan- guage, for we vnderstonde it, and speake not vnto vs in the Iewes speche before the eares of the people that are vpon the wall. Neuer- theles y chefe butler sayde vnto the: Hath my lorde then sent me vnto thy lorde, or to the, to speake these wordes? Yee euen vnto the men, which syt vpon the wall, that they maye eate their owne donge and drynke their owne stale with you. So the chefe butler stode and cried with loude voyce in the Iewes language, and spake and sayde: Heare the worde of the greate kynge the kynge of Assiria.
Thus sayeth the kynge: Let not Ezechias disceaue you, for he 1s not able to delyuer you fro my hade: ¢ let not Ezechias make you to trust in the LORDE, sayenge: The LORDE shall delyuer vs, and this cite shal not be geuen in to the handes of M kynge of Assiria.
Folowe not ye Ezechias, for thus sayeth the kynge of Assiria:

Do me this blessynge, and come forth vnto me, so shal euery man eate of his vyne and of his fygge tre, and drynke of his well, tyll I come my selfe and fetch you in to a londe, which is like youre awne lode, wherin is corne,

Eccli. 48. c. Esa.36.a. t4 Re.12. d. ¢2 Par. 32.a. 

Chap. roi. 

Chap. rir. wyne, bred, vynyardes, oyle trees, oyle and hony, so shal ye lyue, and not dye. Tolowe not ye Ezechias, for he disceaueth you, when he sayeth: The LORDE shal delyuer vs.
* Haue the goddes of the Heythen delyuered euery one his londe from the hande of the kynge of Assiria? Where are the goddes of
Hemath and Arphad? Where are the goddes of Sepharuaim Hena and Ina? Hane they delyuered Samaria fro my hande? Where is there one god amonge the goddes of all londes, which hath delyuered his londe fro my hande? that the LORDE shulde delyuer Ierusalem fro my hande.

As for the people, they helde their peace, and gaue him no answere: for the kynge had commaunded and sayde: Answere him no- thinge. Then came Eliachim the sonne of
Helchia y stewarde, and Sobna the scrybe, and loah the sonne of Assaph the Secretary vnto Ezechias with rente clothes, and tolde him the wordes of the chefe butler.

The yir. Chapter. 

BS Ezechias y kynge herde this, “he 

rente his clothes, q put on a sackcloth, q wente in to y house of the LORDE, a sent
Eliachim the stewarde q Sobna the Scrybe with the Eldest prestes, clothed in sack cloth, vnto the prophet Esay $ sonne of Amos, q they saide vuto him: Thus sayeth Ezechias:
This is a daye of trouble, a of defiaunce a blasphemy. ‘The childré are come to the byrth, q there is no strength to be delyuered of them. Yf happly the LORDE thy God wil heare all the wordes of $ chefe butler, whom his lorde the kynge of Assiria hath sent, to blasphemie y lyuynge God, q to defye him with soch wordes as the LORDE thy
God hath herde, therfore lifte thou vp thy prayer for the remnaunt, which are yet lefte behynde.

And wha kynge Ezechias seruauntes came to Esay, Esay sayde vnto them: Speake thus vnto youre lorde: Thus sayeth the LORDE:
Feare not thou the wordes y thou hast herde, wherwith the kynge of Assirias seruauntes haue blasphemed me. Beholde, I wil put him in another mynde, so y he shall heare tydinges, x go agayne in to his awne countre, tand in his awne londe wil I cause him to fall thorow the swerde.

e Ezels? a. 

* Esa. 10. h. t Esa. 37.0. 2 Par.52.d. 

The iiij. boke of the kpnges. 

And whan y chefe butlar came agayne, he founde the kynge of Assiria fightinge agaynst
Libna: for he had herde that he was departed from Lachis. And he herde of Taracha the kynge of the Morians: Beholde, he is gone forth to fighte with the. Then turned he back, q sent messaungers to Ezechias, q caused to saye vnto him: Let not thy God disceaue the, on whom thou trustest q sayest: Ieru- salem shal not be geuē in to the hāde of the kynge of Assiria. Beholde, thou hast herde what the kynges of Assiria haue done vnto all londes, œ how they daned them, q shalt thou be delyuered? Haue y goddes of ý Heithen delyuered thé, whom my father destroyed, as
Gosan, Haran, Reseph, q the childre of Eden which were at Thalassar? Where is y kynge of Hemath, y kynge of Arphad, q y kinge of y cite Sepharuaim, Hena q Iua?

And whan Ezechias had receaued the letters of the messaungers and had red them, he wente vp vnto the house of the LORDE, and layed them abrode before the LORDE, q made his prayer before the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, thou that syttest vpo the Cherubins, thou onely art God amonge all ¥ kyngdomes of the earth, thou hast made heauen and earth. Enclyne thine eare O LORDE, and heare: open thine eyes, and beholde, and heare the wordes of Senna- cherib, which hath sent hither to blaspheme the lyuynge God. It is true (O LORDE) that the kynges of Assiria haue destroyed the

| Heythen and their londe with the swerde, and 

haue cast their goddes in the fyre: for they were not Goddes, but y worke of més hondes, wodd and stone, therfore haue they destroyed them. But now O LORDE helpe thou vs out of his hande, that all the kyngdomes vpon earth maye knowe, that thou LORDE art
God alone. 

Then sent Esay the sonne of Amos vnto 
Ezechias, sayenge: Thus sayeth the LORDE 
God of Israel : Where as thou hast made thy prayer vnto me concernynge Sennacherib y kynge of Assiria, I haue herde it. This is it that the LORDE hath spoken agaynst him:
He hath despysed y and mocked the O virgin thou doughter Sion: he hath shake his heade at the O doughter Jerusalem. t Whom hast thou despysed œ blasphemed? Ouer whom hast thou lifte vp thy voyce? | Eue agaynst y

iZach.2.b. Matt. 25. d. Acte. 9. a. 

Fo. rrrlyb. 

€ 

So. ceeiybt. 

holy one in Israel hast thou lifte vp thine eyes: thou hast blasphemed $ LORDE by thy messaungers, and sayde: "Thorow the multitude of my charettes haue I gone vp to the toppes of the mountaynes, vpon the sydes of Libanus. I haue hewen downe his hye
Ceders and his chosen Pyne trees, and am come to the vttemost habitacion of the wod of
Carmel that belongeth vntoit. I haue dygged and dronke vp the straunge waters, and with y soles of my fete haue I dryed vp the See.

£| But hast thou not herde how that I haue 

done this longe agoo, and haue prepared it from the begynnynge? Now haue I caused it for to come, that contenclous stronge cities mighte fall in to a waist heape of stones, q they that dwell therin, shal be faynte, and fearfull and a shamed, *and shal be as the grasse vpon the felde, and as y grene herbe and hay vpon the house toppes, that wythereth afore it be growne vp. I knowe thy habita- cion, thy out and ingoynge, and that thou ragest agaynst me. For so moch then as thou ragest agaynst me, and seynge thy presump- cion is come vp to myne eares, therfore wyll
I put a rynge in thy nose, and a brydle bytt in thy lippes, and wyll brynge the agayne, euen the same waye thou camest.

afi And let this be a token vnto the O Eze- 

chias. In this yeare eate y which is fallen, in the seconde yeare soch as groweth of it selfe:
In y thirde yeare sowe and reape, and plante vynyardes, and eate the frute therof. And the doughter Iuda which is escaped q remayneth, shall from hence forth take rote beneth, and beare frute aboue. For the remnaunt shal go forth from Jerusalem, q they y are escaped, shall go out fro mount Sion. The gelousy of the
LORDE Zebaoth shall brynge this to passe. 

Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE con- cernynge y kynge of the Assyrians: He shall not come in to this cite, and shall shute no arowe therin, nether shal there come eny shylde before it, nether shall he dygge eny backe aboute it, but shal go agayne the waye that he came, and shall not come in to this cite, sayeth the LORDE: and I wyll defende this cite, to helpe it for myne awue sake, and for my seruaunt Dauids sake.

And in the same nighte wente the angell of the LORDE, and smote in the hoost of the
Assyrians, an hundreth and fyue and foure 

* Psal. 36. a. 

+ Tobi. 1. d. 

39 Par. 32. c, Esa. 38. a. 

The iiij. boke of the Rpnars. 

Chap. rr. 
[score thousande men. And whan they gatt them vp in the mornynge, beholde, all laye full of deed coarses. t So Sennacherib the kinge of Assyria brake vp, and departed, and returned, and abode at Niniue. And as he worshipped in ¥ house of Nesrach his god, his awne sonnes Adramalech and Sarazer smote him with the swerde, and fled in to ¥ londe of
Ararat. And Asarhadon his sonne was kynge in his steade.
The rr. Chapter. 

T that tyme was Ezechias deedsicke. 
A “And the prophet Esay y sonne of Amos, came to him, q sayde vnto him: Thus sayeth y LORDE: Set thine house in ordre for thou shalt dye q not lyue. And he turned, his face to the wall, and prayed vnto ý LORDE, and sayde: Remembre (O LORDE) that I haue walked faithfully before the, q with a perfecte hert, and haue done y which is good in thy syghte. And Ezechias wepte sore.
But whan Esay was not gone out of halfe the cite, Y worde of LORDE came to him, q sayde: Turne back, q tell Ezechias ý prynce of my people: Thus sayeth y LORDE God of thy father Dauid: I haue here thy praier,
€ considered thy teares. Beholde, I wil heale yi on the thirde daye shalt thou go in to ouse of the LORDE, « fiftene yeares wil adde vnto thy life, x wyll delyuer the q this cite from the kynge of Assyria, q this cite wil
I defende for myne awne sake, and for my seruant Dauids sake. And Esay sayde: Bringe hither a quantite of fygges. And whan they broughte them, they layed them vpon the sore, and it was healed.

Ezechias sayde vnto Esay: Which is y token, that the LORDE wyll heale me, and that I shal go vp in to the house of y LORDE on the thirde daye? Esay sayde: This token shalt thou haue of the LORDE, that the
LORDE shal do acordynge as he hath sayde. 
Shall the shadowe go ten degrees forwarde, or shal it turne ten degrees backwarde? Ezechias sayde: Jt is an easy thinge for the shadowe to go teu degrees downewarde, y is not my mynde: but that it go ten degrees back- warde. Then eryed the prophet Esay vnto the LORDE, ; and the shadowe wente backe ten degrees in Achas Dyall, which he was descended afore.

‘At the same tyme Merodach Baladan the 

1 Eccli. 48, c. 5 Esa. 39. a. 

Chap. rri 

soune of Baladan kynge of Babilon, sent letters and presentes vnto Ezechias, for he had herde that Ezechias had bene sicke. And Ezechias reioysed with them, q shewed them all the house of rotes, the syluer, golde, spyces, and the best oyle, and the house of ordinaunce, and all that was founde in his treasures. "There was nothinge in his house and in all his do- mynion, but Ezechias shewed it them.

Then came Esay the prophet vnto kynge 
Ezechias, and sayde vnto him: What haue these men sayde? and whence came they vnto the? Ezechias sayde: They came to me out of a farre countre, euen from Babilon. He sayde: What haue they sene in thyne house?
Ezechias sayde: They haue sene all that is in my house, aud there is nothynge in my trea- sures but I haue shewed itthem. Then sayde
Esay vnto Ezechias: Heare the worde of the 
LORDE: Beholde, *the tyme commeth, that it shall all be caryed awaye vnto Babilon, and whatsoeuer thy fathers haue layed vp vnto this daye, and there shall nothinge be lefte, sayeth the LORDE. * Yee and the children which come of the, whom thou shalt beget, shalbe taken awaye, to be chamberlaynes iu the kynge of Dabilons palace. Ezechias sayde vnto Esay: Itis good that the LORDE hath spoken. And he sayde morouer: Let there be peace yet and faithfulnesse in my tyme.

What more there is to saye of Ezechias, aud all his power, and what he dyd, and of the pole and water condyte, wher by he con- ueyed water in to the cite, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda. t And Ezechias fell on slepe with his fathers, and Manasses his sonne was kynge in his steade.

The rri. Chapter. 

N | ANASSES was twolue yeare olde, whan 

he was made kinge, "aud reigned fyue and fyftye yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hephziba. And he dyd that which was euell in y sight of the LORDE (euen after the abhominacios of the Heithen, whom the LORDE expelled before the children of
Israel) and waxed frowarde, and builded vp the hye places which his father Ezechias had destroyed,’ and sett vp Baals altares, and made groues (as Achab the kynge of Israel dyd) and worshipped all the hoost of heauen,

* 4 Re, 24. c. and 25, b. t2 Par. 32. E

Iere, 32. c. 
#2 Par. 33.a. 

The iiij. boke of the kynges. 

+ Dan. 1.a. 

and serued them. And buylded altares in the LORDES house, wherof the LORDE

Fo. eeclrosj. 

sayde: I wyll set my name at Ierusalem." 

And in both the courtes of the house of the 
LORDE buylded he altares vnto all the hoost of heaue. And $ caused his sonne to go thorow the fyre, and regarded byrdeseryenge and tokens, and maynteyned soythsayers, and ex- pounders of tokens, and so moch dyd he of this which was euell in the sight of the
LORDE, that he prouoked him vnto wrath. 

A groue Idol also which he had made, set he in the house, wherof the LORDE sayde vnto Dauid and to Salomon his sonne: In this house, aud at Ierusalem (llwhich I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel) wil I set my name for euer, and wyl not cause y fote of Israel to be remoued eny more from the londe, which I gaue vnto their fathers, yee so that they obserue and do acordynge vnto all that I haue charged them, and after all the lawe that my seruaunt Moses comaunded them. Neuertheles they wolde not herken, but Manasses disceaued them, so y they dyd worse then the Heithen, whom the LORDE expelled before y children of Israel.

'Then spake d LORDE by his seruauntes the prophetes, and saide: Because that Ma- nasse the kynge of Iuda hath gone these abhominacions, which are worse then all abhominacious that the Amorites haue done which were before them, and hath caused
Iuda also to synne agaynst their God, therfore thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel:
* Beholde, I wyll brynge soch a plage vpon 
Ierusalem and Iuda, that who so euer heareth it, both his eares shal glowe, and ouer Ieru- salem wyll I stretch forth the lyne of Samaria, and the weighte of the house of Achab, aud wyll wype out Ierusalem, euen as one wypeth a platter, and I wyl ouerthrowe it. And y remnaunt of myne inheritaunce wil I cast out, q scater them abrode, q wil delyuer them in to the hades of their enemies, to be spoyled and rent of all their enemies: because they haue done y which is euell in my sighte, q haue prouoked me vnto wrath, sence the daye that I broughte their fathers out of Egipte, vnto this daye. Manasses also shed excead- inge moch innocét bloude, so longe tyll Ieru- salé was full on euery syde, without the synnes

^ 4 Re. 18. a. § Leu. 20. d. Deut. 18. b. 4 Re. 16. a. 

|| 3 Re. 9. a. € Iere. 19. a. 

B 

€ 

D 

So. eeelrbtyj. Cbr (ij. boke of the kpnars. Chap. rrij. 

wherwith he caused Iuda for to synne, so y 
.|they dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE.

What more there is to sale of Manasses, and all that he dyd, and his synnes which he commytted, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cro- nicles of the kynges of Iuda. And Manasses fell on slepe with his fathers, and was buried in the garden besyde his house, namely, in the garden of Vsa, and Amon his sonne was kynge in his steade.

“Two and twentye yeare olde was Amon whan he was made kynge, q he reigned two yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was
Mesumeleth, y doughter of Harus of latba, and he dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, as Manasses his father had done, and walked in all the waye which his father walked, and serued the Idols which his father had serued, and worshipped them, and forsoke the LORDE the God of his father, and walked not in the waye of the LORDE.

And his seruauntes conspyred agaynst 
Amon, « slewe the kynge in his house. But 

The rrij. Chapter. 

OSIAS ‘was eight yeare olde wha he was 

made kynge, q reigned one and thirtie yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was
Iedida the doughter of Adaia of Bascath, and he dyd that which was righte in y sighte of the LORDE, and walked in all y waye of
Dauid his father, q turned not asyde, nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte.

* And in the eightenth yeare of kynge Iosias, the kynge sent Saphan y sonne of Asalia the sonne of Mesulam the scrybe, in to y house of the LORDE, and sayde: *Go vp to
Helchias the hye prest, that the money that is brought vnto ¥ house of y LORDE (which the tresholde kepers haue gathered of y peo- ple) maye be delyuered vnto them, that they maye geue it to the workmen which are ap- poynted in the house of the LORDE, ¢ to

Or] TERRES d. * 9 Par, 34. a, * 9 Par. 34. b. 

geue it vnto the labourers in the house (y they maye repayre the decaye of the house) namely, vnto the carpenters, and buylders, q masons, and to them y bie timber q fre stone for the repairinge of the house : but so y there be no accomptes taken of them concernynge the money, that is vnder their hande, but y they deale withall vpon credence.

And Helchias y prest sayde vnto Sapha the scrybe: tI haue founde the boke of the lawe in the house of the LORDE. And Helchias gaue the boke vnto Saphan, that he might reade it. And Saphan the scrybe bare it vnto the kynge, and bronght him worde agayne, q sayde: Thy seruauntes haue gathered to- gether y money y was founde in the house, q haue delyuered it vnto the workmé, which are appoynted in y house of the LORDE. And
Saphan the scrybe tolde the kynge and sayde: 
Helchias the prest hath delyuered me a boke, and Saphan red it before the kynge.

But whan the kinge herde the wordes of the boke of lawe, he rente his clothes. And the kynge cómaunded Helchias the prest, q
Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, q Achbor the sonne of Michaia, and Saphan the scribe, q
Asaia y kynges seruaunt, and sayde: ^Go youre waye and axe councell at the LORDE for me, for the people, nd for all Iuda, con- cernynge the wordes of this boke that is founde : for greate is the wrath of the LORDE that is kyndled ouer vs, because oure fathers haue not herkened vnto the wordes of this boke, to do all that is wrytten vnto vs therin.

Then wente Helchias the prest, and Ahi- cam, Achbor, Saphan a Asaia vnto Hulda the prophetisse ý wife of Selln the sonne of
Thecua the sonne of Harham the keper of y clothes, and she dwelt at lerusalem in the seconde porte, and they spake vnto her. And she sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth y LORDE
God of Israel: Tell the man that sent you vnto me, Thus sayeth the LORDE: Be- holde, I wil brynge euell vpon this place, and the inhabiters therof, euen all the wordes of y lawe which the kynge hath caused to be iii because they haue forsaken me, and brent incense vnto other goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath with all the workes of their handes.
Therfore is my wrath kindled agaynst this cite, and shall not be quenched.

But tell this vnto the kynge of Iuda, which|® 

* 4 Re. 12. b. t 2 Pa. 34. c. d Tere. 21. a. 

| 

Chap. rritj. 

Because thine hert is not departed fro the wordes which thou hast herde, and hast hum- bled thyselfe before the LORDE, to heare what I haue spoken agaynst this place and the inhabiters therof (how that they shall become a very desolacion and curse) q hast rente thy clothes, and wepte before me, I hane herde it, sayeth the LORDE: *therfore wyll J gather the vnto thy fathers, so y thou shalt be put in to thy graue in peace, and thine eyes shall not se all the euell that I wyll brynge vpon this place. And they brought the kynge worde

agayne. 
The rri. Chapter. 
ND the kynge sent forth, and “all the 

Elders in [uda and Ierusalem resorted vnto him, and the kynge wente vp in to the house of the LORDE, and all the men of
Juda, and all the inhabiters of Ierusalem with him, the prestes and prophetes aud all the people both small and greate, tand all the wordes of the boke of the couenaunt that was founde in the house of the LORDE, were red in their eares. Aud the kinge stode vpon a piler, ^and made a couenant before the

LORDE, that they shulde walke after the |: 

LORDE, and to kepe his conmaundementes, witnesses, and ordinaunces with all their hert and with all their soule, y they shulde set vp the wordes of this couenaunt, which are wryt- ten in this boke. And all the people entred in to the couenaunt.

And the kynge cOmaunded Helchias the hye prest, aud the prestes of the secode course, and the kepers of the thresholde, y they shulde put out of the temple all the vessels which were made for Baal, and for the groue, and for all the hoost of heauen, q he brent them without Ierusalem in the valley of Cedron, and the dust of them was caryed vnto Bethel.

B| And he put downe the t Kemurims, who 

the kyuges of Iuda had founded, to burne incense vpon the hye places, in the cities of
Iuda, and abonte Iernsalem. He put downe also them that brent incense vnto Baal, to the
Sonne, and the Mone, and the twolue tokens, and to all y hoost of heauen. And the groue caused he to be caryed from the house of the

«9 Par, S4, f. 
* Tosu. 24. e. 

* 4 Re. 23. f. t 2 Esd. 8. a. 

The (tij. boke of the Rpnaes. 

hath sent you to axe councell at the LORDE:| |LORDE out of Ierusalem in to y valley of. 
'Thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: 

Cedron, and brent it in the valley of Cedron, and made it to dust, and cast the dust vpon the graues of y comen people. And he brake

downe the whorekepers houses which were by | 

the house of the LORDE, wherin the wemen made mansions for the groue.

And he caused all the prestes for to come out of the cities of Iuda, and suspended y hye places, where the prestes brent incense, from
Geba vnto Berseba. And brake downe the hye places in the portes, that were at y dore of the gate of Iosua y shreue of the cite, at the lefte hande as one goeth to the cite porte.
Yet had not the prestes of the hye places offred vpon the altare of the LORDE at
Ierusalem, but ate vnleuended bred amonge their brethren.

He suspended $'Tophet also in the valley of the children of Ennon, that noman shulde cause his sonne or his doughter to go thorow i fyre vnto Moloch. And he put downe the

orses, which y kynges of Juda had set vnto the Sonne, at the intringe in to the house of the LORDE, besyde the chest of Netham
Melech the chamberlayne which was at 
Paruarim, and the charettes of the Sonne brent he with fyre, and the altares vpou the rofe of Achabs perler, which the kynges of
Iuda had made. And the altares |lwhich 
Manasses had made in the two courtes of the house of the LORDE, dyd the kynge breake downe. And ranne from thence, and east the dust of them in to the broke Cedron.

And the hye places that were before Ieru- salem on the righte hande of Mount Mashith
{which Salomon the kynge of Israel had buylded vnto Astaroth the abhomynacion of
Sidon, and to Camos the abhominacion of 
Moab, and to Malcom the abhominacion of the children of Ammon, those did the kynge

suspende, and brake the pilers, and roted out’ 

the groues, and fylled their places with mens bones.

And **the altare at Bethel, and the hye place that Jeroboam the sonne of Nebat made, which caused Israel to synne, the same altare brake he downe, and the hye place, q brent the hye place, and made it to dust, and brent vp the grone, And Josias turned him aboute, aud sawe the graues that were vpo the

t Soph. 1. a. $ Iere. 7. d. || 4 Re. 21. a. q 3 Re. 11. a. CEPR LING, 12d.

50 

Fo. ceekrty. 

€ 

D 

Fo. ceeler. 

mount, aud caused the bones to be fetched out of the graues, and brent them vpo the altare, and suspended it, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, *which the man of
God cryed out, that tolde this before. 

And he sayde: What titell is this, that I se here? And the men of the cite sayde vnto him: It is the graue of the man of God, which came from Iuda, and cried out this that thou hast done agaynst y altare of Bethel. And he sayde: Let him lye, no man touche his bones. Thus were his bones delyuered with the bones of the prophet that came from
Samaria. 

He put awaye also all the houses of the hye places in the cities of Samaria (which the kynges of Israel had made to prouoke y
LORDE vnto wrath) and dyd with them acordinge to all as he had done at Bethel.
And all $ prestes of the hye places that were there, offiéd he vp vpon the altares, and t so brent he mens bones theron, and came agayne to Ierusalem.

«And the kynge commauded the people, and sayde: Kepe Easter vnto the LORDE youre God, tas it is wrytten in the boke of this couenaunt. For there was no Easter so kepte as this, sence the tyme of the Iudges which indged Israel, and in all the tymes of the kynges of Israel, and of the kynges of
Iuda: but in the eightenth yeare of kynge losias, was this Easter kepte vnto the LORDE at lerusalem.

And losias expelled all soythsayers, ex- pounders of tokes, ymages and Idols, and all the abhominacions which were sene in the londe of Iuda and at Ierusalem, that he mighte set vp the wordes of the lawe, which were wrytten in the boke, that Helchias y prest foüde in the house of ý LORDE.

His like was no kynge dde him, which so couerted vnto y LORDE with all his hert, with all his soule, c with all his strength, acordinge to all the lawe of Moses. And after him came there not vp soch another.
Yet turned not the LORDE from the indig- nacion of his greate wrath, wherwith he was displeased ouer luda, because of all the prouoeacion wherwith Manasses had prouoked him. And ý LORDE sayde: $I wil put
Iuda out of my presence also, euen as I haue 

* 3 Re, 13. a. +3 Re, 13. a. 23090 Pars 95. n. 

1 Deu. 16. a. 

3 Esd. 1. a. 

The (ij. boke of tbe kpnges. 

put awaye Israel: and this cite which I haue chosen, wyl I cast out, namely, lerusalem, q the house wherof I sayde: My name shalbe there. What more there is to saye of Iosias, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.

* [n his tyme wete Pharao Necho y kynge of 
Egipte vp agaynst the kynge of Assyria by the water Euphrates. But kynge Iosias wente agaynst him, and dyed at Megiddo, wha he had sene him. And his seruauntes caried him deed fró Megiddo, q brought him to Jerusale,
¢ buryed him iu his graue. And the people of the londe toke {| Ioahas the sonne of Iosias, and anoynted him, and made him kynge in his fathers steade.

Thre q twentye yeare olde was loahas wha he was made kynge, « reigned thre monethes at lerusale. His mothers name was Hamutal y doughter of leremia of Libna. And he dyd y which was euell in $ sight of $ LORDE, euen as his fathers had done. But Pharao
Necho toke him presoner of Reblatha in the londe of Hemath, y he shulde not reigne at
Jerusalem: q ssl a taxe vpo the londe, an hundreth talétes of siluer, ¢ one talente of golde. And Pharao Necho made Eliachim y sonne of Iosias kynge in his father Iosias steade, q turned bis name Joachim. { But loahas toke he, q brought him in to Egipte where he dyed. And Ioachim gaue the siluer q golde vnto Pharao, yet taxed he the londe, y he might geue y syluer acordynge to Pharaos comaundement. Euery one amonge the people in y londe taxed he after his abilite in siluer q E to geue it vnto Pharao. Fyue q twentye yeare olde was Ioachim whan he was made kynge, q reigned eleuen yeares at
Ierusalem. His mothers name was Sebida i doughter of Pedaia of Ruma, q he dyd euell in the sight of the LORDE, euen as his fathers had done.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

ie his tyme came vp Nabuchodonosor |A kynge of Babilon, ¢ Ioachim was in sub- ieccion vnto him iij yeare. And he turned back, and rebelled agaynst him. And y
LORDE sent men of warre vpon him out of 
Chaldea, out of Syria, out of Moab, q fro amonge the childré of Ammon, q caused the

#9 Par. 35.a. q Iere. 22. b.

§ 4 Re. 24. a. || That is Ieclionias. 

Chap. rri. | 

Chap. rrb. for to come in to Inda, to destroie it acordinge to the worde of the LORDE, which he spake by his sernauntes the prophetes. It fortuned eué so vnto Iuda, *acordynge to y worde of the LORDE, that he wolde put them awaye from his presence, because of y sinnes of
Manasses which he dyd, a because of the innocent blonde that he shed. And he fylled lerusalem with innocent bloude, therfore wolde not the LORDE be reconcyled.

What more there is to saye of Ioachim, and all that he dyd, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of Inda. And
Ioachim fell on slepe with his fathers. And t Ioachim his sonne was kynge in his steade.
And the kynge of Egipte came nomore out of his londe: for the kynge of Babilon had conquered all that was the kynge of Egiptes, from the ryuer of Egipte vnto ý water
Euphrates. Fightene yeare olde was Ioachim whan he was made kynge, and reigned thre monethes at lerusale. His mothers name was Nebustha the doughter of Elnathan of lerusalem. And he dyd euell in the sighte of the LORDE, euen as his father had done.

At the same tyme wente the seruauntes of 
Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon vp to lerusalem, and came vpon the cyte with ordinaunce of warre. And whan Nabuchodo- nosor and his seruauntes came to the cite they layed sege vnto it. But Ioachim y kynge of
Iuda wente forth to the kynge of Babilon with his mother, with his seruauntes, with his rulers and chamberlaynes.
Babilon receaued him in the eight yeare of his reigne.

tAnd he toke forth fro thence all the treasure in the house of the LORDE, and in y kynges house, and brake all the golden vessell y
Salomon the kynge of Israel had made in the house of the LORDE (acordynge as the
LORDE had sayde) and caryed awaye all 
Ierusalem, all the rulers, all the mightie men, euen ten thonsande presoners, and all the carpenters, and all the smithes, and lefte none behynde bnt the poore people of the londe.

§And he caryed Ioachim awaye vnto Babi- lon, and the kynges mother, the kinges wynes, and his chamberlaynes: and y mightie men of the londe led he awaye presoners also from lerusalem vnto Babilon, and senen thousande

*4 Re. 23.f. lere. 36. d. 
$ Deu. 28. d. Ier. 24. a. 

t4 Re. 20. c. Esa. 29. b. a Jer. 37. a.

Che tj. boke of the kynges. 

And the kynge of} ' 

So. eeelrrt. 

of the best men, and a thousande carpenters and smythes, and all the stronge men of warre.
And the kynge of Babilon made Matania his vncle kynge in his steade, and turned his name
Sedechias. 

i One and twentye yeare olde was Sedechias, whan he was made kynge, and reigned eleuen yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was
Amithal the doughter of Ieremia of Libna. 
And he dyd euell in the sight of the LORDE, eue as Ioachim dyd: for thus fortnned it vnto
Terusalé thorow the wrath of the LORDE, tyll he had cast them out frō his presence.
And Sedechias fell awaye fro the kynge of 
Dabilon. 

The rro. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned, that in ¥ nyenth yeare 
A of his reigne, ^vpon the tenth daye of the tenth moneth, Nabnchodonosor the kynge of Babilon came with all his power agaynst lerusalem. And they laied sege vnto it, and buylded stronge holdes rounde aboute it.
Thus was the cite beseged vnto the eleuenth yeare of kynge Sedechias. But on y nyenth daye of the fourth moneth ‘was the honger so stronge in the cite, that the people of the londe had nothinge to eate. And the cite was broken vp, q all the men of warre fled in the night by the waye of the porte betwene the two walles, which goeth to the kynges gardé. But the Caldees laye aboute the cite.
And he fled by the waye to the playne felde. 
Nenertheles the power of the Caldees folowed after the kynge, and toke him in the plaine felde of Iericho: and all the men of warre that were with him, were scatered abrode from him. And they toke the kynge, and led him vp to the kynge of Babilon vnto Reblatha.
"I And he gaue iudgmét vpon him. And they slewe Sedechias ehildren before his eyes, and put out Sedechias eies, and bounde him with cheynes, and caryed him vnto Babilon.

Vpon the seuenth daye of the fyfth moneth, that is the ninetenth yeare of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon, came Nabusaradan the chefe captayne the kynge of Babilons sernaunt, vnto
Ierusalem, and brent y honse of the LORDE, and the kynges house, ¢ all the houses at Ieru- salem, and all the greate honses brent he with fyre. And all the power of the Caldees which

|| ler. 52. a. ^ Iere. 39. a. and 52.a. * Eze.4. c. and 5. d. q Some reade: And they talked with hi of iudgment.

Fo. rerirrij. 

The iiij. boke of the kpnges. 

was with the chefe captayne, brake downe the walles rounde aboute lerusalem. As for the other people that yet were lefte in the cite, and were fallé vnto the kinge of Babilon, and the other comen people, Nabusaradan the chefe captayne caryed them awaye. And of the poorest people dyd the chefe captaine leaue in ý londe to be wynegardeners and plowmen.

But the brasen pilers in the house of the 
LORDE, aud the seates, aud the brasen laner that was in the house of the LORDE, dyd y
Caldees breake downe, and caried the metall vnto Babilon. And the pottes, shouels, flesh- okes, spones, q all y brasen vessell that was occupied in the seruyce, caried they awaye.
And $ chefe captayne toke awaye i censors | and basens y were of golde and syluer, two
|pilers, one lauer, and the seates y Salomon 
| had made for ¥ house of the LORDE. The: metall of all these ornamentes coulde not be
| weyed. *Eightene cubytes hye was one piler, , and y knoppe theron was of brasse also, q thre | cubytes hye: q the rope and the pomgranates vpon the knoppe rounde aboute, were all of brasse. After the same maner was the other | piler also with the rope.

And the chefe captayne toke Seraia the prest of the first course, q Sophony the prest of the seconde course, and thre dorekepers, and one chamberlayne out of the cite, which was appoynted ouer y men of warre : and fyue men that were euer before the kynge, which

| 

were founde in the cite: and Sophar the cap- | 

'tayne, which taught the people of ¥ londe to fighte : and thre score men of ý people of the

|londe, that were founde in the cite: these dyd 
|Nabusaradan ý chefe captayne take, and 
| broughte them to the kynge of Babilon vnto 
Reblatha. And the kynge of Babilon slewe 

* 3 Re. 7. b. t ler. 40. a. b. 

Chap. rrb. 

them at Reblatha in y londe of Hemath.| | 

Thus was Iuda caried awaye out of his awne londe. t But oner the remnaunt of the peo- ple in the londe of Iuda, whom Nabuchodo- nosor the kynge of Babilon lefte behynde, he set Godolias y sonne of Ahicam ¥ sonne of
Saphan. Now wha all the captaynes of the soudyers, q the men herde, that the kynge of
Babilon had made Godolias gouernoure, they came to Godolias vnto t Mispa, namely, Ismael y sonne of Nathanias, q lohauna y sonne
Carea, q Seraia y sonne of Tanhometh the 
Netophatite, q Iesanias y sonne of Maechati with their men. And Godolias sware vnto them q to their men, q sayde vnto them:
$ Feare not ye ¥ officers of the Caldees, tary in the londe, q submytte youre selues vnto the kynge of Babilon, q ye shal prospere. | But in the seuéth moneth came Ismael the sonne of Nathanias the sonne of Elisama (of the kynges kynred) and ten men with him, and slewe Godolias and the lewes and Caldees
(that were with him at Mispa. Then all the 
|people gat them vp, both small and greate, 
|and the captaynes of the hoost, and came in to Egipte, for they were afrayed of y Caldees.
Howbeit in the seuen and thirtieth yeare 
‘after that Ioachim the kynge of luda was 
| carled awaye on the seuen and twenty daye of the twolueth moneth, Euilmerodach the kynge of Babilon in the first yeare of his reigne, lifte vp the heade of Ioachim y kynge of Iuda out of preson, and spake louyngly vnto him, and set his trone aboue y trones of
|y kynges that were with him at Babilon, and chaunged the clothes of his captiuyte. And he ate allwaye before him as longe as he lyued. And he appoynted him his porcion, which was euer geue him daylie of the kynge, as longe as he lyned.
1 Otherwyse called, Masphat. 

$1Iere.40.c. |] Iere.41.a. 

The ende of the fourth boke of the kynges. 

B 

The first boke of the Cronicles, 

called Paralipomenon. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. II. | Chap. XIIII. 

A rehearsynge of the generacions. How the other trybes were called, and how they fetched awaye the Arke

Chap. HI. 
Of Dauid and his sonnes. Chap. XV. 
& mm Hiram sendeth tymber vnto Dauid. Of Dauids hap. i wyues. He ouercommeth the Philistynes.
A register of the children of Iuda. 
Chap. XVI. 
Eu Dauid appoynteth the Leuites to beare the Arke 
A register of the childre of Simeo. ; 
Chap. VI. QUIS» XVII. 
A register of the Rubenites. The Arke is set in the Tabernacle, with sacrifice and thankesgeuynge.
Chap. VII. 
A register of the children of Leui. Eno. 
God forbyddeth Dauid to buylde the temple. 
Chap. VII. 
Of the children of Isachar t Ben lamin. Chap. XIX. 
Dauid subdueth the enemies on euery syde. 
Chap. IX. 
Of the trybe of Ben Iamin. Chap. XX. c X Hanun the kynge of Amon dealeth shamefully
Hap. d with Dauid seruaütes, that come to comforte 
The nombre of the Israelites, that were caried him. awaye vnto Babilon. Chap. XXI.
Chap. XI. Of certaine batels which Dauid winneth with 
The battayll of the Philistynes agaynst Saul and worshipe. his sonnes. Chap. XXII.
Chap. XII. Dauid nombreth the people, and displeaseth the 
How, Dauid was anoynted kynge, and of his LORDE, which punysheth the people for his kyhgdome. sake.
Chay. XIII. Chap. XXIII. 

Of Dauids worthy men of warre, which came | Dauid prepareth tymber and stone, golde q vnto him ont of all the trybes. syluer for the buyldinge of the teple.

ifo., reelxritj. 
Chap. XXIII. XXV. 

Dauid in his age before his death, appoynteth the offices in the house of God.

Chap. XXVI. 
The office of the children of Asaph, Heman, and 
Iedithun. 
Chap. XXVII. 
The office of the porters. 

The first Chapter. 
DAM, ^Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahalaleel, 
Jared, Henoch, Mathusalah, Lamech, 
Noe, Sem, Ham q Iaphet. 

*The childré of [aphet are these: Gomer, 
Magog, Madai, Jauan, Tubal, Mesech and 
Thiras. The children of Gomer are these: 
Ascenas, Riphat, Togarma. The children of 
Jauan are these: Elisa, Tharsisa, Chitim and 
Dodanim. 

The childré of Ham are these: Chus, Mis- raim, Phut t Canaan. The children of Chus are these: Seba, Heuila, Sabtha, Reyma q
Sabthecha. The childré of Reyma are these: 
Sheba q Dedan. Chus, begat Nemrod, y beganne to be mighty vpon earthe. Misraim begat Ludim, Enanim, Lehabim, Napthuhim,
Pathrusim, and Casluhim: of whom came the 
Philistynes and Caphthorims. Canaan begat 
Sidon his first sonne: Heth, Iebusi, Amori, 
Girgosi, Heui, Arki, Sini, Aruadi, Zemari and Hemathi.

The childré of Sem are these: Elam, 
Assur, Arphachsad, Lud, Aram, Vs, Hul, 
Gether q Masech. Arphachsad begat Salah. 
Salah begat Eber. Vnto Eber there were borne two sonnes: the name of the one was
Peleg, because that in his tyme the worlde was deuyded, and his brothers name was laketan. And Jaketa begat Almodad, Saleph,
Hazarmaphet, Iarah, Hadora, Vsal, Dikela, 
Ebal, Abimael, Seba, Ophir, Heuila and lobab. These all are the children of Iakethan.

tSem, Arphachsad, Salah, Eber, Peleg, 
Regu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, Abram, that is 
Abraham. The children of Abraham are these: Isaac and Ismael. This is their gene- racion : ł The first sonne of Ismael : Nebaioth,

* Gene,5.a. *Gen.10.a. +Geneil.b. $ Gen.25.b. 

The í. boke of tbe Cronicles. 

Chap. 

Chap. XXVIII. 
The office of the captaynes amonge the trybes. 

Chap. XXIX. 
The wordes of Dauid to the captaynes, to the people and to Salomon.
Chap. XXX. 

How Dauid talketh of buyldige the temple, and what the prynces geue ther to.

Cedar, Abdeel, Mibsam, Misma, Duma, Masa, 
Hadad, Thema, Iethur, Naphis q Kedma. 
These are the children of Ismael. 

The children which Ketura Abrahams có- cubyne bare, are these: ^Simram, Iaksan,
Medan, Midian, leszbak and Suah. ‘The children of Iaksan are these: Seba and Dedan.
And the childré of Midian are: Epha, Epher, 
Henoch, Abida and Eldaa. All these are the childré of Ketura. Abraham begat Isaac.
The children of Isaac are: Esau and Israel. 
$ The children of Esau are: Eliphas, Reguel, leus, Iaelam, Korah. The children of Eli- phas are, Theman, Omar, Zephi, Gaethan,
Kenas, Thimna q Amalek. The children of 
Reguel are: Nahath, Serah, Samma and Misa. 

ll The children of Seir are: Lothan, Sobal, 
Zibeon, Ana, Dison, Ezer, Disan. The children of Lothan are: Hori and Homan and Thimna was the sister of Lothan. The children of Sobal are: Aluan, Manahath,
Ebal, Sephi, Onam. The children of Zibeon are: Aia and Ana. The childré of Ana,
Dison. The children of Dison are: Hamran, 
Eszban, lethran and Charan. The children of Ezer are: Bilhan, Seauan q Acan. The children of Disan are: Vz and Aran.

These are the kynges which reigned in the lode of Edom, “or euer there reigned eny kynge amonge the children of Israel: Bela the sonne of Beor, and the name of his cite was Dinhaba. And whan Bela dyed, Iobab the sonne of Serah of Bosra was kynge in his steade. And whan Jobab dyed, Husam out of y londe of the Themanites was kynge in his steade.

Whan Husam dyed, Hadad the sonne of 
Bedad (which smote the Madianites in the felde of y Moabites) was kynge in his steade,

^ Gen.25.a. §Gen.36.b. || Gen.36.d. ¢ Gen. 36. e. 

f. 

€ 

B 

Chap. fj. 

a 

t the name of his cite was Auith. Whan 
Hadad dyed, Samla of Masrek was kyuge in his steade. Whan Samla dyed, Saul of Re- hobeth by the water syde, was kynge in his steade. Whan Saul dyed, Baal Hauan the sonne of Achbor was kynge in his steade.
Whan Baal Hauan dyed, Hadad was kynge in his steade, and the name of his cite was
Pagi, ¢ his wyues name was Mehetabeel the donghter of Matred, q doughter of Mesahab.

But whan Hadad dyed, there were prynces at Edom: Prynee Thimnah, prynce Alua, prynce letheth, prynce Ahalibama, prynce
Ela, prynce Pinon, prynce Kenas, prynce 
Theman, prynce Mibzar, prynce Magdiel, prynce Iram. These are the prynces of Edom.

The ij. Chapter 

HESE are the children of Israel: Ruben, 
Simeon, Leni, Iuda, Isachar, Zabulon, 
Dan, Ioseph, Be Iamin, Nephtali, Gad and 
Aser. *'[he childré of Iuda: Er, Onan q 
Sela: these thre were borne vnto him of y donghter Sua y Cananitisse. Howbeit y first sonne of Iuda was wicked before y LORDE, q therfore he slewe him. But t Thamar his sonnes wife bare him Phares q Zarah, so y all

y childré of Inda were fyue. 

+ The childré of Phares are, Hesrom and 
Hamuel The childré of Zarah are, Simri, 
Ethan, Heman, Chaleol, Dara, which all are fyue in nombre. ‘The childré of Charmi are,
$ Achan, which troubled Israel, wha he synned in the thinge that was damned. The children of Ethan: Asaria.

The children which were borne vnto Hes- rom, are: Raia, Thalubai. {| Ram begat
Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson the prynce of the children of Iuda. Naasson be- gat Salmon. Salmon begat Boos. Boos begat
Obed. Obed begat Isai. f Isai begat Eliab his first sonne, Abinadab the seconde, Samma the thirde, Nathanael the fourth, Raddai y fifth, Ozem ¥sixte, Dauid y vij. And their sisters were Zeruia q L

33| The childré of Zeruia are these thre: Abi- 

sai, Ioab « Asahel. Abigail begat Amasa. 
** The father of Amasa was Iether an Is- maelite.

Caleb the sonne of Hesrom begat Asuba y woman, ¢ lerigoth. And these are the same

* Gen, 38. a. 
7.a. || Matt. 1. a. 

t Matt. 1. a, 

¢ Ruth 4. d. § Iosu. 
{T 1 Re. 16. b. 

** 9 Re. 17. e. 

The i. boke of tbe Cronirles. 

womans childrē: Ieser, Sobab, and Ardon. 
But whā Asuba dyed, Caleb toke Ephrat, which bare him Hur. tt Hur begat Vri. Vri begat Bezaleel.

Afterwarde laye Hesrom with ý doughter of Machir the father of Gilead, x he toke her wha he was thre score yeare olde, and she bare him Segub. Segub begat Jair, which had thre œ twentye cities in the londe of
Gilead. And he toke out of the same Iesur and Aram the townes of lair, and Kenath with the vyllages therof, thre score cities. All these are the children of Machir y father of
Gilead. After y death of Hesrom in Caleb 
Ephrata, lefte Hesrom his wife vnto Abia: which (wife) bare him # Ashur y father of
Thecoa. 

lerahmeel the first sonne of Hesrom had children: the first Ram, Buna, Oren and
Ozem and Ahia. And lerahmeel had yet another wife, whose name was Athara, she is y mother of Onam. ‘The childré of Ram the first sonne of Ierahmeel are, Maaz, Iamin and Eker.

Onam had children: Samaiand lada. The children of Samai are, Nadab q Abisur. Abi- surs wife was called Abihail, which bare him
Ahban and Molid. The childré of Nadab are, Seled and Appaim. And Seled dyed without children. ‘The children of Appaim: lesei. The children of lesei: Sesan. The childré of Sesan: Ahelai. The childré of
Iada y brother of Samai are, Iether q Iona- than. But Iether dyed without childré. The children of Ionathan are, Peleth and Sasa:
These are the children of Ierahmeel. As for 
Sesan, he had no sónes, bnt a doughter. And 
Sesan had a seruaüt an Egipcian, whose name was latha. And Sesan gaue his doughter vnto Iatha his seruaüt to wife, which bare him
Athai. Athai begat Nathan. Nathan begat 
Sabad. Sabad begat Ephal. Ephal begat 
Obed. Obed begat Iehu. Iehu begat Asaria. 
Asarja begat Halez. Halez begat Elleasa. 
Elleasa begat Sissemai. Sissemai begat Sal- lum. Sallum begat Jekamia. lekamia begat
Elisama. 

The children of Caleb the brother of Ie- rahmeel are, Mesa his first sonne, which is the father of $$ Siph, and of the children of
Maresa the father of Hebron. 

tt Exo. 31. a, 

if 1 Par. 4. a. §§ 1 Re. 23. d. 

So. rrefyrb. 

€ 

Fo. ceelrrbdt. The i. boke of the Cronirles. i| The children of Hebron are, Corah, Tha-

Chap. ty. 

Salomons sonne was Roboam, ‘whose sonne | 3 

puah, Rekem, q Sama. Sama begat Raham 
ý father of larkaam. Rekem begat Samai. 
‘The sonne of Samai was called Maon, q Maon was y father of Bethzur.

pha Calebs concubyne bare Haram, Mosa q Gases. Haram begat Gases. ‘The childré of Iahdai are, Rekem, Iothàm, Gesan, Pelet,
Epha and Saaph. Maecha Calebs concubyne bare Seber and Thirhena. And she bare Saaph also $ father of Madmanna, and Scheua the father of Machbena, and the father of Gibea.
But * Achsa was Calebs doughter. 

was Abia, whose sonne was Asa, who sonne was Iosaphat, whose sonne was Joram, whose sonne was Ahasia, whose sonne was loas, whose sonne was Amasias, whose sonne was
Asaria, whose sonne was Iotham, whose sonne was Achas, whose sonne was Ezechias, whose sonne was Manasses, whose sonne was Amon, whose sonne was losias. The sonnes of Losias were: ¥ first, Iohanna : the seconde, Ioachim: the thirde, Sedechias: the fourth, Sallum.
The childré of Ioachim were, lechonias, whose sonne was Sedechias.

These were the children of Caleb: Hur y The childré of Iechonias which were takée| € first sonne of Ephrata, Sobal the father of| |presoners, were ll Selathiel, Malchiram, Pha-
Kiriath [earim, Salma $ father of Bethleem,| |daia, Semeazar, lekamia, Hosanna, Nedabia. 
Hareph y father of Beth Sader. And Sobal| |The childré of Phadaia were: Zorobabel qc the father of Kiriath learim had sonnes,| | Simei. ‘The childré of Zorobabel were: Me- namely the halfe kynred of Manuhoth. sullam q Hanania, q their sister Selomith, and

The kynreds at Kiriath learim were | |Hasuba, Ohel, Barachias, Hasadia, Iusab 
Iethites, Puthites, Sumathites q Misraites.| | Hases, these fyue. The children of Hanania 
From these came forth the Zaregathites q| |were: Platia q Iesaia, whose sonne was Re- 
Esthaolites. The children of Salma are Beth-| |phaia, whose sonne was Arnan, whose sonne leem q the Netophathites the crowne of the} |was Obedia, whose sonne was Sachania. The house of Ioab, and the halfe of the Manahites| |children of Sachania were: Semaia. ‘The of the Zareite. And y kynreds of the serybes| |children of Semaia were: Hatus, Iegeal, Ba- which dwelt at labes, are ¥ Thireathites,| |riah, Nearia, Saphat q Sesa, these sixe. The
Simeathites, Suchothites, t these are the Ke-| |children of Nearia were: Elioenai, Ezechias nites, ý came of Hamath the father of Beth} |a Asrika, these thre. The childré of Elioenai
Rechab. were: Hodaia, Eliasib, Platia, Akub, Iohanna, 

The iij. Chapter. Delaia and Anani, these seuen. a HESE are the childrē of Dauid, “which E were borne vnto him in Hebron. The The iiij. Chapter. first sonne, Amnon of Ahinoam the lesrael- HE children of Iuda? were: Phares,|&

itisse: the seconde, Daniel of Abigail the 
Carmelitisse: the thirde, Absalom y sonne of 
Maecha $ doughter of Thalmai kynge of 
Gesur: the fourth, Adonias the sonne of Ha- gith: the fifth, Saphathia of Abital: the sixte, lethream of his wife Egla. These sixe were borne vnto him at Hebron, for he reigned there vij. yeare q sixe monethes. But at lerusalé reigned he thre q thirtie yeare.

? And these were borne vnto him at lerusa- lem: Simea, Sobab, Nathan, * Salomo: these foure of Bethseba $ doughter of Ammiel.
And lebear, Elisama, Eliphalet, Noga, Ne- pheg, Iapia, Elisama, Eliada, Eliphelet, these nyne. These all are y children of Dauid, besyde those y were the childré of ¥ cocu-

Hesrom, Charmi, Hur q Sabal. Re- hoia the sonne of Sobal begat Jahath. Iahath begat Ahumai and Lahad. "These are the kynreds of the Zaregathites, Elle y father of
Etha, lesreel, Iesma, ledbas and their sister was called Hazelelponi: and Penuel the father of Gedor, q Eser the father of Husa. These are the children of Hur the first sonne of
Ephrata ¥ father of Bethleem. 

* Ashur ¥ father of Thecoa had two wyues, 
Hellea q Naera: and Naera bare Ahusam, 
Hepher, Thennu, q Ahastari: these are the childré of Naera. The childre of Hellea were: Zereth, Iezohar and Ethnan. Chos begat Anub and Hazobeba, and the kynred of Aharhel the sonne of Harum. laebes was

bynes. $ And Thamar was their sister. more honorable then his brethré, and his 
* Iosu. 13. d. Iud. 1. c. tlud.1.d. 9*2 Reg.3.a.| |¢ Mat. i.a. | Matt.1.b. 7 Gen.38.a. 1 Par. 2. b. 
^2 Reg. 5. c. i 2 He. 12. c. $ 2 Re. 13. a. 

Chap. ot. 

mother called him laebes, for she sayde: I haue borne him with trouble.

And Iaebes called vpon the God of Israel, 
& sayde: * Yf thou wilt blesse me, and in- crease the borders of my londe, q yf thy hande be with me, œ thou delyuer me from euell, Ý it trouble me not. And God caused it for to come that he axed.

Chalub the brother of Suah begat Mehir : he is the father of Esthon. Esthon begat
Bethrapha, Passeah, and Thehinna j father of the cite of Nahas: these are the men of
Recha. The children of Kenas were: Ath- niel and Saraia. The childré of Athniel were,
Hathath. 

And Meonothai begat Aphra. And Saraia begat Ioab the father of Geharasim: for they were carpenters. The childré of Caleb the sonne of lephune were: Iru, Ela q Naam.
The children of Ela were: Kenas. The children of Iehaleleel were: Siph, Sipha,
Thiria, « Asarieel. The childré of Esra were: 
Tether, Mered, Epher q Ialon, x Thahar with 
Miriam, Samai, leszbah the father of Esthe- moa, « his wife Iudi Ia bare Jered the father of Geder, Heber the father of Socho, Ieku- thiel $ father of Sanoah: these are the children of Bithia the donghter of Pharao, which Mared toke.

The childré of the wife Hodia the sister of 
Naham y father of Regila, were, Hagarmi q 
Esthomoa the Maechathite. 

'The children. of Simon were: Amnon, 
Rimna «¢ Benhanan, Thiflon. The children of [esei were: Soheth, and Ben Soheth.

The childré of Sela y sonne of Iuda were: 
Er, y father of Lecha. Laeda the father of 
Maresa, € the kynred of y lynnenweuers in y house of Aszbea: q lokim, v the men of
Cosebo, loas q Seraph, which were hous- holders in Moab, and dwelt at Lahem and
Hadebarim Athikim. These were potmakers, and dwelt amoge plantes and hedges, besyde k^ kynge in his busynes, and came q dwelt there.

The b. Chapter. 
HE children of Simeon’ were Nemuel, 
Iamin, larib, Serah, Saul: whose sonne was Sallum, whose sonne was Mipsam, whose sone was Misma. The childr of Misma were, Hamuel, whose sonne was Sachur, whose
* Gen. 28. d. 

a Nu. 26. b. + Iosu. 19. a. 

Thr í. boke of the Cronteles. 

sonne was Simei. Simei had sixtene sonnes and sixe doughters, and his brethren had not many childré. And all their kynred multi- plied not as the children of Iuda. But tthey dwelt at Berseba, Molada, Hazar Sual, Dilha,
Ezem, Tholad, Bethuel, Harma, Ziclag, Beth 
Marchaboth, Hazarsussim, Beth Birei, and 
Saraim: these were their cities vntyll y tyme of kynge Dauid. And their townes, Etam,
Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, Asan, these fyue cities, q all the vyllages that were aboute these cities, vntyll Baal, this is their habitacion and their kynred amonge them.

And Mesobab, lamlech, losa the sonne of 
Amasia, Ioel, Iehu the sonne of Ieschibia, the sonne of Seraia, the sonne of Asiel,
Elioenai, laecoba, lesohaia, Asaia, Adiel, 
Ismael and Benaia. Sisa the sonne of Siphei, y sonne of Alon, the sonne of ledaia, the sonne of Simri, the sonne of Semaia. These were famous prynces in their kynreds of the house of their fathers, and multiplied in nombre.

And they wente forth, that they might come vnto Gedor to the east syde of the valley, to seke pasture for their shepe. And founde fat and good pasture, and a londe large on both the sydes, quyete and riche: for they of Ham dwelt there afore tyme.

And these that are now descrybed by name, came in the tyme of Ezechias the kynge of
Iuda, and smote the tentes and dwellinges of those that were founde there, and damned them vnto this daye, and dwelt in their steade, for there had they pasture for their shepe.

'There wente of them also (of the children of Simeon) fyue hundreth men vnto mount
Seir, with their rulers: Platia, Nearia, Re- phaia and Vsiel, the children of lesei, and smote the remnaunt of the Amalechites (which were escaped) and dwelt there vnto this daye.

The bí. Chapter. 

So. rreirrbij. 

B 

HE children of Ruben the first sonne ofi A 

Israel: for he was the first sonne, but 
ł because he defyled his fathers bed, therfore was his first byrthrighte geuen vnto the children of Ioseph the sonne of Israel, q he was not rekened to y first byrthrighte: for vnto Iuda which was miglitie amonge his brethren, was geuen the pryncipalite before him, and the first byrthrighte vnto Ioseph. The children

t Gen. 49, a. Exo. 6. b. Nu. 26. a. 

51 

fo. rcelrrbiij. now of Ruben the first sonne of Israel are these: Hanoch, Pallu, Hesron and Charmi.
The children of Iohel were, Semaia, whose sonne was Gog, whose sonne was Semel, whose sonne was Micha, whose sonne was Reaia, whose sonne was Daal, whose sonne was Beera,
*whom 'Teglatphalasser the kynge of Assiria caried awaye presoner. He was a prynce amonge the Rubenites. But his brethren

amonge his kynreds (wha they were rekened |. 

amonge their generacion) had Teiel and 
Sacharia to their heades. 

And Bela the sonne of Asan the sonne of 
Sema, the sonne of Ioel, *dwelt at Aroer, and vntyll Nebo q Baal Meon. And dwelt towarde $ East, as one cémeth to the wyl- dernes by y water Euphrates: tfor their catell were many in the londe of Gilead.

And in y tyme of Saul they foughte agaynst y Agarites, which fell thorow their hande, and they dwelt in their tentes towarde all the East parte of Gilead.

But the children of Gad dwelt ouer agaynst them in Y countre of Basan, vntyll Salcha.
Ioel the chefest, and Sapham the secode, 
Taenai and Saphat at Basan. And their brethren of the house of their fathers were,
Michael, Mesullam, Seba, Iorai, Iaecan, Sia and Eber, these seuen.

These are the children of Abihail the sonne of Huri, the sonne of laroah, the sonne of
Gilead, the sonne of Michael, the sonne of lesisai, ý sonne of Iahdo, the sonne of Bus.
Ahi the soune of Abdiel, the sonne of Guni was a ruler in y house of their fathers, and they dwelt at Gilead in Basan, and in y vyl- lages therof, and in all the suburbes of Saron, vnto the vttemost partes therof. All these were rekened in the tyme of Iotham the kynge of Iuda, and of leroboam the kynge of Israel.

The children of Ruben, the Gaddites q the halfe trybe of Manasses (of soch as were fightinge men, which wayre shylde a swerde, and coulde bende the bowe, and were men of armes) were foure and fortye thousande and seuen hundreth and thre score, that wente forth to $ warre. And whan they foughte agaynst y Agarites, Ietur, Naphes and Nodab helped them, and delyuered y Agarites in to their handes, and all that was with them: for they cried vnto God in y batayl. And he

* 4 Tte. 15. f. t Iosu. 13. c. t Nu. 32. a. 
$ Iosu. 13. d. || + Re. 15. d. 

Cbr í. boke of the Cronicles. 

herde them, because they put their trust in him. And they caried awaie their catell, fyue thousande Camels, two hundreth q fyftie thousande shepe, two thousande Asses, and an hiidreth thousande soules of men. For there were many wounded, for why? the battayll was of God. And they dwelt in their steade, vntyll the tyme that they were caried awaye presoners.

The childré of the halfe trybe of Manasses dwelt in y londe $from Basan forth vntyll
Baal Hermon a Seuir, and mount Hermon: for they were many. And these were ¥ heades of the house of their fathers, Epher,
Tesei, Eliel, Asriel, Ieremia, Hodaneia, Iahdiel, mightie valeaunt men, q awncient heades in the house of their fathers.

l And wha they synned agaynst y God of their fathers, and wente awhorynge after the goddes of the people of the londe, (whom God had destroyed before them) the God of Israel stered vp the sprete of Phul the kynge of
Assiria, and the sprete of Teglatphalassar the kynge of Assiria, and led awaye the Rubenites,
Gaddites, and y halfe trybe of Manasses, and broughte the vnto Halah, and Habor, and
Hara, and to the water of Gosan vnto this daye.

The bij. Chapter. 

HE children of Leui were, Gerson, 
Kahath and Merari. The childré of 
Kahath were, Amram, Iezeher, Hebron and 
Vsiel. The children of Amram were, Aaron, 
Moses and Miriam. The children of Aaro were, Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar and Ithamar.
Eleasar begat Phineas. Phineas begat Abisua. 
Abisua begat Buki. Buki begat Vsi. Vsi begat Serahia. Serahia begat Meraioth. Me- raioth begat Amaria. Amaria begat Achitob.
Achitob begat Sadoc. Sadoc begat Ahimaas. 
Ahimaas begat Asaria. Asaria begat Iohanan. 
Iohanā begat fAsaria: for he was prest in the house y Salomon buylded at lerusalem.
Asaria begat Amaria. Amaria begat Acihtob. 
Achitob begat Zadock. Zadock begat Sallum. 
Sallum begat **Helchias. Helchias begat 
Asaria. Asaria begat ttSeraia. Seraia begat losedec. But losedec was caried awaie wha the LORDE caused Iuda q lerusalé to be led

awaye captyue by Nabuchodonosor. 
** 4 Re, 22. b. 

* Gen. 46. b. *| 2 Par. 26. c. 

tt 4 Re. 25. c. 

Chap. bij. 

D 

Chap. bij. 

The children of Leni are these: Gerson, 
Kahath and Merari. These are the names of the children of Gerson: Libni and Semei.
The names of the childré of Kahat are these: 
Amram, lezohar, Hebron and Vsiel. The names of the children of Merari are: Maheli and Musi. These are the kynreds of the
Leuites amonge their housholdes. 

Gersons sonne was Libni, whose sonne was 
Jahath, whose sonne was Sima, whose sonne was Ioah, whose sonne was Iddo, whose sonne was Serah, whose sonne was Ieathrai. Kahats sonne was Aminadab, whose sonne was Corah, whose sonne was Assir, whose sonne was
Eleana, whose sonne was Abiasaph, whose sonne was Assir, whose sonne was Thahath, whose sonne was Vriel, whose sonne was Vsia, whose sonne was Saul.

The childré of Elkana were, Amasai q 
Ahimoth, whose sonne was Elkana, whose sonne was Elkana of Zuph, whose sonne was
Nahath, whose sonne was Eliab, whose sonne was leroham, whose sonne was Elkana, whose sonne was Samuel. Whose first borne sonnes were Seni and Abija.

Meraris sonne was Maheli, whose sonne was Libni, whose sonne was Simei, whose sonne was Vsa, whose sone was Simea, whose sone was Haggia, whose sone was Asaia.

"These are they whom Dauid appoynted to synge in the house of the LORDE, where the
Arke rested, t they mynistred before the habitacion of the Tabernacle of witnes with synginge, vntyll Salomon had buylded the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem, and they stode after their maner in their office. And these are they y stode q their children. Of y children of Kahath was Heman y synger, the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Samuel, the sonne of Elkana, the sonne of Ieroham, $ sonne of
Eliel, the sonne of Thoah, the sonne of Zuph, the sonne of Elkana, the sonne of Mahath, the sonne of Amasai, the sonne of Elkana, the sonne of Iohel, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of Sophonias, the sonne of Thahath, the sonne of Assir, the sonne of Abijasaph, the sonne of Corah, the sonne of Iezehar, the sonne of Kahath, the sonne of Leui, the sonne of Israel.

And his brother Assaph stode at his righte hande, and Assaph was the sonne of Barachia, the sonne of Simea, the sonne of Michael, y sonne of Maeseia, the sonne of Malchija, the

The 1. boke of tbe Cronicles, 

sonne of Athin, y sonne of Serah, the sonne of Adaia, the sonne of Ethan, the sonne of
Sima, the sonne of Simei, the sonne of Jahath, the sonne of Gerson, the sonne of Leni.

Their brethren the childré of Merari, stode on the lefte hande, namely, Ethan the sonne of Kusi, the sonne of Abdi, the sonne of
Malluch, the sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of 
Amazia, the sonne of Helchia, y sonne of 
Amzi, the sonne of Bani, the sonne of Samer, the sonne of Maheli, the sonne of Musi, the sonne of Merari, the sonne of Leui.

As for their brethre the Leuites, they were geuen to all the offices in the habitacion of the house of the LORDE: but the office of
Aaron and his sonnes was to kyndle the fyre vpon the altare of burntofferynges, and vpon the altare of incense, and to all the busynes in the most holy, and to make attonement for the people, acordinge as Moses ¥ seruaunt of
God commaunded. 

These are the children of Aaron: Eleasar his sonne, whose sonne was Phineas, whose sonne was Abisua, whose sonne was Buki, whose sonne was Vsi, whose sonne was Serahia, whose sonne was Meraioth, whose sonne was
Amaria, whose sonne was Achitob, whose sonne was Sadoc, whose sonne was Ahimaas.

And this is their habitacion and rowme in their borders, namely of Aarons children of the kynred of y Kahathites: for this lot fell vnto them. * And they gaue thé Hebron in the londe of Iuda, q the suburbes of the same rounde aboute. But the felde of y cite q the vyllages therof, gaue they vnto Caleb the sonne of lephune. "Thus gaue they vnto the children of Aaron these fre cities, Hebron q Libna with their suburbes, Iather, q Esthemoa, Hilen,
Debir, Asan and Bethsemes, with their sub- urbes. And out of the trybe of Ben Jamin,
Geba, Alemeth and Anathot with their sub- urbes, so y all the cities in their kinred were thirtene. The other childre of Kahath of their kynred, had out of y halfe trybe of Manasses, ten cities by lot. The children of Gerson of their kynred, had out of y trybe of Isachar, q out of the trybe of Asser, ¢ out of the trybe of
Nephtali, ¢ out of the trybe of Manasses in 
Basan, thirtene cities. The childré of Merari of their kynred, had by lot out of the trybe of
Ruben, q out of the trybe of Gad, and out of the trybe of Zabulon, twolue cities.

* Iosu. 14. d. and 21. b. 

So. rcelyxür. 

B 

Fo. eeclrerr. 

And vnto y Leuites gaue the childré of! 
Israel cities with their suburbes, namely by lot, out the trybe of the children of Iuda, ¢ out of the trybe of the childré of Simeon, t| out of the trybe of the children of Ben Jamin, | euen those cities, which they appoynted by name. *Butthe kynreds of the children of
Kahath had the cities of their borders out of the trybe of Ephraim.

So gaue they now vnto thé (namely vnto the kynred of the children of Kahath) y fre cities, Sichem vpon mount Ephraim, Geser, lakmeam, Bethoron, Aialon, aud Gath Rimon with theirsuburbes. And out of y halfe trybe of Manasses, Aner and Bileam with their suburbes. But vnto the children of Gerson they gaue out of the kynred of the halfe trybe of Manasses, Golà in Basan and Astharoth with their suburbes. Out of the trybe of
Isachar, Kedes, Dabrath Ramoth, and Anem with theirsuburbes. Out of the trybe of Asser,
Masal, Abdo, Hukoh and Sehob, with their suburbes. Out of the trybe of Nephtali,
Kedes in Galile, Hamon and Kiriathaim with their suburbes. Vnto the other children of
Merari gaue they out of the trybe of Zabulon, 
Rimano and Thabor with their suburbes. And beyode Iordane ouer agayust lericho east- warde besyde Iordane out of the trybe of
Ruben, Bezer in the wildernes, Iahza, Kede- moth and Mepaath with their suburbes. Out of the trybe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead,
Mahanaim, Heszbon and laeser with their suburbes.

The biij. Chapter. 

HE children of Isachar were, Thola, 

Pua, Iasub and Simrom, these foure. 
The children of Thola were, Vsi, Rephaia, 
Ieriel, Iahemai and Iebsam and Samuel, heades in the house of their fathers of Thola, q mightie men in their kynred, tin nombre in the tyme of Dauid, two and twentye thousande and sixe hundreth. The children of Vsi were, lesrahia. The children of Iesrahia were,
Michael, and Obedia, Ioel and Iesia: all these fyue were heades. And with them amonge their kynred in the house of their fathers there were ready harnessed men of warre to the battayll, sixe and thirtie thou- sande: for they had many wiues and children.
And the mightie men of their brethren in all 

ES] 

* Iosu. 21. c. + 2 Re. 21. 1 Gen. 30. b. 

The i. boke of tbe Cronicles, 

Chap. biij, 

the kynreds of Isachar, were seué and foure score thousande, and were all nombred.

The children of Ben Jamin, were, Bela,|15 
Becher, and Iedieel, these thre. The children of Bela, were, Ezbon, Vsi, Vsiel, leremoth q
Iri, these fyue, heades in ¥ house of their fathers, mightie men: and were nombred two q twentie thousande and foure and thyrtie.

The childré of Becher were, Semira, Ioas 
Elieser, Elioenai, Amri, leremoth, Abia, 
Anathot q Alameh, all these were the children of Becher, and were rekened in their kinreds after the heades in the house of their fathers, valeaunt men, twentie thousande, and two hundreth. The. children of Jedieel were
Bilhan. The childre of Bilhan were, leus, 
Ben Iamin, Ehud, Cnaena, Sethan, Tharsis and Ahisahar, all these were the children of ledieel, heades of the fathers, valeaunt men, euen seuentene thousande, which wente forth to the warre for to fighte. And Supim and
Hupimn were the childré of Ir. But Husim were the children of Aher.

The children of Nephtali were: Iahziel, 
Guni, Jezer and Sallum, tthe children of 
Bilha. 

The children of Manasses are these: Esriel, whom his coneubyne Aramiel dyd beare.
&Dut (first) begat he Machir the father of 
Gilead. And Machir gaue wyues vnto Hupim q Supim, ¢ their sisters name was Maecha.
His secóde sonnes name was Zelaphehad. lAnd 
Zelaphehad had doughters. And Maecha y wife of Machir bare a sonne whose name was
Phares, « his brothers name was Sares, and his sonnes were Vlam and Hakem. Vlams sonne was Bedam. These are the children of Gilead $ sonne of Machir the sonne of
Manasses. And his sister Molecheth bare 
Ishud, Abieser and Mahela. And Semida had these children: Ahean, Sichem, Likhi and Aniam.

The children of Ephraim were these: Su-|¢ thelah, whose sonne was Bered, whose sonne was Thahath, whose sonne was Eleada, whose sonne was Thahath, whose sonne was Sabad, whose sonne was Suthelah, whose sonne was
Eser and Elead. And the men of Gath, that dwelt in the londe, slewe them, because they were gone downe to take their catell. And their father Ephraim mourned for them a longe season, and his brethren came to comforte him.

$ Iosu. 17. a, || Num. 26. d. 27. a. 36. a. 

And he wente in to his wife, which con- ceaued, and bare a sonne, whom he called
Bria, because of the aduersite that was in his house. His doughter was Seera, which builded the lower and vpper Bethoron, q Vsen Serea.
Whose sonne was Rephad q Reseph, whose sonne was Thelah, whose sonne was 'l'hahan, whose sonne was Laedan, whose sonne was
Ammihud, whose soune was Elisama, whose sonne was Nun, whose sonne was losua.

And their substaunce q dwellynge was, 
Bethel and the vyllages therof, and towarde the East syde of Naeran, and towarde the westparte of Geser and ¥ vyllages therof.
Sechem and hir vyllages vnto Aia and hir vyllages. And by the children of Manasses,
Bethsean and y vyllages therof, Thaenach and the vyllages therof, Dor and the vyllages therof.
In these dweltthe children of Ioseph the soune of Israel.

The children of Asser were these: lemna, 
Iesua, Iesui, Bria and Serah their sister. The children of Bria were, Heber and Malchiel, this is ý father of Birsauith. Heber begat laphet, Somor, Hothan, and Sua their sister.
The childre of Iaphlet were, Passach, Bimehal and Asuath, these were the childre of Iaphlet.
The childré of Somer were, Ahi, Rahag, 
Iehuba, and Aram. And the children of his brother Helé were, Zophah, Iemna, Seles and
Amal. The children of Zophah were, Suah, 
Harnepher, Sual, Beri, lemra, Bezer, Hod, 
Sama, Silsa, Iethran and Beera. The children of Iether were, lephune, Phispa and Ara. The children of Vlla were Arah, Haniel and Rizia.

All these were the children of Asser, heades in the house of their fathers, chosen out, valeaunt men, and heades amonge the prynces, and were mustered to the warre for to fight, in their nombre, sixe and twentye thousande men.

The iy. Chapter. 

EN lamin begat Bela his fyrst sonne, 

Aszbal the secode, Ahrah y thirde, Noah 

the fourth, Rapha the fyfth. And Bela had 

children: Gera, Abihud, Abisua, Neman, 
Ahoah, Gera, Sphuphan and Huram. 

These are Ehuds children, which were heades of the fathers amonge the citesyns at
Geba, and wéte awaye vnto Manahath, namely 
Naeman, Ahia and Gera, the same caryed 

* 1 Par. 10. e. 

The i. boke of the Cronítles. them awaye, and begat Vsaand Ahihud. And

Seharaim (whan he had sent thé awaye) begat children in the londe of Moab of Husim and
Baera his wyues. And of Hodes his wyfe begat he Iobab, Zibea, Mesa, Malcham, Ieus,
Sachia, and Mirma, these are his children, heades of the fathers.

Of Husim begat he Ahitob and Elpaal. 
The childré of Elpaal were: Eber, Miseam and Samed. The same buylded Ono q Lod and the vyllages therof. And Bria and Sama were heades of the fathers amonge the citesyns at Aialon. These chaced awaye thé of Gath.
His brethré Sasak, Ieremoth, Sebadia, Arad, 
Ader, Michael, Iespa and Ioha, these are the children of Bria. Sebadia Mesullam, Ezechi,
Heber, Iesmerai, leslia, Ioab, these are y chil- dre of Elpaal —Iakim Sichri, Sabdi, Eloenai,
Zilthai, Eltel, Adaia, Braia and Simrath, these are the childr of Semei. lespan, Eber,
Eliel, Abdon, Sichri, Hanan, Hanania, Elan, 
Enthothia, lephdeia and Penuel, these are the children of Sasak. Samserai, Seharia,
Athalia, Iaeresia, Elia and Sichri, these are, the children of Ieroham. These are the heades of the fathers of their kynreds, which dwelt at lerusalem.

* But at Gibeon dwelt, the father of Gibeon, q his wyues name was Maecha, and his first sonne was Abdon, Zur, Cis, Daal, Nadab,
Gedor, Ahio and Secher. Mikloth begat 
Simea. And they dwelt ouer agaynst their brethre at Ierusalem with theirs. Ner begat
Cis. +Cis begat Saul. Saul begat Ionathas, 
Melchisua, Abinadab and Esbaal. The sonne of lonathas was Meribaal. Meribaal begat
Micha. The children of Micha were: Pithon, 
Melech, Thaerea and Ahas. Ahas begat 
Ioadda. JIoadda begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and Simri. Simri begat Moza. Moza begat
Binea, whose sonne was Rapha, whose sonne was Eleasa, whose sonne was Azel. Azel had sixe sonnes, whose names were: Esricam,
Bochru, Iesmael, Searia, Abadia, Hanan, all these were the sonnes of Azel.

The children of Esek his brother were: 
Vlam his first sonne, Ieus the seconde, Eli- pelet the thirde. The children of Vlam were valeaunt men, and coulde handell bowes, and had many sonnes, and sonnes sonnes an hun- dreth and fiftye. All these are of the children of Ben Jamin.

t L Re. 9. a. and 14. g. 1 Par. 10. e. 

Fo. ceeleret. 

DB 

€ 

Fo. ceelrrrt. 

The y. Chapter. 

a ND all Israel were nombred: and be- holde, they are wrytten in the boke of

the kynges of Israel and luda, and now are they caried awaie vnto Babilo for their synne, euen they y afore dwelt in their possessions and cities, namely Israel, y prestes, Leuites and Nethinim. But at Ierusalem dwelt cer- tayne of the children of luda, some of the children of Ben Jamin, some of the children of Ephraim and of Manasses. * Namely of the children of Phares the sonne of Juda, was
Vthai the sonne of Ammihud the sonne of 
Amri, the sonne of Imri, the sonne of Bani. 
Of Soloni, Asaia y first sonne, and his other sonnes. Of the children of Serah, Ieguel and his brethren, sixe hundreth, foure score and ten.

^Of the children of Ben lamin, Sallu y sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Hodauia, y sonne of Hasnua. And Iebneia the sonne of leroham. And Ela the sonne of Vsi the sonne of Michri. And Mesullam the sonne of
Sephatia the sonne of Reguel the sonne of 
Iebneia. And their brethren in their kinreds nyne hundreth and syxe and fyftye. All these were heades of the fathers in the house of their fathers.

B| Of the prestes: ledaia, loiarib, Jachim, 
And Asaria the sonne of Helchia,’ the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Achitob, prynce in the house of God. And Adaia the sonne of leroham, the sonne of Pashur, the sonne of
Malchia. And Maesai the sonne of Adiel the sonne of Jachsera, the sonne of Mesullam, the sonue of Messylemeth, the sonne of Immer.
And their brethren heades in the house of their fathers a thousande, seuen hundreth and thre score valeannt men in executynge the offyce in the house of God.

Of the Leuites of the children of Merari, 
Semaia the soune of Hasub, *the sonne of 
Asrikam, the sonne of Hasabia. And Bak- bakar the carpenter and Galal. And Ma- thania $ sonne of Micha $ sonne of Sichri, the sonne of Assaph. And Obadia the sonne of Semaia, the sonne of Galal, y sonne of
Elkana, which dwelt in the vyllages of the 
Netophatites. 

€| ‘The porters were: ^Sallum, Acub, Talmon, 
Ahiman, with their brethren, and Sallum the 

* 2 Esd. 11. a. 

* 9 Esd. 11. b. * 2 Esd. 11. c. 

The i. boke of tbe Cronieles, 

chefest: for hither to had the children of Leui kepte the watch at the eastsyde of the kinges gate by armies. And Sallum the sonne of
Core, the sonne of Abiassaph, the sonne of 
Corah, and his brethren of his fathers house. 

The Corahytes were in the worke of the seruyce, to kepe the thresholdes of the Taber- nacle: and their fathers in the hoost of the
LORDE, to kepe the intraunce. Phineas the sonne of Eleasar was the prynce ouer them, because the LORDE had bene with him before. Sachariathe sonne of Meselemia was keper at the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse.

All these were chosen out to be kepers of the thresholdes euen two hundreth and twolue.
These were nombred in their vyllages. And 
Dauid and Samuel the Seer foüded them thorow their faith, that they and their chil- dren shulde kepe the house of the LORDE, namely to kepe the watch of y house of the
Tabernacle. 

These dorekepers were appointed towarde the foure wyndes, towarde the East, towarde the West, towarde the North, ‘towarde y
South. But their brethré were in their vyl- lages, that they might come allwaye on the seuenth daye to be with them: for vnto these foure maner of chefe dorrkepers were the
Leuites committed. And they had the ouer- sight of the chestes and treasures in y house of God.

In the nighte season also remayned they aboute the house of God: for their dewtye was to geue attendaunce to open euery mornynge.
And some of them had the ouersight of the mynistrynge vessell: for they bare the vessell jout and im. And some of thé were ap- poynted ouer the vessell, and ouer all the holy vessell, ouer the fine wheate floure, ouer y wyne, ouer the oile, ouer the frankencense, ouer the swete odoures: but some of y prestes children made the * incense.

Vnto Mathithia one of the Leuites the fyrst sonne of Sallum the Corahite, were y pannes comytted. And certayne of the Ka- hathites their brethren were appointed ouer the shewbred, to prepare it euery Sabbath daye.

"These are the heades of the singers amoge the fathers of the Leuites chosen out ouer the chestes: for daye and night were they in

c9 Esd.11.c. 42 Esd.11.c. *Num.2.d. tExo.30.d. 

gm) 

Iz: 

Chap. rij. 

worke withall ‘These are the heades of y fathers amonge y Leuites in their kinreds.
These dwelt at Ierusalem. 

* At Gibeon dwelt Ieiel the father of Gi- beon, his wiues name was Maecha, and his fyrst sonne Abdon, Zur, Cis, Baal, Ner,
Nadab, Gedor, Ahaio, Sacharia, Mikloth. 
Mikloth begat Simeam. And they dwelt also aboute their brethren at lerusalem amonge theirs. Ner begat Cis, Cis begat Saul, Saul begat Ionathas, Malchisua, Abinadab, Esbaal.
The sonne of Ionathas was Meribaal. Meri- baal begat Micha. The children of Micha were, Pithon, Melech and Thaherea. Ahas begat Iaera, Iaera begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and Simri. Simri begat Moza. Moza begat
Binea, whose sonne was Raphaia, whose sonne was Eleasa, whose sonne was Azel. Azel had sixe sonnes, whose names were: Asrikam,
Bochru, Iesmael, Searia, Obadia, Hanan. 
These are the children of Azel. 

The ri. Chapter. 

HE Philistynes foughte agaynst Israel. 
“And they of Israel fled before the 
Philistynes, and $ wounded fell vpon mount 
Gilboa. And the Philistynes folowed vpon 
Saul and his sonnes, and smote Ionathas, 
Abinadab and Malchisua y sonnes of Saul. 
And the battayll was sore agaynst Saul. And the archers came vpon him, so that he was wounded of the archers. Then sayde Saul vnto his weapenbearer: Drawe out thy swerde, and thrust it thorow me, that these vncircum- cysed come not, and deale shamefully with me. Neuertheles his weapenbearer wolde not, for he was sore afrayed. Then toke Saul his swerde, and fell therin. Whan his weapen- bearer sawe that Saul was deed, he fell vpon

his swerde also, and dyed. 

Thus died Saul and his thre sonnes, and all his housholde together. And whan the men of Israel which were in $ valley, sawe, that Saul and his sonnes were deed) thcy lefte their cities and fled: and the Philistynes came and dwelt therin.

^On the morowe came the Philistynes to spoyle the slayne, and founde Saul, and his sonnes lyenge vpon mount Gelboa, and stryped him out, and toke his heade, and his harnesse, and sent it aboute in to ¥ londe of the Philis- tynes, and caused it to be shewed before their

*]1Par9.d. 71 Re.31.a. ^1Re.31. b. t1 Reg. 15. 

The i. boke of the Cronicles. 

Idoles and the people. And his weapens layed they in the house of their god, and styckte vp his heade vpon the house of Dagon.

But whan all they of Iabes in Gilead herde of euery thinge, that the Philistynes had done vnto Saul, they gat them vp (as many as were men of armes) and toke the body of Saul and of his sonnes, and broughte them vnto Iabes, and buryed their bones vnder the Oke at
Iabes, and fasted seuen dayes. 

Thus dyed Saul in his trespace which he commytted agaynst the LORDE, because the kepte not the worde of the LORDE: :¢ because he axed councell at the soythsayer, and axed not at the LORDE, therfore slewe he him, q turned the kyngdome vnto Dauid.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND all Israel resorted to Dauid vnto 
Hebron, ‘and sayde: Beholde, we are thy bone and thy flesh. And afore tyme whan Saul reigned, thou leddest Israel out and in. So the LORDE thy God hath sayde vnto the: Thou shalt kepe my people of
Israel, and thou shalt be the prynce ouer my people of Israel. And all the Elders of Israel came to the kynge vnto Hebron. And Dauid made a couenaunt with them at Hebron before the LORDE. And they anoynted Dauid to be kynge ouer Israel $acordyuge to the worde

of the LORDE by Samuel. 

And Dauid and all Israel wéte vnto Ie- rusalem, that is Iebus: for the Iebusites dwelt in the lode. And the citesyns of Jebus saide vnto Dauid: Thou shalt not come in hither. Howbeit Dauid wane y castell of
Sio, which is ¥ cite of Dauid. And Dauid sayde: ||who so euer smyteth y Iebusites first, shal be a prynce q captayne. "Thé Ioab y sonne of Zeruia clymmed vp first, q was made captayne. So Dauid dwelt in y castell, ther- fore was it called y cite of Dauid. And he buylded ¥ cite ronde aboute, fro Millo forth on euery syde. As for ¥ remnaunt of y cite,
Ioab buylded it, q repayred it. And Dauid wete forth q grewe, q the LORDE Zebaoth was with him.

These are y chefe amoge ý mightie mé of 
Dauid, which dealt valeauntly with him in his kyngdome with all Israel, to make him kynge, acordinge to the worde of y LORDE ouer
Israel. And this is y nombre of Dauids 
ł 1 Re. 28. b. 

*2Reg.5.a. $1Re.16.c. || 2 Reg. 5. b. 

Fo. ceelyrriij. 

a 

a 

So. rcelyrriíttg. mightie men: lesabeam the sonne of Hach- moni the chefest amoge thirtie. He lifte vp his speare, q smote thre C. at one tyme.

After him was Eleasar the sonne of Dodo the Ahohite, and he was amoge the thre mightie. ‘This mau was with Dauid wha they blasphemed, q the Philistynes gathered the selues there to ¥ batayll. And eué ther was there a pece of londe full of barly, q the peo- ple fled before the Philistynes. And they stode in the myddes of the londe, and rescued it, and smote the Philistynes. And the
LORDE gaue a greate health. 

a And thre of the chefest thirtie wcte downe to the rocke vnto Dauid in to the caue of
Adullam. But the Philistynes hoost laye in the valley of Rephaim. As for Dauid, he was in the castell. And the Philistynes peo- ple were then at Bethleem. And Dauid was desyrous, and sayde: O that some wolde geue me to drynke of the water out of the well at Bethleem vnder the gate. ‘Thé brake those thre in to the Philistynes hoost, and drue of the water out of the well at Bethleem vnder the gate, and caried it, and broughte it vnto
Dauid. Nenertheles he wolde not drynke it, but poured it vnto the LORDE, and sayde:
God let this be farre fro me, y I shulde do it, and drynke the bloude of d men in y parell of their life: for with the parell of their life haue they broughte it: therfore wolde he not drynke it. This dyd the thre
Worthies. 

Abisai the brother of Ioab, he was the chefest amonge ihre. And he lifte vp his speare, and smote thre hundreth. And he was famous amonge thre, and before the thirde, more honorable then the two, yet came he not vnto the thre.

Benaia the sonne of Ioiada the sonne of 
Ishail of Cabzeel, >was a man of greate actes. 
He smote two lyons of the Moabites. And he wente downe, and smote a lyon in the myddes of a well in the tyme of snowe. He smote a man of Egipte also, which was fyue cubites greate of stature, and had in his hande a speare like a weuers lome. Yet wente he downe to him with a staffe, and toke the speare out of his hande, and slewe him with his awne speare. This dyd Benaia the sonne of loiada, and was a famous man amonge thre Worthies, and most awncient amonge

a2 He,93. c. 

Che f. boke of the Cronieles. 

thirtie. But vnto the thre came he not. 
Howbeit Dauid made him of his secrete councell.

The valeaunt Worthies are these: Asahel the brother of Ioab, Elhanam his Vncles sonne of Bethleem, Samoth the Harodite,
Helez the Pelonite, Ira the sonne of Ekes the Thecoite, Abraser the Anathothite, Sibe- chai the Husathite, Hai the Ahohite, Matherai the Netophatite, Heled y sonne of Baena y
Netophatite, Ithai ý sonne of Ribai of Gibeath of the childré of Den Iamin, Benaia the Pir- gathonite, Hura of the broke of Gaas. Abiel the arbathite, Asmaueth the Baherunite,
Eliahba the Saalbonite. The children of 
Hasem ý Gisonite, Ionathas the sonne of 
Sage the Hararite, Ahiam the sonne of Sachar the Hararite, Eliphal the sonne of Vr, Hepher the Macherathite, Ahia the Pelonite, Hezro of Carmel, Naerai the sonne of Aszbai, Ioel the brother of Nathan, Mibehar the sonne of
Hagri, Zeleg the Ammonite, Naherai the 
Berothite the wapenbearer of Ioab the sonne of Zeruia, Ira the Iethrite, Gareb the Iethrite,
Vrias the Hethite, Sabad the sonne of Ahalai, 
Adina the sonne of Sisa the Rubenite, a cap- tayne of the Rubenites, and there were thirtie vnder him: Hanam $ sonne of Maecha, Iosa- phat the Mathonite, Vsia ¥ Astharathite, Sama and Iaiel, the sonnes of Hotham the Aroerite, lediael the sonne of Simri, Ioha his brother the Thirzite, Eliel the Mahenite, Ieribai and
Iosua the sonnes of Elnaan, Iethma the Mo- abite, Eliel, Obed, Iaesiel of Mizobaia.

The viij. Chapter. 

HESE also came to Dauid vnto Siclag 

“whan he was yet kepte asyde because of Saul the sonne of Cis: And they were like wyse amonge the worthies y helped in the battayll, and coulde handle bowes with both their handes, q coulde cast stones, and shute arowes with the bowe.

Of Sauls brethren which were of Ben lamin: The chefest Ahieser and Ioas y chil- dren of Samaa the Gibeathite. Jesiel and
Pelet the children of Asmaueth. Baracha q 
Iehu the Anthothite. lesmaia the Gibeonite, valeaunt amonge thirtie and ouer thirtie.
Ieremia, Iahasiel, Johanan, Iosabad the Ge- derathite. Eleusai, JIerimoth, Beala, Sa- maria, Saphatia the Harophite, Elkana, Iesiia,

62 Re. 23. d. 

* 1 Re. 27. a. 

Chap. rii. 

Chap. rij. The í. boke of 

Asareel, lasabeam y Korahyte, Ioela and 
Sabadia the children of Ieroham of Gedor. 

Of the Gaddites resorted there vnto Dauid to the castell in the wyldernesse, mightie
Worthies and men of armes, which hadled speares and swerdes, and had faces like lios, q were as swifte as the Roes vpon y moun- taynes. "The fyrst Eser, the seconde Obadia, the thyrde Eliab, the fourth Masmanna, y fyfth Ieremia, the sixte Athai, the seuét
Eliel, the eight Iohanna, the nyenth Elsabad, the tenth leremia, M eleuenth Machbanai.
These were of the children of Gad, heades in the hoost, the leest ouer an hundreth, and y greatest ouer a thousande. "These are they which in the fyrst moneth wente ouer Iordane, whan it was full on both the shores, so that all the valleys were eauen both towarde the East and towarde the West.

There came of the children of Ben Iamin also and of Iuda vnto the castell of Dauid.
But Dauid wente forth vnto them, and an- swered and sayde vnto them: Yf ye come to me in peace, and to helpe me, my hert shal be with you. But yf ye come vpo disceate, and to be mine aduersaries (where as there is yet no vurighte in me) the God of oure fathers loke vpon it, and rebuke it. Neuertheles the sprete endued Amasai the captayne amonge thirtie, and he sayde: We are thine O Dauid, and holde with the thou sonne of Isai. Peace, peace be with the, peace be with thy helpers, for thy God helpeth the. Then Dauid re- ceaued them, and made them captaynes ouer the men of warre.

And of Manasses there fell certaine vnto 
Dauid, whan he came to the battayll with the 
Philistynes agaynst Saul, and helped them not, *for the prynces of y Philistynes coun- celed to let him go from them, and sayde:
Yf he fell vnto his lorde Saul, it mighte cost vs oure neckes. Now wha he departed vnto
Siclag, there fell vnto him of Manasses, Adna, losabad, lediael, Michael, losabad, Elihu,
Zilthai, heades ouer thousandes in Manasses. 
And they helped Dauid against the men of warre: for they were all valeaunt Worthies, and were captaynes ouer the hoost. And euery daye came there some to Dauid, to helpe him, till there was a greate hoost as an hoost of God.

And this 1s the nombre of the heades har- nessed vnto the warre, which came to Dauid

* | Re. 29. a. 

the Cronirles, 

Saul vnto him, acordynge to the worde of the 
LORDE. 

The childré of Iuda, which handled speares and swerdes, were sixe thousande, q eight hundreth ready harnessed vnto y warre. Of the children of Simeon noble men of armes for the battayll, seuen thousande and an hū- dreth. Of the children of Leui foure thou- sande and sixe hundreth. And Ioiada the prynce amonge them of Aaron with thre thou- sande and seuen hundreth. Sadoc the yonge valeaunt man of armes with his fathers house, two and twentye rulers. Of the children of
Ben Iamin Sauls brother, thre thousande: for vnto that time helde many of the yet with the house of Saul.

Of y children of Ephraim, twentie thou- sande and eighte hundreth valeaunt men of armes, aud famous in the house of their fathers.
Of the halfe trybe of Manasses, eightene thou- sande, named by name, to come and make
Dauid kynge. Of the children of Isachar 
(which were men of vnderstondynge, whan nede requyred to knowe what Israel shulde do) two hundreth captaynes, and all their brethren folowed their worde. Of Sabulon, soch as wente forth in the hoost to y warre, ready with all maner of weapens for the bat- tayll, fyftye thousande, beynge of one mynde to kepe them selues in ordre.

Fo. ceefrryb. i 

vnto Hebron, for to turne the kyngdome of n 

D 

Of Nephtali, a thousande captaynes, a with |Z 

them soch as handled shylde and speare, seuen and thyrtie thousande. Of Dan, ready har- nessed to the battayll, eight and twentye thou- sande, and sixe hundreth. Of Asser, soch as wente forth in y hoost, ready harnessed to the battayll, fortye thousande. From beyonde
Iordane, of the Rubenites, Gaddites and the halfe trybe of Manasses, with all maner of weapens to the battayll, an hudreth and twen- tye thousande.

All these men of warre, ready harnessed to the battayll,^ came with a whole hert vnto
Hebron, to make Dauid kynge ouer all Israel. 
And all Israel besyde were of one hert, that 
Dauid shulde be made kynge. And there were they with Dauid thre dayes, eatynge and drynkynge: for their brethren had pre- pared for them. And soch neghbours as were aboute them vntyll Isachar, Zabulon and
Nephtali, brought bred vpon Asses, Camels, 

? 2 Reg. 5. a. 

32 

Fo. ceelyypht. 
Mules and oxen to eate: meel, fyges, rasens, wyne, oyle, oxen, shepe, very many: for there was ioye in Israel.

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND Dauid helde a councell^ with the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, and with all the prynces, and sayde vnto all the congregacion of Israel: Yf it lyke you, and yf it be of the LORDE oure God, let vs sende forth on euery syde to oure other brethren in all the countrees of Israel, and to the prestes and Leuites in the cities where they haue suburbes, 1 they maye be gathered together vnto vs, and let vs fetch the Arke of oure God agayne vnto vs: for by Sauls tyme we axed after it. Thé sayde the whole cogre- gacion, that the same shulde be done, for it

pleased all the people well. 

So Dauid gathered all Israel together from 
Sihor of Egipte, tyll a man come vnto Hemath, to fetch the Arke of God from Kiriath Iearim.
And Dauid wente vp with all Israel to Kiriath learim, which lieth in Iuda, to brynge from thence the Arke of God the LORDE, that sytteth vpó the Cherubins, where the name is named: and they caused the Arke of God to be caried vpo a new cart from the house of
Abinadab. 

Vsa and his brethren droue the cart. As for Dauid and all Israel, they played with all their strength before God, with songes, with harpes, with psalteries, with tabrettes, with
Cymbales and trompes. 

But whan they came to the barne floore of 
Chidon, Vsa stretched out his hande to holde the Arke: for the oxen wente out asyde.
Then waxed the wrath of the LORDE fearce ouer Vsa, q smote him, because he stretched out his hade to the Arke, so y he dyed there before God. Thé was Dauid sory, because y
LORDE had made soch a rente vpo Vsa, and called the place Perez Vsa, vnto this daye.
And Dauid stode in feare of God the same daye, q sayde: How shal I brynge y Arke of
God vnto me? Therfore wolde he not let y 
Arke of God be broughte vnto him in to y cite of Dauid, but cared it in to y house of
Ohed Edom the Gathite. So the Arke of 
God abode with Obed Edom in his house thre monethes. And $ LORDE blessed Obed
Edoms house and all that he had. 

72 Re.6.a. 42 Reg. 5. c. 

Che í. boke of tbe Cronteles. 

The rb. Chapter. 

Chap. riiij. 

ND Hiram $ kynge of Tyre’ sent mes-|@ 

saungers vnto Dauid and Cedre tymber, and masons and carpenters, to buylde him an house. And Dauid perceaued, that the
LORDE had confirmed him kynge ouer 
Israel: for his kyngdome increased for his people of Israels sake. And Dauid toke yet mo wyues at lerusalem, q begat yet mo sonnes q doughters. And the names of them y were borne vnto him at lerusalem, are these:
Sammua, Sobab, Nathan, Salomon, lebehar, 
Elisua, Elipalet, Noga, Nepheg, Iaphia, Eli- samma, Baal Iada, Eliphalet.

And whan the Philistynes herde that Dauid was anoynted kynge ouer all Israel, they wente vp all to seke Dauid. Whan Dauid herde that, he wente forth agaynst them. And the Philistynes came, and scatered thé selues beneth in y valley of Rephaim. And Dauid axed councell at God, q sayde: Shal I go vp agaynst the Philistynes? and wilt thou delyuer them in to my hande? The LORDE sayde vnto him: Go vp, and I wil delyuer them in to thy hande. And whan they were gone vp to Baal Prasim, Dauid smote them there.
And Dauid sayde: God hath deuyded myne enemies thorow my hande, euen as the water parteth asunder: therfore called they the place
Baal Prasim. And there lefte they their goddes. Then *commaunded Dauid to burne them with fyre.

But the Philistynes gat them thither agayne, and "scatered them selues beneth in y valley.
And Dauid axed councell at God agayne. 
And God sayde vnto him: Thou shalt not go vp bebynde them, but turne the from them, that thou mayest come vpon thé ouer agaynst the Peertrees. So whan thou hearest aboue vpon the Peertrees the noyse of the goynge, go thou forth then to the batayll: for God is gone forth then before the to smyte the hoost of the Philistynes. And Dauid dyd as God commaunded him. And they smote the hoost of the Philistynes from Gibeon forth vnto
Gaser. And Dauids name was noysed out in alllondes. And the LORDE caused y feare of him to come vpó all the Heythen.

The rbi. Chapter. 

ND he buylded him houses in the cite of Dauid, x made ready a place for y

*Deut.7.a. ‘2 Reg. 5. d. 

B 

€ 

Chap. yoy. 
Arke of God, q pitched a Tabernacle for it. 
At that tyme sayde Dauid: The Arke of God is not to be borne, but onely of y Leuites:
*for them hath the LORDE chosen to beare the Arke of the LORDE, and to mynister vnto him for euer. Therfore gathered Dauid all Israel together vnto lerusalem, to brynge vp the Arke of the LORDE vnto the place which he had prepared for it.

And Dauid broughte the children of Aaron q the Leuites together. Of the children of
Kahath: Vriel the chefe with his brethren, an C. and tweutye. Of the children of
Merari: Asaia the chefe with his brethre, two 
C. and twentye. Of the childré of Gerson: 
Ioel the chefe with his brethren, an C. and thirtie. Of $ childré of Elizaphan: Semaia the chefe with his brethren, two hundreth.
Of the childré of Hebron: Eliel the chefe, with his brethré, foure score. Of the children of Vsiel: Amminadab the chefe, with his brethren, an hüdreth and twolue.

And Dauid called Sadoc and Abiathar the prestes, and the Leuites, namely Vriel, Asaia,
Toeli, Semaia, Eliel, Aminadab, and sayde vuto them: Ye are the heades of y fathers amonge the Leuites: sanctifye youre selues therfore q youre brethre, y ye maye brynge vp the Arke of the LORDE God of Israel, to the place y I haue prepared for it. *For afore whan ye were not there, the LORDE oure God made a rent amonge vs, because we soughte him not, as we shulde haue done.
So y prestes q the Leuites halowed thé selues, y they mighte brynge vp the Arke of the
LORDE God of Israel. And the children of Leui bare the Arke of God the LORDE vpon their shulders with the staues theron, tas Moses comaunded acordinge to ¥ worde of the LORDE.

And Dauid spake vnto y rulers of y Leuites, that they shulde ordeyne some of their brethren to be syngers with psalteries, harpes and loude instrumentes, and Cimbales, to synge loude with ioye.

Then the Leuites appoynted Heman y sonne of Joel: and of his brethren reed the soune of Darachias: and of the children of Merari their brethren, Ethan the sonne of
Cusaia: and with them their brethren of the seconde course, namely Zacharias, laesiel,
Semiramoth, Iehiel, Vnui, Eliab, Benaia, 

* Num. 4. b. t 1 Par. 14. b. 

Che i. boke of the Cronicles, 

Maeseia, Mathithia, Elipheleia, Mikneia, Obed 
Edom, Ieiel, the dore kepers. For Heman, 
Assaph and Ethan were syngers, with brasen belles makynge a loude noyse: but Zacharias,
Iaesiel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Vnui, Eliab, 
Maeseia q Benaia with Phalteries to Alamoth: 
Mathithia, Elipheleia, Mikneia, Obed Edom, 
Teiel ¢ Asasia with harpes to synge aboue them on hye. Chenania the ruler of the Leuites was the master gf Musick to teach them for to syuge, for he was a man of vuderstondinge.

And Barachias and Elcana were the dore- kepers of the Arke. But Sachania, Iosaphat,
Nathaneel, Amasai, Zacharias, Benaia, Elieser the prestes, blewe the trompettes before ¥ Arke of God. Aud Obed Edom and Iehia were dorekepers of the Arke.

So Dauid and the Elders of Israel, and the captaynes ouer thousandes wente vp to fetch the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE out of the house of Obed Edom with ioye.
And whan God had helped the Leuites y bare the Arke of the LORDES couenaunt, there were offred seuen bullockes q seuen rames. And Dauid had a lynné garment vpo him, and so had all the Leuites y bare the
Arke, and y syngers, and Chenania the master of Musick with the syngers. Dauid had an ouerbody cote of lynnen vpon him also.

Thus all Israel brought vp the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE with myrth, with trompettes, tabrettes, q loude Cymbales, with psalteries and harpes. Now whan the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE came in to the cite of Dauid, Michol $ doughter of Saul loked out ata wyndowe: q wha she sawe kynge
Dauid daunsynge a playeuge, she despysed him in hir hert.

The rij. Chapter. 

Fo. ceelyryby. 

n 

ND wha they brought in the Arke of|q 

God, “they set it in y Tabernacle, that 
Dauid had pitched for it, and offred burnt- offerynges q thankofferynges before God. And whà Dauid had ended the burntofferynges and thankofferynges, he blessed the people in the name of the LORDE, a distributed vnto euery man in Israel (both vnto man and woman) a cake of bred, and a pece of flesh and a meece of potage.

And he appoynted before the Arke of $ 
LORDE certayne Leuites to mynister, that 

i Exo. 25. b. * 2 Re. 6. d 

|Fo. ceelyrroty. they shulde geue prayse, thankes and leauinges vnto the LORDE God of Isracl: namely
Assaph the first, Zacharias the seconde, Ieiel, 
Semiramoth, Ichiel, Mathithia, Eliab, Benaia, 
Obed Edom and Iehiel, with psalteries and harpes. But Assaph with lende Cymbales.
Benaia and Ichasicl the prestes with tabrettes, allwaye before the Arke of y conenaunt of Ged.

At the same tyme ordeyned Dauid first of all to gene thakes vnto the LORDE by Assaph and his brethren.

^O geue thankes vnte the LORDE, call vpon his name, tell the people what thinges he hath done.

O let youre songes be of him: prayse him, and let youre talkynge be of all his wonderous workes.

Geue his holy name a good reporte: let y hert of them retoyce, that seke the LORDE.

O seke the LORDE and his strength, seke his face euermore.

Remébre his maruelous workes that he hath dene, his wonders, and the iudgmétes of his mouth.

Ye sede of Israel his sernaunt, ye children ef Iacob his chosen.

He is the LORDE oure God, his indg- métes are in all lendes.

Be myndefull euer of his couenaüt what he hath commaunded in to a thousande genera- cions.

* Which he made with Abraham, « this eoth vnto Isaac.

And he tconfirmed the same vnto lacob for a perpetuall lawe, and to Israel for an euerlastinge couenaunt.

And sayde: Vnto the wyl I gene y londe of Canaan, y metelyne of youre inheritaunce.

Wha they were yet but small q fewe in nóbre, and straungers in the same londe.

And they wente from one nacion to another, q from one realme to another people.

He suffred no man to hurte them, and re- proued enen kynges for their sakes.

$ Touch not myne anoynted, q de my pro- phetes ne harme.

! O synge Hor LORDE, let all ý earth be tellynge of his saluacion from daye to daye.

Declare his holynes amóge the Heythe, a his wonderous workes amonge y people.

Fer the LORDE is greate, and can net 

? Psal. 104. a. 
1 Gen. 28. c. 

* Gen. 22, c. 
$ Psal. 104. b. 

t Gen. 26, a. 
^? Psal. 95. a. 

The í. bake of the Cromeles. 

worthely be praysed, and more to be had in awe then all goddes.

As for all the goddes of the Heythe, they are but Idols: ll but it is the LORDE that made the heauens.

Thankesgeuynge and worshipe are before him, strength and ioye is in his place.

Ascrybe vnto the LORDE ye kynreds of nacions: ascrybe vnto the LORDE worshipe and strength.

Aserybe vnto the LORDE the honoure of his name: brynge presentes, and come before him, and worshipe y LORDE in y bewtye of holynes.

Let the whole earth stode in awe of him: he hath made the compase of the worlde so fast, that it can not be moued.

Let the heauens reioyse, and let the earth be glad: and let it be tolde amonge the Hey- then, that the LORDE reigneth.

Let the See make a noyse, and the fulnesse therof: let the felde be ioyfull, and all that therin is.

Let all the trees in the wod leape for ioye before the LORDE, for he commeth to iudge the earth.

O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious : and his mercy endureth for euer.

And saye: Helpe vs O God oure Sauioure, and gather vs together, and delyuer vs from the Heythen, that we maye geue thankes vnto thy holy name, and synge prayses vnto the in thy Psalmes.

Praysed be the LORDE Ged of Israel from euerlastinge to euerlastinge: and let all people saye, Amen, And: Prayse be vnto the
LORDE. 

So he lefte Assaph and his brethren there before the Arke of the conenaunt of the
LORDE, to mynister allwaye before the 
Arke, euery daye his daye worke. But Obed 
Edom and their brethren, eight and thre score, and Obed Edom the sonne of ledithun, and
Hossa, to be dore kepers. And Sadoc y prest, q his brethre the prestes, lefte he before the habitacion of the LORDE vpon the hye place at Gibeo, to offre burntsacrifices daylie vnto the LORDE vpon the altare of burnt offerynges in the mornynge a in the euenynge, as Desin in the * lawe of the LORDE, which he comaunded vnte Israel. And with

l| Gen. 1. a. T Exo. 29. g. Nu, 28.a. 

Chap. rbíj. 

E 

Chap. roitj. The i. boke of the Croniteles. Fo. reelerric. 

them Heman Iedithun, and y other chosen, which were named by name to geue thankes vnto the LORDE, because his mercy en- dureth for euer. And with them Heman q ledithun to stryke vpon the tabrettes and
Cymbales, and the musicall instrumentes of 
God. As for the childre of Iedithun, he made them dorekepers. So all the people departed, euery oue to his house: and Dauid

of thy sonnes: his kyngdome wyl I stabliszhe, he shal buylde me an house, x I wyl make his seate sure for euer. I wyl be his father, and he shal be my sonne. And I wyl not with- drawe my mercy from him, as I haue with- drawen it fro him that was before the: But I wyll set him in my house and in my kyng- dome for euer, so that his seate shalbe sure for euermore.

returned also to blesse his house. And wha Nathan had spoken vnto Dauid|€ acordinge to all these wordes q all this vision,
The rbüj. Chapter. kynge Dauid came and sat him downe before 
T fortuned wha Dauid dwelt in his house,| |the LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE God, 
“he sayde vnto y prophet Nathan: Be-| | who am I? and what is my house, y thou hast holde, I dwell in a house of Ceder, and the} |broughte me thus farre? And this (O God)
Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE is| |hast thou thoughte yet to litle, but hast spoken amonge the curtaynes. of thy seruauntes house yet longe for to come.
Nathan saide vnto Dauid: What so euer is} | And thon LORDE God hast loked downe in thine hert, that do: for God is with $.| |vpon me from aboue, euen as one man loketh
But the same night came y worde of God vnto| |vpon another. What more shal Dauid saye 
Nathan, and sayde: Go and speake to Dauid| |vnto the, y thou bryngest thy seruaunt to soch my seruaunt: Thus sayeth the LORDE:| |honoure? Thou knowest thy seruaunt O
Thou shalt not buylde me an house to be an LORDE, for thy seruauntes sake and acord- habitació: for I haue dwelt in no house sence] finge to thy hert hast thou done all these greate the daye that I broughte forth the children of| |thinges, that thou mightest shewe all greate
Israel, vnto this daye: But where the Taber-| |thinges vnto thy seruaunt. LORDE t there nacle and habitacion hath bene, there haue I| fis none lyke the, and there is no God but bene where so euer I haue walked in all] |thou, of whom we haue herde with oure eares.
Israel. Spake I euer to eny of the Iudges in| | And + where is there a people vpon earth as 
Israel (whom I commaunded to kepe my| |thy people of Israel where God wente to people) and sayde: Wherfore do yeenot| |delyuer him a people, and to make him selfe buylde me an house of Cedre tymber? a name thorow greate q terrible thinges, to
So shalt thou speake now vnto my seruaunt| |cast out the Heythen before thy people, whom 
Dauid: Thus sayeth the LORDE Zebaoth:| {thou hast delynered out of Egipte? and y 
I toke the from the pasture behynde the shepe,| |people of Israel hast thou made thy people that thou shuldest be the prynce ouer my| |for euer, and thou LORDE art become their

people, and haue bene with the whither so} | God. euer thou wétest, and haue roted out all thine Now LORDE, let the worde be verified| 33

enemies before the, and haue made the a name, acordinge to the name of the greate men that are vpó earth. And for my people of Israel, I wyll appoynte them a place, and wyl plante them, that they maye dwell there, and nomore to be remoued. And the childré of wickednes shal oppresse them nomore, like as afore tyme, whan I comaunded the Iudges ouer my people of Israel. And I wyl subdue all thine enemies, and do declare vnto the, that the LORDE wyl buylde the an house.

* But whan thy dayes are fulfilled, that thou departest hence with thy fathers, I wyl after the rayse vp thy sede, which shall be eué one
ST Eh Is MC: 

22 Re. 7. a. Psal. 131. b. 

for euer, that thon hast spoken oner thy ser- uaunt and ouer his house, q do as thon hast spoken: and let thy name endure and be magnified for euer, that it maye be sayde: The
LORDE Zebaoth, the God of Israel is the 
God in Israel, and that the house of thy ser- uaunt Dauid maye be stablyszhed before the : for thou LORDE hast opened the eare of thy seruaunt, that thou wilt buylde him an house. Therfore hath thy seruaunt founde
(confydence) to make his prayer before the. 
Now LORDE, thou art God, and hast pro- mysed soch good vnto thy seruaunt. Begynne now to blesse the house of thy seruaunt, that

t Deut. 32. f. t Deut. 4. a. 

Fo. ceere. 

it maye be euermore before the: for loke what thou blessest (O LORDE) the same is blessed for euer.

The riy. Chapter. 

F'TER this smote Dauid the Philistynes, 

and subdued them, fand toke Gath q the vyllages therof out of the hande of the
Philistynes. He smote the Moabites like- wyse, so that the Moabites were subdued ynto
Dauid, and gaue him trybute. He smote 
Hadad Eser also y kynge of Zoba in Hemath, whan he wente to set vp his power by the water Euphrates.

And Dauid toke from him a thousande charettes, seuen thousande horsmen, and twe- tye thousande fote men. And Dauid lamed all the charettes, and kepte an hundreth charettes ouer. And the Syrias came from
Damascon, to helpe Hadad Eser the kynge of 
Zoba. Howbeit Dauid smote two q twentie thousande of the same Syrians, and layed men of warre at Damascon in Syria, so that the Syrians were subdued vnto Dauid, and broughte him trybute. For the LORDE helped Dauid, whither so euer he wente.

And Dauid toke the shyldes of golde, y 
Hadad Esers seruaütes had, q broughte thé to 
Jerusalé. And out of Tibehath q Chun the cities of Hadad Eser, toke Dauid very moch brasse, *wherof Salomon made the brasen lauer, and pilers; and brasen vessels.

^And wha Thogu the kynge of Hemath herde, y Dauid had smytten all y power of
Hadad Eser, he sent his sonne Hadora vnto kynge Dauid, to salute him q to blesse him, because he had foughte with Hadad Eser, q smytté hi (for Thogu had warre with Hadad
Eser) and all the same vessels of golde, syluer and of brasse, dyd kynge Dauid consecrate vnto the LORDE, with the syluer and golde | that he had taken from the Heythe, namely,

from the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, |. 

Philistynes, and Amalechites. 

And Abisai the sonne of Zeru Ja smote eightene thousande^ of the Edomites in the
Salt valley, and layed mé of warre in Edomea, so that all the Edomites were subdued vnto
Dauid: for $ LORDE helped Dauid, whither so euer he wente.

Thus Dauid reigned ouer all Israel, and executed indgment and righteousnes vnto all

* 2 Re. 8. a. 

* 3 Re. 7. b. c. 5 2 Re. 8. b. 

The i. boke of the Cronteles. 

the people. Joab the sonne of Zeru Ja was captayne ouer the hoost. Iosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was Chaunceler. Sadoc the sonne of Achitob, and Ahimelech ¥ sonne of Abia- thar, were prestes. Sanesa was Serybe. Be- naia the sonne of loiada was ouer the Chre- thians q Plethians. *And Dauids sonnes were chefe at y kynges hande.

The rr. Chapter. 

ND after this dyed Nahas $ kynge of 
A the childre of Ammon, fand his sonne was kynge in his steade. ‘Then sayde Dauid:
I wil do mercy vpon Hanun the sonne of 
Nahas, for his father dyd mercy vpon me: and so he sent messaungers to comforte him ouer his father. And wha Dauids seruauntes came in to the londe of the children of Am- mon vnto Hannn to comforte him, the prynces of the children of Ammon sayde vnto Hanun:
Thinkest thou that Dauid honoureth thy father in thy sighte, that he hath sent coforters vnto the? Yee his seruauntes are come vnto the, to search and to ouerthrowe, and to spye out the londe. "Then toke Hanun the seruauntes of Dauid, and shoue them, q cut the halfe of their garmentes of, eue by the loynes, q so let the go. And they wente their waye, q sent men to tell Dauid. Neuertheles he sent to mete them (for $ men were put to greate shame) and the kynge sayde: Abyde at lericho, tyll youre beerdes be growne, and then come agayne.

Whan the childré of Ammon sawe, that they stynked in y sighte of Dauid, both Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousande

Chap. rir. 

i 

talétes of syluer, to hyre charettes and hors-|- 

men out of Mesopotamia, out of Maecha and out of Zoba: and hyred two and thirtie thou- sande charettes, t y kynge of Maecha with his people, which came « pitched their tentes before Medba. And the children of Ammon gathered them selues together out of their cities, and came to the battayll. Whan Dauid herde that, he sent Ioab thither with all the hoost of the men of armes. And the childré of
Ammon were gone forth, and prepared them selues to the battayll before the gate of the cite. But the kynges y were come, kepte them asyde in the felde.

Now wha Ioab sawe that the battayll was agaynst him both before and behynde, he

* 9 Re. 8. c. 

t 2 Re. 8. c. * 2 Reg. 10. a. 

€ 

Chap. rri. chose of all the best yonge men in Israel, and prepared him selfe agaynst y Syrians. As for residue of the people, he put them vnder the hande of Abisai his brother, that they shulde prepare them selues agaynst the chil- dren of Ammon, and he sayde: Yf y Syris be to mightie for me, helpe thon me: but yf the childré of Ammon be to stroge for ý, I shall helpe the : take a good corage vnto the, and let vs quyte onre selues manly for oure people and for the cities of oure God: neuer- theles the LORDE do what pleaseth him.
And loab made him forth with the people that was with him, to fighte agaynst y Sy- rians: q they fled before him. And whan the children of Ammon sawe y the Syrians fled, they fled also before Abisai his brother, and wente in to the cite. And Ioab came to
Ierusalem. 
3, But whan the Syrians sawe that they were smytté before Israel, they sent messaungers, and broughte forth y Syrians which were beyonde the water. And Sophach the chefe captayne of Hadad Eser wente before them.
Wha this was tolde Dauid, he gathered all 
Israel together, and wente ouer Iordane. And whan he came at them, he set y battayll in araye agaynst them. And Dauid prepared him selfe to y battayll agaynst y Syrians, q they foughte with him: but y Syrias fled before Israel. And Dauid slewe of the Syrians seuen thousande charettes, q fortye thousande fote men. And Sophach the chefe captayne slewe he also. And whan Hadad Esers ser- uauntes sawe that they were smytté before
Israel, they made peace with Dauid ¢ his 
-|sernauntes. And the Syrians wolde helpe the childré of Ammon nomore.

The rri. Chapter. 

a ND whan ¥ yeare came aboute, "what 
A tyme as ¥ kynges vse to go forth, Ioab broughte the power of the hoost, q destroyed the londe of the children of Ammon, and came and layed sege vnto Rabba. But Dauid abode at lernsalem. *And Ioab smote Rabba, and brake it downe. And Dauid toke their kynges erowne from his heade, and founde the weighte of a talent of golde theron, q precious stones. And it was set vpo Dauids heade.
And very moch spoyle caried he out of the cite. As for the people that were therin, he

3 2 Re. 11. a. *2 Re. 19. f 

The í. boke of the Cronieles. 

Ffo. rere 

broughte thé forth, q parted them in sunder with sawes, q hokes q betels of yron. ‘Thus dyd Dauid vnto all y cities of the childré of
Ammon. And Dauid departed againe, with the people vnto lerusalem.

Afterwarde arose there warre at Gasar with the Philistynes. Then Sibechai y Husathite smote Sibat, which was one of the children of
Rephaim, and he subdued him. And there arose warre agayne with the Philistynes. Thé
Elhamah ¥ sonne of Jair smote Lahemi y brother s Goliath y Gathite, whose speares staff was like a weeuers lome. Afterwarde was there a battayll at Gath, where there was a man of a greate stature, y had sixe fyngers and sixe toes, which make ne and twentye.
And he was borne also of Rapha, and spake despytefully vnto Israel. But lonathas the sonne of Simea Dauids brother smote him.
These were the childré of Rapha at Gath, q fell thorow y hande of Dauid, and of his seruauntes.

The rrij. Chapter. 
ND Sathan stode agaynst Israel,’ q en- tysed Dauid to nombre Israel. And
Dauid sayde vnto Ioab q to y rulers of the people: Go youre waye, nombre Israel from
Berseba vnto Dan, and brynge me the nombre of the, that 1 maye knowe it. Ioab sayde:
'The LORDE make his people an hundreth tymes mo then they are now. But my lorde
O kynge, are they not all my lordes seruauntes? 
Why doth my lorde then axe therafter? Wher- fore shal there a trespace come vpon Israel ?

Neuertheles the kynges worde prenayled agaynst Ioab. And loab wente forth, and walked thorow all Israel, and came to leru- salem, and delyuered vnto Dauid y nombre of the people that was tolde. And of all Israel there were a thousande tymes a thousande, and an hundreth thousande men, that drue out the swerde: and of Iuda foure hundreth thousande and seuétye thousande men, which drue out the swerde. As for Leui and Ben lamin, he nombred them not amonge these: for the kynges worde was abhominable vnto
Ioab. 

But this displeased God righte sore: for he smote Israel. And Dauid sayde vnto God:
I haue synned greuously, that I haue done this. But now take awaye the trespace of thy

^ 9 Re, 24. a. 

Jo. creyetj. 

D 

seruaunt: for I haue done very vnwysely. 
And the LORDE spake vnto Gad Dauids 
Seer, 1 sayde: Go speake to Dauid, a saye: 
Thus saieth the LORDE : Thre thinges laye 
I before the, chose $ one of them, y I maye do it vnto the. And wha Gad came to
Dauid, he spake vnto him: Thus sayeth the 
LORDE: Chose ¥ ether thre yeare derth, or thre monethes to flye before thine aduersaries, q before the swerde of thine enemies, y it maye ouertake the: or thre dayes y swerde of the LORDE, « pestiléce in the londe, y the angell of the LORDE maye destroye in all y coastes of Israel. Loke now what answere I shal geue vnto him y sent me. Dauid sayde vnto Gad: I am in greate trouble: yet wyl I rather fall in to ¥ hande of the LORDE, for his mercy is exceadynge greate, q I wil not fall in to the handes of men.

Then dyd the LORDE cause pestilence to come in to Israel, so that there fell of Israel thre score q ten thousande me. And God sent the angell to lerusale for to destroye it.
And euen in the destruccion the LORDE considered, and he repéted of the euell, and sayde vnto the angell y destroyer: It is ynough, holde now thy hande.

The angell of the LORDE stode besyde y barne of Arnan y Jebusite. And Dauid lifte vp his eyes, and sawe the angell of ý LORDE stondinge betwene heaué and earth, and a naked swerde in his hande stretched out oner lerusalem. Then Dauid and y Elders beynge clothed with sack cloth, fell vpo their faces.
And Dauid sayde vnto God: Am not I he that caused the people to be nombred? I am he that hath synned and done euell: as for these shepe, what haue they done? LORDE my God, let thine hande be agaynst me and agaynst my fathers house, and not agaynst thy people to plage them.

And the angell sayde vnto Gad, that he shulde speake vnto Dauid, that Dauid shulde go vp, q set vp an altare in the barne of Arnan the lebusite. So Dauid wente vp acordinge to y worde of Gad, which he spake in the name of the LORDE. But whan Arnan turned him, and sawe the angell (and his foure sonnes with him) they hyd thé selues: for Arnan throszshed wheate.

Now whan Dauid came to Arnan, Arnan loked, and was aware of Dauid, and wéte forth out of the barne, and worshipped Dauid

Che i. boke of tbe Cronicles. 

with his face to the grounde. And Dauid sayde vnto Arnan: Geue me rowme in the barne, to buylde an altare vnto the LORDE therin: for y full money shalt thou geue it me, that the plage maye ceasse from the people.

But Arnan sayde vnto Dauid: Take it vnto the, and let my lorde the kynge do as pleaseth him. Beholde, that oxe geue I for a burnt- offerynge, and those vessels to the oxe, and wheate for the meatofferynge, I geue it all.
Neuertheles the kynge sayde vnto Arnan: Not so: but for y full money wyl I bye it: for that which is thine wyl not I take for the LORDE, and offre a burntofferynge for naughte.

So Dauid gaue Arnan for y rowme, sixe hundreth Sycles of golde in weight. And there buylded Dauid an altare vnto ¥
LORDE, cq offred burntofferynges q slayn- offerynges. And whan he called vpo the
LORDE, he herde him thorow the fyre from heaué vpon ý altare of the burntofferynge.
And y LORDE sayde vnto the angell, that he shulde put his swerde in to his sheeth.

At the same tyme whà Dauid sawe, that the LORDE had herde him vpon the corne floore of Arnan y lebusite, he dyd sacrifice there. For y habitacion of y LORDE which
Moses had made in the wyldernes, and the altare of burntofferynges, was at that tyme in the hye place at Gibeon. But Dauid coulde not go thither to seke God before it, for he feared the swerde of the LORDES angell.
And Dauid sayde: * Here shal be y house of 
God ¥ LORDE, and this the altare of burnt- offerynges for Israel.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND Dauid comaunded to gather to- 

gether the straungers that were in y londe of Israel, and appoynted masons to hewe stone for the buyldinge of the house of God. And Dauid prepared moch yron for nales in the dores of the portes, and for soch thinges as were to be naled together, and so moch brasse, that it was not to be weyed: and Cedre trees innumerable: for they of Zidon a Tyre brought Dauid moch
Cedre tymbre: for Dauid thoughte, Salomo my sonne is but a childe and tender: But the house that shal be buylded vnto the LORDE, shal be greate, that his name q prayse maye

JEDER 

Chap. rrii. 

(Chap. rrííij. be exalted in all londes, therfore wyl I prouyde

for him. So Dauid made greate prouysion before his death.

33| And he called Salomon his sonne, q com- 

maunded him to buylde the house of the 
LORDE God of Israel, and sayde vnto him: 
My sonne, *I was minded to buylde an house vnto the name of the LORDE my God, but the worde of LORDE came vnto me, and sayde: Thou hast shed moch bloude, and strycken many battayls, therfore shalt thou not buylde an house vnto my name, for as moch as thou hast shed so moch bloude vpon the earth before me. Beholde, the sonne which shal be borne vnto the, shal be a quyete man: and I wyl cause him to be in rest from al his enemies on euery syde, for his name shalbe Salomon: for I wyll geue peace and rest vpon Israel as longe as he lyueth. He shal buylde an house vnto my name. He shal be my sonne, and I wyll be his father. And
I wyl stablyshe y seate of his kyngdome vpo 
Israel for euer. 

Now my sonne, the LORDE shal be wyth the, and thou shalt prospere, that thou mayest buylde an house vnto the LORDE thy God, acordynge as he hath spoken of the. The
LORDE also shal geue the wyszdome q vn- derstondynge, and shal commytte Israel vnto the, that thou mayest kepe the lawe of the
LORDE thy God. But then shal thou prospere, yf thou take hede to do after the ordynaunces and lawes which the LORDE commaunded Moses vnto Israel. Be stronge, and take a good corage vnto the, feare not, and be not faynt harted. Beholde, I haue in my pouerte prouyded for the house of the
LORDE, an hundreth thousande talentes of golde, and a thousande tymes a thousande talentes of syluer, and brasse and yron without nombre : for there is so moch of it.

And tymbre and stone haue I prepared, thou mayest get more therof. Thou hast many workmen also, mesons and carpenters in stone and tymber, and all maner of men that haue vnderstondinge in all worke off golde, syluer, brasse, and yron without nombre. Yet get the vp, and be doynge, and the LORDE shal be with the.

33| And Dauid commaunded all the rulers of 

Israel, to helpe Salomon his sonne, and sayde: 
Is not the LORDE youre God with you, and 

* 9 Re. 7. a. 

The i. boke of the Cronicles. 

Fo. ceegeity. 

| |be exalted in all londes, therfore wyl I prouyde| {hath geuen you rest on euery syde? for he| - 

hath delyuered the inhabiters of the londe in to youre handes, and the londe is subdned before the LORDE and before his people.
Geue ouer youre hert now therfore and youre soule, to seke the LORDE youre God, and get you vp, and buylde a Sanctuary vnto the
LORDE God, that the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE and the holy vessels of God, maye be brought in to the house, which shalbe buylded vnto the name of the LORDE. So
Dauid made Salomon his sonne kynge ouer 
Israel, whan he himselfe was olde, and had lyued ynough.

The rritij. Chapter. 

ND Dauid gathered all the rulers in 

Israel together, and the prestes q Le- uites, to nombre y Leuites from thirtie yeare olde q aboue. And y nombre of thé (which were stroge men) fro heade to heade, was eight and thirtie thousande: of whom there were foure q twentie thousande, which dyd their diligence in the worke ouer ¥ house of the LORDE, and sixe thonsande officers and ludges, and foure thousande porters, q foure thousande that songe prayses vnto y LORDE with instrumentes, which he had made to synge prayse with all.

And Dauid made the ordinaunce amonge the children of Leui, namely amoge Gerson,
Kahath q Merari. The Gersonites were: 
Laedan and Simei. The children of Lae- dan: the first, Iehiel, Sethan, and Ioel, these thre.

The children of Simei were: Salomith, 
Hasiel and Haran, these thre. ‘These were the chefe amonge the fathers of Laedan.
These also were the children of Simei: 
Iahath, Sina, Ieus and Bria, these foure were 
Simeis children also. Jahath was the first, 
Sina the seconde. As for Ieus and Bria, they had not many childré, therfore were they coüted but for one fathers house.

t The children of Kahath were: Amram, 
Jezehar, Hebron and Vsiel, these foure. The childré of Amram were: Aaron and Moses. t As for Aaron, he was separated, to be sanc- tified for the Most holy, he q his sonnes for euer, to burne incense before the LORDE,
& to mynister and blesse in ¥ name of the 
LORDE for euermore. And the children of 

t Exod. 6. c. 1 Par. 7. a. 

i Exo. 29. a. 

So. cceretit. 

€ 

Moses the man of God were named amonge 
$ trybe of the Leuites. *The childré of 
“Moses were Gerson and Elieser. 

The children of Gerson, the fyrst was 
Sebuel. The children of Elieser, the fyrst was Rehabia q Elieser had none other children.
But y childré of Rehabia were many therouer. 
The children of Iezehar were: Salomith the fyrst. The children of Hebron were: leria the fyrst, Amaria the seconde, lahasiel the thirde and Iakmeam Y fourth. The children of Vsiel were: Micha the fyrst and Iesia the seconde

The children of Merari were: Maheli q 
Musi. The children of Maheli were: Eleasar and Cis. And Eleasar dyed, and had no sonnes but doughters. And the children of
Cis their brethren toke them. The children of Musi were: Maheli, Eder and Ieremoth, these thre. These are the children of lind amonge their fathers houses, and the chefest of the fathers, which were counted after the nombre of y names heade by heade: which executed the worke of the offices in the house of the LORDE * from thirtie yeare olde q aboue. For Dauid sayde: The LORDE
God of Israel hath geuen his people rest, q shall dwell at Ierusalem for euer.

'D| Amonge y Leuites also were the childré of 

Leui nombred from thirtie yeare olde and aboue, tthat they neded not to beare y
Habitacion with all the vessels of their office, but acordinge to y last wordes of Dauid, y they shulde cM vnder the hande of the children of Aaron, to mynister in the house of the LORDE in the courte, and to the chestes, and for purifyenge, and to all maner of sanc- tifyenge, and to euery worke of tbe office in the house of God. And for y shewbred, for the fyne floure, for the meatoffrynge, for the vnleuended wafers, for the pannes, for y fryenge, and for all maner of weight and measure. And in the mornynge to stonde for to geue thankes and to prayse the LORDE, and in the euenynge likewyse. And vpon all
Sabbathes, Newmones and feastes to offre all the burntofferynges vnto the LORDE, acord- inge to the nombre and ordre, allwaye before the LORDE: to wayte vpon the Tabernacle of witnesse and of the Sactuary, and vpon their brethré the children of Aaron, to
E in the house of the LORDE. 

HONDA Bh 

| 
| * Exod. : + Num. 4. a, 

The i. boke of the Cronírles, 

The rrb. Chapter. 

HIS was ¥ ordinaunce of the childré of 
Aaron. § The children of Aaron were, 
Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar and Ithamar. But 
Nadab and Abihu dyed before their fathers, and had no children. And Eleasar and
Ithamar were prestes. And Dauid ordred them after his maner: Sadoe out of the children of Eleasar, and Ahimelech out of the children of Ithamar, acordinge to their nombre and office. And there were mo chefe stronge men founde amonge the children of
Eleasar, then the children of Ithamar. And he ordeyned them after this maner: namely, sixtene out of y childré of Eleasar to be rulers thorow ont their fathers house: q eight of the children of Ithamar thorow out their fathers house. Neuertheles he ordeyned them by lot, because that both the pryncipall of the children of Eleasar and of Ithamar were in y
Sanctuary, and chefe before God. And the 
Serybe Semeia the sonne of Nethaneel one of the Leuites, wrote them vp before y kynge and before the rulers, and before Sadoc the prest, a before Ahimelech the sonne of Abia- thar, q before the chefe of the fathers amonge the prestes v Leuites: namely one fathers house for Eleasar, and the other for Ithamar.
And the first lot fell vpon loiarib, the seconde vpon ledana, the thirde vpo Hence the fourth pon Seorim, the fifth vpo Mal- chia, the sixte vpon Meiamin, the seuenth vpon Hakoz, the eight vpon || Abia, the nyenth vpon Iesua, the tenth vpon Sechania, the eleuenth vpon Eliasib, the twolueth vpon
Iakim, the thirtenth vpon Hupa, the fourtenth vpon lesebeab, the fiftenth vpon Bilga, the sixtenth vpon Immer, the senententh vpon
Hesir, the eightenth vpon Hapizez, the nyen- tenth vpon Pethahia, the twentieth vpon Ie- heszkel, the one and twentieth vpon Jachin, the two q twentieth vpon Samul, the thre q twen- tieth vpo Dalaia, y foure and twentieth vpo
Maasia. This is their course after their office, to go in to the house of the LOR DE, acordinge to their maner vnder their father Aaron, as the LOR DE God of Israel commaunded him.
Of the children of Leui amonge the children of Amram, was Subael. Amonge the children of Subael, was lohdea. Amonge the children of p was y first Iesia. Amonge the
Num. 3. a. 

$ Leui. 10. a. || Luc. 1. a. 

Chap. rrb. 

q 

5 

€ 

Chap. rrii. lezeharites was Selomoth. Amonge the child- ren of Selomoth was Iahath. The children of Hebron were: Ieria y first, Amaria the se- conde, Iehasiel the thirde, Iakneam the fourth.

'The children of Vsiel were: Micha. Amoge 

B 

the children of Micha was Samir. The bro- ther of Micha was Jesia. Amonge the children of Iesia was Zacharias. The children of Me- rari were: Maheli y Musi, whose sonne was

Jaesia. The childre of Merari of his sonne 
Taesia were: Soham, Sacur q Ibri. Mabheli had Eleasar: for he had no sonnes. Of Cis,

the children of Cis were: lerahmeel and 
Musi. The children of Musi were, Maheli, 
Eder and Ieremoth. "These are the childré of y Leuites thorow out y house of their fathers.
And the lot was cast for them also besyde their brethren the children of Aaron, in the presence of kynge Danid and Sadoc and Ahi- melech, and before the chefe fathers amonge the prestes q Leuites, as well for the leest bro- ther as for the chefest amonge the fathers.

The pri. Chapter. 

ND Dauid with the chefe captaynes 

sundered to the offices amonge y childre of Assaph, Heman q ledithun y prophetes with harpes, psalteries a Cymbales, and they were nombred vnto the worke acordynge to their offyce. Amonge the childré of Assaph was Sakur, Ioseph, Nethania, Asarela, childré of Assaph vnder Assaph which prophecyed besyde ý kynge. Of Iedithun: The children of ledithun were, Gedalia, Zori, Iesaia, Hasa- bia, Mathithia (Simei) these sixe vnder their father Iedithun with harpes, whose prophe- cienge was to gene thankes and to praise the
LORDE. Of Heman: The children of He- man were Bukia, Mathania, Vsiel, Sebnel, lerimoth, Hanania, Hanani, Eliatha, Gilthi,
Romamthieser, laszbaksa, Mallothi, Hothir and Mehesioth. All these were the children of Hema the kynges Seer in the wordes of
God to lyfte vp the horne: for God gane 
Heman fourtene sonnes q thre daughters. 

All these were vnder their fathers Assaph 
Iedithun and Heman, to synge in the house of the LORDE with Cymbales, Psalteries q harpes, acordynge to the office in the house of
God besyde the kynge. And their nombre with their brethren, which were taughte in the songe of the LORDE (euery one hauynge vnderstondinge) was two hundreth q eight and foure score. And they cast the * lottes oner

The íi. boke of the Crontcles, 

their offyce, for the leest as for the greatest, for the master as for the scolar.

And the first Lot fell vpo Ioseph which was of Assaph: the seconde vpo Gedolia with his brethré and sonnes, of whom there were twolue. The thirde vpo Sacur with his sonnes a brethre, of who there were twolue. The fourth vpon lezri with his sonnes and bre- thren, of whom there were twolue. The fyfth vpo Nethania with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were twolne. The syxte vpon
Bukia with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The seuenth vpon lesreela with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were twolue. ‘The eighte vpon Iesaia with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The nyenth vpon Mathania with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were twolue. The tenth vpon Simei with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue.
'The eleuenth vpon Asraeel with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue.
The twolueth vpon Hasabia with his sonnes and brethre, of whom there were twolue. The thirtenth vpon Subael with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The fourtenth vpon Mathithia with his sonnes q brethré, of whom there were twolue. The fyftenth vpo Ieremoth with his sonnes and brethré, of whom there were twolue. The syxtenth vpon Anania with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The senentéth vpon laszbekasa with his sonnes a brethren, of whom there were twolue. The eightenth vpon Hanani with his sonnes and brethr&, of whom there were twolue. "The nyententh vpon Mallothi with his sonnes q brethren, of whom there were twolne. The twentieth vpon Eliatha with his sounes and bre- thre, of whom there were twolue. The one a twétieth vpon Hothir with his sonnes q brethré of whom there were twolue. The two and twentieth vpon Gidalthi with his sonnes q bre- | : thren, of whom there were twolue. ‘The thre and twentieth vpon Mehesioth with his sonnes and brethren of whom there were twolue.
The foure and twetyeth vpon Komamthieser with his sonnes and brethren, of whom there were twolue.

The rro. Chapter. 

Amonge the Korahytes was Meselemia 
* Pro. 16. d. 

O* the ordinauces of the dorekepers. 

So. rrryrb. 

Fo. ccerrt, 

B 

A 

of the children of Assaph. The children of 
Meselemia were these: the fyrstborne Zacha- rias, the seconde Iediacl, ý thirde Sebadia, the fourth Iathniel, $ fifth Elam, the sixte lohanan, the seuenth Elioenai. ‘The children of Obed Edom were these: the firstborne
Semaia, the seconde Josabad the thirde Joah, the fourth Sachur, y fyfth Nethaneel, the sixte Ammiel, the seuenth Isachar, the eight
Pegulthai: for God had blessed him. And vnto Semaia his sonne there were sonnes borne also, which bare rule in the house of their fathers: for they were mightie valeaunt men. The children of Semaia were, Athni,
Rephael, Obed and Elsabad, whose brethren were valeaunt men, Elihu and Semachia: all these were of the children of Obed Edom.
Meselemia had children and brethren which were stronge men, euen eightene.

Hossa of the children of Merari had child- ren, Simri the chefest: for ¥ fyrstborne was not there, therfore dyd his father appoynte him to be chefest, the secode Helchias, y thirde Tebalia, ¥ fourth Zacharias. All the children and brethren of Hossa were thirtene.

This is the ordinaunce of the dorekepers amonge the heades of the valeaunt men in the offyce besyde their brethren, to mynister in the house of the LORDE. And the lot was cast for the small as for y greate thorow out the house of their fathers at euery dore.
The lot towarde the East fell vpon Meselemia. 
And the lot was cast for Zacharias his sonne, which was a man of prudent councell, ¢ vnto him it fell towarde the North: But vnto Obed
Edom towarde the South, and to his sonnes besyde the house of Esupim. And vnto
Supim and Hossa towarde the West by the gate of Salechet in the strete of the burntoffer- inges, where the tabernacles stonde together.

'"l'owarde the East were there sixe of the 
Leuites. Towarde the north foure on y daie tyme. Towarde the south foure on the daye season likewyse. Besyde Esupim two q two.
By Parbar westwarde were there foure in the strete, and two besyde Parbar. These are the ordinaunces of the dorekepers amonge the children of the Korahites, and the children of
Merari. Of the Leuites, was Ahia ouer the treasures of the house of God, and ouer the treasures that were sanctifyed.

Of the children of Laedan, the childré of the Gersonites. Of Laedan were these the

The t. boke of tbe Cronicles, 

heades of the fathers, namely ý Iehielites. 
The children of the lehielites were, Setha and his brother Ioel ouer the treasures of the house of the LORDE. Amonge the Am- ramites, lezeharites, Hebronites and Vsielites, was Sebuel the sonne of Gerson the sonne of
Moses, prynce ouer the treasures. His bro- ther Elieser had a sonne Rehabia, whose sonne was lesaia, whose sonne was lora, whose sonne was Sichri, whose sonne was Selomith : the same Selomith and his brethren were ouer all the treasures of the thinges that were halowed, which kinge Dauid halowed, and the pryncipall of the fathers amonge the rulers ouer thousandes q ouer hundreds, and rulers in the hoost (of warres and spoyles had they halowed it, to repayre the house of the
LORDE) and ouer all y Samuel the Seer, and Saul the sonne of Cis, q Abner the sonne of Ner, and Ioab the sonne of Zeru Ia had halowed: what soeuer was sanctifyed, it was vnder the hande of Selomith and his brethren.
Amonge the lezeharites was Chenaia with his sonnes for the worke without ouer Israel, offy- cers q Iudges. Amonge the Hebronites was Ha- sabia ¢ his brethren, valeaunt men, a thousande and seuen hundreth, ouer the offyces of Israel on this syde Jordane westwarde for all maner worke of the LORDE, and to serue the kinge.

But amonge the Hebronites was leria the chefest amonge the Hebronites of his kinred amoge the fathers. And search was made amonge them, and in the fortieth yeare of kynge Dauid there were founde valeant men at laeser in Gilead, and their brethren mightie men, two thousande and seuen hundreth pryn- cipall fathers, and Dauid set thé ouer the
Rubenites, Gaddites, and ouer the halfe trybe of Manasses, for all soch busynes as belonged vnto God and the kynge.

Che rybitj. Chapter. 

HE children of Israel acordinge to their ap nombre, were heades of the fathers, and ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, q officers waytinge vpon the kynge, to go of q on after their course euery moneth one, in all monethes of y yeare. Euery course had foure q twentye thousande.

Ouer the first course of the first moneth, was lasebeam y sonne of Sabdiel, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.
Of the children of Phares was the pryncipall 

Chap. rroi. 

|Chap. rrit. 

3 

amonge all the chefe captaynes in the first moneth.

Ouer the course of the seconde moneth was 
Dodai the Ahohite, and Mikloth was the prynce ouer his course. And vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

The thirde pryncipall captayne of the thirde moneth, was Benaia the sonne of loiada y prest, and vnder his course were foure and twen- tyethousande. *Thisis y Benaia the Worthie amonge thirtie and aboue thirtie, And his course was vnder his sonne Ammi Sabad.

The fourth in y fourth moneth was Asahel the brother of Ioab, and Sabadia his sonne after him, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

'The fifth in the fifth moneth was Samehuth the Iesrahite, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

The sixte in the sixte moneth, was Ira y sonne of Ickes the Thecoite, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

The seuenth in the seuenth moneth, was 
Helez the Pelonite of the children of Ephraim, and vnder his course were foure and twétye thousande.

The eight in the eight moneth, was Sibechai the Husathite of y Sarehites, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

The nyenth in the nyenth moneth, was 
Abieser the Anthothite of the childré of Ie- mini, c vnder his course were foure and twé- tye thousande.

The tenth in the tenth moneth, was Maherai the Netophatite of the Serahites, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

The elenenth in the elenéth moneth, was 
Denaia the Pirgathonite of the children of 
Ephraim, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

The twolueth in the twolueth moneth was 
Heldai y Netophatite of Athniel, and vnder his course were foure and twentye thousande.

Quer the trybes of Israel were these: 
Amonge the Rubenites was Prynce Elieser the sonne of Sichri. Amonge the Simeonites was Sephatia the sonne of Maecha. Amonge the Leuites was Hasabia the sonne of Kemuel.
Amonge the Aaronites was Sadoc. Amoge 
Iuda was Elihu one of Dauids brethren. 
Amonge Isachar was Amri the sonne of Mi- chael. Amonge Zabulo was lesmaia the sonne

S IIS OSLGE o Bast 

The i. boke of tbe Cronictes. Fo. rereb. 

of Obadia. Amonge Nephtali was Ieremoth the sonne of Asriel. Amonge the children of
Ephraim was Hosea the sonne of Asasia. 
Amonge the halfe trybe of Manasses was Ioel the sonne of Pedaia. Amonge the halfe trybe of Manasses in Gilead was leddo the sonne of Zacharias. Amonge Ben famin was Iaesiel the sonne of Abner. Amonge Dan was Asareel the sonne of Ieroham. These are the princes of the trybes of Israel.

But Danid toke not the nombre of them that were twentye yeare olde and there vnder: for the LORDE had promysed to multiplye
Israel as the starres of the szkie. t Howbeit 
Ioab the sonne of Zeruia had begonne to nombre them, and perfourmed it not: for there came wrath vpon Israel for the same cause, therfore came not the nombre in to y
Cronicles of kynge Dauid. 

Ouer the kynges treasures was Asmaueth|33 the sonne of Adiel. And ouer the treasures in the lode, in the cities, vyllages and castels was Ionathan the sonne of Vsia. Ouer the huszbandmen to tyll the londe was Esri the sonne of Chelub. Ouer the vynyardes was
Simei the Ramathite. Ouer the wyne Cellers and treasures of wyne was Sabdi the Siphimite.
Ouer the oyle gardens and Molbery trees in the lowe feldes, was Daal Hanan the Gaderite.
Ouer the treasure of the oyle was Ioas. Ouer y oxen of the pasture at Saron was Sitari the
Saronite. Ouer the oxen in the valleys was 
Saphath the sonne of Adlai. 

Ouer the Camels was Obil the Ismaelite. 
Ouer the asses was Iehethia the Meronothite. 
Ouer the shepe was Iasis the Hagarite. All these were rulers ouer kynge Dauids goodes.
Ionathan Dauids vncle was of the councell a wyse man and a scrybe. And Iehiel the sonne of Ilachmoni was with the kynges children. t Achitophel also was of the kynges councell. Husai the Arachite was the kinges frende. After Achitophel was Ioiada y sonne of Benaia and Abiathar. As for Joab, he was the kynges chefe captayne of warre.

The trip. Chapter. 
ND Dauid gathered vnto Ierusalem all| @ the rulers of Israel, namely y prynces of the trybes, the rulers ouer the courses, which wayted vpon the kynge, the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, the rulers

+ 1 Pay, 22. a, 11 Re. 16. d. 

ifo. ceerebitj. 

ouer the goodes and catell of the kynge and of his sonnes, with the chaberlaines, warryers and valeaunt men. And Danid the kynge stode vp vpon his fete, and saide: Heare me my brethren and my people: *I was mynded to buylde an house, where the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE shulde rest, and a fote stole for the fete of oure God, and pre- pared my selfe for to buylde, But God sayde vnto me: “Thou shalt not buylde an house vnto my name, for thou art a man of warre, and hast shed bloude.

tNow hath the LORDE God of Israel 

chosen me out of all my fathers house, y I shulde be kynge ouer Israel: for t Iuda hath he chosen to be the Prynce, and in the house of Iuda amonge my fathers children hath he had pleasure vnto me, to make me kynge ouer all Israel : and amoge all my sonnes (for the LORDE hath geuen me many sonnes) he hath chosen Salomon my sonne, to syt vpon the seate of the kyngdome of the LORDE ouer Israel, and hath sayde vnto me: $ Salo- mon thy sonne shall buylde me an house and my courtes: for I haue chosen him to be my sonne, ¢ I wil be his father, ¢ wyll stablishe his kyngdome for euer, yf he be constant to do after my commaundementes and lawes, as it is this daye. Now in the sight of all Israel the congregacion of the LORDE, and in the eares of oure God, se that ye obserue and seke all the commaundemétes of the LORDE youre God, that ye maye possesse this good londe and that ye and youre children maie haue y inheritaunce therof for euer.
C| And thou my sonne Salomo, knowe thou the God of thy father, and serue him with all thy hert, and with the desyre of thy soule: for the LORDE searcheth all hertes, and vnderstondeth all thonghtes q ymaginacions.
Yf thou seke him, thou shalt fynde him: but yf thou forsake him, he shall refuse the for euer. Take hede now, for the LORDE hath chosen the, to buylde an house to be the
Sàctuary: be stronge, and make it. 

And Dauid gaue Salomon his sonne a patrone of the Porche, and of his house, and of the celles and perlers and ynnermer chà- bers, and of the house of the Mercyseate, q of all that he had in his mynde, namely of the courte of the LORDES house, and of all the oratories rounde aboute the treasures in

* 2 Re. 7. a. 

2? jJ Par abe * 1 Re. 16. a. 

The i. boke of the Cronteles. 

Chap. rrr. y house of God, and of the treasures of soch thinges as were halowed, of the ordinaunces of the prestes, and Leuites, and of all ý busy- nesseof the offyces in the house of the LORDE.

Golde (gaue he him) after y golde weight|B for all maner of vessels of euery offyce, and all siluer ornamentes after the weight for all maner of vessell of euery offyce: and weight for the golden candilstickes and golden lampes, for euery candilstycke and his lampes his weight: likewyse for the siluer candilstickes gaue he the weight to the candilsticke q his lampes, acordynge as was requyred for euery candilstycke. He gaue golde also for y tables of the shewbred, for euery table his weight: and syluer lykewise for the syluer tables. And pure golde for the fleshokes, basens and cen- sors: and for the golden cuppes, vnto euery cuppe his weight: and for the siluer euppes, vnto euery cuppe his weighte: and for the altare of incense his weighte, of the most pure golde.

And a patrone of the charett of the golden | 32 

Cherubins, that they mighte sprede out them selues, and couer the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE. All this is geuen me in wrytinge of the hande of the LORDE, to make me vn- derstonde all the workes of the patrone.

And Dauid sayde vnto Salomo his sonne: 
Be thou manly and stronge, and make it, feare not, and be not fayntharted, the LORDE
God my God shal be with the, and shall not withdrawe his hande, ner fayle the, tyll thou haue fynished euery worke forthe seruyce in the house of the LORDE. Beholde, the courses of the prestes and Leuites to all the offyces in the house of God are with the in euery worke, and are willinge, and haue wisdome to all the offyces : and so haue the prynces and all the people for euery thinge that thou hast to do.

The rrr. Chapter. 

ND kynge Dauid sayde vnto all the|& 
A eongregacion: God hath chosen Salo- mon one of my sonnes, which yet is yonge and tender. But the worke is greate: for it is not a mans palace, but the LORDE Gods. Yet haue I after all my abilite prepared vnto the house of God, golde for the vessels of golde, syluer for them of syluer, brasse for them of brasse, yron for the of yron, wod for them of wod, Onix stones, set Rubyes, q stones of dyuerse coloures, q all precious stones, q

$Ge.49.b. 1 Par. 6. a. $1 Par. 18. b, 2 Par. 6. b. 

‘Chap. rrr. 
Marble stones in multitude. Besydes this, for the good wyl y I haue to the house of
God, I haue of myne awne proper good thre 
M. talétes of golde of Ophir, q seuen M. talétes of pure syluer, which I geue vuto the holy house of God, besyde all y I haue pre- pared, to ouerlaye y walles of the house, y the same which ought to be of golde, maye be of golde: q that it which ought to be of syluer, maye be of syluer: and for all maner of worke by the hande of the craftesmen.
Aud who is now fre wyllinge, to fyll his hande this daye vnto the LORDE?

Then were the prynces of the fathers, y prynces of the trybes of Israel, the captaynes ouer thousandes q ouer hundreds, the rulers ouer the kynges busynes, fre wyllinge, q gaue to y a in ie house of God fyue M. ta- pue of golde, and ten M. guldens, and ten M. talentes of syluer, eightene M. talétes of brasse, and an hundred M. talétes of yron. And by whom so euer were fonde stones, they gaue them to the treasure of the house of the LORDE, vnder the hade of Tehiel the Gersonite.

And ¥ people were glad that they were fre wyllinge: for they gaue it with a good wyll
(euen with all their hert) vnto the LORDE. 
And Dauid also y kynge reioysed greatly, and praysed God, aid sayde before the whole con- gregacion: Praysed be thou O LORDE God of Israel oure father, vnto the belongeth wor- shippe and power, glory, victory q thankes: for all that is in heauen and earth, is thine: thine is ý kyngdome, and thou art exalted aboue all prynces. Thine are riches and ho- noure before y, thou reignest ouer all, in thy hande consisteth power and might, in thy hade is it to make euery man greate aud stronge.

Now thàke we the oure God, and prayse y name of thy glory : For who am I? What is my people? that we shulde be able with a fre wyll to offre, as this is done? For of the commeth all, and of thy hande haue we geuen it the: * For we are but pilgrems q straügers before the, as were all oure fathers. Oure life vpon earth is as a shadowe, and here is no abydinge. O LORDE oure God, all this abundaunce that we haue prepared to buylde the an house vnto thy name, came of thy hande, and is thine alltogether. I knowe my
God, that thou tryest the hert, and that vn- 

* Gen. 47, b. Heb. 11. c. t 3 Reg. 2. f. 

. Cbr ende of the first boke of the Cronítlrs. 

Cbr í, boke of the Cronirles. 

So, terrrir. faynednes is acceptable vnto the: therfore haue I geué all this with an vnfayned hert, eue with a good wyll, and now haue I had ioye to se thy people (which here are present) offre with a fre wyll vnto the. O LORDE
God of oure fathers Abraham, Isaac, q Is- rael, kepe thou euermore soch purposes and thoughtes in ý hertes of thy people, q prepare thou their hertes vnto the. sonne Salomon a perfecte hert, that he maye kepe thy coómaundementes, thy testimonies, q thy statutes, that he maye do all, a buylde this palace, which I haue prepared.

And Dauid sayde vnto the whole cógrega- cion: O prayse the LORDE youre God.
And all the cogregacion praysed y LORDE 
God of their fathers, t bowed them selues, q worshipped the LORDE « then the kynge, and offred sacrifices vnto the LORDE. And on $ nexte morow offred they burntofferynges, a M. bullockes, a M. rames, a M. labes with their drynkofferynges, q plenteously offred they amonge allIsrael. And they ate and dranke y same daie before the LORDE with greate ioye, and made Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge y seconde tyme, and anoynted him to be ¥ pryuce for the LORDE, tq Sadoc to be the prest.

tThus sat Salomon vpon the seate of y 
LORDE, kynge in his fathers steade, a pros- pered. And all Israel obeyed him, « all $ rulers q mightie men, q all kynge Dauids children submytted themselues vnto kynge
Salomon. And y LORDE made Salomon excellent q greate in y sighte of all Israel,
$and gaue him soch a glorious kyngdome, as none had before him ouer Israel.

So had Dauid now bene kynge ouer all 
Israel. And y tyme that he was kynge ouer 
Israel, is fortye yeares: At Hebron reigued he seuen yeare, and at Ierusalem thre « thirtie yeare, t dyed in a good age, full of dayes, riches and honoure. And Salomon his sonne was kynge in his steade.

These actes of kynge Dauid (both y first and last) beholde, they are wrytten amonge the actes of Samuel the Seer, and amonge the actes of the prophet Nathan, and amóge the actes of Gad the Seer, with all his kyng- dome, power and tymes which passed vnder him, both vpon Israel q vpon all the kyng- domes of the earth.

1 3 Re. 2. b. $ 3 Re. 4. a. 

And graunte my |33| ` 

Chap. I. 
Of the kyngdome of Salomon, to whom the 
LORDE appeareth, and Salomon maketh his prayer vnto him.

Chap. II. 
How Salomon deuyseth to buylde the temple of the LORDE.

Chap. III. 
How he begynneth to buylde, and after what faszshion.
Chap. II. 
Of the ornamentes of the temple. 

Chap. V. 
The Arke is broughte in to the temple, qc. 

Chap. VI. 
Salomon speaketh vnto the people, prayseth God, and beseketh him to heare soch as make their prayer in the temple.

Chap. VII. 
The fyre commeth from heauen, ¢ consumeth the sacrifice. The kynge ¢ the people offre. The
LORDE appeareth vnto Salomon, and pro- myseth to heare him.

Chap. VIII. 

Salomon buyldeth cities, and subdueth the Hey- then. Of his captaynes and of his wife.

Chap. IX. 
The Queue of Saba bringeth presentes vnto 

Salomon, q receaueth giftes of him. Salomon dyeth.

THe seconde boke of the Cronicles, called Paralipomenon.

Chat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. X. 

Roboam oppressynge the people, maketh them to fall awaye from him.

Chap. XI. 
The LORDE wil not suffre Roboam kynge of 

Iuda q Bë Jamin to fighte agaynst Israel. He buyldeth cities.

. Chap. XII. 

Roboam forsaketh the Iawe of the LORDE. 
The kynge of Egipte commeth vpon him. The 
LORDE delyuereth him. 

Chap. XIII. 
Of Abia q Ieroboam q their warres. 

Chap. XIIII. XV. 
Of kynge Asa. 
Chap. XVI. 

Baesa cometh vp against Asa, which agreeth with him, therfore is he rebuked.

Chap. XVII. 
Of the reigne of Iosaphat. 

Chap. XVIII. 

Iosaphat maketh frendshippe with Achab, and helpeth him to fight.

Chap. XIX. 
Iehu rebuketh Iosaphat for he pynge the vn- godly. Iosaphat amendeth, and lyueth well.

Chap. XX. 
The Moabites q Ammonites with the Syrians and. 
Edomites go forth agaynst Iosaphat, which prayeth vnto God, and he helpeth him.

Chap. f. 

Chap. XXI. losaphat dyeth. Ioram his sonne is made kynge, slayeth his brethren, and forsaketh the LORDE. Edom falleth awaye from Tuda.
God punysheth Ioram. 

Chap. XXII. 

Ochosias is made kinge, and taketh parte with 
Achabs sonne. 

Chap. XXII. 

loiada maketh Ioas kynge, q commaundeth to slaye Athalia.

Chap. XXIII. 

Whyle Toiada tyneth, kynge Ioas doth well, but after his death he forsaketh the LORDE : Aud because Zacharias reproueth him, he comaund- eth to stone him to death. His awne ser- uauntes kyll him vpon his bed.

Chap. XXV. 

Of kynge Amasias, which smyteth the Edomites. 
He worshippeth their Idols, therfore the pro- phet reproneth him. He wyll nedes fight with the kynge of Israel, which ouercommeth him and taketh him.

Chap. XXVI. 
Of kynge Osias otherwyse called Vsia or Azarias : of his buyldinges, q how he became leper for his presumpcion.

The first Chapter. 

ND Salomon the sonne of Dauid was stablyshed in his kyngdome, “and the
LORDE his God was with him, x made him exceadinge greate. And Salomon spake vnto all Israel, to the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, to the Iudges, and to all y prynces in Israel, and to the chefest fathers, so that they wente (Salomon and the whole congregacion with him) vnto the hye place which was at Gibea: *for there was y Taber- nacle of $ witnesse of God, twhich Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE had made in y wyldernesse. t For Dauid had brought vp the Arke of God from Kiriath Tarim, whan he

t Exo. 36, b. 

2 3 Reg. 3. a. * 1 Par, 22. e. 

The ij. boke of tbe Cronicles, 

fo. ceect. 

Chap. XXVII. 

Of Iothams reigne, of his buyldinges, and of his warres,
Chap. XXVIII. 
Of the wicked kynge Achas. 

Chap. XXIX. XXX. XXXI. 

Of the verteons kynge Ezechias, and of his noble actes.

Chap. XXXII. 

Sennacherib layeth sege to lerusalem, Ezechias comforteth the people. Sennacherib threat- eneth, but the LORDE delyuereth Tuda.
Ezechias is sicke and recouereth. 

Chap. XXXIII. 
Of the reigne of Manasses, and of his amend- ment from his wickednes. Of kynge Ammon his sonne.

Chap. XXXII. XXXV. 

Of the reigne aud most vertuous actes of kynge losias, and of his death.

Chap. XXXVI. 

Thre monethes reigneth [oachas, after whom reigneth Eliachim other wyse called Ioachim, whom Nabuchodonosor carieth vato Babilon, and in his steade reigneth Ioachim his sonne, which also is led awaye captyue vnto Babilon.
Sedechias is made kynge, and at the last caried away presoner with all the people, and leru- salem destroyed.

had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at lerusalem. As for y brasen altare
$ which Bezaleel the sonne of vi the sonne of 
Hur had made, it was there before the habita- of the LORDE: and Salomon and the con- gregacion soughte God. And Salomon offred a thousande burntofferynges vpo the brasen altare that stode before the ‘Tabernacle of witnesse.

In the same nighte appeared God vnto 
Salomon, and sayde vuto him: Axe, what shal I geue the? And Salomon sayde vnto
God: Thou hast done greate mercy vnto my father Dauid, and hast made me kynge in his steade. Now LORDE God, let thy worde that thou hast promysed vnto my father

t 2 Re. 6. a. $ Exo. 38. a. 

54 

Fo. eeri. 

Danid, be verified, *for thou hast made me kynge ouer a people, which is as many in nobre as the dust vpon the earth. Graunte me wyszdome therfore and knowlege, Y I maye go out and in before this people: for who is able to iudge this greate people of thine ?

Then sayde God vnto Salomon: For so moch as thou art so mynded, and hast not desyred riches ner good, ner honoure, ner the soules of thine enemies, ner longe life, but hast requyred wyszdome and knowlege, to judge my people, ouer whom I haue made the kynge, wyszdome therfore and knowlege be geuen the. Morouer, riches ¢ good and ho- noure wyll I gene the, so that soch one as thou hath not bene before the amoge the kynges, nether shal be after the.

So came Salomon from the hye place (which was at Gibeon) ^ vnto Ierusalé from ý Taber- nacle of witnesse, and reigned ouer Israel.
And Salomon gathered him charettes and horsmen, so that he had a thousande and foure hundreth charettes, x twolue thousande horsmen: and those appoynted he to be in the charet cities, and with the kynge at Ieru- salem. And the kynge broughte it so to passe, that there was as moch syluer q golde at lerusalé as stones: and as many Ceders, as the Molberyes trees, that are in the valleys.
And there were horses broughte vnto Salomon out of Egipte, q the kynges marchauntes fetched them from Kena for moneye. And they came vp, and broughte out of Egipte a charet for sixe hüdreth syluer pés, and an horse for an hundreth and fiftye. Thus broughte they also vnto all the kynges of the
Hethites, and to the kynges of y Syrians. 

The ij. Chapter. 

ND Salomon thoughte to buylde an 
A house vnto the name of the LORDE, q an house for his kyngdome: and tolde out thre score and ten thousande men to beare burthens, and foure score thousande that hewed tymber vpó the mount, and thre thousande and sixe nin officers ouer them. +And Sa- lomon sent vnto Hiram the kynge of Tyre, sayenge: As tthou dyddest with my father, q sendedst him Ceder trees, to builde an house for to dwell in (euen so do thou with me also.)
Beholde, I wyl buylde an house vnto the name 

* 2 Re. 4. c. and 10. e. 

The ij. boke of the Cronicles, 

of the LORDE my God, to sanctifie it, for to! 

+3 Reg. 5. A 

Chap. ij. burne good incense before him, and allwaye| to prepare V shewbred, and burntofferynges in the mornynge and in the euenynge, on the| `
Sabbathes t New mones, and solempne feastes of y LORDE oure God euermore for Israel.

And the house that I wyl buylde, shal be|%3 greate: for oure God is greater then all goddes.
But who is able to buylde him an house? 
For heauen q the heauens of all heauens maye not coprehende him. Who am I then, that I shulde buylde him an house? But onely for this intent to burne incense before him?

Séde me now therfore a wyse mà to worke with golde, syluer, brasse, yron, scarlet, purple, yalow sylke and soch one as can graue carued worke with the wyse men that are with me in
Iewry and Ierusalem, whom my father Dauid ordeyned. And sende me tymber of Ceder, pyne tre and costly wodd from Libanus: for I knowe that thy seruauntes can hewe tymber vpon Libanus. And beholde, my seruauntes shalbe with thy seruauntes, to prepare me moch tymber: for the house that I wyl buylde, shalbe greate q maruelous goodly.

And beholde, I wyl geue vnto the carpenters | € thy seruauntes which hewe the tymber, twetye thousande quarters, of beaten wheate, and twentye thousande quarters of barlye, and twentye thousande Batthes of wyne, and twen- tye thousande Batthes of oyle.

Then sayde Hiram the kynge of Tyre by wrytinge, and sent it vnto Salomon: Because the LORDE loueth his people, therfore hath he made $ to be kynge ouer them. And
Hiram sayde moroner: Praysed be ý LORDE 
God of Israel, which made heauen q earth, that he hath gené kynge Dauid a wyse and prudent sonne, and soch ome as hath vnderstondinge to buylde an house vnto the LORDE, ¢ an house for his realme. Therfore sende I now a wyse man that hath vnderstondynge, $euen
Hiram Abi (which is the sonne of a woman of 

the doughters of Dan, and his father was of|33 

Tyre) which can worke in golde, syluer, brasse, yron, stone, tymber, scarlet, yalowe sylke, lynnen, purple and to carue all maner of thinges, and to make what cónynge thinge so euer is geuen him, with thy wyse men, and with the wyse men of my lorde kynge Dauid thy father. And now let my lorde sende the wheate, barlye, oyle and wyne vnto his ser- uaütes, acordinge as he hath sayde, and so

Sid BIS is e: $5 Re. 7. b. 

Chap. iii. wyl we hewe y tymber vpou Libanus, as moch as thou nedest, and wyll brynge it by flotes in the See vnto Iapho, from whence thou mayest brynge it vp to lerusalem.

And Salomon nombred all the straungers in the londe of Israel, acordinge to the nombre whan Dauid his father nombred them: and there were founde an hundreth q fiftye thon- sande, thre thousande and sixe hüdreth. And of the same he made thre score and ten thon- sande bearers of burthens, and foure score thousande hewers vpo y mount, and thre thousande and sixe hundreth ouerseers, which helde ¥ people at their worke.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND Salomon beganne to buylde the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem vpon the mount Moria, * that was shewed vnto
Dauid his father, which Dauid had prepared for the rowme, vpon the corne floore of Arnan the Iebusite. In the seconde daye of the seconde moneth in the fourth yeare of his reigne begane he to buylde. And so layed
Salomon the foundacion to buylde the house of God: first the length thre score cubytes, the bredth twentye cubites: and the Porche before the wydenes of the house, was twentye cubites longe, but the height was an hundreth and twentye, and he ouerlayed it on the ynsyde

with pure golde. 

But the greate house syled he with Pyne tre, and ouerlayed it with the best golde, and made palme trees and throwne worke theron, and onerlayed the house with precious stones to beutifye it. As for the golde, it was golde of Paruaim. And the balkes and postes aboue, and the walles, and the dores of it ouerlayed he with golde, and caused Cherubins to be carued on the walles.

He made also the house of the Most holy, whose length was twentye cubites acordinge to the wydenesse of the house: and the bredth of it was twentye cubites likewyse, and he ouerlayed it with the best golde by sixe hundreth talentes. And for nales he gaue fiftye Sicles of golde in weight, and ouerlayed the chambers with golde. He made also in the house of the most holy, two Cherubins of carued worke, and óuerlayed them with golde: and the length on the wynges of the Cherubins, so that one wynge had fyue cubytes, and

Paria o 

The i. boke of the Cronieles. 

So. cererii. 

touched the wall of the house: and the other wynge had fyue cubytes also, and touched the wynge of the other Cherub.

Euen so had one wynge of the other Cherub | € fyue cubites likewyse, and touched the wall of the house: and his other wynge had fyue cubites also, and touched the wynge of the other Cherub: so that these wynges of the
Cherubins were spred out twentye cubites wyde. And they stode vpo their fete, and their face was turned to the house warde.

He made a vayle also of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple and lynenworke, and made Cherubins theron. And before the house he made two pilers fyue and thirtie cubites longe, and the knoppes aboue theron, fyue cubytes. And he made throwne worke for the quere, and put it aboue vpon the pilers: and made an hundreth pomgranates, and put them on the wrythren worke. And he set vp the pilers before the temple, the one on the righte honde, and the other on the lefte: and that on the righte honde called he Iachin, and it on the lefte honde called he Boos.

The iiij. Chapter. 
E made a brasen altare also, twentye a cubytes longe, and twentye cubytes brode, and ten cubites hye. t And he made a molten lauer ten cubites wyde fro the one
'syde to the other rounde aboute, and fyue jcubytes hye. And a metelyne of thirtie cubites mighte comprehende it aboute. And ymages of Bullockes were vnder it. And aboute the lauer (which was ten cubites wyde) there were two rowes of knoppes, y were molten withall.

It stode so vpon the bullockes, that thre were turned towarde the north, thre towarde the west, thre towarde the south, and thre towarde the east, and the lauer aboue vpon them, and all their hynder partes were on the ynsyde. The thicknesse of it was an hand bredth, and the edge of it was like the edge|: of a cuppe, and as a floured rose. And it conteyned thre thousande Batthes.

And he made ten kettels, wherof he set fyue on the righte hande and fyue on the lefte, to waszshe in them soch thinges as belonged to the burntofferynge, that they
‘mighte thrust them therin: but y lauer (made he) for the prestes to wash in.

| +3 Reg. 7. d. 

Fo. ceectitj. 

B| Ten golden candelstickes made he also as they ought to be, and set them in the temple: fyue on the righte hande, and fyue on the lefte. And made ten tables, and set them in the temple: fyue on the righte hande, and fyue on the lefte. And made an hundreth basens of golde. He made a courte likewyse for the prestes, and a greate courte, and dores in the courte, and ouerlayed y dores with brasse. And the lauer set he on the righte syde towarde the south east. And Hiram made cauldrons, shouels and basens.

So Hiram fynished the worke which he made for kynge Salomon in the house of God: namely the two pilers with the roundels and jknoppes aboue vpon both the pilers, and both
|n wrythen ropes to couer both the roundels lof $ knoppes aboue vpó the pilers, and the foure hundreth pomgranates on both the wrythé ropes, two rowes of pomgranates on euery rope, to couer the roundels of the
|knoppes that were aboue vpon the pilers. 

€| He made the stoles also and y kettels vpon the stoles, and a lauer, and twolue bullockes there vnder. And pottes, shouels, fleshokes, and all their vessels made Hiram Abif of pure metall for kynge Salomon vnto the house of the LORDE. In the coaste of Iordane dyd the kynge cause them to be molten in thicke earth betwene Suchoth and Zaredatha.

And Salomon made all these vessels which 
| were so many, that the weight of y metall was not to be soughte out. And Salomon made all the ornamentes for the house of God: namely, the golden altare, the tables and the shewbreds theron, the candelstickes with their
[lampes of pure golde, to burne before the 
Quere acordinge to the maner : and the floures 
‘and the lampes and the snoffers were of golde, jall these were of pure golde.

And the knyues, basens, spones and pottes, were of pure golde. And the intraunce and his dores within vnto the Most holy, and the dores of the house of the temple were of golde. liie was all ý worke fynished, which Salomon

house of the LORDE. 

The 6. Chapter 

a ab Salomon broughte in all y his father 
Dauid had sanctified,’ namely, syluer 

and golde, and all maner of ornamentes, and 

layed them in the treasures of the house of 

made in the 
| 

* 3 Re. 7. g. 

Che yj. boke of the Cronteles, 

Chap. b. 

God. *Thé gathered Salomon all the Elders in Israel together, all y heades of the trybes, prynces of the fathers amóge the childré of
Israel vnto Ierusalé, to brynge vp the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE out of the cite of Dauid, that is Sion. And there resorted vnto the kynge all the men in Israel at the feast, that 1s in the seuenth moneth, and all y
Elders in Israel came. 

And ¥ Leuites toke the Arke, q broughte it vp with the Tabernacle of witnesse, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tabernacle: and y prestes and Leuites broughte them vp.
As for kynge Salomon and all the cogregacion of Israel that was gathered vnto him before the Arke, they offred shepe and oxen, so many, that no man coulde nombre ner reken them.

Thus the prestes broughte the Arke of y couenaunt of the LORDE vnto hir place in to the quere of the house, euen in to y Most holy vnder the wynges of the Cherubins, so that the Cherubins spred out their wynges ouer the place of the Arke: and the Cherubins couered the Arke and the staues therof from aboue. And the staues were so longe, y the knoppes of them were sene from the Arke before the quere, but on the outsyde were they not sene. And it was there vnto this daye. And there was nothinge in the Arke, saue the two tables, which Moses put therin at Horeb, whan the LORDE made a coue- naunt with the childré of Israel, what tyme as they were departed out of Egipte.

And whan the prestes wente out of the 
Sanctuary (for all y prestes that were founde, sanctified them selues, because the courses were not kepte) the Leuites with all those that were vnder Asaph, Heman, Iedithun and/€ their children and brethren, beynge clothed in lynnen, songe with Cymbales, psalteries and harpes, and stode towarde the east parte of the altare, and an hundreth a twentye prestes with them, which blewe with trom- pettes. And it was, as yf one dyd trompet and synge, as though a voyce had bene herde of praysinge and geuynge thankes vnto the
LORDE. 

And whan the voyce arose from y trom- pettes, cymbales and other instrumentes of musick, and from praysinge the LORDE
(because he is gracious, and because his mercy endureth for euer) the house of the LORDE

* 3 Re. 8. a. 

Chap, bí. 

was fylled on the ynsyde with a cloude, so y the prestes coulde not stonde to mynister for the cloude: for the glory of the LORDE fylled the house of God.

The vi. Chapter. 

HEN sayde Salomon: The LORDE 

sayde, “that he wolde dwell in a darck cloude: I haue buylded an house to be an habitacion vnto the: q a seate, y thou mayest dwell there for euer. And the kynge turned his face, and blessed all the congregacion of
Israel: for the whole cdgregacion of Israel stode, a he sayde: Praysed be the LORDE
God of Israel, which promysed by his mouth vnto my father Dauid, and with his hande hath fulfylled it, wha he sayde: * Séce the tyme that I broughte my people out of the londe of Egipte, I haue chosen no cite in all y trybes of Israel, to buylde an house for my name to be there, nether haue I chosen eny man to be prynce ouer my people of Israel. t But Ierusalem haue I chosen, for my name to be there: q Dauid haue I electe, to be prynce ouer my people of Israel.

33| And whan my father Dauid was mynded 

to buylde an house vnto the name of the 
LORDE God of Israel, the LORDE sayde vnto Dauid my father: Where as thou wast mynded to buylde an house vnto my name, thou hast done well: howbeit thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne which shall come out of thy loynes, shal buylde the house vnto my name.

Thus hath y LORDE now perfourmed his worde, that he spake: for I am come vp in my father Dauids steade, and syt vpon the seate of Israel, euen as the LORDE sayde, q haue buylded an house vnto the name of y
LORDE God of Israel, q in it haue I put y 
Arke, wherin is the couenaunt of y LORDE, which he made with the childré of Israel.

And he stode before the altare of the 
LORDE in the presence of the whole con- gregacion of Israel, and spred out his handes : for Salomon had made a brasen pulpit, and set it in the myddes of the courte, fyue cubites longe, and fyue cubites brode, and thre cubites hye: vpon the same stode he, and fell downe vpon his knees in the presence of the whole cogregacion of Israel, and helde

*9 Re. 7.a. 3 Re. 8.c. t 3 Reg. 8. c.

* 3 Reg. 8. b. 

polar 7.6. 

The i. boke of the Cronicies. 

lout his handes towarde heaué and sayde: +O 

LORDE God of Israel, there is no god like the, nether in heauen ner vpon earth, thou that kepest couenaunt and merey for thy ser- uauntes, that walke before the with all their hert. Thou hast kepte promes with my father
Dauid thy seruannt: With thy mouth thou saydest it, and with thy hande hast thou ful- fylled it, as it is come to passe this daye. Now
LORDE God of Israel, make good vnto my father Dauid thy seruaunt, that which thou hast promysed him, q sayde: ‘Thou shalt not want a man before me, to syt vpon the seate of Israel: yf thy children kepe their waye, so y they walke in my lawe, like as thou hast walked before me: Now LORDE God of
Israel, let thy worde be verified, which thou hast promysed vnto Dauid thy seruaunt.

For thinkest thou that God in very dede dwelleth amonge men vpon earth? § Beholde, the heauen and y heauens of all heauens maye not coteyne the: how shulde then this house do it, which I haue buylded? But turne the vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to his supplicacio (O LORDE my God) that thou mayest heare the thankesgeuynge and prayer, which thy seruaunt maketh before the, so that thine eyes be open ouer this house daye and night, euen ouer this place (wherin thou saydest thou woldest set thy name) that thou mayest heare the prayer, which thy seruaunt shall make in this place. Heare now therfore the intercession of thy seruaunt and of thy people of Israel, what so euer they shall desyre in this place: heare thou it from the place of thy habitacion, eué from heauen: and whan thou hearest it, be mercifull.

*Whan eny ma synneth agaynst his negh- boure, and an ooth be put vpon him which he ought to sweare, and the ooth commeth before thine altare in this house, then heare thou from heauen, and se y thy seruaunt haue righte, so that thou rewarde the vngodly, and recopence him his waye vpon his awne heade, and to iustifye the righteous, and to geue him acordinge to his righteousnes.

Whan thy people of Israel is smytte before their enemies (whyle they haue synned agaynst the) and yf they turne vnto the, and knowlege thy name, and make their prayer and inter- cession before the in this house, then heare

$ Esa. 66. a, lere, 23. d. Acto. 7. e. 5 3 Re. 8. c. 
Exo. 22. b. | 

Fo. eeeh. 

m 

LS 

fo. cebi 

thou them from heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synne of thy people of Israel, q brynge them agayne in to the londe, y thon hast geuen them and their fathers.

* Whan the heauen is shut vp, so that it rayne not (for so moch as they haue synned agaynst the) and yf they make their prayer in this place, and knowlege thy name, and turne from their synnes (whan thou hast brought them lowe) heare thou them then in heauen, and be mercifull vnto the synne of thy ser- uauntes, and of thy people of Israel, that thou mayest teach them the good waye wherin they shulde walke, and let it rayne vpon thy londe which thou hast geuen thy people to possesse.

Whan a derth, or pestilence, or drouth, or blastinge, or greshopper or catirpiller, is in the londe: Or whan their enemye layeth sege to their portes in the lode, or whan eny other plage or disease happeneth, who so euer the maketh his prayer or peticion amonge eny maner of men, or amonge all thy people of

F| Israel, yf eny man fele his plage and disease, 

and spredeth out his handes vnto this house, heare thou then from heauen, euen from ¥ tseate of thy habitacion, and be mercifull : and geue euery man acordinge to all his wayes, in so moch as thou knowest his hert
(for thou onely knowest the hert of the children of men) that they maye feare the, and allwaye walke m thy wayes, as longe as they lyue in the londe, which thou hast geuen vnto oure fathers.

And whan eny straunger which is not of thy people of Israel, commeth out of a farre countre because of thy greate name, and mightie hande, and out stretched arme, and commeth to make his prayer in this house, heare thou him then from heaue, euen from the seate of thy habitacion: and do all for ¥ which that straunger calleth vpó the, that all the nacions vpon earth maye knowe thy name, and feare the, as thy people of Israel do: and that they maye knowe, how y this house which
I haue buylded, is named after thy name. 

Whan thy people go forth to y battayll agaynst their enemies, the waye that thou shalt sende them, and shall praye vnto the ttowarde the waye of this cite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that I haue buylded vnto thy name, heare thou the

* 3 Re. 17. a. 

+ Matt. 5. d. t Dan. 6. b. 

The ij. boke of tbe Cronieles. 

Chap. bij, 

their prayer and peticion from heauen, and helpe them to their righte.

Whan they synne agaynst the ($for there]@ 

is no man that synneth not) and thou be wroth at them, and geue them ouer before their enemyes, so that they eary them awaye eaptyue in to a countre farre or nye, and yf they turne within their hertes in the londe where they are presoners, and so conuerte, and make their intercession vnto the in the londe of their captiuyte, and saye: We haue synned, and done amysse, and haue bene vngodly : and so turne them selues vnto ¥ with all their hert and with all their soule in the londe of their captiuyte, wherin they are presoners: and make their prayer towarde the waye of their owne londe, which thou gauest vnto their fathers, and towarde the eite which thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that
I haue buylded vnto thy name: then heare thou their prayer and supplieacion from hea- uen, euen from the seate of thy dwellynge, and helpe them to their righte, and be mer- eifull vnto thy people that haue synned agaynst the. My God, let thine eyes now be opé, and let thine eares geue hede vnto prayer in this place. i| Aryse now O LORDE God vnto thy restinge place, thou and the Arke of thy strength. Let thy prestes O LORDE
God be clothed with health, and let thy sayentes reloyse ouer this good. LORDE
God, turne not awaye the face of thine anoynted: thinke vpon the mercies of thy seruaunt Dauid.

The bij. Chapter. 

ND wha Salomo had ended his praier, 

there fell a fyre from heauen, and c6- sumed the burntofferynge and the other offer- inges. And the glory of the LORDE fylled the honse, so that y prestes coulde not go in to the house of the LORDE, while y glory of the LORDE filled y LORDES house.
And all the children of Israel sawe the fyre fall downe, and the glory of the LORDE ouer the house: and they fell on their knees with their faces to the gronnde vpon the paue- ment, and worshipped, and gaue thankes vnto the LORDE, because he is gracious, and because his mercy endureth for euer. As for the kynge and all the people, they offred before the LORDE.

$1 Ioh. 1. b. 

|| Psal. 131. a. 

| 

Chap. biij. 

B 

For kynge Salomon offred two and twétye thousande bullockes, and an hundreth thon- sande and twentye thousande shepe, q so both the kynge and all the people dedicated the house of God.

But the prestes stode in their watches, « the Leuites with the musicall instrumentes of the LORDE, which kynge Dauid had caused to make for to geue thankes vnto the LOR DE,
(because his mercy endureth for euer) with psalmes of Dauid thorow their hande. And the prestes blewe trompettes ouer agaynst them, and all Israel stode.

And Salomon halowed the myddelmost courte, which was before the house of the
LORDE, for there prepared he the burnt- offerynges and the fat of the slayne offeringes: for the braseu altare that Salomon made, might not conteyne all the burntofferinges, meatofferynges, aud the fat.

* And at the same tyme helde Salomon a feast seuen daies longe, and all Israel with him a very greate congregacion, from He-
‘math vnto the ryuer of Egipte, and on the eight daye helde he a conuocacion. For the dedicacion of the altare helde they seuen daies, and the feast seuen dayes also.

But on the thre and twentyeth daye of the seuenth moneth he let the people go vnto their tentes ioyfull and with mery hertes because of all the good, that the LORDE had done vnto
| Dauid, vnto Salomo, and to his people of Israel. 

€ Thus fynished Salomo the house of y 

'LORDE, and the kinges house, and all y 
|came in his hert to make in the house of the 
LORDE, and in his awne house, prosperously. 
And the LORDE appeared vnto Salomon in the nighte season, and sayde vnto him: I haue herde thy prayer t and chosen this place vnto my selfe for an house of sacrifyce.
Beholde, whan I shut the heaué so y it raine not, or commaunde the greshopper to cosume the londe, or cause a pestilence to come amonge my people, to humble my people, which is named after my name : and yf they
| praye, and seke my face, and turne from their euell wayes, thé wyl I heare them from hea- uen, and wyll forgeue their sinne, and heale their londe. So shal myne eyes now be open, and myne eares shal be attente vnto prayer in this place. Thus haue I now chosen this house, and sanctifyed it, that my name maye

* 1 Mac. 4. g. + 2 Par. 6. a. i Some reade : them. 

The ij. boke of the Cronicles. 

be there for euer: and myne eyes and my hert shal allwaye be there.

And yf thou walke before me, as thy father |33 

Dauid walked, so that thou do all that I com- maunde the, and kepe myne ordinaiices and lawes, then wyll I stablishe the seate of thy kyngdome, acordynge as I promysed thy fa- ther Dauid, and sayde: Thou shalt not wante a man to be lorde ouer Israel. But yf ye turne backe, and forsake myne ordynaunces and commaundemétes which I haue layed before you, and so go youre waye, and serue other goddes, and worshippe them, thé wyll I rote ł you out of my londe that I haue geuen you: and this house which I haue sanctifyed vnto my name, wil I east awaye out of my presence, and geue it ouer to be a byworde and fabell amoge all nacions. And euery one that goeth by, shall be astonnyed at this hye house, and shall hysse at it, and saye:
$ Wherfore hath the LORDE dealte thus with this londe and with this house? Then shall it be sayde: Euen because they haue forsaken the LORDE God of their fathers
(which brought them out of the londe of 
Egipte) q haue cleued vnto other goddes, q worshipped them, and serued the: therfore hath he brought all this euell vpon the.

The biij. Chapter. 

ND after twentye yeares (wherin Salo- 
A mon buylded the house of the LORDE and his awne house) he buylded the cyties also which Hiram gaue vnto Salomon, and caused the children of Israel to dwell therin.
And Salomon wente vnto Hemath Zoba, and made it stronge, and buylded Thadmor in the wyldernes, and all the cornecyties which he buylded in Hemath. He buylded the vpper and lower Bethoron likewyse, so that they were stronge cities with walles, portes and barres. And Baelath, and all the cornecities which Salomon had, and all the cities of the charettes and of the horse men, and all that
Salomon had lust to buylde, both at Jerusalem and vpon Libanus, and in all the londe of his domynion.

All the remnaunt of the people of the 
Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites and lebusites, which were not of the children of
Israel, and their children which they had lefte behynde them in the londe, (whom the children

§ Deu. 28. d. Tere. 22. a. 

Fo. recrbíj.. 

i 

3 

Fo. ceecbtt. of Israel had not vtterly destroied) those dyd
Salomon make trybutaries vnto this daye. 
As for the children of Israel, Salomon made no bondmen of them vnto his worke, but they were men of warre, and chefe captaynes, and ouer his charettes q horsmen. And the chefe of kynge Salomons officers were two hundreth and fyftie, which ruled the people.

And Salomon caused Pharaos doughter to be fetched vp out of the cite of Dauid, in to the house that he had buylded for her: for he sayde: My wyfe shall not dwell in the house of Dauid the kynge of Israel, for it is sancti- fyed, in as moch as y Arke of the LORDE is come in to it.

Then offred Salomon burntofferynges vnto the LORDE vpon the LORDES altare, which he had buylded before the porche, euery one vpon his daye to offre after the cómaunde- mente of Moses, on the Sabbathes, Newmones q at the appoynted seasons of the yeare, euen thre tymes, namely in y feast of vnleuended bred, in the feast of wekes, ¢ in the feast of
Tabernacles. 

And he set the prestes in ordre to their ministracion *acordynge as Dauid his father had appoynted, and the Leuites in their offyces, to geue thankes and to mynister in the presence of the prestes, euery one vpon his daye. And the dorekepers in their courses, euery one at his dore, for so had Dauid the ma of God commaunded.

D| And they departed not from the kynges 

commaundement ouer the prestes and Le- uites in euery matter and in the treasures.
Thus was all Salomons busynesse made ready, from the daye that the foundacion of the
LORDES house was layed, tyll it was fynished, so that the house of the LORDE was all prepared.

tThen wente Salomon vnto Ezeon Geber, and vnto Eloth by the See syde in the londe of Edomea. And Hiram sent him shippes by his seruauntes which had knowlege of the
See, and they wente with Salomos seruauntes vnto Ophir, and fetched from thence foure hundreth and fyftye talentes of golde, aud broughte it vnto kynge Salomon.

The ir. Chapter. a ND whan the ^quene of rich Arabia herde the fame of Salomon, she came

* 1 Par. 10. d. 

1 3 Reg. 9. e. 

The ij. boke of the Cronicles, 

with a very greate tryne to lerusalem (with 
Camels that bare spyces and golde, and pre- cious stones) to proue Salomon with darke sentences. And whan she came vnto Salo- mon, she spake vnto him all that she had deuysed in hir mynde. And the kynge tolde her all hir matters, ¢ Salomon had nothinge in secrete, but he tolde it her.

And whan the Quene of riche Arabia sawe the wyszdome of Salomon, and ¥ house that he had buylded, the meates of his table, the dwellinges of his seruauntes, y offices of his mynisters and their garmentes, q his butlers and their apparell, and his parler where he wente vp in to the house of the LORDE, she coulde no longer refrayne. And she sayde vnto the kynge: It is true that I haue herde in my londe of thy behaueoure and of thy wyszdome: howbeit I wolde not beleue their wordes, tyll I came my selfe, q sawe it with myne eyes: and beholde, the halfe of thy greate wyszdome hath not bene tolde me: there is more in y then the fame that I haue herde. Happye are thy men, and happie are these thy seruauntes, y allwaye stonde before the, and heare thy wyszdome. Praysed be the LORDE thy God, which had soch plea- sure vnto the, that he hath set the vpon his seate to be kynge vnto the LORDE thy God.
Because thy God loueth Israel, to set them vp for euer, therfore hath he ordeyned y to be kynge ouer them, that thou shuldest mayn- tayne lustice and equyte.

And she gaue y kynge an hundreth and twentye talentes d golde, q very moch spyce q precious stones. There were no mo soch spyces as these that the Quene of riche Arabia gaue vnto kynge Salomō. And Hirams ser- uauntes and the seruauntes of Salomon, which broughte golde from Ophir, broughte costly tymber also q precious stones.

And of the same costly tymber dyd Salo- mon cause to make stares in the house of the
LORDE, and the kynges house, and harpes and psalteries for the Musicians. ‘There was no soch tymber sene before in the londe of
Iuda. But kynge Salomon gaue the Quene of riche Arabia all that she desyred and azed, q moch more then she had broughte vnto the kynge. And she returned, and departed in to hir londe with hir seruauntes.

The golde that was broughte vnto Salomon 

a 3 Re. 10.a. Matt. 12. a. 

Chap. ir. 

5 

€ 

Chap. r. 

in one yeare, was sixe hundreth and sixe and thre score talentes, besydes that y chapmen and marchauntes broughte. And all the kynges of the Arabians, and the lordes in y londe broughte golde and syluer vnto Salo- mon. Of the which kynge Salomon made two hundreth speares of beaten golde, so y sixe hundreth peces of beaten golde came vpo one speare: q thre hundreth shildes of beaten golde, so that thre hundreth peces of beaten golde came to one shylde : and the kynge put the in the house of the wod of Libanus.

Ð| And the kynge made a greate seate of 

Yuery, and ouerlaied it with pure golde: and the seate had sixe steppes, and a fotestole of golde festened vnto the seate, and it had two leanynge postes vpon both the sydes of the seate, and two lyons stode beside the leanynge postes, and there stode twolue Lions vpo the syxe steppes on both the sides. In all realmes hath not soch one bene made.

And all kynge Salomons drynkynge vessels were of golde, and all the vessels of the house of the wod of Libanus, were of pure golde: for syluer was rekened nothinge in Salomons tyme. For the kynges shippes wente vpon the See with the seruauntes of Hira, q came once in thre yeare, and brought golde, syluer,
Yuery, Apes and Pecockes. 

Thus was kynge Salomon greater then all the kynges vpon earth, in riches and wisdome.
And all the kynges of y earth desired (to se) 
Salomons face, and to heare his wysdome, which God had geuen him in his hert. And they brought him yearly euery ma his present:
Iewels of siluer and golde, raymét, harnesse, spyces, horses and Mules.

£| And Salomon had foure thousande charet- 

horses, “and twolue thousande horsmen, and put them in the charet cities, and with the kynge at lerusalem. And he was lorde ouer all the kynges from the water vnto the londe of the Philistynes, and to the coaste of Egipte.
And the kynge brought it so to passe, that there was as moch syluer at lerusalem as stones: and as many Ceders, as there were
Molbery trees in the valleys. And there were horses broughte vnto him out of Egipte, and out of all countres.

What more there is to saye of Salomon, both of his first and of his last, beholde, it is writte in the Cronicles of the prophet Nathan,

? 3 Re. 4. c. 

The ij. boke of tbe Cronieles. 

and in the prophecies of Ahia of Silo, q in $ actes of leddi the Seer against leroboi y sonne of Nebat. And Salomo reigned at lerusale ouer all Israel fortie yeares. And
Salomon fell on slepe with his fathers, q was buried in the cyte of Dauid his father. And
Roboa his sonne was kige 1 his steade. 

The r. Chapter. 
OBOAM wente vnto Sichem: for all 
Israel was come vnto Sichem : ^to make him kinge. And whan Ieroboa the sonne of
Nebat herde that, which was in Egipte 
(*whither he was fled for kynge Salomon) he came agayne out of Egipte. And they sent for him and called him. And Ieroboam came with all Israel, and spake to Roboam, and sayde : ‘Thy father made oure yocke greuous: make thou lighter now ¥ harde bondage of thy father, and ý heny yocke that he layed vpon vs, and we wyll submytte oure selues vnto the. He sayde vnto them: Come to me agayne ouer thre dayes. And ¥ people wente their waye.

And Roboam the kynge axed coiicell at the Elders, which had stonde before Salomon his father whyle he lyued, and he sayde:
What is youre councell that I maye geue this people an answere? ‘They spake vnto him, and sayde: Yf thou be louynge vnto this people, and deale gently with them, and geue them good wordes, then shal they allwaye be obedient vnto the. Neuerthelesse he forsoke the councell of the Elders that they had geuen him, and toke councell at ¥ yonge men which were growne vp with him, and stode before him. And he sayde vnto the: What is youre councell, that we maye answere this people, which haue spoken vnto me, and saide:
Make oure yock lighter, y thy father layed vpon vs? The yongemen y were growne vp with him, spake vnto him, and sayde: Thus shalt thou saye vnto the people, that haue talked with the q spoken: Thy father made oure yock to heuy, make thou oure yock lighter, ‘Thus shalt thou saye vnto them: My litle finger shalbe thicker then my fathers loynes. Yf my father hath layed an heuy yock vpon you, I wyl make youre yock the more. My father chastened you with scourges, but I wyl beate you with scorpions.

Now whan leroboam and all the people 

? 3 Re. 12. a. * 3 Re. 11. g. 

99 

Po. ceeetr. 

a 

B 

€ 

! jfo. cerrr. 

came to Roboam on the thirde daye (acord- yuge as y kinge sayde: Come to me againe ou the thirde daie) the kynge gaue the an harde answere. And Hoboa the kynge for- soke y councell of the Elders, q spake vnto thé after y yonge mens councell, q sayde: Yf my father haue made youre yock to heuy, I wil make it yet heuyer. My father chastened you with scourges, but I wyl beate you with scorpids. Thus the kynge folowed not y peo- ples minde : for so was it determyned of God, y y LORDE might stablishe his worde,
* which he spake by Ahia of Silo, vnto Iero- boa y sonne of Nebat. But whan all Israel sawe that the kynge wolde not consente vnto them, y people answered the kynge, and sayde:
What porcion haue we then in Dauid, or in- heritauce in the sonne of Isai? Let euery man of Israel get him to his tent. Loke thou now to thy house Dauid. And all Israel wente vnto their tentes, so that Roboam reigned but ouer the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Iuda. And Roboam sent forth Ado- ram the rentgatherer, but the children of
Israel stoned him to death. And kynge Ro- boa strengthed himselfe vpon his charet, to flye vnto lerusalem. Thus fell Israel awaie fro the house of Dauid vnto this daye.

The ri. Chapter. 

ND whan Roboam came to lerusalem, 

he gathered together the house of Iuda and Ben lamin (euen an hüdreth and foure score thousande chosen men of armes) to fyghte agaynst Israel, that they mighte brynge the kyngdome agayne vnto Roboam. But y worde of the LORDE came to Semaia the man of God, and sayde: Speake to Hoboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, and to all Israel y are in Iuda and Ben Jamin, and saye: Thus sayeth the LORDE: Ye shal not go vp, ner fyght agaynst youre brethren: let euery man go home agayne, for this is my dede. ‘They herkened vnto the wordes of y
LORDE, and wéte not forth agaynst leroboa. 
As for Roboa, he dwelt at lerusalem, and buylded vp the stronge cities in Iuda, namely
Bethlee, Etan, Tekoa, Bethzur, Socho, Adulla, 
Gath, Maresa, Siph, Adoraim, Laches, Aseka, 
Zarega, Aialon, and Hebron (which were the fensed cities in Iuda and Ben Iamin) « he made them stronge, and set prynces therin, q

* 3 Re. 11. e. 

Cbr i. boke of the Croniteles. 

Chap. rt. 

'prouyded them of vytayles, oyle and wyne, and in all cities prepared he shildes and speares, and made them very stronge. And
Iuda and Ben lamin were vnder him. 

The Prestes and Leuites also came vnto: 3 him out of Israel and from all the borders therof, And lefte their suburbes q possession, and came to Iuda vnto Ierusalem: for lero- boam and his sonnes expelled them, that they shulde not execute the offyce of y presthode voto LORDE. But for himselfe he foüded prestes to y hye places, q to feldedeuels q calues, which he caused to make. And after them came there men out of all the trybes of
Israel, which gaue ouer their hertes to seke ¥ 
LORDE God of Israel, q came to lerusalé for to offre vnto the LORDE God of their fathers. And so strengthed they y kingdome of luda, and matayned Roboam the sonne of
Salomon thre yeare longe: for they walked in y waye of Dauid q Salomon thre yeares.

And Roboam toke Mahelath y doughter of| € leremoth y sonne of Dauid to wife, q Abihail the doughter of Eliab y sonne of Isai, which bare him these sonnes: leus, Semaria q Sa- ham. After hertoke he Maecha the doughter of Absalom, which bare him Abia, Athai Sisa and Selomith. But Roboam loued Maecha the doughter of Absalom better then all his wyues t concubynes: for he had eightene wyues and thre score cocubynes, and begat eight q twentye sonnes, and thre score dough- ters. And Roboam set Abia the sonne of
Maecha to be heade and prynce amonge his brethren: for he thoughte to make him kynge: for he was wyse, q more mightie then all his sonnes in all the countrees of Iuda q Ben lamin, and in all the stronge cities. And he gaue them plenteousnes of fode, and desyred many wyues

The rij. Chapter. 
UT wha the kyngdome of Roboam was| g 

confirmed and stablyshed, he forsoke the lawe of the LORDE ¢ all Israel with him.
And in the fyfth yeare of Roboam wéte Sisack the kynge of Egipte vp agaynst Jerusalem (for they had transgressed agaynst the LORDE) with a thousande and two hundreth charettes, and with thre score thousande horsmen, and the people were innumerable that came with him out of Egipte, Libya, Suchim q out of
Ethiopia, and he wanne the stroge cities that were in Iuda, and came to Ierusalem.

Chap. rtt. The tj. boke of the Cronteles, So. eeeert, 

. Then came Semaia y prophet vnto Roboam| |yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was and to y rulers of Iuda (which were gathered| | Michaia the doughter of Vriel of Gibea. And together at Ierusalem for Sisack) q sayde vnto| |there was warre betwene Abia and leroboam. them: Thus sayeth y. LORDE: Ye haue! |And Abia prepared himselfe to the battayll lefte me, therfore haue I lefte you also in| |with foure hidreth thousande stronge chosen
Sisacks hande. Thé the rulers in Israel with| |men of warre. But leroboam made himselfe the kynge submytted them selues, and sayde:| [ready to fight agaynst him with eight hundreth
The LORDE is righteous. thousande chosen men of strength. 

But wha the LORDE sawe y they hübled And Abia gatt him vp vpon the hyll Ze- them selues, y worde of the LORDE came to| |maraim, which lyeth vpon mount Ephraim
Semaia, q sayde: They haue humbled them| jand sayde: Herken vnto me thou leroboam selues, therfore wyl I not destroye them, but} |andall Israel: Knowe ye not that the LORDE
I wyl geue them a litle delyueraunce, that my | | God of Israel hath geuen Dauid ý kvngdome indignacion fall not vpon lerusalem by Sisack:| |of Israel for euer, vnto him and his sounes for they shalbe snbdued vnto him, y they maye| |with a Salt couenaunt? But leroboà the knowe what it is to serue me, q to serue the| |sonne of Nebat, the seruannt of Salomon kyngdomes of the worlde. Dauids sonne, gat him vp q fell awaye from

Thus wéte Sisack the kynge of Egipte vp| |hislorde. And there resorted vnto him vaga- to lerusalem, q toke the treasures in the} |boundes and children of Belial, and haue house of the LORDE, q the treasures in the} |strengthed them selues against Roboa the kynges house, and caried all awaye, and toke] |sonne of Salomo: for Roboam was but yonge the shyldes of golde, *that Salomon caused to] |and of a fearfull hert, and coulde not resiste make: in steade wherof kynge Roboà made| |them. shyldes of stele, and commytted the vnto the Now thinke ye to set youre selues against chefe fotemen, which kepte the dore of the| |the kyngdome of the LORDE amonge the kynges house. And as oft as the kynge wente| |sonnes of Dauid, for so moch as there is so in to the house of the LORDE, ý fote men] |greate a multitude of you, q haue y golden came a bare them, q brought them againe in| |calues tý leroboam made you for goddes. to y fote mens chaber. And for so moch as| |$ Haue ye not expelled the prestes of the he submytted himselfe, ý wrath of ý LORDE| [LORDE the children of Aaron and the turned fro him, so that all was not destroied:| |Leuites? aud haue made you prestes of youre for there was yet some good in Luda. awne, euen as the people of the londes? Who

Thus was Koboam the kinge stablished in| |so euer commeth to fyll his hande with a yonge 
Ierusalem, and reigned. One and fortye| |bullocke and seuen rammes, shal be preste yeare olde was Roboam whà he was made| |vnto them that are not goddes. kynge, and reigned seuentene yeare at leru- But with vs is y LORDE oure God, who salem in the cite, *which the LORDE had] we forsake not: and the prestes that minister chosen out of all the trybes of Israel, to set his] vnto the LORDE, the children of Aaron and name there. His mothers name was Naema| |the Leuites in their busines, and euery mor- an Ammonitisse: and he did euell, and pre-| |nynge and euery enenynge kyndle they the pared not his hert to seke the LORDE. burntofferynges vnto the LORDE, and the

These actes of Roboam, both fyrst and last,| |swete incense, and prepare the shewbred vpo are wrytten in the actes of Semaia the pro-| |the pure table, and the golden candilsticke phet, q of Iddo the Seer, and are noted, a soj |with his lampes, to be kyndled euery euen- are the warres that Roboam and Ieroboam had| |ynge: for we wayte vpo the LORDE oure together as longe as they lyued. And Roboam| | God.

fell on slepe with his fathers and was buryed in As for you, ye haue forsaken him. Beholde, £ 

the cite of Dauid, a Abia his sonne was kynge| |God is the captayne of oure hoost, and with 

in his steade. vs are his prestes, and the lblowynge trom- 
The xiij. Chapter. pettes, to trompe agaynst you. Ye children 

A| WN the eightenth yeare of kynge Ieroboam,| |of Israel, fight not agaynst the LORDE God was Abia kynge in Iuda, q reigned thre| |of youre fathers: for ye shal not prospere.

* 2) Par. 9.1. t2 Par. 7. b. 1 3 Re. 12. d. $ 2 Pa. 11. d. || Num. 10. a. 

Ffo. ceeertj. 

Neuertheles Ieroboam made a preuy watch on euery syde, to come vpon them behynde, so that they were before Iuda, and y preuy watch behynde. Now wha Iuda turned them, beholde, there was battayll before the q be- hynde. Then cryed they vnto ý LORDE, a the prestes tromped with the trompettes, ¢ wha euery man in [uda gaue a shoute, God plaged Ieroboam and Israel before Abia and
Iuda. Aud the children of Israel fled before 
Iuda, and God gaue them in to their handes, so that Abia q his people dyd a greate slaughter vpon them, and there fell wounded of Israel fyue hundreth thousande chosen men.

D| Thus were the children of Israel subdued 

È 

at that tyme, but the children of Iuda were comforted, for they put their trust in y
LORDE God of their fathers. And Abia folowed vpon leroboam, and wanne cities fro him, Bethel with the vyllages therof, Iesana with hir vyllages, and Ephron with the vil- lages therof, so that Ieroboam came nomore to strength, as longe as Abia lyued. And the
LORDE smote him that he dyed. 

Now whan Abia was strengthed, he toke fourtene wyues, and begat two and twentye sonnes and sixtene daughters. What more there is to saye of Abia, and of his wayes and his doynges, it is wrytten in the storye of the prophet [ddo. And Abia fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buryed him in ¥ cite of Dauid: and Asa his sonne was kynge in his steade. In his tyme was the londe in rest ten yeares.

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND “Asa dyd that which was good ¢ 
A right in the sighte of the LORDE his 
God, and put awaye the straunge altares, and | the hye places, and brake the pilers, and | hewed downe the groues, and sayde vnto Iuda, | that they shulde seke the LORDE God of their fathers, and to do after y lawe and com- maundementes. And the hye places and ymages put he awaye out of all the cities of
Iuda: and the kyngdome had rest before him. 
And he builded stroge cities in Iuda, whyle the londe was in quietnes, q whyle there was ho warre agaynst him in the same yeares : for ¥ LORDE gaue him rest.

And he sayde vnto Iuda: Let vs buylde vp these cities, and fense them rounde aboute
* 3 Re. 15. b. 

* Iudic.7. a. 1 Re. 14. a. 

Che ij. boke of the Cronitles, 

Chap. riii. with walles and towres, with portes and barres, while the londe is yet with vs: for we haue soughte the LORDE oure God, and he hath geuen vs rest on euery syde. So they buylded,

jand it wente prosperously with the. And Asa 

had an hoost of mé which bare shildes qc speares, out of Iuda thre C. thousande, and out of Ben lamin two hidreth and foure score thousande, that bare shyldes & coulde shute with bowes, and all these were mightie stronge men.

But Serah the Moryan came out against thé withan hoost of a thousande times a thou- sande, and with thre hundreth charettes, and came vnto Maresa. And Asa wente forth agaynsthim. And they prepared them selues to the battayll in the valley Zephata beside
Maresa. And Asa called vpon y LORDE his God and sayde: * LORDE, it is no dif- feréce with y, to helpe by fewe or by many.
Helpe vs O LORDE oure God: for oure trust is in the, ¢ in thy name are we come forth against this multitude. LORDE oure
God, let no man preuayle agaynst the. 

And the LORDE smote the Morias before 
Asa and before Iuda, so that they fled. And 
Asa with y people that was by him, folowed vpon them vnto Gerar. And the Morias fell, so that none of them remained alyue, but were smytten before the LORDE and before his hoost. And they caried exceadinge moch spoyle from thence. And he smote all the cyties aboute Gerar, for a fearfulnesse of the
LORDE came vpon them. And they spoyled all the cities, for there was moch spoyle in them. They smote the tentes of the catell also, and toke many shepe and Camels, and came agayne to Ierusalem.

The rb. Chapter. 
ND the sprete of God came vpo Asarias the sonne of Obed, which wente forth

to Asa, and sayde vnto him: Heare me Asa and all Iuda xz Ben lamin: The LORDE is

ye forsake him, he shal forsake you also. 
Neuertheles there shal be many dayes in 
Israel, that tthere shalbe no true God, no prest to teach, q no lawe. And whan they turne in their trouble vnto the LORDE God of Israel, and seke him, he shalbe founde.

t Ose. 3. b. 

Chap. rbi. 

At that tyme shall it not be well with him that goeth out and in: for there shal be greate vproures vpon all them y dwell on the earth.
For one people shall all to smyte another, q one cite another: for God shal vexe them with all maner of trouble. But be ye stronge, and let not youre handes be feble: for youre worke hath his rewarde.

Whan Asa herde these wordes, and the propheciége (of Asarias the sonne) of Obed the prophet, he toke a corage vnto him, and put awaye the abhominacions out of all y londe of Iuda and Ben Iamin, and out of the cities that he had wonne vpon mount Ephraim: and renued the LORDES altare, which stode before the porche of the LORDE. And all
Iuda and Ben Iamin gathered them selues together, and the straungers with them out of
Ephraim, Manasses and Simeon: for there fell many vnto him out of Israel, whan they sawe that the LORDE his God was with him.
And they resorted vnto lerusalem in the thirde moneth of the fyftenth yeare of the reigne of
Asa, and the same daye offred they vnto the 
LORDE of the spoyle that they had broughte, seuen hüdreth oxen, and seuen thousande shepe.

And they entred in to y couenaunt, that they wolde seke the LORDE God of their fathers, with all their hert and with all their soule. And who so euer wolde not seke y
LORDE God of Israel, shulde dye, both small q greate, both man and woman: and they sware vnto the LORDE with loude voyce, with shoutinge, with trompettes and with shawmes. And all Iuda were glad ouer the ooth: for they had sworne with all their hert, and they soughte him with a whole wyll: and he was founde of them, and the LORDE

gaue them rest on euery syde. 

D| And Asa ¥ kynge put downe his mother 

from the mynistracion, that she had founded in the groue vnto Miplezeth. And Asa roted out hir Miplezeth, and beate it in sunder, and brent it by the broke Cedron. But the hye places were not put downe out of Israel. Yet was the hert of Asa perfecte as longe as he lyued. And loke what his father had halowed, and that he him selfe had halowed, he broughte it in to ¥ house of God, syluer, golde and ornamétes. And there was no warre vnto the fyne and thirtieth yeare of the reigne of Asa.

23 Re. 15. c. * 9 Par. 14. c. 

Che i. boke of the Cronieles. 

| 

The rot. Chapter. 

N the sixe and thirtieth yeare of y reigne| & 

of Asa, ^wente Baesa the kynge of Israel vp agaynst luda, and buylded Rama, to let
Asa the kynge of Iuda, y he shulde not go out and in: But Asa toke forth the treasure in the house of the LORDE, and the syluer and golde in the kynges house, and sent it vnto Benadad y kynge of Syria, which dwelt at Damascon, and caused to saye vnto him:
'There is a couenaunt betwene me and the, betwene my father and thy father, therfore haue I sent y syluer and golde, that thou mayest breake y couenaunt with Baesa the kynge of Israel, that he maye departe fro me.

Benadad herkened vnto kynge Asa, and sent his hoost agaynst the cities of Israel, which smote Eion, Dan and Abel Maim, and all the corne cities of Nephtali. Whan Baesa herde that, he lefte of from buyldinge Rama, and ceassed from his worke. But kynge Asa toke all Iuda vnto him, and caried awaye y stones and tymber (wherwith Baesa buylded) and he buylded Geba q Mizpa withall.

At the same tyme came Hanani the Seer vnto Asa the kynge of Iuda, and sayde vnto him: Because thou hast trusted vnto the kynge of Syria, and not put thy trust in the
LORDE thy God, therfore is the power of the kynge of Syria escaped thy hide. *Were not the Moryans and Lybians a greate mul- titude with exceadinge many charettes and horsmen? Yet gaue the LORDE them in to thy hande, whan thou dyddest put thy trust in him : for the eyes of the LORDE loke rounde aboute all londes, to strength them y are in him with all their hert. Thou hast done vn- wysely, therfore shalt thou haue warre from héce forth. But Asa was wroth at y Seer, and put him in preson: for he murmured with him ouerthisthinge. And Asa oppressed certayne of the people at y same tyme.

'These actes of Asa both first and last, be- holde, they are wrytten in the boke of y kynges of luda a Israel. And Asa was diseased in his fete in the nyne and thirtieth yeare of his reigne, and endured ther ouer. + Nether soughte he the LORDE in his sicknesse, but trusted vnto Phisicians. Thus fell Asa on slepe with his fathers, q dyed in the one and fortieth yeare of his reigne, q was buried in

+ Eccli. 38. b. 

Fo. reeerii. 

23 

Fo. cecevitij. 

| 
| 

" 

‘his awne sepulcre which he had caused to be 

grauen for him selfe in the cite of Dauid. 
And they layed him vpon his bed, which was fylled with swete odoures q all maner of spyces
(made after Y Apotecaries craft) and made a ee greate burnynge.

The rbij. Chapter. 

ND Iosaphat his sonne was kynge in his 
A steade, t waxed mightie against Israel. 
And he put men of warre in all the stronge cities of Iuda, and set officers in the londe of
Iuda, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had woune. And the LORDE was with Iosaphat: for he walked in the Sid!

Cbr ü. boke of the Cronteles. 

waves of his father Dauid, x soughte not 
Baalim, but the God of his father, q walked in his commaundementes, xt not after the workes of Israel: therfore dyd the LORDE stablyshe the kyngdome in his hade. And all
Iuda gaue presentes vnto Iosaphat, q he had 
(greate riches q worshippe. And whan his hert was coraged in the wayes of the LORDE, he put downe styll the hye places and groues out of Iuda. ln the thirde yeare of his reigne sent he his prynces, Benhail, Obadia, Zacharias,
Nethaneel x Michaia, to teach in the cities of 
Iuda: q with them the Leuites: Semaia, iNethania, Sebadia, Asahel, Semiramoth,
Ionathan, Adonia, Tobia « Tob Adonia, a with them y prestes Elisama q Ioram. And they taughte in Juda, q had the boke of the is of y LORDE with them, ¢ wente aboute jin all y cities of Iuda, q taughte the people.
And the feare of the LORDE came vpon all Y kyngdomes in the countrees that laye aboute Iuda, so y they foughte not agaynst
| Iosaphat. And the Philistynes broughte 
| presentes and trybute of syluer vnto Iosaphat. 
And the Arabians broughte him seuen thou- sande and seuen hundreth rammes, and senen thousande and seuen hundreth he goates.
Thus increased Iosaphat, q grewe euer greater. 
And he buylded castels and corne cities in 
Iuda. And dyd moch in the cities of Iuda, and had valeaunt and mightie men at Ierusalem.
And this was y ordinaunce thorow out the nouse of their fathers, which were rulers ouer the thousandes in luda. Adna a captayne, q with him were thre hüdreth thousande mightie men. Nexte vnto him was lohanan y chefe, and with him were two hundreth and foure

score thousande. Nexte him was Amasia the sonne of Sichri the fre wyllinge of y LORDE, and with him were two hundreth thousande valeaunt meu. Of the children of Ben Jamin was Eliada a mightie man, and with him were two hundreth thousande ready with bowes and shyldes. Nexte vnto him was losabad, and with him were an hundreth and foure score thousande harnessed men of warre. All these wayted vpon the kynge, besydes those that the kynge had layed in the stroge cities thorow out all Iuda.

The bij. Chapter. 

ND Iosaphat had greate riches and 

worshippe, and made frendshippe with 
Achab. * And after two yeares wente he downe to Achab vnto Samaria. And Achab caused many shepe and oxé to be slayne for him and for y people that were with him.
And he counceled him to go vp vnto Ramoth in Gilead. And Achab the kynge of Israel sayde vnto Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda: Go with me vnto Ramoth,in Gilead. He sayde vnto him: l am as thou, and my people as thy people, we wyll go with the vnto the battayll.

But Iosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of 
Israel; Axe councell (I praye the) this daye at the worde of the LORDE. And the kynge of Israel gathered the prophetes to- gether, euen foure hundreth men, q saide vnto them: Shal we go to the battayll vnto Ramoth in Gilead, or shal I let it alone? They sayde:
Go vp, God shal delyuer it in to the kynges hade. But Iosaphat sayde: Is there not yet one prophet of the LORDE here, y we maye axe at him? The kynge of Israel sayde vnto
Iosaphat: There is yet one man, at whom we maye axe of y LORDE: but I hate him, for he prophecieth me no good, but allwaye euell, namely Micheas the sonne of lemla. Iosa- phat sayde: Let not the kynge saye so. And the kynge of Israel called one of his chamber- laynes, q sayde: Brynge hither soone Micheas the sonne of Jemla.

And the kynge of Israel, and Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda, sat either of them vpon his seate, arayed in their garmentes. Euen in the place at the dore of the porte of Samaria sat they, and all ý prophetes prophecied before them. And Sedechias the sonne of Cnaena

* 3 Re. 22.a. 

Chap. roy. 

a 

Chap. rir. 

had made him hornes of yron, and sayde: 
Thus sayeth the LORDE: With these shalt thou puszshe at the Syrians, tyll thou brynge them to naughte. And all the prophetes pro- phecied likewyse, q sayde: Go vp vnto Ra- moth in Gilead, and thou shalt prospere, and y
LORDEshal delyuer it in to the kynges hande. 

And the messaunger that wente to call 
Micheas, spake vnto him, and sayde: Be- holde, y wordes of the prophetes are with one acorde good before the kynge: let thy worde
(I praye the) be as one of theirs, and speake thou good also. But Micheassayde: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, loke what my God sayeth vnto me, y wyl I speake. And whan he came to the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him: Micheas, shulde we go vnto Ramoth in
Gilead to the battayll, or shulde we let it alone? He saide: Go vp, and ye shal pros- pere. It shal be geué you in youre handes.
But ¥ kynge sayde vnto him: 1 charge y yet agayne, that thou tell me nothinge but y trueth in the name of the LORDE.

Then saide he: I sawe all Israel scatered abrode vpo the mountaynes, as the shepe y haue no shepherde. And the LORDE sayde:
Haue these no lorde? Let euery one turne home agayne in peace. Thé sayde the kynge of Israel vnto losaphat: Dyd not J tell the, y he wolde prophecie me no good, but euell?

And he sayde: Therfore heare ye the worde of the LORDE: *I sawe the LORDE syt vpon his seate, and all the hoost of heauen stondinge at his righte hande « at his lefte.
And the LORDE sayde: Who wyll disceaue 
Achab the kynge of Israel, that he maye go vp q fall at Ramoth in Gilead? And whan one sayde thus, another so, there came forth a sprete, and stode before LORDE, and sayde: I wyl disceaue him. The LORDE sayde vnto him: Wherwith? He sayde: I wyll go forth, and be a false sprete in the mouth of all his prophetes. And he sayde:
Thou shalt disceaue him, and shalt be able: go thy waye, and do so. Beholde now, tthe
LORDE hath geuen a false sprete in the mouth of all these thy prophetes, and the
LORDE hath spoké euell agaynst the. 

Then stepte forth Sedechias the sonne of 
Cnaena, and smote Micheas vpon the cheke, and sayde: Which waye is the sprete of y
LORDE departed fro me, to speake thorow 

*3Re.99.d. Esa. 6.a. 

The ij. boke of the Cronicles. 

the? Micheas sayde: Beholde, thou shalt se it, whan thou commest in to y ynmost chamber to hyde the. But the kynge of Israel sayde:
Take Micheas, and let him remayne with 
Amon the ruler of the cite, and with Ioas the sonne of Melech, and saye: Thus sayeth the kynge: Put this man in preson, and fede him with bred and water of trouble, tyll I come agayne in peace. Micheas saide: Yf thou commest agayne in peace, then hath not the
LORDE spoken thorow me. And he sayde: 
Herken to all ye people. 

So the kynge of Israel, and losaphat y kyuge of luda wente vp vnto Ramoth in
Gilead. And y kynge of Israel sayde vnto losaphat: Chaunge thy clothes, and come to the battayll in thine araye. And y kynge of
Israel chaunged his rayment, q came in to the battayll. But the kynge of Syria had com- maunded the rulers of his charettes: Ye shal fighte nether agaynst small ner greate, but onely agaynst the kynge of Israel.

Now whan the rulers of the charrettes sawe losaphat, they thoughte: It is y kynge of
Israel, and they wéte aboute to fighte agaynst him. But Iosaphat cryed, and the LORDE helped him. And God turned them from him: for whan the rulers of the charettes sawe that it was not y kynge of Israel, they turned back from him. But a certayne man bended his bowe harde, q shot the kynge of
Israel betwene the mawe and the longes. 
'The sayde he vnto his charet man: Turne thine hade, and cary me out of the hoost, for
I am wounded. And the battayll was sore the same daye. And the kynge of Israel stode vpon his charet agaynst the Syrians vntyll the euenynge, and dyed wha the Sonne wente downe.

The rir. Chapter. 

UT losaphat the kynge of luda came 
B home agayne in peace vnto lerusalem. 
And Iehu y sonne of Hanani the Seer wete forth to mete him, q sayde vnto kynge Io- saphat: Shuldest thou so helpe the vngodly, and loue them that hate the LORDE? And for this cause is y wrath vpō the from the
LORDE: neuertheles there is some good founde in the, that thou hast put the groues out of the londe, and hast prepared thine hert toseke God. So Iosaphat abode at Ierusalem.

t Eze. 14. b. 

Fo. eeecrb. 

E 

a 

po. cceerbt. 

B 

And he wente agayne amonge the people, from Berseba voto moŭt Ephraim, and broughte them agayne to the LORDE God of their fathers. And he set Iudges thorow out the londe, in all the stronge cities of Iuda, and a certayne in enery cite. And sayde vnto the ludges: Take hede what ye do: for ye execute not the indgment of man, but of the LORDE, and he is with you in iudgmét: therfore let the feare of the LORDE be with you, and bewarre, and do it: for with the
LORDE oure God there is no vnrighteousnes, ner respecte of personnes, ner acceptinge of giftes.

And at lerusalem dyd Iosaphat ordeyne certayne of the Leuites and prestes, and of the awnciét fathers of Israel for y iudgment of the LORDE, and ouer the matter of the lawe, and caused them to dwell at Ierusalem, and commaunded them, and sayde: Se that ve do thus in the feare of the LORDE, in faithfulnes q in a perfect hert. In all causes that come vnto you from youre brethren (whieh dwell in their cities) betwene bloude and bloude, betwene lawe and eommaundement, betwene statutes and ordinaunees ye shal en- forme them, y they synne not against the
LORDE, and so the wrath to come vpon you and youre brethren. Do thus, and ye shal not offende.

Beholde, Amaria the prest is ehefe ouer you in all causes of y LORDE: so is Sabadia the sonne of Ismael prynee in the house of luda in all the kynges matters: Ye haue officers likewyse the Leuites before you. Take a good corage vnto you, and be doynge, and the LORDE shalbe with the good.

The rr. Chapter. 

FTER this came the childrē of Moab, the children of Ammon, and certayne of Amanim with them, to fighte against losa- phat. And they eame and tolde Iosaphat, and sayde: ‘There cometha greate multitude agaynst the from beyonde the See of Syria, q beholde, they are at Hazezon Thamar, that is Engaddi.
And losaphat was afrayed, q set his face to seke ý LORDE, q caused a fast to be pro- clamed in all Iuda. And luda came together toseke the LORDE. And out of all cities of luda eame they to seke the LORDE.
And losaphat stode amoge y cdgregacion of luda a lerusalem in the house of y LORDE

before the new courte, and sayde : 

The ij. boke of the Cronteles. 

O LORDE God of oure fathers, art not thou God in heauen, and hast domynion in all the kyngdomes of the Heythen? “And in thy hande is strength and power, and there is no man that can withstode the. Hast not thou oure God expelled the inhabiters of this londe before thy people of Israel? and hast geué it vnto the sede of Abraham thy louer for euer? so that they haue dwelt in it, x haue buylded the a Sanctuary vnto thy name therin, and sayde: Yf there come eny plage, swerde, iudgmet, pestilence, or derth vpon vs, we wyll stonde before this house euen before the (for thy name isin this house) and wyll erye vnto the in oure trouble, and thou shalt heare, and shalt saue vs. Beholde now, the children of Ammon, of Moab, q they of mount
Seir, vpon whom * thou woldest not suffre the children of Israel to go, whan they wente out of the londe of Egipte, but they were fayne to departe from thé, and not to destroye them: and beholde, they deale contrarely with vs, and come to thrust vs out of the inheritaunce, that thou hast geuen vs in possession. O oure
God, wylt thou not iudge them? For in vs is no strength to withstonde this greate mui- titude that commeth agaynst vs. We knowe not what we shulde do, but oure eyes loke vnto the. And all Iuda stode before the
LORDE, with their children, wyues and sonnes.

But vpon Iehasiel the sonne of Zacharias, the sonne of Benaia, the sonne of Iehiel, the sonne of Mathania the Leuite of y children of Assaph, came the sprete of the LORDE in the myddes of the congregacion, and sayde:
Geue hede all thou Iuda, and ye inhabiters of Ierusalem, and thou kynge Iosaphat: Thus sayeth the LORDE vnto you: Be not ye afrayed, nether feare ye this greate multitude: for it is not ye that fighte, but God. To- morow shal ye go downe vnto the. And beholde, they go vp by Sis, and ye shal fynde them at the reed see by the broke before the wyldernes of Ieruel: for ye shall not fighte in this cause. Do ye but steppe forth, and stonde, and se the health of the LORDE that is with you. Feare not O Iuda and lerusalem, and be not afrayed, tomorow go ye forth agaynst them, and the LORDE shal be with you.

"Thé Iosaphat bowed him selfe with his face to the earth, q all Iuda, « the inhabiters of

* Deut. 2. c. 

Chap. rr. 

5 

Chap. xri 

Ierusalem fell before the LORDE, q wor- shipped the LORDE. And the Leuites of y childré of the Kahathites q of the children of the Corahites arose to prayse the LORDE
God of Israel with loude voyce on hye. And 

they gat them vp early in y mornynge, and wéte forth by the wyldernesse of ‘Thekoa.
And whan they were goynge out, Iosaphat stode, x sayde: Herké vnto me O Iuda, q ye indwellers of Ierusalé: Put youre trust in the
LORDE youre God, « ye shal be safe: and geue credence vnto his prophetes, x ye shall prospere. And he gaue councell vnto y people, and appoynted the syngers vnto ý LORDE, and them that gaue prayse in the bewtye of holynes, to go before the harnessed mé, « to saye: O geue thankes vnto the LORDE,
‘for his mercy endureth for euer. And whan they beganne to geue thankes and prayse,
* the LORDE caused the hyuder watch that was come agaynst luda, to come vpon the childré of Ammon, Moab ¢ them of mount
Seir, and they smote them. ‘Then stode the children of Ammon q Moab agaynst them of
,mount Seir, to damne them, and to destroye jthem. And whan they had destroyed them of
‘mount Seir, one helped another to destroye them selues also. And whan Iuda came to
Mispa vnto the wyldernes, they turned them towarde the multitude, and beholde, the deed bodies laye vpō the earth, so that none was
| escaped. 
=| And Iosaphat came with his people to 
| denyde the spoyles of them. And they founde 
|amonge them so moch goodes and rayment and precious lewels (which they toke from them) that they coulde not beare them. And thre dayes were they deuydinge the spoyle, for it was so moch. On the fourth daye came they together in to the valley of blessynge: for there blessed they the LORDE. Therfore is the place called the valley of blessinge vnto this daye.

So euery man of Juda q lerusalem turned back agayne, q Iosaphat before them, to go to
Terusalé with ioye: for y LORDE had geuen them gladnesse on their enemies. And they entred in to Ierusalem with psalteries, harpes q trompettes vnto the house of the LORDE.
And there came a feare of God ouer all the kyngdomes in the londes, whan they herde that the LORDE had foughte agaynst y

* Jud. 7. f. 1 Re.14. e. a 3 Re. 22. g. 

The ij. boke of the Cronteles. 

enemies of Israel. Thus was ¥ kyngdome of 
Iosaphat in quyetnes, q God gaue him rest on euery syde.

And Iosaphat reigned ouer luda, « was| dF 

fyue q thirtie yeare olde whan he was made kynge, q reigned fyue q twentye yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was Asuba the doughter of Silhi. And he walked in the waye of his father Asa, q departed not asyde from doyuge y which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE :sauynge that y hye places were not put downe, for the people had not yet prepared their hert to the God of their fathers. What more there is to saye of losa- phat, both the first q the last, beholde, it is wrytten in the actes of Iehu y sonne of Ha- naui, which he noted vp in iis boke of the kynges of Israel.

“Afterwarde dyd Iosaphat the kynge of Iuda agree with Ahasia the kynge of Israel, which was vngodly in his doynges. And he agreed with him to make shippes, for to go vpon the see. And they made the shippes at Ezeon
Gaber. But Elieser the sonne of Dodana of 
Maresa prophecied agaynst losaphat, and sayde: Because thou hast agreed with Ahasia, therfore hath the LORDE broken thy workes.
And so y shippes were broken, q mighte not go vpon the See.

The rri. Chapter. 

ND Iosaphat fell on slepe? with his fathers, t was buried with his fathers in the cite of Dauid, q Ioram his sonne was kynge in his steade. And he had brethre the sonnes of Iosaphat: Asaria, Iehiel, Zacharias,
Asaria, Michael q Sephatia. All these were the children of Iosaphat kynge of Iuda. And their father gaue them many giftes of syluer, golde q Jewels, with stronge cities in luda.
But the kyngdome gaue he vnto Ioram: for 

he was the first borne. 

But whan Ioram came vp ouer his fathers kyngdome, q had gotten the power of it, he slewe all his brethré with the swerde, q cer- tayne rulers also in Israel t T'wo q thirtie yeare olde was loram whan he was made kynge, q reigned eight yeare at lerusale, ¢ walked in the waye of y kynges of Israel, euen as the house of Achab dyd (for Achabs doughter was his wife) x he dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE.

è 3 Re. 22. g. t 4 Re. 8. c. 

56 

~ Fo. rebi, 

a 

Fo. ccecrbiíj. 

B| Neuertheles y LORDE wolde not destroie the house of Dauid, for the couenauntes sake,
*which he made with Dauid, and acordinge as he had sayde, y he wolde geue him and his children a lanterne for euermore.

At y same tyme fell y Edomites awaye from 
Iuda, and made a kynge ouer them selues: for Ioram had gone ouer with his captaynes and all the charettes with him, « had gotten him vp in the night season, and slayne the
Edomites on euery syde, and the rulers of the charettes: therfore fell ý Edomites awaye from Iuda vnto this daye. At y same tyme fell Lybna awaye from him also: because he forsoke the LORDE God of his fathers. He made hye places also on the mountaynes in
Juda, and caused them of Ierusalé to go 

| [awhorynge, and disceaued Iuda. 

«| But there came a wrytinge vnto him fro the prophet Elias, sayenge: Thus sayeth the
LORDE God of thy father Dauid: Because thou hast not walked in the wayes of thy father
Iosaphat, nether in y wayes of Asa the kynge of Iuda, but walkest in the waye of the kynges of Israel, and makest Iuda and them of Ieru- salem to go awhorynge after the whordome of the house of Achab, and hast slayne thy bre- thren also of thy fathers house, which were better the thou. Beholde, the LORDE shal smyte the with a greate plage on thy people, on thy children « thy wyues, and on all thy substaunce. But thou thy selfe shalt haue moch sicknesse in thy bowels, tyll thy bowels go forth from daye to daye for very disease.

iB| So y LORDE raysed vp agaynst Ioram, 

| the sprete of the Philistynes, q Arabians, which lye besyde the Morians, and they wente
| vp in to Iuda, and waysted it, and caried 

| 

awaye all the substaunce that was founde in the kynges house, q his sonnes, and his wyues, so y there was not one sonne lefte him, saue loahas his yogest sonne. And after all this dyd Y LORDE smyte him in his bowels, with soch a sicknesse as coulde not be healed. And whyle that endured from daye to daye, whan the tyme of two yeares was expyred, his bowels wente from him with his sicknesse, and he dyed in euell diseases.

And they made not a burninge ouer him, as they dyd vnto his fathers. Two and thirtie yeare olde was he wha he was made kynge,

* 92 Tie. 7. c. a 4 Re. 8. d. + That is Ochosias, otherwyse called Ahasia. t 4 Re.9. b.

The i. boke of tbe Cronteles. 

and reigned eight yeare at Jerusalé, and walked not well And they buried him in the cite of Dauid, but not amóge the sepul- cres of the kynges.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND they of Ierusalem* made Ochosias 
A his yogest sonne kynge in his steade: for the men of warre that came with the hoost of the Arabians, had slayne all y first, ther- fore reigned Ochosias the sonne of Ioram kynge of Iuda. Two and fortye yeare olde was Ochosias whan he was made kynge, and reigned one yeare at Ierusalem. His mothers name was Athalia the doughter of Amri. And he walked also in y wayes of the house of
Achab: for his mother entysed him so y he was vngodly. ‘Therfore dyd he euell in y sighte of the LORDE, euen as y house of
Achab: for they were his councell geuers after his fathers death, to destroye him, and he walked after their councell.

Chap. xríj. 

And he wente with Ioram the sonne of|i3 

Achab kynge of Israel, to the battayll vnto 
Ramoth m Gilead, agaynst Hasael the kynge of Syria. But the Syrias smote Ioram, so y he turned back to be healed at Iesreel: for he had woundes that were geuen him at Rama, whan he foughte with Hasael the kynge of
Syria. And + Asarias the sonne of Ioram kynge of Iuda wete downe to vyset Joram $ sonne of Achab at Iesreel, which laye sicke :
For it was ordeyned of God vnto Ochosias, that he shulde come to Joram, q so to go forth with Ioram agaynst lehu y sonne of Nimsi, twhom the LORDE had anoynted to rote out the house of Achab.

Now whan Iehu wolde be auéged of ¥ house of Achab, he founde certayne rulers of Iuda, and y childré of Ochosias brethren which serued Ochosias, and he slewe them. § And he soughte Ochosias, and they ouertoke him, wha he had hyd him at Samaria: q he was broughte vnto lehu, which slewe him, and they buried him, for they sayde: He is the sonne of Iosaphat, which soughte y LORDE with all his hert. And there was no man more of the house of Ochosias that mighte be kynge.

Whan Athalia the mother of Ochosias sawe y hir sonne was deed, she gat hir vp, a

$ 4 Re. 9. f. b 4 Re. 11. a. 

€ 

5 

Chap. rrii. destroyed all the kynges sede in the house of
Iuda. But losabeath ¥ kynges sister toke loas y sonne of Ochosias, and stale him awaye fro amonge the kynges childré y were slayne, q put him with his norse in a chamber. ‘Thus losabeath kynge lorams doughter, the wyfe of Ioiada the prest, hyd him from Athalia, so y he was not slayne: for she was Ochosias sister. And he was hyd with them in the house of God sixe yeares, for so moch as
Athalia was quene in the londe. 

| The rritj. Chapter. 

| UT in the seuenth yeare was Ioiada bolde, 
B ^and toke the rulers ouer hundreds: namely Asaria y sonne of Ieraham, Ismael y sonne of Iohanan, Asaria $ sonne of Obed,
Maeseia ¥ sonne of Adaia, and Elisaphat y sonne of Sichri with him, in to the couenaunt: and they wente aboute in Iuda, and broughte y Leuites together out of all the cities of Iuda, and the chefe fathers of Israel, to come vnto lerusalem. And all the cogregacion made a couenaunt with the kynge in the house of
God, and he sayde vnto them: Beholde, the kynges sonne shal be kynge, * eué as the
LORDE spake cócernynge the children of 
Dauid. 

B| This is it therfore y ye shal do: The thirde parte of you that entre on the Sabbath, shalbe amonge the prestes q Lenites, which are dore- kepers at the thresholdes: q one thirde parte in the kynges house, and one thirde parte at the grounde porte. But all the people shalbe in the courtes of the house of the LORDE, and that no man go in to the house of the
LORDE, excepte the prestes and Leuites that mynister there, they shal go in: for they are halowed. And let all y people wayte vpon the LORDE. And the Leuites shal get them rounde aboute y kynge, euery one with his weapen in his hande. And who so els goeth in to $ house, let himdye. And they shall be with the kynge wha he goeth out ¢ in.
€| And the Leuites q all Iuda dyd as Ioiada y prest had commaunded, and euery one toke his men that entred on the Sabbath, with those y wente of on the Sabbath: for loiada
¥ prest suffred not those two companies to parte asunder. And Ioiada y prest gaue the captaynes ouer hundreds speares q shyldes, and kynge Dauids weapens, which were 1n the

? 4 Re. 11. a. *2 Heo. 7. c. t Deut. 17. d. 

The ij. boke of the Cronteles, 

Fo. ceeertr. 

house of God, and set all the people euery one with his weapen in his hande, from the righte corner of the house, vnto the lefte corner of the altare, and to the house warde aboute the kynge. And they broughte forth the kynges sonne, q set the crowne vpon his heade, and gaue them the t wytnesse, ¢ made him kynge.
And loiada with his sonnes anoynted him, q sayde: God saue the kynge.

But whan Athalia herde the noyse of $ people y ranne together and praysed ¥ kynge, she wente forth to the people in to house of the LORDE, and loked: and beholde, y kynge stode in his place at y intraunce, and the rulers and trompettes aboute y kynge: and all the people of the londe were glad, « blewe the trompes, and there were syngers y coulde playe with all maner of musicall in- strumentes. But she rete hir clothes, q sayde:
Sedicion, sedicion. ^ Neuertheles loiada y prest gat him forth with the captaynes ouer hundreds and rulers of the hoost, and sayde vnto them: Brynge her forth betwene ¥ walles, t who so euer foloweth her, shal be slayne with y swerde: for the prest had comaunded, that she shulde not be slayne in $ house of the LORDE. And they layed handes on her. And whan she came at the intraunce of the horsgate of the kynges house, they put her to death there.

And loiada made a couenaunt betwene him and all the people, and the kynge, y they shulde be the people of the LORDE. The wéte all the people in to the house of Baal and destroyed it, ¢ brake downe his altares q ymages, q slewe Mathan the prest of Baal before the altare. And loiada appoynted y officers in the house of the LORDE amoge the prestes q Leuites t whom Dauid had ordeyned for ¥ house of the LORDE, to offre burnt sacrifices vnto y LORDE, as it is wrytten in the $ lawe of Moses: with ioye q songes made by Dauid. And ¥ porters set he at y gates of y house of y LORDE, y none shulde entre, which ,were defiled with eny maner of thinge.

And he toke the captaynes ouer hüdreds and the mightie men and lordes of $ people, and all the people of the londe, aud brought the kinge downe from the house of the
LORDE, and broughte him thorow the hye porte of the kynges house, and caused the

t1 Par. 24. 25. $ Num. 28. 

Jo. cecery. 

kinge sit vpon the seate royall. And all the people of the lode were glad, and the cite was at rest. But Athalia was slayne with the swerde.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

A| Ț OAS’ was seuen yeare olde whan he was 

made kynge, and reigned fortie yeare at 
Terusalé. His mothers name was Zibea of 
Berseba. And Ioas dyd that which was right in the sight of the LORDE, as longe as
Ioiada the prest lyued. And loiada gane him two wiues, q he begat sonnes q doughters.
Afterwarde deuysed loas to renne the house of the LORDE, ¢ gathered together the prestes and Leuites, q sayde vnto the: Go forth vnto all the cities of Iuda, q gather the money of all Israel, to repayre Y house of God yearly, and do it righte soone: but the Lenites made no haist.

Then the kynge called Ioiada the pryncipall, 

and sayde vnto him: Why lokest thou not vnto the Leuites, y they bringe in from Iuda and lerusalem, *the colleccion which Moses the seruaunt of the LORDE appoynted to be gathered amoge Israel for the Tabernacle of witnes? For y vngodly Athalia q hir sonnes
‘haue waisted the house of God: and all that 
‘was halowed for the house of the LORDE, hane they bestowed on Baalim.
33 Then commaunded the kynge to make a chest, and to set it without at the intraunce of the house of the LORDE: q caused it to be proclamed in Iuda and Iernsalé, that they shulde bringe in to the LORDE, the colleccio, which Moses the seruaüt of God appointed vnto Israel in ý wildernes. "The were all y rulers glad, q so were all ý people, q brought it, and cast it in to the chest, tyll it was full.

And whan the tyme was y the Leuites shulde brynge the Arke at ý kinges comaunde- ment (whan they sawe y there was moch money therin) then came the kinges serybe, a he y was appoynted of the chefe prest, and emptyed ithe chest, and caried it againe in to his place.
| Thus dyd they euery daye, so that they eoa, moch money together. Andy kinge jand Ioiada gaue it vnto y workmasters of y
¡house of the LORDE, and they hired masons jand carpenters to repayre the house of ŷ

LORDE, and men that conlde worke in yron and brasse, to repayre the honse of ý LORDE.

a 4 Re. 12.a. * Ex. 30. b. e. 

The ij. boke of the Cronteles, 

Chap. rritij. 

And the labonrers wrought, so that y re-| € pairinge in y worke wente forwarde thorow their hande, and they set the house of God in his bewtye, and made it stronge. And whan they had perfourmed this, they brought the resydue Br the money, before the kynge and
Ioiada, wherof there were made vessels for the house of the LORDE, vessels for the ministracion and burntofferinge, spones and ornamentes of golde and siluer. And they offred burntofferynges allwaye in the house of the LORDE, as longe as Ioiada lyued.

And loiada waxed olde, and had lyued longe ynough, and dyed, q was an hundreth and thirtie yeare olde whan he dyed: and they buried him in the cite of Dauid, amonge the kynges, because he had done good vnto
Israel, and towarde God q his house. And after the death of Ioiada, came the rulers in
Iuda, and worshipped the kynge. 

Then consented the kynge vnto thé. And|5 they forsoke the house of the LORDE God of their fathers, and serued y groues and ymages. Then came y wrath of the LORDE vpo Inda and Jerusalem because of this trespace of theirs. Yet sent he prophetes vnto the, y they shulde turne vnto the LORDE, q they testified vnto thé: but they wolde not heare.

And the sprete of God came vpon t Zachary| the sonne of Ioiada the prest, which stode ouer y people, q sayde vnto the: Thus sayeth God:
Wherfore do ye transgresse the comaunde- mentes of the LORDE, which shall not be to youre prosperite: for ye haue forsaken y
LORDE, therfore shal he forsake you. Ne- uertheles they conspyred agaynst him, q stoned him at y kynges comaundement in y courte of the house of the LORDE. And Ioas y kinge thought not on the mercy y loiada his father had done for him, but slewe his sonne. Notwithstondinge wha he dyed, he sayde: The LORDE shal loke vpon it, and requyre it.

And whan the yeare was gone aboute, |3 power of the Syrians wente vp, q came to
Iuda a Jerusalem, and destroyed the rulers in the people, and sent all the spoiles of them vnto Damascon. For the power of the Sy- rians came but with a fewe men, yet gaue y
LORDE a very greate power in to their hande: because they had forsaken y LORDE
God of their fathers. They executed iudgment 

+ Mat. 93. e. 

Chap. rrb. 

| 

also vpon Ioas. And whan they departed fro him, they lefte him in greate sicknesses.

Neuertheleshisseruauntes conspyred against him (because of the bloude of the childré of loiada the prest) q slewe him vpo his bed, a he dyed, and they buryed him 1n the cite of
Dauid, but not amonge the sepulcres of the kynges. They that conspyred against him, were these: Sabad $ sonne of Simeath the,
Ammonitisse, and Iosabad the sonne of Simrith the Moabitisse. As for his sonnes, and the) summe that was gathered vnder him, and the buyldinge of the house of God, beholde, they are wrytten in the storye in the boke of the kynges. And Amasias his sonne was kynge in his steade.

The rro. Chapter. 

YUE and twentye yeare olde was Amasias 
E whan he was made kynge, and reigned| nyne and twentye yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was Ioadan of lerusalem. And he dyd y which was right in the sighte of the
LORDE, but not with a whole hert. Now whan his kingdome was in stregth, he slewe his seruaütes which had slayne the kinge his father. But their childré slewe he not, for so is it wrytten in the boke of the lawe of Moses,
*where the LORDE comaundeth, and sayeth: 
The fathers shal not dye for the children, nether shal the children dye for the fathers: but euery one shal die for his awne synne.

And Amasias broughte Iuda together, and set them after the fathers houses, after the rulers ouer thousandes q ouer hundreds amonge all Iuda and Ben Iamin, and nombred them from twentye yeare olde q aboue, and founde of the thre hundreth thousande chosen men, which were able to go forth to the warre, and caryed speares and shyldes. And out of Israel appoynted he an hundreth thousande stronge men of warre for an hundreth talentes of siluer.

But there came a man of God vnto him, and sayde: O kynge, Let not the hoost of
Israel come with the: for the LORDE is not with Israel, nether with all the childré of
Ephraim. For yf thou commest to shewe thy boldnes in the battaill, God shal make the fall before thine enemies. For God hath power to helpe, and to cause for to fall. Amasias sayde vnto the man of God: What shal be done then with $ hundreth talentes ý I haue geué

* Deut. 94. c. 4 Re. 14. a. Eze. 18. c. 

Che ij. boke of tbe Cronicles. 

jy soudyers of Israel? The mà of God sayde: 
The LORDE hath yet more thé this to geue the. So Amasias separated out the men of warre which were come to him out of Ephraim, y they shulde departe vnto their place. Then waxed their wrath very whote agaynst Iuda, and they wente agayne vnto their place in|
| wrothfull displeasure. And Amasias strégthed himselfe, and caried out his people, and wente, forth in to the Salt vallev, and smote ten thousande of the children of Seir.

And the childré of Iuda toke ten thousande, of the alyue, whom they broughte vp to the toppe of a mountayne, and cast the downe headlinges from the toppe of the mount, so
‘that they all to barst in sunder. But y childre jof the men of warre whom Amasias had sent awaye agayne (that they shulde not go to the, battayll with his people) fell in to the cities of
Iuda, from Samaria vnto Beth Horon, and smote thre thousande of mé, and toke moch spoyle.

And whan Amasias came agayne from the slaughter of the Edomites, he broughte the goddes of the children of Seir, and made them his goddes, and worshipped before them, a brent incense vnto them. Then was the
LORDE very wroth at Amasias, x sent vnto him a prophet, which sayde vnto him: Why. sekest thou the goddes of the people, which! coulde not delyuer their folke from thy hande?|
And whan he talked with him, the kynge sayde vnto him: Haue they made y of the kynges councell? Ceasse, why wilt thou bel smytten? ‘Then the prophet ceassed, q sayde : |
I perceaue, that the LORDE is mynded to! destroye y, because thou hast done this, and. herkenest not vnto my councell. j|

^ And Amasias ý kynge of Iuda toke coücell, | q sent vnto loas the sonne of Ioahas y sonne of lehu, kynge of Israel, say¢ge: Come, let vs se one another. But loas the kynge of
Israel sent vnto Amasias y kynge of Iuda, sayenge: The hawthorne in Libanus sent vnto y Cedre tre in Libanus, sayége: Geue thy doughter vnto my sonne to wife. But a wylde beest m Libanus ranne ouer $ haw- thorne, « trode it downe. Thou thinkest :
Beholde, I haue smytten the Edomites, ther- fore is thine hert proude to boaste. Now byde at home: why stryuest thou after mys- | fortune, that thou mayest fall q Iuda with the?

a 4 Re. 14. b. 

Fo. ceeerrt. 

€ 

| 
| 

Fo. ceeerry. 
Neuertheles Amasias consented not : for so was it broughte to passe of God, y they mighte be geuen in to the handes of the enemies, because they soughte the goddes of ŷ Edom- ites. 'Then wente loas the kynge of Israel vp, q they sawe one another, he and Amasias the kynge of luda, at Beth Semes which lyeth in Iuda. But Iuda was smytté before
Israel, and they fled euery one vnto his tent. 

And Ioas the kynge of Israel toke Amasias 
Y kynge of Iuda, the sonne of Ioas y sonne of loahas, at Beth Semes, q broughte him to
Ierusalem, q brake downe the wall of Ierusale, from y porte of Ephraim vnto the corner porte, eue foure hundreth cubites longe: and toke with him all the golde, and siluer, and all the ornamentes that were foude in y house of God with Obed Edom, and in the treasures in the kynges house, and the childré to pledge vnto Samaria. And Amasias the sonne of loas kynge of Iuda, liued after the death of loas the sonne of loahas kynge of Israel fiftene yeare.

What more there is to saye of Amasias 
(both the first and last) beholde, 'it is written in y boke of the kynges of Iuda ç Israel. And fro the tyme forth that Amasias departed from the LORDE, they conspyred against him at lerusalem. But he fled vnto Lachis. "Ihe sent they after him vnto Lachis, q slewe him there. And they brought him vpo horses q buried him beside his fathers in the citeof Iuda.

The rrbt. Chapter. 

HEN all the people of luda toke Osias, 
“which was syxtene yeare olde, and made him kynge in steade of his father Ama- sias. He builded Eloth, q broughte it agayne vnto Iuda, after that the kynge was fallen on slepe with his fathers. Sixtene yeare olde was Osias whan he was made kinge, and reigned two and fiftie yeare at lerusale. His mothers name was Iechalia of lerusalem. And he did right in the syght of the LORDE, as his father Amasias had done, and soughte God as longe as Zacharias lyued, which taughte in the visyons of God: and as longe as he sought

the LORDE, God made him to prospere. 
For he wente forth, and foughte agaynst the Philistynes, and brake downe ¥ walles of
Gath, and the walles of Iabne, and the walles of Aszdod, and buylded cities aboute Aszdod,

a 4 Re. 15. a. 

Che fj. boke of the (ronirles. 

Chap. rrbí. q amonge the Philistynes. For God helped him agaynst the Philistines, against the Ara- bians, agaynst them of Gur Baal, v agaynst the Meunites. And y Ammonites gaue Osias presentes, q his name came in to Egipte: for he was exceadinge stronge. And Osias buylded towres at lerusalem vpon the cornerporte, and on the valley gate, and on other corners, and made them stronge. He buylded castels also in the wyldernesse, and dygged many welles: for he had many catell, both in the medewes and in the playnes, huszbandmen also and wynegardeners on the mountaynes and on Carmel: for he delyted in huszbandrye.

And Osias had an hoost of men of warre|33 goynge forth to the battaill, which were nobred vnder the hande of leiel the serybe q of
Maesa the offycer, vnder the hade of Hanania of the kynges rulers. And the nombre of the chefe fathers amonge the stronge mē of warre, was two thousande and syxe hundreth. And vnder the hande of the hoost thre hundreth thousande, and seuen thousande and fyue hun- dreth mete for the battayll, in the strength of an armye to helpe the kinge agaynst the ene- mies. And Osias prepared for all the hoost, shyldes, speares, helmettes, brestplates, bowes and slyngstones. And at lerusalé he made ordinaunce coningly, to be vpon the towres and in the pynnacles, to shute arowes and greate stones. And the fame of him came farre abrode, because he was specially helped, tyll he became mightie.

And whan his power was greate, his hert| € arose to his awne destruccion: for he tres- paced agaynst the LORDE his God, and wente in to the temple of the LORDE, to burne incense vpon the altare of incense.
But Asarias the prest wente after him, and foure score prestes with him, valeaunt men, and withstode kynge Osias, and saide vnto him: *It belongeth not vnto thy offyce (Osias) to burne incense vnto the LORDE, but vnto the prestes belongeth it, euen vnto the children of Aaron, which are halowed to burne incense.
Go forth out of the Sanctuary: for thou offendest, and it shall be no worshippe vnto the before God the LORDE.

And Osias was wroth, and had a censoure|3 in his hande. ^And whyle he murmured with the prestes, the leprosy spronge out of his foreheade in the presence of the prestes in

* Nu. 18. a. ^ Nu. 12. b. 

| Chap. rrbttj. The ij. boke of the Cronieles. So. reeerrtj. 

a 

the house of the LORDE before the altare of incense. And Asarias the chefe prest turned his heade towarde him, and so dyd all the prestes, and beholde, he was leper in his foreheade. And they put him ont from thence. Yee he made haist himselfe to go forth, for his plage came of the LORDE.
Thus became Osias ¥ kynge a leper vnto his death, and dwelt full of leprosye in a fre house: for he was put out of the house of the
LORDE. But Ioram his sonne had the ouersight of the kynges house, and iudged the people in the londe.

What more there is to saie of Osias (both first and last) Esay the sonne of Amos hath wrytten it. And Osias fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buryed him with his fathers in the pece of grounde beside y kynges sepul- cres: for they sayde: He is leporous. And
Iotham his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

The rrbij. Chapter. 

OTHAM was fyue and twentye yeare olde 
] whan he was made kynge, “and reigned sixtene yeare at lerusalem. His mothers name was Jerusa the daughter of Sadoc: q he dyd righte in the sighte of the LORDE as did Osias his father: sauynge y he wente not in to the temple of the LORDE, and the people yet marred them selues. He buylded the hye porte of the house of y LORDE, and on the wall of Ophel buylded he moch, and buylded the cities vpon the mountaynes of Inda, and in the woddes buylded he castelsand towres.

And he fought with the kinge of the child- ren of Ammon, and overcame them, so that the childré of Ammon gaue him ¥ same yeare an hundreth talentes of siluer, ten thousande quarters of wheate, and ten thousande of barlye. So moch dyd the children of Ammon geue him also in y seconde q thirde yeare.
Thus became Iotham mightye, for he gyded his wayes before the LORDE his God.

What more there is to saye of Iotham, q all his warres, and his waies, beholde, it is wrytten in $ boke of the kinges of Israel q
Iuda. Fyue and twentye yeare olde was he whan he was made kynge, « reigned sixtene yeare at [erusale. And Jotha fell on slepe with his fathers, q they buryed him in the cite of Danid, and Achas his sonne was kynge in his steade.

? 4 Re. 15. f. ^ 4 Re. 16. a. 

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

CHAS "was twentye yeare olde whan he|& | 

was made kynge, and reigned sixtene yeare at Ierusalem, and dyd not that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, as did Dauid his father, but walked in the wayes | of the kinges of Israel, and made sus ymages vnto Baalim, and brent incense in the! valley of the children of Hennon, and “brét his awne sonnes in y fire, after the abhominacions of the Heithen, who the LORDE expelled before the childré of Israel. And he dyd sacrifice and brent incense vpon the hye places and vpon the hilles, and amoge all grene trees.

Therfore dyd the LORDE his God delyuer him in to the hande of the kynge of Syria, so that they smote him, and caryed awaye a greate multitude of his men presoners, and broughte them to Damascon. He was geuen also vnder the hande of the kynge of Israel, so y he dyd a greate slaughter vpon him.
For Pecah the sonne of Romelia smote in 
Inda an hundreth q twentye thousande in one daye (which all were valeaunt men) eué be- cause they had forsaken y LORDE God of their fathers. And Sichri a mightie ma of
Ephraim slewe Maeseia y kinges sonne, q 
Asrikam the prynce of the honse, q Elkana the nexte vnto the kynge. And the children of Israel caried of their brethren presoners two hundreth thousande, wemen, sonnes and doughters, and toke a greate spoyle from them, and broughte the spoyle vnto Samaria.

But eué there was there a prophet of y 
LORDE, whose name was Obed, which wéte out to mete y hoost that came to Samaria, and sayde vnto them: Beholde, because the
LORDE God of youre fathers is wroth at 
Iuda, therfore hath he geuen them ouer in to youre handes: but ye haue slayne them so abhominably, that it is come vnto heaue. Now thinke ye to subdue the children of Iuda and
Ierusalem, to be bondmen and bondmaydens vnto you. Is not this a trespace then with you agaynst the LORDE youre God? Herken now vnto me, and sende y presoners hence agayne, whom ye haue caried awaye from youre brethren: for the wrath of ŷ LORDE
1s fearce ouer you. 

Then gat vp certayne of the chefe of the children of Ephraim, Asarias the sonne of

* Deut. 18. b. 4 Re. 21. a. 

B 

ffo. cecerritty. 

Cbr ij. boke of the Cronicles. 

Johanan, Barachias the sonne of Mesillemoth, 
Ezechias the sonne of Sallum, q Amasa y sonne of Hadlai, agaynst them y came from y battayll, q sayde vuto them: Ye shal not henge the presoners in hither, for youre mynde is but to make vs trespace before the
LORDE, to make oure synnes and offences the greater: for the trespace is to moch all- ready, q the wrath is fearce ouer Israel. So the hoost lefte the presoners q the spoyle before ý rulers and before the whole cogre- gacion.

Then stode vp the men (which now were rehearced by name) and toke the presoners, and as many as were naked amonge them, clothed they with y spoyles, q deckte them, and put shues vpon their fete, and gaue thé to eate and drynke, and anoynted them, and caried them vpon asses (as many as were feble) and broughte them to Iericho to y
Palme cite vnto their brethren, and came agayne to Samaria. * At the same tyme sent kynge Achas vnto the kynges of Assur, y they shulde helpe him. And the Edomites came agayne, and smote Iuda, and caried some awaye captyue. The Philistynes also fell in to the cities in the playne, a towarde y south parte of Iuda, q wanne Beth Semes, Aialon,
Gederoth, and Socho with the vyllages therof, 
Timna with the vyllages therof, q Gimso with the vyllages therof, and dwelt therin. For y
LORDE subdued Iuda for Achas sake y kynge of Iuda, because he made Iuda nam and rebelled agaynst the LORDE. And
Teglatpilnesser the kynge of Assur came agayust him, and beseged him, q he was not mightie ynough for him.

For Achas spoyled the house of the LORDE, and the kynges honse, and of the rulers, to geue vnto y kynge of Assur, but it helped him not. Morouer kinge Achas trespaced yet more against the LORDE euen in his trouble, and dyd sacrifyce vnto the goddes of them of
Damascon, which had smitten him, q sayde: 
The goddes of the kynges of Syria helpe them, therfore wil I offre vnto them, that they maye helpe me also, where as the same yet were a fall vnto him and to all Israel.

And Achas gathered the vessels of ¥ house of God together, and brake the vessels in y house of God, q t shut the dores of the house of y LORDE, and made him altares in all

* 4 Re. 16. b. 

+2 Pn. 19. a. ? 4 Re. 18. a. 

corners at Ierusalem, and euery where in the cyties of Iuda made he hye was to burne incense vnto other goddes, and prouoked y
LORDE God of his fathers vnto wrath. 
What more there is to saye of him and of all his wayes (both first and last) beholde, it is wrytten in the boke of the kynges of Iuda and Israel. And Achas fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buried him in ¥ cite of lerusalem : for they brought him not amonge the sepulcres of the kynges of Israel. And
Ezechias his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

The vri. Chapter. 

p ZECHIAS* was fyne q twentye yeare 

olde whan he was made kynge, q reigned nyne q twentye yeares at lerusalem. His mothers name was Abia y donghter of Zachary.
And he dyd that which was right in the sight of the LORDE, as did his father Dauid. tHe opened the dores of y house of the
LORDE in the first moneth of y first yeare of his raigne, a made them stronge, a brought in the prestes and Leuites, and gathered them together vnto the East streate and sayde vnto them: Herken vnto me ye Leuites, sanctifye youre selues now, that ye maye halowe the house of the LORDE God of youre fathers, and put fylthines out of the Sanctuary: for oure fathers haue trespaced, and done y which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE oure
God, and haue forsaken him. Tor they turned their faces from the habitacio of y
LORDE oure God, q turned their backes on it, and shut the dores of the Porche, and put out the lampes, and brent no incense, q offred no burntsacrifyces in the Sanctuary vnto the
God of Israel. 

Therfore is the wrath of the LORDE come ouer Iuda and Ierusalem, and he hath geuen them ouer to be scatred abrode, desolate and to be hyssed at, as ye se with youre eies. For beholde, euen for the same cause fell oure fa- thers thorow the swerde, oure sonnes doughters and wyues were caryed awaye captyue. Now am I mynded to make a couenaunt with the
LORDE God of Israel, y he maye turne awaie from vs his wrath ¢ indignacion. Now my sonnes, be not ye negligent: $for the
LORDE hath chosen you to stode before him, and to be his mynisters and to burne incense vnto him.

Hus PRETI $ Num. 18. a. 

Chap. rrir. 

Chap. rrir. 

Then rose the Leuites : Mahath the sonne of Amasai, and Ioel the sonne of Asaria of the children of the Kahathites. Of the children of Merari: Cis the sonne of Abdi, x Asaria the sonne of Iehaleleel. Of the children of the
Gersonites: Ioah the sonne of Simma, and 
Eden the sonne of Joah. And of the childré of Elizaphan: Simri q leiel. And of the childré of Assaph: Sachary and Mathania.
And of the children of Heman: Iehiel and 
Simei. And of the children of Iedithun: 
Semaia and Vsiel. 

And they gathered their brethren together, and were sanctified, and wente in acordinge to the kynges commaundement at the worde of the LORDE, to clense the house of ¥
LORDE. And the prestes entred within in the house of the LORDE to purifye, and put out all the vuclennes that was founde in the teple of the LORDE, in the courte of the
LORDES house: and the prestes toke it vp, and caryed it out in to the broke Cedron.
The fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth beganne they to sanctifye them selues, and on the eight daye of the moneth wente they in to the porche of the LORDE, and halowed the house of y LORDE eight dayes, and fynished it on the sixtenth daye of the fyrst moneth.

And they wete in to the kynge Ezechias, and sayde: We haue clensed all the house of the LORDE, the altare of burntofferynges, and all his vessels, the table of the shewbred and all the apparell therof: and all the orna- mentes that kynge Achas cast awaye wha he was kynge, what tyme as he transgressed, those haue we prepared and halowed. Beholde, they are before the altare of the LORDE.

D| ‘The the kynge Ezechias gat him vp early, 

and gathered together the Elders of the cite, and wéte vp vnto the house of the LORDE, and they broughte seuen bullockes, seuen rammes, seuen lambes, and seuen he goates to be the synofferynge, for the Sanctuary, « for Inda. And he spake vnto the prestes the childreu of Aaron, that they shulde offre vpon the altare of the LORDE.

So they slewe the bullockes, and the prestes toke the bloude, and sprenkled it vpon y altare: and slewe the rammes, and sprenkled the bloude vpon the altare: and slewe the labes, and sprenkled the bloude vpon the altare. And the goates to y synofferynge

brought they before the kynge and the con- 

The i. boke of the Cronteles, 

gregacio, and layed their handes vpon them : and the prestes slewe them, and sprenkled their bloude vpon the altare to make attonemét for all Israel: for the kynge commaunded to offre burntsacrifyces and sinofferinges for all
Israel. 

And he set the Leuites in the house of|35 

the LORDE with Cymbales, Psalteries and harpes, *as Dauid had commaunded, and Gad the kynges Seer, and the prophet Nathan, for it was the commaundement of the LORDE by his prophetes. And the Leuites stode with the musicall instrumentes of Dauid, a the prestes with the trompettes. And Ezechias commaunded them to offre burntsacrifyces vpon the altare. And aboute the tyme that the burntsacrifyce begane to be offred the songe of the LORDE beganne also, and y trompettes, and dyuerse instrumentes of Danid the kynge of Israel and all the congregacion gaue praise q thankes: and the songe of the
Musicians, and y blowynge of the trompetters, endured all syll the burntofferynge was fy- nished.

Now whan the burntofferynge was perfour- med, the kynge and all they that were with him, bowed them selues, and gaue praise and thankes. And Ezechias the kynge with the rulers commaunded the Leuites to prayse the
LORDE with the songes of Dauid and As- saph the Seer. And they gaue prayse tyll they were ioyfull, and they bowed them selues, and worshipped.

And Ezechias answered and saide: Now haue ye fylled youre hades vnto the LORDE steppe forth, and brynge hither $ sacrifyces and thankofferynges vnto the house of the
LORDE. And the congregacion broughte sacrifyces and thankofferynges, and euery ma of a fre wyllinge hert brought burntofferynges.
And the nombre of the burntofferynges that the congregacion broughte, was thre score bullockes and ten, an hundreth rames, and two hundreth lambes, aud all these for the burntofferynge vnto the LORDE, and they sanctifyed sixe hundreth bullockes, and thre thousande shepe.

But the prestes were to fewe, and coulde not pluck of the skynnes of all the burnt- offerynges, therfore toke they their brethren the Leuites, tyll the worke was fyniszhed, and tyll the prestes were halowed (for the Leuites

*1 Par. 26.a. 

Fo. reerrrb. 

So. reeerrbi, 

a 

are easier to be halowed then the prestes) and’ many of the burnt offerynges were with the, fat of the thankofferynges and drynkofferynges to the burntsacrifices. Thus was the minis- tracion of the house of the LORDE prepared.
And Ezechias reioysed with all the people, that they were prepared with God: for it was done righte haistely.

The yy. Chapter. 

ND Ezechias sent in to all Israel and 
A Iuda, and wrote letters vnto Ephraim and Manasses, that they shulde come to the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem, to kepe easter vnto the LOR DE God of Israel. And the kynge helde a councell with his rulers, and all the cogregacion at Ierusalem, *to kepe
Passeoner in the seconde moneth: for at that tyme they coulde not kepe it, because the prestes were not sanctified ynough, and the people were not yet come together vnto Ieru- salem. And it pleased the kynge well and all

the eogregaclon. And they appointed it to be]. 

proclamed thorow out all Israel from Berseba vnto Dan, that they shulde come to kepe
Passeouer vnto the LORDE God of Israel: for they were not many to kepe it as it is wrytten.

And the postes wente with the letters from the hande of the kynge and of his rulers thorow out all Israell and Iuda, at $ kynges commaundement, and sayde: Ye children of
Israel, turne you vnto the LORDE God of 
Abraham, Isaac and lacob, and he shal turne to y escaped, which are lefte ouer amonge you from the hande of the kynge of Assur: and be not ye as youre fathers and brethren, which rebelled agaynst the LORDE God of their fathers, and he gane thé ouer in to desolacion as ye se youre selues. Be not ye hardnecked now as were yonre fathers, but offre youre hide vnto the LORDE, and come to his sanetuary, which he hath sanctified for euer, and serue the LORDE youre God, q so shal the indignacion of his wrath turne awaye from you. For yf ye ture vnto the LORDE, then shal youre brethren and children haue mercy in the sighte of them which holde them in captiuyte, that they maye come agayne in to this londe : for the LORDE youre God is gracious and mercifull, and shal not turneawaye his face from you, yf ye conuerte vnto him.

* Num. 9, b. t Exod, 34. c. 

The ij. boke of the Cronirles. 

Chap. rrr. | 

And the postes wente from one cite tolt 

another in the londe of Ephraim and Ma- nasses, and vnto Zabulon. But they mocked them and laughed them toscorne. Yet were there some of Asser and Manasses, and of
Zabulon, that submytted them selues, and came to Jerusalem. And the hande of God came in to Iuda, so that he gaue thé one hert to do after the commaundement of the kynge and the rulers at the worde of the LORDE.
And there came together vnto Terusalé a greate people, to kepe the feast of vnle- uended bred in the seconde moneth, a very greate congregacion.

And they gat them vp, and put downe y taltares that were at lerusalem, and all the incense put they awaye, and cast it in to the broke Cedron, and slewe the Passeouer on the fourtenth daye of the secode moneth.
And y prestes and Leuites were ashamed, and halowed them selues, and broughte the burntofferynges to the house of the LORDE, and stode in their ordinaunce, as it was acord- inge, after the lawe off Moses the man of God.
And the prestes sprenkled the bloude from the hande of the Leuites: for there were many in the cdgregacion which were not sanctified, therfore dyd the Leuites kyll Passe- ouer for them which were not clensed, that they mighte be sanctified vnto the LORDE.

There were many people also of Ephraim, 
Manasses, Isachar and Zabulon, which were not cleane, but ate the Easter lambe not as it is wrytten: for Ezechias prayed for them, and sayde: The LORDE, which is gracious, shalbe mercifull vnto all them that prepare their hertes vnto God, to seke the LORDE
God of their fathers, though they be not clensed after the holy purificacion. And the
LORDE herde Ezechias, and healed the people. Thus the children of Israel that were founde at ferusale, helde y feast of vn- leuended bred seuen dayes with greate ioye.
And the Leuites and prestes praysed the 
LORDE euery daye with the loude instru- mentes of the LORDE. And Ezechias spake hertely vnto all y Leuites, which had good vnderstondinge in the LORDE, and they ate the feast seuen dayes, and offred thakofferynges, and gaue thankes vnto y
LORDE God of their fathers. 

And all the congregacion deuysed to kepe 

| 

t9 Pa. 27. d. 

B 

" 

3: 

I bap. xrrt. 

the feast yet other sene dayes, and so they helde 3t those seuen dayes also with ioye: for
Ezechias the kinge of Iuda gaue an Heue- offeryuge for the cógregacion, euen a thon- sande bullockes, and seuen thousande shepe.
But the rulers gaue an Heneofferinge for y congregacion, euen a thousande bullockes, and ten thonsande shepe. And many of the prestes sanctified them selues.

And the whole congregacion of luda re- ioysed, the prestes and Leuites, and all the congregacion that came ont of Israel, and the straungers that were come out of the londe of Israel, and they that dwelt in Iuda, and greate ioye was there at lerusalem: for sence the tyme of Salomon the sonue of Danid the kynge of Israel, was there no soch (ioye) at lernsale. And the prestes and Leuites stode vp and blessed the people, and their voyce was herde, and their prayer came in to his
‘holy habitacion in heanen. 

The ryyi. Chapter. 

ND whan all this was fynished, all the 
A Israelites that were founde in y cities of Iuda, wente out, and brake the pilers, and hewed downe the groues, and brake downe the hye places and altares out of all Iuda, Ben lamin, Ephraim and Manasses, tyll they had destroyed the. And all the children of Israel wente agayne enery one to his possession vnto their cities.

But Ezechias set the prestes and Leuites in their ordinaunces, euery one after his office, both the prestes and Leuites, for the burnt- sacrifices and thankofferynges, to mynister, to geue thankes and prayse in the gates of the hoost of the LORDE. And the kynge gaue his porcion of his substance for the burnt- offerynges in the mornynge and euenynge, and for the burntofferynges of the Sabbath, and of the newmone and of the feastes, as it is wrytten in the lawe of the LORDE.

And he spake vnto y people which dwelt at 
Ierusalem, that they shnlde gene porciós vnto the prestes and Leuites, y they mighte the more stedfastly endure in the lawe of the
LORDE. And wha y worde came forth, the ehildré of Israel gaue many fyrst frutes of corne, wyne, oyle, hony, and all maner increace of the felde, aud bronghte in moch of all maner tithes. And the children of Israel and luda which dwelt in the cities of Iuda,

Che ij. boke of the Cronteles. 

broughte the tithes also of oxen and shepe, and the tithes of soch thinges as were sanc- tifyed, which they had halowed vnto the
LORDE their God, and made here an heape, and there an heape. In the thirde moneth begane they to laye vpon heapes, and in the seuenth moneth dyd they fynishe it.

And wha Ezechias with the rulers wente in, and sawe the heapes, they praysed the
LORDE, and his people of Israel. And 
Ezechias axed the prestes and Leuites con- cernynge the heapes. And Asaria the prest the chefe in the house of Sadoc, sayde vnto him: Sence the tyme that they beganne to brynge the Heueofferynges in to y house of the LORDE, we haue eaten, and are satisfied, and yet is there lefte ouer: for the LORDE hath blessed his people, therfore is this heape lefte ouer. Then commaunded the kynge, that they shulde prepare chestes in the house of the LORDE. And they prepared them, and put in the Heueofferynges, and tithes and that which was halowed, faithfully.

And the onersighte of the same had Cha- nania the Leuite, and Simei his brother the seconde, and Iehiel, Asasia, Naglath, Asahel, lerimoth, Iosabad, Eliel, Iesmachia, Mahath and Benaia, ordeyned of the hande off Cha- nania and Simei his brother, acordinge to the commaundement of kyuge Ezechias But
Asaria was prynce in the house of God. And 
Core y sonne of Iemna the Leuite the porter of the Eastgate was ouer the frewyllinge giftes of God (which were geuen for Heueotlerynges vnto the LORDE) and ouer the Most holy.
And vnder his hande were, Eden, Miniamin, 
Tesna, Semaia, Amaria, and Sachania in the cities of the prestes vpon credence, that they shulde gene vnto their brethré acordinge to their courses, to the leest as to the greatest.

And vnto them that were counted for men childré from thre yeare olde and aboue, amonge all thé that wéte in to the house of the
LORDE, euery one vpo his daye to their office in their attendannces after their courses.
And they that were rekened for prestes in the house of their fathers, and the Leuites from twentye yeare and aboue, in their attendaunces after their courses. And they that were rekened amonge their children, wyues, sonnes and doughters amoge the whole congregacion: for that which was halowed, sanctifyed they vpon credence. ‘There were men also named by

Fo. cecerroy. 

€ 

a 

B 

Ffo. ceeeypbiy. 

name amonge Aarons children the prestes| vpon the feldes of the suburbes in all ¥ cities, that they shulde geue porcions vnto all the | men children amoge the prestes, and to all them that were nombred amonge the Leuites.

Thus dyd Ezechias in all luda, and dyd that which was good, righte and true in the sighte of the LORDE his God. And in all the busynes that he toke in hade concernynge the sernyce of the house of God, acordinge to the lawe and commaundement, to seke his
God, that dyd he with all his hert, and ther- fore prospered he well.

The pryij. Chapter. 

FTER these actes and faithfulnes came 
Sennacherib^ the kynge of Assur, and wente in to Iuda, and pitched before the stróge cities, and thoughte to plucke them vnto him. And whan Ezechias sawe that
Sennacherib came, and that his face stode to fighte agaynst lerusalem, he deuysed with his rulers and mightie men, to couer the waters of the welles that were without the cite, and they helped him: and there gathered together a greate people, and couered all y welles and water brokes in the myddes of the londe, and sayde: Lest the kynges of Assur fynde moch water wha they come. And he toke a corage vnto him, and buylded all the walles where they were in decaye, and made towres theron, and buylded yet another wall without, and strengthed Millo in the cite of Dauid. And made moch ordinaunce and shyldes, and set

captaynes of warre ouer the people. 

And gathered them vnto him vpon the brode strete by the gate of the cite, and spake hertely vuto them, and sayde: Be stronge and bolde, feare not, and be not afrayed for the kynge of Assur, ner all y multitude that is with him: for there is one greater with vs then with him. With him is a *fleshly arme, but with vs is the LORDE oure God, to helpe vs and to fighte for vs. And li people trusted vnto the wordes of Ezechias kynge of
Iuda. 

è Afterwarde sent Sennacherib the kynge of 
Assur his seruauntes vnto lerusalem (for he laye before Lachis, v all his hoost with him) to Ezechias $ kinge of luda, q to all luda that was at Terusalé, sayenge: Thus sayeth
Sennacherib y kynge of Assur: Wheri put 

a 4 Re. 18. c. * Tere. 17. b 

Cbr ij. boke of the Cronicles. 

e youre trust ye that dwell in the beseged fens Ezechias disceaneth you, that he maye delyuer you vnto death, hoger, and thyrst, and sayeth: The LORDE oure God shal delyuer vs from the hande of the kynge of Assur. Is it not Ezechias, that hath put awaye his hye places and altares, and sayde vnto Iuda and lerusalem: Before one altare shal ye worshippe, and burne incense theron ?

Knowe ye not what I and my fathers haue done to all $ people in the londes? Haue the goddes ji the Heythen in the londes bene able to delyuer their countrees fro my hande?
What is he amonge all the goddes of these 
Heythen (whom my father damned) that was able to delyuer his people fro my hande? y youre God shulde be able to delyuer fro my hande. Therfore let not Ezechias now dis- ceaue you, and let him not persuade you eny soch thinge, and beleue him not. For yf no god of all the Heythé and kyngdomes might delyuer his people fro my hande and from the hande of my progenitours, then shal not youre goddes be able to delyuer vou fro my hande.

His seruaütes also spake yet more against the LORDE God, and agaynst his seruaunt
Ezechias. And he wrote a letter to blaspheme the LORDE God of Israel, and spake of him, and sayde: Like as the goddes of the Heythen in their londes haue not bene able to delyuer their people from my hande, euen so shal not the God of Ezechias delyuer his people fro my hande.

And they cryed with loude voyce in the lewish langage vnto the people of lerusalem that were vpon the wall, to make them fearfull and to be fayntharted, that they might wynne the cite. And they spake agaynst the God off! lerusalem, euen as agaynst the goddes off the nacions vpon earth, which were but the workes of mens hondes.

But contrary wyse the kynge Ezechias and the prophet Esay the sonne of Amos prayed, and cryed vnto heaue. And the LORDE sent an angell, which destroyed all the mightie men of the hoost, and the prynces and rulers in y tentes of the kynge of Assur, so that he departed agayne with shame in to his owne londe. t And whan he wente in to his gods house, they y came of his owne body, slewe him there with theswerde. ‘Thus the LORDE helped Ezechias and them at lerusalem, out

è 4 Re. 18. c. t 4 Re. 19. b. 

Chap. rrr. 

B 

Chap. xrrítj. 

3 

of the hade of Sennacherib y kynge of Assur, and of all other, and mayntayned the fro all on euery syde, so y many broughte presentes vnto the LORDE to Ierusalem, and Jewels vnto Ezechias the kynge of Iuda. And afterwarde was he exalted in the sighte of all
Heythen. 

At y same tyme was Ezechias deedsicke, and he prayed vnto the LORDE, * which made him promes, and gane him a wonder- token. But Ezechias recépensed not acord- inge as was geuen vnto him, for his hert was lifted vp: therfore came the wrath vpon him, and vpon luda and Ierusalem. — Nenertheles
Ezechias humbled him selfe because his hert had bene exalted, with them at lerusalem: therfore came not the wrath of the LORDE vpon them, whyle Ezechias lyued.

And Ezechias had very greate riches and worshippe, and made him treasures of syluer, golde, precious stones, spyces, shyldes, and all maner costly vessell, and. corne houses for the inereace of corne, wyne and oyle, and stalles for all maner catell, and foldes for the shepe, and buylded him cities, and had many catell of shepe and oxen: for God gaue him very moch good.

It is the same Ezechias that couered the hye water condyte in Gihon, and conveyed it vnder on the west syde of ¥ cite of Dauid: for Ezechias prospered in all his workes. But whan the interpreters the chefe of Babilon were sent vnto him, to axe question at him
(concernynge the wondertoké that had hap- pened in the londe) God lefte him *to be tempted, that it might be knowne what soeuer was in his hert.

What more there is to saye of Ezechias, and of his mercifulnes, beholde, it is wrytté in the vision of the prophet Esay the sonne of Amos, and in the boke of the kynges of
Iuda and Israel. And Ezechias fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buried him ouer the sepuleres of the children of Dauid, and all Iuda and they of lerusalé dyd him wor- shippe in his death: and Manasses his sonne was kynge in his steade.

The rrriij. Chapter. 
ANASSES was twolue yeare olde wha he was made kynge, and reigned fyue and fiftye yeare at Ierusalem, and dyd
è 4 Re. 21.a. 

a 4 Re. 20.a. Esa. 28. a. — * Deut, 8. a. 

The ij. boke of the Cronieles. 

that which was euell in the sighte of the 
LORDE (euen after the abominacions of the Heythen, whom the LORDE expelled before the children of Israel) and turned backe, and buylded the hye places, (+ which his father Ezechias had broken downe) and set vp altares vnto Baalim, and made groues, and worshipped all the hoost of heauen, and serued them. He buylded altares also in y
LORDES house, wherof the LORDE had sayde: t At Ierusalem shal my name be for euer. And vnto all the hoost of heanen buylded he altares in both the courtes of y house of the LORDE. And in the valley of the sonne of Hennon caused he his awne sonnes to go thorow the fyre, and chosed dayes, q regarded byrdeseryenge, and witches, and founded soythsayers and expounders of tokens, and dyd moch that was euell in the sighte of the LORDE to prouoke him vnto wrath.

Carued ymages also and Idols (which he caused to make) set he vp in Gods house, wherof the LORDE saide vnto Dauid and to
Salomon his sonne: In this house at lerusa- lem which I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel, wyl I set my name for ener and wyl nomore let the fote of Israel remoue fro the londe that I appoynted for their fathers, so farre as they obserue to do all y I haue commaunded them, in all the lawe, statutes and ordinaunces by Moses. But Manasses disceaued Iuda and them of Ierusalé, so that they dyd worse then the Heythen, whom the
LORDE destroyed before the children of 
Israel. And the LORDE spake vnto Manas- ses and his people, and they regarded it not.

Therfore dyd the LORDE cause the rulers of the hoost of the kynge of Assur to come vpo the, which toke Manasses presoner with bodes, and bounde him with cheynes, q broughte him vnto Babilon. $ And whan he was in trouble, he made intercession before the LORDE his God, and humbled him selfe greatly before the God of his fathers, and prayed and besoughte him. "Then herde he his prayer, and broughte him agayne to Ieru- salem to his kyngdome. And Manasses knewe that the LORDE is God.

Afterwarde buylded he y vttemost wall of the cite of Dauid, on the west syde of Gihon by the broke, and at the intraunce of the

t 4 Re. 18. a. 

HOPE. § Deut. 30. a. 

So. eeeerpir. 

B 

€ 

Ho. rereyrr. 

Fyshgate, and rounde aboute *Ophel, and made it very hye. And layed captaynes in y stroge cities of Iuda, q put awaye y straunge goddes q Idols out of ý house of y LORDE, and all the altares which he had buylded vpo the mount of the house of the LORDE, and in Ierusalem, and cast them out of the cite, and buylded the altare of the LORDE, and offred slaynofferynges and thankofferynges theron, and commaunded luda, that they shulde serue the LORDE God of Israel.
Neuertheles though the people offred vnto the 
LORDE thetr God, yet offred they vpon the hye places.

What more there is to saye of Mauasses and of his prayer to his God, and the wordes of the Secrs that spake vnto him in the name of the LORDE God of Israel, beholde, they are amonge the actes of the kynges of Israel.
And his prayer and intercession, and all his synne and offence, q the rowmes wherin he buylded the hye places q groues and founded ydols, afore he hubled himselfe, beholde, they are wrytten amonge the actes of the Seers.
And Manasses fell on slepe with his fathers, and they buried him in his house, and Amon his sonne was kynge in his steade.

Two and twétye yeare olde was Amon wha he was made kynge, and reigned two yeare at lerusale, and dyd euell in the sighte of the
LORDE, as Manasses his father had done. 
And Amon offred vnto all the Idols that his father Manasses had made and serued the.
Yet dyd not he humble himselfe before the 
LORDE, as Manasse his father had sub- mitted himselfe: but Amon trespaced euer more and more. And his seruauntes cospyred agaynst him, and slewe him iu his house.
Then smote the people in the londe all them that had conspyred agayust kynge Amon. Aud the people in the londe made losias his sonne kynge in his steade.

The rrriiij. Chapter. 

| Bln was eight yeare olde whan he was 

made kynge," and reigned one and thirtye yeare at lerusalem, and dyd that which was righte in the sighte of the LORDE, and walked in the wayes of Dauid his father, and turned not asyde, nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte. For in the eight yeare of his reigne wha he was yet but a childe, he beganne to

*9 Esd. 3. c 

The ij. boke of the Cronitles. 

Chap. rrriii. seke the God of his father Dauid: and in the twolueth yeare begāne he to clense Iuda and
Ierusale from the hye places and groues, and carued Idols, and molten ymages: and caused the altares of Baalim to be broken downe before him, and the ymages that were theron, hewed he downe. And y groues and carued
Idols and molté ymages brake he in peces, and made them to dust, and scatred it vpon the graues of them that had offred vnto them.
And the bones of the prestes brent he vpo the altares, and so clesed he Iuda q Ierusale, q in y cities of Manasses, Ephraim, Simeon, and vnto Nephtali in their wyldernesses on euery syde. And wha he had broken downe the altares and groues, and smytten the Idols in peces, and hewed downe all the ymages in all the londe of Israel, he came agayne to
Ierusalem. 

In the eightéth yeare of his reigne ’ wha he had clensed the londe and the house, he sent
Saphan the sonne of Asalia and Maeseia the 
Shreue of the cite, and loath the sonne of loahas the Chaunceler, to repayre the house of the LORDE his God. And they came to
Helchias y hye prest, and there was delyuered vnto them the money that was broughte vnto the house of God, which the Leuites (that kepte the threshouldes) had gathered, of Ma- nasses, Epraim, and of all the residue in Israel, and of all Iuda « Ben lamin, and of them that dwelt at Ierusale, and they delyuered it vnto the hades of the worke men in the house of the LORDE, and gaue it vnto those that wrought in the house of the LORDE, where it was in decaye, y they shulde repayre it.
And the same gaue it forth vnto the car- penters and buylders, to bye fre stone and hewen tymber for the balkes in the houses, which the kynges had destroyed. And the men laboured faithfully in the worke.

And ouer them were ordeyned, Iahath and| € 
Obadia the Leuites of the children of Merari: 
Zachary and Mesullam of the children of the 
Kahathites, to further the worke, and they were all Leuites that coulde playe vpon in- strumentes. But ouer them that bare burthens and furthured all maner of worke in all the offices, there were scrybes, officers and dore kepers of the Leuites. And whà they toke out the money that was broughte vnto y house of the LORDE, Helchias the prest founde

? 4 Re. 22. a. b 4 Re. 22, a. 

Chap. rerb. 
~ |the boke of the lawe of the LORDE geuen| |wordes agaynst this place and the inhabiters| geuen by Moses. And Helchias answered, and saide vnto Saphan the Serybe: * I haue founde the boke of the lawe in y honse of y LORDE.
And Helchias delyuered the boke vnto Saphan. 

And Saphan bare it vnto the kynge, and broughte $ kyuge worde agayne, and sayde:

All that was geuen vnder the handes of thy seruauntes, that make they: and y money that was founde in ¥ house of the LORDE, haue they gathered together, and delyuered it vnto
$ officers, and to the workmen. And Saphan the Serybe tolde the kynge, and sayde: Hel- chias the prest hath delyuered me a boke.

B| And Saphan red therin before the kynge. 
And whan the kynge herde the wordes of the lawe, he rente his clothes. And the kynge commaunded Helchias and Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, and Abdon the sonne of Micha, and Saphan the Serybe, and Asaia the kynges seruaunt, and sayde: Go youre waye, axe councell at the LORDE for me and for the remnaunt in Israel, and for Iuda, concernynge these wordes of the boke that is founde. For greate is the indignacion of the LORDE that is gone forth ouer vs, because oure fathers haue not kepte the worde of the LORDE, to do acordinge as it is wrytten in this boke.
Then wéte Helchias (with the other that were sent from the kynge) vnto the prophetisse
Hulda the wife of Sallum the Sonne of The- coath the sonne of Hasra the keper of the clothes, which dwelt at Ierusalem in the secode parte, and they spake this vnto her.

E| And she sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth the LORDE God of Israel: Tell the man sent you vnto me: Thus sayeth y LORDE,
Beholde, I wil brynge plages vpō this place and the inhabiters therof, eué all the curses which are wrytten in tlie boke, that was red before the kynge of Iuda: because they haue forsaké me, and brét incése vnto other goddes, to prouoke me with all the workes of their handes. And my indignacion shal go forth

vpon this cite, and shal not be quenched. 

And after this maner shal ye saye vnto the kynge of Iuda, that sent you to axe councell at the LORDE: "Thus sayeth y LORDE
God of Israel eoncernynge the wordes that thou hast herde: Because thine hert is moued, and because thon hast humbled thy selfe in the sighte of God, whan thou herdest his

* 4 Re. 22. b. 

? 4 Re. 23. a. t Iosue 24. f. 

Chap. rb. Thei. boke of the Cronies. — — — —— fo. remi. 

wordes agaynst this place and the inhabiters therof, and hast submytted thy selfe before me, and rent thy clothes, and wepte before me, therfore haue I herdethe, sayeth y LORDE.
Beholde, I wil gather the vnto thy fathers, and thou shalt be layed in thy graue with peace, so y thine eyes shal not se all the euell that I SE ge ouer this place, and the eque T And they Droughte the kynge worde agayne.

Then sent y kynge, “and od all the 
Elders in Iuda and lerusalem to come to- gether. And the kynge wente vp in to the house of the LORDE, and all the men of
Iuda and inhabiters st Ierusale, the prestes, the Leuites, and all the people both small and greate: and all the wordes in the boke of the couenaunt that was founde in the honse of the
LORDE, were red in their eares. And y kynge stode in his place, and made a coue- naunt before the LORDE, that they shulde walke after the LORDE, to kepe his có- manndementes, his testimonies, and his sta- tutes with all their hert and with all their soule, to do acordinge vnto all the wordes of the couenaunt that are wrytten in this boke.

And there stode all they that were founde at lerusalem and in Ben lamin. And y inhabiters of Ierusalem dyd acordinge to ae couenaunt of God the God of their fathers.
And Iosias put awaye all abhominacions out of all the londes that were the children of
Israels, and caused all them that were founde in Israel, to serue the LORDE their God.
+ As longe as losias lyued, departed they not from the LORDE the God of their fathers.

The yrrb. Chapter. 

ND Iosias kepte Passeouer’ vnto the 
AN LORDE at lerusalem, and slewe the 
Passeouer on the fourtenth daye off the first moneth, and set the prestes in their offices, and strengthed them to their mynistracion in the house of the LORDE, and sayde vnto the
Leuites that taughte in all Israel, and were sanctified vnto y LORDE: Putthe holy Arke in the house that Salomon y sonne of Dauid kynge of Israel dyd buylde. :Ye shal beare it nomore vpon youre shulders. Se that ye serue now the LORDE yonre God, and his people of Israel, and prepare the house of yonre fathers in youre courses, as it was

5 3 Esd. 1. a. t 1 Pa. 24. d. 

Fo. Chap. pro. THE. boke of the Cronies, ffo. ceeerpri 

F 

Fo. ceeerrrtj. 

5 

| 

Burr by Dauid the kynge of Israel, and by Salomo his sonne: and stonde in the
| Sanctuary after y course of the fathers houses amonge youre brethren the children of the people, And after the course of the fathers
[houses amonge the Leuites, and kyll Passe- ouer, sanctifye and prepare youre brethren, that they maye do acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.

And Iosias gaue lambes and yonge kyddes which were males, to the Heueofferynge for the comontye (all to the Passeouer for euery one that was founde) in the nombre thirtye thonsande, and thre thousande oxen, all of the kynges good. And his prynces of their awne good wyll gaue to the Heucofferynge for the people, q for the prestes and Leuites (namely,
Helchias, Zachary and Iehiel the prynces in 
¥ house of God amoge the prestes) for the 

asseouer, two thousande and sixe hundreth, 
And thre hüdreth oxen. But Chanania, Se- maia, Nathaneel and his brethren, Gasabia, leiel and Josabad the chefe of the Leuites gaue the Leuites to the Hene offerynge for the Passeouer, fyue thousande shepe, q fyue hundreth oxen.

Thus was the Gods seruyce prepared, and the prestes stode in their place, and the Leuites in their courses acordinge to the kynges com- maundement. And they kylled the Passeouer, and the prestes toke it off their handes, and sprenkled it: and the Leuites toke the skynnes off them, and remoued the burntofferynge there from, to gene it amonge the porcions of the fathers houses in the multitudes of their con- gregacion to offre vnto the LORDE, *as it is wrytten in y boke of Moses, Enen so dyd they with the oxen also. And they dighte the
Passeouer at the fyre t acordinge to the lawe. 
And that which was halowed, dighte they in pottes, kettels, and pannes, and made haisf
(for the comon people. Afterwarde prepared they for them selnes also and for ý prestes: for the prestes the children of Aaron were occupied in the burntofferynges and fat vntyll the nighte. "Pherfore must the Leuites pre- pare for them selues and for the prestes the children of Aaron.

And the syngers the children of Asaph stode in their place (acordinge to + Dauids commaundement) and Asaph and Heman,

and Iedithim the kynges Seer, and the porters 

* Leuit. 1, a. t Exo. 12. b. 

The dj. boke of the Cronicles, 

at all the gates. And they departed not from their office. For the Leuites their brethren prepared for them. ‘Thus was all the Gods seruyce prepared the same daye, that the
Passeouer mighte be kepte, and the burnt- sacrifices offred vpon the altare off the LORDE acordinge to the commaundement of kynge
Tosias. 

So the children of Israel that were at hande, helde Passeouer at that tyme, and the feast of vnleuended bred, senen dayes. Sence ¥ tyme of Samuel the prophet, was no Passeouer kepte in Israel like this: and no kynge of
Israel had holdé soch a Passeouer as losias dyd, and the prestes, Leuites, all Inda, and soch as were founde of Israel, and the inha- biters of Ierusalem. In the eightéth yeare of the reigne of Iosias was this Passeouer kepte.

After this, whan Iosias had prepared the house, Necho the kynge of Egipte wente vp to fighte agaynst Carcamis besyde Euphrates.
And Iosias wéte forth agaynst him. But he sent messaungers vnto him, sayenge: What haue I to do with the O kynge off Iuda? I am not come now agaynst the, but I fighte agaynst another house: and God hath sayde, that I shal make haist. Ceasse from God which is with me, that he destroye the not.
Neuertheles Josias turned not his face from him, but prepared himselfe to fighte with him, and herkened not vnto the wordes of Necho out of the mouth of God, q came to fighte with him vpon the playne besyde Mageddo.
But the Archers shot at kynge Tosias. And the kynge sayde vnto his seruauntes: Cary me awaye, for I am sore wounded. And his seruaiites toke him from the charet, and caried him vpon his seconde charet, and broughte him to Ierusalem. And he dyed, and was buried amonge the sepulcres off his fathers.

And All Iuda and Jerusalem mourned for 
Iosias, and leremy bewayled losias, and all the synginge men and wemen, spake their lamétacions ouer losias vnto this daye, and made a custome therof vnto this daye. Be- holde, it is wrytten also amonge the Lamen- tacions. and his mercy acordinge to the scripture in the lawe of the LORDE, and of his actes
(both first and last) beholde, it is wrytten in the boke of the kynges of Israel and
Tuda. 

What more there is to saye of Iosias, 

t1 Pa. 26, 27. 

Chap. rrrb. 

D 

‘Chap. rrt. 

The ij. boke of the Cronteles. 

Fo. cecerprtt. 

| 

Che rrrbi. Chapter. 

ND the people of the londe *toke Ioahas 

the sonne of Iosias, and made him kynge in his fathers steade at Ierusalem. Thre and twentye yeare olde was loahas whan he was made kynge, and reigned thre monethes at lerusalem. For the kynge of Egipte deposed
‘him at Ierusalem, and condemned the londe in an hundreth talentes of syluer, and one talent off golde. And the kynge of Egipte made Eliachim his brother kynge ouer luda and lerusale, and turned his name Joachim.
But Necho toke his brother Joahas, and caried him in to Egipte.

Fyue and twentye yeare olde was Ioachim wha he was made kynge, and reigned eleué yeare at Jerusalé, and dyd that which was jeuell in the sighte of the LORDE his God.
|* And Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon wente vp agaynst him, and bounde him with cheynes, to cary him vnto Babilon. And
Nabuchodonosor broughte certayne vessels of y house of the LORDE vnto Babilon, and put them in his temple at Babilon. What more there is to saye of Ioachim, and off his abhominacions which he dyd, and that were founde in him, beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the kynges of Israel and Iuda.
And Joachim his sonne was kynge in his steade. 

Fight yeare olde was Ioachim whan he was made kynge, and reigned thre monethes and ten dayes at lerusale, and dyd y which was euell in the sighte of y LORDE. But wha the yeare came aboute, Nabuchodonosor sent thither, and caused him be fetched vnto Ba- bilon with the costly vessels aud Iewels of the house of the LORDE, and made Sedechias his brother kynge ouer Iuda and Ierusalem.

*One and twentye yeare olde was Sedechias whan he was made kynge, q reigned elenen yeare at lerusalem, and dyd that which was euell in the sighte of the LORDE his God, and subinytted not himselfe before the face of the prophet leremy, which spake out of the mouth of the LORDE. He fell awaye also from Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon
(which had taken an ooth of him by God) and was styfnecked, and hardened his hert, that he shulde not conuerte vnto the LORDE God

24 Re, 23. f. 3 Esd. 1. d: * 4 Re. 24. a. t lere. 52. a. 4 Re. 24. d. t£lIere.25. 3. t4 Re. 25. a.

of Israel. And all ý chefe amonge the prestes, and the people, Bed their synnes, acord- inge to all the abhominacions of the Heythen, and dyfyled the house of the LORDE, which he had sanctified at Ierusalem.

tAnd the LORDE God of their fathers sent vuto them early by his messaungers (for he spared his people and his habitacion) but they laughed the messaungers of God to scorne, and despysed his wordes, and had his pro- phetes in derision, so loge tyll the indignacion of the LORDE increased ouer his people, and there was no remedye of healinge. + For he broughte the kynge of the Caldees vpon them, and caused for to slaye all their yonge men with the swerde in the house of their
Sanctuary, and spared nether yonge mà ner virgin, nether aged ner graüd father, but gaue them all in to his hande. And all the vessels in the house of God, greate and small, the treasures in the house of ý LORDE, and the treasures of the kynge and of his prynces, all this caused he to be caried vnto Babilon.
And they brent the house of God, and brake downe the wall of Ierusalé, and all the palaces therof brent they with fyre, so that all the costly ornamentes of it were destroyed.

And loke who escaped y swerde, hi caried|38 

he awaye vnto Babilon, x they became his sernantes, q the seruauntes of his sonnes, tyll the Persians had the empyre: that y worde of the LORDE by the mouth of Ieremy mighte be perfourmed, euen vntyll the londe had ynough of hir Sabbathes: for all the tyme of the desolacion was it Sabbath, vntyll the seuentye yeares were fulfylled.

° But in the first yeare of Cyrus the kynge of 
Persia (that the worde of the LORDE spoken by the mouth of Ieremy mighte be fulfylled) the LORDE raysed vp the sprete of Cyrus the kyuge of Persia, that he caused it be pro- clamed thorow out all his empyre, yee and by wrytinge also, sayenge: Thus sayeth Cyrus the kynge of Persia: The LORDE God of heauen hath geuen me all the kyngdomes in the londe, aud hath commaunded me to buylde hin an house at lerusalem in Iuda.
Who soeuer now amonge you is of his people, the LORDE his God be with him, and let him go vp.

$ lere. 25. b. 

*] Esd. 1. a. 3 Esd. 2. a. 

The ende of the seconde boke of the Cronitles, 

53 

| uw IAM WB 

The first boke of Esdras. 

That this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
Cyrus (otherwyse called Cores) the kynge of 
Persia, geueth the Iewes lycéce to go agayne to Ierusalem, and to buylde it

Chap. Il. 
The nombre of them that wente vp from Babilon vato lerusalem.
Chap. II. 
The people resorte to lerusalem, the prestes buylde the altare, kepe the feastes and sacri- fices, and prepare to buylde the temple.

Chap. III. 

The Heythen wolde buylde with them: and because they are not suffred, therfore laboure they (with their councell and letters) to hynder the buyldinge of the temple.

Chap. V. 
In this tyme prophecied Aggeus and Zachary. 
The officers of the Heythen forbyd the buyld- inge, and hynder it.

| The first Chapter. 

A | T N the “first yeare of Cyrus kynge off Persia 
(that the worde of the LORDE spoken 
*by the mouth of Ieremy might be fulfilled) the LORDE stered vp the sprete of Cyrus kynge of Persia, y he caused it be pro- clamed thorow out all his empyre, yee and by wrytinge also, sayenge: Thns sayeth Cyrns the kynge of Persia: The LORDE God of heaue hath geuen me all the kyngdomes in the londe tand hath commaunded ‘me to buylde him an house at Ierusalem in Iuda.

* 2 Pa. 36. d... 3 Esd. 2.a. 

Chap. VI. 
Darius renueth the commaundement of Cyrus, and geueth the lewes lycéce to buylde the temple.

Chap. VII. 

Artaxerses sendeth Eszdras vnto lerusalem with a charge vnto the officers beyonde the water.

Chap. VIII. 

The nombre of them that wente vp with Eszdras vnto Ierusalem.

Chap. IX. 

Eszdras is sory that the people haue myxte them selues with the Heythenish wemen.

Chap. X. 

They make a couenaunt to put awaye their 
Heythenish wyues. 

Who soeuer now amonge you is of his people, the LORDE his God be with him, and let him go vp to Ierusalem in Iuda, and bnylde the honse of the LORDE God of Israel. He is ¥ God that is at lerusale. And who so euer remayneth yet in eny maner of place
(where he is a straunger) let the me of his place helpe him with syluer and golde, with good and catell of a good frewill, for the house of God at Ierusalem.
Then gat vp the pryncipall fathers of Iuda}33 

and Ben lamin, and the prestes and Leuites, and all they whose sprete God had raysed to

* Tere. 25. b. t Esa. 45. a. 

Chap. tj. 

go vp, and to buylde the house of the LORDE at Jerusalé. And all they that were aboute them, strengthed their hande with vessels of syluer and golde, with good and catell, and lewels, besydes that which they gaue of their awne frewill. And kynge Cyrus brought forth the vessels of the LORDES house,
*which Nabuchodonosor had take out of Ieru- salem, and put in his gods house. But Cyrus y kynge of Persia brought the forth by Mith- redath the treasurer, and nombred the vnto
Seszbazar the prynce of Iuda. And this is the nombre of them : thirtye basens of golde, and a thousande basens of syluer, and nyne and twentye knyues, thirtye cuppes of golde, and of other syluer cuppes foure hundreth and ten, and of other vessels a thousande.
So that all the vessels both of golde and syluer, were fyue thousande and foure hundreth.
Seszbazar broughte them all vp, with them that came vp out of the captiuyte off Babilon vnto lerusalem.

The ij. Chapter. 

HESE are the childré of the londe that 

wente vp out of the captiuyte (who 
Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon had caried awaye vnto Babilon) and came agayne to lerusalem and in to Iuda, euery one vnto his cite, and came with Zorobabel, lesua,
Nehemias, Seraia, Reeleia, Mardachai, Bil- san, Mispar, Begeuai, Rehum and Baena.
This is now the nombre of the men of the people of Israel: The children of Phares, two thousande, an hidreth, and two and seuentye: the children of Sephatia, thre hundreth and two and seuentye: the children of Arath, seuen hundreth and fyue and seuentye: the children of Pahath Moab amonge the children of Iesua Ioab, two thousande, eight hundreth and twolue: the children of Elam, a thou- sande, two hundreth and foure and fiftye : the children of Sathu, nyne hundreth, and fyue and fortye: the children of Sacai, seué hun- dreth and thre score: the children of Bani, sixe hundreth and two and fortye : the children of Bebai, sixe hundreth and thre and twentye: the children of Asgad, a thousande two hun- dreth and two and twentye: the children of
Adonicam, sixe hidreth and sixe and sixtye: the children of Bigeuai, two thousande and sixe and fiftye: the children of Adin, foure

* 2 Pa. 36. c. Dan. 1. a. 

The i. boke of (£55uras. 

"|and seuentye. 

Fo. creryyrb.| hundreth and foure and fiftye: the children of Ater of Ezechias, eight and nynetye: the children of Bezai, thre hundreth and thre and twentye: the children of Iorath, an hun- dreth and twolue: the children of Hasum, two hundreth and thre and twentye: the children of Gibbar, fyue and nynetye: the children off Bethleem, an hundreth and thre and twentye: the men off Netopha sixe and fiftye: the men off Anathot, an hundreth and eight and twentye : the children off Asmaueth, two and fortye: the children off Kiriath Arim,
Caphira and Beeroth, seuen hundreth and thre and fortye: the children off Rama and
Gaba, sixe hundreth and one and twétye: the men off Michmas, an hundreth and two and twentye: the men of Bethel and Ai, two hundreth and thre and twentye: the childré of Nebo, two and fyftye: the children of|€ |
Magbis, an hüdreth and sixe and fiftye: the childré of the other Elam a thousande, two hundreth and foure and fiftye: the children of Harim, thre hundreth and twentye: the childré of Lodhadid and Ono, seué hüdreth and fyue and twetye: the childré of Iericho, thre hundreth and fyue and fortye : the child- ren of Senaa, thre thousande, sixe hundreth and thirtye.

The prestes. The children of Iedaia- of the house of Iesua, nyne hundreth and thre and seuentye: the childré of Iemmer, a thou- sande and two and fiftye: the children of
Pashur, a thousande and two hidreth, and seuen and fortye: the childré of Harim, a thousande and seuentene.

The Lenites. The children of Iesua and 
Cadmiel of the children of Hodauia, foure 
The syngers, the children of 
Asaph, an hundreth and eight and twentye. 
The children of the dorekepers. The children of Sallum, the children of Ater, the childre off Talmon, the children off Acub, the children off Hatita, and the children off Sobai: allto- gether an hundreth and nyne and thirtye.

The Nethinims. The children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabaoth, the children of Ceros, the children of Sieha, the children of Padon, the children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Acub, the childré of Hagab, the children of Samlai, the children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the childré of Reaia, the children of Rezin, the children of Necuba,

| Fo. ceeeryyot. The i. boke of Essdras. 

the children of Gasan, the children of Vsa, the children of Passeah, the children of Bessai, the children of Asna, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephussim, the children of
Bacbue, the childré of Hacupha, the children of Harhur, y childré of Hazeluth, y childre of Mehira, the children of Harsa, the children of Bareom, the children of Sissera, the child- ren of Thamah, the children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

The children of Salomons seruauntes. ‘The children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Pruda, the children of Iaela, the childre of Darcon, the childré of Giddell, the childré of Sephatia, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami. All the Nethinims and the children off Salomons seruauntes were allto- gether, thre hundreth and two and nyentye.

And these wéte vp also, Mithel, Melath, 
Thel, Harso, Cherub, Addon and Immer. 
But they coulde not shewe their fathers house ner their sede, whether they were of Israel.
The children of Delaia, the children of To- bias, the children of Necoda, sixe hundreth and two and fiftye.

And of the children of the prestes. The 

children of Habaia, the children of Hacom, the children of Barsillai, which toke one of the daughters of Darsillai the Gileadite to wife, and was counted amonge the same names: these soughte the register of their byrth, and founde none, therfore were they put from the presthode. And Hathirsatha sayde vnto them, that they shulde not eate of the most holy, tyll there rose vp a prest with the *lighte and perfectnesse.
F| ‘The whole congregacion as one man, was two and fortye thousande, thre hundreth and thre score: besyde their seruauntes and maydes, of whom there were seué thousande, thre hundreth and seuen and thirtye. And they had two hundreth singinge men and wemen, seue hundreth and sixe and thirtye horses, two hundreth and fyue aud fortye
Mules, foure hüdreth and fyue and thirtye 
Camels, aud sixe thousande, seuen huudreth and twentye Asses.

And certayne of the chefe fathers, whan they came to the house of the LORDE at lerusalem, they were well mynded vnto the house of God, that it shulde be set in his

Chap. iij. place, and gaue after their abilyte vnto the treasure of the worke, one and thre score thousande guldens, and fyue thousande pounde of syluer, and an hundreth prestes garmentes.
So the prestes and the Leuites, and certayne of y people, and the syngers, and the porters, and ý Nethinims dwelt in their cities, aud all
Israel iu their cities. 

The iij. Chapter. 
ND whan the seuenth moneth came, 
“and the children of Israel were now in their cities, the people came together euen as one man, vnto lerusalem. And there stode vp lesua the sonne of Iosedec and his brethren the prestes, and Zorobabel the sonne of Sala- thiel and his brethren, and buylded the altare of the God of Israel, to offre burntofferynges theron, as it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses the man of God, and the altare set they vpon his sokettes (for there was a fearfulnes amonge them because of the nacions and lédes) and offred burntofferinges theron vnto y LORDE tin the mornynge and at euen. Aud helde the feast of Tabernacles tas it is wrytten, and offred burntsacrifices daylie after the nombre as acordinge was, euery daye his sacrifice.
Afterwarde the daylie burntofferynges also, and of the new Mones and of all the feast dayes of the LORDE that were halowed, and allmaner of fre wyllinge offeringes, which they did of their awne fre wyl vnto the LORDE.
$ Vpon the first daye of the seuenth moneth beganne they to offre burnt sacrifices vnto the
LORDE. But the foundacion of the téple of the LORDE was not yet layed. Neuertheles they gaue money vnto y masons and car- penters, and meate and drynke and oyle vnto them of Zidon and of 'Tyre, to brynge the
Cedre tymbre from Libanus by See vnto lloppa, acordinge to the cómaundement of
Cyrus the kynge of Persia. 

In the seconde yeare of their commynge vnto the house of God at lerusalem in the seconde moneth, beganne Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, and the remnaunt of their brethren the prestes and Leuites, and all they that were come out of the captiuyte vnto lerusalem, and appoynted the Leuites fro twentye yeare olde and aboue, to se that the worke of the house of the
LORDE wete forwarde. And Iesua stode 

* Exod. 28.c. *9 Esd. 8.a. 3 Esd.5.c. + Nu. 28. a. | Ne Oat. 3 Esd. 5.e. || Otherwyse called Iapho. m ———————————M— i. binh |

Chap. tty. with his sonnes and brethren, and Cadmiel with his sonnes, and the children of Iuda, to furthur the workmen of the house of God, namely the childré of Henadad with their children and their brethren the Leuites.

And whan the buylders layed the foundacion of the temple of the LORDE, the prestes stode in their araye, with trompettes. And the Leuites the children of Asaph with Cim- bales, to prayse y LORDE * with the Dytie of Dauid kynge of Israel. And they sunge together, geuynge prayse q thankes vnto y
LORDE, because he is gracious, and because | his mercy endureth for euer vpon Israell.
And all the people shouted loude in praysinge the LORDE, because the foundacion of y house of the LORDE was layed. Neuertheles many of the olde prestes and Leuites and awncient fathers, which had sene the house afore in his foundacion, and this was now before their eyes, wepte loude. But many shouted with ioye, so that the noyse gaue a greate sounde, in so moch that the people coulde not knowe $ ioyfull sounde for the noyse of the wepinge in the people: for the people shouted loude, so that the noyse was herde farre of.

The iiij. Chapter. 

UT whan the aduersaries of Iuda and| 

Ben lamin herde, that the children of the captiuyte buylded the teple vnto the
LORDE God of Israel, they came to Zoro- babel q to the pryncipall fathers, and sayde vnto them: We wyl buylde with you: for we seke the LORDE youre God like as ye do.
And we haue done sacrifice vnto him, tsence the tyme that Assar Hadon the kynge of
Assur broughte vs vp hither. But Zorobabel and lesua and the other awnciet fathers of
Israel, answered them: It is not mete for vs and you to buylde the house of oure God, but we wyl buylde alone vnto the LORDE God of Israel, tas Cyrus the kynge of Persia hath commaunded vs.

Then the folke of the londe hyndered the people of Iuda, and made them afrayed to buylde, and hyred councelers aganst them and hyndered their deuyce, as longe as Cyrus the kynge of Persia lyned, vntyll the reigne off Darius kynge off Persa. But whan
Ahasuerus was kynge, in the begynnynge off 

* ] Par, 17, b. t 4 Re. 17. c. 

The i. boke of Esdras, 

his reigne wrote they vnto him a complaynte agaynst them of Iuda and Ierusalem.

And in the tyme of Artaxerses, wrote 
Bisellam, Mithridath, 'Tabeel and the other of their councell vnto Artaxerses the kynge of Persia. But the scripture of y letter was wrytten in the Syrians speach, and was interpretated in the langage of the Syrians.
| Rehum y chaunceler, and Simsai the scrybe, 
[wie this letter agaynst Jerusalem to Arta- xerses the kynge.
| We Rehum the chaunceler, and Simsai the scribe, and other of the councell of Dina, off
Arphasath, off Tarplat, off Persia, off Arach, of Babilon, of Susan, of Deha, and of Elam, and other of the people $whom the greate and noble Ásnaphar broughte ouer, and set in the cities of Samaria, and other on this syde the water, and in Canaan. And this is y summe of the letter that they sent vnto kynge
Artaxerses : 

Thy seruauntes the men on this syde the water and in Canaan. Be it knowne vnto y kynge, that the Iewes which are come vp from the to vs vnto Ierusale in to that sedicious q wicked cite, buylde the same, and make vp y walles of it, q brynge it out of ý foundacion.
Be it knowne now therfore vnto $ kynge, y yf this cite be buylded q the walles made vp agayne, thé shal not they geue tribute, toll, and yearly custome, and their deuyce shal do

kynge harme. But now that we all are therby which destroyed the temple, we wolde no longer se the kynges dishonoure. "lherfore sent we out, and caused the kynge to be cer- tified therof: That it maye be soughte in $
Cronicles of thy progenitours, and so shalt thou fynde in the same Cronicles, and per- ceaue, that this cite is sedicious and noysome vnto kynges and londes, and that they cause other also to rebell of olde, and for the saine cause was this cite destroyed. Therfore do we certifie the kynge, that yf this cite be buylded, and the walles therof made vp, thou shalt kepe nothinge on this syde the water by the reason of it.

Then sent ¥ kynge an answere vnto Rehum the chaunceler, and Simsai the Scrybe, and to the other of their councell that dwelt in
Samaria, and vnto the other beyonde ¥ water. | 
Peace and salutacion. The letter which ye sent vnto vs, hath bene opely red before me,

1 1 Esd. 1. a. $ 4 Re. 17. c. 

Fo. ceeeryphy. 

B 

€ 

D 

fo. ceeerrrbiij, and I haue commaunded to make search: and it is founde, that this cite of olde hath made insurreccion agaynst kynges, q how y vproure and rebellion hath bene commytted therin. There haue bene mightie kynges also at Terusalé, which haue reigned ouer all that is beyonde the water, and toll, tribute and yearly custome was geuen vnto them.
Do ye now after this commaundemét, forbyd the same men, that the cite be not builded, tyll I haue geué comaundemet. ‘Take hede now that ye be not necligent here in, lest the kynge haue harme there thorow.

Now whà kynge Artaxerses letter was red before Rehum the chaunceler and Simsai the
Serybe and their councell, they wente vp in all the haist to Ierusalem vnto the Tewes, and forbad them with the arme and auctorite.
Then ceassed the worke of the house of God at lerusalem, and continued so vnto the seconde yeare of Darius kynge of Persia.

The 5. Chapter. 

a HE prophetes, Aggeus and Zachary y sonne of Iddo, prophecied vnto y Iewes that were in Iuda and lerusale, in the name of the God of Israel. “Then gat vp Zoro- babel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of losedec, and beganne to buylde the house of God at lerusalem, and with them the
|prophetes of God which strengthed thé. At 
Ithe same tyme came to the Thathnai the debite on this syde the water, and Sethar of
| Bosen, and their councelers, and sayde thus 
,vnto them: Who hath commaunded you to 
| |buylde this house, and to make vp the walles therof? Then tolde we them the names of the men, that made this buyldinge. But the eye of their God came vpon the Elders of the lewes, that they were not inhibyte, tyll the matter was brought before Darius, and tyll

Beas came a wrytinge therof agayne. 
| This is the samme of the letter y Thathnai 
| |the Debyte on this syde the water, and Sethar of Bosen, and their councellers of Apharsach
(which were on this syde the water) sent vnto kynge Darius. And these are the wordes that
B they sent vnto him: Vnto Darius the kynge, 
| all peace. Be it knowne vnto the kynge, that we came in to lewry to the house of y greate
God, which is buylded with all maner of stone, and balckes are layed in the walles, and y

SPA Era Ge * 3 Reg. 6. a. t 4 Re. 24. and 25. 

The i. boke of Esdras, 

worke goeth fast forth, and prospereth in their handes. Neuertheles we axed the Elders and sayde vnto them: Who hath cOmaunded you to buylde this house, and to make vp the walles therof? We axed their names also, that we might certifye the, and haue wrytten the names of the men that were their rulers.
But they answered vs with these wordes, and sayde: We are the seruaütes of the God of heauen and earth, and buylde the house y was buylded many yeares agoo, *which a greate kynge of Israel buylded and set yp.
Howbeit whan oure fathers prouoked the God of heauen vnto wrath, the gaue them ouer in the hande of Nabuchodonosor the kynge of
Babilon the Caldee, which brake downe this house, ¢ caried ¥ people awaye vnto Babilon. t Neuertheles in the first yeare of Cyrus the, kynge of Babilon, $ same kynge Cyrus com- maunded to buylde this house of God: for the vessels of golde and siluer in the house of
God, which Nabuchodonosor toke out of the temple at Ierusalé, and broughte thé in to y temple at Babilon, those dyd Cyrus the kynge take out of y temple at Babilon, Sand de- lyuered them vnto Seszbazer by name, whom he made Debyte, and sayde vnto him: Take’ these vessels, go thy waye and brynge them. vnto the temple at lerusalem, and let the house of God be buylded in his place. Then came the same Seszbazar, and layed y foun- dacion of the house of God at Ierusalem.
Sence that tyme hath it bene in buyldinge, and yet is it not fynished. y.

Yf it please y, kynge now, let there be search made in y kynges treasure house which is at Babilon, whether it haue bene kynge Cyrus com- maundement, that the house of God at Ieru- salem shulde be buylded: q sende vs y kynges mynde conceruynge the same.

The bi. Chapter. 

HEN comaunded kinge Darius, that 
T search shulde be made in ¥ library of ¥ kynges treasure house, which laye at Babilon.
So at Egbathanis in a castell that lyeth in the londe of the Meedes, there was founde a boke, q in it was there an acte wrytten after this maner: In the first yeare of kynge Cyrus, comaunded the same kynge Cyrus to buylde y house of God at lerusalem, in the place where the sacrifice is made, q to laye the

¢ 1 Esd. 1. a. $ 1 Esd. 1. b. 

Chap. b. 

a 

‘Chap. bij. 

5 

foundacion to beare thre score cubites heyght, q thre score cubites bredth, œ thre walles of all maner of stones, and one wall of tymber, q the expences shalbe geuen of the kynges house. And the goldé and syluer vessell of y house of God (which Nabuchodonosor toke out of the temple at Ierusalem, and broughte vnto Babilon) shalbe restored agayne, y they maye be broughte vnto the temple at Ierusale to their place in to the house of God.

Get you farre from them therfore, thou 
Thathnai Debyte beyonde the water, and 
Sethar of Bosen, t youre councelers which are beyonde the water. Let them worke in y house of God, that the Debyte of y Iewes and their Elders maye buylde the house of
God in his place. I haue commaunded also, what shalbe done to ¥ Elders of Iuda for the buyldinge of the house of God, that there shal diligently be take of the kynges goodes, euen of the rentes beyonde the water, q geuen vnto the men, and that they be not hyndered.

And yf they haue nede of calues, lambes, or goates for the burntoffrynge vnto ¥ God of heauen, wheate, salt, wyne and oyle, after the custome of the prestes at lerusalem, there shalbe geuen them daylie as is acordinge: and se that this be not done necligetly, that they maye offre swete sauoures vnto y God of heauen, and praye for the kynges lyfe, and for his children. This commaundement haue
I gene. And what man so euer he be that altereth these wordes, there shal a balke be taken from his house, and set vp, and he shal be hanged theron, and his house shalbe prysed for the dede.

But the God that dwelleth in heauen, destroye all kynges and people, that put to their hàde to alter and to breake downe the house of God at lerusalem. I Darius haue commaunded, that this be diligently done.

Then Thathnai y Debyte beyonde y water, and Sethar of Bosen with their councelers (to whom kynge Darius had sent) dyd their dili- gence. And y Elders of the Iewes buylded, and they prospered thorow the prophecienge of Aggeus the prophet and Zachary the sonne of Iddo: and they buylded, and set vp the worke, acordinge to the commaundement of the God of Israel, and after the commaunde- ment of Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerses kynges of Persia. And they perfourmed the house

* 2 Par, 7. a. 

The t. boke of Esdras, 

Fo. eeeerrrir. vnto the thirde daye of the moneth Adar, that was the sixte yeare of the reigne of kynge
Darius. 

* And the children of Israel, the prestes, the Leuites, and the other children of y cap- tyuite helde the dedicacion of the house of
God with ioye, and offred at the dedicacion of the house of God, an hundreth calues, two hundreth lambes, foure hundreth goates: and for the synofferynge for all Israel, twolue he goates, acordinge to the nombre of the trybes of Israel, and set the prestes in their courses, and ¥ Leuites in their offices, to mynister vnto God which is at Ierusalé, as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses.

And the children of the captyuite helde 
Passeouer vpon the fourtenth daye of the first moneth: for y prestes and Leuites had purified them selues, so y they were all cleane as one man, and kylled Passeouer for all the children of the captyuite, and for their bre- thré the prestes, and for them selues. And the childré of Israel which were come agayne ont of captiuyte, and all soch as had separated them selues vnto them from the fylthinesse of the Heythen in the londe, to seke the
LORDE God of Israel, ate q helde the feast of vnlenéded bred seuen dayes with ioye: for the LORDE had made them glad, and turned the hert of the kynge of Assur vnto thé, so that their handes were strengthed in the worke of the house of God, which is y God of Israel.

The bij. Chapter. 
FTER these actes in the reigne of Ar- taxerses kynge of Persia, “there wente vp from Babilon, Eszdras the sonne of Seraia, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of Helchias, the sonne of Sallum, the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Achitob, the sonue of Amaria, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne Meraioth, the sonne of Serahia, y sonne of Vsi, the sonne of Buki, the sonne of Abisua, the sonne of
Phineas, the sonne of Eleasar, the sonne of 
Aaron the chefe prest, which was a quycke serybe in the lawe of Moses, twhich the
LORDE God of Israel dyd geue. And $ kynge gaue him all that he requyred, acord- inge to the hande of the LORDE his God vpon him.
And there wente vp certayne of the children of Israel, and of the prestes, and of the

a 3 Esd. 8.a. t Exo. 20. a. 

Ffo. cecel. The i. boke 

Leuites, of the syngers, of the porters, and of 

of Esdras. — €bap. bii. fulfyll the same diligently, vntyll an hundreth

the Nethinims vnto lerusalem, in the senenth yeare of kynge Artaxerses. And they came to lerusalem in the fifth moneth, that is the seuenth yeare of the kynge. For vpon the first daye of the first moneth, deuysed he to go vp from Babilon: and on j first daye of the fifth moneth eame he to Ierusalem, acord- inge to the good hande of God vpon him:
For Eszdras prepared his hert to seke the lawe of the LORDE, and to do it, and to teach the precepte q iudgment in Israel.

And this is the summe of the letter, that kynge Artaxerses gaue vnto Eszdras the prest, the serybe, which was a teacher in the wordes of the LORDE and of his statutes ouer
Israel. Vnto Eszdras the prest and serybe in the lawe of the God of heauen, peace and salutacion. 1 haue commaunded, that all they of the people of Israel, and of the prestes and
Leuites in my realme, which are mynded of itheir awne good wyll to go vp to Ierusalem, that they go with the, beynge sent of the kynge and of the seuen lordes of the councell, to vyset Iuda and Ierusalem, acordinge to the lawe of God, which is in thy hide: And that thou shuldest take with the, syluer and golde, which the kynge and the lordes of his councell geue of their awne good wyll vnto the God of lsrael (whose habitacion is at lerusalem) and all the syluer and goide that thou eanst fynde in all y countre of Babilon: with it that the people and prestes geue of their awne good wil vnto the house of God at Ierusalem.

Take thou the same, and bye diligently with the same money, calues, lambes, goates, and meatofferynges and drynkofferynges, to be offred vpon the altare of the house of youre
God at lerusalem. And loke what it lyketh the and thy brethren to do with the remnaunt of the money, that do after the wyll of youre
God. And the vessels that are geuen the for the mynistracion in the house of thy God, those delyuer thou before God at Ierusalem.

And what so euer thinge more shal be nedefull for the house of thy God, which 1s necessary for the to spende, let the same be geuc out of the kynges chamber. 1 kynge
Artaxerses haue commaunded all the trea- surers beyonde the water, y loke what so euer
Eszdras the prest and serybe in the lawe of the God of heaué, requyreth of you, that ye

a 3 Esd. 8. c. 

the children of Elam, Iesaia the sonne of 

taletes of syluer, and tyll an hundreth quarters of wheate, and tyll an hüdreth Batthes of wyne, and tyll an hundreth Batthes of oyle, and salt without measure. Whatsoeuer be- longeth to the lawe of the God of heauen, let the same be done with diligence for the house of the God of heaue, that there come no wrath vpon the kynges realme ¢ his children.

And knowne be it vnto you, that ye shalli ® haue no anetorite to requyre taxinge q custome, and yearly rentes vpon eny of the prestes,
Leuites, syngers, porters, Nethinims and my- nisters in y house of this God. But thou
Eszdras (after the wyszdome of thy God that is in thy hande) set thou iudges and arbiters, to iudge all the people that is beyonde Ior- dane, euen all soch as knowe the lawe of thy
God: and them that knowe it not, those se that ye teache. And who so euer wyl not diligently fulfyll the lawe of thy God, and the kynges lawe, shall haue his iudgmet for the dede, whether it be vnto death, or to be banyshed, or to be condemned in good, or to be put in preson.

Praysed be the LORDE God of oure fathers, which so hath inspyred ¥ kynges hert to garnysh the house of God at lerusalem: and hath enclyned his mercy vnto me in the presence of the kynge, and his councelers, and before all the kynges hye estates. And
I was comforted (acordinge to the hade of the 
LORDE my God ouer me) and so gathered 
I the heades of Israel together, y they mighte go vp with me.

The biij. Chapter. 

HESE are the heades of their fathers 

that were named, ^ which wente vp with 

me from Babilon, what tyme as kynge Arta- 

xerses reigned. Of the childré of Phineas, 

Gersom: of the children of Ithamar, Daniel: 

of the children of Dauid, Hattus: of the 

childré of Pareos, Zachary, and the men 

childre nombred with him, an hundreth and 

fiftye. Of the children of. Pahath Moab, 

Eleoenai the sonne of Serahia, and with him two hundreth males.

Of the children of Sechania, the sonne of lehasiel, and with him thre hundreth males.
Of the children of Adin Ebed, 
Ionathan, and with him fiftie males. 

Chap. bii, 
Athalia, and with him seuentie males. Of the children of Sephatia, Sebadia the sonne of Michael, and with him foure score males.

Of the children of Joab, Obadia the sonne of Iehiel, and with him two hundreth q eightene men children. Of the children of
Selomith, the sonne of Iosiphia, and with him an hundreth and thre score males.

Of the children of Bebai, Zachary the sonne of Bebai, and with him eight and twentye males. Of the children of Asgad, Johanan the yongest sonne, and with him an hundreth and ten males. Of the last children of Ado- nicam, and these were their names: Eliphelet, leiel and Semaia, and with them thre score males. Of the children of Bigeuai, Vthai and Sabud, and with them seué males. And
I gathered them together by the water that renneth towarde Aheua, q there abode we thre dayes.

And whan I loked amonge the people q the prestes, I founde no Leuites there. "The sent I Elieser, Ariel, Semaia, Elnathan, Iarib,

| Elnathan, Natha, Zachary and Mesullam the rulers, and Joiarib and Elnathan the teachers, and those sent I vnto Iddo $ chefest at Casi- phia, that they shulde fetch us mynysters for the house of oure God, and I tolde them what they shulde saye vnto Iddo and to his brethren the Nethinims at Casiphia.

And (acordinge to the good hande of oure 
God vpon us) they broughte us a wyse man from amonge the children of Maheli the sonne of Leui the sonne of Israel, euen Serebia with his sonnes and brethren, eightene. And
Hasabia, and with him Iesaia of the children of Merari, with his brethren q their sonnes, twentye. And of the Nethinims, whom Dauid and the princes gaue to mynister vnto the
Leuites, two hundreth q twentye, all named by name.

“And euen there at the water besyde Aheua, caused I a fastinge to be proclamed, y we mighte humble oure selues before oure God, to seke of him a righte waye for us, q oure children and all oure substaunce. For I was ashamed to require of the kynge, soudyers q horsmen, to helpe us agayust the enemye in the waye. For we had sayde vnto the kynge:
The hande of oure God is for the best vpon all them that seke him, and his violence and wrath vpon all them that forsake him. So

a 3 Esd. 8. d. 

The t. boke of Esdras. 

we fasted, and soughte this at oure God, and he herde us.

And I toke out twolue of the chefe prestes, 
Serebia and Hasabia, and ten of their brethren with them, and weyed them there the syluer and golde and vessels for the Heue offeringe vnto the house of oure God, which the kynge, and the lordes of his councell and prynces, and all Israel that were at hande, had geuen to the Heue offerynge: and there weyed I them vnder their hande sixe hundreth and fiftye talentes of syluer, and in syluer vessell an hundreth talentes, and in golde an hundreth talentes, twentye cuppes of golde of a thou- sande guldens, and two costly ornamentes of good brasse, as cleare as golde, and sayde vnto them: Ye are holy vnto the LORDE, therfore are the vessels holy also, and so is the syluer and golde that is geuen of a good wyll vnto the LORDE God of youre fathers:
Watch ye therfore and kepe it, tyll ye weye it downe before the chefe prestes and Leuites, and awncient fathers of Israel at Ierusalem in the chestes of the hoüse of the LORDE.
Then toke the prestes and Leuites that weyed syluer and golde q vessell, to brynge it to lerusalem vnto y house of oure God.

So we brake vp, from the water of Aheua on the twolueth daye of the first moneth, to go vnto lerusalem: and the hande of oure
God was vpon us, and delyuered us fro the hande of the enemies and preuy waytinges by the waye. And we came to lerusalem, and abode there thre dayes. But on y fourth daye was the syluer and golde, and vessell weyed in the house of oure God vnder the hande of Meremoth the sonne of Vrias the prest, and with him Eleasar the sonne of
Phineas, and with them Iosabad the sonne of lesua, and Noadia y sonne of Benui the Le- uites, acordinge to the nombre « weight of euery one. And the weight was all wrytten vp at the same tyme.

And the children of the captiuyte, which were come ont of preson, offred burntoffer- inges vnto y God of Israel: twolue bullockes for all Israel, sixe and nynetye rammes, seuen and seuentye lambes, and twolue goates for a synofferynge, all to the burnt offeringe of the
LORDE. And they delyuered the kynges commyssion vnto the kynges officers, q to the
Debytes on this syde the water. And they promoted the people and the house of God.

59 

Fo. rererlis 

B 

Fo. crecrij. 
The ir. Chapter. a ) HAN all this was perfourmed, the

\ rulers came to me, and sayde: The people of Israel, and the prestes, a. Leuites are not separated from the nacions in the londes as touchinge their abhominacions, namely of the Cananites, Hethites, Pheresites,
Iebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egipcians, and Amorites. * For they haue taken the doughters of the same, q their sonnes, and haue myxte the holy sede with y nacions in the londes : and the hande of the rulers and lordes of councell hath bene principall in this trespace.

Whan I herde this, I rente my clothes and my rayment, and plucte out the heer of my heade and of my beerd, and sat mournynge.
And there resorted vnto me all soch as feared the worde of the LORDE God of Israel because of the greate transgression. And I sat mournynge vntyll the euenynge sacrifyce.
And aboute the euenynge sacrifice I rose vp fro my heuynes, and rente my clothes and my raiment, and fell ypon my knees, and spred out my handes vnto the LORDE my
God, and sayde : 

My God, I am ashamed, and darre not lifte vp mine eies vnto the my God: for oure wickednesses are growne ouer oure heade, q oure trespaces are waxen greate vnto y heaué.
Sence the tyme of oure fathers haue we bene in greate trespace vnto this daie, tand because of oure wickednesses haue we and oure kynges bene delyuered in to the hande of y kynges of the nacions, in to the swerde, in to captiuyte, in to spoyle, and in to confusion of face, as it is come to passe this daye.

But now is there a litle and sodane gra- ciousnes come from the LORDE oure God, so that some of vs are escaped, that he maie geue vs a nayle in his holy place, that oure
God maye lighte oure eyes, and geue vs a litle lyfe in oure bondage. For we are bond- men, and oure God hath not forsaké vs though we be bondmen, and hath enclyned mercy vnto vs in the sighte of the kynges of Persia, that they shulde geue vs lyfe, and promote the house of oure God, and to sett vp the desolacion therof, and to geue vs an hedge in
Iuda and Ierusalem. 

O oure God, what shall we saye now after 

a Deut, 7, a. and 12.d. Iosu.23.c. Iudic. 3. a. 

The i. boke of Essdras. 

Chap. tr. this? that we haue forsaken thy commaunde- mentes, which thou hast commaunded by thy seruauntes the prophetes, and saide: The londe wherin ye shal come to possesse it, is an vncleane londe thorow the fylthines of the people of the londes, in their abhominacions wherwith they haue made it full of vnclennes on euery syde. Therfore shal ye not geue|73 youre doughters vnto their sonnes, and their doughters shall ye not take vnto youre sonnes, and seke not their peace and welth for euer, that ye maye be stronge, and enioye the good in the londe, and y ye and youre children maye haue the inheritaunce of it for euermore.
And after all this that is come vpon vs (be- cause of oure enell dedes and greate trespace)

thou oure God hast spared oure wickednesses, and hast geuen vs a delyueraunce as it is come to passe.

As for vs, we haue turned backe, q haue 

let go thy commaundementes, to make con- tracte with the people of these abhominacions.

Wilt thou then be wroth at vs, tyll we be 

vtterly consumed, so that nothynge remayne, and tyl there be no delyueraunce? O LORDE

God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we re- 

maine yet escaped, as it isthis daie. Beholde, in thy presence are we in oure trespace, for because of it is there no stondinge before the.

The r. Chapter. 

ND whan Eszdras prayed after this|@ 

maner and knowleged, wepte, and laie before the house of God, there resorted vnto him out of Israel a very greate congregacion of men and wemen, and children: for the people wepte very sore. And Sachania the sonne of lehiel one of the children of Elam, answered, and sayde vnto Eszdras: We haue trespaced agayust the LORDE oure God, in that we haue taken straunge wyues of all the people of the londe. Now there is hope yet in Israel cócerninge this, therfore let vs make a couenaht now with oure God, that we shal put awaye all the wyues (and soch as are borne of them) acordyuge to the councell of y LORDE, and of them that feare the com- maundement of oure God, y we maye do acordynge to the lawe. Get the vp therfore, for the matter belongeth vnto the. We wyll be with the, be of good comforte, and do it.

Then rose Eszdras, and toke an ooth of the 33 

t Deu. 28. d. 

= 

Chap. r. 

The i. boke of Esdras, 

Fo. reeerliij. 

rulers, prestes and Leuites, and of all Israel, that they shulde do acordynge to this worde : and they swore. And Eszdras stode vp before the house of God, and wente in to the chamber of Iohanan the sonne of Eliasab. And whan he came thither, he ate no bred, and dranke no water: for he mourned because of the transgression of them that had bene in captiuyte.

And they caused a proclamacion be made thorow out Iuda and Ierusalem, vnto all the children which had bene in captiuite, y they shulde gather them selues together vnto

Terusalé: And that who soener came not! 

within thre dayes acordinge to the deuyce of the rulers and Elders, all his substaunce shulde be forfett, and he put out from the cogregacion of the captiue.

Then all the men of Iuda and Ben lamin gathered them selnes together vnto Ierusalem in thre dayes, y is on the twentieth daye of the nyenth moneth: and all the people sat in the strete before the house of God, and trem- bled because of the matter, and for the rayne.
And Eszdras y prest stode vp, and sayde vnto them: * Ye haue transgressed, y ye haue taken straunge wyues, to make the trespace of Israel

et more: confese now therfore vnto y 
LORDE God of youre fathers, « do his plea- sure, and separate youre selues from the people of the londe, x from ¥ straunge wyues. The answered all the cógregacion, « sayde with loude voyce: Let it be done as thou hast sayde.
But the people are many, q it is a raynye wether, q they canot stode here without, nether is this a worke of one daye or two, for we are many y haue offended in this transgression.
Let ys appoynte oure rulers therfore in all the congregacion, y all they which haue taken straunge wyues in oure cities, maye come at the tyme appoynted, and the Elders of euery cite and their Iudges with them, tyll the wrath of oure God because of this matter be turned awaye from vs.

‘Then were appoynted Ionathan the sonne of Asahel q Iehasia the sonne of Thecua ouer this matter. And Mesullam and Sabthai the
Leuites helped them. And the children of 
|the captinyte dyd euen so. And Eszdras the 
| prest, and y awncient fathers thorow the house 
‚of their fathers, and all that were now re- 
* Deut. 7. a. 

Iudic.3. a. 

The ende of the first boke of Cssdras. 

hearsed by name, separated théselues, and sat them downe on the first daye of the tenth moneth, to examé this matter. And on y first daye of y first moneth broughte they the matter to a conclusion, concernynge all the men y had také straunge wyues.

And amoge the childre of the prestes there were men founde y had také straunge wyues, namely amoge the children of Iesua the sonne of Iosedee q of his brethré, Maeseia, Elieser,
Iarib and Godolia. And they gaue their hades there vpon, that they wolde put awaye their wyues: a for their trespace offerynge to geue a rame for their trespace. Amoge the children of Immer, Hanani « Sabadia. Amonge the childre of Harim, Maeseia, Elia, Semaia,
Iehiel, and Vsia. Amonge $ children of 
Pashur, Elioenai, Maeseia, Ismael, Nethaneel, losabad « Eleasa. Amonge the Leuites, Io- sabad, Simei and Celaia, He is that Celita,
Pethahia, Iuda and Eleasar. Amonge the syngers, Elyasib. Amonge the porters, Sallum,
Telem and Vri. 

Of Israel. Amonge the children of Pareos, 
Ramia, lesia, Malchia, Meiamin, Eleasar, 
Malchia q Benaia. Anionge y children of 
Elam, Mathania, Zachary, lehiel, Abdy, Iere- moth q Elia. Amonge the children of Sathu,
Elioenai, Eliasib, Mathania, Ieremoth, Sabad q Asisa. Amonge the children of Bebai, Io- hanan, Hanania, Sabai q Athlai. Amonge the children of Bani, Mesullam, Malluch,
Adaia, Tasub, Seal and leremoth. Amonge the children of Pahath Moab, Adna, Chelal,
Benaia, Maesea, Mathania, Bezaleel, Benui and Manasse. Amonge the children of Harim,
Elieser, lesia, Malchia, Semaia, Simeon, Be lamin, Malluch q Samaria. Amonge the childre of Hasum, Mathnai, Mathatha, Sabad,
Eliphelet, leremai, Manasse q Simei. Amoge the childre of Bani, Maedai, Amram, Huel,
Benaia, Bedia, Chelui, Naia, Meremoth, 
Eliasib, Mathania, Mathnai, laesau, Bani, 
Benui, Simei, Selemia, Nathan, Adaia, Mach- nadbai, Sasai, Sarai, Asareel, Selemia, Sa- maria, Sallum, Amaria, q loseph. Amonge the childré of Nebo, Ieiel, Mathithia, Sabad,
Sebina, laddai, Ioel, and Benaia. AH these had taken straunge wyues. And amonge the same wyues there were some, that had borne children.

| 

The seconde boke of Esdras, otherwyse called tbe boke of Nebemias.

What this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

Nehemias mourneth for the captiuyte of the people.

Chap. Il. 

Nehemias optayneth licence of the kynge Ar- taxerses (otherwyse called Arthasastha) to go vnto Ierusalem.

Chap. IIL 
Of buyldinge the cite. 

Chap. Il. 

The officers go aboute to hynder the buyldinge. 
The Iewes watch, q prepayre theselues to buylde and to fighte.

Chap. V. 
Nehemias reproueth vsury. 
Chap. VI. 
The officers go aboute to kyll Nehemias. 
Chap. VII. 
The nombre of them that departe from Babilon. 

The first Chapter. 

|a HESE are the actes of Nehemias the 

sonne of Hachalia. It fortuned in moneth Chisleu in y twétieth yeare, that was in the castell at Susan: and Hanani one of my brethren came with certayne mé of
Iuda, and I axed them how the Iewes dyd that were delyuered and escaped from the captiuyte, q how it wente at lerusale. And

* 4 Re. 25. b. 

Chap. VIII. 

In the feast of the Tabernacles readeth Eszdras the boke of the lawe.

Chap. IX. 

The lawe is red before the people, which are exhorted vnto godlynesse.

Chap. X. 
They renue the couenaunt with the LORDE, and seale it. |
Chap. XI. 
How the people are sundered out, some to dwell at lerusalem, and some in the cities without.

Chap. XII. 
The names of the prestes and Leuites that wente 

vp with Zorobabel. Of the dedicacion of the wall at lerusalem.

Chap. XIII. 

They separate the straungers from amonge the people of God. The porcion of the Leuites is appoynted, and the Sabbath renued.

they sayde vnto me: The remnaunt of the captiuyte are there in the londe in greate mysfortune q rebuke. *The walles of Ieru- salem are broken downe, and the portes therof, are brent with fyre.

Wha I herde these wordes, I sat me downe q wepte, q mourned two dayes, q fasted q prayed before the God of heauen, q sayde: O
LORDE God of heauen, thou greate q terrible 
God, ‘thou y kepest couenaunt q mercy for 

t Exo. 20. a. and 34. a. 

Deut. 7. b. 

Chap. jj. 
|them y loue the q obserue thy cómaunde- 
(mentes: let thy eares marke, q let thine eies be open, ý thou mayest heare the prayer of thy seruaunt, which I praye now before y daye and nighte for the children of Israel thy seruauntes, t knowlege the synnes of the chil- dren of Israel, which we haue commytted agaynst the.

And I « my fathers house haue synned also. 
We haue bene corrupte vnto the, in y we haue not kepte the comaundementes, statutes q lawes, which thou comaundedst thy seruaunt
Moses. Yet call to remembraunce ¥ worde that thou comaundedst thy seruaunt Moses, and saydest: *Yf ye trasgresse, then wil I scater you abrodeamonge the nacios. But yf ye turne vnto me, and kepe my commaunde- mentes ¢ do them: though ye were cast out vnto the vttemost parte of heauen yet wyl I gather you from thence, and wyll brynge you from thence, eué vnto the place, that I haue chosen for my name to dwell there. They are thy seruauntes, and thy people, whom thou hast delyuered thorow thy greate power q mightie hande. O LORDE, let thine eares marke the prayer of thy seruaunt, q the prayer of thy seruauntes, whose desyre is to feare thy name, q let thy seruaunt prospere this daye, q graunte him mercy in the sight of this man: for I was the kynges butlar.

The ij. Chapter. 
N the moneth Nisan of the twentieth yeare of kynge Artaxerses, wha the wyne stode before him, I toke vp the wyne, and gaue it vnto ¥ kynge, and I was heuy in his presence.
Then sayde y kynge vnto me: Why lokest thou so sadly ^ Thou art not sicke, that is not
¥ matter, but thou art heuy harted. Neuer- theles I was sore afrayed, q sayde vnto the kynge: God saue the kynges life for euer, shulde I not loke sadly? the cite of my fathers buryall.lyeth wayest, v the portes therof are consumed with the fyre. Then sayde the kynge vnto me: What is thé thy request?
Then made I my prayer to the God of heaué, and sayde vnto the kynge: yf it please the kynge, and yf thy seruaunt be fauoured in thy sighte, I beseke the sende mein to Iuda vnto i cite of my fathers buryall that I maye uylde it.

B| Aud y kynge sayde vnto me, ¢ so dyd the quene y sat by him: How lóge shal thy iourney

The ij. boke of Essdras. 

cdtynue, and wha wilt thou come agayne? 
And it pleased ¥ kynge to sende me, and I set him a tyme, q sayde vnto the kynge: Yf it please the kynge, let him geue me letters to the Debites beyonde y water, y they maye conueye me ouer, tyll I come in to Iuda: gq letters vnto Assaph the lorde of the kynges wod, y he maye geue me wodd for balkes to the gates of the palace, which are harde on the house q harde on the walles of the cite, q for the house that I shal entre in to. And ¥ kynge gaue me acordinge to the good hande of God vpo me. And whan I came to $
Debites beyonde the water, I gaue them y kynges letters. And the kynge sent captaynes and horsmen with me.

But whan Saneballath the Horonite, q 
Tobias the seruaunt of the Ammonites herde y, it greued them sore, y there was come a man which soughte the welth of the children of Israel. And whan I eame to Jerusalem, q had bene there thre daies, I gat me vp in $ night season, t a fewe men with me: for I tolde no man what God had geué me in my hert to do at Ierusalem: q there was not one beest with me, saue it ý I rode vpon. And
I rode by nighte vnto the valley porte before the Dragon well, q to the Dongporte, t con- sidered y walles of Ierusalem that were broken downe, ¢ the portes therof consumed with the fyre. And I wente ouer vnto y Well porte, q to the kynges condyte, q there was no rowme for my beest, y it coulde go vnder me. Then wéte I on in the nighte by the broke syde, q eosidered y wall, q turned back, q came home agayne to y valley porte.

And $ rulers knewe not whither I wéte, or what I dyd: for hither to had I not tolde the
Tewes q the prestes, the councelers ¢ the rulers, q the other y laboured in the worke, ¢ I saide vnto the: Ye se the myserye y we are in, how Ierusale lyeth wayst, q how y gates therof are brent with fyre, come, let vs buylde vp y walles of Ierusalé, ý we be nomore a rebuke.
And I tolde thé of the good hade of my God which was vpo me: And y kynges wordes y he had spoke vnto me. And they saide:
Then let vs get vp. And we buylded, and their handes were strengthed to good.

But whan Saneballat $ Horonite, and To- bias the seruaunt of ¥ Ammonites, q Gosem the Arabian herde it, they laughed vs to

* Deut. 30. a. 

So. rrecrló. 

€ 

5 

E] 

| 

Fo. ceeerlbt. 

scorne, and despised vs, q sayde : What is this that ye do? Wyll ye fall awaye agayue from the kynge? Then answered I them, and sayde: The God of heauen shal cause vs to prospere : for we liis seruauntes are gotten vp, q are buyldinge. As for you, ye haue no por- cio ner right, ner remembraunee in Ierusale.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND Eliasib the hye prest gat him vp 

with his brethren the prestes, and buylded the Shepegate. They halowed it, and set vp the dores of it: euen vnto the tower Mea halowed they it, namely vnto the
*tower of Hananecl. Nexte vnto him buylded 
Y men of Jericho. And besyde him buylded 
Sachur the sonne of Imri. But the Fysh- porte dyd the children of Senaa buylde, they couered it, and set on the dores, loekes and barres of it. Nexte vnto him buylded Mere- moth the sonne of Vria the sonne of Hacoz.
Nexte vuto him buylded Mesullam y sonne of Barachias y sonne of Mesesabeel Nexte vnto him buylded Sadoc y sonne of Baena.
Nexte vnto him buylded they of Thecoa. 
But their greate me put not their neckes to y seruyce of their lorde.

The Oldgate buylded loiada $ sonne of 
Passeah, x Mesullam the sonne of Besodia: they couered it, and set on the dores, lockes t barres of it. Nexte vnto them buylded
Melacia of Gibeon, and Iadon of Morono, mē of Gibeon and of Mispa, for the seate of the Debyte on this syde the water. Nexte vnto him buylded Vsiel the sonne of Harhaia the goldsmyth. Nexte vnto him buylded
Hanania $ Apoteearys sonne, q they repayred 

/ 

ilerusale vnto the brode wall. Nexte vnto 

him buylded Rephaia the sonne of Hur, the ruler of the halfe quarter of Ierusalem. Nexte vnto him buylded ledaia the sonne of Ha-
|rumaph, ouer agaynst his house. Nexte vnto 
|him buylded Hattus the sonne of Hasabenia. 
| But Malchia the sonne of Harim, and Hasub the sonne of Pahath Moab buylded $ other
| pece, and the tower beside the fornace. Nexte vnto him buylded Sallum the sonne of Halohes the ruler of the halfe quarter of Ierusalem, and his daughters.

, The valley gate buylded Hanum, and the eitesins of Sanoah. ‘They buylded it, and set
[on the dores, lockes and barres therof, and a 

* Iere. 31. f. Zach. 14. b. 

The Ü. boke of Cssdras, 

thousande cubytes on the wall, vnto the 
Dogeporte. But the Dongeporte buylded 
Malechia the sonne of Rechab, the ruler of the fourth parte of the vynyardes : He buylded it, q set on the dores, loekes a barres therof,
But the Wellgate builded Sallum ¥ sonne of 
Chal Hose, the ruler of the fourthparte of 
Mispa: He builded it, q couered it, a set on y dores, lockes, q barres therof, « the wall vnto the pole of Sybah by the kynges garden, vnto the steppes that go downe from the cite of Dauid. After him builded Nehemia the sonne of Aszbuk, the ruler of the halfe quar- ter of Bethzur, vntyll the other side ouer agaynst the sepuleres of Dauid, and to the pole Asuia, q vnto the house of the mightie.

After him buylded the Leuites, Rehum the sonne of Bani. Nexte vnto him buylded
Hasabia y ruler of the halfe quarter at Regila in his quarter. After him buylded their brethré, Banai the sonne of Henadab, the ruler of the halfe quarter of Segila. After him buylded Eser the sonne of Iesua ¥ ruler of Mispa, the other pece hard ouer against the Harnesse corner. After him buylded
Baruc the sonue of Sabai the other pece wor- shipfully x costly, fro the corner vnto ¥ dore of y house of Eliasib ý hye prest. After him builded Meremoth the sonne of Vria the sonne of Haeos the other pece, fro y dore of
Eliasibs house, vnto the ende of the house of 
Eliasib. After him buylded the prestes, the mé of the countre. After him buylded Ben
Iamin and Hasub ouer against their house. 
After thé buylded Asaria the sonne of Maeseia the sonne of Anania neste vnto his house.
After him buylded Benui y sonne of Henadad the other peee from the house of Asaria vnto the turnynge, and vnto the corner.

After him buylded Palal the sonne of Vsai, ouer agaynst the eorner q the hye tower, which lieth out ouer fro the kynges house, besyde the courte of the preson. After him
Pedaia the sonne of Pareos (As for y Nethi- nims they dwelt in Ophel, vnto ý Watergate, towarde the east where y tower lieth out).
After him buylded they of Thecoa ý other pece ouer against y greate tower, y lieth out- warde, and vnto the wall of t Ophel.

But from the Horsgate forth buylded y prestes, euery one ouer agaynst his house.
After them buylded Sadoe y sonne of Immer 

t9 Pa, 33, c. 

Chap. tj. 

F 

Chap. b. The ij. boke of Essnras. Fo. cecerloij. | 

ouer against his house. After him buylded 
Semaia the sonne of Sachania y keper of the eastgate. After him buylded Hanania the sonne of Selemia, x Hanum the sonne of
Zalaph y sixte, y other peace. After him builded Mesullam the sonne of Berechia ouer against his chest. After him builded Malchia the goldsmythes sonne, vntyll y house of the
Nethinims, and of the marchauntes ouer agaynst the councell gate, and to the perler in the corner. And betwene the perler of the eorner vnto the Shepegate builded the goldsmythes and the marchauntes.

The iiij. Chapter. 

UT whan Saneballat herde that we 

builded $ wall he was wroth, q toke greate indignacio q mocked $ lewes q saide before his brethré q the mightie men of Sa- maria: What do the impotét lewes? shall they be thus suffred? shall they offre ? shal they perfourme it in one daie ? shal they make y stones whole againe, y are brought to dust, a brent? And Tobias the Ammonite beside him saide: Let thé builde on, yf a foxe go: vp, he shall breake downe their stonye wall.
Heare O thon oure God, how we are despysed, turne their shame vpon their awne heade, y thou mayest geue them ouer in to despisinge in the londe of their captiuite. Couer not their wickednesse, q put not out their sinne fro thy presence: for they haue prouoked the buylders. Yet buylded we the wall, q ioyned it whole together, vnto y halfe heigth. And the people were well mynded to laboure.

But whan Saneballat, x Tobias, and y 
Arabias, q Ammonites, q Aszdodites herde, y the walles of lerusalem were made vp, and that they had begonne to stoppe vp ¥ gappes, they were very wroth, and cospyred all to- gether, to come and fight against Ierusalem, a to make an hinderaunce therin. Neuerthe- les we made oure praier vnto oure God, q set watchmé vpo the wall daye q night ouer against them. And Tuda saide: The strégth of the bearers is to feble, q there is to moch dust, we are not able to builde on the wall.:
And oure aduersaries thought: ‘They shall not knowe nether se, tyll we come in the myddes amonge thé, and slaye them, « hynder y worke. But whan the [ewes that dwelt besyde them; came out of all the places where they dwelt aboute vs, and tolde vs as good as

te tymes, then set I the people after their kynreds with their swerdes, speares x bowes beneth in the lowe places behynde the wall, q loked, and gat me vp, and sayde vnto the chefe men and rulers, q to the other people :
De not ye afrayed of them, thynke vpon $ greate LORDE which ought to be feared, « fighte for youre brethren, sonnes, daughters, wynes, q houses. Nenertheles whan oure ene-| ¢ mies herde y we had gotten worde of it, God broughte their eouncell to naughte, and we turned all againe to the wall, euery one vnto his laboure. And from that time forth it came to passe, y the halfe parte of the yonge men dyd the labant q the other halfe parte belde the speares, shyldes, bowes, and brest- plates, and the rulers stode behynde all the house of Iuda, which buylded on the wall, q bare burthes, from those that laded the.
With one hande dyd they $ worke, and with the other helde they the weapen. And euery one y buylded, had his swerde girde by his side, q so builded they. And the trompetters stode beside me.

And I sayde vnto the pryncipall men, q rulers, and to $ other people: The worke is
|greate q large, q we are separated vpon the wall one farre from another. Loke m what place now ye heare the noise of $ trompe, re- sorte ye thiter vnto vs. *Oure God shal fight for vs, q we wil be labourige in y worke. And the halfe parte of thé helde $ speares fro y morninge springe, till V starres came forth.
And at y same tyme sayde I vnto ¥ people: 
Euery one abyde with his seruaunt at Iern- salem, y in the night season we maye geue attendaunce to y watch, and to laboure on the daye tyme. As for me and my brethren,

q my seruauntes, and $ men of the watch be- hynde me, we put neuer of our clothes, so moch as to washe oure selues.

The b. Chapter. 
ND there arose a greate complaynte of|A 

y people, a of their wyues against their brethren the Iewes. And there were some y sayde : oure sonnes and doughters are to many, let vs take corne for thé, q eate, that we maye lyue. Some saide: Let vs set oure londes, vynyardes q houses to pledge, q take vp corne in the derth. But some saide : Let vs borowe money of the kinge vpo vsury for oure londes

* Exo. 14. c. 

fo. rterrlbitj. 

G 

and vynyardes. Now are oure brethrens bodies as oure awne bodies, and their children as oure children: els shulde we subdue oure sonnes and doughters vnto bondage, and some of oure doughters are subdued allready, and no strength 1s there in oure handes, and other men shal haue oure londes and vynyardes.
But whan I herde their complaynte and soch wordes, it displeased me sore, and I ad- uysed so in my mynde, y I rebuked the coun- celers, and the rulers, and sayde vnto them:
* Wyl ye requyre vsury one of another? And 
I broughte a greate congregacion agaynst them, and sayde vnto them: We (after oure abilyte) haue boughte oure brethren the lewes, which were solde vnto the Heythen.
And wyl ye sell youre brethren, whom we haue boughte vnto vs? "Then held they their peace, q coulde fynde nothinge to answere.

And ] sayde: It is not good that ye do. 
Oughte ye not to walke in the feare of God, beeause of the rebuke of the Heythen oure enemies? I and my brethré, and my ser- luauntes haue lent them money and corne:
‘but as for vsury, let vs leaue it. Therfore 
‘this same daye se that ye restore the their londes agayne, their vynyardes, oyle gardens
E houses, and the hundreth parte of the 
‘Money of the corne, wyne and oyle that ye haue wonne of them. Then sayde they: We wyl restore them agayne, and wyl requyre nothinge of them, and wyl do as thou hast spoken. And I called the prestes, and toke an ooth of the, that they shulde do so. And
I shoke my lappe, and sayde: God shake out euery man after the same maner fro his house and laboure, that maynteyneth not this worde: euen thus be he shaken out, and voyde. And all y congregacion sayde: Amen, and praysed the LORDE. And the people dyd so.

+ And from the tyme forth that it was com- mytted ynto me to be a Debyte in the londe of Iuda, namely from the twentieth yeare vnto the two and thirtieth yeare off kynge
Artaxerses (that is twolue yeare) I and my brethré lyued not of soch sustenaunce as was geuen to a Debyte: For the olde Debytes that were before me, had bene chargeable vnto the people, and had take of thé bred and wyne, and fortye Sycles of syluer: Yee and their seruauntes had oppressed the people.
But so dyd not I, and that because of the 

* Deut. 23. c. t 2 Esd. 2. a 

The ü. boke of Esdras. 

feare of God. I laboured also in the worke vpon the wall, and boughte no léde. And all my seruaütes came thither together vnto y worke. Morouer there were at my table an hundreth and fiftie of the Iewes and rulers, which came vnto me, from amonge the Hey- then, that are aboute vs. And there was prepared me daylie an oxe, and sixe chosen shepe, and byrdes, and euer once in ten dayes a greate summe of wyne. Yet requyred not
I the lyuynge of a Debyte for ý bondage was greuous vnto y people. "Thynke ó me my
God vnto y best, acordige to all that ° I haue done for this people.

The bi. Chapter. 
ND whan Saneballat, Tobias and Gosem the Arabian, and the other of oure ene- myes herde, that I had buylded the wall, and that there were no mo gappes ther in (howbeit at the same tyme had 1 not hanged the dores vpon the gates) Saneballat and Gosem sent vnto me, sayenge: Come and let us mete together in the vyllages vpon the playne of the cite Ono. Neuertheles they thoughte to do me euell Notwithstondynge I sent mes- saungers vnto them, sayenge: I haue a greate busynes to do, I can not come downe. The worke shulde stonde still, yf I were necligent, and came downe to you. Howbeit they sent vnto me as good as foure tymes after the same maner. And I gaue the same answere.
Then sent Saneballat his seruaunt ynto me the fifth tyme, with an open letter in his hande, wherin was wrytten: It is tolde the
Heythen, q Gosem hath sayde it, that thou and the Iewes thynke to rebell: for y which cause thou bugles the wall, and wylt be their kynge in these matters, and hast or- deyned the prophetes to preach of the at Ieru- salem, and to saye: He is kynge of Iuda.
Now shal this come to the kynges eares: come now therfore, and let us take oure coun- cell together. Neuertheles I sent vnto him, sayenge: There is no soch thinge done as thou sayest: thou hast fayned it out of thine owne hert. For they were all mynded to make us afrayed, and thonghte: They shal withdrawe their handes from the worke, y they shal not laboure. Howbeit I strégthed my hande the more.

Chap. bi, 

B 

And I came vnto $ house of Semaia y C 

* 9 Esd. 1. 3. c. 

Chap. bij. sonne of Delaia the sonne of Mechetabeel, q he had shut him selfe within, t sayde: Let us come together in to ¥ house of God, eue vnto y myddes of y téple, q sparre y dores of y téple: for they wyl come to slaye y, yee eue in the night wyl they come to put the to death. But I saydé: Shulde soch a ma flye?
Shulde soch a ma as I am, go in to y téple, to sane his life? I wyl not go in.

For I perceaned, that God had not sent him: Yetspake he prophecye vpon me, neuer- thelesse Tobias and Saneballat had hired him for money. Therfore toke he the money, that
I shulde be afrayed, and so to do and synne, that they might haue an euell reporte of me, to blaspheme me. My God thynke thou vpon Tobias and Saneballat, acordynge vnto these their workes, and of y prophet Noadia, and of the other prophetes, y wolde haue put me in feare.

D| And the wall was fynished on the fyue « twentyeth daye of the moneth Elul, in two and fyftye dayes. And whan all oure enemies herde therof, all the Heithen y were aboute vs, were afraied, and their corage failed thé: for they perceaued, that this worke came of
God. And at y same tyme were there many of ¥ chefe of Iuda, whose letters wéte vnto
Tobias, q from Tobias vnto them (for there were inany in Inda that were sworne vnto him: for he was the sonne in lawe of Sacha- nia the sonne of Arah, and his sonne Iohanan had the doughter of Mesullam the sonne of
Barachia, and they spake good of him before me, and tolde him my wordes.) And Tobias sent letters, to put me in feare.

The bij. Chapter. 

OW whan we had buylded the wall I 
N hanged on the dores, and the porters, syngers and Leuites were appoynted. And I eomaunded my brother Hanani, and Hanania the ruler of the palace at Ierusalem: (for he was a faithfull man, and feared God more then dyd many other) and I sayde vnto them:
Let not the gates of Ierusalé be opened vntyll the Sonne be whote. And whyle they are yet stondinge in the watch, the dores shall be shut and barred. And there were certayne citesyns of Ierusalem appoynted to be watch- men, euery one in his watch, and aboute his house. As for ¥ cite, it was large of rowme, and greate, but y people were fewe therin, and the houses were not buylded.

Che ij. boke of Essdras, 

And my God gane me in my hert, that I gatherd together the pryncipall men and y people, to nombre them, and I founde a register of their nombre, * which came vp afore out of the captiuyte (whom Nabuchodo- nosor y kynge of Dabilo had caryed awaie) and dwelt at lerusalem and in luda, enery one vnto his cite, and were come with Zoro- babel, lesna, Nehemias, Asaria, Raamia,
Naheman, Mardachai, Bilsan, Mispereth, 
Bigenuai, Nehum and Baena, 

This is the nombre of the men of the peo- ple of Israel. The children of Pareos were two thousande, an hundreth and two and seuentye:
The children of Sephatia, thre hundreth q two and seuentye: the children of Arah, sixe hun- dreth and two and fiftye: y children of Pahath
Moab amonge the childre of Iesua and Ioab, two thousande, eight hudreth, and eightene: the children of Elam, a thousande, two hun- dreth, and foure and fyftye: the children of
Sathu, eight hundreth q fyue and fortye, the children of Saeai, senen hundreth and thre score: the children of Benni, sixe hundreth, and eight and fortye: $ children of Bebai, sixe hundreth and eight and twentye: the children of Asgad, two thousande, thre hun- dreth and two and twentye: the children of
Adonicam, syxe hundreth q thre score: the children of Bigeuai, two thousande, and seuen and thre score: the childré of Adin, sixe hüdreth q fiue and fiftye: the childré of Atter of Ezechias, eight and nyentye.

The children of Hasum, thre hundreth « eighte and twentye: the children of Bezai, thre hundreth and foure and twentye: the children of Hariph, an hundreth and twolue: the children of Gibeon, fyue and nyentye: the men of Bethleem and Netopha, an hudreth and eight and foure score: the men of Ana- thot, an hundreth and eight and twentye: the men of Beth Asmaueth, two and fortye: the men of Kiriath learim, Caphira and Beeroth, seuen hundreth and thre and fortye: the men of Rama and Gaba, sixe hidreth and one and twentye: the men of Michmas, an hundreth and two and twentye: the men of Bethel and
Ai, an hundreth and thre and twentye: the men of Nebo, an hundreth and two and fiftye: the children of the other Elam, a thousande, two hundreth and foure and fyftye: the child- ren of Haram, thre hundreth and twentye:

* 1 Esd. 2. a. 

Fo. ceeeplir. 

B 

€ 

| fo. reeel, The tj. boke of Esdras. Chap. bii. 

the children of Iericho, thre hundreth and| |childré of Delaia, y children of Tobia, q the fyue and fortye: the children of Lodhadid q childré of Necoda, were sixe hüdreth q two a
Ono, seuen hundreth and one and twentye:| |fortye. And of the prestes were, the children the children of Senaa, thre thousande, nyne| |of Habaia, the childré of Hacoz, the children hundreth and thirtye. of Barsillai, which toke one of ý doughters of
J| The prestes. The children of Iedaia of the| | Barsillai the Gileadite to wyfe, and was named house of lesua, nyne hundreth and thre and| |afther their name. These soughte the register seuentye: the children of Immer, a thousande| jof their generacion, and whan they foude it and two aud fyftye: the children of Pashur, a| |not, they were put from y presthode. And thousande, two hundreth and sené and fortye:| |Hathirsatha sayde vnto them, y they shulde the children of Harim, a thousande and seuen-| |not eate of y most holy, tyll there came vp a tene. prest with y light and perfectnesse.

The Leuites. The children of Iesua of The whole congregacio as one mà, was two 
Cadmiel amonge the children of Hodua, foure| jand fortye thousande thre hundreth, and thre q seuentye. The syngers. The children of| |score: besyde their seruauntes and maydes,
Assaph, an hundreth and eight and fortye.| |of whom there were seuen thousande, thre 
The porters were: The children of Sallum,| |hundreth and seué and thirtye. And they had the children of Ater, the childré of Talmon,} |two hundreth and seuen and fortie synginge the children of Acub, the children of Hatita,| |men and wemen, seuen hundreth and sixe and the children of Sobai, alltogether an hundreth| thirtie horses, two hüdreth and fyue and fortie and eight and thirtye. Mules, foure hnndreth and fyue and thirtie

The Nethinims. The children of Ziha, y| |Camels: sixe thousande, seué hundreth and childré of Hasupha, the childré of 'labaoth,| |twentye Asses. the children of Ceros, the children of Sia, y And certayne of the awnciét fathers gaue children of Padon, the children of Libana,| |vnto the worke. Hathirsatha gaue to the the children of Hagaba, the children of Sal-| |treasure a thousande guldens, fiftie basens, mai, the children of Hanan, the children of| |fyue hundreth and thyrtie prestes garmentes.
Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of| | And some of the chefe fathers gane vnto y 
Reaia, the children of Rezin, the children of| |treasure of the worke, twétye thousande guld- 
Necoda, the childré of Gasam, the childré of] |ens, two thousande and two hundreth poüde 
Vsa, the children of Passeah, the children of} |of siluer. And the other people gaue twétye 
Bessai, the children of Megunim, the children | |thousande guldens, and two thousande pounde of Nephusim, the children of Bachuc, the| |ofsiluer, and seué and thre score prestes gar- children of Hacupha, the childré of Harhur,| |mentes. And the prestes and Leuites, the the children of Bazlith, the children of| |Porters, the syngers, and the other of the
Mehida, the children of Harsa, the children of| |people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, 
Barcos, the children of Sissera, the children off |dwelt in their cities. 

Thamah, the children of Neziah, ¥ children of Hatipha. The biij. Chapter.

The childre of Salomons seruauntes were: 

The children of Sotai, the childré of Sophereth, No whan the seuenth moneth drue nye, the children of Prida, the childré of Jaca, thel |1 N and $ children of Israel were in their children of Darcon, the childré of Giddel, the} |citie all the people gathered them selues childré of Sephatia, the childré of Hatil, ¥ together as one man vpon the strete before childré of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children the Martians n hon uer Pu ce
Pa -14.-| |serybe, that he shulde fetch the boke of the 

of Amon. All the Nethinims q the childre es of Moses, which the LORDE C maunded Israel. *And Eszdras the prest

of Salomons seruauntes, were thre hundreth brought y lawe before the congregacié both of

and two and nynetye. : 
And. these vente) vpisi? MRE S men and wemen, and of all that coulde vnderstonde it, vpon the first daye of the

Thel, Harsa, Cherub, Addo, Immer: but seuenth moneth, and red therin in the strete

pe ne not shewe their fathers house ner 

t » wheth ; : : 
Sir sede, wheter they vera that is before the Watergate, from y light mornynge vntyll the noone daye before men

n 

* Deu. 31. c. 4 Re. 23.a. 

Chap. tr. 

B 

and wemen and soch as coulde vuderstonde it: and the eares of all the people were in- clyned vnto the boke of the lawe. And
Eszdras the serybe stode vpon an hye pulpit of wod, which they had made for the preach- ynge, q beside him stode Mathithia, Sema,
Anania Vria, Ezechias, and Maeseia on his righte hand: And on his lefte honde stode
Pedaia, Misael, Malchia, Hasum, Haszbadana, 
Zachary and Mesullam. 

And Eszdras opened y boke before all y people, for he stode aboue all y people. And whan he opened it, all the people stode vp.
And Eszdras praysed the LORDE the greate 
God. And all the people answered Amen, 
Amen, with their handes vp, and bowed thé selues, and worshipped y LORDE with their faces to the grounde. And lesua, Bani, Se- rebia, lamin, Acub, Sabthai, Hodaia, Maeseia,
Celita, Asaria, Iosabad, Hanam, Plaia, and the 
Leuites, caused y people to geue hede vnto the lawe, q the people stode in their place.
And they red in the boke of the lawe of God distinctly and planely, so that men vnderstode the thinge that was red. And Nehemias
(which is Hathirsatha) and Esdras the prest and serybe, and the Leuites y caused the people to take hede, sayde vnto all the people:
This daye is holy vnto the LORDE youre 

‘God: be not ic sory therfore, q wepe not. 

For all ¥ people wepte, wha they herde the wordes of the lawe.

Therfore sayde he vnto them: Go youre waye, and eate the fat, and drynke the swete, and sende parte vnto them also that haue not prepared themselues: for this daye is holy vnto onre LORDE, be not ye sory therfore : for the ioye of the LORDE is youre strength.
And the Leuites stylled all the people, and sayde: Holde youre peace, for the daye is holy, vexe not ye youre selues. And all the people wente their waye to eate and drinke, and to sende parte vnto other, and to make greate myrth, for they had vnderstonde the wordes that were declared vnto them.

And on the nexte daye were gathered to- gether the chefe fathers amonge all the people, and the prestes and Leuites, vnto Esdras the scrybe, that he shulde teach them ¥ wordes of the lawe. And they founde written in the lawe, *how that the LORDE had com- maunded by Moses, that the childré of Israel

* Leui. 23. f. 

Thr ij. boke of Esdras. 

So. ceecli, 

shulde dwell in bothes in the feast of the seuenth moneth. And so they caused it be declared and proclamed in all their cities, q at lerusalem, sayenge: Go vp vnto y moüt and fetch Olyue braunches, Pynebraunches, Myrt- braunches, Palmebraunches, q braunches of thicketrees, to make bothes as it is wrytten.

And y people wente vp, and fetched thé, and made them bothes, euery one vpon the rofe of his house, and in their courtes, and in the courtes of the house of God, and in the strete by the Watergate, and in the strete by
Ephraims porte. And all the congregacion of them that were come agayne out of the captyuite, made bothes, and dwelt therin : for sence the tyme of Iosua the sonne of Ni vnto this daye, had not the children of Israel done so, and there was very greate gladnesse.
And euery daye from the first daie vnto the last, red he in the boke of the lawe of God.
And seuen dayes helde they the feast, q on the eight daye the gatherynge together, acordynge vnto the maner.

The ix. Chapter. 

N the foure and twentieth daye of this 

moneth came the children of Israel to- gether with fastinge and sackclothes, and earth vpon them, and separated the sede of
Israel from all the straunge children, and stode and knowleged their synnes, and the wyckednesses of their fathers, and stode vp in their place, and red in the boke of the lawe of the LORDE their God foure tymes on the daye, and they knowleged, and worshipped the LORDE their God foure tymes on the daye. And the Leuites stode on hye, namely
Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel, Sebania, Buni, Serebia, 
Bani, and Chenani, and cryed loude vnto the 
LORDE their God. And the Leuites, Iesua, 
Cadmiel, Bani, Hasabenia, Serebia, Hodia, 
Sebania, Pethahia, sayde: Stonde vp, prayse the LORDE oure God for euer: and let thankes be geué vnto the name of thy glorye, which excelleth all thankesgeuynge and prayse.
LORDE, thou art alone, thou hast made heauen, and the heauen of all heauens, with all their hoost, the earth and all that therin is, the See and all that is therin: thou geuest life vnto all, and $ hoost of heauen bowe themselues vnto the. Thou art the LORDE|
God, that hast chosen Abra, and broughte him out of Vr in Chaldea, œ called him

So. ceeclij. 

The i. boke of Esdras, 

Abraham, * and founde his hert faithfull before the, tand madest a couenaŭt with him, to geue vuto his sede the londe of the Cananites,
Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusites, and 
Girgosites, and hast made good thy wordes: for thou art righteous. ł And hast considered the mysery of oure fathers in Egipte, and herde their complainte by the reed See, and shewed tokes and wonders vpo Pharao, and on all his seruaütes, and on all his people of his londe: for thou knewest y they were pre- sumptuous q cruell against them, t so madest thou $the a name as it is this daie. And the reed See partedst thou in sunder before them, so that they wéte thorow the myddes of the
See dryc shod: q their persecuters threwest thou in to the depe as a stone, in the mightie waters, and leddest them on the daye tyme in a cloudy pyler, and on the nighte season in a piler of fyre, to shewe them lighte in the waye y they wente.

“Thou camest downe also vpo mount Sinai, and spakest vnto them from heauen, and gauest them righte iudgmentes, true lawes, good commaundementes and statutes, and declared vnto them thy holy Sabbath, and commaunded them preceptes, ordinaunces, and lawes, by Moses thy seruaunt: and II gauest them bred from heauen whan they were hongrye, and * broughte forth water for them out of the rock whan they were thyrstye: and promysed them, ’that they shulde go in, and take possession of the londe, where ouer thou haddest lyfte vp thine hande for to geue them.

Neuertheles oure fathers were proude and hardnecked, so that they folowed not thy co- maundementes, and refused to heare, and were not myndefull of the wonders y thou dyddest for them: but became obstynate and heady, in so moch that they turned back to their bondage in their dishobedience. But thou my God forgauest, and wast gracious, mercifull, pacient, and of greate goodnesse, and for- sokest them not. ** And though they made a molten calfe (and sayde: This is thy God, that broughte the out of the londe of Egipte) and dyd greate blasphemies, yet forsokest thou them not in the wyldernes, acordinge to thy greate mercy. tt And y cloudy piler departed not from them on y daye tyme to lede them

* Gen. 11, d. Gen. 17. a. 
$ Some reade: them. 
16. a. 

t Gen.15.d. ł Exo.3. b. 
^ Exo.19.20. Deut.4.b. || Exo. 
T Num.20. b. ^ Gen.22. c. — ** Exo. 32. b. 

the waye, nether the piler of fyre in the night season, to shewe them lighte in the waye that they wente.

And thou gauest them thy good sprete to enfourme them, :tand withheldest not thy
Manna from their mouth, $$and gauest the water wha they were thirstie. Fortye yeares longe madest thou prouysion for them in the wyldernesse, so that they wanted nothinge: llitheir clothes waxed not olde, and their fete swelled not. And thou gauest the kigdomes
@ nacions, q partedst the acordinge to their porcions, so that they possessed *' the londe of
Sihon kynge of Heszbon, q the londe of Og y kynge of Basan. *** And their childré mul- tiplyedst thou as the starres of heauen, and broughtest thé in to the londe wherof thou haddest spoken vuto their fathers, that they shulde go in to it, and haue it in possession.

And y children wente in, and possessed the londe, tttand thou subdudest before the the inhabiters of the londe, euen the Cananites, q gauest them in to their hande, and their kynges and ¥ people of the londe, y they might do with them what they wolde. And they wanne their stronge cities, q a fat londe, and toke possession of houses y were full of all maner goodes, welles dygged out, vynyardes, oyl- gardens, q many frutefull trees: and they ate q were fylled, q became fat, q lyued in welth thorow thy greate goodnes. Neuertheles they were disobedient, and rebelled agaynst the, and cast thy lawe behynde their backes, #+and slewe thy prophetes (which exhorted them so earnestly, that they shulde couerte vnto the) and dyd greate blasphemies. Therfore gauest thou them ouer in to the hade of their enemies that vexed them.

Chap. ir. 

D 

And in ¥ tyme of their trouble they cried| £ 

vnto the, and thou hardest them from heauen: and thorow thy greate mercy thou gauest them sauiours, which helped thé out of the hande of their enemies. But whan they came to rest, they turned back agayne to do euell before the: therfore leftest thou them in the hande of their enemies, so y they had $ dominion ouer them. So they couerted, and eryed vnto the, and thou herdest them from heauen, and many a tyme hast thou delyuered them acordinge to thy greate mercy, and testified

tt Exo. 13. d. 
TT Nu. 21. d. ttt 3 Re. 18. b.

tt Exo.16.f. 6&6 Exo.17.a. ||| Deut. 8. a. 
"xx Gon 22C ttt Iosu. 2.3. 4. 

Chap. r. 

The ije boke of Cssdras. 

Fo. eeeeltij. 

vnto them, that they shulde turne agayne vnto thy lawe.

Notwithstodinge they were proude, and herkened not vnto thy comaundementes, but synned in thy lawes (which a man shulde do, q lyue in them) a turned their shulder awaye, q were styffnecked, q wolde not heare. And many yeares dyddest thou forbeare them, « testified vnto them thorow thy sprete, euen by the office of thy prophetes, & yet wolde they not heare. ‘Therfore gauest thou thé in to y hade of ý nacions in the londes. But for thy greate mercies sake thou hast not vtterly có- sumed them, nether forsaken them: for thou art a gracious and mercifull God.

| Now oure God, thou greate God, mightie and terrible, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy, regarde not a litle all the trauayle y hath happened vnto vs, x oure kynges, prynces, prestes, prophetes, fathers q all thy people, sence the tyme of the kynges of Assur vnto this daie. Thou art righteous in all y thou hast broughte vpo vs: for thou hast done righte. As for vs, we hane bene vngodly, and oure kynges, prynces, prestes q fathers haue not done after thy lawe, ner regarded thy cómaundementes, q thy earnest exhortacids wherwith thou hast exhorted them, q haue not serued ¥ in their kyngdome, and in thy greate goodes y thou gauest them, and in the large and plenteous lode which thou gauest them to good, and haue not conuerted from their wicked workes. Beholde, therfore are we in bondage this daye: Yee euen in the lode that thou gauest vnto oure fathers, to enioye the frutes and goodes therof, beholde, there are we bond- men. And greate is the increase of it vnto the kynges, whom thou hast set ouer vs be- cause of our synnes, and they haue dominion ouer oure bodies and catell and we are in greate trouble.

And in all this made we a sure couenaunt, q wrote it, q let oure prynces, Leuites q prestes

seale it. 
The y. Chapter. a HE sealers were: Nehemias (that is)
Hathirsatha the sonne of Hachalia and 
Sedechias, Seraia, Asaria, leremy, Pashur, 
Amaria, Malchia, Hattus, Sebania, Malluch, 
Harim, Meremoth, Obadia, Daniel, Sinthun, 
Baruch, Mesullam, Abia, Meiamin, Maasga, 
Bilgai and Semaia: these were prestes. 

2 Par. 15. c. 

* Iosu. 24. c. t Deut. 7. a. 

The Leuites were: Iesua y sonne of Asania, 
Binui amonge the childre of Henadad, Cad- miel. And their brethren: Sechania, Hodia,
Celita, Plaia, Hauan, Micha, Rehob, Hasabia, 
Sachur, Serebia, Sebania, Hodia, Bani and 
Beninu. The heades of the people were: 
Pareos, Pahath Moab, Elam, Sathu, Bani, 
Buni, Asgad, Sebai, Adonia, Bigenai, Adiu, 
Ater, Hezechias, Asur, Hodia, Hasum, Bezai, 
Hariph, Anathot, Neubai, Magpias, Mesullam, 
Hesir, Mesesabeel, Sadoc, laddua, Platia, 
Hanan, Anaia, Hoseia, Hanania, Hasub, 
Halohes, Pilha, Sobek, Rehum, Hasabna, 
Maeseia, Ahia, Hanan, Anan, Malluch, Harim and Baena.

And the other people, the prestes, Leuites, 
Porters, syngers, Nethinims, q all they that had separated them selues from y people in the lodes vnto the lawe of God, with their wyues, sonnes and daughters, as many as coulde vnderstonde it, and their lordes that had rule of them, receaued it for their brethren.

* And they came to sweare, and to bynde them selues with an ooth to walke in Gods lawe, which was geuen by Moses the seruaunt

inge vnto all the commaundementes, iudg- mentes and statutes of the LORDE oure God: tand that we wolde not geue oure doughters vnto the people in the lode, nether to take their doughters for oure sonnes. tAnd yf y people of the lode broughte ware on the Sab- hath, and all maner of vytayles to sell, that we wolde not take it of them on the Sabbath and on the holy dayes. $And that we wolde let the seuéth yeare be fre concernynge all maner of charge.

And we layed a statute vpon oure selues, to geue yearly ¥ thirde parte of a Sycle to the mynistracion in the house of oure God, namely to the shewbred, to the daylie meatofferynge, to the daylie burntofferynge of ý Sabbathes, of the new mones and feast dayes, and to the thinges that were sanctified, and to the syn- offerynges, to reconcyle Israel with all, and to all the busynes in $ house of oure God.

And we cast the lot amonge the prestes, 
Leuites and the people, for offerynge of y wod, to be brought vnto y house of oure God from yeare to yeare, after the houses of oure fathers, that it might be brent at tymes ap- poynted, vpon the altare of the LORDE oure
Deut. 15. a. 

ł 2 Esd. 13. c. § Leui. 25. a. 

B 

of God, that they wolde obserue and do acord-} . 

€ 

Fo. ceecliitj. 
|God, as it is wrytten in the lawe: and yearly to brynge the firstlinges of oure londe, q the firstlinges of oure frutes of all trees, yeare by
;yeare, vnto y house of the LORDE: and the firstlinges of oure sonnes, and of oure catell, as it is wrytten in the lawe: and the firstlinges of oure oxen and of oure shepe, that we shulde brynge all this to the house of oure God vnto the prestes that mynister in the house of oure
God: and that we shulde brynge the first- linges of oure dowe, and of oure Heueoffer- inges, and the frutes of all maner trees, of wyne also and of oyle, vnto the prestes to the chestes of the house of oure God. And the tithes of oure lóde vnto the Leuites, y the
Leuites might haue the tithes in all the cities of oure mynistracion.

And the prest the sonne of Aaron shal with the Leuites haue also of the tithes of ý Leuites, so that the Leuites shal brynge vp the tithes of their tithes vnto the house of oure God to the chest in y treasure house. For the chil- dren of Israel and the children of Leui shall brynge vp the Heueofferynges of the corne, wyne and oyle vnto the chestes, there are the vessels of the Sanctuary, q the prestes y mynister, and the porters q syngers, y we forsake not the house of oure God.

The ri. Chapter. 

ND the rulers of the people dwelt at 

lerusalem. But the other people cast lottes therfore, so that amdge ten one parte wente to lerusalem in to the holy cite to dwell, and nyne partes in the cities. And y people thanked all the men that were willinge to dwell at Ierusalem.

These are the heades of the londe that dwelt at lerusalem. In the cities dwelt Iuda euery one in his possession y was in their cities, namely Israel, the prestes, Leuites, y Nethi- nims, and the children of Salomons seruauntes.
And at Terusalé dwelt certayne of the children of Iuda ¢ of Ben lamin.

^ Of the children of Iuda: Athaia the sonne of Vsia $ sonne of Zachary, the sonne of
Amaria, the sonne of Sephatia, the sonne of 
Mahelaleel, of the children of Phares. And 
Maeseia the sonne of Baruch, the sonne of 
Chal Hose, the sonne of Hasaia, the sonne of 
Adaia, the sonne of Ioiarib, the sonne of 
Zachary, the sonne of Siloni. Al the childré 

^ ] Par. 10. a. * 1 Par. 10. a. * | Par. 10. b. 

The ij. boke of suras. 

Chap. ri. of Phares that dwelt at Ierusalem, were foure
C. and eight q thre score valeaunt men. 

?'These are the childré of Ben Iamin: Sallu the sonne of Mesullam, ý sonne of Ioed, the sonne of Pedaia, the sonne of Colaia, y sonne of Maeseia, the sonne of Ithiel, ẹ sonne of Iesaia. And after him Sabai, Sallai : nyne hundreth and eight and twentye. And Ioel the sonne of Sichri had the ouersight of them: and Iuda ¥ sonne of Hasnua ouer the seconde parte of the cite.

"Of the prestes there dwelt: ledaia y sonne of Ioiarib, Iachin. Seraia the sonne of Hel- chias y sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Achitob, was prynce in the house of God: ghis brethre that perfourmed the worke in j house: of whom there were viij. C. and xxij And
Adaia the sonne of leroham, the sonne of 
Plalia, the sonne of Amzi, the sonne of 
Zachary, the sonne of Pashur q his brethré, chefe amóge the fathers: of whom there were two hundreth and two and fortye. And
Amassai the sonne of Asariel the sonne of 
Ahusai, the sonne of Mesillemoth, the sonne of Immer: and his brethren were valeaunt men, of whom there were an hundreth and eight and twentye. And their ouerseer was
Sabdaiel the sonne of Gedolim. 

? Of the Leuites: Semaia the sonne of Hasub, the sonne of Asrikam, the sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Bunni: And Sabthai and Iosa- bad of the chefe of the Leuites, in the outwarde busynes of y house of God. And
Mathania the sonne of Micha, the sonne of 
Sabdi, the sonne of Assaph, which was the pryncipall to begynne the thankesgeuynge vnto prayer. And bacbuchia y seconde amoge his brethren, and Abda the sonne of Sammua, the sonne of Galal, the sonne of Iedithun.
All the Leuites in the holy cite were two hundreth and foure q foure score. * And ¥

orters Acub and Talman, and their brethren y kepte the portes, were an hundreth and two and seuentye. As for the residue of Israel, the prestes and Leuites, they were in all the cities of Iuda, euery one in his inheritaunce.

And the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and 
Zipha and Gispa belonged vnto the Nethiuims. 
The ouerseer of the Leuites at lerusalem, was 
Vsi the soune of Bani, the sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of Micha.

41 Par. 10. b. * 1 Par. 10. c 

Chap. rij. The ij. boke of Esdras, 

B| Of the children of Assaph there were) syngers aboute y busynes in the house of
God: for it was the kynges commaundement cócernynge them, that ¥ syngers shulde deale faithfully, euery daye as acordinge was.

And Pethaia the sonne of Mesesabeel of the childré of Serah the sonne of Iuda nexte the kynge in all matters concernynge the people. And the children of Iuda that were without in the townes of their londe, dwelt some at Kiriath Arba, and in the vyllages therof, q at Dibon, and in the vyllages therof: and at Cabzeel, and in y vyllages therof: and at Iesua, Molada, Bethphalet, Hazarsual,
Berseba and in their vyllages: q at Siclag and Mochona, and in their vyllages: And at
Enrimmon, Zarega, Ieremuth, Sanoah, Adul- lam and in their vyllages: At Lachis, aud in the feldes therof: At Aseka, and in the vyl- lages therof: and dwelt from Berseba vnto the valley of Hinnom.

The children of Ben Iamin of Gaba, dwelt at Michmas, Aia, Bethel and in their vyllages.
And at Anathoth, Nob, Anania, Hazor, 
Rama, Githaim, Hadid, Ziboim, Neballat, 
Lod, Ono q in the Carpéters valley. And certayne of the Leuites y had porcions in
Iuda, dwelt in Ben Jamin. 

The xij. Chapter. 

a HESE are ¥ prestes and Leuites that 
T wente vp with Zorobabel y sonne of 
Saalthiel and with lesua: Seraia, leremy, 
Esdras, Amaria, Malluch, Hattus, Sechania, 
Rehum, Meremoth, Iddo, Ginthoi, Abia, 
Meiamin, Maadia, Bilga, Semaia, loiarib, 
Tedaia, Sallu, Amok, Helchias « Jedaia. 
These were the heades amoge the prestes and their brethren in the tyme of Iesua. The
Leuites were these: lesua, Bénui, Cadmiel, 
Serebia, Iuda and Mathania, ouer the office of thankesgeuynge, they q their brethre:
Bacbuchia q Vnni and their brethré, were aboute them in the watches.

| lesua begat Ioachim. Joachim begat Elia- sib. Eliasib begat loiada. loiada begat
Ionathan. Ionathan begat laddua. And in the tyme of Ioachim were these the chefe fathers amonge the prestes : namely of Seraia was Meraia, of Ieremy was Hanania, of Esz- dras was Mesullam, of Amaria was Iohanan, of Malluch was Ionathan, of Sebania was

Ioseph, of Harim was Adna, of Meraioth was 
Helcai, of Iddo was Zachary, of Ginthon was 
Mesulla, of Abia was Sichri, of Miniamin 
Moadia was Piltai, of Bilga was Sammua, of 
Semaia was Jonathan, of Ioiarib was Mathnai, of ledaia was Vsi, of Sallai was Callai, of
Amok was Eber, of Helchias was Hasabia, of 
Gedaia, was Nethaneel. 

And in the tyme of Eliasib. loiada, Io- hanan and Jaddua, were the chefe fathers amonge the Leuites, and the prestes wrytté vnder the reigne of Darius y Persian. ‘The children of Leui the pryncipall fathers were wrytten in the Cronicles, vntyll the tyme of
Iohanan the sonne of Eliasib And these were the chefe amoge the Leuites, Hasabia,
Serebia and Jesua the sonne of Cadmiel, q their brethren ouer agaynst them, to geue prayse and thankes, acordinge as Dauid y ma of God had ordeyned it, one watch ouer agaynst another. Mathania, Bacbuchia, Oba- dia, Mesullam, Talmon and Acub were porters in the watch at the thresholdes of the gates.
These were in the tyme of Ioiachim the sonne of Iesua the sonne of losedec, and in the tyme of Nehemias the Debyte, and of the prest Eszdras the scrybe.

And in the dedicacion of the wall at Ieru- salem, were the Leuites soughte out of all their places, that they mighte be broughte to lerusalem, to kepe y dedicacion in gladnesse, with thankesgeuynges, with synginge, with
Cymbales, Psalteries and harpes. And the children of the syngers gathered thé selues together from the playne countre aboute Ieru- salem, and from the vyllages of Nethophathi, and from the house of Gilgal, q out of the feldes of Gibea q Asmaueth: for Y syngers had buylded them vyllages aboute lerusalem.
And y prestes and Leuites purified them selues, and clensed the people, the gates and the wall.

And I caused the prynces to go vp vpon the wall, and appoynted two greate queres of thankesgeuynge, which wete on the righte hande of the wall towarde the Donggate, and after them wéte Hosaia, and halfe of the prynces of Iuda, ¢ Asaria, Eszdras, Mesullam,
Iuda, Ben Iamin, Semaia and Jeremy: and certayne of the prestes childré with trompettes, namely Zachary ý sonne of Ionathan, the sonne of Semaia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of Michaia, the sonne of Sachur, the

fo. crerib, 

B 

€ 

Fo. ceeclor. Che ij. boke of Essdrag, 

sonne of Assaph, and his brethren, Semaia, 
Asareel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nathaneel and Iuda and Hanani, with the musicall instrumentes of Dauid ¥ man of God.

Bi And Eszdras y serybe before thé towarde the Wellgate, and they wente vp ouer agayust them vpon the steppes of the cite of Dauid at the goynge vp of the wall to the house of
Dauid, vnto the Watergate Eastwarde. 

The other quere of thankesgeuynge wente ouer against them, and I after them, and the halfe parte of the people vpon y wall, towarde
ý Fornacegate vpwarde, vntyll y brode wall, and to ¥ porte of Ephraim, and to the Old- gate, and to ý Fyshgate, and to the tower of
Hananeel, and to the tower of Meah, vntyll the Shepegate. And in y presongate stode they styll and so stode the two queres of thankesgeuynge of the house of God, and I and the halfe of the rulers with me, and the prestes, namely Eliachim, Maeseia, Miniamin,
Michaia, Elioenai, Zachary, Hanania, with trópettes, and Maeseia, Semaia, Eleasar, Vsi,
Iohanan, Malchia, Elam and Aser. And the syngers songe londe, and lesrahia was the ouerseer.

£| And the same daye were there greate sa- crifices offred, q they reioysed: for God had geué them greate gladnesse, so that both the wyues and children were ioyfull, q the myrth of lerusalem was herde farre of.

At the same tyme. were there men ap- poynted ouer the treasure chestes (wherin were y Heue offerynges, the firstlinges and the tithes) that they shulde gather them out of y feldes aboute the cities, to destribute the vnto the prestes and Leuites acordinge to the lawe: for Iuda was glad of the prestes, and
Leuites, that they stode and wayted vpon the office of their God, and the office of the puri- ficacion. And the syngers q porters stode after the commaundemét of Dauid q of Salo- mon his sonne: * for in the tyme of Dauid and Assaph, were the chefe syngers founded, and the songes of prayse and thankesgeuynge vnto God. In the tyme of Zorobabel and
Nehemias, dyd all Israel geue porcios vnto the syngers and porters, euery daye his por- cion, and they gaue thinges halowed vnto the Leuites, and the Leuites gaue thinges that were sanetified, vnto the childre of
Aaron. 

* 1 Par. 24. a. t Deut. 23. a. t Nu. 23.a. 

Chap. rii. 

The rij. Chapter. 

ND what tyme as the boke of Moses|@ was red in y eares of the people, there was founde wrytten therin, ty the Ammonites and Moabites shulde neuer come in to the congregacion of God, because they mett not the children of Israel with bred and water,? and hyred Balaam against thé, that he shulde curse them : neuertheles oure God turned $ curse in to a blessynge. Now whan they herde the lawe, they separated from Israel euery one that had myxte him selfe therin.
And before this had the prest Eliasib de- lyuered the chest of y house of oure God vnto his kynsman Tobia: for he had made him a greate chest, and there had they afore- tyme layed the meatofferynges, frankencense, vessell, and the tithes of corne, wyne and oyle (acordinge to the commaundement geuen to the Leuites, syngers and porters) and the
Heueofferynges of the prestes. 

But in all this was not 1 at Ierusalem: for in y two and thirtieth yeare of Artaxerses kynge of Babilon, came I vnto the kynge, and after certayne dayes optayned 1 lycence of the kynge to come to lerusalé. And I gat know- lege of y euell that Eliasib dyd vnto Tobia, in that he had made him a chest in the courte of the house of God, and it greued me sore, and I cast forth all the vessels of Tobias house out of the chest, and eommauded them to clense the chest. And thither broughte I|: agayne the vessels of the house of God, the meatofferynge and the incense.

And I perceaued, that the porcions of 
Leuites were not geuen them, for the whic cause the Leuites and syngers were fled, euery one to his londe for to worke. Then reproued
I the rulers, and sayde: Why forsake we the house of God? But I gathered them to- gether, and set them in their place. "Then brought all luda the tithes of corne, wyne and oyle vnto the treasure. And I made treasurers ouer y treasure, euen Selemia y prest, and Sadoc the serybe, q of the Leuites
Pedaia, and vnder their hande Hanan the sonne of Sachur the sonne of Mathania: for they were counted faithfull, and their office was, to destribute vntotheir brethren. §Thynke vpon me O my God here in, q wype not out

$2 Esd. 5. c. 

Chap. rii, my mercy, that I haue shewed on y house of my God, « on the offices therof.

At the same tyme sawe I some tredinge wyne presses on the Sabbath, and brynginge in clusters, and asses laden wyth wyne, grapes, fygges, and brynginge all maner of burthens vnto Ierusalem, vpon the Sabbath daye. And
I rebuked them earnestly $ same daye that they solde ¥ vytayles. There dwelt mé of
"Tyre also therin, which broughte fysh and all maner of ware, and solde on the Sabbath vnto the childre of Iuda and Ierusalem. Then reproued I the rulers in Iuda, and saide vnto them: What euell thinge is this that ye do, and breake the Sabbath daye? Dyd not oure fathers euen thus, and oure God broughte all this plage vpon vs q vpon this cite? And ye make the wrath more yet vpon Israel, in that ye breake the Sabbath.

And whan the portes of lerusalem were drawen vp before the Sabbath, I commatded to shutt the gates, and charged that they shulde not be opened tyll after the Sabbath: and some of my seruauntes set I at the gates, y there shulde no burthé be broughte in on the Sabbath daye. Then remayned the chap- men and marchauntes once or twyce ouer nighte without lerusalem with all maner of wares. "Then reproued I them sore, q sayde vnto them : Why tary ye all night aboute the wall? Yf ye do it once agayne, I wil laye handes vpon you. From that tyme forth came they nomore on the Sabbath. And I sayde

a Deut. 7. 8. 

The ij. boke of Essdras. 

vnto the Leuites which were cleane, that they shulde come and kepe the gates, to halowe the Sabbath daye. Thynke vpo me (O my
God) cécernynge this also, ¢ spare me acord- ynge to thy greate mercy.

And at the same tyme sawe I Iewes, that maried wyues of Asdod, Ammon and of Moab, and their children spake halfe in the speache of Asdod, and coulde not speake in y Iewish language, but by y tonge mighte a mà per- ceaue euery people. And I reproued them, and cursed them, q smote certayne men of thé, and plucte them vp, and toke an ooth of them by God: “Ye shal not geue youre daughters vnto their sonnes, nether shal ye take their daughters vnto youre sonnes, or for youre selues. ^ Dyd not Salomon ¥ kynge of
Israel synne ther in? q yet amonge many 
Heythen was there no kynge like him, q he was deare vnto his God, and God made him kynge ouer all Israel, and the outlandish wemen.

And one of the children of Ioiada the sonne of Eliasib ¥ hye prest, had made a cétracte wyth Saneballath the Horonite : but I chaced him fro me. O my God, thynke thou vpon them that are quyte of the presthode, and haue defyled the couenaunt of the presthode and of the Leuites. Thus clensed I them from all soch as were outlandish, and ap- poynted the courses of the prestes and Leuites, euery one to his office, and to offre the wod at tymes appoynted, and the first frutes. ‘Thynke thou vpon me (O my God) for the best.

5 3 Re. 11. a. 

The ende of the seconde boke of Cosdras, otheriwpse called the boke of ehemtas.

Fo. ceeelbtj. 

ES 

The boke of Wester. 

That this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
Ahasuerus maketh a greate feast to his lordes and prynces, calleth for Vasthi the quene, she
| commeth not, therfore is she deposed from the kyngdome.
Chap. II. 
Amonge the daughters, Hester pleaseth the kynge. Mardocheus geueth the kynge warn- ynge of his harme.

Chap. III. 

Ama is greate with the kynge, hateth Mar- docheus that wil not worshippe him, and co- maundeth to slaye all the Iewes.

Chap. HII. 

Greate heuynes amonge the Iewes. 

| Chap. V. 

Hester cometh before the kynge, and byddeth him and Aman to a feast. Aman maketh a galowe for Mardocheus.

The first Chapter. . 

4 T N the tyme of Ahasuerus, which reigned 
I from India vnto Ethiopia, ouer an hun- dreth and seuen and twentye londes, what
‘tyme as he sat on his seate roiall in the cas- tell of Susan in the thirde yeare of his reigne, he made a feast vnto all his prynces and ser-
,uauntes, namely vnto the mightie men of 
| Persia and Media, to the Debities and rulers 
‘of his countrees, that he mighte shewe the 
'noble riches of his kingdome, and the glorious worshippe of his greatnesse, many dayes longe, euen an hundreth and foure score dayes.
, And whau these dayes were expyred, the 
|kynge made a feast vnto all the people that 

Chap. VI. 

Mardocheus is recompensed for his frendshippe shewed vnto the kynge.

Chap. VIL 

Hester prayeth for hir people, Aman is hanged on the galowe that he had prepared for Mar- docheus.

Chap. VIII. 

The kynge geueth Amas house vnto the quene, and at hir request he causeth Amas wrytinges to be called agayne.

Chap. IX. 

Amans sonnes are hanged also, and many ene- myes slayne. The lewes kepe a ioyfull feast.

Chap. X. 
Of the auctorite of Mardocheus vnder the kynge. 

were in the castell of Susan, both vnto greate and small, seuen dayes longe in the courte of the garden by the kynges palace: where there hanged whyte, reed q yalow clothes, fastened with coardes of lynnen and scarlet in siluer rynges, vpon pylers of Marble stone.

The benches were of golde and siluer made] 33 vpon a pavement of grene, white, yalowe and black Marble. And y drinke was caried in vessels of golde, and there was euer chaunge of vessell. And the kinges wine was moch acordynge to the power of the kynge. And noman was appoynted what he shulde drinke: for the kynge had commaunded all the officers of his house, that euery one shulde do as it lyked him. And the quene Vasthi made a

‘Chap. új. 

feast also for the wemen in the palace of 
Ahasuerus. And on the seuenth daye whan the kynge was mery of the wine, he cé- maunded Mehuman, Bistha, Harbona, Big- tha, Abagtha, Sethar and Charcas, the seuen chamberlaynes (that dyd seruyce in the pre- sence of kynge Ahasuerus) to fetch the quene
Vasthi with the crowne regall, that he might shewe y people and prynces hir fairnesse : for she was bewtifull. But the quene Vasthi wolde not come at the kynges worde by his chamberlaynes. Then was the kynge very wroth, and his indignacio kyndled in him.

And the kynge spake to ¥ wyse men that had vnderstondinge in the ordinaunces of the londe (for the kinges matters must be hadled before all soch as haue knowlege of the lawe and iudgment: And the nexte vnto him were,
Charsena, Sethar, Admatha, Tharsis, Meres, 
Marsena and Memuchan, the seuen prynces of the Persias, and Meedes, which sawe the kynges face, and satt aboue in the kyngdome)
What lawe shulde be execute vpon the quene 
Vasthi, because she dyd not acordynge to the worde of the kynge by his chamberlaines.
The saide Memuchà before the kynge « the prynces: The quene Vasthi hath not onely done euell agaynst the kinge but also agaynst all the prynces and all the people in all the londes of kynge Ahasuerus, for this dede of the quene shall come abrode ynto all wemen, so that they shall despyse their huszbandes
J|before their eyes, and shall saye: The kynge 
Ahasuers cOmaunded Vasthi ý quene to come before him, but she wolde not. And so shall the pryncesses in Persia and Media saye lyke- wyse vnto all the kynges prynces, whan they heare of this dede of the quene, thus shall there aryse despytefulnes and wrath ynough.
Yf it please the kynge, let there go a kyngly commaundemet from him, and let it be wryt- ten acordynge to the lawe of the Persians and
Medians (and not to be transgressed) that 
Vasthi come nomore before kynge Ahasuerus, and let the kynge geue the kyngdome vnto another that is better then she.

And y this wrytinge of the kynge which shalbe made, be published thorow out all his empyre (which is greate) that all wyues maye holde their huszbandes in honoure, both amonge greate and smal.

This pleased the kynge and the prynces, 

* 4 Reg. 24. c. 

The boke of Hester. 

and the kynge dyd acordynge to the worde of 
Memuchan. ‘Then were there letters sent forth in to all the kynges londes, in to euery londe acordinge to the wrytinge therof, and to euery people after their laguage, y euery man shulde be lorde in his awne house. And this caused he be spoken after the language of his people.

The ij. Chapter. 
FTER these actes whan the displeasure of kynge Ahasuerus was layed, he thoughte vpon Vasthi, what she had done, and what was concluded concernynge her.
Then sayde the kynges seruauntes: Let there be fayre yonge virgins soughte for the kynge, and let the kynge appoynte ouerseers in all y londes of his empyre, that they maye brynge together all fayre yonge virgins vnto the castcl of Susan to the Wemens buyldinge, vnder the hande of Hegai the kynges chamberlayne, that kepeth the wemen, and let him geue them their apparell. And loke which damsell pleaseth the kynge, let her be quene in Vas- this steade. This pleased the kynge, and he dyd so.

In the castell of Susan there was a lewe, whose name was Mardochens, the sonne of
Tair, the sonne of Simei, the sonne of Cis, the sonne of Iemini, which was caried awaye from lerusalem, *whan lechonias the kynge of
Iuda was led awaye, (whom Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon caried awaye) and he norished Hadassa (that is Hester) his vncles daughter: for she had nether father ner mother, and she was a fayre and beutyfull damsel. And whan hir father and mother dyed, Mardocheus receaued hir as his awne daughter.

Now whan ¥ kynges comaundemet and comyssion was published, q many dasels were broughte together vnto the castell of Susan vnder y hande of Hegai, Hester, was take also vnto $ kynges house vnder y hande of
Hegai y keper of y weme, q the damsell pleased hin, q she founde grace in his sighte.
And he put her with hir maydés in M best place of ý Womés buildige. And Hester shewed it not vnto hir people q hir kynred: for Mardocheus had charged her, y she shulde not tell it. And Mardocheus walked euery daye before ¥ courte of ý Womés buyldinge, y he might knowe how Hester dyd, and what shulde become of her.

So. ceeclir. 

a 

B 

| fo. ceeely. 
C| And whan the appoynted tyme of euery 

damsell came that she shulde come to y kynge 
Ahasuerus, after that she had bene twolue monethes in the deckynge of the wemen (for their deckynge must haue so moch tyme, namely sixe monethes with Balme q Myrre, q sixe monethes with good spyces, so were the wemé beutifyed) then wente there one damsell vnto y kynge, and what so euer she requyred, y must be geué her to go with her out of the
Vomens buyldinge vnto y kynges palace. 
And whan one came in the euenynge, y same wéte fro him on y morow in to y seconde house of wemen, vnder the hande of Saasgas the kynges chamberlayne, which kepte y con- cubines. And she must come vnto the kynge nomore, excepte it pleased the kynge, and that he caused her to be called by name.

Now whan the tyme came of Hester the daughter of Abihail Mardocheus ynele (whom he had receaued as his awne daughter) y she shulde come tothe kynge, she desyred nothinge but what Hegai the kynges chamberlayne the keper of the wemen sayde.

And Hester founde fauoure in the sighte of all them that loked vpon her. And Hester was taken vnto kynge Ahasuerus in to the house royall, in the tenth moneth which is called Tebeth, in the seuenthe yeare of his reigne.

And the kynge loued Hester aboue all the wemen, and she founde grace and mercy in his sighte before all the virgins: and he set the quenes croune vpon hir heade, and made her quene in steade of Vasthi. And the kynge made a greate feast vnto all his prynces and seruauntes (which feast was because of Hes- ter) and let the londes be in quyetnes, q gaue royall giftes.

And whan the virgins were gathered to- gether the seconde tyme, Mardocheus sat in the kynges gate. And as yet had not Hester shewed hir kynred and hir people, acordinge as Mardocheus had bydden her: for Hester dyd after the worde of Mardocheus, like as whan he was hir tutoure. At the same tyme whyle Mardocheus sat in the kynges gate, two of the kinges chamberlaynes, Bigthan and
Theres which kepte the dore, were wroth, and sought to laye their handes on the kynge
Ahasuerus: Wherof Mardocheus gat know- lege, and tolde it vnto quene Hester, and
Hester certified the kynge therof in Mardo- 

The boke of Hester. 

cheus name. And whan inquisicion was made, it was founde so. And they were both hanged on tre: and it was wrytté in the Cronicles before the kynge.

The (ij. Chapter. 

FTER these actes dyd the kynge pro- 

mote Aman the sonne of Amadathi the 
Agagite, and set him hye, q set his seate aboue all ¥ prynces that were with him. And all the kynges seruauntes that were in the gate, bowed their knees, and dyd reuerence vnto Aman: forthe kinge had so comaunded.
But Mardocheus bowed not the knee, and worshipped him not. ‘Then the kynges ser- uauntes which were in the kynges gate, sayde vnto Mardocheus: Why transgressest thou the kynges commaundement? And whan they spake this daylie vnto him, and he folowed them not, they tolde Aman, that they mighte se whether Mardocheus matters wolde endure: for he had tolde them, y he was a Iewe. And wha Aman sawe, that Mardocheus bowed not the knee vnto him, ner worshipped him, he was full of indignacion q despyte, that he shulde laye hondes onely on Mardocheus: for they had shewed him y people of Mardo- cheus, but he sought to destroye the people of Mardocheus, and all the people that were in the whole empyre of Ahasuerus.

Nissan, in y twolueth yeare of kinge Aha- suerus, was there occasion and oportunyte sought by Aman, from one daye to another, and from the same moneth vnto the twolueth moneth, that is the moneth Adar. And Ama sayde vnto kinge Ahasuerus: ‘There is a peo- ple scatered abrode and dispersed amonge all people in all the londes of thine empire, and their lawe is cótrary vnto all people, and they do not after the kynges lawes, nether is it the kinges profit to suffre thc after this maner. Yf it please the kynge, let him wryte, that they maye be destroyed, ¢ so wil I weye downe ten thousande talentes of siluer, vnder the handes of the workmen, to be brought into the kynges chamber. Then toke the kynge his rynge from his hande, and gaue it vnto Aman the sonne of Amadathi the
Agagite the lewes enemie. And the kinge sayde vnto Aman: Let the siluer be geuen the, and that people also, to do withall what pleaseth the.

Chap. (tj. | 

Iu the first moneth that is the moneth 35 

€| Then were the kynges scrybes called on ý 

thirtenth daye of the first moneth, q there was wrytten (acordynge as Aman commaiided) vnto the kynges prynces, and to the Debites euery where in the londes, and to the cap- taynes of euery people in the countrees on euery syde, acordynge to the wrytinge of euery nacion, and after their language in the name of kynge Ahasuerus, and sealed with the kynges rynge. And the wrytynges were sent by postes in to all the kynges lodes, to rote out, to kyll, and to destroye all Tewes, both yonge and olde, childré and wemen in one daye (namely vpon the thirtenth daye of the twolueth moneth, which is the moneth
Adar) and to spoyle their goodes. 

This was the summe of the wrytinge, y there shulde be a commanndement geuen in all londes, to be published vnto all people, y they shulde be ready agaynst the same daye.
And the postes wente in all the haist acord- yuge to the kynges commaundement. And in the castell of Susan was the comaunde- ment deuysed. And the kynge q Aman sat q dranke. But y cite of Susan was disquieted.

The iiij. Chapter. 

HAN Mardocheus perceaued all that was done, he réte his clothes, and put on a sack cloth, a aszshes, t wente out in to the myddes of the cite, and cried loude and lamentably, and came before the kynges gate: for there might no man entre within the kynges gate, that had a sack cloth on. And in all lodes « places, as farre as the kynges worde and commaundement extended, there was greate lamentacion amonge the lewes, and many fasted, wepte, mourned, a laye in sack clothes q in aszshes. So Hesters dasels, and hir chamberlaines, came and tolde it her.
Then was the quene exceadingly astonnyed. 
And she sent rayment, that Mardocheus shulde put them on, and laye the sacklothe from him. But Mardocheus wolde not take them. "The called Hester Hathac one of the kinges chamberlaines (which stode before her) and gaue him a cOmaundement vnto Mar- docheus, that he might knowe what it were, and wherfore he dyd so. So Hathac wente forth to Mardocheus vnto the strete of the

cite, which was before the kynges gate. 
And Mardocheus tolde him of all ý had happened vnto him, and of the summe of siluer

The boke of Hester. 

Fo. ereelrt. that Ama had promysed to weie downe in the kynges chamber because of y Iewes for to destroye them, and he gaue him the copye of the commaundement, that was deuysed at
Susan to destroye them, that he mighte shewe it vnto Hester, and to speake to her and charge her, y she shulde go in to the kynge, and make her prayer and supplicacion vnto him for hir people.

And wha Hathat came in, and tolde Hester the wordes of Mardocheus, Hester spake vnto
Hathat, and comannded him to saye vnto 
Mardocheus: All the kynges seruauntes, and the people in the londes of the kynge knowe, that who so euer commeth within the courte vnto y kynge, whether it be man or woman, which is not called, the cómaundement is that the same shal dye immediatly, excepte the kynge holde out the goldé cepter vnto him, that he maye lyue. As for me, I haue not bene called to come in to the kynge now this thirtie dayes.

And wha Mardocheus was certified of 
Hesters wordes, Mardocheus bad saie againe vnto Hester: ‘Thynke not to saue thine awne life, whyle thou art in y kynges house before all Iewes: for yf thou holdest thy peace at this tyme, then shal the Iewes haue helpe and delyueraunce out of another place, q thou q thy fathers house shalbe destroyed. And who knoweth whether thou art come to the kyng- dome, for this tymes sake? Hester bad geue
Mardocheus this answere: Go thou thy waye then, q gather together all $ Iewes y are founde at Susan, q fast ye for me, y ye eate not q drynke not in thre dayes, nether daye ner nighte. Ia my damsels wil fast likewyse, q so wyl I go in to the kynge cotrary to the comaundement: yf I perishe, I perishe. So
Mardocheus wente his waye, q dyd all y 
Hester had coómaunded him. 

The b. Chapter. 

ND on the thirde daye put Hester on}¢ 

hir royall apparell, and stode in the courte of y kinges palace within ouer agaynst the kynges house. And y kynge sat vpo his royall seate in y kynges palace ouer agaynst y dore of the house. And whan the kynge sawe
Hester the quene stodinge in the courte, she founde grace in his sighte. And y kynge helde out the goldé cepter in his hade towarde
Hester. So Hester stepte forth, and touched 

So. cecelyij. 

the toppe of y cepter. Then sayde y kynge vnto her: What wilt thou quene Hester? a what requyrest thou? axe eué the halfe of y empyre, q it shal be geué the. Hester sayde:
Yf it please ý kynge, let y kynge q Aman come this daye vnto y banket y I haue pre- pared. The kynge sayde: Cause Aman to make haist, y he maye do as Hester hath saide.

Now wha the kynge q Aman came to y banket y Hester had prepared, the kynge sayde vnto Hester whan he had dronken wyne:
Hester, what is thy peticion? it shal be geué the. And what requyrest thou? euen the halfe of the empyre, it shal be done.

Then answered Hester and sayde: My peticion and desire is, yf I haue founde grace in y sight of the kynge, q yf it please the kinge to geue me my peticion, and to fulfill my re- quest, then let the kynge q Aman come to the bancket y I shal prepare for thé, and so wil I do tomorow as the kynge hath sayde.

Then wente Aman forth the same daye ioyfull and mery in his mynde. And whan he sawe Mardocheus in the kynges gate, y he stode not vp and kneled before him, he was full of indignacion at Mardocheus. Neuer-' theles he refrained himselfe: and wha he came home, he sent, and called for his frédes, and Seres his wyfe, and tolde them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, all together how the kynge had pro- moted him so greatly, and how that he was taken aboue the prynces and seruauntes of the kynge. Aman sayde morouer: Yee and
Hester the quene let no man come with the kynge vnto the bancket that she had prepared, excepte me, and tomorow am I bidden vnto her also with the kynge. But in all this am I not satisfied as longe as I se Mardocheus the
Iewe syttinge in ý kynges gate. Then sayde 
Seres his wife and all his frendes vnto him: 
Let thé make a galowe of fiftye cubites hie, x tomorow speake thou vnto the kynge, that
Mardocheus maye be hanged theron, yf thou comest merely with the kynge vnto the bancket.
Aman was well content withall, and caused a galowe to be prepared.

The bi. Chapter. 
HE same night coulde not the kynge 
„Slepe, and he commaunded to brynge y 
Cronicles and storyes: which wha they were red before ¥ kinge, they happened on the

Che boke of Hester. 

place where it was wrytté, how Mardochens had tolde, that the kynges two chaberlaynes
(which kepte y tresholdes) sought to laie hondes on kinge Ahasuerus. And the kynge saide: What worshippe and good haue we done to Mardocheus therfore? ‘Then sayde the kynges seruauntes that mynistred vnto him. There is nothinge done for him. And the kynge sayde: Who is in y courte? (for
Aman was gone in to y courte withont before 
ý kinges house, y he might speake vnto y kinge to hange Mardocheus on ¥ tre, y he had prepared for him.) And the kinges seruauntes saide vnto him: Beholde, Ama stodeth in the courte. ‘The kynge saide: Let him come in. And wha Ama came in, y kinge saide vnto him: What shal be done vnto y má, whom the kynge wolde fayne brynge vnto worshippe? But Hama thought in his hert: Whom shulde the kynge els be glad to brynge vnto worshippe, but me? And
Aman sayde vnto the kynge: Let the man vnto whom the kynge wolde be glad to do worshippe, be broughte hither, that he maye be arated with the royall garmentes which the kynge vseth to weere: and the horse that the kynge rydeth vpon, and that the crowne royall maye be set vpon his heade. And let this rayment and horse be delyuered vnder the hande of one of the kynges prynces, that he maye araye the man withall (whom the kynge wolde fayne honoure) and cary him vpon the horse thorow the strete of the cite, and cause it to be proclamed before him: ‘Thus shal it be done to euery man, whom the kynge wolde fayne honoure.

The kynge sayde: Make haist, and take 
(as thou hast sayde) the raymét and the horse, and do euen so with Mardochens y lewe that sitteth before the kynges gate, and let nothinge fayle of all that thou hast spoken. Then toke
Aman the rayment and the horse, and arayed him, and broughte him on horszbacke thorow the strete of the cite, and proclamed before him: Enen thus shall it be done vnto every man whom the kynge is disposed to hononre.
And Mardocheus came agayne to the kynges gate, but Aman gat him home in all the haist, mournynge with bare heade, and tolde Seres his wyfe and all his frendes, enery thynge that had happened him. Then sayde his wise men and Seres his wyfe vnto him: Yf it be Mar- docheus of the sede of the Iewes, before who

Whyle they were yet talkynge with him, came the kynges chamberlaynes, and caused Aman to make haist to come vnto the bancket that
Hester had prepared. 

The bij. Chapter. 
ND whan the kynge and Aman came to the bancket that quene Hester had prepared, the kyuge sayde vnto Hester on the seconde daye whan he had droken wyne:
What is thy peticion quene Hester, that it maye be geuen the? And what requyrest thou? Yee axe euen halfe of the empyre, and it shal be done. Hester y quene answered and sayde: Yf I haue founde grace in thy sighte (O kynge) and yf it please the kynge, then graunte me my lyfe at my desyre and my people for my peticions sake: for we are solde to be destroyed, to be slayne, and to perishe. And wolde God we were solde to be bondmen and bondwemen, then wolde I holde my tonge, so shulde not the enemye be so hye to the kynges harme. The kynge Ahasuerus spake q saide vnto quene Hester: What is he that? Or where is he y darre presume in his mynde to do soch a thinge after that maner?
Hester sayde: The enemye and aduersary is this wicked Aman.
B| As for Ama, he was exceadingly afraied before ¥ kynge q y quene. And the kynge arose fro the bancket q fro y wyne in his dis- pleasure, and wente in to the palace garden.
And Aman stode vp, and besoughte quene 
Hester for his life: for he sawe y there was a mischaüce prepared for him 53 the kynge allready.

And whan the kynge came agayne out of the palace garden in to y parler where they had eaten, Aman had layed him vpon the bed that Hester sat vpon. ‘Then saide the kinge: wyl he force the quene also besyde me in the house? As soone as that worde wente out of the kynges month, they conered Amans face.
And Harbona one of the chamberlaynes that stode before the kynge, sayde: Beholde, there stondeth a galowe in Amas house fiftie cubytes hye, which he had made for Mardocheus, that spake good for y kinge. The kynge sayde:
Hange him theron. So they hanged Aman on the galowe that he had made for Mar- docheus. ‘Then was the kynges wrath stylled.

The boke of Wester. 

So. cerelytij. thou hast begonne to fall, thou canst do 2 nothynge vnto him, but shalt fall before him. The iij. Chapter.

a... same daye dyd kynge Ahasuerus geue the house of Aman the lewes enemye, vnto quene Hester. And Mardo- cheus came before $ kinge: for Hester tolde how that he beloged vnto her. And the kynge put of his fynger rynge, which he had taken from Aman, q gaue it vnto Mardochens.
And Hester set Mardochens oner the house of Aman. And Hester spake yet more before the kynge, and fell downe at his fete, q be- sought him, that he wolde put awaye the wyckednes of Aman the Agagite, and his denice that he had ymagined against y lewes.
And the kynge helde out the golden cepter vnto Hester. Then rose Hester, and stode before the kynge, and sayde: Yf it please the kynge, and yf I haue foüde grace in his sight, q yf it be conenyent for the kinge, and yf it be accepted in his sighte, then let it be wrytté, y the letters of the denyce of Ama the sonne of Amadathai the Agagite, maie be called agayne: which letters he wrote, to destroie y lewes in all y kynges lodes. For how can I se the euell that shal happe vnto my people? and how can I loke vpon the destruction of my kynred ?

Then sayde y kynge Ahasuerus vnto quene 
Hester, and to Mardocheus the Iewe: Be- holde, I haue geuen Hester the house of
Aman, q him haue they hanged vpon a tre, 

a 

because he layed hade vpon ý lewes. Wryteļ 

ye now therfore for the Tewes, as it liketh you in the kynges name, and seale it with ¥ kynges rynge (for the wrytinges that were wrytten in
$ kynges name, and sealed with the kynges rynge, durst no man dysanulle.) Then were the kynges serybes called at the same tyme in the thirde moneth, that is the moneth Siuan, on the thre q twentieth daie.

And it was wrytten (as Mardocheus co- maunded) vnto the Iewes and to the prynces, to the Debities and captaynes in the londes from India vntyll Ethiopia, namely, an hund- reth and seuen and twentye londes, vnto euery one acordinge to the wrytinge therof, vnto euery people after their speche, and to the
Iewes acordinge totheir wrytinge and language. 

And it was written in the kynge Ahasuerus name, and sealed with the kynges rynge.
And by postes that rode vpou swyfte yonge 
Mules, sent he the wrytinges, wher in the 

€ 

Fo. ceeclrtty. 

n 

kynge graunted the lewes (in what cities so euer they were) to gather them selues together, and to stonde for their lyfe, and for to rote out, to slaye, and to destroye all the power of the people and londe that wolde trouble them, with children and wemen, and to spoyle their good vpon one daye in all the londes of kynge
Ahasuerus, namely vpou the thirtenth daye of the twolueth moneth, which is the moneth
Adar. 

The summe of the wrytinge was, how there was a comaundement geuen in all londes to be published vnto all the people, that ý Iewes shulde be ready agaynst that daye to auenge them selues on their enemies. And the postes that rode vpon the Mules, made haist with all spede, acordinge to the kynges worde: and the commauudement was deuysed in the castel of Susan.

As for Mardocheus, he wente out from the kynge in royall apparell of yalow and whyte, and wyth a greate crowne of golde, beynge arayed with a garment of linnen and purple, and y cite of Susan reioysed q was glad: but vnto the Iewes there was come light and glad- nesse, q loye q worshippe. And in all londes and cities, in to what places so euer the kynges worde and commaundemét reached, there was loye q myrth, prosperite and good dayes amonge the lewes: in so moch that many of the people in the londe became of the Iewes beleue, for the feare of the [ewes came vpon

them. 
The ir. Chapter. 
N the twolueth moneth, that is the moneth 
Adar, vpon the thyrtenth daye, which the kinges worde and comaundement had ap- poynted, that it shulde be done, eue vpon y same daie y the enemies shulde haue destroyed the Iewes to haue oppressed them, it turned contrary wise, euen y the Iewes shulde subdue their enemies. ‘Then gathered the lewes together in their cities withiu all $ londes of kynge Ahasuerus, to laye honde on soch as wolde do thé euell, ¢ no man coulde with- stonde them: for ¥ feare of thé was come ouer all people. And all the rulers in the londes, and prynces and Debities, and officers of the kinge promoted the lewes: for the feare of
Mardocheus came vpo thé. For Mardocheus was greate in the kynges house, q the reporte of him was noised in all lédes, how he increased
€ grewe. 

The boke of Hester. 

Chap. ir. 

Thus the Iewes smote all their enemies with a sore slaughter, and slewe and destroyed, « dyd after their wyll vnto soch as were their aduersaries, And at y castell of Susan slewe the lewes and destroied fyue hüdreth men: q slewe Parsandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha, Pora- tha, Adalia, Aridatha, Parmastha, Arissai,
Aridai, Vaiesatha, the ten sonnes of Aman y sonne of Amadathi y enemie of the Iewes: but on his goodes they layed no handes. At the same tyme was the kynge certified of the nombre of those that were slaine at the castell of Susan. And the kynge sayde vnto quene
Hester: The Iewes haue slayne and destroyed fyue hüdreth men at y castell of Susan, and the ten sonnes of Ama: What shal they do in the other londes of ý kynge? What is thy peticion, that it maye be geuen the? q what requirest thou more to be done? Hester sayde: Yf it please the kynge, let him suffre the Iewes tomorow also to do acordinge ynto this dayes commaundement, that they maye hange Amans ten sonnes vpó y tre. And the kynge charged to do so, and the com- maundement was deuysed at Susan, ¢ Amans ten sonnes were hanged. And the Iewes gathered thé selues together at Susan, vpon the fourtenth daye of the moneth Adar, and slewe thre hundreth men at Susan, but on their goodes they laied no hades.

As for the other Iewes in the kynges lodes, they came together, q stode for their lyues, q gatt rest fro their enemies: and slewe of their enemies fyue and seuentye thousande, how- beit they layed no hondes on their goodes.
This was done on the thirtéth daie of the moneth Adar, and on the fourtenth daye of the same moneth rested they, which (daye) they ordeyned to be a daye of feastinge and gladnesse. But the Iewes at Susan were come together both on the thyrtenth daye and on the fourtenth, and on the fyftenth daye they rested, and the same daye ordeyned they to be a daye of feastinge q gladnes. Therfore the Iewes that dwelt in the vyllages and vn- walled townes, ordeyned ¥ fourtenth daye of the moneth Adar, to be a daye of feastinge and gladnes, and one sent giftes vnto another.

And Mardocheus wrote these actes, and sent the writinges ynto all the Iewes y were in all ¥ londes of kynge Ahasuerus, both nye and farre, that they shulde yearly receaue and holde the fourtenth and fiftenth daie of the

Chap. r. 

The boke of Heater. 

D |moneth Adar, as the daies wherin $ lewes 

I 

came to rest from their enemies, q as a moneth wherin their payne was turned to ioye, and their sorowe in to prosperite: that they shulde obserue the same as dayes of wealth and gladnes, and one to sende giftes vnto another, q to distribute vnto the poore.

And the Iewes receaued it that they had begonne to do, and that Mardocheus wrote vnto them: how that Aman the sonne of
Amadathai all $ Iewes enemye, had deuysed to destroye all the Iewes, and caused the lot to be cast for to put them in feare, and to brynge them to naughte: and how Hester

'wente and spake to the kynge, that thorow 

letters his wicked deuyce (which he ymagyned 

‘agaynst the Iewes) might be turned vpon his 
,awne heade, and how he and his sonnes were 

hanged on the tre. For the which cause they called this daye Purim after the name of the lot, acordynge to all $ wordes of this wrytinge: and what they the selues had sene, and what had happened vnto them.

And the Lewes set it vp, and toke it vpon them and their sede, and vpon all soch as ioyned themselues vnto them, that they wolde not mysse to obserue these two dayes yearly, acordynge as they were wrytté and appoynted, how y these dayes are not to be forgotten, but to be kepte of childers children amoge all kynreds in all londes and cities. ‘They are the dayes of Purim, which are not to be ouer-

slipte amonge the Iewes, and the memoriall of them oughte not to perishe from their sede.

And quene Hester the daughter of Abihail and Mardocheus the Iewe, wrote with all auc- torite, to confirme this seconde wrytinge of
Purim, and sent the letters vnto all the Iewes in the hundreth and seuen and twentye londes of $ empyre of Ahasuerus, with frendly and faithfull wordes, to confirme these dayes of Purim, in their tyme appoynted, acord- ynges as Mardocheus the Iewe and Hester the quene had ordeined cócernynge them: lyke as they ypon their soule and vpon their sede had cofirmed the actes of the * fastinges and of hir cóplainte. And Hester comaunded to stablish these actes of this Purim, and to wryte them in a boke.

The y. Chapter. 

ND the kynge Ahasuerus layed tribute 
A vpon the londe, and vpon the Iles of the See. As for all ý worke of his power and auctoryte, and y greate worshippe of Mardo- cheus, which the kynge gaue him, beholde, it is wrytten in the Cronicles of the kynges of
Media q Persia, For Mardocheus the Iewe was the seconde nexte vnto kynge Ahasuerus, and greate amonge y lewes, and accepted amonge the multitude of his brethren, as one y seketh the welth of his people, and speaketh the best for all his sede.

* Hest. 4. c. 

The ende of the seconde parte of tbe fue Testament. 

Fo. crrrirb. 

I 

The boke of Fob. 

| What this boke rontepnetb. 

| Chap. 1. Il. 

The prosperite of lob, and how God geueth Satan power ouer his body ad goodes, which he is content withall.

Chap. IH. 

The flesh can not suffre: and here is described the vnpacient man, that grudgeth agaynst the iudgment of God.

Chap. HII. 

lobs frendes comforte him, and geue his synnes 

the blame of his punyshmet. 
Chap. V. 

That no man is without syune. A prayse off the 

allmightynesse and louynge kyndnesse of God. 

Chap. VI. 

Job excuseth his owne vnpacience, layeth ypo- crysie to his frédes charge, ad sayeth they are but dyssemblers.

Chap. VII. 

A frendly contencion that lob maketh with God, 

shewinge the myserable life and tranayle ofman. 

Chap. VIII. 
Baldad reproueth Iob. The nature of ypocrytes. 

Chap. IX. 
All men are synners in the sight of God, and rightuousnesse commeth only of him. He pu- nysheth also whom he will.

Chap. X. 
No man is without synne, nether maye eny man escape the honde of God.

Chay. XI. 

! Sophar reproueth Iob of synne: and for so moch 
| as no man maye withstonde God, he byddeth 
| him be paciét. 

a 

Chap. XIL 
All thinges come off the mightie ordinaunce of 
God. The wicked haue better dayes then the godly.
Chap. XIII. 
Iob speaketh as he thinketh, reproueth the ypo- 

crysy of his frendes, and comendeth the wis- dome of God.

Chap. XIII. 
The miserable life off man. 
Chap. XV. XVI. 

No man is innocet before God. The conuersacion of the vngodly.

Chap. XVII. 
Iob declareth his mysery. 
Chap. XVIIL 

Baldad reproueth Iob as vngodly, and sheweth the punyshment off the wicked.

Chap. XIX. 

Iob sheweth his miserable estate, and reproueth his frendes, in that they increace his payne.

Chap. XX. 
Punysment off the proude, vngodly and ypocrytes. 

Chap. XXI. 

Wicked men haue prosperite in this worlde. God punysheth acordinge to his owne will.

Chap, XXII. 

They tell Iob, that is punyshment commeth for his synnes.

Chap. XXIII. XXIII. 
Iob defendeth his innocecy. 
Chap. XXV. 
No mà is innocet before God. 

Chap. |^ 

Chap. XXVI. 
Iob mocketh his fredes, because they go aboute to proue the thynge, that he denieth not. The power of God.
Chap. XXVII. 

God punysheth vs not acordinge to oure merites, but is mercifull and spareth euen the vngodly.
Agayne, he chasteneth the most righteous (as lob was) with aduersite.

Chap. XXVIII. 
The wisdome ad foreknowlege of God. 

Chap. XXIX. 

The prosperite that Iob was in afore. cency and good dedes.

His inno- 

Chap. XXX. 
He complayneth of his mysery: how the igno- raunt and symple people laugh him to scorne.

Chap. XXXI. 
He rehearseth his innocet life. 

Chap. XXXII. lobs frendes are angrie, and forsake him.

The first Chapter. 

N the lode of Hus* there was a man called 
Iob: an innocent and vertuous man, soch one as feared God, and eschned euell. This man had? vij. sonnes, and iij. doughters. His substaunce was vij. M. shepe, iij. M. camels, v. C. yock of oxen, v. C. she asses, and a very greate housholde: so y he was one of the most principall men amoge all them of the east countre. His sonnes now wente on euery man, and made banckettes: one daye in one house, another daye in another, and sent for their iij. sisters, to eate q drinke with them.
So when they had passed ouer the tyme of their banckettinge rounde abonute, Job sent for them, and clensed them agayne, stode vp early, and offred for euery one a brétofferinge.
For lob thought thus: peraduenture my sonnes haue done some offence, and haue bene vn- thankfull to God in their hertes. And thus dyd Job enery daye.
“Now vpon a tyme, when the seruauntes of 
God came and stode before the LORDE, 

? Gen. 22. d. * Tob 42. c. 

The boke of Fob. 

Fa. recelo, 

Chap. XXXIII. 

God punysheth for synne, yet heareth he a meke prayer.

Chap. XXXIII. 
Iob withstodeth the wordes of them, which saye, that the wicked only are punyshed.
Chap. XXXV. 
Iob is reproued, for holdinge himself rightuous. 

Chap. XXXVI 

An argument, that God punisheth no man, excepte he haue deserued it.

Chap. XXXVII. 

The power of God is here descrybed. reproued.

Iob is 

Chap. XXXVIII. XXXIX. XL. XLI. 
The foreknowlege and wisdome of God. 

Chap. XLII 

Iobs frendes are reproued, and he himself is re- stored to his prosperite agayue.

Sathan came also amonge them. And the 
LORDE sayde vnto Sathan: From whence commestthou? Sathananswered the LORDE, and sayde: I haue gone aboute the lode, ‘and walked thorow it.

Then sayde the LORDE vnto Satha: hast thou not considered my seruaunt lob, how that he is an innocet and vertuous mà: soch one as feareth God, and eschueth enell, and that there is noue like him in the londe?
Sathan answered, and sayde vnto the LORDE: 
Doth lob feare God for naught? hast thou not preserued him, his house, and all his sub- stannce on euery syde? hast thou not blessed the workes of his hondes? Is not his pos- session encreaced in the londe? But laye thyne honde vpo him a litle, touch once all that he hath, and (I holde) he shall curse the to thy face. And the LORDE sayde vnto
Sathan: lo all that he hath, be in thy power: only vpon him self se that thou laye not thine honde. Then wente Sathan forth from the
LORDE. 

Now vpon a certayne daye when his sonnes |€ 

* Tob 2. a. 4 | Pe, 5. b. 

Fo. recrirbiij. 

n 

a 

and doughters were eatinge, and drynkinge wyne in their eldest brothers house, there came a messaunger vnto Iob, and sayde:
Whyle the oxen were a plowinge, and the 
Asses goinge in the pasture besyde them: the 
Sabees came in violétly, and toke them all awaye: yee they haue slayne the seruauntes with the swearde, and I only ranne my waye, to tell the.

And whyle he was yet speakynge, there came another, and sayde: The fyre of God is fallen from heanen, it hath consumed q brét vp all the shepe and seruauntes: and I only ranne my waye, to tell the. In the meane season whyle he was yet speakinge, there came another, and sayde: The Caldees made thre armies, and fell in vpon the camels, which they haue caried awaye, yee and slayne the seruauntes with the swearde: and I only am gotté awaye, to tell the. Whyle he was speakinge, there came yet another, ad sayde:
Thy sonnes and doughters were eatinge ad drynkinge wyne in their eldest brothers house, ad sodenly there came a mightie greate wynde out off the South, and smote the iiij. corners of the house: which fell vpon thy children, so that they are deed: and I am gotten awaye alone, to tell the.

Then Iob stode vp, and rente his clothes shaued his heade, fell downe vpon the groüde, worshipped, and sayde: * Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked shall I turne thither agayne. ’The LORDE gaue, and the
LORDE hath taken awaye (the LORDE hath done his pleasure) now ‘blessed be y name off the LORDE. In all these thinges dyd Iob not offende, ner murmured foolishly agaynst God.

The ij. Chapter. 

E happened also apon a tyme, ‘that when 

the seruauntes of God came a stode before the LORDE, Sathan eame also amonge them, and stode before him. And the LORDE sayde vnto Sathan: From whence commest thou? Sathan answered and sayde: ‘I haue gone aboute the lode, and walked thorow it.

Then sayde the LORDE vnto Sathan: 
Hast thou not considered my seruaunt Iob, how that he is an innocent q vertuous man soch one as feareth God, and eschueth euell,

* Ecels. 5. c. 
* Paal. 112. a. 

1 Tim. 6. b. 
Iob 2. b, 

5 Eccli. 40. b... Gen. 3. d. 
4 [ob 1. b. * 1 Pe. 5. b. 

The boke of Sob. 

and that there is none like him in the londe ? 
But thou mouedest me agaynst him, to punysh him: yet is it in vayne, for he contynueth still in his godlynesse.

Sathan answered the LORDE, and sayde: 
Skynne for skynne? yee a man will geue all j sud he hath, for his life. But laye thine

onde vpon him, touch him once vpon the bone and flesh, and (I holde) he shall curse the to thy face. Then sayde the LORDE vnto Sathá: lo, there hast thou him in thy power, but spare his life.

So wente Sathan forth from the LORDE, and smote Iob with maruelous sore byles, from the sole off the fote vnto his crowne: so that he sat vpon the grounde in the asshes, and scraped of the etter off his sores with a potsherde.

Then sayde his wife vnto him: /Dost thou yet cotynue in thy perfectnesse ? curse God, a dye. But Iob sayde vnto her: Thon speakest like a foolish womà. Seinge we haue re- ceaued prosperite at the honde of God, wher- fore shulde we not be content with aduersite also? *In all these thinges, dyd not Iob synne with his lippes.

Now when Jobs frendes herde of all $ trouble, that happened vnto him, there came thre off them, euery one from his owne place: namely, Eliphas the Themanite, Baldad the
Suhite, and Sophar the Naamathite. 

For they were agreed together to come, to shewe their compassion vpon him, and to comforte him. So when they lifte vp their eyes a farre off, they knewe him not.

Then they cried, and wepte: then euery one off them rente his elothes, and sprynekled dust vpon their heades in the ayre. They sat them downe by him also vpon the grounde, vij. dayes and vij. nightes. Nether was there eny of them that spake one worde vnto him, for they sawe that his payne was very greate.

The iij. Chapter. 

FTER this opened Iob his mouth, and eursed his daye, and sayde : “lost be that

daye, wherin I was borne: and the night, in the which it was sayde : there is a manchilde eonceaued. The same daye be turned to dareknesse, and not regarded of God from aboue, nether be shyned vpo with light: but f Tob. 2. d.

€ Tob 1. d. ^ Simile Iere. 20. d. 

Chap. ij. 

5 

€ 

Chap. b. 

B 

be couered with darcknesse, and the shadowe of death. Let the dymme cloude fall vpon it, and let it be lapped in with sorowe. Let the darckstorme ouercome y night, let it not be reckened amonge the dayes off the yeare, ner counted in the monethes. — Despysed be that night, and discommended: let them that curse the daye, geue it their curse also, euen those that be ready to rayse vp Leuiathan. Let the starres be dymme thorow darcknesse of it.
Let it loke for light, but let it se none, nether the rysynge vp of the fayre mornynge: be- cause it shut not vp the wombe that bare me, ner hyd these sorowes fro myne eyes.

Alas, why dyed I not in $ byrth? “Why dyd not I perysh, as soone as I came out. of my mothers wobe? Why set they me vpo yir knees? Why gaue they me suck with their brestes? Then shulde I now haue lyen still,
I shulde haue slepte, and bene at rest: like as the kynges ad lordes of y earth, which buylde them selues speciall places: As the prynces that haue greate substaunce of golde, a their houses full of syluer. O that I vtterly had no beynge, or were as a thige borne out of tyme
(that is put asyde) ether as yonge children, which neuer sawe the light. ‘There must the wicked ceasse from their tyranny, there soch as are ouerlaboured, be at rest: there are those letten out fre, which haue bene in preson, so that they heare nomore the voyce of theoppressoure: There are small and greate: thebonde man, and he that is fre fro his master.

Wherfore is the light geuen, to him that is in mysery? and life vnto them, that haue heuy hertes? (Which longe for death, and it commeth not: for yf they might fynde their graue, they wolde be maruelous glad, as those that dygge vp treasure) To the man whose waye is hyd, which God kepeth backe from him.

This is the cause, that I syghe before I eate, and my roaringes fall out like a water floude. For the thynge that I feared, is come vpon me: and the thynge that I was afrayed of, is happened vnto me. Was I not happy?
Had I not quyetnesse? Was I not in rest ? 
And now commeth soch mysery vpon me. 

The iiij. Chapter. 
HEN answered Eliphas of Theman and sayde vuto him: Yf we begynne to

comon with the, peraduéture thou wilt be mys- 
4 Tere. 20. d. — * Tob.2.d. 

e Gala.6.a. — 7? Dan. 10. c. 

The boke of Fob. 

[ 

content, but who can witholde himself from speakynge? Beholde, thou hast bene a teacher of many, and hast comforted the weery hondes.

Thy wordes haue set vp those that were fallen, thon hast refresshed the weake knees.
But now that the plage is come vpon the, thou shréckest awaye: now that it hath touched thyself, thou art faint harted. ’ Where is now thy feare of God, thy stedfastnesse, thy pacience, and the perfectnesse of thy life?
Considre (I praye the) who euer peryshed, beynge an innocent? Or, when were the godly destroyed? ‘As for those that plowe wickednesse (as I haue sene myself) and sowe myschefe, they reape y same. For whé God bloweth vpon them, they perysh, and are de- stroyed thorow the blast of his wrath. The roaringe of the lyon, the cryenge off the lyonesse, q y teth off y lyos whelpes are broké.
The greate lyon perysheth, because he cà get no pray and the lyons whelpes are scatred abrode.

There is spoken vnto me a thynge in coun- cell, which hath genen a terrible sounde in myne eare, with a vision in the night, ¢when men are fallen a slepe. Soch feare and drede came vp6 me, that all my bones shoke. And when the wynde passed ouer by me, the hayres of my flesh stode vp.

Then stode there one before me, whose face l knewe not: an ymage there was, and the wether was still, so that I herde this voyce:
Maye a man be iustified before God? “Maye there eny man be iudged to be clene, by rea- son of his owne workes? Beholde, he hath founde vnfaythfuluesse amonge his owne ser- uauntes, and proude disobedience amonge his angels.

How moch more thé shal they (that dwell in houses of claye, whose foundacion is but earth) be moth eaten? ‘They shalbe destroyed from the mornyuge vnto the euenynge: yee they shall perish, or euer they be awarre: and be taken awaye so clene, that none of the shall remayne, but be deed, or euer they be awarre off it.

The b. Chapter. 
AME me one els, yf thou canst fynde eny: yee loke aboute the, vpon eny of the holy men. As for the foolish man dis- pleasure kylleth him, and anger slayeth y

e Iob 25.a. Psal.142.a. Rom.3.b. Iob 15.b. 2 Pe.2.d. 

Fo. cerelrir. 

Fo. ceeelry. ignoraunt. “I haue sene my self, when the foolish was depe roted, that his bewty was sodély destroyed : that his children were with- out prosperite or health: that they were slayne in the dore, and no ma to delyuer them: ^that his haruest was eaten vp off the hungrie: that
Ithe weapened man had spoyled it, and that the thurstie had droncke vp his riches. It is not the earth that bryngeth forth trauayle, nether commeth sorow out of y groude: but it is man, that is borne vnto mysery, like as the byrde for to fle.

But now will I speake off the LORDE, and talke of God: which doth thinges, that are vnsearcheable, ‘and marueles without nö- bre: Which geueth rayne vpo the earth, and poureth water vpon all thinges: which setteth vp them of lowe degre, and sendeth pros- perite, to those that are in heuynesse: Which destroyeth the deuyces of the sotyll, ^so that they are not able to perfourme the thynges that they take in hode: which compaseth y wyse in their owne craftynesse, and ouer- troweth the councell of the wicked: *In so moch that they runne in to darcknesse by fayre daye, and grope aboute them at the noone daye, like as in the night.

f And so he delyuereth the poore from the swearde, from their mouth, and from the hode of the cruell: that the poore maye haue hope, q that the mouth of the oppressoure maye be stopped.

Beholde, *happie is the man, whom God punysheth : therfore, despyse not thou y chas- tenynge of the Allmighty. For though he make a wounde, he geueth a medicyne agayne: though he smyte, his honde maketh whole agayne.

He delyuereth the out of sixe troubles, so that in the seuenth there can no harme touch the. In the myddest of honger he saueth y from death: and when it is warre, from the power of the swearde.

He shall kepe the from the perlous tonge so that when trouble commeth, thou shalt not nede to feare. “In destruccion and derth thou shalt be mery, and shalt not be afrayed for the beastes of the earth : But the castels in the londe shal be confederate with the, q the beastes of the felde shall geue the peace:

* Psal.36.d. ^ Deu.28.d. ° Deu.928.b. Eccli.10.c. 
Lu. 1.d. Ps. 144. b. 146. a. 1 Re. 2. b. 4 Esa. 8. c. 
1 Cor. 3.c. Paal. 39. b. © Deu. 28.c. f Psal. 10. a. 

Cbr boke of Sob. 

Chap. ti, 
Yee thou shalt se, that thy dwellynge place shalbe in rest: thou shalt beholde thy sub- staunce, and be nomore punyshed for synne.
Thou shalt se also, that thy sede shall en- creace, and that thy posterite shalbe as the grasse vpon the earth. "Thou shalt come to thy graue in a fayre age, like as y corne sheeues are brought in to the barne in due season. Lo, this is the matter, as we oure selues haue proued by experience. "Therfore now that thou hearest it, take better hede to thy selff.

The bi. Chapter. 
OB answered, and sayde: O that my misery |& weere weyed, and my punyshment layed in the balaunces: for then shulde it be heuyer, then the sonde of the see. This is the cause, that my wordes are so soroufull.

For the allmighty hath shott at me with his arowes, whose indignacion hath droncke vp my sprete, and ¥ terrible feares of God fight agaynst me. Doth the wilde asse roare when he hath grasse? ‘Or crieth the oxe, whé he hath fodder ynough? Maye a thynge be eaten vnseasoned, or without salt? What taist hath y whyte within the yoke an egg?
The thinges that some tyme | might not awaye withall, are now my meate for very sorow. O that I might haue my desyre: O y God wolde graunte me the thynge, that I longe for: 'That he wolde begynne and smyte me: that he wolde let his honde go, 1 hew me downe. The shulde I haue some coforte: yee I wolde desyre him in my payne, that he shulde not spare, for I will not be agaynst y wordes of the holy one.

What power haue J to endure? Or what 33 is myne ende, that my soule might be paciēt ?
Is my strength the strength of stones? Or, is my flesh made of brasse? Am I able to helpe my self? Isnot my strength gone fro me, like as yf one withdrewe a good dede from his frende, and forsoke the feare of God? Myne owne brethren passe ouer by me as the water- broke, that hastely runneth thorow y valleys.
* But they that feare the horefrost, the snowe shal fall vpon them.

When their tyme cometh, they shalbe de- stroyed and perishe: and when they be set on fyre, they shalbe remoued out of their place,

^ Psal.90. 

€ Pro. 3.b. 1 Pet. 4. c, Heb.12.a. Osee6.a. 
! Amos 3. a. 

* Esa. 66. a. 

Chap. bii. for the pathes y they go in, are croked: they haist after vayne thinges, and shal perish.
Considre the pathes off Theman, q the wayes off Saba, wherin they haue put their trust.
Confounded are they, that put eny c6fidence in them: For whé they came to opteyne the thynges that they loked for, they were brought to confucion.

Eué so are ye also come vnto me: but now that ye se my mysery, ye are afrayed. Dyd I desyre you, tocome hyther? Or, to geue me eny off youre substaunce? To delyuer me from the enemies honde, or to saue me from the power off the mightie? Teach me and 1 will holde my tonge: and yf I do erre, shewe me wherin.

Wherfore blame ye then the wordes, that are well and truly spoken? which of you can reproue them? Sauynge only that ye are sotyll to check mens sayenges, and can speake many wordes in the wynde. Ye fall vpon the fatherlesse, Ad go aboute to ouerthrowe youre owne frende. Wherfore loke not only vpon me, but vpon youre selues: whether I lye, or no. Turne in to youre owne selues (I praye you) be indifferent iudges, and considre myne vngyltinesse: whether there be eny vnright- uousnesse in my tonge, or vayne wordes in my mouth.

The bij. Chapter. 
| D not the life off mà vpon earth a very batayll? Are not his dayes, like the dayes of an hyred seruaunte? For like as a bonde seruaunt desyreth the shadowe, and as an hyrelinge wolde fayne haue an ende of his worke: Euen so haue I laboured whole monethes longe (but in vayne) and many a carefull night haue I tolde. When I layed me downe to slepe, I sayde: ^O when shal I ryse? Agayne, I longed sore for the night.
Thus am I full off sorowe, till it be darcke. 
My flesh is clothed with wormes, fylthinesse and dust: my skynne is wythered, and crompled together: ^my dayes passe ouer more spedely, thé a weeuer can weeue out his webbe, and are gone, or I am awarre. O remembre, that my life is but a wynde, àd that myne eye shal nomore se the pleasures therof, yee and that none other mans eye shall se me eny more. For yf thou fasten thine eyes vpon me, I come to naught. like as a
* Dan. 2. a. 

a Deu. 28. g. è Tob 9. c. 14.a. 

The boke of Sob. 

Fo. rerelrri. 

cloude is cosumed and vanyshed awaye, euen so he that goeth downe to hell, commeth no- more vp, ner turneth agayne in to his house, nether shall his place knowe him eny more.

Therfore I will not spare my mouth, but will speake in the trouble of my sprete, in $ bytternesse of my mynde will I talke. Am I a see or a whalfysh, that thou kepest me so in preson? When I thynke: my bedd shall comforte me, I shall haue some refresshinge by talkynge with myself vpon my couche:
‘The troublest thou me with dreames, 4d makest me so afrayed thorow visions, that my soule wyssheth rather to be hanged, and my bones to be deed.

I can se no remedy, I shall lyue nomore: 
O spare me then, for my dayes are but vayne. 
7? What is man, that thou hast him in soch reputacion, and settest so moch by him?
Thou takest diligent care for him, and sodély doest thou trye him.

Why goest thou not fro me, ner lettest me alone, so longe till I swalow downe my spetle?
I haue offended, what shal I do vnto $, O thou preseruer off men? Why hast thou made me to stonde in thy waye, and am so heuy a burden vnto my self? Why doest thou not forgeue me my synne? Wherfore takest thou not awaye my wickednesse? Beholde, now must I slepe in the dust: and yff thou sekest me tomorow in the mornynge, I shalbe gone.

The biij. Chapter. 

HEN answered Baldad the Suhite, and|@ sayde: How longe wilt thou talke of

soch thinges? how longe shal thy mouth speake so proude wordes? Doth God per- uerte the thinge that is laufull? Or, doth the Allmightie destroye the thynge that is right? *Whé thy sonnes synned agaynst him, dyd not he punysh thé for their wickednesse ?
YF thou woldest now resorte vnto God by tymes, ‘and make thine humble prayer to ý
Allmightie: yf thou woldest lyue a pure and a godly life: shulde he not wake vp vnto the immediatly, & geue the the bewtie of right- uousnesse agayne? In so moch, that where 1 so euer thou haddest litle afore, thou shuldest now haue greate abundaunce. Enquere of them that liane bene before the, search dili- gently amonge thy forefathers: Namely, y we

d Matt. 6.c. Deu. 8.a. Gen.22.a. *Iobí.c. / Deu. 30.a. 

(Fo. cecelyry. 

are but of yesterdaye, and considre not, that 

The boke of Sob. Chap. tr. 
Yf he eame by me, I might not loke vpó!33 

oure dayes vpon earth are buth a very shadow. 
“They shall shewe the, they shall tell the, yee they will gladly confesse the same.

Maye a resshe be grene without moystnesse? maye the grasse growe without water? No: but (or euer it be shot forth, and or euer it be gathered) it wythereth, before eny other herbe.
Euen so goeth it with all them, that forget 
God: and euen thus also shal the ypocrytes hope come to naught. His confidence shalbe destroyed, for he trusteth in a spyders webbe.

He leeneth him vpo his honse, but he shal not stonde: he holdeth him fast by it, yet shal he not endure. Oft tymes a thinge doth florish, and men thynke that it maye abyde the Sonneshyne: it shuteth forth the braunches im his garden, it taketh many rotes, in so moch that it is like an house off stones. But yf it be taken out off his place, euery man denyeth it, sayenge: I knowe the not. Lo, thus is it with him, that reioyseth in his owne doinges: and as for other, they growe out of the earth.

Beholde, God will not cast awaye a vertuous man, nether wil he helpe the vngodly. Thy mouth shall he fyll with laughynge, ad thy lyppes with gladnesse. They that hate the, shalbe confounded, q y dwellinges of y vngodly shal come to naught.

The ir. Chapter. 

lbs answered, and sayde: ^As for y I 

knowe it is so of a treuth, y a man com- pared vnto God, can not be iustified. Yf he wil argue with him, he shall not be able to answere him vnto one amonge a thousande.
He is wyse of hert, and mightie iu strength. 
Who euer prospered, that toke parte agaynst him? He translateth the moütaynes, or euer they be awarre, q ouerthroweth them in his wrath. He remoueth the earth out of hir place, that hir pilers shake withall. He com- inaundeth the Sõne, q it ryseth not: he closeth vp the starres, as it were vnder a signet. He himself alone spredeth out ¥ heauens, and goeth vpon the wawes of the see. He maketh the “waynes of heauen, the Orions, the * vij. starres and the secrete places of the south.
He doth greate thinges, soch as are vnsearche- able, yee and wonders without nombre.

* Psal, 143. a. > Psal. 142. a. Ro. 3. b. Tob 4. b. 13. b. 

25. a. * Amos 5. a. 

him: yf he wente his waye, I shulde not perceaue it. Yf he be haisty to take eny thinge awaye, who wil make him restore it agayne? Who wil saye vnto him: what doest thou? *He is God, whose wrath no man maye withstode : but the proudest of all must stoupe vnder him. How shulde I then answere him? or, what wordes shulde I fynde out agaynst him? Yee though I be rightuous, yet will I not geue him one worde agayne, but mekely submytte my self to my iudge.
All be it that I call vpon him, and he heare me, yet am I not sure, y he hath herde my voyce: he troubleth me so with the tempest, and woundeth me out of measure without a cause. He will not let my sprete be in rest, but fylleth me with bytternesse.

Yf men will speake of strength, he is the strogest of all: yf me will speake of right- ousnes, who darre be my recorde? yf I will iustifie my self myne owne mouth shall cédemne me: yf I will put forth my self for a perfecte man, he shal proue me a wicked doer: For that I shulde be an innocent, my coscience knoweth it not, yee I my self am weery off my life.

This one thige wil I saye: * He destroyeth both the rightuous q vngodly. And though he slaye sodenly with the scourge, yet laugheth he at the punyshment of the innocent. As for the worlde, he geueth it ouer in to the power of the wicked, soch as the rulers be, wherof all londes are full. Is it not so? where is there eny, but he is soch one?

/ My dayes haue bene more swifte, then a runner: they are gone sodenly, and haue sene no good thinge. ‘They are passed awaye, as the shippes that be good vnder sale, and as the Aegle that haisteth to the pray. When I am purposed to forget my complayninges to chaunge my countenaunce, and to coforte my self: then am I afrayed of all my workes, for
I knowe, thou fauourest not an euell doer. 
Yf I be then a wicked one, why haue I laboured in vayne? Though I wasshed my self with snowe water, and made myne hondes neuer so clene, yet shuldest thou dyppe me in y myre, q myne owne clothes shulde defyle me. For he y I must geue answere vnto, and with whom I go to lawe, is not a man as

* Some call these seuen starres, the clock henne with hir chekens. 4 Eccls. 8. g. lere. 10. a. * Eccls. 9.a. f Iob7.a.

€ 

8 

Chap. ri. 
Iam. Nether is there eny dayes man to reproue both the partes, or to laye his hode betwixte vs. Let him take his rod awaye fro me, yee let him make me nomore afrayed of him, and then shal I answere him without eny feare. For as louge as I am in soch fearfulnesse, I can make no answere: And why? it greueth my soule to lyue.

The y. Chapter. 

a EUERTHELESSE, now will I put forth my wordes: I wil speake out of the very heuynesse off my soule, and will saye vnto God: O do not condemne me, but shewe me the cause, wherfore thou iudgest me on this maner. "Thinkest thou it well done, to oppresse me, to cast me of (beinge a worke of thy hondes) and to manteyne the councell of the vngodly? Hast thou fleszshy eyes then, or doest thou loke as mau loketh? Are thy dayes as the dayes of man, and thy yeares as mans yeares? that thou makest soch inquisi- cion for my wickednesse, and searchest out my synne? where as (notwithstondinge) thou kuowest that I am no wicked person, q that there is no man able to delyner me out of thine honde. “Thy hondes haue made me, q fashioned me alltogether rounde aboute, wilt thou then destroye me sodely? O remembre
(I beseke the) how that thon madest me of the moulde of the earth, and shalt brynge me

to earth agayne. 
35| Hast thou not milked me, as it were mylck: and turned me to cruddes like chese? ‘Thon hast couered me with skynne and flesh, and ioyned me together with bones q synowes.
Thou hast graunted me life, and done me 

good: and the diligent hede that thou tokest, 

vpon me, hath preserued my sprete. 

Though thou hydest these thinges in thine hert, yet am I sure, that thon remembrest thé all. Wherfore didest thou kepe me, when
I synned, and hast not clensed me fro myne offence? Yf I do wickedly, wo is me ther- fore: Yf I be rightuous, yet darre I not lift

vp my heade: so full am I of confucion, and, 

se myne owne misery. 

(€ | Thou huntest me out (beynge in heuynesse) | 

as it were a Lyon, and troublest me out of 

measure. Thou bringest fresh witnesses agaynst | 

me, thy wrath increasest thou vpon me, very many are the plages that I am in. Wherfore

a Gen. 1. d. Psal. 118. k. 

Cbr boke of Fob. 

Fo. ccerlyrítg. 

hast thou brought me^ out of my mothers wombe? O that I had perished, a that no eye had sene me. Yf they had caried me to my graue, as soone as I was borne, then shulde
I be now, as though I had neuer bene. 

Shall not my short life come soone to an ende? O holde the fro me, let me alone, that,
I maye ease myself a litle: afore I go thyther, from whence I shal not turne agayne: Namely, to that londe of darcknesse q shadowe of death: | yee in to that darck clowdy londe q deadly | shadowe, where as is no ordre, but terrible feare as in the darcknesse.

The ri. Chapter. 
HEN answered Sophar the Naamathite,| à and sayde: Shulde not he that maketh many wordes, be answered? Shulde he that bableth moch, be commended therin? Shulde men geue eare vnto the only? Thou wilt laugh other men to scorne, q shal no body mocke the agayne? Wilt thou saye vnto God:
The thinge that I take in honde, is perfecte, | | 
& Iam clene in thy sight? © that God wolde | speake, and open his lippes agaynst the, that he might shewe the (out of his secrete wysz- dome) how manyfolde his lawe is: then shuldest thou knowe, that God had forgotten the, be- cause of thy syunes.

Wilt thou fynde out God with thy sekynge? wilt thou attayne to the perfectnesse of the
Allmightie? He is hyer thé heané, what wilt thou do? Deper thé hell, how wilt thou then knowe him? His length exceadeth the length of the earth, and his bredth y bredth of the see. Though he turne all thinges vp syde downe, close them in, or thrust thé to- gether, who darre check him therfore ?

For it is he, that knoweth the vanite of|33 men: ^he seyth their wickednesse also, shulde| | he not then considre it? A vayne body ex- alteth him self, and the sonne of man is like a wylde asses foale. Yf thou haddest now a right herte, q liftest vp thine hondes o him: yf thou woldest put awaye the wicked- uesse, which thou hast in honde, so that no: vngodlynesse dwelt in thy house: "Then mightest thou lift vp thy face without shame, the shuldest thou be sure, and haue no nede to feare.

Then shuldest thou forget thy misery, and, 

thynke nomore vpon it, then vpon the waters! 

^ [ob 3. b. Tere. 20. d. * | Re. 16. b. Iere. 7. d. | 
63 | 

Fo. cecclyriiy. The boke of Job, 

that rumme by. Then shulde thy life be as cleare as the noone daye, and sprynge forth, as the mornynge. ‘Then mightest thou haue comforth, in the hope that thou hast: q slepe quyetly, when thou art buried. ‘Then shuldest thou take thy rest, and no ma to make the! afrayed, yee many one shulde set moch by the. |
As for the eyes of the vngodly, they shal be) consumed, and not escape: their hope shalbe,

Chap. rij. turneth the mightie vp syde downe. ¢He taketh the verite from out of the mouth, q disapoynteth ¥ aged of their wyszdome. He poureth out confucion vpon prynces, and coforteth them that haue bene oppressed.
Loke ‘what lyeth hyd in darcknesse, he de- clareth it opely: and the very shadowe of death bringeth he to light. He both increaseth the people, and destroyeth them: He maketh

misery and sorow of mynde. 

The rij. Chapter. 
O Iob answered, and sayde: Then (no doute) ye are the men alone, and wysz- dome shal perish with you. But I haue vnderstodinge as well as ye, and am no lesse then ye. Yee who kuoweth not these thinges?

a thinge, who can set it vp agayne? *Yf he shutt a thinge, who wil open it? Beholde, yf he witholde the waters, they drye vp: Yf he let thé go, they destroye the earth. With him is strength and wyszdome: he knoweth both the disceauer, and him that is disceaued.

€| He carieth awaye the wyse men, as it were a spoyle, and bryngeth the iudges out of their wyttes. He lowseth the gyrdle of kynges, and gyrdeth their loynes with a bonde, he ledeth awaye the prestes in to captiuyte, and

"Sap. 3.a. Iob 34.a. > Iob 32. d. € Esa. 22. d. 
Apo. 3.b. Esa, 50. a. 

49 Par. 18.c. Eze. 14. b. 

them to multiplie, and dryueth them awaye. 
He chaungeth the herte of the prynces and kynges of the earth, aud disapoynteth them: so that they go wadringe out of the waye, and grope in the darcke without light, stackeringe to and fro like droncken men.

The rij. Chapter. 

for there is some thinge come in to my mynde. 
Wherfore do I beare my flesh in my teth, and my soule in myne hondes? Lo, there is nether coforte ner hope for me, yf he wil slaye me.
£ But yf I shewe and reproue myne owne wayes in his sight, he is euen the same, that maketh me whole: and why? there maye no Ypocrite come before him, Heare my wordes, and pondre my sayenges with youre eares. Be- holde, though sentence were geuen vpon me,
I am sure to be knowne for vngilty. What is e Luc. 12. a.

f Pro, 17. d. € Psal. 31.a. Luc. 15. c. 

Thus he that ealleth vp6 God, and whom God O, all this haue I sene with myne eye, |A heareth, is mocked of his neghboure: the herde with myne eare, a vnderstonde it. godly q innocent man is laughed to scorne.| |Loke what ye knowe, that same do I knowe
Godlynesse is a light despysed in y hertes of] |also, nether am I inferior vnto you. Neuer- the rich, a is set for them to stomble vpon. thelesse I am purposed to talke with the All-
The houses of robbers are in wealth and| |mightie, and my desyre isto comon with God. prosperite, q they that maliciously medle| |As for you, ye are workmasters of lyes: and agaynst God, dwel without care: yee God, |vnprofitable Phisicians alltogether. Wolde God geueth all thinges richely with his honde. ye kepte youre tonge, that ye might be taken
Axe the catell, q they shal enfourme the:| |for wyse men? ‘Therfore heare my wordes, and the fonles of the ayre, and they shall tell y:| |pondre the sentence of my lippes. Will yemake
Speake to the earth, and it shall shewe the:| |answere for God with lyes, and mateyne him 
Or to the fyshes of the see, and they shal] |with disceate? Wil ye accepte y personne of certifie the. What is he, but he knoweth,| |God, and intreate for him? Shal that helpe you, that y hode of the LORDE made all these?| | when he calleth you to rekenynge? Thynke
“Ti whose honde is the soule of euery lyuynge| !ye to begyle him, as a man is begyled? thinge, and the breth of all men. Haue not| | Punysh you shall he and reproue you, yf ye the eares pleasure in hearinge, and the mouth} |do secretly accepte eny personne. Shall he in tastinge the thinge that it eateth? Amonge| not make you afrayed, when he sheweth him- olde personnes there is wyszdome, and amonge| |self? Shal not his terrible feare fall vpo you? the aged is vnderstodinge. Yee with God is| | youre remembraunce shalbe like the dust, q wyszdome and strength, it is he that hath| |youre pryde shalbe turned to claye. councell g foreknowlege. Yfhe breake downe Holde youre tonges now, and let me speake, |33

Chap. rb. The boke of Sob. So. ererlyrb.! he, that will go to lawe with me? For yf I| |that thou woldest kepe me, and hyde me in holde my tonge, I shal dye. Neuerthelesse| |the hell, vntill thy wrath were stilled: q to

graunte me ij. thinges, and then will I not hyde my self from the.

€| Withdrawe thine honde fro me, q let not the fearfull drede of the make me afrayed.
And then sende for me to the lawe, y I maye answere for iny self: or els, let me speake, and geue thou the answere. How greate are my

myszdedes q synnes? Let me knowe my tras- gressions q offences. Wherfore hydest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemye?
Wilt thou be so cruell a extreme vnto a flyenge leaf, and folowe vpon drye stubble? that thou layest so sharply to my charge, and wilt vtterly vndoo me, for y synnes of my yougth? 'Thou hast put my fote in the stockes: “thou lokest narowly vnto all my pathes, q marckest the steppes of my fete: where as I (notwithstond- inge) must consume like as a foule carion, and as a cloth that 1s moth eaten.

The riiij. Chapter. q AN thatis borne of a woman, hath but a shorte tyme to lyne, and is full of dyuerse miseries. He cometh vp, and falleth

awaye like a floure. He flyeth as it were a 

shadowe, and neuer continueth in one state. 

Thinkest thou it now well done, to open thine 

eyes vpon soch one, and to brynge me before 

the m judgment? Who can make it cleane, that commeth of an vncleane thinge? No!
|body. ‘The dayes of man are shorte, y nombre of his monethes are knowne only vnto the.

Thon hast apoynted him his boundes, he can 

not go beyonde them. Go from him, that he 

maye rest a litle: vutill his daye come, which he loketh for, like as an hyrelinge doth.

B| Yf a tre be cutt downe, there is some hope yet, that it will sproute and shute forth the braunches againe: For thougha rote be waxen olde and deed in the grounde, yet whé the

| |stocke getteth the sent of water, it will budde, 

and brynge forth bowes, like as when it was first planted. But as for man, when he is deed, perished and consumed awaye, what becommeth of him? ê The floudes when they be dryed vp, q the ryuers when they be emptie, are fylled agayne thorow the flowinge waters of the see: “but when man slepeth, he ryseth not agayne, vntill the heauen perish: he shal not wake vp ner ryse out of his slepe. O

a Psal]. 24. c. Iob 33. a. » Kees. 1. a. © Esa, 51. b. 

appoynte me a tyme, wherin thou mightest remembre me. Maye a deed man lyue agayne? “All the dayes of this my pilgrem- age am I lokynge, when my chaunginge shal come. Yf thou woldest but call me, I shulde obeie the: ‘only despyse not the worke of thine owne hondes.

For thou hast nombred all my goynges, yet be not thou to extreme vpon my synnes.
Thou hast sealed vp myne offences, as it were in a bagg: but be mercifull vnto my wicked- nesse. ‘The mountaynes fall awaye at the last, the rockes are remoued out of their place, the waters pearse thorow the very stones by litle and litle, the floudes waszshe awaye the gra- uel q earth: Kuen so destroyest thou the hope of man in like maner. Thou preuaylest agaynst him, so that he passeth awaye: thou chaungest his estate, and puttest him from the. Whether his children come to worshipe or no, he can not tell: And yf they be men of lowe degre, he knoweth not. Whyle he lyneth, his flesh must haue trauayle: and whyle the soule is in him, he must be in sorowe.

The rb. Chapter. 

HEN answered Eliphas the Themanite, 

and sayde: Shulde a wyse man geue 

soch an answere (as it were one that spake in the wynde) and fyll his stomacke with anger ?
Thou reprouest with wordes, that are nothinge wroth: and speakest the thinges, which can do no good. As for shame, thou hast set it asyde, els woldest thou not make so many wordes before God: but thy wickednesse teacheth thy mouth, and so thou hast chosen the a craftie tonge. Thine owne mouth con- demneth the, and not I: yee thine owne lippes shappe the an answere. Art thou the first man, that euer was borne? Or, wast thou made before the hylles? hast thou herde the secrete councell of God, that all wyszdome is to litle for $? What knowest thou, ý we knowe not? What vnderstondest thou, but we can the same? With ys are olde and aged men, yee soch as haue lyued longer then thy forefathers.
Dost thou nomore regarde the comforte of 
God? but thy wicked wordes wil not suffre 

the. Why doth thine herte make the so proude? Why stondest thou so greatly in
2 Pet. 3. 4 Gen. 47. b. Psal. 118. c. * Psal. 137. b. 

| fo. ceeelyy on. 

thine owne conceate ? Where vnto loke thine eyes, y thy mynde is so puft vp agaynst God
€ lettest soch wordes go out of thy mouth? 
What is man, that he shulde be vneleane? what hath he (which is borne of a woman) wherby he might be knowne to be rightuous ?
Beholde, he hath founde vnfaithfulnesse amoge his owne sanctes: “yee the very hea- uens are vnclene in his sight. How moch more then an abhominable and vyle ma, which dryncketh wickednesse like water? I will tell the, heare me: I wil shewe the a thinge, that I knowe: which wyse men haue tolde, q hath not bene hyd from their fathers: vnto whorn only the londe was geuen, that no straunger shulde come amonge them.

The vngodly despayreth all the dayes of his life, ^a the nombre of a tyrauntes yeares is vnknowne. A fearfull sounde is euer in his eares, q when it is peace, yet feareth he de- struecion : He beleueth neuer to be delyuered out of darcknesse, the swearde is allwaye before his eyes. When he goeth forth to get his lyuinge, he thinketh planely, that the daye of darcknesse is at honde. Sorow and careful- nesse make him afrayed, q copasse him rounde aboute, like as it were a kinge with his hoost redy to the battayll. For he hath stretched out his honde agaynst God, q armed himself agaynst y Allmightie. He runneth proudly vpon him, a with a stiff necke fighteth he agaynst htm: where as he couereth his face with fatnesse, and maketh his body well lykynge. ‘Therfore shall his dwellynge be in desolate cities, q in houses which no ma in- habiteth, but are become heapes of stones.

He shall not be rich, nether shall his sub- staunce continue, ner encrease vpon earth.
He shal neuer eome out of darcknesse, the flame shal drye vp his braunches, with ¥ blast of the mouth of God shal he be také awaie.
He wil nether applye himself to faithfulnes ner treuth, so sore is he disceaued with vanite.

He shall perish, afore his tyme be worne out, and his honde shal not be grene. He shal be pluckte of as an vntymely grape from y vyne, and shal let his floure fall, as the olyue doth. For the congregacion of Ypocrites is vnfrutefull, « the fyre shal consume the houses of soch, as are gredy to receaue giftes. ° He conceaueth trauayle, he beareth myschefe, q his body bryngeth forth disceate.

a Tob 4. b. 

2 Pet. 2. d. > Gen. 4. b. 

The boke of Job. 

The rbi. Chapter. 
IS answered, and sayde: I haue oft tymes!@ 

herde soch thinges. Miserable geuers of comforte are ye, all the sorte of you. Shall not thy vayne wordes come yet to an ende?
Or, hast thou yet eny more to saye? I coude speake, as ye do also. But wolde God, that youre soule were in my soules steade: then shulde I heape vp wordes agaynst you, and shake my heade at you. I shulde comforte you with my mouth, and release youre payne with " talkinge of my lyppes. But what shall
Ido? Forall my wordes, my sorow wil not ceasse; and though I holde my tóge, yet wil it not departe fro me. And now that I am full of payne, and all that I haue destroied
(wherof my wryncles beare wytnesse) there stodeth vp a dyssembler to make me answere with lyes to my face. He is angrie at me, he hateth me, and gnassheth vpon me with his teth.
Myne enemy skouleth vpon me with his eyes. 

They haue opened their mouthes wyde vpon me, “and smytten me vpon the cheke despite- fully, they haue eased thé selues thorow myne aduersite. God hath geuen me ouer to the vngodly, and delyuered me in to the hondes of y wicked. I was somtyme in wealth, but sodenly hath he brought me to naught. He hath taken me by the neck, he hath rente me, and set me, as it were a marck for him to shute at. He hath compased me rounde aboute with his dartes, he hath wounded my loynes, q not spared. My bowels hath he poured vpon the grounde. He hath geue me one wounde vpon another, and is falle vpon me like a giaunte. [I haue sowed a sack cloth vpon my skynne, and lye with my strength in the dust.

My face is swollé with wepinge, « myne eyes are waxen dymme. Howbeit there is no wickednesse in my hondes, and my prayer is clene. O earth, couer not my bloude, and let my crienge fynde no rowme. For lo my witnesse is in heauen, and he that knoweth me, is aboue in the heyth. My frendes laugh me to scorne, but myne eye poureth out teares vnto God. Though a body might pleate with God, as one man doth with another, yet the nombre of my yeares are come, q I must go the waye, from whence I shal not turne agayne.

* Psal. 7. b. Esa. 59. a. 4 3 Re. 22. d. Mar. 14. g. 

«€ 

Thap. rir. 

a 

a, 

` jin heuynesse. 

The rij. Chapter. 

Y breth fayleth, my dayes are shortened, 
M I am harde at deathes dore. I haue disceaued no man, yet must myne eye cotinue
O delyuer me, and set me-by the, who shall then be able to thrust my hondes together? Thon hast with holdé their hertes from vnderstodinge, therfore shall they not be set vp an hye. He promiseth his frédes parte of his good, but his owne childré lspende it. He hath made me as it were a byworde of the comon people, I am his gest- inge stocke amoge thé. My countenaunce is heny for very anger, q the membres of my body are become like a shadowe. Vertuous mé therfore shall wel cosidre this, and the innocent shal take parte agayust the Ypocrite.

'The rightuous wil kepe his waye, and he y hath cleane handes, wil euer be stronger q stronger. As for you, turne you, q get you hence, for [ can not se one wyse mà amonge you. My dayes are past, my thoughtes are vanished awaye, which haue vexed myne jherte, chaunginge the night in to daye, q y light in to darcknes. Though I tary neuer so moch, yet the graue is my house, and I must make my bed in the darcke. I call cor- rupcion my father, and the wormes call I my mother and my sister. What helpeth then my longe tarienge? Or, who wil fulfill the thinge, that I loke for? All that I haue, shall go downe in to the pytt, q lye with me in the dust.

The rotij. Chapter. 

HEN answered Baldad the Suhite, and 

sayde: when wil ye make an ende of youre wordes? Marcke well, and considre, we wil speake also. Wherfore are we counted as beestes, ¢ reputed so vyle in youre sight?
Why destroyest thou thy self with anger? 
Shal y earth be forsaken, or the stones re- moued out of their place because of y ? Shal not the light of the vngodly be put out? yee the flame of his fyre shal not burne. The

light shalbe darcke in his dwellinge, q his| 

‘candle shalbe put out with him. His pre- sumptuous goinges shal be kepte i, and his owne councell shal cast him downe. For his fete shalbe taken in the nett, and he shal walke in the snare. His fote shalbe holden

2 Abacu. 1. a. 

The boke of Job. 

The snare is layed for him in the grounde, and a pytfall in the waye.

Fearfulnesse shal make him afrayed on euery syde, that he shall not knowe, where to get out. Honger shalbe his substaunce, and myszfortune shall hange vpon him. He shall eate his owne skynne, yee his owne armes shall he deuoure, beynge a firstborne of death. All his comforte and hope shal be roted out of his dwellynge, very fearfulnesse shall brynge him to the kynge. Other men shall dwel in his house (which now is none of his) and brym- stone shalbe scatered vpon his habitacion.
His rotes shalbe dryed vp beneth, a aboue shall his haruest be cut downe. His remem- braunce shall perish from the earth, q his name shall not be praysed in the stretes: he shalbe dryuen from the light in to darcknesse, and be cast clene out of the worlde. He shall nether haue children ner kynszfolkes amonge his people, no ner eny posterite in his countre: yonge q olde shalbe astonyshed at his death.
Soch are now the dwellynges of the wicked, and this is y place of him that knoweth not
God. 

The riy. Chapter. 

OB answered, q sayde: How loge wil ye vexe my mynde, q trouble me with wordes?
Lo, ten tymes haue ye reproued me: are ye not ashamed, for to laugh me so to scorne? yf I go wronge, I go wronge to my self. But yf ye wil enhaunce youre selues agaynst me, t accuse me to be a wicked personne because of the shame that is come vpon me: knowe this then, y it is God, which hath handled me so violétly, q hath compased me aboute with his scourges. Beholde, though I crie, yet violéce is done vnto me," I can not be herde: ‘Though
I complane, there is none to geue sentece with me. He hath hedged vp my path, I cà not get awaye, he hath set darcknesse in my gate.
He hath spoyled me of myne honoure, q taken the crowne awaye fro my heade. ^He hath destroyed me on euery syde, and I am vndone: My hope hath he taken awaye fro me, as it were a tre plucte vp by the rote.
His wrath is kyndled agayust me, he taketh 

me, as though I were his enemy. 
His men of warre came together, which made their waye ouer me, and beseged my

* Iob 1. 2. 

Fo. tteclyrbij. in the gilder, and the thurstie shal catch him.

| ffo. ercelrrbtij. 

'dwellinge rounde abonte. “He hath put my 
|brethren farre awaye fro me, and soch as were 
[of myne acquauntaunce, are become straugers vnto me. Myne owne kynsz folkcs haue for- saken me, and my frendes haue put me out of remembraunce. ‘The seruauntes and maydens of myne owne house take me for a straüger, and I am become as an aleaunt in their sight.
When I call vpon my seruaut, he geneth me no answere: no though I praie him with my mouth. Myne owne wyfe maye not abyde my breth, Lam fayne to speake fayre vnto the children of myne owne body. Yee the very
'deserte fooles despyse me, and when I am gone from them, they speake enell vpon me.
All soch as were my most familiers, abhorre me: and they whom I loued best, are turned agaynst me. My bone hangeth to my skynne, and the flesh is awaye, only there is left me the skynne aboute my teth. Haue pite vpon me, haue pite vpon me (o ye my frendes) for
‘the hande of the LORDE hath touched me. 
“Seynge God persecuteth me, wil ye vexe me also? Haue ye not yet ynough of the trouble of my flesh?
E: O that my wordes were written, O that they were put in a boke: wolde God they
, were graue with an yron pene in leade or in 
'stone. For I am sure, that my redemer 
‘lyueth, and that I shall ryse out of the earth 
| in the latter daye: that I shal be clothed againe with this skynne, and se God in my flesh. Yee I my self shal beholde him, not with other bnt with these same eyes. My,
| [reynes are consumed within me, when yee saye: | 
Why do not we persecute him? we haue founde lan occasion agaynst him. But bewarre of the pee for the swearde wylbe avenged of wickednesse, and be sure, that there is a
| j|indgment. 

1 

Ci) 

| The yr. Chapter. 

|a HEN answered Sophar the Naamathite, 
| and sayde: For the same cause do my 
| thoughtes compell me toanswere. And why? 
| |my mynde is tossed here and there. I hane sufficiently herde the checkynge a reprofe, therfore am I purposed to make answere after my vnderstédinge. Knowest thou not this,
| |namely: that from the begynninge (ener, 
| |senee the creacion of man vpon earth) the 
|_| prayse of thevngodly hath bene shorte, and that. 

| a Psal. 37. b. è Eccls. 5. 6. 

The boke of Sob. 

‘the ioye of Ypocrytes continued but $ twinck- linge of an eye? Thongh he be magnified vp to the heané, so that his heade reacheth vnto the elondes: yet he perisheth at the last like donge: In so moch y they which haue sene him, saye: Where is he? He vanysheth as a dreame, so that he can no more be founde, q passeth awaye as a vision in y night. So that the eye which sawe him before, getteth now no sight of him, « his place knoweth him nomore. His childré go a begginge, their handes bringe thé to sorow and henynesse.
From his youth his bones are ful of vyce, which shal lie downe with him in y earth.
Whé wickednesse is swete in his mouth, he hydeth it vader his tonge. That he fanoureth, that wyll he not forsake, but kepeth it close in his throte. The meate that he eateth, shalbe turned to the poyson of serpetes within his body. The riches ý he deuoureth, shall he perbreake agayne, for God shal drawe them out of his bely. The serpentes heade shall sucke him, and the adders tonge shall slaye him: so that he shal nomore se the ryuers and brokes of hony and butter: But laboure shal he, q yet haue nothinge to eate. Greate tra- uayle shal he make for riches, but he shal not enioye them. And why? he hath oppressed the poore, and not helped them: houses hath he spoyled, and not buylded them. His bely coude neuer be fylled, therfore shall he perish in his couetousnesse. He deuoured so gredely, y he left nothinge behynde, therfore his goodes shal not prospere. ^'Though he had plenteous- nesse of enery thinge, yet was he poore, q therfore he is but a wretch on euery syde.
For though y wicked haue neuer so moch to fyll his bely, yet God shal sende his wrath vpon him, and cause his battayll to rayne ouer him: so that yf he fle the yron weapens, he shall be shott with the stele bowe. The arowe shal be taken forth, « go out at his backe, and a glisteringe swearde thorow y gall of him, feare shal come vpó him. There shal no darcknes be able to hyde him. An vnkyndled fyre shal consume him, and loke what remayneth in his house, it shall be de- stroyed. ‘lhe heauen shall declare his wicked- nesse, q the earth shal take parte agaynst him. The substannce that he hath in his house, shalbe taken awaye and perish, in the daye of the LORDES wrath. ‘This is the

* Tob 27. b. 

Chap. rr. 

€ 

Chap. rrij. 

€ 

The boke of Job. 

porcion that y wicked shal haue of God, and the heretage that he maye loke for of the
LORDE. 

The yri. Chapter. 

OB answered, and sayde: O heare my 

wordes, and amende youre selnes. Suffre me a litle, that I maye speake also, and thé laugh my wordes to scorne, yf ye will. Is it with a man, that I make this dispntacio ?
Which yf it were so, shulde not my sprete be thé in sore trouble? Marck me well, be abaszshed, and laye youre hàde vpon youre month. For whé I pondre ¢ considre this, I am afrayed, and my flesh is smytten with feare. “Wherfore do wicked më lyue in health and prosperite, come to their olde age, increase in riches? Their childers children lyue in their sight, q their generacion before their eyes.’ Their houses are safe from all feare, for the rodd of God doth not smyte thé. Their bullocke gendreth, and that not out of tyme: their cow calneth, and is not vufrutefull.

They sende forth their children by flockes, and their sonnes lede the daunce. “They beare with them tabrettes and harpes, and haue instrumentes of musick at their pleasure.

They spende their dayes in welthynesse: but sodenly they go downe to hell. They saye vnto God: go from vs, we desyre not the know- lege of thy wayes. “What maner of felowe is the Allmightie, that we shulde serue him?
What profit shulde we haue, to submitte oure selues vnto him? Lo, there is vtterly no good- nesse in them, therfore will not I haue to do with the councell of the vngodly. * How oft shal the candle of y wicked be put out? how oft commeth their destruccion vpon them?
O what sorowe shall God geue them for their parte in his wrath ? / Yee they shal be euen as chaffe before the wynde, and as dust that the storme carieth awaye.

And though God saue their childré from soch sorowe, yet wil he so rewarde thé selues, that they shal knowe it. "Their owne destruc- cion and misery shal they se with their eyes, and drynke of the fearfull wrath of the All- mighty. For whath careth he, what become of his housholde after his death? whose monethes passe awaye swifter then an arowe.

4 Psal. 72. a. lere. 12. a. 
© Esa.5. b. Amos 6. a. 

b Pro. 3. b. Heb. 12. a. d Exo. 5. b. Mala. 5. c.

In as moch thé as God hath $ hyest power of all, who can teach him eny knowlege? One dyeth now when he is mightie x at his best, rich and in prosperite: euen when his bowels are at the fattest, and his bones full of mary.
Another dyeth in sorowe and heuynesse, and neuer had good daies. Now slepe they both a like in the earth, x the wormes couer them.
But I knowe what ye thinke, yee and what ye ymagin agaynst me vnrightuously. “For ye saye: where is the prynces palace? where is the dwellynge of the vngodly: Axe eny man that goeth by the waye, and (yf ye will not regarde their tokens q dedes) he shal tell you, ‘that the wicked is kepte vnto the daye of destruccion, and that the vngodly shalbe brought forth in the daye of wrath. Who darre reproue him for his wayes to his face? who rewardeth him for the vngraciousnesse that he doth? Yet shal he be brought to his graue, and watch amonge the heape of the deed. Thé shal he be fayne to be buried amoge the stones by the broke syde. All men must folowe him, q there are innumer- able gone before him. O how vayne is the comforte y ye geue me? Are not youre an- sweres cleane contrary to right and treuth ?

The rrij. Chapter. 

O Eliphas the Themanite gaue answere, 

q sayde: Maye a man be copared vnto 
God in wyszdome, though he seme to him self, for to be like him? What pleasure hath
God in y thou art rightuous? Or what doth it profite him, y thy waies are perfeete? Is he afrayed to reproue the, « to steppe forth with the in to iudgment?' Cometh not this for thy greate wickednesse,'a for thine vn- gracious dedes which are innumerable? Thou hast take the pledge from thy brethre for naught, q robbed the naked of their clothinge :
"[o soch as were weery, hast thou geué no water to drynke, thou hast withdrawé bred fro the hungrie : Shulde soch one thé as vseth violéce, wroge q oppression (doinge all thinges of parcialyte, t hauynge respecte of personnes) dwell in the lode? ‘Thou hast sent wyddowes awaye emptie and oppressed the poore fa- therlesse.

fo. ceeelerir. 

a 

Therfore art thou compased aboute with|% 

snares on euery syde, q sodély vexed with 

e Pro. 24.c. f Psal.1.b. £ Iob 20. ^ 2 Pet. 2. b. 
Matt. 13.d. * lere. 2. c. * Osee 13. b. ! Iob 27.29. 50.31. 

|f. reda. 

|golde of Ophir like ryuer stones. 

feare. Shuldest thou thé se no darcknesse ? 
Shulde not the water floude runne ouer the? 
Now because y God is hyer thé the heauens, 
€ because thou seist y the starres are so hye, wilt thou therfore saye: *'Fush, how shulde
God knowe? Doth his dominion reach be- yonde the clondes? ‘Tush, the cloudes couer him, y he maye not se, for he dwelleth in heanen. Well, thon wilt kepe the olde waye, y all wicked më hane gone: both olde q yonge, whose foundacion is a runnynge water, which saye vnto God: go from vs, and after this maner: Tush, what wil the Allmightie do vnto vs? where as he (uot with stodiuge) fylleth their houses with all good. Which meanynge of the vngodly be farre fro me.
‘For with ioy shal the godly, and with glad- nesse shal the innocent se, that their increase shal be hewen downe, q their posterite con-

‘sumed with the fyre. 

Therfore recccile the vnto God, q be con- teut, so shal all thinges prospere with the right well. ^NHeceaue the lawe at his mouth, t laye vp his wordes in thine herte. For yf thou wilt turne to the Allmightie, ‘thou shalt stonde fast, q all vnrightuousnesse shall be farre from thy dwellinge: He shal geue the an haruest, which in plenty q abundaunce shall exceade the dust of the earth, and the
Yee the 
Allmightie his owne self shalbe thine haruest, t the heape of thy money. Then shalt thou haue thy delyte in the Allmightie, « lift vp thy face vnto God. The shalt thou make thy prayer vnto him, q he shal heare the, q thou shalt kepe thy promyses. The, loke what thou takest in honde, he shal make it to prospere with the, and the light shall shyne in thy wayes. For who so humbleth himself, him shal he set vp: and who so loketh mekely, shalbe healed. Yf thou be innocét, he shal sane the: and thorow the vugiltynesse of thyne handes shalt thou be delyuered.

The yritj. Chapter. 
OB answered, and sayd: My sayenge is yet this daye in bytternes. and my hande heuy amonge my groninges. O that I might se him q iynde him: O that I might come before his seate, to pleate my cause before
(him, and to fyll my mouth with argumentes : 

* Eccli. 23.d. Eze.8.b.9.c. — ^ Iob 21. b. 

* Psal. 106. e. ! 

* Pro. 2, a. * Deu. 30. a. 

Cbr boke of Job. 

"sure to wynne my matter. 

Chap. rrífj. 
That I might knowe, what answere he wolde gene me: q that I might vnderstonde, what he wolde saye vnto me. Wil he pleate agaynst me with his greate power q strength, or wyll he leane him self vtterly vpon me? Oh no, let him not do so with me. But let hym geue me like power to go to lawe, then am I
For though I go before, I fynde him not: yf I come behynde,
I cà get no knowlege of him: Yf I go on the left syde to pondre his workes, I can not atteyne vnto them: Agayne, yf I go on the right syde, he hydeth himself, y I can not se him. /Bnt as for my waye, he knoweth it: q trieth me as y golde in y fyre.

Nenertheles my fete kepe his path, his hye strete haue I holden, and not gone ont of it.
I haue not forsaken the cõmaundemët of his lippes, bnt loke what he charged me with his month, that haue I shutt vp in my herte. It is he himself alone, who will tnrne him back?
He doth as him listeth, and bryngeth to passe what he wil. He rewardeth me in to my bosome, q many other thinges mo doth he, as he maye by his power. This is ¥ cause, that
I shrenke at his presence, so that when I con- sidre him, I am afrayed of him, For in so moch as he is God, he maketh my herte soft : and seynge that he is Allmightie, he putteth me in feare. ‘Thus can not I get out of darck- nesse, the clonde hath so couered my face.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

ONSIDERINGE then that there is no tyme hyd from the Allmightie, how happeneth it, that they which knowe him, wil not regarde his dayes? For some mé there be, ‘that remoue other més londe markes: that robbe them of their catell, and kepe the same for their owne: that dryue awaye the asse of the fatherlesse: that take ý wyddowes oxe for a pledge: that thrust the poore out of the waye, ^t oppresse the symple of the worlde together. Beholde, the wilde asses in y de- serte go by tymes (as their maner is) to spoyle:
Yee the very wildernesse ininistreth foode for their children. ‘They reape the corne felde that is not their owne: and gather the grapes out of his vynyarde, whom they haue oppressed by violence. They are the cause y so many men are naked and bare, hauynge no clothes

f Sap. 3. a. 1 Pet. 1. b. € Deu. 19. c. 27. c, Exo. 22. c. 
METO EE Be 

Chap, rrbij. to couer them and kepe them from colde:
So that when the showers in the mountaynes haue rayned vpon them, « they be all wett, they haue none other sucoure, but to kepe them amonge the rockes.

They spoyle the suckinge fatherlesse child- ren, and put the poore in preson : In so moch that they let them go naked without clothinge, and yet the hungrie beare the sheeues. ‘The poore are fayne to laboure in their oyle mylles, yee and to treade in their wyne presses, and yet to suffre thyrst. “The whole cite crieth vnto the LORDE with sighinge, the soules of the slayne make their complaynte: But
God destroyeth them not for all this, where as they (not with stodinge) are rebellious and disobedient enemies : which seke not his light and waye, ner turne agayne in to his path.
’Tymely in the mornynge do they aryse, to murthur the symple and poore, « in the night they go a stealinge.

€| ‘The eye of the vngodly is like the aduou- terer, that wayteth for the darcknesse, and sayeth thus in him self: Tush, there shal no ma se me, q so he disgyseth his face. In the night season they search the houses, and hyde them selues in the daye tyme, but wil not knowe y light. For as soone as the daye breaketh, the shadowe of death commeth vpó them, and they go in horrible darcknesse.
The vngodly is very swyft: O y his porció also vpo earth were swyfter then y runnynge water, which suffreth not y shipmà to beholde the fayre q pleasaüt vyniardes. O y they (for the wickednesse which they haue deis) were drawen to the hell, sooner the snowe melteth

Jj|at the heate. O y all cópassion vpon thé were forgotte: y their daynties were wormes: that they were Biene put out of remembraunce,
& vtterly hewe downe like an vnfrutefull tre. 
For they manteyne the baren, q make them 
ý they can not beare, q vnto wyddowes they do no good. They plucke downe the mightie with their power, q when they them selues are gotten vp, they are neuer without feare, as longe as they liue. And though they might be safe, yet they wil not receaue it, br their eyes loke vpon their owne wayes. They are exalted for a litle, but shortly are they gone, brought to extreme pouerte, a také out of the waye: vee q vtterly plucte of as the eares of

* Apoc. 6. b. 4 Es, 15. b. Luc.22.d. © Psal, 142. a. 
Iob 4. b. Iob 15. b. Rom. 3. b. 

The boke of Sob. 

Fo. cecelyrri, corne. Is it not so? Who wil thé reproue me as a lvar, q saye y my wordes are nothinge

worth ? 

The rro. Chapter. 
HEN answered Baldad the Suhite, « sayde: Power ¢ feare is with him aboue, that maketh peace (sittinge) in his hynesse, whose men of warre are innumerable, and whose light aryseth ouer all. ‘But how maye a man copared vnto God, be iustified? Or, how can he be clene, that is borne of a woman?
Beholde, the Moone shyneth no thinge in comparison to him, q the starres are vnclene in his sight. How moch more the, mà, that is but corrupcion: and the sonne of man,

which is but a worme ? 

The rybi. Chapter. 
IS answered, and sayde: O how helpest thou the weake? what comforte geuest thou vnto him that hath no stregth? Where is ¥ coücell Y thou shuldest geue him, which hath no wyszdome? Wilt thou so shewe thine excellent rightuousnes? Before whom hast thou spoken those wordes? Who made the breth to come out of thy mouth? The giauntes q worthies y are slayne, q lye vnder y worlde with their copanions: yee q all they which dwell beneth in the hell are not hyd fro him, q the very destruccion it self ca not be kepte out of his sight. He stretcheth out y north ouer the emptie, q hageth y earth vpo nothinge. He byndeth ý water in his cloudes, that they fall not downe together.
He holdeth back his stole, that it ca not be sene, and spredeth his cloudes before it.
^He hath copased the waters with certayne boundes, vntill the daye « night come to an ende. The very pilers of heaue tréble q quake at his reprofe. ‘He stilleth the see with his power, a thorow his wyszdome hath he set forth ¥ worlde. With his sprete hath he garnished the heaués, ¢ with his hande hath he wounded the rebellious serpét. ‘This is now a shorte summe of his doynges. But who is able sufficiently to rehearce his workes ? Who can perceaue and vnderstonde y thondre of his

power? 
The yrbij. Chapter. 
OB also proceaded and wéte forth in his|q communicacion, sayége: As truly as God

4 Psal. 103. b. Iere. 5. d. Iob 38.a. ¢ Matt. 8. c. 

So. cecelyyrt. 

lyueth (which hath taken awaye my power fro me) q the Allmightie, that hath vexed my mynde: My lippes shall talke of no vanite, and my tonge shal speake no disceate, whyle my breth is in me, and as longe as the wynde (that God hath geuen me) is in my nostrels.

God forbydde, that I shulde graunte youre cause to be right. As for me, vntill myne ende come wil I neuer go fro myne inno- cency. fast, q not forsake it: For my conscience reproueth me not in all my conuersacion.
Therfore myne enemy shalbe founde as the vngodly, q he y taketh parte agaynst me, as the vnrightuous. What hope hath ý Ypocrite, though he haue greate good, and though God geue him riches after his hertes desyre? Doth
God heare him the sooner, whé he crieth vnto him in his necessite? Hath he soch pleasure q delyte in the Allmightie, that he darre all- waye call vpon God? I wil teach you in the name of God, q the thinge that I haue of y
Allmightie, wil I not kepe from you. Be- holde, ye stonde in youre owne conceate, as though ye knew all thinges. Wherfore then do ye go aboute with soch vayne wordes, sayēge :
This is the porcion that the wicked shall haue of God, q the heretage that Tyrauntes shal receaue of y Allmightie. Yf he get many childré, they shal perish with the swearde, q his posterite shall haue scarcenesse of bred.
Loke whom he leaueth behinde him, they shal dye q be buried, t no man shall haue pite of his wyddowes. Though he haue as moch money as the dust of the earth, q raymét as ready as the claye, he maye well prepare it: but the godly shal put it vpon him, and the innocét shal deale out the money. His house shal endure as the moth, q as a bothe that the watch man maketh. When the rich man dyeth, he carieth nothinge with him: he is gone in y twincklynge of an eye. Destruccion taketh holde vpo him as a water floude, q y tépest stealeth him awaye in the night season.
A vehement wynde carteth him hence, q de- parteth: a storme plucketh him out of his place. [t ruszsheth in vpon him, and spareth him not, he maye not escape from the power therof. Than clappe mé their hédes at him, ve and ieast of him, whé they loke vpon his place.

E Deu. 8. b, > Eccli. 1. a 7. c. Iacob. 1. a. 

The boke of Sob. 

My rightuous dealynge wil I kepe |- 

The rrbiije Chapter. 

Chap. rrbíij. 

HERE are places where syluer is molté,|@ 

q where golde is tryed: “where yron is dygged out of the grounde, q stones resolued to metall. The darcknes shal once come to an ende, he can seke out the grounde of all thinges: the stones, the darcke, ¢ the horrible shadowe, with the ryuer of water parteth he a sunder the straunge people, y knoweth no good neghbourheade: soch as are rude, vn- manerly q boysteous. He bryngeth foode out of the earth, t y which is vnder, consumeth he with fyre. There is founde a place, whose stones are clene Saphirs, and where y clottes of the earth are golde. "Tliere is a waye also that the byrdes knowe not, that no vulturs eye hath sene: wherin y proude q hye mynded walke not, x where no lyon commeth. ‘There putteth he his honde vpon the stony rockes, q ouerthroweth the mountaynes. Ryuers flowe out of the rockes, q loke what is pleasaunt, his eye seyth it. Out of droppes bryngeth he greate floudes together, q the thinge that is hyd bryngeth he to light. How commeth a man then by wyszdome? ^Where is the place that men fynde vnderstondinge? — Verely no man can tel how worthy a thinge she is, nether is she foude in the lode of the lyuynge.
The depe sayeth: she is not in me. The see sayeth: she is not with me. She can not be gotten for the most fyne golde, nether maye the pryce of her be bought with eny moneye.
No wedges of golde of Ophir, no precious 
Onix stones, no Saphirs maye be compared vnto her. No, nether golde ner Christall, nether swete odours ner golden plate. There is nothinge so worthy, or so excellét, as once to be named vnto her: for parfecte wyszdome goeth farre beyonde thé all. 'l'he Topas that cometh out of Inde, maye in no wyse be lickened vnto her: yee no maner of apparell how pleasaunt and fayre so euer it be.

From whéce then commeth wyszdome? q where is the place of vnderstondinge? She is hyd from the eyes of all men, yee q fro the foules of the ayre. Destruccion q death saie: we haue herde tell of her with oure eares.
But God seyth hir waie, q knoweth hir place. 
For he beholdeth the endes of the worlde, and loketh vpon all that is vnder the heaue.
When he weyed the wyndes, q measured y 

3 Reg. 3. b. 4. c. Pro. 2. a. Sap. 7. b. | 

a 

Chap. rrr waters: when he set the rayne in ordre, and gaue the mightie floudes a lawe: Then dyd he se her, the declared he her, prepared her and knewe her. And vnto man he sayde:
" Beholde, to feare the LORDE, is wyszdome: q to forsake euell, is vnderstondinge.

The rríp. Chapter. 

O Iob proceaded and wéte forth in his communicacion, sayenge: O y I were as
I was in the monethes by past, ¢ in the dayes whé God preserued me: when his light shyned vpon my heade: whe I wente after the same light q shyne eue thorow the darcknesse. As it stode with me, whé I was welthy a had ynough: whé God prospered my house: when the allmightie was with me: when my hous- holde folkes stode aboute me: whé my wayes ranne ouer with butter, q when the stony rockes gaue me ryuers of oyle: when I wente thorow the cite vnto the gate, q whé they set me a chayre in ¥ strete: whé the yonge mē
(as soone as they sawe me) hyd the selues, « when the aged arose, v stode vp vnto me: whé the princes left of their talkinge, q laied their hade to their mouth: whé the mightie kepte still their voyce, and whé their tonges cleued to the rofe of their mouthes. When all they y herde me, called me happie: q when all they y sawe me, wysshed me good.
For I delyuered y poore whé he cried, q the fatherlesse y wanted helpe. He y shulde haue bene lost, gaue me a good worde, a y widdowes hert praised me. And why? 1 put vpon me rightuousnes, which couered me as a garmét, q equite was my crowne. I was an eye vnto the blynde, q a fote to the lame.
I was a father vnto the poore, a whé I knew not their cause, I sought it out diligétly. I brake the chaftes of ¥ vnrightuous, ^q plucte

the spoyle out of their teth. 

Therfore, I thought verely, y I shulde haue dyed in my nest: q y my dayes shulde haue bene as many as the sondes of the see. For my rote was spred out by the waters syde, ¢ the dew laye vpo my corne, My honoure encreased more ¢ more, and my bowe was euer the stronger in my hande. Vnto me men gaue eare, me they regarded, v with sylence they taried for my coücell. Yf I had spoken, they wolde haue it none other wayes, my wordes were so well taken amonge the.

a Psal. 110. b. Pro. 1.a. 9, b. Eccli. 1. c. 

The boke of Job, 

They wayted for me, as the earth doth for the rayne: ¢ gaped vpon me, as the groude doth to receaue the latter shower. When I laughed, they knew well it was not earnest: a this testimony of my coütenaunce pleased thé nothinge at all. When I agreed vnto their waye, I was the chefe, q sat as a kynge amonge his seruauntes: Or as one that comforteth soch as be in heuynesse.

The my. Chapter. 

B now they that are my inferiours qq yonger then I, haue me in derision: yee!

eué they, whose fathers I wolde haue thought scorne to haue set with the dogges of my catell.
The power q strégth of their hades might do me no good, q as for their age, it is spēt a past awaye without eny profit For very misery q honger, they wente aboute in the wildernesse like wretches ¢ beggers, pluckynge vp herbes from amonge the buszshes, q the
Tunipers rote was their meate. And when they were dryuen forth, men cried after them, as it had bene after a thefe. Their dwellinge was beside foule brokes, yee in the caues q dennes of the earth. Vpo the drye heeth wéte they aboute crienge, q in the brome hilles they gathered them together. They were the children of fooles q vylanes, which are deed awaye fro the worlde. ‘Now am I their songe, q am become their iestinge stocke. they abhorre me, they fle farre fro me q stayne my face with spetle. For y LORDE hath opened his quyuer, he hath hytt me, ¢ put a brydle in my mouth. Vpon my right hade they rose together agaynst me, they haue hurte my fete, made a waye to destroye me, a my path haue they clene marred. It was so easy for them to do me harme, that they neded no man to helpe the. They fell vpon me, as it had bene y breakynge in of waters, q came in by heapes to destroye me. Fearfulnesse is turned agaynst me. Myne honoure vanisheth awaye more swiftly then wynde, q my prosperite departeth hece like as it were a cloude.
Therfore is my mynde poured full of heuy- nesse, q y dayes of trouble haue takë holde vpon me. My bones are pearsed thorow in y night season, t my synewes take no rest.
With all their power haue they chaunged my garmét, q gyrded me therwith, as it were with a coate. I am eue as it were claye, q am

5 Gen. 14. c. * Tren. 3. f. Psal. 68. b. 

Fo. ceerirrritj. 

(Fo. ceeelerritt. 

C 

B 

become like aszshes q dust. Whe I crie vnto the, thou doest not heare me: q though I stonde before the, yet thou regardest me not.
Thou art become myne enemye, q with thy violet hide thou takest parte agaynst me. In tymes past thou didest set me vp an hye, as it were aboue y winde, but now hast thou geuc me a very sore fall. Sure I am, y thou wilt delyuer me vnto death: where as a lodgyng is prepared for all me lyuinge. Now vse not me to do violéce vnto thé, y are destroyed all- ready: but where hurte is done, there vse thei to helpe. Dyd not 1 wepe in y tyme of trouble? Had not my soule copassion vpo y poore? Yet nenerthelesse where as I loked for good, euell happened vnto me: and where as I waited for light, there came darcknesse.
My bowels seeth with in me q take no rest, for y dayes of my trouble are come vpo me.
Mekely q lowly came J in, yee q without eny displeasure: I stode vp in y cogregacion, q commoned with the. But now I am a có- panyon of dragons, q a felowe of Estriches.
My skynne vpo me is turned to black, q my bones are brét with heate: my harpe is turned to sorow, q my pipe to wepinge.

The rrri.. Chapter. 

MADE a couenaunt with myne eyes, y I 

wolde not “loke vpo a dasell. For how greate a porcid shal ] haue of God fro aboue? q what enheritance fro ý Almightie on hie?
As for the vngodly x he y ioyneth himself to 
¥ cópani of wicked doers shal not destruccion v misery come vpon him? Doth not he se my wayes, q tell all my goinges? Yf I haue cleued vnto vanite, or yf my fete haue runne to disceaue: let me be weyed in an eauen balaunce, that God maye se my innocency.
Yf so be that I haue withdrawen my fote out of the right waye, yf my hert hath folowed myne eye sight, yf I haue stayned or defyled my hodes: O then is it reason that I sowe, and another eate: yee that my generacion and posterite be clene roted out. “Yf my hert hath lusted after my neghbours wife, or yf I haue layed wayte at his dore: O then let my wife be another mans harlot, and let other lye with her. Tor “this is a wickednesse and synne, that is worthy to be punyshed, yee a fyre that vtterly shulde consume, q rote out all my sub-

? Matt, 5.c. Eccli. 41. c. 
* 2 Ite. 12. c. 

^ Pro. 5. c. 
4 Deu. 22. c. 

Iob 34. c. 

The boke of Sob. 

staunce, Dyd | ener thynke scorne to do right vnto my sernaütes and maydens, when they had eny matteragaynstme? But seynge that God wil sytt in indgment, what shal I do? And for so moch as he wil nedes vyset me, what answere shal I gene him? He that fashioned me in my mothers wombe, made he not him also? were we not both shappen alyke in oure mothers bodies? When the poore desyred eny thinge at me, haue I denyed it them? Haue I caused j wyddowe stonde waytinge for me in vayne? Hane I eaten my porcion alone, that the fatherles hath had no parte with me? (for mercy grewe vp with me fro my youth, ¢ compassion fro my mothers wombe.) Haue Isene eny man perish thorow nakednes q want of clothinge? Or, eny poore man for lack of rayment, whose sydes thanked me not, because he was warmed with y woll of my shepe?

Dyd 1 euer lyft vp my honde to hurte the fatherlesse? Yee in the gate where I sawe my self to be in auctorite: Thé let myne arme fall fro my shulder, ¢ myne arme holes be broken from the ioyntes. For I haue euer feared $ vengeaunce q punyshmét of God, q knew very well, y I was not able to beare his burthé. Haue J put my trust in golde? Or, hane I sayde to the fynest golde of all: thou art my cófidence? Haue I reioysed because my substaunce was greate, and because my honde gat so moch? ‘Dyd I euer greatly re- garde the rysinge of the Sonne? Or, had I the goinge downe of Y Moone in greate repu- tacion? Hath my hert medled prinely with eny disceate? Or, dyd I euer kysse myne owne honde (that were a wickednesse worthy to be punyshed, for then shulde 1 haue denyed the God that isaboue.) Hane I euer reioysed at the hurte of myne enemy? /Or, was I ener glad, y eny harme happened vnto him? Oh no, I neuer suffred my mouth to do soch a sinne, as to wysh him euell Yet they of myne owne housholde saye: who shal let vs, to haue oure bely ful of his flesh? I haue not suffred a straunger to lye with out, but opened my dores vnto him. Haue 1l ener done eny wicked dede where thorow I shamed my self before men: Or eny abhominacion, y
I was fayne to hyde it? Tor yf I had feared eny greate multitude of people: Or yf I had

© Deu. 4. c. 17. b. Sap. 13.a. S Pro. 17. a. 

Chap. riri, 

C 

Dn 

D 

€ bap. rrriij, bene dispysed of ¥ symple, Oh then shulde I haue bene afrayed. ‘Thus haue I quyetly spent my lyfe, and not gone out at Y dore. O that
I had one which wolde heare me. Lo, this is my cause. Let y Allmightie geue me answere: q let him that is my cotrary party, sue me with a lybell. "Then shall I take it vpon my shulder, q as a garlade aboute my heade. I haue tolde the nombre of my goinges, and delyuered them vnto him as toa prynce. But yf case be that my londe crie agaynst me, or y the forowes therof make eny complaynte: yf I haue eaten the frutes therof vnpayed for, yee yf I haue greued eny of the plow men:
Than, let thistles growe in steade of my wheate, 
& thornes for my barlye. 

Here ende the wordes of Iob. 

The rrrij. Chapter. 

O these thre men wolde stryue nomore 

with Iob, because he helde himself a rightuous man. But Eliu the sonne of Ba- rachel the Bussite ^of the kynred of Ram, was very sore displeased at Iob, that he called himself iust before God. And with Iobs thre frédes he was angrie also, because they had founde no reasonable answere to ouercome him. Now taried Eliu till they had ended their communicacion with Iob, for why? they were elder then he. So when Eliu y sonne of Barachel y Bussite sawe, that these thre men were not able to make Iob answere, he was myscontent: so that he gaue answere himself, and sayde: ^Consideringe y I am yonge, q ye be men of age, I was afrayed, q durst not shewe forth my mynde, for I thought thus within my self: “It becometh olde men to speake, q the aged to teach wyszdome. Éuery ma^ (no doute) hath a mynde, but it is the inspyracion of the Allmightie that geueth vnderstondinge. All men are not wyse, nether doth euery aged man vnderstonde the thinge that is laufull. Therfore wil I speake also (in so farre as I maye be herde) q wil shewe yow myne opinyon. For whé I had wayted till ye made an ende of youre talkynge, q herde youre wyszdome, what argumétes ye made in youre communicacion: yee when I had diligently pondred what ye sayde, I founde not one of you that made eny good argument agaynst

a Gen, 22.d. » Ecci.32.b. c Iob 12. b. 

Pro. 2. a. 

4 Dan. 2. c. 

The boke of Fob. 

So. rreriyyrb. 

Iob, or that directly coude make answere vnto his wordes: lest ye shulde prayse youre selues, to haue founde out wyszdome: because it is
God that hath cast him out, t no man. Ne- uerthelesse, seynge he hath not spoken vnto me, therfore will not I answere him as ye haue done (for they were so abaszshed, that they coude not make answere, ner speake one worde) but in so moch as ye wil not speake, stondinge still like dome men q makinge no answere: I haue a good hope for my parte to shappe him an answere q to shewe him my meanynge.
For I am full of wordes, q the sprete that is within me, cdpelleth me. Beholde, I am as the new wyne which hath no vente, ¢ bursteth the new vessels in sunder. "Therfore wil I speake, that I maye haue vete: I wil open my lyppes, and make answere. I will regarde no maner of personne, no man wil I spare. For yf I wolde go aboute to please me,* I knowe not how soone my maker wolde take me awaye.

The rrriij. Chapter. 

HERFORE, heare my wordes (O Iob) q herken vnto all, that I wyll saye:
Beholde, I wil open my mouth, a my tonge shal speake out of my chawes. My hert shall ordre my wordes a right, q my lyppes shal talke of pure wyszdome. ‘The sprete of God hath made me,’ q the breth of the Allmightie hath geué me my life. Yf thon cast, then geue me answere: prepare thy self to stode before me face to face. Beholde, before God am I euen as thou, for I am fashioned and made eué of the same moulde. Therfore, thou nedest not be afrayed of me, nether nedest thou to feare, that my auctorite shal be to heuy for the. Now hast thou spoken in myne eares, q I haue herde y voyce of thy wordes:
I am clene without eny fawte,* [am innocent, t there is no wickednesse in me. But lo, he hath pyked a quarell agaynst me, q taketh me for his enemy: he hath put my fote in the stockes, x loketh narowly vnto all my pathes.
Beholde, vnto these vnreasonable wordes of 

thyne wil I make answere. 

Shulde God be reproued of man? Why|33 doest thou then stryue agaynst him, because he geueth the no accomptes of all his doinges?
For whé God doth once commaunde a thinge, there shulde no man be curious, to search

4 Gene. 2. b. Iob 19. b. 

Iob 13. c. 

£ Iob 16. c. 

* Galat. 1. b. 

Fo. cecelyerbt. whether it be right. “In dreames and visions of the night season (when slombrynge cometh vpo mē,’ that they fall a slepe in their beddes) he rowneth them in the eares, he infourmeth them, q sheweth thé planely, that it is he, which withdraweth man from euell, delyuereth him from pryde, kepeth his soule from de- struccion, q his life from y swearde. he chasteneth him with sicknesse, « bringeth him to his bed: he laieth sore pnnyshmét vpo his bones, so that his life maye awaye with no bred, q his soule abhorreth to eate eny dayntie meate: In so moch, that his body is clene consumed awaye, q his bones appeare no more.
His soule draweth on to destruccion, ¢ his life to death. Now yf there be an angel (one amonge a thousande) sent for to speake vnto ma, and to shewe him the right waye: thé the
LORDE is mercifull vnto him, q sayeth: He shalbe delyuered, y he fall not downe to de- struccion, for Iam sufficiently recociled. Than his flesh (which hath bene in misery ¢ trouble) shalbe, as it was in his youth. For yf he submitte himself vnto God, he is gracious, q sheweth him his countenaunce ioyfully, q re- wardeth man for his rightuousnes. Soch a respecte hath he vnto mé. Therfore let a man cofesse, (q saye:) I offended, but he hath chastened q refourmed me: I dyd vnrightu- ously, neuerthelesse he hath not recopensed me therafter. Yee he hath delyuered my soule from destruccion, q my life, that it seyth y light. Lo, thus worketh God all waie with mà, that he kepeth his soule from perishinge, q latteth him enioye the light of y lyuinge.
Marke well (O Iob) q heare me: holde the still, vntill I haue spoken. But yf thou hast eny thinge to saye, then answere me and speake, for thy answere pleaseth me. Yf thou hast nothinge, then heare me, and holde thy tonge, so shal I teach the wyszdome.

The rrriiij. Chapter. 

LIU proceaded forth in his comunica- cion, q sayde: Heare my wordes (O ye

wyse men) herken vnto me, ye y haue vnder- stondinge. For like as the mouth tasteth the meates, so the eare proueth q discerneth the wordes. “As for the iudgmét, let vs seke it out! amonge oure selues, y we maye knowe what is right. And why? lob hath sayde: I am’

a Gen. 20. a. 28. c. 31. d. ^ Dan. 2. a. 

Matt. 2. b. 
€ 1 Cor. 14. d, Iob 13. b. 16. c. 33, a. 

4 Psal, 61. b. 

The boke of Job. 

rightuous, but God doth me wronge. I must nedes be a lyar, though my cause be right: q violétly am I plaged, where as I made no fawte. where is there soch one as lob, y drinketh vp scornefulnes like water? which goeth in y company of wicked doers, œ walketh with vngodly mē? For he saieth: "Though a mà be good, yet is he naught before God.
Therfore herke vnto me, ye ý haue vnder- stondinge.

Farre be it from God, that he shulde medle with wickednesse: and farre be it from the
Allmightie, y he shulde medle with vnrightu- ous dealynge: but he rewardeth the workes of man, ^and causeth euery man to fynde acord- inge to his wayes. For sure it is, that God codemneth no man wrongeously and the iudgmet of the Allmightie is not vnrightuous.
Who ruleth the earth in his steade? Or, whom hath he set to gouerne the whole worlde? To whom hath he geuen his herte, for to drawe his sprete and breth vnto him?
* All flesh shal come together vnto naught, a all mē shal turne agayne vnto earth. Yf thou now haue vnderstodinge, heare what I saye and herken to the voyce of my wordes.

Maye he be made whole, that loueth no right? Yf thou were a very innocent man, shuldest thou then be punyshed? For he is euen the same, y knoweth the rebellious kynges, q sayeth to princes: Vngodly men are ye. He hath norespecte vnto the personnes of ý lordly, q regardeth not the rich more the poore.
For they be all the worke of his hondes. 

In the twincklinge off an eye shall they be slayne: and at mydnight, when the people a the tyrauntes rage, then shal they perish, ad be taken awaye without hondes. ‘And why? his eyes loke vpon the wayes of man, and he seyth all his goinges. There is no darcknes ner thicke shadowe, y can hyde the wicked doers from him. For no mà shalbe suftred to go in to iudgment with God.

* Many one, yee innumerable doth he punyshe and setteth other in their steades.
For he knoweth their euell q darcke workes, therfore shal they be destroyed. They that were in y steade of Seers, dealt like vngodly mé. "Therfore turned they back traytorously and vnfaithfully fro hi, q wolde not receaue

his wayes. In so moch that they haue caused 
Matt. 16.d. Iere. 25. b. Rom. 3. a. e Paal. 145. a. 
Gen.3.d. f lob 31.a. Pro. 5.c. € Dan. 2. c. 

a ee EEE Ee t rr 

Chap. rrriii. 

5 

€ 

Chap. rrrbt. 

y voyce of the poore to come vnto him, q now fo heareth the coplaynte of soch as are in ne- cessite. Yf he delyuer q graunte pardo, who will iudge or condemne? But yf he hyde awaye his countenaunce, who wil turne it aboute agayne, whether it be to the people or to eny man? For the wickednesse q synne of Y people, he maketh an ypoerite to reigne ouer thé. For so moch then as I haue be- gonne to talke of God, I wil not hyndre the.
Yf I haue gone amysse, enfourme me: yf I haue done wronge, I wil leaue of. Wilt thou not geue a reasonable answere? Art thou afrayed of eny thinge, seynge thou beganest first to speake, q not I? For els the men of vnderstodinge q wisdome that haue herde me, might saye: What cast thou speake? As for lob he hath nether spoken to the purpose ner wysely. O father, let Iob be well tryed, be- cause he hath turned himself to y wicked: yee aboue his synnes he hath blasphemed, which offence he hath done euen before vs, in y he stryueth agaynst God with his wordes.

The ryrb. Chapter. 

a ita spake morouer, and sayde: Think- 

B 

est thou it right that thou sayest: I am rightuous before God? Seinge thou sayest so, how doest thou knowe it? What thinge hast thou more excellét, the I y am a synner?
Therfore will I geue answere vnto the q thy frendes: loke vnto the heaue, q beholde it: eosidre Y cloudes, how they are hyer then thou. Yf thou synnest, what dost thou vnto him? Yf thine offences be many, how gettest thou hisfauoure ? Yf thou be rightuous, what geuest thou him? “Or, what receaueth he of thy handes? Of soch an vngodly personne as thou, q of y sonne of man that is rightuous as thou pretendest to be: there is a greate crie q coplaynte made by thé that are oppressed with violence, yee euery man complayneth vpon the eruell arme of tyrauntes. For soch one neuer sayeth: Where is God that made me? ad y shyneth vpon vs, that we might prayse him in the night? Which geueth vs more vnderstódinge then he doth the beastes of the earth, and teacheth vs more then the foules off heaué.

Yf eny soch complayne, no ma geueth answere, and y because of the wickednesse off proude tyrauntes. But yf a man call vpon a Psal. 39. b. Heb. 10. a.

Peal. 49. a. > Psal. 31. b. 

The boke of Job. 

God, doth not he heare him? Doth not the 
Allmightie accepte his crie? Wha thou speakest then, shulde not he pardon the, yff thou open thy self before him, and put thy trust in him? ‘Then vseth he no violence in his wrath nether hath he pleasure in curious and depe inquisicions. Therfore hath Iob opened his mouth but in vayne, ad folishly hath he made so many wordes.

The yrybt. Chapter. 

| eee proceaded forth in his talkinge, a 

sayde: holde the still a litle, and I shal shewe the, what I haue yet to speake on Gods behalfe. I wil open vnto y yet more of myne vnderstondinge, and proue my maker rightu- ous. ‘True are my wordes, q no lye: and the knowlege wherwithall I argue agaynst the, is perfecte. Beholde, God casteth not awaye $ mightie, for he himselff is mightie in power and wisdome.

As for the vngodly, he preserueth thé not but helpeth the poore to their right. ê He turneth not his eyes awaye from the rightuous he setteth vp kynges in their Trone, and céfirm- eth them, so that they allwaye syt therin. But yf they be layed in preson and cheynes, or bounde with the bondes of pouerte: then sheweth he them their workes ad dedes and the synnes wherwith they haue vsed cruell violence.

He with punyshinge and nurturinge off them, rowneth them in the eares, warneth them to leaue of from their wickednesse, and to amende. Yf they now will take hede and be obedient, they shall weere out their dayes in prosperite, * and their yeares in pleasure ad loye. But yff they will not obeye, they shall go thorow the swearde, q perish or euer they be awarre. As for soch as be fayned, dys- semblers and ypocrytes, they heape vp wrath for them selues: for they call not vpon him, though they be his presoners. ‘Thus their soule perisheth in foolishnesse, and their lyfe with y condéned. The poore delyuereth he out d his straytnesse, and comforteth soch as be in necessite and trouble. Euen so shall he kepe the (yf thou wilt be content) from the bottomlesse pytte that is beneth: q yf thou wilt holde the quyete, he shal fyll thy table with plenteousnesse.

Fo. cecelerrbtj. 

B 

Neuerthelesse, thou hast condemned thejg 

2Re.7.c. 4 Re.10.c. 2 Par. 33. c. * Esa. 1. c. 

Fo. ceeelyrrbtij. The boke of Sob. Chap. xrrbij. 

iudgment of the vngodly, yee euen soch aj |workes. The beestes crepe in to their dennes, iudgment and sentence shalt thou suffre. For} jq take their rest. Out of the south commeth then shal not thy cause be stilled with crueltie, the tempest, and colde out of the north.

ner pacified with many giftes. Hath God or- At the breth of God, the frost commeth, a} 33 dened then, that the glorious life off the ¢ all the waters are shed abrode. ‘The clondes soch mightie men shulde not be put downe?| |do their labonre in geuynge moystnesse, the
Prolonge not thou the tyme, till there come| |cloudes poure downe their rayne. He dis- a night for the, to set other people in thy| |tributeth also on euery syde, acordinge as it steade. But bewarre that thou turne not} |pleaseth him to deale out his workes, that asyde to wickednesse and synne, which hytherto| they maye do, what so euer he commaundeth thou hast chosen more then mekenesse. Be-| |thé thorow the whole worlde: whether it be holde, God is of a mightie hye power: Where) |to punysh eny londe, or to do good vnto them, is there soch a gyde and lawegeuer as he?| |that seke him.
Who wil reproue him of his waye? who wil Herken vnto this (o Iob) stonde still, and saye vnto him: thou hast done wronge ? considre the wonderous workes of God. Art
3| ^O considre how greate and excellent his| |thou of coücel with God, when he doth these workes be, whom all men loaue and prayse:| |thinges? When he causeth the light to come yee wondre at him, and yet they se him but| |forth of his cloudes? Art thou of his coücell, a farre of. Beholde, so greate is God, that he| |when he spredeth out the cloudes? Hast thou passeth oure knowlege, nether are we able to) |the perfecte knowlege of his wonders? and come to $ experiéce of his yeares. He turn-| |how thy clothes are warme, whé the lode is eth $ water to smal droppes, he dryueth his| |still thorow the south wynde? hast thou cloudes together for to rayne, “so that they} |helped him to spred out the heauen, which is poure downe and droppe vpon men. He can| |to loke vpó, as it were cast of cleare metall? sprede out the cloudes (a couerynge off his| | Teach vs what we shal saye vnto hi, for we are| € tabernacle) and cause his light to shyne vpo| |vnmete because of darcknes. Shal it be tolde them, and to couer the botome of the see.| |him, what I saye? Shulde a man speake, or
By these thinges gouerneth he his people,| |shulde he kepe it backe? For euery mà seith and geueth the abundaunce of meate. In j| |not the light, y he kepeth cleare in the turnynge of a hande he hydeth the light, q at cloudes, which he clenseth whan he maketh his commaundement it commeth agayne. The| |the wynde to blowe. Golde is brought out of rysinge vp therof sheweth he to his frendes| the north, but the prayse and honoure off Gods and to the catell. feare commeth fro God himself. It is not we that can fynde out the allmightie: for in
The yrrbij.. Chapter. power, equite and rightuousnesse he is hyer 
T this my hert is astonnied, and moued then can be expressed. Seinge then that out of his place. Heare then thesounde| |euery body feareth him, why shulde not all of his voyce, and the noyse y goeth out of his| | wyse men also stode in feare of hi? mouth. He gouerneth every thinge vnder the a heauen, and his light reacheth vnto the ende The rrrbiij, Chapter. of the worlde. A roaringe voyce foloweth HEN spake the LORDE! vnto Iob out|&

him: for his glorious magesty geueth soch a of the storme, and sayde: what is he, thondre clappe, that (though a man heare it)| |that hydeth his mynde with foolysh wordes? yet maye he not perceaue it afterwarde. It] |Gyrde vp thy loynes like a mà, for I will ques- geueth an horrible sownde, when God sendeth| |tion the, se thou geue me a dyrecte answere. out his voyce: greate thinges doth he, which] |Where wast thou, when I layed y foundacions we can not coprehende. ^When he com-| |of the earth? Tell planely yf thou hast vnder- maundeth the snowe, it falleth vpon the earth:| |stondinge. Who hath measured it, knowest
As soone as he geueth the rayne a charge,| |thou? Or, who hath spred y lyne vpon it? 
Immediatly the showers haue their strength} | Where vpon stéde the pilers of it? “Or, who and fall downe. He sendeth feare vpon euery} |layed ¥ corner stone? where wast thou when man, that they might knowe their owne| |the mornynge starres gaue me prayse, ad

4 Psal. 23. a. 

* Deu. 11. c. 28. d. 5 Psal, 148. b. * [ob 40. a. 

Chap. rrrir. when all the angels of God reioysed? “Who shutt the see with dores, when it brake forth as a childe out off his mothers wombe? When
I made the cloudes to be a coueringe for it, and swedled it with y darcke? ’ when I gaue it my comaundement, makynge dores ¢ barres for it, sayenge: Hither to shalt thou come,

33 | but no further, and here shalt thou laye downe thy proude and hye wawes. Hast thou geué the mornynge his charge (as soone as thou wast borne) and shewed the dayespringe his place, y it might take holde of the corners of the earth, q y the vngodly might be shaké out? Their tokés q weapés hast thou turned like elaye, q set the vp agayne as the chaung- inge of a garment. Yee thou hast spoyled the vngodly off their light, x broke the arme of the proude. Camest thou euer in to the groüde of the see, Or, hast thou walked in y lowe corners of ¥ depe? Haue the gates of death bene opened vnto the or hast thou sene the dore of euerlastige treasure? Hast thon also perceaued, how brode y earth is? Now yf thou hast knowlege of all, the shewe me where light dwelleth, and where darcknes is: y thou mayest bringe vs vnto their quarters, yf thou cast tell the waye to their houses.
Knewest thou (when thou wast borne) how olde thou shuldest be ?

€| Wentest thou euer in to the treasuries off the snowe, or hast thou sene y^ secrete places of the hale: which I haue prepared agaynst the tyme of tronble, agaynst the tyme of batell q warre? By what waye is the light parted, q the heate dealt out vpon earth?
Who deuydeth the abundance of waters in to ryuers, or who maketh a waye for the stormy wether, y it watereth ¢ moystureth y drye q baren grounde : to make the grasse growe in places where no body dwelleth, ¢ in the wil- dernes where no mà remayneth? Who is the father of rayne? Or, who hath begotten the droppes of dew? Out of whose wobe came the yse? who hath gendred the coldnes of y ayre? y the waters are as harde as stones, q lye congeeled aboue the depe. Hast thou brought y vij. starres together? Or, art thou able to breake the Circle of heaué? Cast thou

D |bringe forth the mornyuge starre or the euen- 

ynge starre at couenient tyme, t cOueye thé 

home agayne? Knowest thou the course off heaué, y thou mayest set vp the ordinaunce

* Tere. 5. d. 5 Psal. 32. b. 103. b. Luc. 8. c. 

The boke of Job. 

Fo. ceecelrrrir. therof vpo earth? Moroner, cast thou lift vp thy voyce to y clondes, ¥ they maye ponre downe a greate rayne vpo the? Canst thou thodre also y they maye go their waye, q be obediét vnto the, sayége: lo, here are we?
Who geueth sure wisdome, or stedfast vnder- stodinge? who nombreth the cloudes in wis- dome ? who stilleth ¥ vehement waters of the heaue ? who turneth the clottes to dust, q thé to be clottes agayne? Huntest thou the praye fro the Lyon, or fedest thou his whelpes lyége in their dénes q lurkinge in their couches ? who prouydeth meate for the rauen, whé his yonge ones crie vnto God, ad fle aboute for want of meate ?

The yrrir. Chapter. 

NOWEST thou the tyme when the wilde 
K gotes brige forth their yoge amoge the stony rockes ? Or layest thou wayte when the hindes vse to fawne? Rekenest thou the monethes after they ingendre, y thon knowest the tyme of their bearinge? Or when they lye downe, when they cast their yonge ones, when they are delyuered off their trauayle q payne? How their yoge ones growe vp q waxe greate thorow good fedinge ? who letteth the wilde asse go fre, or who lowseth the bodes of the Moole? Vnto who I haue geuen the wyldernes to be their house, q the vntilled londe to be their dwellinge place. That they maye geue no force for the multitude off people in the cities, nether to regarde the crienge of the dryuer: but to seke their pas- ture aboute the moütaynes, q to folowe vpon the grene grasse. Wyll the vnicorne be so tame as to do y seruyce, or to abyde still by thy cribbe? Cast thou bynde y yock aboute him in thy forowes, to make him plowe after the in y valleis? Mayest thou trust hi (be- cause i is stróge) or cómitte thy laboure vnto hi? Mayest thou beleue hi, y he wil brige home thy corne, or to cary eny thinge vnto thy barne? "The Estrich (whose fethers are fayrer the y wynges of the sparow hauke) whé he hath layed his egges vpon the grounde, he bredeth them in the dust, and forgetteth them: so that they might be troden with fete, or broken with somme wilde beast.

So harde is he vnto his yong ones, as though they were not his, and laboureth in vayne without eny feare. And that because

* Exod. 9. e. Fosu. 10. c. 

| 

€ 

1 
| 

So. ceceye. 
‘God hath taken wisdome from him, q hath 

not geuen him vnderstondinge. When his tyme is, he flyeth vp an hye, and careth nether for horse ner man.

Hast thou geuen the horse is strength, or lerned him to bowe downe his neck with feare: that he letteth him self be dryuen forth like a greshopper, where as the stoute neyenge that he maketh, is fearfull? he breaketh y grounde with the hoffes of his fete chearfully in his strength, and runneth to mete the harnest men. He layeth asyde all feare, his stomack is not abated, nether starteth he a back for eny swerde. ‘Though the quyuers rattle vpon him, though the speare and shilde glistre: yet russheth he in fearsly, and beateth vpon the grounde. He feareth not the noyse of the trompettes, but as soone as he heareth the shawmes blowe, tush (sayeth he) for he smell- eth the batell afarre of, y noyse, the captaynes and the shoutinge.

Commeth it thorow thy wysdome, that the goshauke flyeth towarde the south? Doth the
Aegle mounte vp q make his nest on hye at thy commaundement? He abydeth in the stony rockes, 4d vpon the hye toppes of harde mountaynes, where no man can come. From thence maye he beholde his praye, and loke farre aboute with his eyes. ° His yonge ones are fed with bloude, and where eny deed body lyeth, there is he immediatly.

Morouer, God spake vnto Iob and sayde: 
Can he that stryueth with the Allmightie, be at rest? Shulde not he which disputeth with
God, geue him an answere? Iob answered the 
LORDE, sayenge: Beholde, I am to vyle a personne, to answere the, therfore will I laye my hande vpon my mouth. Once or twyse haue I spoken, but 1 will saye nomore..

The rl. Chapter. 

a HEN spake the LORDE vnto Iob ont 

of the storme, and sayde: ^gyrde vp thy loynes like a man, and tell me the thige that
I will axe the. Wilt thou disanulle my iudg- ment? Or, wilt thou condemne me, y thou ithy self mayest be made rightuous ? Is thine arme then like the arme of God? Maketh thy voyce soch a soüde as his doth? Then arme thy self with thine owne power, vp, decke the in thy ioly araye, poure out the indigna- cion of thy wrath: se that thou cast downe

? Mat. 24. c. > lob 38. a. * Esa, 27, a. Psal. 73. b. 

Che boke of Sob. 

proude, loke well, that thou makest all} - 

all y 

scd as be stubburne, to obeye: treade all the vngodly vnder thy fete, cast thé downe in to the myre, and couer their faces with darck- nesse: ‘Then will I confesse also, that thyne owne right honde hath saued the.

Beholde, the cruell beaste (whom I made with the) which eateth haye as an oxe: lo, how stronge he is in his loynes, and what power he hath in the nauell of his body. He spredeth out his tale like a Cedre tre, all his vaynes are stiff His shynnes are like pipes off brasse, his rygge bones are like staues of yro. First when God made him, he ordened the wyldernesse for him, y the mountaynes shulde geue him grasse, where all the beastes off the felde take their pastyme. He lyeth amóge the redes in the Mosses, the fennes hyde him with their shadowe, and the wylowes of the broke couer him rounde aboute. Lo, without eny laboure might he drynke out the whole floude, and suppe off Iordane without eny trauayle. Who darre laye honde vpon him openly, and vndertake to cateh him? Or, who darre put an hoke thorow his nose, ad laye a snare for him?

Darrest thou drawe out * Leuiathan with an angle, or bynde his tonge with a snare ? Canst thou put a rynge in the nose of him, or bore his chaftes thorow with an aule? Wyll he make many fayre wordes with the (thynkest thou) or flatre the? Wyll he make a eouenaunt with the ? Or, art thou able for to compell him to do the contynuall seruyce? Wilt thou take thy pastyme with him as with a byrde, or geue him vnto thy maydens, that thy com- panyons maye hew him in peces, to be parted amonge the marchaunt men? Canst thou fyll the nett with his skynne, or y fysh panyer with his heade? Darrest thou laye honde vpon him? It is better for the to considre what harme might happe the there thorow and not to toueh him. For when thou thynkest to haue holde vpon him, he shall begyle the:
Euery man also that seyth him, shall go backe. 
And why? there darre none be so bolde, as to rayse him vp.

The rli. Chapter. 
HO‘ is able to stonde before me? Or, who hath geuen me eny thynge afore hande, that I am bounde to rewarde him

4 Tere. 50. h. 

Chap. rl. 

5 

€ 

The boke of Sob. 

€ 

B 

bap. rli. 
|agayne ? All thinges vnder heauen are myne. 
I feare him not, whether he threaten or speake fayre. Who lifteth him vp and stripeth him tout of his clothes, or who taketh him by the bytt of his brydle? Who openeth the dore of
‘his face? for he hath horrible tethe rounde aboute. His body is couered with scales as it were with shyldes, lockte in, kepte, and well cópacte together. One is so ioyned to another,
'that no ayre can come in: Yee one hangeth so vpon another, and sticke so together, that they can not be sundered. His nesinge is like a glisteringe fyre, and his eyes like the morn- ynge shyne. Out of his mouth go torches and fyre brandes, out off his nostrels there goeth a
‘smoke, like as out off an hote seetinge pott. 
| His breth maketh the coales burne, the flame goeth out of his mouth. In his necke re- mayneth strength, and before his face sorowe is turned to gladnesse. ‘The membres of his body are ioyned so strayte one to another, and cleue so fast together, that he can not be moued.
His hert is as harde as a stone, ad as fast as the stythye that the hammer man smyteth vpon. When he goeth: the mightiest off all are afrayed, and the wawes heuy. Yff he drawe out the swearde, there maye nether speare ner brest plate abyde him. He setteth as moch by a strawe as by yro, and as moch by a rotten stocke as by metall. He starteth not awaye for him that bendeth the bowe, q as for slynge stones, he careth as moch for stubble as for them. He counteth the hammer no better then a strawe, he laugheth him to scorne that shaketh the speare. He treadeth the golde in the myre like ¥ sharpe potsherdes.
He maketh the depe to seeth and boyle like a pott, and stereth the see together like an oyntment. The waye is light after him, the depe is his walkynge place. Vpon earth is there no power like vnto his, for he is so made, that he feareth not. Yff a man will cosidre all hye thinges, this same is a kynge ouer all the children off pryde.

The plij. Chapter. 
HE Iob answered the LORDE, and sayde: “I knowe that thou hast power of all thinges, and that there is no thought

hyd vnto the. For who can kepe his owne 
° Esa.29.c. 1 Re.16.b. 4 Matt. 5.c. ¢ Gen. 4. a. e Pro. 10. c. Ecchi. 11. b.

|? Matt. 19.d. Luc. 18. c. 

councell so secrete, but it shall be knowne ? 
Therfore haue I spoken vnwysely, seynge these thinges are so hye, and passe myne vnderstondinge. O herken thou vnto me also, and let me speake: answere me vnto the thinge that I will axe the. I hane geuen diligent eare vnto the, and now I se y with myne eyes. Wherfore I geue myne owne self y blame, and take repentaunce in the dust and asshes.

Now whé the LORDE had spoken these wordes vnto Iob, he sayde vnto Eliphas $
Themanite: I am displeased with the q thy two frendes, for ye haue not spoken the thinge i is right before me, like as my seruaunt Iob

ath done. ‘Therfore take vij. oxen and seuen rammes, and go to my seruaunt Iob,’ offre vp also for youre selues a brentofferynge, and let my seruaunt Iob praye for you. Him will I accepte, and not deale with you after youre foolishnesse: in that ye haue not spoke y thinge which isright, like as my seruaunt Iob hath done.

So Eliphas the Themanite, Baldad y Su- hite and Sophar the Naamathite wéte their waye, and did acordynge as the LORDE commaunded them. ‘The LORDE also *ac- cepted the personne off Iob, and the LORDE turned him vnto Iob, whe he prayed for his frendes: ^Yee the LORDE gaue Iob twyse as moch as he had afore.

And thé came there vnto him all his brethren, all his sisters with all them that had bene off his acquatauce afore, and ate bred with him in his house, wondringe at him, ad comfortinge him ouer all the trouble, that the LORDE had brought vpon him. ‘Euery ma gaue him a shepe and a Iewell of golde.

And the LORDE made Iob richer then he was before: for he had xiiij. M. shepe, vi. M. camels, a M. yock oxe, and a M. asses. He had children also: vij. sonnesandiij. doughters.
The first he called Daye, the seconde, po- uerte: the thirde, All plenteousnes. In all the londe were none founde so fayre, as the doughters of lob, q their father gaue them enheritaunce amonge their brethren. After this lyued Iob xl. yeares, so that he sawe his children, « his childers children vnto the fourth generacion./ And so he dyed, beinge olde q of a perfecte age.

Iob 1. a. S Gen. 50. d. 

Tob.14.a. Psal. 127. a. 

The ende of the boke of Job. 

So. ceeeret. 

D 

€ 

| 

The Psalter. 

The first psalme. 

a BLESSED is y man, y goeth not in the councell of ý vngodly:^ y abydeth not in the waye off synners, q sytteth not in seate of the scornefull. But delyteth in the lawe of Y LORDE, *¢ exercyseth himself in his lawe both daye and night. Soch a ma is like a tre plited by y water syde, ^y brigeth forth his frute in due season.
33| His leenes shal not fall off, ad loke what soeuer he doth, it shal prospere. As for the vngodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the dust,* which ¥ wynde scatereth awaye from of the grounde. ‘Therfore the vngodly shall not be able to stonde in the indgmét,
*nether the synners in the congregacion off the rightuous. For the LORDE aloweth y waye
(of the rightuous, but the waye of the vngodly 
[shal perishe. 

The tj. A psalme of Dauid. 

a HY do the Heithe grudge?/ why do the people ymagyn vayne thinges?

The kynges of the earth stode vp, and the rulers are come together, agaynst the LORDE ad agaynst his anoynted. Let vs breake their bondes a sunder, and cast a waye their yocke from vs. Neuerthelesse, he that dwelleth in heauen, shall? laugh thé to scorne: yee euen the LORDE himselff shall hane them in de- rision. ‘Then shal he speake vnto them in his wrath, and vexe them in his sore displeasure.
Yet haue I set my kynge vpon my holy hill of Sion. As for me I will preach the lawe, wherof the LORDE hath sayde vnto me:
Thou art my sonne,’ this daye haue I begotten ithe. Desyre off me, and I shall geue the the
' Heithen for thine enheritaunce, Yee the vtte- most partes of the worlde’ for thy possession.
%3| Thou shalt rule them with a rodde of yron,* and breake thé in peces like an erthen vessell.

| a Esa. 8. c. 19. c. — Psal. 32. b. ? Pro. 2. 3. 
* Iere. 17. b. * Pro. 10, c. Esa. 29. b. * Esa. 26. b f Act. 4.c. Psal. 70. a. and 82. a. £ Pro. 1. c

Be wyse now therfore (o ye kynges) be warned, ye that are iudges of the earth. Serue the
LORDE with feare, and reioyse before him with renerence. Kysse the sonne, lest the
LORDE be angrie, and so ye perish from the right waye. For his wrath shalbe kindled shortly :’ blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

The iij. A psalme of Dauid. 
Y A J HY are they so many (o LORDE) y|& 

trouble me? a greate multitude are they, that ryse agaynst me. Yee many one there be that saye off my soule : there is no helpe for him in God. Sela. But thon (o
LORDE) art my defender, my worshipe, 4d the lifter vp of my heade. I call vpon the
LORDE with my voyce, and he heareth me out of his holy hill. Sela. I layed me downe and slepte, but I rose vp agayne, for the
LORDE susteyned me. I am not afrayed for thousandes of the people, that copasse me rounde aboute. Vp LORDE, and helpe me, o my God: for thon smytest all myne ene- mies vpon the cheke bones, and breakest the teth of the vngodly. Helpe belongeth vnto the LORDE, therfore let thy blessynge be vpon thy people.

The iiij. A psalme of Dauid. 

EARE me whe I cal, o God of my| 8 

rightuousnes, thon that comfortest me in my trouble: haue mercy vpon me, and herken vnto my prayer. O ye sonnes off men: how longe will ye blaspheme myne honoure? why haue ye soch pleasure in vanyte, q seke after lyes? Sela. Knowe this, thatthe LORDE dealeth maruelously with his saynte: and when I call vpon the LORDE, he heareth me. ” Be angrie, but synne not:|g como with youre owne hertes vpo youre beddes, q remébre youre selues. Sela. Offre y sacri-

* Heb. 1. d. 5. b. k Apo. 2. d. 19. c. m Epbe. 4. c.

Aet, 13. d. 
Esa. 56. c. 

! Psal. 81. a. 
! lere. 17. b. 

Cbr Psalter. 

fice of rightuousnes, q put youre trust in y 
LORDE. ‘There be many y saye: who wil do vs eny good? where as thou (o LORDE) hast shewed vs the light of thy countenaiice.
Thou reioysest myne herte, though their en- creace be greate both in corne q wyne. Ther- fore wil I laye me downe in peace, ¢ take my rest: for thou LORDE only settest me in a sure dwellynge.

The b. A psalme of Dauid. 

Hn. my wordes (0 LORDE) con- sidre my callynge. O marke the voyce of my peticion, my kynge q my God: for vnto the wil I make my praver. Heare my voyce by tymes (o LORDE) for “early in the morninge wil I gett me vnto the, yee q y with diligéce. For thou art not the God y hath pleasure in wickednesse, there maye no vn-| godly personne dwel with the. Soch as be. cruell maye not stonde in thy sight, thou art an enemie vnto all wicked doers.

Thou destroyest the lyers: the LORDE abhorreth the bloude thurstie and disceatfull.
But as for me, ^I wil come in to thy house, euen vpon the multitude of thy mercy: ad in thy feare wyll I worshipe towarde thy holy téple. Lede me (o LORDE) in thy right- uousnesse, because of myne enemyes, ad make thy waye playne before me. For there is no faithfuluesse in their mouthes: they dyssem- ble in their hertes: their throte is an open sepulchre: with their tonges they disceaue.
Punysh them (o God) that they maye perish in their owne ymaginacions: cast them out because of the multitude of their vngodlinesse, for they rebell agaynst the. Agayne, let all them that put their trust in the, reioyse: yee let them euer be geuynge of thankes, because thou defendest them: that they which loue thy name, maye be ioyfull in the. For thou
LORDE geuest thy blessinge vnto the right- uous: and with thy fauorable kyndnes thou defendest him, as with a shylde.

The bi. A psalme of Dauid. 
H LORDE, rebuke me not in thine anger: Oh chaste me not in thy heuy displeasure. Haue mercy vponme (o LORDE) for I am weake: o, LORDE heale me, for all my bones are vexed. My soule also is in

a Sap. 14. b. Pro. 3.d. ^ Psal. 157. a. 
30.b. Psal. 37. a. 4 Matt. 7. b. 25. d. 

* Jere. 10. d. 
Luc. 13. c. 

Oh saue me, for thy mercies sake. For in death no man remebreth the: Oh who wil geue the thankes in the hell? 1 am weery of grouynge: Euery night wasshe I my bedde, q water my couche with my teares. My coü- tenaüce is chaunged for very inwarde grefe, I cosume awaye, I haue so many enemies.
4 Awaye fro me all ye wicked doers, for the 
LO RDE hath herde the voyce off my wepinge. 
The LORDE hath herde myne humble peti- cio, the LORDE hath receaued my prayer.
All myne enemies shalbe cófounded ¢ sore vexed: yee they shalbe turned backe and put

to shame, and that right soone. 
O LORDE my God, in y do I trust: saue me fro all thé y persecute me, “q delyuer me. Lest he hantch vp my soule like a lyon, « teare it in peces, whyle there is none to helpe. O LORDE my God, yff I haue done eny soch thinge: yf there be eny vnrightuousnes in my hades: Yff I haue re- warded euell vnto the y dealt frendly with me or hurte the y without eny cause are myne enemies: Then let myne enemie persecute my soule, t take me: yee let hi treade my life downe in the earth, q laye myne honoure in the dust. Sela. Stode vp (o LORDE) in thy wrath, lift vp thyself ouer the furious indignació of myne enemies: aryse vp (for me) in the vengeaunce that thou hast pro- mysed. /That the congregacion of the peo- ple maye come aboute the, for their sakes therfore lift vp thyselff agayne. The LORDE is indge ouer the people: Auenge me then
(o LORDE) acordinge to my rightuousnes q innocency. godly come to an ende: but manteyne the iust, thou rightuous God, y triest the very hertes q the reynes. My helpe cometh of
God, ‘which preserueth them y are true of herte. God is a rightuous iude t God is euer threateninge. Yf men wil not turne, he hath whet his swearde : he hath bent his bowe q made it ready. He hath prepayred him the weapens of death, q ordened his arowes to destroye. ^Beholde, he trauayleth with mys- chefe, he hath cóceaued vnhappynesse, and

The bij. A psalme of Dauid. 

e 2 Re. 19. 24. 26. f Deu. 32. e. € Deu. 10. d. 

^ Job 15. d. Esa. 59. a. 

Oh let the wickednes of the vn-| 

Fo. ccerrrítj. greate trouble, but LORDE how longe?
Turne the (o LORDE) « delyuer my soule : 

B 

a 

So. crerrcüü. 

B 

brought forth a lye. “He hath grauen and dygged vp a pytte, but he shal fall himself in to y pytte i he hath made. * For his vnhap- pynes shall come vpon his owne heade, ¢ his wickednes shall fall vpon his owne pate. As for me, I will geue thankes vnto the LORDE for his rightuousnes sake, and wil prayse the name of the LORDE the most hyest.

The biij. A psalme of Dauid. 

LORDE oure gouernoure: how won- 
O derfull is thy name in all the worlde? how excellent is thy glory aboue the heauens ?
‘Out of the mouth of the very babes q suck- linges thou hast ordened prayse, because of thine enemies, y thou mightest destroye the enemie and the auenger. For I considre thy heauens, euen the worke off thy fyngers : the
Moone and the starres which thou hast made. 
Oh what is man, y thou art so myndfull of him ? ether the sonne of ma that thou visitest him? "After thou haddest for a season made him lower thé the angels, thou crownedest him with honoure q glory. ‘Thou hast set

|him aboue the workes off thy hondes: thou 

hast put all thinges in subieccion vnder his fete. All shepe and oxen, yee and the beastes of the felde. The foules of the ayre: the fysh of the see, and what so walketh thorow the wayes of the see. O LORDE oure gouer- noure, how wonderfull is thy name in all the worlde ?

The ir. A psalme of Dauid. 

WIL geue thakes vnto the (o LORDE) 
I with my whole herte, /I wil speake of all thy maruelous workes. I wil be glad q reioyse in the, yee my songes wil I make of thy name, o thou most hyest. Because thou hast dryue myne enemies abacke, they were discofited, q perished at thy presence. For thou hast manteyned my right and my cause : thou syt- test in the Trone that art the true iudge.
Thou rebukest the Heithen, and destroyest the vngodly, thou puttest out their name for euer and euer. ‘The enemies swerdes are come to an ende, thou hast ouerthrowen their cities, their memoriall is perished with the.
But LORDE endureth for euer, he hath prepared his seate vnto iudgmét. He gouern- eth y worlde with rightuousnes q ministreth

a Eccli. 27.e. Heat.7.b. è Psal. 139. b. 

* Matt. 21. b. d Pssl, 143. a. Heb. 2. b. E

Cbr Psalter. 

‚of his sight, he defyeth all his enemies. 

true iudgmét vnto the people. The LORDE is a defence for the poore, a defence in the tyme of trouble. Therfore they y knowe thy name, put their trust in y : for thou (LORDE) neuer faylest thé, that seke the. *O prayse the LORDE, which dwelleth in Sion, shewe
Y people of his doinges. And why? he maketh inquysicion for their bloude, and re- membreth them : ^he forgetteth not the com- playnte of the poore. Haue mercy vpó me
(o LORDE) considre the trouble that I am in amoge myne enemies, thou that liftest me vp from y gates of death. That I maye shewe all thy prayses within the portes off the dough- ter Sion, and reioyse in thy sauynge health.
As for the Heithen, they are suncke downe in the pytte that they made: in the same nette, which they spred out priuely, is their owne fote take. Thus y LORDE is knowne to execute true iudgment, whé the vngodly is trapped in the workes of his owne handes.
Sela. The wicked must be turned vnto hell, and all the Heithen y forget God. But the poore shal not allwaye be out of remem- braunce, the paciét abydinge of soch as be in trouble shall not perish for euer. Vp
LORDE, let not man haue the vpper hade, let the Heithe be codemned before the. O
LORDE, set a scolemaster ouer the, that the 
Heithé maye knowe them selues to be but me. Sela.

Here the Hebrues begynne the x. psalme. 

HY art thou gone so farre of, o 
LORDE? wilt thou hyde thyselff in 

tyme of trouble? Whyle y vngodly hath the ouer hande, the poore must suffre persecucion:
O that they were taken in the ymaginacions which they go aboute. For the vngodly maketh boost of his owne hertes desyre, the cuvetous blesseth him self, and blasphemeth the LORDE. The vngodly is so proude and full of indignació, that he careth not: nether is God before his eyes. His wayes are allwaye filthie, thy iudgmentes are farre out
For he sayeth in his herte : Tush, I shal neuer be cast downe, there shal no harme happé vnto me. His mouth is full of cursynge, fraude and disceate: vnder his toge is trauayle q sorow. He sytteth lurkynge in the gardens,

f Psal. 110. a. and 137, a. 

e Gen. 1. d. Epbe. 1. c. 
^ Psal. 21. c. 

€ Deu. 4. e. Psal. 75. a. 

Psalme bi. 

D 

£ 

Psalme rii. The Psalter. 

that he maye pryuely murthur the innocent, his eyes are set vpo the poore. He lyeth waytinge secretly, as it were a lyon in his denne. He lurketh that he maye rauysh the poore, yee to rauish the poore, when he hath gotten him in to his nett. Then smyteth he, then oppresseth he q casteth downe the poore with his auctorite. For he sayeth in his herte: Tush, God hath forgotten, he hath turned a waye his face, so y he will neuer se
Fit. Aryse o LORDE God, lift vp thine honde, and forget not the poore. Wherfore shulde the wicked blaspheme God, and saye in his herte: Tush, he careth not for it?
This thou seist, for thou considrest the mysery and sorowe: The poore geueth himselff ouer in to thy hande, and committeth him vnto the, for thou art the helper of the frendlesse.
Breake thou ¥ arme off the vngodly and malycious, search out the wickednesse which he hath done, that he maye perish. ‘The
LORDE is kynge for euer, ye Heithen shal perish out off his londe. LORDE, thou hearest the desyrous longinge off the poore: their herte is sure, that thine eare herkeneth therto. Helpe the fatherlesse and poore vnto their right, that the vngodly be nomore exalted vpon earth.

The y. A psalme of Dauid. 

4| TN the LORDE put I my trust: how will ye then saye to my soule : that she shulde fle as a byrde vpon youre hill? For lo, the vngodly haue bēt their bowe, and made redy their arowes in the quyuer: “that they maye priuely shute at them, which are true of herte. The very foundacion haue they cast downe, what ca the rightuous thé do withall ?
But the LORDE is in his holy temple, the 
LORDES seate is in heauen : ^ He cosidereth it with his eyes, ^his eye lyddes beholde the children of men. The LORDE seith both the rightuous and vngodly, but who so de- liteth in wickednes, him his soule abhorreth.
Vpon the vngodly he shal rayne snares, fyre, brymstone, storme and tempest: this rewarde shal they haue to drynke. For the LORDE is rightuous, 4d he loueth rightuousnes, his countenaunce beholdeth the thige y is iust.

The ri. A psalme of Dauid. 

a ELPE LORDE, for there is not one saynte more: very fewe faithfull are

a Pro. 26.c. ^ Aba.2.c. © Esa. 66.a. 4 Psal. 118. c. 

Fo. ceeered. 

there amonge the children off men. Euery man telleth lyes to his neghboure, they do but flater with their lippes and dissemble in their herte. O that the LORDE wolde rote out all disceatfull lippes, ad the tonge that speak- eth proude thinges. Which saye: Oure toge shulde preuayle: we are they that ought to speake, who is lorde ouer vs? Now for the troubles sake off the oppressed, q because of the complaynte of the poore, I wil vp (sayeth the LORDE) I wil helpe thé, and set thé at rest. The wordes of the LORDE are pure wordes : “eué as y syluer, which from earth is tried and purified vij. tymes in the fyre. Kepe thé therfore (o LORDE) and preserue vs fro this generacion for euer. And why? when vanite and ydylnes getteth the ouer hande amonge the children of men, all are full of ¥ vngodly.

The xij. A psalme of Dauid. 
OW longe wilt thou forget me, o 
LORDE? for euer? how longe wilt thou hyde thy face fro me? Oh how loge shall I seke councell in my soule? how longe shall I be so vexed in my herte? how longe shal myne enemie triumphe ouer me? Con- sidre, ād heare me, o LORDE my God: lighten myne eyes, that I slepe not in death.
Lest myne enemie saye: I haue preuayled agaynst hī, for yf I be cast downe, they that trouble me will reioyse at it.
But my trust is in thy mercy, and my hert is ioyfull in thy sauynge health. I wil synge of the LORDE, that dealeth so louyngly with me. (Yee I wil prayse the name of the

LORDE the most hyest.) 

The rítj. A psalme of Dauid. 

HE foolish bodyes saye in their hertes : 
F e Tush, there is no God. They are corrupte, ād become abhominable in their doynges, there is not one y doth good. / The
LORDE loked downe tré heaue vpo the children of men, to se yf there were eny, that wolde vnderstonde q seke after God. But they are all gone out of the waye, they are alltogether become vnprofitable: there is none that doth good, no not one. * Their throte is an open sepulere, with their tonges they haue disceaued, the poyson of Aspes is
J Gen. 11. b. 18. c. 

* Psal. 52. a. E Rom. 3. b. 

| 

So. ceeeredt, 

vnder their lippes.* Their mouth is full of cursinge and bytternes, their fete are swift to shed bloude.* Destruccion q wretchednes are in their wayes, ad the waye of peace haue they not knowne: there is no feare off God before their eyes.* How can they haue vnder- stondinge, y worke myschefe, eatinge vp my people, as it were bred, q call not vpo y
LORDE? 

Therfore shal they be brought in greate feare, for God stondeth by the generacion of the rightuous. As for you, ye haue made a mocke at the coiicell of the poore, because he putteth his trust in the LORDE. "Oh y the sauynge health were genen vnto Israel out off
Sion. Oh that the LORDE wolde delyuer his people out of captiuyte. Thé shulde Iacob reioyse, and Israel shulde be right glad.

The riiij. A psalme of Dauid. 
ORDE, who shall dwell in thy taber- nacle? * who shal rest vpo thy holy hill ?
Euen he y ledeth an vncorrupte life: that doth the thinge which is right, ad that speak- eth the treuth from his herte. He y vseth no disceat in his tonge: he that doth no euell to his neghboure, q slaundreth not his neghbours.
He y setteth not by the vngodly but maketh mol of thé that feare the LORDE: he y sweareth vnto his neghboure q disparate him not. ^He that geneth not his money vpon vsury, and taketh no rewarde agaynst the innocét. "Who so doth these thiges, shal neuer be remoued.

Che yb. A psalme of Dauid. 

a RESERUE me (o God) for in the do I trust. I haue sayde vnto y LORDE:

thou art my God, my goodes are nothinge vnto the. All my delyte is vpon the sanctes that are in the earth, and vpon soch like. Dut they y runne after another, shall haue greate able Their drynkofferynges of bloude wil not I offre, nether make mencion of their name in my mouth. ^'The LORDE himself

is my good and my porcion, thou manteynest my enheritatice. The lott is fallen vnto me in a fayre grounde, yee I haue a goodly
B |heretage. I wil thanke the LORDE for 

genynge me warnynge: my reynes also haue 

a 

* These thre verses are not in the Hebrue. e Esa. 
59. c. Rom. 11. d. è Esa. 33. b. Psal. 23.a. Matt. 
19. c. 1 Ioh. i. b. © Eze. 18. a. 4 Tren. 3. c. 

The Psalter. 

chastened me in the night season. Afore honde sawe I God allwayes before me, “for he is on my right honde, that I shulde not be moued.

/’Therfore dyd my hert reioyce, a my tunge was glad, my flesh also shall rest in hope.
For why? thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, * nether shalt thou suffre thy saynte to se corrupcion. ‘Thou hast shewed me the wayes off life: thou shalt make me full of ioye with thy countenaunce. At thy right hande there is pleasure and ioye for euermore.

The rbi. A psalme of Dauid. 

EARE y right (O LORDE)* cosidre 

my aie: herken vnto my prayer, that goeth not out of a fayned mouth. Let my sentence come forth fro thy presence, and loke vpon the thinge that is equall. ‘Thou hast proued q visited myne herte in the night season: thou hast tried me in the fyre, q hast founde no wickednes in me: for I vtterly pur- posed, that my mouth shulde not offende.
Because of the wordes of thy lippes, I haue kepte me fro the workes of men, in y waye off the murthurer. Oh ordre thou my goynges in thy pathes, that my fote steppes slippe not.
For vnto the I crie, heare me o God: enclyne thine eares to me, and herké vnto my wordes.
Shewe thy maruelous louinge kindnesse, thou that sauest them which put their trust in the, from soch as resist thy right honde. Kepe me as the apple of an eye, defende me vnder the shadowe of thy wynges.* From the vngodly that trouble me, fro myne enemies which compasse my soule rounde aboute.

Which manteyne their owne welthynesse with oppression, q their mouth speaketh proude thinges. ‘They lye waytinge in oure waye on euery syde, turnynge their eyes downe to the grounde. Like as a lyon that is gredy of his pray, q as it were a lyons whelpe lurckynge in his denne. Vp LORDE, dispoynte him q cast him downe: delyuer my soule with thy swerde from the vngodly. Fro the men of thy honde (o LORDE) from the men off the worlde, which haue their porcion in this life: whose belies thou fyllest with thy treasure.

They haue children at their desyre, and leaue the reste of their substauce for their babes.

^ Psal. 25. a. 
! Epbe. 6. b. 

f Act. 2. c. £ Act. 13. d. k Zac. 2. b. Matt. 23. e.

PEro. 3. c- i Pro. 17.a.

T ——À———————— MÀ —————— 

Psalme rity. 

i 

Che Psalter. Fo. ceerprdtj. 

me. For I haue kepte the wayes of the 
LORDE, q haue uot behaued myself wickedly agaynst my God. I haue an eye vnto all his lawes, t cast not out his commaundemétes fro me. Vncorrupte will I be before hi, « wil eschue myne owne wickednes. ‘Therfore shal
$ LORDE rewarde me after my rightuous dealinge, & acordinge vnto y clénesse of my hodes in his eye sight. "With the holy thou shalt be holy, q with $ innocét thou shalt be innocét. With the clene thou shalt be clene
^c with the frowarde thou shalt be frowarde. 
For thou shalt saue the poore oppressed, q brige downe the hye lokes of the proude.
“Thou lightest my cādle, o LORDE my 
God: thou makest my darcknesse to be light. 
For in the I can discofit an hoost of mē: yee in my God I cà leape ouer the wall.

‘The waye of God is a perfecte waye : the wordes of the LORDE are tried in the fyre : he is a shylde of defence, for all them that trust in him. * For who is God, but the
LORDE? ^"Or, who hath eny strength, but oure God? It is God that hath gyrded me with stregth and made my waye vncorrupte.
He hath made my fete like hartes fete, and set me vp an hye. ‘ He teacheth myne hondes to fight, and maketh myne armes to breake euen a bowe off stele. Thou hast geué me the defence of thy health, thy right hande vpholdeth me, and thy louynge correccion maketh me greate. Thou hast made rowme ynough vnder me for to go, that my fote steppes shulde not slyde. 1 will folowe vpon myne enemies, and take them: I will not turne till they be discomfited. I will smyte them, they shall not be able to stonde, but fall vnder my fete. Thou hast gyrded me with strength vnto y batell, thou hast throwé them all downe vnder me, that rose vp agaynst me. Thou hast made myne enemies to turne their backes vpon me, thou hast destroyed the y hated me. They cried, but there was none to helpe thé: ‘yee euen vnto the
LORDE, but he herde thé not. I will beate them as small as the dust before the wynde, I will cast them out as y claye in the stretes.
'Thou shalt delyuer me from the stryuinges of the people, thou shalt make me the heade of the Heithe. A people whom I haue not knowne, shall serue me.

Psalme rij. 
But as for me, I will beholde thy presence 

in rightuousnes: and when thy glory appear- eth, I shal be satisfied.

The rbíj. A psalme of Dauid when he was delyuered from the honde off Saul.

WIL loue the (o LORDE) my stregth. 

'The LORDE is my sucoure, my refuge, my Sauioure: my god, my helper i who I trust: my buckler, y horne of my health, q my proteccio. I wil prayse y LORDE q call vpon him, “so shal I be safe fro myne enemies.
The sorowes of death copassed me,’ q the brokes of vngodlynes made me afrayed. The paynes of hell eame aboute me, the snares of death toke holde vpo me. Yet in my trouble
I called vpo the LORDE, q cóplayned vnto my God. So he herde my voyce out off his holy téple, q my cóplaynte came before hi, yee eue in to his eares. “Thé the earth trembled q quaked, the very foüdacios of the hilles shoke « were remoued, because he was wrothe. There wéte a smoke out of his nos- trels, id a cosumynge fyre out of his mouth, so y coales were kyndled at it. He bowed the heaues q came downe, q it was darcke vnder his fete. He rode vpó the Cherubins q dyd fle: he came flyenge with tie wynges of the wynde. He made darcknesse his pauylion rounde aboute hi, with darcke water q thicke cloudes to couer him. At the brightnes off his presence the cloudes remoued, with hale stones q coales of fyre. The LORDE also thondred out of ¥ heaué, q the heyth gaue his thondre with hale stones q coales of fyre. He sent out his arowes q scatred the, he cast sore lighteninges, q destroyed the. The springes of waters were sene, q the foundacios of the roude worlde were discouered at thy chiding (o LORDE) at the blastinge q breth of thy displeasure. He sent downe fro the heyth to fetch me, x toke me out of greate waters. He delyuered me fro my stronge enemies, and fro my foes which were to mightie for me. They preuented me in the tyme of my trouble, but $ LORDE was my defence. He brought me forth also in to lyberte: q delyuered me, because he had a fauoure vnto me. The LORDE shall rewarde me after my rightuous dealynge, q acordinge to the clénesse of my hodes shal he recópense

€ Deu. 4. f. ^ Aba,3. c. *! Psal. 143. a. * Pro. 1. c. 

* 2 Re. 22. a. > Psal. 114. a. * Matt. 27. f. 
4 2 Re. 22. d. * Pro, 6. b. f Psal. 18. b. 113. c. 

a 

ffo. ceeerebitj. 

As soone as they heare of me, they shall obeye me, but the straunge childré dyssemble with me. The straunge children are waxe olde, and go haltinge out of their pathes.
The LORDE lyueth: Ad blessed be my helper, praysed be the God of my health. Euë ý
God which seyth that I be auenged, and sub- dueth the people vnto me. It is he that delyuereth me fro my cruell enemies: thou shalt lift me vp from them that ryse agaynst me, thou shalt ryd me from the wicked man.

“For this cause I wil geue thankes vnto y 
(o LORDE) amonge the Gentiles, and synge prayses vnto thy name. ‘Greate prosperite geueth he vnto his kynge, and sheweth louinge kyndnesse vnto Dauid his anoynted, yee q vnto his sede for euermore.

The bij. A psalme of Dauid. 
HE very heaués declare the glory off 
God," ad the very firmamét sheweth his hadye worke. One daye telleth another, and one night certifieth another. "There is nether speach ner laguage, but their voyces are herde amoge the. ‘Their soude is gone out in to all londes,? and their wordes in to the endes of the worlde.

In the hath he sett a tabernacle for y Sone, which cometh forth as a brydegrome out of his chambre, q reioyseth as a giaunte to rune his course. It goeth forth fro the one ende of the heauen, aud runneth aboute vnto the same ende agayne, q there maye no ma hyde himself fro the heate therof. The lawe of the
LORDE is a perfecte lawe, it quickeneth the soule. ‘The testimony of y LORDE is true, a geueth wisdome euen vnto babes. The statutes of the LORDE are right, q reioyse the herte: y comaundemet of y LORDE is pure, and geueth light vnto the eyes.

The feare of the LORDE is cleane, q en- dureth for euer: the iudgrhentes of the
LORDE are true and rightuous alltogether. 
More pleasunt are they then golde, “yee then moch fyne golde: sweter then hony q the hony combe. These thy seruaunt kepeth,* œ for kepinge of them there is greate rewarde.
Who ean tell, how oft he offendeth? Oh clese thou me fro my secrete fantes. Kepe thy seruaute also from presumptuous synnes, lest they get the dominion ouer me: so shal I

? Ro. 15. a. 
* Psal. 17. c. 

4 Ro. 10, c. 
Matt. 11. c. 

^9 Re, 99. g. 
Deu. 4, a. 

* Ro. 1. c. 
Psal. 118. r. 

The Psalter. 

be vndefyled q innocét fro the greate offence. 
Yee the wordes of my mouth q the meditacio of my herte shalbe acceptable vnto the, o
LORDE, my helper and my redemer. 

The riy. A psalme of Dauid. 

Psalme rbífj. 

£ LORDE heare the in the tyme offa 

trouble, the name of the God of Iacob defende the. Sende the helpe fro the Sanc- tuary, q strength y out of Sion. Remembre all thy offerynges, and accepte thy brent sacri- fice. Sela. Graunte the thy hertes desyre, t fulfill all thy mynde. We will reioyse in thy health, q triuphe in y name of the LORDE oure God: the LORDE perfourme all thy peticids. Now knowe I, that the LORDE helpeth his anoynted, and will heare him fro his holy heauen: inightie is the helpe of his right hode. Some put their trust in charettes, q some in horses: but we wil remébre ¥ name of the LORDEoure God. They are brought downe and fallen, but we.are rysen and stonde vp right. Saue (LORDE) q helpe vs (o kynge) when we call vpon the.

The ry. A psalme of Dauid. 

| ee how ioyfull is the kynge in thy strength? O how exceadinge glad is he

of thy sauynge health? ‘Thou hast geuen him his hertes desyre, q hast not put him fro the request of his lippes. Sela. For thou hast preucted him with liberall blessinges, a set a crowne of golde vpon his heade. “He asked life of the, q thou gauest him a longe life, euc for euer q euer. His honoure is greate in thy sauynge health, glory and greate worshipe shalt thou laye vpon him. For thou shalt geue him euerlastige felicite, q make him glad with the ioye of thy cotitenatice. And why? be- cause the kinge putteth his trust in the
LORDE, « in the mercy of the most hiest he shal not myscary. Let all thine enemies fele thy honde, let thy right honde fynde out all thé y hate the. ‘Thou shalt make thé like afyre ouen in tyme of thy wrath: the LORDE shal destroye thé in his displeasure, q the fyre shall consume them. Their frute shalt thou rote out of the earth, q their sede fro amdge the childré of men. For they intéded mys- chefe agaynst the, q ymagined soch deuyces, as they were not able to perfourme. Ther- f Pro. 8. a.

£ Psal. 118, a. ^ 2 Re. 12. f. 

a 

3 

Psalme rríij. 

fore shalt thou put thé to flight, ¢ with thy stringes thou shalt make ready thine arowes agaynst the faces off them. Be thou exalted
(LORDE) in thine owne strength, so wil we synge and prayse thy power.

The rri. A psalme of Dauid. 

Y God, my God: why hast thou for- saken me?" y wordes of my coplaynte are farre fro my health. O my God, I crie in the daye tyme, but thou hearest not: and in the night season also I take no rest. Yet dwellest thou in the Sanctuary, o thou worshipe of Israel. Oure fathers hoped in the, they trusted in the, 4d thou dyddest delyuer them.
They called vpon the, and were helped: they put their trust in the, and were not cofounded.
But as for me, I am a worme and no man: a very scorne of mé and the outcast of the people. Allthey y se me, laugh me to scorne:
‘they shute out their lippes, and shake their heades. He trusted in God,’ let him delyuer him: let him helpe hi, yf he wil haue him.
But thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wobe:* thou wast my hope, when I| hanged yet vpon my mothers brestes. I haue bene left vnto the euer seuce I was borne, thou art my God, eué fro my mothers wombe.
O go not fro me the, for trouble is harde at honde, and here is none to helpe me. Greate bulles are come aboute me, fatt oxen close me in on euery syde. They gape vpon me with their mouthes, as it were a rampinge and roaringe lyon.

‘I am poured out like water, all my bones are out of ioynt: my hert in the myddest off my body is euen like meltinge waxe. My strength is dried vp like a potsherde, my tunge cleueth to my goomes, and thou hast brought me in tothe dust of death. For dogges are come aboute me, the coücell of y wicked hath layed sege agaynst me. ‘They pearsed my hondes and my fete, I might haue tolde all my bones: as for them, they stode staringe and lokinge vpon me. ‘They haue parted my garmentes amonge them, ad cast lottes vpor my vesture.

«| But be not thou farre fro me, o LORDE: thou art my sucoure, haist the to helpe me.
Delyuer my soule from the swearde, my dear- 

3 

a Matt. 27. e. Mar. 15.d. 
1 Psal. 70.a. * Iosue 7. a. 
Ioh. 19. c. € Psal. 34. b. 

è Psal. 108.d. ° Matt.27.c 
2 Re. 14. b. f Mat. 27. d 
^ Heh. 2. c. i Psal. 9. b. 

The Psalter. 

linge from the power of thedogge. Saue me from the lyonsmouth, and heare me fro amonge the hornes off the vnicornes.? So will I declare thy name vnto my brethren,’ in the myddest off the congregacion wil I prayse the. O prayse the LORDE ye that feare him: Mag- nifie him all ye sede of Iacob, « let all ¥ sede of Israel feare hi. ‘For he hath not despysed ner abhorred the myserable estate of the poore: he hath not hyd his face fro me, but whé I called vnto him, he herde me. I wil prayse the in the greate congregacion, and perfourme my vowes in the sight off all thé that feare the.
The poore shal eate ad be satisfied: ‘they y seke after y LORDE shal prayse him: youre herte shal lyue for euer.

* All the endes of the worlde shal remembre them selues, q be turned vnto the LORDE: and all the generacions of the Heithen shal worshipe before him. For the kyngdome is the LORDES, and he shal be the gouernoure of y Heithen. All soch as be fat vpo earth, iem also and worshipe: All they that lye in the dust, and lyue so hardly, shall fall downe before him. ‘The sede shall serue him, and preach of the LORDE for euer. They shal come, q declare his rightuousnes: vnto a people that shal be borne,’ who the LORDE hath made.

The rrij. A psalme of Dauid. 

HE LORDE is my shepherde,” I can 
T wante nothinge. He fedeth me in a grene pasture, ād ledeth mẹ to a fresh water.
He quickeneth my soule, ¢ bringeth me forth in the waye of rightuousnes for his names sake.
”Though I shulde walke now in the valley of the shadowe of death, yet I feare no euell, for thou art with me: thy staffe q thy shepehoke coforte me. Thou preparest a table before me agaynst mine enemies: thou anoyntest my heade with oyle, q fyllest my cuppe full. Oh let thy louynge kyndnes ¢ mercy folowe me all the dayes off my life, that I maye dwell in the house off the LORDE for euer.

The rrij. A psalme of Dauid. 
HE earth is the LORDES,’ q all that therin is: the copase of the worlde, ad all y dwelltherin. For he hath fouded it vpo

k Psal. 131.b. — !Psal.101.c. "Ioh,10.a. 1 Pe. 2.c. 
" Pro. 10. b. ° Deu. 10. c. Tere. 27. a. 1 Cor. 10. c. 
Iob 38. a. 

Fo. ceeereip. 

a 

| fo. d. 

the sees, q buylded it vpon the floudes. Who shal go vp in to the hill off the LORDE?
Or, who shal remayne in his holy place? Eug he y hath innocét hodes q a clene herte: which lifteth not vp his mynde vnto vanite, q sweareth not to disceaue.* He shal receaue the blessinge

The jriij. A psalme of Dauid. 

NTO the (o LORDE) I lift vp my 

soule. My God, I trust in ¥: Oh let me not be confounded,’ lest myne enemies triaphe ouer me. For all they y hope in M shal not be ashamed: but soch as be scornefull despysers with out a cause, they shall be put to cofucio. Shewe me thy wayes (o LORDE) q teach me thy pathes. Lede me in thy trueth and lerne me, for thou art the God off my health, and in the is my hope all the daye longe.

Call to remembraunce, O LORDE, thy tender mercyes q thy louinge kyndnesses, which haue bene euer of.olde. Oh remébre not y synnes q offences of my youth, but ardana vnto thy mercy thynke vpon me (O
LORDE) for thy goodnesse. O how frédly 
X rightuous is the LORDE, therfore wil he teach synners in the waye. He ledeth the symple a right, and soch as be meke thé lerneth he his wayes. All the wayes of the
LORDE are very mercy q faithfulnesse, vnto soch as kepe his testament and couenaunt.
For thy ndmes sake O LORDE, be mercifull vnto my synne, for it is greate. What so euer he be that feareth the LORDE, he shal shewe him the waye that he hath chosen.

His soule shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall possesse the londe. The secrete of the
LORDE is amonge them that feare him, and he sheweth them his couenaunt.^ Myne eyes

a Exo. 20, b. ^ Rom. 9. d. Esa. 28. c. Psal. 30. a. 

© Eaa. 43. d. 4 Tere, 31. f. 

Cbr Psalter. 

Psalme rrííij. are euer lokynge vnto the LORDE, for he shal plucke mv fete out of Y nett. Turne the vnto me and haue mercy vpon me, for I am desolate and in misery. ‘The sorowes of my herte are greate, O brynge me out of my troubles.

Loke vpon my aduersite and misery, and forgeue me all my synnes. Considre how myne enemies are many, and beare a malicious hate agaynst me. O kepe my soule, and delyuer me: let me not be confounded, for I haue put my trust in the. Let innocency and rightuous dealinge wayte vpon me, for my hope is in the. Delyuer Israel (O God) out of all his trouble.

The ryb. A psalme of Dauid. 
B thou my iudge (O LORDE) for Ija walke innocently: my trust is in the
LORDE, therfore shall I not fall. 

“Examen me O LORDE, and proue me: trie out my reynes and my hert. For thy louynge kyndnesse is before myne eyes, and I walke in thy trueth. I syt not amoge vayne personnes, and haue no fellishipe with the disceatfull. I hate the congregacion of the wicked, and I will not syt amonge the vngodly.

fI waszshe my hondes with innocency O|33 
LORDE, and so go I to thine aulter. ‘That 
I maye shewe the voyce of thy prayse, and tell of all thy wonderous workes. LORDE,
I loue the habitacion of thy house, and y place where thy honoure dwelleth. O destroye not my soule with the synners, ner my life with the bloudthurstie. In whose hondes is wickednesse, and their right honde is full of giftes. £ But as for me I will walke inno- cently: ^O delyuer me, and be mercifull vnto me. My fote stondeth right: I wil prayse the (O LORDE) in the congregacions.

The prdi. A psalme of Dauid. 

HE LORDE is my light and my|a 

health: ‘whom then shulde I feare? the LORDE is the strength of my life, for whom the shulde I be afrayed? Therfore when the wicked (euen myne enemies q my foes) came vpon me, to eate vp my flesh, they stombled and fell. Though an hoost of men were layed agaynst me, yet shal not my hert be afrayed: and though there rose vp

f Esa. 1. b. £ Exo. 23. a. i Psal. 111. b.

* Psal. 16. a. 58. c. 
^ Deu. 17. a. 

a 

Psalme rrir. 

warre against me, yet wil I put my trust in him. “One thinge haue I desyred of the
LORDE, which I wil requyre: namely, that 
I maye dwell’ in the house of the LORDE all the dayes of my life, to beholde the fayre beutie of the LORDE, and to vyset his temple.

For in the tyme of trouble he hath hyd me in his tabernacle, * yee in the secrete place of his dwellinge hath he kepte and set me vp vpon a rocke of stone. And now hath he lift vp my heade aboue myne enemies, that cdpassed me rounde aboute. Therfore wil I offre in his dwellinge, the oblacion of thakes- geuynge: I wil both synge q speake prayses vnto the LORDE. — Herké vnto my voyce
(O LORDE) when I crie vnto the: haue, mercy vpon me q heare me. My hert speaketh vnto the, my face seketh thee, yee,
LORDE, thy face wil I seke. O hyde not thou thy face fro me, cast not thy seruaunt of in displeasure. ‘Thou art my succoure, leaue me not, nether forsake me, O God my Sa- uioure. For my father and my mother haue forsaken me, but the LORDE hath taken me vp. Shewe me thy waye O LORDE, and lede me in the right path, because of myne enemies. Delyuer me not in to the wylles of myne aduersaries, for there are false wytnesses rysen vp against me, and they ymagyn mys- chefe. Neuerthelesse, I beleue verely to se the goodnesse of the LORDE in the londe of the lyuynge. ?O tary thou y LORDES leysure, be stronge, let thine hert be of good comforte, and wayte thou still for the LORDE.

The rrbtj. A psalme of Dauid. 

NTO the wil I crie, o my stronge de- 

fence: thinke no scorne of me, lest (yf 

thou make the as though thou herdest uot) I 

become like them, that go downe in to y pytte. 

Heare the voyce of my humble peticion, when 

I crie vnto the, and holde vp my hondes towarde thy holy temple.

O plucke me not awaye amonge the vngodly and wicked doers, which speake frendly to their neghboure, but ymagin myschefe in their hertes. Rewarde them acordinge to their dedes and wickednesse of their owne inuen- cions. Recompense them after ¥ workes of their hodes, paye them that they haue de- t 2 Re.7.c. € 1 Re. 21.a. 2 Re. 33. 6.

e Jere. 9. a. f Deut. 8. d. € Deut. 
^ Exo. 7.8, Exo. 9. e. Exo. 14. f. Matth. 8. c. 

a Luce 10. d. 
4 Psal, 30. d. 
392, a. 

The Psalter. 

serued. For they regarde not the workes of the LORDE, ner the operacion of his hades: therfore shal he breake them downe, and not buylde them vp. Praysed be $ LORDE, for he hath herde the voyce of my humble peticio. "The LORDE is my stregth and my shylde: my herte hoped in him, x I am helped: therfore my hert daüseth for ioye, and I will synge prayses vnto him. The
LORDE is the strength of his people, he is the defender and Sauioure of his anoynted.

O helpe thy people, geue thy blessynge vnto thy enheritaunce: ‘fede them, and set them vp for euer.

The rrbij. A psalme of Dauid. 
SCRYBE vnto the LORDE (o ye mightie) ascribe vnto the LORDE worshipe and strength. Geue the LORDE the honoure of his name, bowe youre selues to the holy magesty of the LORDE. “It is the LORDE that commaundeth the waters :
It is the glorious God that maketh y thonder: it is the LORDE y ruleth the see. The voyce of the LORDE is mightie in operacion, the voyce of the LORDE is a glorious voyce.
‘The voyce of the LORDE breaketh the 
Cedre trees: yee the LORDE breaketh the 
Ceders of Libanus. He maketh them to skippe like a calfe: ^Libanus and Sirion like ayonge vnycorne. "The voyce of the LORDE deuideth the flames of fyre: the voyce of the
LORDE shaketh the wildernesse, yee the 
LORDE shaketh the wildernesse of Cades. 
The voyce of the LORDE moueth y hyndes q discouereth the thicke buszshes: in his temple shal euery man speake of his honoure. The LORDE stilleth the water floude, & ý LORDE remayneth a kynge for euer. The LORDE shall geue power vnto his people, the LORDE shal geue his people the blessynge of peace.

The yrrir. A psalme of Dauid. 

T WIL magnifie ¥ (O LORDE) for thou 

hast set me vp, a not suffred my foes to triūphe ouer me. O LORDE my God, I cried vnto the, and thou hast healed me.
"Thou LORDE hast brought my soule out of hell: thou hast kepte my life, where as they go downe to the pytte. Synge prayses

k Deut. 3. b. ! Num. 16. c. m 1 Reg. 2. b. Psal. 85. b.

Eze. 17. d. 

So. Di. 

5 

fo. dij. 

vnto the LORDE (o ye sayntes of his) geue thankes vnto him for a remembraunce of his holynesse. * For his wrath endureth but the twincklinge of an eye, and his pleasure is in life : heuynesse maye well endure for a night, but ioye commeth in the mornynge.

As for me, whé I was in prosperite, I sayde: 
Tush, I shal neuer fall more. (And why? thou LORDE of thy goodnesse haddest made my hill so stronge.) But as soone as thou turnedest thy face fro me, I was brought in feare. "The cried I vnto ¥ (O LORDE) yee vnto $ LORDE made I my prayer. What profit is there in my bloude, ^ yf I go downe to corrupcion? Maye the dust geue thankes vnto 3? Or shal it declare thy faithfulnesse?
Heare (O LORDE) and haue mercy vpon me: LORDE be thou my helper. And so thou hast turned my heuynesse in to ioye: thou hast put of my sack cloth, œ gyrded me with gladnesse. ‘That my honoure might synge prayses vnto the with out ceassynge: O
LORDE my God, I wil geue thankes vnto the for euer.

The rry. A psalme of Dauid. 

N the, O LORDE, is my trust: let me neuer be put to cofucion, but delyuer me in thy rightuousnesse. Bowe downe thine eare to me, make haist to delyuer me: be thou my stronge rocke and a house of defence, that thou mayest saue me. For thou art my stronge holde q my castell: O be thou my gyde, q lede me for thy names sake. Drawe me out of the nett y they haue layed priuely for me," for thou art my stregth.

In to thy hondes I commende my sprete: thou hast delyuered me O LORDE thou God of treuth. I hate them that holde of vanities, and my trust is in the LORDE. I will be glad and reioyse in thy mercy: for thou hast considred my trouble, thou hast knowne my soule in aduersite. Thou hast not delyuered me ouer in to the hódes of the enemie, but hast set my fete in a large rowme. Haue mercy vpon me, O LORDE, for I am in trouble, myne eye is consumed for very heuynesse, yee my soule and my body. My

|life is waxen olde with heuynesse, and my 

yeares with mournynge. My strégth fayleth me because of my aduersite, and my bones

* Esa.54.b. 2 Cor.4.c. * Psal.6.c. ¢ Psal. 24.a.70.a. 
41 Re. 19, a. and 23, b. Luc. 23. e. 

——— MÀ À————— 

The Psalter. 

are corrupte. I am become a very reprofe amonge all myne enemies, my neghbours q they of myne owne acquauntaunce are afrayed of me: they y se me in the strete, cóveye them selues fro me. I am clene forgotten and out of mynde, as a deed man: I am be- come like a broken vessell.

For I haue herde the blasphemy of the multitude: euery man abhorreth me: they haue gathered a councel together agaynst me, and are purposed to take a waye my life.

But my hope is in y O LORDE, a I saye: thou art my God. My tyme is in thy honde: delyuer me from the honde of myne enemies, q from them y persecute me. Shewe thy seruaunt the light of thy countenaunce, helpe me for thy mercies sake. Let me not be confounded (o LORDE) for I call vpon the: let the vngodly rather be put to confucion, and brought vnto the hell. Let the lyenge lippes be put to sylence, which cruelly, disz- danedly q despitefully speake agaynst the rightuous. O how greate and manifolde is thy good, which thou haist hyd for them that feare y? O what thinges bringest thou to passe for them, that put their trust in the, euen before the sonnes of men?

Thou hydest them priuely by thine owne presence from the proude men, thou kepest them secretly in thy tabernacle, from the strife of tonges. ‘Thankes be to the LORDE, for he hath shewed me maruelous greate kyndnesse in a stronge cite. For when the sodane feare came vpon me, I sayde: I am cast out of thy sight. Neuertheles, thou herdest myne humble prayer, when I cried vnto the. O loue the LORDE (all ye his sayntes) for the LORDE preserueth the faith- full, and plenteously rewardeth he the proude doer. ‘Be stroge therfore ¢ take a good herte vnto you, all ye that put youre trust in the
LORDE. 

The rrri. A psalme of Dauid. 

LESSED are they, whose vnrightuous- 
B nesse is forgeuen, ‘and whose synnes are couered. Blessed is the man, vnto whom the
LORDE imputeth no synne, in whose sprete there is no gyle. For whyle I helde my tonge, my bones consumed awaye thorow my daylie complaynynges. And because thy

* Paal. 26. c. f Rom. 4. a. 

Psalme rrr. 

€ 

Dn D 

a 

Psalme rri. The Psalter. 

hande was so heuy vpon me both daye and night, my moysture was like the drouth in
Sommer. Sela. 

Therfore I confessed my synne vnto the, and hyd not myne vnrightuousnesse. “I saide:
I will knowlege myne offence, and accuse my self vnto the LORDE, and so thou forgauest me the wickednesse of my synne.

Sela. ‘For this shal euery saynte make his prayer vnto the in due season, therfore shall not the greate water floudes come nye him. Thou art my defence in the trouble that is come aboute me, O copasse thou me aboute also with the ioye of delyueraunce.

Sela. ‘I wil enforme the, and shewe the the waye wherin thou shalt go: I wil fasten myne eyes vpon the. “Be not ye now like horses q mooles, which haue no vnderstond- inge. Whose mouthes thou must holde with bytt « brydle, yf they wil not obeie the.

Greate plages shall $ vngodly haue, but who so putteth his trust in the LORDE, mercy shall compasse him on euery syde. Be glad (o ye rightuous) and reioyse in the
LORDE, beioyfull all ye that are true of herte. 

So. di. to generacion. "Blessed are the people that holde the LORDE for their God, q blessed are the folke whom he hath chosen to be his heretage. "'The LORDE loketh downe from heauen, q beholdeth all the children of men: from his stronge seate he considreth all them y dwell in the worlde. He only hath fashioned all the hertes of them, q knoweth all their workes. A kynge is not helped by his owne greate hoost, nether is a giaunte saued thorow the might of his owne stregth.

? A horse is but a vayne thynge to saue a man, it is not the power of his stregth that can delyuer him. “Beholde, the eye of the
LORDE loketh vnto them that feare him, a put their trust in his mercy. ‘That he maye delyuer their soules from death, and to fede them in the deare tyme. Let oure soule paciently abyde the LORDE, for he is oure helpe and shilde. So shal oure herte reioyse in him, because we haue hoped in his holy name.
Let thy mercifull kyndnesse (o LORDE) be vpon vs, like as we put oure trust in the.

The rrj. A psalme of Dauid. 

WIL allwaye geue thankes vnto the 

LORDE, his prayse shal euer be in my mouth. My soule shall make hir boast in the LORDE: the poore oppressed shal heare therof, and be glad. O prayse y LORDE with me, and let vs magnifie his name to- gether. ‘I sought the LORDE, and he herde me, yee he delyuered me out of all my feare. They that haue an eye vnto him, shalbe lightened, q their faces shall not be ashamed. This poore man cried vnto the
LORDE, and he herde him, yee and dely- uered him out of all his troubles. ‘The angell of the LORDE pitcheth his tente rounde aboute them that feare him, and delyuereth them.

O taist and se how frendly the LORDE|S is, ‘blessed is the man y trusteth in him. O feare the LORDE, ye y be his sayntes: “for they that feare him, lacke nothinge. The rich shal want and suffre hunger, but they which seke the LORDE, shal wat no maner of thinge, that is good. Come hither (o ye children) herken vnto me, I wil teach you the feare of the LORDE. . *Who so listeth to a Psal. 101. c. ° Pro. 16. a. 21. a. Pp Pro. 21. d.

4 Eccli. 15. c. " 1 Re.21.d. — * 4 Re. 6. 19. Iosue 5. d. t Psal. 2. b. — " Paal. 127.2. Matt. 6. c. ? 1| Pet. 3, b.

The rrj. A psalme of Dauid. 
EIOYSE in y LORDE (o ye rightuous) 
*for it becommeth well the iust to be thankfull. Prayse the LORDE with harpe:
"synge psalmes vnto him with the lute and instrument of ten strynges. Singe him a new songe, yee synge lustely vnto him q with a good corage. For the worde of y LORDE is true, and all his workes are faithfull. He loueth mercy q iudgment, y earth is full of the goodnesse of the LORDE. ‘By the worde of the LORDE were the heauens made, q all the hoostes of them by $ breth of his mouth. He gathereth $ waters together as it were in a bottell, “a laieth vp the depe in secrete. Let all the earth feare the LORDE, and let all them that dwell im the worlde, stode inawe of him. For loke what he sayeth, it is done: ‘and loke what he comaüudeth, it stondeth fast. * The LORDE bryngeth the councell of the Heithen to naught, and turneth the deuyces of the people.
‘But the coucell of the LORDE endureth, and the thoughtes of his hert from generacion

a Job 13. b. Luce 15. c. 5 Pro. 18. b. © Pro. 2,3. 
4 Tob. 6. d. Pro. 26. a. * Paal. 96. b. 7 Colo. 3. b. 
Ephe. 5. b. £ Gen, 1.a. Coloa. 1. b. ^ [ob 38. a. i Paal.148.a. * Esa.8.c. ^! Esa. 46. b. ™ Psal. 143. c.

(Fo. dit. lyue, q wolde fayne se good dayes. Let him refrayne his tonge from euell, and his lippes that they speake no gyle. Let him eschue euell, and do good: Let him seke peace a ensue it. For the eyes of the LORDE are ouer the rightuous, and his eares are open vnto their prayers. But the face of the LORDE beholdeth them that do euel, to destroye the remembraunce of them out of the earth.

When the rightuous crie, the LORDE heareth them, and delyuereth thé out of all their troubles. ‘The LORDE is nye vnto them y are contrite in hert, ¢ wil helpe soch as be of an hüble sprete. “Greate are troubles of the rightuous, but the LORD delyuereth them out of all. He kepeth all their bones, so y not one of them is broken.
Dut miszfortune shal slaye the vngodly, and they that hate y rightuous shal be giltie. The
LORDE delyuereth the soules of his ser- uaütes, and all they that put their trust in him, shal not offende.

The rrriiij. A psalme of Dauid. 

TRYUE thou vith them (o LORDE) 

that stryue with me, fight thou agayust them that fight agaynst me. Laye honde vpon the shylde and speare, and stonde vp to helpe me. Drawe out thy swearde, and stoppe the waye agaynst them that persecute me, saye vnto my soule: I am thy helpe. Let them be cofounded and put to shame, that seke after my soule: let thé be turned back and brought to confucion, that ymagin mys- chefe for me. ? Let thé be as y dust before the wynde, and the angell of the LORDE scaterynge thé. Let their waye be darcke and slippery, and the angell of the LORDE to persecute them. For they haue pryuely laied their nett to destroye me without a cause, yee and made a pitte for my soule, which I neuer deserued. Let a sodane de- strucció come vpon him vnawarres, ‘and y nett that he hath layed priuely, catch him

* Pro. 24. c. 2 Tim. 3. b. è Psal. 82. b. 
1 Tes. 5. a. Eccli. 27. a. 

* Matt. 24. a. 

Cbr Psalter. 

False witnesses are rysen vp, q laye to my charge thinges that I knowe not. “They rewarde me euell for good, to the greate dis- comforth of my soule. Neuertheles, when they were sick, I put on a sack cloth: I hum- bled my soule with fastinge, and my prayer turned in to myne owne bosome. I behaued my self as though it had bene my frende or my brother, I wete heuely, as one y mourneth for his mother. *But in my aduersite they reloyse, and gather them together: yee y very lame come together agaynst me vnawarres, makynge mowes at me, q ceasse not.

With y gredy q scornefull ypocrites, they |qr 

gnaszshed vpon me with their teth. LORDE, whan wilt thou loke vpo this? O restore my soule from ý wicked rumoure of thé, my dearlinge from the lyons. ‘So wil I geue y thankes in the greate congregacion, q prayse the amonge moch people. O let thé not triaphe ouer me, that are myne enemies for naught: O let them not wyncke with their eyes, that hate me without a cause. *And why? their comonynge is not for peace, but they ymagin false wordes agaynst y outcastes of the londe. They gape vpon me with their mouthes, sayenge: there there: we se it with oure eyes. This thou seist o LORDE: holde not thy tonge thé: go not farre fro me, o LORDE. Awake (LORDE) and stonde vp: auenge thou my cause, my God, and my
LORDE. acordinge to thy rightuousnesse, ý they tri- uphe not ouer me. O let thé not saye in their hertes: there there, so wolde we haue it.
O let them not saye : we haue ouercome him. 

Let them be put to confucion and shame, that reioyse at my trouble : let the be clothed with rebuke and dishonoure, that boost thé selues agaynst me. Let them also be glad and reioyse, that fauoure my rightuous deal- inge: yee let them saye allwaye: blessed be y LORDE, which hath plegsure in the pros- perite of his seruaunt. And as for my tonge, it shall be talkynge of thy rightuousnes and of thy prayse, all the daye longe.

The rrr. A psalme of Dauid. 

Y hert sheweth me the wickednesse of]@ 

the vngodly, that there is no feare of 
God before his eyes. For he dyssembleth 

e Pro. 17. à. Iob 31. c. J Psal. 21.c. 

£ Joh. 15. c. 

4 Pssl. 108. a. 

Psalme rrritij. 

| 

Iudge me (o LORDE my God)| Ð 

psalme rrrot. 

a 

B 

before his face, so longe till his abhominable synne be founde out. The wordes of his month are vnrightuousnesse and disceate," he wil not be lerned to do good.

He ymagineth myschefe vpon his bedde, he will come in no good waye, ner refuse the thinge that is euell. “Thy mercy (O LORDE) reacheth vnto the heauen, and thy faithful- nesse vnto the clondes. Thy rightuousnesse stondeth like the stronge mountaynes, q thy iudgment likethe greate depe. Thou LORDE preseruest both me beestes. “How precious is thy mercy (O God) that the children of men maye put their trust vnder y shadowe of thy wynges? They shalbe satisfied with the pleteousnesse of thy honse, and thou shalt geue them drynke of the ryuer of thy plea- sures. “For by the is y well of life, q in thy light, shall we se light. O sprede forth thy louynge kyndnesse vnto them that knowe the, q thy rightuousnes vnto thé that are true of hert. O let not the fote of pryde ouertake me, O let not the hande of y vngodly cast me downe. As for wicked doers, they fall, they are cast downe, q are not able to stode.

The yrrbi. A psalme of Dauid. 
RETT not thy self at the vngodly, be not thou envious agaynst the euell doers.
“For they shall soone be cut downe like y grasse, q be wythered euen as y grene herbe.
Put thou thy trust in y LORDE; q be doinge good: so shalt thou dwell i the londe, q verely it shal fede the. Delyte thou in the
LORDE, c he shal geue the thy hertes desyre. 
€ Comitte thy waye vnto y LORDE, set thy hope in him, and he shal brynge it to passe.
Yee he shall make thy rightuousnesse as cleare as the light, a thy iust dealinge as the noone daye. Holde the still in y LORDE, and abyde paciétly vpon him: but greue not thy self at one that hath prosperite, and lyueth in abhominacion. Leane of from wrath, let go displeasure, let not thy gelousy moue the also to do euell. For wicked doers shal be roted out, but they that paciétly abyde the LORDE, shal enheret the londe.
Suffre yet a litle whyle, ¢ ý vngodly shal be clene gone: thon shalt loke after his place, q he shal be awaye. “But the meke spreted

? Eccli, 21. b. ? Matt. 5. g. * Esa. 30. d. e4 Re. 19.6. fDeu.4.2.5.d. 5 Pro. 16. a. i Psal. 2. a. k Pro. 15. b. Eccli. 29, d.

4 Tere. 2. b. 
^ Matt. 5.a. 
1 Tim. 6. b. 

Che Psalter. 

shal possesse the earth, q haue pleasure in moch rest. ‘The vngodly layeth wayte for the iust, ¢ gnaszsheth vpon him with his tethe.

But y LORDE langheth him to scorne; for he seith ý his daye is cominge. The vngodly drawe out the swerde q bende their bowe, to cast downe y symple q poore, and to slaye soch as go y right waye. Neuertheles, their swerde shal go thorow their owne hert, and their bowe shalbe broke. ^A small thinge ý the rightuous hath, is better then greate riches of the vngodly. For the armes of y vngodly shalbe broken, but the LORDE vpholdeth the rightuous. The LORDE knoweth the dayes of the godly, q their enheritauce shal endure foreuer. They shal not be cofounded in ¥ perlous tyme, q in ý dayes of derth they shall haue ynough. As for y vngodly, they shall perishe: q whe y enemies of y LORDE are in their flonres, they shal cosume, yee euen as the smoke shal they cOsume awaye.
The vngodly * boroweth and paieth not agayne, but the rightuous is mercifull q liberall. Soch as be blessed of him, shal possesse the londe: q they whom he curseth, shalbe roted ont.
The LORDE ordreth a good mans goinge, q hath pleasure in his waye. Though he fall, he shal not be hurte, for the LORDE vp- holdeth him with his hade. ^I haue bene yonge, q now am olde: yet sawe I neuer the rightuous forsake, ner his sede to seke their bred. The rightuous is euer mercifull, q lédeth gétly, therfore shal his sede be blessed.
Fle fro euell, « do y thinge that is good, so shalt thou dwell for euer.

For ý LORDE loueth ¥ thinge y is right, he forsaketh not his sayntes, but they shal be preserued for euermore: as for the sede of the vngodly, it shalbe roted out. Yee the rightuous shal possesse y lode, q dwell therin for euer. "'The mouth of the rightuous is exercised in wyszdome, ¢ his toge talketh of iudgment. 'The lawe of his God is in his hert, therfore shal not his fotesteppes slyde.
The vngodly seyth the rightuous, q goeth aboute to slaye him. But the LORDE wil not leaue him in his hades, ner codemne him when he is iudged. Hope thou in the LORDE, q kepe his waye: « he shal so promote the, that thou shalt haue the lode by enheritaiice,

* Some reade thus: The vogodly lédeth vpon vsury and not for naught. 'Pro, 24.c. Psal, 33. c. 144. b.
Psal.111.a. Pro. 11. b. ™ Pro, 10. d. 

67 

jo. ub. 

€ 

B 

E 

Fo. dbi. 

€ 

q se, when the vngodly shall perishe. I my self haue sene the vngodly in greate power, q florishinge like a grene baye tre: but when I wente by, lo, he was gone: I sought him, but he coude no where be founde.

Kepe innocency, and take hede vnto the thinge that is right, for that shall brynge a man peace at the last. As for the trasgressours, they shal perishe together, and the vngodly shal be roted out at y last. ‘The helpe of the rightuous commeth of the LORDE, he is their strength in the tyme of trouble. "The
LORDE shal stóde by them, and saue them: 

he shal delyner them from the vngodly, and | _ 

helpe thé, because they put their trust in him. 

The rrrbij. A psalme of Dauid. 

UT ine not to rebuke (Oh LORDE) in thine anger:^ Oh chasté me not in thy heuy displeasure. For thy arowes stick fast in me, and thy honde presseth me sore.
There is no whole parte in my body, because of thy displeasure: there is no rest in my bones, by reason of my synnes. For my wickednesses are gone ouer my heade, and are

like a sore burthen, to heuy for me to beare. 

My woundes styncke q are corrupte, thorow my folishnesse. 1 am brought in to so greate trouble and misery, that I go mournynge all the daye longe. For my loynes are clene dried vp, and there is no whole parte in my body. lam feble and sore smytte, I roare for the very disquietnes of my hert.

LORDE, thou knowest all my desyre, « my gronynge is not hyd from the. My hert paunteth, my strength hath fayled me, a the light of myne eyes is gone fro me. My louers t frendes’ stonde lokynge vpon my trouble, and my kynsmen are gone a farre of."

They that sought after my life, and to do me euell, spake of lyes and ymagined disceate all the daye longe. As for me, I was like a deaf ma, and herde not: and as one that were domme, not openynge his mouth. Iam be- come as a man that heareth not, and that can make no resistaunce with his mouth.

For in the (O LORDE) is my trust, thou shalt heare me, O LORDE my God. My desyre is, y myne enemies triumphe not ouer me: for yf my fote slippe, they reioyse greatly against me. I am redy to suffre trouble, and

“Tere. 10. d, Psal, 6. a. è Tob 19, b. d Psal. 89. b. 118. l.

¢ Psal. 54. b. 
* [ob 7. a. 8. a. 

The Psalter, 

Psalme ryróáj. my heuynesse is euer in my sight. For I co- fesse my wickednesse, q my synne greueth me.

But myne enemies lyue, and are mightie: and they that hate me without a cause, are many in nombre. "They that rewarde me euell for good, speake euell of me, because I folowe the thinge that good is. Forsake me not (O LORDE my God) O go not farre fro me. Haist the to helpe me, O LORDE my succoure.

The rrrbij. A psalme of Dauid. 

SAYDE: I wil kepe my waies, that IJa 

offended not in my tonge. And so I shut my mouth, whyle the vngodly layed wayte for me. I helde my tonge, I was domme, I kepte sylence, yee eué from good wordes, but it was payne and grefe to me. My hert was hote within me, q whvle I was thus musynge, the fyre kyndled: so that I spake with my tonge.
^LORDE, let me knowe myne ende, and the nombre of my dayes: that I maye be certified what I wante. *Beholde, thou hast made my dayes a spanne longe, and my life is as it were nothinge before the. O how vayne are all men lyuynge? Sela. Yee euery man walketh as it were a shadowe, and disquieteth himself in vayne: he heapeth vp riches,” and can not tell to whom he gathereth them. And now
LORDE, wherin shall I comforte me? my hope is in the. Delyuer me from all myne offences, and make me not a scorne vnto the foolish, I kepe syléce, and open not my mouth, for thou hast done it. Turne thy plages awaye fro me, for [am cosumed thorow the feare of thy hade. When thou punyshest man for synne, thou chastenest him: so that his beutie consumeth awaye, like as it were a mothe. O how vayne are all men?

Sela. Heare my prayer o LORDE, and considre my callinge: shewe not thy self as though thou sawest not my teares. Yor I am a straunger and pilgrymme with the, ‘as all my forefathers were. Oh spare me a litle, that I maye refresh my self, before I go hence, and be nomore sene.

I 

herde my callinge. 

The rrrip. A psalme of Dauid. 
WAYTED paciently for the LORDE, which enclyned himself vnto me, and
He brought me out of 

4i Jogos QU Tox £ 1 Par. 30. c. 

Psalme rli, The Psalter. fo. nbi. 

the horrible pitte, out of the myre and claye : he set my fete vpo the rocke, and ordred my goinges. He hath put a new songe in my mouth, euen a thankesgeuynge vnto oure God.
Many men seynge this, shal feare the LORDE, q put their trust in him. “ Blessed is the man that setteth his hope in the LORDE, and turneth not vnto the proude, ¢ to soch as go aboute with lies. O LORDE my God, greate are thy wonderous workes which thou hast done: q in thy thoughtes towarde vs there maye none be lickened vnto the.

I wolde declare them, and speake of thé: but they are so many, that they can not be tolde. * Sacrifice and offeringe thou woldest not haue *but a body hast thou ordeined me: burntofferynges and sacrifice for synne thou hast not alowed. Then sayde 1: Lo, I come.
In the begynnynge of the boke it is written of me, that I shulde fulfill thy wil O my God, q that am I contét to do: “yee thy lawe is within my hert. 1 wil preach of thy right- uousnesse in the greate congregacion: Lo, I wil not refrayne my lippes, o LORDE, « that thou knowest. Ido not hyde thy rightuousnes in my hert, my talkynge is of thy treuth and sauynge health: I kepe not thy louynge mercy and faithfulnesse backe from the greate con- gregacion. "Turne not thou thy mercy fro me o LORDE, but let thy louynge kyndnesse and treuth allwaye preserue me. For innu- merable troubles are come aboute me: my syunes haue taken soch holde vpon me, that
I am not able to loke vp: yee they are ino in nombre then the hayres of my heade, and my hert hath fayled me. O LORDE, let it be}. thy pleasure to deliuer me, make haist (o|
LORDE) to helpe me. Let them be ashamed aud cofounded, “that seke after my soule, to destroie it: let them fall backwarde and be put to confucion, that wysh me euell.

Let thé soone be brought to shame, that crie ouer me: there there. But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull and glad in the: and let all soch as delyte in thy sauynge health, saye allwaye: the LORDE be praysed. As for me, ] am poore q in mysery, but the
LORDE careth for me. ‘Thou art my helper q redemer, make no longe tariege, o my God.

The rl. A psalme of Dauid. 
LESSED is he, y considreth ¥ poore: *$ |a 
' LORDE shal delyuer him in the tyme of trouble. The LORDE shal preserue him, and kepe him alyue: he shal make him to prospere vpon earth, and shal not delyuer him m to y wil of his enemies. The LORDE shal refresh him, when he lyeth sick vpon his bedd, yee thou makest his bed in all his sicknesse. I sayde: LORDE be mercifull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue synned agaynst the. Myne enemies speake euell vpo me: whan shal he dye, and his name perishe ?
Though he came in to se, yet meaned he falsede in his hert, heapinge myschefe vpon himself. All they that hate me, runne to- gether agaynst me, and ymagin euell agaynst me. ‘They haue geuen a wicked sentence vpon me: when he lyeth, he shal ryse vp nomore. ‘Yee euen myne owne familier frende, whom I trusted, which dyd eate my bred, hath lift vp his hele agayust me. But be thou mercifull vnto me (o LORDE) rayse thou me vp, and I shal rewarde them. By this I knowe thou fauourest me, that my enemie shal not triumphe ouer me. Thou hast vpholden me because of my innocency, and set me before thy face for euer. O blessed be $ LORDE God of Israel, from héce forth and for euermore. Amen, Amen.

The rli. A psalme of the childre of Corah. 
IKE asthe hert desyreth the water brokes, 
5 so longeth my soule after the, o God. My soule is athurste for God, yee eué for the lynynge
God: wha shal I come, q beholde the face of 
God? My teares are my meate daye and night, whyle it is daylie sayde vato me: where is now thy God? Now when I thinke there vpo, I poure out my hert by my self: ^for I wolde fayue go hence with the multitude, q passe ouer with them vnto the house of God, in y voyce of prayse q thankesgeuynge, amonge soch as kepe holy daye. ' Why art thou so full of heuynes (o my soule) q why art thou so vaquiete within me? O put thy trust in
God, for I wil yet geue him thankes, for the helpe of his countenauce. My God, my soule is vexed within me: therfore I remebre the londe of Iordane, « the litle hill of Hermonim.

a Iere. 17. b. 5 Heb. 10. a. * Some reade thus : but myne eares hast thou opened. * Tere. 51. f. Psal.
21. c. 4 Psal. 69.a. Iob 31. c. Pro. 17. a. © Pro. 14. c. 

f Iob. 13. b. £ Psal.79.a. — ^1 Reg.i.n. "Psal, 
42. a. * Iosue 12. a. 

Fo. bbifj. 

B| One depe calleth another with the voyce of 

thy whystles, “all thy wawes q water floudes are gone ouer me. The LORDE hath pro- mised his louynge kyndnesse daylie, therfore wil I prayse him in the night season, and make my prayer vnto y God of my life. I wil saye vnto God my stony rock: why hast thou forgotten me? why go I thus heuely, whyle the enemie oppresseth me? Whyle my bones are broken, q whyle myne enemies cast me in the tethe, daylie sayenge vnto me: where is now thy God? Why art thou so heuy (o my soule) a why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, for I wil yet thanke him for the helpe of his coun- tenaunce, aud because he is my God.
The rlij. Psalme. 

EUE sentence vpon me (o God) q de- 

fende my cause agaynst the vnholy people: Oh delyuer me from the disceatfull q wicked man. For thou (o God) art my strēgth: why hast thou shot me from the?
Why go I then so heuely, whyle the enemie oppresseth me? Oh sende out thy light q thy trueth, ý they maye lede me q brynge me vnto thy Healy hill and to thy dwellinge.

That I maye go in to the aulter of God, euen vnto the God which is my ioye ¢ pleasure, t vpon the harpe to geue thakes vnto y, o God, my God. Why art thou so heuy (o my soule)
^g why art thou so disquieted within me? 
O put thy trust in God, for I wil yet geue him thakes for ¥ helpe of his countenance, and because he is my God.

The rlij. A psalme of the childré of Corah. 

E haue herde with oure eares (o God) 
*oure fathers haue tolde vs, what thou hast done in their tyme, of olde.

How thou hast dryue out the Heithen with thy honde, q plated the in: how thou hast destroyed the nacions q cast thé out. For they “gat not the londe in possession thorow their owne swerde, nether was it their owne arme that helped them. But thy right hade, thyne arme q the light of thy countenaunce, because thou haddest a fauoure vnto them.

“Thou art $ kinge x my God, thou sendest helpe vnto lacob. 'Thorow y, wil we ouer- throwe oure enemies: q in thy name will we treade them vnder, that tyse vp agaynst vs.

|*Ione2.a. è Psal, 41.a. * Deut.6.b. 4 Deut. 9. a. 

* Psal. 97. a, 

The Psalter, 

Psalme rlij. 

For I will not trust in my bowe, it is not my swerde y shal helpe me. But it is thou that sauest vs fro oure enemies, and puttest them to confucion that hate vs. We will allwaye make oure boast of God, and prayse thy name for euer. Sela. But now thou for- sakest vs, q puttest vs to confucion, and goest not forth with oure hoostes. / Thou makest vs to turne oure backes vpon oure enemies, so that they which bate vs, spoile oure goodes.
*'Thou lettest vs be eaten vp like shepe, q scatrest vs amonge the Heithen.

Thou sellest thy people for naught, q takest no moneye for them. ‘Thou makest vs to be rebuked of oure neghbours, to be laughed to scorne and had in derision, of them that are rounde aboute vs. “Thou hast made vs a very byworde amonge the Heithen, q that the people shake their heades at vs. My cofucion is daylie before me, q the shame of my face couereth me. For the voyce of the slaunderer t blasphemer, for the enemie and auenger.
All this is come vpon vs, q yet haue we not forgotten the, ner behaued oure selues vnfaith- fully in thy couenaunt. Oure hert is not turned backe, nether oure steppes gone out of thy waye. That thou smytest vs so in the place of the serpét, q couerest vs with y shadowe of death. Yf we had forgotten the name of oure God, q holdé vp oure hondes to eny straunge God: Shulde not God fynde it out? for he knoweth the very secretes of the hert. But for thy sake we are kylled all the daie longe, *and are counted as shepe apoynted to be slayne. Vp LORDE, why slepest thou ?
Awake, and cast vs not of for euer. Wherfore hydest thou thy face? wilt thou clene forget oure misery and oppressio? For oure soule is brought lowe euen vnto the dust, and oure bely cleueth vnto the grounde. Arise o
LORDE, helpe vs, and delyuer vs for thy 

mercie sake. 

The rliiij. A psalme of the children of Corah. 
T hert is dytinge of a good matter, I speake of that, which I haue made of the kynge: My tonge is ¥ penne of a ready
,wryter. Thou art the LEAN amonge the children of mé, full of grace are thy lippes, therfore God blesseth the for euer.
Gyrde the with thy swerde vpon thy thee 

£ Esaie 53. b. ^ Psal. 78. a. 

J Psal. 59. b. 
| ! Rom. 8. e. 

Psalme rlotj. 

(o thou mightie) with worshipe and renowne. 
Good lucke haue thou with thine honoure, ryde on with the treuth, mekenesse q right- uousnes: q thy right hode shal teach j woderfull thinges. Thy arowes are sharpe, the people shalbe subdued vnto the, euen in the myddest amonge the kynges enemies.

^'Thy seate (o God) endureth for euer: the cepter of thy kyngdome is a right cepter.

Thou hast loued rightuousnesse, ¢ hated iniquite: wherfore God (which is thy God) hath anoynted the with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes. All thy garmentes are like myrre, Aloes ¢ Cassia, when thou comest out of thine ynerie palaces in thy beutifull glory. Kynges doughters go in thy goodly, araye, t vpon thy right honde stondeth the quene in a vesture of the most fyne golde.
Herken (o doughter) considre, ¢ enclyne thine eare: forget thine owne people, q thy fathers house. So shal the kynge haue pleasure in thy beutie, for he is thy LORDE, a thou shalt worshipe him. The doughters of Tyre shal be there with giftes, the riche amonge the people shal make their supplicacion before the.
The kynges doughter is all glorious within, hir elothinge is of wrought golde. She shalbe brought vnto the kynge in rayment of nedle worke, and maydens after her: soch as be next her shalbe brought vnto the. With ioye and gladnesse shal they be brought, and go in to the kynges palace. In steade of thy fathers thou hast gotten children, whom thou shalt make prynces in all londes. I wil remembre thy name from one generacio to another: therfore shal the people geue thankes vnto the, worlde without ende.

The tlb. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

N oure troubles and aduersite, we haue 
| founde, that God is oure refuge, oure strength and helpe. ‘Therfore wil we not feare, though the earth fell, and though the hilles were caried in to the myddest of the see.

“Though the waters of the see raged a were neuer so troublous, ¢ though the mountaynes shoke at the tépest of the same. Sela.

? For there is a floude, which with his ryuers reioyseth y cite of God, the holy dwellynge of the most hyest. God is in y myddest of her, therfore shall she not be remoued: for God helpeth her, ¢ y right early. The Heithen are

a Heb. 1. b. 

b Esa, 23. c. Eze.927.928. © Psal. 92. a. 

Che Psalter. 

madd, the kyngdomes make moch adoo: but whé he sheweth his voyce, $ earth melteth awaye. the God of Jacob is oure defence.

Sela. O come hither, a beholde y workes of the LORDE, what destruccids he hath brought vpo y earth. ‘He hath made warres to ceasse in all the worlde: he hath broken the bowe, he hath knapped the speare in sonder, q br&t the charettes in the fyre. Be still thé q confesse y I am God: I wil be exalted amonge the Heithë, a I wil be exalted vpon earth. The LORDE of hoostes is with vs, the God of Iacob is oure defence. Sela.

The ribi. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

CLAPPE youre hédes together (all ye people) O synge vnto God with the voyce of thükesgeuynge. For the LORDE the most hyest is to be feared, q he is the greate kynge vpo all earth. He shal subdue the people vnder vs, « the Heithe vnder oure fete. He choseth vs for an heretage, the beutie of Iacob whom he loued. Sela. God is gone vp with a mery noyse, ¢ the LORDE with the sownde of the tropet. O synge prayses, synge prayses vnto God: O synge prayses, synge prayses vnto oure kynge.
For God is kynge of all the earth, O synge prayses vnto him with vnderstondinge.
God is kinge ouer the Heithé, God sitteth in his holy seate. ‘The prynces of the people are gathered together vnto the God of Abra- ham: for God is farre farre hyer exalted, then the mightie lordes of the earth

The rloij. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

REATE is $ LORDE cç hyelie to be praysed, in y cite of oure God, euc vpo his holy hill. "The hill of Sion is like a fayre pláte, wherof all the londe reioyseth: vpon the north syde lyeth the cite of the greate kinge.
God is well knowne in hir palaces, y he is the defence of the same. For lo, kynges are gathered, and gone by together. They mar- veled, to se soch thinges: they were astonnied, q sodély cast downe. — Feare came there vpon thé, q sorowe as vpo a woman in hir trauayle.
Thou shalt breake y shippes of the see, thorow the east wynde. i se we in the cite of the LORDE of hoostes, in the cite of oure God: God vpholdeth the
1 Toh. 7. d. 

* Psal. 75. a. f 2 Par. 20. a. 

Fo. Dir. 

The LORDE of hoostes is with vs,|33 

a 

a 

ike as we haue herde, so|33 

Fo. Dy. The Psalter. Psalme . rIbiíj. 

him. Whyle he lyueth, he is counted an happie man: q so loge as he is in prosperite, mē speake good of him. But whe he foloweth his fathers generacion, he shal neuer se light eny more.

When a man is in honoure and hath no vnderstodinge, he is compared vnto the brute beastes, and becommeth like vnto them.

same for euer. Sela. We wayte for thy louynge kyndnesse (o God) in the myddest of thy temple. O God, acordinge vnto thy name, so is thy prayse vnto the worldes ende: thy right hode is full of rightuousnes.

*Oh let the moüt Sion reioyse, q y doughters of Iuda he glad because of thy iudgmétes.
Walke aboute Sion, go rounde aboute her, and tell hir towres. Marke well hir walles, set vp hir houses: that it maye be tolde them j come after. For this God is oure God for euer q euer, and he shal allwaie be oure gyde.

The plir. A psalme of Asaph. 

HE LORDE euen the mightie God|/@ hath spoke, q called the worlde from the rysinge vp of the sonne vnto the goinge downe ofthe same. Out of Sion apeareth the glorious beutie of God.* Oure God shal come, and not kepe sylence: there goeth before him a con- sumynge fyre, and a mightie tempest rounde ahoute him. He shal call the heauens from aboue, and the earth, that he maye iudge his people. Gather my sayntes together vnto me, those y set more by the couenaunt then by eny offering And the heauens shal declare his rightuousnesse, for God is iudge himself.

Sela. Heare, o my people: let me speake, let me testifie amonge you, o Israel: I am
God, euen thy God. I reproue the not be- cause of thy sacrifice, thy burntofferinges are allwaye before me. ^I wil take no bullockes out of thy house, ner gotes out of thy foldes.
For all the beestes of the felde are myne, and thousandes of catell vpon the hilles.

I knowe all the foules vpon the mountaynes, and the wilde beastes of the felde are in my sight. *Yf I be hongrie, I wil not tell the: for ¥ whole worlde is myne, and all that therin is. Thynkest thou, that I wil eate the flesh of oxen, or drynke the bloude of goates? Offre vnto God prayse and thankesgeuynge, and paye thy vowes vnto the most hyest. *And call vpo me in the tyme of trouble, so wil I heare the, that thou shalt thanke me. But vnto the vngodly sayeth God: Why doest thou preach my lawes, and takest my couenaunt in thy mouth? Where as thou hatest to be re- fourmed, and castest my wordes behynde the?
Yf thou seist a thefe, thou runnest with him, and art partaker with the aduouterers. ‘Thou lettest thy mouth speake wickednesse, q thy tonge paynteth disceate. Thou syttest and speakest agaynst thy brother, yeeand slaundrest thine owne mothers sonne, ‘This thou doest,

The ylbiij. A psalme of the children of Corah. 
O HEARE this, all ye people: pondre it y

well, all ye that dwell vpo the earth. e q lowe, riche q poore, one with another.

My mouth shal speake of wyszdome, and my hert shal muse of vnderstondinge. I wil encline myne eare to the parable, q shewe my darcke speach vpon the harpe. Wherfore shulde I feare the euell dayes, whé the wicked- nesse of my heles copaseth me rounde aboute?
They that put their trust in their good, q boost them selues in the multitude of their riches.
No man maye deliuer his brother, ner make agrement for him vnto God.

? For it costeth more to redeme their soules, so that he must let that alone for euer. Yee though he lyueloge, q se not y graue. “For it shal be sene, y soch wyse mē shal dye q perishe together, as well.as the ignoraunt and foolish, q leaue their goodes for other. Loke what is in their houses, it cótinueth still: their dwell- inge places endure from one generacion to another, q are called after their owne names vpon the earth. -Neuerthelesse mà abydeth not in soch honoure, but is copared vnto y brute beastes, q becometh like vnto the.

This waie of theirs is very foolishnesse, q yet their posterite prayse it with their mouth.

Sela. They lye in the hell like shepe, death shal gnawe vpon them, ¢ the rightuous shal haue dominacion of them in the mornynge by tymes: their strégth shal consumé, ¢ hell shalbe their dwellinge. But God shal deliuer my soule from the power of hell, when he receaueth me. Sela. O be not thou afrayed, whan one is made riche, q the glory of his house increased.
“For he shal cary nothinge awaye with him when he dyeth, nether shal his pompe folowe

^ 9 Par. 15. a. 

1 Cor. 10, c. 

*Psal.96.b. ^1]Ioh.2.a. 1Pet.1.c. © Eccls.2.b. 6.3. c. £ Psal. 23. a. 

4 lob 27. b. * Esaie 2, a. fEsaie 1. b. lerem.7. c. 

Psalme liij. whyle I holde my tonge: and thinkest me to be eué soch one as thy self: but I wil reproue the, q set my self agaynst the. O considre this, ye that forget God: lest I plucke you awaie, and there be none to delyuer you.
Who so offreth me thakes and prayse, he ho- noureth me: q this is the waye, wherby I wil shewe him the sauynge health of God.

Thel. A psalme of Dauid. 
| | AUE mercy vpon me (o God) after thy 

goodnes, q acordinge vnto thy greate mercies, do awaye myne offences.

Wash me well fro my wickednesse, q clense mefromysynne^ Forlknowlege my fautes, and my synne is euer before me.

Agaynst the only, agaynst the haue Isynned, and done euellin thy sight: that thou mightest be instified in thy saynges,’ and shuldest oner come when thou art iudged.

Beholde, I was borne in wickednesse, and in synne hath my mother conceaued me.

But lo, thou hast a pleasure in the treuth, and hast shewed me secrete wyszdome. ^O reconcile me with Isope, and I shal be clene: wash thou me, and I shalbe whyter then snowe. Oh let me heare of ioye and glad- nesse, that the bones which thou hast broken, maye reioyse. Turne thy face fro my synnes, and put out all my myszdedes. “Make me a clene hert (o God) and renue a right sprete within me. Cast me not awale from thy presence, and take not thy holy sprete fro me.
O geue me the comforte of thy helpe agayne, and stablish me with thy fre sprete. ‘Then shal
I teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, that synners maye be conuerted vnto the. Delyuer me from bloudegyltynesse o God, thou that art the God of my health, that my tonge maye prayse thy rightuousnesse. Open my lippes (O LORDE) that my mouth maye shewe thy prayse.

“For yf thou haddest pleasure in sacrifice, I wolde geue it the: bnt thou delytest not in burntofferynges. The sacrifice of God is a troubled sprete, a broken and a cotrite hert
(o God) shalt thou not despise. O be fauorable and gracious vnto Sion, that the walles of lerusalem maye be buylded. For then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifice of rightuous- nesse, with the burntofferynges and oblacions: then shal they laye bullockes vpon thine aulter.

e Psal. 31. a. Iob 13. b. Luc. 18. b. 
* Ephe.5.c. 1 Pet. 3. c. 

^ Rom. 3. a. 

The Psalter. 

4 Eze.36.e. Act.2. a. 

Fo. dri., 

The li. A psalme of Dauid. 

HY boastest thou thy self (thou Ty- raunt) that thou canst do myschefe ?

Where as the goodnesse of God endureth yet daylie. Thy tonge ymagineth wickednesse, and with lyes it cutteth like a sharpe rasoure.
Thou louest vngraciousnesse more thē good, to talke of lyes more then rightuousnesse. Sela.

Thou louest to speake all wordes y maye do hurte, O thou false toge. ‘Therfore shal
God cleane destroye the, smyte the in peces, plucke the out of thy dwellinge, and rote the out of the londe of the lyuinge. Sela.

The rightuous shal se this, & feare, and laugh him to scorne. ^Lo, this is the mà, y toke not God for his strégth, but trusted vnto the multitude of his riches, q was mightie in his wickednesse. As for me, I am like a grene olyue tre in y house of God: my trust is in the tender mercy of God for euer q euer.

I wil allwaye geue thankes vnto the, for that thou hast done: and wil hope in thy name, for thy sayntes like it well.

The lij. A psalme of Dauid. 

HE foolish bodies saye in their hertes : 
‘Tush, there is no God. Corrupte are they, and become abhominable in their wicked- nesses: there is not one, that doth good. God loked downe from heauen vpo the children of men, to se yf there were eny that wolde vnderstonde, or seke after God. * But they are all gone out of $ waye, they are all be- come vnprofitable: there is none y doth good, no not one. How ca they haue. vnderstond- inge, that are the workers of wickednes, eat- inge vp my people as it were bred, q call not vpon God? They are afrayed, where. no feare is: for God breaketh the bones of them that besege the: thon puttest them to confu- cion, for God despiseth them. Oh y the sauynge health were genen vnto Israel out of
Sion: Oh that the LORDE wolde .delyuer his people out of captiuyte. "Then shulde
Iacob reioyse, « Israel shulde be right glad. 

The liij. A psalme of Dauid 

ELPE me (o God) for thy names sake, my prayer (o God) considre the wordes of my

and delyuer me in thy strégth. Heare 

* Mich. 6. b. f Esa. 66. a. 
48. a. Luc. 12. b. 

E Ro. 12.a. i Psal. 13. a.

^ Psal. 
* Rom. 3. b. 

Ho. drij. mouth. For straungers are rysen vp agaynst me, and the mightie (which haue not God before their eyes) seke after my soule. Sela.
But lo, God is my helper: it is he that vp- holdeth my soule. He shall rewarde euell vnto myne enemies, “and in thy treuth shalt thou destroye them. A frewil offeringe wil I geue the, and prayse thy name o LORDE, because it is so comfortable. 3

For thou hast delyuered me out of all my trouble, so that myne eye seyth his desyre vpo

myne enemies. 

EARE my prayer (o God) and hyde not 
E thy self fro my peticion. Take hede vnto me and heare me, how piteously I mourne q coplayne. The enemie crieth so, q the vngodly commeth on so fast: for they are mynded to do me some myschefe, so mali- ciously are they set agaynst me. My herte is heuy within me, and the feare of death is fallen vpon me. Fearfullnesse and tremblinge are come vpon me, and an horrible drede hath ouerwhelmed me. And I sayde: O that I had wynges like a doue, that I might fle somwhere, and be at rest. Lo, then wolde I get me awaye farre of, and remayne in the wildernesse. Sela.

I wolde, make haist to escape, from the stormy wynde and tempest. Destroie their tonges (o LORDE) and deuyde them, * for I se vnrightuousnes q strife in y cite. ‘This goeth daye and night aboute the walles, mys- chefe and vyce are in the myddest of it.

Wickednesse is therin, disceate and gyle go not out of hir stretes. Yf it were myne enemie that reuyled me, I coude beare it: or yf one that ought me euell will dyd threaten me, I wolde hyde myself from him. But it is thou my companyon, “my gyde and myne owne familier frede. We had swete and se- crete communicacion together, and louyngly walked we together in ý house of God.

?Let death come hastely vpon them, and let them go downe quick in to hell, for wicked- nes is amonge them in their dwellinges.

As for me, I will call vnto God, and the 
LORDE shall helpe me. In the eueninge, mornynge and at noone daye wil I mourne

The liiij. A psalme of Dauid. 

* Deut. 3: e. è Gen. 11. b. c Psal. 37, b. Mich. 7. a. 

4 Num. 16. c. 

The Psalter. 

Psalme liiij. 

and complayne: and he shal heare my voyce.

It is he that delyuereth my soule in peace,|€ from them that laye waite for me: for the are many agaynst me. Yee euen God that endureth for euer, shal heare me, and brynge them downe. Sela.

For they wil not turne: and why? they feare not God. Yee they laye hondes vpon soch as be at peace with him, and so thei breake his couenaunt. Their mouthes are softer then butter, q yet haue they batell in their mynde : their wordes are smoother then oyle, and yet be they very swerdes. * O cast thy burthen (or care) vpon the LORDE, he shal norish the, and not leaue the rightuous in vnquietnesse. But as for them, thou (o God) shalt east them downe in to the pitte of de- struccion. The bloudthurstie and disceatfull shal not lyue out half their daies. Neuerthe- lesse my trust is in the.

The lb. A psalme of Dauid. 

E mercifull vnto me (o God) for men will A treade me downe: they are daylie fight- inge q troublinge me. Myne enemies treade me daylie vnder their fete, for they be many, y proudly fight agaynst me.

Neuerthelesse, whé I am afrayed, I put my trust in the. I wil comforte my self in Gods worde, yee I wil hope in God, and not feare :
What can flesh then do vnto me ? 

They vexe me daylie in my wordes: all y they ymagin, is to do me euell. "They holde alltogether, q kepe them selues close: they marck my steppes, how they maye catch my soule. But in vayne, for it shal escape thé: and why? thou (o God) in thy displeasure shalt cast downe soch people. Thou tellest|33 my flittinges, thou puttest my teares in thy botell, and nombrest them. When so euer I call vpon the, myne enemies are put to flight: wherby I knowe, that thou art my God. In
Gods worde wil I reioyse, in the LORDES worde wil I comforte me. Yee in God do I trust, t am not afraied: what cà man thé do vnto me? Vnto the (o God) wil I paye my vowes, vnto y wil I geue thākes q prayse.
/ For thou hast delyuered my soule fro death, q my fete fro fallinge, y I maye walke before
God in y light of y lyuynge. 

e Matt. 6. c. Luc. 12. c. 1 Pot. 5. a. J Psal. 114. b. 

Psalme Ibiij. 

a 

The lbi. A psalme of Dauid. 

E mercifull vnto me (o God) be mercifull 

vnto me, for my soule trusteth in y: “q 

vnder the shadowe of thy wynges shal be my refuge, vntill wickednesse be ouerpast.

I call vnto God ý most hyest, eué ý God y shal helpe me vp agayne. He shal sende froó heauen, q saue me fro the reprofe of him that wolde swalowe me vp. Sela.

This shal God sende, for his mercy and faithfulnesse sake. I lye with my soule amonge the cruell lyons: euen amonge the children of men, whose tethe are speares and arowes, and their tonge a sharpe swerde.

Set vp thy self (o God) aboue the heaues, and thy glory aboue all the earth. They haue layed a nett for my fete, « pressed downe my soule: they haue dygged a pyt before me, and are fallen in to it them selues.

Sela. * My hert is ready (o God) my hert is ready, to synge and geue prayse. Awake
(o my glory) awake lute and harpe, I my self wil awake right early. I wil geue thakes vnto the (o LORDE) amonge the people, I wil synge prayses vato the amonge the Heithe.
* For y greatnes of thy mercy reacheth vnto the heauens, and thy faithfulnesse vnto the cloudes. Set vp thy self (o God) aboue the heaués, q thy glory aboue all ¥ earth.

The bij. A psalme of Dauid. 

A F youre myndes be vpon rightuousnesse 

B 

in dede, then iudge the thinge that is right, o ye sonnes of men. But ye ymagin myschefe in youre hertes, and youre hondes deale with wickednesse. The vngodly are frowarde, eue from their mothers wombe : as soone as they be borne, they go astraie q speake lyes, They are as furious as the ser- pent, “euen like the deaf Adder that stoppeth hir eares. That she shulde not heare the voyce of the charmer, charme he neuer so wysely. Breake their teth (o God) in their mouthes, smyte the chaft bones of the lyons whelpes in sonder, o LORDE.

That they maye fall awaye, like water y runneth a pace: and that when they shote their arowes, they maye be broke. Let the cosume awaye like a snale, q like the vn- tymely frute of a woman, and let them not se

* Psal. 102. b. f Psal. 58. c.

è Psal. 107.2. e 1 Re. 25. g.

* Matt. 23. c. 
4 Acto. 7. g. 

The Psalter. 

Fo. nritj. the Sonne. Or ener youre thornes be sharpe, the wrath shal take them awaye quycke, like a stormy wynde. * The rightuous shal reioyse when he seyth the vengeaunce, and shal wash his fete in the blonde of the vngodly. So that men shal saye: verely, there 1s a rewarde for y rightuous: doutles, there is a God that iudgeth the earth.

The {ditj. A psalme of Dauid. 

ELYUER me fro myne enemies (o my|q 
God) « defende me fro thé y ryse vp agaynst me. O delyuer me fro the wicked doers, t saue me fro the bloudthurstie mé. For lo, they lye waytinge for my soule: $ mightie mē are gathered together against me, with out eny offence or faute of me, o LORDE. They rüne ¢ prepare the selues, with out my faute:
Arise, come thou helpe me, q beholde. Stöde vp o LORDE God of hoostes, thou God of
Israel, to vyset all Heithen: be not merciful vnto the y offende of malicious wickednesse.
Sela. /Let thé go to q fro, q runne aboute the cite youlinge like dogges. Beholde, they |% speake (agaynst me) with their mouth, swerdes are vnder their lippes, for who reproueth the ?
€ But thou (o LORDE) shalt haue them in derision, thou shalt laugh all Heithé to scorne.
My strégth do I ascrybe vnto the, for thou 
(o God) art my defender. God sheweth me his goodnesse plenteously, God letteth me se my desyre vpo myneenemies. Slaye the not, lest my people forget it: but scatre the abrode with thy power q put thé downe, o LORDE oure defence. For y synne of their mouth, for | the wordes of their lippes, & because of their pryde, let thé be taken: « why? their preach- inge is of cursynge q lyes. Cosume them in thy |gr wrath, cosume the y they maye perish, t knowe y it is God, which ruleth in Iacob and in all the worlde. Sela. ^Let thé go to a fro, q rune aboute the cite, youlinge like dogges.
Let thé runne here œ there for meate, and grudge when they haue not ynough. As for me, I wil synge of thy power, ad prayse thy mercy betymes in the mornynge: for thou art my defence and refuge in the tyme of my trouble.

Vnto the (o my strength) wil I synge, for thou (o God) art my defence, and my merciful
God. 

€ Psal. 2. a. 

Pro. 1. c. ^ Psal. 58. a 

68 

So. drii. 

The lir. A psalme of Dauid. 

a GOD, thou y hast cast vs out and scatred 

5 

vs abrode, thou Y hast bene so sore displeased at vs, cóforte vs agayne. ‘Thou y hast remoued the lode a deuyded it, heale the sores therof, for it shaketh. “Thou hast shewed thy people heuy thiuges, thou hast geuen vs a drynke off wyne, y we slobre withall. Yet hast thou geué a toké for soch as feare the, y they maye cast it vpin $ treuth. Sela. That thy beloued might be delyuered, helpe them with thy right hande, and heare me. God hath spoke in his Sactuary (which thinge re- ioyseth me) ^I wil deuyde Siche, q mete out the valley of Suchoth. Galaad is myne, Ma- nasses is myne, Ephraim is the strength of my heade, luda is my captayne. Moab is my washpotte, ouer Edom wil I stretch out my shue, Philistea shal be glad of me. Who will lede me in to the stronge cite? Who will bringe me in to Edom? Shalt not thou do it, o God, thou y hast cast vs ont: ‘thou God, y weutest not out with oure hoostes? O be thou oure helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe ofman. Thorow God we shal do greate actes, for itis he that shal treade downe oure enemies.

The Iy. A psalme of Dauid. 

EARE my crienge (o God) geue hede vnto my prayer. From the endes of y earth wil I call vnto the, whé my herte is in trouble: Oh set me vp vpo an hye rocke. For thou art my hope, a stronge tower for me agaynst the enemie. I will dwell in thy taber- nacle for euer, that I maye be safe vnder the couerynge of thy wynges. Sela. For thou
(o LORDE) hast herde my desyres, thou hast geuen an heretage vnto those that feare thy name. ‘Thou shalt graunte the kynge a loge life, that his yeares maye endure thorow out all generacions. "That he maye dwell before
God for euer: Oh let thy louynge mercy q faithfulnes preserue him. So wil I allwaye synge prayses vnto thy name,’ y I maye daylie perfourme my vowes.

Che Iyi. A psalme of Dauid. 
Y soule wayteth only vpon God, for of him commeth my helpe. He only is my stregth, my saluacion, my defence, so y I shal not greatly fall. How longe wil ye ymagin

a Esa, 51. d. Tere. 25. c. 
4 Psal. 55, b. 

b Psal. 107.a. € Psal. 43. b. 
*1 Reg. 1.b. Psal. 41.a. 

The Psalter. 

myschefe agaynst euery man? ye shal be slayne all y sorte of you: yee as a tottringe wall shal ye be, q like a broken hedge. Their deuyce is only how to put him out, their delyte is 1 lyes: they geue good wordes with their mouth but curse with their herte. Sela. Neuer- theles, my soule abydeth only vpon God, for he is my God. He only is my strégth, my saluacion, my defence: so y I shal not fall.
In God is my health, my glory, my might, « in God is my trust. O put youre trust in him allwaye (ye people) *poure out youre hertes before him, for God is oure hope. Sela. As for men, they are but vayne, mé are disceat- full: vpo the weightes they are al together lighter then vanite it self. O trust not in wronge
€ robbery, geue not youre selues vnto vanite : yf riches increase, set not youre herte vpon them.
God spake once a worde, twyse haue I herde the same: that power belongeth vnto God.
That thou LORDE art mercifull, ¢ that thou rewardest euery man/ acordinge to his workes.

The ij. A psalme of Dauid. 

GOD, thou art my God: early wil I 

seke the. £ My soule thursteth for the, my flesh longeth after the in a baré q drie lode, where no water is. Thus do I loke for the in thy Sactuary, that I might beholde thy power q glory. For thy louynge kyndnesse is better then life, my lyppes shal prayse the.
As loge as I liue wil I magnifie the, q lift vp my hondes in thy name. My soule is satisfied eué as it were with marry q fatnesse, when my mouth prayseth the with ioyfull lippes. In my bedde wil I remembre ý, q whé I wake, my talkynge shalbe of the.

For thou hast bene my helper, q vnder the shadowe of thy wynges wil I reioyse. My soule hangeth vpon the, thy right honde vp- holdeth me. They seke after my soule, but in vayne, for they shal go vnder the earth.
They shal fall in to the swerde, a be a porció for foxes. But y kynge shal reioyse in God: all they that sweare by hym, shal be comméded,
“for the mouth of lyers shalbe stopped 

The Iyiij. A psalme of Dauid. 

EARE my voyce (o God) in my có-|8 

playnte, preserue my life fro feare of y enemie.

f Rom. 2. a. € Psal. 118. 1. 142. a. ^ Deut. 6. c. 

Psalme Irbi. 

Hyde me from the gatheringe together of y frowarde, fro y heape of wicked doers. Which whette their tüges like a swerde, q shute with their venimous wordes like as with arowes.
That they maye preuely hurte y innocét, q sodély to hit him with out eny feare.

They haue deuysed myschefe, and com- moned amonge them selues, how they maye laye snares: tush (saye they)“ whoshallse them?

They ymagin wickednesse, and kepe it se- crete amonge them selues, euery man in y depe of his herte. But God shall sodenly shute with an arowe, y they shall be wounded.
Yee their owne tunges shall make them fall, 
In so moch that who so seyth the, shal laugh thé to scorne. And all men that se it, shal saye: this hath God done, for they shal per- ceaue, y it is his worke. The rightuous shal reioyse in the LORDE, and put his trust in him: and all they y are true off herte, shalbe glad therof.

The lytitj. A psalme of Dauid.* 
HOU (o God) art praysed in Sion, and vnto the is the vowe perfourmed. ‘Thou hearest the prayer, therfore cometh all flesh vnto the. Oure myszdedes preuayle agaynst vs, oh be thou mercyfull vnto oure synnes.
Blessed is the man who thou chosest? and re- ceauest vnto the, that he maye dwell in thy courte: he shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, euen off thy holy temple. Heare vs acordinge vnto thy woderfull rightuousnesse, o God oure saluacio: thou that art the hope of all the endes of y earth, and off the brode see. Which in his strength setteth fast the moütaynes, t is gyrded aboute with power.
Which stilleth y ragige of the see, the roaringe off his wawes, and the woodnes of the people.
They that dwell in ý vttemost partes are afrayed at thy tokens, thou makest both the mornynge and euenynge starres to prayse y. "Thou visetest the earth, thon watrest 1t, and makest it very plenteous. The ryuer of God is full of waters, thou preparest man his corne, ad thus thou prouydest for the earth. Thou watrest hir forowes, thou breakest the harde clottes therof, thou makest it soft with Y droppes of rayne, and blessest the increase of it "Thou crownest the yeare with thy good, and thy fotesteppes droppe fatnesse. The dwellinges of the wildernes are fatt also, y a | Re. 18. d.

> Ephe. 1. a. * Psal. 99. a. 

The Psalter. 

Fo. urb. 

they droppe withall, q the litle hilles are plea- saunt on every syde. ‘The foldes are full of shepe, the valleys stonde so thicke with corne
'y they laugh and synge. 

The lyo. A psalme off Dauid. 
() BE ioyfull in God“ (all ve lódes) synge| g prayses vnto the honoure of his name make his prayse to be glorious. Saye vnto
God: O how wonderfull are thy workes ? thorow the greatnesse of thy power shal thine enemies be confouded. O y all the worlde wolde worshipe the, synge E: the and prayse thy name. Sela. O come hither and be- holde the workes of God, which is so wonder- full in his doinges amonge the children of men.
He turned the see in to drye lode, so that they wente thorow the water-on fote: therfore wil we reioyse in him. He ruleth with his power for euer, his eyes beholde the people: the rennagates shal not be able to exalte them selues. Sela. O magnifie oure God (ye people) make y voyce off his prayse to be herde.
Which holdeth oure soule in life, and suffreth not oure fete to slippe. For thou (o God)|38
¡hast proued vs, thou hast tried vs like as syluer is tried. "Thou hast brought vs in to cap- tiuyte, and layed trouble vpon oure loynes.
Thou hast suffred men to ryde ouer oure heades, we wéte thorow fyre and water,’ butt thou hast brought vs out, and refreshed vs.
Therfore will 1 go in to thy house with brét offeringes, to paye the my vowes,/ which I promised with my lippes, and spake with my mouth, when I was in trouble. I wil offre vnto the fatte brentsacrifices with the smoke of rames, I will offre bullockes and goates.
Sela. O come hither and herke (all ye that | feare God) I wil tell you, what he hath done for my soule. I called vnto hi with my mouth and gaue him prayses with my tüge. (Yff
I enclyne vnto wickednes with my herte, y 
LORDE wil not heare me.) ‘Therfore God hath herde me, ad considred the voyce off my prayer. Praysed be God, which hath not cast out my prayer, ner turned his mercy fro me.

Che Irt. Psalme 

OD be mercifull vnto vs, blesse vs, «à shewe the light off his countenaiice apon |

vs. Bela. That we maye knowe thy waye vpo- earth, thy sauynge health amonge all Heithen.

d Exo. 14. e. Iosue 3.d. * Esa. 43. a. f Eccli. 5. a. 

a 

Fo. nrbi. 

Let the people prayse the (o God) yee let all people prayse the. O let the people reioyse and be glad, that thou indgest the folke right- uously, and gouernest the nacions vpo earth.
Let the people prayse the (o God) let all people prayse the. God (euen oure owne God) geue vs his blessinge, that the earth maye bringe forth hir increase. God blesse vs, and let all the endes of y worlde feare him.

The (ybij. A psalme of Dauid. 
ET God aryse,* so shal his enemies be 
I .4 seatered, and they that hate him, shal fle before him. Like as the smoke vanisheth, so shalt thou dryue them awaye: and like as waxe melteth at the fyre, so shall the vngodly

!perish at the presence off God. 

But the rightuous shal be glad « reioyse before God, they shalbe mery q ioyful. Oh synge vnto God, synge prayses vnto his name:

|magnifie him y rydeth aboue the heauēs 

(whose name is y LORDE) q reioyse before hi. 

He is a father of y fatherlesse, he is a de- fender of widdowes: ^eue God in his holy habitacio. He is the God y maketh mé to be of one mynde in a house, q bryngeth y presoners out of captiuite in due season,^ but letteth y rennagates cotinue in scarcenesse.
O God, when thou wétest forth before thy people, whé thou wétest thorow y wildernes.
Sela. “The earth shoke, q y heauens dropped at the presence of God in Sinai, at y pre- sence of God which is y God of Israel. Thou o God sendest a gracious rayne vpon thyne enheritaiice, q refreshest it, when it is drye.
That thy beastes maye dwell therin, which thon of thy goodnes hast prepared for the poore. The LORDE shal gene the worde, with greate hoostes of Euügelistes. *Kinges with their armies shal fle, q they of y hous- holde shal deuyde y spoyle. Yt so be y ye lye amoge the pales, the doues fethers shalbe couered with sylner, ¢ hir winges of the coloure of golde. When the Allmightie setteth kynges vpo the earth, it shal be cleare enen in the darcknesse. The hill of Basan is Gods hill, the hill of Basan is a pléteous hill. Why hoppe ye so, ye greate hilles? It pleaseth
God to dwell vpo this hill, yee the LORDE wil abyde in it for euer. "The charettes of
God are many M. tymes a thousande, the 
LORDE is amóge them in the holy Sinai. d Exo.

a Num. 10. d, * Deut. 10, d. * Exo. 13. d. 

Che Psalter. 

Psalme Irbíj. 

V Thou art gone vp an hye, thou hast led cap-| € 

,tyuite captyue, q receaued giftes for mē: Yee euen for thy enemies, that they might dwell with the LORDE God. Praysed be the
|LORDE daylie, eue y God which helpeth vs, jt poureth his benefites vpo vs. Sela. "The
|God y is oure Sanioure, eue God the LORDE by who we escape death. The God that smyteth his enemies vpó the heades q vpon the hayrie scalpes : soch as go on still in their
'Wikednes. The LORDE hath sayde : some wil I bringe agayne from Basan, some wil I
|bringe agayne fro the depe of the see. That thy fote maye be dipped in the bloude of thine enemies, q that thy dogges maye licke it vp.

-It is well sene (o God) how thou goest, how thou my God and kynge goest in the Sanc- tuary. The syngers go before, and then the mynstrells amonge the maydens with the tymbrels. O geue thankes vnto God the
LORDE in the congregacion, for the welles of Israel. € There litle Beniamin, the prynces of ludá, the prynces of Zabulo, and the prynces of Nephthali beare rule amoge them.
Thy God hath cómitted strégth vnto the, stablish the thinge (o God) that thou hast wrought in vs. For thy téples sake at Ieru- salem shal kynges brynge presentes vnto the.
Reproue the beestes amonge the redes, the heape of bulles with the calues: those that dryue for money. Oh seatre the people that delytein batayle. The prynces shal come out of Egipte, the Morians lode shal stretch out hir hondes vnto God. Synge vnto God, o ye kyngdomes of the earth : o synge prayses vnto the LORDE. Sela.

Which sytteth in the heauens ouer all fro the begynnynge: Lo, he shal sende ont his voyce, yee and that a mightie voyce. As- erybe ye the power vnto God, his glory is in
Israel, and his might in the cloudes. God is wonderfull in his Sanctuary, he is the God of
Israel, he will geue strength and power vnto his people. Blessed be God.

The frbij. A psalme of Dauid. 
ELPE me (o God) for the waters are come in eue vnto my soule. I sticke fast in the depe myre, where no grounde is:
I am come in to depe waters, and the floudes wil drowne me. lam weery of crienge, my throte is drye, my sight fayleth me, for wayt-

20.c. ludic.5.a. ¢los.10.b. / Epbe.4.a. g Iudi.20. 

B 

Psalme lyy, The Psalter. 

n 

5 

B 

inge so longe vpon my God. “They ý hate me without a cause, are mo then the hayres of my heade: they that are myne enemies q wolde destroye me giltlesse, are mightie: I am fayne to paye the thinges y I neuer toke.
God, thou knowest my symplenesse, and my fautes are not hyd from the. Let not them that trust in the (o LORDE God of hoostes) be ashamed for my cause: let not those y seke the, be confounded thorow me, o God of
Israel. And why? for thy sake do I suffre reprofe, shame couereth my face. lam be- come a straunger vnto my brethren, and an aleaunt vnto my mothers children. ^ For the zele of thine house hath euen eaten me, and the rebukes of them that rebuked the, is fallen vpon me. I wepte and chastened my self with fastinge, and that was turned to my reprofe.
“I put ona sackecloth, and therfore they tested vpon me. They that satt in the gate, spake agaynst me, and the dronckardes made songes vpon me. But LORDE, I made my prayer vnto the in an acceptable tyme: Heare me (0
God) with thy greate mercy q sure helpe. 
Take me out of the myre, y 1 syncke not: 
Oh let me be delyuered fro thé y hate me, a out of ¥ depe waters. Lest y water floude drowne me, that the depe swalowe me not vp, t y the pitte shut not hir mouth vpon me.
Heare me (o LORDE) for thy louynge kyndnesse is confortable: turne the vnto me acordinge vnto thy greate mercy. Hyde not thy face from thy seruaüt, for I am in trouble:
O haist y to helpe me. Drawe nye vnto my soule, and saue it: O delyuer me because of myne enemies. Thou knowest my reprofe, my shame q my dishonoure: my aduersaries are all in thy sight. The rebuke breaketh my hert, q maketh me heuy: I loke for some to haue pitie vpon me, but there is no man:
& for some to coforte me, but I fynde none. 
4 They gaue me gall to eate, q whe I was thurstie, they gaue me vyneger to drynke.
'Let their table be made a snare to take 

them selues withall, an occasion to fall q a| 

rewarde vnto them. Let their eyes be blynded, that they se not: q euer bowe downe their backes.

Poure out thy indignacion vpon them, q let thy wrothfull displeasure take holde of them.
/Let their habitacion be voyde, q no man to 

Psal. 34. c. 
* Job 30. a. 

a Toh. 13. c. 
Rom, 11. a. 

è Psal. 118. f. Ioh. 2. b. 
Tren. 3. f. 4 Mat. 27.d. 

jo. nrbíj. dwell in their tentes. For they persecute him whom thou hast smytten, q besyde thy woundes they haue geuen him moo. Let them fall fro one wickednesse to another, q not come in to thy rightuousnesse. Let the be wyped out of y boke of the lyuinge;* q not be written amonge the rightuous. As for me,
I am poore g in heuynesse, let thy helpe de- fende me, o God. That I maye prayse y|35 name of God with a songe, v magnifie it with thankesgeuynge. This shal please the
LORDE better then a bullocke, that hath hornes q hoffes. O considre this q be glad
(ye that be in aduersite) seke after God, q youre soule shal lyue.

For the LORDE heareth the poore, ¢ de- spyseth not his presoners. Let heauen q earth praise him, the see q all that moueth therin.
For God wil saue Sion, ¢ buylde the cities of 
Iuda, that men maye dwell there, q haue thé in possession. The sede of his seruauntes shal iheret it, q they that loue his name, shal dwell therin.

The lriy. A psalme of Dauid. 

AIST the (o God) to delyuer me,’ a to helpe me, o LORDE. Let thé be shamed q confounded that seke after my soule: let them be turned backwarde q put to confucio, that wysh me euell. Let them soone be brought to shame, y crie ouer me: there there.

But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull q glad in the : and let all soch as delyte in thy sauynge health, saye alwaye: y LORDE be praysed. As for me, I am poore q in misery, haist the God for to helpe me. Thou art my helpe, my redemer ¢ my God: oh make no lovge tarienge.

The irr. Psalme. 

N the, o LORDE, is my trust let me 

neuer be put to cōfuciö, but rydde me q delyuer me thorow thy rightuousnesse: en- cline thine eare vnto me, q helpe me. Be thou my stronge holde (where vnto I maye allwaye fle) thou that hast promised to helpe me: for thou art my house of defence q my castell.
Delyuer me (o my God) out of $ hàde of the vngodly, out of the hande of the vnrightuous q cruell man. For thon (o LORDE God)

Ioh. 18. c. 
E Exo. 32. g. 

e Ro. t1. b. J Mat. 23. e. 
^ Psal. 39, c. 

Act. 1. d. 
* Psal. 30. a. 

Fo. dybitj. 

€ 

lart the thinge that I loge for, ^ thou art my jhope euen fro my youth. I haue leaned vpo y euer seus I was borne, thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wombe, therfore is my prayse allwaye of the. 1 am become a wonder vnto the multitude, but my sure trust is in the. Oh let my mouth be fylled with thy prayse a honoure all the daye loge. Cast me not awaye in myne olde age, forsake me not when my strength fayleth me. For myne enemies speake agaynst me, ¢ they that laye wayte for my soule, take their councell to- gether, sayenge: God hath forsake him, per- secute him, take him, for there is none to helpe him. Go not farre fro me, o God: my
God, haist the to helpe me. Let them be cofounded q perish, that are agaynst my soule: let thé be couered with shame q dishonoure, that seke to do me euell. As for me, I wil pacietly abyde allwaye, q wil euer encrease thy prayse. My mouth shal speake of thy rightuousnesse q sauynge health all the daye loge, for I knowe no ende therof. Let me go in (o LORDE God) « I wil make mencion of thy power and rightuousnesse only. ‘Thou
(o God) hast lerned me fro my youth vp vn- till now, therfore wil I tell of thy wonderous workes. J orsake me not (o God) in myne olde age, when I am gray headed: vntill I haue shewed thyne arme vnto childers child- ren,’ ¢ thy power to all them that are yet for to come. ‘Thy rightuousnes (o God) is very hie, thou that doest greate thinges: o God, who is like vnto the? O what greate troubles q aduersite hast thou shewed me? q yet didest thou turne q refresh me, yee q broughtest me from the depe of the earth agayne. ‘Thou hast brought me to greate honoure, q com- forted me on euery syde. "Therfore wil I prayse the q thy faithfulnesse (o God) “playége vpon the lute, vnto the wil I synge vpon the harpe, o thou holy one of Israel. My lippes wolde fayne synge prayses vnto the: q so wolde my soule, whom thou hast delyuered.

My tonge talketh of thy rightuousnesse all the daye longe, for they are confounded q brought vnto shame, y sought to do me euel.

The Irri. A psalme of Salomon. 
( DANS the kinge thy iudgmet (o God) and thy rightuousnesse vnto the kynges

| 
| 

a Psal. 21. b, Iere. 1. a. 

^ Deut. 6. d. 
4 Deu. 17. d. 

* 2 Reg.7.b. 
* Psal. 88. e. 4. b. 

f Exo. 23. d. 3 Re. 4. 

Cbr Psalter. 

sonne. That he maye gouerne thy people acordinge vnto right, “and defende thy poore.
That the mountaynes maye brynge peace, and the litle hilles rightuousnes vnto the people.
He shal kepe the symple folke by their right, defende the childré of the poore, and punysh the wrongeous doer.

* Thou shalt be feared as longe as ý Sonne and the Moone endureth, from one generacion to another. He shal come downe like the rayne in to a flese of woll, and like the droppes that water y earth. In his tyme shal rightuousnesse florish, yee and abundaiice of peace, so longe as the Moone endureth.

^ His dominion shalbe from the one see to the other, and from the floude vnto the worldes ende. ‘They that dwell in the wilder- nes, shal knele before him, q his enemies shal licke the dust. «The kynges of the see and of the Iles shal brynge presentes, y kinges of
Araby q Saba shall offre giftes. All kynges shal worshipe him, q all Heithé shal do him seruyce. For he shal deliuer the poore whé he crieth, q the nedy y hath no helpe. He shall be fauorable to the symple q poore, he shal preserue the soules of soch as be in ad- uersite. He shal deliuer their soules from extorcion ¢ wronge, q deare slial their bloude be in his sight. He shal lyue, q vnto him shalbe gené of y golde of Arabia: Prayer shal be made euer vnto him, ¢ daylie shal he be praysed. ‘There shalbe an heape of corne in the earth hye vpon the hilles, his frute shal shake like Libanus, q shal be grene in the cite, like grasse vpo the earth. His name shal endure for euer, his name shal remayne vnder the sonne amonge the posterites, which shal be blessed thorow him, ¢ all the Heithen shal prayse him. Blessed be the LORDE
God, euen the God of Israel, which only doth woderous thinges. And blessed be the name of his maiesty for euer, and all londes be ful- filled with his glory. Amen, Amen.

Here ende the prayers of Dauid the sonne of 
Iesse. 

The lrrij. A psalme of Asaph. 
HOW louynge is God vnto Israel, to soch as are of a clene hert? Neuer- thelesse my fete were allmost gone, my tread-
€ 3 Re. 10, a. 

Esa. 60. a. Matt. 2. b. 

Psalme Irri, 

5 

Psalme Irri. 

33 

€ 

inges had wel nye slipte. And why? I was greued at wicked,“ to se the vngodly in soch prosperite. For they are in no parell of death, but stonde fast like a palace. They come in no misfortune like other folke, nether are they plaged like other men. And this is the cause that they be so puft vp in pryde, q ouerwhelmed with cruelte and vnrightuous- nesse. Their eyes swell for fatnesse, they do euen what they lyst. Corrupte are they, and speake blasphemies maliciously, proude and presumptuous are their wordes. They stretch forth their mouth vnto the heauen, q their tonge goeth thorow the worlde. 'lherfore fall the people vnto them, and there out sucke they no small auauntage. * Tush (saye they) how shulde God perceaue it? is there know- lege in the most hyest? Lo, these are the vngodly, these prospere in the worlde, these haue riches in possession. Shulde I then clense my hert in vayne (thought I) “q wash my hondes in innocency? Wherfore shulde I be then punyshed daylie, a be chastened euery mornynge? Yee [had allmost also sayde euen asthey: but lo, then shulde I haue condemned the generacion of thy children. "Then thought
I to vnderstonde this, but it was to harde for me. Vntill I wete in to y Sanctuary of God, q considered the ende of these men. Namely, how thou hast set the in a slippery place,
?that thou maiest cast the downe headlynges q destroye the. O how sodenly do they con- sume, perish, q come to a fearfull ende? “Yee euen like as a dreame when one awaketh, so makest thou their ymage to vanish out of the cite. ‘Thus my hert was greued, q it wente euen thorow my reynes.

So foolish was I and ignoraunt, and as it were a beest before the. Neuerthelesse, I am allwaye by the, thou holdest me by my right hande. ‘Thou ledest me with thy coiicel, and afterwarde receauest me vnto glory. O what is there prepared for me in heauen? there is nothinge vpo earth, that I desyre in compa- rison of the. My flesh and my herte fayleth, but God is the strength of my hert, and my porcion for euer. ^ For lo, they that forsake the, shal perishe, thou destroyest all them that committe fornicacion agaynst the. But it is good for me, to holde me fast by God, to put

a Aba, 1. c. Iere. 12. a. lob 21. a * Psal. 93. a. | 
* Mal. 3. c. 4 Psal. 91. a. e Psal. 89. a. Esa. 29. b. | f Num. 18. c. Psal, 118. h. Tren. 3. c. |

: 

The Psalter. Fo. Dyiy. 

my trust in the LORDE God, and to speake of all thy workes.

The Dy. A psalme of Asaph 

GOD, wherfore doest thou cast vs sola 

cleane awaye? why is thy wrath so hote agaynst y shepe of thy pasture? O thynke vpon thy congregacion, whom thou hast pur- chased fro the begynnynge: the staff of thine inheritaunce, whom thou hast redemed, euen this hill of Sion wherin thou dwellest. ‘Treade vpon them with thy fete, q cast them downe to the grounde, for the enemie hath destroyed alltogether in the Sactuary. ‘Thy aduersaries roare in thy houses, ¢ set vp their banners for tokens. Men maye se the axes glister aboue, like as those that hewe in the wod. "They cutt downe ‘all the sylinge worke of y Sactuary with bylles q axes. They haue set fyre vpon thy Sactuary, they haue defiled ý dwellynge place of thy name, eué vnto the groüde. Yee they saye m their hertes: Let vs spoyle thé all together, thus haue they brent vp all the houses of God in the londe. We se oure tokens nomore, there is not one prophet more, no not one that vnderstondeth enymore. Oh
God, how loge shal the aduersary do this dis- honoure? how loge shal the enemie blaspheme thy name? foreuer? Why withdrawest thou thine honde? why pluckest thou not thy right héde out of thy bosome, to consume thine enemies? But God is my kynge of olde, the helpe that is done vpon earth he doth it him- self. Thou deuydest y see thorow thy power,
“thou breakest the heades of the dragos in the waters.

‘Thou smytest the heades of Leuiathan in peces, q geuest him to be meate for the people in the wildernesse. ‘Thou dyggest vp welles a brokes, thou dryest vp mightie waters. The daye is thyne, q the night is thine: thou hast prepared the lightes q the Sonne. ‘Thou hast set all ¥ borders of the earth, thou hast made both Sommer q wynter. Remembre this
(o LORDE) how the enemie rebuketh, ¢ how the foolish people blaspheme thy name.
O delyuer not the soule of thy turtle doue vnto the beestes, q forget not the congrega- cion of the poore for euer. Loke vpon the couenaunt, for the darcke houses of the earth

3 

€ 4 Re. 25. b. 2 Pa. 36. c. Eze.16.d.. ^ Exo. 14. c. i Esa. 27. a. Iob 40. c.

| ffo. DEP. 

The Psalter. 

Psalme Irritij. 

are full of wickednesse. O let not the symple go awaye ashamed, for the poore a nedy geue prayses vnto thy name. Aryse (o God) a manteyne thine owne cause, remembre how the foolish ma blasphemeth the daylie. For- get not the voyce of thine enemies, for the presumpcion of them that hate the, increaseth euer more q more.

The (rritij. A psalme of Asaph. 

NTO the (o God) will we geue thakes, yee vnto the wyll we geue thankes, ¢ seynge thy name is so nye, we will tell of thy wonderous workes. When I maye get a con- uenient tyme, I shal iudge acordinge vnto right. The earth is weake ¢ all that is therin,

but I beare vp hir pilers. Sela. 

I sayde vnto the madde people: deale not so madly, q to the vngodly: set not vp youre hornes. Set not vp youre hornes an hye, q speake not with a stiff necke. For promocio commeth nether from the east ner from the west, ner yet fro the wyldernesse. And why?
God is the judge: “he putteth downe one q setteth vp another. For in the honde of the
LORDE there is a cuppe full of stronge wyne, q he poureth out of the same: As for the dregges therof, all y vngodly of the earth shal drynke them, q sucke them out. But I wil talke of the God of Iacob, q prayse him for euer. All the hornes of the vngodly will I breake, q y hornes of the rightuous shalbe exalted.

Che Irrb. A psalme of Asaph. 

N Iuda is God knowne, his name is greate in Israel. At Salem is his tabernacle, q his dwellinge in Sion. There breaketh he the arowes of the. bowe, y shylde, ^the swerde a the whole battayll.

Sela. Thou art of more honoure q might the the hilles of robbers. The proude shalbe robbed q slepe their slepe, a ý mightie shalbe able to do nothinge with their hodes. Whe thou rebukest them (o God of Iacob) both the charettes q horsmen shal fall on slepe.
Thou art feareful, for who maye abyde in thy sight, when thou art angrie? ^When thou lattest thy iudgment be herde from heauen, the erth trembleth q is still Yee when
God aryseth to geue iudgment, q to helpe 

* Eccl. 35. b. Esa. 51. b. lere. 25. c. > Psal. 45. b. 
* Iud. 4. c. 2 Par. 29. d. 4 Reg. 19. g. 

all them that be in aduersite vpon earth. 
Sela. 

When thou punyshest one man, he must knowlege, that thou art redy to punysh other mo. “Loke what ye promyse vnto the LORDE youre God, se that ye kepe it, all ye that be roude aboute him: brynge presentes vnto him
M ought to be feared. Which taketh awaye the 

reth of prynces, q is wonderfull amoge the kynges of the earth.

The Irrbi. A psalme of Asaph. 

I CRIED vnto God with my voyce, * yee euen vnto God cried J with my voyce, q he herde me. In the tyme of my trouble I sought the LORDE, I helde vp my hondes vnto him in the night season, for my soule refused all other comforte. When I was in heuynesse, I thought vpo God: whé my hert

was vexed, then dyd I speake. 
Sela. ‘Thou heldest myne eyes wakynge, 
I was so feble, that I coude not speake. 
‘Then remembred I the tymes of olde, q the yeares that were past. J called to remem- braunce my songe in the night, I commoned

with myne owne herte, and sought out my sprete. Wil the LORDE cast out for euer?

a 

Wil he be nomore intreated? Is his mercy 38 

cleane gone? Is his promyse come vtterly toanende for euermore? Hath the LORDE forgotten to be gracious? Or, hath he shut vp his louynge kyndnesse in displeasure ?
Sela. At the last I came to this poynte, that 
I thought: O why art thou so foolish ? the right honde of the most hyest can chaunge all.

Therfore wil I remembre the workes of the 
LORDE, and call to mynde thy wonders of olde tyme. I wil speake of all thy workes, and my talkynge shalbe of thy doinges.

Thy waye (o God) is holy, who is so greate q mightie as God? ‘Thou art the God, that doth wonders, thou hast declared thy power amonge the people. *'Thou with thine arme hast delyuered thy people, euen the sonnes of lacob and loseph. Sela. The waters sawe y (o God) y waters sawe y, q were afrayed : y depthes were moued. The thicke cloudes poured out water, ý cloudes thodered, and thy arowes wente abrode. Thy thonder was herde rounde aboute, the lighteninges shone vpon the grounde, the earth was moued and shoke

4 Deut. 23. d. Eccls. 5.3. * Psal. 141. a. f Psal. 142.8, 
£ Exo. 14. d. 

€ 

Psalme Irby. 

withall. Thy waye was in the see, and thy pathes in the greate waters, yet coude no rnan knowe thy fotesteppes. Thou leddest thy people like a flocke of shepe, by the honde of
Moses and Aaron. 

The (rybij. A psalme of Asaph. 
I | EARE my lawe (o my people) encline 

youre eares vnto y wordes of my mouth. 
“I wil open my mouth in parables, and speake of thinges of olde. Which we haue herde and knowne, and soch as oure fathers haue tolde vs. That we shulde not hyde them from the children of the generacions to come: but to shewe the honoure of the
LORDE, his might and wonderfull workes that he hath done. He made a couenaunt with Iacob, ‘and gaue Israel a lawe, which he comaunded oure forefathers to teach their children. That their posterite might knowe it, and the children which were yet vnborne.

To the intent y when they came vp, they might shewe their children the same. ‘That they also might put their trust in God, ¢ not to forget what he had done, but to kepe his comaundementes. “And not to be as their forefathers, a frowarde and ouerthwarte gene- racion, a generacion that set not their herte a right, and whose sprete was not true towarde
God. Like as the children of Ephraim, which beynge harnessed and carienge bowes, turned them selues backe in the tyme of bat- tayll ‘They kepte not the couenaüt of God,
€ wolde not walke in his lawe. 

They forgat what he had done, and the wonderfull workes that he had shewed for them. Maruelous thinges dyd he in the sight of their fathers in the londe of Egipte, euen in the felde of Zoan. ^He deuyded the see and let them go thorow it, and made the waters to stonde like a wall ‘In the daye tyme he led them with a cloude, and all the night thorow with a light of fyre. He cloaue the hard rockes in the wildernesse, and gaue them drynke therof, as it had bene out of the greate deapth. He brought waters out of the stony rocke, so that they gusshed out like the ryuers. Yet for all this they synned agaynst him, and prouoked the most hyest in the wil- dernesse. They tempted God in their hertes,

a Mat. 13.e. Exo.12.d. Deut.4.b. and 11. c. Ephe. 6.a. 
* Exo. 12.e.and 13.d. Deut.G.d. © Eze. 18. b. and 20. c. 
Deut. 32.a. 4d Exo.14.e. ¢ Exo.13.d. Exo, 17. b. 

The Psalter. 

and requyred meate for their lust. /For they spake agaynst God and sayde: Yee yee, God shal prepare a table in the wyldernesse, shall he? Lo, he smote the stony rocke, that the watery streames gusshed out, and the streames flowed withall: but how can he geue bred and prouyde flesh for his people? When the
LORDE herde this, he was wroth: so the fyre was kyndled in Iacob, and heuy displea- sure agaynst Israel.

Because they beleued not in God, and put not their trust in his helpe. So he com- maüded the cloudes aboue, and opened the dores of heauen. * He rayned downe Manna vpo them for to eate, and gaue them bred from heauen. Then ate they angels fode, for he sent them meate ynough. He caused the east wynde to blowe vnder the heauen, and thorow his power he brought iu the south wynde. ^He made flesh to rayne vpon them as thicke as dust, aud fethered foules like the sonde of $ see. He let it fall amoge their tetes roüde aboute their habitacios. So they ate q were fylled, for he gaue them their owne desyre. ‘ They werenotdispoynted of their lust.

But whyle y meate was yet in theyr mouthes: 
The heuy wrath of God came vpo thé, slewe y welthiest of thé, q smote downe $ chosen men of Israel. yet more, ‘and beleued not his woderous workes. ‘Therfore their dayes were consumed in vanite, and sodenly their yeares were gone.
When he slewe them, they sought him, and turned them early vnto God. :

They thought then that God was their socoure, and that the hye God was their re- demer. Neuerthelesse, they dyd but flater him in their mouthes, and dissembled with him in their tonges. For their herte was not whole with him, nether continued they in his couenaunt. But he was so mercifull, that he forgaue their mysdedes, and destroyed them not: Yee many a tyme turned he his wrath awaye, and wolde not suffre his whole displea- sure to aryse. "For he considered y they were but flesh: euen a wynde that passeth awaye, and commeth not agayne. O how oft haue they greued him in the wildernesse? How many a tyme haue they prouoked him in the deserte? They turned backe ¢ tempted God,

Nu. 20. b. 1 Co. 10. a. f Exo. 16, a. Num. 11. a. 
£ Exo.16.c. Deut.8.a. Sap.16.d. Ioh.6.d. ^ Exo.16.c. 
Num. 11.g. 'Num.11.g. * Num.14.a. ! Psal.102.b. 

69 

Fo. urrt. 

But for all this they synned|33 

So. Orr. 

3:|and moued the holy one in Israel. 
| [thought not of his hàde, in ý daye when he delyuered them from the hande of y enemie.

They 

How he had wrought his miracles in Egipte, and his woders in the londe of Zoan. How he turned their waters in to bloude, so that they might not drynke of the ryuers. How he sent lyse amonge them, to eate them vp, and frogges to destroye them. How he gaue their frutes vnto the catirpiller, and their laboure vnto the greshopper. * How he bett downe their vynyardes with hayle stones, and their Molbery trees with the frost. How he smote their catell with haylestones, and their flockes with hote thoder boltes. How he sent vpon them y furiousnesse of his wrath, anger q displeasure: with trouble and fallinge in of euel angels. “When he made a waye to his fearfull indignacio, and spared not their soules from death, yee and gaue their catell ouer to the pestilence. ^When he smote all the firstborne in Egipte, the most principall and mightiest in y dwellinges of Ham.

F| But as for his owne people, he led them forth like shepe, and caried them in the wyl- dernesse like a flocke. He brought them out safely, that they shulde not feare, and ouer- whelmed their enemies with the see. He caried them vnto the borders of his Sanctuary: euen in to this hill, which he purchased with his right hande. * He dyd cast out the Heithen before them, caused their londe to be deuyded amonge them for an heretage, and made y tribes of Israel to dwell in their tétes. For all this they tempted and displeased the most hye God, and kepte not his couenaunt. But turned their backes and fell awaye like their forefathers, startinge asyde like a broken bowe. And so they greued him with their hie places, a prouoked him with their ymages.
When God herde this, he was wroth, and toke sore displeasure at Israel. So that he for- soke the tabernacle in Silo, euen his habitacion wherin he dwelt amonge men. *He delyuered their power in to captiuyte, and their glory in

Oto the enemies hode. He gaue his people ouer in to the swerde, for he was wroth with his heretage.

The fyre consumed their yonge men, and their maydés were not geuen to mariage.

* Exo. 7. d. Exo. 8. e. Exo. 8. b. è Exo. 10. d. 
Exo. 9. c. * Exo. 9. a. 4 Exo. 19. e. Psal. 134. b. 
* Deut. 3. a. Iosu. 6. a. f]ere.7.2. £ 1 Re.4.5.6. 

MI Reg. 4.a. ' Psal.86.2. *1Re,16.c. /!2 Par.36.c. 

The Psalter. 

Psalme Irrbíij. 

Their prestes were slayne with the swerde, and there were no wyddowes to make la- mentacion. So the LORDE awaked as one out of slepe, and like a giaunte refreshed with wyne. ^He smote his enemies in y hynder partes, and put them to a perpetuall shame.
He refused the tabernacle of Ioseph, and chose not the trybe of Ephraim. — Neuerthe- lesse, he chose ý trybe of Iuda, eué the hill of Sion which he loued. ‘And there he buylded his temple on hye, and layed y foun- dacion of it like Y grounde, that it might per- petually endure. ‘He chose Dauid also his seruaüt, and toke him awaye from the shepe foldes. As he was folowinge the yowes greate with youge, he toke him, that he might fede
Iacob his people, and Israel his enheritaunce. 
So he fed them with a faithfull and true hert, and ruled them with all y diligence of his power.

The lyrbítj, A psalme of Asaph. 

() GOD, y Heithen are fallen in to thine heretage: 'thy holy temple haue they defyled, and made lerusalem an heape of stones. "'The deed bodies of thy seruauntes haue they geuen vnto ¥ foules of the ayre to be deuoured, and the flesh of thy sayntes vnto j beestes of thelonde. Their bloude haue they shed like water on euery syde of leru- salem, and there was no mà to burie them.
^We are become an open shame vnto oure enemies, a very scorne and derision vnto them that are rounde aboute vs.

LORDE, how longe wilt thou be angrie ? shal thy gelousy burne like fyre for euer?
Poure out thy indignacion vpon the Heithen that knowe the not, ^and vpon the kyngdomes that call not vpon thy name.

For they haue deuoured lacob, and layed waiste his dwellinge place. ^O remébre not oure olde synnes, but haue mercy vpon vs (q that soone) for we are come to greate mysery.

Helpe vs (o God oure Sauyoure) for y glory |33 of thy name: o delyuer vs, q forgeue vs oure synnes for thy names sake. Wherfore shall y Heithé saye: where is now their God? O fet the vengeaunce ? of thy seruauntes bloude that is shed, be openly shewed vpon the Heithé in oure sight. O let the soroufull sighinge of the presoners come before the, and acordinge

1 Mac. 7. c. 
? Tere. 10. d. 

m Tere. 15. a. Tere. 16. a. and 34. d. 
^1 Reg. 9. b. Psal. 43. b. lere. 19. a. 
P Esa. 64. b. 1 Psal. 113. b. 

Psalme Iyyrt. 

vnto ¥ power of thine arme, preserue those y are appoynted to dye. And for the blasphemy wher with oure neghbours haue blasphemed y, rewarde the (o LORDE) seuefolde in to their bosome. So we y be thy people « shepe of thy pasture, shal geue the thankes for euer, t wil allwaye be shewinge forth thy prayse more q more

The (rxtx. A psalme of Asaph. 
EARE o thou shepherde of Israel, thou y ledest Iacob like a flocke of shepe : shewe thy self, thou y syttest vpo y Cherubins.
| Before Ephraim, Be lamin q Manasses: stere vp thy power q come helpe vs. Turne vs agayne (o God) shewe the light of ux countenaüce q we shalbe whole. LORD
God of hoostes, how loge wilt m be angrie ouer the prayer of thy “people ? Thou hast fed thé with the bred of teares,’ yee thou hast geuen thé pléteousnes of teares to drynke.
Thou hast made vs a very strife vnto oure neghbours, and oure enemies laugh vs to scorne.

Turne vs agayne (thou God of hoostes) shewe the light of thy coütenaüce, q we shalbe whole. “Thou hast brought a vynyarde out of Egipte, thou didest east out Y Heithe, q plate it. Thou maydest rowme for it, q caused it to take rote, so y it fylled the lode. The hilles were couered with the shadowe of it, « so were the stronge Cedre trees with the bowes therof. She stretched out hir braüches vnto the see, ^q hir bowes vnto the water: Why hast thou then broken downe hir hedge, na all they which go by, plucke of hir grapes ?

The wilde bore out of the wod hath wrutt it vp, q the beestes of the felde haue deuoured it, Turne y agayne (thou God of hoostes) loke downe from heauen, beholde ¢ viset this vynyarde. Manteyne it, that thy right hode hath plated, ¢ the sonne whom thou maydest so moch of for thy sel£^ For why? it is brét with fyre, q lyeth waist: o let thé perishe at the rebuke of thy wrath.

Let thy honde be vpon the man of thy right honde, « vpon the man who thou maydest so moch off for thine owne self. And so wil not we go backe from the: oh let vs lyue, q we shal call vpon thy name. Turne vs agayne

a Nu. 2. c b Psal. 41. a. * Esa. 5, a, Tere. 12. b. 
Mat. 21. d 4 Psal. 88, a. * Exo, 4. d. 2 Par. 36. c. 
J Nume. 10. a 5 Exo.3. b. Exo. 19. c. Exo. 17. a. 

The Cbr Psalter, fo Der 

fo. Cbr Psalter, fo Der o LORDE God of hoostes, shewe the light of thy coütenaüce, q we shal be whole.

YNGE merely vnto God which is oure|@ 
S strégth, make a chearful noyse vnto y 
God of Iacob. Take y psalme, brynge hither the tabret, the mery harpe q lute. Blowe vp the trópettes in the new Moone, vpon oure solépne feast daye./ For this is the vse in
Israel, x a lawe of the God of Iacob. 

This he ordened in Ioseph for a testimony, when he came out of Egipte, q had herde a straüge laguage. When he eased his shulder from ine burthe, ¢ when his hondes were delyuered fro the pottes. £ Whé thou calldest vpon me in trouble, I helped the q herde the, what tyme as the storme fell vpo the, I proued the also at the water of strife. Sela.

Heare o my people, for I assure the o Israel, yf thou wilt herken vnto me: There shal no straunge God be in the, nether shalt thou worshipe eny other God. ^I am the LORDE thy God, which brought the out of the lode of Egipte: opé thy mouth wyde, ¢ I shal fyll it. ‘But my people wolde not heare my voyce, x Israel wolde not obeye me. So I aue thé vp vnto their owne hertes lust," q let thé folowe their owne ymaginacions. O y my people wolde obeye me, for yf Israel wolde walke in my wayes, I shulde soone put downe their enemies, q turne myne hode agaynst their aduersaries. "The haters of y
LORDE shulde mysse Israel, but their tyme shulde endure for euer. He Beni fede them with the fynest wheate floure, 'q satisfie them with hony out of the stony rocke.

The Irrri. A psalme of Asaph. 

OD stondeth in the congregacion of the 

goddes, q is a iudge amonge the iudges. 
"How longe wil ye geue wroge iudgment, q accepte the personnes of the vngodly ? Sela.
Defende the poore q fatherlesse, se that soch as be in nede q necessite hane right. Delyuer the outcaste q poore,” q saue hym from the hande of the vngodly. Neuertheles, they wil not be lerned « vnderstonde, but walke on still in darcknesse: "therfore must all the foundacions of the londe be moued. I haue

The Iyrr. A psalme of Asaph. 

* Exo. 20.a. §Pro.1.c. 
™ Mich. 3. a. Soph. 3. a. 
| [Exe 22, b, Ioh. 10. d. 

k Rom. 1. d. 
^ Pro. 24. b. 

! Deut, 32. b. 
? Esa. 3. a. 

Fo. drriiij. sayde : ye are goddes, ye all are the childré of

most hyest. But ye shal dye like men, q fall like one of the tyrauntes. Aryse (o God) q indge thou the earth," for all Heithen are thine by enheritaunce.

The Irrrij. A psalme of Asaph. 

OLDE not thy tonge (o God) kepe not 

still sylēce, refrayne not thy self, o God. 
* For lo, thy enemies make a murmuringe, q they y hate the, lifte vp their heade. They ymagin craftely agaynst thy people, q take councell agaynst thy secrete ones. Come
(saye they) let vs rote them out from amonge the people, that the name of Israel maye be put out of remébraunce. For they haue cast their heades together with one consent, q are céfederate agaynst the. The tabernacles of the Edomites q Ismaelites, the Moabites q
Hagarenes. Gebal, Ammon and Amalech: the Philistynes with them that dwell at Tyre.
Assur also is ioyned vnto thé q helpe the children of Loth. Selah.

But do thou to them as vnto the Madian- ites, vnto Sisera and vnto labin by y broke of Cyson. “Which perished at Endor, x be- came as the doge of y earth. Make their prynces like Oreb and Zeeb: ^ Yee make all their prynces like as Zebea and Salmana.

Which saye: we wil haue the houses of 
God in possession. O my God, make them like vnto a whele,’ and as the stuble before the wynde. Like as a fyre that burneth vp the wodd, q as the flame that consumeth the mountaynes. Persecute them euen so with thy tempest, q make them afrayed with thy storme. Make their faces ashamed (o
LORDE) y they maye seke thy name. Let thé be cofounded q vexed euer more q more:
Let the be put to shame q perish. That they maye knowe, that thou art alone, that thy name is the LORDE, and that thou only art the most hyest ouer all the earth.

The (ryrüj. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

O HOW amiable are thy dwellīges, thou 
LORDE of hoostes ?/ My soule hath a desyre « loginge for y courte of y LORDE, my hert q my flesh reioyse in y lyuynge God.
For the sparow hath founde ME an house, v the swalowe a nest, where she maye laye hir

a 

* Paal. 2. b. ? Psal, 2, a. * Iud. 7. e. Iud. 4. c. 

4 Iud. 7. g. Iud. 8. b. 

The Psalter. 

Psalme Irrrij. 

yoge: eue thy aulters O LORDE of hoostes, my kynge q my God. O how blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they are allwaye praysinge y. Blessed are ¥ men whose strégth is in y, in whose herte are thy wayes.

Which goinge thorow the vale of mysery, vse it for a well, and the poles are fylled with water. ‘They go from strength to strength] 33 and so the God of Gods apeareth vnto thé in
Sion. O LORDE God of hoostes, heare my prayer: herken o God of Iacob.

Beholde o God oure defence, loke vpon the face of thyne anoynted. For one daye in thy courte is better then a thousande: I had rather be a dore keper in the house of my
God, then to dwell in the tentes of the vn- godly. For the LORDE God is a light and defence, the LORDE wil gene grace q worshipe, and no good thinge shal he witholde from them, that lyue a godly life. O LORDE
God of hoostes, blessed is the man, y putteth his trust in the.

The Irrriiij. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

ORDE, thou barest a loue vnto thy|a 
L londe, thou didest bringe agayne the captiuyte of Iacob. Thou diddest forgeue the offence of thy people,* and couerdest all their synnes. Sela.

Thou tokest awaye all thy displeasure, q turnedest thy self from thy wrothful indigna- cion. Turne vs then (o God oure Sauioure) q let thine anger ceasse from vs. Wilt thou be displeased at vs for ener? wilt thou stretch out thy wrath from one generacion to another?
Wilt thou not turne agayne, q quycken vs, that thy people maye reioyse in the ?

I wil herken what the LORDE God wil|33 saie, for he shal speake peace vnto his people and to his sayntes, that they turne not them selues vnto foolishnes. For his saluacion is nye them that feare him, so that glory shal dwell in oure londe. Mercy and trueth are met together, rightuousnesse and peace kysse ech other. Trueth shal ryse out of y earth, and rightuousnesse shal loke downe from heauen. And why? the LORDE shal shewe louinge kyndnesse, and oure londe shal gene hir encrease. Rightuousnesse shal igo before him, and prepare the waye for his commynge.

£9 Cor. 5. a. g Can. 5. c. 

^ Psal. 31. a. 

* Psal. 1. b. and 34. a. 

Che Psalter. Fo. Drrb. 

her, euen the most hyest which hath buylded her. The LORDE shal cause it be preached q written amonge the people, that he was borne there. Sela.

Therfore the dwellinge of all syngers q daunsers is in the.

The Iyyyb. Psalme. A prayer of Dauid. 
OWE downe thine eare (0 LORDE) and heare me, for I am cofortles and poore.
O kepe my soule, for I am holy: my God, helpe thy sernaunt that putteth his trust in the. Be mercifull vnto me (o LORDE) for
I call daylie vpon the. — Cóforte the soule of thy seruaunt, for vnto the (o LORDE) do I lift vp my soule. “For thon LORDE art good and gracions, ¢ of greate mercy vnto all them that call vpon the.

Geue eare LORDE vnto my prayer, and poudre my humble desyre. In the tyme of my trouble I call vpon the, for thou hearest me. Amonge the goddes there is none like the o LORDE, there is not one that ca do as thou doest. All nacions whom thou hast made, shall come and worshipe before the o LORDE, and shal glorifie thy name. For thou art greate, thon doest wonderous thinges, thon art God alone. Lede me in thy waye
(o LORDE) that I maye walke in thy trueth : 
O let my hert delyte in fearynge thy name. 
I thanke the o LORDE my God, q wil prayse thy name for euer. For greate is thy mercy towarde me, ^thou hast delyuered my soule
€ from y nethermost hell. O God, the proude are rysen agaynst me, and the cogregacion of i mightie seketh after my soule, q set not

efore their eyes. “But thou (o LORD 
God) art full of compassion and mercy, longe suffrynge, greate in goodnesse q trueth. O turne the then vnto me, haue mercy vpó me: geue thy strength vnto thy seruaunt, q helpe the sonne of thy handmayde.

Shewe some toké vpon me for good, that they which hate me, maye se it and be ashamed : because thou LORDE hast helped me, ¢ comforted me.

The Irrrbij. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

LORDE God my Sanyoure, I crie 
O daye q night before the: Oh let my prayer entre in to thy presence, encline thine eare vnto my callynge. For my soule is full of trouble, c my life draweth nye vnto hell.
I am coüted as one of thé that go downe vnto the pytte, I am eué as a mà that hath no strégth. Fre amoge the deed, like vnto thé y lye in the graue, which be ont of remem- braüce, and are cutt awaye from thy honde.
Thon hast layed me in the lowest pytte, in y darcknesse and inthedepe. Thy indignacion lieth hard vpon me, and thou vexest me with all thy floudes. Sela. Thon hast pnt awaye myne acquataunce farre fro me, t made me to be abhorred of them: I am so fast in preson, that I can not get forth.

My sight fayleth for very trouble: LORDE, 
I call daylie vpó the, and stretch out my hondes vnto the. ° Doest thon shewe wonders amonge the deed? Can the physicias rayse them vp agayne, that they maye prayse the ?
^ Maye thy louynge kyndnes be shewed in the grane, or thy faithfulnesse in destruccion?
Maye thy wonderous workes be knowne in the darcke, or thy righteousnes in the londe where all thinges are forgotte ?

Vnto the I crie (o LORDE) and early|¢ cometh my prayer before the. LORDE, why puttest thou awaye my soule? Wherfore hydest thou thy face fro me? My strength is gone for very sorow and misery, with fearful- nesse do I beare thy burthens. Thy wrothfull displeasure goeth ouer me, the feare of the oppresseth me. ‘They come rounde aboute me daylie like water, and compase me toge- ther on euery syde. My louers and frédes hast thon put awaye fro me, and turned awaye myne acquantaunce.

The Iryrbi. A psalme of the children of Corah. 

IR foundacions? are vpó the holy hilles : 
| | the LORDE loneth the gates of Sion more, the all $ dwelliges of Iacob.

Very E caller thiges are spoké of y, thou cite of God. Sela. I wil thinke vpo Rahab q Babilo, so that they shal knowe me: Yee the Philistynes also q they of Tyre with the
Morians. Lo, there was he borne. And of 
Sion it shalbe reported, that he was borne in 

The fyyrbiij. A psalme of Ethan the Esrahite. 

Y songe shal be rr of the louynge kyndnesse of the LORDE, £ with my

e Psal. 6. a. f Esa. 38. d. € Psal. 100. a. 

4 Exo. 34. a. Ioel 2. c. Psal. 102. a, 144. a. ^ Psal. 
29.a. * Psal. 102,2. 144. a. Exo.34.2a. 4 Psal.77.g. 

fo. drrbi. 

The Psalter, 

€ 

mouth wil I euer be shewinge thy faithful- nesse fró one generacion to another. For I haue sayde: mercy shal be set vp for euer, thy faithfulnesse shalt thou stablish in the heauens. ^I haue made a couenaunt with my chosen, I haue sworne vnto Dauid my seruaunt. Thy sede wil I stablish for euer, and set vp thy Trone from one generacion to another, Sela.

O LORDE, the very heaues shal prayse thy wonderous workes, ’ yee q thy faithfulnes in y congregacion of the sayntes. For who is he amonge the cloudes, that maye be copared vnto the LORDE? * Yee what is he amonge the goddes, that is like vnto the LORDE?
God is greatly to be feared in the councell of the sayntes, q to be had in reuerence of all the that are aboute him. O LORDE God of hoostes, who is like vnto the in power? thy trueth is rounde aboute the. ^'lhou rulest the pryde of the see, thou stillest the wawes therof, whé they arise. Thou breakest the proude, like one that is wounded, thou scatrest thine enemies abrode with thy mightie arme.
The heaués are thine, the earth is thine: thou hast layed the foundacio of the ronde worlde and all that therin is. ‘Thou hast made the north and the south, Tabor and Hermon shal reioyse in thy name. "Thou hast a mightie arme, stronge is thy hande, and hye is thy right hande. Rightuousnes and equite is the habitacion of thy seate, mercy and trveth go before thy face. Blessed is the people
(o LORDE) that can reioyse in the, and walketh in the light of thy countenaunce.
"Their delite is in thy name all the daye longe, and thorow thy rightuousnesse they shalbe exalted. For thou art the glory of their strength, q thorow thy fauoure shalt thou lift vp eure hornes. ^ The LORDE is oure defence, and the holy one of Israel is oure kynge. Thou spakest somtyme in visios vnto thy sayntes, and saydest: I haue layed helpe vpon one that is mightie, I haue exalted one chosen out of the people. ^I haue founde
Dauid my sernaüt, with my holy oyle haue I anoynted him. My honde shal holde him fast, and my arme shal strength him. The enemie shal not ouercome him, and the sonne of wickednesse shal nof hurte him. I shal

è Psal. 18. a. € Psal. 

* Esa. 1. a. 
2 Reg. 5. a. 

* 2 Weg. 7. c. Psal. 131. a. 
85. b. 5 Exo.14.e. Mat.8. c. 

Loc. / 1 Re, 16. a. 

smyte downe his foes before his face, and plage them that hate him.

My trueth also q my mercy shalbe with him, and in my name shal his horne be exalted. FÐ wil set his honde in the see,’ and his right honde in the floudes. He shal call me: thou art my father, my God, and the strength of my saluacion. And I wil make him my first- borne, hyer then the kinges of the earth.

My mercy wil I kepe for him for euermore, and my couenaunt shall stonde fast with him.
His sede wil I make to endure for euer, yee and his Trone as the dayes of heauen. * But yf his childré forsake my lawe, and walke not in my iudgmentes. Yf they breake myne ordinaunces, and kepe not my commaunde- mentes. I wil vyset their offences with the rodde, and their synnes with scourges. Ne- uerthelesse, my louynge kyndnesse wil I not vtterly take from him, ner suffre my trueth to fayle. My couenaunt wil I not breake, ner disanulle the thinge y is gone out of my lippes. I haue sworne once by my holynesse, that I wil not fayle Dauid. His sede shal endure for euer, and his seate also like as the
Sonne before me. ‘He shal stonde fast for euermore as the Moone, and as the faithfull witnesse in heauen.

Sela. But now thou forsakest and abhorrest thyne anoynted, and art displeased at him.
Thou hast turned backe the couenaunt of thy seruaunt, and cast his crowne to the grounde.
Thou hast ouer throwne all his hedges,^ and broke downe his stronge holdes. Al they that go by, spoyle him, he is become a rebuke vnto his neghbours. Thou settest vp the right hade of his enemies, and makest all his aduersaryes to reioyse. Thou hast taken awaye the strength of his swerde, and geuest him not victory in the battayll. ‘Thou hast put out his glory, and cast his Trone downe to the grounde. The dayes of his youth hast thou shortened, and couered him with dis- honoure. Sela.

LORDE, how longe wilt thou hyde thy self? For euer? shal thy wrath burne like fyre? O remembre how shorte my tyme is, hast thou made all men for naught? What man is he that lyueth, and shal not se death ?

^ 9 Re. 7.c. 3 Re. 9. b. * Psal. 71.2. * Psal. 79, b. 

! Gen. 2. c. Heb. 9. d. 

Psalme rei, 

Maye a ma delyuer his owne soule from the honde of hell? Sela.

LORDE, where are thy olde louynge kynd- nesses, which thou sworest vnto Dauid in thy trueth? Remébre LORDE the rebuke that y multitude of the people do vnto thy ser- uauntes, t how I haue borne it in my bosome.
° Wherwith thine enemies blaspheme the, q slaüder y fotesteppes of thy anoynted. Thankes be to the LORDE for euermore: Amen,
Amen. 

The lrrrir. Psalme. 

A prayer of Moses the man of God. 
A ORDE, thou art oure refuge from one 

generacion to another. Before the mountaynes were brought forth, or euer the earth q the worlde were made, thou art God from euerlastinge and worlde with out ende.
Thou turnest man to destruccion, Agayne, thou sayest: come agayne ye children of men.
‘For a thousande yeares in thy sight are but as yesterdaye that is past, and like as it were a night watch.

As soone as thou scatrest them, they are euen as a slepe, aud fade awaye sodenly like the grasse. ‘In the mornynge it is grene and groweth vp, but in the euenynge it is cutt downe and wythered. For we consume awaye in thy displeasure, and are afrayed at thy wrothfull indignacion. ‘Thou settest oure miszdedes before the, aud oure secrete synnes in the light of thy countenaunce. For when thou art angrie, all oure dayes are gone, we brynge oure yeares to an ende, as it were a tayle that is tolde. ‘The dayes of oure age are ij. score yeares q ten: q though men be so stronge that they come to iiij. score yeares, yet is their strength then but laboure and sorowe: so soone passeth it awaye, q we are gone. But who regardeth the power of thy wrath, thy fearfull ¢ terrible displeasure? O teach vs to nombre oure dayes, that we maye applie ^onre hertes vnto wyszdome.

Turne the agayne (o LORDE) at the last, and be gracious vnto thy seruauntes. O satisfie vs with thy mercy, and that soone: so shal we reioyse and be glad all the dayes of oure life. Comforte vs agayne, now after the tyme that thou hast plaged vs, and for the yeares wherin we haue suffred aduersite.

a i Pet, 3. b. 
Psal, 36.a. Esa. 40. a. 

> 2 Pet. 3. b. 
4 Psal. 38, a. 

e Peal, 72. c. 
* Matt. 4. a.| 

The Psalter. 

Shewe thy seruauntes thy worke, q their children thy glory. And the glorious maiesty of the LORDE oure God be vpon vs: O prospere thou the worke of oure hondes vpon vs, © prospere thou oure hondy worke.

The re. Psalme. 

HO so dwelleth vnder y defence of the most hyest, q abydeth vnder y sha- dowe of y allmightie: He shal saye vnto y
LORDE: o my hope, ¢ my stronge holde, my 
God, in who I wil trust. m he shal deliuer the fro the snare of the hunter, « fro the noysome pestilence, He shal coner the vnder his wynges, that thou mayest be safe vnder his fethers: his faithfulnesse and trueth shal be thy shylde and buckler. So y thou shalt not nede to be afrayed for eny bugges by night,

ner for arowe that flyeth by daye. 

For the pestilece that erepeth in y darck- nesse, ner for the sicknesse y destroyeth in the noone daye. A thousande shal fall besyde the, and tén thousande at thy right honde, but it shal not come nyethe. Yee with thyne eyes shalt thou beholde, and se the rewarde of the vngodly. For thou LORDE art my hope, thou hast set thy house of defence very hye. There shal no euell happen vnto the, nether shal eny plage come nye thy dwellinge.
‘For he shall gene his angels charge ouer the, to kepe the in all thy wayes.

They shal beare the in their hondes, that thon hurte not thy fote agaynst a stone.

Thou shalt go vpo the Lyon and Adder, the yonge Lyon and the Dragon shalt thou treade vnder thy fete. Because he hath set his loue vpon me, I shal delyuer him: I shal defende him, for he hath knowne my name.

J When he calleth vpon me, I shall heare him : yee I am with him in his trouble, wher- out I wil delyuer him, and brynge him to honoure. With loge life wil I satisfie him, ¢ shewe him my saluacion. i

The yei. Psalme. 
T is a good thinge to geue thankes vnto the LORDE, and to synge prayses! vnto thy name, o most hyest. ‘To tell of thy lou- ynge kyndnesse early in the mornynge, and of thy trueth in the night season.

Exo. 23.c. Psal. 33. a. f Psal. 4. a. 

€ Heb. 13. c. 

Luc. 4. b. 

Fo. urrbüj. 

a 

fo. orrbitj. 
Vpon an instrumét of ten strynges, vpon the lute and with a songe vpon the harpe.

“For thon LORDE hast made me glad thorow thy workes, and I wil reioyse oner the operacion of thy hondes. O LORDE, how glorious are thy workes, thy thoughtes are very depe. An vnwyse man wil not knowe this, v a foole wil not vnderstode it. ° That the vngodly are grene as the grasse, and that all the workes of wickednes do florish, to be destroyed for ener. But thon LORDE o most hyest, abydest worlde without ende.

For lo, thy enemies (o LORDE) lo, thy enemies shal perishe, and all the workers of wickednes shalbe scatred abrode. “But my horne shalbe exalted like the horne of an
Vnicorne, q shal be anoynted with fresh oyle. 
Myne eye also shal se his lust of myne ene- mies, v myne eare shall heare his desyre of the wicked y ryse vp agaynst me. ‘The rightuous shal florish like a palme tre, and growe like a Cedre of Libanus. Soch as be planted in the house of the LORDE, be frutefull, plenteous q grene. That they maye shewe, how true the LORDE my stregth 1s, and that there is no vnrightuousnesse in him.

The reij. Psalme. 

HE LORDE is kynge, and hath put on 
‘| glorious apparell, the LORDE hath put on his apparell q gyrded himself with strégth : “he hath made the ronnde worlde so sure, that it can not be moned. From that tyme forth hath thy seate bene prepared, thou art from euerlastinge.e ‘The flondes aryse /(o
LORDE) the floudes lift vp their noyse, ¥ floudes lift vp their wawes. The wawes of the see are mightie, q rage horribly: * but yet the LORDE that dwelleth on hye, is mightier.
Thy testimonies (0 LORDE) are very sure, 

holynesse becommeth thyne house for euer. 

The reiij. Psalme. 
LORDE God, to whom vengeaunce belogeth:^ thou God to whom ven- geaunce belongeth, shewe thy self.

Arise thou indge of the worlde, a rewarde the proude after their deseruynge. LORDE, how longe shal the vngodly, ‘how longe shal the vngodly tryumphe? How longe shal all

* Rom. 1.b. Sap. 13.a. ? Psal.72.c. c Nu.23. d. 24.b. 

d Psal, 23. a. * Esa. 6. a. f Psal. 45. a. 88. b. t Deut. 26.c. — ^ Deut.32.c. Rom. 12. c, — * Psal.72.a.
* Esa. 29. c. Eze.8.b.9,b. Iob 22. b. Ecchi. 23. d. 

The Psalter. 

wicked doers speake so diszdaynedly, and make soch pronde boastynge? ‘They smyte downe thy people (o LORDE) and trouble thine heretage. They murthur the widdowe and the straunger, and put the fatherlesse to death. And yet they saie: Tush, the LORDE seyth not, ‘the God of Iacob regardeth it not.
‘Take hede, ye vnwise amonge the people: o ye fooles, when wil ye vnderstonde? He that planted the eare, shal he not heare? he that made the eye, shal not he se? ‘He that nur- tureth the Heithen, and teacheth a man know- lege, shal not he punysh? The LORDE knoweth the thoughtes of men, that they are but vayne. Blessed is the ma, whom thon lernest (o LORDE) and teachest him in thy lawe. ‘That thou mayest gene him pacience in tyme of aduersite, vntill the pytte be dygged vp for the vngodly. For the LORDE wil not fayle his people, nether wil he forsake his inheritaunce. And why? iudgment shalbe turned agayne vnto rightuousnesse, and all soch as be true of hert shal folowe it. Who ryseth vp with me agaynst the wicked? who taketh my parte agaynst the euell doers? Yf the LORDE had not helped me, my soule had allmost bene put to sylence.

When I sayde: my fote hath slipped, thy mercy (o LORDE) helde me vp. In y mul- titude of the sorowes that I had in my herte, thy comfortes haue refreshed my soule.

Wilt thou haue eny thinge to do with the stole of wickednesse, which ymagineth mys- chefe in the lawe? ‘They gather them together agaynst the soule of the rightuous, ¢ condemne the innocent blonde. But the LORDE is my refuge, my God is the stregth of my con- fidéce. He shal recompence the their wicked- nesse, and destroye them in their owne malice : yee the LORDE oure God shal destroye them.

The reitij. Psalme. 
O COME, let vs prayse the LORDE, let s

vs hertely reioyse in the strength of oure aluacion.” Let vs come before his presence with thakesgeuynge, q shewe oure self glad in him with psalmes. For the LORDE is a greate God, and a greate kynge abone all goddes. In his honde are all y corners of the earth, and the strength of the hilles is his

Baruc 4. a. 
2 Cor. 1.a. 

! Gen. 7. d. and 19. Exo. 14. e. 1 Cor. 3. c. m [ob 13. b. 11oh. 1.b. Psal. 31. a.
" Ephe. 5. b. 

Psalme reg. | 

Psalme rro. 

also. The see is his, for he made it, and his hondes prepared the drie lode.

O come, let vs worshipe and bowe downe oure selues: Let vs knele before the LORDE oure maker. For he is oure God: as for vs,
^we are the people of his pasture, and the shepe of his hodes. To daye yf ye wil heare his voyce, hardé not youre hertes, as whé ye prouoked in tyme of temptacion in the wilder- nes. Where youre fathers tépted me, proned me, and sawe my workes. XL. yeares longe was I greued with that generacion, t sayde : they euer erre in their hertes, they verely haue not knowne,my wayes. "Therfore I sware vnto thé in my wrath, that they shulde not enter in to my rest.

The rco. Psalme. 

SYNGE wnto the songe,” synge vnto the LORDE all the whole earth. Synge vnto ý LORDE, q prayse his name, be tellynge of his saluacion from daye to daye. Declare his honoure amonge the Heithe, and his wonders amonge all people. ^For LORDE is greate, and can not worthely be praysed: he is more to be feared then all goddes. As for all y goddes of the Heithe, they be but Idols, but it is the LORDE that made the heaues.
Thankesgeuynge and worshipe are before him, power and honoure are in his Sanc- tuary. e Ascrybe vnto the LORDE (o ye kinredes of the Heithen) ascrybe vnto the
LORDE worshipe and strength. Aserybe vnto the LORDE the honoure of his name, brynge presentes, and come in to his courte.
O worshipe the LORDE in the beutye of holynesse, let the whole earth stonde in awe of him. Tell it out amonge the Heithe, that the LORDE is kynge: and that it 1s he which hath made the rounde worlde so fast, that it cannot be moued, and how that he shal iudge the people rightuously. Let the heaués re- loyse, and let the earth be glad: let the see make a noyse, yee q all that therin is. Let the felde be ioyfull and all that is in it, let all the trees of the wodd leape for ioye. Before the LORDE, for he commeth: for he cometh to iudge the earth: yee with rightuousnesse shal he iudge the worlde, and ¥ people with his trueth.
? Psal. 22.a, 99. a. Heb. 3. a. b. 4. b. 

Heb. 4. a. * 1 Par. 17. a. 4 Psal. 46. a, Eccli. 43. d. e Psal. 28. a. S Psal. 43.a. & Iudic. 5.2. * Psal. 18. a.

^ Nu. 14. c. 

Che Psalter, 

LORDE a new: 

Fo. deriv. 

The rebi. Psalme. 
HE LORDE is kynge, the earth maye be glad therof: ‘yee the multitude of the Iles maie be glad therof. Cloudes and darcknesse are rounde aboute him, rightuous- nesse and iudgment are the habitacion of his seate. There goeth a fyre before him, to burne vp his enemies on euery syde. His lightenynges geue shyne vnto the worlde, the earth seyth it ¢ is afraied. *'The hilles melt like wax at the presence of ý LORDE, at the presence of the LORDE of the whole earth. ^'The very heauens declare his right- uousnes, q all people se his glory. Cofounded be all they that worshipe ymages, and delite in their Idols: worshipe him all ye goddes.
Sion heareth of it and reioyseth: ‘yee all y idoughters of Iuda are glad because of thy iudgmentes, o LORDE. For thou LORDE art the most hyest ouer all the earth, thou art exalted farre aboue all goddes. ^O ye that loue the LORDE, se that ye hate the thinge which is euell: the LORDE preserueth the soules of his sayntes, he shal delyuer thé from the honde of the vngodly. There is spronge vp a light for the rightuous, and a ioyfull gladnesse for soch as be true herted.
'Reioyse therfore in the LORDE, ye rightuons: and geue thankes for a remem- braunce of his holynesse.

The yebij. Psalme. 

SYNGE vnto the LORDE a new 
O songe, "for he hath done maruelous thinges. With his owne right honde and with his holy arme hath he gotten the victory. The
LORDE hath declared his sauynge health, and his rightuousnes hath he openly shewed in the sight of the Heithe.

"He hath remembred his mercy and trueth towarde the house of Israel: so that all the endes of the worlde se the sauynge health of oure God. Shewe youre self ioyfull vnto the
LORDE all ye londes, synge, reioyse and geue thankes.’ Prayse the LORDE vpon the harpe, synge to the harpe with a psalme of thankesgeuynge. With trompettes also q shawmes : O shewe youre selues ioyfull before the LORDE the kynge. Let the see make a noyse and all y therin is, yee the whole

i Psal. 47. b. k Amos 5. b. ! Psal. 32. a. m Psal. 95. a. 149. a. n Gen. 12. a, 15.a. Esa, 52. b.
* Epbe. 5. b. 

70 

jo. ary. 

worlde qall that dwell therin. Let the floudes clappe their hondes, “and let all the hilles be ioyfull together. Before the LORDE, for he is come to iudge the earth. Yee with rightuousnes shall he iudge the worlde, and the people with equite.

THe rebiij. Psalme. - 

HE LORDE is kynge, be the people 
T neuer so vnpacient: he sytteth vpon the 
Cherubins, be the earth neuer so vnquiete. 
The LORDE is greate in Sion, q hye aboue all people. O let men geue thàkes vnto thy greate q wonderful name, for itis holy. The kynges power loueth iudgment, thou pre- parest equite, thou exeentest iudgmet q right- uousnes m Iacob. ^O magnifie the LORDE oure God, fall downe before his fote stole, for he is holy. Moses q Aaron amonge his prestes, q Samuel amonge soch as call vp6 his name: these called vpon the LORDE, q he herde the. *He spake vnto thé out of the cloudy piler, for they kepte his testimonies, t the lawe that he gaue them.

Thou herdest thé (o LORDE oure God) thou forgauest thé o God, q punyshedst their owne invencions. O magnifie the LORDE oure God, and worshipe him vpo his holy hill, for the LORDE oure God is holy.

The rey. Psalme. 

BE ioyfull in God? (all ye lodes) serue 

the LORDE with gladnes, come before his presence with ioye. Be ye sure, y the
LORDE he is God: It is he y hath made vs, t not we oure selues: we are but his peo- ple, q the shepe of his pasture. O go youre waye in to his gates the with thankesgeuynge, q in to his courtes with prayse: be thakfull vnto him, q speake good of his name. * For the LORDE is gracious, his mercy is euer- lastinge, and his trenth endureth from gene- racion to generacion.

The c. Psalme. A thakesgeuynge of Dauid. 

M Y songe shalbe of mercy and iudgment, 

yee vnto the/ (o LORDE) wil I synge. 
O let me haue vnderstondinge in the waye of godlynesse, vntill the tyme that thon come vnto me: q so shal I walke in my house with an innocent herte. I wil take no wicked

*Paal.95.a. ^1Par.29,a. c Num.19.a. 1 Reg. 3. a. 
7 Psal.65.a. Paal. 94. b. Eze.34.d. * Psal.116.a.118.m. 

ee 

The Psalter. 

thinge in honde, I hate the synne of vnfaith- fulnesse, it shal not cleue vnto me. A fro- warde herte shal departe fro me, I wil not knowe a wicked personne.

Who so preuely slaundreth his neghboure, him wil I destroye: Who so hath a proude loke q an hye stomacke, I maye not awaye with him. Myne eyes shal loke for soch as be faithfull in the londe, ý they maye dwell with me: and who so ledeth a godly life, shal be my seruaunt. There shall no disceatfull personne dwell in my house, he that telleth lyes shal not tary in my sight. I shal soone destroye all the vngodly of the londe, that all wicked doers maye be roted out of the cite of

the LORDE. 

Che ci. Psalme. 

EARE my prayer! (o LORDE) and let my criége come vnto the. Hyde not thy face fro me in the tyme of my trouble: enclyne thine eares vnto me when I call, O heare me, and that right soone. For my dayes are consumed awaye like smoke, q my

bones are brent vp as it were a fyre brande. 
My hert is smytté downe and wythered 

like grasse, so that I forget to eate my bred. 
“For the voyce of my gronynge, my bone wil scarse cleue to my flesh. Iam become like a Pellicane in the wildernes, and like an
Oule in a broken wall. I wake, and am euen as it were a sparow sittinge alone vpon the house toppe. Myne enemies reuyle me all the daye longe, they laugh me to scorne, and are sworne together against me. I eate ashes with my bred, and mengle my drynke with wepynge. And that because of thy indignacion and wrath, for thou hast taken me vp, and cast me awaye. My dayes are gone like a shadowe, and I am wythered like grasse.
But thou (o LORDE) endurest for euer, and thy remembraunce thorow out all generacions.
Arise therfore and haue mercy vpon Sion, 
‘for it is tyme to haue mercy vpon her, yee the tyme is come. And why ? thy seruauntes haue a loue to hir stones, q it pitieth them to se her in the dust. The Heithen shal feare thy name (o LORDE) and all the kynges of the earth thy maiesty. For the LORDE shal buylde vp Sion, and shal apeare in his glory. He turneth him vnto the prayer of

f Psal.88.a. € Paal.142.a, ^ Tren.4. b. 52Pa.36.d. 
Tere. 25. b. 29. b. 1 Esd. 1. a. 6. 7. 

Psalme rrbíij. 

B 

€ 

Psalme cit}. 

the poore destitute, and despyseth not their desyre. This shalbe written for those y come after, “that the people which shalbe borne, maye prayse the LORDE.

For He loketh downe from his Sanctuary, out of the heauen doth the LORDE be- holde the earth.

That he maye heare the mournynges of soch as be in captiuyte, and delyuer the child- ren of death. That they maie preach the name of the LORDE in Sion, and his wor- shipe at lerusalem. When the people are gathered together, and the kyngdomes also to serue y LORDE. He hath brought downe my strength in my iourney, and shortened my dayes. Yet wil I saye: O my God, take me not awaye in y myddest of myne age: as for thy yeares, they endure thorow out all generacions. "Thou LORDE in the begyn- nynge hast layed y foundacion of the earth, and the heauens are the workes of thy hondes,
“They shal perishe, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wexe olde as doth a garment, a as a vesture shalt thou chaunge the, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou art the same, and thy yeares shal not fayle.

The children of thy seruauntes shall con- tynue, q their sede shal prospere in thy sight.

The cij. A psalme of Dauid. 
RAYSE the LORDE (o my soule) qall that is within me prayse his holy name.
Prayse the LORDE o my soule, q forget not all his benefites. Which forgeueth all thy

synnes, and healeth all thy infirmities. “Which saueth thy life from destruccion, and crowneth the with mercy q louynge kyndnesse. Which satisfieth thy desyre with good thinges, mak- ynge the yonge and lusty as an Aegle. ‘The
LORDE executeth rightuousnesse and iudg- ment, for all them y suffre wronge.

shewed his wayes vnto Moses, and his workes 

x 

vnto the children of Israel. ‘The LORDE is full of compassion and mercy, longe suf- feringe, and of greate goodnesse. He wil not allwaye be chydinge, nether wil he kepe his anger for euer.

He hath not dealt with vs after oure synnes, ner rewarded vs acordinge to oure wicked- nesses. ‘For loke how hye the heaué is in

a Psal.21.d. è Psal.32.b. *Hebre.1.b. ^4 Esa. 40.a. 
2Pet.3.b. * Psal.31.a. f Exo.34.a. Psal.85. c. 144. a. 
€ Psal. 56. b. 107. a. ^ Psal. 77. d. — * Psal. 101. d. 

The Psalter. 

He}. 

Fo. dreri. comparison of the earth, so greate is his mercy also towarde them that feare him.

Loke how wyde the east is from the west, so farre hath he set oure synnes from vs.

Yee like as a father pitieth his owne child- ren, euen so is the LORDE mercifull vnto thé that feare him. “For he knoweth wherof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust. That a man in his tyme is but as is grasse, q florisheth as a floure of the felde.

For as soone as the wynde goeth ouer it, it is gone, and the place therof knoweth it nomore.
But the mercifull goodnesse of y LORDE endureth for euer and euer, ‘vpon them y feare him, and his rightuousnesse vpon their childers children. Soch as kepe his coue- naunt, and thinke vpon his commaundementes to do them. The LORDE hath prepared his seate in heaué, and his kyngdome ruleth ouer all. O prayse the LORDE ye angels of his, ye that be mightie in strégth, fulfillinge his commaundement, that mé maye heare the voyce of his wordes. O prayse the LORDE all ye his hoostes, ye seruauntes of his, that do his pleasure. O speake good of the
LORDE all ye workes of his, in euery place of his dominion: prayse thou the LORDE, o my soule.

The ciij. Psalme. 
RAYSE the LORDE o my soule:* O/@ 
LORDE my God, thou art become ex- ceadinge glorious, thou art clothed with ma- iesty and honoure. Thou deckest thy self with light, as it were with a garment, thou spredest out the heauen like a curtayne.
Thou voltest it aboue with waters, thou makest the cloudes thy charet, and goest vpon the wynges of the wynde. ‘Thou makest thine angels spretes, and thy ministers flammes of fyre. Thou hast layed $ earth vpon hir foundacion, that it neuer moueth at eny tyme.
Thou couerest it with the depe like as with a garmét, "so that the waters stonde aboue the hilles. "But at thy rebuke they fle, at the voyce of thy thonder they are afrayed. (Then are the hilles sene alofte, q the valleys beneth in their place which thou hast appoynted for thé.) °Thou hast set them their boundes, which they maie not passe, that they turne

k Psal. 103. d. ' Heb.1.b. ™Gen.7.d. "Psal.105.b. 
? Tere. 5. d. Iob 26. b. 38. a. Deu. 11. b. 28. b. Iob 5. b. 

jo. dreri. 

€ 

not agayne to couer y earth. Thou causest the welles to sprynge vp amonge the valleys, and the waters runne amonge y hilles. That all the beastes of the felde maye hane drynke, q that the wylde asses maye quench their thyrste. |

Aboue vpon the hilles haue the foules of the ayre their habitacion, and synge amonge the braunches. Thou watrest the hylles from aboue, the erth is fylled with y frutes of thy workes. Thou bryngest forth grasse for the catell, and grene herbe for the seruyce of men.
«Thou bryugest fode out of the earth: wyne to make glad ¥ herte of ma, oyle to make him a chearfull countenaunce, q bred to strength mans herte. The trees of the LORDE are full of sappe, euen the trees of Libanus which he hath planted. There make the byrdes their nestes, and the fyrre trees are a dwellinge for the storcke. The hilles are a refuge for the wylde goates, and so are the stony rockes for y conyes. Thou hast appoynted the
Moone for certayne seasons, the Sonne knoweth his goinge downe. ‘Thou makest darcknesse, that it maye be night, wherin all the beastes of the forest do moue. Yee and the yonge lyons which roare after the praye, and seke their meate at God. But when the Sonne ariseth, they get them awaye together, and lye them downe in their dennes. ° Then goeth man forth to his worke, and to till his londe vntill the euenynge. O LORDE, how manifolde are thy workes, right wysely hast thou made thé all: yee the earth is full of thy riches. So is this greate and wyde see also, wherin are thinges crepinge innumerable, both small and greate beastes. There go the shippes ouer, ‘and there is that Leuiathan, whom thou hast made, to take his pastyme therin.

D| They wayte all vpo the, that thou mayest 

geue them meate in due season. ^ Whé thou geuest it them, they gather it: whe thou openest thine honde, they are fylled with good.
But when thou hydest thy face, they are soroufull: ‘yf thou takest awaye their breth, they dye, q are turned agayne to their dust.
Agayne, when thou lattest thy breth go forth, they are made, and so thou renuest the face of the earth. The glorious magesty of

a Gen, 1. d. Peal. 146. b. Eccli. 31. d. Gen. 18. a. 
Iudic. 19. b. > Gene. 3, d. * Esa. 27. a. lob 40. c. 
Paal. 73. b. * Psal. 144, b. f Psal. 

* Gen. 2, b. 

The Psalter, 

LORDE reioyseth in his workes. The earth trebleth at the loke of him, he doth but touch j hilles and they smoke. I will synge vnto the LORDE as longe as I lyue, I wil prayse my God whyle I haue my beinge. O that my wordes might please him, for my ioye is in the LORDE. As for synners, they shal be cosumed out of the earth, and the vngodly shal come to an ende: “but prayse thou the
LORDE, o my soule. Halleluya. 

The ciiij. Psalme. 

Psalme citi. jthe LORDE endureth for euer, and the

GEUE thankes vnto the LORDE, andj 

call vpon his name: “tell the people what thinges he hath done. O let youre songes be of him: prayse him, and let youre talkynge be of all his wonderous workes.
Geue his holy name a good reporte, let their hertes reioyse that seke the LORDE.

Seke the LORDE, and his strength, seke his face euermore. Remembre the maruelous workes that he hath done, his wonders and the iudgmentes of his mouth. O ye sede of
Abraham his seruaunt, ye children of lacob his chosen. He is the LORDE oure God, whose punyshmentes are thorow out all the worlde. He is allwaye myndfull of his couenaunt, and promyse that he made to a thousande generacions.

i Yee the couenaunt that he made with 
Abraham, and the ooth that he swore vnto 
Isaac. And apoynted the same vnto lacob for a lawe, and to Israel for an euerlastinge testament. Sayenge: vnto the wil I geue the londe of Canaan, the lott of youre heretage.
When there was yet but a fewe of them, and they straungers therin. What tyme as they wente from one nacion to another, from one kyngdome to another. He suffred no man to hurte them, ^but reproued euen kynges for their sakes. ‘Touch not myne anoynted, do my prophetes no harme.

Morouer he called for a derth vpon the lode, and destroyed all the prouysion of bred.

! But he had sent a man before them, enen 
Ioseph which was solde to be a bonde seruaunt. 
They hurte his fete in the stockes, the yron pearsed his herte. “Vntill the tyme that his

143.a. € Psal. 103. a. 41 Par. 17. b. Eaa. 12. a, i Gen. 17.a. Gen. 26.a. Gen. 28. a. * Gen. 12. d. and 20. a. ! Gen, 45. a. 37. f. 59. a. mapiuco Te:

n5 

€ 

Psalme rb. The Psalter. 

worde came, and till the worde of y LORDE had tried him. “Then sent the kinge and caused him be delyuered, the prynce of the people bad let him go. He made him lorde of his house, q ruler of all his substaunce.
That he might enfourme his prynces after his wil, and teach his Senatours wysdome. * Israel also came in to Egipte, and lacob was a straunger in the lode of Ham.
| “But he increased his people exceadingly, and made them stronger then their enemies.
Whose hert turned, so that they hated his people, and dealt vntruly with his seruauntes.
£ Then sent he Moses his seruaunt, and Aaron whom he had chosen. These dyd his tokens amōge them, and wonders in the londe of
Ham. *He sent darcknesse and it was darcke, for they were not obedient vnto his worde. f He turned their waters in to bloude, and slewe their fishe. Their londe brought forth frogges, yee euen in their kynges chambers.
He spake the worde, q their came all maner of flies q lise in all their quarters. He gaue them hale stones for rayne, and flammes of fyre in their lode. He smote their vynyardes q fige trees, and destroyed the trees that were in their coastes. He spake y worde, * and their came greshoppers ¢ catirpillers innumer- able. These ate vp all the grasse in their lode, and deuoured the frutes of their groüde.
£| He smote all y first borne in their lode,’ euen the chefe of all their substaunce. He brought them forth with syluer q golde, there was not one feble personne amoóge their trybes. Egipte was glad of their departinge, for they were afraied of thë.
+He spred out a cloude to be a couerynge, and fyre to geue light in the night season.
‘At their desyre, there came quales, and he fylled them with the bred of heaue. ™ He opened the rocke of stone, q the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ranne in the wildernesse.
For why, he remembred his holy promyse which he had made vnto Abraham his ser-
| uaunt. Thus he brought forth his people 
| |with ioye, and his chosen with gladnesse. 
| And gaue them the lodes of the Heithē, where they toke the labours of the people in possession. That they might kepe his statutes, and obserue his lawes. Halleluya.

a Gen. 41. f. ? Gen. 46.a. — * Exo. 1. a. Acto. 7. c. d Exo. 3. 4. 5. Acto. 7. d. * Exo. 10. c. — / Exo. 7. d.
£ Exo. 8. b. Exo. 8. d. Psal. 77. c. ^ Exo. 10. d. i Exo. 11. a. 12. c. * Exo. 13. d. ! Exo. 16. a.

| 

Fo. urrriój. 
The cb. Psalme. Halleluya. 

GEUE thankes vnto the LORDE, for/@ . 

he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer. " Who can expresse y noble actes of the LORDE, or shewe forth all his prayse?
Blessed are they that allwaye kepe iudg- ment, and do rightuousnes. Remembre vs
(o LORDE) acordinge to the fauoure that thou bearest vnto thy people: o vyset vs with thy sauinge health. ‘That we might se the pleasure of thy chosen, that we might reioyse in the gladnesse of thy people, and geue thankes with thine enheritaunce. " We haue synned with oure fathers, we haue done amysse, we haue dealt wickedly. Oure fathers re- garded not thy wonders in Egipte, they kepte not thy greate goodnesse in remébraunce: but were dishobediet at the see, eué at the reed see. Neuertheles, he helped thé for his names sake, that he might make his power to be knowne. He rebuked the reed see, and it was dried vp: "so he led thé thorow the depe as in a wildernesse. Thus he saned them from the honde of the hater, x delyuered them from the honde of the enemie.

As for those y troubled them, the waters onerwhelmed the, there was not one of thé left. ° Then beleued they in his worde, and songe prayse vnto him. But within a whyle they forgat his workes, q wolde not abyde his councell. 7A lust came vpó them in the wildernesse, so that they tempted God in the deserte. Yet he gaue them their desyre, and sent the ynough at their willes. ‘They angred
Moses in the tetes and Aaron the saynte of the LORDE. So the earth opened q swalowed vp Dathan, and couered the con- gregacio of Abiram. The fyre was kyndled in their company, the flame brent vp the vngodly. ‘They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molte ymage. Thus they turned his glory in to the similitude of a calfe, y eateth haye. They forgat God their
Sanioure, which had done so greate thinges in Egipte. Wonderons workes in the londe of Ham, and fearfull thinges in the reed see.
So he sayde he wolde haue destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stonde before him in y gappe: to turne awaie his wrothfull indignacion, lest he shulde destroye thé.

m Exo.17. b. Nu. 20.b. Exo. 17. a. ^ | Mac. 4. c. 
Tudit. 13. c. Psal. 106.2. Eccli. 43. d. ? Judit, 7. c. p Psal. 103. a. 9 Exo. 15. a. r Nu. 11.2. ! Nu.
16. a. * Exo. 32. a. 1 Cor. 10. a. Rom. 1. c. 

[jfo. üryriiij. 

-Yee they thought scorne of ý pleasaunt 

The Psalter. 

londe, and gaue no credence vnto his worde. 

2| But murmured in their tentes, and herk- 

at 

£ 

Se 

ened not vnto the voyce of the LORDE. 

Then lift he vp his honde agaynst them, to! ouerthrowe them in the wildernes. To cast out their sede amonge the nacions, and to seater them in the londes. * They ioyned them selues vnto Baal Peor, and ate the offeringes of the deed. Thus they prouoked him vnto anger with their owne invécions, and the plage was greate amonge them.

Then stode vp Phineas and executed iustice, q so the plage ceased. “And that was counted vnto him for rightuousnesse, amonge all posterites for euermore. They angerd him also at the waters of strife, ^so that Moses was punyshed for their sakes. Because they prouoked his sprete, and he tolde the planely with his lippes. Nether destroyed they the
Heithen, ‘as the LORDE commaunded them. 
But were mengled amonge the Heithen, and lerned their workes.

In so moch that they worshipped their ymages, which turned to their owne decaye.

Yee they offred their sonnes and their doughters vnto deuels. And shed the inno- cent bloude of their sonnes and of their doughters, whom they offred vnto the ymages of Canaan, so that the londe was defyled with bloude. ‘Thus were they stayned with their owne workes, and wente a whoringe with their owne invencions. Therfore was the wrath of the LORDE kyndled agaynst his people, in so moch that he abhorred his owne enherit- aunce. And gaue them ouer in to the honde of the Heithé, and they that hated them, were lordes ouer them. Their enemies oppressed thé, and had them in subieccion. Many a tyme dyd he delyuer them, but they prouoked him with their owne invécions, and were brought downe for their wickednesse. Neuer-

| 

'thelesse whé he sawe their aduersite, he herde 

their complaynte. /He thought vpō his 

|couenaunt, and pitied thé, acordinge vnto the 

multitude of his mercies. Yee he made all those Y had led them awaye captiue, to pitie
Delyuer vs (o LORDE oure God) q gather vs from amoge the Heithen: that we maye geue thankes to thy holy name, q make

a Num. 14.a. 
© Gen. 15. b. 4 Deut. 1. f. 3. e. 4. e. * Deut. 7. a. and 12. a. fud, 2. a. 1 Reg. 15. a. Iud. 2. b. Deut. 39. c.
4 Re. 23. c. Leui, 20.a. Deu. 18.b. Eze. 20. d. lere. 

* Num, 25.3, Iosue 22, d. 1 Cor. 10. a. | 

‘oure boast of thy prayse. *Blessed be the 
LORDE God of Israel from euerlastinge and worlde without ende, and let all people saye:
Amen, Amen. Halleluya. 

The chi. Psalme. 

he is gracious, ^and his mercy endureth for euer. Let them geue thakes whom the
LORDE hath redemed, « delyuered from the hande of the enemie. And gathered thé out of the londes, fro the east, fro the west, fro the north q from the south.

They wente astraye in the wildernesse in an vntroden waye, 1 founde no cite to dwell in. Hongrie q thirstie, q their soule faynted in the. So they cried vnto the LORDE in their trouble, q he delyuered thé from their distresse. He led thé forth by $ right waie, y they might go to Ẹ cite where they dwelt.

O that mé wolde prayse the goodnesse of the LORDE, « the wonders that he doth for the childré of mé. ‘For he satisfied the emptie soule, ¢ fylled the hongrie soule with good.

Soch as sat in darcknesse and in the shadowe of death, ‘beynge fast bounde in misery a yron.
Because they were not obediét to the cō- maundementes of God, but lightly regarded the councell of the most highest.

Their herte was vexed with laboure, they fell downe, q there was none to helpe them.

So they cried vnto the LORDE in their trouble, q he delyuered them out of their dis- tresse. He brought thé out of darcknesse q out of the shadowe of death, q brake their bondes in sonder. O that men wolde prayse the goodnesse of the LORDE, q the waders that he doth for the childré of men. For he hath broken the gates of brasse, q smitte the barres of yron in sonder. Foolish me were plaged for their offence, q because of their wickednesse. of meate, they were eue harde at deathes dore.
So they cried vnto the LORDE in their trouble, q he delyuered thé out of their dis- tresse. He sent his worde ‘¢ healed thé, q saued thé from destruccion. O that men wolde prayse the goodnesse of the LORDE, q the wonders that he doth for the children of

men. "That they wolde offre vnto him the 
7. d. and 44. a. 4 Deu. 30. a. € Luc. 1. f. 
4 Tudit. 13. c. Psal. 105. a, 117. a. 135.3. 1 Mac. +. c. 

i Exo. 16. a. Deut. 8. a. 
| Nu. 21. b. Esaie 38. b. Matt. 8. a. 

* Psal. 77. c. 104. e. 2 Par. 33. 
™ Heb. 13. c. 

Psalme rbi, 

GEUE thankes vnto the LORDE, for|q 

B 

Their soule abhorred all maner |. 

€ 

Psalme cbitj. 

B 

jin greate waters. 

sacrifice of thankesgeuynge;' and tell out his workes with gladnes. ‘They that go downe to the see in shippes, q occupie their busynesse
These men se the workes of the LORDE, « his wonders in the depe.
For at his worde,^the stormy wynde aryseth, and lifteth vp the wawes therof.

They are caried vp to the heauen, x downe agayne to the depe, their soule melteth awaye in the trouble. ‘They rele to and fro, they stacker like a droncken man, and are at their wittes ende. So they crie vnto the LORDE in their trouble, x he delyuereth thé out of their distresse. “He maketh the storme to ceasse, so that the wawes are still.

Thé are they glad because they be at rest, q so he bryngeth them vnto the hauen where they wolde be. O that men wolde prayse the goodnes of the LORDE, and the wonders that he doth for the children of men.

That they wolde exalte him in the cóogre- gacion of the people, q loaue him in the seate of the elders. Which turneth the floudes in to drie londe, and drieth vp the water sprynges.
A frutefull londe maketh he baren, for the wickednesse of them thatdwelltherin. Agayne, he maketh the wildernes a stondinge water, and water sprynges of a dryegrounde. ‘There he setteth the hongrie, that they maye buylde them a cite to dwell in. That they maye sowe their gronde, plante vynyardes, to yelde them frutes of increase. He blesseth them, so that they multiplie exceadingly, and suffreth not their catell to decrease. Whé they are minished q brought lowe thorow oppressio, thorow eny plage or trouble. Though he suffre thé to be euell intreated thorow ty- rauntes, or let them wandre out of the waye in the wildernesse: Yet helpeth he the poore out of misery (at the last) and maketh him an housholde likea flocke of shepe. The rightuous wil cosidre this and reloyse, the mouth of all wickednesse shall be stopped. Who so is wyse, and pondreth these thinges well, shall vnderstonde the louynge kyndnesses of the
LORDE. 

The cbtj. A psalme of Dauid. 
GOD, my hert is ready to synge, q to geue prayse. “Awake (o my glory) awake lute q harpe, I my selfe will awake

^ Ione 1. a, Act. 27. b. 
* Psal. 56. b. 

s 1 Pet. 2. a. 
43 Re. 17. a, Esa. 43. c. 

* Matt. 8. c. 
S Psal. 102. d. 

The Psalter. 

LORDE) amonge the people, I wil synge prayses vnto the amonge the Heithe.

For the greatnesse of thy mercy is higher then the heauens, and thy faithfulnesse reacheth vnto the cloudes. Set vp thy self (o God) aboue the heaués, q thy glory aboue all the earth. That thy beloued maye be delyuered: helpe then with thy right hande, q heare me.
God hath spoken in his Sanctuary’ (which thinge reioyseth me.) I will deuyde Sichem, and mete out the valley of Suchoth. Galaad is myne, Manasses is myne, Ephraim is the strégth of my heade, luda is my captaine.
Moab is my wash potte, ouer Edom wil I stretch out my shue, Philistea shal be glad of me. Who wil lede me in to the stronge cite?
Who wil brynge me in to Edom? Shalt not thou do it (o God) which hast east vs out: thou God, y wentest not forth with oure hoostes? O be thou oure helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe of man. ‘Thorow God we shall do greate actes, for it is he y shal treade downe oure enemies.

The cbitj. A psalme of Dauid. 

Fo. urb. 

right early. I wil geue thakes vnto the (o 

B 

OLDE not thy toge, o God of my prayse. |A 

For the mouth ofthe vngodly, yee and the mouth of the disceatfull is opened vpon me, and speake agaynst me with false toges.
They compase me aboute with wordesof hatred, q fight agaynst me without a cause. For the loue that I had vnto them, they take now my contrary parte, but I geue my self vnto prayer.

Thus they rewarde me euell for good, q hatred for my good will. “Set an vngodly man to be ruler ouer him, q let Satan stonde at his right hande. When sentence is geuen vpon him, let him be codempned, and let his prayer be turned in to synne. ‘Let his dayes be fewe, and his bishopricke another take. Let his children be fatherlesse, q his wife a wyd- dowe. Let his children be vagabundes, and begg their bred: let them seke it, as they that be destroyed. Let the extorcioner cdsume all that he hath, and let straungers spoyle his laboure. Let there be no man to petie, ner to haue compassion vpon his fatherlesse children.
Let his ende be destruccion, and in the nexte generacion let his name be clene put out.
Let the wickednesse of his fathers be had in 

€ Psal. 59. b. ^ Leui. 26. c. Deut. 28.c. 

"Toh. 17, b... Acto. 1. d. 

Zach. 3. a. 

B 

ffo. Dery. lremembraunce in the sight of the LORDE, and let not the synne of his mother be done awaye. k

Let them be allwaye before the LORDE, but as for the memoriall of them selues, let it perish from out of the carth. And that because his mynde was not to do good, but persecuted the poore helplesse, and him that was vexed at the herte, to slaye him. His delite was in cursynge, and therfore shall it happe vnto him: he loued not blessynge, and that shall be farre frō him. He clothed him self with cursynge like as with a rayment: yee it wente in to his bowels like water, and like oyle in to his bones.
Let it be vnto him as the cloke that he hath vpon him, and as the gyrdle that he is gyrded withall. Let it thus happen from the LORDE vnto myne enemies, aud to those that speake euell agaynst my soule. But deale thou with me (o LORDE God) acordinge vnto thy name, for swete is thy mercy. O delyuer me,
‘for I am helplesse q poore, q my herte is wounded within me. I go hence like y shadowe that departeth, and am dryuen awaye as y greshoppers. My knees are weake thorow fastinge, my flesh is dried vp for want of fatuesse. I am become a rebuke vnto them, they loke vpo me^ and shake their heades.
Helpe me o LORDE my God, oh saue me for thy mercies sake. ‘That they maye knowe, how that this is thy hande, and that thou hast done it. Though they curse, yet blesse thou: and let them be cofounded, that ryse vp agaynst me, but let thy seruaunt reioyse. Let myne aduersaries be clothed with their owne shame, as with a cloake.

As for me, I wil geue thankes vnto the 
LORDE with my mouth, and prayse him amonge the multitude. ^For he stondeth at the right hande of the poore, to saue him from soch as condempne his soule.

The ciy. A psalme of Dauid. 

HE LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE: 
“Syt thou on my right hande, vntill I 

make thine enemies thy fotestole. 
| The LORDE shal sende the rodde of thy 
|power out of Sion, be thou ruler euen in y 
|myddest amonge thine enemies. In the daye of thy power shal thy people offre the frewill

a Paal.21.a. ^ Psal. 15.b. © Mat.22.d. Mar. 12.d. 
Luc.20.e. 1 Cor. 15. c. Heb. 1.b.and 10. b. — * Heb. 7. c. e Psal. 91.2. — /Ps31.33.b. Gen.15.c. £ Psal. 104. e.

The Psalter. 

offeringes with an holy worshipe, y dewe of thy byrth is of the wobe of the mornynge.
The LORDE sware, and wil not repent: 
“Thou art a prest for euer after y order of 
Melchisedec. The LORDE vpon thy right honde, shal smyte euen kynges in the daye of his wrath. He shal be iudge amoge the
Heithen, he shal fyll them with deed bodies, and smyte in sonder the heades ouer dyuerse countres. He shal drynke of the broke in the waye, therfore shal he lift vp his heade.

The cy, Psalme. — Halleluia. 

WIL geue thankes vnto the LORDE with|a my whole herte: secretly amonge the faithfull, and in the congregacion. The workes of the LORDE are greate,’ sought out of all thé that haue pleasure therin. His worke is worthy to be praysed and had in honoure, and his rightuousnesse endureth for euer. ‘The mercifull q gracious LOR DE hath so done his marvelous workes, y they ought to be had in

remébraüce. /He geueth meate vnto the y 

feare him, he is euer myndfull of his couenaüt. 

He sheweth his people the power of his workes, that he maye geue them the heretage of the Heithen. The workes of his hodes are verite q iudgment, all his cómaundemetes are true. They stonde fast for euer q euer,* a are done in trueth q equite. He sent re- dempcion vnto his people, he hath com- maunded his couenaunt for euer, holy q re- uerentis his name. “The feare of the LORDE is the begynnynge of wyszdome, a good vnder- stondinge haue all they that do therafter: the prayse of it endureth for euer.

The cri. Psalme. Halleluya. 

LESSED is the man y feareth the 
LORDE, q 'hath greate delite in his commaundementes. His sede shall be mightie vpon earth, the generacion of the faithfull shalbe blessed. Riches q pléteousnesse shalbe in his house, ¢ his rightuousnes endureth for ener. Vnto the godly there ariseth vp light in the darcknesse: he is merciful, louynge q rightuous. ‘Wel is him that is mercitull, q lendeth gladly, q podreth his wordes with dis- crecion. For he shal neuer be moued, the rightuous shal be had in an euerlastinge re-

à Tob 28.c. Pro.1.2.and 9. b. Eccli. 1. c. * Psal. 36. d. 
* Psal 36.d. Pro.11.c.a8d 19.c. Esa.49.d. Pro.10.a. 
Psal. 26. a. 

Psalme rig. 

Psalme rrítij. 

B|membraunce. He wil not be afrayed for eny euell tydinges, his herte stondeth fast, q be- leueth in ý LORDE. His herte is stablished, he wil not shrencke, vntill he se his desyre vpon his enemies. ^ He hath sparsed abrode, q geué to the poore, his rightuousnes re- mayneth for euer, his horne shal beexalted with honoure. The vngodly shal se it, q it shal greue him: he shall gnash with his teth q consume awaye, q the desyre of the vngodly shal perish.

The crij. Psalme. Halleluya. 
RAYSE the LORDE (0 ye seruauntes) 
O prayse the name of the LORDE.’ 

Blessed be the name of the LORDE, fra this tyme forth for evermore. The LORDES name is worthy to be praysed, “fro the rysinge vp of the Sonne vnto the goinge downe of the same. The LORDE is hye aboue all Heithen, and his glory aboue the heaués. Who is like vnto the LORDE oure God, y hath his dwellinge so hye, which humbleth himself, to beholde that is in heauen and earth? 4 Which taketh vp the symple out of the dust, and lifteth the poore out of the myre. That he maye set him amonge the prynces, euen amonge the prynces of his people. maketh the baren woman to kepe house, and to be a ioyfull mother of children. Halleluya.

The critj. Psalme. 

HEN Israel came out of Egipte, ¢ the 

house of Iacob “from amonge that straunge people. Iuda was his Sactuary,
Israel his dominion. ‘The see sawe that, and fled, Iordan turned backe. The mountaynes skipped like rammes, ¢ the litle hilles like yonge shepe. What ayled the (o thou see) that thou fleddest? and thou Iordan, that thou turnedest backe? Ye mountaynes, that ye skipped like rammes? and ye litle hilles, like yonge shepe? The earth trembled at the presence of the LORDE, at the presence of the God of Iacob. £Which turned the harde rocke in to a stondinge water, q the flynt stone in to a sprynginge well.

Here the Hebrues begynne the exv. psalme. 

3} Not vnto vs (o LORDE) not vnto vs, but vnto thy name geue the prayse, for thy louinge

* Pro. 11. c. 2 Cor. 9. b. ^ Psal. 133. a. and 134. a. ce Mala. 1. c. 41 Re.2, b. * Exo. 13.a. / Exo. 14. e.
Iosu. 3. d. € Exo. 17. b. Nu. 20, b. ^ Psal. 78. b. 

The Psalter. 

So. rij. 

mercy and faithfulnes. Wherfore shal the 
Heithen saye: "where is now their God ? 

As for oure God, he is in heauen, he doth what soeuer it pleaseth him. Their ymages are but syluer and golde, euen the worke of mens hades. ‘They haue mouthes, and speake not: eyes haue they, but they se not.

They haue eares, and heare not: noses haue they, but they smell not. They haue handes and handle not, fete haue they, but they can not go, nether can they speake thorow their throte. They that made them, are like vnto them, and so are all soch as put their trust in them. But let Israel trust in ý
LORDE, for he is their sucoure q defence. 
Let the house of Aaron put their trust in ý 
LORDE, for he is their sucoure q defence. 
They that feare the LORDE, let thé put their trust in the LORDE, ^for he is their sucoure and defence. The LORDE is myndefull of vs, x blesseth vs: he blesseth y house of Israel, he blesseth $ house of
Aaron. Yee he blesseth all them that feare the LORDE, both small q greate. The
LORDE encrease you more q more: you, and youre childré. For ye are y blessed of the LORDE, which made heauen cq earth.
All the whole heauens are the LORDES, but the earth hath he geué vnto $ childre of men. "The deed prayse not the (o LORDE) nether all they that go downe in to sylence.
But we will prayse the LORDE, from this tyme forth for euermore. Halleluya.

The crütj. Psalme. 
AM wel pleased, y the LORDE hath'@ herde $ voyce of my prayer. That he hath enclyned his eare vnto me, therfore wil
I call vpo him as longe as I lyue. "'The snares of death eopased me rounde abonte, the paynes of hell gat holde vpon me, I founde trouble and heuynesse. ‘Then called
I vpon ¥ name of the LORDE: o LORDE, delyuer my soule. Gracious is Y LORDE « rightuous, yee oure God is mercifull.

The LORDE preserueth y symple, I was brought downe, and he helped me. "Turne agayne then vnto thy rest (o my soule) for the LORDE hath geuen the thy desyre.

And why? "thou hast delyuered my soule 

i Paal. 134. c. Esa. 44. b. i Psal. 6.a. Esa. 38, d.
? Paal, 55. b. 

Tere. 10. a. KRsalet7.ic. m 1 Re. 23. c. Psal. 17. a.

jo. dDrrrbiij. The Psalter. Psalme cb. eny confidéce in prynces. .All Heithen com- pased me rounde aboute, but in the name of the LORDE wil I destroye thé.

They kepte me in on euery syde, but in the name of the LORDE, I wil destroye them.

They came aboute me like bees, q were as|13 hote as the fyre in the thornes, but in the name of the LORDE I wil destroye them.

They thrust at me, that I might fall, but the LORDE was my helpe. ‘The LORDE is my strégth, a my songe, q is become my saluacion. The voyce of ioye q myrth is in the dwellynges of y rightuous, for y right hande of the LORDE hath gotté the victory.

The right hande of the LORDE hath the preemynence, the right hade of the LORDE hath gotté the victory. I wil not dye, but lyue, and declare the workes of the LORDE.

The LORDE hath chastened q correcte me, but he hath not geuen me ouer vnto death.

‘Open me the gates of rightuousnes, y I maye go in there thorow, q geue thakes vnto the LORDE. This is the dore of the LORDE, the rightuous shall entre in thorow it.

I thanke the, y thou hast herde me, q art/€ become my saluacio. ^'The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the heade stone in the corner. This was the LORDES doinge, q it is maruelous in oure eyes. This is the daye which the LORDE hath made, let vs reioyse and be glad in it. Helpe now o LORDE, o LORDE sende vs now pros- perite.

‘Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the LORDE, we wish you good lucke, ye that be of the house of the LORDE. God is the
LORDE, q hath shewed vs light: O garnish the solempne feast with grene braunches, eué vnto the hornes of y aulter. Thou art my
God, q I wil thanke the: thou art my God, and I wil prayse the. O geue thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, q his mercy endureth for euer.

from death, myne eyes from teares, and my fete from fallinge. 1 wil walke before y
LORDE, in the londe of the lyuynge. 

The crb. Psalme. 
This psalme do the Hebrues ioyne vntoit that goeth before, and it is with them the cxvi. psalme.
BELEUED, “and therfore haue I spokē, but I was sore troubled. I sayde in my haist: All men are lyers.

What rewarde shal I geue vnto y LORDE, for all the benefites ý he hath done vnto me?
I wil receaue the cuppe of saluacio, and call vpon the name of the LORDE.

I wil paye my vowes in the presence of all his people, right deare in the sight of y
LORDE is the death of his sayntes. O 
LORDE, 1 am thy seruaunt, I am thy ser- uaunt, and the soune of thy handmayden, thou hast broken my bondes in sonder. I wil offre the ’the sacrifice of thankes geuynge, and wil call vpon the name of the LORDE.
I wil paye my vowes vnto the LORDE in the sight of all his people, in the courtes of the LORDES house, eué in the myddest of the, o lerusalem. Halleluya.

The eybi. Psalme. 
PRAYSE the LORDE all ye Gentiles, laude him all ye people.“ For his mer- cifull kyndnes is euer more and more towarde vs, q the trueth of the LORDE endureth for euer. Halleluya.

The erbij. Psalme. 

GEUE thankes vnto the LORDE, for 

he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer.^ Let Israel now confesse, y his mercy endureth for euer. Let the house of
Aaron now confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer. Yee let thé now that feare the
LORDE, confesse, that his merey endureth for euer. I called vpon the LORDE in trouble, and the LORDE herde me at large.
The LORDE is my helper, ‘I wil not feare what man doeth vnto me. The LORDE is my helper, q I shal se my desyre vpon myne enemies. It is better to trust in the LORDE, then to put eny confidence in man. It is better to trust in the LORDE, then to put

The crbiij. Psalme. 

ALEPH. 
LESSED are those y be vndefiled in the à waye: ‘which walke in the lawe of y
LORDE. Blessed are they that kepe his tes- timonies, q seke him with their whole herte.

€ Esa. 26. a. ^ Matt. 21. e. Act.4.a. 1 Pet, 2. a. i Matt. 21. a. Mar. 11. a. Ioh. 12. b. k Psal. 1. a.

?^ 2 Cor. 4. c. Rom. 3. a. 5 Hebr, 13. c. Psal. 91. a. 
* Rom. 15. c. — 4 Tudit. 13. c. Psal. 105. a. 106.3. 135. a. l 1 Mac. 4. c. * Heb. 13. a. f Exo. 15. a. Esa. 12. a.

Psaline crbitj. 

Which walke in his wayes, t do no wicked- nesse. “Thou hast geuen strayte charge to kepe thy commaundementes. O that my wayes were stablished to kepe thy statutes.
So shulde I not be confounded, whyle I haue respecte vnto all thy commaundementes. I wil thanke the with an vnfayned herte, be- cause I am lerned iu the iudgmentes of thy rightuousnesse. I wil kepe thy statutes, o forsake me not vtterly.

BETH. 

B! Where withall shall a yonge man clense his waye? Euen by rulinge himself after thy worde. With my whole herte do I seke y,

O let me not go wronge out of thy comaunde- métes. ^'Thy wordes haue I hyd within my herte, y I shulde not synne agaynst the.

Praysed be thou O LORDE, O teach me thy statutes. With my lippes wil I be tellynge out all the iudgmentes of thy mouth.

I haue as greate delite in the waye of thy testimonies, as in all maner of riches. I wil exercise my self in thy cOmaundementes, q haue respecte vnto thy fotepathes. My delite shalbe in thy statutes, I will not forget thy wordes.

GIMEL. 

«| O do well vnto thy seruaunt, that I maye lyue and kepe thy wordes. Open thou myne eyes, a so shal I spie out wonderous thinges in thy lawe. <I am a straüger vpo earth, O hyde not thy commaundementes fro me.

My soule breaketh out, for the very fer- uent desyre that I haue allwaye vnto thy iudgmentes. ‘Thou rebukest the proude, eursed are they that departe from thy com- maundemétes. O turne fro me shame q rebuke, for I kepe thy testimonies. Prynces also syt q speake agaynst me, but thy seruaut is occupied in thy statutes. In thy testimonies is my delite, they are my councelers.

DALETH. 

My soule cleueth to the dust, O quicken thou me acordinge to thy worde. “I know- leged my wayes, q thou herdest me, O teach me then thy statutes. Make me to vnder- stonde the waye of thy commaundemétes, ¢ so shal I talke of thy wonderous workes.

My soule melteth awaye for very heuynesse, o set me vp acordinge vnto thy worde.

B 

" Deut. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Iosu. 22. 24. ^ Deut. 6. b. and 11. c. 

The Psalter. 

me thy lawe. 

Take fro me the waye of lyenge, q graunte 

treuth, thy iudgmentes haue I layed before 

me. Isticke vnto thy testimonies, o LORDE 
I wil rūne the waye of 

cofounde me not. thy commaundementes, when thou hast com- forted my herte.

HE 

Teach me o LORDE the waye of thy statutes, and I shal kepe it vnto the ende. Ó geue me vnderstondinge, and I shal kepe thy lawe, yee I shal kepe it with my whole herte.

Lede me in the path of thy commaunde- métes, for that is my desyre. Enclyne myne herte vnto thy testimonies, q not to cuvet- ousnes. O turne awaye myne eyes, lest they beholde vanite, q quické me in thy waie.

O stablish thy worde in thy seruaunt, y I maye feare the. Take awaye the rebuke y I am afraied of, for thy iudgmétes are amiable.
Beholde, my delite is in thy commaüdemétes, o quycke me in thy rightuousnesse.

VAU. 

Let thy louynge mercy come vnto me 
(o LORDE) and thy sauynge health acord- inge vnto thy worde. ‘That I maye geue answere vnto my blasphemers, for my trust is in thy worde. O take not y worde of trenth vtterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy iudgmentes. So shal I allwaye kepe thy lawe, yee for euer and euer. And I wil walke at liberty, for I seke thy commaundementes. I wil speake of thy testimonies euen before kynges, and wil not be ashamed.

My delite shalbe in thy commaundementes, which I loue. My hondes also will I lift vp vnto thy commaundemétes which I loue, q

my talkynge shalbe of thy statutes. 

ZAIN. 

O thynke vpon thy seruaunt as concernynge thy worde, wherin thou hast caused me to put my trust. For it is my comforte in my trouble, yee thy worde quyckeneth me.

The proude haue me greatly in derision, yet shrencke not I from thy lawe. I remembre thy euerlastinge iudgmentes (o LORDE) and am comforted. I am horribly afrayed for y vngodly, that forsake thy lawe.

Thy statutes are my songes in the house of| 

my pilgremage. I thynke vpon thy name 

* Gen. 47. b. Iob 14. b. 4 Psal. 43. c 

I haue chosen the waye of 

Fo. urrrir, 

£ 

lé) 

fo. drl. The Psalter, 

(o LORDE) in the night season, and kepe thy lawe. It is myne owne, for I kepe thy commaundementes.

HETH 

| Thou art my porcion (o LORDE) I am 

purposed to kepe thy lawe. ^I make myne humble peticion in thy presence with my whole herte, o be mercifull vnto me acordinge vnto thy worde. I call myne owne wayes to reiembraunce, and turne my fete in to thy testimonies. J make haist, and prolonge not the tyme, to kepe thy commaundemétes.
The congregacions of the vngodly haue robbed me, but I forget not thy lawe. ‘At mydnight stonde I vp, to geue thàkes vnto the, for the iudgmentes of thy rightuousnesse.

I am a companyon of all them that feare the,’ and kepe thy commaundementes.

The earth (o LORDE) is full of thy mercy, 
O teach me thy statutes. 

THETH. 

9| O LORDE, thou hast dealt frendly with thy seruaunt, acordinge vnto thy worde.

O lerne me kyndnesse, nourtoure q know- lege, for I beleue thy commaundementes.

Before I was troubled, I wente wronge, but now { kepe thy worde. ‘Thou art good and frendly,’ O teach me thy statutes.

'The proude ymagin lyes vpon me, but I kepe thy commaundemetes with my whole herte. ‘Their herte is as fat as brawne, but my delite is in thy lawe. It is good for me that I haue bene in trouble, that ] maye lerne thy statutes. The lawe of thy mouth is dearer vnto me, thé thousandes of golde q syluer.

IOD. 

R| Thy hades haue made me ‘and fashioned me, O geue me vnderstondinge, that I maye lerne thy commaundementes. ‘They that feare the, wil be glad when they se me, because I put my trust in thy worde. I knowe
(o LORDE) y thy iudgmentes are right, and 

thou of very faithfulnesse hast caused me m troubled. O let thy mercifull kyndnesse be my comforte, acordinge to the promyse that thou hast made vnto thy seruaunt. O let thy louynge mercies come vnto me, that I maye lyue, for thy lawe is my delyte. Let the proude be confounded, which handle so

| aNu lB o > Psal. 62. a. * Psal. 32, a. 

4 Matt. 19. c. e Gen. 1. d. Iob 10. a. J Psal. 38. a. 
| and 89. b. s Tere. 2, b. ^ Psal. 32, b. and 116, a. 

falsly agaynst me. But let soch as feare the, t knowe thy testimonies, be turned vnto me.
O let my herte be vndefyled in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

CAPH. 

My soule longeth for thy sauynge health, for my trust is in thy worde. Myne eyes loge sore for thy worde, sayége: Oh when wilt thou coforte me? For I am become like a botell in $ smoke, yet do not I forget thy statutes. / How many are the dayes of thy seruaunt? Whé wilt thou be auenged of my aduersaries? € The proude haue dygged pittes for me, which are not after thy lawe.

All thy commaundemétes are true, they persecute me falsly, O be thou my helpe.

They haue almost made an ende of me vpon earth, but I forsake not thy commaunde- metes. O quycké me after thy louinge kyndnes, « so shall I kepe the testimonies of thy mouth.

LAMED. 

O LORDE, thy worde endureth for euer| f 

in heaué. ^'Thy treuth also remayneth from one generacion to another: thou hast layed the foundacion of the earth, and it abydeth.

They cdtinue this daye acordinge to thy ordinaunce, for all thinges serue the. Yf my delyte were not in thy lawe, I shulde perishe in my trouble. I wil neuer forget thy co- maundementes, for with thé thou quyckenest me. lam thine, oh helpe me, for I seke thy commaundementes. "The vngodly laye wayte for me to destroye me, but I considre thy testimonies. I se that all thinges come to an ende, but thy commaundemét is exceadinge brode.

MEM. 

psalme erbi, 

x 

O what a loue haue I vnto thy lawe? all)? 

the daye longe is my talkynge of it. Thou thorow thy commaundement hast made me wyser the myne enemies, for it is euer by me.
‘I haue more vnderstondinge then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my studye.
Yee I am wyser then the aged, for I kepe thy coómaundementes. I refrayne my fete from euery euell waye, that I maye kepe thy wordes, I shrenck not from thy iudgmentes, for thou teachest me. *O how swete are thy wordes vnto my throte? Yee more thé hony

Esa, 40.a. Matt. 5. b. and 24. c. * Deu. 4. a. k Eze. 2. b. and 3.a. Psal. 18. b.

Psalme rrbíij. vnto my mouth. ‘Thorow thy commaunde- mentes I get vnderstondinge, therfore I hate

all false wayes. 
NUN. 

®| Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my fete q a 

light vuto my pathes. ^I haue sworne q am stedfastly purposed, to kepe the iudgmétes of thy rightuousnesse. I am troubled abone measure, quycken me (o LORDE) acordinge vnto thy worde. Let the frewilofferinges of my mouth please the (o LORDE) q teach me thy iudgmétes. My soule is allwaye in my hode, yet do not I forget thy lawe. The vngodly haue laied a snare for me, but yet swarue not I fro thy comaundemétes. Thy testimonies haue I claymed as myne heretage for euer: q why? they are the very ioye of my herte. I applye myne herte to fulfill thy statutes allwaye, euen vnto the ende.

SAMECH. 

: yee I shal euer be talkynge of thy statutes. Thou treadest downe all the y departe from thy statutes, for they ymagin but disceate. Thou puttest awaye all the vn- godly of the earth like drosse, therfore I loue thy testimonies. My flesh trébleth for feare of the, and I am afrayed of thy iudgmétes.

AIN. 

I deale with the thinge y is laufull q right, 
O geue me not ouer vnto my oppressours. 

Be thou suertie for thy seruaut to do him good, that the proude do me no wronge.

Myne eyes are waysted awaye with lokynge for thy health, q for Y worde of thy rightuous- nesse. O deale with thy seruaunt acordinge vnto thy louynge mercy, and teach me thy statutes. I am thy seruaunt, O graunte me vnderstodinge, that I maye knowe thy testi- monies. It is tyme for the (o LORDE) to laye to thine hode, for they haue destroyed thy lawe. For I loue thy comaundemétes aboue golde and precious stone. Therfore

holde I straight all thy commaundemétes, and all false wayes I vtterly abhorre.

a 2 Re. 22, d. Psal. 18. b. Pro. 6. c. ^ Deu. 4. a. 

The Psalter, 

fo. drli, 

PE. 

Thy testimonies are wonderfull, therfore|33 doth my soule kepe them. ^ When thy worde goeth forth, it geueth light and vnderstodinge, eué vnto babes. I opé my mouth q drawe in my breth, for I desyre thy commaundemétes.
O loke thou vpon me, and be mercyfull, as thou vsest to do vnto those y loue thy name.
Ordre my goinges after thy worde, that no wickednesse raigne in me. O delyuer me from the wrdgeous dealinges of mē, and so shal I kepe thy commaundemétes. Shewe the light of thy countenaunce vnto thy ser- uaunt, and lerne me thy statutes. Myne eyes gusshe out with water, because men kepe not thy lawe.

ZADI. 

Rightuons art thou (o LORDE) « true is thy iudgmét. The testimonies that thou hast commanded, are exceadinge rightuous and true. ^My zele hath euen consumed me, because myne enemies haue forgotten thy wordes. Thy worde is tried to the vttemost, q thy seruaunte loueth it. I am small and of no reputacio, yet do not I forget thy eo- maudementes. Thy rightuousnesse is an euer- lastinge rightuousnes, and thy lawe is true.
Trouble and heuynesse haue také holde vpo me, yet is my delite in thy commaundementes.
The rightuousnes of thy testimonies is euer- lastinge, o graunte me vnderstondinge, and I shal lyue.

COPH. 
I call with my whole herte, heare me (o 
LORDE) I wil kepe thy statutes. Yee euen vpó the do I call, helpe me, and I shal kepe thy testimonies. Early iu ¥ mornynge do I crie vnto the, for in thy worde is my trust.
Myne eyes preuéte ý night watches, y I might be occupied in thy wordes. Heare my voyce (o LORDE) acordige vnto thy louynge kyndnesse, quycké me acordige as thou art wot. They drawe nye y of malice persecute me, q are farre fro thy lawe. Be thou nye at hode also (o LORDE) for thy promises are faithfull.
As concernynge thy testimonies, I haue knowne euer sens the begynnynge, that thou hast grounded them for euer.

RES. 
O cousidre my aduersite, q delyuer me, for| Y 

Psal. 18. b. Mat. 11, c. * Psal. 68. b. Iobà. 2. b. 

So. urlij. The Psalter. Psalme rrir, 

I do not forget thy lawe. Manteyne thou my cause and defende me, quycken me acor- dinge vnto thy worde. Health is farre fro the vngodly, for they regarde not thy statutes.
Greate is thy mercy (o LORDE) quycken me as thou art wont. Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me, yet do not I swarue fro thy testimonies. It greueth me, whan I se, that the transgressours kepe not thy lawe. Considre (LORDE) how I loue thy coómaundementes, O quycken me with thy louinge kyndnesse. Thy worde is true from euerlastinge, all the iudgmentes of thy right- uousnesse endure for evermore.

SIN. 

X| The prynces persecute me without cause, but my herte stodeth in awe of thy wordes.
^] amas glad of thy worde, as one y fyndeth greate spoyles. As for lyes, I hate x abhorre them, but thy lawe do I loue. Seuen tymes a daye do I prayse the, because of thy right- uous iudgmentes. Greate is the peace y they haue which loue thy lawe, q they are not offended at it. LORDE, I loke for thy sau- ynge health, ¢ do after thy comaundemetes.
My soule kepeth thy testimonies, q loueth thé exceadingly. I kepe thy comaundemites q testimonies, for all my wayes are before the.

Euen mightie q sharpe arowes, with hote burnige coales. Wo is me y my banishmét endureth so loge: I dwell in the tabernacles of the soroufull. My soule hath loge dwelt amonge them, that be enemies vnto peace.
I laboured for peace, but when I spake therof, they made them to batayll.

The ery. Psalme. 

I LIFT vp myne eyes vnto the hilles, fro|& 

whence commeth my helpe? My helpe cometh euen from the LORDE, which hath made heauen and earth. He will not suffre thy fote to be moued, and he y kepeth the, slepeth not. Beholde, he that kepeth Israel, doth nether slombre ner slepe. The LORDE himself is thy keper, the LORDE is thy defence vpon thy right honde. So that the
Sonne shal not burne the by daye, nether the 
Moone by night. The LORDE preserueth the from all euell, yee it is the LORDE that kepeth thy soule. The LORDE pre- serueth thy goinge out and thy comynge in, from this tyme forth for euermore.

The gyi. A psalme of Dauid. 

I WAS glad, when they sayde vnto me:/@ 
“we wil go in to the house of the LORDE. 
Oure fete shal stonde in thy gates, O Ieru- salem. lerusale is buylded as a cite, that is at vnite in it self. For there ý trybes go vp, euen the trybes of the LORDE: to testifie vnto Israel, to geue thanckes vnto the name of the LORDE. For there is the seate of iudgement, eué the seate of the house of
Dauid. O praye for the peace of Ierusalé,}33 they shal prospere that loue the. Peace be within thy walles, and plenteousnes within thy palaces. For my brethren and compa- nyons sakes, I wil wish the prosperite. Yee because of y house of the LORDE oure God,

I wil seke to do the good. 

THAU. 

p| Let my coplaynte come before the (o 
LORDE) geue me vnderstondinge, acordinge vnto thy worde. Oh let my supplicacio come before the, delyuer me acordinge to thy pro- myse. My lippes shall speake of thy prayse, seynge thou hast taught me thy statutes.

Yee my toge shall synge of thy worde, for all thy comaundemétes are right. Let thy hade helpe me, for I haue chosen thy co- maüdementes. I longe for thy sauynge health
(o LORDE) ¢ in thy lawe is my delyte. Oh let my soule lyue a. prayse the, y thy iudg- mentes maye helpe me. I go astraye, like a shepe that is lost: Oh seke thy seruaunt, for
I do not forget thy commaundementes. 

The cyrij. Psalme. 

NET the lift I vp myne eyes, ^thou ¥/@ 

dwellest in the heauens. Beholde, euen as the eyes of seruaütes loke vnto the handes of their masters : and as the eyes of a mayden vnto the handes of hir mastresse, euen so oure eyes wayte vpon the LORDE oure God, vntill he haue mercy vpo vs. Haue mercy vpo vs (o LORDE) haue mercy vpon vs, for

The cri. 33salme. a HEN I am in trouble, I call vpon y
LORDE, « he answereth me.’ De- lyuer my soule (o LORDE) fro lyenge lippes, q frö a disceatfull tage. What rewarde shal be geuen or done vnto the, thou false tonge ?

* Esaie 9. a. * Ton. 2. a. * Esa. 2. a. Mich. 4. a. Zach. 8. d. d 2 Par. 6. d. Esa. 66. a. 

Psalme crrbíüj. 

we are vtterly despysed. Oure soule is fylled with the scornefull reprofe of the welthy, a with ¥ despitefulnesse of the proude.

The cerriij. A psalme of Dauid. 

F the LORDE had not bene of oure syde 
I (now maye Israel saye) Yf the LORDE had not bene of oure syde, whé mē rose vp agaynst vs: “They had swalowed vs vp quycke, when they were so wrothfully dis- pleased at vs. *Yee the waters had drowned vs, the streame had gone ouer oure soule.

The depe waters of the proude had gone eue vnto oure soule. But praysed be y
LORDE, which hath not geuen vs ouer for a pray vnto their teth. Oure soule is escaped, euen as a byrde out of the snare of y fouler:

snare is broké, and we are delyuered. 

Oure helpe stodeth iu the name of the 
LORDE, which hath made heauen and earth.

The cyritij. Psalme. 

HEY that put their trust in $ LORDE, 

are eue as the mount Sion, ^which maye not be remoued, but stodeth fast for euer.
The hilles stonde aboute lerusalem, euen so stondeth the LORDE rounde aboute his people, fro this tyme forth for euermore.
That the rodd of the vngodly come not in to the lott of the rightuous, lest the rightuous put their honde vnto wickednesse. Do wel
(o LORDE) vnto those that be good and true of herte. As for soch as turne backe vnto their owne wickednesse, “the LORDE shal lede them forth with the euell doers: but peace be vpon Israel.

The arb. Psalme. 

HEN the LORDE turneth agayne ý captiuyte of Sion, then shal we be

like vnto them that dreame. "The shal oure mouth be fylled with laughter, and oure tonge with ioye. Then shal it be sayed amonge the Heithen: the LORDE hath done greate thinges for them. Yee the LORDE hath done greate thinges for vs allready, wherof we reioyse. Turne oure captiuyte (o LORDE) as the ryuers in the south. / They that sowe in teeres, shal reape in ioye. He y now goeth his waye wepige q beareth forth good sede,

> Esa. 8. b. 
J Gala. 6. a. 

* Psal, 120.a. 4 Pro. 10.d. 
€ Exo. 1.d. 4 Re. 9. d. 

ESPOSA. 
* Gala. 6. b. 

Cbr Psalter. 

shal come agayne with ioye, and brynge his sheaues with him.

The cypbi. A psalme of Salomon. 

So. url. 

Estes the LORDEbuylde the house, |A 

their labour is but lost that buylde it.* 
Excepte the LORDE kepe the cite, the watchman waketh but in vayne. ‘It is but lost labour that ye ryse vp early, and take no rest, but eate the bred of carefulnesse: ‘for loke to whom it pleaseth him, he geueth it in slepe. Lo, children and y frute of the wombe are an heretage and gift, that cometh of the
LORDE. Like as the arowes in the héde of the giatite, eué so are the yonge childré.
Happie is the ma, y hath his quyuer full of them: they shal not bs ashamed, when they speake with their enemies in the gate.

The erbij. Psalme. 

JET are all they ‘that feare the 

LORDE, ¢ walke in his wayes. For thou shalt eate the laboures of thine owne hondes : o well is the, happie art thou. Thy wife shalbe as a frutefull vyne vpon the walles of thy house. Thy children like the olyue braunches ronde aboute thy table. Lo, thus shal y mā be blessed, y feareth the LORDE. "The
LORDE shal so blesse the out of Sion, that thou shalt se Ierusalé in prosperite all thy life longe. Yee that thou shalt se thy childers childré, q peace vpó Israel.

The cyybij. Psalme. 
ANY a tyme haue they fought agaynst 
| V Í me fro my youth vp (maye Israel now saie). Yee many a tyme haue they fought agaist me fro my youth vp, but they haue not ouercome me. The plowers plowed vpo my backe, a made loge forowes. But the rightous
LORDE hath hewen y yocke zn) vngodly in peces. Let them be confounded q turned backwarde, as many as hane euell will at Sion.
™ Let the be eué as the haye vpon the house toppes, which wythereth afore it be pluckte vp.
Wherof the mower fylleth not his hande, nether he that byndeth vp the sheaues, his bosome. So that they which go by, saye not so moch as: the LORDE prospere you, we wish you good lucke in the name of the
LORDE. 

^ Pro. 10. c. ? Eccli. 11. b. * Psal. 33. b. 
Iob 42.c. Gen. 50.d. Tobi. 14. a. 

! Num.6. d. m Psal. 36. a.

a 

fo. urliiij. 

a 

The qriy. Psalme. 

UT of the depe call I vnto the (o 

LORDE) LORDE heare my voyce. 
Oh let thine eares considre well the voyce of my complaynte. “Yf thou (LORDE) wilt be extreme to marcke what is done amysse,
Oh LORDE, who maye abyde it? But there is mercy with the, that thou mayest be feared. I loke for the LORDE, my soule doth wayte for him, and in his worde is my trust. My soule doth paciently abyde the
LORDE, fro the one mornynge to the other. 
Let Israel trust in the LORDE, for with the 
LORDE there is mercy and plenteous re- dempcion. ê And he shal redeme Israel from all his synnes.

The crrr. A psalme of Dauid. 

ORDE, I am not hye mynded, I haue no proude lokes. I do not exercise myself

in greate matters, which are to hye for me. 
But I refrayne my soule and kepe it lowe, like as a childe y is weened from his mother, yee my soule is euen asa weened childe. Let

Israel trust in the LORDE, fro this tyme 

forth for euermore. 

Che crrri. Psalme. 

ORDE, remembre Dauid aud all his 

trouble. ^ How he swore vnto $ LORDE, q vowed a vowe vnto y mightie one of Jacob:
I wil not come within the tabernacle of my house, ner clymme vp 1 to my bedde. I wil not suffre myne eyes to slepe, ner myne eye lyddes to slober. Vntill I fynde out a place for the LORDE, an habitacio for the mightie one of lacob. Lo, we herde of the same at
Ephrata, q foüde it in ¥ wod. 

We wil go in to his tabernacle, q fall downe before his fotestole. ‘Arise (o LORDE) in to thy restinge place, thou q y arke of thy stregth.

J Let thy prestes be clothed with rightuous- nesse, and let thy sayntes reioyse. Jor thy seruaunte Dauids sake turne not awaye the presence of thine anoynted. The LORDE hath made a faithfull ooth vnto Dauid, ^q he shal not shrenke from it: Of the frute of thy body shal I set vpon thy seate. Yf thy child-
^ Esa. 43. d. © Eccli. 3. c. 

e2 Par. 6. g. f Exo. 

€2 Ro. 7. c. 1 Par. 18. b. Psal. 88. a, i Luce 1. f.

“Tob 9. a. Psal. 142. a. 

The Psalter. 

ren wil kepe my couenaunt, q my testimony y 
I shal lerne thé, their childré also shal syt vpo thy seate for euermore. For the LORDE hath chosen Sid, to be an habitacio for him- self hath he chosen her. This shalbe my rest, here wil I dwel, for I haue a delite therin.
I will blesse hir vytales with increase, q wil satisfie hir poore with bred. ^I wil decke hir prestes with health, q hir sayntes shal reioyse q be glad. ‘There shall I make the horne of
Dauid to florish, 1 haue ordened a lanterne for myne anoynted. As for his enemies, I shal clothe thé with shame, but vpon himself shal his crowne florish.

The errrij. A psalme of Dauid. 

EHOLDE, how good q ioyfull a thinge 

it is, * brethré to dwell together in vnite. 

It is like ý precious oyntment vpon the heade, 

that ranne downe vnto the beerd, eue vnto 

Aarons beerd, ‘¢ wete downe to the skyrtes 

of his clothinge. Like the dewe of Hermon, 

which fell vpon the hill of Sion." For there 

the LORDE promised his blessynge, and life for euermore.

The cryrió. Psalme. 
EHOLDE, O prayse the LORDE all ye seruauntes of the LORDE, " ye that b night stode in the house of the LORDE. Ò lift vp youre handes in the Sanctuary, and prayse the LORDE. The LORDE y made heauen ç earth, blesse the out of Sion.

The crrriiij. Psalme. 

PRAYSE $ name of ý LORDE, 

praise it o ye seruaŭtes of ý LORDE. 
" Ye y stode in $ house of ý LORDE, in the courtes of the house of oure God. O prayse the LORDE, for the LORDE is gracious: o synge prayses vnto his name, for it is louely. "For why, the LORDE hath chosen lacob vnto him self, q Israel for his owne possessio. For I knowe y y LORDE is greate, q y oure LORDE is aboue all oddes. What so euer ý LORDE pleaseth, y doth he in heaué q in earth, in the see q in all depe places. “He bryngeth forth the cloudes from the endes of the worlde, he turneth ¥ lighteniges vnto rayne, bringige

3 Re. 11.f. 15. a. * Phil. 2. a. Ephe, 4. a. ! Exo. 
30.d. Leui.8.b. " Pro. 19. b. " Psal. 112. a. 134. a. 
1 Tim. 2. b. Nu. 6. d o Paal. 112.23. 133. a. P Deu. 

4. c. and 10. e. ? Tere. 10. c. 51. a. 

Psalme rrrir 

a 

a 

3 

Psalme rrrrbi, 

the wyndes out of their treasuries. “ Which smote the firstborne of Egipte, both of man and beest. He hath sent tokens and wonders in to the myddest of the (o thou londe of
Egipte) vpon Pharao and all his seruauntes. 
* Which smote dyuerse nacions, q slewe mightie kynges. *Sihon kynge of y Amorites, Og the kynge of Basan, and all the kyngdomes of
Canaa. And gaue their lode for an heretage, for an heretage vnto Israel his people. Thy name (o LORDE) endureth for euer, so doth thy memorial! (o LORDE) from one genera- cion to another. “For the LORDE wil auége his people, q be gracious vnto his ser- uaütes. As for the ymages of the Heithé,
“they are but syluer and golde, the worke of mens hades. They haue mouthes, q speake not: eyes haue they, but they se not. They haue eares, and yet they heare not, nether is there eny breth 1 their mouthes.

'They that make them, are like vnto them, q so are all they that put their trust in thé.
Prayse the LORDE ye house of Israel, prayse the LORDE ye house of Aaron.
Prayse the LORDE ye house of Leui, ye that feare y LORDE, prayse the LORDE.
Praysed be the LORDE out of Sion, which dwelleth at lerusalé. Halleluya.

: The prs. Psalme. a GEUE thankes vnto the LORDE, for he is gracious, /and his mercy endureth for euer. O geue thakes vnto the God of all goddes, for his mercy endureth for euer. O thanke the LORDE of all lordes, for his mercy endureth for euer. £ Which only doth greate wonders, for his mercy endureth for euer. Which by his wysdome made the heauens, for his mercy endureth for euer.
^ Which layed out the earth aboue the waters, for his mercy endureth for euer. Which hath made greate lightes, for his mercy endureth for euer. The Sonne to rule the daye, for his merey endureth for euer. The Moone and the starres to gouerne the night, for his mercy endureth for euer. ‘Which smote
Egipte with their firstborne, for his mercy endureth for euer. And brought out Israel from amonge them, for his mercy endureth

s Exo. 12. e. Exo. 7. 8. 9. 10. 
21. c. Deut. 3. a. 
Esa. 44. b. Iere. 10. a. 
106. a. 117.2. 1 Mac. 4. c. Deu. 10. d. 
Psal. 71. c. ^ Tob 38. a. 

b Tosu.12.2. © Num. 
4 Deu. 32. e. e Psal. 113. b. 

f Judit. 13. c. Psal. 105. a. 
€ Iud, 13. d. 
Psal. 23. a. 

Gen. 1. b. 

The Psalter. 

fo. url. 

for euer. With a mightie hade and a stretched out arme, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Which deuyded the reed see in to partes, for his mercy endureth for euer. ^ And made
Israel to go thorow y myddest of it, for his mercy endureth for euer.

But as for Pharao and his hoost, he ouer- threwe them in the reed see, for his mercy endureth for euer. ‘Which led his people thorow the wyldernesse, for his mercy en- dureth for euer. " Which smote greate kynges, for his mercy endureth for euer. Yee and slewe mightie kynges, for his mercy endureth for euer. "Sihon kynge of the Amorites, for his mercy endureth for euer. And Og the kynge of Basan, for his merey endureth for euer.

And gaue awaye their londe for an heretage, for his mercy endureth for euer. Euen for an heretage vnto Israel his seruaunt, for his mercy endureth for euer. ° Which remébreth vs, whé we are in trouble, for his mercy en- dureth for euer. ” Which geueth foode vnto all flesh, for his mercy endureth for euer.

O geue thankes vnto the God of heauen, for his mercy endureth for euer.

The cryrbi. Psalme. 

Y the waters of Babilon we sat downe 

and wepte, ‘when we remébred Sion. 
As for oure harpes, we hanged them vp vpon the trees, that are therin. The, they that led vs awaye captyue, requyred of vs a songe and melody in oure heuynes: synge vs one of the songes of Sion. How shal we synge the
LORDES ‘songe in a strange lode? Yf I forget the (o lerusalem) let my right hande} . be forgotten. Yf I do not remembre the, let my tonge cleue to the rofe of my mouth: yee yf I preferre not lerusalem in my myrth.
* Remembre the childré of Edom (o LORDE) in the daye of lerusalem, how they sayde: downe with it, downe with it, eue to the grounde. *O doughter Babilo, thou shalt come to misery thy self: yee happie shal he be, that rewardeth y as thou hast serued vs.
Blessed shal he be, that taketh thy children, and throweth them agaynst the stones.

i Exo. 12. e. ^ Exo. 14. e. ! Exo. 15. 16, 17. m Josu. 12, a. "Nu. 21. c. Deu. 3. a. ? Iud. 2. 3.4.
P Psal. 103. d. 9 Eze, 1. e. and 3. b. r Mat. 7. a. 
! Iere, 49. d. Eze. 25. b. Abd. 1. a. * Esa. 13. c. 
Tere. 50. 51. 

| So. dribi, 

a 

The eprrbij. A psalme of Dauid. 
WIL gene thakes vnto the (o LORDE) with my whole hert, euen before the goddes wil I synge prayses vnto the.

2] wil worshippe towarde thy holy téple, and prayse thy name because of thy louynge kynd- nesse and treuth, for thou hast magnified thy worde, acordynge vnto thy greate name. When
I call vpo the, thou hearest me, and endewest my soule with moch strégth. All the kynges of the earth shal prayse the (o LORDE) when they heare the wordes of thy mouth. Yee they shal synge in the wayes of the LORDE, that greate is the glory of the LORDE. ^For though the LORDE be hye, yet hath he respecte vnto y lowly: as for y proude, he beholdeth him afarre off. Though I walke i y myddest of trouble, yet shalt thou refresh me: thou shalt streteh forth thine hade vpo the furiousnes of myne enemies, q thy right hande shal saue me. The LORDE shal make good for me, yee thy mercy (o LORDE) endureth for euer: “despyse not then the worke of thine owne handes.

The exypoitj. A psalme of Dauid. 

LORDE, thou searchest me out, and 

knowest me. Thou knowest my downe syttinge q my vprisynge, thou vnderstodest my thoughtes afarre of. Thou art aboute my

path q aboute my bedd, q spyest out all my|. 

wayes. For lo, there is not a worde 1 my toge, but thou (o LORDE) knowest it allto- gether. Thou hast fashioned me behinde a before, t layed thine hode vpon me. Soch knowlege is to wonderfull q excellet for me, I can not atteyne vnto it. Whither shal I go then from thy sprete ? ^Or, whither shal I fle from thy presence? * Yf I elymme vp in to heauen, thou art there: yf I go downe to hell, thou art there also. Yf I take the wynges of the mornynge, q remayne in the vttemost parte of the see: Euen there also shal thy honde lede me, and thy right hande shal holde me. Yf I saye: peradueture the darcknesse shal couer me, then shal my night be turned to daye. Yee the darcknesse is no darcknesse with the, but the night is as cleare as the daye, the darcknesse q light are both alike.
For my reynes are thyne, thou hast couered me 1n my mothers wombe. I wil geue thakes

* Iob 14. b. 

> Psal. 112, a. 

* Peal, 5. a. 

The Psalter. 

Psalme rrrrbij. 

vnto the, for I am woderously made: mar- uelous are thy workes, and that my soule knoweth right well. My bones are not hyd from the, though I be made secretly, and fashioned beneth in the earth. Thine eyes se myne vnparfituesse, they stonde all writte i thy boke: my dayes were fashioned, when as yet there was not one of them.

How deare are thy coücels vnto me o God? 
O how greate is the summe of then? Yf I tell them, they are mo in nombre then the sonde: when I wake vp, I am present with the. Wilt thou not slaye y wieked (oh God) that the bloudethyrstie mighte departe fro me? For they speake vnright of the, thine enemies exalte them selues presumptuously.

I hate them (o LORDE) that hate the, a l maye not awaye with those that ryse vp agaynst the. Yee I hate them right sore, therfore are they myne enemies. /Trye me
(o God) and seke the grounde of myne hert : proue me, q examen my thoughtes. Loke well, yf there be eny waye of wickednesse in me, q lede me in the waye euerlastinge.

The crrriy. A psalme of Dauid. 
ELYUER me (o LORDE) from the euell men, oh preserue me from the

wicked men. Which ymagin myschefe iu their hertes, q stere vp strife all the daye longe. "They sharpen their tonges like a ser- pent, Adders poyson is vnder their lippes.
Sela. Kepe me (o LORDE) from the hande of the vngodly, preserue me from the wicked men, which are purposed to ouerthrowe my goinges. ‘The proude haue layed a snare for me, q spred a nett abrode with coardes, yee q sett trappes in my waye. Sela.

But my sayenge is vnto the LORDE: thou art my God, heare the voyce of my prayer o
LORDE. O LORDE God, thon strength of my health, thou hast couered my heade in y daye of battayll. Let not y vugodly haue his desyre (o LORDE) let him not haue his purpose, lest they be to proude. Sela. Let the myschefe of their owne lippes* fall vpon y head of thé, y copase me aboute. Let hote burnynge bales fall vpo the, let thé be cast in to the fyre, and in to the pytt, that they neuer ryse vp agayne. A man full of wordes shal not prospere vpon earth: a malicious q wicked person shal be hunted awaye and de-

d Amos9. 3. € Tere. 23. d. J Psal.25.a. 5 Psal.7.b. 

Psalme crlif. 

stroyed. Sure I am, that the LORDE wil auenge the poore, and manteyne the cause of the helplesse. The rightuous also shal geue thakes vnto thy name, q the iust shal continue in thy sight.

The cyl. A psalme of Dauid. 

a ORDE, I call vpon the: haist the vnto 

me, and consider my voyce, whe I crie vnto the. ^Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incése, and let the liftinge vp of my hades be an euenynge sacrifice. ’ Set a watch (o LORDE) before my mouth, yee a watch at the dore of my lippes. O let not myne hert be euclyned to eny euell thige, to be mynded as the vngodly or wicked men, lest
I eate of soch thinges as please thé. 

Let the rightuous (rather) smyte me frendly, and reproue me: so wil I take it, as though he had poured oyle vpé my heade: it shal not hurte my heade, yee I wil praye yet for their wickednesse. ‘Their iudges stóble at the stone, yet heare they my wordes, y they be ioyfull.
Oure bones lye scatered beo y pytt, like as when one graueth and dyggeth vp the grounde.
But myne eyes loke vnto y, o LORDE God: in the 1s my trust, oh cast not out my soule.
Kepe me fro y snare which they haue layed for me, and fró the trappes of the wicked doers.
Let the vngodly fall in to their owne nettes together, vntill I be gone by them.

The crli. A psalme of Dauid. 

CRIE vnto the LORDE with my voyce, 

yee eué vnto the LORDE do I make my supplicacion. I poure out my complaynte before him, and shewe him of my trouble.
When my sprete is in heuynesse, for thou knowest my path: in the waye where in I walke, haue they preuely layed a snare for me.
I loke vpon my right honde ¢ se, there is no man that wil knowe me. I haue no place to fle vnto, no man careth for my soule. Ther- fore do I crie vnto the (o LORDE) and saye: thou art my hope and my porcion, in the londe of the lyuynge. Cosidre my com- playnte, for I am brought very lowe. Oh delyuer me fro my persecuters, for they are to stronge for me: Brynge my soule out of preson, that I maye geue thakes vnto thy name: which thinge yf thou wilt graüte me,

> Eccli. 22. c. 
* Psal. 76. a. 

a Exo. 30. b. Nu. 28. a. d Tob 4, b. 25. a. 15. b.

e Psal. 101. a. 
J Psal. 62. a. 

The Psalter. 

then shal the rightuous resorte vnto my có- pany.

The relij. A psalme of Dauid. 

HZ my prayer (o LORDE) considre| A 

my desyre: answere me for thy treuth q rightuousnesse sake. And entre not in to iudgment with thy seruaunt, for in thy sight shal no man lyuynge be iustified.^ For the enemie persecuteth my soule, he smyteth my life downe to the grounde, he layeth me in the darcknesse, as the deed men of the worlde.
Therfore is my sprete vexed within me, and my herte within me is desolate. Yet do I remebre the tymes past,’ I muse vpó all thy workes, yee I exercise my self in the workes of thy hondes. ^I stretch forth my hondes vnto the, my soule crieth vnto the out of the thyrstie londe. Sela. Heare me (o LORDE) and that soone, for my sprete waxeth faynte : hyde not thy face fro me, lest I be like vnto the that go downe in to the graue. me heare thy louynge kyndnesse by tymes in the mornynge, for in the is my trust: shewe thou me the waye that I shulde walke in, for
I lift vp my soule vnto the. Delyuer me (o 
LORDE) fro myne enemies, for I resorte vnto the.

Teach me to do the thinge that pleaseth the, for thou art my God : let thy louynge sprete lede me forth vnto the londe of rightuousnesse.
Quycké me (o LORDE) for thy names sake, and for thy rightuousnesse sake brynge my soule out of trouble. And of thy goodnesse scater myne enemies abrode, and destroye all them that vexe my soule, for I am thy ser- uaunt.

The crliij. A psalme of Dauid. 

B sa s be the LORDE my refuge,? which teacheth my hades to warre, a my fyngers to fight. My hope and my castell, my defence and my delyuerer, my shylde in whom I trust, which gouerneth the people that is vnder me. LORDE, what is ma, that thou hast soch respecte vnto him ?^ Or the sonne of man, that thou so regardest him ?
Man is like a thinge of naught, 'his tyme passeth awaye like a shadowe. Bowe thy heaués (o LORDE) qa come downe, touch the mountaynes, y they maye smoke withall.

^ Psal. 8. b. 

& Psal. 17. d. 2 Re. 22. e. * Iob 8. a. 

Fo. dribi, 

Oh let|:8 

a 

b 

fo. nrlbíij. 

Sende forth the lightenynge q seater thé, shute out thiue arowes and consume them.
Sende downe thine hande from aboue, delyuer me and take me out of y greate waters, from the hande of straunge childré. Whose mouth talketh of vanite, q their right hade is a right hande of falsede. ‘That I maye synge a new songe vnto the (o God) q synge prayses vnto the vpon a tenstrynged lute, Thou that geuest victory vnto kynges, and hast delyuered Dauid thy seruaunt from the parell of the swerde.
Saue me and delyuer me from the honde of straunge childre, whose mouth talketh of vanite, and their right hande is a right hande of falsede. ‘That oure sonnes maye growe vp as the yoge plantes, and that oure doughters maye be as the polished corners of the temple.
That oure garners maye be full and plenteous with all maner of stoare: that oure shepe maye brynge forth thousandes and hundreth thousands in oure villages. That oure oxen maye be stronge to laboure, that there be no myschaunce, no decaye, and no complayninge in oure stretes.

Happie are the people that be in soch a case: yee blessed are the people, which haue the LORDE for their God.’

The cplittj. A psalme of Dauid. 

WIL magnifie the (o my God a kynge) I 

wil prayse thy name for euer q euer. 
Euery daye wil I geue thankes vnto the, and prayse thy name for euer and euer. Greate is the LORDE, q maruelous worthy to be praysed, there is no ende of his greatnesse.
One generacion shal prayse thy workes vnto another, and declare thy power. As for me I wil be talkige of thy worshipe, thy glory, thy prayse and wóderous workes.

So that men shal speake of the might of thy maruelous actes, and tell of thy greatnes.

The memoriall of thy abundaunt kyndnes shal be shewed, and më shal synge of thy right- eousnesse. “The LORDE is gracious and mercifull, longe sufferynge q of greate good- nesse. The LORDE is louynge vnto euery man, and his mercy is ouer all his workes.
All thy workes prayse the (o LORDE) and thy sayntes geue thankes vnto the. They shewe the glory of thy kyngdome, and talke of thy power. That thy power, thy glory

* Deut. 28. a. ? Psal. 32, b. * Exo. 34. a. Psal. 85. c. 
102. a, d Luc. i.c, Dan.3.f.and7. d. Psal. 4-4. b. 

The Psalter, 

Psalme crlitij. v mightynesse of thy kyngdome might be knowne vnto men. “Thy kyngdome is an euerlastinge kyngdome, q thy dominion en- dureth thorow out all ages. The LORDE vpholdeth all soch as shulde fall, and lifteth vp all those that be downe. The eyes of all wayte vpon the, and thou geuest them their meate in due season. Thou openest thine hade, and fyllest all thinges lyuynge with plenteousnesse. The LORDE is righteous in all his wayes, q holy in all his workes. The
LORDE is nye vnto all them that call vpon him, yee all soch as call vpon him faithfully.
He fulfilleth the desyre of them that feare him, he heareth their crie, and helpeth them.
The LORDE preserueth all them that loue him, but scatereth abrode all the vngodly.
My mouth shal speake the prayse of. the 
LORDE, And let all flesh geue thankes vnto his holy name for euer and euer. Halleluya.

The cro. Psalme. 

RAYSE the LORDE (o my soule:) 
‘whyle I lyue wil I prayse the LORDE, yee as loge as I haue eny beynge, /I wil synge prayses vnto my God. O put not youre trust in prynces, ner in the childe of man, for there is no helpe in thé. For when ý breth of man goeth forth, he shal turne agayne to his earth, and so all his thoughtes perishe. Blessed is he that hath y God of lacob for his helpe, and whose hope is in the LORDE his God.
Which made heauen and earth,’ y see and all that therin is, which kepeth his promise for euer. Which helpeth them to right y suffre wronge, which fedeth y hongrie. The LORDE lowseth men out of preson, the LORDE

geueth sight to the blynde. 

The LORDE helpeth thé vp that are fallen, the LORDE loueth the righteous.
The LORDE careth for the straungers, he defendeth y fatherlesse and wyddowe: as for the waye of y vngodly, he turneth it vpsyde downe. The LORDE thy God (o Sion) is kynge for euermore, and thorow out all

generacions. Halleluya. 
PRAYSE the LORDE, for it is a good thinge to synge prayses vnto oure
God: yee a ioyfull and pleasaunt thinge is it 

The loi. Psalme. 

Prou. 24. c. Psal. 33.c. 36. d. Psal.103.d. ¢Psal. 102. a. 
J Psal. 117. a. & Act. 14. c. Apoc. 14. b. 

B 

The Psalter. 

to be thankfull. The LORDE shal buylde vp lerusale, q gather together y outcastes of
Israel. He healeth the contrite in herte, and byndeth vp their woundes. ^ He telleth the nombre of the starres, and calleth them all by their names. Greate is oure LORDE, and greate is his power, yee his wyszdome is infinite. The LORDE setteth vp $ meke, ¢ bryngeth y vngodly downe to y groude.

ʻO synge vnto y LORDE with thankesgeu- ynge, synge praysesvpo y harpe vnto oure God.

Which couereth y la with cloudes, prepareth rayne for ¥ earth q maketh i grasse to growe vpon the mountaynes. Whic geueth foder vnto y catell,’ q fedeth y yonge rauens y call vpo him. He hath no pleasure in the strength of an horse, nether delyteth he in eny màs legges. But the LORDES delyte is in them that feare him, and put

. |their trust in his mercy. 

a 

The exloij. Psalme. 
This psalme do the hebrues ioyne vnto it, that goeth before.

RAYSE y LORDE o Ierusalé, prayse 

thy God o Sion. For he maketh fast y barres of thy gates, q blesseth thy childré within y. He maketh peace in thy borders, t fylleth y with y floure of wheate. He sendeth forth his cOmaundemét vpo earth,’ his worde rüneth swiftly. He geueth snowe like woll, q scatereth y horefrost like ashes.
He casteth forth his yse like morsels, who is able to abyde his frost? He sendeth out his worde and melteth them, he bloweth with his wynde, q the waters flowe. He sheweth his worde vnto lacob, his statutes q ordinaunces vnto Israel. He hath not dealte so with all the Heithen, nether haue they knowlege of

his lawes. Halleluya. 
The exlotij. Psalme. 
PRAYSE the LORDE of heauen, 

O prayse him in the heyth. Prayse him all ye angels of his, prayse hi all his hoost.
Prayse him Sonne ¢ Moone, prayse him all ye starres q light. Prayse him all ye heauens, t ye waters y be vnder the heauens. Let them prayse the name of the LORDE, for

a Esa. 40. d. ^1 Esd.3.c. ° Psal. 103. b. 4 Iob 38. d. 
* Gene. 1. a. 

he cómaunded, /« they were made. made the fast for euer and euer, he hath geue

He hath 

them a lawe which shal not be broke. Prayse the LORDE vpon earth, ye whalfishes and all depes. Fyre and hayle, snowe q vapors, wynde and storme, fulfillimge his worde.
Mountaynes and all hilles, frutefull trees q all 
Ceders. Beastes and all catel, wormes q fethered foules. Kynges of the earth q all people, princes q all iudges of $ worlde.
Yonge men q maydés, olde men and children. 

Let them prayse the name of the LORDE, for his name only is excellent, and his prayse aboue heauen and earth. He exalteth the horne of his people, all his sayntes shal prayse him, the children of Israel, euen the people that serueth him. - Halleluya.

The crlíy. Psalme. Halleluya. 

SYNGE vnto y LORDE a new songe, 

‘let the cdgregacion of sayntes prayse him. Let Israel reioyse in him that made him, and let the children of Sion be ioyfull in their kynge. Let them prayse his name in the daiice, let them synge prayses vnto him with tabrettes and harpes. For the LORDE hath pleasure in his people, and helpeth the mekeharted. Let the sayntes be ioyfull with glory, let them reioyse in their beddes. Let the prayses of God be in their mouth,’ and sharpe swerdes in their handes. To be auenged of the Heithé, q to rebuke the people.
To bynde their kynges in cheynes, q their nobles with lynckes of yron. That they maye be auenged of them, as it is written, * Soch honoure haue all his sayntes. Halleluya.

The el. Psalme. Halleluya. 

PRAYSE the LORDE in his Sanc- 

tuary, prayse him in the firmament of his power. Prayse him in his noble actes, prayse him in his excellét greatnesse.

Prayse him in the sounde of the trompet, prayse him vpo the lute and harpe. Prayse him in the cymbals and daunse, prayse him vpon the strynges and pype. Prayse him vpo the welltuned cymbals, prayse him vpon the loude cymbals. Let euery thinge y hath breth, prayse the LORDE. Halleluya.

f Psal. 32. b. € Esa. 42, b. *Heb.4.c. — ! Deut. 32. f. 

The ende of the Psalter. 

SELA. 

In the psalter this worde Sela commeth very oft, and (after the mynde of the iterpreters) it 

is asmoch to saye as, allwaye, contynually, for euer, forsoyth, verely, a liftinge vp of the voyce, or to make a pause and earnestly to consider, and to ponder the sentece.

So. drlir. 

The Proucrbes of Salomon. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chay. I. 

The wysdome of God calleth vs by the mouth of 
Salomo, exorteth vs, and geueth vs warnynge to eschue the wicked : whose vngodly couersa- cion in worde and worke, and punyshment also of the same, is here descrybed.

Chap. Il. 
How wisdome maye be gotten, and what profit commeth of it.

Chap. Ill. 
He exorteth us to the feare of God and to pacience : he commendeth wyszdome, q re- quyreth us to cleue vnto the same.

Chap. IMI. 
A fatherly exortacion vnto wisdome, with the profit therof, and how we ought to refrayne the mébres of oure body fro euell.

Chap. V. 

He exorteth vnto wyszdoe, and to bewarre of harlottes: he telleth what harme maye folowe therout, whe men medle with soch: he teacheth men, louyngly to cleue vnto their maried wyues, and descrybeth the ende of the vngodly.

Chap. VI. 
He warneth men to bewarre of suertishipe, ex- orteth the slouthfull to laboure, sheweth the wikednesse of false tonges, and requyreth men

m are the prouerbes of Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge of Israel: to lerne wyszdome, nurtoure, vnderstondinge, pru- dence, rightuousnesse, iudgment and equite.
That the very babes might haue wyt, and that yonge men might haue knowlege and vnderstondinge. By hearinge, the wyse ma shal cóme by more wysdome: and by ex-

to bewarre of aduoutry, because it is more perlous then theft or felony.

Chap. VII. 

He exorteth vnto wiszdome, sheweth the con- dicions of harlottes, and what hurt happeneth vnto soch as enclyne to the prouocacios and desyres of the flesh.

Chap. VIII. 

Wyszdome calleth men swetely vnto her, and telleth them what treasure and power she hath.
A comendacion and prayse of wiszdome, wherout euery ma is exorted to cleue vnto her.

Chap. IX. 
Wyszdome crieth vpo the ignoraut, and promiseth them greate thinges. The foolish maner of a light woman.

Chap. X. 

From this chapter forth vnto the XXXI, there are described many swete, louely and wyse sentences, which teach men wyszdome and what profit commeth of it: Agayne, how men maye auoyde foolishnesse, and the hurte therof.

Chap. XXXI. 

W yszdome warneth vs to bewarre of enell women, and descrybeth the couersacion, maner, q behauoure of an honest maried wyfe.

perience, he shal be more apte to vnder- stonde a parable, and the interpretacion therof: the wordes of the wyse, and the darcke speaches of the same. “The feare of the LORDE is the begynnynge of wysdome.
But fooles despyse wysdome and nurtoure. 

* Job 28. c. Pro. 9. b. Psal. 110. b. Eccli. 1. c. 

Chap. tj. 

3 

The first Chapter. 

Y sonne, heare thy fathers doctryne, and forsake not the lawe of thy mother: for that shal brynge grace vnto thy heade, q shal be a cheyne aboute thy necke. My sonne, cosente not vnto synners,’ yf they entyse the, and saye: come wyth us, let us laye wayte for bloude, q lurke preuely for the innocét wythout a cause: let us swalowe thé vp like ¥ hell, ?let us deuoure thé quycke and whole, as those that go downe in to the pytt. So shal we fynde all maner of costly riches, and fyll oure houses wyth spoyles. Cast in thy lott amonge us,

we shal haue all one purse. 

My sonne, walke not thou with them, re- frayne thy fote fro their wayes. “For their fete rine to enell, v are haistie to shed bloude.
But in vayne is y net layed forth before the byrdes eyes. Yee they thé selues laye wayte one for anothers bloude, and one of the wolde slaye another. These are the wayesof all sochas be couetous, that one wolde rauyshanothers life.

Wyszdome crieth without,’ q putteth forth hir voyce in the stretes. She calleth before ¥ congregacion in y open gates, and sheweth hir wordes thorow y cite, sayenge: O ye childre, how loge wil ye loue childyshnesse? how longe wil ¥ scorners delyte in scornynge, ¢ ¥ vnwyse be enemies vnto knowlege? O turne you vnto my correccion: lo, J wil expresse my mynde vnto you, and make you vnderstode my wordes.
Seinge then that I haue called, and ye refused it: ‘I haue stretched out my honde, and no mà regarded it, but all my coücels haue ye despysed, and set my correccios at naught.
Therfore shal I also laugh in youre destruccion, and mocke you, when y thinge that ye feare cometh vpon you: euen whé H thinge that ye be afrayed of, falleth in sodenly like a storme, and youre misery like a tempest: yee whà trouble and heuynesse cometh vpon you. Then shal they call vpo me, but I wil not heare: they shal seke me early, but they shal not fynde me: And y because they hated knowlege, and receaued not y feare of y LORDE, but abhorred my councell, and despysed my cor- reccion. ‘Therfore shal they eate ¥ frutes of their owne waye, and be fylled with their owne councels: for $ turnynge awaye of y vnwyse shal slaye thé, ¢ ¥ prosperite of fooles

* Esa. 59.a. Pro. 6. b. e Eaa. 65. b. Iere. 7. b.

« Esa, 29, d. 
Psal. 13. a. 

> Psal. 123. a, 
4 Pro. 8. a. 

Salomons Prouerbes. 

shalbe their owne destruccio. But who so harkeneth vnto me, shal dwell safely, /and haue ynough without eny feare of euell.

The ij. Chapter. 

Y sonne, yf thou wilt receaue my wordes, 

and kepe my cOmaundemétes by the, that thine eare maye herken ynto wysdome, applie thine herte then to vnderstodinge. For yf thou criest after wyszdome, q callest for knowlege: yf thou sekest after her as after money, and dyggest for her as for treasure:
The shalt thou vnderstonde $ feare of the 
LORDE, and fynde y knowlege of God. For it is the LORDE that geueth wyszdome, * out of his mouth commeth knowlege and vnder- stondinge. He preserueth ¥ welfare of the rightuous, and defendeth them y walke inno- cently: he kepeth them in y right path, and preserueth ¥ waye of his sayntes. Then shalt thou vnderstonde rightuousnesse, iudgment and equite, yee aud euery good path. Yf wyszdome entre in to thine herte, and thy soule delyte in knowlege: then shal councell preserue the, and vnderstondinge shal kepe the.
That thou mayest be delyuered fró y euell waye, and from the man y speaketh frowarde thinges. From soch as leaue the hye strete, and walke 1 $ wayes of darcknesse: which reioyse in doynge euell, and delyte 1 wicked thinges: whose wayes are croked, and their pathes slaunderous.

*That thou mayest be delyuered also from the straunge woman, and from her that is not thine owne: which geueth swete wordes, for- saketh the huszbande of hir youth, and for- getteth the couenaunt of hir God. For hir house is enclyned vnto death, and hir pathes vnto hell. Allthey that go in vnto her, come not agayne, nether take they holde of the waye of life.

That thou mayest walke in ¥ good waye, and kepe the pathes of the rightuous. For the iust shal dwell in the londe, and the inno- centes shal remayne in it: but the vngodly shalbe roted out of $ londe, and the wicked doers shalbe taken out of it.

The iij. Chapter. 
Y sonne,‘ forget not my lawe, but se y thine hert kepe my cOmaundemétes.
J Pro.3.c. € Iaco.1.2.c. Eccla.1.a.and7.c. Iob.28.b. 
3 Reg.3. b. 4. c. — ^Pro.7.a.and5.a. — ' Deu. 11.2. 

fo. dit. 

a 

B 

€ 

So. dij. Salomons Prouerbes, Chap. iiij. 

For they shal prologe y dayes q yeares of thy lyfe, q brynge y peace. Let merey q faith- fulnes neuer go from y: bynde the about thy necke, q wryte them in the tables of thine herte. So shalt thou fynde fauoure and, good vnderstondinge in y sight of God and men.
Put thy trust in y LORDE with all. thine herte, and leane not vnto thine owne vnder- stondinge. In all thy wayes haue respecte vnto him, and he shal ordre thy goinges. “Be not wyse in thine owne coneeate, but feare y
LORDE and departe from euell: so shal thy nauel be whole, and thy bones stronge.

? Honoure the LORDE with thy substaunee, q with y firstlinges of all thine enerease: so shal thy barnes be fylled with plenteousnesse, and thy presses shal flowe ouer with swete wyne. My sonne, despyse not the chastenynge of y LORDE, nether faynte when thou art rebuked of him. For who the LORDE loueth, him he ehasteneth: and yet delyteth in him euen as a father in his owne sonne. Well is him that fyndeth wyszdome, q opteyneth vn- derstondinge, for the gettinge of it is better then eny marehaundise of syluer, q the profit of it is better then golde. Wyszdome is more worth thé precious stones, ^q all y thinges y thou eanst desyre, are not to be compared vnto her. "Vpon hir right hande is longe life, t vpon hir left hande is riches q honoure.

Hir wayes are pleasaunt wayes, and all hir pathes are peaceable. She is a tre of life? to them that laye holde vpon her, and blessed are they that kepe her fast.

With wyszdome hath y LORDE layed the foudacion of ¥ earth, q thorow vnderstondinge hath he stablished y heaués. 'Phorow his wiszdome y depthes breake vp, q y cloudes droppe downe the dew. My sonne, let not these thinges departe from thyne eyes, but kepe my lawe and my eouncell: so shal it be life vnto thy soule, q grace vnto thy mouth.

Then shalt thou walke safely in thy waye, ¢ thy fote shal not stomble. Yf thou slepest, thou shalt not be afrayed, ‘but shalt take thy rest q slepe swetely. Thou neddest not to be afrayed of eny sodane feare, nether for the violent russhinge in of the vngodly, when it comnieth.

For the LORDE shal be besyde the, a kepe 

thy fote y thou be not taken. Refuse not to do good vnto him that shulde haue it, so longe as thine hande is able to do it. Saye not vnto thy neghboure: go thy waye q come agayne, tomorow wil I geue the: where as thou hast now to geue him. Intende no hurte vnto thy neghboure, seynge he hopeth to dwell in rest by the. Stryue not lightly with eny man, where as he hath done y no harme. / Folowe not a wicked man, and chose none of his wayes: for the LORDE abhorreth the fro- warde, but his secrete is amonge the righteous.
The curse of the LORDE is in the house of the vngodly, but he blesseth the dwellinges of the righteous.

As for the seornefull, he shal laugh thé to seorne, but he shal geue grace vnto the lowly.
The wyse shal haue honoure in possession, but shame is the promocio that fooles shal haue.

The iiij. Chapter. 

Lice. (O ye children) the fatherly ex- 

ortacið, q take good hede, that ye maye lerne wyszdome. Yee I shal geue you a good rewarde, yf ye wil not forsake my lawe. For when I myself was my fathers deare sonne, and tenderly beloued of my mother, he taught me also, sayenge: “let thine herte reeeaue my wordes, kepe my commaundementes, and thou shalt lyue.

Get the wyszdome, get the vnderstondinge, forget not y wordes of my mouth, q shréke not from them. Forsake her not, and she shal preserue the: loue her, and she shal kepe the.
The chefe poynte of wyszdome is, that thou be wyllynge to opteyne wyszdome, and before all thy goodes to get the vnderstondynge.
Make moch of her, “and she shal promote the: 
Yee yf thou embracest her, she shal brynge the vnto honoure.

She shal make the a gracious heade, and garnish the with y erowne of glory. Heare my sonne, and reeeaue my wordes, that the yeares of thy life maye be many. 1 wil shewe the y waye of wyszdome, and lede the in the right pathes. So that yf thou goest therin, there shal no straytnesse hynder the: and when thou runnest, thou shalt not fall. Take fast holde of doetryne, let her not go: kepe her, for she is thy life.

* Esa. 5. e. Rom. 12. c. + Tob. 4. b. Deut. 26. a. 
Mala. 3. b. Exo.23.c. and 34. c. 1 Pet.4.b. Tob.12.c. 
Heb. 12.a. Apo, 3. d. * Pro. 8. a. 4 Gen. 2. b. 

a Pro iie: f Pro. t. a. € Deut. 6, b. 11. c. 32. g. 
^ Deu. 26. d. 

Chap. bi. 

Come not in the path of the vngodly, “and walke not in the waye of the wicked.

Eschue it, q go not therin: departe asyde, q passe ouer by it. For they can not slepe, excepte they haue first done some myschefe : nether take they eny rest, exeepte they haue first done some harme. For they eate the bred of wickednesse, aud drike the wyne of robbery. The path of the rightuous shyneth as the light, and is euer brighter « brighter vnto the parfeete daye. But y waye of the vngodly is as the dareknesse, wherin mē fall, or they be awarre.
€; *My sonne, marcke my wordes, and enclyne 
|thine eare vnto my saynges. Let them not departe from thine eyes, kepe them euen in the myddest of thine herte. For they are life vnto all those that finde the, and health vnto all their bodies. Kepe thine hert with all diligence, for there vpon hangeth life.
Put awaye from the a frowarde mouth, and let the lippes of slaunder be farre from the.
Let thine eyes beholde the thinge y is right, t let thine eye lyddes loke straight before the.
Podre the path of thy fete, so shal all thy wayes be sure. “Turne not asyde, nether to the right hande ner to the lefte, but witholde thy fote from euell.

The b. Chapter. 

a Y sonne, geue hede vito my wyszdome, q bowe thine eare vnto my prudéee : y thou mayest regarde good councell, and that thy lippes maye kepe nurtoure.
“For the lippes of an harlot are a droppinge hony combe, and hir throte is softer then joyle. But at ý last she is as bitter as worm- wod, and as sharpe as a two edged swerde.
Hir fete go downe vnto death, and hir steppes pearse thorow vnto hell. She regardeth not
| |the path of life, so vnstedfast are hir wayes, that thou canst not knowe them. Heare me therfore (o my sonne) and departe not fro the wordes of my mouth. Kepe thy waye farre from her, and come not nye y dores of hir house. That thou geue not thine honoure vnto another, and thy yeares to the eruell.
33 | That other men be not fylled with thy goodes, 
& that thy labours come not in a straunge house. Yee that thou mourne not at the last
(when thou hast spent thy body and goodes) 

^ Num. 15. d. Deut. 11. c. 
4 Pro.7.a. è Eccls. 9. b. 

4 Psal. 1. a. and 36. a. 
© Deut. 5. d. and 17. c. 

Salomons j3jrouerbes. 

Fo. dlii. and then saye: Alas, why hated I nurtoure ? why dyd my hert despyse correceion? Wher- fore was not I obedient vnto the voyee of my teachers, q herkened not vnto them that in- fourmed me? I am eome almost in to all mysfortune, in the myddest of the multitude and congregacion. Drinke of the water of thine owne well, and of the ryuers that runne out of thine owne spriges. Let thy welles flowe out a brode, that there maye be ryuers of water in the stretes. But let them be only thine owne, q not straungers with the. Let thy well be blessed, and be glad with the wife of thy youth. Louynge is the hynde, and frendly is the Roo: ‘let her brestes alwaye satisfie the, and holde the euer content with hir loue. My sonne, why wilt thou haue pleasure in an harlot, and embrace the bosome of another woma? /For euery mas wayes are open in the sight of the LORDE, and he podereth all their goinges. The wiekednesses of the vngodly shal eatch himself, and with the snares of his owne synnes shal he be trapped.
Because he wolde not be refourmed, he shal dye: and for his greate foolishnesse he shal be destroyed.

The bi. Chapter. 

Y sõne, yf thou be suertie for thy negh- 

boure, ë thou hast fastened thine hode with another mà: yee thou art boüde with thine owne wordes, and taken with thine owne speach. Therfore (my sonne) do this, dis- charge thy self, for thou art come i to thy neghbours daunger. Go thy waye then soone, q intreate thy neghboure: let not thyne eyes slepe, ner thine eye lyddes slomber. Saue thy self as a doo fro ¥ honde, « as a byrde fro the hode of the fouler. Go to the Emmet
(thou slogarde) eosidre hir wayes, « lerne to be wyse. ^She hath no gyde, no teacher, no leder: yet in the sommer she prouideth hir meate, q gathereth hir foode together i y haruest. How loge wilt thou slepe, thou slogish ma? Wha wilt thou aryse out of thy slepe? Yee slepe on still a litle, slober a litle, folde thine handes together yet a litle, that thou mayest slepe : so shal pouerte come vnto the as one ý trauayleth by the waye, a necessite like a wapened man. A dissem- blynge person, a wicked man goeth with a

f Tob 31. a. and 34. c. € Pro. 21. b. 17. c. 20. c. 
^ Pro. 24. d. 30. c. Pro. 13. a. 

jf». dlii. frowarde mouth: he wyncketh with his eyes, he tokeneth with his fete, he poynteth with his fyngers, he is euer ymageninge myschefe q frowardnesse in his hert, q causeth discorde.
"Pherfore shal his destruccion come hastely vpo him, sodenly shal he be all tobroken, and not be healed.
There be sixe thinges, which the LORDE hateth, q the seuenth he vtterly abhorreth :
“A proude loke, a dyssemblynge tonge, hades that shed innocent bloude, an herte y goeth aboute with wicked ymaginacios, ‘fete that be swift in rennynge to do myschefe, a false wyt- nesse y bringeth vp lyes, q soch one as soweth
€ |discorde amonge brethren. My sonne, kepe thy fathers comaundemétes, q forsake not y lawe of thy mother. Put thé vp together in thine herte, and bynde the aboute thy necke.
That they maye lede the where thou goest, preserue the when thou art aslepe, ¢ y when
| thou awakest, thou mayest talke of the (° For 
| the commaundement 1s a lanterne, and the 

lawe a light : yee chastenynge q nurtoure is y 
| waye of life) that they maye kepe the fro the euell woman, ^a from the flaterynge tonge of the harlott: y thou lust not after her beuty in thine herte, q lest thou be takë with hir fayre lokes. An harlot wil make a ma to begg his bred, but a maried woman wil hunt for y pre- cious life. Maye a man take fyre in his bo- some, and his clothes not be brent? Or can one go vpon hote coales, and his fete not be hurte? Euen so, who so euer goeth in to his neghbours wife; and toucheth her, can not be
33|vungiltie. ‘Men do not vtterly despyse a thefe, that stealeth to satisfie his soule, when he is hongerie: but yf he maye be gotten, he re-

. |storeth agayne seuen tymes asmoch, or els he maketh recompence with all the good of his house. But who so comitteth aduoutrie with a womà, he is a foole, and bryngeth his life to destruccion. He getteth him self also shame
€ dishonoure, soch as shal neuer be put out. 
For the gelousy q wrath of the mà will not be 

\itreated, no though thou woldest ofre him greate giftes to make amendes, he will not receaue them.

"UN 

my cómaundemetes q 

The bij. Chapter. 
'Y sonne, kepe my wordes, x laye vp my comaundemetes by the. ^ Kepe my lawe, eué as the

| a Psul. 17. c. Pro. 12. d. * Pro; 179. c Psal. 118.0.
4 Pro, 5. a. and 7. a. * Exo. 22. a. 

Salomons Prouerbes. 

l Chap. bij. japle of thine eye, q thou shalt lyue. Bynde them vpon thy fyngers, q wryte thé in the table of thine hert. Saye vnto wysdome: thou art my sister, and call vnderstondinge thy kyuswoman : ‘that she maye kepe y fro ý strauge woma, q fro y harlot which geuet swete wordes. l'or out of the wyndowe of my house I loked thorow the trelies, q be- helde the simple people: & amonge other yonge folkes I spyed one yonge foole goinge ouer the stretes, by the corner in the waye towarde the harlottes house in the twylight of the euenynge, when it begüne now to be night and darcke. And beholde, there mett 33 him a woma in an harlottes apparell (a dis- ceatfull, waton q an vnstedfast womà : whose | fete coude not abyde in y house, now is she] | without, now 1 y stretes, q lurketh I euery corner) she caught ý yoge ma, kyssed him a was not ashamed, sayége: Į had a vowe to paye, q this daye I perfourme it. Therfore came I forth to mete the, that I might seke thy face, and so I haue founde the. I haue deckte my bed with coueringes q clothes of
Egipte. My bed haue I made to smell of 
Myrre, Aloes and Cynamom. Come, let vs lye together, q take oure pleasure till it be daye light. For the good man is not at home, he is gone farre of. He hath taken the bagg of moneye with him, who can tell whé he cometh home? “Thus with many swete|€ wordes she ouercame him, and with hir flater- inge lippes she wanne him.

Immediatly he foloweth her, as it were an oxe led to the slaughter (and like as it were ito the stockes, where fooles are punyshed) so longe till she hath wounded his lyuer with hir darte: like as yf a byrde haisted to the snare, not knowinge that the parell of his life lyeth there vpo. Heare me now therfore (o my sonne) and marcke the wordes of my mouth.
Let not thine herte wandre in hir wayes, « be not thou disceaued in hir pathes. For many one hath she wonded and cast downe, yee many a stronge ma hath she slayne. Hir house is the waye vnto hell where men go downe to the chambers of death.

The biij. Chapter. 
OTH not wysdome crie? ‘doth not!q vnderstondinge put forth hir voyce?

f Deut, 11. à. Ni. 15. d. 
^ Eccls. 7. d. 

€ Pro. 9. b. and 5. a. 
* Proc 

Chap. (y. 
Stondeth she not in the hye places in the, stretes q wayes? doth she not crie before the whole cite, ¢ in the gates where men go ont « in? It is you, o ye men (sayeth she) whom I call. — Vnto you (o ye childre of me) lift I vp my voyce. ‘Take hede vnto knowlege o ye ignoraüt, be wyse in herte o ye fooles. Geue eare, for I wil speake of greate matters, q open my lippes to tell thinges that be right.
For my throte shal be talkynge of ý trueth, qt my lippes abhorre vngodlynesse. All the wordes of my mouth are rightuous, there is no frowarduesse ner falsede therin. They are all playne to soch as wil vnderstode, q right to thé that fynde knowlege. Receaue my doc- tryne therfore and not syluer, q knowlege more then fyne golde. For wysdome is more worth then precious stones, yee all the thinges that thou cast desyre, are not to be compared vnto it.

I wysdome haue my dwellynge with know- lege, and prudent councell is myne owne.
With me is the feare of the LORDE, and y eschuynge of euell. As for pryde, disdayne, an euell waye, q a mouth that speaketh wicked thiges, I vtterly abhorre the. I can gene councell, and be a gyde: I haue vnderstond- inge, I haue strength.

Thorow me, kynges reigne: ^thorow me, prices make just lawes. Thorow me, lordes beare rule, and all iudges of y earth execute iudgmét. I am lonynge vnto those that loue me, ‘and they that seke meearly, shal fyndeme.

Riches q honoure are with me, yee excellent goodes q rightuousnes. My frute is better the golde q precious stone, q myne encrease more worth then fyne syluer. I walke in y waye of rightuousnes, a in the strete of iudg- ment. That I maye sende prosperite to those that lone me, q to encrease their treasure.
€, The LORDE himself had me in possessio in the begynnynge of his wayes, or euer he beganne his workes afore tyme. ^L haue bene ordened fro euerlastige, q fro ý beginnynge or euer the earth was made. When I was borne, there were nether depthes ner springes of water. Before the foundacions of $ moun- taynes were layed, yee before all mss was I borne. The earth and all that is vpon the earth was not yet made, no not the grounde it self. * For when he made the heauens, I

a Pro. 16. b. Pro. 3. b. Psal. 18. b. 
Sapi.6.a. ¢Luc.11.b. 4 Eccli. 24, b. 

> Deut. 17. d. 
* Sap. 9. b. 

Salomons Prouerbes, 

was present: wha he set the depthes in ordre: whan he hanged the cloudes aboue: whan he fastened the sprynges of the depe : / Whan he shutt the see within certayne bowndes, that ¥ waters shulde not go oner their marckes.
When he layed the foundacions of the earth, 
I was with him, ordringe all thinges, delytinge daylie q reioysynge allwaye before him. As for the roude copase of his worlde, I make it ioyfull, for my delyte is to be amóge the child- ren of men. ,

Therfore harken vnto me (o ye children) for blessed are they that kepe my wayes.

O geue eare vnto nurtoure, be wyse, and refuse it not. Blessed is y man that heareth me, watchinge daylie at my gates, q geuynge attendaunce at the postes of my dores.

For who so fyndeth me, fyndeth life, and shal optayne fauoure of the LORDE. But who so offendeth agaynst me, hurteth his owne soule. All they that hate me, are the louers of death.

The iy. Chapter. 

YSDOME hath buylded herself an 

house, and hewen ont seuen pilers: she hath slaughted, poured out hir wyne, and prepared hir table. She hath sent forth hir maydens to crie vpo the hyest place of the cite: Who so is 1ignoraüt, let him come hither.
And to the vnwise she sayde: O come on youre waye, eate my bred, and drynke my wyne, which I haue poured out for you. For- sake ignorance, and ye shal lyue: and se that ye go in the waye of vnderstondinge.

Who so reproneth a scornefull personne, getteth him self dishonoure: and he that re- buketh the vngodly, stayneth himself.

Reproue not a scorner, lest he owe the euell wil: but rebuke a wyse man, and he wil loue the. Geue a discrete man but an occasion, q he wilbe the wyser: teach a rightuous man, and he wil increase. The feare of the
LORDE is the begynnynge of wysdome, ^q the knowlege of holy thinges is vnderstond- inge. For thorow me thy dayes shalbe pro- longed, and the yeares of thy life shal be many. Yf thou be wyse, thy wysdome shal do thy selfe good: but.yf thou thynkest scorne therof, it shalbe thine owne harme. A foolish restlesse woman, full of wordes, and

f Iob 26. c. 38. a. £ Sopb. 3. d. ^ Tob 28. c, Psal. 
110. b. Eccli. 1. c. Pro. 4. b. 

. Fo. ly. 

n 

a 

5 

fo. dibi. 

soch one as hath no knowlege, sytteth in the dores of hir house vpō a stole aboue in the

cite, to call soch as go by and walke straight | 

in their wayes. Who so is ignoraunt (sayeth she) let him come hither, and to the vnwyse she sayeth: stollen waters are swete, œ the bred that is preuely eaten, hath a good taist.

But they cosider not that death is there, aud that hir gestes go downe to hell.

The y. Chapter. 
These are prouerbes of Salomon. a WYSE sonne maketh a glad father, but
“an vndiscrete sonue is the heuynesse of his mother. ‘Treasures that are wickedly gotten, profit nothinge, but rightuousnesse delyuereth from death. ^'The LORDE wil not let the soule of the rightuous suffre hoger, but he putteth y vngodly fro his desyre. An ydle hande maketh poore, but a quycke labor- inge hande maketh riche.
Who so gathereth in Sommer, is wyse: but he that is slogish in haruest, bringeth himself to confucion. Louynge aud fauorable is the face of the rightuous, but y fore heade of the vngodly is past shame, and presumptuous.
“The memoriall of the iust shall haue a good reporte, but the name of the vngodly shal stynke. A wyse man wil receaue warnynge, but a foole wil sooner be smytten in the face.
3|He that leadeth an innocent life, walketh 

surely: ^but who so goeth a wroge waye, shalbe knowne. He y wynketh with his eye, wil do some harme: but he that hath a foolish mouth, shalbe beaten. The mouth of a right- uous man is a well of life, but ¥ mouth of the vugodly is past shame, q presumptuous. Euell wil stereth vp strife, ‘but loue couereth y multitude of syaues.

In y lippes of him y hath vnderstodinge a ma shal fynde wysdome, but y rodde belógeth to Y backe of y foolish. Wyse me laye vp knowlege, but y mouth of y foolish is nye destruecio. The rich màs goodes are his stroge holde, but pouerte oppresseth the poore.

The rightuous laboureth to do good, but the vngodly vseth his increase vnto synne.

To take hede vnto y chastenynge of nur- toure, is Y waye of life: but he that refuseth to be refourmed, goeth wroge. Dissemblynge

a Pro. 15. c. Pro. 11. a. Eccli. 5. b. e Psal. 111. a. * Psal. 29. a. Pro. 28. c.

aBer 4, by f Tob 42. c. Eccli. 11. 

Salomons Prourrbhes, 

b Pro. 12. e. 
Eccl. 27. d. 
Psal. 126. a. 

Chap. r. 

lippes kepe hatred secretly, and he that speak- eth euy slaunder, is a foole. "Where moch bablinge is, there must nedes be offence: he that refrayneth his lippes, is wysest of all. An innocent touge is a noble treasure, but the herte of the vngodly is nothinge worth. The lippes of the rightuous fede a whole multitude, but fooles shal dye in their owne foly. ~ The blessynge of the LORDE maketh rich me, as for carefull trauayle, it doth nothinge therto.
A foole doth wickedly q maketh bnt a sporte of it: neuertheles it 1s wysdome for a man to bewarre of soch.

The thinge that the vngodly are afrayed of, shal come vpon them, but the rightuous shal haue their desyre. The vngodly is like a tempest that passeth ouer q is nomore sene, but the rightuous remayneth sure for euer.
As vyneger is to the teth, and as smoke is vnto y eyes, eué so is a slogish personne to them that sende him forth. ‘The feare of y
LORDE maketh a loge life, but y yeares of y vngodly shal be shortened. The pacient abydiuge of the rightuous shalbe turned to gladnesse, but the hope of the vngodly shal perish. The waye of the LORDE geueth a corage vnto y godly, but it is a feare for wicked doers. ‘The rightuous shal neuer be ouerthrowne, “but ¥ vngodly shal not remayne in the londe. The mouth of the iust wilbe talkynge of wysdome, but the tonge of the frowarde shal perish. The lippes of the righ- tuous are occupied in acceptable thinges, but the mouth of the vngodly taketh them to the worst.

The ri. Chapter. 

FALSE balaunce is an abhomiuacion 
A vnto the LORDE;* but a true weight pleaseth him. Where pryde is, there is shame also and confucion : but where as is lowlynes, there is wysdome. The innocent dealynge of the iust shal lede them, but the vnfaithful- nesse of the despysers shalbe their owne de- strucecion. ^ Riches helpe uot in the daye of veugeaunce, but rightuousuesse delyuereth fro death. The rightuousnes of y innocent ordreth his waye, but the vngodly shal fall in his owne wickednesse. The nghtuousnesse of the iust shal delyuer them, but the despysers shalbe

taken in their owue vngodlynesse. When an 
Mat. 6. c. d. £ Psa. 124, a. Psal. 36. d. ^ Pro. 16. b. 
20. b. d. i Prou. 10. a. Eccli. 5. b. 

Chap. rij. 

B 

B 

vngodly man dyeth, his hope is gone, the con- fydence of riches shal perish. ‘The rightuous shalbe delyuered out of trouble, q the vngodly shal come in his steade. Thorow ¥ mouth of y dyssembler is his neghboure destroyed, but thorow knowlege shal the iust be delyuered.
“When it goeth well with the rightuous, the cite is mery: and when the vngodly perish, there is gladnesse. When the iust are in wealth, the cite prospereth: but whan the vngodly haue the. rule, it decayeth. A foole bryngeth vp a slaunder of his neghboure, but a wyse man wil kepe it secrete. ^A dys- semblynge person wil discouer preuy thinges, but he that is of a faithfull hert, wil kepe councel ‘Where no good councel is there the people decaye: but where as are many that can geue councell, there is wealth. ° He that is suertye for a straunger, hurteth him- self: but he that medleth not with suerte- shippe, is sure. A gracious woma manteyneth honestie, as for the mightie, they manteyne ryches. He y hath a gentle liberall stomacke, is mercifull: but who so hurteth his negh- boure, is a tyraüt.

The laboure of the vngodly prospereth not, but he that soweth rightuosnes, shal receaue a sure rewarde. Like as rightuousnes bryngeth life, eué so to cleue vnto euell, bryngeth death.
The LORDE abhorreth a fayned hert, but he hath pleasure in them that are vndefyled.
It shal not helpe y wicked, though they laye all their hondes together, but the sede of the rightuous shalbe preserued. A fayre woman without discrete maners, is like a rynge of golde in a swynes snoute. The iust laboure for peace and traquylite, but the vngodly for disquyetnesse.

* Some man geueth out his goodes, and is the richer, but y nygarde (hauynge ynough) wil departe from nothinge, and yet is euer in pouerte. ‘He that is lyberall in geuynge, shal haue plenty: and he that watereth, shal be watered also himself. Who so hoordeth vp his corne, shalbe cursed amonge the people : but blessynge shal light vpon his heade that selleth it. He that laboureth for honesty fyndeth his desyre: but who so seketh after myschefe, it shal happe ynto him. He that trusteth in his riches, shal haue a fall,

a Pro. 14. d. 
@ Pro, 6. a 
FG Cor. 9. b. 

5 Pro. 10. b. ¢3 Re. 12, a. e Psal. 36. d. and 111. b. Luc. 6. d. |
€ Tere. 17. b. Pro. 18. b. ^ 1 Pet. 4. c.] 

Salomons Prouerdes. 

e 

but 
Teale” 
Who so maketh disquyetnesse in his owne house, he shal haue wynde for his heretage, and the foole shal be seruaunt to the wyse.
The frute of the rightuous is as the tre of life, a wyse man also wynneth mens soules.
^Yf y rightuous be recopesed vpo earth, how moch more the the vngodly ¢ y synner?

rightuous shal florish as the grene 

The rij. Chapter. 

HO so loueth wyszdome, wil be con- 

tent to be refourmed: but he that hateth to be reproued, is a foole. A good man is acceptable vnto the LORDE; but y wicked wyl he condempne. A man cā not endure in vngodlynesse, but ¥ rote of y right- eous shal not be moued. A stedfast woman is a crowne vnto hir huszbonde: but she that behaueth herself vnhonestly, is a corrupcion in his bones. The thoughtes of § righteous are right, but the ymaginacion of the vngodly are disceatfull. The talkynge of the vngodly is, how they maye laye wayte for bloude, but the mouth of y righteous wil delyuer them.
Or euer thou canst turne the aboute,’ the vngodly shal be ouerthrowne, but the house of the righteous shal stode.

A man shalbe commended for his wyszdome, but a foole shal be despysed. A simple man which laboureth and worketh, is better thé one that is gorgious and wanteth bred.

A righteous man regardeth the life of his catell, but the vngodly haue cruell hertes.
” He that tilleth his lode, shal haue plenteous- nesse of bred: but he y foloweth ydylnes, is a veryfoole. ‘The desyre of y vngodly hunteth after myschefe, but the rote of the righteous bryngeth forth frute. "The wicked falleth in to the snare thorow y malyce of his owne mouth, but the iust shal escape out of parell.
Euery man shal enioye good acordinge to the innocency of his mouth, and after the workes of his hades shal he be rewarded. Loke what a foole taketh in honde, he thinketh it well done: but he that is wyse, wyl be couceled.
A foole vttereth his wrath in all the haist, but a diserete man forgeueth wronge. A iust man will tell the trueth, x shewe the thinge y is right: but a false wytnesse disceageth. A

i Gen. 4.a. — 4 Psal. 36. e. 

20. d. Pro. 28. c. 

! Eccls, 10. d. n Pro, 13. a.

m Eccls. 

| jo. dibs. 

a 

| ffo. Divi. slaunderous personne pricketh like a swerde, but a wyse mans tonge is wholsome. A true month is euer constat, but a dyssemblinge tōge is soone chaunged. They that ymagin euell in their mynde, wil disceaue: but the councelers of peace shal haue ioye folowinge thé. There shal no mysfortune happen vnto the iust, but the vngodly shal be fylled with
D |inisery. ^The LORDE abhorreth disceatfull lippes, but they that laboure for treuth, please him. He that hath vnderstodinge, can hyde his wysdome: but an vndiscrete herte telleth out his foolishnesse. A diligét hande shal beare rule, but the ydle shal be vnder tribute.
Heuynesse discorageth y herte of man,’ but a good worde maketh it glad agayne. The righteous is liberall vnto his neghboure, but the waye of the vngodly wil disceaue them selues. A disceatfull man shal fynde no vaütage, but he that is content with that he hath, is more worth the golde. In the waye of righteousnesse there is life, as for eny other waye, it is the path vnto death.

The ritj. Chapter. a WYSE sonne wyll receaue his fathers warnynge, but he y is scornefull, wyll not heare when he is reproued. A good ma shal enioye the frute of his mouth, but he that hath a frowarde mynde, shalbe spoyled. He that kepeth his mouth, kepeth his hfe: but who so speaketh vnaduysed, fyndeth harme.
The slogarde wolde fayne haue, and can not get his desyre: but the soule of the diligent shal haue plenty. A righteous man abhorreth lyes, but the vngodly shameth both other and himself Righteousnesse kepeth the innocét in the waye, but vngodlynesse shal ouerthrowe the synner.

Some men are riche, though they haue no- thinge # agayne, some mé are poore hauynge greate riches. With goodes euery man de- lyuereth his life and the poore wyl not be reproued. ‘The light of the righteous maketh ioyfull, but the candle of the vngodly shal be

33|put out. Amonge the proude there is euer strife, but amonge those that do all thinges with aduysement, there is wyszdome. Hastely gotté goodes are soone spent, but they that be gathered together with the hande, shal inerease.
Longe tarienge for a thinge that is dyfferred, 

? Pro. 6. b. 

* 2 Tim. 6. b. Heb. 13. a. ZIRT Bile Go 

Salomons Prouerbes. 

è Pro. 15. b. and17.d. Eccli. 30. c. e Pro, 24. ¢.

Chap. rii. greueth y herte: but when the desyre com- meth, it is a tre of life. Who so despyseth the worde, destroyeth himself: but he that feareth the comaundement, shal haue peace.
The lawe is a wel of life vnto the wyse, that it maye kepe him from the snares of death.
Good vnderstondinge geueth fauoure, but harde is the waye of the despysers. A wyse man doth all thinges with discrecion, but a foole wil declare his foly. An vngodly mes- saüger bryngeth myschefe, but a faithfull embassitoure is wholsome. He that thinketh | € scorne to be refourmed, commeth to pouerte and shame: but who so receaueth correccion, shal come to honoure. When a desyre is brought to passe, it delyteth the soule: but fooles abhorre him that eschueth euell/ He that goeth in the company of wyse men, shal be wyse: but who so is a cOpanyo of fooles, shal be hurte. Myschefe foloweth vpon syn- ners, but the rightuous shal haue a good rewarde. Which their childers childré shal haue in possessio, for *the riches of the synner is layed vp for y iust. There is plenteousnesse of fode in the feldes of the poore, q shalbe increased out of measure. ^He that spareth the rodde, hateth his sonne: but who so loueth him, holdeth him euer in nurtoure. The rightuous eateth, and is satisfied, but y bely of the vngodly hath neuer ynough.

The riiij. Chapter. 
WYSE woma vpholdeth hir house, but| & 
A a foolish wife plucketh it downe. ; 

Who so feareth the LORDE, walketh in the right path: q regardeth not him that ab- horreth the wayes of the LORDE. In the mouth of the foolish is the boostinge of lord- shipe, but y lippes of $ wyse wilbe warre of soch. "Where no oxen are, there the crybb is emptie: but where the oxen laboure, there is moch frute. A faithfull wytnesse wyl not dyssemble, but a false recorde wil make a lye.

A scornefull body seketh wyszdome, q fynd- eth it not: but knowlege is easy to come by, vnto him that wil vnderstonde. ‘Se ý thou medle not with a foole, t do as houal thou haddest no knowlege. The wyszdome of him that hath vnderstondinge is, to take hede vnto his waye, but the foolishnesse of the vnwyse disceaueth. Fooles make but a sporte of

S Sap. 2. c. £ lob 27. c. ^ Eccli. 30. a. Psal. 23. b. 
Hebr. 12. b. Psal. 53. b. ' Pro. 8. a. 

Chap. rb. synne, but there is fauourable loue amoge the rightuous. The herte of him that hath vnder- stondinge wil nether dispare for eny sorow, ner be to presumptuous for eny sodane ioye.

The houses of the vngodly shalbe ouer- throwne, but the tabernacles of y righteus shal florishe. “There is a waye, which some men thinke to be right, but the ende therof ledeth vnto death. The herte is soronfull euen in laughter, and the ende of myrth is heuynesse. An vnfaithfull personne shal be fylled with his owne wayes, but à good mà wyl bewarre of soch. An ignoraut body beleueth all thinges, but who so hath vnder- stondinge, loketh well to his gomges. A wyse man feareth, and departeth from euell, but a foole goeth on presumptuously. An vnpacient man handeleth foolishly, but he that is well aduysed, doth other wayes.

«| The ignoraut haue foolishnes in possessio, but the wyse are crowned with knowlege.

The euell shal bowe them selues before y good, and the vngodly shal wayte at the dores of the rightuous. The poore is hated euen of his owne neghbours, but the riche hath many frendes. Who so despyseth his neghboure, doth amysse: ^but blessed is he that hath pyte of the poore. ‘They that ymagin wicked- nes, shalbe disapoynted: but they that muse vpo good thinges, vnto soch shal happen mercy and faithfulnesse. Diligēt laboure bryngeth riches, but where many vayne wordes are, truly there is scarcenesse.

Riches are an ornament vnto the wyse, but the ignoraunce of fooles is very foolishnesse.
A faithfull wytnesse delyuereth soules, but a lyar dysceaueth them. 'The feare of the
LORDE is a stroge holde, for vnto his he wyl be a sure defence. The feare of the
LORDE is a well of life, to auoyde the snares of death. ‘The increase and prosperite of the comons is the kynges honoure, but the decaye of the people is the confucio of the prynce. Pacience is a token of wiszdome, but wrath and haistie displeasure is a token of foolishnesse. A mery herte is the life of the body, but rancoure consumeth awaye the bones. “He that doth a poore man wroge, blasphemeth his maker: but who so hath pitie of the poore, doth honoure vnto God.

* Deu. 12, a. Pro. 16. c. 5 Psal. 40. a. ¢ Math. 
Zod.) Pro211-b E ero. 1E Ero 15. c and 25. c. 

1 Reg. 25. b. 3 Reg. 12, b. — /Pro.21. d. Eccls.34. c. | 

Salomons Prouerbes, 

Fo. dlr. 

The vngodly is afrayed of euery parell, but the rightuous hath a good hope eué in death.
Wyszdome resteth in the herte of him that hath vnderstondinge, and he wyll teach them that are vnlerned. ^ Rightuousnes setteth vp the people, but wyckednesse bryngeth folke to destruccion. A discrete seruaunt is a pleasure vnto y kynge, but one y is not honest, prouoketh him vnto wrath.

The rb. Chapter. 

SOFTE aswere* putteth downe displea- sure, but frowarde wordes prouoke vnto anger. A wyse tonge commendeth knowlege, a foolish mouth blabbeth out nothinge but foolishnesse. "The eyes of the LORDE loke in euery place, both vpon ¥ good and badd.
A wholsome tonge is a tre of life, but he that abuseth it, hath a broken mynde. A foole despyseth his fathers correccion, but he y taketh hede whan he is reproued, shal haue y

more vnderstodinge. 

In the house of the rightuous are greate riches, but in the increase of the vngodly there is mysordre. A wyse mouth poureth out knowlege, but y herte of the foolish doth not so. “The LORDE abhorreth y sacrifice of the vngodly, but the prayer of the rightuous is acceptable vnto him. The waye of the vngodly is an abhominacio vnto y LORDE, but who so foloweth righteousnes, him he loueth. He that forsaketh $ right strete, shalbe sore punyshed: q who so hateth cor- reccion, falleth in to death. ‘The hell with hir payne is knowne vnto the LORDE, how moch more then the hertes of men ?

£ A scornefull body loueth not one y rebuketh him, nether wil he come ámonge ¥ wyse. ^A mery herte maketh a chearfull countenaunce, but an vnquyet mynde maketh it heuy. A wyse herte wil seke after knowlege, but y mouth of fooles medleth with foolishnesse.
All the dayes of the poore are miserable, but a quyete herte is as a cotynuall feast. "Better is a litle with the feare of the LORDE then greate treasure, for they are not without sorowe. Better is a meace of potage with loue, then a fat oxe with euell will.

“An angrie man stereth vp strife, but he y is pacient stilleth discorde. V

The waye of y 

^ Pro, 12. d. and 17. d. k Pro. 15.a.

Esa. 66. a. 
Eccli. 30. c. 

& Sap. 2. c. i Psal. 36. b. 1 Tim. 6. b.

\ 

fo. dlr. slouthfull is full of thornes, but y strete of the rightuous is well clensed. A wyse sonne maketh a glad father, "but an vndiscrete body shameth his mother. A foole reioyseth in foolish thinges, but a wyse man loketh well to his owne goinges. Vnaduysed thoughtes shal come to naught, but where as are men y can geue councell, there is stedfastnesse. O how loyfull a thinge is it, a man to geue a con- uenient answere? O how pleasaunt is a worde spoken in due season? The waye of life ledeth vnto heaué, y a man shulde bewarre of hell beneth.

The LORDE wyl breake downe y house of y proude, but he shal make fast y borders of y wyddowe. The LORDE abhoreth ý ymaginacions of j wicked, but pure wordes are pleasaunt vnto him. The couetous mau wrutteth vp his owne house, but who so hateth rewardes, shallyue. A rightuous mà museth in his mynde how to do good, but y mynde of the vngodly ymagineth, how he maye do harme. The LORDE is farre from the vngodly, but he heareth y prayer of the rightuous. Like as y clearnesse of y eyes reloyseth y herte, so doth a good name fede f bones. The eare y harkeneth vnto whol-
|some warnynge, and enclyneth therto, shall dwell amonge y wyse. He that refuseth to be refourmed, eum his owne soule: but he that submytteth himself to correccion, is

wyse, 

The rbi. Chapter. 

HE feare of LORDE is y right scyéce 
T of wyszdome, and lowlynes goeth before honoure. A man maye well purpose a thinge in his harte, but ý answere of ý tonge cometh of LORDE. ^A ma thinketh all his waies to be clene, but it is $ LORDE y fashioneth pees *Commytte thy workes vnto

ORDE, and loke what thou deuysest, it shalprospere. The LORDE doth all thinges for his owne sake, yee q when he kepeth y vngodly for y daye of wrath.

The LORDE abhorreth all presumptuous q proude hertes, there maye nether strength ner power escape. With louynge mercy ¢ faithfulnesse synnes be forgeuen, and who so feareth $ LORDE eschueth euell. When a mans wayes please LORDE, he maketh his

a Pro. 10.a, * Pro. 21. a. Psal. 32. b. * Psal. 36. a. 
4 Pro. 19. c. * Pro. 11. a. and 20. b. 

Salomons Prourrbes, 

Chap. rbi, very enemies to be his frendes. to haue a litle thinge with rightuousnes, thé greate rentes wrongeously gotten. fA ma deuyseth a waye in his herte, but it is y
LORDE y ordreth his goinges. When y prophecy is in Ẹ lippes of y kynge, his mout shal not go wrége in iudgment. ‘A true measure q a true balaüce are y LORDES, he maketh all weightes. It is a greate abhominació when kynges are wycked, for a kynges seate shulde be holden vp with right- eousnesse.

Righteous lippes are pleasaut vnto kynges, and they loue him y speaketh y trueth.

The kynges displeasure is a messaunger of death, but a wyse man wyl pacifie him.

The cherefull countenauce of y kynge is life, and his louynge fauoure is as the euenynge dewe. ‘To haue wyszdome in possession is better then golde, and to get vnderstondynge, is more worth then syluer. The path of righteous eschueth euell, q who so loketh we to his wayes, kepeth his owne soule.

Presumptuousnes goeth before destruccion, jand after a proude stomake there foloweth a fall. Better it is to be of humble mynde with the lowly, then to deuyde $ spoyles with $ proude. He y handleth a matter wysely, opteyneth good: q blessed is he, ‘ý putteth his trust in y LORDE. Who so hath a wyse vnderstondinge, is called to councell: but he y can speake fayre, getteth more riches.
Vnderstondinge is a well of life vnto him y hath it, as for y chastenynge of fooles, it is but foolishnesse. The herte of the wyse enfourmeth his mouth, and amendeth j doctryne in his lyppes.

Fayre wordes are an hony combe, a refresh- inge of ý mynde, q health of ¥ bones.

* There is a waye y men thinke to be right, but the ende therof leadeth vnto death. A troublous soule disquyeteth hir selfe, for hir owne mouth hath brought her therto. An; vngodly personne stereth vp euell, and iu his lippes he is as an whote burnynge fyre.

A frowarde body causeth strife, and he y is a blabbe of his tonge, maketh deuysion amonge prynces. A wicked mà begyleth his negh- boure, q ledeth him $ waye y is not good.

He that wyncketh with his eyes, ymagineth myschefe: and he y byteth his lippes, wyl do

£ Psal. 2. b. ^ Pro. 14. b. Deut. 12. a. 
Esa. 55, b. 

f Pro. 8. a. 

Better is it |33 

"oo UR i: © Gl a aa as Hs ÜEE 
Chap. rbiij. Salomons Prouerbes, Fo. Dirt. hande, q is suertie for another, he is a foole.
He y loueth strife, delyteth in synne: q who so setteth his dore to hye, seketh after a fall.
Who so hath a frowarde herte, opteyneth no good: and he j hath an ouerthwarte tonge, shal fall in to myschefe. An vnwyse body|B bryngeth him selfe in to sorowe, and $ father of a foole can haue no ioye. “A mery herte maketh a lusty age, but .a sorowfull mide dryeth vp y bones. The vngodly taketh giftes ont of the bosome, to wraist the wayes of iudgment. ‘ Wyszdome shyneth in y face of him y hath vuderstondinge, but y eyes of fooles wandre thorow out all lodes.' ^ Án wn- discrete sonne is a grefe vnto his father, and heuynesse vnto his mother y bare him. To punysh ¥ innocent, and to smyte ¥ prynces y geue true iudgmct, are both euell. He is wyse and discrete, y tempereth his wordes: ‘and he is a mà of vnderstodinge, y maketh moch of his sprete. " Yee a very foole (when he holdeth his tonge) is counted wyse, and to haue vnderstodinge, when he shutteth his

lippes. 

some harme. ^" Age is a erowne of worshipe, yf it be founde in the waye of righteousnes.

A pacient man is better then one that is stroge: and he that can rule him selfe, is more worth then he y wynneth a cite. "The lottes are cast in to the lappe, but their fall stodeth in the LORDE.

The roij. Chapter. 

a ETTER is a drye morsell with quyet- nesse, the a full house and many fatt catell with stryfe. °A discrete seruaiit shal haue more rule then the sonnes y haue no wysdome, and shal haue like heretage with the brethren. ^ Like as syluer is tried in the fyre and golde in the fornace, euen so doth the LORDE proue the hertes. A wicked body holdeth moch of false lippes, q a dys- semblynge persone geueth eare to a disceatfull toge. ^Who so laugheth y poore to scorne, blasphemeth his maker: and he y is glad of another mans hurte, shal not be vnpunyshed.
Childers children are a worshipe vnto the elders, and the fathers are the honoure of the children. An eloquent speach becometh not a foole, a dyssemblinge mouth also besemeth
B |not a prynce. Liberalite is a precious stone vnto him that hath it, for where so euer he becémeth, he prospereth. Who so couereth another mans offence, seketh loue: but he y discloseth the faute, setteth frendes at variaunee. One reprofe only doth more good to him y hath vnderstódinge, then an C. stripes vnto a foole. A sedicious personne seketh myschefe, but a cruell messaunger shal be sent agaynst him. It were better to come agaynst a she Bere robbed of hir whelpes, then agaynst a foole in his foolishnes. * Who so rewardeth euell for good, the plage shal not departe fró his house. ‘He y soweth discorde « strife, is like one y dyggeth vp a water broke: but an open enemie is like the
4L | water y breaketh out q reneth abrode. The 
LORDE hateth as well him y iustifieth y vngodly, as him y condempneth the innocét.
What helpeth it to geue a foole money in his hode, where as he hath no mynde to bye wyszdome? He is a frende that allwaye loueth, ^and in aduersite à man shal knowe who is his brother. Who so promiseth by the

The yonuj. Chapter. 

WS so hath pleasure to sowe discorde,}q piketh a quarell in euery thinge. A foole hath no delyte in vnderstodinge, but only in those thinges wherin his herte re- ioyseth. Where vngodlynes is, there is also diszdayne: q so there foloweth shame q dis- honoure. ‘The wordes of a màs mouth are like depe waters, and the well of wyszdome is like a full streame. “It is not good to regarde y personne of the vngodly, or to put backe 3 righteous in iudgmét. A fooles lippes are euer brawlinge, and his mouth prouoketh vnto batayll. A fooles mouth is his owne destruc- cion, and his lippes are y snare for his owne soule. The wordes of a slaunderer are very woüdes, and go thorow vnto the ynmost partes of the body. Who so is slouthfull and slacke in his laboure, is y brother of him y isa waister. The name of ¥ LORDE is a|15 stronge castell, y righteous flyeth vnto it, and shalbe saued. But y rich mas goodes are his stronge holde, yee he taketh them for an hye wall roüde aboute him. After pryde cGmeth destrucció, and honoure after lowlynes. °He

? Leui, 19. g. ^ Eccls. 10. d. ° Sap. 3. a. 1 Pet. 1. b. 
1 Pro. 14. d. Iob 31. c. Pro. 24. c. * 1 Reg. 24. c. 26. b. 
|4 2 Reg. 12. c. £ Pro. 6. a. 11, b. ^ Pro. 12. d. and 

15. b. Eccls. 30. c. Exo. 23, a. ' Eccls. 8. a. ERETO. 
19. b. t Taco. 1. b. m [ob 13. n Pro, 24, c. 
° Eccls. 11. a. 

74 

fo. dri. Salomons Prouerbes, 

 lthat geueth sentéce in a matter before he 

heare it, is a foole, and worthy to be confounded. 
A good stomacke dryueth awaye a mas disease, but whà y sprete is vexed, who maye abyde it? A wyse herte laboureth for knowlege, and a prudent eare seketh vnderstondinge.
Liberalite bryngeth a man to honoure and worshipe, q setteth him amonge greate men.
| The righteous accuseth hi self first of all, 
(f his neghboure come, he shal fynde him. he lot pacifieth y variaüce, q parteth y mightie asunder. ‘The vnite of brethren is stronger then a castell, and they that holde together are like the barre of a palace. A mans bely shalbe satisfied with the frute of his owne mouth, and with the increase of his lippes shal he be fylled. Death and life stonde in the power of the tonge, he that loueth it, shal enioye the frute therof. “Who so fyndeth a wife fyndeth a good thynge, q receaueth an wholsome benefite of the LORDE. The poore maketh supplicacion and prayeth mekely, but the riche geueth a rough answere.
A frende that delyteth in loue, doth a man more frédshipe, and sticketh faster vnto him then

a brother. 
The pir. Chapter. 

a | ETTER is the poore ^that lyueth godly, the the blasphemer that is but a foole.
Where no discrecion is, there the soule is not well: and who so is swifte on fote, stombleth hastely. Foolishnesse maketh a man to go out of his waye, q then is his herte vnpacient agaynst the LORDE. Riches make many frendes, but the poore is forsaké of his owne frendes. ^A false wytnesse shal not remayne
| wnpunyshed, and he that speaketh lyes shal not escape. The multitude hageth vpo greate men, q euery man fauoureth him that geueth rewardes. As for the poore, he is hated amonge all his brethren: yee his owne frendes forsake him, q he that geueth credece vnto
|33|wordes, getteth nothinge. He that is wyse, 
‘loueth his owne soule : and who so hath vnder- stondinge, shal prospere. A false wytnesse shal not remayne vnpunyshed, q he y speaketh lyes shal perishe. Delicate ease becometh ot a foole moch more vnsemely is it, a bonde man to haue $ rule of prynces. A wyse man putteth of displeasure, q it is his

honoure to let some fautes passe. 

? Pro. 19. b. and 21. b. li Pro. 28. c, Psal. 132. a.

è Pro. 28.a. * Deut. 19. d. 
© Pro. 174d. Proqo7-3b- 

ueo AE a a 

“The kynges disfauoure is like ý roaringe of a Lyo, but his frédshipe is like the dewe vpo jy grasse. ‘An vndiscrete sonne is y heuynes of his father, q a braulynge wife is like the topp of an house, where thorow it is euer droppynge. House q riches maye a mà haue by y heretage of his elders, /but a dis- crete womà is the gifte of the LORDE.
Slouthfulnes bryngeth slepe, q an ydell soule shal suffer hóger. Who so kepeth the cé- maundemet, kepeth his owne soule: but he y regardeth not his waye, shal dye. He y hat pitie vpon the poore, lédeth vnto $ LORDE: q loke what he layeth out, it shalbe payed him agayne. Chasté thy sonne whyle there is hope, but let not thy soule be moued to slaye hi. For greate wrath bryngeth harme, therfore let him go, and so mayest thou teach him more nurtoure. O geue eare vnto good councell, q be content to be refourmed, that thou mayest be wyse hereafter. *'There are many deuices in a mas herte, neuertheles the coücell of LORDE shalstode. It is a mans worshipe to do good, q better it is to be a poore ma, then a dyssembler. The feare of the LORDE preserueth the life, yee it geueth pléteousnes, without the visitacio of any plage.
^ A slouthfull body shuteth his honde in to his bosome, so y he can not put it to his mouth.
Yf thou smytest a scorneful personne, the 
"ignoraüt shal take better hede: a yf thou reprouest one y hath vnderstondinge, he wil be $ wyser. He y hurteth his father or shuteth out his mother, is a shamefull q an vnworthy sonne. My sonne, heare nomore the doctrine y leadeth the awaye from the wordes of vnderstondinge.

A false wytnes laugheth iudgmet to scorne, q the mouth of the vngodly eateth vp wicked- nes. Punyshmentes are ordened for the scornefull, and stripes for fooles backes.

The rr. Chapter. 

YNE is a voluptuous thinge, q drock- 

ennes causeth sedicion: ‘who so de- 

lyteth therin, shal neuer be wyse. "The kynge ought to be feared as the roaringe of a lyon, who so prouoketh him vnto anger, offendeth agaynst his owne soule. It is a mans honoure to kepe himself from strife, but they y haue pleasure in braulinge, are fooles eueryone.

å Pro. 26. b. í Pro. 21.b. 
! Pro. 24. b. 

f Pro. 18. c. € Pro. 16. b. 

* Ephe. 5. b. 3 Esd. 3. c. 

Chap. rir. 

€ 

2 

Chap. rri. 

A slouthfull body wyl not go to plowe for colde, therfore shal he go abegginge in Som- mer, and hane nothinge. Wyse councell in the herte of man is like a water in the depe of the earth, but he that hath vnderstondinge, bryngeth it forth. Many there be that are called good doers, but where shal one fynde a true faithful ma? Who so ledeth a godly and an innocent life, “happie shal his children be, whom he leaueth behynde him.

33, A kynge that sytteth in iudgment, and 

€ 

loketh well aboute him, dryueth awaye all euell Who can saye: my hert is cleane, I am innocent from synne? ‘To vse two maner of weightes, or two maner of measures, both these are abhominable vnto the LORDE.

A childe is knowne by his conuersacion, whether his workes be pure and right. As for the hearinge of the eare q the sight of y eye, y LORDE hath made thé both. Delyte not thou in slepe, lest thou come vnto pouerte: but opé thine eyes, q thou shalt haue bred ynough. It is naught, It is nanght (saye men) whan they haue it, but whan it is gone, they geue it a good worde.
| A mouth of vnderstodinge is more worth then golde, many precious stones, and costly lewels. “Take his garment that is suertie for a straunger, q take a pledge of him for y vn- knowne mans sake. Euery mà liketh the bred that is gotten with disceate, but at the last is month shalbe fylled with grauell.

Thorow councell the thinges that men deuyse go forwarde: q with discrecion ought warres to be taken in honde. Medle not
‘with him that bewrayeth secretes, and is a slaunderer, and disceaueth with his lippes.
Who so curseth his father and mother, his light shalbe put out in the myddest of darck- nesse. The heretage that commeth to haistely at the first, shal not be praysed at the ende.
Saye not thou: I will recompence euell, but put thy trust in the LORDE, ¢ he shal de- fende y. *The LORDE abhorreth two maner of weightes, and a false balaüce is an euell thinge. ‘The LORDE ordreth euery mas goinges, for what is he, that vnderstondeth his owne wayes? It is a snare for a man to blaspheme that which is holy, ¿£q then to go aboute with vowes. A wyse kynge destroyeth

4 Psal. 36. ^ 1 Iob. 1. b. ¢ Pro. 6. a. and 27. b. 

1 Exo.20.b. Leu. 20. b.and 21.b. Deu.27.c. 2 Re. 15. a. f Iere. 10. d.

Mat. 5. e. Ro. 12. c. e Pro. 90. b. 

Salomons Proucrbes, 

aoe: q bryngeth the whele ouer them. e lanterne of y LORDE is y breth of man, q goeth thorow all the inwarde partes of the body. Mercy a faithfulnes preserue the kynge,’ t with louynge kyndnes his seate is holden vp.
The strength of yonge men is their worshipe, t a gray heade, is an honoure vnto y aged.
Woundes dryue awaye euell, and so do stripes the inwarde partes of the body.

The yri. Chapter. 
HE kynges hert is in the hande of the 
LORDE, ‘like as are the ryuers of water: he maye turne it whyther so euer he wyll. Euery man thinketh his owne waye to be right, but the LORDE iudgeth ¥ hertes.
"To do rightuousnesse and indgmét is more acceptable to the LORDE thé sacrifice.
A presumptuous loke, a proude stomacke, q the lanterne of the vngodly is synne. The deuyses of one that is diligent, brynge plen- teousnes: but he y is vnaduysed, commeth vnto pouerte. Who so hoordeth vp riches with y disceatfulnes of his tonge, he is a foole, q like vnto them that seke their owne death.
The robberies of the vngodly shalbe their owne destruccion, for they wolde not do the thynge that was right. The wayes of the fro- warde are straunge, "but y workes of him y is cleane, are right. It is better to dwell in a corner vnder ¥ house toppe, then with a braul- inge woman in a wyde house.
The soule of the vngodly wysheth euell, and hath no pitie vpon his neghboure.
When the scornefull is punyshed, the igno- 

raunt take ¥ better hede: q when a wyse man is warned, he wil receane the more vnder- stondinge. The rightuous enfourmeth the

house of the vngodly, but y vngodly go on still after their owne akae Who so stoppeth his eare at the criége of the poore, mhe shal crie himself and not be herde. A preuy rewarde pacifieth displeasure, and a gifte in the bosome stilleth furiousnesse.

The iust delyteth in doynge the thynge that is right, but the workers of wickednesse abhorre the same. The man that wandreth ont of the waye of wyszdome, shal remayne in the co- gregacion of y deed. He y hath pleasure in banckettes, "shal be a poore man: Who so

€ 1 Reg. 15. ^ Pro.29. b. 4Reg.1.c. * Mich. 6. b. 
V'Tit.1.c. Pro.25. d. ™ Matt. 18. d. " Pro. 23.a. 

fo. blrij. 

a 

B 

Fo. dirity. Salomons 3jroucrbes, Chap. rrij. 

| [delyteth in wyne and delicates, shal not be 
© lriche. The vngodly shalbe geuen for the rightuous, q the wicked for the iust.

It is better to dwell in a wyldernesse, “thé with a chydinge and an angrie woman. In a wyse mans house there is greate treasure and plenteousnesse, but a foolish body spendeth vp all. Who so foloweth rightuousnesse and mercy, fyndeth both life, rightuousnesse and honoure. A wyse man wynneth the cite of the mightie, and as for the strength y they

B\trust in, he bryngeth it downe. Who so kepeth his mouth and his tonge, ^the same kepeth his soule from troubles. He y is proude q presumptuous, is called a scornefull ma, which in wrath darre worke maliciously.

The voluptuousnesse of the slouthfull is his owne death, for his hades wyll not labonre.

He coueteth and desyreth all the daye longe, but the rightuous is allwaye geuynge q kepeth nothinge backe. ‘The sacrifice of the vngodly is abhominacion, for they offre the thinge y is gotten with wickednes. 7A false wytnesse shal perishe, but he y wilbe content to heare, shal allwaye haue power to speake himself. An vngodly man goeth forth rashly, but the iust refourmeth his owne waye.

There is no wyszdome, “there is no vnder- stondinge, there is no councell agaynst the
LORDE. The horse is prepared agaynst ¥ daye of battayll, but the LORDE geueth the victory.

The rrij. Chapter. 

a GOOD name is more worth then greate riches, ‘and louynge fauoure is better

then syluer and golde. Whether riches or pouerte do mete vs, it commeth all of God.

A wyse man seyth the plage and hydeth him- self, but the foolish go on still and are pu- nyshed. The ende of lowlynes q the feare of
God, is riches, honoure, prosperite and health. 
Speares and snares are in y waye of the fro- warde, but he y wil kepe his soule, let him fle ifró soch. Yf thou teachest a childe in his youth what waye he shulde go, he shall not leaue it when he is olde. ‘The rich ruleth

| ‘the poore, and ¥ borower is seruaunt to y 
| lender. He y soweth wickednesse, shal reape sorowe, 1 the rodde of his plage shal destroye

Í * Eccli. 25. c. 

2 Pro. 12. b. c Prod1230 lere quce 
4 Pro. 19, a, 

' Esa. 8. c. and 46. b. Psal. 32. c. 

him. ^*A louynge eye shalbe blessed, for he geueth of his bred vnto ¥ poore. Cast out i scornefull man, and so shal strife go out wit him, yee variaunce and slaunder shal cease.
Who so delytcth to be of a clene herte and of gracious lyppes, ¥ kynge shal be his frende.
The eyes of y LORDE preserue knowlege, but as for ý wordes of y despyteful, he bryng- eth them to naught. The slouthfull body sayeth: there is a lyo with out, I might be slayne in ¥ strete. The mouth of an harlot is a depe pytt, ^wherin he falleth that ý
LORDE is angrie withall. Foolishnes stick- eth in the herte of y lad, but ¥ rod of correc- cion driueth it awaye. Who so doth a poore man wronge to increase his owne riches, geueth (comoly) vnto the rich, and at the last commeth to pouerte himself. My sonne, bowe downe thine eare, and herken vnto the wordes of wyszdome, applye thy mynde vnto my doctryne: for it is a pleasaunt thinge yf thou kepe it in thine herte, and practise it in thy mouth: that thou mayest allwaye put thy trust in the LORDE. Haue not I warned $ very oft with councell and lerninge? y I might shewe y the treuth, and that thou with the verite mightest answere them y laye eny thinge against $? Se y thou robbe not ¥ poore because he is weake, and oppresse not y simple in iudgment: for $ LORDE himself wyl defende their cause, and do violence vnto

t 

them 4 haue vsed violence. 

Make no fredshipe with an angrie wylfull| 2 

man, and kepe no company with y furtous: lest thou lerne his wayes, and receaue hurte vnto thy soule. ' Be not thou one of them y bynde their hande vpo promyse, and are suertie for dett: for yf thou hast nothinge to paye, they shal take awaye thy bed from vnder the. ‘Thou shalt not remoue the lande marcke, which thy fore elders haue sett. Seist thou not, y they which be diligent in their busines stonde before kynges, and not amonge

the symple people ? 

V HEN thon syttest at the table to eate with a lorde, ordre thy self manerly

with ý thinges that are set before y. Measure 

thine appetite: and yf thou wilt rule thine 

Che rriij. Chapter. 

OTe yey Gh ty Who Ih ies ee aho So Ek 

Deut. 27. c. 

Gen. 8. d. 

M Ecchi. 41. b. Eccls. 7.a. € Eccli. 31. c. ^ Pro.23. c. 
| fc ANC NELLE es |] — n 0 ——3 

5 

a 

Chap. yrité. 

E 

€ 

owne self, be not ouer gredy of his meate, for meate begyleth and disceaueth.

° Take not ouer greate trauayle and laboure to be riche, bewarre of soch a purpose. Why wilt thou set thine eye vpon y thinge, which sodenly vanisheth awaye? For riches make them selues wynges, and take their flight like an Aegle in to y ayre. Eate not thou with y envyous, and desyre not his meate, for he hat a maruelous herte. He sayeth vnto Y: eate and drynke, where as his herte is not with j.
Yee y morsels that thou hast eaten shalt thou perbreake, and lese those swete wordes. Tel nothinge in to y eares of a foole, for he wyl despyse the wyszdome of thy wordes. ^ Re- moue not y As lande marke, and come not within $ felde of the fatherlesse: For he y deliuereth them is mightie, euen he shal de- fende their cause agaynst the. Applie thine herte vnto lernynge, and thine eare to the wordes of knowlege. * Witholde not correc- cion from y childe, for yf thou beatest him with the rodde, he shal not dye therof. Thou smytest him with the rodde, but thou delyuer- est his soule from hell. My sonne, yf thy herte receaue wyszdome, my herte also shal reioyce: yee my reynes shal be very glad, yf thy lyppes speake the thinge y is right. * Let not thine herte be gelous to folowe synners, but kepe y still in the feare of the LORDE all the daye loge: for the ende is not yet come, and thy pacient abydinge shal not be in vayne. My sonne, geue eare q be wyse, so shal thine hert prospere in the waye. Kepe no company with wyne bebbers and ryotous eaters of flesh: for soch as be dronckardes and ryotous, *shal come to pouerte, q he that is geuen to moch slepe, shal go with a ragged cote. Geue eare vnto thy father that begat the, and despyse not thy mother whan she is olde. Laboure for to get y treuth: sell not awaye wyszdome, nourtoure q vnderstodinge
(for a righteous father is maruelous glad of a wyse sonne, q delyteth in hi) so shal thy father be glad, and thy mother that bare the, shal reioyse. My sonne, geue me thyne herte, and let thine eyes haue pleasure in my wayes.
/ For an whore is a depe graue, and an harlot is a narow pytt. She lurketh likea thefe, and those that be not awarre she brigeth vnto her.
Where is wo? where is sorow? where is strife? 

a Ecci. 27. a. lere. 17. b, 1 Tim. 6. b. PEProS92 d. 
* Pro, 13. c, Eccls, 30. a. d Pro. 24.2. and c. 

Salomons Prouerdes, 

| 

fo. nlrb. 

where is braulynge? where are woundes with- out cause? where be reed eyes? Euen amonge those that be euer at the wyne, and seke out where the best is. Loke not thou vpon the wyne, how reed it is, and what a coloure it geueth in the glasse. goeth downe softly, but at the last it byteth like a serpét, and styngeth as an Adder.
So shal thine eyes loke vnto straunge women, q thine herte shal muse vpon frowarde thinges.
Yee thou shalt be as though thou slepte, in y myddest of y see, or vpo M toppe of the mast.
"They wounded me (shalt thou saie) but it hath not hurte me, they smote me, but I felt it not. Whe I am wel wakened, I wil go to y drynke agayne.

The pritij. Chapter. 
E not thou gelous ouer wicked me, q de- syre not thou to be amonge them.*

For their herte ymagineth to do hurte, a their lippes talke of myschefe. "Thorow wysz- dome an house shalbe buylded, q with vnder- stondinge it shalbe set vp. Thorow discrecion shal y chabers be fylled with all costly q plea- saunt riches. A wyse mā is stróge, yee a ma of vnderstodinge is better, the he y is mightie of strégth. For with discrecion must warres be take in honde, and where as are many y ean geue councell, there is ¥ victory. Wysz- dome is an hie thinge, yee eue to y foole, for he darre not opé his mouth in y gate. He ý ymagineth myschefe, maye wel be called an vngracious personne. ‘The thoughte of y foolish is synne, q ý scornefull is an abhomi- nacion vnto me. vr thou be ouersene q nec- liget in tyme of nede, thé is thy strégth but small. Delyuer thé y go vnto death, q are led awaie to be slaine, ¢ be not necligét therin.
Yf thou wilt saye: I knewe not of it. Thynk- est thou y he which made y hertes, doth not cosidre it? q y he which regardeth thy soule, seith it not? Shal not he recópence euery mau acordinge to his workes? My sonne, thou eatest hony q y swete hony cobe, because it is good q swete in thy mouth. Euen so shall $ knowlege of wysdome be- vnto thy soule, as soone as thou hast gotte it. And there is good hope, yee thy hope shal not be in vayne. Laye no preuy waite wickedly vpon ¥ house of y rightuous, q disquiete not

^ Pro, 92. c. 

f Pro. 22. b. £ Pro. 23. b. 94. c. 

Fo. dirbi, 

B 

his restinge place. “For a iust mā falleth seuen tymes, q ryseth vp agayne, but y vn- godly fall in to wiekednes. Reioyce not thou at y fall of thine enemie, ^and let not thine herte be glad whan he stombleth.

Lest y LORDE (when he seyth it) be angrie, t turne his wrath from him vnto the.
“Let not thy wrath q gelousy moue ¥, to follow $ wicked and vngodly. And why? y wicked hath nothinge to hope for, ^« y càdle of the vngodly shall be put out. My sonne, feare thou y LORDE ¢ y kinge, q kepe no copany with y slaunderous: for their destruc- cion shal come sodenly, ¢ who knoweth y fall of thé both?

These are also y saiéges of y wyse. 

‘It is not good, to haue respecte of any personne in iudgmét. He y saieth to y vn- godly: thou art rightuous, him shall the peo- ple curse, yee ¥ comotie shal abhorre him.
But they y rebuke ¥ vngodly shalbe co- mended, ¢ a riche blessinge shal come vpo thé. He maketh him self to be well loued, that geueth a good answere. First make thy worke y is with out, ¢ loke well vnto y which thou je in y felde, q thé buylde thine house. Be no false wytnesse agaynst thy neghboure, q hurte him not with thy lyppes. f Saye not: I wil hadle him, eué as he hath dealte with me, a wil rewarde euery mà acord- inge to his dedes. I wente by y felde of ý slouthfull, « by ¥ vynyarde of the foolish ma.
And lo, it was all couered with nettels, q stode full of thistles, a $ stone wall was broke downe. This I sawe, q cosidered it wel: I loked vpo it, q toke it for a warnynge. * Yee slepe on still a litle, slobre a litle, folde thine hodes together yet a litle: so shall pouerte come vnto the as one y trauayleth by y waye, q necessite like a wapened man.

The rro. Chapter. 
HESE also are Salomons prouerbes, 

which the men of Ezechias kinge of| 

Iuda gathered together. It is the honoure of 
God to kepe a thinge secrete, ^but y kinges honoure is to search out a thinge. The hea- uen is hie, $ earth is depe, and y kinges hert is vnsearcheable. Take $ drosse from y syl- uer, q there shalbe a cleane vessell therof.

a Psal, 33. c. 36. d. 
1 [ob 21. b. Pro. 13. a. f Pro.20.c. € Pro. 6. b.

* Pro. 23. b. 24, a. 
* Pro, 18. a. 
' Luc. 14. b. 

5 Pro, 17. a. 
Pro. 20, a. 
^ Deut. 17. d, 

Salomons Prouerbes, 

Chap. rrb. 
Take awaye vngodlinesse fro y kynge, q his seate shalbe stablished with rightuousnes.

Put not forth thy self in ¥ presence of y kynge, q prease not in to y place of greate men.

Better it is y it be sayde vnto $ : ‘come vp! 33 hither, then thou to be set downe in j pre- sence of ¥ prynce, whom thou seyst with thine eyes. ‘Be not haistie to go to the lawe, lest happlie thou ordre thy self so at ý last, y thy neghboure put ý to shame. Handle thy mat- ter with thy neghboure himself, ¢ discouer not another mans secrete: lest whan men heare therof, it turne to thy dishonoure, q lest thine euell name do not ceasse. A worde spoken in due season, is like apples of golde in a syluer dyshe.

The correccion of the wyse is to an obe- dient eare, a golden cheyne and a lewel of golde. Like as the wynter coole in the har- uest, so is a faithfull messaunger to him that sent him, q refreszsheth his masters mynde.

Who so maketh greate boastes q geueth nothinge, is like cloudes & wynde without rayne. ‘With pacience maye a prynce be pacified, a with a soft tonge maye rigorousnes be broke. Yf thou findest hony, eate so moch as is sufficiet for y: lest thou be ouerfull, q per breake it out againe. Withdrawe thy loote fro thy neghbours house, lest he be weery of the, and so abhorre the. Who so beareth false wytnesse agaynst his neghboure, he is a very speare, a swearde q a sharpe arowe. The hope of the vngodly in tyme of nede, is like a rotten toth and a slippery foote.
Who so syngeth a songe to a wicked herte, clotheth hi with ragges in the colde, and poureth vyneger vpon chalke. Yfthine enemie honger, fede him:" yf he thyrst, geue him drynke: for so shalt thou heape coales of fyre vpo his heade, and the LORDE shal rewarde the. The north wynde dryueth awaye the rayne, euen so doth an earnest sober coun- tenaüce a back byters tonge. It is better to syt in a corner vnder the rofe, "then with a braulynge woman in a wyde house. A good reporte out of a farre countre, is like colde water to a thyrstie soule. A righteous man fallynge downe before the vngodly, is like a troubled well and a sprynge y is destroyed.

Gene. 32. a. a Pro. 21. b.

Matt. 5. c. ! Pro. 15. a. 
? Rom. 12. c, 1 Reg. 30. b, 

* Eccli. 8. a. 
1 Re.25. e. 

Chap. rrbij. 
“Like as it is not good to eate to moch hony, euen so he that wyll search out hye thynges, it shal be to heuy for him. He that can not rule him self, is like a cite, which is broken downe, and hath no walles.

The yrbi. Chapter. 

IKE as snowe is not mete in sommer, ner rayne in haruest: euen so is wor- shipe vnsemely for a foole. Like as y byrde and the swalowe take their flight and fle here and there, so the.curse that is geuen in vayne, shal not light vpon a man. ^Vnto the horse belongeth a whyppe, to the Asse a brydle, and a rodde to the fooles backe. Geue not the foole an answere after his foolishnesse, lest thou become like vnto him: but make y foole an answere to his foolishnesse, lest he be wyse in his owne cóceate. He is lame of his fete, yee droncken is he in vanite, that comitteth eny thinge to a foole. Like as it is an vnsemely thige to haue legges q yet to halte,

eué so is a parable in y fooles mouth. 

He y setteth a foole in hye dignite, y is eue as yf a man dyd cast a precious stone vpo ¥ galous. A parable in a fooles mouth, is like a thorne y pricketh a droncken man in i hande. A man of experience discerneth all thinges well, but who so hyreth a foole, hyreth soch one as wyl take no hede. Like as the dogg turneth agayne to his vomite,° euen so a foole begynneth his foolishnesse agayne afresh.
Yf thou seyest a man y is wyse in his owne conceate, there is more hope in a foole then in hi. ?The slouthfull sayeth: there is a leoparde in ý waye, and a lyon in ý myddest ofthestretes. Like as the dore turneth aboute vpon the tresholde, euen so doth the slouthfull welter himself in his bedd. ‘The slouthfull body thrusteth his hode in to his bosome, and it greueth him to put it agayne to his mouth.
The slogarde thinketh him self wyser, then vij. men that sytt and teach.

Who so goeth by and medleth with other mens strife, he is like one y taketh a dogg by y eares. Like as one shuteth deadly arowes and dartes out of a preuy place, “euen so doth a dyssembler with his neghboure, And then sayeth he: I dyd it but in sporte. Where no wodd is, there the fyre goeth out:^ and where the bacbyter is taken awaye, there the strife ceaseth. Coles kyndle heate, and wodd y

a Eccli.3. c. ^ Psal.31.b. *2 Pet. 2.d. ¢ Pro. 22.b. e Pro.19. d. /Pssl.10.a. £Eccli.28. b. ^ Eccls. 10. b.

Salomons Proucrbes. 

Fo. dirbi. 

fyre: euen so doth a braulinge felowe stere vp variaunce. A slaunderers wordes are like flatery, but they pearse y inwarde partes of $ body. Venymous lippes t a wicked herte, are like a potsherde couered with syluer drosse.
An enemie dyssembleth with his lippes, and in the meane season he ymagineth myschefe : but whà he speaketh fayre, beleue him not, for there are senen abhominacios in his herte.
Who so kepeth euell will secretly to do hurte, his malyce shal be shewed before the whole congregacion. “Who so dyggeth vp a pytt, shal fal therin: and he y weltreth a stone, shal stomble vpon it hymselfe.

A dyssemblynge tonge hateth one that rebuketh him, and a flaterige mouth worketh myschefe.

The yrbij. Chapter. 
AKE not thy boost of tomorow, forig 

thou knowest not what maye happen todaye.' Let another mà prayse the, t not thine owne mouth: yee other folkes lippes, and not thyne. ‘The stone is heuy, and the sonde weightie: but a fooles wrath is heuyer then they both. Wrath is a cruell thige, and furiousnesse is a very tempest: yee who is able to abyde envye? ‘An open rebuke is better, then a secrete loue, Faithfull are the woundes of a louer, but y kysses of an enemie are disceatfull. He that is full, abhorreth an hony combe: but vnto him that is hogrie, euery sower thinge is swete. He that oft tymes flytteth, is like a byrde y forsaketh hir nest. The herte is glad of a swete oyntment and sauoure, but a stomacke that cà geue good councell, reioyseth a mans neghboure. Thyne| 33 owne frende and thy fathers frende se thou forsake not, but go not in to thy brothers house in tyme of thy trouble.

Better is a frende at hode, then a brother farre of. My sonne, be wyse, and thou shalt make me a glad herte: so that I shal make answere vnto my rebukers. A wyse man seynge the plage wyl hyde hím self, as for fooles they go on still, and suffer harme. Take his garment that is suertie for a straunger," q take a pledge of him for the vnknowne mans sake. He that is to hastie to praise his negh- boure aboue measure, shalbe taken as one y geueth him an euell reporte. A brawlynge woman and the rofe of the house droppynge

Ecch. 27. e. i Eze. 28.8, Luc.12.b. Iaco.4. b. 
* Eccli. 22, c. — ! Psa. 140. a. Luc.29.d. ^ Pro.10.c. 

| Fo. dirbi, in a raynie daye,’ maye well be compared to- gether. He that refrayneth her, refrayneth the wynde, and holdeth oyle fast in his hode.
Like as one yro whetteth another, so doth one man cormforte another. Who so kepeth his fyge tre, shal enioye the frutes therof: he that wayteth vpon his master, shal come to honoure.
Like as in one water there apeare dyuerse faces,’ eué so dyuerse men haue dyuerse hertes.
Like as hell x destruccion are neuer full, euen so the eyes of mé can neuer be satisfied.
Syluer is tryed in the moulde, q golde in the fornace, q so is a man, whan he is openly praysed to his face. Though thou shuldest bray a foole with a pestell in a morter like otemeell, yet wil not his foolishnesse go from him. «Se y thou knowe the nombre of thy catell thy self, and loke well to thv flockes.
For riches abyde not allwaye, a the crowne endureth not for euer. The hay groweth, y grasse cometh vp, q herbes are gathered in y mountaines.

The lambes shal clothe the, « for the goates thou shalt haue money to thy huszbondry.

Thou shalt haue goates mylck ynough to fede the, to vpholde thy husholde, ¢ to susteyne thy maydens.

The rrbtij. Chapter. 

HE vngodly flyeth no man chasynge him,” 
T but the rightuous stondeth stiff as a lyon. Because of synne y londe doth oft chaunge hir prynce: but thorow men of vn- derstondinge q wyszdome a realme endureth longe. One poore man oppressinge another by violence, is like a contynuall rayne that destroyeth $ frute. They that forsake the lawe, prayse ¥ vngodly: but soch as kepe the lawe, abhorre them. ‘Wicked men discerne not the thinge ý is right, but they that seke after the LORDE, discusse all thinges. ‘A poore man ledynge a godly life, is better then the riche that goeth in frowarde wayes. Who so kepeth the lawe, is a childe of vnderstond- inge: but he y fedeth ryotous men, shameth his father. Who so increaseth his riches by vaütage q wynnynge, let him gather them to helpe the poore withall. *He that turneth awaye his eare from hearinge y lawe, his prayer shalbe abhorred. Who so ledeth y rightuous in

. ^ Pro. 19. b. ^ Pro, 30. b. Eccls. 1.a. Eccli.14.a. 
Ecci.27.b. * Ioh. 10. a. 4 Leui.26.c. *1 Cor. 2. b. fPro.19.a. . € Pro. 1. b. ^ Eccli.10.a. Pro. 28. d.

Pro. 29.a. Iob13.b. Psal.13.a. 1Ioh.í.b. Eccli.7.c. 

Salomons Prouerbes, 

Chap, rrbiij. to an euell waye, shal fall in to his owne pytt, but ¥ iust shal haue the good in possession.

The rich man thynketh him self to be wyse, but the poore that hath vnderstondinge, cà perceaue him wel ynough. ^ When rightuous men are in prosperite, thé doth honoure florish: but when the vngodly come vp, ¥ state of men chaungeth. He that hydeth his synnes, shall not prospere: but who so knowlegeth them and forsaketh them, shall haue mercy. Well is him that stodeth all waye in awe: as for him that hardeneth his herte, he shal fall in to mischefe. Like as a roaringe lyon and an hongrie beer, euen so is an vngodly prynce ouer the poore people.

Where the prynce is without vnderstond- inge, there is greate oppression q wronge: but yf he be soch one as hateth eouetousnesse, he shal longe raigne. ‘He that by violéce sheddeth eny mans bloude, shal be a ren- nagate vnto his graue, and no man shal be able to sucoure him. * Who so leadeth a godly and an innocét life, shalbe safe: but he that goeth frowarde wayes, shall once haue a fall.
He y tylleth his londe,^ shal haue plenteous- nesse of bred: but he that foloweth ydilnesse, shal haue pouerte ynough. A faithfull man is greatly to be comméded, but he that maketh to moeh haist for to be riche, "shal not be vngiltie. To haue respecte of personnes in iudgment is not good: And why? he will do wronge, yee euen for a pece of bred. He that wil be rich all to soone, hath an euell eye, and considereth not, that pouerte shall come vpon him. He that rebuketh a man, shall fynde more fauoure at y last, the he that flatreth him. Who so robbeth his father and mother," and sayeth it is no synne: the same is like vnto a mortherer.

He that is of a proude stomacke, stereth vp strife: but he that putteth his trust in
LORDE, shalbe well fedd. He that trustet in his owne hert, is a foole: but he that dealeth wisely, shalbe safe. ° He that geueth vnto the poore, shal not wante: but he that turneth awaye' his eyes from soch as be in necessite, shall suffre greate pouerte himself.

"Whan the vngodly are come vp, men are fayne to hyde them selues: but whe they perish, the rightuous increase.

! Pro. 12. b. Eccli. 20. d. 

n Math. 15.a. “Jere, 17. b. 
2 Cor. 9.b. Deut. 15. a. ? Pro, 28. b. 

! Gen. 4. b. * Pro. 10. d. m 1 Timo. 6. b. Pro, 25. a.
Psal. 48. a. and 29. a.

Chap. rrr. 

The rrp. Chapter. 

a E that is stiffmecked q wyll not be re- 

fourmed, shal sodenly be destroyed with out eny helpe. * Where y rightuous haue the ouer hande, ¥ people are in prosperite: but
.| where the vngodly beareth rule, there ý people mourne. Who so loueth wyszdome, maketh his father a glad man :^ but he y kepeth har- lottes, spedeth awaye y he hath. With true iudgment y kynge setteth vp the londe, but yf he be a man y taketh giftes, he turneth it vpsyde downe. Who so flatreth his neghboure, layeth a nette for his fete. "The synne of y wicked is his owne snare, but y righteous shal be glad and reioyse. The righteous con- sidreth the cause of the poore, but the vngodly regardeth no vnderstondynge. Wicked people brynge a cite in decaye, but wyse men set it vp agayne. Yf a wyse man go to lawe with a foole (whether he deale with him frendly or roughly) he getteth no rest. The bloude- thyrstie hate the rightuous, but the iust seke his soule. A foole poureth out his sprete alltoge- ther, but a wyse man kepeth it in till afterwarde.
Yf a prynce delyte in lyes, all his seruauntes are vngodly. "The poore and the lender mete together, the LORDE lighteneth both their eyes. ©The seate of the kinge y faithfully iudgeth the poore, shal continue sure for euer- more. ‘The rodde and correccion mynistre wyszdome, but yf a childe be not loked vuto, be bryngeth his mother to shame. When the vngodly come vp, wickednesse increaseth: but the rightuous shall se their fall. Nurtoure thy sonne with correccion, and he shal comforte the, yee he shal do the good at thine hert.
Where no prophet is, there the people perishe : but well is him that kepeth the lawe. A seruatt wil not be the better for wordes, for though he vnderstonde, yet wil he not regarde them.
Yf thou seyst a man that is haistie to speake vnaduysed, thou mayest trust a foole more then him. He that delicately bryngeth vp his seruaunt from a childe, shal make him his master at length. An angrie man stereth vp strife, and he that beareth euell wyll in his mynde, doth moch euell. “After pryde com- meth a fall, but a lowly sprete bryngeth greate worshipe. Who so kepeth company with a thefe, hateth his owne soule: he heareth blasphemies, q telleth it not forth.
He that feareth men, shal haue a fall: but 

a Pro. 28. b. d. ^ Pro.5. a. * Pro. 20. d. 4Iob 22, c. 
* Psal. 17. c. 18. b. 118. c. f Deut. 4, a. and 12. d. 

Salomons 3irouerbes. 

| 

So. dlrir. who so putteth his trust in the LORDE, shal come to honoure. Many there be that seke
ý prynces fauoure, but euery mans tudgment commeth from the LORDE.

The rightuous abhorre the vngodly: but as for those that be in y right waye, y wicked hate them.

Che rrr. Chapter. 

The wordes of Agur the sonne of Iake. 

HE prophecie of a true faithfull man, who God hath helped, whom God hath coforted q norished. For though I am y leest of all, q haue no mas vnuderstodige (for I neuer lerned wiszdome) yet haue I vnderstód- inge q am well enfourmed in godly thinges.
Who hath clymmed vp i to heauen? Who 

hath come downe from thence ? 

Who hath holden ý wynde fast in his hade? 
Who hath coprehended ¥ waters in a gar- ment? Who hath set all the endes of ¥ worlde? What is his name, or his sonnes name? Canst thon tell? * All the wordes of
God are pure q cleane, for he is a shylde vnto all them, that put their trust in him. + Put thou nothinge therfore vnto his wordes, lest he reproue the, and thou be founde as a lyar.

Two thinges I requyre of the, that thou wilt not denye me before I dye. Remoue fro me vanite and lyes: geue me nether pouerte ner riches, only graunte me a necessary lyuynge.
€ Lest yf I be to full, I denye y, q saye: what felowe is LORDE? And lest I beinge con- strayned thorow pouerte, fall vnto stealinge, and forsweare the name of my God.

Accuse not a seruaunt vnto his master, lest he speake euell of the also, and thou be hurte.
He that bryngeth vp an euell reporte vpó the generacion of his father and mother, is not worthy to be commended.

The generacion that thynke them selues cleane, shal not be clensed from their fylthy- nesse. There are people y haue a proude loke, and cast vp their eye lyddes. This peoples tethe are swerdes, and with their chaft bones they consume and deuoure the symple of the earth, and the poore from amonge mé.

This generacion (which is like an horsleche) hath two doughters: y one is called, fetch hither: the other, brynge hither.

There be thre thinges that are neuer satisfied, and the fourth saieth neuer hoo. *The hell, a womans wombe, and the earth hath neuer

€ Deut. 8. c. and 31, e. Exo. 5.a. Iob21.b. Eccli. 27. a. nEDrIONOT EC.

-— 

49 

fo. dirr. 

water ynough. As for fyre, it sayeth neuer: hoo. “Who so laugheth his father to scorne, and setteth his mothers commaüdement at naught: the rauens pycke out his eyes in the valley, and deuoured be he of the yonge Aegles.

*There be thre thinges to hye for me, and as for the fourth, it passeth my knowlege.

The waye of an Aegle in y ayre, y waye of a serpent ouer y stone, y waye of a shippe in y see, a y waye of a ma with a yonge woma.
Soch is the waye also of a wyfe y breaketh wedlocke, which wypeth hir mouth like as wha she hath eate, q sayeth: As for me, I haue done no harme. Thorow thre thinges the earth is disquieted, q the fourth maye it not beare: Thorow a seruaüt y beareth rule, thorow a foole ý hath greate riches, thorow an ydle houswife, ¢ thorow an handmayden y is heyre to hir mastres. There be foure thinges in the earth, the which are very litle: but in wyszdome they exceade the wyse. “The Em- mettes are but a weake people, yet gather they their meate together in y haruest.

The conyes are but a feble folke, yet make they their couches amonge the rockes. The greshoppers haue not a gyde, yet go they forth together by heapes. ‘lhe spyder laboureth with hir hádes, q y in y kynges palace.

There be thre thinges y go stiffly, but the goinge of the fourth 1s the goodliest of all. A
Lyon which is kynge of beastes, q geueth place to no man: A cock ready to fight: A rame:
And a kynge y goeth forth with his people. 

Yf thou be so foolish to magnifie thy self, or medlest with eny soch thinge, the laye thine hade vpou thy mouth. Who so chyrneth mylek, maketh butter: he that rubbeth his nose, maketh it blede, and he that causeth wrath, bryngeth forth strife.

The rrri.. Chapter. 

HESE are the wordes of Kynge Lamuel, 

q y lesson y his mother taught him. 
My sonne, thou sonne of my body: O my deare beloued sonne, geue not ouer thy sub- staunce q mynde vnto women, which are the destruccié eué of kynges. O Lamuel, geue kinges no wyne, geue kynges q prynces no stronge drynke: lest they beinge dronken forget the lawe, q regarde not y cause of the

Exo.21.b. Deu. 27. c. è Sap. 5. b. © Pro. 6. a. 

Salomons Proucrbes, 

poore, ¢ of all soch as be in aduersite. Geue stronge drynke vnto soch as are condempned to death, & wyne vnto those y mourne : that they maye drynke it, x forget their misery q aduersite. Be thou an aduocate q stonde in iudgment thyself, to speake for all soch as be dome q sucourles. With thy mouth defende y thinge y is laufull and right, and $ cause of y poore and helplesse.

Who so fyndeth an honest faithful woma, she is moch more worth thé perles. The herte of hir husbande maye safely trust in her, so that he shal haue no nede of spoyles.

She wil do him good ¢ not euel all ¥ dayes of hir life. She oceupieth woll œ flax, œ laboureth gladly with hir handes. She is like a marchauntes shippe, that bryugeth hir vytayles from farre. She is vp in y night season, to prouyde meate for hir housholde, q foode for hir maydens. She considreth lode,
& byeth it, and with the frute of bir handes she planteth a vynyarde. She gyrdeth hir loynes with strength, and courageth hir armes.
And yf she perceaue that hir houswifrie doth good, hir candle goeth not out by night. She layeth hir fyngers to the spyndle, q hir hande taketh holde of y rocke.

She openeth hir hande to y poore, yee she stretcheth forth hir hades to soch as haue nede.
She feareth not y the colde of wynter shal hurte hir house, for all hir housholde folkes are duble clothed. She maketh hir self fayre ornamétes, hir clothige is whyte sylke q purple.
Hir huszbade is moch set by in y gates, whe he sytteth amonge y rulers of ý londe. She maketh cloth of sylke q selleth it, and de- lyuereth a gyrdle vnto y marchaüt.

Strégth and honoure is hir clothinge, q in the latter daye she shal reioyse. She openeth hir mouth with wyszdome, ¢ in hir toge is the lawe of grace. She loketh wel to the wayes of hir housholde, q eateth not hir bred with ydilues. Hir children arise q call hir blessed, q hir huszbande maketh moch of her. Many daughters there be y gather riches together, but thou goest aboue thé all. As for fauoure, it is disceatfull, and beutie is a vayne thinge: but a woman that feareth the LORDE, she is worthy to be praysed. Geue her of the frute of hir handes, and let hir owne workes prayse her in the gates.

The ende of the prouerbes of Salomon. 

Chap. yr 

B 

€ 

D 

3icclestastes. 

What this boke contepneth. : 

Chap. L 

All thinges (yf a ma wyl cosidre them wel) are but vanite. Neuertheles amoge them all there is nothige weaker and more vnstedfast, then man him self.

Chap. Il. 

In this chapter (and in the other also) he maketh oft tymes mésion of the wordes and couersacio of the vngodly: that by this meanes he maye the better cause men to despyse all creatures, in respecte of the only euerlastinge God.

Chap. Ill. 

Euery thiage hath a tyme. There is no thige, but God hath pnt tedyousnesse and trauayle in it, to exercise men withall. What so ener a man enioyeth of his laboure, the same is a gift of God, geuen to the intent that men shulde feare him.

Chap. III. 

A cosideracion of dinerse thinges. There is nothinge so excellent and hye, but yf it do not the deuty and office where vnto it is ordened, it shalbe brought lowe.

Chap. V. 

Agaynst foolish aud temerarions vowes. Let no man marnayle that so moch enell is done, for the wicked are many. Agaynst the riche and agaynst riches.

Chap. VI. 

Agaynst those riche me that darre not enioye 

their riches : how mad and foolish they be. 

Chap. VII. 

No man knoweth what is for to come. How worthy a thige it is to hane a good name.
The profit of wyszdome. 

Chap. VIII. 

Of the obediéce which men owe vnto God and to their heades. The loge sufferaunce of God is not to be despised. It is not possible for eny ma, to coprehende the workes that be in the worlde.

Chap. IX. 
Like thinges happen vnto all men : therfore with myrth and thankfulnesse shulde men enioye

the giftes of God. Wyszdome passeth all thinges.

Chap. X. XI. 

In these two chapters are many wyse and profit- able sentences, wel worthy to be considered of enery man.

Chap. XII. 

In this chapter the preacher sheweth his whole meanynge, as though he wolde saye: As for all the thinges that be vnder the Sonne (wher of I haue spoken) I haue cosidered them, and proued them metely wel by experience. And this is the conclucion, that there is nothynge stedfast and durable but God himself, wha men ought to feare, and to haue his comannde- mentes before their eyes enen from their youth vp.

The first Chapter. 
These are the wordes of the Preacher, the sonne 
| of Dauid, kynge of lerusalem. q LL is but vanite (saieth ¥ preacher) “all
A is but playne vanite. For what els 
° Eccli. 12. b. 

hath a mā, of all the laboure ý he taketh vnder the Sonne? One generacio passeth awaye, another commeth, but the earth abydeth still. The Sone aryseth, the Sonne goeth downe, q returneth to his place, y he maye there ryse vp agayne. The wynde goeth

Fo. nri. 

2 

ES 

towarde y South, q feteheth his c6pase aboute vnto the North, q so turneth in to himself agayne. “All floudes runne in to the see, q yet the see is not fylled: for loke vnto what place the waters runne, thence they come agayne. All thinges are so harde, y no ma can expresse them. ^'The eye is not satisfied with sight, the eare is not fylled with hearinge.
The thinge y hath bene, cometh to passe agayue: q y thinge y hath bene done, is done agayne, there is no new thinge vnder the
Sonne. Is there eny thinge, wherof it maye be sayde: lo, this is new? For it was loge agoo in the tymes y haue bene before vs.
The thinge y is past, is out of remébraunce : 
Eué so the thiges that are for to come, shal no more be thought vpo amoge the that come after. I myself ý Preacher, beynge kynge of
Israel q Ierusalé, applyed my mynde to seke out q search for the knowlege of all thiges y are done vnder heaué. Soch trauayle q laboure hath God geue vnto y childré of me, to exereyse thé selues theri.

Thus I haue considered all the thinges that come to passe vnder the Sone, ¢ lo, they are all but vanite q vexacion of mynde. The croked ean not be mayde straight, ¢ the fautes ei not be nobred. I comoned with myne owne herte, sayege: “lo, I am come to a greate estate, and haue gotte more wyszdome, thé all they y haue bene before me in leru-| salem. Yee my hert had greate experiéce of| wyszdome q knowlege, for there vnto I applyed my mynde: y l might knowe what were wyszdome q vnderstédinge, what were erroure q foolishnes. And I perceaued y this also was but a vexacion of mynde: for where moeh wyszdome is, there is also greate trauayle ¢ disquietnes: q y more knowlege a man hath, the more is his care.

The ij. Chapter. 
HE sayde I thus in my hert: Now go to, I wil take myne ease q hane good dayes. But lo, that was vanite also: in so moeh that I sayde vnto laughter: thou art madd, and to myrth: what doest thou ?

So I thought in my herte, to withdrawe my flesh from wyne, to applye my mynde vnto wyszdome, aud to comprehéde foolishnes, vntill the tyme that (amonge all $ thinges which are vnder $ Sonne) I might se what were best

? Tob 14. b. 

è Pro. 27. e. Eccli, 14. a. Eccls. 3. b. 

Ecclesiastes, 

for men to do, so longe as they lyue vnder heauen.

^|] made gorgious fayre workes, I buylded me houses, and planted vynyardes: I made me ortehardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in them of all maner frutes. “I made poles of water, to water y grene and frutefull trees withall. I bonght seruauntes and maydés, and had a greate housholde. As for catell and shepe, I had more substauuce of them, then all they y were before me in
Jerusalem. I gathered syluer q golde together, euen a treasure of kynges ¢ londes.

I prouided me syngers and womé which conde playe of instrumentes, to make men myrth and pastime. I gat me drynkynge euppes also and glasses. (Shortly) I was greater q in more worshipe, then all my pre- decessours in lerusale. For wyszdome re- mayned with me: q loke what so euer myne eyes desyred, I let them haue it: q wherin so euer my herte delyted or had eny pleasure, I withhelde it not fro it. Thus my hert re- ioysed in all y I dyd, and this I toke for the porcion of all my trauayle. But whan I considered all the workes y my handes had wrought, and all the labours that I had taken therin: lo, all was but vanite and vexacion of] ` mynde, q nothinge of eny value vnder y
Sonne. Then turned I me to considre wysz- dome, erronre and foolishnesse (for what is he amonge men, that might be compared to me y kynge in soch workes?) and I sawe, that wyszdome excelleth foolishnesse, as farre as light doth darknesse. Fora wyse man beareth his eyes aboute in his heade, but the foole goeth in the darknesse. I perceaned also that they both had one ende.

Then thought I in my mynde: Yf it happen vnto the foole as it doth vnto me, what nedeth me then to laboure eny more for wyszdome ?
So I confessed within my harte, that this also was but vanite. For the wyse are euer as litle in remembraunce as the foolish, and all the dayes for to come shalbe forgotten, yee the wyse man dyeth as well as $ foole. ‘Thus begane I to be weery of my nb in so moeh that I coude awaye with nothinge that is done vnder the Sonne, for all was but vanite q vexacion of mynde: Yee I was weery of all my laboure, which I had taken vnder the
Sonne, because I shulde be fayne to leaue 

*3Reg.3.b.and4.c. 43 Reg.3.4.5.6.7. ©3 Reg. 4.9. 

Chap. 6j.| 

Chap. tj. 

them vnto another man, that cometh after 

Ecclesiastes. Jo. Dirrty. 
What hath a ma els (that doth eny thinge) {3 

me: for who knoweth, whether he shalbe a wyse ma or a foole? And yet shal he be lorde of all my labours, which I with soch wyszdome haue taken vnder the Sonne. Is not this a vayne thinge ?

So I turned me to refrayne my mynde from all soch trauayle, as I toke vnder the Sonne: for so moch as a man shulde weery him self with wyszdome, with vnderstondinge and opportunite, and yet be fayne to leaue his labours vnto another, y neuer swett for them.
This is also a vayne thinge and a greate misery. For what getteth a ma of all y laboure q trauayle of his mynde, y he taketh vnder the Sonne, but heuynesse, sorowe q disquyetnes all ý dayes of his life? In so moch that his herte can not rest in the night.
Is not this also-a vayne thinge? Is it not better then for a ma to eate and drynke, and his soule to be mery in his laboure? Yee I sawe that this also was a gifte of God: ¢For who maye eate, drynke, or brynge eny thige to passe without him? And why? he geueth vnto mà, what it pleaseth him : whether it be
. | wyszdome, vnderstondinge, or gladnesse. But vnto the synner he geueth weeryness and sorow, that he maye gather and heape to- gether y thinge, y afterwarde shalbe geuen vnto him whom it pleaseth God. This is now a vayne thinge, yee a very disquietnesse and vexacio of mynde.

The iij. Chapter. 
UERY thinge hath a tyme, yee all that is vnder the heauen, hath is conuenient season. There is a tyme to be borne, and a tyme to dye. * There is a tyme to plate, and

a tyme to plucke vp the thinge, y is planted :|. 

A tyme to slaye, and a tyme to make whole : 
A tyme to breake downe, and a tyme to buylde vp: A tyme to wepe, and a tyme to laugh: A tyme to mourne, and a tyme to daunse: A tyme to cast awaye stones, and a tyme to gather stones together: A tyme to enbrace, q a tyme to refrayne from en- bracynge: A tyme to wynne, and a tyme to lese: A tyme to spare, and a tyme to spende:
A tyme to cutt in peces, and a tyme to sowe together: ^A tyme to kepe syléce, and a tyme to speake: A tyme to loue, ¢ a tyme to hate:
A tyme of warre, and a tyme of peace. 

e 1 Timo. 4. a. " Iob 14.a, ° Eccli.20.a. 4 Eccls, 1.a. 

but weerynesse and laboure? For as touch- inge the trauayle and carefulnesse which God hath geuen vnto mé, I se that he hath geuen it them, to be exercised in it. All this hath he ordened maruelous goodly, to euery thinge his due tyme. He hath plated ignoraunce also in the hertes of men, y they shulde not! fynde out $ grounde of his workes, which he doth from $ beginninge to y ende. So I perceaued, y in these thinges there is no- thinge better for a man, thé to be mery « to do well so longe as he lyueth. For all y a man eateth q drynketh, yee what so euer a mà enioyeth of all his laboure, y same is a gift of God. I césidered also y what so euer God doth, it cotinueth for euer, ¢ y nothinge can be put vnto it ner také from it: q y God doth it to y intent, y men shulde feare jum ?'l'he thinge y hath bene, is now: q the thinge y is for to come, hath bene afore tyme, for God restoreth agayne the thinge that was past.
Morouer, I sawe vnder y Sonne, vngodly-|¢ nesse in the steade of judgment, q iniquite in steade of rightuousnesse.

Then thought I in my mynde: God shal separate the rightuous from the vngodly, ¢ then shal be the tyme ¢ iudgmét of all coun- cels q workes. I cOmoned with myne owne herte also cocernynge the childré of men: how
God hath chosen them, and yet letteth thé apeare, as though they were beastes: for it happeneth vnto men as it doth vuto beastes, q as the one dyeth, so dyeth y other : yee they haue both one maner of breth, so ¥ (in this) a man hath no preemynence aboue a beest, but all are subdued vnto vanite. They go all vnto one place, for as they be all of dust, so shal they all turne vnto dust againe.

*Who knoweth the sprete of man y goeth vpwarde, and the breth of the beest y goeth downe in to the earth ? Wherfore I perceaue, y there is nothinge better for a man, then to be ioyfull in his laboure, for that is his porcion.
But who wil brynge him to se the thinge, that shal come after him ?

The iiij. Chapter. 

O I turned me, ‘and considered all the violent wronge that is done vnder the
Sonne: and beholde, the teares of soch as 

e Eccli. 12. b. Sap.2.a. — / Abac, 1. a. Eccls. 5. a. | 

B 

jo. blyritij. 

juayle ? sume awaye my lyfe? ‘This is also a vayne

were oppressed, and there was no man to comforte them, or that wolde delyner and de- fende them from the violence of their oppres- sours. Wherfore I indged those that are deed, to be more happie then soch as be alyue: yee him that is yet vnborne to be better at ease thë they both, because he seith not the miserable workes that are done vnder the
Sonne. Agayne, I sawe that all trauayle and diligence of laboure was hated of euery man.
This is also a vaine thinge, and a vexacion of mynde. The foole foldeth his handes to- gether, q eateth vp his owne flesh. One hand- full (saicth he) is better with rest, thé both 3 handes full with laboure and trauayle. Mor- ouer, I turned me, and beholde yet another vanite vnder the Sonne. ‘There is one man, no mo but himself alone, hauynge nether childe ner brcther: yet is there no ende of his carefull trauayle, his eyes can not be satisfied

[with riches, (yet doth he not remembre him- 

self, q saye:) For whom do I take soch tra- 
For whose pleasure do I thus con- 

and miserable thinge. ‘Therfore two are better then one, for they maye well enioye the profit of their laboure. Yf one of them fall, his companyon helpeth him vp againe: But wo is him that is alone, for yf he fall, he hath not another to helpe him vp. Agayne, when two slepe together, they are warme: but how can a body be warme alone? One maye be ouer- come, but two maye make resistauce : A thre- folde cable is not lightly broken. A poore childe beynge wyse, is better then an olde kinge, that doteth, and can not bewarre in tyme to come. “Some one commeth out of preson, t is made a kynge: q another which is borne in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouerte. And I perceaued, y all men lyuynge vnder the Sonne, go with the seconde childe, that commeth vp in the steade of the other.
As for the people that haue bene before him, and that come after him, they are innu- merable: yet is not their ioye the greater thorow him. This is also a vayne thinge and a vexacion of mynde. Whan thon commest in to the house of God, kepe thy fote, and drawe nye, that thou mayest heare: ‘that is better then the offeringes of fooles, for they knowe not what euell they do.

* Gen. 41. b. 1 Re. 16. c... 3 Re. 12. c. 
4 Re.25.2. * 1 Reg. 15. e. 

2 Par. 33. 0. 

Erelesiastes. 

The 6. Chapter. 

thine hert speake eny thige rashly be- fore God. For God is in heaven, q thon vpon earth, therfore let thy wordes be fewe.
For where moch carefulnesse is, there are many dreames: q where many wordes are, there men maye heare fooles. Yf thou make a vowe vnto God, be not slacke to perfourme it. As for foolish vowes, he hath no pleasure in them. Yf thou promyse eny thinge, paye it: for better it is that thon make no vowe, then that thon shuldest promise, and not paye.
Vse not thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to synne, y thou saye not before the angell: my foolishnesse is in y faute.

For thé God wil be angrie at thy voyce, and destroye all Y workes of thine handes.

And why? where as are many dreames q many wordes, there are also dyuerse vanities:
“but loke ý thou feare God. Yf thou seyst the poore to be oppressed and wrongeously dealt withall, so y equite « the right of the lawe is wraisted in the londe : maruell not thou at soch iudgmét, for one greate mà kepeth touch with another, and the mightie helpe the selues together. The whole londe also with the feldes and all that is therin, is in subieccion and bondage vnto Y kinge.

He that loneth money, wil nener be satis- fied with money: and who so delyteth in riches, shal haue no profit therof. Is not this also a vayne thinge? Where as many riches are, there are many also that spende them awaye. And what pleasure more hath he that possesseth them, sanynge that he maye loke vpon them with his eyes? A labouringe man slepeth swetely, whether it be litle or moch that he eateth : “but the abundaunce of the riche wil not suffre him to slepe.

Yet is there a sore plage, which I haue sene vnder the Sonne (namely) riches kepte to the hurte of him y hath them in possession.

^ For oft times they perishe with his greate misery and trouble : and yf he haue a childe, it getteth nothinge. Like as he came naked out of his mothers wombe, so goeth he thither agayne, and carieth nothinge awaye with him of all his laboure. This is a miserable plage,

y he shal go awaye euen as he came. What 
© Deu. 23.d. Baruc6.e. 4 Eccls.4.a. — * Iob 20. c. 
Tob 1. c. 

Chap. b. 

B: not hastie with thy month, q let not| & 

B 

€ 

Chap. bij. helpeth it him then, y he hath labored in the wynde? All the dates of his life also must he eate in the darcke, with greate careful- nesse, sicknesse q sorow.

“Therfore me thinke it a better and a fayrer thinge, a man to eate and drynke, and to be refreshed of all his laboure, y he taketh vnder the Sonne all the dayes of his life which God geueth him, for this is his porcion. For vnto whom so euer God geueth riches, goodes and power, he geueth it him to enioye it, to take it for his porcion, and to be refreshed of his laboure : this is now the gifte of God. For he thinketh not moch how longe he shal lyue, for so moch as God fylleth his hert with glad- nesse.

The bt. Chapter. 

HERE is yet a plage vnder y Sonne, q it is a general] thinge amonge me: when God geueth a man riches, goodes q honoure, so that he wanteth nothinge of all that his herte can desyre : and yet God geueth him not leue to enioye the same, but another man spédeth them. This is a vayne thinge a a miserable plage. Yfa man begett an hun- dreth children, and lyue many yeares, so that his dayes are many in nombre, and yet can not enioye his good, nether be buried: as for him I saye, that an vntymely byrth is better then he. For he cometh to naught, q goeth his waye in to darcknes, and his name is for- gotten. Morouer, he seyth not the Sonne, and knoweth of no rest nether here ner there:
Yee though he lyued two thousande yeares, yet hath he no good life. Come not all to one place? All the laboure that a man taketh, is for himself, and yet his desyre is neuer fylled after his mynde. For what hath the wyse more then the foole? What helpeth it the poore, that he knoweth to walke before the lyuynge? ‘The sight of the eyes is better, then that the soule shulde so departe awaye.
Howbeit this is also a vayne thinge and a dis- quietnesse of mynde. What is more excellent then man ? yet can he not in the lawe get the victory of him that is mightier thé he: A vayne thinge is it to cast out many wordes,

but what hath a man els? 

The bij. Chapter. a Es who knoweth what is good for man lyuynge, in y dayes of his vayne life,

‘a Eccls. 9. d. ^ Pro.29. a. Cant.1.a. © Pro. 27. a. 

Ecclesiastes 

which is but a shadowe ? Or, who wil tell a man, what shal happen after him vnder the
Sonne? ^A good name is more worth then a precious oyntment, and the daye of death is better thé y daye of byrth.

It is better to go in to an house of mourn- ynge, then in to a bancket house. For there
1s the ende of all men, and he that is lyuinge, taketh it to herte. It is better to be sory then to laugh, for whé the countenaunce is heuy, the herte is ioyfull. The herte of y wyse is in the mournynge house, but the hert of the foolish is in the house of myrth. It is better to geue eare to the chastenynge of a wyse man, “then to heare the songe of fooles.
For the laughinge of fooles is like y crackynge of thornes vnder a pott. And y is but a vayne thinge.

Who so doeth wronge, maketh a wyse man to go out of his witt, and destroyeth a gentle hert. The ende of a thinge is better then the begynnynge. "The pacient of sprete is better then the hie mynded. Be not haistely angrie in thy mynde, for wrath resteth in the bosome ofa foole. Saye not thou: What is the cause that y dayes of y olde tyme were better, then they y be now ? for that were no wyse ques- tion. Wyszdome is better then riches, yee moch more worth then the eye sight. For wyszdome defendeth as well as moneye, and the excellent knowlege and wyszdome geueth life vnto him that hath it in possession. Con- sidre the worke of God, how that no man can make the thinge straight, which he maketh croked. Vse well the tyme of prosperite, and remembre the tyme of inysfortune: for God maketh the one by the other, so that a man can fynde nothinge els.

These ij. thiges also haue I cósidred in y tyme of vanite: y the iust man perisheth for his rightuousnes sake, « the vngodly liueth in his wickednesse. ‘Therfore be thou nether to rightuous ner ouer wyse, ^ y thon perish not : be nether to vnrightuous also ner to foolish, lest thou die before thy tyme. It is good for the to take holde of this, x not to let y go out of thy hande. For he y feareth God shal escape them all.

* Wyszdome geueth more corage vnto the 

(wyse, then ten mightie men of the citie: for ithere is not one iust vpo earth, y doth good, q sinneth not. Take not hede vnto euery

d Rom.11.c. *2 Re.20. c. Eccli.7.a. 2 Par.6. f. Luc.17.a. 

Fo. ulrrb. 

| fo. Dirrbi. 

D 

Errlesiastes. 

Chap. biij. 

worde y is spoken, lest thou heare thy ser- uaunt curse the: for thine owne hert knoweth, that thou thy self also hast oft tymes spoke euell by other men. All these thinges haue
I proued because of wyszdome: “for I thought to be wyse, but she wente farther fro me then she was before, yee q so depe that I might not reach vnto her. I applied my mynde also vnto knowlege, and to seke out sciéce, wisdome and vnderstondinge: to knowe the foolishnesse of the vngodly, and the erroure of dotinge fooles. And I founde,’ that a woman is bytterer then death: for she is a very angle, hir hert isa nett, and hir handes are cheynes.
Who so pleaseth God shal escape from her, but the synner will be taken with her.
Beholde (sayeth y preacher) this haue I diligently searched out q proued, y l might come by knowlege: which as yet I seke, and fynde it not. Amonge a thousande men I haue founde one, but not one woman amonge all. “Lo, this onely haue I founde, that God made man iust q right, but they seke dyuerse sotylties, where as no man hath wyszdome q vnderstodinge, to geue answere there vnto.

The biij. Chapter. 

YSZDOME maketh a mas face to shyne,^ but malice putteth it out of fauoure. Kepe the kynges commaundemét
(I warne the) q the ooth y thou hast made vnto God. Be not haistie to go out of his sight, q se thou eotynue in no euell thinge: for what so euer it pleaseth him, y doeth he.
Like as when a kynge geueth a charge, his commaundement is mightie: Euen so who maye saye vnto him: what doest thou?’ Who so kepeth the commaundement, shall fele no harne: but a wyse mans herte discerneth tyme aud maner: For euery thinge wil haue opportunite aud iudgment, and this is the thinge that maketh men full of carefulnes q sorowe. And why? a man knoweth not what is for to come, for who wyll tell him? Nether is there eny mà y hath power ouer y sprete, to kepe stil y sprete, ner to haue eny power in the tyme of death: It is not he also that can make an ende of the batayll, nether maye

vngodlynes delyuer him y medleth withall. 
All these thinges haue I considered, and applied my mynde vnto euery worke that is vnder the Sonne: how one man hath lord-

* Job ?8. b. *IProdde: * Gen. 1. d. 4 Pro. 17. d. 

shipe vpon another to his owne harme. For 
I haue oft sene y vngodly/ brought to their graues, and fallen downe from the hye and glorious place: in so moch y they were for- gotten in the cite, where they were had in so hye q greate reputacion. This is also a vayne thinge. Because now that euell workes are not haistely punyshed, the hert of man geueth him self ouer vnto wickednesse: But though an euell personne offende an hundreth tymes, |. and haue a longe life: yet am I sure, that it shal go well with thé that feare God, because they haue him before their eyes. Agayne, as for the vngodly, it shall not be well with him, nether shal he prologe his dayes: but euen as a shadowe, so shall he be that feareth not God.

Yet is there a vanite vpon earth: "There |qr be iust men, vnto whom it happeneth, as though they had the workes of the vngodly:
Agayne, there be vngodly, with whom it goeth as though they had the workes of ¥ rightuous.
This me thinke also a vaine thinge. "Ther- fore I commende gladnesse, because a man hath no better thinge vnder the Sonne, then to eate and drynke, and to be mery: for that shal he haue of his laboure all the daies of his life, which God geueth him vnder the Sonne.
When I applied my mynde to lerne wyszdome, and to knowe the trauayle that is in the worlde
(and that of soch a fashion, y I suffred not myne eyes to slepe nether daye ner night) 1 vnderstode of all Y workes of God, that it is not possible for a man, to attayne vnto y workes that are done vnder ¥ Sonne: and though he bestowe his laboure to seke them out, yet can he not reach vnto the: yee though a wyse man wolde vndertake to knowe them, yet might he not fynde them.

The iy. Chapter. 

OR all these thinges purposed 1 in myją 
In mynde to seke out. ‘The righteus and wyse yee and their workes also are in the hande of God: and there is no man that knoweth ether the loue or hate of the thinge that he hath before him. It happeneth vnto one as vnto another: It goeth with the right- uous as with the vngodly:* with the good q cleane as with the vncleane: with him that offereth as with him that offereth not: like as it goeth with the vertuous, so goeth it also g Iob 9. c.

e Tob 9. b. Leui. 18. a. J Psal. 36. e. 

& 

with the synner: As it happeneth vnto the periured, so happeneth it also vnto him that is afrayed to be man sworne. Amonge all thinges ý come to passe vnder the Sonne, this isa misery, that it happeneth vnto all alyke.
This is the cause also that the hertes of men are full of wickednesse, q madd foolishnesse is in their hertes as longe as they lyne, vntill they dye.

And why? As longe asa man lyueth, he is careles: for a quyck dogg (saye they) is better the a deed lion: for theythat be lyuynge, knowe y they shall dye: but they y be deed, knowe nothinge, nether deserue they eny more.
For their memorial is forgotte, so y they be nether loued, hated ner envyed: nether haue they eny more parte in y worlde, in all y is done vnder the Sonne. Go thou thy waye then, eate thy bred with ioye, q drynke thy wyne with gladnesse, for thy workes please
God. Let thy garmétes be all waye whyte," q let thy heade want no oyntmét. ^ Vse thy self to lyue ioyfully with thy wife whom thou louest, all ¥ daies of thy life (which is but vayne) y
God hath geué the vnder the Sonne, all y dayes of thy vanite: for y is thy porcion in this life, of all thy laboure q trauayle y thou takest vnder the Sonne. What so euer thou takest in hande to do, that do with all thy power: for amoge the deed (where as thou goest vnto) there is nether worke, councell, knowlege ner wyszdome.

So I turned me vnto other thinges vnder y 
Sonne, and I sawe, that in runnynge, it helpeth not to be swift: in batayll, it helpeth not to be stronge : to fedynge, it helpeth not to be wyse: to riches, it helpeth not to be sutyll: to be had in fauoure, it helpeth not to be connynge: but that all lyeth in tyme q for- tune. ‘For a man knoweth not his tyme, but like as the fyshe are take with the angle, and as the byrdes are catched with the snare:
Eué so are men taken in the perilous tyme, when it commeth sodenly vpon them.

This wiszdome haue I sene also vnder y 
Sone, x me thought it a greate thinge. "There was a litle cite, q a few me within it: so there came a greate kynge q beseged it, q made greate bulworkes agaynst it. And in the cite there was founde a poore man (but he was wyse) which with his wyszdome delyuered the

* Luc. 21. d. f Rom. 12. b.

? Matt. 6. b. > Pro. 5. c. 
4 Sap. 6.a. 3Re.22.c. ¢1 Re. 17. c. 

Ecclesiastes, 

Fo. dirrbtj. cite: yet was there no body, y had eny respecte vuto soch a symple man. "Then sayde I: wyszdome is better then strength. ^Neuer- theles, a symple mans wyszdome is despysed, a his wordes are not herde. A wise mans councell that is folowed in sylence, is farre aboue the crienge of a captaine amoge fooles.
For wyszdome is better then harnesse: “but one vnthrift alone destroyeth moch good.

The y. Chapter. 

D- flyes ý corruppe swete oyntment q 

make it to styncke, are somthinge more worth then the wyszdome ¢ honoure of a foole.
A wyse mans hert is vpon the right hande, but a fooles hert is vpon the left. A dotinge foole thinketh, y euery ma doth as foolishly as him- self. Yf a principall sprete be geue the to beare rule be not negligét the in thine office: for so shal greate wickednesse be put downe, as it were with a medecyne. Another plage is there, which I haue sene vnder the Sonne: namely, ¥ ignoraunce y is comonly amonge prynces: in y a foole sytteth in greate dignite, athe rich are sett downe beneth: I se ser- uauntes ryde vpon horses, q prynces goinge vpon their fete as it were seruauntes. But he y dyggeth vp a pytt, shall fall therin him- self: q who so breaketh downe the hedge, a serpent shal byte him. Who so remoueth stones, shall haue trauayle withall: and he that heweth wod, shalbe hurt therwith.

When an yron is blont, and y poynt not sharpened, it must be whett againe, and that with might: Euen so doth wiszdome folowe diligence. A babler of his tonge is no better, then a serpent that styngeth without hyssynge.
The wordes out of a wyse mans mouth are gracious, but the lippes of a foole wil destroye himself. The begynnynge of his talkynge is foolishnes, and the last worde of his mouth is greate madnesse. A foole is so full of wordes, that a man can not tell what ende he wyll make: who wyl then warne him to make a conclucion? The laboure of $ foolish is gre- uous vnto thé, while they knowe not how to go in to the cite.

Wo be vnto the (O thou realme and londe) whose kynge is but a childe, and whose prynces are early at their banckettes. But well is the
(O thou realme and londe) whose kinge is 

€ Pro. 26. c. Eccli. 27. e. 

76 

mm a eT c -- Se en eA 
Fo. olrrbitj. Ecclesiastes. Chap. ri. come of nobles, and whose prynces eate in| |hode and youth is but vanite. Remembre due season, for strength and not for lust.) |thy maker in thy youth, or euer the dayes of
Thorow slouthfulnesse the balkes fall downe,| |aduersite come, and or the yeares drawe nye, and thorow ydle hades it rayneth in at the! | when thou shalt saye: I haue no pleasure in house. Meate maketh men to laugh,* and} |them: before the Sonne, ý light, y Moone wyne maketh them mery: but vnto money| |and the starres be darckened, and or the are all thinges obedient. Wysh the kynge no| |cloudes turne agayne after the rayne: when euell in thy thought, and speake no hurte of| |the kepers of the house shall tremble, and y ryche in thy preuy chambre: for a byrde of| | when the strouge men shal bowe them selues: the ayre shal betraye thy voyce, and with hir| |when the Myllers stonde still because they be fethers shal she bewraye thy wordes. so fewe, and when the sight of the wyndowes
; shal waxe dymme: whan the dores in the 
The ri. Chapter. stretes shal be shutt, and whan ¥ voyce of the 
ENDE thy vytayles ouer the waters, and} | Myller shall be layed downe: whan men shall 
S so shalt thou fynde thé after many yeares.| |ryse vp at the voyce of the byrde, and whan 
Geue it awaye amonge seuen or eight, for| | all ý doughters of musyck shalbe brought lowe: thou knowest not what misery shal come vpo| | whan men shal feare in hye places, and be earth, Whé the cloudes are full, they poure| |afrayed in the stretes: whan the Almonde tre out rayne vpon the earth. And whë y tre| |shalbe despysed, the greshopper borne out, falleth, (whether it be towarde the south or| |and whan greate pouerte shall breake in: north) in what place so euer it fall, there it} |when man goeth to his longe home, and the lyeth. He that regardeth y wynde, shal not| |mourners go aboute the stretes. Or euer the sowe: and he that hath respecte vnto the| |syluer lace be taken awaye, and or the golden cloudes, shal not reape. Now like as thou| |bende be broken: Or the pott be broken at knowest not the waye of the wynde, ner how| the well, q the whele vpon the Cisterne: y bones are fylled iua mothers wombe: Euen| |Or "dust be turned againe vnto earth from so thou knowest not the workes of God, which | |whence it came, and or the sprete returne is the workemaster of all. vnto God, which gaue it. ‘All is but vanite
Cease not thou therfore with thy handes to| |(sayeth the preacher) all is but playne sowe thy sede, whether it be in y mornynge| |vanite. or in the euenynge: for thou knowest mot The same preacher was not wyse alone, but whether this or that shall prospere, q yf they | |taught the people knowlege also: he gaue both take, it is the better. '"Thelightisswete,| |good hede, sought out the gronde and set ta pleasaunt thinge is it for the eyes to loke | |forth many parables. His diligence was to vpon the Sonne. Yf a man lyue many yeares,| |fynde ont acceptable wordes, right scripture, and be glad in them all, let him remembre the} |and the wordes of trueth. ^For the wordes dayes of darcknesse, which shal be many: q| |of f wyse are like prickes and nales that go when they come, all thinges shal be but vanite.| |thorow, wherwith men are kepte together:
Be glad then (O thou yonge man) in thy| |for they are geuen of one shepherde onely. youth, and lat thine hert be mery in thy yonge| | Therfore bewarre (my sonne) that aboue these dayes: folowe the wayes of thine owne hert,| |thou make the not many q innumerable bokes, and the lust of thine eyes: but be thou sure,| |nor take dyuerse doctrynes in hande, to weery that God shal bringe the in to iudgment for| |thy body withall. all these thinges. Lat vs heare the conclucion of all thinges:
. Feare God, and kepe his comaundementes, 
Che rij. Chapter. for that toucheth all men: For God shall a Pe awaye displeasure out of thy hert, q| |iudge all workes and secrete thinges, whether remoue euell from thy body: for childe-| |they be good or euell.

a Psal. 103. b. ^ Eccls. 3. e. € Eccls. 1. a. 4 Heb. 4. c. 

The ende of Ecclesiastes, called the Preacher. 

Salomons Balettes, 

ralled 
Cantica Canticorum. 

The first Chapter. a THAT thy mouth wolde gene me a

O kysse, for thy brestes are more pleasaunt then wyne, q that because of the good and pleasaunt sauoure. “Thy name is a swete smellynge oyntment, therfore do the maydens loue the: yee that same moueth me also to renne after the.

The kynge hath brought me in to his preuy chambre. We wil be glad « reioyce in the, we thynke more of thy brestes then of wyne : well is them that loue the.

I ameblack (o ye doughters of Ierusalē) like as the tentes of the Cedarenes,’ and as the hanginges of Salomon: but yet am I faire q welfauoured withal. Maruell not at me y 1 am so black, « why? $ Sonne hath shyned vp6 me. For whan my mothers childré had euell wil at me, they made me y keper of the vynyarde. ‘Thus was I fayne to kepe a vyn- yarde, which was not myne owne.

Tell me (o thou whom my soule loueth) where thou fedest, where thou restest at the noone daye: lest I go wronge, and come vnto the flockes of thy companyons.

Yf thou knowe not thy self (o thou fayrest amoge women) tha go thy waye forth after y fotesteppes of the shepe, as though thou woldest fede thy goates besyde y shepherdes tentes. There wil I tary for the (my loue) with myne hoost ¢ with my charettes, which shal be no fewer then Pharaos.’

Then shal thy chekes q thy neck be made fayre, t hanged with spages q goodly iewels : a neck bande of golde wil we make y with syluer bottons. When the kynge sytteth at
? Gen. 25. b. 

* Feels. 7. a. 2 Par. 3. c. 

the table, he shal smell my Nardus: for a bodell of Myrre (o my beloued) lyeth betwixte my brestes. A cluster of grapes of Cypers, or of the vynyardes of Engaddi, art thou vnto me, O my beloued.

^ O how fayre art thou (my loue) how fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes. O how fayre art thou (my beloued) how well fauored art thou? Oure bed is decte with floures, y sylinges of oure house are of Cedre tre, v oure balkes of Cypresse.

The tj. Chapter. 
AM the floure of the felde, and lylie of the valleys: as the rose amonge the thornes, so is my loue amonge the daughters.

Like as the aple tre amonge the trees of the wodd, so is my beloued amonge the sonnes.
My delite is to sitt vnder his shadowe, for his frute is swete vnto my throte. He bryngeth me in to his wyne seller, and loueth me specially well. Refresh me with grapes, co- forte me with apples, for I am sick of loue.
* His left hade lyeth vnder my heade, ¢ his right hande enbraceth me. o

I charge you (o ye doughters of Ierusalem) | 3 by the Roes q hyndes of the felde, y ye wake not vp my loue ner touch her, till she be con- tent herself.

Me thynke I heare the voyce of my be- loued: lo, there commeth he hoppinge vpon y mountaynes, and leapinge ouer the litle hilles.
My beloued is like a Koo or a yonge hart. 
Beholde, he stondeth behynde oure wall, he loketh in at the wyndowe, q pepeth thorow the grate.

* Exo. 14, b. 4 Cant, 4. a. * Cant. 8. a. 

Fo * drre. 

My beloued answered q sayde vnto me: O stóde vp my loue, my doue, my beutyfull, q come: for lo, the wynter is now past, the rayne is awaie a gone. The floures are come vp in the felde, the twystinge tyme is come, the voyce of the turtle doue is herde in oure londe. ‘The fyge tre bryngeth forth hir fyges, the vynes beare blossoms, and haue a good smell.

O stóde vp my loue, my beutyfull, and come 
(my doue) out of the caues of the rockes, out of the holes of the wall: O let me se thy countenaunce and heare thy voyce, for swete is thy voyce and fayre is thy face. Gett vs the foxes, yee the litle foxes that hurte y vynes, for oure vynes beare blossoms.

`a My loue is myne, and I am his, (which fedeth amóge the lylies) vntill the daye breake, and till the shadowes be gone. Come agayne preuely (o my beloued) like as a Roo or a yonge harte vnto the mountaynes.

The itj. Chapter. 

Y night in my bedd, I sought him, whom 
B my soule loueth: yee diligently sought I him, but I founde him not. I wil get vp
(thought I) and go aboute the cite: vpon the market and in all ý stretes will I seke him whom my soule loueth, but whan I sought him, I founde him not. The watchmen that go aboute y cite, founde me. Sawe ye not him, whom my soule loueth ?

So whan I was a litle past them, I fouüde him whom my soule loueth. I haue gotten holde vpon him, and wyl not let him go, vntill
I brynge him in to my mothers house, and in to hir chambre that bare me. |

I charge you (o ye doughters of Lerusale)' by the Roes and hyndes of the felde, ^ that ye wake not vp my loue ner touch her, till she be | content herself.

Who is this, that commeth out of y wyl- dernesse like pilers of smoke, as it were a smell of Myrre, frankencense and all maner spyces of the Apotecary ?

Beholde, aboute Salomós bedsteade there stonde LX. valeaunt men of the mightie in
Israel. They holde swerdes euery one, q are experte in warre. Euery man hath his swerde vpo his thee, because of feare in the night.

Kynge Salomon hath made himself a bed- 

* Cant. 6. a, 

è Cant. 2. b, * Cant. 1. c. 

Salomons Balettes. 

| 

\steade of the wodd of Libanus, the pilers are of syluer, the coueringe of golde, ¥ seate of purple, ¥ grounde pleasauntly paued for the doughters of Ierusalem.

Go forth (o ye doughters of Sion) and be- holde kynge Salomon in the crowne, wherwith his mother crowned him in the daye of his mariage, and in the daye of the gladnesse of his hert,

The (iij. Chapter. 
HOW fayre art thou (my loue) how 
O fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes besyde that which lyeth hid within. 4 Thy hayrie lockes are like a flocke of shepe that be clypped, which go first vp from the wash- inge place: where euery one beareth two twyns, and not one vnfrutefull amoge them.
Thy lippes are like a rose coloured rybende, thy wordes are louely: thy chekes are like a pece of a pomgranate, besydes that which lyed hyd within. Thy neck is like the tower of
Dauid buylded with bulworkes, wher vpon there hage a thousande sheldes, yee all the weapés of the giautes. Thy two brestes are
“like two twyns of yonge roes, which fede amoge the lilies. O that I might go to the mountayne of Myrre, and to the hyll of frankynsense : till the daye breake, and till the shadowes be past awaye. fayre (o my loue) « no spott is there in the.
Come to me from Libanus (o my spouse) come to me from Libanus: come soone the next waye from the toppe of Amana, from the toppe of Sanir and Hermon, from the Lyons dennes and from the mountaynes of y leo- pardes. ‘Thou hast wouded my hert (o my sister, my spouse) thou hast wounded my hert, with one of thine eyes, and with one cheyne of thy neck. O how fayre and louely are thy brestes, my sister, my spouse? Thy brestes are more pleasaunt then wyne, and the smell of thy oyntmentes passeth all spices.

combe, yee mylck and hony is vnder thy tonge, and the smell of thy garmentes is like the smell of frankynsense.

'Thou art a well kepte garden (o my sister, my spouse) thou art a well kepte water sprynge, a sealed well. The frutes that sproute in the, are like a very paradyse of pogranates with swete frutes: as Cypresse, Nardus, Saffron,

4 Cant. 6. a. e Cant. 7. a. 

Thou art all, 

Thy. lippes (o my spouse) droppe as the hony|

Chap. fij. | 

3 

& 

Chap. bi. 

Calmus, and all the trees of Libanus: Myrre, 
Aloes, and all the best spyces. ‘Thou art a well of gardens, a well of lyuynge waters, which renne downe from Libanus. Vp thou northwynde, come thou southwynde, and blowe vpo my gardé, that the smell therof maye be caried on euery syde: Yee that my beloued maye come in to my garden, q eate of the frutes and apples that growe therin.

The b. Chapter. 

OME in to my garden o my sister, my 

spouse: I haue gathered my Myrre with 

my spyce, I wil eate my hony and my hony 

cébe, I wil drynke my wyne t my mylk. Eate 

(o ye frendes) drynke and be mery, o ye be- loued.

As I was a slepe, q my hert wakynge, I herde the voyce of my beloued, wha he knocked. Open to me (sayde he) o my sis- ter, my loue, my doue, my derlinge: for my heade is full of dew, and y lockes of my hayre are full of the night droppes.

I haue put off my cote, how cà I do it on agayne? I haue washed my fete, how shal I fyle them agayne? But whan my loue put in his hande at the hole, my hert was moued towarde him : so that I stode vp to open vnto my beloned. My hades dropped with Myrre, q the Myrre ranne downe my fyngers vpon y lock. Neuerthelesse wha I had opened vnto my beloued, he was departed, and gone his waye.

Now like as afore tyme whan he spake, my hert coude no longer refrayne: Euen so now
I sought hi, but I coude not fynde him: I eried vpon him, neuerthelesse he gaue me no answere. Sothe watchmen that wente aboute the cite, fonde me, sinote me, and wounded me: Yee they that kepte the walles, toke awaye my garmét fro me. I charge you therfore (o ye doughters of lerusalem) yf ye fynde my beloued, that ye tell him, how that
I am sick for loue. 

Who is thy loue aboue other louers, O thou fayrest amonge wemen? Or, what can thy loue do, more then other louers, that thou chargest vs so straitly ?

As for my loue, he is whyte and reade coloured, a synguler personne amonge many thousandes: his heade 1s the most fyne golde, the lockes of his hayre are buszshed, browne

? Eccl. 26. c. ê Canti. 4. a. 

Salomons Balettes, 

'as the euenynge: His eyes are as the eyes of doues by the water brokes, washen with mylck, and remaynynge in a plenteous place: His chekes are like a garden bedd, where in the
Apotecaryes plate all maner of swete thinges: 
His lippes droppe as the floures of the most pryncipall Myrre, his hades are full of golde rynges and precious stones. His body is as the pure yuery, decte ouer with Saphyres:
^ His legges are as the pilers of Marbell, sett vpon sokettes of golde: His face is as Liba- nus, and as the bewty of the Cedre trees:
His throte is swete, yee he is alltogether louely. 
Soch one is my loue (o ye doughters of Ieru- salem) soch one is my loue.

Whither is thy loue gone thé (o thou fayrest amonge wemé) whither is thy loue departed, that we maye seke him with the?

The ot. Chapter. 
Y loue is gone downe in to his garden, vnto y swete smellinge beddes, that he maye refresh himself in the garden, and gather floures. My loue is myne, and I am his, which fedeth amonge the lilies.

Thou art pleasaunt (o my loue) euen as louelynesse itself, thou art fayre as Ierusalem, glorious as an armye of men with their baners.
(Turne awaye thine eyes fro me, for they make me to proude.) * Thy hayrie lockes are like a flocke of goates vpon y mount of Galaad.
Thy teth are like a flock of shepe y be elypped, which go out of the washinge place: where euery one beareth two twyns, q not one vn- frutefull amóge them. ‘Thy chekes are like a pece of a pomgranate, besydes y which lyeth hid within. There are thre score quenes,
*foure score concubynes, and yonge wemé without nombre. But one is my doue, my derlynge. She is the onely beloued of hir mother, q deare vnto her that bare her. Wha the daughters sawe her, they sayde she was blessed: Yee the quenes and concubines praysed her. What is she this, that pepeth out as the mornynge? fayre as the Moone, excellent as the Sonne, glorious as an armye of men with their banners ?

I wente downe in to the nutt garden, to se what grew by the brokes, to loke yf the vyn-

arde florished, and yf the pomgranates were shot forth. Then the charettes of the prynce of my people inade me sodenly afrayed. Turne

* 8 Re. 11, a. 

Fo. dlrrri. 

B 

a 

B 

————————M——M———————————————— —————— 

To. blrrri. 
| [againe, turne againe (O thou Sulamite) turne 
| agayne, turne agayne, that we maye loke 

vpon the. 
The bij. Chapter. 
ILAT pleasure haue ye more in ¥ Sula- mite, than when she daunseth amonge the men of warre? O how pleasaunt are thy treadiuges with thy shues, thou prynces daughter? Thy thees are like a fayre iewell, whieh is wrought by a connynge workmaster :
Thy nauell is like a rounde goblett, which is neuer without drynke: Thy wombe is like an heape of wheate, sett aboute with lilies: Thy two brestes are like two twyns of yonge roes:
Thy neek is as it were a tower of yuery: 
Thyne eyes are like y water poles in Hesebon, besyde the porte’ of Bathrabbim : Thy nose is like the tower of Libanus, which loketh towarde Damascus: That heade that stondeth vpon the is like Carmel: The hayre of thy heade is like the kynges purple folden vp in plates.

O how fayre and louely art thou (my der- lynge) in pleasures? Thy stature is like a date tre, aud thy brestes like the grapes. I sayde: I wil elymme vp in to the date tre, and take holde of his brauuches. ‘Thy brestes also shalbe as the vyne grapes, the smell of thy nostrels like the smell of apples, and thy throte like the best wyne.

This shalbe pure v cleare for my loue, his hppes aud teth shal haue their pleasure.
There wil I turne me vnto my loue, and he shal turne him vnto me. O come on my loue, let vs go forth in to the felde, and take oure lodginge in the vyllages. In the mornynge wil we ryse by tymes, and go se the vynyarde : yf it be spronge forth, yf the grapes be growne, q yf the pomgrauates be shott out. There wil I geue the my brestes: There shal the
Mandragoras geue their smell besyde oure dores: There (o my loue) haue I kepte vnto the all maner of frutes, both new and olde.

The biij. Chapter. a THAT I might fynde the without q kysse ý, whom I loue as my brother

a 

The ende of Salomons Balettes, called Cantica Cantirorum. 

Fautes escaped in the pryntinge of this parte. 
In the syxte Chapter of Iob, the letter Gi, 
Within the yoke an egg, rede, Within the yoke of an egg. 
Tn the Psalter. 
| In the cxxxvi. psalme, the aeconde verse : 
Vpon the treea, rede, Vpon the wyllye trees. 

Salomons Balettes, 

Chap. bij. 

which suckte my mothers brestes: q that thou woldest not be offended, yf I toke the and brought the in to my mothers house: that thou mightest teach me, and that I might geue the drynke of spyeed wyne aud of the swete sappe of my pomgranates. ^ His lefte hande lyeth vnder my heade, « his right hande embraceth me.

I charge you (o ye daughters of Jerusalé) that ye wake not vp my loue ner touch her, tyll she be content herself. What is she this, that cometh vp from the wildernes, and leaneth vpon hir loue? I am the same that waked/33 the vp amonge the aple trees, where thy mother beare ¥, where thy mother brought the in to the worlde.

O set me as a seale vpo thine hert, and as a seale vpon thine arme: for loue is mightie as the death, q gelousy as the hell. Hir coales are of fyre, and a very flamme of the LORDE: so y many waters are not able to quench loue, nether maye y streames drowne it. Yee yfa man wolde gene all the good of his house for loue, he shulde counte it nothinge.

When oure loue is tolde oure yonge sister, whose brestes are not yet growne, what shal we do vnto her? Yf she be a wall, we shal buylde a syluer bollworke there vpon: Yf she be a tower, we shal festen her with bordes of
Cedre tre. 

Yf I be a wall, q my brestes like towres, then am I as one that hath founde fauoure iu his sight.

Salomon had a vynyarde at Baal Hamon, this vynyarde delyuered he vnto the kepers: y euery one for the frute therof shulde geue i5 a thousande peces of syluer. But my vynyarde (o Salomon) geueth the a thousande, and two hundreth to y kepers of the frute.

'Thou that dwellest in the gardens, O let me heare thy voyce, that my companyons maye herken to the same. O get the awaye
(my loue) as a roo or a yonge hert vnto the swete smellinge moütaynes.

a Cant. 2. a. 

| gorl 
Jeremp. Amos. 
Baruch. | Abyp. 
Gsechtel. | jonas, 
Daniel. i | HMicheas. 

@seas. Pam, 

—€—————————— MP — — — — — 

All the 33ropbrtes 

in Znglishe. 

Abacur, 
Sophonp. 
Aggeus. 
Zachary. ffalarbp.

| Cbr Prophet Esap. 

Chat Csap rontepnetb. 

Chap. I. 
The prophet rebuketh the people of Israel, for their abhominacions.

Chap. Il. 
The callynge of the Heithen. 

Chap. HI. 
Punyshmet of God, specially for the pryde of wemen.
Chap. III. 

Plages to come, wyth a promyse of the grace and conforte thorow Christ,

Chap. V. 
The louynge kyndnes of God towarde Israel, afore other people. Agayne, the vnthankful- nes and vnfaithfulnes of them.

Chap. VI. 

The sendynge of Esay. The harde hertes of the people.

Chap. VII. 

He rebnketh the kynge, for beynge afrayed of the vngodly kynges of the Heithen, and be- cause he put not his trnst in God. He geueth him a toke of grace, which he receaueth not.

Chap. VIII. 
The people forsake God, q seke helpe at the 
Heithen. 
Chap. IX. 
He putteth the in mynde of the mysery that is past. Of the comynge and kyngdome of
Christ. Punyshment for their pryde. 

Chap. X. 
Punyshment of vnrighteous rnlers. The comforte of Israel agaynst the pryde of the kynge of the
Assyrians. 

4 

Chap. XI. 
A prophecie of Christ. 

Chap. XII. 
A thankesgeuynge of the faithfull people. 

Chap. XIII. 

Punyshment to come vpon Babilon, by the Per- sians « Medes.

Chap. XIII. 
God will hane mercy on his people. eth Palestina.

Chap. XV. 
The plage of Moab. 

Chap. XVI. 
The vexacion ¢ feare of Moab. 

Chap. XVII 
Punyshmet of Damascus ¢ siria. 

He threten- 

Chap. XVIII. 
The callynge of the Heithen. 

Chap. XIX. XX. 
Plages vpon Egipte « Ethiopia. 

Chap. XXI 
The punyshmet of Babilon, Duma, and Arabia. 

Chap. XXII. 
The punyshment vpon lerusale by Senacherib. 
Sobna is put downe, Eliachim commeth in his steade.

Chap. XXIII. 
The punyshment of Tyre, of all the cities by the see coast, and of the Iles.

Chap. XXIIII. 

Of the generall punyshment of the whole earth vnto the ende of the worlde.

Che prophet Esap, 

Chap. XXV. 
A thakesgeuynge vnto God. The callinge of the Heithen.
Chap. XXVI. 
Men ought to trust onely 1 God. 

Chap. XXVII. 

The punyshment of Leuiathan. The goodnes of 
God. The delyneraunce of Israel. The call- ynge of the Heithen.

Chap. XXVIII. 
The punishment of Ephraim. Of mens lawes. 
Of the stone in Sion. 
Chap. XXIX. 

Punyshmet vpon Ierusalem for mens lawes and doctrynes.

Chap. XXX. 

Gods people are punyshed, for sekinge helpe at other then him self.

Chap. XXXI. 
He calleth the people agayne to God, and pro- miseth them defence.

Chap. XXXII. 

Health vnder the kynge of righteousnes. He threateneth the carelesse cities.

Chap. XXXIII. 
Punyshmet vpon the enemies of Gods people. 

Chap. XXXIIII. 
Gods plage vpon the Heithen. 

Chap. XXXV. 

A coforte, q secrete promyse concernynge the callynge of the Heithen.

Chap. XXXVI. 

Sennacherib the kinge of the Assirians sendeth his hoost to besege Iernsale.

Chap. XXXVII. 

The prayer of Ezechias. God cofarteth him by 
Esay. The angel of the LORDE pntteth the 
Assirians hoost to shame. 

Chap. XXXVII. 

Ezechias is deed sicke. God helpeth him vp agayne. He thanketh God.

Chap. XXXIX. 

The kynge of Babilon sendeth Embassitours vnto 
Ezechias, which sheweth them his treasure, q displeaseth God with all.

Chap. XL. 

The delyneraiice not onely of Israel out of the captiuyte of Babilon, but of all faithfnll also in Christ. The vanyte of ma. The excellent power of God.

Chap. XLI. 
God reasoneth with the Tewes qœ getiles, X re- 

proneth the people of Israel for their vn- thankfulnes.

Chap. XLII. 
The comynge q power of Christ. 

The praise of 
God. 

Punishment of the vngodly. 
Chap. XLIII. 

A prophecye of the comynge of the Sauioure. 

He putteth them in myndeof the benefites past. 
Chap. XLIII. 

Vnthakfulnes of the people. The vanite of Idols or ymages. The madd foolishnes of those that make the, or worshipe them.

Chap. XLV. 
The LORDE onely is the true God of Israel. 

Chap. XLVI. 

Of the destruccion of ymages. The power of the true God.

Chap. XLVII. 
Plages vpon proude Babilon. 

Chap. XLVIII. 
Agaynst the vanite of ymages. 

Chap. XLIX. 

The comynge @ office of Christ. the Iewes and for the gentyles.

Chap. L. 
The Tewes refused, because they haue forsaken their maker, and go a whoringe with strannge goddes.

Saluacio for 

Chap. LI. 
The mightie God hath euer done them good : yf they cleue to him, there shal no body hurte them.
Chap. LII. 
A promyse of Messias: He waketh vp the Iewes and Gentyles also to the commynge of him.

77. 

Fo. Dierrbt. 

Chap. LIII. 

He complayneth of the hardneckes of the people, q testifieth clearly of Christ.

Chap. LIII. 
One church of lewes q Getiles. 

Chap. LV. 
God calleth all men to his goodnes in Christ. 

Chap. LVI. 
How the church of Christ shulde prepare hir self agaynst his comynge. A complaynte of false prophetes and rulers.

Chap. LVII. 
He rebuketh the prophetes, rulers and the people, and promyseth mercy to all soch as wy! turne.

Chap. LVIII 
He putteth the prophetes in mynde of their office. 
What the true fast is. 

Chap. LIX. 
Why God heareth not the Iewes. 

HIS is the prophecy of Esay the sonne of Amos, which he shewed vpon Iuda and lerusalem: In the tyme of Osias,
Ioathan, Ahas, and Ezechias kynges of Iuda. 

The first Chapter. 

EARE o heauen, herken o earth,’ for 

the LORDE speaketh: I hane no- rished q brought vp children, and they are fallen awaye fro me. An oxe knoweth his lorde, and an Asse his masters stall but
Israel knoweth nothinge, my people hath no vnderstondinge. Alas for this synful people, which are experte in blasphemies, a frawerde generacion, vnnatural children. * They haue forsaken the LORDE, they haue prouoked the holy one of Israel vnto anger, and are gone baeward. Wherfore shulde ye be plaged eny more? For ye are euer fallinge awaye.
The whole heade is sick, and the herte is very heuy. “From the sole of the foote vnto the heade, there is no whole parte in all youre body : but all are woundes, botches, sores and

* Deut. 32, a. Mich. 1.a. Tere. 8. b. Osee 7. c. 
è? Paal, 88. c. Abac. 1. c. * Deut. 28. d. 

The prophet Esap. 

Chap. LX. 
He calleth vnto all soch as feare God, that they wyl knowe his goodnes.

Chap. LXI. 
The office of a prophet, fulfilled specially in Christ. 

Chap. LXII. 

The prophet maye not leaue of to crie, to warne, and to exorte, vntyll the light of grace aryse in Sion.

Chap. LXIII. 

An exortacion to receaue the Sauioure for to come. 

Chap. LXIII. 
He longeth sore for the commynge of the Sa- uioure, sheweth his power, & prayeth for the

people. 
Chap. LXV. 

of the forsakinge of the lewes, and callinge of 

the Heithen. 
Chap. LXVI. 
The outwarde ceremonies of the lewes are re- 

fused : and here is shewed the true seruyce of 
God. 

—A—EE—————————————————————— MÀ MS —À e Q 

strypes, which can nether be helped, bounde vp, molified, ner eased with eny oyntment.
^Youre londe lieth waist, youre cities are brent vp, youre enemies deuoure youre londe, and ye must be fayne to stonde, and loke vpon it: and it is desolate, as it were with enemies in a batell. Morouer y doughter of
Syon is left alone like a cotage in a vynyearde, like a watchouse in tyme of warre, like a be- seged citie. And excepte the LORDE of|33 hostes had left us a few alyue: ‘we shulde haue bene as Sodoma, q like vnto Gomorra.
^Heare the worde of the LORDE ye ty- rauntes of Sodoma: and herken vnto the lawe of oure God, thou people of Gomorra.
Why offre ye so many sacrifices vnto me? l am discontent for the brentoffringes of wethers, and with y fatnesse of fedbeastes. I haue no pleasure in the bloude of bullockes, lambes and gootes. When ye apeare before me, who requyreth you to treade within my porches? Offre me no mo oblacions, for it is but lost laboure. *I abhorre youre incense.

4 Leuit. 26. ¢Ro.9.f. Ss Tere. 7. c. Mat. 9. b. 
& Hiere. 6. e, Amos 5. b. Mich. 6. b. 

Chap. f. 

Chap. tj. 
I maye not awaye with youre newmoones, youre Sabbathes and solempne dayes. * Youre fastinges are also in vayne. I hate youre new holy dayes and fastinges, euen fro my very harte. ‘They make me weery, I can not abyde them. Though ye holde out youre hondes,
‘yet turne I myne eyes from you. And though ye make many prayers, yet heare I nothinge at all, for youre hondes are full of bloude.

Wash you, make you clene, “put awaye youre euell thoughtes out of my sight, cease from doinge of euell and violence. Lerne to do right, applie youre selues to equyte, de- lyuer the oppressed, helpe the fatherlesse to his right, let the wydowes complaynte come before you. Now go to (saieth the LORDE) we wil talke together. Is it not so? Though youre synnes be as read as scarlet, shal they not be whyter then snowe? And though they were like purple, shall they not be like whyte woll? Is it notso? Yf ye be louynge q obedient, ye shal enioye the best thinge that groweth in the londe. ¢ But yf ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shalbe deuoured with the swerde: for thus the LORDE hath pro- mised with his owne mouth.

How happeneth it then that the rightuous citie (which was full of equite) is become vnfaithfull as an whore? rightuousnes dwelt in it, but now murthur. ‘Thy Siluer is turned to drosse, and thy wyne myxte with water.
Thy prynces are traytours and companyons of theues. ‘They loue giftes altogether, and folowe rewardes. As for the fatherles, they helpe him not to his right, nether wil they let the wydowes causes come before them. Ther- fore speaketh the LORDE God of hostes the mighty one of Israel: Ah I must ease me of myne enemies, and a venge me vpo the. And therfore shal I laye my honde vpon the, and burne out thy drosse from the fynest and purest, and put out all thy leade, q set thy ludges agayne as they were somtyme, and thy
Senatours as they were from y begynnynge. 
*'l'hen shalt thou be called the rightuous citie, the faithful citie. But Sion shalbe redemed with equyte, and hyr captiuyte with rightuous- nesse. For the transgressours and vngodly, and soch as are become vnfaithful! vnto the

? Esa. 58. a. è Zach. 7. b. Mat. 6. b. Esa. 59. a. 
* Tere. 7.a. and 21.a. and22.a. 4 Deut. 11. b. Leui.26.d. 

Deut. 28. d. e Pro. 25. a. Eze.929.b. f Iere. 5. g. 

€ Zach. 8. à. ^ lere, 10. c. * Esa. 29. b. * Mich. 4. a. 

The prophet Esap. 

So. ulyyrbij. 
LORDE, must all together be vtterly de- stroyed.

And excepte ye be ashamed of the oke- trees wherin ye haue so delited, and of the gardés that ye haue chosen: ye shalbe as an oke whose leaues are fallen awaye, “and as a garden that hath no moystnesse. And as for the glory of these thinges, it shalbe turned to drie strawe, ‘and he that made them to a sparke. And they shal both burne to- eae so that no man shalbe able to quench them.

The ij. Chapter. 

OROUER this is the worde that was opened vnto Esaye the sonne of Amos, vpon Iuda and Ierusalem. It will be also in processe of tyme: *That the hill where the house of the LORDE is buylded, shalbe $ chefe amoge hilles, and exalted aboue al litle hille. ‘And al heithé shal prease vnto him and the multitude of people shall go vnto him, speakinge thus one to another: “vp, let us go to the hill of the LORDE, and to the house of ¥ God of Iacob: y he maye shewe us his waye, "and y we maye walke in his pathes. For ¥ lawe shal come out of Syon, and the worde of God from Ierusalem, and shal geue sentence amonge the heithen, and shal reforme the multitude of people : So that they shal breake their swerdes and speares, to make sythes, sycles q sawes therof.°
? From that tyme forth shal not one people lift vp wapen agaynst another, nether shal they lerne to fight from thensforth. It is to the that I erie (o house of Iacob) vp, let us walke in the light of the LORDE. But thou art scatred abrode with thy people (o house of Iacob) for ye go farre beyonde youre fathers, whether it be in Sorcerers (whom ye haue as the phylistynes had) or in calkers of mens byrthes, wherof ye haue to many. ?As soone as youre londe was ful of syluer and golde, and no ende of youre treasure: so soone as youre londe was ful of stronge horses and no ende of youre charettes : * Inmediatly was it ful of Idols also, euen workes of youre owne hondes, which ye youre selues haue facioned, and youre fyngers haue made. There kneleth the man, there falleth the man downe before
‘Zach. 8.d. ™ Paal.121.a. Iere.31.2. " Paal, 49.a. 

Acto.1.a, °Toel3.b. ? Mich.4.b. ? Deut.8. c.and 17. d. 
* Eaa. 44, h. 

So. Derr. them, so y thon canst not bringe him awaye from thence.

And therfore get soone in to some rock, 
“and hyde the in the grounde from the sight of the fearful iudge, and from y glory of his
Magestie. Which casteth downe y high lokes of presumptuous personnes, ‘and bryngeth lowe the pryde of ma, and he only shall be exalted in ý daye. For the daye of y LORDE of hostes chal go ouer all pryde œ presumpcio, vpon all thé that exalte thé selues, and shal bringe them all downe: vpo all high q stoute
Cedre trees of Libanus, and vpon all the okes of Basan, vpon all high hilles, and vpon all stoute mountaynes, vpon all costly towres, and vpon all stronge walles, vpon all shippes of the see, and vpon euery thinge y is glo- rious and pleasaunt to loke vpon.

° And it shall bringe downe the pryde of man, "and laye mans presumptuousnesse full lowe, and the LORDE shal only haue the victory in that daye. ‘But the Idols shal utterly be roted out. Men shal crepe in to holes of stone, Sand in to caues of the earth, from the sight of the fearfull iudge, and from the glory of his magesty: *what tyme as he shal make him vp to shake the earth. Then, thé shal ma cast awaye his goddes of syluer and golde (which he neuertheles had made to honoure thé) vnto Molles and Backes: that he maye the better crepe in to the caues and rockes, and in to the cliffes of hard stones, from y sight of the fearful iudge and from the glory of his Magesty.

The iij. Chapter. 

UERY man can eschue a persone moued 

in anger, for what doth he wysely ? Euen so shal ý LORDE of hoostes take awaye fro lerusalé q Iuda, all possessiós q power, all meat and drinke, y captayne and the soudyare, y iudge and the prophete, the wyse and the aged mà, the worshipful of fiftie yeare olde, and the honorable: the Senatours, and men of vnderstondinge : the masters of craftes and oratours. And I shal geue you children to be youre prynces (saieth the LORDE) and babes shall haue the rule of you. ^One shall euer be doinge violence and wronge to ano- ther. The boye shal presume agaynst the elder, and the vyle persone agaynst the honor-

* 2 Tess. 1.b. ? Esa. 5. b. 
* Luc. 23. c. Osez 10. b. 

4 Esa, 31. d. 
€ Esa. 31. b. 

* Sopb. 2. b. f Apo. 6. d.

The prophet Esap. 

able. Yee one shal take a frende of his owne kynred by $ bosome, and saye: thou hast clothinge, thou shalt be oure heade, for thou mayest kepe us from this fall and parell.

Then shall he sweare and saye: I can not helpe you. Morouer, there is nether meate ner clothinge in my house, make me no rueler of the people. For Ierusalem and Iuda must decaye, because that both their wordes and councels are agaynst the LORDE, they pro- uoke the presence of his magesty vnto anger.
The chaunginge of their countenaunce be- wrayeth them, yee they declare their owne synnes them selues, as the Sodomites, q hyde thé not. Wo be vnto their soules, for they shalbe heuely rewarded. Then shal they saye: O happie are the godly, for they maye enioye the frutes of their studies. * But wo be to y vngodly and vnrightuous for they shalbe rewarded after their workes. O my people, rybaudes oppresse y, and women haue rule of the.

O my people, thy leders deceaue the, and 
* treade out the waye of thy footsteppes. "The 
LORDE is here to comon of the matter, and stondeth to geue iudgment with the people.
'The LORDE shal come forth to reason with the Senatours and prynces of his people, "and shal saye thus vnto them: It is ye that haue burnt vp my vynyearde, the robbery of the poore is in youre house. Wherfore do ye oppresse my people, and marre y faces of the innocentes? thus shal the God of hoostes reuyle them.

Morouer thus saieth LORDE: Seinge the doughters of Sion are become so proude, and come in with stretched out neckes, and with vayne wanton eyes: seinge they come in trippinge so nycely with their fete: Therfore shal the LORDE shaue the heades of the doughters of Sion, and make their bewtie bare in that daye. In that daye shal the
LORDE take awaye the gorgiousnes of their apparel, and spanges, cheynes, partlettes, and colares, bracelettes and hooues, ý goodly floured, wyde and broderd raymét, brusshes and headbandes, rynges and garlades, holy daye clothes and vales, kerchues and pyunes, glasses and smockes, bonettes and taches.

And in steade of good smell there shalbe stynck amonge them. And for their gyrdles

Eze.20.e. ^ Pro.28. b. 

i Roma. 2. a. Matth. 16. d. 
* Esaiz 28. b. i 

!Jud.1.c. —* Esajæ 5. a 

Chap. iij. | 

5 

€ | 

Chap. b. 

there shalbe lowse bondes. And for wellset hayre there shalbe baldnesse. In steade of a stomacher, a sack cloth, and for their bewty wythrednesse and sonneburnynge. ‘Their hus- bondes and their mightie men shall perish with the swerde in batell.

The iiij. Chapter. 

T that tyme shall their gates mourne and 

A complayne, and they shal syt as desolate folck vpon the earth. Then shal seuen wyues take holde of one man, and saye: we will laye all oure meat and cloothinge together in comon, only that we maye be called thy wyues, and that this shamefull reprofe maye be také from us. “After that tyme shal the braunch of $ LORDE be beutiful and mightie, and y frute of the earth shalbe fayre and pleasaunt^ for those Israelites that shall springe therof. ‘Then shall the remnaunt in
Sion and the remnaunt at Ierusalem be called holy: namely al soch as are written amonge the lyuynge at Ierusalem: what tyme as the
LORDE shall wash awaye the desolacion of the doughters of Sio, ad pourge the bloude out from lerusale, with y wynde of his smoke and fyre.
à Morouer vpon all the dwellinges of the hill of Sion and vpon their whole congrega- cion, shal the LORDE prouyde a cloude and smoke by daye, and the shyninghe of a flam- mynge fyre by night, for all their glory shalbe preserued. And Ierusalem shall be a taber- nacle for a shadowe because of hete in the daye tyme, a place and refuge where a man maye kepe him for wether and rayne.

The b. Chapter. 

4| N TOW well than, I will synge my beloued 

frende a songe of his vynyearde. ^My beloued frende hath a vyneyearde in a very frutefull plenteous grounde. This he hedged, this he walled rounde aboute, and planted it with goodly grapes. In the myddest of it buylded he a towre, and made a wyne presse therin. And afterwarde when he loked y it it shulde bringe him grapes, it brought forth thornes. I shewe you now my cause (o ye
Citysens of Jerusalem and whole Inda:) 
Iudge I praye you betwixte me: and my wynegardinge. "What more coude haue bene

a Zach. 3. b. 
4 Jere. 2. d. 

* Tere. 2. c. Matth. 21. d. f£ Iob 21. b.

5 Taaize 62. c. e Esaiz 32. c. and 56. c.

Che prophet Esap. 

done for it, that I haue not done? Wher- fore then hath it geuen thornes, where I loked to haue had grapes of it.

Well, I shall tell you how I will do with my vynyarde: I will take the hedge from it, that it maye perish, and breake downe ¥ wall, that it maye be troden vnder fote. I will laye it waist, that 1t shall nether be twysted nor cut, but beare thornes and breares. I wil also forbyd y cloudes, that they shal not rayne vpon it. As for the vynyarde of the LORDE of hoostes it is the house of Israel, and whole
Inda his fayre plantinge. Of these he loked for equyte, but se there is wronge: for right- uousnesse, lo, It is but misery.

Wo to you that ioyne one house to another, and bringe one londe so nigh vnto another, till ye can get no more grounde. * Wil ye dwell vpon the earth alone? The LORDE of hoostes rowneth me thus: i myne eare: shal not many greater and more gorgious houses be so waist, that no man shall dwell in the? And ten akers of vynes shal geue but a Quarte, and xxx. bushels of sede shal geue but thre.

Wo be vnto them that ryse vp early to vse them selues in dronkynnes, and yet at night are more superfluous with wyne. In whose companies are harpes and lutes, /tabrettes and pipes, and wyne. But they regarde not the worke of the LORDE, * and cosidre not the operacio of his hondes. Therfore cometh my folck also in captiuyte, ^ because they haue no vnderstondynge. Their glory shalbe myxte with hüger, and their pryde shalbe marred for thurste. "Therfore gapeth hel, and openeth hyr mouth marvelous wyde: that pryde, boost- inge and wisdome, with soch as reioyse therin, maye descende in to it.

‘Thus shal man haue a fall, he shalbe brought lowe, and the high lokes of the proude layde downe. But the LORDE of hoostes, y holy God: shalbe exalted and vn- touched, when he shal declare his eqnyte and rightuousnesse after this maner. ‘Then shal y lambes eate their apoynted foder, and shal fede plenteously in the mountaynes. Wo vnto vayne persones, that drawe wickednes vnto the, as it were with a coorde: and synne, as it were with a cart rope. Which vse to speake on this maner: let him make haist now, and
^ Osee +. b. Abac. 2. b. 

€ Amos 6. a. * Esaiz 2. b. 

Fo. dierrir. | 

3 

So. dye. 

go forth with his worke, that we maye se it. 
“Let the councel of y holy one of Israel come, and drawe nie, y we maye knowe it.

* Wo vnto them that call enel good, and good euel: which make darcknesse light, q light darcknesse, y make sower swete, and swete sower. Wo vnto them that are wyse in their owne sight, and thinke them selues to haue vnderstodinge. “Wo vnto them, y are connynge men to suppe out wyne, and experte to set vp drokénesse. “These gyue sentence with the vngodly for rewardes, but condemne the iust cause of the rightuous.

F| Therfore, like as fyre licketh vp the strawe, 

i 

and as the flame cosumeth the stubble: Euen so (when their root is ful,) their blossome shal vanish awaye like dust or smoke, *for they despyse the lawe of the LORDE of hoostes, and blaspheme the worde of the holy maker of Israel.

'Therfore is the wrath of the LORDE kyn- dled also agaynst his people, and he shaketh his honde at them : yee he shal smyte so, that the hilles shal tremble. And their carcases shal lye in the opé stretes, like myre. ^ After all this, the wrath of God shall not ceasse, but he shal stretch his hode wyder. And he shal gyue a toké vnto a straunge people, * and call vnto them in a farre countre: and be- holde, they shal come hastely with spede.
There is not one faynt nor feble amonge them, no not a slogish nor slepery parsone.
There shal not one of them put of the gyrdle from his loynes, ner lowse the lachet of his shue. Their arowes are sharpe, and their bowes bent. Their horse hoofes are like flynt, and their cart wheles like a stormy wynde.
Their erie is as it were of a lyon, and the roaringe of them like lyons whelpes. "They shal roare, and hatch vp the praye, and no man shal reconer it or get it from thé. In that daye they shalbe so fearce vpon them, as the see. And yf we loke vnto the londe, beholde, it shalbe all darcknesse and sorowe.
Yf we loke to heauen: beholde, it shalbe darck with careful desperacion.

The bi. Chapter. ` 
N the same yeare y kynge Osias dyed, I sawe the LORDE ^sittinge vpon an high

a Pro. 20. c. * Pro. 17. c. Mich. 3. a. * Pro. 3. a. d Pro. 17. c. Deut. 17.a. Ezec. 13. d. * Nu. 11. g. f Esa.9.e. — t Esa.43.c. Dan.9.c. ^ 3 Reg. 22. c.

Cbr prophet Esap. 

and glorious seate, and his trayne fylled $ palace. From aboue flakred the Seraphins, wherof euery one had sex wynges. With twayne ech couered his face, with twayne his fete, and with twayne dyd he flye. They cried also ech one to other on this maner: holy, holy, holy is the LORDE of hoostes.'
The whole worlde is ful of his glory. Yee the geastes and dorechekes moued at their erienge, and the house was ful of smoke.
Then I sayde: O wo is me. For I was astonished: that I (which am a man of vn- clene lippes, and dwell amonge people y hath vnclene lippes also:) Shulde se ¥ Kynge and
LORDE of hoostes with myne eyes. 

Then flewe one of the Seraphins vnto me, hauinge a hote cole in his honde, which he had taken from the aulter with the tonges, and touched my mouth, and sayde: lo, this hath touched thy mouth, q thy vnrightouousnes is taken awaye, and thy synne forgeuen. After this I herde the voyce of the LORDE takinge

Chap. bi, 

5 

T 

advysement on this maner: Whom shall I|. 

sende, and who wilbe oure messaunger? Thē 
I sayde: here am I, sende me. And so he sayde: go, and tel this people: ye shall heare in dede, but ye shal not vnderstonde, * ye shal planely se, and not perceaue. Harden the harte of this people, stoppe their eares, and shut their eyes, that they se not with their eyes, heare not with their eares, and vnder- stonde not with their hartes, and conuerte and be healed.

Then spake I: LORDE, how longe? he answered: vntil the cities be vtterly without inhabitours, and $ houses without men, till the lode be also desolate, and lye vnbuylded.
For the LORDE shal take the men farre awaye, so that the londe shal lye waist. Ne- uertheles, the tenth parte shal remayne therin, for it shal conuerte and be fruteful And likewise as the Terebyntes and Oketrees bringe forth their frutes, so shal the holy sede haue frute.’

The bij. Chapter. 
T happened in the tyme of Ahas the sonne of Ionathas, "which was the sonne of
Ioathan Kynge of Iuda: that Rezin the Kinge of Siria, and Poca Romelies sonne, Kynge of

4 Reg.25.a. 2 Par. 6. d. ' Apoc. 4. c. * Matth. 13. b. 
Mar. 4.2. Luc.8.b. Act. 28. f. Iohà. 12. f. Rom. 11. b. 
! Galat. 3. c. " 4 Reg. 16. a. 2 Par. 28. a. 

n 

a 

Chap. biij. 

The prophet (sap. 

fo. drei. 

Israel: wente vp toward lerusalem to besege it (but wanne it not.) Now when the house of Dauid (that is Ahas) herde worde therof, y Siria and Ephraim were confederate to- gether: his herte quaked (yee and y hertes also of his people) like as a tre in the felde, that is moued with the wynde.

Then sayde God vnto Esay: go mete 
Ahas (thou and thy sonne Sear Jasub) at the heade of ¥ ouer pole, in the fote path by the fullers grounde, and saye vnto him : take hede to thy self and be still, but feare not, nether be faynt harted, for these two tales: that is: for these two smokynge fyre brandes, the wrath and furiousnes of Rezin the Sirian and
Romelies sonne: because that the Kynge of 
Siria Ephraim and Romelies sonne haue 

33 wekedly conspyred agaynst the, sayenge : We will go downe in to Iuda, vexe the, and brynge them vnder vs, and set a Kynge there, euen the sonne of Taball. For thus saieth the
LORDE God ther to, It shall not so go forth, nether come so to passe: for the head citie of y Sirians is Damascus, but the head of Damascus is Rezin. And after fyue and threscore yeare, shal Ephraim be nomore a people. And the chefe citie of Ephraim is
Samaria, but the head of Samaria is Romelies sonne, And yf ye beleue not, there shall no promyse be kepte with you."

Morouer, God spake vnto Ahas, sayenge : requyre a token of the LORDE thy God, whether it be towarde the depth beneth or towarde y hight aboue. Thé sayde Ahas: I will requyre none, nether will I tempte the
LORDE. The LORDE answered: Then heare to, ye of the house of Dauid: Is it not ynough for you, that ye be greuous vnto men,

€ |but ye must greue my God also? And ther- 

fore the LORDE shal geue you a token of him self: ê Beholde, a virgin shal coceaue and beare a sonne, and shal call his name

Emanuel. Butter and hony shal he eate, y 

he maye knowe the euel, and chose y Bud. 

But or euer that childe come to knowlege, to 

eschue the euel and chose the good: The londe (that thou art so afrayde for) shalbe desolate of both hir kynges.

'The LORDE also shal sende a tyme vpon the, vpon thy people, and vpo thy fathers

house (soch as neuer came sence the tyme y 

a Heb. 3. b. ° Luc. 1. d. Math. 1. d. 
Esa. 36.a. 4 2 Par. 22. e. 

* 9 Par. 32. a. 
* Eaa. 30. b. 

Ephraim departed from Iuda) thorow y kynge of the Assirians. For at the same tyme shal the LORDE whistle for the flyes y are aboute the water of Egipte, “and for ý Beyes in the
Assirians londe. These shall come, and shal light all in the valeyes, in ý vowtes of stone, vpon all grene thinges, and in all corners.

At the same tyme shal the LORDE shaue the hayre of the heade and the fete and the beerd clene of, with the rasoure that he shall paye them withall beyonde the water : namely, with y kynge of the Assirians. At the same tyme shall a man lyue with a cowe, and two shepe. Then because of the aboundaunce of 34 mylck, ^he shal make butter and eat it. So that euery one which remayneth in the londe, shal eate butter and hony. At the same tyme all vynyardes (though there be a thousand

es in one, and were solde for a thousand siluerlinges) shalbe turned to brears and thornes. Like as they shal come in to the londe with arowes and bowes, so shal all the londe become brears and thornes. And as for all hilles that now are hewen downe, thou shalt not come vpó them, for feare of brears and thornes. But the catel shal be dryuen thither, and the shepe shal fede there.

The biij. Chapter. 

OROUER the LORDE sayde vnto h me : ° Take the a greate leaf, and wryte in it, as men do with a penne, that he spede him to robbe, and haist him to spoyle. And
Inmediatly I called vnto me faithful wyt- nesses: Vrias the prest, and Zacharias y sonne of Barachias. After that went I vnto the prophetisse, that now had conceaued and borne a sonne. Then sayde the LORDE to me: gene him this name: Maherschalal haschbas, that is. a spedie robber, an hastie spoyler. For why, or euer the childe shal haue knowlege to saye: Abi and Im, y is father, and mother: shal y riches of Damascus and y substaunce of Samaria be take awaye,
Jthorow the kynge of y Assirians. 

'The LORDE spake also vnto me, sayenge: efor so moch as the people refuseth the stil- renninge water of Silo, and put their delite in Rezin and Romelies sonne: Beholde, the
LORDE shal bringe mightie and great floudes of water vpon them : namely, ^y kynge of the

f4 Re. 16. b. 4 Re. 17. a. 
Eaaim 30.a. Iohel9.a. 

€ Tere. 2. a. Psal. 123, a. 
^ 4 Reg. 18.c. Esaiz 36. a. 

So. dye. 
Assirians with all his power. Which shall poure out his furyousnes vpo euery man, and renne ouer all their bankes. And shal breake iu vpon Iuda, increasinge in power, till he get him by the throte. He shal fyl also the wyde- uesse of thy londe with his brode wynges,

€|O Emanuel Go together ye people, and 

gather you, herken to all ye of farre coun- trees. — Mustre you, and gather you: mustre you and gather you, take youre councel to- gether, “yet must youre councel come to nought: go in honde withal, yet shal it not prospere. Excepte Emanuel: (that is God) be with us. For the LORDE chastised me, and toke me by $ honde, and warned me, sayeuge vnto me: that I shulde not walcke in the waye of this people. He sayde mor- ouer: rounde with none of the, who so euer saye: yonder people are bounde together.
ê Neuertheles feare them not, nether be afrayde of them, but sanctifie the LOR DE of hoostes, let him be youre feare and drede. For he is the sanctifienge, and stone to stomble at, y rock to fall vpon, a snare and net to both the houses: to Israel, and the inhabitours of Ieru- salem. And many shal stomble, fall, and be broké vpon him: yee they shalbe snared and taken.

5| Now laye the witnesses together (sayde the 

LORDE) “and seale the lawe with my dis- 

ciples. Thus I waite vpon the LORDE, 

that hath turned his face from the house of 

Iacob, and I loke vnto him. — ^ But lo, as for 

me, and the children which the LORDE 

hath geuen me: we are a token and a wondre in Israel, for the LORDE of hoostes sake, which dwelleth vpon the hill of Syon.

And therfore yf they saye vnto you: aske councel at the soythsayers, witches, charmers and coniurers, then make them this answere:
Is there a people enywhere, that axeth not councel at his God: whether it be concernynge the dead, or the lyuynge? *Yf eny man want light, let him loke vpon the lawe and the testimony, whether they speake not after this meanynge. Yf he do not this, he stombleth and suffreth huger. And yf he suffre honger, he is out of pacience, and blasphemeth his kynge and his God. Then loketh he vp- warde, and downe warde to the earth, and

* Esaie 19, e. ^ 1 Pet.3. b. 4 eg. 17. g. Mattb. 10, d. 
1 Cor. 1.d. 1 Pet. 2. b. € Daniel 8. d. — 4 Heb. 2.d. e Psal. 19. /Matth.4. b. € 4 Reg. 15. f. 4 Reg. 17.8.

The prophet Csap, 

Chap. ty. 
(beholde, there is trouble and darcknesse, vexacion is rounde aboute him, and the cloude of erroure, And out of soch aduersite, shall he not escape.

The tr. Chapter. 

4 UEN like as in tyme past it hath bene|@ 

well sene, ‘that ¥ londe of Zabulon and the londe of Nepthali (where thorow the see waye goeth ouer lordane in to the londe of
Galilee) ¢was at the first in litle trouble, but afterward sore vexed.

Neuertheles ¥ people that haue dwelt in darcknesse, i se a greate light. As for them that dwel in the londe of the shadowe of death, vpon them shal the light shyne.
Shalt thou multiplie the people, and not in- crease the ioye also? “They shal reioyse before the euen as men make mery in haruest, and as men that haue gotten the victory, when they deale the spoyle. For thou shalt breake the yocke of the peoples burthen : the staff of hys shulder, 'and the rod of his op- pressoure, as in ¥ daye at Madia.

Morouer all temerarious and sedicious power (yee where there is but a cote fyled with bloude) shalbe burnt, and fede the fyre.
For vnto us a childe shalbe borne, *and vnto us a sonne shalbe geué. Vpo his shulder shal the kyngdome lye, and he shalbe called with his owne name: "The woderous geuer of councel, the mightie God, the euerlastinge father the prynce of peace, he shal make no ende to encrease the kyngdome and peace, and shal syt vpon the seate of Dauid and in his kyngdome, to set vp the same, to stablish it with equyte and rightuousnesse, from thence forth for euermore. This shal the gelousy of the LORDE of hoostes bringe to passe.

The LORDE sent a worde in to lacob, |t the same is come in to Israel. All the peo- ple also of Ephraim, and they that dwel in
Samaria, can saye with pryde and hie sto- mackes, on this maner: ‘The tyle worcke is fallen downe, but we will buylde it with harder stones. ‘The Molbery tymbre ys broken, but we shal set it vp agayne with Cedre. Neuer- theles, the LORDE shal prepare Rezin the enemie agaynst the, and so ordre their aduer- saries, that y Sirians shal laye holde vpon

i Esaim 37.f. Iudi. 6. and 7. 
! Phil. 4. b. Daniel 2. g. 7. c. 

^ Psal. 118. x. Proner. 16.c. k Luce 1. c. Matth, 1. c.
Tobe. 12. d. 

€ bap. r. 

pi 

The prophet Esap. 

them before, and the Philistynes behynde, and so deuoure Israel with open mouth.

After all this, the “wrath of the LORDE shal not ceasse, but yet his hande shalbe stretched out still. For the people turneth not vnto him, that chastiseth them, nether do they seke the LORDE of hoostes. Ther- fore the LORDE shal rote out of Israel both heade and tale, braunch and twygge in one daye. By the heade, is vnderstonde the
Senatoure and honorable man, and by y tale, the prophet that preacheth lyes. For all they which enfourme the people that they be in a right case, soch be disceauers. Soch as men thynke also to be perfecte amonge these, are but cast awaye.

Therfore shal the LORDE haue no plea- sure in their yonge mē, nether fauoure their fatherlesse and wydowes. For thei are alto- gether ypocrites and wicked, and all their! mouthes speake foly. After all this shal not the LORDES wrath ceasse, but yet his honde shalbe stretched out still. For the vngodly burne, as a fyre in the bryers and thornes:,
And as it were out of a fyre in a wod or a redebush, so ascendeth the smoke of their pryde.

For this cause shal y wrath of the LORDE of hoostes fall vpon the londe, and the people shalbe consumed, as it were with fyre, no man shal spare his brother. Yf a man do turne him to the right honde, he shal famesh, or to the lefte hande to eat, he shal not haue ynough. Euery man shal eate the flesh of his owne arme: Manasses shal eate Eph- raim, and Ephraim Manasses, and they both shal eate Iuda. After all this shal not the
LORDES wrath ceasse, but yet shal his honde be stretched out still.

The r. Chapter. 

Ws be vnto you y make vnrightuous 

lawes,’ and devyse thinges, which be to harde for to kepe: wherthorow the poore are oppressed, on euery syde, and the inno- cétes of my people are there with robbed of iudgment: that wyddowes maye be youre praye, and that ye maye robbe the father- lesse. What will ye do in tyme of the visita- cion and destruction, that shal come from farre? To whom will ye renne for helpe? or

t Luc. 11. f. Mat. 23. a. Esa. 28. d Esaie 26. a. Tere, 25.

a Esa, 5. d. 10. a. 

a. 
* Esaiz 5. d. aud 9. c. b. | 

to whom will ye geue youre honoure, that he maye kepe it? that ye come not amonge the presoners, or lye amonge the deed? ^ After all this shal not the wrath of the LORDE ceasse, but yet shal his honde be stretched out still.

“Wo be also vnto Assur, which is a staff of my wrath, in whose honde is the rod of my punyshment. For I shal sende him amonge those ypocritish people, amonge the people that haue deserued my disfauoure shal I send him: that he maye utterly robbe them, spoyle them, and treade them downe like the myre in the strete. Howbeit his meanynge is not so, nether thinketh his harte of this fashion.
But he ymagineth only, how he maye ouer- throwe and destroye moch people, for he saleth: are not my princes all kynges? Is not
Calno as easie to wynne, *as Charchamis? Is it harder to conquere Antiochia then Arphad?
Or is it lighter to ouercome Damascus thé 
Samaria? As who say: I were able to wynne the kingdome of the Idolaters and their goddes, but not lerusalem and Samaria. Shal I not do vnto lerusalem and their ymages, as I dyd vnto Samaria and their ymages ?

Wherfore the LORDE saieth: As soone as 
I haue perfourmed my whole worcke vpon the Hyl of Syon and Jerusalem: thé will I also vyset the noble and stoute kynge of
Assiria, with his wysdome and pryde. For he stondeth thus in his owne coceate : / This do I, thorow the power of myne owne honde, and thorow my wisdome: For I am wyse, I am he that remoue the londes of the people,
I robbe their prynces: and (like one of the worthies) I dryue them from their hie seates.
My honde hath founde out the hoostes of the people, as it were a nest. And like as egges, that were layde here and there, are gathered together: So do I gather all countrees. And there is no man, y darre be so bolde, as to touch a fether, that darre open his mouth, or once whisper.

* But doth the axe boost itself, agaynst him y heweth therwith, or doth the sawe make eny krakinge, agaynst him that ruleth it?
That were euen like, as yf the rod dyd exalte it self agaynst him, thàt beareth it: or as though ¥ staff shulde magnifie it self, as who saye: it were no wodd. “Therfore shal the

f Deut. 8. d. Esa.47. b. 
2 Jospo 37 S 

Eze.21. b. 
Eze. 29. b. 

* 4 Reg. 18. f. 
€ Esa. 45. b. Rom. 9. c. 

73 

Fo. dreit, 

B 

So. uyrülj. 
LORDE of hoostes sende him pouerte in his riches, and burne vp his power, as it were with a fyre. “But the light of Israel shalbe y fyre, and his Sanctuary shalbe the flame, and it shal kyndle, and burne vp his thornes and breyers in one daye, yee all the glory of his woddes and feldes shalbe consumed with body and soule. As for him self, he shalbe as one chased awaye. ‘The trees also of his felde shalbe of soch a nombre, that a childe maye tell then.

After y daye shal the remnaunt of Israel, and soch as are escaped out of the house of lacob, seke no more cóforte at him that smote them, but shal conforte them selues with faith- fulnesse and treuth in the LORDE, the holy, one of Israel. ° The remnaunt, yee and the
Posteryte of Iacob, shal couerte vnto God the mighty one. For though thy people (o Israel) be as the sonde of the see, yet shal but the remnaunt of them only conuerte vnto him.
Perfecte is the 1udgmét of him that floweth in rightuousnesse: and therfore ý LORDE of hoostes shal perfectly fulfil the thinge, that he hath determyned in the myddest of the whole worlde. Therfore thus saieth the
LORDE God of hoostes: Thou my people, that dwellest in Sion, be not afrayde for the kinge of the Assirians: He shal wagg his staff at the, yee and beate the with the rodd, as the Egiptias dyd sometyme: But soone after, shal my wrath and my indignacion be fulfylled agaynst their blasphemies.

Morouer the LORDE of hoostes shal pre- pare a scourge for him, ‘like as was the punysh- met of Madia vpo y mount of Oreb. ^ And he shal lift vp his rod ouer the see, as he dyd somtyme ouer the Egiptians. Then shal his burthen be taken from thy shulders, and his yock from thy neck, yee the same yock shal corrupte for very fatnesse, He shal come to
Aiath, and go thorow toward Migron. But at Machmas shal he muster his hooste, and go ouer y foorde. Gaba shal be their restinge place, Rio shalbe afrayde, Gabea Saul shal fle awaye. The voyce of ¥ noyse of thy horses (o doughter Gallim) shalbe herde vnto lais and to Anathoth, which also shalbe in trouble. Madmena shal tremble for feare, but the citesyns of Gabim are màly, yet shal

* Mat. 13. a. 63 Re.19.c. Ro.9.c. Esa. 28. f. and 11. c. € Esa. 37. f. Indic. 7. g. 4 Exo, 14. c.
* Mat. 1. a. Esa. 61. a. Luc. 4. b. and7. c. / 2 Thea. 2. b. 

The prophet Esap, 

Chap. rt. he remayne at Nob that daye. After that, shal he lift vp his honde agaynst the mount
Sion, and agaynst the hill of Ierusalem. But se, the LORDE God of hoostes shal take awaye the proude from thence, with feare. He shal hew downe the proude, and fel the hie mynded. The thornes of the wod shal be rooted out with yron, and Libanus shal haue a mightie fal.

The ri. Chapter. 
FTER this there shal come a rod forth}@ of ý Kynrede of lesse,* and a blossome out of his rote. The sprete of the LORDE shal light vpon it: the sprete of wysdome, and vnderstondinge: the sprete of councel, and strength: y sprete of knowlege, and of the feare of God: and shal make him feruent in the feare of God. For he shal not geue sentéce, after the thinge y shal be brought before his eies, nether reproue a matter at the first hearinge : but with rightousnesse shal he iudge the poore, and with holynes shal he refourme the symple of the worlde.

‘He shal smyte ý worlde with y staff of his mouth, q with $ breath of his mouth shal he slaye the wicked. € Rightuousnesse shalbe the gyrdle of his loynes, treuth aud faithfulnesse the gyrdinge vp of his raynes.
"Thé shal y wolfe dwel with the labe, and the leoparde shal lye downe by the gote.^ Bul- lokes, lyons and catel shal kepe company together, so that a litle childe shal dryue them forth. ‘The cowe and the Bere shal fede to- gether, and their yongones shal lye together.
The ly6 shal eate strawe like the oxe, or the cowe. The childe whyle he sucketh, shal haue a desyre to the serpentes nest, and whe he is weened, he shal put his hande in to the
Cockatryce denne. ‘Noman shal do euel to another, no man shal destroye another, in all the hill of my Sanctuary. For the earth shalbe ful of $ knowlege of y LORDE, euen as though the water of the see flowed ouer the earth.

Then shal the Gentiles enquere after the rote of lesse (which shalbe set vp for a token vnto the Gentiles) for his dwellinge shalbe glorious. ‘At the same tyme shal the LORDE take in honde agayne, ‘to conquere y remnaunt

^ Esa. 65. d. 
Ro. 15. b. 

i Esa. 65. d. Abac. 2. b. 

€ Ephe. 6. b. k ! Esa. 10. d.

Chap. rij 

D 

B 

of his people (which are lefft alyue) From the Assiriās, Egiptians, Arabians, Morians,
Elamites, Caldeyes, Antiochias and llodes of the see. ^ And he shal set vp a toké amonge the Gentiles, and gather together y dispersed of Israel, yee and the outcastes of Iuda from the foure corners of y worlde. The hatred of
Ephraim, and y enmyte of Iuda shalbe clene rooted out. ED shal beare no euel wil to Iuda, and luda shal not hate Ephraim: but they both together shal flye vpo the shulders of the Philistynes toward the West, and spoyle them together that dwell toward the East. 'The Idumytes and the Moabites shal let their hodes fall, and the Ammonites shalbe obedient vnto them.

The LORDE also shal cleue the tunges of the Egipcias see, and with a mightie wynde shal he lift vp his honde ouer Nilus, and shal smyte his seué streames and make men go ouer drye shod. And thus shal he make a waye for his people, y remayneth from the
Assirians, ‘like as it happened to y Israelites, what tyme they departed out of the londe of
Egipte. 

The rij. Chapter. 

O that then thou shalt saye: O LORDE, 
I thanke the, for thou wast displeased at me, but thou hast refrayned thy wrath, and hast mercy vpon me. ‘ Beholde, God is my health, in whom 1 trust, and am not afrayde.
For the LORDE God is my strength, and my prayse, he also shalbe my refuge. Ther- fore with ioye shal ye drawe water out of the welles of the Sauioure, and then shal ye saye:
? Let vs geue thankes vnto the LORDE, and call vpon his name, and declare his councels amonge the people, and kepe them in re- membraunce, for his name is excellet. O synge praises vnto the LORDE, for he doth greate thinges, as it is knowne in all the worlde. Crie out, and be glad, thou that dwellest in Sion, for greate is thy prince: the holy one of Israel.

The rij. Chapter. 

a HIS is DAI burthé of Babilo, which t

Esaye the sonne of Amos dyd se. Make some tokes to the hie hilles, *call vnto them, holde vp youre hode, that the prynces maye

5 Exo. 14. f. * Ábac. 3. c. Exo. 15. a. 
4 Psal. 104. a, 1 Para. 16. b. * Iere, 50. a. 

gucie 
Paal. 117. b. 

Che prophet Esap. 

go in at the dore. For I will sende for my debites and my gyaŭtes (sayeth the LORDE) and in my wrath I will call for soch, as tryumphe in my glory.

J With that, me thought I herde in the moütaynes, a noyse, like as it had bene of a greate people: and a ruszshinge, as though the kyngdomes of all nacions had come toge- ther. (And the LORDE of hoostes was the captayne of the whole armye.) As they had come not only out of farre countrees, but also from the endes of the heaués: Eué the
LORDE himself with the ministers of his wrath, to destroye the whole lode. Mourne therfore, for the daye of the LORDE is at honde, and commeth as a destroyer from ý allmighty. ‘Then shall all hondes be letten downe, and all mens hertes shal melt awaie, they shal stonde in feare, carefulnesse and sorowe shal come vpo them, and they shal haue payne, as a woman that traueleth with childe. *One shall euer be abaszshed of another, « their faces shal burne, like $ flame.

For lo, the daye of the LORDE shall come, terrible, full of indignacion and wrath: to make the londe waist, and to root out the synne therof. For the starres and planetes of heauen shal not geue their light, the Sonne shalbe quenched in the rysinge, ^and the
Mone shal not shyne with his light. And I wil punysh the wickednesse of the worlde, q the synnes of the vngodly, sayeth the LORDE.
The hye stomackes of the proude will I take awaye, and will laye downe the boostinge of tyrauntes. I wil make a man dearer the fyne golde, and a man to be more worth, thé a golden wedge of Ophir. Morouer, I will so shake the heaue, that the earth shall remoue out of hir place.

Thus shall it go with Babilon, in the wrath of the LORDE of hoostes in y daye of his fearfull indignació. And Babilon shalbe as an hunted or chased doo, and as a flocke with- out a shepherde. Euery ma shal turne to his owne people, q fle echone in to his owne londe. "Who so is founde alone, shalbe shot thorow: And who so gather together, shalbe destroyed with the swerde. "Their children shalbe slayne before their eyes, their houses spoyled, q their wyues rauyshed. For lo, I shall bringe vp ¥ Medes agaynst thé, which

J 4 Re. 7. b. 2 Mac. 5.a. £ Nail. 2. c. 
Toel 2. b. and 3. c. 

^ Ezec. 32. b. 

So. dreb. 

€ 

fo. drebi. shal not regarde syluer, nor be desyrous of golde. Then shall yonge mens bowes be knapped asunder. The Medes shal haue no pitie vpo womé with childe, q their faces shall not spare y childré. And Babilo (y glory of kigdomes and bewtie of the Caldees honoure) shalbe destroyed, enë as God destroyed Sodom q Gomorra.* It shal neuer be more inha- bited, nether shal there be eny more dwell- inge there, from generacion to generacion.
The Arabians shall make no mo tentes there, nether shall the shepardes make their foldes there eny more: bnt wylde beastes shal lie there, q Y houses shalbe full of greate
Oules. Estriches shal dwell there, q Apes shal daunse there: The litle Oules shall crie in the palaces, one after another, ¢ Dragos shalbe in the pleasaut perlours. And as for
Babilons tyme, it is at honde, q hir dayes 

maye not be longe absent. 

UT $ LORDE wilbe mercyfull vnto 
B eens q wyll take vp Israel agayne, q set thé in their owne lode. Strangers shal cleue vnto thé, q get the to y house of Iacob.
è They shal take y people, q cary thé home with the. And y house of Israel shal haue thé in possession, for seruaiites ¢ maydés in y lóde of LORDE. ‘They shal take those prisoners, whose captyues they had bene afore: q rule those, y had oppressed the. When y
LORDE now shal bringe ¥ to rest, fro y tra- uayle, feare, q harde bondage y thou wast laden with all: then shalt thon vse this mockage vpon ¥ kinge of Babilon, q saye: How hap- peneth it y $ oppressour leaueth of? Is y golden tribute come to an ende? Doutles the
LORDE hath broken the staff of the vngodly, 
& the cepter of y lordly. Which whé he is wroth, smyteth y people with durable strokes, tin his woders he persecuteth the, q tameth thé cotinually. And therfore y whole worlde is now at rest and quyetnesse, q men synge for ioye.

Yee euen the Fyrre trees and Cedres of 
Libanus reioyse at thy fall, sayenge: Now y thon art layde downe, there come no mo vp to destroye vs. Hell also trembleth at thy commynge. All mightie men and prynces of the earth, steppe forth before the. All kynges of the earth stonde vp fró their seates, that

The riiij. Chapter. 

? Gen. 19. c. ^ Abdie 1.d. Zach. 2. b. * Luc. 10. c. 

The prophet Esap. 

they maye all (one after another) synge and speake vnto the. Art thou wounded also as
|we? art thou become like vnto vs? Thy pompe and thy pryde is gone downe to hell:*
Mothes shalbe layde vnder the, q wormes shalbe thy coueringe.

How art thou fallen from heanen^ (o Luci- fer) thou faire mornige childe? hast thou gotten a fall euen to the gronnde, thon that
(notwithstondinge) dyddest subdue the peo- ple? And yet thou thonghtest in thine harte:
I will clymme vp in to heauen, and make my seate abone the starres of God, I wyll syt vpon the glorious mount toward the North, I wyll clymme vp aboue the cloudes, q wilbe like the highest of all. Yet darre I laye, ý thou shalt be brought downe to the depe of hell. “They that se the, shal narowly loke vpo the, and thinke in them selnes, sayenge :
Is this the man, that brought all londes in feare, and made y kingdomes afrayde: Is this he that made the worlde in a maner waist, q layde the cities to the grounde, which let not his prisoners go home ?

How happeneth it, that the kynges of all people lie, euery one at home in his owne palace, with worshipe, and thou art cast out of thy graue like a wilde braunch: like as dead mens rayment that are shott thorow with the swerde: as they that go downe to the stones of the depe: as a dead coarse that is troden vnder fete: and art not buried with them? Euen because that thou hast waisted thy lode, and destroyed thy people. For the generacion of the wicked shalbe without honoure, for euer. There shal a waye be sought to destroye their childré, for their fathers wickednes: they shal not come vp agayne to possesse the londe, and fyll the worlde ful of castels and townes.

I wil stonde vp agaynst them (sayeth the 
LORDE of hoostes) and root out y name and generacion of Babilon (saieth the LORDE) t wil geue it to the Otters, and wil make water poddels of it. And I wil swepe them out with the besome of destruccion, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. The LORDE of hoostes hath sworne an ooth, sayege: It shal come to passe as I haue determined: q shalbe fulfilled as I haue denysed. ‘The Assirians shalbe destroyed in my londe, and vpon my mountaynes wyll I treade them vnder fote. f Esa, 37. a.

4 Apo. 12. d. * Eze. 31. c. Eze. 32. c. 

Chap. riii. 

D 

33 | herde vnto Jahaz. 

Chap. rbi. 
Wher thorow his yocke shall come from you, q his burthen shalbe taken from youre shulders.
This deuyce hath God taken thorow the whole worlde, and thus is his honde stretched out ouer all people. For yf the LORDE of hoostes determe a thinge, who wy! dysanulle it? And yf he stretch forth his honde, who wil holde it in agayne?

The same yeare that kynge Achas dyed, 
God threatned by Esay on this maner: “ Re- ioyse not (thou whole Palestina) as though ¥ rod of him y beateth the were broken: For out of ¥ serpentes rote, there shal waxe a kockatrice, q the frute shalbe a fyrie worme.
But the poore shall fede of the best thinges, and the symple shal dwell in safetie. ^'lhy rotes wil I destroye with honger, and it shall slaye thy remnaunt. Mourne ye portes, wepe ye Cities. And feare thou (o whole Palestina) for there shal come fro the North a smoke, whose power no man maye abyde. Who shall then maynteyne the messages of the
Gentyles? But the LORDE stablisheth 
Syon, q the poore of my people shall put their trust in him.

The yb. Chapter. 
A HIS is y heuy burthé vpo Moab: Ar of 
T Moab was destroyed (as me thought) in the night season: “The walles of Moab perished in the night, « vanished awaye: They wēte to Baith and Dibon in the hie places, for to wepe: Moab did mourne fro Nebo to
Medba: All their heades were colled, and al their beardes shauen. In their stretes were they gyrded aboute with sack cloth. In all the toppes of their houses q stretes was there nothinge, but mournynge and wepinge. He- sebon and Eleale cried, that their voyce was
The worthies also of Moab bleared and cried for very sorow of their myndes: Wo is my hert for Moabs sake.
They fled vnto the cite of Zoar, which is like a fayre fruteful bullock, they went vp to
Luhith, wepinge. ‘The waye toward Horo- naim was ful of lamentacion for y hurte. The waters of Nimrim were dried vp, the grasse was wythred, the herbes destroyed, a what necessary grene thinge there was besyde. In like maner the thinge y was left them of their substaunce, they caried it by water to Araby.

a Tere. 47. a. 
è 4 Reg. 1. b. 

Ezec. 25.c. Soph.2.a. 3 Reg. 12. b. 
€ Eze. 25. b. Soph.2.b. Tere. 48. f. 

Che prophet Esap. 

from Eglaim vnto Beer, was there nothinge but mournynge. ‘The waters of Dimon were full of bloude, for y enemie had sent thither a bonde of men, which as a lyon, layde waite for the remnaunt of the londe, and for them y were escaped.

The rbi. Chapter. 
HEN sent the lordes of the lode a ma of warre, from the rocke that lieth to- ward the deserte, vnto the hill of the doughter
Sion (For as for the doughters of Moab, they were as it had bene a trymblinge byrde, y is put out of hir nest, by the fery of Arnon) which messaunger sayde: gather youre coun- cel, come together, couer vs with youre sha- dowe in the myddaye, “as the night doth: hyde the chased, « bewraye not the that are fled, let the persecuted Moabites dwel amoge you, be oure open refuge agaynst the de- stroyer: for the aduersary oppresseth vs, the robber vndoeth vs, q the tyraunte dryueth vs out of oure londe. But y Trone of youre kingdome is ful of grace, therfore he that syt- teth vpon it with faithfulnesse q treuth in the house of Dauid, knowe the thinge q do his diligence to helpe shortly, acordinge to Equite and rightuousnes. As for Moabs pride (shal they answere) it is wel knowne. ‘And all though they be excellent, proude, arrogant, a hie mynded: yet is their strength nothinge like. And therfore Moab complayneth vnto
Moab, wher thorow they come all to mourne: a now y they be smytten, they take their deuyce beneth by the bryckwall and make their coplaynte.

The suburbes also of Hesebon were made waist, t the princes of the Gentyles hewed downe y vynyardes of Sibma, which were planted with noble grapes, and spred vnto
Iazer, and went vnto the ende of the deserte, whose braunches stretched their selues forth beyonde the see. Therfore I mourned for lazer, a for y vynyardes of Sibma with greate sorow. I poured my teares vpon Hesebon q
Eleale, for all their songes were layde downe, in their haruest ¢ gatheringe of their grapes:
Myrth and chere was gone out of y felde q 

'vynyardes, in so moch, that no man was glad 

ner sunge. ‘There wéte no treader in to the 

Eze. 7. c. 

4 Tere. 48. b. Act. 18. b. f Tere. 48. c. Ezec. 25. b.

* Esa. 21. c. 

So. nyrbij. 

The erie went ouer the whole londe of Moab:! € 

a 

€ 

So. dyrebitj. 

S 

| 

' wynepresse, their mery chere was layde downe. ne my bely robled (as it had bene a
‘lute) for Moabs sake, q myne inwarde mem- 
|bres, for the bryckwalles sake. For it hap- pened thus also: whé Moab sawe that she was turned vp syde downe: “she went vp an hie in to hir sanctuary, to make hir prayer there, but she might not be helped. This is the deuyce, which the LORDE toke in honde at that tyme agaynst Moab. But now the
LORDE sayeth thus: In thre yeare shal y power of Moab with their pope (which is greate) be minished, like as y burthe of an hyred seruaunte: And as for ¥ remnaunt of them, they shalbe lesse then a fewe, and not rekened moch worth.

The rbi. Chapter. 

HIS is the heuy burthé vpo Damascus: 
T ? Beholde, Damascus shal be nomore a cite, but an heape of broken stones. The
‘cities of Aroer shalbe waist, The catel shal lie 
‘there, q nomā shal fraye thē awaye. Eph- 

raim shal no more be stroge, x Damascus 

skal no more be a kyngdome. And as for y glory of ¥ remnaunt of y Sirians, it shalbe as the glory of the childre of Israel, saieth y
LORDE of hoostes. At that tyme also shal f glory of Iacob be very poore, q his fatnes eane. It shal happé to thé, as when one sheareth in haruest, which cutteth his handful with the sickle, q when one gathreth y sheaues together in the valley, of Rephaim, there re- mayneth yet some ears ouer. Or as whé one shaketh an olyue tre, * which fyndeth but two or thre olyue beries aboue in the toppe, and foure or fyue in the braunches. Thus the
LORDE God of Israel hath spoken. 

Then shal man cóuerte agayne vnto his maker, q turne his eyes to the holy one of
Israel. And shal not turne to the aulters that are y worke of his owne hides, nether shal he loke vpon groaues ¢ ymages, which his fyngers haue wrought. At the same tyme shal their stronge cities be desolate, like as were once y forsaké plowes q corne, which they forsoke,
"for feare of Y children of Israel. 

So shalt thou (o Damascus) be desolate, because thou hast forgotté God thy Sauioure, t hast not called to remébraunce $ rock of thi strégth, Wherfore thou hast also set a fayre plate, q grafted a straunge braunch. In

* Deut. 32.e. 4 Iere, 49, d. Amos 1. a. ° Esa. 24, b. 

Cbr prophet sap. 

the daye when thou diddest plante it, it was greate, and gaue soone the frute of thi sede:
But in the daye of haruest, thou shalt reape an heape of sorowes q miseries,

Wo be to the multitude of moch people, that russh in like the see, and to the heape of folke, that renne ouer all like greate waters.
‘For though so many people increase as the flowinge waters, and though they be armed, yet they fle farre of, and vanish awaye like the dust with the wynde vpon an hill, and as the whyrle wynde thorow a storme. Though they be fearful at night, yet in the morninge it is gone with thé, This is their porcion, that do vs harme, and heretage of them, that robbe vs.

The rbíij. Chapter. 

Wwe be to the londe of flienge shippes, which is of this syde ¥ floude of
Ethiopia : which sendeth hir message ouer the see in shippes of redes vpó ý water, and sayeth : go soone, and do youre message vnto a straunge and harde folke : to a fearful peo- ple, æ to a people y is further then this: to a desperate and pylled folke, whose londe is deuyded from vs with ryuers of water. Yee all ye y syt in the compasse of the worlde, and dwell vpon the earth: when the token shalbe geuen vpo the mountaynes, then loke vp: and when the horne bloweth, then herken to, for thus hath LORDE sayde vnto me.
I layde me downe, and pondred the matter in my house, at the noone daye when it was hote: and there fel a myslinge shower, like a dew, as it happeneth in haruest. But the frutes, were not yet ripe cut of, and the grapes were but yonge and grene. ‘Then one smote of the grapes with an hoke, yee he hewed downe also the buwes and the braunches, q dyd cast thé awaye. And thus they were layde waist, for the foules of the mountaynes, and for ¥ beastes of the earth together. So y the foules sat ther vpon, and the beastes of the earth wyntered there. Then shal there be a present brought vnto the LORDE of hoostes: euen that harde folke, that fearful folke, and that further is thé this : y desperate and pylled folke (whose londe is deuyded from vs with floudes of water) vnto the place of the name of the LORDE of hoostes: /euen

vnto the hill of Sion. 
4 4 Re. 7. b. 

* Esa, 37, f. f Deut. 12. a. 

B 

5 

|oEYNNN.;-.. GO ————:————————————— ———————————À HMM cr 

Chap. Xr. 

The rir. Chapter. a HIS is the heuy burthen vpon Egipte :
“Beholde, the LORDE wil ryde vpon a swifte clonde, and come in to Egipte. And the goddes of Egipte shal trymble at his comynge, and the hert of Egipte shal quake within her. For thus saieth the LORDE:
] wil stere vp the Egiptians one agaynst another amonge them selues, ^so that one shalbe euer agaynst his brother and negh- boure, yee one cite agaynst another, and one kyngdome agaynst another. And Egipte shalbe choked in hir self. Whe they axe councel at their goddes, at their Prophetes, at their soythsayers and witches: then will 1

bringe their councel to naught. 

z| I wil delyuer Egipte also in to the hondes of greuous rulers, and a cruel kinge shal haue the rule of them. The water of the see shalbe drawé out, Nilus shal synke awaye, q be dronke vp. The ryuers also shalbe drawen out, the welles shal decreace and drie awaye.
Rede and rush shal fayle, the grasse by the waters syde or vpon ¥ ryuers bancke, yee and what so euer is sowen by the waters, shalbe wythered, destroyed, q brought to naught.
The fyshers shall mourne, all soch as cast angles in the water, shal complayne, x they that sprede their nettes in the water, shalbe faynt harted. Soch as laboure vpon flax q sylcke, shal come to pouerte, « they also that weeue fyne workes. All the poundes of
Egipte, all the policie of their Moates q diches shal come to naught.*

C| Yee the vndiscrete prynces of Zoan, the 
?councel of the wyse Senatours of Pharao, shal turne to foolishnesse: Those that darre boast q saye of Pharaos behalfe: I am come of wyse people. I am come of ¥ olde regall
Progeny. But where are now s wyse me? 
Let them tel the q shewe the, what the 
LORDE of hoostes hath taken in honde agaynst Egypte. Fooles are those prynces of
Zoan, q proude are the prynces of Noph: yee they “dysceaue Egypte with the nobilite of their stocke. For the LORDE hath made
Egypte droncké with the sprete of erroure, and they shal vse it in all matters: eue like as a dronke mà goeth spewinge aboute. For
Egipte shal lacke good councel so y they 

? Tere. 46. a. Eze. 29. a. Luc. 21. d. 
* 2 Reg. 17. b. 

? Mar. 13. a. 

The prophet Esap. 

|eause of those that oppresse them: that he 

ffo. dreir.! shal not knowe what to do, nether beginnynge nor ende, nether vpon the lode nor water.
Thé shal $ Egiptias be like vnto womé, afrayde q astoied, at the liftinge vp of the hode, which LORDE of hoostes shal lifte vp ouer them.

The londe of Iuda also shal make the Egip- tians afrayde, who so doth but speake vpon it, shal put them in feare: And that because of the councel, which y LORDE of hoostes hath devysed agaynst them. Then shal the fyue cities of Egipte speake with the Canaanites tunge, ande sweare by the LORDE of hoostes, t Heliopolis shalbe one of them. At the same tyme shal the LORDE of hoostes haue an aulter in the myddest of the londe of
Egipte, with this title ther by: Vnto the 
LORDE. This shalbe a token or testimony 
^vnto the LORDE of hoostes in the londe of 
Egipte, when they shal crie vnto him, be- 

shal sende them a captayne and a Sauioure to delyuer them.

Morouer, Egipte shalbe bought vnto the 
LORDE, and the Egiptians also shal knowe the LORDE at the same tyme: they shal do him reuerence with peace offringes, and with meat offringes: they shal promyse him of- fringes, yee x paye him also. Thus the
LORDE shal smyte Egipte, « heale it agayne: q so shal they turne to ý LORDE, and he also shal haue mercy vpo them, and saue them. Then shal there be a comon waye out of Egipte in to Assiria. The Assirians shal come in to Egipte, and the Egypcians in to
Assiria. The Egipcians also and the Assirians shal both haue one Gods seruyce. ‘Then shal
Israel with honoure be the thirde to Egipte and Assur. And the LORDE of hoostes shal blesse them, sayenge: Blissed is my people of the Egipcians, Assur is the worke of my hodes, but Israel is myne enheritaunce.

The rr. Chapter. 

HE same yeare that Harthan came to 
T Aschdod, where Sargé the kinge of the 
Assirians sent him, what tyme as he also be- seged Aschdod, « wane it y same season: The spake the LORDE vnto Esaye $ sonne of
Amos, sayenge: go and lowse of y sack cloth frö thy loynes, and put of thy shues from thy

d Esaie 8. c. * 3 Reg. 22,d. — / Deut. 10. d. 

So. ur. The prophet Esap, Chap. rri. 

3 

fete. And so he dyd, goinge naked q barefote. 
'Then sayde the LORDE: where as my ser- uaunt Esaye goeth naked and barefote, it is a token and siguifienge of the thinge, that after thre yeare shal come vpo Egipte and Ethiopia.
For euen thus shal the kinge of the Assirians driue both yonge and olde, as prisoners naked and barefote, out of Egipte and Ethiopia,
And shal dyscouer ¥ shame of Egipte. They shalbe also at their wittes ende, and ashamed one of another: the Egipcians of the Moryans, and the Morians of the Egipcians, at the sight of their glory.

Morouer they that dwel in y Iles shal saye euen the same daye: beholde, this is oure hope, to whom we fled to seke helpe, that we might be delyuered from the kinge of y

Assirians. How will we escape? 
The yri. Chapter. 
HIS is the heuy burthé of the waist see: 

A greuous visio was shewed vnto me, like as when a storme of wynde and rayne russheth in from the wyldernesse, that terrible londe. Who so maye disceaue (sayde the voyce) let him disceaue: Who so maye dis- troye, let him distroye. Vp Elam, besege it o Madai, for I will still all their gronynges.
With this, the raynes of my backe were ful of payne: “ Panges came vpon me, as vpon a woman in hir trauayle. When I herde it, I was abasshed: and whé I loked vp, I was afrayde. Myne herte paunted, I trembled for feare. ‘The darcknesse made me fearfull in my mynde.

Yee soone make redy the table (sayde this voyce) kepe the watch, eate and drynke: Vp ye captaynes, take you to youre shylde, for thus the LORDE hath charged me: go thy waye, and set a watchma, that he maye tell what he seyth. And whé he had wayted diligetly, he sawe two horsmen: the one rydinge vpon an Asse, the other vpon a camel.
And the lyon cried: LORDE, I haue stonde waytinge all the whole daye, and haue kepte my watch all the night. With y came there one rydinge vpon a charet, which answered, and sayde: ê Babilon is fallen, she is turned vpsyde downe, and all y ymages of hir goddes are smytten to y grounds This (o my felowe throsshers and fanners) haue I herde of the

a Esa. 13. a. Iere. 13. a. and 18. a.

5 Tere, 51. a. 
* Tere. 49, b. 

Apo. 14. b. 

LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel, to shewe it vnto you.
The heuy burthen of Duma. 

One of Seir cried vnto me: 'watchman, what hast thou espied by night? Watchman, what hast thou espied by night? ‘The watch- man answered: ‘The daye breaketh on, and the night is comynge: Yf youre request be earnest, then axe, and come agayne.

The heuy burthen vpon Arabia. 

“At euen ye shal abyde in the wod, in the waye toward Dedanim. Mete the thurstie with water, (o ye citisens of Hema) mete those with bred that are fled. For thei shal runne awaye from the weapen, from the drawé swerde, from the bot bowe, and from the greate batell. For thus hath the LORDE spoken vnto me: ouer a yeare shal all the power of Cedar be gone, like as when the office of an hyred seruaunte goeth out: And the remnaunt of the good Archers of Cedar, shalbe very few: For the LORDE God of
Israel hath spoken it. 

The rrij. Chapter. 
The heuy burthen, apon the valley of Visions. 

\ HAT hast thou there to do, that thou 

clymnest vp in to the house toppe, o thou citie of miracles, sedicious and wilfull? seinge, thy slayne mé are nether killed with swerde, ner deed in batel? For all thy cap- taynes gat them to their horses from the ordi- naunce, yee they are altogether rydden awaye, and fled farre of. When I perceaued y, I sayde: awaye fro me, y I maye wepe bytterly.
/'l'ake no laboure for to coforte me, as touch- inge the destruetion of my people. For this is y daye of the LORDE of hoostes, wherin he will plage, treade downe, and wede out the valley of Visios, and breake downe the walles, with soch a crack, that it shal geue a sownde in the mountaynes.

I sawe the Elamites take the quyuers to carte and to horse, and that the walles were bare from harnesse. Thy goodly valleys were ful of Charettes, the horse men made them soone to besege the gates. ‘Then was the coueringe of Iuda put from thence, and then was sene the sege of the tymbre house. "There shal ye se the riftes in the walles of the cite of f Tere. 9. a. Luce 19. d.

4 Esa. 16. a. e Tere. 49. e. 

39 

Chap. rrii. 
Dauid," wherof there shalbe many. Ye shal gather together the waters of the lower pole, and tel the houses of Ierusalé, and break of some of thé to kepe y walles. And ye shal make a pyt betwyxte y twayne walles of the water of the olde pole, and nothinge regarde him, that toke it in honde and made it. And at the same tyme shal y LORDE of hoostes cal mé to wepinge mourninge, to baldnesse and puttinge on of sack clothe. But they to fulfil their lust and wilfulnes, slaughter oxé, they kyll shepe, they eate costly meate, ¢ drynke

ne: *let vs eate and drinke, tomorow we shal die. Neuertheles whe the LORDE of hoostes herde of it, he sayde: yee, yf this wickednes of yours shalbe remitted, ye must die for it. This hath y LORDE God of hoostes spoken.

Thus sayeth the LORDE God of hoostes: 
*Go in to the treasury vnto Sobna the gouern- oure, and saye vnto him: What hast thou here to do? q from whéce comest thou? that thou hast made the a graue here? For he had caused a costly tombe of stone to be made for himself, and a place to lye in to be hewen out of a rock. Beholde the LORDE shal cast the out by violence, he will deck the of another fashion, and put vpon the a straunge clothe. He shal carie y in to a farre coütre, like a ball with his hondes. "There shalt thou die, there shal the pompe of thy charettes haue an ende: thou vylleyne of the house of thy LORDE: I wil shute the out of thine office, and put the from thine estate.

J| After this wil I cal my seruaunt Eliakim, y 

sonne of Helkia, and araye him with thy cote, and gyrde him with thy gyrdle, and I wil geue thy power in to his honde. He shalbe a father of the citisens of Ierusalem,” and of the Kynred jof Iuda. I will also. laye the keye of Dauids house vpon his shulders, and yf he open, no man shal shit, and yf he do shyt, no man shal open. Iwil fasten him to a nale in the place of the most hie faithfulnesse," and he shalbe vpon the glorious trone of his fathers house.
They shal hage vpon him all the glory of his fathers house, of the children and childers childre, all apparel small and great, all instru- mentes of measure q musike. This shal come to passe (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) when the nale, y is fastened to the place of the

* Esa. 36. a. 

? 2 Reg. 5. b. 

è Sap. 2. b, 1 Cor. 15. c. d Apo. 1. d. Tob 12. b.

79 | 

The prophet Esap. 

highest faithfulnesse: shalbe pluckt of, And whe the weight that hangeth vpon it, shal fall,

be broken, and hewen in peces. For the 
LORDE himself hath sayde it. 
The rritj. Chapter. 

Mourne 

N heuy burthen vpon Tirus. ye shippes of Tharsis, “for she is

throwne downe to the grounde, and conquered of them, that are come from Cithim. The
Indwellers of the Ilondes, the marchauntes of 
Sidon, and they that occupied the see (of whom thou wast ful somtyme) are at a poynte.
For by see were there frutes brought vnto the, and all maner of corne by water. ‘Thou wast the comon marcket of al people. Sido is sory for it, yee and all $ power of the see coplaneth, and saieth: O y I had neuer traueled with childe, that I had neuer borne eny, y I had nether norished boye, ner brought vp doughter.
As soone as Egipte perceaueth it, she wilbe as sory as Tirus it self. Go ouer the see,
Mourne ye y dwel in the Iles. Is not that the glorious cite, which hath bene of longe antiquite? whose natyues dwellinge farre of, commende her so greatly? Who hath deuysed soch thinges vpon Tirus the crowne of al cities, whose marchaütes and captaynes were the highest and principal of the worlde? Eué the LORDE of hoostes hath deuysed it, that he maye put downe al pompe, and minish all the glory of the worlde. Go thorow thy londe
(£o thou doughter of the see) as men go ouer the water, and there is not a gyrdle more.
^'Thus the LORDE (that remoueth the kingdomes, and hath taken in hande agaynst that mightie Canaan to rote it out:) hath stretched out his honde ouer the see, and sayde: From hence forth shalt thou make no more myrth (o thou doughter Sidon) for thou shalt be put downe of the Cethes. Stonde vp therfore, and go where the enemie wil carie the, where thou shalt also haue no rest. Be- holde (for thyne ensample:) The Caldees were soch a people, that no man was like them. Assur buylded them: he set vp his castels q palaces, and broke them downe agayne. And therfore mourne (ye shippes of the see) for youre power shalbe throwne downe.
After that, shal the lxx. yeares of Tirus 
(euen as longe as their kinges life was) be 

f lere. 47. c. Eze. 26. a. and 27, 28. 
€ Tob 12. b. ^ Dan. 2. c. 

* Zach. 10, a. 

fo. det. 

ffo. Dev. 

a 

5 

forgotten. And after lxx. yeares, it shal happé to Tirus as with an harlot that m vpon alute. "Take thy lute (saie men to her) and go aboute the citie, thou art yet an vn- knowne wensche, make pastyme with dyuerse balettes, wherby thou mayest come in to ac- quantaunce. ‘Thus shal it happen after lxx. yeares, "The LORDE shal uiset the citie of
Tirus, and it shal come agayne to hyr Mar- chaundyse, and shal occupie with al the King- domes that be in the worlde. But all hir occupiége and wyunynge, shalbe halowed vnto the LORDE.’ For then shal they laye vp nothinge behinde them nor vpon heapes: but the marchaüdise of Tirus shal beloge vnto the citisens of the LORDE, to the fedinge and susteninge of the hügrie, and to the clothinge

|of the aged. 

The rrij. Chapter. 

EHOLDE, y LORDE shal waist and 

plage the worlde, “he shal make the face of the earth desolate, q scatre abrode y inha- bitours therof. Then shal the prest be as the people, the master as the seruaunt, the dame like the mayde, the seller like the byer, he that lédeth vpon vsury, like him y boroweth vpo vsury, the creditoure, as the detter. Yee miserably shal $ worlde be waysted q clene destroyed. For ý LORDE hath so determed in himself. The earth shalbe heuye and decaye : The face of y earth shal perish q fal awaye, the proude people of $ worlde shal come to naught, For y earth is corrupte of hir indwellers.

For why? they haue offended lawe, chaunged the ordinaüces, and made the euer- lastinge testamét of none effecte, And ther- fore shal the curse deuoure the earth: for they y dwell thero, haue synned, wherfore they shalbe brent also, and those that remayne, shalbe very few. The swete wyne shal mourne, the grapes shalbe weake, and all y haue bene mery in harte, shal sighe. “The myrth of tabrettes shalbe layde downe, the chere of the ioyful shal ceasse, and the plea- sure of lutes shal haue an ende: there shal no more wyne be dronke with myrth, the beer shal be bytter to the that drinke it, the wicked cities shalbe broken downe, all houses shalbe shut, that no man maye come in.

In the stretes shal there be lift vp a crie 

|* Act. 291. a. ? Psal. 44. c. 

* Ose. 4, b. 4 Apo. 18. c. 

Cbr prophet (sap. 

because of wyne, all mens chere shal vanish awaye, and all ioye of the earth shal passe.
Desolacion shal remayne in the cities, and the gates shalbe smytten with waistnesse. For it shal happen vnto all londes and to all people, like as when a mà smyteth downe y olyues, y are left vpon the tre: ‘or seketh after grapes, when the wyne gatheringe is out. And those same (that remayne) shal lift vp their voyce, and be glad, « shal magnifie the glory of the
LORDE, euen from the see, q prayse the name of the LORDE God of Israel, in the valeis and Ilodes. We heare songes sunge to the prayse of the rightuous, fro al the endes of the worlde. Therfore I must speake: O my vnfrutfulnesse, o my pouerte, Wo is me, all is ful of synneres, which offende of purpose and malice. And therfore, (o thou that dwellest vpon the earth) there is at hode for the, feare, pyt and snare. Who so escapeth the terrible crie, shal fall in tothe pyt.” And yf he come out of the pyt, he shalbe take with the snare.
For the wyndowes aboue shalbe opened, and the foundacion of the earth shal moue.

The earth shal geue a greate crack, it shal haue a sore rnyne, and take an horrible fall.
The earth shal stacker like a dronken man, and be take awaye like a tent. Hir misdedes shal lie so heuye vpó her, y she must fall, and neuer rise vp agayne. At the same tyme shal the LORDE mustre together the hie hooste aboue, and $ kynges of the worlde vpon the earth. These shalbe coupled toge- ther as prisoners be, and shalbe shut in one warde and punished innumerable daies. * The
Moone and the Sonne shalbe ashamed, when the LORDE of hoostes shal rule them at lerusalem vpon the mount Sion, before and with his excellent councel.

The rrb. Chapter. 

LORDE, thou art my God, I wil prayse 

the, and magnifie thy name: For thou bringest marvelous thinges to passe, acordinge to thine olde councels, truly and stedfastly.
^'Thou makest of townes, heapes of stone: and of head cities, broken walles: The palaces of the wicked destroyest thou out of the citie, that they shal neuer be buylded againe. Ther- fore the very rude people must magnifie the, and the cities of the cruel heithen must feare the. For thou art the poore mans helpe, a e Esa. 17. b.

J Iere. 48. g. € Luc, 21. c. 

^ Esa. 26. 3. 

Chap. rrtttj. 

€ 

a 

‘Chap. rro. strégth for the neadful in his necessite. ‘Thou art a defence agaynst euel wether, a schadowe agaynst the hete. But vnto the presumptuous, thou art like a stroge whyrle wynde, that casteth downe the boostinge of the vngodly, thou kepest men from heate with the shadow of the cloudes, thou cuttest of the braunches of tyrauntes.

3| Moroner the LORDE of hoostes shal once prepare a feast for all people vpo the hill: “A
!plenteous, costly, pleasaunt feast, of fat and welfed beastes, of swete and most pure thinges.
Vpon the hill shal he take awaye the syde vale y hageth before y face of al people, and the coueringe wherwith all Gentiles are co- uered. "As for death, he shal vtterly cosume it, The LORDE God shal wipe awaye the teares from all faces, and take awaye the con- fucdo of his people thorow $ whole worlde.
For y LORDE himself hath sayde it. 

At the same tyme shal it be sayde: lo, this is oure God in who we put oure trust, “and he hath healed vs. This is the LOR DE that we haue wayted for: Let vs reioyse q delyte in his health. For the hode of y LORDE ceaseth vpo this hil. But Moab shalbe throsshé downe vnder him, like as the straw is trodé vnder fete in a doge hill. For he shal stretch out his hodes vpon him, like as a swimmer doth to swymme. And with the power of his hondes shal he cast downe his hie pompe. As for his stroge holdes q hie walles: he shal buwe them, cast thé downe, and fell the to the grounde in to dust.

The rroi. Chapter. 

a HEN shal this songe be sunge in the londe of Iuda: ^ We haue a stroge citie,

the walles q the ordinaūce shal kepe vs. Opé 
M gates, ý the good people maye go in, which aboureth for the treuth. And thou, which art the doer and hast the matter in honde: shalt prouyde for peace, *eué the peace y mé hope for in the. Hope stil in the LORDE for in the LORDE God is euerlastinge strégth.
For why, it is he, y bringeth lowe the hie mynded citesyns, q casteth downe the proude cities. He casteth thé to the groüde, yee eue in to y myre, y they maye be trodé vnder the fete of the symple, q with the steppes of

? Luc. 14. d. ? Ose. 13. e. 1 Co. 15. g. Ápo. 7. d. and 21.a. * Ephe. 2. a. d Pro. 18. b. Zac. 2. a. l Psal. 117. b.

e Rom. 5.a. Esa. 12. b. Esa. 25. a. 

The prophet Esap. 

So. drii. the poore. / Thon (LORDE) cosidrest the path of ¥ rightuous, whether it be right, whether the waye of y rightuous be right.
Therfore (LORDE) we haue a respecte vnto the waye of thy imdgmentes, thy name and thy remébraunce reioyse the soule. ‘My soule lusteth after the all the night loge, q my mynde haisteth frely to the. For as soone as thy iudgment is knowne to the worlde, the the inhabitours of the earth lerne rightuousnesse.
But the vngodly (though he haue receaued |33 grace) yet lerneth he not rightuousnesse, but in that place where he is punished, he offendeth, qœ feareth not the glory of the
LORDE. 

LORDE, they wil not se thine hie honde, but they shal se it, and be confounded: whé thou shalt deuoure them with the wrath of the people, and with the fyre of thine enemies.
But vnto vs (LORDE) pronyde for peace: 
“for thou workest in vs all oure workes. O 
LORDE oure God, though soch lordes haue dominacion vpon vs as knowe not the: yet graüte, that we maye only hope in the, and kepe thy name in remembraunce. ‘The malicious Tyrauntes whé they die, are nether in life nor in the resurrectio, for thou visitest thé and rootest thé out, and destroyest all the memoryall of them. Agayne, thou increacest the people (o LORDE), thou increacest the people, thou shalt be praysed and magnified in all y endes of the worlde. ‘The people that seke vnto the in trouble, that same ad- uersite which they complane of, is vnto the a chastenynge before the. Like as a wife with childe (whé hir trauayle cometh vpo her) *is ashamed, crieth and suffreth the payne: Kué so are we (o LORDE) in thy sight. We are with childe, we trauayle,’ q beare, q with the sprete we bringe forth health, wherethorow the earth is vndestroyed, and the inhabitours of the worlde perish not.

™ But as for thy dead men and ours, that be departed, they are in life and resurrection.
They lie in the earth, een wake, q haue loye: for thy dew is a dew of life q light. But y place of the malicious Tyrauntes is falle awaye. "So go now my people in to thy chàbre, and shut the doore to the, and suffre now $ twicklinge of an eye, "till the wrath be

f Pro. 16. a. Tere. 10. d. 
^ Phil9,a. * Pss 51.5. iO (Clit, (oh DE n Gen. 19. c.

€ Psal. 62. a. and 142. a. k [ob. 16. c. ! Rom.8. d.
? Apo. 6. b. 

So. Detitj. ouerpast. For beholde, the LORDE wil go out of his habitacion, “a vyset the wickednes of the that dwell vpou earth. He wil discouer the bloude that she hath deuoured, she shal neuer hyde the, that she hath murthured.

The rybij. Chapter. 

HEN the LORDE with his heuye, great p and loge swearde shal vyset Leuiathà, that invincible serpét: eue Leuiathà y croked serpent, and shal slaye the Wallfish in $ see.
At the same tyme shal mé synge of the vyn- yarde of Muscatel. I the LORDE kepe it, and water it in due season. I watch daye q night, that no man breake in to it. I beare no euel wil in my mynde. Who will compell me, that I greatly forgettinge all faithfulnesse, shulde burne it vp at once with thornes q bnshes? Or who will enforce me to kepe or make peace? It wil come to this poynte, y
Iacob shalbe rooted againe, and Israel shalbe grene q beare ftoures, q they shal fyll y whole worlde with their frute. Smyteth he not his smyter, as euel as he is smytte himself?
Destroieth he not y murtherers, as he is murthured? Euery ma recopeuseth with y measure y he receaueth: He mnseth vpó his sore wynde, as vpo the dayes of extreme heate.
And therfore shal the iniquite of Iacob be thus reconciled. And so shal he take awaye all y frute of his synnes.

? As for aulter stones, he shal make them all as stones beaten to poulder: the Groues and
Idols shal not stonde. ‘The stronge cities shalbe desolate, and y fayre cities shalbe left like a wildernes. The catel shal fede and lie there, and the shepe shal eate it vp. "Their haruest shal be brent, their wyues which were their bewtie when they came forth : shalbe defyled.
For it is a people without vnderstodinge, and therfore he ¥ created them, shal not fauoure them: and he y made them, shal not be merciful to the. In y tyme shal LORDE shute from ¥ swifte water of Euphrates, vnto
Y ryuer of Egipte. And there shal the chil- dren be chosen out one by one. Then shal the greate trompet be blowen, so that those which haue bene destroyed in the Assirians londe, and those that be scatred abrode in
Egipte: shal come q worshipe the LORDE at lerusalé, vpō the holy mount.

a Mich. 1, a. 
| Deu. 32. b. 

è Danie. 9, c. © Deut. 28, Leui. 26. 
4 Osee 3.a. e Esa. 40.a. J Esa. 5. c. 

The prophet Esap. 

Chap. rrbíj. 

The rrbtij. Chapter. 

Wwe be to y crowne of pryde, to ¥ dronkc|a 
Ephraemites, and to the faydinge 

floure, to the glory of his pope, y is vpo the toppe of the pléteous valley: which mē be ouer laden with wyne. Beholde, the strength and power of the LORDE shal breake in to the londe on euery syde, like a tempest of hale, that beareth downe stronge holdes, and like an horrible, mightie and ouer flowinge water. And the proude crowne of the dronken
Ephraemites, shal be troden vnder foote. And as for the faydinge floure," the glory of his pompe, which isvpon the toppe of the plenteous valley: it shal happen vnto him, as to an

|vntymely frute before the haruest come. Which 

as soone as it is sene, is by and by deuoured, or euer it come well in a mans honde.

And then shal the LORDE of hoostes be a ioyful crowne, and a glorious garlade vnto the remnaunt of his people. Vnto the lowly, he shalbe a sprete of iudgment, and vnto them that dryue awaye the enemies from y gates, he shalbe a sprete of stregth. But they go|t wronge by y reason of wyne, they fall and stacker because of stroge drynke. Yee eué the prestes and prophetes them selues go amisse,/ they are dronken with wyne, and weake braned thorow stronge drynke. They erre in seinge, and iniudgmet they fayle. For all tables are so ful of vomyte and fylthynes, y no place is clene. What is he amonge them, y cau teach, instructe or enfourme the childré, which are weened from suck or taken from the brestes: of eny other fashion, then: * Com- maunde y maye be commaunded, byd y maye be bydde, forbyd that maye be forbydde, kepe backe y maye be kepte backe, here a litle, there a litle. “And therfore the LORDE also shal speake with lispinge lippes and with a straunge laguage vnto this people, to whom he spake afore of this maner: This shal bringe rest, yf one refresh the weery, ye this shal bringe rest. But they had no will to heare.
And therfore the LORDE shal answere their stubbournes (Comaunde y maye be cé- maunded, byd y maye be DER. forbyd y maye be forbydde, kepe backe y maye be kepte backe, here a litle, there a litle) That they maye go forth, fall backwarde, be brussed,

£ Esa, 10. a. Mat. 23. b. ^ 1 Cor, 14. c. 

Chap. reir. 

The prophet Esap, 

B 

a 

+ | Luc. 20. b. 

snared and taken. Wherfore heare the worde of the LORDE, ye mockers that rule the
LORDES people, which is at Ierusalé. For ye cóforte youre selues thus: Tush, death q we are at a poynte, q as for hell, we haue made a códicion with it: that though there breake out eny sore plage, it shal not come vpon vs. “For with disceate wil we escape, and with nymblenes will we defende oure selues. "Therfore thus saieth the LORDE
God: Beholde, I wil laye a stone in Sion, a greate stone, a costly corner stone for a sure foundacion: y who so putteth his trust in him, shal not be confoüded. Rightuonsnes wil I set vp agayne in y balaunce, and iudgment in the weightes. “The tépest of hale shal take awaye youre refuge, that ye haue to disceaue withal, and y ouerflowinge waters shal breake downe youre stroge holdes of dissimulacio.
Thus the appoyntmet that ye haue made with death, shalbe done awaye, and the códicion that ye made with hell, shal not stode. When the greate destructio goeth thorow, it shal all to treade you, It shal take you quyte awaye before it. For it shal go forth early in the mornynge, and contynue only y daye and y night. And the very feare only shal tach you, when ye heare it. For y bedde shal be so narow y a ma cà not lye vponit. And the coueringe to small, that a ma maye not wynde him self therin. ¢ For the LORDE shal steppe forth as he dyd vpon the mount Perazim, and shal take on as he dyd vpo the dale of Gabaon: that he maye bringe forth his deuyce, his straunge deuyce: and fulfil his worke, his wonderful worcke. And therfore make no mockes at it, that youre captiuyte increase not: for I haue herde the LORDE of hoostes saye, that there shal come a soden destruction and plage vpon the whole earth. ‘Take hede, and heare my voyce, pondre and merck my wordes wel. Goeth not the husbonde man euer in due season earnestly to his londe? he moweth q ploweth his grounde to sowe.
And whé he hath made it playne, he soweth it with fitches or comyn. He soweth y wheate and Barlye in their place, Milium and Rye also in their place. And y he maye do it right, his God teacheth him and sheweth him.
For he treadeth not the fitches out with a wayne, nether bringeth he the cart here and

b Psal. 117.0. 
* 1 Cor. 13. b. 

a Amos 9. d. Ro. 9.g. 1 Pet.2.a. 

d Esa.37. f. 9 Re. 5. d. 

there ouer the comyn, but he throssheth $ fitehes out with a flale, and the comyn with a rod. As for the wheate, he gryndeth it to make bred therof, In as moch as he can not bringe it to passe with treadinge out. For nether the brussinge that the cart wheles make, ner his beastes can grynde it. This and soch like thinges come of the LORDE of hostes which is maruelous in councel, and greate in rightuousnesse.

The pri. Chapter. 
O vnto the o Ariel Ariel, thou cite that 
Dauid wane.’ Take yet some yeares, and let some feastes yet passe ouer: then shal
Ariel be beseged, so that she shal be heuy and sorouful, and shal be vnto me euen as a lyon. For I wil laye sege to the rounde aboute, and kepe y in with towers, and graue vp dykes agaynst Y. And thou shalt be brought lowe, and speake out of the earth, and thy wordes shal go humbly out of $ grounde.
Thy voyce shal come out of the earth, like the voyce of a witch, and thy talkinge shal groane out of the myre. For the multitude of thine enemies shalbe like mealdust. /And the nombre of ‘Tyrauntes shalbe as y dust that the wynde taketh awaye sodenly.

Thon shalt be visited of the LORDE of hoostes with thondre, earth quake, and with a greate crack, with the whyrle wynde, tempest, and with the flame of a consumynge fyre.
But now the multitude of all the people, that went out agaynst Ariel: the whole hooste, the stronge holdes, and sege: is like a dreame which apeareth in the night. ‘It is like as when an hungrie man dreameth that he is eatynge, and when he awaketh, he hath no- thinge: like as when a thurstie man dreameth that he is drinkinge, and when he awaketh, he is faynt, and his soule vnpacient.

So is the multitude of all people, that mustre them selues agaynst the hill of Sion.
But ye shalbe at youre wittes ende, ye shalbe abasshed: ye shal stackre, and rele to and fro.
Ye shalbe dronken, but not of wyne. Ye shal fall, but not thorow dronkenes: For the
LORDE shal geue you an hard slepinge sprete, and holde downe youre eyes: namely youre prophetes and heades which shulde se, them shal he couer. “And all visions shalbe

Iosue 10. b. 1 Par. 14. d. * Eze. 43. c. 

2 Reg- 5c a. f£ Psal. 1. b. € Psal. 72. c.

. ^ Esa. 6. b. 

fo. urb. 

q 

5 

So. debi, 

vnto you, as the wordes that stonde in a sealed lettre, when one offreth it to a man that is lerned, and sayeth: rede vs this lettre. Thé he answereth : I cà not rede it, for it is shutt.
But yf it be geué to one y is not lerned, or sayde vnto him: rede this lettre: Then sayeth he. Ican not rede.

Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: “For so moch as this people draweth nye me with their mouth, and prayseth me highly with their lippes (where as there herte neuertheles is farre fro me, and the feare which they owe vnto me, that turne they to mens lawes and doctrynes) therfore wil I also shewe vnto this people, a maruelous terrible and greate thinge
(Namely this:) ^I wil destroye the wisdome of their wise, and the vnderstodinge of their lerned men shal perish. ^ Wo be vnto them that seke so depe, to hyde their ymaginacion be fore the LORDE, which rehearce their coücels in darknes, and saye: who seith vs, or who knoweth vs?

Which ymaginacion of yours is euen as when the potters claye taketh advisemet, as though the worke might saye to y worke master: make me not, or as when an erthen vessel saieth of the potter: he vnderstondeth not.
4Se ye not that it is hard by, that Libanus shalbe turned in to Charmel, and that Charmel shalbe taken as a wodde? ‘Then shal deaf men vnderstonde the wordes of the boke, and the eyes of the blynde shal se without eny cloude or darknes. The oppressed shal holde a mery feast in the LORDE, and the poore people shal reioyse in the holy one of Israel.

Then shal the furious people ceasse, and y mockers shal be put awaye, and all they y do wronge shalbe rooted out, soch as laboure to drawe mē vnto synne:* and y disceaue him, which reproueth them in the gate, q soch as turne good personnes to vanite.

And therfore the LORDE (euen the de- fender of Abraham) saieth thus vnto the house of Iacob: ‘Now shal not Iacob be ashamed, nor his face cofounded, when he seith amonge his children (whom my hondes haue made) soch as halowe my name amonge them: that they maye sanctifie the holy one of Iacob, and feare the God of Israel: and that they which afore tyme were of an erroneous sprete, haue

a Mat. 15. à. Mar, 7. a. ^ Abdie 1. c. 1 Cor. 1. c. 
* Esa. 47. d. Ecci. 23. b. Eze.9.c. d Esa, 23. d. 
Tere. 2. b. e Pro. 1. b. f Esa. 43. a. £ Esa. 8. b. 

Che prophet Esap. 

Chap. rrr. now vnderstondinge, and y soch as before, coude not speake, are now lerned in my lawe.

The rrr. Chapter. 
1 À JO be to those shrenkinge children|@ 
(saieth the LORDE) ‘which seke councel, but not at me: which take a webbe in honde, but not after my will: that they maye heape one synne vpon another. ‘They go downe in to Egipte, (and axe me no coun- cel) to seke helpe at the power of Pharao, and cóforte in the shadowe of the Egipcias.
But Pharaos helpe shalbe youre cofucion, and the comforte in the Egipcians shadowe shalbe youre owne shame. Youre rulers haue bene at
Zoan, and youre messaungers came vnto Hanes. 
^ But ye shal all be ashamed of the people y maye not helpe you, which shal not bringe you strength or comforte, but shame and confucion.
Youre beastes haue borne burthens vpo their backes towarde the South, thorow the waye that is ful of parell and trouble, because of the lyo and lyones, of the Cockatrice and
\shutynge dragon. Yee the Mules bare youre substaunce, and the Camels brought youre treasure vpon their croked backes, vnto a people that can not helpe you. For the
Egipcians helpe shalbe but vane and lost. 
Therfore I tolde you also y youre pryde shulde haue an ende. ‘Wherfore go héce, and write them this in their tables, and note it in a booke: that it maye remayne by their posterite, and be stil kepte. For it is an ob- stinate people, ^vnfaithful children, children that will not heare the lawe of the LORDE.
They darre saye to the prophetes : "Intro- mitte youre selues with nothinge, and vnto y
Soythsayers: tell us of nothinge for to come, but speake frendly wordes vnto vs, and preach vs false thinges. ‘Treade out of the waye, go out of the path, turne the holy one of Israel from vs. ‘Therfore thus saieth the holy one of Israel : In as moch as ye haue cast of youre bewtie, and conforted youre selues with power and nymblenesse, and put youre confidence therin: therfore shal ye haue this myschefe agayne for youre destruction and fall, like as an hie wall, that falleth because of some rift
(or blast,) whose breakinge cometh sodenly. 
And youre destruction shalbe like as an 

^ Eze. 29. à. 4 Reg. 18. d. k Esa, 1. a.

Iere. 16. b. + Esa. 8. a. l Iere. 11. d. Amos 7. b.

Chap. rrr. erthé pot, “which breaketh no man touchinge it, yee and breaketh so sore, that a man shal not fynde a sheuer of it to fetch fyre in, or to take water with all out of the pyt. ^ For the
LORDE God, euen the holy one of Israel hath promised thus : With stilsittinge and rest shal ye be healed, In quyetnesse and hope shal youre strength lie. Notwithstondinge ye regarde it not, but ye will saie: No, for thus are we costrayned to fle vpo horses.
(And therfore shall ye fle) we must ryde vpon swift beastes, and therfore youre persecutours shal yet be swifter. ^A thousand of you shal fle for one, or at the most for fyue, which do but only geue you euell wordes: vntil ye be desolate, as a ship mast vpon an hie moun- tayne, and as a beaken vpon an hill.

? Yet stondeth the LORDE waitinge, that he maye haue mercy vpon you, and lifteth him self vp, that he maye receaue you to grace, For the LORDE God is rightuous.
Happie are all thei that wate for him. For thus (o thou people of Sion and ye citisens of
Ierusalem) shal ye neuer be in heuynes, for doutlesse he will haue mercy vpon the. As soone as he heareth the voyce of thy crie, he will helpe the. The LORDE geueth you the bred of aduersite, and the water of trou- ble. But thine instructer fleyth not farre from the, yf thine eyes loke vnto thine in- structer, and thine eares harken to his worde, that crieth after the and saieth: ° This is the waye, go this, and turne nether to the right honde nor the leffte.

Morouer yf ye destroye the syluer workes of youre Idols, and cast awaye the golden coapes that ye deckt them withall (as fylthy- nes) and saie, get you hence: Thé wil he geue rayne to the sede, that ye shal sowe in the earth, and geue you breade of the en- crease of the earth, so that all shalbe plen- teous and abundaunt. ‘Thy catel also shal he fede in the brode medowes, yee thyne oxé and Mules that till the grounde, shal eate good fodder, which is pourged with y fanne.
Goodly ryuers shal flowe out of all his moun- taynes and hilles. In the daye of the greate slaughter when the towers shal fall, «the Moone shal shyne as the Sonne and y Sone shyne shalbe seuéfolde, and haue as moch shyne, as in seuen dayes beside.

n 

a Psal. 2.b. 4% Exo. 14. d. 2 Par. 20. c. 

Tosu. 23. c. 4 Re, 2, a. 

* Leui. 26. b. 

The prophet Csap. 

In that daye shal the LORDE bynde vp y brussed sores of his people, and heale their woundes. Beholde, the glory of the LORDE shal come from farre, his face shal burne, that no man shalbe able to abyde it, his lippes shal wagge for very indignacion, and his tunge shal be as a consumynge fyre. His breath like a vehement floude of water, which goeth vp to the throte. "That he maye take awaye
¥ people, which haue turned them selues vnto vanite, and the brydle of erroure, that lieth in other folkes chawes.

But ye shal synge, as the vse is in ý night of the holy solempnite. Ye shal reioyse from youre hert, as they that come with the pipe, when they go vp to the mount of the LORDE, vnto ¥ rock of Israel. The LORDE also shalset vp the power of his voyce, and de- clare his terrible arme, with his angrie coun- tenaunce, yee and the flame of the consumynge fyre, with earth quake, tempest of wynde, and hale stones. *Then shal the Assirian feare also, because of the voyce of the LORDE, which shal smyte him with the rodde. And the same rodde which the LORDE wil sende vpon him, shal moue the whole foundacion : with trompet, with noyse of warre and batell to destroye. For he hath prepared the fyre of payne from the begynnynge, yee euen for kynges also. This hath he made depe q wyde, y norishinge therof is fyre and wodde innu- merable, which the breath of the LORDE kyndleth, as it were a match of brymstone.

The rrrt. Chapter. 

O vnto them that go downe in to 

Egipte for helpe, and trust in horses, and conforte them selues in Charettes, be- cause they be many, and in horse me because they be lustie and stronge. But they regarde not the holy one of Israel, and they aske no question at the LORDE. Where as he neuertheles plageth $ wicked, and yet goeth not from his worde, whà he steppeth forth and taketh the victory agaynst the housholde of the frauwerde, and against the helpe of euel doers. Now the Egiptians are men, and not
God, and their horses flesh and not sprete. 
And as soone as the LORDE stretcheth out his honde, then shal the helper fall, and he that shulde haue bene helped, and shal

f Psal.36.b. £92Pet.3.b X^ Esa.10.a. 

* Mat. 25. d. 

* Deut. 4. a. 

Fo. Debi. 

F 

B 

Fo. debii, 

altogether be destroyed. For thus hath the 
LORDE spoke vnto me: “Like as the Lyon or lyos whelpe roareth vpon the pray that he hath gotten, and is not afrayde, though y multitude of shepardes crie out vpon him, nether abashed for all the heape of them: So shal the LORDE of hoostes come downe from the mount Sion, and defende his hill.
Like as byrdes flotre aboute their nestes, so 
^shal the LORDE of hoostes kepe, saue, de- fende and deliuer Ierusalem. ‘Therfore (o ye childre of Israel) turne agayne, like as ye haue exceaded in youre goinge back. For in y daye euery man shal cast out his Idols of syluer and golde, ^ which ye haue made with youre synful hondes. Assur also shalbe slayne with the swerde, not with a mans swerde. A swerde shal deuoure him, “but not a mans swerde. And he shal fle from the slaughter, and his seruauntes shalbe taken prisoners.
He shal go for feare to his stronge holdes, and his prynces shal fle from his badge. This hath ý LORDE spoke, whose light burneth in Sion, and his fyre in Ierusalem.

The xrrij.. Chapter. 

EHOLDE, the kinge shal gouerne after 
B ý rule of rightuousnes, and ¥ princes shal rule acordinge to the balaunce of equite.
He shalbe vnto me, as a defence for the wynde, and as a refuge for the tempest, like as a ryuer of water in a thurstie place, and y schadowe of a greate rock in a drie lode. "The eyes of the seinge shall not be dymme, and the eares of them that heare, shal take diligét hede.
The hert of the vnwise, shal attayne to know- lege, and the vnparfite tige shal speake planely and distinctly. ‘Then shal the nygarde be no more called gentle, ner the churle lybe- rall. But the churle wil be churlishly mynded, and his hert wil worke euell and playe the ypocrite, and ymagyn abhominacios agaynst
God, to make the hungrie leane, and to with- holde drinke from the thurstie : These are the perlous weapons of the cuvetous, these be his shameful councels: that he maye begyle the poore with disceatful workes, yee euen there as he shulde geue sentence with the poore.
‘But the liberall person ymagineth honest thinges, and commeth vp with honesty.

Vp (ye rich and ydle cities), harken vnto 

^ Apo.5.a. Gen. 49. b. 
4 Esa. 37.f. © Pro. 17. b. 

* Esa. 9. d. 
€ Ieren. 33. c. 

5 Deut. 32, b. f Roma. 5. a.

The prophet Esap. 

Chap. rrr. my voyce. Ye careles cities, marcke my wordes, After yeares and dayes shal ye be brought in feare, o ye carelesse cities, For
Haruest shalbe out, and the grape gatheringe shal not come. O ye rich ydle cities, ye that feare no parell, ye shalbe abashed and re- moued: when ye se the barennesse, the naked- nesse and preparinge to warre. Ye shal knock vpõ youre brestes, because of the pleasaunt felde, and because of the fruteful vynyarde.
My peoples felde shal bringe thornes and thistels, for in euery house is voluptuousnes t in the cities, wilfulnes. "The palaces also shalbe broken, and the greatly occupide cities desolate. become dennes for euermore, the pleasure of
Mules shalbe turned to pasture for shepe: 
Vnto the tyme that y sprete be poured vpon vs from aboue.

Then shal the wildernesse be a fruteful felde q the plenteous felde shalbe rekened for a wodde. Then shal equyte dwel in the deserte, and rightuousnesse in a fruteful londe.
‘And the rewarde of rightuousnesse shalbe peace, and hir frute rest and quietnesse for euer. * And my people shal dwel in the ynnes of peace, in iny tabernacle and pleasure, where there is ynough in thé all. And whé the hale falleth, it shal fall in the wodde and in the citie. O how happy shal ye be, whé ye shal safely sowe youre sede besyde all waters q dryue thither the fete of youre oxé q asses.

The ryriij. Chapter. 

HERFORE wo vuto the (o robber) à ap shalt not thou be robbed also?’ and vnto the that laiest wait, as who saye there shulde no waite be layde for the? * Wo vnto the which doest hurte, euen so shalt thou be hurt also. And as thou layest waite, so shal wait be layde for the also.

LORDE be merciful vnto vs, we wait for the. * Thine arme is at a poynte to vyset vs, but be thou oure health in the tyme of trouble.
Graüte that the people maye fle at the anger of thy voyce, q that at thy vpstondinge the
Gentiles maye be scatred abrode, and that their spoyle maye be gathered, as the gres- hoppers are comonly gathered together in to the pyt. Stonde vp LORDE, thou that dwellest on hie: Let 5io be fylled with equyte

^ Math. 26. e. — * Leui. 24, d. Exod, 21.b. Sapien. 11. c. 

Math. 7. a. * Psalm 9. b. 

'The towers and bulwerckes shal|€ 

Chap. rrrittj. and rightuousnesse. Let treuth and faithful- nesse be in hir tyme: power, health, wisdome, knowlege a the feare of God are hir treasure.
Beholde, their aungels crie with out, the messaungers of peace wepe bytterly. The stretes are waist, there walketh no man therin, the appoyntment is broken, the cities are despised, they are not regarded, the desolate earth is in heuynes. Libanus taketh it but for a sporte, that it is hewen downe: Saron is like a wyldernes: Basa a Charmel are turned vpside downe. And therfore saieth y LOR DE:
I wil vp, now wil I get vp, now wil I aryse. 
^ Ye shal conceaue stubble, and beare strawe, q youre sprete shal be the fyre, that it maye consume you: q the people shalbe burnt like lyme, q as thornes burne that are hewen of, q cast in the fyre.

Now herken to (ye that are farre of) how I do with them, q cosidre my glory, ye that be at honde. The synners at Sion are afrayde, a sodane fearfulnesse is come vpon the ypo- erytes. What is he amonge us (saye they) that will dwell by that consumynge fyre? which of vs maye abyde that euerlastinge heate? ^He that ledeth a godly life (saye I) q speaketh the treuth: He that abhorreth to do violence and disceate: he that kepeth his hode that he touch no rewarde: which stop- peth his eares, that he heare no councel agaynst the innocent: which holdeth downe his eyes, that he se no euel. He it is, that shal dwel on hie, whose sauegarde shalbe in the true rocke, to him shalbe geuen the right true meat q drynke. His eyes shal se the kynge in his glory: q in the wyde worlde, and his herte shal delite in the feare of God.
What shal then become of the scrybe?" of the 
Senatoure? what of him that teacheth childre? 
"There shalt thou not se a people of a straunge tüge, to haue so diffused a laguage, that it maye not be vnderstonde: nether so straunge a speache, but it shal be perceaued.

There shal Sion be sene, the head citie of oure solempne feastes. There shal thine eyes se lerusalem that glorious habitation: the tabernacle that neuer shal remoue,? whose nales shal neuer be taken out worlde without ende, whose coardes euerychone shal neuer corruppe: for the glorious Magesty of the
LORDE shal there be present amoge vs. 
In that place (where fayre broade ryuers q 

a [eremi.5.c. ^ Psalm 14.a. 23. a. *1 Cor. 1.d. 4 Heb. 

The prophet Esap. 

streames are) shal nether Gallye rowe, ner greate shippe sale. For the LORDE shalbe oure capteyne, ‘the LORDE shalbe oure lawe geuer, The LORDE shalbe oure kinge, q he himself shalbe oure Sauioure. ‘There are the coardes so layd abrode, that they ca not be better: The mast set vp of soch a fashion, that no baner ner sale hageth thero : but there is dealed greate spoyle, yee lame men runne after the pray. There lieth no mà that saieth:
I am sick, but all euel is taken awaye from the people, that dwel there.

The yrriij. Chapter. 
OME ye Heithen ç heare, take hede ye people. Herké thou earth ¢ all that is therin: thou rounde cépasse q al that groweth thervpon: for the LORDE is angrie with al people, q his displeasure is kindled agaynst all the multitude of them, to curse them, q to slaye them. So that their slayne shalbe cast out, t their bodies stincke: that eue the very hilles shalbe wet with the bloude of them. AH the starres of heauen shalbe consumed, q the heauen shal folde together like a roll, /q all the starres therof shall fall, like as the leaues fall from the vynesandfygetrees. For my swearde
(saieth he) shalbe bathed in heauen, q shal immediatly come downe vpon Idumea, and vpon the people which I haue cursed for my vengeaunce.

Aud the LORDES swearde shalbe full of bloude, q be rustie with the fatnesse x bloude of lambes and gootes, with the fatnesse of ueeres of the wethers. For the LORDE shal kyl a great offringe in Bosra, and in the londe of Idumea. There shal the Vnicornes fall with the Bulles, (that is with the giauntes) and their londe shalbe washed with bloude, q their grounde corrupte with fatnesse. Vnto the also (o Sion) shal come the daye of the vengeaunce of God,’ and the yeare when as thyne owne iudgmentes shalbe recompensed.
Thy floudes shalbe turned to pytch, and thine earth to brymstone, q therwith shal the londe be kyndled, so that it shal not be quenched daye ner night: But smoke euermore, ¢ so forth to lie waist. And no man shal go thorow thy londe for euer: * But Pellicanes, Storkes, great Oules, and Rauens shall haue it in possession, ¢ dwell there in.

For God shal sprede out the lyne of/@ 

9.b. *Iaco. 4.c. /92 Pet.3.b. £ Esa.63.a. ^ Soph.2.b. 
80 

Fo. Deir. 

| ffo. Der. 

| 

desolacion vpon it, a weye it with the stones of emptynes. When kinges are called vpo, there shalbe none, and all princes shalbe awaye.
Thornes shal growe in their palaces, nettels a thistles in their stronge holdes, y the dragons maye haue their pleasure therin, q that they maye be a courte for Estriches. “There shal straunge visures and monstruous beastes mete one another, q the wylde kepe company to- gether. ‘There shal the lamia lye, q haue hir lodginge. There shall the hedghogge buylde, digge, be there at home, and bringe forth his yonge ones. ‘There shal the kytes come to- gether, ech one to his like.

ê Seke thorow the scripture of the LORDE q rede it. There shal none of these thinges be left out, there shal not one (ner soch like) fayle. For what his mouth commaundeth, that same doth his sprete gather together (or fulfilleth). Vpon whom so euer y lot falleth, or to whom he dealeth it with the line: those shal possesse the enheritaunce from generacion to generacion, and dwel therin.

The yyrb. Chapter. 

UT the deserte q wildernesse shal reioyse, 

y waist grounde shal be glad, and florish as the lilly. She shal florish pleasauntly, and be ioyful, and euer be geuynge of thankes more and more. For y glory of libanus, the bewty of Charmel q Sarō shalbe geuen her. These shal knowe the honoure of the
LORDE, and the magesty of oure God. And therfore strength y weake hodes, and conforte the feble knees.“ Saye vnto them that are of a fearful hert: Be of good chere, and feare not. Beholde: youre God cometh, to take vengeaunce q to rewarde, God cometh his owne self, and wil delyuer you. + Then shal the eyes of the blinde be lightned, and the eares of the deaff opened. Then shal the lame man leape as an herte, q the domme mas tiige shal geue thankes.

“In the wildernesse also there shal welles springe, and floudes of water in the deserte.
The drie grounde shal turne to ryuers, and the thurstie to springes of water. Where as dragons dwelt afore, there shal growe swete floures and grene russhes. There shalbe foot- pathes q comon stretes, this shalbe called the

| a Tren. 4. b. 5 Ioh. 5. b. Deut, 28. * Heb. 12, b. 
Deut. 20. a. 31. b. d Matt. 11. a. 15.c, Luc. 7. c. 
Psal. 8. a. e Esa. 41. c. — Esa, 43. c. Esa, 44. a. 

The prophet Esap. 

holy waye. No vnclene person shal go thorow it, for the LORDE himself shal go with thé that waye, and the ignoraut shal not erre.
"There shalbe no lyon, and no rauyshinge beast shall come therin nor be there, but men shal

o there fre and safe. ‘And the redemed of the LORDE shal conuerte, and come to Sion with thankesgeuinge. Euerlastinge ioye shal they haue, pleasure q gladnesse shalbe amóge them, And as for all sorow and heuynes, it shal vanish awaye.

The ryybí. Chapter. 

N the xiiij. yeare of kinge Ezechias, *came 
I Sennacherib kinge of the Assirians downe, to laye sege vnto all the stronge cities of Iuda.
And the kinge vf the Assirias sent Rabsaches from Lachis toward Ierusalem, agaynst kinge
Ezechias, with a greuous hooste, which set him by the condite of the ouerpole, in the waye that goeth thorow y fullers lode. And

[so there came forth vnto him Eliachim ^Hel- 
| chias sonne the presydent, Sobna the scribe, and Ioah Asaphs sonne the Secretary.

And Rabsaches sayde vnto them: Tel 
Ezechias, that the greate kinge of Assiria sayeth thus vnto him: What presumpcion is this, that thou trustest vnto? Thou thinkest
(peraducture) that thou hast councel q power ynough, to mayntene this warre: or els wher to trustest thou, that thou castest thi self of fro me? lo, Thou puttest thy trust in a broken staff of rede’ (I meane Egipte) which he that leaneth vpon, it goeth in to his honde q shuteth him thorow. Kuen so is Pharao the kinge of
Egipte, vnto all thé that trust in him. But yf thou woldest saye to me: We trust in y
LORDE oure God: A goodly god, in dede: whose hie places œ aulteres Ezechias toke downe, and commaunded Iuda and Ierusalem, to worshipe only before the aulter. Abyde the, thou hast made a condicion with my lorde the kinge of the Assiriás, that he shulde geue the two thousande horses: Art thou able to set mé there vp? Seinge now that thou canst not resist the power of the smallest prynce that my lorde hath, how darrest thou trust in y charettes and horse men of Egipte? Mor- ouer, thinkest thou y I am come downe hither, to destroye this pu with out the LORDES

2 Par. 23.a. 

f 1 Pet, 1, c. Apo. 21. a. € 4 Re. 18. g. 
^ Esa, 22. c. 

Esa. 7. c. 8. b. 10.2. 17.d. 33. a. i4 Re. 18. d. Ezec. 29.a.

Chap. cero. | 

| i

a 

5 

Chap. rrrbtj. 

€ 

D 

a 

will? The LORDE sayde vnto me: go downe in to that londe, that thou mayest destroye it.

Then sayde Eliachim, Sobna q Iohah vnto | 
Rabsaches: Speake to vs thy seruauntes (we praye the) in the Sirians language, for we vnderstonde it well: And speake not to vs in the Lewes tunge, lest the folcke heare, which: lieth vpon the wall. Then answered Rab- saches: Thinke ye, y the kinge sent me to speake this only vnto you? Hath he not sent me to thé also, that lie vpo the wall? that they be not cópelled to eate their owne donge, and drinke their owne stale with you?

And Rabsaches stode stiff, q cried with a loude voyce in the Iewes tüge, and sayde:
Now take hede, how the greate kinge of the 
Assirias geueth you warnynge. Thus saieth the kinge: Let not Ezechias disceaue you, for he shal not be able to delyuer you. Morouer, let not Ezechias comforte you in the LORDE, when he saieth: The LORDE with out doute shal defende vs, q shal not geue ouer this cite in to the hondes of the kinge of the Assirias, beleue him not. But thus saieth the kinge of |
Assiria: opteyne my fauoure, enclyne to me: 
So maye euery mà enioye his vynyardes and fygetrees, and drinke the water of his cisterne: vnto the tyme that I come myself, q bringe you in to a londe, y is like youre owne: wher in is wheat and wyne, which is both sowen with sede, and planted with vynyardes. Let not Ezechias disceaue you, when he sayeth vnto you: the LORDE shal delyuer us.

^Might the goddes of the Gentiles kepe euerymans londe, from the power of the kinge of the Assirians? Wher is the God of hemath t Arphad? Where is the God of Sepharnaim?
And who was able to defende Samaria out of my honde? Or which of all the goddes of the lodes, hath deliuered their countre out of my power, so that the LORDE shulde delyuer lerusalem fro my honde? Vnto this, Ezechias messaungers helde their tunges, and answered not one worde: for the kinge had charged them, that they shulde geue him none an- swere. So came Eliachim Elchias sonne the presidet, Sobna the serybe, and Joah Asaphs sonne the Secretary, vnto Ezechias with rente clothes, q tolde him the wordes of Rabsaches.

Che rrrbtj. Chapter. 
HEN Ezechias herde that, he rente his clothes,’ q put on a sack cloth, q went

a Esa. 10. b. è 4 Re. 19. a. * Ione 3. a. 

The prophet Esap. 

in to the temple of the LORDE. But he sent Eliachim the Presidét, Sobna the seryhe with the eldest prestes cloothed in sack,° vnto the Prophet Esay the sonne of Amos, q they sayde vnto him: Thus saieth Ezechias: this is the daye of trouble, of plage « of wrath: like as when a childe cometh to the byrth, but the woman hath no power to bringe it forth.
'The LORDE thy God (no donte) hath well considered the wordes of Rabsaches, whom his lorde y kinge of the Assirians hath sent, to defie q blaspheme the lyuynge God: with soch wordes, as the LORDE thy God hath herde right well. And therfore lift vp thy prayer for the remnaunt, that yet are left. So the seruauntes of kinge Ezechias came to Esay.

And Esay gaue them this answere: Saie thus vnto youre lorde: thus saieth the LORDE:
Be not afrayde of the wordes that thou hast herde, wherwith the kinge of Assirias ser- uauntes haue blasphemed me. Beholde, I will cause a wynde go ouer him,’ as soone as he heareth it, he shal go agayne in to his countre, there wil I distroye him with the swerde. ^Now when Rabsaches returned, he founde ¥ kinge of Assiria layenge sege to
Lobna, for he had vnderstonde, that he was departed from Lachis. For there came a rumoure, y Taracha kinge of Ethiopia was come forth to warre agaynst him.

And when the kinge of Assiria herde y, he sent other messaungers to kinge Ezechias, with this commaundement. Saye thus to Ezechias kinge of Iuda: Let not thy God disceaue the, in whom thou hopest, q sayest: lerusale shal not be geué in to the hondes of the kinge of
Assiria. For thou knowest well, how the kinges of Assiria haue handled all the londes, that they haue subuerted, a hopest thou to escape? Were the people of the Gétiles (whom my progenitours coquered) deliuered at eny tyme thorow their goddes? As namely, Gozan,
Haran, Rezeph,/ a the childré of Eden, which dwell at Thalassar. Where is the kinge of
Hemath, « the kinge of Arphad, ¢ the kinge of the citie Sepharnaim, Ena and Aua? Now when Ezechias had receaued y lettre of the messaungers, t red it, he went vp in to the house of the LORDE, « opened the lettre before $ LORDE. And Ezechias prayed be- fore the LORDE on this maner: O LORDE of hoostes, thou God of Israel, which dwellest

d Esa. 31. b. * 1 Re. 23. e. f 4 Re. 17. a. 

So. deri 

B | 

Fo. derij. 

D 

im 

Sp ee 

vpo Cherubin. “Thou art the God, that only is God of all the kingdomes of the worlde,* for thou only hast created haue q earth. Encline thine eare LORDE q cósidre, open thine eyes (o LORDE,) « se, and pondre all the wordes of Sénacherib, which hath sent his embassage to blaspheme the, the lyuynge God.
It is true (o LORDE) that the kinges of 
Assiria haue coquered all kingdomes q londes, q cast their goddes in the fyre. Notwithstod- inge those were no goddes but the workes of mens hondes, of wodd or stone, therfore haue they destroyed them. Delyuer vs then (o
LORDE oure God) from the hondes of Sen- uacherib, y all kingdomes of the earth maye knowe, that thou only art ý LORDE. Then
Esay the sonne of Amos sent vnto Ezechias, sayeuge: Thus saieth y LORDE God of
Israel: Where as thou hast made thy prayer vnto me, as touchinge Sennacherib, this is the answere, that the LORDE hath geuen concernynge him: Despised art thou, x mocked
(o doughter of Sion) he hath shaken his heade at the, o doughter of lerusalem. But thou
Sennacherib, whom hast thou defied or blas- phemed? "And agaynst who hast thou lifted vp thy voyce, q exalted thy proude lokes? euen agaynst the holy one of Israel. Thou with thy seruauntes hast blasphemed the LOR DE, and thus holdest thou of thy self: I couer the hie mountaynes, q sydes of Libanus with my horsmen. And there wil I cut downe the hie
Cedre trees q the fayrest Fyrre trees. 1 will vp in to the heyth of it in to the chefest of his timbre woddes. Yf there be no water, I wil graue q drynke. And as for waters of defence, l shal drie them vp with the fete of myne hooste. Yee (saiest thou) hast thou not herde, what I haue taken in honde, « brought to passe of olde tyme? That same wil 1 do now also: waist, destroye, a bringe the stronge cities vnto heapes of stones. For their inha- bitours shalbe like lame men, brought in feare x confounded. They shalbe like the grasse q grene herbes in the felde, like the hay vpo house toppes, that wythereth, afore it be growne vp.

I knowe thy wayes, thy goinge forth q thy comynge home, yee q thy madnesse agaynst me. ‘Therfore thy furiousnesse agaynst me, q

thy pryde is come before me. 1 wil put a a Baruc 2. c. * Exo. 95. c. Gene. 1. a. * Zac. 2. b.
Matt. 25. b. 4 Act. 9. a, * Esa. 31. b. 

The prophet (Sap. 

Chap. rrrbítj. rynge in thy nose, ¢ a bridle byt in the chawes of the, q turne the aboute, eue the same waye thou camest. I wil geue the also this token
(o Ezechias) this yeare shalt thou eate that is kepte in stoare, q the next yeare soch as groweth of himself, and in the thirde yeare ye shal sowe and reape, yee ye shal plante vyn- yardes, and enioye the frutes therof.

And soch of the house of luda as are escaped, shal come together, and the remnaunt shal take rote beneth, q bringe forth frute abone.
For the escaped shal go out of lerusale, q the remnaunte from the mount Sion. And this shal the gelousy of the LORDE of hoostes bringe to passe. ‘Therfore thus saieth the
LORDE, cocernynge the kinge of the Assi- rians: He shall not come in to the citie, and shal shute no arowe in to it, there shall no shilde hurte it, nether shal they graue aboute it. The same waye that he came, shal he returne, and not come at this citie, saieth the
LORDE. And I wil kepe and saue the citie 
(saieth he) for myne owne, q for my seruaunte 
Dauids sake. 

Thus the angel went forth,’ and slewe of the 
Assirians hooste, an clxxxv. thousande./ And when men arose vp early (at lerusalé:) Be- holde, all laye ful of deed bodies. So Sen- nacherib the kinge of the Assirians brake vp, and dwelt at Niniue. Afterwarde it chaunsed, as he prayed in the Téple of Nesrah his god, that Adramalech and Sarazer his owne sonnes slewe him with the swearde, and fled in to the londe of Ararat. And Esarhadon his sonne reigned after him.

The yyrbíij. Chapter. 

OT longe afore this, was Ezechias dead- 
N sick: *And the prophet Esay the sonne of Amos came vnto him, and sayde: Thus cominaundeth the LORDE: Set thyne house in ordre, for thou must dye, and shalt not escape. Then Ezechias turned his face to- warde the wall, q prayed vnto the LORDE, and sayde: Remembre (o LORDE) that I haue walked before the in treuth and a sted- fast hert, and haue done the thinge that is pleasaunt to the. And Ezechias wepte sore.
Thé sayde God vnto Esay: Go and speake vnto Ezechias: The LORDE God of Dauid thy father sendeth $ this worde: ^I haue herde

f4Re.19.g. Ecci. 48. b. £ 4 Re. 20. a. 2 Par. 32.f. 

^ [one 3. b. 

Chap. r1. thy prayer, and considred thy teares: beholde,
I will put xv yeares mo vnto thy life, and delyuer the and the citie also, from the honde of the kinge of Assiria, for I will defende the cite. “And take the this token of the LORDE, y he will do it, as he hath spoken: Beholde, lon returne the shadowe of Achas Diall, y now is layed out with the Sonne, and bringe it ten degrees bacward. So the Sonne turned ten degrees baeward, the which he was de- scended afore.

A thankesgeuynge, which Ezechias kinge of luda wrote, when he had bene sicke, q was recouered.

I thought I shulde haue gone to the gates of hell in my best age, and haue wanted the residue of my yeares.

I spake within my self: I shal neuer viset the LORDE God in this life: I shal neuer se man, amonge the dwellers of the worlde.

Myne age is folden vp together and taken awaye fro me, like a sheperdes cotage: my lyfe is hewen of, like as a weeuer cutteth of his webb.

Whyl I was yet takinge my rest, he hewed me of, t made an ende of me in one daie.

^] thought I wolde haue lyued vnto the morow, but he brussed my bones like a lyon, and made an ende of me in one daye.

Then chatred I like a swalowe, and like a 
Crane, and mourned as a doue. 

I lift vp myne eyes in to y hight: O 
LORDE, (sayde I) violence is done vnto me, be thou suertie for me.

What shal I speake or saye, that he maye this doo? y I maye lyue out all my yeares, yee in the bytternesse of my life?

Verely (LORDE,) men must lyue in byt- ternesse, q all my life must I passe ouer therin: For thou raysest me vp, and wakest me. But lo, I wilbe wel content with this bytternes.

Neuertheles my cóuersacion hath so pleased y. that thou woldest not make an ende of my life, so that thou hast cast all my synnes be- hynde thy backe.

For hell prayseth not the, *death doth not magnifie the.

They that go downe in to the graue, prayse not thy treuth: but the lyuynge, yee the ly- uynge acknowlege the, like as I do this daye. blob 4. d.

a t Reg. 2.g. ¢Psal. 116.d. Psal. 6.a. Psal.8. 

The prophet Esap, 

The father telleth his children of thy faith- fulnesse.

Delyuer vs (o LORDE) and we wil synge prayses in thy house, all the dayes of oure life.

And Esay sayde: take a playster of fyges, and laye it vpon the sore, so shal it be whole.
Then saide Ezechias: O what a greate thinge is this, that I shal go vp in to the house of the
LORDE. 

The yrríy. Chapter. 

So. Deritj. 

T the same tyme Merodach Balada,?/4 

Baladas sonne kinge of Babilon, sent lettres and presentes to Ezechias. For he vnderstode, how that he had bene sick, q was recouered agayne. “And Ezechias was glad therof, x shewed them the comodities of his treasure: of syluer, of golde, of spyces ¢ rootes, of precious oyles, all that was in his cub- boordes and treasure houses. ‘There was not one thinge in Ezechias house, q so thorow out all his kingdome, but he let them se it.

The came Esay the prophet to kinge Eze- chias, and sayde vnto him: What haue $ men sayde, and from whence came they vnto the?
Ezechias answered: ‘They came out of a farre countre vnto me: out of Babilon. Esay sayde: what haue they looked vpon in thyne house ?
Ezechias answerde : All that is in myne house, haue they sene: and there is nothinge in my treasure, but I shewed it them.

Then sayde Esay vnto Ezechias: /Vnder- stode the worde of the LORDE of hoostes,
Beholde, the tyme wil come, that euery thinge which is in thine house, and all that thy pro- genitours haue layde vp in stoare vnto this daye, shalbe caried to Babilon, and nothinge left behinde. This sayeth the LORDE.
Yee and parte of thy sonnes that shal come of the, and whom thou shalt get, shalbe caried hence, and become gelded chamberlaines in the kinge of Babilons courte: Then sayde
Ezechias to Esay: Now God prospere his owne councel, which thou hast tolde me. He sayde morouer: So that there be peace, and faithfulnesse in my tyme.

The yl. Chapter. 
E of good chere my people, be of good chere (saieth youre God) Conforte Ie- rusalem, and tell her: that hir trauale is at an ende, that hir offence is pardoned, that she
44 Re. 90. c. 

e2 Par. 32. e. S4 Re. 2. c. 

33 

a 

Fo. Devitt. 

hath receaued of the LORDES honde suffi- cient correction for all hir synnes. A voyce erieth : *Prepare y waye for the LORDE in the wyldernesse, make straight i path for oure God in the deserte. Let all valleis be exalted, and euery mountayne and hill be, layde lowe. What so is croked, let it be made; straight, and let the rough places be made playne feldes. "For the glory of the LORDE shal apeare, q all flesh shal se it, for why, y mouth of the LORDE hath spoken it.

The same voyce spake: Now crie. And 
Isayde: what shal I crie? Then spake it: that, all flesh is grasse, and that all the bewtie therof, is as the floure of the felde.^ When the grasse is wytthered, the floure falleth awaye. Kuen so is the people as grasse, when the breath of the LORDE bloweth vpon them.. Neuerthelesse whether the grasse wyther, or the floure fade awaye:^ Yet the worde of oure God endureth for euer. Mor- ouer the voyce cried thus: Go vp vnto the hill (o Sion) thou that bringest good tidinges, lift vp thy voyce with power, o thou preacher lerusalem. Lift it vp without feare, and say vnto the cities of Iuda : '* Beholde, youre God: beholde, the LORDE, euen the almightie shal come with power, œ beare rule with his arme. Beholde, he bringeth his treasure with him, and his workes go before him. He shal fede his flock like au hirdman./ He shal gather the lambes together with his arme, and carie them in his bosome, q shal kindly in- treate those that beare yonge.

Who hath holden the waters in his fist? 
Who hath measured heauen with his spaune, and hath comprehended all the earth of y worlde in thre fyngers? Who hath weyed the mountaynes and hilles? Who hath re- fourmed the mynde of the LORDE? Or who is of his councel to teach him? — At whom hath he asked coücel, to make him vnderstode, and to lerne him the waye of iudgment: to teach him science, and to en- structe him in the waye of vnderstodinge?
Beholde, all people are in cóparison of him, as a droppe to a bucket full, and are counted as the leest thinge y the balaunce weyeth.
Beholde, $ Iles are in comparison of him, as the shadowe of the Sonne beame. Libanus

* Matt. 3. a. Mar. 1.a. Luc. 3. c. Esa.57.e. Ioh.1.d. 
Jib: * Paal. 89. a. Ecci. 14. e. laco. 1. b. 
á Matt. 5. d. Psal. 32. b. Iaco. 1. b. 

The prophet Esap. 

is not sufficiet to ministre fyre for his offringe, and all the beastes therof are not ynough to one sacrifice. All people in comparison of him, are rekened, as nothiuge, ^yee vayne vanite and emptynesse.

To whom then will ye licke God? or what similitude will ye set vp vnto him? Shal the caruer make him a carued ymage ? and shal the goldsmyth couer him with golde, or cast him in to a fourme of syluer plates? Mor- ouer shal the ymage maker (y the poore man whieh is disposed, maye haue somthinge to set vp also) seke out and chose a tre, that is not rotten, and carue therout an Jus y moueth not? Knowe ye not this? Herde ye neuer of it? Hath it not bene preached vnto you sence the begynnynge? Haue ye not bene enfourmed of this, sence the foun- dacion of y earth was layde: That he sytteth vpon the Circle of the worlde, and that all the inhabitours of the worlde are in cOparison of him, but as greshoppers : ‘That he spredeth out the heaués as a coueringe, that he stretch- eth them out, as a tent to dwell in: That he bringeth princes to nothinge, and the iudges of the earth to dust: so that they be not planted nor sowen agayne, nether their stocke rooted agayne in the earth ? For as soone as he bloweth vpon them, they wither q fade awaye, like the strawe in a whirle wynde.

To whom now wil ye licken me, q whom shal I be like, saieth the holy one? Lift vp youre eyes an hie, and considre. Who hath made those thinges, which come out by so greate heapes? and he can call them all by their names. ‘For there is nothinge hyd vnto the greatnesse of his power, strength, and might. How maye then Jacob thinke, or how maye Israel saye: My wayes are hyd from the LORDE, and my God knoweth not of my iudgmentes. Knowest thou not, or hast thou not herde, that the euerlastinge
God, the LORDE which made all the corners of the earth, is nether weery nor faynt, and that his wisdome cannot be comprehended: but that he geueth strength vnto the weery, and power vnto the faynte? Children are weery and faynt, and the strongest men fall:
‘But vnto them that haue the LORDE before their eyes, shal strength be encreased, Aegles

J Esa. 34. d. 
* Esa. 44. e. 

1 Pet. 2, b. 
Ro. 11. d. 
! Tere. 17. b. 

* Esa. 62. c. 
^ Psal. 61. b. 

€ Sap. 9. b. 
* Psal. 146. a. 

Chap. rl. 

Chap. rit. 

a 

wynges shal growe vpon them: When they runne, they shal not fall: and when they go, they shal not be weery.

The rli. Chapter. 

E still (ye Ilondes) and herken vnto me. 
Be stronge ye people, Come hither, and shew youre cause, we will go to the lawe to- gether. Who rayseth vp y iuste from the rysinge of the Sonne, and calleth him to go forth ? Who casteth downe the people, and subdueth the kinges before him: that he maye throwe them all to the grotide with his swearde, and scatre them like stuble with his bowe?
He foloweth vpon them, and goeth safely him- self, and cometh in no footpath with his fete.
Who hath made, created, and called the ge- neracions from the begynnynge? Euen I the
LORDE, ‘which am the first, and with the last. 
Beholde ye Iles, that ye maye feare, and ye endes of the earth, that ye maye be abasshed, draw nye, and come hither. Euery man hath exorted his neghboure, and brother, and byd- den him be stronge. The Smyth conforted the moulder, q the Ironsmyth the hammer- man, sayenge: It shalbe good, that we fasten this cast worke: and then they fastened it with nales, that it shulde not be moued. And thou Israel my seruaunt: lacob my electe sede of Abraha my beloued, whom I led from the endes of the earth by the honde: For I called the from farre, « saide vnto the: Thou shalt be my seruaunt: ^I haue chosen the, q will not cast ý awaye: be not afrayde, for I wil be with y. Loke not behinde y, for I wil be thy God, to strégth y, helpe ý, q to a

with this right hode of myne. Beholde, they that resist the, shal come to confucion and shame: and thine aduersaries shalbe de- stroyed q brought to naught. So that who so seketh after them, shal not fynde them. Thy destroyers shal perish, ¢ so shall they that vndertake to make batell agaynst the. For I thy LORDE q God, wil strength thy right honde. Euen I that saye vnto the: Feare not, I will helpe the. Be not afrayde thou litle worme Iacob, and thou despysed Israel :
For I will helpe the, saieth the LORDE, « the holyone of Israel thine avenger. Beholde,
I wil make the a treadinge cart q a new flale, 

ý thou mayest throsshe q grynde the moun- 

2 Esa. 44. a. Esa. 48. b. Apoc. 2. c. 
Esa. 43. a. 

è Esa. 44. c. 

Cbr prophet Esap. 

taynes, and bringe the hilles to poulder. Thou shalt fanne them, ¢ the wynde shal carie them awaye, q the whyrlwynde shal scatre thé.
But thou shalt reioyse in the LORDE, and shalt delite in praysinge the holyone of Israel.

When the thurstie and poore seke water q fynde none, *& when their tunge is drie of thurst : ^I geve it them, saieth the LORDE. l the God of Israel forsake them not. I bringe forth floudes in the hilles, ¢ welles in the playne feldes. I turne $ wildernes to ryuers, and the drie londe to condytes of water. [plante in the wayst grounde trees of
Cedre, Boxe, Myrre aud olyues. And in the drie, I set Fyrre trees, elmes and hawthornes together. All this do I, ý they altogether maye se and marcke, perceaue with their hertes, & considre: that the honde of the
LORDE maketh these thinges, and that the holyone of Israel bringeth them to passe.
Stonde at youre cause (saieth the LORDE) and bringe forth youre strogest grounde, coun- celeth the kinge of lacob. Let the goddes come forth them selues, and shewe vs the thinges y are past, what they be: let thé de- clare thé vnto vs, y we maye take them to herte, and knowe them herafter. Ether, let the shewe vs thinges for to come, and tel vs what shalbe done herafter: so shal we knowe, that they be goddes. Shewe somthinge, ether good or bad, so wil we both knowlege y same, q tel it out.

Beholde, ye goddes are of naught, q youre makinge is of naught, but abhomination hath chosen you. Neuertheles I haue waked vp one from the North, x he shal come. And another from the East, which shal call vpo my name, q shal come to the prynces, as the
Potter to his claye, q as y Potter treadeth downe the myre. Who tolde y afore? So wil we confesse q saye, that he is rightuous.
But there is none that sheweth or declareth eny thinge, there is none also that heareth youre wordes. Beholde, I will first graiite the of Sion q lerusalem to be Euangelistes.
But when I eosidre: there is not one amonge thé y prophecieth, nether (when I axe him) y answereth one worde. Lo, wicked are they q vayne, with the thinges also that they take in honde: yee wynde are they, and emptynesse, with their ymages together.

© Gene. 21. c. 4 Esa. 35. b. and 43. c. and 44. a. | 

Fo. derb. 

Fo. derbi, 

The plij. Chapter. a EHOLDE now therfore, this is my ser- uaunt whom I will kepe to my self: “my

electe, In whom my soule shalbe pacified. I will geue him my sprete, that he maye shewe forth iudgment q equyte amonge the Gentiles.
He shal not be an outeryer, ner an hie mynded person. His voyce shall not be herde in y stretes. A brussed rede shal he not breake, q the smokinge flax shal he not quench: but faithfully q truly shal he geue iudgmét. He shal nether be ouersene ner haistie, that he maye restore rightuousnesse vnto the earth: q the Gétiles also shal kepe his lawes. ^Forthus saieth God the LORDE vnto him (Eueu he that made the heauens, and spred them abrode, q set forth the earth with hir encrease: which geueth breath vuto the people that is in it, q to them that dwel therin) I the LORDE haue called ¥ in right- uousnesse, ¢ led the by the honde. Therfore wil I also defende the, q geue the for a coue- naunt of the people, q to be the light of the
Gétiles. “That thou mayest open the eyes of the blinde, let out the prysoners, q them that syt in darknesse, out of the dongeon house.
I myself, whose name is the LORDE, which geue my power to none other, nether myne honoure to the goddes: shewe you these new tidinges, and tel you them or they come, for olde thinges also are come to passe.

^ Synge therfore vnto the LORDE, a new songe of thakes geuynge, blow out his prayse vnto the ende of the worlde. "They that be vpon the see, ¢ all that is therin, prayse him, the Iles q they that dwel in them. Let the wildernes with hir cities lift vp hir voyce, the townes also that be in Cedar. Let them be glad that syt vpon rockes of stone, and let them crie downe from the hie mountaynes: ascribinge almightynes vnto the LORDE, a magnifienge him amonge the Getiles. ‘The
LORDE shal come forth as a gyaunte, and take a stomacke to him like a fresh man of warre. He shal roare and crie, and ouercome his enemies.

I haue longe holden my peace (saieth the 
LORDE) shulde I therfore be still, and kepe sylence for ener? I will crie like a trauelinge

* Matt. 3. d, Matt. 19. d. Matt. 17. a. ^ Esa. 44. e. 
Esa. 40. f. * Esa. 49. b. Luc. 2. c. Zac. 9. b. d Psa. 149. a. * Esa. 44, b, f Matt. 15. b.

The prophet Esap. 

woman, and once wil I destroye, and deuoure. 
I wil make waist both mountayne q hill, x drie vp euery grene thinge, that groweth theron.
I wil drie vp the floudes of water, « drinke vp the ryuers. I wil bringe the blinde in to a strete, that they knowe not: and lede them in to a fotepath, that they are ignoraunt iu. I shal make darknesse light before thé, x the thinge y is croked, to be straight. These thinges will I do, q not forget them. “And therfore let them conuerte, and be ashamed earnestly, that hope in Idols, ¢ saye to fashioned ymages: ye are oure godes.

Heare, o ye deaf men, and sharpen youre sightes to se (o ye blinde.) /But who is blynder, thé my seruaunt? Or so deaf, as my messaungers, whom I sent vnto them? For who is so blynde as my people, a they y haue the rule of them? They are like, as yf thou vnderstodest moch, and keptest nothinge: or yf one herde well, but were not obedient.
The LORDE be merciful vnto them for his rightuousnesse sake, that his worde might be magnified q praysed. But it is a myscheuous a wiked people. ‘Their yonge men belonge all to the snare, q shal be shut in to preson houses. ° They shal be caried awaye captyue and no man shal lowse them. They shal be trodé vnder fote, ^t no man shal laboure to bringe thé agayne. But who is he amonge you, y pondreth this in his mynde, y con- sidreth it, q taketh it for a warnynge in tyme to come ?

i Who suffred Iacob to be trodden vnder fote, and Israel to be spoyled? dyd not the
LORDE? Now haue we synned agaynst him, and haue had no delite to walke in his wayes, nether bene obedient vnto his lawe.
Therfore hath he poured vpon vs his wroothful displeasure, and stroge batell, which maketh vs haue to do on euery syde, yet will we not vnderstode : He burneth vs vp, yet syncketh it not in to oure hartes.

The yliij. Chapter. 
UT now, the LORDE that made the (o 
Iacob) *and he that fashioned the (o Is- rael) saieth thus: Feare not, for I will defende y. I haue called $ by thy name, thou art myne owne. When thou wentest in the

^ Esa, 44. d. ! Baruc 1. d. Tobi, 3. a. 
5 * Esa. 41. b. 4 Re. 17.g. Deut. 7. a. Deu. 
26. d. Ose. 1. b. Exo. 14. e. Dan.3. d. 

Chap. rli, 

5 

Chap. rliiij, water, I was by the, that the stroge floudes shulde not luck fae When thou walkest in the fyre, it shal not burne y, and the flame shall not kindle vpon the. For I am the
LORDE thy God, the holyone of Israel, thy 
Sauioure. I gaue Egipte for thy delyueraunce, the Moryas and the Sabees for the: because thou wast deare in my sight, and because I set by the, and loued the. ^I pilled all men for the, and delyuered vp all people for thy sake, ^that thou shuldest not feare, for I was with the. I wil bringe thy sede from the east, and gather the together from the west.
I wil saye to the north: let go. And to the south, kepe not backe: But bringe me my sonnes from farre, and my doughters from the endes of the worlde: Namely, all those that be called after my name: For thé haue I created, fashioned, and made for myne ho- noure.

33| Bringe forth that people, whether they haue eyes or be blynde, “deaf or haue eares. All nacions shal come in one, and be gathered in one people. But which amonge yonder goddes shall declare soch thinges, ¢ tell vs what is to come? Let them bringe their witnesses, so shal they be fre: for the men shal heare it, and saye: it is truth. But I bringe you wit- nesses (saith the LORDE) euen those that are my seruauntes, whom I haue chosen: to the intent that ye might be certified, and geue me faithful credence: yee and to cosidre, that
I am he, before whom there was neuer eny 
God, and that there shalbe none after me. 
^] am only the LORDE, and without me is there no Sauioure. I geue warnynge, I make whole, I teach you, that there shulde be no straunge God amonge you. And this recorde must ye beare me youre selues (saieth the LORDE) that I am God. And euen he am I from the begynnynge, and there is none,
“that can take eny thinge out of my honde. 
And what I do, can no man chaunge. 

Thus saieth the LORDE the holy one of 
Israel youre redemer: / For youre sake I will sende to Babilon, and bringe all the strongest of them from thence: Namely, the Caldees that boost them of their shippes: Euen I the
LORDE youre holy one which haue made 
Israel, and am youre kinge. Morouer, thus 

a Esa. 41. d. Matt. 8. b. ^ Esa, 29. d. Galat. 3. a. d Esa. 44. b. Apoc. 1. b. f Esa. 5.d, g Exo. 14. e.

^ 1 Cor. 5. d. Apoc. 21. b. 

* Tob. 10. f. 
Ios. 3. d. Ess. 10, s. Esa, 37. f. 

The prophet Esap, 

saieth the LORDE (Euen he that maketh a waye in the see, and a footpath in the mightie waters: which bringeth forth the charettes and horses, the hooste and the power, that they maye fall a slepe and neuer ryse, and be ex- tincte, like as tow is quenched.

^ Ye remembre not thinges of olde, and re- garde nothinge that is past. "Therfore beholde,
I shal make a new thinge, and shortly shall it apeare: Ye shall well knowe it, I tolde it you afore, but I will tell it you agaane.

I will make stretes in the deserte, and ryuers of water in the wildernesse. The wilde beastes shal worshippe me: the dragon, and the Estrich. ‘For I shall geue water in y wildernesse, and streames in the deserte: that
I maye geue drike to my people, whom I chose. This people haue I made for my self, and they shal shewe forth my prayse. For thou (lacob) woldest not call vpon me, but thou haddest an vnlust towarde me, o Israel.
Thou gauest me not thy yonge beastes for burntoffringes, nether didest honoure me with thy sacrifices. Thou boughtest me no deare spice with thi money, nether pouredest the fat of thy sacrifices vpon me. *Howbeit I haue not bene chargeable vnto the in offriges, nether greuous in Incense.

‘But thou hast ladé me with thy synnes, and weeried me with thy vngodlynes: Where as I yet am euen he only, that for myne owne selfes sake do awaye thine offences, x forget thy synnes: so that I wil neuer thinke vpon them. Put me now in remembraunce (for we will reason together) q shewe what thou hast for the, to make the quyte. ™Thy first father offended sore, and thy rulers haue synned agaynst me. Therfore I ether sus- pended, or slewe the chefest prynces: I dyd eurse Iacob, and gaue Israel in to reprofe.

The yiii. Chapter. 

O heare now, o lacob my seruaunt, aud 
"Israel whom I haue chosé. For thus saieth the LORDE, that made the, fashioned the, and helped the, euen from thy mothers wombe: Be not afrayde (o lacob my ser- uaunte,) thou rightuous, whom I haue chosen.
"For I shal poure water vpon the drie grounde, and ryuers vpon the thurstie. I shal i Psal. 106. d. Esa.35.b. 41.0.44. a. — * Esa. 1. b. Tere.
7.c. ' Psal. 24. b. Iere. 33. b. — "^ Gen. 3. b. Nu. 20. b. 

" Tere. 30. b. Iere. 46. g. Esa. 43. a. Esa.41. b. ° Eze. 
36. d. Ioel 2. g. Act. 2. g. 

81 

Fo. derbij. 

B 

a 

Jo. Derdttj. poure my sprete vpon thi sede, and myne encrease vpo thy stocke. They shal growe together, like as the grasse, and as the Willies by the waters side. One will saye: I am the
LORDES. Another wil call vnder the name of Iacob. The thirde shal subscrybe with his honde vnto y LORDE, and geue him self vnder the name of Israel.

Morouer, thus hath the LORDE spoke: 
“euen the kinge of Israel, and his avenger, y 
LORDE of hoostes: I am the first, and the last, and without me is there no God. For what is he, that euer was like me, which am from euerlastinge? Let him shewe his name and do wherthorow he maye be lickened vnto me. Let him tell you forth planely thiges, that are past and for to come: yee and that without eny feare or stoppe. For haue not I euer tolde you hyther to, q warned you? Ye can beare me recorde youre selues. Is there eny God excepte me? or eny maker, that I shulde not knowe him ?

Wherfore all caruers of Idols are but vayne, and their laboure lost. They must beare recorde them selues, that (semge they can nether se ner vnderstonde) they shalbe con- founded. * Who shulde now make a god, or fashio an Idol, that is profitable for nothinge ?
° Beholde all the felashippe of thé must be brought to confucion. Let all the workmasters of them come and stonde together from amonge men: they must be abashed and con- foüded one with another. The smyth taketh yron, and tempreth it with hote coles, and fashioneth it with hammers, v maketh it with all the strength of his armes: Yee somtyme he is faynt for very hunger, and so thurstie, that he hath no more power. The carpenter
(or ymage caruer) taketh me the tymbre, and spredeth forth his lyne: he marketh it with some coloure: he playneth it, he ruleth it, ad squareth it, and maketh it after the ymage of a man, and acordinge to the bewtie of a man: that it maye stonde in the temple.

Morouer, he goeth out to hewe downe 
Cedre trees: He bringeth home Elmes and okes, and other tymbre of the wodd. Or els the F'yrre trees which he planted himself, ad soch as the rayne hath swelled, which wodde serueth for me to burne. Of this he taketh and warmeth himself withall: he maketh a

G 

a Esa. 41. b. Apo. 1. d. Esa. 48. b. Apo. 29. c. Esa. 43. b. 
? Esa. 42. b. * Psal. 113. b. Sap. 13. c. 

The prophet Esap. 

Chap. rlii. fyre of it to bake bred. And after warde maketh a god there of, to hononre it: and an
Idol, to knele before it. One pece he burneth in the fyre, with another he rosteth flesh, that he maye eate roste his bely full: with the thirde he warmeth himself, and saieth: A ha:
I am well warmed, I haue bene at the fyre. 
And of the residue, he maketh him a god, and an Idol for himself. He kneleth before it, he worshippeth it, he prayeth vnto it, and sayeth: delyuer me, for thou art my god.

? Yet men nether considre ner vnderstonde, because their eyes are stopped, that they can not se: and their hertes, that they can not perceaue. They pondre not in their myndes
(for they haue nether knowlege ner vnder- stodinge) to thinke thus: I haue brét one pece in the fyre, I haue baked bred with y coles there of, I haue rosted flesh withall, q eaten it: Shal I now of the residue make an abhominacion, and fall downe before a rotten pece of wodd? The kepinge of dust, and folishnesse of herte hath turned them a syde: so that none of them can haue a fre conscience to thinke: maye not I erre?

Cosidre this (o Iacob and Israel) for thou art my seruaüt. I haue made the, that thou mightest serue me. O Israel, forget me not.
*As for thyne offences, I dryue them awaye like the cloudes, and thy synnes as the myst.
Turne y agayne vnto me, q I will delyuer y. 

Be glad ye heauens, whom the LORDE hath made, let all y is here beneth vpon the earth, be ioyfull. Reioyse ye mountaynes q woddes, with all the trees that are in you: for y LORDE shal redeme Iacob, ¢ shewe his glory vpon Israel. For thus saieth the
LORDE thy redemer, euen he that fashioned the from thy mothers wombe: /I am the
LORDE, which do all thinges my self alone. 
I only haue spred out the heauens, and I only haue layde the foundacion of the earth. I destroye the tokens of witches, and make the
Sothsayers go wronge. As for the wise, I turne them bacward, and make their conninge folishnesse.

But I set vp the purpose of my seruauntes, and fulfil the councel of my messaigers. I

* Esa. 43. d. f Rom. 11. d. Gen. 1. a. 
Esa. 4. c. 

4 Esa. 42. c. 

Chap. rib. 

grounde: be drie. And I drie vp thy water floudes. I saye to Cirus: thou art myne hyrd man, so that he shal fulfill all thinges after my will. I saye to Ierusalem: be thou buylded, and to the téple: be thou fast grounded.

The rlo. Chapter. 

HUS saieth the LORDE vnto Cirus his anoynted, whom he ledeth by y right hode: that the people maye fall downe before him: I wil lowse the gyrdle of kinges, y they shal open the gates before thy face, and not to shut their dores. I wil go before the, and make the croked straight. I shal breake the brasen dores, t burst the yron barres. I shall geue the the hyd treasure, q the thinge which
Is secretly kepte: that thou mayest knowe, y 
¿I the God of Israel haue called the by thy name: and that for Iacob my seruaunt sake, q for Israel my chosen. For I called the by thy name, and ordened the, or euer thou knewest me: Euen I the LORDE, “before whom there is none other, for without me there isno God. I haue prepared the, “or euer thou knewest me: that it might be knowne from the risynge of the Sonne to the goinge downe of the same, that all is nothinge without me.
* For I am the LORDE, « there is els none. 
It is I y created the light and darcknes, I make peace and trouble: Yee euen I the
LORDE do all these thinges. ‘The heauens aboue shal droppe downe, and the cloudes shal rayne rightuousnes. ‘The earth shal open it self, and brynge forth health, and therby shal rightuousnes florish. Euen I the LORDE

shal bringe it to passe. 

f Wo be vnto him that chydeth with his maker, the potsherde with the potter. Saieth y claye to the potter: What makest thou? or, thy worke serueth for nothige? Wo be vnto him, y saieth to his father: why begettest thou? And to his mother: why bearest thou?
Thus saieth the LORDE, euen the holy one q maker of Israel: Axe me of thinges for to come, concernynge my sonnes: and put me in remébraunce, as touchinge the workes of my hodes: I haue made the earth, and created ma vpon it. With my hondes haue I spred forth heauen, and geuen a commaundment for all the hooste therof. I shal wake him vp

a i Esd. i.a. ^Gen.39.a. * Esa. 43. b. 4 Tere. 1. a. e Gen. 1. Iudic. 9. d. f lere. 18. a. 19, c. Esa. 29. c.
Ro. 9. d. Eccli. 33. b. € 1 Esd. 1.a. ^ Rom. 11. d. 

The prophet Esap. 

with rightuousnesse, and ordre all his wayes. 
He shal buylde my cite, *x let out my prisoners: q that nether for gift nor rewardes, saieth the
LORDE of hoostes. 

The LORDE hath sayde morouer: The occupiers of Egipte, the marchauntes of the
Moryans and Sabees, shal come vnto the with tribute, they shalbe thine, they shal folowe the, and go with cheynes vpon their fete. They shal fall downe before the, and make supplicacion vnto the. For God (with out who there is none other God) shal be with the. *O how profounde art thou o God, thou
God x Sauioure of Israel? Confounded be ye, and put to dishonoure: go hence together with shame, all ye that be workmasters of erroure: (that is worshippers of Idols.) But
Israel shalbe saued in the LORDE, which is the enerlastinge saluació: They shal not come to shame ner confucion, worlde withont ende.

For thus sayeth the LORDE: ‘euen he that created heauen, the God y made the earth, that fashioned it, and set it forth: I haue not made it for naught, but I made it to be enhabited: Euen I the LORDE, without whom there is none other. I haue not spoken secretly,‘ nether in darcke places of the earth.
It is not for naught, that I sayde vnto the sede of Iacob: seke me. I am the LORDE, which whe I speake, declare the thinge that is rightuous and tme. Let the be gathered q come together, let thé drawe nye hyther, y are escaped of the people: Haue they eny vnder- stondinge, that set vp the stockes of their
Idols, and praye vnto a god, that cà not helpe the? Let men drawe nye, let them come hither, ād aske councel one at another, and shewe forth: What is he, that tolde this be- fore? or, who spake of it, euer sence the begynnynge? Haue not I y LORDE done lit: without " whom there is noue other God?
Ithe true God and sauioure, “and there is els none but I? And therfore turne you vnto me
(all ye endes of the earth) so shal ye be saued, for lam God, q there is els none. I sweare by my self: out of my mouth cometh y worde of rightuousnesse, and that maye no man turne: but all knees shal bowe vnto me,’ and all tunges shal sweare by me, sayenge: Verely in the LORDE is my rightuousnes and

! Esa. 44. c. Baruc 6. 
° Ro. 14. b. Phil. 2. b. 

* Exo. 20. c. 
? Esa. 44. b. 

i Gen. 1. a. m Esa. 48. b.

Fo. Deri. 

Fo. Dery. strength. To him shal mé come: they that thinke scorne of him, shalbe con- founded. And the whole sede of Israel shalbe iustified, q praysed in LORDE.

The ribi. Chapter. 
EUERTHELES Bel shal fall, q Nabo shalbe broken: whose ymages are a burthe for the beastes and catell, to ouerlade the, and to make them weery. They shal syneke downe, and fall together: for the maye not ease them of their burthen, ther- fore must they go in to captiuyte.
Herken vnto me, o house of Iacob, and all ye that remayne yet of the honsholde of Israel: whom I haue borne from youre mothers woinbe, and brought you vp from youre byrth, till ye were growen: 1 I which shall beare you vnto youre last age: I haue made you, I will also norish you, beare you and saue you.
Whom will ye make me like, in fashion or ymage, that I maye be like him? ^Ye fooles
(no doute) wil take out syluer and golde out of youre purses, and weye it, and hyre a gold- smyth to make a god of it, that men maye knele downe and worshipe it. *Yet must he be taken on mens shulders and borne, and set in

“me come: but alll | S rs 

his place, that he maye stonde and not mone. 
Alas that men shulde crie vnto him, which geueth no answere: and delyuereth not the man that calleth vpon him, from his trouble.

Considre this well, and be ashamed, Go in to youre owne selues (O ye runnagates).
Remembre the thinges which are past, sence the begynnynge of the worlde: that I am
God, and that there is els no God, yee and y there i is nothinge like us me. In the be- gyunynge of a thinge, I shewe the ende therof: and I tel before, thinges that are not yet come to passe. With one worde is my deuyce accomplished, q fulfilleth all my plea- sure. I call a byrde out of the east, ^and all that I take in honde, out of farre countrees.
As soone as I commaunde, I bringe it hither:* as soone as I thinke to deuyse a thinge, I do it.

Heare me, o ye that are of an us stomack, but farre from rightuousnesse. I shal bringe forth my rightuousnesse, It is not farre, and my health shal not tarie longe awaye. I wil laye health in Sio, and geue Israel my glory.

* Dani. 14, c, 1 Re.5. a, Tere. 5. a. ? Esa. 44. f. 
Exo. 32. a. * Esa. 44. c. Baruc 6. c. 4 Exo. 16. c e Psal. 148. a. 32. b. f Eze. 16. d. Nau. 3, b.

The prophet = The prophet Esay, Chay, mwi 

The rloij. Chapter. 

Chap. rlbi, 

UT as for the (O doughter, thou virgin «X 

Babilon) thou shalt syt in the dust. 
Thou shalt syt vpon the gronde, and not in a trone (o thou mayden of Chaldea). Thou shalt nomore be called tender, and pleasaüt.
Thou shalt bringe forth the querne, q grynede meel put downe thy stomacher, make bare thy ce, and shalt wade thorow the water oe ‘Thy shame shalbe discouered, ād thy preuyties shal be sene. For I wil auenge me of the, and no man shal let me: saieth oure redemer, which is called the LORDE of hoostes, the holy one of Israel.

Syt still, holde thy tunge, and get the into some darcke corner (O doughter Caldea) for thou shalt nomore be called lady of kyng- domes. I was so wroth with my people, y I punyshed myne enheritaunce,* and gaue them in to thy power. Neuertheles, thou shewdest them no mercy, but euen the very aged men of thé, didest thou oppresse right E with thy yock, t thou thoughtest thus: I shalbe lady for euer. And besyde all that, thou hast not regarded these thinges, nether cast, what shulde come after.

Heare now therfore, thou wilful, that syttest so carelesse, q speakest thus in thine herte:* I am alone, and without me is there none: I shal neuer be wydow, ner desolate agayne.
And yet both these thiges' shal come to the vpo one daye in the twincklinge of an eye:
Namely, wyddowhead, and desolacion. "They shal mightely fall vpon the, for ¥ multitude of thy witches, and for the greate heape of thy coniurers. For thou hast conforted thy self in thy disceatfulnes, and hast sayde: No ma seith me. Thyne owne wisdome q con- nynge hane disceaued the, ^In that thou hast sayde: I am alone, and without me there is none. ‘Therfore shal trouble come vpo f, q thou shalt not knowe, from whéce it shal arise.
Myschefe shal fall vpo y, which thou shalt not he able to put of. A sodane misery shal come vpon the, or euer thou be awarre.

Now go to thy coniurers, and to the multi- tude of thy witches, (whom thou hast bene ac- quanted withal from thi youth) yf they maye helpe the, orstrengthe the. "Thon hast hither

£ Pro. 21. b. Iere. 50. b. 

^ Esa. 10. b. Apo. 18. c. 
ë Dani. 5. e. 

k Esa. 29, c. 

5 

€ 

Chap. rlbiG. to had many councels of them, so let the heauengasers q the beholders of starres, come on now and delyuer the: yee and let the shewe, when these new thinges shall come vpon the. Beholde, they shalbe like strawe, which yf it be kindled with fyre, no man maye rydde it for the vehemence of the flame: And yet it geueth no zynders to warme a ma by, ner cleare fyre to syt by. Euen so shal they be vnto the, whom thou hast vsed q occupide from thy youth. Euery one shal shewe ¥ his erro- neous waye, yet shall none of them defende the.

The rloiij. Chapter. 
EARE this, O thou house of Iacob: ye y are called by the name of Israel, and are come out of one stocke with Iuda: which sweare by the name of the LORDE, and beare witnesse by the God of Israel (but not with treuth and right) ^which are called fre men of the holy citie, as they that loke for conforth in the God of Israel, whose name is the LORDE of hoostes.

The thinges that I shewed you euer sence the begynnynge: Haue I not brought the to passe, immediatly as they came out of my mouth, and declared them ? And they are come? Howbeit I knewe that thou art ob- stinate, and that thy neck hath an yron vane, and that thy brow is of brasse. Neuertheles
I haue euer sence the begynnynge shewed the of thinges for to come, and declared thé vnto the, or euer they came to passe: that thou shuldest not saye: myne Idol hath done it, my carued or cast ymage hath shewed it.
Heare ¢ considre all these thinges, whether it was ye that prophecied the: But as for me,
I tolde the before at the begynnynge, new « secrete thinges, y thou knewest not of: *And some done now not of olde time, wherof thou neuer herdest, before they were brought to passe: that thou canst not saye: I knewe of them. Morouer there be some wherof thou hast nether herde ner knowne, nether haue they bene opened vnto thine eares afore tyme.
For I knew that thou woldest maliciousli offende, therfore haue I called the a trans-

gressoure, euen from thy mothers wombe. 
Neuertheles for my names sake, I haue withdrawen my wrath, and for myne honours

5 Epbe.2. b. Esa.51. c. lerem.3.f. č Esa. 37. f. 
* Exo. 3. b. 4 Esa. 42. b. * Esa, 41. h. Apo. 1. b. f Esa.45.d. €Ro.7.b. 1Tim.1.b, Tit.3.b. Deut. 28.

The prophet Esap. 

fo. dept. sake I haue ouersene the, so that I haue not rooted the out. Beholde I haue pourged the, and not for moneye. I haue chosen the in|€ the fyre of pouerte, And that only for myne owne sake, *for I geue myne Honoure to none other, that thou shuldest not despise me.
Herken vnto me o Iacob," q Israel who I haue called. I am euen he that is, I am y first and the last. My honde is the foundacion of the'earth, ¢ my right honde spanneth ouer the heauens. As soone as I called thé they were there. Gather you all together, ad herken:
Which of yonder goddes hath declared this, that the LORDE wil do by the kinge of
Babilon, (whom he loueth ¢ fauoureth) and by the Caldees his arme? I my self alone haue tolde you this before. Yee I shal call him and bringe him forth, q geue him a pros- perous iourneye. Come nye « heare this: haue
I spoke eny thige darckly/ sence the begyn- nynge? whé a thige begynneth, I am there.

Wherfore the LORDE God with his sprete| 2 hath sent me, And thus saieth the LORDE thine avenger, the holyone of Israel: “I am
LORDE thy God, which teach the profitable thinges, and lede ¥ the waye, that thou shuldest go. Yf thou wilt now regarde my cOmaunde- ment, thy welthynes shalbe as the water streame: q thy rightuousnes as the wawes flowinge in the see. Thy sede shalbe like as the sonde in the see, a the frute of thy body, like the grauel stones therof: Thy name shal not be roted out, nor,destroyed before me.
Ye shal go awaye from Babilon, and escape the Caldees with a mery voyce. “This shalbe spoken of, declared abrode, q go forth vnto the ende of the worlde: so that it shalbe sayde:
The LORDE hath defended his seruaunte 
Iacob, that they suffred no thurste,’ whé they trauayled in the wildernesse. He claue the rockes a sonder, and the water gusshed out.
As for the vngodly, they haue no peace, saieth the LORDE-

MESSIAS. 

The plir. Chapter. 
ERKEN ynto me, ye Iles, and take hede|q ye people from farre: The LORDE hath called me fro my byrth, and made mécion of my name fro my mothers wobe: ‘he hath

1 Esd. 1. b. i Exo. 17. hb. Nu, 20. b. t Esa. 51. c. Eph. 6. b.

^ Tere. 51. a. k Esa. 57. c.

fo. Depry. 

B 

made my mouth like a sharpe swerde, vnder 
¥ shadowe of his honde hath he defended me, and hyd me in his quyuer, as a good arowe, and sayde vnto me: ‘Thou art my seruaunt
Israel, I wilbe honoured in the.^ Then an- swerde I: I shal lese my laboure, I shal spende my strength in vayne. Neuertheles, I wil commytte my cause and my worke vnto the LORDE my God. And now saieth the
LORDE (eué he that fashioned me fro my mothers wombe to be his seruaüte, that I maye bringe lacob agayne vnto him: how- beit, Israel will not be gathered vnto hi agayne.
In whose sight I am greate, which also is my 
LORDE, my God and my strégth.) Let it be but a smal thinge, that thou art my ser- uaunt, to set vp the kinreddes of lacob, q to restore the destructio of Israel: ^yf I make the not also the light of the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my health vnto the ende of the worlde.

Morouer thus saieth the LORDE the aveger and holy one of Israel, because of the abhorringe and despisinge amonge the
Gentiles, concernynge the seruaunt of all them y beare rule: Kynges and prynces shal se, and arise and worshipe, because of the
LORDE that he is faithfull: and because of the holy one of Israel, which hath chosen the.

* And thus saieth the LORDE : In the tyme apoynted wil I be present with the.
And in the houre of health wil I helpe the, ¢ delyuer the. I wil make the a pledge for y people, so y thou shalt helpe vp the eart agayne, and chalenge agayne the scatred here- tages: ^'That thou mayest saye to y presoners: go forth, q to them that are in darknesse: come in to the light, that they maye fede in the hie wayes, « get their lyuynge in all places.
There shal nether hunger ner thurste, heate nor Sonne hurte them. ‘For he that fauoureth them, shal lede them, and geue them drike of the springe welles. I will make wayes vpon all my mountaynes, and my fote pathes shalbe exalted. And beholde, they shal come from farre: lo, some from the north and west, some from the south. / Reioyse ye heauens, and synge prayses thou earth:
Talke of ioye ye hilles, for God wil coforte his people, q haue mercy vpon his, y be in trouble.

* Ioh. 17. a. 5 Esa. 42. hb. Act. 13. g. Ioh. 8. b. 
*2 Cor. 6.a. lere. 11.a. Esa. 42. a. 4 Luc. 4. c. Zach. 9. b. 

The prophet (say. 

Chap. lir. 

Then shal Sion saye: God hath forsaken |B me, and the LORDE hath forgotté me. z Doth a wife forget the childe of hir wombe, ad the sonne who she hath borne? And though she do forget, yet wil not I forget the.
Beholde, I haue wntten the vp vpon my hondes, thy walles are euerin my sight. They that haue broken the downe, shal make haist to buylde the vp agayne: and they that made the waist, shal dwell in the. Lift vp thine eyes, and loke aboute the: all these shal gather them together,“ and come tothe. As truly as
I lyue (saieth the LORDE) thou shalt put them all vpo the, as an apparell, and gyrde thé to the, as a bryde doth hir lewels. As for thy londe that lieth desolate, waisted q destroyed: it shalbe to narow for thé, that shal dwell in it. And they y wolde deuoure the, shalbe farre awaye. ‘Then the childe whó y bare shall bringe forth vnto ¥, shal saye in thine eare: this place is to narow, syt nye together, y I maye haue rowme. ‘Then shalt thou thinke by thy self: Who hath begotté me these? seinge I am bare q aloe, a captyue q an outcast? And who hath norished thé vp for me? I am desolate q alone, but fro whéce come these ?

And therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: 
Beholde, I will stretch out myne honde to the 

Gentiles, and set vp my token to the people. |£ 

They shal bringe the thy sonnes in their lappes, q carie thy doughters vnto y vpon their shulders. For kinges shalbe thy noursinge fathers, and Quenes shalbe thy noursinge mothers. They shal fall before the with their faces flat vpon the earth, and lick vp the dust of thy fete: that thou mayest knowe, how that I am the LORDE. ‘And who so putteth his trust in me, shal not be confounded.
Who spoyleth the giaunte of his pray? or who taketh the presoner from the mightie ?
And therfore thus saieth the LORDE: The prisoners shalbe taken from the giaunte, and the spoyle delyuered from the violéte: for I wil maynteyne thy cause agaynst thine aduer- saries, and saue thy sonnes. And wil fede thine enemies with their owne fleshe, and make thé drinke of their owne bloude, as of swete wyne. And all flesh shal knowe (o
Iacob) that I am the LORDE thy Sauioure, and stronge auenger.

6 Iere. 14. d. Psal. 111. a. 
í Ro. 9. d. 

f Esa, 52, b. 

* Apo. 7. d. 
Esa. 60. a. 

^ Gen. 15. a. 

Chap. li. 

The l. Chapter. 

a HUS saieth the LORDE: Where is the 

bill of youre mothers deuorcemet, that I sent vnto her ?* or who is the vsurer, to who
Isolde you? Beholde, for youre owne offéces are ye solde: *q because of youre transgres- sion, is youre mother forsake. For why wolde no mà receaue me, when I came? q when I called, no man gaue me answere. Was my hode clene smyté of, that it might not helpe? or, had I not power to delyuer? ‘lo, at a worde I drike vp the see, q of water floudes I make drie léde: so y for want of water, the fish corruppe and die of thurst. As for heauen, I clooth it with darcknesse, and put a sack vpon it.

The LORDE God hath geué me a wel lerned tüge, so that I can conforte them which are troubled,’ yee q y in due season. He waked myne eare vp by tymes in y mornynge
(as ¥ scolemasters do) y I might herké. ‘The 
LORDE God hath opened myne eare, ther- fore ca I not saye naye,/ ner with drawe my self, but 1 offre my backe vnto y smyters, and my chekes to the nyppers. I turne not my face fro shame ad spittinge, for the LORDE
God helpeth me, therfore shal I not be co- founded. I haue hardened my face like a flynt stone, for I am sure, that I shal not come to confucion. Myne aduocate speaketh for me, who wil then go with me to lawe?
Let vs stode one agaynst another: yf there be eny that wil reason with me, let him come here forth to me. Beholde, the LORDE
God stondeth by me, * what is he that can condempne me? lo, they shalbe all like as an olde cloth, ^which y mothes shal eate

ee who so feareth the LORDE amoge you, let him heare the voyce of his seruaüt. Who so walketh in darcknesse, q no light shyneth vpo him, let him hope in the
LORDE, and holde him by his God. But take hede, ye haue all kyndled a fyre, and gyrded youre selues with the flame: Ye walke in the glistrige of youre owne fyre, and in the flame that ye haue kyndled. "This cometh vnto you fro my honde, namely, y ye shal slepe 1n sorowe.

a Jere. 3.a. — ^ Esa. 59.a. ‘Exo. 14, c, Iosu. 3. d. 
4 Exo. 10. c. — *2 Cor. 1. a. — / Psal. 39. b. Iob 30. d.| 
Mat. 26. g. Heb. 13. c. & Ro. 8. f. ^ Psalm 101. i Gen. 21.2. Rom. 4.a., Gen. 12. a. k Esa. 2. a.

The prophet Esap. 

The li. Chapter. 

Fo. derrit. 

ERKEN vnto me, ye that holde of right-| A 

uousnes, ye that seke the LORDE. 
Take hede vnto the stone, wherout ye are hewen, and to the graue wherout ye are digged.
‘Considre Abraham youre father, « Sara that bare you : how that 1 called him alone, pros- pered him wel, q encreased him: how the
LORDE conforted Sio, and repayred all hir decaye: makinge hir deserte as a Paradise, and hir wildernesse as the garden of the
LORDE. Myrth and ioye was there, thankes- geuynge and y voyce of prayse. Haue respecte vnto me then (o my people) and laye thine eare to me: for a lawe, and an ordinaunce shal go forth fro me,‘ to lighten the Gentiles.
It is hard by, that my health « my rightuous- nesse shal go forth, and the people shalbe ordred with myne arme.

The llondes (that is ¥ Gentiles) shal hope in me, and put their trust in myne arme.
Lift vp youre eyes toward heaué, and loke vpon the earth beneth. ’For the heauens shal vanish awaye like smoke, and the earth shall teare like a clothe, q they that dwel therin, shal perish in like maner. "But my health endureth for euer, and my rightuous- nes shall not ceasse. ‘Therfore hercken vnto me, ye y haue pleasure in rightuousnes, "thou people that bearest my lawe in thine herte.
* Feare not the curse of men, be not afrayde of their blasphemies q reuylinges : for wormes a mothes shal eat thé vp like clothe q woll.
But my rightuousnesse shal endure for euer, 
« my sauynge health from generacion to generacion.

Wake vp, wake vp, q be stronge: O thou arme of the LORDE: wake vp, lyke as in tymes past, euer and sence the worlde beganne.
“Art not thou he, that hast wounded that proude lucifer, and hewen the dragon in peces? Art not thou euen he, which hast dried vp the depe of the see, which hast made playne the see grounde, that the delyuered might go thorow? ° That the redemed of the LORDE, which turned agayne, might come with ioye vnto Sio, there to endure for euer? That myrth and gladnesse might be with them: that sorowe q wo might fle from thé? " Yee

! Psal. 101. d. Matt. 24. c. 2 Pet. 3, b. ™ Psalm 36. 
? Tere. 31. f. ° Matt. 10. d. Luc. 12. a. Psal. 101. d. 
P Esa. 14. d, Exo.14.c. ¢ 1 Esd. 3.b. * 2 Cor. 1. a, 

i5 

€ 

Fo. rrj. Cbr prophet Esap. Chap. lý. 
I, I am eue he, that in all thiges geueth you| |thou citie of the holy one. For from this consolacion. What art thou then, thatfearest| |tyme forth, there shal no yncircumcised ner a mortall mà, y childe of man, which goeth| |vncleane person come in the. Shake the frō awaye as doeth the floure? And forgettest the dust, arise q stonde vp, o Ierusalé. Pluck the LORDE that made the,’ that spred out} [out thy neck from the bode, o thou captyue the heauens, and layde the foundacion of the| |doughter Sion. Forthus saieth the LORDE: earth. But thou art euer afrayde for the sight] |^Ye are solde for naught, therfore shal ye be of thyne oppressoure, which is ready to do| |redemed also without eny money. harme: Whereis the wrath of the oppressoure? For thus hath the LORDE sayde: ‘My
It cometh on fast, it maketh haist to apeare:| |people wete downe afore tyme in to Egipte, 
It shal not perish, y it shulde not be able to] |there to be straungers. Afterwarde dyd the destroye, nether hal it fayle for faute of| |kingeofthe Assirians oppresse the, for naught. norishinge. Iam the LORDE thy God, that| | And now what profit is it to me (saieth y make the see to be still) and to rage: whose| |LORDE) y my people is frely caried awaye, name is the LORDE of hoostes. I shal put} |/« brought in to heuynes by their rulers, and my worde also in thy mouth, and defende the] |my name euer still blasphemed? saieth the with the turnynge of my honde: that thou} |LORDE. ‘But y my people maye knowe mayest plante the heauens, and laye the| |my name, I my self will speake in that daye. foundacions of the earth, and saye vnto Sion:| |Beholde, here am I. O how bewtiful are the thou art my people. fete of the Embassitoure, y bringeth the mes-
| Awake, Awake, and stonde vpo Ierusalem,| |sage fro the mountayne, ^a proclameth peace: 
*thou that from the honde of the LORDE, I brigeth the good tydinges, q preacheth hast dronké out the cuppe of his wrath;| |health, q saieth vnto Sion: Thy God is the thou that hast supped of, and sucked out| jkinge. Thy watchme shal lift vp their voyce, the slombringe cuppe to the botome. For| |with loude voyce shal they preach of him: for amonge all the sonnes whom thou hast be-| they shal se him present, whé the LORDE gotten, there is not one that maye holde the| |shal come agayne to Sion. vp: and not one to lede the by the honde, of Be glad, ʻo thou desolate Ierusale, q reioyse all the sonnes that thou hast norished. Both! |together: for the LORDE will coforte lis these thinges are happened vnto the, but who is sory for it? Yee, destruction, waistinge, hunger q swerde: but who hath conforted the?
Thy sonnes lie comfortles at y heade of euery strete like a take venyson, q are ful of y ter- rible wrath of LORDE, q punyshmét of thy
God. And therfore thou miserable q dronke| |amonge soch, And be cleane, ye that beare the 
(howbeit not with wyne) Heare this: Thus] |vessell of the LORDE. But ye shal not go saieth thy LORDE: thy LORDE q God, | |out with sedicio, ner make haist as they that fle defender of his people: Beholde, I wil take| |awaye: for the LORDE shal go before you,
ý slobrige cuppe out of thy héde, eué ý cuppe| |"ad the God of Israel shal kepe the watch. with the dregges of my wrath: y fro hence Beholde, my seruaunt shal deale wysely, forth thou shalt neuer drinke it more, q wil) {therfore shal he be magnified, exalted q put it 7 their hode that trouble the: which| |greatly honoured. Like as y multitude shal haue spoken to thy soule: stoupe downe, that} |woódre vpon him, because his face shalbe so we maye go ouer the: make thy body eaué deformed q not as a mans face, q his bewtie with the grounde, and as the strete to go vpon.| {like no man: Euen so shal the multitude of the Getiles loke vnto him, q y kinges shal
The lij. Chapter. shut their mouthes before him. For they y a NM Sion vp, take thy strength vnto the:| |haue not bene tolde of him, shal se him : "and put on thine honest rayment o Ierusal&,| |they y herde nothinge of him, shal beholde him.

people, he wil delyuer lerusale. The LORDE wil make bare his holy arme,‘ q shewe it forth in the sight of all the Gétiles, q all the endes of the earth shal se the sauynge health of oure
God. ‘Awaye, Awaye, get you out fro thence, 
& touch no vncleane thinge. Go out from 

e Esa. 40. a. 1 Pet. 1. d. * Esa. 49. a. Matt. 8. c. € Naum 2, d. ^ Ro. 10. c. i Esa. 49. d. * Psal. 97.a. e Psal. 74. b. Tere, 25. c. 4 Ro. 7. b. * Gen. 46. a. 12 Cor.6.d. ^" Exo.13.d. "Rom. 15.c. Esa. 65. a.
Exo. 1.a. 4 Re. 18. fRo.2.d. Eze. 36.d. 

Chap. tiii. 

The fij. Chapter. a UT who geneth credence vnto oure preachinge ? “Or to who is the arme of the LORDE knowne? He shal growe before the LORDE like as a braüch, q as a rote in a drie grounde. He sha] haue nether bewty ner fauoure. When we loke vpon him, there shalbe no fayrnesse: we shal hane no lust vnto him. ^He shalbe the most symple
€ despised of all, which yet hath good expe- rience of sorowes q infirmities. We shal reken him so symple a so vyle, that we shal hyde oure faces fro him. — ' Howbeit (of a treuth) he only taketh awaye oure infirmite, q beareth oure payne: ^Yet we shal iudge him, as though he were plaged and cast downe of God: where as he (not withstédinge) shal be woüded for oure offences, t smytten for oure wickednes.
For the payne of oure punyshmét shalbe layde vpó him, « with his stripes shal we be healed.

As for vs, we go all astraye (like shepe), euery one turneth hisowne waye. But thorow him, the LORDE pardoneth all oure synnes.
He shal be payned q troubled, ad shal not ope his mouth. * He shalbe led as a shepe to be slayne, yet shal he be as still as a lambe before the shearer, q not open his mouth.
He shal be had awaye, his cause not herde, q without eny iudgment : Whose generacion yet no man maye nombre, when he shalbe cut of fro the grounde of the lyvinge: Which pu- nyshment shal go vpon him, for the trans- gression of my people. “His graue shalbe geué him with the codemned, ¢ his crucifienge with the theues, * Where as he dyd neuer violence ner vnright, nether hath there bene eny disceatfulnesse in his mouth.
€| Yet hath it pleased y LORDE to smyte him with infirmite, ^that when he had made his soule an offeriuge for synne, he might se a loge lastinge sede. And this device of the
LORDE shal prospere in his honde. With trauayle and labonre of his soule, shal he optayne greate riches. My rightuous sernaunt shall with his wisdome iustifie q delyner the multitude, for he shal beare awaye their synnes.
"Therfore wil I geue him the multitude for his parte, a he shal deuyde the stroge spoyle

a Ro. 10. c. Iob. 12. e. — ^ Hebr. 3. a. ¢ Math.8. b. 
1 Pet. 2. d. 4 2 Cor. 11. c. e Tere, 11. d. Actu. 8. f. 
Mat. 27. b. 1 Cor. 5.c J Mat. 27. e. g 2 Cor, 5. c. 
1Pet.2.d. * Joba. 12. c. Rom.8.d. í Rom. 3. c. 

The prophet Esap. 

Fo. Derr. 

because he shal geue ouer his soule to death, 
*q shalbe rekened amonge the transgressours, which neuertheles shal take awaye y synnes of the multitude, and make intercession for the myszdoers.

The tiiij. Chapter. eee be glad now, thou barë that |

bearest not. Reioyce, synge q be mery, thou y art not with childe: For the desolate hath moo children, ‘then the maried wife, saieth the LORDE. Make thy tente wyder, q sprede out the hanginges of thine habitacio: spare not, laye forth thy coardes, and make fast thy stakes: for thou shalt breake out on the right syde and on the left, « thy sede shal haue ¥ Getiles in possession, ad dwel in the desolate cities. — F'eare not, for thou shalt not be confoüded : Be not ashamed, for thou shalt not come to confucion. Yee thou shalt forget the shame off thy youth, and shalt not re- membre the dishonoure of thy wedowheade.
For he that made the, shalbe thy LORDE t husbonde (whose name is the LORDE of hoostes) "x thine avenger shalbe euen the holy one off Israel, the LORDE of the whole worlde. For the LORDE shal call the, beinge as a desolate soroufull woman, and as a yonge wife that hath broken hir wedlocke : saleth thy God.

A litle while haue 1 forsaken the, "but with greate mercifulnes shal I take the vp vnto me. Whé I was angrie, I hid my face from the for a litle season, but thorow euerlastinge goodnesse shal I pardon the, saieth the
LORDE thine avenger. And this must be vnto me, as the water of Noe: For like as I haue sworne y I wil not bringe the water off
Noe eny more vpó the worlde:^ So haue l sworne, ”ý I wil neuer be angrie with the, ner reproue the: The mountaynes shall remoue, q the hilles shal fall downe: but my louynge kyndnesse shal not moue, and the bonde off my peace shal not fall downe fro y, saieth y
LORDE thy merciful louer. 

Beholde, thon poore, vexed « despised : I £ wil make thy walles of precious stones, *« thy foundacié of Saphires, thy wyndowes off
Cristall, thi gates of fyne cleare stone, « thy borders of pleasaiit stones. Thy childré shal

B 

* Mare. 15. d. Luc. 22.b. ^ Gala.4. d. — " Esa, 62. a. 
Eze. 16. b. Esa. 48. a. n Esa. 26. d. Psal. 29, a. 
? Gen. 9. b 12:93 YS T. C. ? Esa. 6. b. 

' fo. Derr. The prophet Esap. Chap, Ib. 
2i 

all be taught of God," q I wil geue thé plen-| |exceade yours, £q my thoughtes yours. And teousnes of peace. In rightuousnes shalt thou} like as the rayne q snowe cometh downe from be grounded, q be farre fró oppression: for| |heaué, v returneth not thither agayne, but the which thou nedest not be afrayed, nether| |watereth the earth, maketh it frutefull q grene, for hynderaiice, for it shal not come nye the.| |that it maye geue corne q breade vnto the
Beholde, y aleaunt y was farre fro the, shal] |sower: So the worde also that commeth out dwell with the: the y wassomtymeastraunger| |of my mouth, shal not turne agayne voyde vnto the, shalbe ioyned with the: Beholde, I| |vnto me, but shal accoplish my wil q prospere make the smyth y bloweth the coles in the| |in the thinge, wherto I sende it. And so fyre, q he maketh a weapon after his hondy| |shal ye go forth with ioye, q be led with worke. J make also the waister to destroye:| |peace. ‘The mountaynes and hilles shal synge but all the weapens y are made agaynst the,| |with you for ioye, and all the trees of the shal not prospere. And as for all tunges,| |felde shal clappe their hondes. For thornes, y shal resiste the in iudgmet, ^thou shalt] |there shal growe Fyrre trees, ¢ Myrte tre ouercome the, t codemne them. ‘This is the} |in the steade of breres. And this shal be done heretage of the LORDES sernauntes, q the} |to the prayse of the LORDE, q for an euer- rightuousnes that they shal hane of me,| |lastinge toke, that shal not be taken awaye. saieth the LORDE.

The Ibi. Chapter. 
The lo. Chapter. HUS saieth y LORDE: Kepe equite, 
OME to the waters all ye, y be thurstie, T and do right, for my sauynge health a ye that haue no moneye. Come, bye,| {shal come shortly, q my rightuosnes shalbe that ye maye haue to eate. Come, bye wyne| |opened. Dlissed is the man y doth this, q the t mylck, without eny money, or moneye| mans childe which kepeth the same. He that worth, Wherfore do ye laye out youre moneye,| |taketh hede, ^y he vnhalowe not the Sabbath for the thinge y fedeth not, and spende youre| |(that is) he that kepeth himself that he do no laboure aboute the thinge that satisfieth yon} |euel. Then shal not the straunger, which not? But herké rather vnto me, ad ye shal] |cleaueth to the LORDE, saye: ‘Alas the eate of the best, t youre soule shal haue hir, | LORDE hath shut me cleane out from his pleasure in pléteousnes. Enclyne youre eares,| |people. Nether shal the gelded man saye : lo, t come vnto me, take hede q youre soule shal| |I amadrietre. Forthussaieth the LORDE, lyue. ^For I will make an euerlastinge coue-| first vnto the gelded y kepeth my Sabbath: naunt with you, eué the sure mercies of Dauid.| |Namely: that holdeth greatly of the thinge
Beholde, I shal geue him for a witnesse| that pleaseth me, and kepeth my couenaut: amoge y folke, for a prynce q captayne vnto| |Vnto them wil I geue in my housholde and the people. Lo, thou shalt call an vnknowne| |with in my walles, a better heretage t name: people: t a people that had no knowlege of! |‘ thé yf they had bene called sonnes q daugh- the, shall runne vnto the: because off thej |ters. I wil geue them an euerlastinge name,
LORDE thy God, ¥ holy one of Israel, which| | that shall not perishe. Agayne, he saieth vnto glorifieth the. Seke the LORDE while he| |the straugers that are disposed to sticke to maye be founde, call vpo him while he is nye.| |the LORDE, to serue him, q to loue his
‘Let the vngodly man forsake his wayes, àd| |name: That they shalbe no bode mē. And 
‘the vnrightuons his ymaginacios, a turne |. jall they, which kepe thé selues, that they vn- agayne vnto the LORDE, so shal he be mer-| |halowe not the Sabbath, namely: that they ciful vnto him: and to oure God, for he is] | fulfill my couenaut: Them wil I bringe to my redy to forgeue. holy moutayne, ^t make the ioyfull in my house
For thus saieth the LORDE: My thoughtes| |of prayer. Their burnt offringes and sacrifices are not youre thoughtes, t youre wayes are| |shalbe accepted vpo myne aulter, "for my not my wayes: But as farre as the heauens| |house shalbe an house of prayer for all people. are hyer then the earth, so farre do my waies Thus saieth the LORDE God which ga-

*1 Ioh. 2. d. Ioh. 6. c. * Luc, 21. b. Actu, 4.a.| |E Deu. 32. a. ^ Esa. 58. c. i Deu. 25. a. 
* Kees, 51. d. Ioh. T. d. Apo. 22. d. 4 Act. 13. d.| |*Ioh.1.2. ^1Mace.7.e, ™ Math.21. b. 3 Reg. 8. f, 

Chap. lot. The prophet Esap. 

thereth together the scatred of Israel: ^I wil bringe yet another cógregacion to him. All the beastes of the felde, q all the beastes of y wod, shal come to deuoure hi. For his watch- men are all blinde, they haue alltogether no vnderstondinge, they are all domme dogges,
^ not beinge able to barcke, they are slepery : slogish are they, q lie snortinge: they are shamelesse dogges, y be neuer satiszfied. The sheperdes also in like maner haue no vnder- stondinge, but euery man turneth his owne waye, ^euery one after his owne couetousnes, with all his power. Come (saye they) I wil fetch wyne, so shal we fyll oure selues, that we maye be dronken. And do tomorow, like as to daye, yee and moch more.

The loij. Chapter. a U'T in the meane season y righteous perisheth, q no mà regardeth it in his hert. Good godly people are taken awaye, q no ma cosidreth it. “Namely: that the righ- teous is conuayed awaye thorow y wicked: that he himself might be in rest, lie quietly vpon his bed, q lyue after his owne pleasure.
Come hither therfore ye charmers children, 
*ye somes of the aduoutrer q the whore: 
Wherin take ye youre pleasure? Vpo whom gape ye with youre mouth, q bleare out youre tonge? Are ye not childré of aduoutry, q a sede of dissimulacion? / Ye take youre plea- sure vnder the okes, a vnder all grene trees, the childe beynge slayne in the valleys, « dennes of stone. ‘Thy parte shalbe with the stony rockes by the ryuer: Yee euen these shal be thy parte. For there thou hast poured meat and drynkoffringes vnto thé. Shulde I ouersee that? ‘Thou hast made thy bed vpon hie mountaynes, thou wentest vp thither, and there hast thou slayne sacrifices. Behynde the dores q postes, hast thou set vp thy re- membraunce ?

When thou haddest discouered thyself to another then me, when thou wétest downe, q made thy bed wyder (that is) when thou didest carue the certayne of yonder Idols, ¢ louedest

33|their couches, where thou sawest thé: Thou wentest straight to kinges with oyle q dyuerse oyntmentes (that is) £ thou hast sent thy mes- saungers farre of, and yet art thou fallen in to

a Mar.11.b. Luc. 19.d. ^ Iere.12.b. € Iere.6. b. 

Esa. 22. b. 1 Cor. 15.c. Sapi. 2. b. 4 Sap. 2. b. 

Eccli. 33. b. e Matt. 12. d. f Eze. 16. b. Esa. 65. a. lere. 7. a. Deut. 18. b. Eze. 20. d. Leui. 20. a. Deut. 32. c.

Fo. Derrotj. the pyt therby. Thou hast had trouble for $ multitude of thyne owne wayes, yet saydest thon neuer: I wil leaue of. “Thon thinkest to haue life (or health) of thy self, and ther- fore thou beleuest not that thou art sick. For when wilt thou be abaszshed or feare, seinge thon hast broken thy promyse, q remembrest not me, nether hast me in thine hert? Think- est thou, that I also will holde my peace (as afore tyme) y thou fearest me not? Yee verely I wil declare thy goodnes q thy workes, but they shal not profit Y, ‘whé thou criest, let thy chosen heape deus: the. But the wynde shal take-them all awaye, q cary thé into y ayre. Neuertheles, they y put their trust in me, shal inheret the londe, and haue my holy hill in possession.

And therfore thus he saieth: Make redy, make redy, and clense y strete, take vp what ye can out of the waye, that ledeth to my people. For thus saieth the hie and excellit, euen he that dwelleth in* euerlastingnesse, whose name is the holyone: ^I dwel hie aboue and in the sanctuary, q with him also, y is of a cótrite and hüble sprete: y I maye heale a troubled mynde, and a cotrite herte. "For I chide not euer, q am not wroth with out ende.
But y blastinge goeth fro me, though I make the breath. Iam wroth with hi for his coue- tousnes ¢ lust, I smyte him, I hyde me, and am angrie, whé he turneth him self, and foloweth y bywaye of his owne hert. But yf I maye se his right waye agayne, I make him whole, I lede him, and restore him vnto them whom he maketh ioyful, q that were sory for him. I make the frutes of thakesgeuinge.
I geue peace vnto them that are farre of," and to them that are nye, saye I the LORDE, that make him whole. But the wicked are like the raginge see, that ca not rest, whose water fometh with the myre q grauel. " Eué so y wicked haue no peace, saieth my God.

The lbiij. Chapter. 

ND therfore crie now, "as loude as thou canst. Leaue not of, lift vp thy voyce

like a tropet, and shewe my people their offences, and y house of Iacob their syunes.
For they seke me dalye, and wil knowe my wayes, euen as it were a people that dyd g Ose. 12. a. Eze. 16. b. ^ Math. 9. b. i Iere, 2. d.
Deut. 32, d. * Peal, 50, b, Esa. 61. a. ! Psal. 101. a. 

m Ephe. 2. d. " Esa, 48. d. e Eze. 3. c. lere. 19. a, 
Ionz 3. a. Mat. 10. a. and 28. c. 

Fo. brrrbiij. 

Cbr prophet Esap. 

Chap. lir. 

right, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God. They argue with me concernynge right iudgment, and wil pleate at the lawe with their God. Wherfore fast we (saye they) and thou seist it not? we put oure liues to straitnesse, and thou regardest it not?

Beholde, when ye fast, youre lust remayneth still: “for ye do no lesse violence to youre detters: lo, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smyte him with youre fist, that speaketh vnto you. Ye fast not (as somtyme) that youre voyce might be herde aboue. *Thynke ye this fast pleaseth me, that a mà shulde chasteu himself for a daye, and to wryth his heade aboute like an hoke in an hairy cloth, q to lye vpon the earth? Shulde that be called fastinge, or a daye y pleaseth ý LORDE?
But this fastinge pleaseth not me, “till ¥ tyme be thou lowse him out of bondage, that is in thy daunger: that thou breake the ooth of wicked bargaynes, that thou let the oppressed go fre, and take from them all maner of bur- thens. “It pleaseth not me, till thou deale thy bred to the hongrie, q brynge the poore fatherlesse home in to thy house, when thou seist the naked that thou couer him, and hyde not thy face fro thine owne flesh. Then shal thy light breake forth as y mornynge, and thy health florish right shortly: “thy rightuous- nesse shal go before the, and y glory of the
LORDE shal embrace the. 

Then yf thou callest, the LORDE shal answere the: ‘yf thou criest, he shal saye: here I am. Yee yf thou layest awaye thy burtheus, and holdest thy fyngers, and ceasest from blasphemous talkinge, yf thou hast com- passion vpon the hongrie, and refreszshest y troubled soule: £ Then shal thy light springe out in the darknesse, and thy darknesse shalbe as the noone daye. The LORDE shal euer be thy gyde, and satisfie the desyre of, thine hert, and fyl thy bones with marry. Thou shalt be like a freshwatred garden, and like the founteyne of water, that neuer leaueth runnynge. Then the places that haue euer beue waist, shalbe buylded of the: there shalt thou laye a foundacion for many kyn- reds. Thou shalt be called the maker vp of hedges, and ý buylder agayne of y waye of the Sabbath.

4 Eze, 18. b. 
£ Zach. 7.a. 
5 Esa. 50.a. 

* Esa. 1. b. 
Mat. 25. b. 
| Mat. 5. b. 

e Deu. 15.2. 
J Pro. 21. b. 
Esa. 66. d. 

è Zacb. 7. 
* Luc. 11. d. 
^ Esa. 56. a. 

^ Yee yf thou turne thy fete from the Sab- bath, so that thou do not the thinge which pleaseth thyself in my holy daye: then shalt thou be called vnto the pleasaunt, holy q glo- rious Sabbath of the LORDE, where thou shalt be in hououre: so y thou do not after thine owne ymaginacion, nether seke thine owne wil, ner speake thine owne wordes. The shalt thou haue thy pleasure in $ LORDE, which shal carie y hie aboue y earth, q fede the with the heretage of Iacob thy father: for the LORDES owne mouth hath so promised.

The lir. Chapter. 
EHOLDE, the LORDES honde is not/@ so shortened y it can not helpe, ‘ nether is his eare so stopped y it maye not heare.
But youre myszdedes haue separated you from youre God, q youre synnes hyde his face from you, y he heareth you not. For youre houdes are defyled with bloude, *and youre fyngers with vnrighteousnesse: Youre lippes speake lesynges, x youre tonge setteth out wickednes. No man regardeth righteousnes, q no mà iudgeth truly. Euery man hopeth in vayne thinges, and ymagiueth disceate, co- ceaueth weerynesse, q bringeth forth euell.
‘They brede cockatrice egges, t weeue y spy- ders webb. Who so eateth of their egges, dieth. But yf one treade vpon thé, there cometh vp a serpent. ‘Their webbe maketh no clothe, q they maye not couer the with their labours. ‘Their dedes are y dedes of wickedues, ¢ ý worke of robbery is in their hodes. Their fete runne to euell, x they make haist to shed innocét bloude. "'Their coucels are wicked coucels, harme q de- strucció are in their wayes. But y waye of peace they knowe not. In their goinges is no equyte, their wayes are so croked, y who so euer goeth therin, knoweth nothinge of peace.

And this is Y cause y equite is so farre fro vs, q Y rightuousnes cometh not nye vs. "We loke for light, lo, it is darknesse: for y morn- yuge shyue, se, we walke in y darke. We grope like $ blynde vpon y wall, we grope euen as one y hath none eyes. We stomble at $ noone daye, as though it were toward night: iu ý fallinge places, like men y are

* Tere. 5. c. Esa. 1. d. "Tob 15. d. 
" Prou. 1. b. Psal. 9. c. Psal. 13. a, Rom. 
3. b. " Sapi. 5.a. Iob 30. c. Deut. 28. c. lob. 12. e. 

Chap. lr. 

The prophet Esap. 

half deed. We roare all like Beeres, q mourne’ 

stil like doues. We loke for equite, but there is none: for health, but it is farre fro vs. For oure offences are many before y, q oure synnes testifie agaynst vs. Yee we must cófesse y we offende, q knowlege, y we do amysse:
Namely, transgresse q dyssemble agaynst ý 
LORDE, a fall awaye fro oure God: vsinge presüptuous q traytorous ymaginacions, q cast- inge false matters in oure hertes. And ther- fore is equyte gone asyde, q righteousnes stodeth farre of: “treuth is fallen downe in the strete, and the thinge that is playne and open, maye not be shewed. Yee y treuth is lade in preson, and he that refrayneth himself fro euel, must be spoyled.

? When the LORDE sawe this, it displeased him sore, y there was no where eny equite.
He sawe also, that there was no man, which had pitie therof, or was greued at it. And he helde him by his owne power, and clened to his owne rightuousnes. “He put right- uousnes vpó him for a brest plate, q set the helmet of health vpo his heade. He put on wrath in steade of clothige, q toke gelousy aboute him for a cloke: (like as when a man goeth forth wrothfully to recópence his enemies, q to be avenged of his aduersaries.)
Namely, that he might recompence and re- warde the Ilodes, wherthorow the name of the
LORDE might be feared, from the risynge of the Sone: and his magesty, vnto the goinge dowue of the same.

For he shal come as a violent waterstreame, which the wynde of the LORDE hath moued.
? But vnto Sion there shal come a redemer, and vnto them in Jacob that turne from wicked- nesse, saieth the LORDE. I will make this couenaunt with them (sayeth y LORDE):
My sprete that is come vpon the, q the wordes which I haue put in thy mouth, shal neuer go out of thy mouth, nor out of y mouth of thy childré, no ner out of ¥ mouth of thy childers childre, from this tyme forth for euer more.

The ly. Chapter. 
ND therfore get the vp by tymes, for thy light cometh, q the glory of y
LORDE shal ryse vp vpo y. For lo, while y darknesse q cloude couereth the earth q the

a Ose, 4. a. Dani. 8. c. 

è Amos 5, a, — * Ephe. 6. b. 
4 Psal. 13. a. Ro. 11. d. * Act. 26. c. f Esa. 19, e. € Esa, 49, c, Gen. 15. a.

| gather thé selues to the on euery side. 

people, the LORDE shal shewe the light,” a his glory shal be sene in the. "The Gentiles shal come to thy light, fr kynges to the brightnes y springeth forth vpo $. Lift vp thine eyes, t loke rounde aboute the: All these gather thé selues, ¢ come to the. Sonnes shal come vnto y from farre, a doughters shal
When thou seist this, thou shalt maruel exceadingly, and thine hert shalbe opened: when the power of the see shalbe couerted vnto the (that is) whé the strength of the Gentiles shal come vnto the. ‘The multitude of Camels shal couer y, the Dromedaries of Madia and Epha.
All they of Saba shal come, ^bringinge golde t incense, q shewinge the prayse of the
LORDE. All the catel of Cedar shalbe gathered vnto y, the rames of Nabaioth shal serüe the, 'to be offred vpo myne aulter, which
I haue chosen, q in the house of my glory which I haue garnished. But what are these that fle here like the cloudes; and as the doues flienge to their wyndowes?

The Iles also shal gather the vato me, and specially the shippes of ¥ see: that they maye bringe the sounes from farre, and their syluer and their golde with them, vnto the name of the LORDE thy God, vnto the holy one of
Israel, that hath glorified the. ^ Straügers shal buylde vp thy walles, and their kiges shal do the seruyce. smyte the: and when it pleaseth me, I pardon the. Thy gates shal stonde open still both

For when I am angrie, I} 

So. Derr. 

5 

daye and night,’ and neuer be shut: that the|q 

hooste of the Gentiles maye come, and that their kinges maye be brought vnto the. For euery people q kingdome that serueth not the, shal perish, and be distroyed with the swerde.
The glory of libanus shal come vnto the: The 
Fyrre trees, Boxes q Cedres together, to garnish the place of my Sanctuary, for I wil glorifie the place of my fete.

Morouer those shal come knelinge vnto the, y haue vexed the: ¢ all they that despised y, shal fall downe at thy fote. Thou shalt be called the cite of the LORDE, the holy Sion of Israel. Because thou hast bene forsake and hated, so that noman went thorow the: I wil make the glorious for euer and euer, ad ioyful thorow out all posterities. ” Thou shalt

+ Heb. 13. b. 
™ Esa. 49. e. 

Mar. 8, a. ^ Matt. 2, b. Psal, 71. k Esa. 54. b. — ' Apo. 21. g.

So. Derry. 

9 

iX set vp y olde deserte. 

sucke the mylck of the Gentiles, and kinges brestes shal fede the. And thou shalt knowe that I the LORDE am thy Sauioure and defender, the mighty one of lacob. For brasse wil I geue the golde, and for yron syluer, for wod brasse, and for stones yron.
I wil make peace thy ruler, and rightuousnes thyne officer. Violence and robbery shal neuer be herde of in thy londe, nether harme and destruction with in thy borders. Thy walles shalbe called health, t thy gates the prayse of God. “The Sonne shal neuer be thy daye light, 4d the light of the Moone shal neuer shyne vnto the: * but y LORDE himself shalbe thy euerlastinge light, x thy
God shalbe thy glory. 

Thy Sonne shal neuer go downe, a thy 
Moone shal not be taken awaye, for the 
LORDE himself shalbe thy euerlastinge light, ad thy sorouful dayes shalbe rewarded y. Thy people shalbe all godly, v possesse the londe for euer: the floure of my plantinge, the worke of my hondes, wherof I wil reioyce.
The yongest q leest shal growe in to a thou- sande, q the symplest in to a stronge people.
I the LORDE shal shortly bringe this thinge to passe in his tyme.

The (rt. Chapter. 

HE sprete of the LORDE God is with me, for ý LORDE hath anoynted me, t sent me, to preach good tydiges vnto the oore, y l might bynde vp y wounded hertes, y I might preach delyueraunce to ¥ captyue, t open the preson to thé that are bounde :
ý I might declare $ acceptable yeare of y 
LORDE, a the daye of $ avégeaunce of oure 
God: that I might comforte all them that are in heuynesse;? that I might geue vnto them y mourne in Sion, bewty in the steade of asshes, ioyful oyntmet for sighinge, pleasaunt raymét for an heuy mide: That they might be called excellent in rightuousnesse, a platinge of the

LORDE: for him to reioyce in. 
"They shal buylde the loge rough wildernes, 
They shal repayre 

¡the waist places, v soch as haue bene voyde 

thorow out many generaciós. Straügers shal stode x fede youre catel, ¢ the Aleauntes shalbe youre plowmé q reapers. But ye shalbe named the prestes of the LORDE,’ q me

*Apo.2l.g. — ^ Apo. 99. b. — c Luc. 7. c. Luc. 4. c. 
Esa. 11.2. Esa. 66.a. Esa.57.c. 4 Matt, 5. a. Matt. 11. d. 

Cbr prophet Esap, 

shall call you the seruaütes of oure God. Ye shall enioye the goodes of ý Gétiles q tryüphe in their substaüce. For youre greate reprofe
1 shame, shal they haue ioye, y ye maye haue parte with the. For they shal haue dubble possession 1 their lode, q euerlastinge ioye shalbe with them.‘ For I the LORDE, which loue right 4d hate robbery (though it were offred me) shal make their workes ful of faithfulnes, q make an euerlastinge couenaunt with them.

'Their sede also and their generacion shal be knowne amoge the Gentiles, and amóge the people. All they that se them, shall knowe, that they are the hie blessed sede of ¥
LORDE. And therfore I am ioyful in the 
LORDE, q my soule reioyseth in my God. 
For “he shall put vpon me the garmét of health, x couer me with the matle of right- uousnes. He shal decke me like a bryde- grome, q as a bryde that hath hir apparell vpo her. For like as ¥ grounde bringeth forth frute, q as the garde shuteth forth sede:
So shal the LORDE God cause rightuousnes, and the feare of God to florish forth before all the Heithen.

The lrij. Chapter. 

OR Sions sake therfore wil I not holde my tuge, q for lerusalés sake I will not ceasse: vutill their rightuousnes breake forth as ý shyninge light, q their health as a burn- ynge lampe. ‘Then shal the Gétiles se thy rightuousnesse q all kinges thy glory. Thou shalt be named with a new name, which the mouth of $ LORDE shal shewe. Thou shalt be a crowne in the honde of the LORDE, and a glorious garlade in the héde of thy God.
From this tyme forth thou shalt neuer be called the forsake, q thy lode shal nomore be called the wildernesse. But thou shalt be called Hephziba (that is, my beloued) ¢ thy londe Beula (that is) a maried woma: ‘for y
LORDE loueth ¥, x thy lode shalbe inhabi 
And like as a yonge ma taketh a doughter to mariage, so shal God mary himself vnto thy sonnes. And asa brydegrome is glad of his

bryde, so shal God reioyse ouer the. 
] wil set watchmé vpo thy walles (o Ieru- salem) which shall nether ceasse daye nor night, to preach LORDE. And ye also

* Esa. 60. d. 
^ Psal. 131. b. 

J Esa. 66. d. Iere. 33. d. € Luc. 2, d. 
! Eze, 16. b. Osee 2. d. Esa. 54. a 

Chap. Iri. 

E] 

PT Lt) Wl i <<< 
Chap. Iriiij. Che prophet Esap, Fo. Mer shall not kepe him close, nor leaue to speake| {them of his owne fauoure, q acordinge to the of hi, vntill Ierusalé be set vp, q made the| | multitude of his louynge kindnesses. For he prayse of the worlde. "The LORDE hath| |sayde: These no doute wilbe my people, and sworne by his right honde q by his stronge| |no shrékinge children, and so he was their arme, that fro hence forth he wil not geue thy| |Sauioure. “In their troubles he forsoke thé corne to be meate for thine enemies, nerthy| |not, but the angel that went forth from his wyne (wheri thou hast laboured) to be drynke| |presence, delyuered them: Of very loue q for y straungers. But they that hane gathered| |kindnesse that he had vnto them, redemed he in the corne, shal eate it, c geue thankesto the| |them. He hath borne them, and caried them
LORDE: «they that haue borne in the wyne,| |vp euer, sence the worlde begane. But after shall drynke it in the court of my Sanctuary. | |they prouoked him to wrath and vexed his

Stöde back, q departe a sunder, ye y stonde| |holy minde, he was their enemie, and fought vnder y gate, make rowme ye people, repayre| |agaynst them him self. Yet remebred he the the strete, q take awaye y stones, q set out aj |olde tyme, of Moses q his people: ‘How he toke for the people. “Beholde, y LORDE| jbrought them from the water of the see, as a proclameth in the endes of the worlde: tel y, |shepherde doth with his shepe: how he had doughter Sio: se, thy Saluacié cometh, be-| |geuen his holysprete amonge them: howhe had holde, he bringeth his treasure with him, a| |led Moses by the right honde with his glorious his workes go before him. For they who | |arme: how he had deuyded the water before
LORDE delyuereth, shalbe called the holy! |them (wherby he gat him self an euerlastinge people: q as for the, thou shalt be named the} |name) how he led them in the depe, as an greatly occupied, and not the forsaken. horse is led in the playne, that they shulde

" not stomble. The sprete of the LORDE led 
The trij. Chapter. them, as a tame beast goeth in the felde. 
HAT is he this, that cometh from Thus (o God) hast thou led thy people, to 
Edom, with stayned reade clothes of| |make thy self a glorious name withall. Loke 
Bosra: (which is so costly cloth) q cometh inj |downe then from heaué,/ and beholde the so necbly with all his strégth? J am he ý |dwellinge place of thy sanctuary q thy glory. teacheth rightuousnes, q am of power to helpe.| |How is it, y thy gelousy, thy strength, the
Wherfore the is thy clothinge reade, q thy| |multitude of thy mercies and thy louynge raymet like his y treadeth in y wyne presse?| |kyndnesse, wyl not be entreated of vs? * Yet
I haue troddé the presse my self alone, q ofj) |art thou oure father: For Abraham knoweth all people, there was not one with me. Thus! |vs not, nether is Israel acquanted with vs. haue I trodé downe myne enemies in my| |But thou LORDE art oure father and re- wrath,’ and set my fete vpo them in iny in-| |demer, and thy name is euer lastinge^ O dignacion : And their bloude sprange vpo my| | LORDE wherfore hast thou led vs out of thy cloothes, q so haue I stayned all my rayment.| |waye? wherfore hast thou hardened oure
For the daye of vengeauce that I haue take, |hertes, that we feare the not? Be at one in honde, x the yeare of my delyueraunce is| {with vs agayne, for thy seruauntes sake y are come. I loked aboute me, and there was no| |of the generacio of thy heretage. Thy people mà to shewe me eny helpe. I fel downe, and, {hath had out litle of thy Sanctuary in pos- no man helde me vp. Thé I helde me by| |sessio, for oure enemies haue take it in: And myne owne arme, q my feruétnesse susteyned| |we are become, euen as we were from the me. And thus haue I troden downe the| |beginnynge: but thou art not their LORDE, people in my wrath, and bathed them in my} jfor they haue not called vpon thy name. displeasure: In so moch that I haue shed v their bloude vpon the earth. The tiiij. Chapter.

I will declare the goodnesse of the LORDE, THAT thou woldest cleue the heauen in 
“yee and the prayse of the LORDE for all sonder, ¢ come downe: that the moun- that he hath gyuen vs, for the greate good y| |taynes might melt awaye at thy presence, like he hath done for Israel: which he hath gyuen| fas at an hote fyre: and that the malicious

? Esa. 40. b. Zacba. 9. b. Matt, 21. a. Esa. 96. c. 23.c. *Exo.14.c. Psal.76.b. J Deu.26.d. Baruc 
’ Esa. 34. b. * Exo.15.a. Esa.12.a. ĉ Exo. 13. d. 14. d. 2.d. € Matt 6 b. Luc.1l.a. Matt.23.a, ^ Psal.118.b. 

Fo. derrrij. 

: 

5 

might boyle, as the water doth vpon the fyre: 
Wherby thy name might be knowne amoge thine enemies, q y the Gétiles might tréble before y. That thou mightest come downe with thy wonderous straunge workes, then shulde the hilles melt at thy presence. For sence the begynnynge of the worlde there was none (excepte thou o God) that herde or per- ceaued, “nether hath eny eye sene what thou dost for thé, that put their trust in the.

Thou helpest him that doth right with cherefulnesse, and them that thynke vpon thy wayes. But lo, thou art angrie, for we offende, and haue bene euer in synne, and there is not one whole. ^We are all as an ynclene thinge, a all oure rightuousnesses are as the clothes stayned with the floures of a woman: we fall euerychone as the leaf, for oure synnes carie vs awaye like the wynde. There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, that stondeth vp to take holde by the. "Therfore hydest thou thy face from vs, and consumest vs, because of oure synnes.

But now o LORDE, *thou father of ours: we are the claye, and thou art oure potter, and we all are the worke of thy hondes. Be not to sore displeased (o LORDE) and kepe not oure offences to lége in thy remembraunce, but considre that we all are thy people. "The cities of thy Sanctuary lye waist, ^Sion is a wildernesse, and lerusalem a deserte. Oure holy house whieh is oure bewty, where oure fathers praysed the, is brent vp, yee all oure comodities and pleasures are waysted awaye.
Wilt thou not be intreated (LOR DE) for all this? Wilt thou holde thy peace, and scourge vs so sore ?

The lro. Chapter. 
HEY shal seke me, that hitherto haue not axed for me:* they shal fynde me, that hither to haue not sought me. Then shal I saye immediatly, to the people that neuer called vpon my name: I am here, I am here. For thus longe haue I euer holden

out my hondes to an vnfaithful people, that 

go not the right waye, but after their owne 

|ymaginacions: To a people, that is euer de- 

fyenge me to my face. ‘They make their oblacions in gardens, and their smoke vpon

a 1 Cor. 2. b. 5 Ro.3.b. Psal. 13.a. * Matt. 6. b. 
| Iere. 18.b. Ro. 9. c. Ecci. 33.b. Iere. 10. d. Psal. 
,78.a. lere.26.d. ¢ Mich.3.c. © Esa.52.a. Ro. 10. d. 
/ Deut. 12. a. Deut. 14. b. E Leuit.11. a. Deut. 14.8. 

Cbr prophet Esap. 

aulters of bricke, they lurck amonge the graues, and lie in the dennes all night. ‘They eate swyne flesh, and vnclene broth is iu their vessels. Yf thou comest nye them, they saie: touch me not, for I am holyer then thou.

All these men when I am angrie, shalbe turned to smoke and fyre, that shal burne for euer.^ Beholde, it is written before my face, t shal not be forgotten, but recópensed. I shal rewarde it them in to their bosome: ‘I meane youre mysdedes, and the mysdedes of youre fathers together (saieth the LORDE) which haue made their smokes vpon the moun- taynes, and blasphemed me vpon the hilles: therfore will I measure their olde dedes in to their bosome agayne.

Morouer thus saieth the LORDE: ‘like as when one wolde gather holy grapes, men saye vnto him: breake it not of, for it is holy:
Euen so will I do also for my seruauntes sakes, that I will not destroye them all. ‘But I will take a sede out of Iacob, and out of Iuda one, to take possession of my hill. My chosen shal possesse these thinges, t my seruauntes shall dwell there. Saron shalbe a shepefolde, and the valley of Achor” shal geue stallinge for the eatell of my people, that feare me. But as for you, ye are they, y haue forsaken the LORDE, and forgotten my holy hill. Ye haue set vp an aulter vnto fortune, q geué rich drinkoffer- inges vnto treasure. "Pherfore wil I nombre you with the swerde, that ye shall be destroyed all together. "For when I called, no man gaue me answere: when I spake, ye herkened not vnto me, but dyd wickednes before myne eyes, and chosed the thinge that pleased me not.

Chap. Irb. 

B 

Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God:'¢ 

Beholde, my seruauntes shal eate, but ye shall haue honger. Beholde, my seruauntes shall drynke, but ye shal suffre thurste. Beholde, my seruauntes shal be mery, but ye shal be cofounded. Beholde, my seruauntes shal re- loyse for very quietnesse of herte.” But ye, shal crie for sorow of hert, and coplayne for vexacion of mynde. Youre name shal not be sworne by amonge my chosen, for God the
LORDE shal slaye you, and call his ser- uauntes by another name. ” Who so reioyseth vpo earth, shall reioyse in the true God: And
Who so sweareth vpo earth, shal sweare in the 

^ Matt, 25, d. i Iere. 7. a. Esa, 57.a. Eze. 20. d. 
* Ro. 11. b. !3 Re. 19. c. Ro. 9. c. ™ [osu. 7. d. n Pro.1.c. Iere.7?.c. ? Tacob. 4. b. P Tere. 9, d.
Cored.) 2 Cor. 11.8. 

Chap. Irbi. 

true God. For the olde enemite shalbe for- gotten, and taken awaye out of my sight. For lo, I shal make a new heaue, “q a new earth.
And as for the olde, they shall neuer be thought vpo, ner kepte in mynde: but mé shalbe glad and euermore reioyse, for the thinges, that I shall do.

B| For why: Beholde, I shal make a ioyfull lerusale, yee I my self will reioyse with Ieru- salem, q be glad with my people: ^And the voyce of wepinge and waylinge shall not be herde in her from thece forth. There shall neuer be childe ner olde man, that haue not their full dayes. But whe the childe cometh to an hüderth yeare olde, it shall dye. And yf he that is an hüderth yeare of age do wronge, he shalbe cursed. “They shal buylde houses, and dwel in them: they shal plante vynyardes, and eate the frute of them. They shall not buylde, q another possesse: they shall not plante, and another eate: 4 But the life of my people shalbe like a tre, and so shal the worke of their houdes.

My chosen shal lyue longe, they shall not laboure in vayne, ner beget with trouble: for they are the hie blessed sede of the LORDE,
& their frutes with them. And it shalbe, that or euer they call, I shal answere them.* Whyle they are yet but thinkinge how to speake,
I shal heare them. The wolff and the lambe shal fede together, and the lyon shal eate haye like the bullocke. But earth shalbe the ser- pétes meate.” There shal no man hurte ner slaye another, in all my holy hill, saieth the
LORDE. 

The (ybi. Chapter. 

HUS saieth the LORDE: Heaué is my seate, “and the earth is my fote stole.
Where shal now the house stonde, ¥ ye will buylde vnto me? And where shal be the place, y I wil dwel in? As for these thinges, my hode hath made them all, and they are all created, saieth the LORDE. Which of them shal I then regarde? Euē him that is of a lowly troubled sprete, and stodeth in awe of my wordes. For who so slayeth an oxe for me, doth me so greate dishonoure, as he y kylleth a mà. He that kylleth a shepe for me, choketh a dogge. He that bringeth me a 2Pet.3.b. Apo.21.a. ^ ^Apo.21.a. ° Deut.28. c.

4 Geoe, 2. b. lere, 17. b. Psal. 1. a. * Esa. 11. b. 

S Gene. 3. b. € Act. 7. f. Act. 17. d... 3 Re. 8. d. 
2 Par.6.d. Esa.57,c. Esa.61.8. Psal.50.b. ^ ^Iob6.b. 

Che prophet Esap. 

meat offringes, offreth swynes bloude: Who so maketh nie a memoriall of Incense, prayseth the thinge y is vnright. Yet take they soch wayes in honde, and their soule deliteth in these abhominacions.

^ Therfore wil I also haue pleasure in laugh- inge them to scorne, and the thinge that they feare, wil I bringe vpon the. For when I called, no man gaue answere: when I spake, they wolde not heare: But dyd wickednesse before myne eyes, q chose the thinges that displease me. Heare the worde of God all ye, that feare the thinge which he speaketh.
Youre brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my names sake, saye: Let the LORDE magnifie himself, that we maye se youre glad- nesse: ¢ yet they shalbe cofounded.

‘For as touchinge the cite and the temple, 
I heare the voyce of the LORDE, that will rewarde, and recompéce his enemies: like as when a wife bringeth forth a man childe, or euer she suffre the payne of the byrth and angnysh of ý trauayle. Who euer herde or sawe soch thinges? doth the grounde beare in one daye? or are the people borne all at once, as Sion beareth his sonnes? For thus sayeth the LORDE: Am I he that maketh other to beare, and beare not my self? Am not I he that beareth,^ and maketh baren? saleth thy God. Reioyse with lerusalem, q be glad with her, all ye that loue her. Be ioyful with her, all ye that mourned for her.
For ye shal sucke coforte out of hir brestes, and be satisfied. Ye shal taist, and haue delite in the plenteousnesse of hir power. For thus sayeth the LORDE: beholde, I wil let peace 1 to her, like a water floude, q y might of the Heithé like a flowinge streame. Then shal ye sucke, ye shal be borne vpon hir sydes, and be ioyful vpó hir knees. For like asa childe is comforted of his mother, so shal I conforte you, and ye shalbe comforted in Ie- rusalem.' And when ye se this, youre herte shal reioyse, and youre bones shal florish like an herbe.

Thus shal the honde of the LORDE be knowne amonge his seruauntes, and his in- dignacion amonge his enemies. For beholde, the LORDE shal come with fyre, and his charet shal be like a whyrlwynde, that he
Pro. 1. b. Esa. 65. b. 

k Gen. 16. s. 29. f. 30. a. 
Eze. 37, a. 

i Tere. 18. a. 
Math, 5. b. 

Zac. 14. a. 
C hen ach 

So. nur. 

B 

O. Deprptty. maye recompence his vengeaunce in his wrath, and his indignacion with the flame of fyre.
‘For LORDE shal iudge all flesh with the 
|fyre and with his swerde, and there shalbe a greate nombre slayne of the LORDE. Soch as haue made thei selues holy and cleane in the gardens, and those that haue eaten swyne flesh, myce, and other abhominacios, shal be taken awaye together, saieth the LORDE.
For I wil come to gather all people and tonges, with their workes and ymaginacions: these shal come, and se my glory. Vnto them shal
I geue a toké, and sende certayne of thé (that be delyuered) amonge the Gentiles: in to
Celicia, Africa and Lidia (where men can handle bowes) in to Italie also and Greke londe.

“The Iles farre of, that haue not herde speake of me, q haue not sene my glory: shal
‘preach my prayse amonge the Gentiles, and shal bringe all youre brethré for an offringe

a Esa, 61, a. 52. a. 60. a. 65. a. 

The prophet Esap. 

vnto the LORDE, out of al people, vpo horses, charettes and horse lytters, vpo Mooles and cartes to lerusalem my holy hill (saieth the LORDE) like as the children of Israel bringe the offringe in cleane vessels, to the house of the LORDE.

“And I shal take out certayne of them for to be preastes and leuites, saieth LORDE.
For like as the new heaué and the new earth which I wil make, shalbe fast stablished by me: (saieth the LORDE) So shal youre sede and youre name contynue, and there shalbe a new Moone for the other, and a new
Sabbath for the other, q all flesh shal come to worshipe before me, (saieth $ LORDE.)
And they shal go forth, and loke vpo the caryons of them, that haue transgressed agaynst me. For their wormes shal not dye,
“nether shal their fyre be quenched, q all flesh shal abhorre them.

* Esa.61.a. 1 Pet. 2. Rom.12,a, — * Mat. 9. g. Mar. 9, e. 

The ende of the prophet Esap. 

Chap. Irbi. 

The Prophet Peren. 

What Feremp contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
He declareth first his callinge, and in a vision he seith the destruccion of Jerusalem.

Chap. 1I. 
The faithfulnesse and louynge mercy of God: 
Agayne, the vnthanckfulnes of the people. 

Chap. III. 
He crieth vpon the people to amende, and shew- eth them the wrath of God.

Chap. NII. 

He layeth the wrothfull displeasure of God before them, and exorteth the to amendment.

Chap. V. VI. VII. VIII. 

The wrath of God, and the cause therof. Plages and misery for to come.

Chap. IX. 
The prophet mourneth and coplayneth vpon the synnes of the people.

Chap. X. 

He geueth the warnynge, that they folowe not the vses and customes of the Heithe, and sheweth them how vayne a thinge it is to wor- ae ymages, and to forget the true lyuynge

od. 

Chap. XI. 
He puteth them in remembraiice of the coue- naunt, sheweth their misery, t complayneth of his owne persecucion.

Chap. XII. 
The prosperite of the wicked, œ trouble of the 

that are godly. The forsakynge of the lewes, and callynge of the Heithé,

Chap. XIII. 

Sore plages vpo the people, shewed vnto the prophet by the lynninge breche.

Chap. XIIII. 

The derth of frutes. So wroth is God at the people, that he forbiddeth the prophet to praye for them.

Chap. XV. 

God wil not be intreated, where his lawe is troden vnder fote. He answereth the prophet to his complaynte.

Chap. XVI. 

The LORDE forbiddeth the prophet to kepe company with the people, or to take a wife in that place, for he is mynded to punish them.

Chap. XVII. 
Punyshment of them that forsake the LORDE, and put their trust in men. A comaundement concernynge the Sabbath.

Chap. XVIII. 
By the potters worke the prophet is taught, so that he warneth the people, and telleth them of the punyshment.

Chap. XIX. 
The plage vpo lerusalem and Tophet. 

Chap. XX. 
Pashur the chefe prest smyteth Ieremy the pro- phet, and putteth him in preson : which shew- eth him his plage for to come.

Chap. XXI. 

The prophet sheweth the kynge, what shal become of the cite.

Chap. XXII. 

He exorteth the kynge and all the people vnto godlynesse, and telleth what shal become of
Sellü (other wyse called loas) the sonne of losias: and what shal happé to lechonias the sonne of Joachim.

Chap. XXIII. 
He reproueth the wicked rulers and false prophetes.

— — M — M eee eee 

Cbr prophet Sereni. 

Chap. XXIII. 
The vision of the fyge maüdes. 

Chap. XXV. 
He reproueth the kynge and all the people, and sheweth the punyshment for to come vpon the heithen.

Chap. XXVI. 

Because the prophet rebuketh the people, the prestes and the prophetes put him to trouble: but at the last Ahicam delyuereth him.

Chap. XXVII. 
God commaundeth the prophet for to make bondes and cheynes, to signifie the captiuyte of the Heithen kynges.

Chap. XXVIII. 
Hananias the false prophet withstondeth Ieremy. 

Chap. XXIX. 
A lettre of Jeremy sent vnto the presoners at 
Babilon. 
Chap. XXX. leremy (at the comaundement of God) wryteth his sermons in a boke. Swete and cofortable promises vnto the godly: Agayne, the wrath of God agaynst the wicked.

Chap. XXXI. 

He putteth the people in mynde of the louynge mercy and benefites of God, aud coforteth them with his promises.

Chap. XXXII. 

The prophet beyuge in preson sheweth the dely- ueraunce of the people out of captiuyte.

Chap. XXXIII. 
A playne and manifest prophecy of the kyngdome of Christ.
Chap. XXXIII. 

He sheweth the kynge Sedechias and the people their punyshmet for breakynge the couenaunt.

Chap. XXXV. 
He reproueth the disobediece of the people, thorow the good example of the Rechabites.

Chap. XXXVI. 

The kynge burneth the prophetes boke, but a greater is wrytté agayne for it, and the kynge punyshed.

Chap. XXXVII. 

Pharao commeth ont of Egipte to helpe the kynge, but in vayne. leremy is put in preson.

Chap. XXXVIII. 

The prynces laboure to haue the prophet deed, they put him i a sorer preson: but Abdemelech getteth him out, and the kynge comoneth with him.

Chap. XXXIX. 

The cite of Ierusalem is wonne, the kynge taken, his sonnes and prynces slayne before his face, his owne eyes put ont, and he led vnto Babilon.
But Ieremy and Abdemelech escape. 

Chap. XL. 
How the chefe captayne intreateth Ieremy. Go- dolias is made gouernoure of the londe, the people resorte vnto him.

Chap. XLI. 
Ismael slayeth Godolias, and taketh the people presoners, but Iohanna defendeth them.

Chap. XLII. 

The captaynes axe councell at Ieremy, but folowe him not.

Chap. XLII. XLIII. 

They wil nedes go in to Egipte agaynst the com- maundement of God. The prophet exorteth the to the cotrary, and to leaue their ydolatry :
Neuertheles, they regarde it not, but wil do as their fathers dyd before them.

Chap. XLV. 
Ieremy comforteth Baruch, cocernynge his weak- nesse of mynde.
Chap. XLVI. 
The summe of leremies preachinge vnto the 
Heithen, specially vnto Egipte. 
Chap. XLVII. 
Agaynst the Philistynes. 
Chap. XLVIII. 
Agaynst Moab. 
Chap. XLIX. 

Agaynst the Ammonites, Edomites, Damascus, 
Cedar and Elam. 

Chap. L. LI. 
Agaynst Babilon. 
Chap. LII. 

A recitynge how lerusale was beseged, wonue, and taken.

Chap. fj. 
HESE are the Sermons of leremy the 
T sonne of Helchia the prest, one of them that dwelt at Anathot in the londe of Ben
Iamin:^ when the LORDE had first spoken with him, in the tyme of Iosias the sonne of Amon kinge of Iuda, in the xiij yeare of his kingdome: and so duringe vnto the tyme of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda, and vnto the xj yeares of Sedechias the sonne of Iosiasê kinge of Iuda were ended: when Ierusalem was taken, euen in the fyfth Moneth.

The first Chapter: a HE worde of the LORDE spake thus vnto me: “Before I fasshioned the in thy mothers wobe, I dyd knowe the: And or euer thou wast borne, I sanctified the, q or- dened the, to be a prophet vnto the people.
The sayde 1:2 Oh LORDE God, I am vn- mete, for I am yet but yonge. And the
LORDE answered me thus: Saye not so, I am to yonge: * For thou shalt go to all that I shall sende the vnto, and what so euer I co- maunde the, that shalt thou speake. Be not afrayed of their faces, for I wilbe with the, to delyuer the, saieth the LORDE.

f And with that, the LORDE stretched out his honde, and touched my mouth, and sayde morouer vnto me: Beholde I put my wordes in thy mouth, and this daye do I set the ouer the people and kingdomes: that thou mayest rote out, breake of, destroye, and make waist; and that thou mayest buylde vp, and plate.
After this, the LOR DE spake vnto me sayenge: 
Ieremy, what seist thou? And I sayde: I se a wakyuge rodde^ ‘Then sayde y LORDE: thou hast sene right, for I will watch diligently vpon my worde, to perfourme it.

It happened afterwarde, that the LORDE spake to me agayne, q sayde: What seist thou? “And I sayde: I do se a seethinge pot, lokinge from out of the north hitherwarde.

Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: Out of the north‘ shall come a plage vpon all the dwellers of the londe. For lo, I will call all the officers of the kyngdomes of the north,
(saieth the LORDE.) And they shall come, and euery one shall set his seate in the gates of Ierusalem, and in all their walles rounde

a Jere, 11. d. ? Jere. 39. a. 4 Re. 25. a. * Eaa, 44. a. 
6.a. Paal. 70. a. 4Tere. 14. b. Exo. 4. c. — * Act. 9. b. 
Matt. 10. c. 1 Cor.3.a. Iere. 18. a. f Esa. 6. a. 

‘Tere. 4. b. Abac. 1. b. 

& Jere, 24. b. ^ Iob 41. b. 

The prophet Seremp. 

aboute, and thorow all the cities of Iuda. 

Fo. Derrrby. l 

And thorow them shall I declare my iudg-|€ 

ment, vpon all the wickednesse of those men that haue forsaken me: that haue offred vnto straunge goddes, q worshipped the workes of their owne hondes.

And therfore gyrde vp thy loynes, arise, and tell them all, that I geue the in comaunde- ment, Feare them not, I will not haue the to be afrayed of thé. For beholde,’ this daye do I make the a stroge fensed towne, an yron pyler, and a wall of * stele agaynst y whole londe, agaynst the kinges and mightie men of luda, agaynst the prestes and people of the londe. ‘They shall fight agaynst the, but they shall not be able to ouercome the: “for I am with the, to delyuer the, saieth the LORDE.

The ij. Chapter. 

OROUER, the worde of the LORDE 

comaunded me thus : " Go thy waye, crie in the eares of lerusale, q saye: ‘Thus saieth the LORDE: I remembre the for the kyndnesse of thy youth, and because of thy stedfast loue: in that thou folowdest me thorow the wildernesse, in an vntilled londe.
Thou Israel wast halowed vnto the LORDE, and so was his first frutes. ° All they that deuoured Israel, offended: miszfortune fell vpon them, saieth the LORDE. Heare therfore the worde of the LORDE, O thou house of Iacob, and all the generacion of the house of Israel. Thus saieth y LORDE vnto you:

What vnfaithfulnesse founde youre fathers in me, that they wente so farre awaye fro me, fallinge to lightnesse, and beinge so vayne?
They thought not in their hertes: Where haue we left the LORDE, y brought vs out of the lode of Egipte: "y led vs thorow the wildernesse, thorow a deserte and rough londe, thorow a drie and a deedly londe, yee a londe that no man had gone thorow, and wherein no man had dwelt. ° And when I had brought you in to a pleasaunt welbuylded londe, that ye might enioye the frutes and all the como- dities of the same: ‘ye went forth and defyled my londe, q brought myne heretage to ab- hominacion.

The prestes the selues saide not once; 

Tere. 25. b. k Eze. 3. a. ! Tere. 15. d. * Or brasse. 
™ Tere. 25. d. ? Tere. 3. d. ? Tere. 10. d. and 30. c. 
Zac. 2. b. ? Exo. 14. c. ? Esa. 32. f. Deut. 6. b. r Tere. 32. c.

B 

Chap. (ij. 

The prophet Seremp. —— 

Fo. berrrir. 

“Vpon thy wynges is founde the bloude of poore and innocent people, and that not in corners and holes only, but opély in all these places. Yet darrest thou saye: I am gilt- lesse: Tush, his wrath can not come vpó me.
Beholde, I wil reason with y, because thou darrest saye: I haue not offended. O how euel wil it be for the, to abyde it: ^when it shall be knowne, how oft thou hast gone bac- warde? For thou shalt be confounded, as wel of Egipte, as of the Assirians: Yee thou shalt go thy waye from thé, q smyte thyne hondes together vpon thy heade. Because the LORDE shal bringe that confidence and hope of thine to naught, and thou shalt not prospere with all.

The iij. Chapter. 

OMONLY, when a man putteth awaye 

his wife, “and she goeth from him, and marieth with another, then the question is: shulde he resorte vnto her eny more after that?
Is not this felde then defyled and vnclene? 
? But. as for the, thou hast played the harlot with many louers, yet turne agayne to me, saleth the LORDE. Lift vp thine eyes on euery syde, and loke, yf thou be not defyled.
Thou hast waited for them in the stretes, and asa murtherer in the wildernesse. Thorow thy whordome and shamefull blasphemies, is the londe defyled.

e This is the cause, that the rayne and euen- ynge dew hath ceased. Thou hast gotten the an whores foreheade, and canst not be ashamed.
Els woldest thou saye vnto me: O my father, thou art he that hast brought me vp, and led me fro my youth: Wilt thou then put me awaye, and cast me of for euer? Or wilt thou withdrawe thy self clene frome? Neuertheles, thou speakest soch wordes, but thou art euer doinge worse, and worse.

33| The LORDE sayde also vnto me, in the 

tyme of losias the kinge: Hast thou sene what that shrékinge Israel hath done? how she hath runne vp vpon all hie hilles, /and amonge all thick trees, and there played the harlot? hast thou sene also, (when she had done all this) how I sayde vnto her: that she shulde turne agayne vnto me, and yet she is not returned? *Iuda that vnfaithfull sister of

* Deut. 18. b. Iere. 7. a. Eze. 20. d. Psal. 105. c. 
18. d. Eze. 29. a, Esa. 30. a. Iere. 17. b. 
4 Oaee 2, a. Eze. 16. b. Osee8. b. 

t 4 Re. 

* Deu. 24. a. 
* 8 Re. 17. a. 

hirs also sawe this: Namely, that affter I had well sene the aduoutrye of the shrenkinge harlot Israel, I put her awaye, and gaue her a byll of deuorcement.

For all this, hir vnfaithfull sister Iuda was not ashamed, but wente backe and played the whore also. Yee and the noyse of hir whor- dome hath defyled the whole lode. For she bath committed hir aduoutrie with stones and stockes.

Neuerthelesse, hir vnfaithfull sister Iuda is not ^turned vnto me agayne with hir whole herte, but faynedly, saieth the LORDE. And the LORDE sayde vnto me: The bacslyder
Israel is more rightuous, ‘thé the vnfaithfull 
Iuda: and therfore go preach these wordes towarde the north, q saye: Thou shrenkinge
Israel, turne agayne (saieth the LORDE,) and I will not turne my face from you, for I am merciful, saieth the LORDE, q I will not allwaye beare displeasure agaynst the: but on this condicion, that thou knowe thy greate blasphemy: Namely, that thou hast vnfaith- fully forsaken the LORDE thy God, * « hast made thy silf partaker of straunge goddes vnder all grene trees, but hast had no wil to heare my voyce, saieth the LORDE.

^O ye shrenkinge children, turne agayne, saieth the LORDE, and I wilbe maried with you. For I will take one out of the citie and two out of one generacion from amoge you, and bringe you out of Sion: and will geue you hyrdmé after myne owne mynde, which shal fede you with lernynge and wyszdome.
Morouer, when ye be increased and multi- plied in the londe, then (saieth the LORDE) there shall nomore boost be made of the arke of the LORDES Testament: No man shall thinke vpon it, nether shall eny man make mencion of it: for from thence forth it shall nether be visited, ner honoured with giftes.

Then shall Ierusalem be called the LORDES seate, and all Heithen shalbe gathered vnto it, for the name of the LORDE sake, which shalbe set vp at lerusalem. And from that tyme forth, they shall folowe nomore the ymaginacion of their owne frauwarde herte.

Thé those y be of the house of Iuda, shal go vnto the house of Israel: And they shal come together out of the north, "in to the

f Iere. 2. d. 4 Re. 17. b. € Eze. 23. b. ^ Qagee 5. a. i Eze. 16. e. k Tere. 5. b. Eaa. 57. a. ! Eze. 2. e.
Osee 14. a. Eze. 14. a. Osee 2. d. n Matt. 8. b. 

Jo. deri, 

b 

same londe that I haue geuen youre fathers. 
I haue shewed also, how | toke the vp beinge but a childe, and gaue the a pleasaunt londe for thine heretage, yee and a goodly hooste of the Heithen: and how I commaunded the,
“that thou shuldest call me father only, and not to shrencke fro me.

But like as a woman fayleth hir louer, so are ye vnfaithfull vnto me (o ye house of
SE Israel) saieth the LORDE. And therfore the voyce of the children of Israel was herde on euery side, wepinge and waylinge: ° for they haue defyled their waye, and forgotten
God their LORDE. 

O ye shrenkinge children, turne agayne, 
(saynge: lo, we are thine, for thou art the 
LORDE oure God:) And so shal I heale youre bacturnynges. ‘The hilles fall, and all the hie pryde of the mountaynes, but the health of Israel stondeth only vpon God oure
LORDE. 

* Confucion hath deuoured oure fathers la- boure from oure youth vp: yee their shepe and bullockes, their sonnes and doughters.
So do we also slepe in oure confucion, and shame couereth vs: for we and oure fathers from oure youth vp vnto this daye haue synned agaynst the LORDE oure God, and haue ^not obeyed the voyce of the LORDE oure God.

The (iij. Chapter. 

ISRAEL, yf thou wilt turne the, then 
O turne vnto me, saieth the LORDE. 
And yf thou wilt put awaye thy abhominacios out of my sight, thou shalt not be moued:
* And shalt sweare: The LORDE lyueth: in treuth, in equite and rightuousnesse: and all people shall be fortunable and ioyfull in him.
For thus saieth the LORDE, to all Iuda and lerusalem: plowe youre londe, and sowe not amonge the thornes.

J Be circumcided in the LORDE, and cut awaye the foreskynne of youre hertes, all ye of Iuda, ? and all the indwellers of Ierusalem: that my indignacion breake not out like fyre, t kyndle, so that no man maye quench it, because of the wickednes of youre ymagina- cions.

Preach in Iuda and Ierusalem, erie out and speake: *blowe the trompettes in the londe,

^ Matt. 93. c.— ^ Iere. 31. c. * Tren, 5. a. Dan. 3. b. 
6.2. Baruci.b. Jere.14,a. Psal.105.a. Esa. 64.a. 
Hest. 14.a. Iudit, 7. c. 41 Esd. 9. a. and 10. b. 

«Tera. 5.a.and 12.a. J Iere.6.b.and 9.2. £ Iere.21.c. 

Cbr prophet Feremp. 

Chap. uy. crie that euery man maye heare, and saye:
Gather you together, and we will go in to stronge cities. Set vp the token in Sion, spede you, and make no tarienge: for I will bringe a greate plage, and a greate destruc- tion from the north. : For the spoyler of the
Gentiles is broken vp from his place, as a lyon out of his dene, that he maye make the londe waist, and destroye the cities, so, that no man maye dwell thérin. Wherfore gyrde youre selues aboute with sack cloth, mourne, and wepe, for the fearfull wrath of the LORDE shal not be withdrawen from you.

At the same tyme (saieth the LORDE) the hert of the kinge and of the prynces shal be gone, the prestes shalbe astonished, and the prophetes shalbe sore afrayed. ‘Then sayde
I: O LORDE God, hast thou then dis- ceaued this people and lerusalem, sayenge: ye shall haue peace, ‘and now the swearde goeth thorow their lyues? Then shal it be saide to the people q to lerusalem: ‘there commeth a warme wynde from the north thorow the waye of my people, but nether to fanne, ner to clése.

After that shall there come vnto me a stronge wynde, and then wil I also geue sen- tence vpon them. For lo, he commeth downe like as a cloude, and his charettes are like a stormy wynde : "his horsmen are swifter then the Aegle. "Wo vnto vs, for we are destroyed.
O Ierusalem, wash thine hert from wicked- nesse," that thou mayest be helped. How longe shal thy noysome thoughtes remayne with the?

For a voyce from Dan and from ¥ hill of 
Ephraim speaketh out, and telleth of a de- struction. Beholde, the Heithen geue leru- salem warnynge, and preach vnto her, that hir destroyers are comynge from farre countrees.
'They tell the cities of Iuda the same also, they shall geue them warnynge in euery place, like as the watch men in the felde. For they haue prouoked me to wrath, "saieth the
LORDE. 

P Thy wayes and thy thoughtes, haue brought the vnto this, this is thyne owne wickednesse and disobediece, that hath possessed thyne hert: Ah my bely, ah my bely, (shalt thou crie) how is my hert so sore? my hert paunt-

! Tere. 1. b. 
* Zac. 8. c. 

^ Eaa. 58.a. lere. i.c. — * Deut. 28. a. m Tren. 4. d. Dan. 7. a. * Esa. 1. c.
? 3 Re. 18. b. Iera, 2. c. and 44. d. 

Chap. b. 

eth within me, I can not be still, for I hane herde the crienge of the trompettes, and peales of warre.

They erie murthur vpon murthur, the whole londe shal perish. Immediathly my tentes were destroyed, and my hanginges, in the twincklinge of an eye. How longe shall I se the tokens of warre, and heare the noyse of the trompettes ?

2| Neuertheles this shall come vpon them, 

because my people is become foolish, ^ and hath vterly no vnderstondinge. They are the children of foolishnes, and without eny dis- creció. To do euell, they haue witt ynough: but to do well, they haue no wiszdome. I haue loked vpon the earth, and se, it is wayst and voyde. I loked towarde heauen, and it had no shyne.

I behelde the mountaynes, and they trem- bled, and all the hilles were in a feare. I loked aboute me, and there was no body, and all the byrdes of the ayre were awaye. I marked well, and the plowed felde was become waist: yee all their cities were broken downe at the presence of the LORDE, and indigna- cion of his wrath.

£| For thus hath the LORDE sayde: The 

whole londe shalbe desolate, yet will I not then haue done. And therfore let the earth mourne, and let the heauen be sory aboue: for the thinge that I hane purposed and taken vpon me to do, shal not repente me, and I will not go from it. The whole londe shal fle, for the noyse of the horsmen and bowmen: they shall runne in to dennes in to woddes, and clymme vp the stony rockes. All the cities shalbe voyde, and no man dwellinge therin.

What wilt thou now do, thou beinge de- stroyed? “For though thou clothest thy self with scarlet, q deckest $ with gold: though thou payntest thy face with colours, 4 yet shalt thou trymme thy self in vayne.

For those that hither to haue bene thy greate fauourers, shal abhorre the, and go aboute to slaye y. For (me thinke) I heare a noyse, like as it were of a woman trauelinge, or one laboringe of hir first childe: Euen the voyce of the doughter Sion, that casteth out hir armes, and swowneth, sayenge: Ah wo is me, how sore vexed and faynte is my herte, for them that are slayne ?

a Esa. 5. d. Baruc 3. d. 
4 4 Re. 9. f. 

b Deut. 32. b. c Iere.2. c. 
* Tere. 4. a. 12, c. f Deut. 17. d. 

The prophet Feremp. 

Fo. derli. 

The b. Chapter. 

OKE thorow Jerusalem, beholde and se:|q 
Seke thorow hir stretes also within, yf ye can fynde one man, that doth equall and right, or that laboureth to be faithfull: and I shall spare him (saieth the LORDE). * For though they can saye: the LORDE lyueth, yet do they sweare to disceaue : Where as thou
(o LORDE) lokest only vpon faith and treuth. 

Thou hast scourged them, but they toke no repentaunce: thou hast correcte them for amendemét, but they refused thy correction.
They made their faces harder then a stone, and wolde not amende.

Therfore I thought in my self: peraduen- ture they are so symple and folish, that they vnderstonde nothinge of the LORDES waye, fand iudgmentes of oure God. ‘Therfore will
I go vnto their heades and rulers, and talke with them: yf they knowe the waye of the
LORDE, and the iudgmétes of oure God. 
But these (in like maner) haue broken the yock, and bursten the bondes in sonder.

Wherfore a lyou out of the wod shal hurte|33 them, *and a wolfe in the euenynge shal de- stroye them. The cat of the mountayne shal lie lurkinge by their cities, to teare in peces all them, that come therout. For their offences are many, and their departinge awaye is greate.

^Shulde I then for all this haue mercy vpon the? ‘Thy children haue forsaken me, and sworne by them that are no goddes. And albeit they were bounde to me in mariage, yet they fell to aduoutrie, and haunted harlottes houses.

In the desyre of vnclenly lust they are be- come like the stoned horse, euery man neyeth at his neghbours wife. ‘Shulde I not correcke this, saieth the LORDE?

* Shulde I not be avenged of euery people, that is like vnto this? Clymme vp vpon their walles, beate them downe, but destroye them not vtterly: cut of their brauuches, because they are not the LORDES.

For vnfaithfully hath the house of Israel aud luda forsaken me, saieth the LORDE.
‘They haue denied the LORDE, and sayde: it 1s not he.

Tush, there shall no miszfortuue come vpon vs, we shall se nether swearde ner honger.
€ Deut. 32. d. t Eze. 22, b. 

^ Sopho. 1. a. * Tere. 9. a. 

1 2 Pet. 2. a. Iere. 14. b. Deu. 29. c. Soph. 1. c. Iere. 23, c. 

So. derli, 

€|As for the warnyuge of the prophetes, they 

take it but for wynde, ‘yee there is none of these, which will tell them, that soch thinges shal happen vnto them.

Whertore thus saieth the LORDE God of hoostes: because ye speake soch wordes, beholde: ^'fhe wordes that are in thy mouth will I turne to fyre, and make the people to be wod, that it maye consume them.

‘Lo, I will bringe a people vpo you from farre, o house of Israel (saieth the LORDE) a mightie people, an olde people, a people whose speach thou knowest not, nether vnder- stodest what they saye.

Their arowes are sodane death, yee they them selues be very giauntes. This people shal eate vp thy frute q thy meate, yee they shal deuoure thy sonnes and thy doughters, thy shepe and thy bullockes.

They shall eate vp thy grapes q fyges. As for thy stronge and well fensed eities, wherin thou didest trust, they shal destroye them with the swearde.

J| Neuertheles I will not then haue done with 

you, saieth the LORDE. But yf they saye: wherfore doth the LORDE oure God all this vnto vs?

Then answere them: because, that like as ye haue forsaké me, and "serued straunge goddes in youre owne londe, euen so shall ye serue other goddes also in a straunge londe.

Preach this vnto the house of Iacob, q crie it out in luda, and saye thus: Heare this
(thou folish and vndiscrete people.) ‘Ye haue eyes, but ye se not: eares haue ye, but ye heare not.

Feare ye not me, saieth the LORDE? 
Are ye not ashamed, to loke me in the face? 
‘which bynde the see with the sonde, so that it ean not passe his boundes: For though it rage, yet ean it do nothinge: and though the wawes therof do swell, yet maye they not go ouer.

But this people hath a false and an obsti- nate herte, they are departed and gone awaye fro me. They thinke not in their hartes: O let vs feare the LORDE oure God, that geueth vs rayne early and late, when nede is: which kepeth euer still the haruest for vs yearly.

Neuertheles youre miszdedes haue turned these from you, ^q youre synnes haue robbed

2 Tere. 6. b. ? Esa. 33. b. d lere. 16. b. Deu. 98. g.

© Deut. 98. f. Baru. 4. c. e Esa. 6. b. Ioh. 9. d.

Che prophet Feremp. 

Chap. bi. you herof. Foramonge my people are founde wicked personnes, that priuely laye snares and waite for men, to take them, and destroye them.

And like as a net is full of byrdes, so are their houses full of that, which they haue gotten with falsede and disceate. Herof cometh their greate substaunce and riches, herof are they fat and welthy, and are runne awaye fro me with shamefull blasphemies.
They ministre not the lawe, ‘they make no ende of the fatherlesses cause, they iudge not the poore acordinge to equite.

*Shulde I not punysh these thinges, saieth the LORDE? Shulde I not be avenged of all soch people, as these be? Horrible and greuous thinges are done in the londe.

The prophetes teach falsely, and the prestes folowe them, and my people hath pleasure therin. What will come therof at the last ?

The ot. Chapter. 
OME out of Ierusalem, ye stronge childré of Ben lamin: ‘blowe vp the trompettes ye Tecuites, set vp a token vnto
Bethacarem, for a plage and a greate misery pepeth out from the North.

I will licken the doughter Sion to a fayre and tendre woman, and to her shall come the shepherdes with their flockes. Their tentes shal they pitch rounde aboute her, and euery one shal fede with his honde. Make batell agaynst her (shal they saye:) Arise, let vs go vp, while it is yet daye.

Alas, the daye goeth awaye, q the night shadowes fall downe: Arise, let vs go vp by night, and destroye hir stronge holdes, for thus hath the LORDE of hoostes commaunded.

Hew downe hir trees, and set vp bulworkes agaynst lerusalé. This is the cite that must be punished, for in her is all maliciousnes.
Like as a codyte aboundeth in water, eué so this eitie aboudeth in wickednes. Robbery and vnrightuousnesse is herde in her, sorow q woundes are euer there in my sight. Améde the (o lerusalem) lest I with drawe my herte from the, and make the desolate: ¢ thy londe also, y no man dwel in it. For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes : The residue of Israel shalbe gathered, as the remnaunt of grapes.

And therfore turne thine honde agayne in 

to the baszket, like the grape gatherer. But f Yob26.b.928.a. £ Esa.59.a. ^ Esa.i.c. ‘Tere. 9.2.
Tere. 5. b. * 4 Re. 14. a. 

Chap. bij. 

€ 

vnto whom shal I speake ? whom shal I warne, that he maye take hede? “Their eares are so vncircumcised, that they maye not heare.

Beholde, ^they take the worde of God but for a scorne, and haue no lust therto. And therfore I am so full of thy indignacion
(o LORDE) that I maye suffre no longer. 
Shed out thy wrath vpon the children that are without, and vpon all yonge men. Yee the man must be taken presoner with the wife, and the aged with the crepel. Their houses with their londes and wiues shal be turned vuto straungers, whe I stretch out myne hode vpon the inhabitours of this londe, saieth the
LORDE. *For from the leest vnto the most, they hange all vpon covetousnes: and from the prophet vnto the prest, they go all aboute with falsede and lyes.

? And besyde that, they heale the hurte of my people with swete wordes, sayenge : peace, peace, when there is no peace at all." Ther- fore they must be ashamed, for they haue comitted abhominacion. But how shulde they be ashamed, when they knowe nothinge, nether of shame ner good nurture? And therfore they shal fall amouge the slayne, and in the houre when I shall viset them, they shal be brought downe, saieth the LORDE.

Thus saieth the LORDE: go im to the stretes, considre and make inquisicion for the olde waye: and yf it be the good aud right waye, theu go therin, that ye maye fynde rest for youre soules. (But they saye: we will not walke therin) and I will set watchmen ouer you, and therfore take hede vnto the voyce of the trompet. But they saye : we will not take hede. Heare therfore ye Gentiles, and thou congregacion shalt knowe, what I haue de- uysed for them. Heare thou earth also: be- holde, *I will cause a plage come vpon this peo- ple, euen the frute of their owne ymaginacions.

For they haue not bene obedient vnto my wordes aud to my lawe, but abhorred them.
^Wherfore bringe ye me incense from Saba, q swete smellinge Calamus from farre coun- trees? Youre burnt offeringes displease me, and I reioyse not in youre sacrifices.

And therfore thus saieth the LORDE: be- holde, I will make this people fall, and there shal fall from amonge them the father with

a Tere. 4, a. 9. d. ^ Tere. 5. c. Iere.20.b. ¢ Iere. 8. b. 
Esa. 56. c. 4 Esa, 56. c. Iere. 8. b. * Eze. 13. b. f Iere. 10. e. g Iere. 19. a. ^ Esa, 1. b. Iere. 7. c.

The prophet Feremp. 

Fo. derliij. the children, one neghboure shal perish with another.

Morouer thus saieth $ LORDE: Beholde, 
‘there shal come a people from the North, q a greate people shal arise from ¥ endes of y earth, with bowes q with dartes shal they be weapened : It is a rough q fearce people, an vnmerciful people: their voyce roareth like the see, they ride vpo horses wel apoiuted to y batell agaynst the, o doughter Sion. Then shal this erie be herde: Oure armes are feble, heuynes and sorow is come vpon vs, as vpon a woman trauelinge with childe. Noman go forth in to the felde, no man come vpon the hie strete: for the swearde and feare of the enemie shalbe on euery side.

Wherfore, gyrde a sack cloth aboute the 
(o thou doughter of my people) sprynkle thy self with aszshes, ‘mourne and wepe bitterly, as vpon thy only beloued sonne: For the destroyer shal sodenly fall vpon vs. The haue I set for a prouer of my harde people, to seke out and to trye their wayes. For they are all vnfaithful and fallen awaye, they hange vpon shameful lucre, they are clene brasse and yron, for they hurte and destroye enery man.
The bellons are brent in the tyre, the leade is consumed, the melter melteth in vayne, for the euel is not taken awaye from them. Ther- fore shal they be called naughty syluer, because the LORDE hath cast them out.

The bij. Chapter. 

HESE are the wordes, that God spake vnto leremy: ' Stonde vnder the gates of the LORDES house, and crie out these wordes there, with a loude voyce, and saye:
Heare the worde of the LORDE, all ye of 
Iuda, that go in at this dore, to honoure the 
LORDE. Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel. "Amende youre wayes and youre councels, and I wil let you dwell in this place. Trust not in false lyenge wordes, sayenge: here is the temple of the
LORDE, here is the temple of the LORDE, 

here is the temple of the LORDE. 2 
"For yf ye will amende youre waies and councels, yf ye wil iudge right betwixte a man and his neghboure : yf ye wil not oppresse the straunger, the fatherles t the wyddowe : yf ye

i Tere. 1. b. 5.c. Abac. 1. b. k Amos 8. b. 
17. d. and 26. a. ™ Esa. 1. c. Tere. 26. c. 
22. c. Zach. 8. c. Levit. 19. g. Iob 24. a. 

! Tere. 
" Exo, 

So. Devitt. will not shed innocent bloude in this place: yf ye wil not cleue to straüge goddes to youre owne destruction: then wil I let you dwell in this place, yee in the londe that I gaue afore tyme vnto youre fathers for euer. But take hede, yee trust in councels, that begyle you and do you no good. For when ye haue stolle, murthured, committed aduoutrie, and periury:
Whé ye haue offred vnto Baal, folowinge straunge q vnknowne goddes: ^'Then come ye, and stonde before me in this house (which hath my name geuen vnto it) and saye: Tush, we are absolued quyte, though we haue done all these abhominacions.

What? ’ thinke you this house that beareth my name, is a denne of theues? And these thinges are not done priuely, but before myne eyes, saleth the LORDE. Go to my place in Silo, where vnto I gaue my name afore tyme, and loke well what I dyd to the same place, for the wickednes of my people of
Israel. And now, though ye haue done all these dedes (saieth the LORDE) and I my self rose vp euer by tymes to warne you and to comon with you: yet wolde ye not heare me: I called, ye wolde not answere. *And therfore euen as I haue done vnto Silo, so wil
I do to this house, that my name is geuen vnto, (and that ye put youre trust in) yee vnto the place that I haue geuen to you and youre fathers. ^ And I shal thrust you out of my sight, as I haue cast out all youre brethren the whole sede of Ephraim.

*'Therfore thou shalt not praye for this people, thou shalt nether geue thàkes, nor byd prayer for them: thou shalt make no in- tercession to me for them, for 1n no wise will
I heare the. Seist thou not what they do in the cities of Iuda, and without Ierusalem ?
‘The children gather stickes, the fathers kyndle the fyre, the mothers kneade the dowe, to bake cakes for the quene of heauen.

They poure out drinkoffringes vnto strauge goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath: How be it they hurte not me (saieth the LORDE) but rather confounde, and shame them selues.

And therfore thus saieth the LORDE 
God: beholde, my wrath and my indignacion shalbe poured out vpon this place, vpon men and catell, vpo the trees in the felde and all

* 3 Re. 8. 8. > Esa. 56. b. Ioh. 2. b. Matt. 21. b. lere. 32. d. Iosu. 18. a. Tere. 26.a. 1 Re.3.4. 5. 6.
* Esa. 65. b. Pro. 1. c. Luc. 21. a. 4 4 Re. 17. a. e Iere. 14. b. 1 Ioh. 5.a. Eze. 14. c. f Iere, 44. e.

Cbr prophet Seren. 

Chap. ti. frute of the londe, q it shal burne so, that no man maye quench it.

Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes, the | 

God of Israel: f Ye heape vp youre burnt- offringes with youre sacrifices, q eate y flesh.
^But when I brought youre fathers out of 
Egipte, I spake no worde vnto them of burnt- offringes and sacrifices: but this Icommaunded them, sayenge: herken and obeye my voyce,
‘and I shalbe youre God and ye shal be my people: so that ye walke in all the wayes, which I haue comaunded you, that ye maye prospere.

* But they were not obedient, they inclyned not their eares there vnto, but went after their owne ymagynacions and after the mocions of their owne wicked herte, and so turned them selues awaye, and conuerted not vnto me.
And this haue they done, from the tyme that youre fathers came out of Egipte, vnto this daye.

í Neuertheles, I sent vnto them my ser- uauntes all the prophetes: I rose vp early and sent them worde, yet wolde they not herke, ner offre me their eares, but were obstinate, and worse then their fathers.

And thou shalt now speake all these wordes vnto them, but they shal not heare the: thou shalt crie vpon them, but they shal not answere the. Therfore shalt thou saye vnto them:|9 this is the people, that nether heareth the voyce of the LORDE their God, ner re- ceaueth his correction. ~” Faithfulnes q treuth is clene rooted out of their mouth.

*Wherfore cut of thine hayre, and cast it awaye, take vp a complaynte in the whole londe: for the LORDE shal cast awaye, and scatre the people, y he is displeased withall.

e For the children of Iuda haue done euell in my sight, saieth the LORDE. They haue set vp their abhominacions, in the house y hath my name, and haue defyled it. ” They haue also buylded an aulter at Tophet, which is in the valley of ¥ childré of Enno: y they might burne their sonnes and doughters, which
I neuer comaunded them, nether came it euer in my thought. And therfore beholde, the dayes shal come (saieth the LORDE) that it shal no more be called, Tophet, or *the valley of the children of Ennon, but the valley of

8 Esa. 1. a. ^ Deut. 10.a. Esa. 43.d. Exo. 6. b. i Exo. 20.a. * Zach. 7. b. ! Tere. 25. a. m Tere. n Eze. 5. a. ? Tere. 32. d. ? 4 Re. 23. e.

4 Tere. 19. e. 

5.a. 
Deut. 32. c. Psal. 105. e. Iere. 44. a. 

Chap. biij. Che prophet Seremp. Fo. derib. the slayne: for in Tophet they shal be buried,| | wise be confounded, they shalbe afrayed and because they shal els haue no rowme. “Yeej |taken: for lo, “they haue cast out the worde y deed bodies of this people shal be eaten vp| |of the LORDE: what wyszdome can then of the foules of the ayre q wilde beastes of the! {be amonge them? Wherfore, I will geue earth, q no man shal fraye them awaie. ^And| |their wyues vnto aleauntes, and their feldes to as for the voyce of myrth « gladnesse of the| |destroyers. cities of Tuda, q lerusalem, the voyce of the For from the lowest vnto the hyest, they brydegrome and of the bryde: ^I will make} |folowe all shamefull luere: and from the them ceasse, for the londe shal be desolate. prophet vnto the prest, they deale all with lies.
' Neuertheles, they heale the hurte of my 
The biij. Chapter. 

people with swete wordes, sayenge: peace, 
A T the same tyme, saieth the LORDE, 

peace, where there is no peace at all. the bones of the kinges of Iuda, the Fye for shame, how abhominable thinges bones of his princes, the bones of the prestes

dothey? And yet they be not ashamed, yee and prophetes, yee and the bones of the

they knowe of no shame. citisens of lerusale, shalbe brought out of * Wherfore in the tyme of their visitacion, their graues? and layed agayust the Sonne,| |they shal fall amonge the deed bodies, saieth the Moone and all the heauenly hooste: whom| |the LORDE. they loued, whom they serued, whom they

Morouer I will gather them in (saieth the ranne after, whom they sought q worshipped.| | LORDE) so that there shal not be one grape
They shal nether be gathered together ner 

vpon the vyne, nether one fyge vpon the fyge buried, but shal lye vpo the earth, to their| | tre, and the leaues shalbe plucte of. shame and despisinge.

Then will I cause them to departe, and 

“And all they that remayne of this wicked} |saye: why prolonge we the tyme? Let vs generacion, shal desyre rather to dye the to| |gather oure selues together, and go in to the lyue: where so euer they remayne, q where

stronge cite, there shall we be in rest: For as I scatre them, saieth the LORDE of} |the LORDE oure God hath put vs to sylence, hoostes. This shalt thou saye vnto them also:

and geuen vs water myxte with gall, to drynke, 
Thus saieth the LORDE: Do men fall so, 

because we haue synned agaynst him. that they arise not vp agayne: And turne

We loked for peace, and we fayre not the they so farre awaye, y they neuer conuerte?| |better, we wayted for the tyme of health,
Wherfore then is this people and lerusalem 

and lo, here is nothinge but trouble. gone so farre backe, that they turne not Then shall the noyse of his horses be herde againe? They are euer the longer the more

from Dan, the whole londe shall be afrayed at obstinate, and will not be conuerted. the neyege of his stronge horses: for they
For I haue loked, and considered: /but 

shal go in, and deuoure the londe, with all there is no ma, that speaketh a good worde:

that is in it: the cities, and those that dwell there is no man, that taketh repetaunce for his| |therin. ~ Morouer, I will sende Cockatrices synne, that will so moch as saye: wherfore

q serpétes amonge you (which will not be haue I done this? But euery man (as soone| | charmed) and they shal byte you, sayeth the as he is turned backe) runneth forth still,

LORDE. like a wilde horse in a battayl. The Storke Sorowe is come vpon me, and heuynes knoweth his apoynted tyme, the 'Turtledoue,| |vexeth my herte: for lo, the voyce of the y Swalow and the Crane, cdsidre the tyme of| |criege of my people is herde from a farre their trauayle: £ but my people will not knowe

countre: Is not the LORDE in Sion? Is the tyme of the punyshment of the LORDE.| |not he kinge in her? Wherfore then haue
How darre ye saye then: we are wise, we 

they greued me (shall the LORDE saye) with haue the lawe of the LORDE amonge vs? their ymages and foolish straunge fashions?
Beholde, the disceatfull penne of the 

The haruest is gone, the Somer hath an ende, scrybes, setteth forth lies: therfore shal the} |and we are not helped. I am sore vexed,

Esa. 56.c. Eze. 13. b. * Tere, 7. d. ! Tere. 14. d. 
? Leui. 26. d. 

a Tere. 8. b. 9. c. ? Eze. 26. b. ^Tere. 16. b. 25. b. 
4 Deut. 4. e. Sap. 21. a. e Luc.23.c. J Eze. 20. f. i Tere. 6. b.

fo. derlut. 

because of the hurte of my people: I am heuy and abashed, for there is no more Triacle at Galaad, and there is no Phisician, that cà

heale the hurte of my people. 
WHO wil geue my heade water 

O) 9 ynough, q a well of teares for myne eyes: that I maye wepe night ad daye, for the slaughter of my people? Wolde God that I had a cotage some where farre from folke, that
I might leaue my people, and go from the: for they be all aduoutrers and a shrenckinge sorte. "They bede their tüges like bowes, to shute out lies: As for the treuth, they maye nothinge awaye with all in the worlde. For they go from one wickednes to another, and holde nothinge of me, saieth the LORDE.

Yee one must kepe himself from another, 
“no man maye safely trust his owne brother : for one brother vndermyneth another, q one neghboure begyleth another. Yee one dis- sembleth with another, and they deale with no treuth. *'They haue practised their tunges to lye, and taken greate paynes to do myschefe.
They hane set their stole in the myddest of disceate, and (for very dissemblinge falsede) they wil not knowe me, saieth the LORDE.

Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes, beholde, I wil melte them and trie the, for what shulde I els do to my people? ‘Their tunges are like sharpe arowes, “to speake dis- ceate. With their mouth they speake peace- ably to their neghboure, but preuely they laye waite for him. Shulde I not punysh them for these thinges, saieth the LORDE? Or, shulde I not be auenged of eny soch people, as this? Vpon the mountaynes will I take vp a lamentacion and soronfull crie, and a mourn- ynge vpon the fayre playnes of the wildernes:
Namely, how they are so brente vp, that no man goeth there eny more: Yee a man shal not heare one beast crie there.

" Byrdes and catell are all gone from thece. 
I will make Ierusalem also an heape of stones, and a denne of venymous wormes. And I wil make the cities of Iuda so waist, that no man shal dwell therin. What man is so wise, as to vnderstonde this? Or to whom hath the
LORDE spoken by mouth, that he maye 

The iy. Chapter. 

a lere. 12, b. Matt, 10. c. Miche 7. a. + Psal. 27. a, 
© Pro. 18.a. Psal. 17. a. 4 Tere. 5. b. e. * Psal. 78. a. 
Micb. 3. c. f Osee 14. d. € Deu. 29. b. Ilosu. 24. c. 

Che prophet Seremp. 

shewe this, and saye: O thou londe, why perishest thou so? Wherfore art thou so brent vp, and like a wildernesse, that no mà goeth thorow? Yee the LORDE himself tolde the same vnto them, that forsoke his lawe, and kepte not the thynge that he gaue them in commaundement, nether lyued ther- after: € but folowed the wickednes of their owne hertes, and serned straunge goddes, as their fathers taught them.

Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes, the God of Israel: Beholde, I will fede this people with wormwod, and geue thé gal to drynke. ^I will scatre them also amonge the Heithen, whom nether they ner their fathers haue knowne: and I vill sende a swearde amonge them, 'to persecute them, vntill I bringe them to naught. Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: loke that ye call for mournynge wyues, and sende for wise women: that they come shortly, and singe a mournyuge songe of you: that the teares maye fall out of oure eyes, and that oure eye lyddes maye guszhe out of water.

For there is a lamentable noyse herde of 
Sion: O how are we so sore destroyed? O how are we so piteously confounded? We must forsake oure owne naturall countre, and we are shot out of oure owne lodgiges. Yet heare the worde of the LORDE (o ye women) and let youre eares regarde the wordes of his mouth: that ye maye lerne youre doughters to mourne, and that euery one maye teach hir neghbouresse, to make lamentacion. Namely thus: Deeth is clymmé vp in at oure wyndowes, he is come in to oure houses, to destroye the childe before the dore, a ¥ yonge man in the strete.

But tell thou planely, thus saieth y LORDE: 
The deed bodies of men shal lye vpon ¥ grounde, as the donge vpon the felde, * and as the hay after the mower, and there shal be no man to take them vp. the LORDE: Let not the wise man reioyse in his wisdome, ner the stronge man in his strength, ‘nether the rich man in his riches:
But who so wil reioyse, let him reioyse in this, that he vnderstódeth, and knoweth me: for I am the LORDE, which do mercie, equite and rightuousnes vpon earth. ™Therfore haue I

* Tere. 7. d. m Matt.

^ Deu. 32, c. Iere. 23. c. i Deu. 28. c. 
8.b. ! Esa. 65. c. 1 Cor. 1. g. 2 Co. 10. d. 
9. b. 12. a. Ose. 6. b. 

Chap. tr. 

€ 

Morouer, thus saieth | B 

Chap. y. pleasure in soch thinges, saieth LORDE.
Beholde, the tyme cometh (saieth the LORDE) that I wil vyset all them, whose foreskynne is vneireumcised: The Egipcians, “the lewes, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the shauen Madianites, that dwel in the wildernes. ^ For all y Gentiles are vncircum- cised in the flesh, but all the house of Israel, are vncircumcised in the herte.

The y. Chapter. 

fl EARE the worde of the LORDE, y he speaketh vnto the, o thou house of Israel:
Thus saieth the LORDE : Ye shal not lerne after the maner of the Heithé, “and ye shal not be afrayed for the tokens of heauen: for the Heithen are afrayed of soch: Yee all the customes and lawes of the Gétiles are nothinge, but vanite. ?% They hewe downe a tre in the wod with the hondes of the workeman, and fashion it with the axe: they couer it oner with golde or syluer, they fasten it with nales and hammers, that it moue not. It stodeth as stiff as the palme tre, it can nether speake ner go, but must be borne. “Be not ye afrayed of soch, for they cà do nether good ner euel. But there is none like vnto ¥ (o
LORDE) thou art greate, and greate is the name of thy power. Who wolde not feare the? or what kige of the Gentiles wolde not obeye the ?
38| For amonge all the wysemen of the Gen- tiles, and in all their kingdomes, there is none, that maye be lickened vnto the. "They are all together vnlerned and vnwise, All their connynge is but vanite: namely, wod, syluer, which is brought out of Tharsis, and beaté to plates: * and golde from Ophir, a worke y is made with the honde of the craftesman q the easter, clothed with yalow sylek and scarlet: euen so is the worke of their wyse men all together. But the LORDE is a true God, a lyuinge God, and an euerlastinge kinge. *Yf he be wroth, the earth shaketh: all the Gétiles maye not abyde his indignacion.

As for their goddes, it maye well be sayde of thé: they are goddes, that made nether heaué ner earth: therfore shal they perish fro the earth, and from all thinges vnder heauen.

@ Tere. 25. c. b Tere. 4. a. 6. b. Rom. 2. c. * Hsa. 
47.e. ^ Esa. 44. b. * Baruc6. 4Re.17.g. Apo. 
15. a ^ Naum 1. a. 1 Gen. 1. a. 

€ 3 Reg. 9. 

The prophet Seremp. 

Fo. Derlby, 

‘But (as for oure God) he made the earth with his power, and with his wisdome hath he fynished the whole compasse of the worlde, with his discrecion hath he spred out the hea- uens, At his voyce the waters gather together in the ayre, he draweth vp y cloudes from the vttemost partes of y earth: ‘he turneth lighten- inge to rayne, and brigeth forth the wyndes out of their treasuries: ‘ His wisdome maketh all men fooles. And confunded be all casters of ymages, " for that they cast, is but a vayne thinge, and hath no life. ” The vayne craftes men with their workes, that they in their vanite haue made, shall perish one with ano- ther in the tyme of visitacion. Neunertheles,
Iacobs porcio is not soch: but it is he, that hath made all thinges, and Israel is the rodd of his inheritauce: The LORDE of hoostes is his name. Put awaye thy vnclennesse out of the londe, thou that art in the stronge cities. For thus saieth the LORDE: Be- holde, I wil now thrust out the inhabitours of this londe a greate waye off, and trouble them of soch a fashio, that they shal no more be founde.

Alas, how am I hurte? Alas, how panefull| 33 are my scourges vnto me? For I cósidre this sorow by my self, a I must suffre it, My taber- nacle is destroyed, and all my coardes are broken. My children are gone fro me, ad can no where be founde. Now haue I none to sprede out my tente, or to set vp my hang- inges. For the hyrdmen haue done folishly, that they haue not sought the LORDE. Ther- fore haue they dealt vnwisely with their catell, q all are scatred abrode. Beholde, the noyse is harde at honde, and greate sedició ont of the north: to make the cities of Iuda a wylder- nesse, and a dwellinge place for Dragons.
° Now I knowe (o LORDE) that it is not in mas power to ordre his owne waies, or to rule his owne steppes q goinges. Therfore chasté thou vs (o LORDE) but with fauoure, ? and not in thy wrath, bringe vs not vtterly to naught. Poure ont thy indignacion rather vpon the Gétiles, that knowe ¥ not, and vpon the people that call not on thy name: And that because they haue consumed, deuoured and destroyed lacob, and haue roted out his glory.

Tere. 31. c. * Psal. 134.b. — ! Psal. 143. n Esa. 1.d, Iere. 6. c. ? Pro. 20. d,
Psal. 78. a. Eccls.36. a. Iere. 30. c. 50. b. 

m Esa. 44. b. 
P Esa, 64. b. 

a HIS is another Sermon, which the 

Fo. Dcrlbiüj. 

The ri. Chapter. 

LORDE commaunded leremy for to preach, sayenge :

Heare the wordes of the couenaunt, and speake vnto all Iuda, and to all them that dwel at lerusalem, And saye thou vnto thé:
Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel: 
Cursed be euery one, that is not obedient vnto ¥ wordes of this couenaüt: which I com- maunded vnto youre fathers, what tyme as I brought them out of Egipte, from the yron fornace, sayenge: “Be obedient vnto my voyce, and do accordinge to all that I com- maunde you : ^so shal ye be my people, and I wil be youre God, and will kepe my promyse, y 1 haue sworne vnto youre fathers: Namely, that I wolde geue them “a londe which floweth with mylke and hony, as ye se, it is come to passe vnto this daye.

Then answered I, and sayde: Amen. is euen so LORDE, as thou sayest. the LORDE sayde vnto me agayne: Preach this in y cities off Iuda and rounde aboute lerusalem, and saye: Heare the wordes off this couenaunt, that ye maye kepe them. For
I haue diligently exorted youre fathers, euer sence the tyme that I brought them out off the Londe off Egipte, vnto this daye. I gaue them warnynge by tymes, sayenge: herken vnto my voyce: ?Neuertheles, they wolde not obeye me, nor enclyne their eares vnto me, ‘but folowed the wicked ymaginaciós of their owne hertes. And therfore haue I accused them as transgressours of all the wordes off this conuenaunt, that I gaue them to kepe, which they (notwithstodinge) haue not kepte.

And the LORDE sayde vnto me: It is foude out, that whole Israel and all the citisens

their fore fathers, which had no lust to heare my worde. Euen likewise haue these also folowed straunge goddes, and worshipped them. The house off Israel and Iuda haue broken my couenaunt, which I made with their fathers.

Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Be- 

a Exo. 19, a. Exo.6. b. ° Gen. 15. c. 26. a. 28. c. 
4 Tere. 13. b. ¢ lere, 9, b. Deu. 24. c. — fZacb.7. b. 
£ Deu. 32. c. ^ lere, 2. d. ' Iere. 7. c. * Tere. 15. a. 

Che prophet Feremp. 

holde, I will sende a plage amonge you, which ye shal not be able to escape: and though ye crie vnto me, I will not heare you.’ The shal the townes off Iuda and the citisens off Ieru- salem go, and call vpon their goddes, vnto whom they made their oblacios: ‘but they are not able to helpe them iu tyme off their trouble. “For as many cities as thou hast
(o Iuda) so many goddes hast thou also: ‘And loke how many stretes there be in the (o leru- salem) so many shameful aulters haue ye set vp, to offre vpon them vnto Baal. *But praye not thou for this people, byd nether prayse ner prayer for them: for though they crie vnto me in their trouble, yet will I not heare them.

O thou beloued, why doest thou so shame- full greate blasphemies in my house? 'euen as though that holy flesh might absolue the, specially when thou hast made thy boost off thy wickednes. The LORDE called the a grene olyue tre," a fayre one, a frutefull one, a goodly one: but now that there is a contrary reporte off the abrode, he will burne the vp, ad destroye thy braunches. *For the LORDE off hoostes that plated the, hath deuysed a plage for the (o thou house of Israel q Iuda) for y euel that ye haue done, to prouoke him to wrath, in that ye dyd seruyce vnto Baal.

This (o LORDE) haue I lerned of the, and vnderstonde it, for thou hast shewed me their ymaginacions. ° But I (as a meke lambe) was caried awaye to be slayne: not knowinge, that they had deuysed soch a councel agaynst me, sayenge: ?We will destroye his meate with wod, and dryue him out of the londe of the lyuynge, that his name shal neuer be thought vpon. Therfore I will beseke the now (o LORDE of hoostes) ‘thou rightuous judge, thou that tryest the reynes and the hertes: let me se the auenged of them, for vnto the haue I committed my cause. The
LORDE therfore spake thus of the citesens of Anothot, that sought to slaye me, sayége:
‘Preach not vnto vs in the name of the 
LORDE, or els thou shalt dye of oure hondes. 
"Thus (1 saye) spake the LORDE of hoostes: 
Beholde, 1 will viset you. Youre yonge mé shal perish with the swearde, youre sonnes and youre doughters shal vtterly dye of honger,

1 Agg. 2. b. ^ lere. 17, b. Matt. 7. b. Ro. 11. c. 
^ Esa. 12. d. * Esa. 53. b. P Tere. 18. b. f lere. 
90. c. 17. b. * Esa. 30. b. Amo. 7. b. 

Chap. rf. 

e 

‘Chap. rii. so that none shal remayne. For vpon the citesyns off Anathot wil I bringe a plage, and the yeare of their visitacion.

The rij. Chapter. 

a LORDE, thou art more rightuons, then 

that I shulde dispute with the: Neuer- theles, let me talke with the in thinges reasonable. * How happeneth it, that the waye off the vngodly is so prosperous? and that it goeth so wel with them, which (with out enyshame) offéde and lyue in wickednesse?
Thon plantest them, they take rote, they growe, and bringe forth frute. They boost moch off the, yet doest thou not punysh them.
But thou LORDE (to whom I am well knowne) thou that hast sene, t proned my herte, take them awaye, like as a flock is caried to the slaughter house, and apoynte them for the daye off slaughtinge.

How longe shall the londe mourne, and all the herbes off the felde perish, for the wickednes off them that dwell therin?

° The catell and the byrdes are gone, yet saye they: tush, God will not destroye vs vtterly.

Seinge thou art weery in runnynge with the fote men, how wilt thon then runne with horses? In a peaceable sure londe thou mayest be safe, but how wilt thou do in the furious pryde of Iordane? For thy brethren ad thy kynred hane altogether despised the, and cried ont vpon the in thine absence.
? Belene them not, though they speake fayre wordes to the. As for me (saye I) I haue forsaken myne owne dwellinge place, and left myne heretage. My life also that I loue so wel, haue I geuen in to the hodes of myne enemies. Myne heretage is become vnto me, as a Lyon in the wod. It cried out vpon me, therfore haue I forsaken it. “Myne heretage is vnto me, as a spreckled byrde, a byrde of dyuerse coloures is vpon it. Go hence, and gather all the beastes of the felde together, that they maye eate it vp.

^Dyuerse hyrdmé haue broken downe my vynyarde, and troden vpon my porcion. Of my pleasaunt porcion, they haue made a wil- dernes q deserte. ‘They haue layed it waist : and now that it is waist, it sigheth vnto me.
Yee the whole londe lieth waist, and no man 

a Job 21. a. Aba. 1. c. "2 Pets2.c. 
Deu. 29. c. Soph. 1. c. Tere. 5. b. 23. c. 

* Tere. 14. b. d fere. 9. a.

Che prophet Seremp. 

regardeth it. The distroyers come ouer the heeth euery waye, for ‘the swearde off the
LORDE shal consume from the one ende of ý lode to the other, and no flesh shal haue rest.
They shal sowe wheat, and reepe thornes. 
They shal take heretage in possession, but it shal do them no good. And ye shalbe con- founded of youre owne wynnynges, because of the greate wrath of the LORDE.

Thus saieth the LORDE vpon all myne euel neghbours, that laye honde on myne heretage, which I haue geuen my people of
Israel: Beholde, I wil plucke them (namely 
Israel) out of their londe, and put ont the house of [uda from amonge them. “And whe
I haue rooted thé out, I wilbe at one with the agayne, and wil hane mercy vpon them : and brynge them agayne, euery man to his owne heretage, and in to his lode. And yf they
(namely that tronble my people) wil lerne y wayes of them, to sweare by my name: The
LORDE lyueth (like as they lerned my people to sweare by Daal) the shal they be rekened amoge my people. ‘But yf they wil not obeye, the will I rote out the same

folke, and destroye them, saieth the LORDE. 

The nij. Chapter. 
OROUER, thus saied the LORDE vnto me: go thy waye q get the a lynnen breche, and gyrde it aboute thy loynes, and let it not be wet. Then I got me a brech, acordinge to the commaundemét of the
LORDE, and put it aboute my loynes. After this, the LORDE spake vnto me agayne:
Take the breche that thou hast prepared q put abonte the, and get the vp, and go vnto
Euphrates, and hyde it in a hole off the rock. 
So wét I, and hydde it, as the LORDE commaunded me. And it happened longe after this, that the LORDE spake vnto me:
Vp, and get the to Euphrates, and fet the breche from thence, which I commaunded the to hyde there. Then went I to Euphrates, and digged vp, and toke the brech from the place where I had hyd it: and beholde, the brech was corrupte, so that it was profitable for nothinge.
Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: Thus saieth the LORDE: Euen so will I corruppe the pryde off Iuda, and the hie mynde off

FEDrONCO Nd. i Mat. 22. b.

* Esa. 19. c. f Esa. 56. c. Esa. 5. a. 
^ Deu. 4. c. 30. a. Esa. 54. b. 1 Esd. 1. a. 

85 

Fo. Derlir. 

€ 

B 

fo. del. 

€ 

lerusale. “This people is a wicked people, they will not heare my worde, they folowe y wicked yinaginacions off their owne hert, q hange vpon straüge goddes, the haue they serued ¢ worshipped : and therfore they shalbe as this brech, that serueth for nothinge. For as strately as a brech lieth vpon a mas loynes, so strately dyd I bynde ý whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Iuda vnto me, saieth the LORDE:? that they might be my people: that they might haue a glorious name: y they might be in honoure: but they wolde not obeye me. Therfore laye this ryddle before them, and saye: Thus saieth the LORDE
God of Israel: euery pot shal be fylled with wyne. And they shal saye: thinkest thou we knowe not, y euery pot shalbe fylled with wyne? Then shalt thou saye vnto them:
Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I shal fyll all the inhabitours of this lode with dronckénes, the kynges that syt vpo Dauids stole, the prestes and prophetes, with all y dwell at lerusalem. And I will shute them one agaynst another, yee $ fathers agaynst the sonnes, saieth the LORDE.

I wil not pardon them, I wil not spare them, ner haue pitie vpon them: but destroye them.
Be obedient, geue eare, take no diszdayne at it, for it is the LORDE himself that speaketh.
Honoure y LORDE youre God herein, or he take his light from you, and or euer youre fete stomble in darknesse at y hill: lest whé ye loke for the light, he turne it in to y shadowe and darknesse of death. But yf ye wil not heare me, that geue you secrete warnynge, I will mourne fro my whole herte for youre stubburnesse. ^Piteously will I wepe, and the teares shall guszhe out of myne eyes. Forthe LORDES flocke shal be caried awaye captiue. Tell the kinge q the rulers:
Humble youre selues, set you downe lowe, for dua. of youre glory shal fall from youre

eade. The cities towarde the south shalbe 

shut vp, q no man shal open the. All Iuda shal be caried awaye captyue, so that none shall remayne.

Lift vp youre eyes, and beholde thé, that come from the North: Like a fat flocke shal they fall vpon the. To whom wilt thou make thy mone, when they come vpon the? for thou
| hast taught thé thy self, and made thé masters 
| 

a Tere. 7. c. 11. b. 18. a. 19. c. 

| ^ Deu. 4. c. 28. d. je Tere. 31. c. Thren. 1, a.

d Tere, 30. a. Esa. 13. b. 

The prophet Seremp. 

ouer the. ^Shal not sorowe come vpo the, as on a woman trauelinge with childe? And yf thou woldest saye the in thine hert: Wher- fore come these thinges vp6 me? Eué for the multitude of thy blasphemies, “shall thy hynder partes q thy fete be discouered. For like as the man of Inde maye chaunge his skynne, q the cat of the mountayne hir spottes: so maye ye that be exercised in euell, do good.
Therfore will I scatre you, lyke as ¥ stobble that is také awaye with ¥ south wynde. This shal be youre porcion, and the porcion of youre measure, wher with ye shal be rewarded of me, saieth the LORDE: because ye haue forgotten me, and put youre trust in disceat- ful thinges. /Therfore shall I turne thy clothes ouer thy heade, and discouer thy thees, that thy preuyties maye be sene: thy aduoutrie, thy deedly malice, thy beastlynes and thy shamefull whordome. For vpon the feldes and hilles I haue sene thy abhominacions.
Wo be vnto the (o lerusale) whé wilt thou euer be clensed enymore?

The riiij. Chapter. 
The worde of the LORDE shewed vnto leremy, eocernynge the derth off the frutes.

UDA shal mourne, men shall not go moch more thorow his gates: the londe shal be nomore had in reputacion, q the crie of leru- salé shal breake out. "The lordes shall sende their seruauntes to fetch water, q when they come to the welles, they shal fynde no water, but shal carie their vessels home emptie. They shal be ashamed ad confounded, q shal couer their heades. * For the groüde shalbe dried vp, because there cómeth no rayne vpon it.
The plowmen also shalbe ashamed, ad shal couer their heades. "The Hynde shal forsake the yonge fawne, that she brigeth forth in y felde, because there shalbe no grasse. The wilde Asses shall stonde in the Mosse, and drawe in their wynde like the Dragos, their eyes shal fayle for wat of grasse.

Doutles oure owne wickednesse rewarde vs: 
But LORDE do thou acordinge to thy name, though oure transgressions and synnes be many. ^For thou art the comforte q helpe of Israel in the tyme of trouble. Why wilt thou be as a straunger in the Londe, and as

e Iere. 15. b, / Osee 2. b. £ Jere, 23. b. 

^ Esa. 49. b. Tere. 16. c. 17. c. 

Esa, 21. a. 

Chap. rity. 

Chap. rb. 

one that goeth ouer the felde, ad cometh in only to remayne for a night? Why wilt thou make thy self a cowarde, and as it were a giaüte that yet maye not helpe? For thou art ours (o LORDE) and we beare thy name, therfore forsake vs not.

'Then spake the LORDE, concernynge this people y haue pleasure to go so nembly with their fete, and leaue not of, and therfore dis- please the LORDE: in so moch, that he will now bringe agayne to remembraunce all their myszdedes, ad punysh all their synnes. Yee euen thus sayde the LORDE vnto me: Thon shalt not praye to do this people good. ^ For though they fast, I will not heare their prayers.
And thongh they offre burnt offriges q sacri- fices, yet wil not I accepte them. For I will destroye them with the swearde, honger and pestilence. Then answerde I: O LORDE
God, the prophetes saye vnto them: * Tush, ye shal se no swearde, and no honger shall come vpon you, but the LORDE shal geue you continuall rest in this place.

And the LORDE sayde vnto me: The prophetes preach lies vnto them in my name.
* [ haue not spoken with them, nether gaue I them eny charge, nether dyd I sende the: yet they preach vnto yon false visions, charmynge, vanite, and disceatfulnesse of their owne herte.
Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: As for those prophetes that preach in my name
(whom I neuertheles haue not sent) aud y saye: Tush, there shal nether batel ner hon- ger be in this londe: With swearde ad with honger shal those prophetes perish, ^ and the people to whom they haue preached, shal be cast out of lerusalem, dye of honger, àd be slayne with the swearde, (and there shal be no man to burie them) “both they ad their wyues, their sonnes and their doughters. For thus wil I poure their wickednes vpon thé. This shalt thou saye also vnto them: Myne eyes shal wepe withont ceassinge daye q night.
^ For my people shalbe destroyed with greate harme, and shall perish with a greate plage.
For yff I go in to the felde, lo, it lieth all full off slayne men: Yff I come in to the cite, lo, they be all fameshed of honger.

Yee their prophetes also and prestes shal be led in to an vnknowne londe.

a Tere, 7. b. Esa. 1. b. 
14.b. 23.c. € Iere. 23. d. f Thren. 2. f. Tren. 1. d.

> Tere. 5. b. Soph. 1. c. Tere. e Tere. 16. a.
^ Esa. 49. e. 

4 Zach. 13. a, 
€ Iere. 8. c. 

The prophet Seremp. 

| 

(sayde I) Dost thou so abhorre Sio ? Or hast thou so plaged vs, that we can be healed no more? *Weloked for peace, and there cometh no good: for the tyme of health, q lo, here is nothinge but trouble. We knowlege (o
LORDE) all oure myszdedes, and the synnes of oure fathers, that we haue offended y. Be not displeased (o LORDE) for thy names sake, forget not thy louynge kyndnes: * Re- membre y trone of thyne hononre, breake not the couenaüt, that thon hast made with vs. ‘Are there eny amonge the goddes of the
Gentiles, that sende rayne, or geue the showers of heauen? Dost not thou it o LORDE oure
God, in who we trust? Yee LORDE, thou dost all these thinges.

The ro. Chapter. ; 

HEN spake the LORDE vnto me, àd sayde: * Though Moses and Samuel stode before me, yet haue I no herte to this people. Dryue them awaye, that they maye go out of my sight. And yf they saye vnto the: "Whyther shal we go? Thé tell the: The
LORDE geueth you this answere: Some vnto death, some to the swearde, some to honger, some in to captiuyte. For I will bringe foure plages vpon them, saieth the LORDE. "'The swearde shal stragle them, the dogges shal deuoure them, the foules of the ayre ad beestes of the earth shal eate them vp, and destroye them. I will scatre them aboute also in all kingdomes and londes to be plaged, because of Manasses "the sonne of Ezechias kinge of
Iuda, for the thinges that he dyd in Ierusalem. 
Who shal then haue pite vpon the, o Ieru- salem ? Who shal be sory for the? Or who shal make intercession, to opteyne peace for the? seinge thou goest fro me, àd turnest

bacwarde, saieth the LORDE? Therfore 1/33 

will stretch out myne honde agaynst the, to destroye the, and I will not be intreated. I will scatre the abrode with the fanne on euery side of the londe: ^I will waist my people and destroye them, for they haue had no lust to turne from their owne wayes. I will make their wyddowes moin nombre, then the sondes ofthe see. Vpon y mothers of their children,
I shal bringe a destroyer in the noone daye. 

í Tere. 5. d. k Tere, 7. h. 11. c. 14. b. Eze. 14. c. 
‘Zach. 11. b. Eze. 5. c. — " Iere. 16.8. * 4 Re. 21.a. 
? [ere. 6. c. 

Ffo. Delt. 

Hast thou then vtterly forsaken Iuda?|3B 

| fo. Delt. 

* Sodenly and vnawarres, shal I sende a feare vpon their cities. She that hath borne vij. children, shal haue none, hir herte shal be ful of sorowe.

The Sonne shall fayle her in the cleare daye, when she shalbe confounded and faynte for very heuynesse. ^As for those y remayne,
I wil delyuer them vnto the swearde off their enemies, saleth the LORDE. |. ^O mother, alas that euer thou dydest beare me, an ene- mie and hated of the whole londe: "Though
I neuer lente ner receaued vpon vsury, yet euery man speake euell vpon me. And jy
LORDE answered me: Lede not I the then vnto good? Come not I to the, when thou art in trouble: and helpe y, when thine ene- mie oppresseth the? Doth one yron hurte another, or one metall that cometh from the north, another? As for youre riches and trea- sure, I wil geue them out in to a pray, ^ not for eny money, but because of all youre synnes, that ye haue done 1 all youre coastes. And I wil brige you with youre enemies in to a londe,
* y ye knowe not: for the fyre that is kyndled in my indignacion, shal burne you vp.

O LORDE (sayde I then) thou knowest all thinges, therfore remembre me, àd viset me, delyuer me fro my persecuters: Receaue not my cause in thy loge wrath, yet thou knowest, that for thy sake I suffre rebuke.
‘When I had founde thy wordes, I at them vp gredely: they haue made my hert ioyfull q glad. For I call vpon thy name, o LORDE
God off hoostes. I dwell not amonge the scorners, nether is my delyte therin: but I dwell only in the feare of thy honde, for thou hast fylled me with bytternes. Shall my heuynes endure for euer? Are my plages then so greate, y they maye neuer be healed ?
Wilt thou be as a water, that falleth, and can notcontynue? Wpon these wordes, thus sayde the LORDE vnto me: Yf thou wilt turne agayne, I shal set the in my seruyce: and yf thou wilt take out the thinge that is precious from the vyle, thou shalt be euen as myne owne mouth. *'They shal conuerte vnto the, but turne not thou vnto the: and so shal I make the a stroge wall of stele agaynst this people. “They shal fight agaynst the, but they shal not preuayle. For I my self will be

* Jere. 20. d. — 4 Jere, f Eze. 3. a. Psal. 118. n.

^ Amo. 8. b. 
* Deu. 32. c. 
^ Tere, 1. c. 

e 1 Tess. 5. a. 
17. a. 96. b. 
€ Tere. 21. a, 

Cbr prophet Feremp. 

! Leui. 10, b. lere. 14. ¢. 

Chap. rbi. 

with the, to helpe the, and delyuer the, saieth the LORDE. And I will ryd the out of the hondes of the wicked, and delyuer the out of the honde of Tirauntes.

The rbi. Chapter. 
OROUER, thus sayde the LORDE/@ vnto me: Thou shalt take $ no wife, ner beget children in this place. tee of the children that are borne in this place, of their mothers that haue borne them, and of their
‘fathers that haue begotten them in this londe, thus saieth the LORDE: They shal dye an horrible deeth, no ma shal mourne for them, ner burie them, but they shal lye as doge vpon the earth. They shal perish thorow the swearde and honger, and their ‘bodies shal be meate for the foules of the ayre, and beestes of the earth. Agayne, thus saieth the LORDE:
Go not vnto them, that come together, for to mourne and wepe : for I haue taken my peace fro this people (saieth the LORDE) yee my fauoure and my mercy. And in this londe shal they dye, olde and yonge, and shall not be buried ; no man shall bewepe them, no man shall clippe or shaue himselff for them.

There shal not one viset another, to mourne with them for their deed, or to comforte them.
One shall not offre another the cuppe off con- solacion, to forget their heuynes for father and mother. ''lhou shalt not go in to their feast house, to syt downe, moch lesse to eate or drynke with them. For thus saieth the
LORDE off hoostes the God off Israel: ” Be- holde, I shall take awaye out of this place, the voyce off myrth ad gladnesse, the voyce off the brydegrome and off the bryde: yee and that in youre dayes, that ye maye se it.

"Now when thou shewest this people all these wordes, and they saye vnto the: Wher- fore hath the LORDE deuysed all this greate plage for vs? Or what is the offence and synne, that we haue done agaynst the LORDE oure God? Then make thou them this an- swere: Because youre fathers haue forsaken me (saieth the LORDE) "and haue cleued vnto straunge goddes, whom they haue ho- noured and worshipped: but me haue they forsaké, and hane not kepte my lawe. ” And ye with youre shamefull blasphemies, haue

7 Jere.7. d. o Deu. 4, d.

k Psal. 78. a. lere. 15. a. 
25. b. 
P lere. 7, d. 

! 1 Cor. 5. b. 
» Jere. 7. b. Iere. 5. d. 

Chap. rii, 

exceaded the wickednes off youre fathers. 
For enery one off you foloweth the frawerde euel ymaginacion off his owne hert, and is not obedient vnto me.

“Therfore wil I cast you out off this londe, in to a londe that ye and youre fathers knowe not: and there shall ye serue straunge goddes daye and night, there will I shewe you no fa- uonre. Beholde therfore (saieth the LORDE) the daies are come, that it shall nomore be sayed : "The LORDE lyueth, which brought the children of Israel out of the lode of Egipte: but (it shall be sayde) the LORDE lyueth, that brought the children of Israel from the
North, q from all londes where I had scatred them. For I wil bringe thé agayne in to the lode, that I gane vnto their fathers.

Beholde, (saieth the LORDE) I will sende out many fiszhers* to take them, and after y wil I sende out many hunters to hunte the out, from all mountaynes and hilles ad out of the canes of stones. For myne eyes beholde all their wayes, and they can not be hyd fro my face, nether can their wicked dedes be kepte close out of my sight. But first will
I sufficiently rewarde their shamefull blas- phemies and synnes, wherwith they haue de- fyled my londe: Namely, with their stinck- inge Idols and abhominacions, wherwith they haue fylled myne heretage. ^O LORDE, my strength, my power, and refuge in tyme off trouble. The Gentiles shall come vnto the from the endes off the worlde, and saye:
Verely oure fathers haue clened vnto lies, their Idols are but vayne and vnprofitable.
How ean a man make those his goddes, which are not able to be goddes? And therfore, I will once teach them (saieth LORDE) I wil shewe them my honde and my power, that they maye knowe, y my name is y LORDE.

Che roij. Chapter. 

OURE synne (o ye off the trybe of Iuda) 

is writté in the table of youre hertes, q graue so vpon the edges of youre aulters with a penne of yron q with an Adamat clawe: y youre children also maye thynke vpon youre aulters, woddes, thicke trees, hie hilles, moun- taynes q feldes. "Wherfore, I will make all youre substaunce q treasure be spoyled, for

a Deu. 28. c. lere. 23. b. — ^]ere.93.b. * Matt. 4. c. d Tere. 14. a. 17. c. * Tere. 15. c, 20. b. JS Psal. 48.a.
Tere. 46. e. 48. a. Pro. 11. c. Eze. 29. a. € Psal. 2. b. 

Che prophet Seremp. 

the greate synne that ye haue done vpon youre hie places, thorow out all y coostes off youre lode. Ye shal be cast ont also from the heretage, that I gaue you. And I wil subdue you vnder the heuy bodage of youre enemies, in a londe that ye knowe not. For ye haue ministred fyre to my indignacion, which shal burne euermore. ‘Thus saieth the
LORDE: /Cursed be the man that putteth his trust in man, ad that taketh flesh for his arme: and he, whose herte departeth from $
LORDE. He shall be like the heeth, that groweth in the wildernes. As for the good thinge that is for to come, he shall not se it: but dwell in a drie place off the wildernes, in a salt and vnoccupied londe. O Blissed is the man, ‘that putteth his trust in the LORDE, and whose hope the LORDE is himself. For

So. dlii, 

5 

he shalbe as a tre, that is planted by the water] 

syde: which spredeth out the rote vnto moyst- nesse, whom the heate can not harme, when it commeth, but his leaues are grene. And though there growe but litle frute because off drouth, yet is he not carefull, but he neuer leaueth of to bringe forth frute. Amonge all thinges lyuynge, man hath the most disceat- full and vnsercheable hert.

Who shall then knowe it? *Euen I the 
LORDE ripe out the grounde off the hert, ad search the reynes and rewarde euery ma acordinge to his wayes, aud acordinge to the frute off his councels.

The disceatfull maketh a nest, but bringeth forth no yonge: He commeth by riches, bnt not rightuously. In the myddest off his life must he leaue them behinde him, and at the last be founde a very foole. But thou (o
LORDE) whose trone is most glorious, ex- cellent and off most antiquite, which dwellest in the place of oure holy rest: Thou art the comforte off Israel. All they that forsake the, shalbe confounded: 'all they that departe from the, shalbe written in earth, for they haue forsaken the LORDE, the very condite of the waters of life.

Heale me (o LORDE) and I shall be whole: saue thon me, and I shalbe saued, for thou art my prayse. Beholde, these men saye vnto me: Where is the worde of the LORDE?
Let it come. Where as I neuertheles ledinge 

Pro. 22. c. Psal. 1. a. 117. a. 124. a. ^ Apo. 2. d. 

Tere. 134. d. Rom.2.a, Pro.23.a. Psal. 5t. b. Luc. 12. b. 
' Tere. 2. b. Ioh. 4. b. Eze. 36. d. 

So. Delt. the flock in thy wayes, haue compelled none by violence. For I neuer desyred eny mas deeth, this knowest thon well. My wordes also were right before the. “Be not now ter- rible vnto me (o LORDE) for thou art he, in whom I hope, when I am in parell. Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me: let them be afrayed, and not me. ‘Thou shalt bringe vpon thé the tyme off their plage, and shalt destroye them right sore.
3| Agayne, thus hath the LORDE sayde vnto me: ^Go and stonde vnder the gate, where thorow the people and the kinges of Iuda go out and in, yee vnder all the gates of Ieru- salem, and saye vnto them: Heare the worde of the LORDE, ye kinges of Iuda, and all thou people of luda, and all ye citesyns of jerusalem, that go thorow this gate: Thus the LORDE commaundeth: “Take hede for youre lyues, that ye carie no burthen vpon you in the Sabbath, to bringe it thorow the gates of Ierusalem : ye shall beare no burthen also out of youre houses in the Sabbath: Ye shall do no laboure there in, but halowe the
Sabbath, as I commaunded youre fathers. 
“How be it they obeyed me not, nether herk- ened they vnto me: but were obstinate q stubburne, 4d nether obeyed me, ner receaued my correccion.

3:| Neuertheles, yf ye will heare me (saieth the 

LORDE) and beare no burthen in to y cite thorow this gate vpon the Sabbath: Yf ye will halowe the Sabbath, ‘so that ye do no worke there in: then shal there go thorow the gates of this cite, kinges and prynces, that shall syt vpon the stole of Dauid: They shall be caried vpon charettes, and ryde vpon horses, both they and their princes: Yee whole Inda and all the citesyns of lerusalem shall go here thorow, and this cite shall euer be the more and more inhabited. "There shall come men also from the cities of Inda, from aboute lerusalem, ad from $ londe of Ben
Iamin, from the playne feldes, from the monn- taynes and from the wildernesse: which shall bringe burntoffringes, sacrifices, oblacions, and incense, and offre vp thankesgeuynge in the house of the LORDE. But yff ye will not be obedient vnto me, to halowe the Sab- bath, so that ye will beare youre burthens

* Tere. 14. a. 16. c. ? Iere.7.a. 26. à. © Deu. 4. b. 
Deu. 5. b. Exo. 20. b. 4 Eze, 20. b. * Exo. 20, b. f Esa. 45. b. Ro. 9. c. Iere. 19. c. & Eze. 18. c. 33. c.

Cbr prophet Serempy. 

thorow the gates off Ierusalem vpon the 
Sabbath: Then shall I set fyre vpon the gates off Ierusalem, 4d it shal burne vp the houses off lerusalem, and no man shal be able to quench it.
The rbiij. Chapter. 
This is another communicacion, that God had with leremy, sayenge :

RISE, and go downe in to the Potters 

house, and there shall I tell the more off my mynde. Now when I came to the
Potters house, I founde him makinge his worke vpon a whele. The vessel that the
Potter made off claye, brake amonge his hodes: So he beganne a new, and made ano- ther vessell, acordinge to his mynde. ‘Then sayde the LORDE thus vnto me: / Maye not
I do with you, as this Potter doth, O ye house off Israel? saieth the LORDE? Beholde, ye house off Israel: ye are in my honde, euen as the claye in the Potters honde.

e When I take in honde to rote out, to de- stroye, or to waist awaye eny people or kig- dome: yff that people (agaynst whom I haue thus denysed) couerte from their wickednes :
Immediatly, I repente off the plage, that I denysed to bringe vpon the.^ Agayne: Whé
I take in honde, to buylde, or to plante a peo- ple or a kingdome: yff the same people do euell before me, and heare not my voyce:
Immediatly, I repente of the good, that I denysed to do for them.

Speake now therfore vnto whole Iuda, and to them that dwell at Ierusalem : Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I am deuysinge a plage for you, and am takinge a thinge in honde agaynst yon.

'"Therfore, let euery man turne from his euell waye, *take vpon you the thinge that is good, and do right. But they saye: ‘ No more of this, we will folowe oure owne ymaginacions, and do euery mà acordinge to the wilfulnesse of his owne de. ;

Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Axe amonge the Heithen, yf eny man hath herde soch horrible thinges, as the doughter of Sion hath done. Shal not y snowe (y melteth vpon the stony rockes of Libanus) moysture the feldes? Or maye the springes off waters be

h Ione. 5. 1 Re. 15. * Ione.3. Tere. 25. a. 
"Tere, 13. b. 

Luc. 15. a. 

* Tere, 35. c. 

Chap. robii, 

a 

Chap. rir. 

so grauen awaye, that they runne no more, geue moystnesse, ner make frutefull? But my people hath so forgotten me, y they haue made sacrifice vnto vayne goddes. And whyle they folowed their owne wayes they are come out of the hie strete, and gone in to a fote waye not vsed to be troden. Where thorow they haue brought their londe in to an euer- lastinge wildernesse and scorne: ^So y who so euer trauayleth ther by, shalbe abashed, and wagge their heades. With an East wynde will
Iscatre thé, before their enemies. And when their destruction cometh, I will turne my backe vpo them, but not my face.

*Then sayde they: come, let vs ymagin somthinge agaynst this Ieremy. Yee this dyd eueu the prestes, to whom y lawe was commytted: the Senatours, y were the wysest: and the prophetes, which wanted not y worde off God. Come (sayde they) let vs cut out his tüge, and let vs not regarde his wordes.
Considre me (o LORDE) and heare the voyce of myne enemies. Do they not re- compence euell for good, ^when they dygg a pyt for my soule? ¢Remembre, how that I stode before the, to speake for the, ad to turne awaye thy wrath from them.

"'Fherfore let their childré dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed with the swearde.
Let their wyues be robbed of their childre, and become wyddowes: /let their huszbodes be slayne, let their yonge men be kylled with the swearde in the felde. Let the noyse be
|herde ont of their houses, when the murtherer cometh sodenly vpon them: For they haue digged a pit to take me, and layed snares for my fete. *Yet LORDE, thou knowest all their coucell, that they haue deuysed, to slaye me. And therfore forgeue them mot their wickednes, and let not their synne be put out of thy sight: but let them be iudged before the as the giltie: This shalt thou do vnto the in y tyme of thy indignacion.

The rir. Chapter. 
OROUER, thus saide the LORDE li vnto leremy: Go thy waye, and bye the an erthen pytcher, and bringe forth the
Senatours and chefe prestes in to the valley of the children off Ennon, which lieth before

? Tere. 11. d. 

a Tere, 19. b. 49. c. * Psal. 108. a. 
Psal.34.b. 4]Iere.10.d. * Tren.3.f. fPsal.108.a. 
€ Tere. 11. d. ^4Re.21.c. Iere. 6. c. i Deu. 12 d. 

Cbr prophet Serempy. 

the porte that is made of brick, q shewe them there the wordes, that I shall tell the, and saye thus vnto them: Heare the worde of the
LORDE, ye kinges of Iuda, ad ye citesyns of lerusalem: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will bringe soch a plage vpon this place, that y eares of all that heare it, shal glowe. “And that because they haue forsake me, aud vn- halowed this place, and haue offred in it vnto straunge goddes: who nether they, their fathers, ner the kinges off Iuda haue knowne.
They haue filled this place also with the bloude of innocentes, for they haue set vp an aulter vnto Daal, to burne their children for a burnt- offringe vnto Baal, which I nether com- maunded, ner charged them, nether thought once there vpon.

Beholde therfore, y tyme cometh’ (saieth|33 the LORDE) y this place shal nomore be called Tophet, ner y valley of y childré of
Enno, but y valley of slanghter. For in this place wil I slaye the Senatours of Juda q
Ierusale, q kill the downe with the swearde in y sight of their enemies, ad of them that seke their lyues. And their deed carcases wil I geue to be meate for the foules of the ayre, and beestes of the felde. And I wil make this cite so desolate, ad despysed: that ‘who so goeth there by, shal be abaszhed q geast vpon her, because of all hir plages.

I will fede them also with the flesh" of their sonnes ¢ their doughters. Yee" euery one shal eate vp another in the beseginge q straytnesse, wher with their enemies (y seke their lyues) shal kepe the in. And the pitcher shalt thou breake in the sight of the me, y shalbe with the, and saye vnto thé: Thus saieth the
LORDE off hoostes: ° Eué so wil I destroye this people q cite: as a Potter breaketh a vessel, that can not be made whole agayne.

In 'Tophet shal they be buried," for they shal haue none other place. ‘Thus wil I do vnto this place also, saieth the LORDE, and to thé y dwell there in: yee I wil do to this cite, as vnto Tophet (For the houses of Ie- rusalé q the houses of the kinges of Iuda are defyled, like as Tophet,) because off all the houses, in whose parlers they dyd sacrifice vnto all the hooste of heaué, and poured out

28. b. Eze.20.d. Psal. 105. e. Eze. 16. b. * Iere. 7, d. 
!3 Re. 9. b. Iere. 18. b. 49. c. 50. b. m Tre, 4. b. 

n Deu. 28. b. ? Tere. 18. a. P Tere. 7. b. 

Fo. del. | 

fo. dbi. 

The prophet Seremp. 

Chap. rr. 

drynke offringes vuto straunge goddes. And so leremy came from Tophet, where the
ILORDE had sent him to prophecie, and stode in the courte off the house off the
LORDE, and spake to all the people: Thus saleth the LORDE off hoostes the God of
Israel: Beholde, I will bringe vpon this cite and vpon euery towne aboute it, all the plages
‘that I haue deuysed agayust them: for they haue bene obstinate," ad wolde not obeye my warnynges.

The rr. Chapter. a HEN Pashur the preast,. the sonne off Emmer, chefe in the house of y
LORDE, herde Ieremy preach so stedfastly: 
*he smote Ieremy, and put him in the stockes, that are by the hie gate of Ben Iamin, in the house of $ LORDE. The nexte daye folow- inge, Pashur brought Ieremy out of the stockes agayne. ‘Then sayde leremy vnto him: The
LORDE shall call the nomore Pashnr (that is excellent and increasinge) but Magor (that is fearfull ad afrayed) euery where. For thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I will make the afrayed, the thy self, and all that fauoure y: which shal perish with the swearde off their

enemies, euen before thy face. 

And I wil geue whole Iuda vnder the power of the kinge of Dabilou, which shall carie some vnto Babilon presoners, and slaye some with
33 the swearde. Morouer, ‘all ¥ substaunce of this londe, all their precious and gorgeous workes, all costlynesse, and all the treasure of the kinges of Iuda: wil I geue in to the hodes of their enemies, which shal spoyle them, and carie them vnto Babilon. But as for the (o
Pashur) thou shalt be caried vnto Babilon with all thine housholde, q to Babilo shalt

thou come, where thou shalt die, and be 

|buried: thou and all thy fauourers, to whom thou hast preached lies. O LORDE, thou

makest me weake, but thou refreszhest me, q 

makest me stronge agayne. “All the daye 

longe am I despysed, and laughed to scorne of euery man: because I haue now preached
| longe agaynst malicious Tyranny, and shewed 
| them off destruccion. ‘For y which cause 
| they cast the worde off the LORDE in my 
| |teth, and take me euer to the worst. 
€ Wherfore, I thought from hence forth, not 

| 

| *]ere.7. c. 13. b. ^ Act.23.a. Ioh.18.c, ¢4Re. 

to speake of him, ner to preach eny more in his name. But the worde off the LORDE was a very burnynge fyre in my hert and in my bones, which when I wolde haue stopped,
I might not. For why, I herde so many derisios and blasphemies, /yee enen of myne owne companyons, and off soch as were con- uersaunte with me: which wente aboute, to make me afrayed sayenge: vpon him, let vs go vpon him, to feare him, and make him holde his tonge: y we maye'ouercome him, and be avenged off him.

But the LORDE stode by me, like a mightie giaunte: therfore my persecuters fell, and coude do nothinge. "They shal be sore confoüded, for they haue done vnwisely, they shall haue an euerlastinge shame. And now, o LORDE of hoostes,* thou rightuous sercher
(which knowest the reynesand the very hertes:) let me se them punyshed, for vnto the I com- mitte my cause.

Synge vnto the LORDE, and prayse him,|33 for he hath delyuered the soule off the op- pressed, from the honde off the violent. Cursed be the daye, wherein I was borne: ‘vnhappie be y daye, where in my mother brought me fors Cursed be the man, that brought my father the tidinges, to make him glad, sayenge: thou hast gotten a sonne. Let it happen vnto that man, as to-the cities which ý LORDE turned vpside downe (when he had longe herde the wicked rumoure of them) because he slewe me not, as soone as I came out off my mothers wombe, and because my mother was not my graue hirselff, that the byrth might not haue come out, but remayned still in her. ^Wherfore came I forth off my mo- thers wombe? To haue experience of laboure and sorowe? and to lede my life with shame?

The rri. Chapter. 
HESE are the wordes that the LORDE|& 

spake vnto leremy, what tyme as kinge 
Sedechias sent vnto him Pashur the sonne off 
Melchia, and Sophonias the sonne of Maasia, prest, sayenge: Axe councell at the LORDE
(we praye the) of oure behalfe, for Nabu- chodonosor the kinge off Babilon besegeth vs, yff the LORDE (peraduenture) will deale with vs, acordinge to his maruelous power, and take him from vs.

^ Tob 3.a. Iere. 15. b. 

f Psal. 30. b. € Tere. 11. d. 
3 * Tob 10. c. 

i Gen. 19. c. 

| ,20.c. Tere. 15. c. 17, a. ure E de * Iere. 6. b. 

Chap. rri. 

B 

Then spake Ieremy: Geue Sedechias this answere, “Thus saieth the LORDE God off
Israel: beholde, I will turne backe the weapens, that ye haue in youre hondes, wherwith ye fight agaynst the kinge of Babilo q the Caldees, which besege you rounde aboute y walles: q
I wil brige thé together in to the myddest of this cite, and I my selff will fight agaynst you, with an outstretched honde, ad with a mightie arme, in greate displeasure and terrible wrath: and will smyte them, that dwell in this cite : yee both mé ad catell shal dye of the pestilence.

And after this (saieth the LORDE) I shall delyuer Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, q his sernauntes, his people (and soch as are escaped in the cite, froin the pestilence, swearde, and honger) ^in to the power of Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon: yee in to the hédes of their enemies, in to the hodes of those y folowe vpon their lyues, which shall smyte them with y swerde: they shal not pite thé, they shal not spare them, they shall haue no mercy vpon them.

And vnto this people thou shalt saye: 
° Thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I laye before you the waye of life and deeth. Who so abydeth in this cite, shal perish: ether with the swearde, with honger, or with pestilēce.
But who so goeth out to holde on y Caldees parte, y besege it, he shal saue his life, and shall wynne his soule for a pray. For I haue set my face agaynst this cite^ (saieth the
LORDE) to plage it, and to do it no good. 
It must be geué in to the honde of the kinge of Babilon, q be brent with fyre.

And vnto the house of the kinge off Iuda, saye thus: Heare the worde of y LORDE
(o thou house off Dauid) for thus saieth the 
LORDE: f Ministre rightuousnes, and that soone, delyuer the oppressed fro violent power: or euer my terrible wrath break out like a fyre, and burne so, that no man maye quéch it, be- cause of the wickednes of youre ymaginacions.
Beholde (saieth the LORDE) /I wil come vpo you, that dwel in the valleis,’ rockes and feldes and saye: Tush, who will make vs afrayed? or who will come in to oure houses?
For I will vyset you (saieth the LORDE) be- cause off the wickednes off youre invencions, and will kyndle soch a fyre in youre wod, as shall cosume all, that is aboute you.

a Tere. 37. a. 4 Ke. 22. b. 2 Par. 18. a. Tere. 42. a. b Tere. 29, a. e Deu. 30. e. Iere. 38. a. Iere. 27. a. d lere. 32. a, * Zach. 7. b. Iere. 22. a, Esa. 1. e. Iere.

4.a. Zach. 8. c. / Iere 48.a. 6 Iere. 12. a. Deu. 29. c. 

The prophet Jeremy. 

Fo. Woi. 

The rrij. Chapter. 
NH sayde the LORDE also: Go|& downe in to the house of the kinge off
Iuda, and speake there these wordes, q saye : 
Heare the worde off the LORDE, thou kinge off Iuda that syttest in the kyugly seate off
Dauid: thou and thy seruauntes and thy people, that go in « out at this gate. * Thus the LORDE commaundeth: kepe equite and rightuousnesse, delyuer the oppressed fro the power off the violent: do not greue ner oppresse the straunger, the fatherlesse ner the wyddowe, àd shed no innocét bloude in this place.

And yff ye kepe these thinges faithfully, then shall there come in at the dore off this house kynges, to syt vpo Danids seate: they shal be caried in Charettes and ryde vpon horses, both they q their seruauntes, 4d their people. ‘But yf ye wil not be obedient vnto these commaundementes, I sweare by myne owne self (saieth y LORDE) this house shal be waist. For thus hath the LORDE spoken vpon the kinges house of Iuda: Thou art the heade, as Galaad is in Libanus: What wilt thon laye of it, yf I make the not so waist (q thy eities also) that no man shal dwell there in? I will prepare a destroyer with his wea- pēs for the, to hew downe thy special Cedre trees, and to cast them in the fyre.

And all the people that go by this cite, shall speake one to another: Wherfore hath the LORDE done thus vnto this noble cite?
Then shall it be answered: because they haue broken the couenaunt off the LORDE their
God,‘ and haue worshipped and serued straüge goddes. Mourne not ouer the deed, and be uot wo for them, but be sory for him that departeth awaye: for he commeth not agayne, ad seeth his natyue countre no more. For thus saieth the LORDE, ‘as touchinge Sellum the sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda, which reygued after his father, and is caried out off this place:

He shal neuer come hither agayne, for he shal dye in the place, where vnto he is led captyue, and shall se this londe nomore. “Wo worth him, that buyldeth his house with vn- rightuousnes, ad his perlers with the good,

Iere. 5. b. 14. b. 23. c. Soph. 1. c. ^ Esa. 1. e. Iere. 

21. d. Zach. 7. b. 8. c. 1 Iere. 51. c... Esa. 45. c. 
Heb. 6. b * Deu. 29. b. 3 Re. 9. b. 4 Re. 23. b. 
! 2 Par. 3. b m Esa. 5.c. Agg. 1. a. 

86 

Fo. debii. 

that he hath gotten by violence: which nea recompenseth his neghburs laboure, ner payeth him his hyre. He thinketh in himself: I wil buylde me a wyde house, äd gorgeous perlers :
He causeth wyndowes to be hewen there in, aud the sylinges and geastes maketh he off,
Cedre, and paynteth them with Zenober. 
Thinkest thou to reigne, now that thou pro- uokest me to wrath with thy Cedre trees ?

Dyd not thy father eate and drynke, and prospere well, as loge as he dealt with equite ad rightuousnesse? Yee when he helped y oppressed and poore to their right, then prospered he well.

From whence came this, but only be- 

cause he had me before his eyes? saieth the 
LORDE. Neuertheles, as for thine eyes and thine herte, they loke vpon covetousnesse, to shed innocent bloude, to do wronge and violence. And therfore, thus saieth the
LORDE agaynst Ioachim, y sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda: “ They shall not mourne for him (as they vse to do) alas brother, alas syster: Nether shall they saye vnto him:
Alas syr, alas for that noble prynce. But as an Asse shall he be buried, corrupte and be cast without the gates of Ierusalem.
D| Clymme vp the hill off Libanus (o thou doughter Sion) lift vp thy voyce vpon Basau, crie from all partes: for all thy louers are destroyed. I gaue the warninge, whyle thou wast yet 1 prosperite, But thou saydest: I wil not heare. And this maner hast thou vsed from thy youth, that thou woldest neuer heare my voyce. All thy hyrdmen shalbe dryuen
‘with the wynde, and thy derlinges shalbe caried awaye in to captiuyte: Then shalt thou be brought to shame and confucion, because of all thy wiekednes: * thou that dwellest vpon
Libanus, 4d makest thy nest in the Cedre trees. O how greate shal thy mournynge be, when thy sorowes come vpon the, as a woman trauelinge with childe ?

As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE.) 
‘Though lechonias the sonne off Ioachim kinge off Iuda were the signet off my right honde, yet will I plucke him of: And I wil gene the in to y power off thé that seke to slaye the, and in to the power off them that thou fearest: in to the power off Nabuchodo-
Si|nosor the kinge off Babilon, and in to the 

? 4 Re. 23. 24. a. 
Iere. 13. d. 30, a. 

Tere. 36, d. 
* 4 Reg. 24. b. 

è Esa. 13. b. 21, 8. 
4 Ezec. 34. a. 

The prophet Seremp. 

power of the Caldees. Morouer, I will sende the, and thy mother that bare the, in to a straunge londe, where ye were not borne, ad there shall ye dye. But as for the londe that ye will desyre to returne vnto, ye shall neuer come at it agayne. This ma lechonias shal be like an ymage robbed and torne in peces, which pleaseth no man, for all his apparell.
Wherfore both he and his sede shalbe sent awaye, and cast out in to a lode, that they knowe not.

O thou earth, earth, earth: heare the worde off the LORDE: Wryte this man amonge the outlawes, for no prosperite shall this man haue all his life longe. Nether shall eny of his sede be so happie, as to syt vpon the seate of Dauid, and to beare rule in Iuda.

The rriij. Chapter. 

O be vnto the shepherdes, “that de- 

stroye, and scatre my flocke, saieth the LORDE. Wherfore, this is the co- maundemét of the LORDE God of Israel, vnto the shepherdes that fede my people: Ye scatre àd thrust out my flocke, and loke not vpon them. ‘Therfore, now will I vyset the wickednes of youre ymaginacions, saieth y
LORDE: And will gather together the rem- naunt of my flocke, from all londes that I had dryuen them vnto, and will bringe them agayne to their pastures, that they maye growe and increace. I will set shepherdes also ouer them, which shall fede them. They

shall no more feare and drede, for there shall none off them be lost, sateth the LORDE.
* Beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the 
LORDE) that I wil rayse vp the rightuous braunch off Dauid, which shall beare rule,
/and discusse matters with wyszdome, and shall set vp equyte and rightuousnes agayne in the earth.

* n his tyme shall Iuda be saued, and Israel shal dwell without feare. And this is the name that they shall call him: euen the
LORDE oure rightuous maker. And ther- fore beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the
LORDE) that it shall no more be sayde: the 
LORDE lyueth, which brought the children off Israel out of the londe of Egipte: But the LORDE lyueth, which brought forth, ad led the sede of the house off Israel, out off

* Tere. 33. c. J Esa. 11. a. 
| 1. d. 

* Deu. 33.a. 
Tere. 16. c. 

^ 1 Cor. 

Chap. rrii. 

a 

B 

Chap. rri. the north londe, and from all countrees where
I had scatred them, and they shal dwell in their owne londe agayne.

My herte breaketh in my body because of the false prophetes, all my bones shake: I am become like a droncken man (that by the reason of wyne can take no rest) for very feare of the LORDE, and of his holy wordes:
Because the londe is full of aduoterers, where thorow it is destroyed and mourneth, ^ and y pleasaunt pastures of the deserte are dryed vp.
.|Yee the waye that men take, is wicked, q their gouernaunce is nothinge like the holy worde of the LORDE. For the prophetes and the prestes them selues are poluted
Ypocrytes, ad their wiekednes haue I founde in my house, saieth the LORDE. Wherfore, their waye shall be slippery in the darcknesse, wherein they maye stacker and fall. For I will bringe a plage vpon them, euen the yeare of their visitacion, saieth the LORDE. I haue sene foly amonge the prophetes of
Samaria, y they preched for Baal, àd dis- ceaued my people off Israel. I haue sene also amonge the Prophetes off Ierusalem foule aduoutery, and presumptuous lies. "They take the most shamefull men by the hode, flatringe them, so that they cà not returne from their wickednes. All these with their citesyns are vnto me, as Sodom, and as the inhabitours off
Gomorre. 

Therfore thus? saieth the LORDE of hoostes concernynge the prophetes: ^ Beholde,
I wil fede them with wormwod, q make them dryncke the water of gall. For fro the pro- phetes of Ierusalem is the sicknes of Y pocrisie come in to all the londe.

And therfore the LORDE of hoostes geueth you this warnynge: *Heare not the wordes of the prophetes, that preach vnto you, and dis- ceaue you: for they speake the meanynge of their owne herte, and not out of the mouth of the LORDE. ^'They saye vnto them, that despyse me: The LORDE hath spoken it:
Tush, ye shal prospere right well. And vnto all them, that walke after the lust of their owne herte, they saye: Tush, there shall no myszfortune happen you. For who hath sytten in the councell of the LORDE, that he hath herde and vuderstonde, what he is aboute to
* Iere. 27, b. and 28. b. 

* Tere. 14. a. ^ Tere. 9. b. 

d Jere. 12.a. Sopb.i.c. Iere. 5, b. snd 14. b. Deut. 29, c¢. e Tere. 30. d. f Iere. 30. d.

€ Jere. 14. b. ^ Psal. 138. a. 

Che prophet Feremp. 

do? ‘Who hath marcked his deuyce, and herde it? Beholde, the stormy wether of the
LORDE (that is, his indignacion) shal go forth, and shal fall downe vpon the heade of the vngodly. And the wrath of the LORDE shal not turne agayne, vntill he perfourme, and fulfyll the thoughte of his herte. /And in the latter dayes ye shall knowe his meanynge.

I haue not sent these prophetes, (saieth the 
LORDE) and yet they ranne. I haue not spoken to them, and yet they preached. *But yf they had continued in my councell and herde my wordes: they had turned my people from their euell wayes and wicked ymagina- cions. “Am I thé God that seeth but the thinge, which is nye at honde, and not that is farre of? saieth the LORDE. Maye eny man hyde him self so, that I shal not se him? saleth the LORDE. ‘Do not I fulfill heauen and earth? saieth the LORDE. I haue herde well ynough, what the prophetes saye, that preach lyes in my name, sayege: I haue dreamed, I haue dreamed. How longe wil this cotynue in the prophetes hertes, to tel lyes, and to preach the eraftie sotylte of their owne herte? Whose purpose is, (with the dreames that euery one tell) to make my people forget my name, as their fore fathers dyd, whé Baal came vp. The prophet that hath a dreame, let him tell it: and he that vnderstondeth my worde,‘ let him shewe it faithfully.

For what hath chaffe and wheat to do together? saieth the LORDE. Is not my worde like a fyre, (saieth the LORDE) and like an hammer, that breaketh the harde stone? Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: beholde, I wil vpo the prophetes, that steale my worde priuely from euery man. Beholde, here am I (saieth the LORDE) agaynst the prophetes, that take vpon their tunges to speake: The LORDE hath sayde it. Be- holde, here am I (saieth y LORDE) agaynst those prophetes, that darre prophecy lies, and disceaue my people with their vanities and miracles, whom I neuer sent, ner commaunded them. ‘They shal do this people greate harme, saieth the LORDE.

Yf this people, ether eny prophete or prest axe the, and saye: what is the burthen of the

Ezech. 8. b. i Psal. 138. a. 
Act. 7. f, and 17, d. 

Esa. 66. a. 
1 Cor. 4. a. 

Amos 9, a, 
* 1 Pet. 4. b. 

Fo. delir. 

B 

Fo. drlr. 

LORDE? Thou shalt saye vnto them: 
What? burthen? Therfore will I cast you fro me (saietl the LORDE) because ye youre selues are a burthen. And the prophet, prest or people that vseth this terme (the burthen of the LORDE) him will I viset, and his house also.

But thus shall ye saye, euery one to another: 
What answere hath the LORDE geuen? or, what is the LORDES commaundement ?
And as for the burthen of the LORDE, ye shal speake nomore of it: for euery mans owne worde is his burthen, because ye haue altered the wordes of the lyuynge God the
LORDE of hoostes oure God. 

Thus shall euery man saye to the non e what answere hath the LORDE geuen the?
Or, what saieth the LORDE? And not once to name the burthen of the LORDE.
Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: For so moch as ye haue vsed this terme (the burthen ofthe LORDE) where as I notwithstondinge sent vnto you, and forbade you to speake of the LORDES burthen:

Beholde therfore, I will repute you as a burthen, and will cast you out of my presence: yee and the cite also, that I gaue you and youre fathers: and will bringe you to an euer- lastinge confucion, and in to soch a shame, as shal neuer be forgotten.

The rritij. Chapter. 
HE LORDE shewed me a visio: Be- holde, there stode two maundes of figes before $ Téple of the LORDE, “after y Na- buchodonosor kynge of Babilo had led awaye captyue lechonias the sonne of Ioachim kinge of Inda, the mightie men also of Iuda, with the workemasters and conynge men of Ieru- salem, vnto Babilon. In the one maunde were very good fyges, euen like as those that be first ripe. In the other maunde were very naughtie figes,’ which might not be eaten, they were so euell.

'Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: what seist thou leremy? I sayde: fyges, where of some be very good, and some so euel, that no man maye eate them.

‘Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, after this maner: Thus saieth y LORDE the God of Israel: like as thou knowest the

* 4 Reg. 24. d. 

£g. > Ose. 9. b. 
31.f,30.d.3%e 

4 Tere. 29. c, 

* Deu. 29. a. Iere. 
* Psal. cuve ute. "lere d9. e. (Psal 78 a [Barutana CONI a. Baru. 3. a. 

Cbr prophet Sieremp. 

Chap. rritij. 
[good fyges, so shal I knowe the men led awaye, whoin I haue sent out of this place in to the londe of the Caldees, for their profite: and I will set myne eyes vpon them for the best, for
I will bringe them agayne in to this londe: I wil buylde them vp, and not breake them downe: I will plante them, and not rote them out. “And I will geue them an herte, to knowe, how that I am the LORDE. They shalbe my people, and I wilbe their God, for they shal returne vnto me with their whole herte.

And like as thou knowest the naughtie fyges, which maye not be eate, they are so euel: Euen so wil I (saieth the LORDE) let
Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, (ye and all his prynces, q the residue of lerusalem that re- mayne ouer in this londe, q them also that dwell in Egipte) to be vexed q plaged in all kingdomes çq londes. And will make them to be a reprofe, ‘a comon byworde, a laughinge stocke q shame, in all the places, whens I shal scatre them. I will sende the swearde, honger q pestilence amonge them, vntill I haue clene consumed them out of the londe, that I gaue vnto them q their fathers.

The rrb. Chapter. 
SERMONE that was geuen vnto Ie-|¢ remy, vpon all the people of Iuda: In

the fourth yeare of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kinge of Iuda, that was, in the first yeare of
Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon. Which sermone, Jeremy the prophet made vnto all the people of Iuda, ¢ to all $ Inhabitours of lerusale, on this maner:

From the xiij yeare of Tosias the sonne of 
Amon kinge of luda, vnto this present daye, 
(that is euen xxiij yeare) the worde of the 
LORDE hath bene committed vnto me. 
/ And so I haue spoké to you, I haue rysen vp early, I haue geué you warnynge in season, but ye wolde not heare me. Though the
LORDE hath sent. his seruauntes, ^ the prophetes vnto you in season: Yet wolde ye not obeye, ye wolde not encline youre eares to heare.

He sayde: turne agayne euery man from his euell waye, *q from youre wicked ymagi- nacions, q so shal ye dwell for euer in the londe, that the LORDE promised you ¢ youre
^ 4 Re. 17.c. 

J Tere. 29. c. 44.a. 35. c. £ 9 Par. 36. c. 

Chap. rrb. fore fathers: And go not after straunge goddes, serue them not, worshipe them not, q angre me not with the workes of youre hodes: then will not I punysh you. Neuertheles, ye wolde not heare me (saieth the LORDE) but haue defied me with the workes of youre hodes, to youre owne greate harme.

Wherfore, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Because ye haue not herkened vnto my worde, lo, I will sende out, « call for all the people, ý dwell in the north* (saieth the
LORDE) « wil prepayre Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon my seruaunt, ^and wil bringe them vpon this londe, and vpon all y dwell therein, q vpon all the people that are, aboute them, and will vterly rote them out.
I will make of them a wildernesse, a mockage, and a continuall deserte.

Morouer, I will take from them the voyce of gladnesse and solace, the voyce of the brydegrome q the bryde, the voyce of the anoynted, with the creszshettes: q this whole londe shal become a wildernes, ¢ they shall serue the sayde people and the kinge of Ba- bilon, thre score yeares and ten. ^ When the lxx yeares are expyred, I wil viset also the wickednesse of the kinge of Babylon ¢ his people, saieth the LORDE: yee q the londe of the Caldees, q wil make it a perpetuall wildernes, q wil fulfil all my wordes vpon that londe, which I haue deuysed agaynstit: yee all that is written in this boke, which Ieremy hath prophecied of all people: so that they also shal be subdued vnto dyuerse nacions q greate kynges, for I wil recompense them,
*acordinge to their dedes q workes of their owne hondes.

For thus hath the LORDE God of Israel spoken vnto me: /'lake this wyne cuppe of indignacion fro my honde, that thou mayest cause all the people (to whom I sende the) for to drinke of it: that when they haue dronke thereof, they maye be madd, q out of their wyttes, when the swearde commeth, that I wil sende amoge them. ‘Then toke I the cuppe from the LORDES honde, q made all the people drynke there of, vnto whom the
LORDE had sent me. 

But first the cite of Ierusalem, q all the cities of Iuda, their kinges ¢ prynces: to make

a Tere. 1. b. 5 Esa, 10. a. Tere. 17. a. * Tere. 7. d. and 16.b. ^Iere.29.b. 1 Es.1.a. lere.5.e. 9 Par.36.d.
Dan. 9.a. Zach. 1. b. * Tob 34. b. J Esa. 51. d. 

The prophet Seremp. 

the desolate, waist, 'lespysed q cursed, acord- inge as it is come to passe this daye. Yeeq
Pharao ¥ kinge of Egipte, his seruauntes, his prynces c his people altogether one with another and all kinges of the londe of Hus, all kinges of the Philistynes londe, Ascalon,
Gaza, Accaron q the remnaunt of Aszdod, the 
Edomites, the Moabites q the Ammonites: all the kinges of Tirus q Sidon: the kinges of the Iles, that are beyonde the see: Dedan,
Thema, Buz t the shauen Ismaelites:« all the kinges of Araby, q (generally) all the kinges that dwell in the deserte: all the kinges of
Simri, all the kinges of Elam, all ý kinges of the Meedes, all kinges towarde the north
(whether they be farre or nye) euery one with his neghbours: Yee and all the kingdomes that are vpon the whole earth. The kinge of
Sesach (sayde he) shal drinke with them also. 

And saye thou vnto them: this is tlie com- maundement of the LORDE of hoostes the
God of Israel: drinke and be droncken, spewe, and fall, that ye neuer ryse: and that thorow the swearde, which I wil sende amonge you.
But yf they will not receaue the cuppe of thy honde, and drinke it, then tell them: Thus doth the LORDE of hoostes threaten you:
^drynke it ye shal, and that shortly. ` For 
I begynne to plage the cite, that my name is geuen vnto: thynke ye then, that I will leaue you vnpunyshed? Ye shall not go quyte.
For why, I call for a swearde vpo all the in- habitours of the earth, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.

Therfore tell them all these wordes, and saye vnto them: ‘The LORDE shal crie from aboue, and let his voyce be herde from his holy habitacion. With a greate noyse shall he crie from his courte regall. He shal geue a greate voyce (like the grape gatherers) and the sounde thereof shalbe herde vnto the endes of the worlde. For the LORDE hath a indgment to geue vpon all people, and will holde his courte of iustice with all flesh and punyshe the vngodly, saieth the LORDE.

‘For thus sayeth ¥ LORDE of hoostes: 
Beholde, a miserable plage shall go from one people to another, and a greate stormy water shal arise from all the endes of the earth.
And the same daye shall the LORDE him- 

^ Tere, 49. b. Eze, 9. b. 
Amos 1. a. * Tere. 30. d. 

Psal. 74. b. 
1 Pet. 4. c. 

8 Tere. 9. d. i Ioel 3. c.

Fo. deri] 

So. Delt. j self slaye them, from one ende of the earth to
X: |another. There shall no mone be made for eny of them, none gathered vp, none buried: but shall lie as dunge vpon the grounde.
Mourne (o ye shepherdes) q crie: sprinckle youre selues with aszshes, o ye rammes of the flocke: for the tyme of youre slaughter is ful-

made for pleasure. 

° The shepherdes shall haue no waye to fle, and the rammes of the flocke shall not escape.
Then shal the shepherdes crie horribly, and the rammes of the flocke shal mourne: for the LORDE shal consume their pasture, and their best feldes shal lie deed because of the horrible wrath of the LORDE. They shall forsake their foldes like as a lyon: For their

The prophet Feremp. 

filled, and ye shal fall like vessels connyngly, 

londes shalbe waist, because of the wrath of the destroyer, and because of his fearfull in- dignacion.

The rrbi. Chapter. 

T^ the begynnynge of the reigne of Ioachim 

the sonne of losias kynge of Iuda, came this worde from the LORDE, sayenge: Thus saieth the LORDE: ^Stonde in the courte of the LORDES house, and speake vnto all them which (out of the cities of Iuda) come to do worshippe in the LORDES house, all’ the wordes ý 1 commaunde the to saye. Loke that thou kepe not one worde backe, yf (pera-' uenture) “they will herk&, and turne euery man from his wicked waye: that I maye also repente of the plage, which I haue determed

to brynge vpon them, because of their wicked invencions.

And after this maner shalt thou speake vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE: yf ye will not obeye me, to walke in my lawes, which I haue geuen you, and to heare the wordes of my seruauntes the prophetes, whom
I sent vnto you, rysynge vp tymely, and still sendinge: Yf ye will not folowe the (I saye) then will I do to this house, as I dyd vnto
Silo, and will make this cite to be abhorred of all the people of the earth. ^ And the prestes, the prophetes and all the people herde Ieremy preach these wordes, in the house of the
LORDE. 

Now when he had spoken out all the wordes, that the LORDE commaunded him to preach

* Psal. 141. a. 

^ Iere. 7. 3. 17.d. * Deut. 4. a, 12. b. 
1 Tere. 7. a. 

*4 Re. 15. g. Iere. 36. b. , f Toh. 19. a. 

Chap. rrbi. vnto all the people, then the prestes, the pro- phetes and all the people toke holde vpon him, and sayde: thou shaltdye. How darrest thou be so bolde, as to saye in the name of the LORDE: it shal happen to this house as

it dyd vnto Silo? and this cite shalbe so waist, that no man shal dwell there in?

And when all the people were gathered aboute Ieremy in the house of the LORDE, the prynces of Iuda herde of this rumoure, q they came soone out of the kinges Palace in to the house of the LORDE, and sat them downe before the new dore of the LORDE.
“Then spake the prestes and the prophetes vnto the rulers q to all the people, these wordes: /'lhis man is worthy to dye, for he hath preached agaynst this cite, as ye youre selues haue herde with youre eares.

Then sayde Jeremy vnto the rulers and toi @ all the people: The LORDE hath sente me to preach agaynst this house q agaynst this cite all the wordes that ye haue herde. £ Ther- fore amende youre wayes, and youre advyse- mentes, and be obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE youre God: so shal the LORDE repét of the plage, y he had deuysed agaynst you. Now as for me: I am in youre hondes, do with me, as ye thinke expediét and good.
But this shall ye knowe: yf ye put me to death, ye shal make youre selues, this cite ¢ all the inhabitours there of, ^giltie of innocent bloude. For this is of a treuth: that the
LORDE hath sente me vnto you, to speake all these wordes in youre eares.

Then sayde the rulers and the people vnto the prestes and prophetes: This man maye not be condemned to death, for he hath preached vnto vs in the name of the LORDE| B oure God. The Elders also of the londe stode vp, q sayde thus vnto all the people: 'Micheas the Morascite, which was a prophet vnder
Ezechias kinge of Iuda, spake to all the peo- ple of Iuda: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: ^Sion shalbe plowed like a felde, lerusal& shalbe an heape of stones, q the hill of the LORDES house shalbe turned to an hie wod. Dyd Ezechias y kinge of Iuda q the people of lida put him to deeth for this?
No verely, but rather feared LORDE, a made their praier vnto him. For the which cause also y LORDE repented of the plage,
^ Mat. 23. e k Mich. 3. c. 

€ Tere, 7. a. i Mich. 1. a. 

SO LL Los nM MM OM (€ —————————————————gÁPÓ ÁSG ÉÓÓ A (A Ó——AÁMM—ÁÁÉ 

Chap. rrt. y he had deuysed agaynst them. Shulde we then do soch a shamefull dede agaynst oure soules? There was a prophet also, that preached stiffly in the name of the LORDE, called Vrias the sonne of Semeia of Cariathi- arim: this ma preached also agaynst this cite q agaynst this lode, acordinge to all as Ieremy saieth. * Now when Ioachim the kinge with all the estates q prynces had herde his wordes, the kinge went aboute to slaye him. ° When
Vrias perceaued that, he was afrayed, « fled, 
& departed in to Egipte. 

'Then Ioachim the kinge sent seruauntes in to the lode of Egipte, Namely: Elnatha the sonne of Achbor, q certayne men with him in to. Egipte, which fetched Vrias out of
Egipte, q brought him vnto kinge Ioachim that slewe him with the swearde, q cast his deed body in to ¥ como peoples graue. But
Ahicam the sonne of Saphan helped Ieremy, that he came not in to the hondes of the people to be slavne.

The yrbij. Chapter. 

N the begynnynge of the reigne of Ioachim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda, came this worde vnto leremy from the LORDE, which spake thus vnto me: Make the bondes
& chaynes, and put them aboute thy neck, a sende thé to the kinge of Edom, the kinge of
Moab, the kinge of Amon, the kinge of Tirus, q to the kinge of Sidon: q that by the mes- saungers, which shal come to lerusalem vnto
Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, and byd them saye vnto their masters: Thus saleth the
LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel, speake thus vnto youre masters: “I am he that made the earth, the men q y catell that are vpon the grounde, with my greate power q out- stretched arme, q haue geuen it vnto whom it pleased me. ^And now will I delyuer all these londes in to the power of Nabuchodo- nosor the kinge of Babilon my seruaunt. The beestes also of the felde shal 1 geue him to do him seruyce. And all people shal serue him, q his sonne, and his childes children, vntil the tyme of the same lode be come also: Yee

many people q greate kinges shal serue him. orouer, that people q kingdome which wil not serue Nabuchodonosor, and that wil not put their neckes vnder y yock of the kinge of

53 Re. 22.d. ^2 Re. 19. a. Matt. 2.c. ^ Deut. 10. c. d Ecci. 10.a, Iudic. 11. d. Tere. 32. a. Dan.4.c. Iere.

The prophet Feremp. 

Babilon: the same people will I viset with swearde, with honger, with pestilence, vntill I haue consumed them in his hondes, saieth the
LORDE. «And therfore, folowe not youre prophetes, soythsayers, expounders of dreames, charmers q witches, which saye vnto you: ye shal not serue the kinge of Babilon. For they preach you lies, to bringe you farre from youre londe, q that I might cast you out, q destroye you. But the people that put their neckes vnder the yock of the kinge of Babi- lon, q serue him, those I wil let remayne still in their owne lode (saieth the LORDE) « they shal oceupie it, q dwell there in.

‘All these thinges tolde I Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, and sayde: Put youre neckes vnder the yock of the kinge of Babilon, and serne him q his people, that ye maye lyue.
Why wilt thou and thy people perish with the swearde, with honger, with pestilence: like as the LORDE hath deuysed for all people, that wil not serue the kinge of Babilon? ‘Therfore geue no eare vnto those prophetes (that tell you: Ye shall not serue the kinge of Babilon) for they preach you lies, * nether hane I sent them, saieth the LORDE: how be it they are bolde, falsely for to prophecie in my name: that I might y sooner dryue you out, q that ye might perish with youre preachers.

I spake to the prestes also and to all the people: Thus saieth the LORDE: ^ Heare not the wordes of those prophetes, that preach vnto you, q saye: Beholde, the vessels of the
LORDES house shall shortly be brought hither agayne from Babilon: For they pro- phecie hes vnto you. Heare them not, but serue the kinge of Babilon, y ye maye lyue.
Wherfore will ye make this cite to be de- stroyed? But yf they be true prophetes in very dede, and yf the worde of the LORDE be commytted vnto them, then let them praye the LORDE of hoostes, that the remnaunt of the ornamentes (which are in the house of the LORDE, and remayne yet in the house of the kinge of Iuda and at lerusalem) be not caried to Babilon also. For thus hath the
LORDE of hoostes spoken concernynge the pylers, the lauer, the seate and the residue of the ornamentes that yet remayne in this citie, which Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon toke not, when he caried awaye lechonias

25.b. Tere, 22, b. 38. a. 42. c. f Tere. 38. c.

e Iere. 23. c. 39. b. 
^ Tere. 28, a. 

€ Tere. 23. c. Iere. 29. b. 

Fo. Delritj. 

5 

Fo. Delpy. 
* the sonne of Ioaehim kinge of Iuda, with all the power of Iuda and lerusalem, from Ieru- salem vnto Dabilon, captyue.

Yee thus hath the LORDE of hoostes the 
God of Israel spoken, as touchinge the residue of the ornamentes of the LORDES house, of the kinge of Iudaes house, and of Ierusalem:
*'They shalbe earied vnto Babilon, and there they shall remayne, vntil I vyset them, saieth the LORDE. ‘Then wil I bringe them hither agayne. ‘And this was done in the same yeare: ené in the begynnynge of the reigne of Sedeehias kinge of Inda.

The rrbtij. Chapter. 

UT in the fourth yeare of the reigne of 
Sedechias kinge of luda, in the fifth 
Moneth, It happened, that Hananias y sonne of Assur the prophet of Gabaon, spake to me in the house of the LORDE, in the presence of the prestes q of all the people, q sayde:
Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: I haue broké the yock of the kinge of Babilon, and after two yeare will “1 bringe agayne in to this place, all the ornamentes of the LORDES house, y Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon earied awaye from this place vnto Babilon. Yee 1 will bringe agayne
Iechonias the sonne of Ioachim the kinge of 
Iuda himself, with all the presoners of Iuda, 
(y are caried vnto Babilon,) eué in to this place, saieth $ LORDE, for 1 wil breake y

yock of the kinge of Babilo. 

Then the prophet leremy gaue answere vnto that prophet Hananias, before the prestes q before all the people that were present in the house of the LORDE. And the prophet
Ieremy sayde : * Amen, the LORDE do that, tgraunte the thinge, which thou hast prophe- eied: that he maye bringe agayne all the ornamentes of the LORDES house, ¢ restore all the presoners from Babilon in to this place.
Neuertheles, herken thou also, what l will saye, that thon q all the people maye heare:
The prophetes that were before vs in tymes past, which propheeied of warre, or trouble, or pestilence, ether of peace, vpon many na- cions q greate kingdomes, were proued by this (yf God had sende them in very dede) when the thinge came to passe, which that prophet tolde before.

^ 4 Re. 25. be € 1 Eads i. b. 
* Mich. 3. c. f Deu. 18. d. Nu. 16. a. 

a 4 Re. 24. c. 
4 Tere. 27, c. 

Cbr prophet Seremp. 

Chap. rrbif. 

/AÀnd Hananias the prophet toke the chayne from the prophet Ieremias neek, q brake it: q with that sayde Hananias, that all the people might heare: Thus hath the LORDE spoken:
Euen so will I breake the yock of Nabuchodo- nosor kinge of Dabilo, from the neck of all naelons, yee q that within this two yeare.
And so the prophet Jeremy wente his waye. |€ 
After now that Hananias the prophet had taken the chayne from the prophet leremies neek, and broken it: The worde of the
LORDE came vnto the prophet leremy sayenge: Go, and tell Hananias these wordes:
Thus saieth the LORDE: Thou hast broken the chayne of wodd, but in steade of wodd, thou shalt make ehaynes of yron. For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of
Israel: I wil put a yoek of yron vpon the neck of all this people, that they maye serue
Nabuehodonosor the kinge of Babilon, yee q soshal they do. And I wil geue him ¥ beestes in the felde. € Then sayde the prophet Ieremy vnto Y prophet Hananias: Heare me (I praye the) hians The LORDE hath not sent the, but thou bringest this people in to a false beleue. And therfore thus saieth y LORDE: beholde, I wil sende the out of the lode, q within a yeare thou shalt die, beeanse thou hast falsely spoké agaynst the LORDE. So
Hananias the prophet died the same yeare in the seuenth Moneth.

The rri. Chapter. 

HIS is the Copie of the lettre, y leremy 
IR the prophet sent from Ierusalem vnto the presoners: the Senatours, prestes, pro- phetes, q all the people, whom Nabuchodo- nosor had led vnto Babilo: after y tyme ý kinge lechonias q his Quene, his ehambre- laynes, the prynees of Iuda q lerusalé q the workmasters of Ierusalé were departed thither.
Whieh lettre, Elasa Y sonne of Saphà q Ga- maria ¥ sonne of Helehia dyd beare, who
Sedechias the kinge of Inda sent vnto Babilo to Nabuchodonosor ý kinge of Babilo : these were ¥ wordes of leremias lettre: Thus hath y LORDE of hoostes ¥ God of Israel spoke, vnto all the presoners, y were led fro lerusale vnto Dabilo: ^Bnuylde you houses to dwell therein: plate you gardes, y ye maye enioye the frutes thereof: ‘take you wyues, to beare i Gen. 1. d. 9. a.

€ Tere, 29. c, ^ Tere. 35. a. 

Chap. rrir. you sonnes and doughters: prouyde wyues for youre sonnes, q huszbondes for youre doughters: that they maye get sonnes ¢ doughters, and that ye maye multiplie there.
Laboure not to be fewe, but seke after peace t prosperite of the cite, where in ye be pre- soners, t praye vnto God for it. “For in the peace there of, shal youre peace be.

‘For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Let not those prophetes and soythsaiers y be amonge you, disceaue you: q beleue not youre owne dreames. “For why, they preach you lies in my name, q I haue not sent them, saieth the LORDE.
But thus saieth the LORDE: When ye haue fulfilled lxx yeares at Babilon,’ I wil bringe you home, and of myne owne goodnes I will carie you hither agayne vnto this place. For
I knowe, what I haue deuysed for you, saieth the LORDE. My thoughtes are to geue you peace, q not trouble (which I geue you all redie) q that ye might haue hope agayne.
“Ye shall crie vnto me, ye shal go q call vpo me, t I shal heare you. /Ye shal seke me, q fynde me: Yee, yf so be that ye seke me with youre whole herte, I will be founde of you (saieth the LORDE) and will delyuer you out of preson, q gather you together agayne out of all places, where in I haue scatred you, saieth the LORDE: and wil bringe you agayne to the same place, from whence I caused you be caried awaye captyue.

But where as ye saye, that God hath raysed you vp prophetes at Babilon: Thus hath the
LORDE spoken (concernynge the kinge that sytteth in the stole of Dauid, and all y people that dwell in this cite, *youre brethren that are not gone with you in to captiuyte.) Thus
(I saye) speaketh the LORDE of hoostes: 
Beholde, I wil sende a swearde, honger ¢ pestilence vpon them,’ and wil make them like vntymely fyges, that maye not be eaté for bytternes. And I wil persecute them with the swearde, with honger ¢ death.

I will delyuer them vp to be vexed of all kingdomes, to be cursed, abhorred, laughed to scorne, ¢ put-to confucion of all the people, amonge whom I haue scatred them: q that because they haue not bene obedient vnto my commaundementes, (saieth the LORDE)

? Tere. 23. c. 27. b. 
1 Esd. 1. a. 

1 Tim. 2. e. d 2 Pa. 36. d. Tere. 25. b. f Ioan. 7. d.

? Baru. 1. c. 
* Tere. 14. e. 
* Deu. 4. e. 30. a. 

E 4 Reg. 24. d. 

The prophet Seremp. 

which I sent vnto them by my seruauntes the prophetes. ‘I stode vp early, and sent vnto them, but they wolde not heare, saieth the
LORDE. Heare therfore the worde of the 
LORDE, all ye presoners, whom I sent from lerusale vnto Babilon : Thus hath the
LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel spoken, of Achab y sonne of Colaias, q of Sedechias the sonne of Maasia, which prophecie lies vnto you in my name: Beholde, I wil delyuer them in to the honde of Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon, that he maye slaye them before youre eyes. And all y presoners of
Iuda that are in Babilon, shal take vpo them this terme of cursinge, and saye: Now God do vnto the, as he dyd vnto Sedechias q
Achab, whom the kinge of Babilon rosted in the fyre, because they synned shamefully in
Israel. 

For they haue not onely defiled their negh- bours wyues, but also preached lyenge wordes in my name, which I haue not commaunded them. This I testifie, q assure, saieth the
LORDE. But as for Semeia the Nehe- lamite, thou shalt speake vnto him: Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of
Israel: Because thou hast sealed lettres vnder thy name, vnto all the people that is at Ieru- salem, q to Sophonias the sonne of Maasia the prest, yee and sent them to all the prestes: where in thou wrytest thus vnto him: The
LORDE hath ordened the to be prest in steade of Ioiada the prest, that thou ‘shuldest be the chefe in the house of the LORDE abone all prophetes, q preachers, q that thou mightest put them in preson, or in ¥ stockes.
How happeneth it then, that thou hast not reproued Ieremy of Anathot, which neuer leaueth of his prophecienge. And beside all this, he hath sent vs worde vnto Babilon, and tolde vs planely, that oure captiuyte shal longe endure: that we shulde buylde vs houses to dwell therin, ¢ to plante vs gardens, that we might enioye the frutes therof. Which lettre
Sophonias the prest dyd rede, and let Ieremy the prophet heare it.

Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto leremy, sayenge: Sende worde to all them that be in captiuyte, on this maner:
"Thus hath the LOR DE spoken concernynge 

^ Tere. 24. b. i Tere, 25. a. 44. a. 

2 Baracoa, ! Tere. 28. c. 

* 4 Re. 11. a. 

87 

Fo. Delph. 

D 

fo. drelrbi, 

'Semeia Y Nehelamite: Because that Semeia hath prophecied vnto you without my com- myssion, ¢ brought you in to a false hope, therfore thus the LORDE doth certifie you:
Beholde, I wil vyset Semeia the Nehelamite, a his sede: so that none of his shall remayne amouge this people, t none of them shall se the good, ý I will do for this people, saieth the LORDE. . For be hath preached falsely of the LORDE.

The rrr. Chapter. 

HESE are the wordes, that the LORDE 

shewed vnto leremy, saienge: Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel: * Wryte vp diligently all the wordes, that I haue spoken vnto the, in a boke. For lo, the tyme com- meth (saieth the LORDE) that I will bringe agayne the presoners of my people of Israel and Iuda, saieth the LORDE: For I will restore them vnto the londe, that I gaue to their fathers, and they shall haue it in pos- session.

Agayne, these wordes spake the LORDE, cocernynge Israel and Iuda: Thus saieth the
LORDE: We heare a terrible crie, feare and disquietnesse. For what els doth this signifie, that I se? Namely, that all stronge men smyte, euery man his honde vpon his loynes, as a woman m the payne of hir trauayle. Who euer sawe a man trauayle with childe?^ En- quere therafter, q se. Yee all their faces are maruelous pale.

Alas for this daye, which is so dredefull, that none maye be lickened vnto it: and alas for the tyme of Iacobs trouble, from the which he shall yet be delyuered. For in that daye, saieth the LORDE, I will take his yock from of thy neck, ¢ breake thy bondes. ‘They shall nomore serue straunge goddes vnder him, but they shall do seruyce vnto God their LORDE, and to Dauid their kinge,’ whom I will rayse vp vnto them. And as forthe, o my seruaunt lacob, feare not (saieth y LORDE) and be not afrayed, o Israel. For lo, ^I will helpe the also from farre, x thy sede from the londe of their captiuyte.

And Iacob shall turne agayne, he shalbe iu rest, and haue a prosperous life, and no man shall make him afrayed. For I am with the, to helpe the, saieth the LORDE. And

* Tere. 36. a. 
^ Amos 9, b, 

^ Iere, 13. d. * Eze. 34. d. e Jere. 10. d. Exo, 34. a.

ere. 46. e. 
Nahü. 1. a. 

The prophet Seremp. 

Chap. rrr. though I shal destroye all the people, amonge whom I haue scatred the, yet will I not destroye the, but correcke the, and that with discrecion. “For I knowe, that thou art in no wise without faute. ‘Therfore thus saieth y
LORDE: I am sory for thy hurte and woundes. There is no man to medle with thy cause, or to bynde vp thy woundes: there maye no man helpe the.

All thy louers haue forgotten the, and care nothinge for the. For I haue geuen the a cruell stroke, and chastened the roughly: and that for the multitude of thy myszdedes,/ for thy synnes haue had the ouer hande. Why makest thou mone for thy harme? I my self haue pite of thy sorowe, but for the multitude of thy myszdedes and synnes, I haue done this vnto the.

* And therfore all they that deuoure the, shalbe deuoured, and all thine enemies shal be led in to captiuyte. All they that make the waist, shalbe waisted them selues: and all those that robbe the, will I make also to be robbed. For I will geue the thy health agayne, and make thy woundes whole, saieth the LORDE: because they reuyled the, as one cast awaye and despised, o Sion. :

^ For thus saieth the LORDE : Beholde, I will set vp Iacobs tentes agayne, and defende his dwellinge place. The cite shalbe buylded in hir olde estate, and the houses shal haue their right foundacion. And out of them shall go thankesgeuynge, and the voyce of ioye.

I will multiplie them, and they shall not|x mynishe: I shall endue them with honoure, and no man shall subdue them. ‘Their chil- dren shalbe as afore tyme, and their congre- gacion shal cotinue in my sight. And all those that vexe them, will I viset.

A captayne also shall come of them,’ and a prynce shall springe out from the myddest of them: him will I chalenge to myself, and he shall come vnto me. ‘For what is he, that geueth ouer his herte, to come vnto me? saleth the LORDE. "Ye shalbe my people also, and I wilbe youre God. Beholde, on the other syde shall the wrath of the LORDE breake out as a stormy water, as a mightie whyrle wynde: and shal fall vpo the heades of the vngodly.

The terrible displeasure of the LORDE 

f Iere. 13. d. £ Iere. 2.a, 20, d. t Ioan. 6. e.

^Nu.24.a. *Mich.5. a. 

! ere. 13. b. 24. b. 3. f. Tere. 23. c. 25. d. 

Chap. rri. 

a 

B 

shall not leaue of, vntill he haue done, a per- fourmed the intent of his herte," which in the latter dayes ye shal vnderstonde. At the same tyme (saieth the LORDE) shal I be the God of all the generacions of Israel, ¢ they shalbe my people.

The rrri. Chapter. 

HUS saieth the LORDE: The people 
T of Israel which escaped in y wildernes from the swearde, ^founde grace to come in to their rest. Euen so shal the LORDE now also apeare vnto me from farre, and saye: I loue the with an euerlastinge loue, therfore do I sprede my mercy before the. “I will repayre the agayne (o thou doughter of Israel) that thou mayest be fast and sure. Thou shalt take thy tabrettes agayne, q go forth with them, that lede the daunce.

Thou shalt plante vynes agayne vpon y hilles of Samaria, and the grape gatherers shall plante, and synge.

And when itis tyme, the watchmen vpon the mount of Ephraim shall crie: ¢ Arise, let vs go vp vnto Sion to oure LORDE God, for thus saieth the LORDE: Reioyce with gladues because of Iacob, crie vnto the heade of the Gentiles: speake out, synge, and saye:
The LORDE shall delyner his people, the remnaunt of Israel, x make them whole. Be- holde, I will bringe them agayne from out of the north lode, and gather them from the endes of the worlde, with the blynde and lame that are amonge them, with the women that be greate with childe, and soch as be also delyuered: and the company of them that come agayne, shal be greate.

They departed from hence in heuynes, but with ioye will I bringe them hither agayne.
I will lede them by the ryuers of water in a straight waye, where they shall not stomble:
For I will be Israels father, and Epraim shalbe my firstborne.*

Heare the worde of the LORDE (o ye 
Gentiles) preach in the Iles, that lie farre of, and saye: he that hath scatred Israel, shall gather him together agayne, and shall kepe him as a shepherde doth his flocke. For the
LORDE shall redeme Iacob, and ryd him from the honde of the violent. And they shal come, ¢ reioyce vpon the hill of Sion, q

4 Esa. 2. a. 
Matt. 2. c. 

è Nu. 14. c. 
Gen. 48. d. 

* Eze. 16. b. 
/ Tere. 3. e, 

* Tere. 23. c. 
* Deut. 32. a. 

Che prophet Feremp. 

shall haue plenteousnes of goodes, which the 

LORDE shall geue them: Namely, wheate, wyne, oyle, yonge shepe and calues. And their conscience shalbe as a well watred garden, for they shall nomore be hongrie.

Then shal the mayde reioyce in the daunce, yee both yonge and olde folkes. For I will turne their sorow in to gladnesse, and will comforte them, and make them ioyfull, euen from their hertes. I will poure plenteousnes vpon the hertes of the prestes, and my people shalbe satisfied with good thinges, saieth the
LORDE. 

Thus saieth the LORDE: “The voyce of heuynes, wepynge and lamentacion came vp in to heauen: euen of Rachel mournynge for hir children, and wolde not be comforted, because they were awaye.

But now saieth the LORDE: leaue of from wepynge and crienge, witholde thyne eyes from teares, for thy laboure shalbe re- warded, saieth the LORDE. And they shall come agayne out of the londe of their enemies:
Yee euen thy posterite shall haue consolacion in this (saieth the LORDE) that thy children shall come agayne in to their owne londe.

Morouer 1 herde Ephraim, (that was led awaye captyue) complayne on this maner: O
LORDE, thou hast correcte me, and thy chastenynge haue I receaued, as an vntamed calfe. ^Conuerte thou me, and I shalbe con- uerted, for thou art my LORDE God. Yee as soone as thou turnest me, I shall refourme my self: and when I vnderstonde, I shall smyte vpon my thee. For verely I haue comitted shamefull thinges: O let my youth beare this reprofe and confucion.

Vpon this complaynte, I thought thus by n 

my self: ‘is not Ephraim my deare sonne 

Is he not the childe, with whom I haue had all myrth and pastyme? For sence the tyme that I first cOmoned with him, I haue him euer in remembraunce: therfore my very herte dryueth me vnto him: gladly and louyngly will I haue mercy vpon him, saieth the LORDE. Get the watchmen, prouyde teachers for the: set thine herte vpon the right waie, that thou shuldest walke, and turne agayne: (o thou doughter of Israel) turne agayne to these cities of thyne. How longe wilt thou go astraie, o thou shrékinge doughter?
^ Zach. 1, a. Tren. 5. c. 

& Eze. 20. f. i Gen. 48. d. 

Fo. urrbij. 

So. Delroy. 

F 

lFor the LORDE will worke a new thynge vpon earth: A woman shall compasse a man.

For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the 
God of Israel: It will come therto, that when 
I haue brought Iuda out of captiuyte, these wordes shalbe herde in y londe and in his cities: ^The LORDE, which is the fayre brydegrome of rightuousnesse, make the frute- full, o thou holy hill: And there shall dwell
Iuda and all hir cities, the shepherdes and huszbonde men: For I shall fede the hongrie soule,^ and refresh all faynte hertes. When I herde this, I came agayne to my self, and mused, like as I had bene waked out of a swete slepe.

Beholde (saieth the LORDE) the dayes come, that I will sowe the house of Israel and the house of Iuda, with men and with catell.
Yee it shall come therto,^ that like as I hane gone aboute in tymes past to rote them out, to scatre them, to breake them downe, to destroye them and chaste them: Euen so will
I also go diligently aboute, to buylde them vp agayne, and to plante them, saieth the
LORDE. 

“Then shall it no more be sayde: y fathers haue eaten a sower grape, and the childrens teth are set on edge: for euery one shal dye for his owne myszdede, so that who so eateth a sower grape, his teth shalbe set on edge.

*Beholde, the dayes come (saieth the 
LORDE) y I will make a new couenaunt with ¥ house of Israel q with ¥ house of Iuda: not after the couenaunt that I made with their fathers, when I toke them by the honde, q led them out of the londe of Egipte: which couenaunt they brake, wherfore I punyshed them sore, saleth the LORDE: But this shal

be the couenaunt that I will make with the house of Israel after those dayes,/ saieth the
LORDE: I will plante my lawe in the in- warde partes of them, and write it in their hertes, and wilbe their God, and they shalbe my people.

And from thece forth shall no man teach his neghboure or his brother, and saye: knowe
(the LORDE: But they shall all knowe me, from the lowest vnto the hyest, saieth the
LORDE. For I will forgeue their mysz- dedes, and wil neuer remembre their synnes

* Esa. 62. a. ^ Matt. 5. a. 11. e. * Deu. 28. g. 
Zach. 8. c. Iere. 32, c. 4 Eze, 18, a. * Heb. 8. b. f Hebre. 10.d. Esa. 51,b. Iere, 94. b.30.d. č Gene. 1.b.

The prophet Seremp. 

Chap. rri. eny more. ‘Thus saieth the LORDE which gaue the sonne to be a light for the daye, and the Moone and starres to shyne in the night: which moueth the see, so that the floudes therof waxe fearce: his name is the LORDE of hoostes. Like as this ordinaunce shal neuer be taken out of my sight, saieth the LORDE:
So shal the sede of Israel neuer ceasse, but all waye be a people before me.

Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE: like as the heauen abone can not be measured, and as the foundacions of the earth beneth maye not be sought out : “So will I also not cast out the whole sede of Israel, for that they haue commytted, saieth the LORDE. Beholde, the daies come saieth the LORDE, y the cite of ý LORDE shalbe enlarged from the towre of Hananeel, vnto y gate of the corner wall. ‘From thence shal the right measure be taken before her vnto the hill toppe of
Gareb, and shal come aboute Gaatha, and the whole valley of the deed carcases, and of the ashes, *q all Seremoth, vnto the broke of
Cedron: and from thence vnto the corner of the horsgate towarde y east, where as the
Sanctuary of the LORDE also shal be set. 
And when it is now buylded, q set vp of this fashion it shall neuer be broken, ner cast downe eny more.

The rrvij. Chapter. 

HESE wordes spake the LORDE vnto 

Ieremy, in the tenth yeare of Sedechias kinge of luda, which was y xviij yeare of
Nabuchodonosor, what tyme as the kinge of 
Babilons hooste layed sege vnto lerusalem. 
But Ieremy the prophet laye bounde in y courte of the preson, which was in the kinge of Iudaes house: where Sedechias the kinge of Iuda caused him to be layed, because he had prophecied of this maner: "Thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I will delyuer this cite in to the hondes of the kinge of Babilon, which shal take it. As for Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, he shal not be able to escape the Caldees, but surely he shall come in to the hondes of the kinge of Babilon: which shall speake with him mouth to mouth, and one of them shall loke another in the face.
And Sedechias shalbe caried vnto Babilon, 

^ Ro, 11. a. i 2 Esd. 3. a. Zach. 14. b. k Tere. 19, b. 
! Jere. 21. c. Iere. 34, a. 27, a, 38. a. 39. a. 

Chap. rrj. and there shall he be, vntill the tyme that I vyset him, saieth the LORDE. But yf thou takest in hode to fight agaynst the Caldees, thou shalt not prospere.

And Ieremy sayde: Thus hath the LORDE spokeu vnto me: Beholde, Hananeel the sonne of Sellum thine Vneles sonne shall come vnto the, and requyre the to redeme ¥ londe, that lieth in Anathot vnto thy self: “for by reason of kynred it is thy parte to redeme it, and to bye 1t out.

And so Hananeel myne Vncles sonne came to me in the courte of the preson, (acordinge to the worde of the LORDE,;) and sayde vnto me: Bye my londe (I praye the) that lieth in Anothot in the countre of Ben lamyn: for by heretage thou hast right to lowse it out for thy self, therfore redeme it. Then I pre- ceaued, that this was the commaundement of the LORDE, and so I lowsed the londe from
Hananeel of Anathot, myne Vnceles sonne, and weyed him there the moneye: euen seuen sycles, and ten syluer pens.

I caused him also to make me a writinge, aud to seale it, and called recorde there by, and weyed him there the money vpon the waightes. So I toke the euydence with the copie (when it was orderly sealed and red ouer) and I gaue the euydence vnto Baruch the sonne of Nerias the sonne of Maasia in the sight of Hananeel my cosen, and in the presence of the witnesses, that be named in the euydence, and before all the lewes that were therby in the courte of the preson.

I charged Baruch also before them, saienge: 
The LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel commaundeth the, to take this sealed euydence with the copie, and to laye it in an erthen vessell, that it maye longe continue.

For the LORDE of hoostes the God of 
Israel hath determed, that houses, feldes and nudes shalbe possessed agaynein this londe.

ow when I had delyuered the euydence vnto Baruch y sonne of Nerias, I besought the LORDE, sayenge: ^O LORDE God, lt is thou that hast made heauen and earth with thy greate power and hie arme, and there is nothinge to harde for y. Thou shewest mercy vpon thousandes, “thou recompécest the wickednes of the fathers, in to the bosome of the children that come after them.

a Leui,25. d. Nu.27,2.36.a. Ruth 4. a. lere. 10. b. * Exo. 34. a,

5 Gene. 1.a. 
4 Ro. 2, a. 

Che prophet Feremp. 

Fo. Delrtr. 

Thou art the greate and mightie God, whose name is the LOR DE of hoostes : greate in councell, and infinite in thought: Thine eyes loke vpon all the wayes of mens children,
“to rewarde euery one after his waye, and acordinge to the frutes of his inuencions:
Thou hast done greate tokens and wonders in the londe of Egipte (as we se this daye) vpon the people of Israel and vpon those men: to make thy name greate, as it is come to passe this daye : “Thou hast brought thy people of
Israel out of the londe of Egipte, with tokens, with wondres, with a mightie honde, with a stretched out arme and with greate terriblenes: and hast geuen them this londe, like as thou haddest promysed vnto their fathers: Namely, that thou woldest geue them a léde, that flow- eth with mylke and honye.

‘Now when they came therin, and pos- sessed it, they folowed not thy voyce, and walked not in thy lawe : but all that thou com- maundedest them to do, that haue they not done, and therfore come all these plages vpon them.

Beholde, there are bulworckes made now agaynst the cite, to take it: and it shalbe wonne of the Caldees that besege it, with swearde, with honger and death, and loke what thou hast spoken, that same shal come vpon them.

For lo, all thinges are present vnto the: 
Yet sayest thou vnto me (o LORDE God) and commaundest me, that I shall loose a pece of londe vnto my self, and take witnesses therto: and yet in the meane season the cite is delyuered in to the power of the Caldees.

Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, sayenge: Beholde, I am the LORDE
God of all flesh, Is there eny thinge then to harde for me? Therfore thus sayde the
LORDE: beholde, I shal delyuer this cite in to the power of the Caldees, and in to the power of Nabuchodonosor“ the kinge of Babi- lon, they shall take it in: For the Caldees shall come, and wynne this cite, and set fyre vpon it, and burne it: with the gorgeous houses, in whose parlers they haue made sacrifice vnto Baal, and poured drynke offer- inges vnto straunge goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath.

For seinge the children of Israel and the 

e Exo.7. vnto the 15. chapter. — / Judi, 2. 3. 4. 6. 8. 

€ Tere. 25. b. 39. b. 

Fo. Delp. 

| haue they els done, but prouoked me with 
| |the workes of their owne hondes? saieth the 
LORDE. 

Or, what hath this cite bene els, but a pro- uokinge of my wrath, euer sence the daye that
] buylded it, vnto this houre? Wherin I cast it out of my sight, because of the greate blas- phemies of the childré of Israel and luda, which they haue done to prouoke me: yee they, their kinges, their prynces, their prestes, their prophetes, whole Iuda, and all the cite- syns of Ierusalem.

* When I stode vp early, and taught them and instructe them, they turned their backes to me, and not their faces. They wolde not heare, to be refourmed and correcte. They haue set their goddes in y house,’ that is halowed vnto my name, to defyle it. ‘They haue buylded hie places for Baal in the valley of the children of Ennon, to vowe their sonnes and doughters vnto Moloch: which I neuer commaüded them, nether came it euer in my thought, to make Iuda synne with soch abho-

| |minacion. 

z Morouer thus hath the LORDE God of 
Israel spoken, concernynge this cite, which 

| (as ye youre selues confesse) shalbe delyuered in to the honde of the kinge of Babilon, when it is wonne with the swerde, with honger and with pestilence. “Beholde, I will gather them together from all londes wherin I haue scatred them in my wrath, in my fearfull and greate displeasure : and will bringe them agayne vnto this place, where they shal dwell safely. And they shalbe my people, and I wilbe their God.

* And 1 will geue them one herte and one waye, that they maye feare me all the daies of their life, that they and their children after them maye prospere. ‘And I will set vp an euerlastinge couenaunt with them, Namely: that I will neuer ceasse to do them good, and that I will put my feare in their hertes, so that they shall not runne awaye fro me.

^Yee I will haue a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faithfully to plante them in this londe, with my whole herte, and with all my soule.

For thus saieth the LORDE: like as I haue brought all this greate plage vpon this

* Tere. 2. d. è Tere. 7. a. d. 

d Psal. ec: 

* Deu. 30. a. 

Cbr prophet Seremp. 

children of Iuda haue wrought wickednes [people so will I also bringe vpon them all before me euer from their youth vp, what! ithe good, that 1 haue promysed them. And

Chap. rrritj. 

men shall hane their possessions in this londe, wherof ye saye now, that it shal nether be inhabited of people ner of catell, but be deliuered in to the hodes of the Caldees: Yee londe shalbe bought for money, q euydéces made ther vpon q sealed before witnesses in the countre of Ben lamin, q rounde aboute lerusalem : in the cities of Iuda, in the cities that are vpo the mountaynes, q in them that lie beneth, yee q in the cities that are in the deserte. For I wil bringe their presoners hither agayne, saieth the LORDE.

The yrriij. Chapter. 
OROUER the worde of the LORDE|& scame vnto leremy on this maner, whe he was yet bounde in the courte of the preson:
Thus saieth the LORDE, which fulfilleth the thinge that he speaketh, the LORDE which
|perfourmeth the thinge that he taketh in honde: enen he, whose name is the LORDE:
Thou hast cried vnto me, and I haue herde the: I haue shewed greate and hie thinges, which were vnknowne ynto you.

Thus (1 saye) spake the LORDE God of 
Israel, concernynge the houses of this cite, and the houses of the kinges of luda: that they shalbe broken thorow the ordinaunce and weapens, when the Caldees come to besege them: and they shalbe fylled with the deed carcases of men, whom J will slaye in my wrath and displeasure: whe I turne my face from this cite, because of all hir wickednes.
Beholde, (saieth the LORDE) I will heale their woundes, and make them whole: I will open them the treasure of peace and treuth.

^ And I will returne the captiuyte of Iuda|33 and Isracl: and will set thém vp agayne, as they were afore. From all myszdedes (wherin they haue offended agaynst me) F will clése them: And all their blasphemies which they haue done agaynst me, when they regarded me not, I will Drea them.

And this shal get me a name, a prayse and honoure, amonge all people of the earth, which shall heare all the good, that I will shewe vnto them: Yee they shall be afrayed and astonnied at all the good dedes and benefites, that I will do for them. Morouer, thus saieth the

€Eze.36.e. f Deu.39.b. Iere.31.e. £ Tere, 20.a.32.a. 
^ Esa. 43. d. 

Chap. rrritij. 
LORDE: “In this place, wherof ye saye that it shalbe a wildernesse, wherin nether people ner catell shal dwell:

gladnesse be herde agayne, the voyce of the brydegrome and of the bryde, the voyce of them that shall synge: (’ Prayse the LORDE of hoostes, for he is louynge, and his mercy endureth for euer) and the voyce of them that shall offre vp giftes in the house of the
LORDE. For I will restore the captiuyte of this londe, as it was afore, saieth the LORDE.
Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes. It shall come yet therto, that in this londe, which is voyde from men and catell, and in all the cities of the londe, there shal be set vp shepherdes cotages: in the cities vpon the mountaynes, and in the cities that lie vpon the playne, and in the deserte.

In the londe of Ben Jamin, i in the feldes of lerusalem, and in the cities of Iuda shal the shepe be nombred agayne, vnder the honde of him, that telleth them, saieth the LORDE.
Beholde, ‘the tyme commeth (saieth the 
LORDE) that I wil perfourme that good thinge, which I haue promised vnto the house of Israel and to the house of Juda. In those daies and at the same tyme, I will bringe forth vnto Dauid, the braunch of rightuousnes, and he shall do equite and rightuousnesse in the londe. ^In those daies shall Iuda be helped, and lerusalem shall dwell safe, and he that shall call her is euen God oure rightuous maker. For thus the LORDE promyseth :
* Dauid shal neuer want one, to syt vpon the stole of the house of Israel: /nether shall the prestes and Leuites want one to offre all waye before me, burntofferinges, to kyndle the meatofferinges, q to prepare the sacrifices.

And the worde of the LORDE came vnto leremy after this maner: Thus saieth the
LORDE: Maye the couenaunt which I haue made with daye and night, be broken, that there shulde not be daye and night in due season? ‘Then maye my couenaunt also be broken, which I made with Dauid my ser- uaunt, and so he not to haue a sonne to reigne in his Trone.

^ So shall also the prestes and 
Leuités neuer fayle, but serue me. 

' For like 

a Tere. 7. d. 
4 Esa. 32. a 

^ 1 Ma. 4. c. Psal. 117. a. 
* 2 He. 7. e. 

* Tere. 23. a. 

|! Esa. 32,2. ^2 He,7. e, 1 Re.?.g. «€ Gene.8.d.| [25.a Tere. 32. a. 39.a. "^ 1 Re.31.c. ^2 Par. 11. a. € Gene. 8. d. 

Cbr prophet Seremp. 

In like maner in the cities of Iuda and without lerusalem (which also shalbe so voyde, that nether people ner eatell shall dwell there) Shal the voyce of

Fo. uclryt. as the starres of heauen maye not be nombred, nether the sonde of the see measured : so will
I multiplie the sede of Dauid my seruaunt, and of the Leuites my ministers.

Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came to Jeremy, saienge: Cosidrest thou not what this people speaketh 7 ? Two kynreddes (saye they) had the LORDE chosen, q those same two hath he cast awaye. For so farre is my people come, y they haue no hope to come together eny more, and to be one people agayne. ‘Therfore thus saieth the LORDE:
Yf I haue made no couenaunt with daye q night, and geu& no statute vnto heauen and earth: then will I also east awaye the sede of
Dauid my seruaunt: so that I wil take no prynce out of his sede, to rule the posterite of Abrahà, Isaac and Iacob. But yet I will turne agayne their captiuyte, and be mercifull vnto them.

The mij. Chapter. 
HESE are the wordes which the LORDE]q 

spake vnto Ieremy,* what tyme as Nabu- chodonosor the kinge of Dabilon, q all his hoostes (out of all the kingdomes y were vnder his power) and all his people, fought agaynst lerusalem and all the cities therof. Thus saleth the LORDE God of Israel: Go, q speake to Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, q tell him: "The LORDE sendeth the this worde:
Beholde, I will delyuer this cite in to the hode of the kinge of Babilon, he shal burne it, and thou shalt not escape his hondes, but shalt be led awaye presoner, and delyuered into his power. ‘Thou shalt loke the kinge of Babilon in the face, and he shal speake with the mouth to mouth, and then shalt thou go to Babilon.
Yet heare the worde of the LORDE, o Sede- chias thou kinge of Iuda: Thus saieth the
LORDE vnto the: Thou shalt not be slayne with the swearde, but shalt die in peace. Like as thy fore fathers, "the kinges, thy progenit- ours were brente : so shalt thou be brente also, t in the mournynge they shal saye: oh lorde.
For thus haue I determed, saieth the LORDE. 

Then spake Jeremy the prophet all these 35 

wordes vnto Sedechias kinge of Iuda in Ieru- salem: what tyme as the kinge of Babilons hooste beseged Ierusalem, and the remnaunt of the cities: Namely, Lachis t Azecha,” which

^1 Pet 2.a. !Gen.15.8. 22.c. * Tere. 39. a. 
25, a. lere, 32. a. 39. a. 71 Re. 31. c. 

! 4 Re. 
"» 2 Par. 11. a, 

ffo. ndi. yet remayned of the stronge defensed cities of
Iuda. 

These are the wordes that the LORDE spake vnto Ieremythe prophet, when Sedechias was agrecd with all the people at Ierusalem, that there shulde be proclamed a liberte: ° so that euery man shulde let fre go his seruaunt and handemayde, Hebrue q Hebruesse, q no lewe to holde his brother as a bonde man.
Now as they had consented, euen so they were obedient, q let them go fre. But afterwarde they repented, q toke agayne the seruauntes and handemaydens, whom they had letten go fre, and so made them bonde agayne.

€| For the which cause the worde of the 
LORDE came vnto leremy from the LORDE himself, sayenge: Thus saieth the LORDE
God of Israel: I made a couenaunt with youre fathers, when I brought them out of
Egipte, (that they shulde no more be bond- men,) sayenge : ^ When seuen yeares are out, euery man shal let go fre his bought seruaunte an Hebrue, yf he haue serued him sixe yeares.
But youre fathers obeied me not q herkened not vnto me. As for you, ye were now turned,

q dyd right before me, in y ye proclamed, euery ma to let his neghboure go fre, q in y ye made a couenaunt before me, in the temple that beareth my name: But yet ye haue turned youre selues agayne, and blasphemed my name: In this, ý euery man hath requyred his seruaunt and hand mayden agayne, whom ye had letten go quyte and fre, and compelled them to serue you agayne, and to be youre

Z|bonde men. And therfore thus saieth the 
LORDE: Ye haue not obeyed me, euery man to proclame fredome vnto his brother and neghboure: wherfore, I will call you vnto a fredome, saieth the LORDE: euen vnto the swearde, to the pestilence, and to honger, and will make you to be plaged in all the kyngdomes of the earth. Yee those men that haue broké my couenaunt, and not kepte the wordes of the apoyntmét, which they made before me: ^when they hewed the calfe in two, t when there wente thorow the two halfes therof: The prynces of luda, the prynces of lerusalem, the gelded men, the prestes and all the people of the londe (which wete thorow the two sydes of the calfe.) Those men wil I geue in to the power of their enemies, and in

s Exo. 21.8. Leuit. 25. f. Deut. 15. b. 
Exo. 21. a. * Gene. 15. b. 

? Deut. 15. b. 

The prophet Seremp. 

Chap. rrrb. to the hondes of them that folowe vpon their lyues.

?And their deed bodies shall be meate for the foules of the ayre, and beestes of the felde.
As for Sedechias the kinge of Iuda q his prynces, I will delyuer them in to the power of their enemies, and of them that desyre to slaye them, and in to the honde of the kynge of Babilons hooste, ‘which now is departed from you: But thorow my commaundement
(saieth the LORDE) they shal come agayne before this cite, they shall fight agaynst it, wyune it, and burne it. Morouer I will laye the cities of Iuda so waist, that no man shall dwell therin.

The yyxb. Chapter. 

HE wordes which the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy, (in the reigne of Ioachim the sonne of losias kinge of luda) are these:
/ Go vnto y house of the Rechabites, q call them out, t bringe thé to ¥ house of the
LORDE in to some commodi place, and geue them wyne to drynke. Then toke I
Jasanias the sonne of leremy, the sonne of 
Habazania, and his brethre and all his sonnes, and the whole housholde off the Re- chabites: and brought them to the house off the LORDE, in to the closet of the children off Hanan the sonne off Igdalia the man off God: which was by the closet off the prynces, that is aboue the closet of Maasia the sonne of Sellum, which is the chefe off the tresury. And before the sonnes of the kynred of the Rechabites, I set pottes full of wyne, and cuppes, and sayde vnto them: drynke wyne. But they sayde: we drynke no wyne,
For lonadab the sonne of Rechab oure father commaunded vs, sayenge: Ye and youre sonnes shall neuer drynke wyne,* buylde no houses, sowe no sede, plante no vynes, yee ye shall haue no vynyardes: but for all youre tyme ye shall dwell in tétes, y ye maye lyue

loge in the lode, wherin ye be straugers. 
'Thus haue we obeyed the comaundemet of 
Ionadab $ sonne of Rechab oure father, in all y he hath charged vs, and so we drynke no wyne all oure lyue longe: we, oure wyues, oure sonnes q oure doughters. Nether buylde we eny house to dwell therin, we haue also amonge vs nether vynyardes, ner corne lode

4 Peal. 78. a. Tere. 7. d. e Tere, 37. a, 
€ Tere. 29. b. 

J 4 Re. 10. c. 

to sowe : but we dwell in tentes, we obeye, q do acordinge vnto all, that lonadab oure father commaunded vs.

But now y Nabuchodonosor the kinge of 
Babiló eame vp in to the lode, we sayde: come, let vs go to lerusalé, y we maye escape the hooste of the Caldees ad the Assirias: « so we dwell now at Ierusalé. Then came y worde of the LORDE vnto leremy, sayenge:
Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Go a tell whole Iuda q all the inhabitours of lerusale: Wyll ye not be re- fourmed, to obeye my wordes? saieth the
LORDE. The wordes which Ionadab the sonne off Rechab comaunded his sonnes, y they shulde drynke no wyne, are fast q surely kepte: for vnto this daye they drynke no wyne: but obeye their fathers comaundement.
But as for me,“ I haue stode vp early, I haue spoke vnto you, t geuen you earnest warn- vnge: q yet haue ye not bene obediet vnto me. Yee I haue sent my seruaütes, all the prophetes vnto you, I rose vp early, q sent you worde, sayenge: O turne you, euery man from his wicked waye: améde youre lyues, x go not after straiige goddes, to worshippe | the: y ye maye cotinue in the lode, which
I haue geuen vnto you and youre fathers, but ye wolde nether heare me, ner folowe

me. 

The childre of Ionadab Rachabs sonne haue stedfastly kepte their fathers comaüde- ment, y he gaue them, but this people is not obedient vnto me. And therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes T God of Israel:
Beholde, I wil bringe vpo Iuda q vpõ euery one y dwelleth in Ierusalé, all the trouble y
I haue deuysed agaynst the. ^For I haue spoke vnto thé, but they wolde not folowe :
I haue called vnto them, neuertheles they wolde geue me no answere. Ieremy also spake vnto the housholde off the Rechabites:
Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: For so moch as ye haue obeyed y comaundemet of Jonadab youre father, q kepte all his preceptes, ¢ done acordinge vnto all y he hath bydden you: Therfore thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of
Israel: *Ionadab the sonne of Rechab shal| not fayle, but haue one out of his stocke, to stode allwaye before me.

è Pro. 1. c. Esa. 65. b. 
4 Tere. 30, a. e ere, 18, a. 

a Tere, 18. a, 25. a. 
¢ Tere. 33. e. 

The prophet Feremp. 

Tere.7. o| 

The rrroi. Chapter. 

Fo. delrritj.' 

N the fourth yeare of Ioachim the sonne à 

of losias kynge of Iuda, came y worde of the LORDE vnto Ieremy, sayége: Take a boke, q "write therin all y wordes, y I haue spoke to the, to Israel, to Iuda q to all the people, fro the tyme y 1 begüne for to speake vnto the (in y reigne of losias) vnto this daye. ‘That when the house of Iuda heareth of the plage, which I haue deuysed for thé, they maye peraduéture turne, *euery man fro his wicked waye, that I maye forgeue their offences and synnes.

Then dyd Ieremy call/ Baruch the sonne of 
Nerias, « Baruch wrote in the boke at ¥ mouth of leremy, all the wordes of the LORDE, which he had spoken vnto him. And Ieremy commaunded Baruch sayenge: I am in pre- son, so that I maye not come in to the house of y LORDE: therfore go thou thither, q rede the boke, that thou hast writte at my
(mouth: Namely, the wordes off the LORDE, 
|t rede thē in the LORDES house vpon the 
'fastinge daye : that the people, whole Iuda, q all they that come out of the cities, maye heare. Peraduenture they will praye mekely before the face of the LORDE, and turne,
'euery one from his wicked waye. For greate lis the wrath and displeasure, that the LORDE
LE taken agaynst this people. 

So Baruch the sonne of Nerias dyd, acord- linge vnto all that leremy the prophet co- maüded him, readinge the wordes off the
LORDE out off the boke in the LORDES house. And this was done in the fyfth yeare off Joachim y sonne of losias kinge of Iuda, in the ix. moneth ¢ when it was commaunded, that all the people of lerusalem shulde fast
;before the LORDE, and they also that were 
[come from the cities of Iuda vnto Ierusalem. 
| Then red Baruch the wordes of leremy out of the boke within the house of the
(LORDE, out of ý treasury of ^ Gamarias the sonne off Saphan the serybe, which is besyde the hyer loffteoff the newdoreofthe LORDES house: that all $ people might heare. Now whe Micheas the sonne of Gamarias the sonne of Saphan had herde all the wordes of the
LORDE out of $ boke, he wete downe to the kinges palace in to ¥ serybes chabre, for

f Tere, 45. a. € lone 3. a. ^ fere. 26. d. 

88 

PE i 

| ffo. nelrrij. 
[there all ý prynces were set: Elisama the 
|serybe, Dalias the sonne of Semei, Elnatha the sonne off Achbor, Gamaria the sonne of
Saphan, Sedechias the sonne of Hananias, with all the princes. And Micheas tolde them all the wordes, y he herde Baruch rede out of the boke before the people.

Then all the prynces sent Iehudi ¥ sonne of Nathanias the sonne of Salamia the sonne of Chusi, vnto Baruch, sayenge: ‘Take in thine honde the boke, wherout thou hast red before all the people, and come. So Baruch the sonne of Nerias toke y boke in his honde, and came vnto them. And they sayde vnto him: Syt downe, and rede the boke, y we maye heare also. So Baruch red, y the might heare. Now when they had herde all the wordes, they were abaszhed one vpon another, and sayde vnto Baruch: We wil cer- tifie the kinge of all these wordes. And they examined Baruch, sayenge: Tell vs, how didest thou wryte all these wordes out off his mouth? Then Baruch answered them: He spake all these wordes vnto me with his mouth, and I alone was with him, and wrote them in the boke.

Then sayde the prynces vnto Baruch: Go thy waye, and hyde the with Ieremy, so that no man knowe where ye be. And they went in to the kinge to the courte. Butthey kepte the boke in the chambre off Elisama the scrybe, ad tolde the kynge all the wordes, that he might heare. So the kynge sent lehudi to fetch him ¥ boke, which he brought ont of
Elisama ¥ serybes chambre. And Iehudi red it, that the kynge and all the prynces, which were aboute him, might heare. Now the kynge sat in the wynter house, for it was in the ix. Moneth, and there was a good fyre before him. And whe Iehudi had red thre or foure leaues therof,? he cut the boke in
(peces with a penne knyfe, and cast it in to 
[the fyre vpo the herth, vntil the boke was all 
|brente in the fyre vpon the herth. 

Yet no man was abashed therof, or rente his clothes: nether the kynge himselffe, ner his seruauntes, though they herde all these wordes. Neuertheles Elnathan, Dalias ad
Gamarias, besoughte the kinge, that he wolde not burne the boke: notwithstondinge $ kynge wolde not heare them, but commaunded Ie- ramyhel the sonne off Amalech, Sarias the

j a Acto. 19. b. ^ 4 Re. 24. b. * fere. 22. c. 

The prophet Feremp. 

sonne of Esriel and Selamia ¥ sonne of Ab-| diel, to laye hondes vpon Baruch the scrybe, and vpon leremy the prophet: but the
LORDE kepte them out of sight. After now that the kynge had brente the boke, ad y sermós which Baruch wrote at ¥ mouth off

eremy: The worde of the LORDE came vnto leremy sayenge: Take another boke, and write in it all the forsayde sermons, that were written 1n the first boke, which Ioachim the kynge off Inda hath brente.

And tell Ioachim the kynge off Iuda, 'Thus saieth the LORDE: thou hast brente y boke, and thoughtest within thy selff: Why hast thou written therin, that the kynge off Babilon shal come, ¢ make this lode waist? so that he shall make both people and catel to be out of it? * Therfore thus the LORDE saieth, of
Ioachim the kynge of Iuda: There shal none of his generacion syt vpon the trone of Dauid.
His deed corse shalbe cast out,” that the heat off the daye, and the frost of the night maye come vpon him: And I will vyset the wicked- nes of him, of his sede, and of his seruauntes.
Moroner all the euell that I haue promised thé (though they herde me not) will I bringe vpon them, vpon ¥ inhabitours of lerusalem, and vpon all Iuda. Then toke leremy another boke, and gaue it Baruch the scrybe the sonne of Nerias, which wrote therin out of the mouth off Ieremy: all the sermons that were in the first boke, which Ioachim the kynge off Iuda dyd burne. And there were added vnto them many mo sermons, then before.

The rrrbij. Chapter. 

Chap. ryrbij.. 

B 

oo ý sonne of Iosias (¢which|q 

was made kynge thorow Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon) reigned in the londe of
Iuda, in the steade off Jechonias the sonne of 
Joachim. But nether he, ner his sernauntes, ner the people in the lode wolde obeye the wordes of LORDE, which he spake by the prophet Ieremy. ‘Nenertheles Sedechias the kynge sent Iuchal the sonne of Selamia and Sophonias the sonne of Maasia the prest to the prophet Ieremy, sayenge: O praye thon vnto the LORDE oure God for vs. Now
Ieremy walked fre amonge the people at that tyme, and was not pnt in preson as yet. ^ Pha- raos hooste also was come out of Egipte : which

4 4 Re. 24. d. * Tere. 21. a. 24. a. f Eze.17. b. 

Chap. rrrbtij. when the Caldees that beseged lerusalem, perceaued, they departed from thence.

Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto Ieremy the prophet, sayege : Thus saieth
$ LORDE God of Israel, ‘This answere shal ye geue to the kynge of Iuda, that sent you vnto me for councell: Beholde, Pharaos hooste which is come forth to helpe you, shall returne to Egipte in to his owne londe: But the Caldees shall come agayne, a fight agaynst this cite, wynne it, and set fyre vpon it. For thus saieth the LORDE: disceaue not youre owne myndes, thinkynge on this maner:
Tush, the Caldees go now their waye from vs: No, they shall not go their waye. For though ye had slayne the whole hooste off the
Caldees that besege you, and euery one of the slayne laye in his tent, yet shulde they stonde vp, and set fyre vpon this cite. Now whe the hooste of the Caldees was broké vp from Ieru- salé for feare of the Egipcians armye, Jeremy went out of Jerusalé towarde the lode of Ben
Iamin, to do certayne busynesse there amoge 

people. And whé he came vnder Ben 

amyns Porte, there was a porter called Ierias 

the sonne of Selamia’ $ zone of Hananias, which fel! vpo him a tele him, sayege: thy mynde is to runne to the Caldees. Then sayde Ieremy: It is not so, I go not to the
Caldees. Neuertheles Ierias wolde not beleue him, but brought Ieremy boüde before the princes. Wherfore the princes were angrie with Ieremy, causinge him to be beaten, q to be layed in preson in the house of Ionathas the serybe. For he was the ruler of the preson. Thus was leremy put in to the dongeon q preson, and so laye there a longe tyme. “Then Sedechias the kynge sent for him, q called him, q axed him quietly in his owne house, sayenge : thinkest thou this busy- nes (that now is in houde) cómeth of the
LORDE? Ieremy answerde: yee y it doth: q thou (sayde he) shalt be delyuered in to the kynge of Babilons power.

Morouer, Jeremy sayde vnto kynge Se- dechias: What haue I offended agaynst f, agaynst thy seruaütes, or agaynst this people, that ye haue caused me be put in preson?
* Where are youre prophetes, which haue pro- phecied vnto you and sayde, that ¥ kynge of
Babilo shulde not come agaynst you q this lode? And therfore heare now, o my lorde

a Tere. 46. a. è Tere. 28. a. 

¢ Tere. 38. c. 

Cbr propbrt Seremp. 

the kynge: let my prayer be accepte before the, q sende me nomore in to $ house of
Ionathas the serybe, that I dye not there. 
Then Sedechias the kynge commaunded to put leremy in the fore entrie off the preson, and dayly to be geuen him a cake of bred, and els no dighte meate, vntill all the bred in the cite was eaten vp. Thus leremy remayned in ¥ fore entre off the preson.

The yrrotij. Chapter. 

APHATIAS the sonne off Matha, Ge- dolias the sonne of Pashur, Iuchal the sonne of Selamia, q Pashur the sonne of
Malchias perceaued the wordes, y Jeremy had spoke vnto all the people, namely on this maner: Thus saieth the LORDE: Who so remayneth in this cite, shall perish, ether with the swearde, “with honger or with pestilence:
But who so falleth vuto the Caldees, shal escape, wynnynge his soule for a pray, a shal lyue. For thus saieth the LORDE: This cite (no doute) ^must be delyuered in to y power of the kige of Babilo, q he also shal wynne it. The sayde the prynces vnto y kynge: Syr, we besech you let this man be put to death, For thus he discorageth the hodes of the soudyers y be in this cite, q the hódes of all the people, whé he speaketh soch wordes vnto thé. This mà verely laboureth not for peace of y people, but mischefe. Se- dechias the kinge answered and sayde : lo, he is in youre hodes, for y kige maye denye you nothinge. "Then toke they Jeremy, and cast him in to the dongeon off Malchias the sonne off Amalech, that dwelt in the fore entre off the preson. And they let downe Ieremy with coardes in to a dongeon, where there was no water, but myre. So leremy stack fast in the myre. Now when Abdemelech the Morian beynge a chamberlayne in the kynges courte, vnderstode, that they had cast leremy in to the dongeou: he went out off the kynges house, and spake to the kynge (which the sat vnder the porte off Ben lamin) these wordes: My lorde the kynge, where as these men medle with Ieremy the prophet, they do him wronge:
Namely, in that they haue put him in preson, there to dye of honger, for there is no more bred in the cite. Thé the kynge commaüded
Abdemelech the Morian, and sayde: Take from héce xxx. men whom thou wilt, q drawe

4 Tere. 28. 29. * Tere. 21. b. 27. a. f Tere. 32, a. 

fo. Deltrh.! 

B 

So. Delyrbt. 

| 
| 

| 

vp leremy the prophet out of the dongeon, before he dye. So Abdemelech toke the men with him, x went to y house of Amalech, q

there vnder an almery he gat olde ragges q 

worne cloutes, q let the downe by a coarde, in to the dongeon to Jeremy.

And Abdemelech the Morian sayde vnto the prophet Ieremy: O put these ragges and cloutes vnder thine arme holes, betwixte the and the coardes: iid leremy dyd so. So they drewe vp leremy with coardes and toke him out of the dongeon, and he remayned in the fore entrie of the preson. "The Sedechias the kynge sent and caused Ieremy the prophet be called vnto him, in to the thirde entrie, that was by the house off the LORDE.* And the kynge sayde vnto leremy: I wil axe the somwhat, but hyde nothinge fro me. Thé
Ieremy answerde Sedechias: Yf I be playne vnto the, thou wilt cause me suffre death: yf
I geue the coücell, thou wilt not folowe me. 

The prophet Seremp. 

So the kynge swore an ooth secretly vnto leremy, sayenge: As truly as the LORDE lyueth, that made vs these soules, I will not slaye the, ner geue the in to the hodes of them, that seke after thy life.

Then sayde leremy vnto Sedechias: Thus saleth y LORDE off hoostes the God of
Israel: Yf case be, that thou wilt go forth vnto the kynge off Babilons prynces, thou shalt saue thy life, ^and this cite shall not be bret, yee both thou and thy housholde shall escape with youre lyues. But yff thou wilt not go forth to the kynge off Babilons prynces, then shal this cite be delyuered in to the hondes of the Caldees which shal set fyre vpon it, and thou shalt not be able io escape them. And Sedechias sayde vnto leremy:
I am afrayde for the Tewes, that are fled vnto the Caldees, lest I come in their hodes, and so they to haue me in derision.

p| But Ieremy answerde: No, they shal not 

betraye the: O herken vnto the voyce off the 
LORDE (I beseke ¥) which I speake vnto the, so shalt thou be well, and saue thy life.
But yf thou wilt not go forth, the LORDE hath tolde me this planely: Beholde, all the women that are left in the kynge of Iudaes house, shal go out to the kynge of Babilons prynces. For they thynke, y thou art dis- ceaued : and that y men in whom thou didest put thy trust, haue gotten the vnder, and set

* Tere. 37. c. * Tere. 27. b. * Iere. 39. c. 

from the. — Therfore all thy wyues with their children shall fle vnto the Caldees, and thou shalt not escape their hondes, but shalt be ¥ kynge of Babilons presoner, q this cite shall be brent. 'Then sayde Sedechias vnto leremy: loke y no body knowe off these wordes, and thou shalt not dye. But yf the prynces perceaue, that I haue talked with the, and come vnto the, sayenge: O speake, what

sayde the kynge to the? hyde it not from vs,| 

and we wil not put the to death. Tell vs 
(we praye the) what sayde y kynge to the? 
Se thou geue them this answere: I haue humbly besonght the kynge, that he will let me lye no more in Ionathas house, that I dye not there? Then came all the princes vnto leremy, and axed him, And he tolde them, after the maner as the kynge bad him.* Then they helde their peace, for they perceaued nothinge. So leremy abode still in the fore entrie off the preson, vntil the daye that
Ierusalem was wonne. 

Whe yrrir. Chapter. 

OW when the cite off lernsalé was 

taken? (for in the ix. yeare of Sedechias kynge of luda in the tenth Moneth, came
Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilon and all his hooste, and beseged lerusalem. And in the xi. yeare of Sedechias in the fourth Moneth
|y ix. daye of y Moneth, he brake in to the cite). Then all the kynge of Babilons prynces came in, q sat thé downe vnder the porte:
Nergall, Sarezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, 
Rabsaris, Nergal, Sarezer, Rabmag, with all the other prynces of the kynge of Babilon.
And when Sedechias *the kynge of Iuda with his soudyers sawe them, they fled, and de- parted out of y cite by night thorow the kynges garde, and thorow the porte that is betwene the two walles, and so they wente towarde the wildernesse.

But the Caldees hooste folowed fast after them, and toke Sedechias in the felde of lericho, and brought him presoner to Nabu- chodonosor the kynge off Babiló vnto Reb- latha, that lieth in the londe off Hemath where he gaue iudgment vpon him. So the kynge of Babilon caused the children of Sedechias and all the nobles off Iuda be slayne, before his face at Reblatha. And made Sedechias

4 Tere. 32. a. 4 Re. 25. a. Iere. 52. a. 

* Tere. 34. a. 

Chap. rrrir. 

! [thy fete fast in the myre, and gone their waye 

Chap, rl. 

The prophet Seren. 

' leyes be put out, and boüde him with chaynes, 

and sent him to Babilon. 

Morouer, the Caldees brét vp the kynges palace, “with ¥ other houses of the people, and brake downe the walles off lerusalem. As for the remnaunt of the people that were in the cite, and soch as were come to helpe them
(what so euer was left of the come sorte) 
Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne caried them to Babilon. But Nabuzarada the chefe cap- tayne let the rascall people (and those that had nothinge) dwell still in the lode off Iuda, and gaue them vynyardes and corne feldes at the same tyme. Nabuchodonosor also the kynge of Babilon gaue Nabuzarada the chefe captayne a charge, cocernynge leremy, say- enge: take and cherish him, and make moch off him: se thou do him no harme, but in- treate him after his owne desyre.

So Nabuzaradà y chefe captayne, Nabu- saszba the chefe chamberlayne, Nergalsarezer the treasurer and all the kynge of Babilons lordes, ^sent for Ieremy, q caused him be fet out off the fore entrie off the preson, and committed him vnto Godolias the sonne off
Ahicam the sonne of Saphan: that he shulde carie him home, and so he dwelt amonge the people. ‘Now whyle Ieremy laye yet bounde in the fore entrie of the preson, y worde off the LORDE came vnto him sayenge: Go, and tell Abdemelech the Morian: Thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes ý God off
Israel: Beholde, the cruell and sharpe plage that I haue deuysed for this cite, will I brynge vpon them, that thou shalt se it: but I wil delyuer the (sayeth the LORDE) and thou shalt not come in the hondes off those men, whom thou fearest. For doutles I will saue the, so that thou shalt not perish with the swearde: but thy life shalbe saued, and that because thou hast put thy trust in me, saieth the LORDE.

The rl. Chapter. 

HIS is the maner, how the LORDE in- treated leremy, when Nebuzaradan the
*chefe captayne had let him go fre from Rama, whither as he had led him bounde, amonge all the presoners, that were caried from Ierusalem and luda vnto Babilon. The chefe captayne called for leremy, and sayde vnto him: The

54 Re. 25.b. Iere.32.d. ^? Tere. 38. d. 
4 [ere. 43. a. Iosue 18. d. 

* Tere. 40, b. 

Fo. ncrrbij. 

LORDE thy God spake mightely before off the mysery vpon this place: Now the LORDE hath sent it, and perfourmed it, as he had| promised: For ye haue synned agaynst the!
LORDE, and haue not bene obedient vnto, his voyce, therfore commeth this plage vpon! you. Beholde, I lowse the bondes from thy hodes this daye: yf thou wilt now go with me vnto Babilon, vp the: For I will se to the, and prouyde for the: But yf thou wilt not go with me to Dabilon, then remayne here.
Beholde, all the londe is at thy will: *loke| where thou thinkest conveniet ¢ good for the, to Abyde, there dwell. Yf thou canst not be: content to dwell alone, then remayne with
Godolias the sonne off Ahica the sonne of, 
Sapha, /whom the kynge of Babilo hath made. gouernoure ouer y cities of Iuda, ¢ dwell with, him amonge the people, or remayne, where| so euer it pleaseth y. So the chefe captayne | gaue him his expéses with a rewarde, q let him go. *Then wéte Ieremy vnto Godolias y sonne of Ahica to Masphat, q dwelt there with him amonge the people that were left in the londe.

Now when y captaynes of the hooste of 
Iuda (which with their felowes were scatred, abrode on euery syde in y lode) vnderstode, y the kynge of Babilo had made Godolias y | sonne of Ahica gouernoure in the lode, ¢ y man, wife q childe, yee q the poore men in the londé (y were not led captyue to Babilon) shulde be vnder his Iurisdictio: They came to Godolias vnto Masphat: Namely, Ismael: the sonne of Nathanias, Iohana q Ionathas the sonnes of Carea, Sareas the sonne of Tanho-| meth, the sonnes of Opheus ¥ Netophetite, lesanias ¥ sonne of Machati, with their copa- nyons. And Godolias the sonne of Ahicam the sonne off Saphà, swore vnto thé q their felowes on this maner: ^Be not afrayed to serue the Caldees, dwell in the lode, ¢ do the kynge of Babilon seruyce, so shal ye prospere.
Beholde, I dwell at Masphat to be an officer in the Caldees behalfe, t to satisfe soch as come to vs. Therfore gather you wyne, corne and oyle, and kepe them in youre ware houses, and dwell in youre cities, that ye haue in kepinge.

Yee all the lewes also 

y dwelt in Moab vnder ¥ Ammonites, in ide

mea ç in all ý 

\ 

e Gen. 13. b. Tob.1.b. / 4 Re. 25.c. & Tere. 39. c. 
^ 4 Re. 25. c. i 

DB 

coütrees, whé they herde, y the kinge of Ba- bilo had made Godolias the sonne of Ahica the sonne of Saphā, gouernoure vpo thé y were left in Iuda: All the Iewes (I saye) re- turned out off all places where they were fled vnto: q came in to the lode of Iuda to Godo- lias vnto Masphat, q gathered wyne and other frutes, and that very moch.

Moroner Iohanna the sonne of Carea q all 
¥ captaynes of $ hooste, y were scatred on euery syde in the londe, came to Godolias in
Masphat, q sayde vnto him: knowest thou not y Baalis kinge of $ Ammonites hath sent
Ismael y sonne of athanias, to slaye the? 
But Godolias $ sonne of Ahica beleued thé not. Thé sayde Iohāna the sonne of Carea vnto Godolias in Masphat these wordes se- cretly: Let me go (1 praye the) ¢ I will slaye
Ismael the sonne of Nathanias, so y no bod shal knowe it. Wherfore will he kyll the, y all the Iewes which resorte vnto the, might be scatred, q the remnaunt in Iuda perishe ?
Thé sayde Godolias the sonne of Ahicam to 
Iohanna the sonne of Carea: Thou shalt not do it, for they are but lies, that men saye of
Ismael. 

The rli. Chapter. 
UT in the seuenth Moneth it happened, 

^y Ismael the sonne of Nathanias ý sonne of Elisama (one of ¥ kynges bloude) came with thé that were greatest aboute the kynge, a ten men that were sworne with him: vnto Godolias the sonne off Ahicam to Mas- phat, and eate there together. And Ismael y sonne of Nathanias with those ten men that were sworne to him, starte vp, and smote
Godolias the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of 
Saphan with the swearde, q slewe hym, whom the kynge off Babilo had made gouernoure off the londe. Ismael also slewe all the Iewes that were with Godolias at Masphat, and all the Caldees that he founde there waitynge vpon him.

The nexte daye after that he had slayne 
Godolias (the matter was yet vnknowne) there came certayne men from Sichem, fro Silo and
Samaria, to the nombre off Ixxx. which had shauen their beerdes, rent their clothes, q were all heuye, bringinge meat offringes and incense in their hondes, to offre it in the house off the LORDE. And Ismael the

* 4 Re. 23. d. 

^ 3 Re. 15. * 4 Re. 25. c. 

The prophet Feremp. 

sonne of Nathanias went forth of Masphat wepinge, to mete them. Now whé he met them, he sayde: Go youre waye to Godolias the sonne of Ahicam. And when they came in the myddest off the cite, Ismael the sonne off Nathanias (with them that were sworne vnto him) slewe them, eué at the myddest off the pyt. Amonge these lxxx. mé there were ten, y sayde vnto Ismael: Oh slaye vs not, for we hane yet a greate treasure in the felde, off wheate, barley, oyle and hony. So he spared the, and slewe them not with their brethren. Now the pyt wherin Ismael dyd east the deed bodies off the mé (whom he slewe because off Godolias) had kynge Asa caused to be made, ^for feare off Baasa the kynge off Israel, and the same pit dyd Ismael fyll with slayne men. As for the renaunt off the people, the kynges doughters and all the peo- ple that were yet left at Masphat, “vpon whom
Nabusaradan the chefe Captayne had made 
Godolias the sonne of Ahicam gouernoure : 
Ismael the sonne off Nathanias caried them awaye presoners towarde the Ammonites.
But when Iohana the sonne off Carea and all they which had bene captaynes ouer the kynges hooste with him, “herde of all the wickednes that Ismael the sonne off Nathanias had done: they toke their companyons, and wente out for to fight with Ismael the sone of Nathanias, and founde him by the waters of Rabim in Gabaon. Now when all the people, whom Ismael led captyue, sawe Io- hana y sonne off Carea and all the other captaynes off the hooste, they were glad. So all the people that Ismael had caried awaye fro Masphat, were brought agayne.

And whé they returned, they came to Io- hanna the sonne off Carea. But Ismael the sonne off Nathanias fled from lohàna with eight of his sworne companyons, q wente to the Ammonites. ‘Then [ohanna the sonne of
Carea and all the captaynes of the hooste that were with him, toke the remnaüt of the peo- ple, whom Ismael the sonne of Nathanias had led awaye (When he had slayne Godolias the sonne of Ahica) whom they also had rescued from him: fightinge men, women ¢ children, and gelded men, whom they brought agayne from Gabaon: and wente from thence, and sat them downe at Geruth Chimham, which lieth besyde Bethleé, that they might go in to

4 Gen. 14. c. 1 Re. 30. b. 

Chap. rli, 

T 

Chap. rlii. 

Egipte for feare of the Caldees: of whom they were afrayed, because that Ismael the sonne off Nathanias had slayne Godolias Ahi- cams sonne, whom the kynge off Babilon had
“made gouernoure in the londe. 

Che rlij. Chapter. 

O all the rulers, and Johana the sonne off 
Carea, Iesanias the sonne off Osias came with all the people fro the leest vnto the most, q sayde vnto Ieremy the prophet: ^O heare oure peticio, that thou mayest praye for vs vnto the LORDE thy God, and for the rem- naunt, wherof there be very few left off many, as thon seist vs: that the LORDE thy God maye shewe vs a waye to go in, q tell vs, what we shulde do. Then leremy the prophete sayde vnto them: I haue herde you. Be- holde, I will praye vnto God youre LORDE, as ye haue requyred me: and loke what answere the LORDE geueth you, I shall certifie you theroff, and kepe nothinge back fro you. ‘And they sayde vnto leremy:
The LORDE off treuth q faithfulnes be oure recorde, that we wil do all, that the LORDE thy God commaundeth vs, whether it be good or euell. We will herken vnto the voyce off oure LORDE God, to whom we sende the: that we maye prospere, when we haue folowed

the voyce off the LORDE oure God. 

And after ten dayes came the worde off the 
LORDE vnto Ieremy. Then called he Io- hanna the sonne of Carea, and all the cap- taynes of the people that were with him: Yee q all the people from the leest to the most, q sayde vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE
God of Israel vnto whom ye sent me, to laye forth youre prayers before him: Yf ye wil dwell in this londe, I shall buylde you vp, q not breake yon downe: I shall plante you, a not rote you out: for I am pacified, as cocern- ynge the trouble that I haue done to you.
Feare not the kynge off Babilon, off whom ye stonde in awe: O be not afrayed off him, saieth the LORDE: for I will be with you, to helpe you, and delyuer you from his honde.
I will pardon you, I wil haue mercy vpon you, and brynge you agayne in to youre owne londe.

Neuertheles, yf ye purpose not to dwell in this londe, ner to folowe the voyce off the
LORDE youre God: but will saye thus: we 

a Tere. 40. a. 
1 Mac. 2. d. 

è Tere. 21. a. lere.37. a. lere. 43. a. — 4 Iere. 27, a.

* Iosue 1. c. 
* Jere. 41. c. 

The prophet Seremp. 

will not dwell here, but go in to Egipte: where’ we shall nether se warre, heare the noyse off batell, ner suffre honger, there will we dwell. Wherfore heare now the worde of the LORDE, o ye remnaunt of Iuda. Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of
Israel: ^Yf ye be whole purposed to go in to 
Egipte, ad to be there as straügers: *the swearde that ye feare, shall ouer take you in
Egipte: and the honger wheroff ye be here afrayed, shall hange vpon you in to Egipte, and there ye shall dye. For all they, that off set purpose vndertake to go in to Egipte, there to ease them selues off their mysery, shall perish with the swearde, with honger and pestilence: not one off them shall remayne, there shal none escape the plage, that I wil bringe vpon them.

For thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes the God off Israel: like as my wrath and indignacion is come vpon the inhabitours of
Terusalé, so shall my displeasure go forth vpon you also, yf ye go in to Egipte: For there ye shalbe reuyled, abhorred, brought to shame and confucion: and as for this place, ye shall neuer se it more. The LORDE forbyddeth you (o ye remnant of Iuda) that ye shall not go in to Egipte. And forget not that I haue warned you earnestly this daye els shal ye begyle youre selues. “For ye sent me vnto the LO RDE youre God, and sayde: O praye thou the LORDE oure God for vs: and loke what answere the LORDE oure God geueth the, that bringe vs agayne, àd we shall do thereafter. Now haue I shewed, and de- clared vnto you the voyce off the LORDE youre God, for the which cause he hath sent me to yon. “Yf ye will not folowe it, be sure, y ye shall perishe with the swearde, with ieee q pestilence: euen in the same place, where youre lust was to go, and dwell.

The rliij. Chapter. 
OW when leremy had ended all wordes of LORDE God vnto y peo- ple, (for their sakes to whom God had sent him) Asarias the sonne of Osias, q Iohana ¥ sonne of Carea, with all the proude personnes, sayde vnto leremy: Thou lyest, the LORDE oure God “hath not sent ¥ to speake vnto vs, that we shulde not go in to Egipte, and dwell f Tere. 42. a.

£ Deu. 28, c. ^ Yere. 42. a. 

fo. nclyrir. 

B 

yia 

| ffo. bel. there: But Baruch the sonne of Nerias pro- uoketh the agaynst vs, that he might bringe vs in to the captyuyte off the Caldees: that they might slaye vs, and carie vs awaye pre-
'soners vnto Dabilon 
! So Iohanna the sonne of Carea, and all the 
'eaptaynes of the hooste, and all the people folowed not the commaundement of the
LORDE: Namely, to dwell in the londe off 
Iuda: But Iohanna the sonne of Carea q all the captaynes of the hooste, caried awaye all the remnaunt in Iuda, that were come together agayne from the Heithen (amoge whom they had bene scatred)^ to dwell in the londe of
| |Iuda: Men, women, childré, the kynges dough- ters: all those that Nabusaradan the chefe captayne had left with Godolias the sonne of
| |Ahicam. They caried awaye also the prophet 
| Ieremy, Baruch the sonne of Nerias, and so came in to Egipte : for they were not obedient
| |vnto the commaundement of God. ‘Thus 
|. came they to Taphnis. 
| 

3! And in Taphnis the worde off the LORDE happened vnto leremy, sayenge: Take greate
. [stones in thine hóde, and hyde them in the 
| |brick wall, vnder the dore off Pharaos house 
| |in Taphnis, that all the men of Iuda maye se, andsaye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE lof hoostes the God of Israel: ê Beholde, 1 will
;sende and call for Nabuchodonosor the kynge 
(of Babilon my seruaunt, and will set his seate 
| vpon these stones that I haue hyd, and he shall 
| sprede his tente ouer them. 
And when he commeth, he shal smyte the lode of Egipte with slaughter, with preson-
(ment and with the swearde. He shall set fyre 
| |vpon the temples of the Egipeias goddes, and burne them vp, q take them selues presoners. |
| Morouer he shall araye himselff with the lode 
| 
| 
| 
| 

of Egipte, like as a shepherde putteth on his cote, and shall departe awaye from thence in peace. The pilers also of the temple of the Sonne that is in Egipte, shal he breake in peces, and burne the tempels of the Egipcians goddes.

The rtiiij. Chapter. a WI is the worde y was shewed to Ieremy
A cocerninge all ý lewes, which dwelt in 
| |Egipte: at Magdal, at Taphnis, at Memphis, 
| |tinthe londe of Patures. Thus saieth the 
| [LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Ye 

l 3 Tere. 41. c. * Tere. 25. a. 29. c. 

5 Iere. 46. c. 

The prophet Seremp. 

haue sene all ý mysery, y I haue brought vpon 
Ierusalem, and vpon all the cities of luda: so that this daye they are desolate, and no man dwellinge therin: « y because of the greate blasphemies, which they committed, to pro- uoke me vnto anger: In that they wente backe to do sacrifice ad worshipe vnto straunge goddes: whom nether they, ner ye, ner youre fathers haue knowne. How be it, I sent vnto them my seruaütes all the prophetes: ^I rose vp early, I sent vnto them, and gaue them warninge: O do no soch abhominable thinges, q thinges that I hate. But they wolde not folowe ner herké, to turne from their wicked- nes, and to do no more sacrifice vnto straunge goddes.

Wherfore my indignacion q wrath was kyn- dled, and it brente vp the cities of Iuda, the feldes with the stretes off Ierusalem: so that they were made waist and desolate, as it is come to passe this daye. Now therfore thus saleth the LORDE of hoostes the God of
Israel: How happeneth it, that ye do so greate euell vnto youre owne soules, thus to
.destroye the men and women, childré and 
'babes of Iuda? so that none of you is left, because ye prouoke me vnto wrath with the workes of youre owne hondes: whé ye offre vnto straunge goddes in the londe off Egipte, where as ye be gone to dwell: That ye might vtterly perishe, and that ye might be reuyled and shamfully intreated of all nacions. Or, haue ye now forgotten the wickednes off youre forefathers, the wickednes off ¥ kynges of Iuda and their wyues, ý wickednes that ye youre selues ad youre wyues haue done in the londe of luda, in the cite and in the londe off
Ierusalem ? 

Yet are ye not sory this daye, ye feare not, inether walke ye in my lawe and in my com- maundementes, that I haue geué vnto you and youre forefathers.

Therfore thus saieth the LOR DE of hoostes the God off Israel: ^I am stedfastly advysed and determed, to punysh you, and to rote out all luda. ‘As for the remnaunt off Iuda that purposly wente in to Egipte, there to ease them off their mysery: I will take them, and they shall all be destroyed. In $ londe of
Egipte shall they perishe, beynge consumed with the swearde and with honger. For from
¥ leest vnto y most, they shal perishe with the 

| 

4 Amo. 9. b. * Tere. 42, c. 43. a. 

Chap, rlii, 

5 

Chap. rib. 

€ 

swearde and with honger. Morouer they shalbe reuyled, abhorred, shamed, and con- founded. For I will viset them that dwell in
Egipte, ^as I haue visited Ierusalem : with the swearde, with honger and with pestilence:
So that none off the remnaunt off Iuda, which are gone to dwell in Egipte, shall be left to come agayne in to y londe off Iuda: all though they thynke to come thither agayne, and to dwell there. For none shal come agayne, but soch as are fled awaye.

Then all the men which knewe that their wyues had offred vnto straunge goddes, q a greate sorte off wyues that stode there, yee and all the people that dwelt there in Egipte in the cite of Patures, answerde leremy, q sayde: As for the wordes that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the LORDE, we will in no wyse heare them: but what so euer goeth out of oure owne mouth, that wil we do: We will do sacrifice, and offre oblacions vnto the Quene off heauen: “like as we and oure forefathers, oure kynges and oure heades haue done in the cities off Iuda, and in the stretes and feldes of Ierusalem. For then had we plenteousnesse off vytales, then were we in prosperite, and no myszfortune came vpon vs.

But sens we left of, to offre, and to do sacrifice vnto the Quene of heauen, ^we haue had searcenes of all thinges, and perish with the swearde and honger. Last of all, when we womé did sacrifice and offred vnto the
'Quene of heaue, did we make her cakes ad 

"poure vnto her drinkofferinges, to do her 

seruyce, withont oure huszbondes wylles? 

B| Then sayde Ieremy vnto all the people, to 

the men, to the women and to all the folke, which had geuen him that answere: Dyd not the LORDE remembre the sacrifices that ye, youre forefathers, youre kiges q rulers (with all the people) haue offred in the cities of
Iuda, in the stretes and londe off Ierusalem ? and hath he not considered this in his mynde?
In so moch, that the LORDE might no longer suffre the wickednes off youre inuen- cions, and the abhominable thynges which ye dyd? ‘Is not youre londe desolate q voyde, yee and abhorred, so that no mà dwelleth therin eny more, as it is come to passe this daye ?

/ Dyd not all this happen vnto you, because 

è Iere. 7. b. *1 Mach. 1.b. 4 Jere. 39. 
/ 3 Re. 18. b. Iere. 2. c. 3. e. 5. e. 

a Tere. 39. 
* Esa. 1. a. 

Cbr prophet Feremp. 

ye made soch sacrifice, and synned agaynst the LORDE? Ye haue not folowed his voyce, to walke in his lawe, in his ordinaunces and statutes.’

Yee this is the cause, that all mysfortune happened vnto you, as it is come to passe this daye.

Morouer, leremy spake vnto all the people and to all the women: Heare the worde off the LORDE all Iuda, ye that be in the londe off Egipte: Thus saieth the LORDE off hoostes the God of Israel: Ye and youre wyues haue spoken with youre owne mouth, the thinge that ye haue fulfilled in dede.

Yee thus haue ye sayde : “We will not fayle, but do the thynge that pleaseth vs: we wil do sacrifice and poure out drynkoffringes to the
Quene of heauen. Purposly haue ye set vp youre owne good meanynges, ¢ hastely haue ye fulfilled youre owne intente. And therfore, heare the worde of the LORDE all Iuda, ye that dwell in the londe off Egipte.

Beholde, 'I hane sworne by my greate name 
(saieth the LORDE) that my name shal not be rehearsed thorow eny mans mouth of Iuda, in all the londe of Egipte: to saye: The
LORDE God lyueth, for I wil watch, to plage them, and not for their wealth. And all the men of Iuda that be in the lóde of Egipte,
* shal perish with the swearde and with hoger, vntill they be vtterly destroyed.

Neuertheles, those that fled awaye for y swearde, shal come agayne in to the lode of
Iuda (but there shal be very fewe of them) 
And all the remnaunt off Iuda, that are gone in to Egipte, there to dwell, shall knowe, whose wordes shalbe founde true: theirs or myne.
Take this for a token, that I wil viset you in this place (saieth the LORDE) and that ye maye knowe, how that I (without doute) wil perfourme my purpose vpon you, to punysh you. Beholde (saieth the LORDE) I wil delyuer Pharao Ophram kynge of Egipte in to the hondes of his enemies, y seke after his life: euen as I gaue Sedechias the kynge of
Iuda ‘in to the hondes of Nabuchodonosor kige of Dabilo, which sought after his life.

The rib. Chapter. ss. are the wordes y leremy the

prophet spake vnto Baruch the sonne 

€ Baruc 3. a. ^ Tere. 44. c. ! Gen. 22. a. * Iero. 42. c. 

i 4 Re. 25.a. Iere. 39. b. 

89 

Fo. ner. 

| ffo. Delerrtj. of Nerias, “after that he had written these
Sermoós in to a boke at the mouth of Jeremy, 
In the fourth yeare of loachim the sonne of 
Tosias kynge of Iuda. 

Thus saieth the LORDE God of Israel vnto the, O Baruch: In so moch as thou thoughtest thus (when thou wast writinge)
Wo is ine, the LORDE hath geuen me payne for my trauayle: I haue weeried my self with sighinge, and shall I fynde no rest? Therfore tell him (O Ieremy) y the LORDE saieth thus: Beholde, The thige that I haue buylded, wil I breake downe agayue, and rote out the thinge, that 1 haue planted, yee this whole londe. And sekest thou yet promoció? Loke not for it, and desyre it not. For I will bringe a miserable plage vpo all flesh, saieth the
LORDE. ^But thy life will I geue the fora pray, where so euer thou goest.

The plot. Chapter. 

ERE folowe the wordes off the LORDE 

to the prophet Ieremy, which he spake vnto the Gentiles. ° These wordes folowinge preached he to the Egipciäs concernynge the hoost off Pharao Necho kynge off Egipte, when he was in Charcamis besyde the water off Euphrates: what tyme as Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon slewe him, In the fourth yeare off Ioachim the sonne off losias kynge off Tuda.

? Ye make redy buckler and shylde, ye go forth to fight: Yee harnesse youre horses, q set youre selues vpon them: Ye set youre salettes fast on, ye bringe forth speares, ye scoure youre sweardes, q put on youre brest plates.

But alas, how happeneth it, that I se you so afrayed ? why shrécke ye backe? wherefore are youre worthies slayne? Yee they ruune so fast awaye, that none off them loketh behyude him. Fearfulnesse is fallen. vpon euerychoue off them, saieth the LORDE.
The lightest off fote shall not fle awaye, and the worthies shall not escape.

Towarde the north by the water of Euphrates they shall stomble and fall. But what is he this, that swelleth vp, as it were a floude, roaringe q raginge like the streames off water ?
It is Egipte that ryseth vp like the floude, and casteth out the waters with so greate noyse.

? Tere. 36. a. € Esa. 19, a. 30. a. 

4 Re. 24. b. 

è Tere. 21. b. 
Eze. 29, n. 30. 31. 

The prophet Seremp. 

Chap. ribi 

For they saye: We will go vp, and will couer the earth: we wil destroye y cities, with them that dwell therin. Get you to horse backe, roll forth y Charettes, come forth ye worthies: ye Moriaus, ye Libeans with youre buclers, ye Lideans with youre bowes: So shall this daye be vato the LORDE God of
|hoostes, a daye of végeaunce, that he maye avege him of his enemies. The swearde shal
| deuoure, it shal be satisfied and bated in their 
;bloude: For the LORDE God off hoostes shall haue a slayneoffringe towarde the North, by the water of Euphrates. Go vp (o Galaad)
& bringe triacle vnto the doughter off Egipte: 

But in vayne shalt thou go to surgery, for thy wounde shall not be stopped. The Heithen shall heare off thy shame, and the londe shalbe full of thy confucion : for one stronge man shall stomble vpon another, how then shulde they not fall both together ?

These are the wordes that the LORDE|€ spake to the prophet Ieremy, * concernynge ¥ hoost of Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon, which was to destroye the londe off Egipte:
Preach out thorow the londe of Egipte, and cause it be proclamed at Migdal, Memphis and Taphnis, and saye: Stonde still, make the redie, for the swearde shal consume the rounde aboute.

How happeueth it that thy mightie worthies are fallen? why stode they not fast? Enen because the LORDE thrust them downe.
The slaughter was greate, for one fell euer still vpon another. One cried vpon another:
Vp, let vs go agayne to oure owne people, and to oure owne naturall countre, from the swearde of oure enemie.

Crie euen there: O Pharao kynge of Egipte, the tyme will briuge sedicion. ^As truly as I lyue (saieth the kynge, whose name is the
LORDE of hoostes) it shall come as ¥ mount of Thabor, and as Libanus yf it stode in the see. O thou doughter of Egipte, make redy |3) thy geer to flyt. For Memphis shalbe voyde and desolate, so that noma shal dwell theriu.
'The londe of Egipte is like a goodly fayre calfe, but one shall come out of the north to dryue her forwarde. Hir wagied souldyers that be with her, are like fat calues.

"They also shall fle awaye together, and not abyde: for the daye off their slaughter and

4 Tere. 36. a. * lere. 45. b. f Isa. 48. a. 11. e. 

Chap. ribtij. 

The prophet Jeremp. 

So. nri. 

Ithe tyme of their visitacion shall come vpon them.

The crie off their enemies shall make a noyse, as the blast of a trompet. For they shall entre in with their hooste, and come with axes, as it were hewers downe of wod.
And they shall cut downe hir wod (saieth the 
LORDE) with out eny diserecion. For they shal be mo in nobre then the greshoppers, so that no man shalbe able to tell thé. The doughter of Egipte shalbe confoiided, whé she shalbe delyuered in to the hondes off the peo- ple off the north.
£i Morouer thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde I will vyset that restlesse people off Alexandria, Pharao and
Egipte, yee both their goddes and their kynges: euen Pharao, and all them y litten vnto him. “Yee I will delyuer them in to the hondes off those, that seke after their lyues:
Namely, in to the power off Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilon, and in to the power off his seruaütes. ‘And after all these thinges, it shalbe inhabited as afore tyme, saieth the
LORDE. 

* But be not thou afrayed (o my seruaunt lacob) feare not thou, o Israel. For lo, I wil helpe the from farre, and thy sede from the londe of thy captiuyte. lacob also shall come agayne, and be in rest: he shall be rich, and no man shall do him harme. 7? Feare thou not (o Iacob my seruaunt) saieth the LORDE, for I am with the: and will destroye all nacions, amonge whom I haue scatred the.
Neuertheles I will not consume the, but chasten the and correcke the: yee and that with discrecion : nether wil I spare the, as one that were fautlesse.

The yIotj. Chapter. 

a HESE are the wordes, that the LORDE spake vnto Ieremy the prophet agaynst the Phylistines, before that Pharao smote the cite off Gaza. Thus saieth the LORDE:
Beholde, there shall waters arise out off the north: and shall growe to a greate floude, runnynge ouer and couerynge the londe, the

cities and them that dwell therin. 
And the men shall crie, and all they that dwell in the londe, shall mourne at the noyse and stampynge off their stronge barded horses,

* Esa. 44. a. lere. 30. b. 
Eze, 25. c. Sopb.?.a. 

5 Eze. 29, b. 
* Esa. 14. c. 

a Tere. 14. b. 
4 Agg. 2. a. 

at the shakynge off their charettes, and at the romblinge off the wheles. The fathers shall not loke to their children, so feable and weery shall their hondes be: at the same tyme, when he shal be there, to destroye the whole londe off the Phylistynes. He shall make waist both Tirus, Sidon ad all other that are sworne vnto them.

For the LORDE will destroye all Pales- tina, and the other Iles, that be deuyded fro the countre. Baldnesse is come vpon Gaza,
Ascalon with hir other valleys shall kepe hir peace.

How longe wilt thou slaye, O thou swearde off the LORDE? Turne agayne in to thy sheeth, reste, and leaue off. But how can it ceasse, when the LORDE himselff hath geuen it a charge agaynst Ascalon, and raysed it vp agaynst the cities off the see coast ?

The yIbíij. Chapter. 
HUS saieth y LORDE off hoostes y 
God of Israel against Moab: / Wo be to y cite of Nebo, for it shal be layed waist, brought to confucion and taken. Yee thy stroge cite of Cariatharim shalbe bronght to shame, and afrayed: Moab shall nomore be had in honoure: Wicked eouncell shalbe taken vpon Hesebon. Come (shall they saye) let vs rote them out, that they maye be nomore amonge the nombre of the Gentiles, yee that they maye nomore be thought vpon: Thus the swearde shall persecute y. A voyce shall crie from Horonaim: With greate waistinge and destruction, is Moab made desolate.
And this crie shalbe herde in all hir cities. 
At the goinge vp vnto Luhith there shall arise a lamétacion: and downe towarde Horonaim, there shall be herde a cruell and a deedly crie:
Get you awaye, saue youre lynes q be like vnto the heeth in y wildernes. 5 For, because thou hast trusted in thy stronge holdes and treasure, thou shalt be taken. Chamos with his prestes and prynces shall go awaye in to captiuyte.
The destroyer shal come vpon all cities, none shall escape. The valleys shalbe de- stroyed, and the feldes shall be layed waist: like as the LORDE hath determed.
Make a token vnto Moab, that she get hir awaye spedely: for hir cities shalbe made so desolate, that no man shall dwell therin.

f Esa. 15.2. 16.2. 25. b. Eze. 25. b. Soph.2. b. Iosue 
1936: 5 Tere. 17. b. Eze. 29. a. Esa. 2. b. 

| Fo. Deleryity. 
Cursed be he that doth the worke of the 
LORDE necligently, and cursed be he that kepeth backe his swearde from sheddynge off bloude.*

Moab hath euer bene rich and carlesse from hir youth vp, she hath sytten and take hirease with hir treasure. She was neuer yet put out off one vessell in to another (y is) she neuer wente awaye in to captyuyte, therfore hir taist remayneth, and hir sauoure is not yet chaunged. i

But lo, the tyme commeth (saieth the 
LORDE) that I shall sende hir trussers to trusse her vp, to prepare and season hir ves- sels: yee hir tankerdes rattell, and shake to q fro. And Moab shalbe ashamed off Chamos, like as Israel was ashamed off Bethel, wherin she put hir trust.

Wherfore do ye thinke thus : we are mightie, and stronge men off warre?^ Moab shal be destroyed, and hir cities brente vp :* hir chosen yonge men shall be slayne, saieth the kinge, whose name is the LORDE off hoostes. The destruction off Moab commeth on a pace, and hir fall is at honde.

All hir neghbours shall mourne for her, and all they that knowe hir name, shal saye:
O how happeneth it, that the stronge staff and the goodly rod is thus broken? And thou doughter Dibo, come downe from thy glory, and syt in pouerte. For he that de- stroyeth Moab, shall come vp to the also, and breake downe thy stronge holdes.

And thou that dwellest in Aroer, get the to y strete, q loke aboute the: axe them that are fled and escaped, and saye: what thynge is happened? O, Moab is confounded and ouercome.

Mourne and crie, tell it out at Arnon, that 
Moab is destroyed. And mysery shall come vpon the playne londe: Namely, vpó holon, and Jaza: vpon Mephat and Dibo, vpon
Nebo and the house of Diplathaim, ‘vpon 
Cariatharim and Bethgamul, vpon Bethmaon and Carioth, vpon Bosra and all the cities in the lode off Moab, whether they lye farre or

neare. 

B| The horne of Moab shal be smytte downe, 

1 hir arme broken, saieth the LORDE. Make hir dronken (for she magnified hir self aboue the LORDE:) that men maye clappe their hondes at hir vomyte, and that she also maye

* Iere. 47. b. ^ 3 Re. 13. e. 

* 3 Re. 11. g. 

Che prophet Sereni. 

be laughed to scorne. O Israel, shalt thou not laugh him to scorne, when he is taken amoge theues? Yee because off thy wordes that thou hast spoken agaynst him, thou shalt be dryuen awaye. Ye Moabites shal leaue the cities, and dwell in rockes off stone, and become like doues, that make their nestes in holes.

As for Moabs pryde, we haue herde off it, she is very hie mynded. ‘I knowe hir stout- nesse, hir boostinge, hir arogácy and the pryde off hir stomack, saieth the LORDE. For hir furiousnes maye nether vpholde hir with strength, ner dede. 'lherfore shal there mournynge be made for Moab, and euery mà shal crie for Moabs sake: a lamentacion shalbe made, to the men that stonde vpon the wall. So will I mourne for the also (o
Iazer) and for the, O thou vynyarde off Sybma. 

Thy wyne braüches shal come ouer y see, and the braunches off Iazer but vnto the see: the destroyer shall breake in to thy haruest and grape gatheringe. Myrth and cheare shalbe taken awaye from the tymbre felde, and from the whole londe off Moab.

There shall be no swete wyne in the presse, the treader shall haue no stomacke to crie, yee there shall be none to crie vnto him: which afore tyme were herde from hesebon to Eleale and Ioaz, which lifted vp their voyce from Zoar vnto Horonaim, that bul- lock off thre yeare olde. "The waters also off
Nemrim shalbe dried vp. 

Morouer I will make Moab ceasse (saieth the LORDE) from the offringes and censinge that she hath made vnto hir goddes in hie places. Wherfore my herte mourneth for
Moab, like a crowde playenge an heuy songe: and for the mens sake off the bricke wall my herte mourneth also,/ euen as a pype, that pipeth a dolefull songe: for they shalbe very fewe, and destroyed.

All heades shall be shauen, and all beerdes clipped off: all hondes bounde, and all loynes gyrded aboute with sack cloth. Vpō all the house toppes and stretes off Moab, there shalbe mournynge: For I will breake Moab like an vnprofitable vessell saieth the LORDE.

Chap, ribi. 

O how fearfull is she? O how mourneth she?| 4f 

O how doth Moab hange downe hir heade, and is ashamed? Thus shall Moab be a laughinge stocke, and had in derision off all them, that be rounde aboute her.

f Esa. 15, a. 

4 Nu, 27, a. * Esa. 16. b. lere. 49. c. 

Chap. riir. 

For thus saieth the LORDE : * Beholde, the enemie shal come flyenge as an Aegle, and sprede his wynges vpon Moab. ‘They shall clymme ouer the walles, and wynne the stronge holdes. Then the mighty mens hertes in Moab, ^shalbe like the herte off a woman trauelinge with childe.

And Moab shalbe made so desolate, that she shal nomore be a people, because she hath set vp her selfe agaynst the LORDE. Feare, pyt, and snare shall come vpo the (o Moab) saieth the LORDE. Who so escapeth the feare, shal fall in the pyt: and who so getteth out off the pyt, shall be taken in the snare.°

For I will bringe a yeare off visitacion vpon 
Moab, saieth the LORDE. They that are able to fle, shall stonde vnder the shadowe off
Hesebon. For there shall go a fyre out off 
Hesebon, and a flame from Sion, œ shall burne vp that proude people off Moab, both before and behynde.

Wo be vnto the (o Moab) for thou people off Chamos shalt perish: Yee thy sonnes and doughters shall be led awaye captyue. Yet at the last will I bringe Moab out off cap- tiuyte agayne, saieth the LORDE. Thus farre off the plage off Moab.

The rliy. Chapter. 

S concerninge the Ammonites, "thus the 
LORDE saieth: Hath Israel no child- ren, or is he without an heyre? Why hath youre kynge then taken Gad in? wherfore doth his people dwell in his cities? Beholde therfore, the tyme commeth (saieth y LORDE) that I will brynge a noyse off warre in to Ra- bath off the Ammonites. Lahel shalbe deso- late, and hir cities brent vp: and the Israelites shall be lordes ouer those, that had thé in possession afore, saieth the LORDE. Hese- bon shall mourne, for it shal be roted out off the grounde, saieth the LORDE. The cities off Rabath shall crie out, and gyrde them selues with sack cloth: they shall mourne, and runne aboute the walles: for their kynge shall be led awaye presoner: yee his preestes

and prynces with him. 

Wherfore trustest thou 1n the water streames, that flowe to and fro, o thou fearce doughter: and thynkest thou art so safe (by reason off thy treasure) that no man shal come to the?

a Deu. 28. c. Iere. 49. d. — ^ Iere. 49, d. ° Esa. 24.0. 
4 Eze, 21. d. 25. a. Amos 1. a. * Esa. 21. b. Eze. 25. b. 

The prophet 3eremp. Fo. Delyrrd. 

Beholde, I will brynge a feare vpon the, saieth the LORDE God off hoostes, from all those that be aboute the: so that ye shall be scatred euery man from another, and no ma shall gather them together agayne, that be fled. But after that, I will bringe the Am- monites also out off captyuyte agayne.

Vpon the Edomites hath the LORDE off|35 hoostes spoken on this maner: “Is there no more wyszdome in Theman? Is there no more good councell amonge his people? Is their wyszdome then turned clene to naught ?
Get you hence, turne youre backes, crepe downe in to the depe, O ye citesyns off Dedan.

For I will bringe destructió vpon Esau, yee and the daye off his visitacion. Yff the grape gatherers came vpon the, shulde they not leaue some grapes? Yff the night robbers came vpon the, shulde they not take so moch, as they thought were ynough ?

But I will make Esau bare, and discouer his secretes, so that he shall not be able to hyde them. His sede shalbe waisted awaye, yee his brethren and his neghbours, ad he himselff shall not be left behinde.

Thou shalt leaue thy fatherlesse children behinde the, fand I will kepe them and thy wydowes shall take their comforth in me. For thus hath the LORDE spoken: Beholde, they that men thought were vnmete to drinke of the cuppe, haue dronken with the first: and thynkest thou then to be fre?

No, no: thou shalt nether be quyte nor fre, but thou must drynke also: For why, I haue sworne by my selif (saieth the LOR DE) that
Bosra shall become a wyldernesse, an open|¢ shame, a laughinge stocke and cursynge: and hir cities shalbe a continuall deserte.

For Iam perfectly infourmed ofthe LORDE, that he hath sent a message all ready vnto the Heithen. Gather you together, and go forth agaynst them : make you ready to the battayle, for lo: *I will make the but small amonge the Heithen, and litle regarded amonge men.

Thy hie stomack « the pryde of thy herte haue disceaued y, because thou wilt dwell in the holes of stony rockes, and haue the hie mountaynes in possession. Neuertheles though thy nest were as hie as the Aegles, yet wil I cast the downe, saieth the LORDE. Morouer

SEE bb th f lere. 25. b. Eze.9.b. 1 Pe.4.c. 
€ Abdie 1. a. Esa. 47. b. Iere, 48. d. 

Fo. Delyyrot. — 

Idumea shall be a wildernesse: “who so goeth by it, shalbe abashed, and wondre at all hir miserable plages. Like as Sodom, Gomor and the cities that laye there aboute, were turned vpsyde downe (saieth ý LORDE) so shal no body dwell in Idumea, and no man shal haue his habitacion there. Beholde, like as the Lyon cometh vp from the pleasaunt medowes of lordane vnto y grene pastures of Etha, so wil I dryue him, q make him runne agaynst her. But who is the yonge man that
I will ordene therto? Who is like, vnto me? 
What is he that will stryue with me? What shepherde maye stonde in my hondes ?
‘Therfore heare the councell of the LORDE, 
‘that he hath taken vpon Jdumea: q his pur- pose, that he hath deuysed vpon the citesyns of Theman: The leest of the flocke shal teare them in peces, q loke what fayre thynge they haue, they shal make it waist, q them- selues also. At the noyse of their fall y earth shal quake, the crie of their voyce shalbe herde vnto the reed see. Beholde, ¥ enemie shall come and fle vp hither, like as it were an Aegle, q sprede his wynges vpon Bosra.
Then shal the hertes of the worthies in Edom be ^as the herte of a woman trauelinge of childe. Vpon Damascus, Hemath and Ar- phad shall come confucion, for they shall heare euell tydinges: they shal be tossed to and fro like the see that can not stonde still.
Damascus shalbe sore afrayde, q shal fle, tremblinge shal come vpon her. Sorowe and payne shal ouer take her as a woman trauel- inge of childe. But how shulde so worship- full and glorious a cite be forsaken? — Heare therfore: hir yonge men shal fall in the stretes, and all hir men of warre shal be také awaye in that tyme, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.
I will kyndle a fyre in the walles of Damascus, which shal cosume the palace of Benadad.

E| As for Cedar and the kyngdome of Hasor, 

¢whom Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon smote downe, the LORDE hath spoken thus vpon them: Arise, and get you vp vnto
Cedar, and destroye the people towarde the easte. Their tentes and their flockes shal they take awaye, yee their hanginges and their ves- sell. Their Camels also shall they carie awaye with them. They shall come aboute them on euery syde with a fearfull crie.

* Tere. 18. b. 19. b. 50. b. Gene. I9. c. ? Psal. 136. b. 
* Tere. 48. f. Esa, 17. e. Amos 1, a. 4 Psd, 21. 6. 

The prophet Seremp. Chap. L| 

Fle, get you soone awaye, crepe in to caues, that ye maye dwell there: O ye inhabitours of Hasor, saieth the LORDE: for Nabn- chodonosor ¥ kinge of Babilon hath holden al councel concernynge you, q concluded his deuyce agaynst you. Arise, q get you vp agaynst yonder rich q carelesse people (saieth the LORDE) which haue nether gates ner dore barres, q that dwell not together. Their
Camels shalbe stollen, « the droues of their catell dryuen awaye.

Morouer, these that be shauen wil I scatre towarde all the wyndes, q bringe them to destruction: Yee q that thorow their owne familiers, saieth the LORDE. Hasor also shall be a dwellinge for Dragons, and an euerlastinge wildernesse: so that no body shal dwell there, and no mau shal haue there his habitacion.

These are the wordes, that the LORDE| F 
“spake to the prophet leremy concernynge 
Elam, in the begynnynge of the reigne of 
Sedechias kinge of Juda. Thus saieth the 
LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, I wil breake the bowe of Elam, and take awaye their strength: and vpon Elam I wil bringe the foure wyndes from y foure quarters of heauen, q wil scatre them agaynst the same foure wyndes. And there shal be no people, but some of Elam shal fle vnto them.

For I wil cause Elam be afrayed of their enemies, q of them that seke their lyues: q wil bringe vpo them the indignacion of my wrath, saieth the LORDE. And I wil per- secute them with the swearde so longe til I haue brought them to naught. | wil set my stole in Elam, I wil destroye both the kinge a
Y prynees from thence, saieth the LORDE. 
But in processe of tyme, I wil bringe Elam out of captiuyte agayne, saieth the LORDE.

The T. Chapter. 
HE wordes y the LORDE spake vnto|q 

the prophet Ieremy, concernynge Babi- lon, q the londe of the Caldees: ~ Preach amonge the Gentiles, let youre voyce be herde, make a tokē: crie out, kepe no sylence, but saye: Babilon shal be wonne, Bel shalbe co-

founded, and Merodach shalbe ouercome. 
Yee their goddes shal be brought to shame, and their ymages shall stonde in feare. For

e Eze. 32. d. Dan. 8. a. f Esa. 13. a. 47. a. Iere. 25. b. 
31. a Esa.46. a, Dan. 5. a. 

Chap. I. 

The prophet Jeremy. — 

out of the north there shal come a people agaynst her, which shal make hir londe so waist, that no body shal dwell therin: nether man ner beast, for they shall fle and departe from thence. In those dayes q at that tyme
(saieth the LORDE) “the childré of Israel shall come, they a the children of luda, wepinge q makinge haist, q shal seke the
LORDE their God. They shall axe the waye to Sion, thyther shall they turne their faces, ¢ come, and hange vpon the, in a coue- naunt that neuer shal be broken.

^My people hath bene a lost flocke, my shepherdes haue disceaued them, ¢ haue made them go astraye vpon the hilles. They haue gone from the mountayne to the litle hill, q forgotten their folde. All they y came vpon them, haue deuoured thé: œ their enemies sayde: We haue made no faute agaynst them, for they haue displeased the LORDE, yee euen the LORDE which is the bewtie of their rightuousnes, « y defended their fathers.
Yet shal ye fle from Dp q departe out of y londe of the Caldees, aud ye shall be as the rammes that go before the flocke. “For lo,
I wil wake vp an hoost of people from y northren londe, x bringe them vpon Babilon: these shal laye sege to it, q wynne it: Their arowes shal not mysse, like as a connynge archer shuteth not wronge. And the Caldees shalbe spoyled, q all they that spoyle them, shalbe satisfied, saieth the LORDE: “because ye were so chearfull q glad, to treade downe myne heretage, q fulfilled youre pleasures, as the calues in the grasse: and triumphed ouer them like the bulles, when ye had gotten the victory. Youre mothers shalbe sore con- founded, and they that bare you, shal come to shame. She shall be the leest set by amonge the nacions, voyde, waist, q dried vp.
No man shal be able to dwell there, for the feare of y LORDE, but she shal be whole desolate. All they that go by Babilon, * shall stonde still, ¢ be abashed, q shal wondre at all hir plages.

Go forth in youre araye agaynst Babilon rounde aboute, all ye that can hadle bowes : shute at her, spare no arowes, for she hath synned agaynst the LORDE. Crie out: vpon her, vpon her, agaynst her roude aboute: she shal yelde her selfe, her foundacios shal fall,

a | Esd. 1. a. 
4 Esa. 47, a. 

è Tere. 25. a, Eze. 36. f. e Tere. 18. b. 19, b. 49. c.

* Tere. 50. g. 
J Exo. 21. b. 

læ hir walles shall come downe, for it shalbe the vengeaunce of the LORDE. "Yee vē- geaunce shalbe taken of her, q as she hath done, so shal she be dealt withall. They shal rote out the sower from Babilon, q him y handleth the sickle in haruest. For feare of the swearde of the enemie, euery man shall get him to his owne people, q euery man shal fle to his owne londe. flocke, the Lyons haue dispersed them. First the kinge of the Assirians deuoured them, last of all this Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon hath brussed all their bones.

"Therfore thus saieth the LOR DE of hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will viset the kinge of Babilon q his kingdome, “as I haue visited the kinge of the Assirians: and will bringe Israel agayne to his pleasaunt pasture, that he maye fede vpon Charmel q Basan, and be satisfied vpon the mount of Ephraim t Galaad. In those dayes and at the same tyme (saieth the LORDE) * yf the offence of
Israel be sought for, there shal none be founde: 
Yf men enquere for the synne of Iuda, there shal be none: for [ wil be mercifull vnto them, whom I suffre to remayne ouer.

Go downe (o thou avenger) in to the ene- mies londe, ¢ viset them that dwell therin: downe with them, and smyte them vpon the backes, saieth the LORDE: do acordinge to all, that I haue commaunded the. ‘There is gone aboute the londe a crie of a slaughter x greate murthur, namely on this maner: How happeneth it, that the hammer of the whole worlde is thus broken q brussed in sonder?
How chaunceth it, that Babilon is become a wildernes amonge the Heithen on this maner ?
I my self haue layed wayte for the, q thou art taken: vnawarres art thou trapped q snared: for why, thou hast prouoked y LORDE vnto anger: The LORDE hath opened his house of ordinaunce, q brought forth the weapens of his wrath. For the thinge that is done in the londe of the Caldees, it is the LORDE of hoostes worke.

These thinges shal come vpon her at the last, they shal breake in to hir preuy chabres, they shall leaue her as bare as stones, that be layed together vpon heapes. ‘They shall so destroye her, y nothinge shal be left. They shal slaye all i mightie souldyers, and put

Leu. 24. d. Yobel 3. b. 
4 Re. 25. b. 

€ 4 Reg. 17. e. Esa. 10, a. 
^4 Re. 19. g, Esa. 14. d. — * Tere. 51. a. 

m Fo. brlryrbij. 

Israel is a scatred; 

D 

E 

"fo. delycrdtyj. The prophet Seremp. 

Wo be vnto thé, for the daye | 

them to death. 

a tyme of their visitacion is at honde. Me- 

thinke I heare already a crie, of them that be 

fled q escaped out of the londe of Babilon, which shewe in Sion the vengeaunce of the

LORDE oure God, the vengeaunce of his 

temple: Yee a voyce of them, that crie 

agaynst Babilon: Call vp all the archers agaynst Babilon, pytch youre tentes rounde aboute her, that none escape. “Recompence
| Ther, as she hath deserued: and acordinge as 
` [she hath done, so deale with her agayne: for 
| she hath set vp her self agaynst the LORDE, 
| lagayust $ holy one of Israel. ‘Therfore shal 
| [hir yonge men fall downe in the stretes, q all 
| [hir men of warre shal be roted out in y daye, 
| |saieth the LORDE. Beholde, I CUR vnto the (o thou proude) saieth the LORDE God of hoostes: for thy daye shal come, eué the tyme of thy visitacio. And the proude shal stomble q fall, ¢ no man shal helpe him vp.
I wil burne vp his cities with fyre, q it shal consume all that is rounde aboute him.

J| Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: The children of Israel q Iuda suffre violence to- gether. Allthey that haue them in captiuyte, kepe them fast, q wil not let them go: but their aveger q redemer is mightie, whose name is the LORDE of hoostes: he shal manteyne their cause, he shal make the londe shake, q iudge them that dwell therin, one with another.
The swearde shall come vpon the Caldees 
(saieth the LORDE) vpon them that dwell in Babilon, vpon their prynces, œ vp6 their wyse mé: The swearde vpon their soythsayers,
(as for those, they shall become fooles.) ‘The swearde vpo their worthies, so that they shal stonde in feare: The swearde vpon their horsmen and charettes, x vpon all the comon people that dwell vnder the: so that they all shal become like women: The swearde vpon their treasure, so that it shal be stollen awaye:

&|The swearde vpon their waters, so that they 

shalbe dried vp: For the londe worshippeth 

ymages, q delyteth in straunge wondrefull 

thinges. ‘Therfore shal wilde beestes, Apes q 

Estriches dwell therin: for there shal neuer 

man dwell there, nether shal eny man haue 

his habitacion there for euer more. ^Like as God destroyed Sodom q Gomorre, with the cities that laye there aboute, saieth the

* Apoc. 18. b. > Gene. 19. d. © Tere. 50. b. 
Deut. 28. c. 

Chap, Ii. 

LORDE: So shal noman dwell there also, nether shal eny ma haue there his habitacion.
° Beholde, there shal come a people from the north, with a greate bonde of men, q many kinges shal stonde vp from the endes of the earth: "They beare bowes q buclers, cruell are they q vnmercifull.

Their voyce roareth like the raginge see, they ryde vpon horses, q come weapened to fight agaynst the: O Babilon. As soone as the kinge of Babilon heareth tell of them, his hondes shal waxe feable: Sorowe and henynes shall come vpon him, as a woman trauelinge with childe. Beholde, “like as the Lyon commeth vp from the pleasaunt medowes of lordane vnto the grene pastures of Ethan, so wil I dryue the forth, and make them runne agaynst her. But whom shal I chose out, ¢ ordene to soch thinge? * For who is like me, or who wil stryue with me? or what shepherde maye stonde agaynst me? Therfore heare the councel that the LORDE hath geuen vpon Babilon, and the deuyce that he hath taken vpon the londe of the Caldees. The leest amoge the people shal teare them in peces, q loke what pleasaunt thinge they haue: they shal laye it waist. The noyse at y wyn- nynge of Babilon shal moue the earth, q the crie shalbe herde amonge the Gétiles.

The li. Chapter. 

HUS hath the LORDE sayde: ^ Be- holde, I will rayse vp a perlous wynde agaynst Babilon q hir citesens, y beare euell will agaynst me. I wil sende also in to Babilo fanners, to fanne her out, q to destroye hir londe: for in the daye of hir trouble they shal be aboute her on euery syde. Morouer, the
LORDE hath sayde vnto the bowe men, q to them y clymme ouer the walles in brest plates:
Ye shal not spare hir yonge mē, kyll downe all hir hoost. ‘Thus the slayne shal fall downe in the londe of the Caldees, and the wounded in the stretes. ‘As for Israel q Iuda, they shall not be forsake of their God, of the
LORDE of hoostes, of the holyone of Israel: no, though they haue fylled all their londe full of synne. “Fle awaye from Babilon, euery man saue his life. Let no man holde his tunge to hir wickednes, for the tyme of the
LORDES vengeaunce is come, yee he shal 

4 Tere. 49. c. * Iob 41. a. J Tere. 25. b. 50. a. 
£ Tere. 50. d. ^ Esa. 48. d. 

3 |rewarde her agayne. 

Chap. li. 
Babilon hath bene in the LORDES honde a golden cuppe, “ý maketh all londes droncken. Of hir wyne haue all people droncken, therfore are they out of their wittes. ^But sodenly is Babilon fallen, and destroyed. Mourne for her, brynge plasters for hir woundes, yf she maye peraduenture be healed agayne. We wolde haue made Babilon whole (saye they) but she is not recouered. "Therfore wil we let her alone, x go euery ma in to his owne countre.
For hir tudgmét is come in to heauen, q is gone vp to the cloudes. And therfore come on, we will shewe Sion the worke of the
LORDE oure God. à 

Make sharpe the arowes, and fyll the 

quyuers: “for the LORDE shall rayse vp the | 

sprete of the kynge of the Meedes, which hath allready a desyre to destroye Babilon.
This shalbe the vengeaunce of the LORDES, and the vengeaunce of his temple.

Set vp tokens vpon the walles of Babilon, make youre watch stronge, set youre watch- men in araye, yee holde preuye watches: q yet for all that shall the LORDE go forth with the deuyce, which he hath taken vpon them that dwell in Babilon.

O thon that dwellest by the greate waters, o thou that hast so greate treasure and riches, thyne ende is come: q the rekenynge of thy wynnynges ^The LORDE of hoostes hath sworne by himself, that he wil ouer whelme the with men like greshoppers in nombre, which with a corage shall crie Alarum Alarum agaynst the. *Yee euen the LORDE of hoostes, that with his power made the earth, with his wiszdome prepayred y rounde worlde, q with his discrecion spred out the heauens.
As soone as he letteth his voyce be herde, the waters in the ayre waxe fearce: /He draweth vp the cloudes from the endes of the earth.
He turneth j lightenynges to rayne, he bringeth the wyndes out of their secrete places. By the reason of wyszdome, all men are become fooles. € Confounded be all the casters of ymages: for y thinge that they make, is but disceate, xz hath no breath.
Vayne is it, x worthy to be laughed at: q in the tyme of visitacion it shal perish.

J| Neuertheles, the porcion of Iacob is none 

soch: but he that made all thinges, whose 

a Tere. 25, c. ^ Esa. 21. b. Apo. 18. a. 14. b. © Iud. 

2,c. 3 Re. 11. c. 

The prophet Seremp. 

name is the LORDE of hoostes, he is the rodde of his enheritaunce. ‘Thou breakest my weapens of warre, q yet thorow the I haue scatred the nacions q kyngdomes: Thorow the haue I scatred horse q horse man, yee the charettes, t soch as sat vpon them: ‘Thorow the I haue scatred man q woman, olde and yonge, bacheler q mayden. ‘Thorow the I haue scatred the shepherde « his flocke, the husbond man ç his catell, the prynces q the rulers. Therfore wil I rewarde the cite of
Dabilon q all hir citesyns the Caldees, with all the euell which they haue done vnto Sion:
Yee that ye youre selues shall se it, saieth the 
LORDE. Beholde, I come vpon the (thou noysome hill) saieth the LORDE, thou that destroyest all londes. I wil stretch out my honde ouer the, « cast the downe from the stony rockes: q wil make the a brente hill, so that nether corner stones, ner pinnacles, ner foundacion stones shalbe taken eny more out of the, but waist ¢ desolate shalt thou lie for evermore, saieth the LORDE.

Set vp a toké in the londe: blowe the trompettes amonge the Heithen, prouoke the nacions agaynst her, call the kyngdomes, of
Ararat, Menni q Ascanes agaynst her: nombre out ‘Taphsar agaynst her, bringe as greate a sorte of horses agaynst her, as yf they were greshoppers. Prepare agaynst them ¥ people of the Meedes with their kynges, prynces q all their chefe rulers, yee and the whole londe that is vnder them.

The londe also shal shake a be afrayed, when the deuyce of the LORDE shall come forth agaynst Babilon: to make the londe of
Babilon so waist, that no ma shal dwell en more therin. The Worthies of Babilon shal leaue the batell, q kepe them selues in stronge holdes, their strength hath fayled them, they shalbe like women. ‘Their dwellinge places shal be brent vp, their barres shalbe broken.
One purseuaunt shal mete another, yee one poste shal come by another, to bringe the kinge of Babilon tydinges: that his cite is taken in on euery syde, the foordes occupyde, the fennes brent vp, and the souldyers sore afrayed.

For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes the 
God of Israel: The doughter of Babilon hath bene in hir tyme like as a threszshinge floore,

4 Amos 6. c. Tere. 22. a. — * Tere. 10. b. 
5 Esa. 44. c. Baru. 6. a. 

f Psal. 134. b. 

90 

Fo. nelrrrir. 

| ffo. Deve. 

|but shortly shal hir harnest come, Nabucho- 

donosor the kinge of Babilon hath deuoured and distroyed me, he hath made me an emptie vessell He swalowed me vp like a Dragon, and fylled his bely with my delicates: he
‘hath cast me out, he hath take my substaunce awaye, q the thinge that was left me hath he caried vnto Babilon, saieth the doughter, that dwelleth in Sion: Yee « my bloude also, vnto the Caldees, saieth lerusalem. ‘Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Beholde, I wil defende thy cause, q avenge the: I will drynke vp hir see, q drye vp hir water sprynges.

a Babilon shal become an heape of stones, a dwellinge place for dragons, a fearfulnes q wondringe, because no man dwelleth there.
They shall roare together like lyons, q as the yonge lyons when they be angrie, so shal they béde them selues. In their heate I shal set
‘drynke before thé, x they shalbe droncken for ioye: Then shal they slepe an euerlastinge slepe, ^a neuer wake, saieth the LORDE.
I shal carie them downe to be slayne like shepe, like wethers q gootes. O, how was
Sesah wonne? O, how was the glory of y whole londe taken? how happeneth it, that

Babilon is so wondred at amonge the Heithe? 

The see is rysen ouer Babilon, « hath couered her with his greate wawes. Hir cities are layed waist, the londe lieth vnbuylded and

‘voyde: it is a londe where no man dwelleth, 

(t where no mà traueleth thorow. 

Morouer, 
“I wil vyset Bel at Dabilo: q the- thinge that he hath swalowed vp, that same shal I plucke out of his mouth. The Gentiles also shall

'runne nomore vnto him, yee and the walles of 

Babilon shal fall. 

2O my people, come out of Babilon, that 
‘euery man maye saue his life, from the fearfull 
‘wrath of the LORDE. Be not faynte herted, 
‘q feare not at euery rumoure that shalbe herde 
‘in the londe: for euery yeare bringeth new tydinges, yee straunge wickednes and lord-
ES And lo, the tyme commeth that J wil vyset the ymages of Dabilo, and the whole londe shalbe eonfounded, yee and hir slayne shal lie in the myddest of her. Heauen and earth with all that is therin, *shall reioyce ouer Dabilon, when the destroyers shal come vpon her from the north, saieth y LORDE.

‘Like as Babilo hath beaten downe and 

? Esa. 21. c. 
Dan. 14. d. 

* Tere. 51. b. * Tere. 30, a. Esa. 46. a. 
1 9 Cor. 6. c. Esa. 59. b, 

Cbr prophet Feremp. 

* Apoc. 18. e. 

Chap. li, slayne many out of Israel, so shal there fall many, and be slayne in all hir kyngdome.
Ye that haue escaped the swearde, haist you, stode not still, remembre the LORDE afarre of: and thinke vpon lerusalem, for we were ashamed to heare the blasphemies: oure faces were couered with shame, because the straunge aleauntes came in to the Sanctua of the LORDE. Wherfore beholde (sitet the LORDE) the tyme commeth, that I wil vyset the ymages of Babilon, and thorow the whole lode they shal mourne and fall. “Though
Babilon clymmed vp in to heaué, and kepte her power an hie: yet shal I sende her de- stroyers saieth the LORDE.

A piteous crie shall be herde from Babilon, | 9 and a greate mysery from the londe of the
Caldees: when the LORDE destroyeth them, and when he dryueth out the hie stomack q proude boostinge, where with they haue bene as furious, as the wawes of greate water floudes, and made greate crakes with their wordes. For the destroyers shall come vpon her (euen vpon Babilon) which shal take hir worthies, and brake their bowes: for God is disposed to avenge him self vpon them, q suf- ficiently to recompence the. Yee (saieth the
LORDE) I will make their prynces, their wyse men, their chefe rulers q all their worthies, droncké: so that they shal slepe an euerlast- inge slepe, and neuer wake: Thus saieth the kinge, whose name is ý LORDE of hoostes.

Morouer, thus saeth the LORDE of|5 hoostes: The thicke wall of Babilon shal be broken, and hir proude gates shalbe brente vp.
And the thinge that the Gétiles and the peo- ple haue wrought with greate trauayle and labonre, shal eome to naught, and be con- sumed in the fyre.

This is the charge that leremy gaue vnto 
Sarias the sonne of Nerias, the sonne of 
Maasia, when he wente towarde Babilon with 
Sedechias the kinge of Iuda, in the fourth yeare of his reigne. Now this Sarias was a peaceable prynce. leremy wrote in a boke, all the misery that shulde come vpon Babilon, yee and all these sermons that be written agaynst Babilon, and gane Sarias this charge:
When thou commest vnto Dabilon, se that thou rede all these wordes, and saye: O
LORDE, thou art determed to rote out this 

f Tere. 50. c. E lere. 49. d. 

Chap. lij. 

place, so that nether people ner catell shal dwell there eny more, but to lie waist for euer: and when thou hast redde out the boke, bynde a stone to it, and cast it in the myddest of Euphrates, and saye: ^ Eue thus shal Babilon syncke, ¢ be thrust downe with the burthen of trouble, that 1 will bringe vpon her: so that she shal neuer come vp agayne. Thus farre are y preachinges of
Ieremy. 

The lij. Chapter. 

EDECHIAS was xxj. yeare olde, when 

he was made kynge, 't he raigned xj. yeare in lerusalem. His mothers name was
Hamithal, Ieremies doughter of Lobna. He lyued wickedly before the LORDE euen as loachim dyd. Wherfore the LORDE was angrie at lerusalem q luda, so longe till he had cast thé out of his presence. And Sede- chias fel from the kynge of Babilon. * But in y ix. yeare of his raigne, In the téth
Moneth, the tenth daye of the Moneth it happened, that Nabuchodonosor kynge of
Babilon with all his hooste came before Ieru- salem, q beseged it, q made them bulworkes rounde aboute it. And this beseginge of the cite endured vnto the xj. yeare of kynge Se- dechias.

And in the fourth Moneth, the ix daye of the Moneth, there was so greate honger in the cite: that there were no more vitayles for the people of the londe. So all the souldyers brake awaye, and fled out of the cite by night, thorow the waye of the porte betwene the two walles by the kynges garden. Now y
Caldees had copassed the cite rounde aboute, yet wente these men their waye towarde the wildernesse.

And so the Caldees folowed vpon them, and toke Sedechias the kinge in the felde of
Iericho, when his hoost was runne from him. 
So they caried the kynge awaye presoner to 
Reblatha, vnto the kinge of Babilon in the londe of Hemath, * where he gaue iudgment vpon him.

The kinge of Babiló also caused Sedechias sonnes be slayne before his face, yee q put all the prynces of Iuda to death at Reblatha.
Morouer he put out the eyes of Sedechias, caused him be bounde with cheynes, to be

^ 4 Re. 24. d. 2 Par. 36. b. c Tere. 

d Tere. 38. b. 39. a. 

? Apoc. 18. e. 
39. a. 4 Re. 25. a. 

Cbr prophet Seremp. 

caried vnto Babilon: q let him lie in preson, till he dyed.

Now y tenth daye of the fyfth Moneth in the xix yeare of Nabuchodonosor kynge of
Babilon, Nabusaradan the chefe captayne and the kinge of Babilons seruauntes came vnto lerusalem, q brent vp the house of the
LORDE. He brent vp also the kinges palace, all the houses ¢ all the gorgeous buyld- inges in lerusale. And the whole hoost of the Caldees y were with the chefe captayne, brake downe all the walles of Ierusalem rounde aboute.

As for the poore people q soch folke as yet was left in the cite, which also were fallen to the kinge of Babilon, yee q what people as yet remayned: Nabusaradan the chefe cap- tayne caried them awaye presoners. But y poore people of the countre, dyd Nabusar- adan the chefe captayne leaue in the londe, to occupie the vynyardes q feldes. ‘The Cal- dees also brake the brasen pilers, that were in the house of the LORDE, yee the seate and the brasen lauer that was in the house of $
LORDE: q caried all the metall of them vnto Babilon. They toke awaye also the
Cauldrons, shouels, flesh hokes, sprinklers, spones q all the brasen vessell that was occu- pide in the seruyce: with the basens, cole- pannes, sprinklers, pottes, candilstickes, spones, and cuppes: wherof some were of golde, and some of syluer.

The chefe captayne toke also the two pilers, the lauer, the xij brasen bullockes y stode vnder y seate, ‘which kinge Salomon made in the house of the LORDE: q all the vessell conteyned so moch metall, that it might not be weyed. For euery piler was xviij cubites hie, q the rope that went aboute it, was xij cubites, q foure fingers thick and rounde:
Now vpon the rope were brasen knoppes, q euery knoppe was fyue cubites hie: q vpon the knoppes were whopes, a pomgranates rounde aboute of clene brasse.

After this maner were both the pilers fashioned with the pomgranates, wherof there were an hundreth and xevj, which hanged’ vpon the whoopesrounde aboute. The chefe. captayne also toke Sarias y hie prest, q So- phonias that was chefe next him, and the thre: kepers of the treasury. He toke out of the

e Tere. 39. b. 7/3 Re. 7. 

So. derei. 

€ 

D 

| fo. derei. 

Che Lamentacions of Seremp. 

Chap. 

lecite a chamberlayne which was a captayne of the souldyers, q seuen men that were the
‘kinges seruauntes, which were founde in the lecite: q Sepher a captayne that vsed to muster
‘the men of warre: with lx men of the countre that were taken in the cite. "These Nabu- saradan the chefe captayne toke, q caried them to the kinge of Babilon vnto Reblatha: and the kinge of Dabilon caused them to be put to death at Reblatha in the londe of Hemath.
¿And thus luda was ledde awaye captyue, out of his owne londe.

This is the summe of the people, whom Nabu- chodonosor ledde awaye captyue.

£| In the seuenth yeare of his reigne, he caried awaye of M lewes, thre thousande thre and twenty. In the xvij yeare Nabuchodonosor
'caried awaye from lerusalem eight hunderth and xxxij personnes. In the xxij yeare of

Nabuchodonosor Nabusaradan the chefe cap- tayne, toke awaye seuen hundreth xlv Iewes presoners. The whole summe of all the pre- soners, is foure thousande and sex hundreth.

" [n the xxxvij yeare after that Ioachim the kinge of Iuda was caried awaye in the xxv daye of the xij Moneth, Euilmerodach kinge of Babilon (the same yeare y he reigned) gaue Ioachim the kinge of Iuda his pardon, and let him out of preson, and spake louyngly to him: And set his trone aboue y trones of the other kinges that were with him in Babi- lon. He chaunged also the clothes of his preson, yee aud he att with him all his life longe. And he had a cotinuall lyuynge geuen him of the kinge of Dabilon, euery daye a certayne thinge alowed him, all the dayes of his life, vntill he dyed.

* 4 Re. 95. d. 

The ende of the prophet Feremp. 

The Lamentactons of Jeremy. 

ND it came to passe (after Israel was brought in to captiuyte, and Ierusalem destroyed:) that Ieremy the prophet sat wepinge, mournynge and makinge his mone in lerusalem: so that with an heuy herte

he sighed, q sobbed, sayenge : 

The first Chapter. a LAS, how sitteth the cite so desolate, y
N some tyme was full of people? how is she become like a wedowe, which was the lady of all nacions? “How is she brought vnder

tribute, that ruled all londes ? 

^ 92 Re. 4, b. 4 Re. 15. a. 

She wepeth sore in the night, so that y teares runne downe hir chekes: for amonge all hir louers, there is none, that geueth her eny comforte: yee hir nexte frendes abhorre her, q are become hir enemies.

Iuda is taken presoner, because she was defyled: q for seruynge so many straunge goddes, she dwelleth now amonge the Heithen.
She fyndeth no rest, all they that persecuted her, toke her, and so she dwelleth amonge hir enemies.

The stretes of Sion mourne, because no man commeth more to the solempne feastes :
All hir gates are desolate, hir prestes make 

il. 

a 

B 

Chap. fj. 

lamentacion, hir maydens are carefull, and she herself is in greate heuynesse. m| Hir enemies are fallen vpon hir heade, q haue put her to shame: because the LORDE hath chastened her for hir greate wickednes:
^hir children are ledde awaye captiue before their enemie.
J| All the bewtie of the doughter of Sion is awaye, hir prynces are become like wethers, that fynde no pasture. They are dryue awaye before their enemie, so that they haue no more power.
? | Now doth Ierusalem remembre the tyme of hir misery q disobedience, yee the ioye q plea- sure y she hath had in tymes past: seynge hir corte is brought downe thorow the power of their enemie, q there is no man for to helpe her: hir enemies stode lokinge at her and laugh hir Sabbath dayes to scorne.
€, Ierusalem synned euer more q more, ther- 
T! fore is she come in decaye. All they that had her in honoure, despise her: for they haue sene hir fylthinesse. Yee she sigheth, and is a shamed of herselfe.
| Hir skyrtes are defyled, she remébred not what wolde folowe: therfore is hir fall so greate, aud there is no mà to comforte her. O
LORDE, cosidre my trouble, for myne enemie hath the vpper honde.
`| The enemie hath put his honde to all the precious thinges that she had, yee euen before hir eyes came the Heithen in aud out of the
Sanctuary: whom thou (neuertheles) ^hast forbydden to come within thy congregacion.
2| All hir people seke their bred with heuynes, q loke “what precious thinge euery man hath, that geueth he for meate, to saue his life.
Considre (O LORDE) and se, how vyle I am become.
7| o ye all that go fore by, beholde and se, yf there be eny sorowe like vnto myne, wher with the LORDE hath troubled me, in the daye of his fearefull wrath.
| From aboue hath he sent downe a fyre, in 
D |to my bones and chastened me: he hath layed a net for my fete, and throwne me wyde open: he hath made me desolate, so that I must euer be mournynge.
'The yocke of my transgression is come at the last, with his honde hath he taken it vp, and put it aboute my neck. My strength is

^ Deu. 23.a. *4 Re. 6. f. Tren. 2. c. 
Tren. 2, e. e Dan. 9. a. 

" Tere. %5, a. 
4 Tere. 14. c. 

The Lamentactons of Feremp. 

f Tren. 4. b.| 

Fo. uryríiij. gone: the LORDE hath delyuered me in to those hondes, wherout I can not ynyte myself.

The LORDEhath destroyed all the mightie D men, that were in me. He hath proclamed a feast, to slaughter all my best mē. The
LORDE hath troden downe the doughter of 
Iuda, like as it were in a wyne presse. 

Therfore do I wepe, and myne eyes gusshe |Y out of water: “for the coforter that shulde quycken me, is farre fro me. My children are dryuen awaye, for why? the enemie hath gotten the oner honde.

Sion casteth out hir hodes, and there is no man to comforte her. The LORDE hath layed the enemies rounde aboute Iacob, and
Ierusalem is as it were a menstruous woma, in the myddest of them.

The LORDE is rightuous," for I haue pro- uoked his countenaunce vnto anger. O take hede all ye people, and cousidre my heuynes:
My maydens and my yonge men are led awaye in to captiuyte.

I called for my louers (but they begyled me:) for my prestes and councelers, but they perished: euen while they sought for meate, to saue their lyues.

Considre (O LORDE) how I am troubled, my wombe is disquieted, my herte turneth aboute in me, and I am full of heuynes. The swearde hurteth me without, and within I am like vnto death.

They heare my mournynge, but there is none that wil comforte me. All myne ene- mies haue herde of my trouble, and are glad therof, because thou hast done it. But thou shalt brynge forth the tyme, when they also shal be like vnto me.

From the shall come all their aduersite:| 1 thou shalt plucke them awaye, eué as thou hast plucked me, because of all my wicked- nesse. For my sorow is very greate, and my herte is heuy.

The ij. Chapter. — 
LAS, how hath Y LORDE darckened the doughter of Sion’ so sore in his wrath? As for the honoure of Israel, he hath casten it downe from heauen: ¢How hap- peneth it, that he remembred not his owne fote stole, when he was angrie ?

£ 1 Par. 19. a. 

Psal. 98. a. 

Fo. dereit. 

3| TheLORDE hath east downe all the glory of Iacob without eny fauoure: All the stronge places of the doughter Iuda hath he broken in his wrath, q throwne them downe to the grounde: hir kyngdome q hir prynces hath he suspended.

J| in the wrath of his indignacion he hath 

broken all the horne of Israel: he hath with | 

drawé his right honde from the enemie: yee a flame of fyre is kyndled in Iacob, q hath consumed vp all rounde aboute.

"Ii He hath bent his bowe like an enemie, he hath fastened his right honde as an aduersary: and euery thinge that was pleasatit to se, he hath smyten it downe. He hath poured out his wrath like a fyre, in to the tabernacle of the doughter Sion.

"| The LORDE is become, like as it were an enemie, he hath cast downe Israel q all his places: yee all his stronge holdes hath he destroyed, and fylled the doughter of luda with moch sorow and heuynesse.

| Hir tabernacle (which was like a garden of 

S pleasure) hath he destroyed: hir hie solépne feastes hath he put downe. “The LORDE hath brought it so to passe, that the hie so- lempne feastes and Sabbathes in Sion, are clene forgotté. In his heuy displeasure hath he made the kynge « prestes to be despised.

}| The LORDE hath forsaken his owne aulter, q is wroth with his owne Sanctuary, q hath geuen the walles of their towres in to the hondes of the enemie. ‘Their enemies made a noyse in the house of the LORDE, as it had bene in a solempne feast daye.

n| The LORDE thought to breake downe the walles of the deughter Sion, he spred out his lyne, q drewe not in his honde, till he had destroyed them. ‘Therfore mourne the tur- rettes and the broken walles together.

O| Hir portes are casten downe to the grounde, hir barres are broken q smytten in sonder: hir kynge q prynces are caried awaye to the
Gétiles.’ They haue nether lawe ner pro- phetes, ner yet eny visien from the LORDE.

*| The Senatours of the doughter Sion sit 

C | vpon the grounde in sylence, they haue strowed aszshes vpon their heades, and gyrded them selues with saek cloth. ‘The maydens of Ie- rusalem hange downe their heades to the grounde.

2| 'Myne eyes begynne to fayle me thorow 

^lere.7. b. ^ Iere, 52. b. € Tren. 1. c. 4 Iere, 5. b. 

= The Xamentarions of Jeremy. 

Chap. tj. wepinge, my body is disquieted, my leuer is poured vpon the earth, for the greate hurte of my people, seynge the children and babes dyd swowne in the stretes of the cite.

Euen when they spake to their mothers :|5 where is meate and drynke? for whyle they so sayde, they fell downe in the stretes of the cite, like as they had bene wounded, and some dyed in their mothers bosome.

What shal J saye of the (O thou doughter|/5 lerusalem) to whom shall I lické the? To whom shal I cépare the (o thou doughter
Sion) to comforte the withall? Thy hurte is like a mayne see, who maye heale the?

Thy prophetes haue loked out vayne q folish} 3 thinges for the," they haue not shewed the of thy wickednesse, to kepe the from captiuyte: but haue ouerladen the, and thorow falsede scatred the abrode. |

All they that go by the, clappe their hondes|D at the: hissinge and wagginge their heades|33 vpon the doughter lerusalem, and saye: is this the cite that men call so fayre, wherin the whole londe reioyseth ?

All thine enemies gape vpon the, whisper-|y inge and bytinge their teth, sayenge: let vs | deuoure, for the tyme that we loked for, is |

| 

come: we haue founde and sene it. 

The LORDE hath fulfilled the thinge.|5 that he was purposed to do: and perfourmed that he had deuysed longe agoo: he hath de- stroyed, and not spared. He hath caused thine aduersary to tryumphe ouer the, and set vp the horne of thine enemie.

Let thine hert erie vnto the LORDE, O/¥ thou cite of the doughter Sion: “let thy teares | rūne downe like a ryuer daye q night: rest not, q let not the aple of thine eye leaue of.

Stonde vp, and make thy prayer in the first watch of the night, poure out thine hert like} gg water before the LORDE: lift vp thine hondes, for the lyues of thy yonge children, that dye of honger in the stretes.

Beholde (O LORDE) q considre, why hast} thou gathered me vp so clene? Shal the women then eate their owne frute, euen chil- dren of a spanne longe? Shal the prestes and prophetes be slayne thus in the Sanctuary of the LORDE?

Yonge q olde lye behinde the stretes vpon | the grounde, my maydens q yonge men are slayne with the swearde: whom thou in the

14. b. 23. c. 27. b. 29, b. e Deu. 4. c. 30, a. lere. 29. c. 

Chap. ii. The Zamentacions of Srremp. Fo. uryrb. 

daye of thy wrothfull indignacion hast put to Namely, that the mercies of the LORDE|N death: Yeeeuen thou hast put them to death,| |are not clene gone, « that his louynge kynd-

q not spared them. nesse ceasseth not. 

N| My neghbours that are rounde aboute me, His faithfulnes is greate, and renueth itself 71 hast thou called, as it were to a feast daye:| |as the mornynge.

so that in the daye of the LORDES wrath The LORDE is my porcion (saieth my 1 none escaped, nether was eny left behinde.| |sonle) therfore wil I hope in him.

Those that I had brought vp q norisshed, hath O how good is the LORDE vnto the, that 0 myne enemy destroyed put their trust in him, and to the soule that

Re seketh after him ? | 
The iij. Chapter. O how good is it with stilnesse to wate and 0 
AM the ma, that (thorow the rodd of his! |tarie, for the health of the LORDE? wrath) haue experiéce of misery. O how good is it for a man, to take the yock | O
He droue me forth, and led me: yee in to darcknesse, but not in to light.

vpon him from his youth vp? 
He sitteth alone, he holdeth him still, and| 5 
Agaynst me only he turneth his honde, ¢ layeth it euer vpon me.

dwelleth quietly by him self. 
He layeth his face vpon the earth, yf (perj 5 
My flesh a my skynne hath he made olde, and my bones hath he brussed.

case) there happen to be eny hope. 
He offreth his cheke to the smyter, he will| * 
He hath buylded rounde aboute me, ¢ closed me in with gall and trauayle.

be content with reproues. 
For the LORDE wil not forsake for euer. |2 
He hath set me in darcknesse, as they that be deed for ener.

But though he do cast of, yet (acordinge to| 5 
He hath so hedged me in, that I can not 

y multitude of his mercies) he receaueth to 

grace agayne. 

get out, q hath layed heuy lynckes vpon me. For he doth not plage, q cast out the chil-| 5 
Though I crie q call piteously, yet heareth 

he not my prayer. 

dren of men from his herte. 
'To treade all the presoners of the earth 5 
He hath stopped vp my wayes with foure | squared stones, ¢ made my pathes croked.

vnder his fete. | 
'To moue the iudgment of man before the 5 
He layeth waite for me like a Bere, and as| | most highest. a lyon in a hole.
He hath marred my wayes, and broké me 

To condemne a man in his cause: The 5 
LORDE hath no pleasure in soch thinges. 

in peces, he hath layed me waist altogether. 

He hath bent his bowe, and made me as it 

What is he then that saieth: there shulde| 72 somthinge be done without the LORDES| were a marck to shute at. comaundement ? |
The arowes of his quyuer hath he shot, euen Out of the mouth of the most highest goeth | 2 in to my reynes.
Iam laughed to scorne of all my people, 

not enell and good. 
Wherfore then murmureth the lyuinge man?| 2 they make songes vpon me all y daye loge.
He hath fylled me with bytternesse, q geuen 

let him murmoure at his owne synne. me wormwod to drynke.

Let vs loke well vpon oure owne waies, 1| 3 remembre oure selues, and turne agayne to y

He hath smytten my teth in peces, ¢ rolled me in the dust.

He hath put my soule out of rest, I forget all good thinges.

I thought in my self: I am vndone, there is no hope for me in the LORDE.

O remembre yet my mysery and mytrouble, the wormwod and the gall.

Yee thou shalt remébre them, for my soule melteth awaye in me.

Whyle I cosidre these thinges in my hert, 
I get a hope agayne. 

pd ES 

4 

4% 

JS JS -$ n we we UU B 

LORDE. 

Let vs lift vp oure hertes with oure hondes| 3 vnto the LORDE, that is in heauen.

We haue bene dyssemblers q haue offended, | 3 wilt thou therfore not be intreated ?

Thou hast eouered vs in thy wrath, q per- D secuted vs, thou hast slayne vs without eny fauoure.

Thou hast hyd thy self in a cloude, that D oure prayer shulde not go thorow.

Thou hast made vs outcastes, and to be'D despysed amonge the Heithen. |

KANN 

Y| All onre enemies gape vpon vs. 

y l'eare and snare is come vpon vs, yee des- pite and destruccion.

y | Whole ryuers of water guszshe out of myne eyes, for the greate hurte of my people.

5| Myne eyes runne, and can not ceasse, for there is no rest.

5| OLORDE, when wilt thou loke downe fro heauen, and considre ?

D| Myne eye breaketh my herte, because of all the doughters of my cite.

¥ | Myne enemies hunted me out sharpely like a byrde, yee and that with out a cause.

¥| They haue put downe my life in toa pitte, and layed a stone vpon me.

V | They poured water vpon my heade, then thought 1: now am I vndone.

p| _I called vpon thy name (O LORDE) out of the depe pitte.

pI Thou hast herde my voyce, q hast not turned awaye thine eares fro my sighinge and

^ Jerienge. 

ip |, Thou hast enclyned thy self vnto me, whē 
I called vpon the, q haist sayde: feare not. 

"4| Thou (O LORDE) hast mayntened the 

| |eause of my soule, and hast redemed my life. 

<] OLORDE, thou hast sene my blasphemers, take thou my cause vpon the.

"^| Thou hast well considred how they go aboute to do me harme, q that all their councels are agaynst me.

wi Thou hast herde their despytefull wordes 
(O LORDE) yee and all their ymaginacions agaynst me.

W| The lippes of myne enemies, q their deuyces that they take agaynst me, all the daye longe.

W| Thou seist also their sittinge downe and their rysinge vp, they make their songes of nothinge but of me.

n| Rewarde them (O LORDE) acordinge to the workes of their hondes.

n| Geue them y thinge, that their owne herte is afrayed of: euen thy curse.

n| Persecute them, (O LORDE) with thy 

indignacion, q rote them out from vnder the 

heauen. 

The iiij. Chapter. 
O HOW is the golde become so dymme ? 
How is the goodly coloure of it so sore chaunged? and the stones of y Sanctuary thus scatred in the corner of euery strete ?

a Gen. 19. c. 5 Psal. 101, a. 

Che Lamentations of Seremp. 

Chap. iiij. 

The children of Sion that were all waye in| 3 honoure, q clothed with y most precious golde: how are they now becomme like the erthen vessels which be made with the potters honde?

The Lamyes geue their yonge ones suck} 3 with bare brestes: but the doughter of my people is eruel, and dwelleth in the wylder- nesse: like the Estriches.

The tonges of the suckinge children, cleue|F to ¥ rofe of their mouthes for very thurst. The yonge children axe bred, but there is noman, that geueth it them.

They that were wonte to fayre delicatly, | f perishe in the stretes: they that afore were brought vp in purple, make now moch of donge.

The synne of the doughter of my people is|33 become greater, then y wickednesse of Sodome, | 3 that sodély was destroyed," and not taken with hondes.

Hir absteyners (or Nazarees) were whyter| f then y snowe or mylke: their coloure was fresh read as the Corall, their beutie like the
Saphyre. 

But now their faces are very black:^ In so|T1 moch, that thou shuldest not knowe them in the stretes. Their skynnecleueth totheir bones,

It is wythered, and become like a drye stock. 

"They that be slayne with the swearde, are| D happier, then soch as dye of honger, and perishe awaye famishinge for the frutes of the felde.

The womé (which of nature are pitefull)| * haue sodden their owne children‘ with their hondes: that they might be their meate, in y miserable destruccion of the doughter of my

eople. . 

The LORDE hath perfourmed his heuy|5 wrath:^ he hath poured out the furiousnes of hisdispleasure. He hath kindled a fyre in Sion, which hath consumed the foundacions therof.

Nether the kinges of the earth, ner all $|b inhabitours of the worlde, wolde haue peler. that the enemie q aduersary shulde haue come in at the gates of the cite of Ierusalē.

Which neuertheles is come to passe for |1 synnes of hir prophetes, and for the wickednes of hir prestes, that haue shed innocentes bloude within her.

So that these blynde men wéte stomblinge| 3 in the stretes, and stayned them selues with bloude, which elswolde touche no bloudy cloth.

c Deu. 28. e. 4 Re. 6. f. Tren. 2. e. 4 Tren. 2. a. 

D| Butthey cried vnto euery ma: fle the stayn- ynge, awaye, get you héce, touch it not. Yee
(sayde they) ye must be brent, ye must dwell amonge the Gentiles, ¢ byde no longer here.

Y| The countenaunce of the LORDE hath banyshed them, q shal neuer loke more vpon them: For they them selues nether regarded the prestes, nor pitied their elders.

2| Wherfore yet oure eyes fayle vs, whyle we 

D |loke for vayne helpe : seynge we be euer wait- ynge vpon a people, that can do vs no good.

¥| They laye so sharpe waite for vs, that we can not go safe vpou the stretes: for oure ende is come, oure dayes are fulfilled, oure ende is here.

P| _Oure persecuters are swifter then the Aegles of the ayre: they folowed vpon ys ouer the moun- taynes, and layed wait for vs in y wildernesse.

^| The very breth of oure mouth:^ euen the anoynted LORDE himself shalbe take in oure synnes, of whom we saye : Vnder his shadowe we shalbe preserued amonge the Heithen.

U| And thou (O doughter Edom) that dwellest in the londe of Hus, be glad and reioyce : for the cuppe shal come vnto the also, which whe thou suppest of, thou shalt be droncke.

N| Thy syune is wel punished (O thou dough- 

ter Sion) he shall not suffre the to be caried 

awaye eny more. But thy wickednesse (O 

doughter Edom) shall he vyset, and for thy 

synnes sake, he shal lede the in to captiuyte. 

The b. Chapter. a ALL to remébraunce (O LORDE) what we haue suffred, cdsidre and se oure cofucion. Oure enheritaunce is turned to the straungers, v oure houses to the aleauntes.
We are become carefull and fatherlesse, and 

^ Gen. 2. b. ^ Tere. 31. e. Eze. 18. a. 

The Lamentacions of Feremp. 

Fo. Deredtj. 

oure mothers are as the wydowes. We are fayne to drynke oure owne water for moneye, and oure owne wod must we bye with moneye.
Oure neckes are vnder persecucion, we are weery, and haue no rest.

Afore tyme we yelded oure selues to the 
Egipcians, and now to the Assirians, only that we might haue bred ynough. Oure fathers
(which now are gone) haue synned, ^q we must beare their wickednesse. Seruauntes haue the rule of vs, and no man delyuereth vs out of their hodes. We must get oure lyuynge with the parell of oure lyues, because of the drouth of the wildernesse.

Oure skynne is as it had bene brent in an ouen, for very sore honger. ‘The wyues are raueshed in Sion, ¢ the maydens in the cities of luda. The prynces are hanged vp with the honde of the enemies, they haue not spared the olde sage meu, they haue taken yonge mens lyues from them, and the boyes are hanged vp vpon trees. The elders syt no more vnder the gates, and the yonge men vse no more playenge of Musick. The ioye of oure herte is gone, oure mery quere is turned in to mourninge. The garlande of oure heade is fallen : alas, that euer we synned so sore.

Therfore oure hert is full of heuynesse, ¢ oure eyes dymme: because of y hill of Sion that is destroyed, In so moch, that the foxes runne vpon it. But thou (O LORDE) that remaynest for euermore, and thy seate worlde with out ende: Wherfore wilt thou still forget vs, and forsake vs so longe? O LORDE:
Turne thou vs vnto the, q so shal we be turned. 
^ Renue oure daies as in olde tyme, for thou hast now banished vs longe ynough, and bene sore displeased at vs.

* Tere. 31. e. 

The enne of the Lamentacions of Seremp. 

The Prophet Baruch. 

Chat Baruch contepneth, 

Chap. I. 
Baruch readeth the boke before the kynge and all the people, which sende money to Ierusalem.

Chay. Il. 

They knowlege, that they haue deserued punysh- ment : God promyseth them forgeuenesse.

Chap. III. 
They praye hartely beinge in preson, and he exorteth them to amende.

Chap. IHI. 
A sermon to the people, with an exortacion to pacience.
Chap. V. 
He conforteth them, and sheweth the vocacion of the Heithen.

Chap. VI. 
A copie of the epistole, that Ieremy sent to the 

Tewes, which were led awaye presoners vnto 
Babilon. 

HESE are the wordes of the boke, that 

Baruch the sonne of Nerias the sonne 

of Maasia, the sonne of Sedechias, the sonne 

of Sedei, the sonne of Helchia, wrote at 

Babilon in the fifth yeare the seuéth daye 

of the moneth: ° what tyme as the Caldees wanne lerusalem and brent it.

The first Chapter. a ND Baruch dyd rede the wordes of this boke, that Iechonias the sonne of
Ioachim kynge of Iuda might heare: and in the presence of all the people, that were come to heare the boke: yee and before all the noble kinges sonnes, before ¥ lordes of the councell and elders: and before the whole people, from $ lowest vnto the hyest: before all them that dwelt at Babilon, by Y water of
Sodi. Which when they herde it, wepte, fasted, and prayed before the LORDE.
3! They made a colleccion also of money, 
,acordinge to euery mans power, and sent it to 
DEUM vnto Ioachim the sonne of Helchia ithe sonne of Salon prest, with y other prestes: land to all the people which were with him at
Terusalé, what tyme as they had gotten the ornamentes of the temple of $ LORDE (that i were taken awaye out of the temple) that they might brynge them agayne in to the londe of luda, the x. daye of the moneth Siban:

^ Deu. 14. c. 

24 Re. 95. b. 

namely, syluer vessel, (which Sedechias the sonne of losias kinge of Iuda had made.)
After that Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon had take Iechonias, with all his prynces, lordes, and all the people, and led them captyue from
Ierusalem vnto Babilon. 

And they sayde: ^Beholde, we haue sent you money, to bye you burntofferynges and incense withall: make you vnleuended bred, t offre for synne vpon the aulter of the LORDE oure God. “And praye for the prosperite of]
Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon, and of 
Balthasar his sonne: y their dayes maye be vpon earth, as the dayes of heauen : that God also maye geue vs strength, and lighten oure, eyes : that we maye lyue vnder the defence of
Nabuchodonosor kinge of Babilon, and vnder the proteccion of Balthasar his sonne: that we maye longe do them seruyce, and fynde fa- uoure in their sight. Praye for vs also vnto the LORDE onre God, for we haue synned agaynst the LORDE oure God, and vnto this daye is not his wrath turned yet awaye from vs. And se that ye rede this boke (which we haue sent vnto you to be rehearced in the temple of the LORDE) vpon the hye dayes, and at tyme connenient.

Thus shal ye saye: ?^The LORDE oure 
God is rightuous, but we are worthy of cofu- cion q shame: like as itis come to passe this

* Tere. 29. b. 1 Tim. 2. a. 4 Baruc 2. b. Dan. 9.a. 

Chap. fj. daye, vnto all Iuda, q to euery one y dwelleth at lerusalem : to oure kinges, prynces, prestes, prophetes q to oure fathers. We haue synned before the LORDE oure God, we haue not put oure trust in him, ner geuen him credence: we haue not obeyed him, we haue not herk- ened vnto the voyce of the LORDE oure
God, to walke in the commaundementes that he gaue vs. Sens the daye that he brought oure forefathers out of the londe of Egipte vnto this present daye, we haue bene euer a mysbeleuynge and an vnfaithful people vnto ¥
LORDE oure God: destroyenge oure selues vtterly, and shrenckinge backe, that we shulde not heare his voyce.

Wherfore there are come vpon vs greate plages q dyuerse curses,“ like as the LORDE deuysed by Moses his seruaut: which brought oure forefathers out of the lode of Egipte, to geue vs a lode, that floweth with myleke and hony, like as it is to se this daye. Neuer- theles, we haue not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE oure God, acordinge to all the wordes of the prophetes, whom he sent vnto vs and to oure rulers: but euery man folowed his owne mynde and wicked ymagi-

uacion: to offre vnto straüge goddes, and to do euel in the sight of the LORDE oure God.

The ij. Chapter. 

OR the which cause the LORDE oure 

God hath perfourmed his deuyce,’ wherof he certified vs, and oure heades that ruled in lerusale: yee and oure kynges, oure princes, with all Israel and Iuda. And soch plages hath ý LORDE brought vpo vs, as neuer came to passe vnder the heaue : like as it is fulfilled in Hierusalem, acordinge as it 1s written in the lawe of Moses: ‘that a man shulde eate y
|flesh of his owne sonne, x the flesh of his owne doughter. Morouer, he hath delyuered them in to the hondes of all the kinges, y are rounde aboute vs (to be confounded and de- solate) q scatred thé abrode in all londes g naciós. Thus are we brought beneth q not aboue, for we haue synned against the
LORDE oure God, q not bene obedient vnto his voyce. “Therfore ý LORDE oure God is rightuous, a we with oure fathers (as reason is) are brought to ope shame, as it is to se this daye. And as for these plages y are come

* Leui. 26. Deu. 28. Exo. 12. 13. 14. 
* Deu. 28. e. 4 Re.6.f. Tren. 4. b. 

+ Dan. 9. b. 
2 Baruct.d. € Exo. 

The prophet Baruch. 

vpon vs allready, y LORDE had deuyced thé for vs: yet wolde we not praye vnto y LORDE oure God, y we might euery mà turne fró his vngodly wayes. So y LORDE hath caused soch plages to come vpon vs, for he is right- uous in all his workes, which he hath comaunded vs: which we also haue not done, ner harkened vnto his voyce, for to walke in y comaunde- métes of Y LORDE, y he had geué vnto vs.

And now o LORDE God of Israel, thou 
*that hast brought thy people out of the londe of Egipte with a mightie honde, with tokens and wodres, with thy greate power àd out- stretched arme: and hast gotten thy selff a name, as it is come to passe this daye: O
LORDE oure God, /^we haue synned, we haue done wickedly, we haue behaued oure selues vngodly in all thy rightuousnesses.
Turne thy wrath fro vs (we beseke the) for we are but a few left amonge the Heithen, where thou hast scatred vs. Heare oure prayers (o LORDE) q oure peticids, * bringe vs out of captiuyte, for thine owne sake: get vs fauoure in the sight of th&, which haue led vs awaye: y all lodes maye knowe, that thou art the LORDE oure God, and that Israel and his generacion calleth vpon thy name.

^O LORDE, loke downe fro thy holy house vpon vs: enclyne thine eare, q heare vs. For the deed, y be gone downe to their graues, a whose soules are out of their bodies,
‘ascribe vnto the LORDE nether prayse ner rigtuousmakynge: but the soule that is vexed for the multitude of hir synnes, which goeth on heuely and weakely, whose eyes begynne to fayle: yee soch a soule ascrybeth prayse and rightuousnesse vnto the LORDE. O
LORDE, we poure out oure prayers before the, and requyremercyin thy sight, O LORDE oure God: not lor eny godlynesse off oure forefathers, but because thou hast sent out thy wrath q indignacion vpon vs: acordinge as thou dydest threaten vs, by thy seruaiites the prophetes, sayenge :

* Thus sayeth the LORDE: Bowe downe youre shulders and neckes, and serue the kynge of Babilon, so shal ye remayne still in the londe, that I gaue vnto youre fathers.
Yff ye will not do this, ner heare the voyce of y LORDE youre God, to serue the kynge of
Babilon: I shall destroye you in the cities of 

7.8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 
^ Deu.26. c. Esa. 63. c. 

. A Dan. 9. c. 
3 Psal. 113, c. 

€ 2 Par. 6. e. k Tere. 27. a. b.

Fo. Deretr. 

D 

fo. Dee. 

iR 

Ffor I wil scatre thé abrode. 

Iuda, within lerusalem and without. I will also take from you the voyce off inyrth and | the voyce of ioye, the voyce of the bryde- grome and the voyce of the bryde, ad there, shal no man dwell more in the londe. But they wolde not herken vuto thy voyce, to do | the kynge of Babilon seruyce: and therfore hast thou perfourmed the wordes, that thou spakest by thy seruauntes the prophetes: namely, that the bones of oure kvuges and the bones of oure fathers shulde be traslated out of their place.

And lo, now are they layde out in the heate of $ Sonne, q in the colde of y night, ad deed in greate mysery: with hunger, with swearde, with pestilence q are clene cast forth. As for the téple wherin thy name was called vpon thou hast layde it waist, as it 1s to se this daye: q y for the wickednes of the house of Israel q the house of luda. O LORDE oure God, thou hast intreated vs after all thy goodnes q acordinge to all y greate louinge mercy of thyne, like as thou spakest by thy seruaunte Moses, in the daye when thou
;didest coómaüde him, to wryte thy lawe before the children of Israel, sayenge: Yf ye will not herké vnto my voyce, “thé shal this greate multitude be turned 1n to a very smal people,
Not withstodinge l am sure, that this folke will not heare me: for it is an hardnecked people. But in y lode of their captiuyte, they shall remembre them selues, q lerne to knowe, y 1 am the LORDE their God: when 1 geue thé an herte to vnderstode, t eares to heare. Then shal they prayse me in the lode of their captiuyte, q thynke vpon my name. ‘Then shall they turne them fro their harde backes, q from
[their vngodlynes: Then shal they remembre the thynges, y happened vnto their forefathers, which synned agaynst me. So will 1 bringe them agayne in to the londe, which | pro- mised with an ooth vnto their fathers: Abraha,
Isaac q lacob: q they shal be lordes of it, yee 
I wil increace thé, and not minysh the. And 
I wil make another couenaüt with them :’ soch one as shal endure for euer: namely, y
I will be their God, and they shalbe my peo- ple: and I wil nomore dryue my people the children off Israel, out of the londe y I haue

geue the. 

a Deu. 4. d. 28. d. 

> Heb.8.c. Zach.8. b. Apoc. 21. b. 
* Ephe. 2. a. 

d Dani. 3. c. Iere. 2. c. 3. e. 5. e. 

The prophet Baruch. 

Chap. (ij, 

The iij. Chapter. 
ND now o LORDE allmightie, thou|@ 
God of Israel: oure soule y is in trouble, q oure sprete y is vexed, crieth vnto the: heare vs (o LORDE) q haue pite vpon vs, for thou art a mercifull God: be gracious vnto vs, for we haue syuned before y. Thou endurest for euer, shulde we the vtterly perishe? O LORDE almightie, thou God of Israel: Heare now y prayer of y “deed
Israelites q of their childré, which haue synned before ¥, 4a not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE their God, for the which cause these plages hange now vpo vs.
O LORDE, remébre not y wickednes of oure forefathers, but thinke vpo thy power q name now at this tyme: for thou art y LORDE oure God, a Y (o LORDE) wil we prayse.
For thou hast put thy feare 1 oure hartes, to y intct y we shulde call vpon thy name, q prayse Y in oure captiuyte: ‘and y we might turne from the wickednesse of oure forefathers, y synned before the.

Beholde, we are yet this daye in oure cap- tiuyte, where as thou hast scatred vs, to be an labhominacion, curse, and synne: like as it hath
|happened vnto oure fathers also,’ because o jall their wickednesse and departynge from the.

O Israel, heare the commaundementes of life: pondre them well with thine eares, that thou mayest lerne wysdome. But how happeneth it Israel, that thou art in thyne enemies lóde? thou art waxen olde in a strange countre, and defyled with the deed. Why art thou become like them, that go downe to their graues? ^ Eue because thou hast forsaken the well of wysdome. For yf thou haddest walked in the waye of God, truly thou shuldest haue remayned still safe 1 thine owne londe.

^O lerne then where discrecion is, where vertu is, where vnderstodinge is: that thou mayest knowe also fro whence cometh longe life, ‘a necessary lyuynge, the light of the eyes q quyetnes. Who euer foüde out hir place ? or who came euer in to hir treasures?

Where are y prynces of the Heithen be- come, and soch as ruled the beestes vpon the earth? They that had their pastyme with the foules of the ayre, they that hoorded vp syluer and golde (wherin men trust so moch) and made no ende of their gatheringe? What

f Psal.78.a. -£ lere.2. b. 
3 Psal. 18. b. 118. r. 

e Nu.14. 8. Psal. 77. a. 
^ Pro. 1. 8. 3. a. 

Chap. iiij. 

35 

is worth of them, that coyned siluer, and were so carefull, and coude not bringe their workes to passe? They be roted ont, and gone downe to hell, and other men are come vp in their steade: Yonge men haue sene light, and dwelt vpon earth: but the waye of reformacion haue they not knowne, ner vnder- stonde the pathes therof: nether haue their children receaued it, yee right farre is it fro the. It hath not bene herde of in the lode of
Canaan, nether hath it bene sene at Theman. 

The Agarenes sought after wisdome, but that which is earthly, like as the marchauntes of the lode do. They of Theman are con- nynge also, q they laboure for wisdome q vnderstondinge : but y waye of true wisdome they knowe not, nether do they thynke vpon the pathes therof. O Israel, how greate is the house of God? and how large is the place of his possession? “Greate is he, and hath none ende: hye and vnmeasurable. What is become of those famouse giauntes, that were so greate of bodyes, and so worthy men of warre? Those had not the LORDE chosen, nether haue they founde the waye of reforma- cion, therfore were they destroyed: and for so moch as they had no wisdome, they perished because of their foolishnesse.

Who hath gone vp in to heauen, to take wisdome there, ¢ brought her downe fro the cloudes? Who hath gone ouer the see to fynde her, q hath chosen her aboue golde, and so brought her hither? No man knoweth the wayes of wisdome, nether is there eny y can seke out hir pathes. But he that woteth all thynges, knoweth her, q he hath founde her out with his fore knowlege. "This same is he which prepared the earth at the begynnynge, q fylled it with all maner of foules q beestes.
When he sendeth out the light, it goeth: q whe he calleth it agayne, it obeyeth hi with feare. The starres kepe their watch, q geue theirlight, yee and y gladly. When he calleth them, they saye: here we be. And so with chearfulnes they shewe light vnto him y made the. This is oure God, ad there shall none other be copared vnto him: It is he, y hath founde out all wisdome, ° and hath geuen her| yuto Iacob his seruaunt, q to Israel his beloued.
? Afterwarde dyd he shewe himself vpon earth, and dwelt amonge men.

a Deu. 4. f. Iere. 23. d, Psal. 144. a. 
Esa. 38. b. Eccli. 46. a. 

> Gen. 1. Iosu. 1. c. e Psal, 147. a. Deu. 4. a.

Cbr prophet Baruch. 

Fo. deei. 

The iiij. Chapter. 

HIS is the boke off the commaundemétes 

of God, and the lawe y endureth for euer. All they y kepe it, shall come to life : but soch as forsake it, shall come to death.
Turne the o Iacob, and take holde of it: walke by this waye, thorow his brightnesse and shyne. Geue not thyne honoure to another, and thy worshipe to a straunge people. “O
Israel, how happie are we, seige that God hath shewed vs soeh thynges as are pleasaut vnto him? Be of good cheare, thou people of
God, o thou awnciét Israel. Now are ye solde amonge the Heithen, howbeit not for youre vtter destruccion: but because ye prouoked
God the LORDE to wrath and displeasure, therfore were ye delyuered vnto youre enemies:
For ye displeased the euerlastinge God that made you, offerynge vnto deuels and not God.
Ye haue forgotte him that bronght you vp, ad youre nurse haue ye greued, o Ierusalem.

When she sawe that the wrath off God was commynge vpon you: she sayde: Herké o ye that dwell aboute Sion, for God hath brought me in to greate heuynesse: ad why? I se the captyuyte of my people, of my sonnes and doughters, which the euerlastynge God will brynge vpon them. With ioye dyd I norish them, but now must I leaue them with wepynge and sorow.

Let no man reioyce ouer me wyddowe àd forsaken: which for the synnes off my children, | am desolate of euery man. For why, they departed from the lawe of God: they wolde not knowe his rightuousnes, ner walke in the waye off his comaundementes : and as for the pathes off the treuth and godlynesse, they had no lust to go in them.

O ye dwellers aboute Sion: come, and let] ¢ vs call to remembraunce the captiuyte, that the enerlastinge God hath brought vpon my sonnes and my doughters. He hath brought a people vpon them from farre,/ an vneur- teous people, and of a straunge laguage: which nether regarde the olde, ner pyte the yonge.

These haue earied awaye the deare beloued of my wyddowes, leauynge me alone, both desolate and childlesse. But alas, what can I

n3 

helpe you? Now he y hath brought these 
4 oh. 1.a. 1 Ioh. 1. a. — * Psal. 93. b. J Deu. 98. e., 

Jeru. 5. e. | 

! fo. derij. 

B 

plages vpon you, delyuer you also fro the hondes of youre enemies.

Go youre waye (O my children) go youre waye : for I am desolate and forsaken. I haue put of the clothinge of peace, and put vpon me the sackcloth off prayer, and for my tyme
I will call vpon the most hyest. Be off good cheare, o my children : “erie vnto the LORDE, and he shal delyuer you from the power of the prynces, youre enemies.

For verely, I haue euer a good hope off youre prosperous health: yeea very gladnesse is come vpon me from the holy one, because ofthe mercy that yeshall haue offoure euerlastinge Sauioure.

With mournynge and wepinge dyd I let you go fro me, but with ioye and perpetuall gladnesse, shall the LORDE brynge you agayne vnto me. Like as the neghbours of
Sion sawe youre captyuite from God, Eue so shal they also se shortly youre health in God, which shal come on you with greate honoure and euerlastinge worshipe.

O my children, suffre paciétly the wrath that shal come vpon you, For the enemie hath persecuted the, but shortly thou shalt se his destruccion, and shalt treade vpon his necke. My derlinges haue gone rough harde wayes, for they are led awaye as a flocke that is scatred abrode with the enemies. But be of good coforte (o my children) q crie vnto the LORDE: For he that led you awaye,

3:| hath you yet in remembraüce : and like as ye 

haue bene mynded to swarue from youre 
God, so shal ye now endeuoure youre selues x. tymes more, to ^turne agayne, and to seke him. For he that hath brought these plages vpo you, shal brynge you euerlastinge ioye agayne with youre health. Take a good herte vnto the, o Ierusale: for he which gaue y that name, exorteth the so to do.

“The wicked doers that now put the to trouble, shall perish: and soch as haue re- ioysed at thy fall, shalbe punyshed. The cities whom thy children serue, and that haue caried awaye thy sonnes, shal be correcte. For like as they be now glad of thy decaye, so shal they mourne in their owne destruccion. The ioye off thcir multitude shalbe taken awaye ad their cheare shalbe turned to sorowe. For a fyre shal fall vpon them from the euerlast- inge God, longe to endure: and it shalbe inhabited of deuels for a greate season.

| * Deu. 4. e, 30. a. Psal. 129. a, 

è Esa. 55. b. 

The prophet Baruch. 

Chap. b. 
The b. Chapter. 

IERUSALEM, loke aboute the to-|@ 

warde the east, and beholde the ioye, that commeth vnto the from God.' For lo, thy sonnes, (whom thou hast forsake, and that were scatred abrode) come gathered together from the east and west, reioysinge in the worde of the holy one, vnto the honoure off God.

Put of thy mournynge clothes (o leru- salem) and thy sorow, and decke the with the worshipe and honoure, that commeth vnto the from God, with euerlastinge glory. God shal put the cloake off rightuousnesse vpon the, and set a crowne off euerlastinge worshipe vpon thine heade: for vpon the will God de- clare his brightnes, that 1s vnder the heauen :
Yee an euerlastinge name shalbe geuen the of God, with peace of rightuousnesse, q y honoure of Gods feare.

Arise o Ierusalem, stode vp on hye: loke aboute the towarde the east, and beholde thy children gathered from the east vnto the west: which reioyce in the holy worde, hauynge
God in remembraunce. They departed from the on fote, and were led awaye of their ene- mies: but now shal the LORDE bringe them caried with honoure, as children off y kyng- dome. For God is purposed to brynge downe all stoute moütaynes, yee and all hye rockes, to fyll the valleys, q so to make them eauen with the grounde : y Israel maye be diliget to lyue vnto honoure of God. The woddes q all pleasaüt trees shal ouershadowe Israel, at the comaundement of God. For hyther shal
God brynge Israel with ioyfull myrth, and in the light of his magesty : with the mercy and rightuousnesse, that cometh of himselff.

A copie off the epistle, that Ieremy the prophet did sende vnto the Iewes, which were led awaye presoners by the kynge of Babilo. Wherin he certifieth them of the thinge, that was co- niaunded him of God

The bi. Chapter. 
ECAUSE of the synnes that ye haue done agaynst God, “ye shal be led awaye captyue vnto Babilon, euen off Nabuchodo- nosor the kynge of Babilon. So when ye be come in to Babilon, ye shall remayne there many yeares, and for a longe season: namely, vij. generacions : q after that wil I bringe you awaye peaceably from théce. Now shal ye se

© Tere. 50. a. b. c. 4 Ter. 25. a. b. 

[Chap. bí. 

in Babilo, goddes of golde, of syluer, of wodd and of stone: borne vpon mens shulders, to cast out a fearfulnes before the Heithen. But loke that ye do not asthe other: be not ye afrayed, and Jet not the feare of them ouercome you.

Therfore, when ye se the multitude of peo- ple worshippinge them behinde q before, saye ye in youre hertes: O LORDE, it is thou, that oughtest only to be worshipped ? “Myne angel also shal be with you, and I myself wil care for youre soules. As for the tymbre of those goddes, y carpéter hath polisshed them: yee gylted be they, a layed ouer with syluer, yet are they but vayne thinges, q can not speake. Like asa wench y loueth peramonrs is trymly deckte, euen so are these made q hanged with golde. Crowues of golde verely haue their goddes vpon their heades: so the prestes them selues take the golde and syluer from them, q put it to their owne vses: yee they geue of the same vnto harlottes, ad trymme their whores withall: Agayne, they take it from the whores, and decke their goddes therwith. Yet can not these goddes delyuer them selues from rust and mothes. 4 Whé they haue couered them with clothynge off purple, they wype their faces for the dust of the temple, wherof their is moch amoge thé.
One hath a sceptre in his honde, as though he were iudge of the countre: yet can he not slaye soch as offende him. Another hath a swearde or an axe in his honde, for all that, is he nether able to defende him selfe from batayll, ner fro murtherers.

By this ye maye vnderstonde, that they be no goddes: therfore se y ye nether worshipe them, ner feare them. — For like as a vessel y a man vseth, is nothinge worth when it 1s broken, euen so is it with their goddes. When they be set vp in the temple, their eyes be full of dust, thorow the fete of those that come in. And like as E dores are shut in roüde aboute vpo him, y hath offended the kinge :
Or asit were a deed body kepte besyde the graue: Euen so the prestes kepte the dores with barres and lockes, lest their goddes be spoyled with robbers. ‘They set vp cadels be- fore thé (yee verely and y many) wherof they can not se one, but euen as blockes, so stonde they in the temple. It is sayde, y the serpentes and wormes, which come off the earthe gnawe out their hertes, eatinge them q their clothes

“ Deu. 6. c. 

The prophet Baruch. 

So. Dect. also, and yet they fele it not. Their faces are blacke, thorow the smoke y is in the temple.
The oules, swalowes q byrdes fle vpon them, yee and the cattes runne ouer their heades.

By this ye maye be sure, that they are not zy goddes, therfore feare them not. ‘The golde. that they haue, is to make them beutifull: for, all that, excepte some body dight off their, rust, they wil geue no shyne: and when they were cast in to a fourme, they felt it not.
They are bought for money, and haue no breth off life within them. They must be borne vpon mens shulders, as those that haue no fete: wherby they declare vnto men, that they be nothynge worth. Confounded be they then, that worshipe them. For yf they fall to the grounde, they can not ryse vp agayne of thé selues: Yee though one helpe them vp and set them right, yet are they not able to stonde alone: but must haue proppes set vnder them, like deed men. As for the thinge that is offred vnto them, their prestes sell it, ad abuse it: yee the prestes wyues take therof, but vnto the sicke and poore they geue no- thinge of it, the women with childe q the mestruous laye hondes of their offerynges. By this ye maye be sure, that they are not goddes, therfore be not ye afrayde of them. From whence cometh it thé, that they be called goddes? ‘The women syt before the goddes of syluer, golde and wodde, and the prestes syt in their temples, hauynge opeu clothes, whose heades and beerdes are shauen, and haue nothige vpon their heades: roaringe and eryenge vpon their goddes, as men do at the feast, when one is deed.

The prestes also take awaye the garmentes | 3: of the ymages, and decke their wyues q child- ren withall Whether it be good or euell y eny man do vnto them, they are not able to recompence it: they can nether set vp a kynge, ner put him downe. In like maner they maye nether geue riches, ner rewarde euel. ‘Though a mau make a vowe vnto them ad kepe it not, they wil not requyre it.*
‘They can not restore a blynde mā to his sight, ner helpe eny ma at his nede. They ca shewe no mercy to the wyddowe, ner do good to y fatherles. ‘Their goddes of wodd, stone, golde q syluer, are but euen as other stones, y be hewé of ý mountayne. They y worshipe the, shal be cofounded. How shulde they |

+ Jere. 10. a. © Eccls. 5. a. 

| 

d 

6 

Fo. Derity. 

then be taken for goddes? yee how darre men call thé goddes? And though the caldees worshiped thé not, hearinge y they were but domme q coude not speake: Yet they them selues offre vnto Bel, and wolde fayne haue him to speake: as who saye, they coude fele, y maye not mouc. But when these më come to vnderstodinge, they shall forsake them, for their goddes haue no felinge. A greate sorte off women gyrded with coardes, syt in the stretes, qų burne olyue beries. Now yf one off them be conveyed awaye, « lye with eny soch as come by: she casteth hir neghbnresse in the teth, because she was not so worthely re- puted, ner hir coorde broken. What so euer is done for them, it is but in vayne äd lost:
How maye it thē be thonght or sayde, ý they are goddes? Carpenters q goldsmythes make thé, nether be they eny other thinge, but enen what the worke men wil make of them. Yee the goldsmithes them selues that make the, are of no longe cótynuaunce: How shulde then the thiges that are made of them, be goddes? Vayne therfore are the thinges (yee very shame is it) that they leaue behinde the for their posterite. For as soone as there cometh eny warre or plage vpon the, then the prestes ymagyn, where they maye hyde the selues with thé. How can men thynke then, that they be goddes, which nether maye de- fende them selues from warre, ner delyuer thé fro mysfortune? For seynge they be but of wodd, of stone, of syluer and of golde: all people x kynges shal kuowe herafter, that they be but vayne thinges: yee it shalbe openly declared, that they be no goddes: but euen the very workes off més hodes, ¢ that God hath nothinge to do with the. They can set no kynge in the londe ner geue rayne vnto men. ‘They can gene no sentence of a matter, nether defende the londe frö wronge: For they are not able to do so moch as a crowe, that flyeth betwixte heuen and earth.

Whé there happeneth a fyre in to the house of those goddes of wodde, of syluer and of golde, the prestes wil escape q sane the selues, but the goddes burne as the balkes therin.
They can not withstode eny kynge or batell: how maye it then be thought or graunted, that they be goddes? Moroner, these goddes

Che prophet Baruch. 

Che ende of the prophet Baruch which is not in the Canon of the Hebrue. 

of wodde, of stone, of golde q syluer maye nether defende thé selues from theues ner robbers: yee y very wicked are stronger thé they. These strype them out off their ap- parell, that they be clothed withall, these take their golde q syluer fro thé, and so get thé awaye: yet ca they not helpe thé selues.
Therfore it is moch better for a man, to be a kinge q so to shewe his power: or els a pro- fitable vessel in a house, wherin he y oweth it, might haue pleasure: yee or to be a dore in a house, to kepe soch thinges safe as be therin: the to be soch a vayne god. The Sone, the
Mone « all the starres when they geue their shyne q light, are obedient, q do men good:
When the lightenynge glistreth, all is cleare: 
The wynde bloweth in euery countre, q whé 
God comaundeth the cloudes to go rounde aboute the whole worlde, they do as they are bydden: when the fyre is sent downe fro aboue q comaunded, it burneth vp hilles ad woddes: But as for those goddes, they are not like one off these thynges, nether in beuty ner strégth. Wherfore mē shulde not thynke, ner saye that they be goddes, seynge they ca nether gene sentence in iudgment, ner do men good. For so moch now as ye are sure, that they be no goddes, then feare them not: For they can nether speake euell ner good of kynges. They ca shewe no tokens in heaué for y Heithen, nether shyne as the Sõne, ner gene light as the Mone: yee y vnreasonable beastes are better then they: for they can get the vnder the rofe, and do them selues good :
So can ye be certified by no maner off meanes, that they be goddes: therfore feare thé not.
For like as a frayboggarde in a garden off 
Cucumbers kepeth nothinge, euen so are their goddes of wod, of syluer q golde: and like as
& whyte thorne in an orcharde, that euery byrde sytteth vpon: yee like as a deed body that is cast in the darcke, Enen so is it with those goddes of wodde, syluer and golde. By the purple and scarlet which they hane vpon the, ad soone faydeth awaye, ye maye vnder- stonde, that they be no goddes: yee they them selues shal be cosumed at the last, which shal be a greate cofucion of the londe. Blessed is the godly man, y hath no ymages q worship- peth noue, for he shalbe farre from reprofe.

Chap. bí. 

® 

Che Prophet Esechiel. 

Ghat Eechiel contepnetb. 

Chap. I. Chap. XIII. 
The vision of the iiij. beestes and wheles. A sermon agaynst false prophetes 
Chap. II. Chap. XIIII. 

Punyshment for wylfulnesse and presumpcio of 

The sendinge out of the prophet. syune. God letteth soch people be disceaned. 

Chap. III. 

The office of a prophet. ajeg AV. 
Agaynst Ierusalem that vnfrutfull vyne. 
Chap. IIL. 
A prophecy of the sege of Ierusalem. Chap. XAI: 
A maruelous goodly descripcion of the Idolatry 
Chap. V. of Ierusalem, for the which he calleth them 
With what plages God punished Ierusalem. nores. 
Chap. XVII. 
Chay. VI. A prophecy of the destruccion off Ierusalem. A 
Punishment for Idolatry. promyse of Christ. 

Chap. VII. i Chap. XVIII. 
The longe captiuyte of the people and causes | Euery man shall beare his owne synne, and not therof. anothers.
Chap. VII. Chap. XIX. 
Ezechiel seyth greate abhominacion thorow the | The captiuyte off the kynges of Iuda. The hole in the wall. crueltie of kinges and princes.
Chap. IX. Chap. XX. 
The slaughter of the people. Soch as haue the The greate vnthaufulnesse off the people. Agayne, signe of T1 Thau, are saued. the merciful longe sufferaunce of God.
Chap. X. Chap. XXI. 

The visio of the iiii. beestes agayne. The swearde, prophecyed to come vpon Israel and the Ammonites, by the kynge of Babilon.

Chap. XI 

The vision of the xxv. men. Chap. XXII. 

The synnes, wherfore lerusale was punished: 
Chap. XII. both the prophetes, prestes, rulers and comon 

A prophecy of the captiuyte of Iuda. people. i 

a ee EE 

92 

ffo. Deebt. 

Chap. XXIII. 

The Idolatry or whordome of Samaria and le- rusalem.

Chap. XXIII. 

The destruccion off Ierusalem and captiuyte of the people signified by the pot.

Chap. XXV. 
Agaynst Ammon, Moab, Seir,and the Palestynes. 

Chap. XXVI. 
He mourneth vpon the cite off Tyre (otherwyse 

called Zor) for the destruccion that was to come vpon her.

Chap. XXVII. XXVIII. 
Agaynst the prince of Tyre, and agaynst Sidon. 

Chap. XXIX. XXX. XXXI. XXXII. 
Plages vpon Egipte and the kynges therof. 

Chap. XXXIII. 
The office off a preacher. The worde of God must be folowed in very dede, and not only in mouth.

The first Chapter. 

T chaüsed, in the xxx. yeare the fifth daye off the fourth Moneth, that I was amonge the presoners by the ryuer off Cobar: where the heauens opened, q I sawe a vision of God.
Now the fifth daye off the Moneth made out the fyfth yeare off kynge loachims captiuyte.
At the same tyme came ý worde off the 
LORDE vnto Ezechiel the sonne off Buzi prest, in the londe off the Caldees by the water of Cobar, where the honde off the LORDE came vpó him. “And I loked: q beholde, a stormy wynde came out off the north with a greate cloude full of fyre, which with his glistre lightened all rounde aboute.

And iu $ myddest off the fyre it was all cleare, and as it were the licknesse of foure beastes, which were fashioned like a man: sauynge, that euery one had foure faces and foure wynges.

Their legges were straight, but their fete were like bullockes fete, and they glistred, as

a Eze. 10. c. 

The prophet Esechtel. 

Chap. i 

Chap. XXXIII. 

Agaynst euell shepherdes, Christ the only true shepherde is promised.

Chap. XXXV. 

Agaynst the mount Seir, that is, agaynst the 
Edomites, 

Chap. XXXVI. 
A promyse of the delyueraunce of Israel. 

Chap. XXXVII. 

A consolacion for the Israelites, and a figure of the generall resurreccio, signified by the drye bones.

Chap. XXXVIII. XXXIX. 
Of Gog and Magog, with their destruccion. 

Chap. XL. 1 

From this chapter vnto the ende, the prophet seith in a vision the buyldinge agayne of le- rusale, ad the temple : Wherby is descrybed the mystery off the church off christ, and sal- uacion of the faithfull in him.

it had bene fayre scoured metall. Vnder their wynges vpon all the foure corners, they had mens hondes. Their faces and their wynges were towarde the foure corners: yet were the wynges so, that one euer touched another.
‘When they wente, they turned them not aboute: but ech one wente straight forwarde.
Vpon the right side off these foure, their faces were like the face off a man aud the face off a Lyon: But vpon the left side, they had the face off an oxe and the face off an Aegle.
Their faces also and their wynges were spred out aboue: so that two wynges off one touched euer two wynges off another, and with the other two they couered their bodie.
Euery one when it wente, it wente straight forwarde.
Where as the sprete led them, thither they wente, ‘and turned not aboute in their goynge.
The fashion and countenaüce of the beestes was like hote coales off fyre, euen as though burnynge cresshettes had bene amonge the beestes: and the fyre gaue a glistre, and out

* Eze. 10. b. * Eze. 10. c. 

Chap. tij. off the fyre there wente lighteninge. Whé y beestes wete forwarde q backwarde, one wolde haue thought it had lightened. Now whe I had well considered the beestes, I sawe a worke off wheles vpon the earth with foure faces also like the beestes.

D! The fashion q worke of the wheles was like 

the see. The foure wheles were ioyned and made (to loke vpon) as it had bene one whele in another. When one wente forwarde, they wente all foure, and turned thé not aboute 1 their goinge. ‘They were large, greate and horrible to loke vpon.

Their bodies were full off eyes rounde aboute them all foure. Whé the beestes wcte, the wheles wente also with them: And when the beestes lift them selues vp from y earth, the wheles were lift vp also. Whyther so euer the sprete wente, thither wente they also, a ý wheles were lift vp q folowed the, for y sprete of life was in the wheles. When y beestes wéte forth, stode still, or lift them selues vp from the earth: then the wheles also wente, stode still, « were lift vp, for y breth off life was in the wheles.

Æ| Aboue ouer ¥ heades of the beestes there 

was a firmament, which was fashioned as it had bene off the most pure Christall, q that was spred out aboue vpon their heades: vnder the same firmament were their wynges layed abrode, one towarde another, and two wynges couered the body of euery beest. And when they wente forth, I herde the noyse off their wynges, like the noyse of greate waters, as it had bene the voyce off the greate God, and a russhinge together as it were off an hoost off men. And when they stode still they let downe their winges. Now when they stode still, and had letten downe their wynges, it thondred in the firmament, that was aboue their heades.

Aboue the firmament that was ouer their heades, there was the fashion off a seate, as it had bene made off Saphir. Apon the seate there sat one like ama. I behelde him, and he was like a cleare light, as it had bene all of fyre with in from his loynes vpwarde.

And beneth when I loked vpon him vnder y loynes, me thought he was like a shyninge fyre, that geueth light on euery syde. Yee the shyne and glistre y lightened rounde aboute, was like a raynbowe, which in a raynie daye apeareth in the cloudes. Eué so

a Eze.3.d. * Exo.32.a. -*Iere.1.c. ^ Apo.5.a. 

The prophet Esechiel. 

was the similitude, wherin the glory off the 
LORDE apeared. Whé I sawe it, I fell vpon my face, and herkened vnto the voyce off him, that spake.

The ij. Chapter. 

HEN sayde he vnto me: Stonde vp 

vpon thy fete (O thou sonne of ma) and I will talke with the. “And as he was commonynge with me, the sprete came in to me, and set me vp vpon my fete: so that I marcked the thinge, that he sayde vnto me.
And he sayde: Beholde, thou sonne off man: 
I will sende the to the children off Israel, to those runnagates and obstinate people: for they haue také parte agaynst me, and are runne awaye fro me: both they, ^and their forefathers, ynto this daye.

Yee I will sende ¥ vnto a people ¥ haue rough vysages and stiff stomackes: vnto whom thou shalt saye on this maner: This the
LORDE God himselff hath spoken, y whether they be obedient or no (for it is a frauwarde housholde) they maye knowe yet that there hath bene a prophet amonge them.

.Therfore (thou sonne off man) feare thé not, nether be afrayed off their wordes: ° for they shall rebell agaynst the, and despise y.
Yee thou shalt dwell amonge scorpions: but feare not their wordes, be not abashed at their lokes, for it is a frauwerde housholde.

Se that thou speake my wordes vnto them, whether they be obediét or not, for they are obstinate. Therfore (thou sonne of man) obeye thou all thinges, that I saye vnto y, and be not thou stiffüecked, like as they are a stiffnecked housholde. Open thy mouth, and eate that I geue the.

So as I was lokynge vp, beholde, there was sent vnto me an hande, wherin was a closed boke:^ and the hande opened it before me, and it was written within and without, full off carefull mourninges: alas, and wo.

The iij. Chapter. 

HEN sayde he vnto me: thou sonne of 

ma, eate that, what so euer it be: Yee 

eate that closed boke, ‘and go thy waye, and speake vnto the children off Israel. So I opened my mouth, and he gaue me the boke for to eate, and sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thy bely shal eate, and thy bowels

e Iere. 15. c. 4 Es. 14. e. Apo. 10. b. 

Fo. urrbij. 

a 

35 

Fo. Deevitj. 

shalbe fylled with ¥ boke, that I geue the. 
“Then dyd I eate ls boke, and it was in my mouth sweter then hony.

And he sayde vnto me: thou sonne of ma, get the soone vnto the house off Israel, ad
^shewe thé ¥ wordes, that I cómaunde the: for I sende the not to a people that hath a strage, vnknowne or harde speache, but vnto the house off Israel: Not to many nacions, which haue diuerse speaches and harde languages, whose wordes thou vnderstodest not: Neuertheles, “yf I sent the to those people, they wolde folowe the: But the house off Israel wil not folowe ý, for they wil not folowe me: ^ Yee all the house off Israel haue stiff foreheades and harde hertes. Beholde therfore, I will make thy face preuayle agaynst their faeces, and harden thy foreheade agaynst their foreheades: so that thy foreheade shall be harder then an Adamat or flynt stone: that thou mayest feare them y lesse, and be lesse afrayed off them, for they are a frauwerde housholde. |
B| He sayde morouer vnto me: thou sonne off. 

man, take diligent hede with thine eares, to ¥ wordes that I speake vnto the, fasten them in thine herte: and go to the presoners off thy people, speake vnto them, ad saye on this maner :

Thus the LORDE God hath spoké: 
Whether ye heare, or heare not. With that, the sprete toke me vp. And I herde the noyse of a greate russhinge and remouynge off the most blissed glory off the LORDE out off his place.

I herde also the noyse off the wynges off the beestes, that russhed one agaynst another, | yee and the ratlynge off the wheles, that were by | them, which russhinge q noyse was very greate.

‘Now when the sprete toke me vp, and, caried me awaye, I wente with an heuy and a soroufull mynde, but the honde off ý LORDE comforted me right soone.

And so in the begynnynge off the Moneth 
Abib, I came to the presoners, that dwelt by the water off Cobar, *and remayned in that place, where they were: and so continued I amonge them seuen dayes, beinge very sory.

€| And when the seuen dayes were expyred, the LORDE sayde vnto me: Thou sonne off man, ^I haue made the a watch man vnto the

* Psal, 18. b. Psal. 118. n. Apo. 10. b, ^ Tere. 1. e. 

* Tone 3. a. 4 Mich. 3. b. 

Che prophet Esechiel. 

f Eze. 8. a. 11. d. 
* Esa. 50. b. i 

Chap. iij. house of Israel: therfore take good hede to the wordes, and geue them warnynge at my commaundement.

Yff I saye vnto the, concernynge the vn- godly ma, that (without doute) he must dye, and thou genest him not warnynge, ner speak- est vnto him, that he maye turne from his euell waye, and so to lyue: Then shall the same vngodly man dye in his owne vnright- uosnes: but his bloude will I requyre off thyne honde. Neuertheles, yff thon geue warnynge vnto the wicked, and he yet forsake not his vngodlynesse : then shall he dye in his owne wickednesse, but thou hast discharged thy soule.

Now vf a rightuous ma go fró his rightuous- nesse,' and do the thinge that is euell: I will laye a stomblinge blocke before him, and he shall dye, because thou hast not geuen him warninge: Yee dye shall he in his owne synne, so that the vertue, which he did before, shall not be thought vpon: but his bloude will I requyre of thine honde.

Neuertheles, yf thou exhortest the right- uous, that he synne not, and so y rightuous do not synne: Then shall he lyue, because he hath receaned thy warnynge, and thou hast discharged thy soule. And there came the hode off the LORDE vpon me, and he sayde vnto me: Stonde vp, and go in to the felde, y I maye there talke with the.

So when I had rysen vp, and gone forth in to the felde: Beholde, the glory off the
LORDE stode there, like as I sawe it afore, by the water off Cobar.

‘Then fell I downe vpon my face, and y sprete came in to me, which set me vp vpon my fete, and sayde thus vnto me: Go thy waye, and sparre thy selff in thyne honse.
Beholde (O thou sonne off man) there shall chaynes be brought for the, to bynde the withall, so that thou shalt not escape out off thé. And I will make thy tunge cleue to the rofe off thy mouth, that thou shalt be domme, and not be as a chider with them: for it is an obstinate housholde.

But when I speake vnto the, then open thy mouth, aud saye: Thus saieth the LORDE
God : who so heareth, let him heare: who so will not, let him leaue: for it is a fran warde housholde.

^ Eze, 33. b. 
! Eze. 1. g. 

5 Psal. 136. a. k Eze. 1. a. Eze. 2. a.

' Eze, 18. a. 

Chap. b. 

The iiij. Chapter. 

a HOU sonne off man: take a tyle stone, 

and laye it before the, and descrybe | vpon it the cite off Ierusalem: how it is be- seged, how bulworkes and stroge diches are grauen on euery syde off it: descrybe also tentes, and an hoost off men rounde aboute it.

Morouer, take an yron panne, and set it betwixte the q y cite in steade off an yron wall, Then set thy face towarde it, besege it, and laye ordinaunce agaynst it, to wynne it.
This shal be a token vnto the house off Israel. 
But thou shalt slepe vpon thy left syde, and laye the synne of the house off Israel vpon the.

Certayne dayes apoynted, thou shalt slepe vpon that syde, and beare their synnes."
Neuertheles I will apoynte the a tyme (to put off their synnes) and the nombre off the daies:
Thre hundreth q xc. dayes must thou beare the wickednesse off the house of Israel. When thou hast fulfilled these dayes, lye downe agayne, and slepe vpon thy right syde sl. dayes, and beare the synnes off the house of Iuda.

A daye for a yeare, ^a daye (I saye) for a yeare, will I euer laye vpon the. ‘Therfore set now thy face agaynst that beseged leru- salem, and discouer thine arme, that thou mayest prophecie agaynst it.

Beholde, I will laye chaynes vpon the, that thou shalt not turne the from one syde to ano- ther, till thou hast ended the dayes of thy sege.

Wherfore, take vnto the wheate, barly beanes, growell sede, milium and fitches: and put these together in a vessell, and make the loaues of bred therof, acordinge to the nombre of the dayes that thou must lye vpon y syde: that thou mayest haue bred to eate, for thre! hundreth and XC. dayes.

And the meate that thou eatest, shall haue a certayne waight apoynted: Namely, twentie sycles euery daye. This apoynted meate shalt thou eate daylie, from the beginnynge to the ende.

The prophet Csechiel. 

Thou shalt dryncke also a certayne measure off water: Namely, the sixte parte of an Hin shalt thou drynke daylie from the begynnynge to the ende. Barly cakes shalt thou eate, yet shalt thou first strake the ouer with mas donge, they maye se it. And with that, sayde the

ORDE: ^Euen thus shal the children of 
Israel eate their defyled bred in the myddest 

* Dan. 9. d. ^ Nu. 14. e. * Osee 9, a. 4 Eze. 5. d. 

off the Gentiles, amonge whom I will scatre them.

Then sayde I: Oh LORDE God, Be- holde, my soule was yet neuer stayned: for fro my youth vp vnto this houre, I dyd neuer eate of a deed earcase, or of that which was slayne of wilde beestes, nether came there euer eny vnclene flesh in my mouth.

Where vnto he answered me, and sayde: 
Well than, I will graunte the to take cowes donge, for the donge off a man, and to strake the bred ouer with all, before the.

And he sayde vnto me: ^Beholde thou sonne off man, I will mynishe all the prouy- sion of bred in lerusalem, so that they shall weye their bred, and eate it with scarcenesse.
Dut as for water, they shall haue a very litle measure theroff, to drynke. And when they haue nomore bred ner water, one shal be destroyed with another, and famish awaye for their wickednesse.

The b. Chapter. 

AKE the then a sharpe knyfe (O thou sonne of man) namely, a rasoure. Take that, and shane the hayre off thy heade and beerd: Then take the scoales and the waight, and deuyde the hayre a sunder. And burne the thirde parte therof in the fyre in the myddest off the cite, and cut the other thirde parte in peces with a knyfe.' As for the thirde parte that remayneth, cast it in the wynde, and then shewe the bare knyfe.

Yet afterwarde take a litle off the same, a bynde it in thy cote lappe. Then take a curtesy of it, and cast it in the myddest of y fyre, and burne it in the fyre. Out of the same fyre shall there go a flame, vpon the whole house of Israel.

Morouer, thus sayde the LORDE God: 
This same is lerusalem. I set her in the middest of the Heithen and nacions, that are rounde aboute her, but she hath despised my iudgmetes more then y Gentiles the selues, and broken my comaundementes more then the nacions, that lye rounde abonte her: For they haue cast out myne ordinaunces, and not walked in my lawes. /Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as ye with youre wickednesse farre exceade the
Heithé, that dwell rounde aboute yon: (For ye haue not walked in my lawes, nether haue
Eze. 14. d. 4 Re. 25. a. 

* Jere. 2. d. £ Leui. 18. d. 

Fo. Veet. 

5 

fo. derr. 

ye kepte myne ordinañces) Therfore thus 

saieth y LORDE God: 

I will also come vpon the, for in the myddest of the will I syt in indgmét, in the sight of the Heithen, and will handle the of soch a fashion, as I neuer dyd before, and as I neuer wil do from that tyme forth, and that because of all thy abhominacions. “For in the the fathers shal be fayne to eate their owne sonnes, and the sonnes their owne fathers.
Soch a courte will I kepe in the, and the whole remmnaunt will I scatre in to all the wyndes.

Wherfore, as truly as I lyue (saieth the 
LORDE God) seynge thon hast defyled my 
Sanctuary, with all maner off abhominacions and with all thy shamefull offences: For this cause will I also destroye the. Myne eye shall not ouersee the, nether will I spare the.

¿One thirde parte within the, shall die of the pestilence and of honger: Another thirde parte shall be slayne downe rounde aboute the, with the swearde: 'The other thirde parte that remayneth, will 1 scatre abrode towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out the swearde after them. ‘Thus wil I perfourme my indig- nacion and set my wrath agaynst them, and ease my self. So that when I haue fulfilled myne anger agaynst them, they shall knowe, that I am the LORDE, which with a feruent gelousy haue spoken it.

Morouer I will make the waist and abhorred, before all the Heithen that dwell aboute the, and in the sight off all them, that go by the: so that when I punysh the in my wrath, in myne anger, and with the plage off my whote displeasure: thou shalt be a very abhominacion, shame, a gasinge and won- dringe stocke, amonge the Heithen that lye aboute the.

Euen I the LORDE haue spoken it, and it shall come to passe, when I shute amonge them the perlous dartes of hoger, which shalbe but death: *Yee therfore shall I shute them, because I will destroye you. I will encrease hunger, aud mynish all the prouysion off bred amonge you.

Plages and mysery will I sende you, yee 

and wilde beestes also to destroye you. Pesti- lence and bloudsheddinge shall come vpon you, and the swearde wil I bringe ouer you.
Euen I the LORDE, haue sayde it. 

^ Deu. 28. e. Tren. 4. b. 4 Reg. 6. f. ? Tere. 15. a. 

The prophet Csechrel. 

Chap. bt. 

The bi. Chapter. 
HE worde of the LORDE came vnto|4 me, sayenge: ‘Thou sonne off man,
^turne thy face to the mountaynes of Israel, that thou mayest prophecie vnto them, and saye: Heare the worde of the LORDE God, o ye mountaynes off Israel: Thus hath the
LORDE God spoken to the moütaynes, hilles, valleys and dales:

Beholde, I will brynge a swearde ouer you, and destroye youre hie places: I wil cast downe youre aulters, and breake downe youre temples. Youre slayne men will I laye before youre goddes, and the deed carcases off the children off Israel will 1 cast before their ymages, youre bones wil I strowe rounde aboute youre aulters, and dwellinge places.

The cities shalbe desolate, y hillchapels layed waist: youre aulters destroyed, q broken: youre goddes cast downe, and taken awaye, youre tépels layde eaué with the groude, youre owne workes clene roted out. Youre slayne men shall lie amonge you, that ye maye lerne to knowe, how y I am the LORDE. Those
ER you haue escaped the swearde, will 

leaue amonge the Gentiles, for 1 will scatre you amonge the nacions. “And they that escape from you, shall thinke vpon me amonge the heithen, where they shalbe in captiuyte.

As for that whorish and vnfaithfull herte of theirs, wherwith they runne awaye fro me, I will breake it: yee q put out those eyes off theirs, that committe fornicacion with their
Idols. 

Then shall they be ashamed, and displeased 

with their selues, for the wickednesses ad abhominacions, which they haue done: and shal lerne to knowe, how that it is not in vayne, that 1 the LORDE spake, to bringe soch mysery vpon them.
The LORDE sayde morouer vnto me:|€ 
Smyte thine hondes together, and stampe with thy fete, and saye: Wo worth all the abhominacions and wickednesses of the house of Israel, for because of thé, they shal perish with the swearde, with hoger and with pesti- lence. Who so is farre of, shall dye off the pestilence: he that is nye at hande, shall perish with the swearde: and y other that are beseged, shall dye of honger.

Thus wil I satisfie my wrothfull displeasure 
* Baru. 3. f. 

* Eze. 4. c. 4 Eze. 36. c, 

Chap. bij. 

The prophet Csechiel. 

Po. derri. 

Es] 

B 

vpon them. And so shall ye lerne to knowe, that I am the LORDE, whé youre slayne men lye amdge youre goddes, and aboute youre aulters: vpon all hie hilles and toppes off mountaynes, amoge all grene trees, amonge all thicke okes: euen in the places, where they dyd sacrifice to all their Idols. T will stretch myne honde out vpon them, « will make the londe waist: So that it shall lye desolate and voyde, from the wildernesse off
Deblat forth, thorow all their habitacions: to lerve them for to knowe, that I am the
LORDE. 
The bij. Chapter. 
HE worde off the LORDE came vnto me, on this maner: The I call, O thou

sonne off man. Thus saieth the LORDE 
God vnto the londe off Israel: The ende commeth, yee verely the ende commeth vpon all the foure corners off the earth.

But now shall the ende come vpon the: for 
I will sende my wrath vpo the, and wil punysh the: acordinge to thy wayes, and rewarde the after all thy abhominacios. ^ Myne eye shall not ouersee the, nether will I spare the: but rewarde the, acordinge to thy waies, and de- clare thy abhominacions. Then shall ye knowe, that I am the LORDE. i

Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, one mysery and plage shall come after another: the ende is here. The ende (I saye) that waiteth for the, is come already, y houre is come agaynst the, that dwellest in the londe.

The tyme is at honde, the daye of sedicio is hard by, q no glad üdinges vpo the moü- taynes. ‘Therfore, I will shortly poure out my sore displeasure ouer the, and fulfill my wrath vpon the. I will iudge the after thy waies, and recompence the all thy abhominacions.

? Myne eye shal not ouersee the, nether wil 
I spare the: but rewarde the after thy waies, and shewe thy abhominacions: to lerne you for to knowe, how y I am the LORDE, y smyteth. Beholde, the daye is here, the daye is come, the houre is runne out, the rodde florisheth, wylfulnesse waxeth grene, malicious violece is growne vp, and the vn- godly waxen to a staff. Yet shall there no complaynte be made for them, ner for the trouble that shall come of these thinges.

The tyme cometh, the daye draweth nye: e1 Cor. 7. d.

* Eze. 7. b. 9. c. ^ Eze. 7. b. 9. c. 

d 2 Tess. 5. a. Iere. 15. b. 

* Who so byeth, let him not reioyce: he that selleth, let him not be sory: for why, * Trouble shall come in the myddest off all rest: so that the seller shall not come agayne to the byer, for nether off them both shall lyue. For the vision shal come so greatly ouer all, y it shal not be hyndered: No mà also with his wicked- nesse shall be able to saue his owne life.

The trompettes shall ye blowe, and make you all ready, but no man shall go to the batell, for I am wroth with all the whole multitude.

The swearde shalbe without, pestilence and honger within: so that who so is in the felde, shalbe slayne with the swearde: “and he that is in the cite, shall perish with honger and pestilence.

And soch as escape and fle from amonge them, shal be vpon the hilles, like as the doues in the felde: euery one shalbe afrayed, because off his owne wickednesse.

J All hondes shalbe letten downe, and all knees shalbe weake as the water: they shall gyrde them selues with sack cloth, feare shal fall vpon them. Their faces shall be confoided, and their heades balde: their syluer shall lye in the stretes, and their golde shalbe despised: e Yee their syluer and golde maye not delyuer them, in the daye of the fearful! wrath of the
LORDE. 

They shall not satisfie their hongrie soules, nether fyll their emptie belies therwith: For it is become their owne decaye thorow their wickednesse: because they made therof, not only costly Ieweles for their pompe and pryde,
^but also abhominable ymages and Idols. 
For this cause will I make them to be ab- horred. Morouer, I will geue it in to y hondes off the straungers to be spoyled: and to y wicked, for to be robbed, and they shall de- stroye it.

My face wil I turne from the, my Treasury shall be defyled: for the theues shall go in to it, and suspende it. I wil make clene ryd- daunse, for the londe is whole defyled with vnrightuous judgment of innocent bloude, q the cite 1s full off abhominacions.

D 

Wherfore, I will bringe the most cruell| 3 

tyrauntes from amonge the Heithen, to take their houses in possession. I will make the pompe off the proude to ceasse, ād they shal

e Deu. 32.d. — / Esa. 15. e. € Soph. 1. c. Ecc. 5. b. 

^ Osee 8. a. 

So. Deep. 

Che prophet €serbiel. 

take in their Sanctuary. When this trouble cometh, they shal seke peace, but they shal haue none. One myschefe and sorowe shal folowe another, and one rumoure shal come after another: Then shall they seke visions in vayne at their prophetes. ^'Ihe lawe shal be
-|gone from the prestes, and wyszdome from the elders. The kynge shall mourne, the princes shalbe clothed with heuynesse, and y hódes off the people in the londe shall tremble for feare. I will do vnto them after their owne waies, q acordinge to their owne iudg- mentes will I iudge them: to lerne them for to knowe, that I am the LORDE.

The biij. Chapter. 
T happened, that in the sixte yeare, the fifth daye of the sixte Moneth I sat in my house, and the lordes off the councell off Iuda with me: and the honde off the LORDE
God fell euen there vpo me. 

And as I loked vp, I sawe as it were a licknesse off fyre from his loynes downwarde,
^and from his loynes vpwarde it shyned maruelous cleare.

'This symilitude stretched out an honde, and toke me by the hayrie lockes off my heade, and the sprete lift me vp betwixte heauen and earth: and God brought me in a vision to lerusalem, in to the conrte off the inwarde porte that lieth towarde the north: there stode an ymage, with whom he that hath all thinges in his power, was very wroth.

And beholde, the glory off the God off 
Israel was in the same place: ‘eué as I had senc it afore in the felde. And he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne off man, O lift vp thine eyes, and loke towarde the north. Then lift
I vp myne eyes towarde the north, and be- holde: Besyde the porte northwarde, there was an aulter made vnto the ymage off prouo- cacion in the very entrynge in.

And he sayde furthermore vnto me: Thou sonne off man, Seist thou what these do?
Seist thou the greate abhominacions that the honse off Israel commytte in this place? which onght not to be done in my sanctuary?

But turne the aboute, and thou shalt se yet greater abhominacions. And with that brought he me to the courte gate: and whé I loked, beholde, there was an hole in the wall.

? Tere. 38. c. t Eze. 3. b. 11. d. 

4 Exo. 18. d. Num. 11. d. 

* Eze. 1. a. 

Chap. biij, 
Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne off|23 man, dygge thorow the wall. And when I dygged thorow the wall, beholde, there was a dore. And he sayde vnto me: go thy waye in, q loke what wicked abhominacions they do there.

So I wente in, and sawe: and beholde, there were all maner ymages off wormes q beastes, all Idols and abhominacions of y house off Israel paynted euerychone rounde aboute the wall.

“There stode also before the ymages lxx. lordes of the councell off the house off Israel : and in the myddest off them stode laasanias the sonne off Saphan: And euery one off them had a censoure in his honde, q ont off the incense, there wente a smoke, as it had bene a cloude.

Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne off man, * hast thou sene what the Senatours off the house off Israel do secretly, euery one in his chambre? For they saye: Tush, the
LORDE seth vs not, the LORDE regardeth not the worlde. And he sayde vnto me:
Turne the yet agayne, and thou shalt se the greate abhominacions that they do.

And with that, he brought me to the dore off the porte off the LORDES house, towarde the north. And beholde, there sat women mournynge for Thamus. Then sayde he vnto me: hast thou sene this, thou sonne of mà?
Turne y aboute, q thou shalt se yet greater abhominacions. And so he brought me in to the inwarde courte of the LORDES house: a beholde, at the porte of the LORDES house, betwixte the fore entrie and the aulter, there were fyue and twenty men, that turned their backes vpon the Temple of the LORDE, q their faees towarde the easte, and these wor- shipped the Sonne.

And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, thou sonne of man? Thinketh the house of Israel, that it is but a trifle, to do these abhominacions here? Shulde they fyll the londe full of wickednesse, and vndertake to prouoke me vnto anger? Yee q purposly to cast vp their noses vpon me? — Therfore wil I also do some thinge in my wrothfull displea- sure, so that myne eye shall not ouersee them, nether wil I spare them. Yee and though they crie in myne eares with loude voyce, yet wil I not heare them.

* Esa. 29. c. Iob 22. b. Tere. 23. d. Eze. 9. c. 
1. c. Jere. 11. c. 14. b. Mich. 3. a. 

f Pro. 

‘Chap. p. 

a 

n 

The ir. Chapter. 

E cried also with a loude voyce in myne eares, sayenge: Come here ye rulers of

the cite, euery man with his weapened honde to the slaughter. Then came there sixe men out of the strete of the vpper porte towarde the north, and euery man a weapen in his honde to the slaughter. There was one amongst them, that had on him a lynninge rayment, and a wryters ynckhorne by his syde.

"These wente in, and stode beside the brasen aulter: “for the glory of the LORDE was gone awaye from the Cherub, and was come downe to the thresholde of ne house, « he called the ma, that had the lynnynge rayment vpon him, and the writers ynckhorne by his syde, and the LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye thorow the cite of Ierusalem, and set this marck 7 Thau vpo the foreheades of them, that mourne, and are sory for all the abhominacions, that be done therin. And to the other, he sayde that 1 might heare: Go ye after him thorow the cite, slaye, ouersee none, spare none: ^Kyll, q destroye both olde men and yonge, maydens, children, and wyues.

But as for those, that haue this marck F 
Thau vpo them: se that ye touch them not, and begynne at my Sanctuary. “Then they begane at the elders, which were in the Temple, for he had sayde vnto them: When ye haue defyled the ‘Temple, and fylled the courte with the slayne, then go youre waye forth.
So they wéte out and slewe downe thorow y cite. Now when they had done y slaughter, a I yet escaped: I fell downe vpon my face, q cried, sayenge: O LORDE, wilt thou then destroye all the resydue of Israel, in thy sore displeasure, that thou hast poured vpo Ie- rusalem ?

Then sayde he vnto me: The wickednesse of the house of Israel and Tuda is very greate: so that the lode is full of bloude, and ¥ cite full of vnfaithfulnesse: "For they saye: Tush, y LORDE regardeth not the earth, he seyth vs not. Therfore will I vpon them, myne eye shall not ouersee them, nether will I spare them, but will recompence their wickednesse vpon their heades.

And beholde, the mà that had the lynnynge 

b Judith 2, a. 
Es Iob 22, b. Esa, 29.c. 

a Ex, 40. e, Nu. 9. c. 3 Re. 
* Tere. 25. d. 49. b. 1 Pet. 4. c. 

Che prophet Csechiel. 

rayment vpon him, and thewriters ynckhorne by his syde; tolde all the matter how it hap- peued, and sayde: LORDE, as thou hast commaunded me, so haue I s

The r. Chapter. 

ND as I loked, beholde, In the firma- ment that was aboue the Cherubins there apeared the similitude of æ stole of
Saphir vpo them: “Then sayde he that sat therin, to him that had the lynnynge rayment vpon him: Crepe in betwene the wheles that are vnder the Cherubins, and take thine honde full of hote coales out from betwene the
Cherubins, and cast them ouer the cite. And 

he crepte in, that I might se. 

Now the Cherubins stode vpó the right syde of the house, when the man wéte in, and the cloude fylled the ynnermer courte. 7 But the glory of the LORDE remoued from the
Cherubins, and came vpon the thresholde of the house: so that the Temple was full of cloudes, and the courte was full of the shyne of the LORDES glory. Yee and the sounde of the Cherubins wynges was herde in to the forecourte, like as it had bene the voyce of the almightie God, when he speaketh. Now when he had bydden the man y was clothed in lynnynge, to go and take the hote coales from the myddest of ¥ wheles, which were
|vnder the Cherubins: he wente and stode besyde the wheles. 'Then the one Cherub reached forth his honde from vnder the Che- rubins, vnto y fyre that was betwene the
Cherubins, and toke therof, and gaue it vnto him (that had on the lyunynge rayment) in hishonde: which tokeit, and wenteout. And vnder the wynges of y Cherubins, there apeared the licknes of : a mas hode: I sawe also foure wheles besyde the Cherubins, so that by euery
Cherub there stode a whele. And the wheles were (to loke vpon) after y Ld fashion of y pre- cious stone of Tharsis: Yet (vnto the sight) were they fashioned q like, 1 yf one whele had bene in another.

When they wente forth, they wēte all i iiij together, not turnynge aboute in their goinge:
But where the first wente, thither wente they after also, so that they turned not aboute in their goinge. “Their whole bodies, their backes, their hodes q wynges, yee q the wheles
Ecci. 93. d. Ezec. 7. a. 

e Eze. 9. a. f 9 Par. 7. a. 

€ Eze, 1. b. 

Fo. deerit. 

a 

ES 

Fo. Deer}. also, were all full of eyes rounde aboute them: all foure. And I herde him call y wheles,'
Galgal (that is) a rounde boull. Euer one of them had foure faces: so that the one face was the face of a Cherub, the seconde of a man, the thirde of a lyon, the fourth of an
Aegle, q they were lifted vp aboue. This is the beest, that I sawe at the water of Cobar.

| Now when the Cherubins wente, the wheles wente with them: q when the Cherubins shoke their wynges to lift them selues vpwarde, the wheles remayned not behynde, but were with them also. Shortly, when they stode, these stode also: And when they were lift vp, y wheles were lift vp also with thé, for the sprete of life was in the wheles.

a Then the glory of the LORDE was lift vp from the thresholde of the temple, and re- mayned vpon the Cherubins: And the Che- rubins flackred with their wynges, and lift thé selues vp from the earth: so that I sawe when they went, and the wheles with them.
And they stode at the east syde of the porte that is in the house of the LORDE. So the glory of the LORDE was vpon them. This is the beest that I sawe vnder the God of
Israel, by the water of Cobar. And I per- ceaued, that it was the Cherubins. Euery one had foure faces, q euery one foure wynges, q vnder their winges, as it were més hondes.
Now the figure of their faces was, euen as I had sene them, by the water of Cobar, q so was the countenaunce of thé: Euery one in his goinge wente straight forwarde.

The yi. Chapter. 

A OROUER, the sprete of the LORDE lift me vp, « brought me vnto y east

porte of the LORDES house. And beholde, there were xxv men vnder the dore: amoge whom I sawe laasanias the sonne of Asur, q
Pheltias the sonne of Banias, the rulers of the people. "Then sayde the LORDE vnto me:
Thou sonne of man: These men ymagin myschefe, and a wicked councel take they in this cite, sayenge: Tush, there is no destruc- icion at honde, let vs buylde houses: ‘This
Ierusalem is the cauldron, q we be the flesh. 
| Therfore shalt thou prophecie vuto them, yee prophecie shalt thou vnto them, O sonne of
‘man. And with that, fell the sprete of the 
LORDE vpon me, and sayde vnto me: 

|* Eze. 11.d. 43.a. ^ Eze. 24.a. Matt.26.e. ¢Leuit.18.a. 

Cbr prophet Cserbiel. 

Chap. rt. 

| Speake, thus saieth the LORDE: On this 
¡maner haue yee spoké (O ye house of Israel) jand I knowe the ymaginaciós of youre hertes.
‘Many one haue ye murthured in this cite, ¢ filled the stretes full of the slayne.

Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: 
The slayne men that ye haue layed on the grounde in this cite, are the flesh, q this cite is the cauldron: ^ But I wil bringe you out of it: ye hane drawé out y swearde, eue so wil
I also bringe a swearde ouer you, saieth y 
LORDE God. I will dryue you out of this cite and delyuer you in to youre enemies honde, q wil condemne you. Ye shal be slayne in all the coastes of Israel, I wil be avenged of you: to lerne you for to knowe, that I am the LORDE. This cite shal not be youre cauldron, nether shal ye be the flesh therin : but in the coastes of Israel wil I punysh you, that ye maye knowe, that I am the LORDE: in whose commaundementes ye haue not walked, ner kepte his lawes: but ‘haue done after the customes of the Heithen, that lie rounde aboute you.

Now when I preached, Pheltias the sonne of Banias dyed. Then fell I downe vpo my face, q cried with a loude voyce: O LORDE
God, wilt thou then vterly destroye all the remnaunt in Israel? And so the worde of the LORDE came to me on this maner:
Thou sonne of man: Thy brethren, thy kyns- folke, ¢ y whole house of Iuda, which dwell at lerusalem, saye: They be gone farre from the LORDE, but the londe is geuen vs in possession. Therfore tell them, thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil sende you farre of amoge the Gentiles, q scatre you amonge the nacions, ¢ I wil halowe you but a litle, in the londes where ye shall come. Tell them also, thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil gather you agayne out of the nacions, « bringe you from the countrees where ye be scatred, q will geue you the londe of Israel agayne: a thither shal ye come. And as for all impedimentes, q all youre abhominacions: I will take them awaye.

And I wil geue you one herte, q wil plante a new sprete within youre bowels. “That stony herte wil I take out of youre body, a geue you a fleshy herte: that ye maye walke in my com- maundementes, and kepe myne ordinaunces, q do them: that ye maye be my people, and

Deut. 12. d. 4 [ere.51. f. Eze.18.e.36.e. Eze.36.f. 

y 

Thap. nij. 

B 

The prophet ECsechiel, 

I youre God. But loke whose hertes are dis- posed to folowe their abhominacions and wicked lynynges: Those mens dedes will I bringe vpon their owne heades, saieth the
LORDE God. After this dyd the Cherubins lift vp their winges, and the wheles wente with them, and the glory of the LORDE was vpon them. “So the glory of the LORDE wente vp from the myddest of the cite, ^a stode vpon the mount of the cite towarde the east. But the wynde toke me vp, x in a vision (which came by the sprete of God) it bronght me agayne in to Caldea amonge the presoners.
Then the vision that I had sene, vanyshed awaye fro me. So I spake vnto the presoners, all the wordes of the LORDE, which he had shewed me.

The rij. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: “Thon sonne of ma, thon dwellest in the myddest of a frauwerde hous- holde: which haue eyes to se, q yet se not: eares haue they to heare, and yet heare they not, for they are an obstinate honsholde.
Therfore (O thon sonne of man) make thy gere redy to flit, and go forth by fayre daye light, y they maye se. Yee eué in their sight shalt thou go from thy place to another place : yf peraduenture they wil considre, y they be an vnobedient housholde. Thy gere that thon hast made redy to flit withall, shalt thou beare out by fayre daye light, that they maie se: q thou thy self shalt go forth also at eué

in their sight, as a ma doth whé he flitteth. 

Dygge thorow the wall, that they maye se, and beare thorow it the same thinge, that thou tokest vp in their sight. As for thy self, thou shalt go forth in the darcke. Hyde thy face that thou se not y earth, for I haue made the a shewtoké vnto the house of Israel. Now as Y LORDE comaunded me, so I dyd: y gere that I had made redy, brought I out by daye. At euen I brake downe an hole thorow the wall with my honde: « when it was darcke,
I toke the gere vpo my shulders, and bare them ont in their sight.

And in the mornynge, came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, yf Israel, y franwerde housholde axe the, and saye: what dost thou there? Then

* Ezec. 10. c. 43. a, 

è Ezec. 3. b. 8. a. * Eaa. 6. b. 

Matt. 13. b. Mar. 4. a. Luc. 8. b. Act. 28. d. Ro. 11. b. 

This punyshment toucheth the chefe rulers at lerusalem, and all the house of Israel, that dwell amonge them: Tell them: I am youre shewtoken: like as I haue done, so shal it happen vnto you: Flyt shal ye also, and go in to captiuyte. “The chefest that is amonge you, shall lade his shulders in the darcke, and get him awaye. He shal breake downe the wall, to carie stuff there thorow: He shal couer his face, that he se not the grounde, with his eyes.

My lyne will I sprede out vpon him, and catch him in my net, ‘and carie him to Babi- lon, in the léde of the Caldees: which he shal not se, t yet shal he dye there. As for all his helpers, and all his hoostes that be aboute him: I will scatre them towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out a swearde after them.
‘So when I haue scatred them amonge the 
Heithen, and strowed them in the londes: they shal knowe, that I am ¥ LORDE. But,
I will leane a litle nombre of them, from the swearde, hunger « pestilence : to tell all their abhominacions amonge the Heithen, where they come: that they maye knowe, how that
I am the LORDE. 

Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me sayenge : Thou sonne of man: with a fear full trēblinge shalt thou eate thy bred, with carefulnesse q sorowe shalt thou drynke thy water. And vnto the people of the londe, speake thou on this maner: Thus saieth the
LORDE God, to them that dwell in Ierusa- lem, and to the londe of Israel: Ye shall eate youre bred with sorowe, and drynke yonre water with heuynesse: Yee the londe with the fulnesse therof shalbe layde waist, for y wickednesse of them that dwell therin. And the cities that now be well occupied, shal be voyde, and the londe desolate: that ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

Yet came the worde of the LORDE vnto me agayne, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, what maner of byworde is that, * which ye vse in the londe of Israel, sayenge: Tush, seynge that the daies are so slacke in commynge,^ all the visios are of none effecte: Tell them therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil make that byworde to ceasse, so that it shall nomore be comonly vsed in Israel.

e Eze. 17. c, 32. a. J Eze. 15. b. 22. b. 
€ Ro. 2.a. ^ 9 Pet, 3. b. 

4 Tere. 21, b. 

So. ncryb. tell thera: Thus saieth the LORDE God: _

€ 

ps 

Jo. Deerbt. 

The prophet Cserhiel. 

Chap. riij. 

^— B 

But saye this vnto them: The daies are at honde, that euery thinge which hath bene prophecied, shalbe fulfilled. There shall no vision be in vayne, nether eny prophecie fayle amonge the children of Israel: For it is I the
LORDE, that speake it: and what so ener I 

LORDE speake, it shal be perfourmed, and not be slacke in commynge.

Yee euen in youre dayes (O ye frauwarde housholde) will 1 denyse some thinge, q bringe it to passe, saieth the LORDE God. And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me sayenge: Beholde, thou sonne of man: The honse of Israel saye in this maner: Tush, as for the vision that he hath sene, it will be many a daye or it come to passe: It is farre of yet, the thinge that he prophecieth. Ther- fore saye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE
God: All my wordes shal nomore be slacke : 
Loke what Í speake, that same shal come to passe, saieth the LORDE.

The riij. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came vnto 

me, sayége: Thou sonne of man, Speake prophecie agaynst those prophetes, that preach in Israel: q saye thou vnto them that pro- phecie out of their owne hertes: Heare the worde of the LORDE, thus saieth the
LORDE God: *Wo be vnto those folish 
(prophetes, that folowe their owne sprete, and 
‘speake, where they se nothinge. O Israel, thy prophetes are like the foxes vpon the drie felde: For they stonde not in the gappes, nether make they an hedge for the house of
Israel, ° that mē might abyde the parell in the daye of the LORDE. Vayne thinges they se, q tell lies, to mayntene their preach- inges withall. The LORDE (saye they)
‘hath spoké it, when in very dede the LORDE hath not sent them. Vayne visios haue ye sene, q spoké false prophecies, when ye saye : the LORDE hath spoken it, where as I nener
‘sayde it. 

33 Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: 

Because youre wordes be vayne, q ye seke out lies: Beholde, I wil vpon you, saieth y
LORDE. Myne hondes shal come vpon the prophetes, that loke out vayne:thinges, and preach lies: they shal not be in the councell jof my people, ner written in the boke of the house of Israel, nether shal they come in the

a Eze. 34, a. 5 Tere. 97. a. * Tere. 8. b. 

londe of Israel: that ye maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE God. And.that for this cause: “they hane disceaued my people, q tolde them of peace, where no peace was.
One setteth vp a wall, q they dawbe it with lowse claye. ^Therfore tell them which dawbe it with vntempered morter, that it shall fall.
For there shal come a greate shuwer of rayne, greate stones shall fall vpon it, q a sore storme of wynde shal breake it, so shal ¥ wall come downe. Shal it not then be sayde vnto you: where is now the morter, that ye dawbed it withall? Therfore thus saieth the LORDE
God: J will breake out in my wrothfull dis- pleasure with a stormy wynde, so that in myne anger there shal come a mightie shuwer of rayne, t hale stones in my wrath, to destroye withall.

As for ¥ wall, that ye haue dawbed with vntempered morter, I wil breake it downe, q make it eauen with the grounde: so that the foundacion therof shal remoue, q it shal fall, yee q ye youre selues shall perish in the myddest therof: to lerne you for to knowe, that I am the LORDE. ‘Thus wil ! per- fourme my wrath vpon this wall, q vpon them that hane dawbed it with vntempéred morter, and then will I saye vnto you: The wall is gone, a the dawbers are awaye. ‘These are the prophetes of Israel, which prophecie ynto the cite of lerusalem, q loke out visions of peace for them, where as no peace is, saieth the LORDE God. Wherfore (o thon sonne of mà,) set thy face agaynst the doughters of thy people, which prophecie out of their owne hertes: q speake thou prophecie agaynst them, q saye: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Wo be vnto you, that sowe pilowes vnder all arme holes, and bolsters vnder the heades both of yonge and olde, to catch soules withall. For when ye hane gotten the soules of my people in youre captinyte, “ye promyse them life, and dishonoure me to my people, for an hand full of barly, q for a pece of bred: when ye kyll the soules of them that dye not, q pro- myse life to them, that lyue not: Thus ye dys- semble with my people, y beleueth youre lies.

Wherfore thus saieth the LORDE God: 
Beholde, I wil also vpo the pillowes, wherwith ye catch the soules in flyenge: thé will I take from youre armes, q let the soules go, that ye catch in flyenge. Youre bolsters also wil I

4 Matt, 7, c. * Esa. 5. e. Mich. 3. b. 

B 

Chap. riii. teare in peces, q delyuer my people out of youre honde: so that they shal come no more in youre hodes to be spoyled, ¢ ye shal knowe, that I am the LORDE. Seinge y with youre lyes ye discomforte the herte of the rightuous, whom I haue not discomforted: Agayne:
* For so moch as ye corage the honde of the wicked, so that he maye not turne from his wicked waye, q lyue: therfore shall ye spie out nomore vanyte, ner prophecie youre owne gessinges: for I wil delyuer my people out of

youre honde, that ye naye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

The riiij. Chapter. 

HERE resorted vnto me certayne of y 
T elders of Israel, ^q sat downe by me. 
Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, these men beare their Idols in their hertes, ¢ go purposly vpon the stomblinge block of their owne wick- ednesse: how darre they then axe councell at me? Therfore speake vnto them, q saye: thus saieth the LORDE God: Euery man of the house of Israel that beareth his Idols in his herte, purposynge to stomble in his owne wiekednesse, and commeth to a prophet, to enquere eny thinge at me by him: vnto that man wil I the LORDE myself geue answere, acordinge to the multitude of his Idols: that the house of Israel maye be snared in their owne hertes, because they be clene gone fro me, for their Idols sakes.

Wherfore, tell the house of Israel: thus saieth the LORDE God: ^ Be conuerted, for- sake youre Idols, and turne youre faces from all youre abhominacions. For euery man
(whether he be of the house of Israel, or a straunger, that sogeourneth in Israel) which departeth fro me, and carieth Idols in his herte, purposinge to go still stomblinge in his owne wickednesse, and commeth to a prophet, lor to axe councell at me thorow him: vnto y man wil I the LORDE geue answere, by myne owne self.

I wil set my face agaynst that man, and wil make him to be an example for other, yee and a comon byworde: and wil rote him out of my people, that he maye knowe, how y I am the LORDE. ‘And yf that prophet be disceaued, when he telleth him a worde: then
I the LORDE myself haue disceaued that 

a Ose. 4. b. ^ Eze. 20. a. c Eze.20.e. 43 Re. 22.d. 

The prophet Eserbiel, 

prophet, and wil stretch forth myne honde vpon him, to rote him out of my people of
Israel: and they both shall be punyshed for their wickednesse.

Acordinge to y synne of him that axeth, shal the synne of the prophet be: that $ house of Israel be led nomore fro me thorow erroure, and be nomore defyled in their wickednesse: but that they maye be m people, and I their God, saieth the LORDE
God. And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, when the londe synneth agaynst me, and goeth forth in wiekednesse : I will stretch out myne hide vpon it, and destroye all the prouysion of their bred, and sende derth vpon them, to destroye man q beest in the londe. ‘And though Noe,
Daniel and Iob these thre men were amonge them, yet shal they in their rightuousnesse delyuer but their owne soules, saieth the
LORDE God. 

Yf I bringe noysome beestes in to the londe, to waist it vp, and it be so desolate, that no man maye go therin for beestes: yf these thre men also were in the londe, as truly as I lyue
(saieth the LORDE God) they shal saue nether sonnes ner doughters, but be only delyuered them selues: and as for the londe, it shal be waist.

Or, yf I bringe a swearde in to the londe, and charge it to go thorow the londe: so that
I slaye downe man and beest in it, and yf these thre men were therin: As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE God) they shal de- lyuer nether sonnes ner doughters, but only be saued them selues.

Yf I sende a pestilence in to the londe, and poure out my sore indignacion vpon it in bloude, so that I rote out of it both man and beest, and yf Noe, Daniel and Iob were therin: Astrulyas I lyue (saieththe LORDE
God) they shal delyuer nether sonnes ner doughters, but saue their owne soules in their rightuousnesse.

Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: 
J Though I sende my foure trublous plages vpon lerusalem: the swearde, honger, perlous beestes and pestilence, to destroye man and beest out of it: yet shal there a remnaunt be saued therin, which shal bringe forth their sonnes and doughters. Beholde, they shal come forth vnto you, and ye shall se their

lob 12. c. e Eze. 4. d. 5. d. lere. 15.a. JS Iere. 27. b. 

Fo. Deevdij. 

€ 

D 

= E a c uuu uu 

So. Deeybitj. 

waye, and what they take in hende, q ye shal be cóforted, as touchinge all the plages that I haue breught vpon Ierusalem.

They shall coemferte you, when ye se their waye and workes: and ye shal knowe, how y it is not without a cause, that I haue done so agaynst lerusalem, as I dyd, saieth the
LORDE God. 

The yo. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came vnte 

me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man: 
What commeth of the vyne amonge all other trees? and of the wyne stocke, amoge all other tymbre of the greaue? De me take wodd ef it, te make eny werke withall? Or maye there a nale be made of it, to hange eny thinge vpon? Beholde, it is cast in the fyre to be brent, the fyre consumeth both the endes of it, the myddest is brent to aszshes.
Is it mete then for eny werke? No. 

Seinge then, that it was mete for no worke, beinge whole: mech lesse maye there eny thinge be made ef it, when the fyre hath con- sumed and brent it. And therfore thus saieth the LORDE Ged: Like as I cast the vyne in to the fyre fer te be brent, as other trees of the wed: Euen se wil I do with them that dwell in Ierusalem, and set my face agaynst them: they shall ge out from the fyre, and yet the fyre shall consume them. “Then shal ye knewe, that I am the LORDE, when I set my face agaynst them, and make the lende waist: because they haue so sere offended, saleth the LORDE God.

The rbi. Chapter. 

GAYNE, the werde of the LORDE 

spake vnte me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, shewe the cite of Ierusalem their abhominaciens, and saye: thus saieth the
LORDE Ged vnte Ierusalem: Thy progeny | and kynred came out of the londe of Canaan,
(thy father was an Amorite, thy mother a 
|Cethite. In y daye ef thy byrth when theu wast borne, y stringe ef thy nauel was not cut of: theu wast not bathed in water to make the clene: Thou wast nether rubbed with salt, ner swedled in cloutes: No man regarded
‘the so moch, as to do eny of these thinges for! y» or to shewe the sech fauoure, but thou wast

a Eze. 12. c. 22. b, 5 Esa. 5. a, Iere. 11. c. © Tere. 

3.2. Ose. v.c. 

Che prophet Esechiel. 

Chap. rb. 

vtterly cast out vpon y felde, yee despised wast theu in the daye d thy byrth.

Then came I by the, and sawe the treden downe in thine ewne bloude, ¢ sayde vnto the: theu shalt be pourged from thine owne bloude, fro thine owne bloude (I saye) shalt theu be clensed. *Se I planted the, as the blessome of thy felde: thou art grewen vp, q waxé greate: theu hast gotten a maruelous plea- saunt beutie, thy brestes are come vp, thy hayre is goodly grewen, where as thou wast naked and bare afore.

New when I wente by ý, q loked vpon the: |33 beholde, thy tyme was come, yee eué the tyme to wowe the. Then spred I my clothes euer the, te couer thy dishonestie: “Yee I made an ooth vnto the, q maried my self with the
(saieth the LORDE God) « so thou becamest myne owne. Then waszshed I the with water, q peurged thy bloude from the. I aneynted the with eyle, I gaue the chaunge of raymentes,
I made the shues of Taxus lether: I gyrthed 
Mp with white sylcke, I clothed the with 

erchues, I decked the with costly apparell, I put rynges vpon thy fyngers: a chayne abeute thy necke, spages vpo thy fereheade, eare rynges vpon thyne eares, q set a beutifull crowne vpon thine heade. Thus wast thou deckte with syluer q golde, t thy rayment was ef fyne white sylke, of nedle worke q of dynerse colenrs.

Theu didest eate nothinge but symnels, honny q eyle: marueleus goodly wast thou q beutifull, yee euen a very Quene wast thou:
In so moch, that thy beuty was spoken of amenge the Heithen, for thou wast excellét in my beuty, which I put vpo the, saieth the
LORDE God. But thou hast put confidéce in thine owne beuty, q played the harlet, when thou haddest gotten the a name. ‘Theu hast committed whordome, with all that wente by the, « hast fulfilled their desyres: Yee thou hast taken thy garmétes of dyuerse colours, q deckte thine aulters therwith,? where vpon theu mightest fulfill thine wherdeme, of sech
à fashion, as neuer was done, ner shalbe. ‘The goodly ernamétes q Iewels which I gaue the of myne ewne golde and syluer, hast thou take, q made the mes ymages theref, and committed whordome withall.

Thy garmentes of dyuerse colours hast thou 

* Esa. 46. a. Ose, 2. b. 13. a. Eze. 20. d. 
7. d. Ose. 8. a. 

4 Tere. 9. 3. 5. 

Chap. rbí. taken, and deckte them therwith: myne oyle q incense hast thou set before them. My meate which I gaue the, as symnels, oyle q hony: (to fede the withall) that hast thou set before them, for a swete sauoure. And this came also to passe, saieth the LORDE God:
Thou hast také thine owne sonnes ¢ doughters, whom thou haddest begotten vnto me: “and these hast thou offred vp vnto them, to be their meate. Is this but a small whordome of thine (thinkest thou) that thou slayest my children, and geuest them ouer, to be brét vnto them? And yet in all thy abhominacions and whordome, thou hast not remembred the dayes of thy youth, how naked and bare thou wast at that tyme, q troden downe in thine owne bloude. After all these thy wickednesses
(wo wo vnto the, saieth y LORDE) thou hast buylded thy stewes and brodel houses in euery place: yee at the heade of euery strete hast thou buylded the an aulter. Thou hast made thy beuty to be abhorred: thou hast layed out thy legges to euery one that came by, and multiplied thine whordome. *' Thou hast committed fornicacion with the Egipcians thy neghbours, which had moch flesh: « thus hast thou vsed thine whordome, to anger me.
Beholde, I will stretch out myne honde ouer the, and wil mynish thy stoare of fode, and delyuer the ouer in to the willes of the
Philistynes thine enemies, which are ashamed of thy abhominable waye. ° Thou hast played the whore also with the Assirians, which might not satisfie the: Yee thou hast played the harlot, t not had ynough. Thus hast thou still comitted thy fornicacion from the londe of Canaan vnto the Caldees, and yet thy lust not satisfied. How shulde I circumcide thine herte (saieth the LORDE God) seinge thou doest all these thinges, thou precious whore : buyldinge thy stewes at the heade of euery strete, and thy brodel houses in all places ?
Thou hast not bene as an other whore, y maketh booste of hir wynnynge: but as a E. y breaketh wedlocke, q taketh other in steade of hir huszbode. Giftes are geuen to all other whores, but thou geuest rewardes vnto all thy louers: q offrest them giftes, to come vnto the out of all places, q to committe for- nicacio with the. It is come to passe with the in thy whordomes, contrary to the vse of other

Deut. 18. b. 
+ Eze. 23. b. 

a Leuit. 18. c. Deu. 32. c, Leni. 20. a. lere. 7. d. Eze. 20. c. Psal. 105. e.

Che prophet Esechtel. 

women: yee there hath no soch fornicacion bene committed after the, seinge that thou profrest giftes vnto other, t no rewarde is geuen the: this isa contrary thinge. Ther- fore heare the worde of the LORDE, o thou harlot: Thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as thou hast spet thy moneye, q dis- couered thy shame, thorow thy whordome with all thy louers, and with all the Idols of thy abhominacions in the bloude of thy children, whom thou hast geuen them: ^Beholde ther- fore, I wil gather together all thy louers, vnto whom thou hast made thy self comon: yee a all them whom thou fauourest, and euery one that thou hatest: ‘and will discouer thy shame before thé, that they all maye se thy fylthines.

Morouer, I wil iudge the as a breaker of wedlocke and a murthurer, and recompence the thine owne bloude in wrath and gelousy.
I wil geue the ouer in to their power, that shal breake downe thy stewes, and destroye thy brodel houses: they shal stripe the out of thy clothes, all thy fayre q beutifull Iewels shal they take from the, and so let the syt naked œ bare: ‘Yee they shal bringe the comon people vpon the, which shal stone the, q slaye the downe with their sweardes. They shall burne vp thy houses, and punysh the in the sight of many womé. Thus wil I make thy whordome to ceasse, so that thou shalt geue out no mo rewardes.

Shulde I make my wrath to be still, take my gelousy from the, be content, and nomore to be displeased ? seinge thou remembrest not the dayes of thy youth, but hast prouoked me to wrath in all these thinges? Beholde ther- fore, I wil bringe thine owne wayes vpon thine heade, saieth the LORDE God: how be it, I neuer dyd vnto the, acordinge to thy wickednesse and all thy abhominacions. Be- holde, all they ý vse comon prouerbes, shall vse this prouerbe also agaynst the: Soch a mother, soch a doughter.

Thou art euen thy mothers owne doughter, that hath cast of hir houszbonde and hir children: Yee thon art the sister of thy sisters, which forsoke their huszbodes and their child- ren. “Youre mother is a Cethite, and youre father an Amorite. Thine eldest sister is
Samaria, she and hir doughters that dwel vpo thy left honde.

44]e.16.c.17.c. *Naü.3.a. Eze.23. f. f Leui. 20. b. 4 Re. 25. b. — € Eze. 16. a.

e Eze. 23. a. 
Esa. 47. a. 

Fo. Deeriy. 

n 

£ 

Fo. derrr. 

But thy yongest sister that dwelleth on thy right hode, is Sodoma and hir doughters.
Yet hast thou not walked after their wayes, ner done after their abhominacions: But in all thy wayes thou hast bene more corrupte then they.

“As truly as I lyue, saieth the LORDE 
God: Sodoma thy sister with hir doughters, hath not done so euel, as thou and thy dough- ters. Beholde, the synnes of thy sister So- doma were these: Pryde, fulnesse, of meate, abundaunce and Idilnesse: these thinges had she and hir doughters. Besydes that, they reached not their honde to the poore and nedy, but were proude, and dyd abhominable thinges before me: ‘therfore I toke them awaye, when I had sene it. “Nether hath
Samaria done half of thy synnes, yee thou hast exceaded them in wickednesse: In so moch that in comparison of all the abhomi- nacions which thou hast done, thou hast made thy sisters good women. Therfore beare thine owne shame, thou that in synne hast ouercome thy sisters: seinge thou hast done so abhominably, that they were better then thou. Be ashamed therfore (I saye) and beare thine owne confucion, thou that makest thy sisters good women.

As for their captiuyte, namely the captiuyte of Sodoma and hir doughters : the captiuyte

F|of Samaria and hir doughters: I wil bringe 

them agayne, so will I also bringe agayne thy captiuyte amóge them: that thou mayest take thine owne confucion vpon the, and be ashamed of all that thou hast done, and to comforte them.

Thus thy sisters (namely) Sodoma and hir doughters: Samaria and hir doughters with thy self q thy doughters, shalbe brought agayne to youre olde estate. Whé thou wast in thy pryde, and before thy wickednesse came to light: thou woldest not heare speake of thy sister Sodoma, vntill the tyme that the Sirtans with all their townes, and the Philistynes with all that lye rounde aboute them, brought the to shame and confucion: that thou mightest beare thine owne fylthynes and abhominacion, saieth the LORDE.

For thus saieth the LORDE God: I shulde (by right) deale with the, as thou hast done. Thou hast despysed the ooth, and broken the couenaunte. ^ Neuertheles, I wil

a Gen, 18. 19. * Tere. 3. c. 

> Gene. 19, f. 

Thr prophet Esechtel. 

Chap. rbij. remembre the couenaunt, that I made with the in thy youth, in so moch that it shall be an euerlastinge couenaunt: So that thou also remembre thy wayes, and be ashamed of thé: then shalt thou receaue of me thy elder and yonger sisters, whom I wil make thy doughters, and that besyde thy couenaunt. * And so I wil renue my couenaunt with the, y mayest knowe, that I am the LORDE: that thou mayest thincke vpo it, be ashamed, and excuse thine owne confucion nomore : when I haue forgeuen the, all that thou hast done, saleth the LORDE God.

The rotj. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge : Thou sonne of man: put forth a darcke speakynge and a parable,* vnto the house of Israel, and saye: /Thus saieth the LORDE God: There came a greate
Aegle with greate wynges, yee with mightie longe wynges, and full of fethers of dyuerse colours, vpon the mount of Libanus, and toke la braunch from a Cedre tre, and brake of the toppe of his twygge, and caried it in to the londe of Canaan, and set it in a eite of mar- chauntes. He toke also a braunch of the londe, and planted it in a frutefull grounde, he brought it vnto greate waters, q set it as a wilye tre therby. Then dyd it growe, and was a greate wyne stocke, but lowe by the grounde : thus there came of it a vyne, and it brought forth blossomes, q spred out braunches.
But there was another Aegle, a greate one, which had greate wynges and many fethers : and beholde, y rotes of this vyne had an hüger after him, and spred out his braunches to- warde him, to water his frutes: Neuertheles it was plated vpon a good grounde besyde greate waters: so that (by reason) it shulde haue bronght out braunches and frute, and haue bene a goodl e. Speake thou ther- fore, thus saieth the LORDE God : Shal this vyne prospere? shal not his rotes be pluckte out, his frute broken of, his grene braunches wythereed and fade awaye ? yee without ether stronge arme or many people, shal it be plucked vp by the rotes. Beholde, it was planted : shall it prospere therfore? Shall it not be dryed vp and withered, yee euen in the shutinge out of his blossomes, as soone as y

east wynde bloweth ? 

4 Tere. 31. e. Heb. 8. b. *Eze.94.2. / Dan.7.a. \ 

Chap. rbíij. 

Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me sayenge: “Speake to that frauwarde housholde: knowe ye not, what these thinges do signifie? "Tell them: Beholde, the kinge of Babilon came to Ierusalem, and toke the kinge q his prynces and ledde them to
Babilon. 

He toke of the kinges sede, and made a couenaumnt with him, and toke an ooth of him:
'The prynces of the londe toke he with him also, that the londe might be holden in sub- ieccion, and not to rebelle, bnt kepe the coue- naunt, and fulfill it. But he fell from him, q sent his Embassitours in to Egipte, that he might haue horses q moch people. Shulde that prospere ? Shulde he be kepte safe, that doth soch thinges? Or shulde he escape, that breaketh his couenaunt ?

As truly as I lyue, saieth the LORDE 
God: He shal dye at Babilon, in y place where the kinge dwelleth, that made him kinge: whose ooth he hath despised, and whose couenaunt he hath broken. Nether shall Pharao with his greate hoost and multi- tude of people, maynteyne him in the warre: when they cast vp diches, and set vp bul- workes to destroye moch people. For seinge he hath despysed the ooth, and broken the couenaunt (where as he yet gaue his honde thervpon) and done all these thinges, he shall not escape.

Therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: 
As truly as I lyue, I will bringe myne ooth that he hath despysed, and my couenaunt that he hath broken, vpon his owne heade.^ I wil cast my net aboute him, and catch him in my yarne. To Babilon will I cary him, there will
I punysh him, because of the greate offence that he made me. — As for those y fle from him out of y hoost, they shalbe ee with the swearde. The residue shalbe scatred towarde all the wyndes: and ye shal knowe, that I the LORDE haue spoken it.

Thus saieth the LORDE God: I will also take a braunch from an hie Cedre tre, and will set it, and take the vppermost twygge, that yet is but tendre, and plante it vpon an hie hill: Namely, vpon the hie hill of Sion will I plante it: that it maye bringe forth twygges, and geue frute, and be a greate
Cedre tre: so that all maner of foules maye 

* Tere. 31. e. 

* E2e. 12. b. 32, a. d Psal. 23. a.

a 4 Re. 24. c. 

The prophet Esechiel. 

byde in it, and make their nestes vnder the shadowe of his braunches.

And all the trees of the felde shall knowe, that I the LORDE hane brought downe the hie tre, and set the lowe tre vp: that 1 haue dryed vp the grene tre, and made the drye tre to florish: Euen I the LORDE y spake it, haue also brought it to passe.

The rbij. Chapter. 
HE worde of the LORDE came vnto me, on this maner: what meane ye by this comon prouerbe, that ye vse in the londe of Israel, sayenge: The fathers haue eaten soure grapes, “and the childrés teth are set on edge? As truly as I lyue, saieth y LORDE
God, ye shal vse this byworde nomore in Israel. 
* Beholde, all soules are myne. Like as the father is myne, so is y sonne myne also.
The soule that synneth, shal dye. *Yf a man be godly, and do the thinge that is equall q right, (he eateth not vpon the hilles: he lifteth not his eyes vp to the Idols of Israel: he de- fyleth not his neghbours wife: he medleth with no menstruous woman: he greueth no body: he geueth his detter his pledge agayne: he taketh none other mans good by violéce : he parteth his mete with the hongrie: he clotheth the naked: he lendeth nothinge vpon vsury: She taketh nothinge ouer: he with- draweth his honde from doinge wronge: he hadleth faithfully betwixte man q man: he walketh in my commaundementes, q kepeth my lawes, œ perfourmeth the faithfully:) * This is a rightuous mà, he shal surely lyue, saieth the LORDE God.
Yf he now get a sonne, that is a murthurer, a shedder of bloude: yf he do one of these thinges (though he do not all) “he eateth vpon the hilles: he defyleth his neghbours wife : he greueth the poore and nedy: he robbeth and spoyleth: he geueth not the detter his pledge agayne: he lifteth vp his eyes vnto
Idols, q medleth with abhominable thinges : he lendeth vpon vsury, and taketh more ouer.
Shal this man lyue? He shal not lyue. 
Seinge he hath done all these abhominacions, he shall dye: his bloude shalbe vpon him.
Now yf this man get a sonne also, that seith all this fathers synnes, which he hath done: and feareth, nether doth soch like:

J Matt. 25. c. Psal. 14. a. 6 Ro. 10. a. 

^ Taco. 2. b. 

* Leui. 18. a. 

So. Veer. 

a 

B 

fo. nccrrí. The prophet Csechiel. Chap. rir. 

his wickednesse, that he hath done, and doth the thinge which is equall and right: he shal saue his soule alyue. For in so moch as he remembreth himself, and turneth him from all the vngodlynes, that he hath vsed, he shall lyue, and not dye.

And yet saicth the house of Israel: Tush, the waye of the LORDE is not equall. Are my wayes vnright, o ye house of Israel? Are not youre wayes rather vnequall? As for me, I wil iudge euery man, acordinge to his wayes, O ye house of Israel, saieth the
LORDE God. *Wherfore, be conuerted, and turne you clene from all youre wicked- nesse, so shal there no synne do you harme.
Cast awaye fro you all youre vngodlynesse, that ye haue done: /make you new hertes and a newsprete. Wherfore wil ye dye, O ye house of Israel? seynge I haue no pleasure in y death of him that dyeth, saieth the LORDE
God. "Turne you then, and ye shal lyue. 

Namely, he eateth not vpon the mountaynes : he lifteth not his eyes vp to the Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neghbours wife: he vexeth no man: he kepeth no mans pledge: he nether spoyleth, ner robbeth eny man: he dealeth his meate with the hungrie: he clotheth the naked: he oppresseth not the poore: he receaucth no vsury, ner eny thinge ouer: he kepeth my lawes, and walketh in my commaundementes: This man shal not dye in his fathers synne, but shall lyue without fayle. As for his father: because he oppressed and spoyled his brother, and dyd wyckedly amonge his people: lo, he is deed in his owne synne. And yetsaye ye: Wherfore thé shulde not this sonne beare his fathers synne? Ther- fore: because the sonne hath done equyte and right, hath kepte all my commaundementes, and done them: therfore, shall he lyue in dede.

“The same soule y synneth, shall dye. The sonne shal not beare the fathers offence, ne- ther shal the father beare the sonnes offence.
The rightuousnes of the rightuous shall be vpon himself, and the wickednes of the wicked shal be vpon him self also. But yf y vngodly will turne awaye, from all his synnes that he hath done, and kepe all my commaundemites, and do the thinge y is equall ¢ right: doutles he shal lyue, and not dye. As for all his synnes that he dyd before, they shall not be thought vpon: but in his rightuousnes that he
J|hath done, he shal lyue. ‘For haue I eny pleasure in the death of a synner, saieth the
LORDE God? but rather that he conuerte, and lyue ?

Agayne: yf the rightuous turne awaye from his rightuousnes, and do iniquyte, acordinge to all the abhominacions, that ý wicked ma doth: shal he lyue? All the rightuousnes that he hath done, shall not be thought vpo : but in the fawte that he hath offended withall, and in the synne that he hath done, he shal dye.

And yet ye saye: ‘Tush, the waye of y 
LORDE is uot indifferet. Heare therfore ye house of Israel: Is not my waye right? Or, are not youre wayes rather wicked? When a rightuous ma turneth awaye from his rightu- ousnesse, and medleth with vngodlynes: he must dye therin: Yee for the vnrightuousnes
3: that he hath done, must he dye. Agayne: 
“when the wicked man turneth awaye from 

The riy. Chapter. 

UT mourne thou for the prynces off Is- 

rael, ¢ saye: Wherfore laye thy mother that lyonesse, amoge the lyons? q norished hir yonge ones amége the lyons whelpes? One of hir whelpes she brought vp, ¢ it became a lyon: it lerned to spoyle, and to deuoure folke.
The Heithen herde of him, q toke him in their nettes, q brought him in chaynes vnto the londe of Egipte.

Now when the damme sawe, that all hir hope q comforth was awaye, she toke another of hir whelpes, and made a lyon of him: which wente amonge the lyons, q became a fearce lyon: lerned to spoyle and to deuoure foleke: he destroyed their palaces, and made their cities waist: In so moch that the whole londe and euery thinge therin, were vtterly desolate, thorow the very voyce of his roaringe.

Then came the Heithen together on euery syde out of all countrees agaynst him, layed their nettes for him, and toke him in their pytte. So they bounde him with chaynes, and brought him to the kinge of Babilon: which put him in preson, that his voyce shulde nomore be herde vpon the mountaynes of
Israel. As for thy mother, she is like a vyne in thy bloude, planted by the water syde: hir frutes and braunches are growen out of many

4 Esa. 55, b. * Esa. 55. b. Matt. 3. a, f Eze. 11. d. 
33. c. 36. e. £ 4 Re. 25. a. Tere. 39, c. 52. a. 

* Deu. 24. c. 4 Re. 14. c. 2 Par. 25, a. Iero. 18. a. 
Ro. 1.b. Abac. 2.a. ^ 2 Pet. 3. b. © Eze. 33. c. 

Chap. rr. waters: hir stalkes were so stronge, that men might haue made staues therof for officers: she grew so hie in hir stalkes.

So when men sawe that she exceaded y heith and multitude of hir braunches, she was roted out in displeasure, and cast downe to the grounde. The East wynde dryed vp hir frute, hir stronge stalkes were broken of, wythered and brent in the fyre. But now she is planted in the wildernesse, in a drye and thurstie grounde. And there is a fyre gone out of hir, stalkes, which hath brét vp hir braunches and hir frute: so that she hath no mo stronge stalkes, to be staues for officers.
This is a piteous and miserable thinge. 

The yy. Chapter. 

I5 the xvij yeare the x daye of the v 
Moneth, it happened, "that certayne of the elders of Israel came vnto me for to axe councell at the LORDE, and sat them downe byme. Then came the worde of the LORDE vnto me on this maner: ‘Thou sonne of man:
Speake to the elders of Israel, and saye vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Are ye come hither to axe eny thinge at me? As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE,) I will geue you no answere. Wilt thou not reproue them (thou sonne of man) wilt thou not re- prouethem? Shewe them the abhominacions of their forefathers, q tell the: Thus saieth the LORDE God: ^In the daye when I chose Israel, and lift vp myne honde vpon the sede of the house of Iacob, q shewed my self vnto them in the londe of Egipte: Yee when
I lifte vp myne honde ouer the, and sayde: 
I am the LORDE youre God, euen in the daye that I lift vp myne honde ouer them, to bringe them out of the londe of Egipte: in to a londe that I had prouyded for them, which floweth with mylcke and hony, and is a pleasaunt lode amonge all other: Then sayde
I vnto them: “Cast awaye euery man the abhominacions that he hath before him, and defyle not youre selues with the Idols of

Egipte, for 1 am the LORDE youre God. 
But they rebelled agaynst me, and wolde not folowe me: to cast awaye euery man the abhominacions of his eyes, and to forsake the
Idols of Egipte. Then I made me to poure 

a Eze. 14. a. 5 Exo. 3. b. e Deu. 7. a. 4 Exo. 
20.21.22. 23. Deu. 4. 5. Gala. 5.b. Leui. 18.a. Exo. 
16. e. 31. c. 32. c. * Nu. 14. b. Exo. 16. f. S Eze. 18. b. 

The prophet Gserhiel. 

my indignacion ouer them, and to satisfie my wrath vpon them: yee euen in the myddest
‘of the londe of Egipte. But I wolde not do it, for my names sake: that it shulde not be vnhalowed before the Heithen, amonge whom
‘they dwelt, and amonge whom I shewed my self vnto them, that I wolde bringe them out of the londe of Egipte. Now when I had caried them out of the londe of Egipte, and brought them in to the wildernesse: ^l gaue them my commaundementes, q shewed thé my lawes: which who so kepeth shal lyue in them. I gaue them also my holy dayes, to be a token betwixte me and them, and therby lto knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haloweth them. And yet the honse of Israel rebelled agaynst me in the wildernesse, they wolde not walke iu my commaundementes, they haue cast awaye my lawes: (which who so kepeth shulde lyue in them,) and my Sab- bath daies haue they greatly vnhalowed.

“ Thē I made me to poure ont my indigna- cion vpon them, q to cosnme them in the wildernesse. Yet I wolde not do it, for my names sake: lest it shulde be dishonoured before the Heithe, from the which I had caried them awaye. But I swore vnto them in the wildernesse, that I wolde not bringe them in to the londe, which I gaue them: a londe that floweth with mylcke q hony, q is a plea- sure of all londes: q y because they refused my lawes, q walked not in my comaunde- metes, but had vnhalowed my Sabbathes, for their herte was gone after their Idols. Neuer- theles myne eye spared the, so ý I wolde not vtterly slaye the, q cosume thé in the wilder- nes. Moroner, I sayde vnto their sonnesin ý
| wildernesse: “walke not in the statutes of youre 
\forefathers, kepe not their ordinaunces, and 
;defyle not youre selues with their Idols, for I iam the LORDE youre God. But walke in
(my statutes, kepe my lawes q do them, halowe my Sabbathes: *for they are a token betwixte me q you, that ye maye knowe, how y I am the LORDE. "^ Notwithstodinge, their sonnes rebelled against me also: they walked not in my statutes, ‘they kepte not my lawes to fulfill ithein (which he that doth shal lyue in them) nether halowed they my Sabbath dayes. The
|I made me agayne to poure out my indignacion 

€ Exo. 16. e. 31. c. 32. c. hENI2 2a ! Leui. 18. a. 

Galat, 3. b. Ro. 10. a. 
| 

Fo. derrriij. 

€ 

| 
| 
| 

| fo. Deerrittj. 

Dn 

ouer them, and to satisfie my wrath vpon then in the wildernesse. Neuertheles I with drewe my honde for my names sake, lest it shulde be vnhalowed amonge the Heithé, before whom I had brought them forth. I lift vp. myne honde ouer them also in the wildernesse, | that I wolde scatre them amonge the Heithen, and strowe them amonge the nacions: because they had not kepte my lawes, but cast asyde my commaundementes, vnhalowed my Sab- bathes, and lift vp their eyes to their fathers
Idols. Wherfore I gaue them also com- maundementes not good, q lawes thorow the which they shulde not lyue, ^a I vnhalowed them in their owne giftes: (when I appoynted for my self all their first borne) to make them desolate: that they might knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

Therfore (O thou sonne of man) tell the house of Israel, thus saieth the LORDE God:
Besyde all this, youre forefathers haue yet blasphemed me more, and greatly offended agaynst me: For after I had brought them in to the londe, ý I promysed to geue them, when they sawe euery hie hill ¢ all the thicke trees: they made there their offringes, and prouoked me with their oblacions, makinge swete sauoures there, q poured out their drinke offeringes. ‘Then I axed them: what haue ye to do with all, that ye go thither ?
And therfore is it called the hie place vnto this daye. Wherfore, speake vnto the house of Israel: Thus saieth the LORDE God:
Ye are euen as vnclene as youre forefathers, 
^t committe whordome also with their abho- minacios. In all youre Idols, where vnto ye bringe youre oblacios, x to whose honoure ye burne youre children: ye defyle youre selues, euen vnto this daye: how darre ye thé come, and axe eny question at me? O ye housholde of Israel? As truly as I lyue (saieth the
LORDE God) ye get no answere of me: q as for the thinge that ye go abonte, it shal not come to passe, where as ye saye: we wil be as the Heithen, x do as other people in the londe, wod q stone wil we worshipe.

As truly as I lyue (saieth the LORDE 
God) I myself wil rule you with a mightie honde, with a stretchedout arme, and with indignacion poured out ouer you: q wil bringe you out of the nacious and londes, wherin ye

* Exo.13.a. ^ ere. 19, a. Deut. 12.d. 18. b. Eze. 16. c. 

4 Ra. 17. c. 21. a, 2 Par. 28. a. 

The prophet Csecbiel. 

Chap. rr. are scatred: and gather you together with a mightie héde, with a stretchedout arme q with indignacion poured out vpou you: g wil bringe you in to the wildernesse of the people, t there I will reason with you face to face.
Like as I punished youre forefathers in the wildernesse, so wil I punish you also, saieth the LORDE God. I wil bringe you vnder| my iuriszdiction, and vnder the bonde of the couenaunt. The forsakers also and the trans- gressours wil I take from amonge you, q bringe them out of the londe of youre habitacion: as for the londe of Israel, they shall not come in it: that they maye knowe, how that I am the
LORDE. ' 

* Go now then (saieth the LORDE God) ye house of Israel, cast awaye, and destroye euery man his Idols: then shal ye heare me, and nomore blaspheme my holy name with youre offrynges and Idols. But vpon my holy hill, eue vpon the hie hill of Israel shal all the house of Israel and all that is in the londe, worshipe me: “and in the same place will I fauoure them, and there will I requyre youre heaueoffringes, and the firstlinges of youre oblacions, with all youre holy thinges.

I wil accepte youre swete sauoure, when I| JF y >

bringe you from the nacions, and gather you together out of the londes, wherin ye be scatred: that I maye be halowed in you be- fore the Heithen, and that ye maye knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haue brought you in to the londe of Israel: yee in to the same lode, that I swore to geue vnto youre fore fathers. ‘There shal ye call to remeni- braunce youre owne wayes and all youre ymaginacious, wherin ye haue bene defyled:
"and ye shal be displeased with youre owne selues, for all youre wickednes, that ye haue doue. And ye shal knowe, that I am the
LORDE: when I entreate you after my name, not after youre wicked wayes, ner acordinge to youre corrupte workes: o ye house of Israel, saieth the LORDE.
Morouer, the worde of y LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of mà, set thy face towarde the south, q speake to the south wynde, and saye to the wodde towarde the south: Heare the worde of the LORDE, thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil kyndle a fyre in the, ý shal cósume the

* Esa. 2. c. 30. d. Eza. 14.a. á Deu. 12, a. 14. b. 

e lera. 8. a. 18. a. 31. c. 

Chap. rrí. 

grene trees with the drye. No man shal be; able to quench his flame, but all that loketh | from the south to the north, shal be brent therin : q all flesh shal se, that I the LORDE haue kyndled it, so that no man maye quench it. Then sayde I: O LORDE, they wil saye of me: * Tush, they are but fables, that he telleth.

! 

The rri. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came to me, 

sayenge: Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde lerusalem, speake agaynst the,
Sanctuary, ¢ prophecie agaynst the londe of; 
Israel, saye to the lode of Israel: ‘Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, I wil vpon the, q wil drawe my swearde ont of y sheth, q rote out of y both the rightuous q the wicked.
Seinge then that I will rote out of the both the rightnons q wicked, therfore shal my swearde go out of his sheth, agaynst all flesh from the north to the south :* that all flesh maye knowe, how that I the LORDE haue drawen my swearde out of the sheth, q it shal not be put in agayne.

Mourne therfore (o thou sonne of man) thy loynes crack withall, yee mourne bytterly for them: And yf they saye, wherfore mournest thou? Then tell them: for the tydinges that commeth, at the which all hertes shall melt, all hondes shal be letten downe, all stomackes sha] faynte, and all knees shall waxe feble.
Beholde, it commeth ¢ shal be fulfilled, saieth the LORDE God.

Agayne, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thon sonne of man, prophecie, and speake: Thus saieth the
LORDE God: speake, the swearde is sharp- ened q wel scoured. Sharpened is it for the slaughter, q scoured y it maye be bright.
^O, the destroyenge staff of my sonne, shal bringe downe all wodde. He hath put his swearde to ý dightinge, Y good holde maye be| take of it. This swearde is sharpened q dight, y it maye be geuen in to the honde of the manslayer.

Crie (o thou sonne of man) and howle, for this swearde shal smyte my people, q all the rulers in Israel, which with my people shall, be slayne downe to the grounde thorow this swearde. Smyte thou vpo thy thee, for, wherfore shulde not the plage q staff of indgmét

t 

? ere. 20. b. * Esa. 10. a. 

Cbr prophet Csechicl. 

So. Derry. 

come? Prophecy thou sonne of man, q smyte thine hodes together: make the swearde two edged, yee make it thre edged, y man- slayers swearde, that swearde of the greate slaughter, which shal smyte them, euen in their preuy chambres: to make them abaszshed q faynte at the hertes, t in all gates to make some of them fall. O how bright and sharpe is it, how wel dight q mete for y slaughter?
Get the to some place alone, ether vpon the right honde or on the lefte, whither so euer thy face turneth. I wil smyte my hondes to- gether also, and satisfie my wrothfull indig- nacion: Euen I the LORDE haue sayde it.

'The worde of the LORDE came yet vnto me agayne, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, make the two stretes, that the swearde of $ kinge of Babilo maye come. Both these stretes shall go out of one londe. He shal set him vp a place, at the heade of the strete shal he chose him out a corner. Make y a strete, that the swearde maye come towarde Rabath of the Ammonites, and to the stronge cite of lerusalem. For the kinge of Babilon shall stonde in the turnynge of the waye, at the heade of the two stretes: ^to axe conncell at the soythsayers, castinge the lottes with his arowes, to axe councell at the Idols, and to loke in the lyuer. But the soythsayenge shall poynte to the right syde vpon Ierusalem, that he maye set men of warre, to smyte it with a greate noyse, to crie out Alarum, to set batell- rammes agaynst the gates, to graue vp dyches, a to make bulworkes.

Neuertheles, as for y soythsayenge, they shall holde it but for vanite, euen as though a lest were tolde them: Yee and they them selues remembre their wickednesse, so that by right they must be také and wonne.
Therfore saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as ye youre selues shewe youre offence, and haue opened youre wickednesse, so that in all youre workes men maye se youre synnes :
Yee in so moch (I saye) that ye youre selues hane made mencion therof, ye shalbe taken by violence.

O thou shameful wicked gyde of Israel, whose daye is come: euen the tyme that wickednesse shall haue an ende: Thus saieth the LORDE God: take awaye the mytre, and put of the crowne, and so is it awaye: the humble is exalted, and the proude bronght

* Leuit. 19.f. 20. a. Deut. 18. b. 

fo. Deerrht. 

lowe. Punysh, punysh, yee punysh them will 
I, and destroye them: and that shall not be fulfilled, vntill he come, to whom the indg- ment belongeth, and to whom I haue geue it.
And thou (o sonne of man) prophecy, q speake: 
° Thus saieth the LORDE God to the children of Ammon, ¢ to their blasphemy, speake thou:
The swearde, the swearde, is drawen forth al- redy to the slaughter, ¢ scoured that it glistreth
(because thou hast loked the out vanities, t prophecied lyes) y it maye come vpon thy necke, like as vpo the other vngodly, which be slayne: whose daye came, when their wick- ednesse was full.

Though it were put vp agayne in to the sheath, yet will I punysh the, in the londe where thou wast norished ¢ borne, and poure my indignacion vpon the, and will blowe vpon the in the fyre of my wrath, and delyuer the vnto cruell people, which are lerned to de- stroye. ‘Thou shalt fede the fyre, and thy bloude shall be shed in the londe, that thou mayest be put out of remembraunce. Euen
I the LORDE haue spoken it. 

The rrij. Chapter. 

/TOROUER, the worde of LORDE 
N came vnto me, q sayde: ‘Thou sonne of man, wilt thou not reproue this bloud- thurstie cite? Shewe the their abhominacios, a tell them: Thus saieth the LORDE God:
O thou cite, y sheddest bloude in ý myddest of the, y thy tyme maye come also: and makest the Idols to defyle the withall. Thou hast made thy self gilty, in $ bloude 4 thou hast shed: a defyled $ 1 ¥ ydols, which thou hast made. ‘Thou hast caused thy daies to drawe nye, q made the tyme of thy yeares to come. Therfore will I make y to be con- founded amoge the Heithé, q to be despised in all the lodes, whether they be nye or farre fro the: they shal laugh $ to scorne, thou y hast gotté the so foule a name, q art full o myschefe. ^Beholde, the rulers of Israel haue brought euery man his power, to shed blonde in the. In the haue they despised father ¢ mother, in the haue they oppressed the straü- ger, in the haue they vexed the wyddowe q the fatherlesse. Thou hast despysed my Sac- tuary, and vnhalowed my Sabbath. *Mur- therers are there in the, that shed bloude, q

* Tere. 49. c. Eze.25.a. Amosi.c. e Deu. 12. Leui, 18.

5 Deu. 5. c. 25. c. 
4 Eze. 33. f. Iere, 5. e. 

Cbr prophet Esechtel. 

eate vpon the hilles, and in the they vse vnhappynesse.

In y haue they discouered their fathers shame, in the haue they vexed women in their sicknesse. “4 Euery ma hath dealte shamefully with his neghbours wife,¢ abhominably defyled his doughter in lawe. In the hath euery man forced his owne sister, *euen his fathers doughter: Yee giftes haue bene receaued in the, to shed bloude. ‘Thou hast taken vsury t encreace, thou hast oppressed thy neghbours by extorcion, and forgotten me, saieth the
LORDE God. Beholde, I haue smytten my hondes vp6 thy couetousnesse, that thou hast vsed, and vpon the bloude which hath bene shed in the. Is thy herte able to endure it, or maye thy hondes defende them selues, in the tyme that I shall bringe vpon the? Euen
I the LORDE that speake it, will bringe it also to passe.

JI will scatre the amonge the Heithen, q strowe the aboute in the lodes, and wil cause thy fylthynesse to ceasse out off the: yee and
I will haue the in possession in the sight of the Heithen, that thou mayest knowe, that I am the LORDE.

And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, the house of Israel is turned to drosse.* All they that shulde be brasse, tynne, yró q leade, are in the fyre become drosse. ‘Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as ye all are turned in to drosse, beholde: I will brynge you together vnto lerusalem, like as syluer, brasse, yron, tynne and leade are put together in the fornace, and the fyre blowen there vnder to melt them: Euen so will I gather you, put you in together, and melt you in my wrath and indignacion. I will brynge you together, and kyndle the fyre of my cruell displeasure vnder you, that ye maye be melted therin.

Like as the syluer is melted in the fyre, so shall ye also be melted therin: that ye maye knowe, how that I the LORDE hane poured my wrath vpon you.

And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayege: ‘Thou sonne of ma, tell her:
Thou art an vn clene londe, which is not rayned vpon in the daye off the cruell wrath:
^thy prophetes that are in the, are sworne 

*Deu.27.c. Eze.13.d. Exo. 22.c. f Eze. 12. c. 15. b. 

€ Esa. 1. c. ^ Mich. 3. c. 

Chap. rríj. 

€ 

Chap. rrii. Cbr prophet Ezechiel, Fo. Deerrby. fornicacio, that she vsed with the Egipcians: for in hir youth they laye with her, they brussed the Bus of hir maydenheade, and poured their wordome vpon her. / Wherfore,
I delyuered her in to y hodes of hir louers, euen the Assirians, whom she so loued. £ These disconered hir shame, toke hir sonnes and doughters, and slewe her with the swearde:
An euell name gat she of all people, ad they punyshed her.

^ Hir sister Ooliba sawe this, ad destroyed|33 herself with inordinate loue, more then she, q exceaded hir sister in whordome : she loued y
Assirians (which also laye with her) namely, the prynces « greate lordes, that were clothed with all maner of gorgious apparell, all lusty horsmen and fayre yonge personnes. Then
I sawe, that they both were defyled a like. 
But she increased stil in whordome: for when she sawe men paynuted vpon the wall, the ymages off the Caldees set forth with fresh colours, with fayre gyrdles aboute them, and goodly bonettes vpon their heades, lokynge all like prynces (after $ maner of the Babi- lonias and Caldees in their owne londe, where they be borne) Inmediatly, as soone as she sawe them, she brent in loue vpon them, and sent messaügers for them in to the londe of the Caldees.

Now when the Dabiloniis came to her, they laye with her, and defyled her with their whordome, and so was she poluted with them.
And when hir lust was abated from them, hir whordome and shame was discouered q sene:
‘then my herte forsoke her, like as my herte was gone from hir sister also. Neuertheles she vsed hir whordome euer the longer the more, and remembred the dayes off hir youth, wherin she had played the harlot in the londe off Egipte: she brent in lust vpon them, whose flesh was like y flesh of Asses,* and their sede like the sede off horses. Thus thou hast re- nued the fylthynesse of thy youth, when thy louers bressed thy pappes, aud marred thy brestes in Egipte.

Therfore (o Ooliba) thus saieth y LORDE 
God. I will rayse vp thy louers (with whom thou hast satisfied thy lust) agaynst the, and gather them together rounde aboute the:
Namely, the Babilonians, and all the Caldees: 
Pecod, Schoa and Coa, with all the Assirians: 

together to deuoure soules, like as a roaringe 
Lyon, that lyueth by his pray. They receaue riches and good, and make many wyddowes in y. Thy prestes breake my lawe, and defyle my Sanctuary. “They put no dyfference betwene the holy and vnholy, nether discerne betwene the clene and vnclene: they turne their eyes fro my Sabbathes, and I am vn- halowed amonge them.

*Thy rulers in the are like rauyshinge wolues, to shed bloude, and to destroye soules, for their owne covetous luere. As for thy prophetes, they dawbe with vntempered claye, they se vanities, and prophecie lies vnto them, sayenge: the LORDE God sayeth so, where as the LORDE hath not spoken. ‘The people in the londe vseth wicked extorcio and rob- bery. “They vexe the poore and nedy: and oppresse the straunger agayust right. And I sought in the londe for a man, that wolde make vp the hedge, and set him self in the gappe before me in the lodes behalfe, y I shulde not vtterly destroye it: but I coude fynde none. "Therfore wil I poure out my cruel] displeasure vpon them, and burne them in the fyre of my wrath: their owne wayes wil I recompence vpo their heades, saieth

the LORDE God. 

The rriij. Chapter. 

HE worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, there were two wome, that had one mother: These
(wheu they were yonge) beganne to playe the harlottes in Egipte. ‘There were their brestes brussed, and the pappes off their mayden- heade destroyed. The eldest of them was called Oola, and hir yongest sister Ooliba.
These two were myue, and bare sonnes and doughters. ‘Their names were, Samaria, and that was Oola: and Ierusalem, that was Ooliba.
As for Oola, she beganne to go a whorynge, when I had také her to me. She was set on fyre vpon hir louers the Assirians, which had to do with her: *euen the prynces and lordes, that were deckte in costly araye: fayre yonge

men, lusty ryders of horses. 

"Thus thorow hir whordome, she cleued vnto all the yonge men off Assiria: Yee she was madde vpon them, and defyled herselff with all their Idols. Nether ceassed she fro the

€ Eze. 16. b. ^ Tere. 3. b. 4 Re. 16. b. * Esa. 47. a. 
Naum3, d. Eze. 16. e. * Eze. 16. c. 

? Leui. 10. c. * Mich. 3. d. Soph. 3. d. Eze. 13, b. e Exo.22.c. d Eze.20.a. -*4Re.15.d. /4 Re.17.e.

ffo. Deexroty. 

B 

all yonge and fayre louers: prynces and lordes, knyghtes and gentlemen, which be all good horsmen: These shall come vpon the with horses, charettes, q a greate multitude of people: which shal be harnessed aboute the on euery syde, with brestplates, sheldes and helmettes. I will punysh y before them, yee they thé selues shal punysh the, acordinge to their owne iudgmét. I will put my gelousy vpou the, so that they shall deale cruelly with the. They shal cut of thy nose and thine eares, and the remnaunt shall fall thorow the swearde. ‘They shall cary awaye thy sonnes and doughters, « the resydue shalbe brent in the fyre. They shal strype the out of thy clothes, q cary thy costly Iewels awaye with them.

'Thus will I make an ende off thy fylthy- nesse q whordome, which thou hast brought out of the lode of Egipte: so that thou shalt turne thine eyes nomore after them, q cast thy mynde nomore vpon Egipte. For thus saleth the LORDE: Beholde, I vill delyuer y in to the hédes of them, whom thou hatest : yee euen in to the hondes of them, with who thou hast fulfylled thy lust, which shall deale cruelly with y: All thy laboure shal they take with them, and leaue the naked and bare, and thus the shame of thy filthy whordome shal eome to light. All these thinges shal happen vnto the, because of thy whordome, which thou hast vsed amonge the Gentiles, with whose
Idols thou hast defyled thy self. Thou hast walked in the waye of thy sister, therfore will
I geue the hir cuppe in thy honde. 

Thus saieth the LORDE God: Thou shalt dryuke off thy sisters cuppe, how depe « farre so euer it be to the botome. ‘Thou shalt be laughed to scorne, and had as greatly in deri- sion, as is possible. 'Thou shalt be full off dronekennes and sorowe, for the cuppe of thy sister Samaria is a cuppe of destruccion q waistinge : the same shalt thou drynke, and suppe it out eue to y dregges, yee thou shalt eate vp the broken peces off it, and so teare thine owne brestes: For euen I haue spoken it, saleth the LORDE God.

Therfore thus saieth y LORDE God: For so moch as thou hast forgotté me, q cast me asyde, so beare now thine owne fylthinesse q whordome. The LORDE sayde morouer voto me: Thou sonne of mà, wilt thou not

a 4 Re. 21. a. 

^ Eze. 16. c. * Exo. 20. d. 

The prophet Csechiel. 

reproue Oola q Ooliba? Shewe thé their abhominaciós: namely, y they haue broké their wedlocke, q stayned their hodes with bloude: yee euen with their Idols haue they committed aduoutry, "x offred them their owne children (to be deuoured) who they had borne vnto me. ?Yee q this haue they done vnto me also: they haue defyled my Sactuary in that same daye, x haue vnhalowed my Sab- bath. For when they had slayne their childré for their Idols, they came the same daye in to my Sanctuary, to defyle it. Lo, this haue they done in my house. Besyde all this, thon hast sent thy messaungers for men out of farre coütrees: and whé they came, thou hast bathed, trymmed and set forth thy selff off the best fashion: ‘thou sattest vpo a goodly bed, q a table spred before the: whervpon thou hast set myne incense and myne oyle.
Then was there greate cheare with her, q the men y were sent fro farre coütrees ouer the deserte: vnto these they gaue bracelettes vpon their hondes, q set glorious crownes vpon their heades. Then thought I: no doute, these wil vse their harlotry also with yoder olde whore. And they wente in to her, as vnto a comon harlot: Euen so wente they also to Oola q Ooliba, those filthy women.
^O ye all that loue vertue and rightuous- nes, judge the, punysh them: as aduoutrers and murtherers ought to be iudged and punyshed. For they are breakers off wed- locke, and the bloude is in their hondes.
Wherfore thus saieth the LORDE God: bringe a greate multitude off people vpon them, and make them be scatred and spoyled: these shal stone them, and gorre them with their sweardes. They shal slaye their sonnes ms doughters and burne vp their houses with re. j "Thus will I destroye all soch fylthynes out off the londe: that all women may lerne, not to do after youre vnclénesse. And so they shall laye youre fylthinesse vpon youre owne selues, and ye shalbe punyshed for the synnes, that ye haue committed with youre Idols: q ye shall knowe, that I am the LORDE.

The yyiij. Chapter. 
N the ix. yeare, in the x. Moneth, the 

x. daye off the Moneth, came the worde off the LORDE vnto me, sayenge: O thou

d Leui. 20. b. Eze. 16. d. 

Chap, rritij. 

F 

a 

C Che prophet Esechiel, 

C a NS 

bap. rrb. 

sonne off man, wryte vp the name off this daye, yee eué y houre of this present daye : when the kynge of Babilon set himself agaynst
Terusalé. “Shewe y obstinate housholde a parable, q speake vnto the: Thus sayeth the
LORDE God: Get the a pot, set it on, q poure water in to it: put all the peces together in it, all the good peces: the loyne and the shulder, « fyll it with the best bones. ‘Take one off the best shepe, x an heape off bones withall : let it boyle well, q let the bones seyth well therin.

With that, sayde the LORDE God on this maner: ^Wo be vnto the bloudy cite of y pot, whervpon the rustynesse hageth, and is not yet scoured awaye. ‘lake out the peces that are in it, one after another: there nede no lottes be cast therfore, for the bloude is yet in it. Vpon a playne drye stone hath she poured it, and not vpon the grounde, that it might be couered with dust. And therfore haue I letten her poure hir bloude vpon a playne drye stony rocke, because it shulde not be hid, and that
I might bringe my wrothfull indignacion and vengeaunce vpon her.

Wherfore, thus saieth y LORDE God: 
O, wo be vnto that bloudthurstie cite, for who 
I wil prepare a heape off wodde: beare thou y bones together, kyndle thou the fyre, seeth the flesh, let all be well sodde, that the bones maye be suckte out. Morouer, set the pot emptye vpon the coales, that it maye be warme and the metall hote: that the fylth and rusty- nesse maye be consumed. But it will not go off, there is so moch off it: the rustinesse must be brent out. Thy filthinese is abhomi- nable, for 1 wolde haue clensed the, but thou woldest not be clensed. ‘Thou canst not be pourged from thine vnclennesse, till 1 haue poured my wrothfull indignacion vpon the.
Euen I the LORDE haue so deuysed: Yee it is come therto allredy, that I will do it. 1 will not go backe, I will not spare, I wil not be intreated: but acordinge to thy wayes ad ymaginacions, thou shalt be punyshed, saieth the LORDE God.

And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne off man, beholde,
I will take awaye the pleasure off thine eyes with a plage: yet shalt thou nether mourne ner wepe, ner water thy chekes therfore: thou mayest mourne by thy selff alone, but vse no deadly lamentacion. Holde on thy bonet,

a Eze. 17. a. Eze. 11. b. 5 Nau. 3. e. Aba. 2. a. 

and put on thy shues vpon thy fete, couer not thy face, and eate no mourners bred. So I spake vuto the people by tymes in the morn- ynge, and at euen my wyfe dyed: then vpon the nexte morow, I dyd as 1 was cOmaunded,
And y people sayde vnto me: wilt thou not tell vs, what that signifieth, which thou doest?
I answered them, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayege: Tell the house of
Israel, thus saieth y LORDE God: beholde, 
I wil suspende my Sanctuary: eué the glory of youre power, the pleasure of youre eyes, and the thinge that ye loue: youre sonnes and doughters whom ye haue left, shal fall thorow the swerde.

Like as I haue done, so shall ye do also:|B 

Ye shal not hyde youre faces, ye shal eate no mourners bred: youre bonettes shal ye haue vpon youre heades, q shues vpon youre fete.
Ye shal nether mourne ner wepe, but in youre synnes ye shal be soroufull, and one repéte with another. Thus Ezechiel is youre shewtoké.
For loke as he hath done, so (when this commeth) ye shall do also: that ye maye lerne to knowe, that I am Y LORDE God. But beholde, O thou sonne of man: In the daye when I take from them their power, their ioye and honoure, the lust off their eyes, the burthé of their bodies: namely, their sonnes and doughters: ‘Thé shall there one escape, and come vnto the, for to shewe the. In that daye shal thy mouth be opened to him, which is escaped, that thou mayest speake, and be nomore domme: Yee and thou shalt be their shewtoké, that they maye knowe, how that | am the LORDE.

The pro. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came vuto 

me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, set 

thy face agaynst y Ammonites, ‘prophecy vpon them, and saye vnto the Ammonites: Heare the worde off the LORDE God, Thus saieth the
LORDE God: For so moch as thon speakest ouer my Sanctuary: A ha, I trow it be now sus- pended: and ouer the londe of Israel, I trow it be now desolate: yee ad ouer the house of luda, 1 trow they be now led awaye presoners:
Beholde, 1 will delyuer ¥ to the people of the east, y they maye haue the in possession: these shal set their castels and houses in the.
They shall eate thy frute, and drynke vp thy 

e Eze. 21. d. Iere. 49. a, 

95 

So. deerrir. 

| fo. Deerer. myleke. As for Rabath, I wil make of it a stall for camels, and of Ammon a shepefolde : and ye shal kuowe, that I am the LORDE.

For thus saieth the LORDE God: In so moch as thou hast clapped with thine hondes, and stamped with thy fete, yee reioysed in thine herte oner the londe of Israel with despyte: beholde, I wil stretch ont myne hode ouer the also, and delyuer the, to be spoyled off the Heithen, and rote the out from amonge the people, and cause the be destroyed ont off all londes: yee I will make the be layed waist, that thou mayest knowe, that I am the
LORDE. 

Thus saieth ¥ LORDE God: “For so moch as Moab and Seir do saye: As for the house off Iuda, it is but like as all other
Gétiles be: Therfore beholde, I will make the cities off Moab weapenlesse, and take awaye their strength: their cities and chefe eoastes off their londe, which are the pleasures off the countre: As namely. Betiesimoth,
Baalmeó and Cariathaim: these will I open vnto thé off the east, y they maye fall vpon the Ammonites: and wil geue it them in possession: so that the Ammonites shal no more be had in remébraunee amonge the
Heithen. Éuen thus will I punysh Moab also, that they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

Morouer, thus sayeth the LORDE God: 
! Because that Edom hath avenged q eased himself vpon the house off Iuda, therfore thus saieth the LORDE: I will reach out myne honde vpon Edom, and take awaye man and beest out off it. From Thema vnto Dedan wil I make it desolate, they shalbe slayne with the swearde. ‘Thorow my people of Israel,
‘wil I avenge me agayne vpo Edo: they shal hadle him, acordinge to my wrath and indig- nacio, so that they shal knowe my vengeaunce, saieth the LORDE God.

Thus saieth LORDE God: ^Forso moch as the Philistynes haue done this: namely, taken vengeaunce with despitefull stomackes, and off an olde euell will set them selues to destroye: Therfore thus saieth the LORDE
God: Beholde, I wil stretch ont myne hode ouer the Philistynes, and destroye the de- stroyer, and cause all the remnaunt off the see coast to perish. A greate vengeaunce will

* Esa. 15.16. Esa. 48. a. Soph.2. b. ^ Esa. 34. a. 
Tere. 49. b. Eze. 32. f. 35. a. Psal. 136. b. Gen. 25. d. 

The prophet Cserbitl. 

Chap. rrbí. 
I take vpon them, and punysh them cruelly : 

that they maye knowe, how that I am the 
LORDE, which haue avenged me off them. 

The rrt. Chapter. 

IE happened, that in the xi. yeare, the first à 

daye off the Moneth, the worde of the 
LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: * Thon sonne of man, Because that Tyre hath spoken vpon lerusalem: A ha, now I trow the portes of the people be broken, and she turned vnto me, for I haue destroyed my bely full. Yee therfore saieth y LORDE God: Beholde O
Tyre, 1 will vpo the, I wil bringe a greate multitude off people agaynst $, like as whé the see aryseth with his wawes: These shal breake the walles off Tyre, and cast downe hir towres : I wil serape the grounde from her, and make her a bare stone: yee as the dry- enge place, where the fyshers hange vp their nettes by the see syde. Enen I haue spoken it, sayeth the LORDE God. The Gétiles shal spoyle her: hir doughters vpon the felde shall perish with the swearde, y they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

For thus saieth the LORDE God: Be-|33 holde, I will brynge hither Nabuchedonosor
(which is the kynge off Babilon q a kynge of kynges) from the North, vpo Tyre, with horses, charettes, horsmen and with a greate multitude of people. Thy doughters that are in the'londe, shal he slaye with y swearde :
But agaynst y, he shall make bullworkes q graue vp dyches aboute the, q lift vp his shylde agayust y. His slynges q batelrames shal he prepare for thy walles, q with his weapés breake downe thy towres. The dust of his horses shal coner y, they shalbe so many: thy walles shal shake at the noyse of ¥ horse men, charettes t wheles: when he comet. to thy portes, as men do in to an open cite.
With the hoffes off his horse fete, shal he treade downe all thy stretes.

He shal slaye thy people with the swearde, 
& breake downe the pilers of thy strength. 
They shal waist awaye thy riches, q spoyle thy marchaiidise. Thy walles shal they breake downe, c destroye thy houses of pleasure.
Thy stones, thy tymbre q foundacions, shall they cast in the water. Thus wil I brynge the melody of thy songes, /x the voyce of thy

* 1 Macb, 5. a. 4 Esa. 14. e. lere. 47. a. Soph. 2. a. e Esa. 23. a. lere. 47. b. Eze. 27. 28. Sf Tere. 7. d.

Chap. rrbij. 

Che prophet Esechiel. 

Fo. Deeprrt. 

myustrelsy to an ende, so that they shal no-| more be herde. I wil make a bare stone oii the, yee a dryenge place for nettes, and shalt neuer be buylded agayne: For euc I y.
LORDE haue spoken it, sayeth the LORDE 
God: thus hath the LORDE God spoken concernynge Tyre: The Iles shall be moued at the noyse off thy fall, q at the crie of the slayne, y shal be murthured in the. AN kynges off the see shall come downe from their seates regall: they shal laye awaye their roabes, and put off their costly clothinge: Yee with tremblinge shal they be clothed, they shall syt vpo the grounde : they shal be afrayed at thy sodane fall, and be abasshed at the.

They shal mourne for the, and saye vnto the: O thou noble cite, y hast bene so greatly occupyed off olde, “thou that hast bene the strongest vpon the see with thine inhabitours off whom all men stode in feare: How art thou now so vtterly destroyed? Now at the tyme off thy fall the inhabitours off the Iles, yee and the Iles them selues shall stonde in feare at thine ende. For thus sayeth the
LORDE God: when I make the a desolate cite (as other cities be, that no man dwell in) and when I brynge the depe vpon the, y greate waters maye couer the: ‘Then will I east the downe vnto them, that descende in to y pytte: ynto a people that hath bene loge deed, and set the in a londe y is beneth, like the olde wyldernes, with them which go downe to their graues, so y no ma shal dwell more in the. And I wil make the to be no more in honoure, in the lode of the lyuynge. I wil make an ende off the, ad thou shalt be gone.
'Though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou not be founde for euermore, saieth ý LORDE
God. 

The rrbij. Chapter. 

HE worde off the LORDE came vnto 

me, sayenge: O thou sonne off ma, make a lamentable coplaynte vpon Tyre, a saye vnto Tyre, which is a porte off the see, y occupieth with moch people:^ and many les: thus speaketh Y LORDE God: O Tyre thou hast sayde: what, I am a noble cite, thy borders are in the myddest of the see, and thy buylders hane made the maruelous goodly.
All thy tables haue they made of Cipre trees of the mount Senir. Fré Libanus haue they

2 Tren. 1, a. 5 Eze. 26. 28. 

take Cedre trees, to make the mastes: q the 
Okes of Dasan to make the rowers. 

Thy boordes haue they made of yuery, « of costly wod out of the Ile of Cethim. Thy sale was of whyte small nedle worke out oif the londe of Egipte, to hage vpo thy mast: q thy hanginges of yalow sylcke q purple, out of y Iles of Elisa. They of Sido a Arnad were thy maryners, q the wysest in Tyre were thy shypmasters. The eldest and wysest at Gebal were they, that mended q stopped thy shippes.

All shippes off the see with their shipmé occupied their marchaundies in the. The
Perses, Lydians and Lybians were in thyne hoost, and helped the to fight: these hanged vp their shildes q helmettes with the, these set forth thy beuty.

They off Arnad were with thine hoost roüde aboute thy walles, q were thy watch- men vpon thy towres: these hanged vp their shildes roüde aboute thy walles, and made the maruelous goodly. Tharsis occupied with the in all maner of wares, in syluer, yron, tynne and lead, and made thy market greate. Tauan,
Tubal and Mesech were thy marchauntes, which brought the men, q ornamentes off metall for thy occupyenge. They off the house of Thogarma brought vnto the at the tyme off thy Marte, horse, horsmen and mules.
“They off Dedan were thy marchaütes: and many other Iles that occupyed with the, brought the wethers, elephat bones and Pay- cockes for a present. ‘Lhe Sirians occupied with the, because of thy dyuerse workes, and increased thy marchaundies, with Smaragdes, with scarlet, with nedle worke, with whyte lynninge cloth, with syleke and with Christall.

Iuda and the londe off Israel occupide with the, and brought vnto thy markettes, wheate, balme, hony, oyle, q triacle. Damascus also vsed marchaüdies with the, in the best wyne and whyte woll: because thy occupienge was so greate, and thy wares so many. Dan, lauan, and Meusal haue brought vnto thy markettes, yron redy made, with Casia and
Calamus, acordinge to thyne occupienge. 
Dedan occupied with the, in fayre tapestry worke and quyszhyns. Arabia q all the princes off Cedar haue occupied with the, in shepe, wethers and goates.

The marchauntes off Seba and Rema haue occupied also with the, in all costly spices, in

* Eze. 25. e. 

5 

So. Deeper. 

€ 

a 

all precious stones and golde, which they brought vnto thy marckettes. Haran, Chene and Eden, the marchauntes off Saba, Assiria and Chelmad, were all doers with y and occu- pied with the: In costly rayment, off yalow sylke and nedle worke, (very precious, q ther- fore packte q boüde together with roapes) Yee and in Cedre wodde, at the tyme off thy marck- ettes. The shippes of Tharsis were the chefe off thy occupienge.

Thus thou art full, and in greate worshipe, euen in the myddest off the see. Thy ma- ryners were euer brynginge vnto the out of many waters. But y easte wynde shal ouer- beare the in to the myddest off the see: so y thy wares, thy marchaudies, thy ryches, thy maryners, thy shipmasters, thy helpers, thy occupiers (that brought the thinges necessary) the men off warre that are in the: yee and all thy comons shall perish in the myddest off the see, in the daye off thy fall. ‘The suburbes shall shake at the loude crie off thy shippmen.
All whirry men, and all maryners vpo the see, shall leape out of their boates, and set them selues vpon the lode. ‘They shal lift vp itheir voyce because off the, and make a la- mentable crye. They shall cast dust vpon their heades, ad lye downe in the asshes.
| They shal shaue them selues, ¢ put sacke cloth vpon them for thy sake.

They shall mourne for the with hertfull sorow, and heuy lamentacion, yee their child- ren also shall wepe for the: Alas, what cite hath so bene destroyed in the see, as Tyre is?
‘When thy wares q marchaundies came frō the 
‘sees, thou gauest all people ynough. The 
‘kynges off the earth hast thou made rich, 
Ithorow the multitude off thy wares and occu- pienge: But now art thou cast downe in to the depe of the see, all thy resorte of people is perished with the. All they that dwell in the Iles are abasshed at the, and all their kynges are afrayed, yee their faces haue chaunged coloure. The marchauntes of the nacions wondre at the, In that thou art so clene brought to naught, a cOmest nomore vp.

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

HE worde of the LORDE came vnto 
| me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, tell the prynce of Tyre:* Thus saieth the LORDE
God: because thou hast a proude hert and 

* Eze. 26. 27, * Esa. 14. c. 

The prophet Eserhtet, 

hast sayde: *I am a God, I haue my seate in the myddest off the see like a god: where as thou art but a man ¢ not God, q yet stondest in thine owne coceate, that thou art God:
Beholde, thou thynkest thy selfe wyser then 
Daniel, that there is no secretes hyd from y.* 
With thy wiszdome q thy vnderstodinge, thou hast gotté the greate welthynesse, and gathered treasure of syluer q golde. With thy greate wiszdome and occupienge, hast thou increased thy power, and because of thy greate riches thy hert is proude.

Therfore thus saieth y LORDE God: For so moch as thou hast lift vp thine herte, as though thou werst God : beholde, I wil bringe enemies vpon the, euen the tyrauntes of the
Heithé: these shal drawe out their sweardes vpon thy beuty and wiszdome, and shall de- fyle thy glory. "They shal cast the downe to the pytte, so that thou shalt dye in the middest of the see, as they that be slayne. Let se, yff thou wilt saye then (before the that slaye y)
Iam God: where as thou art but a man, and not God, in the hondes of them that slaye the. Dye shalt thou, euen as the vncireum- cised in the hades of ý enemies: for I myself haue spoken it, saieth the LORDE God.

Morouer, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: ‘Thou sonne off man, make a lamentable complaynte ouer the kynge of
Tyre, q tell him: Thus saieth the LORDE 
God: Thou art a seale of a licknesse, full off wyszdome q excellent beuty. Thou hast bene in ¥ pleasaut garde off God: thou art decte

co 

beuty q y holes y be in y 

I haue set the vpon the holy mount off 
God, there hast thou bene, and walked amoge the fayre glisteringe stones. From the tyme of thy creacion thou hast bene right excellent, tyll wickednesse was foundeinthe. “Because off thy greate marchaundise, thy hert is full of wickednesse, q thou hast offended. Ther- fore wil I cast the from the mount of God, (O thou coueringe Cherub) and destroye the amoge the glisteringe stones. Thy hert was proude in thy fayre beuty, q thorow thy beuty thou hast destroyed thy wiszdome. I will

* Dan. 2. 

d Esa. 2. b. 

€ bap. rrbíiij. 

B 

Chap. rrir. cast y downe to the grounde, q y in y sight of kynges. Thou hast defyled D Sactuary, with the greate wickednesse off thy onright- nous occupyenge. I wil bringe a fyre from the myddest of the, to consume the: ad wil make the to asshes, in the sight of all the y loke vpon the. All they that haue bene ac- quaunted with the amonge the Heithe, shal be abasshed at the: seinge thou art so clene brought to naught, and comest no more vp.
And the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, set thy face agaynst Sido, Prophecie vpo it, and speake. “Thus saieth the LORDE God:
Beholde o Sidon, I wil vpo the, q get me honoure in the: that it maye be knowne, how that I am y LORDE, when I punysh her, ¢ get me honoure in her. For I will sende pestilence ¢ bloud sheddinge in to hir stretes, so ý those which be slayne with the swerde, shal lye rounde aboute in the myddest of her: q they shal knowe, that I am the LORDE.
She shal no more be a prickinge thorne, q an hurtinge brere vnto the house of Israel, ner vnto thé that lye rounde aboute her and hate her: and they shal knowe, that I am the
LORDE. : 
Thus saieth the LORDE God: when I gather the housholde of Israel together agayne, from the nacions amonge whom they be scatred: then shal I be sanctified in the, in y sight of the Gétiles: q they shal dwell in the lode, y I gaue to my seruaunt Iacob. They shal dwell safely therin, *buylde houses, and plante vynyardes: Yee safely shal they dwell therin, when I haue punyshed all those, that despyse them rounde aboute: and then shall they knowe, y I am the LORDE their God.

The rrir. Chapter. 

N the x. yeare, vpon the xij. daye off the 
T x. Moneth, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayége: “O thou sonne off ma, set now thy face agaynst Pharao the kynge off
Egipte, Prophecye agaynst him and agaynst the whole lode of Egipte: Speake, and tell him, thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde, o Pharao thou kinge of Egipte, I wil vpo the, thou greate whall fysh, y lyest in thy waters:
Thou y sayest: the water is myne, I haue made it myself. I wil put an hoke in thy

^ Deu. 28. c. Esa. 65. d. 
Tere. 46. a. Eze. 30. 31. 32. 

a Ioel 3. a. Zach. 9, a. 
* Esa. 19. a. 20, a. 

Cbr prophet €serbiel. 

chawes, q hage all the fish in thy waters vpo thy skales: after y I wil drawe the out of thy waters, yee q all the fish of thy waters that hange vpon thy skales.

I wil cast the out vpon the dry lode with the fish of thy waters, so that thou shalt lye vpon the felde. ‘Thou shalt not be gathered ner taken vp, but shalt be meate for the beestes of the felde, q for the foules off the ayre: that all they which dwell in Egipte, maye knowe, that I am the LORDE: be- cause thou hast bene a staff of rede to the house of Israel. ^ When they toke holde of ¥ with their hode thou brakest and prycdest them on euery syde: and yff they leaned vpo the, thou brakest, ad hurtdest the reynes of their backes. Therfore, thus sayeth the
LORDE God: beholde, I will brynge a swearde vpou the, and rote out of the both man and beest. Yee the londe of Egipte shalbe desolate and waist, ¢ they shal knowe, that Iam the LORDE: Because he sayde: the water is mine, I my self haue made it.
Beholde therfore, I wil vpon the, q vpon thy waters: I will make the londe off Egipte waist and desolate, from the towre of Syenes vnto the borders of the Morias londe: so that in xl. yeares there shall no fote off man walke there, nether fote of catell go there, nether shal it be inhabited. 1 wil make the londe of
Egipte to be desolate amonge other waist countrees, and her cities to lye voyde xl. yeares, amonge other voyde cities: And I wil scatre the Egipcians amonge the Heithen and nacions.

Agayne, thus sayeth the LORDE God: 
Whé the xl. yeares are expyred, I wil gather the Egipcians together agayne, out off the nacids, amonge who they were scatred, and wil bringe the presoners off Egipte agayne in to the londe off Pathures their owne natyue countre, that they maye be there a lowly small kyngdome: yee they shal be the smallest amonge other kyngdomes, lest they exalte them selues aboue the Heithen: for I will so myuish them, that they shall nomore rule the
Heithen. They shall nomore be an hope vnto the house off Israel, nether prouoke the eny- more to wickednesse, to cause them turne i backe, and to folowe them: dd they shal knowe, that I am the LORDE God.

4d 4 Re. 18. d. Esa. 30. a, 31. a. 36. a. * Tere, 46. e. 

Fo. Deerrriy. 

| ffo. Deeryyttt, 

c 

B 

In the xxvij. yeare, the first daye of the first Moneth, came ¥ worde off the LORDE vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne off man, Na- bnehodonosor the kynge off Babilon hath made his hoost, with greate trauayle and laboure to come before Tyre: that euery heade maye be balde, and euery shulder bare.
Yet hath Tyre geuen nether him ner his hoost eny rewarde, for ý greate trauayle y he hath taken there. ‘Therfore thus saieth $ LORDE
(God: beholde I will gene the lode of Egipte vnto Nabuchodonosor the kynge off Babilo, y he maye take awaye all hir substaüce, robbe hir robberies, ad spoyle hir spoyles, to paye his hoost their wagies withall. I wil geue him the londe of Egipte for his laboure, that he toke for me before Tyre. At the same tyme wil I cause the horne off the house of Israel to growe forth, q open thy mouth agayne amonge them: that they maye knowe, how that I am the LORDE.

The rrr. Chapter. 

OROUER, the worde off the LORDE 

came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne 

of man, prophecy q speake: thus saieth the 
LORDE God: * Mourne, wo worth this daye, for the daye is here, the daye of y LORDE is come: the darcke daye of ¥ Hehe’ the houre is at honde, the swearde commeth vpon
Egipte. When the wounded men fall downe in Egipte, when hir people are taken awaye, and when hir foundacids are destroyed: the
Morians londe shal be afrayed, yee the Mo- 

rians londe, Lybia q Lydia, all their comon people, t Chub, ¢ all y be confederate vnto the, shal fall with the thorow f swearde.
Thus saieth $ LORDE: The maynteyners of the lode of Egipte shal fall, the pryde of

hir power shal come downe: eué vnto the tower off Syenes shall they be slayne downe with the swearde, saieth y LORDE God: amonge other desolate countrees they shal be made desolate, ¢ amége other waist cities they shalbe waisted. And they shal knowe, y I am y LORDE, when I kyndle a fyre in Saati, t when all hir helpers are destroyed.

At that tyme, shal there messaungers go forth fro me in shippes, to make y carelesse
Morians afrayed: and sorowe shal come vpon them in the daye of Egipte, for doutles it shal come. Thus saieth the LORDE God: I wil

* Eze. 29. 31. 32. 

Che prophet Csecbiel. 

Chap. rrr! make an ende of the people of Egipte thorow the honde of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Ba- bilon. He and his people with him, yee and the eruell tyrauntes of the Heithen shalbe bronght to destroye the londe. "They shal drawe out their sweardes vpou Egipte and fyll the londe full of slayne men. I will drye vp their floudes of water, ad sell the lode in to the hondes of wicked people. The lode and all y is therin, wil I destroye thorow the ene- mies. Eué I the LORDE haue sayde it.

And thus saieth the LORDE God: I will destroye the Idols, and brynge the ymages of
Noph to an ende. *'lhere shal nomore be a prynce of Egypte, and a fearfulnesse will I, sende in to the Egipcians londe. As for Pa- thures, I wil make it desolate, ad kyndle a fyre in Zoan. Alexandria will I punysh, q poure my wrothfull indignacio vpo Sin, which’ is the strength of Egipte. All the sustaunce of Alexandria will I destroye, and kyndle a fyre in Egipte.

Sin shalbe in greate heuynesse, Alexandria shalbe roted out, and Noph shall haue daylie sorowe. ‘The best men off Heliopolis q Bu- basto shalbe slayne with the swearde, ad caried awaye captyue. At Taphnis the daye shalbe darcke, when I breake there the scepter of the londe of Egipte, and when Y pompe of hir power shal haue an ende. A cloude shal couer her, and hir doughters shalbe led awaye intocaptyuyte. Thus will Ipunysh Egipte,that| | they maye knowe, how that Iam the LORDE. |

It happened in the xi. yeare, vpon the|23 seueth daye of $ first Moneth, y the LORDES worde came vnto me, sayége: Beholde, thou sonne of ma, I wi! breake y arme of Pharao kynge of Egipte: and lo, it shal not be boude vp to be healed, nether shal eny playstre be layed vpon it, for to ease it, or to make it so stroge, as to holde a swearde. ‘Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde, I will vpon
Pharao y kinge of Egipte, q brusse his stroge arme (yet is it but a broken one) q will smyte the swearde out of his honde.

As for the Egipcians, I wil scatre them amonge the Heithen, q strowe thé in the londes aboute. Agayne I wil strength y arme| of the kinge of Babilo, q geue him my swearde in his hode: but I wil breake Pharaos arme, | so y he shal holde it before him piteously, like a wounded man.

è Zach. 13. a. ! 

Chap. rrrij. 

a 

Yee I will stablish the kynge of Babilos arme, q the armes of Pharao shal fall downe: that it maye beknowne,that I am the LORDE, which geue the kynge off Babilon my swearde in his hode, that he maye drawe it out vpon the londe of Egipte: and that when I scatre the Egipcians amonge the Gentiles, and strowe them in y lodes aboute, they maye knowe, y I am the LORDE.

The rrri. Chapter. 

OROUER, it happened in the xi. yeare 
M y first daye of the thirde Moneth, that the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: "Thou sonne of man, speake vnto
Pharao the kynge of Egipte, ad to all his people: Whom art thou like in thy great- nesse? Beholde, Assur was like a Cedre tre vpó the mount of Libanus, with fayrebraüches: so thicke, that he gaue shadowes, and shot out very hye. His toppe reached vnto the cloudes.
The waters made him greate, and the depe set him vp an hye. Roide abonte the rotes of him rane there floudes of water, he sent

Jout his litle ryuers vnto all the trees of the 

felde. 'lherfore was he hyer thé all the trees of the felde, and thorow y multitude of waters that he sent fro him, he optayned many and longe braunches. All foules of the ayre made their nestes in his braüches, vnder his bowes gedred all the beastes of ¥ felde, q vnder his shadow dwelt all people. Fayre and beutifull was he in his greatnesse, and in the length of his braunches, for his rote stode besyde greate waters: no Cedre tre might hyde him. In the pleasaüt garden of God, there was no
Fyrre tre like his braüches, the playne trees were not like ý bowes of him. Al the trees in the garden off God might not be copared vnto him in his beuty: so fayre and goodly had I made him with the multitude of his braunches: In so moch, y all the trees in the pleasaut garde of God, had envye at hi.
Therfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: For so moch as he hath lift vp himself so hie, q stretched his toppe in to the cloudes, q seinge his hert is proude in his highnesse: I wil delyuer him in to ¥ hondes of $ mightiest amoge y Heithe, which shall rote him out.
Acordige to his wickednes will I cast him awaye, the enemies shal destroye him, q the mighty men of the Heithen shall so scatre

* Eze, 29. 30. 32. 

è Esa. 14. c. Eze. 32. c. 

Che prophet Cserbicl. 

him, that his braunches shal lye vpon all mountaynes q in all valleys: his bowes shall be broken downe to the grounde thorow out the londe. Then all the people of the londe shal go from his shadowe, and forsake him.
When he is fallé, all ý foules of y ayre shal syt vpon him, and all wilde beestes of the felde shal go aboute amonge his braüches : so that from hence forth, no tre in the water shall attayne to his hyenesse, nor reach his toppe vnto the cloudes, nether shall eny tre off the water stonde so hye, as he hath done.
For vnto death shall they all be delyuered vnder the earth, and go downe to y graue, like other men.

| Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: 
In the daye when he goeth downe to the graue, I wil cause a lamentacion to be made.
I will couer the depe vpon him, I will staunch his floudes, and the greate waters shalbe eus I shall cause Libanus to be

soroufull for his sake, and all the trees off the felde shall be smytté. I wil make the Heithen shake at the sounde of his fall,* when I cast him downe to hell, with them y descende in to the pytte. All the trees of Eden, with all the chosen and best trees of Libanus, yee and all they that are planted vpon the waters, shal mourne with him also in the lower habitacios: for they shal go downe to hell with him, vnto thé that be slayne with the swearde, which dwelt afore vnder the shadow off his arme amoge the Heithe. To whom shalt thou be lickened, that art so glorious q greate, amonge the trees off Eden? Yet art thou cast downe vnder $ earth (amonge the trees off Eden) where thou must lye amonge the vncircum- cised, with them that be slayne with the swearde. Enen thus is it with Pharao q all his people, saieth the LORDE God.

The rrrij. Chapter. 

N the xij. yeare, the first daye of the xij. 
I Moneth, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: ‘Thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentacion vpo Pharao the kynge of
Egipte, q saye vnto him: “Thou art reputed as a Lyon of the Heithen, q as a whalfish in
Ithe see. ‘Thou castest thy waters aboute the, 
{thou troublest the waters with thy fete, and stampest in their floudes. Thus sayeth the
LORDE God: “J wil sprede my net ouer y, 

© Eze, 29, 50. 31. 4 Eze. 12. b. 17. c. 

Fo. Deere. 

c 

a 

Fo. derrrrbi, namely, a greate multitude of people: these shal dryue the in to my yarne, for I will cast the vpo the lóde, and let the lye vpo the felde, that all the foules of the ayre maye syt vp6 the: I wil geue all the beastes of the felde ynough off the. Thy flesh will I cast vpó the hilles, and fyll the valleys with thy hyenesse.
I will water the londe with the abundaunce off thy blonde euen to the moütaynes, q y valleys shal be full off the.

*When thou art put out, I will couer the heauen, and make his starres dymme. Į will sprede a cloude ouer the Sonne, ad the Moone shall not geue hir light. All the lightes off iheauen will I put out ouer the, and bringe darcknesse vpon thy londe, saieth y LORDE
God. I wil trouble the hertes off many peo- ple, when I bringe thy destruccion amoge the
Heithen and countrees, whom thou knowest not. Yee I will make many people with their kynges so afrayed thorow -y, that their hayre shal stonde vp, whe I shake my swearde at their faces. Sodenly shal they be astonnyed, euery man in him self, at y daye of thy fall.

For thus saieth the LORDE God: the kynge of Babilons swearde shal come vpon y, with y sweardes of the worthies will I smyte downe thy people. All they that be mightie amonge the Gétiles, shal waist the proude
[ever of Egipte, and brynge downe all hir people. All the eatell also of Egipte wil I destroye, that they shal come nomore vpo the waters: so that nether màs fote ner beastes
£ |clawe, shal stere them eny more. Then wil I make their waters cleare, and cause their floudes to runne like oyle, sayeth the LORDE
God: when ! make the londe of Egipte deso- late, and when y countre with all that is therin, shalbe layde waist: and whé I smyte all the which dwell in it, that they maye knowe, that I am the LORDE. This is the mourn-

ge, that the doughters off the Heithen shall make: Yee a sorow and lamentacio shal they take vp, vpon Egipte and all hir people, saieth the LORDE God.

In the xij. yeare, the xv. daye of the 
Moneth, came the worde off the LORDE vnto me sayenge: ‘Thou sonne of man. Take vp a lamentacion vpon the people of Egipte, and east them downe, yee ad the mightie people of the Heithé also, ^euen with the that dwell beneth: and with them that go downe

" Eze. 13. b. Ioe. 3. c. 5 Esa. 14. c. Eze. 31. c. 

Cbr prophet Cserhtel. 

in to the graue. Downe (how fayre so euer thou be) and laye the with the vncireumcised.
Amoge those that be slayne with the swearde, shal they lye. ‘The swearde is geuen alredy, he shal be drawen forth and all his people.
The mightie worthies and his helpers, y be gone downe and lye with the vneireumcised and with them that be slayne with y swearde: shal speake to him out of the hell.

Assur is there also with his company, àd their graues rounde aboute, which were slayne ad fell all with the swearde, whose graues lye besyde him in the lowe pytte. His comos are buried rounde aboute his graue: allto- gether wounded and slayne with the swearde, which men afore tyme brought feare in to y londe off the lyuynge.

“There is Elam also with all his people, and their graues rounde aboute: which all beynge wounded and slayne with the swearde, are gone downe vncireumcised vnder the earth, which neuertheles somtyme bronght feare in to the londe off the lyuynge: for the which they beare their shame, with the other that be gone downe to y graue.

Chap. rrr. 

5 

Their buryall is geuen them and all their|38 

people, amonge them that be slayne. Their graues are rounde aboute all them, which be vncireumeised, and with them that be slayne thorow the swearde : for seynge that in tymes past they made the londe off the lyuynge afrayed, they must now beare their owne shame, with them that go downe to the pytte, and lye amonge them, that be slayne.

There is Mesech also and ‘Tubal, and their people, and their graues rounde aboute. These all are amonge the vneirencised, and them that be slayne with the swearde, because afore tyme they made the londe off the lyuynge afrayed.

Shulde not they then lye also amonge i worthies, and vneireumcised Giauntes ? whic with their weapens are gone downe to hel: whose sweardes are layed vnder their heades, whose wickednesse is vpon their bones: be- cause that as worthies, they haue brought feare in to y lode of y lyuinge? Yee amoge the vneircucised shalt thou be destroyed, and slepe with them, that perished thorow the swearde.

There is the lode off Edom with hir kynges and prynces also, ^which with their strégth are

e Tere, 49, f. Dan. 8. a. 4 Tere. 49, b. Eze. 25. b. 35. a. 

F 

‘Chap. reri. 

layed by them that were slayne with the swearde, yee amonge the vncireumcised, and them which are gone downe in to the pytte.
Morouer, there be all the prynces of the north, with all the Sidonias, which are gone downe to the slayne.

With their feare and strength they are come to confucion, and lye there vncireum- cised, amonge those that be slayne with the swearde: and beare their owne shame, with them that be gone downe to y pytte. Now when Pharao seyth this, he shal be com- forted oner all his people, that is slayne with the swearde: both Pharao ¢ all his hoost, saieth y LORDE God. For I haue geué my feare in the lode of the lyuynge. But Pharao q all his people shal lye amoge the vucircum- cised, and amonge them that be slayne with the swearde, saieth the LORDE God.

The rrriij. Chapter. 
GAYNE, the worde off the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thon sonne off man, Speake to the childré of thy people, and tell them: When I sende a swearde vpon a londe, yf the people off the londe take a man off their countre, and set him to be their watchman: ^$ same man (wha he seyth the swearde come vpon the londe) shall blowe the trompet, and warne the people.

Yf a man now heare the noyse off the trompet ¢ will not be warned, and the swearde come ad take him awaye: his bloude shall be vpo his owne heade: For he herde the soiide of the trompet, and wolde not take hede, therfore his bloude be vpon him. But yff he will receaue warnynge, he shal saue his life.
Agayne, yf the watch man se the swerde come, and shewe it not with the trompet, so y the people is not warned: yff the swearde come then, and take eny man from amoge the: the same shall be taken awaye in his owne synne, bnt his bloude will I requyre off the watehimans honde.

3| And now (O thou sonne of man) I haue 

made the a watchman ^ vnto the house of Is- rael: that where as thou hearest eny thinge ont of my mouth, thou mayest warne them on my behalfe. YÍf I saye vnto the wicked: thou wicked, thon shalt surely dye: and thou genest him not warnynge, that he maye be- warre off his vngodly waye: then shall the

" 4 Re. 9, d. | ^ Eze. 3. c. * Eze. 18. e. 4 Eze. 18. d. 

The prophet Esechiel. 

wicked dye in his owne synne, but his bloude will I requyre of thy honde. Neuertheles yf thon warne the wicked off his waye, to turne from it, where as he yet wil not be turned from it: then shal he dye because off his synne, but thou hast delyuered thy soule.

Therfore (O thou sonne off man) speake vuto the house off Israel, Ye saye thus: Oure offences and synnes lye vpon vs, and we be corrupte in them: how shulde we then be restored vnto life? Tell them: As truly as I

lyue (saieth the LORDE God) I haue no} 

pleasure in the death off the wicked, bnt moch rather that the wicked turne from his waye and lyue. Turne yon, turne you from youre vngodly wayes, o ye off the house off
Israel. Oh, whertore will ye dye? 

Thou sonne off man, tell the children off] ¢ 

thy people: ‘The rightuousnes of the righ- tuous shall not saue him, whan so euer he turneth awaye vnfaithfully : Agayne, the wick- ednesse of the wicked shal not hurte him, whan so euer he conuerteth from his vngodlynesse :

And y rightuonsnesse of the rightnons shal not saue his life, when so ener he synneth.
Yff I saye vnto the rightuons, that he shall surely lyue, and so he trust to his owne rightuousnesse, and do synne: then shall his rightnousnesse be nomore thought vpon, but in the wickednesse that he hath done, he shall dye.

Agayne, yff I saye to the wicked: *thon shalt surely dye: and so he turne fro his synnes, and do the thinge that is lanfull and right: [n so moch that the same wicked ma geueth the pledge agayne, restoreth that he had taken awaye by robbery, walketh in the comaundementes off life, and doth no wróge :

Then shall he surely lyue, and not dye. 
Yee the synnes that he had done, shal neuer be thought vpon: For in so moch as he doth now the thynge that is laufull and nght, he shall lyue. And yet the children off thy people saye: Tush, the waye of the LORDE is not right, where as their owne waye is rather vnright.

When the rightuous turneth from his righ- tnonsnesse, and doeth the thynge that is wicked, he shall dye therfore. But yf the wicked turne from his wickednesse, doinge the thinge that is laufnll and right, he shall lyue therfore. / Yet ye saye: the waye of $

J Eze. 18. f. Ro. 2. a. 

* Esa. 55. b. Iere. 18.a. 

Fo. Deerrroy. 

| i

| ffo. decrrrbiij, 

df that they haue wrought. 

| 
| 
| l

1 

LORDE is not equall. O ye house of Israel, 
I wil iudge euery one of you after his waycs. 

In the xij yeare, the v. daye of the x. 
Moneth of oure captyuyte, it happened, that one which was fled out of lerusalem, came vnto me, and sayde: y cite is destroyed.
Now the honde of the LORDE had bene vpon me the euenynge, afore this man (which was escaped) came vnto me, and had opened my mouth, vntyll the mornynge that he came tome: Yee he opened my mouth, so y I was nomore domme. Then came the worde of y
LORDE vnto me, and sayde: Thou sonne off man, these that dwell in the waisted londe of Israel, saye: Abraham was but one man, ad he had the londe in possessio: now are we many, and the londe is geuen vs to possesse also. And therfore tell them: "Thus saieth the LORDE: Iu the bloude haue ye eaten, youre eyes haue ye lift vp to Idols, “and haue shed bloude: shal ye then haue the londe in possession ?

Ye leane vpon youre sweardes, ye worke 
'abhominacions, euery one defyleth his negh- bours wife: and shal ye then possesse the londe? Saye thou these wordes vnto the:
| Thus saieth the LORDE God: As truly as I lyue, all ye that dwell in this wildernesse,
[shall be slayne with the swearde: what so is 
'vypon the felde, will I geue vnto the beestes to be deuoured: those that be in stronge holdes and dennes, shall dye off the pestilece. For
I wil make the londe desolate and waist, and y pope off hir strength shall come to an ende.
The mountaynes in Israel shal be so waiste that no man shall trauayle therby.

?'Then shall they lerne to knowe, that I am ithe LORDE, whe I make the lode waist aud
Idesolate, because off all their abhominacions, 
Aud thou sonne off man, the children off thy people y talke of the, by the walles ad in the dores of their houses, sayenge one to another: come, let vs heare, what worde is gone forth from the
LORDE: These come vnto the, after Y maner of a greate people: yee my people syt downe before the, and heare thy wordes, but they do not therafter: ^ For in their mouthes they shewe them selues, as though they were feruent, but their herte goeth after their owne couetous luere. And as a balet y hath a

* Leui. 17. d. Deu. 3. c. 
Mat. 15. a. 

*UEze2954c- 
4 Eze. 13. a. Tere. 14. b. 23. a. 

* Esa. 29. c. e Luc. 4. b.

The prophet Esechtel. 

swete tune, ad is pleasaut to synge, so shalt thou be vnto them: thy wordes shal they heare, but they will not do therafter. Whe this commeth to passe (for lo, it cémeth in dede) then shal they knowe, that there hath bene a prophet amonge them.

The rrríüj. Chapter. 

ND the worde off the LORDE came 
A vnto me, sayenge: ‘Thou sonue off mà, prophecye agaynst the shepherdes of Israel, prophecy, and speake vnto them: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Wo be vnto the shep- herdes off Israel, ^that fede them selues.
Shulde not the shepherdes fede ¥ flockes ? 

Ye haue eaten vp the fatte, ye haue clothed you with the woll: the best fedde haue ye slayne, but y flocke haue ye not norished:
“The weake tate ye not holden vp, the sicke haue ye not healed: the broken haue ye not bounde together, the outeastes haue ye not brought agayue: ^y lost haue ye not sought, but churlishly and cruelly haue ye ruled the.
Thus are they scatred here and there without a shepherde: yee all the beastes off the felde deuoure them, and they go astraye.

My shepe go wandringe vpon all moütaynes and vpon euery hye hill, yee they be scatred abrode in all feldes, and there is no man, that careth for them, or seketh after them.

Therfore o ye shepherdes, heare the worde off the LORDE, Thus sayeth the LORDE
God: As truly as 1 lyue, for so moch as my shepe are robbed, and deuoured off all the wylde beestes off the felde, hauyuge no shep- herde: and seynge that my shepherdes take no regarde off my shepe, but fede them selues only, and not my shepe: Therfore heare y worde off the LORDE, o ye shepherdes:
Thus sayeth the LORDE God: Beholde, I my selff will vpon the shepherdes, and requyre my shepe from their hondes, and make the ceasse from fedynge of my shepe: yee the shepherdes shall fede them selues nomore:
For I wil delyuer my shepe out off their mouthes so that they shall not deuoure them after this.

For thus saieth the LORDE God: Be- holde, * I will loke to my shepe myselff, and seke them. Like as a shepherde amōge the flocke seketh after the shepe that are scatred

€ Ioh. 10. a. Heb. 13. d. 1 Pe. 2. c. 5.a. 

VIT Pers. 8. 

Chap. rrrífíj. 

a 

B 

Chap. rrrb. 

B 

abrode, euen so will I seke after my shepe, and gather them together out off all places, where they haue bene scatred in the cloudy and darcke daye. I will bringe them out from all people, and gather them together out of all londes. I will bringe thé in to their owne londe, and fede them vpon the moun- taynes off Israel, by the ryuers, and in all the places of the countre. I will fede them in right good pastures, and vpon the hie moun- taynes off Israel shall their foldes be. There shal they lye in a good folde, ad in a fat pasture shall they fede: euen vpon the moun- taynes of Israel.

I will fede my shepe myselff, and bringe them to their rest, sayeth the LORDE God.
Soch as be lost, will I seke: "soch as go astraye, wil I brynge agayne: soch as be woüded, will I bynde vp: soch as be weake, will I make stronge : soch as be fat aud well lykinge, those will I preserue, and fede them with y thinge that is laufull. And as for you
(o my shepe) sayeth the LORDE God: I will put a difference amonge the shepe, ^amonge the wethers ād the goates. Wasit not ynough for you, to eat vp the good pasture, but ye must treade downe the residue of youre pas- ture with youre fete also? Was it not ynough for you to drynke cleare water, but ye must trouble the residue also with youre fete ?

Thus my shepe must be fayne toeate y thinge, that ye haue troden downe with youre Mr and todrynkeit, that ye with youre fete haue defyled.

Therfore, thus sayeth the LORDE God vnto them: Beholde, I will seuer the fat shepe from the leane: for so moch as ye haue shot the weake shepe apo y sydes q shulders, and runne vpon them with youre hornes, so longe till ye haue vtterly scatred them abrode.
I wil helpe my shepe, so y they shal nomore be spoyled: yee I wil discerne one shepe from another. I wil rayse vp vnto them one only shepherde: *euen my seruaunt Dauid, he shal fede thé, and he shal be their shepherde. I the LORDE wil be their God, and my ser- uaunt Dauid shal be their prince: Euen I the
LORDE haue spoken it. 

Morouer, I wil make a couenaunt of peace with them, and dryue all euell beastes out of the londe: so that they maye dwell safely in the wildernesse, and slepe in the woddes.

? Luc. 4. b. 
Act. 2. c. Mich. 5.a. 

Ioh.10.a. ^ Matt. 25. c. 
€ Deu. 11. b. 28. b. 

e Tere. 50. b. e Psal. 94. bh.

Che prophet Esechtel. 

Fo. Deerpyir. 

Good fortune q prosperite wil I geue them, and vnto all that be rounde aboute my hill.
? A prosperous shower and rayne wil I sende them in due season, that the trees in the wodde maye bringe forth their frutes, q y 'grounde hir increase. ‘They shalbe safe in their londe, and shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haue broké their yocke, and delyuered them out of the hondes of those, that helde them in subieccion.

Theyshal nomore be spoyled of the Heithen, ner deuoured with the beastes of the lode: but safely shal they dwell, ¢ no man shall fraye them. I wil set vp an excellét plate for them, so y they shal suffre no more hunger in the londe, nether beare the reprofe of y Heithen eny more. Thus shal they vnderstonde, that
I the LORDE their God am with them, q y they (euen the house of Israel) are my people, saleth the LORDE God. Ye men are my flocke, ye are the shepe of my pasture:^ and
I am youre God, saieth the LORDE God. 

The yryb. Chapter. 

OROUER, the worde of the LORDE|/@Q 

came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne 

of man, turne thy face towarde the mount 
Seir, prophecy vpon it, q saye vnto it: /'Thus saleth the LORDE God: Beholde, (o thou mount Seir) I will vpon the, 1 will reach out myne hode ouer the, yee waist q desolate wil
I make the. Thy cities wil I breake downe, 
& thou shalt lye voyde: that thou mayest knowe, how that I am the LORDE. ‘For so moch as thou bearest an olde enemyte agaynst the children of Israel, q with a cruel! honde hast made them afrayed, what tyme as they were troubled q punyshed for their synne:
Therfore, as truly as I lyue (saieth y LORDE 
God) J wil prepare the vnto bloude, yee bloude shal folowe vpon the: “seinge thou layest waite for bloude, therfore shall bloude perse- cute the. Thus wil I make the mount Seir desolate q waist, and bringe to passe, that there shall no man go thither, ner come from thence.
His mountaynes wil I fyll with his slayne men: thy hilles, dales and valleys shal lye full of them, that are slayne with $ swearde. I wil make the a perpetuall wildernesse, so that

noman shal dwell in thy cities: y ye maye knowe, how y 1 am the LORDE.

J Esa.34.a. lere. 49. b. Eze. 25. b. 52. f. 36. a. 
é Nu. 20. c. Deu. 2. a. ^ 1 Mac. 5. a. 

99. a. 

ffo. Deep. 

3| And because thou hast sayde: what, both these nacions and both these londes must be myne, q I wil haue them in possession,’ where as the LORDE was there. T'herfore, thus saieth the LORDE God: As truly as I lyue,
I will hadle the acordinge to thy wrath and gelousy, like as thou hast dealt cruelly with them: that I maye be knowne amoge them, how I haue punyshed the. Yee and that thou also mayest be sure, that I the LORDE haue herde all thy despyteful wordes, which thou hast spoké agaynst the mountaynes of Israel, sayenge: Lo, they are made waist, and geuen vs to deuoure.

Thus with youre mouthes ye haue made youre boost agaynst me, yee q multiplied youre proude wordes agaynst me, which I haue herde altogether. Where vnto, thus saieth y
LORDE God: when the whole worlde is in wealth, then wil I make the waist. * And like as thou (o mount Seir) wast glad, because the heretage of the house of Israel was destroyed: euen so wil I do vnto the also, that thou and whole Edom shall be destroyed, ¢ knowe, that lam the LORDE.

The rrrbi. Chapter. 

HOU sonne of man, prophecie vpon the mountaynes of Israel, q speake: Heare

the worde of the LORDE, o ye mountaynes of Israel: Thus saieth the LORDE God:
Because youre enemie hath sayde vpon you: 
Aha, y hie euerlastynge places are now be- come ours: prophecy therfore, q speake: thus saleth y LORDE God: Seinge ye be waisted
« trode downe on euery syde, q become a possession vnto y resydue of y Gétiles, which haue brought you in to més mouthes q vnto an euel name amonge y people: Therfore, heare the worde of the LORDE God, o ye mountaynes of Israel: "Thus saieth the
LORDE God vnto the mountaynes and hilles, valleys q dales, to the voyde wilder- nesses q desolate cities, which are spoyled, and had in derision on euery syde, amonge the resydue of the Heithe: Yee eué thus saieth the LORDE God: In the fyre of my gelousy haue I taken a deuyce, agaynst the resydue of the Getiles, and agaynst all Edom: which haue take in my lode vnto the seluesfor a possession: which also reioysed fro their whole herte with a despiteful stomacke, to waist it, and to spoyle it.

? Exo. 25. c. * Eze. 22. c. 26. a. 

The prophet Csechiel, 

speake vnto y mountaynes and hilles, to valleys and dales, thus saieth the LORDE God:
Beholde, this haue I deuysed in my gelousy and terrible wrath: For so moch as ye haue suffred reprofe of the Heithen, therfore thus saieth the LORDE God: I haue sworne, that the Gentiles which lye aboute you, shal beare youre confucion them selues. And as for you
(o mountaynes of Israel) ye shall shute out youre braunches, and bringe forth youre frute to my people of Israel, for it is harde by, that it wil come.

Beholde, I come vnto you, and vnto you wil I turne me, that ye maye be tylled and sowen. I wil sende you moch people, which shalbe all of the house of Israel: the cities shalbe inhabited, and ¥ decayed places shalbe repayred againe. I wil prouyde you with moch people and catell, which shal increase q bringe frute. I wil restore you also to youre olde estate, and shewe you more kindnes thé euer ye had before: wherby ye shal knowe, y
Iam the LORDE. Yee people wil I sende vnto you (o my folke of Israel) which shal haue the in possession, and thou shalt be their inheritaunce, so that thou shalt nomore he without them. Agayne, thus saleth the
LORDE God: For so moch as they saye vnto you: thou art an eater vp of men, and a waister of thy people: therfore thou shalt eate no mo men, nether destroye thy people eny more, saieth the LORDE God. And I wil not suffre the, for to heare thine owne con- fucion amonge the Gentiles from hensforth.
Thou shalt not beare the reprofe of the nacions, ner cast out thine owne people enymore, saieth the LORDE God.

Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: O thou sonne of ma, when the house of Israel dwelt vpon their owne grounde, they defyled them selues with their owne wayes t ymaginacions: so that in my sight their waye was like the vnclennesse of a menstruous woman. Wherfore I poured my wrothfull displeasure vpon them, because of the bloude that they had shed in the londe, ¢ because of their Idols, wherwith they had de- fyled them selues. Iscatred them also amonge the Heithen, so that they were strowed aboute in thelodes. Acordinge to their wayes q after their owne inuencions, so dyd I punysh them.

* Eze. 6. c. 4 Eze. 35. a. 

Chap. rrvbt. 

Prophecy therfore vpon the londe of Israel, | 33 

| Chap. rrrbij. 
B| “Now when they were gone vnto the 
Heithen, and come in amonge them, they dishonoured my holy name:, so that it was sayde of them: Are these the people of God,
& must go out of their owne londe? Then spared 1 my holy name, which $ house of
Israel had dishonoured amonge the Gentiles, to whom they came. Therfore tell y house of Israel: Thus saieth the LORDE God: I do not this for youre sakes (O house of Israel) but for my holy names sake, which ye dis- honoured amoge the Heithen, when ye came to them. ‘Therfore, I wil halowe my greate name agayne, which amonge the Getiles is euel spoken of: for ye youre selues haue dishonoured it amoge them. And the Gen- tiles shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, when
I am honoured in you before their eyes, saieth j LORDE God.

As for you, I wil take you from amonge the Heithen, and gather you together out of all countrees, and bringe you agayne in to youre owne londe. "'Then will I poure cleare water vpon you, q ye shalbe clene: Yee from all youre vnclennesse and from all youre Idols shal I clense you. A new herte also wil I geue you, “and a new sprete wil I put in to you: As for that stony hert, I will take it out of youre body, and ?geue you a fleszshy herte.
I wil geue you my sprete amonge you, and cause you to walke in my commaundemétes, to kepe my lawes, and to fulfill them.

And so ye shall dwell in the londe, that I gaue to youre forefathers, q ye shal be my people, and I wil be youre God. I wil helpe you ont of all youre vnclénesse, I wil call for the corne, and wil increase it, and wil let you haue no honger. I will multiplie the frutes of the trees and j increase of the felde for yon, so that ye shal beare no more reprofe of honger amoge the Heithe. Then shal ye remébre youre owne wicked wayes, and youre ymaginaciés, which were not good: so that ye shal take displeasure at youre owne selues, by reason of youre synnes and abhominacions.

J| But I wil not do this for youre sakes (saieth 

the LORDE God) be ye sure of it. Ther- fore (o ye house of Israel) be ashamed of youre
Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE 
: what tyme as I shal clése you from all youre offences, then wil I make the cities to

> Esa. 44, a. Tere. 17. c. 
4 Deu. 8. d. e Iere, 50. a. 

“Ro. 2. c. Esa. 52. b. 
¢ Eze. 11. d. 18. e. 

The prophet £serbicl. — 

be ocenpied agayne, and wil repayre the places that be decayed. ‘The desolate londe shal be buylded agayne, which afore tyme laye waist, in the sight of all them, that wete by. Then shal it be sayde: This waist lode is become like a garden of pleasure, and the voyde, desolate and broké downe cities, are now stronge, and fensed agayne. Then the residue of the Heithen that lye rounde aboute you, shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, which repayre that was broken downe, and plante agayne, that was made waist. Enen I the
LORDE haue spoken it, q wil do it in dede. 

Thus saieth the LORDE God: 1 wil yet once be founde agayne of y house of Israel, q do this for them: ° I shal increase them as a flocke of men. Like as the holy flocke and the flocke of Ierusalem are in the hie solempne feastes: so shal also the wilde waisted cities be fylled with flockes of men: and they shal knowe, that I am the LORDE.

The rrrbij. Chapter. 

HE honde of the LORDE came vpon 
T me, q caried me out in the sprete of the 
LORDE, « let me downe in a playne felde, that laye full of bones, q he led me rounde
|aboute by them: q beholde, the bones that laye vpon the felde, were very many, q mar- uelous drye also. Then sayde he vnto me:
Thou sonne of man: thinkest thon these bones mayelyueagayne? lanswered: O LORDE
God, thou knowest. And he sayde vnto me: 
Prophecy thou vpon these bones, q speake vnto them: Ye drye bones, heare the worde of the LORDE. Thus saieth the LORDE
God vnto these bones: Beholde, I will put breth in to yon, that ye maye lyue: I wil geue you synowes, q make flesh growe vpon you, a coner you ouer with skynne: q so geue yon breth,/ that ye maye lyue, and knowe, that J am the LORDE.

*So I prophecied, as he had comaunded me. And as I was prophecienge, there came a noyse and a greate mocion, so that the bones ranne euery one to another. Now whé I had loked, beholde, they had synowes, and flesh grewe vpon them: and aboue they were couered with skynne, but there was no breth in them. Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, prophecie thou towarde the

€ 1 Cor. 15. a. 

f Gene. 2. b. 

Fo. Deel, 

| fo. Dry. wynde: prophecy, and speake to the wynde:
Thus saieth the LORDE God: Come (o thou ayre) from the foure wyndes, q blowe vpon these slayne, that they maye be restored to life. So I prophecied, as he had commaunded me: Then came the breth in to them, and they receaued life, and stode vp vpon their fete, a maruelous greate sorte.

Morouer, he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, these bones are the whole house of
Israel. Beholde, they saye: “oure bones are dryed vp, oure hope is gone, we are clene cut of. 'Pherfore prophecie thou, q speake vnto them. Thus saieth the LORDE God: Be- holde, I wil open youre graues (o my people)
& take you out of youre sepulcres, q bringe you in to the londe of Israel agayne. So shall ye knowe y I am the LORDE, when I open youre graues, ¢ bringe you out of them. My sprete also wil I put in you, « ye shal lyue: I wil set you agayne in youre owne londe, and ye shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, which haue sayde it, and fulfilled it in dede.

The worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, take a sticke and wryte vpon it: Vnto luda a to the children of Israel his companyons. Then take another sticke, and wryte vpon it: Vnto loseph the stocke of Ephraim, and to all the housholde of Israel his companyons. And than take both these together in thine honde, so shal there be one stycke therof. Now yf the childré of thy people saye vnto the: wilt thou not shewe vs, what thou meanest by these? ‘Then geue them this answere: Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, ^I wil take the stocke of Ioseph, which is in the honde of Ephraim and of the trybes of Israel his felowes, and wil put them to the stocke of Iuda, q make them one stocke, and they shal be one in my honde. And the two stickes where vpon thou wrytest, shalt thou haue in thine honde, that they maye se, and shalt saye vnto them:

Thus saieth the LORDE God: beholde, 
I wil take awaye the childré of Israel from amonge the Heithen, vnto whom they be gone, and wil gather them together on euery syde, and bringe them agayne in to their owne londe: yee I wil make one people of thé in y londe, vpon the mountaynes of Israel, and they all shal haue but one kinge. ‘They shall nomore be two peoples from hensforth, nether

a Eze. 33. b. ^ Osee 1. b. 

The prophet Esechiel, 

be deuyded in to two kingdomes: they shal also defyle thé selues nomore with their abhominacions, Idols and all their wicked- doinges. I wil helpe thé out of all their dwellinge places, wherin they haue synned: v will so clense them, that they shalbe my people, and I their God.

* Dauid my seruaunt shalbe their kinge, q they all shal haue one shepherde only. ‘They shal walke in my lawes, and my commaunde- mentes shal they both kepe q fulfill. They shal dwell in the londe, that I gaue vnto Iacob my seruaunt, where as youre fathers also haue dwelt. Yee eue in the same londe shal they, their children, q their childers children dwell for euermore: and my seruaunt Dauid shal be their euerlastynge prynce. Morouer, I will make a bonde of peace with them, which shal be vnto them an euerlastinge couenaunt. I wil sattle the also, and multiplie them, my
Sanctuary wil I set amonge thé for euermore. 

My dwellinge shalbe with them, yee I wil be their God, q they shalbe my people. Thus the Heithen also shal knowe, that I the
LORDE am y holy maker of Israel: whé my 
Sanctuary shal be amonge them for euer more. 

The rrybíitj. Chapter. 

ND the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde Gog in the londe of
Magog, which is the chefe prynce at Mesech and Tubal: prophecy agaynst him, and saye:
?'l'hus saieth the LORDE God: ‘O Gog thou chefe prynce of Mesech and Tubal: beholde,
I wil vpon the, and wil turne the aboute, and put a bytt in thy chawes: I wil bringe the forth and all thine hoost, both horse q hors- men, which be all weapened of the best fashion: a greate people, that handle altogether speares, shyldes, and swerdes: the Perses,
Moryans and with them the Lybians, which all beare shyldes and helmettes: Gomer, and all his hoostes: the house of Thogorma out of the north quarters, and all his hoostes, yee

and moch people with the. 

Therfore prepare the, set thy self in araye with all thy people, that are come vnto the by heapes, and be thou their defence. After many dayes thou shalt be visited, and in the latter yeares thou shalt come in to the lode, that hath bene destroyed with the swearde, ¢
4E7039; 

* Eze, 54. d. Ioh. 10. b. * Apo, 20. c. 

Chap. redii. 

a 

Chap. rrrir. 

Pu 

The prophet Esechtel. 

now is replenished agayne with dyuerse people vpon the mountaynes of Israel, which haue loge lyen waist. Yee they be brought out of the nacions, q dwell all safe. Thou shalt come vp like a stormy wether, to couer the lode, and as it were a darcke cloude: thou with all thine hoostes, and a greate multitude of people with the.

Morouer, thus saieth the LORDE God: 
At the same tyme shal many thinges come in to thy mynde, so that thou shalt ymagyn myschefe, and saye: I wil vp to yonder playne londe, seinge they syt at ease, and dwell so safely (for they dwell all without eny walles, they haue nether barres nor dores) to spoyle them, to robbe thé, to laye honde vpon their so wel inhabited wildernesses: agaynst that people, y is gathered together from amonge the Heithé, which haue gotten catell and good, and dwell in the myddest of the londe. ‘Then shal Saba and Dedan and the marchauntes of
Tharsis with all their Worthies, saye vnto the: 
Art thou come to robbe? Hast thou gathered thy people together, because thou wilt spoyle ? to take syluer and golde: to cary awaye catell and good: and to haue a greate pray ?

Therfore, o thou sonne of man, thou shalt prophecie, and saye vnto Gog: Thus saieth the LORDE God: In that daye thou shalt knowe, that my people of Israel dwelleth safe: and shalt come from thy place, out of the north partes: thou and moch people with the, which ryde vpon horses, wherof there is a greate multitude and an innumerable sorte.
Yee thou shalt come vpon my people of Israel, as a cloude to couer the lode. This shal come to passe in the latter dayes: I wil bringe the vp in to my londe, that the Heithen maye knowe me, when I get me honoure vpon the
(o Gog) before their eyes. 

Thus saieth the LORDE God: Thou art he, of whom I haue spoken afore tyme, by my seruauntes y prophetes of Israel, which prophecied in those dayes q yeares, that I shulde bringe the vpon them. At the same tyme, when Gog commeth vp in to the londe of Israel (saieth the LORDE God) shal my indignacio go forth in my wrath. For in my gelousy and hote displeasure ^ I haue deuysed, that there shalbe a greate trouble in the londe of Israel at that tyme. The very fyszshes in the see, the foules of the ayre, the beestes of

* Dan. 12. a. Mat. 24, b. Luc. 21. c. 

the felde, and all the men y are vpon the earth, shal tremble for feare of me.

The hilles also shalbe turned vp side downe, the stayres of stone shal fall, and all walles shal syncke to the grounde. I wil call for a swearde vpon them in all my mountaynes, saieth the LORDE God: so that euery mans swearde shal be vpon another. With pestiléce aud bloude wil I punysh him: stormy rayne and hale stones, fyre and brymstone, wil I cause to rayne vpon him and all his heape, yee and vpon all that greate people that is with him. Thus wil I be maguified, honoured, and
|knowne amonge the Heithen: that they maye be sure, how y I am ¥ LORDE.

Che rrrir. Chapter. 

HERFORE o thou sonne of man, 

prophecie agaynst Gog, and speake: 
Thus saieth the LORDE God: Beholde, o Gog: ^thou chefe prynce at Mesech and
Tubal, I wil vpon the, and tume the aboute, q carie the forth, q lede ¥ from the north partes, and bringe the vp to the mountaynes of Israel. As for thy bowe, I wil smyte it out of thy left honde, and cast thine arowes out of thy right honde. ‘Thou with all thine heape, and all the people that is with the, must fall vpon the mountaynes of Israel.
Then wil I geue the vnto y foules and wilde beastes of the felde, to be deuoured: there must thou lye vpon the felde: for eue I the
LORDE haue spoken it, saieth the LORDE 
God. 

In to Magog, and amonge those that sit so carelesse in the Iles: wil I sende a fyre, and they shal knowe, y Iam the LORDE. I wil make also the name of my holynesse to be knowne amonge my people of Israel: and I will not let my holy name be euel spoken of enymore: but the very Heithen also shal knowe, that I am the LORDE, the holy one of Israel. Beholde, it commeth, and shalbe fulfilled in dede, saieth the LORDE God.
This is the daye, wherof I haue spoken: 
They that dwell in y cities of Israel, shal go forth and set fyre vpon the weapens, and burne them: shyldes and speres, bowes and arowes, bylles and clubbes: seuen yeares shall they be burnynge therof, so that they shall els bringe no stickes from y felde, nether haue nede to hew downe eny out of the wodde: For they

5 Eze. 38. 

Ho. derli, 

a 

5 

So. Deevlitt. shall haue weapens ynew to burne. They shal robbe those that robbed them, and spoyle those that spoyled them, saieth y LORDE God.

€| At the same tyme will I geue vnto Gog, a 

place to be buried in, in Israel: euc the valley, 

where thorow men go from the east to the see warde. Those that trauayle therby, shal abhorre it. There shal Gog and all his peo- ple be buried: and it shalbe called the valley of the people of Gog. Seuen monethes longe shall the house of Israel be burienge of them, that they maye clense the lode: Yee all the people of the londe shal burie them. O it shal be a glorious daye, when I get me that jhonoure, saieth the LORDE God. They
‘shal ordene men also to be deedburiers, euer igoinge thorow the lode, and appoynte them certayne places to bury those in, which re- mayne vpon the felde, that the londe maye be clensed. From ende to ende shal they seke, and that vij monethes loge. Now those that go thorow the londe, where they se a
| mans bone, they shall set vp a token by it, till 
| the deedburiers haue buried it also, in the 
| valley of the people of Gog. And the name of the cite shalbe called Hamona : ‘Thus shall they make the londe clene.

D And thou sonne of man: thus saieth the 

LORDE God: Speake vnto all the foules 

‘aud euery byrde, yee and to all the wilde 

| \beastes of the felde: heape you together and 

' |eome, gather you roüde aboute vpo my 

‘slaughter, that I haue slayne for you: euen a 

greate slaughter vpon the mountaynes of 

Israel: eate flesh, and drynke bloude. “Ye 

shal eate y flesh of the worthies, and drynke 

the bloude of the pryuces of the londe: of the 
| \wethers, of the lambes, of the goates, and of 

the oxen that be all slayne at Basan. Eate y fat youre bely full, and drynke bloude, till ye be dronckeu of the slaughter, which I haue slayne vnto you. Fyl you at my table, with horses q stronge horsmen : with captaynes and all mé of warre, saieth the LORDE God.

| I will bringe my glory also amonge the 
Gentiles, that all the Heithen maye se my ludgment, that I haue kepte, and my honde which I haue layed vpon them: that y house of Israel maye knowe, how that I am
LORDE their God, from that daye forth. 

i; |And the Heithen shal knowe, that where as the house of Israel were led in to captiuyte :

* Apo. 19. d. 

The prophet Ezechiel, 

Chap. rl. | it was for their wickednes sake, because they offended me.

For the which cause I hyd my face from them, and delyuered them in to the hondes of their enemies, that they might all be slayne with the swearde. Acordinge to their vnclen- nesse and vnfaithfull dealinges, so haue I en- treated them, and hyd my face from them.
Therfore thus saieth $ LORDE God: Now will I bringe agayne the captyues of Iacob, and haue merey vpon the whole house of
Israel, aud be gelous for my holy names sake. 
All their confucion and offence that they haue done agaynst me, shal be taken awaye : aud so safely shal they dwell in their londe, that no man shal make them afrayed. And when I haue brought thé agayne from amonge the people, when I haue gathered them together out of their enemies londes, and am praysed iu them before many Heithen: then shall they knowe, that I am the LORDE their
God, which suffred them to be led in to cap- tiuyte amonge the Heithen, but now haue brought them agayne in to their owne londe, and not left one of them yonder.

After that, will I hyde my face nomore from them, but will poure out my sprete vpon the house of Israel,’ saieth the LORDE God.

The pl. Chapter. 
N the xxv yeare of oure captiuyte, in the begyunynge of the yeare, the x daye of the moneth: that is the xiiij yeare, after that j cite was smytten downe: the same daye came the honde of the LORDE vpon me, and caried me forth: euen in to the londe of
Israel brought he me in the visions of God: and set me downe vpo a maruelous hie moun- tayne, whervpon there was a buyldinge (as it had bene of a cite) towarde the north.
Thither he caried me, and beholde, there was a man, whose similitude was like brasse, which had a threde of flax in his honde, and a meterodde also. He stode in the dore, q sayde vnto me: marcke well with thine eyes, herken to with thine eares, and fasten it in thine hert, what so euer I shal shewe the, for to the intent that they might be shewed the, therfore art thou brought hither. And what soeuer thou seyst, thou shalt certifie the house of Israel therof.
Beholde, there was a wall on the outsyde 

5 Eze. 36, d. 

Chap, rl. 

rounde aboute the house : the meterodde that he had in his honde, was six cubites longe q a spanne. So he measured the bredth of the buyldinge, which was a meterodde, and the heyth also a meterodde. ‘Then came he vnto the east dore, and wente vp the stares, q mea- sured the postes of the dore: wherof euery one was a meterodde thicke. Euery chambre was a meterodde longe and brode: betwene the chambers were fyue cubites. The poste of the dore within the porche, was one mete- rodde. He measured also the porche of the ynnermer dore, which conteyned a meterodde.
Thé measured he the entrie of the dore, that conteyned eght cubites, and his pilers two eubites : and this entrie stode inwarde.

The chambers of the dore eastwarde, were thre on euery syde: alike brode and longe.
The pilers also that stode of both the sydes, were of one measure. After this, he measured the wydenesse of the dore: which was x cubites, q the heyth of the dore xiij cubites.
The edge before the chabres was one cubite brode vpó both the sydes, q the chambres six cubites wyde of either syde. He measured y dore from the rygge of one chabre to another, whose wydenesse was xxv cubites, q one dore stode agaynst another. He made pilers also lx eubites hie, rounde aboute the courte dore.
Before the inwarde parte vnto the fore entre of the ynnermer dore, were fiftie cubites.
The chambers and their pilers within, rounde aboute vnto ¥ dore, had syde wyndowes: So had the fore entries also, whose wyndowes wente rounde aboute within. And vpon the pilers there stode date trees.

Then brought he me in to the fore courte, where as were chabres q paued workes, made in y fore courte roüde aboute: xxx chabres vpon one paued worcke. Now the paued worke was a loge besyde the dores, and that was the lower paued worke. After this, he measured y bredth from the lower dore, vnto the ynnermer courte of the out syde, which had an hundreth cubites vpon the east q the north parte. And the dore in the vttemost

courte towarde the north, measured he after the legth and bredth : his thre chambres also on either syde, with his pilers q fore entries: which had euen the measure of the first dore.
His heyth was fiftie cubites, the bredth xxv cubites: his wyndowes ¢ porches with his date trees, had euen like measure as the dore

Che prophet Esechtel. 

towarde the east: there were vij steppes to go vp vpo, q their porche before them. Now y dore of the ynnermer courte stode straight ouer agaynst the dore, that was towarde y north east. From one dore to another, he measured an C cubites.

After that, he brought me to the south syde, where there stode a dore towarde y south: whose pilers and porches he measured, these had the fyrst measure, q with their

|porches they had wyndowes rounde aboute, 

like the first wyndowes. The heyth was | cubites, y bredth xxv, with steppes to go vp vpon: his porche stode before him, with his pilers and date trees on either syde. And the dore of the ynnermer courte stode towarde the south, q he measured from one dore to another an C cubites. So he brought me in to y ynnermer courte, thorow the dore of the south syde: which he measured, q it had the measure a fore sayde. In like maner, his chambres, pilers and fore entries, had euen the fore sayde measure also. And he had with his porches rounde aboute, wyndowes of l eubites hye, q xxv cubites brode. The porches rounde aboute were xxv cubites longe, and v cubites brode: and his porch reached vnto y vttemost courte: vpon his pilers there were date trees, and viij steppes to go vp vpon.

He brought me also in to the ynmost courte vpon the east syde, and measured the dore, acordinge to y measure afore sayde. His chabers, pilers and porches had euen the same measure, as the first had: q with his porches he had wyndowes roüde aboute. The heith was | cubites, y bredth xxv cubites: His porches reached ynto the vttemost courte: his pilers also had date trees on either syde, and viij steppes to go vp vpon. And he brought me to the north dore, and measured it, which also had the foresayde measure. His chabres, pilers and porches had wyndowes rounde aboute: whose heyth was | cubites, and the bredth xxv. His pilers stode towarde the vtte- most courte, and vpon them both were date trees, and viij steppes to go vp vpon. ‘There stode a chambre also, whose intraüce was at the dore pilers, and there the burntoffringes were waszshed.

In the dore porche, there stode on ether syde two tables for the slaughtinge: to slaye the brentoffringes, synneoffringes and tres- paceoffringes thervpon. And on the out syde

Fo. Deevlo. 

x 

fo. derrlbi. 

as men go forth to the north dore, there stode | two tables. Foure tables stode on ether, syde of the dore, that is viij tables, whervpon dts slaughted. Foure tables were of hewen| stone for the burntoffringes, of a cubite and
(a half longe and brode, and one cubite hie :, 
'whervpon were layed y vessels and orna- mentes, which were vsed to, the burnt q slayne offeringes, when they were slaughted. And within there were hokes foure fyngers brode, fastened rounde aboute, to hange flesh vpon, n vpon the tables was layed the offringe flesh.
'On the outsyde of the ynnermer dore were the syngers chambers in the iuwarde courte besyde ý north dore ouer agaynst the south.
‘There stode one also, besyde the east dore north warde. d^ And he sayde vnto me: * This chambre on
„the south syde belongeth to the prestes, that kepe the habitacion: and this towarde the north, is the prestes that wayte vpon the aulter: which be the sonnes of Sadoch, that do seruyce before the LORDE in steade of ithe children of Leui. So he measured the fore courte, which had in length an C cubites, and as moch in bredth by the foure corners.
Now the aulter stode before the house: And he brought me to the fore entre of the house,
(and measured the walles by the entre dore: which were fyue cubites longe on ether syde.
The thicknesse also of the dore on ether syde, was thre cubites. The légth of the porche was xx cubites, the bredth xj. cubites, and vpon steppes went men vp to it: by the walles also were pilers, on either syde one.

The pli. Chapter. a FTER this he brought me to the tem-

| ple, and measured the postes: which were of both the sydes vj. cubites thicke, acordinge to the wydenesse of the tabernacle.
The bredth of $ dore was x. cubites, q the walles of the dore on either syde fyue cubites.
He measured the length therof, which con- teyned xl. eubites, and the bredth xx. Thë wente he in, and measured the dore postes, which were two cubites thicke : but the dore it self was sixe cubites, and the bredth of the dore was vij. cubites. He measured the legth and bredth therof, which were euery one xx. cubites, before the temple.

And he sayde vnto me: this is the holyest of all. He measured also the wall of the

The prophet Csechiel. 

house, which was sixe cubites. The chambres y stode rounde aboute y house, were euery one foure cubites wyde, and one stode harde vpo another, wherof there were xxxiij And there stode postes beneth by the walles rounde aboute the house, to beare thé vp: but in y wall of y house they were not fastened: The syde chambres were the hyer the wyder, and had steppes thorow them rounde aboute y house. ‘Thus was it wyder aboue, that from the lowest men might go to the hyest q mydde chabers. I sawe also that the house was very hye roundeaboute. "The foundacion of the syde chambres was a meterodde (that is sixe cubites) brode. "The thicknesse of the syde wall without, conteyned fyue cubites, q so dyd y outwall of the chàbers in y house.

Betwene the chambers, was the wydenes 
‘xx. eubites rounde aboute y house. The chambre dores stode ouer agaynst the out wall, the one dore was towarde the north, y other towarde the south: and the thicknesse of the outwall was v cubites rounde aboute.
Now the buyldinge that was separated towarde the west, was Ixx. cubites wyde: the wall of the buyldinge was v cubites thicke roüde aboute, and the length foure score cubites and ten. So he measured the house which was an
C. cubites longe, and the separated buyldinge with the wall were an C. cubites loge also.
The wydnesse before the house and of it y was separated towarde the east, was an C. cubites.

And he measured the length of the buyld- inge before and behinde with the chabers vpon both the sydes: and it conteyned an C.
‘eubites. The ynnermer temple, the porch of the fore courte, $ syde postes, these thre had
¡syde wyndowes, and pilers rounde aboute ouer agaynst the postes, from the grounde vp to the wyndowes: The wyndowes them selues were syled ouer with bordes: q thus was it aboue the dore, vnto the ynmost house, and without also: Yee the whole wall on euery syde both within and without was syled ouer with greate bordes. ‘There were Cherubins and date trees made also, so that one date tre stode euer betwixte two Cherubins: One
Cherub had two faces, y face of a man lokinge asyde towarde the date tre, and a lyons face on the other syde. Thus was it made roüde aboute in all the house: Yee the Cherubins

* | Par. 52. a. 3 Reg. 2. f. 

Chap. rli. 

| 
| 

€ 

B 

Chap. rlii. and date trees were made from the grounde vp aboue the dore, and so stode they also vpon the wall of the temple.

The bypostes of the temple were foure squared, and the fashion of the Sanctuary was, euen as it appeared vnto me afore in y vision. The table was of wodde, thre cubites hie and two cubites longe: his corners, the length and the walles were of wodde. And he sayde vnto me: This is the table, that shal stonde before the LORDE. The tem- ple and the holiest of all had ether of them two dores, and euery dore had two litle wick- ettes which were folden in one vpon another, on euery syde two. And vpon the dores of the temple there were made Cherubins and date trees, like as vpon the walles: and a greate thicke balke of wodde was before on the out syde of the porche. Vpo both the sydes of the walles of the porche, there were made depe wyndowes and date trees, hauynge beames and balkes, like as the house had.

The rlij. Chapter. 

a HEN earied he me out in to the fore courte towarde the north, t brought me in to the chambre that stode ouer agayust the backebuyldinge northwarde, which had the length of an C. cubites, whose dore turned towarde the north. ‘The wydenesse conteyned
L. eubites, ouer agaynst the xx. cubites of the ynnermer courte, q agaynst the paued worke that was in the fore courte. Besyde all these thre there stode pilers, one ouer against another: And before this chabre there was a walkinge place of x. cubites wyde, and within was a waye of one cubite wyde, and their dores towarde the north. ‘Thus the hyest
| chambres were allwaye narower then the lowest and myddelmost of y buildinge: for they bare
| chambre vpon chambre, and stode thre toge- ther one vpon another, not hauynge pilers like the fore courte: therfore were they smaller then those beneth and in the myddest, to reken from the grounde vpwarde.
| The wall without that stode by y chambres towarde the vttemost courte vpon the fore syde of the chambres, was L. cubites loge: for the légth of y vttemost chambers in the fore courte was L. cubites also: but the length therof before the temple was an C. enbites. ‘These chambres had vnder them an intraunce of the east syde, wherby a man

Che prophet Esechiel. 

might go in to them out of the fore courte, thorow the thicke wall of the fore courte towarde the east, right ouer agaynst the sepa- rated buyldiuge. Before the same buyldinge vpo this syde there were chábers also, which had a waye vnto them, like as the chambers on the north syde of the same length and wydenesse.

Their intraunce, fashion and dores were all! of the same maner. Yee euen like as the’ other chamber dores were, so were those also| of the south syde. And before the waye towarde the syngers steppes on the east syde, there stode a doreto go inat. Then sayde he vnto me: The chambers towarde the north q the south, which stéde before the backe buyld- inge: those be holy habitacions, wherin the prestes that do seruyce before the LORDE, must eate the most holy offringes: and there must they laye the most holy offringes: meat offringes, synneoffringes q trespaceoffringes, for it is an holy place. When the prestes come therin, they shal not go out in to the fore courte: but (seynge they be holy) they shall leaue the clothes of their ministracion, and put on other garmentes, when they haue eny thinge to do with the people.

Now when he had measured all the ynner- mer house, he bronght me forth thorow s east porte, and measured the same rounde aboute. He measured the east syde with y meterodde, which rounde aboute conteyned v. C. meteroddes. And the north syde mea- sured he, which conteyned rounde aboute euen so moch. The other two sydes also towarde the south and the west (which he measured) conteyned ether of them v. C. meteroddes. So he measured all $ foure| sydes where there wente a walle rounde aboute v. C. meteroddes longe, and as brode also, which separated the holy from the vnholy.

The rliij. Chapter. 

O he brought me to y dore, that turneth 
S towarde the east. Beholde, thé came the glory of the God of Israel from out of the east, whose voyce was like a greate noyse of waters, and the earth was lightened with his glory. His sight to loke vpon was like the first, “that I sawe, when I wente in, what tyme as the cite shulde haue bene destroyed : and like the vision that I sawe by the water

| 

| 
* Eze. 10. il. 

Fo. Deeplby. 

D 

beo] 

Fo. Deerlotyj. Che prophet Csechiel. Chap. rly. of Cobar.“ Then fell I vpon my face, but “The aulter was foure cubites hie, x from the glory of the LORDE came in to the! the aulter vpwarde stode foure hornes, and it house thorow the east dore. So a wyndetoke| |was xij cubites longe and xij cubites brode, me vp, and brought me in to y ynnermer| |vpon the foure corners: the coueringe of the courte: q beholde, the house was full of the| jaulter was xiiij cubites longe and brode vpon glory of the LORDE. the foure corners, and the ledge that wente
I herde one speakinge vnto me out of the! |rounde aboute, had half a cubite: and the house, and there stode oue by me, that sayde| |botome therof rounde aboute one cubite: his vnto me: ^O thou sonne of man, this rowme| jsteppes stode towarde the easte. And he is my seate, and the place of my fotesteppes:| |sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thus where as I wil dwell amonge the children of} |sateth the LORDE God: these are the or-
Israel for euermore: so that the house of} |dinaunces and lawes of the aulter, in the daye 
Israel shal nomore defyle my holy name:| |whé it is made, to offre burntoffringes, and to nether thei, ner their kinges, thorow their| |sprenkle bloude ther vpon. ‘To the prestes, whordome, thorow their hie places, t thorow| |to y Leuites that be of the sede of Sadoch, the deed bodies of their kinges: which haue| jand treade before me to do me seruyce, saieth buylded their thresholdes in maner harde vpon| tthe LORDE God: Vnto these geue thou a my thresholdes, and their postes almost at my| |yonge bullocke, for a synoffringe: q take the postes: so that there is but a bare wall be-| |bloude of him x sprenkle his foure hornes twixte me and them. withal, x the foure corners of the aulter couer-
Thus haue they defyled my holy name} linge, with the ledge that goeth rounde aboute: with their abhominacions, that they haue) |herewith shalt thou clense it," and reconcile it. comitted. Wherfore I haue destroyed them| | Thou shalt take the bullock also of the syn- in my wrath: But now they shal put awaye| |offringe, q burne him in a seuerall place with their whordome and the deed bodies of their| |out the Sanctuary. kinges out of my sight, that I maye dwell The nexte daye, take a gootbuck without amoge them for euermore. °Therfore (othou| {blemish for a synoffringe, to reconcile the sonne of man) shewe thou the housholde of| |aulter withall: like as it was reconciled with
Israel a temple, that they maye be ashamed| |¥ bullocke. Now when thou hast made it of their wickednesse, and measure them selues| |clene, then offre a yonge bullocke without an example therat. blemish, and a ramme out of the flocke with-
And when they beashamedofalltheirworkes,| jout blemish also: “Offre them before the then shewe them the fourme and fashion of the] | LORDE, and let the prest cast salt thervpon, temple: the cOmynge in, the goinge out, allj |“and geue them so vnto the LORDE for a the maner and descripcion therof, yee all the| |burntoffringe. Seuen dayes shalt thou bringe, vses and ordinaunces of it, y they maye kepe| |euery daye a gootbucke. A yonge bullocke
1 fulfill all the fashions and customes therof. q a ramme of the flocke (both without blemish) 
This is the descripcion of the house: Aboue| |shal they offre. Seuen dayes shal they re- vpo the mount rounde aboute all the corners,| {concile and clense the aulter, q offre vpon it. it shalbe ý holiest of all. Beholde, that is} | When these dayes are expired, then vpon the the descripcion and fashion of the house. This} |viijj daye and so forth, the ‘prestes shal offre is the measure of the aulter (after the true| [their burntoffringes and healthoffringes vpo y cubite: which is a spanne longer then another| |aulter: so wil I be mercifull vnto you, saiet cubite) his botome in the myddest was a| |the LORDE God. cubite longe and wyde, and the ledge that 2 wente rounde aboute it, was a spanne brode. The pliij. Chapter.
This is the heyth of the aulter: From the FTER this, he brought me agayne to ¥ grounde to the lower steppes the length is two outwarde dore of the Sanctuary on the cubites, and the bredth one cubite: and from| |east syde, and that was shut. Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: This dore shal be stil

the lower steppes to the higher are foure cubites, x the bredth but one cubite. ‘shut, and not opened for eny ma to go thorow
| 

| f Leui. 16. f. £ Leui. 22. c. ^ Leui. 2. b. 

x 

* Eze.1.a. Eze. 10. c. 11. d. è Esa. 6. a. 66. a. 
Apo. 21.e. * Zac. 2, a. d Exo. 27. a. * Eze. 44. c. 

Chap. rliítj. 

5 

it, but only for the LORDE God of Israel: yee he shal go thorow it, els shal it be shut still. The prynce himself shal come thorow it, that he maye eate bred before the LORDE.
At the porche shal he come in, and there shal he go out agayne. “Then brought he me to the dore, vpon the north syde of the house.
And as I loked aboute me, beholde, the glory of the LORDE fylled the house: and I fell downe vpon my face. So the LORDE spake vnto me: O thou sonne of man, fasten this to thine herte, beholde, and take diligét hede to all that I wil saye vnto the, concernyuge all the ordinaunces of the LORDE and all his lawes: pondre well with thine herte the commynge in of the house and the goinge forth of the Sanctuary: and tell that obstinate housholde of Israel: ‘Thus saieth the LORDE
God: O house of Israel, ye haue now doue ynough with all youre abhominacios, seynge that ye haue brought in to my Sanctuary straungers, hauynge vneircumcised hertes q flesh, where thorow my Sactuary is defiled, whé ye offre my bred, fat, q bloude.

Thus with all youre abhominacions ye haue broken my couenaunt, and not kepte the holy ordinaunces of my Sanctuary: but set kepers of my Sanctuary, euen after youre owne mynde. Therfore thus saieth ý LORDE
God: Of all the straungers that dwell amoge the childré of Israel, no straunger (whose herte q flesh is not circumcised) shal come within my Sanetuary: No mer the Leuites that be gone backe fro me, and haue disceaued the people of Israel with erroures, goinge after their Idols: therfore shal thei beare their owne wickednes. Shulde they be set and ordened to ministre, vnder the dores of the house of my Sanctuary? and to do seruyce in the house: to slaye burntoffringes and sacri- fices for ¥ people: to stode before them, and to serue them: seynge the seruyce that they do them, is before their Idols, and cause the house of Israel to stomble thorow wickednesse?

^For the which cause I haue pluckte out myne honde ouer them (saieth the LORDE) so that now they must beare their owne ini- quyte, and not to come nye me, to serue me with their preasheade, in my Sanctuary, and most holyest of all: that they maye beare their owne shame and abhominacions, which

a Exo. 40.c. 24. d. Nu.9.c. 3 Reg.8. b. 2Par 7.a. g
53Reg.2.f. ^ ^ Eze. 43. d. 48. b. 4 Leui, 19. f. 21. a. 

The prophet Cserbícl. 

they haue done. Shulde I vse them to be porters of the house, and to all the seruyce y is done therin? “But the prestes ¥ Lenites the sonnes of Sadoch, that kepte the holy ordinaunces of my Sanctuary, when the chil- dren of Israel were gone fro me: shal come to me, to do me sernyce, to stonde before me, and to offre me the fat and the bloude, saieth the LORDE God.

They shall go in to my Sanctuary, and treade before my table, to do me seruyce, and to waite vpo myne ordinaunces. Now whe they go in at the dores of the ynnermer courte, they shal put on lynnynge clothes, so that no wollyne come vpon them: whyle they do seruyce vnder the dores of Y ynnermer courte, and within. ‘They shal haue fayre lynnynge bonettes vpon their heades, and lynnynge breches vpon their loynes, which in their laboure they shal not put aboute them: And when they go forth to the people in to the outwarde courte, they shal put of the clothes, wherin they haue ministred, and laye them in the habitacion of the Sanctuary, q put on other apparell lest they onhalowe y people with their clothes.

“They shal not shaue their heades, ner norish the bushe of their hayre, but roüde their heades only. “All the prestes that go in to the ynmost courte, shall drynke no wyne.
They shall mary no wydowe, nether one that is put from hir huszbonde: but a mayde of the sede of the house of Israel, or a wydowe, that hath had a prest before.

‘They shal shewe my people the difference betwene the holy and vnholy, betwixte the clene and vnelene. Yf eny discorde aryse, they shal discerne it, and geue sentence after my iudgmentes. My solempne feastes, my lawes and ordinaunces shal they kepe, and halowe my Sabbathes. *'They shal come at no deed persone, to defyle them selues: (ex- cepte it be father or mother, sonne or doughter, brother or sister that hath had yet no hus- bonde) in soch they maye be defyled.

And when he is clensed, there shal be rekened vnto him vij dayes: and yf he go in to the Sanctuary agayne to do seruyce, he shal bringe a synoffringe saieth the LORDE
God. ‘They shall haue an heretage, yee I my self wilbe their heretage: els shall ye geue

e Leui. 10. c. 21. b. Ose. 1. a. 3. a. f Deu. 17. c. 
€ Leui.21.a. Nu.6.d. * Deu. 18.a, Nu. 18.c. Iosu. 13. b. 

So. Deerltr. 

D 

Fo. Decl. 

| 
| 

B |acordinge to their trybes. 

thé no possession in Israel, for I am their possession. ‘The meatotfringe, synoffringe q trespace offringe shal they eate, and euery dedicate thinge in Israel, shalbe theirs. ‘The firstlinges of 5l the first frutes, and all fre will offringes shal be the prestes.

Ye shall geue vnto the prest also the first- linges of youre dowe, that God maye prospere the resydue. “But no deed carion shall the prest eate, ner soch as is deuoured of wilde beestes, foules or catell.

The plo. Chapter. 

\ À J HEN ye deuyde the lode by the lott, 

ye shal put asyde one parte for the 
LORDE, ^to be holy from other londes: namely, xxv M meteroddes longe, aud x M brode. This shalbe holy, as wyde as it is rounde aboute. Of this parte there shal be- longe vnto the Sanctuary v C meteroddes iu all the foure corners, and | cubites wyde rounde aboute to the suburbes. And from this mea- sure, namely of xxv M metteroddes longe, and x M brode, thou shalt measure, wherin the
Sanctuary and the holiest of all maye stonde. 

The resydue of that holy grounde shall be the prestes, which do seruyce in the Sanctuary ofthe LORDE, and goiu before the LORDE to serue him, that they maye haue rowme to dwell in.

As for the Sanctuary, it shal stoude for itself: and to the Leuites that serue iu the house, there shalbe geuen xx habitacions, of the xxv M legth ¢ x M bredth: ye shal geue also vnto the cite a possessio of v M meteroddes brode, x xxv M longe, besyde the parte of y
Sanctuary: that shal be for the whole house of Israel. ^ Vpon both the sydes of the
Sanctuarys parte, q by the cite, there shalbe geuen vnto the prynce, what so euer lyeth ouer agaynst the cite, as farre as reacheth westwarde and eastwarde: which shalbe as longe as one parte, fro ¥ west vnto y east.

This shalbe his owne lode in Israel, that my princes be nomore chargeable vnto my people. And soch as remayneth yet ouer in the londe, shalbe geuen to the house of Israel
Thus saieth the 
LORDE God: O ye princes, ye haue now oppressed and destroyed ynough: now leaue of, handle now acordinge to the thinge, that is

* Exo. 22. d. Leu. 22. a. 5 Eze. 48. b. * Eze. 48. d. 
* Leui. 19. g. Deut. 25, c. Pro. 20. b. 

The prophet Cserhiel. 

equall and laufull: and thrust out my people nomore, sayeth ý LORDE God. Ye shal haue a true weight, a true Epha, q a true Bat.

“The Epha q the Bat shalbe alike. One 
Bat shal coteyne y téth parte of an Homer, and so shal one Epha do: their measure shal be after $ Homer. One Sycle maketh xx.
Geras. “So xx. Sycles, and xxv. ¢ xv. Sycles make a pounde. This is the Heaue offrynge, that ye shal geue to be heaued: namely, the xvj. parte of au Epha, out of an Homer of wheat : and the xvj. parte of an Epha, out of an Homer of barlie. The oyle shal be measured with the
Bat : euen the x. parte of one Bat out of a Cor. 

Ten Battes make one Homer: for one 
Homer maketh ten Battes. And one labe from two hundreth shepe out of the pasture of
Israel, for a meatoffrynge, burntoffrynge and healthoffrynge, to recocile them, sayeth the
LORDE God. All the people of the londe shal geue this heaue offrynge with a fre wil.
Agayne, it shal be the prynces parte to offre burntoffrynges, meatofirynges and drynk- offrynges vuto the LORDE, tn the holy dayes, new Moones, Sabbathes, aud in all the hye feastes of the house of Israel. The synoffrynge, meatofferynge, brentofferynge « healthoftringe shal he geue, to recocile the house of Israel.
Thus sayeth ý LORDE God: The first daye of the first moneth thou shalt take a yoge bullocke without blemysh, and clense the
Sanctuary. 

So the prest shal take of the bloude of y synoffrynge, and sprenkle it vpon the postes of the house, aud vpon the foure corners of the aulter, with the dorepostes of the ynnermer courte. And thus shalt thou do also the
;seuenth daye of y moneth (for soch as haue synned of ignoraunce, or beynge disceaued) to reconcile the house withall. Vpon ¥ xiiij. daye of the first moneth ye shal kepe Faster.
/Seué dayes shal the feast contynue, wherin there shal no sower ner leuéded bred be eate.

Vpon the same daye shal ý prynce gene for himself and all the people of the londe, a bullocke for a synoffringe. And in the feast of the seuen dayes he shal offre euery daye a bullocke ¢ a ram, that are with out blemysh, for a burntoffrynge vnto the LORDE: q an he goate daylie for a synoffrynge. For the meatoffrynges he shall geue euer an Epha to

e Exo. 30. b. Leui. 27, d. Nu. 3. g. 
Leui. 23, a. Deu. 16. a. 

f Exo, 12. a. 

Chap. rib. 

| 

Chap. ribi. 

a bullocke, an Epha to a ram, q an Hin of oyle to an Epha. Vpon y xv. daye of the senenth moneth, he shal kepe the seuen dayes holy one after another, eué as the other vij. dayes: with the synoffrynge, burntoffringe, meatoffrynge, and with the oyle.

The ribi. Chapter. 

HUS sayeth the LORDE God: y dore of the ynnermer courte towarde the east, shall be shnt the vj. worke dayes: bnt in the Sabbath and in the daye of the new
Moone, it shalbe opened. ‘Then shal the prynce come vnder the dore porche, « stonde still without by the dore cheke. So y prestes shall offre vp his burnt q healthoffrynges. And he shal worshipe at the dore poste, and go his waye forth agayne: but y dore shal nomore

be shut till the enenynge. 

On the same maner shal the people of the londe also do their worshipe before the
LORDE, without this dore vpon the Sab- bathes and new Moones. ‘This is now the burntoffrynge, that the prynce shall bringe vnto the LORDE vpon the Sabbath: sixe lambes without blemysh, a a ram without blemysh, and an Epha for a meatoffringe, with y ram. As for the lambes, he maye geue as many meatoffrynges to them, as he wil, q an
Hin of oyle to an Epha. In the daye of the new moneth, it shalbe a yonge bullocke with out blemysh, sixe lambes q a ram also without blemysh. With the bullocke he shal geue an
Epha, and with the ram an Epha also for a meatofferinge : but to y lambes, what he maye come by: And euer an Hin of oyle to an
Epha. When the prynce cometh, he shall go vnder the dore porche, and euen there departe forth agayne. But when the people of the londe come before the LORDE in the hye solempne feast, as many as come in by the north dore to do worshipe, shal go out agayne at the south dore. And they that come in at the south dore, shal go forth agayne at Y north dore. There shal none go out at the dore where he came in, but shal go forth right ouer on the other syde, and the prynceshall goin and outamonge them.

Vpon the solempne and hie feaste dayes, this shalbe the meatofferynge: An Epha to a bullock, and an Epha to a ram: and to the lambes, as many as he wil, but euer an Hin of oyle to an Epha. Now when the prynce

* Leu, 25, b. Nu. 36. c. 

Che prophet Esechicl. 

bryngetha burntofferynge oran healthofferynge with a fre wil vnto the LORDE, the east dore shalbe opened vnto him, y he maye do with his burnt q healthofferynges, as he doth vpo the Sabbath: and when he goeth forth, the dore shal be shut after him agayne. He shal daylie brynge vnto the LORDE a lambe of a yeareolde without blemish fora burntofferynge: this shall he do euery mornynge. And for a meatofferynge he shal geue the sixte parte of an Épha, ¢ the thirde parte of an Hin of oyle
(to myngle with the cakes) euery mornynge. 
Yee this shalbe a daylie meatofferinge vnto the LORDE, for an euerlastinge ordinaunce: q thus shal the lambe, the meatofferynge and oyle be geuen euery mornynge, for a dailie burntofferinge.

Moroner, thus sayeth the LORDE God: 
Yf the prynce geue a gifte vnto eny of his sonnes, then shall it be his sonnes heretage perpetuall, y he maye possesse it. But yf he wil geue one of his seruauntes some of his heretage, ^it shall be his to the fre yeare, and

,thé to returne agayne vnto y prynce: ‘for his| 
| heretage shalbe his sonnes only. 

The prynce also shal take none of the peoples enheritaunce, ner put the from their possession: but to his owne sonnes shal he geue his possession, that my people be not scatred abrode, but that euery man maye haue his owne.

And he brought me thorow the intraunce at the syde of the dore to y habitacion of the
Sanctuary, that belongeth to y prestes and stode towarde the north, a beholde, there was a place vpon the west syde, then sayde he vnto me: This is the place, where the prestes shall dight the trespace and synofferynges, q bake ý meatofferynges: that they nede not beare the in to the outwarde courte, and so to vnhalowe the people. So he brought me in to the vttemost courte, rounde abonte all the foure corners. Beholde, in euery corner of y fore courte, there was yet a litle courte. Yee in all the foure corners of the courte, there was made a litle courte of xl. enbites longe, and xxx. eubites brode: these foure litle courtes were of one like measure, q there went a rygge wall rounde aboute them all foure, vnder the which there were harthes made rounde abonte.
Then sayde he vnto me: This is the kechin, where the ministers of the house shal dight the; slayne offerynges of the people.

| 

^ 3 Re. 21.8. 2 Re. 9. b. 

fo. Weli. 

€ 

D 

Fo. derdi. 

The yo. Chapter. a FTER this he brought me agayne before the dore of the house: q beholde, there guszshed ont waters from vnder y postes of the honse eastwarde (for the house stode to- warde the east) that ranne downe vpō the right syde of the honse, which lyeth to the aulter south warde. ‘Thé caried he me ont to the north dore, and brought me forth there rounde aboute by the vttemost dore, y turneth eastwarde. Beholde, "there came forth the water vpon the right syde. Now whan the man y had the meterodde in his honde wente out vnto the east dore, he measured a M. cu- bites, q thé he brought me thorow y water, eué to the aneles: so he measured yet a thousande, q bronght me thorow y water agayne vnto the knees: yet measured he a thousande, and bronght me thorow the water vnto the loynes. After this he measured a thousande agayne, then was it soch a ryuer, y
I might not wade thorow it: The water was so depe, that it was nedefull to haue swymmed, for it might not be waded ouer. And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, o thou sonne of man? and with that, he brought me to the ryuer banck agayne.

Now when I came there, there stode many trees vpon ether syde of the ryuer backe.
Then sayde he vnto me: 'This water that floweth out towarde the east, and runneth downe in to the playne felde, commeth in to the see: and from the see it runneth ont, q maketh the waters whole. Yee all that liue and moue, where vnto this ryuer commeth, shal reconer. And where this water cometh, there shalbe many fysh. For all that commeth to this water, shall be lusty and whole. By this riuer shal the fyszshers stonde from En- gaddi vnto En Eglaim, q there sprede out their nettes: for there shalbe greate heapes of fysh, like as in the mayne see. As for his claye and pyttes, they shal not be whole, for why, it shalbe oceupide for salt.

By this ryuer vpon both the sydes of the shore, there shall growe all maner of frutefull trees, whose leanes shall not fall of, nether shal their frnte perish:* but euer be rype at their monethes, for their water runneth ont of the Sanctuary. His frute is good to eate, and his leaf profitable for medyeine. ‘Thus sayeth the LORDE God: Let this be the border,

* Zacb. 13. c. and 14, b. * Gen. 22. c. 

t Psal ika. 

The prophet Esechiel, 

wherin ye shall deuyde the londe vnto the xij. trybes of Israel, with the lyne. Parte it indifferently vnto one as vnto another: “of the which lode I swore vnto youre fathers, that it shulde fall to youre enheritaunce.

This is the border of the londe vpon the north syde, from the mayne see, as men go to
Zadada: namely, Hemath, Berotha, Sabarim : from the borders of Damascus and Hemath vnto Hazar Tichon, that lieth vpon the coastes of Hanerà. Thus the borders fro the see forth, shalbe Hazar Enan, the border of
Damascus the north, and the borders of He- math : that is the north parte.

The east syde shal ye measure from Haueran and Damascus, from Galead and the londe of
Israel by Iordane and so forth, from the see coast, that lieth eastwarde : and this is the east parte.

The south syde is, from Thamar forth to the waters of strife vnto Cades, “the ryuer, to the mayne see: and that is the south parte.

The west parte: namely the greate see from the borders therof, till a man come vnto
Hemath : this is the west parte. 

This londe shal ye parte amonge you, acordinge to the trybes of Israel, and denyde it to be an heretage for you, and for the straugers that dwel amoge you, and begette children.

* For ye shal take them amonge the childré of Israell, like asthough they were of youre owne housholde and countre, and they shal hane he- retage with you amonge the childré of Israel.

Loke in what trybe the straunger dwelleth, in the same trybe shal ye gene him his here- tage, saieth the LORDE God.

The plotij. Chapter. 
HESE are y names of the trybes that lye vpon the northsyde, by the waye of
Hetlon, tyll thou commest vnto Heinath and 
Hazar Enam, the borders of Damaseus to- warde the north besyde Hemath: Dan shal haue his porcio from the east quarter vnto the west. Vpon the borders of Dan from the east syde vnto the west, shal Asser hane his porcion.
Vpon the borders of Asser fro the east parte vnto the west, shal Nephtali haue his porcion.
Vpon the borders of Nephtali from the east quarter vnto the west, shal Manasses haue his porcion. Vpon the borders of Manasses from the east syde vnto the west, shal Ephraim haue his poreion. Vpon the bordersof Ephraim from the east parte vnto the west, shal Ruben

4 Num. 20, b. Exo. 17.b. e Leui. 19. g. Deut. 10.d.and 24.c. 

Chap. ribi. 

D 

a 

Chap. ribiij. haue his porcion. Vp6 the borders of Ruben from the east quarter vuto the west, shal Iuda haue his porcion. Vpon the borders of Iuda from the east parte vnto the west, ye shal set a syde one porcio of xxv. M. meteroddes longe and brode (like as another porcion from the east syde vnto the west,) wherin the Sanc- tuary shal stode.

As for the porcion, that ye shal “separate out for the LORDE, it shalbe xxv. M. longe, and x. M. brode. Which separated holy porcion shal belonge vnto these: namely to the prestes, towarde the north xxv. M. q towarde the west x. M. brode, towarde the east x. M. brode also, v towarde the south xxv. M. longe, wherin the Sanctuary of the
LORDE shalstonde. Yee this same place shal be the prestes, y are of the childré of
Sadoch, ^t haue kepte my holy ordinaunce : which wente not astraye in the erroure of the children of Israel, like as the Leuites are gone astraye: and this separated pece that they haue of the londe, shalbe the most holy, harde vpon the borders of the Leuites. And nexte vnto the prestes, shal the Leuites haue xxv. M. loge and x. M. brode. This shalbe on euery syde xxv.
M. longe, and x. M. brode. Of this porció they shal sell nothinge, ner make eny permnta- cion therof, lest the chefe of the londe fall vnto other, for it is halowed vnto the LORDE.

The other v. M. after the bredth, y lyeth by the xxv. M, shalbe comon: it shal belonge to the cite and to the suburbes for habitacions, and $ cite shal stonde in the myddest therof.
Let this be the measure: towarde $ north parte, v. C. q iiij. M: towarde the south parte, v. C. q iiij. M: towarde the east parte, v. C. and iij. M: towarde y west parte, v. C. and iiij. M.

The suburbes harde vpon the cite, shall haue towarde the north, L. and ij. C: towarde the south, L. and two C: towarde the east, L. and two C: towarde the west also, L. and two C.
As for the residue of the length, that lyeth hard vpon the separated holy grounde: namely,
.|x- M. towarde the east and x. M. towarde the west, next vnto the holy porcio: it and the increase therof shal serue for their meate, that laboure in the cite. They that laboure for the welth of the cite, shall manteine this also, out of what tribe so euer they be in Israel.

2 Eze. 45. a. > Eze. 43. d. and 44, c. 

The prophet (erbirl. 

fo. bci. 

All that is separated of the xxv. M. longe and xxv. M. brode on the foure partes, y shall ye put a syde for the separated porcion of the
Sanctuary, q for the possession of y cite. "The|33 resydue vpon both the sydes of the Sanctuary and possession of the cite, "shall belonge to the prynce, before the place of y xxv. M. vnto the east ende, « before the place of y xxv. M. westwarde, vnto the borders of y cite: this shalbe y prynces porcio. This shalbe the holy place, and the house of the Sanctuary shal stonde in the myddest. — Morouer, from the Leuites and the cities possession, y lye in the myddest of the prynces parte: loke what remayneth betwixte the border of Iuda q the border of Ben Jamin, it shal be the prynces.

Now of the other trybes. 

Fro the east parte vnto the west, shal Ben 
Iamin haue his porcion. Vpon the borders of Ben Iamin fro the east syde vnto ¥ west, shal Symeon haue his porcion. Vpon the borders of Symeo from the east parte vnto the! west, shal Isachar haue his porcion. Vpo the borders of Isachar from the east syde vnto the west, shal Sabulon haue his porcion. od the borders of Sabulon from the east parte vnto the west, shal Gad haue his porcion.
Vpon the borders of Gad southwarde, the coastes shal reach fro Thamar forth vnto the waters of strife to Cades, and to the floude, euen vnto the mayne see.

*'lhis is y lode with his porciós, which ye}3¢ shal distribute vnto the trybes of Israel, saieth y
LORDE God. Thus wyde shal the cite reach: vpon the north parte v C and iiij M measures.
The portes of the cite, shal haue the names of the trybes of Israel. Thre portes of y northsyde:
One Ruben, another Iuda, the thirde Leui. 

Vpo $ east syde, v C q iiij M measures, with y thes portes: The one Ioseph, another
Be Iamin, the thirde Dan. Vpon the south syde v C and iiij M measures, with the thre portes : the one Symeon, another Isachar, the thirde Sabulon. And vpon the west syde v C and iiij M measures, with thre portes also: the one Gad, another Asser, the thirde Nephtali.
Thus shal it haue xviij M measures roüde aboute. And from that tyme forth, y name of the cite shal be: the LORDE is there.

* Eze. 45. a. 4 Nume. 32. Ios, 13. 14. 

The ende of the prophet Csechtel. 

| 

The Prophet Baniel. 

What Daniel contepneth. 

| Chap. I. 
Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Asarias are chosen 
| to lerne Caldeish, q to stade before the kynge. 

Chap. Il. 
Daniel expoüdeth the kynges dreame. 

Chap. lil. 
The thre children wil not worshipe the ymage, 

they be cast in the fyre, but God delyuereth them.

Chap. IIE. 
Another dreame expounded. 
Chap. V. 

Daniel readeth the writinge on the wall, and declareth it.

Chap. VI. 

Daniel is cast in the Lyons denne. 

Chap. Vil 
The vision of the foure beestes. 

Chap. VIII. 
Of the Ramme and the gote. 

Chap. IX. 
The prophecy of the seuentie wekes and of Christ. 

Chap. X. 
Another vision shewed to Daniel. 

Chap. XI. XII. 

| 

Certayne reuelacions of thinges for to come: 

some, of the delyueraunce fro the captiuyte of 

Babilon: some, of the destruccion of leru- salem : some, concernynge the latter dayes.

The first Chapter. 

a T y thirde yeare of y raigne of Ioachim 

kynge off luda, "came Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon vnto lerusalem, q beseged it: and the LORDE delyuered Ioachim the kynge off Iuda in to his honde, with certayne lornamentes of the house off God, which he caried awaye vnto the londe of Sennar, to the
(house of his god, and there brought them in ito his gods treasury. And the kynge spake vnto Asphenes y chefe chamberlayne, that he
;shulde bryuge him certayne of the children of 
Israel, that were come of the kynges sede and 
Im prynces, yoge spryngaldes with out eny blemish but fayre àd welfauored, instructe in

a 4 Re, 24. a, 2 Par, 36. c. 

all wisdome, connynge and lentia: which were able to stonde in the kynges palace, to reade, and to lerne for to speake Caldeish.

Vnto these the kinge appoynted a certayne porcion of his owne meate and of the wine, which he drancke himselff, so to norish thé thre yeare: that afterwarde they might stonde before the kynge. Amonge these now were|38 certayne of the children off Iuda: namely
Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Azarias. Vnto these the chefe chamberlayne gaue other names, and called Daniel, Balthasar: Ana- nias, Sydrac: Misael, Misac: and Asarias,
Abdenago. But Daniel was ata poynt with himself, that he wolde not be defyled thorow the kynges meate, ^ner y wyne which he

^ Gen. 43. f. Tob. 1. b. Iudit. 12. a. 

Chap. d. droke. And this he desyred off the chefe chaberlayne, lest he shulde defyle himselff.
So God gaue Daniel fanoure and grace before y chefe chamberlayne, that he sayde vnto
E I am afrayed off my lorde the kynge, which hath appoynted you youre meate and drynke: lest he spye youre faces to be worse lykynge then the other spryngaldes of youre age, ad so ye shal make me loose my heade vnto ¥ kynge.

'Then Dauiel answered Melassar, whom the chefe chamberlayne had set oner Daniel,
Ananias, Misael and Asarias, and sayde: O proue but ten dayes with thy seruauntes, and let vs haue potage to eate, and water to drynke: then loke vpon oure faces, and theirs that eate off the kynges meate. And as thon seyst, so deale with thy seruauntes. So he consented to them in this matter, ad proued the x. dayes. And after y ten dayes,
-|their faces were better lykinge q fatter, then all the yonge spryngaldes, which ate of the kinges meate.

Thus Melassar toke awaye their meate and wyne, and gaue them potage therfore. God gaue now these foure spryngaldes connynge and lernynge in all scripture and wisdome: but vnto Daniel specially, he gaue vnder- stondinge off all visions and dreames. Now when the tyme was expyred, that the kynge had appoynted to brynge in these yonge springaldes vnto him: the chefe chamber- layne brought them before Nabuchodonosor, and the kynge commoned with them. But amonge them all were founde none soch as
Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Asarias. ‘Ther- fore stode they before the kynge, which in all wisdome and matters off vnderstodinge, that he enquered off them, founde them ten tymes better, thé all the soythsayers and charmers,

that were in all his realme. And Daniel 

abode still, vnto the first yeare of kynge Cyrus. 

a ie the secdde yeare off the raigne of Na- buchodonosor, had Nabuchodonosor a dreame, * where thorow his sprete was vexed, and his slepe brake from him. Then the kynge comaunded to call together all ¥ soyth- sayers, charmers, witches and Caldees, for to shewe the kynge his dreame. So they came, and stode before the kynge. And the kynge sayde vnto them: I haue dreamed a dreame,

€ 

Dn 

The ij. Chapter. 

Che prophet Daniel. 

So. derib. 

q my sprete was so troubled therwith, y I haue clene forgotten, what I dreamed. Vpon this, the Caldees answered the kynge in the Syrians speach: O kynge, God saue thy life for euer.
Shewe thy sernauntes the dreame, and we shal shewe the, what it meaneth. ‘The kynge gaue the Caldees their answere, ad sayde:
It is gone fro me: Yf ye wil not make me vnderstonde the dreame with the interpreta- cion theroff, ye shal dye, and youre houses shal be prysed. But ytf ye tell me the dreame and the meanynge therof, ye shall haue off me giftes, rewardes and greate honoure: only, shewe me the dreame and the significacion of it. They answered agayne, and sayde: the kynge must shewe his seruauntes the dreame, and so shal we declare, what it meaneth.

'Then the kynge answerde, sayenge: I per- ceaue off a treuth, that ye do but prologe $ tyme: for so moch as ye se, that the thinge is gone fro me. "Fherfore, yff ye wil not tell me the dreame, ye shal all haue one iudg- ment. But ye fayne and dyssemble with vayne wordes, which ye speake before me, to put off the tyme. ‘Therfore tell me the dreame, àd so shall I knowe, yff ye can shewe me, what it meaneth. Vpon this, the Caldees gaue answere before the kynge, and sayde: there is no man vpon earth, that can tel! the thinge, which $ kynge speaketh of: Yee there is nether kynge prynce ner lorde, that euer axed soch thinges at a soythsayer, charmer or
Caldeer: for it is a very harde matter, that the kyuge requyreth. Nether is there eny, that can certifie the kynge theroff, excepte the | goddes: whose dwellinge is not amonge the creatures. ——

For $ which cause the kynge was wroth € | with greate indignacio, and comaunded to destroye all the wyse men at Dabilon: and y proclamacion wéte forth, that the wyse me shulde be slayne. They sought also to slaye
Daniel with his cópanyons Then Daniel enquered Arioch the kynges stewarde, off the indgment and sentence, that was gone forth alredy to kyli soch as were wyse at Babilon.
He answered, and sayde vnto Arioch beinge then the kinges debyte: Why hath the kynge proclamed so cruell a sentence? So Arioch tolde Daniel the matter. Vpon this, wente
Daniel vp, and desyred the kinge, y he might hane leysoure, to shewe the kynge the inter-

a Iob 7b. Dan. 4 a. 5. a. | 

' fo. Derloi. 

pretacion : and then came he home agayne q shewed the thinge vnto Ananias, Misael q
Asarias his companiós: y they shulde beseke the God of heauen for grace in this secrete, that Daniel and his felowes with other soch as were wyse in Babilon, perished not. Then was the mystery shewed vnto Daniel in a visio by nyght. And Daniel praysed ý God of heaué, Daniel also cryed loude, and sayde :
O that the name of God might be praysed for euer and euer, for wiszdome and strength are his owne: “he chaungeth the tymes and ages: he putteth downe kynges, he setteth vp kynges: he geneth wyszdome vnto the wyse, and vnderstódinge to those that vnderstode: he openeth the depe secretes: he knoweth y thynge that lyeth in dareknesse, for the light dwelleth with him.’ I thanke the, and prayse the (O thou God off my fathers) that thou hast lent me wyszdome and strength, q hast shewed me the thinge, that we desyred off the, for thou hast opened the kynges matter vnto me.

Vpon this wente Daniel in vnto Arioch, whom the kinge had ordened to destroye the wyse at Babilon: he wente vnto him, and sayde: destroye not soch as are wyse in Dabi- lon, but bringe me in vnto the kynge, and I shal shewe the kynge the interpretacion. ‘Then
Arioch brought Daniel in to the kynge in all the haist, and sayde vnto him: I haue founde a man amonge the presoners off Iuda, y shal shewe the kinge the interpretacion. Thé auswered the kynge, and sayde vnto Daniel, whose name was Balthasar: Art thou he, y cast shewe me y dreame, which I haue sene, q the interpretacion therof? Daniel answered the kynge to his face, and sayde: As for this secrete, for the which the kinge maketh in- quisicion : it is nether the wyse, the sorcerer, the charmer ner the deuell coniurer, that can certifie the kynge off it: Only God in heaué ca open secretes, “and he it is, that sheweth the kinge Nabuchodonosor, what is for to come in the latter dayes.

Thy dreame, and that which thou hast sene in thyne heade vpon thy bed, is this: O kynge, thou didest cast in thy mynde, what shulde come herafter: So he that is the opener off mysteries, telleth the, what is for to come.
As for me, this secrete is not shewed me, for 

a Dan. 7. d. Luc. 1. e. Iob 34.b. Iere. 27. a. Dan. 4. c. 
Iob 32. b. ? 1 Toh. 1. b. * Mat. 11. e. 

The prophet Daniel. 

Chap. tj. 

eny wiszdome that I hane, more then eny 

other lyuynge: but only that I might shewe|3: 

the kynge the interpretacion, q that he might knowe the thonghtes off his owne herte. Thou kynge sawest, and beholde: there stode before the a greate ymage, whose fygure was mar- uelous greate, and his vysage grymme. The ymage heade was of fyne golde, his brest and armes off syluer, his body ad loynes were off copper, his legges were off yron, his fete were parte off yron, and parte of earth.

This thou sawest, till the tyme that (with- out eny hondes) there was hewen off a stone
? which smote the ymage vpon the fete, that were both off yron and earth, and brake thé to poulder: then was the yron, the earth, the copper, the syluer and golde broken altogether in peces: and became like the chaffe off corne, that the wynde bloweth awaye from ¥ somer floores, that they ca nomore be foüde.
But the stone that smote the ymage, became a greate mountayne, which fulfylleth the whole earth: This is the dreame. And now vill we shewe before the kynge, what it meaneth.

*O kynge, thou art a kynge off kynges: 
For the God off heaue hath geue the a king- dome, ryches, strength and maiesty: q hath delyuered the all thinges, that are amoge y children off men: the beastes off the felde, ad the foules vnder the heaué, and geuen the dominion ouer them all. ‘Thou art that goldé heade. After ý there shal aryse another king- dome, which shal be lesse then thyne. The thyrde kingdome shal be lyke copper, and haue dominacion in all lodes. "The fourth kingdome shal be as stronge as yron. For like as yron brusseth and breaketh all thinges:
Yee euen as yron beateth euery thinge downe, so shal it beate downe and destroye.

Where as thou sawest the fete and toes, parte of earth and parte off yron: that is a denyded kyngdome, which nenertheles shal haue some off the yron grounde mixte with it, for so moch as thou hast sene the yron mixte with the claye.

The toes of the fete that were parte off yron and parte off claye, signifieth: that it shalbe a kyngdome partely stronge and partely weake.
And where as thou sawest yron myxte with claye: they shall myngle them selues with y sede off symple people, q yet not contynue

* Dan. 5. d. 

4 Matt. 21. c. Luc. 20, b. 

Chap. ty. one with another, like as yron wil not be souldered with a potsherde.

“In the dayes off these kynges, shall the 
God of heauen set vp an euerlastinge kyng- dome which shall not perish, and his kyng- dome shall not be geuen ouer to another people: Yee the same shall breake and de- stroye all these kyngdomes, but it shall endure for euer.

And where as thou sawest, that without eny hondes there was cut out of the mount a stone,’ which brake the yron, the copper, y earth, the syluer and golde in peces: by that hath y greate God shewed the kynge, what wyl come after this. This is a true dreame, and the interpretacion of it is sure.

Then the kynge Nabuchodonosor fell downe vpon his face, and bowed him self vnto Daniel, and commaunded that they shulde offre meat- offrynges and swete odoures vnto him.

The kynge answerde Daniel, and sayde: 
Yee off a treuth, youre God is a God aboue 

all goddes, a LORDE aboue all kynges, and: an opener of secretes: seynge thou canst dis- |

couer this mysterie. So the kynge made 
Daniel a greate man, and gaue him many and greate giftes.

He made him ruler off all the countrees of 
Babilon, and lorde of all the nobles, that were at Babilon. Now Daniel intreated the kynge for Sydrae, Misac and Abdenago, so that he made them rulers ouer all the offyces in the londe off Babilon: but Daniel himself remayned still in the courte by the kynge.

The iij. Chapter. 

ABUCHODONOSOR the kynge caus- ed a goldé ymage to be made, which was lx. eubites hye, and sixe cubites thicke.
This he made to be set vp in the valley of 
Duran in the londe of Babilon q sent out to gather together the dukes, lordes q nobles, the iudges and officers, the debites ad shreues, with all the rulers of the londe: y they might come to the dedicacion of the ymage which
Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp. So the dukes, lordes and nobles, the iudges and officers, debytes and shreues with all the rulers of the londe gathered them to gether, and came vnto the dedicatynge of $ ymage, that

Nabuchodonosor the kinge had set vp. 
Now wheu they stode before the ymage, 

a Esa, 9. b. * Heb. 12. c. 

Cbr prophet Daniel. 

which Nabuchodonosor set vp, the bedell cried out with all his might: O ye people, kynreddes and tunges, to you be it sayde: that whé ye heare the noyse off the trompettes, which shalbe blowne, with y harpes, shawmes, Psalteries,
Symphonies and all maner off Musick: ye fall downe and worshipe the golden ymage, y
Nabuchodonosor the kynge hath set vp. Who so then falleth not downe and boweth himself, shal euen the same houre be cast in to an hote burnynge ouen. ‘Therfore, when all the folke herde the noyse off the trompettes that were blowne, with the harpes, shawmes, Psal- teries, Symphonies and all kynde of Melody : the all the people, kynreddes and nacions fell downe, and bowed them selues vnto the golden ymage, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp.

Now were there certayne men off the 
Caldees, that went euen then and accused y 
Tewes, and sayde vnto kynge Nabuchodonosor: 
O kynge, God saue thy lyfe for euer. Thou beynge kynge hast geuen a commaüdemet, that all men when they heare the noyse off the trompettes, harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonies and all the other melodies: shall fall downe and bowe them selues towarde the golden ymage: who so thé fell not downe and worshipped not, that he shulde be cast in to an hote burnynge ouen. Now are there cer- taine Iewes, whom thou hast set ouer the offices of the londe off Dabilon:^ namely,
Sydrac, Misae and Abdenago. These men 
(o kynge) regarde not thy comaundemet, yee they will not serue thy goddes, ner bowe them selues to the golden ymage, that thou hast set vp.

Fo. Deelbtj.| 

n 

Then Nabuchodonosor in a cruell wrath|qr 

and displeasure, commaunded, y Sidrac, Misac t Abdenago shulde be brought vntohim. So these men were brought before the kynge.
Then Nabuchodonosor spake vnto them, and sayde: what? o Sidrac, Misac and Abdenago, will not ye serue my goddes? nor bowe youre selues to the golden ymage, that I haue set vp? wel, be redy herafter, when ye heare the noyse of the tropettes, blowne with the harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonies and all y other melodies: that ye fall downe, and wor- shipe the ymage which I haue made. But yff

e worshipe it not, ye shal be cast immediatly in to an hote burnynge oven. Let se, what

* Dan. 2. g. 

jfo. dDerlbity. The prophet Daniel. Chap. iij. 

god is there, y maye delyuer you out of my 

hondes ? 

Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago answered the kynge, and sayde: O Nabuchodonosor, we ought not to cdsente vnto y in this matter, for why: “oure God whom we serue, is able to kepe vs from the hote burnynge ouen (O kynge) and can right wel delyuer vs out off thy hondes. And though he wil not, yet shalt thou knowe (o kynge) that we will not serue thy goddes, ner do reueréce to the ymage,

DB which thou hast set vp. Then was Nabu- chodonosor full off indignacion, so that ¥ countenaunce of his face chaunged vpo Sidrac,
Misac q Abdenago. "Therfore he charched and commaunded, that the ouen shulde be made seuen tymes hoter, then it was wote to be: and spake vnto the strongest worthies that were in his hooste, for to bynde Sidrae,
Misac and Abdenago, and to cast them in to the hote burnynge ouen.

So these men were bounde in their cotes, hosen, shues with their other garmentes, ad cast in to the hote burnynge ouen: for the kinges commaundement was so strate, and the ouen was exceadynge hote. As for the men that put in Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, the flame off the fyre destroyed them. And these thre men Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago fell downe in ¥ hote burnynge ouen,’ beinge fast bounde.

Then Nabuchodonosor the kynge marueled, and stode vp in all haist: he spake vnto his councel and sayde: dyd not ye east these thre men bounde in to the fyre? They answered,

%|and sayde vnto the kynge: Yee okynge. He answered and sayde: lo, for all that, yet do
I se foure men goinge lowse in the myddest off the fyre, and nothinge corrupte : ‘and the fourth is like an angel to loke vpon. Vpon this wéte Nabuchodonosor vnto the mouth of the hote burnynge ouen: he speake also, q sayde: O Sydrae, Misac and Abdenago, ye seruauntes of the hye God: go forth, and come hither. And so Sydrae, Misac, and
Abdenago wente out of the fyre. Then the dukes, lordes and nobles, and the kynges councell came together to se these men, vpon whom the fyre had no maner of power in their bodies:^ In so moch that the very hayre of their heade was not burnt, and their clothes

vnchaunged: Yee there was no smell of fyre felt vpon them.

Then spake Nabuchodonosor, and sayde: 
“Blessed be the God of Sidrac, Misae q Ab-| | denago: which hath sent hisangel, ad defended his seruaütes, that put their trust in him: y haue altered the kynges commaundement, and ioperde their bodies thervpon: rather then they wolde serue or worshipe eny other god, excepte their owne God only. Therfore I/ wil and commaude, that all people, kynreddes q tunges, which speake eny blasphemy agaynst the God of Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, shal dye, and their houses shalbe prysed: Because, there is no God y maye saue, as this.‘ So the kynge promoted Sidrae, Misac and Abdenago, in the londe of Babylon.

e Nabuchodonosor kynge, vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges that dwell vpon the whole earth: peace be multiplied amoge you.
I thought it good to shewe the tokes q mar- uelous workes, y ý hye God hath wrought vpon me. ^O how greate are his tokés, t how mightie are his wonders? His kyngdome is an euerlastinge kyngdome, and his power lasteth for euer and euer.

The iij. Chapter. 

I NABUCHODONOSOR beynge at resta in myne house, ad florishinge in my palace, sawe a dreame, which made me afrayed: ad the thoughtes that I had vpo my bed, with the visions of myne heade, troubled me. ''Then sent Í out a commission, that all they which were of wiszdome at Dabilo shulde be brought before me, to tell me the interpretacion of the dreame. So there came the soythsayers, charmers, Caldees and coniurers of deuels: to whom I tolde the dreame, but what it be- tokened, they coude not shewe me: till at the last, there came one Daniel (otherwyse called Balthasar, acordinge to the name of my
God) which hath the sprete of the holy goddes in him : to whom I tolde the dreame, sayenge:
O Balthasar, thou prynce of saythsayers: For so moch as Í knowe, that thou hast the sprete of the holy goddes, and no secrete is hyd from the: tel me therfore, what y visio of my dreame (y I haue sene) maye signifie. | sawe a vision in my heade vpon my bed: and beholde, there stode a tre vpon the grounde,

ET] 

f Esa. 43. b. Osee13. b. € Dan, 6. e. ^ Psal. 44. b. 

* Nu. 16. g. ^ Esa. 45.a. * Actu. 9. a. Dan. 10. b. 
144. b. Dan.7.d. Luc. 1.c. ' Dan. 2.a. 

d Esa. 43. a. e Act. 12. c. Dan. 6. d. Psal. 33. a. 

Chap. tty. 
|which was very hye, greate and mightie: $ heyth reached vnto the heaué, and the bredth extended to all the endes of the earth: his leaues were fayre, he had very moch frute, so y euery mà had ynough to eate therin.

The beastes of the felde had shadowes vnder it, and the foules off the ayre dwelt in the bowes therof. Shortly, all ereatures fed of it.
I sawe in my heade a vision vpon my bed: q beholde, a watcher (eué an holy angel) came downe from heauen, and eryed mightely, say- lenge: Hew downe the tre, breake otf his
! braunches, shake of his leaues, and scatre his frute abrode: that all the beestes maye get them awaye from vnder him, and the foules from his braunches. Nenertheles leaue the grounde of his rote still in the earth, and bynde him vpon the playne felde, with cheynes of yron and stele. With the dew of heauen shall he be wet, and he shall haue his parte in the herbes of the grounde with other wylde beastes.
| That mans herte off his shall be taken from him, and a beastes herte shall be genen him, till seuen yeares be come and gone vpon him.

This erande of the watcher, is a comaunde- met grounded and sought out in the councel off him, that is most holy: to lerne men for to vnderstonde, that the hyest hath power ouer the kyngdomes off men, ad geneth them, to whom it liketh him, and bryngeth the very outcastes off men ouer them. ‘This is the dreame, y I kynge Nabuchodonosor haue sene.

Therfore o Balthasar, tell thou me what it signifieth: for so moch as all the wyse men off mv kyngdome are not able to shewe me, what it meaneth. But thou canst do it, for ý sprete of the holy Goddes is in the.

Then Daniel (whose name was Balthasar) helde his peace by the space of an houre ad his thoughtes troubled him. So the kynge spake, and sayde: O Balthasar, let nether the dreame ner the interpretacion theroff feare the.
Balthasar answered, sayenge: O my lorde, this dreame happen to thyne enemies, and the interpretacion to thyne aduersaries. As for the tre that thou sawest which was so greate q mightie, whose heyth reached vnto the heauen, and his bredth in to all the worlde : whose leaues were fayre, ad the frute moch: vnder the which the beastes of the felde had their habitacion, and vpon whose braunches the foules of the ayre dyd syt:

K The prophet Daniel. - 

Euen thou (o kynge) art the tre, greate q stroge. Thy greatnesse increaseth, q reacheth vnto the heauen, so doth thy power to the endes of the earth. But where as the kynge sawe a watcher euen an holy angel, that came downe from heauen, and sayde: hew downe the tre, and destroye it: yet leaue the grounde of the rote in the earth, and bynde him vpon the playne felde with cheynes off yron and stele: He shall be wet with the dew off heaurn, and his parte shalbe with the beestes of the felde, till seuen yeares be come and gone vpon him: This (o kynge) is y interpretacio, yee it is the very deuyce of him, y is hyest of all, a it toucheth my lorde the kynge.

Thou shalt be cast out fro men, and thy dwellinge shalbe with the beestes of the felde : with grasse shalt thou be fed like an oxe.
‘Thou must be wet with the dew of the heauen: yee seuen yeares shall come and go vpon the, till thou knowe, that the hyest hath power vpon the kyngdomes of men, “q geueth them, to whom he lyst. Morouer, where as it was sayde, that the rote of the tre shulde be left still in the grounde: it betokeneth, y thy kyngdome shall remayne whole vnto y, after thou hast lerned to knowe, that the power commeth from heauen. Wherfore (o kinge) be contét with my conncel, that thon mayest lowse thy synnes with rightuousnesse, ad thyne offences with mercy to poore people: for soch thinges shall prolonge thy peace. All these thynges touch the kynge Nabuchodonosor.

So after xij. monethes, the kynge walked vp and downe in the paalace off the kyngdome off Babilon, and sayde: This is the greate cite off Babilo, which I myself (with my he q strength) haue made a kynges courte, for the honoure off my magesty. Whyle these wordes were yet in the kynges month, there fell a voyce from heaué, sayenge: O kinge Nabu- chodonosor, to the be it spoke: Thy kyngdome shall departe from the, thon shalt be cast out of mens company: thy dwellinge shalbe with the beestes off the felde, so that thou shalt eate grasse like as an oxe, till senen yeares be come and gone ouer the: euen vntill thou knowest, that the hyest hath power vpon the kyngdomes off men, and that he maye geue them, vnto whom it pleaseth him.

The very same houre was this matter ful- fylled vpo Nabuchodonosor: so that he was

2 Dan. 2. c. Iere. 27. a. 

Fo. bli. 

“~ 

3: 

ee a M. 

So. deely. 
[cast out off més cópauy, q ate grasse like an oxe. His body was wet with the dew of heauen, till his hayres were as greate as Aegles fethers, and his nales like byrdes clawes.

When this tyme was past, I Nabuchodo-| nosor lift vp myne eyes vnto heauen, and | myne vnderstondinge was restored vnto me agayne. Then gaue I thankes vnto the hyest.
I magnified and praysed him that lyueth for evermore, whose power endureth allwaye, and his kyngdome from one generacion to another: in comparyson off whom, all they that dwell vpon the earth, “are to be reputed as nothinge.

He handleth acordinge to his will, amége 
ý powers of heauen ^x amonge the inhabitours: of the earth: and there is none that maye: resiste his honde, or saye: * what doest thou ?.
At the same tyme was myne vnderstondynge, geuen me agayne, and I was restored to the honoure of my kingdome, to my dignite, and to myne owne shappe agayne. My great estates and prynces sought vnto me, and I. was set in my kyngdome agayne, so that I had yet greater worshipe.

The dyd I Nabuchodonosor, loaue, mag- nifie and prayse the kynge of heaven: for all. his workes are true, and his wayes right. As| for those that go on proudly, he is able to bringe them downe.

The d. Chapter. 

ALTHASAR the kynge made a greate 
B bancket to his thousande lordes: withall 
‘these thousande he made greate cheare, and, 
|when he was dronken with wyne, he com- maunded to brynge him y golden and syluer
,vessel, which his father Nabuchodonosor had taken out of the temple at Ierusalem:¢ that the kynge and his lordes (with his quene and concubynes) might drike therout.

So they brought the golden vessel, that was také out of the temple of the LORDES house at Ierusalem. ‘Then the kynge and his lordes with his quene and concubines dronke out of them. They dronke wyne, and praysed their Idols of golde, syluer, copper, yron, wodde and stone.

In the very same houre there appeared fyngers, as it had bene of a mans honde
|writynge, right ouer agaynst the candelsticke vpon the playne wall in the kynges palace: and the kynge sawe the palme of y honde y

iieu erii > Psal. 134, a. c Iob 42. b. 

The prophet Daniel, 

| wrote. “Then chaunged the kynge his coun- tenaunce, and his thoughtes troubled him: so that the ioyntes off his body shoke, and his knees smote one agaynst the other. Wherfore the kynge cryed mightely, that they shulde
|brynge him the charmers, Caldees and con- 
|iurers of deuels. ‘The kynge spake also to ithe wyse men of Babilon, and sayde: Who so can rede this wrytynge, and shewe me the playne meanynge theroff: shall be clothed with purple, haue a cheyne off golde aboute
‘his necke, and rule the thirde parte off my 
| kyngdome. 

Vpon this, came all the kynges wyse men: 

shewe the kynge what it signified. "Thé was the kynge sore afrayed, in so moch, that his coloure chaunged,.and his lordes were sore vexed. So by reason off this matter, y had happened to the kynge ¢ his lordes, the quene went vp herself in to the bancket house, and
¡spake vnto the kynge, sayenge: O kynge, God 
‘saue thy life for euer: Let not thy thoughtes 
,trouble the, and let not thy countenaunce be 
‘chaunged. For why: there is a man iu thy kyngdome, that hath the sprete off the holy goddes within him, as it was sene in thy fathers dayes. He hath vnderstondinge ad wysdome like the goddes. Yee the kynge
Nabuchodonosor thy father made this man chefe of the soythsayers, charmers, Caldees and deuel coniurers: because that soch an abundaunt sprete, knowlege q wisdome (to expoüde dreames, to open secretes, and to declare harde dowtes) was founde in him: yee euen in Daniel, whom the kynge named Dal- thasar. Let this same Daniel be sente for, land he shall tell, what it meaneth.

Then was Daniel brought before the kinge. 
So the kynge spake vnto Daniel, and sayde: 
Art thou that Daniel, one off the presoners of 
Iuda, whom my father the kynge brought out of lewry? I haue herde speake of the, that thou hast the sprete of the holy goddes, expe- rience and vnderstddinge, and that there hath bene greate wisdome founde in the. Now haue there bene brought me, wise and con- nynge charmers, to rede this wrytynge, and to shewe me the meanynge theroff: But they coude not tell me, what this matter signified.
Then herde I saye, y thou canst expounde darcke thinges, and declare harde doutes.

4 2 Par. 36.c. — *lere.50.a. — / Dan. 2. a 

Chap. b. 

B| 

but they coude nether rede the wrytinge, ner| - 

€ 

Chap. bí. 

wm 

Well than, yf thou canst rede this writinge, and shewe me the meaninge therof: thou shalt be clothed with purple, haue a cheyne of golde aboute thy necke, q rule the thirde parte of my kyngdome.

Daniel answered, and sayde before ý kynge: 
As for thy rewardes, kepe them to thy self, or geue thy rych giftes to another: ^yet not the- lesse, I wil rede the wrytyuge vnto y kinge, and shewe him the interpretacion therof. O kinge, God the hyest gaue vnto Nabuchodo- nosor thy father, ^y dignite of a kynge, with worshipe q honoure: so y all people, kyn- reddes q tunges stode in awe ç feare of him, by reason off the hye estate, that he had lent him. For why: he slewe, whom he wolde: he smote, whom it pleased him. Agayne: whom he wolde, he set vp: and whom he list, he put downe. ° But because his herte was so proude, and his stomack set fast vnto wyl- fulnesse: he was deposed from his kyngly trone, and his magesty was taken from him.
He was shot out from amonge men, his herte was like a beestes herte, and his dwellyuge was with the wylde Asses: he was fayne to eate grasse like an oxe, and his body was wet with the dew off the heauen: till he knewe, that the hyest had power vpon the kyngdomes of men, aud setteth ouer them, whom he list.

And thou his sonne (o Balthasar) for all this, hast not submitted thine hert, though thou knewest all these thinges: but hast mag- nified thy selff aboue the LORDE off heauen, so that the vessels off his house were brought before the: that thou, and thy lordes, with thy quene and concubynes, might drynke wyne therout: And hast praysed the Idols of syluer and golde, copper and yron, off wodde « stone: As for the God, ĉin whose honde con- sisteth thy breth ad all thy wayes: thou hast not loaued him.

"Therfore is the palme off this honde sent hither from him, to token vp this wrytinge.
And this is the scripture, that is written vp: 
Mane, Thetel, Phares. Now the interpreta- cion off the thynge is this: Mane, God hath nombred thy kyngdome, and brought it to an ende: Thetel, Thou art weyed in thie balaunce, and art founde to light: Phares,
Thy kyngdome is delt in partes, and geuen to the Medes and Perses.

Then commaunded Balthasar, to cloth 
* Dan. 2. e. 

a 4 Re. 5. d. Mat. 10. a. * Dan. 4. d. | 

Che prophet Dantel, 

Daniel with purple, to hange a cheyne off golde aboute his necke, and to make a pro- clamacion concernynge him: that he shulde be the ruler off the thirde parte off his kyng- dome. “The very same night was Balthasar the kynge off the Caldees slayne, and Darius out of Media toke in the kyngdome, beynge
Ixij. yeare off age. 

The bi. Chapter. 
T pleased Darius to set ouer his kigdome an C. and xx. lordes, which shulde be in all his kingdome aboute. Aboue these he set thre prynces (off whom Daniel was one) that the lordes might geue accomptes vnto them, and the kynge to be vndiseased.

But Daniel exceaded all these princes ad lordes, for the sprete off God was plenteous in him: so that the kynge was mynded to set him ouer the whole realme. Wherfore the prynees and lordes sought, to pyke out in
Daniel some quarel agaynst the kyngdome: yet coude they fynde none occasion ner fawte vpon him. For why: he was so faythful, y there was no blame ner dishonesty founde in him.

Then sayde these men: we will get no quarell agaynst this Daniel, excepte it be in the lawe off his God. Vpon this, wente the princes and lordes together vuto the kynge, and sayde thus vnto him: kynge Darius, God saue thy life for euer.

All the great estates off the realme: as y. prynces, dukes, senatours and iudges, are de- termed to put out a commaundement off y kynge, and to make a sure statute: namely,

that who so desyreth eny peticion. ether of| eny god or man (with in this xxx. dayes)|

excepte it be only off the, O kynge: the same person maye be cast in to the Lyons deune.
Wherfore, o kynge, confirme thou this statute, and make a writynge: that the thyuge which the Medes and Perses haue ordened be not altered ner broken.

So Darius made the wrytynge, and con- firmed it. Now when Daniel vnderstode that the wrytynge was made, he wente in to his house: and the wyndowes of his hall towarde lerusalem stode open. There kneled he downe vpon his knees, thre tymes a daye: there he made his peticion, and praysed his
God, like as his maner was to do afore tyme. 

4 Act, 17. e. * Esa. 47. b. 21. a. Dan. 9. s. 

99 

So. Deelyt. 

5 

fo. Deelytj. 

Then these men made searche, and founde 

Daniel makynge his peticion, and prayenge vnto his God. So they came to the kynge, and spake before him concernynge his com- maundement, sayenge: O kynge, hast thou not subscribed the statute, that within xxx. dayes who so requyreth his peticion off eny god or man, but only of thyself, o kynge: he shalbe cast in to the denne of the Lyons? The kyuge answered, ad sayde: yee, it is true. It must be as a lawe of ¥ Medes and Perses, that maye not be broken.

Then answered they, and sayde vnto the kyuge: Daniel one of the presoners of Iuda
(O kynge) regardeth nether the ner thy sta- tute, that thou hast made, but maketh his peticion thre tymes a daye. When the kynge herde these wordes, he was sore greued, and wolde haue exeused Daniel, to delyuer him, and put off the matter, vnto the Sonne wete downe, to the intent that he might saue him.

These men perceauynge the kynges mynde, sayde vnto him: knowe this (o kynge) that
‘the lawe off the Medes and Perses is, that 
‘the commaundement and statute which the kynge maketh, maye not be altered. “Then
[the kynge bad them brynge Daniel, and they 
| cast him in to the Lyons denne. 

;B| The kynge also spake vnto Daniel ad sayde: Thy God, whom thou allwaye seruest, euen he shall defende the. And there was brought a stone, and layed vpon the hole of the denue: this the kynge sealed with his owne rynge, and with y signet of his prynces: that the kynges commaundement concernynge
Daniel, shulde not be broken. 

| So the kynge wente in to his palace, and 
;kepte him sober all night, so that there was no table spred before him, nether coude he take eny slepe. Dut betymes in the mornynge at the breake off the daye, the kynge arose, and wente in all haist vnto the denne off the Lyons.

Now as he came nye vnto y dene, he cried jwith a piteous voyce vnto Daniel: Yee y kige spake, and sayde vnto Daniel: O Daniel, thou seruaunt off the lyuynge God, Is not thy God
(whom thou allwaye seruest) able to delyuer the from the lyons? Daniel sayde vnto the kynge: O kynge, God saue thy life for euer:
^ My God hath sent his angel, which hath 

* Dani. 14. e, > Dan. 3. e. Act. 12. c. Iud. 14. c. 
1 Re. 17. e. Heb. 11. f. * Hest. 2. b. Dani. 14. g. 
4 Dan. 3. f. * Dani. 14. f. 7. c. J Esa, 43. b. 

The prophet Daniel, 

Chap. bij. 

shut the lyons mouthes, so that they might not hurte me. For why: myne vngiltynesse is founde out before him. And as for the
(o kynge) I neuer offended the. 

Then was the kynge exceadinge glad, ad|% commaunded to take Daniel out off the denne.
So Daniel was brought out of the déne, and no maner of hurte was founde vpo him. For he put his trust in his God. And as for those men which had accused Daniel, the kige commaunded to bringe them, and to cast them in the lyons denne: “them, their child- ren and their wyues. So the lyons had the mastry of them, and brake all their bones a sonder, or euer they came at the grounde.

^ After this, wrote kynge Darius vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges, that dwelt in all londes: peace be multiplied with you:
My commaundement is, in all my dominio and kyngdome, that men feare and stonde in awe off Daniels God :

* For he is the lyuinge God, which abydeth euer: his kyngdome shall not fayle, and his power is euerlastynge. It is he that delyuer- eth, and saueth: he doth wonders and mar- uelous workes, in heauen and in earth: he hath preserued Daniel from the power of the lyons. ‘This Daniel prospered in the raigne off Darius and Cirus of Persia.

| The bij. Chapter. 

ITA the first yeare off Balthasar kynge off 
| Babilon, sawe Daniel a dreame, and a vision was in his heade vpon his bedde.
Which dreame he wrote, and the summe of the matter is this: Daniel spake, and sayde:
I sawe in my vision by nyght, and beholde : the foure wyndes of $ heauen stroue vpon the see, and foure greate beestes came vp from the see, one vnlike another.

The first was as a lyon, and yet had he 
Aegles wynges. *I sawe, that his wynges were plucte from him, and he taken awaye from the earth: that he stode vpon his fete as a man,
'and that there was geuen him a mans herte. 

Beholde, the seconde beest was like a Beer, and stode vpon the one syde. *Amonge his teth in his mouth he had iij. greate lóge teth and it was sayde vnto him: Arise, eate vp moch flesh.

Then I loked, q beholde, there was another 

Osee 13. b. Dan. 3. f. 
Eze. 1. b. 10. b. 

^ Tere, 4. a. b. k Pro. 28. c.

€ Dan. 14. f. 
! Eze. 17. 8. 

Chap. bij. like vnto a Leoparde: this had wynges as a foule, euen foure vpon the backe. ‘This beest had foure heades, ad there was power geuen him. ^ After this I sawe in a vision by night,
33 |q beholde: the fourth beest was grymme and horrible, and maruelous stronge. It had greate yron teth, it deuoured, and destroyed, and stamped the residue vnder fete. It was farre vnlike the other beestes that were before it: ^for it had ten hornes, wheroff I toke good hede.

And beholde, there came vp amonge the, another like horne, before whom there were thre of the first hornes pluckte awaye. Be- holde, this horne had eyes like a ma, q a mouth speakynge presumptuous thinges. ^] loked till the seates were prepared, 4d till the olde aged sat him downe. His clothinge was as white as snowe, and the hayres of his heade like the pure woll.

His trone was like the firie flame, and his wheles as the burnynge fyre. "There drew forth a firie streame, x wente out from him.
? A thousand tymes a thousande serued him, x. M. tymes ten thousande stode before him.
The iudgmét was set, and the bokes opened. 
Then toke I hede there vnto, because of the voyce of the proude wordes, which that horne spake.

I behelde, till the beest was slayne, and his body destroyed, *« geuen ouer to be brent in the fyre.

As for the power of the other beestes also, it was taken awaye, but their lyues were pro- longed for a tyme and season. I sawe in a vision by night, and beholde : there came one in the cloudes of heauen like the sonne of a man, which wente vnto the olde aged, before whom they brought him: Then gaue he him power àd dignite regall, *that all people, trybes and tunges shulde serue him. His power is an euerlastinge power, which shal neuer be put downe: q his kyngdome en- dureth vncorrupte. ^ My herte was vexed, a
I Daniel had a troubled sprete within me, ad the visions off my heade made me afrayed:
‘till I gat me vnto one off them that stode by, to knowe the treuth, concerninge all these thinges. So he tolde me, and made me vn- derstode the interpretacio of these thinges.

a Da. 8. b. 11. a. 1 Mac. 1. a. > Apo. 13. a. 17. c. 
* Apo, 1. c. 4. a. 20. b. Dan, 10. a. 4 Apoc. 5. b. 

e Mat. 25. d. Apo. 19. d. 20. c. 4 Matt. 13. c. Act. 1. b. 

Apo. 1. a. € Phil. 2.2. Matt. 28. c. Ioh. 12. d. 

The prophet Daniel. 

Fo. Declrttj. 

These foure greate beastes, are foure kinges which shal aryse out of the earth. These shal take in the kyngdome off the sayntes of the most hyest, and possesse it still more q more for a longe season. After this I requyred diligently to knowe the treuth, concerninge the fourth beest, which was so farre vnlike the other beestes, and so horrible: whose teth were of yron, and his nales off brasse: which deuoured and destroied, and stamped the resydue vnder his fete. ‘1 desyred also to knowe the treuth, as touchinge the ten hornes that he had vpon his heade, and this other which came vp afterwarde, before whose face there fell downe thre: which horne had eyes and a mouth that spake presumptuous thinges, and loked with a grimmer visage then his felowes.

I behelde, and the same horne made battail agaynst the sayntes, yee ad gat the victory off them: vntill the tyme, that the olde aged came, that the iudgment was geué to the chefest sayntes: and till the tyme, that ý sayntes had the kyngdome in possession.

He gaue me this answere: That fourth beest shalbe the fourth kingdome vpo earth : it shalbe more then all other kyngdomes, it shall deuoure, treade downe ad destroye all other londes.

“The ten hornes, are ten kynges that shal aryse out of that kyngdome, after who there shall stonde vp another, which shall be greater then the first.

He shall subdue thre kynges, and shall speake wordes agaynst the hyest off all: he shall destroye the sayntes of the most hyest, and thynke, that he maye chaunge tymes and lawes. ” They shall be geuen vnder his power, vntill a tyme, two tymes, and halff a tyme.

But the indgment shalbe kepte, so that his power shalbe taken from him, for he shal be destroyed, and perish at the last. As for the kyngdome, power and all might that is vnder the heauen: it shal be geuen to the holy people off the most hyest, " whose kyngdome is euerlastinge, yee all powers shall serue and obeye him. ‘Thus farre extéde y wordes.

Neuerthelesse, 1 Daniel was so vexed in my thoughtes, that my countenaunce chaunged,
° but the wordes I kepte still in my herte. 

^ Dani. 14. f. 
! Zach. 1. c. 
Dan. 14, f. 

* Dan. 9. d. * Apo. 13. a. 17. c. m Dan. 2. c: Apoc: 12. d. En Lune. de,
* Luc. 2. c. 

Fo. Deeley. 

The biij. Chapter. 

A | F N the thirde yeare off the raigne of kinge 

Balthasar, there apeared a visio vnto me 
Danicl, after that I had sene the first. “I sawe in a vision, (and when I sawe it, I was at Susis in the chefe cite, which lyeth in the londe off Elam) and in y vision, me thought I was by the ryuer off Vlai.

Then | loked vp, and sawe: and beholde there stode before the ryuer, a ramme, which had hornes: and these hornes were hye, but one was hyer then another, and the hyest came vp last. J sawe that this ramme puszhed with his hornes, agaynst the west, agaynst the uorth, and agaynst the south: so that no beestes might stonde before him, ner defende them from his power: but he dyd as him listed, and waxed greatly. I toke hede vnto this, and then came there an hegoate from the west, ouer the whole earth, and touched not the grounde.

This goate had a maruelous goodly horne betwixte his eves, and came vnto the ramme, that had the two hornes (whom I had sene afore by the ryuer syde) and ranne fearcely vpon him with his might. I sawe him drawe nye vnto the ramme, beynge very fearce vpon him: yee he gaue him soch a stroke, that he brake his two hornes :

Nether had the ramme so moch strength as to stonde before him: but he kest him downe, trodde him vnder his fete: and no man was able to delyuer the ramme out of his power.

The goate waxed exceadinge greate, and when he was at the strongest, his greate horne was broken also. Then grewe there other

'foure soch like in the steade, towarde the 

foure wyndes off the heauen. ’ Yee out of one of the leest off these hornes, there came vp yet another horne, which waxed maruelous greate: towarde the south, towarde the east, and towarde the fayre pleasaunt londe. It grewe vp to the hoost off heauen, wherof it dyd cast some downe to the grounde, and off the starres also, and trode them vnder fete.
Yee it grewe vp vnto the prynce off the hoost, from whom the daylie offeringe was takeu, aud the plaee off his Sanctuary casten downe. And a certayne season was geuen vnto it, agaynst the daylie offeringe (because of wickednesse) that it might cast downe the

s Dando das 

Cbr prophet Daniel. 

verite to the grounde, and so to prospere in all thinges, that it went aboute. Vpon this I herde one off the sayntes speakynge, which saynte sayde vnto one that axed this question:

How longe shall this vision off the daylie sacrifice and of the waistinge abhominaeion endure: that the Sanctuary and the power shall so be troden vnder fote? And he answered him: Vnto the euenynge q the morninge, euen two thousande and thre hū- dreth dayes: then shall the Sanctuary be clensed agayne.

Now when I Daniel had sene this vision, and sought for the vnderstondinge of it: be- holde, there stode before me a thinge like vnto a man. And I herde a mans voyce in the ryuer off Vlai, which cryed, and sayde:
O Gabriel, make this man vnderstonde the vision. So he came, and stode by me. But
I was afrayed at his cominge, and fell downe vpon my face.

Then sayde he ynto me: O thou sonne of man, marcke well, for in the last tyme shall this vision be fulfylled. Now as he was speakynge vnto me, I waxed faynte, so that I suncke downe to the grounde. But he toke holde vpon me, and set me vp agayne, say- enge: Beholde, I will shewe the, what shall happen in the last wrath: for in the tyme appoynted it shal be fulfilled.

‘The ramme which thou sawest with the two hornes, is the kynge off the Medes ad
Perses: but the goate is the kynge of Greke londe: the greate horne that stode betwixte his eyes, that is the pryncipall kynge. But where as it brake, and foure other rose vp in the steade: it signifieth, that out of this peo- ple shall stonde vp foure kyngdomes, but not so mightie as it.

After these kyngdomes (whyle vngodlynesse is a growiuge) there shall aryse a kynge off an vushamefast face, which shall be wyse in darcke speakinges.

He shalbe mightie and stronge, but not in his owne strength. He shall destroye aboue measure, and all that he goeth aboute, shall prospere: he shall slaye the stronge and holy people. And thorow his craftynes, falsede shall prospere in his honde, his herte shall be proude, and many one shall he put to death in his welthynesse. He shalstonde vp agaynst the prynce off prynces, but he shalbe destroyed

? Dan. 7. 3.11. a. 1 Mac. 1. a. 

Chap. bij. 

€ 

n 

Chap. tr. without honde. “And this vision that is shewed ynto the, is as sure as the evenynge and the mornynge. Therfore wryte thou vp this sight, ^for it wylbe longe or it come to passe.

Vpon this was I Daniel very faynte, so that 
I laye sicke certayne dayes: but whan I rose vp, I wente aboute the kynges busynesse, and marueled at the vision, neuerthelesse no man knewe of it.

The iy. Chapter. 

N the first yeare off Darius the sonne off 
Ahasuerus, ^ which was of the sede off the 
Medes, q was made kynge ouer the realme of the Caldees: Yee euen in the first yeare off his raigne, I Daniel desyred to knowe the yearly nombre out of the bokes, ^ wherof the
LORDE spake vnto Ieremy the prophet: that Ierusalem shulde lie waist lxx. yeares: ad I turned me vnto God the LORDE, “for | to praye and make myne intercessio, with fast- | inge, sack cloth ad ashes I prayed before the

LORDE my God, and knowleged, sayenge : 

O LORDE, thou greate q fearfull God, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy with them, which loue the, and do thy commaunde- mentes: / We haue synned, we haue offended, we haue bene disobedient and gone backe : yee we haue departed from all thy preceptes and iudgmentes. |

We wolde neuer folowe thy seruauntes the prophetes, that spake in thy name to oure kynges and prynces to oure fore fathers, and to all the people off the londe. *O LORDE, rightuousnesse belongeth vnto the, vnto vs pertayneth nothynge but open shame: as it is come to passe this daye vnto euery man of
Iuda, and to them that dwell at Ierusalem: 

Yee vnto all Israel, whether they be farre or nye: thorow out all londes, wherin thou hast strowed them, because of the offences that they had done agaynst the.

Yee o LORDE, vnto vs, to oure kinges & pryuces, to oure fore fathers: euen to vs all, that haue offended the, ^belongeth open shame.
But vnto theo LORDE oure God, pertayneth mercy and forgeuenesse. As for vs, we are gone backe from him, and haue not obeyed the voyce of the LORDE oure God, to walke in his lawes, which he layed before vs by his

è Esa. 8. d. * Dan. 
€9 Esd, 1. a. 9. c. 
^ Psal. 105. a. 

a 2 Mach. 9. e. 2 Tess. 2. b. 
5.e. 4 Tere. 25, b. Iere. 29, b. 
/ Baru. 1. a. £ Tren. 1. d. 

Cbr prophet Daniel, 

seruauntes the prophetes : * yee all Israel haue transgressed, and gone backe from thy lawe, so that they haue not herkened vnto thy voyce.

? Wherfore the curse and ooth, that is writ- ten in the law of Moses the seruaüt of God
(against whom we haue offended) is poured vpon vs. And he hath perfourmed his wordes,
‘which he spake agaynst vs, q agaynst oure iudges that iudged vs: to bringe vpon vs soch a greate plage, as neuer was vnder heauen, like as it is now come to passe in Ierusalem.
Yee all this plage, as it is writteu in the lawe of Moses, is come vpon vs. Yet made we
‘not oure prayer before the, LORDE oure 
(God, that we might turne agayne from oure 
| wickednesse, and to be lerned in thy verite. 

'"'Therfore hath Y LORDE made haist, to 

(bringe this plage vpon vs: for the LORDE 
‚oure God is rightuous, in all his workes which he doth: for why, we wolde not harken vnto his voyce.

| And now, o LORDE oure God, thou that 
|” with a mightie honde hast brought thy peo- 
‘ple out of Egipte, to get thy self a name, which remayneth this daye : we haue syuned
|(o LORDE) a done wickedly agaynst all thy 
‘rightuousnes: yet let thy wrothfull displeasure be turned awaye (I beseke the) from thy cite
| Ierusalem thy holy hill. And why? for oure synnes sake and for the wickednesse of oure forefathers: is lerusalem and thy people abhorred, of all them that are aboute vs. Now therfore (O oure God) heare the prayer of thy seruaunt, and his intercession: O let thy face shyne ouer thy sanctuary, that lieth waist.

O my God, enclyne thine eare, and herken 
(at the leest for thine owne sake) open thine eyes: beholde how we be desolated, yee and the cite also, which is called after thy name:
For we do not cast oure prayers before the in oure owne rightuousnesse, no: but only in thy greate mercies. O LORDE, heare: O for- geue LORDE: O LORDE considre, tary not ouer longe: but for thine owne sake do it,
O my God: for thy cite and thy people is called after thy name.

As I was yet speakinge at my prayers, knowleginge myne owne synnes and ý synnes of my people, makinge so myne intercession before the LORDE my God, for the holy

19 Pet. 1i. d. Zach, 7. b. * Deu. 27. 28. Leui. 26. t Baruc 2. m Baruc 2. b. Ex. 12. 13. 14.

Fo. derlrhb., 

D 

a —————————— i 

Fo. Deelrbt. 

E 

E 

d'|the most holy one. 

a 

hils sake of my God: yee whyle I was yet speakinge in my prayer, beholde, the ma
Gabriel (“whom [had sene afore in the vision) came flyenge to me, and touched me aboute y offeringe tyme in the euenynge. He in- fourmed me, and spake vnto me: O Daniel
(sayde he) I am now come, to make the vn- derstonde it: For as soone as thou begannest to make thy prayer, it was so dinysed, and therfore am I come to shewe the. ° And why ? for thou art a man greatly beloued.

Wherfore, pondre the matter wel, that thou mayest lerne, to vnderstonde the vision, Lxx. wekes are determed ouer thy people, q ouer thy holy cite: that the wickednesse maye be consumed, that the synne maye haue an ende, that the offence maye be reconciled, and to bringe in euerlastinge rightuousnesse, to fulfill y visions and the prophetes, and to anoynte
Vnderstode this then, and marcke it well: “that from the tyme it shalbe concluded, to go and repayre lerusalem agayne, vnto Christ (or the anoynted) prynce: there shalbe seuen wekes. ‘Then shall the stretes t walles be buylded agayne lxij. wekes, but with harde troublous tyme. Afther these
Ixij. wekes, shal Christ be slayne, ¢ they shal haue no pleasure in him. Then shal there come a people with the prynce, and destroye the cite and the sanctuary: and his ende shal come as the water floude. But the deso- lacion shall continue till the ende of the batell.

He shall make a stronge bonde with many, for the space of a weke: and when the weke is half gone, he shal put downe the slayne

and meatoffringe. ^ And in the temple there shalbe an abhominable desolacio, till it haue destroyed all. And it is concluded, y this waistinge shal continue vnto the ende.

The y. Chapter. 
N the thirde yeare of kinge Cirus of Per- sia, there was shewed vnto Daniel (other- wise called Balthasar) a matter, yee a true matter, but it is yet a longe tyme vnto it.

He vnderstode the matter well, and per- ceaued what the vision was. At the same tyme, I Daniel mourned for the space of thre wekes, so that I had no lust to eate bred: as for flesh and wyne, there came none within

* | Par. 36. d. e Dan. 7. b.

2 Iro Cs Pi gg 

| ? Da. 10. c. d. ji Ead. 1. a.

4 Matt. 24. 13. Mar. 13. b. 

The prophet Baniel, 

m mouth: No, I dyd not ones anoynte my self, till the whole thre wekes were ont.

Vpon the xxiiij. daye of the first moneth, I 
(was by the greate floude, called Tigris: I lift vp myne eyes, and loked: and beholde, a man clothed in lyunynge, ‘whose loynes were gyrded vp with fyne golde of Araby: his body was like the Chrisolite stone, his face (to loke vpon) was like lightenynge, his eyes as the flame of fyre, his armes and fete were like fayre glisteringe metall, but the voyce of his wordes was like y voyce of a multitude.

^] Daniel alone sawe this vision, the men that were with me, sawe it not: bnt a greate fearfulnesse fell vpon them, so that they fled awaye, and hyd them selues. I was left there my self alone, and sawe this greate vision, so longe til there remayned nomore strength within me: Yee I lost my coloure clene, I waisted awaye, and my strength was gone.
Yet herde I the voyce of his wordes: q as soone as I herde it, fayntnesse came vpon me, and I fell downe flat to the grounde vpon my face. And beholde, an hande touched me, which set me vp vpon my knees q vpon the palmes of my hondes, sayenge vnto me: £ O
Daniel, thou well beloued man: take good hede of the wordes, that I shal saye vnto y, a stode right vp, for vnto ¥ am I now sent.

And when he had sayde these wordes, I stode vp tremblinge. Then saide he vnto me: feare not Daniel: for why, sence the first daye that thou set thine herte to vnderstonde, and didest chasten thy self before thy God: thy wordes haue bene herde. And I had come vnto the whé thou begannest to speake, had not the prynce oner the kingdome of the
Perses with stonde me xxj. dayes. But lo, 
Michael one of the chefe prynces, ^ came to helpe me, him haue I left by the kinge of
Persia, q am come to shewe the, what shal happen vnto thy people in the latter dayes: for it wilbe loge yet or the vision be fulfilled.

Now when he had spoken these wordes vnto me, I kest downe my heade to y grounde, and helde my tunge. Beholde, there touched my lippes one, very like vnto a man. "Then opened I my mouth, and sayde vnto him, that. stode before me: O my lorde, my ioyntes are lowsed in the vision, and there is no more stregth within me: How maye my lordes

J Dan. 3. e. Act. 9. a. £ Dan. 9, b. 

Apo. 1. c. 
^ Tosu. 5. d. Dan. 12. a. 

Chap. r. 

3 

€ 

Chap. rt. 

35 

seruaunt then talke with my lorde? seinge there is no strength in me, so that I can not take my breth? Vpon this there touched me agayne, one moch like a man, q conforted me, sayenge : ^O thou man so wel beloued, feare not: be content, take a good herte vnto the, and be stronge. So when he had spoken vnto me, I recouered, q sayde: Speake on my lorde, for thou hast refreszshed me. The sayde he: knowest thou wherfore I am come vnto ¥? now wil I go agayne to fight with the prynce of the Perses. As soone as I go forth, lo, the prynce of Grekelonde shal come.
Neuertheles, I wil shewe the the thinge, y is fast noted in the scripture of treuth. Anl as for all yonder matters, there is none that help- eth me in them, but Michael youre prynce.

The ri. Chapter. 

ND in the first yeare of Darius of Me- 
AÀA dia, 1 stode by him, to conforte him, q to strength him, and now wil I shewe the the treuth. Beholde, there shal stonde vp yet thre kinges in Persia, but y fourth shal be farre richer then they all. And when he is in the chefest power of his riches, he shal pro- uoke euery man agaynst the realme of Greke- londe. ‘Then shal there arise yet a mightie kinge, that shal rule with greate dominion, and do what him list. ^ And as soone as his kingdome commeth vp, it shalbe destroyed, ¢
“deuyded towarde y foure wyndes of the hea- uen. They y come after him, shall not hane soch power q dominion as he: but his king- dome shalbe scatred, yee euen amonge other the those. And the kynge of y south shalbe mightier, then his other prynces. Agaynst him there shal one make himself stroge, q shal rule his dominio with greate power.

But after certayne yeares they shalbe ioyned together, q the kynges doughter of the south shall come to the kynge of the north, for to make frédshipe, but she shal not optayne the power of that arme, nether shall she be able to endure thorow his might: but she, q soch as brought her (yee a he y begat her, q con- forted her for his tyme) shalbe delyuered vp.
Out of ý braunches of hir rote, there shal one stonde vp in his steade: which with power of armes shal go thorow the kynges londe of the north, ¢ handle him acordinge to his strength.
As for their Idols q prynces, with their costly 

a Dan. 9. b. > Dan. 7. a. 

Che prophet Daniel, 

lewels of golde q syluer, he shal cary them awaye captyues in to Egipte, and he shal pre- uayle agaynst the kynge of the north certayne yeares. And when he is come in to y kynges realme of y south, he shal be fayne to turne agayne in to his owne londe. Wherfore his sonnes shalbe displeased, and shal gather to- gether a mightie greate hoost of people: and one of them shal come, and go thorow like a waterflonde: then shal he returne, and go forth with defyenge and boostinge vnto his owne londe.

The the kinge of y south shalbe angrie, and shal come forth to fight agaynst the kmge of the north: Yee he shall bringe a greate mnltitude of people together, and a greate heape shalbe geue in to his honde: these shal he cary awaye with greate pryde, for so moch as he hath cast downe so many thousandes, neuertheles he shall not preuayle. For y kinge of ¥ north shal gather (of the new) a greater heape of people then afore, q come forth (after a certayne tyme and yeares) with a mightie hoost q exceadinge greate good.

At the same tyme there shall many stonde vp agaynst the kinge of the south, so that y wicked children of thy people also shal exalte them selues (to fulfill the vision) and then fall. So the kinge of the north shall come to laye sege, and to take the stroge fensed cities:
And the power of thé of y south shal not be able to abyde him, q the best men of the people shall not be so stronge, as to resist him. Shortly, when he commeth, he shall handle him as he list, q no man shalbe so hardy as to stonde agaynst him. He shal stode in the pleasaunt countre, which thorow him shalbe destroyed. He shal set his face with all his power to optayne his kingdome, q to be like it. Yee that shal he do, q geue him vnto the doughters amoge women, to de- stroye him. But he shal fayle, nether shal he optayne his purpose. After this, shall he set his face vnto the Iles, q take many of the.
A prynce shal stoppe him, to do him a shame, besyde the confucion that els shal come vnto him. Thus shal he turne agayne to his owne londe, stomble, q fall, and be nomore founde: so he that came vpon him q dyd him vio- lence, shal stonde in his place, q haue a pleasaunt kingdome: and after few dayes he shal be destroyed, q that nether in wrath ner

* 1 Mach, 1. 

Fo. urrlrbij. 

€ 

Fo. brelrbiij. 
Djin batell. In his steade there shal aryse a vyle person not holdé worthy of a kinges dignite: this shall come in craftely, x optayne the kingdome with fayre wordes: he shal fight. agaynst the armes of the mightie (q destroye them,) yee q agaynst the prynce of the coue- naunt.

So after ¥ he hath taken truce with him, he shal hadle dt EE that he maye get vp, q ouer come him with a small flocke: q so, with eraftynesse to get him to y fattest place of the londe, and to deale otherwise, then ether his fathers or graudfathers dyd. For he shal destroye the thinge, y they had robbed q spoyled, yee q all their substauuce : ymagen- ynge thoughtes agaynst the strége holdes, q that for a tyme. His power and herte shalbe sterred yp with a greate armye agaynst the kinge of the south: where thorow the kinge of the south shalbe moued then vnto batell, with a greate q mightie hoost also. Neuer- thelesse, he shal not be able to stonde, for they shall conspyre agaynst him. Yee they y eate of his meate, shal hurte him: so that his hoost shal fall, q many be slayne downe.

These two kinges shalbe mynded to do myschefe, q talke of disceate at one table: but they shal not prospere: “for why, the ende shal not come yet, vnto the tyme apoynted.
Thé shall he go home agayne in to his owne londe with greate good, q set his herte agaynst the holy couenaunt, he shalbe busy agaynst it, q then returne home. At the tyme appoynted he shal come agayne, q go towarde the south:
So shall it happen otherwise then at the first, yet ones agayne. And why, the shippes of
Cythim shal come vpon him, that he maye be smytten q turne agayne: ^y he maye take indignacion agaynst the couenaunt of holynes, to medle agayust it. Yee he shal turne him, t drawe soch vnto him, as leaue the holy couenaunt.

É| He shal set mightie men to vnhalowe the sanctuary of strégth, to put downe the daylie offeringe, x to set vp the abhominable desola- cion. And soch as breake the couenaunt, shal he flatre with fayre wordes. But ¥ people that wil knowe their God, shal haue the ouerhade and prospere. ‘Those also that haue vnder- stondinge amonge the people, shal enfourme the multitude: q for a longe season, they

? 2 Mac. 5. a. 
4 Apoc. 15. a. 

5 Nu. 24. d. 
* Apo. 12, c. 

* 2 The. 2. a. 
/ Apo. 11. c. 

The prophet Daniel. Chap. ri. 

shalbe persecuted with swearde, with fyre, with captyuyte q with the takynge awaye of their goodes. Now whé they fall, they shalbe set vp with a litle helpe: but many shal cleue vnto them faynedly.

Yee some of those which haue ynderstond- ynge shal be persecuted also: y they maye be tryed, purified q clésed, till the tyme be out: for there is yet another tyme appoynted. The kinge shal do what him list, he shal exalte and magnifie himself agaynst all, that is God.: Yee he shall speake maruelous thinges agaynst the
God of all goddes, wherin he shal prospere, so 
"longe till the wrath be fulfilled, for the con- clusion is deuysed alredy. He shal not re- garde the God of his fathers, but his lust shall be vpon womé: Yee he shal not care for eny
God, for he shal magnifie himself aboue all. 
In his place shal he worshipe the mightie 
Idols: q the god whom his fathers knewe not, shal he honoure with golde and syluer, with precious stones and pleasaunt Jewels.

This shal he do, sekinge helpe and sucoure at the mightie Idols and straunge goddes.
Soch as wil receaue him, and take him for 
God, he shal geue them greate worshipe and power: yee and make them lordes of the multitude, and geue them the londe with re- wardes. In the latter tyme, shal the kinge of

ithe south stryue with him: and the kinge of 

the north in like maner shall come agaynst him with charettes, horsmen q with a greate nauy of shippes. He shal come in to the londes, destroye and go thorow: he shal entre also in to the fayre pleasaunt londe. “Many cities t countrees shal decaye, excepte Edom,
Moab q the best of the children of Ammon, which shal escape from his honde. He shall stretch forth his hodes vpon the countrees, q the londe of Egipte shal not escape him. For thorow his goinge in, he shal haue dominion ouer the treasures of syluer q golde, q ouer all the precious Iewels of Egipte, Lybia and
Ethiopia. / Neuerthelesse the tydinges out of the east and the north shall trouble him, for the which cause he shal go forth to destroye q curse a greate multitude. The tentes of his palace shall he pytch betwixte the two sees, vpon the hill of the noble sanctuary, for he shal come to the ende of it, and then shal no man helpe him.

€ Apo. 19. d. 20 c. 

(Chap. rj. Cbr prophet Daniel. So. derrig.) 

a HE tyme wil come also, that the greate 

B 

The rij. Chapter. 

prynce Michael,” which stondeth on thy peoples syde, shal aryse vp, for there shal come a tyme of trouble,’ soch as neucr was, sens there begane to be eny people, vnto that same tyme. ‘Then shal thy people be de- lynered, yee all those that be foude written in the boke. * Many of them that slepe in the dust of the earth, shal awake: some to ener- lastinge life, some to perpetuall shame q re- profe. +The wyse (soch as haue taught other) shal glister, as the shyninge of heauen: and those that haue instructe the multitude vnto godlynesse, shalbe as the starres, worlde with- out ende.

And thou o Daniel, shut vp these wordes, q seale the boke, till the last tyme. Many shal go aboute here and there, and thé shal know- lege increase. So I Daniel loked, and beholde, there stode other two: one vpon this shore of the water, the other vpon yonder syde. And one of thé sayde vnto him, which was clothed in lynnynge, and stode aboue vpon the waters of the floude: How longe shall it be to the

¢Toh. 5. c. 1 Cor. 15. e. 

? Apo. 19. c. ? Mat. 24. b. 
* Apo. 10. a. 

4 Matt. 13. c. 

ende of these wonderous workes? ‘Then herde I the man with the lynnynge clothes, which stode aboue vpon the waters of thel? floude : when he helde vp his right and left honde vnto heauen, q sware by him which lyueth for euer :^ that it shal tary for a tyme, two tymes q half a tyme: q when the power of the holy people is clene scatred abrode, thé shal all these thinges be fulfilled.

I herde it well, but I vnderstode it not. € 
Then sayde I: O my lorde, what shal happen after that? He answered: Go thy waye
Daniel, for these wordes shal be closed vp «| sealed, till the last tyme: q many shalbe puri- fied, clensed q tried. But the vngodly shall: lyue wickedly, and those wicked (as many of thé as they be) shal haue no vnderstondinge.
* As for soch as haue vnderstondinge, they shal regarde it. And from y tyme forth that the daylie offerynge shalbe put downe q the abhominable desolacion set vp, there shalbe a! thousande two hüdreth q xc. dayes. O well is him, that waiteth, ¢ commeth to the thou-, sande iij. C. q xxxv. dayes. Go thou thy waye now, till it be ended: take thy rest, and byde in thy lot, till the dayes haue an ende.

f Apo. 11. c. 12. c. * Matt. 13. b. 

Che ende of the prophet Danict. 

The Prophet Oseas., 

THbhat Ostas contepneth. 

Chap. L 
God refuseth the lewes, and marieth himself to the Gentiles.
Chap. Il. 

Plage ouer the lewes, that will not amende: A 
Promyse of mercy to those that wil repente. 
Chap. Ul. 

The mercifull loue of God, towarde the same 

vnthankful people. 
Chap. HH. 
The synnes of the prestes and of the people, with reprofe for the same.
Chap. V. ` 
Against the prestes that disceaue the people. 
Chap. VI. 

The vnthankfulnes of the People : Agayne, the louynge kyndnesse of God.

Chap. VII. 

No medycine can helpe, so sore are they wounded with ydolatry.

HIS is the worde of the LORDE, that came vnto Oseas the sonne of Beeri, in the dayes of Osias," Ioathan, Achas q Eze- chias kinges of Iuda: and in the tyme of
Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas kynge of Israel. 

The first Chapter. 
A IRST, when the LORDE spake vnto 
Oseas, he saide vnto him: Go thy waye, 

a4 Reg. 12. 15. 16, 17. 

è Leni, 21, b. Eze. 44. d. 

Chap. VIII 

Idolatry in Samaria and Israel. 

Chap. IX. 
Punyszhment vpon Israel for Idolatry. 

Chap. X. 
The vnthankfulnesse of Israel. The calfe in 
Samaria, for the which and soch like abhomi- nacions, he telleth them of destruccion.

Chap. XI. XII. 

God calleth them agayne, with rehearsinge his benefites done to them afore,

Chap. XIII. 

He sheweth them their wickednesse, and punyszh- ment for the same.

Chap. XIII. 
He crieth and exorteth the people to conuerte, promisynge swetely and louyngly to receaue them,

take an harlot to thy wife, and get childré by her: ‘for the lode hath comitted greate whor- dome agaynst the LORDE. So he wente, and toke Gomer $ doughter of Deblaim: which conceaued, and brought forth a sonne. And the LORDE sayde vnto him: ‘call his name lesrael, for I wil shortly auenge the bloude of
Iesrael vpon the house of Iehu, and will bringe the kingdome of the house of Israel to an

*3 Re. 21. b. 4 Re. 15. c. 17. 18. b. 

ende. Then will I breake the bowe of Israel, in the valley of Iesrael.

She conceaued yet agayne, and bare a doughter. And he sayde vnto him: Call hir name Loruhama (that is, not opteyninge mercy)" for I wil haue no pyte vpon the house of Israel, but forget them, and put them clene out of remembraunce. ^ Neuerthelesse I wil haue mercy vpou the house of Iuda, q wil saue them, euen thorow the LORDE their God.
But I wil not delyuer them thorow eny bow, swearde, batel, horses or horsmen.

Now when she had weened Loruhama, she conceaued agayne, q bare a sonne. Then sayde he: call his name Lo Ami, (that is to saye, not my people.) For why? ye are not my people, therfore will not I be yours. “And though the nombre of the children of Israel be as the sonde of the see, which can nether be measured ner tolde: Yet in the place where it is sayde vnto them, ye be not my people: euen there shall it be thus reported of them: they be y childré of the lyuynge
God. Then shal the children of Iuda and the childré of Israel be gathered together agayne, q chose them selues one heade, and then departe out of the londe: for greate shalbe the daye of Iesrael.

The ij. Chapter. 
ELL youre brethren, that they are my people: and youre sisteren, that they haue optayned mercy. As for youre mother, ye shal chyde with her, and reproue her: for she is not my wife,’ nether am I hir huszbode: vnlesse she put awaye hir whordome out of my sight, and hir aduoutry from hir brestes.
Yf no, I shal strype her naked, q set her, euen as she came in to y worlde:/ Yee I shal laye hir waist, and make her like a wildernesse, and slaye her for thyrste. I shal haue no pite also vpon hir children, *for they be the children of fornicacion.

Their mother hath broken hir wedlocke, and she that bare them, is come to cofucion.
^ For she sayde: I wil go after my louers, that geue me my water and my bred, my woll a my flax, my oyle and my drynke. But I will hedge hir waye with thornes, and stoppe it, that she shal not fynde hir fotestoppes: and

Cbr prophet stas. 

So. drelrri, 

though she runne after hir louers, yet shall she not get them: ‘she shal seke them, but not fynde them. Then shal she saye: well, I will go turne agayne to my first huszbonde, for at y tyme was I better at ease, then now.
But this wolde she not knowe, where as I yet gaue her corne, wyne, oyle, syluer and golde, which she hath hanged vpon Baal.

*Wherfore now will I go take my corne q wyne agayne in their season, and fet agayne my woll and my flax, which I gaue her, to couer hir shame. ‘And now will I dyscouer hir foolishnesse, euen in the sight of hir louers, and no man shal delyuer her out of my hondes. Morouer, I wil take awaye all hir myrth," hir holy dayes, hir new moones, hir
Sabbathes and all hir solempne feastes: I will destroye hir vynyardes and fyge trees, though she saieth: lo, here are my rewardes, that my louers haue genen me. I wil make it a wodde, and the wylde beestes shall eate it vp: I will punysh her also for the dayes of
Baal,” wherin she censed him, deckynge him with hir earynges and cheynes: when she folowed hir louers, and forgat me, saieth the
LORDE. 

Wherfore beholde, I wil call her againe, bringe her in to a wildernes, and speake frendly vnto her: there wil I geue her hir vynyardes agayne, yee and the valley of Achor also, to shewe hir hope q comforte. Then shal she synge there as in the tyme of hir youth, ¢ like as iu the daye “when she came out of the londe of Egipte. Then (saieth the LORDE)
|she shal saye vnto me: O my houszbande, q shal call me nomore Baal: for I wil take awaye those names of Baal from hir mouth, yee she shal neuer remembre their names eny more. Then will I make a couenaunt with them, with the wylde beastes, with the foules of the ayre, q with euery thinge that crepeth vpon the earth.

’ As for bowe, swerde and batel, I will de- stroye soch out of the londe, ¢ wil make them to slepe safely. “Thus wil I mary the vnto myne owne self for euermore: yee euen to my self wil I mary the, in rightuousnesse, in equyte, in louynge kyndnesse and mercy. In faith also will I mary the vnto my self, q thou
‘shalt knowe the LORDE. At the same tyme 

| 
|* Leui. 15. c. 

*"4Re.17.a. ^Gen.49. b. 4 Re. 19.g. © Esa. 10. d. * Eze. 16. b. ' Iere. 13. c. " Deu. 16. c. 
Rom.9.c. Gen. 22, c. 4 Ioh. 1. a. Eze. 37. c. * Iud. 2. b. 10. b. ? losu. 7. d. ? Iudic. 5. a. e Iere. 3.a. J Eze. 16.a, £&]Ioh.8.d. ^4 Re. 17. a. | Exo. 15.a. 4 Leui. 26.a. * Esa.2.a. * Eze. 16. b.!

—— 

fo. Deelrry. 

wil I shewe my self frendly and gracious vnto y heauens, saieth the LORDE: q the heauens shal helpe the earth, and the earth shal helpe the corne, wyne and oyle, and they shal helpe lesrael. 1 wil sowe them vpo earth, for a sede to myne owne self, q wil haue mercy vpon her, y was without mercy. And to the which were not my people,” I wil saye: thou art my people. And he shal saye: thou art my God.

The iij. Chapter 

ay’ | WHEN sayde y LORDE to me: *Go 

yet thy waye q wowe an aduouterous woma, whó thy neghboure loueth,asy LORDE doth the childre of Israel: how be it they haue respecte to straunge goddes,' and loue the wyne kannes. So 1 gat her for xv. syluer- linges, and foran Homer and an half of barlye, q sayde vnto her: Thou shalt byde with mea longe season, but se that thou playest not the harlot, and loke thou medle with none other man, ¢ then wil 1 kepe my self for the.

Thus the childre of Israel shal syt a greate whyle without kinge and prynce,^ without offerynge and aulter, without prest and reue- lacion. But after warde shal the children of
Israel conuerte, and seke the LORDE their 
God, and ‘Dauid their kinge: and in y latter dayes they shal worshipe the LORDE, and his louynge kyndnesse.

The iiij. Chapter. 

| p y worde of the LORDE, o ye children of Israel: For the LORDE must punysh thé, y dwel in the londe. And why? ‘There is no faithfulnesse, there is no mercy, there is no knowlege of God m the lode: but swearinge, lyege, maslaughter, theft and aduoutry haue gotten the ouerhande, q one bloudgiltynesse foloweth another. Ther- fore shal the londe be in a miserable case, and all they that dwell therin, shal mourne. ‘The beastes in the felde, the foules in y ayre, and the fishes in the see shall dye. Yet is there none, that wil chasté nor reproue another.
The prestes which shulde refourme other mē, 

are become like the people. 
Therfore stomblest thou in y daye tyme, ¢ the prophet with the in the night. 1 wil bringe thy mother to sylence, q why? ‘my people

* Ro, 9.c. 1 Pet. 2. b. è Eze. 44. d. — * Esa, 28. a. 
Amos 6. a. 42 Par. 25.a. Dan. 3. d. * Eze. 34. d. f Baruc 3. c. Esa. 5. b. Mala. 1. b. Exo. 19. a.

The prophet (stas. 

perish, because they haue no knowlege. Seinge then that thou hast refused vnderstondinge, therfore wil I refuse ¥ also: so that thou shalt nomore be my prest. And for so moch as thou hast forgotten the lawe of thy God, 1 wil also forget thy childré. ‘The more they increased in multitude, the more they synned agaynst me, therfore wil I chaunge their honoure in to shame. *'They eate vp the synnes of my people, ¢ corage them in their wickednesse. “Thus the prest is become like the people. ' Wherfore I will punysh them for their wicked wayes, q rewarde them acord- inge to their owne ymaginacions. ‘They shal eate, ¢ not haue ynough: They haue vsed whordome, therfore shall they not prospere : q why? they haue forsaken the LORDE, ¢ not regarded him.

Whordome, wyne and dronckennesse take the herte awaye. ‘My people axe councel at their stockes, their staffe must tell them. For an whorish mynde hath disceaued them, so y they comitte fornicacion agaynst their God.
‘They make sacrifice vpon the hie moun- taynes, q burne their incense vpon the hilles, yee amonge the okes, groues q buszshes, for there are good shadowes. Therfore youre doughters are become harlottes, and youre spouses haue broké their wedlocke I wil not punish youre doughters for beinge defyled, q youre brydes that became whores: "seinge the fathers them selues haue medled with har- lottes, and offered with vnthriftes: but the people that wil not vnderstonde, must be punyshed.

Though thou Israel art disposed to playe y harlot, yet shuldest not thou haue offended, o
Iuda: “thou shuldest not haue runne to Gal- gala, ner haue gone vp to Bethaué, ner haue sworne: the LORDE lyueth. For Israel is gone backe, like a waton cowe. The LORDE therfore shal make hir fede, as y làbe y goeth astraye. And where as Ephraim is become partaker of Idols, wel, let him go. Their dronckénesse hath put thé backe, y brought them to whordome. Their rulers loue re- wardes, brynge (saye they,) to their owne shame. A wynde shall take holde of their fethers, q they shal be cofounded in their offeringes.

£ Eze. 13. d. — ^ Esa. 24. a. 
Agg.1.a. *4 Reg. 1. a. 
"3 Re. 12, d. Deu. 10. d. 

* Leui. 26.d. Mich. 6. c. 
!4Re.17.b. ™ Nu. 25. a. 

Chap. tij. 

€ 

B 

The b. Chapter. 

EARE this, o ye prestes: take hede, 

o thou housholde of Israel: geue eare, o thou kingly house: for this punyshment wil come vpon you, that are become a snare vnto
Myspa, and a spred net vnto the mount of 
Thabor: They kyll sacrifices by heapes, to begyle the people therwith: “therfore wil I punysh them all. I knowe Ephraim well ynough, c Israel is not hyd fro me: for
Ephraim is become an harlot, and Israel is defyled. They are not mynded to turne vnto their God, for they haue an whorish herte, so y they can not knowe the LORDE.

? But the pryde of Israel wil be rewarded him in his face, yee both Israel and Ephraim shal fall for their wickednesse, and Iuda with them also. “They shall come with their shepe q bullockes to seke y LORDE, ?but they shal not fynde him, for he is gone from them. As for the LORDE, they haue re- fused him, and brought vp bastarde children: a moneth therfore shall deuoure them with their porcions.

Blowe with the shawmes at Gabea, and with the trumpet in Rama, crie out at
Bethauen vpon the yonside of Ben Iamin. 
In the tyme of y plage shal Ephraim be layed waist, therfore dyd I faithfully warne the trybes of Israel. ° Yet are the prynces of
Iuda become like them, that remoue the londemarckes, therfore wil I poure out my wrath vpon them like water. Ephraim is oppressed, and can haue no right of the lawe: for why? they folowe $ doctrynes of men.
Therfore will I be vnto EUM as a moth, q to the honse of Iuda as a caterpiller.

‘When Ephraim sawe his sicknesse, and luda his disease: Ephraim wente vnto Assur, and sent vnto kinge Iareb: yet coude not he helpe you, ner ease you of youre payne. I am vnto Ephraim as a lyon, and as a lyons whelpe to the house of Iuda. Euen I, I wil spoyle them, q go my waye. I wil take them with me, and no man shal rescue them. I wil
ES and returne to my place, till they waxe faynt, and seke me.

The bi. Chapter 
N their aduersite they shall seke me, and saye: come, let vs turne agayne to the

? Eze. 8. b. Tere. 23. d. 
Eze. 14. a. 

? Osee 7. b. 
* Deu. 19. d. 

* Tere. 3. b. 

1 Deu. 4. e. Deu. 27. b. 

The prophet Oseas. 

LORDE: “for he hath smytten vs, and he shal heale vs: He hath wounded vs, a he shal bynde vs vp agayne: after two dayes shal he quycken vs, in the thirde daye he shal rase vs vp, so that we shal lyue in his sight. Then shal we haue vnderstondinge, q endeuoure oure selues to knowe the LORDE. He shal go forth as the sprynge of the daye, ^and come vnto vs as the euenynge and mornynge rayne vpon the earth.

O Ephraim, what shal I do vnto the? O 
Iuda, how shal I intreate the? seynge youre loue is like a mornynge cloude, ¢ like a dew y goeth early awaye. Therfore haue I eut downe |33 the prophetes, q letten them be slayne for my wordes sake: so that thy punyshment shal cometolight. For I hane pleasure in louynge kyndnesse, and not in offerynge:* Yee in the knowlege of God, more then in burnt sacrifice. t But euen like as Adam dyd, so haue they broken my couenaunt, and set me at naught.
Galaad is a cite of wicked doers, of malicious people and bloudshedders. The multitude of the prestes is like an heape of theues, mur- therers q bloudthurstie: for they haue wrought abhominacion. * Horrible thinges haue I sene in the house of Israel, there playeth Ephraim the harlot, and Israel is defyled: but Iuda shall haue an haruest for himself, when I re- turne the captiuyte of my people.

The bij. Chapter. 

HEN I vndertake to make Israel|a 

whole, then the vngraciousnesse of 
Ephraim and the wickednes of Samaria com- meth to light: then go they aboute with lyes.
At home, they be theues: and without, they fall to robbynge. They cosidre not in their hertes, that I remébre all their wickednes.
They go aboute with their owne ynuencios, but I se them wel ynough. They make the kinge and the princes, to haue pleasure in their wickednes q lyes. All these burne in aduoutry, as it were an ouen y the baker heateth, whe he hath lefte kneadinge, till the dowe be leuended. Euen so goeth it this daye with oure kinges and prynces, for they begynne to be woode droncken thorow wyne: they vse familiarite with soch as disceaue thé.
They with the ymaginacion of their herte are like an oué, their slepe is all ¥ night like the|33

à Pro. 16. b. 
! Tere, 18. b. 

£f 4 Re. 16. b. 2 Par. 98. c. — € Iob 5. b. i Matt. 9. b. 12, a. * Gen. 3. b.

fo. derlrrii. 

ffo. Deelerty. 
. [slepe of a baker, in the mornynge is he as hote as the flame of fyre: they are altogether as hote as an ouen.
They haue devoured their owne iudges, all their kinges are falle: yet is there none of the y calleth vpon me. ‘Therfore must Ephraim be mixte amonge y Heithen. Ephraim is become like a cake, y no man turneth: straungers haue deuoured his strength, yet he regardeth it not: he waxeth | ful of gray haires, yet wil he not knowe it: a Y pride of Israel is cast downe before their face, “yet wil they not turne to the LORDE their God, ner seke him, for all this.
€| Ephraim is like a doue, that is begyled, and hath no herte. ^ Now call they vpon the
Egipcians, now go they to the Assirians: but whyle they be goinge here and there, I shal sprede my net ouer them, q drawe them downe as y foules of the ayre: and acordinge as they haue bene warned, so will I punysh them.
* Wo be vnto ean for they haue forsaké me. 
They must be destroyed, for they haue set 
,me at naught. “Iam he that haue redemed them, and yet they dyssemble with me. They
| leall not vpon me with their hartes, but lye 
'youlinge vpon their beddes. Where as they 
| |come together, it is but for meate q drincke, 
| |and me will they not obeye. I haue taught 
| |them, and defended their arme, yet do they 
| |ymagin myschefe agaynst me. ‘They turne 
| them selues, but not a right, t are become as 
|a broken bowe. ‘Their prynces shalbe slayne 
| |with the swearde, for the malice of their 
| |tunges, soch blasphemies haue they lerned in 
| the londe of Egipte 

The biij. Chapter. 
'A |Q ET the horne to thy mouth, and blowe : 
“get the swiftly (as an Aegle) vnto the house of the LORDE: for they haue broken
| my couenaunt, and transgressed my lawe. 
Israel can saye vnto me: thou art my God, we knowe the: but he hath refused the thinge that is good, therfore shall the enemye folowe vpon him. / They haue ordened kinges, but not thorow me: they haue made prynces, and
I must not knowe of it. Of their syluer and golde haue they made them ymages, to bringe them selues to destruccion.

* Osee 5. a. à 4 Re. 16. b. c Esa. 1. a. 42 Pet. 2. a. 
Matt. 15. a. Esa, 29. d. Eze. 33. f. * Deu. 31. d. 
£3 Re. 12. c. £ Eze. 7.d. ^ 3 Re. 12. d. 

Cbr prophet Oseas, 

Chap. biij. 

" Thy calfe (O Samaria) shalbe taken awaye, for my wrothfull indignacion is gone forth agaynst the. How longe wil it be, or they can be clensed? For the calfe came from
Israel, the worke man made it, therfore can it be no God, but euen to a spy ders webbe shal y calfe of Samaria be turned. They haue sowne wynde, therfore shal they reepe a storme.

Their sede shal beare no corne, there shal} 3 ! no meel be made of their increase: though

re be, yet shall straungers deuoure it vp. ae shall perish, the Gentiles shall entreate him as a foule vessel. Sens they went vp to the Assirians, they are become like a wylde asse in the deserte.

‘Ephraim geueth rewardes to get louers, therfore are they scatred amoge the Heithe, there wil I gather them vp. ‘They shal soone be weery of the burthen of kinges q prynces.
Ephraim hath made many aulters to do wickednes, therfore shal the aulters turne to his synne. Though I shewe thé my lawe neuer so moch, they counte it but straunge doctrine. TIS they do sacrifice, offeringe the flesh and eatinge it: the LORDE will haue no pleasure therin: but will remembre their wickednes, and punysh their synnes..
* Israel turneth agayne in to Egipte, they haue forgotten him that made them, they buylde churches, and Iuda maketh many stronge cities: ‘therfore wil I sende a fyre in to their cities, and it shal consume their places.

The ty. Chapter. 

O not thou triumphe (O Israel) make|@ 

no boostinge more then the Heithen, for thou hast comitted aduoutry agaynst thy
God: straunge rewardes hast thou loued, more thé all corne flores. " Therfore shall they nomore enioye the cornefloores and wyne- presses, and their swete wyne shal fayle thé.
They wil not dwel in the LORDES londe, 
"but Ephraim turneth agayne in to Egipte, q eateth vncleane thinges amonge the Assirians.
They poure out no wyne for a drinkofferinge vnto the LORDE, nether geue they him their slayne offeringes: but they be vnto them as mourners meates, wherin all they that eate' them, are defyled. For the bred that they

i 4 Re. 17.a. Eze. 16. b. 

! 4 Re, 25, b. ^ Agg. 2 

j pe €. ||
* Eze. 4. c. MY 

‘Chap. r. 

haue soch lust vnto, shal not come in the house of the LORDE. What wil ye do then in the solempne dayes, and in the feast of the
LORDE? lo, they shall get them awaye for the destruccion, Egypte shal receaue them, a
Noph shal bury them. 

The nettles shall ouergrowe their pleasaunt goodes, and burres shalbe in their tabernacles.

\33 | Be ye sure (O Israel) the tyme of visitacion 

LUN 

is come, the dayes of recompencinge are at honde. As for the prophet, ye holde him for a foole: and him that is rich in the sprete, for a mad man: so greate is youre wickednes and malice, Ephraim hath made himself a watchman of my God, a prophet y is become a snare to do hurte in euery strete, and abho- minacion in the house of his God. “They be gone to farre, a haue destroied the selues, like as they dyd afore tyme at Gabaa. ‘Therfore their wickednes shal be remébred, and their synnes punyshed.

I fande Israel like grapes in the wildernes, q sawe their fathers as the first fyges in y toppe of ý fyge tre. But they are gone to
Baal Peor, ^g runne awaie fro me to y shamefull Idoll, ¢ are become as abhominable as their louers Ephraim flieth like a byrde, so shal their glory also: In so moch, y they ishal nether begette, cóoceaue ner beare children.

And though they bringe vp eny, yet will I make them childlesse amonge men. Yee wo shall come to them, when I departe from them.
* Ephraim (as me thinke) is planted in welthi- nesse, like as Tyrus, but now must she bringe hir owne children forth to the manslayer.

O LORDE thou shalt geue them: what shalt thou geue them? geue them an vnfrute- full wombe and drye brestes <All their wickednesse is done at Galgal, there do I abhorre them. For the vngraciousnes of their owne inuencions, I wil dryue them out of my house. I will loue them nomore, for all their prynces are vnfaithfull. Ephraim is hewen downe, their rote is dryed vp, so y they shal bringe nomore frute: yee and though they bringe forth eny, yet wil I slaye euen the best beloued frute of their body. My God shall cast them awaye, for they haue not bene obe- diet vnto him, therfore shal they go astraye amonge the Heithen.

* jud. 19. a. 1 Re.10. c. 4 Reg. 9. a. 
Nu. 25. a. * Gen. 48. a. 4 Iosue 4, d. 

? Tere. 24. a. 
* Esa. 5. a. 

The prophet (stas. 

The y. Chapter. 

Fo. Deelrry. 

[see was a goodly vyne, but he hath|q 

* brought forth vnprofitable frute: yee the more frute he bad, the mo aulters he made: y more good I dyd to their londe, the more frendshipe shewed they to their ymages. Their herte is deuyded, therfore wil they be de- stroyed. The LORDE shall breake downe their ymages, he shal destroye their aulters.
Then shal they saye: we haue no kinge, for why? we baue not feared the LORDE. And what shal then the kinge do to vs? They comon together, and sweare vayne oothes: they be cofederate together, therfore groweth their punyshment, as the wedes in the forowes of the londe.

They that dwell in Samaria haue wor- shipped the calfe of Bethaué: therfore shall the people mourne ouer them, yee and the prestes also, that in their welthynesse reioysed with them: and why? it shal passe awaye from them. It shalbe brought to the Assi- rian, for a present vnto kinge lareb. Ephraim shal receaue full punishment: Israel shal be confounded for his owne ymaginacions, Sama- ria with his kinge shall vanish awaye, as the scomme vpon the water. The hye places of
Auen where Israel do synne, shal be cast downe: thistles and thornes shal growe vpon theiraulters. ‘Then shal they saye to ¥ moun- taynes: “couer vs, and to the hilles: fall vpon vs.

O Israel, thou hast synned as Gabaa dyd afore tyme, where they remayned: * shulde not the batel then come vpon the wicked children, as wel as vpon the Gabaonites? I wil chasten them, euen after myne owne de- syre, the people shal be gathered together ouer them, whe I punysh them for their greate wickednesse. Ephraim was vnto me, as a cow that is vsed to go to plowe, therfore I loued him, and fell vpon his fayre neck. I droue Ephraim, ^ Iuda plowed, q Iacob played the huszbode man: that they might sowe vnto rightuousnes, and reape the frutes of weldoynge: y they might plowe vp their fresh londe, and seke the LORDE, till he came, and lerned them rightuousnes.

But now they haue plowed them wicked- nesse, therfore shal they reepe synne, and eate the frute of lyes. Seinge thou puttest thy
£ lud. 19. a. 

4 Luc. 23. c. Apo. 6. c. ^ Matt. 11. c. 

B 

jo. Deelryot. 

cofidence in thine owne wayes, and leanest to y multitude of thy worthies: there shal growe a sedicion amonge thy people. All thy stroge cities shalbe layed waist, ° cenen as Salmana was destroyed with his familiers, thorow him that was auenged of Baal, in the daye of batel, where y mother perished with hir childré. Enen so shal it go with you (o
Bethel) because of youre malicious wickednes. 
Like as the moruynge goeth awaye, so shal the kinge of Israel passe.

The ri. Chapter. 
HEN Israel was yoge, I loued him: 
^and called my sonne ont of the londe of Egipte. But y more they were called, the more they wente backe : offerynge vnto Idols, and censynge ymages. ‘I lerned Ephraim to go, and bare them in myne armes, but they regarded not me, that wolde haue helped them. J led them with coardes of frendshipe, a with bondes of loue. I was enen he, that layed the yocke vpon their neckes. ^I gaue them their fodder my self, y they shulde not go agayne in to Egipte: And now is Assur their kinge: For they wolde not turne vnto me. ‘Therfore shal y swearde begynne in their eities, the stoare that they haue lickened vnto, shall be destroyed and eaten vp: and that because of their owne ymaginacions. My people hath no lust to turne vnto me, *their prophetes laye the yocke vpon the, but they

ease them not of their burthen. 

What greate thinges haue I geuen the, o 
Ephraim? how faithfully haue I defended the, o Israel? haue I dealt with the as with
Adama? /or haue I intreated the like Se- boim? No, my hert is otherwise mynded.
Yee my mercy is to feruent: therfore haue I not turned me to destroye Ephraim in my wrothful displeasure. For I am God and no man, I am euen that holy one in the myddest of the, though I came not within the cite.

The LORDE roareth like a lyon, that they maye folowe him : * Yee as a lyon roareth he, that they maye be afrayed, like the children of the see: that they maye be scarred awaye from Egipte, as men scarre byrdes: ¢ frayed awaye (as dones vse to be) from the Assirias

a Ind. 8. c. 5 Exo. 3. b. 6. b, Matt. 2. c. * Exo. 
32.b. 3 Re. 12. e. 4 Re. 16. c. 4 Exo. 16. c. * Esa. 
10.2.28.b. Matt. 23. Luc. 11. d. J Gen. 19. e. 

Che prophet Oseas, 

Chap. ri londe: and that because I wolde haue them tary at home, saieth the LORDE. But Ephraim goeth aboute me with lies, and the house of
Israel dyssembleth. Only Iuda holdeth him with God, and with the true holy thinges.

The rij. Chapter. 

INE. kepeth the ayre, and foloweth 

after the east wynde : he is euer increas- inge lyes q destruction. ‘They be confederate with the Assirians, thefr oyle is caried in to
Egipte. “The LORDE hath a courte to holde with Iuda, and wil punysh Iacob: After their owne waies and acordinge to their owne inuencions, shal he recompence them. He toke his brother by the hele, ‘when he was yet in his mothers wombe: and in his strength he wrestled with God. He stroue with the
Angel, and gat the victory: so that he prayde and desyred him. He fande him at Bethel, t there he talked with vs.

Yee the LORDE God of hoostes, euen $ 
LORDE him self remembred him: Then turne to thy God, kepe mercy and equyte, and hope still in thy God. But the mar- chaunt hath a false weight in his honde, he hath a pleasure to occupie extorcion. * Ephraim thinketh thus: Tush, I am rich, I haue good ynough: In all my workes shal not one fawte be founde, that I haue offended. Yet am I the LORDE thy God, eue as when I brought the out of the londe of Egipte, and set the in thy tentes, and as in the hye feast dayes.

I haue spoké thorow the prophetes, and shewed dynerse visions, and declared my self by the ministracion of y prophetes. But at
Galaad is the abhominacion, they are fallen to vanyte. At Galgal they haue slayne oxen:
“and as many heapes of stones as they had in their lóde forowes, so many aulters haue they made. lacob fled in to the londe of Siria,
“and Israel serued for a wife, aud for a wife he kepte shepe.

By a prophet the LORDE brought them out of Egipte, and by a prophet he preserued the. But Ephraim hath prouoked him to displeasure thorow his abhominacions: ther- fore shal his bloude be poured vpon him self, and the LORDE his God shal rewarde him his blasphemies.

Deu. 29. d. € Apo. 5. a. ^ 4 Re. 16. b. Esa, 57. b. 
' Gen. 25.a, Gen, 32, d. Gen. 35. b. t Apo. S. c. 
! Deu. 12. a. 14. b. " Gen. 28. a. 

Chap. riii. 

The viij. Chapter. 

a HE abhominaeion of Ephraim is come 

also in to Israel. He is gone backe to 
Baal, therfore must he dye. ^ And now they synne more aud more: of their syluer, they make them molten ymages, like the Idols of the Heithen, and yet all is nothinge but the worke of the eraftesman. — Notwithstodinge they preach of the same: who so wil kysse the calues, offreth to men. Therfore they shalbe as the mornynge cloude, and as the dew that early passeth awaye : and like as dust that y wynde taketh awaye from the floore, and as smoke that goeth out of $ chymney.

^I am the LORDE thy God, which brought the out of the londe of Egipte: that thou shuldest knowe no God but me only, q that thou shuldest haue no Sauioure but only me.
“I toke diligent hede of the in the wildernesse that drye londe. But when they were wel fedde and had ynough, they waxed proude, and forgat me. ?Therfore will I be vnto them as a lyon, and as a leoparde in y waye to the Assirians. I wil come vpon them as a she beer, that is robbed of hir welpes, and I wil breake that stubburne herte of theirs.
There wil I deuoure them as a lyon: yee the wylde beastes shal teare them.

*O Israel, thou doest but destroye thy self, In me only is thy helpe. Where are thy kinges now, that shulde helpe the in all thy cities? Yee and thy iudges, of whom thou saydest: geue me a kinge and prynces ? /well,
I gaue the a kinge in my wrath, and in my displeasure will 1 take him from the agayne.
The wiekednesse of Ephraim is bounde toge- ther, v his synne lieth hyd. Therfore shall sorowes eome vpon him, as vpon a woman that traualeth. An vndiserete sonne is he: for he considreth not, that he shulde not haue bene able to haue endured in the tyme of his byrth, had not I defended him from the graue, and delyuered him from death.

* O death, I wil be thy death: o hell, I wil be thy stynge. Yet ean I se no eomforth, for

a Esa. 46. a. Eze.16. b. Osee 2. b. Osee8.a. ^" Exo. 
20.a. * Esa. 43. b. Deu. 8. a. 4 Deu. 32. b. e Iob 22.a. J1 Reg.8.a. € 1 Cor. 15. f. Heb. 2. b.

The ende of the prophet Oseas. 

The prophet (seas. 

when he is now the goodliest amonge the brethren, the east wynde (euen the wynde of the LORDE) shal come downe from the wil- dernesse, and drye vp his eondytes, and drynke vp his welles: he shal spoyle the treasure of all pleasaunt vessels.

^ As for Samaria, they shalbe made waist, t why? they are disobedient vnto their God.
"They shal perish with the swearde, their ehild- ren shalbe slayne, and their women bygg with childe shalbe rypte vp.

The riiij. Chapter. 
URNE the now (o Israel) vntoy LORDE thy God, ‘for thou hast taken a greate fall thorow thy wickednesse. ‘Take these wordes with you, when ye turne to the LORDE, a saye vuto him: O forgeue vs all oure synnes, receaue vs graciously, a then wil we offre y bullockes of oure lyppes vnto the.‘ Assur shalbe no more oure helper, nether will we. ryde vpon horses eny more. As for the workes of oure hondes, we wil nomore call vpon them:,
For it is thou that art oure God, thou shewest. euer mercy vnto the fatherlesse.

O (yf they wolde do this) I shulde heale, their sores: yee with all my herte wolde I. loue them: so y my wrath shulde elene be, turned awaye from them. Yee I wolde be, vnto Israel as the dewe, and he shulde growe as j lylie, q his rote shulde breake out as
Libanus. abrode, q be as fayre as the olyue tre, œ smel as Libanus. They that dwel vnder his sha-| dowe, shulde come agayne, q growe vp as the corne, « florish as the vyne: he shulde haue as good a name, as the wyne of Libanus.

O Ephraim, what haue I to do with Idols eny more? | wil graciously heare him, q lede him forth. I wil be vnto the as a grene Fyrre tre, vpon me shalt thou fynde thy frute. Who so is wyse, shal vnderstonde this: q he y is right enstruete, wil regarde it. For y wayes of the LORDE are rightuous, soch as be godly wil walke in them: As for the wieked, they wil stomble therin.

! 

^ 4 Re. 17. a. 
3 Re. 12. c. 

* Jere. 18.a. Eze. 18. e. 33. c. k Heb. 13. c. Psal. 91. a. | l

| 

101 

So. Declrroij.| 

His brauuehes shulde sprede out 33 

The Prophet Focl. 

That Joel contepneth. 

Chap. 1. 

He sheweth Israel, that all their glory and out- warde ceremonies, shal be put downe and ceasse

Chap. II. 
The plages are greate, wherfore he wolde haue 

them to mourne: yet yf they will amende, they maye hope for grace.

Chap. III. 

How the people are brought agayne, and their enemies punished

Che first Chapter. 

a HIS is the worde of the LORDE, that came vnto Ioel the sonne of Phatuel:
Heare o ye elders: podre this wel, all ye that dwell in the lode: yf euer there happened soch a thinge in youre dayes, or in y dayes of youre fathers. ‘Tell youre children of it, ¢ let them jshewe it vnto their children, q so they to cer- tifie their posterite therof. “Loke what the caterpiller hath lefte, y hath the greshopper eaten vp: what the greshopper lefte, that hath the locuste eaten vp: a what the locuste hath lefte, that hath the blastinge consumed. Wake vp ye dronckardes, q wepe: mourne all ye wyne suppers, because of youre swete wyne, for it shal be taken awaye from youre mouth.
Yee a mightie q an innumerable people shall come vp in to my londe: these haue teth like the teth of lyons, ^x chaftbones like the lyon- esses, They shal make my vinyarde waist, they shal pyll of the barckes of my fygetrees, strype them bare, cast them awaye, and make

the braunches whyte. i3, Make thy mone as a virgin doth, y gyrdeth her selfe with sacke, because of hir bryde grome. For the meate q drynkofferynge shalbe taken awaye from the house of the
LORDE: ¢ the prestes y LORDES ministers shal mourne. ‘The felde shalbe waisted, the londe shalbe in a miserable case: for the corne shalbe destroyed, the swete wyne shal come

* Exo. 10. d. 5 Deu. 32. d. 

to confucion, ¢ the oyle vtterly desolate. The huszbode men q the wyne gardeners shal loke piteously q make lamentacion, for the wheate wyne q barley, q because the haruest vpon the felde is so clene destroyed. ‘The grapega- therers shal make greate mone, wheu the vynyarde q fygetrees be so vtterly waisted.
Yee all the pomgranettes, palmtrees, aple- trees q the other trees of the felde shall wyther awaye. Thus the mery cheare of the children of meu, shal come to confucion.

Gyrde you, q make youre mone, o ye prestes: mourne ye ministres of the aulter: go youre waye in, q slepe in sackcloth, o ye officers of my God: for the meat q drynk- offerynge shal be taken awaye from the house of youre God. Proclame a fastynge, call the cogregacion, ‘gather the elders q all the inha- biters of the londe together in to the house of the LORDE youre God, q crie vnto the
LORDE : alas, alas for this daye. And why? the daye of the LORDE is at honde, and commeth as a destroyer from the Allmightie.
Shal not $ meates be taken awaye before oure eyes, the myrth also « ioye from the house of oure God? "The sede shal perish in the grounde, the garuers shall lye waist, the floores shalbe broken downe, for the corne shalbe destroied. ^O what a sighinge make the catell ? the bullockes are very euel likynge, because they haue no pasture: and the shepe are fameszshed awaye.

* Toel 2. c. 4 5 Re. 18. a. 

Chap. fj. 

O LORDE, to the will I crie : for the fyre hath consumed the goodly pastures of the wyl- dernesse, and the flame hath brent vp all the trees of the felde. Yee the wylde beestes crie also vnto the: for the water ryuers are dryed vp, and the fyre hath consumed the pastures of the wyldernesse.

The ij. Chapter. 

LOWE out trompet in Sion, q crie vpo my holy hill, ý all soch as dwel in the londe, maye treble at it: for ý daie of the
LORDE commeth, ^x is harde at honde : a darcke daye, a gloomynge daye, a cloudy daye, yee q a stormy daye, like as the mornynge spredeth out vpo the hilles: Namely, a great q mightie people: soch as haue not bene sens y begynnynge, nether shal be after them for euermore. Before him shal be a consumynge fyre, a behynde him a burnynge flame. The londe shal be as a garden of pleasure before him, but behinde him shal it be a very waist wildernesse, ¢ there is no man, that shal escape him. They are to loke vpon like bayrded horses, q runne like horse men. They skyppe vp vpon y hilles, as it were the sounde of cha- rettes : as the flame of fyre that consumeth the strawe, andasa mightie peopleredy to the batell.
The folke shalbe afrayed of him, all faces shal be as blacke as a pot. These shal rine like giauntes, q leape ouer the walles like men of warre. Euery mà in his goinge shal kepe his araie, ¢ not go out of his Path. There shal not one dryue another, but ech shal kepe his owne waye. They shal breake in at the wyndowes, q not be hurte: They shal come in to the cite, q runne vpon the walles: They shal clymme vp vpon the houses, q slyppe iu at the wyndowes like a thefe. The earth shal quake before him, yee the heanens shalbe moued: ^the Sonne q Moone shal be darck- ened, and the starres shal withdrawe their shyne. The LORDE shal shewe his voyce before his hoost, for his hoost is greate, stronge t mightie to fulfill his commaundement. This is Y greate and maruelous fearfull daye of the

LORDE: And who is able to abyde it? 
Now therfore saieth the LORDE: * Turne you vnto me with all youre hertes, with fast- inge, wepynge and mournynge: rente youre hertes, q not youre clothes. "Turne you vnto

* Soph. 1. c. Amos 5. c. ^ Ioel5. c. 
* Apoc. 6. c. Deu. 4. e. 30. a. 

Matt. 24. c. 

The prophet Jort. 

the LORDE youre God, “for he is gracious a mercifull, longe sufferynge q of greate com- passion: q redy to pardone wickednes. Then
(no doute) he also shal turne, q forgeue: q after his chastenynge, he shal let youre in- crease remayne, for meat q drynck offerynges vnto the LORDE youre God? * Blowe out with the tropet in Sion, proclame a fastynge, call the congregacion, « gather the people together: warne the congregacion, gather the elders, bringe the children q suclynges to- gether. Let $ brydegrome go forth of his chabre, ¢ the bryde out of her closet. Let the prestes serue the LORDE betwixte the porch q y aulter, wepinge q sayenge : be fauourable
(o LORDE) be fauourable vnto thy people: let not thine heretage be brought to soch confucion, lest the Heithen be lordes therof.
Wherfore shulde they saye amonge the Heithen: 
/ where is now their God ? 

Then shal the LORDE be gelous ouer his londe, q spare his people: yee y LORDE shal auswere, q saye vnto his people: Be- holde, I wil sende you corne, wyne q oyle, so that ye shal haue plenty of them: q I wil nomore geue you ouer to be a reprofe amonge the Heithen. Agayne, as for him of the north,
I shal dryue him farre from you: q shute him out in to a drye and waist londe, his face towarde the east see, and his hynder partes towarde the vttemost see. ‘The stynke of him shall go vp, and his fylthy corrupcion shal fall vpon himself, because he hath dealte so proudly.
Feare not (o londe) but be glad and reioyse, for the LORDE wil do greate thinges. Be not ye afrayed nether (o ye beastes of the felde) for the pastures shal be grene, and the trees shal beare their frute: the fygetrees q vinyardes shal geue their increase.

Be glad then (o ye children of Sion) and)% 

reioyse in the LORDE youre God, for he hath geuen you the teacher of rightuousnes :
2q he it is y shal sende you downe shuwers of rayne, early and late in the first moneth : so that y garners shal be full of corne, and the presses plenteous in wyne and oyle. And as for the yeares that y greszshopper, locuste, blasstinge q caterpiller (my greate hoost, which
I sent amonge you) haue eaten vp, I shal restore them to you agayne: so that ye shal haue ynough to eate, and be satisfied: and

d Psal]. 85. a. Ione 4, a. * Ioel 1. c. 
£ Leui. 26. a. Deu. 11. b. 28. b. 

f Psal. 78. b. 

Fo. declrrir. 

n 

Fo. derler. prayse the name of the LORDE youre God, that so maruelously hath dealte with you.

And my people shall neuer be confounded eny more: Ye shall well knowe, that I am in the myddest of Israel, and that | am youre
God: yee and that there is none other, and my people shall nomore be brought to confucion.

JF| After this, will I poure out my sprete vpon 

all flesh: “q youre sonnes q youre doughters 

shal prophecy: youre olde mē shal dreame dreames q youre yonge men shal se visions:

* Yee in those dayes I will poure ont my sprete 

vpon seruauntes and maydens. I will shewe 

wonders in heauen aboue, and tokës in the earth beneth: bloude and fyre, and the vapoure off smoke. The Sonne shalbe turned in to

darcknesse, ¢ ¥ Moone in to bloude: before y 

greate q notable daye off the LORDE come. 

"And the tyme shal come: y who so euer 

calleth on the name of the LORDE, shalbe 

saued. For vpon the mount Sion çq at Ieru- salem, there shalbe a saluacion, like as the
|LORDE hath promised: yee q amonge the other remnaunt, whom the LORDE shall call.

Che iij. Chapter. 
A TOR take hede: In those dayes q at ý same tyme, when I turne agayne the captyuite of Iuda q lerusale: I shal gather all people together, q brynge thé in to the valley of losaphat: and there wil I reason with thé, because of my people a heretage of
Israel: whō they haue scatred aboute in the nacions, q parted my lode: yee they haue cast lottes for my people, the yonge më haue they set in the brodel house, q solde the Damsels for wyne, y they might haue to drike. “Thou
Tirus and Sido and all ye borders of the 
|Philistynes: what haue ye to do with me? 
Will ye defye me? well: yf ye will nedes defye me, I shall recopence you, euen vpon youre heade, a y right shortly: for ye haue take awaye my syluer q golde, my fayre q goodly Iewels, q brought them in to youre gods houses. The children also of Iuda and
| |lerusalem haue ye solde vnto the Grekes, 
| (that ye might brynge thé farre fro y borders of their owne countrees.

^ Nu. 11. f... Esa. 44. a. Eze. 36. d. 2 s Cds Tg 
| IE Rom. 10. b. d Eze. 96. a. 97, 98, Amos 1 b. 
| |e Tere. 50. c. Abd. 1. c. f Esa, 9. a. € Apo. 14. d. 

m wl 
| l 

The prophet Joel, 

The ende of the prophet Joel. 

Chap. iij. 

Beholde therfore : I will rayse them out of| 8 the place, where ye haue solde them,* q will rewarde you euen vpon youre heade. Youre sonnes q youre doughters will I sell thorow the hondes of the childré of Iuda, œ so they shal geue them forth to sell, vnto thé of Saba, a people of a farre coütre: for the LORDE himself hath sayde it. Crie out these thinges amonge the Gentiles, proclame warre, wake vp the giauntes, let them drawe nye, let the come vp all the lusty warryours of the. Make you sweardes of youre ploweshares, and speares of youre syckles q sythes./ Let ¥ weake man saye: I am stronge. Mustre you, and come, all ye Heithe roude aboute: gather you to- gether, there shall the LORDE laye all thy giauntes to the grounde. Let the people aryse, and get them tothe valley of Iosaphat: for there wil I syt, and iudge all Heithe roüde aboute.

e Laye to youre sythes, for the haruest is rype: come, get you downe: the wynepresse is full, yee the wynepresses runne ouer, for their wickednesse is waxen greate. In the valley appoynted, there shalbe many, many people: for the daye of the LORDE is nye in y valley appoynted. The Sonne and Moone shall be darckened,^ q the starres shal with- drawe their light. The LORDE shal roare out of Sion, q crie out of lerusale,* that the heauens q the earth shal quake withall. But the LORDE shal be a defence vnto his owne people, ad a refuge for the childré of Israel.
Thus shal ye knowe, ¥ I the LORDE youre 
God dwell vpo my holy mount of Sion. Then shal ferusale be holy, q there shal no straungers go thorow her enymore. Then shal the mon- taynes droppe swete wyne, q the hylles shall flowe with mylcke, ‘All the ryuers of Iuda shal haue water ynough, t out of the LORDES house, there shal flowe a sprynge, to water ý broke of Sitim: but Egipte shalbe layed waist, q Edo shal be desolate: because they haue dealte so cruelly with the childré of
Iuda, and shed innocent bloude in their londe. 
Agayne, Iuda shalbe inhabited for euermore, q lerusalé from generacion to generacid: for
I wil not leaue their bloude vnauenged. And the LORDE shal dwell in Sion.

^ Toe] 2. b. Esa. 13. b. ! fere. 25. d. 
Tere. 46. a. Tere. 49. b. 

* Amos 9. e, 

The Prophet Amos. 

What Amos contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
He prophecyeth agaynst Damascus, Gasa, Tyre, 
Edom and Ammon. 

Chay. I. 
Punyshment vpo Moab, luda, and Israel. 

Chap. III. 
God warneth before he punysh. 

Chap. Ill. 
He sheweth them their wickednesse, and the plages for the same, and exorteth the to amende.

Chap. V. 
He complayneth for the captyuyte off Israel. 

The first Chapter. 

HESE are the sermons, that were shewed vnto Amos (which was one of the shep- herdes at Thecua) vpon Israel, in the tyme of Osias kynge of luda, “q in the tyme of
Jeroboa y sonne of Ioas kynge of Israel, two yeare before $ earthquake. And he sayde:
V[he LORDE shal roare out off Sion, q shewe his voyce fro lerusale: so that y pastures of the shepherdes shal be in a miserable case, q

y toppe of Charmel dryed vp. 

Thus sayeth the LORDE: “for thre q foure wickednesses of Damascus, I will not spare her: because they haue throszhed Galaad with yro flales: But I wil sende a fyre in to y house of Hazael, the same shal consume the palaces of Benadab. Thus wil I breake the

+ Tere, 25. d. Ioel 3. c. 

a 4 Re. 15. a. 4 Re. 14. c. 

Chap. VI. 

He reproueth the welthy, ydyll and delicate people, tellinge them their destruccion.

Chap. VII. 

The punyshment off the people shewed by dyuerse visions. E

Chap. VIII. 

A vision agaynst the covetous people and false waightes. The hunger of Gods worde.

Chap. IX. 

The power off God. The 

Plages vpon Iuda, 
Conuersion off 

receauynge off the Heithen. the Tewes.

| 

| 

barres off Damascus, q rote out the inhabiter| 

fro the felde of Auen, and him y holdeth the scepter, out of ¥ pleasunt house: so y the people shalbe dryuen out of fayre Siria, sayeth the LORDE. Thus saieth the LORDE:
For thre ç foure wickednesses of Gaza, I wil not spare her: “because they make the pre- soners yet more captyue, q haue dryuen thé in to the lode of Edom. Therfore wil I sende a fyre in to ¥ walles of Gaza, which shal de- uoure hir houses. I wil rote out thé y dwell at Asdod q him y holdeth the scepter of
Ascalon, and stretch out myne honde ouer 
Accaron, that the remnaunt of the Philistines shal perish, saieth the LORDE.

Thus sayeth the LORDE: For thre and foure wickednesses off the cite off Tyre, I will not spare her: “because they haue increased y e Ioel 5. a.

* Esa, 17. a. Iere. 49, d. 4 Zach. 9. c. 

Fo. ncelirrij. 

leaptiuyte of the Edomites, and haue uot re- membred the brotherly couenaunt. Ther- fore will I sende a fyre in to the walles off
Tyre, that shal consume hir pallaces. ‘Thus jsayeth the LORDE: For thre and foure wickednesses of Edom I wil not spare him,’ because he persecuted his brother with the swerde, destroyed his mothers wombe, bare hatred very longe, and so kepte indignacion allwaye by him. Therfore will I sende a fyre in to Thema, which shal deuoure the pallaces of Bosra.

Thus sayeth the LORDE: ‘For thre ad foure wickednesses of the children off Ammon,
I will not spare them: because they rypte vp the womé greate with childe in Galaad, to make the borders of their londes the wyder.
Therfore I wil kyndle a fyre in the walles of 
Rabbath, that shall consume hir palaces: with a greate crie, in the daye of batel, in tempest and in the daye off storme: so that their kynge shal go in to captiuyte, he and his prices together, sayeth the LORDE.

The tj. Chapter. a Pp sayeth the LORDE: For thre

and foure wickednesses off Moab, ^T will 
‘not spare him: because he brent the bones off the kynge of Edom to asshes. Therfore will
|I sende a fyre in to Moab, which shal cosume y pallaces of Carioth: so y Moab shal perish with a noyse, and the sounde of a shawme.
I will rote out the iudge from amoge them, and slaye all his prynces with him, sayeth the
LORDE. Thus sayeth the LORDE: ‘for thre ad foure wickednesses of Juda, I wil not spare him: because he hath cast asyde the lawe of the LORDE, and not kepte his com- maundementes : for why, they wolde nedes be disceaued with the lyes, that their forefathers folowed. Therfore will I sende a fyre in to
Tuda, which .shal consume the palaces of 
Ierusalem. 
3| Thussayeththe LORDE: For thre q foure wickednesses of Israel, I wil not spare him: because he hath solde the rightuous for money, and the poore for shues. ‘They treade vpon poore mens heades in the dust of the earth, q croke the wayes off the meke. The sonne and the father go to the harlot, to dishonoure my holy name: they lye besyde euery aulter

QST 5.a. > Abd. 1. a. Iere. 49. b, Gen, 27. g. 
|* Iere. 49. e. Eze. 21. d. 25. a. 

The prophet Amos. 

4 Esa. 15. a. 16. a. Jere. 14. e. Deu. 8 à. 

Chap. i. 

vpon clothes taken to pledge, and in the house of their goddes they drynke the wyne of the oppressed. /Yet destroyed I the Amo- rite before them, that was as hie as the Cedre trees, and as stronge as the okes: notwith- stodinge I destroyed his frute fro aboue, and his rote from vnder.

Agayne : I brought you out of the londe of} ¢ 
Egipte, ‘and led you xl. yeares thorow the wyldernesse, that ye might haue the Amoriters londe in possession. I raysed vp prophetes amonge youre children, and absteyners amonge youre yoge men. Is it not so, o ye children of Israel, sayeth the LORDE? But ye gaue the absteyners wyne to drynke, “yee ye có- maunded the prophetes, sayenge: Prophecy not. Beholde, I wil crasshe you in sonder, like as a wayne crassheth, y is full of sheaues: so that y swifte shall not escape, nether the stronge be able to do eny thynge: no, the giaunte shal not saue his owne life. The archer shall not abyde, and the swifte off fote shall not escape. The horsma shal not saue his life, q he that is as maly of stomack as a giaunte, shall in that daye be fayne to runne his waye naked, sayeth the
LORDE. 

The iij. Chapter. 

EARE, what the LORDE speaketh vnto you (o ye children of Israel) namely, vnto all $ trybes, who I brought out of Egipte, and sayde: You only haue I ac- cepted from all the generacions off the earth : therfore will I vyset you in all youre wicked- nesses. Maye twaine walke together excepte they be agreed amonge them selues? Doth a lyon roare in the wodde, excepte he haue a pray? Or crieth a lyons whelpe out of his denne, 'excepte he haue gotten somthige?
Doth a byrde fall in a snare vpo y earth where no fouler is? "Taketh a man his snare vp from the grounde, afore he catche som- what? Crie they out Alarum with the trompet in the cite, and the people not afrayed? Com- meth there eny plage in a cite, without it be the LORDES doinge? Now doth the
LORDE God no maner of thinge, but he telleth his secrete before vnto his seruauntes
ý prophetes. When a lyon roareth, who will not be afrayed? Seynge then that the

£ Exo. i Iob 6. a.

e Mich. 1. b. / Nu. 13. d. 
^ Nu. 6. a. Iere. 11. d. 

25.9. Eze. 48. a. 

Chap. b. 

LORDE God himself speaketh, who will not prophecy ?

Preach in the palaces at Asdod, and in the palaces off the londe off Egipte, and saye: gather you together vpon the moütaynes off
Samaria, so shall ye se greate murthur and violent oppression amonge them: for why, they regarde not the thinge that is right, sayeth the
LORDE: they gather together euell gotten goodes, and laye vp robbery in their houses.

Therfore, thus sayeth the LORDE God: 
This londe shalbe troubled and beseged roude aboute, thy strength shalbe plucte from the, and thy palaces robbed. Thus saieth the
LORDE: like as an hyrdeman taketh two legges or a pece off an eare out off the Lyons mouth: Euen so the children of Israel (that dwell in Samaria, hauynge their couches in the corner, and their beddes at Damascus) shalbe plucte awaye. Heare, and beare recorde in the house of Iacob * (sayeth the LORDE
God of hoostes) that when I begynne to vyset the wickednesse of Israel, I will vyset y aulters at Bethel also: so that the hornes of the aulter shalbe broken of, q fall to the groude.

As for the wynter house and sommer house, 
I will smyte them downe: and the houses of yuery, yee and many other houses shal perish, and be destroyed, sayeth the LORDE.

The iiij. Chapter. 

EARE this worde, o ye fat kyne, that 

be vpon the hill of Samaria: ye that do poore me wronge, and oppresse the nedy : ye that saye to youre lordes: brynge hyther, let vs drynke. Therfore the LORDE hath sworne by his holynesse: The dayes shall come vpon you, that ye shalbe lift vp vpó speares, and youre posterite caried awaye in fyssher pannes. Ye shall get you out at the gappes one after another, and in Armon shal ye be cast awaye, sayeth the LORDE.

Ye came to Bethel for to worke vngra- ciousnes, and haue increased youre synnes at
Galgal. Ye brought youre sacrifices in the mornynge, and youre tythes vnto the thirde daye. Ye made a thakofferinge off leuen, ye promised frewillofferinges, and proclamed them. Soch lust had ye, o ve children of
Israel, sayeth the LORDE God. Therfore haue I geuen you ydle teth in all youre cities,

è Tosu. 16. a. 3 Re. 12. e. Osee 4. c. 
* Deu. 11. b. 28. b. Iere. 14. a. Ioel 3. c. 

* 4 Re. 16. 17. 
Osee 9. c. 12. b. 

The. prophet Amos, 

‘left scarce an C. therin: and where 

q scarcenesse off bred in all youre places: yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the LORDE.
° Whé there were but thre monethes vnto y haruest, I withelde the rayne from you: yee
I rayned vpó one cite, and not vpó Bn one pece off grounde was moystured with rayne, and the grounde that I rayned not vpon, was drye. Wherfore two (yee thre)

‘Jeities came vnto one, to drynke water: but 

they were not satisfied, yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth ý LORDE.

I haue smyten you with drouth and blast- inge: and loke how many orchardes, vinyardes, fygetrees and olyue trees ye had: y catirpiller hath eaten them vp. But yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the LORDE. Pesti- lence haue I sent amdge you, ^as I dyd in
Egipte: youre yonge men haue I slayeu with y swerde, and caused youre horses be taken captyue: I made the stynckinge sauoure of youre tentes to come vp in to youre nostrels :
Yet wil ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the 
LORDE. ‘Some off you haue I ouer- throwen: as I ouerthrewe Sodome q Go- morre: so that ye were as a brande plucte out of the fyre. Yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the LORDE. Therfore, thus will I handle the agayne (O Israel) ye euen thus will I handle the. Make the ready then to mete thy God, o Israel. For lo, he maketh the mountaynes, he ordeneth the wynde, he sheweth man what he is aboute to do: he maketh the mornynge and the darcknesse, he treadeth vpo the hye places off the earth: y
LORDE God of hoostes is his name. 

The b. Chapter. 

EARE this worde (o ye house of Israel) 

and why? | must make this mone for you: The vyrgin Israel shall fall, q neuer ryse vp agayne: she shall be cast downe vpon hir owne grounde, and no man shal helpe hir vp.
For thus sayeth $ LORDE God: Where as there dwelt a M. in one cite, there shalbe re dwelt an C. there shal scarce ten be left for the house off Israel. Neuertheles, thus sayeth the LORDE vnto y house of Israel: Seke after me, ad ye shal lyue, but seke not after
Bethel. Come not at Galgal, and go not to 
Bersaba: for Galgal shall be caried awaye 

4 Exo. 9. b. * Gen. 19. b. 2 Pet, 2. b. 

Fo. nrrlrrritj. 

aq 

So. bcrlyrritij. 

B 

The prophet Amos. Chap. bi. 

captyue, aud Bethel shal come to naught. 
Seke the LORDE, y ye maye lyue: lest the house of Ioseph be brent with fyre and cosumed, and lest there be none to quench Bethel.

Ye turne the lawe to wormwod, and cast downe rightuousues vnto the grounde. ‘The
LORDE maketh the vij. starres and the 
Oryons,’ he turneth the night in to daye, aud off the daye he maketh darcknesse. He calleth
¥ waters of the see, and poureth them out vpon the playne grounde: ^the LORDE is his name. He rayseth destruccion vpon the mightie people, ¢ bryngeth downe the stronge holde: but they owe him euel will y re- proueth them openly: and who so telleth the the playne treuth, they abhorre him. For so moch thé as ye oppresse y poore, ^and robbe him of his best sustenaunce: therfore, where, as ye haue buylded houses off square stone, | ye shall not dwell in them. — Maruelos plea- saunt vynyardes shall ye plante, but the wyne of thé shal ye not drynke: and why? as for the multitude of youre wickednesses and youre stoute synnes, I knowe them right well.
“Enemies are ye off the rightuous, ye take rewardes, ye oppresse the poore in iudgment.
Therfore the wyse must now be fayne to holde his tiige, so wicked a tyme is it.

Seke after the thinge that is good, q not euell, so shall yelyue: yee the LORDE God off hoostes shal be with you, acordinge to youre owne desyre. “Hate the euell and loue the good: set vp right agayne in the porte: q (no doute) the LORDE God of hoostes shall be mercifull vnto the remnaunt of loseph. Yff no (sayeth the LORDE God, the God of hoostes) there shal be mourninge in all stretes, yee they shal saye 1 euery strete: alas, alas. ‘They shall call the housbonde man to lamentació, and soch as can mourue, to mournynge. In all vynyardes there shal be heuynesse, for I will come amonge you, sayeth the LORDE. Wo be vnto them that desyre the daye off LORDE: Wherfore wolde ye haue it? As for that daye of the LORDE, it shalbe darcke àd not cleare: Yee like as when a ma rüneth fro a lyon, and a Beer meteth with him: or, wh& he commeth in to the house, and leeneth his honde vpon the wall, a serpent byteth him. /Shall not the daye of

a [ob 9.a. ? Am. 9. b. € Deu. 28. c. Soph. 1. c. 
* Exo. 23. a. Mich. 3. a. * Psal. 96. b. Deu. 17. a. 

Ro. 12. b. f Ioe] 2. b. Soph. 1. c. £ Esa, 1. b. 
Mich. 6. b. Esa. 58. a. Mala. 1. c. ^ Tere. 7. c. Act. 7. e | 

the LORDE be darcke, and not cleare ? shal it not be cloudy, and no shyne in it ?

*] hate and abhorre youre holy dayes, àd|33 where as ye cense me when ye come together
I will not accepte it. And though ye offre me brentofferinges and meatofferinges, yet haue I no pleasure therin: As for youre fat thankofferynges, I wil not loke vpon them.
Awaye with that noyse of thy songes, I wil not heare thy playes of musick: but se that equyte flowe as the water, and rightuousnesse as a mightie streame. O ye house of Israel,
^ gaue ye me offeringes and sacrifices those xl. yeares longe in the wyldernesse? Yet haue ye set vp tabernacles to youre Moloch, aud ymages of youre Idols, * Yee ad the starre of youre god Rempha, figures which ye made to worshipe them. Therfore wil I cause you be caried awaye beyonde Damascus, sayeth the
LORDE, whose name is the God off hoostes. 

The bi. Chapter. 

W? be to the proude welthy in Sio, *to 

soch as thinke thé so sure vpon y mount of Samaria? which holde them selues for the best of the worlde, and rule the house of Israel, eue as they list. Go vnto Calne, and se: and from thence get you to Hemath the greate cite, and so go downe to Gath of the Philistines: be they better at ease then these kyngdomes, or the border of their londe wyder then yours? Ye are taken out for the euel daye, euen ye that syt in the stole of wylfulnesse: Ye that lye vpou beddes off yuery, and vse youre wantonnesse vpon youre couches: ye that eate the best lambes of y flocke, aud the fattest calues off the droaue:
"ye that synge to the lute, and in playenge off instrumentes compare youre selues vnto Dauid: ye that drynke wyne out of goblettes, q anoynte youre selues with the best oyle, but no mau is sory for Ioseps hurte. Therfore now shall ye be the first of them, that shal be led awaye captyue, and the lusty chere of the wylfull shall come to an ende.

The LORDE God hath sworne euen by himself (sayeth the LORDE God of hoostes :)
7 I hate the pryde of Iacob, and I abhorre his palaces: and l wil geue ouer the cite, with all that is therin : so that though there remayne

i Leu. 20. a. 3 Re. 11. f. * Luc. 6. c. ! Tob 21. b. 
Esa. 5. h. 1Re.16.d. 2 Re. 6.a. m lere, 51. c. 
Amos 8. a. Heb. 6. b. 

Chap. bij. Cbr prophet Amos. Fo. Deelrrrb.| 

ten men in one house, they shal dye. So their nexte kynszfolckes and the deed buriers shall take them, and cary awaye their bones, and saye vnto him, that is in the ynnermer house: is there yet eny mo by y? And he shal answere: they are all gone, holde thy tunge (shall he saye) "for they wolde not remembre the name of the LORDE.

Beholde, the LORDE is mynded to smyte the greate houses, so that they shall decaye : ad the little houses, that they shall cleue a sunder. Who can runne with horses, or plowe with oxen vpon the harde rockes off stone?
For why, ye haue turned true iudgment in to bytternesse, and the frute of rightuousnesse in to wormwod: Yee euen ye, that reioyse in vayne thynges: ye that saye: haue not we optayned hornes in oure owne strength ? Well, take hede, o ye house off Israel, sayeth the
LORDE God of hoostes: I will brynge a people vpo you, which shall trouble you, from the waye that goeth towarde Hemath, vnto the broke in the medowe.

The bij. Chapter. 

HE LORDE God shewed me soch a vision: beholde, there stode one that made greszshoppers, euen when the corne was shutynge forth, after the kynge had clipte his shepe. Now when they vndertoke to eate vp all the grene thinges in y lode, I sayde: O
LORDE God, be mercifull, 1 beseke the: who shulde els helpe vp Iacob, that is brought solowe? Sothe LORDE was gracious therin, and the LORDE sayde: well, 1t shall not be.
Agayne, y LORDE shewed me this vision: beholde, the LORDE God called the fyre to punysh withall, and it denoured the greate depe: yeeitconsumed a parte allredy. "Then sayde 1: O LORDE God, holde thyne honde: for who shulde els helpe vp lacob that is brought so lowe? | Sothe LORDE was mer- ciful therin, and the LORDE God sayde:

well, it shal not be. 

Morouer, he shewed me this vision: be- holde, the LORDE stode vpon a plastered wall, x *a masons trowell in his hode. And the LORDE sayde vnto me: Amos, what seist thou? I answered: a masons trowell.
Then sayde the LORDE: beholde, I will laye the trowell amoge my people of Israel, and will nomore ouersee them: but the hye hilchapels off Isaac must be layed waist, and

7 Deu. 8. d. Some call it * a lyne. è 4 Re. 17. a. 

the churches off Israel made desolate: and as for the house of Ieroboam, I will stonde vp agaynst it with the swerde. ^ Vpon this sent
Amasias the prest to Bethel vnto leroboam the kinge of Israel, sayenge: *Amos maketh the house off Israel to rebell agaynst the, the londe cà not awaye with his wordes. For
Amos sayeth: Ieroboam shall dye with the swerde, and Israel shall be led awaye captyue out of their owne londe. And Amasias sayde vnto Amos: Get the hence (thou that cast se so well) and fle in to the londe of luda: get the there thy lyuynge, and prophecy there:
^and prophecy nomore at Bethel, for it is the kynges chapel, and the kynges courte.

Amos answered, and sayde to Amasias: As for me, * 1 am nether prophet, ner prophetes sonne: but a keper of catell. Now as I was breakynge downe molberies, and goynge after the catell, the LORDE toke me, q sayde vnto me: Go thy waye, and prophecy vnto my people of Israel. And therfore, heare thou now the worde off the LORDE: Thou saiest: prophecy not agaynst lsrael and speake nothinge agaynst the house off Isaac. Wher- fore thus sayeth the LORDE: Thy wife shalbe defyled in y cite, thy sonnes and doughters shalbe slayne with the swerde, and thy londe shalbe measured out with the lyne: Thou thy self shalt dye in an vnclene londe, and Israel shalbe dryuen out off his owne countre.

The biij. Chapter. 
HE LORDE God vision: and beholde, there was a mande with sommer frute. And he sayde: Amos, what seist thou? I answered: a maude with sommer frute. Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: the ende commeth vpon my people of Israel, I wil nomore ouersee them. In that daye shall the songes off the temple be turned in to sorow, sayeth the LORDE God.
Many deed bodyes shal lye in euery place, q be cast forth secretly. Heare this, O ye y oppresse the poore, /and destroye the nedy in
ý londe, sayenge: Whan will the new moneth be gone, that we maye sell vytale, and y Sab- bath, that we maye haue scarcenesse of corne: to make the buszshel lesse, and the Sycle greater? We shall set vp false waightes, y we maye get the poore vnder vs with their money, and the nedy also for shues: yee let vs sell the chaffe for corne. c3 Re.17.a. 4 Esa. 30. b.

e Zach. 13. a. ./ Esa. 5. b. 
102 

shewed me this|€ 

Fo. Deelrrrdt. 

The prophet Amos. 

“The LORDE hath sworne agaynst the pryde of Iacob: these workes of theirs will I neuer forget. Shal not the londe tremble, and all they that dwell therin, mourne for this? Shal not their destruccion come vpon them like a water streame, q flowe ouer thé, as the floude of Egipte? At the same tyme
(sayeth the LORDE God) ’I shall cause y 
Séne to go downe at noone, and the londe to be darcke in the cleare daye. ‘Youre hye feastes will I turne to sorow, and youre songes to mournynge: I will brynge sackcloth vpo all backes, x baldnes vpo euery heade: ° yee soch a mournynge wil I sende them, as is made vpon an only begotten sonne, and they shall haue a miserable ende.

Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the 
LORDE God) y I shal sende an hunger in to y earth: not the hunger of bred, ner the thyrst of water: but an hunger to heare the worde off the LORDE: so that they shal go from the one see to the other, yee from y north vnto y east, runnynge aboute to seke the worde of LORDE, and shal not fynde it. In that tyme, shal the fayre virgins and the yonge men perish for thyrst, yee euen they that sweare in the offence off Samaria, and saye: as truly as thy God lyueth at Dan, and as truly as thy God lyueth at Bersaba. These shal fall, and neuer ryse vp agayne.

The iy. Chapter. 

SAWE the LORDE stondinge vpon the 
I aulter, and he sayde: smyte the dore | cheke, that the postes maye shake withall.
For their couetousnesse shal fall vpon all their heades, and their posterite shalbe slayne with | the swerde. They shall not fle awaye, there | shall not one off them escape, ner be delyuered.
Though they were buryed in the hell, my honde shal fetch them from thence: * though they clymme vp to heauen, yet shal I cast them downe: though they hyde them selues vpo the toppe of Carmel, yet shal I seke them out, and brynge them from thence: Though they crepe downe fro my sight in to the depe of the see, I shal comaide the serpente, euen there to byte them. Y they go awaye before their enemies 1 to captyuyte, then shall
I commaunde the swerde, there to slaye them. 

? Àm.6. b. è Tere. 15. b. e Tonto a 4 Tere. 6. d. 
* Psal. 138. a. Abd. 1.a. — / Am. 8.a. 3 Re. 8. g. 

Thus wil I set myne eyes vpon them, for their harme and not for their wealth. For when the LORDE God of hoostes toucheth a londe, it cosumeth awaye, and all they that dwell therin, must nedes mourne: And why?
‘their destruccion shal aryse as every streame and runne ouer them, as the floude in Egipte.
He that hath his dwellinge in heauen, àd groundeth his tabernacle in the earth: £ He that calleth the waters of the see, and poureth them out vpon the playne grounde: his name is the LORDE. O ye children off Israel, are ye not vnto me, euen as the Morians, sayeth the LORDE? haue not I brought
Israel out off the londe off Egipte, the Philis- tynes from Capthor,’ and the Sirians fro Cyr?
Beholde, the eyes of the LORDE are vpon the realme that synneth,' to rote it clene out of the earth: Neuertheles, I will not vterly destroye the house of lacob, saieth the
LORDE. 

For lo, this I promyse: though I siffte $ house of Israel amonge all nacions (like as they vse to sifte in a syue) yet shall not y smallest grauel stone fall vpo the earth: But all the wicked doers of my people, that saye :
Tush, the plage is not so nye, to come so hastely vpon vs: those shal perish with the swerde. ‘At that tyme wil I buylde agayne the tabernacle off Dauid, that is fallen downe, and hedge vp his gappes: and loke what is broké, I shal repayre it: Yee I shal buylde it agayne, as it was afore tyme, y they maye possesse the remnaunt of Edom, yee and all soch people as call vpon my name with thé, saieth the LORDE, which doth these thinges.

Beholde, the tyme commeth (saieth the 
LORDE) that the plowman shal ouertake y mower, and ¥ treader off grapes, him that soweth sede. ‘The mountaynes shall droppe swete wyne, and the hilles shall be frutefull, and I wil turne the captyuyte of my people of
Israel: they shal repayre the waist cities, q haue thé in possessio: they shal plante vin- yardes, ad drynke the wyne therof: they shal make gardens, and enioye the frutes off thé.
And I wil plate them vpo their owne groude, so that I will neuer rote them out agayne from their londe, which I haue geuen thé sayeth the LORDE thy God.

é Amos 5. b. ^ Gen. 10. b. iere, 30. b. Zach. 13. b. 
Rom. 9. c. k Act. 15. c. Mich. 7.b. — ! Ioel 3. c. 

Che ende of the prophet Amos. 

Chap. ir. 

Chic Prophet Abdyp. 

What abp contepreth. 

Chap. I. 

He prophecyeth agaynst the proude stomackes of the Edomites, that vexed the Israelites in their aduersite. He sheweth, what plages shal come vpon them

The first Chapter. 

HIS is the vision that was shewed vnto 
Abdy: Thus hath y LORDE God spoke vpo Edo: “We haue herde of the
LORDE ý there is an embassage sent amonge the Heithen: Vp, let vs aryse, and fight agaynst them. Beholde, I will make y small amoge the Heithen, so that thou chee be vtterly despised. ° The pryde of thine herte hath lift the vp, thou that dwellest in y stroge holdes off stone, and hast made the an hye seate: Thon sayest in thyne herte: who shal cast me downe to the grounde? But
“though thon wentest vp as hye as the Aegle, and maydest thy nest aboue amonge the starres: yet wolde I plucke the downe from thece. Yf ý thenes q robbers came to y by- night, thou takinge thy rest: shulde they not steale, till they had ynough? yf the grape gatherers came vpon the, wolde they not leaue the some grapes? But how shall they rype

Esau, and seke out his treasures ? 

Yee the men that were sworne vnto the, shal dryue the out off the borders off thyne owne londe. They that be now at one with the, shal disceaue the, and ouercome y: Eue they that eate thy bred, shall betraye the, or euer thou perceaue it. ?^Shal not I at the same tyme destroye the wyse men of Edom, ad those that hane vnderstondinge, from the mount of Esau? Thy giauntes (o Theman)

a Eze. 28. b. and 35. à. Amos 1. c. 
* Ámos9.a. Aba. 2. b. 

* Tere. 49, c. 

shalbe afrayed, for thorow the slaughter they shalbe all ouer throwne vpon the mout of
Esau. Shame shal come vpon the, for y malice that thou shewedest to thy brother
Iacob: ‘yee for euermore shalt thou perish, q that because of the tyme, when thou didest

set thyself agaynst him, euen when the ene- mies carled awaye his hoost, and when the aleauntes came in at his portes, and cast lottes vpon Jerusalem, and thon thyself wast as one of them.

Thou shalt nomore se the daye of thy bro- | € ther, thou shalt nomore beholde the tyme of

his captinyte: thou shalt nomore reioyse ouer the children of Iuda, in the daye of their de- struecion, thou shalt tryumphe nomore in the tyme of their trouble. ‘Thou shalt nomore come in at the gates off my people, in the tyme of their decaye: thou shalt not se their mysery in the daye of their fall.

'Thou shalt sende out no man agaynst their hoost, in the daye of their aduersite: nether shalt thou stode waytinge enymore at y cor- ners of the stretes, to murthur soch as are, fled, or to take them presoners, that remayne in the daye of their trouble. For the daye off the LORDE is harde by vpon all Heithen.
Like as thou hast done, so shalt thou be dealte withall, yee thou shalt be rewarded euen vpon thine heade. For like wyse as ye haue droncken vpon myne holy hill, so shal all heithen dryncke continually: yee dryncke shall they, and swalowe vp, so that ye shall be, as though ye had nener bene.

But vpon the mount Sion, there shall a|33 

remnaunt escape : ‘ these shalbe holy, and the house of Iacob shal possesse euen those, that

e Exo. 17. c, Num. 20. c. 
€ Zach. 2. b. 

4 Esa. 29. c. 1 Cor. 1.c. f lere. 50. c. Ioel3. b.

Fo. Deelyyrbtj. The prophet Jonas. 

had them selues afore in possessio. Morouer, the house of Iacob shalbe a fyre, *the house of Ioseph a flame, q the house of Esau shalbe the strawe: which they shal kyndle and co- sume, so that nothinge shalbe left of the house of Esau, for the LORDE himself hath sayde it. They of the south shal haue the mount of Esau in possession: and loke what lieth vpon the grounde, that shal the Philistynes haue: the playne feldes shal Ephraim and

* Tere. 5. c. 

Chap. |. 
God sendeth Ionas vnto Niniue, he fleyth, and is cast in to the see.

Chap. I. 

A fysh swaloweth vp Ionas, which crieth vnto 
God, and prayseth hym, and the fysh casteth him out agayne vpon the londe.

The first Chapter. a HE worde of the LORDE eame vnto
Jonas the sonne of Amithai, sayenge: 
Aryse, and get the to Niniue that greate cite: land preach vnto them, ^how y their wicked- nesse is come vp before me. And Ionas made him ready to fle vnto Tharsis from the pre- sence of the LORDE, and gat him downe to
Ioppa: where he founde a shippe ready for to go vnto "Tharsis. So he payde his fare, and wente aborde, that he might go with them vnto
Tharsis from the presence of the LORDE. 

* 4 Re. 14. c. Ione 3. a. Gen. 10. b. 

Chap. f. 

Samaria possesse: and the mountaynes of 
Galaad shal Ben Iamin haue. And this hoost shalbe the childré of Israels presoners: Now what so lieth from Canaan vnto Sarphad, and in Sepharad, that shal be vnder the subieccion of lerusalem : and the cities of the south shall enheret it. Thus they that escape vpon the hill off Sion, shall go vp to punysh the mount off Esau, ^and the kyngdome shalbe the
LORDES. 

> Zac. 14. b. 

The ende off the prophet Abdp. 

The Prophet Fonas. 

hat Jonas contepneth. 

Chap. HI. 

God sendeth him agayne to Niniue, to shewe them 

the punyshment for to come, yf they wil not repent: they amende, and God is mercifull to them.

Chap. III. 

Ionas is angrie, and complayneth of God, which refourmeth him.

But the LORDE hurled a greate wynde in to the see, and there was a mightie tempest in the see: so that the shippe was in ioperdy of goinge in peces. Then the maryners were afrayde, and cried euery man vnto his god: and the goodes that were in the shippe, they cast in to the see, to lighten it off them. But
Ionas gat him vnder y hatches, where he layed him downe and slombred.

So the master of the shippe came to him|% and sayde vnto him: why slomberest thou?
Vp, call vpon thy God: yf God (happly) wil thynke vpon vs, that we peryshe not. And

> Gen. 18. c. 

Chap. (ij. The prophet Jonas. 

they sayde one to another: come, let vs cast 

© Fo. btrlrymir. 

The waters compased me, euen to the|3 

lottes: that we maye knowe, for whose cause we are thus troubled.^ And so they cast lottes, and the lot fell vpon Ionas.

The sayde they vnto him: tell vs, for whose cause are we thus troubled? what is thine oceupacion? whence commest thou? what countre man art thou, and of what nacion ?
He answered them: I am an Ebrue, and I feare the LORDE God of heauen, which made both the see and drie londe. Then were y men exceadingly afrayed, q sayde vnto him : why didest thou so? (for they knewe, that he was fled from the presence of the
LORDE, because he had tolde them) and sayde morouer vnto him : What shall we do vnto the, that the see maye ceasse from troublinge vs? (for the see wrought and was troublous) he answered them: Take me, and cast me in to the see, so shal it let you be in rest: for I wote, it is for my sake, that this greate tempest is come vpon you.

Neuerthelesse, the men assayed with row- inge, to brynge the shippe to léde: but it wolde not be, because the see wrought so, q was so troublous agaynst them. Wherfore they cried vnto the LORDE, and sayde: tO LORDE, let vs not perish for this mans death, nether laye thou inuocent bloude vnto oure charge: for thou (o LORDE) hast done, euen as thy pleasure was.

So they toke Ionas, and cast him in to the see, and the see lefte ragynge. And the men feared the LORDE exceadingly, doynge sacri- fices àd makynge vowes vnto the LORDE.

The ij. Chapter. 

UT the LORDE prepared a greate fyshe, to swalow vp lonas. ^So was lonas in the bely of the fysh, thre dayes and thre nightes. And Ionas prayed vnto the
LORDE his God, out of the fysshes bely, and sayed: ^In my trouble I called vnto y
LORDE, and he herde me: out off the bely off hell I cried, and thou herdest my voyce.
Thou haddest cast me downe depe in y middest off the see, and the floude compased me aboute : “yee all thy wawes and rowles of water went ouer me, I thought that I had bene cast awaye out of thy sight: but I wil yet agayne loke towarde thy holy temple.

* Matt. 12. d. 4 Psal. 
€ Esa. 37. a. 

a Iosu. 7, c. * Deu. 21. b. 
119, a. * Psal. 41. b. J Tone 1. a. 

very soule: the depe laye aboute me, and the wedes were wrapte aboute myne heade. I wente downe to the botome of the hilles, q was barred in with earth for euer. But thou
(o LORDE my God) hast brought vp my lyfe agayne out of corrupcion. When my soule faynted within me, I thought vpon the
LORDE: and my prayer came in vnto the, euen in to thy holy temple. They that holde of vayne vanyties, wil forsake his mercy. But
I wil do the sacrifice with the voyce of thankes- geuynge, and wil paye that I haue vowed: for why? saluacion commeth of the LORDE.
And y LORDE spake vnto ¥ fysh, and it cast out Ionas agayne vpon the drye londe.

The iij. Chapter. 

HEN came the worde of the LORDE|@ 

vnto lonas agayne, sayenge: vp, and get the to Niniue that greate cite, q preach vnto them the preachinge, which I bade the.
So lonas arose, and wente to Niniue at the 
LORDES commaundement. Niniue was a greate cite vnto God, namely, off thre dayes journey.

And lonas wente to, and eutred in to y cite: euen a dayes iourney, and cried, say- enge: There are yet xl. dayes, and then shal
Niniue be ouerthrowen. ^ And the people of 
Niniue beleued God, and proclamed fastinge, and arayed them selues in sack cloth, as well the greate as the small of them. And the tydinges came vnto y kinge of Niniue, which arose out off his seate, and dyd his apparell off, and put on sack cloth, and sate him downe in asshes.

And it was cried and commaunded in 
Niniue, by the auctorite of the kige and his lordes, sayenge: “se that nether man or beest, oxe or shepe taist ought at all: and that they nether fede ner drincke water: but put on sack cloth both man and beest, and crye mightely vnto God: yee se that euery man turne fro his euell waye, ' aud from the wick- ednesse, y he hath in honde.

Who can tell? God maye turne, and repéte, and cease from his fearce wrath, that we perish not. And when God sawe their workes, how they turned from their wicked wayes:
* he repented on the euell, which he sayde he wolde do vnto them, andsdyd it not.

k Esa. 38. b. 

^ Matt. 12, d. Luc. 11. c. ! Tere. 18. a. 

Fo. derre. 
The di. Chapter. a \ HERFORE Ionas was sore discontét, and angrie. And he prayed vnto the
LORDE, and sayde: O LORDE, was not this my sayenge (I praye the) when I was yet in my countre? therfore I haisted rather to fle vnto Tharsis, for I knowe well ynough that thou art a mercifull God, full of compassion, loge sufferinge, and of greate kyndnesse, and repentest when thou shuldest take punysh- ment. “And now o LORDE, take my life fro me (I beseke the) for I had rather dye then lyue. Then sayde the LORDE: art thou so angrie? and lonas gat him ont of the eite, and sat downe on y east syde therof: and there made him a bothe, and sat vnder it in the shadow, till he might se, what shulde chaunce vnto the cite.
And the LORDE God prepared a wylde vyne, which sprange vp ouer lonas, that he

2 3 Re. 19. a. 

The prophet Micheas. 

Chap. f. 

|might haue shadowe aboue his heade, to de- lyuer him out of his payne. And lonas was exceadinge glad of the wylde vyne. But vpé the nexte morow agaynst the springe of the daye, the LORDE ordened a worme, which smote the wylde vyne, so that it wethered awaye. Andwhen the Sone was vp God pre- pared a feruent east wynde: and the Sonne bete ouer the heade of Ionas, that he faynted agayne, and wyszshed vnto his soule, that he might dye, and sayde: It is better for me to dye, thé tolyue. And God sayd vnto Ionas:
Art thou so angrie for the wylde vyne? And he sayde: yee very angrie am I euen vnto the deeth. And the LORDE sayde: thou hast compassion vpon a wylde vyne, whero thou bestowdest no laboure, ner maydest it growe: which sprange vp in one night and perished in another: And shulde not I then haue com- passion vpon Niniue that greate cite, wherin; there are aboue an C. and xx. thousande per- sonnes, y knowe not their right hode fro the lefte, besydes moch catell ?

The ende of the prophet Jonas. 

Chap. |. 

Ife reproueth the people off Israel and Iuda for their wickednesse and Idolatry: he telleth them their punyshment with mournynge.

Chap. Il. 

He rehearseth their abhominacions. 

Chap. III. 

He reproueth the rulers and the prophetes, as cause of the peoples misery.

Che Prophet Mlicheas. 

What Micheas rontepneth. 

Chap. I. V. 

He prophecyeth of the saluacion off Gods people in Christ, of his kyngdome, and power of his gospel.

Chap. VI. 

Another reprofe. Outwarde offeringes are ex- cluded, and here is declared what God re- quyreth off man.

Chap. VII. 

The summe off the thinges before sayde. The 

litle flocke of the faithfull. 

| 

Chap. ij. 

The first Chapter. 

a HIS is the worde of the LORDE, that 

came vnto Micheas “the Morastite, in the dayes of Ioathan, Achas and Ezechias kiges of Iuda: which was shewed him vpon
Samaria and lerusalem. 

? Heare all ye people, marcke this well o earth, and all that therinis: Yee the LORDE
God himself be witnesse amonge you, euen y 
LORDE from his holy temple. For why? beholde, the LORDE shal go out of his place,
€ come downe, and treade vpon the hie thinges of the earth. The moütaynes shall consume vnder him, “q the valleys shal cleue asunder: like as wax cosumeth at the fyre, q as y waters runne downwarde. And all this shal be for the wiekednesse of lacob, and the synnes of the house of Israel

But what is the wickednesse of lacob? Is not Samaria? * Which are the hye places of
Iuda? Isnot Ierusalé? Therfore I shall make 
Samaria an heape of stones in the felde, to laye aboute the vynyarde: hir stones shal I

Che prophet Mirheas. 

cast in to the valley, q discouer hir foüdacios. 
All hir ymages shalbe broke downe ¢ all hir wynnynges shal be brent in the fyre: yee all hir Idols will I destroye: for why, they are gathered out of the hyre of an whore, ‘q in to an whores hyre shal they be turned agayne.
Wherfore I wil mourne q make lamentacion, bare q naked will Í go: I must mourne like y dragós, q take sorow as y. Estriches: for their woüde is past remedy: And why? it is come in to Iuda, q hath touched y porte of my peo- ple at Ierusalé allredy. Wepe not, / lest they at Geth perceaue it.

Thou at Betaphra, welter thy self in the dust and asshes. Thou that dwellest at
Sephir, get the hence with shame. The proude shall boost nomore for very sorowe: q why? hir neghboure shall take from her what she hath. "The rebellious cite hopeth, that it shal not be so euell : but for all that, the plage shal come from the LORDE, euen in to the porte of Ierusalem. The greate noyse off the charettes shall feare them, that dwell at
Lachis, which is an occasion of y synne of ¥ doughter of Sion, for in the came vp the wickednesses of Israel. Yee she sent hir coursers in to the londe of Geth.

a 4 Re. 15. a. 2 Pa, 27, a. 4 Re. 16. a. 4 Re.18. a. and 19, 
è Deu. 32. a. Esa. 1. a. e Esa. 26, c. d 3 Re. 12. c. 

fo. Deeret. 

The houses of lies will disceaue the kynges of Israel. And as for the (o thou that dwellest at Morassa) I shal brynge a possessioner vpon the, ad the plage of Israel shal reach vnto
Odolla. Make the balde, and shaue the, because of thy tender children: Make the cleane balde as an Aegle, for they shalbe caried awaye captyue from the.

The ij. Chapter. 
O vnto them, that ymagyn to do harme, and deuyse vngraciousnesse vpon their beddes, to perfourme it in y cleare daye : for their power is agaynst God. When they covet to haue londe, they take it by violence, “ they robbe men off their houses.

Thus they oppresse a ma for his house, q euery man for his heretage. Therfore thus sayeth the LORDE: * Beholde, agaynst this housholde haue 1 deuysed a plage, wherout ye shal not plucke youre neckes: Ye shal nomore go so proudly, for it will be a perlous tyme.
In that daye shall this terme be vsed, and a mournynge shal be made ouer you on this maner: We be vtterly desolate, the porcion off my people is translated. Whan wil he parte vnto vs the londe, that he hath taken from vs?

Neuerthelesse there shalbe no man to deuyde the thy porcion, in the congregacion off the LORDE. ‘Tush, holde youre tunge
(saye they) It shall not fall vpon this people, we shall not come so to confucion, sayeth the house off Iacob. Isthe sprete off the LORDE so clene awaye ? oris he so mynded? Treuth it is, my wordes are frendly vnto them that lyue right: but my people doth the contrary, therfore must I take parte agaynst them: for they take awaye both cote and cloke from the symple.

Ye haue turned youre selues to fight, the women off my people haue ye shot out fro their good houses, and taken awaye my excel- lent giftes from their children. Vp, get you hence, for here shall ye haue no rest.

Because off their Idolatry they are corrupte, and shall myserably perish. Yff I were a fleshly felowe, and a preacher of lyes and tolde them that they might syt bebbinge and bollynge, and be droncken: O that were a prophet for this people.

f 2 Re. 1.c. 
* Nu. 33. f. 

* Deu. 23. c. i Am. 5. b.

3 Re. 11. a. 4 Re. 16. a. 21. 8. 
€ 4Re.18.c. ^3Re.21.a. 

‘Fo. derc. The prophet Micha, Chap. iij. perreíj. 

But I will gather the in dede (o Iacob) and dryue the remnaunt off Israel all together. I shall eary them one with another, as a flocke in the folde, and as the catell in their stalles, that they maye be disquicted of other men.

Who so breaketh the gappe, he shall go be- fore. They shall breake vp the porte, and go in and out at it. Their kynge shall go before them, and the LORDE shalbe vpon the heade of them.

The iij. Chapter. 

EARE, o ye heades of the house of lacob, and ye leders of the house of
Israel: "^ Shulde not ye knowe, what were laufull andright? But ye hate the good, and loue the euell : ye plucke of mens skynnes, and the flesh from their bones: Ye eate the flesh of my peo- ple, ad flay of their skynne: ye breake their bones, ye choppe them iu peces as it were in to a cauldron, ad as flesh in to a pot. ?^ Now the tyme shall come, that when they call vnto the
LORDE, he shall not heare them, but hyde his face from them: because that thorow their owne

ymaginacios, they haue dealte so wickedly. 

And as concernynge the prophetes that 

;disceaue my people, thus the LORDE sayeth agaynst them: * When they haue eny thinge to

byte vpon, then they preach that all shalbe well: but yf a raan put not some thinge in to their mouthes, they preach of warre agaynst him.

?'Therfore youre vision shalbe turned to night, q youre prophecyenge to darcknesse.
The Sonne shall go downe ouer those pro- phetes, q the daye shalbe darcke vnto them.
Then shall the vision seers be ashamed, a y saythsayers confounded : yee they shalbe fayne
(all the packe of thé) to stoppe their mouthes, for they haue not Gods worde. ^ As for me, I am full of strength, q BE sprete of y LORDE, full of iudgment q boldnesse: to shewe the house of Jacob their wickednesse, q the house of Israel their synne.

O heare this ye rulers of the house of Iacob, and ye iudges of the house off Israel: ye that abhorre the thinge that is laufull, and wraist asyde the thinge that is straight: ! Ye that buylde vp Sion with bloude, and lerusalem with doynge wronge. O ye iudges, ye geue| sentence for giftes: O ye preastes, ye teach for lucre: O ye prophetes, ye prophecy for

* Deu. 17. d. Iere. 5. a. Psal. 81, a. * Esa. 1. b. 
Eze. 8. c. 1 Pet. 3. b. ¢ Eze. 25. d. * Deu. 28. c. 

e Iere. Y, c. Eze.3.2. J Aba.92.b. 1 Re. 8. a. Eze. 22. b. 
Amos 5. b. lere. 6. b. ere. Geb. € Tere. 26, d. Iere.9.b. 3Re.9.b.^ | —h&m3sÉ ^ — 26, d. Iere. 9. b. 3 Re. 9. b. 

Che prophet Micheas, 

Chap. tj. 

money. Yet wil they be také as those that holde vpon God, and saye: Is not the LORDE amonge vs? £ Tush, there can no misfortune happen vs. Therfore shal Sion (for youre sakes) be plowed like a felde: lerusalé shall become an heape of stones, and the hill of ¥ temple shal be turned to an hye wodde.

The tit}. Chapter. 
UT in the latter dayes it wil come to passe, that “the hill off the LORDES house shalbe set vp hyer thé eny moütaynes or hilles: Yee the people shall preese vnto it, and the multitude off the Gentiles shal haist them thither, sayege: Come, let vs go vp to the hill of the LORDE, q to the house of the
God of lacob: that he maye teach vs his waye, and that we maye walke in his pathes.

' For the lawe shall come out off Sion, àd the worde of God from lerusalem, and shall geue sentence amonge the multitude óff the
Heithen, and refourme the people off farre coütrees: so that of their swerdes they shal make plowshares, and sythes off their speares.

One people shall not lift vp a swerde agaynst another, *yee they shall nomore lerne to fight: but euery man shal syt vnder his vinyarde and vnder his fyge tre, and no man to fraye him awaye: for the mouth off $
LORDE of hoostes hath spoken it. Ther- fore, where as all people haue walked euery man in y name of his owne god, we will walke in the name of oure God for euer and euer. ' At the same tyme (sayeth the LORDE) will I gather vp the lame and the outcastes, and soch as Í haue chastened: and will geue yssue vnto the lame, and make of y outcastes a greate people :
"and the LORDE himself shal be their kynge vpon the mount Sion, fro this tyme forth for euermore. "And vnto the (O thou tower of
Eder, thou stronge holdeoff the doughter Sion) vnto the shal it come: eué the first lordshipe and kyngdome of the doughter lerusale. Why the art thou now so heuy ? ? is there no kynge in the? are thy councelers awaye, that thou art so payned, as a woman in hir trauayle ?

And now (o thou doughter Sion) be sory, let it greue the as a wife laboringe with childe: for now must thou get the out off the cite, and dwell vpon the playne felde: Yee vnto
Babilo shalt thou go, there shalt thou be 
Luc.19.d.21.a. ^ Esa. 2.2. Leui. 26. g. 

Psal. 49. a. * Esa. 11. b. Esa. 65. d. m Luc. 1. c. ^ Gen. 35. d.

* Leui. 24. d. 
! Soph. 3. d. 

Chap. bi, The prophet Mirheas. 

Ch Fo. brrrtij.] delyuered, and there the LORDE shal lowse

flocke of shepe : which (when he goeth thorow) 

the from the honde off thine enemies.” 

Now also are there many people gathered together agaynst the, sayenge: what, Sion is cursed, we shall se oure lust vpon her. But

treadeth downe, teareth in peces, and there is no man that can helpe. Thyne honde shalbe lift vp vpon thine enemies, and all thine ad- uersaries shal perish.

they knowe not the thoughtes off the LORDE, The tyme shal come also {sayeth thej 
^they vnderstonde not his councell, that shall! |LORDE) that I wil take thine horses from gather them together as the sheeues in the| |the, ¢ destroye thy charettes. I will breake barne. Therfore get the vp (o thou doughter| |downe the cities off thy londe, and ouerthrowe
Sion) and throsshe out the corne: For I wil] |all thy stronge holdes. ¢ All witcheraftes will make thy horne yron, and thy clawes brasse,| |I rote out of thyne hande, there shall no mo that thou mayest grynde many people: their} |soythsayenges be within the. Thine Idols goodes shalt thou appropriate vnto the} |and thyne ymages will I destroye out of y so
LORDE, and their substaunce vnto the ruler! | that thou shalt nomore bowe thy self ynto the off the whole worlde. workes of thyne owne hondes. Thy groues wil I plucke vp by the rotes, q breake downe
The b. Chapter. thy cities. Thus will I be anéged also, vpon 

FTER that shalt thou be robbed thy} al] Heithen that will not heare. selff, o thou robbers doughter: they shal laye sege agaynst vs, and smyte the iudge The bi. Chapter.

off Israel with a rodde vpon the cheke. And -J ERKEN now what the LORDEsayeth:/q thon Bethleem Ephrata, ‘art litle amonge H Vp, reproue the mountaynes, ^ and let the thousandes off Iuda. Out off the shal} |the hilles heare thy voyee. © Heare the come one vnto me, which shall be y gouern-| |punyshment of the LORDE, ye mountaynes, oure 1 Israel: whose outgoinge hath bene} |and ye mightie foundacids of y earth: for the from the begynnynge, and from euerlastinge.| |LORDE wil reproue his people, ad reason
In the meane whyle he plageth them for aj with Israel: O my people, what haue I done season, vntill the tyme that she (which shall} |vnto the? or wherin haue I hurte the? gene beare) haue borne: then shall the remnaunt| |me answere. ‘Because I brought the fro the of his brethren be conuerted vnto y children| (londe of Egipte, and delyuered the out of the of Israel. He shal stonde fast, and gene fode| house of bondage? Because I made Moses, in the strength of the LORDE, "and in the| | Aaron and Miriam to lede the 2 Remembre victory of the name of LORDE his God:| (o my people) what Balach the kynge of and when they be conuerted, he shall be mag-| | Moab had ymagined agaynst the,’ ad what unified vnto the farthest partes of the worlde. answere that Balaam the sonne of Beor gaue
Then shal there be peace, so that the) him, from Sethim vnto Galgal: y ye maye 
Assirian maye come in to oure londe, and] ‘knowe the louynge kyndnesses of y LORDE. 

treade in oure houses. We shall brynge vp What acceptable thynge shal I offre vnto|33 seuen shepherdes and viij. prynces vpo them:| |the LORDE? shall I bowe my kne to the

these shal subdue the londe of Assur with the swerde, and the londe of Nymrod with their naked weapens. “Thus shal he delyuer vs from the Assirià, when he commeth within oure lande, and setteth his fote within oure borders. And the remnaunt of Iacob shal be amonge the multitude of people, as the dew of the LORDE, and as the droppes vpon the grasse, that tarieth for no man, and waiteth of no body. /Yee the residue of Iacob shalbe amonge the Gentiles and the multitude off people, as the lyon amonge the beestes of y wodde, and as the lyons whelpe amonge a

? Mich. 5. b. 5 Esa. 14.d. “Matt.2.a. Iob. 7. d. 
|4 Eze. 34. d. Ioh. 10. a. Rom. 1. b * Gen. 10. b. 

A 

hye God? Shal I come before him with brent offeringes, and with calues of a yeare olde? Hath the LORDE a pleasure in many thousand rammes, or innumerable streames of oyle? Or shal I geue my firstborne for myne offences, and the frute of my body for
‘the synne of my soule? I wil shewe the (O anà) what is good, and what the LORDE requyreth off the: Namely, to do right, to haue pleasure in louynge kyndnesse, to be
‘lowly, and to walke with thy God : " that thou mayest be called a cite of the LORDE, q that thy name maye be rightuousnesse. Heare (o

Mich. 4. c. fGen. 49. b. € Deu. 18. b. 
,!EÉxo.14.c. * Nu.12.a. ! Nu. 29. 23. 94. 25, 

103 

^ Esa. 58. a. m Esa, 1.d.

Ho. Deereiiyj. ye trybes) who wolde els geue you soch warn- ynge? “Shulde I not be displeased, for the vnrightuous good in the houses of the wicked, and because the measure is minished? Or shulde I iustifie the false balaunces and the bagge of disceatfull weightes, amonge those that be full off riches vnrightuously gotten: where the citesyns deale with falsede, speake lyes, and haue disceatfull tunges in their mouthes ?

(| Therfore I will take in honde to punysh the, and to make the desolate, because of thy synnes. Thou shalt eate, q not haue ynough: yee thou shalt bringe thy self downe. ^'Thou shalt fle, but not escape: àd those y thou woldest saue, wil I delyuer to the swerde.
Thou shalt sowe, but not reape: “thou shalt presse out olyues, but oyle shalt thou not haue, to anoynte thy self withall: thou shalt treade out swete must, but shaltdrynkeno wyne.
? Ye kepe the ordinaunces of Amri, q all the customes of the house of Achab: yefolowe their pleasures, therfore wil I make the waist, q cause thy inhabiters to be abhorred, O my people: q thus shalt thou beare thine owne shame.

The vij. Chapter. 

O is me: I am become as one, that 

goeth a gleenynge in the haruest. 

There are no mo grapes to eate, yet wolde I fayne (with all my herte) haue of the best frute. ‘There is not a godly man vpo earth,
“there is not one rightuous amoge mé. They laboure all to shed bloude, q every mà hunteth his brother to death: yet they saye they do well, when they do euell. As the prince wil, so sayeth the iudge: y he maye do him a pleasure agayne. The greate mà speaketh what his herte desyreth, x y hearers alowe him. The best off thé is but as a thistle, and the most rightuous of them is but as a brere in the hedge. But when the daye of thy preachers commeth, y thou shalt be vysited : thé shal they be waisted awaye. /Let no man beleue his frende, ner put his confidéce in a prince. Kepe the porte of thy mouth, from her y lieth in thy bosome: ‘for y sonne shal put his father to dishonoure, the doughter shal ryse agaynst her mother, y doughter in lawe agaynst hir mother in lawe: and a a Leu. 19. g. Deu. 25. c. Pro.20.b. Eze. 25. b.

^ Leui. 26. d. Osee 4. b. Agg.1.a. © Deu. 28, c. 
4 3 Re.16.e. ¢Rom.3.b. //lere.9.a. & Matt. 10. e, 

The prophet Micheas. 

mans foes shalbe euen they of his owne housholde.

Neuerthelesse I wil loke vp vnto y LORDE, 
I wil paciently abyde God my sauioure: my 

God shal heare me. O thou enemie of myne, reioyce not at my fall, for I shal get vp agayne:
| *and though I syt indarcknesse, yet y LORDE is my light. 1 will beare the punishment of the LORDE (for why, I haue offended him)
| till he syt in iudgment vpon my cause, and se that I haue right. He wil bringe me forth to the light, and I shal se his rightuosnesse.

She that is myne enemy shall loke vpon it, 
|q be confounded, which now saieth: * Where is thy LORDE God? Myne eyes shal be- holde her, when she shalbe troden downe, as the claye in the stretes. * The tyme wil come, that thy gappes shal be made vp, and the lawe shal go abrode: and at that tyme shal they come vnto the, from Assur vnto the stroge cities, and from the stronge cities vnto the ryuer: from the one see to the other, from the one mountayne to the other.
| Notwithstondinge the londe must be waisted, 

because of them that dwell therin, and for the 

frutes of their owne ymaginacions. Therfore 
‘fede thy people with thy rodde, the flocke of thine heretage which dwell desolate in the
;wodde: that they maye be fedde vpon the 
|mount of Charmel, Basan q Galaad as afore tyme. Maruelous thinges will I shewe them, like as when they came out of Egipte. This shal the Heithen se, and be aszshamed for all their power: "so that they shal laye their honde vpon their mouth, and stoppe their eares. “They shal licke the dust like a ser- pent, q as the wormes of the earth, y tremble iu their holes. They shalbe afrayed of the

LORDE oure God, q they shal feare y. 
| Where is there soch a God as thou? that par- 
| donest. wickednes, and forgeuest the offences of the remnaunt of thine heretage? He kepeth

not his wrath for euer. And why? his delyte is 

to haue compassion: ^he shal turne agayne, q be mereyfull to vs: he shal put downe oure wickednesses, x cast all oure synnes in to the botome of the see. Thon shalt kepe thy trust with Iacob, and thy mercy for Abraham, like as thou hast sworne vnto oure fathers longe agoo.

Deu. 13. b. 33. b. Psal, 37. b. 54. b. ^ Pro. 17. c. 
!4Re.19.2. *Amos9.c. 'Exo.14.a. ™ Iob 39. d. 
" Gen. 3. c. ? Tere, 9. d. 

The ende of the prophet Micheas. 

Chap. bij. 

The Prophet Dium. 

What Paum contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

He prayseth the power and goodnesse of God : he reproueth the Niniuites, because they de- spysed the councell and punyshment of God.

HIS is the heuy burthen of Niniue, which Naum of Elchos dyd wryte, as he sawe it

The first Chapter. 

HE LORDE is a gelous God, and a 

taker of vengeaunce: yee a taker of vegeaunce is y LORDE, and wrothfull. “The
LORDE taketh vengeaunce of his enemies, and reserueth displeasure for his aduersaries.
* The LORDE suffreth longe, he is of greate power, q so innocent, that he leaueth no man fautlesse before him. The LORDE goeth forth in tempest and stormy wether, the cloudes are the dust of his fete. Whé he reproueth the see, he dryeth it vp, q turneth all the floudes to drye londe. Basan is deso- late, Charmel and the pleasure of Libanus waisteth awaye. The mountaynes tremble for him, the hilles consume. At the sight of him, the earth quaketh : yee the whole worlde, and all that dwell therin. “Who maye endure before his wrath? Or who is able to abyde his grymme displeasure? His anger taketh on like fyre, and the harde rockes burst in sunder before him.

* Deu. 5. b. è Ro. 2. a. Exo. 34, a. Iere. 30. b. c Iere, 10. b. Esa. 34. a. Abac. 3. a. Sopb. 3. b.

Chap. II 
He deserybeth vnto them the terryblenesse of the plage.
Chap. IIl. 

He reproueth the abhominacions of the malicious cite, and sheweth them of their punyshment.

Ful gracious is the LORDE, and a stronge holde in tyme of trouble, he knoweth the that put their trust in him: when the floude ren- neth ouer, and destroyeth the place, and when the darcknesse foloweth still vpon his enemies.
What do ye ymagin then agaynst the LORDE on this maner? (Tush, when he hath once made an ende, there shal come nomore trou- ble.) For like as the thornes that sticke together, and as the drye strawe, so shal the dronckardes be consumed together, euen when they be full. There come out of ¥ soch as ymagin myschefe, and geue vngracious coun- cell agaynst the LORDE.

Therfore thus saieth the LORDE: Let thé be as wel prepared, yee and as many as they can, yet shal they be hewen downe, and passe awaye. And as for the, I wil vexe the, but not vtterly destroie the. And now wil I breake his rodde from thy backe, and burst thy bondes in sonder. But the LORDE hath geuen a commaundement cocernynge the, that there shall come nomore sede of thy name. ‘¢ The carued and casten ymages will
I rote out of the house of thy god. Thy graue shal I prepare for the, and thou shalt, be confounded.

4 Mich. 5 

. fo. Deerebi. 

The prophet Paum. 

Chap. fj. 

| 

| The ij. Chapter. | 
Q EHOLDE, vpon the mountaynes come the fete of him, “that bryngeth good. tydinges, t preacheth peace. O luda, kepe | thy holy dayes, perfourme thy promyses: for
Belial shal come nomore in the, he is vtterly roted out.
| The scaterer shal come vp agaynst the, q laye sege to the castell. Loke thou wel to the stretes, make thy loynes stronge, arme thy self with all thy myght: for the LORDE shal restore agayne the glory of Iacob, like as y glory of Israel. The destroyers haue broken them downe, q marred the wyne braunches.
The shylde of his giauntes glistereth, his men of warre are clothed in purple. His charettes are as fyre, when he maketh him forwarde, his archers are wel deckte q trimmed. The charettes rolle vpon the stretes, q welter in the hye wayes. ‘They are to loke vpon like cres-
| settes of fyre, and go swyftly, as the lightenynge. 
133| When he doth but warne his giauntes, they fall in their araye, « haistely they clymme vp the walles: yee the engyns of the warre are prepared all ready. The water portes shal be opened, and the kinges palace shall fall. ‘The quene hir self shal be led awaye captyue, and hir gentilwomen shal mourne as the doues, a grone within their hertes. ^ Niniue is like a pole full of water, but then shal they be fayne to fle. Stonde, stode, (shal they crie) q there shal not one turne backe. Awaye with the syluer, awaye with the golde: for here is no ende of treasure. There shalbe a multitude of all maner costly ornamentes. Thus must she be spoyled, emptied q clene striped out: that their hertes maye be melted awaye, their knees tréble, all their loynes be weake, and their faces blacke as a pot.

Where is now the dwellinge of the lyos, and the pasture of the lyons whelpes? where the lyon and the lyonesse wente with the whelpes, and no man frayed them awaye?
But the lyon spoyled ynough for his yonge ones, and deuoured for his lyonesse : he fylled his dennes with his pray, q his dwellinge place with that he had rauyszshed. Beholde, I wil vpon the (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and wil set fyre vpon thy charettes, that they shal smoke withall, and the swerde shal deuoure thy yonge lyons. I wil make an ende of thy

e a a E MÀ — 

? Esa. 52. b. Ro. 10. c. è Tob. 14. b. Soph. 2. c. 

spoylinge from out of the earth, q the voyce of thy messaungers shall nomore be herde.

The iij. Chapter. 
O to that bloudthursty cite, which is| æ all full of lyes and robbery, “q wil not leaue of from rauyszshinge. ‘There a man maye heare scourginge, ruszshinge, the noyse of the wheles, the crienge of the horses, q the rollinge of the charettes. There the horse men get vp with naked swerdes, and glister- ynge speares: There lyeth a multitude slayne, and a greate heape of deed bodies: There is no ende of deed coarses, yee men fall vpon their bodies: And that for the greaté and manyfolde whordome, of the fayre aud beuti- full harlot: which is a mastresse of wycheraft, yee and selleth the people thorow hir whor- dome, and the nacions thorow hir wicheraft.

“Beholde, I wil vpon the (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and wil pull thy clothes ouer thy heade: that I mayeshewe thy nakednes amonge the Heithen, and thy shame amonge the king- domes. I wil cast dyrte vpon y, to make the be abhorred, and a gasynge stocke: Yee all they that loke vpon the, shal starte backe, q saye: Niniue is destroyed.

Who wil haue pyte vpo the ? where shal I|33 seke one to conforte the? — Art thou better then the greate cite of Alexadria? that laye in the waters, and had the waters rounde aboute it: which was strongly fenced q walled with the see? Ethiopia and Egipte were hir strégth, a that exceadinge greate aboue mea- sure. Aphrica and Lybia were hir helpers, yet was she dryuen awaye, q brought in to captiuyte: hir yonge children were smytten downe at the heade of euery strete, the lottes were cast for the most awncient men in her, and all hir mightie men were bounde in chaynes. Euen so shalt thou also be droncken, and hyde thy self, and seke some helpe agaynst thine enemy. All thy stronge cities shal be like fyge trees with rype fyges: which whe a ma shaketh, they fail in to the mouth of the eater.

* Beholde, thy people with in the are but women: the portes of thy londe shal be opened vnto thine enemies, and the fyre shal deuoure thy barres. Drawe water now agaynst thou be beseged, make vp thy strége holdes, go in to the claye, tempore the morter, make

¢ Eze. 24. a. Abac. 2. b. 4 Esa, 47. a. Eze. 16. d. 

Chap. í. stronge bricke: “yet the fyre shal consume the, the swerde shal destroye the, yee as y locuste doth, so shal it eate the vp. It shal fall heuely vpon the as the locustes, yee right heuely shal it fall vpon the, euen as the gres- hoppers. ‘Thy marchauntes haue bene mo then the starres of heaué: but now shal they sprede abrode as the locustes, and fle their waye: Thy lordes are as the greshoppers, q thy captaynes as the multitude of greshoppers:

a Esa. 10. a. 30. f. 31. b. Zach. 10, b. 

The prophet Gbarur. 

Fo. nrryrbtj. 

which whé they be colde, remayne in ¥ 

hedges: but when the Sonne is vp, they fle awaye, and no ma can tell where they are be- come. ‘Thy shepherdes are aslepe (o kinge of
Assur) thy worthies are layed downe: thy peo- ple is scatred abrode vpon the mountaynes, and no man gathereth them together agayne.
Thy wounde can not be hyd, thy plage is so sore. All they that heare this of the, shall clappe their handes ouer the. For what is he, to who thou hast not allwaye bene doynge hurte ?

The ende of the prophet Paum. 

The Prophet Abvacue. 

what Abacuc contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
He complayneth vnto God of the wickednes of the people, and threateneth them with the plage of God.

The first Chapter. 

HIS is the heuy burthé, which the prophet Abacucdydse. “O LORDE, how longe shal I crie, ¢ thou wilt not heare ?
* How longe shall I complayne vnto the, suf- frynge wronge, and thou wilt not helpe? Why lettest thou me se weerynesse and laboure ?
Tyrany and violence are before me, power ouergoeth right: for the lawe is torne in peces, and there can no right iudgment go forth. And why? the vngodly is more set by then the rightuous: this is the cause, y wronge iudgment procedeth. ^ Beholde amonge the
Heithen, and loke wel: wondre at it, and be 

€ Act, 13. d. 

a Psal. 21. a. > Tob 19. a. 

Chap. II. 
He reproueth the cuvetous and vnrightuous men. 

Chap. III. 
A prayer of the prophet. 

abaszshed: for I wil do a thinge in youre tyme, which though it be tolde you, ye shal not beleue.

For lo, ^I wil rase vp y Caldees, that bytter and swifte people: which shal go as wyde as! the londe is, to take possession of dwellinge places, that be not their owne. A grymme q boysteous people is it, these shal syt in iudg- ment q punyshe. Their horses are swifter then the cattes of the mountayne, q byte sorer then y wolues in y euenynge. “Their hors- men come by greate heapes from farre, they fle hastely to deuoure as the Aegle. They come all to spoyle: out of them commeth| an east wynde, whieh bloweth and gathereth

d Deu. 28. c. * Soph. 3. a. 

B 

| fo. Drtrrbitj. their captyues, like as the sonde. ‘They shall mocke the kinges, and laugh the prynces to scorne. They shal not set by eny stronge holde, for they shal laye ordinaunce agaynst it, and take it. Then shal they take a fresh corage vnto them, to go forth q to do more enell, ^a so ascrybe that power vnto their God.
But thon o LORDE my God, my holy one, thou art from the begynnynge, therfore shal we not dye. O LORDE, thon hast ordened them for a punyshmét, and set them to re- proue the mightie. ‘Thine eyes are clene, thou mavest not se euell, thou canst not be- holde $ thinge that is wicked. ^ Wherfore then dost thou loke vpon the vngodly, and holdest thy tunge, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is better thé himself? Thon makest men as the fish in the see, and like as the crepinge beestes, that haue no gyde.
They take vp all with their angle, they catch it in their net, q gather it in their yarne: wherof they reioyce and are glad. Therfore offre they vnto their net, and do sacrifice vnto their yarne: because that thorow it their porcion is become so fat, and their meate so pléteous. Wherfore they cast out their net agayne, q neuer ceasse to slaye the people.

The ij. Chapter. 

STODE vpon my watch, and set me vpon my bulworke, to loke x se what he wolde saye vnto me, and what answere I shnlde geue him y reproneth me. But the LORDE answered me, and sayde: Wryte the vision planely vpon thy tables, that who so commeth by, maye rede it: for y visio is yet farre of for a tyme, ^but at y last it shal come to passe, t not fayle. And though he tary, yet wait thou for him, "for in very dede he wil come, and not be slacke. Beholde, who so wil not beleue, his soule shal not prospere: but the iust shal lyue by his faith” Like as the wyne disceaueth the dronckarde, euen so the proude shal fayle q not endure. He openeth his desyre wyde vp as the hell, ¢ is as vnsaciable as death. / All Heithen gathereth

he to him, q heapeth vnto him all people. 
But shall not all these take vp a prouerbe agaynst him, and mocke him with a byworde, and saye: Wo vnto him that heapeth vp other

a Ess. 46, a. 2 Par. 28. d. 
4 Heb. 10. d. 
^ Esa. 5. b. 

* Iere, 12, a. Psal. 56. a. e Ro: 12b. 9 f Pro. 30. b.
' Abdi. 1.a, * Luc. 19. d. 

Cbr prophet Gbarur. 

Chap. fj. mens goodes? How longe wil he lade him- self with thicke claye? O how sodenly wil they stonde vp, y shal byte the, q awake, that shal teare y in peces? yee thou shalt be their pray. * Seinge thou hast spoyled many
Heithen, therfore shall the remnaunt of the people spoyle the: because of mens blonde, q for the wronge done in the londe, in the cite q vnto all them that dwel therin.

^ Wo vnto him, that couetously gathereth euell gotten goodes in to his house: that he maye set his nest an hye, to escape from the power of mysfortune. ‘Thou hast deuysed y shame of thine owne house, for thou hast slayne to moch people, and hast wilfully of- fended: ‘so that the very stones of the wall shal crie out of it, and the tymbre that lieth betwixte the ioyntes of the buyldinge shall answere. ‘Wo vnto him, y buyldeth the towne with bloude, and maynteneth y cite with vnrightuousnes. Shal not the LORDE of hoostes bringe this to passe, that the laboures of the people shal be brent with a greate fyre, and that the thinge wher vpon the people haue weeried them selues, shall be lost?
" For the earth shalbe full of knowlege of the 
LORDES honoure, like as the waters that couer the see.

Wo vnto him that geueth his neghboure dryncke, to get him wrothfull displeasure for his dronckennesse: "that he maye se his pre- uytees. Therfore with shame shalt thon be fylled, in steade of honoure. Dryncke thou also, till thou slombre withall: for the cuppe of the LORDES right hode shall compasse the aboute, and shamefull spewinge in steade of thy worshipe. For the wroge that thou hast done in Libanus, shal ouerwhelme the,
^and the wilde beastes shal make the afrayed : because of mens bloude, and for the wronge done in the londe, in the cite, and vnto all soch as dwel therin.

What helpe than wil Y ymage do, whom the workman hath fashioned? Or the vayne cast ymage, wherin because the craftesman putteth his trust, therfore maketh he domme
Idols? Wo vnto him, that saieth to a pece of wod: arise, and to a domme stone: stonde vp. For what instrueció maye soch one geue?
Beholde, it is layed ouer with golde and 

! Eze. 24. a. Naŭ. 3.a. Mich. 3. c. m Exo. 9. c. 
Nu. 14. c. Esa. 11. b. " Gen. 9. d. ? Tere, 50. e. 
Abdi. 1. c. 

jwrath thou thinkest vpon mercy. 

Cbr prophet Abacuc. 

° But the 
LORDE in his holy téple is he, whom all the worlde shulde feare.

syluer, t there is no breth in it. 

The iij. Chapter. 
A prayer of the prophet Abacuc for the ignoraunt. 
O LORDE, when I herde speake of v, I 

was afrayed. The worke y thou hast taken in honde, shalt thou perfourme in his tyme, O LORDE: aud when thy tyme com- meth, thou shalt declare it. In thy very
God com- meth from Theman, and the holy one from the mount of Pharan. Sela.

His glory couereth the heauens, aud the earth is full of his prayse. His shyne is as y sonne, q beames of ie t go out of his hondes, there is his power hid. Destrucci6 goeth be- fore him, and burnynge cressettes go from his fete. He stondeth, q measureth the earth:
He loketh, q the people consume awaye, the moütaynes of y worlde fall downe to powlder, aud the hilles are fayne to bowe them selues, for his goinges are euerlastinge and sure.

I sawe, that the pauilions of the Morians and the tentes of the londe of Madianu were vexed for weerynesse. Wast thou not angrie
(o LORDE) in the waters? was not thy wrath in the floudes, and thy displeasure in the see? yes, whé thou sattest vpon thine horse, and when thy charettes had the victory.
Thou shewdest thy bowe opély, like as thou 
^haddest promised with an ooth vnto the trybes. Sela.

Thon didest deuyde the waters of the earth. 
When the mountaynes saw the, they were 
© Iosue 10. c. 

? Psal. 10. a. ^ Gen. 49, c. 

afrayed, y water streame wéte awaye: the depe made a noyse at the liftinge vp of thine honde. “The Sonne and Mone remayned still in their habitacion. ‘Thine arowes wente out glisteringe, and thy speares as the shyne of the lightenynge. “Thou trodest downe the londe in thine anger, and didest throsshe the Heithen in thy displeasure. Thou camest forth to helpe thy people, to helpe thine anoynted. ‘Thou smotest downe the heade in the house of the vngodly, q discoueredest his foundacions, eué vnto y necke of him.
Sela. 

Thou cursest his septers, the captayne of his men of warre: which come as a stormy wynde to scatre me abrode, q are glad when they maye eat vp j poore secretly. Thou makest a waye for thine horses in the see, euen in the mudde of greate waters. Whé I heare this, my body is vexed, my lippes tremble at y voyce therof, my bones corruppe,
I am afrayed where I stonde. O that I might rest in the daye of trouble, that I might go vp vnto oure people, which are al- redy prepared.

For the fyge trees shal not be grene, q the vynes shal beare no frute. ‘The laboure of y olyue shalbe but lost, and the londe fl bringe no corne: the shepe shalbe taken out of y folde, and there shalbe no eatell in $ stalles. But as for me, I wil be glad in the LORDE, and will reioyce in God my
Sauioure. “The LORDE God is my strength, he shall make my fete as the fete of hertes:
& he which geueth y victory, shal bringe me to my hye places, synginge vpon my psalmes.

4 Iosue 11, a. * Psal. 17. d. 

The ende of the prophet Gbarur. 

Fo. Deere. 

The Prophet Sophanp. 

what Sophonp contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

He prophecieth of plages for to come vpon Iuda. 
Chap. II. 

He exorteth them to amede, that they maye 

escape the wrath of God: and slheweth the 
Gentiles their punyshment. 

Chap. III. 
Punyshment because of the wickednesse of the 
Iewes: whom God therfore refused, and chose the Heithen.

The first Chapter. 
HIS is the worde of the LORDE, which came vnto Sophony the sonne of Chusi, the sonne of Gedolias, the sonne of Amarias ¥ sonne of Hezechias: in the tyme of losias the sonne of Amon kinge of luda. ^I will gather vp all thinges in the londe (saieth the
LORDE) I wil gather vp man and beest: I wil gather vp the foules in the ayre, and the fysh in the see (to the greate decaye of the wicked) x wil vtterly destroye the men out of the londe, saieth the LORDE. I wil stretch out myne honde vpon Inda, and vpon all soch as dwel at lerusalem. Thus wil I rote out the remnaunt of Daal from this place, and the names of the Kemuryns and prestes: yee q soch as vpon their house toppes worshipe q bowe them selues vnto the hoost of heauen: which sweare by the LORDE; and by their
Malchom also: which starte a backe from y 
LORDE, and nether seke after the LORDE, ner regarde him.
"Be still at presence of the LORDE 
God, for the daye of the LORDE is at honde: yee the LORDE hath prepared a slayne

offeringe, and called his gestes therto. And 
* 4 Re. 21. & 25. è Deut. 17. b. Iere. 5. b. 
* Zach. 2, b. d 4 Reg. 25. Tere. 39. b. * Jere. 5. c. 

thus shall it happen in the daye of the 
LORDES a slaynofferinge: ?I will vyset the prynces, the kinges children, q all soch as weere strauge clothinge. In the same daye also wil I vyset all those, that treade ouer the thresholde so proudly, which fyll their lordes house with robbery and falsede. At $ same tyme (saieth the LORDE) there shall be herde a greate crie from the fyshporte, and an howlinge from $ other porte, and a greate murthur from the hilles. Howle ye that dwel in the myll, for all the marchaunt people are gone, and all they that were laden with syluer, are roted out.

“At the same tyme wil I seke thorow Ieru-|€ 

salem with lanternes, and vyset them that contynue in their dregges, and saye in their hertes: Tush, the LORDE wil do nether good ner enell. Their goodes shalbe spoyled, and their houses layed waist. ‘They shall buylde houses, and not dwel in them: they shal plante vynyardes, but not drynke the wyne therof. *For the greate daye of the
LORDE is at honde, it is harde by, q com- meth on a pace. Horrible is $ tydinges of the
LORDES daye, then shall the giaunte crie out : for that daye is a daye of wrath, a daye f Amos 5. b. £ loel?.a.

Deut. 29. c. Iere. 23.c. 

| 

| 

Cbr prophet Sophonp. 

of trouble x heuynesse, a daye of vtter de- struccion q mysery, a darcke q glomynge daye, a cloudy q stormy daye, a daye of the noyse of trompettesand shawmes, agaynst the stronge cities and hie towres. I wil bringe y people in to soch vexacion, that they shal go aboute like blinde mé, because they haue synned agaynst the LORDE. Their bloude shalbe shed as the dust, q their bodies as the myre.
“Nether their syluer ner their golde shalbe able to delyuer thé in that wrothfull daye of the LORDE, ^but the whole londe shalbe co- sumed thorow the fyre of his gelousy: for he shall soone make clene ryddaunce of all them that dwell in the londe.

The tj. Chapter. 
OME together and gather you, O ye frauwerde people: or y thinge go forth that is concluded, t or the tyme be passed awaye as the dust: or the fearfull wrath of the LORDE come vpon you, yee or the daye of the LORDES sore displeasure come vpon you. “Seke the LORDE all yee meke harted vpon earth, ye that worke after his iudgmét : seke rightuousnesse, seke lowlynesse: that ye maye be defended in the wrothfull daye of y
LORDE. For Gaza shal be destroyed, «| 
Ascalon shall be layed waist: "They shal cast out Aszdod at the noone daye, and Accaron shal be pluckte vp by the rotes. |
Wo vnto you y dwel vpon the see coost, ye murthurous people: the worde of ý LORDE shal come vpon you. O Canaan thou londe of the Philistynes, I wil destroye the, so that there shal no man dwel in the eny more: ¢ as for the see coost, it shal be hyrdmens co- tages q shepe foldes: yee it shalbe a porcion for soch as remayne of the house of Inda, to fede ther vpon. In y houses of Ascalon shal they rest towarde night: for the LORDE their God shal vyset thé, q turne awaye their captyuite. I haue herde the despite of Moab, q the ‘blasphemies of the children of Ammon: how they haue shamefully intreated my people, and magnified them selues within the borders. of their londe. ‘Therfore as truly as 1 lyue}
(saieth the LORDE of hoostes the God of 
Israel) Moab shalbe as Sodome, q Ammon as Gomorra: euen drie thorne hedges, salt

* Eze. 7. d. ’ Soph.3. b. ¢4 Re.20.a. Ione. 3. a. 
4 Esa. 14. e. lere. 47. a. Eze. 25. c. * Esa. 15. 16. 
Tere. 48.a, Eze.25. b. f Zach. 2. b. £ Esa. 2. c.| 

pittes and a perpetuall wyldernes. The residue of my folke shall spoyle them, the remnaunt of my people shall haue them in possession. This shal happen vnto them for their pryde, “because they hane dealte so shamefully with the LORDE of hoostes people, and magnified them selues aboue them. The LORDE shall be grymme vpon them, and ‘destroye all the goddes in the
‘londe. And all the Iles of the Heithen shal worshipe him, euery man in his place.

Ye Morias also shal perish with my swerde: 
Yee he shall stretch out his honde ouer the north, and destroye Assur. As for Niniue, he shal make it desolate, drye and waist.
The flockes and all the beastes of the people shall lye in the myddest of it, pellicanes and storckes shall abyde in the vpper postes of it, foules shal synge in the wyndowes, and rauens shal syt vpon the balckes, for the bordes of
Cedre shalbe ryué downe. * This is the proude and carelesse cite, that sayde in hir herte: I
(am, and there is els none. O how is she made so waist, y the beestes lye therin? Who so goeth by, mocketh her, and poynteth at her with his fynger.

The iij. Chapter. 
O to the abhominable, fylthie and 
| cruel cite: which wil not heare, ner be refourmed. Hir trust is not in the LORDE, nether wil she holde her to hir God. ‘ Hir rulers within her are as roaringe lyons: hir iudges are as wolues in the euenynge, which leaue nothinge behynde them till the morow.
Hir prophetes are light personnes and vn- faithfull men: hir prestes vnhalowe the Sanc- tuary, and do wronge vnder the pretence of hn lawe. But the iust LORDE that doth

no vnright, was amonge them, euery mornynge shewinge them his lawe clearly, and ceassed not. But the vngodly will not lerne to be aszshamed. Therfore wil I rote out this people, and destroye their towres: yee and
| make their stretes so voyde, that no man shall go therin. Their cities shall be broke downe, so that no body shal be left, ner dwel there eny more.

I sayde vnto them: O feare me, and be cotent to be refourmed. That their dwellinge

^ 4 Re. 19. f. Esa. 47. b. 34. c. * Eze. 22. c. Mich. 3. c. 
Abac. 1. b. 

104 

Fo. Devi. 

E 

So. ucreij. 

shulde not be destroyed, and that there shulde happen vnto them none of these thinges, wherwith I shal vyset thé. But neuertheles they stonde vp early, to folowe the filthynes of their owne ymaginacions. Therfore ye shal waite vpon me (saieth the LORDE) vntil the tyme that I stonde vp: for I am determed, to gather the people and to bringe the king- domes together, that I maye poure out myne anger, yee all my wrothfull displeasure vpon them. “For all the worlde shalbe consumed with the fyre of my gelousy. And then wil I clense the lippes of the people, that they maye euerychone call vponthe name of the LORDE, and serue him with one shulder. Soch as I haue subdued, and my children also whom I haue scatred abrode, shal brynge me presentes beyonde the waters of Ethiopia.

In that tyme shalt thou nomore be con- founded, because of all thy ymaginacions, wher thorow thou haddest offended me: *for I wil take awaye the proude boosters of thine honoure from the, so that thou shalt nomore tryumphe because of my holy hill. In the also wil I leaue a smal poore symple people, which shal trust in the name of the LORDE.
The remnaunt of Israel shal do no wickednes, ner speake lyes: nether shal there eny dis- ceatful tunge be founde in their mouthes.
| For they shal be fed, and take their rest, and 

a Naum i.a. Soph. 1. c. 

Cbr prophet Sophonp. 

The ede of the prophet &opbonp. 

Chap. iij. no man shal make them afrayed. Geue thankes o doughter Sid, be ioyful o Israel: reioyce q be glad from thy whole herte, o doughter lerusalem, for the LORDE hath taken awaye thy punyshment, and turned backe thine enemies. The kinge of Israel, euen the LORDE himself is with the: so that thou nedest nomore to feare eny mysz- fortune.

In that tyme it shall be sayed to Ierusalem :| B feare not, and to Sion: let not thine hondes be slacke, for the LORDE thy God is with the, it is he that hath power to saue: he hath a special pleasure in the, and a maruelous loue towarde the: yee he reioyseth ouer the with gladnesse. Soch as haue bene in heuy-
| nesse, wil I gather together, and take out of 
|thy congregacion : as for the shame and re- profe that hath bene layed vpon the, it shal be farre from the. And lo, m y tyme wil I destroye all those that vexe the: “I wil helpe
‘the lame, and gather vp the cast awaye : yee 
|I wil get them honoure and prayse in all 
|lodes, where they haue bene put to shame. 
| At y same tyme wil I bringe you in, and at the same tyme wil I gather you. I wil get you a name and a good reporte, amonge all people of the earth, when I turne backe
, youre eaptiuyte before youre eyes, saieth the 

ORDE. 

è Tere. 50. b. * Mich. 4. b. 

The Prophet Aqgeus. 

Ghat Aqgeus contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

He exorteth the people to buylde vp the teple, and reproueth their loge tariege.

Chap. II. 

He geueth the rulers a corage. Of the orna- metes and glory of the seconde temple, wherby is vnderstode the church of the faithfull.

The first Chapter. 

ie the seconde yeare of kynge Darius, ^in 

the vj. moneth the first daye of the moneth, came the worde of the LORDE (by the prophet Aggeus) ^vnto Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel $ prynce of Iuda, and to Iesua the sonne of Iosedec the hye prest, sayenge:
Thus speaketh the LORDE of hoostes, and saieth: This people doth saye: The tyme is not yet come to buylde vp the LORDES house. Then spake the LORDE by the prophet Aggeus q sayed: “Ye youre selues can fynde tyme to dwell in syled houses, and shal this house lye waist? Considre now oure owne wayes in youre hertes (saieth y
LORDE of hoostes) ye sowe moch, but ye bringe litle in: "Ye eate, but ye haue not ynough: ye drinke, bnt ye are not fylled: ye decke youre selues, but ye are not warme: q he y earneth eny wage, putteth it in a broken purse.

Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: Co- sidre youre owne wayes in youre hertes, get you vp to the mountayne, fetch wod, q buylde vp the house: ‘that it maye be acceptable vnto me, and that I maye shewe myne honoure, saleth the LORDE. Ye loked for moch,

and lo it is come to litle: ¢ though ye brynge 

^1 Esd. 6.a. Dan. 5, e. 6. a. 1 Esd. 
2. 3. 4. 5. * Tere, 22. b. 
Osee4.b. Mala.3.b. ¢3 Re. 8. d. 

5 1 Esd. 5. a. 

4 Leui. 26.d. Mich. 6. b. f 1 Cor. 3, b. 6. c.

it home, yet do I blowe it awaye. And why so, saieth the LORDE of hoostes? Eué be- cause that my house lyeth so waist, fand ye renne euery man vnto his owne house. Wher- fore the heauen is forbyddé to gene you eny dew, and the earth is forbydden to geue you encrease. ¢I haue called for a drouth, both vpo the londe q vpon the mountaynes, vpon corne, vpon wyne q vpon oyle, vpon euery thinge that the grounde bryngeth forth, vpon men and vpon catell, yee and vpon all handy laboure.

Now when Zorobabel the sonne of Sala- thiel, q Iesua the sonne of losedec the hye prest with the remnaunt of the people, herde the voyce of the LORDE their God, « the wordes of the prophet Aggeus (like as the
LORDE their God had sent him) the people dyd feare the LORDE. Then Aggeus the
LORDES angel sayed in the LORDES message vnto the people: ^I am with you, saieth the LORDE. So the LORDE waked vp the sprete of Zorobabel the prynce of
Iuda, and the sprete of lesna the sonne of 
Iosedec the hye prest, and the sprete of the remnaunt of all the people: y they came q laboured, in the house of the LORDE of hoostes their God.

2 Cor. 6. c. 
Agg. 2.a. 

€ Deut. 28. d. ^ Deut. 7. d. 31. g. lere. 46. e. 1 Esd. 5. a.

a 

B 
| 

ELE Deectitj. 

! 
The ij. Chapter. 

PON the xxiiij. daye of the siste moneth, 
V in the secode yeare of kinge Darius, the xxi. daye of the seuenth moneth, came the worde of the LORDE by the prophet
Aggeus, sayenge: speake to Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel prynce of luda, aud to
Iesua the sonne of Iosedec the hye prest, and to the residue of $ people, t saye: “Who is left amoge you, ist sawe this house in hir first beuty? But what thinke ye now by it?
Is it not in youre eyes, eué as though it were inothinge? Neuerthelesse be of good chere, lo Zorobabel (saieth the LORDE) ’be of good
Iconforte, o Iesua thou sonne of Iosedec, hye prest: take good hartes vnto you also, all ye people of the londe, saieth the LORDE of hoostes, and do acordinge to the worde (for I am with you, saieth the LORDE of hoostes) like as I agreed with you, when ye came out of the londe of Egypte: q my sprete shalbe amonge you, feare ye not.

For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: 
? Yet once more will I shake heaué and earth, the see and the drye lode: Yee I will moue lall Heithen, « the comforte of all Heithen shall come, q so wil I fyll this house with honoure, saieth the LORDE of hoostes. The syluer is myne, q the golde is myne, saieth the LORDE of hoostes. Thus y glory of the last house shalbe greater thé the first, saleth the LORDE of hoostes: œ in this place wil I geue peace, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.

The xxiij. daye of the ix moneth iu the seconde yeare of kinge Darius, came the worde of the LORDE vnto the prophet Ag- geus sayenge: Thus saieth $ LORDE God of hoostes: Axe the prestes concernynge the jlawe, q saye: /Yf oue beare holy flesh in his cote lappe, œ with his lappe do touch the bred, potage, wyne, oyle or eny other meate: shall he be holy also? ‘The prestes answered, q salde: No. Then sayde Aggeus: Now yf

è Deu.31.b. Iosu.1.b. cÁgg.1.c. e Deut. 8, b. f Tere. 11. c.

* 1 Esd. 3. c. 
1 Heb, 12. d. 

The prophet Aggeus. 

one beynge defyled with a deed carcase, touch 

eny of these: shall it also be vnclene? The prestes gaue auswere q sayed : yee, it shall be vnclene. *'Theé Aggeus answered, and sayde:
Euen so is this people q this nacion before me, saieth y LORDE: and so are all the workes of their hodes, yee and all that they offre, is vnelene.

And now (I praye you) cósidre from this daye forth, and how it hath gone with you afore: or euer there was layed one stone vpo another in the temple of the LORDE: that wheu ye came to a corne heape of xx. bus- shels, there were scarce, ten: ^and that when ye came to the wyne presse for to poure out
L. pottes of wyne, there were scarce xx. For 
I smote you with heate, blastinge q hale stones in all the labours of youre hondes: yet was there none of you, that wolde turne vnto me, saleth the LORDE. Considre then from this daye forth aud afore, namely, from the xxiiij. daye of the ix. moneth, vnto the daye that the foundacion of the LORDES temple was layed: ' Marck it well, Is not the sede yet in the barne? haue not the vynes, the fyge trees, the pomgranates and olyue trees bene yet vnfrutefull? but fro this daye forth,
I shal make them to prospere. 

Morouer the xxiüj. daye of the moneth came the worde of the LORDE vnto Aggeus agayne, sayenge: Speake to Zorobabel the prynce of Iuda, and saye: I will shake both heauen and earth, and ouerthrowe the seate of the kingdomes, yee q destroye the mightie kingdome of the Heithe. 1 wil ouerthrowe the charettes, and those that syt vpon them, so that both horse and man shal fall downe, euery man thorow his neghbours swerde.
And as for the, o Zorobabel (saieth the 
LORDE of hoostes) thou sonne of Salathiel, my seruaunt: I wil take the (saieth the
LORDE) at the same tyme, and make the as a seale: for I haue chosen the, saieth the
LORDE of hoostes 

ip Leui. 5. a. 11. d. Nu.19.b. ^Agg.1.a. Zach. 8. b. 

The ende of the prophet Aggeus. 

Chap. fj. 

The Prophet Zachary. 

What Zacharp contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

He exorteth the people, not to be disobedient to the voyce of God, as their forefathers were, but to conuerte: and he sheweth them ioyfull thinges in visions.

Chap. II. 

Visions, signifienge the delyueraunce out of the captiuyte of Babilon, and the redempcion in
Christ. 

Chap. IIl. 

A vision in Iesua, signifienge the LORDE Iesus oure hye prest.

Chap. III. 

Another vision, wherin Zorobabel is conforted with his litle nombre of people. The right mystery herof belongeth vnto Christ.

Chap. V. 
The wrath of God for the synnes of the people. 
Chap. VI. 

À vision, wherin is declared the almighty power of God, which geueth peace or warre at his

pleasure. 
Chap. VIL 

What the true fast is: namely, to kepe iudg- ment and iustice, a man to do good to his neghboure, to defende the widdowe and the fatherlesse, to do no man wronge, qc.

The first Chapter. 
N the eight moneth of the secode yeare of 

kinge Darius, came the worde of the 
LORDE vnto "Zachary the sonue of Bara- chias, the sonne of Addo, the prophet, say-

Mala. 3. b. 

95 Matt. 23, c. * Tere. 31. c. 

Chap. VIII. 

Cause of all the wrath of God: yet yf men wil turne, he is mercifull.

Chap. IX. 
The ioyfull callinge of the Heithé. 

Chap. X. 

Thorow corporal promises, the prophet ledeth men vnto the promises that are fulfilled in
Christ: and threateneth punyshment vnto the false prophetes and shepherdes.

Chap. XI. 

Of secrete mysteries, and of the destruccio of the secode temple. God is a good shepherde.

Chap. XII. 
The punyshnient which the LORDE deuysed for 
Israel. 

Chap. XII. 

Of welles and clensynge, which belonge to the tyme of Christ.

Chap. XIII. 

The plage of the Tewes. The takynge vp of 
Terusalem the church of God. 

The LORDE hath bene sore dis- pleased at youre forefathers. And saye thou vnto them: thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes. *Turne you vnto me (saieth the
LORDE of hoostes) and I wil turne me vnto you, saieth the LORDE of hoostes. . * Be not

enge: 

Psal, 77. a. | 

¢ Tere. 44. c. | 

Fo. Deeevt. 

ye like youre forefathers, vnto whom the prophetes cried a fore tyme, sayége: ‘Thus saieth the LORDE God of hoostes: “Turne you from youre euell wayes, q from youre wicked ymaginacions. But they wolde not heare, ner regarde me, saieth the LORDE.
ê What is now become of youre forefathers and the prophetes? are they yet still alyue? But dyd not my wordes q statutes (which I co- maunded by my seruauntes y prophetes) touch youre fore fathers? — Vpo this, they gaue an- swere q sayde: like as y LORDE of hoostes deuysed to do vnto vs, acordinge to oure owne wayes q ymaginacions, euen so hath he dealte with vs.

Vpon the xxiijj daye of the xj. moneth 
(which is the moneth Sebat) in the seconde yeare of Darius, came the worde of the
LORDE vnto Zachary the sonne of Bara- chias, the sonne of Addo the prophete, say- enge: I sawe by night, and lo, there sat one vpon a reade horse, and stode still amonge the Myrte trees, “that were beneth vpon the grounde: and behynde him were there reade, spreckled and whyte horses.

Then sayde I: O my LORDE, what are these? And the angel that talked with me, sayed vnto me: I will shewe the what these be. And the man that stode amoge the
Myrte trees, answered q sayde: These are they, whom the LORDE hath sent to go thorow the worlde. And they answered the angel of the LORDE, that stode amonge the
Myrte trees, and sayde: We haue gone thorow the worlde: and beholde, all the worlde dwell at ease, and are carelesse.

Then the LORDES angel gaue answere and sayde: O LORDE of hoostes, how longe wilt thou be vnmercifull to lerusalé and to the cities of Iuda, ^with whom thou hast bene displeased now these lxx. yeares? So the
LORDE gaue a louynge and a confortable answere, vnto the angel that talked with me.
And the angel that commoned with me, sayde vnto me: Crie thou, and speake, thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: I am exceadynge gelous ouer Ierusalem and Sion, and sore dis- pleased at the carelesse Heithen: for where as I was but a litle angrie, they dyd their best that I might destroye them. Therfore thus

^ Osee 14, a. Tob. 13. b. ? Eze. 33. b. Iere. 44. a. 35. c. 
* Zach. 6. a. Apo.6.a. 4 Tere. 25. b. 29. b. 1 Esd. 1. a. 
*Zach.8.u. — / Dan. 7. d. € Eve. 43. b. Apo. 21. c. 

The prophet Zacharp, 

Chap. ij. saieth the LORDE: “I wil turne me agayne in mercy towarde lerusalem, so that my house shalbe buylded in it, saieth the LORDE of hoostes: yee and the plommet shal be layed abrode in Ierusalem, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.

Crie also, and speake: thus saieth the 
LORDE of hoostes: My cities shall be in good prosperite agayne, the LORDE shall yet conforte Sion, and chose Jerusalem.
'Then lift I vp myne eyes and sawe, and be- holde, foure hornes. And I sayde vnto the angel, that talked with me: what be these? he answered me: / These are y hornes, which haue scatred luda, Israel and lerusalem abrode. And ¥ LORDE shewed me iiij. car- penters. "Then sayde I: what wil these do?
He answered, q sayde: Those are the hornes, which haue so strowed Iuda abrode, that no man durst lift vp his heade: But these are come to fraye them awaye, and to cast out y hornes of the Gentiles, which lift vp their horne ouer the londe of Iuda, to seatre it abrode.

The ij. Chapter. 

LIFT vp myne eyes agayne, q loked:|Q 

and beholde, ĉa man with a measure lyne in his honde. Then saide I: whether goest thou? And he sayde vnto me: To measure
Ierusalem, that I maye se how longe and how brode it is. And beholde, the angel that talked with me, wente his waye forth. Then wéte there out another angel to mete him, q sayde vnto him: Runne, speake to this yonge man, q saye: lerusalem shal be inhabited without eny wal, for y very multitude of people q eatell, y shal be therin. “Yee I my- self (saieth the LORDE) wil be vnto her a wall of fyre rounde aboute, q wilbe honoured in her.

O get you forth, O fle from the londe of y north (saieth the LORDE) ye, ‘whom I haue scatred in to the foure wyndes vnder heaué, saieth the LORDE. Saue thy self, o Sion: thou that dwellest with y doughter of Babilon, for thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes:|33
‘With a glorious power hath he sent me out to the Heithé, which spoyled you: for who so toucheth you, shal touche the aple of his

^ Deut.4.d. Zach. 9. a. * Tere. 23. b. k Tere, 2. a. 
20. d. 30. c. Psal. 16. b. Esa. 14. a. 

Chap. b. 

owne eye. Beholde, I will lift vp myne honde ouer them: so that they shal be spoyled of those, which afore serued them: q ye shal knowe, that the LORDE of hoostes hath sent me.

“Be glad, q reioyce, o doughter of Sion: for lo, I am come to dwell in the myddest of the, saieth the LORDE. At the same tyme there shal many Heithen cleue to the
LORDE, q shal be my people. Thus wil I dwel in the myddest of the, q thou shalt knowe, that the LORDE of hoostes hath sent me vnto the. The LORDE shall haue Iuda in possession for his parte in the holy grounde, q shal chose Ierusalem yet agayne. ^Let all flesh be still before the LORDE, for he is rysen out of his holy place.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND he shewed me Iesua y hye prest, 

*stondinge before the angel of the 
LORDE, and Satan stode at his right honde to resiste him. And the LORDE sayde vnto Satan: The LORDE reproue the (thou
Satan) yee the LORDE that hath chosen lerusalem, reproue the. Is not this a brande take out of the fyre? Now Iesua was clothed in vnclene rayment, and stode before the angel: which answered q sayde vnto those, y stode before him: take awaye y foule clothes from him. And vnto him he sayde: Beholde,
I haue také awaye thy synne from the, a wil decke the with chaunge of raymét. He sayde morouer: set a fayre myter vpon his heade.
So they set a fayre myter vpon his heade, « put on clothes vpon him, and the angel of $
LORDE stode there. "Then the angel of the 
LORDE testified vnto Iesua, q spake, thus sayeth the LORDE of hoostes: Yf thou wilt walke in my wayes, q kepe my watch: thou shalt rule my house, x kepe my courtes, q I wil geue the place amoge these that stonde here. Heare o Iesua thou hye prest, thou a thy frendes that dwell before the, for they are woderous people. Beholde, ^I will bringe forth the braunch of my seruaunt: for lo, the stone that I haue layed before Iesua: vpon one stone shalbe vij. eyes. Beholde, I will hewe him out (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and take awaye the synne of that londe in one

° Exo. 25.a. Matt. 28. c. è? Soph. 1. b. * Psal. 
108.a. Matt. 4. a. Jude 1. b. 4 Esa. 47. a. Zach. 6. b. lere. 23. a. 33.c. Esa. 28. c. 1 Pet. ?.a. Esa, 53. a.

Che prophet Zacharp. 

Fo. nrerbij. 

daye. Then shall euery man call for his neghboure, vnder the vyne q vnder ý fyge tre, saieth the LORDE of hoostes.

The iiij. Chapter. 

ND y angel that talked with me, came|q 
A agayne, q waked me vp (as a man that is raysed out of his slepe) q sayde vnto me:
What seist thou? And I sayde: I haue loked, and beholde : a candelsticke all of golde, with a boll vpon it « his vij. lampes therin, “q vpon euery lampe vij. stalkes: And ij. olyue trees therby, ove vpon the right syde of the boll, a the other vpon the left syde. So I answered, q spake to the angel y talked with me, sayenge:
O my lorde what are these? The angel that talked with me, answered gq sayde vnto me: knowest thou not what these be? And I sayde: No, my lorde. He answered, q sayde vnto me: This is the worde of the LORDE vnto Zorobabel, sayenge: Nether thorow an hoost of men, ner thorow strégth, / but thorow my sprete, saieth $ LORDE of hoostes. What art thou (thou greate mountayne) before
Zorobabel? thou must be made eauen. “And he shal bringe vp the first stone, so that men shall crie vnto him: good lucke, good lucke.

Morouer, the worde of the LORDE came| 33 vnto me, sayenge: *The hondes of Zorobabel haue layed y foundacion of this house, his hondes also shal fynishe it: that ye maye knowe, ‘how that the LORDE of hoostes hath sent me vnto you. For he that hath bene despysed a litle season, shal reioyce, whé he seyth the tynne weight in Zorobabels honde.
The vij eyes are the LORDES, which go thorow the hole worlde. ‘Then answered I, q sayde vnto him: What are these two olyue trees vpon the right and left syde of the can- dilsticke? I spake morouer, q sayde vnto him: what be these ij. olyue braunches which
(thorow y two golden pipes) emptie them selues in to the golde? He answered me, q sayde: knowest thou not, what these be?
And I sayde: No, my lorde. Then sayde he. These are the two olyue braunches, ^that stonde before the ruler of the whole earth.

The b. Chapter. 
SS I turned me liftynge vp myne eyes, a! à 

loked, x beholde, a flyenge boke. And 
*Àpo.11.a. Z Esa 11,2. € Esa.98.c. ^ Phi. 1.a. 
' Deut. 18. d. * Apoc. 11. a. 

Fo. Deccbditj. 

B 

he sayde vnto me: what seist thou? I an- swered: I se a flyenge boke of xx. cubites longe q x. cubites brode. ‘Then sayde he vnto me: This is the curse, y goeth forth ouer the whole earth : For all theues shalbe iudged after this boke, x all swearers shalbe iudged acordinge to the same. I wil bringe it forth (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) *so y it shal come to the house of the thefe, q to the house of him, that falsely sweareth by my name : q shal remayne in his house, t cosume it, with the tymbre q stones therof. The the angel that talked with me, wente forth, q sayde vnto me: lift vp thine eyes q se, what this is y goeth forth. And I sayde: what is it? He answered: this is a measure goinge out. Hesayde morouer: Kuen thus are they
(y dwell vpon the whole earth) to loke vpon. 
And beholde, there was lift vp a talent of leade: a lo, a woman sat in the myddest of the measure. And he sayde: This is vngod- lynesse. So he cast her in to the myddest of the measure, q threwe ¥ lompe of leade vp in to an hole.

Then lift I vp myne eyes, q loked: q be- holde, there came out ij. women, ¢ the wynde was in their wynges (for they had wynges like the wynges of a Storke) q they lift vp the measure betwixte the earth q the heauen.
Then spake I to the angel, y talked with me: whyther wil these beare the measure? And he sayde vnto me : ^in to the londe of Synear, to buylde them an house: which when it is prepared, the measure shall be set there in

his place. 

OROUER I turned me, liftynge vp 
M myne eyes, q loked: q beholde, there came iiij. charettes out fro betwixte two hilles, which hilles were of brasse: “In the first charet were reade horse, In the secode charet were blacke horse, In ¥ thirde charet were whyte horse, In y fourth charet were horses of dyuerse colours, q stronge. Then spake I, and sayde vnto the angel that talked with me:
O lorde, what are these ? The angel answered, q sayde vnto me: “These are the iiij. wyndes of the heauen, which be come forth to stode before the ruler of all y earth. That with the blacke horse wente in to the londe of the

The bi. Chapter. 

* 2 Thes. 2, b, Rom. 1. d. * Gen. 10. b. 

The prophet Zacharp, 

‘Bethel for to praye before that they shulde saye vnto the prestes, which
| were in the house of the LORDE of hoostes, 

north, q the whyte folowed thé, and the sprekled horses wente forth towarde the south.
These horses were very stronge, q wente out: and sought to go and take their iourney ouer the whole earth. And he sayde: get you hence, and go thorow the worlde. So they wéte thorow out the worlde. Then cried he vpon me, and spake vnto me, sayenge: Be- holde, these that go towarde y north, shal still my wrath in the north countre.

And the worde of the LORDE came vnto|33 

me, sayenge: ‘Take of the presoners that are come from Babilon: namely, Heldai, Tobias and Idaia: q come thou the same daye, and go in to the house of Iosias the sonne of
Sophony. ‘Then take golde and syluer, and make erownes therof, and set them vpon the heade of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, the hie prest, and speake vnto him: 'Thus saieth the
LORDE of hoostes: Beholde, the man whose name is the braunch: ‘a he that shall springe vp after him, shal buylde vp the temple of the LORDE: yee euen he shall buylde vp the temple of the LORDE. / He shal beare the prayse, he shall syt vpon the LORDES trone, and haue the dominacion.

* A prest shall he be also vpon his trone, q a peaceable councell shalbe betwixte them both. And the crownes shal be in the temple of the LORDE, for a remembraunce vnto
Helem, Tobias, Idaia and Hen the sonne of 
Sophony. And soch as be farre of, shal come and buylde the temple of the LORDE: that ye maye knowe, how that the LORDE of hoostes hath sent me vnto you. And this shal come to passe, yf ye wil herken diligently vnto the voyce of the LORDE youre God.

The bij. Chapter. 

T happened also in the fourth yeare ofi A 

kynge Darius, that the worde of the 
LORDE came vnto Zachary in the fourth daye of the ix. moneth, which is called Casleu : what tyme as Sarasar and Rogomelech and the men that were with them, sent vnto

LORDE: and 

and to the prophetes : ê Shulde I wepe in the fyfte moneth, and absteyne, as I haue done now certayne yeares? ‘Then came the worde

* Zach. 

1.b. Apo. 6.a. 4 Tere. 4, b. ¢ Zacb. 3. b. Psal. 126.a. ^ 4 Re. 25. b. 

f ÀÁpo.4. b. 5. b. € Psal. 109. a. Heb. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 

Chap, bi. 

1 

Chap. biij. of the LORDE of hoostes vnto me, sayenge :
Speake vnto all the people of the londe, and to the prestes, and saye: when ye fasted and mourned “in the v q vij moneth (now this
Ixx. yeares) dyd ye fast vnto me? When ye ate also and dronke, dyd ye not eate and drinke for youre owne selues? Are not these the wordes, which the LORDE spake by his prophetes afore tyme, when lerusalem was yet inhabited and welthy, she and the cities rounde aboute her: when there dwelt mē, both towarde the south and in the playne countrees ?

And the worde of the LORDE came vnto 
Zachary, sayenge: Thus saieth $ LORDE of hoostes: Execute true iudgment: shewe mercy and louynge kyndnesse, ^euery man to his brother: Do the wyddowe, the fatherlesse, the straunger, and poore no wronge: and let no man ymagen euell agaynst his brother in his hert. *^Neuertheles they wolde not take hede, but turned their backes, and stopped their eares, that they shulde not heare, yee they made their hertes as an Adamant stone, lest they shulde heare the lawe q wordes,
*which the LORDE of hoostes sent in his holy sprete by the prophetes afore tyme.

Wherfore the LORDE of hoostes was very wroth at them. And thus is it come to passe,
‘that like as he spake and they wolde not heare: euen so they cried, and I wolde not heare (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) but scatered them amonge all Gentiles, whom they knewe not. Thus the londe was made so desolate, y there traualed no man in it nether to ner fro, for that pleasaunt londe was vtterly layed waist.

The biij. Chapter. 

‘\O the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge : Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: I was in a greate gelousy ouer Sion, yee I haue bene very gelous ouer her iu a greate displeasure. thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: I wil turne me agayne vnto Sion, and wil dwel in the myddest of Ierusalem: so that Ierusalem shalbe called a faithfull and true cite, the hill of the LORDE of hoostes,

yee an holy hill. 
'Thus saieth the 

39 

LORDE of hoostes: 

* fere. 41. a. 4 Re. 25. d. 
Leui. 19. g. Iob 24. a. Tere. 7. a. 
1. d. * Tere. 11. b. S Esa. 1. d. 

c Jere.7. c. 4 9 Pet. 

The prophet Zarharp. 

hoostes: Beholde, I wil delyuer my people 

brynge them agayne : that they maye dwel at 

nesse. let youre hondes be stronge, ye that now

6 Zach. 8. c. Exo. 22. c. 
£ Mat. 19. d, 

So. Deecir. 

There shall yet olde men and women dwel agayne in the stretes of Ierusalem: vee and soch as go with staues in their hondes for very age. The stretes of the cite also shalbe full of yonge boyes and damselles, playnge vpon the stretes.

Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: yf the residue of this people thynke it to be vn- possible in these dayes, shulde it therfore be vupossible in my sight, * sayeth the LORDE of hoostes? Thus saieth the LORDE of

from the londe of the east and west, and wil 

lerusalem. ^'Phey shalbe my people, and I will be their God, in treuth and rightuous-
Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes : 

heare these wordes by the mouth of the pro- phetes, which be in these dayes that the foundacion is layed vpon the LORDE of hoostes house, that the temple maye be buylded. For why? before these dayes ne- ther men ner catel coude wynne eny thinge, nether might eny man come in and out in rest, for trouble: but I let euery man go agayust his neghboure.

Neuerthelesse I wil now intreate the resi- due of this people nomore, as afore tyme
(saieth the LORDE of hoostes) but they shalbe a sede of peace. ‘The vynyarde shal geue hir frute, the grounde shal geue hir increase, and the heauens shal geue their dew: and I shal cause the remnaunt of this people, to haue all these in possession. And it shall come to passe, that like as ye were a curse amonge the Heithen (O ye house of
Iuda and ye house of Israel) Euen so wil I delyuer you, that ye shalbe a blessynge: feare not, but let youre hodes be stronge.

For thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes : like as I deuysed to punysh you, what tyme as youre fathers prouoked me vnto wrath
(sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) and spared not: Euen so am I determed now in these dayes, for to do wel vnto the house of Iuda and lerusalem, therfore feare ye not. Now the thinges that ye shal do, are these: ‘Speake euery man the treuth vnto his neghboure, execute iudgment truly and peaceably within

^ Tere. 3. f. 

Heb.8.c. Apo. 21. c. ' Age. 1. a. 
AOAC cece 5 

! Ephe. 4. c. Zacb. 7. b. Mala. 2. b 

105 

Fo. derer 

| a HE worde of the LORDE shalbe re-

youre portes, none of you ymagyn euell in his hert agaynst his neghboure, and loue no false oothes: for all these are the thinges that I hate, sayeth the LORDE. And the worde of the LORDE of hoostes came vnto me, sayenge : thus sayeth the LORDE of hoostes:
The fast of the fourth moneth, the fast of the fifth, the fast of the seuenth, and the fast of the tenth, shal be ioye and gladnesse, ¢ pros- perous hye feastes vnto the house of luda:
Only, loue the treuth and peace. 

‘Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: There shall yet come people, and the inhabiters of many cities: and they that dwell in one cite, shal go to another, sayenge: " Vp, let vs go, and praye before the LORDE, let vs seke the
LORDE of hoostes, I wil go with you. Yee moch people and mightie Heithen shal come and seke the LORDE of hoostes at Ierusa- lem, and to praye before the LORDE. Thus saieth the LORDE of hoostes: In that tyme shal ten men (out of all maner of languages of the Gentiles) take one Iewe by the hemme lof his garment, and saye: we wil go with you, for we haue herde, that God is amonge you.

The iy. Chapter. 

ceaued at Adrach, q Damascus shal be 
‘his offerynge: for the eyes of all mé and of the trybes of Israel shall loke vp vnto the
|LORDE. The borders of Hemath shal be harde therby, Tyrus also q Sidon, for they are very wise. * Tyrus shal make hirself stronge, heape vp syluer as the sonde, and golde as the claye of the stretes. Beholde, the LORDE shal take her in, and haue her in possession : he shal smyte downe hir power in to the see," and she shalbe consumed with fyre. This shal Ascalon se, and beafrayed. Gaza shalbe very sory, so shal Accaron also, “because hir hope is come to confucion. For the kinge of
Gaza shall perish, and at Ascalon shal no man 
| dwel. 
| Straugers shall dwel at Aszdod, q as for y pryde of y Philistynes, I shal rote it out.
'Their blonde will I take awaye from their mouth, *aud their abhominaciós from amonge their teth. ‘Thus they shal be left for oure
God, yee they shalbe as a prynce in Iuda, ¢ 

3 Esa. 2.a. Psal. 121. a. 
* Exo. 14. c. 
1 Cor. B. a. 10. c. 

Iere. 31. a. è Ioel 3. a. 
4 Tere. 47. a. Amos 1. b. e Áct. 15. d. f Esa. 62. c. Matt. 21. a. Ioh. 12. b.

Che prophet Zacharp. 

Accaron like as Iebusi. And so will I com- pase my house rounde aboute with my men of warre, goinge to and fro: that no oppressoure come vpon them eny more. For that haue I sene now with myne eyes.

Reioyce thou greatly, o doughter Sion: be glad, o doughter Ierusalem. ^For lo, thy kinge commeth vnto the, euen the rightuous and Sauioure: Lowly and symple is he, he rydeth vpon an asse, and vpo the foale of an asse. [wil rote out the charettes fro Ephraim,
& the horse from lerusalem, the batel bowes shal be destroyed. He shall geue the doctryne of peace vnto the Heithen, “and his dominion shalbe from the one see to the other, q from the floudes to the endes of the worlde.

Thou also thorow the bloude of thy coue- naunt: “shalt let thy presoners out of the pytte, wherin is no water. Turne you now to the stronge holde, ‘ye that be in preson, a longe sore to be delyuered: And this daye I bringe the worde, that I wil rewarde the dubble agayne. For Iuda haue I bent out as a bowe for me, and Ephraim laue I fylled.

Thy sonnes (o Sid) wil I rayse vp agaynst the Grekes, and make the as a giauntes swearde: the LORDE God shalbe sene aboue the, and his dartes shall go forth as the lightenynge. The LORDE God shall blowe the trompet, and shal come forth as a storme out of the south.

*The LORDE of hoostes shall defende the, they shall consume and deuoure, and subdue them with slynge stones. They shal drynke q rage, as it were thorow wyne. ‘They shalbe fylled like ý basens, q as y hornes of y aulter. ‘The LORDE their Goll shal delyner the in y daye, as the flock off his people: for the stones off his Sanctuary shalbe set vp in his lade. O how prosperous and goodly a thynge shall that be? ‘The corne shall make the yonge men chearefull, and the new wyne the maydens.

The y. Chapter. 
RAYE the LORDE then by tymes to geue you the latter rayne, so shall the
LORDE make cloudes, 'and geue you rayne ynough for all the inereace off the felde: For vayne is the answere of Idols. The soyth-

' Rom. 8. c. 

£ Psal. 71. b. ^ Esa. 42. a. Apo. 9. a. 
! Deu. 28. c. 

* Zach. 2. a. Ecci. 47. a. 1 Re. 17. f. 

Chap. tr. 

35 

‘Chap. ri. 

PS] 

the comforth that they geue, is nothynge worth. 
Therfore go they astraye like a flocke of shepe, 
àd are troubled, because they haue no shep- herde. ^ My wrothfull displeasure is moued at the shepherdes, and I will vyset the goates.
For the LORDE of hoostes wil graciously 

vyset his flocke (the house of Iuda) and holde: 

them as a goodly fayre horse in the batell. 
’ Out of Iuda shal come the helmet, the nale, the batelbowe, and all the princes together.
They shalbe as the giauntes, which in the batell treade downe the myre vpon ? stretes.
They shal fight, for $ LORDE shalbe with them, so that the horsmen shalbe confounded.

I wil coforte the house of luda, and pre- serue the house of loseph. I wil turne them also, for I pytie them: and they shal be like as they were, when I had not cast them of.
For I the LORDE am their God, and wil heare them. Ephraim shalbe as a giaunt, and their herte shalbe cherefull as thorow wyne: Yee their children shal se it, and be glad, and their herte shal reioyce in the
LORDE. I wil blowe for them q gather them together, for 1 wil redeme them. ‘They shall inereace, as they increased afore. I wil sowe thé amonge the people, y they maye thinke vpo me in farre countrees : they shal lyue with their childré, and turne agayne.
I wil bringe them agayne also from the londe of Egipte, and gather them out of Assiria. I wil carye them in to y londe of Galaad and to Libanus, and they shal wante nothynge.
He shall go vpon the see of trouble, and smyte the see wawes: so y all the depe floudes shalbe dryed vp. ‘The proude boost- inge “of Assur shalbe cast downe, and the scepter off Egipte shall be taken awaye. I will comforte them in the LORDE, that they maye walke in his name, saieth the LORDE.

The ri. Chapter. 

PEN thy dores (o Libanus) that the 

fyre maye consume thy Cedre trees. 
Howle ye Fyrre trees, for the Cedre is falle, yee all y proude are waisted awaye. Howle
(o ye oke trees of Baasan) for y mightie stronge wod is cut downe. Men maye heare the shepherdes mourne, for their glory is destroyed.
Me maye heare the lyons whelpes roare, for the pryde off Iordane is waisted awaye.

a Eze. 13. a. è Esa. 22. d, Gen. 49. b. 

The prophet Zzacbary. 

ee ee ees E a eee sayers se lyes, and tell but vayne dreames:

Thus sayeth the LORDE my God: Fede the shepe of y slaughter, which shalbe slayne of those that possesse them: yet they take it for no synne, but they y sell thé, saye: The
LORDE be thanked, ] am rich: Yee their owne shepherdes spare them not. Therfore wil I nomore spare those that dwell in the londe (sayeth the LORDE) but lo, I will delyuer the people, euery man in to his negh- bours honde, and in to the hode of his kynge: that they maye smyte the londe, and out oft their hondes wil not I delyuer them.

I myself fedde y slaughter shepe (a poore flocke verely) ad toke vnto me two staues: ithe one | called louynge mekenesse, the other
|I called wo, and so I kepte the shepe. Thre ishepherdes destroyed I in one moneth, for 1
(might not awaye with them, nether had they 
Jeny delyte in me. Then sayde I : I will fede 
| you nomore, “the thinge that dyeth, let it dye : and that wil perishe, let it perish, q let the rénaunt eate, euery one the flesh of his negh- boure. I toke also my louynge meke staff, ad brake it, that I night disanull the conuenaunt, which I made with all people, And so it was broken in that daye.

Then the poore symple shepe that had a 
‘respecte vnto me, knewe therby, that it was the worde of the LORDE. And I sayde vnto them: yff ye thynke it good, brynge hither my pryce: yfno, then leaue. So they wayed downe xxx. syluer pens, y value that I
[was prysed at. * And the LORDE sayde 
|vnto me: cast it vnto the potter (a goodly pryce for me to be valued at of them) and I toke the xxx. syluer pens, and cast them to the potter in the house of the LORDE.
| Then brake I my other staff also (namely 
[wo) that I might lowse the brotherheade be- twixte Iuda and Israel. And the LORDE sayde vnto me: Take to the also the staff off a foolish shepherde: for lo, I will rayse vp a

shepherde in the londe, which shall not seke|. 

after the thinges that be lost, ner care for soch as go astraye: he shall not heale the wounded, he shal not norish the thinge that is whole: but he shall eate the flesh off soch as be fat, and teare their clawes in peces.

O Idols shepherde, that leaueth the fiocke. 
The swerde shal come vpon his arme and vpon his right eye. His arme shalbe clene dried vp, and his right eye shalbe sore blynded. e Esa. 10. a. Eze. 29.

d Apo. 22. c. e Matt. 27. a. 

So. dereyi. 

Fo. Deeerij. 

The rij. Chapter. 
The heny burthen which the LORDE hath deuysed for Israel.

HUS saieth the LORDE, which spred 

cion of the earth, and geneth man j breath of life: Beholde, I will make lerusalem a cuppe of surfet, vnto all the people y are rounde aboute her: ^Yee luda himself also shalbe in the sege agaynst lerusalem. At the same tyme will I make Jerusalem an heuy stone for all people, so that all soch as lift it vp, shalbe toarne and réte, and all the people of the earth shalhe gathered togetheragaynst it.

In that daye (sayeth Y LORDE) I wil make all horses abasshed, and those that ryde vpon them, to be out of their wyttes. I will open myue eyes vpon the house of Iuda, ad smyte all the horses of the people with blynd- nesse. And the prynces of Inda shall saye in their hertes: The inhabiters off lerusalem shall geue me consolacion in the LORDE off hoostes their God. “In that tyme will I make the prynees of Iuda like an hote burnynge ouen with wodd, and like a cresshet off fyre amonge the strawe: so that they shal cosume all the people ronde aboute them, both vpon the right honde and the left. Ierusalé also shalbe inhabited agayne: namely, in the same place where Ierusalem stondeth.

The LORDE shall preserue the tentes off 
Iuda like as afore tyme: so that the glory of the house of Dauid and the glory of the cyte- syns of lerusalem, shalbe but htle regarded, in comparison off the glory off Iuda. In that daye shall the LORDE defende the citesyns of lerusalem: sothat the weakest then amonge them shalbe as Dauid: “and the house of
Danid shalbe like as Gods house, and as the angell off the LORDE before them.
€| At the same tyme will I go aboute to de- stroye all soch people as come agaynst Ieru- salem. *Morouer, vpon the house off Dauid and vpon the citesyns off lernsalem, will I poure out the sprete of grace and prayer: ‘so that they shal loke vpon me, whom they haue pearsed: and they shall bewepe him, as men mourne for their only begotten sonne: Yee aud be sory for him, as men are sory for their first childe.

Che prophet Zacharp, 

the heaués abrode, ^layde the founda- 

e Then shall there be a greate mournynge | at lerusalem, like as the lamentacion at Á- dremnon in the felde off Maggadon. ^And the londe shall bewayle, euery kynred by the, selues: The kynred off the house of Dauid them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues: ‘The kynred off the house of Nathan them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues: The kynred off the house of Leui thé selues alone, and their wiues by them selues:
The kynred of the house of Semei them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues: In like maner, all the other generacios, euerychone by them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues.

The riij. Chapter. 

N that tyme shall the house off Dauid and 

the citesyns off Ierusalem haue an open well ‘to wash of synne and vncelenuesse.
And then (sayeth the LORDE off hoostes) 
I will destroye the names of Idols out off the londe: 'so that they shal nomore be put in remembraunce.

"As for the false prophetes also and the vn clene sprete, I shall take them out of the londe: So that yf eny off them prophecy eny more, his owne father and mother that begat him, shall saye vnto him: "'Thou shalt dye, for thou speakest lyes vnder the name off the
LORDE: Yee his owne father and mother that begat him, shall wounde him, when he prophecyeth. And then shall those prophetes be confounded, euery one off his vision when he prophecieth: nether shall they weere sack clothes eny more, to disceaue mé with all.
"But he shall be fayne to saye: I am no prophet: I am an husbonde man, for so am
I taught by Adam fro my youth vp.? And yff it be sayde vnto him: How came these woundes then in thine hondes? He shall answere: ‘Thus am I wounded in the house off myne owne frendes.

? Arise (o thou swearde) vpon my shepherde, and vpon the prynce of my people, sayeth the
LORDE of hoostes: Smyte the shepherde and the shepe shalbe scatred abrode, and so will I turne myne honde to the litle ones.
And itshal come to passe (sayeththe LORDE) that in all the londe two partes shalbe rotedout,

Chap. rij. 

19 

^ Esa. 40. c. 44. e. 45. b, Gen. 2. b. ^ Zac. 14. c. ^2 Par.35.e. '9Re.12.a. ^ Eze. 47. a. Zach. 14. b. 
* Abd. 1. d. Amos 1. a. 4) Re 17. f. — * Eze. 36. d. Tob. 19.d. ! Esa.2. c. Eze.30.c. ™ Iere. 14. c. " Den. 13. b. loel2.f. Act. 2. b. J Ioh. 19, d. € Luc. 23. c. ° Amos ?7.c. P Gen.3.d. 9 Matt. 26. e. Mar. 14. d.

——— MÀ eee 

Chap. riiij. 

“but the thirde parte shalremaynetherin. And the same thirde parte’ wil I brynge thorow the fyre, and will clense them, as the syluer is clens- ed: Yee and trye them, like as golde is tryed.
Then shall they call vpon my name, and I wil heare them: I will saye: it is my people.
And they shal saye: LORDE, my God. 

The riiij. Chapter. 

EHOLDE, the daye of the LORDE cometh, that thou shalt be spoyled and robbed: for I wil gather together all the
Heithen, to fight agaynst Terusalem: so that the cite shalbe wonne, the houses spoyled, and the women defyled. The half of the cite shal go awaye in to captiuyte, and the residue of

the people shal not be caried out of the cite. 
After that shall the LORDE go forth to fight agaynst those Heithen, as men vse to fight in the daye of batell. "The shall his fete stode vpo the mount oliuete, that lieth vpon the east syde of Ierusalé. And y mount oly- uete shal cleue in two, eastwarde, q westwarde so y there shal be a greate valley: q the halff mount shal remoue towarde the north, and

the other half towarde the south. 

And ye shall fle vnto the valley of my hilles, for the valley off the hylles shal reach vnto
Asal. “Yee fle shall ye, like as ye fled for the earthquake in the dayes off Osias kynge of
Iuda. And the LORDE my God shal come, and all sanctes with him. ?In that daye shal it not be light, but colde and frost. This shalbe that specyall daye, which is knowne vnto the LORDE: nether daye ner night, but aboute the enenynge tyme it shal be light.
“In that tyme shall there waters of life rnnne out from Ierusalem: the half parte of them towarde the east see, ad the other half towarde the vttemost see, and shall continue both somer and wynter. /And the LORDE him- self shalbe kynge ouer all the earth.

At that tyme shal there be one LORDE only, and his name shalbe but one. Men shal go aboute the whole earth, as vpon a felde: from Gibea to Remmon, and from y south to lerusalem. “She shalbe set vp, and inha- bited in hir place: From Ben Iamins porte,

* Amos 9. b. è Iob 23.a. Esa. 43. a. Psal, 16. a. 
25. a. 65.b. 1 Pet. 1.b. Pro.17.a. Sap. 3.a. Eccli. 2. a. 

|e Amos 1.a, 2 Matt. 24.c. ¢Zach.13.a. Apoc. 22. a. 

Cbr prophet Zarharp. 

Fo. nerit. vnto the place of the first porte, ^and vnto ¥ corner porte: and from the tower of Handel vnto the kynges wyne presses. There shall men dwell, and there shal be nomore cursinge, but lerusalem shalbe safely inhabited.

This shalbe the plage, wherwith y LORDE € 

| wil smyte all people, that haue fought agaynst 

Ierusalem : Namely, their flesh shall consume awaye, though they stonde vpon their fete: their eyes shall corruppe in their holes, and their tunge shal consume in their mouth.

In that daye shall the LORDE make a 

greate sedicion amoge them, so that one mà shal take another by the honde, and laye his hondes vpon the hondes of his neghboure. i Iuda shal fight also agaynst lerusalem, ad the goodes of all the Heithen shalbe gathered together rounde aboute : golde and syluer and a very greate multitude off clothes. And so shal this plage go ouer horses, mules, camels, asses and all the beastes that shall be in the hooste, like as yonder plage was.

Euery one that remayneth then of all y people, which came agaynst lerusalem, shal go vp yearly, to worshipe the kynge (euen y
LORDE of hoostes) ^and to kepe the feast off tabernacles. And loke what generacion vpon earth goeth not vp to Ierusalem, for to worshipe the kynge (euen the LORDE of| B hoostes) vpon the same shal come no rayne.
Y the kynred of Egipte go not vp a come not, it shall not rayne vpon them nether.

This shalbe the plage wherwith y LORDE wil smyte all Heithen, that come not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles: Yee this shalbe the synneplage of Egipte and the synneplage of all people, that go not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles.

At that tyme shal the rydinge geer of $ horses be holy vnto the LORDE, and the} kettels in the LORDES house shal be like the basens before the aulter: yee all the kettels in lerusalem and Iuda, shalbe holy vnto the LORDE of hoostes: and all they that slaye offeringes, shall come and take of them, and dight them therin. And at that tyme there shal be no mo Cananites in the house of the LORDE.

J Abd. 1. d. £ Iere. 31, f. ^ 3 Esd. 3. a. k Nu. 29. b. Leui.23.f. 3 Esd. 5. e.

| 

! Zach. 12.2. 
2 Mac. 1. b. 

| The ende off the prophet Zacharp. 

a 

| Wihat Malachy contepneth. 

Chay. I. 

The benefites of God, shewed specially vnto 
Israel before all other: Agayne, the punysh- ment of the vnthanfulnesse, vnfaithfulnesse and covetousnesse of the prestes and the people.

Chap. Il. 
He threatneth punyshment and confucion vnto 

The first Chapter. 

The heuy burthen which the LORDE sheweth agaynst Israel by Malachy.

HAUE loued you, sayeth y LORDE: ad 
I yet ye saye: wherin hast thou loued vs? 
Was not Esau lacobs brother, sayeth the 
LORDE? yet haue I loued Iacob, and hated 
Esau: * Yee I haue made his hilles waist, and his heretage a wyldernesse for dragós. And though Edom sayde: well, we are destroyed, we wil go buylde vp agayne the places that be waisted: yet (sayeth y LORDE of hoostes) what they buylded, that brake I downe: ^so that it was called a cursed londe, and a people, whom the LORDE hath euer bene angrie withall.

Youre eyes haue sene it, ad ye youre selues must confesse, that ¥ LORDE hath brought the londe of Israel to greate honoure. Shulde not a sonne honoure his father, and a seruaut his master? Yf I be now a father, where is myne honoure? *yf I be the LORDE, where am I feared? sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.

* Gen. 25. c. Ro. 9. b. Iosu. 24. a. Gen. 36. a. ^ Abd, 
1.2. * Exo. 20. a. Deu. 32. a. 

Che Prophet Malachy. 

the prestes, and commaundeth men to loue their wyues.
Chap. Il. 

Of Christes commynge, and of him that maketh redy his waye before him. Off the abrogacion of the olde leuiticall prestheade. Of the power of the iudge for to come and of that fearfull daye.

Now to you prestes, that despise my name. | 33 
And yf ye saye: wherin haue we despised thy name? [n this, that ye offre vnclene bred vpo myneaulter. And yf ye wil saye: wherin haue we offred eny vnclene thynge vnto the?
In this that ye saye: the aulter of the LORDE is not to be regarded. Yf ye offre y blynde, is not y euell? ‘And yf ye offre the lame and sick, is not that euell? Yee offre it vnto thy prynce, shal he be cotent with the, or accepte thy personne, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes ?

And now make youre prayer before God, that he maye haue mercy vpon vs: for soch thinges haue ye done. Shal he regarde youre personnes (thynke ye) sayeth the LORDE of hoostes? Yee what is he amonge you, that wil do so moch as to shut $ dores, or to kyndle y fyre vpo myne aulter d. naught? I haue no pleasure in you, sayeth the LORDE off hoostes: and as for the meatofferinge, “I wil not accepte it at youre honde. / For from|€ the rysinge vp of y sonne vnto y goinge downe of the same, my name is greate amonge the

4 Leu. 22.c. Eze. 43. e. * Esa. 1. b. f Psal. 112.2. 

Chap. iij. 
Gentiles: Yee in euery place shal there sacri- fice be done, and a clene meatofferinge offred vp vnto my name: for my name is greate amonge the Heithé, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. But ye haue vnhalowed it, in that ye saye, the aulter of y LORDE is not to be regarded, and the thinge that is set thervpon, not worthy to be eaten.

Now saye ye: Itis but laboure and trauayle, and thus hane ye thought scorne at it, (sayeth the LORDE off hoostes) offerynge robbery, yee the lame and the sicke. Ye haue brought me in a meatofferynge, shulde I accepte it of youre honde, sayeth the LORDE? Cursed be the dyssembler, which hath in his flocke one that is male, and when he maketh a vowe, offereth a spotted one vnto the LORDE. For
Iam a greate kynge (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) and my name is fearfull amonge the
Heithen. 

The ij. Chapter. 

ND now (0 ye prestes) this commaunde- 

ment toucheth you: yf ye will not heare it, ner regarde it, to geue the glory vnto my name (sayeth the LORDE off hoostes) ^ I wil sende a curse vpon you, a will curse youre blessinges: yee curse them will I yf ye do not take hede. Beholde, I shal corruppe youre sede, and cast donge in youre faces: euen the donge of youre solempne feastes, and it shal cleue fast vpon you. And ye shall knowe, that I haue sent this com- maundement vnto you: that my couenaunt which I made with Leui, might stonde, sayeth y LORDE of hoostes.

I made a couenaunt of life and peace with him: this I gaue him, that he might stonde in awe of me: and so he dyd feare me, ad had my name in reuerence. The lawe of treuth was in his mouth, and there was no wickednesse founde in his lippes. He walked with me in peace ad equyte, ’and dyd turne many one awaye from their synnes. For the prestes lippes shulde be sure knowlege, that men maye seke the lawe at his mouth, for he is a messaunger of the LORDE of hoostes.
But as for you, ye are gone clene out off the waye, and haue caused the multitude to be offended at the lawe: ‘ye haue broken the

2 Deu. 28. b. ? Num. 25. c. * Deu. 33. b. d Ephe. 4. a. Zac. 7. b. 8. c. *1 Esd. 9. a. Leui.21.c.
"The one. This the interpreters reke to be spoken of 

The prophet Malachy. 

couenaunt of Leui, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. Therfore wil I also make you to be despised, and to be of no reputacion amonge all ý people: because ye haue not kepte my wayes, but bene parciall in the lawe.

‘Haue we not all one father? Hath not one 
God made vs? why doth euery one off vs then despyse his owne brother, and so breake the couenaunt of oure fathers? Now hath
Iuda offended: yee the abhominacion is done in Israel and in Ierusale, for “Juda hath de- fyled the Sactuary of the LORDE, which he loued, and hath kepte the doughter of a straunge God. But the LORDE shal destroye the ma that doth this (yee both the master q the scolar) out off the tabernacle of Iacob, with him that offreth vp meatofferynge vnto the LORDE off hoostes. Now haue ye brought it to this poynte agayne, that the aulter of the LORDE is couered with teares, wepynge and mournynge: so that I will no- more regarde the meatofferynge, nether wil I receaue or accepte eny thinge at youre hddes.

And yet ye saye: wherfore? Euen because that where as the LORDE made a couenaüt betwixte y and the wife off thy youth, thou hast despysed her: Yet is she thyne owne copanyon and maried wife.

So dyd not *the one, q yet had he an ex- cellent sprete. What dyd then the one? He sought the sede promised of God. — 'Therfore loke well to youre sprete, q let no man despyse i wife of his youth. Yf thou hatest her, put

er awaye, sayeth the LORDE God of Israel, and /geue her a clothinge for the scorne, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. Loke well then to youre sprete, and despyse her not. Ye greue the LORDE with youre wordes, and yet ye saye: wherwithall haue we greued him? In this, that ye saye: All that do euell are good in the sight of God, and soch please him. Or els where is the God that punysheth?

The iij. Chapter 
EHOLDE, ‘I wil sende my messaunger, which shal prepare the waye before me: and the LORDE whom ye olde haue, shal soone come to his temple, yee euen the mes- saunger of the couenaunt whom ye longe for.
Beholde, he commeth, sayeth the LORDE 

Abra-ham. 
Mar. 1.a. 

£ Deu. 24. a, 
Luc. 7. c. 

Iere. 3. a. € Matt. 11 b. 
Gen. 4. a. 5. d. Esa. 64. a. 

Fo. Deeerb. 

€ 

ffo. Deeerbi. 

of hoostes. But who maye abyde the daye of 

The prophet Malachy. Chap. ii, 

Ye speake hard wordes agaynst me, sayeth} € 

his commynge? Who shalbe able to endure, when he appeareth? For he is like a gold- smythes fyre, dd like wasshers sope. He shall syt him downe to trye and to clense y syluer, he shal pourge the children of Leui, and purifie them like as golde and syluer: that they maye brynge meatofferinges vnto the
LORDE in rightuousnes. Then shall the offeringe of Iuda and Jerusalem be acceptable vnto the LORDE, like as from the begyn- ninge q in the yeares afore tyme. Iwill come q punysh you, t I my self wil be a swift wytnes agaynst the witches, agaynst the aduouterers, agaynst false swearers: yee àd agaynst those, that wrogeously kepe backe the hyrelynges dewty: which vexe the wyddowes ¢ the father- lesse, ¢ oppresse the straunger, and feare not me, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes. For I am the LORDE y chaunge not, œ ye (o chil- dren of lacob) wil not leaue of: “ye are gone awaye fro myne ordinaiices, t sens y tyme of youre forefathers haue ye not kepte them.

’Turne you now vnto me, and I wil turne me vnto you, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.
Ye saye: Wherin shal we turne? Shulde a man vse falsede and disceate with God, as ye vse falsede and disceate with me? Yet ye saye: wherin vse we disceate with the? In
Tythes and heaue offerynges. ‘Therfore are ye cursed with penury, because ye dyssemble with me, all the sorte of you.

Brynge euery Tythe in to my barne, y there maye be meat in myne house: and proue me withall (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) yf I wil not open the wyndowes of heauen vnto you, and poure you out a blessinge with plenteousnesse. Yee I shal reproue the con- sumer for youre sakes, so that he shall not eate vp the frute of youre grounde, nether shal ¥ vynyarde be baren in the felde, sayeth
$ LORDE of hoostes: In so moch that all people shal saye, that ye be blessed, for ye shall be a pleasaunt lode, sayeth the LORDE off hoostes.

* Leui. 27. d, 
* Iob 21. a, 

a Deu. 31. f. 4Re.17.c. — ^ Zach. 1. a. 

Agg. 1. a. b. 

4 [ob 21. b. Psal. 72. b. 

The ende of the prophet Malachp. 

the LORDE. And yet ye saye: What haue we spoken agaynst the? Ye haue sayed: It is but lost laboure, to serue God: ^What profit haue we for kepynge his commaundementes, and for walkinge humbly before the LORDE off hoostes? Therfore maye we saye, that the proude are happie,’ and that they which deale with vngodlynesse, are set vp: for they tempte
God, and yet escape. 

But they that feare God, saye thus one to another: The LORDE césidreth and heareth it. Yee it is before him a memoriall boke written for soch as eare the LORDE, and remembre his name. And in the daye that I wil make (saieth LORDE of hoostes) they shalbe myne owne possession: and I will fa- uoure them, like as a man fauoureth his owne sonne, that doth hin seruyce. Turne you therfore, and considre what difference is be- twixte the rightuous and vngodly : betwixte him that serueth God, ad him that serueth him not.

For marck, the daye commeth that shall! 33 

burne as an oué: “and all the proude, yee aud all soch as do wickednesse, shalbe straw: and the daye that is for to come, shall burne the vp (sayeth the LORDE of hoostes) so that it shal leaue them nether rote ner braunch.
But vnto you that feare my name, shall the 
Sone of rightuousnesse aryse, « health shal be vnder his winges. Ye shal go forth, ¢ multi- plie as ¥ fat calues. Ye shal treade downe y vngodly: for they shalbe like the asshes vnder the soles of your fete, in the daye y I shal make, sayeth the LORDE of hoostes.
Remembre the lawe of Moses my seruaunt, which I committed vnto him in Oreb: for all
Israel, with the statutes and ordinaunces. 
Beholde, ^I will sende you Elias y prophet: before the cOmynge off the daye of the great and fearful LORDE. He shall turne the hertes of the fathers to their children,’ and the hertes of the children to their fathers, that I come not, and smyte the earth with cursynge.

Tere. 12. a. f Psal. 17. a. 
^ Matt. 11. b. 17. b. 

- € Deu. 4. 5. 9. 
* Luc. 1. a, 

mee O CR Pane 

The Vokes and treatises 

which amonge the fathers of olde are not rekened to br of like authorite with the other bokes of the byble, nether are they fode in the Canon of the Webruc.

The fourth boke of Essdras, 
The boke of Tobias. 

The boke of Judith, 
Certapne chapters of Hester. | 
The boke of C2lpssnomr. 

Ecrlesiasticus, | 
The Storpe of Susanna. 

The Storpe of Bell, | 
The first boke of the Marchabees, | 
The seconde boke of tbe Machabees. | 

The thirde boke of Essnras. 
| 

"Pto these also belongeth Baruc, whom twe fauc set amöge the prophetes next buta 
Hevemp, because he toas His sernbe, and in his tome. 

The transslatoure onto the reaver. 

E bokes (good reader) which be called Apocrypha, are not iudged amonge the doctours to be of like reputacion with the other scripture, as thou mayest perceaue by S. Jerome in epistola ad Paulinum. And the chefe cause therof is this: there be many places in them, that seme to be repugnaunt vnto the open and manyfest trueth in the other bokes of the byble. Neuertheles I haue not gathered them together to the intent that I wolde haue them despysed, or litle sett by, or that I shulde thinke them false, for I am not able to proue it: Yee I doute not verely, yf they were equally conferred with the other open scripture (tyme, place, and circumstaunce in all thinges considered) they shulde nether seme contrary, ner be vntruly q peruersly aledged.
Treuth it is: A mas face can not be sene so wel in a water, as in a fayre glasse: nether cà it be shewed so clearly in a water that is stered or moued, as in a styll water. These q many other darck places of scripture haue bene sore stered and myxte with blynde and cuvetous opynions of men, which haue cast soch a myst afore the eyes of ¥ symple, that as longe as they be not coferred with the other places of scripture, they shall not seme other wyse to be vnderstonde, then as cuvetousnes expoundeth them. But who so euer thou be that readest scripture, let the holy goost be thy teacher, and let one text expounde another vnto the: As for soch dreames, visions and darck sentences as be hyd from thy vnderstondinge, commytte them vnto God, and make no articles of them:
But let the playne text be thy gyde, and the sprete of God (which is the author therof) shal lede the in all trueth.
As for the prayer of Salomo (which thou findest not herin) ¥ prayer of Azarias, and the swete songe that he and his two felowes songe in the fyre: the first (namely the prayer of Salomon) readest thou in the eight chapter of the thirde boke of the kynges, so that it appeareth not to be Apocryphum: The other prayer and songe (namely of the thre children) haue I not founde amonge eny of the interpreters, but onely in the olde latyn texte, which reporteth it to be of Theodotios translacion. Neuertheles, both because of those y be weake and scrupulous, and for their sakes also that loue soch swete songes of thankesgeuinge: I haue not left them out: to the intent that the one shulde haue no cause to complayne, and that the other also might haue the more occasion to geue thankes vnto God in aduersite, as the thre children dyd in the fyre. Grace be with the. Amen.

ee NAM 

Chap. I. 

The vertuous kynge Osias renueth the seruyce of 
God, setteth the prestes in their ordre, and holdeth the feast of Easter. Of his death.
Of Iechonias his sonne. Of kynge loachim and Sedechias.

Chap. II. 

God monethkinge Cyrus todelyuer the presoners, like as he promysed by the prophet leremy.
Of kynge Artaxerses, by whose auctorite the 
Iewes are forbydden to buylde vp Ierusalem. 

Chap. Il. 

Of the feast that kinge Darius made, and of the thre yonge men that wrote euery one his sen- tence, to proue who might saye the best. The first sheweth his mynde.

Chay. HII. | 
The seconde goeth aboute to proue his sentence the wisest, but Zorobabel getteth the victory, for the trueth beareth euer the bell. Darius comaundeth to buylde vp lerusalem agayne.

The thivde boke of 
3:o3uras. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chap. V. 

What they be ¢ how many, that come agayne to 
Ierusalem out of the captiuyte of Babilon. 
The teple and the altare are buylded agayne. 
The Heithen withstonde them. 

Chap. VI. 

The officers in Syria laboure vnto kynge Darius, to forbyd the buyldinge of the temple at Ieru- salem : but he commaundeth to kepe the ordi- naunce that kynge Cyrus made before.

Chap. VII. 

The aduersaries myndes are satisfied, the buyld- inge is fynished, and the Passeouer holden.

Chap. VIII. 

How Eszdras and the other (beinge discharged by the letters and commaüdemet of kinge
Artaxerses) go vp to lerusalem. The com- playnte concernynge those, that were defyled and vncleane.

Chap. IX. 

Of the councell that was taken, as touchinge the 

vncleane mariage. 

The first Chapter. 

ND Iosias helde the feast of Easter in lerusalem vnto the LORDE, ^ and

slewe y Passeouer the xiij. daye of the first moneth. He set y prestes also in ordre
(acordige to their daylie courses) beynge arayed in longe garmétes in the téple of the
LORDE. And he spake vnto the Leuites the holy ministers of Israel, that they shulde

* 2 Par, 25.a. 4 Re. 23. c. 

halowe them selues vnto the LORDE, to set the holy arke of the LORDE, in the house that kynge Salomó the sonne of Dauid had buylded and sayde: Ye shal nomore beare the
Arke vpon youre shulders. Now serue youre 
LORDE, ¢ take the charge of his people of 
Israel, after youre vyllagies and youre trybes: acordinge as kynge Dauid the kynge of Israel hath ordened, q acordinge as Salomon his sonne hath honorably prepared: Yee loke y ye all do seruyce in the temple, acordinge to

the ordringe and distribucion of the prynci- 

The (tj. boke of Essdras, 

pall më which are appoynted out of the trybes, to do seruyce for the childré of Israel. ^ Kyll y Passeouer, « prepare offeringes for youre bre- thren, and do accordinge to the commaunde- mét of y LORDE, which he gaue vnto Moses.
And vnto ý people y was foude, Iosias gaue 
XXX. a, of shepe, lambes, kyddes and goates, q thre thousande oxe. ‘These the kynge (of his kyngly liberalite) gaue vnto the people, acordinge as he had promysed: ¢ to the prestes (for the Passeouer) he gaue two thousande shepe q an hundreth oxé. Mor- ouer lechonias q Semeias and Nathanael brethren, q Hasabias, Iehiel and losabad, gaue them to the Passeouer, fyue thousande shepe and fyue hundreth bullockes.

And whan these thinges were brought to passe, the prestes and the Leuites stode good- ly in their ordre, and had the vnleuended bred thorow out y trybes. And after the ordringe of the pryncipall men in the trybes, they offred vnto the LORDE in the sight of the people, aeordinge as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses, ^a so they rosted the Easter- lambe as acordinge was. As for the thak offeringes q the other, they dight thé in ket- tels q pottes, q sett them before the people with good will, and afterwarde before them selues and the prestes. For the prestes offred the fatt, vntyll the tyme was expyred, but the
Leuites prepared for them selues q for their brethren the childré of Aaron. The syngers also $ children of Asaph stode in their ordre, acor d as Dauid had deuysed. So dyd
Asaph, Zachary q ledithü, which were ap- poynted by the kynge. Morouer the porters q dorekepers stode by the dores q y diligently, so ý none wente out of his stondinge q ser- uyce: for their brethren (the Leuites) pre- pared for them. ‘Thus were all thinges per- fourmed, that belonged to the offringe of the
LORDE. In that daye they helde the 
Passeouer, q offred thank offeringes besyde y sacrifice of y LORDE, acordinge to y co- maundement of kynge Josias.

So the children of Israel which were the present helde an honorable Passeouer, q the feast of swete bred vij: dayes loge. Yee soch a Passeouer was not kepte in Israel, from y tyme of the prophet Samuel. And all the kynges of Israel helde not soch an Easter, as this which kynge Iosias helde, q ¥ prestes, ¥

|: Exo.19.d. ^Exo.12.b. © 4 Re. 25. f. 3 Par. 25. d. 

leuites, ý lewes q all Israel, of all tho y were at lerusale. In y xviij yeare of $ raigne of losias was this Passeouer kepte. And with a parfecte hert dyd kynge Iosias ordre all his workes (before LORDE) a y things y were wrytte of hi in tymes past, cocernynge those
I synned q were vngodly agaynst j LORDE efore all people, a y sought not the

y LORDE vpon Israel. After all these actes of kynge losias Pharao y kynge of Egipte wéte vp, t came towarde * Carcamis by Eu- phrates, q Josias wete to mete hi. Then sent the kynge of Egipte vnto losias, sayenge: what haue I to do with y, o kynge of Iuda?
I am not sent of y LORDE to fight agaynst y; for my warre is upo Euphrates, go thou y waye home agayne in all y haist. And Iosias wolde not turne agayne vpon his charet, but vndertoke to fight agaynst him, q herkened not vnto y worde of y prophet, which he tolde him out of the mouth of God, but pitched a battaill agaynst him in y felde of Mageddo.
And the prynces preassed to kynge losias. 
Then sayde the kynge vnto his seruauntes: 
“Cary me awaye out of the battayll, for I am sore wounded, And immediatly his seruauntes toké him awaye out of the front of the battayll.
Then satt he vp vpon the secode charett, came to lerusale, dyed, q was buried in his fathers sepulcre. And in all Iewry they mourned for Iosias, yee the rulers also with their wyues made lamétacion for him vnto this daye:
And this was done euer still in Israel. 

These thinges are written in the boke of Ð the stories of y kynges of Iuda: namely, all the actes q workes of kynge Josias, his kyngly power q maiesty, his vuderstandinge in the lawe of God, q what he dyd, yee thinges which are not wrytte in the boke of the kynges of
Israel q Iuda. “And y people toke Iechonias the sonne of losias, & made him kynge in y steade of Iosias his father, whan he was xxxiij. yeare olde. And he raigned ouer Israel thre monethes. And the kinge of Egipte put him downe, y he shulde not raigne in Jerusalé, a raysed vp a taxinge of the people: namely, an C. talentes of syluer a one talét of golde.
The kinge of Egipte also made Ioachim his brother kynge of Iuda q Ierusale. As for the of the kinges councell with the kynge himself and Zaraceles his brother, he toke the, q ca- ried the awaye presoners into Egipte. Fyue

d 3 Re. 22. f. * 4 Re. 25. f. 2 Par. 36.a. 

Chap. f. 

Chap. tj. 

ttwentie yeare olde was Joachim, whan he was made kynge in the londe of Iuda and lerusalem, and he dyd euell before the
LORDE. ^ After this, Nabuchodonosor ¥ kynge of Babylo came vp, bounde him wit bandes of yron, q caried him vnto Babilo.
Nabuchodonosor also toke all y vessell y were halowed in the téple of the LORDE, q all $
Jewels, q caried thé vnto Babilon, ¢ brought the in to his owne téple at Babilon. Of his vnclennes ¢ vngodlynes, it is writte in y boke ofthe actes of y kynges. And Joachim his sonne raigned in his steade: He was made kynge beinge xviij. yeare olde, q raigned but thre monethes q x. dayes in lerusale, q dyd euell before the LORDE. So after a yeare,
Nabuchodonosor sent q caused him be brought vnto Babilon with ¥ holy vessels of y LORDE, q made Sedechias his brother kynge of Iuda and lerusale, whan he was xxj. yeare olde: and he raigned xj. yeare.

And he dyd euell also in y sight of y 
LORDE, q cared not for y wordes y were spoke vnto hi by y prophet lens at y mouth of the LORDE. ^ And where as he had made on ooth vnto kynge Nabuchodonosor, he man- swore himself, q fell fro him hauynge a stiff neck ç hert, q trasgressed all ý statutes q or- dinaunces of the LORDE God of Israel.
The rulers also q heades of ý people of the 
LORDE dyd moch euell, x became vngodly, more thë the Heithen, beynge defyled in all maner of abhominacios: Yee « defyled y holy teple of the LORDE at Iernsale. And the

F|God of their fathers sent his messaungers 

vnto the, to turne them backe q to call the agayne fro their synnes: for he wolde fayne haue spared the for his holy tabernacles sake.
Neuertheles, they had his messaungers in derision: q loke what God spake vnto thé by his prophetes, they made but a sporte of it.
This drew on so longe, tyll the LORDE was wroth with his people for their vngodlynes, a tyll he caused the kinges of y Caldees to come vp, which slew their yonge men with the swerde, yee euen in the compasse of their holy téple, q spared no body, nether yonge ner olde, nether mayden ner yonge man: but they were all delyuered in to the power of the kynges of M Caldees, « all the holy vessels of the LORDE and the kynges treasures toke they, q caried them vnto Babilon. ^As
* [ere. 39. 52. 

^ 4 Reg. 24. c. ? Tere. 37. a. 

Che tj. boke of Esdras. 

fo. for the house of the LORDE, they brét it, q brake downe the walles of Ierusalé, set fyre vpon hir towres, destroyed all hir noble buyld- inges and brought them to naught, and the people that were not slayne with the swerde, they caried vnto Babilon.

Thus became they y presoners q bode me of y kynge of Babilon, tyll they were dely- uered q raygned for them selues, when the wordes of the LORDE were fulfilled, which he promysed them by the mouth of the pro- phet Jeremy, and tyll the londe had hir rest:
^namely, all the time y it laye wayest, had it rest q quyetnes Ixxvij. yeares.

The ti. Chapter. 

INE E wha kynge Cyrus raigned ouer the 

Persians, ° q whā the LORDE wolde per- fourme the worde y he had promysed by the mouth of the prophet Ieremy: the LORDE raysed vp the sprete of Cyrus, the kynge of the Persis, so y he caused this wrytinge to be proclamed thorow out his whole realme, sayenge: Thus sayeth the kynge of y Per- sians: The LORDE of Israel that hye
LORDE hath made me kynge of the lode, and commaunded me to buylde him an house at lerusalem in lewry. Yf there be eny now of youre people, ý LORDE be with him, and go vp with him to lerusalem. And all they that dwell rounde abonte y place, shal helpe the, whether 1t be with golde, with syluer, with giftes, with horses and necessary catell, and all other thinges that are brought with a fre wyll to the house of the LORDE at lerusale.

Then the pryncipall mé out of the trybes and vyllages of Iuda and Ben Iamin stode vp: so dyd the prestes also a the leuites (who the LORDE had moued) to go vp, and to buylde the house of the LORDE at Ieru- sale. And they that were abonte them, helped them with all maner of golde, and syluer, and catell also and with many liberall giftes, and this dyd many one, whose mynde was stered vp therto. Kynge Cyrus also brought forth the vessels and ornamentes, that were halowed vnto the LORDE (which
Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon had carled awaye from lerusalem, and conse- crated them to his Idoll and ymage) and delyuered them to Mithridatus his treasurer,

4 Tere. 25. b. and 29. b. * 2 Par. 36. d. 1 Esd., 1. a. | 

b. 

B 

Fo. bj. 

and by him they were delyuered to Salma- nasar y debyte in Iewry. And this was the nobre of them: Two thousande and iiij. C. syluer boules, xxx. syluer basens, xxx. basens of golde, ij. M. and iiij. C. vessels of syluer, and a thousande besyde. All the vessels of golde and syluer were v. M. viij. C. and lx.
These were nombred vnto Salmanasar, and them that were come agayne with him to lerusalé out of the captiuyte of Babilon.
Now in the tyme of kynge Artaxerses the kynge of Persia, these men: Balemus and
Mithridatus, Sabellius, Rathimus, Balthemus, 
Semelius ý scrybe, and other that dwelt in 
Samaria q in other places vnder y dominion therof, Wrote a letter vnto kynge Artaxerses, wherin they complayned vnto the kynge of them in Iewry and Ierusalem. ‘The letter was made after this maner:

Syr, thy seruauntes Rathimus the story wryter, Sabellius the Serybe, q other iudges of thy courte in Celosyria and Phenices.
Be it knowne and manifest to our lorde the kynge, that the Iewes which are come vp fró you vnto vs in to the rebellious and wicked cite, begynne to buylde it agayne, and the walles aboute it, and to set vp the teple of the new. Now yf this cite and the walles therof be sett vp agayne, they shal not only refuse to geue trybutes and taxinges, but also rebell vtterly agaynst the kynge. And for so moch as they take this in hande now aboute the temple, we thought it reason, to thinke no scorne of it, but to shewe it vnto our lorde the kynge, q to certifie him therof: to the intent y yf it please the kinge, he maye cause it be sought in the bokes of olde: and thou shalt fynde soch warnynge wrytten, and shalt vnderstonde, that this cite hath allwaye bene rebellious and disobedient, that it hath subdued kynges and cities, and that the Iewes which dwell therin, haue euer bene a rebellious, obstinate, vnfaithfull and fight- inge people, for the which cause this cite is waysted. Wherfore now we certifie oure lorde the kynge, that yf this cite be buylded and occupied agayne, q the walles therof set vp a new, thou canst haue no passage in to
Celosyria and Phenices. 

Then wrote the kynge to Rathimus the story wryter, to Balthemus, to Sabellius y scrybe, and to the other officers and dwellers in Syria and Phenices, after this maner: I

Che ty. boke of Esdras, 

Chap. tt. haue red the epistle which thou sentest vnto me, and haue commaunded to make diligent search, and haue founde, that the cite hath euer resisted kynges, that the same people are dishobedient, and haue caused moch warre, q that mightie kynges haue raigned in Jerusalem, which also haue raysed taxinges of Syria and Phenices. Wherfore, I haue commauded those people, that they shal not buylde the cite, that they make no more in it, and that they procede no further with, the bnyldinge: for so moch as it might be the cause of warre, and displeasure vnto kynges.

Now whan Rathymus and Sabellius the scrybe and the rulers in the londe had red the wrytinge of kynge Artaxerses, they gatt them together, and came in all the haist to lerusalem with an hoost of horsemen, and with moch people of fote, and forbad them to buylde. And so they left of from buyldinge of the temple, vnto the seconde yeare of kynge Darius.

The iij. Chapter. 
| 1 YNGE Darius made a greate feast vnto|@ 

his seruaütes, vnto all his courte, q to all the officers of Media and Persia, yee and to all the debytes q rulers that were vnder him, from India vnto Ethiopia, an hundreth q xxvij. countrees. So whan they had eaten, and dronken beinge satisfied, and were gone home agayne, Darius the kynge wente in to his chambre, layed him downe to slepe, and so awaked.

Then the thre yonge men, that kepte the kynges personne, and watched his body, commoned amonge them selues, and spake one to another: Let euery one of vs saye some thinge, and loke whose sentence is wyser and more excellent then the other, vnto him shal kinge Darius geue greate giftes, and clothe him with purple. He shal geue him vessels of golde to drynke in, clothes of golde and coueringes: he shall make him a costly charett q a brydle of golde, he shall geue him a bonet of whyte sylke and a chayne of golde aboute his neck: yee he shal be the seconde q pryncipall nexte vnto kynge Darius, q that because of his wyszdome, and shalbe called y kynges kyns- man.

So euery one wrote his meaninge, sealed it |33 

Chap, iiij. and layed it vnder the kinges pelowe, and sayde: whan the kynge aryseth, we will geue him oure wrytinges: and loke whose worde the kynge and his chefe lordes iudge to be the most wysely spoken, the same shall haue the vietory. One wrote: wyne is a stronge thinge.
The secode wrote: The kynge is stroger. The thirde wrote: wemen haue yet more strength, but aboue all thinges y trueth beareth awaye the victory. Now whan the kynge was rysen vp, they toke their wrytinges and delyuered them vnto him, and so he red them. Then sent he forth to call all his chefe lordes, all the debytes q rulers of the countrees of Media and Persia. And whan they were sett downe in the councell, the wrytinges were red before them. And he commaunded to call for ¥ yonge mē, y they might declare their mean-

ges the selues by mouth. So when they were sent for, and came in, y kynge sayde vnto them: shew vs and make vs to vnder- stode, what the thinges are that ye haue wrytten.

Then beganne the first (which had spoke of the strength of wyne) a sayde: O ye men, wyne is maruelous stroge," and ouercometh them y drynke it: it disceaueth the mynde, « bryngeth both the poore man q y kynge to dotage and vanite. Thus doth it also with the bondman and with the fre, with the poore q rych: it taketh awaye their understondinge, and maketh them careles and mery, so that none of them remembreth eny heuynes, dett or dewtie: It causeth a man to thinke also that ¥ thinge which he doth, is honest and good: and remembreth not that he is a kynge, nor y he is in auctorite, q y he ought not to do soch thinges. Morouer, whan men are drynckinge, they forgett all frendshipe, all brotherly faithfulnes and loue: but as soone as they are droncké, they drawe out the swerde q wil fight: q wha they are layed downe frö the wyne, q so rysen vp agayne, they can not tell what they dyd. Iudge ye now, Is not wyne the strongest? For who wolde els take in hande, to do soch thinges?
And whan he had spoken this, he helde his tonge.

The tit}. Chapter. 

a HEN the seconde (which had sayde, y the kynge was stronger) beganne to

a Pro. 20. a. 

Che ij. boke of Esdras, 

speake, sayege: O ye men, are not they the strongest q most excellent, y eoquere the lode q the see, q all y is in ¥ see q in the earth? Now is the kynge lorde of all these thinges, q hath dominion of thé all: œ loke what he comaüdeth, it is done. Yf he sende his mé forth a warfare, they go and breake downe hilles; walles q towres. ‘They are slayne, q slaye (other men) them selues, q ouer passe not y kynges worde. Yf they get the victory, they brynge the kynge all the spoyle.
Likewyse, the other y medle not with warres and fightinge, but tyll the grounde: whan they reape, they brynge trybute vnto y kynge.
And yf ¥ kynge alone do but cOmaunde to kyll, they kyll: yf he cómaunde to forgeue, they forgeue: yf he comaunde to smyte, they smyte: yf he byd dryue awaye, they dryue awaye: yf he commiaunde to buylde, they buylde: yf he cõmaüde to breake downe, they breake downe: yf he cómaunde to plante, they plate. The comon people a y rulers are obedient vnto him. And ¥ kynge in the meane season sytteth hi downe, eateth and drynketh, q taketh his rest: thé kepe they watch roiide aboute kinge, q not one of the darre gett him out of y waye, to do his owne busynes, but must be obediét vnto $ kinge at a worde. Judge ye now o ye men, how shulde not he go farre aboue, vnto whom men are thus obediét? And whan he had spoké this, he helde his tonge. The thirde
(whose name was Zorobabel, which had spoké of wemen g of y trueth) begane to saye after this maner: O ye mé, it is not ¥ greate kynge, it is not the multitude of mé, nether is it wine y excelleth: Who is it the, y hath y lordshipe ouer thé? Haue not wemen borne the kynge, q all y people y rule these thinges ?
Haue not wemé borne thé, q brought the vp, y plante the vynes, wherout $ wyne cómeth ?

ey make garmétes for all mé, they geue honour vnto all men, q with out wemen can not men lyue. Yf they gather golde q syluer v all precious thinges, q se a fayre q wel fauoured woma, they leaue all together, and turne their eyes onely vnto the woman, q gape vpon her, q haue more desyre vnto her, then vnto the syluer q golde, or eny maner of precious thinge. A mà leaueth his father’ y brought him vp, he leaneth his owne Raal contre, and cleueth vnto the woman: yee he

è Gen. 2.d. Mat. 19.a. 1Cor.6.d. Ephe.5.c. 

B 

Fo. bij.| 

Fo. bij. ioperdeth his life with the woman, and re- membreth nether father, ner mother, ner countre. By this then ye must nedes knowe, y wemen haue y domynion ouer you.

Doth it greue you? A mà taketh his swerde q goeth his waye to steale, to kyll, to murther, to sayle vpon the see, q seyth a lyon, and goeth in the darcknes: and when he hath stollen, disceaued q robbed, he bringeth it vntohisloue. Agayne, a man loueth his wyfe better then father and mother: yee many one there be, that renne out of their wyttes ¢ be- come bondmen for their wyues sakes: many one also haue perished, q haue bene slayne, q haue synned because of wemen.

And now beleue me, I knowe a kynge which is greate in his power, « all lodes stode in awe of him, ¢ no man darre laye hande vpon him: yet dyd I se, y Apame (y daugh- ter of the greate kynge Bartacus) the kynges cécubine, satt besyde the kynge vpo the right hade, and toke of his crowne from his heade, and set it vpon hir owne heade, and smote the kynge with hir left hande. Morouer, the kynge loked vpo her with open mouth: yf she laughed vpon him, he laughed also: but yf she toke eny displeasure with him, the kynge was fayne to flater her, q to geue her good wordes, till he had gotten hir fauoure agayne.

O ye men, are not wemen then stronger? 
Greate is the earth, and hie is the heauen that do these thinges. Then the kynge q the prynces loked one vpon another. So he be- ganne to speake of the trueth: O ye men, are not wemé stronger? Greate is the earth, hye is the heauen, swyft is the course of the
Sonne, he comnaseth the heauen rounde aboute, “and fetcheth his course againe to his owne place in one daye. Is he not excellent that doth this? yee greate is the trueth, and stronger then allthinges. Allthe earth calleth vpon the trueth, the heauen prayseth it, all workes shake and tremble at it, and with it is no vnrighteous thinge. Wine is vnrighteous, the kynge is vnrighteous, wemen are vn- righteous: all the children of men are vn- righteous, yee all their workes are vnrigh- teous, and there is no trueth in them, in their vnrighteousnes also shall they be destroyed and perish. ^As for y trueth, it endureth,
[eun is allwaye stronge: it lyueth, and coquer- eth for euermore worlde without ende.

ê Eccls, 1. a. 

è Esa, 40. a. Psal. 116. a. 

The iij. boke of Essdras. 

teth no difference betwiate rych or poore, be- twixte y mightie or symple, but doth right vnto euery ma, whether they be euel or good, q all men are louyngly dealt withall in the workes of it. In the iudgment of it there is no vnrighteous thinge, but strength, kinedome q power and maiesty for euermore. Blessed be the God of trueth.

And with that he helde his toge, and all y people cried q sayde: Greate is the trueth, and aboue all. Then sayde the kynge vnto him: Axe what thou wilt, more then is ap- poynted in the wrytinge, and I shal geue it the, for thou art founde wyser then thy com- panyons: thou shalt sytt nexte me, and be my kynsman. Then sayde he vnto the kynge:
Remembre thy promyse and vowe, which thou hast vowed and promysed (in the daye whan thou camest to the kyngdome) to buylde vp lerusalem, and to sende againe all the vessels and Jewels, that were taken awaye out of lerusalem: which Cyrus separated, whan he offred in Babilon, and wolde sende them agayne: And thy minde was to buylde vp the temple, which the Edomites bret, whan lerusalem was destroyed by the Caldees.
This onely (O kynge) is the thinge that I requyre, this is y maiesty, which, I desyre q axe of the: that thou perfourme the vowe, which thou with thine owne mouth hast made vnto the kynge of heauen.

Then Darius the kynge stode vp, and|35 kyssed him, and wrote a "letter vnto all the debytes and shreues, to all $ lordes and no- bles, y they shulde conveye him forth, ¢ all them y wolde go vp with him. He wrote a letter also vnto all y shreues y were in
Celosyria q Phenices, q vnto Libanus, y they shulde harle cedre trees from Libanus vnto
Ierusalem, to buylde ¥ cite withall Morouer he wrote vnto all ý eres that were gone out of his realme in to Iewry because of the fre- dome, y no officer, no ruler ner shreue shulde come to their dores: and that all their londe which they had conquered, shulde be fre and not tributary: And that the Edomytes shulde geue ouer the cities and vyllagies of the lewes, which they had taken in: yee q that they shulde yearly geue xx. talétes to y buyl- dinge of the temple, vntill the tyme that it were fynished: and to the daylie halowinge

€ 9 Esd. 2. b. 3 Esd. 6. d. 

Chap. tj. 

The trueth accepteth no personnes, it put-| D 

Chap. b. 

of the brent offeringes (as it is commaunded) ten talentes yearly also: And y all they which come from Babilon to buylde the cite, shulde haue fre lybertie, they q their children, and all the prestes.

Fi He wrote the greatnesse also, q com- 

maunded that the holy garment shulde be geuen thé, wherin they ministred: and wrote that commaundementes shulde be geuen to the Leuites, vntill the daye, that the house were fynished and Ierusalem buylded vp: and comaunded that all they that watched the cite, shulde haue their porcions and wagies.

He gaue ouer also all the vessell y Cyrus had separated from Babilon: qœ all y Cyrus had geué in cómanndement, ¥ same charged he also, y it shulde be done, ¢ sent vnto Ieru- salem. Now whan this yonge mà was gone forth, he turned his face towarde lerusale, q praysed ¥ kinge of heaue, q sayde: Of y cometh “victory, of the cómeth wyszdome q clearnesse, q I am thy seruaunt. Blessed art thou, which hast geuen me wyszdome: the wyll I prayse, O LORDE, thou God of oure fathers.

And so he toke the letters, t wente vnto 
Babilon: And whan he came there, he tolde this vnto all his brethré y were at Babilé, q they praysed ¥ God of their fathers, y he had gené them refreszshinge q lyberte to go vp, x to buylde Ierusalé q the temple (which is there called after the name of the LORDE) and they reioysed with instrumentes q glad- nesse, seuen dayes longe.

The b. Chapter. 

a FTER this, were the prynciall mé of all vyllagies chosen in the trybes q kin- reddes, that they shulde go vp with their wiues and children, with their seruauntes and maydens, with all their catell ¢ substaunce. |
And Darius the kynge sent with them a. thousande horsmen, to conveye them safely vnto Ierusalem: and their brethré were glad, playenge vpon instrumétes, and synginge.
And these are the names of the mé, which wente vp out of the vyllagies acordinge to the trybes. Of the prestes, the sonne of Phi- neas, the sonne of Aaron: Jesus the sonne of Iosedec, Joachim the sonne of Zorobabel? the sonne of Salathiel (of the kynred of Dauid, | out of the kynred of Phares, of the trybe of|

* Eccli. 1. a. ^ Matt. 1. b. 

The itj. boke of Cssdras, 

*Iuda) which spake wonderfull thinges vnder 
Darius the kynge of Persia, in y seconde yeare of his raigne in the first moneth of
Nisan. 

These also are they of Iewry, which came vp and turned Agayne vnto Jerusalem, out of the captiuyte that Nabuchodonosor ¥ kynge of
Babilon had brought vnto Babilon. And euery man sought his porcion agayne in lewry, his cite, they that came with Zoro- babel, and with lesus, Nehemias, Saraias,
Raelaias, Elimeus, Emmanius, Mardocheus, 
Beelserus, Mechpsa, Rochor, Oliorus, Emo- nias, one of their prynces.

And the nobre of thé, acordinge to their kynreddes q rulers, was. The childré of
Phares, two thousande, an hundreth q lxxij. 
The children of Ares, iij. M. an C. and lvij. 
The children of Femo, an C. and xlij. In the sonnes of Iesus and Ioabes, a M. iij. C. and two. The sonnes of Beniu, ij. M. iiij. C. and lss. The sonnes of Choroba, ij. C. and v.
The sonnes of Banica, an C. and lxvij. 
The sonnes of Rebech, iiij. C. and thre. The sonnes of Archad, iiij. C. and xxvij The sonnes of Cham, xxxvij. The sonne of Zoroar, ij. M. and Ixvij. The sonnes of Adinu, iiij. C. and lxj. The sonnes of Adarectis an C. and viij. ‘The sonnes of Ciaso and Zelas, an C. and vij. 'The sonnes of Azorec, iij. C. and xxxix. The sonnes of Iedarbone, an C. and xxxij. The sonnes of Hananias, an C. and xxx. The sonnes of Asoni, xc. The sonnes of Marsar, iij. C. and xxij The sonnes of
Zabarus, xev. The sonnes of Sepholemon, an C. and xxiij. The sonnes of Nepopas, lv.
The sonnes of Hechanatus, an C. and lviij. 
The sonnes of Zebethanus, an C. and xxxij. 
'The sonnes of Crearpatros, (which is called also Enohadies and Modias) iiij. C. and xxiij.
Of them of Gramos and Gabea, an C. and xxj. Of them of Besselon and Ceagge, lxv.
Of them of Bastharus, an C. and xxij Of them of Bechenobes, lv. Of the sonnes of

Liptis, there were an C. and lv. Of the sonnes of Labonnus, iij. C. and lvij. Of the sonnes of Siehem, ij. C. and lxx. Of the

sonnes of Suadon and Elimon, iij. C. and 
Ixxviij. Of the sonnes of Ericus, ij. M. an C. and xlv. The sonnes of Anaas, thre hun- dreth and lxx.

The prestes: The sonnes of Ieddus: The 

* 3 Esd. 4. b. 
107 

Fo. tr. 

a 

sonnes of Euther: The sonnes of El Iasib, iij. C. and Ixxij. The sonnes of Emerus, ij.

The sonnes of Fasurius, iij. C. q 

The sonnes of Carea, ij. C. « xxvij. 
The Leuites: The sonnes of Iesus in Caduhel and Banus, and Serebias, and Edeas, seuentie and foure.
€| The whole nombre of these from xi). yeares, was iij. M. iiij. C. and lxi. Of the sonnes, daughters and wyues, the whole summe was ij. M. ij C. and xlij. The sonnes of the prestes that praysed God in the temple:
The sonnes of Asaph, of whom there were an C. and xxviij. But the dore kepers were:

The children of Esmenus: The children of 

Aser: The children of Amon: The children of Acuba, Topa: The children of Tobi: an
C. and xxxix. in all. 

The prestes that serued in the temple: 
The sonnes of Sel, the sonnes of Gaspha, the sonnes of Tobloch, the sonnes of Caria, the sonnes of Sub, the sonnes of Heliu, the sonnes of Labana, y sonnes of Armacha, y sonnes of Acub, the sonnes of Vtha, the sonnes of
Cetha, the sonnes of Aggab, the sonnes of 
Obay, the sonnes of Anani, the sonnes of 
Canna, ý sonnes of Geddu, ý sonnes of An, y sonnes of Radin, ¥ sonnes of Desanon, the sonnes of Nechoba, the sonnes of Caseba, the sonnes of Goza, the sonnes of Ozul, the sonnes of Sinona, the sonnes of Atra, sonnes of Hastem, ¥ sonnes of Asiana, y sonnes of Manei, y sonnes of Nasisim, y sonnes of Accufa, ¥ sonnes of Agista, ¥ sonnes of Azui, y sonnes of Fauon, the sonnes of
Phasalon, the sonnes of Meeda, the sonnes of 
Susa, the sonnes of Cared, y sonnes of Barcus, the sonnes of Sarea, y sonnes of Coesi, y sonnes of Nasit, y sonnes of Agista, the sonnes of Pedou: Salomon his sonnes, the sonnes of
Asophot, the sonnes of Phazida, the sonnes of Celi, y sonnes of Dedon, the sonnes of
OL the sonnes of Zapheus, ¥ sonnes of Aggia, the sonnes of Sacharet, ¥ sonnes of
Sabathé, the sonnes of Saroneth, y sonnes of 
Malsit, y sonnes of Ania, y sonnes of Sasus, 
ý sonnes of Addus, y sonnes of Suba, $ sonnes 

of Eura, $ sonnes of Rahotis, the sonnes of 

Phasphat, $ sonnes of Malmon. All these mynistred in the Sanctuary, q were seruauntes of Salomon: euen iiij. C. and Ixxxij.

B| These: folowinge are they, y wete vp fro 

abiehsda Gia: 

Che tj. boke of Essdras. 

Chelmellat Thelarsa (whose prynces were 
Carmela « Careth) « might not shewe forth their cities q kynreddes, how they were of
Israel: ‘The sonnes of Dalarus, y sonnes of 
Tubé, y sonnes of Nechodaicus. Of $ prestes y executed y office of ŷ presthode, q were not founde: The sonnes of Obia, ne of
Achisos, the sonues of Addin, which maried one of $ daughters of Phargeleu, q were named, after him. The writinge of y same kynred was sought in y register of their generacion, but it was not foude: and ther- fore were they forbyddé to execute ¥ office of y presthode. Vnto these sayde Nehemias and
Astharas, y they shulde haue no porcion in $ 
Sanctuary, tyll there rose vp an hie prest, y were well instructe in the playne clearnes q trueth. Of all Israel (besyde seruauntes q maydens) there were xlij. M. iij. C. ¢ xl. Now were there of seruauntes q maydens, vij. M. iij. C. and xxxvj. Of synginge më q synginge wemen there were ij. C. q lxv. Foure hundreth q xxxv. Camels. Seuen thousande q xxxvj. horses. Two hundreth thousande a xlv.
Mooles. Fyue thousande and xxxv. Asses. 

Their heades also and the rulers in the trybes, whan they came to Ierusalem, t wolde buylde q sett vp y tēple of God againe in his place, they gaue (after their abylite) vnto the téple, to y treasure q to y seruyce of the
Sactuary, xij. M. poundes of golde, v. thou- sande of syluer, x an hundreth prestes gar- metes. And so dwelt the prestes q the
Leuites, q the people y wente out to Ierusalé q in the countre there aboute, the syngers also a the porters, euery one of Israel in his owne lande.

So whan the seuenth moneth came, and whan the childré of Israel were enery man® at his busines, they came all with one césent in to the courte, which was before $ east dore. And there stode Iesua the sonne of losedee and his brethren ¥ prestes, q Zoro- babel the sonne of Salathiel and his brethren, settinge vp an aulter, to offre breut sacrifices vpon it, as it is written in y lawe of Moses.

There came people also of other countrees, and the Heithen out of all londes set vp the aulter in his place, and offred sacrifices q brent offerynges vnto the LORDE in the mornynge. And so they helde the feast of tabernacles, as it is commaunded in the lawe.’

> Leui, 23. f. 

Chap. b. 

And daylie offred they as acordinge was, and made the sacrifices appoynted, the offeringes also of the Sabbathes and of the new Moones, and all holy feastes. “And all they that vowed offerynges vnto the LORDE, beganne at the new Moone of y seuéth moneth to offre vnto God, for the temple of the LORDE was not yet buylded. And they gaue vnto the Masons and Carpéters, money, meate « drynke with chearfulnesse. Vnto them of
Sydon also and Tyre they gaue cartes, y they shulde cary Cedre trees from Libanus to be ieastes and beames, and that they shulde make shippes in the hauen of Ioppa, acord- inge as it was appoynted and ordeyned, by
Cyrus kynge of the Persians. 

And in the seconde yeare they came in to the temple of God at lerusalem. In the seconde moneth beganne Zorobabel? the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of losedee, and their brethren the prestes and
Leuites, and all they that were come vnto 
Ierusalem out of the captiuyte of Babilon, q layed the foundacion of the temple, in the new Moone of the seconde moneth in the seconde yeare y they were come in to lewry

Fjand lerusalem. And they appoynted the 

Leuites (that were aboue xx. yeare olde) vnto the seruyce of the LORDE: so Iesua and his sonnes and his brethren all the Leuites stode together, and perfourmed the lawe « ordinaunce in the house of the LORDE.
And the prestes stode and had their gar- mentes q trompettes, q the Leuites, the sonnes of Asaph had Cymbals, geuynge thankes, and prayses vnto the LORDE, acordinge as Dauid the kynge of Israel had ordeyned.
And the songe that they dyd synge vnto the 
LORDE, was after this maner: O synge vnto the LORDE; for he is gracious, and his goodnes vpon Israel endureth for euer.
And all the people blew out with trompettes, and sunge with loude voyce, praysynge the
LORDE together in the rearinge vp of the house of the LORDE. There came also from amonge the prestes and Leuites the rulers and elders, acordinge to the trybes and kynreds (soch as had sene the house afore) to the buyldinge of this temple with greate crye and greate mournynge, many also with trompettes and greate ioye: In so

* Eccli. 49. b. and c. d Psal, 135. a.

a 1 Esd. 3. b. * 1 Par. 17. b. 

Cbr ii. boke of Essdras. 

moch, that the trompettes might not wel be herde for the wepynge and mournynge. For the comon people blew goodly vpé the trompettes.

Then came the enemies of the trybes of 
Iuda and Ben Iamin, to knowe what that tropettynge and noyse of shawmes might be.
And they perceaued y it was they which were come agayne out of captiuyte, x wolde buylde the temple a new vnto the LORDE
God of Israel. So they wente to Zorobabel and Iesua and to the rulers of the vyllages, q sayde vnto them: Shal we buylde with you also? for we like wyse haue herde youre
LORDE, q we walke after the same maner, from the dayes of Aszbazareth the kinge of
Assiria, which brought vs hither. "Then 
Zorobabel and Iesua and the rulers of the villages of Israel sayde vnto them: It is not mete, that ye shulde buylde the temple of oure God with vs: we oure selues alone wil buylde vnto the LORDE, like as Cyrus’ the kynge of the Persians hath commanded vs.

But the Heithen in the londe layed them selues against those that were in Iewry, helde vp the buyldinge from them, layed wayte vpó them preuely, stopped soch as brought eny thinge to them, forbad them to buylde, a hyndered those that made thé passage, that the buyldinge shulde not be fynished: q this contynued so longe as kynge Cyrus lyned: q so they put of the buyldinge for the space of two yeare, vntill y raigne of kynge Darius.

The bi. Chapter. 

OT with stondinge, in the seconde yeare of the raigne of Darius,’ Aggeus q
Zachary the sonne of Addo prophecied vpon them in Iewry and Ierusalem, in the name of the God of Israel. Then Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel and Iesua the sonne of
Iosedec stode vp,^ and beganne to buylde the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem, when the prophetes of the LORDE helped them.
At the same tyme came Sysennes the vnder shreue in Syria and Phenices, with the landlordes and his companyons, and sayde vnto them: Who hath bydden q commaunded you to buylde the house? to make the rofe and all other thinges agayne? And who are the workemen, that buylde them? Neuer-

4 1 Esd. 1. a. 
^ Agg. 1. c. 

* 1 Esd, 4. a. € 1 Es. 5. a. 

So. rt. 

& 

a 

fo. ry. 

a 3 Reg. 6. a. 

theles the elders of the lewes had soch grace of the LORDE, that they wolde not be lett
(though they were prouoked therto) but buylded on still, vntill the tyme that kynge
Darius were certified therof, and an answere receaued from him. The letter that these men sent vnto kynge Darius, was after this maner:

Sysennes the vnder shreue in Syria and 
Phenices, and the land lordes with their co- panios, which are head rulers in Syria and
Phenices, sende their salutacion vnto Darius the kynge. We certifie oure lorde the kynge, that we came in to the londe of lewry, q wente to lerusalem : where we founde them buyldinge the greate house of God and the téple, with greate costly fre stone and with goodly tymbre for the walles: yee they make greate haist with the worke, q helpe one another, and it goeth forth prosperously in their handes, and with greate diligence q worshipe is it made. Then axed we the elders, who had comaunded them to make vp the house and the buyldinge: and this we dyd, to ¥ intet that we might certifie the perfectly, and wryte vnto the, the names of those y were $ rulers of the worke. So they gaue vs this answere: we are the seruauntes of the LORDE, which made heauen and earth: q as for this house," it hath bene buylded and set vp afore tyme by the greate and mightie kynge of Israel. But whan oure fathers prouoked God vnto wrath, q synned agaynst the God of Israel, ^he gaue the ouer in to the power of Nabuchodonosor kynge of
Babilon the kynge of the Caldees, which brake downe y honse and brét it, and caried awaye the people presoners vnto Babilon.

Neuertheles, in the first yeare that kynge 
Cyrus reigned at Babilon, Cyrus the kynge wrote and commaunded to buylde vp this house agayne: and all the ornamentes that
Nabuchodonosor caried awaye from lerusalem vnto Dabilon, and appropriated vnto his owne temple: those brought Cyrus forth agayne, and delyuered them to Zorobabel q to Salmanasar the vndershreue, commaund- ynge them, y they shulde brynge those same ornamentes agayne to lerusalé in to ¥ téple, q to begynne from y tyme forth, to buylde the téple agayne in his owne place. 'Thē Sal- manasar layed the foundacion of $ LORDES

? 4 Re. 24. and 25. Iere. 39. 52. 

The iij. boke of (suras, 

house at Jerusalem, and euer sence haue they buylded, q yet is it not ended. And therfore (O kynge) yf thou thynkest it good, let it be sought in the Lybraries q rolles of kynge Cyrus: yf it be founde thé, that it is done with the councell and cosent of kynge
Cyrus, and yf oure lorde y kynge be so mynded, let him wryte vnto vs therof.

Then comaunded kinge Darius, to seke in the Lybraries:* and so at Egbathanis in a litle cite in Media there was founde soch a wrytinge: In the first yeare of the raigne of
Cyrus, the same kynge Cyrus comaunded, y the house of the LORDE at Ierusalem shulde be buylded agayne (q odoures to be made there contynually vnto the LORDE) whose heyth shalbe ten cubites, y bredth lx. cubites q iiij. square with thre hewen stones, with a lofte of tymbre of the same countre, yee with a new loft, q the expenses therof to be geuen of ¥ house of kynge Cyrus. And the orna- métes of golde q syluer, ý Nabuchodonosor toke out of the house of the LORDE at le- rusalem, shalbe set agayne in the temple at lerusale, where they were afore. Sysennes also the vndershreue in Syria and Phenices, j prynces and their companyons, and the other y be head rulers in Syria and Phenices, shall not medle ner haue eny thinge to do with that place.

I Cyrus haue comaunded also, that they shal buylde the house of the LORDE whole vp: q haue ordeyned them, to helpe those y be come out of captiuyte, tyll the house of the LORDE be fynished: q out of the try- bute and taxinge that is yearly raysed vp in
Syria and Phenices, diligently to geue them a certayne summe, to the offerynge of the
LORDE: and the same to be delyuered vnto 
Zorobabel the officer: that he therwithall maye ordeyne oxen, rammes, lambes, q corne, salt, wyne and oyle, and that contynually euery yeare: after the expences which the prestes that be at Ierusalem, shew to be made daylie:* this shalbe geuen vnto them with- out delaye, that they maye offer sacrifices daylie to the hyest God, for the kynge and for his seruauntes, and to praye for their lyues. Let it be proclamed also on euery syde, that who so euer breaketh or despyseth this comaundement of y kynge, shalbe hanged vpon a galow (made of his owne good) « all

t 1 Esd. 5. c. ^1 Esd. 6. a. 3 Esd. 4. c. * 3 Esd. 6. b. 

Chap. bí. 

Chap. biij. 

his goodes shalbe seasoned vuto y kynge. 
The LORDE therfore (whose name is there called vpon) rote out and destroye all y kynges and people, that vndertake by vio- lence to hynder the same, or to deale vncur- teously with the house of the LORDE at Ie- rusalem. I Darius the kinge haue ordeyned, that these thinges shalbe done with all dili- gence.
The bij. Chapter. 

HEN Sysennes y vndershreue in Ce- ale losyria and Phenices, and the other landlordes with their companyons, obeyed the thinges that kynge Darius had ordened, were diligent in the holy workes, & were felow helpers with the olde rulers of the lewes.
And so the worke of the Sanctuary wente forth and prospered, whan Aggeus and Za- chary prophecied. And they perfourmed all thinges thorow the commaundement of the
LORDE God of Israel, and after the deuyce of Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerses kynges of
Persia. 

And thus was oure house fynished, vnto the xxiij. daye of the moneth Addar in y vj. yeare of kynge Darius. And the children of
Israel the prestes ¢ the Lenites, q the other that were come out of captiuyte, v soch as were ioyned vnto them, dyd acordinge as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses. And in the dedicacion of the temple they offred an hun- dreth oxen, an C. rammes, iiij. C. lambes, q xij. goates for the synnes of all the people of
Israel, after ¥ nombre of the trybes of Israel. 
The prestes also q the Leuites stode arayed in the prestly garmétes, after y trybes, oner all Y workes of the LORDE God of Israel, acordinge to ¥ boke of Moses, and the porters by all the dores.

And the children of Israel (with those y were come out of captiuyte) helde the Passe- ouer the xiiij. daye of the first moneth, whan the prestes and the Leuites were sanctified.
They that came out of captiuyte, were not all sanctified together: but the Leuites were all sanctified together. And so all they that came ont of captiuyte, kylled the easter lambe, for their brethré, for the prestes q for them selues. And the childré of Israel y came out of captiuyte, q escaped fro all $ abhomina- cions of the Heithé, sought the LORDE, and kepte the feast of vnleuended bred vij. daies longe, eatinge q drynkynge q were mery be-

The tj. boke of Essdras, 

So. rii. fore the LORDE: ve LORDE had turned the deuyce of the kynge of Assiria, t com- forted their handes to the workes of y LORDE
God of Israel. 

The biij. Chapter. 

ND after him, whan Artaxerses the 

kynge of y Persias raigned,* there wete vnto him Eszdras the sonne of Saraias, the sonne of Azarias, the sonne of Helchia, y sonne of Salli, the sonne of Sadoe, y sonne of Achitob, the sonne of Amarias, y soune of Azarias, the sonne of Boccus, y sonne of
Abisu, y sonne of Phineas, the sonne of 
Eleazar, y sonne of Aaron ¥ first prest. This 
Eszdras wéte vp from Babilon (for he had good vnderstondinge in y lawe of Moses, y was geue of the LORDE God of Israel, to be taught q done in dede.) And y kinge fa- uoured him, x dyd him greate worshipe and honoure, after all his desyres. "There wente vp with him also certayne of y children of
Israel, of the prestes, of y Leuites, of the syngers, porters, and mynisters of y temple at lerusalem.

In the vij yeare of the raigne of kynge 
Artaxerses, in the v. moneth, y is in the vij. yeare of the raigne, they wente from Babilon in the newmoone of the v. moneth, « came the hye waye to Ierusalé after his commaunde- ment, like as the LOIR DE had prospered their journey. For in these Eszdras gat greate instruccion, y he shulde leane none of y thinges behynde, which were in y lawe q comaundementes of God. And he taught whole Israel all righteousnes q iudgment.

Then came the Secretaries of kynge Ar- taxerses, q delyuered y wrytinges (y were come fro Artaxerses the kynge) to es the prest q reder of the lawe of the LORDE:
And this is ¥ copye of y letter: Kynge Ar- taxerses a his gretinge vnto Eszdras the prest q reder of the lawe of ý LORDE: Of frendshipe q good will I haue ordeyned and charged, yf there be eny of the lewes, of y prestes c Leuites in my realme, which de- syreth a is contét to go with the vnto Terusalē, y he maye doit. Therfore yf eny be mynded to beare the cópany, let thé come together, a go with the (like as I am contet q my vij. frendes my coiicelers:) to se what they do at lerusalé q in Iewry, ¢ kepe y thinges acord-

? 1 Esd. 7. a. 

The iij. boke of Esdras. Chap. biij. 

salem, and hath made me to be aecepted in the sight of ý kynge, of his councell, of his

Fo. rib. 
| | inge as thou hast in y lawe of the LORDE: 
33 (a to bringe the giftes vnto God the LORDE 

1 

of Israel, y I q my frendes haue promysed to lerusale, q all the syluer q golde y is in y eountre of Babilon, vnto y LORDE to le- rusalé, with the thinge y is geué for the peo- ple in the LORDES temple at Ierusalem:
Yee that the same syluer ¢ golde maye be gathered, and oxen, rammes, shepe « goates and other that beloge to these thinges: and that they maye offer sacrifices vnto the
LORDE, vpon the aulter of their LORDE, which is at lerusalem.

And what so euer thou q thy brethré wyl do with the syluer a golde, y do after ý mynde, x after the cómaundement of the LORDE thy God: q like wyse with all the holy vessels, y are geué the for the seruyce of the house of the LORDE thy God: ¢ other thinges what soeuer is necessary for the to the worke of the temple, y shalbe geué the of the kynges treasure: q foke what thou with thy brethré wilt do with the golde and syluer, that do after ý wil of the LORDE. And I kynge
Artaxerses haue commaunded the kepers of j treasures in Syria and Phenices, that what soeuer Eszdras the prest and reder of the lawe of the LORDE doth wryte, it shalbe geuen him: tyllan C. talentes of syluer, and of golde in lyke maner: Of corne also au C. measures, and tyll an hüdreth vessels of wyne, and other plenteous thinges without nombre.
Let all thinges be done after the lawe of y hyest God, that the wrath of God aryse not in the realme of the kynge and of his sonnes.
I commaunde you also, that ye requyre no taxinge ner tribute of the prestes, Leuites, syngers, and mynisters of the temple, ner of the wryters: and that no man haue auctorite to medle eny thinge against them. As for the (O Eszdras) set thou iudges and arbitrers in the whole lande of Syria and Phenices, after the wyszdome of God: and lerne all soch as are ignoraunt in the lawe of God thy
LORDE, and let all them that offende agaynst the lawe, be punyshed: whether it be with death, with payne, to be condemned in money, or to be banyshed.

Then sayde Eszdras ¥ wryter: Blessed be y God of oure fathers, that hath geuen so good a mynde and wyll in to the hert of the kynge, to magnifie his house y is at Ieru-

«1 Esd. 8. a. 

frédes and of his nobles. And so I was sted- fast in my mynde, acordinge as the LORDE my God helped me, and 1 chose out men of
Israel, to go vp with me. And these are the heades' (after their kynreds q houses of their fathers) that wente vp with me from Babilon, out of the kyngdome of Artaxerses: Of the sonnes of Phares, Gersonius. Of y sonnes of Siemarith, Amenus. Of the sonnes of
Dauid, Accus, the sonne of Cecilia. 

Of the sonnes of Phares, Zachary: and with him there turned agayne an hundreth and fiftie men. Of the sonnes of the captayne of Moabilon, Zaraei, and with him ij. C. and l.men. Of the sonnes of Zachnes, lechonias
Zecholi, and with him ij. C. and l. men. Of the sonnes of Salamaasias, Gotholie, and Ixx. with him. Of the sonnes of Zaphacia, Zarias
Miheli, and with him lxxx. Of the sonnes of Iob, Abdias leheli, and with him ij. C. and xij. men. Of the sonnes of Bania, Sali- moth the sonne of Iosaphia, and with him an
C. and lx. men. Of the sonnes of Beer, 
Zachary Bebei, and with him ij. C. and viij. men. Of the sonnes of Esead, lohannes
Ezechan, and with him Cx. men. Of the sonnes of Adonicà those that were the last, and these are their names: Eliphalam y sonne of Gebel and Semeias, q with him Ixx. men. All these ealled I together by the water Thia, where we pitched oure tentes thre dayes, and there I mustered them.

^As for the sonnes of the prestes and 
Leuites, I founde none there. ‘Then sent I vnto Eleazar, q Eecelom, and Masman, q
Malobam, and Enaathan, and Samea, and loribimathan, Eunagan, Zachary, Mosollamu
(these were the leders and men of experiéce) q I sent them worde, that they shulde come vnto Loddeus, which was by the place of the treasury, ¢ commaunded them that they shulde speake vnto Loddeus and to his brethren q to those that were in the treasury, to sende vs soch mé, as might execute the prestes office in the house of the LORDE oure God. And with the mightie hade of oure LORDE God, they brought vnto vs mé of good experience, from amoge the sonnes of
Moolius, the sonne of Leui, sonne of Israel, 
Sebebeiam ç the sonnes q his brethré Aszbin 

^ 1 Esd. 8. b. 

€ 

J| ‘Then commaunded I a fastynge vnto 

Chap. bij. 

& Anim, of whom there were xviij. From amoge the children of the sonnes of Cananeus, q their sonnes were xx. men. And of them y serued in the temple, whom Dauid had or- deyned, and the pryncipall men that ministred for the worke vnto the Leuites in the temple, i. C. and xx. men: whose names are all tokened vp in wrytinge.

yonge men before the LORDE, y I might desyre of him a prosperous journey q a good waye for vs, yee for vs, for oure children and for the catell, because of the layenges awayte: a I durst not require of the kynge men of horse q of fote, to conveye vs safely agaynst oure enemies, for we had sayde vnto the kynge, that ¥ power of the LORDE oure
God shulde be with them, that seke him with their whole hert. And therfore we besought
God oure LORDE earnestly because of these thinges, and he was mercifull vnto vs, and herde oure prayer. And I separated from amonge y rulers of the people, q from y prestes of y temple xij men, q Sebeia q
Asania, v ten men of their brethren with them. And I weied thé the golde q the syluer tall the prestly ornamétes of the house of oure
God, which the kynge q his coücell, q his prynces q whole Israel had geué. And whan
I had weyed it, I gaue the an Cl. talétes in syluer, an C. talentes of syluer vessell, an C. talentes of golde, q of golde vessell seué tymes twentie, and vessels of other metall (yee of good metall) xij. glisteringe as the golde, q saide vnto the: ye also are holy vnto the
LORDE, « the vessels are holy, q the golde q the syluer is promised vnto the LORDE the God of oure fathers. Be diligent now «

kepe it, vntill the tyme y ye delyuer it to the| 

rulers of the people, to y prestes, to the 
Leuites q to y pryncipall me of the cities of 
Israel in Ierusalem, « in the chambre of the house of oure God.

So y prestes q the Leuites which receaued of me the golde,’ the syluer q the vessell, brought it to Ierusalé in to the téple of the
LORDE. And from Thia we brake vp the xij. daye of the first moneth, tyll we came to lerusale. And whan the thirde daye was past, the weyed golde q syluer was delyuered in y house of the LORDE the fourth daye,

vnto Marimoth the sonne of lor the prest, a 

* 1 Esd. 8. c. 

è 1 Esd. 8. d. 

The tj. boke of Essnras. 

e 

with him was Eleazar y sonne of Phineas, and with thé were Iosabdus y sonne of Iesnet,
Medias q the sonne of Banus, q certayne of the Leuites to the nombre q to the waighte : q the waight of them was writte vp the same tyme. As for those that were come out of captiuyte, they offred sacrifice vnto the
LORDE the God of Israel: eue xij. oxen for all Israel, lxxxvj. rammes, lxxi). shepe, xij. goates for synne, xij. kyne for a thank- offeringe, all to the sacrifice of the LORDE.
And $ kinges comission delyuered they vnto 
¥ stewardes and debytes of the kynge, and to the vndershreues in Celosyria and Phenices.

“Now whan these thinges were done, the rulers came vnto me, and sayde: The gene- racion of Israel, the prynces, y prestes and
Leuites, the straunge people and indwellers of the londe, haue not put awaye their vn- clennesse, from the Cananites, Hethites,
Pheresites, from the Moabites, Egipcians q 
Edomites. For both they and their sonnes haue mengled them selues with the daughters of them, q the holy sede is mixte with the outlandish Heithen, q sens the begynnynge of their raigne haue the rulers and heades bene partakers of their wickednesse.

As soone as I had herde these thinges, immediatly I rent my holy garmentes, and pulled out y hayre of my heade q my beerd, q sat me downe soroufull t heuy. So all they that were moued thorow the worde of the
God of Israel, came vnto me: and I sat still full of henines vntill the euenynge sacrifice.
Then stode I vp fro fastinge, hauynge rente clothes q the holy garmet, kneled downe vpon my knees, helde out my hades vnto y
LORDE, q sayde: O LORDE, I am con- founded q ashamed before thy face, for oure synnes are become many vpon oure heades, q oure wickednesses are exalted vnto the heaué : for sens y tyme of oure fathers we are in greate sinne vnto this daye. And for the synnes of vs q oure fathers, we with oure brethren q with oure prestes haue bene de- liuered vnto the kinges of the earth, in to the swerde, q in to captiuite, q became a spoyle with confucion q shame vnto this dale. And now O LORDE God, how greate is the mercy y we have gotté of the? in y thou hast left vs a rote t a name in the E of thy Sanctnary, to discouer oure light in the

* 1 Esd. 9. a. 

Fo. rb. 

F 

So. rbi 

house of y LORDE oure God, q geué vs meate at all tymes of our ministracion. And whan we were in captiuyte, we were not for- saken of the LORDE oure God: but he made the kynges of Persia gracious q fauour- able vnto vs, so y they gaue vs vytayles q meate, yee q leue to buylde vp the teple of oure LORDE God agayne, to repayre the waisted places of Sion, and to dwell in lewry a lerusalem. And now O LORDE, what shall we saye, hauynge all these thinges in possession? For we haue broken thy cō- maundementes, which thon gauest vnto vs by the handes of thy seruauntes the prophetes, sayenge: The londe y ye go vnto, a y is geuen you for an heretage to haue in posses- sion, is defyled with the vnclennes q fylthynes of the Heithen, q with their abhominacion haue they poluted it alltogether. Therfore shal ye not ioyne^ youre daughters vnto their sonnes, ner mary youre sonnes vnto their daughters: Morouer, ye shall neuer seke to make peace with them, y ye maye increase ¢ eate the best in the lande, q y ye maye de- uyde y inheritaunce of the lande vnto youre children for euermore. As for the thinge y now happeneth vnto vs, it commeth all for oure wicked workes and greate synnes. yet hast thou geuen vs soch a rote, y we are
| come againe in to oure owne londe: and we are so wicked, y we haue broke thy statutes q comaundementes agayne, q mengled oure selues with the vnelenes of the outlandish
Heithen. O LORDE, art thou angrie with vs? wilt thou rote vs cleane out? ý oure rote q name remayne nomore? O LORDE
God of Israel, thou art true, for oure rote endureth yet vnto this present daye. And beholde, now are we before ¥ in oure synnes, now can we not stonde before the in them.
And whan Eszdras with this prayer had knowleged the synne, wepinge,’ q lycge flatt vpon the grounde before the téple, there gathered vnto him from lerusalem a greate multitude of men a wemen, of yonge men q maydens, for there was a very greate wepinge and mournynge in the cogregacion. So whan lechonias the sonne Ieheli one of the children of Israel cried, he sayde vnto Eszdras: we haue synned agaynst the LORDE, be- cause we haue maried outlandish women of the Heithé. Now art thou ouer all Israel.

? Deut. 7. a. and 12. d. 

^ 1 Esd. 10. a. 

Cbr ij. boke of Essdras. 

which we haue také of the Heithé, with their childré: like as it is appoynted the by oure fore elders. Stonde vp then, open thou it and declare it playnely vnto vs acordige to the lawe of y LORDE: for the matter be- longeth vnto ý, « we wyll helpe the, quyte thy self manly. So Eszdras arose, and toke an ooth of the rulers of y prestes q of y
Leuites q of all Israel, to do after these thinges, and they sware.

The ty. Chapter. 

ee Eszdras stode vp from the courte 

of the téple without," q wente in to the chaber of Ionathas the sonne of Nasabus, q remayned there, q ate no meate ner dronke drynke, for the multitude of the wickednes of the people. And there was made a procla- macion in all lewry q at Ierusalem, for all soch as were gathered at Jerusalé out of cap- tiuyte, y who so euer came not to lerusalé within two or thre dayes (acordinge to the iudgment of the olde lordes of councell) his goodes shulde be taken from him, q he excluded from the cégregacion of the cap- tiuyte. And in thre dayes were all they of the trybe of Iuda q Ben Jamin gathered together at Ierusalem, the xx. daye of y ix. moneth. And y whole multitude sat tré- blinge in the courte of the temple, for it was wynter. So Eszdras arose vp, q sayde vnto them: ye haue done vnrighteously, in that ye haue taken outlandish wyues to mariage, q so to increase the synnes of Israel. And now knowlege the same, q geue prayse vnto the LORDE God of oure fathers, q per- fourme his wil, departinge from the Heithen of the londe, « from the outlandish wyues.
'Then cried the whole multitude with loude voyce, q sayde: like as thou hast spoke, so wil we do: But for so moch as the people are many, q y wynter here, we maie not stode without y house: agayne, this worke is not a thinge, y can be fynished in a daye or two, for we be many y haue synned in these thinges: Ordene therfore, y the rulers of

the multitude and all they that dwell with vs, 

and as many as haue outlandish wyues, the prestes also and iudges of euery place, maye stonde in the tyme appoynted. tyll they

* 1 Esd. 10. b. 

Chap. tr. 

|We wil sweare an ooth therfore vnto $ 
|LORDE, y we shal put awaye all oure wyues 

Chap. tr. 

€ 

lowse vp the wrath of the LORDE in this busynes.

Then Ionathas the sonne of Ezeli, x Ozias and Thecam receaued y charge of this matter, q Bozoramus, q Leius and Sabatheus helped thé therto. After this, all they stode vp y were come ont of captiuyte. And Eszdras the prest chose vnto him the pryncipall men from amonge the fathers acordinge to their names, q in the new moone of the tenth moneth they sat together, to examen this matter. And so the matter was a determynge
(concernynge the men y had outlandish wyues) vntili the new moone of the first moneth. And of the prestes y had mixte the selues with out- landish wyues, there were founde:* Of the sonnes of lesu the sonne of Josedec q his brethren, Mazeas, Eleazer, loribus q Ioadeus, which offred them selues to put awaye their wyues, ¢ to offre a ramme for their ignoraunce.
And of the sonnes of Gemmeri, Masseas, q 
Esses q Ieelech Azarias. Of y sonnes of 
Fosera, Limosias, Hismaen, Nathanea, Tussio, 
Ieddus, a Talsas. And of the Lenites, Io- sabdus, Semeis and Colnis, Caletas, Facteas,
Colnas and Elionas. Of the syngers of the 
Sactuary, Eliarib, Zackarns. Of the porters, 
Sallumus q Tolbanes. And of Israel, of the children of Foro, Osi q Remias, q Geddias, a Melchias, Michelus, Eleazarns, Iemebias q
Bannas. And of the childré of lolaman, 
Chanias, Zachary, Ietzrelus, Ioddius, Erimoth v Elias. And of y sonnes of Iathoim, Elia- das, Liasamus, v Zochias, Larimoth, Sabdis a Tebedias And of $ sonnes of Zebes, lohanes Amanias, Zabdias, q Emens. And of the sonnes of Bannus, Olammus, Malu- chus, Ieddus, lasub, Asabus q lerimoth.
And of y sonnes of Addin, Naatus q Moosias t Caleus « Raanas Maasnas, Mathathias,
Besel, Bannus, and Manasses. 

And of the sonnes of Naue, Nones, Afeas, 
Melchias, Sameas, Simo, Ben Iamin, Malchus a Marras. And of the sonnes of Asom, Ca- rianeus, Mathathias, Bannns, Eliphalach, Ma- nasses, Semei. Of the sonnes of Bannus,
Ieremy, Moodias, Abramas, Iohel, Baneas, 
Peliaas, Iona, Marimoth, Eliasib, Mathaneus, 
Eliasis, Orizas, Dielus, Semedins, Zambris « 
Ioseph. Of ¥ sonnes of Nobens, Idelus, Ma- thathias, Sabadus, Zecheda, Sedmi, Iesseus, q Baneas. All these had take outladish wemé

a 1 Esd. 10. d. > 9 Esd. 8. a. 

Cbr iH. boke of Cssdras. 

to mariage, q they put thé awaye with their childré.

The prestes q Leuites, q all they y were of Israel, dwelt at Ierusalem q thorow out all y londe, in the new moone of the senenth moneth, q the childré of Israel were in their dwellynges. And y whole multitude came together vpon y floore at y east syde^ of the holy porte of Y teple. And they spake vnto
Eszdras y hie prest q reder, y he wolde brynge y lawe of Moses, which was geué of ý LORDE
God of Israel. So Eszdras the hie prest brought the lawe vnto the whole multitude, to man and woman, ¢ to all prestes, y they might heare the lawe, in the new moone of the seuenth moneth. And he red in y floore y is before y holy porte of y téple, from the mornynge early vntill the euenynge, before men wemen. And they applied their mynde all ynto the lawe.

And Eszdras the prest q reder of y lawe stode vp vpon a scaffolde of wodd, which was made therfore: q vpon his right hande there stode by him Mathathias, Samus,
Ananias, Azarias, Vrias, Ozechias, q Bal- samus: Vpon his lefte hade stode Faldeus,
Misael, Malachias, Abuschas, Sabus, Naba- dias, q Zachary. Then toke Eszdras ¥ boke before the whole multitude, for he was + pryncipall and had in most hononre of thé all.
And wha‘he had red out y lawe, they stode all straight vp vpon their fete. So Eszdras praysed the LORDE the most hye God, the
Allmightie God of hoostes. And all y people answered, Amen: q helde vp their hades, fell downe flat vpon the earth, q praysed y
LORDE: Iesus, Beneas, Sarebias, [addimus, 
Accubus, Sabbatheus, Calithes, Azarias, Io- radus, Ananias, ¢ Philias the Leuites which tanght the lawe of the LORDE, q red the lawe of the LORDE in the cogregacion, q euery man sett those before y vnderstode the lawe. Then spake Atharathes vnto Eszdras the hye prest q reder, q to the Leuites M taught the multitude, sayenge: This daye is holy vnto the LORDE: ¢ all they y had herde the lawe, wepte. So Eszdras sayde:^
Departe youre waye then, q eate the best, q drynke the swetest, qœ sende giftes vnto them y haue nothinge: for this daye is holy vnto the LORDE, and be not ye sory. Then wente they their waye enerychone, ate and

e 2 Esd. 8. c. 
108 

Fo. roy. 

ffo. rou. 

with gladnesse: for they 

Chap. I. 

God reproueth the people for their vnthank- fulnes, and rehearseth vnto them his owne louynge mercy, that he maye bringe the agayne: yf they wyl not amende, he wil chose another people.

Chap. II. 
The Synagoge coplayneth vpo hir children. The callynge of the Heithen.

Chap. II. 

Eszdras sheweth of the excellent workes of God, done vnto the people, and hath a frendly contencion with God: because he suffreth the
Babilonians to haue the dominion ouer them, where as they yet are sinners also.

Chap. II. 

The angel rebuketh Eszdras, for takinge in hade to seke out the grounde of Gods iudg- ment, and instructeth him with fayre symili- tudes.

Chap. V. 
A communicacio of Eszdras and the angel to- gether.
Chap. VI. 

The angel enfourmeth Eszdras, and answereth him to his questions.

The (ij. boke of Esstras. 

dronke and were mery, q sent rewardes vnto thé y had nothinge, y they also might eate were exceadiugly reioysed, thorow the wordes that were red

The ende of the thirde boke of (esuras. 

vnto them in the lawe: And so they were all gathered together at Jerusalem to holde the feast, acordinge to the couenaunt of y LORDE
God of Israel. 

The fourth boke of 
G@ssdras. 

Wihat this boke rontepneth. 

Chap. VII. 
The angel sheweth Eszdras many secrete mat- ters, and thinges for to come.

Chap. VIII. 

Eszdras prayeth for the people, that God wyll rather loke vpon his owne louynge mercy and the godlynes of few, the vpon the wycked synnes of many.

Chap. IX. 

Tokens of the tyme and punyshment for to come. Visions are shewed vnto Eszdras.

Chap. X. 
A communicacion betwixte Eszdras, and the woman that appeared voto him.

Chap. XI. XII. XIII. 

Of certayne visions and the interpretacions therof.

Chap. XIII. 

God appeareth vnto Eszdras in the bush, talketh with him, and comaundeth him what he shal doo.

Chap. XV. 

God sheweth Eszdras the punyshmet that he wyl sende vpon the synfull people, and com- maundeth him to tell them the same.

Chay. XVI. 
Punyshment vpon the Heithen, and how the people of God shal behaue them selues therin.

Chap. f. 

The first Chapter. 

a HE seconde boke of ¥ prophet Eszdras:* 
(y sonne of Saraias, the sonne of Aza- rias, y sonne of Helchia, j sonne of Salli,

the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Achitob,| 

the sonne of Amerias, the sonne of Azarias, the sonne of Maraioth, the sonne of Sarahias, the sonne of Vzi, the sonne of Boccus, the sonne of Abisu, the sonne of Phineas, the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron, of the trybe of Leui) which was presoner in the lande of the Meedes, in the raigne of Ar- taxerses kynge of Persia.

And the worde of the LORDE came vnto me, sayenge: ^Go thy waye q shew my people their synfull dedes, q their children their wickednesses, which they haue done against me, that they maye tell their childers childre the same: for the synnes of their fathers are increased in them. And why? they haue forgotten me, q haue offred vnto straunge goddes. Am not I euen he, that brought them out of the lande of Egipte, from the house of bondage? But they haue prouoked me vnto wrath, q despysed my councels. Pull thou out then the hayre of thy heade, and cast all euell ouer them, for they haue not bene obedient vnto my lawe.

It is a people without lernynge qœ nour- toure. How longe shal I forbeare them, vnto whom I haue done so moch good? Many kynges haue [ destroyed for their sakes:*
Pharao with his seruaütes and all his power haue I smytten downe and slayne:^ All y nacions haue I destroyed and roted out before them, and in y east haue I brought two landes and people to naught, euen Tyre q Sydon, and haue slayne all their enemies. Speake thou therfore vnto them, sayenge: Thus sayeth the LORDE:* I led you thorow the see, and haue geuen you sure stretes sence the begynnynge. I gaue you Moses to be youre captayne, and Aaron to be the prest:/
I gaue you light in a piler of fyre, q greate woders haue I done amoge you: yet haue ye forgotten me, sayeth the LORDE.

Thus sayeth the allmightie LORDE: I 
*gaue you quales to eate, and tentes for youre sucoure: Neuertheles ye murmured, and

2 | Esd. 7. a. 3 Esd. 8. a. ^ Esa. 58.2. — * Exo. 14. f. 
3 Nu. 21. d, Iosu. 8. 10. & 12. ¢ Exo. 14. f. J Exo. 3. b. 
Nu. 18.a. Exo.13.d. ¢ Exo.16.c. ^ Nu. 14. a. 

The iiij. boke of €ojuras. 

ascrybed not y victory of youre enemies vnto my name: yee this same daie do ye yet mur- moure. Where are the benefites, that I haue done for you? Whan ye were hongrie in the
^wilddernes, dyd ye not crie vnto me: Why hast thou brought vs in to this wildernes, to kill vs? It had bene better for vs, to haue serued y Egipcians, then to dye in this wil- dernesse. Thē had I pitie vpon youre mour- ninges, and gaue you Manna to eate. Ye ate angels foode. Wha ye were thyrstie, dyd not
‘I hew ý hardstone, q caused water ynough to flowe thereout? For the heate, I couered you with ¥ leaues of the trees. A good pleasaunt fatt londe gaue I you: I cast out the Ca- nanites, the Pheresites and Philistynes before you. What shal I do more for you, saieth the LORDE?

Thus sayeth the Allmightie LORDE: 
*Whan ye were in the wildernes, in the water of the Amorites, beynge a thyrst q blas- phemynge my name, I gaue you not fyre for youre blasphemies, but cast a tre in to y wa- ter, and made the ryuer swete. What shall I do vnto the, O Iacob? Thou [uda woldest not dbeye me. ‘I wil turne me to another people, q vnto those will I geue my name, that they maye kepe my statutes. Seinge ye haue forsake me, I wil forsake you also.
Whan ye desyre me to be gracious vnto you, 
I shal haue no mercy vpon you. "Whan ye call vpó me, I wil not heare you. For ye haue defyled youre hades with bloude, and youre fete are swift to commytt manslaugh- ter. Ye haue not forsaken me (in a maner) but youre owne selues, sayeth the LORDE.

'Thus sayeth the Allmightie LORDE: haue I not prayed you, as a father his sonnes, as a mother hir daughters, and as a norsse hir yonge babes, that ye wolde be my people, and I shulde be youre God: that ye wolde be my children, and I shulde be youre owne father ? "I gathered you together, as an henne gathereth hir chekens vnder hir wynges.
But now what shal I do vnto you? I shal cast you out fro my face. "Whan ye offre vnto me, I shal turne my face from you: for your solempne feast dayes, youre new moones and youre circumcisions haue I forsaken. I sent vnto you my seruauntes the prophetes,

! Nu. 90. b... ^ Exo. 15. d. 
^ Matt. 93. d. ^ Esa. 1. a. and 66. a. 

Fo. rir. 

! Deu. 32, b. " Esa. 1. b. 

n 

Fo. rr. whom ye haue taken and slayne, and torne their bodies in peces, whose bloude I wyll requyre of youre handes, sayeth the LORDE.

Thus sayeth the Allmightie LORDE: youre house must be desolate. I wil cast you out as the wynde doth y strawe: youre chil- dren shal not be frutefull, for they haue despysed my commaundement, and done y thinge y is euell before me. Youre houses wil I geue vnto a people y shal come, and
"they y neuer herde me, shal beleue in me: i they vnto whó I neuer shewed token, shal do the thinge y I cómaunde the. They haue sene no neice yet shal they call their synnes to remembraunce, and knowlege the.
I reporte me vnto the grace, that I wil do for the people which is to come, whose children reioyse in gladnes: q though they haue not sene me with bodely eyes, yet in sprete they beleue the thinge that I saye. And now brother, beholde what greate ^worshipe, and se y people that commeth from the east, vnto whom I wyll geue the dukedome of Abra- ham, Isaac and lacob, of Oseas, Amos, and
Micheas, of Ioel, Abdy, Ionas, Naum and 
Abacue, of Sophony, Aggeus, Zachary and 
Malaehy, which is called also an angel (or messanger) of the LORDE.

The tt. Chapter. 

T sayeth the LORDE: I brought 

this people out of bondage, I gaue thë my cOmaundementes by my seruañtes y prophetes, whom they wolde not heare, but despysed my coücels. The mother that bare them, sayeth vnto them: Go youre waye ye children, for I am a wyddow a forsaken: I brought you vp with gladnesse, but with sorow and heuynes haue I lost you: for ye haue synned before the LORDE youre God, and done y thinge that is euell before him. But what shall I now do vnto you? I am a wyddow and forsaké: go youre waye (o my children) and axe mercy of the LORDE. As for me
O father, I call vpon the for a wytnesse ouer the mother of these childre, which wolde not kepe my couenaunt: y thou brynge them to cofucion, and their mother to a spoyle, that she beare no more. Let their names be scatred abrode amonge the Heithen, let them be put out of the earth, for they haue thought scorne of my couenaunt.

a Esa. 65. a. Rom, 10, c, ^ Esa. 41. d. Luc. 13. c. 

The iij. boke of Esdras. 
Wo be vnto the Assur, thou that hydest | 3 

the vnrighteous by the. ‘Thou wicked people, remembre what I dyd vnto “Sodom and
Gomorre, whose land is turned to pitch and aszshes. Euen so also wyll I do vnto all them, that heare me not, sayeth the All- mightie LORDE. Thussayeth the LORDE vnto Eszdras: ‘Tell my people, y I will geue them the kyngdome of lerusalem, which I wolde haue geuen vnto Israel. ‘Their glory also wyl I take vnto me, and geue them the euerlastynge tabernacles, which I had pre- pared for those.

'The tre of life shalbe vnto them a swete smellynge oyntment: they shal nether laboure ner be weery. Go ye youre waye, q ye shall receaue it. Praye for youre selues a few dayes, that they maye dwell therin. Now is the kingdome prepared for you, therfore watch. Take heaué and earth to wytnesse, for I haue broken the euell in peces, and created the good, for I lyue sayeth y LORDE.
Mother enbrace thy children, and brynge them vp with gladnes: make their fete as fast as a piler, for I haue chosen the, sayeth the
LORDE. 

And those that be deed wyll I rayse vp agayne from their places, and brynge them out of ¥ graues, for I haue knowne my name in Israel. Feare not thou mother of the children, for I haue chosen the, sayeth the
LORDE. And for thy helpe I shal sende the my seruauntes Esay and Jeremy, after whose councell I haue sanctified q prepared for the, xij. trees with dyuerse frutes, and as many welles flowinge with mylck and hony,
€ seuen mountaynes, whervpo there growe roses and lilies, wherin I wyl fyll my children with ioye. Execute iustice for the wyddowe, be iudge for the fatherlesse: geue to y poore: defende the cófortlesse: clothe the naked: heale the wounded and sick: laugh not a lame man to scorne: defende the crepell, and let the blinde come in to y sight of my clear- nes. Kepe the olde q yonge within thy walles: ^where so euer thou fyndest the deed, toke them, and burye them, and I shal geue the the first place in my resurreccion, Holde styll (O my people) and take thy rest, for thy quyetnes is come. Fede thy children O thou good norsse, stablish their fete: As for the seruauntes whom I haue geuen the, there
4 Tobi. 1. d. 

Matt. 8. b. * Gen. 19. c. 

Chap. i. 

Chap. ttt. shal not one of them perishe, for I wyl seke thé from thy nombre, vexe not thy self.

For whan the daye of trouble and heuynes commeth, other shal wepe and be soroufull, but thou shalt be mery and plenteous. The
Heithen shalbe gelous, but they shalbe able to do nothinge agaynst the, sayeth the
LORDE. My handes shal couer the, so that thy children shal not se the fyre euer- lastinge. Be ioyfull O thou mother with thy childre, for I wyll delyuer the, sayeth the
LORDE. Remembre thy deed childré, for 
I shal brynge them out of the earth, and shew mercy vnto them, for I am mercifull, sayeth the LORDE Allmightie.

Enbrace thy childre, vntyll I come and shew mercy vnto them, for my welles runne ouer, and my grace shal not fayle. I Eszdras receaued a charge of the LORDE vpon the mount Oreb, that I shulde go vnto Israel.
But whan I came vnto the, they set me at naught, and despysed the commaundement of y LORDE. And therfore I saye vnto you O ye Heithen, that heare and vnder- stonde: Loke for youre shepherde, he shal geue you euerlastinge rest: for he 1s nye at hande, that shal come in the ende of the worlde. Be ready to the rewarde of the kyngdome, for the euerlastinge light shall shyne vpon you for euermore. Fle the sha- dowe of this worlde, receaue the ioyfulnes of youre glory. I testifie my sauioure openly:
O receaue the gift y is geuen you, and be glad, geuynge thankes vnto him, that hath called you to the heauenly kyngdome. Aryse vp, and stonde fast: beholde the nombre of those that be sealed in the feast of the
LORDE, which are departed from the sha- dowe of the worlde, and haue receaued glo- rious garmétes of the LORDE. ‘Take thy nombre O Sion, and shutt vp thy purified, which haue fulfilled the lawe of the LORDE.
The nombre of thy children whom thou longedest for, is fulfilled: beseke the power of the LORDE, that thy people which haue bene called from the begynnynge, maye be halowed.

I Eszdras sawe vpon the mount Sion a greate people, whom I coude not “nombre, « they all praysed the LORDE with songes of thankesgeuynge. And in the myddest of the there was a yonge mà of an hye stature, more

* Apo. T. c. 

The iiij. boke of Esdras. 

excellent then all they, and vpon euery one of thcir heades he sett a crowne, and was ener hygher and hygher, which I marueled at greatly. So I axed angell, q sayde: Syr, what are these? He answered and sayde vnto me: These be they, that haue put of the mortall clothinge and put on the immortall, and haue testified q knowleged the name of
God. Now are they crowned, and receaue the rewarde.

Then sayde I vnto the angell: what yonge personne is it, that crowneth them, q geueth them the palmes in their handes? So he answered and sayde vnto me: It is y sonne of
God, whom they haue knowleged in the worlde. 'Then beganne I greatly to com- mende them, that stode so stifly for the name of the LORDE. And so the angell sayde vnto me: Go thy waye, and tell my people, what maner of thinges and how greate won- ders of the LORDE thy God, thou hast sene.

Che it}. Chapter. 

I5 the thirtie yeare of the fall of the cite, 

I was at Babilon « laye troubled vpo my bed, q my thoughtes came vp ouer my hert: for I sawe y desolacion of Sion, q the plen- teous wealth of them y dwelt at Babilon:
€ my sprete was sore moued, so that I begane to speake fearfull wordes to the most hyest, and sayde: O LORDE LORDE, thou spakest at the begynnynge, whan thou plant- edst y earth, (and that thy self alone) and gauest commaundement vnto y people, and a body vnto Adam, ’ which was a creature of thy handes, and hast brethed in him the breth of life: and so he lyued before the, and thou leddest him in to paradyse, which garde of pleasure thy right hande had planted, or euer the earth was made. And vnto him thou gauest commaundemet to loue y waye, which he transgressed, a immediatly thou appoynt- edest death in him, and in his generacions.
Of him came nacions, trybes, people, q kyn- reddes out of nombre. “And euery people walked after their owne wil, and did nyce thinges before the: and as for thy com- maundementes, they despysed them.

? But in processe of tyme thou broughtest the water flonde, vpon those that dwelt in the worlde, and destroydest them. And like as the death was in Adam, so was the water
* Gen. 6. b. 

^ Gen. 2. b. 4 Gen. 7. b. 

Fo. rri. 

15 

Fo. rrii floude also in these. Neuertheles one of them thou leftest: namely, Noe with his housholde, of whom come all righteous mē. And it ha pened that, whan they y dwelt vpon the earth, beganne to multiplic, and had gotten many children, and were a greate people, they be- ganne to be more vngodly then the first.

Now whan they all lyued so wickedly before the, ^thou didest chose the a man from amonge them, whose name was Abram. Him thou louedest, and vnto him only thou shewd- est thy wyll, and maydest an euerlastinge couenaunt with him, promisinge him, that thou woldest neuer forsake his sede. ^ And vnto him thou gauest Isaac, vnto Isaac also thou gauest lacob and Esau. As for lacob thou didest chose him, and put backe Esau.
And so Iacob became a greate multitude. 

And it happened that wha thou leddest his sede out of Egipte, thou broughtest thé vp to the mount Sion, “bowinge downe the heauens, settinge fast the earth, mouynge the grounde, makynge the depthes to shake, and troublynge the worlde: And thy glory wente thorow foure portes of fyre, and earth quakes, and wyndes and colde: that thou mightest geue the lawe vnto the sede of lacob, and diligence vnto the generacié of Israel.

And yet tokest thou not awaye from thé that wicked hert, that thy lawe might brynge forth frute in them. For the first Adam bare a wicked hert, transgressed, and was ouer- come, and so be all they y are borne of him.
4 Thus remayned weaknes with the lawe in the hert of the people, with the wickednesse of the rote: so that the good departed awaye, and the euell abode still. So the tymes passed awaye, aud the yeares were brought to an ende. *'Then didest thou rayse the vp a ser- uaunt called Dauid, whom thou commaundedst to buylde a cite vnto thy name, and to offre vp incense and sacrifice vnto the therin. This was done now many yeares.

D| Then the inhabiters of the cite forsoke the, 

and in all thinges dyd eué as Adam and all his generacions had done: for they also had a wicked hert. And so thou gauest thy cite ouer in to the handes of thine enemies. Are they of Babilon then better and more righte- ous then thy people, y they shal therfore haue the domynion of Sion? For whan I came

? Gen. 12. 15. è Gen. 21. a. Gen. 25. c. Gen. 32. a. 

The iiij. boke of Esdras, 

there, and sawe their vngodlynes, and so greate wickednesse, that it coude not be nobred: yee whan my soule sawe so many eucll doers (in y xxx. yeare) my hert fayled me, for I sawe, how thou suffrest them in soch vngodlynes, and sparest } wicked doers: but thine owne people hast thou roted ont, and preserued thine enemies, ¢ this hast thou not shewed me.

I cannot perceaue how this happeneth. Do they of Babilon then better, then they of
Sion? Or is there eny other people, y know- eth the, sauynge the people of Israel? Or what generacion hath so beleued y couenaütes, as Iacob? And yet their rewarde appeareth not, and their laboure hath no frute. For I haue gone here and there thorow the Heithé, q Ise, y they be rych a wealthy, q thynke not vpon y commaundementes. Weye thou ther- fore oure wickednesse now in y balaunce, and theirs also that dwell in the worlde, and so shal thy name be no where founde but in
Israel. Or where is there a people vpon earth, y hath not synned before the? Or what people hath so kepte thy commaunde- mentes? Thou shalt fynde, that Israel by name hath kepte thy preceptes, but not the other people and Heithen.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND the angell that was sent vnto me 
(whose name was Vriel) gaue me an- swere, and sayde: Thy hert hath také to moch vpon it m this worlde, and thou think- est to comprehende the waye of the Hyest.
Then sayde I: yee my lorde. And he an- swered me, and sayde: I am sent to shewe the thre wayes, and to sett forth thre symili- tudes before the: wherof yf thou canst declare me one, I wil shewe the also the waye, that thou desyrest to se, and I shal shewe the from whece the wicked hert commeth. And I sayde: tellon my LORDE. Then sayde he vnto me: Go thy waye, weye me the weight of the fyre, or measure me the blast of the wynde, or call me agayne the daye that is past. Then answered I and sayde: What man borne is able to do that? Why requyrest thou soch of me? And he sayde vnto me:
Yf I shulde axe the, how depe dwellinges are in the see? Or how greate water springes are

* Exo. 19. a. Deut. 4. b. 4 Rom. 8. a. 
* 1 Re. 16. c. 2 Reg. 5. a. 

Chap. iii. 

Chap. (ifj. vpon y firmamét? Or how greate water sprynges are in the begynnynge of the depe ?
Or which are the outgoinges of Paradise? 
Peradnéture thou woldest saye vnto me: I neuer wente downe yet in to Y depe ner hell, nether dyd I euer clymme vp in to heauen.
Neuertheles now haue I axed the but onely of fyre and wynde and of the daye, where thorow thou hast trauayled, and from the which thon canst not be separated: and yet eanst thon gene me no answere of them.

He sayde morouer vnto me: Thine owne thinges, and soch as are growne vp with y, canst thou not knowe: how shulde thy vessel then be able to coprehende the waye of the
Hyest, and now outwardly in the corrupte worlde, to vnderstode the corrupcion y is euydent in my sight? Thé sayde I vnto him:
It were hetter that we were not at all, the that we shulde lyue in wickednesse, and to suffre, and not to knowe wherfore. He an- swered me, and sayde: I wete in a wod, and the trees toke soch a denyce and sayde:
^ Come let vs go, and fight agaynst the see, that it maye departe awaye before vs, and that we maye make vs yet more woddes.

'The floudes of the see also in lyke maner toke this deuyce, and sayde: Come, let vs go vp, and fight agaynst the trees of the wodd, that we maye make our londe the wyder.
The thought and deuyce of the wodd was but vayne and nothinge worth, for the fyre came, and consumed the wod: The thought of the floudes of the see came likewyse to naught also, for the sonde stode vp and stop- ped them.

Yf thou were iudge now betwyxte these two, whom woldest thou iustifie, or whom woldest thou codemne? I answered and sayde:
Verely it is a foolish thought that they both haue deuysed. For the grounde is geuen vnto the wod, and the see also hath his place to beare his floudes. Then answered he me q sayde: Thou hast geuen a right indgment, why iudgest thou not thy self also? For like as the grounde is geuen vnto the wod, and the see to his floudes: ^euen so they that dwell vpon earth, maye vnderstonde nothinge, bnt that which is vpon earth: and he that. dwelleth ahoue the heauens, maye onely vn- derstóde the thinges, that are abone the hea-

> Esa. 55. c. Ioh. 3.c. 

GIG) th elite 25C 

Che iiij. boke of Essnras, 

uens. ‘Then answered I and sayde: I beseke the (O LORDE) let me haue vnderstond- inge: for it was not my mynde to be curions of thy hye thinges, but of soch as we daylie medle withall: namely, wherfore that Israel is blasphemed of the Heithen, and for what cause the people (whom thou euer hast loued) is geuen ouer, to be punyshed of vngodly naciós: and why the lawe of oure fathers is brought to naught, and the wrytten coue- nauntes come to none effecte, and we passe awaye out of the worlde as the greshopers, and oure life is a very feare, and we are not worthy to optayne mercy. What wyl he do

then vnto his name, which is called vpon| 

ouer vs? Of these thinges haue I axed question.

Then answered he me and sayde: The more thou searchest, the more thou shalt maruel, for the worlde hasteth fast to passe awaye, and can not comprehende the thinges, that are promysed for the righteous in tyme to come, ^for this worlde is full of vnright- eousnes and weaknes.

But as concernynge the thinges wherof thon axest me, I wyl tell the. The euell is sowne, but the destruccion therof is not yet come. Yf the enell now that is sowne, be not turned vpsyde downe, and yf the place where y euell is sowne, passe not awaye, then can not the thinge come y is sowne with ý good. For the corne of euell sede hath hene sowne in the hert of man from the begyn- nynge, and how moch vngodlynes hath he bronght vp vnto this tyme? and how moch shal he yet brynge forth, vntyll he come in to the barne?

Pondre now by thyself, wha y corne of euell sede is cutt downe, how greate a barne shal it fyll? I answered and sayde: How and whā shal these thinges come to passe?
Wherfore are oure yeares few q euell? And he answered me, sayége: Haist not thou to moch vpon the Hyest, for thy haistynes to he abone him is but in vayne, thon makest to moch a doo. Dyd not y sonles also of the righteous axe question of these thinges in their holynes, sayenge: How longe shal I hope of this fashion? Whan commeth the frute of my barne, and my rewarde? And vpo this Ieremiel the archangel gaue them answere, and sayde: ^ Eué whan the nombre

* 1 Ioh. 5. c. 

1 Cor. 2. b. 4 Apoc. 6. b. 

Fo. rrie 

Fo. xxttij. 

of the sedes is fylled in you: for he hath weyed the worlde in the balaunce: in mea- sure and nombre hath he measured the tyme, and moueth it not, vntyll the same measure be fulfylled. Then answered I and sayde:
O LORDE LORDE, now are we all full of synne, and for oure sake peraduenture it is not, that the barne of the righteous shall not be fylled, because of the synnes of thé that dwell vpon earth.

So he answered me, q sayde: Go y waye toa woman with childe, and axe her, when she hath fulfilled hir ix. monethes, yf hir childeszbed maye kepe y byrth eny loger within her. The sayde I: No LORDE, that can she not. And he sayde vnto me: In hell the secrete places of soules are like $ preuy chamber of a woman. For like as a woman that tranayleth, maketh haist, whan the tyme q necessite of the byrth is at hande: Eué so doth she haist to delyuer it that is commytted vnto her. Loke what thou desyrest to se, it shalbe shewed the from the begynnynge.
Then answered J and sayde: Yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, and yf it be pos- sible, and yf I be mete therfore, shewe me then, whether there be more to come thé is past, or more past then is forto come. What
Is past, I knowe: but what is for to come, I knowe not.

@| And he saide vnto me: Stonde vp vpo 

right syde, and I shal expounde the symih- tude vnto the. So I stode, x beholde, an whote burnynge oué wente ouer before me: tit happened y whan the flamme was gone by, the smoke lad the vpper hande. After this there wéte ouer before me a watery cloude, and sent downe moch rayne with a storme: q whan the stormy rayne was past, the droppes remayned still. ‘Then sayde he vnto me: like as the rayne is more then the droppes, and as the fyre exceadeth the smoke, euen so y measure of the thinges that are past, hath the vpper hande. "Then wente the droppes and the smoke aboue: and I prayed and sayde: May I lyue (thynkest thou) vntyll that tyme? Or what shall happen in those dayes? He answered me, and sayde: As for the tokés wherof thou axest me, I maye tell the of thé in a parte: but as touchinge *y life, I may not shewe the, for I am not sent therfore.

* Some rede, my life. 

The (ij. boke of Esdras. 

The b. Chapter. 
D ooo a as concernynge| 4 thetokens, mark this: Beholde, the dayes shal come, that they which dwell vpon earth, shalbe take in a greate nombre, q the waye of the trueth shalbe hyd, and the lode shalbe baren from faith:^ but iniquyte shal haue the vpper hande, like as thou hast sene now, and as thou hast herde loge agoo. And the londe that thou seist now to haue rule, shalt thou shortly se waist. But yf God graunte the to lyue, thon shalt se after y thirde trom- pet, that the Sonne shal sodenly shyne agayne in the night, and the Moone thre tymes in the daye, q bloude shal droppe out of wodd, and the stone shal geue his voyce, and the people shalbe vnquyete: and euen he shal rule, whom they hope not that dwell vpon earth, and the foules shal flyt, and the Sodo- mitysh see shal cast out his fish, and make a noyse in the night, which many shal not knowe, but they shal all heare the voyce therof.

There shalbe a céfucion also in many places, and the fyre shal be oft sent agayne, and the wylde beastes shal go their waye, q menstruous wemen shal beare monsters, and salt waters shalbe founde in the swete: one frende shal fight agaynst another: then shal all wyt and vnderstandinge be hyd and put asyde in to their secrete places, q shalbe sought of many, and yet not be founde: then shal vnrighteousnes and volupteousnes haue the vpperhande vpon earth. One lande also shal axe another, and saye: Is righteousnes gone thorow the? And it shal saye: No. At the same tyme shal men hope, but nothinge op- tayne: they shal laboure, but their wayes shall not prospere.

To shewe the soch tokens I haue leue, and yf thou wylt praye agayne, q wepe as now, and fast seuen dayes, thou shalt heare yet greater thinges. Then I awaked, and a fear- fulnes wente thorow all my body, q my mynde was feble and carefull, so that I all- most swowned withall. So the angell that was come to talke with me, helde me, com- forted me, and sett me vp vpon my fete.

And in the seconde night it happened, y 
Salathiel the captayne of the people came vnto me, sayenge: Where hast thou bene?

? Mat. 24. a, 

Chap. b. 

and why is thy countenaunce so heuy? 
Knowest thou not, y Israel is commytted 

Vp then, and eate, and forsake vs not, as the shepherde that leaueth his flock in the handes of wicked wolues. ‘Then sayde I vnto him:
Go thy waye fro me, and come not nye me: t he herde it, and as I sayde, so wete he his waye fro me. And so I fasted seuen dayes, mournynge and wepynge, like as Vriell the angell commaunded me. And after seuen dayes it happened, that ý thoughtes of my hert were very greuous vnto me agayne, q my soule receaued ¥ sprete of vnderstandynge, a
I begane to talke with the most hyest agayne, and sayde: O LORDE LORDE, of euery wod of ¥ earth q of all the trees therof, thou hast chosen y one onely vynyarde: aud of all londes of the whole worlde thou hast chosen the one pytt : and of all floures of the groüde thou hast chosen the one lylie: and of all the depthes of the see thou hast fylled the one ryuer: and of all builded cities thou hast halowed Sion vnto thy self: and of all y foules that are ereated, thou hast named the one doue : and of all the catell ý are made, thou hast prouyded y one shepe : a amoge all y multitudes of folkes thou hast gotten the one people, and vnto this people whom thou louedest, thou gauest a lawe, y is proued of all.

And now O LORDE, why hast thou geué this one people ouer vnto many? q vpon the one rote thou hast prepared other, and why hast thou seatred y one onely people amonge many? which treade the downe, yee which haue euer withstonde j promyses, q neuer beleued y couenaütes? And though thou werest enemye vnto y people, yet shuldest thou punysh thé with thine owne handes.
Now wha I had spoke these wordes, the an- gell ý came to me ¥ night afore, was set vnto me, q sayde vnto me: Heare me, q herké to y thinge y I saye, q I shal tell ý more. And
1 sayed: Speake on my LORDE. ‘The sayde he vnto me: Thou art sore vexed q troubled for Israels sake. Louest thou y people better, then him y made them? And
Isayde: No LORDE, but of very grefe a copassion haue I spoke. For my reynes payne me euery houre, because I wolde haue experience of the waye of the most hyest, and to seke out parte of his iudgment. And he sayde vnto me: that thou mayest not.

The tj. boke of Esdras, 

vnto the, in the londe of their captyuyte ?! 

fo. rrb. 
And I sayde: wherfore LORDE? Where vnto was I borne then? Or why was not my mothers ehildesbed then my graue? So had
I not sene the mysery and trouble of Iacob, and the trauayle of my people of Israel.

And he sayde vnto me: Nobre me $ thinges, y are not yet come: gather me to- gether y droppes, that are scatred abrode : make me y floures grene agayne, y are wythered: ope me the thinge that is eed aud bringe me forth the wyndes, that are shutt vp: Shewe me the ymage of a voyce, and then shal I declare the the thinge, that thou labourest to knowe. And I sayde: O
LORDE LORDE, who may knowe these thinges, but he that hath not his dwellynge with me? As for me, I am vn wise: how maye I thé speake of these thinges, wherof thou axest me? "Thé sayde he vnto me: like as thou canst do none of these thinges y I haue spoken of, Euen so canst thou not fynde out my iudgment, or in the ende the loue that
I haue promysed vnto my people. And I sayde: Beholde o LORDE, yet art thou nye vnto them that haue no ende: and what shal they do that haue bene before me, or we that be now, or they that shal come after vs? And he sayde vnto me: J wylllycken my iudgment vnto a rynge. Like as there is no slacknesse of the last, euen so is there no swiftnesse of the first. So I answered q sayde: Coudest thou not make those (that haue bene made, and that be now, and that are for to come) in one, that thou mightest shewe thy iudgment the sooner ?

Then answered he me and sayde: The ereature may not haist aboue the maker, nether maye the worlde holde thé at once, that shalbe created.

And I sayde: How hast thou sayde then vnto thy seruaunt, that thou lyuynge maker hast made the creature lyuynge at once, q the creature bare it? eué so might it now also beare them that be present, at once. And he sayde vnto me: Axe the childeszbed of a woma, and saye vnto her: Yf thou bringest forth childré, why doest thou it not together, but one after another? Praye her therfore, to brynge forth ten children at once. And I sayde: she can not, but must do it one after another.

Then sayde he vnto me: Euen so haue I geuen a childeszbed vnto the earth, for those

109 

that be sowne vpon it by proeesse of tyme. 
For like as a yonge childe maye not brynge forth the thinges that belonge to the aged, euen so haue I ordened the worlde which I made.

And I axed and sayde: Seynge thou hast now geué me a waye, I wyl speake before y : for oure inother of who thou hast tolde me, is yet yonge, q now she draweth nye vnto age.
He answered me q sayde: Axe a woman that beareth children, « she shal tell the. Saye vnto her: wherfore are not they (whom thou hast now brought forth) like those that were be- fore the, but less of stature? And she shal answere the: They y be borne in the youth of strégth, are of one fashion: and they that are borne in the tyme of age (whan the child- eszbed fayleth) are other wyse. Cosidre now thy self, how that ye are lesse of stature, then those that were before you, and so are they that come after you, lesse then ye, as the erea- tures whieh now begynne to be olde, and haue passed ouer the strength of youth. "Then sayde I: LORDE I beseke the, yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, shewe thy ser- uaunt, by whom: doest thou vyset thy erea- ture ?

The bi. Chapter. 

ND he sayde vnto me: In the begyn- 
A nynge whan the grounde was made, before the worlde stode, or euer y wyndes blew, before it thondred and lightened, or euer the foundaeions of Paradise were layed, before the fayre floures were sene, or euer the moueable powers were stablished, before y innumerable multitudes of angels were gathered together, or euer y highnesses of y ayre were lifted vp, afore y measures of the firmament were named, or euer ý ehymneys in Sion were hote, and or the presente yeares were sought out, and or euer the invencions of them y now synne, were put asyde, before they were sealed that now gather faith for a treasure: then dyd I césidre and pondre all these thinges, and they all were made thorow me, and thorow none other: by me also they be ended, and by none other.

Then answered I and sayde: which shalbe the partynge asunder of the tymes? Or whan shalbe the ende of the first, and the begyn- nynge of it that foloweth? And he sayde vnto me: From Abraha vnto Isaac, wha
Iacob q Esau were borne of him, lacobs 

The iiij. boke of Essdras. 

hande helde first the hele of Esau: for Esau is the ende of this worlde, and Iaeob is the begynnynge of it that foloweth. The hande of man betwixte the hele and the hande.
Other question (Eszdras) axe thou not. 

I answered then and sayde: O LORDE 
LORDE, yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, I beseke the, shewe thy seruaunt the ende of thy tokés, wherof thou shewdest me parte the last night. So he answered and sayde vnto me: Stode vp vpon thy fete, and heare the perfeete voyce and sounde. There shal come a greate moeion, but y place where thou stodest shal not be moued. And ther- fore whan thou hearest the wordes, be not afrayed: for of the ende shal the worde and foundacion of y earth be vnderstonde. And why? the worde therof trembleth and quaketh, for it knoweth, that it must be ehaunged at the ende. And it happened, that wha I had herde it, I stode vp vpon my fete and herkened: and beholde, there was a voyee y spake, and the sounde of it was like the sounde of many waters, and it sayde. Beholde, y dayes come, y I wyl begynne to drawe nye, and to vyset them that dwell vpo earth, and wy! begynne to make inquysieion of them, what they be y haue hurte equyte with vnrighteousnes, and whan the lowe estate of Sion shalbe fulfylled : and whan the worlde, that shal vanish awaye, shalbe ouersealed, then wyl I do these tokens.

The bokes shalbe opened before the firma- ment, and they shal se all together, q the ehil- dren of a yeare olde shal speake with their voyees: the womé with childe shal brynge forth vntymely children of thre or foure monethes olde, and they shall lyue, and be raysed vp: a sodély shal the sowne places appeare as the vnsowne, the full store houses shal sodenly be fonnde emptie, and the trom- pett shal geue a sounde, which wha euery man heareth, they shalbe haistely afrayed.
At that tyme shall frendes fight" one agaynst another like enemies, and the earth shal stonde in feare with them.

The sprynges of the welles shal stonde styll, and in thre houres they shal not renne.
Who so euer remayneth from all these thinges that I haue tolde the, shal escape, and se my saluacion, and the ende of youre worlde. And the men that are receaued, shal se it, they

a Mat. 10. c. Mich.7. a. 

Chap. bí. 

B 

€ 

Chap. bí. that haue not taisted death fro their byrth:| andthe hert of the indwellers shalbe chaunged, and turned in to another meanynge: for euell shalbe put out, and disceate shalbe quenched.
As for faith, it shal florish, corrupcion shalbe ouercome: and the trueth, which hath bene so longe without frute, shalbe declared.

B| And it happened whan he talked with me, that I loked demurely vpo him, before who
I stode, and these wordes sayde he vnto me: lam come to shewe ¥, the tyme of y night for to come.

Yf thou wilt praye yet more, and fast seué dayes agayne, I shal tel the more thinges, a greater then before: for thy voyce is herde before the Hyest: for why? the Mightie hath sene thy righteous dealynge, he hath sene also thy chastite, which thou hast had euer sence thy youth : and therfore hath he sent me to shewe the all these thinges, and to saye vnto the: Be of good comforte, and feare not, and haist not with y tymes that are past to thynke vayne thinges, and make no haist of the latter tymes.

And it happened after this, y I wepte agayne, and fasted seuen dayes in like maner, that I might fulfill the thre wekes, which he tolde me. In the eight night was my hert vexed within me agayne, and I beganne to speake before the Hyest: for my sprete was greatly set on fyre, and my soule was in dis- tresse, and I sayde: O LORDE, thou spakest vnto thy creature from the begynnynge (euen the first daye) and saydest: Let" heauen and earth be made, and thy worde was a perfecte worke. And then was there the sprete, and the darcknesses were yet on euery syde, and sylence: there was no mans voyce as yet from the. Then commaundedst thou a fayre light to come forth out of thy treasures, that thy worke might appeare and be sene.

É| Vpon the seconde daye thou maydest the 

sprete of the firmament, and commaundedst it to parte asunder q to make a deuysion be- twixte the waters, that the one parte might remayne aboue, and the other beneth. Vpon the thirde daye thou broughtest to passe, y the waters were gathered in the seuenth parte of the earth: Sixe partes hast thou dryed vp, and kepte them, to the intet y men might sowe and occupie huszbandrie therin. As soone as thy worde wente forth, the worke was

* Gen. 1. a. 

The (ij. bake of Essdras. 

madé. For immediatly there was greate in- numerable frute, q many dyuerse pleasures q desyres of temptacion, floures of chaungeable coloure and smell, and this was done the thirde daye.

Vpon the fourth daye thou cémaundedst that the Sonne shulde geue his shyne, and y
Moone hir light: the starres didest thou sett in ordre, and gauest them a charge, to do seruyce euen vnto man,’ that was for to be made. Vpo the fifth daye thou saydest vnto the seuenth parte (where the waters were gathered) that they shulde bringe forth diuerse beastes, foules and fishes. And so it came to passe, that the domme water and without soule, brought forth lyuynge beastes at the commaundement of God, that all people might prayse thy wonderous workes. ‘Then didest thou preserue two soules, ¥ one thou calldest
Enoch and the other Leuiathan, and didest separate the one from the other: for the seuenth parte (namely, where the water was gathered together) might not holde them both. Vnto Enoch thou gauest one parte, which was dryed vp the thirde daye, that he shulde dwell in the same parte, wherin are a thousande hilles. But vnto Leuiatha thou gauest the seuenth parte, namely the moyst, and hast kepte him to deuoure what thou wylt, and whan.

Vpon the sixte daye thou ganest comaunde- ment vnto the earth, that before the it shulde brynge forth beastes, catell and all y crepe,
€ (besydes this) Adam also, whom thou maydest lorde of all thy creatures: Of him come we all, and the people also, whom thou hast chosen specially vnto thy self. All this haue I sayde now and spoken before the, that
I might shewe, how that the worlde is made for oure sakes. As for the other people which also come of Adam, thou hast sayde that they are nothinge, but be like a spetle, and hast lickened the abundaüce of them vnto a droppe
(that falleth) from the rofe of the house. 

And now (O LORDE) the Heithé which haue euer bene reputed as nothinge, haue begone to be lordes ouer vs, and to denonre vs: but we thy people (whom thou hast called y first borne, thy only begotten, and thy fer- uent louer) are geuen in to their handes and power. Yf the worlde now be made for oure sakes, why haue we not the inheritaunce in

^ Deu. 4. c. 

Fo. rroi. 

Fo. rrbitj. possession with the worlde? How longe shal this endure ?

The bii. Chapter. 

ND it happened after that I had spoken 

out these wordes, there was sent vnto me an angell (which had bene by me also the nightes afore) and he sayde vnto me: Vp
Eszdras, and heare the wordes that I am come totellthe. And I sayde: speake on LORDE my God. "Thé sayde he vnto me: The see is sett in a wyde place, y it might be depe and greate: but the intraüce is narow and small like a ryuer. For who wolde go in to the see, to loke vpon it, and to rule it? Yf he wente not thorow the narow, how might he come in to the brode?

Item, another. A cite is buylded and sett vpon a brode felde, and is full of all goodes: the intraunce is narow and sodane, like as yf there were a fyre at the right hande, and a depe water at the left, and as it were onely one strate path betwixte thë both, so small, that there coude but one man go there.

Yf this cite now were geuen to an heyre, ¢ he neuer wente thorow this parlous waye, how wolde he receaue his inheritauce? And I sayde: It is so, LORDE. Then sayde he:
Euen so is Israel also a porcion. And why? for their sakes haue I made the worlde: « whan Adam trasgressed my statutes, then was y thinge iudged that was done. Then were i intraunces of the worlde made narow, fu of sorow and trauayle: They are but few « euell, fuil of parels and laboure. For the intraunces of the fore worlde were wyde and sure, and brought immortall frute.
33| Yf they now which are entred in to this worlde, maye not comprehende these strayte and vayne thinges, moch lesse maye they có- prehende and vnderstonde the secrete thinges:
Why disquietest thou thy self then, seynge thou art but a corruptible ma? And what woldest thou knowe, where as thou art but mortall? And why hast thou not receaued in to thine hert the thinge that is for to come, but that is present?

Thé sayde I: O LORDE LORDE, thou hast ordened in thy lawe,’ that the righteous shulde inheret these thinges, but that the vn- faithfull and vngodly shulde perishe. Neuer-

? Deut, 8. a. 

The iiij, boke of Esdras. 

theles the righteous shall suffre strayte thinges, and hope for wyde : for they that haue lyned vngodly q suffred strayte thinges, shal not se the wyde.

And he saide vnto me: Fhere is no iudge aboue God, and none that hath vnderstond- inge aboue the Hyest. For there be many y perish, because they despyse y lawe of God that is sett before them. Por God hath geuen strayte commaundement to soch as come, that they knowe what they do, and how they shulde lyue: and yf they kepte this, they shulde not be punyshed.

Neuertheles they were not obedient vnto him, but spake agaynst him: ymagined vayne thinges, v purposed to synne, and sayde morouer, that there was no God, q that God regarded it not. His wayes haue they not knowne, his lawe haue they despysed, x de- nyed his promyses: in his statutes q ordi- naunces haue they not bene faithfull q stedfast, and haue not perfourmed his workes.

And therfore Eszdras, vnto the full, plenty: | and to the emptye, emptynesse. Beholde, the tyme shal come, y these tokens which I haue tolde the, shal come to passe, q the bryde shall appeare: a the earth y now passeth awaye, shalbe shewed: q who so euer is de- lyuered from y foresayde euels, shal se my woders. For my sonne lesus shal be openly declared, with those y be with him: and they y remayne, shal be mery in foure hundreth yeares.

After these same yeares shall my sonne 
Christ dye, and all men that haue hfe: and y worlde shalbe turned in to the olde sylence seuen dayes, like as in the fore iudgmentes, so that no man shall remayne. And after seué dayes, the worlde that yet awaketh not, shalbe raysed vp, q shal dye corrupte. And the earth shal restore those that haue slepte in her, and so shall the dust those that dwell in sylece, and the secrete places shal delyuer those that be committed vnto them. And y most hyest shal be openly declared vpon the seate of judgment, q all misery shal vanysh awaye, and loge suffringe shalbe gathered together. But the iudgment shall contynue, y trueth shal remayne, and faith shal waxe stroge, the worke shal folowe, and the rewarde shall be shewed, the righteousnesses shall watch, and the vnrighteousnesses shall beare no rule.

Chap. by. 

Chap. biij, 

B| Then sayde I: Abraham prayed first for the Sodomites,“ q Moses for the fathers y synned in the wyldernes, q he Pi came after him for Israel, in ¥ tyme of Achas and
Samuel: and Dauid for y destruccion, and 
Salomon for them that came in to the Sanc- tuary, q Helias for those that receaued rayne, and for the deed, that he might lyue: and
Ezechias for $ people in the tyme of Sen- nacherib: q dyuerse other in like maner, which haue prayed for many.

Eué so now, seynge y corrupte is growne vp, and wickednes increased, and the righ- teous haue prayed for the vngodly, wherfore shal it not be so now also?

He answered me, and sayde: 'This present worlde is not ende, there remayneth moch honoure in it, therfore haue they prayed for the weake. But the daye of dome shalbe the ende of this tyme, and ¥ begynnynge of the immortalite for to come, wherin all corrup- cion vanysheth, all volupteousnes is lowsed, all myszbeleue taken awaye, righteousnes growne, and the verite spronge vp. Then shall no man be able to saue him that is de- stroyed, ner to oppresse him y hath gotté y

%6\victory. I answered thé, q sayde: This is my first q last sayenge: y it had bene better, not to haue geuen the earth vnto Adam: or els whan it was geué him, to kepe him that he shulde not synne. For what profit is it for men now in this present tyme to lyne in heuynes, q after death to loke for punysz- ment? O thou Ada, what hast thou done?
For though it was thou y synned, thou art not fallé alone, but we all y come of the.
For what profit is it vnto vs, yf there be pro- mysed vs an immortall tyme, where as we medle with deadly workes? x that there is promysed vs an euerlastinge hope, where as we oure selues are euell and vayne? q y there are layed vp for vs dwellynges of health q fredome, where as we haue lyued euell? and that the worshipe of y Hyest is kepte to defende them, which haue led a pacient life, where as we haue walked in ý most wicked wayes of all? and that there shalbe shewed a paradyse, whose frute endureth for euer, wherin is fredome and medycyne, where as we shal not go in? for we haue walked in vn- pleasaunt places: And that the faces of them

a Gen. 18. d. Exo. 32.c. 2 Re. 24. b. 

2 Par. 6. c. 
3 Re. 17. a.” 4 Re.18 and 19 : 

The tj. boke of (suras. 

which haue absteyned, shal shyne aboue the starres, where as oure faces shalbe blacke and darcke? For whyle we lyued and dyd vn- righteously, we considered not, that we shulde suffre therfore after death ?

Thé answered he me, and sayde: This is the consideracion q thought of the battayl, which man hath vpon earth: that yf he be ouercome, he shall suffre as thou hast sayde.
But yf he gett, the victory, he shall receaue the thinge that I saye. For this is the life, wherof Moses spake vnto the people, whyle he lyued, sayenge: Chose the hfe,’ that thou mayest lyue. Neuertheles they beleued him not, nether the prophetes after him, No ner me which haue spoken vnto them, that heuynes shulde not reach ynto them to their destruc- cion, like as ioye is for to come ouer those, that haue suffred thé selues to be enfourmed in salvacion.

Ianswered then q sayde: I knowe LORDE, that the Hyest is mercyfull, in y he hath mercy vpon them, which are not yet in the worlde, and vpon those also that walke in his lawe:° and that he is pacient and longe suf- feringe towarde those that haue synned im their workes: and that he is liberall to geue where as it requyreth: and that he is of greate mercy, for he multiplieth his louynge kynd- nesses towarde those that are present, and that are past, and to them which are for to come. For yf he multiplie not his mercies, the worlde shal not be made lyuynge, with those that dwell therin: He geueth also, for yf he gaue not of his goodnesse, that they which haue done euell, might be eased, the ten thousande parte of men shulde not be made lyuynge. And yf the iudge forgaue not those Y bé healed with his worde, and yf he wolde dotes y multitude that stryueth, there shulde be very few left in an innumer- able multitude.

The biij. Chapter. 
ND he answered me, sayege: The most hyest made this worlde for many, but the worlde to come for few. I wyl tell the a symilitude, Eszdras: As whan thou axest the earth, it shal saye vnto the, that it geueth moch moulde, wherof erthen vessels are made, but litle of it y golde cometh of.

* Rom. 2.a. 

t Deut. 30. d. 

5 

Fo. rrr. 

Euen so is it with the worke of this worlde. 
There be many created," but few shall be preserucd. ‘Then answered I q sayde: Then swalowe vp the witt (thou soule) and deuoure the vnderstondinge, for thou art agreed to herken and to geue eare, and wyllinge to prophecie: for thou hast no longer space geuen the, but only to lyue. O LORDE, wilt thon not geue thy seruaunt leue, y we maye praye before the, and that thou mayest geue sede vnto oure hert, and buylde oure vnderstondinge, that there maye come frute of it: and that euery one which is corrupte, and beareth the state and place of a man, maye lyue?

For thou art alone, and we all are one workmanshipe of thy handes, like as thou hast sayde, and like as the body is fashioned now in the childeszbed, and thou geuest the membres, and thy creature is preserued in fyre and water: q ix. monethes doth thy worke suffre thy creature, which is fashioned in her: but the thinge that preserueth and it
ý is preserued, shal both be kepte together: q whan tyme is, the childeszbedd delyuereth y thinge, that is kepte and growne iu her.

For thou hast commaunded the brestes to geue mylck vnto the frute, that the thinge which is created and fashioned, maye be no- rished for a tyme: and then thou disposest and ordrest it with thy mercy, bryngest it vp with thy righteousnes, nurturest it in thy lawe, and refourmest it with thy vnderstoud- inge, mortifiest it as thy creature, and makest it lyuynge as thy worke. Seinge then that thou destroyest him, which with so greate labours is ereated and fashioned thorow thy commaundement, thou coudest lyghtly ordene also, that the thinge which is made, might be preserued.

And this I speake now of all men in generall, as thou knowest: but of thy people, for whose sake I am sory: and of thy in- heritaunce, for whose cause I mourne: and of Israel, for whom I am wofull: and for
Iacob, for whose sake I am greued: therfore begynne I to praye before the, for my self and for them, for I se the fall of vs, euen of vs, that dwell vpon earth. But I haue herde the swiftnes of the iudge, which is to come: therfore heare my voyce, and vnderstóde my wordes, and I shal speake before the.

^ Mat. 20, b. and 21. b. 

The tif. boke of Esdras, 
This is the begynnynge of the wordes of| € 

Chap. biij. 

Eszdras, before he was receaued: O LORDE, thou that dwellest in euerlastyngnesse, whose eyes are lift vp in the ayre, whose stole is exceading hye, whose glory and maiesty maye not be comprehéded, before whom the hoostes of heauen stonde with tremblinge, whose kepinge is turned in winde and fyre, whose worde is true, whose talkynge is stedfast, whose commaundement is stronge, whose ordynaunce is fearfull, whose loke dryeth vp the depthes, whose wrath maketh the moun- taynes to melt awaye, q whose trueth beareth wytues: O heare y prayer of thy seruaunt, and marck with thine eares the peticion of thy creature.

For whyle I lyue, I wil speake: and so loge as I haue vnderstondinge, I will answere.
Oloke not vpo the synnes of thy people, which serue y in the trueth. Hane no re- specte vnto the wicked studies of the Heithen, but to the desyre of those that kepe thy testi- monies with sorowes. "l'hinke not vpon those that haue walked faynedly before the, but vpon them, which with wyll haue knowne thy feare.

Let it not be thy wyll to destroye them, which haue had beastly maners, but to loke vpon them that haue clearly taught thy lawe.
Take thou no indignacion at them, which are worse then beastes: but loue them, that allwaye put their trust in ¥ righteousnes and glory; for we and oure fathers haue all the same sicknes and disease, but because of oure synnes thou shalt be called mercifull.

For yf thou hast mercy vpon vs, thou shalt be called mercifull, where as we haue no workes of righteousnes: for $ righteous which haue layed vp many good workes together, shall out of their dedes receaue rewarde. For what is man, that thou shuldest take displea- sure at him? Or what is the corruptible mortall generacion, that thou shuldest be so rough towarde him ?

* For of a trueth there is no man amonge them that be borne, but he hath dealt wick- edly : and amonge the faithfull there is none, which hath not done amysse. For in this (O
LORDE) thy righteousnes a thy goodnes shalbe praysed and declared, yf thou be mer- cifull vnto them, which are not rych in good workes.

2 Par. 6. f. 1 Ioh. 1. b. 

+S Re. 8. g. 

Chap. tr. 

Then answered he me and sayde: Some thinges hast thou spoken a right, and acord- inge vnto thy wordes it shal be. For I wil not verely cosidre the worke of them, which haue synned before death, before the iudg- ment, before destruccio, “but I wyll reioyse ouer the worke and thought of y righteous.
I wil remembre also the pilgramege, the ho- lymakynge and the rewarde. Like as I haue spoken now, so shall it come to passe. For as the huszbad man soweth moch sede vpon the grounde, and planteth many trees, and yet allwaye the thinge that is sowne or plated is not all kepte safe, nether doth it all take rote: Euen so is it of them that are sowne in the worlde, they shal not all be preserued.

I answered then q sayde: Yf I haue founde grace, then let me speake. Like as the hus- bade mans sede perisheth, yf it receane not rayne in due season, or yf there come to moch rayne vpon it: Euen so perisheth man also, which is created with thy handes, and is like vnto thine owne ymage and to thy self, for whose sake thou hast made all thinges, and lickened him vnto the huszbande mans sede.
Be not wroth at vs (O LORDE) but spare thy people, and haue mercy vpon thine owne inheritaunce: O be mercifull vnto thy crea- ture.

Then answered he me and sayde: Thinges present are for the present, and thinges to come for soch as be to come. For thon watest yet moch, seynge thou mayest loue my creature aboue me: I haue oft times drawne nye vnto the, but neuer to the vnrighteous.
In this also thou art maruelous before the 
Hyest, in that thou hast humbled thy self, as it becommeth the, and hast not regarded thine owne self, Y thou art had in soch ho- noure amonge z righteous. Therfore shal greate wrechidnes and mysery come vpon them, that in the latter tyme shal dwell in ý worlde, for they haue walked in greate pryde.

But vnderstonde thou for thy self, and seke out glory for soch as be like the: for vnto you is paradyse opened, the tre of life is plated, the tyme to come is prepared, plen- teousnes made ready: a cite is builded for you, and a rest is prepared, yee perfecte good- nes and wyszdome. ‘The rote of euell is marked from you, the weaknes and moth is hyd from you, « into hell flyeth corrupcion in

a Gen. 4. a. 

The iii. boke of Esdras, 

So. rrt. forgetfulnes. Sorowes are vanyshed awaye, and in the ende is shewed the treasure of immortalite. And therfore axe thou no more questions, cocernynge the multitude of them that perishe. For they haue taken libertie, despysed the Hyest, thonght scorne of his lawe, and forsaken his wayes.

Morouer, they haue troden downe his righteous, ^ and sayde in their hert, that there is no God, yee and that wittingly, for they dye. For hke as the thinge that I haue spoken of, is made ready for you: Enē so is thyrst and payne prepared for them. For it was not his wil that man shulde come to naught: but they which be created, haue de- fyled the name of him that made them, and are vnthankefull vnto him, which prepared life for them. And therfore is my indgment now at hande. ‘These thinges haue I not shewed vnto all men, but vnto few: namely, vnto the, and to soch as be like the.

Then answered I and sayde: Beholde O 
LORDE, now hast thon shewed me the mul- titude of the tokens, which thou wilt begynne to do at thelast: but at what tyme and whan, thou hast not shewed me.

The ir. Chapter. 

E answered me then and saide: Mea- sure thou the tyme diligently in it self, whan thou seist that one parte of the tokens come to passe, which I haue tolde y before: so shalt thou vnderstonde, that it is the very same tyme, wherin the Hyest wil begynne to vysit the worlde, which he made. And wha there shalbe sene earthquake and vproure of the people in the worlde, then shalt thou well vnderstonde, that the most hyest spake of those thinges, from the dayes that were before

the, euen from the begynnynge. 

For like as all that is made in the worlde, hath a begynnynge and ende, and the ende is manyfest: Euen so the tymes also of the
Hyest haue playne begynnynges in wonders and signes, and the ende in workynge and in tokens. And euery one that shalbe saued, and shall be able to escape by his workes q by faith (wherin ye haue beleued) shall be preserued from the saide parels, and shal se my sauioure in my londe and within my borders, for I haue halowed me from the worlde. "Then shall they be in carefulnesse,

> Psal, 13. a. 

(fo. rrii. yn 

which now haue abused my waies: and they that haue cast them out despytefully, shall dwell in paynes.

For soch as in their life haue receaued benefites, and haue not knowne me, and they that haue abhorred my lawe, whyle they had yet fredome, and whan they had yet open rowme of amendemét and conuersion, q vn- derstode not, but despysed it: y same must knowe it after death in payne. And therfore be thou nomore carefull how the vngodly shalbe punyshed, a how the righteous shalbe saued, and whose the worlde is, and for whom the worlde, and whan it is. Then answered
I and sayde: “I haue talked before q now I speake, and wyl speake also herafter, that there be many moo of them which perish, then shal be saued, like as the floude is greater then the droppes.

And he answered me, sayenge: like as the felde is, so is also the sede: as the floures be, so are the colours also: soch as the workman is, soch is also ý worke: and as the huszband man is himself, so is his huszbandrye also, for it was the tyme of the worlde. And whan I prepared for them that are now, or euer the worlde was made, wher in they shulde dwel, then was there no man that withstode me.
Now whan euery one was, and the maker also in the worlde which is now prepared, and the moneth that ceaseth not, and the lawe which is vnsearcheable, their maners were corrupte. So I considered the worlde, and beholde, there was parell, because of ý thoughtes that were come in to it. And I sawe, and spared thé greatly, and haue kepte me a wynebery of the grapes, and a plante from amonge many generacions. Let the multitude perish thé, which are growne vp in vayne, and let my grape q wynebery be kepte: euen my plante: for with greate la- boure haue I made it vp.

Neuertheles yf thou wilt take vpon the yet seuen dayes mo (but thou shalt not fast in them) go thy waye then in to y felde of floures, where no house is buylded, and eate onely of the floures of the felde, taist not flesh, drinke no wine, but eate floures onely.
Praye vnto the Hyest contynually, so will I come, and talke with the.

So I wente my waye and came in to the felde which is called Ardath (like as he com-

a 4 Esd. 8. a. 

> Exa. 19. d. and 24. a. Deut. 4. b. 

Che tif. boke of Cssdras, 

Chap. tr. maunded me) and there I sat amonge ¥ floures, and ate of the herbes of the felde, and y meate of the same satisfied me. After seuen dayes I sat vpon the grasse, q my hert was vexed within me like as afore: and I opened my mouth, and beganne to talke be- fore the Hyest, and saide: O LORDE, thou y shewest thy self vuto vs, ^thou hast declared and opened thy self vnto oure fathers in the wyldernes, in a place where no man dwelleth, in a baren place, whan they came ont of
Egipte, and thou spakest, sayege: Heare me 
O Israel, and marke my wordes thou sede of lacob.. Beholde, I sowe my lawe in you, and it shal brynge frute in you, q ye shalbe honoured in it for euer. For oure fathers which receaued the lawe, kepte it not, and obserued not thy ordinaunces and statutes, v the frute of y lawe was not declared: for it might not, for why? it was thine. For they that receaued it, perished, “ because they kepte not y thinge that was sowne in them.

It is a custome whan the grounde receaueth| £ sede, or the see a shipp, or a vessell meate and drynke, that, whan it perisheth or is broken wherin a thinge is sowne, or wherin eny thinge 1s put: the thinges also perishe q are broken, which are sowne or putt therin.
But vnto vs it hath not happened so: for we y haue receaued the lawe, perish in synne, and oure hert also which receaued the lawe: notwithstondinge “the lawe perisheth not, but remayneth in his laboure.

And whan I considered these thinges in my hert after this maner, I loked aboute me with myne eyes, “and vpon the right syde I sawe a woman, which mourned sore, made greate lamentacion, and wepte with loude voyce: hir clothes were rent in peces, q she had aszshes vpon hir heade.

Thé let I my thoughtes go, y I was in, q turned me vnto her, q sayde: wherfore wepest thou? why art thou so sory q discomforted ?
And she sayde vnto me: Syr, let me bewayle my self q take yet more sorowe: for lam sore vexed in my mynde, q brought very lowe.
And I said vnto her: what ayleth y? Or who hath done eny thinge to y? tell me.
She sayde: I haue bene vnfrutefull and baren, and haue had an huszband thirtie yeares. And these xxx. yeares I do nothinge els daye and night and all houres, but make

* 4Es. 10. d. 

* Deut. 32. f. 4 Esa. 40. a. 2 Tim. 2.a. 

| ffo. xrrib. 

i 

to corrupcion, and my prayer to rebuke. 
And as I was speakynge these wordes, he came vnto me, and loked vpon me, and I laye as one that had bene deed, and myne vnderstandinge was altered, and he toke me by the right hande, and comforted me, and set me vp vpon my fete, aud sayde vnto me: what ayleth the? and why is thine vnder- standinge vexed ? and the vnderstondinge of thy hert, and wherfore art thou sory? And I sayde: Becanse thou hast forsaken me: and
I haue done acordynge vnto thy wordes,” I wente in to the felde, and there haue I sene thinges, that I am not able to expresse. He saide vnto me: Stode vp and be manly, and
I shal geue the exortacion. 

'Then sayde I: Speake on to me my 
LORDE, forsake me not, lest I dye in vayne: for I hane sene that I knewe not, x herde that
Ido not knowe. Or shall my vnderstondynge be disceaued, and my mynde? But now I beseke the, that thou wilt shewe thy seruaunt of this woder. He answered me thé and sayde: heare me, and I shall enfourme the, and tell the wherfore thou art afrayed, for the
Hyest hath opened many secrete thynges vnto the.

He hath sene that thy waye is right, and that thou takest sorowe continually for thy people, and makest greate lamentacion for
Sion: and therfore vnderstonde the vision which thou sawest a litle whyle agoo after this maner: Thou sawest a woman mournynge, and thou hast comforted her: Neuertheles now seist thon the licknes of the woman no- more, but thou thoughtest there was a cite buylded : and like as she tolde the of the fall of her sonne, so is this the answere: The woman whom thou sawest, is Sion: and where as she tolde the, that she hath bene thirtie yeares vnfrutefull and baren, those are the xxx. yeares, wherin there was no offeringe made in her. .

But after xxx. yeares Salomon buylded her, and offred, and then bare the baren a sonne. And where as she tolde the, that she norished him with laboure, that was the dwellynge of lerusalem. But where as the sonne dyed in hir chamber, that is the fall of lerusalem. And thou sawest hir lickenesse, how she mourned for hir sonne: and what els happened vnto her, I haue shewed jy.

* 4 Esd. 9. a. 

The (itj. boke of Cssdras, 

Chap. ri. 
And now God seyth, that thou art sory in thy mynde, and suffrest from y hert for her: and so hath he shewed the hir clearnesse, and the fayrnes of hir bewtye.

And therfore I bad the remayne in the felde, where no house is buylded. For I knew y the Hyest wolde shew this vnto the, therfore I commaunded the to go in to the felde, where no foundacion ner buyldinge is.
For in the place where the Hyest wyll shewe his cite, there shall be no mans buyldinge.
And therfore feare not, and let not thine hert be afrayed, but go thy waye in, and se the glorious and fayre buyldinge, and how greate it is, and how greate thou thinkest it after the measure of thine eyes, q then shalt thou heare as moch as thine eares maye comprehéde. For thou art blessed aboue many other, and art called with the Hyest, as y few. But to- morow at night thou shalt remayne here, and so shal the Hyest shewe the visions of hye thinges, which he wyll do vnto them that dwell vpon earth in y last dayes. So I slepte the same night like as he comaunded me.

The ri. Chapter. 

HEN sawe I a dreame: and beholde, there came vp from y see an Aegle, which had xij. wynges and thre heades: And
I sawe, and beholde, he spred his wynges ouer all the earth, and all the wyndes of the ayre blew in them, and so they were put to- gether agayne. And I behelde, and out of his fethers there grew other litle contrary fethers: the heades rested, the head in the myddest was greater then the other, yet rested it with the residue. j
Morouer I sawe, that the Aegle flew with his wynges, and raigned vpon earth, q ouer all them that dwell vpon the earth: and 1 sawe M all thinges vnder heauen were subiecte vnto him, and no man spake against him, no not one creature vpon earth. I sawe also that the Aegle stode vp vpon his clawes, ¢ gaue a sounde with his fethers, q a voyce sayege after this maner: watch not all to- gether, slepe euery mà in his owne place, q watch for a tyme, but let the heades be preserued at the last. Neuertheles I sawe, y the voyce wente not out of his heades, but from the myddest of his body. And I nom- bred his cotrary fethers, a beholde, there were eight of them. And I loked, « beholde, vpon

Ch ap. rij. 

the right syde there arose one fether, q raigned ouer all the earth. And it happened, ý whan it raigned, the ende of it came, q the place therof appeared no more. So the nexte folowinge stode vp, q raigned, q had a greate tyme: q it happened, ý whan it raigned, the ende of it came also like as the first, so that it appeared nomore.

Then came there a voyce vnto it, q sayde: 
Heare thou y hast kepte in the earth so loge, this I saye vnto the, before thou begynnest to appeare nomore: There shal none after y atteyne vnto thy tyme. Then arose the thirde, t raigned as the other afore, a appeared no- more also. So wéte it with all the residue one after another, so y euery one raigned, q thé appeared nomore. Thé I loked, q be- holde, in processe of tyme the fethers y folowed were set vp vpó the right syde, y they might rule also: and some of the ruled, but within a while they appeared nomore: for some of the were set vp, but ruled not. After this I loked, x beholde, y xij. fethers appeared no- more, and the two wynges: q there was no- more vpon the Aegles body, but two heades that rested, q sixe fethers. "Then sawe I also, y the sixe fethers were parted in two, q re- mayned vnder the heade, y was vpon the right syde, for the foure cotynued in their place. So I loked, and beholde, they that were vnder the wynges, thought to set vp them selues, and to haue the rule. Then was there one set vp, but shortly it appeared no- more, and the seconde were sooner awaye then the first. And I behelde, and lo, the two thought also by thé selues to raigne: a wha they so thought, beholde, there waked one of the heades that were at rest, namely, it that was in the myddest, for that was the greater of the two heades. And then I sawe, that the two heades were fylled with him, and the heade was turned with them y were by him, v ate vp y two vnder wynges, ý wolde haue raigned. a

D| But this heade put ¥ whole earth in feare, 

and bare rule in it, ouer all those y dwelt vpon earth with moch laboure, and he had the gouernaunce of the worlde, ouer all the foules that haue bene. After this I loked, and be- holde, the heade that was in the middest, sodenly appeared nomore, like as $ wynges: then came the two heades, which ruled vpon earth, q ouer those that dwelt therin. And I

The inj. boke of Esras. 

behelde, « lo, the heade vpon the right side, deuoured it that was vpon theleftsyde. And
I herde a voyce, which sayde vnto me: loke before the, and considre the thinge that thou seist. Then I sawe, and beholde, as it were a lyon that roareth, rennynge haistely out of y wod, and he sent out a mans voyce vnto the Aegle, and sayde: Heare thou, I wyl talke with the, and the Hyest shal saye vnto the: Is it not thou that hast the vietory of the foure beastes, whom I made to raigne vpon earth and in my worlde, and that y ende of their times might come thorow thé ?

And the fourth eame, and ouerwanne all) 3 

the beastes that were past, and had power ouer the worlde with greate fearfulnes, and ouer the whole compasse of the earth with the most wicked laboure, and so longe time dwelt he vpon the earth with disceate, qœ the earth hast thou iudged not with trueth. For thon hast troubled the meke, thou hast hurte the peaceable and quyete, thou hast loued lyers, and destroyed the dwellynges of them that brought forth frute, and hast cast downe the walles of soch as dyd the no harme. ‘Therfore is thy wrongeous dealynge and blasphemy come vp vnto the Hyest, and thy pryde vnto the Mightie. ‘The Hyest also hath loked vpo the pronde tymes, and beholde, they are ended, and their abhominacions are fulfilled.
And therfore appeare nomore thou Aegle, and thy horrible wynges, and thy wicked fethers, and thy vngracious heades, and thy synfull clawes, and all thy vayne body: that the earth maye be refreshed, and come agayne to herself, whan she is deliuered from thy vio- lence, and that she maye hope for y iudgment and mercy of him that made her.
The rij. Chapter. 

ND it happened whā $ Ly6 spake these 
A wordes vnto y Aegle, *¥ heade y afore had y vpperhade, appeared nomore: nether dyd y foure wynges appeare eny more, y came to hi, q were sett vp to raigne, q their kyng- dome was small q full of vpronure.

And I sawe, a beholde, they appeared no- more, t y whole body of y Aegle was brét, q the earth was in greate feare. Then awaked
I out of the traunce of my mynde, and from greate feare, and sayde vnto my sprete: Lo, this hast thou geuen me, in y thou searchest

* Rede, I sawe, and beholde, 

Fo. pyr. 

fo. revo. 

j 
| 
| 
| 
| 

out the wayes of the Hyest: lo, yet am I weery in my minde, and very weake in my sprete, and litle strégth is there in me, for the greate feare that I reccaued this night. Ther- fore wil I now beseke the Hyest, y he wyl comforte me vnto the ende, « I sayde:
LORDE LORDE yf I haue founde grace before thy sight, and yf I am iustified with y before many other, q yf my prayer be come vp before thy face, cóforte me then, and shew me thy seruaunt the interpretacion q playne differéce of this horrible sight, that thou mayest perfectly coforte my soule: for thou hast iudged me worthy, to shew me y last of tymes.

And he sayde vnto me: this is the inter- pretacion of this sight, The Aegle whom thou sawest come vp from the see, is the kingdome which was sene in the vision of thy brother
“Daniel, but it was no expounded vnto him, for now I declare it vnto the.

Beholde, the dayes come, that there shal ryse vp a kyngdome vpo earth, and it shal be feared aboue all the kyngdomes y were before it. In the same kyngdome shal xij. kynges raigne, one after another. For the secode shal begynne to raigne, and shal haue more tyme the the other, q this do Y xij. wynges signifie, which thou sawest. As for the voyce that spake, and that thou sawest go out from the heades but not from y body, it betokeneth, that after the tyme of that kyngdome there shall aryse greate stryuynges, and it shal stonde in parell of fallynge: neuertheles it shal not yet fall, bot shal be set in to his beginnynge. And ¥ eight vnderwynges which thou sawest hage vnto y wynges of hi, betoke, y in hi there shal aryse eight kynges, whose tyme shalbe but small, « their yeares swift, « two of them shal beare. But whan the mid- dest tyme commeth, there shal be foure kepte in the tyme, whan his tyme begynneth to come that it maye be ended, but two shal be kepte vnto ¥ ende.

And where as thou sawest thre heades restynge, this is the interpretacion : In his last shal the Hyest rayse vp thre kyngdomes, and call many agayne in to thé, q they shal haue the dominion of the earth, and of those that dwell therin, with moch laboure aboue all those y were before thé. — 'T'herfore are they called ý

eades of the Aegle: for it is they y shal 
* Dan. 7. 

The iiij. boke of Essdras. 

For we are no better, then they y dyed there: 

bringe forth his wickednes agayne, q y shal perfourme ç fynish his last. And where as thou sawest, that y greate heade appeared no- more, it signifieth, that one of them shal dye vpo his bed, q yet with payne, for the two that remayne, shalbe slayne with the swerde.
For the swerde of the one shal deuoure the other, but at the last shal he fall thorow the swerde himself.

And where as thou sawest two vnderwinges vpon the heade that is on the right syde, it signifieth, that it is they, who the Hyest hath! kepte vnto their ende: this is a small kyng-' dome, q full of trouble. The Lyon who thou sawest rysinge vp out of the wodd and! roaringe, and speakinge vnto the Aegle, and rebukynge him for his vnrighteousnesse, is the wynde, which the Hyest hath kepte for them and for their wickednesse vnto the ende: he shal reproue them, and rente them asunder before them. For he shal sett them lyuynge before the iudgment, and shal rebuke them : for the residue of my people shal he delyuer with trouble, those y be preserued ouer myne endes: and he shal make them ioyfull vntyll the commynge of the daye of iudgment, wherof
I haue spoken vnto the from the begynnynge. 
This is the dreame that thou sawest, and this is the interpretacion. ‘Thou only hast bene mete to knowe the secrete of the Hyest.

Therfore wryte all these thinges y thou hast sene in a boke, and hyde them, and teach the the wyse in the people, whose hertes thou knowest maye comprehéde and kepe these secretes. But wayte thou here y self yet seuen dayes moo, that it maye be shewed the, what so euer it pleaseth the Hyest to declare vnto the, and with that he wente his w

aye. nd whan all the people perceaued, y the seuen dayes were past, q I not come agayne into ý cite, they gathered them all together from the least vnto the most, x came vnto me, and sayde: what haue we offended the? and what euell haue we done agaynst the, y thou forsakest vs, q syttest here in this place? For of all people thou only art left vs, as a grape of the vyne, and as a candell in a darcke place, and as an hauen q shippe preserued from ¥ tépest. Haue we not els aduersite ynough, but thou must forsake vs? Were it not better for vs, that we had bene brent with Sion?

Chap. ri. 

n 

Chap. rii. 

and they wepte with loude voyce. "Then an- swered I thé q sayde: Be of good céforte O
Israel, x be not heuy thou house of Iacob: for 
We hath you in remébraüce, ¢ y Mightie 

ath not forgotté you in tetació. As for me, 
I haue not forsake you, nether am I departed from you: but am come in to this place to praye, because of y mysery of Israel, that I might seke mercy is y lowe estate of youre
Sactuary. And now go youre waye home euery ma, and after these dayes wyl I come vnto you.
So the people wéte their waye in to the cite, like as I commaunded them: but I remayned still in the felde seuen dayes, as ¥ angell bad me, and I ate onely of the floures of the felde, and had my meate of the herbes in those dayes.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND it happened after the seué dayes, y 
A I dreamed a dreame by night. And beholde, there arose a wynde from the see, that it moued all the floudes therof. And I loked, and beholde, the man was stronge and increased with the cloudes of heauen: and whan he turned his countenaunce to cosider, all the thinges trembled that were sene vnder him: and whan the voyce wente out of his inouth, all they brent that herde him, like as the earth whan it feleth the fyre.

After these I sawe, x beholde, there was gathered together a multitude of mē out of nombre from the foure wyndes of the heaué, to fight agaynst y man, that came out from y see. And I loked, ¢ beholde, he graued him- self a greate moutayne, and flew vp vpon it.
But I wolde haue sene the border or place, wherout the hill was grauen, q I coude not.

I sawe after these, y all they which came to fight agaynst him, were sore afrayed, and yet durst they fight. Neuertheles whan he sawe the fearsnesse and violence of the people, he nether lift vp his hande ner helde swerde, ner eny weapen: but onely (as I sawe) he sent out of his mouth as it had bene a blast of fyre, and out of his lippes ¥ wynde of the flamme: and out of his toge he cast out sparkes and stormes, and they were all myxte together: the blast of fyre, the wynde of the flames, and y greate storme, q fell with a russhe vpou y people, which was prepared to fight q brét the vp euerychone: so that of the in- numerable multitude there was nothinge sene,

The iiij. boke of Essdras, 

but onely dust ¢ smoke. was afrayed.

Afterwarde sawe I the same man come downe from the mountayne, and callinge vnto him another peaceable people: and there came moch people vnto him: some were glad some were sory, some of them were bounde, so that they were caried and brought forth,

Then was I sick thorow greate feare, and I awaked, and sayde: thou hast shewed y ser- uaunt all y woders fro y begynnynge, q hast counted me worthy, y Mes mightest receaue my prayer: shewe me now yet the interpreta- cion of this dreame. For thus I cosidre in my vnderstandinge : Wo vnto them that shal be left in those dayes, ¢ moch more wo vnto thé that are not left behynde: for they that were not left, were in heuynes.

Now vnderstonde I y thinges that are layed vp in the latter dayes, which shal happen vnto thein, and to those that are not left behynde.
Therfore are they come in to greate parells, and many necessities, like as these dreames declare. Yet is it easier, y he which suffreth hurte, come in these, then to passe awaye as a cloude out of the worlde, and now to se ¥ thinges y shal happen in y last.

Then answered he me, and sayde: The in- terpretacion of the sight shall I shewe the, and I will open vnto the, the thinge y thou hast requyred. For thou hast spoken of them that are left behynde, and this is the inter- pretacion. He that taketh awaye the parell in that tyme, hath kepte himself. ‘They that be fallen in to harme, are soch as haue workes v faith vnto the Most mightie. Knowe this therfore, that they which be left behynde, are more blessed, then they that be deed. This is the meanynge of the vision. Where as thon sawest a man commynge vp from the depe of the see, y same is he whom God the Hyest hath kepte a greate season, which by his owne self shall delyuer his creature, q he shal ordre the that are left behynde. And where as thou sawest, y out of his mouth there came a blast of ale fyre and storme, q how y he lift vp uether swerde ner weapen, but y the ruszsh- inge in of him destroyed the E multitude, y came to fight agaynst him: it signifieth, that the dayes come, whan God wyll delyuer thé y are vpon earth, q in a traunce of mynde shall he come vpon thé, y dwell in the earth.
And one shal vndertake to fight agaynst 

Whan I saw this, Í 

Fo. rrrby. 

gB 

€ 

ffo. rrrbiý. 

D 

another, one cite agaynst another, one place agaynst another," one people agaynst another, x one realme agaynst another. Whan this commeth to passe, then shal the tokens come, that I shewed the before: and thé shal my) sonne be declared, who thou sawest clymme vp as ana. And whan all ¥ people heare his voyce, euery man shal in their owne lode leane the battayll, y they haue one agaynst another, andan innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as they that be willinge to come and to ouercome him by fightinge. But he shal stode vpon the toppe of the mount Sion.
Neuertheles Sion shall come, a shall be shewed, beynge prepared q buylded for all men, like as thou sawest the hill grauen forth without eny hades. But my sonne shal rebuke the people y are come for their wickednes, with the tempest, and for their euell ymagi- nacions: and their paynes wherwith they shal be punyshed, are lickened vnto the flamme: and without eny laboure shal he destroye them, euen by the lawe, which is copared vnto the fyre.

É| And where as thou sawest, that he gathered 

another peaceable people vnto hi: those are the ten trybes, which were caried awaye pre- soners out of their owne londe, in the tyme of Oseas the kynge, whom * Salmanasar the kinge of Assiria toke presoner, and caried them ouer y water, and so came they in to another nde.

But they gaue them this councell, y they shulde leane the multitude of the Heithé, and to go forth in to a farther countre, where neuer mankynde dwelt: that they might there kepe their statutes, which they neuer kepte in their owne lande. And so they entred in at the narow passages of the water of Euphrates, and ^God shewed tokens for the, and helde styll the floude tyll they were passed ouer: for thorow that countre there was a greate waye, namely of a yeare and an half iour- ney, for the same region is called Asareth.
Then dwelt they there vnto the latter tyme: and when they come forth agayne, y Hyest shall holde styll the sprynges of the streame agayne, that they maye go thorow, therfore sawest thou the multitude with peace. And they that be left behynde of thy people, are those that be founde within my border. Now whan he destroyeth the multitude that is
* Mat. 24. a. 

^ 4 Re. 17. a. © Exo. 14. c. Iosu. 3. d. 

Cbr tj. boke of €e3nras. 

gathered together, he shal défede his people that remayne, and then shal he shew them greate wonders.

Then sayde I: O LORDE LORDE, shew me this: wherfore haue I sene the man commynge vp from the depe of the see?

And he sayde vnto me: Like as thou cast nether seke out ner knowe these thinges that are in the depe of the see, euen so maiest thou not se my sonne, or those that be with him, but in the tyme of the daye. This is the interpretacion of the dreame which thou sawest, therfore thou onely art here lightened: for thou hast forsaken thine owne lawe, and applied thy diligence vnto myne, and sought it. Thy life hast thou ordred in wyszdome, and hast called vnderstondinge thy mother, and therfore haue I shewed the ¥ treasure of, the Hyest. After thre dayes I wil shew the more, and talke with the at more large, yee heuy and wonderous thinges wyl I declare vnto the.

Then wente I forth in to y felde, geuynge prayse and thankes greatly vnto God, because of his wonders which he dyd in tyme, and because he gouerneth the same, and soch as is in tyme, and there I satt thre dayes.

The riiij. Chapter. 

J] PON the thirde daye I satt vnder an oke tre, then came there a voyce vnto me out of the bush, q sayde: Eszdras, Esz- dras. And I sayde: here I am LORDE, and stode vp vpon my fete. Thé spake he vnto me: *In the bush dyd I appeare vnto
Moses, q talked with him, wha my people serued in Egipte, and I sent him, and led my people out of Egipte, « brought him vpó y mount Sion, where I helde him by me a longe season, and tolde him my wonderous workes, and shewed him y secretes of the tymes, and the ende, and commaunded him, sayége:
These wordes shalt thou declare, t not hyde thé. And now I saye vnto the, that thon laye vp in thine hert the dreames that thou hast sene, and the interpretacions which I haue shewed the : for thou shalt be receaued of all, thou shal be turned and remayne with my

councell, and with soch as be like the, vntyll tymes be ended. For the worlde hath lost his n and the tymes begynne to wase olde. or the tyme is deuyded in to twolue partes,

* Exo. 3. a. 

4 3 Reg. 5. Prou. 7. a. 

Chap. rig. 

Chap. rb. 

and ten partes of it are gone ~ and ten partes of it are gone all ready, and| | from whéce they were delyuered, and receaned| _ ready, and half of the tenth parte : yet remayneth there that, which is after y half of y tenth parte.
B| "Therfore prepare and ordre thy house, and refourme thy people: comforte soch of them as be in trouble: and tell now of the destruc- cion: let go from the mortall thoughtes : cast awaye the burthens of man: put of the weake mature: laye vp in some place thoughtes that are most heuy vnto the, and haist the to flyt from these tymes: for soch euell t wickednesse as thou hast now sene happe, shal they do yet moch worse. For the weaker that the worlde and the tyme is, the more shal
“synne and wickednesse increase, in them that dwell vpó earth. For the trueth is fled farre awaye, t lesynge i is hard at hande. For now haisteth the vision to come, that thou hast sene.

Then answered I and sayde: Beholde 
LORDE, I wyl go as thou hast commaunded me, and refourme the people which are pre- sent. But they y shal be borne afterwarde, who wyl exhorte or rebuke the? Thus the worlde is set in darcknes, and they y dwel therin, are without light: for thy lawe is kyndled, because no man knoweth the thinges that are done of the, or that shalbe done. Yf
I haue foude grace before the, sende the holy goost in to me, and I shall wryte all that hath bene done in the worlde sens the begynnynge, which was wrytten in thy lawe, that men maye fynde the path, and that they which wyl lyue in the latter dayes, may lyue.

And he answered me, sayege: Go y waye, gather thy people together, q saye vnto thé, that they seke the not for xl. dayes, but loke thou gather the many boxe trees, and take with the Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Echanus and Asial, these fyue, which are ready to wryte swiftly, and come hither, and I shal light a cadle of vnderstodinge in thine hert, which shal not be put out, tyll the thinges be perfourmed which thou shalt begynne to wryte. And then shalt thou declare some thinges openly vnto the perfecte, and some thinges shalt thou shew secretly vnto ý wyse.
Tomorow this houre shalt thou begynne to wryte.

D| Then wete J forth (as he commauded me) and gathered all people together, and sayde:

Heare these wordes o Israel: Oure fathers from thebegynnynge were straungersin Egipte,

a Mat. 24. a. 1 Joh. 2. c. ^ Deut. 4. 5. 

The (ij. boke of Cssdras. 

from whéce they were delyuered, and receaued the lawe of life, ^ which they kepte not, which ye also haue trasgressed after the. Then was this londe and the londe of Sion parted amoge you by the lot to possesse. But youre fathers and ye youre selues also haue done vnright- eousnes, q haue not kepte the wayes which the
Hyest cémaunded you. And for so moch as he is a righteous iudge, he toke from you in iyme the thinge that he had geuen you. And now are ye here and youre “brethren amoge you. "Therfore yf so be that ye wil subdue youre owne vnderstandinge, and refourme youre hert, ye shal be kepte aliue, « after death shal ye opteyne mercy. For after death shall the iudgment come, whan we shal lyue agayne: and then shal the names of the rghteous be manifest, and y names of the vngodly with their workes shalbe declared.
Let no mà therfore come now vnto me, ner axe eny question at me these xl. dayes.

So I toke the fyue men (as he commaunded | % me) and we wente in to the felde, and re- mayned there. The next daye a voyce called me sayége: ^Eszdras Open thy mouth, q drynke that I geue the. Thé opened I my mouth, q beholde, he reached me a full euppe, which was full of water, but the colour of it was like fyre. Aud I toke it and dranke.
And wha I had dronken it, my hert had vn- derstondinge, and wyszdome grew in my brest: for my sprete was kepte in remembraunce, and my mouth was opened and shut no more.
The Hyest gaue vnderstondinge vnto the fyue men, y they wrote ý hye thiges of the night, which they vnderstode not. But in the night they ate bred: as for me, [ spake in the daye, and helde not my tonge by night. In xl. dayes, they wrote two hundreth q foure bokes.

And it happened wha the xl. dayes were fulfilled, that the Hyest spake, sayenge: The first that thou hast wrytté, speake openly, y the worthy and vnworthy maye rede it. Bait kepe y lxx. last, y thou mayest shew it onely to soch as be wyse amonge thy people. For in them is the sprynge of vnderstodinge, the fountayne of wyszdome, and the streame of knowlege. And I dyd so.

The yb. Chapter. 

my people the wordes of prophecie, 

¢ Eze. 5. a. Apo. 10. b. 

Fo. —— ee E L 

TA speake thou in the eares ofa 

Fo. rl. 

which I wyll put in § mouth, saieth the 
LORDE: and cause them to be wrytten in a letter, for it is the trueth. Feare not the ymaginacios against y, let not y vnfaithful- nes of them trouble the, that speake agaynst the. For all the vnfaithfull shal dye in their vnfaithfulnes. Beholde saieth the LORDE,
I wil brynge plages vpon the worlde: ¥ swerde, 
Monger death Eus Tee for aked hath the vpper hande in all ¥ earth, and their shamefull workes are fulfilled.

Therfore saieth the LORDE: I wil holde my tonge nomore vnto their wickednesse, which they do so vngodly: nether wil I suffre them in the thinges, that they deale with all so wickedly. ^ Beholde, the innocent bloude of the troubled crieth vnto me, and the soules of the righteous complayne cotynually: and therfore (saleth the LORDE) I wil surely auége, and receaue vnto me all the innocét bloude from amonge them.

ê Beholde, my people, is led as a flock of shepe to be slayne, I wil not suffre them now to dwel in Egipte, but wy! brynge them out with a mightie hande and a stretched out arme, and smyte it with plages as afore, and wyl destroye all the londe off it. Egipte shal mourne, and the foundacions of it shalbe smytten with the plage and punyshment, y
God shal brynge vpon it. 

They that tyll ý groude, shal mourne, for their sedes shal be destroyed thorow the blast- inge and hale, and an horrible starre. Wo worth y worlde and them that dwell therin, for y swerde ¢ their destruccio draweth nye: t one people shal stode vp to fight against another, q swerdes in their hades. For mē shalbe vnstedfast, and some shal do violence vnto other: they shal not regarde their kynge and prynces, the wayes of their doinges and hadelinges in their power. A man shal de- syre to go in to the cite, q shal not be able.
For because of their pryde y cities shalbe brought in feare, y houses shal shake, and men shalbe afrayed. A man shal haue no pitie vpon his neghboure, but one shal pro- uoke another vnto battayll to spoyle their goodes because of the honger of bred, and because of the greate trouble.

Beholde, I gather a call together all the kynges of ¥ earth which are from the vprys- inge, from the south, from the east and Liba-

? Apo. 6. b. and 19, a. 

Cbr tj. boke of €sjbras. 

nus to turne vnto them, and restore the thinges that they haue geué them. Like as they do yet this daye vnto my chosen, so wil I do also, and recopense thé in their bosome. Thus sayeth ý LORDE God: My right hande shal not spare y synners, and my swerde shal not ceasse ouer them, that shed the innocét bloude vpon earth. ‘The feare is gone out fré his wrath, and hath cosumed the foundacions of the earth, and the synners like the strawe that is kindled. Wo worth them that synne, and kepe not my commaundementes, saieth the
LORDE. I wil not spare them. Go youre waye ye children from violence, defyle not my Sanctuary: for the LORDE knoweth all the that synne agaynst him, and therfore delyuereth he them vnto death and destruc- cid: For now are the plages come vpon the worlde, q ye shal remayne in the. For God shal not delyuer you, because ye haue synned agaynst him.

Beholde, an horrible vision commeth fro the east, where generacions of Dragons shal come out, and the people of the Arabes with many charettes, and the multitude of them shalbe as the wynde vpo earth, that all they which heare them ragynge in their wrath, maye feare and be afrayed : and as the wylde bores out of y wod, so shal they go out, and with greate power shal they come, and stonde fightinge with the, and shal waist the porcion of the londe of the Assirians.

And then shal the Dragons haue the vpper hande, not remembringe their byrth, and shal turne aboute swearinge together in greate power, to persecute them. But these shalbe afrayed, and kepe sylence at their power, and shal fle: and one out of the londe of the
Assirians shal besege the, and consume one of the, and in their hoost shal be feare and drede, and strife amonge their kynges.

Beholde cloudes from the east, and from the north vnto the south, and they are very horrible to loke vpon, full of wrath and storme.
They shal smyte one vpon another, and they shal smyte at ý greate starre vpon earth and their starre, and the bloude shalbe from the swerde vnto the bely, and the smoke of mà vnto y Camels lytter: And there shalbe greate fearfulnes and tremblinge vpo earth, and they that se the wrath, shal be afrayed, and a trem- blinge shal come vpon them.

b Psal. 43.c. Rom.8. c. 1 Co. 4. b. 

Chap. rb. 

Chap. rbi. 

And then shal there come greate raynes from ¥ south and from the north, and parte from the west, and from the stormy wynde from the east, and shal shutt them vp agayne,
& the cloude which he raysed vp m wrath, and the starre to cause feare towarde Y east and west wynde, shalbe destroyed, « the greate clondes shalbe lift vp, and y mightie cloudes full of wrath, and the starre, that they maye make all the earth afrayed aud the y dwell therin, and that they maye poure out ouer all places an horrible starre, fyre and hale and flyenge swerdes, and many waters: y all feldes maye be full, and all ryuers, « they shal breake downe the cities q walles, mountaynes c hylles, all trees, wod, and the grasse of the medowes, and all their frute.
And they shal go stedfast vnto Babilon, and make her afrayed, they shal come to her and besege her: the starre and all wrath shal they poure out vpon her.

&} Then shal the dust and smoke go vp vnto 

the heauen, and all they that be aboute her, shal bewayle her: and they that remayne vn- der her, shal do seruyce vnto them that haue put her in feare. And thou Asia y cofortest thyself also vpo the hope of Babilon, and art a worshipe of hir personne: Wo be vnto the thou wretch, because thou hast made thyself like vnto her, q hast decte $ daughters 7 whordome, that they might tryumphe and please thy louers, which haue allwaye desyred to comytte whordome with the: thou hast folowed the abhominable cite in all hir workes and invencions.

Therfore sayeth God: I wyl sende plages vpon the, wyddowhode, pouerte, hoger, warres, and pestilence, to walst thy houses with destruccion and death, and the glory of thy power shal be dryed vp as a floure, whan y heate aryseth y is sent ouer the. Thou shalt be sick as a poore wife that is plaged q beate of wemen: so y the mightie and louers shal not be able to receaue the. Walde I so hate the saieth the LORDE? Yf thou haddest not allwaye slayne my chosen, exaltinge the stroke of thy handes, and sayde ouer their death, whan thon wast dronke: set forth the bewtye of thy countenaunce.

The rewarde of thy whordome shalbe re- compensed the in thy bosome, therfore shalt thou receaue * rewarde.

E 
* Some rede, no rewarde, 

The iiij. boke of €e5nras. 

Fo. rli. 
Like as thou hast done vnto my chosen|® 
(sayeth the LORDE) euen so shal God do vnto the, and shal delyuer the in to the plage.
Thy childré shal dye of honger, « thou shalt fall thorow y swerde. Thy cities shalbe broken downe, q all thine shal perish with the swerde in y felde. They y be in ý moütaynes shal dye of honger, q eate their owne flesh, q drinke their owne bloude for very hoger of bred and thyrst of water. ‘Thou vnhappie shalt come thorow the see, q receaue plages agayne.
In the passage they shal caste downe the slayne cite, q shal rote out one parte of y londe, q cósume the porcion of thy glory.
They shal treade the downe like.stuble, a they shalbe thy fyre and shal consume the: thy cities and thy londe, thy wod and thy frutefull trees shal they burne vp with the fyre. Thy children shal they cary awaye captyue, and loke what thou hast, they shal spoyle it, and marre the bewtie of thy face.

The sot. Chapter. 

O vnto the Babilon q Asia, wo vnto Y 

Egipte q Syria: gyrde youre selues with clothes of sack q hayre, and mourne for youre childré, be sory, for youre destruccion is at honde. A swerde is sent vpon you, q who wil turne it back? A fyre is kyndled amoge you, q who wil quench it? Plages are sent vnto you, q what is he that wyl dryue them awaye? Maye eny man dryue awaye an hogrie lyon in the wod? Or maye eny mà quench the fyre in the stubble, whan it hath begonne to burne? Maye one turne agayne the arowe, y is shot of a stronge archer? "The mightie LORDE sendeth the plages, ¢ what is he that wil dryue them awaye? The fyre is kyndled a gone forth in his wrath, and what is he that will quench it?
He shall cast lightenynges, and who shal not feare? He shal thonder, and who shall not be afrayed? The LORDE shal threaten, and who shal not vtterly be beaten to ponlder at his presence? The earth quaketh, q the foundacions therof: j see aryseth up with wawes frum the depe, and the floudes of it are vnquyete, q the fishes therof also before the LORDE, a before the glory of his power.
For stronge is his right hande that holdeth the bowe, his arowes that he shnteth, are sharpe, q shall not mysse, whan they begynne to be shot in to $ endes of the worlde.

fo. rlij. 

B| Beholde, y plages are sent, a shal not turne 

€ 

n 

agayne, tyll they come vpon earth. ‘The fyre is kyndled, « shall not be put out, tyll it con- sume the foundacions of the earth. Like as an arowe whieh is shot of a mightie archer, returneth not bacwarde, euen so y plages y shal be sent vpon earth, shal not turne agayne.
Wo is me, wo is me, who wyl delyuer me in those dayes? The begynnynge of sorowes a greate mourninge: the begynnynge of derth v greate death: the begynnynge of warres, q the powers shal stonde in feare: the begyn- nynge of euels, q they shal tremble euery one.
What shal I do in these thinges, whan the plages come? Beholde, hoger and plage, trouble q anguysh are sent, as scourges for amendement. But for all these thinges they shal not turne fro their wiekednesses, ner be allwaye myndefull of ý seourges.

Beholde, vitayles shalbe so good cheape vpon earth, y they shal thinke them selues to be in good case: and euen then shal myschefe growe vpó earth, warres, derth q greate dis- quietnes. For many of them that dwell vpo earth shall perish of hoger, « the other that escape the honger, shal the swerde destroye : q the deed shalbe cast out as donge, q there shalbe no man to coforte them. For y earth shalbe waisted, q the cities shalbe cast downe: there shalbe no man left to tyll y earth q to sowe it. The trees shal geue fu a who shal plucke thé of a gather them? The grapes shal be ripe, a who shal treade the?
For all places shalbe desolate of mé, so that one man shal desyre to se another, or to heare his yoyee. For of one whole cite there shalbe ten left, q two in the felde, which shall hyde thé selues in the thicke buszshes, q in the elyffes of stones: like as whan there remayne thre or foure olyues vpon the olyue tre, or as whan a vynyarde is gathered, there are left some grapes, of them that diligétly sought thorow the vynyarde.

Euen so in those dayes there shalbe thre or foure left, for thé y search their houses with the swerde. And the earth shalbe left waiste,
€ the feldes therof shall waxe olde: and hir wayes and all hir pathes shal growe full of thornes, because no man shal trauayle there thorow. 'The daughters shal mourne; hauinge no brydegromes: the wemen shal make la- mentacion, hauynge no huszbandes, their

* 1 Cor, 7. d. 

Cr iiij. boke of Essdrag. 

Chap. rbi. 

daughters shal mourne, hauinge no helpe of their brydegrome. In the warres shall they be destroyed, q their huszbandes shal perish of honger. O ye seruauntes of the LORDE, heare these thinges, t marek thé. Beholde, the worde of the LORDE, O receaue it: beholde, the plages drawe nye, q are not slack in tarienge. Like as a trauaylinge woman, whieh after ý ix. moneth brigeth forth a sonne, whan the houre of the byrth is come, an houre two or thre afore that the paynes come vpo hir body, q whan the childe cOmeth to the byrth, they tary not the twineklynge of an eye: Eue so shall not y plages be slack to come vpon earth, q the worlde shal monrne, q sorowes sha] come vpo it on euery syde.

O my people, heare my worde, make you redy to the battayll: q in all euell be euen as pylgrems vpon earth. He y selleth, let him be as he that flyeth his waye: q he y byeth, as one that wil lese.* Who so oceupieth mar- chaüdies, as he that wynneth not: « he that buyldeth, as he that shall not dwell therin: he that soweth, as one y shal not reape: he that twysteth the vynyarde, as he that shal not gather the grapes: they that mary, as they that shall get no children: and they y mary not, as the wyddowes: ^a therfore they y laboure, laboure in vayne. For straungers shall reape their frutes, q spoyle their goodes, ouer throwe their houses, q take their childré captyue, for in eaptiuyte q honger shal they get children. And they that occupie their marchaundies with robbery, how longe decke they their cities, their houses, their posses- sions q personnes? the more wil I punysh them for their synnes, sayeth the LORDE.
Like as an whore enuyeth an honest woman, so shall righteousnes hate iniquyte, whan she decketh hir self, and shall aeeuse her to hir face, whan he eometh that defendeth, which shal make inquysieio for all synne vpo earth.
And therfore be not ye like there vnto, ner to the workes therof: for or euer it be longe, in- iquite shalbe taken awaye out of the earth, and righteousnes shal raigne amonge you.

Let not the synner saye, that he hath not synned: for eoles of fyre shal burne vpon his heade, whieh saieth before the LORDE God q his glory: I haue not synned. Beholde, the LORDE knoweth all y workes of men, their ymaginacions, their thoughtes q their

Eceli. t1. b. 

5 Psal. 126. a. Pro. 10. c. 

Chap. rbi. 

hertes. For he spake but the worde:^ let the earth be made, q it was made: let the heaué be made, and it was made. In his worde were y starres made, q he knoweth the nombre of them. He searcheth the grounde of the depe, « the treasures therof: he hath mea- sured the see, and what it conteyneth. He hath shut the see in the myddest of the waters, and with his worde hath he hanged the earth vpon the waters. He spredeth out the heauen like a vowte, vpon the waters hath he founded it. In the deserte and drye wyldernes hath he made sprynges of water, and poles vpo the toppe of the mountaynes, y the floudes might poure downe from ¥ stony rockes to water the earth. He made man, and put his hert in the myddest of ¥ body, and gaue him breth, life and vnderstandinge, yee and the sprete of y
Allmightie God, which made all thinges, and hath searched the groüde of all the secretes of the earth.

&| He knoweth youre ymaginacions q inué- cions, and what ye thynke whan ye synne, q wolde hyde youre synnes. Thertore hath y
LORDE searched and sought out all youre workes, and he shal bewraye you all. And whan youre synnes are brought forth, ye shalbe ashamed before men, and youre owne synnes shalbe youre accusers in that daye. What wil ye do? Or how will ye RU youre synnes before God and his angels? Beholde, God himself is the iudge, feare him, leaue of from a Gene. 1. a.

The (iif. boke of Cssdrag, 

The ende of the fourth boke of Esdras, 

Fo. rity. youre synnes, and forget. youre vnrighteous- nesses, and medle nomore with them: so shal
God lede you forth, and delyuer you from all trouble. For beholde, the heate of a greate multitude is kyndled ouer you, and they shal take awaye certayne of you, and fede the ydle with Idols: and they that cosent vnto them, shal be had in derision, laughed to scorne, q trodden vnder fote.

For vnto the places there shalbe a place, and in the next cities a greate insurreccion vpon those that feare LORDE. They shal] ® be like mad men, they shall spare no man: they shall spoyle and waist soch as feare the
LORDE, their goodes shall they take from them, and shute them out of their houses.
Then shall it be knowne who are my chosen, q they shalbe tryed as the golde in the fyre.
Heare O ye my beloued, saieth the LORDE: beholde, the dayes of trouble are at honde, but I wil delyuer you from the same. Be not ye afraied, dispayre not, for God is youre captayne.

Who so kepeth my comaundementes and preceptes (sayeth the LORDE God) let not youre synnes weye you downe, ¢ let not youre vurighteousnesses be lift vp. Wo be vnto the that are subdued vnto their synnes, and tangled in their wickednesses: like as a felde is hedged in with buszshes, and the path therof couered with thornes, y no man maye trauayle thorow : and so is he taken, and cast in the fyre, and brent.

That this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
Of the kynred, life and godly conuersacion of 
Tobias. 
Chap. Il. 

The louynge compassion that Tobias sheweth in buryege the deed, for the which cause he is hated and persecuted. God nurtoureth him with blyndnes. His wyfe casteth him in the teth.

Chap. II. 

Tobias prayeth hertely vnto God, for the trouble and captiuyte of him self and the people. Of
Sara the daughter of Raguel. 

Chap. II. 
Tobias teacheth his sonne in the feare of God. 

Chap. V. 
The sonne obeyeth the father, and goeth his earade. God prouydeth mercifully for him, and sendeth his angell to be his gyde.

Chap. VI. 

In their iourney they take a fish, wherof the an- gell commaundeth him to kepe the hert, the gall and the leuer, and telleth him wherto it is good.

Chap. VII. 

They come to Raguel, which receaueth them lou- yngly, and marieth his daughter Sara vnto
Tobias. 

The first Chapter. a OBIAS was of the trybe and cite of
Nephtali, which lyeth in the hye coun- trees of Galile aboue Naason the waye to- warde the west, hauynge the cite of Sephet vpon the left syde.
'Though he was taken presonner in the 

The boke of Tobias. 

Chap. VIII. 
Tobias goinge to bed with his wife, ordreth him self as the angell bad him, and so both he and his wyfe are preserued from euell,

Chap. IX. 

Tobias sendeth the angell vnto Gabelus for the money.

Chap. X. 

Tobias father and mother loge sore for his com- mynge: And Raguel seynge that he can kepe him no longer, sendeth him awaie with his wife.

Chap. XI. 

They returne home, and are welcommed ioyfully. 
Olde Tobias hath his sight agayne. They reioyse alltogether, and geue thakes vnto God.

Chap. XII. 
The father and the sonne wolde fayne rewarde the angell. He wil haue nothinge: but sheweth them what he is.

Chap. XIII. 
Tobias the elder prayseth God, q exorteth other me, to be thankfull vnto him.

Chap. XIII. 

Tobias beynge now olde, prophecieth the destruc- cio of Niniue, and the prosperous health of
Israel. The sonne forsaketh the sinfull cite, as his father bad him, q goeth to his father in lawe.

dayes of "^ Salmanasar kynge of the Assirians, neuertheles beynge in captiuyte, he forsoke not y waye of trueth: In so moch that what so euer he might gett, he parted it dailie with his felowpresoners q brethren, that were of his kynred. And though he were yonger the

a 4 Re. 17. a. 

Chap. ij. The boke of Tobias, 

all in the trybe of Nephtali, yet dyd not he behane himself childeshly in his workes. And whan all the other wente to the goldé calues, which “Jeroboam the kynge of Israel had made, he himself alone fled all their companies, and gat him to Ierusalem vnto the temple of the
LORDE, and there worshipped y LORDE 
God of Israel, *faithfully offeringe all his first frutes and tithes, so that in the thirde yeare he ministred all the tithes vnto the straungers and conuertes. "These and soch like thinges dyd he acordinge to the lawe of God, whan he was yet but yonge.

But whan he was a man, he toke out of his 
` [owne trybe^ a wyfe called Anna, and of her he begat a sonne, whom he called after his owne name, and taught him from his youth vp, to feare God, and to refraine from all synne.

Now whan he with his wife, his sonne and with all his kynred was come in captiuite vnto
Niniue, what tyme as they all ate of the meates of the Heithe, he “kepte his soule, and was neuer defyled in their meates. And for so moch as he was myndefull of the LORDE
. in all his hert, God gane him fauoure* in the presence of Salmanasar the kynge, which gane him power to go where he wolde, and so had he liberte to do what him list.

So wente Tobias vnto all them that were in preson; and comforted them, and gaue them wholsome exortacions. And whan he came to Rages a cite of the Medes, hauynge * ten talétes of syluer (of ¥ thinges wherwith the kynge had honoured him) and sawe amonge a greate company of people of his kinred, one Gabelus (which was of his owne trybe) beynge in necessite, he gaue him the sayde weight of syluer vnder an handwritinge.

After a longe season whan Salmanasar the kynge was deed, and Sennacherib his sonne reigned in his steade, which hated the children of Israel, Tobias wente daylie thorow out all his kynred, and comforted them, and gaue of his goodes to euery one of the, as moch as he might: he fed the hongrie, clothed the naked, and buried the deed and slaine, and that dili- gently.

J| And whan Sennacherib the kynge came agayne and fled out of Iewry,’ (what tyme as
God punyshed him for his blasphemy) « in 

Fo. rib. 

his wrath slew many of the children of Israel, 
Tobias buried their bodies.“ But whan it was tolde the kynge, he commannded to slaye him, and toke awaye all his goodes. —Neuertheles
Tobias with his sonne q with his wife fled his waye, and was hyd naked, for there were many that loued him. But after xlv. dayes the kynge was slayne of his owne sonnes.
Then came Tobias againe to his house, and all his goodes were restored vnto him.

The ij. Chapter. 
FTER these thinges vpon a solempne 
A daye of the LORDE Tobias made a good feast in his house, q sayde vnto his sonne:
Go y waye q brynge hither some of onre trybe, soch as feare God, that they maye make mery with vs. And wha he was gone, he came agayne, and tolde his father, that one of the children of Israel laye slayne vpon the strete.
And immediatly he leape from his table, left the feast, came fastinge to the deed coarse, toke him q bare him preuely in to his house, y whan the Sonne was downe, he might safely burye him. And wha he had hyd the coarse, he ate his meate with mournynge and feare, remembrynge ¥ wordes, that the LORDE sayeth by the prophet Amos: ‘youre hye feastes shalbe turned to sorowe and heuynes.
But whan ¥ Sonne was downe, he wente his waye q buried him. Then all his negh- bours reproued him, sayenge : It is not lage, sens it was commaunded to slaye the* because of this matter, and hast scarce escaped the daunger of death, and buriest thou the deed againe ? Neuertheles Tobias fearinge God more then the kynge, toke the bodies of the slayne, hyd them in his house, q buried them at mydnight.
It happened vpo a daye, that he had buried/¢ y deed, q was weery, came home, q layed in downe by the wall q slepte. And whyle he was a slepe, there fell downe vpé his eyes warme donge out of the swalowes nest, so y he was blynde. ‘This tentacion dyd God suffre to happen vnto him, that they which came after, might haue an example of his paciéce, like as of holy Iob. For in so moch as he ener feared God from his youth vp, ¢ kepte his commaundementes, he was not heuy

* Some reade : ten talétes of golde. € 4 Re. 19. g. 
^ 4 Esd.9. c. * Amos 8. b. 1 Mac. 1. b. * Tobi, 1. d. 
! Deu. 8. a. and 13, a. Ioh. 9. a. and 11. a. 

* 3 Re. 12. d. è Exo. 22. d. and 23. c. Deut. 12. a. 
18. a. 26. a. * Nu. 36, c. 4 Gen. 43. f. Iudit, 12. 
* Tere. 40. a. ^ Matt. 25. c. 

= 

So. ribi. 

against God, that the plage of blyndnes chaüsed vnto him, but remayned stedfast in the feare of God, and thanked God all the dayes of his life.

J| For like as blessed Iob was had in derision of kynges, euen so was he laughed to scorne of his elders q kynsfolkes, which sayde vnto him: “where is thy hope, for ¥ which thou hast done allmes and buried the deed? But
Tobias rebuked thc, t spake: Saye not so, for we are the children of holy men,’ q loke for the life, which God shal geue vnto them, that neuer turne their beleue from him. Anna his wife wente daylie to the weeuynge worke, q loke what lyuinge she eoude get “with the laboure of hir handes, she brought it. And it happened y she toke a kyd and brought it home.

And whan hir huszband herd it crie, he sayde: loke y it be not stollen, restore it agayne to the owners: for it is not laufull for vs, to eate or to touch eny thinge of theft.
"Then was his wife angrie, and sayde: * Now is thy hope become vayne openly, q thy allmes dedes are manifest. With these a sóch like wordes dyd she east him in the tethe.

The dj. Chapter. 

a HEN Tobias toke it heuely, q with 

teares beganne to make his prayer, sayege: O LORDE, thou art righteous, ¢ all thy indgmétes are true, yee all ¥ wayes are mercy, faithfulnes q iudgmét/’ And now O
LORDE be myndefull of me, ¢ take no ven- geaunce of my synnes, nether remembre my myszdedes ner y myszdedes of my elders.
For we haue not bene obedict vnto y eomaun- demétes, therfore are we spoyled, brought in to eaptiuyte, in to death, in to derision q shame vnto all nacions, amoge who thou hast seatréd vs. And now O LORDE, y iudg- mentes are greate, for we haue not done acor- dige to ¥ comaundemétes, nether haue we walked innocétly before y. And now O
LORDE, deale with me acordinge to thy wil, q comaunde my sprete to be receaued in peaee, for more expediet were it for me to dye, thé to lyue.

At the same tyme it happened, that Sara the daughter of Kaguel at Rages a cite of y
Medes was slaundred of one of hir fathers handmaydes, namely, that she shulde haue

*Iob4.a. ^ Tobi.8.a. *Epbe.4.c. 4 Deu. 29. a. 

The boke of Tobias. 

Chap. tj. had seuen huszbandes, whieh as soone as they were gone in vnto hir, were slayne of the deuell called Asmodeus. — Therfore whan she reproued the mayden for hir faute, she an- swerde her, sayenge: God let vs neuer se sonne ner daughter of the more vpon earth, thou kyller of thy huszbandes. Wilt thou slay me also, as thou hast slayne seuen men? At this voyce wéte Sara in to an hye chamber of hir house, and thre dayes and thre nightes she nether ate ner drake, but eotynued in prayer, and besought God with teares, that he wolde delyuer her from this rebuke.

Vpon the thirde daye it ehaunced, that|€ whan she had made an ende of hir prayer, she praysed the LORDE, sayenge: Blessed be thy name O God of oure fathers, which whan thou art wroth, shewest mercy, and in the tyme of trouble thou forgeuest the synnes of them, that call vpon the. Vnto the O
LORDE turne I my face, vnto the lift I vp myne eyes. I beseke y O LORDE, lowse me out of the bondes of this rebuke, or els take me vtterly awaye fro of ý earth. Thou knowest LORDE, that I neuer had desyre ynto man, and that I haue kepte my soule eleane from all vnelenly lust. F haue not kepte eompany with those that passe their tyme in sporte, nether haue I made my self partaker with them that walke in lighte be- hauoure. Nenertheles an huszbande haue I eonsented to take, not for my pleasure, but in thy feare.

Now peraduenture either I haue bene|J vnworthy of them, or els were they vnmete for me, for thou happly hast kepte me to another huszband. For why? ‘thy councell is not in y power of man. But who so euer loueth the and serueth the a right, is sure, that yf his life be tempted and proued, it stadeth in the tryenge: and yf he endure in paeienee, he shal haue a rewarde and be hylie erowned : and yf he be in trouble, that God
(no doute) shal delyuer him: and yf his life be in ehastenynge, that he shall haue leue to come vnto thy mercy.

For thou hast no pleasure in oure damp- nacion: q why? after a storme thou makest i wether fayre and still: after wepinge and

euynes thou geuest greate ioye. ‘Thy name 
O God of Israel, be praysed for euer. At the same tyme were both their prayers herde in

*[ob2.b. f Psal. 24. b. Esa, 8. d. and 40. b. and 46. b. 

Che boke of Tobias. 

the sight of the magesty of the Hyest God. 
And Raphael the holy angel of the LORDE was sent to helpe thé both, whose prayers came together before God.
The iiij. Chapter. 

O wha Tobias thought his prayer to be 

herde, that he might dye, he called vnto him his sonne Tobias, ¢ sayde vnto him: My sonne, heare the wordes of my mouth, and laye thé in thine hert as a foundacion. Whan
God taketh awaye my soule, burie thou my body, q “holde thy mother in honoure all the dayes of hir life. For thou oughtest to re- membre, what and how greate parels she suffred for y in hir wobe. And wha she also hath fulfilled the tyme of hir life, bury her besyde me. Hane God in thy thought all the dayes of thy hfe, q bewarre, lest at eny tyme thou cósent vnto "synne, and lest thou let slippe the commaundemétes of the LORDE oure God.

Geue allmes of thy goodes, and turne neuer thy face from the poore : and so shal it come to passe, that the face of the LORDE shal not be turned awaye from the. - Be mercifull after ý power. Yf thou hast moch, geue pléteously : yf thou hast litle, do thy diligence, gladly to gene of that litle. For so gatherest thou thy self a good rewarde in the daye of necessite. For allmes delyuereth *fro death, q suffreth not the soule to come in darcknes.
A greate comforte is allmes before the hye 
God, vnto all them that do it. 

My sonne, kepe the well from all whor- dome, and (besyde thy wife) se that no faute be knowne of the. Let neuer pryde haue rule in thy mynde ner in thy worde, for in
“pryde beganne all destruccion. 

Who so euer worketh eny thinge for the, immediatly geue him his ^hyre, and loke that thy hyred seruaunte wagies remayne not by the ouer night. “Loke that thou neuer do vnto another man, the thinge that thou wold- est not another mà shulde do vnto the. Eate thy bred with the /hongrie and poore, and couer the naked with thy clothes. Set thy bred and wyne vpon the buryall of the righ- teous, and do not thou eate and drynke therof with the synners. Axe euer councell at y wyse.

a Exo.20.b. Eccli.7.c. ^ Rom. 6. b. * Some reade: fio all synne & from death. 1 Tess. 4. a.

Be allwaye thankfull vnto God, and beseke him, that he will ordre thy wayes, q that what so euer thou deuysest or takest in hande, it maye remayne in him. — I certifie the also my sonne, that (whan thou wast yet but a bab)
“I delyuered ten talentes of syluer vnto 
Gabelus, at Rages a cite of the Medes, q his handwritinge haue I by me. And ther- fore seke some meanes, how thou mayest come by him, q receaue of him $ sayde weight of syluer, and geue him his handwritynge agayne.

My sonne, be not afrayed: trueth it is, we lede here a poore life: “but greate good shall we haue, yf we feare God, and departe from all synne, and do well.

The b. Chapter. 

4 pem answered Tobias his father, q 

sayde : father, all that thou hast com- maunded me, wil I do, and that diligently.
But how I shal requyre this money, I can not tell. Nether doth he knowe me, ner I him.
What token shal I geue him? And as for the waye thither, I neuer knew it. Then his father answered him, and sayde: I haue his handwritinge by me, which whan thou shewest him, immediatly he shall paye the. But go thy waye now, q get the some faithfull man to go with y for an hyre, that thou mayest re- ceaue Y money, whyle I am yet lyuynge.

Then wente Tobias out, q vpon the strete he founde a fayre yonge man stondinge, gyrded vp, and as it were one ready to take his iourney. And he knew not that it was an augell of God, but saluted him, and sayde:
From whence art thou, thou good yonge man? 
He answered: Of the children of Israel. 

And Tobias sayde vnto him: knowest thou the waye, that ledeth vnto the countre of y
Medes? He answered: I knowe it well, and all those stretes haue I gone oft tymes, and haue lodged with oure brother Gabelus, that dwelleth in Rages a cite of y Medes, which lyeth vpon the mount Egbathanis. Tobias sayde vnto him: I praye the, tary for me, tyll
I haue tolde my father these thinges. Then wete Tobias in, and tolde his father all. At y which his father marueled, q prayed, that i3 wolde come iu vnto him.

Now whan the angell came in, he saluted 

4 Deu. 24. c. 
€ Tobi. 1. c. 

* Matt. 7.3. 
^ Rom. 8. d. 

c Gen. 3. a. f Luc. 14, b. 

Fo. ribi. 

Fo. rou. him, and sayde: ioye be with the for euermore.
And olde T obias saide : what ioye can I haue, that syt here in darcknes, q se not the light of heauen? The yonge man sayde vnto him:
Be of good cheare, God shal helpe the shortly. 
And Tobias sayde vnto him: Canst thou brynge my sonne to Gabelus, vnto the cite of
Rages in Media? And whan thou commest agayne, I shal paye the thy hyre. And the angell sayde vnto him: I shal lede thy sonne, and brynge him to the agayne. Then Tobias answered him: Tell me I praye the, of what house, or of what trybe art thou?

The angell Raphael sayde vnto him: Axest thou after the kynred of an hyrelinge, or sekest thou a gyde for thy sonne to go with him? But that I make the not carefull, I am Azarias the sonne of greate Hananias.
And Tobias answered: Thou art come of a greate kynred, but I praye y, be not dis- pleased, that I desyred to knowe thy kynred.
‘The angell sayde vnto him: Thy sonne shal 
I lede forth safely, and brynge him whole to the agayne.
| Then answered Tobias, and sayde: well, go on youre waie, and God be in youre iour- ney, and his angell beare you company. So whan they had prepared all thinges, y they wolde take with them in their journey, Tobias bad his father « his mother fare well, and they wente on their waye both together.
Now whan they were gone, his mother be- ganne to wepe, and sayde: "The staff of oure age hast thou taken awaye, and sent him from vs.

Wolde God that money had neuer bene, for the which thou hast sent him awaye. Yf we had bene content with oure pouerte, this had bene greate riches vnto vs, that we sawe oure sonne here. Then sayde Tobias vnto her: wepe not, oure sonne shall come to vs agayne safe and sounde, « thine eyes shall se him. For I trust, that good angell of God shal beare him copany, and ordre well all the thinges that he doth: so that he shal come to vs agayne with ioye. At these wordes his mother left of fro wepynge, q helde hir tonge.

The bi. Chapter. 

SS Tobias wente on his waye, and a dogg folowed him, and ¥ first night they abode by the water of Tigris. ‘Then wente he out

* Tob. 10. a. 

Che boke of Tobias, 

Chap. bi. 

to wash his fete, and beholde, there came forth an horrible fish to deuoure him. Of whom Tobias was afrayed, and cried with a loude voyce, sayenge : LORDE, he commeth vpon me. And the angell sayde vnto him:
‘Take him by the cheke blade, and drawe him to the. And he dyd so, and drew him vpo the londe, and the fish beganne to leape at his fete.

"The sayde the angell vnto him: Take out the bowels of this fish, and as for the hert, the gall and the leuer, kepe them by the.
For these thinges are necessary and good for medicyne. ‘Tobias dyd so, and rosted the fish, and they toke him with them in their iourney: the residue they salted, as moch as was sufficient for them, till they came to
Rages. Then Tobias axed the angell, and sayde vnto him: I praye y brother Azarias, tell me, wher to are these thinges good of the fish, that thou hast bydden me kepe?

The angell answered him and sayde: Yf thou layest a pece of the hert vpon the coales, the smoke therof dryueth awaye all maner of euell spretes, whether it be from man or from woman, so that from thence forth y same shal come nomore vnto them. The gall is good to anoynte or to strake y eyes withall, where as there is eny blemish in them, so shal they be whole.

And Tobias sayde vnto him: where wilt thou that we remayne? "The angell answered and saide: Here is a nye kinsman of thine, one
Raguel by name, which hath a daughter called Sara, x hath nether sonne ner daughter but her. All his good belogeth vnto the, and thou must mary his daughter: and therfore desyre her at her father, and he shal geue her the to wife. Then answered Tobias q sayde:
As I vnderstonde, she hath bene maried vnto seuen huszbandes, and they all are deed: and
I haue herde saye, that the deuell slew them. 
I am afrayed therfore, lest soch thinges happen vnto me also: which yf it came to passe (seinge I am the onely sonne of my father and my mother) I shulde brynge thé in their age with sorow to their graues.

Then sayde $ angell Raphael vnto him :|33 
Heare me, a will tell the, what they be of whom the deuell hath power. Namely, they that receaue mariage of soch a fashio, that they shut God out from thé and from their

> Nu. 36, a. 

Chap. biij, hert, and “geue them selues to their owne lust, euen as it were an horse and Moole, which haue no vnderstondinge: vpon soch hath y deuell power. But whan thou takest her, and art come in to the chamber, witholde thy self from her thre dayes, and geue thy diligence vnto nothinge but ^vnto prayer with her.

And in the first night rost the leuer of the fish, and the deuell shalbe dryué awaye. ‘The secode night shalt thou be receaued in to the company of the holy patriarkes. ‘The thirde night shalt thou opteyne the blessinge of God, so that whole children shalbe borne of you.
After the thirde night take the mayden in the feare of God, and more for the desyre of children, then for eny fleshly lust: that in the sede of Abraham thou mayest optayne the blessinge in children.

The bij. Chapter. 

HEN wente they in to Raguel, which 
T receaued them ioyfuly. And whan 
Raguel loked vpon Tobias, he sayde vnto 
Anna his wife: How like is this yonge man vnto my sisters sonne. And whan he had spoken this, he saide: whence be ye good brethren? They saide: Of the trybe of
Nephtali, ont of the captiuyte of Niniue. 
Then sayde Raguel vnto them: knowe ye my brother Tobias? They saide: yee, we knowe him well. And whan he had spoken moch good of him, the angell sayde vnto Raguel :
Tobias of whom thou axest, is this yonge mas father. Then Raguel bowed him self downe, and wepte, toke him aboute the neck and kyssed him, and sayde: “Gods blessynge haue thou my sonne, for thou art the sonne of a good vertuous man. And Anna his wyfe and
Sara his daughter wepte also. 

Now wha they had talked together, Raguel bad kyll a wether, and to make a feast. And wha he prayed thé to sytt downe to dyner,
Tobias sayde: I wil nether eate ner drinke here this daye, excepte thou first graunte me my peticion, q promyse me to geue me thy daughter Sara. Whan Raguel herde this, he was astonnyed, for he knew, what had hap- pened vnto the other seuen men, that wéte in | vnto her: and he beganne to feare that it shnlde chaunce vnto him also in like maner.

And whyle he stode so in doute, and gaue 

a 1 Tess. 4.a. Psal. 31. b. * Tobi. 8. b. * Tobi. 9. b. 

Cbr boke of Tobias. 

fo. rliy. the yonge man no answere, the angell sayde vnto him: Feare not to gene him thy daughter, for vnto this man that feareth God, belogeth thy daughter to wife, therfore might none other haue her.

Thé sayde Raguel: I doute not, bnt God|¢ hath aecepted my prayers and teares in his sight: and I trust he caused yon to come vnto me for the same intent, that this daughter of myne might be maried in hir owne kynred, acordinge to the lawe of Moses? And now dowte thou not, but I wil geue her vnto the :
So he toke the righthande of his daughter, and gaue her in to the right hade of ‘Tobias, and sayde: The God of Abraha, the God of
Isaae and the God of Iacob be with yon, ioyne you together, and fulfill his blessynge in you.
And they toke a letter and made a wrytinge ofthe mariage. And then made they mery, and praysed God. And Raguel called Anna his wife vnto him, and bad her prepare another chamber, and thither he brought Sara his danghter, and she wepte. Then sayde he vnto her: Be of goode cheare my daughter, the LORDE of heauen geue the ioye, for the heuynesse that thou hast suffred.

The biij. Chapter. 

OW after y they had supped, they|q 
N brought the yoge man in to her. The thought Tobias vpon the wordes of the angell, and toke out of his bagg a pece of the leuer of the fish, and layed it vpon the hote coales.
So the angell Raphael toke holde of the deuell, and sent him awaye, and bounde him in the wyldernes of the hyer Egipte. "The spake Tobias vnto the virgin, and sayde: Vp
Sara, let vs make oure ‘prayer vnto God to daye, tomorow, and ouermorow: for these thre nightes wil we reconcyle oure selues with
God: and whan the thirde holy night is past, we shall ioyne together in y deutye of mariage.
For we are the children of holy men, and we maye not come together as the Heithen, y knowe not God.

Then stode they vp both together, and be-|33 sought God earnestly, /ý he wolde preserue them. And Tobiassayde: O LORDE God of oure fathers, praysed be thou of heaué q earth of the see, welles, q floudes, q of all the creatures that be therin. Thou maydest
Adamf of the moulde of the earth, q gauest 

4 Nu. 36. c. Tob. 6. c. * 1 Cor. 7. a. / Tob. 6. d. € Gen. 2. b. 
112 

Fo. 1. him Eua for an helper. And now LORDE thou knowest that it is not because of volup- tuousnes, that I take this sister of myne to wyfe, but onely for the loue of children, in whom thy name be blessed for euer. And
Sara sayde: haue mercy vpon vs (O LORDE) haue mercy vpon vs, and let vs both come whole aud sounde to a good age.

€| And aboute the cocke crowe, it happened, that Raguel called his seruauntes, and they wéte with him, io make a graue. For he sayde: it is chaunced vnto him peraduéture, as it dyd vnto the other seuen men, that wente in vnto her. Now wha they had made the graue, Raguel came agayne to his wyfe, and sayde vnto her: sende one of thy maydés, to loke yf he be deed, that I maye burye him afore 1t be light daye.

So she sent a mayden to se, which whan she came in to the chamber, she founde them whole and sounde, slepynge together. And so she came agayne, q brought good tydinges.
D|/Then Raguel and Anna his wife praysed y 
LORDE, and sayde: Praysed be thou o 
LORDE God of Israel, For it is not hap- pened vnto vs, as we thought. For thou hast dealte mercifully with vs, and put awaye from vs the enemye that persecuted vs, and hast shewed mercy vnto yonder two beloued. O
LORDE, cause thé to magnifie the more perfectly, and to offre the the sacrifice of thy prayse, and of their health: that all people maye knowe, y thou onely art God in all the earth.
É| And immediatly Raguel commaunded his seruauntes, to fyll the graue, that they had made, with earth, afore it was light: and bade his wife prepare a feast, q to make ready all thinges that were necessary for meate, to soch as wente by y waye. He caused two fatt kyne also and foure wethers to be slayne,
« meates to be prepared for all his neghbours and frendes.

And Raguel charged Tobias, to remayne with him two wekes. As for all the good y he had, he gaue Tobias $ one half of it, and made his wrytinge, that the half which remayned, shulde fall vnto Tobias after their death.

The iy. Chapter. 
HEN Tobias called vnto him the angell, 
_ whom he thought to haue bene a man, and sayde vnto him. Brother Azarias, I praye the herké vnto my wordes: Yf I shulde

The boke of Tobias, 

geue myself to be ý seruaunt, I shal not 

deserue y prouydence. Neuertheles I be- seke the, that thou wylt take the beastes and the seruauntes, and go vnto Gabelus in Rages the cite of the Meedes, and delyuer him his handwrytinge, and receaue the money of him, and praye him to come to my mariage. For thou knowest thyself, that my father telleth y dayes: and yf I tary one daye to longe, he wyl be sory in his mynde. Now seist thou how earnestly Raguel hath requyred me, so that I can not saye him nay.

Then toke Raphael foure of Raguels ser- uauntes, and two Camels, t wente vnto Rages the cite of the Medes: and whan he had founde Gabelus, he gaue him his handwry- tynge, q receaued all ¥ money. He tolde him also of Tobias y sonne of Toby, how all thiges had happened, œ caused him to come with him to y mariage. Now whan he came in to the house of Raguel, he fotide Tobias syttinge at y table: q he leape vp, a they kyssed one another, and Gabelus wepte, and praysed God, and sayde: the blessynge of the
God of Israel haue thou,” for thou art the sonne of a right verteous q iust man, ¢ of one y feareth God, « geueth greate allmes. And blessynge haue y wife, and youre elders, fhat ye maye se youre children, and youre childers childré, vnto the thirde and fourth generacio, and that youre sede maye be blessed of y God of Israel, which reigneth worlde without ende. And ‘whan they all had sayde Amen, they wente to the feast, but with the feare of the LORDE helde they the feast of the mariage.

The y. Chapter. 

Na whyle yoge Tobias made loge 

tarienge by reason of y mariage, his father was full of care and heuynes, and thought: what shulde be the cause, that my sonne tarieth so longe? Or why shulde he be kepte so longe there? Peraduenture
Gabelus is deed, and no man wyl geue him the money. Thus begane he to be very soroufull, he & Anna his wife with him, qœ be- ganne to wepe both together, because their sonne was not come agayne vnto them at the daye appoynted. As for his mother, she wepte with discomfortable teares, and sayde:
Wo is me, my sonne: Oh what ayled vs to sende the awaye into a straunge countre, thou

a Tob, 7. a. 

€ bap. ir. 

5 

bap. rt 

light of oure eyes, thou staff of oure age, thou comforte of oure life, ^thou hope of oure gene- racion? Seinge all y thinges that we haue are onely in the, we shulde not haue sent the awaye from vs.

Then Tobias comforted her, and sayde: holde thy tonge, and be not discomforted, oure sonne is whole and sounde: the man y we sent him withall, is faithfull ynough.
Neuertheles she might in no wyse be cofort- ed: but daylie wente out, loked aboute, and wente aboute all the stretes, wherby she thought he shulde come againe: that (yf it were possible) she might se him comynuge afarre of.

But Raguel saide vnto his sonne 1 lawe: 
O tary here, and I shall sende a messanger vnto thy father Tobias, to tell him y thou art in good health. Tobias sayde vnto him: I am sure, that my father and my mother counte euery daye, and that their hertes are sory.

So whan Raguel prayed Tobias with many wordes, t he wolde in no wyse heare him, he delyuered Sara vnto him, q the half parte of all his good: in seruauntes and handmaydes, in shepe, in camels, and in kyne and moch money, and so sent him awaye from him with peace and ioye, and sayde: The holy angell of the LORDE be with you in youre iourney, and brynge you forth safe q sounde, that ye maye fynde all thinges in good case with youre elders, and that myne eyes maye se youre children, afore I dye.

So the elders enbraced their daughter, kyssed her, and let her go, exortinge her to honoure hir father and mother in lawe, to loue hir huszbande, to rule well hir huszsholde, to kepe hir house in good ordre, and to shew hir self fautlesse.

The pi. Chapter. 

OW as they were goinge homewarde againe, vpon y xj. daye they came to
Charra, which lyeth in the half waye towarde 
Niniue. And the angell sayde: Brother 
Tobias, thou knowest how thou hast left thy father: therfore yf it please the, we two wyll go before, and let the husholde with thy wife and y catell come soft q fayrly after vs. And whan Tobias was content that they shulde go before, Raphael sayde vnto him: ‘Take of the gall of the fish with the, for it shal be ueces-

9 Tob. 5. d. 

The boke of Tobias., 

sary. So Tobias toke of the gall, and they wente their waye. But Anna the mother of
Tobias sat daylie by the waye syde vpon y toppe of an hill, from whence she might se farre aboute her.

And whyle she was waytinge there for his comynge, she loked afarre of, and anone she perceaued hir sonne comminge, and ranne and tolde hir huszbande, sayenge: beholde, thy sonne commeth. And Raphael sayde vnto Tobias: As soone as thou commest in to the house, immediatly worshipe the LORDE thy God, and geue thankes vnto him: then go to thy father, and kysse him, q strake his eyes oner with the gall of y fish, that thou hast brought with the. For be sure, that his eyes shal straight waye be opened, and thy father shal se the light of heauen, and shal reioyse at the sight of the. Then the dogg that had bene with them in their iourney, rane before, and came as a messaüger, and wagged with his tayle for gladnesse.

So y blynde father arose, and beganne to renne, and stombled with his fete, and gaue a seruaunt his hande, ranne to mete his sonne, receaued him, and kyssed him, he and his wife, and beganne to wepe for ioye.

Now whan they had worshipped q thanked 
God, they satt downe. Then toke Tobias of the fishes gall, and anoynted his fathers eyes: and taried half an houre, and then beganne the blemysh to go out of his eyes, like as it had bene the whyte szkynne of an egg: which
‘Tobias toke and drew from his eyes, and im- mediatly he receaued his sight.

Then they praysed God, he and his wife, and all they that knew him. And Tobias sayde: O LORDE God of Israel, I gene the prayse and thankes, for thou hast chastened me, and made me whole. And lo, now do I se my sonne Tobias. After seuen dayes came
Sara his sonnes wife also whole and sounde with all ¥ housholde and catell, with camels and moch money of his wyues, and with the money that he had receaued of Gabelus: and he tolde his father and his mother all the benefites, which God had done for him, by the man that led him. Achior also and
Nabath Tobias sister sonnes came and were glad, q reioysed with him, by reason of all the good that God had shewed vnto him.

And so for y space of seuen dayes they made mery, and were right ioyfull euerichone.

————tÓ—G 

lagen i) |.é. T —— 1 41 72 0g 0 ne 8d fo. It.

€ 

D 

| 
| 

Fo. lij. 

a 

B 

€ 

The boke 

The rit. Chapter. 

HE ‘Tobias called his sonne vnto him 
(m q sayde: What maye we geue this holy man, that wente with the? Tobias answered his father and sayde: Father, what rewarde shal we geue him? Or what thinge can de- serue his benefites? He hath bene my gyde, and brought me safe agayne: he receaued the money from Gabelus, he caused me to get my wife, he droue the euell sprete from her, he hath bene occasio of gladnesse to hir father and mother: he delyuered me, that I was not denoured of the fish, he hath made the to se the light of heauen, yee we all haue receaued greate good of him. How shulde we worthely deserue these thinges vnto him? But I praye the my father, that thou wilt desyre him, yf happlie he wil voutsafe, to take with him the half of all that we haue brought.

So the father and the sonne called him, toke him asyde, and beganne to praye him, that he wolde be content to take in good worth, the half parte of all that they had brought. Then sayde he secretly vnto them:
Prayse $ God of heauen, and geue thankes vnto him before all men lyuynge, for he hath shewed his mercy * vnto vs. It is good to hyde the Kynges secrete, but to shew and to prayse ¥ workes of God, it is an honorable thinge. Prayer is good with fastinge, and to geue allmes is better, then to hoorde vp trea- sures of golde. ^ For allmes delyuereth from death, clenseth synne, and causeth to fynde euerlastinge life, But they that do synne and vnrighteousnes, are y enemies of their owne sonles.

Wherfore I tell you the trueth, and wyll hyde nothinge from you. ^Whan thou praydest with teares, and burydest the deed, and leftest thy dyner, and hyddest the deed in thy house vpon the daye tyme, that thou mightest burye them in the night, I offred thy prayer before the LORDE. And because thou wast ac- cepte and beloued of God, it was necessary, that tentacion shulde trye the. ^And now hath the LORDE sent me to heale the, and to delyuer Sara y sonnes wife from the jeuell sprete. For I am Raphael an angell,
‘one of the seuen that stonde before God. 

Wha they herde this, they were sore afrayed, 

* Tob. 4. b. Dani. 4. d. 
* Prou. 3. b. 

* Some rede, vnto you. 
Tob. 2. a. 

of Tobias. Chap. ry. 

and trembled, and fell downe vpon their faces vnto the grounde. ‘Then sayde the angell:
Peace be with you, feare not. Where as I haue bene with you, it is the will of God, gene prayse and thankes vnto him.

? You thought that I dyd eate and drinke with you, but I vse meate that is invisible, and drynke that can not be sene of men.

Now therfore is ¥ tyme that 1 must turne agayne, vnto him that sent me: but be ye thankfull vnto God, and tell out all his won- derous workes.

And whan he had spoken these wordes, he was taken awaye out of their sight, so y they sawe him nomore. Then fell they downe flat vpon their faces by the space of thre houres, and praysed God: and whan they rose vp, they tolde all his woderous workes.

The rij. Chapter. 

HEN olde Tobias opened his mouth, and praysed the LORDE and sayde:
Greate art thon o LORDE for euermore, and thy kyngdome worlde without ende: for
“thou scourgest and healest, thou ledest vnto hell, and bryngest out agayne, and there is none y maye escape thy hande. O geue thankes vnto y LORDE ye children of Israel, and prayse him in the sight of the Heithe.
For amonge the Heithen which knowe him not hath he scatred you, to the intet that ye shulde shew forth his maruelous workes: a cause them for to knowe, that there is none other God allmightie but he. He hath chast- ened vs for oure myszdedes, and for his owne

mercy sake shal he saue vs. 
Considre then, how he hath dealt with you, t prayse him with feare and drede, and mag- nifie the euerlastinge kynge in youre workes.
I wil prayse him euen in the londe of my captiuyte, for he hath shewed his maiesty vnto a synfull people. "Turne you therfore
O ye synners, and do righteousnes before 
God, and be ye sure, that he wyl shew his mercy vpon you. As for me q my soule, we wil reioyse in God. O prayse the LORDE all ye his chosen, holde the dayes of gladnesse, and be thankfull vnto him. /O Ierusalem thou eite of God, the LORDE hath punyshed the for the workes of thine owne handes. O prayse the LORDE in thy good thinges, q

4 Gen. 18. a. and 19.a. Iud. 13.c. 
* Deut. 52. f. 1 Reg. v. b. Sap. 16. c. — / 2 Para. 6. a. 

Chap. riiij. 

po) 

geue thankes to the euerlastinge God, that he maye builde vp his tabernacle agayne in y, that he maye call agayne vnto the, all soch as be in captiuyte, and that thou mayest haue ioye for euermore. “With a fayre light shalt thou shyne, q all ý endes of y worlde shal honoure the. *The people shal come vnto the from farre, they shal bringe giftes, and worshipe Y LORDE in the, and thy londe shal they hane for a Sanctuary, for they shal call vpon the greate name in the.

Cursed shal they be that despyse the, q all they that blaspheme the, shal be condépned : but blessed shal they be, y buylde the vp.
As for the, thou shalt reioyse in y childre, for they all shalbe blessed, and gathered together vnto the LORDE. Blessed are they all y loue y, and be glad of thy peace. Prayse thou the LORDE o my soule, for the LORDE oure God hath delyuered his cite Ierusalem from all hir troubles. I wil counte my self happie, yf my sede remayne to se y clearnes of Terusalé.

The gates of lerusalem shalbe buylded with Saphyre and Smaragde, and all the cópase of hir walles with precious stones.” All hir stretes shalbe paued with whyte Marble stone, and in all hir stretes shal Alleluya be sunge. Praysed be ý LORDE, which hath exalted her, y his kyngdome maye be vpon her for euermore, Amen. And so Tobias made an ende of his talkynge.

The riiij. Chapter. 
ND after that Tobias had gotte his 
A s 

ight agayne, he lyued two aud xl. yeares, q sawe his childers children. Now whan he was an hundreth and two yeare olde, he dyed, q was buried honorably in Niniue.
For whan he was sixe and fiftie yeares of age, he lost the sight of his eyes, and whā he was thre score yeare olde, he gat his sight agayne.
The residue of his life led he in ioye, and 

^ Esa, 60. a. Mar. B. a. 
4 Tob 42. c. 

? Luc; 2. c. c Apo. 21, c.

Acto. 2. a. 
Psal. 127. a. 

The boke of Tobias. 

Fo. ly. increased well in the feare of God, and de- parted in peace.

But in y houre of his death he called vnto|33 him his sonne Tobias, and seuen yonge sprin- galdes his sonnes children, and sayde vnto them: The destruccion of Niniue is at hande," for the word of the LORDE can not fayle, and oure brethren that are scatred out of the londe of Israel, shal come thither agayne.
And the whole londe of it that hath bene waist, shalbe fylled:/ and the house of God that was brent m it, shalbe buylded againe, q all soch as feare God shall returne thither: the Heithen also shal forsake their Idols, « come to lerusalem, and dwell there, and all the kynges of the earth shalbe glad of her, and worshipe the LORDE God of Israel.

And therfore my children, heare youre father: Serue the LORDE in faithfulues;* seke after his will, and do the thinge that pleaseth him. Commaunde youre children y they do right, geue allmes, be myndefull of
God, and euer to be thankfull vnto him in trueth and with all their power. Heare me therfore my childré, and abyde not here: but in what daye so euer ye haue buried youre mother besyde me, gett you from hence.
For I se, that the wickednes of it shal brynge it to destruccion and ende.

After ¥ death of his mother, Tobias de- parted awaye from Niniue, with his wife and children, and with his childers children, ¢ came agayne to his father and mother in lawe, and founde them whole and in a goad age, and toke the care of the. And he closed their eyes, and was heyre vnto all Raguels goodes, and sawe the fifth generacion and childers childre. And whan he was xcix. yeare of age, he dyed in the feare of the
LORDE, and his kynsfolkes buried him. 
And all his posterite continued in a good life, aud holy conuersacion: so that they were
Youed a accepted both of God and men, and of all the people of the londe.

Soph.2.c. S 1 Esd. 3. 6. 

(d 3 Esd, 5. d. 
€ Deut. 6. c. 1 Reg. 7. a. 

Josu. 24. c. 

The ende of the boke of Tobias, 

— A x 

The boke of Judith. 

WAbat this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
Of the noble cite Egbathanis. Of Nabuchodo- nosor the kynge of the Assirians, of his victory and power.

Chap. H. 

The vnsaciable desyre that Nabuchodonosor had to raigne : of his hoost q tyranye.

Chap. NI. 
Dyuerse kynges and prynces yelde them selues 

for feare. The tyranny of Holofernes and pryde ofthe kynge.

Chap. INI. 

The Iewes are afrayed and carefull for Ierusalem and the temple, make their londe stroge, pre- pare them selues to the battayll, call vpon
God and Eliachim the prest comforteth them. 

Chap. V. 
| Holofernes taketh indignacion at the children of 
Israel, because they go aboute to defende them selues. Achior beareth wytnesse to the trueth.

Chap. VI. 

Achior for tellynge the trueth is take, and de- lyuered vnto the people of the Iewes : vnto whom he telleth all the matter, which moueth the people to crye vpon God.

Chap. VII. 

Holofernes layeth sege to Bethulia. The children of Israel crye vpon God. Holofernes taketh the water from them, so that they in the cite haue greate thyrst, and are vnpacient. Osias comforteth them, and appoynteth fyue dayes to the grace of God.

Chap. VIII. 

Iudith reproueth the elders that sett a tyme to the mercy of God ; she exorteth the people to amedemet q to praier, rehearseth the benefites of God, and telleth them hir deuyce.

Chap. IX. 
Iudith goeth in to hir oratory, and prayeth fer- 

uently vnto God, for the deliueraüce of hir people.

Chap. X. 
Iudith decketh herself of the best fashio, taketh 

hir mayde with her, q goeth forth by night in to 
Holofernes tent. 

Chap. XI. 
Iudith telleth Holofernes the cause of hir co- mynge, which pleaseth him well.

Chap. XII. 
Holofernes commaundeth to intreate hir well, and geueth hir liberty to go in and out to hir

prayer, maketh a greate supper, byddeth hir to it, and is dronken.

Chap. XIII. 

Iudith seketh oportunite, prayeth vnto God for strégth, smyteth of the heade of droken Holo- fernes, and bryngeth it in to the cite, where the people reioyse and prayse God.

Chap. XIIII. 

Holofernes heade is stickte vp vpon the walles, the children of Israel fall vpon their enemies, which take their flight. Achior cometh in to the nombre of the people of God.

Chap. XV. 

Holofernes hoost are out of their wyttes after his death, the Israelites folowe vpo the, the other cities of Israel helpe them, they wynne greate spoyles, t comede Iudith.

Chap. XVI. | 

Iudith syngeth prayse vnto the LORDE. The 

people come together vnto Ierusale to geue 

thankes and prayse vnto the LORDE. How 
Iudith made hir ende. 

Chap. ij. 

The boke of Judith. 

The first Chapter. 

a RPHAXAT the kynge of the Medes subdued many people vnto his domi- nion, q buylded a noble stroge cite, which he called Egbathanis. The walles of it made he of fre stone, foure squared, seuétie cubites hye, and thirtie cubites brode. He made towres therevpon of an hundreth cubites hye.
But vpon the foure corners euery syde was twentie fote brode. He made the portes in the heith, like as the towres. This kynge trusted in his mightie hoost, ¢ in his glorious charettes.

So in y twolft yeare of his raigne it hap- pened, that Nabuchodonosor y kynge of the
Assirians (which raigned in the greate cite of 
Niniue) fought agaynst Arphaxat, and ouer- came hi in y greate felde called Ragau, be- syde Euphrates and Tigris and Iadason in the felde of Erioth the kinge of the Elikes.

33| Then was the kyngdome of Nabuchodono- sor exalted, and his hert was lift vp:^ and he sent vnto all them that dwelt in Celicia, in
Damascus, in Libanus, and vnto the Heithen that dwelt in Carmel and Cedar, and to soch as dwelt in Galile in the greate felde of Esz- drelo, to all them that were in Samaria, and beyonde the water of Iordane vnto Ierusalem and the whole londe of lesse vnto the moun- taynes of Ethiopia. Vnto all these dyd Na- buchodonosor the kynge of ý Assirians sende messaungers. But they all with one consent wolde not agree vnto him, and sent the mes- saungers agayne emptie, and pnt the awaye without honoure. ‘Then Nabuchodonosor the kynge toke indignació at all those londes, and sware by his trone ¢ by his kyngdome, that he wolde be auenged of all these countrees.

The ij. Chapter. 

A| VN the xiij. yeare of kynge Nabuchodono- sor, vpon the xxij. daye of y first moneth,

it was denysed in the courte of Nabuchodo- nosor y kynge of the Assirias, that he wolde diede himself. So he called vnto him all ¥ elders, all his captaynes and men of warre, and shewed them his secrete councell and tolde them, that his purpose was, to brynge the whole earth vnder his domynion. Now whan they were all content with this sayenge,
Nabuchodonosor the kinge called Holofernes 

eM Mati ida. 

vnto him: Go thy waye forth agaynst all the kyngdomes of the west and specially agaynst those that haue despysed my commaunde- ment. Thou shalt spare no realme, all! stronge cities shalt thou brynge in subieccion vnto me.

Then Holofernes called together all the|33 captaynes q rulers of all the power in Assiria, and mustred the soudyers vnto the hoost (like as the kynge commaunded him) namely, an hundreth and twétye thousande fightinge men vpon fote, and twolue thousande archers vpon horsebacke. All his ordinaunce sent he before with an innumerable multitude of camels, so that the hoost was well prouyded for with oxen, and small catell, and y without nombre. He caused corne to be prepared out of all Syria for his hoost. Moch golde and syluer also toke he out of the kynges house.
So he toke his iourney, he and all his hoost, with charettes, horsmen, and archers: of whom there were so many, that they couered the grounde of the lande, like the gres- hoppers.

And whan he was gone past the borders of] ¢ the Assirians, he came towarde the greate mountaynes of Ange, which lye vpon the left syde of Celicia: and so he wente vp in to all their castels, and wanne euery stroge holde.
As for y welthy citie of Melothus, he brake it downe, q spoyled all the childré of Tharsis and the Ismaelites, which laye towarde the wyldernes and vpon the south syde of y londe of Chelon. He went ouer Euphrates also, and came in to Mesopotamia, and brake downe all the hye cities that were there, from the broke of Mambre tyll a man come to the see: and he toke the borders in from Celicia! ` vnto the coastes of Iaphet towarde the south.
He caried awaye all the Madianites, and spoyled all their goodes: q who so euer with- stode him, he slew them with the swerde.
After this he wente downe in to the felde of 
Damascus in the tyme of haruest, and brent vp all the corne and all the trees, and caused the vynes to be cutt downe. And the feare of him fell vpon all them that dwelt in y earth.

The iij. Chapter. 
So the kynges q prynces of all cities ¢/@ 

londes sent their Embassitours : namely, 

the chefe captayne of his warres and saide 
| 
| 

^ Eze. 9.b. 

Jo. lot. 

they of Syria and Mesopotamia, Syria Sobal 
1 Lybia q Celicia, which came to Holofernes, q sayde: Let thy wrath ceasse towarde us:
It is better for vs to serue the greate kynge. 
Nabuchodonosor with oure lyues, and to be. subiecte vnto the, then that we shulde dye and be slayne, and receaue greater hurte. All oure cities and possessions, all mountaynes and hilles, all feldes, greate aud small catell, shepe,

The boke of Subitb. 

goates, horses, and camels, all oure goodes and housholdes, be in thy power, vnder thy subieccion be it alltogether. We oure selues also and oure children wylbe thyne owne, come vnto vs a peceable lorde, and vse oure seruyce at thy pleasure.

Then came Holofernes downe from the mountaynes with horseme q greate power, and conquered all stronge fensed cities, and all that dwelt in the londe. And out of all cities he toke stronge men, q soch as were nete for ¥ warre, to helpe him. ‘There came soch a feare also vpon those countrees, that the indwellers of all the cities, the prynces| and rulers ¢ the people together, ^wete forth to mete him as he came, q receaued him honor- ably with garlandes q torches, with daunses, tabrettes and pipes.

Neuertheles though they dyd this, yet might they not swage his rigorous stomak : but he destroyed their cities, q hewed downe their woddes. For Nabuchodonosor the kynge had commaunded him, that he shulde rote out all the goddes of the londe: to y intent that he onely might be called and taken for God, of the nacions which Holofernes with his power brought vnder him. So wente he thorow Syria Sobal, and thorow all Appamia, and all Mesopotamia, came to the Idumeans in the lode of Gabaa and Septopoli, and toke their cities, and remayned there thirtie dayes, wherin he caused all the whole multitude of his hoost to be gathered together.

The iij. Chapter. 

HAN the children of Israel y dwelt in 

lewry herde this, they were sore 

afrayed of him. There came soch tremblinge also and feare vpon them, that they sorowed he shulde do vnto the cite of Ierusalem and the temple of the LORDE, as he had done to other cities x their temples. So they seut in to all Samaria roude aboute vnto a ludit, 5. a.

? Keeli, 33. b. * Exo. 17. c. 

| lericho, toke in and occupied all the toppes of the mountaynes, made fast the townes with walles, and prepared corne for them agaynst the battayll.

Eliachim also y prest wrote vnto all the that dwelt towarde Eszdrelon (which lyeth ouer agaynst y greate felde by Dotha Im) q vnto all those by whom men might haue pas- sage vnto them, that they shulde take in the wayes of the mountaynes, wherby there might be eny waye and passage to Ierusalem,
& y they shulde holde diligent watch, where eny strate waye was betwixte y moütaynes.
And the children of Israel dyd, as Eliachim the prest of the LORDE had commaunded them. ^And all the people, cried earnestly, and humbled their soules with fastinges and prayers, they and their wyues. The prestes put on hayrie clothes, and layed the yonge babes before the temple of the LORDE, and couered the aulter of the LORDE with an hayrie clothe. And with one acorde cried they vnto the LORDE God of Israel, that their children shulde not be geuen in to a pray, and their wyues in to a spoyle, y their cities shuldé not be layed waist, q y their
Sanctuary shulde not be vnhalowed, and so they to be a shame and rebuke vnto the
Heithen. 

Then Eliachim the hye prestofthe LORDE wente rounde aboute all Israel, and spake vnto them, sayenge: Be ye sure, y the
LORDE wil heare youre peticions, yf ye co- tynue stedfast in fastinges and prayers in y sight of the LORDE. Remembre Moses the seruaunte of the LORDE, which *ouer- threw $ Amalechites (that trusted in their might q power, in their hoost, in their shildes, in their charettes x horsmen) not with weapens, but with holy prayers. Euen so shal all the enemies of Israel be, yf ye contynue in this worke, that ye haue begonne. So vpon this exortacion they contynued in prayer before the LORDE: In so moch that they which offred brent sacrifices vnto the LOR DE, offred the offringes vnto y LORDE, beynge arayed in hayrie clothes, and had aszshes vpon their heades. And they all besought God from their whole hert, y he wolde vyset his people of Israel.

The b. Chapter. 
ND worde came to Holofernes the prynce of the warres of the Assyriās, y the

Chap. iiij. 

Chap. b. 

childré of Israel prepared them selues to make resistaunce, q how they had stopped the wayes betwixte the mountaynes. Then was he ex- ceadinge wroth, q called all the prynces of
Moab, q the captaines of Ammon, q sayde vnto them: Tell me, what people is this, ¥ kepeth in the moutaynes ? Or what maner of cities are they? What is their power? Or what maner of hoost haue they? Who is their captayne? And why do they “despyse vs (more then all those that dwell in the east) and come not forth to mete vs, y they might receane vs with peace ? :

Then Achior the ^captayne of all the Am- monites answered, and sayde: Syr, yf it please the to heare me, I wil tell the trueth before the concernynge this people that dwell in the mountaynes, and there shal no lye go out of my mouth. | people is of the generacion of the
Caldees, they dwelt first in Mesopotamia, for they wolde not folowe y goddes of their fathers that were in the dis of the Caldees, v so forsoke they the customes of their fore fathers
(which had many goddes) and worshipped one 
God, that made heaue and earth : which also commaunded them that they shulde go from thence, and dwell at Haran. Now whan there came a derth? in to ý whole londe, they wente downe to Egipte, q there they dwelt foure hundreth yeares, in ¥ which they multiplied so greatly, that their hoost might not be nombred.
And whan the kynge of Egipte oppressed them,* and subdued the in buyldinge of his cities with makynge of claye q brick, they cried vnto God their LORDE, which pun- yshed the whole londe of Egipte with dynerse plages.
€| Now whan the kynge of Egipte let thé go their waye;/ q the plage ceassed, q then folowed after thé, to take the, q to brynge the agayne in to his seruyce, whyle they were flyenge awaye, the God of heaué opened $ see, so ý the waters stode fast vpon both the sydes as a wall, q these wente thorow the botome of the see drye shod, In the which place wha an in- numerable people of the Egipcians folowed vpon them, they were so ouerwhelmed with the waters, that there remayned not one, to tell thé that came after, how it happened.

5 Judit. 3. b. è [udit, 11. b. * Gen. 11. d. d Gen. 41. g. and 46. a. Exodi 1, a. aud 12. f. Galat. 3. c.
* Exodi 1. b. and 5. b. f Exo. 12. c. and 14. b. 

The boke of Judith. 

Fo. Ibij. 

So whan this people was passed thorow the| 3 reed sèe, they came in to the wildernes of the mount Synai, where neuer man might dwell afore, q where the sonne of mā had neuer rested. There were $ bytter waters made swete for thé, that they might drynke, q xl. yeares had they meate from heaue. Where so euer they wente (without bowe q arowe, without bukler or swerde) their God fought for the, q caused thé to haue the victory. Yee no man was able to hurte this people, ex- cepte it were so, ý they departed vnfaithfully from ¥ worshippinge of the LORDE their},
God. Butas oft as they worshipped’ eny other besyde their God, he gaue them ouer to be spoyled, to be slayne, ¢ to be put to confucion.
Neuertheles as oft as they were sory for de- partynge from the worshipe of their God, the same God of heauen gaue them power q stregth to withstode their enemies.

Morouer they slew the kynge of the Cana- nites, Iebusites, Pherezites, Ethites, Euites q
Amorites,' q all $ mightie in Hesebon, q toke their lodes q cities in possession: and so longe as they synned not in ¥ sight of their God, it wéte well with them, for their God hateth vn- righteousnesse. For in tymes past whan they wente out of $ waye,’ which God had geuen them, y they shulde walke in it, they were destroyed in dyuerse battayles of many nacions, q many of them were caried awaye presoners into a straüge coutre. But now lately they haue turned thé selues agayne vnto the LORDE their God, q are come together agayne' out of the conntrees where they were scatred abrode: and thus haue they coquered these mountaynes q dwell therin: q as for
Ierusalem where their Sanctuary is, they haue it againe in possession.

And therfore my lorde, make diliget inqui- sicion, yf this people haue done wickednesse in the sight of their God, then let vs go vp agaynst them, for doutles their God shal de- lyuer them in to thy handes, x subdue them vnto ¥ power. But yf this people haue not displeased their God, we shal not be able to withstande them, for their God shal defende thé,” q so shall we be a shame to all ý worlde.

Now whan Achior had spoken out these wordes, all the prynces of Holofernes were

^Iudit. 2. 3. 4. 
! 1 Esd. 1. a. 

€ Exo. 15. d. Exo. 16. f. Deut. 8. a. 
1! Nu. 21. a, Iosu, 12. * 4 Re. 25. a. 
™ Tudit. 6. c. 

113 

fo. tbii. wroth, q thought to slaye him, q sayde one to another: what is he this, which darre saie, ý i childré of Israel are able to withstode Na-

uchodonosor the kynge ¢ his hoost? where as they are an vnwapened people, without strégth or vnderstodinge of ý fettes of warre?
That Achior therfore maye knowe, y he hath disceaued vs, we wil go vp in to y moütaynes: q whan the mightie men of thé are taken, he also shalbe stickte with the swerde, y all people maye knowe, that Nabuchodonosor is the God of the earth, and that there is none other without him.

The oí. Chapter. 

O whan they had left of speakinge, Holo- 
S fernes toke sore indignacion, q sayde vnto Achior. For so moch as thou hast prophecied vnto vs, sayenge: that the people of Israel “shalbe defended of their
God, I will shew the, that there is no God but Nabuchodonosor. Yee whan we slaye them all as one man, ^thou also shalt perish with them thorow the swerde of the Assirians, tall Israel shal be destroyed with the, q thé shalt thou fele, that Nabuchodonosor is the
LORDE of the whole earth. Thé shal the swerde of my knyghthode go thorow thy sydes, q thou shalt fall downe stickte amonge the wounded of Israel, q shalt not come to thy self agayne, but be vtterly destroyed with the. But yf thou thynkest thy prophecy to be true, why dost thou then chaunge thy coloure? why art thou afrayed? Thynkest thou that my wordes are not able to be per- fourmed? But that thou mayest knowe, that thou shalt fele these thinges with thé, be- holde, from this honre forth wyll I sende the vnto yonder people, that whan the punysh- ment of my swerde (which they haue worthely deserued) falleth vpon them, thou mayest be punyshed with them.

So Holofernes cOmaunded his sernauntes to take Achior, q to cary him vnto Bethulia, and to delyuer him in to the handes of the children of Israel. Then Holofernes ser- uaütes toke him, q wéte thorow the playne felde. But whan they drew nye vnto the mountaynes, the slynge casters came out agaynst them: Neuertheles they gat them awaye by the syde of the mountayne, t bounde Achior hand ¢ fote to a tre, q so left

a [udit. 5. f. > Tudit. 5. a. 

The boke of Judith. 

him bounde with wythies, q turned agayne vnto their lorde.

Notwithstodinge the children of Israel wente downe fro Bethulia, came vnto him, lowsed him, bronght him to Bethulia, set him in the myddest of the people, and axed him what the matter was, that the Assirias had left him bounde.

Chap. bí. 

Osias the sonne of Micha of the trybe of|€ 

Symeon, q Charmim (which is also called 
Gothoniel) were the pryncipall rulers at the same tyme. Now whan Achior stode in the myddest of the Senatonrs, q before thé all, he tolde them, ‘what answere he gaue Holo- fernes, to the thinge that he axed him, and how Holofernes people wolde haue slayne him for so sayenge, q how Holofernes himself was wroth, t cOmaunded him for the same cause to be delyuered vnto y Israelites: that whan he ouercame the childré of Israel he might commaunde Achior also to be put to death with dynerse tormentes, because he sayde: ^the God of heanen is their defender.

And whà Achior had playnely tolde out all these thinges, all the people fell downe vpon their faces, praysinge the LORDE, and poured out their prayers together vnto the
LORDE, with a general complaynte q wepynge, q sayde: O LORDE God of heanen q earth, beholde their pryde, q loke vpon oure lowlynes, ¢ cosidre how it standeth with thy sayntes, t make it to be knowne, y thou forsakest not those, which holde them fast by the, t how y thon bringest thé lowe, y presume of thé selues, ¢ make their boast in their owne strength. So whan the wepinge and prayer of the people (which they had made the whole daye longe) was ended, they coforted Achior, sayége: the God of oure fathers, whose power q strength thou hast praysed, shall so rewarde the, y thou shalt rather se their destruccion. Whan ý LORDE oure God then shall geue his seruauntes this liberte, God be with the also amonge vs: so y if it please y, thou with thyne mayest dwell with vs.

Now whan Osias had ended the councell, he toke him in to his house, and made a greate supper, called all the elders to it, q so they refreszshed them selues after the fastinge.
And afterwarde was all the people called to- 
‘gether, which made their prayers all the night 

* Iudit. 5. b. 

4 ludit, 5. f. 

1 

£ 

Chap. bij. The boke 

longe in the congregacion, and besought the 
God of Israel for helpe. 

The bij. Chapter. 

a HE nest daye Holofernes commaunded 

his hoost, to go vp agaynst Bethulia. 
There were ^an C. q xx. thousande fightinge men on fote, q two q twentie thonsande horsme, besyde the preparynge of them y were wonne, q came to them on euery syde out of the countrees q cities which he had take. All these prepared them selues vnto| the battayll agaynst the Israelites, and came on by the hyll syde, vnto the topp that loketh ouer agaynst Dothaim, from the place which is called Belma, vnto Chelmon y lyeth to- warde Eszdrelon.

Now whan the childré of Israel sawe so greate a multitude of the Assirians, they fell downe flat vpon y grounde, strowed aszshes vpon their heades, q prayed with one acorde, y the God of Israel wolde shew his mercy vpon his people. And so they toke their weapens, t sat betwixte the mountaynes in y narow place, t kepte the waye daye q night.
But whyle Holofernes was goinge aboute, he founde the water springe, which from the south syde was conueyed in to the cite by a condyte: this comaunded he to be directe another waye, ¢ to cut their condite in sunder.
There were welles also not farre from the walles, which they vsed secretly, more for pleasure then for necessite.

Then wente the Ammonites q the Moabites vnto Holofernes, and sayde: The children of
Israel trust nether in speare ner arowe, but haue taken in, and kepe the mountaynes and hilles. That thon mayest ouercome them therfore without y strykynge of eny battayll, sett me to kepe the welles, that they drawe no water out of them: so shalt thou destroye thé without swerde, or at the least they shall be so feble, that they must be fayne to geue oner the cite, which they thinke not able to be wone, for so moch as it lieth in the moi- taynes. These wordes pleased Holofernes well and all his men of warre, and he ^set an hundreth men at euery well rounde aboute.
B| And whan this watch had endured twentye dayes, the Cisternes and all that had water, fayled them that dwelt in the cite of Bethulia,

a Tudit. 2. b. * Tudit. 16. a. 

* Exo. 17. a. 

of Judith. 

so that in ¥ whole cite they had not drynke ynough for one daye, for the people had water geuen them daylie in a measure. ‘Then came the men and women, yonge personnes and children all vnto Osias, and sayde all with one voyce : “God be indge betwixte vs and the, for thon hast dealt euell with vs: thou woldest not speake peaceably with the kynge of the
Assirians, therfore hath God solde vs in their handes, and there is no manu to helpe vs, where as we are brought downe before their eyes in thirste and greate destruccion. Ther- fore gather now together all the people that be in the cite, that we maye all yelde oure selues wyllingly vnto y people of Holofernes : for better it is y we be captyue and prayse the LORDE with oure lyues, then to be slayne and perishe, and to be laughed to scorne q shamed of euery man whan we se oure wyues and children dye before oure eyes.
We take heauen a earth this daye to recorde, and the God of oure fathers (which punysheth vs acordinge to the deseruynge of oure synnes) and geue you waruynge, y ye geue vp the cite now in to y power of Holofernes hoost, that oure ende maye be shorte with the swerde, which els shal endure longe for wante of water and for thirst.

Whan they had spoke ont these wordes, there was a greate wepynge and howlynge in the whole congregacion, and that of euery man, and they cryed an whole houre longe vnto God with one voice, sayenge: we hane syuned with onre fathers we haue done amysse, we haue dealt wickedly. "Thon y art gracious, haue mercy vpon vs, punysh oure vnrighteousnes with thine owne scourge, and geue not those ouer that knowlege the, vnto a people which knoweth the not, lest they saye amonge the Heithen: ‘where is their
God? 

And whan they were so weery with this erienge and wepynge, that they Hale their tunges, Osias stode vp with watrye eyes, and sayde: /O take good hertes vnto yon (deare brethren) and be of good cheare, and let vs wayte yet these fyue dayes for mercy of the
LORDE: peraduenture he shal ent awaye his indignacion, and gene glory vnto his name.
But yf he helpe vs not whau these fyue dayes are past, we shall do as ye haue sayde.

4 Psal. 105. a. 

* Psal. 113. b. J Tudit. 8. b. 

Fo. lir. 

£ 

idfo. Ip. 

The bij. Chapter. 

a ND it happened whan these wordes 

A came to the eares of Iudith a wyddow, which was the daughter of Merari, the sonne of Idox, the sonne of Ioseph, the sonne of
Osias, the sonne of Elai, ý sonne of Iammor, the sonne of Iedeon, the sonne of Raphoim, the sonne of Achitob, the sonne of Melchia, the sonne of Euam, y sonne of Nathania, the sonne of Salathiel, y sonne of Symeon, the sonne of Ruben. And hir huszbande was called Manasses, which dyed in the dayes of the barlye haruest. For whyle he was bynd- inge ý sheeues together in the felde, the heate came vpon his heade, and he dyed at
Bethulia his cite, and there was he buried beside his fathers. Now was Iudith his deso- late wyddow thre yeares q six monethes.
And in the hyer partes of hir house she made hirself a preuy chambre, where she dwelt, beynge closed in with hir maydés. She ware a smock of hayre, and fasted all the dayes of hir life, excepte the Sabbathes, and new moones q the solempne dayes that the people of Israel kepte. She was a very fayre and beutyfull personne. Hyr husbande also had lefte her greate riches, a plenteous housholde, greate vnmoueable possessions and many catell. This Iudith was a woman of a very good reporte with euery one, for she feared the LORDE greatly, and there was no body that speake an euell worde of her.

Wha this Judith herde, how Osias had promised the people, “that after the fyfite daye he wolde geue vp y cite vnto the Assirians, she sent for the elders Chambri and Charmin: and whan they came to her, she sayde: what thinge is this, wherin Osias hath consented, y yf God helpe not within fyue dayes, he wil geue ouer the cite to the Assirians? What are ye, that ye tempte the LORDE? This deuyce optayneth no mercy of God, but pro- uoketh him vnto wrath and displeasure. Wyl ye set the mercy of y LORDE a tyme, q appoynte him a daye after youre wyll?
€| Neuertheles for so moch as the LORDE 

is pacient, let vs rather amende oure selues, 

pouringe out teares, and besekynge him of grace. ^For God threateneth not as a mà, nether wyll he be prouoked vnto wrath as the

a Judit. 7. e. 
|4. a. 6. a. 

» fere. 18. a. and 25. a. © Iudic. 2. b. 
4 Deut. 32. e. * Deu. 8. a. 2 Par. 32. f. 

The boke of Judith. 

children of men. And therfore let vs hertely fall downe before him, and serue him with a meke sprete, and with wepynge eyes saye vnto the LORDE, that he deale with vs acordinge to his owne wyll and mercy: that like as oure hert is now vexed, q brought lowe thorow the pryde of them, it maye so be comforted thorow his grace: in so moch as we folowe not the synnes of oure fathers, which forsoke their
God, « worshipped other goddes: ‘for the which synne they perished with the swerde, were spoyled q brought to shame of all their enemies. As for vs, we knowe none other
God but onely him, for whose cóforte let vs tarry with mekenesse. He shall requyre and make “inquisicion for oure bloude, from the vexacions of oure enemies: he shal brynge downe all the Heithen, that ryse vp agaynst vs, and put them to dishonoure, eue the
LORDE oure God. 

Therfore deare brethren, seinge ye are the honorable and elders in the people of God, vnto whom all y people haue respecte, and vpon whom the life of the people stondeth, lift vp their hertes with youre exortacion, y they maye call to remembraunce, how oure
"fathers also iu tymes past were tempted, y they might be proued, yf they worshipped their God a right. "They ought to remebre,
‘how onre father Abraham beinge tempted, and tryed thorow many tribulacions, was founde a louer and frende of God. So was
Isaac, so was lacob, so was Moses, and all they that pleased God, beinge tryed thorow many troubles, were foüde stedfast in faith.
Agayne, they that receaued not their tenta- cions with the feare of God, but put the selues
"forth with vnpaclency and murmurynge agaynst God, perished of the destroyer, and were slayne of serpentes. And therfore shulde not we vndertake to be auenged, for the thinge that is done vnto vs: but to considre, that all these punyshmentes are farre lesse then oure synnes q myszdedes: Beleuynge also, that this correccion commeth vnto vs
(as to the ‘seruauntes of God) for amendment, and not for oure destruccion.

Then sayde Osias q the elders vnto Iudith: 
All that thou speakest, is true, and no ma can reproue thy wordes. Praie thou for vs now therfore vnto God, for thou art an holy

€ Gen. 28. b. Pro. 3. b. Heb. 12. a. 

f Gen. 17. a. and 22. a. 
* Rom. 8. d. 

^ Nu. 11. a. and 21. a. 1 Cor. 10. a. 

Chap. big. 

The boke of Judith. Fo. bri 
Eue so LORDE let it go with these, that| 3 

Chap. r. womā, and fearest God. And Iudith sayde

vnto them: “Seynge ye knowe, that my wordes are of God, then proue my councell and deuice, yf it be of God: and beseke God, that he wyll brynge my councell to a good ende.

Thus haue I deuysed: ^Ye shal stode this night before the porte, and I wyll go forth with Abra my mayde: Praye ye therfore vnto
God, that he wyl graciously remébre his peo- ple of Israel within fyue daies, as ye haue sayde. As for the thinge that I go in hande withall, axe ye no questions of it, tyll I open it vnto you myself: do ye nothinge els, but praye vnto the LORDE youre God for me.
Then Osias the prynce of the people of Iuda sayde vnto her: Go thy waye in peace, the
LORDE be with the, that we maye be auenged of oure euemies, And so they wente from her agayne.

trust in y power and multitude of their men of warre, in their charettes,° arowes q speares, and knowe not, that thou onely art oure God, which destroyest warres from the begynnynge, and that thou art the LORDE. O lift vp thine arme now like as euer from y begyn- nynge, and in thy power brynge their power to naught, cause their might to fall m thy wrath. They make their boast, y they wyl vnhalowe and defyle thy Sanctuary, and to waist the tabernacle of thy name, and to cast downe the horne of thine aulter with their swerde. Brynge to passe (O LORDE) y the pryde of the enemye maye be cut downe with his owne swerde: that he maie be taken with the snare of his eyes in me, and y thou mayest smyte him with the lippes of my loue.
O geue me a stedfast mynde, that I maye despyse him and his strength, and that I maye destroye him.

The ip. Chapter. This shal brynge thy name an euerlastinge| € 

NX wha they were gone their way,! |remébraunce, yf the hande of a woman/ ouer- 

Iudith wente in to hir oratory, put onj |throwe him. For thy power (O LORDE) an hayrie smock, strowed aszhes vpon hir| |stondeth not in ¥ power of men, nether hast heade, fell downe before the LORDE, and| |thou eny pleasure in the strégth of horses. cryed vnto him, sayenge: O LORDE God| | There was neuer proude personne that pleased of my father “Symeon, which gauest him a| |the, but in the prayer of the humble and swerde for a defence agaynst the enemies,| |meke hath thy pleasure bene euermore. that vsed violenee and wilfulnes, and that O thou God of the heauens, thou maker of rauyshed y vyrgin and put her to dishonesty.| |the waters, and LORDE of all creatures,
Thou that gauest their wiues in to a praye,| jheare me poore woman, callynge vpon the, and their daughters in to captiuyte, and all} |and puttynge my trust in thy mercy. Re- their praye for a spoyle vnto thy sernauntes,| |membre thy *couenaunt O LORDE, and which bare a zele vnto the, helpe me wyddow,| |mynister wordes in my mouth, q stablysh this
O LORDE my God, I beseke y. * For thou} |deuyce in my hert, that thy house maye hast done all thinges from the begynnynge,| |contynue still in holynes, and that all the and loke what thou hast taken in hande and| |Heithen maye knowe and vnderstóde, that deuysed, it came euer to passe. For all thy| |thou art God, and that there is none other wayes are prepared, q thy iudgmentes are| {but thou. done in thy euerlastinge fore knowlege. O £r Xn loke now vpon the armyes of the Assirians, He y. Chapter.

a 

like as it was thy pleasure somtyme to loke vpon the hoost of the ^ Egipcians, whan they beynge weapened, persecuted thy seruauntes, q put their trust in their charettes, horsmen, and in the multitude of their men of warre.
But thou lokedest vpon their hoost, castinge a thick darcknes before them: and whan they came in to the depe, the waters ouerwhelmed them.

^ Judit. 10. b. 
* Psal. 45. b. 

a 1 Cor. 14. d. 1 Ioh. 4. a. 1 Tess. 5. c. 
* Gen. 34. d. 

4 Exo. 14. c. 

ND whan she had left of cryenge vnto 
A the LORDE, she rose vp from the place, where she had lyen flat before the
LORDE, and called hir mayde, wente downe in to hir house, layed y hayrie cloth from her,
^put of the garmentes of hir wyddowhode, waszshed hir body, anoynted hir self with precious thinges of swete sauoure, broyded and plated hir hayre, sett an hooue vpon hir

J Iudic. 4. d. and 5. d. 2 Par. 14. c. 16. b. 20. a. Iudic. 7. a 
Psal.146.b. € Eccli. 36.a. ^ Iudit. 16, b. 

| fo. tri. Che boke of Judith. Chap. ri 

heade, and put on soch apparell as belongeth| |pauylion, and tolde ‘him of her. Now whan vnto gladnesse, slippers vpon hir fete, arme- she came in before him, immediatly he was lettes, spanges, earynges, fynger rynges, and} |ouercome q taken with hir bewtye. Then deckte herself with all hir best araye. saide his seruauntes: who wolde despyse $
The LORDE gaue her also a speciall! |people of ý Iewes, y haue so fayre wemé? beutye and fayrnesse (for all this deckinge of} | Shulde we not by reason fight against thé for hir self was not done for eny volupteousnesse| |these? So whā Iudith sawe Holofernes syt- and pleasure of the flesh, but of a right dis-| |tinge in a canapye, y was wrought of purple, crecion and vertue, therfore dyd the LORDE, |sylke, golde, Smaragde and precious stones, increase hir bewtye) so y she was exceadinge, |she loked fast vpo him, q fell downe vpo the amyable and welfauoured in all mens eyes.| |earth. And Holofernes seruaütes toke hir vp
She gaue hir mayde also a bottell of wyne, a| |agayne, at their lordes commaundement. pot with oyle, pottage, cakes, bred q chese, The ri. Chapter

and wente hir waye. 
3| Now whan she came to the porte of the HEN sayde Holofernes vnto her: Be of good chere, and feare not in thine hert,

cite, she founde Osias and the elders of the 

cite waitinge there. Which whan they sawe d I RUNS hurte man, that wolde serue 

her, they were astonnyed, q marueled greatly abucho im the kynge. As for thy 

at her bewty, neuertheles they axed no ques- people, yft ey had not despysed me, I shulde 

tion at her, but let her go, sayenge: The not haue lift vp a speare agaynst the. But tell me now, what is the cause y thou art

i God of oure fathers gene y his grace, and 
‘with his power perfourme all the deuyce of; |departed from them, and wherfore art thou come vnto vs?

thv hert: that lerusalem maye reioyse ouer : : 
: : And ludith sayde vnto him: Syr, vnder- the, and that thy name maye be in the nombre stonde the mordes of thy ham EN

of the holy q righteous. And all they y were 2 s k there, sayde with one voyce : so be it, so be it. yf thou wilt do after ¥ wordes of thy hād-
Iudith made hir prayer vnto ý LORDE, «| mayden, the LORDE shall brynge thy mat- wente out at Ẹ porte, she « hir mayde. ter to a prosperous effecte. As truly as
And as shè was goinge downe the moun- Nabuchodonosor a lorde of the londe lyueth, tayne, it happened that aboute the sprynge of| |t 8 truly as his power lyueth, which is in the the daye, the spyes of $ Assirians met with| |*° the punyshment of all men that go wronge, her, and toke her, sayenge: whence commest all men shall not onely be subdued vnto him thou ? Or whither goest thou? She answered: thorow the, but all the beestes also of j felde.
I am a daughter of $ Hebrues, and am fled, |For all people speake of thy prudét actiuyte, from them, for I knowe, that they shalbe and it hath euer bene reported, how thou onely art good and mightie in all his kyng-

eue vnto you to be spoyled: because they : s by : honak ie to yelde thé selues vnto you, e and thy discrecion is comméded in all ondes.

that they might fynde mercy in youre sight. s , f ; 
Therfore haue I deuysed by my self after this The thinge is manifest also, that Achior 
| ispake," and it is wel knowne, what thou com- 

maner: I wyll go before the prynce Holo-, à : Af i fernes, and tell him all their secretes, and e to do Ms him. For this is plaine wyll shew him, how he maye come by them, | |?n9 ot a suretye, that oure God is so wroth and wynne them, so that not one man of his with vs (by the reason of oure synnes) that hoo E SII perish. he hath shewed by his prophetes vnto the
C) And whan these men had herde hir wordes, people, how that for their synnes he wyl de- lyuer them ouer vnto the enemie. And for

1 considered hir fayre face, they were aston- $ 
À PR : so moch as the children of Israel knowe that nyed (for they wondred at hir excellent bewtye) 2 Uus so displeased their Codey EO

q sayde vnto her: Thou hast saued thy life 

iby pem oute this deuyce, y thou den sore afrayed of the. They suffre greate hon- icome downe to oure lorde: q be thou sure,| |8°T also, q for wante of water, they are deed that whā thou cémest vnto him, he shal in-, |MOW m a maner. Morouer, they are ap- treate the well, q thon shalt please him at y poynted to slaye all their catell, that they hert. So they brought her in to Holofernes

{ 

? Tudit. 5. a. 

Chap. rij. maye drynke the blonde of them: and are| purposed to spende all the holy ornamentes of their God (which he hath forbyddé thé to touch) for corne, wyne and oyle. Seinge now that they do these thinges, it is a playne case, y they must nedes be destroyed. Which whan
1 thy handmayden perceaued, I fled from them, and the LORDE hath sent me vnto y, to shew the these thinges. For I thy hand- mayden worshipe God euen here now besyde the, and thy honde mayden shal go forth, and
I wil make my praier vnto God, and he shal tell me, whan he wyl rewarde thé their synne: then shal I come and shew the, q brynge the thorow the myddest of lerusalem, so that thou shalt haue all ¥ people of Israel, as the shepe withont a shepherde: there shal not so moch as one dogg barck agaynst the, for these thinges are shewed me by the pro- nydence of God: and for so moch as God is displeased with them, he hath sent me to tell the the same.

B| These wordes pleased Holofernes and all 

his seruauntes, which marueled at the wys- dome of her, and sayde one to another: there is not soch a woman vpon earth, in bewtye and discrecion of wordes. And Holofernes sayde vnto her: God hath done well, that he hath sent the hither before thy people, that thou mayest gene them in to oure handes.
And for so moch as thy promyse is good, yf thy God perfourme it vnto me, he shall be my God also, and thou shalt be excellent and greate in the courte of Nabuchodonosor, and thy name shalbe spoken of in all the londe.

The rij. Chapter. 

HEN commaunded he her to go in, 

where his treasure laye, and charged that she shulde haue hyr dwellynge there, and appoynted, what shulde be geuen her fro his table. Judith answered him, and sayde: “As for the meate that thou hast commaunded to gene me, I maye not eate of it as now (lest I displease my God) but wyl eate of soch as I haue brought with me. Then sayde Holo- fernes vnto her: Yf these thinges that thou hast brought with the fayle, what shal we do vnto the? And Iudith sayde: As truly as thou lynest my lorde, thy hande mayden shall

* Gen. 34. f. 

The boke of Hudith. 

So. tritj. 
‘not spende all this, tyll God haue brought to passe in my hande, the thinges that I hane
‘deuysed. 

| So his seruauntes brought her in to the tent, where as he had appointed. And as she was goinge in, she desyred that she might haue leue to go forth by night a before daye, to hir prayer and to make intercession vnto the LORDE. Then commaunded Holofer- nes his chamberlaynes, that she shulde go ont and in at hir pleasure, to praye vnto hir God those thre dayes.

And so in the night season she wéte forth in to the valley of Bethulia, and wasszhed hirself in the well water. Then wente she vp, and besonght the LORDE God of Israel that he wolde prospere hir waye, for the delyneraunce of his people. And so she wente in, and remayned cleane in hir tent, till she toke hir meate in the enenynge.

Vpon y fourth daye it happened, y Holo- fernes made a costly supper vuto his seruaütes, and sayde vnto Vagao his chamberlayne: Go thy waye, and councell this Hebrnesse, that she maye be wyllynge to consent to kepe com- pany with me. For it were a shame vnto all the Assirians, that a woman shulde so laugh a man to scorne, that she were come from him vnmedled withall.

Then wente Vagao vnto Iudith, and sayde: 
Let not the good daughter be. afrayed, to come in to my lorde, that she maye be ho- nonred before him, that she maye eate and drynke wyne, and be mery with him. Vnto whom Indith answered: Who am I, that I shulde saye my lorde naye? what so euer is good before his eyes, I shal do it: and loke what is his pleasure, that shal I thinke well done, as long as I lyue.

So she stode vp, and deckte hirself with hir |X: apparell, and wente in, and stode before him.
And Holofernes hert was whole moned, so that he brent in desyre towarde her. And
Holofernes sayde vnto her: drynke now and sytt downe, and be mery, for thou hast founde fanoure before me. "Then sayde Iudith: Syr,
I wil drynke, for my mynde is meryer to daye, than euer it was in all my life. And she toke and ate and dranke before him, the thinges that hir mayden had prepared for her.
And Holofernes was mery with her, and dite more wyne, then euer he dyd afore in

s life. 

Fo. Irii. 

The viij. Chapter. 

a OW whan it was late in the night, his seruauntes made haist, euery ma to his lodginge. And Vagao shutt the chamber dores, and wente his waye, for they were all ouerladen with wyne. So was Judith alone in the chamber. As for Holofernes, he laye vpon the bed all droncken, and of very dronkennes fell a slepe.

Then commaunded Judith hir mayden, to stode without before the dore, and to wayte.
And Iudith stode before the bed, makynge her prayer with teares, and moued hir lippes secretly, and sayde. Strength me O LORDE
God of Israel, and haue respecte vnto the workes of my handes in this honure, that thon mayest set vp thy cite of lerusalem, like as thou hast promysed: O graunte that by the
I maye perfourme the thinge, which I haue deuysed thorow the belene that I haue in the.

(B| And whan she had spoken this, she wente 
‘to the bedsteade, and lowsed the swerde that hanged vpon it, and drew it out. Then toke ishe holde of the hairie lockes of his heade, and sayde: Strength me o LORDE God in this houre, and with that, she gane him two
‘strokes vpon the neck, and smote of his heade. 
| Then toke she the canapy awaye, and rolled 
‘the deed body asyde. Immediatly she gat 
|her forth, and delyuered the head of Holo- fernes vnto hir mayden, and bad hir put it in hir walett.

And so these two wente forth together after their custome, as though they wolde praye, land so passed by the hoost, and came thorow
\the valley vnto the porte of the cite. And z cried afarre of vnto ¥ watchmen vpon

the walles: Open the gates (sayde she) for 

God is with vs, which hath shewed his power 

in Israel. And whan they herde hir voyce, 

they called the elders of the cite together. 

And they came all to mete her, litle x greate, 

yonge q olde, for they thought not that she 

shulde haue come so soone. So they lighted 

candels, and gathered aboute hir euerichone: 

but she wente vp in to an hye place, and 
| |cansed sylence to be proclamed. 

Whan euery man now helde his tonge, 
Iudith sayde: O prayse the LORDE oure 
God, for he hath not despysed, ner forsaken them, that put their trust in him: and in me

[^ 

* Eccli. 31. c. 

The boke of Judith. 

[his honde mayden he hath perfourmed his mercy, which he promysed vnto the house of
Israel: yee in my hade this same night hath he slayne the enemy of his people.

And with that she toke forth the heade of 
Holofernes out of the walett, and shewed it them, sayenge: Beholde the heade of Holo- fernes the captayne of the Assirias, and this is the canapy, wherin he laye in his dronken- nes: where the LORDE oure God hath slayne him by the hande of a woman. ,

But as truly as the LORDE lyueth, his angell hath kepte me, goinge thither, remayn- inge there, and commynge hither agayne from thence. And the LORDE hath not suffred me his handmayden to be defyled, but with- out eny fylthynes of synne hath he brought me agayne vnto you: q y with greate victory, so that I am escaped, and ye delynered. O geue thankes vnto him euerychone, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer.’

So they praysed the LORDE alltogether, and gaue thakes vnto him. And to her they sayde: The LORDE hath blessed the in his power, for thorow the he hath brought oure enemies to naught.

And Ozias y chefe ruler of the people of 
Israel, sayde vnto her: Blessed art thou of the LORDE the hye God, aboue all wemen vpon earth.

Blessed be the LORDE the maker of heauen and earth, which hath gyded y a right to wounde and to smyte of the heade of the captayne of oure enemies. For this daye he hath made thy name so honorable, that thy prayse shall neuer come out of the mouth of mē, which shal all waye remembre y power of the LORDE: seinge thou hast not spared thine owne self, but put the in ieoperdy, con- sideringe the anguysh and trouble of thy people, and so hast helped their fall before
God oure LORDE. And all the people sayde: Ame, Amen.

Achior also was called, 1 he came. "Then sayde Iudith vnto him: The God of Israel vnto who thon gauest wytnes, that he wolde be auenged of his enemies, euen he hath this night thorow my hande smytté of the head of all the vnfaithfull. And that thou mayest se that it so is, beholde, this is y heade of Holo- fernes, which in his presumptuous pryde des- pysed the God of the people of Israel, and

è Psal. 105. a. end 106. a. 

Chap. rítj. 

£ 

Chap, rb. 

threatened y with destruccion, sayenge : 
“whan the people of Israel is take, I shall cause the also to be stickte with the swerde.
Whan Achior sawe Holofernes heade, he fell downe vpon his face to the grounde for very anguish q feare, so y he swowned withall.
But after that he was come agayne to himself, he fell downe before her ¢ praysed her, sayége:
Blessed art thou of thy God in all the taber- nacles of Iacob: for all the people that heare of thy name, shall prayse the God of Israel because of the.

The riiij. Chapter. 

UDITH saide vnto all the people: Bre- 

thren heare me, Styck vp this heade vpon oure walles, and whan the Sonne aryseth, take euery man his weapen, and fall out violently: not as though ye wolde go besyde them, but to renne vpon them with violence. Whan the spyes in the tétes se this, they shall of neces- site be copelled to fle bacwarde, and to rayse vp their captayne to the battyll. So wha their captaynes come in to Holofernes pauy- lion, and fynde the deed body wrapped in the bloude, fearfulnes shall fall vpon them: and whan ye perceaue that they fle, folowe them without all care, for God shal delyuer them vnto you, to be destroyed.

Then Achior seynge the power of God which he had shewed vnto the people of
Israel, fell of from his Heithenish beleue, and put his trust in God, and let him self be cir- eumcided: and so was he nombred amonge the people of Israel, he and all his posterite vnto this daye.

33| Now as soone as it was daye, they stickte 

vp Holoferues heade vpon the walles, and euery man toke his weapen, and so they wente out with an horrible erye. Whan the spyes sawe that, they ranne vnto Holofernes tent. And they that were within the tet, came before his chamber, and made a greate russzhinge to wake him vp, because they thought with the noyse to haue raised him.
For there durst not one of the Assirians knocke, go in, ner to open.

But whan the captaynes and prynces and all the chefe in the kynge of the Assirians hoost came together, they saide vnto the ehamberlaynes: Go youre waye in, and wake

? Judit. 6. a. 

The boke of Judith. 

Fo. irb. 

him vp, for the myse are crepte out of their holes, ^and darre prouoke vs vnto battayll.

Then wente Vagao in to his chamber,| € 

stode before the bed, and clapped with his handes, for he thought he had bene slepynge with Iudith.

But wha he had herkened perfectly with his eares, and coude perceaue no sterynge, he wente nyer to the bed, and lift it vp, and then sawe he the deed body of Holofernes lyenge there without a heade, weltred in his bloude vpon the earth. Then cried he with loude voyce, and with wepynge rent his clothes, and wente in to Iudiths tent, and founde her not: And so he leapte out vnto the people, and sayde: one woma of y lewes, hath brought all Nabuchodonosors people to shame.

For lo, Holofernes lyeth vpon the grounde, and hath no heade.

Whan the chefe of the assirians hoost herde that, they rente their clothes, and there fell an intollerable feare and tremblinge vpo them, so y theyr myndes were sore afrayed. And there was an exceadynge greate crye in the whole hoost.

The ro. Chapter. 
OW whan all the hoost herde that 
Holofernes was headed, their mynde and councell fell from them: and soch a feare came vpon them, that they vndertoke to defende them selues by flyenge awaye: one spake not to another, but hanged downe their heades, left all behynde them, and made haist to escape from the Hebrues: for they herde, that they were haistinge to come after with their weapens, and so they fled by the wayes of the feldes, and thorow all the fote pathes of the dales.

And whan y children of Israel sawe that they fled, they folowed vpon them, and wente downe with tropettes, blowinge and makynge a greate crie after the. As for the Assirians, they had no ordre, and kepte not thé selues together, but fled their waye. Neuerthelesse the children of Israel fell vpon them with one company and ordre, and discomfited as many as they might gett. And Osias sent messaungers vnto all the cities and coütrees of Israel.

So all the regions and euery cite sent out|33 

^ 1 Re. 14, b. 

Fo. Irbi. 

their best men after them in harnesse, q smote them with the swerde, tyll they came to ý vttemost parte of their borders. And the other that were in Bethulia came in to the tetes of the Assirians, and toke all that they which were fled, had left behynde them, and so they fonnde greate good. And they that came agayne to Bethnlia from the bat- tayll, toke with them soch thinges as had bene theirs: there was no nobre of the catell, and of all costly Iewels, so that from the lowest vnto the hyest, they were all made riche of the spoyles of them. And Ioachim the Hye prest at lerusalé, came to Bethulia with all the elders, that they might se
Iudith. 

Now whan she came out vnto them, they beganne all to prayse her with one voyce, sayenge: thou worshipe of the cite of Ieru- salem, thou ioye of Israel, thou honoure of oure people, thou hast done manly, and thy hert is comforted, because thou hast loued clenlynes and chastyte, q hast kuowne no man but thine owne huszbande: therfore hath the hide of the LORDE comforted the, and blessed shalt thou be for euer. And all people sayde: so be it, so be it.

In thirtie dayes coude the people of Israel scarse gather vp the spoyles of the Assirians.
But all that belonged vnto Holofernes, and had bene his specially, (whether it were of golde, of syluer, precious stones, clothinge and all ornamentes) they gane it vnto Iudith.
And all the people reioysed, both wemen, maydens, and yonge people, with pipes and harpes.

The rbi. Chapter. 

HEN sange Indith this songe vnto the 
LORDE: Begynne vnto the LORDE 

vpon the tabrettes, singe vnto the LORDE vpon the cymbals. O synge vnto him a new songe of thankesgeuynge, be ioyfull and call vpon his name. “It is the LORDE that destroyeth warres, euen the LORDE is his name. Which hath pitched his tentes in the myddest of his people, that he might delyuer vs from the hande of all oure enemies. Assur came out of the mountaynes in the multitude of his strength. His people stopped the water brokes, ^ and their horses couered the valleys.

a Psal.45. b. ? [udit. 7. c. 

* [udit. 10. d. 

e [udit, 10, a. 

Thr boke of Judith. 

He purposed to haue brét vp my londe, and to slaye my yonge men with the swerde.

He wolde haue caryed awaye my children | 

and virgins in to captiuyte, but the allmightie 
LORDE hurte him, and delyuered him in to the handes of a woman, which brought him to confucion. For their mightie was not destroyed of the yonge men. It was not the sonnes of Titan that slew him, nether haue the greate giauntes sett them selues agaynst him: but Iudith the daughter of Meran with hir fayre bewtye hath discomfited him, and bronght him to nanght. ° For she layed awaie hir widdowes garment, and put on the apparell of gladnesse in the reioysinge of the children of Israel. She anoynted hir face, and bounde vp hir hayre in an hooue, to begyle him. Hir slippers rauyshed his eyes, hir bewtye capty- uated his mynde, ^ with the swerde smote she of his neck. The Persians were astonnyed at hir stedfastnesse, and the Medes at hir bold- nes. ‘Then howled the armyes of ¥ Assirians, whan my symple appeared, drye of thyrst.

Chap. rbi, 

The sonnes of the daughters haue pearsed|¢ 

them thorow, and slayne them as fugityue childré: they peryshed in the battayll, for the very feare of the LORDE my God. Let us synge a songe of thakesgenynge vnto the
LORDE, a new songe of prayse wyl we synge vnto onre God. LORDE, LORDE, thou art a greate God, mightie in power, whom no man maye ouercome. All thy creatures shulde serue the, *for thou spakest but the worde, q they were made: thou sente thy sprete, q they were created, and no man maye with- stonde thy voyce. The mountaynes shal moue from the foundacions with the waters, the stony rockes shal melt before the like waxe. Dut they that feare the, shal be greate with ý in all thinges. Wo vnto the people that ryse vp against my generacion, for the allmightie LORDE wyll auenge him self of them, q in the daye of iudgmet wyl he vyset them. For he shall geue fyre q wormes in to their flesh, that they maye burne aud fele it for euermore.

After this it happened, that after the vic- tory all the people came to Ierusalem, to geue prayse and thankes vnto the LORDE. And wha they were purified, they offred all their brent sacrifices and their promysed offerynges.

* Gen, 1.a. Psal. 32. a. Psal. 103. d. 

D 

Chap. rt. The boke of Wester. Fo. irbii. 

And Iudith offred all Holofernes weapens,! {dayes she wente out with greate worshipe. and all the Iewels, that $ people had geuē! |She dwelt in hir huszbandes house an hun- her, “and the canapy that she toke from his, |dreth and fyue yeare, q left hir honde bed, and hanged them vp vnto the LORDE. mayden fre, and dyed, and was buried be-
The people was ioyfull as the vse is: q this, |syde hir huszbande in Bethulia. And all ioye by reason of the victory, with Iudith,| | the people mourned for her seuen dayes. ^So endureth thre monethes. | |longe as she lyued, there was none that
So after these dayes euery man wente home | |troubled Israel, and many yeares also after hir agayne, and Iudith was in greate reputacion| |death. at Bethulia, and right honorably taken in all | The daye wherin this victory was gotten, the londe of Israel. nto hir vertue also was| |was solemply holden, and rekened of the chastite ioyned, so y after hir huszbonde |lewes in the nombre of the holy dayes, and is
Manasses dyed, she neuer knew man all the) | yet greatly holden of the Iewes ener sence, dayes of hir life. Vpon the hye solempne| | vnto this daye.

a QRe. 8. b. Tudit. 13. b. ^ Gen. 50. b. 

The enne of the boke of Judith. 

The chapters (n the boke of Wester, 

Thich are not founne in the tert of the Hebrue, but in the 
Greke and Latpn. 

[dragos, ready to fight one agaist another. 
Their erye was greate. Atthe which roaringe and erye all Heithen were vp, to fight agaynst y righteous people. And y same daye was full of darcknes q very vneleare, full of trouble
ARDOCHEOUS the sonne of Iair, the! |q anguysh, yee a greate fearfulnes was there sonne of Semei, "$ sonne of Cisei of} |in all the londe. The righteous were amased, y trybe of Ben Iamin a i which had his) for they feared y plage q euell ý was deuysed dwellynge in Susis, a man of greate reputacio,| |ouer the, q were at a poynte with them selues q excellent amonge all them that were in the! |to dye. So they cried vnto God, and while kynges courte (Neuerthelesse he was one of| |they were cryenge, the litle well grew in to a the presoners, whom ^Nabuchodonosor the eate ryuer q in to many waters. And with kynge of Babilo had caried awaye from leru-| |y it was daye, q the sonne rose vp agayne. salem vnto Babilon with lechonias the kynge} | And y lowly were exalted, and denoured the of luda.) [n the seconde yeare of the raigne, |glorious and proude. of greate Artaxerses in the first daye of y Now whan Mardocheus had sene this moneth Nisan, had this Mardocheus soch a| |dreame, he awoke, and mused stedfastly in his dreame : He thought he herde a greate tépest,| |hert, what God wolde do: and so he desyred horrible thonderclappes, erthquakes, ¢ greate| |to knowe all the matter, and his mynde was vprour in ¥ londe: q y he sawe two greate| there vpon vntyll the night.

The rt. Chapter after the Latyn. 

In this chapter is descrybed the dreame of | 
Mardocheus. 

* Hester 2. a. | * 4 Reg. 24. d. Iere. 24. a. 

So. Irbiij. 
The rij. Chapter. 
In this chapter is declared, how Mardocheus vttereth the treason of the two seruauntes

agaynst the kynge, and therfore doth the kynge rewarde him.

a T the same tyme dwelt Mardocheus 

A with Bagatha and Thares the kynges chamberlaynes and porters of the palace.
But whan he herde their deuyce, and had diligently considered their ymaginacions, he perceaued that they wente aboute, to laye their cruell “handes vpon the kynge Arta- xerses: and so he certified the kinge therof.
Then caused the kynge to examen y two gelded with tormentes. And whan they had graunted it, they were put to death.

This the kynge caused to be put in ¥ 
Cronicles for an euerlastinge remembraiice, and Mardocheus wrote vp the same matter.
So the kynge commaunded, that Mardocheus shulde do seruyce in the courte, and for this faithfulnesse of his, he gaue him a rewarde.
But Aman the sonne of Amadathu the 
Agagite, which was holden in greate honoure and reputacion in the kynges courte, vnder- toke to hurte Mardocheus q his people, be- cause of the two chamberlaynes that were put to death.

The ri. Chapter 
The copie of the commaundement, which kige 
Artaxerses (by the entisinge of Ama) sent out in to all countres, for the destruccion of the
Iewes. The prayer of Mardocheus. 

HE greate kynge Artaxerses which 
"m *raigneth from India vnto Ethiopia, ouer an hundreth and seuen and twétye londes, sendeth his frendly salutacion vnto all the prynces and debytes of the countrees, which be subiecte vnto his dominion. Whan I was made lorde ouer many people, and had sub- dued the whole earth vnto my dominion, my mynde was not with crueltye and wronge to exalte myself by the reason of my power: but purposed with equyte allwaye and gentylnes, to gouerne those that be vnder my iurisz- diccion, and wholy to set them in a peaceable life, and therby to brynge my kingdome vnto tranquyhte, that men might safely go thorow on euery syde, and to renue peace agayne,
33 | which all men desyre. Now whan I axed my 

* Hest. 2. d. and 6. a. 

The boke of Hester. 

councelers, how these thinges might be brought to a good ende, there was one by vs, excellet in wyszdome, whose good wyll, trueth q faith- fulnes hath oft bene shewed q proued (which was also y pryncipall q next vnto y kige) Ama by name, which certified vs, how y in all lodes there was crepte in a rebellious folke,
ý made statutes q lawes agaynst all other peo- ple, q haue allwaye despysed the proclamed commaundementes of kynges: and how that for this cause it were not to be suffred, that soch rule shulde contynue by you q not to be put downe. Seinge now we perceaue the same, that this people alone are contrary vnto euery man, vsynge straunge and other maner of lawes, œ withstonde oure statutes and doinges, and go aboute to stablish shrewd matters, that oure kyngdome shulde neuer come to good estate and stedfastnes: Therfore haue we commaided, that all they that are appoynted in wrytinge and shewed vnto you by Aman (which is ordened and set ouer all oure busynes, and the most pryncipall next vnto the kynge, and in maner as a father) shal with their wiues q children be destroyed and roted out with the swerde of their ene- mies and aduersarles: q y there shalbe no mercy shewed, q no man spared. And this shalbe done y xiiij. daye of the moneth called
Adar) of this yeare, that they which of olde 
(and now also) haue euer bene rebellious, maye in one daye with violence be thrust downe in to the hell, to the intet that after this maner, oure empyre maye haue peace and tranquylite.

But Mardocheus thought vpon all the workes and noble actes of y LORDE, « made his prayer vnto him, sayenge: O LORDE
LORDE, thou valeaunt and allmightie kynge 
(for all thinges are in thy power, and yf thou wilt helpe and delyuer Israel, there is no mà that can withstode ner lett the: for thou hast made heauen çq earth, and what wonderous thinge so euer is vnder the heauen: thou art
LORDE of all thinges, and there is no man, y can resist the O LORDE) Thou knowest all thinges, thou wotest LORDE, that it was nether of malyce, ner presumpcion, ner for eny desyre of glory, that I wolde not bowe downe myself ner worshipe yonder proude presumptuous Aman (for I wolde haue bene cótent, and y with good wyll, yf it might haue

b l'est, 1. a. and 16. a. 

Chap. ríj. 

Chap. riiij, done Israel eny good, to haue kyst eué his fotesteppes) but that I dyd it, because I wolde not sett the honoure of a ma in the steade of the glorye of God, and because I wolde worshipe none but onely ý my LORDE.
And this haue I done in no pryde ner pre- sumpcion.

And therfore O LORDE thou God and kinge, haue mercy vpon thy people for they ymagyn how they maye bringe vs to naught, yee their mynde and desyre is to destroye and to ouerthrowe the people, that hath euer bene thine enheritaunce of olde. O despyse not thy poreio, which thou hast delyuered q brought out of Egipte for thine owne self.
Heare my prayer, and be mercifull vnto thy people, who thou hast chosen for an heretage vnto thyself. Turne oure complaynte and sorow in to ioye, that we maye lyue O
LORDE, and prayse thy name. O LORDE, suffre not mouthes of them that praise the, to be destroyed.

All $ people of Israel in like maner cried as earnestly as they coude vnto the LORDE, for their death and destruccion stode before their eyes.

Che riiij. Chapter. 

Of the sorowe, complaynte and prayer of quene 
Hester. 

a UENE Hester also beynge in the battayll 

Q of death, resorted vnto the LORDE, layed awaye hir glorious apparell, and put on the garmētes that serued for sighinge and mournynge. In the steade of precious oynt- ment, she scatred ashes and doge vpon hir heade: and as for hir body, she humbled it, and brought it very lowe, All the places where she was wote to haue ioye afore, those

O my LORDE, thou onely art oure kynge, helpe me desolate woma, which haue no helper but y, for my misery and destruccion is harde at my hande. Fro my youth vp I haue herde “out of the kynred of my father, that thou tokest Israel from amdge all people
(and so haue oure fathers of their fore elders) that they shulde be thy perpetuall inherit- aunce, and loke what thou didest promise thé, thou hast made it good vnto the.

? Deut. 4. c. and 7. d. ? Tere. 32. c. 

The boke of Hester. 

Fo. lrir. 

Now well LORDE, we haue synned before |33 the, ‘therfore hast thou geuen vs in to the hades of oure enemies, because we worshipped their goddes. LORDE thou art righteous.
Neuertheles it satisfieth thé not, that we are in bytter and heuy captiuyte and oppressed amonge them, but thou hast layed their hondes vpon the hondes of their goddes: so that they begynne to take awaye, the thinge that thou with thy mouth hast ordened and appoynted: to destroye thyne inheritaunce, to shut and to stoppe y mouthes of them that prayse the, to quéch the glory and worshipe of thy house and thine aulter, and to open the mouthes of the Heithen, y they maye prayse the power q vertue of the goddes, and to magnifie the fleshly kynge for euer.

O LORDE, geue not thy cepter vnto thé that be nothinge, lest they laugh vs to scorne in oure misery and fall: but turne their de- uyce vpó them selues, and punysh him, that hath begonne the same ouer vs, and set him to an example. "Thinke vpon vs O LORDE, and shew thy self in ý tyme of oure distres and of oure trouble. Strength me O thou kynge of goddes, thou LORDE of all power, geue me an eloquét^ and pleasaunt speach in my mouth before the Lyon. Turne his hert iu to ¥ hate of oure enemie, to destroye him, and all soch as consent vnto him. But de- lyuer vs with thy hande, and helpe me deso- late woman, which haue no defence ner helper but onely $. LORDE thou knowest all thinges, thou wotest that I loue not the glory and worshipe of the vnrighteous, and that I hate and abhorre the bed of the vncircücyded and of all Heithen.

Thou knowest and wotest my necessite, y 
I hate the token of my preemynence q wor- shipe, which I beare vpon my heade, what tyme as ] must shew my self and be sene, a that I abhorre it as an vncleane cloth, and that I weere it not wha I am quyete and alone by my self. Thou knowest also that I thy honde mayden haue not eaten at Amas table, and that I haue had no pleasure ner delyte in the kynges feast, that I haue not dronke the drynkofferinges, and that I thy honde mayden haue had no ioye sens y daie that I was brought hither vnto this daye: but onely in the O LORDE. O thou God of
Abraham, O thou mightie God aboue all, 

* Exo. 4. c. Tere. 1. a. 

So. Irr. 

heare the voyce of them, that haue none other hope, and delyuer vs out of the

my feare. 

The rb. Chapter. 

Quene Hester appeareth before the kynge, with an heuy hert for the trouble of hir people, and God turneth the kynges hert.

ND vpon y thirde daye it happened, 

that Hester^ layed awaye y mournynge garmétes, and put on hir glorious apparell, and decte hirself goodly (after that she had called vpon God, which is the beholder q
Sauioure of all thinges) toke two maydes with her: vpon the one she leaned hir self, as one y was tender: the other folowed her, and bare the trayne of hir vesture. "The shyne of hir bewtye made hir face rose coloured.
The similitude of hir face was chearfull and amyable, but hir hert was soroufull for greate feare. She wente in thorow all the dores, and stode before the kynge. The kynge sat vpon the trone of his kingdome, and was clothed in his goodly araye, all of golde, and sett with precious stones, and he was very terryble. He lift vp his face, that shone in the clearnes, and loked grymly vpon her.
Then fell the Quene downe, was pale and faynt, leaned hir self vpon the heade of the mayde that wente with her.
B| Neuertheles God turned y kynges mynde, that he was gentle,’ that he leape out of his seate for feare, and gat her in his armes, q helde hir vp tyll she came to herself agayne.
He gaue her louynge wordes also, x sayde vnto her: Hester, what is the matter? lam thy brother, be of good cheare, thou shalt not dye: for oure commaundement toucheth the comons, not the. Come nye. And with that he helde vp his golden wande, and layed it vpon hir neck, and enbraced her frendly, and sayde: talke with me. "The sayde she:
I sawe the^ (O lorde) as an angell of God, q my hert was troubled for feare of thy maiesty and clearnesse. For excellent and wonderfull art thou (O lorde) and thy face is full of amyte. But as she was thus speakynge vnto him, she fell downe agayne for fayntnes: for the which cause the kynge was afrayed, and all his seruauntes comforted her.

* Hester 5, a. 

^ Prou. 21. a. 

Che boke of Hester. 

hande of $ wicked, q delyuer me out of 

Chap. rb. 

The rbi. Chapter. 
A copye of the commaundement, which kinge 
Artaxerses caused to be proclamed in all the 

countrees of his domynion, for the wealth of the lewes.

HE greate kynge Artaxerses, which|@ 

raigneth fro India vnto Ethiopia, ouer an hundreth and xxvij. londes, sendeth vnto the prynces q rulers of the same londes, soch as loue him, his frendly salutacion. ‘There be many, that for the sondrye frendshipes and benefites which are diuersly done vnto them for their worshipe, be euer y more proude and hye mynded, and vndertake not onely to hurte oure subiectes (for plenteous benefites maye they not suffre, and begynne to ymagin some thinge agaynst those that do them good, and take not onely all vnthankfulnes awaye fro men) but in pryde and presumpcion (as they that be vnmyndefull and ynthakfull for the good dedes) they go aboute to escape the iudgment of God, y seyth all thinges, which
(iudgment) hateth x punysheth all wickednes. 
It happeneth of also, y they which be set in office by the hyer power, and vnto whom the busynes and causes of the subiectes are comytted to be handled, waxe proude, and defyle thé selues with sheddynge of innocent bloude, which bryngeth them to intollerable hurte. Which also with false and disceatfull wordes and with lyenge tales, disceaue and betraye the innocent goodnes of prynces.

Now is it profitable and good, that we take| 3 hede, make search therafter, and consider, not onely what hath happened vnto vs of olde, but the shamefull vnhonest, and noysome thinges, that the debites haue now taken in hande before oure eyes: and therby to be- warre in tyme to come, that we maye make the kyngdome quyete q peaceable for all men, and that we might some tyme drawe it to a chaunge: and as for ý thinge that now is present before oure eyes, to withstande it, and to put it downe, after the most frendly maner.

What tyme now as Aman the sonne of 
Amadathu ý Macedonyan? (a straunger verely of the Persians bloude, and farre from oure goodnes) was come in amoge vs as an aleaunt, and had optayned the frendshipe that we

* Gen. 33. b. 2 Re. 19. c. 3 Hester 3. a. 

Chap. rbi, 

beare towarde all people, so that he was called oure father, and had im hye honoure of euery man, as the next and pryncipall vnto the kynge, he coude not forbeare him self from his pryde, hath vndertaken not onely to robbe vs of the kyngdome, but of oure life.

With manyfolde disceate also hath he de- syred to destroye Mardocheus oure helper and preseruer, which hath done vs good in all thinges: and innocent Hester the like par- taker of oure kyngdome, with all hir people.
For his mynde was (whan he had take them out of the waye, and robbed vs of them) by this meanes to translate the kyngdome of the
Persians vnto thé of Macedonia. But we fynde, that the [ewes (which were accused of y wicked, y they might be destroyed) are no euell doers, but vse reasonable q right lawes, and that they be the children of the most Hye lyuynge God, by whom the kyngdome of vs and oure progenitours hath bene well ordred hither to. Wherfore, as for the letters and comaundementes, that were put forth by
Aman the sonne of Amadathu, ye shal do well, yf ye holde them of none effecte: for he that set them vp and inuented thé, hangeth at

The boke of Hester. 

Fo. Irri. 
Susis before the porte, with all his kinred, and God (which hath all thinges in his power) hath rewarded him after his deseruynge.

And vpon this ye shal publish and set vp|B the copy of this letter in all places, that the
Iewes maye frely and without hinderannce holde them selues after their owne statutes, and that they maye be helped, and that vpo
M xiij. daye of y xij. moneth Adar they maye 

e auenged of them, which in the tyme of their anguysh and trouble wolde haue op- pressed the. For the God that gonerneth all thinges, hath turned to ioye, the daye wherin y chosen people shulde haue perished.

Morouer, amoge the hye solempne dayes that ye haue, ye shall holde this daye also with all gladnesse: that now and in tyme to, come, this daye maye be a remembraüce to good, for all soch as loue the prosperite of the
Persians: but a remembraunce of destruccion to those that be sedicious vnto vs.

All cities and lodes that do not this, shal horribly perish and be destroyed with the swerde and fyre, and shall not onely be no- more inhabited of men, but be abhorred also of ý wilde beastes 1 foules.

| 
| 

THe boke of CApssdome. 

What this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

An exortacio for iudges and rulers to loue wysz- dome. The sprete of wyszdome hateth falsede, dissimulacion and Y pocrysie, rebuketh vnright- eousnesse and abhorreth wicked doers.

Chap. II. 

The ymaginacios and thoughtes of the vngodly, how they geue the selues ouer vnto synne, and persecute all vertue and trueth.

Ch ap. LI. 

The felicite and health of godly people, though they be put here to trouble and heuynesse:
Agayue, what sorow shall happen to the vn- godly and their children.

Chap. Ill. 

To lyue chaist q godly withall, is comendable. 
A disprayse of the wicked. The honoure of verteous age. The shamefull death of the vngodly.

Chap. V. 

How the iust men shal stode against the wicked, that haue put them here to trouble « what sorowe shall come vpon the vngodly. Agayne, what ioye shal happen to the righteous, which haue God himself for their defece.

Chap. Vi. 

An exortacion vnto soch as be in rule and aucto- rite, to receaue wyszdome. A commedacion of wyszdome.

Chap. VII. 

All men haue like intraiice in to the worlde : yet who so calleth vpon God for wyszdome, shal haue his desyre. The profit that cometh by wyszdome passeth all other thinges.

Chap. VIII. 

Wiszdome shulde be receaued in youth. He that marieth himself vnto her, shall optayne loue of God and men.

Chap. IX. 
A prayer vnto God for the gift of wyszdome. 

Chap. X. 
What profit and good came by wyszdome in the olde tyme.
Chap. XI. 
How wiszdome ledeth the righteous, t how the 

vngodly are punyshed thorow the mightie hande of God.

Chap. XII. 

God is mercifull and suffteth longe, to the intent that synners shulde amende.

Chap. XIII. 

Vayne are they that haue not the knowlege of the lyuynge God, but turne vnto the crea- tures: vnhappie are they that honoure ymages.

Chap. XIII. 

The worshippinge of ymages. The power of God. 
Punyshment of them that make ymages, and of soch as worshipe them. How ymages came vp first. The honouringe of ymages is the cause, begynnynge, and ende of all myschefe.

Chap. XV. 

The faithfull haue respecte vnto God and not vnto ymages.

Chap. XVI. 

God punisheth the wicked, but defendeth the godly, t that by greate wonders.

Chap. XVII. 

Of the greate darcknesse in Egipte, and blynd- nesse of the vngodly.

Chap. XVIII. 

How God destroied the firstborne of Egipte. 
Gods people eate the easter lambe ioyfully, the Egiptians mourne. God punysheth the synners in the wildernesse. Moses intreateth for the people.

Chap. XIX. 

Like as the wicked are euer synnynge more and more, so doth the wrath of God neuer ceasse, tyll they be destroyed. Of them that were

punyshed in the tyme of Loth. 

Chap. tj. The boke of Wipssdome, Fo. iret. 

The first Chapter. 

SET youre affeccion vpo wyszdome, 
O ye that be iudges of the earth." Haue a good opinion of the LORDE, q seke him in the synglenesse of hert. ^ For he will be foüde of them that tempte him not, and ap- peareth vnto soch as put their trust in him.
As for frowarde thoughtes, they separate from 
God, but vertue (yf it be alowed,) refourmeth 
$ vnwyse. And why? wyszdome shall not entre in to a frowarde soule, ner dwell iu the body that is subdued vnto synne. For the holy goost abhorreth fayned nurtoure, q with- draweth himself fro y thoughtes that are without vnderstondinge: q where wickednes hath the vpper hade, he flieth from thence.
° For the sprete of wyszdome is louynge, gentle and gracious, and wil haue no pleasure in him that speaketh euell with his lippes. For God is a witnesse of his reynes, a true searcher out of his hert, and an hearer of his tonge. ^ For the sprete of Y LORDE fylleth the rounde compasse of ie worlde, and y same that vpholdeth all thinges, hath knowlege also of the voyce.

° Therfore he that speaketh vnrighteous thinges, can not be hydd, nether maye he escape the iudgmét of reprofe. And why? inquysicion shal be made for the thoughtes of the vngodly, and the reporte of his wordes shal come vnto God, so that his wiekednes shalbe punished. For the eare of gelousy heareth all thinges, and the noyse of the grudginges shal not be hydd. 'Therfore bewarre of murmuringe, which is nothinge worth, and refrayne youre tonge from slaüder.
/ For there is no worde so darck and secrete, that it shall go for naught: and the mouth that speaketh lyes, slayeth the soule.

* O seke not youre owne death in y erroure of youre life, destroye not youre selues thorow the workes of youre owne handes. For God hath not made death, nether hath he pleasure in the destruccion of the lyuynge. For he created all thinges, that they might haue their beynge: yee all the people of the earth hath he made that they shulde haue health, that there shulde be no destruccion in them, and that the kyngdome of hell shulde not be vpon

hod 

2 3 Reg. 3. à. Psal, 2. b. * 2Par. 15.a. ¢ Galat. 5. b. 
4 Esaie 6. a. lere. 23. d. Acto. 7. c. * 3 Re. 2. g. 
Matt, 6. a. Heb. 4. b. 4 Luc. 12. a. £ Deut. 4. c. 

earth (for righteousnesse is euerlastinge and immortall, but vnrighteousnes bringeth death.)
Neuerthelesse, the vngodly call her vnto them both with wordes q workes, a whyle they thinke to haue a frende of her, they come to naught : for the vngodly that are confederate with her and take hir parte, are worthy of death.

The tj. Chapter. 
Fo y vngodly talke « ymagin thus amonge them selues (but not right :)
^ The tyme of oure life is but short q tedious, q when a man is once gone, he hath nomore loye ner pleasure, nether knowe we eny man y turneth agayne from death: for we are
Borne of naught, a we shal be herafter as though we had neuer bene. For oure breth is as a smoke in oure nostrels, a Y wordes as a sparck to moue oure herte. K for oure body, it shalbe very aszshes y are quéched, q oure soule shal vanish as y soft ayre. Oure lifg shall passe awaye as y trace of a cloude, ¢ come to naught as y myst y is dryue awaye with the beames of y Sonne, q put downe with the heate therof. Oure name also shalbe forgotten by litle q litle, q no man shal haue

oure workes in remembraunce. 

For oure tyme is a very shadow y passeth awaye, 'and after oure ende there is no re- turnynge, for it is fast sealed, so y no mà cometh agayne. Come on therfore, let vs enioye y pleasures y there are, q let vs soone vse y creature like as in youth. We wil fyll oure selues with good wyne ¢ oyntment, there shal no floure of the tyme go by vs. We wil crowne oure selues with roses afore they be wythered. ‘There shal be no fayre medowe, but oure lust shal go thorow it. Let euery one of you be partaker of oure volupteousnes.
Let vs leaue some token of oure pleasure in euery place, for y is oure porcion, els gett we nothinge. Let vs oppresse the poore right- eous, let vs not spare the wyddowe ner olde man, let vs not regarde y heades y are gray forage. Let y lawe of vnrighteousnesse be oure auctorite, for y thinge y is feble is no- thinge worth. Therfore let vs defraude the righteous, q why? he is not for oure profit, yee he is cleane cotrary to oure doinges. He checketh vs for offendinge agaynst y lawe, a

^ Tob 7. a. Mat. 22. b. 1 Cor. 15. d. 
Esa. 22. b. and 56. c. Sap. 5. b. 

! 1 Par. 30, c. 

115 

So. irri. 

if 

Islaundreth vs as transgressours of all nur- toure. He maketh his boost to haue y know- lege of God, yee he calleth him self Gods sonne. He is the bewrayer of our thoughtes :
^ [t greueth vs also to loke vpon him, for his lyfe is not lyke other mens, his wayes are of another fashion. He counteth vs but vayne personnes, he withdraweth him self from oure wayes as from fylthynes: he comendeth greatly ¥ latter ende of the iust, x maketh his boast y God is his father. Let vs se then yf his wordes be true, let vs proue what shal come vpon him: so shal we knowe what ende he shal hane. For yf he be y true sonne of
God, ^he will receaue him q delyuer him from the handes of his enemies. Let vs exa-
‘men him with despitefull rebuke and tor- mentinge, that we maye knowe his dignite q prone his pacience. ^ Let vs condemne him with the most shamefull death: for like as he hath spoken, so shal he be rewarded.

Soch thinges do the vngodly ymagm, q igo astraye, for their owne wickednes hath
‘blynded them. As for the misteries of God, they vnderstonde them not: they nether hope for the rewarde of righteousnesse, ner regarde the worshipe that holy soules shall haue. For
God created man to be vndestroied, yee ^ after the ymage of his awne licknesse made he him. ° Neuerthelesse thorow envye of the deuell came death in to the worlde, / and they that holde of bis syde, do as he doth.

The iij. Chapter. 

a UT the soules of $ righteous are in 
| $ hande of God,’ « y payne of death shal not touch thé. * In i sight of y vnwyse they appeare to dye, q their ende is také for very destruccion. "The waye of the righteons is iudged to be vtter destruccion, but they are in rest. And though they suffre payne be- fore men, ‘yet is their hope full of immor- talite. They are punished but in few thinges, neuerthelesse in many thinges shal they be well rewarded. For God proueth them, q fyndeth thé mete for himself: yee as the golde in the fornace doth he trye them, « receaueth them as a brentofferinge, and when y tyme commeth they shalbe loked
'vpon. 

? Toh. 7. a. Esa, 53. a. > Psal. 21. a, Matt. 27. c. 
* Tere. 11. d. 4 Gen. 1.2, t Gen.3.a. — /Toh.8. d. 

€ Deut. 33. LN ic Sap. 5.b. Heb. 11. f. 11 Pet. 1. c. 

The boke of Celpssdome, 

Chap. iij. 
The righteous shal shyne as the sparkes|18 y renne thorow the rede buszshe. *They shal indge the nacions, q haue dominion ouer y people, q their LORDE shal raigne for euer.
They y put their trust in him, shal vnder- stonde the trueth, and soch as be faithfull, wil agree vnto him in loue: for bis chosen shal haue giftes x peace. ‘ But the vngodly shalbe punyshed acordinge to their awne ymagina- clos, for they haue despysed the righteous, q forsaken the LORDE.

Who so despyseth wyszdome q nurtoure, he is vnhappie, and as for the hope of soch, it is but vayne, their labours vnfrutefull, and their workes vnprofitable. Their wyues are vndiserete, and their childré most vngodly.
Their creature is cursed. — Blessed is rather y baren q vndefyled, which hath not knowne the synfull bedd: she shall haue frute in the rewarde of the holy soules. And blessed is y gelded," which with his handes hath wrought no vnrighteousnesse, ner ymagined wicked thinges agaynst God. For vnto him shal be geuen y speciall gift of faith, and the most acceptable porcion in y temple of God. For glorious is the frute of good laboure, q the rote of wyszdome shall neuer fade awaye. As for y childré of aduoutrers, they shal come to an ende ¢ the sede of an vnrighteous bedd shal be roted out. And though they lyue loge, yet shal they be nothinge regarded, q their last age shalbe without honoure. Yf they dye haistely, they haue no hope, nether shal they be spoken to in the daye of knowlege. For horrible is the death and ende of the vnright-

eous. 
HOW fayre is a chaist generacion with | vertue? The memoriall therof is im- mortall, for it is knowne with God and men.
When it is present, me take exáple thereat : and yf it go awaye, yet they desyre it. It is allwaie crowned q holden in honoure, a wyn- neth y rewarde of the vndefyled battayll. But the multitude of vngodly childré is vnprofit- able, and the thinges y are planted with whor- dome, shal take no depe rote, ner laye eny fast foundacion,” Though they be grene in the braunches for a tyme, yet shal they be shake with the wynde: for they stonde not fast, q

The iiij. Chapter. 

Rom. 8.c. 2 Cor. 5. a. * Matt. 13. c. 1 Cor. 15. c. 
Matt. 19. c. 1 Cor. 6. a. 1! Matt. 25. d. m Esa. 56. h. n Tere. 17. b. Mal. 1. a. Mat. 7. c.

Chap. b. 

thorow the vehemence of the wynde they shalbe roted out. For the vnparfecte braun- ches shalbe broken, their frute shalbe vnpro- fitable q sower to eate, yee mete for nothinge.
And why? all the children y are borne of the wicked, must beare recorde of the wickednesse agaynst their fathers a mothers, when they be axed. But though the righteous be ouertaken with death, yet shal he be in rest.

Age is an honorable thinge: neuertheles it stondeth not only in the lenth of tyme, ner in the multitude of yeares: but a mans wysz- dome is the graye hayre, and an vndefyled life is the olde age. He pleased God, q was beloued of him: so that where as he lyued amoge synners, “he traslated him. Yee sodély was he taken awaye, to the intent y wicked- nesse shulde not alter his vnderstodinge, « y ypocrisye shulde not begyle hissoule. For y craftie bewitchinge of lyes make good thinges darck, ý vnstedíastnesse also q wickednes of voluptuous desyre, turne asyde y vnderston- dinge of ¥ symple. Though he was soone deed, yet fulfilled he moch tyme. For his soule pleased God, therfore haisted he to take him awaye fro amonge y wicked. This the people se, q vnderstonde it not: they laye not vp soch thinges in their hertes, how y y lou- ynge fauoure q mercy of God is ypé his saintes, t y he hath respecte vnto his chosen.
€| Thus ¥ righteous y is deed, codemneth the vngodly which are lyuinge: q $ youth y is soone brought to an ende, y loge life of y
'wnrighteous. For they se T of y wyse, 

but they vnderstode not what God hath de- uysed for him, q wherfore y LORDE hath taken him a waie. And why? they se him q despyse him, therfore shall God also laugh th& to scorne: So y they the selues shal dye here after (but without honoure) yee in shame amonge y deed for euermore. For without eny voyce shal he burst those y be puft vp, « remoue the fro y foundacions, so y they shalbe laied waist vnto the hyest. ‘They shal mourne, and their memoriall shall perishe. So they beynge afrayed shall remembre their synnes, and their owne wickednesse shal bewraye the.

The b. Chapter. q HEN shal ¥ righteous stonde in greate stedfastnesse^ agaynst soch as haue dealt

© Sap. 3.a 
* Pro. 30. b, 

a Heb. 11.2. ^ Matt. 19. c. 
4 1 Par. 30. c. Sap. 2. b. 

The boke of CUpssdome. 

extremely with thé, x take awaye their labours. 
When they se it, they shalbe vexed with hor- rible feare, q shal wonder at the haistynesse of y sodane health: groninge for very dis- tresse of mynde, a shall saye within them selues (hauynge inwarde sorow, and mourn- ynge for very anguysh of mynde) :

These are they, whom we somtyme had in derision, q iested vpo. “We fooles thought their life very madnesse, q their ende to be with- out honoure. But lo, how they are counted amonge the children of God, q their porcion is amonge the sayntes. ‘Therfore we haue erred from the waye of trueth, y light of righteousnesse hath not shyned vnto vs, and the Sone of vnderstodinge rose not vp vpo vs. We haue weeried oure selues in y waye of wickednesse ¢ destruccion. Tedious wayes haue we gone: but as for the waye of the
LORDE, we haue not knowne it. 

What good hath oure pryde done vnto vs? 
Or, what profit hath the pompe of riches brought vs? All those thinges are passed awaye like a shadowe, q as a messaunger ren- nynge before: as a shippe y passeth ouer the wawes of the water, which whan it is gone by, the trace therof can not be founde,’ nether y path of it in the floudes. Or as a byrde y flyeth thorow ¥ ayre, q no man can se eny token where she is flowen, but only heareth the noyse of hir wynges, beatinge the light wynde, partinge the ayre thorow the vehemece of hir goinge, « flyeth on shakynge hir wynges, where as afterwarde no toke of hir waye can be foüde. Or like as whé an arowe is shott at a marck, it parteth the ayre, which immediatly cometh together agayne, so that a man can not knowe where it wente thorow. Euen so we in like maner as soone as we were borne, beganne immediatly to drawe to oure ende: a haue shewed no token of vertue, but are consumed in oure owne wickednesse.

Soch wordes shal they that haue synned, speake in the hell: for the hope of the vngodly is like/ a drye thistell floure (or dust) that is blowne awaye with the wynde: like as thynne scomme y is scatred abrode with the storme:

‘like as ¥ smoke which is dispersed here q there 

with the wynde, q as y remembraunce of a straüger ^y tarieth for a daie, q thé departeth.
But $ righteous shal lyue for euermore : 

f Tob 8. a. Psal. 1. b. Pro. 10. d. and 11. a. Iac. 1. b. 
& Psal. 39. a, 

Fo. Irro. 

So. lyybt. 

their rewarde also is with the LORDE, a their remembraunce with the Hyest. Therfore shal they receaue a glorious kyngdome q a beuti- full crowne of the LORDES hande: for with his right hande shal he couer the, q with his owne arme shall he defende thé. His gelousy also shal take awaye the harnesse, and he shal wapé y creature to be anéged of y enemies.
He shal put on "righteousnes for a brest plate, q take sure iudgment in steade of an helmett.
The invyncible shylde of equite shall he take, his eruell wrath shal he sharpe for a speare, a the whole compase of the worlde shall fight with him agaynst the vnwyse.

B| The shal the thonder boltes go ont of y 

lighteninges, a come out of the rayne bowe of the cloudes to the place apoynted: ont of the hard stony indignacion there shall fall thick hales, x ¥ water of ¥ see shal be wroth agaynst

| 
| thé, q the flondes shal renne roughly together. 

| 
| 
E 

|| 

———————————— 

Yee a mightie wynde shal stode vp agaynst them, q a storme shall seater thé abrode. Thus the vnrighteous dealinge of thé shal bringe all the lode to a wyldernes, a wickednes shall ouerthrowe the dwellinges of the mightie.

| The bi. Chapter. 

YSZDOME is better then strength,’ q 

a ma of vnderstadinge is more worth thé one y is stroge. Heare therfore (O ye
'kinges) q vnderstonde: O lerne ye y be indges of the endes of the earth. Gene eare ye y rule ¥ multitudes, q delite in moeh people.
| For the power is gene you of the LORDE, q the strégth from the Hyest: which shal trie youre workes and search out youre ymagina- cios: How that ye beynge officers of his
.kyngdome, haue not exeented true iudgment, haue not kepte the lawe of righteousnes, ner walked after his will. EHorribly q that right soone shall he appeare vnto you: foran harde

B |iudgmét shal they haue y beare rule. Merey 

‘is graüted vnto the symple,? but they that be in auetorite shalbe sore punyshed. For God which is LORDE ouer all, shall excepte no màs personne, nether shal he stande in awe
E eny mans greatnesse: for he hath made ¥ 
| 

small and greate, q careth for all alyke. But the mightie shal hane ¥ sorer punyshmét.

l; Vnto you therfore (o ye kinges) do I speake, 
.y ye maye lerne wyszdome and not go amysse: 
| 

* Ephe. 6. b. ? Eccls. 9. d. * Rom. 13. a. d Eccii. 10. c. * Rom. 13. b.

The boke of CUpssdome. 

for they y kepe righteousnes shalbe righteously iudged: and they y are lerned in righteous

|] 

thinges, shal finde to make answere. Wher- fore set youre lust vpon my wordes, q lone thé, so shal ye come by nurtoure. Wyszdome is a noble thinge, t neuer faydeth awate: yee she is easely sene of thé that loue her, a founde of soch as seke her. She preuéteth them y desyre her, y she maye first shewe herself vnto the.
Who so awaketh vnto her by tymes, shal haue no greate tranayle, for he shal fynde her sytt- inge ready at his dores. ‘To thinke vpon her, is parfecte vnderstandinge: q who so watcheth for her, shalbe safe, q that soone. For she goeth abonte, sekynge soch as are mete for her, sheweth her self cherefully vnto them in their goynges, t meteth them with all diligece.
For ¥ vnfaimed desyre of refourmacion is hir begynnynge: to care for nurtonre is lone, and‘ loue is the kepinge of hir lawes. Now the kepinge of y lawes is perfeccion q an vn corrupte life, q an vn corrupte life maketh a man familier with God. And so the desyre of wyszdome ledeth to $ kingdome euerlast- inge. If youre delyte be the in royall seates q cepters (o ye kynges of the people) /set youre lust vpo wyszdome, y ye maye raigne for ener more. O lone the ln: of wyszdome, all ye y be rulers of the people. As for wyszdome, what she is, and how she came vp, I wil tell you, and will not hyde the misteries of God from you: but wil seke her out from y be- gyunynge of the natiuyte, and brynge the knowlege of her in to light, and wil not kepe back the trneth. Nether will I haue to do with cosumynge envye, for soch a man shal not be partaker of wiszdome. But the multi- tude of the wyse is the welfare of the worlde,
(and a wyse kynge is the vpholdinge of the 
'people. O receaue nourtoure then thorow my 
'wordes, and it shal do you good. 

The bá. Chapter. 
MYSELF also am a mortall man, like as all other, q am come of ¥ earthy genera- cio of him y was first made, q in my mothers
I wobef was I fashioned to be flesh: In the tyme of ten monethes was I bronght together in bloude thorow the sede of man, q the co- modious appetite of slepe. Whan I was
‘borne, I receaned like ayre as other men, 

J Num. 27. c. 2 Re. 14. c. 5 Re. 3. a. 
£ Tob 10. a. b. 

Chap. bí. 

| 

‘Chap. viij, - 

The boke of Cipssdome. 

fo. Irrotj. 

q fell vpon the earth (which is my nature) crienge q wepinge at the first, as all other do.
I was wrapped in swadlinge clothes, ¢ brought vp with greate cares. For there is no kinge y hath had eny other begynnynge of byrth.’
All men then haue one intraunce vnto life, q one goinge out in like maner.

33| Wherfore I desyred, and vnderstandinge was gené me: I called, q the sprete of wysz- dome came in to me. I set more by her thé by kingdomes q royall seates, q counted riches nothinge in coparison of her.’ As for preci- ous stone I compared it not vnto her: for all golde is but grauell vnto her, « syluer shal be counted but claye before hir sight. I loued her aboue wel fare q beutie, q purposed to take her for my light, for hir shyne can not be quenched. ^ All good thinges came to me with her, q innumerable riches thorow hir hades. I was glad in thé all, for this wysz- dome wēte before me, q I knew not y she is the mother of all good thinges. Now as I myself lerned vnfaynedly, so do I make other men partakers of her, q hyde her riches from no man: for she is an infinite treasure vnto men, which who so vse, become partakers of the loue q frendshipe of God, and are ac- cepted vnto him for the giftes of wyszdome.

€| God hath graunted me to talke wysely, a conuenietly to hadle the thinges y he hath graciously lent me. For it is he, y ledeth vnto wyszdome, q teacheth to vse wyszdome aright. ‘In his hade are we q oure wordes : yee all oure wyszdome, oure vnderstandinge q knowlege of all oure workes. For he hath geué me y true sciéce of these thinges: so that I knowe how $ worlde was made, q the powers of y elemétes: y begynnynge, endinge q myd- dest of ¥ tymes: how the tymes alter, how one goeth after another, and how they are fulfilled: y course of the yeare: the ordi- naunces of the starres: the natures q kindes of beastes: the furiousnesse of beastes: the power of ý wyndes: the ymaginacions of mé : the deuersities of yonge plantes: the vertues of rootes, q all soch thinges as are secrete q not loked for, haue [ lerned. For the worck- master of all thinges hath taught me wysz-

B\dome. In hir is y sprete of vnderstadinge, which is holy, manifolde, one onely, sotyll, curteous, discrete, quyck, vndefyled, playne, swete, louynge the thinge y is good, sharpe,

? Iob 1. c. 1 Tim. 6. b. * Tob 28. b. 

which forbyddeth not to do well, gétle, kynde, stedfast, sure, fre: hauynge all vertues, cir- cüspecte in allthinges: receauinge all spretes of vnderstadinge beige cleane q sharpe. For wiszdome is neembler thé all neéble thiges : she goeth thorow q attayneth to all thiges, because of hir clennes. For she is y breth of y power of God, « a pure cleane expressinge of y clearnes of Allmightie God. ‘Therfore can no vndefyled thinge come in to her: for
"she is ý bryghtnes of y euerlastige light, y vndefiled myrroure of ý maiesty of God, a y ymage of his goodnesse. And for so moch as she is one, she maie do all thinges: q beinge stedfast herself she renueth all, x amoge y people coveyeth she herself in to ý holy soules.
She maketh Gods frendes q prophetes: for 
God loueth no ma, but him in who wyszdome dwelleth. For she is more beutyfull then the
Sonne, and geueth more light then the starres, and the daye is not to be cóopared vnto her: for vpo $ daye cometh night. But wicked- nesse can not ouercome wyszdome, and fool- ishnes maye not be with her.

The biij. Chapter. 

YSZDOME reacheth fro one ende to another mightely, a louigly doth she

ordre all thinges. 1 haue loued her and la- boured for her eue fro my youth vp: I dyd my diligéce to mary my self with her, soch lone had I vnto hir beutye. Who so hath y copany of God, comedeth hir nobilyte, yee the
LORDEofall thinges himself louethher. For she is y scolemastresse of ý nurtoure of God, q y choser out of his workes. Yf a man wolde desyre riches in this life, what is richer then wiszdome, y worketh all thiges? (Thou wilt saye :) vnderstadinge worketh. What is it amoge all thinges, y worketh more thé wysz- dome? Yfa man loue vertue ¢ righteousnes, let him laboure for wyszdome, for she hath greate vertues. And why? she teacheth sober- nes q prudence, righteousnes q stregth, which are soch thinges as mé can haue nothinge more profitable in their life. Yf a mā desyre mochj| 38 knowlege, she cà tell ý thinges y are past, a discerne thinges for to come: she knoweth y sotilties of wordes, ¢ cà exponde darke sen- téces. She can tell of tokés ¢ woderous thinges, or euer they come to passe, q the

* 3 Re. 5. b. Matt. 6. d. — 4Sap.3.a, * Heb. 1. a. 

jo. Ini. endes of all tymes q ages. So I purposed after this maner: I will take her vnto my copany, q como louigly with her: no doute she shal geue me good coücell, q speake co- fortably vnto me in my carefulnes q grefe.
For hir sake shal I be well and honestly taken amóge the comos q lordes of ý councell.
Though I be yonge, yet shal I haue sharpe vnderstandinge: so y I shal be maruelous in y sight of greate me, q y faces of prynces shal woder at me. Wha I holde my toge, they shal byde my leysure:* wha I speake, they shal loke vpo me: q yf I talke moch, they shal laye their handes vpó their mouth. Mor- ouer, by the meanes of her I shal optayne immortalite, and leaue behinde me an euer- lastinge memoriall, amdge thé y come after me. I shal set ¥ people in ordre, and the nacions shalbe subdued vnto me. Horrible tyrauntes shal be afrayed, whan they do but heare of me: amonge the multitude I shal
Ibe counted good, q mightie in battayll. Wha 
I come home, I shal fynde rest with her: for hir copany hath no bytternes, q hir felashipe hath no tediousnesse, but myrth q ioye.
€| Now whan I cosidered these thinges by myself, q pondered them in my hert, how y to be ioyned vnto wyszdome is immortalite, q greate pleasure to haue hir frendshipe: how

in the workes of hir handes are infinite riches: how that, who so kepeth company with her shalbe wyse: and that he which talketh with her, shal come to honoure: I wente aboute sekynge, to gett her vnto me.
For I was a ladd of a rype wytt, and had a good vnderstandinge.

But whan I grewe to more vnderstadinge, 
I came to an vndefyled body. Neuertheles whan I perceaued that I coude not kepe my- self chaist, excepte God gaue it me (q y was a poynte of wyszdome also, to knowe whose gift it was) I stepte vnto the LORDE, and besought him, and with my whole hert I sayde after this maner :

The iy. Chapter. 
O GOD of my fathers, t LORDE of mer- cies, (thou ý hast made? all thiges with thy worde, q ordeyned mà thorow thy wysz- dome, y he shulde haue dominio ouer y crea- ture, which thou hast made: y he shulde

* Job 29. c. è? 3 Reg. 3. b. Gen. 1. 

d 1 Par. 29. b. 9 Par, 1.a. 

* Psal. 115. b. 

Chap. tr. ordre y worlde acordinge to equite q right- eousnes, q execute iudgmét with a true hert) geue me wyszdome, which is euer aboute thy seate, q put me not out fro amoge thy children: for I thy seruaunt q sonne of thy handmayden,‘ am a feble personne, of a shorte tyme, and to yoge to the vnderstandinge of iudgment and y lawes. And though a man be neuer so parfecte amonge the children of men, yet yf thy wyszdome be not with him, he shal be nothinge regarded. ? But thou hast chosen me to be a kynge vnto thy people, and the iudge of thy sonnes and daughters.

Thou hast comaunded me to buylde a tem- ple vpon thy holy mount, q an aulter in the cite wherin thou dwellest: a licknesse of thy holy tabernacle which thon hast prepared fro the beginnynge, and thy wyszdome with y, which knoweth thy workes:° which also was with y whan thou maydest y worlde, x knew what was acceptable in thy sight, q right in thy commaundementes. O sende her out of thy holy heauens and from the trone of thy ma- iesty, that she maye be with me, q laboure with me: that I maye knowe, what is accept- able in thy sight. For she knoweth and vn- derstandeth all thinges : and she shal lede me soberly in my workes, and preserue me in hir power. So shal my workes be acceptable, q then shal I gouerne thy people righteously, ¢ be worthy to syt in my fathers seate. / For what man is he, that maye knowe the coun- cell of God? Or, who can thinke what the will of God is? For the thoughtes of mortall men are miserable, q oure forecastes are but vncertayne. “And why? a mortall and cor-/C€ ruptible body is heny vnto the soule, and the earthy mansion kepeth downe the vnder- standinge y museth vpon many thinges. Very hardly can we discerne the thinges that are vpon earth, and greate laboure haue we, or we can fynde the thinges which are before oure eyes: Who will then seke out the groude of the thinges that are done in heaué? Oh
LORDE, who cà haue knowlege of thy vnder- standinge and meaninge, excepte thou geue wyszdome and sende thy holy goost fro aboue? that the wayes of them which are vpon earth maye be refourmed: y men maye lerne $ thinges that are pleasaunt vnto the, and be preserued thorow wyszdome.

* Pro.8.c. Ioh. 1. a. f Esa. 40. b. Rom. 11. d. 1 Cor. 2. b. 
€ 2 Cor. 5. a. 

‘Chap, ri. 

a 

The y. Chapter. 

YSZDOME preserued y first ma, 

who God made“ a father of the worlde, 

wha he was created alone, brought him out of his offence, toke him out of the moulde of i earth, q gaue him power to rule all thinges.
Vhan the vnrighteous wente awaye in his 
‘wrath from this wyszdome, $ brotherheade perished’ thorow $ wrath of murthur. A- gayne, wha y water" destroyed y whole worlde, wyszdome preserued the righteous thorow a poore tre, wherof she was gouerner herself.
Morouer wha wickednes had gotten y vpper- hande, so y the nacions were puft vp with pryde, “she knewe y righteous, preserued him jfautlesse vnto God, and layed vp sure mercy for his children.

rished, what tyme as y fyre fell downe vpon y v. cities: Like as yet this daye the vnfrute- full, waist and smokinge lode geueth testi- mony of their wickednesse: yee the vnripe and vntymely frutes that growe vpon the trees.

And for a toké of a remembraunce of the vnfaithfull soule, there standeth a piler of salt. For all soch as regarded not wyszdome, gat not only this hurte, that they knewe not
‘the thinges which were good, but also left ibehinde them vnto mč, a memoriall of their foolishnes: so y in the thinges wherin they synned, they coude not be hydd. But as for soch as take hede vnto wyszdome, she shal delyuer them from sorowe.

€| Whan the righteous fled because of his 

brothers wrath, / wyszdome led him the right waye, shewed him ý kyngdome of God, gaue him knowlege of holy thinges, made him riche in his laboures, and brought to passe the thinges that he wente aboute. In y dis- ceatfulnes of soch as defrauded him, she stode by him, q made him ryche. She saued him from the enemies, and defended him from y disceauers. She made him stronge in littayll and gaue him the victory, y he might knowe, how that wyszdome is stronger then all thinges.
* Whan the righteous was solde, she forsoke him not, but delyuered him frosynners. She wente downe with him in to the dongeon, and

> Gen. 4. b. f Gen. 28. b.

* Gen. 6. 7. 8. 
€ Gen. 37. e. 

a Gen. 1. d. and 2, b. 
4 Gen. 11. d. 
Acto. 7. b. 

* Gen. 19. c. 

Cbr boke of CApssdome, 

“She preserued the righte-! ous, whan he fled from the vngodly y pe-,

fayled him not in the bandes : ^tyll she had brought him the cepter of $ realme, and power agaynst those that oppressed him. As for them that had accused him, she declared them to be lyers, q brought him to perpetual] worshipe.

Fo. lrrir. 

She delyuered the righteous people and|3 

fautlesse sede, ‘from thenacions that oppressed them. She entred in to the soule of the ser- uaunt of God, and stode by him in wonders and tokens agaynst the horrible kynge. She gaue y righteous the rewarde of their labours, t led them forth a maruelous waye : on the daye tyme she was a shadowe vnto them, and a light of starres in the night season. "She brought them thorow the reed see, and caried them thorow the greate water. She drowned their enemies in the see, and brought them out of the depe. So the righteous toke the spoyles of the vngodly, and ‘praysed thy holy name (o LORDE) and magnified thy vic- torious had with one acorde. For wyszdome openeth the mouth of ¥ domme, q maketh $ tonges of babes to speake.

The ri. Chapter. 

HE ordred their workes in the hades of 

the holy prophet:" so y they wente thorow 
ý wyldernes y was not inhabited, q pitched their tétes in y waist deserte. They stode agaynst their enemies, q were auenged of their aduersaries. “Wha they were thirstie, they called vpo y, q water was geué them out of y rok, q their thirst slockened out of y hardestone. For by y thinges, where thorow their enemies were punished, were they helped in their nede. For vnto the enemies thou gauest màs bloude in steade of lyuynge water.
And where as they had scarcenesse in y rebuke whan the children were slayne, thou gauest vnto thine awne a plenteous water vnloked for: declaringe by the thyrst y was at that tyme, how thou woldest bringe thine awne vnto honoure, « slaye their aduersaries.

a 

For whan they were tryed q nourtured with |33 

fatherly mercy, “they knowleged how the vn- godly were iudged, and punyshed thorow ý wrath of God. These hast thou exorted as a father, q proued thé: but vnto ¥ other thou hast bene a boysteous kynge, layed hard to

^ Gen. 41, f. ? Exo. 1. b. and 3. 4.5.7.9. * Exo. 14. f. 
! Exo. 15. a. m Exo. 16. a. ? Exo. 17. b. Nu. 20. a. 
? Deut. 8. a. 

Fo. lr. 

Che boke of Cipssdome. 

Chap. rij. 

their charge, q condened thé. Whether they were absent or present, their punyshmét was alyke. For their grefe was dubble: namely, mournynge, and y remébraunce of thinges past. But wha they perceaued y their punish- metes dyd thé good, they thought vpon the
LORDE, q wondered at y ende. For at the last they helde moch of him, of whó in y out- castinge they thought scorne, as of an abiecte.
Neuerthelesse $ righteous dyd not so when they were thirstie: but euen like as y thoughtes of Y foolish were, so was also their wickednes.
€ Where as certayne mé now (thorow erroure) idyd worshipe domme "serpentes q vayne beestes, thou sendedst a multitude of domme beastes vpon them for a vengeaunce: y they might knowe, that loke where withall a ma syuneth, by the same also shal he be punyshed.

For vnto thy allmighty hande, that made the 

worlde of naught, it was not vnpossible, to 

sende amonge them an heape of ^Beeres, or 

woode lyos, or cruell beastes of a strauge 

kynde, soch as are vnknowne, or spoute fyre, 

or cast out a smokinge breth, or shote horrible 

sparkes out of their eyes: which might not lonly destroye them with hurtinge, but also
‘kyll them with their horrible sight. Yee 
‘without these beestes might they haue bene slayne with one winde, beynge persecuted of their awne workes, and scatered abrode thorow the breth of thy power.

B| Neuertheles thou hast ordred all thinges in measure, nobre a weight. For thou hast euer had greate strégth q might, x who maye with- stode y power of thine arme? And why like as y small thynge y y balaunce weyeth, so is y worlde before y: yee as a droppe of y morninge dew, that falleth downe vpon the earth. Thou hast mercy vpon all, for thou hast power of all thynges: and makest the as

| "though thou sawest not the sinnes of mē, 

| [because they shulde amende. For thou louest all the thinges that are, and hatest none of thë whō thou hast made: nether didest
B ordeyne or make eny thinge of euell will.

How might eny thinge endure, yf it wer not thy will? Or how coude eny thinge be preserued, excepte it were called of y ? But thou sparest all, for all are thine, o LORDE, thou louer of soules.

* Sap. 12. c. Rom. 1. c. 

* Leni, 26. d. Sap. 16. a. 
Iere. 8. c. 

* Rom. 2. a. 

The rij. Chapter. 

LORDE, how gracious t swete is thy] à 

sprete in all thinges? Therfore chas- tenest thou thé measurably that go wróge, and warnest them, concernynge the thinges wherin they offende : thou speakest vnto them
(o LORDE) and exortest thé to leaue their wickednes, and to put their trust in the. As for those olde ‘inhabiters of thy holy londe, thou mightest not awaye with them, for they commytted abhominable workes agaynst the: as wytchcraft, sorcery and Idolatry: they slew their owne children without mercy: they ate vp mens bowels, and deuoured the bloude:
Yee because of soch abhominaciós, myszbe- leues q offeringes, thou slewest the fathers of the desolate soules by the handes of oure fathers : that Y londe which thou louest aboue all other, might be a dwellinge for the childré of God.
, Neuertheles thou sparedest thé also (as|38 mē) q sendedst y forerüners of thyne hoost, eue hornettes to destroye the out by lytle q litle. Not y thou wast vnable to subdue y vngodly vnto y ‘righteous in battayll, or y cruell beestes, or with one rough worde to destroye thé together: But thy mynde was to dryue thé out by lytle q litle, geuinge thé time q place to amende: knowinge well, y it was an vnrighteous nacion q wicked of nature, q y their thought might neuer be altered.
For it was a cursed sede from ý begynnynge, q feared no ma: Yet hast thou pardoned their synnes. For who wyl saye vnto the:| | why hast thou done y? Or who wyl stode agaynst thy iudgmét? Or who wil come before thy face an auéger of vnrighteous me ?
Or who wil blame ¥, yf y people perish, who] € thou hast made? For there is none other
/ God but thou, y carest for all thinges: y thou mayest declare how y thy iudgmét is not vnright. ‘There dare nether kige, ner tyraüt in thy sight requyre accóptes of them, who thou hast destroyed.

For so moch thé as thou art righteous thy self, thou ordrest all thiges righteously, q
*punishest eué hi y hath not deserued to be punyshed, q takest him for a strauger q an aleaunt in y lode of thy power. For thy power is y beginnynge of righteousnes: and because

* Exo. 25. d. Deut. 7. d. 
€ Iob 9. b. 

4 Deut. 9. a. 12. d. 18. b. f 1 Pet. 5. a.

Chap. ritj. 

thou art LORDE of all thinges, therfore art thou gracious vnto all. Whan men thinke 7 not to be of a full strength, thou declarest th power: q boldly delyuerest thou them ouer y knowe y not. But thou LORDE of power iudgest quyetly, and ordrest us with greate worshipe, for thou mayest do as thou wilt.

By soch workes now hast thou taught thy people, that a mà also shulde be iust and louynge : and hast made thy childré to be of a good hope: for euen when thou iudgest, thou geuest rowme to amende from synnes.
For in so moch as thou hast punyshed, and with soch diligence delyuered $ enemies of thy seruaütes, which were worthy to dye
(where thorow thou gauest thé tyme a place of amédement y they might turne fro their wickednes) with how greate diligence then punyshest thou thine awne childre, vnto whose fathers thou hast sworne q made couenaütes of good promises? So where as thou doest but chasten vs, thou punyshest oure enemies dyuerse wayes: to ¥ intet y wha we punysh, we shulde remébre thy nose q whan we oure selues are punyshed, to put oure trust in thy mercy.

Wherfore where as men haue lyued igno- raütly q vnrighteously, thou hast punyshed thé sore, eué thorow y same thinges that they
“worshipped. For they wente astraye very loge in y waye of erroure, q helde y beestes
(which eué their enemies despysed) for goddes, lyuynge as children of no vnderstandinge.
Therfore hast thou sent a scornefull punysh- ment amonge them, as amonge the childré of ignoraunce. As for soch as wolde not be refourmed by those scornes a rebukes, they felt the worthy punishmét of God. For y thinges y they suffred, they bare thé vn- paciétly, beinge not contét in them but vn wyllinge. And whan they peryshed by y same thinges that they toke for goddes, they knowleged then, that there was but one true
God, whom afore they wolde not knowe: therfore came y ende of their dampnacion vpon them.

The rij. Chapter. 
AYNE are all men, which haue not y 

The boke of TCpssdome. 

knowlege of God: as were they that. 

out of the good thinges which are "sene, knewe not him, that of himself is euerlastinge.
> Rom. 1. b. 

a Sap. 11. c. Rom. 1. c. 

| 

Nether toke they so moeh regarde of the workes that are made, as to knowe, who was the craftesman of them: but some toke the fyre, some the wynde or ayre, some y course of y starres, some Y water, some toke Sonne and Moone, or the lightes of heauen which
‘rule y earth, for goddes. But though they had soch pleasure in their beuty, that they thought them to haue bene goddes: yet shulde they haue knowne, how moch more fayrer he is that made them. For the maker of beuty hath ordened all these thinges. Or yf they marueled at the power and workes of the, they shulde haue perceaued therby, y he which made these thinges, is mightier then they.

For by the greatnesse « beutye of the crea- ture, y maker therof maye playnely be knowne.
Notwithstondinge they are the lesse to be blamed, that sought God q wolde haue founde him, and yet myssed. And why? for so moch as they wéte aboute in his workes and sought after them, it isa toké, that they re- garded and helde moch of his workes y are sene: howbeit they are not wholy to be ex- cused. For yf their vnderstondinge and knowledge was so greate, y they coude dis- cerne the worlde and y creatures, why dyd they not rather fynde out Y LORDE therof?

But vnhappie are they, and amonge the deed is their hope, that call the God which are but the workes of mens handes: golde, syluer and the thinge, that is founde out by connyuge, the similitude of beastes, or eny vayne stone that hath bene made by hande of olde. ^Or as whan a carpenter cutteth downe a tre out of the wodd, and pareth of the barck of it connyngly: and so with the one parte maketh a vessel to be vsed, and dighteth meate with the residue. As for the other parte that is left, which is profitable for nothinge (for it is a croked pece of wodd and full of knobbes) he carueth it diligently thorow his vanite, and (acordinge to the knowlege of his connynge) he geueth it some proporcion, fashioneth it after the similitude of a man, or maketh it like some beest, straketh it ouer with reed and paynteth it, and loke what foule spot is in it, he casteth some coloure vpon it. Then maketh he a conueniet tabernacle for it, setteth it in the wall and maketh it fast with yron, prouydinge

4 Esa. 44. b. 
116 

* Deut.4, c. and 17. b. Iere. 10. a. 

So. lrrri. 

B 

€ 

Fo. Irertj. 

| 

B 

so for it, lest it happē to fall: for it is well knowne, that it ean not helpe it self: And why? it is but an ymage, and must of neccs- site be helped.

B| Then gocth he and offreth of his goodes 

vnto it for his children and for his wife: he seketh helpe at it, he axeth councell atit: he is not ashamed to speake vnto it y hath no soule: for health, he maketh his peticion vnto him that is sicke: for life, he prayeth vnto him that is deed: he calleth vpon him for helpe, that is not able to helpe him self: q to sende him a good iourneye, he prayeth him that maye not go. And in all the thinges y he taketh in hande (whether it be to optayne eny thinge or to worke) he prayeth vnto him that can do no maner of good.

The riiij. Chapter. 
GAYNE, another mā purposinge to sayle q beginyng e to take his iourney thorow ¥ m raginge see, calleth for helpe vnto a stock, y is farre weaker, thé y tre ý beareth him. For as for it, coueteousnesse of moneye hath founde it out, « y craftesma made it with his connynge. But thy prouydence (O father) gouerneth all thinges fro E. begynnynge, for thou hast made a waye in y see,” q a sure path in the myddest of y wawes: declaringe therby, y thou hast power to helpe in all thinges, yee though a man wente to the see without shippe. Neuerthelesse, y M y workes of thy wyszdome shulde not be vaine, thou hast caused an arke to be made:^ q therfore do men commytte their lyues to a small pece of wod passinge ouer the see in a shyppe, q are saued.
For in the olde iyme also wha the proude giauntes perished,’ he (in who the hope was left to inerease y worlde) wéte in to the shippe, whieh was gouerned thorow thy hande, and so left sede behinde him vnto y worlde.
For happie is y tre where thorow rig teousnes cometh: but cursed is the ymage of wod, Y is made with hades, yee both it q he y y avails he
He, because he made it: q it, because it was called God, where as it is but a frayle thinge.
? l'or the vngodly & his vngodlynes are both like abhominable vnto God. Euen so ¥ worke q he y made it also shal be punyshed together.
'Therfore shal there a plage come vpon the ymages of the Heithen: for out of the erea- a Exo. 14. d.

^ Gen. 6,c. — Ee tol) j^ Husa Uae ta D Mao uo eb Grae Hes | 

Cbr boke of QQlpsyponu. 

“so for it, lest it happe to fall: for it is well| [ture of God they are become an abhomina-| | they are become an abhomina- cion, a temptacion vnto the soules of men, and a snare for the fete of the vnwyse. And why? the sekinge out of ymages is the begin- nynge of whordome, and the bringinge vp of them is the destruecion of life. For they were not from the begynnynge, nether shall they cotinue for euer. men hath founde them out vpon earth, ther- fore shal they come shortly to an ende. Whe a father mourned for his sonne y was taken awaye fro him, he made him an ymage (in all y haist) of his deed sonne: q so begane to worshipe him as God, which was but a deed mà q ordened his seruauntes to offre vnto him. Thus by processe of tyme q thorow loge custome, this erroure was kepte as a lawe, q tyraütes cépelled me by violéce to hououre ymages. As for those y were so farre of, y me might not worshipe them pre- sently, their picture was brought fro farre
(like the ymage of a kynge who they wolde honoure) to the intent that with greate dili- gence they might worshipe him which was farre of, as though he had bene present.
Agayne, the syngular connynge of the eraftes- man gaue the ignoraunt also a great occasio to worshipe ymages. For the workman wyl- linge to do him a pleasure that sett him a worke, laboured with all his connynge to make the ymage of the best fashion. And so
(thorow the beuty of the worke) the comon people was disceaued, in so moch that they toke him now for a God, which a litle afore was but honored as a man. And this was the erroure of mans life, whan men (ether for to serue their owne affeccion, or to do some pleasure vnto kinges) ascrybed vnto stones and stockes the name of God, which ought to be geuen vnto no man.

Moroner, this was not ynough for them that they erred in the knowlege of God: but where as they lyued in the greate warres of ignoraunee, those many and greate plages called they peace. For ether they slewe their awne children and offred them, or dyd sacrifice in the night season, or els helde vnreasonable watches: so that they kepte nether life ner mariage cleane: but ether one slewe another to death maliciously, or els greued his negh- boure with aduoutrie. And thus were all thinges myxte together: bloude, manslaughter,
Iere, 7. a, and 19. a. 

4 Psal. 7. a. * Deut. 18. b. 

Fo. irri. The boke of QXipsipone. Chap. rij. 

The welthy ydilnes of|€ 

B 

E 

theft, dissimulacion, corrupcion, vnfaithful- nesse, sedicion, periury, disquyetinge of good men, vnthakfulnes, defylinge of soules, chaü- ginge of byrth, vnstedfastnesse of mariage, mysordre of aduoutrie and vnelennesse. And why? the honouringe of abhominable ymages, is the cause, the begynnynge and ende of all euell For they y worshipe Idols, either they are madd wha they be mery, or prophecie lyes, or lyue vngodly, or els lightly mausweare them selues. For in so moch as their trust is in y Idols (which haue nether sole ner vnder- stondinge) though they sweare falsely, yet they thinke it shal not hurte them.

Therfore commeth a greate plage vpon them, and that worthely : for they haue an euell opinió of God, geuinge hede vnto Idols, swearinge vniustly to disceaue, and dispysinge righteousnes. For their swearinge is no vertue, but a plage of them that synne, and goeth euer with the offence of the vngodly.

The rb. Chapter. 

UT thou (O oure God) art swete, longe 

sufferinge and true, and in mercy ordrest thon all thinges. Though we synne, yet are we thine, for we knowe thy strength. Yf we synne not, then are we sure, that thou regard- est vs. For to knowe the, is parfecte right- eousnes: Yee to knowe thy righteousnes and power, is the rote of immortalite. As for the thinge that men haue founde out thorow theyr euell science, it hath not disceaued vs: as the payntinge of the picture (an vnprofitable laboure) and carued ymage, with diuerse colours, whose sight entiseth the ignoraunt: so that he honoureth and loueth the picture of a deed ymage, that hath no soule.

Neuertheles, they that loue soche euell thinges, are worthy of death: they that trust in them, they that make them, they that loue them, and they that honoure them. ‘The potter also taketh q tempereth soft carth, laboureth it, aud geueth it the fashion of a vessell, what so euer serueth for oure vse: and so of one pece of claye he maketh some cleane vessel for seruice, and some contrary.
But where to euery vessell serueth, that knoweth y potter himself. So with his vayne laboure he maketh a god of the same claye: this doth euen he, which a litle afore was made of earth himself, and within a litle

a Psal. 114. b. 

Chap. yo. The boke of QCipsibo The boke of CUpssbome. Fo. TL CUpssdome, 

Fo. Irrráj. 
C [theft, dissimulacion, corrupcion, vnfaithful-| |whyle afte: after (whan he dyeth) turneth to earth agayne.

Notwithstandinge, he careth not y more|€ because he shal laboure ner because his life is shorte: but stryueth to excell gold- smythes, y syluer smythes q copper smithes, and taketh it for an honoure to make vayne thinges. For his hert is ashes, his hope is but vaine earth ¢ his life is more vyle then claye: for so aT as he knoweth not his awne maker, that gaue him his soule to worke, and brethed in him the breth of life. They counte oure life but a pastyme, and oure con- uersacion to be butt a market, and that men shulde euer be gettinge, yee and that by euell meanes. Now he ý of earth maketh frayle vessell and ymages, knoweth himself to Bands aboue all other.

All the enemies of thy people and y holde them in subieccion, are vnwyse, vnhappie and exceadinge pronde vnto their owne soules: for they iudge all the Idols of the Heithe to be goddes," which nether haue eyesight to se, ner noses to smell, ner eares to heare, ner fingers of handes for to grope: q as for their fete, they are to slowe to go. For man made them, and he that hath but a borowed sprete, fashioned them. But no man can make a
God like vnto him: for seinge he is but mor- tall himself, it is but mortall that he maketh with vnrighteous handes. He himself is better then they whom he worshippeth, for he lyued though he was mortall, but so dyd neuer they. Yee they worshippe beestes also, which are most miserable: for compare thinges that can not fele vnto them, q they are worse then those. Yet is there not one of these beestes, that with his sight cà beholde eny good thinge, nether haue they geuen prayse ner thankes vnto God.

The rbi. Chapter. 

OR these and soch other thinges haue they| A 
F suffred worthy punyshment, € thorow y multitude of beestes are they roted out. In steade of the which punishmentes thou hast graciously ordred thine awne people, x geuen them their desyre that they loged for: a new q straunge taist, preparinge them ^ quales to be their meate: to the intent y (by the thinges which were shewed and sent vnto them) they y were so gredy of meate, might be with-

> Num. 11. g. 

Fo. Werth. drawen euen from the desyre that was neces- sary. But these within shorte tyme were brought vnto pouerte, and taisted a new meate. Vor it was requisite y (without eny excuse) destruccion shulde come vpo those which vsed tyriny, x to shewe onely vnto the other, how their enemies were destroyed. ^ For whan the eruel woodnesse of the beestes came vpon them, they peryshed thorow the stinges of the eruell serpentes.

3| Notwithstodinge thy wrath endured not perpetually, but they were put in feare for a litle season, y they might be refourmed, hauynge a token of saluaeion, to remembre the eomaundement of thy lawe. For he y couerted, was not healed by the thinge y he sawe, but by THE, O sauioure of all. So in this thou shewdest thine enemies, y it is thou, which deliuerest fro all euell As for the whan they were bytten with greshoppers and flyes, ? they died, for they were worthy to perish by soch: But nether the teth of dragons uerofvenymous wormes ouereame thy children, for thy merey was euer by them q helped the.
Therfore were they punyshed to remebre thy wordes, but hastely were they healed agayne: lest they shulde fall in to so depe forgetful- nesse, that they might not vse thy helpe.

€| It was nether herbe ner plaster Y restored 

thé to health, but thy worde (o LORDE) 

which healeth all thinges. It is thou (o 

LORDE) y hast the power of life « death: 

“thou ledest vnto deathes dore, q bringest vp 

agayne. But man thorow wickednes slayeth 

his owne soule, x when his sprete goeth forth, it turneth not agayne, nether maye he eall agayne y soule y istaké awaye: It is not pos-

sible to eseape thy hande. For $ vngodly y 

wolde not knowe ¥, were punyshed by y 

strégth of thine arme: ^ with straüge waters, 

hales and raynes were they persecuted, q 

thorow fyre were they edsumed. For it was 

a wonderous thinge that fyre might do more 

then water which quécheth all thinges: but y 

worlde is y auéger of the righteous. Some 

tyme was Y fyre so tame, y the beestes which 

were sent to punysh y vngodly, brent not: q 

Y because they shulde se q knowe, y they 

were persecuted with the punyshmét of God. 

And somtyme brent the fyre in the water on 

euery syde, ý it might destroye Y vnrighteous 

^ Num. 21, a, ^ Exo. 10. d. 
4 Exo, U. e. 

* Deut. 32. f. 1 Re. 2. b. 
* Exo. 16. a. 

The boke of GOlps;Domr. 

J Deut. 8.a. Matt. 4.a. 

Chap. rij. nació of the earth. Againe, thou hast fed|Ð thine awne people with angels fode, *« sent the bred ready from heaue (without their laboure) beynge very pleasaüt q well gusted.
And to shewe thy riches q swetnesse vnto thy ehildre, thou gauest euery one their de- syre, so y euery man .might take what liked him best. But the snowe q yse abode the violéce of the fyre, « melted not: y they might knowe, y the fyre burninge in the i q rayne, destroied ý frute of y enemies: y fyre also forgatt his strégth agayne, y ¥ righteous might be norished. For y creature y serueth y
(which art Y maker) is fearse in punyshinge y vnrighteous, but it is easy q gétle to do good, vnto soeh as put their trust in the.
Therfore dyd all thinges alter at the same tyme, q were all obediet vnto thy grace, which is y norse of all thinges, acordinge to y desyre of thé y had nede therof: y thy childré (O
LORDE) who thou louest, / might knowe, y it is not nature q the growinge of frutes y fedeth me, but y itis thy worde, which pre- serueth the y put their trust in the. For loke what might not be destroyed with the fyre, as soone as it was warmed with a litle
Sonne beame, it melted: y all men might knowe, y thankes ought to be geuen vnto y before y Sonne ryse, a ý thou oughtest to be worshipped before y daye sprynge. For y hope of y vnthankfull shal melt awaie as the wynter yse, ¢ perishe as water, y is not necessary.

The rbij. Chapter. 

REATE are thy iudgmétes (o LORDE) 

*« thy councels can not be expressed: therfore men do erre, y wil not be refourmed with thy wyszdome. For whan the vnright- eous thought to haue thy holy people in sub- iecio, ^they were bounde with the bandes of darcknes q longe night, shutt vnder y rofe, thinkinge to escape y euerlastinge wiszdome.
And whyle they thought to be hyd in y darcknesse of their synnes, they were scatered abrode in $ very myddest of the darck couer- inge of forgetfulnes, put to horrible feare q wonderously vexed. For the corner where they were, might not kepe them from feare: because y sounde came downe and vexed them: yee many terryble and straunge visions made them afrayed.

€ Rom, 11. d. ^ Exo. 10. c. 

Fo. Irrrb. 

nesse that was to come vpon them. Yee they 

‘Chap. rbi, The boke of Tpssdome. 
B| No power of the fyre might geue them 

light, nether might the cleare flames of the starres lightē y horrible night. For there appeared vnto thé a sodane fyre, very drede- ful: At ¥ which (whan they sawe nothinge) they were so afrayed, that they thought y thinge which they sawe, to be the more fear- full. ^ As for the sorcery x enchauntemét y they vsed, it came to derisio, and the proude wyszdome was brought to shame. For they y promysed to dryue awaie the fearfulnes q drede fro y weake soules, were sick for feare thé selues, and that with scorne. And though none of y wéders feared thé, yet were they afrayed at the beestes which came vpon the, cat ý Hissynge of the serpétes: In so moch that with treblinge they swowned, a sayde they sawe not y ayre, which no mà yet maye escape.

For it is an heuy thinge, wha a mans owne consciéce beareth recorde of his wickednes q condépneth him. And why? a vexed «c wounded consciéce, taketh euer cruell thinges in hade. ^ Fearfulnes is nothinge els, but a declaringe y a mà seketh helpe q defence, to answere for him self. And loke how moch lesse the hope is within, the more is y vncer- taynte of the matter, for the whieh he is punished. But they y came in y mightie night, slepte y slepe y fell vpo the fro vnder
& fro aboue: somtyme were they afrayed thorow y feare of Y wonders, q somtyme they were so weake, y they swowned withall: for an hastie q sodane fearfulnes came vpon thé.
Afterwarde, yf eny of the had falle, he was kepte q shutt in preson, but without chaynes.
But yf eny dwelt in a vyllage, yf he had bene an hyrd or huszbandman, he suffred intoller- able necessite : for they were all bounde with one chayne of darcknesse.

Whether it were a blasynge wynde, or a swete songe of y byrdes amonge the thicke braunches of the trees, or the vehemence of haistie rünynge water, or greate noyse of y fallynge downe of stones, or the playenge q rünynge of beastes who they sawe not, or y mightie noyse of roaringe beestes, or sownde y answereth agayne in the hye mountaynes : it made the swowne for very feare. For all the earth shyned with cleare light, a no ma was hyndered in his laboure. Onely vpon the there fell a heuy night, an ymage of darck-

a Exod. 7. b. ^ Psal. 45. a. 

¢ Exo, 13. a. 

were vnto them selues the most heuy q hor- rible darcknesse.

The rbiij. Chapter. 

EUERTHELES thy sayntes had a very greate light (and the enemies herde their voyce, but they sawe not the figure of them.) And because they suffred not ¥ same thinges, they magnified the: and they y were vexed afore (because they were not hurte now) thanked the, and besought y
(o God) y there might be a difference. Ther- fore had they “a burnynge piler of fyre to lede them in the vnknowne waye, q thou gauest them the Sonne for a fre gift without eny hurte. Reason it was, that they shulde want light q to be put in the preson of darck- nes, which kepte thy childré in captiuyte, by whom the vncorrupte light of the lawe of y worlde was for to be geuen. Whan they thought to slaye ^the babes of the righteous
(one beinge laied out, and yet preserued to be leder vnto the other) thou broughtest out the whole multitude of the children, *and de- stroydest these in the mightie water. Of that night were oure fathers certified a fore, that they knowinge vnto what oothes they had geuen credéce, might be of good cheare. Thus thy people receaued y health of the right- eous, but the vngodly were destroied. For like as thou hast hurte oure enemies, so hast thou promoted vs whom thou calledest a fore.
For the righteous children of the good men offred secretly, x ordred the lawe of righteous- nes vnto vnite: y the iust shulde receaue good and euell in like maner, singinge prayses vnto y father of all men. Agayne, there was herde an vnconuenient voyce of the enemies, q a piteous crie for childre that were bewayled.
'The master and the seruaüt were punyshed alike, the meane man and the kynge suffred in like maner. For they all together had innumerable that dyed one death.

J Nether were y lyuinge sufficient to bury y deed, for in y twincklinge of an eye, the noblest nacion of thé was destroyed. As oft as God helped thé afore, yet wolde it not make thé beleue: but in y destruccion of y first borne they knowleged, that it was y people of God. For whyle all thinges were still, ¢ wha y night was in Y myddest of hir

` 4 Exo. 1. c. * Exo. 14. 

f Exo. 12. c. 

Fo. Irrrbt. course, thy Allmightie worde (0 LORDE) leapte downe fro heaué out of thy royall trone, as a rough mà of warre, in y myddest of y londe y was destroyed: q y sharpe swerde perfourmed thy straite cómaundemcet, stádiuge q fyllinge all thinges with death: yee it stode vpo y earth q reached vnto the heanen. Then the sight of the euell dreames vexed them sodenly, and fearfulnesse came vpon them vnawarres.
D| Then laye there one here, another there half deed half quyck, and shewed the cause of his death. For the visious that vexed the, shewed the these thinges afore: so that they were not ignoraunt, wherfore they perished.
The tentacion of death touched the right- eous also, and amonge the multitude in the wyldernesse there was insurreccion, but thy wrath endured not longe. For the fautlesse man wente in all the haist,“ and toke the bat- tayll vpon him, brought forth the weapé of his ministracion: euen prayer and y césours of recocilinge, set himself agaynst Y wrath, and so brought the misery to an ende: de- claringe therby, that he was thy seruaunt.
For he ouereame not the multitude with, bodely power, ner with weapés of might: but with the worde he subdued him that vexed him, puttinge the in remembraunce of the ooth q couenaüt made vnto the fathers. For whan the deed were fallen downe by heapes one vpon another, he stode in the myddest, pacified the wrath, and parted y waye vnto the lyuynge. And why? ^in his longe garmét was all the beuty, and in the foure rowes of the stones was the glory of the fathers graue, and thy maiesty was written in the crowne of! his heade. nto these the destroyer gaue place, and was afrayed of them: for it was only a tentacion worthy of wrath.

The riy. Chapter. 
S for the vngodly, the wrath came vpo them without merey vnto the ende.
For he knew before what shulde happe vnto them: how that (whan they had cosented to

The boke of Tepsi dome, 

lett them go, and had sent them out with greate diligence) they wolde repente, q folowe vpon them. “For whan they were yet mourn-

ge and makinge lamētacion by the graues of the deed, they deuysed another foolishnes : so that they persecuted them in their flienge,

? Num. 16. g. ^ Exo. 28. b. c. 

* Exo. 14. a. 

Chap. ri. 

whom they had cast out afore with prayer. 
Worthy necessite also brought them vnto this ende, for they had cleane forgotten the thinges y happened vnto them afore. But the thinge that was wantynge of their punysh- ment, was requysite so to be fulfilled vpon them with tormetes: that thy people might haue a marnelous passage thorow, and that these might fynde a straunge death.

Thé was euery creature fashioned agayne of the new acordinge to the wyll of their maker, obeyenge thy commaundementes, y thy children might be kepte without hurte.
For the cloude ouershadowed their tentes, t the drye earth appeared, where afore was water: so y in the reed see there was a waye without impediment, and the greate depe be- came a grene felde: where thorow all people wente that were defended with thy hande, seinge thy wonderous aq maruelous workes. For as y horses, so were they fedd, q leapte like labes, praysing the (o LORDE) which haddest delyuered them. And why? they were yet myndefull of the thinges, that happened whyle they dwelt in the londe: how the grounde brought forth flyes in steade of catell, and how y ryuer scrauled with the multitude of frogges in steade of fyszshes.

But at the last they sawe a new creacion of € byrdes, what tyme as they were "disceaued with lust, and desyred delicate meates. For whan they were speakinge of their appetite, the quales came vp vnto them from the see, and punyshmentes eame vpon y synners, not without the tokes which came to passe afore by the veheméce of ¥ streames: for they suffred worthely acordinge to their wicked- nesses, they dealt so abhominably ¢ churlishly with straungers. Some receaued no vn- knowne gestes, some brought the straungers in to bondage that dyd them good. Besyde all these thinges there were some, that not only receaued no straungers with their wylles, but persecuted those also,’ and dyd thé moch euell, that receaued thé gladly. ‘Therfore were they punyshed with blyndnesse, like as they that were couered with /sodane darcknesse at the dores of the righteous: so y enery one sought y intraunce of his dore.

Thus the elementes turned in to them selues, like as whan one tune is chaunged vpon an instrument of musick, and yet all

* 3 Ioh. b. / Gen. 19. c. 4 Re. 6. d. 

4 Exo. 16. c. Nu. 11. g. 

Chap. rir. the residue kepe their melody: which maye easely be perceaued, by the sight of the thinges that are come to passe. The drye lode was turned in to a watery, v y thinge that afore swamme in the water, wente now

Che boke of QOlpssuomt. 

Agayne, the flammes of the noysome beastes hurte not the flesh of them that wéte with them, nether melted they the yse, which els melteth lightly. In all thinges hast thou pro- moted thy people (o LORDE) and brought

Fo. Irrrbtj. 

them to honoure: thou hast not despysed them, but allwaye and in all places hast thou stonde by them.

vpon the drye gronnde. The fyre had power in the water (cotrary to his awne vertue) and the water forgatt his awne kynde to quench.

The ende of the boke of wpssdome, 

Zcelestasticus called Yesus Sprac. 

The prologe of Jesus the some of prar bunto his boke,

ANY and greate mē haue declared wyszdome vnto vs out of y lawe, out of y 

prophetes q out of other that folowed thé. In the which thinges Israel ought to be commended, by the reason of doctrine and wiszdome: Therfore they that haue it q reade it, shulde not onely thé selues be wyse there thorow, but serue other also with teachinge and wrytinge.

After that my graundfather Iesus had geuen diligent laboure to reade the lawe, the prophetes and other bokes that were left vs of oure fathers, and had wel exercised himself therin: he purposed also to wryte some thinge of wyszdome and good maners, to the intet that they which were wyllinge to lerne and to be wyse, might hane the more vnder- standinge, and be the more apte to lede a good conuersacion.

Wherfore I exorte you to receaue it louyngly, to reade it with diligence, and to take it in good worth: though oure wordes be not so eloquent as the famous oratours. For the thinge that is wryttin in the Hebrue tonge, soundeth not so well whan it is traslated in to another speache. Not only this boke of myne, but also the lawe, the prophetes, and other bokes sounde farre other wyse, than they do, whan they are spoken in their awne language.

Now in the XXXVIII. yeare whan I came in to Egipte in the tyme of Ptolomy 
Euerges, and continued there all my life, I gat libertie to reade and wryte many good thinges. Wherfore I thought it good and necessary, to bestowe my diligence and trauayle to interprete this boke. And consideringe that I had tyme, I laboured and dyd my best to perfourme this boke, and to brynge it vnto light: that the straügers also which are | disposed to lerne, might applye them selues vnto good maners, q lyue acordinge to y lawe of y LORDE. |

Erclesiastirus. 

That this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

All wyszdome commeth of God, for he onely is 

wyse. The frute of Gods feare. 
Chap. II. 
An exortacion vnto pacience q to the feare of 
God. 
Chap. III. 

A doctryne for children, how they shulde honoure father and mother: q how men ought to be gentle and lowly.

Chap. III. 

Wyszdome lerneth to be mercifull and louynge vnto euery man. What rewarde wyszdome geueth, to them that loue her and seke her.

Chap. V. 

Let no man trust in his riches, let no man leane vpon his owne power, let no man despyse the mercy ¢ longe sufferynge of God.

Chap. VI. 

Of true q false frendshipe. herken vnto wyszdome.

Chap. VII. 

Many goodly lessons and documetes. 

Chap. VIII. 

He teacheth to bewarre of strife, to thincke scorne of no ma, to avoyde suertyshipp, to be- warre of branelesse and cruell people.

Chap. 1X. 

How me shulde behaue them selues with their wyues, t how olde frendshipe ought not to be broken, tc. with many other good lessons.

Chap. X. 

Of iudges and rulers of the people. ought to be eschued.

An exortacion to 

How pryde 

Chap. XI. 
Many good instruccions. 
Chap. XII. 

How and to whom a ma shulde do good. 

| Chap. XIII. 

|How the poore shulde kepe himself from the 
| riche. 

Chap. XIIII. 

The vnfaithfulnes and wickednes of rich nygardes. 
An exortacion to do good t to cleue vnto wyszdome.

Chap. XV. 
The profit that commeth of the feare of God q of wyszdome, whicl the wicked will not receaue.

Chap. XVI. 
The multitude of euell children is not good, for the grace of God is not amonge the vngodly.
The pacience, mercy, and wyszdome of God. 

Chap. XVII. 
How God made man, endewed him with giftes, openynge his wil ¢ lawe vnto him: but chose
Israel out of all people. 

Chap. XVIII. 

The wyszdome of God and ordre of his workes, which no man maye comprehende. The dayes of man are shorte. God suffreth longe, re- buketh and teacheth all soch as wil receaue nurtoure.

Chap. XIX. 

Many good lessons of wyszdome. 

Chap. XX. 

Men ought to geue warnynge, to exorte and to rebuke: but not to be cruel, violent or malicious. Of sylence, and speakinge, t how to bewarre of lyes.

Chap. XXI. 

All maner of synnes ought to be eschued. The 

difference of the wyse and foolish. 
Chap. XXII. 

A foole wyll not be refourmed nor rebuked. Be 

faithfull vnto thy neghboure and frende. 
Chap. XXIII. 

A faithfull prayer vnto God, to preserue the mouth and tonge from noysome wordes and oothes, q the hert from euell thoughtes. How greate abhominacion aduoutry is.

Chap. XXIIII. 
A commendacion of wyszdome. 

Ecclestasticus. 

Chap. XXV. 

There is nothinge better, then an honest verteous woman. Agayne, there is nothinge worse then an euell, vngodly, q frowarde woman.

Chap. XXVI. 
À commendacion and prayse of a good honest woman, and how noysome an euell wyfe is.

Chap. XXVII. 

Many goodly sentences. 

Chap. XXVIII. 

Men ought not to take vengeaüce, but euery man to forgeue his neghboure, q not to beare euell wil ner to stryue. What harme commeth of false tongues q slaunderers.

Chap. XXIX. 

How mé shulde haue compassion and lende vnto their neghbours: and how they that borowe, ought to behaue them selues agayne. Of vn- aduysed suertieshipe. How euery man ought to be content with that he hath, and not to be chargeable vnto other.

Chap. XXX. 

Who so loueth his children, teacheth them, nur- toreth them and chasteneth the. Health is a noble gift.

Chap. XXXI. 

The misery of the cuvetous. How one shulde behaue him self at the table, and be measur- able in meate and drynke. What harme com- meth of drynkingé to moch wyne.

Chap. XXXII. 

To be set in rule q dignite, shulde not make a man proude and hye minded, but to feare, to be diligent and faithful vnto them, that are committed vnto him qc. with other good lessons.

Chap. XXXIII. 

How God ought to be feared, q his lawe kepte. 
The difference of dayes and of men. The ordringe of children and housholde.

Chap. XXXIII. 

The hope of the vngodly is vayne: the righteous shalbe preserued, for he putteth his trust in
God, which wil not be reconciled with offer- inges, but with an innocent life.

Chap. XXXV. 

The offringe that pleaseth God is to kepe his comaundementes, to be thankful, mercifull, and to ceasse from synne. God is the de- fender of wyddowes, fatherlesse, and op- pressed, and heareth their prayer.

Chap. XXXVI. 

An earnest prayer vato God for helpe agaynst the enemies. The prayse of an honest woman.

Chap. XXXVII. 

Of true ¢ false fredshipe. Good councell ought to be sought at them, which are verteous and feare God, but first at God himself. Of wyszdome and sobernesse.

Chap. XXXVIII. 

Phisicians and medicyns ought not to be des- 

* pysed, but vsed as a gift of God: neuertheles 
God himself is first to be sought in all sick- nesse. Men shulde be measurable iu mourn- inge for the deed, q prepare them selues also vnto death. Euery workman ought to be diligent in his laboure, and to please God with kepinge his commaundementes.

Chap. XXXIX. 

Wyszdome and the feare of God excell all other thinges. All thinges are made to serue the faithfull.

Chap. XL. 
The life of man is a battayll. All thinges passe awaie, but the trueth abydeth for euer. The liberal! and louynge condicions of the right-

eous. The vnfaithfullnes and nigardnesse of the vngodly.

Chap. XLI. 

Death is fearfull vnto the wicked, but a ioye vnto the righteous. The cursinge of the vngodly.
A good name is a noble thinge. What the thinges be, wherof a man ought to be ashamed.

Chap. XLII. 

Where one ought not to be ashamed. The care and bringinge vp of childré. The power and wyszdome of God.

Chap. XLIII. 

The beuty of the firmamet, wherby the power and wyszdome of God is knowne, q shulde by right be praysed.

Chap. XLIII. 

A commendacion and prayse of the olde fathers. 

Chap. XLV. 

Of the faithfull worthies, aud their noble actes. 
Of the presthode and otferinges. The punysh- ment of the sedicious.

117 

Fo. xr. 

Chap. XLVI. 

The manlynesse of Iosue t Caleb. Of the rulers in Israel, vnto the tyme of faithfull Samuel.

Chap. XLVII. 
Of Nathan, Dauid and Salomon. 

Chap. XLVII. 
Of Elyas, Ezechias and Esay. 

The first Chapter. 

LL wyszdome cometh of God? the 

LORDE, q hath bene euer with him, and is before all tyme. Who hath nombred
¥ sonde of the see, y droppes of the rayne ¢ the dayes of tyme? Who hath measured the heyth of heané, y bredth of the earth q the depenesse of the see? Who hath sought ont the grounde of Gods wiszdome,’ which hath bene before all thinges? ^ Wiszdome hath bene before all thinges, and the vnderstand- inge of prudence from enerlastinge. (Gods worde iu the heyth is the well of wyszdome, and the euerlastinge comaundementes are the intraunce of her.) Vnto whom hath y rote of wyszdome bene declared? Or who hath knowne hir wyt? Vnto whom hath the doctrine of wyszdome bene discouered and shewed? and who hath vnderstande the manyfolde entraüce of her?

33| "There is one: eue the Hyest, the maker of 

all thinges, y Allmightie, y kynge of power 
(of whom men onght to stonde greatly in awe) which sytteth vpon his trone, beinge a
God of dominion: He hath created her thorow y holy goost: he hath sene her, nom- bred her, and measured her: He hath poured her out vpon all his workes, and vpon all flesh acordinge to his gift: he geueth her richely vnto them that lone him. The feare of the LORDE is worshipe and triüphe, gladuesse q a ioyfull crowne. The feare of the LORDE maketh a mery hert, geneth gladnesse, ioye and longe life. Who so fear- eth the LORDE, it shal go well with him at the last, « in the daye of his death he shal be blessed.

a 3 Re. 3. b, and 4. c. 

lob 28. c. Iacobi 1. a. 

Ercclestasticus, 

Chap. t. 
Chap. XLIX. 

The actes of good Iosias. The decaye of leru- salem. Of the prophetes and patriarckes,

Chap. L. 
A commédacion of Simeon the sonne of Onias. 
Chap. LI. 

A prayer of IesusSyrac. Wyszdome calleth the 

ignoraunt vnto her. 

The loue of God is honorable wiszdome :| 

loke vnto whom it appeareth, they loue it, for they se what woderous thinges it doth.‘
The feare of LORDE is the begynnynge of wyszdome, and was made with the faithfull in the mothers wombe: it shall go with the chosen wemen, and shalbe knowne of y righ- teous and faithfull. The feare of the LORDE is ¥ right Gods seruyce, that preserueth and iustifieth the hert, and geneth myrth q glad- nesse. Who so feareth the LORDE, shalbe happie: and whan he hath nede of comforte, he shal be blessed. To feare God is the wisz- dome that inaketb rich, and bringeth all good with her. She fylleth the whole house with hir giftes, q the garners with her treasure.
The feare of the LORDE is the crowne of wyszdome, and geueth plenteous peace q health. He hath sene her q nombred her: knowlege and vnderstandinge of wyszdome hath he poured out as rayne: and them that helde her fast, hath he brought vnto honoure.

The feare of the LORDE is the rote of|33 

wyszdome, and hir braunches are longe life. 
(In the treasures of wyszdome is vnderstond- inge and denocion of knowlege, but wysz- dome is abhorred of synners.) ‘The feare of the LORDE dryueth ont synne, for he that is withont feare, can not be made righteous, q his wilfull boldnes is his owne destruccion.
A paciét man wyl suffre vnto the tyme, and thé shal he haue y rewarde of ioye. A good vnderstodinge wil hyde his wordes for a tyme, and many més lippes shal speake of his wysz- dome. In the treasures of wyszdome is the declaracion of doctrine, but the synner ab- horreth the worshipe of God. My sonne, yf

l Rom. 11. d. * Psal. 110. b. Pro. 9. b. 

Chap. iij. 

B 

thou desyre wiszdome, kepe the commaunde- ment, and God shal geue her vnto the: for the feare of the LORDE is wyszdome q nur- toure, he hath pleasure in faith and louynge mekenesse, and he shal fyll the treasures therof. Be not obstinate and vnfaithfull to the feare of the LORDE, and come not vnto him with a duble hert. Be not an ypocrite in the sight of men, and take good hede what thou speakest. Marck well these thinges, lest thou happen to fall and brynge thy soule to dishonoure, and so God discouer thy secretes, and east the downe in the myddest of the congregacion: because thou woldest not re- ceaue the feare of God, and because thy hert is full of faynednes and disceate.

The ij. Chapter. 

Y sonne, yf thou wilt come in to y h seruyce of God,” stonde fast in righte- ousnes and feare, q arme thy soule to ten- tacion: sattle thine hert, and be paciét: bowe downe thine eare, receaue the wordes of vnderstondinge, and shrencke not awaye, whan thou art entysed. Holde the fast vpon
God, ioyne thy self vnto him q suffre, that thy life maye encreace at the last. What so euer happeneth vnto the, receaue it: suffre in heuynesse, and be pacient in thy trouble.’
For like as golde aud syluer are tryed in the fyre, euen so are acceptable men in the for- nace of aduersite. Beleue in God, and he shal helpe the: ordre thy waie a right, and put thy trust in him. Holde fast his feare, and growe therin. O ye y feare the LORDE, take sure holde of his mercy: shrencke not awaye fro him, that ye fall not. O ye that feare $ LORDE, beleue him, and youre re- warde shall not be emptye. O ye that feare y LORDE, put youre trust in him, q mercy shal come vnto you for pleasure. O ye y feare y LORDE, set youre loue vpo him, « youre hertes shal be lightened.

Considre the olde generacions of men (o ye children) and marek them well:^ was there euer eny one confounded, that put his trust in the LORDE? Who euer contynued in his feare, and was forsaken? Or whom dyd he euer despyse, that called faithfully vpo him? For God is gracious and mercifull, he forgeueth synnes in y tyme of trouble, and is

s Matt. 4. 2. 2 Tim. 3. b. 2 Pet. 4. b. 

» Sap. 3. a. Pro. 17. a. 
* Psal. 30. a. Esa. 26, a, b. 

4 Iob. 14. * Rom. 13. b. 

€ trlestastítrus. 

a defender for all them y seke him in $ trueth. 
Wo be vnto him that hath a dubble hert, wicked lippes and euell occupied handes, q to the synner y goeth two maner of waies.
Wo be vnto ien that are lowse of hert, which put not their trust in God, and ther- fore shal they not be defended of him. Wo be vnto them that haue lost pacience, forsaken the right wayes, and are turned back in to frowarde wayes. What wyl they do, whan the LORDE shal begynne to vyset the ?

They that feare $ LORDE, wil not mys- trust his worde: and they that loue him, ^wyl kepe his commaundement. They that feare the LORDE, wyl seke out y thinges that are pleasaunt vnto him: and they that loue him, shal fulfill his lawe. They that feare y
LORDE wil prepare their hertes, and hüble their soules in his sight. (They that feare the
LORDE, kepe his commaundementes, and wil be pacient, tyll they se himself) sayenge:
/ better it is for vs to fall in to the handes of $ 
LORDE, then in to the hades of men: for his mercy is as greate as him self.

The iij. Chapter. 

So. pet. 

qe children of wyszdome are a cogre-|& 

gacion of the righteous, and their exer- cise is obedience and loue. Heare me youre father (o my deare children) and do there after, that ye male be safe. * For the LORDE wil haue the father honoured of the children, and loke what a mother commaudeth hir children to do, he wil haue it kepte. Who so honour- eth his father, his synnes shall be forgeué him: and he that honoureth his mother, is like one that gathereth treasure together.
Who so honoureth his father, shal haue ioye of his owne children: q whan he maketh his prayer, he shal be herde. He that honoureth his father," shall haue a longe life: q he that is obedient for y LORDES sake, his mother shal haue ioye of him.
He that feareth the LORDE, honoureth his father and mother, and doth them seruyce,

Jas it were vnto the LORDE himself. Ho- 

noure thy father in dede, in worde and in all pacience, that thou mayest haue his blessinge:* for the blessinge of y father buyldeth vp the houses of the children, but the mothers curse roteth out the foundacions. Reioyse not

f2 Re. 24. c. Susan.d. € Exo. 20. b. Deut. 5. b. Ephe. 6.a. 
^ Epbe. 6. a. ! Gen. 27. d. aud 49. a. Deut. 33, a. 

B 

Fo. rej. whan thy father is reproued, for it is no ho- noure vuto the, but a shame. For the wor- shipe of a mans father is his awne worshipe, and where the father is without hououre, it is the dishonesty of the sonne. My sonne, make moch of thy father in his age, and greue him not as longe as he lyueth. And yf his vnder- standinge fayle, haue pacienee with him, ¢ despyse him not in thy strength. For the good dede that thou shewest vnto thy father, shall not be forgotten: and whan thou thy self wantest, it shall be rewarded the (and for thy mothers offence thou shalt be recompeused with good, yee it shal be founded for the in righteousnes) and in the daye of trouble thou shalt be remembred: thy synnes also shall melt awaye, like as the yse in y fayre warme wether.

He y forsaketh his father, shall come to shame: and he that defyeth his mother, is eursed of God. My sonne, perfourme thy workes with louynge mekenesse, so shalt thou be loned aboue other men. “The greater thou art, the more hüble thy self (in all thinges) and thou shalt fynde fauoure in the sight of
God. For greate power belongeth onely vnto 
God, a he is honoured of the lowly. 

?Seke not out the thinges that are aboue thy eapacite, and search not the grounde of soch thinges as are to mightie for the: but loke what God hath commaunded the,’ thinke vpo that allwaye, and be not curions in many of *his workes. For it 1s not nedefull for the, to se with thine eyes, ¥ thinges y are secrete.
Make not thou to moch search in superfluous thinges, and be not curious in many of his workes: for many thinges are shewed vnto the allready, which be abone y capacite of men.
The medlinge with soch hath begyled many a man, and tangled their wyttes in vanite.
Now he that loueth parell, shal perish therin. 

An harde herte shal fayre euell at y last 
(an hert that goeth two wayes, shal not pros- pere: q he that is frowarde of hert, wyll euer be the worse and worse.) A wicked hert shall be lade with sorowes, and y vngodly sinner wyll heape one synne vpon another. ‘The councell of the proude hath no health, for y plante of synne shal be roted out in thé. ‘The hert of him y hath vnderstandinge, shal per- eeaue hye thinges, and a good eare wil gladly
SL es ay Yt eS SL 

Rom. 12. a. © Deut. 4. a. 

Cerlesiasticus. 

Chap. tj. herken vnto wyszdome. An hert that is wyse t hath vnderstadinge, wyl abstayne from synnes, and increase in the workes of righte- ousnes. ^" Water quencheth burnynge fyre, a mercy reconcyleth synnes. God hath respecte vnto him y 1s thankfull: he thinketh vpon him agaynst the tyme to come: so that whan he falleth, he shal fynde a stronge holde.

The iiij. Chapter. 
Y sonne, defraude not the poore of his|€ almes/ and turne not awaye thine eyes from him that hath nede. Despise not an hongrie soule, and defye not the poore in his necessite: greue not the hert of him that is helplesse, and withdrawe not the gift from ý nedefull. Refuse not the prayer of one that is in trouble, and turne not awaye thy face from the nedy. Cast not thine eyes asyde fro y poore, y thou geue him not occasion to speake euell of the. For yf he complayne of y iu the bytternes of his soule, his prayer shal e herde: eué he y made him, shal heare him. Be curteous vnto ¥ company of the poore, humble thy soule vnto the elder, a bowe downe thy heade to a man of worshipe.
Let it not greue the to bowe downe thine eare vnto the poore, but paye thy dett, and geue him a frendly answere, and y with mekenesse.
Delyuer him y suffreth wroge fro ý hade of 
¥ oppressoure,/ q be not faint harted wha thou sittest in iudgmét. Be merciful vnto y father- les as a father, q be in steade of an huszbade vnto their mother: so shalt thou be as an obedict sonne of ¥ Hyest, and he shal loue the more the thy mother doth. Wiszdome bretheth life in to hir children, receaueth thé y seke her, q wyll go before thé in ý waye of right- eousnes. He y loueth her, loueth life: q they y seke her diligétly, shal haue greate ioye.
They y kepe her, shal haue the heretage of life: for where she entreth in, there is the blessinge of God. "They that honoure her, shal be y sernauntes of the holy one: and they that loue her, are beloued of God.
Who so geueth eare vnto her, shal iudge the 
Heithé: and he that hath respecte vnto her, shall dwell safely.
He that beleueth her, shal haue her in pos- session, and his generacion shal endure: for whan he falleth, she shal go with him before

* Deut. 15. a. 
Exo. 2. b. 

4 Psal. 40.2. Dan. 4.d. Math. 5. a. 
Mat. 25. c. f Gen. 14. c. 

* Some rede, thy workes. 

Chap. bt. 

all. Feare, drede and tentacion shal she bringe vpon him, and trye him in hir doc- trine: tyll she haue so proued him in his thoughtes, that he committe his soule vnto her. Thē shal she stablish him, bringe the right waye vnto him, make hi a glad ma, shewe him hir secretes, and heape vpon him the treasures of knowlege, vnderstondinge and righteousnes. But yf he go wronge, she shall forsake him, and geue him ouer in to the handes of his enemie.

“My sonne, make moch of the tyme, eschue the thinge y is. euell, and for thy life shame not to saye y trueth. ^ ^For there is a shame
Y bringeth synne, and there is a shame that bringeth worshipe and fauoure. “Accepte no person after thine owne will, that thou be not confounded to thine owne decaye. Be not ashamed of thy neghboure in his aduersite, ¢ kepe not back thy councell wha it maye do good, nether hyde thy wyszdome in hir beuty.
For in the toge is wyszdome knowne, so is vnderstandinge, knowlege and lernynge in the talkinge of the wyse, q stedfastnesse in y workes of righteousnes. In no wise speake agaynst the worde of treuth, but be ashamed of the lyes of thine owne ignoraunce. Shame not to confesse thine erroure, and submitte not thyself vnto euery man because of synne.
Withstande not y face of the mightie, and stryue not agaynst the streame. But for the trueth stryue thou vnto death, and God shal fight for the agaynst thine enemies. Be not haystie in thy tonge, nether slack and negli- gent in thy workes. Be not as a lyon in thine owne house, destroyinge thy housholde folkes, and oppressinge them y are vnder the. "Let not thine hande be stretched out to receaue, and shutt whan thou shuldest geue.

The d. Chapter. 

RUST not vnto thy riches, and saye 

not: tush, I haue ynough for my life. 
(For it shall not helpe in the tyme of ven- geaunce and temptacion.) Folowe not the lust of thine owne hert in thy strength, and saye not: tush, how shulde I, or who wyl cast me downe because of my workes? for doutles
God shal auenge it. And saye not: I haue committed mo synnes, butt what euell hath

* Ephe. 5. b. > Math. 10, e. * Leui. 19. d. d Act. 20. c. *Luc.12. b. Eccli.11.c. f£ Rom. 7.a.
5 Eccli. 21. a. ^ Eceli. 16. b. * Pro. 10.a. and 11. c. 

Errlestasticus, 

happened me? For the Allmightie is a pacient rewarder. / Because thy synne is for- geué ý, be not therfore without feare, nether heape one synne vpó another. . And saye not:
*tush, the mercy of the LORDE is greate, he shal forgeue my synnes, be they neuer so many. ^For like as he is mercifull, so goeth wrath from him also, and his indignacion cometh downe vpon synners.

Make no tariége to turne vnto y LORDE, q put not of fro daye to daie: for sodenly shal his wrath come, q in the tyme of vengeaunce he shal destroie y. ‘Trust not in wicked riches for they chal not helpe in the daye of punishment and wrath. Be not caried aboute to euery wynde, and go not in to euery waye: for so doth the synner that hath a dubble tonge (Stonde fast in y waye of y LORDE) be stedfast in thy vnderstandinge, abyde by thy worde, and folowe the worde of peace and righteousnes. De gétle to heare y worde of
God, that thou mayest vnderstande it, and make a true answere with wyszdome. *Be swift to heare, but slowe and pacient in geuinge answere. Yf thou hast vnderstond- inge, shappe thy neghboure an answere: Yf no, laye thine hade vpó thy mouth: lest thou be trapped in an vndiserete worde, q so cofoüded. Honoure q worshipe is in a mas wyse talkinge, but ¥ toge of y vndiscrete is his awne distruecio. ‘Be not a preuy accuser as long as thou lynest, and vse no slaunder with thy tonge. For shame and sorow goeth ouer the thefe, and an euell name ouer him that is dubble tonged: but he that is a preuy aceuser of other men, shalbe hated envyed and confounded. Se that thou iustifie the smal] and greate alyke.

The bi. Chapter. 

E not thy neghbours enemye for thy 
B frédes sake: for who so is euel shal be y heyre of rebuke q dishonoure, q who so euer beareth envye and a dubble toge, offend- eth. "Be not proude in the deuyce of thyne owne vnderstandinge, lest thy leaues wyther, and thy frute be destroyed, ¢ so thou be left as a drye tre. l'or a wicked soule destroyeth him that hath it, maketh him to be laughed to scorne of his enemies, (and brmgeth him to

Eze.7.c. Soph.1.c. * Taco. 1. b. 

m Rom. 12. c. Phil. 2. a. 

! Levi. 19. d. 

So. ret. 

a 

Fo. petty. Errlesiasticus. Chap. bij. 
| Seke after her, and she shalbe shewed the: and wha thou hast her, forsake her not. For at the last thou shalt fynde rest in her, and that shal be turned to thy greate 1oye. Then shal hir fetters be a stronge defence for the, q hir yock a glorious rayment. For the bewtye of life is in her, and hir bandes are the coup- linge together of saluacion. Yee a glorious rayment is it, thou shalt put it on, and the same crowne of ioye shalt thou weere.

My sonue, yf thou wilt take hede, thou shalt haue vnderstadinge: and yf thou wilt applye thy mynde, thou shalt be wyse. Yf thou wilt bowe downe thine eare, thou shalt receaue doctryne: and yf thou delyte in hear- inge, thou shalt be wyse. Stonde with y mul- titude of soch elders as haue vnderstandinge, and consente vnto their wyszdome with thine hert: that thou mayest heare all godly ser- mons,/ and that the worthy sentences eseape the not. And yf thou seist a man of discrete vnderstandinge, gett the soone vnto him, and let thy fote treade vpon the steppes of his dores. “Let thy mynde be vpon the com- maundementes of God, and be earnestly ocen- pied in his lawes: so shal he stablish thy hert, and geue y wyszdome at thine owne desyre.

the poreion of the vngodly.) "A swete worde multiplieth frendes, and pacificth thé y be at variaunce, and a thankfull tonge will be plen- teous in a good man. Holde frendshipe with many, neuertheles haue but one counceler of a thousande.

Yf thou gettest a frende, proue him first,’ and be not haistie to geue him eredence. For some man is a frende but for a tyme, and wyl not abyde in the daye of trouble. And there is some frende that turneth to enemyte, and taketh parte agaynst the: and yf he knowe eny hurte by the, he telleth it out. Agayne, some frende“ is but a companyon at the table, and in the daye of nede he contynueth not.
But a sure frende wil be vnto y euen as thyne owne self, and deale faithfully with thy hous- holde folke. Yf thou suffre trouble and ad- uersite, he is with the, and hydeth not him self from the. Departe fro thine enemies, yee and bewarre of thy frendes.

A faithful frende is a stronge defence: who so findeth soch one, findeth a noble treasure.
A faithfull frende hath no peare, the weight of golde and syluer is not to be compared to the goodnesse of his faith. A faithfull frende is a medicyne of life, q they y feare the
LORDE, shal fynde him. Who so feareth the LORDE, shal prospere with frendes: and as he is himself, so shal his frende be also. My sonne, receaue doctryne fro thy youth vp, so shalt thou fynde wyszdome tyll thou be olde.
Go to her as one that ploweth, and soweth, and wayte paciétly for hir good frutes. For thou shalt haue but litle laboure in hir worke,? but thou shalt eate of hir frutes right soone.
O how exceadige sharpe is wiszdome to vn- lerned men? an vnstedfast body wyl not remayne in her. Vnto soch she is as it were a twichstone, q he casteth her from him in all the haist: for wyszdome is with him but in name, there be but few y haue knowlege of her. (But with them that knowe her, she abydeth ené& vnto y appearinge of God.)

D| Geue eare (my sonne) receaue my doc- tryne, and refuse not my councell Put thy fote m to hir lynckes, and ‘take hir yoek vpon thy neck: bowe downe thy shulder ynder her, beare hir paciently, and be not weery of hir bandes. Come vnto hir with thy whole hert, and kepe hir wayes with all thy power.

. The bij. Chapter. 

O no euell, so shall there no harme happen vnto the. Departe awaye from the thinge that is wicked, and no mysfortune shal medle with the. My sonne, sowe no euell thinges in the forowes of vnrighteousnes, so shalt thou not reape the seuenfolde. Laboure not vnto man for any lordshipe, nether vnto the kynge for the seate of honoure. Iustifie not thy self before God" (for he knoweth the hert) and desyre not to be reputed wyse in the presence of the kynge. Make no laboure to be made a iudge, excepte it so were, y thou coudest mightely put downe wickednes: for yf thou shuldest stode in awe of y presence of the mightie, thou shuldest fayle m geuynge sentence. Offende not in $ multitude of tbe eite, and put not thyself amonge the people.
Bynde not two synnes together,‘ for in one synne shalt thou not be vnpunyshed. Saye not: tush, God wil loke vpo the multitude of my oblacions, and whan Í offre to the hyest

God, he wyl accepte it. 

e Mat. 11. c. f Ecchi. 8. a. g€ Psal.1.2. — ^ Psal. 

2 Eccli. 20, b. è Deut. 13. b. and 33, b. Mich. 7. a. 
142. a. Eccls. 7. c. Iob 9. a. c. Luc. 19. b. $ Eccli. 12. c. 

Mat. 10. c. e Eccli. 37. a. 4 Eccli. 51. d. 

D 

Chap. biij. 

B| Be not faynt harted whan thou makest thy 

prayer, nether slack in geuinge of allmesse. 
Laugh no man to scorne in the heuynesse of his soule, for God (which seyth all thinges) is he that can bringe downe, and set vp agayne.
Accepte no lesynge agaynst thy brother, nether do the same agaynst thy frende. Vse not to make eny maner of lye, for the custome therof is not good. Make not many wordes, whan thou art amonge the elders: and whan thou prayest, make not moch bablinge. Let no laborious worke be tedious vnto the, nether the huszbandrie which the Allmightie hath created. Make not thy boast in the multi- tude of thy wickednes, but humble thy self euen from thine hert: and remembre that the wrath shall not be longe in tarienge, and that the vengeaunce of the flesh of Y vngodly is a very fyre and worme. Gene not ouer thy frende for eny good, ner thy faithfull brother for the best golde.

C| Departe not from a discrete and good 

woman, that is fallen vnto the for thy porcion in the feare of the LORDE, for y gift of hir honesty is aboue golde. ^ Where as thy ser- uaunt worketh truly, intreate him not euell, ner the Hyrelinge that is faithfull vnto the.
Loue a discrete seruaunte as thine owne soule, defraude him not of his libertie,? nether leaue him a poore man. Yf thou haue catell, loke well to them: and yf they be for thy profit, kepe them. Yf thou haue sonnes, brynge them vp in nurtoure and lernynge,' q holde the in awe from their youth vp. Yf thou haue daughters, kepe their body, q shew not thy face cherefull to warde thé. Marye thy daughter, and so shalt thou perfourme a weightie matter: but geue her to a man of vnderstandinge. Yf thou haue a wife after thine owne mynde, forsake her not: (but co- mitte not thy self to the hatefull.)

^Honoure thy father from thy whole herte, and forgett not the sorofull trauaile that thy mother had with the: remembre that thou wast borne thorow them, and how cast thou recopense them the thinges that they haue done for the? Feare the LORDE with all thy soule, q honoure his ministers. “Loue thy maker with all thy strégth, and forsake not his seruauntes. Feare the LORDE with all thy

a ] Reg. 2. b. ^ Mat. 6. b. Eccli. 1. c. Ro. 12. b. 
© Leui, 19. c. 4 Deut. 25. a. * Eccli. 30. a. | 
£f Eccli. 3.a. Tobi. 4.a. € Deut. 12. c. ANu. 18. b. c. 

Grelestasticus, 

Fo. reb. 

soule, x ^honoure his prestes. Geue thé their porcion of the first frutes and increase of y earth, like as it is commaüded the: geue the y shulders, and their appoynted offeringes, and firsthnges, Reach thine hande vnto the poore, that God maye blesse the with plente- ousnes. ‘Be liberal] vnto all men lynynge, yet let not but do good euen to them that are deed.’

Let not them that wepe be without com- forte,’ but mourne with soch as mourne. Let it not greue the to vyset the sick, " for that shal make the to be loued. What so euer thou takest in hande, remembre the ende, and thou shalt neuer do amysse.

The biij. Chapter. 
TRYUE not with a mightie man, lest thou chaunse to fall in to his hades. Make no variatice with a riche mā,” lest he happen to bringe vp an harde quarell agaynst y. For golde q siluer" hath vndone many a man, yee eué ý hertes of kynges hath it made to fall.
Stryue not with a mā that is full of wordes, q laye no stickes vpon his fyre. Kepe no com- pany with the vnlerned, lest he geue thy kynred an euell reporte. "Despyse not a man that turneth himself awaye from synne, and cast him not in the teth withall: but remébre y we are frayle euerychone. ‘Thynke scorne of no mà in his olde age, for we waxe olde also. Be not glad of the death of thine ene- mie, but remembre that we must dye all the sorte of vs (and fayne wolde we come in to ioye.) " Despyse not the sermons of soch elders as haue vnderstandinge, but acquaunte thy self with the wyse sentences of them: for of them thou shalt lerne wyszdome and the doctrine of vnderstandinge, and how to serue

greate men without complaynte. 

Go not from Y doctryne of the elders, for they haue lerned it of their fathers. For of them thou shalt lerne vnderstandinge, so y thou mayest make answere in y tyme of nede.
Kyndle not ¥ coales of synners, lest thou be brent in the fyrie flammes of their synnes.
Resist not the face of the blasphemer, that he laye not wayte for thy mouth. Lende not vnto him that is mightier then thyself: Yf thou lendest him, counte it but lost. Be not

t Galat. 6. b. * Tobi. 1.d. !' Ro. 12. b. " Matt. 25. c. 
" Matt. 5. c. ° Eccli. 31, a. P Gala. 6. a. 2 Cor. 2. b. 
1 Leu. 19. g. * Eccli. 6. c. * Eccli. 29. a. 

jfo. rebi 

suertie aboue thy power: yf thou be, then thynke surely to paye it. Go not to lawe with the iudge, for he wyl iudge acordinge to his owne honoure. Trauayle not by the waye with him y is ^ branelesse, lest he do the euell: for he foloweth his awne wilfulnes, q so shalt thou perish thorow his foly.

Stryue not with him that is angrie and cruell, and go not with him in to y ^wyldernes: for bloude is nothinge in his sight, and where there is no helpe, he shal murthur y. “Take no councell at fooles, for they lone nothinge but the thinges that please themself. Make no coücell before a straunger, for thou canst not tell what wyll come of it. Opé not thine hert vnto euery man, lest he be vnthafull to the, and put the to reprofe.

The iy. Chapter. 

E not gelous ouer y wyfe of thy bosome, 
B y she shew not some shrewed poynte of wicked doctryne vpo the. Geue not the power of thy lyfe vnto a woman, lest she come in thy strength, and so thou be confounded.
Loke not vpon a woma that is desyrous of many men, lest thou fall in to hir snares. Vse not the company of a woma that isa player and daüser, q heare hir not, lest thou perish thorow hir entysinge. Beholde not a mayde, that thou be not hurt in hir bewtye. Cast not thy mynde vpon harlottes in eny maner of thinge, lest thou destroye both thy self and thine heretage. Go not aboute gasinge in euery layne of the cite, nether wadre thou abrode in the stretes therof. “Turne awaye thy face from a beutyfull woman, and loke not vpon the fayrnesse of other.

Many a man hath perished thorow the bewty of / women, for thorow it the desyre is kyndled as it were a fyre. (An aduouterous
| woman shalbe trodden vnder fote as myre, 

of euery one that goeth by the waye. Many 

a man wonderinge the bewtye of a strauge 

woman, haue bene cast out, for hir wordes 

kyndle as a fyre.) Sytt not with another mans wyfe by eny meanes, lye not with her

vpon the bedd, make no wordes with her at y 

wyne: lest thine hert consent vnto her, q so 

thou with thy blonde fall in to destruccion. 

a Gen. 4. b. 
37, a. b. Pay, Sis as Matt. 5. c. 
2 Re. 11. à. Iudit. 10. and 11. 12. 

* Pro. 22. d. Esa. 3. a. * Eccli. 9. c. 

GErrlesiasticus, 

f Gen. 34. a 

Chap. ir. 
Forsake not an olde frende, for the new shal not be like him.

A new frende is new wine: let him be olde, q thou shalt drynke him with pleasure. De- syre not ý honoure and riches of a synner, for thou knowest not what destruccion is for to come vpon him. Delyte not thou in the thinge that the vngodly haue pleasure in: beinge sure, that the vngodly shall not be accepted vntyll their graue.

Kepe the from the man that hath power to} € slaye, so nedest thou not to be afrayed of death. And yfthou commest vnto him, make no fawte, lest he happen to take awaye thy life. Remembre that thou goest in the myddest of snares, and vpon the bulworkes of y cite. Bewarre of thy neghboure as nye as thou canst, and * medle with soch as be wyse and haue vnderstandinge. Let iust men be thy gestes, let thy myrth be in the feare of
God, let the remembrauce of God be in thy mynde, and let all thy talkynge be in the commaundementes of the Hyest. In the handes of craftesmen shall the workes be commended, so shal the ^ prynces of the people in the wyszdome of their talkynge. A man full of wordes is perlous in his cite: and he that is temerarious and past shame in his talkinge, is to be abhorred.

The y. Chapter. 

WYSE iudge wil ordre his people with|@ 

discrecion, and where a man of vnder- standinge beareth rule, there goeth it well. i As the iudge of the people is himself, eué so are his officers: and loke what maner of man the ruler of the cite is, soch are they that dwell therin also. * An vnwise kinge destroyeth his people, but where they that be in auctorite are men of vnderstandinge, there the cite prospereth.

The power of the earth is in the hande of 
God, and whan his tyme is, he shal set a pro- fitable ruler vpon it. In the hande of God is the power of man, and vpo the scrybes shal he laye his honoure. Remembre no wronge of thy neghboure, and ‘medle thou with no vnrighteous workes. Pryde is hatefull before
God and men, and all wickednes of the 

& Eccli. 8. c. and 37. a. b. 
* 3 Re. 1278. 

^ 3 Re. 3. 
! Leui. 19. c. 

* Pro, 29. b. 

Chap. rt. 
Heithen is to be abhorred. “Because of vn- righteous dealinge, wronge, blasphemies and diuerse disceate, a realme shal be traslated fro one people to another.

There is nothinge worse then a cuvetous man. What prydest thou the, o thou earth and aszshes? ‘There is not a more wicked thinge, then to loue moneye. And why? soch one hath his soule to sell: yet is he but fylthie doge whyle he lyueth.

And though the phisician shewe his helpe neuer so longe, yet in conclucion it goeth after this maner: to daye a kynge, to morrow deed. For whan a man dyeth, he is the heyre of serpentes, beastes and wormes. The begynnynge of mans pryde, is to fall awaye from God: and why? his hert is gone from his maker, for pryde is the origenall of all synne. Who so taketh holde therof, shalbe fylled with cursinges, and at y last it shal ouer throwe him. Therfore hath the LORDE brought the cógregacions of the wicked to dishonoure, and destroyed them vnto the ende.

God hath destroyed the seates of proude prynees, and sett vp the meke in their steade.
God hath wythered the ’rotes of the proude 
Heithen, and planted the lowly amonge them. 
God hath ouerthrowne the ‘londes of the 
Heithen, and destroyed them out of the grounde. He hath caused them to wyther awaye, he hath brought them to naught, and made the memoriall of them to ceasse from out of the earth. (God hath destroyed the name of the proude, and left the name of $ humble of mynde.) Pryde was not made for man, nether wrothfulness for mens children.
'The sede of men that feareth God, shalbe brought to honoure: but ý sede which trans- gresseth the commaundementes of y LORDE shalbe shamed. He y is the ruler amóge brethren, is holdé in honouke amoge them, and he regardeth soch as feare the LORDE.

The glory of the riche, of the honorable and of the poore is the feare of God.

Despyse not thou the iust poore man, and magnifie not ¥ rich vngodly. Greate is the iudge and mightie in honoure, yet is there none greater, then he y feareth God. — Vnto y ‘seruaunt that is discrete, shal the fre do seruyce. He that is wyse and well nur-

a Tere. 27. a. Dan. 4. c. ^ Sap. 6. b. Luc. 1. d. 
14. b. 18. b. * Gen. 19. c. 4 Pro. 17. a. 62 Re. f Pro. 12. b. € Gen. 41. f. Dan. 6. a.

Erclesiasticus. 

toured, wyll not grudge whan he is refourmed, q an “ignorat body shal not come to honoure.
Be not pronde to do thy worke, and dispare not in the tyme of /aduersite. Better is he y labonreth, and hath plenteousnes of all thinges, then he y is gorgious, and wanteth bred.

My sonne, kepe thy soule in mekenes, and geue her hir due honoure. Who shal iustifie him, that synneth agaynst himself? Who wil honoure him, that dishonoureth his owne life?
The poore is honoured for his faithfulnes and trueth, but y rich is had in reputació be- cause of his goodes. He that ordreth him- self honestly in pouerte, how moch more shal he behaue himself honestly in riches? And who so ordreth himself vnhonestly in riches, how moch more shal he behaue himself vn- honestly in pouerte ?

The ri. Chapter. 

HE ‘wyszdome of him y is brought lowe, shal lift vp his heade, and shal make him to sytt amonge greate me. Com- mende not a man in his bewtye, nether despyse a man in his vtter appearance. The
Bey is but a small beast amonge the foules, yet is hir frute exceadige swete. Be not proude of thy rayment, "and exalte not thyself in the daye of thy honoure: for ¥ workes of the Hyest onely are wonderfull: yee glorious, secrete and vnknowne are his workes. Many un haue bene 'fayne to syt downe vpo the earth, q y vnlickly hath worne ¥ crowne.
Many mightie mé hane bene brought lowe, and the honorable haue bene delyuered in to other mens handes. ‘Condemne no man, before thou haue tryed out the matter: and whan thou hast made enquisicion, then re- fourme righteously. Geue no sentéce before thou hast herde the ‘cause, but first let men

tell out their tayles. 

Stryue not for a matter that toucheth not thyself, and stonde not in the iudgment of synners. My sonne, medle not with many matters: q yf thou wylt be "riche, thou shalt not gett it: and though thou rennest thy waye afore, yet shalt thou not escape. There is some mà that "laboureth, and the more he weerieth himself, the lesse he hath. Agayne,

^ Acto. 12. d. ! 1 Reg. 15. f. Hest. 6.7. 
13. b. and 17. b. Iosu. 7. c. and 22. c. m Mat. 19. c. 1 Ti. 6. b. " Pro. 10. c.

* Deut. 

! Pro. 18. b. 

Fo. rebi. 

1o. rrbiij. Ecelestasticus. Chap. rij. 

some man is slouthfull, hath nede of helpe,| |warre of the disceatfull, for he ymagineth wüteth stregth, and hath greate pouerte, and! | wicked thinges, to bringe j in to a perpetuall
Gods eye loketh vpon him to good, setteth| |shame. Yf thou takest an aleaüt vnto y. he him vp from his lowe estate, and “lifteth vp| |shal destroye the in vnquietnes, and dryue his heade: so that many men maruell at him,| |the from thine owne wayes.

and geue honoure vnto God. 

Prosperite and aduersite,’ life and death, Che rij. Chapter. pouerte and riches come all of the LORDE. HAN thou wylt do good, knowe to
(Wyszdome, nurtoure and knowlege of ¥ whom thou doest it, ¢ so shalt thou 

lawe are with God : loue and ¥ wayes of good! |be greatly thanked for thy benefites. «Do are with him. Erroure and darcknes are| |good vnto the righteous, and thou shalt fynde made for synners: and they that exalte them| |greate rewarde: though not of him, yet (no selues in euell, waxe olde in euell) The] |doute) the LORDE him self shal rewarde gift of God remayneth for the righteous, and| |the. He stodeth not in a good case, that is his good wyl shal geue prosperite for euer.| |allwaye occupied in euell, x geueth no allmes:
Some man is rich by lyuynge nygardly, and y| |for the Hyest hateth the synners, and hath is the porcion of his rewarde, in that he} |mercy vpon them that shew the workes of sayeth: now haue I gotten rest, and now wyl| |repétaunce. Geue thou vnto soch as feare
I eate and drynke of my goodes myself ^alone.| |God, and receaue not a synner: As for the 
And yet he considereth not, that the tyme} |vngodly and synners, he shall recompense draweth nye, y he must leaue all these thinges| |vengeauce vnto them, and kepe them to the vnto other men, and dye himself. Stonde| |daye of wrath. Geue thou vnto the good, thou fast in thy couenaunt, and exercyse thy| |and receaue not the synner: do well vnto him self therm, and remayne in the worke vnto y| |that is lowly, but geue not to the vngodly. age. Contynue not in the workes of synners,| | Let not the bred be geuen him, that he be but put thy trust in God, and byde in thine] |not mightier then thy self therin. For so estate : for it is but an easy thige in y sight of| |shalt thou receaue twyse as moch euell, in all
God, to make a poore man riche, and that| |the good that thou doest vnto him: And sodenly. The blessinge of God haisteth to $| !why? the Hyest hateth synners, and shal re- rewarde of the righteous, and maketh his| |warde vengeaunce to the vngodly.

frutes soone to florish and prospere. Saye In prosperite a frende shal not be knowne, not: what helpeth it me? and what shal I| |q in aduersite an enemye shal not be hyd. haue ý whyle? Agayne, saye not: I haue| |For whan a ma is in wealth, it greueth his ynough, how can I wante? Whan thou art} |enemies: but in heuynes and trouble a man in welfare, forget not ^aduersite: and whan it| |shal knowe his frende. "Trust neuer thine goeth not well with the, haue a good hope,| |enemy, for like as an yron rusteth, so doth that it shal be better. For itis buta small| |his wickednes. And though he make moch thinge vnto God, in the daye of death to| |croutchinge and knelinge, yet kepe well thy rewarde euery mà acordinge to his wayes.| |mynde, and bewarre of him. Sett him not
The aduersite of an houre maketh one to| |by ¥, nether let him sytt at thy right hade: forgett all pleasure, and whan a man dyeth,| |lest he turne him, gett in to thy place, take his workes are discouered. Prayse no body| |thy rowme and seke thy seate, and so thou before his death, for a man shalbe knowne in| |at the last remembre my wordes, and be his children. pricked at my sayenges.

Bringe not euery man in to thine house, Bynde not two synnes together, for there for the disceatfull layeth wayte dyuersly.| |shal not one be vnpunyshed/ Who wil haue
Like as a partrich in a maüde, so is the hert| |pite of the charmer, that is stynged of y of the proude: and like as a spye, that loketh| |serpét, or of all soch as come nye ¥ beastes ? vpon the fall of his neghboure. Forheturneth| |Eué so is it with him y kepeth copany with a good vnto euell, and slaundreth the chosen.| |wicked ma, q lappeth him self in his synnes.
Of one sparck is made a greate fyre, q an| |For a season wil he byde with the, but yf vngodly mà layeth wayte for bloude. Be-| |thou stomble, he tarieth not. An enemy is

? Tob 42. c. *Tob1.c. Eze. 28. a. e Luc. 12. b. d Recht. 18. c. € Galat, 6. b. 1 Tim. 5. a. J Eccli. 7. a. 

Chap. riiij. 
‘swete in his lippes, “he can make many wordes q speake many good thinges: Yee he can wepe with his eies, but in his herte he ymagineth, how to throwe the in to the pytte: t yf he maye fynde oportunyte, he wil not be satisfied with bloude. Yf aduersite come vpon the, thou shalt fynde him there first: q though he pretéde to do y helpe, vet shal he vndermyne ý. He shal shake his heade, q clape his handes oner y for very gladnes, q
|whyle he maketh many wordes, he shall dys- guyse his countenaunce.
The riij. Chapter. 

HO so toucheth pitch, shalbe fyled 
| withall: ^and he that is famyliar with y proude, shal clothe himself with pryde. He
'taketh a burthen vpon him, that accompanyeth a more honorable man then him self. Ther- fore kepe no familiarite with one that is richer then thy self. How agree the ketell q the pott together? for yf y one be smytten agaynst the other, it shal be broke. The rich dealeth
|vnrighteously, q threateneth withall: but y 
‚poore beinge oppressed and wrogeously deal jwithall, suffreth scarcenesse, q geueth fayre wordes. Yf thou be for his profit, he vseth the: but yf thou haue nothinge, he shal for- sake the. As longe as thou hast eny thinge of thine owne, he shal be a good felowe with thee: Yee he shal make the a bare man, and not be sory for the. Yf he haue nede of the, he shall defraude the: q (with a preny mock) shal he put the in an hope, and geue the all good wordes, and saye: what wantest thou?
Thus shal he shame y in his meate, vntill he haue supte the cleane vp twyse or thryse, and at the last shal he laugh the to scorne. After- warde, whan he seyth that thou hast nothinge, he shal forsake the, and shake his heade at the.

Bewarre, that thou be not diseeaued and brought downe in thy symplenesse. (Be not to humble in thy wyszdome, lest whan thon art brought lowe, thon be disceaued thorow foolishnes.) Yf thou be called of a mightie man, absent thy self, so shal he call the to
‘him the more oft. Preasse not thou vnto him, that thou be not shott out: but go not thou farre of, lest he forgett the. Withdrawe not thy self fro his speach, but beleue not his many wordes. For with moch cómunicacion

? Tere. 41. b. > Deut. 7. a. * 2 Cor. 6. c. 

Errlesiastirus. 

Fo. reir. shall he tempte the, and (with a preuy mock) shall he question y of thy secretes. The vn- mercifull mynde of his shal marck thy wordes, he shal not spare to do y hurte q to put $ in preson. Bewarre, q take good hede to thy self, for thou walkest in parell of thy ouer- throwinge.

(Now wha thou hearest his wordes, make the as though thou werest in a dreame, q wake vp. Loue God all thy life longe, ¢ call vpon him in thy nede.) Euery beast loueth his like, euen so let euery man loue his negh- boure. All flesh wil resorte to their like, and euery man will kepe company with soch as he is himself. But as y wolfe agreeth with the lambe, so doth the vngodly with y righteous.
What felishippe^ shulde an holy man haue with a dogg? How can the ryche and the poore agree together? The wilde asse is the lyons pray in the wildernesse, euen so are poore men the meate of the ryche. Like as the proude maye not awaye with lowlynes, euen so doth the riche abhorre the poore. Yf a rich man fall, his frendes sett him vp agayne: but whan the poore falleth, his frendes forsake him. Yf a rich mā fall in to an erroure, he hath many helpers: he speaketh proude wordes, and yet men iustifie him.

But yf a poore man go wronge, he is punyshed: yee though he speake wisely, yet can it haue no place. Whan the riche man speaketh, euery body holdeth his toge: and loke what he sayeth, they prayse it vnto the cloudes. But yf the poore man speake, they saye: What felowe is this? and yf he do amysse, they shal destroye him. Riches are good vnto him that hath no synne in his con- science, and pouerte is a wicked thinge in the mouth of the vngodly. The hert of man chaungeth his countenaunce, whether it be in good or euell A chearfull countenaunce is a toké of a good hert, for els is it an harde thinge to knowe the thought.

The rij. Chapter. 

LISSED is the man, that hath not fallen with y worde of his mouth,’ and is not pricked with the conscience of synne. Happie is he that hath had no heuynes in his mynde, and is not fallen from his hope. It becom- meth not a cuvetous man and a nygarde, to be ryche: and what shulde a nygarde do with

4 Eccli. 19. c, and 25. c, Iaco. 3. a. 

| Fo. £. golde? He that with all his carefulnes heapeth together vnrighteously, gathereth for
| other folkes, and another ma shal make good chere with his goodes. He y is wicked vnto
| |him self, how shulde he be goode vnto other mé? How ean soch one haue eny pleasure of his goodes? ‘There is no thinge worse, then whan one disfauoureth himself, « this is a rewarde of his wickednes. Yf he do eny good, he doth it not knowinge therof, and agaynst his will, and at the last he declareth his yngraciousnes. A nygarde hath a wicked eye, he turneth awaye his face, and despyseth his owne soule. “A couetous mans eye hath neuer ynough in the porcion of wickednes,
| |vntyll the tyme that he wither awaye, and 
~ [haue lost his owne soule. 
B] A wicked eye spareth bred, q there is scarcenesse vpo his table. My sonne, do good to thy self of i thou hast, ¢ geue y
LORDE his due offeringes. Remembre y death tarieth not, x how y the couenaunt of the graue is shewed vnto the: (for the conenaunt of this worlde shal dye the death.) ^Do good jynto thy frende before thou dye, and acord-
| Inge to thy abylite reach ont thine hande, and 
| |geue vnto y poore. Be not dispoynted of ¥ good daye, q let not y porcion of y good daie ouerpas the. Shalt thou not leaue thy tra- uayles and labours vnto other men? In the deuydinge of the heretage geue and take, and
‘sanctifie thy soule. Worke thou righteousnes before thy death, for in y hell there is no meate to fynde. “All flesh shal fade awaye like grasse, q like a florishinge leaf in a grene tre. Some growe, some are cast downe: euen so is Y generacion of flesh and bloude: lone commeth to an ende, another is borne.
€| All transitory thinges shall fayle at the last, and the worker therof shal go withall. Eue chosen worke shall be iustified, and he y medleth withall, shal haue honoure therin.
Blessed is the man y kepeth him in wysz- dome, and exercyseth himself in vnderstand- inge, t with diserecion shal he thinke vpon the fore knowlege of God. Which considereth y wayes of wyszdome in his hert, hath vnder- standinge in hir secretes, goeth after her (as one that seketh hir oute) q contynueth in hir wayes. He loketh in at hir windowes, q herkeneth at hir dores: He taketh his rest

* Pro. 27. c. Eccls. 1.a. è Eccli. 4. a. Tobi. 4. b. Luc. 16. b. 
€ Esa. 40. a. 1 Pet. 1. d. Iacob. 1. b. 

Erclestasticus, 

| LORDE shal geue her vnto him. 

Chap. rb. besyde hir house, q festeneth his stake in hir walles: He shall pitch his tent nye vnto hir hande, and in his tent shal good thinges rest for euermore: He shal sett his children vnder hir coueringe, q shal dwell vnder hir braunches. "Vnder hir coueringe shal he be defended from the heate, and in hir glory shall he rest.

The rb. Chapter. 

E that feareth God, wil do good: and|& 

| | who so kepeth the lawe, shal optayne wyszdome. As an honorable mother shal she mete him, and as a vyrgin shall she receaue him. ^With ¥ bred of life and vnderstandinge shal she fede him, and geue him the water of wholsome wyszdome' to drynke. Yf he be constant in her, he shall not be moued: and yf he holde him fast by her, he shal not come to cofucion. She shall brynge him to honoure amonge his neghbours, and in the myddest of the congregacion shall she open his mouth. With the sprete of wyszdome and vnderstadinge shal she fyll him, and clothe him with the garment of glory. She shal heape the treasure of myrth q ioye vpo him, and geue him an euerlastinge name to heretage. Foolish men wyll not take holde vpon her, but soch as haue vnderstandinge, wil mete her, for she is farre from pryde and disceate. Men that go aboute with lyes, wil not remembre her: (but men of trueth shall be founde in her, euen vnto the beholdinge of
God.) Prayse is not semely in the mouth of y vngodly, for he is not sent of y LORDE.
For of God commeth wyszdome, q the prayse shall stonde by the wyszdome of God, and shal be plenteous in a faithfull mouth, and the

Saye not thou: It is the LORDES faute that I am gone by, for thou shalt not do + thinge that God hateth. Saye not thou: he hath caused me to go wronge, for he hath no nede of the vngodly. God hateth all abho- minacion of erroure, ¢ they that feare God wyl loue no soch. / God made man from the begynnynge, q left him in the hande of his councell. He gaue him his commaundementes and preceptes: yf thou wilt obserue the commaundementes, q kepe acceptable faith- fulnes for euer, they shal preserue y. He

* Ioh. 4. b. f Gen. 1. d, 

4 Matt, 4. a. 

Chap. rbtj. hath “set water and fyre before the, reach out thine hande vnto which thou wilt. Before man is life and death, good and euell: loke what him liketh, shalbe geuen him. For the wyszdome of God is greate and mightie in power, and beholdeth all men contynually.
’ The eyes of the LORDE are vpon them: that feare him, and he knoweth all the workes of man. He hath commaüded no man to do vugodly, nether hath he geuen eny man leue to synne.

The rbi. Chapter. 

ELYTE not thou in the multitude of 

vngodly children, and haue no pleasure in them, yf they feare not God. "Trust not thou to their life, and regarde not their la- bours: for one sonne y feareth God is better, the a thousande vngodly. And better it is for a man to dye without childré, thé to leaue behynde him soch children as are vngodly.
For by one y hath vnderstandinge, maye a whole cite be vpholden, but though the vn- godly be many, yet shal it be waysted thorow them. Many soch thinges hath myne eye sene, and greater thinges then these haue I herde with myne eares. ^In the congrega- cion of the vngodly shal a fyre burne, q amonge vnfaithfull people shal the wrath be kyndled.

The olde giautes optayned no grace for their synnes, ^ which were destroyed, trustinge to their owne strégth. Nether spared he them, ^amoge whom Loth was a straunger: but smote them and abhorred them because of the pryde of their wordes. He had no pitie vpo them, but destroyed all the people, that were so stoute in synne. ^ And for so moch as he ouersawe not the sixe hundreth thou- sande, that gathered them selues together in y hardnesse of their hert: it were maruell yf one beynge hardnecked, shulde be fre. For mercy c wrath is with him: “he is both mightie to forgeue, and to poure out displea- sure. Like as his mercy is greate, euc so is his punyshment also, he iudgeth a man acord- inge to his workes. The vngodly shal not escape in his spoyle, and the longe pacience of him that sheweth mercy, shal not byde behynde. All mercy shall make place vnto euery man acordinge to the deseruynge of his

* Psal. 33. b. 
* Gen. 19. e. 

* Eccli. 21. b. 
J Nu. 14. c. and 26. f. 

a Tere. 21. b. 
4 Gen. 6. a. 

Errlestasticus, 

workes, (and after the vnderstandinge of his pilgremage.)

Saye not thou: I wyl hyde my self from 
God, for who wyl thinke vpon me from aboue? I shal not be knowne in so greate a heape of people, for what is my soule amonge so many creatures? Beholde, the heauen, yee the heauen of heauens, the depe, the earth and all that therin is, shall be moued at his presence: the mountaynes, the hilles and the foundacions of the earth shal shake for feare, whan God vysiteth them. These thinges doth no hert vnderstonde, but he vnderstandeth euery hert, and who vnderstandeth his wayes?
No man seyth his storme, and the most parte of his workes are secrete. Who wil declare the workes of his righteousnes ? Or who shal be able to abyde them ? for the couenaunt is farre from some, and the tryenge out of men is^in the fulfillynge. He that is humble of hert, thinketh vpon soch thinges: but an vn- wyse and erroneous man casteth his myude vnto foolish thinges.

My sonne, herken thou vnto me, q lerne vnderstadinge, and marck my wordes with thine hert: I wyll geue the a sure doctrine, q planely shal I enstrucke the. God hath sett his workes in good ordre from the hegynninge, and parte of them hath he sundered from the other. He hath garnyshed his workes from euerlastinge, and their begynnynges acord- inge to their generacions. None of thé hyn- dered another, nether was eny of them disho- bedient vnto his worde. After this, God loked vpo the earth, and fylled it with his goodes.
With all maner of lyuinge beastes hath he couered the grounde, and they all shalbe turned vnto earth agayne.

The rbij. Chapter. 

OD shope man of the earth, and turned 

him vnto earth agayne. * He gaue him the nombre of dayes and certayne tyme, yee and gaue him power of the thinges that are vpo earth. He clothed him with strength, and made him after his owne licknes. He made all flesh to stonde in awe of him, so that he had the dominion of all beastes « foules.
! He made out of him an helper like ynto him self, and gaue them discrecion and tonge, eyes and eares, and a hert to vnderstande, and
^ Gene. 1. d. 

£ Eccli. 5. a. i Gen. 2. d. 

So. ety. 

| 

€ 

| porcion. 

!fylled them with instruccion q vnderstandinge. 
He created for them also the knowlege of the sprete, fylled their hert with vnderstandinge, and shewed them good and euell. He sett his eye vpo their hertes, declaringe vnto them his greate and noble workes: (that they shulde prayse his holy name together, reioyse of his wonders, q be tellinge of his noble actes.)
^ Besydes this, he gaue thein instruccion, and the lawe of life for an heretage. He made an euerlastinge couenaunt with them, and shewed them his righteousnes q iudgmentes. "They sawe his glory with their eyes, and their eares herde the maiesty of his voyce. And he saide vnto them : bewarre of all vnrighteous thinges. He gaue euery man also a com- maundement concernynge his neghboure.

| ‘Their waies are euer before him, and are 
‘not hyd from his eyes. * He hath sett a ruler 
| vpon euery people, but Israel is y LORDES 
All their workes are as the Sonne in y sight of God, q his eyes are allwaye lokynge vpon their wayes. All their vnright- eousnesses are manifest vnto him, and all their wickednesses are open in his sight. ‘The mercy y a man sheweth ^is as it were a purse with him, and a mans good dede preserueth him as the apple of an eye. At the last shall he awake, ^q rewarde euery man vpon his heade as he hath deserued, and shal turne them together in to the nethermost partes of the earth. ‘ But vnto them that wyll repent, he hath geué the waye of righteousnes. As for soch as be weake, be comforteth the, suffreth them, and sendeth them the porcion

lof $ verite. O turne then nto the LORDE, 

forsake thy synnes, make thy prayer before the LORDE, do the lesse offence, turne agayne vnto the LORDE, forsake thine vn- righteousnes, be an vtter enemy to abhomina- cion (lerne to knowe the righteousnes and iudgmentes of God, stonde in the porcion that is sett forth for the q in the prayer of the most hye God. Go in to the porcion of the holy worlde, with soch as be lyuinge and geue thankes vnto God.)

/ Who wil prayse the LORDE in the hell? 
Abyde not thou in the erroure of the vn- 
‘godly, but geue him thakes before death. As for y deed, thankfulnesse perisheth from him jas nothinge. Geue thou thankes in thy life,
| a Exo. 20.a. Deut. 4. 5. and 9. 
3. c. and 10. c. * Eccli. 29, b. 

6 Rom. 13. a. Deut. 
4 Matt. 25. c. 

€ rrlesiastirus. 

Chap. rbuj. yee whyle thou art lyuynge a whole shalt thou geue thankes, and prayse God and reioyse in his mercy. O how greate is the louynge kyndnesse of the LORDE, and his mercifull goodnes vnto soch as turne vnto him? For all thinges maye not be in man: q why? the, sonne of man is not immortall, and he hath pleasure in the vanyte of wickednes. What’ is more cleare thé the Sonne? yet shal it fayle. Or what is more wicked, then the thinge that flesh and bloude hath ymagined? and that same shall be reproued. The
LORDE seyth the power of the hye heauen, and all are but earth and aszshes.
The rbitj. Chapter. 

E that lyueth for euermore, made all 

thinges together.^ God onely is right- eous, q remayneth a victorious kynge for euer.
^ Who shalbe able to expresse the workes of him? Who hath sought out the grounde of his noble actes? Who shal declare the power of his greatnesse? Or, who will take vpon him to tell out his merey? As for the won- derous workes of the LORDE, there maye nothinge be taken from them, nothinge maye be put vnto them, nether maye the grounde of them be founde out. But whan a man hath done his best, he must begynne agayne: and whan he thinketh to be come to an ende, he must go agayne to his laboure. What is man? Wherto is he worth? What good or euell can he do? ‘ Yf the nombre of a mans dayes be allmost an hundreth yeare, it is moch.

Like as the droppes of rayne are vnto y see, and as a grauell stone is in comparison of the sonde : “so are these few yeares to the dayes euerlastinge. ‘Therfore is LORDE pacient with them, and poureth out his mercy vpon them. He sawe and perceaued the thoughtes and ymaginacions of their harte, that they were euell: therfore heaped he vp his mercifull goodnes vpon them, and shewed them the waie of righteousnes. The mercy that a mà hath, reacheth to his neghboure: but y mercy of God is vpon all flesh. He chasteneth, he teacheth and nourtureth: yee euen as a shepherde turneth agayne his flock, so doth he all them that receaue chastenynge, nurtoure and doctryne. Merciful is he vnto

* Acto 3. c. f Psal. 6. a. Esa. 38. d. * Gen. 1. a. 
^ Psal. 105. a. Eccli. 43. d. * Psal.89.b. *2 Pet. 3. b. 

Chap. rir. Erclestastirus, 

them, “that stonde in awe of his iudg- mentes.

€| My sonne, whan thou doest good, make no grudginge at it: and what so euer thou geuest, speake no discomfortable wordes. Shal not the dew coole the heate? Euen so is a worde better then a gift. Is not a frendly worde a good honest gift? ^ but a gracious man geueth them both. A foole shal cast a man in the tethe, and that roughly, “and a gift of the nygarde putteth out y eyes. Get the right- eousnes before thou come to iudgmet: Lerne before thou speake, and go to phisick or euer thou be sick: ^examen and iudge thy self, before the iudgment come, and so shalt thou fynde grace in the sight of God. Humble thy self afore thou be sick, and in tyme of thy disease shewe thy conuersacion. Let uot to praye allwaye, aud stonde not in feare to be refourmed vnto death, for the rewarde of
God endureth for euer. Before thou prayest, prepare thy soule, and be not as one y tempt- eth God. Thynke vpon the wrathfull indig- nacion that shalbe at the ende, and the houre of végeaunce, wha HE shal turne awaie his face. “Whan thou hast ynough, remembre the tyme of honger: and whan thou art rych, thynke vpon the tyme of pouerte and scarce- nesse.

3| From the mornynge vntyll the euenynge the tyme is chaunged, and all soch thynges are soone done in ¥ sight of God. A wyse man feareth God iu all thiuges, and in the dayes of transgression he kepeth him self from synne. A discrete man hath pleasure iu wyszdome, and he that fyndeth her, maketh moch of her. They that haue had vnder- standinge, haue dealt wysely in wordes, haue vnderstonde the trueth and righteonsnes, and haue sought out wyse senteces and iudg- mentes. /Folowe not thy lustes, but turne y from thine owne will. For yf thou geuest thy soule hir desyres, it shal make thine ene- mies to laugh the to scorne. "Take not thy pleasure in greate volupteousnes, q medle not to moch withall. Make not to greate cheare of the thinge that thou hast wonne by avaunt- age: lest thou fall in to pouerte, and haue nothinge in thy purse.

fo. rij. 

The riy. Chapter. 

LABOURYNGE man that is geuen|@ 

vnto dronckennes, shall not be riche: and he that maketh not moch of small thynges, shal fall by litle and litle. Wyne and wo- men make wyse men rénagates, and put men of vnderstadinge to reprofe: and he that ac- companieth aduouterers shal become a wicked man. Mothes and wormes shall haue him to heretage, yee he shall be sett vp to a greater example, and his soule shalbe roted out of the nombre. “He that is haistie to geue cre- dence, is light mynded, and doth agaynst himself. Who so reioyseth in wickednes, shal be punished: he that hateth to be refourmed, his life shalbe shortened: and he that abhor- reth bablinge of wordes, quencheth wickednes.
(He that offendeth agaynst his owne soule, shal repent it: and he that reioyseth m wick- ednes, shalbe punyshed.)

Rehearse not a wicked and churlish worde |33 twyse, and thou shalt not be hyndered. Shew thy secretes nether to frende ner foo, q yf thou hast offended, tell it not out. For he shal herken vnto the and marck the: and whan he fyndeth oportunyte, he shall hate the. ‘Yf thou hast herde a worde agaynst thy negh- boure, lett it be deed within the: and be sure, thou shalt haue no harme therby. A foole trauaileth with a worde, like as a woman that is payned with bearinge of childe. Like as an arowe shott in a dogges thye, so is a worde in a fooles hert. "'lell thy frende his faute, lest he be ignoraunt, and saye: I haue not done it, or yf he haue done it, that he do it nomore. Reproue thy neghboure, that he kepe his tonge: and yf he haue spoke, that he saye it nomore.

Tell thy neghboure his faute, for oft tymes |t an offeuce is made, and geue mot credece to euery worde. A man falleth somtyme with his tonge, but not with his will. ‘For what is he, y hath not offended in his tonge? Geue thy neghboure warnynge, before thou threaten him, and geue place vnto the lawe of the
LORDE. The feare of God is all wysz- dome, q he that is a right wyse man kepeth the lawe. As for the doctrine of wicked- nes, it is no wyszdome, and the prudeuce of

? Esa. 66. a. > Pro. 15. a, aud 25. c. * Eccli. 20. b. d 1 Cor.11. d. * Eccli. 11. d. / Rom. 6. b. and 13. b.
€ Gen. 19. g. 3 Reg. 11. a. ^ Josu, 22. c. 

i Eccli. 22. d. and 27. c. * Leui. 19. d. Matt. 18. b. 
! Eccli. 14. a, and 25. b. Iacob. 3. a. 

Errlestasticus, Chap. rr. 

some gift that is nothinge worth: Againe, there is some gift, whose rewarde is dubble.
Some man getteth a fall for beynge to proude, and some commeth to worshipe from lowe estate. Some man bieth moch for a litle pryce, and must paye for it seuenfolde. ise man with his wordes maketh him|%

self to be loued, *but the fauours of fooles shalbe poured out. The gift of the vn wyse shal do the no good, for his eyes are seuen folde. ‘He shal geue litle, q saye he gaue moch: he openeth his mouth and crieth out, as it were one that crieth out wyne. To daye he lendeth, tomorow he axeth it agayne, and soch a man is to be hated. ‘The foole sayeth:
I haue no frende, I haue no thanke for all my good dedes: yee euen they that eate my bred, speake no good of me. O how oft, and of how many shal he be laughed to scorne?
He taketh a more perlous fall by soch wordes, then yf he fell vpon the grounde: euen so shal the falles of wicked men come haistely.
In the mouth of him that is vntaught, are many vnconuenient and vnmete wordes. A wyse sentence shall not be alowed at the month of the foole, for he speaketh it not in due season.

Some man synneth not, because he hath € not wherwithall, and in his rest he shall be stynged. Some man there is that destroyeth his owne soule with shame, and for an vnwyse bodyes sake destroieth he it, (and with ac- ceptinge of personnes shal he vndoo himself.)
Some man promiseth his frende a gift for very shame, and getteth an enemye of hin for naught. A lye is a wicked shame in a man, yet shall it be euer in the month of the vnwyse. A thefe is better, then a man that is accustomed to synne, but they both shal haue destruccion to heretage. The condi- cions of lyers are vnhonest, and their shame is euer with them.

A wyse man shall brynge himself to ho-| 3 noure with his wordes, “and he that hath vn- derstondinge shall be sett by amonge greate men. He that tylleth his londe, “shal increase his heape of corne: he that worketh righte-

fo. rth, 

synners is no good vnderstondinge: it is but wickednesse and abhominacion q a blasphem- yuge of wyszdome. A symple man of small vnderstandinge that feareth God, is better then one that hath moch wyszdome, and transgresseth the lawe of the Hyest.

A craftye sotell man can be wyse, but he is vnrighteous, and with giftes he wraysteth the open and manyfest lawe. A wicked man can behaue himself humbly, and can douke with his heade, and yet is he but a disceauer within. He hydeth his face,” and disguyseth it: q because he shulde not be knowne, he preuenteth tho.

And though he be so weake that he can do the no harme, yet whan he maye fynde oportunyte, he shall do some euell. A man maye be knowne by his face, and one that hath vnderstondinge, maye be perceaued by the loke of his countenaunce. A mans gar- ment, ^laughter x goynge, declare what he is.

The rr. Chapter. 

OME man reproneth his neghboure oft tymes, but not in due season: “Agayne, some man holdeth his tonge, and he is wyse and discrete. It is moch better to geue warnynge and to reproue, then to beare euell will: for he that knowlegeth him self openly, shalbe preserued from hurt and destruccion.
Like as whan a chamberlayne thorow desyre and lust defyleth a mayden, enen so is it with him that vseth violence and vnrighteousnes in y lawe: (O how good a thinge is it, a man y
1s reproued, to shewe openly his repentaunce ? 

for so shalt thou escape wylfull synne.) 

Some man kepeth sylence, and is fonnde wyse: but he that is not ashamed what he sayeth, is hatefull. Some man holdeth his tonge, because he hath not the vnderstand- inge of the language: and some man kepeth sylence, waytinge a conuenyent tyme? A wyse man wyll holde his tonge tyll he se oportunyte, but a wanten and an vn discrete body shal regarde no tyme. He that vseth many wordes, shal hurte his owne goule: and he that taketh auctorite vpo him vnrighte- ously, shalbe hated. 'ousnes, shall be exalted, q he that pleaseth

Some man hath oft tymes prosperite in| jgreate men, shall escape moch euell. 'Re- wicked thinges: Agayne, some man getteth| |wardes and giftes blynde the eyes of the wyse, moch, and hath harme and losse. There is| |and make him domme, that he can not tell

* Matt. 6. b. è Eccli. 21.c. € Eccli. 31. d.| |/ Eccli. 18. c. &Gen. 41. f. Dan.2.g. — ^ Pro. 12. b. 
4 Eccls.3. a. Eccli. 32. a. * Eccli. 6. a. * Exo. 23. a. Deut. 17. a. 

Chap. rri. Grelesiasticus. Fo. cb. 

mé their fautes. Wyszdome that is hyd, and treasure that is hoorded vp,^ what profit is in them both? Better is he that kepeth his ignoraunce secrete, then a man that hydeth his wyszdome.

The rri. Chapter. 

Y sonne, yf thou hast synned, do it 

no more:’ but praye for thy foresynnes, that they maye be for geuen the. Fle from synne, euen as from a serpent: for yf thou commest to nye her, she wyll byte the. The teth therof are as the teth of a lyon, to slaye the soules of men. ‘The wickednes of man is as a sharpe two edged swerde, which maketh soch woundes that they can not be healed.

Stryfe and wrongeous dealinge shall waist awaye a mans goodes, q thorow pryde a rich house shalbe brought to naught: so the riches of the pronde shalbe roted out. The prayer of the poore goeth out of the mouth,’ and commeth vnto the eares, and his vengeaunce
(or defence) shall come, and y haistely. Who so hateth to be refourmed, it is a token of an vngodly personne: but he that feareth God, wyl remembre himself. A mightie man is knowne afarre of by his tonge, but he that hath vnderstondinge, perceaueth that he shal haue a fall.

Who so buyldeth his house with other mens cost, is like one that gathereth stones in wynter. The congregacion of the’ vngodly is like stubble gathered together, their ende is a flamme of fyre. The waye of the vn- godly is sett with stones, but in their ende is hell, darcknes, and paynes. He that kepeth the lawe, wyll holde fast the vnderstandinge therof, and the ende of the feare of God is wyszdome. He that is not wyse, wyll not be taught in good: but the vnwyse man aboun- deth in wickednes: and where bytternes is, there is no vnderstodinge. ‘The knowlege of the wyse shall flowe like water that renneth ouer, and his councell is like a fountayne of life.

€| The hert of a foole is like a broke vessell, 

he can kepe no wyszdome. Whan a man of vnderstondinge heareth a wyse worde, he shal commende it, and make moch of it. But yf a volupteous man heare it, he shall haue no pleasure therin, but cast it behynde his back.
'The talkynge of a foole is like an heuy bur- 

I 
@ Ecch. 41. c. > Eccli, 5.2. 7. a. 12, c. Psal. 40. a. 
Luc. 15. c. * Exo. 3. b. and 22. c. 

then by the waye: but to heare a wyse man: speake, it is a pleasure. Where a donte is in the congregacion, it is axed at the month of the wyse, and they shal pondre his wordes in their hertes. Like as a house that is de- stroyed, euen so is wyszdome vnto a foole: As for the knowlege of the vnwyse, it is but darck wordes. Doctryne is vnto him y hath no vnderstandinge, euen as fetters aboute his fete, and like mannicles vpon his right hande.‘
A foole lifteth vp his voyce with laughter, but a wyse man shall scarse langh secretly.

Lernynge is vnto a wyse man a lewell of|D golde, and like au armlett vpo his right arme.
A foolish mans foote is soone in his neghbours house, but one that hath experience, shall be ashamed at the personne of the mightie. A foole wyll pepe in at ¥ wyndow in to the house, but he that is well nourtured, wyll stonde without. A foolish man stondeth her- kenynge at the dore, but he that is wyse, wyll be ashamed.

The lippes of the vnwyse wylbe tellynge foolish us but y vede of EE as M vnderstandinge, shalbe weyed in the balaunce.
The hert of fooles is in their mouth, but the month of the wyse is in their hert. Whan the vngodly curseth the blasphemer, he eurseth his owne soule/ A preuy accuser of other men shal defyle his owne soule, and be hated of enery man: (but he that kepeth his tonge and is discrete, shall come to honoure.)

The wij. Chapter. 
SLOUTHFULL body is moulded of] A a stone of claie: he that toucheth him, must wash his handes agayne. A mysnur- tored sonne is the dishonoure of the father.
A foolish daughter shalbe litle regarded. A wyse daughter is an heretage vnto hir hns- bande: but she that commeth to dishonesty, bringeth hir father in henynes. A daughter that is past shame, dishonoureth both hir father and hir huszbande: the vngodly shal regarde her, but they both shal despise her. the playenge of Musick is not mete where henynes is, euen so is the correcció q doctryne of wyszdome euer vnpleasaunt vnto fooles.
Who so teacheth a foole, is enen as one that | 33 gleweth a potsherde together: as one that telleth a tayle to him that heareth him not,

d Eccli. 16. a. e Eccli. 19. d. J Leuit, 19. d. 

119 

Er] 

Fo. coi. 

and as one that rayseth a ma out of an heuy slepe. Who so telleth a foole of wyszdome, is euen as a man, which speaketh to one y is aslepe. Wha he hath tolde his tayle, he sayeth: what is the matter? Wha one dyeth, lamentacion is made for him, because the light fayleth him: eué so let mē monrne oner a foole, for he wanteth vnderstandinge. Make but litle wepinge because of the deed: for he is come to rest: bnt the life of the foole is worse then the death. “Seuen dayes do men mourne for him that is deed, but the lamen- tacion ouer the vnwyse and vngodly shulde endure all the dayes of their life.

Talke not moch with a foole, and go not with him that hath no vnderstondinge. Be- warre of him, lest it turne the to trauayle, a thou shalt not be defyled with his synne. De- parte from him, and thou shalt fynde rest, q shalt not be drawé back in to his foolishnes.
What is heuyer then leade? And what shulde a foole be called els, but leade? ^Sode, salt q a lõpe of yron is easier to beare, then an vnwyse, foolish, and vngodly man. Like as the band of wodd bounde together in the foundacion of the house can not be lowsed, eue so is it with $ hert y is stablished in ¥ thought of
Meu The thought of the wyse, shal nether feare ner be offended at eny tyme.

B| Like as a fayre playstred wall in a winter 

house, q an hye buyldinge, maye not abyde y wide q storme: eue so is a fooles hert afraied in his ymaginacion: he feareth at euery thinge, and can not endure. He that nyppeth a mans eye, bryngeth forth teares: and he that pricketh the hert, bringeth forth y meanynge t thought. Who so casteth a stone at the byrdes, frayeth them awaye: q he y blasphe- meth his fréde, breaketh y fredshipe. though thou drewest a swerde at thy frende, yet dis- payre not, for thou mayest come agayne to thy frende. Yf he speake sowerly, feare not, for ye maye be agreed together agayne: ex- cepte it be so that thou blaspheme him, dysz- dayne him, opé his secretes and wounde him tratorously: for all soch thinges shal dryue awaye a frende.

Be faithfull vnto thy neghboure in his pouerte, that thou mayest reioyse with him also in his prosperite. Abyde stedfast vnto him in ¥ tyme of his trouble, that thou maiest be heyre with him in his heretage. Like as

| * Gen. 50. b. ^ Pro, 27. a. © Psal. 140. 

Erclestasticus. Chap. rrii. 

the vapor and smoke goeth out at the ouen before y fyre, euen so euell wordes, rebukes and threatenynges go before bloudsheddinge.
Be not ashamed to defende thy frende: as for me, I wyl not hyde my face from him, though he shulde do me harme. Who so euer heareth it, shal bewarre of him. Who shal set a watch before my mouth," q a sure seale vpon my lippes, y I fall not with thé, q y my| | tonge destroye me not? |

The rriij. Chapter. 

LORDE, father and gouernoure of my|@ 

life, leane me not in their ymaginació q councell. Oh let me not fall in soch reprofe.
Who wyll kepe my thought with y scourge, and the doctryne of wyszdome in myne herte? that he spare not myne ignoraunce, that I fall not with them, lest myne ignoraunces increase, that myne offences be not many in nombre, and that my synnes exceade not: lest I fall before myne enemyes, and so my aduersary reioyse. O LORDE, thou father q God of my life, leaue me not in their ymaginacion. O let me not haue a proude loke, but turne awaye all volupteousnes fro me. ‘Take fro me the lustes of the body, let not the desyres of vnclennes take holde vpon me, and geue me not ouer in to an vnshamefast and obsti- nate mynde.

Heare me (o ye children) I will gene you a| B doctryne, how ye shal ordre youre mouth: who so kepeth it, shal not perish thorow his lippes, ner be hurt thorow wicked workes (As for the synner, he shalbe taken in his owne vanite: he that is proude and cursed, shal fall therin.) ¢Let not thy mouth be accustomed with swearinge, for in 1t there are many falles.
Let not the namynge of God be continually in thy mouth: for like as a seruaunt which is oft punyshed can not be without some sore, euen so what so euer he be y sweareth and nameth God, shal not be cleane pourged fro synne. A man that vseth moch swearinge, shalbe fylled with wickednes, and the plage shall neuer go from his house. Yf he begyle his brother, his fante shalbe vpon him: yf he knowlege not his synne, he maketh a dubble offence: and yf he sweare in vayne, he shall not be founde righteous, for his house shalbe full of plages.

The wordes of $ swearer bringeth death € 

d Exo. 20. b. Eccli. 97. d. Matt. 5. d. 

Chap. rriiij, 
| (God graunte y it be not founde in the house | of Iacob.*) But they y feare God, eschue all soch and lye not weltringe in synne. Vse not thy mouth to vnhonest and fylthye talkynge,’ for in it is the worde of synne. Remembre thy father and thy mother, wha thou art set amonge greate men: lest God forget ¥ in their sight, and lest thou dotinge in thy custome, suffre rebuke, and wyshe not to haue bene borne, and so curse the daye of thy natiuite.
The man that is accustomed with the wordes of blasphemy,’ wyl neuer be refourmed all y dayes of his life. To synne twyse is to moch, but the thirde bringeth wrath and destruccion.
An whote stomack can not be quenched, (eue like a burnynge fyre) tyll it haue swalowed vp somthige: eué so an vnchaste ma hath no rest in his flesh, tyll he haue kyndled a fyre.
D All bred is swete to an whoremonger, he wyl not leaue of, tyll he haue his purpose. A man that breaketh wedlock, q regardeth not his soule, but sayeth: Tush, who seyth me ??
I am compassed aboute with darcknes, the walles couer me, no body seyth me: whom nede Ito feare? The Hyest wyl not remembre my synnes. (He vnderstondeth not that his eyes se all thinges, for all soch feare of mé dryueth awaye the feare of God from him: for he feareth onely the eyes of men, and con- sidereth not that the eyes of the LORDE are clearer then the Sonne, beholdinge all $ wayes of men and the grounde of the depe, and lokynge euen to mens hertes in secrete places. The LORDE God knewe all thinges or euer they were made, and after they be brought to passe also he loketh vpon them all. The same ma shalbe opély punyshed in i pm of ý cite, and shalbe chased abrode ike a yonge horse foale: and when he thinketh leest vpon it, he shalbe take, 'Thus shal he be put to shame of euery man, because he wolde not vnderstonde the feare of the LORDE.
And thus shal it go also with euery wyfe y leaueth hir huszbande, q getteth enheretaunce by a straüge mariage. First, she hath bene
F | vnfaithfull vnto the lawe of y Hyest:/ Secodly, she hath forsaken hir ownehuszbande: Thirdly, she hath played ¥ whore in aduoutry, q gotté hir childré by another man. She shalbe brought out of y cdgregacid, and hir childre shalbe loked vpo. Hir childré shal not take

* 9 Re. 16. b. 

a Leui. 24. c. 
4 Esa. 29. c, 

5 Ephe. 5, a. 
© Leui. 20. b. Deut. 22.c. 

Errlesiasticus, 

S Exod. 20. c. 

rote: q as for frute, hir braüches shal brige forth none. A shamefull reporte shal she leaue behynde her, « hir dishonoure shal not be put out. And they y remayne, shal knowe, y there is nothige better, thé ý feare of God: q y there is nothinge sweter, then to take hede vnto the commaundementes of the LORDE.
A greate worshipe is it to folowe y LORDE, for longe life shalbe receaued of him.

The rriiij. Chapter. 
YSZDOME shal prayse hirself, q be honoured in God, q reioyse in y myddest of his people: In the cogregacions of the Hyest shal she open hir mouth, q try- umphe in M beholdinge of his power: In $ myddest of hir people shal she be exalted, « wondred at in the holy fulnesse: In the mul- titude of the chosen she shalbe commended, zt amonge soch as be blessed she shalbe praysed, q shal saye: I am come out of the mouth of y Hyest, first borne before all crea- tures. I caused $ light y fayleth not, to aryse in the heauen, ¢ couered all the earth as a cloude. My dwellinge is aboue in y heyth, q my seate is in the piler of the cloude. I my self alone haue gone rounde aboute the compasse of heauen, q pearsed the grounde of y depe: I haue walked in the floudes of y see, q haue stonde in all landes: my domy- nion is in euery people and in euery nacion, q with my power haue I troden downe the

hertes of all, both hye and lowe. 

In all these thinges also I sought rest, q a dwellinge in some enheritaunce. So y creator of all thinges gaue me a commaundement: q he that made me, appoynted me a tabernacle, and saide vnto me: Let thy dwellinge be in lacob, and thy inheritaunce in Israel, q rote thy self amoge my chosen. ‘I was created from the begynninge and before the worlde, a shal not leaue of vnto the worlde to come.
“In the holy habitacion haue I serued before him, and so was I stablished in Sion. ‘In y holy cite rested I in like maner, ¢ in lerusa- lem was my power. I toke rote in an ho- nourable people, euen in the porcion of y
LORDE ç in his heretage, q kepte me in y fulnes of the sayntes. I am sett vp an hye like a Ceder vpo Libanus, q as a Cypers tre vpon the mount Hermon: I am exalted like,

^ Exo. 31, a. 

£ Pro. 8. c. i Psal. 131. b. 

,. 

So. rbi. 

ffo. bii. 
[Iericho: As a fayre olyue tre in the felde, q am exalted like as a plantayne tre by the water syde. I haue geuen a smell in the stretes, as Y Cynamon and Balme, that hath so good a sauoure: yee a swete odoure haue
I geuen, as it were Myrre of the best. 
€| Ihaue made my dwellinges to smell as it were of rosyn, Galbanum, of Clowes and
Incense, q as Libanus whan it is not hewé downe, x mine odoure is as the pure Balme.
As the Terebynte haue I stretched out my braunches, and my braunches are the braunches of honoure and louynge fauoure.
“As y vyne haue I brought forth frute of a swete sauoure, and my floures are y frute of honoure and riches. I am the mother of bewtye, of loue, of feare, of knowlege and of holy hope. In me is all grace of life and trueth : ^In me is all hope of life and vertue.
O come vnto me, all ye that be desyrous of me, and fyll youre selues with my frutes: for my sprete is sweter then hony, q so is my inheritaunce more then the hony combe: the iremembraunce of me endureth for euermore.
They that eate me, shal haue the more hon- ger: and they that drynke me, shal thyrste ithe more. Who so herkeneth vnto me, shal
|not come to confucion: and they that worke in me, shal not offende. "They that make me to be knowne, shal haue euerlast- inge life.

All these thinges are the boke of life, the couenaunt of the Hyest, and the knowlege of the trueth. “Moses commaunded the lawe in the preceptes of righteousnes for an heretage vnto the house of Iacob," and comitted y pro- myses vnto Israel (Out of Dauid his seruaüt
HE ordened to raise vp a most mightie kinge, syttinge in the seate of honoure for euermore.)
< This fylleth with wyszdome like as the floude of Phison, q as y floude of Tigris, whan the new frutes are a growinge.

D! This bringeth a plenteous vnderstandinge, like Euprates :/ a fylleth it vp, as Iordane in
|the time of haruest. This maketh nurtoure ito breake forth as the light, q as the water
|Gihon in $ haruest. The first hath not 
|knowne her perfectly, nomore shal the last seke out $ grounde of her. For hir thought

| * Ioh. 15.a. ^ Toh, 14. a, © Exo. 20, a. and 24. a. d Psal.131.b. Act. 2.d. € Deut. 4, a, and 29, b.
J losu. 3. c. © Ecch.33.b. ^Gen.13.b. Rom. 12.a. 

_ ———— áÓM 

Ecclestasticus. 

a palme tre in Cades, q as a rose plited in| |1s fuller thé the see, and hir councell is pro- 

Chap. yr. 

founder then the greate depe. 

I wyszdome haue cast out floudes. I am as a greate waterbroke out of y riuer. Iam as the ryuer Dorix, and as a water condyte am I come out of the garden of pleasure. I sayde: I wyl water the garden of my yonge plantes, and fyll the frute of my byrth. So my waterbroke became exceadinge greate, and my ryuer approched vnto the see. For I make doctryne to be vnto all mé as light as the fayre mornynge, and I shall make it to be euer the clearer. (I will pearse thorow all the lower partes of the earth, I wyll loke vpon all soch as be a slepe, and lighten all thé that put their trust in the LORDE.) I shal yet poure out doctrine, like as prophecy, and leaue it vnto soch as seke after wyszdome, and their generacions shal I neuer fayle, vnto the holy euerlastinge worlde. Beholde, how that I haue not laboured for my self onely,
‘but for all them y seke after y trueth. 

The ryb. Chapter. 
HRE thinges there are, y my sprete|@ fauoureth, ^which be also a lowed before
God and men: The vnyte of brethren, the loue of neghbours, and man and wyfe that agree well together.’

Thre thinges there be which my soule hateth, and I vtterly abhorre the life of them:
A poore man that is proude. <A rich mà that is a lyar,' and an olde body that doteth and is vnchaste.

Yf thou hast gathered nothinge in thy youth, what wylt thou fynde the in thine age?
O how pleasaüt a thinge is it, whà gray headed men are discrete, t whan the elders ean geue good councell? O how edly a thinge is wysz- dome vnto aged men? yee vnderstondinge and councell is a glorious thinge. The crowne of olde men is to haue moch experience, q y feare of God is their worshipe.

There be ix. thinges, which I haue iudged|35 in my hert to be happie, and the tenth wil I tell forth vnto men with my tonge. A man y whyle he lyueth, hath ioye of his children, and seith y fall of his enemies. Well is him, that dwelleth ‘with an houswife of vnderstod- inge, and that hath not fallen with his tonge,

2 

* Gen. 18. b. ! Eccli. 14. a. and 19. c. 

laco. 3. a. 

* Eccl. 40. d. 

Chap. prot. 

and y hath not bene faine to serue soch as are vnmete for him. Wel is him, y fyndeth a faithfull frende: q wel is him, which talketh of wiszdome to an eare ý heareth him. O how greate is he, y fyndeth wyszdome q know- lege? Yet is he not aboue him, that feareth the LORDE. The feare of God hath sett itself aboue all thinges. Blessed is M man, vnto who it is graunted to haue the feare of
God. Vnto who shal he be lickened, y kepeth it fast? The feare of God is the begynnynge of his loue, and the begyunynge of faith is to cleue fast vnto it. The heuynes of the hert is all the punyshment, and the wickednes of a woman goeth aboue all All punyshment q plage is nothinge in comparison of the plage of the hert, eué so all wickednes is nothinge to the wickednes of a woman.

What so euer happeneth vnto a man, is nothinge in comparison of it, y his euell willers do vnto him: and all vengeaunce is nothinge to the vengeauce of the enemye.
There is not a more wicked heade then the heade of the serpét, and there is no wrath aboue ý wrath of a woman. “I wyl rather dwell with a lyon and dragon, then to kepe house with a wicked wyfe. The wickednesse of a woman chaungeth hir face, she shal moffell hir cottenaunce as it were a Beer, q as a sack shall she shewe it amonge the negh- bours. Hir husbande is brought to shame amoge his neghbours, q wha he heareth it, it maketh him to sighe. All wickednes is but litle to the wickednes of a woman, y porcion of the vngodly shal fall vpon her.

D| Like as to clymme vp a sondy waye is to y 

fete of the aged, eué so isa wife full of wordes to a still quyete man. *Loke not to narowly vpon the bewtye of a woman, lest thou be prouoked in desyre towarde her. The wrath of a woman is dishonoure and greate confu- cio. Yf a woman gett the mastrie, then is she contrary to hir huszbande. A wicked wife maketh a sory hert, an heuy countenaunce and a deed wounde. ^Of the woman came y begynnynge of synne, and thorow her we all are deed. Geue thy water no passage, no not a litle, nether geue a wicked woman hir wil. Yf she walke not after thy hande, she shall confounde the in the sight of thy enemies.
Cut her of then from thy flesh, that she do not allwaye abuse the.

* Pro.21.c. > Eccli.42.b. 2 Reg.11.a.and 13.a. ¢ Gen. 

Erclesiasticus. 

The rrbi. Chapter. 

APPIE is the man that hath a vertuous|@ 

wyfe, for the nobre of his yeares shalbe dubble. An honest woman maketh hir husz- bande a ioyfull man, g she shall fyll y yeares of his life in peace. A vertuous woman is a noble gift, which shalbe geuen for a good por- cion vnto soch as feare God. Whether a man be rich or poore, he maye haue euer a mery hert, « a chearful countenaüce. There be thre thinges y my hert feareth, and my face is afrayed of the fourth. Treason in a cite, a sedicious people, and noysome tonges, all these are heuyer then the death. But whan one is gelous ouer his wife, it bryngeth payne and sorowe vnto the hert: and a woman that telleth out all thinges, is a scourge of the tonge. Whan one hath an euell wife, it is euen as whan an vnlike pare of oxen must drawe together: he that getteth her, getteth a scorpion. A dronken woman is a greate plage, for she can not couer hir owne shame.

The whordome of a woman maye be knowne in the pryde of hir eyes and eye- lyddes. *Yf thy daughter be not shamefast, holde her straitly, lest she abuse hirself thorow ouermoch liberte. Bewarre of all the dis- honesty of hir eyes, and maruell not yf she do agaynst the. Lik as one that goeth by the waye and is thyrstie, so shall she open hir mouth, and drynke of euery nexte water that she maye gett.

By euery hedge shal she syt her downe, q ope hir quyuer against euery arowe. A lou- ynge wyte reioyseth hir huszbande, and fedeth his bones with hir wyszdome. A woman of few wordes is a gift of God, and to a well nurtured mynde maye nothinge be compared.

An honest and manerly woman is a gyft aboue other giftes, and there is no waight to be compared, vnto a mynde that can rule itself Like as the Sonne whan it aryseth, is an ornament in the hye heauen of ¥
LORDE, so is a vertuous wife ¥ bewtye of all hir house. Like as the cleare light is vpon ¥ holy cadelstick, so is the bewtye of the face vp6 an honest body. / Like as the goldé pilers are vpon the sockettes of syluer, so are the fayre legges vpon a woman that hath a costant mynde. (Perpetuall are the foida- cions that be laied vpon a. whole stonye rocke,
3.a. 1 Tim.2. b. 

2 Iudic.16. * Eecli.42. b. JCant.5.d. 

B 

€ 

fo. cir, 

B |thinge in the thought of man. 

cns 
Fo. tr. so are ¥ commaundementes of God vpon an holy woman.)

There be two thinges y greue my hert, and in the thirde is a displeasure come vpon me.
When an experte man of warre suffreth scarsenes and pouerte, Whan men of vnder- stondinge and wyszdome are not set by: And whan one departeth from righteousnes vnto synne. Who so doth soch, the LORDE hath prepared him vnto the swerde. There be two maner of thinges, which me thyncke to be herde and perylous. A marchaunt can not lightly kepe him from wronge, nether a tauerner himself from synne.

The yrbtj. Chapter. 

a ECAUSE of pouerte haue many one 

offended : and he that seketh to be riche, turneth his eyes asyde. Like as a nale in the wall sticketh fast betwixte two stones, euen so doth synne sticke betwixte y byer and the seller. Yf he holde him not dili- gently in y feare of the LORDE, his house shall soone be ouerthrowne. Like as whan one sifteth, the fylthynes remayneth in the syue: So, remayneth there some vncleane
'The ouen proueth the potters vessell, so doth “tentacion of trouble trye righteous men. The tre of the felde is knowne by his frute, so is the thought of mas hert knowne by his wordes.
Prayse no mà excepte thou haue harde him, for a man is knowne by his wordes. Yf thou folowest righteousnes, thou shalt get her, and put her vpon y as a fayre garment. (And thou shalt dwell with her, and she shal de- fende the for euer, and in y daye of knowlege thou shalt fynde stedfastnesse.) The byrdes resorte vnto their like, so doth the trueth turne vnto them that be occupied withall.
The lyon wayteth for ¥ praye: so do the synnes lurke vpon the workes of wickednes.
The talkinge of him that feareth God, is nothinge but wyszdome: as for a foole, he chaungeth as ¥ Moone. Yf thou be amonge the vndiscrete, kepe thy worde to a conue- nient ^tyme, hut amonge soch as be wyse,
€ |speake on hardely. The talkinge of fooles is abhominacio, and their sporte is volupteous- nesse and mysnurtoure. ^Moch swearynge

* Sap.3.a. 1 Pet. 1. b. Matt. 7. b. > Ro. 12. b. 
Col. 4. a. * Eccli. 23. b. 4 Eccli. 19. b. and 22. d. t Pro.10.b. J Exo.21.b. € Hest.7.b. Psal. 7.b.

Erclestasticus. 

Chap. rrbg. maketh the hayre to stonde vp, and to stryue with soch, stoppeth the eares.

The stryfe of the proude is bloudsheddynge, q their blasphemyuge is heny to heare. “Who so discouereth secretes, leseth his credence, and fyndeth no frende after his will. Loue, thy frende, and bynde thyself in faithfulnes| with him: but yf thou bewrayest his secretes, thou shalt not get him agayne: For like as the ma is that destroyeth his enemye so is he also that dealeth falsly in the frendshipe of his neghboure.

Like as one that letteth a byrde go out of |B his honde, can not take her agayne: Euen so thou, yf thou gene ouer thy frende, thou canst not get him agayne: Yee thou cast not come by him, for he is to farre of. He is vnto the as a Roo escaped out of the snare, for his soule is wounded. As for woundes, they maye be bounde vp agayne, and an euell worde maye be reconcyled: but who so be- wrayeth the secretes of a frende, there is no more hope to be had vnto him.

He that “wyncketh with the eyes, ymagineth some euell, and no man shal take him from it. _Whan thou art present, he shal hylie commende and prayse thy wordes: but at the last he shall turne his tayle, and slaüder thy sayenge. Many thinges haue I hated, but nothinge so euell, for the LORDE himself also abhorreth soch one.

Who so casteth a stone an hye, it shal fall % vpon his owne heade: fand he that smyteth with gyle, woundeth himself. Who so diggeth | a “pytt, shal fall therin: and he that layetha' | snare, shal be taken in it himself. Who so geueth a wicked noysome councell, it shall come vpon himself, and he shall not knowe from whéce. ‘The proude blaspheme and are scornefull, but vengeaunce lurketh for them asa lyon. They that reioyse at the fall of i righteous, shal be taken in y snare, anguys of hert shall consume them before they dye.
Anger and rigorousnes are two abhominable thinges, and $ vngodly hath them both vpon him.

The yrbitj. Chapter. 

E that seketh vengeaunce, shal fynde| 8 
^vengeaunce of the LORDE, which shal surely kepe him his synnes. Forgeue

Ecels, 10. a, ^ Deut. 32, c. 
Mat. 5. b. 6. b. 18. b. 

Rom. 12. c. 

| 

Pro. 26. c. 

Chap. rrir. 

Errlestasticus, 

thy neghboure the hurte that he hath done the, and so shal thy synnes be forgeuen the also, whan thou prayest. A man that beareth hatred agaynst another, how darre he desyre forgeuenesse of God? He that sheweth no mercy to a ma which is like himself, how darre he axe forgeuenesse of his synnes? Yf he that is but flesh, beareth hatred and kepeth it, who wy] intreate for his synnes? Remem- bre the ende, q let enmyte passe, which seketh death and destruccion, and abyde thou in y commaundementes. Remembre y commaun-
|. |dement, so shalt thou not be rigorous ouer thy 
S neghboure. Thynke vpo the couenaunt of y 
| |Hyest, and forgeue thy neghbours ignoraüce. 
“Bewarre of strife, and thou shalt make y synnes fewer. l'or an angrie man kyndleth variaunce, and the vngodly disquyeteth fredes, and putteth discorde amonge them that be at peace. The more wodd there is, the more vehement is the fyre: and the "mightier y men be, the greater is the wrath: and the longer the strife endureth, the more it burneth.
€| An haistie brawlinge kyndleth a fyre, and an haistie strife sheddeth bloude. Yf thou blowe the sparke : it shal burne: Yf thou spytt vpo it, it shal go forth, and both these go out of thy mouth. The “slaunderer and dubble tégued is cursed, for many one that be frendes setteth he at variaunce. The thirde tonge hath disquieted many one, and dryuen them
| |from one londe to another. Stronge cities 
| [hath it broken downe, and ouerthrowne the houses of greate men. ‘The thirde toge hath
‚cast out many an honest woman, and robbed them of their labours. Who so harkeneth
| |vnto soch, shal neuer fynde rest, and neuer dwell safely. The stroke of $ rod maketh yedders, but the stroke of the tonge smyteth the bones in sunder. There be many that haue perished with the swerde, but many mo thorow the tonge.
D| Welis him that is kepte fro an euell tonge, 
| |t commeth not in y anger therof: which 
| |draweth not the yock of soch, and is not 
| |boüde in the bondes of it. For the yock therof is of yron, and y bonde of it of stele.
The death therof is a very euell death: hell were better for one, then soch a tonge. But the fyre of it maye not oppresse them that

a Eccli. 8. a. ^Pro.96.c. © Eccli. 91. d. 4 Deut. d

15.a. Luc. 6. d. 

feare God, and $ flamme therof maye not burne thé. Soch as forsake the LORDE, shal fal] therin: and it shal burne them, and no man shal be able to quench it. It shal fall vpon thé as a Lyö, and deuoure them as a leparde. Thou hedgest thy goodes with thornes: why doest thou not rather make dores and barres for thy mouth? Thou weiest thy golde and syluer: why doest thou not weye thy wordes also vpon the balaunce ?
Bewarre, that thou slyde not in thy tonge, and so fall before thine enemies, that laye wayte for the.

The rrir. Chapter. 

NUT so wil shewe mercy, let him lende 

vnto his ^neghboure: and he that is able, let him kepe the commaundement.
Lende vnto thy neghboure in tyme of his nede, and paye thou thy neghboure agayne in due season. Kepe thy worde, q deale faith- fully with him, ¢ thou shalt allwaye fynde the thinge y is necessary for the. “There haue bene many, that whan a thinge was lent them, rekened it to be founde: and made them trauayle and laboure, that had helped them.
Whyle they receaue eny thinge, they kysse the handes of soch as geue them, and for their neghbours good they hüble their voyce. But whau they shulde paye agayue they kepe it back, and geue euell wordes, and make many excuses by reason of the tyme: q though he be able, yet geueth he scarse the half agayne, and rekeneth y other to be founde. And yf he witholde not his moneye, yet hath he an enemye of him, and that vndeserued.

He payeth him with cursinge and rebuke and geueth him euel wordes for his good dede. There be many one which are not glad for to lende, not because of euell, but they feare to lese the thinge that they lende.
Yet haue thou pacience with the symple, and withholde not mercy from him. Helpe the poore for the commaundementes sake, and let him not go emptye from the because of his necessite. Lese thy money for thy brother and neghbours sake, and burye it not vnder a stone, wher it rusteth and corruppeth. Gather thy "treasure after the commaundement of ¥
Hyest, and so shal it bringe the more profit the golde. Laye vp the allmes in the hande

* Math. 6. c. Luc. 12, d. 1 Tim. 6. d. 

fo. trí. | 

Fo. eri. 

of the poore, and it shal kepe the from all euell^ (A mans allmes is asa purse with him, aud shall kepe a mans fauoure as the apple of an eye: and afterwarde shall it aryse, q paye euery man his rewarde vpon his heade.) — It shal fight for the agaynst thine enemies, bet- ter then the shylde of a giaunte, or speare of the mightie. .

A good honest mā is suertye for his negh- boure, but a wicked personne letteth him come to shame. Forget not the frendshipe of thy suertye, for he hath geué his soule for y.
The vngodly despyseth y good dede of his suertye, q the vnthanktull and ignoraunt leaueth his suertie in daunger. (Some man promyseth for his neghboure: ¢ whan he hath lost his honesty, he shal forsake him.) Suer- tishipe hath destroyed many a ryche man, at remoued them as the wawes in y see.
Mightie people hath it dryuen awaye, and caused the to wandre in straunge countrees.
Au vngodly man transgressynge the com- maundement of the LORDE, shal fall in to an euell suertishipe: and though he force himself to get out, yet shal he fall in to iudg- ment. Helpe thy neghboure out after thy

power, and bewarre, y thou thy self fall not 

in soch dett. * The chefe thinge that kepeth in the life, is water and bred, clothinge and lodginge, to couer the shame.

Ð| Better is it to haue a poore lyuynge in a 

mans owne house, the delicate fayre amoge the straunge. ^Be it litle or moch y thou hast, holde the contet withall (x thou shalt not be blamed as a vagabounde:) for a myserable life is it, to go from house to house: and where a mà is fremde, he darre not opé his mouth. ‘Though one be lodged, and haue meate and drynke, yet shall he be taken as vnworthy, q heare many bytter rough wordes, namely thus: Go thy waye thou straunger, and prepare a table (for thy self) and fede me also of that thou hast. Awaye thou straunger (so, that he regardeth his honoure nomore) my brother commeth in to my house, q so he telleth him the necessite of his house. These thinges are heuy to a man that hath vnderstandinge: namely, the for- byddinge of y house, x that the leder casteth him in the teth.

Luc. 11.d. — Act. 10. a. Tob. 4. b. 

* Psal. 36. b. 41 Tim. 6. b. 
* Pro. 13. c. and 23, b. 4 Deut. 6. a. 

Erelestasticus. 

The rrr. Chapter. 

HO so loueth his childe, holdeth him 

still vnder correccion,’ that he maye haue ioye of him afterwarde (and that he grope not after his neghbours dores.) /He y teacheth his sonne, shall haue ioye in him, q nede not be ashamed of him amoge his aquantaice. Who so enfourmed q teacheth his sonne, greueth $ enemie, and before his frendes he maye haue ioye of him. ‘Though the father dye, yet is he as though he were not deed: for he hath left one behynde him that is like him. In his life he sawe him, q had ioye in him, q was not sory in his death,
(nether was he ashamed before $ enemies.) 
For he left behinde him an auenger agaynst his enemies, and a good doer vnto the frendes.
For the life of childré he shal binde the woundes together, and his hert is greued at euery crye. An vntamed horse wylbe harde, and a wanton childe wylbe wylfull. Yf thou brynge vp thy sonne delicatly, he shal make j afrayed: and yf thou playe with him, he shal brynge the to heuynes. Laugh not with him, lest thou wepe with him also, and lest thy teth be sett on edge at the last.

Geue him not liberte in his youth, q excuse |i not his foly^ Bow downe his neck whyle he is yonge, hytt him vpon the sydes whyle he is yet but a childe, lest he waxe stubburne, q geue no more force of ¥ (and so shalt thou haue heuynes of soule.) ‘Teach thy childe, a be diligét therin, lest it be to thy shame.
Better is the poore beynge whole q stronge, thé a man to be riche, q not to haue his health. Health and welfare is aboue all golde, and an whole body aboue all treasure.
There is no riches aboue a sounde body, a no loye aboue the ioye of the hert. Death is better then a wretched life, or contynuall sicknes. The good thinges y are put in a close mouth, are like as whan meate is layed vpon $ graue.

What good doth the offeringe vnto an Idoll ? 
For he can nether eate, taist ner smell^ Eue so is it also with the riche, whom God maketh seke: he seith it with his eyes, x groneth ther- after, and is euen as a gelded man, that lyeth with a vyrgin and sygheth. ‘Geue not ouer

è Bel. a. 
Ecchi. 38. c. 

£ Eccli. 7. c. * Pro. 12. d. 15. b. 17. d. 

Pro. 14. d. 

Chap. riri. thy mynde in to heuynes, « vexe not thy self in thine owne councell ‘The ioye q chear- fulnes of the hert is the life of man, and a mans gladnes is the prolonginge of his dayes.
Loue thine owne soule, and comforte thine hert: as for sorow and heuynes, dryue it farre from y," for heuynes hath slayne many a man, and bryngeth no profit. Zele and anger shorten the dayes of the life: carefulnes and sorow brynge age before the tyme. Vnto a mery hert euery thinge hath a good taist, that he eateth.

The mpi. Chapter. 

RAUAYLE and carefulnes for riches 

taketh awaye the slepe, and ’maketh the flesh to cosume. Whan one lyeth and taketh care, he waketh euer vp, like as greate sicknes breaketh the slepe. The rich hath greate laboure in gatheringe his riches to- gether, and then with the pleasure of his riches he taketh his rest q is refreshed. But who so laboureth and prospereth not, he is poore: and though he leaue of, yet is he a begger. He that loueth riches, shall not be iustified: and who so foloweth corrupcio, shal haue ynough therof. “Many one are come in greate mysfortune by the reason of golde, q haue founde their destruccion before them.
It is a tre of fallynge vnto them that offre it vp, and all soch as be foolish fall therin.
Blessed is the rich, which is founde without blemysh, aud hath not gone after golde, ner hoped in money and treasures. Where is there soch one? and we shal commende him, and call*him blessed, for greate thinges doth he amonge his people. Who so is tryed, ¢ founde perfecte in soch thinges, shalbe com- mended and praised. Who might offende, a hath not offended? Who coude do euell, and hath not done it? ‘Therfore shal his good be stablished, and the whole congregacion shal declare his allmesses. Yf thou sytt at a greate mans table, open not thy mouth wyde vpon it, and make not many wordes. Re- membre, that an enell eye is a shrew.

What thinge created is worse then a wicked eye? therfore wepeth it before euery mas face? Laye not thine hand vpon euery thinge that thine eye seyth, and stryue not with him in the dyshe.^ Ponder by thy self what thy

? 1 Tim. 6. b. 
* Eccli. 37. d. 

* Eccli. 8. a. f Rom. 12. b.

a 9 Cor. 7. b. 
4 Matt. 7. 8. 

Erciesiasticus. 

Fo. crit. neghboure wolde fayne haue, q be descrete in enery poynte. Eate the thinge that is set before the, manerly, as it becommeth a man : and eate not to moch,’ lest thou be abhorred.
Leaue thou of first of all because of nurtoure, lest thou be he whom no man maye satisfie, which maye turne to thy decaye. Wha thou syttest amonge many men, reach not thine hade out first of all. O how well contét is a wyse man with a litle wyne? so y in slepe thou shalt not be seke therof, ner fele eny payne. A swete wholsome slepe shal soch one haue, and fele no inwarde grefe. He ryseth vp by tymes in y mornynge, and is well at ease in him self. But an vnsaciable eater slepeth vnquyetly, and hath ache and payne of the body. Yf thou felest that thou hast eaten to moch, aryse, go thy waye, cast it of thy stomach, and take thy rest.

My sonne, heare me, and despyse me not :|£ and at the last thou shalt fynde as I haue told the. ‘In all thy workes be diligent and quycke, so shal there no sicknes happen vnto the. Who so is liberall in dealynge out his meate, many men shall blesse him and prayse him with their lippes: and the same is a sure token of his lone and faithfulnes. But he y is vnfaithfull in meate, the whole cite Sal complayne of him: and that is a sure ex- periece of his infidelite and wickednes. ^Be not thou a wine bebber, for wyne hath destroyed many a man. The fyre proueth y hard yron, euen so doth wyne proue the hertes of the proude, whan they be droncken.

Wyne soberly droncken, quyckeneth the life|33 of mā’ Yf thou drynckest it measurably, thou shalt be temperate. What life is it, y maye contynue withont wyne? Wyne was made from the begynnynge to make men glad (and not for dronkennes.) Wyne mea- surably dronké is a reioysinge of the soule and body. But yf it be dronken with excesse, it maketh bytternes and sorowe vnto the mynde. Dronkénes fylleth the mynde of the foolish with shame and ruyne, mynisheth the strégth, and maketh woundes. * Rebuke not thy neghboure at y wyne; and despyse him not in his myrth. Geue him no despytefull wordes, and preasse not vpon him with con- trary sayenges.

€ Pro. 22. a. ^ Ephe. 5. b. ludit. 13, a. * Paal, 103. b. 
Pro.31.a. 1 Tim. 5. c. * Eccli. 20. a. 

| d'a. erib. 

The rrrij. Chapter. a F thou be made a ruler, pride not thy self therin,” but be thon as one of the eople. Take diligent care for them, and tke well therto: and whan thou hast done all thy dewtye, syt the downe, that thou mayest be mery with them, and receaue a crowne of honoure. Talke wysely « honestly, for wyszdome becommeth the right well.
Hynder not musyck. Speake not, where there is no audyence: ‘and poure not forth wyszdome out of tyme, at an importunyte.
Like as the Carbuncle stone shyneth, that is set in golde, so doth a songe garnysh the wyne feast: and as y Smaragde that is set in golde, so is the swetnes of Musyck by y myrth of wyne.

'Thou yonge mà, speake that becommeth the, q that is profitable, and yet scarse whan thou art twyce axed. Comprehende moch with few wordes. In many thinges be as one that is ignoraunt, geue eare, and holde thy tonge withall. Yf thou be amonge men of hyer auctorite, desyre not to compare thy self vnto them: and wha an elder speaketh, make not thou many wordes therin. Before the thonder goeth lightenynge, and before nur- toure and shamefastnesse goeth loue and fauoure. Stode vp by tymes, and be not the last: but get the home soone, q there take thy pastyme, « do what thou wilt: so y thou do no euell, and defye no ma. But for all thinges geue thankes, vnto him that hath made the, and replenished the with his goodes.

Who so feareth the LORDE, wyl receaue his doctryne: and they that get them to him by tymes, shall fynde grace. He that seketh the lawe, shall be fylled withall: As for him js but fayned, he wyll be offended therat.

ey that feare the LORDE, shal fynde the iudgment, q their righteousnes shalbe kyndled asalight. An vngodly man will not be re- fourmed, but can helpe himself with the example of other in his purpose. A man of vnderstondinge despyseth no good councell: but a wylde and proude body hath no feare.
My sonne, do nothinge without advisement, so shal it not repet the after y dede. Go not in the waye where thou mayest fall, ner

? Deut. 17. d. 
* Rom. 9. c. 

* Rom. 12. b. € Eccls. 3. a, Eccli. 20. a. 
* Some reade: two agaynst one. 

Erclestastirus, 

Geue not thy self in to a laborious slypery waye, and bewarre of thine owne children. In all thy workes put thy trust in God from thy whole hert, for that is the kepinge of the comaundementes. Who so beleneth Gods worde, taketh hede to the commaundementes: he that putteth his trust in y LORDE, shal wante nothinge.

The rrriij. Chapter. 

HERE shall no euell happen vnto him 

that feareth God: bnt whan he is in tentacion, the LORDE shall delyuer him. A wyse man hateth not y lawe, but an ypoeryte is as ashyp in a raginge water. A man of vnderstondinge geueth credence vnto the lawe of God, and y lawe is faithfull vnto him. Be sure of the matter, then talke therof: Be first wel instructe, the maiest thou geue answere.
The hert of y foolish is like a cartwhele, and his thoughtes renne aboute like the axell tre.
Like as a wylde horse that neyeth vnder euery one y sytteth vpon him, so is 1t with a scorne- full frende. Why doth one daie excell an- other, seynge all the dayes of the yeare come of the Sonne? The wyszdome of the LORDE hath so parted them a sunder, and so hath he ordened the tymes and solempne feastes.

Some of them hath he chosen and halowed! 

before other dayes. And all men are made of the grounde, q out of the earth of Adam.
In the multitude of scyence hath y LOR DE sundered them, and made their wayes of dyuerse fashions. Some of them hath he blessed, made moch of them, halowed them, q claymed them to himself. But some of thé hath he cursed, brought thé lowe, œ put the out of their estate. “Like as y claye is in the potters hande, ¢ all the ordrynge therof at his pleasure: soare men also in the hande of him y made thé, so that he maye geue them as it iketh him best. Agaynst euell is good, and agaynst death is life: so is the vngodly agaynst soch as feare God. Beholde thus all the workes of the Hyest, « there are euer *two agaynst two, and one set agaynst another. I am awaked vp last of all, as one that gathereth after in haruest. In the giftes of God and in his blessynge I am increased, q haue fylled my wyne presse, like a grape gatherer. “Beholde,

* Ecclesiastici 24, d. 

Chap. rrritj. 

‘where thou mayest stomble against the stone. 

5 

Chap. rrritij. 

Ecclestasticus. 

how I haue not laboured onely for my self, but 

for all soch as loue nurtoure and wyszdome. 
C| Heare me O ye greate men of the people, 

q harken with youre eares ye rulers of y con- 

gregacion. Geue not thy sonne q wyte, thy brother q frende power ouer the, whyle thou lyuest: q geue not awaye thy substaunce and good to another, lest it repent the, q thou be fayne to begg therfore en self. As longe as thou lyuest q hast breth, let no man chaunge the: For betteritis thy children to praye the, then y thou shuldest be fayne to loke in their handes. In all thy workes be excellent, that thy honoure be neuer stained. At the tyme whan thou shalt ende thy dayes, and fynish thy life, distribute thine inheretauce. The fodder, the whyppe, and the burden belongeth vnto the Asse: Meate, correccion, and worke vnto the seruaunt.

B| Yf thou set thy seruaunt to laboure, thou shalt fynde rest. But yf thou let him go ydel, he shal seke libertye. ‘The yock and y whyppe bowe downe the neck, but tame thou thy euell seruaunt with bodes q correccion.
Sende him to laboure, that he go not ydle: 
For Idylnesse bryngeth moch euell Sett him to worke, for that belongeth vnto him and becometh him well. Yf he be not obedient, bynde his fete: but do not to moch vnío him in anye wyse, q without discrecion do nothinge. “Yf thou haue a (faithfull) seruaüt, let him be vnto the as thine owne soule, for in bloude hast thou gotten him. Yf thou haue a seruaunt, holde him as thy self, for thou hast nede of him as of thy self. Yf thou intreatest him euell, aud kepest him harde, and makest him to be proude, and to renne awaye from f, thou canst not tell, what waye thou shalt seke him.

The rrrütj. Chapter. 

a MM people begyle them selues with vayne and disceatfull hope, and fooles

trust in dreames. Who so regardeth dreames, 

is like him that wil take holde of a shadowe, and folowe after the wynde: Euen so is it with the appearinges of dreames. Before the face

is the licknes of a face. Who can be clensed of $ vncleane? Or what treuth can be spoken of a lyar? Soythsayenge, witchcraft, sorcery, and dreaminge is but vanyte: like as whan a woma trauayleth with chylde, and hath many

* Deu. 24. c. 

* Eccli. 7. c. è Pro. 15. a. 

fantasyes in hir herte. Where as soch visions come not of God, set not thine herte vpon them: For dreames haue disceaued many a mā, and they fayled, that put their truste therin.

The lawe shalbe fulfilled without lyes, q| 3 wyszdome is sufficient to a faithfull mouth.
A wyse man y is well instructe, vnderstondeth moch: q he y hath good experiéce, can talke of wyszdome. He y hath no experiéce, knoweth litle: q he y erreth, causeth moch wickednes. Whan I was yet in erroure, I lerned moch also: yee I was so lerned, that I coude not expresse it all, and came oft in parell of death therouer, tyll I was delyuered from it. Now I se, that they which feare
God, haue the right sprete: for their hope stodeth in him, that can helpe thé. Who so feareth the LORDE, stodeth in awe of no man, and is not afrayed, for the LORDE is his hope and comforte. ,

Blessed is the soule of him y feareth the! ¢ 
LORDE: In who putteth he his trust? who is his stregth? For the eyes of the LORDE haue respecte vnto them, that loue him. He is their mightie proteccion, q stroge grounde:
A defence for the heate, a refuge for the hote noone daye, a sucore for stomblynge, q an helpe for fallynge. He setteth vp the soule, and lighteneth y eyes: He geueth health life, and blessynge. He that geueth an offeringe of vnrighteous good, his offerynge is refused: and the scornefull dealinges of the vnrighteous please not God. ^God hath no delyte in the offerynges of y vngodly, nether maye synne be reconcyled iu the multitude of oblacions.
Who so bryngeth an offerynge out of y goodes of ¥ poore, doth eué as one y kylleth ý sonne before ¥ fathers eyes.

The bred of the nedefull is the life of the poore: he y defraudeth him therof, is a man, of bloude. Who so robbeth his neghboure of his lyuinge, doth as greate synne as though he slew him to death. ‘He that defraudeth y laborer of his hyre, is a bloude shedder. Wha one buyldeth, and another breaketh downe, what profit haue they then but laboure?
Whan one prayeth, ¢ another curseth, whose voyce wyl the LORDE heare? ^He that washeth himself because of a deed body, q then toucheth the deed agayne, what doth his waszshinge ? ‘So is it with a man that fasteth

n 

Eccli. 7. c. 4 Nu. 19. b. * Pro. 26. b. 2 Pet. 2. b. 

Fo. erbi, 

for his synnes, and doth them agayne: who wil heare his prayer? Or what doth his fast- ynge helpe him?

The yryb.. Chapter. 
HO so kepeth the lawe, bryngeth of- ferynges ynough. “He that holdeth fast the commaundement, offreth the right healthoffrynge. He, y is thankfull q recom- penseth, offreth fyne floure. * Who so is mer- cifull q geueth allmes, y is the right thank offrynge. God hath pleasure, wha one de- parteth fro synne: qto forsake vnrighteousnes recocileth vs with him. Thou shalt not appeare emptye before ý LORDE, for“all soch is done because of y cOmaundemét. The offeringe of y righteous maketh y aulter fatt, a a swete smell is it before ¥ Hyest. “The offerynge of the righteous is acceptable vnto
God, and shal neuer be forgotté. Geue God his honoure with a chearfull eye, q kepe not backe the firstlinges of thy handes. In all thy giftes shew a mery countenaunce, q‘ halowe thy tithes vnto God with gladnes. /Geue vnto
God, acordinge as he hath enriched q pros- pered the: q loke what thine hande is able, y geue with a chearfull eye: for the LORDÉ recompenseth, q geueth y seué tymes as moch againe.

Geue no vnrighteous giftes, for soch wil not hereceaue. Bewarre of wrongeous offeringes, for ý LORDE is “a righteous iudge, q re- guo no mans personne: He accepteth not the personne of the poore, but he heareth y prayer of Y oppressed. “He despyseth not ý desyre of y fatherles, ner ý wyddow, whan she poureth out hir prayer before him. Doth not
God se $ teares, y renne downe y chekes of the wyddow? Or heareth he not the com- playnte, ouer soch as make her to wepe? Who so serueth God after his pleasure, shalbe ac- cepted, q his prayer reacheth vnto the cloudes.
‘The prayer of him y humbleth himself, goeth thorow y cloudes, tyll she come nye. She wyl not be comforted, ner go hir waye, tyll y hyest God haue respecte vnto her, geue true sentéce, q perfourme y iudgmét. And y
LORDE wil not be slack in cOmynge, ner tary longe: tyll he haue smytté in sonder y backes of ý vnmercyfull, q anenged himself of y Heithen: tyll he haue take awaye y multi-

? lere. 7. c. d Gen, 4. a.

è Heb. 13, c. e 2 Cor. 9. b.

Phil. 4. c. f Tobi. 4. b.

* Exo. 34. c. 
£ Deut. 10. d. 

Grclesiasticns. 

Chap. rrrb. tude of ý cruell, q broke the cepter of the vn- righteous: tyll he geue euery man after his workes, q rewarde them as they haue deserued: tyll he haue delyuered his people, mayntened their cause, and reioysed them in his mercy.
O how fayre a thinge is mercy, in the tyme of anguysh¢ trouble? Itis like a cloude of rayne, y cometh in ý tyme of a drouth.

The rrrbi. Chapter. 

AUE mercy vpon vs O LORDE, thou 
God of all thinges. Haue respecte vnto vs (shew vs the light of thy mercies, a sende thy feare amoge y Heithé q straügers, which seke not after the: y they maye knowe, how y there 1s no God but thou, and y they maye shew thy wonderous workes.) Lift vp thine hande ouer the outladish Heithen, y they maye lerne to knowe thy might q power.
Like as thou art. halowed in vs before them, so brynge to passe, y thou mayest be magni- fied also in them before vs: y they maye knowe the, like as we knowe the. For there is none other God, but onely thou O LORDE.
Renue the tokens, q chaunge the wonderous workes. Shewe thine hade and thy right arme gloriously. Hayse thy indignacion, q poure out thy wrath. Take awaye the ad- uersary, q smyte the enemye. Make y tyme shorte, remembre thy couenaunt, that thy wonderous workes maye be praysed. Let the wrath of the fyre consume them, that lyue so careles: and let them perish, that do thy
| people hurte. Smyte in sonder the heade of the prynces, that be oure enemies, and saye:

there 1s none other but we. 
Gather all y trybes of Iacob together againe, 
ý they maie knowe, how ý there is none other God but onely thou, y they maie shew thy wonderous workes, and be thy people q heretage, like as from the begynninge. O
LORDE haue mercy vpon the people y hath thy name,’ q vpo Israel, whom thou hast lick- ened to a first borne sonne. O be merciful vnto lerusale the cite of thy Sanctuary, y cite of thy rest. ' Fyll Sion with thy vnspeake able vertues, q thy people with thy glory.
Geue wytnes vnto thy creature, whom thou maydest from the begynnynge, and rayse vp the prophecies y haue bene shewed in thy name. Rewarde them y wayte for the, y

4 Judit. 4. b. Exo. 3. b. k Exo. 4. f.

' Tren. 3. d. Acto. 10. a. ipearoupe

| 

Chap. rrrbtj. Ecclestasticus. 

€ 

thy prophetes maye be founde faithfull. O 
LORDE heare the prayer of thy seruauntes, acordinge to y blessinge of Aaron ouer thy people: ^that all they which dwell vpon earth, maye knowe, that thou art the LORDE the eternall God, which is from euerlastinge.
The bely deuoureth all meates, yet is one meate better then another. Like as the tonge taisteth venyson,^ so doth an hert of vnder- stondinge marck false wordes. A frowarde hert geueth heuynes, but a man of experience lifteth him vp agayne. The woman receaueth euery man, yet is one daughter better then another. A fayre wife reioyseth hir husz- bande, and a man loueth nothinge better. Yf she be louynge q vertuous withall, then is not hir huszbande like other men. He that hath gotten a vertuous woman, hath a goodly pos- session: she is vnto him an helpe and piler wher vpon he resteth. "Where no hedge is, there the goodes are spoyled: and where no houszwife is, there y frédles mourneth. Like as there is no credence geuen to a robber, y goeth from one cite to another: So is not y man beleued, that hath no nest, and must turne in, where he maye abyde in the night.

The rrrotj. Chapter. 

a Ins frende sayeth: I wil be frendly 

vnto him also. But there is some frende, which is onely a frende in name. Remayneth there not heuynes vnto death, whan a com- panyon and frende is turned to an enemye?
O most wicked presumpcion: Fro whence art thou spronge vp, to couer the earth with falsede q disceate? “There is somecompanyon, which in prosperite reioyseth with his frede: but in the tyme of trouble, he taketh parte agaynst him. There is some copanyon, that mourneth with his frende for the bely sake: but whan trouble commeth, he taketh holde| of the shylde. Forget not thy frende in thy mynde, q thynke vpon him in thy riches.
Euery counceler bryngeth forth his councell : 
Neuertheles there is some, y counceleth but for his owne profit. * Bewarre of ý counceler, t be aduysed afore wherto thou wilt vse him, for he wil geue coücell for him self. Lest he cast the lott vpon the, q saye vnto the: Thy waye and purpose is good, and afterwarde he stande agaynst the, and loke what shal be- come of the.

7 Num. 6. d. b 1 Cor. 2. b. * Eccli. 6. b. 

Fo. erbij, 

Axe no coŭcell at him, ý suspecketh $ for] 3! an enemie, q hyde thy councell from soch as hate y. Axe no councell at a woman, có- cemynge y thinges y she logeth for: ner at a fearful q fayntharted body, in matters of warre: or at a marchaunt, how deare he wil cheape thy wares towarde his: or at a byer, of sellynge: Or at an envyous man, of thankesgeuynge: Or at the vnmercifull, of louynge kindnes: Or at y slouthfull, of work- inge: Or at an hyrelynge which hath no house, of profit or wealth. (An ydle body wolde not gladly heare speake of moch la- boure.) Take no soch folkes to coitcell, but be diliget to seke coücel at a vertuous man, y feareth God, soch one as thou knowest to be a keper of y cOmaundemétes, which hath a minde after thine owne minde, q is sory for y wha thou stoblest.

And holde thy councell fast in thine hert :| € for there is no man more faithful to kepe it, then thou thy self. For a màs mynde is som- tyme more disposed to tell out, then seuen watchmen that sytt aboue in an hye place lokynge aboute them. And aboue all this praye the Hyest, that he wil lede thy waye in faithfulnes q trueth. Before all thy workes axe councell first: and or euer thou doest eny thinge, be well aduysed. There be foure thinges that declare a chaunged hert, wherout

‘there springeth euell ¢ good, death q life, qa 

masterfull tonge that bableth moch. Some man is apte and well instructe in many thinges, and yet very vnprofitable vnto him- self. Some man there is, that can geue wyse and prudent councell, and yet is he hated, a contynueth a begger: for that grace is not geue him of God, to be accepted. Another is robbed of all wiszdome, yet is he wise vnto himself, and the frute of vnderstodinge is faithfull in his mouth.

A wyse man maketh his people wyse, a ¥|B frutes of his wiszdome fayle not. A wyse ma shal be pléteously blessed of God: q all they that se him, shal speake good of him. The life of man stondeth in y nobre of the dayes, but the dayes of Israel are innumerable. A wyse man shal opteyne faithfulnes q credence amonge his people, q his name shalbe per- petuall. My sonne, proue thy soule in thy life: q yf thou se eny euell thinge, gene it not: vnto her. * For all thinges are not profitable

4 Eccli. 8. c. and 9, c. * 1 Cor. 6. c. and 10. c. 

LI us ee NM Nou C ec ee tct 

ffo. eroii. 

e 

for all men, nether hath euery soule pleasure in euery thinge. Be not gredy in euery eat- ynge, and be uot to haistye vpo all meates.
Vor “excesse of meates bryngeth siknes, and glotony commeth at the last to an vnmea- surable heate. Thorow glotony haue many one perished: but he that dyeteth him self temperatly, prolongeth his life.

The rrrbiij. Chapter. 

ONOURE the Phisician: hononre him because of necessite. God hath cre- ated him (for of the Hyest commeth mede- cyne) and he shal receaue giftes of the kynge.
'The wiszdome of the phisician bryngeth him to greate worshipe, ¢ in the sight of the greate men of this worlde, he shalbe honorably taken.
The LORDE hath created medecyne of the earth, and he that is wyse, wyl not abhorre it.
^ Was not y bytter water made swete with a tre? that men might lerne to knowe the vertue therof. The LORDE hath geuen men wyszdome q vnderstondinge, y he might be honoured in his woderous workes. With soch doth he heale men, q taketh awaye their paynes: Of soch doth the Apotecary make a confeccion, yet can no man perfourme all his workes For of y LORDE commeth pros-

perous wealth ouer all y earth. 

My sonne, despyse not this in thy sicknes: but praye vnto the LORDE; « he shal make the whole. Leaue of from synne, « ordre thy handes a right: clése thine hert from all wickednes. Gene a swete sauoured offrynge, t ¥ fyne floure for a token of remembraunce: make the offrynge fatt, as one that geueth the first frutes, q geue rowme to the Phisician.
For ý LORDE hath created him: let him not go from the, for thou hast nede of him.
The houre maye come, y the seke maye be helped thorow them, whan they praye vnto y
LORDE, y he maie recouer, ¢ get health to lyue loger. He that synneth before his maker, shall fall in to the handes of the Phisician.

My sonne, brynge forth thy teares ouer the deed: and ^begynne to mourne, as yf thou haddest suffred greate harme thy ae q the couer his body after a conuenyent maner, q despyse not his buryall. Enforce thy self to wepe, q prouoke thy self to mourne, « make lamentacion expediently,’ and ý a daye or two,

a Eccli. 31. b. ^ Exo. 15. d. 4 Re. 4. c. 
É Esa. 38. a. 2 Par.16.c. 4 Eccli. 22. c. * 1 Thes. 4. b. 

Grrlesiasticus, 

| 

Chap. rrrbiij. lest thou be euell spoken of: q then cóforte thy self because of the heuynes. For of he- uynes cometh death,” the heuynes of $ hert breaketh strength. Heuynes and pouerte greneth the hert in tentacion q offence. Take no heuynes to hert, dryue it awaye, and re- membre the last thinges. Forget it not, for there is no turnynge agayne. ‘Thou shalt do him no good, but hurte thy self. Remembre his iudgmét, thine also shalbe likewyse: vnto me yesterdaye, vnto the to daye. Let the remembraunce of the deed ceasse in his rest, and coforte thy self agayne ouer him,’ seynge his sprete is departed from him.

The wyszdome of the serybe is at coue- nyent tyme of rest: q he y ceasseth from ex- ercyse q laboure, shalbe wyse. He that hold- eth y plough, q hath pleasure in proddynge q dryuynge y oxen, q goeth aboute with soch workes, he can speake of oxen. He setteth his hert to make forowes, q is diligent to geue y kyne fodder. So is euery carpenter also q work master, that laboureth still night q daye: he carueth, graueth q cutteth out, q his desyre is in sondrye connynge thinges, and his hert ymagineth, how he maye conyngly cast an ymage, his diligence also q watchinge per- fourmeth the worke. The yronsmyth in like maner bydeth by his stythie, v doth his dili- gence to laboure the yron. The vapoure of the fyre brenneth his flesh, and he must fight with the heate of the fornace. ‘The noyse of the Hammer soundeth euer in his eares, and his eyes loke still vpon the thinge y he maketh.
He hath set his minde there vpon, that he wyll make out his worke, and therfore he watcheth, how he maie set it out, and brynge it to an ende.

So deth the potter syt by his worke, he turneth $ whele aboute with his fete, he is diligent q carefull in all his doynges, q his laboure and worke is without nombre. He fashioneth the claye with his arme, and with his fete he tépereth it. His hert ymagineth how he maye make it pleasaunt, q his dili- gence is to clense the ouen. All these hope in their hades, q euery one thinketh to be connynge in his worke. Without these maye not the cities be manteyned, inhabited ner occupied: yet come they not hye in the congregacion : they vnderstande not the coue-

f Pro. 12. d. and 17. d. Eccli, 30. c. 6 2 Re. 12. c. 

(Chap. rrrit. 

naunt of ¥ lawe : they can not declare equyte | 

q iudgment: they can not fynde out the darck sentéces: but thorow them shal the creature of y worlde be manteyned: their prayer concerneth onely the worke q laboure of coninge.

The rrrir. Chapter. 

UT he y applyeth his mynde to vnder- stande the lawe of God, doth diligently seke out $ wyszdome of them of the olde tyme, q exercyseth him self in the prophetes.
He kepeth y sayenges of famous men, and preasseth to the vnderstandinge of darck sentéces of wyszdome. He seketh out jy mysterye of secrete sayéges, and exercyset him self therin cotynually. He doth seruyce amonge greate men, q appeareth before the rynce. He goeth in to a straunge countre, q trauaileth thorow it: loke what good or euell is amdge men, he proueth it q seketh it out.
He purposeth in his hert, to resorte early vnto the LORDE y made him, q to praye before the hyest God. He openeth his mouth in prayer, ¢ prayeth for his synnes.
When the greate LORDE wil, he shalbe filled with the sprete of vnderstadinge, y he maie then poure out wyse sentences, v geue thankes vnto the LORDE in his prayer. He shal ordre his deuyce, and lede his knowlege aright, q geue him vnderstandinge of secrete thinges. He shal shew forth the sciéce of his lerninge, q reioyce in the couenaunt of the lawe of the LORDE. The whole congre- gacion shal comende his wyszdome, ç it shal neuer be put out. The remembraunce of him shal neuer be forgotten, q his name shal contynue from one ^generacion to another.
His wyszdome shalbe spoken of, q the whole congregacion shall openly declare his prayse.
Whyle he liueth, he hath a greater name the a thousande besyde: q after his death, the same name remayneth vnto him. Yet wyll I speake of mo men of vnderstandinge, for I am full as the Moone.
€| Herké vnto me (ye holy vertuous childré) brynge forth frute, as the rose that is planted by the brokes of the felde, and geue ye a swete smell as Libanus. Florish as the rose garden, synge a songe of prayse. O geue thakes

a Eccli. 44. b. * Gen. 1. d. * Gen. 7. d. 

Rom. 8. d. 

4 Ose. 14. b. 

Errlestasticus. 

vnto God ouer all his workes. Geue glory and honoure vnto the LORDE, shew his prayse with youre lippes. Yee euen with the songe of youre lippes, with harpes q play- enge, and in geuinge thankes vnto him, saye after this maner: ^ All $ workes of the LORDE are exceadinge good, and all his commaun- dementes are mete and convenient in due season.

A mā nede not to saie: what is y? what is that ? for at time ^conuenient they shal all be sought. At his comaundement y water was as a wall, q at the worde of his mouth y wa- ters stode still, In his commaundement is euery thinge acceptable and reconcyled, and his health can not be minished. The workes of all flesh are before him, q there is nothinge hydd from his eyes. He seith from euerlast- inge to euerlastinge, and there is nothinge to wonderfull or hye vnto him. A man nede not to saye then, what is this, or that? For he hath made all thinges to do good vnto man. His blessynge shall renne ouer as the streame, and moysture the earth like a floude of water. Like as he maketh the water for drouth, so shall his wrath fall vpon the
Heithen. 

d His wayes are playne and right vnto y iust, but the vngodly stomble at them. For the good are good thinges created from the begynnynge, and euell thinges for the vngodly.
Allthinges necessary for the life of man are created from the begynnynge: ‘water, fyre, yron and salt, meel, wheate and hony mylke and wyne, oyle and clothinge. All these thinges are created for the best to the faithfull:
But to the vngodly shal all these thinges be turned to hurte and harme. There be spretes that are created for vengeaüce, and in their rigorousnes haue ‘they fastened their tor- mentes. In the tyme of the ende they sha} poure ont their strégth, and pacifie y ‘wrath of him that made them. Fyre, hayle, honger and death: all these thinges are created for vengeaunce.

The teth of wylde noysome beestes, the scorpions, serpentes, and the swerde are created also for vengeaunce, to the destruc- cion of the vngodly. They shall be glad to do his commaundementes : and whan nede is, they shalbe ready vpon earth: and whan their

1 Ti. 4. a. 
£ Eccli. 40. b. 

© Eccli. 29. c. f Matt. 25, d. 

So. erir. 

Fo. ar. houre is come, they shal not ouerpasse the commaundement of the LORDE.

Therfore haue I taken a good corage vnto me from the begynnyuge, and thought to put these thinges in wrytiuge, aud to leaue the behynde me. * All y workes of the LORDE are good, and he geueth euery one in due season, and whan nede is, So that a man nede not to saye: this is worse then that. For in due season they are all pleasaunt and good: And therfore prayse the LORDE with whole hert and mouth, q geue thankes vnto his name.

The rl. Chapter. 

GREATE trauayle is created for all 

mé, and an heuy yock vpon all mens children, from the daye that they go out of their mothers wombe, tyll they be buried in
(the earth) the mother of all thinges: namely, their thoughtes and ymaginacions, feare of the hert, councell, meditacions, longinge and desyre, the daye of death: from the hyest that sytteth vpon the glorious seate, vnto the lowest and most symple vpon the earth: from him that is gorgiously arayed, and weereth a crowne, vutyll him that is but homely and symple clothed. There is nothinge but wrath, zele, fearfulnes, vnquietnes, and feare of death, rigorous anger and stryfe. And in the night whan one shulde rest and slepe vpon his bedd, the slepe chaungeth his vnder- standinge and knowlege. A litle as nothinge is his rest, in y slepe as well as in the daye of laboure.

He feareth and is disquyted iu the vision of his hert, as one that renneth out of a bat- tayll: and in the tyme of health he awaketh, and marueleth that the feare was nothinge.
Soch thinges happen vnto all flesh, both man and best: but seuenfolde to the vngodly.
Morouer death, bloudsheddinge, strife q swerde, oppression, honger, destruccion and
*punyshment: these thinges are all created agaynst the vngodly, and for their sakes came the floude also. All that is of the earth, shal turne to earth agayne: and all waters ebb agayne in to the see. All brybes and vn- righteousnes shalbe put awaye, but faithfulnes

and trueth shal endure for euer. The sub- a Gen. 1. d + Eccli. 39. c. Gen. 7. d. Gen. 3. d.
| Eccli. 41. b. € Eccli. 41. b. 

Erelestasticus, 

Chap. rl. staunce and goodes of ¥ vngodly shalbe dried vp and syncke awaye as a water floude, and they shall make a sounde like a greate thon- der in the rayne.

Like as the righteous reioyseth whan he openeth his hande, so shall the trasgressours be faynte, whan their goodes vanysh and con- sume awaye. “The children of the vngodly shal not optayne many braunches: and vncleane rotes vpo the hye rockes shalbe roted out before the gras by the water syde ¢ vpon the ryuer bankes.

Frendlynes and liberalite in the increase and blessynge of God, is like a paradise q garden of pleasure: soch mercy also q kindnes endureth for euer. “To laboure q to be con- tent with that a man hath, is a swete plea- saunt life: q that is to fynde a treasure aboue all treasures. To beget children and to repayre the cite, maketh a perpetuall name: but an honest woman is more worth the they both. Wyne and mynstralsye reioyse the hert, but the loue of wyszdome is aboue them both.

Pypinge and harpinge make a swete noyse, but a frendly tonge goeth beyonde them both.
'Thine eye desyreth fauoure and bewtie but a grene sede tyme rather thé they both. A frende and companyon come together at oportunyte, ‘but aboue them both is a wife that agreeth with hir huszbande. One bro- ther helpeth another in the tyme of trouble, but allmes shal deliuer more then they both.
Golde and syluer fasten the fete, but a good councell is more pleasaunt then they both.
Temporall substaunce and strength lift vp the mynde: but the feare of the LORDE more then they both. The feare of the
LORDE wanteth nothinge, and nedeth no helpe. The feare of y LORDE is as a plea- saunt garde of blessynge, and nothinge so bewtyful as it is. My sonne, lede not a beggers life, for better it were to dye thé to begg. Who so loketh to another mans table, taketh no thonght for his owne lyuynge how to vpholde his life, for he fedeth himself with other mens meate. But a wyse and well nurtonred mau wyll bewarre therof. Beg- gynge is swete in the mouth of the vn- shamefast, but in his bely there burneth a fyre.

11 Tim. 6. b. Phil. 4. b. * Eccli. 25. a. 

INE .... —— ss eee 

Ercelestasticus. 

Chap. rfj. 

The rli. Chapter. 

a DEATH, how bytter is the remem- 

O braunce of the, to a man that seketh rest and comforte in his substaunce and riches, vnto the man that hath nothinge to vexe him, and that hath prosperite in all thinges, yee vnto him that yet is able to receaue meate ?
O death, how acceptable and good is thy iudgment vnto the nedefull, and vnto him whose strength fayleth, q that is now in his last age, and that in all thinges is full of care and fearfulnes; vnto him also that is in dis- payre, and hath no hope ner pacience? Be not thou afrayed of death : remembre them y haue bene before the: and y come after y: this is the iudgmét of y LORDE ouer all flesh. And why woldest thon be agaist this pleasure of $ Hiest? Whether it be ten, an hundreth, or a thousande yeares: death axeth not how longe one haue lyued.

The children of the vngodly are abhomin- able children, and so are they that kepe com- pany with the vngodly. ‘The inheretaunce of vngodly children shall come to naught, ‘and their posterite shal haue perpetuall shame and confucion. The children complayne of an vngodly father: and why? for his sake they are rebuked and despysed. Wo be vnto you (O ye vngodly) which haue forsaké the lawe of ý hyest God: Yf ye be borne, ye shal be borne to cursynge: yf ye dye, y curse shal be yonre porcion.

* All that is of ý earth, shal turne to earth agayne: so go the vngodly also out of y curse in to destruccion. ‘The sorow of men is in their body: but $ name of the vngodly shal be put out, for it is nothinge worth. Laboure to get the a good name, for that “shall con- tynue surer by the, then a thousande greate treasures of golde. A good life hath a nobre of dayes, but a good name endureth euer.

My children, kepe wyszdome in peace: for wiszdome that is hyd and a treasure that is not sene, what profit is in thé both? * A man that hydeth his foolishnes, is better then a man that hydeth his wyszdome. Therfore be ye turned at my wordes: for it is not good, in all thinges and allwaie to be ashamed.
True faith must proue and measure it. 

Be ashamed of whordome before father and mother: Be ashamed of lesynge before

a Gen. 3. ^ Eccli. 40. c. 

* Eccli. 40. b. 

the prynce and men of auctorite: Of synne, before the iudge and ruler: Of offence, before the congregacion and people: Of vnrighte- ousnes, before a companyon and fréde: Of theft, before ý neghbours. As for the trueth of God and his couenaunt,! be not ashamed therof.

Be ashamed to lye with thyne elbowes vpon the bred: Be ashamed to loke vpo harlottes :
Be ashamed to turne awaye thy face from thy frende: Be ashamed to take q not to geue:
Be ashamed also to loke vpon another mans wyfe, and to make many tryflinge wordes with hir mayden, or to stonde by hir bedsyde. Be ashamed to vpbrade thy fréde: and whan thou geuest eny thinge, cast him not in the teth withall.

The rl. Chapter. 

Ii o. not a thinge twyse, and dis- close not the wordes, that thou hast herde in secrete. Be shamefast q well ma- nered in dede, so shall euery man fauoure the. Of these thinges be not thou ashamed, and accepte no personne to offende. Namely, of these thinges be not ashamed: Of the lawe of God, of the couenaunt, of iudgmét : to brynge the vngodly from his vngodlines vnto righteousnes, and to make him a good man: to deale faithfully with neghboure « companyon: to distribute the heretage vnto y frendes: to be diligent to kepe true mea- sure and weight: to be content, whether thou gettest moch or litle: to deale truly with tem- porall goodes in byenge and sellynge: to brynge vp children with diligence: to correcke an euell seruaunt: to kepe that thine is fro an euell wife: to set a lock where many handes are: what thou delyuerest and geuest out to be kepte, to tell it, and to weye it: to wryte vp all the out geuynge and receauynge: to enfourme y vnlerned and vnwyse: Of the aged, that are iudged of the yonge. Yf thou be diliget in these thinges, truly thou shalt be

lerned and wyse and accepted of all men. 
The daughter maketh y father to watch secretly: and the carefulnes that he hath for her, taketh awaye his slepe: yee in the youth, lest she shulde ouergrowe him: And whan she hath an huszbande, lest she shulde be hated: lest she shulde be defyled or rauyshed in hir virginyte, or gotten with childe in hir

4 Eccli. 22. a. * Eccli. 20. d. 

121 

f Rom. 1. b. 

Fo. rri. 

Fo. erri. 

!fath»rs house: Or (whan she commeth to the 

man) lest she behaue herself not right, or contynue vn frutefull Yf thy daughter be wanton,’ kepe her strately, lest she cause thine enemies laugh the to scorne, q the whole cite to geue $ an euell reporte, and so thou be fayne to heare thy shame of euery man, and be confounded before all ¥ people. ^Deholde not euery bodies bewtye, q haue not moch dwellynge amouge wemen. For like as the worme and moth commeth out of clothinge,
*so doth wickednes come of wemen. 

It is better to be with an euell man, then with a frendly wife ý putteth one to shame and rebuke. I wyl remembre the workes of the LORDE, and declare the thinge y I haue sene. In ý wordes of y LORDE are his workes. The Séne oust{ehetn all thiges with his shine, q all his workes are full of y clearnes therof. Hath not the LORD brought to passe, that his sayntes shulde tell out all his woderous workes, which the all- mightie LORDE hath stablyshed? All thinges endure in his glory. He seketh out the grounde of the depe and the hert, and he knoweth all their ymaginacion q wyszdome.
For i LORDE knoweth all scyence, and he loketh in to y token of the time. He de- clareth the thinges y are past and for to come, q discloseth thinges that are secrete. 4?No thought maye escape him, nether maye eny worde be hyd from him. He hath garnyshed the hye excellent workes of his wyszdome, and he is fro euerlastinge to euerlastinge.
Vnto him maye nothinge be added nether can he be mynished, he hath no nede also of eny councell. O how amiable are all his workes, q as a sparke to loke vpon? They lyne all, and endure for euer: and whan so euer nede is, they are all obedient vnto him. ‘They are all dubble, one agaynst another: he hath made nothinge* that hath faute or blemysh.
He hath stablyshed the goodes of euerychone: and who maye be satisfied with his glory, whan he seith it ?

The rti. Chapter. 
HE glory of the heyth, is the fayre and cleare firmament,’ the bewtye of the heauen in his glorious clearnes. "The sonne whan it appeareth, declareth the daye in y

a Eccli. 26. b. 
4 [ob 24.a. Esa. 29. c, 

> Eccli. 25. d. 
* Deut. 32. a. 

© Gen, 3. b. 

Errlesiastitus. 

J Psal. 8. a. 

Chap. rlitj. goinge out of it, a maruelous worke of the
Hyest. At noone it burneth ¥ earth, and who maye abyde for the heate therof? Who so kepeth an ouen whan it is hote, thre tymes more doth the Sonne burne vpon ¥ moun- taynes, whan it bretheth out the fyrie beames and shyneth: with the brightnes of it, it blyndeth the eyes. Greate is the LORDE that made it, and in his commaundement he causeth it to renne haistely.

*'U'he Moone also is in all, and at conue- nient season it sheweth the tymes, and is a token of the tyme. “The token of the so- lempne feast is taken of the Moone, a light that mynisheth and increaseth againe. The
Moneth is called after the Moone, it groweth wonderously in hir chaunginge.

The armye of heauen also is in the Heith, in the firmament of heauen it geueth a cleare and glorious shyne. This is the clearnes of the starres, the bewtifull apparell of heanen, the apparell that the LORDE lighteneth in the heyth. In his holy worke they continue in their ordre, and not one of them fayleth in his watch. 'Loke vpon $ rayne bowe, and prayse him that made it: very bewtifull is it in his shyne. He compaseth the heauen aboute with his clearnes and glory, the handes of the Hyest haue beded it. ‘Thorow his commaundement he maketh the snowe to fall, and the thonder of his indgment to smyte hastely. Thorow his commaundement the treasures are opened, and the cloudes fle as the foules. In his power hath he strengthened the clondes, and broke the hayle stones.

The mountaynes melt at y sight of him, the wynde bloweth accordinge to his wyll.
The sounde of his thonder beateth $ earth, and so doth the storme of the north: the whirle wynde also lighteth downe as a fe- thered foule, casteth out and spredeth the snow abrode: and as the greshoppers that destroye all, so falleth it downe. ‘The eie marueleth at y bewtye of the whytenesse therof, and the hert is afraled at the raine of it. He poureth out the frost vpon earth, like salt, and whan it is frosen, it is as sharpe as the prycke of a thistle.

Whan the colde northwynde bloweth, harde 
Christall commeth of the water. He lighteth downe vpon all the gatheringes together of

1 Gen. 9. b. 

£ Gen. 1. b. 

^ Exo. 12. a. 

Chap. rg. water, and putteth on y waters as a brest plate. He deuoureth the mountaynes, and burneth the wyldernesses: and loke what is grene, he putteth it out like fyre. The me- dycine of all these is, whan a cloude commeth hastely: and whan a dew commeth vpon the heate, it shalbe refreszshed agayne.

(In his worde he stylleth the wynde,) In his councell he setteth the depe, and (the
LORDE) Iesus planted it. ‘They that sayle ouer the see, tell of his parels and harmes: and whan we heare it with oure eares, we maruell therat. For there be strauge won- derous workes, dyuerse maner of nyce beestes and whall fishes. Thorow him are all thinges set in good ordre and perfourmed, q in his worde all thinges endure.

Ispeake moch, but I can not sufficiently attayne vnto it, for he himself onely is the perfeccion of all wordes. We shulde prayse the LORDE after all oure power, for he is greate in all his workes. “The LORDE isto be feared yee very greate is he, and maruelous is his power. Prayse the LORDE, and mag- nifie him as moch as ye maye, yet doth he farre farre exceade all prayse. ^O magnifie him with all youre power, and laboure earnestly, yet are ye in no wyse able sufficiently to prayse him. “Who hath sene him, that he might tell vs? Who can magnifie him so greatly as he is? For there are hyd yet greater thinges the these be: as for vs, we haue sene but few of his workes, For the LORDE hath made all thinges, and geuen wyszdome to soch as feare God.

e 

The rli. Chapter. 
A commendacion of the olde vertuous fathers. 

ET vs commende the noble famous 

_4 men, and the generacion of oure fore- elders and fathers. Many more glorious actes hath the LORDE done, and shewed his greate power euer sens y begynnynge.
The noble famous men raigned in their kyngdomes, and bare excellent rule. In their wyszdome and vnderstondinge, they folowed the councell shewed in the prophecies? They led the folke thorow the councell and wysz- dome of the scrybes of the people. Wyse sentences are founde in their instruecion.

a Psal. 95. a. — ? Psal. 105. a. 

© Gen. 7. d. 

* Deut. 5. c. Ioh. 1. b, f Eccli. 49. c. Gen. 5. c.

4 Exo. 18. c. 

Ecclestasticus. 

So. rrii, 
They sought the swetenes and melody of 
Musick, and brought forth the pleasaunt songes in scripture. ‘They were riche also, v coude comforte and pacifie those that dwelt with them. All these were very noble and honorable men in their generacions, and were well reported of in their tymes. ‘These haue left a name behynde them, so that their prayse shal allwaye be spoké of. Afterwarde there were some, whose remembraunce is gone.‘
They came to naught and perished, as though they had neuer bene: and became as though they had neuer bene borne, yee q their children also with them.

Nenertheles these are louynge men, whose righteousnes shal neuer be forgotten, but contynue by their posterite. ‘Their children are an holy good heretage: Their sede en- dured fast in ¥ couenaunt. For their sakes shal their childré q sede contynue for euer, a their prayse shal neuer be put downe. Their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lyueth for enermore. ‘The people can speake of their wyszdome, q the congregacion can talke of their prayse. / Enoch walked right q acceptably before the LORDE: therfore was he traslated for an example of amendemet to y generacions. * Noe was a stedfast q righteous man: q in the tyme of wrath he became a recócylinge. ‘Therfore was he left a rem- naunt vnto the earth, whan the floude came.
“An euerlastinge couenaunt was made with him, that all flesh shulde perishe nomore with y water.

Abraham was a greate father of many people,‘ in glory was there none like vnto him.
He kepte the lawe of the Hyest, ¢ came in to a conenaunt with him. He set the couenaunt in his flesh,* and whan he was tempted, he was founde faithfull. ‘Therfore swore God vnto him with an ooth, that he wolde blesse all people in his sede, that he wolde multiplie and increase him as the dust of the earth, and to exalte his sede as the starres: yee and that his sede shulde haue y possession and in- heretaunce of the londe from see to see, and from the ryuer vnto y borders of the londe.

With Jsaac’ dyd he stablish y same coue- naüt, for Abraha his fathers sake. Yee y gracious blessynge and health of all men, and couenaunt dyd he stablysh with Isaac, and

€ Gen. 6. b. and 7.8. 
15.3. 17. a. 

^ Gen. 9. h. k Gen. 22. a.

i Gen. 12, a. 
! Gen. 26. a. 

Fo. errui. 

made it to rest vpon the heade of Iacob. 
He knew him,’ in that he prospered him so well and richely, and gaue him an heretage, and sundered his porcion by it self,’ and parted it amonge the twolne trybes. Mercifull men brought he out of him, which founde fauoure before all flesh.

The rlo. Chapter. 

OSES beloued of God and mé, whose remembraunce is in hye prayse: “him hath the LORDE made like in the glory of the sayntes, and magnified him so that the enemies stode in awe of him, thorow his wordes he dyd greate wonders. He made him greate in the sight of kynges, gaue him com- maundement before his people, and shewed him his glorious power. He stablyshed him with faithfulnes and mekenes,? and chose him out of all men. For he herde his voyce, and led him in the darcke cloude,’ and there he gaue him the commaundementes, yee the lawe of life and wyszdome, that he might teach

Iacob the couenaunt, and Israel his lawes. 
He chose Aaron his brother also out of y trybe of Leui, exalted him, q made him zi like. An euerlastinge couenaunt made he with him,’ and gaue him the presthode in the people. He made him glorious in bewtifull araye, and clothed him with the garment of honoure. He put perfecte ioye vpo him, and gyrded him with strength. He deckte him with syde clothes and a tunycle, with an ouer- body cote also and gyrdle. Rounde aboute made he him belles of golde, and that many : that whan he wente in," the sounde might be herde, that they might make a noyse in the
Sanctuary, and geue the people warnynge. 
The holy garment was wrought q broderd with golde, yalow sylke and purple. And in the brestlappe there was a goodly worke,

wherin was fastened light and perfectnesse. 
Vpon ¥ same also there was a worke fastened and set with costly precious stones, all bounde with golde: and this he brought in his mynistracion, The stones also were fastened for a remembraunce, after the twolue trybes of Israel. Vpon his mytre there was a plate of pure golde, a grauen ymage of holynes, a famous and noble worke, garnished,

* Gen. 28. c. 29. 30. 
4 Num. 12. a. 
* Exo. 28. f. 

b Iosu. 18. 19. 
* Exo. 19, 20. t Exo. 28. c.

* Exo. 11. 8. f Exo, 4. c. k Leui. 8. a.

Erclesiasticus, 

and pleasaunt to loke vpon. Before him were there sene no soch fayre ornamétes, and these it behoued hi allwaye to vse: There might none other put them on, but onely his children and his childers children perpetually.
Daylie perfourmed he his burntofferinges two tymes. Moses fylled his handes, and anoynted him with holy oyle.

This was now confirmed him with an euer- lastinge couenaunt, and to his sede, as dayes of heaué: namely, that his childre shulde allwaye mynistre before him, and per- fourme the office of the presthode, and wysh the people good in his name. Before all men lyuynge chose he him, that he shulde offre before the LORDE, and make odours for a swete sauoure and remembraüce, that he shulde reconcyle the people of the LORDE with him agayne.’ He gaue him auctorite also in his commaundementes and in y coue- naüt, that he shulde teach Iacob the statutes and testimonies, and to enfourme Israel in his lawe.

'Therfore there stode vp certayne agaynst him," and had envye at him in the wyldernes: namely, they that were of Dathan a Abirams syde, and the furious congregacio of Chore.
This the LORDE sawe, and it displeased him, and in his wrothfull indignacion were they consumed. A greate wonder did he vpon them, and consumed them with the fyre.
" Besydes this, he made Aaron yet more honor- able and glorious. He gaue him an heretage, and parted the first frutes vnto him." Vnto him specially he appoynted the bred for sus- tenaunce (for the prestes ate of y offerynges of the LORDE) this gaue he vnto him ç his sede. Els had he no heretage? ner porcion in y londe and with the people. For the
LORDE himself is his porcion and en- heritaunce.

The thirde noble and excellent mà is 
Phineas the sonne of Eleazer, which pleased the God of Israel? because he had y zele q feare of the LORDE. For whan the people were turned back, he put him self forth right soone, q that with a good wyll, to pacifie the wrath of the LORDE towarde Israel. Ther- fore was there a couenaüt of peace made with him, y he shulde be the principall amonge

a Num. 16. a. 
? Deut. 12. b. 

t Deu. 17. c. and 21.a. Mal. 2. a. 
^ Num. 17. b. ? Exo. 25. f. Leui. 24. b. and 18. a. Eze. 44. d. 1 Num. 25. c.

Chap. rib. 

D 

Chap. rloij. 

the righteous and the people, that he and his posterite shulde haue the office of the prest- hode for euer (Like as there was made a couenant with Dauid of the trybe of Juda, that fró amonge his sonnes onely there shulde be akynge: And that Aaron also q his sede shulde be the heretage, to geue vs wyszdome in oure hert, to iudge his people in righteous- nes: that his goodes shulde not come in to forgetfulnes, and that their honoure might endure for euer.

The ploi. Chapter. a ANLY a stronge in battaill was Iesus y sonne of Naue,' which in steade of
Moses y prophet was geuen to be captayne of the people (which acordinge vnto his name was a greate sauionre vnto the electe of God) to punysh the enemies, that rose vp agaynst
Israel, y Israel might optayne their in- heritaunce. O how greate, noble and ex- cellent was he, whan he lift vp his hande, and drew out his swerde agaynst the cities?
Who stode so manly before him? For the 
LORDE himself brought in the enemies.’ 
Stode not the Sonne styll at his commaunde- mét, and one daye was as longe as two? He called vpon the Hyest q most mightie, wha y enemies preassed vpon him on euery syde: and the LORDE herde him with the hayle stones. ‘They smote ý Heithenish people mightely, « in fallinge downe they slew all y aduersaries, so that the Heithé knewe his hoost, and all his defence, that the LORDE himself fought against them, for he folowed vpon the mightie men of them.

In the tyme of Moses also he and Caleb the sonne of lephune,^ dyd a good worke, which stode agaynst the enemies, withelde the people from synne, and stylled y wicked mur- murynge. “And of sixe hundreth thousande people of fote, they two were preserued, whan they were brought in to the heretage, namely, a londe that floweth with mylke q hony. The
LORDE gaue strength also vnto Caleb, which remayned with him vnto his age: so that he wente vp in to the hye places of the londe, and his sede conquered the same for an heretage: that all the childré of Israel might se, how good a thinge it is, to be obedient vnto the LORDE. And the iudges or rulers

4 fogu. 12. c. 
^ Iosu. 8. 

Num. 27.d. Deut.34. b. 
© [osu. 10. c. 4 Num. 14.a. 

Iosu. 1. a. 
* Num. 26. g. 

Erclestasticus, 

(euery one after his name) whose hert wente not a whormge, ner departed from $ LORDE, and that forsake not the LOR DE vnfaith- fully, whose remembraiice hath a good re- porte: Yee their bones florish out of their place, and their name shal neuer be chaüged.

Samuel the prophet beloued of the 
LORDE; ordeyned a kinge, and anoynted the prynces ouer the people. In the lawe of the LORDE ruled he, and iudged the con- gregacion, q the LORDE had respecte vnto lacob. 'The prophet was founde diligent in his faithfulnes: yee in his faithfulnes was the faithfulnes of the vision knowne. He called vpon y LORDE the mightie," wha the ene- mies preassed vpon him on euery syde, what tyme as he offred the suckynge lambes. And the LORDE thondred from heauen, and mayde his voyce to be herde with a greate noyse. He discomfited the prynces of Tyre, q all the rulers of the Philistynes. ‘Before his last ende he made protestacion in the sight of the LORDE aq his anoynted, that he toke nether substaunce ner good of eny man, no not so moch asa shue: q no man might accuse him. After this he tolde, that his ende was at honde, and shewed the kynge also his ende and death: q from y earth lift he vp his voyce in the prophecie, y the vngodly people shulde perishe.

The xloij. Chapter. 

FTERWARDE in the tyme of kynge 
A Dauid, there rose vp a prophet called 
Nathan: For like as the fat is taken awaye from the offrynge, so was Dauid chosen out of the childre of Israel. He toke his pastyme with the lyons as with kyddes, and with beares like as with lambes. Slew he not a giaunte whan he was yet but yonge,’ q toke awaye the rebuke from his people? what tyme as he toke the stone in his hande, t smote downe proude
Goliath with the slynge? For he called vpon the hyest LORDE, which gaue him strength in his right hande, so that he ouerthrew the mightie giaunte in the battayll, that he might set vp the horne of his people agayne.

Thus brought he him to worshipe aboue all 33 prynces, and made him to haue a good reporte in the "prayse of the LORDE, y he shulde weere a crowne of glory. For he destroied

J losu. 14. 

€ 1 Reg. 10. and 16. c. 
!1 Re. 12. a. 

*2Re.12.2. '1Re.17.f. 

Fo. cryb. 

| fo. rb. the enemies on euery syde,“ roted out the
Philistynes his aduersaries, v brake their horne in sunder, like as it is broké yet this daye. In all his workes he praysed ý Hyest « Holiest, q aserybed the honoure vnto him. With his whole hert dyd he prayse and loue him that made him. He set syngers also before the aulter, and in their tune he made swete songes.
He ordeyned to kepe the holy daies worship- fully, and that the solempne feastes thorow the whole yeare shulde be honorably holde, with praysinge the name of the LORDE, © with synginge by tymes in the mornynge in the Sanctuary.

The LORDE ‘toke awaye his synnes, and exalted his horne for euer. He gaue him y couenaunt of the kyngdome, and the trone of worshipe in Israel. After him there rose vp the wyse sonne called Salomon, “and for his sake he droue y enemies awaie farre of. This
Salomon reigned with peace in his tyme (for 
God gaue him rest from his enemies on euery syde, that he might buylde him an house in his name, t prepare the Sanctuary for euer) like as he was well istruete in his youth ¢ fylled with wyszdome and vnderstodinge, as it were with a water floude. He couered and fylled the whole londe with similitudes and wyse prudent sentences.

B| His name wente abrode in the Iles, because of his peace he was beloued. All londes marueled at his songes, prouerbes, symilitudes, and at his peace, and at the name of y
LORDE God, which is called the God of 
Israel. ‘He gathered golde as tynne, q he had as moch syluer as leade. /He was moued in ynordinate lone towarde we men, andwas ouer come in affeceion. He stayned his honoure and worshipe, yee his posterite defyled he also, in bringinge the wrath of the LORDE vpon his children, and sorowe after his ioye: so y his kyngdome was deuyded, & * Ephraim rue an vn faithfull q an vn constant king- dome. Neuertheles God forsoke not his mercy, nether was he vtterly destroyed because of his workes, y he shulde leane him no posterite.

É| As for y sede Y came vpon him (which he loued) he brought it not vtterly to naught, but gaue yet a remnaunt vnto lacob, and a

rote vnto Dauid out of him. ‘Thus rested 
*26.5.8. *2Par.26.a. *92 Re.19.c. 43Re.3.c. 
£3 Re. 11. 8. 6 3 Re. 12, c. 

13 Re. 12. b. 3 Re. 12. d. k 3 Re. 17. a. 

Erclesiasticus. 

Chap. rlbtij. 
Salomon with his fathers, and out of his sede he left behynde him a very foolishnes of the people, and soch one as had no vnderstóodinge: namely, ‘Roboa which turned awaye the people thorow his councell, and Ieroboam $ sonne of
Nabat, which eaused Israel to synne, and shewed Ephraim the waye of vngodlynes: In so moch that their synnes q myszdedes had the vpper hande so sore, that at the last they were dryuen out of the londe for the same:
Yee he sought out ¢ brought vp all wickednes, tyll the vengeaunce came vpon them.

The yIbiij. Chapter. 
HEN stode vp Elias the prophet* as a| & 

fyre, and his worde bret like a creshett. 
He brought an hoger vpon thé and in his zele he made them few in nombre. (For they might not awaye with the commaudementes of the LORDE.) 'Thorow the worde of the
LORDE he shut the heauen, and thre tymes brought he the fyre downe. ‘Thus became
Elias honorablein his wonderous dedes. Who maye make his boost to belike him? One that was deed raysed he vp from death,” q in the worde of $ Hyest he brought him out of the graue agayne. He cast downe kynges and destroyed them, and the honorable from their seate. Vpon the mount Syna he herde the punyshment, ¢ vpon Horeb the iudgmet of the vengeaunee. He propheeled recompensynge vnto kynges, and ordeyned prophetes after him. ” He was taken vp in the storme of fyre, in a eharett of horses of the LORDE. He was ordeyned in the reprouynges in tyme, to pacifie the wrath, to turne y hertes of the fathers vnto the children,’ q to set vp the trybes of Iaeob agayne. Blessed were they that saw the, and were garnished in loue: for we lyue in life.

Elias was couered in the storme, but He-|33 liseus was fylled with his mouth. " Whyle he lyned he was afrayed of no prynce, and no man might ouer come him. ‘There coude no worde disceaue him,’ q after his death his body propheeied. He dyd wonders in his life, q in death were his workes maruelous. For all this, the people amended not, nether departed they from their synnes: tyll they were caried awaye presoners out of the londe, and were

'3 Re. 18. c. 4 Re. 1. c. 
19. c, 4Re. 2. c. 
7 4 Re. 13. a. 

mS Re. 17. c. n 3 Re. 
? Luc, 1, a P 4 Re. 2. c. 3. 4. 
4 Re. 5. 6.7. 13. 4 Re. 18. b. 

Chap. I. 

seatred abrode in all countrees, so that of them 

there remayned but a very litle people, and a 

prynce vnto y house of Dauid. How be it 

some of them dyd right, and some heaped vp 

vngodlynes. 

€| Ezechias made his cite stronge, conveyed water in to it, ^dygged thorow the stony rock with yron, t made vpa well by the water syde.
In his tyme came Sennacherib vp,’ and sent 
Rabsaches, lift vp his hande agaynst Sion, 
& defyed them with greate pryde. The trymbled their hertes and handes, so y they sorowed like a woman trauaylinge with childe.
So they called vpoó the LORDE, which is mercyfull q lift vp their hades before him.
Immediatly the LORDE herde the out of heauen, and delyuered them by the hande of
Esay. “He smote the hoost of the Assirians, q his angell destroyed the. For Ezechias had done the thinge that pleased the LORDE, « remayned stedfastly in the waye of Dauid his father. "Which Esay was greate q faithfull in his visions. ?In his tyme y Sonne wéte back- warde, q he lengthened the kynges life. With a right sprete prophecied he, what shulde come to passe at the last: q to soch as were soroufull in Sion he gaue consolacion, wherwhith they might coforte them selues for euermore. He shewed thinges y were for to come q secrete, or euer they came to passe.

The rliy. Chapter. 

a HE remembratice of losias is like as whan the Apotecary' maketh many pre- cious swete smellynge thinges together. His remembraunce shalbe swete as hony in all mouthes, and as the playenge of Musick by the wyne. He was appoynted to turne the people agayne, q to take awaye all abhomina- cions of ¥ vngodly. He directed his hert vnto the LORDE, « in the tyme of the vngodly he set vp the worshipe of God agayne. All kynges (excepte Dauid, Ezechias q Josias) comitted wickednes: for euen y kynges of
Iuda also forsoke y lawe of God. For they gaue their horne vnto other, their honoure q

worshipe also to a straunge people. 
B| "Therfore was the electe cite of the Sāc- tuary brent with fyre, and /the stretes therof laye desolate and waist: for they intreated

guo Par 32.a. b 4 Re.18.c. Esa. 36. a. * 4 Re. 
19. g. 44 Re. 20.b. Esa. 38. b. * 4 Re. 22, a. and 23. 2 Pa. 34. a. 7 4 Re. 25. b. € Tere. 1. a.
^ Agg.2. a. 1 Esd.3. a. 3 Esd. 5. a. * Agg. 1. c. 

Geelestasticus. 

Fo. errbtj. 
Ieremy euell, which neuertheles was a prophet p^ ordeyned from his mothers wombe,! that he might rote out, breake of, q destroye: q that he might buylde vp, q plante agayne. Ezechiel sawe the glory of the LORDE in a vision, which was shewed him vpon the charet of the
Cherubins. For he thought vpon the enemies in y rayne, to do good vntosoch as had ordred their wayes a right. And the bones of the twolue prophetes florish from out of their place: for they gaue comforte q consolacion vnto Iacob, and delyuered the faithfully. How shall we prayse Zorobabel, “which was as a ringe in the right hande ?

So was lesus also the sonne of Iosedec:: these men in their tymes buylded the house, q set vp the Sanctuary of LORDE agayne, which was prepared for an euerlastinge wor- shipe. And Nehemias* is allwaye to be có- mended, which set vp for vs the walles' y were broken downe, made the portes q cs agayne, and buylded our houses of the new.
" But vpon earth is there no man created like 
Enoch, for he was taken vp from y earth. 
And Ioseph, which was lorde of his brethren, q the vpholder of his people: His bones were couered q kepte. Seth t Sem were in greate honoure amonge ¥ people: and so was Adam aboue all the beastes, wha he was created.

The l. Chapter. 

YMON the sonne of Onias the hye prest, 

* which in his life set vp the house agayne, 

t in his dayes made fast the téple. The heyth of y temple also was founded of him, the dubble buyldinge, v the hye walles of the temple. In his dayes the welles of water flowed out, and were exceadinge full as the see. He toke care for his people, q delyuered them from destruccion. He kepte his cite q made it stronge, that it shulde not be beseged.
He dwelt in honoure and worshipe amonge his people, and enlarged the intraunce of the house and the courte. He geueth light as the mornynge starre in the myddest of the cloudes, and as y Moone whan it is full. He shyueth as the Sonne in the temple of God. He is as bright as Y rayne bowe in y fayre cloudes, q florisheth as the floures and roses in the sprynge of y yeare, q as the lilies by the

and 2. a. k2 Esd. 1. a. ! 92 Esd. 7. a. ™ Gen.5. c. 
Eccli. 44. b. Heb. 11.3. Gen. 41. f. 42. a. 45. c. 
^ 2 Mac. 3. b. 

Fo. orbit. Ecclestasticus, Chap. lí. | 

ryuers of water: Like as the braunches vpon the mount Libanus in tyme of Sommer: as à fyre q incése that is kyndled: Like as an whole ornament of pure golde, set with all maner of precious stones: and as an olyue tre that is frutefull: q as a Cypres tre which groweth vp an hye.

Whan he pnt on the garment of honoure, q was clothed withall bewtye: whan he wente to the holy altare, to garnysh the couerynge of the Sanctuary: whan he toke i porcions out of the prestes hande, he himse f stode by the herth of the altare, and his brethren rounde aboute in ordre. As the brannches of Cedre tre vpon the mount Libanus, so stode they rounde aboute him. And as the braunches of the olyue tre, so stode all ¥ sonnes of Aaron in their glory. And y he might sufficiently perfourme his seruyce vpon the altare, q garnysh the offrynge of the hyest
God, he stretched out his hande and toke of the drynkofferynge, q poured in of the wyne: so he poured vpon the botome of the aulter a good smell vnto the hyest prynce.

Then beganne ¥ sonnes of Aaron to synge, and to blowe S trompettes, q to make a greate noyse, for a remembraüce q prayse vnto the LORDE. ‘Then were the people afrayed, q fell downe to the earth vpo their faces, to worshipe the LORDE their God, « to geue thankes to Allmightie God. They sunge goodly also with their voyces, so that there was a pleasaunt noyse in y greate house of the LORDE. And the people in their prayer besought the LORDE the Hyest, that he wolde be mereyfull, tyll the honoure of y
LORDE were perfourmed. Thus ended they their mynistracion and seruyce.

€| Then wente he downe, and stretched out 

his handes ouer the whole multitude of the people of Israel, that they shulde geue praise q thankes ont of their lippes vnto y LORDE, and to reioyse in his name. He beganne yet once also to praye, that he might openly shew the thankesgeuynge before the Hyest, namely thus: O geue prayse a thankes (ye all) vnto the LORDE oure God, which hath euer done noble and greate thinges: which hath increased onre dayes from oure mothers wombe, and dealt with vs acordinge to his mercy: that he wyl geue vs the ioyfulnes of hert, « peace for oure tymes in Israel.
Which faithfully kepeth his merey for vs 

euermore, q allwaye delyuereth vs in due season.

There be two maner of people, that I ab-|yy 

horre fro my hert: as for the thirde, whom I hate, it is no people: They that syt vpon the mountayne of Samaria, the Philistynes, q the foolish people that dwell in Sichimis.

I Iesus the sonne of Sirac Eleazarus of lerusalem, haue tokened vp these informa- cions and doeumetes of wyszdome and vnder- stadinge in this boke, and poured out the wyszdome out of my hert. Blessed is he that exerciseth him self therin: and who so taketh soch to hert, shal be wyse. Yf he do these thinges, he shal be stronge in all. For the light of the LORDE ledeth him.

The li. Chapter. 

A prayer of Iesus the sonne of Sirac. 
THANKE the O LORDE and kynge, and praise the O God my Sauioure. I

wil yelde prayse vnto thy name: for thou art my defender and helper, q hast preserued my body from destruccion, from ¥ snare of tray- torous toges, and from the lippes that are occupied with leyes. ‘Thou hast bene my helper, from soch as stode vp agaynst me, and hast delyuered me after the multitude of thy mercy, and for thy holy names sake.
Thou hast delyuered me from the roaringe of them, that prepared them selues to deuoure me, out of y handes of soch as sought after my life: from the multitude of them y trou- bled me, q wente aboute to set fyre vpon me on euery syde, so Y I am not brentin the myddest of the fyre: From the depe of hell, from an vneleane toge, from lyenge wordes, from the wicked kynge, and from an vnright- eous tonge. My soule shal prayse $ LORDE vnto death, for my life drew nye vnto hell.
They copased me rounde aboute on euery syde, a there was no má to helpe me. I loked aboute me, yf there were eny man that wolde socoure me: but there was none. Then thought I vpon thy mercy O LORDE, and vpon thy actes that thou hast done euer of olde: namely, y thou delyuerest soch as putt their trust in the, and ryddest them out of y handes of the Heithen. Thus lift I vp my prayer from the earth, and prayed for dely- ueraunce from death. I called vpon the
LORDE my father, that he wolde not leaue me without helpe, in the daye of my trouble

B 

Chap. ti. 

Erclesiasticus, Fo. crt. 

q in the tyme of the proude. I praysed thy name contynually, yeldinge honoure and thakes vnto it: and so my prayer was herde.
Thou sauedest me from destruccion, and de- lyueredest me fro y vnrighteous tyme. Ther- fore wil I aknowlege and praise the, and magnifie ¥ name of the LORDE.

Ci Wha I was yet but yonge, or euer I wéte astraye, I desyred wyszdome openly in my prayer. I came therfore before the temple, a sought her vnto the last. Then florished she vnto me, as a grape that is soone rype. My hert reioysed in her, then wente my fote the right waye, yee from youth vp sought I after her: I bowed downe myne eare and receaued her. I founde me moch wyszdome, and pros- pered greatly in her. Therfore wyll I aserybe the glory vnto him, that geueth me wysz- dome: for I am aduysed to do therafter. I will be gelous to cleue vnto the thinge y is good, so shal I not be cofounded. My soule hath wrestled with her, and I haue bene dili- gent to be occupied in her. I lift vp myne handes an hye, then was my soule lightened

a Esa, 35. a. 

thorow wiszdome, that I knowleged my fool- ishnes. I ordred my soule after her, she q
I were one hert from the begynninge, and I founde her in clennesse. And therfore shal I not be forsaken.

My hert longed after her, and I gat a good 33 treasure. Thorow her y LORDE hath geuen me a new tonge, .wherwith I wil praise him. |
O come vnto me ye vn lerned, q dwell in y house of wyszdome: withdrawe not youre selues from her, but talke q comon of these thinges, for youre soules are very thirstie. I opened my mouth, and spake!” O come g bye wyszdome without money, bowe downe youre neck vnder hir yock, and youre soule shall receaue wyszdome. She is harde at hande, q is content to be founde. Beholde with youre eyes,’ how that I haue had but litle laboure, and yet haue founde moch rest. O receaue wyszdome, and ye shall haue plenteousnes of syluer and golde in possession. Let youre mynde reioyse in his mercy, a be not ashamed of his prayse. Wyrke his worke by tymes, q he shal geue you youre rewarde in due tyme.

ê Eccli. 6. c. 

The ende of Ccrlesiasticus, otherwpse called Jesus the somme of Sprat. 

a 

The praper of Azarias and the songe of p thre hiren

after Theovotios translacion: which wordes are torpten in p* thirde chapter of Haniel after the ove tert in Latyn.

ND they walked in the myddest of the flamme, praysynge God and magni- fienge $ LORDE. Asarias stode vp, and prayde on this maner, Euen in the myddest of the fyre opened he his mouth, « saide:
Blessed be thou (o LORDE God of oure fathers) right worthy to be praysed and ho- noured is name of thine for euermore: for thou art righteous in all $ thinges y thou hast done to vs: Yee faithfull are all thy workes, thy wayes are right, q thy iudgmetes true. In all ¥ thinges y thou hast brought vpon vs, q vpon the holy cite of oure fathers
(euen lerusalem) thou hast executed true iudgment: Yee acordinge to right and equyte hast thou brought these thinges vpo vs, be- cause of oure synnes.
For why? we haue offended, q done wick- edly, departynge from the: In all thinges haue we trespaced, “q not obeyed thy cOmaunde-

(mentes, ner kepte the, nether done as thou 

hast bydden vs, ý we might prospere. Wher- fore, all ý thou hast brought vpon vs, ^x euery thinge y thou hast done to vs, thou hast done them in true iudgment: As in delyueringe vs in to the hondes of oure enemies, amoge vngodly x wicked abhominacions, q to an vnrighteous kinge, yee ý most frowarde vpo earth. And now we maye not ope oure mouthes, we are become a shame q reprofe vnto thy seruauntes, q to the y worshipe the.

Yet for thy names sake (we beseke the) geue vs not vp for euer, breake not thy coue- naunt, t take not awaye thy mercy from vs, for thy beloued Abrahams sake, for thy ser- uaunt Isaacs sake, q for thy holy Israels sake: to whom thou hast spoken q promysed, ^y thou woldest multiply their sede as y starres of heauen, « as the londe Y lieth vpon y see shore. For we (o LORDE) are become lesse thé eny people, q be kepte vnder this daye in

* Dan. 9. c. > Baruc 2. b. 
* Gen. 17, a, 22. c. Deut. 28. g. 

all the worlde, because of oure synnes: So that now we haue nether prynce, duke, pro- phet, burntofferynge, sacrifice, oblacid, incése ner Sanctuary before the.

Neuerthelesse, in a contrite herte and an humble sprete let vs be receaued, y we maie opteyne thy mercy. Like as in the burnt- offerynge of rammes q bullockes, and like as in thousandes of fat lambes: so let oure
‘offrynge be in thy sight this daye, y it maye 

lease y, for there is no cofucion vnto them, y put there trust in the. And now we folowe the with all oure hert, we feare the, x seke thy face. Put vs not to shame, but deale with vs after thy louynge kyndnesse, q acord- inge to the multitude of thy mercies. Delyner vs by thy miracles (o LORDE) « get thy name an honoure : that all they which do thy seruauntes euell maye be confonded. Let them be ashamed thorow thy Allmightie power, and let their strength be broken: that they maye knowe, how that thou only art the
LORDE God, « honoure worthy thorow out all the worlde.

And the kynges seruaütes y put them in, ceassed not to make the ouen hote with wylde fyre, drye strawe, pitch q fagottes: so that the flamme wente out of the ouen vpon a slix. cubites: yee it toke awaye, q brent vp those
Caldees, y it gat holde vpon besyde the ouen. 
But the angel of the LORDE came downe in to the ouen to Asarias and his felowes, q smote ¥ flamme of the fyre out of the ouen, q made the myddest of the ouen, as it had bene a coole wynde blowinge : so that the fyre nether touched them, greued them, ner dyd them hurte. Then these thre (as out of one mouth) praysed, honoured, and blessed God in the fornace, sayenge :

* Blessed be thou, o LORDE God of oure fathers: for thou art prayse t honoure worthy,^

41Pet.2.a, Ro.10.c. Esa.98.d. Ro. 9. g. 
* 1 Mac. 4. d. 4 Psal. 71. c. 

yee q to be magnified for euermore. Blessed be ý holy name of thy glory, for it is worthy to be praysed, and magnified in all worldes.
Blessed be thou in the holy temple of thy glory, for aboue all thinges thou art to be praysed, yee q more then worthy to be mag- nified for euer. Blessed be thou in the trone of thy kyngdome, for aboue all thou art worthy to be wel spoken of, q to be more then mag- nified for euer. ^Blessed be thou, that lokest thorow the depe, q syttest vpon the Cheru- byns: for thou art worthy to be praysed, q aboue all to be magnified for euer. Blessed be thou in ¥ firmament of heauen, for thou art prayse and honoure worthy for euer.

O all ye workes of the LORDE: speake good of Y LORDE, prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O ye angels of the LORDE, ^speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O ye heaués, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O all ye waters that be aboue the firmamét, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O all ye powers of the LORDE, speake good of the LORDE : prayse him, q set him vp for euer.

*O ye Sone q Moone, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer. 

^O ye starres of heaue, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, ¢ set him vp for euer. 

O ye schowers « dew, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer. 

O all ye wyndes of God, speake good of y 
LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer. 

O ye fyre q heate, speake good of ¥ 
LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer. 

O ye wynter and sommer, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer. 

O ye dewes çq frostes, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, a set him vp for euer. 

O ye frost and colde, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer. 

O ye yse and suowe, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him and set him vp for euer. 

O ye nightes and dayes, speake good of the 
LORD E: prayse him, and set him vp for euer. 

Oye light and darcknesse, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, and set vp him for euer. 

e Psal.79.2. è Paal.101.c. and 148. a. ¢ Psal. 148. a. 
4 Psal. 135. a. * Psal, 112, a. 134. a. & 133. a. Apo. 19. a.| 

Che songe of the tj. children. 

O ye lightenynges and cloudes, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer.

O let the earth speake good of the 
LORDE: yee lett it prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O ye moütaynes and hilles, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O all ye grene thinges vpon the earth, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, a set him vp for euer.

O ye welles, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O ye sees and floudes, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer. 

O ye whalles and all that lyne in the waters, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O all ye foules of the ayre, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer. 

O all ye beastes ¢ catell, speake good of y 
LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer. 

O ye children of men, speake good of the 
LORDE: prayse him, « set him vp for euer. 

O let Israel speake good of the LORDE, prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O ye prestes of y LORDE, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

‘O ye seruauntes of the LORDE, speake good of the LORDE: prayse him, q set him vp for euer.

O ye spretes and soules of the righteous, speake good of LORDE: prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

O ye holy and humble men of herte, speake ye good of the LORDE: prayse ye him, « set him vp for euer.

O Ananias, Asarias and Misael, speake ye good of the LORDE: prayse ye him, and set hi vp for euer. ^ Which hath delynered vs from y hell, kepte vs from ¥ honde of death, rydde vs from the myddest of the * burnynge flamme, and saued vs eué in the myddest of fyre. O geue thakes therfore vnto y LORDE:
^for he 1s kynde harted, and his mercy en- dureth foreuer. O all ye deuoute men, speake good of the LORDE, euen the God of all goddes: O prayse him, and geue him thankes, for his mercy endureth worlde without eude.

1 Mac. 2. f. 
& 135. a. 

£ Esa, 43. a. 
106. a. 116. a. 

f Tere. 20, c. 

^ Psal. 104.2. 105.2. 

I 

I 

The storp of Susanna, 

Tich is tbe rij. chapter of Danielt after tbe Latpn. 

a HERE dwelt a man in Babilo, called 
Ioachim: y toke a wife, whose name was Susanna, (f doughter of Helchias) a very fayre woman, q soch one as feared God. Hir
\father q hir mother also were godly people, q taught their doughter acordinge to y lawe of
Moses. Now Ioachim (hir huszbonde) was a greate rich man, q had a fayre orcharde loyninge vnto his house. And to him resorted the lewes comonly, because he was a man of reputacion amonge them. . The same yeare were there made two indges, soch as the
LORDE speaketh of: All the wickednesse of 
Babilon, cometh from $ elders (y is) from y iudges, which seme to rule the people. These came offt to Ioachims house, q all soch as had eny thinge to do in the lawe, came thither vnto them.

B| Now when the people came agayne at 

after noone, Susanna wente i to hir husz- bodes orcharde, to walke. "The elders seynge this, that she wente in daylie q walked: they burned for lust to her, yee they were allmost out of their wittes, t cast downe their eyes,
\that they shulde not se heaué, ner remembre, y God is a righteous iudge. For they were both wonded with the loue of her, nether durst one shewe another his grefe. And for shame, they durst not tell her their inordynate lust, Y they wolde fayne haue had to do with her. Yet they layed wayte for her earnestly from daye to daye, that they might (at the leest) haue a sight of her. And the one sayde to Y other: Vp, let vs go home, for it is dyner tyme. So they wente their waye from her.

When they returned agayne, they came together, enqueringe out y matter betwixte them selues: yee the one tolde $ other of his

wicked lust. Thé apoynted they a tyme, whé they might take Susanna alone.

It happened also y they spyed out a con- uenict tyme, when she wente forth to walke
(as hir maner was) q no body with her, but two maydés, ^x thought to wash her self in the garden, for it was an hote season: And there was not one person there, excepte the two elders, y had hyd them selues, to beholde her. So se sayde to hir maydens: go fet me oyle q sope, q shut the orcharde dore, y I maye wash me. And they dyd as she bad them, q shut the orcharde dore, q wente out them selues at a backe dore, to fet the thinge y she had comaunded: but Susanna knewe not, y ¥ elders laie there hyd within. Now when the maydens were gone forth, y two elders:gat them vp, q ranne vpon her, say- enge: now, the orcharde dores are shut, that no man can se vs: we haue a lust vnto the, therfore consent vnto vs, and lye with vs.

Yf thou wilt not, we shall bringe a testi- moniall agaynst the: that there was a yonge felowe with the, and that thou hast sent awaye thy maydens from the for the same cause.
Susanna sighed, and sayde: Alas, I am in trouble on euery syde. Though I folowe youre mynde, it wyll be my death : and yf I consent not vnto you, I can not escape youre hondes. Wel, it is better for me, to fall in to youre hondes without the dede doinge, then to synne in the sight of the LORDE: and with that, she cried out with a loude voyce: the elders also cried out agaynst her.

Then ranne there one to the orcharde dore, q smote it open. Now when the seruauntes of the house herde y crie in y orcharde,

a Exo. 2.a. 2 Re. 11.a. 

Ex] 

d'|orcharde dores. 

Che storp of Susanna. 

they ruszshed in at the back dore, to se what the matter was. So when the elders tolde them, the seruauntes were greatly ashamed, for why, there was neuer soch a reporte made of Susanna. On the morow after came the people to Ioachim hir houszbonde, and ¥ two elders came also, full of myscheuous ymagina- cions agaynst Susanna, to bringe her vnto death, x spake thus before the people: Sende for Susanna y daughter of Helchias, Ioachims wife. And immediatly they sent for her. So she came with her father q mother, hir children q all hir kynrede. Now Susanna was a tender person, and maruelous fayre of face. Therfore the wicked men cómaunded to take of the clothes from her face (for she was couered) y at the leest, they might so be satisfied in hir beutie. Then hir fredes, yee q all they y knewe her, begàne to wepe.

These two elders stode vp in the myddest of the people," q layed their hondes vpon y heade of Susanna: which wepte, and loked vp towarde heauen, for hir herte had a sure trust in the LORDE. And the elders sayde:
As we were walkinge in the orcharde alone, this woman came in with hir two maydes: whom she sent awaye from her, q sparred y
With that, a yonge felowe 
(which there was hyd) came vnto her, q laye with her. As for vs, we stode in a corner of the orcharde. And whé we sawe this wicked- nes, we rane to her: q perceaued, y they had medled together. But we conde not holde him, for he was stronger then we: thus he opened ¥ dore, q gat him awaye. Now whé we had také this woma, we axed her, what yoge felow this was: but she wolde not tell vs. This is y matter, q we be witnesses of y same.

The comon sorte beleued them, as those y were the elders q iudges of the people, q so they condemned her to death. Susanna cried out with a loude voyce, q sayde: O euerlastinge God,’ thou sercher of secretes, thou y knowest all thinges afore they come to passe: thou wotest, y wa haue borne false wytnes agaynst me: q beholde, I must dye, where as I neuer dyd eny soch thinges, as these men haue maliciously inuented agaynst me. And y LORDE herde hir voyce. For whé she was led forth to death, ý LORDE

e 

raised vp y sprete of a yoge childe, whose 

a Leui. 24. c. ^ Hebr.$& c. ^9Re.3.f. Act. 20. d. 

Fo. nxriij. 
|name was Daniel, which cried with a loude voice: ^I am clene fro this bloude. The all y people turned the towarde him, q saide:
What meane these wordes, y thou hast spoke? 
Daniel stode in y myddest of thé, q sayde: 
Are ye soch fooles (O ye childré of Israel) y ye cà not discerne? Ye haue here condéned a daughter of Israel vnto death, and knowe not the trueth wherfore: Go syt on iudgment, agayne, for they haue spoken false witnesse, agaynst her.

Wherfore the people turned agayne in all the haist. And the elders (that is, the prin- cipall heades) sayde vnto him: come sit downe here amonge vs, and shewe vs this matter, seynge God hath geuen the as greate honoure, as an elder. And Daniel sayde vnto them: * Put these two asyde one from another and then shal I heare them. When they were put a sunder one from another, he called one of them, and sayde vnto him: O thou olde canckerde carle, that hast vsed thy wickednesse so longe: thine vngracious dedes which thon hast done afore, are now come to light. For thou hast geuen false iudgmentes, thon hast oppressed the innocent, and letten the giltie go fre, where as yet the LORDE saieth :
* The innocent and righteous se thou slaye not. 

Wel than, yf thou hast sene her, tel me,|22| 

vnder what tre sawest thou them talkynge together? He answered: Vnder a Molbery tre. And Daniel sayde: very wel, Now thou leist euen vpon thine heade. Lo the mes- saunger of the LORDE hath receaued the sentence of him, to cut Y in two.

Then put he him i6 ds and called for the other, and sayde vnto him: O thou sede of
Canaan but not of Iuda: Fayrnesse hath disceaued the, and lust hath subuerted thine herte. "Thus dealte ye afore with the daugh- ters of Israel, and they (for feare) consented vnto you: but the daughter of Iuda wolde not abyde youre wickednesse. Now tell me than, vnder what tre didest thou take them speakinge together? He answered: vnder a pomgranate tre. Then sayde Daniel vnto him: very wel now thou leyst also euen vpo thine heade. The messaunger of the
LORDE stondeth waytinge with the swerde, to cut the in two, and to slaye you both.

With that, all the whole multitude gaue a greate shoute, and praysed God, which all-
* Exo. 23, a. 

4 3 Reg. 3. d. Pro. 17. c. 

| ffo. erertitj. waye delyuereth them y put their trust? in him. And they came vpon the two elders,
(whom Daniel m conuicte with their owne mouth: that they had geuen false witnesse) and dealte with them,’ euen likewyse as they wolde haue done with their neghbouresse:
Yee they dyd acordinge to the lawe of Moses, 

a Psal. 16.8. ^ Deu. 19. d. Prou. 19. a. 

HERE was at Babilon an ymage, called 
T Bel: and there were spent vpon him euery daye, xij. cakes, xl. shepe, and sixe greate pottes of wine. Him dyd the kynge worshipe himself, and went daylie to honoure him: but Daniel worshiped his owne God.
And the kynge sayde vnto him: Why dost not thou worshipe Bel? he answered and sayde: ^ Because I maye not worshipe thinges, that be made with hondes, but the lyuynge
God, which made heanen and earth, and hath power vpon all flesh. The kynge sayde vnto him: thinkest thou not, y Bel is a lyuynge
God? Or seist thou not, how moch he eateth and drynketh euery daye? Daniel smyled, and sayde: O kynge, disceaue not thyselfe:
This is but made of claye within, and of metall without, nether eateth he ener eny thinge.’

Then the kynge was wroth, and called for his prestes, and sayde vnto them: Yf ye tell me not who this is, that eateth vp these ex- penses, ye shal dye: But yf ye can certifie me, that Bel eateth them, then Daniel shall dye, for he hath spoken blasphemy agaynst
Bel. And Daniel sayde vnto the kynge: let 

* Deut. 4. c. and 5.a. Exo.20.a, Deut.6.d. Matt. 4. a. 

The storpe of Bel. d 

and put them to death. Thus the innocent bloude was saued the same daye.

Thé Helchias q his wife praysed God for their daughter Susanna, with Ioachim hir huszbonde and all y kinrede: that there was no dishoneste founde in her. From that daye forth was Daniel had in greate reputa- cio in the sight of y people.

Che ende of the storp of Susanna. 

The storp of Bel, 

tobicb is the riti. Chapter of Daniel after the Latin. 

| it so be, acordinge as thou hast sayde. The prestes of Bel were lxx. besyde their wyues and children. And the kynge wente with
Daniel in to the temple of Bel. So Bels prestes sayde: Lo, we wil go out, q set thou j meate there (O kynge) q poure in the wyne: then shutt the dore fast, and seale it with thine owne signet: and tomorow when thon commest in, yf thou fyndest not, that
Bel hath eaten vp all, we wil suffre death: or els daniel, that hath lyed vpon vs. The prestes thought them selues sure ynough, for

vnder.y altare they had made a preuy in- € 

traunce, q there wente they in euer, and ate vp what there was.

So when they were gone forth, the kynge set meates before Bel. Now Daniel had eomaunded his seruauntes to bringe aszshes and these he siffted thorow out all the temple, that the kynge might se. Then wente they out, ¢ sparre the dore, sealinge it with y kynges signet, and so departed. In y night came the prestes with their wyues aida child- ren (as they were wonte to do) and ate and dronke vp all. In the mornynge be tymes at the breake of the daye, the kynge arose, ¢

^ Eccli. 30. c. * Leu. 24. c. 

Che storpe of Bel. 

Daniel with him. And the kynge sayde: 
Daniel, are the seales whole yet? He answered: Yee (o kynge) they be whole.
Now as soone as he had opened the dore, the kinge loked vnto y altare, and cried with a loude voyce: Greate art thou o Bel, and with the is no disceate. Then langhed Daniel, and helde the kynge, that he shulde not go in, and sayde: Beholde the pauement, marcke well, whose fotesteppes are these? The kynge sayde: I se the fotesteppes of men, women and children.

D| Therfore the kynge was angrie, and toke the prestes, with their wyues and childré, « they shewed him y preuy dores, where they came in, q ate vp soch thinges as were vpon y altare. “For the which cause y kynge slewe them, q delyuered Bel in to Daniels power, which destroyed him and his temple.

And in that same place there was a greate dragon, which they of Babilon worshipped.
And y kynge sayde vnto Daniel: sayest thou, i this is but a god of metall also? lo, he iueth, he eateth q drinketh: so y thou cast not saye, that he is no lyuinge God, therfore worshipe him. Daniel sayde vnto y kinge:
I wil worshipe the LORDE my God,’ he is ¥ true lynynge God: as for this, he is not the
God of life. But geue me leaue (o kynge) a 
I shal destroye this dragon without swearde or staff. The kynge sayde: I geue y leaue.
Then Daniel toke pitch, fatte, and hairie woll, and did seyth them together, and made lompes therof: this he put in y Dragos mouth, and so y dragon barst in sonder: and Daniel
25 de : lo, there is he whom ye worshipped. 

E] When they of Babylon herde that, they 

toke greate indignacion, and gathered them together agaynst the kynge, sayenge: The kynge is become a lewe also, he hath de-

stroyed Bel, he hath slayne $ Dragon, and nd the prestes to death. So they came to ¥

ynge, q sayde: let us haue Daniel, or els we wil destroye the and thine house.

Now whan y kynge sawe, that they russhed in so sore vpon him, q that necessite con- strained him, ^he deliuered Daniel vnto them: which cast him in to the lyons denne, where he

Esa. 46. a. d Eze. 8. a.

a Tere. 51. g. lere. 50. a. > Dan. 6. c. 

* Daniel 6, c. 

€ SRe. 17.2. / Iere. 38. b. | 

The ende of the Storpe of Bel. 

fo. erred. was sixe dayes. In the denne there were| ' seuen lyons, and they had geuen them euery daye two bodies and two shepe: which then

were not geué them, that they might deuoure 
Daniel. 

There was in lewry a prophet called| dF 

Abacuc, which had made potage, and broken bred in a depe platter, and was goinge in to the felde, for to brynge it to y mowers. But the angell of the LORDE sayde vnto Abacue: go cary the meate that thou hast in to Babilon, vnto Daniel, which is in lyos denne.
And Abacue sayde: LORDE, I neuer sawe 
Babilon: and as for the denne, I knowe it not. ^'Then the angel of the LORDE toke him by the toppe, and bare him by the hayre of the heade, and (thorow a mightie wynde) set him in Babilon vpon the denne. And
Abacue cried, sayenge: O Daniel thou ser- uaunt of God,’ haue, take the breakfast, y
God hath sent ¥. And Daniel saide: O God, hast thou thought vpon me? wel, thou neuer faylest them that loue the. So Daniel arose, a ate: and the angel of the LORDE set
Abacuc in his owne place agayne imme- diatly.

Vpon the seuenth daye, the kynge wente to bewepe Daniel: and whan he came to the denne, he loked in: and beholde, Daniel sat in the myddest of the lyons. Then cried y kynge with a loude voyce, sayenge: Greate art thou, o LORDE God of Daniel :* q he drewe him out of the denne. As for those that were y cause of his destruccio he dyd cast the in to the denne, and they were de- uoured in a moment before his face.

After this, wrote the kynge vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges, that dwelt in all countrees, sayenge: peace be multiplied with you. My commaundement is, in all the dominyon of my realme: that men feare and stonde in awe of Daniels God," for he is the lyuynge God, which endureth euer: his kyng- dome abydeth vneorrupte, and his power is euerlastinge.’ It is he that can delyuer and saue: he doth wonders and maruelous workes in heaven and in earth, for he hath saued
Daniel from the power of the Lyons. 

€ Dan. 6. c. 
Esa. 43. b. 

Hest. 7. b. ^ Dan. 6. c. 

Ose. 13. b. Dan. 3. f. 

! Luc. 1. c. 

—————MM————— 

The first boke of the Machabees. 

That this boke contepneth. 

Chap. I. 

Of the power of Alexander kynge of Macedonia. 
Of certayne vnfaithfull Israelites. Of the greate tyranny of Antiochus, ¢ how miserably he destroyeth Ierusalé : which God suffreth to be plaged, because they haue forsaken him.

Chap. Il. 

How feruently Matathias and his sonnes stryue for the honoure of God and welfare of the people; How swetely he exorteth his sonnes
(eue in the houre of his death) to be stedfast in the lawe of God.

Chap. III. 
Of Iudas Machabeus that worthy captayne, and of his noble actes agaynst Antiochus.

Chap. INI. V. 

Of the glorious victory, that God gaue Iudas against Gorgias and Lisias ; how they wynne the cite, and clense the temple agayne, qt how they fyght afterwarde against the Heithen.

Chap. VI. 
Antiochus besegeth Elymas in Persia. ludas 

layeth sege to the castel at lerusalem, the kynge goeth aboute to help the that are therin.

Chap. VII. 
The tyranny of Demetrius. They take truce with the people of God, ¢ kepe it not.

Chap. VIII. 
Iudas hearinge how reasonable the Romaynes are, seketh for to make peace with them.

Chap. IX. 
How [udas was slaine in the bataill and how there came vp derth after his death. Ionathas

was captayne after him, and gatt the victory of Bachides.

Chap. X. 

Of Alexader the sonne of Antiochus. Demetrius maketh peace with Jonathas, t so doth Alex- ander afterwarde. Ptolomy geueth his doughter
Cleopatra vnto Alexader. Demetrius defyeth 
Ionathas. 

Chap. XI. 

Ptolomy ryseth agaynst Alexander and Ionathas, and promyseth to geue Demetrius his daughter, whom he had geuen allredy vnto Alexander.
The death of Alexander and Ptolomy, the raigne of Demetrius. Demetrius and Ionathas are frendes. Alexanders sonne taketh the kyngdome vpon him.

Chap. XII. 

The lewes wryte vnto the Romaynes and Spar- cians to renue the olde frendshipe. Triphon receaueth Ionathas with fayre wordes, and then causeth him and his to be slayne.

Chap. XIII. 

After the death of Ionathas is Symon his brother made Captaine of the people which goeth forth agaynst Triphon, and burieth his brother.
Triphon slayeth Antiochus haynously. Symon maketh peace with Demetrius, and layeth sege to Gaza.

Chap. XIMI. 

Demetrius seketh helpe against Tripho. Deme- trius is take. Peace in lewry. Simo ruleth well. The Romaines and they of Sparta renue the peace with Symon.

Chap. XV. 
Antiochus wryteth louyngly vnto the lewes, and persecuteth Triphon, He breaketh the bonde with the Iewes.

Chap. XVI. 

The faithfulnes of Symo q his sonnes. Ptolomy szlayeth them disceatfully, and betrayeth the londe.

Chap. f. The t. boke of the 3Elarbabers. | 

a 

B 

The first Chapter. 

FTER that Alexander the sonne of 

Philippe, kynge of Macedonia wente forth of the londe of Cethim, and slewe Darius kynge of the Persias and Meedes: It hap- pened, that he toke greate warres in honde, wanne very many stronge cities, and slew many kinges of y earth: goinge thorow to y endes of the worlde, and gettinge many spoyles of the people: In so moch, y the worlde stode in greate awe of him," q therfore was he proude in his herte. Now whé he had gathered a mightie stroge hoost, « sub- dued y lodes and people with their prynces, so that they became tributaries vnto hi: he fell sick. And whe he perceaued that he must nedes die, he called for his noble estates
(which had bene brought vp with him of children) q parted his kyngdome amonge them,’ whyle he was yet alyue. So Alexader raygned xij. yeare, and then dyed.

After his death fell the kyngdome vnto his prynces, and they optayned it euery one in his rowme, and caused them selues to be crowned as kynges: and so dyd their childre after them many yeares, q moch wickednesse increaced in the worlde. Out of these came y vngracious rote, noble Antiochus $ sonne of Antiochus the kynge^ (which had bene a pledge at Rome) q he raigned in y Cxxxvij. yeare of the raigne of the Grekes.

In those dayes wéte there out of Israel wicked men, which moued moch people with their coücel? sayége: Let vs go v make a couenaunt with the Heithen, y are rounde aboute vs: *for sence we departed from them, we haue had moch sorow. So this deuyce pleased them well, and certayne of $ people toke vpon thé for to go vnto y kynge, which gaue them licence to do after the ordinaüce of the Heithen/ Then set they vp an open scole (at lerusalem) of the lawes of the
 Heithe, and were nomore circumcised: but forsoke ý holy Testamente, and ioyned them selues to y Heithe, q were cleane solde to do myschefe.

So when Antiochus beganne to be mightie in his kyngdome, he wente aboute to optayne y londe of Egipte also, that he might haue

the dominion of two realmes. Vpon this a Tudit. 1. b. t Dan. 7. a. and 8. b. * 1 Mac. 8. a.
S 2 Mac. 4. b. 

4 Deut. 7. a. Iudic. 2. a. * Jere. 44. c. 

ra 

Fo. tryrbij. 

entred he in to Egipte^ with a stronge hoost, with charettes, elephantes, horsmen q a greate nombre of shippes, and beganne to warre agaynst Ptolomy the kynge of Egipte. But
Ptolomy was afrayed of him, and fled: and many of his people were wounded to death.
Thus Antiochus wane many stroge cities, and toke awaye great good out of the londe of Egipte.

And after that Antiochus had smytten 
Egipte, he turned agayne in the Cxlirj. yeare q wente towarde Israel,’ and came vp to Ieru- salem with a mightie people: and entred proudly into j Sanctuary, and toke awaye the golden altare, the candilsticke and all y ornamétes therof: the table of the shewbred the pouringe vessel, the chargers, the golden spones, the vale, the crownes and golden apparel of the temple, and brake downe all.
He toke also the syluer and golde, the pre- cious Iewels, and the secrete treasures that he foüde. And when he had taken awaye allto- gether, caused a greate murthur of men, and so fulfilled his malicious pryde, he departed in to his owne londe.

Thus there arose greate heuinesse and misery in all the londe of Israel. ‘The prynces and the elders of the people mourned, the yoge men and the maydens were defyled, and the fayre beutye of women was chaunged: the brydegrome and the bryde toke them to mournynge: the londe and those that dwelt therin, was moued: for all the house of Iacob was brought to confucion.

After two yeares the kynge sent his chefe treasurer vnto the cities of Iuda,* which came to lerusalem with a greate multitude of people, speakige peaceable wordes vnto thé, but all was disceate: for when they had geuen him credence, he fell sodely vpon the cite, and smote it sore, 'and destroyed moch people of
Israel. And when he had spoyled the cite, he set fyre on it, "castinge downe houses and walles on euery syde. ‘The women q their children toke they captiue, and led awaye their catell. "Then buylded they the castel of
Dauid with a greate and thicke wall, and with mightie towres, and made it a stronge holde for them. people and vngodly men to kepe it, stoared it with weapens and vytales: gathered the goodes

1 2 Mac. 5. c. 
™ 1 Mac. 3. f. 

^ 9 Mac. 5. a. 

€ 3 Reg. 21. d. t 1 Mac. 7. b.

* 2 Mac. 5. e. 

i23 

Besyde all this they sett wicked]. 

H 

Fo. rrrrbiij. 

"n 

of lerusalem, and layed thé vp there: thus became it a theuysh castell.

And this was done to laye waite for the people that wente in to the Sanctuary, and for the cruell destruecion of Israel. ‘Thus they shed innocent bloude on enery syde of y
Sanetuary, and defyled it: In so moch that the citesyns were fayne to departe, and the cite became an habitacion of straungers, be- ynge desolate of hir owne sede, for hir owne natyues were fayne to leaue her. Hir Sac- tuary was clene waisted," hir holy dayes were turned in to mournynge, hir Sabbathes were had in derision, and hir honoure brought to naught. Loke how greate hir glory was afore, so greate was hir coufucion, and hir ioye turned in to sorow.

Antiochus also the kynge sent out a com- mission’ vnto all his kyngdome, that all the people shulde be one. Then they left euery man his lawe, and all the Heithen agreed to the comaundement of kynge Antiochus: Yee many of the Israelites consented there vnto, offerynge vnto Idols, and defylinge the Sab- bath. So the kynge Antiochus sent his messaungers with his commission vnto leru- salem, and to all ¥ cities of Iuda: that they shulde folowe y lawes of the Heithe, and for- bad ether burntofferynge, meatofferynge or peaceofferynge to be made in the temple of
God, q that there shulde no Sabbath ner hye feast daye be kepte: but commaunded, that the Sanctuary and the holy people of Israel shulde be defyled.

He commaunded also that there shulde be set vp other altares, temples and Idols: to offre vp swynes flesh and other vnclene beastes: that men shulde leaue their children vncir- eumceised, to defyle their soules with all maner of vnclennesse q abhominacions: that they might so forget the lawe, and chaüge all the holy ordinaunces of God: and that who so euer wolde not do acordynge to the com- maundement of kynge Antiochus, shulde suffre death. In like maner commaunded he thorow out all his realme, and sett rulers ouer the people, for to compell them to do these thynges, commaundinge the cities of Iuda to do sacrifice vnto Idols.

Then wente the people vnto the Heithen by heapes, forsoke the lawe of the LORDE, and committed moch euell in the londe: yee

a Tobi. 2.a. 

Amos 8. b. ^ 2 Mac. 6. a. 

Che i. boke of the Marhabees. 

and chaced out the secrete Israelites, which had hyd them selues in corners and preuy places. The xv. daye of the moneth Caslen, in the Cxlv. yeare, set kynge Antiochus an abhominable Idol of desolacion vpon the altare of God, and they buylded altares thorow out all the cities of Iuda on enery syde, before the dores of the houses, and in the stretes: where they brent incense, and dyd sacrifyce.
And as for the bokes of the lawe of God, they brent them in the fyre, and rente them in peces. What so euer he was that had a boke of the Testament of the LORDE founde by hym, yee who so euer endeuored himself to kepe the lawe of the LORDE, the kynges commaundement was, y they shulde put him to death. And thorow his auctorite they executed these thinges euery moneth, vpon the people of Israel that were founde in the cities.

The fyue and twentye daye of the moneth,? what tyme as they dyd sacrifice vpon the altare (which stode in the steade of the altare ofthe LORDE) acordinge to the commaunde- ment of kynge Antiochus, they put certayne women to death, which had caused their children to be circumcised: Not only that, but they hanged vp the children by the neckes thorow out all their houses, and slewe the circumcisers of them.

Yet were there many of the people of 
Israel, which determed in them selues, that they wolde not eate vncleane thinges: but chose rather to suffre death, then to be defyled with vncleane meates. So because they wolde not breake the blessed lawe of God, they were cruelly slayne. And this greate tyranny in- creased very sore vpon the people of Israel.

The tj. Chapter. 

N those dayes there dyd stode vp one 
Matathias the-sonne of Symeon the prest 
(out of the kynred of loaris) fró Ierusalem, and dwelt vpon the mount of Modin, and had v. sonnes: Iho called Gaddis: Symon, called
Thasi: Iudas, other wyse called Machabeus: 
Eleazer, other wyse called Abaron: and 
Ionathas, whose surname was Apphus. These sawe the euell, y was done amonge the people of Iuda and Ierusalem. And Matathias sayde:
Wo is me, alas that euer I was borne, to se this misery of my people, and ¥ piteous de-

49 Ma. 6. b. 

© lere. 36. c. 

Chap. ij. 

Chap. úi. 

struccid of the holy cite: q thus to syt so styll, it beynge delyuered in to the hondes of the enemies, ^Hir Sanctuary is come in to the power of straungers, hir temple is, as it were a man y hath lost his good name. Hir pre- clous ornamentes are carled awaye captyue, hir olde men are slayne in the stretes, and hir yonge men are fallen thorow the swearde of the enemies.

What people is it, that hath not some pos- session in hir kyngdome? Or who hath not gotten some of hirspoyles? All hir glory is taken awaye. She was a Quene, and now she is become an handmayde. Beholde our Sanc- tuary, oure bewtye and honoure is waisted awaye, and defyled by the Gentiles. What helpeth it vs then to lyue? And Matathias rente his clothes, he and his sonnes, and put sackcloth vpon them, q mourned very sore.

Then came the men thither which were sent of kynge Antiochus, to compell soch as were fled in to the cite of Modin, for to do sacrifice and to burne incense vnto Idols, and to forsake the lawe of God. So, many of the people of Israel consented and enclyned vnto them, but Matathias and his sonnes remayned stedfast. Then spake the commissioners of kynge Antiochus, q sayde vnto Matathias :
Thou art a noble man, of hye reputacion and greate in this cite, hauinge fayre children and brethren. Come thou therfore first, and fulfill the kynges commaundemet, like as all the
Heithen haue done, yee and y men of Iuda, and soch as remayne at Jerusalem: so shalt thou and thy children be in y kynges fauoure, and enriched with golde, syluer and greate rewardes.

Matathias answered, and spake with a loude voyce: Though all nacions obeye the kynge
Antiochus, and fall awaie euery man fro kep- ynge ¥ lawe of their fathers: though they consente to his commaundementes, yet wil I q my sonnes and my brethren, not fall from the lawe of oure fathers. God forbyd we shulde: that were not good for vs, that we shulde for- sake the lawe and ordinaunces of God,’ and to agre vnto the commaundement of kynge An- tiochus. Therfore we will do no soch sacrifice, nether breake the statutes of oure lawe, to go another waye. And whé he had spoken these wordes, there came one of the lewes, which openly in the sight of all, dyd sacrifice vnto the

? | Mac. 1. b. 5 Act. 5. b. 

* Pro. 4. c. 

The í. boke of the Machaberes. 

Idols vpon the aulter in the cite of Modin, acordinge to the kynges commaundement.

When Matathias sawe this, it greued him at the herte, so that his raynes shoke withall, and his wrath kindled for very zele of the lawe. With that he gaue a szkippe forth, and kylled the lewe besyde the aulter: Yee and slewe $ kynges commissioner, that có- pelled him to do sacrifice, q destroyed the aulter at the same time: soch a zele had he vnto the lawe of God, like as "^ Phinees dyd vnto Zambri the sonne of Salomi. And Ma- tathias cried with a loude voyce thorow y cite, sayenge: Who so is feruent in the lawe, a wil kepe y couenaunt, let him folowe me. So he and his sonnes fled in to the mountaynes* and left all that euer they had in y cite. Many other godly men also departed in to the wyl- dernesse with their children, their wyues and their catell, and remayned there: for the tyranny increaced so sore vpon them.

Now when the kynges seruauntes and the hoost, which was at Jerusalem in the cite of
Dauid herde, that certayne mé had broken the kynges commaundement and were gone their waye to the wyldernesse in to secrete places, and that there were many departed after them: they folowed vpon them to fight agaynst them in the Sabbath daye, and sayde:
Wyll ye yet rebell ? Get you hence q do the commaundement of kynge Antiochus, and ye shal lyue. They answered: We wil not go forth, nether wil we do the kinges comaunde- ment, to defyle $ Sabbath daye./ Then beganne they to font agaynst them neuer- thelesse they gaue them none other answere, nether cast they one stone at them, ner made fast their preuy places, but sayde: We wil dye all in our innocency, heauen q earth shal testifie with vs, that ye put vs to death wrong- eously. Thus they fought agaynst them vpon the Sabbath, q slewe both men and catell, their wyues and their children, to the nombre of a thousande people.

When Matathias and his frendes herde this, they mourned for them right sore, and sayde one to another: Yf so be that we all do as oure brethré haue done, and fight not for oure lyues q for oure lawes agaynst the Heithen: then shall they the sooner rote vs out of the earth.
So they cócluded amonge théselues at the same tyme, sayenge: What soeuer he be that

4 Num. 25. b. * 2 Ma, 5. c. f Iosu. 1. c. 

fo. trrrir.! 

E 

IF| After this when the tyme drew on fast, 

So. erl, cometh to make battayll with vs vpon the
Sabbath daye, we wyll fight agaynst him, a not dye all, as oure brethren y were mur- thured so haynously. Vpó this came the
Synagoge of the Iewes vnto thé: stronge men of Israel, all soch as were feruent in the lawe. And all they that were fled for per- secucion, came to helpe them, and to stonde by them: In so moch that they gathered an hoost of men, and slewe the wicked doers in their gelousy, and the vngodly men in their wrath. Some of the wicked fled vnto the
Heithen, and escaped. 

Thus Matathias and his frendes wente aboute, and destroyed the aulters, and circum- cided the children, that had not yet receaued circumcision: as many as they founde within
ý coostes of Israel: and folowed mightely vpon the children of pryde, and this acte prospered in their hondes: In so moch, that they kepte the lawe agaynst the power of the Gentiles and the kynges, and gaue not ouer their do- minion vnto wicked doers.

that Matathias shulde dye, he sayde vnto his sonnes: Now is pryde and persecucion in- creased, now is the tyme of destruccion and wrathfull displeasure: Wherfore (o my sonnes) be ye feruent in the lawe, and ioperde youre lyues for the Testament of the fathers: call to remembraunce what actes oure fathers dyd in their tyme, so shall ye receaue greate ho- noure and an euerlastinge name.

Remembre Abraham,’ was not he founde faithfull in tentacion, and it was reckened vnto him for righteousnesse? Joseph in tyme of his trouble kepte the commaundement, and was made a lorde of Egipte. Phinees oure father was so feruent for the honoure of God,

that he? optayned the couenaiit of an euer- 

lastinge presthode. Josue for fulfillinge the worde of God, was made the captayne of Is- rael. “Caleb bare recorde before the cogre- gacion, and receaued an heretage. "Dauid also in his mercifull kynduesse, optayned the trone of an euerlastinge kyngdome. “Elias beynge gelous and feruent in the lawe, was taken vp into heaué. / Hananias, Asarias and
Misael remayned stedfast in faith, and were 

* lacob. 2. c. Heb.11. d. Ro.4. d. Gen. 22. a, Eccli. 
44. c. Gen. 41. f. Nu. 25. c. Eccli. 45. f. — * Nu. 27. d. 
Ioau. 1.a. © Nu. 14.a. 41 Re.24.c. *4Re.2.c. f Dan. 3. d. € Dan.6. d. Belg. ^ Heb, 11. b.

The i. boke of the Machabees. 

delyuered out of the fyre. In like maner 
^Daniel beynge vngiltie, was saued from the mouth of the Lyons.

And thus ye maye considre thorów out all|@ 

ages sens the worlde beganne,' that who so euer put their trust in God, were not ouer come. ‘Feare not ye then the wordes of an vngodly man, for his glory is but donge and wormes: to daye is he set vp, and to morow is he gone: for he is turned in to earth, and his memoriall is come to naught. Wherfore
(o my sonnes) take good hertes vnto you, and quyte youre selues like men in the lawe: for yf ye do the thinges that are commaunded you in the lawe of the LORDE youre God, ye shal optaine greate honoure therin.

And beholde, I knowe that youre brother 
Symon is a man of wyszdome: se that ye geue eare vnto him allwaye, he shall be a father vnto you. As for Judas Machabeus, he hath euer bene mightie and stróge from his youth vp: let him be youre captayne, and ordre the battayll of y people: Thus shall ye brynge vnto you all those that fauoure the lawe, and se that ye auenge the wronge of youre people, and recompence the Heithen agayne, and applie youre selues whole to the commaundement of the lawe. So he gaue

fathers sepulcre, ¢ all Israel made greate la- mentacion for him.

The iij. Chapter. 

HEN stode vp Iudas Machabeus in his 

fathers steade,^ and all his brethré helped him: and so dyd all they that helde with his father, and fonght with cherefulnesse for Is- rael. So Iudas gat his people greate honoure:
He put on a brest plate as a giaunte, and arayed him self with his harnesse, and de- fended the hoost with his swearde. In his actes he was like a lyon, q as a lyons whelpe roaringe at his praye. He was an enemie to the wicked,’ and hunted them out: and brent vp those, that vexed his people: So that his enemies fled for feare of him, and all the workers of vngodlynes were put to trouble:

i Mat. 10, d. Esa. 51. c.and 40. a.. 1 Pet.1.d. Iacob. 1. b. 
Eccli. i4. b. Paal. 26. c. and 30. d. * Iosephus cap. 
8. 9. li. 12 Antig. ! Psal. 100. b. 2 Mac. 8. a. 

Chap. tt. 

e 

— — — —À 

soch lucke and prosperite was in his honde. 
This greued dyuerse kynges, but Iacob was greatly reioysed thorow his actes, and he gat him self a greate name for euer.

He wente thorow the cities of Iuda, de- stroyenge the vngodly out of them, turnynge awaye the wrath from Israel, ànd receauynge soch as were oppressed: and the fame of him wente vnto the vttemost parte of y earth.
Then Appollonius (a prynce of Syria) ga- thered a mightie greate hoost of the Heithen q out of Samaria, to fight agaynst Israel.
Which when Iudas perceaued, he wente forth to mete him, fought with him, slewe him, and a greate multitude with him: the remnaunte fled, and he toke their substaunce. ludas also toke Appollonius owne swearde, and
‘fought with it all his life longe. 

Now when Seron (another prynce of Siria) herde saye, that Iudas had gathered vnto him the congregacion and church of the faithfull, he sayde: I will get me a name and a prayse thorow out the realme: for I will go fight with Iudas and them that are with him, as many as haue despised the kynges com- maundement. So he made him ready, and there wente with him a greate mightie hoost of the vngodly, to stonde by him, and to be auenged of the childré of Israel. And when they came nye vnto Bethoron, Iudas wente forth agaynst them with a small company.
| And when his people sawe soch a greate hoost before the, they sayde vnto Iudas: How are we able (beynge so fewe) to fight agaynst so greate a multitude and so stronge ? seinge we be so weery, and haue fasted all this daye?

But Iudas sayde:^ It is a small matter for many to be ouer come with fewe: Yee there is no difference to the God of heauen, to de- lyuer by a greate multitude or by a small company: for the victory of the battell stond- eth not in the multitude of the hoost, but the strength commeth from heauen. Beholde, they come agaynst vs with a presumptuous and proude multitude: to destroye vs, oure

es and oure children, and to robbe vs. 
But we will fight for oure lynes and for oure lawes, and the LORDE himself shall de- stroye the before oure face: therfore be not ye afrayed of them.

As soone as he had spoken these wordes, he leapte sodenly vpon thé. Thus was Seron

? | Re. 14. a. ^ 2 Par. 25. b. * 1 Mac. 6. 8. 

The i. boke of the fflarbabers. 

smytten, and his hoost put to flight, and Iudas folowed vpon them beyonde Bethoron vnto the playne felde: where there were slayne eight hundreth men of them, and the residue fled in to the londe of the Philistynes. Then all the Heithen on euery syde were afrayed for Iudas and his brethren: so y the rumoure of him came vnto the kynges eares, for all the Gentiles coude tell of the warres of
Iudas. 

So whan kynge Antiochus herde these tidinges, he was angrie in his mynde: wher- fore he sente forth and gathered au hoost of his whole realme, very stronge armies: and opened his treasury, and gaue his hoost a yeares wagies in honde, commaundynge them to be ready at all tymes.

Neuerthelesse when he sawe, that there was not moneye ynough in his treasuries, and that thorow the discorde and persecucion, which he made in y londe (to put downe ¥ lawes that had bene of olde tyme) his cus- tomes and tributes of the londe were my- niszshed: he feared that he was not able for to beare the costes and charges eny lenger, ner to haue soch giftes, to geue so liberally as he dyd a fore, more theu the kynges that were before him.

Wherfore he was heuy in his mynde, and thought to go in to Persides, for to take tri- butes of y londe, and so to gather moch moneye. So he left Lysias (a noble man of the kynges bloude) to ouersee the kynges busynesses, from the water Euphrates vnto the borders of Egipte: and to kepe well his sonne Antiochus, till he came agayne.

Morouer, he gaue him half of his hoost and elephantes, committed vnto him euery thinge of his mynde, concernynge those which dwelt in Iuda, and Ierusalem: that he shulde sende out an army agaynst them, to destroye and to rote out the power of Israel and the remnaunt of Ierusalem: to put out their me- moriall from that place, to set straungers for to inhabit all their quarters, and to parte their londe amoge them. “Thus the kynge toke the other parte of the hoost, and de- parted from Antioch (a cite of his realme) ouer the water of Euphrates, in the hundreth and xlvij. yeare, and wente thorow the hye countrees.

‘And Lysias chose vnto him Ptolomy the 

d Tosep. cap. 10. libro 12 Antiq. * 2 Mac. 8. b. 

33 i 

£ 

Fo. lt. 

{ 

So. erli. sonne of Doriminus, Nycanor and Gorgias mightie men, x the kynges frendes. These he sent with xl. thousande fote men and vij. thousande horsmen, for to go in to y londe of Iuda, and to destroye it, as the kynge commaunded. So they wente forth with all their power, and came to Emmaus in to the playne felde. When the marchaütes herde the rumonre of them, they and their seruauntes toke very moch siluer and golde, for to bye the children of Israel to be their bonde men.
There came vnto them also yet moo men of warre on euery syde, out of Syria ¢ thé from the Palestynes.

JF| Now when Iudas and his brethré sawe that trouble increased, and that the hoost drew nye vnto their borders : consideringe y kynges wordes which he commaunded vnto the peo- ple: namely, that they shulde vtterly waist and destroye them: They sayde one to ano- ther: Let vs redresse the decaye of oure people, let vs fight for oure folke and for oure Sanctuary. Then the congregacion were soone ready gathered to fight, to praie and to make supplicacion vnto God for mercy and grace.

“As for lerusalem, it laye voyde, and was as it had bene a wyldernesse. There wente no man in nor out at it, and the Sanctuary was troden downe. ‘The aleauntes kepte the castell, there was the habitacion of the
Heithen. The myrth of lacob was taken awaye, the pype a the harpe was gone from amonge them.

The Israelites gathered them together, and came to Maspha before lerusalem: for in Maspha was the place where they prayed afore tyme. "So they fasted that daye, and put sackelothes vpo them, cast aszshes vpon their heades, rente their clothes, and layde forth the bokes of the lawe (wherout y Heithen sought the lieknesse of their ymages) and brought the prestes ornamentes, the firstlinges and the 'l'ythes. They set there also the absteyners (which had fulfilled their dayes)
"before God, and eried with a loude voyce towarde heauen, sayenge: what shal we do with these? and whither shall we cary them awaye ?

For thy Sanctuary is troden downe and defyled, thy prestes are come to henynesse

* | Mac. 1. d. 

? 1 Reg. 7. b. 
* Deu. 20, a. 

* Num.6.a. 4Exo.18. d. 

Iudic. 7. a. 

The i. boke of the Machabees. 

| 

Chap. tí. and dishonoure: and beholde, the Heithen are come together for to destroye vs. "Thou knowest what thiges they ymagyn against vs.
How maye we stonde before them, excepte thou (o God) be oure helpe?

'They blewe out the trompettes also with a loude voyce. "Then Indas ordened captaynes ouer the people: ^ouer thonsandes, ouer hun- dredes, ouer fiftie, and ouer ten. But as for soch as bnylded them houses, maried wynes, planted them vynyardes, and those that were fearfull: ‘he commaunded them euery man to go home, acordinge to y lawe. So the hoost remoued, and pitched vpon the South syde of Emmaus.

And Iudas sayde: Arme youre selues, be stronge (o my children) make you ready agaynst tomorow in the mornynge, that ye maye fight with these people, which are agreed together to destroye vs q onre Sane- tuary. Better is it for vs to dye in battayll, then to se onre people and oure Sanctuary in soch a miserable case. ^ Neuerthelesse, as y will 1s in heauen, so be it.

The iiij. Chapter. 
HEN toke Gorgias fyue thousande men of fote, and a *thousande of the best horsmen: and remoued by night, to come nye where y Jewes hoost laye, and so to slaye them sodenly. Now the men that kepte the castell, were the coueyers of them. Then arose Iudas to smyte the chefe and pryncipall of the kinges hoost at Emmaus, for the army was not yet come together. In the meane season came Gorgias by night in to Indas tentes: q when he founde no man there, he sought them in the moütaynes, and thought they had bene fled awaye because of him.
But whé it was daie, Iudas shewed himself in i felde with thre thousande men only, which ad nether harnesse ner sweardes to their myndes.

But on the other syde, they sawe that the 
Heithen were mightie and wel harnessed, and their horsmen aboute them, and all these wel experte in fettes of warre. Then sayde Iudas to Y men that were with him: ^Feare not ye the multitude of them, be not afrayed of their violente runnynge: remembre how onre fa- thers were delyuered in the 'reed see, when

f Matt. 6. b. Luc. 11. a. 
^ Deu. 20. a. 

& Iosephus ubi supra. i Exo. 14. f.

Chap. iiij. 

Pharao threatned them with a greate hoost.| {score thousande chosen men of fote, and fyuc] _ greate hoost. 
^Euen so let vs also crie now towarde heauen : and the LORDE shall haue mercy vpon vs, and remembre the couenaunt of oure fathers, yee and destroye this hoost before oure face this daye: And all Heithen shal knowe, that it is God himself, which delyuereth and saueth

Israel. 

Then the Heithen lift vp their eyes: and when they sawe that they were commynge agaynst them, they wente out of their tentes in to the battayll: and they that were with
Iudas, blewe vp the trompettes. So they 
’buckled together, and the Heithen were dis- comfited, and fled ouer the playne felde: but the hynmost of them were slayne. For they folowed vpon them vnto Assaremoth, and in to the feldes of Idumea towarde Azot and lamnia: so that there were slayne of them vpon a thre thousande men. So Iudas turned agayne with his hoost, and sayde vnto the

people: Be not gredy of y spoyles, we haue yet a battayll to fight: for Gorgias ¢ his hoost are here by vs in the mountaynes, but stonde ye fast agaynst oure enemies, and onercome them : then maye ye safely take the spoyles.

As ludas was speakynge these wordes, there apeared one parte of them vpon the mount. But when Gorgias sawe that they of his partie were fled, and the tentes brent vp
(for by the smoke they might vnderstonde what was done) they perceanynge this, were very sore afrayed: and when they sawe also that Iudas and his hoost were in ý felde ready to stryke battayll, they fled euerychone in to the londe of the Heithen.

So Iudas turned agayne to spoyle the tentes, where they gat moch golde and syluer, precious stones, purple q greate riches. Thus they wente home, and sunge a Psalme of thankesgeuynge and “praysed God in heauen: for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer: And so Israel had a greate victory in that daye.

Now all the Heithen that escaped, came and tolde Lysias euery thinge as it happened.
Wherfore Lysias was sore afrayed and greued in his mynde, because Israel had not gotté soch mysfortune as he wolde they shulde, nether as the kynge ‘commaunded. The nexte yeare folowinge, gathered Lysias thre

a 1 Mac. 9. c. ^1 Mac.8.d. *Iudit.13.c. Psal. 106.2. 
117.2. 135.2. and 105. a. 

Chap. tj. — — Che í. boke of tbe Marhabers. fo. riii. fo. HH. — ^ ^ ^ Cbe i. boke of the Harbabees. — — — — jo. mli. | 

their tentes at Bethoron, where Iudas came agaynst them with ten thousande men. And when he sawe so greate mightie an hoost, he made his prayer and sayde: Blessed be thou
(o sauionre of Israel) which diddest ‘destroye the violent power of the giaunte, in the honde of thy seruaunt Dauid, and gauest the hoost of the Heithé in to the honde of Ionathas
(the sonne of Saul) and of his weapen bearer.

Put this hoost now in to the honde of thy people of Israel, and let them be confounded in their multitude and horsmen. Make them afrayed, q discomforth the boldnes of their strength, y they maye be moued thorow their “destraccion. Cast them downe thorow the swearde of thy louers, then shal all they that knowe thy name, prayse the with thankes-
Beuynge. 

So they stroke the batell, and there were slayne of Lysias hoost, fyue thousande men.
Then Lysias seynge the discomfetynge of his men, and the manlynesse of the ewes, how they were ready, ether to lyue or to dye like men: He wente vnto Antioche and chose out men of warre : that when they were gathered together, they might come agayne in to lewry. Then sayde Iudas and his brethren: beholde, oure enemies are discomfited: Let vs now go vp, to clése and to repayre the
Sanctuary. 

Vpon this, all the hoost gathered them| £ together, and wente vp vnto mount Sion.
Now when they sawe the * Sanctuary laied waist, the aulter defyled, the dores brent vp, the shrubbes growinge in the courtes, like as in a wod or vpon mountaynes, yee and that the prestes Celles were broken downe: 'They rente their clothes, made greate lamentacion, cast aszshes vpon their heades, fell downe flat to the grounde, made a greate noyse with the trompettes, and cried towarde heanen.

Then ludas apoynted certayne men to fight against those which were in the castel, till they had clensed the Sanctuary. So he chose prestes y were vndefyled, soch as had pleasure in the lawe of God: and they clensed the Sanctuary, ¢ bare out the defyled

ai Mac. Sco —— C hits To pas f 4 Re. 14. b. 
€ 2 Mac. 10. a. 

score thousande chosen men of fote, and fyue thousande horsmen, to fight agaynst them.
So they came in to lewry, and pitched|D 

‘fo. elii. 

stones in to an vncleane place. And for so moch as the aulter of burntofferynges was vn- halowed, he toke aduysement, what he might do withall: so he thought it was best to de- stroye it (lest it shulde happen to do them eny shame) for the Heithen had defyled it, a therfore they brake it downe. As for the stones, they layed them vp vpon the mountayne by the house in a conuenient place: till there came a prophet to shewe, what shulde be done with them.

F| So they toke whole stones acordinge to the 

lawe, and buylded a new aulter soch one as was before, and made vp the Sanctuary within and without, and halowed the courtes. They made new ornamentes, q brought Y candil- sticke, the aulter of incense, and the table in to the temple. The incense layed they vpon the aulter, x lighted the lampes which were vpon the candilsticke, that they might burne in the temple. They set the shewbred vpon the table, and hanged vp the vale, and set vp y temple, asit was afore. ^And vpon the xxv. daye of the ix. moneth (which is called the moneth of Casleu) in the C.xlviij. yeare: they rose vp by tymes in the mornynge for to jdo sacrifice (acordinge to the lawe) vpon the jnew burnt offrynge aulter, that they had made: after the tyme and season that y
Heithen had defyled it. The same daye was it set vp agayne, with songes pipes, harpes and cymbales.

And all the people fell vpon their faces, worshippynge and thankynge the God of heauen, which had geuen them the victory.
“So they kepte the dedicacion of the aulter | vii. dayes, offerynge burntsacrifices and thankofferinges with gladnesse. They deckte
[iac temple also with crownes and shyldes of| golde, and halowed the portes and celles, and. hanged dores vpon them. Thus was there! very greate gladnes amonge the people, be-: cause the blasphemy of the Heithé was put, awaye.

So Iudas and his brethren with the whole. cógregacion of Israel, ordened, that the tyme | of the dedicacion? of y aulter shulde be kepte in his season from yeare to yeare, by the space of viij. dayes, from the xxv. daye of the moneth Casleu: yee and that with myrth and
|gladnesse. 
| 

è 2 Mac. 10. a. 
£1 Mac. 6. d. f. 

* Exo. 20. d. Deu. 27. a. Iosu. 8. g. e Mi malos 4 ]oh. 10. c.

The i. boke of the XPlarbabees. 

And at the same tyme buylded they vp ý mount Sion with hye walles and stronge towres rounde aboute: lest y Gentiles shulde come and treade it downe, as they dyd afore.
Therfore Iudas set men of warre in it, to kepe it: and made it stronge, for to defende
Bethsura: that the people might haue a refuge agaynst the Edomites.

The b. Chapter. 

fe happened also that when ý Heithen rounde aboute herde,/ how that the aulter and the Sanctuary were set vp in their olde estate: it displeased them very sore, wherfore they thought to destroye the generacion of lacob that was amonge them: In so moch that they: beganne to slaye and to persecute certayne of y people. ^ Then Iudas fought against the children of Esau in Idumea, and agaynst those which were at Arabathane^ (for they dwelt rounde aboute y Israelites) where he slewe q spoyled a greate multitude of the.
He thought also vpon the malice and vnfaith- fulnes of the children of Bean, how they were a snare and stoppe vnto y people, and how they layed waite for them in the hie waye: wherfore he shut them vp in to towers, and came vnto them, condemned them, and brent

vp their towres, with all that were in them. 
Afterwarde wente he agaynst the children of Ammon, wherof he founde a mightie power and a greate multitude of people, with
Tymothy their captayne. So he stroke many battayls with them, which were distroyed be- fore him. And when he had slayne them, he wanne Gazer the cite, with the townes be- longinge therto, and so turned agayne in to
Iewry. The Heithen also in Galaad gathered them together, agaynst the Israelites that were in their quarters, to slaye them: but they fled to the castel of Datheman, and sent letters vnto Iudas and his brethren, sayenge:
The Heithen are gathered agaynst vs on euery syde, to destroye vs, and now they make thé for to come and laye sege to y castel, whervnto we are fled, q Timothy is the captayne of their hoost: come therfore, and delyuer vs out of their hondes: for there is a greate multitude of vs slayne all ready. Yee and oure brethren that were at Tubin, are slayne and destroyed (wel nye a thousande

/ losephus, cap. 12. libro 12. £ Eze. 25. c. and 35, a. 
%2 Ma. 10. c. 

Chap. b. 

Chap. b. 

G 

men) and their wyues, their children and their goodes haue the enemies led awaye captyue.

Whyle these letters were yet a readinge, beholde, there came other messaugers from
| Galilee, with rente clothes: which tolde euen the same tydinges, and sayde, that they of
Ptolomais, of Tirus and of Sidon were gathered agaynst them, and that all Galilee was fylled with enemies to destroye Israel.
When Iudas and ¥ people herde this, they came together (a greate congregacion) “to deuyse, what they might do for their brethren,
(that were in trouble and beseged of their enemies. And Iudas sayde vnto Symon his brother: chose ¥ out certayne men, and go delyuer thy Erediron in Galilee: As for me and my brother Ionathas, we wyl go in to
Galaadithim. So he left Iosephus $ sonne of 
Zachary, and Asarias, to be captaynes of the people and to kepe the remnaunt of the hoost in lewry, q commaunded them, sayenge:
Take the ouersight of this people, and se that ye make no warre agaynst the Heithen, vntill the tyme that we come agayne. And vnto
Simon he gaue thre thousande men for to go in to Galilee, but Iudas himself had eight thousande in to Galaadithim.

Then wente Symon in to Galilee, and stroke dyuerse batels with the Heithen: whom he discomfited, and folowed vpon them vnto the porte of Ptolomais. And there were slayne of the Heithen allmost iij. thousande men. So he toke the spoyles of them, and caried awaye the Israelites (that were in
Galilee and Arbatis) with their wyues, their children and all that they had, and brought them in to lewry with greate gladnesse.
Iudas Machabeus also and his brother Iona- thas, wente ouer lordane, and trauayled iij. dayes iourney in the wyldernesse: Where the
Nebuthees met them, and receaued them louyngly, and tolde the euery thinge that had happened vnto their brethren in Galaadithim, and how that many of them were beseged in
Barasa, Bosor, Alimis, Casphor, Mageth and 
Carnaim (all these are stronge walled and mightie greate cities) and y they were kepte in other cities of Galaad also: and tomorow they are apoynted to brynge their hoost vnto these cities, to take them and to wynne them in one daye.

? 2 Mac. 8. c. 

The i, boke of tbe Marhabees. 

So. rrlb. 

So Iudas and his hoost turned in all the haist in the wildernesse towarde Bosor, and wanne the cite, slewe all the males with the swearde, toke all their goodes, and set fyre vpon the cite. And in the night they toke their iourneye from thence, and came to the castell. And by tymes in the mornynge when they loked vp, beholde, there was an innu- merable people bearynge laders and other instrumétes of warre, to take the castell and to oner come them.

When Iudas sawe that the battayll beganne, and that the noyse therof wente vp and range in to the Heauen, and that there was so greate a crie in the cite: He sayde vnto his hoost: fight this daye for youre brethren.
And so came behynde their enemies in thre companies, and blewe vp the trompettes, and cried in their prayer to God.

But as soone as Tymothis hoost perceaued that Machabeus was there, they fled from him, and ¥ other slewe them downe right sore: so that there were kylled of them that same daye, allmost eight thousande men.
Then departed Iudas vnto Maspha, layed sege vnto it and wanne it, slewe all the males in it, spoyled it, and set fyre vpon it. From thence wente he and toke Casbon, Mageth,
Bosor and the other cities in Galaad. 

After this gathered Timothy another hoost, | 79 which pitched their tentes before Raphon? beyonde the water. Iudas sent to spye the hoost, and they brought him worde againe, sayenge: All the Heithen that be rounde aboute vs, are gathered vnto him, and the hoost is very greate: Yee they haue hyred the
Arabians to helpe them, q haue pitched their tentes beyonde the water, and are ready to come and fight agaynst the. So Iudas wente on to mete them.

And ‘Timothy sayde vnto the captaynes of his hoost: when Iudas and his hoost come nye the ryuer: yf he go ouer first, we shall not be able to withstonde him: for why, he wil be to stronge for vs. But yf he darre not come ouer, so that he pitch his tente beyonde the water: then will we go ouer, for we shalbe stronge ynough agaynst him. Now as soone as [udas eame to the ryuer, he appoynted certayne scrybes of the people, and com- maunded them, sayenge: se that ye leaue none behynde vpon this syde of ¥ ryuer, but

^ 2 Mac. 10. d. 

———M———— J— — | 

124 

Fo. clot. 

let euery man come to the battayll. So he wente first ouer vnto them, and his people after him.

And all the Heithen were discomfited be- fore him, and let their weapens fall, and ranne in to the temple that was at Carnaim. Which cite ludas wanne, and brent the temple with all Y were in it: So was Carnaim subdued, and might not withstode Iudas. ‘Then ludas gathered all the Israelites that were in
Galaadithim, from y leest vnto the most, with their wyues and their children (a very greate hoost) for to come in to the londe of
Iuda. 

So they came vnto Éphron, which was a nightie, greate and stronge cite," and laye in their waye. For they coude not go by it, ncther of the right honde ner of the left, but must go thorow it. Neuerthelesse they that were in the cite, wolde not let them go thorow, but walled vp the portes with stones.
And ludas sent vnto the with peaceable wordes, sayenge: Let vs passe thorow youre londe,’ that we maye go in to oure owne coütre: there shal no body do you harme, we wil but only go thorow. But they wolde not let them in.

Wherfore Iudas commanded a proclamacion to be made thorow out the hoost, that euery man shulde kepe his ordre: and so they dyd their best like valeaunt men.

And Judas beseged the cite all that daie and all that night, and so wanne it: where they slewe as many as were males, and de- stroyed the cite, and spoyled it, and wéte thorow all the cite ouer them that were slayne.
Then wente they ouer Iordane in to the playne felde before Bethsan. And ludas helped those forwarde that came behynde, aud gaue the people good exortacion all y waye thorow, till they were come in to the londe of Iuda. Thus they wente vp vnto the mount Sion, where they offred with myrth and thankesgeuynge :‘ because there were

m 

Cbr i. boke of the sHlachabees, 

none of them slayne, but came home agayne peaceably.

Now what tyme as ludas and lonathas were in the londe of Galaad, and Symon their brother in Galilee before Ptolomais:
Then losephus the sonne of Zachary and 
Asarias the captaynes, hearinge of the actes 

a 9 Mac. 12, c. > Nu. 20. c. 

* 2 Par. 20. e. 
* | Mac. 5. b. 

© Deut. 7.2. 

that were done and of the battels that were stroken, sayde: Let vs get vs a name also, and go fight agaynst the Heithen that are rounde aboute vs.

So they gaue their hoost a commaunde- ment, and wente towarde Jamnia. Then came Gorgias and his men out of the cite, to fight agaynst them: losephus also and
Asarias were chased vnto $ borders of lewry, q there were slayne y daye of $ people of
Israel ij. M. men: so y there was a grcate misery amoge y people, q all because they were not obediet vnto ludas q his brethren, but “thought they shulde quyte them selues manfully. Neuertheles they came not of the sede of these men, by whom Israel was helped.
But the men that were with ludas, were greatly commended in the sight of all Israel and all Heithen, where so euer their name was herde vpo, and the people came vnto them byddinge them welcome.

After this wente ludas forth with his bre- thren, and fought agaynst the children of
Esau, in the londe y lieth towarde the south where he wanne the cite of Hebron and the townes that lye besyde it: and as for the walles and towres rounde aboute it, he brent them vp. Then remoued he to go in to the lode of the Philistines, and wente thorow
Samaria. At the same tyme were there many prestes slaine in y battayll, which wil- fully & without advysement wente out for to fight to get them honoure. And when Iudas came to Azot in the Philistynes londe, he brake downe their altares,' brent the ymages of their Idols, spoyled the cities, and came agayne in to the londe of luda.

The oi. Chapter. 

Ni when kynge Antiochus trauayled 

thorow the hye countrees,/ he herde that 
Elymas in Persia was a noble and plenteons cite in siluer and golde, q that there was in it a very rich temple: where as were clothes, cote armoures and shyldes of golde, which
Alexander the sonne of Philippe kynge of 
Macedonia had left behynde him. Wherfore 

it, but he was not able: for y citisés were warned of it, q fonght with him. And so he fled, and departed with greate heuynesse, «

f Iosephus cap. 13. li. 12.anti. 2 Ma. 9. a. 

he wente aboute to take the cite and to zd | 
| 

Chap. bi. 

F 

Chap. bt, came agayne in to Babilon. Morouer there came one which brought him tidinges in
Perside, ý his hoostes which were in the londe of luda, were dryuen awaye, and how that Lisias wente forth first with a greate power, and was dryuen awaye of the lewes: how they had wonne the victory, and gotten greate goodes out of the hoostes that pe- ryshed: how they had broken downe the abhominacion, which he set vp vpon the altare at lerusalem, and fenced the Sanctuary with hye walles, like as it was afore: yee and
Bethsura his cite also. 

So it chaunced, that when the kinge had herde these wordes, he was afrayed and greued very sore. Wherfore he layed him downe vpon his bed, and fell sicke for very sorowe: and all because it had not happened as he had denysed. And there continued he longe, for his grefe was euer more and more, so y he sawe he must nedes dye. ‘Therfore he sent for his frendes, q sayde vnto them: y slepe is gone fro mine eyes, for ¥ very sorowe and vexació of herte y I haue. For when I considre in my mynde $ greate aduersitie y I am come vnto and the Asides of heuynesse which I am in, where as afore tyme I was so mery, and so greatly set by (by reason of my power)
Againe, cosideringe y euell y I haue done at lerusalé, from whence I toke all ¥ riches of golde and syluer y were in it, q sent to fetch awaye the inhabitours of lewry without eny reason why: I knowe, y these troubles are come vpon me for the same cause. And beholde, I must dye with greate sorow in a straüge londe.

Then called he for one Philippe a frende of his, whom he made ruler of all his realme and gaue him the crowne, his robe and his rynge: that he shulde take his sonne Antiochus vnto him and brynge him vp, till he might raigne himself. “So the kynge Antiochus dyed there, in the Cxlix. yeare. When Lysias knewe that the kynge was deed,’ he ordened Antiochus his sonne (whom he had brought vp) to raigne in his fathers steade, and called him Eupator.
Now they that were in the castel (at Ierusa- lem) kepte in the Iewes rounde aboute the
Sactuary, and sought euer styll to do them harme, for the strengthenynge of the Heithen.

Wherfore Iudas thought to destroye them, 

a 1 Mac. 3. c. and 4. n. b.c. d. e.

> 4 Mac. 1. f. 
4 [osepbus capi. 14. libr. 12. 

* 2 Mac. 9. 
1 Mac. 3. d. 

The i. boke of the Marhabees. 

Fo. elt. 

and called all the people together, y they might laye sege vnto them. So they came together in the Cl. yeare, and beseged thé layenge forth their ordinaunce and instru- mentes of warre. "Then certayne of them y were beseged wente forth (vnto whom some vngodly men of Israel ioyned the selues also) and wente vnto the kynge, sayege: How longe wilit be, or thou punysh and avenge oure brethren? We haue bene euer mynded to do thy father seruyce, to walke in his sta- tutes, and to obeye his commaundementes :
Therfore oure people fell from vs, and where so euer they founde eny of vs, they slewe them: and they haue not only medled with vs, but with all oure countrees: and beholde, this daye are they beseginge the castell at lerusalem, and haue made vp the stronge holde in Bethsura: ‘And yf thou doest not preuente them right soone, they wil do more then these, and thou shalt not be able to ouercome them.

When the kynge herde this, he was very|33 

angrie,/ and called all his frendes, the captaynes of his fote men and of all his horse men together. He hyred men of warre also out of other realmes and out of the Iles of the see, which came vnto him. And the nombre of his hoost was an hundreth thousande fote men, and twentye thousande horsmé, q xxxij.
Elephantes wel exercised to battayll. *'These came thorow Idumea vnto Bethsura, and beseged it a longe season, and made dynerse instrumentes of warre agaynst it. But the lewes came out and brent them, and fought like men. Then departed Iudas from the castell at lerusalem, and remoued ý hoost towarde Bethzacara ouer agaynst the kynges armye.

So the kynge arose before the daye, and brought the power of his hoost in to y waie to Bethzacaran, where the hoostes made them to the battayll, blowynge the trompettes.
^ And to prouoke the Elephantes for to fight, they shewed them the sappe of reed grapes and molberies. And deuyded the Elephantes amonge the hoost: so that by euery Elephante there stode a M. men wel harnessed, and helmettes of stele vpon their heades: Yee vnto euery one of the Elephantes also, were ordened v. C. horsmen of the best, which

f 2 Ma. 13. a. 

* 1 Ma. 4. g. ON ac. m.

€ 1 Mac. 4. g.and 6. f. 

E 

Jfo. tlbi. waited of the Elephante, goinge where so euer he wente, and departed not from him.
Euery Elephante was couered with a stroge; tower of wod, where vpon were xxxij. va- leaunt men with weapens to fight, a within it was a man of Inde to rule the beest.

As for the remnaunt of the horsmen, he set them vpon both the sydes in two partes with trompettes, to prouoke the hoost, and to stere vp soch as were slowe in the armye.
And when the Sonne shone vpon their shyldes of golde and stele, the mountaynes glistered agayne at them, q were as bright as the ereszshettes of fyre. The kynges hoost also was deuyded, one parte vpon the hie moun- taynes, the other lowe beneth: so they wente on, takyuge good hede, and kepinge their ordre. And all they that dwelt in the londe, were afrayed at the noyse of their hoost, when the multitude wente forth, and when the weapens smote together, for the hoost was both greate ¢ mightie. Iudas also and his hoost entred in to the battayll, and slewe vj. C. men of the kynges armye.

Now when Eleasar the Sonne of Saura dyd se one of y Elephantes deckte with the kynges badge, and was a more goodly beest the the other: He thought y kinge shulde be vpó him, and ioperde himself to delyner his people, and to get him a perpetuall name.

Wherfore he ranne with a corage vnto the 
Elephante in the myddest of the hoost, smyt- inge them downe of both the sydes, and slewe many aboute him. So wente he to the Ele- phantes fete, and gat him vnder him, and slewe him: then fell the Elephante downe, vpon him, and there he dyed. {udas also and his men seinge the power of the kinge and the mightie violence of his hoost, departed

df from them. And the kynges armye wente vp 

agaynst them towarde lerusalem, and pitched their tentes in lewry besyde mount Sion.
Morouer the kynge toke truce with them that were in Bethsura.’

But when they came out of the cite’ (be- cause they had no vytales within, and the londe laye vntylled) the kynge toke Bethsura, and set men to kepe it, q turned his hoost to the place of the Sanctuary, and layed sege to it a greate whyle. Where he made all maner ordinaunce: handbowes, fyrie dartes, rack- ettes to cast stones, scorpions to shute arowes,

ie Mac. 4. g. 6. d. ? 2 Mac. 11.2. 15.d. 

Cbr i. boke of the fHlarbabrrs, 

and slynges. The Iewes also made ordi- naunce agaynst theirs, and fought a longe season.

But in the cite there were no vytayles, for 
‘it was the seuenth yeare of the warres, and those Heithen that remayned in Jewry had eaten vp all their stoare. And in the Sanc- tuary were few men lefte, for the hunger came so vpon them, that they were scatered abrode euery man to his owne place.

So when Lysias herde, that Philippe* (whom 
Antiochus the kynge whyle he was yet lyuinge, had ordened to bringe vp Antiochus his sonne, that he might be kynge) was come agayne out of Persia and Media with the kynges hoost, and thought to optayne the kyngdome: He gat him to the kynge in all the haist and to the captaynes of the hoost, and sayde: we decrease daylie, and oure v ytales are but small:
Agayne, the place that we laye sege vnto, is very stronge, and it were oure parte to se for the realme. Let vs agre with these men and take truce with them, and with all their people, and graunte them to lyue after their lawe, as they dyd afore. For they be greued and do all these thinges agaynst vs, because we hane despysed their lawe. So the kynge and the prynces were content, and sent vnto them to make peace, and they receaued it.
| Now whé the kynge and the prynces had made an ooth vnto them, they came out of the castel, and the kynge wéte vp to mount
Sion. But when he sawe that y place was wel fenced, he brake the ooth that he had made, and commaunded to destroye the wall rounde aboute. Then departed he in all the haist, and returned vnto Antioche, where he founde Philippe hauynge dominion of the cite.
So he fought agaynst him, and toke the cite agayne in to his hondes.

The bij. Chapter. 

ia the Clj. yeare came ^ Demetrius y sonne 

of Seleucus from y cite of Rome with a small company of men, vnto a cite of the see coast, and there he bare rule. And it chaunced, that when he came to Antioch the cite of his Progenitours, his hoost toke An- tiochus and Lysias, to brynge them vnto him.
But when it was tolde him, he saide: let me not se their faces. So the hoost put them to death. Now when Demetrius was set vpon

* 1 Mac. 6. b. 

4 2 Mac. 14. a. 

Chap. bíj. 

a 

Chap. by. 

the trone of his kyngdome, there came vnto him wicked and vngodly men of Israel: whose captayne was Alcimus, that wolde haue bene made hye prest. These men accused the people of Israel vnto the kynge, sayenge:
Iudas and his brethren haue slayne thy frendes, and dryuen vs out of oure owne londe. Wher- fore sende now some man (to whom thou geuest credence) that he maye go and se all the destruccion, which he hath done vnto vs and to the kynges londe, and let him be punished with all his frédes and fauourers.

Then the kynge chose Bachides a frende of his, which was a man of greate power in the realme (beyonde the greate water) and faithfull vnto the kynge: and sent him to se the destruccion that Iudas had done. And as for that wicked Aleimus, he made him hye
Prest, and commaunded him to be auenged of the children of Israel. Sothey stode vp, and came with a greate hoost in to ¥ londe of
Iuda, sendinge messaügers to ludas ¢ his brethre, q speakinge vnto them with peaceable wordes: but vnder disceate. Therfore Iudas this people beleued not their saiege," for they sawe y they were come with a greate hoost.

After this came y scribes together vnto 
Alcimus q Bachides, trustinge the best vnto them. And first, y Assideans requyred peace of them, sayenge: Alcimus y prest is come of the sede of Aaro, how can he disceaue vs? So they gaue them louige wordes, t swore vnto them, and sayde: we wil do you no harme, nether youre frendes: and they beleued them.
But the very same daye toke they lx. men of them, q slewe thé: acordinge to $ wordes y are writté: They haue cast ¥ flesh of thy sanctes, q shed their bloude eile aboute Ierusalé,’ ¢ there was noma y wolde bury thé.

So there came a greate feare and drede amonge the people, sayenge: there is nether treuth nor righteousnesse in them, for they haue broke the appoyntment and ooth that they made. And Bachides remoued his hoost from lerusalem, and pitched his tente at
Bethzecha: where he sent forth, and toke many of them that had forsaken him: He slewe many of the people also, and cast them. in to a greate pytt. Then committed he the. londe vnto Alcimus, and left men of warre with him to helpe him, and Bachides himself wente vnto the kynge. And thus Alcimus

| 
7 1 Mac. 1. d. t Psal. 78.2. * 2 Ma. 15. a.| 

The i. boke of the Marhabers. 

defended his hie presthode, and all soch as vexed Israel, resorted vnto him: In so moch that they optayned the lode of Iuda, and dyd moch euell vnto the Israelites.

Now when Iudas sawe al! the myschefe that 
Alcimus and his company had done (yee more then the Heithé them selues) vnto the Israel- ites: He wente forth rounde aboute all the borders of Iewry, and punyshed those vnfaith- full rennagates, so that they came no more out in to the countre. So whe Alcimus sawe, that
Iudas and his people had gotten the vpper- hande, and that he was not able to abyde them: he wente agayne to the kynge, and sayde all the worst of them that he coude.
Then the kynge sent Nicanor, one of his chefe prynces (which bare euell wyl vnto Israel) and commaunded him, that he shulde vtterly destroye the people.

So Nicanor came to lerusalem with a greate hoost,^ and sent vnto ludas and his brethren with frendly wordes (but vnder dis- ceate) sayenge: there shal be no warre betwixte me and you: I wil come with a few men, to se how ye do, with frenshtpe. Vpon this he came vnto Iudas, and they saluted one another peaceably: but the enemies were appoynted to take Iudas by violence. Neuer- theles it was tolde Iudas, y he came vnto him but vnder disceate : SES he gat him awaie from him, and wolde se his face nomore.
When Nicanor perceaued M his councell was bewrayed, he wente out to fight agaynst Iudas, besyde Capharsalama: Where there were slayne of Nicanors hoost, v. M. men: the residue fled vnto the castell of Dauid.

After this came Nicanor vp vnto moüt 
Sion : and the prestes with the elders of the people wente forth to salute him peaceably, q to shewe him ¥ burnt sacrifices y were offered for the kynge. But he laughed thé to scorne, mocked the, defyled their offeringes, and spake diszdanedly, yee and swore in his wroth, sayenge: ° Yf Iudas and his hoost be not delyuered now in to my hondes, as soone as euer I come agayne (and fayre well) I shal burne vp this house. With that, wente he out in a greate anger. Then the prestes came in, and stode before the aulter of the téple, wepinge q sayenge: For so moch as thou (o
LORDE) hast chosen this house, that thy name might be called vpon therin, and y it

1 2 Mac. 14. c. *92 Par. 7. c. 3 Reg. 8. f. 

Fo. rli. 

The i. boke of the Machabees. 

shulde be an house of praier and peticion? vn to thy people: Be avenged of this ma q his hoost, and let them be slayne with y swearde: remembre the blasphemies of them, q suffre them not to continue eny longer.

When Nicanor was gone from lerusalem, 

he pitched his tente at Bethoron, and there an hoost met hi out of Siria. And ludas came to Adarsa with ij. M. mē, q made his prayer vnto God, sayenge: O LORDE, be- cause the messaungers of kynge Senacherib blasphemed the, the angel wente forth, and slewe an Clxxxv. thousande of them: *Euen so destroye thou this hoost before vs to daie that other people maye knowe, how that he hath blasphemed thy Sanctuary: and punysh him, acordinge to his malicionsnesse.
J| And so the hoostes stroke the felde, the thirtente daye of the moneth Adar: and
Nicanors hoost was discomfited, and he him- self was first slayne in the battayll. *When
Nicanors men of warre sawe that he was kylled, they cast awaye their weapens and fled: but the Iewes folowed vpon them an whole dayes iourney, from Adazer vnto Ga- zara, blowinge with the trompettes, and makinge tokens after them. So the lewes came forth of all the townes there aboute, and blewe out their hornes vpon them, and turned agaynst them: "Thus were they all slayne, and not one of them lefte.

Then they toke their substaunce for a pray, and smote of Nicanors heade q his right honde
(^which he helde vp so proudly) and brought it with them, and haged it vp afore Ierusalem.
Wherfore the people were exceadingly re- ioysed, and passed ouer that daye in greate gladnesse. And ludas ordened, that y same daye (namely the xiij. daye of ý moneth Adar) shulde be kepte in myrth euery yeare. Thus the londe of Iuda was in rest a htle whyle.

The biij. Chapter. 
A| JUDAS herde also the fame of the Ro- maynes, that they were mightie and va- leaunt men, agreable to all thinges that are en of them, q make peace with all men, which come vnto them, and how they were doughty men of strength. Besydes that, it was tolde him of their battayls & noble actes which they dyd in Galacia, how they had con-

a Esa. 56. b. Mat. 21. b. > Esa. 57.f. 2 Ma.8.d. and 15.d. 3 Mac. 2. f. 4 Re.19. g. * 2 Mac. 15. d,

quered them and brought them vnder tribute: and what greate thinges they had done in
Spayne, how that with their wyszdome and sober behauoure they had wonne the Mynes of syluer and golde that are there, and op- tayned all the londe, with other places farre from thé: how they had discomfited and slayne downe the kynges that came vpon them from the vttemost parte of the earth, and how other people geue them tribute euery lyeare: How they had slayne and ouercome
Philippe and Perses kynge of Cethim and lother mo (in battayll) which had brought their ordinaunce agaynst them: how they dis- comfited greate Antiochus kynge of Asia (that wolde nedes fight with them) hauynge an hundreth and xx. Elephantes, with horsmen, charettes, and a very greate hoost: how they toke him self alyue, and ordened him (with soch as shulde raigne after him) to paye thé a greate trybute, ‘yee and to fynde the good suerties and plege: Besydes all this, how they had take from him India, Media and Lydia
(his best londes) and genen them to kynge 
Eumenus Agayne, how they perceauynge y the Grekes were comynge to vexe them: sent against thé a captaine of an hoost which gaue the battayll, slewe many of the, led awaye ther wyues and children captyue, spoyled thé, toke possession of their londe, destroyed their stronge holdes, and subdued the to be their bonde men vnto this daye:
Morouer, how y as for other kyngdomes q 
Iles, which somtyme withstode thé, they de- stroyed them, and brought them vnder their dominion: But helped euer their owne frendes and those y were confederate with them, q conquered kra both farre a nye: qý who so euer herde of their renowne, was afrayed of them: for whom they wolde helpe to their kyngdomes, those raigned: and who it lyked not them to raigne, they put him downe: And how they were come to greate preeminence: hauynge no kynge amonge the, nether eny man clothed in purple, to be magnified there thorow: but had ordened the selues a perlament, where in there sat iij.
C. and xx. Senatours daylie vpon the councell, to dispatch euer the busynesse of the people, and to kepe good ordre: And how y euery yeare they chose a Mayre, to haue the gouer-

42 Mac. 14. e. * | Mac. 1.a. 

Chap. vty, 

Chap. ir. naunce of all their londe: to whom euery man was obedient, and y there was nether euell will ner discencion amonge them.

Then Iudas chose Eupolemus the sonne of 
Thon the sonne of Jacob, ¢ Iason the sonne of Eleazar, ¢ sent thé vnto Rome for to make frenshipe t a bonde of loue with them: y they might take fro them the bondage of y
Grekes, for ý lewes sawe y the Grekes wolde snbdue the kyngdome of Israel. So they wéte vnto Rome (a very greate journey) q came in to $ Perlamét, q saide: Iudas Ma- chabeus ex his brethré q the people of y lewes hath sent vs vnto you, to make a bonde of frendshipe q peace with you, q ye to note vs as youre louers q frendes. And y matter pleased ý Romaines right well, wherfore it was writte vp: of y which ý Romaynes made a wrytinge in tables of Lato q sent it to Ie- rusale: y they might haue by thé a memo- riall of $ same peace q bade of frédshipe, after this maner: God saue y Romaines q y people of the Iewes both by see q by lode, q kepe y swearde q enemy fro thé for euermore. Yf there come first eny warre vpo y Romaynes or eny of their frédes thorow out all their dominyo y people of ý Iewes shal helpe the
(as y tyme requireth) q ý with all their hertes. 
Also they shal nether gene nor séde vnto their enemies vitales, weapés, money ner shippes: but fulfil this charge at the Romaynes plea- sure, q take nothinge from them therfore.
Againe yf the people of the Iewes happé first to haue warre, the Romaynes shal stonde by thé with a good wil, acordinge as the tyme wil suffre: Nether shal they geue vnto the lewes enemies, vytales, weapens, money ner shippes. ‘Thus are the Romaynes content to do, q shal fulfill their charge without eny disceate. :

Acordinge to these articles, the Romaynes made the bonde with the lewes. Now after these articles (sayde they) yf eny of the par- ties wyll put to them, or take eny thinge from them: they shal do it with the consente of both: and what so euer they adde then vnto them or take from them, it shall stonde fast.
And as touchinge the euell that Demetrius hath done vnto the lewes, we haue wrytten vnto him, sayenge: Wherfore layest thou thy heuy yocke vpon the lewes oure frendes and louers? Yf they make eny complaynte of

a1 Mac. 7.f. Iose. ca. 17. libro 12. 

The 6 boke of the 3rlarbabers., 

fo. clit. 

the agayne vnto vs, we shall defende them, and fight with the by see and by londe.

The ir. Chapter. 
I y meane season” when Demetrius herde | that Nicanor « his hoost was slayne in the felde, he proceded further to sende Bachides and Alcimus againe in to lewry, and those that were in the right wynge of his hoost, with them. So they wete forth by the waye that ledeth vnto Galgala, and pitched their tentes before Mesaloth which is in Arbellis, and wanne the cite, and slewe moch people.
In $ first moneth of the Clij yeare, they brought their hoost to Ierusalem, and rose vp and came to Berea, with xx. M. fote men, and 1j. M. horsmen.

Now ludas had pitched his tente at Laisa, with thre thonsande chosen men. And when they sawe the multitude of the other army y it was so greate, they were sore afrayed, q many conveyed them selues ont of the hoost,
In so moch y there abode no mo of them but vij. C. men. When Judas sawe that his hoost fayled him, and that he must nedes fight: it brake his herte, y he had no tyme to gather them together: wherfore the man was in extreme trouble. Neuerthelesse he sayde vnto them, y remayned with him: Vp, let vs go agaynst oure enemies, peraduanture we shal be able to fight with them. But they wolde haue stopped him, sayenge: we shall not be able, therfore let vs now saue oure lynes, and turne agayne to oure brethren, and then wil we fight agaynst thé, for we are here but fewe. And Iudas sayde: God forbyd, that we shulde fle from them. Wherfore yf oure tyme be come, let vs dye manfully for oure brethren, and let vs not stayne oure hononre. Then the hoost remoned out of the tentes, t stode agaynst them. ‘The horsmen were deuyded in two partes: the slynge casters and the archers wente before the hoost, and all the mightie men were for- mest in the felde. Bachides himself was in the right wynge of the batell ¢ the hoost drewe nye in two partes, and blewe the trom- pettes. They of Iudas syde blewe y trom- pettes also, a the earth shoke at the noyse of the hoostes, and they stroke a felde from the morow till night. And when Iudas sawe y
Bachides hoost was strongest of the right syde, he toke witli him all the hardy mé, and brake

So. tlij. 

e 

Ithe right wynge of their ordre, and folowed vpon them vnto the mount Azot.

Now when they which were of the lefte wynge, sawe that the right side was discom- fited, they persecuted ludas and them that were with him. ‘Then was there a sore bat- jtayll, for many were slayne and wounded of both the parties, Iudas also himself was kylled, and the remnaunt fled. So Ionathas and
Sym6 toke ludas their brother, and buried him in his fathers sepulcre in the cite of Mo- din. And all the people of Israel made greate lamentacion for him, and mourned longe, say- euge: Alas, that this worthy shulde be slayne, which delyuered ¥ people of Israel. As for other thinges pertayninge to y battayls of ludas, the noble aetes that he did and of his
|worthynesse: they are not writté, for they were very many.

And after the death of Iudas, wicked me came vp in all the eoastes of Israel," and there
‘arose all soch as worke vngodlynesse. In 
[those dayes was there a greate derth in the loude, and all the countre gaue ouer them selues q theirs vnto Baehides. So Bachides chose wieked men, and made them lordes in the londe. These sought out and made search for Iudas frendes, and brought them vnto
Bachides: which auenged himself vpon thé with greate despite. And there came so greate trouble in Israel, as was not sens the time that no prophet was sene there.

Then came all Iudas frendes together, and sayde vnto Ionathas: For so moch as thy brother Iudas is deed, there is none like him jto go forth agaynst oure enemies, agaynst
|Bachides, and soch as are aduersaries vnto loure people. Wherfore this daye we chose the for him, to be oure prynce and captayne to ordre oure batell. And Jonathas toke the
\gouernaunce vpon him at the same tyme, and 
|ruled in steade of his brother Iudas. When 
|Bachides gat knowlege therof, he sought for ito slaye him: But Ionathas and Symon his jbrother, perceauynge that, fled in to y
| Vildemesse of 'Thecua with all their company, and pitched their tétes by the water pole of
| Asphar. 
| Which when Bachides vnderstode, he came ouer Iordane with all his hoost vpon y Sab- bath daye. Now had lonathas sent his bro- ther lhon (a captayne of the people) to praye

| t Ioseph. €. 1. lib. 13. Au. 

The i. boke of the Mlarhabers. 

|his frendes the Nabuthites, y 

| place for vs to departe vnto. 

they wolde lende them their ordinaunee, for they had moch. So the children of Jambry came out of Madaba, q toke Ihon a all y he had, q wente their waye withall. ‘Then came worde vnto Ionathas q Symon his brother, ý the children of Iambri made a greate mariage, t brought y bryde from Madaba with greate pompe: on she was doughter to one of the noblest prynees of Canaan. Wherfore they remembred the bloude of Ihon their brother, and wente vp, and hyd them selues vnder the shadowe of the mountayne.

So they lift vp their eyes, and loked: and beholde, there was moch a doo, a greate re- payre: for the brydegrome came forth, q his frédes and his brethren met them with tym- panys, instrumentes of musick, and many weapes. Then Ionathas and they that were with him, rose out of their skoukinge places agaynst them, and slewe many of them. As. for the remnaunt, they fled in to $ moun- taynes, and they toke all their abaa
Thus the mariage was turned to mournynge, and y noyse of their melody in to lamen- tacion. And so when they had auenged the bloude of their brother, they turned agayne vnto Iordane.

Bachides hearinge this, came vnto ¥ very border of Iordane with a greate power vpon the Sabbath daye. And Jonathas sayde to his company: let vs get vp, a fyght agaynst oure enemies : for it stondeth not with vs to daye, as in tymes past: Beholde, oure ene- mies are in oure waye, y water of Iordane vpon the one syde of vs, with banckes, fennes and woddes of ý other syde, so y there is no

4 ? Wherfore erie now vnto heauen, that ye maye be delyuered from the power of youre enemies. So they stroke the batell. And Ionathas stretched out his honde to smyte Bachides, but he fled baewarde. Then Ionathas and they y were with him leapte in to Iordane, q swymmed ouer Iordane vnto him, q there were slayne of Baehides syde that daye, a thousande men.

Therfore Bachides with his hoost turned againe to lerusalem, q buylte vp y eastels q stronge holdes that were in Iewry, lerieho,
Emaus, Bethoron, Bethel, Thanata, Phara q 
Thopo, with hye walles, with portes q with lockes : q set men to kepe them, y they might

1 Mac. 4. b. 

è 2 Par. 20. a. 

Chap. tr. 

Chap. r. 

6 

|vse their malice vpon Israel. He walled vp 
‘Bethsura, Gazara q the castell at lerusalé also, & prouyded them with men « vytales:
He toke also the chefest mens sonnes in the countre for pledges, and put them in the castel at Ierusalem to be kepte.

Afterwarde in the C.hij. yeare in the se- conde moneth, Aleimus comaunded, that ý walles of the ynmost Sanctuary shulde be destroyed, q the buyldinges of y prophetes also. And when he beganne to destroye the, y thinges y he wéte aboute, were hyndered: for he was smytten with a palsey, q his mouth shutt, so y he coude nomore speake ner com- maunde eny of his house eocerninge his busy- nesse. Thus dyed Alcimus in greate misery at the same tyme. And whé Bachides sawe
ý Alcimus was deed, he turned agayne to y kynge, q so the londe was in rest ij. yeares.
"Thon all the vngodly men helde a councell, sayenge: Beholde, Ionathas and his copany are at ease, t dwell without care. Wherfore let vs brynge Bachides hither, q he shall take them all in one night.

So they wete q gaue Bachides this councell, which arose to come with a greate hoost, q sent letters priuely to his adherentes which were in lewry, to take Ionathas q those y were with him: but they might not, for the other had gotten knowlege of their deuyce.
And Jonathas toke L. men of the countre 
(which were the ryngleders of them) a slewe them. Then Jonathas and Symon with their eopany departed vnto the cite Bethbessen, which lieth in the wyldernesse, and repayred the decaye therof, q made it stronge. When
Bachides knewe this, he gathered all his hoost, and sent worde to them that were of lewry. Thé came he and layed sege to
Bethbessen, and fought against it a longe season, and made instrumentes of warre.
Now Ionathas lefte his brother Symon in the cite, and wente forth himself in to the countre, and came with a certayne nombre, and slewe
Odares and his brethren and the children of 
Phaseron in their tentes: so y he beganne to be stronge, q to increase in power. ;

As for Symon and his company, they wente out of the cite, and brét vp the instru- métes of warre, and fought agaynst Bachides, and diseofited him. And Bachides was sore vexed, because his councell and trauayle was

a Josephus cap. 2. 3. libro 13. 

The i. boke of the Machabrees. 

in vayne. Wherfore he was wroth at wicked men (that gaue him councell to come in to their londe) and slew many of them.
Then purposed he with his company to go awaye in to his owne countre: wherof whe
Ionathas had knowlege, he sent embassitours vnto him, for to make peace with him, q y he shulde deliuer him his presoners againe.
To the which Bachides cóosented gladly, and dyd acordinge to his desyre: yee and made an ooth, that he shulde neuer do him harme all the dayes of his life. So he restored vnto him all the presoners that he had taken out of the londe of Iuda, and thé turned and wente his waye in to his owne londe, nether proceded he eny further to come vnto ý bor- ders of luda. "Thus Israel had no more warre. And Ionathas dwelt at Machmas, and beganne there to gouerne the people, and destroyed the vngodly men out of Israel.

The r. Chapter. 

D the C.lx. yeare came Alexander $ sonne of noble ^ Antiochus, and toke
Ptolomais, whose citisens receaued him, and there he raigned. When Demetrius herde therof, he gathered an exceadinge greate hoost, and wéte forth agaynst him to fight.
Wherfore Demetrius sent letters vnto Ionathas with louynge wordes, and praysed him greatly.
For he sayde: we wyll first make peace with him, before he bynde him selfe with Alex- ander agaynst vs: els he shall remembre the euell that we haue done against him, his brother q his people. ^And so he gaue Iona-

.|thas leue to gather an hoost, to make weapens, 

and to be confederate with him, and com- maunded the pledges that were in the castell, to be delyuered vnto him.

Then eame Ionathas to Ierusalem, and red the letters in the audience of all the people, and of them that were in y castell. And therfore were they sore afrayed, because they herde, that the kynge had geué him licence to gather an hoost. Thus were the pledges delyuered vnto Ionathas, which restored them to their elders. Ionathas also dwelt at Iern- salem, and begane to buylde vp and to repayre the cite: commaundinge the worke men, to wall it, and the mount Sion rounde aboute with fre stone, to be a stronge holde, and so

^ 1 Mac. 9. c. 

125 

Fo. clit. 

a 

B 

fo. clit}. 

they dyd. As for the Heithen that were in y castels which Bachides had made vp, they

fled: so that euery man left the place, and, 

wéte in to his owne countre. Onely at Beth- sura remayned certayne of the Lewes, which had forsaken the lawe and comaundementes of God, for Bethsura was their refuge.

Now when kynge Alexander herde of y promises y Demetrius had made vnto Io- nathas, and when it was tolde him of y batels and noble actes, which he and his brethren had done, and of the greate trauayles that they had taken: he saide: where shal we fynde soch a man? wel, we will make him oure frende, q be confederate with him. Vpon this he wrote a lettre vnto him, with these wordes: kinge Alexader saluteth his brother
Ionathas. We haue herde of the, ý thou art a valeaunt man, q mete to be oure frende: wherfore this daye we ordene the to be the hye prest of thy people, and to be called the kynges frende. (Vpon this, he sente him a purple clothinge q a crowne of golde) y thou mayest considre what is for oure profit, q kepe frendshipe towarde vs.

So in the vij. moneth of the C. Ix. yeare vpon the solempne feast daye of the taber- uacles, Ionathas put the holy rayment vpon him. Then gathered he an hoost, q made many weapés. Which when Demetrius herde, he was maruelous sory, q sayde: Alas, what haue we done, ý Alexander hath preuented vs in gettinge the frendshipe of the Iewes, for his owne defence? Yet wil I wryte louingly vnto them also, yee q promise them dignities v rewardes, y they maye be of my syde.
Whervpon he wrote vnto the these wordes: 
Kinge Demetrius sendeth gretinge vnto y people of the lewes. Where as ye haue kepte youre couenaunt towarde vs, q cotinued in oure frendshipe, not enclyninge to oure enemies we were glad, when we herde therof.
Wherfore remayne still ¢ be faithfull to vs: t we shal wel recopense you for the thinges, ý ye haue done on oure partie : we shall release you of many charges, and geue you rewardes.

And now I discharge you q all y lewes from tributes, I forgeue you the eustomes of salt, and release you of the crowne taxes, of the thirde parte of sede, aud half of the frute of trees, which is myne owne dewty. ‘These
I leaue for you, from this daye forth: so that they shall not be taken of the londe of Iuda

The i. boke of tbe sHachabees. ner of the thre cities which are added ther|B

Chap. r. 

vnto out of Samaria and Galilee, from this daye forth for euermore. Jerusalé also with all thinges beloginge therto, shal be holy and fre, yee y tithes q tributes shal pertayne vnto it. As for the power of y castell which is at
Ierusalem, I remytte q geue it vnto the hye prest, that he maye set In it soch men, as he shall chose to kepe it. I frely delyuer all the lewes that are presoners thorow out all my realme: so that euery one of them shalhe fre from payenge eny tribute, yee euen of their catell.

All the solepne feastes, Sabbathes, New mones, the dayes appoynted, the thre daies before and after the feast shall be fre for all the lewes in my realme: so that in them no man shal haue power to do eny thinge, or to moue eny busynesse agaynst eny of them in eny maner of cause. ‘There shal xxx. M. also of the lewes be written vp in the kynges hoost, and haue their wages payed, as all other men of warre of the kynges shulde haue: and of them shalbe ordened certayne, to kepe the kynges stronge holdes: yee and some of them shalbe set ouer the kynges busynesse, that they maye faithfully deale with the same.
The lewes also shal haue prynces of their owne, q walke in their owne lawes, as the kynge hath commaunded in the londe of
Iuda. 

And the thre cities that are fallen vnto Iewry from the countre of Samariaand Galilee: shalbe taken as lewry, and be vnder one: nether be subiecte to eny straunge lorde, but to the hye preste. As for Ptolomais and the londe per- tayninge therto, I geue it vnto the Sanctuary at Ierusalem, for the necessary expéces of the holy thinges. Morouer, I will geue euery|3é yeare xv. M. Sycles of syluer out of ý kynges checker (which pertayneth vnto me) to the worke of the temple: yee q loke what re- mayneth (which they y had oure matters in honde in tymes past, haue not payed) that same shal they geue vnto them also. And besydes all this, the v. M. sycles which they toke yearly of the rétes of the Sanctuary, shal belonge vnto the prestes that do seruyce.

Item, who so euer they be that fle vnto the temple at lerusalem or within the liberties therof, where as they are fallen in to the kynges daunger for eny maner of busynes, they shall be pardoned, and all the goodes |

Chap. Fr. 

that they haue in my realme, shalbe fre. For the buyldinge also q repayringe of the worke of the Sanctuary, expenses shalbe geuen out of the kynges Checker: Yee and for the makinge of the walles rounde aboute Ierusa- lem, for the breakinge downe of the olde, and for the settinge vp of the stronge holdes in lewry, shal $ costes and charges be geuen out of the kynges Checker.

"But when Ionathas and the people herde these wordes, they gaue no credence vnto them, nether receaued them: for they re- membred the greate wickednesse that he had done vnto Israel, and how sore he had vexed them. Wherfore they agreed vnto Alexander, for he was a pryuce that had dealte frendly with them, and so they stode by him allwaye.
Thé gathered kynge Alexader a greate hoost, and brought his armye agaynst Demetrius.
So y two kynges stroke battayll together,’ but 
Demetrius hoost fled, and Alexander folowed 

F 

after and fell vpon them. A mightie sore felde was it, continuynge till the Sonne wente downe, and Demetrius was slayne the same daye.
And Alexander sente embassitours vnto 
Ptolomy the kynge of Egipte with these wordes, sayenge: For so moch as I am come agayne to my realme, and am set in the trone of my progenitours, and haue gotten the do- minion, ouer come Demetrius, conquered the londe, and striken a felde with him, so that we haue discomfited both him and his hoost, and syt in the trone of his kyngdome: Let vs now make frendshipe together, geue me thy daughter to wife: so shall I be thy sonne in lawe, and both geue the rewardes, and hir greate dignite. Ptolomy the kynge gaue answere, sayenge: Happy be the daye wherin thou art come agayne to the londe of thy progenitours, and set in the trone of their kyngdome. And now will I fulfill thy writynge: but mete me at Ptolomais, y we maye se one another, and that I maye mary my doughter vnto the acordinge to thy desyre.
So Ptolemy wéte out of Egipte with his doughter Cleopatra, t came vnto Ptolomais in
Í Clxij yeare: where kynge Alexāder met im, q he gaue Alexander his doughter Cleo- patra, and maried them at Ptolomais with m worshipe, like as the maner of kynges ls to be.

^ 1 Mac. 7. b. è Iosephus ca. 5. lib. 13. 

The i. boke of the Marhabees. 

Then wrote kynge Alexander vnto Iona- thas, that he shulde come and mete him. So he wente honorably vnto Ptolomais, x there he met the two kinges, and gaue them greate presentes of golde and syluer, q founde fa- uoure in their sight. And there came together agaynst lonathas certayne wicked men and vngracious personnes of Israel, makynge com- playntes of him, but the kynge regarded them not. As for Ionathas, the kynge commaunded to take of his garmentes, and to clothe him in purple: and so they dyd. "Then the kynge appoynted him to syt by him, and sayde vnto his prynces: Go with him in to the myddest of the cite, and make a proclamacion, that no man complayne agaynst him of eny matter, and that no man trouble him for eny maner of cause.

So it happened that when his accusers sawe the worshipe which was proclamed of him, a y he was clothed in purple: they fled enery- chone. And the kynge made moch of him, wrote him amonge his chefe frendes, made him a duke, and partaker of his dominion.
Thus lonathas wente agayne to lerusalem with peace and gladnesse. ^In the Clxv. yeare came Demetrius the sonne of Deme- trius from Creta in to his fathers londe: wherof when Alexander herde tell, he was right sory, and returned vnto Antioche. And
Demetrius chose? Appollonius (which had the gouernaunce of Celosyria) to be his captayne.

So he gathered a greate hoost and came vnto Iamnia, and sende worde vnto Ionathas the hye prest, sayenge: Darrest thou with- stonde vs thy self alone? As for me, I am but laughed to scorne and shamed, because thou prouest thy strength agaynst vs iu the monntaynes. Now therfore, yf thou trustest in thyne owne strength, come downe to vs in to the playne felde, and there let vs proue oure strength together: thou shalt fynde, that
I haue valeaunt men of warre with me: and shalt knowe who I am, ¢ the other that stonde by me.

Which saye, that youre fote is not able to stonde before oure face, for thy fathers haue bene twyse chaced in to their owne londe.
And now, how wylt thou be able to abyde so 

greate an hoost of horsmen and fotemen in 

the felde, where as is nether rocke, stone ner place to fle vnto?

* Iosephus cap. 6. lib. 13. Antiq. 4 1 Mac. 3.a. 

fo. rlo, 

Fo. clot. 

When Ionathas herde the wordes of Ap- 

pollonius, he was moued in his mynde: wher- fore he chose x. thousande men and wente out of Ierusalem, and Symon his brother met him for to helpe him: And they pitched their tentes at Ioppa, hut the cite kepte him forth, for Ioppa was an holde of Appollonius. Then
Ionathas layed sege to it, and they that were in the cite, for very feare let him in: and so
Ionathas wanne loppa. Appollonius hearinge of this, toke thre thousande horsmen, with a greate hoost of fote, and wente as though he wolde go to Azotus, q came Immediatly in to the playne felde: because he had so many horsmé, and put his trust in the. So Ionathas folowed vpon him to Azotus, q there they stroke the battayll. Now had Appollonius left a M. horsmen behynde them pryuely in the tétes. And when Ionathas knewe that soch waite was layed behynde them, they wéte rouude aboute the enemies hoost, and shot dartes at the people from the mornynge to the euenynge. As for Ionathas people, they kepte their ordre as he had commaunded them, t the enemies horses were euer labouringe.
3, Then brought Symon forth his hoost, and set them agaynst the fote men. For the horsmé were weery allready. So he discom- fited them, and they fled. And they that were scatred in the felde, gat them to Azotus, and came in to the temple of Dagon their
Idol, y they might there saue their lyues. 
But Iouathas set fyre vpon Azotus aud all the cities rounde aboute it, x toke their goodes,
“and brét vp the temple of Dagon with all them that were fled in to it.

Thus were slayne and brét well nye viij. thousandemen. Solonathas remoued the hoost from thence, and brought them to Ascalon: where y men of the cite came forth, and met him with greate worshipe. After this wente
Ionathas and his hoost agayne to lerusalem, with greate substaunce of good. And when kynge Alexander herde these thinges, he thought to do Ionathas more worshipe, q sent him a colar of golde, as the vse is to be geuen vnto soch as are of the kyuges nexte bloude.
He gaue him also Ẹ cite of Accaron (with the londes belongynge therto) in possession.

Che ri. Chapter. ae Y kvuge of Egipte gathered an

The í. boke of the Marchabees. 

hoost, ^(like the sonde ¥ lieth vpon the| | 

see shore) and many shippes: and wente aboute thorow disecate to optayne y kingdome of Alexüder, q to ioyne it vnto his owne realme. — Vpon this he toke his iourneye in to
Syria, q was letten in to the cities, and mē came forth to mete him : for kinge Alexader had comaunded them so to do, because he was his father in lawe. Now when Ptolomy entred in to eny cite, he lefte mé of warre to kepe it, and this he dyd thorow out all y cities. And when he came to Azotus, they shewed him the temple of Dagon and Azotus* that was brent vp, with the other thinges which were destroyed, the deed bodies cast abrode, and y graues that they had made by the waye syde, for soch as were slayne in the felde: And tolde the kynge that lonathas had done all these thinges, to the intet they might get him enell will But the kynge sayde not a worde therto.

And Ionathas met the kynge with greate hononre at Toppa, where they saluted one another, and toke their rest. So when Iona- thas had gone with $ kynge, vnto the water that was called Eleutherus, he turned agayne to lerusalem. Now Ptolomy had gotten the dominion of the cities vnto Seleucia vpon the see coost, ymaginynge wicked councels agaynst
Alexander, q sent embassitours vnto Deme- trius, sayenge: Come, let vs make a bonde betwixte vs, so shall I geue the my doughter that Alexander hath, and thou shalt raigne in thy fathers kyngdome. I repente that I gaue
Alexander my doughter, for he goeth aboute to slaye me. And thus he slaundred Alex- ander, because he wolde haue had his realme.

"Thus he toke his doughter from him, gaue her vnto Demetrius, and forsoke Alexander, so that his malice was openly knowne. And
Ptolomy came to Antioche, where he set two crownes vpon his owne heade: the crowne of
Egipte and of Asia. In the meane season was kynge Alexander in Cilicia, for they that dwelt in those places, had rebelled agaynst him. But when Alexader herde of this, he came to warre agaynst him. So kinge
Ptolomy brought forth his hoost and met him with a mightie power, and chaced him awaye. Theu fled Alexander in to Araby, there to be defended, and kynge Ptolomys honoure increased. And Zabdiel the Arabian smote of Alexanders heade, and sent it vnto

*1Mac.11.a. * Iosephus cap. 7. libro 13. ¢ 1 Mac, 10. i. 

Chap. rt. 

Chap. ri 

n 

Ptolomy. But the thirde daye after, died kynge Ptolomy himself: and they whom he had set in the stronge holdes, were slayne of those that were within y cities. And Deme- trius raigned in y hundreth and seuen and sixtie yeare.

At the same tyme gathered Ionathas them that were in lewry to laye sege vnto the castell which was at lerusalem, and so they made many instrumentes of warre agaynst it.
Then wente there certaine vngodly personnes 
(which hated their owne people) vnto kynge 
Demetrius, and tolde him, that Ionathas be- seged y castell. So when he herde it, he was angrie, and Immediatly came to Ptolomais, and wrote vnto lonathas, that he shulde not laye sege to the castell, but come and speake with him in all the haist. Neuerthelesse when lonathas herde this he commaunded to besege it. He chose also certayne of the elders and prestes of Israel, and put him self in the parell, and toke with him golde, sylner, clothinge and diuerse presentes: and wente to Ptolomais vnto the kynge, and founde him gracious.

And though certayne vngodly men of his owne people made complayntes vpon him, yet the kynge intreated him,’ like as his pre- decessours had done before: and promoted him in the sight of all his frendes, confirmed him in the hye presthode with all the worshipe y he had afore, and made him his chefe frende. Ionathas also desyred the kynge that he wolde make lewry fre, with the thre head cities of Samaria? and the londes pertayninge therto: vpon this dyd Ionathas promyse him thre C. talentes. Where vnto the kynge con- sented, and gaue lonathas wrytinge of the same, conteyninge these wordes: kynge De- metrius sendeth gretinge vnto his brother
Ionathas and to the people of y Iewes. We sende you here a copy of the lettre which we dyd wryte vnto oure elder Lasthenus, con- cernynge you, that ye shulde knowe it.

Kynge Demetrius sendeth gretinge vnto 
Lasthenus his elder. For the faithfulnes that oure frendes the people of the lewes kepe vnto vs, and for the louynge kyndnesse which they beare towarde vs: we are determed to do them good. Wherfore we ordene all $ coostes of lewry with the thre cities, Lyda and Ramatha (which are added vnto lewry

a 1 Ma. 10. b. ^ 1 Ma. 10. d. 

Che i. boke of the Marhabeers. 

from Samaria) q all $ lodes pertayninge there vnto, to be frely separated for soch as do sacrifice in lerusalé: both concernynge the paymétes which the kynge toke yearly afore tyme, q y frutes also of the earth q trees. As for other tithes q tributes y be- longed vnto vs, we discharge thé therof from this tyme forth. In like maner we graüte vnto thé all the customes of salt and crowne taxes, which were brought vnto vs. And this fredome shal they haue firme q stedfast, fro this tyme forth for euermore. ‘Therfore se y ye make a copy of these oure letters, and delyuer it vnto Ionathas: that it maye be kepte vpon y holy mount in a couenient place.

After this, when Demetrius the kynge sawe that his londe was in rest, and that no re- sistaunce was made him: be sent awaye all his hoost euery man to his owne place, ex- cepte an armye of straungers whom he brought from the Iles of the Heithen, wher- fore all his fathers hoost had euell wyll at him. Now was there one Triphon' (that had bene of Alexanders parte afore) which when he sawe that all the hoost murmured agaynst
Demetrius: he wente to Emalcuel the 
Arabian (that brought vp Antiochus the sonne of Alexander) and laye sore vpon him, to delyuer him this yonge Antiochus: that he might raigne in his fathers steade. He tolde him also what greate euell Demetrius had done, q how his mé of warre loued him not: qt so remayned there a loge season.

And lonathas sent. vnto kynge Demetrius, to druye them out which were in the castell at lerusalem and in the other refugies, for they dyd Israel greate harme. So Demetrius sent worde vnto Ionathas, sayenge: I wil not only do these thinges for the and thy people, but at tyme conueniet I wil do both the q thy people greate worshipe. But now thou shalt do me a pleasure, yf thou wilt sende me men to helpe me: for all myne armye is gone fro me. So Ionathas sent him iij M. stronge men vnto Antioche, and they came vnto the kynge, wherfore the kynge was very glad at their commynge. But they that were of the cite (euen an Cxx. thousande mé) gathered them together, a wolde haue slayne the kynge, which fled in to his courte: q the citesyns kepte the stretes of the cite, and beganne to fight.

* 1 Mac. 12. e. 

Sa. ribij. 

3: 

F 

e 

| ffo. tlbiij. 

Then the kynge called for the Tewes helpe, which came vnto him all together, q wente abrode thorow the cite, and slewe the same) daye an C. M. men: set fyre vpon the cite, gat many spoyles in that daye, and delyuered
$ kynge. So when the citesyns sawe that the lewes had gotten their wyll of the cite, and they them selues dispoynted of their purpose: they made their supplicacion vnto the kynge, saycge : Graunte vs peace, and let the lewes ceasse from troublinge vs and the cite, and vpon this they cast awaye their weapens.
Thus they made peace, and y lewes gat greate worshipe in the sight of the kynge, and in the sight of all that were in his realme, and were spoken of thorow out the kyngdome: and so they came agayne to lerusalem with greate goodes.

So the kynge Demetrius sat in the trone of his kyngdome, and had peace in his lode.
Neuertheles he dyssembled in all that euer he spake, q with drewe himself from lonathas, nether rewarded him acordinge to the bene- fites which he had done for him, but troubled him very sore. After this came Triphon agayne with yonge Antiochus, which raigned q was erowned kynge. ‘Then there gathered vnto him all ¥ men of warre, who Demetrius had put awaye: these fought agaynst Deme- trius, which fled « “inet his backe. So
Triphon toke the Elephantes, « wanne 
Antioche. And yoge Antiochus wrote vnto 
Ionathas, sayenge: I confirme the in thy presthode, ¢ make y ruler of iiij. countrees, y thou mayest be a frende of y kinges.

Vpon this he sent. him golden “vessel to be serued in, and gaue him leue to drynke in golde, to be clothed in purple, and to weere a colar of golde. He made his brother Symon also captayne, from the coostes of Tyrus vnto the borders of Egipte. Then Ionathas toke his iourney, q wente thorow ý cities beyode the water (of Iordane) and all the men of warre of Syria gathered thé vnto him for to helpe him. So he eame vnto Ascalon, and they of the eite receaned him honorably: « from thence wente he vnto Gaza, but they wolde not let him in: wherfore he layed sege vnto it, burnynge vp and spoylinge the places that were aboute the cite.

X| And the citesyns of Gaza submytted thé 

selues vnto Ionathas, which made peace with e 1 Mac.8. a,

Che i. boke of the fHarbabers. 

them, but toke of their sonnes to pledge, sent the to ferusale, v wente thorow the countre vnto Damaseus. Now when lonathas herde that Demetrius princes were come in to
Cades (which is in Galilee) with a greate hoost, purposinge to put Demetrius out from medlinge in the realme: he came agaynst them, and lefte Symon his brother in the londe: which came to Bethsura, and layed sege to it a longe season, and discomfited them. So they desyred to haue peace with him, whieh he graunted them, « afterwarde put them out from thence, toke the eite, and set mé to kepe it. And Ionathas with his hoost came to the water of Genesar, q by tymes in the mornynge gat them to the playne felde of Azor.

And beholde, the hoostes of the Heithen met thé in the felde, t layed watch for thé in the mountaynes: so y when Ionathas came agaynst thé, the other (which were layed to watch) rose out of their places, q fought, q they that were of Ionathas syde, fled euery man: q there was not one of thé lefte, excepte
Matathias the sonne of Absalomus, and Iudas the sonne of Calphi the captayne of the hoost.
"The lonathas rente his clothes, layed earth vpo his heade, made his prayer, q turned againe to thé in y felde: where they fought together, and he put. them to flight. Now when his owne mē y were fled, sawe this : they turned agayne vnto him, ¢ ‘helped him to folowe vpon all their enemies vnto their tentes at Cades. So there were slayne of the
Heithen the same daye, iij. M. men, q lona- thas turned agayne to lerusalem.

The rij. Chapter. 

ONATHAS seynge that ¥ tyme was mete|™ 
I for him, chose certayne men and sent them ynto Rome for to stablish q to renue the frendshipe with the. “He sent lettres also vnto
Sparta, and to other places in like maner. So they wte vnto Rome and entred in to councell, q sayde: lonathas y hye prest a the people of the lewes sent vs vnto you, for to renue y olde frédshipe and bonde of loue.
Vpo this ý Romaynes gaue thé fre pasportes, y mé shulde lede thé home in to y lode of ade peaceably. And this is ¥ copy of the lettres that Ionathas wrote vnto the Sparcians:

Ionathas y hye prest with ¥ elders, prestes, q the other people of y lewes, sende gretinge

Chap. rij. 

Chap. rij. vnto y Sparcias their brethré. There were lettres sente loge agoo vnto Onias ¥ hye prest, | from Arius which than raigned amonge you: that ye are oure brethren, as the wrytinge made thervpon specifieth. And Onias in- treated the embassitoure that was sent, honor- ably, and receaued y lettres: wherin there was mencion made of the bonde of loue « frendshipe. But as for vs, we nede no soch writinges : for why, we haue the holy bokes of scripture in oure hondes to oure comforte.
Neuerthelesse we had rather sende vnto you, for the renuynge of y brotherhode and frend- shipe: lest we huld be straunge vnto you, for it is longe, sens y tyme y ye sent worde vnto vs. Wherfore in y sacrifices y we offre q other ceremonies vpon ¥ hye solempne dayes and other we allwaye remembre you without ceassynge (like as reason is, and as it becom- meth vs to thynke vpon onre brethren) yee and are right glad of youre prosperous honoure.

And though we haue had greate troubles and warres, so that the kynges aboute vs haue foughten agaynst vs: yet wolde we not be greuous vnto you ner to other of oure louers and frendes in these warres. For we haue had helpe fro heaué, so that we are delyuered, and oure enemies subdued. Wherfore we chose Numenius the sonne of Antiochus and
Antipater the sonne of Jason, and sente them vnto the Romaynes, for to renue the olde bonde of frendshipe and loue with them. We commaunded them also to come vnto you, to salute you, and to delyuer you oure lettres, concerninge the renouacion of oure brother- hode. And now ye shal do right wel, to geue vs an answere there vnto.

And this is the eopy of the wrytinge, which 
Arius the kynge of Sparta sente vnto Onias: 
Arius kinge of the Sparcians sendeth gretynge vnto Onias the hye prest. It is founde in wrytynge, that the Sparcians and lewes are brethren, and come of the generacion of
Abraham. And now for so moch as this is come to oure knowlege, ye shal do wel, to wryte vnto vs of youre prosperite. As for vs, we haue wrytten oure mynde vnto you: Oure catell and goodes are yours and yours, ours.
These thinges haue we comaunded to be shewed vnto you.

When Ionathas herde, that Demetrius prices were come forth to fight against him with a greater hoost thé afore, he wente fro

The 6 boke of the Marchabees. 

lerusalem, « met thé in the lode of Hemath, for he gaue them not space to come in to his owne countre. And he sent spyes vnto their tentes, which came agayne and: tolde him, that they were appoynted to come vpo him in the night season. Wherfore when the Sone was gone downe, Ionathas comaunded his men to watch all y night, a to be ready with wea- pens for to fight: and set watchmen rounde aboute the hoost. But when the aduersaries herde that Ionathas was ready with his men to the battayll, they feared q were afrayed in their hertes, q kyndled fyres in their tentes, brake vp, and gat them awaye. Neuertheles|
Ionathas and his company knewe it not till the | morninge, for they sawe the fyres burnynge.

Then Ionathas folowed vpon the, but he might not ouertake them, for they were gone ouer the water Eleutherus. So Ionathas departed vnto y Arabias (which were called
Zabadei) slewe them, a toke their goodes. 
He proceded furthur also, and came vnto 
Damascus, q wente thorow all that countre. 
But Simon his brother toke his iourney and came to Ascalon and to the nexte stronge holdes: departinge vnto Ioppa, and wanne it.
For he herde, that they wolde stonde of De- metrius partie: wherfore he sent mé of warre in the cite, to kepe it. After this came Jona- thas home agayne, q called the elders of the people together: and deuysed with thé for to buylde vp the stroge holdes in Iewry, and the walles of lerusalem, to set vp an hye wall betwixte the castell and y cite, for to separate it from the cite, that it might be alone, and that men shulde nether bye nor sell in it.

Vpo this they came together for to buylde vp the cite: and for so moch as the wall vpo the broke of the west syde (called Caphetheta) was fallen downe, they repayred it. And
Symon set vp Adiada in Sephela, and made it stronge, settinge portes q lockes vpo it.
“Now when Triphon purposed to raigne in 
Asia, to be crowned, and to slaye the kynge 
Antiochus: he was afrayed that Ionathas wolde not suffre him, but fight against him.
Wherfore he wente aboute to take Ionathas, and to kyll him.

So he departed, and came vnto Bethsan. 
Then wente Ionathas forth against him to the battayll with fourtye thousande chosen men, and came vnto Bethsan also. But whe

*1Ma.11.c. Tosephus capi. 19. libro 13. 

Fo. rliy. 

B 

3c 

| ffo. cir. 

Che í. boke of the Marchabrees, 

| |Triphon sawe that Ionathas came with so| |the lawe q the Sactuary, and what 

greate an hoost to destroye him, he was afrayed: and therfore he receaued him honor- ably, commended him vnto all his frendes,| |I am left alone.” And now let not gaue him rewardes, and commaunded his men of warre to be as obediët vnto him as to} |am no better then my brethren: avenge my people and the Sanctuary, oure children and oure wyues: for all the Heithen are gathered together, to destroye vs of very

himself. 

And saide vnto Ionathas: why hast thou caused this people to take soch trauayle, seynge

there is no warre betwixte vs? Therfore sende| | malice. 

them home agayne, q chose certaine mé to waite vpon the, q come thou with me to

Ptolomais: for I wil geue it the, with the] |with a londe voyce, sayenge: Thou 

other stroge holdes, men of warre and their jofficers: As for me, I must departe, this is
|J only ¥ cause of my comynge. Ionathas be-| |so euer thou commaundest vs, we shall do it. 

leued him, a dyd as he sayde, puttinge awaye| |So he gathered all the men of warre, makinge 

his hoost, which wente in to y londe of Iuda.| |haist to fynish all the walles of I 

He kepte but iij. M. by bim, wherof he sente i. M. in to Galilee, & one M. wente with

himself. 

sent Triphon an hoost of fote 

Now «> soone as [lonathas entred in to 
Ptolomais, the citesyns sparred the gates of 

with the swerde, that came in with him. Then 

më and horsmen} |warde. And Simon pitched his 

in to Galilee and in to the greate playne felde,| | Addus before the playne felde. to destroye all Ionathas company. But when they knew that Ionathas w

as taken, and all| |stode vp in steade of his brother 

they slayne that wayted vpon him: they toke| |and that he wolde warre agaynst 
|councell together, and came forth ready to] {sent messaungers vnto him, sayenge 

the battayll. So when they which folowed vpon them. sawe, that it was a matter of life,

they turned backe agayne. 

him right sore. And Israel made greate| |that when he is letté forth he shal n 

lamentacion. Thé all the 

rounde abonte them, sought to destroye the. 
For they sayde: now haue they no captayne, 

nor eny man to helpe them. 

ouercome them, and rote out their name from 

amonge men. 

Heithen y were| |vs: and we shal sende him agayne. 

The rij. Chapter. nathas deed. 

gathered a greate hoost, to come in to y 

londe of Iuda, and to destroye it: and sawe y 

| the people was in greate fearfulnesse and care: 
| He came vp to lerusalem, and gathered the people together, x gaue the exortacion, sayenge:

Ye knowe what greate battayls I and my 

| [brethren x my fathers house haue 

|a INS whan Symon herde that Triphon 
| | 

a 

wente Symon and his hoost also. 

stryken for * 1 Ma. 6. c. 9. b. d, 13. b. 

troubles we haue sene: thorow occasion wherof, all my brethren are slayne for Israels sake, and

myne owne life in eny maner of trouble, for I 

At these wordes the hartes of the people were kyndled together, so that they cried

oure captayne in steade of Iudas q Ionathas thy brethren, ordre thou oure batell, q what

which he made stronge rounde aboute. Then sent he Ionathas the sonne of Absalomus with a fresh hoost vnto Ioppa, which droue them out y were in the castell, and remayned there himself. ‘Triphon also remoued from Ptolo- the cite, and toke him, and slewe all them! |mais with a greate armye, to come in to the londe of Iuda, and lonathas with him in

But when Triphon knewe that Symon 

as we haue kepte Ionathas thy brother, it is for money that he is owynge in the kynges
As for the other,| |accompte, concernynge the busynesse y he they wente in to y londe of Iuda peaceably, t| |had in honde. Wherfore sende now an C.

bewayled Ionathas, q them that were with| |talétes of syluer and his two sonnes for suertie, 

thelesse Symon knewe, that he dyssembled in his wordes: yet commaunded he the money
‘Therfore let vs| |a children to be delyuered vnto him: lest he shulde be the greater enemye agaynst y people of Israel, and saye: because he sent him not the money and the children, therfore is Io-

So Symon sent him the children and an hundreth talentes, but he dyssembled, a wolde not let Ionathas go. Afterwarde came Tri- phon in to the londe, to destroye it, and wente rounde aboute by the waye, y ledeth vnto
Ador. But where so euer they wente, thither 

Chap. rítj. 

maner of 

me spare 

but wil 

shalt be 

erusalem, 

tentes at 

Ionathas, him: he
: Where 

ot forsake 
Neuer- 

Now they 

Chap. rii. that were in the castell, sent messaungers vnto ‘Triphon, that he shulde make haist to come by the wyldernesse, and to sende them vytales: And ‘Triphon made ready all his horsmen to come that same night. Neuer- thelesse it was a very greate snowe, so that he came not in Galaadithim. And whe he drewe nye Baschama, he slewe Ionathas and his sonnes there, and then turned for to go home in to his owne londe.

The sente Symon for to fet his brothers deed coarse, and buried it in Modin his fa- thers cite. So all Israel bewayled him with greate lamentacion, and mourned for him very longe. And Symon made vpon the se- pulcre of his father and his brethré a buyld- ynge hye to loke vnto of fre stone behynde and before: and set vp senen pylers, one agaynst another (for his father, his mother and foure brethren) and set greate pilers roude aboute, with armes vpon them for a perpetuall memory, and carued shippes besyde the armes: y they might be sene of me saylinge in the see. This sepulcre which he made at Modin, stondeth yet vnto this daye.

“Now as Tripho wente forth to walke with y yoge kynge Antiochus, he slewe him tray- terously, and raigned in his steade, crowned himself kynge of Asia, and dyd moch euell in the londe. Symon also buylte vp the castels in lewry, makynge them stronge with hye towres, greate walles, portes and lockes, and layed vp vytales in the stronge holdes. And
Symon chose certayne men, and sente them to kynge Demetrius: to desyre him, y he wolde discharge the londe from all bondage, for Triphon had spoyled it very sore. Where vpon Demetrius the kynge answered him, q wrote vnto him after this maner:

Demetrius $ kige sendeth gretinge vnto 
Symon the hye prest his frende, with the el- ders and people of the Iewes. The golden crowne and precious stone y ye sente vnto vs, haue we receaued: and are ready to make a stedfast peace with you, yee and to wryte vnto oure officers, for to release you, concern- ynge the thinges wherin we made yon fre: and the appoyntment y we make with you, shalbe firme and stable. The stronge holdes which ye haue buylded, shalbe youre owne.
As for eny ouer sight or fawte committed vnto this daye, we forgeue it, and the crowne

* Iosephus capite 10. libro 13. 

The i. boke of the $rarbabers. 

[taxe that ye ought vs also. And where as 
[was eny other tribute in lerusalem, it shal 
‘now be no tribute: and loke who are mete amonge you to be in oure courte, let them be written vp, that there maye be peace be- twixte vs.

Thus the yock of the Heithen was taken from Israel, in the hundreth and seuentie yeare. And the peple of the Iewes beganne to write in their lettres and actes on this maner: "In y first yeare of Symon the hye prest, and prynce of the Iewes.

In those dayes wente Symon vnto Gaza, and beseged it rounde aboute, where he set vp ordinaunce of warre. And wanne a towre, which he toke. So they that gat in to the towre leapte into the cite, which was in a greate feare: In so moch that the people of the cite rente their clothes, and clymmed vp vpon the walles with their wyues and chil- dren, besekynge Symon to be at one with them, sayenge:

O rewarde vs not after oure wickednes, but be gracious vnto vs, and we shal do ¥ seruyce.
Then Symon for very pite, wolde fight no- more agaynst them, but put them out of the cite, and caused the houses (wherin the ymages were) to be clensed: and so entred the cite with Psalmes of prayse, geuinge thankes vnto the LORDE. So when he had cast all abhominacios out of the cite, he set soch men in it as kepte the lawe of God, and made the cite stronge, and builded a dwell- inge place for himself.

Now when they in the castell at lerusalem were kepte so strately, that they coude not come forth. ner in to countre, and might nether bye ner sell: they were very hungrie, and many of them famished to death: In so moch that they besought Symon to be at one with them, which he graunted them. So he put them ont from thence, and clensed the castell from fylthynesse. And vpon the xxiij. daye of the seconde moneth in the Clxxj. yeare they entred into it with thankesgeuynge and braunches of palme trees, with harpes, crowdes, cymbals, and lutes, synginge psalmes and songes of prayse vnto God, for that the greate enemy of Israel was ouer come.

And Symon ordened that the same daye shulde be kepte euery yeare in gladnesse, and made stronge the hyll of the temple that

| è 1 Macha. 14. d. 
126 

fo. cli. 

ia 

fo. cri. 

was besyde the castell, where he dwelt him self with his company. Symon also perceau- ynge that Ihon his sonne was a mightie man of armes, made him captayne of all the hoostes, and caused him to dwell at Gaza.

The riiij. Chapter. 

N the Clxxij yeare gathered kynge De- 
Ji metrius his hoost, and departed vnto Me- dia, to gett him helpe for to fight agaynst
Triphon. Now when Arsaces the kynge of 
| Persia and Media herde, that Demetrius was entred within his borders: he sente one of his prynces to take him alyue, and to brynge him vnto him. So he wente and slewe De- metrius hoost, toke himselfe, brought him to
Arsaces, which kepte him in warde. And all the londe of Iuda was in rest, so longe as
Symon lyued: for he sought the wealth of his people, therfore were they glad to haue him for their ruler, and to do him worshipe allwaye.

Symon wanne the cite of Ioppa also for an hauen towne, and made it an intraunce in to the Iles of the see. He enlarged the borders of his people, and coquered them more londe:
He gathered vp many of their people that were presoners: he had the dominio of Gaza,
Bethsura and the castell, which he clensed from fylthines, and there was no ma that resisted him: So that euery man tylled his grounde in peace, the londe of Iuda and the trees gaue their frute and encreace. "The elders sat all in iudgment, and toke their deuyce for the wealth of the londe: the yonge
‘men put on worshipe and harnesse vpon them. 
| He prouyded vytayles for the cities, and made goodly stronge holdes of them: so that the fame of his worshipe was spoken of vnto the ende of ý worlde. “For he made peace thorow out the londe, and Israel was full of myrth and ioye.

Euery ma sat vnder his vyne q fyge trees and there was no man to fraye them awaye.
There was none in ¥ londe to fight agaynst them, for then the kinges were ouer come.
He helped those that were in aduersite amonge his people, he was diligent to se y lawe kepte: as for soch as were vngodly and wicked he toke the awaye. He set vp y

Sanctuary, q encreased the holy vessels of the temple.

* Leui.26.a. 3 Reg. 4.b. 

The i. boke of the fHarbabees., 

When ý Romaynes and Sparcians had gotten worde, y Ionathas was deed, they were right sory. But when they herde y Symon his brother was made hye prest in his steade, and how he had wonne the londe agayne with the cities in it: they wrote vnto him in tables of laton, to renue the frendshipe q bonde of loue, which they had made afore with Iudas t Ionathas his brethré. ^ Which writinges were red before the congregacion at Ierusalem.

And this is the copy of the lettres, that the 
Sparcians sent: The Senatours and citesyns of Sparta sende gretinge vnto Simo y greate prest with the elders, prestes, q ¥ other peo- ple of the lewes their brethre: Whé youre embassitours that were sente vnto oure people, certified vs of youre worshipe, honoure and prosperous wealth: we were glad of their cominge, and haue written the earande which they spake before the councell of the people: namely, that Numenius the sonne of Antio- chus, and Antipater the sonne of Iason the
Iewes embassitours are come vnto vs, for to renue the olde frendshipe with vs. Vpon this the people consented, that the men shulde be honorably intreated, and that the copy of their earande shulde be written in the speciall bokes of the people, for a perpetuall memory vnto the Sparcians: yee and that we shulde sende a copy of the same vnto Symon the greate prest.

After this dyd Symon sende Numenius vnto Rome, with a golden shylde of a thou- sande pounde weight, to confirme the frend- shipe with them: which when the Romaynes vnderstode, they saide: what thakes shal we recompence agayne vnto Symon q his child- ren? For he hath stablished his brethre, and ouer come the enemies of Israel. Wherfore they grauted him to be fre. And all this wrote the Iewes in tables of laton, and naled it vnto the pilers vpon the mount Sion. The copy of the writinge is this:

The xviij. daye of $ moneth Elul in the 
Clxxij. yeare in the thirde yeare of Symon the hye prest, in the greate congregacion of y prestes, rulers of the people, and elders of the countre at Asaramel, were these wordes openly declared :

For so moch as there was moch warre in oure londe, therfore Symon $ sonne of Mata- thias (come of the children of Iareb) and his

è 1 Ma. 8. c. d. and 12. a. 

Chap. riiij. 

Chap. rb. 

brethren, put them selues in parell, and re- sisted the enemies of their people: that their
Sanctuary and lawe might be manteyned, and dyd their people greate worshipe. Ionathas in like maner, after that he had gouerned his people and bene their hye prest: dyed, and lyeth buried besyde his elders.

After that wolde their enemies haue trodden their holy thinges vnder fote, destroyed their londe, and vtterly waisted their Sanctuary.
Then Symon withstode them, and fought for his people, spent moch of his owne money, weapened the valeaunt men of his people, gaue them wages, made stronge ý cities of
Iuda, with Bethsura that lieth vpon the bor- ders of Iewry, (where the ordinaunce of their enemies laye somtyme) q set lewes there for to kepe it.

F) He made fast Ioppa also, which lieth vpon the see, and Gaza that bordreth vpon Azotus,
(where the enemies dwelt afore) and there he set lewes to kepe it: and what so euer was mete for the subduynge of the aduersaries, that layed he therin. Now whé the people sawe the noble actes of Symon, and what worshipe he purposed to do for them, his godly behauoure, and faithfulnesse which he kepte vnto them, q how he sought by all waies
|ý wealth of his people, because he dyd all this, therfore they chose nm be their

rynce q hye prest. And in his tyme the 

ncc a by him, so ý the Heaths ee také out of their londe: q they also which were in the cite of Dauid at Ierusalé in the castell (where they wente out and defiled all thinges that were aboute the Sanctuary, and did greate harme vnto clenlynes) and Symon put men of the Iewes in it, for the defence of the londe and the cite, and set vp the walles of lerusalem.

&| And kynge Demetrius confirmed him in his hye presthode, made him his frende, and dyd him greate worshipe. For he herde that the Romayns called y Iewes their frendes, louers and brethren: how honorably they receaued Symons embassitours: how y Iewes and prestes consented that he shulde be their prynce and hye prest perpetually (till God raysed vp the true prophet) and that he shulde be their captayne, to care for the
| Sanctuary, and to set officers vpon the workes therof, ouer the londe, ouer the weapens, ouer the houses of defence, to make prouysion for

The i. boke of tbe Marhabers. 

Fa. elrtty. the holy thynges, and to be obeyed of euery man, and all the writynges of y londe to be made in his name: that he shulde be clothed iu purple and golde, and that it shulde be laufull for none of the people nor prestes to breake eny of these thynges, to withstonde his wordes, ner to call eny congregacion in the londe without him: that he shulde be clothed in purple, and weere a colar of golde: And yf there were eny which disobeyed or brake this ordinaunce, that he shulde be punyshed.
So all the people consented to alowe Sy- mon, and to do acordynge to these wordes.
Symon also himself toke it vpon him, and was contente to be the hye prest, the cap- tayne and prynce of the lewes and prestes, and to gouerne them all. And they com- maunded to make this writinge in tables of laton, and to fasten it vnto the compasse of the Sanctuary in an open place: and to laye vp a copy of the same in the treasury, that
Symon and his posterite might haue it. 

The rb. Chapter. 

OROUER, kynge Antiochus the sonne |& 

of Demetrius sente lettres from the 

Iles of the see, vnto Symon the hye prest and 

prynce of the lewes, and to all the people, 

conteyninge these wordes: Antiochus the 

kynge sendeth gretinge vnto Symon the hye 

prest and to the people of the Iewes. For so 

moch as certayne wicked men haue gotten 

the kyngdome of oure progenitours, I amj 

purposed to chalenge the realme agayne, and to restore it to the olde estate.

Wherfore I haue gathered a greate hoost and made shyppes of warre: that I maye go thorow the countre, and be auenged of them which haue destroyed oure londe, and waysted many cities in my realme. And therfore now I make the fre also from all the tributes, wherof all kynges my progenitours haue dis- charged the, and from other customes (wher from they haue released the) what so euer they be: Yee I geue the leaue to smyte money of thine owne within thy londe. As for lerusalem, I wil that it be holy and fre : and all the weapens and houses of defence which thou hast buylded and kepest in thine hondes, shal be thine. Where as eny thinge

is or shal be owynge vnto the kynge, I forgeue it the, from this time forth for euermore.
And when we haue optayned oure kyngdome, 

Ffo. ririt. 

‘we shal do the, thy people and the temple greate worshipe: so that youre honoure shal be knowne thorow out ¥ whole worlde.

In the Clxxiiij. yeare wente Antiochus in to his fathers londe, and all the men of warre came together vnto him, so that fewe were left with Triphon. So the kynge Antiochus folowed vpon him, but he fled vnto Dora, which lieth by the see syde: for he sawe y there was myschefe comminge vnto him, and that his hoost had forsaken him. ‘Then came
Antiochus vnto Dora with an hudreth q twen- tye thousande inen of armes vpon fote, and eight thousande horsmen. So he compased the eite rounde aboute, and y shippes came by the see. Thus they vexed the cite by londe and by water, in so moch that they suffred no man to go in nor out.

“In the meane season came Numenius (a they that had bene with him) from the cite of Rome, hauynge lettres written vnto the kynges and prouyncies, wherin were conteyned
€ these wordes: Lucius the Mayre of Rome sendeth gretinge vnto Ptolomy the kynge.
The embassitours of the lewes oure frédes beinge sent from Symon the hye prest and
‘from the people of the Iewes, came vnto us, for to renue the olde frendshipe and bonde of loue, and brought a shylde of golde weyenge a thousande pounde, which we were contente to receaue of them. Wherfore we thought it good to wryte vnto the kynges q prouincies, to do them no harme, nor to take parte agaynst thé, their cities ner countrees nether to mayntene their enemies agaynst them.
Yf there be eny wicked personnes therfore fled from their countre vnto you, delyuer them ynto Symon the hye prest, y he maye punysh them acordinge to their owne lawe.

The same wordes wrote the Romaynes also vnto Demetrius the kynge, to Attalus, Araba,
Arsaces and to all regions: as Samsanes, to them of Sparta, Delo, Mido, Sydon, Caria,
Samos, Pamphilia, Lycia, Aliearnassum, and to y Rhodes: to Faselis, Coo, Sida, Arado,
Gortyna, Gnydum, to Cypres and to Cyren. 

D | And of euery lettre they sent a copy to Sy- 

mon the hye prest and to the pee of the lewes. So Antiochus the kynge brought his host vnto Dora the seconde tyme, to take it: where he made diuerse ordinaüce of warre, and kepte Triphon in, y he shulde not come

* | Ma. 14. d. 

The i. boke of the Marchabees, 

forth, Then Symon sent Antiochus two thousande chosen mé to helpe him with golde, syluer and other plenteous geer: Neuerthe- lesse he wolde not receaue them, but brake all ¥ couenaunt which he made with Symon afore, q withdrewe himself fro him.

He sent Athenobius also a frende of his vnto Symon, for to reason with him, sayenge:
Ye witholde fro me loppa and Gaza (with the castell that is at Ierusalé) whieh are cities of my realme, whose borders ye haue de- stroyed, and done greate euell in the londe, hauynge the dominacio in many other places of my kyngdome. Wherfore delyuer now y cities which ye haue take, with y tributes of y places y ye haue rule vpon without the bor- ders of lewry: Or els geue me fyue hüdreth talentes of syluer, yee and for the harme that ye haue done in the cities and for the tributes of the same, other fyue hundreth taletes. Yf no, we shal come and fight agaynst you.

So Athenobius the kynges frende came to lerusale, and when he sawe ¥ greate worshipe and honoure of Symo in golde, syluer and so greate plenty of ornamentes: he marveled, and tolde Symon as the kynge commaunded him. ‘Then answered Symon and saide vnto him: ^Asfor vs, we haue nether taken other més londe, ner witholdé them, but only oure fathers heretage, which oure enemies had vnrighteously in possession a certayne tyme.
This heretage of oure fathers haue we cha- lenged in processe of tyme. And where as thou cóplaynest concernynge Joppa and Gaza, they dyd greate harme to oure people and in oure londe, yet wyll we geue an C. talentes for them.

Neuertheles Athenobius answered him not one worde, but turned agayne wrothfully vnto y kynge, and tolde him all these wordes, and the greate dignite of Symon with all that he had sene, and the kinge was very angrie. In the meane tyme fled Triphon by shippe vnto Orthosaida. Then the kynge made Cendebeus eaptayne of the see coost, q gaue him an hoost of fote men and horsmen, comaundinge him to remoue y hoost towarde
Iewry, q to buylde vp the cite of Cedron, to make vp y portes, t to warre agaynst y people of the lewes. As for the kynge him self, he folowed vpon Triphon. So Cendebeus came vnto Tamnia, a beganne to vexe y people, to

è Iudic. 11. c. d. 

Chap, rb. 

E 

F 

Chap. rbi. 

The i. boke of the Marchabees. 

treade downe Jewry, to “take the people pre- soners, to slaye the q to buylde vp Cedron: where he set horsme q other men of warre, that they might come forth and go thorow the stretes of Iewry, like as the kynge had com- maunded him.

The rbi. Chapter. 

HEN came Ihon vp from Gaza,’ and tolde Symon his father, what Cendebeus had done amonge their people. Vpon this called Symon two of his eldest sonnes, Iudas
€ Ihon, and sayde vnto them: I and my brethren q my fathers house, haue euer from oure yonth vp vnto this daye, foughten agaynst the enemies of Israel ¢ God gaue vs good fortune to delyuer Israel oft tymes. And now for so moch as I am olde, be ye in steade of me q my brother, to go forth q fight for oure people, ¢ the helpe of God be with you. So he chose xx. M. fightinge men of the countre, with horsmen also, which wente forth agaynst

Cendebeus and rested at Modin. 

In the mornynge they arose, q wéte in to y playne felde: and beholde, a mightie greate hoost came agaynst thé, both of fote men « horsmen. Now was there a water broke betwixte them, a Ihon remoned the hoost towarde them. And when he sawe that the people was afrayed to go ouer y water broke, he wente ouer first him self: and the men seynge this, folowed him.

Then Ihon set his horsmen çq fote men in ordre, the one by the other, for their enemies horsmen were very many. But when they blewe vp the prestes trompettes, Cendebeus fled with his hoost, wherof many were slayne, and the remnannt gat them to their stronge holde. Judas also Ihos brother whas wonded at ý same tyme. And Ihon folowed still vpon i enemies, till he came to Cedro which he

uylded. The enemies fled also vnto the towres y were in y feldes of Azotus, q those dyd Ihon burne vp. Thus there were slayue i. M. men of them, q Ihon turned agayne peaceably in to Iewry. a | Mac. 16. b.

^ 1 Mac. 13. f. * 1 Mac. 15. f. 

And in the felde of Iericho was Ptolomy the sonne of Abobus made captayne: which because he had abundaunce of syluer q golde,
(for he had maried the doughter of Symon the hye prest) waxed pronde in his mynde, q thought to conquere the lode, ymageninge falsed agaynst Symo q his sonnes, to destroye the. Now as Symon was goynge abonte thorow the cities, ý were in y coütre of Iewry, and carynge for them: he came downe to
Jericho, with Matathias q Iudas his sonnes, in 

So. clirb. 

the Clxxvij. yeare, in y xj moneth called|. 

Sabat. Then Ptolomy y sonne of Abobus receaued them (but with disceate) in to a stronge house of his called Doch, which he had buylded, where he made them a bancket.

So when Symon ç his sonnes were mery q had dronken well, Ptolomy stode vp with his men (who he had hyd there) ¢ toke their weapens, entred in to the bancket house, q slewe Symon with his two sonnes, q certayne of his seruaütes. Soch greate vmnfaithful- nesse dyd Ptolomy in Israel, and recopensed euell for good. Then wrote this Ptolomy ý same vnto kynge Antiochus, requyringe him that he shulde sende him an hoost to helpe him: q so shulde he delyuer him the londe, with the cities q tributes of the same. He sent other men also vnto Gaza, for to take
Ihon: q wrote vnto the captaynes to come to him, q he shulde geue them syluer, golde and rewardes. And to lerusalem he sent other, to take it and the Sanctuary.

The ranne there one before, x tolde Ihon in Gaza, that his father q his brethren were slayne, and how that Ptolomy had sent to slaie him also. Whé Ihon herde this, he was sore abaszshed, and layed hodes of them that were come to destroye him, and slewe them: for he knewe, that they wente aboute to kyll him.

As for other thinges concernynge Ihon : of his warres, of his noble actes (wherin he behaued him self manfully) of the buyldinge of walles which he made, and other of his dedes: They are written in the cronicles of his presthode, from the tyme forth y he was made hye prest after his father.

The ende of the first boke of tbe Marhabees, 

DE 

The seconde boke of the Machavbees. 

What this boke contepnetb. 

Chap. I. 
The Iewes wryte vnto Aristobolus of the clensynge of the temple, and of the feast of tabernacles.
Of the fyre that was hyd in the pyt. 

Chap. Il. 
What Ieremy requyred of the Iewes that were in preson, and of their stories.

Chap. II. 

The Heithe kynges helde the temple at Ierusalem in honoure. The variaunce betwixte Simon and Onias. What Appollonius œ Heliodorus dyd at lerusalem. The punyshment of Helio- dorus.

Chap. HII. 

The wickednes of Symon. The faithfulnesse of 
Onias. lason laboureth to be hye prest. Of his wickednesse, and how he was dryuen awaye.
The alteracion of the presthode. Andronicus 
Du Onias, and God striketh him ther- 

ore. 

Chap. V. 

Wonderous thinges done at lerusalem. lason falleth vpon the cite, handleth abhominably, and yet is fayne to fleat thelast. The kynge of Egipte taketh the cite agayne with greate bloudsheddynge.

Chap. VI. 

The kynge procedeth forth in his tyranny, as well in other cities where the lawe of God is kepte, as at lerusalem. All this sendeth God for the wickednes of the people. The stedfastnesse of
Eleazar. 

Chap. VII. 
The death of the vij. brethre q their mother. 

How constante they are to suffre, rather then to obeye the wicked kynge.

Chap. VIII. 
The manlynesse of Iudas Machabeus, and how 
Philippe medleth against him. Judas con- forteth his people, and ouercommeth Nicanor.

Chap. IX. 
Of Antiochus and his pryde, t how God punyshed him.

Chap. X. 

Machabeus wynneth the holy cite agayne, and clenseth it. Eupator foloweth his father An- tiochus. ludas Machabeus ordreth him self well.

Chap. XI. 
What Lysias purposeth. Iudas withstondeth him, 
God taketh his parte. Lysias q ludas are at one.

Chap. XII. 
Timotheus, Appolonius and other, ymagin treason. ludas Machabeus punysheth them, wynneth
Caspin q other cities. 

Chap. XIII. 

Antiochus qt Lysias make the forth agaynst the lewes. ludas gathereth the people, t byddeth them call vpon God, goeth on, and besyde
Modin striketh a greate batell. 

Chap. XIII. 

Of Demetrius the sonne of Seleucus; The tray- terous dealinge of Alcimus, Nicanor breaketh falsely the bonde made with Iudas Machabeus.
Of the malynes of Razis. 

Chap. XV. 
Nicanors wicked purpose. fudas geueth his people godly consolacion. Of his dreames and visions, and how Nicanor perished.

The first Chapter. 
HE brethré of $ lewes which be at 
Ierusalem « in the londe of Iewry, wish vnto those brethré of $ Iewes that are thorow out Egipte: good fortune, health and peace.

God the LORDE be gracious vnto you, q thynke vpon his couenaunt y he made with
Abraham, Isaac œ lacob his faithfull ser- uauntes: and “geue you all soch an herte, that ye maye loue and serue him, yee and per- fourme his wyll with an whole herte and of a wyllinge mynde: He opē youre hertes in his lawe and in his commaundementes, sende you peace: heare youre prayers, be at one with you, and neuer forsake you in tyme of trouble. This is heare oure prayer for you.

What tyme as Demetrius raigned, in the 

Clxix. yeare, we lewes wrote vnto you in y trouble and violence that came vpon vs. In those yeares after that Iason departed out of the holy londe and kyngdome, they brent vp the portes, and shed innocent bloude. Then made we oure prayer vnto ý LORDE, and were herde: we offred, and lighted the can- dels, settinge forth cakes and bred. * And now come ye vnto the feast of tabernacles in the moneth Casleu.
In the Clxxxviij. yeare $ people y was at 
Ierusalem and in lewry, the councell and 
Iudas him self, sent this wholsome salutacio vnto Aristoboluskynge Ptolomys master, which came of the generacion of the anoynted prestes: and to the lewes that were in Egipte: In so moch as God hath delyuered vs from greate parels, we thanke him hylie, In that we resisted so mightie a kynge. And why? he brought men out of Persis by heapes, to fight agaynst vs and the holy cite. For as he was in Persis
(namely, y captayne with the greate hoost) he perished in the temple of Naneas, beynge disceaued thorow the deuyce of Naneas prestes.
For as he was purposed to haue dwelt there, 
Antiochus ¢ his frédes came thither, to receaue moch moneye for a dowry. So whé Naneas prestes had layed forth $ moneye, he entred | with a small company in to the compasse of the temple, and so they shut the temple.

Now when Antiochus entred by openynge the preuy intraunce of the temple, y prestes stoned $ captayne to death, owed the in peces that were with him, smote of their

? Deut. 30, b. 5 Leui. 23. f. | 

The fj. bake of tbe Marhabees. 

heades, and threwe them out. In all thinges 
God be praysed, which hath delyuered the wicked in to oure hondes.

Where as we now are purposed to kepe the purificacion of the temple vpon y xxv. daye of the moneth Casleu, we thought necessary to certifie you therof: that ye also might kepe the tabernacles feast daye, q the daye of the fyre, which was geuen vs when Nehemias offred, after that he had set vp y temple ¢ the aulter. For what tyme as oure fathers were led awaye vnto Persis, y prestes (which then sought the hononre of God) toke y fyre priuely from ¥ aulter, q hyd it in a valley, where as was a depe drye pyt: « therin they kepte it, because the place was vnknowne to euery man. Now after many yeares when it pleased God, y Nehemias shulde be sent from the kynge of Persia: he sent the *childers children of those prestes (which had hyd the fyre) to seke it. And as they tolde vs, they founde no fyre, but thicke water.

Thé comaunded he them to drawe it vp, t to brynge it him, q y offerynges withall.
Now when y sacrifices were layed on ç ordred, the prest Nee commaunded to sprenkle them q the wod with the water. Whe this was done, q the tyme come y the Sonne shone, which afore was hyd in the cloude: there was a greate fyre kyndled, In so moch y euery man marueled. Now all the prestes prayed, whyle the sacrifice was a makynge. lonathas prayed first, and y other gaue an- swere.

And Nehemias prayer was after this maner: 
O LORDE God maker of all thinges, thou fearfull q stronge, thou righteous q mercifull, thou y art onely a gracious kynge, onely
Tical, onely iust, Allmightie and euer- lastinge, thou y delyuerest Israel from all trouble, thou y hast chosen the fathers q halowed them: receaue the offeringe for the whole people of Israel, preserue thine owne

orcion, q halowe it. Gather those together, y are scatred abrode from vs: delyuer them y are vnder the Heithés bondage, loke vpon them which are despysed q abhorred, y the
Heithen maie knowe q se, how y thou art oure God: Punyshe them y oppresse, and proudly put vs to dishonoure. Set thy people agayne in thy holy place,” like as Moses hath spoke.

* Leuit. 6. a. 10. a. 16. c. 3 Deu. 30. a. 

So. clrbtj. 

B 

Fo. chroi. g! And the prestes songe Psalmes of thankes- geuynge, so loge as the saerifice endured.
| Now when the sacrifiee was brent, Nehemias eommaunded the greate stones to be sprenkled with the ^resydue of the water. Which when it was done, there was kyndled a flamine of the also: but it was consumed thorow the light, y shyned from the aulter. So whé this matter was knowne, it was tolde the kynge of Persia, that in the plaee where the prestes (which were led awaye) had hyd fyre, there apeared water in steade of fyre, a that Nehemias
1 his eompany had purified the sacrifices withall. Then the kynge considerynge « ponderynge y matter diligently, made him a temple, to proue the thinge y was done.
And whé he founde it so in dede, he gaue the prestes many giftes q dyuerse rewardes: yee he toke them with his owne hōde, q gaue thē.
And Nehemias called the same place Neph- thar, which is as moch to saye as a clensynge: but many men call it Nephi.
The ij. Chapter. 
A T T is founde also in the writinges of Ieremy the prophet, ý he eommaunded them which were caried awaye, to take fyre, as it is sayde afore. *He comaunded them also, y they shulde not forget the “lawe q eomaunde- mentes of the LORDE, q y they shulde not erre in their ^myndes, whé they se ymages of syluer q golde with their ornamentes. ‘These
& soch other thinges commaunded he them, a exorted them, that they shulde not lett the lawe of God go out of their hertes.

It is wrytten also, how the prophet (at y commaundement of God) charged them, to take the tabernaele q the arke with them: t he wente forth vnto the mountaine, where
Moses clymmed vp, “q sawe y heretage of 
God. And when leremy came there, he founde an open caue, wherin he layed the tabernacle, Y arke q the aulter of incense, q so stopped the hole. There eame certayne ien together also folowinge him, to marek

B the place, but they coude not fynde it. Which when leremy pereeaued, he reproued the, isayenge: As for that place, it shalbe vn- knowne, vntill $ tyme that God gather his
|People together againe, q receaue thé vnto 
(mercy. ‘Then shal God shewe them these 

* Iudic.6.d. 3 Re, 18. e. Eccli. 48. a. 5 2 Mac. 1. c. 
| S lere. 29, b. 4 Baruc6.a. ¢ Deu.34.a, f Exo. 13. d. 

The ij. boke of the Marchabees. 

thinges, t the maiesty of the LORDE shall appeare, q the cloude also, like as it was shewed vnto Moses: ¢ like as when Salomon desyred y the place might be ‘sanctified, q it! was shewed him.

For he beynge a wyse man, handled hono- rably œ wysely: offerynge vnto God in y halowinge of the temple, when it was Sissi
^And like as when Moses prayed vnto the 
LORDE, the fyre came downe from heauen,' 
& consumed the burntofferinge: Enen so prayed Salomon also, q the ‘fyre came downe from heauen, ¢ eosumed the burntofferinge.
And Moses sayde: because the synofferynge was not eaten, therfore it is cOsumed. In like maner Salomon kepte the dedicaeion
(or halowynge) eight dayes. 

In ý Annotacions q wrytynges of * Ieremy, were these thinges put also: q how he made a lybrary, x how he gathered out of all eoun- trees the bokes of the prophetes, of Dauid, the epistles of the kynges, and of the pre- sentes. Euen so Iudas also, loke what he lerned by experiéce of warre, q soch thinges as hath happened vnto vs, he gathered thé all together, q so we haue them bys. Yf ye now desyre to haue the same, sende some body to fetch them vnto you. Where as we thé are aboute to eelebrate the purifieacion, we haue written vnto you. Therfore ye shall do well, yf ye kepe the same dayes. We hope also, that the God (whieh delyuered his people, q gaue them all y heretage, kyng- dome, presthode q * Sanetuary y he promised them in the lawe) shal shortly haue mercy vpo vs, a gather vs together from vnder the heaué in to his holy place: for he hath saued vs fró greate parels, q hath clensed the place.

As eoneernynge ludas Machabeus q his brethren, the purifieacion of the greate tem- ple, the dedicaeion of the aulter, yee q of the warres y eócerne noble Antiochus and 'Eu- pator his sonne, of the shyninges y came downe from heanen vpon those, whieh man- fully defended the Iewes. (For though they were but fewe, yet defended they the whole londe, droue awaye y enemies hoost, recouered agayne the temple, y was spoken of thorow out all the worlde, delyuered the cite, doynge their best y the lawe of the LORDE which was put downe, might with all tranquilite be

^ Leui.9.d. '2 Par.7.a. *Somereade: k Deut. 30.a. ^ 1 Mac. 6. a.

€ 3 Re. 8. b. 
Nehemias. 

Chap. $j.| 

Chap. iij. 

| 
| i

iR 

o agayne vnto the LORDE, ý was so mercifull vnto the.) As touchinge Iason also of Cyren, we haue vndertake copendiously to brynge in to one boke, the thinges y were coprehended of him in fyue. For we cósi- deringe the multitude of the bokes, and how harde it shulde be for them y wolde medle with stories and actes (and that because of so dyuerse matters) haue vnder taken so to com- prehende the stories: that soch as are disposed to reade, might haue pleasure and pastyme therin: and that they which are diligent in soch thinges, might the better thinke vpon them: yee and that who so euer red them, might haue profit therby.

Neuerthelesse we oure selues that haue medled with this matter for the shortenynge | of it, haue taken no small laboure, but greate | diligence, watchynges and trauayle. Like as they that make a feast, wolde fayne do other men pleasure: Euen so we also (for many mens sakes) are very wel content to take the laboure, where as we maye shortly com-
\prehéde, the thynges that other men haue truly wrytten.
| For he y buyldeth an house a new, must prouyde for many thynges to $ whole buyl- dinge: but he that paynteth it afterwarde, seketh but only what is comly, mete and con-. uenient to garnysh it withall. Euen so do| we also in like maner. And why? He that
!begyuneth to wryte a story for the first, must with his vnderstondinge gather the matter
|together, set his wordes in ordre, and dili- gently seke out euery parte: But he that afterwarde wyll shorten it, vseth few wordes, and toucheth not the matter at the largiest.
Let this be sufficient for a prologe, now wyll we begynne to shewe the matter : for it is but a foolish thinge to make a longe prologe, and to be shorte in the story it self.

The iij. Chapter 

HAT tyme as the holy cite was inha- 

bited in all peace and wealth, & when 

the lawes were yet very well kepte. (For so was it ordened by Onias the hye prest and other godly men, that were enemies to wick- ednesse:) It came therto, that euen the kynges and ^pryuces the selues dyd the place greate worshipe, and garnyshed ¥ temple with greate giftes: In so moch that Seleucus

? 2 Mac. 1.6. 

The ij. boke of the fflarbabres. 

costes ^belonginge to the seruyce of the offerynges. Then Symon of the trybe of Ben lamin, a ruler of the temple, laboured to worke some myschefe in the cite: but the hye prest resisted him.

Neuerthelesse when he might not ouercome 
Onias, he gat him to “Appolonius the sonne of Thersa (which thé was chefe lorde in
Celosyria and Phenices) and tolde him, y the treasury in lerusalem was full of innumerable money, and how that the comons goodes
(which belonged not vnto the offeringes) were exceadinge greate alsó: yee and how it were possible, that all these might come vnder the kynges power.

Now when Appollonius had shewed the kynge of the moneye, as it was tolde him: y kinge called for Heliodorus his stewarde, and sent him with a commaundement, to brynge him the sayde money. Immediatly Helio- dorus toke his journey, but vnder a coloure, as though he wolde go thorow Celosyria and
Phenices to vyset the cities, but his purpose was to fulfill the kynges pleasure. So when he came to lerusalem, and was louyngly re- ceaued of the hye prest i to the cite: he tolde what was determed concernynge the moneye, and shewed the cause of his com- mynge: he axed also, yf it were so in dede.
Then the hye prest tolde him, that there was soch money layed vp for the vpholdinge of weddowes and fatherlesse childré, and how that a certayne of it belonged vnto Hyrcanus
Tobias a noble man: and that of all the moneye (which that wicked Symon had be- wrayed) there were iiij. hundreth talentes of syluer, and ij. hundreth of golde: yee q that it were vnpossible for those mens meaninge to be disceaued, that had layed vp their moneye in the place and temple (which is had in worshipe thorow the whole worlde) for the mayntenaunce and honoure of ¥ same.
Whervnto Heliodorus answered, y the kynge had commaunded him in eny wyse, to brynge him the moneye.

So at the daye appoynted, Heliodorus entred in to the temple to ordre this matter.
But there was no small feare thorow out the whole cite. ‘The prestes fell downe before the aulter in their vestimentes, and called vnto heauen vpon him, which had made a

^ 2 Mac. 4. a. 

* 2 Mac. 3. b. 
127 

| Fo. elytr. 
|kynge of Asia of his owne rentes bare all the 

B 

€ 

Fo. clrr. lawe concernynge stuffe genen to kepe; that they shnlde be safely preserued, for soch as comitte them vnto kepynge. ‘Then who so had loked the hye prest in the face, it wolde liaue greued his herte: For his countenaunce and the chaunginge of his coloure, declared the inwarde sorowe of his mynde. ‘The ma was all in henynesse, and his body in feare : wherby they that loked vpon him, might per- ceaue the grefe of his herte. The other people also eame out of their houses by heapes vnto the comon prayer, because the place was like to come in to confucion. The women came together thorow the stretes, with hayrie clothes aboute their brestes.

The virgins also that were kepte in, ranne to Onias, some to the walles, other some loked out at the wyndowes: yee they all helde vp their hondes towarde heané, q prayed. A miserable thinge was it, to loke vpon the comon people, v the hye prest beynge in soch trouble. But they besought
Almightie God, that the goodes which were committed vnto the, might be kepte whole, for those that had deliuered them vnto their kepynge. Nenertheles the thinge that Helio- dorus was determed to do, that perfourmed he in the same place, he him self personally beynge aboute the treasury with his men of warre. But the sprete of Allmightie God shewed him self openly, so that all they which presumed to obeye Heliodorus, fell thorow y power of God in to a greate fearfulnesse q drede. For there apeared vnto them an horse,’ with a terrible man syttinge vpon him, deckte in goodly araye, and the horse smote at Heliodorus with his fore fete. Now he that sat vpon y horse, had harnesse of golde vpon him.

Morouer there apeared ij. fayre and beu- tifull yonge men in goodly araye, which stode by him, scourged him of both the sydes, q gaue him many stripes without ceassinge.
With that, fell Heliodorus sodenly vnto the grounde. “So they toke him vp (beynge compased aboute with greate darcknesse) and
%|bare him out vpo a beare. ‘Thus he that came with so many runners and men of warre in to Y sayde treasury, was borne ont, where as no man might helpe him: and so the power of God was manifest and knowne. He laye still domine also by the power of God,

* Exo. 22, b. è? 2 Ma. 10. c. and 11. b. 

The ij. boke of the Marchabees. 

Chap. iiij. destitute of all hope and life. And they praysed the LORDE, that he had shewed his power vpon his place and temple, which a litle afore was full of feare q trouble: and that thorow the reuelacion of the Allmightie
LORDE it was fylled with ioye and gladnesse. 
The certaine of Heliodorus frédes praied 
Onias, that in all haist he wolde call vpon 
God, to graunte him his life, which was geuynge vp the goost. So the hye prest con- sidered the matter, and lest the kynge shulde suspecte that the Iewes had done Heliodorus some enell: he offred an healthofferynge for him. Now whé y hye prest had opteyned his petieion, the same yonge mé in the same clothinge apeared, q stode besyde Heliodorus, sayenge: 'lhanke Onias y hye prest, for for his sake hath Y LORDE graunted the thy life :* therfore seynge y God hath scourged y, gene |f him prayse q thankes, and shewe euery man his might q power. And whé they had spoken these wordes, they apeared nomore.
So Heliodorus offred vnto God, made greate vowes vnto him which had granted him his life, thaked Onias, toke his hoost, q
!wete againe to y kinge. The testified he vnto euery ma, of y greate workes of God, y he had sene with js eyes. And whé the kynge axed Heliodorus who were mete to be sent yet once agayne to Jerusalem, he sayde: Yf thou hast eny enemy or aduersary vnto thy realme, sende him thither, q thou shalt haue him punished, yf he escape with his life: for in y place (no doute) there is a speciall power lq workinge of God. For he y dwelleth in heané, vysiteth q defendeth ý place: qall y come to do it harme, he punysheth q placet the. This is now ¥ matter cocerninge Helio- dorus, q ý kepinge of ý treasury at lerusalé.

The iiij. Chapter. 
HIS Symon now (of whom we spakej 4 

afore) ‘beynge a bewrayer of the money and of his owne naturall countre, reported the worst of Onias: as thongh he had moned
Heliodorus vnto this, and as though he had bene a brynger vp of euell. Thus was he not ashamed to call him an enemie of y realme, that was so faithfull an ouerseer q defender of the cite x of his people: yee q so fernent in the lawe of God. But when the malice of
Symon increased so farre, y thorow his frendes 

* 2 Mac. 5. c. 7 Act. 57. 6, * 2 Ma. 3. a. 

Chap. tif. 

n 

there were certayne manslaughters comitted d 
Onias considered the parell y might come! thorow this strife, and how that Appollonius
(namely the chefe lorde in Celosyria and 
Phenices) was all set vpon tyranny, and 
Symons malice increased the same: He gat: him to the kynge, not as an accuser of the. citesyns, but as one that by him self intended the comon wealth of the whole multitude.
For he sawe it was not possible to lyue in peace, nether Symon to leane of from his foolishnesse, excepte the kynge dyd loke therto. |

But after the death of Seleucus, when 
Antiochus (which is called the noble) toke 
¥ kyngdome: lason the brother of Onias laboured to be hye prest: For he came vnto the kynge, and promised him thre hundreth t lx. talentes of syluer, a of the other rétes
Ixxx. talentes. Besydes this he promised him yet an C. q L, yf he might haue y scole of y children, and that he might call them of lerusalem Antiochians. Which when the kynge had graunted, q he had gotten the superiorite: he begane immediatly to drawe his kinsmen to the custome of the Heithen, put downe the thinges, that the Iewes had set vp of loue, by Ihon the father of Eupolemius
(which was sent embassitoure vnto Rome, for to make the bonde of frendshipe and loue.)
He put downe all the Lawes « Lyberties of the Lewes, and set vp wicked statutes. He durst make a fightinge scole vnder y castell, and set fayre yonge men to lerne the maners of whores and brodels.

This was now the begynnynge of the 
Heithenish q straunge couersacion, brought in thorow the vngracious and vnherde wicked- nesse of Iason (which shulde not be called a prest, but an vngodly personne.) In so moch, that the prestes were now nomore occupide aboute the seruyce of the aulter, but despysed the temple, regarded not the offrynges: yee gaue their diligéce to lerne to fight, to wristle, to leape, to daunce, q to put at y stone: not settynge by ý honoure of y fathers, but liked y glory of the Grekes E of all: for the vhi they stroue perlously, and were gredy to folowe their statutes, yee their lust was in all thinges to be like the, which afore were their enemies ¢ destroyers. Howbeit to do wickedly agaynst y lawe of God, shal not

* These were kepte euery fifth yeare. 

The ij. boke of the Marchabees. 

escape vnpunyshed: but of this we shal speake here after.

Fo. clert. 

What tyme as the *Olympiades sportes|D 

were played at Tyrus (the kynge him selfe beinge presente) this vngracious Iason sent wicked men, bearinge from them of Ierusalem
(which now were called Antiochians) iij. C. drachmas of syluer for an offerynge to
Hercules. ‘These had they that caried them, desyred vnder soch a fashio, as though they shulde not haue bene offred, but bestowed to other vses. Neuertheles he that sent them, sent them to the intent that they shulde be offred ynto Hercules. But because of those that were present, they were geuen as to the jmakynge of shippes. And Appollonius the sonne of Nesteus was sent in to Egipte, be- cause of the noble men of kynge Ptolomy
Philometor. Now when Antiochus perceaued y he was put out from medlinge in the realme, he sought his owne profit, departed from thence, came to Ioppa, « then to Ieru- salem: where he was honorably receaued of lason q the cite, x was brought in with torche light and with greate prayse: and so he turned his hoost vnto Phenices.

After ijj yeare lason sent Menelaus (the fore sayde Symons brother) ^to beare the money vnto y kynge, q to bringe him answere of other necessary matters. But he (when he was praysed of y kynge for magnifienge of his power) turned y hye presthode vnto him self, layenge vp iij. C. talétes of syluer for
Iason. So whé he had gotten comaundemetes from $ kynge, he came, hauinge nothinge y becometh a prest, but bearinge y stomack of a cruell tyraunte, q the wrath of a wylde brute beest. “Then lason (which had disceaued his owne brother) seynge y he him self was begyled also, was fayne to fle in to y lode of v Ammonites, q Menelaus gat y dominio.
But as for ¥ moneye y he had promised ynto the kynge, he dyd nothinge therin, when
Sostratus the ruler of ¥ castell requyred it of him. (For Sostratus was the man, y gathered y customes) wherfore they were both called before the kynge. Thus was Menelaus put out of y presthode, t Lysimachus his brother came in his steade. — Sostratus also was made lorde of the Cyprians.

It happened in $ meane season, y y Thar- sians a Mallocians made insurrecio, because

^ 2 Mac. 4. b. * 2 Mac. 4. b. 

F3 

| 

3c 

F 

So. dri. they were geuen for a present vnto kynge
| Antiochus concubyne. Then came $ kinge 
‘in all $ haist, to still them agayne and to pacifie the matter, leauynge Andronicus there to be his debyte, as one mete therfore. Now
Menelaus supposinge that he had gotten a right convenient tyme, stole certayne vessels of golde out of the temple, and gaue thé to
| Andronicus for a present: and some he solde 

lat Tyrus and in the cities therby. 

Which when Onias knewe of a suertye, he reproued him: but he kepte him in a santuary besyde Daphnis that lyeth by Antioche.
| Wherfore Menelaus gat him to Andronicus, 
‘and prayed him that he wolde slaye Onias. 
!So when he came to Onias, he counceled him 
'eraftely to come out of the santuary, geuynge him his honde with an ooth (how be 1t he suspecte him) and the he slewe Onias, with- out eny regarde of rightuousnesse. For the which cause not only the lewes, but other

[nacions also toke indignacion, and were dis- 

'pleased for the vnrightuous death of so godly 

a man. 
© And when the kynge was come agayne from Cilicia, the Iewes and certaine of the
Grekes wente vnto him, complayninge for the vnrightuous death of Onias. Yee An- jtiochus himself also was sory in his mynde for Onias, so y it pitied him, and he wepte, remembringe ie sobernesse and manerly be- hauoure. Wherfore he was so kyndled in his mynde, y he cOmaunded Andronicus to be striped out of his purple clothinge, q so to be} led thorow out all the cite, yee and y vngra- cious man to be slayne in y same place, where, he committed his wickednes vpon Onias.
Thus ¥ LORDE rewarded him his punysh-! ment, as he had deserued. Now when Lysi- machus had done many wycked dedes in ¥ temple thorow the councell of Menelaus, and the voyce came abrode: the multitude ga- thered thé together agaynst Lisimachus, for he had caried out now moch golde.

So when the people arose and were full of displeasure, Lisimachus armed iij. M. vn- thriftes to defende him: a certayne tyraunte beynge their captayne, which was growen both in age q woodnesse. But when the people vnderstode the purpose of Lysimachus, some gat stones, some good stronge clubbes, q some cast aszshes vpon Lisimachus. Thus there were many of thé wounded, some

The ij. boke of the sMachabees. 

beynge slayne, q all the other chaced awaye. 
But as for y wicked churchrobber himself, they kylled him besyde the treasury. Of these matters therfore there was kepte a courte agaynst Menelaus.

Now when ý kinge came to Tyrus, they |0 made a cóplaynte vnto him of Menelaus, | concerninge this busynesse, q ý embassitours were thre. But Menelaus wente q promised
Ptolomy to geue him moch money, yf he wolde persuade the kynge. So Ptolomy wéte to the kinge in to a courte (where as he was set to coole him) q brughte him out of y mynde. In so moch y he discharged Mene- laus frd y accusacions, j not withstondinge was cause of all myschefe: and those poore men (which yf they had tolde their cause, yee before the Scythians, they shulde haue ben iudged innocét) thé he codened to death.
"Thus were they soone punyshed, which folowed vpo y matter for y cite, for y people, q for y holy vessell. Wherfore they of Tyrus toke indignacion, t buried the honorably. And so thorow ¥ covetousnesse of them that were in power, Mere remayned still in authorite, increasinge in malyce, to the hurte of the citesyns.

The b. Chapter. 

T y same tyme Antiochus made him 
A ready to go againe in to Egipte. "The were there sene at lerusalem (xl. dayes loge) horsmé runninge to and fro in the ayre, which had rayment of golde, t speares. ‘There were sene also whole hoostes of më weapened, q horses runnynge in an ordre, how they came together, how they helde forth their shildes, how $ harnessed men drew out their sweardes, q shot their dartes, The shyne of y golde weapes was sene, ¢ of all maner of armure.
Wherfore euery mà prayed, y those tokens might turne to good. Now whé there was gone forth a false rumonre, as though An- tiochus had bene deed: lason toke a M. me, q came sodely vpo ¥ cite. The citesyns rane vnto y walles, at y last was y cite taken, and
Menelans fled in to the castell. 

As for Iason, he spared not his owne citesyns in the slaughter, nether considered he what greate euell it were, to destroye y prosperite of his owne kynsmen: but dyd as one that had gotten the victory of his enemies, and not of his frendes. For all this gatt he not the

Chap. bi, 

The ij. boke of the Harhabees, 

superiorite, but at the last receaued confucion | for his malice, and “fled agayne like a vaga- bunde in to the londe of the Ammonites.
Fynally (for a rewarde of his wickednesse) he was accused before Aretha the kynge of the
Arabians: In so moch that he was fayne to fle from cite to cite, beynge despysed of cuery man as a forsaker of the lawes, and an abho- minable personne. And at ¥ last (as an open enemy of his owne naturall countre and of the citesyns,) he was dryuen in to Egipte.
Thus he y afore put many out of their owne natyue londe, peryshed from home him | self. He wente to Lacedemon, thinkinge | there to haue gotten sucoure by reason of kynrede. And he that afore had casten many one out vnburied, was throwen out himself,
‘no man mournynge for him, ner puttinge him in his graue: so that he nether enioyed y buriall of a straunger, nether was he par-
' |taker of his fathers sepulcre. 
Now when this was done the kinge sus- 
| pecte, Y the lewes wolde haue fallen from 
| him: wherfore he came in a greate displea- 
| sure out of Egipte, q toke the cite by violence. 
| |^He comaunded his men of warre also, that 
| they shulde kyll q not spare, but slaye downe 
| 

soch as with stode them, or clymmed vp vpo 

y houses. ‘Thus was there a greate slaughter 

of yonge men, olde men, women, children 

and virgins. In iij. dayes were there slayne 

lxxx. M, fourty thousande put in preson, a 

no lesse solde. Yet was he not cotent with 

this, but durst go in to the most holy temple 
| (Menelaus that traytoure to y lawes q to his 

owne naturall countre, beynge his gyde) q 

with his wicked hondes toke $ holy vessell, ich other kynges « cities fad geuen thither

‘for ¥ garnishinge q honoure of y place: thé 

toke he in his hodes vnworthely, « defyled 
|o them. 

So madd was Antiochus, that he consi- dered not, how that God was a litle wroth for the synnes of them that dwelt in the cite, for
| |the which soch confucion came vpon that place. And why? ^yf it had not happened them to haue bene lapped in many synnes, this Antiochus (as soone as he had come) had sodenly bene punished, and: shot out for his
| |presumpcioó: “like as Heliodorus was, whom 
| [Seleucus the kynge sente to robbe $ treasury. 
' |Neuertheles God hath not chosen the people 

*2Ma.4.e., ^i1Mac.l.c. ‘¢Iudit.5.d. 492 Ma. 3. d. 

for the places sake, but the place for the peoples sake: and therfore is the place be- come partaker of the peoples trouble, but afterwarde shall it enioye the wealth of them.
And like as it is now forsaken in the wrath of allmighty God, so when the greate God is reconcyled, it shal be set vp in hye worshipe agayne.

So when Antiochus had taken a M. and|35 viij. C. talentes out of the temple, he gat him to Antioche in all the haist, thinkinge in his
‚pryde, that he might make me sale vpon the drye londe, and to go vpon ¥ see, soch an hye anynde had he. He lefte debites there to vexe the people: At lerusalem left he Phi- lippe a Phrigian, in maners more cruell thé himself y set him there: At Garisim he left
Andronicus q Menelaus, which were more grenous to the citisyns then other. Now as he was thus set in malyce against ý Iewes, he sent Appollonius an hated prynce,’ with xxij.
M. cómaundinge him to slaye all those y were of perfecte age, and to sell the wome,
| maydes a children. When he came now to lerusalem, he fained peace, q kepte him still vntill $ Sabbath daye. And then he cé- maunded his men to take them to their weapens (for y lewes kepte holy daye) and so he slewe EIS y were gone forth to the jopen playe, runninge here and there thorow the cite with his men wapened, and mur- thured a greate nombre. /But ludas Ma-
,chabeus which was the tenth, fled in to the 
/wyldernesse, led his life there with his com- pany amonge the wylde beestes and vpon the mountaynes: dwellinge there and eatinge igrasse, lest they shulde be partakers of the fylthynesse.

The bi. Chapter. 

| OT longe after this, sent the kynge a 
| messaunger of Antioche,’ for to com- pell ¥ Iewes to altre $ ordinaunces of y fathers q the lawe of God, to defyle the temple y was at lerusalem, « to call it the teple of Iupiter
Olimpius: q y they shulde be in Gazarim, as those which dwell at $ place of Iupiter the harberous. This wicked sedicio of y vngodly was heuy vpon all $ people: For y temple was full of voluptuousnes bebbinge q bollinge of y Heithé, of ribaudes q harlottes together.
The womé wente in to ¥ holy place, « bare 

€ 1 Mac. 1. d. 

f 1 Mac. 2. c. 

* 1 Mac. 1. d. 

Fo. clrrij. 

4 

| 
| 
I 
| l

| fo. clrritij. 

in that was not laufull. 

The aulter also was full of vnlaufull thinges, which y lawe for- byddeth to laye vpo it. 'The Sabbathes were not kepte, the other solempne feastes of y londe were not regarded. To be plaine, there durst no mā be a knowne that he was a
Iewe. 

Iu the daye of the kynges byrth they were compelled perforce to offre: t when y feast of Bachus was kepte, they were cóstrayned to weere garlandes of yven, and so to go ahoute for the honoure of Bachus.

Morouer thorow the councell of Ptolomy, there wente out a commaundement in y nexte cities of the Heithen, y they shulde intreate the lewes in like maner: namely, to cópell the for to do sacrifice after y lawes of y
Gentiles: and who so wolde not, to put them to death. ^A piteous thinge was it to se.
There were ij. women accused to haue cir- eumcided their sonnes, whom when they had led rounde aboute the cite (the babes hang- inge at their brestes) they cast them downe headlinges ouer the walles. Some y were crepte in to dennes and had kepte the Sab-

.|bath, were accused vnto Philippe, and brent 

in the fyre : because that for the feare of God they kepte the commaüdement so stiffly, and wolde not defende them selues.

Now I beseke all those which reade this boke, that they refuse it not for these falles of aduersite: q 1udge the thinges g are hap- pened) for no destruccion, but for a chas- tenynge of oure people. And why? Whé
God suffreth not synners longe to folowe their owne mynde, ‘but shortly punysheth them, it is a toké of his greate louynge kynd- nes. For this grace haue we of God more then other people, y he suffreth not vs longe to synne vnpunyshed like other nacions, that when the daye of iudgment commeth, he maye punysh thé in the fulnes of their synnes.
Yf we synue, he correcketh vs, but he neuer withdraweth his mercy fro vs: q though he punysh with aduersite, yeth doth he neuer for- sake his people. But let this that we haue

|spoké now with few wordes, be for a warninge 

q exortacié of y Heithé. Now wil we come to the declaringe of the matter. Eleazar one of y principall scribes, an aged mà q of a wel- fauored coütenaüce, was costrained to gape with opé mouth ¢ to cate swynes flesh.^ But

* 1 Noc. 1. f. 

t Prou. 3. b. * Leui. 11. a. 

The ij. boke of the Machabees. 

he desyringe rather to dye gloriously thé to liue with shame, offred himself willigly to y martirdome. Now whé he sawe y he must nedes go to it, he toke it pacietly: for he was at a poynte with himself, y he wolde consente to no vnlaufull thynge for eny pleasure of life. They y stode by beynge moued with pyte (but not a right) for y olde frendshipe of the man, toke him asyde priuely, and prayed him y he wolde let soch flesh be brought him as were laufull to eate, q thé to make a coüte- naiice as though he had eaten of ¥ flesh of y sacrifice like as the kynge commaunded, for so he might be delyuered from death: q so for the olde frendshipe of y man, they shewed him this kindnes. But he beganne to con- sidre his discrete and honorable age, his noble and worshipfull stocke, and how y fro his youth vp he had bene of an honest and good conuersacion, yee q how constautly he had kepte ý ordinaunces and lawes commaüded by Gol wherfore he gaue them this answere, and sayde :

Yet had I rather first be layed in my graue. “For it becommeth not myne age
(sayde he) in eny wyse to dyssemble, wherby many yonge personnes might thinke, that
Eleazar beinge lxxx. yeare olde and ten, were now gone to a straunge life: and so thorow myne ypoerisy (for a litle tyme of a transitory life) they might be disceaued : by this meanes also shulde I defyle myne age, ¢ make it abho- minable. For though I were now delyuered from the tormentes of men, yet shulde I not escape the “honde of allmightie God, nether alyue ner deed. Wherfore I will dye man- fully, q do- as it becommeth myne age:
Wherby I maie peraduenture leaue an exaple of stedfastnesse for soch as be yonge, yf I with a ready mynde q manfully dye an honest death, for the most worthy and holy lawes.

When he had sayde these wordes, imme- diatly he was drawen to the tormete. Now they that led him and were mylde a litle afore, beganne to take displeasure, because of the wordes y he sayde: for they thought he had spoke them of an hye mynde. But whé he was in his martirdome, he mourned and sayde: Thou (O LORDE) which hast the holy knowlege, knowest openly : that where as
I might be delyuered fro death, I suffre these sore paynes of my body: but in my mynde I

4 1 Tess. 5. c. * Amos 1. a... 

Chap. bi, 

D 

Chap. bij. 

The ij. boke of the Marhabees. 

a 

33 

am wel contente to suffre them, because I feare the. Thus this man dyed, leauynge y memoriall of his death for an example, not only vnto yonge men, but vnto all $ people, to bé stedfast and manly.

The bij. Chapter. 
T happened also that there were vij. 

“brethren (with their mother) taken, a: 

compelled by the kynge agaynst the lawe, to eate swynes flesh: namely with scourges and lethren whippes.. And one of them which
¡was y chefe, sayde: What sekest thou, and what requyrest thou of vs? As for vs, we are ready rather to suffre death, then to offende the lawes of God and the fathers.
Then was the kynge angrie, and bad heate cauldrons and brasen pottes. Which when they were made hote, immediatly he com- maunded y tonge of him that spake first, to be cut out, to pull the skynne ouer his heade, to payre of the edges of his handes and fete: yee and that in the sight of his mother and the other of his brethren. Now when he was cleane marred, he commaunded a fyre to be made, q so (whyle there was eny breath in him) to be fryed in the caudron. In the which when he had bene longe payned, the other brethren with their mother exorted him to dye manfully, sayége: The LORDE God shal regarde the treuth, and comforte vs, like as Moses testifieth and declareth in his ^songe, sayenge: and he wyl haue compassion on his seruauntes.

So whé the first was deed after this maner, they brought the seconde to haue him in derision, pulled the skynne with the hayre ouer his heade, and axed him, yf he wolde eate swynes flesh, or he were payned in y other membres also thorow out his body.
But he answered boldly, and sayde : I will not do it. And so was he tormented like as y first. And whé he was eué at y geuinge vp of y goost, he sayde: Thou most vngracious personne puttest vs now to death, but the kynge of y worlde shall rayse vs vp (which dye for his lawes) in $ resurreccion of euer- lastinge life.

After him, was the thirde had in derision : and when he was requyred, he putt out his tonge, and that right soone, holdinge forth his hondes manfully, and spake with a stedfast

? Leuit. 11, a. ? Deut. 32. c. 

faith: These haue I of heaué, but now for | 

the lawe of God I despyse them: for my trust is, that I shall receaue them of him agayne.
In so moch that the kynge and they which were with him, marueled at the yonge mans boldnesse, that he nothinge regarded the paynes. |

Now when he was deed also, they vexed the | fourth with tormentes in like maner. So when he was now at his death, he sayde: It is better that we beynge put to death of mē, haue oure hope and trust in God, for he shal | rayse vs vp agayne. “As for the, thou shalt haue no resurreccion to life.

And when they had spoken to the fifth, they torméted him. Then loked he vnto y kinge, q sayde: Thou hast power amoge me
(for thou art a mortall man also thy self) to do what thou wilt, but thinke not, y God hath forsaken oure generacion. Abde the, tary styll a whyle, q thou shalt se the greate power of God, how he wil punysh the q thy sede.

After him they brought the sixte, which beynge at the poynte of death, sayde : Be not disceaued (o kynge) for this we suffre for oure owne sakes, because we haue offended oure
God, q therfore marvelous thinges are shewed vpon vs. But thinke not thou (which takest | in honde to stryue agaynst God) that thou! shalt escape vnpunyshed.

This excellent mother (worthy to be well reported of, and had in remembraunce) sawe hir seuen sonnes dye in one daye, and suffred it paciétly, because of the hope that she had in God: Yee she exorted euery one of them in especiall, and that boldly and stedfastly, with parfite wyszdome, wakynge vp hir wyuysh thought with a manly stomacke, and sayde vnto them : I can not tell how ye came in my wombe, for I nether gaue you breth ner soule, no ner life. It is not I y ioyned y mébres of youre bodies together, but y maker of y worlde, which fashioned y byrth of ma, q begane all thinges. Euen he also of his owne mercy shall geue you breath and life agayne, like as ye now regarde not youre owne selues for his lawes sake.

Now thought Antiochus that she had despysed him, therfore he let her go with hir reproues, and beganne to exorte the yongest sonne (which yet was left) not only with wordes

* Toh. 5. c. 

Fo. cfrrb. 

f 

€ 

| ffo. clyrbt. but swore vnto him with an ooth, y he shulde make him a rich q welthy man (yf he wolde forsake $ lawes of his fathers) yee and y he shulde geue him, what so euer were necessary for him. But whé the yonge man wolde not be moued, for all these thinges, he called his mother, q counceled hir to sane hir sonnes life. And when he had exorted her with many wordes, she promised him, that she shulde speake vuto hir sonne. So she turned her vnto him (laughinge ý cruell tyraunte to scorne) q spake with a bolde voyce: O my sonne, haue pite vpon me, y bare ý ix. monethes in my wombe, that gaue the sucke, norished the and brought the vp vnto this age. I beseke the (my sonne) loke vpon heauen and earth and all that is therin, and considre, that God made them and mans generacion of naught: so shalt thou not feare this hangman, but suffre death stedfastly, like as thy brethren hane done: that I maye receaue the agayne in the same mercy with thy brethren.

Whyle she was yet speakynge these wordes, the yonge man sayde: Whom loke ye for?
Wherfore do ye tary? I wil not obeye the kynges commaundement, but the lawe that
God gaue vs by “Moses. As for the that ymaginest all myschefe agaynst the lewes, thou shalt not escape the honde of God: for we suffre these thinges, because of oure synres. .

And though God be angrie with vs a litle whyle (for oure chasteninge q reformacion,) yet shal he be at one agayne with his ser- uauntes. But thou. (O shame full q most abhominable personne.) Pryde not thy self thorow vayne hope, in beynge so malicious vpon $ seruauntes of God: for thou hast not yet escaped the indgmét of the God, which is all mighty, q seyth all thinges. My bre- thren y haue suffred a litle payne, are now vnder the couenaunt of euerlastinge life: but thorow the iudgment of God, thou shalt be punyshed righteously for thy pryde.

As for me (like as my brethre haue done) 
I offre my soule q my body for y lawes of oure 
, |fathers, callinge vpon God, y he will soone be 
| mercifull vnto oure people: yee q with payne 

1t punyshment to make the graunte,’ y he only is God. In me now q in my brethre i wrath of allmighty God is at an ende, whic

E 

* Leuit. 114.8. Deut. 14. a. ^ 2 Mac. 9. c. 

The ij. boke of the Machabees. 

righteously is fallé vpon all oure people. ‘Then y kynge beynge kyndled in anger, was more cruell vpon him then vpon all y other, q toke iudignacio, y he was so lightly regarded. So this yonge ma dyed vndefiled, q put his trust stil in $ LORDE. Last of all after ý sonnes, was y mother put to death also. Let this now be ynough spoken, concernynge ¥ of- fringes, q extreme cruelnesse.

The biij. Chapter. 
HEN Iudas Machabeus and they y were with him, wete prynely in to ¥ townes, called their kinsfolkes q frendes together, toke vnto them all soch as contynued yet in the faith and lawe of y Iewes, and brought forth vj. M. men. So they called vpon the LORDE, y he wolde haue an eye vnto his people, which was troddé downe of euery ma: to be gracious vnto y téple, y was defyled of the vngodly: to haue copassion vpon y destruccion of the eite, (whieh was shortly like to be laied waist) to heare ¥ voyce of ¥ bloude y cried vnto him: to remébre y most vnrighteous deathes of yonge innocent children, the blasphemies also done vnto his name, ¢ to punysh thé. Now whé * Machabeus had gathered this multitude together, he was to mightie for the Heithen
(for ¥ wrath of y LORDE was turned in to mercy) he fell vpon the townes and cities vnawarres, brent them, toke the most cōmo- dious places, q slewe many of the enemies.
But specially he made soch chases by night, in so moch that his manlynesse was spoken of euery were.

So when Philippe sawe that the man in- creased by litle and litle, and that the matter prospered with him for the most parte: he wrote vnto Ptolomy (which was a captayne in
Celosiria q Phenices) to helpe him in y kinges busynes. Thé sent he Nicanor Patrocli (a speciall frende of his) in all y haist,’ q gaue him of ¥ comon sorte of the Heithen no lesse than xx. M. harnessed men, to rote out y whole generacion of the Iewes, hauinge to helpe him one Gorgias a man of warre, which in matters concernynge battayls had greate experience. Nicanor ordened also the tribute
(which the Romaynes shulde haue had) to be geuen vnto the kynge, out of the captiuyte of ihe Iewes, namely, ij M. talentes. And immediatly he sent to ¥ cities of y see coost,

* | Mac. 2. a. 4 4 Mac. 3. c. 

Chap. bii, 

a 

| 

Chap. biij, 

€ 

requyringe thé for to bye lewes to be their seruauntes t bonde men, promisynge to sell them lxxx. and ten for one talente: but he considered not the wrath of allmighty God, y was to come vpon him.

When Iudas knewe of this, he tolde the lewes y were with him, of Nicanors comynge.
Now were there some of them fearfull, not trustinge vnto the rightuousnes of God and fled their waye. But the other j remayned, came together q besought the LORDE, to delyuer thé fro y wieked Nicanor, which had solde the or euer he came nye them: and though he wolde not do it for their sakes, yet for the couenaunt that he made with their fathers, q because they called vpon his holy q glorious name. “And so Machabeus called his men together, namely aboute vi. M. ex- ortinge them not to agree vnto their enemies, nether to be afrayed for ¥ multitude? of their aduersaries cOmynge agaynst them vnrigh- teously: but to fight manly, consideringe ¥ reprofe that they had done to the holy place without cause, how they had despysed and oppressed the cite, yee and destroyed y lawes of the fathers. For they (sayde he) “trust in their weapens and boldnesse, but oure con- fidence is in the allmighty LORDE, which in the twincklinge of an eye maye both destroye them that come agaynst vs, and all the worlde.

D| He exorted them also to call to remébraüce 

the helpe, that God shewed vnto their fathers: das whé there perished an C. q Ixxxv. M. of
Sennacheribs people: And of $ battaill y they had in Babilo agaynst y (o ans: how y all the Macedonias y came to helpe thé, stode in feare; q how they beynge but onl vj. M. slewe an C. q xx. M. thorow y helpe y was geuen them from heauen, wherby they also had receaued many benefites.

Thorow these wordes $ mé toke good hertes vnto thé, ready to dye for the lawe q the coiitre. So he set vpon euery eópany a captayne, one of his owne brethren: Simon,
Ioseph and Ionathas: geuynge ech one xv. C. men. He caused Eszdras also to reade the holy boke vnto them, and to geue them a token of the helpe of God.

Then he himself beinge captaine in y fore front of the battayll,” buckled with Nicanor.

* Tere. 
Esa. 37. f. 

a 1 Mac. 5. b. ^ Deut. 20. a. 2 Pa. 20. c. 
17. b. — Psal. 19. b. 4 4 Re. 19. g. 

The ý. boke of the Marchabees. 

And God was there helpe, in so moch that they slewe aboue ix. M. mē q compelled y more parte of Nicanors hoost to fle, they were so wounded and feable. ‘Thus they toke the money from those that came to bye the, and folowed vpon them on euery syde. But whe the tyme came vpon them, they returned, for it was the Sabbath, and therfore they folowed nomore vpon them. So they toke their weapens and spoyles q kepte the Sabbath, geuynge thankes vnto the LORDE, which had delyuered them that daye, and shewed them his mercy. After the Sabbath they distributed the spoyles to the sicke, to y fatherlesse, and to wyddowes, and the residue had they them selues with theirs. Whé this was done, and they all had made a generall prayer: they besought the mercifull LORDE to be at one with his seruanntes.

Of those also that were with Timotheus and Bachides, which fought agaynst them, they slewe xx. M. wanne hye and stronge holdes, and deuided moo spoyles: euer geuynge an equall porcion vnto y sicke, to
ý fatherles, to wyddowes q to aged persons. 
And when they had diligently gathered their weapés together, they layed them all in con- venient places, a the remnaunt of y spoyles brought they to lerusalem. They slewe
Philarches that wicked personne, which was with Timotheus, and had vexed many Iewes.
And when they helde the thankesgenynge at 
Ierusalem for the victory, they brent those that had set fyre on the portes of the temple : namely Calisthenes, which was fled in to an house: and so they gat a worthy rewarde for their wickednesse. As for that most vngra- cious Nicanor, which had brought a thousande marchaüutes, to bye the Iewes, he was thorow y helpe of the LORDE brought downe, euen of them whom he regarded not: in so moch that he put of his glorious raymét, fled by see, and came alone to Antioche with greate shame q dishonoure, which he gat thorow the destruccion of his hoost. Thus he y pro- mysed the Itomaynes to paye the their tribute, when he toke lerusalem: beganne now to saye planely, that God was y defender of the
Iewes, ¢ therfore not possible to wounde them, because they folowed y lawes which God had made.

* 1Ma. 4. b. 
1Re.30.e. Deu. 20.b. 

128 

1 Mac. 7. c. f Num. 31.d. 

Fo. rirriý. 

35 

x 

F 

Fo. Fo. cerbi, The üj. boke of the Mahabees, Chap. ir. 

a 

a 

The ty. Chapter. 

T the same tyme came Antiochus agayne 

with *dishonoure out of Persis. For 

when he eame to Persepolis, and vndertoke to robbe the temple and to subdue the cite, the people ranne together and defended them selues, in so moch y he and his were fayne to fle with shame. And so after that flight, it happened, that Antiochus came agayne with dishonoure. But when he came to Egbathana, he gat knowlege what was happeued vnto
Nicanor t Timotheus. Now as he was auauncinge himself in his wrath, he thought he was able to avenge the iniury that was

The ij. boke of the fHarbabres. 

lege of him self: for the punyshment of God warned him, q his payne increased euer more qa more. And when he him self might not abyde his owne styncke, he sayde these wordes: It is reason to be obedient vnto God, t that a man desyre not to be like vnto him.
This wicked personne prayed also vnto the 
LORDE, of whom he shulde haue optained no mercy. And as for the cite that he came vnto so haistely, to brynge it downe to the grouude, q to make it a graue for deed men: now he desyreth to delyuer it fre. And as touchiuge y lewes, whom he had iudged not worthy to be buried, but wolde haue cast the out for to be deuoured of the foules and

done to them, vpou the ewes: and therfore ylde beastes, sayenge, that he wolde haue commaunded to make ready his charet, haist-| |destroyed both olde and yonge: Now he pro- inge on his journey without ceassinge: the| |misetb, to make thé like y citesyns of Athens. iudgmét of God prouokynge him, because he| |And where as he had spoyled the holy temple had spoké so proudly, that he wolde come to| |afore, now he maketh promyse to garnish it
Ierusalem, and make it a graue of the Iewes.| |with greate giftes, to increase the holy orna- 
But the LORDE God of Israel,’ that seith| |métes, and of his owne rentes to beare the all thinges, smote him with an invisible plage,| [costes and charges belonginge to the offer- which no man coude heale. ges: yee and that he wolde also become a
For as soone as he had spoken these wordes, lewe him self, to go thorow euery place of the there came vpon him an horrible payne of his] |worlde, and to preach the power of God. bowels, q a sore grefe of the tharmes. And y But when his paynes wolde not ceasse, (for

was but right: for he had martired other meus bowels with dyuerse and straüge tor- mentes, how be it he wolde in no wyse ceasse from his malice. Yee he was yet the prouder, and more malicious agayust the lewes: But whyle he was commaundinge to make haist in the matter, it happened ý he fell downe vio- lently from the charet, so y it brussed his body, x dyd him greate payne.
And so he that thought he might com- maunde $ floudes of the see (so proude was he beyonde the condicio of man) and to weye the hye mountaynes in a payre of scoales, was now brought downe to the grounde, t caried vpon an horszlytter, knowlegynge y manyfest power of God vpon him: so that y wicked body of his^ was full of wormes, which in his payne fell quyck out of his flesh: In so moch y his hoost was greued with the smell and styncke of him. ‘Thus he that a litle afore thought he might reach to the starres of heanen, him might no man now abyde ner beare, for the vehemence of styncke.
Therfore he beynge brought from his greate pryde, begane for to come to y know-

* 1 Mac. 6.a 

FasIpar. —À c NMEAXNONUDDUR —— d] 2 vv eeEnOb | b. 

the righteous iudgmét of God was come vpon him) out of a very despayre he wrote vnto the
Tewes a lettre of intercession, coteyninge these wordes: ‘The kynge and prynce Antiochus wysheth vnto the vertuous citesyns of the ipu moch health and good prosperite.

Yf ye and youre children fare well, and yf all thinges go after youre mynde: we geue greate thankes. In my sicknesse also do I remembre you louyngly: for as I came out of Persia, and was taken with sore disease: I thought it necessary to care for the comon wealth. Nether despare I in my self, but haue a good hope to escape this sicknes.

But cousiderynge that my father led an hoost some tyme in ¥ hyer places, q shewed who shulde raigne after him, that (yf there happened eny cotrouersy, or eny harde thinge were declared,) they in the londe might knowe their chefe lorde, + there shulde be no self, how that all Y mightie men and negh- bours rounde aboute, are layege waite, and loke but for oportunyte to do harme: 1 haue ordened that my sonne Antiochus shall raigne

© Act. 19. d, 

Fo. cerbi, The üj. boke of the Machabres. — — — — Clap. ir. ir. 

B 

insurreccion : Agayne, when I pondre by my |3: 

| 

Chap. r. 

after me, whom I oft commended to many of you, when I was in the hyer kyngdomes, and haue wrytten vnto him as it foloweth herafter.
Therfore I praye you and requyre you, to re- membre the benefites that I haue done vnto you generally and in especiall For I hope that he shall be of sober ¢ louynge behauoure, and yf he folowe my deuyce, he shal be indifferent vnto you.

“Thus that murthurer and blasphemer of 
God was sore smytté: and like as he had intreated other men, so he dyed a myserable death in a straunge countre vpon a mountayne.
And his body dyd Philippe (that wéte with him) cary awaye: which fearynge the sonne of Antiochus, wente in to Egipte to Ptolomy
Philometor. 

" The p. Chapter. 

ACHABEUS now q his company’ 
(thorow the helpe of the LORDE) wanne the temple and the cite agayne, de- stroyed the aulters and chapels that the
Heithe had buylded thorow the stretes:* clensed the temple, made another aulter of bricke stone, and after ij. yeares they offered sacrifices, set forth the incense, the lightes and shewe bred. When that was done, they fell downe flat vpon the grounde, and besought the LORDE, that they might come nomore in to soch trouble: but yf they synned eny more agaynst him, he him self to chasten them with mercy, aud not to come in the hondes

of those aleauntes and blasphemous men. 
Now vpon the same daye that y straungers poluted the temple, it happened that on the very same daye it was clensed agayne:^ namely, the xxij daye of the moneth called
Casleu. They kepte viij. dayes in gladnesse, like as in the feast of the tabernacles: remem- brynge that not longe afore, they helde the feast of y tabernacles vpon the mountaynes and in dennes like beastes. And to y same token they bare grene bowes, braunches and palmes before him that had geuen them good fortune to clense his place. ‘They agreed also together, and made a statute, y euery yeare those dayes shulde be solemply kepte of all

the people of the Iewes. 

How Antiochus then (that was called the noble) dyed, it is sufficiently tolde. Now wil we speake of Nicanor the sonne of that

^ 1 Mac. 4. c. 

* Dan. 8. c. * Exo, 20. d. 

The ij. boke of the Marhabers, 

wicked Antiochus, how it happened with him: and so with few wordes to comprehende the aduersite that chaunsed in y warres.
When he had taken in the kyngdome, he made one Lysias (which had bene captayne of the hoost in Phenices and Syria) ruler ouer the matters of the realme. For Ptolomy that was called Macron, beynge a ruler for the Iewes (and specially, to syt in iudgment for soch wronge as was doue vnto them) vndertoke to deale peaceably with them.
For the which cause he was accused of the frendes before Eupator: and when he was suspecte to be a traytoure (because he had left Cypers, that Philometor had committed vnto him: and because he departed from noble Antiochus, that he was come vnto) he poysoned himself, and dyed.

Now when Gorgias was gouernoure of the same places, he toke straungers and vndertoke oft tymes to warre with y Iewes. Morouer the Idumeans that helde the stroge holdes, receaued those that were dryuen from Ieru- salem, and toke in honde to warre also. But they that were with Machabeus, besought and

Fo. elyrir. 

€ 

prayed vnto the LORDE,” that he wolde be| . 

their helper: and so they fell in to the stronge holdes of the Idumeans, q wanne many places by strength: Soch as came agaynst them they slew, and kylled no lesse (of all together) then twentye thousande. Neuerthelesse some (no lesse then nyue thousande) were fled in to two stronge towres, hauynge all maner of ordinaunce to withstonde them.

Then Machabeus leauynge Symon, lose- phus, Zachaus and those that were with them,
(which were very many) wente to besege the, and to fight where most nede was. Now they that were with Symon beynge led with couetousnesse, were intreated for money, thorow certayne of those that laye in the towers: toke lxx. M. drachmas, q let some of them escape. But when it was tolde Macha- beus what had happened, he called ¥ captaynes of the people together, accusynge those per- sonnes, that they had solde the brethren for money, and let their enemies go. So he slewe those traytours, q immediatly wente in honde with the ij. towers. And when they had ordred them selues manly with their weapens q hondes, they slewe in y two castels moo the twétie thousande.

4 | Mac. 4, f. * 1 Mac. 5. a. 

Jfo. cli. 
| "Now 'Iimotheus whom the lewes had ouercome afore, gathered a multitude of straunge people, bronght an hoost also of horsmen of the Asians, to wynne lewry by

# strength. But when he drewe nye, Machabens and they that were with him fell to their prayer,’ sprencled aszshes vpon their heades, beynge gyrded with hayrie cloth aboute their

loines, fel downe before ¥ aulter, q besought 

the LORDE that he wolde be mercifull to them, but an enemie vnto their enemies, and to take parte agaynst their aduersaries, acord- linge as it is promised in the lawe. So after ithe prayer they wente on further from the

‘cite: and when they came nye the enemies, 

they prepared them selnes agaynst them. 

And by tymes in the mornynge at y breake of the daye, both the hoostes buckled together. ‘The one parte had the LORDE for their refuge, which is the gener of prosperite, stregth and victory. The other had a mily stomack, which is a captayne of warre.

The battayll now beynge greate, there 
'apeared vnto the enemies from heanen v. men, vpon horszback with brydels of golde, ledinge the lewes, and two of them hauynge
| Machabeus betwixte them, y kepte him safe jon euery syde with their weapes, bnt shot
‘dartes and lighteninges vpon the enemies, 

blyndnesse and so sore afrayed, that they fell downe. There were slayne of fote men
| |twenty thousande and fyue hundreth, and 
Qf|sxe hüdreth horsmen. As for Timotheus him self, he fled vnto Gazar a very stroge holde, wherin Cereas was captayne. But
Machabeus and his company layed sege to it cherfull iij. dayes. Now they that were within, trustinge to the strength of the place, cursed q banned exceadingly, and made greate crakynge with wicked wordes. Nenerthelesse vpon the fifth daye in the mornynge, xx. yonge men of Machabeus cópany, beynge set on fyre in their myndes becanse of the blasphemy: came manfully vnto the wall, and with bolde stomackes they and their other companyons
| |clymmed vp vpon the towres, vndertakynge 
| |to set fyre vpon the portes, q to burne those 
|^ \blasphemons personnes quycke. Two dayes were they destroyenge the castell, which when

page thorow they were confounded with|. 
| 

——— 

* 1 Mac. 5. d. 2 Mac. 8. c. 

^2 Mac. 11. b. © Deut.28. a. 
|^ Tere. Y.b. 2 Par.32. b. 

* 4 Reg. 6. 9 Mac. 3. d. 

A The i. boke of the Marhabers, 

[they founde Timotheus (that was crepte in to 

Chap. rt. 

a corner) they kylled him, and slewe Cereas his brother in like maner with Appollophanes.
When this was done, they sunge Psalmes, with prayses and thankesgeuynges vnto the
LORDE, which had done so greate thinges for Israel, x geuen them the victory.

The ri. Chapter. 

OT longe after this, Lysias the kynges|a 

stewarde and a kynsman of his, (which had the gouernaunce of his matters) toke sore displeasure for the thinges that had hap- pened: and when he had gathered lxxx. M. men of fote with all the hoost of the horsmen, he came agaynst the lewes, thinkynge to wynne the cite, to make it an habitacion for the Heithen, “and the temple wolde he haue to be an house of lucre, like as the other goddes houses of the Heithé are, q to sell $ prestes office euery yeare: Not consideringe the power of God, but was wylde in his mynde, trustinge in y multitude of fote mé,
*in thousandes of horsmé, and in his lxxx. 
Elephantes. 

So he came in to Iewry q then to Bethsura 33 
(a castell of defence lyenge in a narow place, v. furlonges from lerusalée) and wanne it.
Now when Machabeus and his company knew that the stronge holdes were taken, they fell to their prayers^ with wepynge and teares before the LORDE: and all the people in like maner besought him, that he wolde sende a good angell to delyuer Israel. Machabens him self was the first that made him ready to the battayll, exortynge the other that were with him, to ioperde themselues and to helpe their brethré. And when they were goyenge forth of Ierusalem: together with a ready and wyllynge mynde, there apeared before thé vpon horszbacke a mà in whyte clothinge with harnesse of golde, shakinge his speare. Then they praysed ý LORDE all together, which had shewed them mercy, and were conforted in their myndes: in so moch that they were ready, not only to fight with men, but with y most cruell beestes, yee and to runne thorow walles of yron.

Thus they wente on wyllingly hauynge an | helper from heaué, and the LORDE mer- cifull vnto them. They fell mightely vpon hio Naio. c.

and1ib. / Ioh. 2.b. € Esa. 36, b. 

i 92 Mac. 3. d. 

—————————————MÁ———————————————— — ÉEN 

Chap. rh. 

The tj. boke of the Marhabees. 

| Lysias sendeth gretinge to the people of 

their enemies like lyons, brought downe xj. 
M. fote men, xvj. C. horsmen, put all y other to flight, many of them beynge wounded, and some gat awaye naked. Yee Lysias himself was fayne to fle shamefully, and so to escape.
Neuerthelesse the man was not without vn- derstondinge, but considered by himself that his power was mynished, and pondred how y lewes beynge defended by the helpe of AIL. mighty God, were not able to be ouercome: wherfore he sent them worde, and promised, that he wolde consente to all thinges which were reasonable, and to make the kynge their, fréde. To the which prayer of Lysias Ma- chabeus agreed, sekynge in all thinges the comon wealth: and what so euer Machabeus wrote vnto Lysias cocernynge the lewes, the kynge graunted it. For there were lettres writté vnto y lewes from Lysias conteynynge these wordes:

the lewes. Ihon and Absalon which were sent from you, delyuered me wrytinges, and requyred me to fulfill the thinges concernynge their earande. ‘Therfore loke what might be graunted, Í certified y kynge therof: and what so euer was conuenient, [agreed therto.
Yf ye now wyll be faithfull in the matters, I shal endeuer my self herafter also to do you good. As concernynge other thinges by euery article therof: I haue committed them to youre messaungers, and to those whom I sent vnto you, to comon with you of the same, fare ye well, In the hüdreth and xlviij. yeare, the xxiiij. daye of the moneth Dioscorinthius.

Now the kynges lettre conteyned these wordes: Kynge Antiochus sendeth gretinge vnto his brother Lysias. “For so moch as oure father is now deed, oure wyll is, that they which are in oure realme, lyue without eny insurreccion, and euery man to be diligent in his owne matters. We vnderstonde also, that the Iewes wolde not consent to oure father, for to be brought vnto the custome of the Gentiles, but stiflly to kepe their owne statutes: for the which cause they requyre of vs also, to let them remayne still by their owne lawes. j

Wherfore oure minde is, that this people shalbe in rest: we haue concluded and de- termed also, to restore them their temple agayne: that they maye lyue acordinge to the

dyd with them, as thongh they had ought 
2 9 Ma. 9. b. them no euell wyll. For so moeh then as 

vse q custome of their forefathers. Thou shalt do vs a pleasure therfore, yf thou sende vnto them « agre with them: that when they are certified of oure mynde, they maye be of good chere, and loke to their owne wealth.

And this was the lettre, that the kynge wrote vuto the lewes: Kynge Antiochus sendeth gretinge vnto the councell and the other people of the Iewes. Yf ye fare well, we haue oure desyre: as for vs, we are in good health. Menelaus came and tolde vs, how y youre desyre was to come downe to youre people, which are with vs.

Wherfore those that wyll come, we geue them fre lyberte, vnto the xxx. daye of the moneth of Aprill, that they maye vse y meates of the Iewes and their owne lawes, like as afore: and none of them by eny maner of wayes to haue harme, for thinges done in ignoraunce. Menelaus whom we haue sent vnto you, shal comon with you at large, fare ye well. In the Cxlviij. yeare, the xv. daye of the moneth of Aprill.

‘The Romaynes also sent a lettre, conteyn- ynge these wordes: Quintus Mennius q Titus
Manilius embassatours of the Romaynes, sende gretinge vnto the people of the Iewes. Loke what Lysias the kynges kynsman hath graunted you, we graunte you the same also. But as concernynge the thinges which he referred vnto the kynge, sende hither some with spede: and podre the matter diligétly amonge youre selues, that we maye cast y best to youre profite, for we must departe now vnto An- tioche. And therfore wryte shortly agayne, that we maye knowe youre mynde. Fare well In the hundreth xlviij. yeare, y xv. daye of the moneth of Aprill.

The rý. Chapter. 

HEN these couenauntes were made, 

Lysias wente vnto the kynge, and y lewes tylled their grounde. But "Timotheus,
Appollonius the sonne of Gemei, Ierome and 
Demophon y proude, Nicanor y captayne of 
Cypers, and they that laye in those places: wolde not let them lyue in rest and peace.
They of Ioppa also dyd euen soch a shamefull dede: They prayed y Iewes that dwelt amoge them, to go with their wyues and children in to the shippes whieh they had prepared, «

Fo. tirri. 

Fo. eli. there was gone forth a generall proclamacio thorow ¥ cite because of peace, they con- sented therto, and suspecte nothinge: but when they were goue forth in to the depe, they drowned no lesse then ij. C. of them.

Whe ludas knew of this cruelte shewed vnto his people, he commaunded those that were with him to make them ready, exortinge them to call vpon God the righteous iudge: wéte forth agaynst those murthurers of his brethré, set fyre in ¥ hauen by night, brent vp ¥ shippes, and those that escaped from the

3|fyre, he slewe with the swearde. And when he had done this, he departed as though he wolde come agayne, and rote out all them of loppa. But when he had gotte worde that the Iamnites were mynded to do in like maner vnto $ Iewes which dwelt amonge them, he came vpon the lamnites by night, and set fyre in the hauen with the shippes: so that the light of the fyre was sene at lerusalem, vpon a ij. C. q xl. furlonges.

Now when they were gone from thence ix. furlonges, in their iourney towarde Ti- jmothens: v. thousande men of fote and v. hundreth horsmen of the Arabians fought with him. So when the batell was earnest, and prospered with Iudas thorow the helpe of
God: $ residue of the Arabians beynge ouer- 
‘come, besought Iudas to be at one with them, 
‘and promised to geue him certayne pastures, q to do him good in other thinges. Iudas thynkynge that they shulde in dede be pro- fitable concernynge many thynges, promised them peace: whervpon they shoke hondes,
‘and so they. departed to their tentes. Judas wente also vnto a cite, which was very fast kepte with brydges, fensed rounde aboute with walles, q dyuerse kyndes of people dwell- inge therin, called Caspin.

C) They that were within it, put soch trust in the strength of the walles, q in their stoare of vytales: that they were the slacker in their doynges, cursinge and reuylinge Iudas with blasphemies, and speakynge soch wordes as it becommeth not. Bnt Machabeus callynge vpon the greate prynce of $ worlde (which without eny battayll rammes or ordinaunce of warre, “dyd cast downe the walles of Iericho, in the tyme of Josue) fell manfully vpon the walles, toke the cite, and (thorow the helpe of the LORDE) made an exceadinge greate

* Tosu. 6. c. è Tudit.7. f. 1 Re. 14. c. 2 Pa. 20. d. 

The tj. boke of the Marhabees. 

Chap. rije 

slaughter: In so moch that a lake of ij. fur- lóges brode which laye therby, semed to flowe with the bloude of the slayne.

Then departed they from thence vij. C. and 
L. furlonges, and came to Taraca vnto y lewes that are called Tubianei. But as for Timo- theus, they coude not get him there: for (not one matter dispatched,) he was departed from thence, and had lefte certayne men in a very stronge holde. But Dositheus and Sosipater which were captaynes with Machabeus, slewe those y Timotheus had lefte in the house of defence, euen x. M. men. And Machabeus prepared him with y vj. M. men y were aboute him, set them in ordre by companies, and wente forth agaynst Timotheus, which had with him an C. and xx. M. men of fote, ij.
M. and v. C. horsme. 

When Timotheus had knowlege of Iudas commynge, he sent the women, children and the other baggage vnto a castell called Carnion.
(For it coude not be wonne, q was harde to come vnto, the wayes of the same places were so narow) and when Iudas copany came first in sight, the enemies were smytten with feare, thorow the presence of God, which seyth all thinges: In so moch y they fleynge one here, another there, were rather discomfited of their owne people,’ q woiided with the strokes of their owne sweardes. ludas also was very earnest in folowinge vpon them and punysh- inge those vngodly, and slewe xxx. M. men of them. "Timothens also himself fell in to the hondes of Dositheus œ Sosipater, whom he besought with many prayers, to let him go with his life: because he had many of the lewes fathers and brethren in preson, which
(yf they put him to death) might be dis- apoynted. So when he had promised faith- fully to delyuer them agayne acordinge to the condicion made, they let him go without harme, for the health of y brethren. And when Iudas had slayne xxv. M, he wente from
Carnion. 

Now after y he had chased awaye and slayne his enemies, he remoued the hoost towarde
Ephron a stroge cite, wherin dwelt many dyuerse people of the Heithen, and $ stronge yonge men kepte the walles, defendinge thé mightely. In this cite was moch ordinaunce, and prouysion of dartes. ^But when Iudas aud his company had called vpon Allmighty

* 1 Mac. 5. c. 4 2 Ma. 10. c. 

Chap. rii. 
God, (which with his power breaketh the strength of the enemies) they wanne the cite, and slew xxv. M. of them y were within. From thence wente they to the cite of the Scythians, which lieth vj. C. furlonges from Ierusalem.
But when y lewes which were in the cite testified, that the citesyns dealte louyngly with them, yee and intreated them kyndly in y tyme of their aduersite, Iudas and his com- pany gaue them thankes, desyringe them to be frendly still vnto them: ^and so they came to Ierusalem the hye feast of the wekes beynge at honde. And after the feast they wéte forth agaynst Gorgias the gouernoure of Idumea, with iij. M. men of fote and iiij. C. horsmé.
Which when they met together, it chaunsed a few of the Iewes to be slayne.

F| And Dositheus one of the Bachenors a 

mighty horsmà toke holde of Gorgias, and wolde haue také him quyke. But an horsma of Thracia fell vpon him, and smote of his arme, so that Gorgias escaped and fled in to
Moresa. When they now that were of Gor- igias syde, had foughté longe and were weery:
Iudas called vpon the LORDE that he wolde 
|be their helper, « captayne of the felde: and with that, he beganne with a manly voyce to take vp a songe of prayse, and a crie: In so moch that he made the enemies afrayed, and
Gorgias men of warre to take their flight. So 
| Iudas gathered his hoost, and came in to y cite of Odolla. And when the seuenth daye came vpon them, they clensed them selues (as the custome was) q kepte the Sabbath in the same place. And vpon the daye folowinge,
Iudas q his company came to take vp the bodies of them that were slayne, and to bury them in y fathersgraues. Now vnder y cotes of certayne lewes which were slayne, they founde qe that they had taken out of the temple and from the Idols of the Iamniters : which thinge is ^forbydden the Iewes by the lawe. Then euery man sawe y this was the cause, wherfore they were slayne.

And so euery man gaue thankes vnto the 
LORDE for his righteous iudgmet, which had opened the thinge that was hyd. "They fell downe also vnto their prayers, and besought
God, that the fawte which was made, might be put out of remembraunce. Besydes that,
Iudas exorted y people earnestly, to kepe them 

Deu. 16. b. ^ 2 Ma. 19, b. Deut. 
* Some reade : twolue thousande. 

| Acto. 2. a. 
7. c, fosu. 7. a. 

The ij, boke of the fHarbabers. 

selues from soch synne: for so moch as they sawe before their eyes, y these men were slayne for the same offence. So he gathered of euery one a certayne, in so moch that he| brought together* two thousande drachmas of syluer, which he sent vnto Ierusalem, y there might a sacrifice be offred for the myszdede.
In the which place he dyd well x right: for he had some cosideracion q pondringe of y life y is after this tyme. For yf he had not thought y they, which were slayne, dyd yet lyue, it had bene superfluous and vayne, to make eny vowe or sacrifice, for thé y were deed. But for so moch as he sawe, that they which dye in the fauoure q beleue of God, are in good rest q ioye, he thought it to be good q honorable for a reconcylinge, to do the same for those which were slayne, that the offence might be forgenen. :

The rij. Chapter. 

T the Cxlix. yeare gat Iudas knowlege, “ý 

Antiochus Eupator was commynge with a greate power in to lewry, ¢ Lysias the stewarde
« ruler of his matters with him: hauynge an 
C. and x. M. men of fote, v. M. horsmen, xxij. Elephantes, and iij. C. charettes. Mene- laus also ioyned him self with them (but with greate disceate) q spake fayre to the kynge, not for eny good of y coütre, but because he thought to haue bene made some greate man of auctorite. But the kynge of kynges moued
Antiochus mynde agaynst this vngodly per- sonne, q Lysias infourmed the kynge, that this
Menelaus was the cause of all myschefe :^ so that y kynge commaunded to take him, and
(as y maner of them is) to put him vnto death in the same place.

There was also in the same place a tower of L. cubites hye, heaped with aszshes: but aboue it was so made, that men might loke downe on euery syde. Where in to the kynge commaunded that shamefull person to be cast amonge the aszshes, as one that was cause of all vngraciousnesse. And reason it was, y ý vnthrift shulde dye soch a death, and not to be buried: for he had done moch myschefe vnto the aulter of God (whose fyre and aszshes were holy) therfore was it right, y he him self also shulde be destroyed with aszshes.

* 1 Mac. 6. d. 

4 9 Mac. 4. c. 

Fo. clrrritj. 

13 

fo. cirrrittj. 

The i. boke of the Marhabers. 

Chap. rity. 

came to shewe him self more cruell ynto the 
Tewes, then his father was. “Which when Iudas 
| perceaued, he commaunded the people to call vpon the LORDE night and daye: that he
[se now helpe them also, like as he had done allwaye: (For they were afrayed to be put from their lawe, from their naturall countre and from $ holy temple:) and not to suffre the people (which a litle whyle afore beganne to recouer) to be subdued agayne of y blas- phemous nacions.
€| So when they had done this together, and besought the LORDE for mercy, with wep- ynge and fastinge thre dayes longe, flat vpon the grounde: ludas exorted them, to make them selues ready. But he and the elders together deuysed, to go forth first with their people, afore the kynge brought his hoost in to lewry, and afore he beseged the cite, q so to committe the matter vnto God. Wher- fore he aserybed the power of all thinges vnto
God the maker of y worlde, exortinge his 
| [people to fight manfully, (yee euen vnto 
| |death) for y lawes, the temple, y cite, their 
[owne natyue countre, x to defende y citesyns: q set his hoost before Modin. He gaue them also y were with him, a token of y victory of
God, chosinge out the manlyest yonge men, wente by night in to the kynges pauylion,
?^slewe of the hoost xiiij M. men, and the greatest Elephantes, with those that sat vpon them.
2| Thus when they had brought a greate feare t rumoure amonge y tentes of their enemies, and all thinges wente prosperously
[me them, they departed in the breake of y daye, God beynge their helper q defender.
Now when the kynge perceaued the manly- inesse of the Iewes, he wente aboute to take the stronge places by craft, q remoued his
‘hoost vnto *Bethsura, which was a wel kepte 
| house of defence of the Iewes: but they were 
| |ehaced awaye, hurte and discomfited. And 
| |ludas sent vnto them that were in it, soch thinges as were necessary. In the lewes hoost also there was one Rhodocus, which talde the enemies their secretes: but they sought him out, and when they had gotten him, they put him in preson. After this dyd the kynge comon with them that were in
|Bethsura, toke truce with them, departed, 

jo 
| But the kynge was woode in his mynde, a 

| 

| * 2 Mac. 10. c. ^ 1 Mac. 6. f. 

eee 

and stroke a battayll with Iudas, which ouer- came him.

But when he vnderstode, that Philippe|% 
(whom he had left to be ouerseer of his busy- nesses at Antioche) begane to rebell agaynst him, he was astonnied in his mynde: so that he yelded himself to the Iewes, and made them an ooth, to do what so euer they thought right. Now when he was reconcyled with them, he offred, made moch of the temple, gaue greate gyftes vnto it, enbraced Macha- beus, makynge him captayne and gouernoure from Ptolomais vnto y Gerrenes.

Neuerthelesse when he came to Ptolomais, the people of the cite were not content with that bonde of frendshipe: for they were afrayed, that he wolde breake the couenaunt.
Then wente Lysias vp in to the seate, and enfourmed the people, shewed thé the cause why, and pacified them. So he came agayne to Antioche. This is now the matter con- cernynge y kynges iourney, and his returne.

The riiij. Chapter. 

FTER thre yeares was Iudas infourmed,|@ 

how that Demetrius the sonne of Se- leucus was come vp with a greate power and shippes, thorow the hauen of Tripolis (to take certayne commodious places and countrees) agaynst Antiochus and his captayne Lysias.
Now Alcimus (which had bene hye prest, and wilfully defyled himself, in the tyme of the myxtinge) seynge, that by no meanes he coude be helped, ner haue eny more intraunce to the altare: he came to kynge Demetrius in the hundreth and one and fiftie yeare, pre- sentinge vnto him a crowne of golde, a palme and an olyue tre: which (as men thought) belonged to the temple, and that daye he helde his tonge.

But when he had gotten oportunite for his madnesse, Demetrius called him to concell, and axed him, what thinges or councels the lewes leaned vnto? He answered: The
Tewes that be called Assidei (whose captayne is Iudas Machabeus) maynteyne warres, make|_ insurreccions, and wyl not let the realme be in peace.

For I beynge depryued of my fathers|% honoure (I meane the hye presthode) am come hither: partly because I was faithfull vnto the kynge, and partly because I sought

* 2 Mac. 11. a. 

Chap. riii. the profit of the citesyns. And why? all oure people (thorow the wickednesse of them) are not a litle troubled. Wherfore I beseke the (o kynge) considre all these thinges dili- gently, and then make some prouysion for the londe and the people, acordinge to the kynd- nesse that thou hast offred vnto them. For as longe as Iudas hath the vpper hande, it is not possible that men can lyue in peace.

When he had spoken these wordes, other frendes also hanynge euell will at Iudas, set the kynge Demetrius on fyre agaynst him.
Which immediatly sent Nicanor (ruler of ¥ elephantes) a captayne, in to lewry: com- maundinge him, to take Indas himself alyue, but to slaye them that were with him, and to make Alcimus hye prest of the temple.

Then the Heithen which fled out of Jewry from Iudas, came to Nicanor by flockes, thinkynge the harme and decaye of the Iewes to be their welfare. Now whé the lewes herde of Nicanors commynge, q the gather- ynge together of y Heithé: they "spreckled them selues with earth, and besought him
(which made them his people, and ener de- tended his owne porcion with euydent tokens) that he wolde preserne them still. So at the commaundement of the captayne, they re- moued from thence, and came to a towne called Dessasan. And Symon Iudas brother fell in honde with Nicanor, but thorow the sodane commynge of the enemies, he was afrayed.

Neuertheles Nicanor hearinge the man- lynes of them that were with Iudas, and y bolde stomackes that they had to fight for their naturall countre, durst not proue the matter with bloudsheddinge. Wherfore he sent Possidonius, Theodocins « Mathias be- fore, to geue and to take peace. So when they had taken longe advysement there vpon, and the captayne shewed it vnto the multi- tude: they were agreed in one mynde, to haue peace. And they appoynted a daye to syt vpon these matters quyetly amonge them selues, y stoles also were brought and set forth. Neuerthelesse Iudas cómaunded cer- taine men of armes to waite in conueniét places, lest there shulde sodenly aryse eny euell thorow the enemies. And so they com- moned reasonably together.

Nicanor, whyle he abode at Ierusalem, 

^ 2 Ma. 10. c. 

Cbr ij. boke of the Harbabees. 

ordred himself not vnreasonably, but sent awaye the people that were gathered to- gether. He loued Iudas euer with his hert, and fauoured him. He prayed him also to take a wyfe, and to brynge forth children.
So he maried, lyued in rest, and they led a comon life. But Alcimus perceauynge the loue that was betwixte them, and how they were agreed together, came to Demetrius, and tolde him that Nicanor had taken straunge matters in honde, and ordened Iudas (an enemy of the realme) to be the kynges suc- cessoure. Then the kinge was sore dis- pleased, and thorow the wicked acensations which Aleimus made of Nicanor, he was so prouoked, that he wrote vnto Nicanor, say- enge: that he was very angrie for the frend- shipe and agrement, which he had made with
Machabeus. Neuertheles he commaunded him in all the haist, that he shulde take
Machabens presoner, and sende him to 
Antioche. 

Which lettres when Nicanor had sene, he was at his wittes ende, and sore greued, that he shulde breake the thinges, wherin they had agreed: specially, seynge Machabeus was the man, that neuer dyd him harme. But be- cause he might not withstonde the kynge, he sought oportunite to fulfil his commaunde- ment. Notwithstondinge when Machabeus sawe that Nicanor beganne to be churlish vnto him, and that he intreated him more rughly then he was wonte, he perceaued that soch vnkyndnes came not of good, and ther- fore he gathered a few of his men, and with- drewe himself fro Nicanor. Which when he knewe that Machabeus had manfully pre- uented him, he came in to the greate and most holy temple: and commaunded the prestes (which were doynge their vsuall offeringes) to delyuer him the man. And when they sware that they coude not tell, where the mà was who he sought, he stretched out his honde, and made an ooth, sayenge :
Yf ye wyll not delyuer me Iudas ’captyue, I shall remoue this temple of God in to the playne felde, I shal breake downe the aulter, and consecrate this teple vnto Bachus. After these wordes he departed.

Then the prestes lift vp their hondes to- warde heanen, and besought him that was euer the defender of their people, sayenge:

5 1 Mac. 7. e. 

129 

Fo. clryrb, 

‘fo. chyrrot. 

The tj. boke of the Marhabees. 

Chap. rb. 

ó 

Thou o LORDE of all, which hast nede of nothinge, woldest that the temple of thy ha- bitacion shulde be amonge vs. Therfore now (o most holy LORDE) kepe this “house euer vndefyled, which lately was clensed.
Now was there accused vnto Nicanor, one 
Razis an Alderman of lerusalem, a louer of the whole cite, and a man of good reporte: which for the kynde hert that he bare vnto the people, was called a father of y lewes.
This man oft tymes (when the lewes were mynded to kepe them selues vndefyled) de- fended and delyuered them, beynge content stedfastly to spende his body and his life for his people.

So Nicanor wyllinge to declare the hate, that he bare to the Iewes, sent fyue hundreth men to take him: for he thought, yf he gat him, he shulde brynge the lewes in greate decaye. Now when the people beganne to ruszshe in at his house, to breake the dores, and to set fyre on it: he beynge now taken, wolde haue defended himself with his swearde: chosinge rather to dye manfully, then to yelde himselfe to those wicked doers: and because of his noble stocke, he had rather haue bene put to extreme cruelte.

Notwithstondynge what tyme as he myssed of his stroke for haist, and the multitude fell in violently betwixte the dores: he rine boldly to y wall, q cast himself downe manfully amonge the heape of them, which gaue soone place to his fall, so that he fell vpon his bely. Neuerthelesse whyle there was yet breath within him, he was kyndled in his mynde: and whyle his bloude guszshed out exceadingly (for he was very sore wounded) he ranne thorow the myddest of y people, and gat him to the toppe of a rocke. So when his bloude was now gone, he toke out his owne bowels with both his hondes, and threw them vpon the people: callinge vpon the
LORDE of life and sprete, to rewarde him this agayne, and so he dyed.

The rb. Chapter. 
OW when Nicanor knewe that Iudas was in the countre of ’Samaria, he thought with all his power to strike a felde with him vpon a Sabbath daye. Neuerthe- lesse the lewes that were compelled to go with him, sayed: O do not so cruelly and

| ° 1 Mac. 4. e. 2 Mac. 10. a. * | Mac. 7. d. 

e e e e MM 

vnkyndly, but halowe $ Sabbath daye, and worshipe him that seyth all thinges. For all this, yet sayed the vngracious personne: “Is there a mightie one 1n heauen, that com- maunded the Sabbath daye to be kepte?
And when they sayde: yee the lyuynge God, the mightie LORDE in heauen commaunded the seuenth daye to be kepte," he sayde: And
I am mightie vpon earth, to commaunde them for to arme them selues, and to perfourme the kynges busynesse. Notwithstondinge he might not haue his purpose.

Nicanor had deuysed with greate pryde to ouercome ludas, and to brynge awaye y vic-

tory. But Machabeus had euer a fast con-| < 

fidece and a parfecte hope in God that he wolde helpe him, and exorted his people, not to be afrayed at the commynge of the Heithen: but allwaye to remembre the helpe that had bene shewed vnto them from heauen, yee and to be sure now also, y Allmightie God wolde geue them the victory. He spake vnto them out of the lawe and prophetes, puttinge them in remembraunce of the battayls, that they had striken afore, ¢ made them to be of a good corage.

So when their hartes were plucte vp, he shewed them also the disceatfulnesse of the
Heithen, and how they wolde kepe no coue- naunt ner ooth. Thus he weapened thé not with the armoure of shylde and speare, but with wholsome wordes and exortacions. He shewed them a dreame also, wherthorow he made them all glad, which was this: He thought that he sawe Onias (which had bene hye prest, a vertuous ¢ louynge man, sad, and of honest conuersacion, well spoken, and one that had bene exercised in godlynes fro a childe) holdinge vp his hodes towarde heauen, and prayenge for his people. After this there apeared vnto him another mà, which was aged, honorable and glorious. And Onias sayde: This is a louer of the brethren, and of the people of Israel. This is he that prayeth moch for the people, and for all the holy cite: leremy the prophet of God. He thought also y leremy helde out his right hode, and gaue him (namely vnto Iudas) a swearde of golde, sayenge: Take this holy swearde, a gifte from God, wherwith thou shalt smyte downe the enemies of the people of Israel.

And so they were wel conforted thorow the 

A3 Re 90, 6. 4 Exo. 20. b. 

> So” eer Spr oS er "IE ras Loe 

Chap. rb. 

D 

wordes of Iudas, and toke corage vnto thē, so that the yonge men were determed in their myndes to fight, q to byde styfly at it: In so moch that in the thinges which they toke in honde, their boldnesse shewed the same, because the holy cite and the temple were in parell: for the which they toke more care, then for their wyues, children, brethré and kynsfolkes. Agayne, they that were in the cite, were most carefull for those which were to fight. Now when they were all in a hope that the iudgment of the matter was at hode, and the enemies drew nye, the hoost beynge set in araye, the Elephantes and horsmé euery one stondinge in his place: Machabeus considered the commynge of the multitude, the ordinaunce of dyuerse weapens, the cruel- nesse of the beestes, and helde vp his hondes towarde heauen, callinge vpon the LORDE that doth wonders, which geueth mot the victory after the ^multitude of weapens and power of the hoost (but to them that please him) acordinge to his owne will Therfore in his prayer he sayde these wordes :

^O LORDE, thou that diddest sende thine angell in the tyme of Ezechias kynge of Iuda, and in the hoost of Sennacherib slewest an hundreth and fyue and foure score thousande: sende now also thy good angell before vs
(o LORDE of heauens) in the fearfulnesse and drede of thy mightie arme, that they which come agaynst thy holy people to blas- pheme them, maye be afrayed. And so he made an ende of his wordes. ‘Then Nicanor and they that were with him, drew nye with shawmes and songes: but Iudas and his com- pany with prayer and callinge vpon God.

*2Ppa.14.c. Iudic.7.b. 

Che ij. boke of tbe Marchabees. 

With their hondes they smote, but with their hertes they prayed vnto the LORDE, and slewe no lesse then xxxv. M. me: For thorow the present helpe of God they were gloriously conforted.

Now when they left of, and were turninge agayne with ioye, they vnderstode that Nica- nor himself was slayne with the other. Then they gaue a greate shoute and a crie, praysinge the allmighty LORDE with a loude voyce.
And Indas (which was euer ready to spende his body and life for his citesyns) com- maunded to smyte of Nicanors heade, with his arme and honde, and to be brought to
Jerusalem. When he came there, he called all the people, and the prestes at the aulter with those that were in ¥ castell, and shewed them Nicanors heade, and his wicked honde, which he had presumptuously holden vp agaynst the temple of God. He caused y tonge also of that vngodly Nicanor to be cut in litle peces, and to be east to the foules, and the cruell maus honde to be hanged vp before the temple.

So euery man gaue thankes vnto y LORDE, salenge: blessed be he, that hath kepte his place vndefyled.

As for Nicanors heade, he hanged it vp vpó the hye castell, for an euydent and playne token of the helpe of God. And so they agreed all together, to kepe that daye holy: namely y xiij. daye of y moneth Adar, which in y Syrias language 1s called ŷ nexte daye s Mardocheus daye. ‘Thus was Nicanor slayne, and from that tyme forth the lewes had the cite in possession: And here wil I now make an ende.

^ 4 Reg.19.g. Esa. 37.f. 1 Mac.7.e. 2 Ma, 8. d. 

The ende of the seconde boke of the Machabees. 

Fo. cixrroi. 

The new testament. 

The gospell of S. Mathew. 
The gospell of >. arke. 
The gospell of S. Luke, 
The gospell of 3», Jhon. 
The Artes of the Apostles. 

The epistles of S. Paul. 

The epistle bnto tbe Romapnes, 

The first and seconde epistle to the Corinthians. 
The epistle to the Galathtans, 

The epistle to the Ephesians. 

The epistle to the Philippians, 

The epistle to the Colossians, 

The first and serdde epistle to the Tessalonians. 
The first and seconde epistle Onto Tymothp. 
The epistle onto Titus, 

The epistle bnto Philemon. 

The first and seronde epistle of S. Peter. 
The thre epistles of 3». Jhon. 

The epistle onto tbe Hebrues. 

The epistle of S. James, 
The epistle of S. Jude, 
The Reuelacton of S. Jhon. 

The gospel of z. Mathew. 

What S. Mathew contepneth. 

Chap. I. 
The genealogy of Christ, and mariage of his mother Mary. The angell satisfieth losephs mynde.

Chap. Il. 

The tyme q place of Christes byrth. The wyse men ofre their presentes, Christ flyeth in to
Egipte, the yonge childern are slayne. Christ turneth in to Galilee.

Chap. Ill. 

The baptyme, preachinge and office of Ihon, and how Christ was baptysed of him in Jordan.

Chap. IIl. 

Christ fasteth and is tempted : he calleth Peter, 
Andrew, lames and Jhon, œ healeth all the sicke.

Chap. V. 

In this Chapter and in the two next folowinge is conteyned the most excellet and louynge Ser- mon of Christ in the mount : Which sermon is the very keye that openeth the vnderstondinge in to the lawe. In this fifth chapter specially he preacheth of the VIII. beatitudes or bless- inges, of manslaughter, wrath and anger: of aduoutrie, of swearinge, of suffringe wronge, and of loue euen towarde a mans enemies.

Chap. VI. 

Of Almes, prayer and fastinge. He forbyddeth 

the carefull sekynge of wordly thinges. 

Chap. VII. 

He forbyddeth fooliszh and temerarious iudgment, reproueth ypocrisie, exorteth vnto prayer, war- neth to bewarre of false prophetes, and so concludeth his sermon.

Chap. VII. 

Christ clenseth the leper, healeth the captaynes seruaunt and many other diseases: helpeth
Peters mother in lawe, stilleth the see and the wynde, and dryueth the deuels out of the possessed in to the swyne.

Chap. IX. 

He healeth the palsye, calleth Mathew from the custome, answereth for his disciples, healeth the woman of the bloude yssue, helpeth Iairus doughter, geueth ij. blyndmen their sight, maketh a domme man to speake, dryueth out a deuell.

Chap. X. 

Christ sendeth out his Xij. Apostles to preach in lewry, geueth them a charge, teacheth them,
Œ comforteth them agaynst persecucion and | trouble.

Chap. XI. 

Ihon baptist sendeth his disciples vnto Christ, which geueth them their answere, rebuketh the vnthakfull cities, and louyngly exorteth men to take his yock vpon them.

| 

A i —————————————————— 

'The Pharises requyre a token. 

Chap. XII. 

The disciples plucke the eares of corne, he excuseth them,healcth the dried hande, helpeth the possessed that was blynde and dome, rebuketh the vnfaithfull that wolde nedes haue tokens, and sheweth who is his brother, sister and mother.

Chap. XIII 
The parable of the sede, of the tares, of the mustarde sede, of the leuen, of the treasure hyd iu the felde, of the perles, and of the nett.
Chap. XILMI. 

Ihon is taken and headed, Christ fedeth fyue thousande men with v. loaues and two fishes, and apearcth by night vnto his disciples vpon the see.

Chap. XV. 

Christ excuseth his disciples, and rebuketh the scrybes and pharises for transgressinge Gods comaundement thorow their owne tradicions.
The thinge that goeth in to the mouth defyleth not the ma. He delyuereth the woman of
Cananees daughter, healeth the multitude, and with vij. loaues and a fewe litle fishes fedeth iiij. M. men, besyde wemen q children.

Chap. XVI. 

Jesus warneth his disciples of the pharises doctrine. The confession of peter. The keyes of heauen.
The faithfull must beare the crosse after Christ. 

Chap. XVII. 
The transfiguracion of Christ vpo the mount of 
Tabor. He healeth the lunatike and payeth tribute.

Chap. XVIII. 

He teacheth his disciples to be humble, and harmlesse, to avoyde occasios of euel, and one to forgeue anothers offence.

Chap. XIX. 

Christ geueth answere concernynge mariage, q teacheth not to be carefull ner to loue worldly riches.

Chap. XX 

Christ teacheth by a similitude that God is detter vnto no man, and how he is allwaye callinge me to hislaboure. He teacheth his disciples to be lowly, q geueth ij blynde men their sight.

The gospell of 3. Mathew. 

Chap. XXI. 

He rydeth in to Jerusalem, dryueth the mar- 

chauntes out of the temple, curseth the fyge 

tre, and rebuketh the Pharises with the simili- 

tude of the ij. sonnes and of the huszband- men, that slew soch as were sent vnto them.

Chap. XXII. 

The mariage of the kynges sonne. Tribute to be geue to the Emperoure. Christ confuteth the opynion of the Saduces cocernynge the resurreccio, and answereth the scrybe vnto his questyon.

Chap. XXIII. 

Christ crieth wo ouer the pharises scribes and ypocrites, and prophecieth the destruccion of lerusalem.

Chap. XXIII. 

Clirist sheweth his disciples the destruccion of the temple, the ende of the worlde, the tokens of the latter dayes, and warneth the to wake, for the worlde shal sodely perish.

Chap. XXV. 

The X. virgins, the talentes delyuered to the seruauntes, and of the generall iudgment.

Chap. XXVI. 

The Magdalene anoynteth Christ. They eate the easter lambe and the supper of the LORDE,
Christ prayeth in the garden, Tudas betraieth him, Peter smyteth of Malcus eare, Christ is ied by false wytnesses. Peter denyeth

im. 

Chap. XXVII. 
Christ is delyuered vnto Pilate. Iudas hangeth 

himself. Christ is crucified amoge theues, he dyeth and is buried. Watchmen kepe the graue.

Chap. XXVII. 

The resurreccio of Christ. The hye prestes geue the soudiers large moneye, to saie that Christ was stollé out of his graue. Christ appeareth to his disciples, and sendeth them forth to preach and to baptyse.

The gospel of 5. Mathew. 

The first Chapter. 

a HIS is the boke of the generacion of 

lesus Christ^ y sonne of Dauid, the sonne of Abraham. ^Abraha begat Isaac:
Isaac begat Iacob: lacob begat ludas q his brethre :
Iudas begat Phares q Zara of Thamar: 
Phares? begat Hesrom: 
Hesrom* begat Aram: 
Aram” begat Aminadab: 
Aminadab* begat Naasson : 
Naasson begat Salmon: 
Salmon begat Boos of Rahab: 
Boos begat Obed of Ruth: 
Obed begat lesse: 
Iesse^ begat Dauid the kynge : 
Dauid' the kynge begat Salomon, of her that was the wyfe of Vry:
Salomon begat Roboain: 
Roboam begat Abia: 
Abia begat Asa: 
Asa begat Iosaphat : 
Iosaphat begat Ioram : 
Ioram begat Osias: 
Osias* begat Ioatham : 
Ioatham‘ begat Achas: 
Achas" begat Ezechias: 
Ezechias" begat Manasses : 
Manasses" begat Amon: 
Amon? begat Iosias: losias* begat lechonias and his brethren aboute the tyme of the captiuyte of Babylon.
‘And after the captiuyte of Babylon, le- chonias begat Salathiel :
Salathiel begat Zorobabel: 
* Gen. 21. a. Gen.25.c. Gen. 29. f. 
- d Gen.46.b. © Ruth4.d. f2 Par, 2, a. 
^ 1 Reg. 16, a. 12 Re.12.e. 1 Par. 

3.b. 3 Re. 11. g. k 2 Par. 26.d. '2Pa. 97. b. 
" 9 Par. 28. d. n 4 Re. 20. c. ? 4 Re. 21. d. 

Zorobabel begat Abiud: 

Abiud begat Eliachim : 

Eliachim begat Azor: 

Azor begat Sadoc: 

Sadoc begat Achin: 

Achin begat Eliud: 

Eliud begat Eleasar : 

Eleasar begat Matthan: 

Matthan begat Iacob : 

Iacob begat loseph the huszbande of Mary, of who was borne that lesus, which is called
Christ. 

All the generacions from Abraha to Dauid are fourtene generacions: From Dauid vnto the captiuite of Babylon, are fourtene gene- racions. From the captiuite of Babylon vnto
Christ, are also fourtene generacions. 

The byrth of Christ was on thys wyse:j 

‘When his mother Mary was maried to Ioseph 
*before they came together, she was foüde with chylde by y holy goost. But Ioseph her huszbande was a perfect man, and wolde not bringe her to shame, but was mynded to put her awaie secretely. Neuertheles whyle he thus thought, beholde, the angell of the
LORDE appered vnto him in a dreame, saynge: loseph thou sonne of Dauid, feare not to take vnto the Mary thy wyfe. For that which is coceaued in her, is of y holy goost. She shall brynge forth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Jesus.‘ For he shall saue his people from their synnes.

All this was done, y the thinge might, be fulfilled, whieh was spoken of the LORDE by the Prophet, saynge: "Beholde, a mayde shall be with chylde, and shall brynge forth a

P 4 Re. 21. e. 1 4 Re. 23. f. 24, 95. * j Par.3. c. 
Agg.1.a. 1 Esd. 3, a. * Luc. 1. b. * Some reade before they sat at home together. ¢ Phi.9.a. Act.4.a.
" Esa. 7. c. 

130 

fo. bi. sonne, and they shall call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretacion, God with vs.
Now whan loseph awoke ont of slepe he did as the angell of Y LORDE bade hym, and toke his wyfe vnto hym, and knewe her not, tyll she had brought forth hir fyrst borne sonne," and called his name lesus.

The ij. Chapter. 

a PHEN lesus was borne at Bethleé in 
W Iury, in the tyme of Herode the kynge, Beholde, there came wyse men from the east to Ierusalé, saynge: Where is the new borne kynge of the Iues? We haue sene his starre in the east, and are come to worship him.

When Herode ¥ kynge had herde thys, he was troubled, x all Ierusalé with hym, and he gathered all the hye Prestes and Seribes of y people, and axed of them, where Christ shulde be borne. And they sayde ynto hym: at
Bethleem in Iury. For thus it is written by the Prophet: ^And thou Bethleem in the londe of Iury, art not the leest amonge the
Princes of Juda. ‘For out of y shall come vnto me the eaptayne, that shall gouerne my people Israel.

3| ‘Then Herod preuely ealled the wyse men, and dyligently enquyred of them, what tyme the starre appered, and sent them to Bethleem, sainge: Go, and searehe dyligently for the chylde. And when ye haue founde hym, bringe me worde agayne, that I maye come and worshippe hym also.

When they had heard the kynge, they de- parted: and lo, the starre whieh they sawe in the east, went before them, tyll it came, and stode ouer the place where the chylde was.
When they sawe the starre, they were mar- uelously glad: and went into the house, and found the chylde with Mary his mother, and kneled downe and worshipped hym,‘ ¢ opened ther treasures, and offred vnto hym gyftes: gold, franekynsenee and myrre. And after they were warned of God in a dreame, that they shuld not go ageine to Herod, they returned into their awne countre another waye.

C| When they were departed: beholde, the angell of the LORDE appered to Ioseph in a dreame, sayinge: aryse, and take the chylde

* Luc, 2.a. ^ Mich. 5. a. 
71.b. Ésa.60.2. € Exo. 4. d. 

* Iohan. 7. d. 4 Psal. f Ozee 11. a. Nu. 24. b.

Cbr Gospell of 3. Mathew. 

Chap. (tj. 

and his mother, and flye into Egypte, ‘and abyde there tyll I brynge the worde. For
Herod wyl seke the chylde to destroye hym. 
'Thé he arose, and toke the chylde and his mother by night, and departed into Egypte, and was there vnto y deeth of Herod, that the thinge might be fulfylled which was spoke of the LORDE, by the Prophet, which sayeth: fout of Egypte haue 1 called my sonne.

Then Herod perceauynge y he was dis- ceaued of the wyse men, was excedynge wroth, and sent forth, and slue all the ehyl- dren that were in Bethleem, and in all the eoastes there of, as many as were two yere olde and vnder, aecordynge to the tyme whieh he had diligently searehed out of the wyse men.

Then was y fulfilled which was spoken by y Prophet Ieremy sayinge:* On y hilles was a voyce herde, greate mournynge, wepynge, q lamentacion: Rachel wepynge for her chyl- dren, and wolde not be conforted, because they were not.

When Herode was deed: beholde, an angell] B of the LORDE appered in a dreame to Ioseph in Egypte, sayinge: arise and take the chylde and his mother, and go in to y londe of
Israel. For they are deed, which sought the chyldes life. And he arose vp, and toke y chylde and his mother, q came into the londe of Israel. But whé he herde that Archelaus did raygne in lury, in y rowme of his father
Herode, he was afrayde to go thither. Not- withstondinge after he was warned of God in a dreame, he turned asyde into the parties of
Galile, and went and dwelt in a cite ealled 
Nazareth,’ to fulfill Y which was spoken by the 
Prophetes: he shalbe called a Nazarite. 

The ij. Chapter. 

(5 those dayes Ihon the Baptyst came and preached m the wildernes of lury, saynge:
Amede youre selues, the kyngdome of heuen is at honde.’ ‘This is he, of whom it is spoke by y Prophet Esay, which sayeth: The voyce of a eryer in y wyldernes, prepare the
LORDES waye, andi make his pathes straight. 
This Ihon had his garment of camels heer, and a lethré gerdell aboute his loynes.* Hys meate was locustes and wylde hony. ‘Then went out to hym lerusalem, and all Iury, and

£ Iere. 31. c. ^Iudic. 13. b. ‘Math. 4. b. Iohan, 1. b. 
Esai. 40. a. *4Reg.1.b. Mare. 1. a. 

Chap. iiij. all the region rounde aboute Iordan, and were baptised of him in Iordan, cofessynge their synnes.

“Now when he sawe many of the Pharises and of ¥ Saduces come to hys baptim, he sayde vnto them: ye generaci of vipers, who hath certified you, that ye shal escape jy vengeaunce to come? . Bewarre, brynge fort due frutes of pennaunce. Thinke not now, to saye in your selues, we haue Abraham to oure father. For I saye vnto you, that God is able of these stones to rayse vp chyldren vnto Abraham. Euen now is the axe put vnto y rote of the trees: therfore ^euery tre which bringeth not forth good frute, shalbe hewé downe, and cast into the fyre.

I baptise you with water to repentaunce: but he that cometh after me, is myghtier the
L^ whose shues I am not worthy to beare. 
He shall baptise you with y holy goost q with fyre: which hath also his fan in his hond, and will pourge his floore, and gadre the wheet into his garner, q will burne y chaffe with vnquencheable fyre."

Then eame lesus from Galile to Iordan," vnto Ihon, to be baptised of hym. But Iho forbade hym, saynge: I haue nede to be bap- tysed of the: and commest thou to me? Iesus answered q sayd vnto hym: Let it be so now.
For thus it be commeth vs to fulfyll all righteousnes. Then he suffred hym. And
Iesus assone as he was baptised, came straight out of the water. And lo, heue was opé ouer hym: and Ihon sawe the spirite of God descende lyke a doue, and lyght vpon hym.
And lo, there came a voyce fro heué sayng: 
*'Thys ys that my beloued sonne, in whom is my delyte.

The iiij. Chapter. 

HEN was Iesus ledd awaye of the spirite 

in to wildernes, to be tempted of the deuyll. And when he had fasted fourtye dayes and fourtye nightes, he was afterward an hungred. “And the tépter came to him and sayde: yf thou be the sonne of God, commaunde, that these stones be made breed.
He answered q sayde: yt is wrytte: ‘Man shall not lyue by bred onlye, but by euery worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of God.

? Luc. 3. h. ^ Matth. 7. hb. Luc.3.b. ° Marc, 1. b. 
Luc.3.c. Ioban. 1. c. 4 Luc. 3. c. * Marc. 1. a. 
Toh. 13. a. f Marc. 1. a. Luc.3.c. Iohau. t. d. 
& Esa. 42. a. Mat. 17. a. Luc. 9, d. 2 Pet. 1. d. 

Che gospelil of S. Mathew. 

Then the deuyll toke hym vp into the holy cite, and set hym on a pynacle of the temple, and sayde vnto hym: yf thou be y sonne of
God, cast thy sylfe downe. ‘For it is wrytten: he shall geue his angels charge ouer the and with their handes they shal holde the vp, that thou dashe not thy fote agaynst a stone. And lesus sayde vnto hym: it ys wrytten also:
Thou shalt not tempte thy LORDE God. 

Agayne, the deuyll toke hym vp and led hym in to an exeedynge hye mountayne, and shewed hym all the kyngdomes of the worlde, and all the glorie of them, and sayde vnto hym: all these wil I geue the, yf thou wilt fall downe and worship me. "' Then sayde lesus vnto hym: Auoyde Sata. For it ys wrytté: thou shalt worshyp the LORDE thy
God and hym onely shalt thou serue. 

Then the deuell left hym, and beholde, the angels came and ministred vnto hym.

"When lesus had herde that Ihon was taken, he departed into Galile and left
Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is a eite apon the see, in the coostes of zabulon and Neptalim, y the thinge might be fulfilled whiche was spoken by Esay the
Prophet, sayinge : "'T'he londe of zabulon and 
Neptalim, the waye of the see beyonde Jordan, and Galile of the Gentyls, the people which sat in darknes, sawe a greate lyght, q to them which sat in the region q shadowe of deeth, lyght is begone to shyne.

From that tyme forth beganne lesus to preach, and to saye: Amende youre selues, y kingdome of heauen is at honde.

As Iesus walked by the see of Galile, he sawe two brethren: Simon which was called
Peter, x Andrew his brother, castynge a net into ¥ see, for they were fiszhers, and he sayde vnto them: folowe me, q I will make you fiszhers of më” And they strayght waye lefte their nettes, and folowed hym.

And whan he wét forth from thence, he sawe other two brethren, lames the sonne of zebede, and Thon his brother, in the ship with zebede their father, mendynge their nettes, and called them. ‘And they without tarynge lefte Y shyp and their father, and folowed hym.

And lesus went aboute all Galile,” teachyng in their synagoges, and preachynge the gospel
^ Marc. 1. b. Luc. 4. a. 

k Psal. 90.b. ? Deut. 6. c. 
^ Marc. 1. b. Luc. 4. b. 

‘Dut. 8. a. Sap. 16. c. m Deut. 6. c. 1 Reg. 7. a.
° Luc. 4. d. Esa. 9. a. 

P Iere. 16.c. Eze. 47. b. ¢ Mat. 19. d. Luc. 5. b. * Marc.1.c. 

Fo. bij. 

35 

€ 

So. vi}. of the kyngdome, and healed all maner of siknes, q all maner dyseases amonge the people. And his fame spred abrode through out all Siria. And they brought vnto hym all sick people, that were taken with diuers diseases and gripinges, and thé X were possessed with deuils, q those which were lunatyke, and those that had the palsie: q he healed the. And ther folowed hym a greate nombre of people, from Galile, ¢ from the ten cities, and from lerusalem, and from the

regions tliat lye beyonde Iordan. 

HEN he sawe the people, he went vp 
Y into a mountayne: and when he was set, his diseiples came to hym, and he opened his mouth, and taught them, sayinge: * Blessed are the poore in sprete: for theirs is the kyngdome of heué. Blessed are they that mourne: for they shalbe eoforted.' Blessed are the meke: for they shall inheret the erth.
* Blessed are they which honger q thyrst for rightewesnes: for they shalbe filled. Blessed are the mercifull: for they shall obteyne mercy. Blessed are the pure in herte: for they shall se God. Blessed are the peace- makers: for they shalbe called the ehyldren of God. Blessed are they which suffre per- secucion for rightwesnes sake: for theirs is the kyngdome of heuen. ‘Blessed are ye when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and falsly say all manner of yuell saynges against you for my sake. / Reioyce and be glad, for greate is youre rewarde in heué.

For so persecuted they the Prophetes which were before youre dayes.

Ye are y salt of the earth, but and yf the salt hane e his saltnes, “what can be salted therwith? It is thence forth good for nothynge, but to be east out, and to be trodden vnder fote of men. Ye are the light of the worlde. A eite that is set on an hill, cau not be hid: nether do men lyght a eandell, aud put it vnder a buszhell, but on a candel- stick, and it lighteth all that are in the house.
Let youre light so shyne before men," that they maye se youre good workes, and glorify youre father which is in heauen.

The b. Chapter. 

* Marc. 3.a. Luc. 6. b. and 66. b, 4 Tere. 31. d. and 3. c. 4 Act. 5, e. £ Marc. 9. e. Luc. 14. d.
Mare. 4. b. Luc. 8, b. and 11.c. * Math. 6. a. 1 Pet. 2, b. 

Mat. 1.c. 9.c. d, Luc. 16, c, Luc. 18. d. Esa. 40. a. 

> Luc. 6. c. * Esa. 61. a. 
*1 Pet. 4. c. 1 Pet. 2. c. 

The qosprll of ©, Mathew. 

Thinke not, that I am come to destroye the lawe, or the Prophetes:* no, I am not come to destroye them, but to fulfyll them.
For truly I saye vnto you: till heauen and earth. periszhe, one iott or one tyttle of the lawe shall not escape, tyll all be fulfilled.

* Whosoeuer breaketh one of these least cómaundmentes, and teacheth mé so, he shalbe called the leest in the kyngdome of heauen. But whosoeuer obserueth and teacheth the same shalbe called greate in the kyngdome of heauen.

For I saye vnto you: excepte youre rightewesnes exceade the rightewesnes of the
Scribes and Pharises, ye can not entre in to the kyngdome of heauen.

Ye haue herde, how it was sayde to thé of|£ 

the olde tyme: ‘Thou shalt not kyll. For whosoeuer kylleth, shall be in daunger of iudgement. But I saye vnto you: whosoeuer is angrie with his brother, is in daunger of the iudgement. Whosoeuer sayeth vnto his brother: Racha, is in daunger of y consell.
But whosoeuer sayeth: thou told is in daunger of hell fyre.

”Therfore when thou offrest thy gift at the altare, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought agaynst the: leaue there thyne offrynge before the altare, and go thy waye first, and reconeyle thy selfe to thy brother, a then eome and offre thy gyfte.

"Agre with thine aduersary quicklye, whyle thou art in the waye with hym, lest that adnersary deliuer the to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer the to the minister, and then thon be east in to preson. I saye vnto the verely: thou shalt not come out thece, till thou haue payed the vtmost farthinge.

Ye haue herde, how it was sayde to them of olde tyme: °Thou shalt not committe aduoutrie. But I saye vnto you, that whoso- euer loketh on a wife lustinge after her, hath committed aduoutrie with hir already in his hert.

Wherfore yf thy right eye offende the, plucke hym out, and cast him from the.
* Better it is for the, that one of thy membres periszhe, then that thy whole body shulde be cast in to hell Also yf thy right honde

* Jaco. 2. b. Ezec.18.b. — !Exo.20.c. 21. b. Leu. 24. d. 

Deut. 5. c. m Tob 42. b. Mala. 2. b. n Luc, 12. f. 
Prou, 25. b. ° Exo. 20. c. Eccl. 41. c. Iob 31. a. 
P Deut, 13. à. Marc. 9. c. 

D 

Chap. bt. 

offende the, cut hym of, and cast him from the. Better yt is that one of thy mébres periszh, thé y all thy body shulde be cast in to hell.

It is sayde: “whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe, let hym geue her a testimonyall of the deuoreemét. But I saye vnto you: ^who- soeuer putteth awaye his wyfe (except it be for fornicacio) causeth her to breake matry- mony. And whosoeuer maryeth her that is deuorsed, breaketh wedlocke.

Agayne, ye haue herde, how it was sayde to thé of olde tyme: “Thou shalt not for- sweare thy selfe, but shalt performe thyne ooth to God. But I saye vnto you: sweare not at all nether by heaué, for it is Godis seate: nor yet by the earth, for it is his fote stole: nether by lerusalem, for it is the cyte of ¥ greate kinge: nether shalt thou sweare by thy heed, becanse thou canst not make one heer whyte or blacke: But your com- municacion shalbe, yee, yee: nay, nay. For what soeuer is more then that, commeth of euel.

Ye haue herde howe it is sayde: An eye for an eye, a toth for a toth. But I saye vnto you: that ye resist not euell. But who- soeuer geueth the a blowe on thy right cheke, turne to him the other also. And yf eny man will sue the at the lawe, q take awaye thy coate, let him haue thy cloake also. And who so compelleth the to go a myle, go with hym twayne. Geue to hym that axeth: and from hym that wolde borowe, turne not awaye.

Ye haue herde, how it is saide: ‘thou shalt loue thyne neghboure, q hate thyne enemy.
But I saye vnto you: loue youre enemies: 
Blesse thé that cursse you: *Do good to the that hate you: Praye for thé which do you wronge and persecute you, that ye maye be the chyldern of youre father which is in heauen: “for he maketh his sonne to aryse on the euel and on the good, and sendeth his rayne on the iust and vniuste. ‘For yf ye loue them which loue you, what rewarde shall ye haue? Do not the Publicans eué so?
And yf ye be frendly to youre brethren onlye: what singuler thynge do ye? Do not the

? Deu. 24. a. Math. 19. b. ^ Mare. 10. a. Lue. 16. c. 
€ Leuit. 19. e, Exo. 20. Deu. 10. d. Iaco. 5. c. 2 Para. 6. f. 

Esa. 66.a. Mat. 23. c. — 4 Ephe.4.c. ^ * Exod. 21. c. 
Deu. 19. d. Leui. 24. d. Luc. 6.c. f Leui. 9. c. 
€ Rom. 12, c. ^ Deut. 4.c. 5 Luc.6.c. * Leui.19. a. 

Cbr qospell of 3. Mathew, 

Publicans also lyke wyse? * Ye shall therfore be perfecte, euen as youre father in heaué is perfecte.

The bí. Chapter. 

AKE hede to youre almes, that ye geue/Q it not in the syght of men, ‘to the intent that ye wolde be sene of them: or els, ye get no rewarde of youre father which is in heauen.
When soeuer therfore thou geuest thine almes, thou shalt not make a trompet to be blowen before the, as the ypocrites do in the synagoges and in the stretes, for to be praysed of mē.
Verely I saye vnto you: they haue their re- warde. But whé thou doest almes, let not thy lefte hande knowe, what thy righte hande doth, that thine almes maye be secrete: and thy father which seith in secrete, shall rewarde the openly.

“And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as y ypocrytes are. For they loue to stode and praye in the synagoges, and in the corners of the stretes, to be sene of men. Verely I sale vnto you: they haue their rewarde. " But when thou prayest, entre in to thy chamber, and shut thy dore to the, q praye to thy father which is in secrete: and thy father which seith in secrete, shall rewarde the openly.

And when ye praye, bable not moch, as y 
Hethen do: for they thinke that they shalbe herde, for their moch bablynges sake.: Be not ye lyke them therfore. "For youre father knoweth where of ye haue nede, before ye axe of him. After thys maner therfore shall ye praye :

* O oure father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kyngdome come. Thy wyll be fulfilled vpon earth as it is in heauen.
Geue vs this daye oure dayly bred. And forgeue vs oure dettes, as we also forgeue oure detters. And lede vs not in to teptacion: but delyuer vs from euell For thyne is the kyngdome, and the power, and the glorye for ener. Amen. For yf ye forgeue other men their treaspases, youre heauenly father shall also forgeue you. ‘But and ye wyll not for- geue me their trespases, nomore shall youre father forgene you youre trespases.

'Moreouer when ye fast, be not sad as y 

! Luc. 11. d m 3 Re.18.d. Esa.29.c. Luc.11.a. 
"4 Re. 4. d. Act. 10. a. ? Esa. 1, b. ? Rom. 8. d. 
1 Luc, 11. a. " Mat. 18. d. Marc. 11. c. * Esa. 58.a. 
Mat. 9. b. 

fo. ty. 

| fo. I. 

ypoerytes are. For they disfigure their faces, that they myght be sene of men to fast.
Verely I saye vnto you: they haue their re- warde. But thou, whé thou fastest, annoynte thyne heed, and wash thy face, that it appeare not vnto men, that thou fastest: but vnto thy father which is in secrete: and thy father which seyth in secrete, shal rewarde the openly.

Se that ye gather you not treasure vpon the earth,” where rust and mothes corrupte, and where theues breake through and steale.
But gather you treasure together in heanen, where nether rust nor mothes corrupte, and where theues nether breake vp nor yet steale.
For where youre treasure is, there is youre herte also.

’ The eye is the light of the body. Yf thyne eye then be syngle, all thy body shal be ful of light: But and yf thyne eye be wycked, all thy body shalbe full of darckenes: Wher- fore yf the light that is in the, be darckenes, how greate then shall that darckenes be ?

No mā can serue two masters. For ether he shall hate the one and loue the other:° or els he shall leane to the one, and despise the other: Ye can not serue God and mammon.
Therfore I saye vnto you: be not ye carefull for youre lyfe, what ye shall eate, or what ye shall drinke : nor yet for youre body, what ye shal put on. Ys not the lyfe more worth the meate, and the body more of value then raymét? Beholde the foules of $ ayer: for they sowe not, nether reepe, nor yet cary in to the barnes: and yet youre heauely father fedeth thé. Are ye not moch better thé they?

Which of you (though he toke thought therfore) coulde put one cubit vnto his sta- ture? why care ye then for rayment? Con- sidre the lylies of the felde, how they growe.
They laboure not, nether spynne. And yet for all that I saye vnto you, that euen Salo- mon in all his royalte was not arayed lyke vnto one of these. Wherfore yf God so cloth the grasse, which is to daye in the felde, and to morowe shalbe cast in to the fornace: shal he not moch more do the same vnto you, o ye of lytle fayth?

Therfore take no thought, sayinge: what shall we cate, or what shall we drinke? or

a Luc. 12. d. Eccle. 29. b. ]ere, 17. a. Pro, 25. a. 
^ Luc.11. c. * Luc. 16. b. 4 Luc. 12.c. Paal. 54.c. 
1 Pet. 5.a. *3 Reg.3.b. f Luc.6.d. Rom.2.a. 

The gospelil of >. Mathew, 

where with shall we be clothed? After all soch thynges do the heithen seke. For youre pam father knoweth, that ye haue nede of all these thynges. “Seke ye fyrst the kyngdome of heauen and the righteousnes therof, so shal all these thynges be ministred vnto you.

Care not then for the morow, for the morow shall care for it self: Euery daye hath ynough of his owne trauayll.

The bij. Chapter. 

UDGE not, that ye be not iudged: /For 

as ye iudge, so shal ye be iudged. And with what measure ye meete, with the same shall it be measured to you agayne. Why seist thou a moate in thy brothers eye, and perccauest not the beame y is yn thine awne eye? Or why saiest thou to thy brother: holde, I wil plucke the moate out of thyne eye, and beholde, a beame is in thyne awne eye. Ypocryte, fyrst cast out the beame out of thyne awne eye,” and then shalt thou se clearly, to plucke out the moate out of thy brothers eye.

Geue not that which is holy, to dogges: nether cast ye youre pearles before swyne,* lest they treade them vnder their fete, q the other turne agayne and all to rente you.

i Axe, and it shalbe geuen you: Seke, and ye shall fynde: knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you. For whosoeuer axeth, receaueth : and he that seketh, fyndeth:* and to hym y knocketh, it shalbe opened. Ys there eny man amonge you, which yf his sonne axed hym bred, wolde offer him a stone ? Or yf he axed fyszhe, wolde he proffer hym a serpent? yf ye then which are euell,’ can geue youre chyldren good gyftes: how moche more shall youre father which is in heauen, geue good thynges to them that axe hym?

"Therfore what soeuer ye wolde that me shulde do to you, eué so do ye to them. This ys the lawe and the Prophetes.

Enter in at the strayte gate: for wyde is the gate," and broade is the waye, that leadeth to destruccion : q many there be, which go in therat. But strayte is the gate, and narowe ys the waye, which leadeth vnto lyfe, and fewe there be that fynde it.

Mare. 4.c. 6 Prou.18.c. ^ Psal.136.c. ‘ere. 29.c. 
Iohan.16.c. * Luc.11.b. !Gen.6.a. " Eccli. 31. b. lob 4.c. Luc. 6. c. ^ Lue. 13. c.

Chap. bij 

Chap. bij. 

* Beware of false Prophetes, which come to you in shepes clothinge, but inwardly they are raueuynge wolues, Ye shall knowe them by their frutes. Do men gather grapes of thornes? or figges of thistles? Euen so euery good tree bryngeth forth good frute.
But a corrupte tree, bryngeth forth euyl frute, 
* A good tree can not bryng forth bad frute : nother can a rotten tre bringe forth good frute. ‘Euery tre that bryngeth not forth good frute, shalbe hewen downe, and cast into the fyre. Wherfore by their frutes ye shall knowe them.

? Not all they that saye vnto me, LORDE 
LORDE, shall enter in to the kyngdome of heauen: but he that doth the will of my father which ys in heauen.

* Many shall saye to me in that daye: 
LORDE, LORDE: haue we not prophecied in thy name? Haue we not cast out deuyls in thy name? Haue we not done many greate dedes in thy name? And then will I knowlege vnto them: /I neuer knewe you,
Departe fro me, ye workers of iniquite. 

Whosoeuer therfore heareth of me these sayinges,° and doeth the same, I wyll lycké hym vnto a wyse man, which buylt hys house vpon a rocke: Now whau abundaunce of rayne descended, and the wyndes blewe and bet vpou that same house, it fel not, because it was grounded on the rocke. And who soeuer heareth of me these sayinges, q doth the not, shalbe lyckened vnto a folysh ma, which buylt his housse apon the sonde:*
Now whan abüdaunce of rayne desceded, q the wyndes blewe, q bet vpon ý housse, it fell, and great was the fall of it.

* And it came to passe, that when Iesus had had ended these saynges, the people were astonnyed at hys doctryne. For he taught them as one hauynge power, and not as the
Scribes. 

The biij. Chapter. 
HEN he was come downe from the mountayne, moch people folowed him. And lo, there came a leper, and wor- sheped him, sayinge: LORDE, yf thou wylt, thou canst make me cleane. And lesus put

a Deut. 13. a. Iohā, 4.a. Luc. 6.e. ^ Matb. 12. d. 
© Tere. 11. c. Math. 3.a, Luc. 3. b. 4 Matb. 25. a. 
Luc. 6. e. and 13. c. © Act. 19, b. f Psal. 6. b. 
Math. 25. d. € Luc. 6, e. Rom. 2. b. ^ Taco. 2. b. 
* Eze. 13. b. k Marc. 1. b. Luc. 4. c. ! Marc. 1. d. 

The gospell of S, Mathew. 

forth hys honde, q touched him, sayinge: 1 wyl, be thou cleane: q immediatly his leprosie was clensed? And lesus sayde vnto him:
Se thou tell no ma, but go and shew thy selfe to the preste, and offer the gyfte that
Moses cOmaunded,” in witnes to them. 

When Iesus was entred into Capernaum,” there came vnto him a Captayne, x besought hym, sayinge: Syr, my seruaunt lyeth sicke at home of the palsye and ys greuously payned. lesus sayd vnto hym: I wil come t heale him. The Captayne answered and sayde: Syr, I am not worthy, that thou shuldest come vnder my rofe, but speake the worde only,’ and my seruaunt shalbe healed.
For I my selfe also am a ma subiect to y auctorite of another, q haue sowdiers vnder me. Yet wha I saye to one: go, he goeth, and to another: come, he commeth: q to my seruaunt: do this, he doeth it. When Iesus hearde that, he marueled, and sayde to them that folowed hym: Verely I say vnto you: I haue not founde so greate fayth: no not i
Israel. But I say vnto you: "Many shall come from the east and west, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac and lacob in the kyng- dome of heauen: and the chyldren of the kyngdome shalbe cast out in to vtter darcknes: there shal be wepinge, q gnaszhing of teth.
And lesus sayd vnto y Captayne: go thy waye, and as thou beleuest, so be it vnto the.
And his seruaunt was healed the same houre. 

7 And lesus went in to Peters housse, and sawe hys wyues mother lyinge sicke of a feuer: so he touched her hande, and the feuer left hir: and she arose, and ministred vnto them.

‘When the euen was come, they brought vnto him many that were possessed with deuylls. And he cast out y spirites with a worde, q healed all that were sicke, that $ thinge might be fulfilled, which was spoken by
Esay the Prophet, sayinge: “He toke on him oure infirmities, and bare oure sickneses.

*Whe Jesus sawe moch people about him, he commaunded to go ouer the water. And there came a scribe and sayde vnto hym: master, I wyll folowe the, whyther so euer thou goest. And Jesus sayde vnto him: the foxes haue holes, and the byrddes of the ayer
™ Leui. 14. a. 

Luc. 5. b. ? Luc. 7. a. Iohan.4. f. 

? Psal. 106. c, — ? Esa. 41. d. Luc. 13. c. ? Luc. 4. d. 
Marc. 1. c. * Luc, 4. c. + Esa, 53. a. 1 Pet. 2. c. t Luc. 9. f.

fo. rt. 

B 

pO ae Ce C UT TS m 3] fo. rij. The gospell of 3. Mathew. Chap. tr.

sinnes are forgeué the. And beholde, cer- teyne of the scribes sayde in them selues: this man blasphemeth. But when Iesus sawe their thoughtes, he sayde: wherfore thinke ye euill in youre hertes ? Whether ys it easier to saye: thy synnes be forgeue y, or to saie: arise and walke? But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes in earth, thé sayde he vnto the sicke of y palsye:' arise, take vp thy bed, and go hone And he arose and wente home. When y people sawe it, they marueyled, q glorified
God, which had geué soch power vnto men. 

* And as Iesus passed forth from thence, he sawe a man syt a receyuinge of custome, named Mathew, q sayde vnto him: folowe me.
And he arose, and folowed him. And it came to passe as he sat at meate in the house : be- holde, many publicans and synners came and sat downe also with lesus and hys disciples.

When the Pharises sawe that, they sayde to hys disciples: why eateth youre master with publieans and synners? When lesus herde that, he sayde vnto them: The whole nede not y phisicio, but they that are sicke. Go and learne, what that meaneth : I haue plea- sure in mercy, and not in offerynge.’ For I am not come to call the righteous, but y synners to repentaunce.

” Then came the disciples of Ihon to hym sayinge: why do we q y Pharises fast so oft: and thy disciples fast not? And Iesus sayde vnto thé: Can the weddynge chyldré mourne as loge as the bridegrome is with them ? The tyme will eome, when the bridegrome shalbe taken from them, and thé shall they fast. No man peceth an olde garment with a pece of newe clothe. For then taketh he awaye the pece agayne from the garment, q the rent ys made greater. "Nether do men pnt new wyne in to olde vessels, for then the vessels breake, and the wyne runneth out, q y vessels peryshe,
But they poure newe wyne in to newe vessels, and so are both saned together.

Whyle he thus spake, vnto them, beholde there came a certayne ruler,’ and worshipped him, sayinge: My doughter is eué now deceased, but come and lay thy honde on her, and she shall liue. lesus arose and folowed hym with hys disciples.’ And beholde, a
Luc. 5. d. 15, a. ! Ose. 6. b. Math. 12. a. 1 Tim. 1. c- 

m Mar. 2. b. Luc. 5. c. " Act. 2. b, ? Marc. 5. d. 
Luc. 8. c. PMar.5.c. Luc.8.c. Leuit. 15. d. 

[haue nestes, but M sonne of mà hath not 

iwheron to rest his heede.* Another that was one of his disciples, sayde vnto hym: Syr, geue ine leue fyrst, to go q burye my father.
| But Iesus sayde vnto him: folowe thou me, 
‘and let the deed burie their deed. ] 

| And he entred in to a shyppe, q his disci- ples folowed him. Aud beholde, there arose a greate tempest in the see, in so moch that ithe shippe was couered with wawes, q he was laslepe. And his disciples came vnto him,
[and awoke hym, sayinge: LORDE, saue vs, 
[we perishe. And he sayde vnto them: why are ye fearfull, o ye of lytell faithe ? Then he arose, and rebuked the wyndes and the see," a there folowed a greate calme. And the men marneyled and sayde: what mà is this, that both wyndes and see obey hym?

D| And when he was come to y other syde, in to the countre of the Gergesites, there met him two possessed of deuyls,^ which came out of the graues, and were out of measure fearce, so that no man myght go by that waye. And
(beholde, they eryed out sayinge: Oh lesu thou sonne of God, what haue we to do with

The ir. Chapter. 

HEN entred he in to a shipp, and passed 

ouer and came in to his awne cite. And 

lo, they brought vnto him a man sicke of y palsie, lyinge in his bed. ^And when Iesus sawe the faith of the, he sayde to the sicke of y palsie: my sonne, be of good cheare, thy
2 dus Gh Ue è Mar. 4.d. Luc. 8. c. e Iob 26. b. 
Psal. 106. d. Esa. 51. c. * Mar. 5.a. Lu. 8.a. 

* 2 Cor. 6. c. f Mar.5.b. Act. 16.c. ^ Marc. 2. a. 
Luc. 5. c. Iohan. 5. a. 5 Act. 9. c. * Mar. 2. b. 

Chap. y. 

woman which was diseased with an yssue of bloude xij. yeres, came behynde hym, and touched the hem of hys vesture. For she sayde in her silfe: yf I maye touche but euen his vesture only, I shalbe safe. Then lesus tourned him aboute, and behelde her, sayinge:
Doughter be of good conforte, thy faith hath made y safe. And she was made whole, euen that same houre.

“And when Iesus came into the rulers house, and sawe the minstrels and the people raginge, he sayde vnto them: Get you héce, for y mayde is not deed, but slepeth^ And they laughed hym to scorne. But whan the people were put forth, he went in, and toke her by the honde, and the mayde arose. And this was noysed through out all that londe.

And as lesus departed thence, two blynde mé folowed hym, cryinge and sayinge: O thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs.
And when he was come home, the blynde came to hym, And lesus sayde vnto them

D| Beleue ye, that I am able to do thys? And 

they sayde vnto hym : yee, LORDE. Then touched he their eyes, sayinge: acordinge to youre fayth, be it vnto you.” And their eyes were opened. And lesus charged the, sayinge:
Se that no ma knowe of it. But they de- parted, x spred abroade his name through out all the londe.

Whan these were gone out,’ beholde, they brought to hym a domme man possessed of a deuyll. And whan the deuyl was cast out, the domme spake: And the people merueled sayinge : it was neuer so sene in Israel. But y Pharises sayde: ‘he casteth out deuyls, thorow the chete deuyll.

‘And lesus wente aboute in all cities and townes, teachinge in their synagoges q preach- yng y gospel of ý kyngdome, q healinge all maner sicknes q all maner desease amoge the people. *And when he sawe the people, he had compassion on thé, because they were pyned awaye, and seattered abroade, euen as shepe hauinge no shepherd.

Then sayde he to hys disciples: $ hernest is greate, but Y laborers are fewe. Wü praye the LORDE of the haruest,^ to sende forth lahorers into hys haruest.

a Mar. 5.d. Luc. 8. f. > Toha, 11. b. * Mat. 8, b. 
4 Mar. 7. d. Luc. 11. b. * Mat. 12. c, Mar. 3. b. 
.8. Luc.13.b € Mar. 6. d. ^ Luc. 10, a. 

D Mer. 3. b. Luc. 6. b. 9. a. 10. a. 

The gospell of S. Mathew. 

The r. Chapter. 

ND he called his xii. disciples vnto hym, 
A a 'gaue them power ouer vneleane spretes, to cast them out, ¢ to heale all maner of sicknesses, and all maner of deseases.

The names of the xii. Apostels are these: 
The fyrst, Simon called Peter: q Andrew his brother. lames the sonne of Zebede, and
Ihon his brother. Philip and Bartlemew. 
Thomas, and Mathew the Publican. lames ithe sonne of Alphe, and Lebbeus otherwyse
[called Taddeus. Simon of Cane, and Iudas 
Iscarioth, which also betrayed hym. 

These twolue sent Iesus, and commaunded them, sayinge:* Go not in to the wayes y leade to the Heithen, and in to the cities of the
Samaritàs enter ye not. But go rather to the lost shepe of the housse of Israel. 'Go and preach, sayinge: The kyngdome of heué is at hande. Heale the sicke, clense the lepers rayse the deed, cast out the deuils. " Frely ye haue receaued, frely geue againe. Posses not golde, nor siluer, nor brasse yn youre gerdels, nor yet scrip towardes your iorney: nether two cotes, nether shues, nor yet a staffe. For
“the workman is worthy of his meate. In to what soeuer cite or towne ye shall come, en- quyre in it, who is mete for you, and there abyde, tyll ye go thence.

And whé ye come in to an house, salute y same. And yf the housse be mete for you, youre peace shal come vpo it. But yf it be not mete for you, youre peace shal turne to you againe.

And yf no man wil receaue you, ner heare youre preachinge, departe out of that house or that cite, and shake the dust of youre fete.
Truly I saye vnto you: "it shall be easyer for y londe of Sodoma and Gomorra in y daye of iudgment, then for that cite.

Beholde, I sende you forth as shepe amoge wolues. Be ye therfore wyse as serpentes, and innocent as doues. ” Beware of men, for they shall deliuer you vp to the coüsels, and shal scourge you in their synagoges. And ye shall be brought before prynces and kynges for my sake, in witnes to them and to the gentyls.

* Luc. 9. a. ! Mar. 6. b. ™ Act. 8. b. Mar. 6. a. 
Lu. 9. a. aud 10. a. "^ Phi.2. c. 1 Timo. 5. c. 
^ Mar. 6. b. Lu. 9.a. an 10. a. Act. 13. c, an. 18. a. 
Luc. 10. a. ? Mar. 13. b. Luc.21. b. Toba, 16. a. 

131 

Fo. rij. 

fo. rib. 
€ | “But when they delyuer you vp, take no thought how or what ye shall speake, for yt ishalbe geuen yon, euen in that same loure, what ye shall saye. For it is not ye that speake, but the sprete of your father which speaketh in you.

‘The brother shall delyuer the brother to decth, and the father the sonne. And the chyldren shall aryse agaynst their fathers q mothers, q shall helpe them to deeth: q ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. But he y endureth to the ende, shalbe saued.* I .

When they persecute you in one cite," flye in to another. I tell you for a treuth, ye shall not fynysshe all the cities of Israel, tyll the sonne of man come. ‘The disciple is not aboue the master, nether the seruaunt aboue the LORDE. It is ynough for the disciple, to be as his master, and the sernaunt as his
LORDE. Yf they hane called the good mà of the house Beelzebub, how moch more shal they call them of his housholde so? — Feare them not therfore.

‘There is nothinge hyd, that shal not be openly shewed: and nothinge secrete, that shall not be knowne. What I tell you in dareknes, that speake ye in light: and what ye heare in the eare, that preach ye vpon the house toppes.

* And feare ye not them that kyll the body, and be not able to kyll thesoule. But rather feare hi, which is able to destroye both soule and body in to hell. Are not two sparowes solde for a farthinge? Yet doth there none of the light vpon the groude without youre father. And now are all y hayres of youre heade tolde. Feare ye not therfore: ye are iof nore value then many sparowes.

^'Therfore whosoener knowlegeth me before me, him wil I knowlege also before my father which is in heauen. But who soener denyeth me before me, him wil I also denie before my father which is in heauen.

‘Thynke not that I am come to sende peace vpon earth. I came not to sende peace, but a swerde. For I am come to set a ma at variaunce ageynst his father, and the doughter ageynst hir mother," ¢ the doughter in lawe

* Mar. 13. b. Luc. 12. b. an, 21. b. è Mich. 7. a. 

* Mat. 24, a. ?]ere.1.a. Mat.2.c. Act. 8.a. 14. a. 
€ Luc. 6. d. Yobà, 13. b. and 15. b, f Marc. 4. b. 
Luc. 8. b. and 12. a. € Luc. 12. a. ^ Marc. 8. c. 

| Luc. 9. c. and 12. b. * Luc. 12. f. * Mich. 7. a. 

The gospeil of &. Mathew. 

Chap, rt. 

ageynst her mother in lawe: and a mans foes shalbe they of his owne housholde.

‘Who so loueth father and mother more then me, is not mete for me: and he that loueth sonne or doughter more then me, is not mete for me. And he y taketh not his crosse and foloweth me, is not mete for me.
Who so fyndeth his life, shal lose it:” and he that loseth his life for my sake, shal fynde it.

He that receaueth you, receaneth me: q who so receaneth me, receaneth him y sent me. He that receaueth a prophet im the name of a prophet," shal receaue a prophetes rewarde. He y receaueth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shal receaue a righteous mans rewarde: “And who soeuer geueth vnto one of the least of these a cuppe of colde water onely to drinke, in y name of a disciple, verely I saie vnto you: he shal not lose his rewarde.

The rt. Chapter 

ND it came to passe, wha Iesus had|@ 

made an ende of comaundinge his 

twolue disciples, he departed thence, to teach and to preach in their cities.

Whan Ihon beinge in preson” herde of the workes of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, and sayde vnto him: Art thon he y shal come, or shal we loke for another? lesus answered and sayde vnto thé: Go youre waye and tell Ihon agayne, what ye se and heare.
The blynde se, and the lame go:* the lepers are clensed, and y deaf heare: the deed aryse ageyne, and the ‘gospell is preached to the poore: and blessed is he, that is not offended at me.

Whan they wente their waye, lesus beganne to speake vnto the people, ‘concernynge Ihon:
What are ye gone out for to se in the wyl- dernes? Wolde ye se a rede shaken with the wynde? Or what are ye gone ont for to se?
Wolde ye se a man clothed in soft rayment ? 
Beholde, they that weare soft clothinge, are in kinges houses, But what are ye gone out for tose? A prophet? Yee I saye vnto you, and more thé a prophet. For this is he, of

! Luc. 44. d. and 17. d. ^ Mat. 16. d. Marc. 8. c. 

Joha.12.c. Luc. 9. b.and 10.c. Ioh. 13. c. ^S Reg. 
18. a. ° Marc. 9. c. P Luc.7?, b. 1 Esa. 35. a. r Eaa. 61. a. £ dms na Go

Chap. rij. The qospell of 3» Mathew. 

who it is written: Beholde, I sende my mes- sauger before thy face, which shal prepare thy waye before the.

Verely I saye vnto you: Amonge y chil- dren of wemen arose there not a greater then
Thon the baptist. Not withstondinge he that is * lesse in the kyngdome of Heauen, is greater then he. From the tyme of Ihon baptist hither to, $ kyngdome of heauen’ snflreth violence, and the violent plucke it vnto them.
For all the prophetes and the lawe prophecied vnto Ihon. Also yf ye wil receaue it, this is
Helias which shnlde come. Who so hath eares to heare, let hi heare.

But where vnto shal I lické this generacion? 
It is like vnto childré which syt in the market, and call vnto their felowes, q saye: we hane pyped vnto you, and ye wolde not daunse:
We haue morned vnto you, q ye wolde not wepe. For Ihon came nether eatinge nor drynkinge, q they saye: he hath the deuyll.
The sonne of man came eatinge and drynk- inge, q they saye: lo what a glutton and wyne bebber this ma is, and a companyon of pub- licans q synners? And wiszdome is iustified of hir children.

3j| Then beganne he to vpbrade the cities, in the which most of his miracles were done,
*because they amended not. Wo vnto the 
Chorasin, Wo vnto the Bethsaida: for yf the miracles which haue bene shewed amoge you, had bene done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented longe agoo in sackcloth and aszhes.
Neuertheles I saye vnto you: It shalbe easyer for Tyre and Sidon in the daye of iudgment, then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lift vp vnto heauen, shalt be brought downe vnto hel. For yf the miracles which haue bene done in the, had bene shewed in Sodom, they had remained vnto this daye. Neuer- theles I saye vnto you: It shalbe easyer for the londe of Sodome in the daye of judgment, the for the.

Æ| At y same tyme lesus answered, and sayde: 

| |*I prayse the (O father and LORDE of heauen and earth) that thou hast hid these thinges from the wyse and prudent, and opened the vnto babes. Enen so father, for so it pleased the. ‘All thinges are geuen ouer vnto me of

a Mal.3.a. Marc. 1. a. * Some reade : leaat. 
? Luc. 16.c. © Luc. 1.2. Mala. 3.d, Ihon 1. b, Luc.7.d. d Luc. 10. b. *Luc.10.c. Prou.11.a. /Mat.28.c.
Luc.10.c. Iohan.3.c. Iohà.7.c.8.b. 10. b. £ Eccli.| 

my father: and no mà knoweth the sonne, but the father: nether knoweth eny man the father, saue the sonne, and he to whom the sonne wil open it. Come vnto me all ye that laboure and are laden, and I wil ease you.*
Take my yock vpon you, and lerne of me, for 
Iam meke and lowlye of hert, « ye shal fynde rest vnto youre soules: ^for my yock is easy, and my burden is light.

Thre rij. Chapter. 

T the same tyme wéte Jesus thorow the corne vpon the Sabbath, and his dis- ciples were hongrie, and beganne to plucke of the eares of the corne, and to eate. When y
Pharises sawe that, they sayde vnto him: 
Beholde, thy disciples do that, which is not laufull to do vpon the Sabbath. He sayde vnto them: haue ye not red what Dauid did, whan he was hongrie, a they also y were with him? How heentred in to the house of God, a “ate the shew breds which were not laufull for him to eate, nether for thé y were with him, but onely for the prestes? Or haue ye not red in the lawe how that the prestes in the temple breake the Sabbath, and yet are blamelesse? But I saye vnto you: y here is one greater then the temple. 'But yf ye wyst what this were (I haue pleasure in mercy, and not in offeringe) ye wolde not haue condemned innocentes: For the sonne of man is LORDE

euen ouer the Sabbath. 

And he departed thence, and wente in to their synagoge: and beholde,” there was a ma which had his hade dryed vp. And they axed him, sayenge: Is it laufull to heale, vpon the
Sabbath?" because they might accuse him. 
But he sayde vnto thc: Which of you is it, yf he had a shepe falle in to a pytte vpon the
Sabbath, that wolde not take him, and lift him out? And how moch is a man better then a shepe? Therfore it is lefull to do good vpon the Sabbath. Then sayde he to the mà: Stretch forth thine hande. And he stretched it forth: and it was whole agayne like vnto the other.

Then wente the Pharises out,? and helde a councell agaynst him, how they might de- stroye him. But wha lesus knew therof, he

6.d. Iere. 6. c. ^ 1 Iohà. 5. a. i Marc. 2.c. Luc. 
6.a. Dut.23.d. *1Re.2i.b. 'Ose.6.b. Mat. 9. b. a Marc. 5.a. Luc. 6. a. n Luc. 14. b. ? Deu. 22. a.
P? Marc. 3.a. Joba. 10. d. and 11. f. 

fo. xb. 

Fo. rbi. departed thence, a moch people folowed him: and he healed them all, and charged them, y they shulde not make him knowne: that the thinge might be fulfylled, which was spoken by Ksay the prophet, which sayeth: ^ Beholde, this is my seruaunt, whom I haue chosen : and my beloued, in whom my soule delyteth :
I wil put my sprete s hi, and he shal shewe iudgment vnto the Heithe. He shal not stryue, uer erye, nether shal eny man heare his voyce in the stretes. A brosed rede shal he not breake, and flax that beginneth to burne shal he not quench, tyll he sende forth iudgment vnto victory. And in his name shal the Heithen trust.

Then was there bronght vnto him one possessed’ (of a deuell) the which was blynde aud domne, aud he healed him: in so moch y ¥ blynde and domne both spake and sawe.
And all the people were amased, and sayde: 
Is not this the sonne of Dauid? “But whan the Pharises herde that, they sayde: He dryueth the deuyls out none other wyse, but thorow Beelzebub the chefe of the deuyls.
Neuertheles lesus knew their thoughtes, and sayde vnto them: Euery kyngdome deuyded within it self, shalbe desolate: and euery cite or house denyded in it self, maye not con- tynue. So yf one Sathan cast out another, thé is he at variaunce within him self: how maye then his kyngdome endure? But yf I east out deuils thorow Beelzebub, thorow whom do youre childré cast them out? Ther- fore shal they be youreiudges. But yf I cast out the deuyls by the sprete of God then is the kyngdome of God come vpon you. Or how cà a man entre in to a stronge mans house, ^and violently take awaye his goodes, excepte he first bynde the stronge mà, q thé spoyle his house? He that is not with me, is agaynst me: q he y gathereth not with me, scatereth abrode. "Dons I saye vnto yon:
"All synne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen vnto men, but the blasphemy agaynst the sprete shal not be forgeuen vnto men: And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man,” it shalbe forgeué him. But whoso- euer speaketh agaynst the holy goost it shal not be forgeuen him, nether in this worlde, ner in the worlde to come.

The qospell of S. Mathew., 

^ Ksa.42,a. >Luc.ii.b, © Math.9.d. Marc.3. b. 
Luc. 11. b. 4 Luc. 11. a, * Marc. 3. c. Luc. 12. a. f1feg.1.c. € Mat. 7. b. Luc.6.c. — ^ Psal, 39. b.
Luc. 6. c ‘Luc, 19. b. 2 Reg. 1. c. * Mat. 16. a. 

Chap. rij. 
£ Either make the tre good and his fruten good also, or els make the tre euel q his frute enel also. For the tre is knowne by the frute.
O ye generacio of vypers, how can ye speake good, whan ye youre selues are enell? ^For of $ abundace of M hert y mouth speaketh.
A good man out of the good treasure of his hert, bringeth forth good thinges: q an euel man out of his euell treasure, bringeth forth euell thinges. But I saye vnto you, that of euery ydell worde that mé haue spoken, they shal geue accomptes at y daye of iudgmet.
‘Out of thy wordes thou shalt be iustified, q out of thy wordes thou shalt be codemned.

Then answered certayne of the serybes and Pharises, and sayde: Master, we wolde fayne se a toké of the. *And he answered and saide vnto thé: This euell and ad- uouterous generacion seketh a token: and there shal no token be geuen the, but the token of the prophete lonas. / For as Ionas was thre dayes and thre nightes in the Whalles bely, so shal the sonne of ma be thre dayes and thre nightes in the hert of the earth.
The men of Ninyue shal ryse in the last iudgment with this generacion, and shal con- demne it: "for they dyd pénaunce acordinge to y preachinge of lonas. And beholde, here is one greater thé Ionas. The quene of the south shal "aryse in the last iudgmet with this generacion, and shal condéne it: for she came from the vttemost partes of the earth, to heare ¥ wyszdome of Salomon: And lo, here is one greater then Salomon.

Whan the vneleane sprete is gone out of] 35 man, “he walketh thorow dry places, sekinge rest, a fyndeth none. "The saieth he: I wil turne agayne in to my house, fro whence I wete out. And whan he cometh, he fyndeth it emptye, swepte and garnyshed. Then goeth he his waye, q taketh vnto him seuen other spretes worse then him self: and whan they are entred in, they dwell there: ” And the ende of that man 1s worse then the be- gyunynge. Kuen so shal it go with this euell generacion. :

Whyle he yet talked vnto the people, be- holde, his mother q his brethre stode without desyringe to speake with him. “Then sayde one vnto him: Beholde, thy mother and thy| `

Marc. 8. b. Luc. 11. c. ! Tone 2. a. m [onc 3. b. 
^3 Re. 10. a. 2 Par. 9. a. * Luc. 11-6. P 2 Pet. 
2.d. Heb. 6. a. 1 Marc. 3. c. 

Luc. 8. c. 

The qospell of 3. Mathelv. 

brethren stonde without, ¢ wolde speake with the. Neuertheles he answered q sayde vnto him that tolde him: Who is my mother? q who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hande ouer his disciples, q sayde:
Beholde my mother and my brethré. For 
“who soeuer doth ¥ wyll of my father which is in heaue, the same is my brother, sister and mother.

The rij. Chapter. r | ‘HE same daye wente lesus out of i

house, ^and sat by the see syde, q moc 

people resorted vnto him : so y he wéte in to a shyppe and satt him downe, and all the people stode vpo the shore. And he spake many thinges vnto the in symilitudes, say- enge: Beholde, The sower wente forth to sowe : and as he sowed, some fell by the waye syde: Then came the foules, q ate it vp.
Some fell vpon stony grounde, q anone it spronge vp, because it had no depth of earth:
But whan the Sonne arose, it caught heate : and for so moch as it had no rote, it withred awaye. Some fell amoge the thornes, q the thornes grewe vp, and choked it. Some fell vpo good gronde, q gaue frute : some an hun- dreth folde, some sixtie folde, some thirtie folde. heare.

And the disciples came vnto him, and sayde: ^ Why speakest thou to thé by parables?
He answered and sayde vnto thé: Vnto yon it is geuen to knowe the ^mystery of the king- dome of heauen, but vnto them it is not genen. For whoso hath, vnto him shal be geué, and he shal haue abundaunce. But who so hath not, from him shalbe taken awaye, eué that he hath. Therfore speake I vnto thé by parables, for with seynge eyes they se not, q with hearinge eares they heare not, for they vnderstonde it not. And in them is fulfilled y prophecie of Esay, which sayeth:
* Ye shal heare in dede, and shal not vnder- stonde: and with seinge eyes shal ye se, and not perceaue. For y hert of this people is waxed grosse, q their eares are thick of hearige, q their eyes haue they closed, lest they shulde once se with y eyes, q heare with

Who so hath eares to heare, let hi 

? Toba. 15. b. 
4.a. Luc. 8. b. 
Luc. 8. b. and 19. c. 

^ Marc. 4, a. Luc. 8. a. * Marc. 
42 Cor.3.c. Mat.25.c. Marc. 4. b. 
* Esa. 6. b. Marc. 4. a. Luc. 8. b. 

the eares, q vnderstode with the hert, q turne, that I might heale them.

But blessed are youre eyes, for they se: al yonre eares, for they heare. Verely I saye vnto yon: /Many prophetes q righteous men haue desyred to se y thinges that ye se, and haue not sene thé: and to heare the thinges that ye heare, and haue not herde the. Heare ye therfore the parable of the sower. *Whan one heareth y worde of the kyngdome, and vnderstondeth it not, the euell man cometh, and plucketh it awaye that is sowne in his hert: q this is he ý is sowne by the waye syde. But he y is sowne in the stonye grounde, is this: wha one heareth the worde, q anone with ioye receaueth it: neuertheles he hath no rote 7 him, but endureth for a season: wha trouble q persecucion aryseth because of the worde, immediatly he his offended. As for him that is sowne amonge y thornes, this is he: Whà one heareth the worde, q the carefulnes of this worlde, q the disceatfulnes of riches choke the worde, q so he becometh vnfrutefull. But he y is sowne in the good grounde, is this: whan one hear- eth the worde, and vnderstondeth it, and bringeth forth frute: and some geueth an hüdreth folde, some sixtie folde, and some thirtie folde.

Another parable put he forth vnto the, q sayde: The kyngdome of heaué is like vnto a man,^ y sowed good sede in his felde. But whyle mé slepte, there came an enemye, and sowed tares amonge y wheate, q wente his waye. Now wha the blade was spróge vp v brought forth frute, thé y tares appeared also. Then came the seruaütes to y hous- holder, q sayde vnto him: Syr, sowdest not thou good sede in thy felde? — Fro whéce thé hath it tares? He sayde vnto thé: that hath the enemye done. Thé sayde ý seruaütes: wilt thou then y we go q wede thé out? He sayde : No, lest whyle ye wede out y tares, ye plucke vp the wheate also with the. Let the both growe together tyll the haruest, and in tyme of haruest I wil saye vnto the reapers :
Gather y tares first, q bynde thé in sheeues to be bret: but gather the wheate in to my barne.

Another parable put he forth vnto the, and 

Johá. 12. c. 
1 Pet. 1. b. 

Act. 28.d. Rom. 11. b. 
€ Marc. 4. b. Luc. 8. b. 

7 Luc. 10. c. 
^ Marc. 4. c. 

Fo. bij. 

fo. roii. sayde: The kyngdome of heauen is like vnto a “grane of mustarde sede, which a man toke, and sowed it in his felde. Which is the leest amonge all sedes. But whan it is growne, it is the greatest amonge herbes, and is a tre: so that the byrdes vnder the heaven come and dwell in the braunches of it.

É| Another parable spake he vnto thé: ^The kyngdome of heaué is like vnto leué, which a woman toke, and myxte it amonge thre peckes of meele, tyll all was lenended.

“All soch thinges spake Iesus vnto y people by parables, q without parables spake he nothinge vnto thé: y the thinge might be fulfilled, which was spoke by $ prophet, say- enge: I wil open my mouth in parables, and wil ^speake ont the secretes from the begyn- nynge of the worlde.

eame home. And his disciples came vnto hi, and sayde: Declare vnto us y parable of y tares of $ felde. lesus answered, and sayde
,vnto them: He that soweth the good sede, is the sonne of man: the felde is the worlde: y good sede are the childré of the kyngdome:
The tares are the children of wickednes: y 
,enemye that soweth thé, is the deuell : har- 
[uest is the ende of the worlde: $ reapers are 
|j angels. «For like as $ tares are weded out, and brent in the fyre, eué so shal it go in y ende of this worlde. The sonne of man shal sende forth his angels, q they shal gather out of his kingdome all thinges y offende, q thé y do iniquyte, ¢ shal cast thé in to a fornace of fyre, there shalbe waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth. "The shal the righteous shyne as the Sonne, in the kyngdome of their father.
Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare. 
J| Agayne, the kingdome of heanen is like vnto a treasure hyd in the felde, which a mà founde and hid it, and for ioye therof he wéte q solde all y he had, and bought y felde.
Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen is like vnto a marchant, y sought good pearles: q wha he had founde a precious pearle, “he wéte and solde all that he had, q bought it.
Agayne, ý kyngdome of heaué is like vnto a nett cast in to y see, wherwith are take all maner of fyshes: q wha it is ful, mē drawe it out vnto ¥ shore, q sytt q gather y good 1 to

^ Mare. 4. c. Luc. 13.b. ! Luc. 13. b. * Marc. 
4. d, 4 Psal. 77.2, * Apo, 14. d. f Dan. 12. a. 
|Bap. 3.b. 1 Cor. 15. c. € Phil. 3. a. ^ Mat. 22. b. 
| Mat. 15. c, * Marc. 6.a, Luc. 4. b. ! [ohà. 6. c. 

The gospeli of S. Mathew. 

Then sent lesus the people awaye, and, 

the vessels, but cast the bad awaye. shal it be also in ¥ ende of ¥ worlde. angels shal go out, a seuer the bad fro the righteous, q shal cast the in to a fornace of fyre, 'there shalbe waylinge « gnaszhinge of teth.

And lesus sayde vnto them: Haue ye vnderstóde all these thinges? They sayde:
Yee LORDE. Then sayde he vnto the: 
Therfore euery scribe taught vnto y king- dome of heanen, is like an houszholder, which bryngeth out of his treasure thinges new and olde.

And it came to passe wha Iesus had ended these parables, he departed thence, and came in to his owne coutre, and taught thé in their synagoges: in so moch, that they were aston- nyed and sayde: Whece cometh soch wysz- dome q power vnto him? 'Is not this the carpéters sonne? Is not his mother called
Mary? and his brethre lames q loses, and 
Symonand Iude? And are not all his sisters here with us? Whence hath he the all these thinges? And they were offended at him.
But lesus sayde vnto thé: “A prophet is nowhere lesse sett by, thé at home ¢ amonge his owne. And he dyd not many miracles there, because of their vnbeleue.

The riiij. Chapter. 

T that tyme Herode y Tetrarcha herde 
A of ¥ fame of Iesu, "q sayde vnto his seruaites: This is Iho y baptist. He is rysen agayne fro the a therfore are his dedes so mightie. "For Herode had takë Tho bounde hi, v put him in preson for Herodias sake his brothers Philips wife. For Thon sayde vnto him: *It is: not laufull for Tuo haue her. And fayne wolde he haue put him to death, but he feared the people," because they helde him for a Prophet.

‘But whan Herode helde his byrth daye, the doughter of Herodias daunsed before the,’ and that pleased Herode well, wherfore he pro- mysed her with an ooth, y he wolde geue her, whatsoeuer she wolde axe. And she (beynge instructe of hir mother afore) sayde: gene me [hon baptistes heade in a platter. And the kynge was sory. Neuertheles for y ooth sake, q thé y sat with him at y table, he

m Marc.6. a. Luc. 4. c. Iobà. 4. c. ^ Marc. 6. b. 
Luc. 9.a. ? Luc. 3.c. * Leui. 18. b. ? Mat. 21. b. 
1 Gen. 40. c. r Marc. 6. c. 

jo 3 

Chap. riii. 

Chap. rb. 

comaunded it to be geuen her, q sent, q be- heeded Ihon in the preson. And his heed was brought in a platter, and genen to the damsell, q she brought it vnto her mother.
Then came his disciples, and toke his body, and buried it, and wente and tolde Iesus.
Whan lesus herde y, he departed thence by shippe in to a desert place alone.” And wha the people herde therof, they folowed him on fote out of Y cities. And Iesus wéte forth, and sawe moch people, and had pytie vpon them, and healed their sicke. But at euen his disciples came vnto him, q saide: This is a deserte place, and ¥ night falleth on: let y people departe from the, that they maye go in to the townes, and bye them vytayles. But lesus sayde vnto them: They nede not go awaye, geue ye the to eate, Thé saide they vnto him: We haue here but fyue loaues and two
€ fyshes. And he sayde: bringe thé hither. 
And he comaunded y people to syt downe vpon the grasse, and toke y fyue loaues and two fiszhes, and loked vp towarde heauen, and gaue thankes, and brake and gaue the loaues vnto the disciples, and the disciples gaue them to the people. And they all ate, and were suffised. And they gathered vp of the broken meate that remayned ouer, twolue baszkettes full. And they y ate, were aboute a fyue thousande men, besyde wemen and children.
And straight waye lesus made his disciples to entre in to a shippe, « to go ouer before hi, tyll he had sent $ people awaye. And whan he had sent the people awaye, he wéte vp in to a mountayne alone, to make his prayer.
And at euen he was there him self alone. 
And y shippe was allready in y myddest of the see, t was tost with wawes, for the winde was cotrary. But in $ fourth watch of y night lesus came vnto the, walkinge vpon the see.
And whan his disciples sawe him goinge vpon the see, they were afrayed, sayenge: It is some sprete, and cried out for feare. But straight waye lesus spake vnto them, and sayde: Be of good cheare, it is I, be not afrayed.
D| Peter answered him, q saide: LORDE, yf it be thou, byd me come vnto the vpon ¥ water. And he sayde: come on thy waye.
And Peter stepte out of the shippe, q wete 

vpon the water, to come vnto lesus. But 
* Marc. 6. d. Luc. 9. b. Toba. 6. a. è Marc. 6. e. 
Ioha. 6. b. ^Luc.6.b. ¢Mare.6.f. © Mare.7.a. 

The gospell of S. Mathri. 

Fo. rir. whan he sawe a mightie wynde, he was afrayed, q begane to synke, q cried, sayenge: LORDE, helpe me. And imediatly Iesus stretched forth his hande, q caught him, q sayde vnto him:
O thon of litle faith, wherfore doutest thou? 
And they wente in to the shippe,^x the wynde ceased. Then they that were in y shippe, came q fell downe before him, q sayde: Of a trueth thou art y sonne of God. And they shipped ouer, ¢ came in to the lode of Gena- zereth. And wha ý mē of y place had know- lege of hi, they sent out in to all that coutre rounde aboute, & brought vnto him all that were sicke, q besought him, that they might but touch the hemme of his vesture onely: a as many as touched it, were made whole.

The yb. Chapter. 
HEN came vnto him the scribes and|& pharises from lerusalem," sayenge:
Why do thy disciples transgresse y tradicions of the elders? for they wash not their hodes whan they eate bred. He answered q sayde vnto thé: Why do ye transgresse the co- maundemét of God, because of youre owne tradicids? For God comaunded, sayege:
Honoure father q mother: q fhe y curseth father q mother, shal dye the death. But ye saye: Enery man shal saye to father or mother: € The thige y I shulde helpe y withal, is geue vnto God. By this is it come to passe, that no man honoureth his father or his mother eny more. And thus haue ye made the comaundement of God of none effecte, for youre owne tradicios. Ye ypocrites, full well hath Esaye prophecied of you, q sayde :^
This people draweth nye vnto me with their month, ¢ honoureth me with their lippes, how beit, their hert is farre fro me. But in vayne do they serue me, whyle they teach soch doc- trynes as are nothinge but the commaunde- mentes of men.

And he called y people to hi, q saide vnto thé: Heare q vnderstode: That which goeth in to the mouth, defyleth not the mà: but y which cometh out of the mouth, defyleth y ma.

Then came his disciples, q sayde vnto him: knowest thou y the Pharises were offended, whan they herde this sayenge ? He answered, and sayde: ‘All plantes which my heauenly father hath not planted, shal be pluckte vp by

£ Pro. 28. d. 
1 Act. C. 

/ Exo. 20. b. Deu. 5. b. and 27. c. 
^ Esa. 99. c, Ezec. 33. f. 

Fo. xr. 

y rotes. Let thé go, they are y blynde leaders 

of ¥ blynde. Wha one blinde eater another, they fall both 1 y diche.“

*'Then answered Peter q sayde vnto him: 
Declare vnto us this parable. And Iesus sayde vnto thé: Are ye yet thé without vnderstondinge ? Perceaue ye not, y what so- euer goeth in at ¥ mouth, descedeth downe in to ý bely, t is cast out in to the dranght ?
But the thinge that proceadeth out of the mouth, eómeth frö y hert, q that defyleth y ma. For out of y hert come euell thoughtes murthur, breakynge of wedlocke, whordome theft, false witnesse, blasphemy. ‘These are y thinges that defyle a man. But to eate with vnwaszhen hondes, defyleth not a man.
C| And “Iesus wente out from thence, q de- parted in to the coastes of Tyre of Sidon.
And beholde, a woma of Canaan wēte out of 

same coastes, q cried after him, sayege: O 

ORDE, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon me. My doughter is sore vexed with a deuell. And he answered her neuer a worde.
Thé came his disciples vnto him, q besought him, sayége: Sēde her awaye, for she crieth after us. But he answered, ¢ saide: I am not

Israel. Notwithstondinge she came q fell downe before him, q sayde: LORDE, helpe me. He answered q sayde: It is not good, to take the childrens bred, q to cast it vnto dogges. It is trueth LORDE (sayde she)
Neuertheles the whelpes eate of the crommes, that fall fro their lordes table. Then answered lesus q sayde vnto her: O womi, greate is thy faith be it vnto the, eue as thou desyrest. And hir doughter was made hole at y same houre.
And lesus departed théce, and came nye vnto the see of Galile, and wente vp in to a mountayne, and sat downe there, And there came vnto him moch people, hauinge with them, lame, blynde, dome, crepell, and other many, and cast them downe at lesus fete.
And he healed thé, in so moch that the people wodred, to se the dome speake, the crepell whole, the halt to go, « the blynde to se. And they praysed the God of Israel.
3| And lesus called his disciples vnto him, q sayde: ^I haue copassion vpon the people, for they haue cotynued with me now thre dayes,

is ? Eaa, 49. c. Luc. 6. d. è Mare. 7. b. * Marc. 7. c. 
Luc. 19. a, € Esa. 35.a. JS Marc. 8. a. € Marc. 
. Iohà.6, d. ^ Luc. 12. f, * Mat. 12. d. 

The qaspell of ©. Mathew. 

sent, “but vnto the lost shepe of the house of 

Chap, rbi, 

q haue nothinge to eate, q I wil not let the departe fastynge, lest they perishe in ý waye.
And his disciples sayde vnto him: Whence shulde we get so moch bred in the wyldernes, that we might satiszfie so moch people? And
Iesus sayde vnto the: How many loaues haue ye? They sayde: seue, q a few litle fyshes.
And he eomaunded ¥ people to syt downe vpo the grounde, axi toke y seué loaues, q the fyshes, q gaue thankes q brake the, a gaue the to his disciples, q y disciples gaue the vnto the people. And they all ate, a were suffised. And they toke vp of the broke meate y was left, seuen baszkettes full. And they y ate, were foure thousande mē, besyde wemen and children. And whan he had sent awaye the people, he wente in to a shippe, q came in to the parties of Magdala.

The poi. Chapter. 

HEN came the Pharises q Saduces vnto him, q tepted him, requyringe him to shewe thé a toké from heauc. But he an- swered, q sayde: “At eué ye saye: It wil be fayre wedder, for $ szkye is reed. And in y mornynge, ye saye: It wil be foule wedder to daye, for the szkye is reed, q gloometh. O ye ypocrytes, ye can discerne the fashion of y szkye: can ye not thé discerne the tokés of these tymes also? This euell and aduouterous generacio seketh a toké, q ‘there shal no toké be geué thé, but the toké of ¥ prophet Ionas."

So he left thé, and departed. 

‘And wha his disciples were come to the other syde of the water, they had forgotten to take bred with them. Iesus sayde vnto thé:
Take hede a bewarre of the leue of y Pharises qof the Saduces.” — Thé thought they in the selues, sayége: We haue take no bred with us. Whé lesus perceaued y, he sayde to the:
O ye of litle faith, why are ye combred (in youre mindes) because ye haue také no bred with you? Do ye not yet perceaue? Remembre ye not those fyue loaues," whé there were fyue thousande me, and how many baszkettes toke ye vp? Nether y ° seuē loaues whan there were foure thousande men, q how many baszkettes toke ye vp? Why perceaue ye not then, y 1/33 spake not to you of bred, whé I saide: be- warre of ¥ leue of ¥ Pharises q of $ Saduces?

t Marc. 8. b. " Luc. 12.8. 
° Mat. 15. d. 

å Tone 2. a. ^ Mat. 14. c. 

Chap. rbi. 

The vnderstode they, how y he bad not thé bewarre of the leue of bred, but of $ doc- tryne of the Pharises and of the Saduces.

Then came Iesus in to the coastes of the cite Cesarea Philippi, q axed his disciples q saide: Who do me saie,* y ¥ sonne of mà is?
They sayde: Some saye, pon art Iho the baptist, Some y thou art Elias, Some ý thou art leremy, or one of y prophetes. He saide to thé: But who saye ye y I am? "The answered Symo Peter and saide: Thou art
Christ $ sonne of ¥ lyuinge God.’ And Iesus answered, q saide vnto hi: Blessed art thou
Symo ý sonne of Ionas, for flesh q bloude hath not opened y vnto the, but my father y is in heaue. And I saie to y: Thon art
Peter, q tvpo this rocke wil E my cógre- gacion: and ¥ gates of hell shal not prenayle agaynst it. “And the keyes of heanen wil I geue vnto the: Whatsoeuer thon shalt bynde vpon earth, shalbe bounde also in heauen: q whatsoeuer thou shalt lowse vpon earth, shalbe lowsed also in heauc. Then charged he his disciples, that they shulde tell no ma that he was lesus Christ.

¢From that tyme forth beganne lesus to shew vnto his disciples, how that he must go vnto Ierusale, and suffre many thinges of the elders, and of the hye prestes, and of the scrybes, and be put to death, and ryse againe the thirde daye. But Peter toke him asyde, and beganne to rebuke him, sayenge:
LORDE, fauoure thy self, let not this happen vnto the. ^Neuertheles he turned him abonte, q sayde vnto Peter: Auoyde fro me Satha, thou hindrest me, for thou sauourest not y thinges that be of God, but of men.

Then sayde lesus vnto his disciples : ^ Yf eny man wil folowe me, let him forsake him self, ¢ take vp his crosse, and folowe me. For who so wil saue his life, shal lose it: but who so loseth his life for my sake, shal fynde it.
What helpeth it a man though he wanne the whole worlde, and yet suffred harme in his soule? Or what can a man geue, to redeme his soule withall? For it wil come to passe, that the sonne of ma shal come in the glory of his father with his angels, and then shal he rewarde euery one acordinge to his dedes.’
Verely I saye vnto you: ‘there stonde here 

* Some reade that I the sonne of man am. ? Iohà. 6. g. 

^[ohà.6.e. ti Cor.10.a. © Esa.28. a. 1 Par. 18. b. 
Mat. 18, b. Iohā. 20. c. 4 Marc, 8. d. Luc. 9. c. 
* 3 Re. 19. d. f Mat. 10. e. Marc. 8. c. Luc. 9. c. 

The gospel of 3», Mathew. 

se Y sonne of mà come in his kingdome. 

The rbij. Chapter. 

ND after sixe dayes lesus toke Peter|@ 

James, and Jhon his brother; and brought them vp in to an hye mountayne out of the waye, and was transfigured before the : t his face shone as ý Sonne, and his clothes were as white as the light. And beholde, there appeared vnto the Moses and Elias talkinge with him. Then answered Peter, and sayde vnto lesus: LORDE, here is good beynge for us. Yf thou wilt, let us make here thre tabernacles: one for the, one for
Moses, and one for Elias. ^Whyle he yet spake, beholde, a bright cloude ouershadowed them: and lo, there came a voyce out of the cloude, saienge: ‘This is my deare sonne, in whom I delyte, iheare him. Whan M disciples herde that, they fell vpon their faces, and were sore afrayed. But lesus came and touched them, and sayde: Aryse, and be not afrayed. And whan they loked vp, they sawe no man, but Iesus onely.

And wha they came downe fro y moun-|33 

tayne, Iesus charged them, and sayde: " Tell no man of this vision, tyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from ŷ deed. And his dis- ciples axed him, and sayde: Why saye the scrybes then, that Elias must first come ?” lesus answered and sayde vnto them: Elias shall come first in dede, and bringe all thinges to right agayne. But I saye vnto you: Elias is come all ready, x they knewe him not, but haue done vnto him what they wolde. Eué so shal also the sonne of man suffre of them.
Then the disciples perceaued, that he spake vnto them of Ihon the baptist.

*And whan they were come to the people, there came vnto him a certayne man, and kneled vnto him, and sayde: LORDE, haue mercy vpon my sonne, for he is lunatike, q sore vexed. He falleth oft tymes in to y fyre, and oft in to ¥ water: and I brought him vnto thy disciples, and they coude not heale him. lesus answered, and sayde: O thou faithles and frowarde generacion, how longe shal I be with you? How longe shal I suffre

you? Bringe him hither to me. And Iesus and 14. d. Ioha. 12. c. £ Rom. 2. a. ^ Marc. 8. e.
Luc. 9. o. i Mare. 9. a. Luc. 9. d. * Esa, 42. a. 
Math. 3. b. t Marc. 1. a. Iohà. 1. d. 1 Deut. 18. c. 
™ Marc. 9. a. " Mal. 3. d. ? Marc. 9.b. Luc.9.d 

132 

Fo. rri 

some, which shal not taist of death, tyll they [^ 

€ 

Fo. rrij. 

| 

D 

a 
| 

| 

| 

rebuked him, and y deuyll wéte out of him, and y childe was healed, euen that same houre.

Then came the disciples vnto Iesus secretly, q sayde: * Why coude not we cast him out ? lesus sayde vnto them: Because of youre vn- beleue. For I saye verely vnto you: ^Yf ye haue faith as a grane of mustarde sede, ye maye saye vnto this mountayne: Remoue hence to yonder place, and he shal remoue, nether shal eny thinge be vnpossible vnto yon.
How beit this kinde goeth not ont, but by prayer and fastynge.

Whyle they occupied in Galile, Iesus sayde vnto them: it wil come to passe, that the sonne of man shalbe delyuered iu to the hondes of men, and they Bn kyll him, and the thirde daye shal he aryse agayne. And they were very sory. Now whà they were come to Capernaum, they that receaued y tribute money, eame to Peter, and sayde:
Doth youre master paye tribute? He sayed: yee. And when he was come home, lesus preuented him, and sayde: What thinkest thon Symon? Of whom do the kynges of the earth take toll or tribute? Of their children, or of straungers? Then sayde
Peter to him: Of straungers. Jesus sayde vnto him: “Then are y children fre. Neuer- theles lest we offende them, go thy waye to the see, and cast thine angle, and take the fysh that first cómeth vp, and whan thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt fynde a pece of twenty pens, take that, and geue it them for me and the.

The rbi. Chapter. 

T the same tyme came the disciples vnto 
A lesus, and sayde: ‘Who is the greatest in the kyngdome of heaven? And Iesus called a childe vnto him, and set him in the myddest amonge them, and sayde: Verely I saye ynto you: Excepte ye turne and become as children,” ye shal not entre in to the kyngdome of heauen. Whosoeuer therfore humbleth him self as this childe, ¥ same is the greatest in $ kyngdome of heauen. And who so receaueth soch a childe in my name, receaueth ine. / But who so offendeth one of
|these litle ones which beleue in me, it were better for him, that a mylstone were hanged

^ Marc. 9. c, è Mat. 21. c. Luc.17.a. © Mat. 22.c. 

a Marc. 9. d. Luc. 9. e. *iPet.2.a. — / Marc, 9. e, 
| Luc. 17. a. f 1 Cor. 11. b. ^ Mat. 5. d. Marc. 9. e. 
|! Deut. 13.2. * Luc. 15.a. ! Luc. 17. a. Eccli. 17. b. 

The gospell of S. Mathew. 

aboute his neck, and he drowned in the depth of the see.

Wo vnto the worlde because of slaüders. 
* Yee there must slaunders come: but wo vnto that man, by whom slaunder commeth. *But yf thy hande or thy fote offende the, ent him of, and cast him from the. It is better for y to entre in vnto life lame or erepell, thé y thou shuldest haue two hodes or two fete, and be cast in to euerlastinge fyre. ‘And yf thyne eye offende the, plucke it out, ¢ cast it from the. Better it 1s for the to entre in vnto life with one eye, thé to haue two eyes, and to be cast in to hell fyre.

Take hede, y ye despyse not one of these litle ones. For I saye vnto you: their angels do alwaye beholde the face of my father which is in heauen: for the sonne of man is come to saue that which is lost. How thinke ye? *Yfa man haue an hundreth shepe, and one of thé be gone astraye, doth not he leaue the nyentie and nyene in the mountaynes,

and goeth, and seketh that one which is gone’ 

astraye? And yf it happen that he fynde it, verely I saye vnto you’ he reioyseth more ouer it, then ouer the nyentie q nyene which wéte not astraye. Euen so is it not the will before youre father in heauen, that one of these litle ones shulde perishe.

‘Yf thy brother trespace agaynst the, go and tell him his faute betwene the and him alone. Yf he heare the, thou hast wone thy brother. But yf he heare the not, then take yet with the one or two, that in the mouth of two or thre wytnesses," euery matter maye be stablyshed. Yf he heare not them, tell it vnto the congregacion. Yf he heare not the cogregacion, holde him as an Heithen and
Publican. Verely I saye vnto you: "what soeuer ye shal bynde vpon earth, shalbe boiide also in heauen: q what soeuer ye lowse vpon earth, shalbe lowsed also in heaue.

Chap. rbiyj. 

B 

Agayne, I saye vnto yon: Yf two of you shal| € 

agree vpon earth (for what thinge soeuer it be y they wolde desyre) they shal haue it of my father which is in heaué. For where two or thre are gathered together 1 my name,’ there am I in the myddest amonge them.

Then came Peter vnto him, q sayde, 
"LORDE, how oft shal I forgeue my brother, 

Deut. 19. d. m Num. 25. d. Deut. 17. b. and 19. c. 
2 Cor. 13. a. ? Mat. 16.c ? Luc. 24. b. 
P Mat. 6. b. Marc. 11. c. Luc. 17.a. 

———— —— 00 0 0 0 210. 

Chap. rir. 

y trespaceth agaynst me? Seué tymes? 
| sus salde vnto hi: I saye not vnto y seué tymes, but seuétie tymes seuen tymes. Ther- fore is y kingdome of heaue lickened vnto a kynge which wolde reken with his seruauntes.
And whan he beganne to reké, one was brought vnto him, which ought him ten thousande poüde. Now wha he had nothinge to paye his lorde comaunded him to be solde, q his wife q his childré, q all y he had, q pay- ment to be made. "Then the seruaunt fell downe, q besought him, sayenge: Syr, haue paciéce with me, and I wil paye the all.
Then had the lorde pytie on that seruaunt, q discharged him, and forgaue him the dett.

And the same seruaunt wete out, q foüde one of his felowes, which ought him an hüudreth pens, and layed hande vpon him, and toke him by the throte, and sayde: paye me that thou owest. Thé his felowe fell downe, and besought him, sayenge: haue paciéce with me, and I wil paye the all. Neuertheles, he wolde not, but wente and cast him in to preson, tyll he shulde paye the dett. Whan his felowes sawe what was done, they were very sory, and came and tolde their lorde all that had happened. "Then his lorde called for him, and sayde vnto him: “O thou wicked seruaut, I forgaue the all this dett, because thou praydest me: shuldest not thou then haue had compassion also vpon thy felowe, euen as I had pytie vpon the? And his lorde was wroth, and delyuered him vnto the iaylers, tyll he payed all that he ought. ^So shal my
| heauenly father do also vnto you, yf ye euery lone of you fro your hertes, forgeue not his brother his trespaces.

The rir. Chapter. a ND it came to passe, wha lesus had
A ended these sayenges, “he gat him fro 
Galile, t came 1 to y coastes of Iewry beyonde 
Iordane, q moch people folowed him, and he healed them there.

Then came vnto him the Pharises q tépted him, ¢ sayde vnto him: Is it laufull for a man to put awaye his wife for eny maner of cause?
He answered q sayde vnto thé: Haue ye not red, how y he which made (man) at the begynnynge, made thé mà q woma, ¢ sayde:

a Jaco. 2. b. % Mat.6. b. Marc. 11.c. © Mar. 10.2. 
4 Gen. 2. d. * Deu. 24.2. Iere.3.a. Mala.2.c. f Mat. 5. d. Marc. 10.2. Luc. 16. d. € Sap. 8. c.

The qospell of S. Mathetv. 

Fo. rri. 

“For this cause shal a mā leaue father q mother, q cleue vnto his wife, and they two shalbe one fleshe. Now are they not twayne then, but one flesh. Let not man therfore put a sunder, y which God hath coupled together.

"Then sayde they: Why dyd Moses then 

cémaunde to geue a testimonyall of deuorse-! ment, q to put her awaye? He sayde vnto.

thé: Moses (because of ¥ hardnes of youre hertes) suffred you to put awaye youre wyues:
Neuertheles fro the begynnynge it hath not bene so. But I saye vnto you: / Whosoeuer putteth awaye his wife (excepte it be for for- nicacion) and marieth another, breaketh wed- locke. And who so marieth her y is deuorced, commytteth aduoutrye.

Then sayde his disciples vnto him: Yf $ matter be so betwene mà and wife, thé is it not good to mary. But he sayde vnto them:
All mé can not cóprehende y sayenge, saue they to who it is geué. *For there be some gelded, which are so borne from their mothers wombe : and there be some gelded, which are gelded of men: q there be some gelded, which haue gelded thé selues for the kyngdome of heauens sake. He that can cdprehende it, let him comprehende it.

^'Then were brought vnto him yóge children, y he shulde put his hondes vpon thé, q praye.
And y disciples rebuked them. But lesus sayde: Suffre y childré, q forbyd thé not to come vnto me, for vnto soch belogeth the kyngdome of heauen. And wha he had layed his hodes vpo thé, he departed théce.

And beholde, one came vnto him, and sayde: ' Good master, what good shal I do, y
I maye haue the euer lastinge life? He sayde vnto him: Why callest thou me good ? there is none good, but God onely. *Neuer- theles yf thou wilt entre in to life, kepe $
*comaudemetes. "The sayde, he vnto him: 
Which? Jesus saide: Thou shalt not kyll: thou shalt not breake wedlocke: thou shalt not steale:! thou shalt beare no false wytnes:
Honoure father and mother: and thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self. Then sayde the yonge ma vnto him: ” All these haue I kepte fro my youth vp: what lack I yet? Iesus sayde vnto him: Yf thou wilt be perfecte,

^ Marc. 10. b. Luc. 18. b. ‘Marc. 10. b. Luc. 18. c. 
* Psal. 118. i * Exo. 20. d. — Deu.4. a. and 5. a. 
! Rom. 13. b ™ Gal. 5. b. 

| 

B 

e 

Fo. rrtty. 

D 

go thy waye and sell that thou hast,” q geue it vnto the poore, and thou shalt haue a treasure in heauen,’ and come and folowe me.
Whan y yonge man herde y worde, he wente awaye sory, for he had greate possessions. lesus sayde vnto his disciples: *Verely I sale vnto you: it shalbe harde for a rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of heaué. And moroner I saye vnto you: It is easier for a
Camell to go thorow the eye of a nedle, thé for a rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of heauen. Whan his disciples herde that, they were exceadingly amased, and sayde: Who can thé be saued? Neuertheles lesus behelde them, and sayde vnto them : With men it is po yele but with God all thinges are possyble.^
“Then answered Peter q sayde vnto him: 
Beholde, we haue forsaké all, and folowed the: What shal we haue therfore? Iesus sayde vnto thé: Verely I saye vnto you: that when the sonne of man^ shal sytt in the seate
‘of his maiestye, ye which haue folowed me in the new byrth, shal syt also vpon twolue seates, and iudge ¥ twolue trybes of Israel.
! And who so euer forsaketh houses or brethré,* or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or londes, for my names sake, the same shal receaue an hundreth folde, and
'inheret euerlastinge life. ‘But many that be ithe first, shalbe the last: and the last shal be the first.

The rr. Chapter. 

HE kyngdome of heauen is like vnto an 

housholder, which wéte out early in the mornynge, to hyre labourers in to his vyniarde.
And wha he had agreed with the labourers 
\for a peny a daye, he sent thé in to his vynyarde. And about y thirde houre he wente out, and sawe other stondinge ydle in the market place, and sayde vnto them: Go ye also in to my vynyarde, q what so euer is right, I wil gene it you. And they wete their vaye. Agayne, he wéte out aboute the sixte and nyenth houre, and dyd likewyse, And aboute the elenenth houre he wéte out, and founde other stodynge ydle, and sayde vnto them: Why stonde ye here all the daye ydle?
They sayde vnto him: because no man hath 

A ? Luc.12. d. ^ Mat.6.c, — * Marc. 10.c. Luc. 18. c. 
14 Zach. 8, a. * Marc. 10. c.. Luc. 18. c. Mat. 4, c. 
/ Luc.21.b. ¢Sap.5.a. ^Deu.33.b. Mat. 20. b. 

The gospel! of >. Mathew. 

Chap. rr. hyred us. He saide vnto thé: Go ye also in to my vinyarde, and loke what is right, ye shal haue it. Now whan euen was come, the lorde of the vynyarde sayde vnto his stewarde:
Call the labourers, and geue them their hyre, begynnynge from the last vnto y first. ‘Then they that were hyred aboute the eleuenth houre, came and receaued euery man a peny.
But whan the first came, they supposed that they shulde receaue more: and they also receaued eueryman a peny. And whan they had receaued it, they murmured agaynst the housholder, and sayde: ‘These last haue wrought but one houre, and thou hast made thé equall vnto us, which haue borne the burthen and heate of the daye. He answered and sayde vnto one of them: frende, I do y no wronge: diddest not thou agree with me fora peny? Take that thine is, and go thy waye. I wil geue vnto this last also, like as vnto the. * Or haue I not power, to do as me listeth with myne owne? Is thine eye enell, because [am good? ‘So the last shalbe the first, ¢ the first the last. For many are called, but few are chosen.

" And lesus wente vp to lerusalem, and toke the twolue disciples asyde in the waye, and sayde vnto them: Beholde, we go vp to lerusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe de- lyuered vnto the hye prestes and scribes: q they shal condemne him to death, and shal delyuer him vnto ý Heithen, to be mocked to be scourged, and to be crucified. And the thirde daye he shal ryse agayne.

'Then came vnto him the mother of Ze- bedes childré with hir sonnes,” fell downe before him, and desyred a certayne thinge of hi. And he saide vnto her: What wilt thou?
She sayde vnto him: Let these two sonnes of myne syt in thy kyngdome: the one vpon thy right honde, q the other vpon thy left honde.
But Iesus answered, and sayde: Ye wote not what ye axe. Maye ye ke the cuppe, that
I shal drynke? k d pee E the baptyme, that I shalbe baptysed withall?
They sayde vnto him: Yee that we maye. 
And he sayde vnto them: My cuppe truly shal ye drynke, q with the baptyme y I shal be baptysed withall, shal ye be baptysed:
Neuertheles to syt vpon my right honde ¢ on 

Luc. 13. c. k Rom.11.c. ‘Mat. 19.d. Marc. 10. c. 
Luc. 13.c. Mat.92. b. ^ Mar.10. d. Luc. 18. d. 
^ Mar. 10. d. 

‘Chap. rri. The gospell of 2. Mathew. 

my left, is not myne to geue, but vnto thé for who it is prepared of my father."

D| ^Whan the ten herde that, they disdayned at the two brethren. But lesus called them vnto him, and sayde: Ye knowe that y prynces of the worlde haue domynacion of the people, and the greatest *exercise power amonge the. It shal not be so amonge yon.
But who so euer wyl be greate amonge you, let him be youre mynister: q who soeuer wyl be chefe, let him be youre seruaunt: Euen as the sonne of man came, not to be serued, but to do seruyce, and to geue his life to a redép- cion for many.

*And when they departed from Iericho, moch people folowed him: and beholde, two blynde men sat by the wayesyde: And when they herde that lesus passed by, they cried q sayde. O LORDE, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs. But $ people rebuked the, that they shulde holde their peace. Neuer- theles they cried the more, q sayde: O
LORDE, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon vs. And Iesus stode styll, and called them, and sayde: What wil ye, y I shal do vnto you? They sayde vnto him: LORDE, that oure eyes maye be opened. And lesus had compassion vpon them, and touched their eyes: q immediatly their eies receaued sight.
And they folowed him. 

The rri. Chapter. 

a OW whan they drew nye vnto leru- salem,’ and were come to Bethphage

vnto mount Oliuete, lesus sent two of his disciples, and sayde vnto them: Go in to the towne that lyeth before you, q anone ye shal fynde an Asse bounde, and hir foale with her: lowse them, and brynge thé vnto me. And yf eny man saye ought vnto you, saye ye: the
LORDE hath nede of the, And straight waye he wil let them go. But all this was done, that the thinge might be fulfyiled, which was spoken by the prophet, sayenge:
"Tell the doughter of Sion: beholde, thy kynge commeth vnto y meke, syttinge vpon an Asse and a foale of y Asse vsed to the yocke. The disciples wente, and dyd as Iesus commaunded them, and brought the Asse and

4 Mat. 25.c. > Marc. 9. d. and 10. e. Luc. 9. e. and 22. b. *Some reade, The greatest deale with violence.
* Marc. 10. e. Luc. 18. d. d Marc. 11.a. Luc. 19. c, 

e Zach, 9.b. Esa. 69.c. f Ioba. 12. b. € Psal. 117. c. 
^ Marc. 11. b. Luc.19.d. ^ Ioha.2.b. Iohà.7. d. 

fo. rro. 

the foale, q layed their clothes vpon them, and set him theron. But many of the people spred their /garmentes in the waye: other cut downe braunches from the trees, and strawed them in the waye. As for the people that wente before and that came after, they cryed and sayde: Hosianna vnto the sonne of
Dauid, * Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the LORDE, Hosianna in the height.

And whan he was come in to Ierusalem, all the cite was moued, and sayde: “Who is this? And the people sayde: This is Iesus y prophet of Nazareth out of Galile. And
Jesus wente in to the téple of God, and cast out all them that bought and solde in the téple, and ouerthrew the tables of the money chaungers, and the seates of them that solde doues, and sayde vnto them: It is wrytté:
‘My house shalbe called ¥ house of prayer, but ye haue made it a denne of murthurers.
The blynde also and ý lame came vnto him in the temple, and he healed them.

But whan the hye prestes and the serybes sawe the wonders that he dyd, and the children crienge in the temple and sayenge: Hosianna vnto the sonne of Danid, they disdayned, and sayde vnto him: Hearest thou what these saye? lesus sayde vnto them: Yee. Haue ye neuer red: *Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklinges thou hast ordeyned prayse? And he left them there, 'and wente out of the cite vnto Bethania, and there abode ouer night.

" But in the mornynge as he returned in to the cite, he higred. And in the waye he sawe a fygge tre, and came vnto it, and founde nothinge theron, but leaues onely," and sayde vnto it: Neuer frute growe on the from hence forth. And immediatly the fygge tre wythred awaye. And whan his disciples sawe that, they marueyled, and sayde. How is ¥ fygge tre wythred awaye so soone? Iesus answered | € and sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: ° Yf ye haue faith q doute not, ye shal not onely do this with the fygge tre, but yf ye shal saye vnto this mountayne: Avoyde, and cast thy self in to the see, it shal be domne.
"And what soeuer ye axe in prayer, yf ye beleue, ye shal receaue it.

i 3 Reg. 8.d. Esa.56.b. Iere.7.a. k Psal. 8. a, 
‘Toba. 8.a. ™ Marc. 11.c. ” Luc.13.a. ° Mat.17.c. 
Luc. 17. a. P Marc. 11. c. Ioha.14. b. 15.a.16. c. 
Luc. 20.a. Marc. 11. d. 

So. rbi. 
And when he was come in to the téple, the chefe prestes and the elders of the people came vnto him (as he was teachinge) a sayde:
“By what auctorite doest thou these thinges ? and who gaue the this auctorite? lesus an- swered aud sayde vnto them: I wil axe a worde of you also: which yf ye tell me, I in like wyse wyl tell s by what auctorite I do these thinges. The baptime of Ihó, whéce was it? from heaué, or of men? Then thought they amoge them selues, and saide: Yf we saye it was from heaue, then shal he sa ye vnto us: Why dyd ye not then beleue him? But yf we saye it was of men, the feare we the people: For ^euery ma helde Ihon for a pro- phet. And they answered lesus, œ sayde:
We can not tell. "Then sayde he vnto them: 
Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these thinges. But what thinke ye? A cer- tayne man had two sonnes, and came to the first, and sayde: Go thy waye my sonne, ¢ worke to daye in my vynyarde. He answered and sayde: I wil not, but afterwarde he re- pented, and wente. He came also vnto the
D secóde, and sayde likewyse. And he answered and saide: I wilsyr. And wete not. Whether of them twayne dyd the wil of the father?
They sayde vnto him: the first. Iesus sayde vnto the: Verely I saye vnto you: The pub- licans and harlottes shal come in to the kyngdome of God before you. “For Ihon came vnto you, and taught you y right waye and ye beleued him not: but the publicans t harlottes beleued hi. As for you, though ye sawe it, yet were ye not moued with repétaunce, that ye might afterwarde haue beleued him.

Heare another parable. "There was a cer- tayne houszholder which planted a vynyarde,? and hedged it roude aboute, and dygged a wyne presse in it, and built a tower, and let it out vnto huszbandmen, and wente in to a straunge countre. Now wha the tyme of the frute drew neare, he sent his seruaütes to the huszbandmen, to receaue the frutes of it.
Then the huszbandmen caught his seruauntes: one they bett, another they kylled, the thirde they stoned. Agayne, he sent other ser-
‘uauntes, moo then the first, and they dyd 
|vnto them in like maner. At the last he 

j * Exo. 2. b. Act. 4. a. and 7. d. > Mat. 14. a. 
IE Mat. 3. a. d Gen. 9, c. Esa. 5. a. Iere. 12. b. 
| Mare. 12. b. Luc.20.a. * Gen.37.d. f Psal. 117.c. 

The qgospell of à. Mathelv. 

Chap. rt. sent his owne sonne vnto them, and sayde: they wyl stode in awe of my sonne. But whe the huszbandmé sawe the sonne, they sayde amonge the selues: This is the Heyre, come, let us kyl hym,’ and take his inheritauce vnto oure selues. And they caught him, and thrust him out of the vynyarde, q slew him.
Now whé the lorde of the vynyarde commeth, what wyl he do with those huszbandmen?
They sayde vnto him: He wyl cruelly de- stroye those euell personnes, q let out his vyniarde vnto other huszbadmen, which shal delyuer him the frute at tymes conuenyent.

lesus sayde vnto thé: Dyd ye neuer rede in the scriptures: The same stone which the buylders refused,’ is become the heade stone in the corner? This was the LORDES doynge, q it is maruelous 1 oure eyes. "l'her- fore I saie vnto you: The kingdome of God shalbe take fro you, q shalbe geué vnto the
Heithe, which shal brynge forth y frutes of it. 
And who so falleth vpo this stone, shalbe broké in peces:* q loke vpo whom it falleth, it shal grynde him to poulder^ And when the hye prestes q Pharises herde his parables, they perceaued, that he spake of them. And they wente aboute to take him, but they feared y people, because "they helde hi for a prophet.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND Iesus answered, and spake vnto thé 

agayne by parables, q sayde: The king- dome of heauen is like vnto a kynge,' which maried his sonne. And sent forth his ser- uauntes, to "call the gestes vnto the mariage, ia they wolde not come. Agayne, he sent forth other seruauntes, and sayde: Tell the gestes: Beholde, Í haue prepared my dynner, myne oxen and my fed catell are kylled, and all thinges are readye, come to the mariage.
But they made light of it, and wente their wayes: one to his huszbandrye, another to his marchauudise. As for the remnaüt, they toke his seruauntes, and intreated the shame- fully, and slew the. When the kynge herde that, he was wroth, and sent forth his war- ryers, and destroyed those murtherers, and set fyre vpon their cite. Then sayde he vnto his seruauntes: The mariage in dede is

Act. 4.a. 1 Pet. 2.a. g Zach. 12. a. ^ Dan. 2. e. i Marc. 11. c. Luc. 19. a. and 20. b. k Joha. 7. d.
!Luc.14.b. — " Apo. 19. b. 

Chap, rrii. The gospell of 

prepared, but the gestes were not worthy. 
Go youre waye out therfore in to ý hye wayes, and as many as ye fynde, byd them to the mariage. And the seruauntes wéte out in to the hye wayes, and gathered together as many as they coulde fynde, both good and bad, q the tables were all full. Then the kynge wéte in, to se the gestes, and spyed there a man that had not on a.weddynge garment, and sayde vnto him: Frende, how camest thou in hither, ¢ hast not on a weddyinge garment? And he was euenspechlesse. Then sayde the kynge vnto his seruauntes: “Take and bynde him hande and fote, q cast him into y vtter darcknes: there shal be waylinge and guaszhinge of teth. For many be called, but few are chosé.’

Then wente the Pharises, and toke councell, how they might tangle him in his wordes, and
“sent vnto him their disciples with Herodes officers, and sayde: Master, we knowe that thou art true, and teachest the waye of God truly, and carest for no ma: for thou regardest not the outwarde appearaunce of me. Tell us therfore, how thinkest thou? Is it laufull to geue tribute vnto the Emperoure, or not?
Now wha Iesus perceaued their wickednes, he sayde: O ye ypocrites, why tépte ye me?
Shewe me y tribute money. And they toke 
€ |hi a peny. And he saide vnto thé: Whose 

is this ymage and superscription? "They sayde 

vnto him: The Emperours. Then sayde he vnto them: ^Geue therfore vnto the Em- perour, that which is the Emperours: and geue vnto God, that which is Gods. When they herde that, they marueyled, and left him,

q wete their waye. 

The same daye there came vnto him the 
Saduces* (which holde that there is no resur- reccion) and axed him, and sayde: Master,
Moses sayde: /Yf a man dye, hauynge no children, his brother shal mary his wife, q rayse vp sede vnto his brother. Now were there with usseué brethren. The first maried a wife, and dyed: q for somoch as he had no sede, he left his wife vnto his brother. Like wyse the secode, and thirde vnto the seuéth.
Last of all the woman dyed also. Now in the resurreccion, whose wife shal she be of the

5 

a Mat. 13. f. and 25, c. è Mat. 20. b. © Marc. 12. a. 
Luc. 20. c. Ioha.7.d. d Mat. 17. d. Rom. 13. b. e Mar.12. b. Luc. 20. d. Act. 23.a. f Deut. 25. a.
€ Exod.3.a. Heb. 11. c. ^ Marc. 19. c. Luc. 10. e| 

S. Mathrw, Fo. rrbij. 

seuen? For they all had her. Iesus an- swered, and sayde vnto them: Ye erre, and vnderstode not the scriptures, ner the power of God. In the resurreccion they shal nether mary, ner be maried, but are as the angels of
God in heauen. 

As touchinge the resurrecci6 of the deed, |B haue ye not red, what is spoken vnto you of
God, which sayeth: I am the God of Abraham, and y God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob?:
Yet 1s not God a God of the deed, but of the lyuynge. And whan the people herde that, they were astonnyed at his doctryne.

When the Pharises herde, that he had stopped the mouth of the Saduces, they gathered them selues together. And one of them (a Scrybe) tépted him, and sayde:
Master, which is the chefest commaundemét in the lawe? Iesus saide vnto him: Thou shalt loue the LORDE thy God with all thy hert,‘ with all thy soule, and with all thy mynde: this is the pryncipall and greatest comaundement. As for the seconde, it is like vnto it: * Thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self. In these two commaundementes hange all the lawe and the prophetes.

Now whyle the Pharises were gathered to- gether,' lesus axed them, and sayde: What thinke ye of Christ? Whose sonne is he?
They sayde vnto him: Dauids. He sayde vnto them: How then doth Dauid in sprete, call him LORDE, sayenge: The LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE: "Syt thou on my right honde, tyll I make thine enemies thy fote stole. Yf Dauid now call him LORDE, how is he then his sonne? And no man coude answere him one worde, nether durst eny man | axe him eny mo questiðs, fro that daye forth.

The rij. Chapter. 

HEN spake Iesus vnto y people and to 
T his disciples, and sayde: The scrybes q 
Pharises are set downe vpon Moses seate. 
Therfore what soeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and do,"* but after their workes shal ye not do, for they saye q do not. °For they bynde heuy and intollerable burthens, and laye them vpon mens shulders: But they them selues wil not heaue at them with one

i Deut. 6. b. and 30. b. * Leui. 19. c. Rom. 13. b. 
! Marc. 12. d. ™ Psal. 109. a. n Deut. 17. c. 

o Esa. 10. a, and 28. b. Luc. 11. d. 

Fo. rrbiij. 

synagoges, 
DC and to be called of me Rabbi. 

“But ye shal not suffre youre sclues to be ealled Rabbi, for one is youre master, cuen
Christ, and all ye are brethren. And call no man father vpon earth, for one is youre father, which is in heauc. And ye shal not suffre youre selues to be called masters, for one is youre master, namely, Christ He that is greatest amdge you, shalbe youre seruaunt.
* For who so exalteth himself, shal be brought lowe: and he that humbleth himself, shalbe exalted.

Wo vnto you Serybes and Pharises, ye 

ocrytes, that shut vp the kyngdome of 
Mica before men: Ye come not in youre selues, nether suffre ye them to enter, that wolde be in.

Wo vnto you Scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, that deuoure wyddowes houses, and that vnder the culoure of prayenge longe prayers, therfore shal ye receaue y greater damnacion.

Wo vnto you Scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, which compasse see and lode to make one fProselyte: and whan he is be- come one, ye make of him a childe of hell, two folde more then ye youre selues are.

Wo vnto you blyndegydes, which saye: 
Who so euer sweareth by the temple, that is nothinge: but who so euer sweareth by the golde of the temple, he is giltie. Ye fooles and blynde, whether is greater? the golde, or the téple that sanctifieth the golde? And who so euer sweareth by the altare, that is nothinge: but who so euer sweareth by the offeringe that is vpó it, he is giltye. Ye fooles and blynde, whether is greater? the offerynge, or the altare that sanctifieth the offeringe ? "Therfore who so sweareth by the altare, sweareth by the same, and by all that is theron: and who so sweareth by the tem- ple, sweareth by the same, and by him that dwelleth therin. And who so sweareth by

* Philateriea were writinges wherin the commaunde- meles were wrytté. ? Iacob.3.a, " Luc. 14.b. and 18, b.
* Lue, 20.c. ^ f Proselyte, a nouyce or conuerte, turned from the beleue of the Heythen vnto the Iewes. 4 Mat. 5. d,

The gospell of >. Mathew. 

heauen,’ sweareth by the seate of God, and by him that sytteth theron.

Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, which tythe Mynt, Anyse and
Commyn, and leave the waightier matters of the lawe behynde: namely, iudgment, mercy, and fayth. ‘These ought to haue bene done, and not to leaue the other behynde.
O ye blynde gydes, which strayne out a gnat, but aleve vp a Camell.

Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye 
Ypocrytes, which make cleane the vtter syde of the cuppe and platter, but within are ye full of robbery and texcesse. ‘Thou blynde
Pharise, clense first the in syde of the cuppe and platter, that the out syde maye be cleane also.

Wo vnto you serybes and Pharises, ye 
Ypocrites, which be like vnto paynted Se- pulcres, that appeare beutyfull outwarde, but within they are full of deed mens bones and all fylthines. Euen so are ye also: Out- warde ye appeare righteous vnto men, but within ye are full of ypocrisye and iniquyte.

Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrites, which buylde the tombes of the prophetes, and garnysh the sepuleres of the righteous, and saye: Yf we had bene in oure fathers tyme, we wolde not haue bene par- takers with them in the bloude of the pro- phetes. Therfore ye be wytnesses vnto youre selues, that ye are the children of them,/ which slew the prophetes. Go to, fulfyll ye also the measure of youre fathers. O ye serpentes, O ye generacion of vypers, how wyl ye escape the damnacion of Hell?

Therfore beholde, I sende vnto you pro- phetes and wyse men, and scrybes,’ and some of them shal ye kyll and erucifye, and some of them shal ye scourge iu youre synagoges, and persecute them from cite to cite: that vpon you maye come all the righteous bloude which hath bene shed vpon y earth, from the bloude of righteous Abel vnto y bloude of
Zachary y sonne of Barachias, whom ye slew betwene the temple and the altare. Verely
Isaye vnto you: Allthese thinges shal light vpo this generacion. O Ierusalem Jerusalem,‘ thou that slayest the prophetes, and stonest

© Luc. 11. d. tSomereade: vnclennes. 1 Tesa.2.c. 
£ Mat. 10. b. Luc.11.e. Joba.16.a. Act.5.e.and 7. g. 
^ Gen. 4. b. HOPE anodes * Luc. 13. d. 

Chap. rrii. 

D 

3: 

Chap. rriítj. 

them that are sent vnto the: How oft wolde| 
I haue gathered thy children together, euen as the henne gathereth hir chekens vnder hir wyuges, and ye wolde not? Beholde, youre habitacion shalbe left vnto you desolate.’ For
I saye vuto you: Ye shal not se me hence forth, tyll ye saye: “Blessed be he, that com- meth in the name of the LORDE.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

a ND Iesus wente out and departed from the temple,’ and his disciples came vnto him, to shew him the buyldinge of the tem- ple. But Iesus sayde vnto them: Se ye not all these thinges? Verely I saye vnto yon:
"there shal not be left here one stone vpon another, y shal not be cast downe. And as he sat vpou the mount Oliuete, his disciples came vnto him secretly, q saide: Tell us, whé shal these thinges come to passe? and which shal be the token of thy comynge, and of the ende of the worlde? Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: Take hede, that no man disceaue you. For there shal many come in my name, and saye: I am Christ,

and shal disceaue many. 

Ye shal heare of warres, and of y noyse of warres: take hede, and be not ye troubled.
All these thinges must first come to passe, but the ende is not yet. For one people shall ryse vp agaynst another,’ and one realme agaynst another: and there shalbe pestiléce, honger, and earthquakes here q there. All these are the begynnynge of sorowes.

“Then shal they put you to trouble, a shal kyll you, and ye shalbe hated of all people for my names sake. ‘Thé shal many be offended, and shal betraye one another, and shal hate one the other. And many false prophetes shal aryse, and shal disceaue many: and
‘because iniquyte shal haue the vpper hande, the loue of many shal abate. But whoso endureth vnto y ende,* ¥ same shal be saued.
And this gospell of ke kyngdome shalbe preached in all the worlde for a wytnes vnto all people,’ and then shal the ende come.

B| Whan ye therfore shal se the abhominacion of desolacion” (wher of it is spokē by Daniel the prophet) stonde in the holy place (who so readeth it, let him marck it well) thé let thé

a 4 Esdr. 1. c. 5 Psal, 68. d, € Paal. 117. c. 
4 Marc, 13. a. Luc, 21.a. ¢Luc.19.d. Z Col. 2. c. 

£ 4 Esd. 13. c. ^ Mat. 10. b. Marc.13.b. Luc.21. b. 
Iohá.16.a. 54 Es.i14.b. * Mat. 10.c. ! Marc. 13. b. 

The gospel! of S. Mathew, 

Fo. vrir. which be in Iewry, flye vnto moŭtaynes: and let him which is on the house toppe, not come downe to fet eny thinge ont of his house: and let him which is in ¥ felde, not turne back to fetch his clothes. But wo vnto them that are with childe, and to them that gene suck in those dayes. But praye ye, that youre flight be not in y wynter, ner on the
Sabbath. "For then shal there be greate trouble, soch as was not from the begynnynge of the worlde vnto this tyme, ner shalbe. Yee and excepte those daies shulde be shortened, there shulde no flesh be saued: but for y chosens sake those dayes shalbe shortened.

“Then yf eny man shal saye vnto you: lo, here is Christ, or there, beleue it not. For there shal aryse false Christes and false pro- phetes,” and shal do greate tokés and wonders:
In so moch, that (yf it were possible) the very chosen shulde be brought in to erronre.
Beholde, I hane tolde yon before. Wherfore 

f they shal saye vnto you: Beholde, he is in the wildernes, go not ye forth: Beholde, he is in the chamber, beleue it not. For like as the lightenynge goeth out from the East, and shyneth vnto the west, so shal the com- mynge of the sonne of man be. For where so euer a deed carcase is,’ there wyl the
Aegles be gathered together. 

" Immediatly after the trouble of the same tyme, shal the Sonne and Moone lose their hght, and the starres shall fall from heauen, and the powers of heauen shal mone: and then shal appeare the token of the sonne of man in heaue: and then shal all the kynreds of the earth mourne, and they shal se the sonne of man 'come in the clondes of heauen with greate power and glory. And he shal sende his angels with ¥ greate voyce of a trompe,' q they shal gather together his chosen from the foure wyndes, from one ende of the heauen to the other.

Lerne a symilitude of y fygge tre. * When his braunche is yet tender, and his leaues spronge, ye knowe that Sommer is nye. So likewyse ye, whan ye se all these thynges, be ye sure, that it is nye euen at the dores. Verely
I saye vnto you: This generacion shal not passe, tyll all these be fulfylled. Heanen and earth shal perishe, but my wordes shal not

™ Marc. 13. b. Luc. 21. c. Dan. 9.e. ^ Dan. 12. a. e Marc. 13. c. Luc. 17.c, ? 2Tess. 2. b. Deut. 13. a.
9 Iob 39. d. * Marc. 13. c. Luc. 21. c. Ioel 2. b. 
* Act. 1. b. ^ 1 Tess. 4. c. " Marc. 13.d, Luc. 21.d. 

133 

Fo. rer. 

perishe. knoweth no man, no not the angels of heauen,

D|but my father onely. Euen as it was in the 

tyme of Noe, so shal the commynge of the sonne of man be also. *For as they were in the dayes before ý floude (they ate, they dronke, they Enid, and were maried, euen vnto the daye y Noe entred in to the shippe, and they regarded it not, tyll the floude came and toke them all awaye) So shal also the commynge of the sonne of man be. "Thé shal two be in the felde:^ the one shal be receaued, and the other shalbe refused: Two shal be gryndinge at the Myll, the one shalbe receaued, and the other shalbe refused: (Two in the bed, the one shalbe receaued, and the other refused.)

?Watch therfore, for ye knowe not what houre youre LORDE wil come. But be sure of this, that yf the good man of the house knewe what “houre the thefe wolde come, he wolde surely watch, and not suffre his house to be broken vp. ‘Therfore be ye ready also, for in the houre that ye thynke not, shal the sonne of man come. “Who is now a faithfull and wyse seruaut, whom his lorde hath made ruler ouer his houszholde, that he maye geue them meate in due season? ‘Blessed is y seruaüt, whom his lorde (whan he cómeth) shal fynde so doynge. Verely. I saye vnto you: he shal set him ouer all his goodes. But and yf the euell seruaüt shal saye in his hert :
Tush, it wil be longe or my lorde come, and begynne to smyte his felowes, yee and to eate and drynke with the dronken: The same seruaütes lorde shal come in a daye, wha he loketh not for him, and in an houre that he is not ware of, and shal hew him in peces and geue him his rewarde with ypocrytes: there shal be waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth.

The rrb. Chapter. 

HEN shal the kyngdome of heauen be 

like vnto ten virgins, which toke their lapes, and wente forth to mete the brydegrome.
But fyue of them were foolish, and fyue were wyse. ‘The foolish toke their lapes, neuerthe- les they take none oyle with them. But the wyse toke oyle in their vessels with their lampes Now whyle the brydegrome taried,

* Esa, 40. a. and 51. b. Act. 1. a. > Gen. 6. 7. 
Luc. 17. c. * Luc. 17.d. d Mat.25.a. Marc. 13. d. 
Luc. 12.d. © Apo.!6.c. f Mat.95.b. £ Apo. 16. c. 

The gospel of S. Mathew, 

“Neuertheles of that daye a houre, 

they slombred all and slepte. But at myd- night there was a crye made: Beholde, the brydegrome commeth, go youre waye out for
‘to mete him. Then all those virgins arose, land prepared their lampes. But the foolish
|sayde vnto the wyse : geue vs of youre oyle, for oure làpes are gone out. Then answered the wyse, and sayde: Not so, lest there be not ynough for vs and you, but go rather vnto them that sell, and bye for youre selues. And whyle they wente to bye, the brydegrome came: and they that were readye, wente in with him vnto the mariage, and the gate was shut vp. At y last came y other virgins also, and sayde: ^ LORDE LORDE, ope vnto vs.
But he answered, and sayde: Verely I saye vnto you: I knowe you not. ‘Watch ye ther- fore, for ye knowe nether the daye ner yet the houre, whan y sonne of man shal come.

Like wyse as a certayne ma ready to take his iourney in to a straunge countre,^ called his seruaiites, and delynered his goodes vnto thé.
And vnto one he gaue fyue talentes, to another two, and to another one: vnto euery man after his abilyte, and straight waye departed.
Then he that had receaued the fyue talentes, wente and occupied with the same, and wanne other fyue talentes. Likewyse he y receaued two talentes, wane other two also. But he that receaued y one wente and dygged a pyt in the earth, and hyd his lordes money. Aíter a longe season the lorde of those seruauntes came, and rekened with them. "Then came he that had receaued fyue talentes, and brought other fyue talentes, and sayde: Syr, thou delyuerdst vnto me fyue talentes: Beholde, with them haue I wonne fyue talétes mo.’
Then sayde his lorde vnto hi: wel thou good q faithfull seruaunt, thou hast bene faithfull ouer litle, I wil set the ouer moch: entre thou in to the ioye of thy lorde. Thé came he also that had receaued two talentes, and sayde: Syr, thou delyuerdst vnto me two talentes: Beholde, I haue wonne two other taletes with the. His lorde sayde vnto him:
Wel thou good and faithfull seruaüt, thou hast bene faithfull ouer litle, I wil set the ouer moch: entre thou in to the ioye of thy lorde.

Then he that had receaued the one talct, came and sayde: Syr, I knew that thou art

^ Mat. 7. b. !Luc.6.e. Mat.94.d. Marc. 13. d. 
Luc. 12. d. and 21. d. k Marc. 13. d. Luc. 19. a. 
! Mat. 24. d. 

Chap. rrb. 

B 

Chap. rrbt. an hard man: thou reapest where thou hast not sowen, and gatherest where thou hast not strowed, and so I was afrayed, and wéte and hyd thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast thine owne. But his lorde answered, and sayde vnto him: Thou euell and slouthfull seruaunt, knewest thou that I reape where I sowed not, and gather where I strawed not?
Thon shuldest therfore haue had my money to the chaungers, and then at my commynge shulde I haue receaued myne owne with vauntage. Therfore take the talent fro him, and geue it vnto him that hath ten talentes.
"For who so hath, to him shalbe geuen, and he shal haue abundaunce. But who so hath not, fro him shalbe také awaye euen that he hath.
And cast the vnprofitable seruaunt in to vtter darcknes: ^there shalbe waylinge and gnaszh- inge of teth.

“But whan the sonne of man shal come in his glory, and all holy angels with him, then shal he syt vpon the seate of his glory. And all people shalbe gathered before him: and he shal separate them one from another’ as a shepherde deuydeth the shepe from ¥ goates.
And he shal set ¥ shepe on his right honde, and the goates on the lefte. ‘Then shal the kynge saye vnto them that shalbe on his right honde: Come hither ye blessed of my father, inheret ye $ kingdome,’ which is prepared for you from the begynnynge of the worlde. For
I was hongrie, and ye gaue me meate: I was thirstie, and ye gaue me drynke:/ I was har- bourlesse, and ye lodged me: I was naked, q ye clothed me: I was sicke, and ye vysited me: °I was in preson, and ye came vnto me.
| Then shal the righteous answere him, q saye: LORDE, whe sawe we the hogrie, and fed the? Or thirstie, and gaue the drynke?
When sawe we the herbourlesse, and lodged the? Or naked, and clothed y ? Or whé sawe we ¥ sicke or in preson, and came vnto the?
And the kynge shal answer and saye vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: Loke what ye haue done vuto one of the least of these my brethren, the same haue ye done vnto me.

Then shal he saye also vnto them that shalbe on the left hande: * Departe fro me ye cursed in to the euerlastinge fyre, which is

* Màr. 15. b. Marc. 4. 8. Luc. 8. b. and 19. c. 

> Mat. 13. f. * 2 Tess. 1. b. 4 Ezec. 34. c. e Mat.20.c. — / Esa. 58. b. Ezec. 18. a. 5 Eccli. 7. d.
2 Tim. 1. c. ^ Psal.6. b. Mat. 7. b. Lue. 13. c. 

Esa. 30. f. Dan. 7. b. Apo. 19.d. and 20.c. ^ Zach. 

The qospell of S, Mathew. 

Fo. yyri, prepared for the deuell and his angels. For I was hogrie, and ye gaue me no meate: I was thirstye, and ye gaue me no drynke: I was herbourlesse, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me not: I was sicke and in preson, and ye vysited me not.

Then shal they also answere hi, and saye : 
LORDE, when sawe we the hogrie, or thyrstie, or herbourlesse, or naked, or sicke, or in preson, and haue not mynistred vnto the?
"The shal he answere them, and saye: Verely 
I saye vnto you: ‘Loke what ye haue not 
{done vnto one of the leest of these, the same haue ye not done vnto me. And these shal

go in to euerlastinge payne, but the righteous in to enerlastinge life.

The rroi. Chapter. 

A% it came to passe whā Iesus had|& fynished all these wordes, he sayde vnto his disciples: Ye knowe, that after two dayes shalbe Easter, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered to be crucified.’

Then ‘assembled together the hye prestes and the serybes, and the elders of the people in to the palace of the hye prest which was called Caiphas, and helde a councell, how they might take lesus by disceate, and kyll him.
But they sayde: Not on the holy daye, lest there be an vproure in the people.

Now when lesus was at Bethany" in the house of Symon the leper, there came vnto hi a woman, which had* a boxe with precious oyntment, and poured it vpon his heade, as he.sat at the table. Whan his disciples sawe that, they diszdayned, and sayde: Where to serueth this waist? This oyntmét might haue bene wel solde, and geué to the poore. Whe lesus perceaued that, he sayde vnto them:
Why trouble ye thewoman? She hath wrought a good worke vpon me for ye haue allwaye the jpoore with you,” but me shal ye not haue allwayes. Where as she hath poured this oyntmét vpon my body, she dyd it to bury me. Verely I saye vnto you: where so euer this gospell shalbe preached thorow out all
‘the worlde, there shal this also that she hath 
; done, be tolde for a memoriall of her. 

2. b. Tere. 30. c. Pro. 14. d. and 17. a. Toha. 5. c. k Mar. 14. a. Luc. 22. à. Iohà. 18.3. ! Tohà. 11. e. m Mar. 14. a. Luc. 7. d. Ioha. 12. a. * Some reade: A glas with precious water. " Deut. 15. b.

Fo. rri. 

B 

The gospell of S. dHlatbelu. 

‘Then one of the twolue (called Iudas Is- carioth) wente vnto the hye prestes, and sayde: "What wil ye geue ine, and J shal delyuer him ynto you? And they offred hi thirtie syluer pens. And from that tyme forth, he M oportuuyte to betraye him. f

The first daye of swete bred came the dis- ciples to Iesus,’ and sayde vnto him: Where wilt thou that we prepare for the, to eate the
Easter lambe ? He sayde: Go in to the cite to soch a man, and saye vnto him: The
Master sendeth the worde: My tyme is at honde, I wil kepe myne Easter by the with my disciples. And the disciples dyd as lesus had appoynted them, and made ready the
Easter lambe. 

* And at euen he sat downe at the table with the twolue. And as they ate, he sayde:
Verely 1 saye vnto you: One of you shal betraye me. And they were exceadinge soroufull, and beganne euery one of them to saye vnto him: Syr, is it 1? He answered and sayde: He that deppeth his honde with me in the dyszhe, the same shal betraye me. The sonne of man goeth forth, as it is wrytten of him: but wo vnto that man by who the sonne of man shalbe betrayed: It had bene better for that ma, yf he had neuer bene borne.
Thé Iudas that betrayed him, answered and sayde: Master, is it I? He sayde vnto him:
Thou hast sayde. 

And as they ate, lesus toke the bred, gaue thankes,^ brake it, and gaue it to the disciples, and sayde: "Take, eate, this is my body. And he toke the euppe, and thanked, and gaue it the, and sayde: Drynke ye all therof, this is my bloude of the new testa- ment, that shalbe shed for many for the remission of synnes. I saye vnto you: I wil not drynke hence forth of this frute of the vyne tre, vntill that daye that I shal drynke it new with you iu my fathers kyngdome.

And whan they had sayde grace, “they wente forth vnto mount Oliuete. ‘Then sayde lesus vnto them.* This night shal ye all be offended in me. For it is wrytten: 1 wil smyte the shepherde, and the shepe of the flocke shalbe scatered abrade. But after that I ryse agayne,
'| wil go before you in to Galile. Peter answered and sayde vnto him: t'Though all

* Mar.i4.b. Luc.22.a, lohà. 18.a. 5 Marc. 14. b. 
Luc. 22. a. € Marc. 14. c. Luc. 22. b. Iohà. 13. c. 
4 Marc. 14. c. Luc. 22. b. 1 Cor. 11. c. * Mar. 14. d. 

Luc.21.c. lohà.18.a. * Mat. 26.f. Zach.13.b. Mar. 

men shulde be offended in y, yet wyl I neuer be offéded. lesus sayde vnto hi: Verely I saye vnto y: This same night before $ cock crowe, shalt thou denie me thryse. Peter saide ynto him: And though I shulde dye with the, yet wil I not denye the. Likewyse also sayde all the disciples.

Then eame lesus with them in to a felde which is called “Gethsemane, and sayde vnto the disciples: Syt ye here, whyle I go yonder a praye. And he toke with him Peter, and the two sonnes of Zebede, and beganne to wexe soroufull and to be inan agonye. Then sayde lesus vnto them: “My soule is heuy euen vnto the death. ary ye here, and watch with me. «And he wente forth a litle, and fell flat vpon his face, and prayed sayenge:
O my father, yf it be possible, let this cuppe passe fro me: neuertheles not as I wil but as thou wilt. And he came to his disciples, and founde thé a slepe, q sayde vnto Peter:
What? coude ye not wateh with me one houre? Watch q praye, that ye fall not in to temptacion. ‘The sprete is wyllinge, but the flesh is weake.

‘Agayne, he wēte forth the seconde tyme and prayed, sayenge: O my father, yf this cuppe ean not passe awaye fro me (excepte 1 drynke of it) thy will be fulfilled. And he came, and founde them a slepe agayne, and their eyes were heuy. And he left them, and wente forth agayne, and prayed the thirde tyme, sayenge the same wordes. Then came he to his disciples, and sayde vnto them:
Slepe on now, and take youre rest. Beholde, the houre is come, y the sonne of man shalbe delynered in to the hondes of synners: Aryse, let ns be goynge. Beholde, he is at hode, that betrayeth me.

Whyle he yet spake, lo, Iudas one of the twolue came, "and with him a greate multitude with swerdes and staues, sent fro the hye prestes and elders of the people. And he that betrayed him, had geuen them a tokē, sayenge : Whom so euer 1 kysse, that same is he, laye hodes vpo him. And forth withal he came to lesus, and sayde: Hayle master, and kyssed him. And lesus sayde vnto him:
Frende, wherfore art thou come? Then came they, and layed hondes vpon Iesus, and toke

14.d Iobà. 16. d. f Act. 1.a.. t Mar.14 d. Luc. 
22. c. Joba. 13. d. € Mar, 14, d. h Iobā. 12. c. 
* Luc. 29. c. k Gal. 5. c. ! Mar, 14. e. ™ Mar. 
14. b. Luc.22.d. Toba. 18. a. 

Chap. rrbt. 

Chap. rrii. 

F 

him. And beholde, one of them that were with Iesus, stretched out his honde, and drue his swerde, and stroke a seruaunt of the hye prestes, q smote of his eare: Then sayde
Iesus vnto him: Put vp thy swerde in to his place. “For all that take the swerde, shal perish with the swerde. Or thinkest thou that I can not praye my father now, to sende me more then twolue legions of angels? But how thé shulde the scriptures be fulfylled?
* For thus must it be. 

In the same houre sayde lesus vnto the multitude: ^Ye are come out as it were to a murthurer with swerdes and staues for to take me. I sat daylie teachinge in the tem- ple amonge you, and ye toke me not. But all this is done, that the seriptures of the * pro- phetes might be fulfylled.* Thé all the dis- ciples left him, and fled. But they that toke lesus, led him to Caiphas the hye prest, where the scrybes and the elders were ga- thered together. As for Peter, he folowed him a farre of vnto the hye prestes palace, q wente in, and sat with the seruauntes, that he might se the ende.

“But the hye prestes and the elders, and the whole councell sought false wytnesse ageynst lesus, that they might put him to death, and founde none. And though many false wytnesses stepte forth, yet founde they none. At the last there stepte forth two false wytnesses, ¢ spake: He sayde: I can breake downe the temple of God, /and buylde it agayne in thre dayes.

* And the hye prest stode vp, and sayde vnto him: Answerest thou nothinge, vnto it, that these testifie agaynst the? Neuerthe- les lesus helde his tonge. And the hye prest answered, and sayde vnto him: ^I charge the by y lyuynge God, that thou tell us, yf thou be Christ the sonne of God. Iesus spake:
Thou hast sayde it. Neuerthelesse I saye] vnto you: ‘From this tyme forth it shal come to passe, that ye shal se the sonne of man syttinge vpon the right hande of the power (of
God) and commynge in the cloudes of the heauen.

@| Then the hye prest rente his clothes, and 

sayde: ‘He hath blasphemed, what nede we 

a Gen. 9. a. Apoc. 13. b. Ezec. 11. b. * Lu. 24. d. 
> Marc. 14. f. Luc. 22. d. * Esa. 35. d. Psal. 21. 69. t Mat. 26. c. 4 Marc, 14. f. Toha. 18. b. €
14.f. Act.6.b. — JIobà.9.c. £ Mar.14.¢. 
22.e. ‘Ioba.6.g. Act. 1. b. * Mar. 14. g. 

The gospell of >. jfHatbrv. 

Fo. xrritj. eny mo wytnesses? Lo, now haue ye herde his blasphemy: What thinke ye? They an- swered, ysayde: He is gyltie of death. "Then tspytted they in his face, v smote him with fistes. Some smote him vpon the face, and sayde: Prophecie vnto us thou Christ, who is it, that smote the ?

" Às for Peter, he sat without in the palace. 
And there came vnto him a damsell, and sayde: And thou wast with lesus of Galile also. Neuertheles he denyed before thé all, and sayde: I can not tell what thou sayest.
But whan he wéte out at the dore, another damsell sawe him, and sayde vnto them that were there: This was also with Iesus of
Nazareth. And he denyed agayne, and sware also: I knowe not the ma. And after a litle whyle, they that stode there, stepte forth, and sayde vnto Peter: Of a trueth thou art one of them also, for thy speach be- wrayeth the. Then begane he to curse and to sweare: I knowe not the man. And im- mediatly the cock crew. Then thought Peter vpon the wordes of lesus, which sayde vnto him: "before the cock crow, thou shalt denye me thryse. And he wente out, and wepte bytterly.

The rrbij. Chapter. 

PON the morow, all the hye prestes| ¢ 

and elders of the people helde a coun- 

cell agaynst Iesus, "that they might put him 

to death, and bounde him, and led him forth, 

and delyuered him vnto ’ Pontius Pilate the debyte.

When Iudas which betrayed him, sawe this that he was condemned vnto death, it
‘repented him, and brought agayne the thirtie syluer pens to the hye prestes and the elders,
‘and sayde: I haue done euell, in that I haue betrayed innocet bloude. 'Iheysayde: What haue we to do with y? Se thou therto.
And he cast the syluer pens in the téple, and 
‘gat him awaye, and wente and hanged him self.

So the hye prestes toke the syluer pens, and sayde: lt is not laufull to put them in to
‘the Gods chest, for it is bloudmoney. Neuer- itheles they helde a councell, and bought with

22. e. ! Leui. 24. c. f Esa. 50. h. Iohà. 18. c. 
|" Mar. 14. ge Lue. 22. d. Iohà. 18. b. ^ Mat. 26. c. e Psal. 2.a. Mare. 15.a. Luc. 23. a. Iobà, 18 d.
P Act. 3. b. 7 2 Re.17.d. Act, 1. c. 

So. rrruy. 

the a potters felde, for to burye straugers in. Wherfore the same felde is called the bloudfelde vnto this daye. Then was that fulfylled, which was spoken by Ieremy the pro- phet sayenge: “And they toke thirtie syluer pens, the pryee of him that was solde, whom they bought of the children of Isracll: and these they gaue for a potters felde, as the
LORDE commaunded me. 

As for lesus, he stode before the debyte, and the debyte axed him, and sayde : ^Art thou the kynge of the lewes? And Iesus sayde vnto him: Thou sayest it, And wha he was accused of the hye prestes and elders, he answered nothinge. ‘Then sayde Pylate vuto him: Hearest thou not, how sore they accuse the? And *he answered him not one worde: in so moch that the debyte marueled exceadingly.

“At that feast, the debyte was wote to delyuer a presoner fre vnto the people, whom jthey wolde. And at the same tyme he had a
‘notable presoner called Barrabas. And whan 
|they were gathered together, Pylate sayde vnto them : Whether wil ye, that 1 geue lowse vnto you? Barrabas, or Iesus which is called
Christ? For he knewe well that they had delyuered him of enuye. And wha he sat
|vpo the iudgmét seate, his wife sent vnto him, sayenge: Haue thou nothinge to do with that righteous man, for I haue suffred many thinges this daye in a dreame because of him.

But the hye prestes and the elders per- suaded the people, “that they shulde axe Bar- rabas, and destroye lesus. Then answered the debyte, q sayde vnto thé: “Whether of these two wyl ye y I geue lowse vnto you?
They sayde: / Barrabas: Pylate sayde vnto them: What shal I do then with Iesus, which
| [is called Christ? They sayde all: let him be crucified. The debyte saide: What euell hath he done the? Neuertheles they cried yet more and sayde, let him be crucified. So whan Pilate sawe, that he coude not helpe, but that there was a greater vproure, he toke water, and waszhed his handes before the people, and sayde: I am vngiltie of y bloude of this righteous man. Se ye therto. Then answered all the people, and sayde: His

È 

A 

| j Tere. 32.b. Zach. 11. c. b Marc. 15.a, Luc, 23. a. 
Toha. 18.d. * Esa, 53. b. *Mare.15.a. Luc.23. h. 
Ioha. 18. e. 4 Mar. 15. a. * Luc. 23. b. f Act. 

[3- b. Mare. 15. b. € Act. 5. d. Marc. 15. b. 

Cbr qospell of 3» Mathew, 

bloude come vpon vs, and vpon oure children. 
* Then gaue he Barrabas lowse vnto the, but caused lesus be scourged, and delynered him to be crucified.

Then the debites soudyers toke Iesus, in to the eomon hall, ^and gathered the whole multitude ouer him, and stryped him out of his clothes, and put a purple robe vpo him, and plated a crowne of thorne, q set it vpon his heade, and a rede in his hade, and kneled before him, and mocked him, and sayde: hayle kynge of the Iewes. And spytted vpon him, and toke y rede, q smote him vpon the heade. And wha they had mocked hi, they toke the robe of him ageyne, q put his owne clothes vpon him, and led him forth, y they might crucifie hi. ' And as they were goinge out, they founde a man of Cyren called
Symon: him they compelled to beare his crosse. And when they came vnto the place called ^ Golgatha (that is to saye by interpre- tació a place of deed mens sculles) they gaue him to drynke, veneger myxte with gall. And whan he had tasted therof, hewolde not drynke.

'So whan they had crucified him, they parted his garmétes, and cast lottes therfore : that the thinge might be fuifilled, which was spoken by the prophet: ” They haue parted my garmétes amonge thé, q cast lottes vpon my vesture. And there they sat, and watched hi. And aboue ouer his heade, they put vp the cause of his death in wrytinge: namely:
This is the kynge of the Iewes. 

Then were there two murthurers cru- cified with him, "the one of the right hande, and the other on the left. They that wente by, renyled him, and wagged their heades and sayde: Thou that breakest downe the téple of God, and buyldest it in thre dayes, helpe thy self. Yf thou be the sonne of God, come downe from the crosse. ‘The hye prestes also in like maner with the serybes
& elders, laughed him to scorne, and sayde: he hath helped other, and can not helpe him- self: Yf he be the kynge of Israel,’ let him come downe now from the crosse, and we wil beleue him. tHe trusted in God, let him delyuer him now, yf he wil haue him. For he hath sayde: I am the sonne of God. ‘The

230€. Ioha. 19. a. ^ Marc. 15. b. — Iohà. 19. a. 
! Marc. 15. c. Luc. 23. c. k Toha. 19, b. ! Marc. 
15.c. Icha. 19. c. ™ Psal. 21. b. " Esa, 53. b. 

? Sap. 2. d. t Psal. 21. a. aud 38. 69. 

Chap. rrii. 

Chap. rrbíij. 

murtherers also that were crucified with him, cast the same in his tethe.

“And from ¥ sixte houre there was darcknes ouer the whole earth vnto the nyenth houre.
And aboute the nyenth houre, lesus cried with a loude voyce, and sayde: Eli, Eli,
Lamma asabthani? thatis, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?? But some of thé that stode there, when they herde y sayde: he calleth Elias. ‘And immediatly one of them ranne, and toke a spoge, and fylled it with veneger, and put it vpon a rede, and gaue him to dryncke. But y other sayde: holde, let se whether Elias wyl come, and delyuer him. Iesus cried agayne with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the goost.

F| And beholde, the vale of the temple was 

6 

rente in two peces, from aboue tyll beneth, and the earth quaked, and the stones rent, and the graues opened, and many bodies of the sayntes that slepte, arose, and wéte out of the graues after his resurreccion, and came in to the holy cite, and appeared vnto many.

“But the captayne and they that were with him, and kepte Iesus, when they sawe the earthquake and the thinges that were done, they were sore afrayed, and sayde: Verely this was Gods sonne. And there were many wemen there lokynge to afarre of," which had folowed Iesus from Galile, and had mynistred vnto him: amonge whom was Mary Mag- dalene, and Mary the mother of Iames and loses, and the mother of the children of
Zebede. 

At euen there came a rich man of Arima- thia, called Ioseph, which was also a disciple of lesus. He wéte vnto Pylate, and axed the body of lesus. Then commaunded Pylate that the body shulde be geué him. And loseph toke the body, and wrapped it in a cleane lynnen cloth, and layed it in his owne new sepulcre, which he had hewen out in a rocke, and rolled a greate stone to the dore of the sepulere, and wente his waye. And there was Mary Magdalene and y other Mary,‘ syttinge ouer agaynst the es

The next daye that foloweth the daye of preparynge, the hye prestes and Pharises came together vnto Pylate, and saide: Syr, we

a Marc. 15. c. Luc. 23.d. ? Psal. 21. a. * Marc. 
15. d. Luc. 19. c. 4 Marc. 15. d. Luc. 23. c. e Marc. 15. o. f Marc. 15. e. Luc.23. e. Ioha. 19. e.

£ Marc. 15. e. * Mat. 16. c. 17. c. d. Marc. 9. d. 

The gospell of S. Mathew. 

haue called to remembraunce, that this dis- ceauer sayde whyle he was yet alyue:* After thre dayes I wyl ryse agayne. Comaunde therfore that the sepulere be kepte vnto the thirde daye, lest peraduenture his disciples

come, and steale him awaye, and saye vnto| 

the people: He is rysen from the deed, and so shal the last errour be worse the the first.

Pylate sayde vnto them: 'lhere haue ye 

watchmé, go youre waye, and kepe it as ye can. ‘They wéte and kepte the sepulcre with watchmen, and sealed the stone.

The rrbiij. Chapter. 

PON the euenynge of the Sabbath holy | 

daye," which dawneth ý morow of the first daye of $ Sabbathes, came Mary Mag- dalene and y other Mary, to se y sepulcre.
And beholde, there was made a greate earth- quake: for the angell of the LORDE de- scended from heauen, and came and rolled backe y stone from the dore, and sat vpon it.
And his countenaunce was as y lightenynge, and his clothinge whyte as snowe. But y watch me were troubled for feare of him, and became as though they were deed.

The angell answered,’ and sayde vnto ¥ women: Be not ye afrayed. I knowe that ye seke lesus that was crucified. He is not
|here. He is rysen, as he sayde. Come, and se y place, where the LORDE was layed, and go youre waye soone, and tell his dis- ciples, that he is rysen from the deed. And beholde, he wyl go before you in to Galile, there shal ye se him. Lo, I haue tolde you.

And they departed from the graue in all| % 

ithe haist with feare and greate loye,! q ranne jto brige his disciples worde. And as they were goinge to tell his disciples, beholde,
Iesus met them, and sayde: God spede you. 
And they wente vnto him, and helde his fete, and fell downe before him. Thé sayde Iesus vnto them: Be not afrayed: go youre waye and tell my brethren, that they go in to Galile, there shal they se me.’

And whan they were gone, beholde, cer- tayne of the watchmen came in to the cite, q tolde the hye prestes euery thinge that had happened. And they came together with the

Luc. 18. d. à Mare. 16. a. Luc. 24. a. Ioha. 20. a. i Marc. 16.a. Luc. 24. a. k Mar. 16. b. Luc. 24. a.
1 Cor. 15. a. ? Act. 1. b. 

Fo. rrrb. 

T 

| 

| 

The qospell of &. Mathew, Chap. rrbtij. 

| ffo. rroi. them. And whan they sawe him, they fell

m lelders, and helde a councell and gaue y 

souders money ynough, and sayde: Saye ye: his disciples eame by night, and stole him
€ |awaye, whyle we were a slepe. And yf this come to the debytes eares, we wyl styll him, and brynge it so to passe, that ye shal be safe.
And they toke the money, and dyd as they were taught. And this sayenge is noysed amonge the Iewes vnto this daye. nr.
'The eleuen disciples wente vnto Galile in to a mountayne, where lesus had appoynted

a Mat. 11. e. [oha.17.a. Phil. 2.a. Mar. 16. b. 

downe before him: but some of them douted. 
And Iesus came vnto them, talked with them, and sayde: *Vnto me is geue all power in heauen and in earth. Go ye youre waye therfore, and teach all nacions, and baptyse them in the name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy goost: and teach them to kepe all thinges, what soeuer I haue com- maunded you. ^Andlo, I am with you euery daye vnto the ende of the worlde.

è Toba. 14. b. 

The ende of the gospell of S. Mathew. 

Zhe gospel of S. Marke. 

What >. Marke contepneth. 

Chap. 1. 

The office of Ihon the baptist. The baptyme of 
Christ, his fastynge, his preachinge, and the callynge of Peter, Andrew, lames and Jhon.
Christ healeth the man with the vncleane sprete, helpeth Peters mother in lawe, and clenseth the leper.

Chap. IL E 

He healeth the man of the palsye, calleth Leui the customer, eateth with open synners, and excuseth his disciples.

Chap. II. 

He helpeth the man with the dryed hande, choseth his apostles, and casteth out the vncleane sprete, which the Pharises ascrybe vnto the deuell. The brother, sister and mo- ther of Christ.

Chap. III. 

The parable of the sower. Christ stilleth the 

tempest of the see, which obeyeth him. 
Chap. V. 

He delyuereth the possessed from the vncleane sprete, the woman from the bloudye yssue, and rayseth the captaynes doughter.

Chap. VI. 

Christ preacheth at home, and is not regarded. 
He sendeth out his disciples. Ihon baptist is taken and headed. Christ fedeth fyue thou- sande men with fyue loaues and two fiszhes.
He walketh vpon the see. 

Chap. VII. 

The Pharises are not cotent, that the disciples eate with vnwaszhen handes: but Christ re- buketh the selues for breakinge the com- maundementes of God, healeth the woman of
Canaans daughter, and maketh the domme to speake.

Chap. VIII. 

He fedeth foure thousande me with vij. loaues, reproueth the Pharises that are so desyrous of tokens, warneth his disciples to bewarre of their leuen, maketh a blynde man to see, axeth his disciples what men holde of him, reproueth
Peter, telleth his disciples of his passion, and exorteth them to folowe him.

Chap. IX. 

The transfiguracion of Christ, which healeth the childe that was possessed of a domme sprete, teacheth his disciples to be lowly, and to auoyde occasions of euell.

Chap. X. 

Christ geueth his answere concernynge mariage, and that it is harde for the rich to come in to heave: reproueth the disdayne of his disciples, lerneth the to be meke, and restoreth blynde
Barthimeus to his sight. 

Chap. XI. 
Christ rydeth in to lerusalem, dryueth the mar- chauntes out of the temple, curseth the fyge tre, and confoundeth the Pharises.

Chap. XII. 

He rebuketh the synne and vnthankfulnesse of the lewes with a goodly symilitude, taketh the in their owne disceatfull questions, exorteth to bewarre of their doctryne and lyuynge, and commendeth the good wyll of the poore wyddowe.

Chap. XIII. 

He warneth his disciples to bewarre of false teachers and disceauers, comforteth them agaynst the trouble for to come, tellinge them of the horrible destruccion of lerusalem, of his commynge, and ende of the worlde.

Chap. XIIII. 

The Magdalene anoynteth Christ. They eate the easter lambe, and the supper of the
LORDE. Christ is taken, and brought in to 
Caiphas house. Peter denyeth him. 

Chap. XV. 
The crucifienge of Christ, and how he was buried. 

Chap. XVI. 

The resurreccion of Christ, which appeareth vnto 
Mary Magdalene and to his disciples, whom he sendeth forth in to the worlde to preach the gospell, and ascedeth vp in to heauen himself. |

134 

The gospeli of 5. Marke. 

The first Chapter. 

a HIS is the begynnynge of the gospell of 
T lesus Christ the sonne of God, as it is wrytté in the prophetes. ^ Beholde, I sende my messauger before thy face, which shal prepare thy waye before the. * The voyce of a cryer is in the wyldernes: Prepare the waye of the LORDE, make his pathes straight.

* Ihon was in the wyldernes, and baptysed, and preached the baptyme of amendment, for the remyssion of synnes. And there wente out vnto him the whole londe of lewry, and they of Ierusalem, and were all baptysed of him in Jordan, and knowleged their synnes.

#Thon was clothed with Camels heer, and with a lethron gerdell aboute his loynes, and ate locustes and wylde hony, and preached, and sayde: ‘There commeth one after me, which is stronger then I: before whom I am not worthy to stoupe downe, and to lowse vp y lachet of his shue. I baptyse you with water, but he shal baptyse you with the holy goost.

‘And it happened at the same tyme, that 
Tesus came out of Galile from Nazareth, and was baptysed of Ihon in lordan. And as soone as he was come out of the water, he sawe that the heauens opened, and the goost as a doue cOmynge downe vpon him. And there came a voyce from heaue: Thou art my deare sonne,* in whom I delyte.

38| And immediatly the sprete droue him in to the wyldernes: ‘and he was in the wyldernes fourtye dayes, and was tempted of Sathan, and was with the wylde beestes. And the angels mynistred vnto him.

* Mal.3. a. Mat.11.b. Luc. 7. c ^ Esa. 40. a. 
Mat. 3.a. Luc.3.a. Iohà.1. b * Toha. 3. d. d Mat. 3. a. e Mat. 3. b. Luc, 3. c. Iohá. 1. c.
/ Mat.3.b. Luc.3.c. lohà.1.d. * Some reade : 

But after that Ihon was taken,^ Iesus came in to Galile, and preached the gospell of the kyngdome of God, and sayde: the tyme is fulfylled, and the kyngdome of God is at hande: Amende youre selues, and beleue the gospell.

i So as he walked by the see of Galile, he sawe Symon and Andrew his brother, castinge their nettes in the see, for they were fyszhers.
And lesus sayde vnto thé: Folowe me, and 
I wil make you fyszhers of mé.* And imme- diatly they left their nettes, and folowed him.

And when he was gone a lytle further from thence, he sawe Iames the sonne of Zebede, and Ihon his brother, as they were in the shyppe mendynge their nettes. And anone he called them. And they left their father
Zebede in the shyppe with the hyred ser- uauntes, and folowed him.

‘And they wente in to Capernaum, and immediatly vpon the Sabbathes, he entred in to the synagoge, and taught. And "they were astonnyed at his doctryne: for he taught them as one hauynge power, and not as the
Serybes. 

And in their synagoge there was a man possessed with a foule sprete,” which eried and sayde: Oh what haue we to do with the, thou lesus of Nazareth. Art thou come to de- stroye us? I knowe that thou art euen y holy one of God. And Iesus reproued him, and sayde: holde thy tonge, and departe out of him. And the foule sprete tare him, and cried with a loude voyce, and departed out of him. And they were all astonnyed, in so inoch that they axed one another amonge thé

selues, q sayde: What is this? What new 
In who I am pacified. £ Mat. 4. a. Luc. 4. a, 
^ Mat. 4. b. Luc. 4. b, i Mat. 4.c. Luc. 5. a. k lere, 16. c. Eze. 47. b. t Luc. 4. d. Iohà. 2. b. m Mat. 7. c. a Luc. 4, d.

Chap. fj. 

lernynge is this? For he cómaundeth the foule spretes with power, and they are obedient vnto him. And immediatly the fame of him was noysed rounde aboute in the coastes and borders of Galile.

“And forth with they wente out of the synagoge, and came in to the house of Symó and Andrew, with Iames and Ihon. And
Symons mother in lawe laye, ¢ had the feuers, and anone they tolde him of her. And he came to her, and set her vp, and toke her by
ý hande, and the feuer left her immediatly. 
And she mynistred vnto them. 

^At euen whan the Sonne was gone downe, they brought vnto him all that were sick and possessed, and the whole cite was gathered together at the dore, and he healed many that were diseased with dyuerse sieknesses, and cast out many deuels, and suffred not the deuels to speake, because they knew him.

B| And in the mornynge before daye, he 

arose, and wente out. And lesus departed in to a deserte place, and prayed there.
Peter also and they that were with him, folowed after him. And whan they had founde him, they sayde vnto him: Euery man seketh the. And he sayde vnto them:
Let us go in to the next townes, that I maye preach there also, for therto am I come.
And he preached 1 their synagoges, in all 
Galile, and droue out the deuyls. 

“And there came vnto him a leper, which besought him, and kneled before him, q sayde vnto him: Yf thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane. And it pitied lesus, and he stretched forth his honde, and touched him, and sayde:
I wyll be thou cleane. And wha he had so spoken, immediatly the leprosy departed fro him, and he was clensed.? And lesus for- bad him strately, and forth with sent him awaye, and sayde vnto him: Take hede, that thou saye uothinge to eny man, but go thy waye, and shew thy self vnto the prest, and
‘offre for thy clensynge what Moses com- maunded, for a wytnesse vnto them. But he whan he was departed, beganne to speake moch of it, and made the dede knowne: in so moch that lesus coude no more go in to the cite openly, but was without in deserte places, q they came vnto him fro all quarters.

Luc. 4. d. 
Luc. 5. b. 
J Mat. 9. a. 

? Mat. 8. b. 
* Mat. 8. a. 
© Leui, 14. a. 

^ Mat, 8. b. Luc. 4. c. 
4 Marc. 7. d. and 9. a. 
Luc. 5.¢. Ioha. 5.a., 

The qospell of &. Marke. 

So. rrr. 
The ij. Chapter. 
ND after certayne dayes he wente|@ 
A agayne vnto Capernaum,” and it was noysed that he was in y house. And imme- diatly there was gathered a greate multitude, in so moch that they had no rowme, no not without before the dore. And he spake the worde vnto the. And there came vnto him certaine, which brought one sicke of the palsye borne of foure. And when they coude not come nye him for ý people, they vn- couered y rofe of y house where he was.
And when they had made a hole, they let downe the bed (by coardes) wherin the sicke of y palsy laye. But when lesus sawe their faith, he sayde vnto the sicke of the palsye:
My sonne, thy synnes are forgeuen the. 

Neuertheles there were certayne scrybes which sat there, q thought in their hertes :
How speaketh this man soch blasphemy ? 
* Who can forgeue synnes, but onely God? 
And immediatly Iesus knew in his sprete, that they thought so in thé selues, and saide vnto them: Why thynke ye soch thinges in youre hertes? Whether is easier to saye to the sicke of the palsye: Thy synnes are forgeue ihe, orto saye: aryse, take vp thy bed and walke. But that ye maye knowe, that y sonne of man hath power to forgeue synnes vpon earth, he sayde vnto the sicke of y palsye: I saye vnto the, aryse, take vp thy bed, and go home. “And immediatly he arose, toke his bed, and wente forth before them all: in so moch that they were all astonnied, and praysed God, and sayde: We neuer sawe soch.

And he wente forth agayne vnto the see, and all the people came vnto him,' and he taught them. And as lesus passed by, he sawe Leui the sonne of Alpheus syttinge at the receate of custome, and sayde vnto him:
Folowe me. And he arose, and folowed him. 
And it came to passe as he sat at the table in his house, there sat many publicans q synners at the table with lesus and his disciples : For there were many y folowed him. And whan the serybes and Pharises sawe that he ate with publicans q synners, they sayde vnto his disciples: Why doth he eate and dryncke

€ Esa. 43. d. ^ Act. 9. c. 

and 15. a. 

* Mat. 9. a. Luc. 5. d. 

fo. rl. with $ publicans and synners ? Whan lesus herde that, he sayde vnto thé: The whole nede not $ Phisician, but they that are syeke.
I am not come to call the righteous, but the synners to repetaumee." . :

And the disciples of Ihon and of ¥ Pharises fasted.’ And there came certaine, which sayde vnto him: Why fast the disciples of lhon, and of y Pharises, and thy disciples fast not? And lesus sayde vnto them: How can the weddinge children fast, whyle the bryde- grome is with them? So longe as ý bryde- grome is with them, they can not fast. But the tyme wyl come, that the brydegrome shalbe taken oi them, and then shal they fast.

No man soweth a pece of new cloth vnto an olde garment, for els he taketh awaye the new pece from the olde, and so is the ret worse. And no man putteth new wyne in to olde vessels, els the new wyne breaketh the vessels, and the wyne is spylt, and ¥ vessels perishe: but new wyne must be put in to new vessels,

‘And it chaunsed that vpon y Sabbath he wente thorow the corne feldes, and his dis- ciples begine to make a waye thorow, and to plucke the eares of y corne. And the
Pharises sayde vuto him: Beholde, what thy disciples do, which is not laufull vpo the
Sabbath. And he sayde vnto thé: Haue ye neuer red what Dauid dyd, wha he had nede, and was an hongred, both he and they that were with him: how he wente in to the house of God in the tyme of Abiathar the hye prest, and ate the shewbreds (which was laufull for no man to eate, but for the prestes) and he gaue them vnto him, and to them that were with him? And he sayde vnto them:
The Sabbath was made for mans sake, and not man for the Sabbathes sake. ‘Therfore is the sonne of man LORDE enen ouer the

Sabbath. 

LE E wente agayne also in to the synagoge, and there was there a ma that had

a wythred hande.: And they marked him, 

whether he wolde heale him onthe Sabbath, that 

they might accuse him. And he sayde vnto 

mà with the wythred hide: Steppe forth here. 

The iij. Chapter. 

*1Tim lc. > Mat. 9. b. Luc. 5. c. * Mat, 12. a. 
Luc. 6. a, 3 1 Re. 21. b. e Mat. 12. b. Luc. 6. a. 
| / 3 Re. 13. b. € Mat. 12. b. Toba. 10. d. 

^ Mat. 4. c. 

Cbr gospell of S. Marke. 

Chap. iij. 
And he sayde vnto thé: Is it laufull to do good on the Sabbath? Or is it laufull to do euell? to saue life, or to kyll? But they helde their tonge. And he loked rounde aboute vpon them with wrath, and was sory for the harde hertes of thé, and sayde vnto the man: Stretch out thine hande. And he stretched it out. ‘And his hande was made whole like as Y other.

And the Pharises wéte out, and straight waye ‘they helde a councell with Herodes officers agaynst him, how they might destroye him. But lesus departed awaye with his disciples vnto the see. “And there folowed him moch people ont of Galile, and fro Iewry, and from lerusalé, and out of Idumea, and from beyonde Iordan, and they that dwelt aboute Tyre and Sydon, a greate multitude which had herde of his noble actes, and came vnto him.

And he spake vnto his disciples y they shulde kepe a shyppe for him because of the people, lest they shulde thrunge him : for he healed many of them, in so moch, that all they which were plaged, preased vpon him, that they might touch him. And whan the foule spretes sawe him,’ they fell downe be- fore him, and cried, and sayde: Thou art the sonne of God. And he charged them strately, that they shulde not make him knowne.

‘And he wente vp in to a mountayne, and called vnto him whom he wolde, and they came vnto him. And he ordeyned y twolue, that they shulde be with him, and that he might sende them out to preach, and that they might haue power to heale sicknesses, and to cast out deuyls. And vnto Symon he gaue the name Peter, and Iames the sonne of
Zebede, and Ihon the brother of Iames, and gaue the the name Bonarges, that is to saye, the children of thonder: and Andrew, and
Philippe, and Bartylmew, and Mathew, and 
Thomas, and Iames y sonne of Alpheus, and 
Taddeus and Symon of Cana, and Iudas 
Iscarioth which betrayed him. 

And they came to house. Then assembled the people together agayne, in so moch that they had no leysure to eate. And when they that were aboute him herde of it, they wente out to holde him. For they sayde: *he

Luc. 6. b. 
Act. 1. b. 

!Luc.4.c. * Mat. 10. a. Luc. 6. b. and 9. a. 
* Some reade: He wil go out of bis witt. 

Chap. iiij. taketh to moch vpon him. But the serybes that were come downe from Ierusalem, sayde:
He hath Belzebub, and thorow the chefe deuell casteth he out deuyls. And he called them together, and spake vnto them in symilitudes :

How can one Sathan dryue out another? 
And yf a realme be deuyded in it self, how can it endure? And yf a house be deuyded agaynst it self, it can not contynue. Yf
Sathan now ryse agaynst him self, and be at variaunce with him self, he can not endure, but is at an ende. No man can entre in to a stronge mans house, and take awaye his goodes, excepte he first bynde the stronge man, and then spoyle his house.

ż Verely I saye vnto you: All synnes shalbe forgeuen the children of men, and the blasphemy also wherwith they blaspheme.
But who so blasphemeth the holy goost, hath neuer forgeuenes, but is giltie of the euer- lastinge judgment. For they sayde: he hath an vncleane sprete.

*And there came his mother and his brethré, and stode without, and sente vnto him, and called him. And the people sat aboute him, and sayde vnto him: Beholde, thy mother and thy brethré axe after the without. And he answered, and sayde: Who is my mother and my brethren? And he loked rounde aboute him vpon his disciples, which sat rounde in compasse aboute him, and sayde: Beholde, my mother and my brethren. For who so euer doth the will of
God the same is my brother, and my sister and my mother.

The (ij. Chapter. a ND he begāne agayne to teach by y see
A side. “And there gathered moch people vnto him, so that he wente in to a shippe, and sat vpon the water. And all the people stode vpon the londe by the see syde.
And he preached longe vnto thë by parables, and sayde vnto thē in his doctryne :
Herken to, beholde, there wente out a sower to sowe: q it happened whyle he was sowinge, that some fell by the waye syde. Then came the foules vnder the heauen, and ate it vp.
Some fell vpon stonye grounde, where it had 

a Mat. 9. d. and 12. c. 
Luc. 12.a. 1 Ioh. 5. c. 
4 Mat. 13. a. Luc. 8. b. 

Luc. 11. b. Mat. 12. c. 
© Mat. 12. c. Luc, 8. c. 
* Mat. 13. b. Luc. 8. b. 

The qospell of S. Marke. 

| i

Fo. rit. 

not moch earth: and anone it came vp, be- cause it had not depe earth. Now wha the
Sonne arose, it caught heate : and in so moch as it had no rote, it wythred awaye. And some fel amonge the thornes, ¢ the thornes grew vp, and choked it, and it gaue no frute.
And some fell vpon a good grounde, which gaue frute, that came vp and grew. And some bare thirtie folde, and some sixtie folde, and some an hundreth folde. And he sayde vnto them: Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare.

‘And whan he was alone, they that were aboute him with the twolue, axed him con- cernynge this parable. And he sayde vnto thé: Vnto you it is geuen, to knowe the mystery of the kyngdome of God: but vnto them that are without, all thinges happen by parables,” that with seynge eyes they maye se, and not discerne: and that with hearinge eares they maye heare, and not vnderstode, lest at eny tyme they turne, and their synnes be forgeuen them. And he sayde vnto them:
Vnderstonde ye not this parable? How wyl ye then vnderstonde all other parables ?

The sower soweth the worde. These be they that are by the waye syde: where the worde is sowne, and as soone as they haue herde it, immediatly commeth Satha, and taketh awaye the worde that was sowen in their hertes. And likewyse are they that are sowen on the stonye grounde: which when they haue herde the worde, receaue it with ioye, and haue no rote in them: but endure for a tyme. When trouble and persecucion aryseth for $ wordes sake, immediatly they are offended. And these are they that are sowen amoge the thornes: which heare the worde, and y carefulnes of this worlde, and the disceatfulnes of riches, and many other lustes entre in, and choke the worde, and so is it made vnfrutefull. And these are they y are sowen vpó a good grounde : Which heare y worde, and receaue it, and brynge forth
Írute: some thirtie folde, and some sixtie folde, and some an hundreth folde.

And he sayde vnto the: ^Is a candle lighted to be put vnder a buszhell, or vnder a table?
Is it not lighted, to be set vpon a candel- sticke? For there is nothinge hyd, that shal

Ioba. 12. e. Aet. 28. d. Rom. 11. b. 
^ Mat. 5. b. Luc. 8. b. and 11. c. 

J Esa.6. b. 
€ Mat. 13. c. 

B 

| gfo. rly. Cbr gospell of >. Marke. 

not be openly shewed: and there is nothinge| 

jsecrete, y shal not be knowne. “Who so hath 
€ |eares to heare, let him heare. And he sayde vnto them: Take hede what ye heare. With what measure ye mete, with the same shal it be measured vnto youagayne. "And vnto you that heare this, shal more be geuen. ‘For who so hath, vnto him-shal be geuen: and who so hath not, from him shalbe taken awaye, euen that he hath. :

And he sayde: The kyngdome of God is after this maner, as when a man casteth sede vpon the londe, and slepeth, and stondeth vp night and daye,’ and the sede spryngeth vp, & groweth, he not knowinge of it. (For the earth bryngeth forth frute of her selfe: first the grasse, afterwarde the eare, then the full wheate in the eare.) But whan she hath brought forth the frute, he putteth to the syckell, because the haruest is come.
` And he sayde: Where vnto wyl we licken the kyngdome of God? Or by what symili- tude wyl we compare it? ‘It is like a grayne of mustarde sede, which whà it is sowe vpo the londe, is the leest amonge all sedes of the earth. And wha it is sowen, it groweth vp, and is greater then all herbes, and getteth greate braunches, so y the foules vnder the heaué maye dwell vnder ¥ shadowe therof.
D| And by many soch parables he spake the worde vnto the, there after as they might heare it,” without parables spake he nothinge vnto them: but vnto his disciples he ex- pounded all thinges pryuately. And the same daye at euen he sayde vnto them: * let us passe ouer. And they let the people go, and toke him as he was in the shippe, and there were mo shippes with him. — And there arose a greate storme of wynde, and daszhed the wawes in to the shippe, so that the shippe was full. And he was behynde in the shippe and slepte vpon a pelowe. And they awoke him « sayde vnto him: Master, Carest thou not, that we perishe? And he arose, and rebuked $ wynde, and sayde vnto the see:
Peace, and be styll, And the wynde was layed, « there folowed a greate calme. And he sayde vnto them: Why are ye so fearfull?
How is it, that ye haue no faith? And they feared exceadingly, x sayde one to another :

M 

í Mat, 10. d. Luc. 8. b. and 12. a. ^ Mat. 7. a. 
Luc. 6. d. € Mat. 13. b. and 25. c. Luc.8.b. and 
18. c. 4 Mat. 13. d. * Mat. 13. d. Luc. 13. b. 

| 
| 

What is he this? For wynde and see are obedient vnto him.

The b. Chapter. 

ND they came ouer vnto the other syde of the see in to the countre of the
Gaderenites. “And whan he wéte out of the shippe, there met him a ma possessed of an vncleane sprete, which had his dwellinge in the graues. And no man coude bynde hym, no not with cheynes: for he was oft bounde with fetters q cheynes, and pluckte the cheynes in sunder, and brake the fetters in peces, and no man coude tame him. And he was allwaye both daye and night vpon the mountaynes and in the graues crienge, and beatinge him self with stones. But whan he sawe lesus afarre of, he ranne, and fell downe before him, and cried loude, and sayde : ‘What haue
I to do with the O Iesus thou sonne of y 
Hyest God? I charge the by God, that thou torment me not. Neuertheles he sayde vnto him: Go out of the man thou foule sprete.
And he axed him: What is thy name? And he answered and sayde: My name is Legion, for there be many of vs. And he prayed him instantly, that he wolde not sende them awaye

out of that countre. 

And enen there in the mountaynes there was a ‘greate heerd of swyne fedynge, and all the deuyls praied him, and sayde: Let vs departe in to the swyne. And anone lesus gaue them leue. ‘Then the foule spretes wente out, and intred in to the swyne. And the heerd of swyne, ranne heedlinges in to y see with a storme. ‘They were aboute a two thousande swyne, and were drowned in the see.

And the swyneherdes fled, and tolde it in the cite, and in the countre. And they wente out for to se what had happened, and came to lesus, and sawe hym which was possessed and had had y legion, that he sat, and was clothed, and in his right mynde, and they were afrayed. And they that had sene it, tolde them what had happened to the pos- sessed, and of the swyne.

And they beganne to praye him, that he wolde departe out of their coastes. And whan he came in to the shyppe, the possessed prayed him, that he might be with him.

/ Mat. 13. e. © Mat. 8.c. Luc. 8. c. ^ Mat. 8. d. 
Luc. 8. c. ! Act. 16. c. * Mat. 8. d. Luc. 8. c. 

Chap. b. 

Chap. bi. The gospell of 3. Marke. Fo. rlii. 

Isayde vnto the ruler of the synagoge: Be not thou afrayed, beleue onely.

And he suífred no mà to folowe him, but 
Peter and James and Ihon his brother. And he came in to the ruler of the synagoges house, and sawe the busynes, and them that wepte and wayled greatly: and he wente in, and sayde vnto them: Why make ye this a doo, and wepe? -*'Fhe mayde is not deed, but slepeth.

And they laughed him to scorne. *And he droue them all ont, and toke the father and mother of the mayde, and them that were with him, and wente in where the mayden laye. And he toke the mayde by the honde, and sayde vnto her: Thabitha Cumi (which is by interpretacion) Maydé, I saye vnto the:
Aryse. *And immediatly the mayden arose, and walked. She was twolue yeare olde, and they were astonnyed out of measure. And he charged them strately, that no man shulde knowe of it, and sayde vnto them, that they shulde gene her to eate.

Nenertheles Iesus wolde not suffre hi, but saide vnto hi: Go ī to thy house q to thine awne, and tell the how greate benefites the
LORDE hath done for y, and how he hath had mercy vpon the. And he wente his waye, and beganne to publish in the ten cities how greate benefites Iesus had done for him.
And enery man marueyled. 

€| And whan lesus passed ouer agayne by shippe, there gathered moch people vnto him, and was by the see syde. "And beholde, there came one of the rulers of the synagoge, whose name was Iairus. And whan he sawe him, he fell downe at his fete, and besought him greatly, q sayde: My doughter is at the poynte (of death) let it be thy pleasnre to come and laye thine honde vpon her, that she maye be whole and lyue. And he wente with him, and moch people folowed him, and thronged him.

And there was a woman, ^which had had the bloudeyssue twolue yeares, and had suffred moch of many phisicians, and spent all that she had, and was not helped, but rather in worse ease. Whan she herde of Iesus, she came behynde amonge the people, and touched his garment. For she sayde: Yf I maye but touch his clothes, I shal be whole.

And immediatly y fountayne of hir blonde was dryed vp, and she felt in hir body, y she was healed of the plage.

| And forth with Iesus felt in himself the power that was gone ont of him, and turned him abonte amoge the people, and sayde:
Who hath touched my clothes? And his disciples sayde vnto him: Thon seist that the people thrusteth the, and sayest: Who hath touched me? And he loked aboute to se her, that had done it.

As for the woman, she feared and trembled 
(for she knew, what was done in her) and came and fell downe before him, and tolde him the whole trueth. And he sayde vnto her: *Doughter, thy faith hath made the whole: go thy waye in peace, a be whole of thy plage.

? Whyle he yet spake, there came certayne from the ruler of the synagoges house, and sayde: Thy doughter is deed, why troublest thou the master eny more? But lesus herde right soone the worde that was spoken, and

The bi. Chapter. 

ND he departed thence, and came in to|@ 

his awne ‘countre, and his disciples folowed him. And wha y Sabbath came, he begane to teach in their synagoge. And many that herde it, marueled at his lernynge, andsayde: From whéce hath he these thinges?
And what wyszdome is this, y is geué him: a soch actes as are done by his handes? Is not this the Carpenter the sonne of Mary, and the brother of Iames and Ioses, and of!
Inde and Symon? Are not his sisters here with vs also? And they were offended at| him. But Iesus saide vnto the: £A prophet is nowhere lesse set by, thé in his awne countre, ¢ at home amonge his awne. And he coude not shew one miracle there, but layed his handes vpon a few sicke, and healed them. And he marueyled at their vnbeleue.
And he wente aboute in the townes on enery syde, and taught them. And called the twolue, and begine to sende them two and jtwo, and gane them power oner the yncleane spretes. And commaunded thé, that they shulde take nothinge with them towarde their iourney, saue onely a rodde: no serippe, no bred, no money in the gerdell, but shulde

* 4 Re. 4. d. f Ioha.5.e. Act. 9.f. f Mat. 13. a. 
Luc. 4. b. £ Mat.13. g. Luc.4.c. Iobā 4. c. 

a Mat, 9. c. Luc. 8. e. ^ Mat. 9, c. Luc. 8. e. 
© Luc. TA c. a Mat. 9.c. Luc.8.f. *[ohà. 11. b. 

Fo. rli. be shod with sandales, and that they shulde not put on two cotes. And he sayde vnto them: Where so euer ye shal entre in to an house, there abyde, tyll ye go thence. And who so euer wyll not receaue you," ner heare you, departe out from thence, and shake of the dust from youre fete, for a wytnesse vnto them. I saye vnto you verely: At shal be easyer for Sodome and Gomorra in the daye of iudgment, then for that cite.

* And they wete forth, and preached, that men shulde améde them selues, and they cast out many denyls: and many that were sicke anoynted they with oyle, and healed thé.

“And it came to kynge Herods eares (for his name was now knowne) and he sayde: lhon the baptist is rysen agayne from the deed, and therfore are his dedes so mightie.
But some sayde: It is Elias. Some sayde: 
It is a prophet, or one of $ prophetes. But when Herode herde it, he sayde: It is Ihon whom I beheeded, he is rysen againe from the deed. This Herode had sent forth, and taken Ihon, and put him in preson, because of Herodias his brother Philippes wife, for he had maried her. Neuertheles Ihon sayde vnto Herode: *It is not laufull for the to haue thy brothers wife. But Herodias layed wayte for him, and wolde haue slayne him, and coude not. ^ Notwithstodinge Herode feared Ihō, for he knew that he was a iust and holy man: and he kepte him, and her- kened vnto him in many thinges, and herde him gladly.

And there came a conuenient daye, that 
Herode on his *byrth daye made a supper to the lordes, eaptaynes and chefe estates of
Galile. Then the daughter of Herodias came in, and daunsed, and pleased Herode, and them that sat at the table. Then sayde the kynge vnto $ damsel: Axe of me what thou wilt, I wil geue it the. And he sware vnto her: What soeuer thou shalt axe of me, I wil geue it the, euen vnto y one half of my kyng- dome. She wente forth, and sayde vnto hir mother: what shal laxe? She sayde: Ihon baptistes heade. And immediatly she wéte in to the kinge with haist, and sayde: I will that thou geue me straight waye in a platter
|e heed of Ihon the baptist. Then the kynge was sory: Yet for the oothes sake and

a Mat.10.b. Luc. 9. a. 
© Mat. 10, a, 

è Mat. 11. d... Luc. 10. a. i Mat, 14.3. Luc. 9. a. * Leui. 18. b.

The gospell of >. Marke. 

the that sat at the table, he wolde not saye her nay.

Chap. bí. 

And immediatly he sent the hangman, and|® 

commaunded his heade to be brought in. 
So he wéte, and heeded him in the preson, and brought his heade in a platter, and gaue it vnto the damsell, and the damsell gaue it vnto hir mother. And whan his disciples herde that, they came and toke his body, a layed it in a graue.

And the Apostles came together vnto lesus, and tolde hi all, and what they had done and taught. And he sayde vnto them:
Let vs go out of the waye in to the wyldernes, and rest a litle. For there were many comers and goers, and they had not tyme ynough to eate. And there he passed by shippe out of y waye in to a deserte place. And the people sawe thé departynge awaye, and many knewe of it, q ranne thither together of fote out of all cities, x came before thé, q came vnto him. And Iesus wente out, and sawe moch people, and had cópassion vpon them: for they were tas the shepe, that haue no shep- herde, and he begane a loge sermon.

Now whan the daye was farre past, his disciples came vnto him, and sayde : This is a deserte place, let them departe,^ that they maye go iu to the vyllagies and townes rounde aboute, and bye them selues bred, for they haue nothinge to eate. But lesus answered and sayde vnto them: geue ye them to eate.

And they sayde vntohim: Shal we go then, and bye two hundreth peny worth of bred, and geue them to eate? He sayde vnto them: ‘How many loaues haue ye? Go and se. And when they had searched, they sayde:
Fyue, and two fiszhes. And he commaunded them all to syt downe by table fulles vpon the grene grasse. And they sat downe here a rowe and there a rowe by hundreds and by fifties. And he toke the fyue loaues and two fiszhes, and loked vp vnto heauen, and gaue thankes, and brake the loaues, and gaue to the disciples, to set before them. And the two fiszhes parted he amonge them all. And they all ate, and were satisfied. And they toke vp twolue baskettes full of ý broken peces and of the fiszhes. And they that ate, were aboute fyue thousande men. And anone he

* Mat. 14, a. 
€ Mat. 9. d. 

Gen. 40. c. t Ezec. 34. a.

f Mat. 14. b. 
^ Mat. 14. b. 

Luc. 9. b. i Marc. 8. a.

ha 

Chap. dij. 

caused his disciples" to go in to the shippe, and to passe ouer before him vnto Bethsaida, whyle he sent awaye the people. And at euen was the shippe in the myddest of the see, and he alone vpon the londe. And he sawe

that they were in parell with rowynge, for the: 

wynde was agaynst them. 

JF| And aboute the fourth watch of y night he 

came vnto them, and walked vpon the see, and wolde haue gone ouer by the. And whan they sawe him walkinge vpon the see, they thought it had bene a sprete, and cried out, for they sawe him all, and were afrayed.
But immediatly he talked with them, and sayde vnto them: Be of good comforte, it is
I, be not afrayed. ^And he wéte vnto them in to the shippe, and the wynde ceassed. And they were astonnyed, and marueled excead- ingly: for they had forgotten the *loaues, and their hert was blynded.

And whan they were passed ouer, they came in to y lande of Genezareth, and drne vp in to the hauen. And whan they were come out of the shippe, immediatly they knewe him, and ranne thorow out all the region aboute, and beganne on euery syde to brynge vnto him in beddes soch as were sicke, where they herde that he was. And whither so euer he entred in to townes, cities or vyllagies, there layed they the sicke in the market place, and prayed him, that they might but touch the hemme of his garment. And as many as touched him, were made whole.

The tij. Chapter. 

ND there came vnto him the Pharises, and certayne of the serybes," that were come from lerusale And wha they sawe certayne of his disciples eate bred with comon
(that is, with vnwashen) handes, they com- playned. For the Pharises q all the Iewes eate not, excepte they wash their handes oft tymes: obseruynge so the tradicions of the elders. And whan they come from the market, they eate not, excepte they waszhe.
And many other thynges there be, which they haue taken vpon them to obserue, as the washinge of euppes and eruses, and brasen

vessels and tables. 
Then the Pharises and serybes axed him: 
Why walke not thy disciples after the tradi- 

a Mat. 14. c. 
* Mat. 15. a. 

Toha. 6. b. 
4 Esa. 29, c. 

^ Mat.14.d, — * Marc. 6. e. 
€ Exo.20.b. Deut. 5.a. 

The qospell of S. Marke. 

Fo. rib, 

cions of the elders, but eate bred with vn- waszhen handes? But he answered q sayde vnto them: Full well hath Esay prophecied of you Ypocrytes, as it is wryttē: This people honoureth me with their lippes, but their hert is farre fro me. Butin vayne do they serue me, whyle they teach soch doctrynes as are nothinge but the commaundemétes of mē.
Ye leaue the cOmaundement of God and kepe the tradicions of men, as the wasshynge of cruses and euppes, q many soch thinges do ye.

Ka he saide vnto thē: How goodly haue ye cast asyde the cómaundement of God, to manteyne youre owne tradicions? *For Moses sayde: Honoure father q mother. t Who so curseth father and mother, shal dye the death.
But ye saye: A ma shal saye to father or mother: Corban, that is, The thinge ae shulde helpe the withall, is geué vnto God.
And thus ye suffre him nomore to do ought for his father or his mother, « make Gods worde of none effecte, thorow youre owne tradicions that ye haue set vp. And many soch thinges do ye.

And he called vnto him all the people,/ and sayde vnto them: Herken vnto me ye all, and vnderstonde me. ‘There is nothinge without a man, that can defyle him, whan it entreth in to him. But that goeth out of him, that is it that maketh the man vneleane. Yf eny man haue eares to heare, let him heare.
And whan he came from the people in to y house, his disciples axed him of this symi- litude. And he sayde vnto them: Are ye so then without vnderstondinge? Perceaue ye not yet, y euery thinge which is without, and goeth in to the ma, can not defyle him? For it entreth not in to his hert, but in to y bely, and goeth out in to the draught, that purgeth all meates.

And he sayde: The thinge that goeth out of the man, that defyleth the man. For from within out of the hert of man proceade euell thoughtes, aduoutrye, whordome, murthur, theft, coueteousnes, wickednes, disceate, vn- clennes, a wicked eye, blasphemy, pryde, foolishnes. All these euell thinges go from within, and defyle the man.

* And he arose, and wente from thence in to the borders of Tyre and Sydon, q entred f Mat. 15. b.

f Exo. 21. b. € Mat. 15. c. 

135 

€ 

| jfo. ribi. 

Tin to an house, and wolde let no man knowe of it, and yet coude he not be hyd: For a certayne woman (whose doughter had a foule
| sprete) herde of him, and came and fell downe at his fete (and it was an Heithé woman of
Syrophenices) and she besought him, that he wolde dryue out the deuell from hir doughter.
| But lesus sayde vnto her: Let the children 
|be fed first: It is not mete to take the childrés 
|bred, and to cast it vnto dogges. She an- 
[swered and sayde vuto him: Yee LORDE, ueuertheles the whelpes also eate vnder y itable, of j childrés erómes. And he sayde

D|vnto her: Because of this sayenge go thy waye, the deuell is departed out of thy doughter. And she wente vnto her house, ¢ founde that the deuell was departed, and hir
|doughter lyenge on the bed. 

* And whan he wente out agayne from the coastes of Tyre and Sydon, he came vnto the see of Galile, thorow the myddes of ¥ coastes of the tē cities. And they brought vnto him one that was deaf, and had impediment in his; speach. And they prayed him, that he wolde | laye his hande vpon him.

And he toke him a syde from the people, jand put his fyngers in his eares, and dyd spyt, and touched his tonge, and loked vp vnto heauen, sighed, and sayde vnto him: Ephatha, that is, be opened. And immediatly his eares were opened, and the bonde of his toge was lowsed, and he spake right. ^And he charged them, that they shulde tell noman.

But the more he forbad them, the more they published it, q marueyled out of mea- sure, and sayde: * He hath done all thinges well. The deaf hath he made to heare, and the domme to speake.

The biij. Chapter. 

a T the same tyme whan there was moeh people there, and had nothinge to eate,

lesus called his disciples to him, and sayde jmto them: I haue compassion vpon the

| |people, for they haue taried with me now thre dayes, t haue nothinge to eate. And yf I
Jet them go home fro me fastynge, they shulde faynte by the waye. tFor some of

| them were come from farre. And his dis- 
| {ciples answered him: Where shulde we get 

z «Mat.9.c. Luc. 11. b. ^ Marc, 1. d. and 9. a. 
| Gen. t.d. Eccli. 39. c. t Tob. 13. b, Esa, 60. a. 
If Mare. 6. e, * Mat. 16.a. [oha. 6. d. * Mat. 12, b. 

———————— 

Cbr gospell of 3. Marke. 

Chap. biij, 

[bred here in the wyldernes, to satisfie them ? 
‘And he axed thé: ‘How many loanes haue lye? They sayde: Seuen. And he com- mad the people to syt downe vpon the grounde. And he toke the seuen loaues, and gaue thakes, and brake them, and gaue the vnto his disciples to set them before the people.
And they set thé before the people. And they had a few small fyshes, and whan he
| had geuen thankes, he bad set the same before the people. They ate, and were satisfied, q toke vp sene baszkettes full of y broke meate that was left. And they ý ate, were vpō a pone thousande. And he sent thé awaye.
| And forth with he wente in to a shippe with 
| his disciples? and came in to the coastes of 
Dalmanutha. And the Pharises wente out, and begane to dispute with him, and tempted him, and desyred a token of him from heaue.
And he sighed in his sprete, and sayde: * Why doth this generacion seke a token? Verely I saye vnto you: There shal no toke be geué vnto this generacion. And he left them, and wéte againe in to the shippe, and passed ouer.
^ And they forgat to take bred with them, and had nomore with them in the shippe but one loaf. And he cOmaunded them, and sayde: Take hede, and bewarre of the leuen of the Pharises, and of the leuen of Herode.
And their myndes wauered here and there, and sayde amonge them selues: This is it, that we haue no bred. And Iesus vnderstode that, and sayde vnto them: Why trouble ye youre selues, that ye haue no bred? Are ye yet without vnderstondinge? Haue ye yet a blynded hert in you? Haue ye eyes, q se not? and haue yeeares, and heare not? and re-|€ mébre ye not, ‘that I brake fyue loaues amonge fyue thousande, how many baszkettes full of broken meate toke ye then vp? They sayde: twolue. And #whan I brake the senen amonge the foure thousande, how many baskettes full of broken meate toke ye then vp? They sayde: Seuen. And he sayde vnto thé: Why are ye then without vnder- stondinge ?

And he came to Bethsaida, ¢ they brought one blynde vnto him, and prayed him to touch him. And he toke the blynde by the hande, and led him out of the towne, and spat

Luc. 12. a. £ Marc. 6. c. t Mat. 15. d. Marc. 8. a.

Luc. 11. 8. f Mat. 16. a. 
Iohà. 6. a. 

Chap. tr. 

33| And lesus wente out and his disciples into 

in his eyes, and layed his handes vpon him, and axed him whether he sawe ought. And he loked vp, and sayde: I se men goynge as yf I sawe trees. After this he layed his handes vpon his eyes ageyne, and made him to se. And he was brought to right againe, and sawe all clearly. And he sent him home, and sayde: Go not in to ¥ towne, and tell it also vnto noman therin.

the townes of the cite Cesarea Philippi," And in $ waye he axed his disciples and Rs vnto them: What do men saye, that I am ? They answered: They saye, thou art [hon the bap- tist: Some saye thou art Elias, some that thou art one of the prophetes. And he sayde vnto them: But whom saye ye that I am?
Then answered Peter’ and sayde vnto him: 
Thou art very Christ. And he charged them strately, that they shulde tell no man of him.
And he begane to teach them: ° The sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and be cast out of the elders hye prestes and serybes, and be put to death, and after thre dayes ryse agayue. And that worde spake he fre openly.
And Peter toke him vnto him, and beganne to rebuke him. But he turned him aboute, and loked vpon his disciples, and reproued
Peter, and sayde: Go after me thou Sathan, for thou sauourest not the thinges that be of
God, but of men. 

And he called vnto him the people with his disciples, and sayde vnto them: ^Who so euer wyl folowe me, let him denye himself, and take vp his crosse, and folowe me. *For who so euer wyl saue his life, shal lose it: and who so euer loseth his life for my sake and y gospels, y same shal saue it. What helpet it a ma though he wane the whole worlde, and yet toke harme in his soule? Or, what can a man geue, to redeme his soule withall? /Who so euer is ashamed. of me and of my wordes amonge this aduouterous and synfull genera- cion, of him shal the sonne of man also be ashamed, whan he commeth in the glory of his father with the holy angels. *And he sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you:
There stode here some, which shal not taist of death, tyll they se the kyngdome of God come with power.

a Mat. 16. b. Luc. 9. c. ^ [ohà. 6. g. * Mat. 16. c. 
17. d. 20. b. 4 Mat. 16. d. Luc. 9. e. * Lue, 17. d. 
Iohá.12.c. f Mat. 10.d. Luc.9.c. 12. c. Act. 24. b. 

£ Mat. 16.d. Luc. 9. c. A Mat. 17.a. Luc. 9. d. 

The qospell of S. Marke. 

The ir. Chapter. 
ND after sixe dayes Iesus toke vnto him! @ 
A Peter, James and Jhon,“ and brought them vp in to an hye mountayne out of the waye alone, and was trasfigured before them, and his clothes were bright and very whyte as j snowe, so whyte as no fuller can make vpon earth. And there appeared vnto thé Elias with Moses, and they talked with Iesus. And
Peter answered, and sayde vnto lesus: Rabbi, here is good beynge for vs. Let vs make thre tabernacles: one for the, one for Moses, and one for Elias. For he knewe not what he sayde, and they were very fearfull. And there was a cloude, which ouershadowed the. ‘And out of the cloude there came a voyce, and sayde: ‘This is my deare sonne,* heare him.
And immediatly they loked aboute them, and sawe noman more then Iesus onely with them.

* But whan they wente downe from the mountayne, lesus charged them, that they shulde tell no man what they had sene, tyll the sonne of man were rysen agayne from $e deed.

And they kepte that sayenge by them, and|33 

axed one another: What is that rysinge agayne from the deed? And they E Vin d sayde: Why saye the serybes then, that + Elias must first come? He answered and sayde vnto them: Elias shal come.first in dede, and brynge all thinges to right agayne. The sonne of man also shal suffre many thinges, and be despysed, tas it is wrytten. But I saye vnto you: Elias is come, and they haue done vnto him what they wolde, acordinge as it is wrytten of him.

‘And he came to his disciples, and sawe moch people aboute them, and the scrybes disputynge with them. And as soone as the people sawe, they were astonnyed, and ranne vnto him, and saluted him. And he axed the serybes: What dispute ye with them? And one of the people answered, and sayde:
Master, I haue brought vnto the my sonne, which hath a domme sprete: and whan so euer he taketh him, he teareth him, and he fometh, and gnaszheth with the teth, and pyneth awaye, ¢ I haue spoken to thy

! Mat. 3. b. Marc. 1.a. Luc. 3. c. * Deu. 18.c. k Mat. 17. b. t Mala. 3. d. ł Esa. 53,a. Psal. 21.a.
‘Mat. 17. b. Luc. 9. d. 

Fo. rlbij, 

€ 

fo. rivi. 

disciples that they shulde cast him out, and they coude not.

{le answered him, and sayde: O thou vu- faithfull generacion, how longe shal I be with
-on? How longe shal [ suffre you? Brynge hi hither to me. And they brought him vnto him. And as soone as the sprete sawe him, he tare him, and fell vpon the earth, and weltred and fomed. And he axed his father:
How longe is it, sens this happened vnto him? 
He savde: Of a childe, and oft tymes hath he cast him in to the fyre and water, to destroye him: but yf thou canst do eny thinge,
‘haue merey vpou vs, and helpe vs. lesus sayde vuto him: Yf thou couldest beleue :
All thinges are possible vnto him that be- 
|leueth. And immediatly the father of the childe cried with teares, and sayde: LORDE
I beleue : O helpe thou myne vnbeleue. 

Now whan lesus sawe that the people ranne to, he rebuked the foule sprete, and sayde vnto him; Thou domme and deaf sprete, I charge the, departe ont of him, and entre no- more in to him from hence forth. And he eried, and rent him sore, and departed. And he was as though he had bene deed, in so moch that mauy sayde: he is deed. But lesus toke him by the hande, and set him vp.
And he arose. And whan he came home, his disciples axed him secretly: ^Why coulde not we cast him out? And he sayde: This kynde ci go out by no meanes, but by prayer and fastynge.

Aud they departed théce, and toke their iourney thorow Galile,’ and he wolde not that eny man shulde knowe of it. But he taught his disciples, and sayde vnto them: ‘The sonne
,of mà shalbe delyuered in to the handes of 
|men, and they shal put him to death: and whan he is put to death, he shal ryse ageyne the thirde daye. But they vnderstode not that worde, and were afrayed to axe him.
| And he came to Capernaum. “And whan he was at home, he axed them: What dis- puted ye amonge youre selues by y waye? But

they held their tüges: ¢ For ied disputed by the waye amonge them selues, who shulde be y greatest. And he sat downe, and called the twolue, and sayde vnto them: * Yf en man wy! be the first, the same shal be the last

* Mat. 17. c. 
Luc. 18. d. and 9, c. 
|* Mat. 20. d. 

* Mat. 17. d. Marc. 8. d. and 10. d. 
© Mat. 18. a. 4 Marc. 10. c. f Luc. 9. e. and 10. b. lohà. 13. c.

The qosprll of S. Marke. 

Chap. r. 

lof all, and the seruannt of all. And he toke ia childe, and set him in the myddest of them, and toke him in his armes, and sayde vnto them: ^ Who so euer receaueth soch a childe in my name, receaueth me: and who so euer receaueth me, receaueth not me, but him that hath sent me.

Ihon answered him, and sayde: Master, we sawe one dryue out deuels in thy name, but he foloweth not vs, and we forbad him because he foloweth vs not. But lesus sayde:
Forbyd him not: for *there is no mà that doth a myracle iu my name, and can soone speake euell of me. For who so euer is not agaynst vs, the same is for vs. And who so euer geueth you a cuppe of water* to drynke in my name, because ye belonge vnto Christ, verely I saye vnto you: he shal not lose his rewarde. And “who so offendeth one of these litle ones that beleue in me, it were better for him, that a mylstone were haged aboute his neck, and he cast in to the see. * Yf thy hade offende the, cut him of. Better it is for the to entre in to life lame, thé hauynge two hondes to go in to hell in to the euerlastinge fyre, where their worme dyeth not, and their fyre goeth not out. :

Yf thy fote offende the, cut him of. Better it is for the to entre in to life crepell, thé hauynge two fete te be cast in to hell in the fyre euerlastynge, where their worme dyeth not, and their fyre goeth not out. Yf thine eye offende the, cast him from the. Better it is for the to entre in to y kyngdome of God with one eye, then hauynge two eyes to be cast in to the fyre of hell: where their worme* dyeth not, and their fyre goeth not out. For euery mà must be salted with fyre, q t euery offerynge shalbe seasoned with salt. ‘The salt is good: but yf y salt be vnsauery, wher- with all shal it be ala Haue salt in you, ¢ peace amonge youre selues one with another.

The y. Chapter. 
Bs he rose vp, and came from thence in to the places of Iewry beyonde Iordan.
And the people wéte agayne vnto him by heapes, and as his maner was he taught them agayne. And the Pharises came vnto him, and axed him, yf it were laufull for a man to

*2110021272; E Mat. 10. c, i Mat. 5. d. and 18. a. t Leui. 2. d.

^ Mat. 18. a. Luc. 17.8. k Esa. 66. d. Ezec. 20. f.
! Mat. 5. b. Luc. 14. d. 

Chap. r. 

put awaye his wife, and tempted him withall. 
But he answered and sayde: What hath Moses comaunded you? “They sayde: Moses suffred to wryte a testimoniall of denorcemet, and to put her awaye. lesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Because of y hardnesse of yonre hert dyd Moses wryte you this commaunde- ment. But from the first creacion God made the man and woman. ? For this cause shal a man leane his father q mother, and clene vnto his wife, and they two shalbe one flesh. Now are they not twayne thé, but one flesh. Let not man therfore put asunder that, which God hath coupled together.

And at home his disciples axed him agayne of y same. And he sayde vnto thé: Who so euer putteth awaye his wife, q marieth another, breaketh wedlocke to her warde.
And yf a woma forsake hir huszbande, a be maried to another, she cómitteth aduoutrie.

And they brought childré vnto him, that he might touch them. ‘But the disciples re- proned those that brought thé. Neuertheles whan lesus sawe it, he was displeased, and sayde vnto them: Suffre the children to come vnto me, and forbyd them not, for of soch is the kyngdome of God. Verely I saye vnto you: Who so euer receaneth not the kyng- dome of God as a childe, he shal not entre therin. And he toke them vp in his armes, and layed his handes vpon them, and blessed them.

And whan he was gone forth vpon the waye, there came one runninge,’ and kneled vnto him, q axed him: Good Master, what shal I do, that I maye inheret euerlastinge life ?
But Iesus saide vnto him: Why callest thon me good? There is no man good,’ but God onely. Thou knowest the commaundementes: e Thou shalt not breake wedlocke: thou shalt. not kyll: thou shalt not steale: thou shalt beare no false wytnesse: thon shalt begyle no man: Honoure thy father and mother. But he answered, and sayde vnto him: Master, all these haue I kepte fro my youth vp. And lesus behelde him, and loued him, q sayde vnto him: Thou wantest one thinge: Go thy waye, and * sell all that thou hast, and gene it vnto y poore: so shalt thou hane a treasure in heauen, and come ç folowe me, and take

a Deu. 24, a. Mala. 2. c. Mat. 5. a. 5 Gen. 2. d. 
* Mat. 5. d. and 19. b. Luc. 16. c. 4 Mat. 19. b. 
Luc. 18. b. * Mat, 19. c. Luc. 18. c. f Deut. 32. f. 

The gospell of S. Marke. 

the crosse vpon y. And he was disconforted at the sayenge, q wente awaye sory, for he had greate possessions.

And lesus loked aboute him, and sayde vnto his disciples: ^O how hardly shal the ryche come in to y kyngdome of God? And the disciples were astonnyed at his wordes.
But lesus answered agayne, and sayde vnto them: Deare children, how harde is it for them that trust in riches, to come in to the kyngdome of God? It is easier for a Camell to go thorow tlle eye of a nedle, then for a rich man to entre in to y kyngdome of God.
Yet were they astonnyed ¥ more, and sayde amonge thé selues: Who can the be saued?
But lesus behelde them, and sayde: With men it is vnpossyble, but not with God :? for with God all thinges are possyble.

Then sayde Peter vnto him: Beholde, we haue forsaken all, and folowed the. Iesus answered q sayde: Verely I saye vnto you:
There is no man that forsaketh honse, or brethren, or sisters, or father or mother, or wife, or children, or londes for my sake and the gospels, that shal not receaue an hundreth folde now in this tyme, houses, and brethre, and sisters, and mothers and children, and londes with persecucions, and in the worlde to come euerlastinge life. Bnt many that are the first, shal be the last: and the last the first.’

They were in the waye goinge vp to Ie- rusalem, and Iesus wente before them. ™ And they were astonnyed, and folowed him, and were afrayed. And lesus toke the twolne agayne, and tolde them what shulde happé vnto him. Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto the hye prestes and scrybes, and they shal condemne him to death, and delyuer him vnto the Heythé. And they shal mocke hi; and scourge him, and spyt vpon him, and put him to death, and on the thirde daye shal he ryse agayne.

“Then wéte vnto him lames and Ihon $ sonnes of Zebede, and sayde: Master, We desyre, that what soeuer we axe of the, thou wilt do it for vs. He sayde vnto thé: What desyre ye that I shal do to yon? They sayde vnto him: Graunte vs, that we maye syt one

€ Exo. 20. b. * Act. 2. e. and 4. d. ^ Mat. 19. c. 
Eocalg de. i Zach. B. a. * Mat. 19.d. Luc. 18. c. d Jie TS Go m Mat. 20. b. Luc. 18.d. " Mat. 10. c.

Fo. rlir. 

€ 

B 

at thy right hande, and one at thy left hande in thy glory. But Iesus sayde vnto thé: Ye wote not what ye axe. Maye ye drynke the cuppe, ¥ I shal drynke? and be baptysed with the baptyme that I shal be baptysed withall? They sayde ynto him: Yee y we maye. lesus sayde vnto them: The cuppe that 1 drynke, shal ye drynke in dede: and be baptysed with the baptyme that I shall be baptysed withall. Neuertheles to syt at my right hande and at my left, is not myne to geue you, but vnto them for whom it is prepared. :

And whi the ten herde that, they disdayned at lames and lhon. But Iesus called them, and sayde vnto them: Ye knowe that the prynces of ý worlde haue domynacion of the people,” and y mightie exercise auctorite amonge them. So shal it not be amonge you: but who so euer wil be greate amoge you, shal be youre mynister: and who so wyl be chefest amonge you, shalbe seruaunt of all. For the sonne of man also came not to be serued, but to do seruyce, and * to geue his life to a redempcion for many.

And they came vnto lericho. And whan he wente out of I[ericho,’ and his disciples, and moch people, there sat one blynde Bar- thimeus the sonne of Thimeus by y waye, and begged. And wha he herde that it was lesus of Nazareth, he beganne to erie and saye: lesu thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon me. And many reproued him, that he shulde holde his tunge. But he cried moch more: Thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpo me. And lesus stode styll, and bad call him.
And they called the blynde, and sayde vnto him: Be of good conforte, aryse, he calleth the. And he cast awaye his garment from him, stode vp, and came to Jesus. And Iesus answered, q sayde vnto him: What wilt thou that 1 do vnto the? The blynde sayde vnto him: Master, that I might se. Jesus sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, thy faith hath helped ý. And immediatly he had his sight aud folowed him in the waye.

im 

The vi. Chapter. a. ND whan they came nye lerusalem to
| s Bethphage* and Bethanye vnto mount 

ij * Mat. 20. d. Marc. 9. d, Luc. 9. e. and 22. b. 
Ioh. 10. b. b Mat. 20. d. Luc. 18. d. * Mat. 21.a. 
Luc. 19.c. J]ohà.12, c. *Psal.117.c. Mat 21.b. 

The gospel of 3». Marke. 

Toha. 7. d. 

Chap. rt. 
Oliuete, he sent two of his disciples, and sayde vnto them: Go in to the towne that lyeth before you, and as soone as ye come in, ye shal fynde a foale bounde, wher vpon no man hath sytté: lowse it, and brynge it hither.
And yf eny man saye vnto you: wherfore do ye that? "Then saye ye: The LORDE hath nede therof, and forth with he shal sende it hither. They wete their waie and founde the foale tyed by y dore without at the partynge of the waye, and lowsed it. And certayne of those y stode there, axed them: What do ye, that ye lowse the foale? But they sayde vnto thé, like as Iesus had commaunded them.
And so they let them alone. And they brought the foale vnto Iesus, and layed their clothes theron, and he sat theron. But many spred their garmétes in the waye:^ some cut downe braunches fro the trees, and strowed thé in the waye. And they that wente before, and that folowed after, cried, and sayde:
Hosyanna,’ blessed be he, that commeth in the name of the LORDE: blessed be the kyngdome of oure father Dauid, which com- meth in the name of the LORDE. Hosyanna in the height.

And the LORDE entred in to Ierusalem,|33 and wente in to the temple, and loked vpon all. And at euen he wente out vnto Bethany with the twolue: and on the morow/ wha they departed from Bethanye, he hugred, and sawe a fygge tre afarre of, which had leaues. Then came he nye,’ (to se) yf he coude fynde eny thinge theron. And whan he came to it, he founde nothinge but leaues (for the tyme of fygges was not yet.) And lesus answered, and sayde vnto it: Neuer mà eate frute of the for euermore. And his disciples herde it.

And they came to lerusalem. And lesus wente in to the temple, and beganne to dryue out the sellers and byers in the téple,’ q ouer- threw the tables of the money chaungers, and the stoles of the doue sellers, and suffred not eny man to cary a vessell thorow the temple.
And he taught and sayde vnto them: Is it not wrytten: * My house shalbe called a house of prayer for all people? But ye haue made it a denne of murthurers.

' And the scrybes and hye prestes herde of| C it. And they sought how they might destroye

^ Mat. 21. b. Luc. 19. d. Iohà. 2. b. 

E Luc. 13. a. f Esa. 56.b. Iere.7.a. 3 Reg. 8.d. ! Mat. 21. c.

Chap. ry. him, but they were afrayed of him, for all the people marueled at his doctryne. And at euen he wente out of the cite. And on the morow they passed by, and sawe the fygge tre, that it was wythred vnto the rote. And
Peter thought theron, and sayde vnto him: 
Master, beholde, the fygge tre y thou cursedest, is wythred awaye. Jesus answered, and sayde vnto them: ^Haue faith in God. Verely I saye vnto you: Who so euer saieth vnto this mountayne: Avoyde, and cast thy self in to the see, and *douteth not in his hert, but beleueth that the thinges shal come to passe which he saieth, then loke what he sayeth, it shal come to passe. “Therfore I saye vnto you: What so euer ye desyre in youre prayer, beleue that ye shal receaue it, and ye shal haue it. *And whan ye stonde and praye, forgeue yf ye haue ought ageynst eny man, that youre father also in heauen, maye forgeue you youre trespaces.

And they came agayne vnto Ierusalem and whan he wente in the temple,’ there came vnto him the hye prestes and scrybes and the elders, and sayde vnto him: By what auctorite dost thou these thinges? and who gaue the this auctorite to do soch?

But lesus answered and sayde vnto the: 
I wil axe you a worde also, answere me, and 
I wyl tell you, by what auctorite I do these. 
The baptyme of Thon, was it from heauen, or 

of men? Answere me. 

And they thought in them selues: yf we saye, it was from heauen, then shal he saye:
Why dyd ye not then beleue him? But yf we saye: lt was of men, then feare we the people, for they all helde that Ihon was a true prophet. Aud they answered, and saide vnto him: We can not tell. And Jesus an- swered, and sayde vnto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these thinges.

The rij. Chapter. 
ND he beganne to speake vnto them by parables: A certayne ma planted a vynyarde, ‘and made a hedge aboute it, and dygged a wynne presse, and buylded a tower, and let it out vnto huszbande men, and wente in to a straunge countre. And whan the tyme was come, he sent a seruaüt

^ Mat. 21. b. ^ Mat. 17, c. Luc. 17. c. 
* Tohà. 14. b. 15. a. 16. c. 
17. a. e Mat. 21. c. 

* Taco. 1. a. 
4 Mat. 6. b. 18. c, d. Luc. 
Luc. 20. a. J Mat. 21. d. 

The gospell of >. Marke. 

Fo. li. to the huszbande men, that he might receaue of the huszbandmen, of the frute of the vynyarde. But they toke him, and bet him, and sent him awaye emptye. Agayne, he sent vnto them another seruaunt, whom they stoned, and brake his heade, and sent him awaye shamefully dealt withall Agayne he sent another, whom they slew, and many other: some they bett, and some they put to death.

Then had he yet one sonne onely, whom he loued, him he sent also vnto them at the last, and sayde: they wyl stonde in awe of my sonne. But the same huszbandmen sayde amonge them selues: ‘This is the heyre, Come, let vs kyll him, so shal the inheritaunce be ours. And they toke him, and slewe him, and cast him out of the vynyarde. What shal now the lorde of the vynyarde do? He shal come and destroye the huszbande men, and geue the vynyarde vnto other. Haue ye not red this scripture: * The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the headstone in the corner? This was the LORDES doynge, and it is maruelous in oure eyes.
“And they wente aboute to take him (but they feared the people) for they perceaued, that he had spoké this parable agaynst the.
And they left him, and wente their waye. 

And they sent vnto him certayne of the 
Pharises and Herodes ‘ officers to take him in his wordes. And they came, and sayde vnto hi: Master, we knowe that thou art true and carest for no man. For thou regardest not the outwarde appearaunce of men, but teach- est y waye of God truly. Isit laufull to geue tribute vnto the Emperoure, or not? Ought we to geue it, or ought we not to geue it?
But he perceaued their ypocrisye, and sayde vnto them: Why tempte ye me? me a peny, that I maye se it. brought it him. ymage and superscripcion is this? sayde vnto him: The Emperours. answered lesus and sayde vnto the: *Geue therfore vnto the Emperoure that which is the Emperours, and vnto God that which is
Gods. And they marueled at him. 

‘Then came vnto him the Saduces (which holde that there is no resurreccion) these

Luc. 20. a. i Luc. 20. c.
29.6. 

€ Psal. 117.c. — ^ Mat.22.b. Luc. 20. b. 
T Mat. 17. d. Rom. 13. b. * Mat. 
Luc. 20. d. Act. 23. a. 

fo. lij. The qosprll of 3». Marke, Chap. rit. 

answered discretly, he sayde vnto him: Thon art not farre from the kyngdome of God.
And after this durst no man axe him eny mo questions.

And lesus answered, and sayde, whan he|33 taught in the temple : / How saye the serybes, y Christ is the sonne of Dauid? But Dauid
Nina saieth thorow the holy goost: *'The 
LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE: Syt thon on my right honde, tyll I make thine enemies thy fotestole. ‘There Dauid ealleth him his
LORDE. How is he thé his sonne? And many people herde him gladly.

And he taught thé, and sayde vnto the: 
^Bewarre of the serybes, that loue to go in longe garmentes, and loue to be saluted in the market, and syt gladly aboue in the syna- goges and at the table: they deuoure wyd- dowes houses, and vnder a coloure they make longe prayers. These shal receaue the more damnacion.

‘And lesus sat ouer agaynst the *Gods chest, and behelde how the people put money in to the Gods chest. And many that were riche: pnt in moch. And there came a poore wyddowe, and put in two mytes, which make a farthinge. And he called vnto him his diseiples, and sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: this poore wyddowe hath put more in ý Gods chest, then all they that haue putin: For they all haue pnt 1 of their super- fluyte, but she of hir pouerte hath put in all that she had, euen hir whole lyuynge.

axed him, and sayde: Master, Moses wrote vnto vs. “Yf eny mans brother dye, and leaue a wife, and leaue no children, his brother shal take his wife, and rayse vp sede vnto his brother. Now were there seuen brethren : the first toke a wife, and dyed, and left no sede: and the seconde toke her, and dyed, and left no sede also: the thirde in like maner.

And they all seuen toke her, and left no sede. At the last after them all, the wyfe dyed also. Now in the resurreccion whan they shal ryse agayne, whose wife shal she be of them? For seuen had her to wife.

Then answered lesus, and sayde vnto them: Do not ye erre? because ye knowe not the scryptures ner y power of God? Whan they shal ryse agayne from the deed, they shal nether mary ner be maried, but they are as the angels in heauen. As touchinge the deed, that they shal ryse agayne, haue ye not red in the boke of Moses, how God spake vnto him in the bush, and sayde: ^I am the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, a the 
God of lacob? Yet is not God a God of the deed, but of the lyuynge. "Therfore ye erre greatly.

*And there came vnto him one of the scrybes, that had herkened vnto the how they disputed together, and sawe that he had answered them well, and axed him: Whieh is the chefest comaundement of ali? Iesus answered him: The chefest commaundemét of all commaundementes is this: Heare O
Israel, the LORDE oure God is one God, and thou shalt lone the LORDE thy God with all thy hert, with all thy soule, with all thy mynde, and with all thy strength. ‘This is the chefest commaundement, and the se- conde is like vnto it: “Thou shalt loue thy neghboure as thy self. There is none other greater commaundement then these.

And the serybe sayde vnto him: Master, 
Verely thou hast sayde right: for there is but one God, q there is none other without him, aud to loue him with all the hert, with all the mynde, with all the soule, and with all the strength, and to loue a mans neghboure as himself, is more then brent sacrifices and all offerynges. But whā lesus sawe that he

The rij. Chapter. 

ND whan he wéte out of the temple,| A 

one of his disciples sayde vnto him: 
Master, se, what stones and what a buyldinge is this? And Iesus answered and sayde vnto him: Seist thou all this greate buyldinge ?
There shal not one stone be left vpo another, y shal not be broken downe.

And whan he sat vpon mount Oliuete ouer ageynst the temple, Peter and lames, and
Ihon, and Andrew axed him pryuatly: Tell vs, Whan shal all these come to passe? And what shalbe the toke, wha all these shalbe fulfilled? Iesus answered them, and beganne to saye: Take hede, that no man disceane you, for there shal many come vnder my

* aut. 25. a. ^ Exod. 3.a. Act. 7. d, c Mat. ^ Mat. 25. a. Luc. 20. c. i Luc. 21. a. * 4 Reg. 
22. d. 4 Deut. 6. b. and 30, b. * Leui. 19. c. Ro. 12. b. k Mat. 24.a. Luc. 21. a. 
13. b. J Mat. 22.d. Luc. 20. c. & Psal, 109. a. 

Chap. riiij. 

name, and saye: I am Christ, q shal disceaue many. But whan ye shal heare of the noyse of warres, be not ye afrayed: for so must it be, but y ende is not yet. “One people shal ryse ageynst another, and one realme ageynst another, and there shal be earth quakes here and there, and derth shal there be and trou- bles. ‘These are the begynnynge of sorowes.

But take ye hede to youre selues. ^For they shal delyuer you vp to the *councels, and synagoges, and ye shal be beaten, and shalbe brought before prynees and kynges for my namessake, for a wytnesse vnto thé. And y gospel must first be preached amoge all people.

“Now whan they shal lede you and delyuer you vp, take ye no thought atore what ye shal saye: and ymagyn ye nothinge afore hande, but what so euer shal be geué you at the same houre, that speake : for it is not ye that speake, but the holy goost. One brother shal delyuer another vnto death, and the father the sonne, q the children shal ryse ageynst their fathers and mothers, and shal helpe them to death, and ye shal be hated of all men for my names sake. But who so en- dureth to the ende, shalbe saued.

¢Whan ye shal se the abhominacio of de- solacion (wherof it is spoké by tDaniel the prophet) stonde where it ought not (who so readeth it, let him marck it well) then let the which be in Iewry, flye vnto the mountaynes: and let him that is on the house toppe not descede in to the house, ner come therin, to fetch eny thinge out of the house. And let him that is in the felde, not turne backe to fetch his clothes.

But wo ynto them that are with childe, and to them that geue suck in those dayes.
Neuertheles praye ye, that youre flight be not in the wynter. For in those dayes there shal be soch trouble as was not from the begynnynge of y creatures which God created, vnto this tyme, nether shal be. And yf $
LORDE had not shortened those dayes, there shulde no man be saued. But for the electes sake whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened those dayes.

* Now yf eny man shal saye vnto you at y tyme: Lo, here is Christ: o, he is there,

a Esa. 19. a, ^ Mat. 10. b. * Some reade: coücell. bouses * Mat. 10, c. — Luc. 12. b. and 21. b.
4 Mat. 24. b. Luc. 21. c t Dan. 9. c. * Mat. 24. b. 
Luc. 17. c. f Mat. 24. c. Luc. 21. c. Ioel 2. b. 

The qospell of S. Marke. 

fo. li. beleue it not. For there shal aryse false
Christes, and false prophetes, which shal do tokens q wonders, to disceaue euen the very chosen, yf it were possyble. But take ye hede, Beholde, I haue tolde you all before.

^But at the same tyme after this trouble, the Sonne and Mone shal lose their light, and the starres shall fall from heauen, and the powers of the heauens shal moue: sand then shal they se the sonne of man commynge in the cloudes with greate power and glory.
And thé shal he sende his angels, and shal gather together his chosen fro the foure wyndes, from one ende of the earth to the other.

Lerne a symilitude of the fyge tre: Wha fhis braunch is yet téder, and hath brought forth leaues, ye knowe that the Sommer is nye. So lykewyse wha ye se all these thinges come to passe, be ye sure, that it is nye enen at the dores. Verely I saye vnto you: this generacio shal not passe, tyll all these be ful- filled. Heauen and earth shal perishe, but! my wordes shal not perishe. But of that daye| and houre knoweth no man, nether the angels in heauen, no not the sonne him self, but the father onely.’

* Take hede, watch, q praye, for ye knowe not whan the tyme is. Like as a man that, wente in to a straunge countre, and left hisi house, and gaue his seruauntes auctorite, vnto euery one his worke, and commaunded y porter, that he shulde watch. Watch ye ther- fore, for ye knowe not wha the master of y house cometh, whether he cometh in the euenynge, or at mydnight, or aboute the cock crowynge, or in the mornynge, that he come not sodenly, and fynde you slepynge. Loke what I saye vnto you, that saye I vnto all.|
Watch. 

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND after two dayes was Easter, and the daies of swete bred. ‘And ¥ hye prestes

q scrybes songht how they might take him with disceate, q put him to death. But they sayde:
Not in the feast daye, lest there be an vproure in the people. |
“And when he was at Bethanye in the house of Symon the leper, and sat at the
€ Mat. 24. c. Luc, 21. d. 

Luc. 12, d. and 19. a. 
Toba. 11. e. 

t Dan. 7. b. ^ Act. 1. a. 
* Mat. 

! Mat. 26.a. Luc. 

' Mat. 24. b. and 25. a. 
26. a. 
7. d. 

Luc. 22. a. 
Toha. 12, a. 

eee 

Fo. liti. table, there came a woman, which had a boxe of pure and costly Nardus oyntment. And she brake y,boxe, q poured it vpo his heade,
Then were there some, y disdayned and sayde: Where to serueth this waist? This oyntment might haue bene solde for more then thre hundreth pens, q bene geué to y poore. And they grudged agaynst her.

But lesus sayde: let her be in rest. Why trouble ye her ? She hath done a good worke vpo me. Ye haue allwaye the poore with yon, and wha so euer ye wil, ye maye do thé good: but me haue ye not allwaie. She hath done what she coulde, she is come before, to anoynte my body for my buriall. Verely [ saye vnto you: Where so euer this gospell shal be preached in all the worlde, there shal this also that she hath now done, be tolde fora remem- braunce of her.

And Iudas Iscarioth one of the twolue wente vnto the hye prestes, to betraye him vnto them. Whan they herde y, they were glad, & promysed that they wolde geue him money. And he sought, how he might coueniently betraye him.

? And vpon ¥ first daye of swete bred, wha the Easter lambe was offered, his disciples sayde vnto him: Where wilt thou y we go and prepare, y thou mayest eate y Easter labe? And he sent two of his disciples, and sayde vnto them: Go youre waye in to the cite, and there shal mete you a mà bearinge a pitcher with water, folowe him, q where so euer he goeth in, there saye ye to the good man of the house: The Master sendeth the worde: Where is the gest house, wherin I maye eate the Easter labe, with my disciples?
And he shal shewe you a greate parlour, which is paued q prepared, there make readye for vs. And y disciples wete forth, q came in to y cite, x foüde it as he had sayde vnto the.
And they prepared y Easter lambe. 

At euen he came with the twolue. And as they sat at the table q ate, Iesus sayde: Verely
I saye vnto you: One of you y eateth with me, shal betraye me. And they were sory, t sayde vnto hi one after another: Is it I? ¢ another (sayde:) is it I? He answered q saide vnto thé: One of the twolue, euen y same y dyppeth with me in $ platter. The sonne of man truly goeth forth, as it is wrytté of hi,

DD + Exod. 12. c. 
"Mat. 26. b. Lue 22nb, 

The mosprll of 3. Marke. 

But wo vnto that ma, by whom the sonne of man is betrayed. It were better for the same man, that he had neuer bene borne.

? And as they ate, lesus toke the bred, gaue thankes, q brake it, and gaue it thé, a sayde :
Take, eate, this is my body. And he toke the cuppe, thaked, and gaue it the, and they all dranke therof. And he sayde vnto them:
This is my bloude of the new "Testament, which shalbe shed for many. Verely I saye vnto you, that from hence forth I wil not drynke of the frute of the vyne, tyll ý daye y
I drynke it new in $ kyngdome of God. And wha they had sayde grace, they wéte forth vnto mount Oliuete.

And lesus sayde vnto them: ‘This night shal ye all be offended in me, for it is wrytten:
* I wil smyte the sheperde, q the shepe shal be seatred abrode. Neuertheles after y I am rysen agayne, I wil go before you in to Galile
But Petersayde vnto him: And though all men shulde be offended, yet wolde not I be offended. And lesus sayde vnto him: Verely
Isaye vnto y: To daye in this same night, before y cock crowe two tymes, shalt thou denye me thryse. But he saide yet more:
Yee though I shulde dye with y, yet wil I not denie y. So saide they all i file maner.

And they came in to y felde called Gethse- mane, and he saide vnto his disciples: Syt ye here, tyll I go yonder, and praye. And he toke with him Peter q James, « Ihon, and begàne to waxe fearefull, q to be in an agonye, q sayde vnto thé: My soule is heuy eue vnto y death: tary ye here and watch. And he wente forth a litle, fell vpon the grounde and prayed, that, (yf it were possyble) y houre might passe fro him, and sayde: Abba, my father, all thinges are possyble vnto the, take this cuppe awaye fro me: Neuertheles not what I wyl, but what thou wilt.

And he eame vnto them, and founde the slepynge, and sayde vnto Peter: Symon, slepest thon? Couldest thou not watch with me one houre? Watch and praye, that ye fal not in to temptacion. The sprete is wyllinge, but y flesh is weake. And he wéte forth agayne, aud prayde, and spake the same wordes, and returned, and founde them slep- ynge agayne: for their eyes were heuy, q they knewe not what they shulde answere him.

4 Mat. 26. c. 
* Lica lobe 

Luc, 99. b. 1 Cor. 11. c. f Act. 1. a.

Iohà. 13. c. 
* Mat. 26. c. 

Chap, riii, 

D 

£ 

Chap. rb. 

And he came the thirde tyme, and sayde vnto them: Slepe on now, and take youre rest. It is ynough, the houre is come: beholde, y sonne of man shalbe delyuered in to the handes of synners: aryse, let vs be goynge.
Beholde, he is at hande, that betrayeth me. 

" And immediatly whyle he yet spake, came 
Iudas one of the twolue, and with him a greate multitude, with swerdes and staues from the hye prestes and serybes and elders. And the traytoure had geuen them a toke, and sayde :
Whom so euer I kysse, that same is he, laye handes vpon him, and lede him awaye warely.
And whà he was come, he wente straight waye vnto him, and sayde vnto him: O master, master, and kyssed him. ‘Then layed they their handes vpon him, q toke him. But one of the that stode by, drew out his swerde, and smote the hye prestes seruaunt, aud cut of his eare.

Jf, And lesus answered, and sayde vnto the: 

“Ye are come forth as it were to a murthurer with swerdes and with staues to take me. I was daylie with you in the temple, and taught, and ye toke me not. * But this is done, that the scrypture maye be fulfilled. And all the disciples forsoke him, and fled. And there folowed him a yonge ma, which was clothed in lynnen vpon the bare skynne, and the yonge mé toke holde of him. But he let the jlynnen go, and fled naked from them.

* And they led lesus vnto the hye prest, where all y hye prestes, and elders and scrybes were come together. As for Peter, he folowed him afarre of in to the hye prestes palace.
And he was there, and sat with the seruauntes, and warmed him.

? But the hye prestes and the whole councell sought wytnesse agaynst lesus, y they might brynge him to death, and they funde none.
Many gaue false wytnesse agaynst him, but their wytnesses agreednottogether. And some stode vp, and gaue false wytnes agaynst him, and sayde: We herde him saye: I wil breake downe this temple that is made with hdédes,’ and in thre dayes buylde another not made with handes. But their wytnesse agreed not together.

'@| And the hye prest stode vp amonge them, 

and axed lesus, and sayde: / Answerest thou 

a Mat. 26. d. Luc. 22. d. Iohà. 18. a. > Mat. 26. f. 

Luc. 22. d. * Esa. 53. b. Marc, 15.c. * Mat, 26. f. 
Luc. 22, d. Joh. 18. b. 4 Mat. 26. f. * [ohà. 2. a. f Mat. 26. f. € Luc. 22. c. ^ Tohà. 6. g.

The qospell of ©. Marke. 

|nothinge vnto it, that these testifie agaynst the? But he helde his tunge, and answered nothinge. ‘Thé the hye prest axed him agayne, and sayde vnto him: Art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed? lesus sayde: I am.
And ye shal se the sonne of man syt at the 
“right hande of power, and come in the cloudes of heaué. "Then the hye prest rent his clothes, q sayde: What nede we eny mo wytnesses? Ye haue herde the blasphemy.
What thynke ye? They all cédemned him, that he was giltie of death. Then beganne there some to spyt vpo him, and to couer his face, and to smyte him with fistes, and to saye vnto him Prophecie vnto vs. ‘And the ser- uauntes smote him on the face.

* And Peter was beneth in y palace. "The, came one of the wenches of the hye prest ::
And wha she sawe Peter warmynge him, she loked vpo hi, and sayde: And thou wast with lesus of Nazareth also. But he denyed, q | sayde: I knowe him not, nether can I telli what thou sayest. And he wente out in to the fore courte, and the cock crew. And a damsell sawe him, and beganne agayne to saye vnto them that stode by: This is one of them. Andhe denyed itagayne. And after a litle whyle they y stode by, sayde agayne vnto him : Of a trueth thou art one of them for thou art a Galilean, and thy speach soundeth euen alike. But he begane to curse and sweare: I knowe not the man, that ye speake of. And the cock crew agayne. Then thought Peter vpon the worde, that Iesus sayde vnto him: t Before y cock crow two tymes, thou shalt denye me thryse. And he beganne to wepe.

The rb. Chapter. 

ND soone in the mornynge the hye prestes helde a councell with the elders

and serybes and the whole councell,’ ¢ bounde 
Tesus, and led him awaye, and delyuered him vnto Pylate. And Pylate axed him: Art thou the kynge of the Iewes? He answered, and sayde vnto him: Thou sayest it. And the hye prestes accused him sore. But Pylate axed him agayne, and sayde: Answerest thou nothinge? Beholde, how sore they laye to

i 3 Re. 22.d. Ioh 16. b. ^ Mat. 26. g. Luc, 22. d. 
Toha. 18. b. t Marc. 14. d. ! Psal. 2. à, Mat. 27. 3. 
Luc. 23.a. Iobà.18.d. Mat. 27. b. 

fo. Ib. 

Ffo. Ibi. 

B 
| 

€ 

‘thy charge. Neuertheles Iesus answered no more, in so moch y Pylate marueyled.

“At that feast of Easter he was wonte to delyuer vnto them a presoner, whom so euer they wolde desyre. ‘There was I preson with the sedicious, one called Darrabas, which in ithe vproure had committed murthur. And ithe people wente vp, and prayed him, that he wolde do, as he was wonte. Pylate answered them: wyl ye that I geue lowse vnto you the kynge of the lewes? For he knew, that $ hye prestes had delyuered him of envye. But the hye prestes moued $ people,’ that he shulde rather geue Barrabas lowse vnto them.

Pylate answered agayne, and sayde vnto them : * What wil ye the that I do vnto him, whom ye accuse to be kynge of the lewes?
They cried agayne: Crueifie hi. —Pylate sayde vnto the: What euell hath he done?
But they cried yet moch more: Crucifie him. 
So Pylate thought to satisfie the people, and gaue Barrabas lowse vnto them, and delyuered thé Iesus, to be scourged « crucified.

^And the soudyers led him in to the como hall, and called the whole multitude together, and clothed him with purple, and plated a erowne of thorne, and crowned him withall, and beganne to salute him: Hayle kynge of the Iewes. And smote him vpon the heade with a rede, and spytted vpo him, and fell vpo the kne, a worshipped him. ‘And wha they had mocked him, they toke y purple of
‘him, and put his clothes vpon him, q led him out, that they might crucifye him.

And they compelled one that passed by, called Symon of Cyren (which caine from the felde,/ and was the father of Alexander and
Ruffus) to beare his crosse. And they brought him to the place Golgatha, which is by interpretacion: a place of deed mens skulles. And they gaue him wyne myxted with myrre, to drynke, ¢ he toke it not. And whan they had erucified him, they parted his garmétes, v east lottes therfore, what euery one shulde take. And it was aboute y thirde houre, q they crucified him. And the tytle of his cause was wrytté ouer aboue him (namely:)
The kynge of the Iewes. And they crucified him with two murthurers, one at y right hande, and one at the left. "Then was the
F LM 97.b. > Mat.97.c. © Mat. 27. c. Luc. 23. h. 

Mat. 27. d. Yohá. 19. a. — « Ioha. 49. b. — / Mat. 97. d. 

Luc. 23. c, £ Dsal.21. b. Mat.97.d. Iohà.19.c 
^ Esa. 53. b. Marc, 14, f. t Mat. 27.6. Luc 

conde 

The qospell of S. Marke. 

Chap. rb. 

serypture fulfilled, which sayeth: “He was couted amonge the euell doers.

‘And they that wéte by, reuyled him, and wagged their heades, and sayde: Fye vpon the, how goodly breakest thou downe y téple, t buyldest it agayne in thre dayes? Helpe thy self now, t come downe fro the crosse.
The hye prestes also in like maner laughed him to scorne amonge the selues, with the scrybes, q sayde: He hath helped other, him- self can he not helpe. Yf he be Christ and y kynge of Israel, let him come downe now fro the crosse, y we maye se it, v beleue.
And they y were crucified with hi, checked ht also.

And whà it was aboute the sixte houre, there was a darcknesse ouer the whole lode,’ tyll aboute ¥ nyenth houre. And aboute y nyenth houre lesus cried loude, and sayde:
Eli, Eli, lamma asabthani? which is inter- preted: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?’ And some that stode by, whan they herde y, they sayde: Beholde, he calleth Elias. "Then rane there one, q fylled a spoge with vyneger, q stickte it vpo a rede, v gaue hi to drynke, q sayde: Holde styll, let se, whether Elias wil come, and take him downe. But Iesus cried loude, and gaue vp the goost. And the vale of the téple rent in two peces, from aboue tyll beneth.

The captayne that stode thereby ouer agaynst him, “whan he sawe y he gaue vp the goost with soch a erye, he sayde: Verely this man was Gods sonne.

And there were wemen there also, which} 3 

behelde this afarre of,’ amoge who was Mary 
Magdalene, ¢ Mary of James y litle, q the mother of Toses, q Salome, which had folowed him wha he was in Galile, and mynistred vnto hi: q many other y wéte vp with hi to lerusalem. And at euen” (for so moch as it was the daye of preparinge, which is the fore
Sabbath) there came one Ioseph of Arimathia, a worshipfull Senatoure (which loked also for the kyngdome of God) q wéte in boldely vnto
Pilate, q axed y body of lesus. But PORE marueyled y he was deed all ready, q called y captayne, q axed hi, whether he had loge bene deed. And whā he had gotten knowlege of the captayne, he gaue loseph y body. And

k Mat. 27.e. Luc. 93. d. — ! Psal. 21. a. m Mat. 27, e. 
Ioh. 19, c. " Mat. 27. f. Luc. 23. e. o Toba. 19. c. 
P Mat. 27. g. Luc.23.e. Ioha. 19. d. 

The gospel of S. Marke. 

fo. Ibij, 

he bought a lynné cloth, q toke him downe, q wrapped hi in y lynné clothe, q layed him in a sepulcre, which was hewé out of a rocke, q rolled a stone before ý dore of y sepulcre.
*But Mary Magdalene and Mary Ioses be- helde, where he was layed.

The rbi. Chapter. 

a ND whan the Sabbath was past,^ Mary 
Magdalene, q Mary James, and Salome, bought spyces, y they might come, « anoynte hi. And they came to the sepulere vpo a daye of y Sabbathes very early, wha ¥ Sonne arose, q savde one to another: Who i rolle vs y stone fro y dore of the sepulcre? And whan they loked, they sawe, that the stone was rolled awaye: for it was a very greate one. And they wente in to the sepulcre, and on the right hande they sawe a yonge man syttinge, which had a longe whyte garmet vpon him, and they were abaszhed. But he sayde vnto the: Be not ye afrayed, ye seke lesus of Nazareth which was erncified: he is rysen, he is not here. Beholde, y place, where they layed him. But go ye youre waye, and tell his disciples and Peter, that he wil go before you in to Galile,’ there shal ye se him* as he sayde vnto you. And they wente forth i all the haist, and fled from the sepulere: for there was a tremblynge
& feare come vpon them, nether sayde they eny thinge to eny man, for they were afrayed.

a Mat, 97, e 5 Mat, 28.a. Luc. 24.a. Iohà. 20. a. 
* Áct. 1. a. * Mar. 14. d. 1 Mat, 28. a. Luc. 24, a. 
1 Cor, 15. a. * Luc. 24, b. J Luc. 24, c, 

The ende of the qospell of S, Marke. 

“But lesus, whan he was rysen vp early|% vpo the first daye of the Sabbathes, he appeared first vnto Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast out seuen deuels. And she wete and tolde the that were with him, as they mourned and wepte. And whan they herde that he lyued, and had appeared vnto her, they beleued it not. After warde as two of the were walkynge, he shewed himself vnder another figure,’ whan they were goynge vpon the felde. And they wente, and tolde the other: these they beleued not also.

! At the last, as the eleuen sat at the table, he shewed him self vnto them, and rebuked their vnbeleue, and y hardnesse of their hert, because they beleued not the which had sene him rysen. And he sayde vnto them: *Go ye youre waye in to all the worlde, and preach the gospell vnto all creatures. Who so be- leueth and is baptysed, shalbe saued: but who so beleueth not, shalbe damned.

As for the tokens, which shal folowe the] that beleue, these are they: ^In my name shal they cast out deuyls: tSpeake with new tunges: Dryue awaye serpétes: And yf they drynke eny deedly thinge, it shal not hurte them: *' They shal laye their handes vpo the sicke, and they shal recouer.

And the LORDE, after that he had spoken vnto them, was taken vp in to heauen, and sytteth at the right hade of God. And they wente out, and preached euery where. And the LORDE wrought with them, and con- firmed the worde with tokens folowynge.

& Mat. 28. c. Ioha. 20. c. t Act. 2.a. and 28. a.

^ Act. 5. b. 8.a. 16.c. 19.a. 
Luc.10.b. Act. 28. a. 1 Act. 14. b. 
Luc. 24. d. Act. 1. b. and 7. g. 

s 

THe gospell of S. Luke. 

What S. Luke contepneth. 

l 
Chap. I. 
The cocepcion and byrth of lhon the baptist. 
| 

Chap. Il. 

The byrth q circücision of Christ. How he was receaued in to the teple, how Symeon and
Anna prophecie of him, and how he was founde in the teple amoge the doctours

The concepcion of Christ. The thakful songes 
Chap. Ill. 

of Mary, and Zachary. 
| 

| |The preachinge, baptyme, and presonment of 
Chap. V. 
Christ preacheth in the shippe: The disciples 

Ihon. The baptyme of Christ, and a rehearsall of the generacion of the fathers.

Chay. WII 

lesus is led m to the wyldernesse, ¢ fasteth all the tyme of his temptacion, ouercometh the deuell, goeth in to Galilee, preacheth at
Nazareth and Caphernau: the Tewes despyse him, the deuels knowlege him: he cometh in to Peters house, healeth his mother in lawe and doth greate miracles.

forsake all, and folowe him. He clenseth the leper, healeth the man of the palsye, calleth
Mathew the customer, and eateth with open synners.

Chap. VI. 

He excuseth the disciples, that plucke the eares of corne, he healeth the man with the wythred hande, choseth his twolue Apostles, maketh a

ee sermon, and teacheth to do good for euell.

Chap. VII. 

He healeth the captaynes seruaunt, rayseth vp the wyddowes sonne from death to life, en- fourmeth the disciples whom hon baptist sent vnto him, commendeth Thon, and re- proueth the Tewes for their vnthankfulnesse.
He eateth with the pharisee. The woman waszheth his fete with hir teares, and he for- geueth her hir synnes.

Chap. VHI. 

Christ with his apostles goeth fro towne to towne and preacheth, sheweth the parable of the sede, telleth who is his mother and his brother, stilleth the raginge of the see, delyuereth the possessed, and dryueth the deuels in to the heerde of swyne, helpeth the sick woman and lairus daughter.

Chap. IX. 

He sendeth out the twolue Apostles to preach, 
Herode heareth tell of hi, He fedeth fyue thousande men with fyue loaues and two fishes, the disciples confesse him to be the sonne ofj
God, he transfigureth himself vpon the mount, delyuereth the possessed, and teacheth his dis- ciples to be lowly. They desyre vegeaunce, but he reproueth them.

Chap. X. 

He sendeth the seuentye before him for to preach, and geueth thé a charge how to behaue them selues, prayseth his heauenly father, answereth the scrybe that tempted him, and (by the ex- ample of the Samaritane) sheweth who is a mas neghbour. Martha receaueth the LORDE in to hir house, Mary Magdalene is feruent in hearinge his worde.

The gospell of 3. Luke. 

Chap. XI. 

He teacheth his disciples to praye, dryueth out a deuel, and rebuketh the blasphemous pharises.
They requyre sygnes and tokens. He eateth with the pharisee, and reproueth the ypocrisy of the pharises, scrybes and ypocrites.

Chap. XII. 

The leuen of the pharises. Christ conforteth his disciples agaynst persecucion, warneth them to bewarre of cuvetousnesse, by the symilitude of a certayne rich man: he wyll not haue them to hange vpo earthly thinges, but to watch and to be ready agaynst his commynge.

Chap. XIII. 

Of the Galileans whom Pilate slew and of those that dyed in Syloe. The symilitude of the fyge tre. Christ healeth the sicke woman. The parable of the mustarde sede and leuen. Few entre in to the kyngdome. Christ reproueth
Herode and lerusalem. 

Chap. XIII. 

lesus eateth with the pharisee, healeth the dropsye vpon the Sabbath, teacheth to be lowly, telleth of the greate supper, and warneth them that wyll folowe him, to laye their accomptes before, what it wyll cost the.
The salt of the earth. 

Chap. XV. z 

The louynge mercy of God openly set forth in the parable of the hundreth shepe, and of the | sonne that was lost.

Chap. XVI. 

The parable of the wicked Mammon. Not one title of Gods worde shal perish. Of the rich man, and of poore Lazarus.

Chap. XVII. 

Christ teacheth his disciples to avoyde occasions of euell, one to forgeue another, stedfastly to trust in God, and no man to presume in his owne workes. He healeth the ten lepers, speaketh of the latter dayes, and of the ende of the worlde.

i 

| 

Chap. XVIII. 

be feruet in prayer cotinually. 

He teacheth to 
Of the pharisee and the publican. The kyng- dome of God belongeth vnto childre. Christ answereth the ruler, and promiseth rewarde vnto all soch as suffire losse for his sake and folowe him. The blynde ma is restored to his sight.

Ierusalem, and wepeth ouer it. 

Chap. XX. 

They axe Christone questyon, and lie axeth them another. The parable of the vynyarde. Of tribute to be geue vnto the Emperoure, q how
Christ stoppeth the mouthes of the Saducees. 

Chap. XXI. 

Christ commendeth the poore wyddow, telleth of the destruccion of Ierusalem, of false teachers, of the tokes and troubles for to come, of the ende of the worlde, and of his owne commynge.

Chap. XXII 

Christ is betrayed, they eate the easter lambe. 
The institucion of the sacramet. They stryue who shalbe greatest, he reproueth them: He prayeth thre tymes vpon the mount. They take him and bringe him to the hye prestes house: Peter denyeth him thryse, and they bringe him before the councell.

Chap. XXIII. 

lesus is brought before Pilate and Herode. The weme take lamétacion for him. He prayeth for his enemies, forgeueth the synner vpon his right hande, dyeth on the crosse, and is buried.

Chap. XXIII. 

The wemen come to the graue, Christ apeareth vnto the two disciples that go towarde Emaus, stondeth in the myddest of all his disciples, openeth their vnderstondinge in the scriptures, geueth them a charge, and ascendeth vp in to heauen.

Chap. XIX. 
Of Zacheus, and the ten seruauntes to who the ten talétes were delyuered. Christ rydeth to
| 

Thc gospel of S. Auke. 

The prologe of S. Luke. 

OR so moch as many haue taken in 

hande, to set forth y wordes of the actes that are come to passe amonge vs, like as they delyuered thé vnto vs, which from the be- gyunynge sawe them their selues, and were mynisters of the worde, I thought it good
(after that I had diligently searched out all ifrom the begynnynge) to wryte the same orderly vnto the (good Theophilus) that thou mightest knowe the certéte of y wordes, wherof thou art infourmed.

The first Chapter. 

I the tyme of Herode kynge of Iewry, 

there was a prest named Zachary of the 
* course of Abia: and his wife of the doughters of Aaron, ¢ hir name Elizabeth. They were both righteous before God, and walked in all the commaundementes and statutes of the
LORDE vnreproueably. And they had no childe, for Elizabeth was baren, and they were both well stricken 1n age. :

And it came to passe as he executed the prestes office before God whan his course jcame (acordinge to the custome of the prest- hode) it fell to his lott to burne incense. And
Ithe wente in to the temple of the LORDE, and the whole multitude of the people was without in prayer, whyle the incense was aburnynge. And the angell of the LORDE appeared vnto him, and stode on the right syde of the altare of incése. And whan
Zachary sawe him, he was abaszhed, q there came a feare vpon him.

But the angell sayde vnto him: Feare not 
Zachary, for thy prayer is herde. And thy 

3L IBIaETSHUR 

t Exo. 30, b. Heb. 9.a. 
Matt, 11. b. 

t Mala. 3.d. 
* Gen. 17, c. and 18. b. 

Iudic. 13. b. 

wife Elizabeth shal beare the a sonne, whose name thou shalt call Ihon, q thou shalt haue ioye and gladnesse: and many shal reioyce at his byrth, for he shal be greate before the
LORDE. Wyne and stronge drynke shal he not drynke. And he shalbe fylled with the holy goost, euen in his mothers wombe. And many of the children of Israel shal he turne vnto the LORDE their God. And he shal go before him in the sprete and power of t Elias, to turne the hertes of ý fathers vnto the children, and the vnfaithfull vnto the wyszdome of the righteous, to make the people ready for the LORDE.

And Zachary sayde vnto the Angel: 
^Wherby shal I knowe this? For I am olde, and my wife well stricken in age. The angell answered, and sayde vnto him: I am Gabriell that stonde before God, and am sent to speake vnto the, and to shewe the these glad tydinges.
And beholde, thon shalt be domme, and not able to speake, vn tyll the daye that this come to passe, because thou hast § not belened my wordes, which shalbe fulfylled in their season.

And the people wayted for Zachary, and marueyled, that he taried so longe in the téple. And wha he wéte out, he conde not speake vnto them. And they perceaued, that he had sene a vision in the teple. And he beckened vnto them, and remayned speach- lesse.

And it fortuned wha the tyme of his office was ont, he wente home m to his house.
And after those dayes Elizabeth his wife conceaued, and hyd hir self fyue monethes, q sayde: Thus hath $ LORDE done vnto me in y dayes, wherin he hath loked vpo me, to take awaye fro me my rebuke amoge men.

$ 4 Re. 7. a. 

‘Chap. i 

^ And in the sixte moneth was the angell 
Gabriel sent from God in to a cite of Galile, called Nazareth, vnto a virgin that was spoused vnto a man, whose name was loseph, of the house of Dauid, and the virgins name was
Mary. And the angell came in vnto her, and sayde: Hayle thou full of grace, the LORDE is with the: blessed art thou amonge wemen.

Wha she sawe him, she was abaszhed at his sayenge, and thought: What maner of salutacion is this? And the angell sayde vnto her: ^Feare not Mary, for thou hast fonde grace with God. Beholde, thou shalt coceaue in thy wóbe, q beare a sonne * q shalt call his name lesus: he shalbe greate, q shalbe called ý sonne of the Hyest. And the
LORDE God shal geue him jy seate of 
Dauid his father, q he shal be kinge ouer y house of Jacob for euert q there shalbe no ende of his kyngdome. Then sayde Mary vnto the angell: How shal this be, seinge I knowe not a ma? ‘The angell answered, « sayde vnto her: The holy goost shal come vpon the, ¢ the power of the Hyest shal ouer- shadowe the. ‘Therfore that Holy also which shalbe borne (of the) shalbe called the sonne of God. And beholde, thy cosen Elizabeth she also hath coceaued a sonne in hir olde age, q this is the sixte moneth of her, which is reported to be baren:? for with God is nothinge vnpossyble. And Mary sayde: Be- holde, here am I the handmaydé of the
LORDE: be it vnto me, as thou hast sayde. 
And the angell departed fro her. 

B| And Mary arose in those dayes, and wente 

in to the moütaynes with haist, into $y cite of Iewry, and came in to y house of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth. And it fortuned as
Elizabeth herde the salutacion of Mary, the babe sprange in hir wombe. And Elizabeth was fylled with the holy goost, q cried loude, and sayde: Blessed art thou amoge wemen, and blessed is the frute of thy wombe. And how happeneth this to me, that y mother of my LORDE commeth vnto me? Beholde, whan I herde the voyce of thy salutacion, the babe sprange in my wombe with ioye, And blessed art thou that hast beleued, for y
'thinges shalbe perfourmed, which were tolde y fro ý LORDE. And Mary sayde:

a Mat. 1. c. > Esa.7.c. Mat. 1. c. 
* Esa. 9. b. t Dan. 7. d. f Mar. 9. c. Luc. 18. c.

* Luc. 2. c. 
Mich.4.b. Heb.1.b. 
$ Terusalé. d Esa, 61. b. 

The gospell of S. Luke, 

“My soule magnifieth the LORDE. 
And my sprete reioyseth i God my Sa- uioure.

For he hath loked vpo the lowe degre of his hande mayde. Beholde, fro hence forth shal all generacions call me blessed.

For he that is Mightie, hath done greate thinges vnto me, and holy is his name.

And his merey endureth thorow out all generacions, vpon them that feare him. |

He sheweth strength with his arme, and) scatreth them that are proude in the ymagi- nacion of their hert.

*He putteth downe the mightie from the seate, and exalteth them of lowe degre.

He fylleth the hongrie with good thinges, and letteth the riche go emptye.

He remebreth mercy, and helpeth vp his seruaunt Israel.

Euen as he promysed vnto oure fathers, 
| Abraham and to his sede for euer. 

And Mary abode with her aboute thre monethes, and then returned home agayne.

And Elizabethes tyme was come, that she shulde be delyuered, q she brought forth a sonne. And hir neghbours and kynsfolkes herde, y the LORDE had shewed greate mercy vpo her, q they reioysed with her. And it fortuned vpon the eight daye,” they came to cireumcyse y childe, and called him Zachary after his father: And his mother answered, and sayde: No, but he shalbe called Jhon.
And they sayde vnto her: There is none in thy kynne, y is so called. And they made signes vnto his father, how he wolde haue him called. And he axed for wrytinge tables, wrote q sayde: His name is Ihon. And they marueyled all. And immediatly was his mouth and his toge opened, and he spake, q praysed
God. And there came a feare vpon all their neghbours. And all this acte was noysed abrode thorow out all the hill countre of
Iewry: And all they y herde therof, toke it to hert, and sayde: What maner of man wil this childe be? For the hande of the LORDE was with him.

And Zachary his father was fylled with the holy goost, and prophecied, and sayde :
Blessed be ý LORDE God of Israel, for he hath vysited and redemed his people.
Eccli. 10. c. f Gen. 

* 1 Reg. 2. a. || Gen. 22. c. 

17. b, Levi, 12. a. 

Fo. Irt. 

35 

fo. lij. 

c 20 e mess ani at al 
| And hath set vp an * horne of saluacion in 

the house of his seruaunt Dauid. 

Euen as he promysed afore tyme, by the mouth of his holy prophetes. f

That he wolde delyuer vs fro oure enemies, 
(x from y hande of all soch as hate vs. 
| And y he wolde shewe mercy vnto oure fathers, q thynke vpó his t holy couenaüt.

Euen the ooth y he sware vnto oure father 
Abraham, for to geue vs. 

| t That we delyuered out of ¥ hāde of oure 

| enemies, might serue him without feare all the dayes of oure life, in soch holynes and

| |righteousnes as is accepte before him. 

| And thou ehilde shalt be called a prophet of the Hyest: for thou shalt go before y
LORDE, to prepare his wayes. 

And to geue knowlege of saluacion vnto his people, for the remyssion of their synnes.

Thorow the tender mercy of oure God, wherby the daye sprynge from an hye hath vysited vs.

'That he might geue light vnto them y syt in dareknesse and shadowe of death, and to gyde oure fete in to the waye of peace.

And the childe grew, and waxed stronge in sprete, and was in the wyldernes, tyll the tyme that he shulde shewe him self vnto the people of Israel.

| The ij. Chapter. 
A|YT fortuned at the same tyme, that there l wéte out a comaundement fro Augustus the Emperoure, that the whole worlde shulde be taxed. And this taxynge was the first that was executed, whan Syrenius was leftenaunt in Siria. And they wente all, euery one to his owne cite to be taxed. Then loseph gat him vp also fro Galile, out of the cite of
Nazareth, in to Iewry, to y cite of Dauid,§ which is called Bethleem, (Deep he was of
|ŷ house and lynage of Dauid) that he might e taxed with Mary his spoused wife, which
|was with childe. 
“And it fortuned whyle they were there, y tyme was come, that she shulde be dated
And she brought forth hir first begotté sonne, q wrapped him in swadlinge clothes, and layed him in a maunger: for they had els no rowme in the ynne.
B, And there were in y same region shep- 

* Psal, 151.b. t Gen. 22, c. 

1 1 Esa. 38. d. Heb. 9. c. 
€ 1 Reg. 15. 16. a. 20. b. 

«Mat. 1. c. ^ Gen. 17. b. 

Cbr qospell of 3. Luke, 

€ Leuit.12.b. 1 Reg. 1.d. T Exo. 13. a. 
Num. 8. c. 

Chap. fj. herdes in the felde by the foldes, and watchinge their flocke by night. And beholde, y angell ofthe LORDE stode by the, and y brightnes of the LORDE shone rounde aboute them, and they were sore afrayed. And the angell sayde vnto them: Be not afrayed. Beholde,
I brynge you tydiges of greate ioye, which shall happen vnto all people: for vnto you this daye is borne y Sauioure, eue Christ
LORDE, in the cite of Dauid. And take this for a token: Ye shal fynde the babe swadled, and layed in a maunger. And straight waye there was by the angell a multitude of hea- uenly hoostes, which praysed God, and sayde:
Glory be vnto God an hye, q peace vpon earth, and vnto men a good wyll.

And it fortuned whà the angels were gone from the in to heaue, the shepherdes sayde one to another: let vs go now euen vnto
Bethleem, and se this thinge that is happened, which $ LORDE hath shewed vnto vs. And they came with haist, œ founde both Mary and
Ioseph, q the babe layed in y maunger. And whan they had sene it, they published abrode the sayenge, y was tolde the of this childe.
And all they that herde it, wondred at the wordes, which the shepherdes had tolde them.
But Mary kepte all these sayenges, and pondred them in hir hert. And the shepherdes returned, praysinge and laudinge God, for all that they had herde and sene, euen as it was tolde them.

* And whan eight dayes were ended, that the childe shulde be cireumcysed, his name was called Iesus, which was named of y angell, before he was conceaued in his mothers wombe.

And whà the dayes of their purificacion 
*after the lawe of Moses, were come, they brought him to Ierusalé, that they might present him vnto the LORDE (As it is wrytten in the lawe of the LORDE:* Euery machilde that first openeth the Matrix, shalbe called holy vnto ý LORDE) and that they might geue the offerynge, as it is wrytte in the lawe of the LORDE (namely) a payre of turtle doues, or two yonge pigeons.

And beholde, there was a man (at Ierusalé) whose name was Symeon, and the same mà was iust, and feared God, and loged for the consolacion of Israel, and the holy goost was

|| Luc. 1. c. 

Chap, itj. in him. And an answere was geue him of the holy goost, that he shulde not se death, before he had sene ¥ LORDES Christ. And he came by inspiracion into the téple.

And whan the elders brought the childe 
Iesus in to the temple, to do for him after ý custome of the * lawe, then toke he him vp in his armes, and praysed God, and sayde:

LORDE, now lettest thou thy seruant departe in peace, acordinge to thy promesse.

For myne eyes haue sene thy Sauioure, who thou hast prepared before all people.

tA light for the lightenynge of the Heythe, q for the prayse of thy people of Israel.

And his father and mother marueyled at 

the thinges that were spoké of him. And 
Symeon blessed them, and sayde vnto Mary his mother: Beholde, this (childe) shalbe set to a fall, and to an vprysinge agayne of many in Israel, and for a token, which shalbe spoke agaynst. And the swerde shal pearse thy soule, that the thoughtes of many hertes maye be opened.
F| And there was a prophetisse, one Anna, the doughter of Phanuel of the trybe of Aser, which was of a greate age, and had lyued seuen yeares with hir huszbade from hir virginite, a had now bene a wedowe aboute foure score q foure yeares, which came neuer fro the téple, seruynge God with fastynge and prayenge, daye and night: the same came forth also the same houre, and praysed the LORDE, and spake of him vnto all that loked for the redempcion at Jerusalem.

And whan they had perfourmed all acord- inge to the lawe of the LORDE, they returned i to Galile, to their owne cite
Nazareth. And the childe grewe, and wexed stronge in sprete, full of wyszdome, q the grace of God was with him.

And his elders wente to lerusalem euery yeare at the feast of Easter. And whan he was twolue yeare olde, they wente vp to lerusalem,; after the custome of the feast.
And whan they had fulfilled the dayes, and were gone home agayue, the childe Iesus abode styll at lerusalem. And his elders knewe it not, but thought he had bene in the company, and they came a dayes iourney, and sought hi amoge their kynszfolkes q

* Leui. 12. b. f Esa. 49. b. Act. 13.e. t Exo. 
23. b. and 34. c. 2 Leuit. 23. a. t Matt. 7. c. 
Marc. 1. b. Luc. 4. d. § Toba. 2. a. || Luc. 9. c. 

Che qosprll of S. Luke. 

acquataunce. And wha they founde him not, they wéte agayne to lerusale, and sought him.

founde him in the temple, syttinge amonge the teachers, hearynge thé, and opposynge them. ^And allthey that herde him, wodred at his vnderstondynge and answeres. And whan they sawe him, they were astonnyed.
And his mother sayde vnto him: My sonne, why hast thou done this vnto vs? Beholde, thy father and I haue sought the sorowynge.
Aud he sayde vnto them: $ What is it, that ye haue sought me? Wyst ye not, y I must go aboute my fathers busynes? And they
|| vnderstode not the sayenge y he spake vnto them. And he wente downe with the, and came to Nazareth, and was obediét vnto them.
And his mother kepte all these wordes in hir hert. And Iesus increased in wyszdome, age and fauoure with God and men.

The iij. Chapter. 

Tiberius the Emperoure, wha Pontius 
Pilate was leftenaut in Iewry f and Herode one of the foure princes in Galile, and his brother Philippe one of the foure prynces in
Iturea, q in the coastes of Traconites, and 
Lysanias one of the foure princes of Abilene, when Hannas and Caiphas were hye prestes, thé came y worde of God vnto Ihon the sonne of Zachary in the wyldernes. And he came in to all y coastes aboute Iordan, and preached the baptyme of repétaunce for the remyssion of synnes. As it is wrytté in y boke of y sayenges of Esaye the prophet, which sayeth: The voyce of a cryer in the wyldernes:^ prepare the waye ofthe LORDE, and make his pathes straight. Euery valley shalbe fylled, and euery mountayne q hyll shalbe brought lowe. And what so is croked, shalbe made straight: and what rough is, shalbe made smooth, and all flesh shal se the
Sauioure of God. 

Then sayde he vnto the people, y wente out to be baptysed of him :* Ye generacion of vipers,- who hath certified you, that ye shal escape y wrath to come? Take hede, brynge forth due frutes of repétaüce, a begynne not

¢ Mat, 3.a. Marc. 1. a. 
* Mat. 3. a. 

and 18. d. 
Ioha. 1. b. 

{T Luc. 23. a. 
4 Esa. 40. a. 

Fo. Irii, 

And it fortuned after thre dayes, y they/G 

r the fiftenth yeare of the raigne ofja 

35 

So. Irth. to saye: We haue Abraha to oure father. For
Isaye vnto you: God is able of these stones to rayse vp children vnto Abraham. The axe is put vnto the tre allready:* so that euery tre which bryngeth not forth good frute, shalbe hewen downe, and cast in to the fyre. And the people axed him, and sayde: * What shal we do then? He answered, q sayde vnto thé:
He that hath two coates, let him parte with him y hath none: and he that hath meate, let him do likewyse.

The publicans came also, to be baptysed and sayde vnto him: Master, what shal we do? He sayde vnto them: Requyre nomore, then is appoynted you. Then E axed him likewyse, and sayde: What shal we do then? And he sayde vnto the: Do no man violence ner wronge, and be content with youre wages.

But whan the people were in a doute, q thought all in their hertes, whether he were
Christ, Ihon answered, and sayde vnto thé all: ^I baptyse you with water, but after me there cometh one stronger the I, whose shue lachet I am not worthy to lowse: the shal baptyse you with the holy goost and with fyre.
Whose fanne is in his hande, and he shal pourge his floore, and shal “gather y wheate in to his barne, and shal burne the chatfe with vnquencheable fyre. And many other thynges more exorted he, q preached vnto the people.

4 But Herode the Tetrarcha (wha he was rebuked of him because of Herodias his bro- thers wife, and for all the euels that Herode dyd) besydes all this he layed Iho in preson.

“And it fortuned whan all the people re- ceaued baptyme, and whan lesus also was baptysed and frayed, that heauen opened, and the holy goost came downe in a bodely shappe like a doue vpon him. And out of heauen there came a voyce, which sayde:
Thou art my deare sonne, in who I delyte. 

And lesus was aboute thirtie yeares whan he beganne. tAnd he. was taken for the sonne of Ioseph, which was the sonne of Eh, which was the sonne of Mathat.

Which was the sonne of Leui. 
Which was the sonne of Melchi. 
Which was the sonne of Ianna. 
Which was the sonne of Ioseph. 
Which was the sonne of Mathathias. 

a Mat. 3. a. and 7. b, 

Act; 2. d. 
| Mare, 1.2. Iohà. 1. c. 

+ Ezec, 36. d. e. 

6 Mat. 3. b. 
* Mat. 3. b. 

The gospell of 3. Luke. 

Chap. th. 
Which was the sonne of Amos. 
Which was the sonne of Nahum. 
Which was the sonne of Eszli. 
Which was the sonne of Nange. 
Which was the sonne of Maath. 
Which was the sonne of Mathathias. 
Which was the sonne of Simei. 
Which was the sonne of Ioseph. 
Which was the sonne of Iuda. 
Which was the sonne of Iohanna. 
Which was the sonne of Resia. 
Which was the sonne of Zorobabel. 
Which was the sonne of Salathiel. 
Which was the sonne of Neri. 
Which was the sonne of Melchi. 
Which was the sonne of Abdi. 
Which was the sonne of Cosam. 
Which was the sonne of Elmadam. 
Which was the sonne of Her. 
Which was the sonne of Ieso. 
Which was the sonne of Eliezer. 
Which was the sonne of Iorem. 
Which was the sonne of Mattha. 
Which was the sonne of Leui. 
Which was the sonne of Simeon 
Which was the sonne of Iuda. 
Which was the sonne of Ioseph. 
Which was the sonne of Ionam. 
Which was the sonne of Eliachim. 
Which was the sonne of Melca. 
Which was the sonne of Menam. 
Which was the sonne of Mathathan. 
Which was the sonne of Nathan. 
Which was the sonne of Dauid. 
Which was the sonne of Iesse. 
Which was the sonne of Obed. 
Which was the sonne of Boos. 
Which was the sonne of Salmon. 
Which was the sonne of Naasson. 
Which was the sonne of Aminadab 
Which was the sonne of Aram. 
Which was the sonne of Esrom. 
Which was the sonne of Phares. 
Which was the sonne of Iuda. 
Which was the sonne of Iacob. 
Which was the sonne of Isaac. 
Which was the sonne of Abraham. 
Which was the sonne of Thara. 
Which was the sonne of Nahor. 
Which was the sonne of Serug. 
Which was the sonne of Regu. 

d Mat. 14. a. e Mat. 3. b. Marc. 1. a. i Mat. 13.d. Marc.6.2. fF Luc. t.c.

Toba. 1. d. 
Toha. 1. e. 

— 
— aa eee 5s 

Chap. (itj. 

Which was the sonne of Peleg. 
Which was the sonne of Eber. 
Which was the sonne of Salah. 
Which was the sonne of Caynan. 
Which was the sonne of Arphachsad. 
Which was the sonne of Sem. 
Which was the sonne of Noe. 

Which was the sonne of Lamech. 
Which was the sonne of Mathusalah. 
Which was the sonne of Henoch. 
Which was the sonne of Jared. 
Which was the sonne of Mahaleel. 
Which was the sonne of Kenan 
Which was the sonne of Enos. 
Which was the sonne of Seth. 
Which was the sonne of Adam. 
Which was the sonne of God. 

The iiij. Chapter. 
Ee full of the holy goost, came agayne 

from Iordane," and was led of ¥ sprete in to wyldernes, q fourty dayes loge was he tcpted of y deuell. *And in those dayes ate he nothinge. And whan they were ended, he hongred afterwarde. And the deuell sayde vnto him: Yfthou be ¥ sonne of God, co- maunde this stone, y it be bred. And Iesus answered q sayde vnto hi: It is wrytten:
* Man shal not lyue by bred onely, but by euery worde of God. And y deuell toke him vp in to an hye moñtayne, and shewed him all the kyagdomes of y whole worlde in y twinckelinge of an eye, q sayde vnto him:
All this power wil I geue vnto the, and the glory therof, for it is geué ouer vnto me, and
I geue it, to whom I wil. Yf thou now wilt worshippe me, they shal all be thine. Jesus answered him, and sayde: Auoyde fro me thou Satan. It is wrytten: ê Thou shalt wor- shippe the LORDE thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue.

And he caried him to lerusalem, and set him vpon a pynnacle of the temple, and sayde vuto him: Yf thou be y sonne of God, cast thy self downe from hence. For it is wrytté:
He shal geue his angels charge ouer the, to kepe the, and with their handes they shal holde the vp, that thou dashe not thy fote agaynst a stone. And lesus answered, and

* Exo.34.d. 3 Re. 19. b. 
* Psal. 90. b. 4 Deut. 6. c. f Mat. 13.g. Marc. 6.a.

a Mat. 4.a. Marc. 1. b. t Deut. 8b. ^ Deut. 6. c. i Mat. 4. b. Marc. 1. c.

Che gospell of S. Luke. 3 

sayde vnto him: It is sayde: ? Thou shalt not tempte the LORDE thy God. And whan y deuel! had ended all the temptacions, he de- parted from him for a season.

And *lesus came agayne in the power of the sprete into Galile. And the fame of him was noysed thorow out all y region rounde aboute. And he taught in their synagoges, and was commended of euery man.

And he came vnto Nazareth where he was noursed,’ and as his custome was, he wéte in to the synagoge vpon y Sabbath, and stode vp for to rede. ‘Then was there delyuered him the tboke of $ prophet Esay. And whan he had turned ouer the boke, he founde the place where it is wrytten: The sprete of the LORDE is with me,’ because he hath anoynted me: to preach the Gospell vnto y poore hath he sent me: to heale the broken harted: to preach delyueraüce to the captyue, and sight to the blynde: and frely to set at liberty them that are brused: and to preach the acceptable yeare of the LORDE.

And whan he had closed the boke, he gaue it agayne to y inynister, q sat him downe.
And the eyes of all that were in the synagoge, were fastened on him. And he begāne to saye vnto them: This daye is this scripture fulfilled in youre eares. $ And they all gaue him wytnesse, and wodred at the gracious wordes, which proceaded out of his mouth, and they saide; Is not this Iosephs sonne ?^

And he sayde vnto them: Doutles ye wyl saye vnto me this prouerbe: Phisician, heale thyself. For how greate thinges haue we herde done at Capernai? Do the same here also in thine owne countre. But he saide:
Verely I saye vnto you: There is no prophet accepted in his owne countre.’ Neuertheles of a trueth I saye vnto you: |l There were many wedowes in Israel in y tyme of Elias, wha the heaué was shut thre yeares and sixe monethes, and whan there was a greate derth in all the lande: ato none of thé was Elias sent, but onely vnto Sarepta of the Sydonyans to a wedowe. And many lepers were there in Israel in the tyme of Eliseus ý prophet, and none of thé was clensed, saue onely Naa- man of Syria.

And as many as were in the synagoge,|39 

t 2 Esd.8.b. & Esa. 61. a. § Mat. 13. g. Mare. 6. a. 
Iohà.6.e. , ‘Mat. 13. ge Marc. 6. a. Ioha. 4. e. 
|) 3 Re. 17. a. T 4 Reg. 5. c. 

Fo. Irb.) 

€ 

————M——— — 

Fo. Irbi. 

And they rose vp, and thrust him out of the lcite; and led him vp to the edge of the hyll whervpo their cite was buylded, that they
Bo cast him downe headlynge. But he wente his waye euen thorow the myddest of them," and camo to Capernaum a cite of
Galile, and taught thé vpo the Sabbathes. 
And they wondred at his doctryne, *for his 
|preachinge was with power. 

And in the Synagoge there was a man 

ossessed with a foule deuell, « he cryed oude, and sayde: Let me alone, what haue we to do with the thou Iesus of Nazareth ?^
Art thou come to destroye vs? I knowe y who thou art, euen the Holy of God. And
Iesus rebuked him and sayde: holde thy tüge, and departe out of him. And the deuell threw hi in the myddest amonge them, and departed from him, and dyd him no harme.
And there came a feare ouer thé all, and they spake amonge them selues, and sayde: What maner of thinge is this? He commaundeth the foule spretes with auctorite and power, and they departe out. And y fame of him was noysed thorow out all the E a of y countre rounde aboute.

And he rose vp out of the synagoge,” and came in to Symons house. And Symés mo- ther in lawe was take with a greate feuer,
& they prayde him for her. And he wéte vnto her, q comaunded the feuer. And it left her, q imediatly she rose vp, a mynistred

|vnto the. 

And whau the Sonne was gone downe all they that had sicke of dyuerse “diseases, brought thé vnto him. And he layed his hades vpon euery one of the, q made thc whole. “The deuels also departed out of)
(many, criége and sayenge: Thou art Christ the sonne of God. And he rebuked the, q suffred them not to speake: for they knewe

The gospril of 3. Luke, 

lwha they herde y, were fylled with wrath.| | 

that he was Christ. But wha it was daye, he wéte out in to a deserte place. And the people sought hi, and came vnto him, q kepte him, y he shulde not departe fro the. But he sayde vnto thé: I must preach the Gospell of y kyngdome of God to other cities also: for there to am I sent. And he preached in the synagoges of Galile.

* Mat. 4. b. Marc. t. b. Ioba. 2. b. * Mat. 7. c. 
Luc. 2. g. > Marc. 1. c. * Mat. 8. b. Marc. 1.c 
4 Mat. 8. b. Marc. 1. c. * Marc. 3.b. — / Mat. 4. c 

The b. Chapter. 

T came to passe, y the people /preassed | à. 

vpon him to heare the worde of God, and he stode by the lake of Genazereth, and sawe two shippes stode by $ lake syde, but fishers were gone out of the, and had waszhed their nettes. ‘Then wente he in to one of the shippes, which was Symons, and prayed him, y he wolde thrust out a litle fro the londe.
And he sat him downe, and taught the people out of y shippe.

And whan he had left of talkynge, he sayde vnto Symon: Launch out in to the depe q let slyppe youre nettes, to make a draught. And
Symon answered and sayde vnto him: Master, we haue laboured all y night, and taken nothinge. But vpo thy worde, I wil lowse forth the nett. they toke a greate multitude of fiszhes, q their net brake. their felowes which were in y other shippe, y they shulde come, q helpe the. And they came, q fylled both the shippes full, so y they soncke. Whan Symon Peter sawe y, i downe at lesus knees, q sayde : LORDE, go fro me, for I am a synfull man: For he was astonnyed and all that were with him, at this draught of fishes which they toke, and so were
Tames and Ihon also the sonnes of Zebede, which were Symons companyons. And lesus sayde vnto Symo: Feare not, for fro hence forth thou shalt take men. And they brought the *shippes to londe, and left all, and folowed him.

^ And it fortuned as he was in a cite, be-|qf 

holde, there was a man full of leprosy. Wha he sawe Iesus, he fell vpo his face, a besought him, and sayde: LORDE, yf thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane. And he stretched out his hade, and touched him, and sayde : I wil, be thou cleane. And immediatly the lepros

departed from him. And he charged hin, y he shulde tell no mà, but go thy waye (sayde he) and shewe thy self vnto y prest, and offre for thy clensynge,t as Moses comaunded, for a witnesse vnto thé. But y fame of hi wéte out farther abrode, q there came moch people together, to heare him, q to be healed by hi fro their sicknesses.

5 Mat. 4. c. ^ Mat. 8.a. Mare. 1. d. 

t Leui. 14. a. 

Marc. 1. b. 

Chap. b. 

And wha they had so done, 

And they made sygnes to, 

e fell B 

And he departe 

| 
| 
| 
| 

Chap. bí. 

in to the wyldernesses, q gaue him self toj prayer.

And it fortuned vpó a daye, ý he taught, and there sat y Pharises and serybes, which were ^come out of all the townes of Galile, and Iewry, and fro Ierusale, and the power of the LORDE wete fro him, « healed euery man. And beholde, certayne men brought vpon a bed, a man y had y palsye, and they sought how they might brynge him in, and laye him before him. And whan they coude not fynde by what waye they might briuge him in (for ¥ people) they clymmed vp to y toppe of the house, q let him downe thorow the tylinge with the bed, amoge thé before
Iesus. And whan he sawe their faith, he sayde vnto hi: Man, thy synnes are forgeué y. And the serybes and pharyses begane to thynke, q saide: What is he this, y speaketh blasphemy. *Who ca forgeue synnes, but onely God?

Neuertheles wha Jesus perceaued their thoughtes, he answered, and saide vnto thé:
^ What thynke ye in youre hertes? Whether is easier to saye: Thy synnes are forgeué y,
Or to saye: Aryse, and walke? But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of ma hath power to forgeue synnes vpon earth, he sayde vnto ¥ sicke of the palsie: I saye vnto y: Aryse, take vp thy bed, and go home. And imme- diatly he rose vp before thé, q toke vp the bed y he had lyen vpé, and wéte home, and praysed God.: And they were all astonnyed, and gaue God y prayse, and were fylled with feare, and sayde: We haue sene maruelous thynges to daye.

B| And afterwarde he wéte out, and sawe a 

publican named Leui, syttinge at y receate of custome, q he sayde vnto him: ‘Folowe me. And he left all, rose vp, « folowed him.
And Leui made hi a greate feast 1 his house. 
And many publicans ¢ other sat with hi at ¥ table. And the scrybes and Pharyses mur- mured agaynst his disciples, q saide: Wherfore do ye eate q drynke with publicds q synners?
? And Jesus answered, q sayde vnto the: The whole nede not y phisician, but they y are sicke. J am not come to call y righteous, but sinners to repentauce."

But they sayde vnto him: Wherfore fast 

* Mat. 9. a. Marc. 2. a. * Eaa, 43. d. and 44. d, 
^ Mat. 9. a. Marc, 2. a. Tohàa. 5. a. * Mat. 9. a. 
Marc. 2. b. Luc. 15. a. aiue. 7. e, and 15. a. 

The gospell of S. Luke. 

y disciples of [ho so of, a praye so moch, q the disciples of the Pharises likewyse, but thy disciples eate and drynke? And he sayde vnto them: Can ye make the weddynge childré fast, so lóge as the brydegrome is with thé? But the tyme wil come that the bryde- grome shalbe také fro thé, then shal they fast.

And he sayde vnto them a symilitude : 
No man putteth a pece of new cloth in to an olde garment: for els he renteth the new, and the pece of the new agreeth not with the olde. And no man putteth new wyne in to olde vessels, for els y new wyne barsteth the vessels, and runneth out it self, and the vessels perishe. But new wyne must be put in to new vessels, and so are they both preserued.
And there is no man that drynketh the olde, and wolde straight waye haue the new, for he sayeth: the olde is pleasaunter.

The bi. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned vpon an after pryncipall 
M Sabbath,’ that he wente thorow the corne felde, q his disciples plucked the eares of corne, and ate, and rubbed thé with their hades. But certayne of the Pharises sayde vnto them: Wherfore do ye that, which is not laufull to do vpon the Sabbath? And Iesus auswered, and sayde vnto the: * Haue ye not red what Dauid dyd, whà he was hongrie, and they that were with him, how he wente in to the house of God, and toke the tshewbred, and ate, and gaue also vnto them that were with him, which was laufull for no man to eate, but for the prestes onely? And he sayde vnto them: “The sonne of man is
LORDE euen ouer the Sabbath. 

It came to passe vpo another Sabbath, that he wéte in to the synagoge, and taught: and there was à man, whose right hande was wythred. But y serybes and Pharises marked him, whether he wolde heale vpon the Sab- bath, that they might fynde an occasion agaynst him. Neuertheles he perceaued their thoughtes, and sayde vnto the ma with the wythred hande: Aryse, and steppe forth here. And he arose, and stepped forth.
‘Then sayde Iesus vnto thé: I wil axe you a question: What is it laufull to do vpo the
Sabbath? good, or euell? to saue life, or to 

Leo rir ee J Mat. 12. a. 
Carsten t Exo. 25. c. 

Marc. 2. c. € 1 Reg. 

^ Mat. 12. b. Marc. 3. a. 

Fo. Irbi. 

a 

| ffo. Ibi. destroye it? And he behelde thé all rounde aboute, and sayde vnto the ma: Stretch out thine hande. And he dyd so. Then was his hande restored him to right, euen as whole as the other. But they were fylled full of mad- nes, and commoned together, what they wolde do to him.

* And it fortuned at the same tyme, that he wente out in to a mountayne to praye, and continued all night in prayer to God.* And whà it was daye, he called his disciples, and chose twolue of them, whom he called also apostles. Symon, whom he named Peter, and Andrew his brother, lames and Ihon,
Phylippe and Bartylmew, Mathew and Tho- mas, lames the sonne of Alpheus, Symon called Zelotes, Iudas the sonne of Iames, and
Iudas Iscarioth, which was the traytoure. 

^And he wente downe with them, and stode vpou a playne in the felde, and the company of his disciples, and a greate multi- tude of people, from all Iewry, and Ierusale, and from Tyre and Sydon by the see coast, which were come to heare him, and to be healed of their diseases, and they that were vexed with foule spretes, were healed. And all the people sought to touch him, for there wente vertue fro him, and healed the all.

And he lift vp his eyes vpo his disciples, and sayde: ‘Blessed are ye poore, for yours is the kyngdome of God. Blessed are ye that honger here, for ye shalbe satisfied. Blessed are ye y wepe here, for ye shal laugh. Blessed are ye, whan men hate you, and put you out of their copanyes, and reuyle you, and cast out youre name as an euell thinge, for the sonne of mans sake. Reioyse ye then, and be glad: for beholde, youre rewarde is greate in heauen. ^Euen thus dyd their fathers vnto the prophetes also.

But wo vnto you riche, for ye haue youre cosolacion allready. Wo vnto you that are full, for ye shal honger. Wo vnto you that laugh here, for ye shal wepe and wayle. Wo vnto you whan euery man prayseth you,
Euen so dyd their fathers vnto the false pro- phetes also.

But I saye vnto you that heare: Loue youre enemies: do good vnto them that hate you: blesse them that curse you: praye for

* Mat. 14. c. Marc. 6.e. * Mat. 10, a. Marc.3. b. and 6. a. Luc. 9.a. Act. 1. b. ^ Mat. 4. c. Marc. 3.a.
* Mat. 5, a. 4 Amos 6. a. t Tob. 4. c. Eccli. 31. b. 

Mat. 7. a. * Mat, 5. c. 

Cbr qospell of 3». Luke, 

J Mat. 7. a. and 1%. c. 

them that wrongfully trouble you. And o | so smyteth the on the one cheke, offre him ý other also. And who so taketh awaye thy cloake, forbyd him not thy cote also. Who so euer axeth of the, geue him: and who so! taketh awaye thyne, axe it not agayne. tAnd

as ye wolde that men shulde do vnto you, 
“euen so do ye vnto them likewyse. 

And yf ye loue them that loue you, what|zy thake haue ye therfore? For synners also loue their louers. And yf ye do good for youre good doers, what thanke haue ye therfore?
For synners also do euen the same. And yf ye lende vnto them, of who ye hope to re- ceaue, what thake haue ye ther fore? For synners also lende vnto synners, that they maye receaue as moch agayne. But rather loue ye youre enemies, do good, and lende, lokynge for nothinge therof agayne: so shal youre rewarde be greate, and ye shalbe the children of the Hyest, for he is kynde, euen to the vnthankfull and to the euell.

Be ye therfore mercifull,/ as youre father also is mercifull. Iudge not, and ye shal not be iudged. Condépne not, and ye shal not be condempned. Forgeue, and ye shal be forgeuen. +Geue, and to you shalbe geue.
A good measure, pressed downe, shaken to- gether, q rimynge ouer, shal me geue in to youre bosome. “For with what measure ye meete, with the same shal it be measured to you agayne.

And he sayde a symilitude vnto the: ^Can the blynde shewe the waye to y blynde? Do they not both thé fall in to the dyche? The disciple is not aboue his master. But whoso- euer is perfecte, ¥ same shalbe as his master.
But why seist thou a moote 1 thy brothers eye, and considrest not the beame, that is in thine awne eye? Or how canst thou saye vnto thy brother: holde styll brother, I wil plucke y moate out of thyne eye,‘ and thou thy self seist not ý beame in thine awne eye?
Thou ypoeryte, on cast the beame out of thine awne eye, and thé shalt thou se clearly to pull the moote out of thy brothers eye.

For it is no good tre, ^y bryngeth forth |3z euell frute: and no euell tre y bringeth forth good frute. Euery tre is knowne by his frute.
For mé gather not fygges of thornes, ner 

^ Mat. 15. b. 
! Mat. 7. b. 

1 Pro. 11. c. £Mat.7.a. Marc. 4.c. 
* Mat. 10. c... Ioha. 13. b. * Mat. 7. 8. and 12. d.

The gospel! of &. Luke. Fo. lrir. 

came home agayne, they founde the seruaŭt| - that was sicke, whole.
And it fortuned afterwarde, that he wóte|13 

Chap. bij. grapes of buszhes. A good ma out of y good treasure of his hert, bryngeth forth y which

is good: and an euell ma out of the euell treasure of his hert, bryngeth forth that which is euell For of the abundaunce of the hert, the mouth speaketh.

“But why call ye me LORDE LORDE, q do not that I saye vnto you? * Who so euer commeth vnto me, and heareth my wordes and doth thé, I wil shewe you to whom he is lyke. He is like vnto a man which buylded an house, and digged depe, and layed y foun- dacion vpon a rocke. Whan the waters came, the floudes bett vpon that house, and coulde not moue it: for it was groiided vpo ¥ rocke.
But he that heareth and doth not, is like vnto a man that buylded his house vpo the earth withont foundacion, and the streames bett vpo it, and it fell immediatly, and greate was the fall of that house.

The bij. Chapter. 
HAN he had ended his talkynge vnto 

the people,’ he wente in to Caper- naum: and a captaynes sernaunt laye deed sicke, whom he loued. Wha he herde of lesus, he sent the elders of the Iewes vnto him, and prayed him, that he wolde come, and make his seruaunt whole. But wha they came to Iesus, they besought him instantly, q sayde: He is worthy y thou shuldest shewe this for him, for he loueth oure people, q hath buylded vs $ synagoge. And lesus wente with them.

Now whan they were not farre from y house, y captaine sent frédes vnto hi, saiége vnto him: Oh LORDE, trouble not thy self,
I am not worthy, y thou shuldest enter vnder my rofe, and therfore I thought not my self worthy to come to y: but speake y worde, q my sernaütshalbe whole. For I my self also am a mà, subiecte to the hygher auctorite, « haue soudyers vnder me. And I saye vnto one: Go, q he goeth. And to another:
Come, and he cometh. And to my seruait: 
Do this, x he doeth it. Whan Iesus herde y, he marueyled at hi, ¢ turned him abonte, « sayde vnto ¥ people y folowed hi: I saye vnto you: So greate faith haue I not founde, no not in Israel. And wha they that were sent,

* Mal, 1. a. 
Iaco. 1. c. 

Mat. 7. b. and 25. a. 
^ Mat. 8.a, Tohà. 4. f. 

* Mat. 7. c. 
1 3 Re. 17. c. 

in to a cite called Naim, and many of his disciples wente with him, and moch people.
Whan he came nye to the gate of the cite, beholde, there was caried out one deed, which was the onely sonne of his mother, and she was a wyddowe, and moch people of the cite wente with her. And whan the LORDE sawe her, he had cdpassion on her, and sayde vnto her: Wepe not. And he came nye, and touched the Coffyn. And they that bare him, stode styll. And he sayde: Yonge man, I saye vnto the: Aryse. And tthe deed sat vp, and beganne to speake. And he dely- uered him vnto his mother. And there came a feare on them all, and they praysed God, and sayde: tA greate prophet is rysen amonge vs, and God hath vysited his people. And this fame of him was noysed in all lewry, and in all y regions that laye rounde aboute.

And the disciples of Ihō shewed him of all these thinges. And Ihon called vnto him two of his disciples, and sent thé vnto lesus sayenge: Art thou he that shal come, or shal we loke for another? Whan the men came to him, they sayde: Ihon y baptist hath sent vs vnto the, sayenge: Art thou he that shal come, or shal we loke for another?

At the same houre healed he many from sicknesses q plages, and fro euell spretes, and vnto many that were blynde, he gane sight.
And lesus answered, q sayde vnto the: Go youre waye, shewe Ihon, what ye haue sene q herde. “The blynde se, the halt go, the lepers are clensed, the deaf heare, the deed aryse, $ the Gospell is preached vnto y poore, and blessed is he, that is not offended at me.

?Whan the messaungers of [ho were de- parted, lesus begane to speake vnto y people cócernyunge Iho: What are ye gone ont for to se in y wyldernesse? Wolde ye se a rede, that is shaké with the wynde? Or what are ye gone out for to se? Wolde ye sea mà clothed in soft rayment? Beholde, they that are gorgiously arayed, q lyue delycately, are in kynges courtes. Or what are ye gone out for tose? Wolde ye se a prophet? Yee I saye vnto you: one that is more thé a prophet.

ÀiRe.4.d. Act. 9. f. and 20. b. 
* Esa. 35. a. § Esa. 61. a. 

138 

1 Iobà. 4. c. and 6. b. d Mat. 11. a.

Fo. trv. 
This is he, of whom it is wrytten: ^ Beholde, 
I sende my messaunger before thy face, which shal prepare thy waye before the. For I saye vnto you: Amonge thé y are borne of wemé, there is no greater prophet thé Thon the baptist. Notwith stondynge he that is lesse in the kyngdome of God, is greater then he. i

And all the people that herde him, and $ publicans, iustified God, and were baptysed with the baptyme of Ihon. But the Pharises and serybes despysed y councell of God against thé selues, q were not baptised of hi.

But the LORDE saide: Where vnto shal 
I licken the men of this generacion?’ And whom are they like? They are like vnto childré which syt in the market, and erye one to another, and saye: We haue pyped vnto you, and ye haue not daunsed: we haue mourned vnto you, q ye haue not wepte.
For Ihon ¥ baptist came, and *ate no bred, and drake no wyne, and ye saye: he hath deuell. The sonne of man is come, eatet and drynketh, q ye saye: This man is a glutton and a wyne bebber, a frende of pub- licans and synners. And wyszdome is iustified of all hir children.

And one of the Pharises desyred him, y he wolde eate with him. And he wente in to the Pharises house, and sat him downe at y table. tAnd beholde, there was in the cite a woma, which was a synner. Whé she knewe that lesus sat at the table in the Pharises house, she brought a boxe with oyntment, q stode behynde at his fete, and wepte, and
| beganne to water his fete with teares, and to 
|drye thé with the hayres of hir heade, and kyssed his fete, ¢ anoynted thé with oyntmét.

But whan the Pharise which had called him sawe that, he spake within himself,’ and sayde: Yf this mà were a prophet, he wolde knowe who, q what maner of woman this is that toucheth him, for she is a synner. And
| Iesus answered, and saide vnto him: Simo, haue somewhat to saye vnto the. He sayde:
Master saye on. A certayne lender had two detters, the one ought fyue hundreth pens, the other fiftie: but whan they had nothinge ito paye, he forgaue thé both. Tell me which of them wyl loue him most? Symon an- swered, and sayde: He, (I suppose) to who

D 

in 

* Mal. 3. a. Marc, 1. a. 
© Mat. 26. a. Mar. 14. a, 

> Mat. 11. c. t Toha. 12, a.

* Mat. 3, a. 
4 Luc. 15. d. 

The gospell of S. Luke. 

he forgaue most. ‘Then sayde he vnto him: 
Thon hast iudged right. 

And he turned him to the woman, and sayde vnto Symo: Seist thou this woma? I am come in to thine house, thou hast geué ime uo water vnto my fete, but she hath watred imy fete with teares, and dryed thé with the hayres of hir heade: Thon hast geué me no kysse, but she (sens the tyme she came in) hath not ceassed to kysse my fete: Thou hast not anointed my heade with oyle, but she hath anoynted my heade with oyntment. Ther- fore I saye vnto the: Many synnes are for- geuen her, for she hath loued moch. But vnto whom lesse is forgeuen, the same loueth the lesse.

And he sayde vnto her: Thy synnes are forgenen the. Then they that sat at the table with him, beganne to saye within themselues:
What is he this, that forgeueth synnes also? 
But he sayde vnto the woman: Thy faith hath 

saued the, Go thy waye in peace. 

The bij. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned afterwarde, that he wente thorow the cities and townes, and preached, and shewed ý Gospell of the kyng- dome of God, and the twolue with him. And certayne wemen also, who he had healed fro euell spretes and infirmities: Namely, Mary which is called Magdalene, out of whom wente seuen denels, and Ioanna y wife of
Chusa Herodes stewarde, and Susanna, and many other, that mynistred vnto them of their substaunce.
^ Now wha moch people were gathered to- gether, and haisted vnto him out of the cities,
He spake by a symilitude: There wente out a sower to sowe his sede, q whyle he was sowynge, some fell by the waye syde, and was trodde vnder fote, and the foules of the ayre ate it vp. And some fell on stone, and whan it was spronge vp, it wythred awaye, because it had no moystnesse. And some fell amonge thornes, and the thornes sprange vp with it, and chokedit. And some fell vpo. a good grounde, and sprange vp, and bare frute an hundreth folde. Wha he sayde this he cryed: Who so hath eares to heare, let him heare. f Mat. 13. a. Marc. 4. a.

* Luc. 23. e. 1 Luc. 24.a. 

Chap. bii. 

a 

The quspell of S. Luke. So. Irri. 

vnto him, and waked him vp, a sayde: 

Chap. bij. 
33| And his disciples axed him, and sayde: 

“What symilitude is this? And he sayde: 
Vnto yon it is geué, to knowe the mysteryes of the kyngdome of God, but vnto the other in parables, y though they se it, they shulde not se it, and though they heare it, they shulde not vnderstonde.

This is the parable: The sede is the worde of God: As for those that are by y waye syde, they are they that heare it, afterwarde commeth the deuell, and taketh awaye the

Master master, we perishe. Then he arose, and rebuked the wynde, and the tépest of water, and they ceassed, and it waxed calme.|
But hé sayde vnto thé: Where is youre faith?) 
Neuertheles they were afrayed, and wodred, and sayde one to another: What is he this?
For he comaundeth the wyndes and the water, and they are obedient vnto him. f And they sayled forth in to the countre of the
Gadarenites, which is ouer agaynst Galile. 

worde out of their hertes, that they shulde And whan he wente out to londe, there|33 not belene, and be saued. But they on y| |met him out of y cite a ma, which had a stone, are soch as whan they heare it, receaue| |deuell longe tyme, q ware no clothes, q taried the worde with ioye, and these haue no rote:| |in no house, but in the graues. Neuertheles they beleue for a whyle, and in the tyme of| |whà he sawe lesus, he cried, and fell downe temptacion they fall awaye. As for it that} [before him, and cried loude, q sayde: What fel amonge the thornes, are soch as heare it,| |haue I to do with the Iesus, thou sonne of the and go forth amonge the càres, riches and| |Hyest God? I beseke the, that thon wilt not volupteousnesses of this life, and are choked| |tormete me. For he comaunded the foule and brynge forth no frute. But that on the| |sprete, that he shulde departe out of the ma, good grounde, are they that heare the worde,} |for he had plaged hi a loge season. And he and kepe it in a pure good hert, and brynge| |was bounde with cheynes, and kepte with forth frute in pacience. fetters, and he brake the bondes in sonder,
“No man lighteth a cadell, and couereth it} jand was caried of the denell in to the wyl- with a vessell, or putteth it vnder a table, but| |dernesse. setteth it vpon a candelsticke, that soch as go And lesus axed him, and sayde: What is in mayese light. “For there is nothingehyd,| thy name? He sayde: Legion. For there that shal not be openly shewed: and there is| |were many deuels entred in to him. And nothinge secrete, that shal not be knowne,| |they besought him, that he wolde not co- and come to light. ‘Take hede therfore how} |maunde the to go in to the depe. * But ye heare. * For who so hath, vnto him shalbe| |there was there a greate heerd of swyne geue: but who so hath not, from him shalbe| jfedynge vpon the mountayne, and they taken awaye, eué the same that he thynketh| |besonght him, that he wolde geue them leue, to haue. to entre in to ¥ same. And he gaue thé
There wente vnto him his méther and| |lene. Then departed y deuels out of the his brethren, and coude not come at him for! |mà, and entred in to the swyne. And the the people. And it was tolde him. Thy} |heerd ruszhed headlynges with a storme in mother and thy brethren stonde without,’ and} |to the lake, and were drowned. But wha y wolde se the. But he answered, q sayde vnto} |herdmen sawe what had chaunsed, they fled, the: My mother and my brethren are these,| {and tolde it in the cite and in the vyllagies. which heare the worde of God, and do it. Then wente they out, for to se what was done, | 35

/ And it fortuned vpon a certayne daye, y he wente in to a shippe, and his disciples with him, q he sayde vnto the: Let vs passe ouer to the other syde of y lake. And they thurst of fro the lode. And as they sayled, he slepte.
And there came a storme of wynde vpon y lake, and the wawes fell vpon the, and they stode in greate ioperdy. Then wéte they

5 Esa. 6. b. * Mat. 5. b. 
4 Mat. 10. d. Marc, 4. b. 
* Mat. 12. e. 

a Mat. 13.b. Marc. 4.a. 
Marc. 4. b. Luc. 11. c. 
* Mat. 13. b. and 25. c. Marc. 4. c. Luc. 19. c. 

and came to Iesus, and founde the ma (out of whom the deuyls were departed) syttinge at lesus fete, clothed, and in his right mynde, and they were afrayed. And they y had sene it, tolde thé how the possessed was healed.
And the whole multitude of y countre of the 
Gadarenites besought him, that he wolde departe from them, for there was a greate

£f Mat. 8. c. Marc. 4. d. g Mat. 8. d. 
^ Mat, 8. d. Marc. 5, b. 

Marc. 3. c. 
Marc. 5. a. 

| fo. Wri. 
|feare come vpon thé. * And he gat him in 
(to y shippe, and turned agayne. And the man out of who the deuels were departed, besought him, y he might be with him. But lesus sent him awaye, and sayde: Go home agayne, and shewe how greate thinges God hath done for the. And he wente his waye, q preached thorow out all M cite, how greate thinges lesus had done for hi.

“And it fortuned wha lesus came agayne, the people receaued him, for they wayted for him. And beholde, there came a man named lairus (and he was a ruler of the synagoge) and fell at Iesus fete, a besought him, that he
(wolde come in to his house. For he had but 

one doughter (vpon a twolue yeare of age) and she laye at y poynt of death. ^ And as he wente, the people thronged him. And a woma hauyuge the bloudyssue twolue yeares,
(which had spent all hir substaunce vpon phisicians, and coude be healed of none) came behynde, q touched the hemme of his garmét, and immediatly hir yssue of bloude was staunched.
F | And Iesus sayde: Who hath touched me ? 
But whan they all denyed, Peter sayde, and they that were with him: Master, the people
‘thronge the and thrust the, and thou sayest : 
Who hath touched me? Iesus saide: Some body hath touched me, for I fele, that there is vertue gone out fro me. But whan the woman sawe that she was not hyd, she came tréblynge, and fell downe before him, and tolde him before all the people, for what cause she had touched him, a how she was jhealed immediatly. And he sayde vnto her:
Doughter, be of good comforte, thy faith 
‘hath made the whole, go thy waye in peace. 
| ‘Whyle he yet spake, there came one fro y 
| ruler of y synagoges house, and sayde vnto him: Thy doughter is deed, disease not the master. Whan lesus herde that, he answered him, and sayde: Feare not, beleue onely, and she shal be made whole. But whan he came in to the house, he suffred no man to go in,
|saue Peter, and lames and Iho, and the father and mother of the mayden. They wepte all and sorowed for her. But he sayde: Wepe not, for she is not deed, but
'slepeth. And they laughed hi to scorne, 

* Marc. 5, b. 
Marc. 5. c. 
4 Mat, 10. a. 

a Mat. 9.c. Marc.5. c. 
€ Mat. 9, c. Marc. 5. d. 
Marc.3. b. and 6.a. Luc. 6. b. 

è Mat. 9. c. t Iohà. 11, b.
1 Mar. 6. a. 

Cbr gospell of 3» Luke. 

Chap. ir! knowynge well that she was deed. But he thrust them all out, and toke her by the hande, and cryed, and sayde: Maydé aryse.
And hir sprete came agayne, q she arose straight. waye. And he comaunded to geue her meate. And hir elders were astonnyed.
But he charged them, that they shulde tell no man, what was done.

The ir. Chapter. 
ND he called the twolue together, *and|a gaue them power and auctorite ouer all deuels, and that they might heale diseases.
And he sent thé out to preach the kyngdome of God, aud to heale y sicke, and sayde vnto them: tYe shal take nothinge with you by the waye, nether staff, ner scryppe, ner bred, ner money: ner haue two coates. And in to what house so euer ye entre, there abyde, tyll ye go thence. “And who so euer receaue you not, departe out of the same cite, aud shake of the dust from youre fete, for a wytnesse ouer them. And they departed, and wente thorow the townes, preachinge y Gospell, q healynge euery where.

J Herode the Tetrarcha herde of all that was done by him. And he toke care, for so moch as it was sayde of some: Iho is rysen agayne from the deed: of some, Elias hath appeared: of some, One of the olde prophetes is rysen agayne. And Herode sayde: Iho haue I beheaded, who is this then, of who I heare soch thinges? And he desyred to se him.

§ And the Apostles came agayne, and tolde him how greate thinges they had done. And he toke them to him, and wente asyde in to a solytary place by the cite called Bethsaida.
Whan the people knew of it, they folowed him. 
And he receaued them, and spake vnto them of the kyngdome of God, and healed soch as hade nede therof. But the daye beganne to go downe. Then came the twolue to him, and sayde vnto him: let the people departe fro the, that they maye go in to the townes rounde aboute, and in to y vyllagies, where they maye fynde lodgynge q meate, for we are here in y wyldernesse. But he sayde vnto them: Geue ye them to eate. "They sayde:
We haue nomore but fyue loaues and two 

fyszhes. Excepte we shulde go q bye meate | 
Luc. 10. a. * Mat. 10. b. Marc. 6. b. Act.13. e.| | f Mat. 14.a. Mare. 6. b. $ Mat. 14. b. Marc. 6. d.
Iobà. 6. a. 

(Chap. tr. The gospel of S, Luke, Fo. Irritj. 

|for so moch people (for there were vpon a fyue thousande men) But he sayde vnto his
'disciples: Cause them to syt downe by fifties in a cópany. And they dyd so, and made them all to syt dowue. ‘Then toke he the fyue loaues and two fiszhes, and loked vp towarde heaue, and sayde grace ouer them, brake them, and gaue them to the disciples, to set thé before the people. And they ate, and were all satisfied. And there were taken vp of that remayned to them, twolue bas- kettes full of broken meate.

And it fortuned whan he was alone, ^and at his prayer, and his disciples with him, he axed them, and sayde: Whom saye the people that I am? ‘They answered, and sayde: They saye, thou art Ihon the baptist :
Some, that thou art Elias: Some, that one of the olde prophetes is rysen agayne. But he sayde vnto them: Whom saye ye that I am?
Then answered Peter and sayde: ^'l'hon art the Christ of God. And he charged them strately, and commaunded them, that they shulde tell this vnto no mà, and sayde: * For the sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and be cast out of the Elders and of y hye prestes, and serybes, and be put to death, and ryse agayne the thirde daye.

Then sayde he vnto them all: * Yf eny ma wil folowe me, let hi denie himself, q take vp his crosse daylie, q folowe me. * For who so euer wil saue his life, shal lose it. But who so loseth his life for my sake, shal saue it.
For what auauntage hath a man, though he wanne the whole worlde, and loseth himself, or runneth in dammage of himself? 7 Who so is ashamed of me and of my sayenges, of him shall the sonne of ma also be ashamed, whan he commeth in his glory, and in the glory of his father, and of the holy angels.
I saye vnto you of atreuth: ‘there be some of them that stonde here, which shall not taist of death, tyll they se the kyngdome of
God. 

And it fortuned, that aboute an eight dayes after these wordes, he toke vnto him
Peter, Ihon and Tames, and wente vp in to a moüt for to praye. +And as he prayed, the
| shappe of his countenaunce was chaunged of another fashion, and his garment was whyte,

e Mat. 16. a. Marc. 8. d. ^ Ioha.6.¢. and 20. b. Marc. 8. d. 9. d. 10. d. Luc. 18. d. f Luc. 17. d. 4 Mat. 10. d. Marc. 8. e. e Mat. 16. d. Marc. 8..

* Mat. 16. c. 
* Marc.8. e. 
Luc. 12. a. 

f Mat. 17. a. Marc. 9. a. 

and shyned: and beholde, two men talked with him, Which were Moses and Elias, that appeared gloriously, and spake of his depart- yuge, which he shulde fulfill at Ternsalem.
As for Peter and them that were with him, they were full of slepe. But whan they awoke, they saw his glory, and the two men stondynge with him.

And it chaunsed, whan they departed fro him, Peter sayde vuto Iesns: Master, here is good beynge for vs. Let vs make thre tabernacles: one for the, one for Moses, and one for Elias, and wyst not what he sayde.
But whyle he thus spake, there came a cloude, and ouershadowed them. And they were afrayed, whan the cloude couered them.
And out of the cloude there came a voyce, which sayde: This is my deare sonne,$ heare him. And whyle this voyce came to passe, they founde lesus alone. And they kepte it close, and tolde no mà in those dayes eny of the thinges which they had sene.

^And it chaunsed on the nexte daye after, whan they came downe from the mount, moch people met him, and beholde, a man amonge the people cryed out, and sayde:
Master, I beseke the, loke vpon my sonne, for he is my onely sonne: beholde, the sprete taketh him, and sodenly he crieth, and he teareth him, that he fometh, and with payne departeth he from him, whan he hath rente him. And I besought thy disciples to cast him out, and they coulde not. Then answered lesus, and sayde: Oh thou vnfaithfull and croked generacion, how longe shal I be with yon, q suffre you? Brynge hither thy sonne.
And whan he came to him, the deuell rente him and tare him. But Iesus rebuked the foule sprete, and healed the chylde, and de- lyuered him vnto his father agayne. ‘And they were all amased at the mighty power of God.

And whyle they wondred euery one at all|35 thinges which he dyd, he sayde vnto his disciples: Comprehende these sayenges in youre eares. ‘For the sonne of mau must be delyuered in to the hades of men. But they wyst not what that worde meaned, and it was hyd from them, that they vnderstode it not.
And they were afrayed to axe him of that 

t2Pe.i.d. s Mat.17.a. Marc.9.a. § Deut. 18. c. 
^ Mat. 17. b. Marc. 9. b. i Marc. 1,c. Luc. 4. d. k Mat. 16. c. and 20. b. Marc. 8. d. and 9, d. Luc. 2. g. and 18. d.

Fo. rrii. 

Iworde.* There came a thought also amonge 
‘them, which of them shulde be the greatest. 
But wha lesus sawe the thoughtes of their hert, he toke a childe, q set him harde by him, aud sayde vnto them: ^Whosoeuer re- ceaueth this childe in my name, receaueth ine: and who so euer receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. But who so is leest amoge you all, ý same shal be greate.

'Then answered Iho, and sayde: Master, we sawe one dryue out deuels in thy name, and we forbad him, for he folowed the not with vs. And Iesus saide vnto him: For byd him not, for he that is not agaynst vs, is for vs.

Aud it fortuned whan the tyme was ful- fylled that he shulde be receaued vp from
‘hence, he turned his face to go straight to lerusalem, and before him he sent messaun- gers, which wente their waye, and came in to a towne of the Samaritans, to prepare lodginge for him. And they wolde not re-
.ceaue him, because he had turned his face to go to lerusale. But whan his disciples lames and Ihon sawe that, they sayde: LORDE, wilt thou, that we commaunde, that fyre fall downe from heauen, and consume them,? as
| Elias dyd? Neuertheles lesus turned him aboute, and rebuked them, and sayde:
Knowe ye not, what maner of sprete ye are lof? The sonne of man is not come to de-
|stroye mens soules, but to saue them. And 
Ithey wente in to another towne. 

^ And it fortuned as they went by the waye, one sayde vnto him: I wil folowe the, whyther so euer thou go. And lesus sayde vnto him: 'The foxes haue holes, and the byrdes vnder the heaué haue nestes: but the sonne of man hath not wheron to laye his heade.

‘And he sayde vnto another: Folowe me. 
He sayde: Syr, geue me leue first to go, and burye my father. But lesus sayde vnto him:
$Let the deed burye their deed. But go thou thy waye, and preach the kyngdome of God.

And another sayde: Syr, I will folowe the,|| but geue me leue first, to go byd them farwele, which are at home in my house.

lesus sayde vnto him: Who so putteth his 

* Mat. 18. à. Marc. 9. d. Luc. 22. b. a Mat. 10. e. 
Mare. 9. d. Luc. 10. b. Iohà. 13, c. t Mat. 20, d. 
Marc. 9. d. and 10, e. Luc. 22. b. 1 4 Re.1. c. 
^ Mat. 8. c * Mat. 8. c. $ Leu. 21. b. 

The gospell of 3». Luke. 

hade to the plowe, and loketh backe, is not mete for the kingdome of God.”

The y. Chapter. 

FTERWARDE the LORDE ap-|@ 

poynted out other seuentie, and sent them two and two before him in to euery cite and place, whither he himself wolde come, and sayde vnto them: * The haruest is greate, but the labourers are fewe. Praye therfore the LORDE of the haruest, to sende forth labourers in to his haruest. /Go youre waye : beholde, I sende you forth as the labes amonge y wolues. Beare nether wallet, ner scryppe, ner shues, and ‘salute no ma by the waye.
In to what so euer house ye entre, first saye: 
Peace be in this house. And yf the childe of peace be there, youre peace shal rest vpon him. Yf no, then shal youre peace turne to you agayne. But tary ye still in the same house, eatinge and drynkinge soch as they haue. For the labourer is worthy of his rewarde.

Go not from house to house. And in to what so euer cite ye entre, and they receaue you, eate soch thinges as are set before you.
And heale the sicke that are there, and saye vnto them: The kyngdome of God is come nye vnto you. “But in to what so euer cite ye come, and they receaue you not, go youre waye out in to the stretes of the same, and saye: Euen the very dust which cleaueth vpon vs of youre cite, wype we of vpon you.
But of this ye shal be sure, that the kyng- dome of God was come nye vnto you. I saye vnto you: [t shalbe easyer for Sodome in that daye, then for that cite.

Wo vnto the Chorazin, wo vnto the Beth- saida:^ for yf the miracles which haue bene done amonge you had bene done at Tyre and
Sidon, they had done pennaunce longe agoo, syttinge in sackcloth and in asshes. Neuer- theles it shalbe easyer for Tyre and Sidon at the iudgment, then for you. And thou
Capernaum which art exalted vnto the heauen, shalt be thrust downe vnto hell. He that heareth you, heareth me :* and he that despyseth you, despyseth me: but who so despyseth me, despyseth him y sent me.

|| 3 Re. 19. d. 42 Pet. 2. d. * Mat, 9. d. f Mat.10.8. Marc. 6. à. Luc. 9. a. q 4 Re. 4. d.
£ Mat. 10. b. Marc. 6. b. Luc. 9. a. Act. 13. e, and 18. a. 
^ Mat. 11. b. i Mat. 10. e. Iohà. 13. c. Marc. 9. d. | 

5 

Chap. x. 

Chap. ri. The gospell of S. Luke. Fo. lyrb.| 

The seuétye came agayne with ioye, and sayde: LORDE, the deuels also are subdued vnto vs in thy name. But he sayde vnto them: ^I sawe Sathan fall downe from heauen as a lightenynge. Beholde, *I haue geuen you power to treade vpon serpétes and scorpions, and ouer all power of the enemye, and nothinge shall hurte you. Neuertheles, reioyce not ye in this, that the spretes are subdued vnto you: but reloyse, tthat youre names are wrytten in heauen.

€| At the same houre reioysed Jesus in sprete, and sayde: ^I prayse the (O father and
LORDE of heauen and earth) that thou hast hyd these thinges from the wyse and prudent, and hast opened them vnto babes. Kuen so father, for so it pleased the. ‘All thinges are geuen ouer vnto me of my father: tand no man knoweth who the sonne is, but onely the father: nether who the father is, saue onely the sonne, and he to whó the sonne will open it.

And he turned him vnto his disciples, and sayde in especiall: Blessed are the eyes, which se that ye se. For I saye vnto you:
? Many prophetes and kynges, wolde haue sene the thynges that ye se, and haue not sene them: and to haue herde the thynges that ye heare, and haue not herde them.

And beholde, there stode vp a scrybe and tempted him, and sayde: Master, what must
I do, to inheret euerlastinge life? He sayde vnto him: What is wrytten in the lawe?
How readest thon? He answered and sayde: 
‘Thou shalt loue thy LORDE God with all thy hert, with all thy soule, with all thy strength, and with all thy mynde, and § thy neghboure as thy self. He sayde vnto him:
Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt lyue. But he wolde haue iustified him- self, t sayde vnto lesus: Who is then my neghboure ?

JW Then answered lesus, and sayde: A cer- tayne man wente downe from Ierusalem vnto lericho, and fell amonge murthurers, which stryped him out of his clothes, and wounded him, and wente their waye, and left him half deed. And by chaüce there came downe a prest the same waye: and whan he sawe him, he passed by. And likewyse a

Leuite, whà he came nye vnto the same place and sawe him, he passed by. But a Samari- tane was goynge his iourney, and came that waye, and whan he sawe him, he had com- passion vpon him, wente vnto him, bounde vp his woundes, and poured oyle and wyne therin, and lifte him vp vpon his beast, and brought him in to the ynne, and made prouysion for him. Vpon the next daye whan he departed, he toke out two pens, and gaue them to the oost, and sayde vnto him: Fake cure of him, and what so euer thou spendest more, I wil paye it the, whan I come agayne. Which of these thre now thinkest thou, was neghboure vnto him, that fell amonge the murtherers ?
He sayde: He that shewed mercy vpon him. 
Then sayde lesus vnto him: Go thy waye then, and do thou likewyse.

It fortuned as they wete, that he entred in to a towne, where there was a woman named
Martha, which receaued him in to hir house. 
And she had a sister, called Mary,” which sat hir downe at lesus fete, and herkened vnto his worde. But Martha made hir self moch to do, for to serue him. And she stepte vnto him, and sayde: LORDE, carest thou not, that my sister letteth me serue alone? Byd her therfore, that she helpe me. But Iesus answered, and sayde vnto her: Martha Martha, thou takest thought, and combrest thy self aboute many thinges: llthere is but one thinge nedefull. Mary hath chosen a good parte, which shal not be taken awaye from her.

The ri. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned that he was in a place,| q 
A and prayed. And whan he had ceassed, one of his disciples sayde vnto him: LORDE, teach vs to praye, as Ihon also taught his disciples. He sayde vnto the: Whan ye praye, saye: O oure father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kyngdome come.
Thy wil be fulfilled vpon earth, as it is in heauen. Gene vs this daye oure daylie bred.
And forgeue vs oure synnes, for we also forgeue all them that are detters vnto vs.
And lede vs not in to temptacion, but delyuer vs from euell.

And he sayde vnto them: Which of you is it that hath a frende, and shulde go to him

a Esa. 14. b. Apo. 12. c. * Mar. 16. c. Act. 28.a. t Phil 4.a. Apo.17.b. — ^Mat.11.c. Mat. 98.c.
Tohà. 13. a. t Mat.11.e. Tohà.7. c. 8.b. 10. b. 

4 Mat. 13.c. ¢ Deut.6.b. $ Leui. 19. c. Rom. 13. b. f Deut.33. a. , || Psal. 26. a.

jfo. Irrbt. 

The gospell of 3. fo. hrb. |. — bt gospel of >. Lukee bap. ri. 

Chap. rt. 

at mydnight, and saye vnto him: frende, lende me thre loaues, for a frende of myne is come to me out of the waye, and I haue nothinge to set before him: and he within doike. answere and saye: Disquyete me not, the dore is shutt allready, and my children are with me in the chamber, I can not ryse, and geue the. I saye vnto you: and though he wolde not aryse and geue him, because he is his frende, Yet because of his vnshamefast begginge he wolde aryse, and geue him as many as he neded.

And I saye vnto you also: Axe, and it shal be geuen you: “Seke, and ye shal fynde: knoeke, and it shalbe opened vnto you. For who so euer axeth, receaueth: and he that seketh, fyndeth : and to him that knocketh, shal it be opened. Yf the sonne axe bred of eny of you that is a father, wyl he geue him a stone therfore? Or yf he axe a fyszhe, zm he for the fish offre him a serpent ? Or yf he axe an egg, wyl he profer him a scorpion ? Yt ye then which are euell can geue youre children good giftes, how moch more shàl the father of heauen geue the holy sprete vnto them that axe him ?

ż And he droue out a deuell that was domme: and it came to passe whan the deuell was departed out, the domme spake, and the people wondred. But some of them sayde :*
He dryueth out the deuels, thorow Beelzebub the chefe of the deuels. The other tempted him, and desyred a token of him from heauen,
But he knewe their thoughtes, and sayde vnto them: Euery kyngdome deuyded within it self, shal be desolate, and one house shal fall vpó another. Yf Sathan then be at variaunce within himself, how shal his kyngdome endure?
Because ye saye, that I dryue out deuels thorow Beelzebub.

And yf I dryue out deuels thorow Beelzebul, by whom thé do youre children dryue them out? 'lherfore shall they be youre iudges.
But yf I cast out the deuels by the fynger of 
God, then is the kyngdome of God come vnto you.

Whan a stronge harnessed man kepeth his house,‘ that he possesseth is in peace: * but whan a stronger then he commeth vpó him, and ouer commeth him, he taketh fro him all

* Pro, 8. b. Mat. 7. a. Toba. 14. b. 15. a. 16. c. 
* Mare. 3. b. 4 Mat. 12. c. 

f Marc. 8. b. t Ione 

his wapens, wherin he trusted, and deuydeth the spoyle. He that is not with me, is agaynst me: and he that gathereth not with me, scatereth abrode.*

* Whan the vncleane sprete is gone out of a man, he walketh thorow drye places, sei rest, and fyndeth none. Then sayeth he: wil turne agayne in to my house, from om
I wente out. And whan he commeth, he fyndeth it swepte, and garnished. Then goeth he, and taketh vnto him seuen other spretes, worse thé himself. And whan they are entred in, they dwell there. And the ende of that man is worse then the begynnynge.

And it fortuned whan he spake soch, a cer- tayne woman amonge the people lift vp hir voyce, and sayde vnto him: Blessed is $ wombe that bare the, and the pappes that thou hast sucked. But he sayde: Yee blessed are they that heare the worde of God, and kepe it.

Whan the people were gathered thicke together, he beganne to saye: /This is an euell generacion, , they desyre a toké, and there shal no token be geuen them, but the toké of the prophet Ionas. + For like as Ionas was a toké vnto the Niniuytes, so shal the sonne of man be vnto this generacion. £ The quene of the south shal aryse at the iudgmet with the men of this generacion, and shall con- dempne them: for she came from the ende of the worlde, to heare the wyszdome of
Salomon. on beholde, here is one more then Salomon. The men of Niniue shal aryse at the iudgment with this generacion, and shall condempne them: for they dyd pennaunce after the preachinge of Ionas: and beholde, here 1s one more the Ionas.

^ No man lighteth a candell, and putteth it in a preuy place, nether vis a buszhell, but vpon a candilsticke, that they which come in, may se ¥ light. +The eye is the light of the body, Yf thine eye then be syngle, all thy body shal be full of light: but yf thine eye be wicked, then shal all thy eae be full of darcknesse. Take hede therfore, that the light which is in the, be not darcknesse. Yf thy body now be light, so that it haue no parte of darknesse, then shal it be all full of light, and shall light the euen as a cleare

lightenynge. 

2.a. and 3, b. € 3 Re. 10.8. 2 Par. 9. a. 
^ Mat. 5. b. Marc. 4. b. Luc. 8. b. 

Mat. 12. d. 
¢ Mat. 6. c. 

. 

Chap. rij. The qosprll of 3. Luke, 
B| But whyle he yet spake, a certayne Pharise | 

Fo. Irrbij. 

prayed him, that he wolde dyne with him. 
And he wente in, and sat him downe at the table. Whan the Pharise sawe that, he marueyled, that he waszhed not first before dyner. But the LORDE sayde vnto him:
Now do ye Pharises make cleane the out syde of the cuppe and platter,“ but youre inwarde partes are full of robbery and wickednesse.
Ye fooles, is a thinge made cleane within, because the outsyde is clensed? Neuertheles geue almesse of that ye haue, and beholde, all is cleane vnto you.

But wo vnto you Pharises,’ ye that tythe mynt and rewe, and all maner herbes, and passe ouer iudgmét and y loue of God. These ought to haue bene done, and not to leaue the other vndone.

* Wo vnto you Pharises, for ye loue to syt vppermost in the synagoges, and to be saluted in the market.

Wo vnto you serybes and Pharyses, ye ypocrites, for ye are like couered sepulcres, where ouer men walke, and are not awarre of them.

Then answered one of the serybes, and sayde vnto him: Master, with these wordes thou puttest vs to rebuke also. But he saide:
And wo vnto you also ye scrybes, for ye lade men with vntollerable burthens, and ye youre selues “touch them not with one of youre fyngers.

Wo vnto you, for ye buylde the sepulcres of the prophetes,* but youre fathers put them to death. Doutles ye beare wytnesse, and consente vnto the dedes of youre fathers: for they slewe them, and ye buylde their sepulcres.

J Therfore sayde the wyszdome of God: I wil sende prophetes and Apostles vnto thé: and some of them shal they put to death and persecute, that the bloude of all the prophetes which hath bene shed sens the foundacion of the worlde was layed, maye be requyred of this generacion: from the bloude of Abell,® vnto y bloude of * Zachary, which perished betwene the altare and y temple. Yee I saye vnto you: it shalbe requyred of this generacion.

Wo vnto you scrybes, for ye haue receaued y keye of knowlege.* Ye are not come in

* Mat. 23. c. ^ Mat. 23. c. © Mat. 23, a. 
12. d. Luc, 10. c. 4 Mat. 23, a. if Mat. 23. c. € Gen. 4. b.
23. b. 

Marc. e Mat, 23. d.
* 2 Pa. 94. b. ^ Mat. f Sap. i.b. Mat.

i Mat. 16. a. Marc. 8. a. 

youre selues, and haue forbydden them that wolde haue bene in.

Whan he spake thus vnto them, the scrybes and Pharyses beganne to preasse sore vpon him, and to stoppe his mouth with many questions, and layed wayte for him, and sought to hunte out some thinge out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

The rij. Chapter. 

HERE were gathered together an innu- merable multitude of people, in so moch that they trode one another: Then beganne he, and sayde first vnto his disciples: ‘Bewarre of the leuen of the Pharises, which is ypocri- sye.t But there is nothinge hyd, that shal not be discouered: nether secrete, that shal not be knowne. 'Pherfore whatsoever ye haue spoké in darknesse, that same shal be herde in light: and that ye haue spoken in to the eare in the chabers, shalbe preached vpon

the house toppes. 

But I saye vnto you my frendes: *Be not afrayed of them that kyll the body, and after that haue nomore that they can do. But I wil shewe you, whom ye shal feare. Feare him, which after he hath kylled, hath power also to cast in to hell: Yee I saye vnto you:
Feare him. Are not fyue sparowes bought for two farthinges? Yet is not one of them forgotten before God. The very hayres of youre heade also are nombred euery one.
Feare not therfore, for ye are better then many sparowes.

I saye vnto you: ‘Who so euer knowlegeth me before men, him shal the sonue of mà also knowlege before the angels of God:
But he that denyeth me before men, shal be denyed before the angels of God. And who so euer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeuen him: " But who so blasphemeth the holy goost, it shal not be forgeuen him.

Whan they brynge you in to their syna- goges," and to the rulers q officers, take ye no thought, how or what ye shal answere,|. or what ye shal speake: for the holy goost shal teach you in the same houre, what ye ought to saye.

Marc. 4. b. Luc. 8. b. k Mat. 10, d. 2 Par. 

! Mat. 10.d. Marc.8.e. Luc.9.c. Apo. 3. a. 
Marc. 3. c. ^ Mat. 10, c. Marc. 13. b. 

TO d. 
20. c. m Mat. 12. c.
Lue. 21. b. 

Ho. Ixrbiij. 

But one of the people sayde vnto him: 
Master, byd my brother deuyde the enheri- tannce with me. Neuertheles he sayde vnto him: Man, who hath set ine to he a iudge or heretage parter ouer you? And he sayde vnto them: Take hede, and bewarre of couetousnesse, for noman lyueth therof, that he hath abundaunce of goodes. And he tolde them a symilitude, and sayde: There was a riche man, whose felde had brought forth frutes plenteously, and he thought in himself, and sayde: What shal Ido? I haue nothinge wher in to gather my frutes. And he sayde:
This wil I do, I wil breake downe my barnes, t buylde greater, and therin wil I gather all myne increace, t my goodes, q wil saye vnto my soule: “Soule, thou hast moch goodes layed vp in stoare for many yeares, take now thine ease, eate, drinke, and be mery. But
God sayde vnto him: * Thou foole, this:night shal they requyre thy soule from the, *and whose shal it be that thou hast prepared?
Thus goeth it with him y gathereth treasure for himself, and is not riche in God.

But he sayde vnto his disciples: "Therfore 
I saye vnto you: “Take ye no thought for youre life, what ye shal eate: nether for youre body, what ye shal put on. The life is more then meate, and the body more then raymet.
Consydre the rauens, they nether sowe ner reape, they haue also nether stoarehouse ner barne, and yet God fedeth them. But how moch better are ye then the foules ?

^Which of you (though he toke thought therfore) coulde put one cubyte vnto his stature? Seinge then ye be not able to do that which is least, why take ye thought for the other? — Considre the lilies vpo the felde, how they growe: they laboure not, they spynne not. But I saye vnto you: that euen Salomon in all his royalte was not clothed like one of these. Wherfore yf God so cloth the grasse, y is to daye in y. felde, and tomorow shalbe cast in to the fornace, how moch more shal he clothe you, o ye of litle faith? Axe not ye therfore what ye shal eate, or what ye shal drynke, and clymme not vp an hye: The
Heithen in the worlde seke after all soch thinges. But seke ye the kyngdome of God, and all these shal be mynistred vnto you.

Eccli I1. c- è Iere. 17. b. * Psal. 38. a. 
€ Psal. 54. c. Mat. 6. c. 1 Pet. 5. a. 4 Mat. 6. d. 
|* Deut. 1. c. and 20, a, J Mat. 6. c. and 19, e.| 

c————w———————— 

The gospell of 3. Luke, 

Feare not thou litle flocke, for it is youre fathers pleasure to geue you the “kyngdome.
Sell that ye haue, and geue almesse. Make you bagges, which waxe not olde: euen a
‘treasure that neuer fayleth in heauen, where no thefe commeth, and no moth corruppeth : for where youre treasure is, there wil youre hert be also.

£ Let youre loynes be gerded aboute, and youre lightes burnynge, and be ye like vnto men that wayte for their lorde, agaynst he returne from the mariage, that whan he cémeth q knocketh, they maye straight waye open vnto him. Blessed are those ser- uauntes, whom the LOR DE (whan he cometh) shal fynde wakynge. Verely I saye vnto you:
* He shal gyrde vp him self, and make them syt downe at the table, and shal go by them, and mynister ynto them. And yf he come in the seconde watch, and in the thirde watch, and fynde them so, blessed are those ser- luauntes. ^But be sure of this, that yf the
‘good man of the house knewe, what houre 

;the thefe wolde come, he wolde surely watch, ' 

jand not suffre his house to be broken vp. 
"Therfore be ye ready also, for at an houre whan ye thynke not, 'shal the sonne of man come.

But Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, tellest thou this symilitude vnto vs, or to all men also? The LORDE sayde: How greate a thinge is a faithfull and wyse stewarde, whom his lorde setteth ouer his houszholde, to geue the their dewtye in due season?
Blessed is that seruaunt, whom his lorde 
(whan he cometh) shal fynde so doynge.’ 
Verely I saye vnto you: ‘he shal set him ouer all his goodes. But yf the same seruaut shal saye in his hert: Tush, it wil be longe or my lorde come, and shal begynne to smyte y seruauntes and maydens, yee q to eate and drynke, q to be dronke: the same seruauntes lorde shal come in a daye whan he loketh not for him, and in an houre that he is not aware of, q shal hew him in peces, and geue him his rewarde with the vnbeleuers.

"'lhe seruaunt that knewe his lordes wil and prepared not himself, nether dyd acor- diuge to his will, sha! be beaten with many strypes: But he that knewe it not, and yet

€ Ephe. 6. d. 1 Pet. 1. c. t Luc. 22. b. ^ Mat. 
94.d. Mare. 13. d. * Mat. 25. a. * Apo. 16. c. 
! Mat. 24. d. ™ Taco. 4. b. 

Chap. rij. 

D 

3: 

Chap. rii. dyd thinges worthy of strypes, shal be beaten with few strypes. For loke vnto whom moch is geuen, of him shal moch be sought: and loke to whom moch is commytted, of him shal moch be requyred.

I am come to kyndle fyre vpo earth, and. what wolde I rather, thé that it were kyndled allready. — Notwithstodimge I must first be baptised with a baptyme, and how am I payned tyll it be ended? Thynke ye, that I am come to brynge peace vpon earth? “I tell you nay, but rather debate. For from

. hence forth there shal be at varyance in one house: thre agaynst two, and two agaynst thre. The father shal he deuyded agaynst | sonne, and the sonne agaynst the father: the mother agaynst the doughter, q the donghter agaynst the mother: the mother in lawe agaynst hir doughter in lawe, and y doughter in lawe agaynst hir mother in lawe.

Aud he sayde vnto the people: ^ Whan ye se a cloude ryse out of y west, straight waye | ye saye: there cémeth a shower, and so it 1s: and whan ye se the southwynde blowe, ye saye: It wil be hote, and it commeth so to passe. O ye ypocrytes, ye can discerne the fashion of the skye and of the earth: Why, can ye not discerne this tyme also? Yee and why indge ye not of youre selues, what is right ?

Whyle thou goest with thine aduersary vnto the Prynce, geue diligece by the waye, that thou mayest be quyte of him, lest he brynge the before the 1udge, and the iudge delyuer the to the iaylar, and the iaylar cast the in to preson. I tell the, thou shalt not come out thence, tyll thou paye the vttemost myte.

The rij. Chapter. a HERE were present at the same season |

certayne, that shewed him of y *Gali- leans, whose blonde Pilate had mégled with their awne sacrifice. And lesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Suppose ye, that these |
Galileas were greater synners then all the other Galileans, because they suffred soch punyshment? F tell you naye, but excepte ye améde youre selues, ye shal all perishe likewyse. Or thinke ye that M eightene

The qospell of S, Luke, 

(vpon whom the tower in Siloe fell and slewe 

them) were giltie abone all men that dwell " 

? Mat. 10. e. Mich.7.a. ^ Mat. 16.3. * Act. 5. c. 

Fo. Irrír. 

lerusalem? I tell you naye: but excepte ye amende youre selues, ye shal all perishe likewyse.

And he tolde them this symilitude: A cer- tayne mà had a fygge tre, which was planted in his vynyarde, q he came and sought frute theron, and founde none. Then sayde he vnto the wynegardener: Beholde, This thre yeare longe haue I come enery yeare, and sought frute vpon this fygge tre, and fynde none: cut it downe, why hyndreth it the grounde? But he answered, and sayde:
Syr, let it alone yet this yeare, tyll I dygge roüde aboute it and donge it, yf it wyl brynge forth frute: Yf no, then cut it downe afterwarde.

And he taught in a synagoge vpon the 
Sabbath: and beholde, there was a woma, which had a sprete of infirmyte eightene yeares, and was croked, and coulde not well loke vp. Whan Iesus sawe her, he called her to him, and sayde vnto her: Woman, be delyuered from thy disease. And he layed his handes vpo her, and immediatly she was made straight, and praysed God. Then answered the ruler of the synagoge, and toke
(indignacion (because lesus healed vpo y 
| Sabbath) and sayde vnto the people: There are sixe dayes, wherin meu ought to worke, in them come and he healed, and not on the
Sabbath. 

Then the LORDE answered him, and sayde: Thon ypocryte, doth not euery one of you lowse his oxe or asse frö the crybbe vpo
Sabbath, and leade him to the water? But 
| shulde not this (which is Abrahams doughter) whom Sathan hath bounde now eightene yeares, be lowsed from this bonde vpo the
Sabbath? And whan he thus sayde, all his aduersaries were ashamed. And all the people reloysed ouer all the excellent dedes, that were done by him.

And he sayde: *What is the kyngdome of 
God like? Or wher vnto shal I copare it? 
It is like a grayne of mustarde sede, which a man toke, and cast in his garden: and it grewe, and waxed a greate tre, and the foules of the ayre dwelt amonge the braunches of it.

And agayne he sayde : *^Where vnto shal I licken the kyngdome of God? It is like vnto leuen, which a woman toke, and myxte it

* Mat. 13. d. Marc. 4. a. 4 Mat. 13. e, 

Fo. err. age thre peckes of meele,* tyll it was all leuended. And he wéte thorow cities and townes, and taught, and toke his iourney towarde lerusalem.

C| And one sayde vnto him: LORDE, are there few (thinkest thou) that shalbe saued ?
But he sayde vnto them: ^Stryue ye to entre in at the strayte gate, for many (l saye vnto you) shal seke to come in, and shal not be able. From that tyme forth, whan the good man of the house is rysen vp, and hath shut the dore, then shal ye begynne to stonde without, and to knocke at y dore, and saye:
LORDE LORDE, open vnto vs. “And he shal answere, and saye vnto yon: I knowe you not whence ye are.

Then shal ye begynne to saye: We haue eaten and dronken before the, aud thou hast taught vs vpon y stretes. And he shal saye:
I tell you, I knowe yon not whence ye are. 
? Departe fro me all ye workers of iniquyte. 
There shalbe wepynge and gnaszhinge of teth, when ye shal se Abraham, and Isaac, and
Iacob and all the prophetes in ý kyngdome of God, and youre selnes thrust out, And wha they shal come from the east and from the west, ‘from the north and from the south, which shal syt at y table in the kyngdome of
God. And Eun there are last, which shal be fyrst: and there are first, which shalbe last.

| Vpon the same daye there came certayne of y Pharises, and sayde vnto him: Get the out of the waye, and departe hence, for
Herode wyl kyll the. And he sayde vnto the: 
Go ye and tell that foxe: beholde, I cast out deuels, and heale the people todaye and to- morow, and vpo the thirde daye shal I make an ende: for it can not be, that a prophet perishe without lerusalem.

*O Ierusalem Ierusalé, thou that kyllest the prophetes, and stonest thé that are sent vnto y, how oft wolde I haue gathered thy children together, euen as the henne gathereth hir nest vnder hir wynges, and ye wolde not?
Beholde, youre habitacion shal be left vnto you desolate. For I saye vnto you: ye shal not se me, tyll $ tyme come that ye shal saye:^ blessed be he, y cometh in $ name of the LORDE.

*Gen. 18.a. è Mat.7. b. * Mat.25.a. 4 Psal. 6. b. 
Mat. 7. b. and 25. d. * Mat. 8. b. J Mat. 19. d. and 20. b. Marc. 10. c. £ Mat. 23. e. ^ Luc. 19. d.

The gospell of 3». Luke, 

Chap. riii. 

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned that he came in to the|/@ house of one of y chefe Pharises vpō a
Sabbath, to eate bred, q they watched him. 
And beholde, there was a ma before him, which had y dropsye. And Iesus answered, q spake vnto the scrybes and Pharises, q sayde:
‘Ts it laufull to heale on the Sabbath? But they helde their tonge. And he toke him, and healed him, cq let him go, and answered, and sayde vnto the: Which of you shal haue an oxe or an asse fallen in to a pytte,* and wil not straight waye pull him out on the Sabbath daye? And they coude not answere him agayne

to that. 

And he tolde a symilitude vnto ¥ gestes, wha he marked how they chose the hyest seates, q sayde vnto thé: Whan thou art byddé of eny man to a weddynge, syt not downe in the hyest rowme, lest a more honor- able man thé thou be bydde of him, and he that bade both the and him, come q saye vnto j: geue this mà rowme, and thou thé be- gynne with shame to take ¥ lowest rowme.
But rather wha thou art byddé, go and syt in y lowest rowme, that wha he that bade the, cometh, he maye saye vnto the: Frende, syt|133 vp hyer: thenshalt thou haue worshipe in the presence of them that syt at the table. For who so euer exalteth himself, shalbe bronght lowe:" and he y humbleth himself, shalbe exalted.

He sayde also vnto him that had bydden him: Wha thou makest a dyner or a supper, call not thy frendes, ner thy brethren, ner thy kynsfolkes, ner thy riche neghbours, lest they call the agayne, and recompéce be made y.
But wha thou makest a feast," call the poore, the crepell, the lame, the blynde, then art thou blessed, for they can not recompéce y.
But it shalbe recompensed the in the resur- reccion of the righteous.

Whan one of them that sat by at the table herde this, he sayde vnto him: Blessed is he, that eateth bred in y kyngdome of God.
But he sayde vnto him: A certayne mà made a greate supper,’ and called many ther to.
And in y houre of the supper he sent his seruaüte, to saye vnto the y were bydde:

Psal.117.c. * Luc. 6.a. and 13. b. Mat. 12. b. Marc. 3.4. k Exo. 23. a. Deut. 22. b. ! Pro. 25. a. ^ Mat. 23. b.
Luc. 18. b. ^ Tob. 4. c. ° Mat. 22.a. Apo. 19, b. 

€|Come, for now are all thinges ready. 

Chap. yb. 
And they begane all together to excuse thé selues one after another: The first saide vnto hi:
I haue bought a ferme, and I must nedes go forth and se it, I praye $ hane me excused.
And ¥ seconde sayde: I hane bought fyne yoke of oxen, and now I go to proue them, I praye the haue me exensed. And the thirde sayde: I haue maried a wife, therfore can I not come. And the seruaunt came, and brought his lorde worde agayne therof.

Then was the good man of the house dis- pleased, aud sayde vnto his seruaüt: Go out quyckly in to the stretes and quarters of y cite, and brynge in hither the poore and crepell, and lame and blynde. And the ser- uaut sayde: lorde, it is done as thou hast comaunded, and there is yet more rowme.
And the lorde sayde vnto the sernaunt: Go out in to the hye wayes, and to the hedges, and compell them to come in, that my honse maye be fylled. But I saye vnto you: that none of these men which were bydden, shal taist of my supper.

D| There wente moch people with him,’ and 

he turned him abonte and sayde vnto them: 
Yf eny man come vnto me, and hate not his father, mother, wife, childré, brethré, sisters, yee and his owne life also, he can not be my disciple. And whosoeuer beareth not his crosse, and foloweth me, can not be my disciple.

Which of you is it y wil buylde a tower, and sytteth not downe first and counteth y cost, whether he haue sufficiét to perfourme, it? lest after he hath layed the foundació, and is not able to perfourme it, all they that se it, begynne to laugh him to scorne, q to saye:
This man beganne to buylde, and is not able to perfurme it. Or what kynge wil go to make battayl agaynst another kynge, and sytteth not downe first, and casteth iu his mynde, whether he be able with ten thou- sande, to mete him that commeth agaynst him with twentye thousande? Or els, whyle the other is yet a greate waye of he sendeth embassage, and desyreth peace. So likewyse euery one of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, can not be my disciple.

Salt is a good thinge:^ but yf the salt be vnsauery, what shal they season withall? It

è Mat. 5. b. e Mat. 9. a. Marc. 2. b. Luc. 5. d.

? Deut. 13, b. Mat. 10. e. and 16. d. 
Marc. 9. e. 

The qospell of 3. Luke. 

donge hyll, but shal be cast awaye. He that 

; hath eares to heare, let him heare. 
The yb. Chapter. 

licans and synners,’ that they might heare him. And ¥ Pharises and scrybes
|murmured, and sayde: * This man receaneth synners, and eateth with them. But he tolde thé this symilitude, and sayde: What man is he amonge you, that hath an hundreth shepe, and yf he loose one of thé,’ that leaueth not the nyne and nyentye in the wyldernesse, and

goeth after that which is lost tyll he fynde it? 
And whan he hath founde it, he layeth it vpon his shulders with ioye: and whan he commeth home, he calleth his fredes and neghbours, and sayeth vnto the: Reioyce with me, for I haue founde my shepe, y was lost.
I saye vnto you: Eué so shal there be ioye in heanen ouer one synner that doth pennaunce, more then ouer nyne and nyentye righteous, which t nede not repentaunce.

Or what woman is it that hath ten grotes, yf she loose one of them, that lighteth not a candell, and swepeth the house, and seketh diligently, tyll she fynde it? And whan she hath founde it, she calleth hir frendes q negh- bouresses, and sayeth: Reioyce with me, for
I haue foüde my grote, which I had lost. 
Euen so (I tell you) shal there be ioye before the angels of God, ouer one synner y doth pennaunce. k

And he sayde: A certayne man had two sonnes, and the yonger of them sayde vnto the father: Father, gene me the porcion of y goodes, that belongeth vnto me. And he denyded the good vnto them. And not longe therafter, gathered the yonger sonne all to- gether, q toke his iourney in to a farre countre, and there waisted he his goodes with ryotous lyuynge. Now whan he had spent all that he had, there was a greate derth thorow out all the same lode. And he begane to lacke, and wente his waye, and claue to a cytesin of that same countre, which sent him in to his felde, to kepe swyne. And he wolde fayne haue fylled his bely with the coddes, that the swyne ate. And noman gane him them.
4 Mat. 18. b. 

* Luc. 5. d. and 7. e. 1 Luc. 5. d. 

Fo. Irrri. 

is nether good vpon the lande, ner in the] 

, | 'HERE resorted vnto him all the pnb-| 4 

B 

Fo. erri. 

€ 

Then came he to him self, and sayde: How many hyred seruauntes hath my father, which haue bred ynough, and I perish of honger?
I wil get vp, and go to my father, and saye vnto him: Father, I haue synned agaynst heauen and before the, and am nomore worthy to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hyred seruauntes. And he gat him vp, q came vnto his father. But whan

‘he was yet a greate waye of, his father sawe 
;him, and had cōpassion, and ranne, and fell 

aboute his neck, and kyssed him. Then sayde the sonne vnto him: Father, 1 haue synned agaynst heaue, and before the, I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne. But the

father sayde vnto his sernauntes: Brynge forth the best garment, and put it vpon him, and geue him a rynge vpon his hande, and shues on his fete, and brynge hither a fed calfe, and kyll it, lat vs eate and be mery: for this my sonne was deed, and is alyue agayne: he was lost, and is founde. And they beganne to be mery.

But the elder sonne was in the felde. And whan he came, and drewe nye to the house, he herde y mynstrelsye and daunsynge, and called one of the sernauntes vnto him, and axed what it was. He sayde vnto him: Thy brother is come, and thy father hath slayne a fed calfe, because he hath receaned him safe and sounde. Then was he angrie, and wolde not go in. Then wente his father out, and prayed him. But he answered, and sayde vnto his father: Lo, thus many yeares haue I done the seruyce, nether haue I yet broken thy commaundement, and thou gauest me neuer one kydd, y I might make mery with my frendes. But now that this thy sonne is come, which deuoured his goodes with har- lottes, thou hast slayne a fed calfe. But he sayde vnto him: My sonne, thou art allwaye with me, and all that is myne, is thine: thou shuldest be mery and glad, for this thy brother was deed, and is alyne agayne: he was lost, and is founde agayne.

The rbi. Chapter. 
E sayde also vnto his disciples: ‘There 
A was a certayne riche man, which had a stewarde, that was accused vnto him, that he had waisted his goodes. And he called him, and sayde vnto him: How is it, that I heare

a Psal.31.a. Iob 13.b. 

* Mat.6. c. — * Mat. 11. b. 

The qospell of S. Like. 

this of the? geue acomptes of thy steward- shipe, for thou mayest be no longer stewarde.
The stewarde sayde within himself: What shal I do? My lorde wil take awaye the stewardshipe fro me. 1 cà not dygge, and to begg I am ashamed. I wote what I wil do, that wha I am put out of the stewardshipe, they maye receaue me in to their houses.

And he called vnto hi all his lordes detters, and sayde vnto the first: How moch owest thou vnto my lorde? He sayde: an hundreth tonnes of oyle. And he sayde: Take thy byll, syt downe quyckly, q wryte fiftie. Then sayde he vnto another: How moch owest thou? He sayde: An hundreth quarters of wheate. And he sayde vnto him: Take thy byll, and wryte foure score. And the lorde comended the vnrighteous stewarde, because he had done wysely. For the children of this worlde are in their kynde wyser, thé the children of light. And I saye vnto you:
Make yon frendes with the vnrighteous Mam- mon, y whan ye shal haue nede, they maye receaue you in to euerlastinge Tabernacles.

He that is faithfull in the least, is faithfull also in moch: and he that is vnrighteous in the least, is vnrighteous also in moch. Yf ye then haue not bene faithfull in the vnrighteous
Mammon, who wyll belene you in that which is true? And yf ye haue not bene faithfull in another mans busynesse, who wil gene yon that which is youre awne?

^No seruaunt can serue two masters: for either he shal hate the one, and loue y other: or els he shal leane to the one, and despyse the other. Ye can not serne God and Mammon.

All these thinges herde the Pharises, which were couetous, and they mocked hi. And he sayde vnto them: Ye are they that iustifie youre selues before men, but God knoweth youre hertes. For y which is hye amonge men, is an abhominacion before God.

The lawe and y prophetes prophecied vnto 
Ihon, and from that tyme forth is y kyng- dome of God preached thorow ¥ Gospell, and euery man preasseth in to it by violence. But easler is it, for heauen and earth to perishe, then one tittle of ý lawe to fall. Who so ener putteth awaye his wife, q marieth another, breaketh matrimonye: ^and he that marieth her which is deuorced fro hir huszbande, breaketh wedlocke also.

4 Mat. 5. d. and 19. b. Marc. 10. a. 

Chap, rbi., 

B 

€ 

Chap, rbij. 

| There was a certayne riche man, which 
SS him self with purple and costly lynnen, and fared deliciously euery daye. And there
‘was a poore man named Lazarus which laye 
‘at his gate full of sores, and desyred to be fylled with the crommes, that fell from the riche mans table. Yet came the dogges, and licked his sores. But it fortuned, that the poore man dyed, and was caried of the angels in to Abrahams bosome. The riche man dyed also, and was buried.

| Now whan he was in the hell, he lift vp his eyes in the payne, and sawe Abraham afarre of, and Lazarus in his bosome: and he cried, and sayde: Father Abraham, haue mercy vpon me, and sende Lazarus, that he maye dyppe the typpe of his fynger im water, coole my tonge, for I am torméted iu this flame. But Abraha saide: Remébre sonne, y thou hast receaued good in thy life, q con- trary wyse Lazarus receaued euell But now js he comforted, and thou art tormented.
And beside all this, there is a great space set betwene vs and you: so y they which wolde go downe from hence vnto you, can not: nether maye they passe ouer from thence vnto vs.

'Then sayde he: I pray the then father, that thou wilt sende him vnto my fathers house, for I haue yet fyue brethren, that he maye warne them, lest they also come in to this place of torment. Abraham sayde vnto him: They haue Moses and the prophetes, let them heare them. But he sayde: Nay father Abraham, but yf one wente vnto them fro the deed, they wolde do pennaunce.
Neuertheles he sayde vnto him: Yf they heare not Moses q the prophetes, then shal they not beleue also, though one rose agayne fro the deed.

The rbij. Chapter. 

H* sayde vnto his disciples: It is vnpos- 

sible that offences shulde not come: * but wo vnto him by whom they come: It were better for him, that a mylstone were banged aboute his neck, and he cast in to the see, then that he shulde offende one of these litle ones. Take hede to youre selues. Yf thy brother trespace agaynst the, rebuke him: and yf he amende, ^forgeue him. And though he synne agaynst the seuen tymes in

a Mat, 18.a. Marc. 9. e. 

? Mat. 18. b. 

The qospell of 3. Luke, 

a daye, and come seuen tymes in a daye to 

e 

M agayne, and saye: It repenteth me, forgeue 

im. 

And the Apostles sayde vnto LORDE: 
Increace oure faith. The LORDE sayde: Yf ye haue faith as a grayne of mustarde sede, and saye vnto this Molbery tre: Plucke thy self vp by the rotes, and plate thy self in the see, it shalbe obediet vnto you. Which of you is it, that hath a seruaunt (which ploweth, or fedeth the catell) wha he commeth home, from y felde, that he wil saye vnto him: Go quyckly, and syt the down to meate ? not thus? that he sayeth vnto him: Make ready, that I maye suppe, gyrde vp thyself, and serue me, tyll I haue eaten and dronken, afterwarde shalt thou eate and drynke also.
Thanketh he the same seruaunt also, because he dyd that was commaunded him? I trowe not. So likewyse ye, whā ye haue done all that is comaunded you, saye: We are vnpro- fitable seruauntes, we haue done that we were bounde to do.

And it fortuned, whan he toke his iourney towarde lerusalem, he wente thorow the myddest of Samaria and Galile. And as he came in to a towne, there met him ten leporous men, which stode afarre of, and lift vp their voyce, and sayde: lesu master, haue mercy vpon vs. And whan he sawe them, he sayde vnto the : * Go, and shewe youre selues vnto y prestes. And it came to passe, as they wente, they were clensed. And one of them wha he sawe that he was clensed, he turned backe agayne, and praysed God with loude voyce, and fell downe on his face at his fete, and gaue him thankes. And the same was a
Samaritane. [esus answered and saide: Are there not ten clensed? But where are those nyne? There were els none founde, that turned agayne, and gaue God the prayse, saue onely this straiiger. And he sayde vnto him:
Aryse, go thy waye, thy faith hath made y whole. 

But whan he was demaunded of $ Pha-| € 

rises: Whan cometh the kyngdome of God? 
He answered them, and sayde: The kyng- dome of God commeth not with outwarde appearaunce, nether shal it be sayde: lo, here or there is it. For beholde, y kyngdome of
God is inwarde in you. 

And he sayde to the disciples: The tyme shal come, wha ye shal desyre to se one daye

* Mat. 17. c. ana 21, c. * Leuit. 14. a. 

Fo. trent. 

Is it}%3 

| 
| 
| 
I 
| 

The qospell of >. Luke. Chap. rbiij. 

this weddowe is so importune vpon me, I wil delyuer her, lest she come at the last, and rayle vpon me.

Then sayde the LORDE: Heare what y vnrighteous iudge sayeth. But shall not God also delyuer his chosen, that erye vnto hi daye and night, though he differre thé? I saye vnto you: He shal delyner them, and that shortly. Neuertheles, whan the sonne of man cometh, suppose ye, that he shal fynde faith vpon earth ?

And vnto eertayne which trusted in thé selues, that they were perfecte, and despysed other, he spake this symilitude: There wente vp two men in to the téple, to praye: the one a Pharise, the other a publican. The Pharise stode, and prayed by himself after this maner:
‘I thanke the God, that I am not as other men, robbers, vnrighteous, aduouters, or as this publican. I fast twyse in the weke, I geue the tithes of all that I haue. And the publican stode afarre of, and wolde not lift vp his eyes to heauen, but smote vpon his brest, and sayde: God be thou mereyfull vnto me synner. I tell you: This man wente downe in to his house iustified more the the other.’
For who so euer exalteth himself, shalbe brought lowe: and he that humbleth himself, shalbe exalted.

‘They brought yonge children also vnto him, that he shulde touch them. But whan the disciples sawe that, they rebuked them.
Neuertheles Iesus called them vnto him, and sayde: Suffre childré to come vnto me, and forbyd thé not, for of soch is ¥ kyngdome of
God. Verely I saye vnto you: Whosoeuer receaueth not y kyngdome of God as a childe, shal not enter therin.

And a eertayne ruler axed him, and sayde: 
” Good master, what must I do, that I maye enheret euerlastinge life? But lesus sayde vnto him: Why eallest thou me good? There is no man good, but God onely. Thou knowest the comaundementes: ‘Thou shalt not breake wedlocke: 'Thou shalt not kyll:"
Thou shalt not steale: Thou shalt not beare false wytnesse: Honoure thy father and th mother. But he sayde: All these haue 1 kepte fro my youth vp. Whan lesus herde that, he sayde vnto him: Yet lackest thou one

Fo. rrr. of the sonne of man, and shal not seit. And they shal saye vnto you: “Se here, Se there
Go not ye, nether folowe, for as the lighten- mge shyneth aboue from the heauen, and
Hiehteth ouer all that is vnder the heaué, so shal the sonne of ma be in his daye. But first must he suffre many thinges,’ and be refused of this generacion.

* And as it came to passe in the tyme of 
Noe, so shal it come to passe also in y dayes of the sonne of man. They ate, they dranke, they maried, and were maried, euen vnto y daye that Noe wente in to the Arke, and y floude eame, and destroyed them all.

D| Likewyse also as it came to passe in the 

tyme of Lot, they ate, they dranke, they 

bought, they solde, they planted, they buylded. 

But euen the same daye that Lot wente out 

of Sodom,’ it rayned fyre and brymstone from 

heaué, and destroyed them all. After this maner also shal it go, in the daye whau the sonne of man shal appeare.

In that daye, who so is vp6 the rofe, and his stuffe in $ house,‘ let him not eome downe to fetch it: Likewyse he that is in the felde, let him not turne baeke, for it that is behynde him. * Remébre Lottes wife. Who so euer goeth aboute to saue his life,’ shal lose it: and who so euer shal lose it, shal saue it.

I saye vnto you: In y night shal two lye vpon oue.bed, the one shalbe receaued, the other shalbe for saken. ‘Two shalbe gryndinge together, the one shalbe receaued, the other shalbe forsaken. And they answered, and sayde vnto him: Where LORDE? He
| |sayde vnto the: Where so euer y deed carcase is there wil ý Aegles be gathered together.

The rhitj. Chapter. 

a E tolde them a symilitude," signifienge, 
ý men ought allwayes to praye, q not 

to leaue of, q sayde: There was a iudge in a cite, which feared not God, and stode in awe

of no man. And in the same cite there was 

a wedowe, which eame vnto him, and sayde: delyuer me fro myne aduersary. And he wolde not a greate whyle. But afterwarde he thought within hi self: Though I feare not
God, a stonde in awe of no man, yet seynge 

* Mat. 24. b. Marc, 13. c. ^ Mat. 16. c. * Gen. 7. b. 
Mat. 24.d. 4 Gen. 19. c. * Mat. 24. b. * Gen. 19. c. f Mat. 10. e. Marc. 8. e. € Mat. 24. d. ^ 1 Tess. 5. c.

i Deu. 26. c. Eccla. 7. c. k Mat. 23. b. Luc. 14. b. 
! Mat. 19. b. Mar. 10. b. m Mat, 19. c. Mar. 10. b. 
^ Exo, 20. c. 

Chap. rir. thinge, sell all that thou hast, and gene it vnto y poore, and thou shalt haue a treasure in heauen, and come q folowe me. Whan he herde that, he was sory, for he was very riche.

*Whan lesus sawe that he was sory, he sayde: How hardly shal the riche come in to the kyngdome of God? It is easyer for a
Camell to go thorow the eye of a nedle, the for a rich man to entre in to the kyngdome of
God. Then sayde they y herde that: Who can then be saued? But he sayde: loke what'is vnpossible with mé, is possible with
God.’ 

Then sayde Peter: Beholde, we haue for- saké all, and folowed the. He sayde vnto the: "Verely I saye vnto you: There is no ma y forsaketh house, or elders, or brethren, or wife, or children for the kyngdome of Gods sake, which shal not receaue moch more in this tyme, and euerlastinge life in the worlde to come.

He toke vnto him the twolue, and sayde vnto them: ^Beholde, we go vp to Jerusalé, and it shal all be fulfilled, that is wrytten by the prophetes of the sonne of man. For he shal be delyuered vnto $ Heythen, and shalbe mocked, and despytefully intreated, and spitted vpon: and whan they haue scourged him, they shal put him to death, and vpon the thirde daye shal he aryse agayne. *And they vnderstode nothinge of these thinges.
And this sayenge was hyd from them, and’ they perceaued not the thinges that were spoken.

‘And it eame to passe, whan he came nye vnto lericho, there sat one blynde by the waye, and begged. And whan he herde the people passe by, he axed what it was. Then sayde they vnto him, that lesus of Nazareth passed by. And he eryed, and sayde: Iesu thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy vpon me.
But the people that wente before, rebuked him, that he shulde holde his tunge. Neuer- theles he cried moch more: Thou sonne of
Dauid haue mercy vpo me. lesus stode styl, t comaunded hi to be brought vnto hi. And, whan he was come neare, he axed him and sayde: What wilt thou, that I do vnto the ?
He sayde: LORDE, that I maye receaue my sight. And Iesus sayde vnto him: Receaue thy sight, thy faith hath saued the. And,

* Mat, 19. d. 
* Luc. 23. a. | 

* Mat. 19. c. Marc. 10. c, ^ Luc. 1. c. 
Mar. 10.c. 4 Mat. 20. b. Marc. 10. d. 

The qosprll of S, Luke, 

Fo. Iyrrb. immediatly he sawe, and folowed him, q praysed
God. And all the people that sawe it, gaue 
God the prayse. 

The riz. Chapter. 
ND he entred in, and wente thorow/@ 
Iericho: q beholde, there was a man named Zacheus, which was a ruler of the, publicans, and was riche, and desyred to se lesus what he shulde be, and he coulde not for the people, for he was lowe of stature.
And he ranne before, and clymmed vp in to a wylde fygge tre, that he might se him: for he shulde come y waye. And whan Iesus came to the same place, he loked vp, and sawe him, and sayde vnto him: Zache, come downe haistely, for to daye must I turne in to thy house. And he came downe hastely, and receaued himt with ioye. Whan they sawe that, they murmured all, and sayde, y he was gone in, to a synner.

But Zacheus stode forth, and sayde vnto the LORDE: Beholde LORDE, the half of my goodes geue I to the poore: and yf I haue defrauded eny man, I restore him foure folde. lesus sayde vnto him: This daye is health happened vnto this house, for so moch as he also is Abrahams sonne. For the sonne of mà is come, to seke and to saue that which was lost.

Now whyle they herkened, he tolde a symilitude also, because he was nye vnto
Ierusalem, and because they thought, that the kyngdome of God shulde appeare immediatly.
And he sayde: “A certayne noble mà wete in to a farre countre, to receaue hi a kyngdome, and then to come agayne. ‘This man called ten of his seruauntes, and delyuered them ten pounde, and sayde vnto them: Occupye, tyll I come agayne. But his citesyns hated him, and sent a message after him, and sayde: We wil not haue this man to reigne ouer vs.

And it fortuned whan he came agayne, | 33 after that he had receaued the kyngdome, he bade call for the seruauntes, vnto whom he had geué his money, y he might knowe, what euery one had done. Then came the first and sayde: Syr, thy pounde hath wonne ten pounde. And he sayde vnto him: Well thou good seruaüt, for so moch as thou hast bene

f Mat. 20. d. Marc. 10. c. f Act. 16. c. 
€ Mat. 25, a. Marc.13. d. 

140 

* Luc. 2. g. 

1 Mat. 15. c. | 

fo. lrrrbt. 
!faithfull in the least, thou shalt haue auctorite ouer ten cities. The seconde came also, and sayde: Syr, thy pounde hath wonne fyue pounde. And fo him he sayde: And thou shalt be ouer fyue cities. And y thirde came, and sayde: Lo syr, here is thy pounde, which
I haue kepte in à napkyn. I was afrayed of the, for thou art an harde man, thou takest vp y thou hast not layed downe, and reapest that thou hast not sowne. He sayde vnto him: *Of thine awne mouth iudge I the thou euell seruaunt. Knewest thou that I am an harde man, takynge vp that I layde not downe, and reapynge that I dyd not sowe? Wherfore then hast thou not delyuered my money to the exchaunge banke? And at my commynge might I haue requyred myne awne with vauntage ?
C] And he sayde vnto them that stode by: 
Take ¥ pounde from him, and geue it vnto him that hath ten pounde. And they sayde vnto him: Syr, he hath ten pounde already.
But I saye vnto you: ^Whosoeuer hath, vnto him shal be geué: but from him that hath not, shal be taken awaye euen that he hath.
As for those myne enemies, which wolde not that I shulde raigne ouer them, bringe them hither, and slaye them before me. And whan he had thus sayde, he wéte on forwarde, and toke his iourney vp to lerusalem.

‘And it fortuned whan he came nye to 
Bethphage and Bethany vnto mount Oliuete, he sent two of his disciples, and sayde: Go in to the towne that lyeth ouer agaynst you, and assone as ye are come in, ye shal fynde a foale tyed, wheron yet neuer man satt, lowse it, and brynge it hither. And yf eny mà axe

ou wherfore ye lowse it, saye thus vnto him. 
Fhe LORDE hath nede therof. 

And they that were sent, wéte their waye and founde euen as he had sayde. But whā they lowsed y foale, the owners therof sayde vnto thé: Why lowse ye the foale? They sayde: The LORDE hath nede therof. And they brought it vnto lesus, and cast their clothes vpo the foale, and set lesus theron.
‘Now as he wente, they spred their garmentes in the waye.

B| And whan he wéte downe fro mount 

Oliuete, $ whole multitude of his disciples 

* 2 Reg. i.c. Mat. 12. d, a Mat. 13. b. and 25. c. 
Marc. 4. e. Luc. 8. b. > Mat. 21.a. Marc. 11. a. e Joha. 12. b. aiue, 19: d. t Eph. 2. c. t Abac. 2. b. $ Iohà. 11. d. e Jere. 59. a. Mich. 3. c.

The qospell of 3». Luke, 

'begüne ioyfully to prayse God with loude voyce, ouer all the miracles that they had
(sene, and sayde: “Blessed be he, that cometh a kynge in the name of the LORDE. t Peace be in heauen, and prayse in the height. And some of the Pharises amonge the people sayde vnto him: Master, rebuke thy disciples. And he answered and sayde vnto them: I tell you, tyf these holde their peace, yet shal the stones crye.

And whan he was come neare, he behelde the cite, and §wepte vpo it, and sayde: Yf thou knewest what were for thy peace, thou shuldest remébre it euen in this present daye of thine. But now is it hyd from thine eyes.
* For the tyme shal come vpon the, that thine enimies shal cast vp a bake aboute the, and aboute thy children with the, and besege y, and kepe the in on euery syde, and make the eauen with the grounde, and shal not leaue in the one stone vpon another, because thou hast not knowne y tyme, wherin thou hast bene visited.

f And he wente in to the temple, and begane to dryue out them that bought and solde therin, and sayde vnto them: It is wrytten :

My house is an house of prayer, but ye haue made it a denne of murthurers. And he taught daylie in the téple. But the hye prestes and the serybes and the chefest of N people wente aboute to destroye him,? and founde not, what to do vnto him. For all the people stacke by him, and gaue him audience.

The yr. Chapter. 

ND it fortuned one of those dayes, whan 
A he taught the people in the teple,^ and preached the Gospell, the hye prestes and serybes came to him with the Elders, and spake vnto him, and sayde: Tell vs, by what auctorite doest thou these thinges? Or who gaue the this auctorite? But he answered, q sayde vnto the: I wil axe you a worde also, tell it me: The baptyme of Ihó was it from heauen, or of men? But they thought in them selues, and sayde: Yf we saye, from heauen, then shal he saye: Why dyd ye not thé beleue him? But yf we saye, of men, then shal all the people stone vs, for they be persuaded, that Ihon is a prophet. And they answered,

Mat. 24. a. Marc. 13.2. Luc. 21. a. f Mat. 21. b. 
Mare. 11. b. Toba. 2. b. Esa. 56. b. lere. 7. a. 
3 Re. 8. d. € Mat. 21. e. Luc. 20. b. Iohà. 7. c. and 8. d. ^ Mat. 21. c. Marc. 11. d.

Chap. rr. 

Chap. rt. 

lesus sayde vnto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these thinges.

And he beganne to tell the people this symilitude : A certayne man planted a vyn- yarde, and let it out vnto huszbadmen, and wente himself in to a straunge countre for a greate season. And whan his tyme was come, he sent a seruaŭt to the huszbadmen, that they might geue him of the frute of the vyn- yarde. But the huszbandmen bet him, and sent him awaye emptye. And agayne he sent yet another seruaüt: but they bet him also, and intreated him shamefully, x sent him awaye emptye. And besydes this, he sent the thirde: but they wounded him also, and thrust him out.

* deare sonne, peraduenture they wil stonde in awe of him, whan they se him.

But whan the huszbande men sawe the sonne, they thought in the selues, and sayde :
This is the heyre, come,! let vs kyll him, y the inheritaunce maye be oures. And they thrust him out of ¥ vynyarde, and slew him.
What shal now the lorde of the vynyarde do vnto them? He shal come, and destroye those huszbandmen, and let out his vynyarde vnto other. Whan they herde that, they sayde:
God forbyd. 

But he behelde the, and sayde: What is this then that is wrytten: * The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the head corner stone? Who so euer falleth vpon this stone, shalbe broken in sunder: but vpó who so euer he falleth, he shall grynde him to poulder. “And the hye prestes and scrybes wente aboute to laye handes vpon him the same houre, and they feared the people: for they perceaued, that he had spoke this symi- litude agaynst them.

And they watched hi, q sent forth spyes, which shulde fayne thé selues perfecte," that they might take him in his wordes, to delyuer him vnto the power and auctorite of y debite.
And they axed him, q sayde: Master, we knowe that thou sayest q teachest right, and regardest the outwarde appearaüce of no man, but teachest the waye of God truly. Is it laufull, that we geue tribute vnto the Em-

a Mat. 21. d. Marc. 12. a. * Joha. 3. c. Rom. 8. a. 
Phil. 2. a. t Gen. 37. d. è Psal. 117.c. Esa. 28. c. 
€ Mat. 21. c. Marc. 12. a. Luc. 19. d. 4 Mat. 22, b. 

Then sayde the lorde of the 
'|vynyarde: What shal I do? I wil sende my: 

The qgospell of S. Luke, 

that they coulde not tell, whence it was. And 

Fo. Iyyrbij. peroure, or not? But he perceaued their eraftynes, and sayde vnto them: Why tépte ye me? Shewe me the peny. Whose ymage and superscripcion hath it? They answered, and sayde: The Emperours. ‘Then sayde he vnto them: Geue thé vnto the Emperoure, that which is the Emperours: q vnto God, that which is Gods. And they coude not reproue his worde before the people, and marueyled at his answere, and helde their | peace.

*'Phen came vnto him certayne of the 
Saduces (which holde that there is no resur-| | reccion) and axed him, and sayde: Master,
Moses wrote vnto vs, yf eny mans brother dye hauynge a wife, and dyeth without childré,’ then shal his brother take his wife, and rayse vp sede vnto his brother. Now were there seué brethré: the first toke a wife, and dyed childlesse: and the seconde toke the wife, and dyed without children also: and the thirde toke her, likewyse all the seué, and left no children behynde thé, and dyed. At the last after them all, the woman dyed also. Now in the resurreccion, whose wife shal she be of them? For seuen had her to wife. And lesus answered and saide vnto them: The childré of this worlde mary, q are maried, but they y shalbe worthy to enioye that worlde and the resurreccion from the deed, shal nether mary ner be maried, for they can dye nomore. For they are like vnto the angels, and are the ; children of God, in so moch as they are children of the resurreccion.

But that the deed ryse agayne, hath Moses also signified besydes the bush, when he called the LORDE, the God of Abraham,’ the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. But God is not a God of the deed but of the lyuynge, for they lyue all vnto him. Then answered cer- tayne of the scrybes, and sayde: Master, thou haist sayde well. And from that tyme forth they durst axe him no mo questions.

^ But he sayde vnto them : How saye they that Christ is Dauids sonne? And Dauid him- self sayeth in the boke of the Psalmes: The
LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE: ‘Syt thou on my right honde, tyll I make thine enemies thy fote stole. Dauid calleth him LORDE, how is he then his sonne ?

m 

Marc. 12. b. * Mat. 22. d. Marc. 12. b. / Deut. 25.a. t 1 Ioha. 3. a. ë Exod. 3. a. ^ Mat. 22, d.
Marc. 12. d. * Psal. 109, a. 

Fo. Irrrbtij. 

* Now whyle all the people gaue audience, he sayde vnto his disciples: Bewarre of the serybes, which wyl go in longe garmentes, and loue to be saluted vpon the market, and desyre to syt hyest in the synagoges, and at the table. They deuoure wedowes houses, and that vnder a culoure of longe prayenge: These shal receaue the greater.danacion.

The pri. Chapter. 

a ND he loked vp, and behelde y riche,’ 

how they put in their offerynges in to 

the Gods chest. He sawe also a poore wedowe, 

which put in two mytes, and he sayde: Verely 

I saye vnto you: * This poore wedowe hath 

put in more thé they all: For these all haue 

of their excesse put in vnto the offerynge of 

God, but she of hir pouerte hath put in all hir lyuynge that she had.

* And wha some spake of the temple, that it was garnished with goodly stones and Iewels, he saide: t The time shal come, wherin of all this that ye se, there shal not be left one stone vpon another, which shal not be broken downe.
They axed him, and sayde: Master, wha shal these be? and what shalbe the token, whan these shal come to passe?

He sayde: Take hede, that ye be not disceaued: ^For many shal come in my name, and saye, I am he, ¢ the tyme is come hard by. Folowe them not. '

33| But whan ye heare of warres and insur- reccions, be not ye afrayed, for soch must come to passe, but the ende is not yet there so soone. Then sayde he vnto them: One people shal ryse agaynst another, and one realme ageynst another, a shal be greate earth- quakes here and there, pestilence, and derth, and fearfull thinges. And greate tokés shal there be fré heaué. But before all these, they shal laye handes vpon you,” and persecute you, and delyuer you vp in to their synagoges and presons, and brynge you before kynges ¢ prynees for my names sake. But this shal happen vnto you for a wytnesse. Be at a poynt therfore in youre hertes, that ye take no thought, how ye shal answere: for I wil geue you mouth q wyszdome,’ agaynst the

* Mat. 23.a. Marc. 12. d. Luc. 11. d. ^ Marc. 12. d. 
* 2 Cor.8.b. * Mat.24.a. Marc. 13.2. +3 Re. 9. b. lere. 7. b. Luc. 19, d. 4 1 Joh. 4, a. © Esa, 19. a.

f Mat. 10. b. and 24, a. Marc. 13,b. Luc. 12.b. lohá. 
15. b. and 16. a. 

£ Exod. 4. c. Esa, 54. c. Act. 6. b. 

The gospell of S. Luke, 

which all youre aduersaries shal not be able to speake ner toresist. But ye shal be delyuered vp euen of youre elders, brethren, kynszfolkes and frendes,' and some of you shal they put vnto death, and ye shal be hated of euery man for my names sake, and yet shal not one hayre of youre heade perishe. Holde fast youre soules with pacience.

But whan ye shal se Ierusalem beseged with an hoost, then vnderstonde,' that the desola- cion of itis nye. Then let them which be in lewry, fle vnto the mountaynes: and let soch as be in the myddest therof, departe out : and let soch as be in the countrees, not come therin. For these are the dayes of ven- geaunce, that euery thinge which is wrytten, maye be fulfilled. But wo vnto them that are with childe, and to them that geue sucke in those dayes: for there shalbe greate trouble vpon earth, and wrath ouer this people, and they shal fall thorow the edge of the swerde, and be led captyue amoge all nacions.t And
Terusalé shalbe troden downe of the Heithen, vntyll the tyme of the Heithen be fulfilled.

* And there shal be tokens in the Sonne and Mone, and starres, and vpon earth the people shalbe in soch perplexite, that they shal not tell which waye to turne them selues.
And the see and the waters shal roare, and men shal pyne awaye for feare, and for lokynge after the thinges which shal come vpo earth.
For euen the very powers of heauen shal mone.

‘And then shal they se the sonne of man commynge in the cloude with power and greate glory But whan these thinges be- gynne to come to passe, thé loke vp, and lift vpp youre heades, for youre redempcion draweth nye.

And he tolde them a symilitude: Deholde the fygge tre," and all the trees, whà they now shute forth their buddes, ye se by them, and perceaue, that Sommer is now at hande. So likewyse ye, whan ye se all these thinges come to passe, be sure that the kyngdome of God is nye. Verely I saye vnto you: This generacio shal not passe, tyll all be fulfilled. Heauen and earth shal passe, but my wordes shal not passe.

^ Micb. 7.a. $ Mat. 24. b. Marc. 13.b. — t Rom. 11. d. k Mat. 24. c, Marc. 13. c. Ezec. 38. c. Ose. 90. b.
Apoc. 6. c. ! Esa. 19. a. Luc. 17. e. Iobà, 1. c. 
|m Mat. 24, c. Marc. 13. d. 

| 

Chap. rrij. 
“But take hede vnto youre selues, that youre hertes be not ouerladé with excesse of eatinge and with dronkennes, and with takinge of thonght for lyuynge, and so this daye come vpó you unawares. For asa snare shal it come on all them that dwell vpon earth. ^ Watch therfore cotynually, and praye, that ye maye be worthy to escape all this that shal come, q to stode before y sonne of man.
And on the daye tyme he taught in the temple, bnt in the night season he wente out and abode all night vpon mount Oliuete.
And all the people gat them vp early vnto him in the temple, for to heare him.

The rrij. Chapter. a HE feast of swete bred (which is called
IT Easter) drue nye. “And y hye prestes and Scrybes sought how they might. put him to death, and were afrayed of the people.
But * Satan was entred in to Iudas, named 
| Iscarioth (which was of nombre of ¥ twolue) and he wēte his waye, and talked with the hye prestes and with y officers, how he wolde betraye him vnto them. And they were glad, and promysed to geue him money. And he cosented, q sought oportunite, y he might betraye hi without eny rumoure.
?'Then came y daye of swete bred, wherin the Easter lambe must be offered. And he sent Peter and Ihon, and sayde: Go youre waye, prepare vs the Easter lambe, that we maye eate. But they sayde vnto him: Where wilt thou, that we prepare it? He saide vnto them: Beholde, wha ye come in to y cite, there shal mete you a man, bearinge a pitcher of water, folowe him in to the house y he entreth in, and saye vnto the good man of the house: The master sendeth y worde: Where is y gesthouse, wherin I maye eate the Easter labe with my disciples? And he shal shewe you a greate parlour paued. They wente their waye, and founde as he had sayde vnto them, and made ready the Easter lambe.
B| And whan the houre came, he sat him downe, and the twolue Apostles with him, and he sayde vnto them : I haue hertely desyred to eate this Easter labe with you before I suffre. For I saye vnto you: that henceforth
I wil eate nomore therof, tyll it be fulfilled 

a Rom.13. b. ^ Mat.24.d. Marc. 13.d. 1 Pet.5.b. 
* Mat. 26. a. Mar.14.a. [ohà.7.c.11.e.andf. * Ioh. 

12. a, and 13. c. 4 Mat. 26. b. Mar. 14. b. * Mat. 
26.c. Mar.14.c. 1 Cor.11. c. tlohà.6.f. | / Mat. 

The qospeil of S. Luke. 

Fo. Irrrür. in the kyngdome of God. ‘And he toke the cuppe, gaue thankes, and sayde: Take this and deuyde it amonge you. For I saye vnto you: I wil not drynke of the frute of Y vyne, vntyll the kyngdome of God come.

And he toke the bred, gaue thankes, and brake it, and gaue it them, and sayde: This is my body, ;which shalbe geuen for you.
This do in the remembraunce of me. Like- wyse also the cuppe, after they had supped, and sayde: This cuppe is the new Testamét in my bloude, which shalbe shed for you.

^But lo, the hande of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. And the sonne of man trulye goeth forth, as it is appoynted.
But wo vnto that man, by whom he is be- trayed. And they beganne to axe amonge them selues, which of them it shulde be, that shulde do that.

e There rose a strife also aindge thé, which of them shulde be take for the greatest. But he sayde vnto them: The kynges of y worlde haue domynion ouer $ people, and they that beare rule ouer thé, are called gracious lordes. t But ye shal not be so: But the greatest amonge you, shalbe as the yongest: and the chefest, as a seruaunt. For which is the greatest? he that sytteth at the table, or he that serueth? Is not he that sytteth at the table? $ But I am amóge you as a mynister.
As for you, ye are they, that haue byddé with me in my temptacions. And I wil appoynte the kyngdome vnto you, euen as my father hath appoynted me, that ye maye eate and drynke at my table in my kyngdome, || and syt vpon seates, and iudge the twolue trybes of Israel.

But the LORDE sayde: Simon Simon, beholde, Satan hath desyred after you, that he might siffte you euen as wheate: but I haue prayed for y, that thy faith fayle not.
And whan thou art couerted, strength thy brethren: ^But he sayde vnto him: LORDE,
I am ready to go with the in to preson, and in to death. Neuertheles he sayde: Peter, I saye vnto the: The cock shal not crowe this daye, tyll thou haue thryse denyed, y thou knewest me.

And he sayde vnto them: T Whan I sent you without wallet, without scryppe, and

€ Mat.20.d. Marc. 9. d. and 10. e. 

26.b. Mar. 14.c. 

Luc. 9. e. t 1 Pet. 5, a. $ Luc. 12. d. || Mat. 
19. d. Apoc. 3. d. ^ Mat. 26. c. Marc. 14.c. Iobà. 
13. d. T Mat. 10.a. Marc. 6.a. Luc. 9. a. 

|dfo. rt. 

D 

The gospell of S. Luke. 

without shues, lacked ye eny thinge? They sayde: No. ‘Then sayde he ynto them: But now, he that hath a wallet, let him take it vp, likewyse also the seryppe. But he that hath not, let him sell his coate, q bye a swerde.
For I saye vnto you: It must yet be fulfilled on me, that is wrytté: * He was counted amonge the euell doers. For loke what is wrytten of me, it hath an ende. But they sayde: LORDE, Beholde, here are two swerdes. He sayde vnto thé: It is ynough.
* And he wente out (as he was wonte) vnto mout Oliuete. But his disciples folowed him vnto the same place. And whan he came thither, he sayde vnto thé: t Praye, that ye fall not in to téptacion. And he gat him from them aboute a stones cast, and kneled downe, prayed, q sayde: Father, yf thou wilt, take awaye this cuppe fro me: Neuer- thelesse, not my wyll, but thyne be fulfylled.
And there appeared vnto him an angell fro heauen, and conforted him. And it came so, that he wrestled with death, and prayed the longer. And his sweate was like droppes of bloude, runnynge downe to the grounde.
And he rose vp fro prayer, and came to his disciples, and founde them slepinge for heny-

uesse, and sayde vnto them: What, slepe ye?) 

ryse vp and praye, that ye fall not in to ten- tacion.

But whyle he yet spake, beholde, the mul- titude, ‘and one of the twolue called Iudas wente before them, and he came nye vnto lesus, to kysse him. But lesus sayde vnto him: ludas, betrayest thou the sonne of mà with a kysse? Whan they that were abonte him, sawe what wolde folowe, they sayde vnto him: LORDE, shal we smyte with the swerde? And one of the stroke a seruaut of y hye prestes, q smote of his eare. . But lesus answered, and sayde: Suffre the thus farre forth. And he touched his eare, q healed him.

‘But lesus sayde vnto the prestes and rulers of the temple, and to the Elders that were come vnto him: Ye are come forth as it were to a murthurer with swerdes, « with staues. I was daylie with you in the temple, and ye layed no handes vpon me. But this
Is youre houre, and the power of darknesse. 

* E32.53. c. a Mat. 26.c. lohà. 18. a. t Mat. 

6. b. è [oha. 6. d. * Mat. 26. e. Mare. 14. e. 

Iohà. 18.a. 4 Mat. 26. f. Marc. 14. f. * Joha. 18. b. 

|f Luc. 22. c, Mat. 26. c. Mar. 14. c. f Mat. 16. c. 

Neuerthelesse they toke him, and led him, and brought him in to the hye prestes house.
As for Peter, he folowed hi a farre of. 

Then kyndled they a fyre in the myddest of the palace, and sat them downe together.
And Peter sat him downe amonge them. 
Then a damsell sawe him syttinge by the light, and behelde him well, and sayde vnto him: This same was also with him. But he denyed him, and sayde: Woma, I knowe him not. And after a litle whyle, another sawe him, and sayde: Thou art one of them also.
But Peter sayde: Man, I am not. 

And aboute the space of an houre after, another affirmed, q sayde: Verely this was with him also, for he is a Galilean. But
Peter saide: Ma, I wote not what thou sayest. And immediatly whyle he yet spake, y cock crewe. And the LORDE turned him aboute and loked vpo Peter. And Peter remembred the wordes of y LORDE, how he sayde vnto him: t Before the cock crowe, thou shalt denye me thryse. And Peter wente out, and wepte bytterly.

The men that helde Iesus, mocked him,; and stroke him, blyndfolded him, and smote him on the face, and axed him, and sayde:
Prophecie, who is it that smote the? And many other blasphemies sayde they vnto hi.

And whan it was daye, there gathered together the Elders of the people, the hye prestes and scrybes, and led him vp before their councell, and sayde: Art thou Christ?
Tell vs. But he sayde vnto them: Yf I tell you, ye wyl not beleue: But yf I axe you, ye wyl not answere me, nether wyl ye let me go.
4 From this tyme forth shal the sonne of man sytt at the right hade of the power of God.
Then sayde they all: Art thou then y sonne of God? He sayde vnto them: Ye saye it, for I am. They sayde: What nede we anye farther wytnesse ? We oure selues haue herde it of his awne mouth.'

The rrj. Chapter. 
ND the whole multitude of thé arose,* and led him vnto Pilate, and begane to accuse him, and sayde: We haue founde this felowe pernertinge the people, and forbyd- dinge to geue trybute vnto the Emperoure,

£ Mat. 26.f. Mar. 14. g. ^ Col. 3.a. Heb. 1.a. and 10.b. — * Mat. 26. g. * Mat. 27. a. Marc. 15. a.
Toba. 18. d. 

Chap. rri. 

T 

(Chap. rrii. The gospel! of &. Luke. Fo. pet. 

and sayeth, that he is Christ a kynge. But 
Pilate axed him, and sayde: “Art thou the kynge of the Iewes? He answered him, and sayde: Thou sayest it. Pilate sayde vnto y hye prestes and to the people: 1 fynde no cause in this man. But they were the more fearce, and sayde: He hath moned the people, in that he hath taught here q there in all the londe of Iewry, and hath * begonne at Galile vnto this place.

Whan Pilate herde mencion of Galile, he axed whether he were of Galile. And whan he perceaned that he was vnder t Herodes iurisdiecion the sent him to Herode, which was also at lerusale in those dayes. When
Herode sawe lesus, he was exceadinge glad, for he had longe bene desyrons to se him: because $he had herde moch of him, q hoped to se a miracle of hi. And he axed him many thinges. Neuertheles he answered him nothinge. The hye prestes and scrybes stode, and aeeused him sore. But Herode with his men of warre despysed him, and mocked him, pnt a whyte garmét vpo him, and sent him agayne vnto Pilate. Vpo y same daye were Pilate and Herode made frendes together, for afore they had bene at variaunce.

B| Pilate called the hye prestes, and the rulers, and the people together, and sayde vnto thé:
? Ye haue bronght this man vnto me, as one that pernerteth the people, and beholde, I haue examyned him before yon, q fynde in the mà none of the causes, wherof ye accuse him: Nor yet Herode: for I sent you to him, and beholde, there is brought vpon hi nothinge, that is worthy of death. || Therfore wil I chasten him, andlet him lowse: For he must haue let one lowse vnto them after the custome of the feast.

“Then cried the whole multitude, and sayde: Awaye with him, and delyner vnto vs
Barrabas, which for insurreccion made in the cite, and because of a murthur, was cast in to preson. Then called Pilate vnto them agayne, q wolde haue let lesus lowse. But they cried, and sayde: Crucifye him, Crucifye him. Yet sayde he vnto them, the thirde tyme: What enell thé hath he done? I fynde no cause of death in hi, therfore wil I chasten him, and

let him go. But they laye styll vpon him with greate crye, and requyred y he might be crucified, And the voyce of thé and of the hye preastes prenayled.

? And Pilate gaue sentence, that it shulde| € be as they reqnyred, and let lowse vnto the, him, that for insurrecció and murthur was cast in to preson, whom they desyred, but gane Iesus ouer vnto their wyll. And as they led him awaye, they toke one Simon of Cyren
(which came from the felde) “and layed $ crosse vpon him, to beare it after lesus.

/ And there folowed him a greate multitude of people and of wemen, which bewayled and lamented him. But Jesus turned him aboute vnto thé, and sayde: Ye doughters of Ierusale, wepe not ouer me: but wepe oner youre selues, and ouer youre childré. For beholde, the tyme wil come, wherin it shal be sayde:
Blessed are the baren, and the wombes that haue not borne, and the pappes that hane not geuen sucke.1 ‘Then shal they begynne to saye vnto the mountaynes: Fall vpon vs.
And to the hylles: Couer vs. For yf this be done to a grene tre, what shal be done then to the drye ?

* And two other (which were myszdoers) were led out also, to be put to death with him.
And wha they came to y place, which is called 
Calnery, they crucifyed him euen there, and the two myszdoers with him, the one on the righte hande, the other on y left. But lesus sayde: ^Father, forgeue them, for they wote not what they do.** And they parted his gar- mentes, and east lottes therfore. And the people stode and behelde.

And the rulers mocked him with them, and|33 sayde: He hath helped other, let him helpe him self now, yf he be Christ y chosen of
God. The soudyers also mocked him, wéte vnto him, ¢ brought him vyneger, and sayde:
Yf thon be the kynge of the Iewes, then helpe thyself. And aboue oner him was this superseripcion* wrytten with letters of Greke,
Latyn, and Hebrue: This is the kynge of the lewes.

And one of the myszdoers that hanged there, blasphemed him, and sayde: Yf thon be Christ, then helpe thy self and vs. Then answered the other, rebuked him, and sayde:

^ Mat.27.b. * Mat. 4.b. + Luc.3.a. t Luc.18.d.| | { Tere. 8. a. Ose. 10. b. Apoc. 6. c. € Esa. 53. c. 
Lue. 9. a. ^ Mat. 27. b. Marc, 15.a. Tohà. 18. c. à Act. ?. g. .** Psal. 21. b. Mat. 27. c. Marc. 15. c. 
Toba. 19.a. ° Mat.27. c. Marc.15.b. 4 Mat. 27. c. Toha, 19. c. i Mat. 27. d. Iobā, 19. b. 

ct. 3, b. e Mat. 27. d. Toha. 19. b. J Zach. 12. c. 

Fo. rrij, 

And thou fearest not God also, which art 

| 

; 

yet in like dànacion. And truly we are therin by right, for we receaue acordinge to oure dedes. As for this mau, he hath done nothinge amysse. And he sayde vnto lesus: LORDE, remembre me, whan thou commest in to thy kyngdome. And lesus sayde vnto him:
Verely I saye vnto the: To daye shalt thou be with me in Paradyse. And it was aboute the sixte hourc,” and there was darknesse ouer
* whole londe vntyll the nyenth houre. And the Sonne was darkened, and the vayle of the temple rente in two euen thorow the myddes.

And Iesus eryed loude, q sayde: Father, *in to thy handes I commende my sprete. And whan he had so sayde, he gaue vp the goost.
But whan the Captayne sawe what had happened, he praysed God, and sayde: Verely this was a iust ma. And all the people that
[ode by q behelde, whan they sawe what was done, smote vpon their brestes, q turned backe agayne. But all his acquantaunce, and the wemen that had folowed him out of Galile, stode a farre of, and behelde all these thinges.

“And beholde, a mā named loseph, a 
Senatour, which was a good inst man, the same had not consented vnto their councell, and dede, which was of Arimathia a cite of the lewes, which same also wayted for the kyngdome of God: he wéte vnto Pilate, and axed the body of Iesus. And he toke him downe, wrapped him in a lynnen cloth, and layed him in a hewen sepulcre, wherin neuer man was layed. And it was the daye*of preparinge, and the Sabbath drue on.

?'The wemen that were come with him ont of Galile, folowed him, and behelde the
Sepulere, x how his body was layed. But they returned, and made ready the spyces « anontmétes. And vpon the Sabbath they rested, acordinge to the lawe.

The pritij. Chapter. 

a UT vpon one of the Sabbathes very 

early in the mornynge, they came vnto the Sepulcre, and brought $ spyces which they had prepared, and certayne wemen with thc. Neuertheles they founde the stone rolled awaye from the sepulcre, and wente in, and

* Mat. 27. e. Marc. 15. d. * Psal. 30. a. Act. 7. g. t Mat. 27. f. Marc. 15. d, * Mat. 27. g. Marc. 15. e.
Ioba. 19. d. ^ 4 Luc.8.a. ¢ Mat. 28.a. Marc. 16. a. 

The qospell of 3. Luke, 

Chap, ret. founde not the body of $ LORDE Iesu.t
And it happened as they were amased therat, beholde, there stode by them two men in shyninge garmentes. And they were afrayed, and cast downe their faces to the earth. Then sayde they vnto thé: What seke ye? the lyuynge amoge the deed? He is not here.
He is rysen vp. Remembre, how y he tolde you wha he was yet in Galile, and sayde:?
The sonne of man must be delyuered in to the hades of synners, and be crucified, and the thirde daye ryse agayne.

And they remebred his wordes, and wente from the sepulere, and tolde all this vnto the eleuen,/ and to all the other. It was Mary
Magdalene, and Iohanna, and Mary lames, and the other with them, that tolde this vnto the Apostles. And theyr wordes semed vnto them, as though they had bene but fables, and they beleued them not. But Peter arose, and ranne to the sepulcre, and stouped in, and sawe the lynnen clothes layed by them selues, and departed. And he wondred within him- self at that which had happened.

* And beholde, two of them wente that same daye, to a towne (which was thre score furloges from lerusalem) whose name was called Emaus. And they talked together of all these thinges y had happened. And it chaunced^ as they were thus talkinge and reasonynge together, lesus himself drne nye, and wente with them. But their eyes were holden, that they shulde not knowe hi. And he sayde vnto them: What maner of cómuni- cacions are these that ye haue one to another as ye walke, and are sad? Then answered the one, whose name was Cleophas, and sayde vnto him: Art thou onely a straunger at lerusale, not knowinge what is come to passe there in these dayes? And he sayde vnto the:
What? They sayde vnto him: That of Iesus of Nazareth, $ which was a prophet, mightie
|in dede and worde, before God and all y people, how oure hye prestes and rulers delynered him to the condemnacion of death, and crucified him. But we hoped that he shulde hane delyuered Israel. And besydes all this, todaye is the thirde daye that this was done.l Yee q certayne wemen also of oure company which were earlyat the Sepulcre,

Toba. 20. a. + Ioba, 20. b. RplLuc. 9. Ce f Mat. 98. b. Mare. 16.b. Ioha. 20. b. & Mar. 16. b.
^ Mat. 18. c. $Mat. 21. e. j| Luc. 24.a. Tohá. 20. a. 

Chap. rrutj. and founde not his body, came and tolde, that they had sene a visio of angels, which sayde he was alyue. And certayne of them that were with vs, wente vnto the sepulere, and founde it euen so as y wemé sayde, but hi fonnde they not.
C| And he sayde vnto the: O ye fooles and slowe of hert to beleue all that the prophetes haue spoke? * Ought not Christ to haue suffred these thinges, and to entre in to his glory? And he beganne at Moses and at all the prophetes, and expounded vnto them all the scriptures, that were spoken of him. And they drue nye vnto the towne, which they wéte vnto, and he made as though he wolde haue gone farther. * And they compelled him, andsayde: Abyde with vs, for it draweth towardes night, and the daye is farre passed.
And he wente in to tary with thé. And it came to passe whan he sat at the table with the, he toke the bred, gaue thankes, brake it, and gaue it them. ‘Then were their eyes opened, and they knewe him. And he vanyshed out of their sight. And they sayde, betwene thé selues: Dyd not oure hert burne with in vs, whan he talked with vs by the waye, whyle he opened the scriptures vnto vs?
And they rose vp the same houre, turned agayne to lerusalem, and founde y eleue gathered together, and them that were with them, which sayde: The LORDE is rysen of a trueth, and hath appeared vnto Symon.
And they tolde thé what had happened by y waye, and how they knewe him in breakynge of the bred.

“But whyle they were talkynge therof, Iesus himself stode in the myddes amonge the, and sayde: Peace be with you. But they were

a Toha, 20. c. 
|| Mich. 4.a. 

* Esa. 53. a. 
? Tohà. 21. b. 

t Gen. 19, a. Luc. 14. c. 
1 Mat. 16. c. $ Act. 17. a, 

The gospel of 3». Luke, 

The ende of the gospell of S. Luke. 

abashed and afrayed, supposinge that they had sene a sprete.
Why are ye abashed? œ wherfore ryse there soch thoughtes in youre hertes ? Beholde my hades q my fete, it is euen I my self. Handle me, and se, for a sprete hath not flesh and bones, as ye se me haue. And whan he had thus spoke, he shewed the his hodes and his fete. But whyle they yet beleued not for ioye and wondred, he sayde vnto them: * Haue ye eny thinge here to eate? And they set before him a pece of a broyled fish, and an hony combe. And he toke it, and ate it before the.

And he sayde vnto them: These are the wordes which I spake vnto you, whyle I was yet with you. For it must all be fulfilled that was wrytten of me in the lawe of Moses, in the prophetes, q in the Psalmes. Thé opened he their vnderstondinge, that they might vnderstonde the scriptures, and sayde vnto them: $'lhus is it wrytte, and thus it behoued Christ to suffre, « the thirde daye to ryse agayne fro the deed, and to let repen- taunce and remyssion of synnes be preached in his name amoge all nacions,|| and to begynne at lerusale. As for all these thinges, ye are wytnesses of thé. And beholde, ^I wil sende vpon you the f promes of my father: but ye shal tary in the cite of Ierusalem, tyll ye be endewed with power from aboue.

? But he led them out vnto Bethany, and lift vp his handes, and blessed them. And it came to passe wha he blessed them, he departed from them, and was caried vp in to heauen. And they worshipped him, and turned agayne to Ierusalem with greate ioye and were contynuall in y téple, geuynge prayse and thankes vuto God. Amen.

€ Act. 1. a. and 2. a. 
4 Mar. 16. c. 

T Iohà. 14. c. 15. c. 16. a. 
Act. 1. b. 

Fo. rciij. 

And he saide vnto thē:| B 

Che gospel 

of S. Jhon. 

What S. Hhons gospell contepneth. 

Chap. 1.—The cuerlastinge byrth of the sonne of 
God, and how he became man. The testimony of Ihon and of his baptyme. The callinge of
Andrew, Peter, Philip and Nathanael. 

Chap. 1!.—Christ turneth the water vnto wyne at the mariage in Cana, and dryueth the mar- chauntes out of the temple.

Chap. IHI.—The swete talkinge of Christ with 
Nicodemus. The doctryne t baptyme of Iho, and what wytnesse he beareth of Christ.

Chap. IIII.—The louynge communicacion of 
Christ with the woman of Samaria by the welles syde. How he commeth in to Galile, and healeth the rulers sonne.

Chap. V.—He healeth the man that was sicke eight q thirtie yeare. The lewes accuse him as a breaker of the Sabbath : he answereth for him self, and reproueth them.

Chap. Vi.—lIesus fedeth fyue thousande men with fyue barlye Loaues, departeth awaye, that they shulde not make him kynge, goeth vpo the see, and reproueth the fleshly hearers of his worde. The carnall are offended at hi, and forsake him.

Chap. VII.—lesus commeth to Ierusale at the feast, teacheth the lewes and reproueth the :
The pharises q the hye prestes hearinge that the people begynne to fauour Christ aud to beleue in him, sende out officers to take hi.
There are dyuerse opinions of him amoge the people. The pharises rebuke the officers because they haue not taken him, and chyde with Nicodemus for takinge his parte.

Chap. VIII.—A woman is taken in aduoutrie : 
Christ delyuereth her. The fredome of soch as folowe Christ, whom they accuse to haue the deuel within him, and go aboute to stone him.

Chap. IX.—Christ maketh the man to se that was borne blynde, where thorow he getteth him self more displeasure amonge the lewes and
Pharises. 

Chap. X.—Christ is the true shepherde, and the dore of the shepe. Some saye: Christ hath the deuell, and is madd, some saye: he speaketh not the wordes of one that hath the deuell.
Because he telleth the trueth, the Iewes take vp stones to cast at him, call his preachinge blasphemy, and go aboute to take him.

Chap. XI.—Christ rayseth Lazarus fro death. 
The hye prestes q the pharyses gather a coun- cell, and cast their heades together agaynst him, therfore he getteth him out of the waye.

Chap. XIL—Mary anoynteth Christes fete, 
Iudas murmureth, Christ excuseth her, rydeth in to Ierusalem, and is louyngly receaued of the thankfull, but vtterly despysed of the vngodly.

Chap. XIIIL— Christ washeth the disciples fete, telleth them of Iudas the traytour, and com- maundeth the earnestly to loue one another.

Chap. XIIIIL.—He armeth his disciples with consolacion agaynst trouble for to come, taketh fro the the heuynesse that they had because of his departinge, and promiseth them the holy goost, the spirite of comforte.

Chap. XV.—The true vyne, the huszbandman 
& the braunches. A doctryne of loue, and a swete comforte agaynst persecucion,

Chap. XVI.—Cosolacion agaynst trouble. 
Prayers are herde thorow Christ. 

Chap. XVII.—The most hartely ¢ louinge prayer of Christ vnto his father, for all soch as receane the trueth, and be his awne.

Chap. XVIII—Christ is betrayed. The wordes of his month smyte the officers to the grounde.
Peter smyteth of Malchus eare. lesus is brought before Anna, Caiphas, and Pilate.

Chap. XIX.—Christ is crucified. He com- 

imendeth his mother vnto Ihon, sheddeth his bloude, and is buried.

Chap. XX.—The resurreccion of Christ, which appeareth to Mary Magdalene and to all his disciples, to their greate comforte.

Chap. XXI.—He appeareth to his disciples agayne by the see of Tyberias, and com- maundeth peter earnestly to fede his shepe.

a 

The first Chapter. 

N the begynnynge was the worde, and the 
I worde s eR God, and God was ¥ worde. The same was in the begynnynge with God.* All thinges were made by the same, and without the same was made nothinge that was made. In him was the t life, and the life was the ilight of men: and the light shyneth in the darknesse, and the darknesse comprehended it not.

There was sent from God a man, whose name was Ihon. The same came for a wit- nesse, to beare wytnesse of y light, that thorow him they all might beleue.$ He was not that light, but that he might beare witnesse of ¥ light. That was the true light, which lighteth all men, that come in to this worlde.
He was in the worlde, q the worlde was made by him, and ¥ worlde knewe him not. He came in to his awne, and his awne receaued him not. But as many as receaued him, Ito them gaue he power to be the children of
God: euen soch as beleue in his name. Which are not borne of bloude, ner of the wyl of the flesh, ner of the wyl of man, but of God.

* And the worde became flesh, and dwelt amonge vs: and we sawe his glory, a glory as of the onely begotté sonne of the father, full of grace and trueth.

Thon bare wytnesse of him, eryed, and sayde: ’It was this, of whom I spake: After me shal he come, that was before me, For he was or euer 1: and **of his fulnesse haue all we receaued grace for grace. For the lawe was geuen by Moses, grace and trueth came

* Gen. 1. a. Pro. 8.b. t Ioha.14.b. + Ioha. 8. b. 
9, a. 12. e. $ Ioha. 5. d. || Ose. 1. b. Rom. 8. b. 
Gal. 4. a. a Baruc 2. e. "| Mat. 17. a. 2 Pet. 1. c. 
1 Iohà. 1. a. ^ Mat, 3. b. Marc. 1. a. Sa Col 2. b. 

The gospe of S. Whon. 

by Iesus Christ. “No man hath sene God at eny tyme. The onely begotté sonne which is in the bosome of the father, he hath declared the same vnto vs.

And this is the recorde of Ihon, whan the 
Tewes sent prestes and Leuites fro Ierusalem, to axe him: Who art thou? And tthe con- fessed and denyed not. Aud he confessed, and sayde: I am not Christ. And they axed him: What thé? Art thou Elias? He sayde:
Iam not. Art thou the t# Prophet? And he answered: No. ‘Then sayde they vnto him:
What art thou thé, y we maye geue answere vnto thé that sent vs? What sayest thou of thy self? He sayde: ^I am y voyce of a eryer in the wyldernesse. Make straight y waye of the LORDE. $$As y prophet Esay sayde.

e 

And they that were sent, were of M Pharises.| € | 

And they axed him, ¢ sayde vnto him: Why baptysest thou then, yf thou be not Christ, ner Tc ner a prophet? Ihon answered them, and sayde: ‘I baptyse with water, but there is one come in amonge you, whom ye knowe not. It is he that cometh after me, which was before me: whose shue lachet I am not worthy to vnlowse. This was done at
Bethabara beyonde Iordane, lllwhere Thon dyd baptyse.

The nexte daye after, Ihon sawe Iesus commynge vnto him, and sayde: Beholde the f'llabe of God, which taketh awaye the synne of the worlde. This is he, of whom I sayde vnto you: After me commeth a man, which was before me. For he was or euer I, and I knewe him not: but that he shulde be

* Deut. 5.c. 1 Ioha. 4. b. tt Ioha.3.d. 1f Deut. 18. c. 
4 Mat.3.a. Marc.1.a. Luc.3.a. $$ Esa.40.a. * Mat. 
3.b. Marc. 1.a. Luc.3. c. Act. 19. a. lll] Iohà. 3. d. and 10. d. T1 Esa. 83. b. 1 Cor. 5. b.

aio, rebi 

deelared in Israel, therfore am I come to baptyse with water.

D| And Ihon bare reeorde, q sayde: “I sawe the sprete descende from heauen like vnto a doue, and abode vpon him, ¢ I knewe him not.
But he that sent me to baptyse with water, 
$ same sayde vnto me: Vpon whom thou shalt se the sprete descende and tary styll on him, the same is he, that baptyseth with the holy goost. And I sawe it, and bare recorde, that this is the sonne of God.

The nexte daye after, Ihon stode agayne, and two of his disciples. And wha he sawe
Tesus walkynge, he sayde: Beholde the *labe of God. ‘And two of his disciples herde him speake, and folowed lesus. And lesus turned him aboute, and sawe them folowinge, and sayde vnto the: What seke ye? They sayde vnto him: Rabbi, (which is to saye by inter- pretacion, Master.) Where art thou at lodg- inge? He sayde vnto them: Come and se it. They came and sawe it, q abode with him the same daye. It was aboute the tenth houre.

One of the two, which herde Jhon speake, 

and folowed lesus, was Andrew the brother of 
Symon Peter: the same founde first his brother Symon, and sayde vnto him: We haue founde Messias (which is by interpreta- eion, y Anoynted) and brought him to Iesus.
Whan Iesus behelde him, he sayde: Thou art 
Symon the sonne of lonas,t thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretacion, a stone.
E| The’ nexte daye after, wolde lesus go agayne in to Galile, and founde Philippe, and sayde vnto him: ^ Folowe me. Philippe was of Bethsaida the eite of Andrew and Peter.
Philippe founde Nathanael, and sayde vnto him: We haue founde him, of who? Moses in the lawe, and y $prophetes haue wrytten, euen Iesus the sonne of Ioseph of Nazareth.
And Nathanaell sayde vnto him: || What good ean come out of Nazareth? Philippe sayde vnto him: Come, and se.

lesus sawe Nathanael eomynge to him, and sayde of him: Beholde, a righte Israelite, in whom is no gyle. Nathanael sayde vnto him: From whence knowest thou me? Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him: Before y
Philippe ealled the, whan thou wast vnder 

* Mat, 3. b. Marc. 1.a. Luc. 3, c. * Exod. 12. a. 
Esa. 53. b. t Mat. 16. c. Iohà. 12. c. t Gen. 3. c. 
|22. c. 49. b. Deut. 18. c. $ Esa. 7. c. and 9. b. 

The gospeli of >. Jhon. 

Chap. dj. the fygge tre, I sawe the. Nathanaell an- swered, and sayde vnto hī: Rabbi, thou art y sonne of God, thou art y kynge of Israel. eae answered, q sayde vnto hin: Because I sayde vnto the, that I sawe the vnder the fygge tre, thou beleuest: thou shalt se yet greater thinges thé these. And he sayde vnto him: Verely verely I saye vnto you:* Fro this tyme forth shal ye se the heauen open, and the angels of God goinge vp q downe ouer the sonne of man.

The ij. Chapter. 

ND vpon the thirde daye there was a 

mariage at Cana in Galile, and the mother of lesus was there. Iesus also and his diseiples was called vnto y mariage. And whan the wyne fayled, the mother of lesus saide vnto him: They haue no wyne. lesus sayde vnto her: 1 Woma, what haue I to do with the? Myne houre is not yet come.
His mother sayde vnto y mynisters: What- soeuer he sayeth vnto you, do it. There were set there sixe water pottes of stone, after y maner of the purifienge of ¥ lewes, euery one eoteyninge two or thre measures.

lesus sayde vnto the: Fyll the water pottes with water. And they fylled the vp to y brymme. And he sayde vnto the:
Drawe out now, q brynge vnto the Master of the feast. And they bare it. Whà the master of y feast had taisted y wyne whieh had bene water, and knewe not whence it came (but the mynisters that drue y water, knewe it) the Master of the feast called the bryde- grome, and sayde vnto him: Euery man at the first geueth the good wyne: q whan they are dronken, thé that which is worse. But thou hast kepte baeke the good wyne vntyll now.

This is the first token that lesus dyd at 
Cana in Galile, and shewed his glory, and his diseiples beleued on him. "Afterwarde wente he downe to Capernaum, he, his mother, his brethré, and his diseiples, and taried not longe there.

‘And the lewes Easter was at hande. 
And lesus wéte vp to lerusalem, and founde syttinge in the téple, those that solde oxen, shepe, and doues, and chaungers of money.

| Ioha.7.e. € Gen. 28. c. Luc. 21. d. 
IE Mat. 4. b. Marc. i. b. Luc. 4. d. 
11.b. Luc. 19.d. 

T Luc. 2. g. 
* Mat. 21. b. Marc. 

Chap. tj. 

Cbr gospel of S. Jhon. 

Fo. rbi. 

And he made a scourge of small cordes, and droue them all out of the tēple with the shepe and oxen, and poured out the chaungers money, and ouerthrewe the tables; and sayde vnto them that solde the doues: Haue these thinges hēce, and make not my fathers honse an house of marchaundyse. His disciples remembred it, that is wrytten: * The zele of thine house hath euen eaten me.

Then answered the Iewes, and sayde vnto him : * What token shewest thou vnto vs, that thou mayest do these thinges? lesus an- swered q sayde vnto the: t Breake downe this temple, and in thre dayes wil I set it vp agayne. ‘Then sayde the Iewes: #Sixe and fourtye yeare was this temple abuyldinge, and wilt thou set it vp in thre dayes? But he spake of $ téple of his body. Now wha he was rysen agayne from the deed, his dis- ciples remembred .that he thus sayde, and they beleued the scripture, and the wordes which Iesus spake.

Wha he was at Ierusale at Easter in $ feast, many beleued on his name, whan they sawe y tokes y he dyd. But Iesus comytted not himself vnto the, for he knewe thé all, « neded not y eny mà shulde testifye of man,
$for he knewe well what was in man. 

The iij. Chapter. 

HERE was a man of the Pharises, 

named Nicodemus? a ruler amoge the lewes. ‘The same came vnto Iesus by night, q sayde vnto hi: Master, we knowe y thou art come a teacher fro God: for lno mà can do these tokés y thou doest, excepte God be with him. Jesus answered, and sayde vnto him: Verely verely I saye vnto the: Excepte a man be borne a new, he can not se the kyngdome of God. Nicodemus sayde vnto him: How can a man be borne, whan he is olde? Can he entre in to his mothers wombe, and be borne agayne? lesus answered:
Verely verely I saye vnto the: f Excepte a mà be borne of water and of the sprete, he can not come in to y kyngdome of God.

** That which is borne of flesh, is flesh: q that which is borne of the sprete, is sprete.
Maruell not, that I sayde vnto $: Ye must be borne of new. The wynde bloweth where

* Paal. 68. b. “^ Mat. 16.a. Ioha.6.d, + Mat. 26. f. t1 Esd. 5.6. $Iere. 17. b. Apo. 2. d. — ?Iohà. 7. c. und 19.d. ]||Ioha.9.b. *| fohà. 4. b. and 7. d. Tit. 3.a.

"* Kom.8.a. tt Eocls. 11. a. ff Ephe. 4.a. ¢Num. 

he wyl and thou hearest his sounde: ttbut thou canst not tell whéce he commeth, and whither he goeth. So is euery one, that is borne of the sprete.

Nicodemus answered, and sayde vnto him: 
How maye these be? {esus answered, q sayde vnto hi: Art thou a Master in Israel, q knowest not these? Verely I saye vnto y
We speake that we knowe, and testifie that we haue sene, and ye receaue not oure wyt- nesse, Yf ye beleue not whan I tell you of earthly thinges, how shulde ye beleue, wha I speake vnto you of heauenly thinges ?

ttAnd noman ascendeth vp in to heauen, but he that is come downe from heaue,
(namely) the sonne of man which is in heauen. “And like as Moses lift vp the serpent in the wyldernes, euen so must the sonne of man be lift vp, that who so euer beleueth in him, shulde not perish, but haue euerlastinge life.

“For God so loued the worlde, that he gaue his onely sonne, that who so euer beleueth in hi, shulde not perishe, but haue euerlastinge life.$$ For God sent not his sonne in to y worlde to condempne the worlde, but that the worlde might be saued by him. He that beleueth on him, shal not be codemned. But he that beleneth not, is codemned allready: because he beleueth not on the name of the onely sonne of God. But this is y codempna- cion, ‘that the light is come in to the worlde, and men loued the darknesse more thé light: for their workes were euell. Whoso- euer doth euell, hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, that his dedes shulde not be reproued. But he that doth the trueth, commeth to the light, that his workes maye be knowne : for they are done in God.

Afterwarde came lesus ¢ his disciples in to the lode of Iewry, and had his beynge there with them, and /baptysed. II] [hon baptysed also in Enon besyde Salem: for there was moch water there. And they came thither, and were baptysed: for Ihon was not yet put in preson.

Then arose there a question amonge the disciples of Ihon with the Iewes aboute the purifenge, and they came vnto Ihon, and sayde vnto him: Master, he y was with the
21. b. Iohà. 8. c. and 12. d. d Rom. 5. a. 1 Iohà, 4. b. 

Luc. 19. a. e Joha, 1.a. and 12. f. J loha, 4. a. ii Mat.3.a, Marc. 1.a. Luc.3.a. Mat.4. b.

D 

fo. rebiti. The gospell of &. Jhon., 

beyonde Iordan, of whom thou barest wyt- nesse, beholde, he baptyseth, and euery man cometh vnto him. Ihon answered and sayde:
A man can receaue nothinge, excepte it be geuen him from heaué. Ye youre selues are my witnesses, how *that I sayde, [ am not
Christ, but am sent before him. He that hath the bryde, is the brydegrome: but the frende of the brydegrome stondeth, and herkeneth vnto him, and reioyseth greatly ouer the voyce of the brydegrome, this same ioye of myne is now fulfilled. He must in- ereace, but I must decreace.

£| He that commeth from an hye, is aboue jall. He that is of the earth, is earthly, and
‘speaketh of the earth. He that commeth fro 
| heauen, is aboue all, and testifieth what he hath sene x herde, and no man receaueth his wytnesse. But he that receaueth it, hath set to his seale, tthat God is true. For he who
God hath sent, speaketh $ wordes of God: tfor God geueth not the sprete (vnto him) by measure. “The father loueth the sonne, and hath geuen him all thinges in to his hande.
$He that beleueth on the sonne, hath euer- lastinge life: he that beleueth not the sonne, shal not se the life, but y wrath of God abydeth vpon him.

The iiij. Chapter. 

q OW whan Iesus had knowlege, y it was 
N come to the eares of the Pharises, that lesus made and baptised mo disciples thé

| |Ihon (howbeit Iesus himself baptysed not, but his disciples) lhe left the londe of Iewry, and departed agayne in to Galile. But he must nedes go thorow Samaria. Then came he in to a cite of Samaria, called Sichar, nye vnto ŷ pece of lode, Tý lacob gaue vnto
| loseph his sonne. And there was Iacobs well. 
| |Now whan lesus was weerye of his iourney, 
| |he satt hi downe so vpo the well. And it was aboute the sixte houre. Then came fhere a woman of Samaria to drawe water. lesus sayde vnto her: Gene me drynke. (For his disciples were gone their waye in to y cite, to bye meate.) So the woman of Samaria sayde vnto him: How is it that thou axest drynke of me, seynge thou art a Iewe, and I

| *[ohà.l.b. t Rom.3.a. £Esa.61.a. ° Marc. 11.c. 
| Luc. 10. c. — § Toh. 6. f. 1 Iohà. 5. b. || Mat. 4. b. 
{ Gen. 48.d. **4 Re.17.c. Lohàa.8.c. ^ Tere. 2. b. 

Chap. iii. a woman of Samaria? For the Iewes medle not with the ** Samaritans.

lesus answered, and sayde vnto her: Yf thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that sayeth vnto the, geue me drynke, thou woldest axe of him, and he wolde geue the, the water of life.’ The woman sayde vnto him: Syr, thou hast nothinge to drawe withall, and the well is depe, from whence hast thou then that water of life? Art thou greater then oure father lacob, which gaue vs this wel? Andhe himself dranke therof, and his children, and his eatell. lesus answered, and sayde vnto her: Who so euer drynketh of this water, shal thyrst agayne: But whosoeuer shal drynke of the water that I shal geue him, shal neuer be more a thyrst: ttbut the water that I shal geue him, shalbe in him a well of uer which spryngeth vp in to euerlastinge

e. 

The woman sayde vnto him: tt Syr, geue me that same water, that I thyrst not, nether nede to come hither to drawe. Iesus sayde vnto her: Go, call thy huszbande, and come hither. 'The woman answered, and sayde vnto him: I haue no huszbande.

lesus sayde vnto her: Thou hast sayde well, I haue no huszbande: for thou hast had fyue huszbandes, and he whom thou hast now, is not thine huszbande: there saydest thou right. The woma sayde vnto him: Syr, I se, that thou art a prophet. Oure fathers worshipped vpon this mountayne, and $$ye saye, that at lerusalem is the place, where men ought to worshippe. Jesus sayde vnto her: Woman, beleue me, the tyme commeth, that ye shal nether vpon this mountayne ner at lerusalem worshippe the father. Ye wote not what ye worshippe, but we knowe what we worshippe, for lill Saluacion commeth of the
Iewes. But the tyme commeth, and is now allready, that the true worshippers shal wor- shippe the father in f *sprete and in the trueth:
For the father wil haue soch so to worshippe him. *** God is a sprete, and they that wor- shippe him, must worshippe in sprete and in the trueth.

The woma sayde vnto him: I wote that 
Messias shal come, which is called Christ. 
Whan he commeth, he shal tell vs all thinges. 

Joha. 7. d. tt Ioha. 3.a. Tit. 3. a. tt Ioha. 6. d. 

$$5 Reg.9.a. 2 Par.7. c. ||| Gen. 92. c. TT Rom. dins ss 9 Cor. 3. c.

Chap. b. 

Iesus sayde vnto her: I that speake vnto the, am he. And in the meane season came his disciples, and they marueyled that he talked with the woman. Yet sayde no man: What axest thou, or what talkest thou with her?
Then the woman let hir pot stonde, and wente in to the cite, and sayde vnto the people: Come, se a man, which hath tolde me all that euer I dyd, Is not he Christ?
'Then wente they out of the cite, and came vnto him: In the meane whyle his disciples | prayed him, and sayde: Master, eate. But, he sayde vnto them: I haue meate to eate, that ye knowe not of. Then sayde tbe dis- ciples amoge them selues: Hath eny man brought him meate? lesus sayde vnto thé:
My meate is this, that I do the wyll of him that sent me, and to fynish his worke. Saye not ye youre selues: There are yet foure monethes, and then commeth the haruest?
Beholde, I saye vnto you: lift vp youre eyes, and loke vpon the felde, * for it is whyte allready vnto the haruest.

É| And he that reapeth, receaueth rewarde, and gathereth frute to euerlastinge life, that both he that soweth and he that reapeth, maye reioyse together. For herin is the pro- uerbe true: One soweth, another reapeth. I haue sent you to reape that, wheron ye bestowed no laboure. Other haue laboured, and ye are come in to their laboures.

Many Samaritans of the same cite beleued on him, for the sayenge of the woman, whicb testified: He hath tolde me all that euer I dyd. Now whan the Samaritans came to him, they besought him, that he wolde tary with them. And he abode there two dayes, and many mo beleued because of his worde, and sayde vnto the woman: We beleue now hence forth, not because of thy sayenge, twe haue herde him oureselues, and knowe, that this of a trueth is Christ the Sauioure of the worlde.

After two dayes he departed thence, and wente in to Galile. For Iesus himself testi- fied, that a prophet is nothinge set by at home. Now wha he came in to Galile, the
Galileis receaued him, which had sene all that he dyd at lerusalem in the feast: for they also were come thither in the feast.
And lesus came agayne vnto Cana in 

t Iohà. 17. b. 
§ Ioha. 2. a. 

* Mat. 9. d. Luc. 10. a. 
Mar. 6. a. Luc. 4. c. 

t Mat. 13. g. 
|| Act. 18. a. 

The qospelf of S. Jhon, 

Fo. reir. 
| Galile,§ where he turned the water vnto e.

And there was a certayne ruler, whose|jf soune laye sicke at Capernaum. This herde that lesus came out of lewry in to Galile, and wente vnto him, and besought him, that he wolde come downe, and helpe his sonne, for he laye deed sicke. And lesus sayde vnto him: Excepte ye se tokens and wonders, ye ibelene not. The ruler sayde vnto him: Come downe Syr, or euer my childe dye. Iesus
|sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, thy sonne lyueth. The man beleued the worde, that e sayde vnto him, and wente his waye.
And as he was goinge downe, his sernauntes mett him, and tolde him, and sayde: Thy childe lyneth. Then enquyred he of them the houre, wherin he beganne to amende.
And they sayde vnto him: Yesterdaye aboute the seucth houre the feuer left him. Then the father perceaued, that it was aboute the same houre, wherin lesus sayde vnto him:
Thy sonne lyueth.| And he beleued with his whole house. This is now the seconde token that Iesus dyd, whan he came from lewry in to Galile.

The b. Chapter. 

FTERWARDE, there was a feast of|à the Iewes, and Iesus wente vp to Ieru- salem. ‘There is at Ierusalem by the slaughter house a pole, which in Hebrue is called Beth- seda, q hath fyue porches, wherin laye many sicke, blynde, lame, wythred, which wayted, whan the water shulde moue. For the angell wente downe at his tyme in to the pole, and stered the water. Who so euer now wente downe first, after that the water was stered, Y same was made whole, what soeuer disease he had. And there was a man, which had lyen sicke eight and thirtie yeares. Whan lesus sawe him lye, q knewe that he had lyen so longe, he saide vnto him: Wilt thou be made whole? The sicke answered him: Syr, I haue no man, whan the water is moued, to put me in to the pole. And whan I come, another steppeth downe in before me. lesus sayde vnto him: Aryse, take vp thy bed, and go thy waye. And immediatly the man was made whole," and toke vp his bed

a Mat. 9. a. Marc. 2. à. Luc. 5. c. 

Fo. c 

B 

€ 

and wente his waye. * But vpon the same daye it was the Sabbath. Then sayde the lewes vnto him that was made whole: To daye is ¥ Sabbath, it is not laufull for the to cary the bed. He answered them: He that made me whole, sayde vnto me: Take vp thy bed, and go thy waye. Then axed they him: What man is that, which sayde vnto the: Take vp thy bed, and go thy waye?
But he that was healed, wyst not who he was: for lesus t had gotté him self awaye, because there was moch people.

Afterwarde founde Iesus him in the teple, and sayde vnto him: Beholde, thou art made whole, synne nomore, lest a worse thinge happen vnto the. The ma departed, and tolde the Iewes, that it was lesus, which had made hi whole. 'Pherfore dyd y Iewes per- secute lesus, and sought to slaye him, because he had done this vpo y Sabbath.

But lesus answered them: § My father worketh hither to, and I worke also. Ther- fore sought the Iewes the more to slaye hi: because he brake not onely y Sabbath, but saide also, that God was his father, and made him self equall with God. Thé answered lesus, and sayde vnto them: Verely verely
I saye vnto you: Il The sonne can do nothinge of himself, but that he seyth the father do.
For what soeuer he doeth, that doeth y sonne also. The father loueth the sonne, q sheweth him all that he doth, and wyll shewe him yet greater workes, so that ye shal marueyle.
For as the father rayseth vp the deed, and maketh them lyue, eué so the sonne also maketh lyuynge whom he wyll. For the father iudgeth no man, but f hath geuen all iudgmét vnto the sonne, that they all might honoure the sonne, euen as they honoure y father. Who so hononreth not the sonne, the same honoureth not the father which hath sent him.

Verely verely I saye vnto you: Who so heareth my worde, ^and beleueth him that sent me, hath euerlastinge life, and ** cometh not in to damnacion, but is passed thorow from death vnto life.

Verely verely I saye vnto you: tt The houre cometh, q is now allready, y the deed shal

* Mat. 12.a. Marc. 2.c. and 3.a. Luc. 6. a. 13. b. 14. a. 

Iohà. 7. b. and 9. h. t Ioha. 6. b. 1 Ioha. 8. a. 
$1Cor.12.2a. ]||Iohá.9.a. J Mat.11.c. * Iohà. 8. c. 
** Luc. 23. d. tt Marc. 5. e, Ioha. 11. e. tt Ioha. 
I, a. and 14. a. $$ Dan. 12. a. Mat. 25. d. ||| Ioh. 

Cbr gospel! of 3. Jhon. 
|heare ý voyce of ¥ sonne of God: and they 

Chap. b. 

that heare it, shal lyue. For if as the father hath life in him self, so likewyse hath he genen vnto the sonne, to haue life in him self: q hath gene hi power also to execute iudgmét because he is the sonne of ma. Maruayle not ye at this: $$ for y houre cometh, in ý which all that are in y graues, shal heare his voyce, and shal go forth, they that haue done good, vnto the resurreccion of life: but they that haue done enell, vnto the resurreccion of damnacion.

I can do nothinge of my self. As I heare, so I iudge: q my indgmét is iust. For I seke not myne owne wyll, but the wyll of the father which hath sent me. Ill Yf I beare wytnesse of my self, my wytnesse is not trne.
There is another that beareth wytnesse of me, and I am sure, that the wytnesse which he beareth of me, is true.

11 Ye sent vnto Ihon, and he bare wytnes of the trueth. As for me, I take no recorde of mà, but these thinges I saye, that ye might be saued. He was a burnynge and shyninge light, but ye wolde haue reioysed a litle whyle in his light. Neuertheles I hane a greater wytnesse then the wytnesse of Ihon. For the workes? which the father hath geué me to fynish, the same workes which I do, beare wytnesse of me, that the father hath sent me.
‘And y father him self which hath sent me, beareth wytnesse of me.*** Ye haue nether herde his voyce at eny tyme, ner sene his shappe: and his worde haue ye not abydinge in you, for ye beleue not him, whom ye hath sent.

? Searche the scripture, for ye thinke ye haue euerlastinge life therin: *and the same is it that testifyeth of me, and ye wil not come vnto me, that ye might haue life. ~I receaue not prayse of men. But I knowe you, that ye haue not the loue of God in you. I am come in my fathers name, and ye receaue me not.ttt Yf another shal come in his awne name, him wil ye receaue. How can ye beleue which receaue prayse one of another, and seke not the prayse, that is of God onely ?

Ye shall not thynke that I wyll aceuse you before ¥ father: there is one ý accuseth

8. b. c. TT Iob. 1. b. è 1 Iohá. 5. a. Ioh. 10. c. 
* Mat. 3. b. and 17, a. Ioh. 8. b. *** Deut. 5. c. 
Ioh. 1. b. and 6. e. 1 Ioh. 4. b d Act. 17. b. 
* Deut. 18. c. $ Joh. 12. f. ttt 1 Iob. 2. c. 

2 Tess. 2. a. 

(Chap. bí. 

you, enen Moses, in who ye trust. Yf ye beleued Moses, ye shulde beleue me also:
For he hath wrytté of me.* But yf ye beleue not his wrytinges, how shal ye beleue my wordes ?

The vi. Chapter. 

ITER this wente lesus ouer the see 

ynto the cite ‘Tiberias in Galilee. “And 

moch people folowed him, because they sawe the tokens that he dyd vpon thé which were diseased. But lesus wéte vp in to a moun- tayne, and there he sat with his disciples.
And Easter y feast of the lewes was nye. 
Then lesus lift vp his eyes, and sawe y there came moch people vnto him, and he sayde vnto Philippe: Whence shal we bye bred, y these maye eate? But this he sayde to proue him, for he himself knewe, what he wolde do.

Philippe answered him: ‘Two hundreth peny worth of bred is not ynough amonge thé, y euery one maye take a litle. Thé nde vnto hi one of his disciples, Andrew y brother of Symo Peter: There is a lad here, y hath fyue barlye loaues, and two fishes, but what is that amoge so many?’ Iesussayde: Make the the people syt downe. 'There was moch grasse in the place. Then they sat thé downe, aboute a fyue thousande men. lesus toke the loaues, thanked, and gaue them to the disciples: the disciples (gaue) to them that were set downe.
Likewyse also of the fishes as moch as they wolde.

Whan they were fylled, he sayde vnto his disciples: Gather vp the broken meate that remayneth, that nothinge be lost. Thé they gathered, and fylled twolue baskettes with the broke meate, that remayned of the fyue barlye loaues, vnto them which had eaten. Now whan the men sawe the token y lesus dyd, they saide: t This is of a trueth the Prophet, y shulde come into the worlde. Whan Jesus now perceaned that they wolde come, and take him vp, to make him kynge,t he gat him awaye agayne in to a mountayne himself alone.

At euen wente his disciples downe to y see, and entred in to the shippe, and came to the other syde of $ see vnto Capernau. And it was darcke allready. And lesus was not come to the. And ¥ see arose thorow a greate wynde. Now whan they had rowed vpo a

* Deut. 18. c. 
^ 4 Re. 4. c. 

a Mar. 14. b. Marc. 6. d. Luc. 9. b. f Luc. 7. b. Ioh. 4. c. 1 Ioha. 5. a.

The gospell of S. Jhon. 

| Ioha. 2. c. 

fyue and twétie or thirtie furlonges, they sawe lesus goinge vpon the see, and came nye to theshippe. And they were afrayed. But he sayde vnto them: It is L be not afrayed.
Then wolde they haue receaued him in to ý shippe. And immediatly y shippe was at the londe whither they wente.

The nexte daye after, the people which stode on the other syde of the see, sawe that there was none other shippe there saue that one, wherinto his disciples were entred: and that lesus wéte not in with his disciples in to the shippe, but y his disciples were gone awaie alone. Howbeitthere came other shippes from Tiberias, nye vnto y place where they had eate the bred, after y the LORDE had geuen thankes. Now whan the people sawe that Iesus was not there, nether his disciples, they toke shippe also, and came to Caper- naum, and songht lesus.

And whan they founde him on the other syde of the see, they sayde vnto him: Master, whan camest thou hither? lesus answered thé, q sayde: Verely verely I saye vnto you:
Ye seke me not because ye sawe y tokés, but because ye ate of the loaues, and were fylled.
Laboure not for the meate which perisheth but y endureth vnto euerlastinge life, which the sonne of mà shal geue you: For him hath
God the father sealed. 

Thé sayde they vnto him: What shal we do, that we maye worke y workes of God?
Iesus answered, and sayde vnto the: This is the worke of God, that ye beleue on him, whom he hath sent. Then sayde they vnto him: $ What token doest thou the, that we maye se and belene y? What workest thou ?
Oure fathers ate Mana in the wyldernesse, as it is wrytte: “He gane the bred fro heauen to eate. Then sayde Iesus vnto thé: Verely verely I saye vnto yon: Moses gaue you not bred from heaué, but my father geueth you the true bred from heanen: For this is that bred of God, which commeth from heauen, and geueth life vnto the worlde.

The sayde they vnto him: ll Syr, geue vs allwaye soch bred. But Iesus sayde vnto thé:
I am y bred of life. He that cometh vnto me, shal not hüger: q he that beleneth on me, shal neuer thyrst. But I haue sayde vnto you, y ye haue sene me, and yet ye beleue

© Mat, 14, c. Marc. 6. e. 

4 Exo. 16. a. 

Mat. 16. a. Marc. 8. b. 
Psal. 77. c. || Ioh. 4. b. 

143 

fo. tt. 

€ 

D 

Fo. tij. 

uot. Allthat my father geucth me, cometh vnto me: and who so cometh vnto me, him wyl not I cast out: for I am come downe from heaue, not to do myne awne wyll, but the wyll of him that hath sent me."

This is will of the father, which hath sent me,’ that of all that he hath geué me, I shulde lose nothinge, but shulde rayse it vp agayne at the last daye. This is the wyl of him which hath sent me, that, who soener seyth the sonne and beleueth on him, haue euerlastiuge life, and I shal rayse him vp at the last daye.

The murmured the Iewes ther ouer, that he sayde: I am y bred which is come downe from heaué, and they sayde: Isnot this Iesus,
Iosephs sonne, whose father and mother we kuowe? How sayeth he then, I am come downe from heanen? Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Murmur not amonge youre selues. * No man can come vnto me, excepte the father which hath sent me, drawe him.
And I shal rayse him vp at the last daye. It is wrytten in the prophetes:^ ‘They shal all be taught of God. Who so euer now heareth it of the father, and lerneth it, commeth vnto me.
* Not that eny man hath sene the father, saue he which is of the father, the same hath sene the father.

Fj Verely verely I saye vnto you:t He that 

beleneth on me, hath euerlastinge life. I am that bred of life. Youre fathers ate Manna in the wyldernes, and are deed. This is that bred which commeth from heanen, that who so eateth therof, shulde not dye. I am that lyuynge bred, which came downe fro heauen:
Who so eateth of this bred, shal lyue for euer. 
And the bred that I wil geue, 1s my flesh $ which I wil geue for y life of the worlde.
Then stroue the Iewes amonge them selues, and sayde: How cà this felowe geue vs his flesh to eate? Iesus sayde vnto thé: Verely verely I saye vnto you: Excepte ye eate y flesh of ¥ sonne of man and drynke his bloude, ye haue no life in you. Who so eateth my flesh, and drynketh my bloude, hath euer- lastinge life: and I shal rayse him vp at the last daye. For my flesh is y very meate, and my bloude is y very drynke. Who so eateth my flesh, and drynketh my bloude,’ abydeth

* Luc. 22. c. ? Toba. 10. c. and 18. a. © Toha. 5. c. 
* Mar. 16. c. Ioh. 6. g.— 2 Tess. 3. a. d Esa. 54. c. 
Iere. 31. f. Mat. 11.e. Luc. 10. c. f Deut. 5. c. 

The qospell of S. Jhon, 

in me, and I in him. As the lynynge father hath sent me, and I lyue for the fathers sake:
Euen so he that eateth me, shal lyue for my sake. This is ý bred which is come fro heauen: Not as youre fathers ate Manna, and are deed. He that eateth of this bred, shal lyne for euer.

‘These thinges sayde he in the synagoge, wha he taught at Cien Ma of his disciples that herde this, sayde: This is an harde sayenge, who maye abyde the hearynge of it? But when Iesus perceaued in hi self, that his disciples murmured therat he sayde vnto them: Doth this offende you ?
What and yf ye shal se the sonne of man ascende vp thither, where he was afore? It is y sprete that quyckeneth, $ flesh profiteth nothinge. The wordes that I speake, are sprete, and are life. Dut there are some amóge yon, that beleue not. For lesus knewe well from the begynnynge, which they were that beleued not, and who shulde betraye him. And he sayde: Therfore haue I sayde vnto you:l No man can come vnto me, excepte it be geuen him of my father.

From that tyme forth, many of his disciples wente backe, and walked nomore with him.
Then sayde lesus vnto the twolue: Wyll ye also go awaye? Then answered Simon Peter:
LORDE, Whither shal we go? ‘Thou hast the wordes of euerlastinge life: and we haue beleued q knowne, that thou art Christ the sonne of the lyuynge God. Iesus answered them. Haue I not chosen you twolue, and one of you is a denell? But he spake of Iudas
Symon Iscarioth: the same betrayed him afterwarde, and was one of the twolue.

The bij. Chapter. 
FTER that wente Iesus aboute in Galile, for he wolde not go aboute in Iewry, because the Iewes sought to kyll him. But the Iewes feast of Tabernacles’ was at hande.

* 1 Ioh. 4. b. 

1 Ioh. 5. b. 
|| Toha. 6. e. 

t Ioh. 3. c. $ Luc. 22. b. 

4 Leuit. 23. b. 

Chap. bij. 

6 

a 

Chap. bij. 

The gospell of S, Jhon. 

So. rij. 

Then sayde lesus vnto them: My tyme is not yet come, but youre tyme is allwaye ready. “The worlde can not hate you,* but me it hateth: because I testifye of it, that the workes of it are euell Go ye vp vnto this feast, I wyll not go vp yet vnto this feast, for my tyme is not yet fulfylled. Whan he sayde this vnto them, he abode styll in
Galile. But as soone as his brethren were gone vp, then wente he vp also vnto the feast, not openly, but as it were secretly. ‘Then sought him y Lewes at y feast, and sayde:t
Where is he? And there was a greate murmur of him amonge the people. Some sayde:
He is good. But other sayde: No, he doth but disceaue the people. ?Howbeit no man spake frely of him, for feare of the Iewes.

But in the myddes of the feast wéte Iesus vp in to the temple, and taught. And the lewes marueyled and sayde: How can he y serypture, seynge he hath not lerned it? Iesus answered them, and sayde: My doctryne is not myne, but his that hath sent me. Yf eny man wyl do his will, he shal knowe,
| whether this doctryne be of God, or whether iI speake of my self. He that speaketh of himself, seketh his awne prayse: but he that seketh the prayse of him that sent him, the same is true, q there is no vnrighteousnes in him. “Hath not Moses geuen you the lawe, and none of you kepeth the lawe? Why go ye aboute to kyll me? The people answered, and sayde: Thou hast the deuell, who goeth aboute to kyll the? Iesus answered and sayde:
ł One worke haue I done, and ye all maruayle. 
Moses gaue you the circumcision, (not be- cause it commeth of Moses, but of y § fathers:)
Yet do ye cireumcyse a man vpon the Sab- bath. Yf a man receaue circücision vpon the
Sabbath, that the lawe of Moses shulde not be broken, diszdayne ye then at me, because
I haue made a mà every whyt whole on the 
Sabbath? ‘Iudge not after the vtter appear- aüce, but iudge righteous iudgment.

'Then sayde some of them of Ierusalem: 
Is not this he, who they go aboute to kyll? 
And beholde, he speaketh boldely, and they saye nothinge to him. Do oure rulers knowe in dede, that he is very Christ? Howbeytl

a Ioh. 15.b. *Sap.2.c. t Ioh. 11. f. ?Ioh.12.f. 
* Exo.20.a. Leui. 14. d. iloh.5.a. — 6 Gen. 17. b. 
4 Deut. 1. b || Mat. 13. g. Marc. 6.a. Luc. 4. c. 

e Luc. 19. d. 20. hb. 22.a. Ioh. 8. b. f 1Re.19.d. Mat. 22.b.

** Tob. 8. c. and 11. e. 

we knowe, whence this is. But whà Christ commeth, no man shal knowe whence he is.

Then eryed lesus in the temple as he taught, and sayde: Yee ye knowe me, and whence I am ye knowe," and of my self am
I not come, but he y sent me, is true, whom ye knowe not. But I knowe him, for I am of him, and he hath sent me. Then sought they to take him," but no man layed handes vpon him, for his houre was not yet come.
** But many of the people beleued on him, and sayde: Whan Christ commeth, shall he do mo tokens, then this doth ? |

And it came to the’ Pharises eares,/ that y people murmured soch thinges of him. And the Pharises and hye prestes sent out ser- uauntes, to take him. ‘Then sayde Iesus vnto them: I am yet a litle whyle with you and then go I vnto him that hath sent me. Ye shal seke me, q not fynde me:* and where I am, thither can ye not come. "Then sayde the Iewes amonge them selues: Whyther wil he go, that we shal not fynde him? Wyl he go amoge the Grekes that are scatred abrode, and teach the Grekes? What maner of say- enge is this, that he sayeth: ye shal seke me, and not fynde me: and where I am, thither can not ye come ?

But in the last daye which was y most solempne daye of the feast, lesus stode vp, cried, and sayde: ^Who so thyrsteth, let him come vnto me, and drynke. He that beleueth on me, as the scripture sayeth, out of his body shal flowe ryuers of the water of life. (But this spake he of the tt sprete, which they that beleue on him, shulde receaue. For the holy goost was not yet there, because lesus was not yet glorifyed.) Many of the people now whan they herde this sayenge, sayde: This is a very prophet/ Othersayde:tt* He is Christ.
But some sayde: Shal Christ come out of 
Galile? Sayeth not the scripture, that Christ shal come of the sede of Dauid, and out of the towne of $$ Bethleem, where Dauid was?
Thus was there discencion amonge the people for his sake. Some of them wolde haue taken him, but no man layed handes on him.

The seruauntes came to the hye prestes| 3% and pharises, and they sayde vnto them:

Marc. 12. b. Luc. 20. c. Ioh. 16. b. £ Tere. 29. c. 
Ioh. 8. b. and 13. d. ^ Esa. 55. a. Esa. 12. 2, Ioel 
2.f. Ioh.3.a. and 4. b. tt Act. 2, a. ' Mat. 21. b. tt Mat. 16. c. Ioh. 1. e. * Psal. 131. h. $$ Micb.

5.a. Mat, 2.a. 

Fo. citi. 

Why haue ye not brought him? The ser- 

Ini 

uauntes answered: Neuer mà spake as this man doth. "Then answered them the pharises:
Are ye also disceaued? * Doth eny of the rulers or pharises beleue on him? But the comon people which knowe not the lawe, are cursed. Nicodemus sayde vnto them, he that came to him by night which was one of them: t Doth oure lawe iudge eny man, before it heare him, and knowe what he hath done? ‘They answered and sayde vnto him?
Art thou a Galilean also? £f Searche and loke, out of Galile aryseth no prophet. And so euery man wente home.

The biij. Chapter. 

ESUS wente vnto mount Oliuete,’ and 

early in the mornynge came he agayne in to the temple, and all the people came vnto him. And he sat downe, and taught them.
And ¥ scrybes and Pharises brought vnto him a woman taken in aduoutrye, and set her there openly, and sayde vnto him: Master, this woman was taken in aduoutrye, eué as the dede was adoynge. ‘Moses in the lawe commaunded vs to stone soch. What sayest thou? This they sayde, to tempte him, that they might haue wherof to accuse him. But
Iesus stouped downe, and wrote with his fynger vpo the grounde. Now whyle they contynued axynge him, he lift him self vp, and sayde vnto them: He that is amonge you without synne, let him cast the first stone ather. And he stouped downe agayne, and wrote vpon the grounde. But whan they herde that, they wente out, one after another: the eldest first, and left Iesus alone, and the woman stondinge before him. Iesus lift him- self vp, and whan he sawe noman bnt the woman, he sayde vnto her: Woman, where are thine accusers? Hath noman condempned the? She sayde: LORDE, no man. lesus sayde: Nether do I codempne the," Go thy waye, and synne nomore.

Then spake lesus agayne vnto them, and sayde: I am the light of the worlde. He that foloweth me, shal not walke in darknesse, but shal haue the light of life. Then sayde the Pharises vnto him: Thou bearest recorde of thy self, thy recorde is not true.

* [oh. 12. f. 
23a. 

; 1 Cor. 1. d. aloh. Sma t Exo. 
Leui. 19. d. 1 Ioh. 1. e. ^ Mat. 21. b. 
* Leui. 20. b. 4 Toha. 5. h. * Ioh. 

$ Deut. 17. a. and 19. c. / Mat. 17.a 

Marc, 11. b. 
1. a. 9. a. 12, e. 

The gospell of S. Jhon. 

lesus answered, and sayde vnto them: 
Though I beare recorde of my self, yet my recorde is true: for I knowe whence I came, and whither I go: but ye can not tell whence
I come, and whither i go. Ye iudge after the flesh, I iudge no man: but yf I iudge, my iudgment is true: for I am not alone, but land the father that hath sent me. It is wrytten also in youre lawe, §that the testi- mony of two men is true. I am one that beare wytnesse of my self: And the father that sent me,/ beareth wytnes of me also.
Then sayde they vnto him: Where is thy father? lesus answered: £Ye nether knowe me ner yet my father. Yf ye knewe me, ye shulde knowe my father also. These wordes spake Iesus vpon the Godschest, as he taught in the teple. And noman toke him,’ for his houre was not yet come.

Then sayde Iesus agayne vnto them: ‘I go my waye, and ye shal seke me, and shal dye in youre synnes: whither I go, thither can not ye come. ‘Then sayde y Iewes: Wy] he kyll him self then, that he sayeth: whither I go, thither ean not ye come? And he sayde vnto them: Ye are from beneth, I am from aboue:
Ye are of this worlde, I am not of this worlde. 
Therfore haue I sayde vnto you, that ye shal dye in youre synnes. || For yf ye be- leue not that 1 am he, ye shal dye in youre synnes.

Then sayde they vnto him: Who art thou then? And lesus sayde vnto the: Eué the very same thinge that I saye vnto you. I haue many thinges to saye and to iudge of you. But hethat sent me, is true: *and loke what I haue herde of him, that speake I before the worlde, Howbeit they vnderstode not, that he spake of the father.

Then sayde lesus vnto them: Whan ye haue lift vp an hye the sonne of man, then shal ye knowe that I am he, and that I do nothinge of my self:' but as my father hath taught me, euen so I speake. And he that sent me, is with me. The father leaueth me not alone, for I do alwaie that pleaseth him.
Whan he thus spake, 1 many beleued on him. 
Then sayde lesus vnto the lewes, that be- leued on him: Yf ye contynue in my worde, then are ye my very disciples, and ye shall

£ Mat. 11. e. Luc. 10. c. Ioh.7. c. ^ Ioh. 7. c. i Ioh. 7. d. and 13. d. || Marc. 16. b. Ioh. 3. c.
* Toh. 15. b. ! Tohà. 3. e. $ Iohà.7. c. 

Chap. bij. 

€ 

Chap. tr. 

knowe the trueth, and the trueth shal make you * fre.

Then answered they him: We are Abra- hams sede, we were neuer bonde to eny man, how sayest thou then: Ye shal be fre? Iesus answered them, and sayde: Verely verely I saye vnto you: t Who so euer doth synne, is the seruaunt of synne: As for the seruaunt, he abydeth not in the house for euer, but the sonne abydeth euer. Yf the sonne therfore make you fre, then are ye fre in dede. I knowe that ye are Abrahams sede, but ye seke to kyll me. For my worde taketh not amonge you. I speake that I haue sene of my father, ¢ ye do that ye haue sene of youre father.

They answered, and sayde vnto him: 
Abraham is oure father. lesus sayde vnto them: Yf ye were Abrahams children, ye wolde do the dedes of Abraham. But now ye go aboute to kyll me, a man, that haue tolde you the trueth, t which I haue herde of God, this dyd not Abraham. Ye do the dedes of youre father. ‘Then sayde they vnto him: We are not borne of fornicacion, we haue one father, euen God. Iesus sayde vnto them: Yf God were youre father, then wolde yeloue me. For I am proceaded forth, and come from God. For I am not come of my self, but he hath sent me. Why knowe ye not thé my speach? [ue because ye can not abyde the hearinge of my worde.

Ye are of the father the deuell, and after the lustes of youre father wyl ye do. $'The same was a murthurer from the begynnynge, and abode not in the trueth: for the trueth is not in him. Whan he speaketh a lye, then speaketh he of his awne: for he is a lyar, and a father of the same. But because I saye the trueth, ye beleue me not.

Which of you can rebuke me of one synne? 
Yf I saye the trueth, why do ye not beleue me? lHe that is of God, heareth Gods worde. Therfore heare ye not, because ye are not of God.
£| Then answered the Jewes, and sayde vnto him: Saye we not right, that thou art a
Samaritane," and hast the deuell? Iesus answered: I haue -no deuell, but I honoure my father, and ye haue dishonoured me. I

* Rom. 6. h. and 8. a. 
2 Pet. 2. d. 
1 Ioh. 3. b. 
? Toha. 5. c. 

Gal. 4. a. t Rom. 6. b. 
$ Gen. 3. a. 
{ Ioha. 10. b. 

Marc, 3. h. 

|| Iohà. 10. a. «4. 
** Mat. 9. d. and 21. c. 

The gospell of S. Jhon, 

^ fo. rb. 

seke not myne awne prayse, but there is one that seketh it, and iudgeth. Verely verely I saye vnto you: ^Yf eny man kepe my worde, he shal neuer se death.

Then sayde the lewes vnto him: Now knowe we, that **thou hast the deuell. Abra- ham is deed and the prophetes, and thou sayest: Yf eny mà kepe my worde, he shal neuer taist of death. Art thou greater then oure father Abraham? which is deed, and the prophetes are deed? Who makest thou thy self? lesus answered: tt Yf I prayse my self, then is my prayse nothinge. But it is my father that prayseth me, which ye saye is youre
God, and ye knowe hi not: but I knowe him. 
And yf I shulde saye, I knowe him not, I shulde be a lyar, like vnto you. But I knowe him, and kepe his worde.

Abraham youre father was glad, that he shulde se my daye, tt And he sawe it, and reioysed. Then sayde the Iewes vnto him:
Thou art not yet fiftie yeare olde, and hast thou sene Abraham? Iesus sayde vnto thé:
Verely verely I saye vnto you: Or euer Abra- ham was,$$ Í am. Then toke they vp stones, to cast at him. But Iesus hyd himself, and wente out of the temple.

The ir. Chapter. 

ND lesus passed by, and sawe a man that was borne blynde. And his dis- ciples axed him, q sayde: Master, Who hath synned? this, or his elders, that he was borne blynde? lesus answered: Nether hath this synned, ner his elders, ll but that Y workes of
God shulde be shewed on him. I must worke the workes of him that hath sent me, whyle it is daye. The night commeth, whan no man can worke. As longe as I am in the worlde,

I am the {light of the worlde. 

Whan he had thus sayde, he spat on the grounde, and made claye of the spetle, and rubbed the claye on the eyes of the blynde, and sayde vnto him: Go thy waye to the pole of *** Syloha (which is interpretated, sent) and wash the. Then wéte he his waye and waszhed him, and came seynge. The negh- bours and they that had sene him before, that he was a begger, sayde: Is not this he that sat, and begged? Some sayde: It is he.

Toh. 7. h. tt Ioh. 5. c. tt Gen.17.22.3. Heb. 
11. c. §§ Exod. 3. c. Illl Iob. 11. a. TT Ioha. 
1. a, 8. h. 12. c. eee Esa, 3. h. 

| 

| 

fo. tbi. 

Other sayde: he is like him. But he him- self sayde: I am euen he. Then sayde they vnto him: How are thine eyes opened ? He answered, and sayde: The ma that is ealled lesus, made claye, and anoynted myne eyes, and sayde: Go thy waye to the pole of Siloha, and wash the. I wente my waye, q washed me, and receaued my sight. Then sayde they vnto him: Where is he? He sayde: I can not tell.

3| Then brought they vnto the pharises, him 

that a litle before was blynde. *It was the 
Sabbath, whan lesus made the elaye, and opened his eyes. Then agayne the Pharises also axed him, how he had reeeaned his sight.
He sayde vnto thé: He put claye vpon myne eyes, and I waszhed me, a now I se. :

'Then sayde some of the pharises: This man is not of God, seynge he kepeth not y
Sabbath. *But the other sayde: How can a synfull man do soch tokens? And there was a stryfe amonge thé. They sayde agayne vnto ¥ blynde: What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He sayde: he is a prophet.

The lewes beleued not hi, that he was blynde, and had receaned his sight, tyll they ealled the elders of him, that had receaued his sight, and they axed them, and sayde: Is this youre sonne, whom ye saye, was borne blynde? How doth he now se then? His elders answered them, and sayde: We kuowe, that this is oure sonne, and that he was borne blynde. But how he now seyeth, we can not tell: or who hath opened his eyes, ean we not tell. He is olde ynough himself, axe him, let him speake for him self.

(| This sayde his elders, because they feared 

the Iewes. +¥or the Iewes had conspyred allready, that yf eny man dyd confesse that he was Christ, the same shulde be exco- municate. Therfore sayde his elders: He is olde ynough, axe him.

Then called they the mā agayne y was blynde, and sayde vnto him: $Geue God y prayse, we knowe that this man is a synner.
He answered, q sayde: Whether he be a synner or no, I ean not tell: one thinge am I sure off, that I was blynde, and now I se.
Thé sayde they vnto him agayne: What dyd he vnto the? How opened’ he thine eyes?

v Mat. 12. a, Marc. 1.c. Luc.6.2. Iohā.5.a. and7. b. t Iohà. 7. d. 10. b. 12. h. ł Ioh. 11. f. § Iosue 7. c.

The qospell of 3». Jhon. 

He answered them: I tolde you right now. 
Herde ye it not? What, wil ye heare it agayne? Will ye also be his disciples? Then rayted they him, and sayde: Thou art his diseiple. We are sure that God spake with
Moses: As for this felowe, we know not whéee he is.

The man answered, and sayde vnto the:|33 

This is a maruelous thinge, that ye wote not whence he is, and he hath opened mine eyes.
For we knowe that God heareth not $ sin- ners: but yf eny ma be a fearer of God, and doth his will, him hearethhe. Sens ¥ worlde beganne was it not herde, that eny man opened the eyes of one that was borne blynde.
Yf this man were not of God, he coulde haue done nothinge. They answered, and sayde vnto him: Thou art alltogether borne in synne, and teachest thou vs? And they thrust him out.

lesus herde, y they had thrust him out, and wha he had founde him, he sayde vnto him: Beleuest thou on the sonne of God?
He answered, and sayde: LORDE, who is it, y I might belene on him? Iesus sayde vnto hr Thou hast sene him, and he it is, that talketh with the. He sayde: LORDE, I beleue. And he worshipped him.

And lesus sayde: I am come to iudgmet in to this worlde, that they which se not, might se: and that they whieh se, might be made blynde. And some of the Pharises y were with him, herde this, and sayde vnto him: Are we then blynde also? Iesus sayde vnto thé: Yf ye were blynde, ye shulde haue no synne. But now that ye saye, we se, therfore youre synne remayneth.

The y. Chapter. 

V verely I saye vnto you: He ý 

entreth not in at the dore in to the shepefolde, but elymmeth vp some other waye, the same is a thefe q a murthurer. But he that goeth in at the dore, is the shepherde of the shepe: to him y porter openeth, and the shepe heare his voyee, and he Vealleth his awne shepe by name, and ledeth them out.
And whan he hath sent forth his awne shepe, he goeth before them, and the shepe folowe him: for they knowe his voyee. As for a straunger, they folowe him not, but flye from
Act. 12, d. loha. 15. c. 

?]oh,8.d. ¥ Pro.27. c. 

Chap. r. 

Chap. rt. 

€ 

him: for they knowe not the voyce of straungers. This prouerbe spake lesus vnto them, but they vnderstode not what it was, that he sayde vnto them.

Then sayde lesus vnto them agayne: 
Verely verely I saye vnto you: *I am the dore of the shepe. All they that are come before me, are theues and murthurers. But y shepe harkened not vnto them. I am the dore. Yf eny man entre in by me, he shalbe saued, and shal go in and out, and fynde pasture. A thefe cometh not, but for to steale, kyll, and destroye. I am come, y they might haue life and haue it more abundauntly.

I am a good shepherde. A good shepherde geueth his life for the shepe. "But an hyred seruaunt, which is not the shepherde, nether the shepe are his awne, seyth y wolfe comynge, and leaueth $ shepe, and flyeth. And the wolfe catcheth q scatereth y shepe. But the hyred seruaut flyeth, because he is an hyred seruaunte, and careth not for the shepe. 1 am a good sheperde, tand knowe myne, and am knowne of myne. Eue as my father knoweth me, and I knowe y father. And +] geue my life for my shepe. And I haue yet other shepe, which are not of this folde, and those same must I brynge also, and they shal heare my voyce, and there shalbe one flocke and one shepherde.

Therfore doth my father loue me, because 
I leaue my life, that I maye take it agayne. 
No ma taketh it fro me, but I leaue it of my self. I haue power to leaue it, and haue power to take it agayne. "This commaunde- ment haue I receaued of my father. Then was there discension amoge the lewes for these sayenges. ^Many of the sayde: He hath the deuell, and is madd, why heare ye him? Other sayde: $'These are not wordes of one that is possessed. Can the deuell also open $ eyes of the blynde?

It was the dedicacion of the téple at Ieru- salé,° q was wynter, and lesus walked in l| Salomos porche. "Thé came y Iewes rounde aboute hi, q saide vnto hi: How loge dost thou make vs doute? Yf thou be Christ, tell vs planely. lesus answered the: I tolde you, t ye beleue not. The workes y I do

* Toh. 14. a. a Eze. 34. d. Mich. 5. a. t 2 Tim. oy lah i Marc. 10. e. ^ Mat. 9. d. Marc. 3. c.
$Ioh.7.d. 8.6e.9.b. — * 2 Mac. 10. b. | 3 Re. 6. a. 
T Ioh. 14. a. and 17. c. ** Toha. 5. b. tt Psal. 

The gospel of S. Jhon. 

in my fathers name, they beare wytnesse of me. But ye beleue not, because ye are not of my shepe as I sayde vnto you. My shepe heare my voyce, q I knowe thé, q they folowe me. And I gene thé euerlastinge life, t they shal neuer perishe, and noma shal plucke thé out of my hande. My father which gaue thé me, is greater thé all: q noman is able to plucke them out of my fathershande. {I and the father are one. ‘Then the Iewes toke vp stones agayne, to stone him. lesus answered thé: Many good workes haue I shewed you fro my father, for which of thé stone ye me?

The Iewes answered hi, and sayde: For the good worke sake we stone the not, **but for the blasphemy : and because y thou beynge a man, makest thy self God. Iesus answered thé: Is it not wrytten in youre lawe: I haue sayde, Ye are Goddes?tt Yf he call them
Goddes, vnto whom the worde of God came 
(t the scripture can not be broke) saye ye thé vnto hi, who $ father hath sanctified q sent in to ¥ worlde: "thou blasphemest God, because I sayde: I am y sonne of God? +tYf
I do not $ workes of my father, beleue me not: but yf I do the, thé (yf ye beleue not me) yet beleue ¥ workes, y ye maye knowe q
!beleue, y the father is in me, q I in y father. 

“They wente aboute agayne to take him, but he escaped out of their hades, and wcte awaye agayne beyode Iordane, in to y place
$$ where Iho had baptysed before, q there he abode. And many came to hi, and sayde:
Tho dyd no tokés, but all ý Ihon spake of this man, istrue. And many beleued on him there.

The ri. Chapter. 

HERE laye one sicke, named Lazarus 

of Bethania, in ý towne of Mary ¢ hir sis- ter Martha. Illl (It was y Mary which anoynted y LORDE with oyntment, q dryed his fete with hir heer, whose brother Lazarus laye sicke.) "The sent his sisters vnto hi, a sayde:
LORDE, beholde, he whé thou louest lyeth sicke. Wha Iesus herde that, he sayde:
5f This sicknesse is not vnto death, but for the prayse of God, e: sonne of God maye be
|praysed there thorow. lesus loued Martha it hir sister, q Lazarus. Now wha he herde

81. d. d Mat. 26. g. Mar. 14. b. Luc. 92. e. tł Ioha 9. a, and 15. c. * Mat. 21. e. Marc, 3. a.
Iohā. 7. b. $$Ioh.1.c. ||| Luc. 7. e. TT Ioha, 
9. a, 

Fo. rbij. 

a 

Fo. bii. that he was sicke, he abode two dayes in y place where he was. ;

After warde sayde he vnto his disciples: 
Let vs go agayne i to lewry. His disciples sayde vnto him: Master, *lately wolde the lewes hane stoned the, q wilt thou go thither agayne? lesus answered: Are there not twolue houres in $ daye? He y walketh in the daye, stombleth not, for he seyeth y light of this worlde. But he that walketh in the night, stobleth: for there is no light in him.
Bİ This he spake, q after warde sayde he vnto thé: Lazarus oure frende tslepeth, but I go to wake him ont of slepe. Thé sayde his disciples: LORDE, yf he slepe, he shal do well ynough (Howbeyt lesus spake of his death but they thought y he had spoké of y bodely slepe.) "The sayde lesus vnto the planely: Lazarus is deed, q I am glad for youre sakes, y I was not there, that ye maye beleue. Neuertheles let vs go vnto hi. Thé sayde Thomas (which is called Didimus)“ vnto
¥ disciples: Let vs go also, y we maye dye with hi.

"Thé came Iesus, q founde ý he had lyen in y graue foure dayes allready. Bethanye was nye vnto lerusale, aboute fiftene fnurloges.
And many of the lewes were come to 
Martha q Mary, to coforte thé ouer their brother. Now wha Martha herde y Iesus came, she wéte to mete him. But Mary satt styl at home.

The sayde Martha vnto Iesus: LORDE, yf thou haddest bene here, ^my brother had not bene deed. But neuertheles I knowe also, what soeuer thon axest of God, that God wyl gene it the. lesus sayde vnto her: Thy brother shal ryse agayne. Martha sayde vnto hi: I knowe, y he shal ryse agayne in the resurreccion at y last daye. Iesus saide vnto her: I am the resurreccion q the life. He y beleueth on me, shal lyue, though he were deed allready: q whosoener lyueth and be- leueth on me, shal neuer dye. Beleuest thon this? She saide vnto him: Yee LORDE, I beleue, that thou art Christ the sonne of God, which shulde come in to the worlde. And wha she had sayde this, she wéte hir waye, q called Mary hir sister secretly, q saide: The maister is come, q calleth for the. She whan she herde that, rose vp quyckly, and came

* Toha. 7. c. 8. e. 10. c. 
8. c. a ]ohà. 20. c. 

t Mat.9.c. Mar. 5.e. Luc. 
* foh. 11. d. 

1 Rom. 1. b. Ioh. 

The gospell of S. Jhon. 

ynto him: For Iesus was not yet come in to 
$ towne, but was yet in the place, where 
Martha met him. ‘The Iewes that were with her in the house and comforted her, whan they sawe Mary, that she rose vp haistely, q wente out, they folowed her, q saide: She goeth to the graue, to wepe there.

Now wha Mary came where lesus was q sawe him, she fell downe at his fete, q sayde vnto hi: “LORDE, yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had not bene deed. Wha lesus sawe her wepe, q the Iewes wepinge also y came with her, he groned in the sprete,
@ was sory with in himself, a sayde: Where 

haue ye layed him? They sayde: LORDE 

come, q se it. And $lesus wepte. Then sayde y lewes: Beholde how he loned him.
But some of thé saide: Coulde not he Il which opened the eyes of ¥ blynde, hane made also, that this ma shulde not haue dyed? But
Iesus groned agayne in himself, and came to the graue. It was a caue, and a stone layed on it. Jesus saide: Take awaye y stone.
Martha the sister of him y was deed, saide vnto hi: LORDE, he stynketh allready, for he hath bene deed foure dayes. Iesus sayde vnto her: Sayde I not vnto the, that yf do: dyddest beleue, thou shuldest se the glory o
God? 

Then toke they awaye the stone, where the deed laye. Iesus lift vp his eyes, and sayde:
Father, I thake y, that thou hast herde me. 
Howbeit I knowe, that thou hearest me allwaye: but f because of y people that stonde by, I sayde it, that they maye beleue, that thou hast sent me.

Whan he had sayde this, he cryed loude: 
Lazarus come forth. And ¥ deed came forth bounde hande q fote with graue clothes, q his face bounde with a napkyn. Jesus sayde vnto the: Lowse him, ¢ let i go. Many now of y Iewes which were come vnto Mary, and sawe what lesus dyd, belened on him. But some of thé wente their waye vnto the pharises, and tolde thé what Iesus had done.

“Then the hye prestes, and the pharises gathered a councell, and sayde: ** What do we? ‘This man doth many tokens. Yf we let him go thus, all mē wyl beleue in him: ttthe shal the Romaynes come, and take

awaye oure londe and people. But one of 
3.b. and 6.f. — *Ioh.11.c. — $Luc.19.d. |[Ioh.9.a. 
*| 1oh.12.d. 2 Psal.2.a. **Act.4.b. tt Dan.9. e. 

Chap. rt. 

Chap. rij. them, named Caiphas, which was hye prest that same yeare, sayde vnto them: Ye knowe nothinge nether considre ye eny thinge at all.* It is better for us that one mà dye for the people, then that all the people shulde perishe.

F| This spake he not of himself, but for so 

moch as he was hye prest of the same yeare, he prophecied. For Iesus was for to dye for the people, and not for the people onely, but that he shulde gather together the children of
God, which were scatered abrode: From that daye forth they toke concell, how they might put him to death. Iesus walked nomore openly amonge the lewes, but wente from thence in to a countre by the wyldernesse, to a cite called Ephraim, q there had he his beynge with his disciples.

‘The Iewes Easter was nye at hande. And there wente vp many to Terusalé out of that countre before $ Easter, to purifye them selues. Then stode they vp, and axed after lesus, and spake amonge them selues in the temple: What thynke ye, that he cometh not to y feast? ‘The hye prestes q pharises had geuen a commaundement, that yf eny man kuewe where he were, n shulde shewe it, that they might take him.

The rij. Chapter. 

IXE dayes before Easter came lesus vnto *Bethanye, where Lazarus was, which was deed, whom lesus raysed vp from the deed. There they made him a supper, and Martha serned. But Lazarus was one of them, that sat at the table with him.
#Then toke Mary a pounde of oyntment of pure and costly Nardus, and anoynted Iesus fete, q dryed his fete with hir heer. The house was full of the sauoure of the oyntment.
Then sayde one of his disciples, Iudas 
Iscarioth Symons sonne, which afterwarde betrayed him: Why was not this oyntment solde for thre hundreth pens, and geuen to the poore? (This sayde he not that he cared for the poore, but because he was a thefe, and Shad the bagge, and bare that which was geué.) Then sayde lesus: Let her alone, this hath she kepte agaynst the daye of my

* Toha. 18. b. t Iohà. 7. a. a Mat. 26.a. Mar. 
14. a. Lue. 22. a. 1 Luc. 7. d. $ Ioh. 13. c. 
Iohá. 11. e. * Mat. 21, a. Marc. 11. a. Luc. 19. c. 
J Psal. 117. c. ** Eaa. 62. c. Zach. 9. h. Hu oo UNS» *SBe| eee 

The gospell of >. Jhon, 

buryenge. with you, but me haue ye not allwaye.

‘Then moch people of the Iewes had know- lege, that he was there, and they came not for lesus sake onely, but also y they might se
Lazarus whom he had raysed from the deed. 
But y hye prestes were aduysed to put 
Lazarus to death also: because y for his sake many of the [ewes wéte awaye and beleued on Iesus.

’Vpon the nexte daye moch people which were come vnto the feast, whan they herde that lesus came towarde Ierusalem, they toke braunches of palme trees, and wéte out to mete him, and cryed: Hosianna, * Blessed be he, that in the name of the LORDE com- meth kynge of Israel. Iesus gat a yonge
Asse, and rode theron, As it is wrytte: 
** Feare not thou doughter of Sion, beholde, thy kynge cometh ryding e vpo an Asses foale. Neuertheles his disciples vnderstode not these thinges at the first, but whan Iesus was glorified, then remébred they that soch thinges were wrytté of him, and that they had done soch thinges vnto him.

The people that was with him whan he called Lazarus out of ¥ graue and raysed him from the deed, commended the acte. Ther- fore the people met him, because they herde, that he had done soch a miracle. But the pharises sayde amonge them selues: Ye se that we preuayle nothinge, beholde, all y worlde runneth after him.

'There were certayne Grekes (amonge the that were come vp to Ierusalé to worshipe at the feast)‘ the same came vnto Philippe, ttwhich was of Bethsaida out of Galile, q prayed him, and sayde: Syr, we wolde fayne se lesus. Philippe came, q tolde Andrew.
And agayne, Philippe and Andrew tolde lesus. Iesus answered thé, and sayde : ^'l'he houre is come, that the sonne of man must be glorified.

Verely verely I saye vnto you: Excepte the wheatcorne fall in to the grounde,* and dye, it bydeth alone: But yf it dye, it bryngeth forth moch frute. ‘He that loueth his life, shal lose it: and he that hateth his life in this worlde, shal kepe it vnto life euerlastinge.
He that wyl serue me, let him folowe me. 

4 Toh, 13. d, and 17. a. f Mat. 10. e. Mar. 8. e.

8.f. Act.8.c. tt Iohà. 1. e. e Esa. 53. c, 1 Cor. 15. d.
Luc. 9. c. and 17. d, 

MEN X O- P OC unm 

So. riy. 

For the poore haue ye allwaye 

B 

€ 

jfo. cr. 

And where I am, there shal my seruaunt be 

also: and he that serueth me, him shal my 

father honoure. 

^ Now is my soule heuy, and what shal I saye? Father, helpe me out of this houre.
But therfore am I come in to this houre. 
Father, glorifye thy name. 

3| Then came there a voyee from heauen: I haue glorified it, and wyl glorifye it agayne.
Then sayde the people that stode by and herde: It thondereth. Other sayde: An angell spake vnto him. Jesus answered, and sayde: * This voyee came not because of me, but for youre sakes.

Now goeth the iudgment ouer the worlde. 
Now shal the prynce of this worlde be thrust out. And I whan I am lift vp from the earth, wyl drawe all vnto me. (But this he sayde, to signifye, what death he shulde dye.)
'Then answered him the people: We haue herde in the * lawe, that Christ endureth for euer: and how sayest thou then, that the sonne of man must be lift vp? Who is this sonne of man?
£| "Then sayde Iesus vnto them: The light is 

yet a litle whyle with you, walke whyle ye haue the light, that the darknesse fall not vpo you. He that walketh in the darknesse, woteth not whither he goeth. Beleue ye on the light, whyle ye haue it, that ye maye be the children of light.

'These thinges spake lesus, and departed awaye, and hyd himself from them. And though he had done soch tokens before the,

yet beleued they not on him, that the sayenge of Esay the prophet might be fulfylled,° which he spake: LORDE, who beleueth oure preach- inge? Or to whom is the arme ofthe LORDE opened? 'Pherfore coulde they not beleue, for Esay saide agayne: He hath blynded their eyes, and hardened their hert, that they shulde not se with the eyes, ner vnderstonde with the hert, q shulde be conuerted, and he shulde heale them. This sayde Esay, whan he sawe his glory, and spake of him.

| Neuertheles many of the chefe rulers be- leued on him,’ but because of the Pharises they wolde not be aknowne of it,” lest they shulde be excommunicate, + For they loued more the prayse with men, then with God.

| 

The gospell of S. Jhon. 

*Toha. 11. e. 

Chap. rii. 

lesus eryed and sayde: He that beleueth on me, beleueth not on me, but on him that sent me. And he that seyth me, seyth him y sentme. * Iam come alight in to the worlde, that whosoeuer beleueth on me, shulde not byde in darknesse. And he that heareth my wordes and beleueth not, I iudge him not, for I am not come to iudge the worlde,” but to saue the worlde. He that refuseth me, and receaueth not my wordes, hath one allready that iudgeth him. § The worde that I haue spoken, that shall iudge him at the last daye,
For I haue not spoken of my self:’ but the father that sent me, hath geuen me a com- maundement, what I shulde do and saye.
And I knowe that his commaundement is life euerlastinge. Therfore loke what I speake, that speake I eué so, as the father hath sayde vnto me.

The rij. Chapter. 
EFORE the feast of Easter whan Iesus|q 

knewe that his tyme was come, that he shulde departe out of this worlde vnto y father, as he loued his which were iu the worlde, euen so loued he them vnto the ende.
And after supper, whan the deuell had all- ready put in to y hert of Iudas Iscarioth*
Symons sonne, to betraye him, lesus know- inge that the father had geuen all thinges in to his handes,' q that he was come from God, and wente vnto God, he rose from supper, and layed asyde his vpper garmentes, and toke a towell, and gyrde it aboute him. After- warde poured he water in to a basen, and beganne to wash the disciples fete, and dryed them with the towell, y he was gyrded withall.
'Then came he vnto Symon Peter, and y same sayde vnto him: LORDE, shalt thou washe my fete? lesus answered and sayde vnto him: What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shalt knowe it herafter. 'Thé sayde
Peter vnto him: Thou shalt neuer wash my fete. Iesus answered him: Yf I wash y not, thou shalt haue no parte with me. Symon
Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, not the fete 

onely, but the handes also and the heade. 

Iesus sayde vnto him: He that is waszhe, |33 

nedeth not, saue to washe y fete, but is cleane 

euery whytt. And ye are cleane || but not c 8. b.9.a. ^ Toh. 3. c. $ Deut. 18. c. 3 Ioh.
16. b k Mat. 26. b. Mar. 14. b. Luc. 22. a. 

i Mat, 1.e. Luc. 10. c. || Ioh. 6. g. 

Chap. rity. all. For he knewe his betrayer, therfore sayde he: ye are not all cleane.

Now whan he had waszhen their fete, and taken his clothes, he sat him downe agayne, and sayde vnto thé: Wote ye what I haue done vnto you? Ye call me master and
LORDE, and ye saye right therin, for so I am. Yf I then youre LORDE and master haue waszhen youre fete, ye ought also to wash one anothers fete. ^I haue geué you an ensample, that ye shulde do as I haue done vnto you. Verely verely I saye vnto you:
* the seruaunt is not greater then his lorde, nether is the Apostell greater then he that sent him. Yf ye knowe these thinges, ^ blessed are ye yf ye do them. I speake not of you all, I knowe whom I haue chosen, but that the scripture might be fulfilled: t He y eateth my bred, hath lift vp his hele against me. I tell it you now, before it come,’ that whan it is come to passe, ye maye beleue, that I am he.

€, Verely verely I saye vnto you: He that 

receaueth whom so euer I sende,? receaueth me: and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. Whan lesus had thus sayde, he was heuy in sprete, and testified, and sayde: 'Verely verely I saye vnto you: One tamonge you shal betraye me. Then the disciples loked one vpon another, q were in doute, of whom he spake. But there was one amoge his disciples, that leaned at the table on Iesus bosome, who Iesus loued:/ to him beckened Symon Peter, that he shulde axe, who it was, of whom he spake. For the same leaned vpo lesus brest, and sayde vnto him:

LORDE, who is it?, lesus answered: It is 

he, vnto whom I dyppe the soppe ¢ geue it. 

And he dypte in the soppe, and gaue it vnto 

Iudas Iscarioth Symons sonne. And after $ 

soppe the deuell entred in to him. 

Then sayde lesus vnto him: That thou doest, do quyckly. But y same wyst no man at the table, for what intent he sayde it vnto him. Some thought (for so moch as Iudas had the bagge*) that lesus had sayde vnto him: Bye that is necessary for vs agaynst the feast: Or that he shulde geue some thinge vnto the poore. Whan he had receaued the soppe, he wente out immediatly, and it was night.

a Ephe. 5.a. 1 Pet. 2, c. * Mat. 10. c. Luc. 6.d. 
Ioh. 15. b * Mat. 5. b. t Paal. 40. b. * Iohà. 
14. c. and 16. a d Mat. 10. e. Mar.9. d. Luc. 10. b. 

* Mat. 26. b. Marc. 14. c. Luc. 92. a. SO Hoy o Gy 

The gospel! of S. Jhon. 

Fo. rrt. 

Whan he was gone forth, Iesus sayde:|B 
Now is the sonne of mà glorified,’ and God is glorified in him. Yf God be glorified in him, thé shal god glorifie him also in hiself, q straight waye shal he glorifye him. Deare childré, I am yet a litle whyle with you. Ye shal seke me, and (as I sayde vnto y Iewes’) whither I go, thither can ye not come. And now I saye vnto you, “A new comaundemét geue I you, that ye loue together as I haue loued you, y euen so ye loue one another.
By this d euery man knowe that ye are my disciples,’ yf ye haue loue one to another.
Symon Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, whither goest thou? lesus answered him:
Whither I go, thou canst not folowe me now, 
$but thou shalt folowe me herafter. Peter sayde vnto him: LORDE, why cà not I folowe the now? I wil geue my life for thy sake. lesus answered him: Wilt thou geue thy life for my sake? Verely verely I saye vnto y. || The cock shal not crowe, tyll thou haue denyed me thryse. .

The xiij. Chapter. 

ND he sayde vnto his disciples: Let not youre hert be afrayed. Yf ye beleue on God, thé beleue also on me. In my fathers house are many dwellinges. Yf it were not so, I wolde haue tolde you: I go to prepare the place for you. And though I go to prepare the place for you, yet wil 1 come agayne, and receaue you vnto my self, y ye maye be where I am. And whither I go, ye knowe, and the waye knowe ye also.

Thomas sayde vnto hin: LORDE, we knowe not whither thou goest, t how can we knowe the waye? lesus sayde vnto him: I am the waye, and the trueth, and the life.
" Noman cometh to the father but by me. Yf ye knewe me, ye knewe my father also. And fro héce forth ye knowe hi, « haue sene him.
Philippe sayde vnto him: LORDE, shewe vs the father, and it sufficeth vs. Iesus sayde vnto him: Thus longe am I with you, and hast thou not knowne me? Philippe, he that seyth me, seyth the father. And how sayest thou then: Shewe vs the father? Beleuest thou not that I am in the father," and that y

Act. 20. d. f Toba, 20. a. £ Toba. 12. a. ^ Toha. 
12. c. and 17. a. * Toh. 7. d. and 8. b. * Toha. 15. b. 
1 1 Ioh. 2. a. and 3. b. $ Ioha. 21. d. || Ioh. 18. d. 

m Ioh. 1. a. 11. c. Ioha. 6. e. ? Iohà. 10. c. 

Fo. crt. father is in me? The wordes that I speake vnto you, those "speake not I of my self: but the father that dwelleth in me, he doth the workes. Beleue me, that I ain in the father, and that y father is in me: Or els, beleue me at the leest for the workes sake.

Verely verely I saye vnto you: He that beleueth on me, shal do the workes that I do, and shal do greater then these: for I go to the father. And what soeuer ye axe ¥ father in my name, ^that wyl I do, that the father maye be praysed in the sonne. Yf ye axe eny thinge in my name, I wyl do it.

Yf ye loue me, kepe my commaundementes. 
And I wyl praye the father, and he shal geue you another comforter, that he maye byde with you for euer: euen y sprete of trueth, whom y worlde can not receaue, for it seyth him not, nether doth it knowe him: but ye knowe him, for he abydeth with you, q shalbe in you.” I wil not leaue you cófortles, I come vnto you. It is yet a litle whyle, the shal the worlde se me nomore, tbut ye shal se me: for I lyue, and ye shal lyue also. In y daye shal ye knowe, that I am in the father and ye in me, and I in you. He that hath my comaundementes, “and kepeth them, the same is he that loueth me: and he that loueth me, shalbe loued of my father: q I wyl loue him, and wyl shewe myne awne self vnto him. tTudas sayde vnto hi: (not that Iscarioth)
LORDE, What is the cause thé, that thou wilt shewe thy self vnto vs, and not vnto the worlde ?

Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him: He that loueth me, wyl kepe my worde, and my father wyl loue him: and we wyl come vnto him, and wyll make oure dwellynge with him.
But he that loueth me not, kepeth not my sayenges. And the worde that ye heare, is not myne, but the fathers which hath sent me.

This haue I spoken vnto you, whyle I was with you. *But that comforter euen ý holy goost, $ who my father shal sende in my name, he shal teache you all thinges, a bringe all to youre remembraunce, what soeuer I haue tolde you.

Peace I leaue vnto you, my peace I geue you: I geue not vnto you, as the worlde

geueth. Let not youre hert be troubled, 
* Toh. 3. e. 7. b. 8. c. 12. f. 14. c, LEGS PA ls Gs 
Marc. 11. c. Ioh. 15, a, and 16. c. * Mat. 28. c. 

t Ioh. 20. b. c. d. 21. a. b. 

1 Act. 15. c. 4 Áct. 2, a, 2 Tim, 1. a. 

The gospelil of 3. Jhon, 

e Joha. 15.a. 1 Ioh. 5. a. 
$ Ioh. 16. b. 

nether let it beafrayed. Ye haue herde, that 
I sayde vnto you: I go, q come agayne vnto lyou. Yf ye loued me, ye wolde reioyse, be- cause I saide, I go to the father: for $ father is greater the I. And now haue I tolde you, before it come, that whan it is come to passe, ye maye beleue: Here after wyl not I talke moch with you. ‘For the prynce of this worlde cometh, and hath nothinge in me.
But that the worlde maye knowe that I loue y father. And as the father hath comaunded me, so do I. Aryse, let vs go hence.
I AM a true * vyne, and my father is an huszbande man. Euery braunch that bringeth not forth frute in me, shal he cut of: and euery one that bryngeth forth frute, shal he pourge, y it maye bringe forth more frute.
Now are ye cleane, because of the worde, that 
I haue spoke vnto you. Byde ye in me, and 
I in you. Like as $ braunch can not brynge forth frute of it self excepte it byde in the vyne, Euen so nether ye also, excepte ye abyde in me.

I am the vyne, ye are the braunches. He that abydeth in me, and I in him, the same bryngeth forth moch frute: for without me can ye do nothinge. He that abydeth not in me, is cast out as a vyne braunche, and it wythereth, and men gather it vp, and cast it in to the fyre, and it burneth. ** Yf yeabyde in me, and my wordes abyde in you, ye shal axe what ye wyl, q it shal be done vnto you.
Herin is my father praysed, that ye brynge forth moch frute, and become my disciples.
Like as my father hath loued me, eué so haue I loued you. Cotynue ye 1 my loue.tt
Yf ye kepe my cOmaundementes, ye shal cótynue in my loue: like as I haue kepte my fathers comaundementes, and cotynue in his loue.

These thinges haue I spoken vnto you, that my ioye might remayne in you, and y youre ioye might be perfecte. ‘This is my co- maundement, that ye loue together, as I hau loued you. No man hath greater loue, then to set his life for his frende. ttYe are my frendes, yf ye do that I commaunde you.
Hence forth call I you not seruauntes, for a 

The yb. Chapter. 

Toh. 13. b. and 16. a. e Toha. 12. d. {T Eccli. 24. c. 
** Mat. 21. c. Marc. 11. c. Ioh. 14. b. and 16. c. tt Ioh. 14. d. /Ioh. 13. d. 1 Ioh. 3.c. tt Mat. 12. e.

Chap. rb. 

w 

(bap. roi. 

€ 

seruaunt knoweth not what his lorde doeth. 
But I haue sayde that ye are frendes: For all that I haue herde of my father, haue I shewed vnto you. “Ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you, and ordeyned you, that ye go, and *bringe forth frute, and that youre frute contynue, that what soeuer ye axe the father in my name, he shulde geue it you.

This I commaunde you, that ye loue one another. Yf the worlde hate you, then knowe, that it hath hated me before you. Yf ye were of the worlde, the worlde wolde loue his awne. Howbeit because ye are not of the worlde, but I haue chosen you from the worlde, therfore the worlde hateth you. Re- membre my worde, that I sayde vnto you:
"Dhe seruaunt is not greater then his lorde. 
Yf they haue persecuted me, they shal per- secute you also: Yf they haue kepte my worde, they shal kepe yours also.

But all this shal they do vnto you for my names sake, because they knowe not him y sent me. Yf I had not come q spoke vnto the, thé shulde they haue no synne. But now haue they nothinge to cloake their synue withall He y hateth me, hateth my father also. Yf I had not done amoge thé the workes which no other mà dyd, they shulde haue no synne. But now haue they sene it, and yet haue they hated both me ¢ my father.
Neuertheles that the sayenge might be ful- filled, which is wrytten in their lawe: “They haue hated me without a cause.

. But wha the comforter commeth, who 7I shal sende you from the father eué the sprete of trueth which proceadeth of the father, he shal testifie of me tand ye shal beare wytnesse also: for ye haue bene with me from the begynnynge.

The rbi. Chapter. 

"n thinges haue I sayde vnto you, 

that ye shulde not be offended. They shal excomunicate you. The tyme commeth, that who soeuer putteth you to death, shal thynke that he doth seruyce vnto God.’ And soch thinges shal they do vnto you, because they haue nether knowne y father ner yet me.
But these thinges haue 1 sayde vnto you, 
‘that whan the tyme cómeth ye maye thynke 

? Ephe.1.a. * Col.1.a. è Mat. 10. c. Luc. 6. d. 
Toh. 13. h. * Psal. 34. c. and 68. a. d Joh. 14. c. and 16. a. Act. 2.a, ¢ Act.1.a. and 2.d. — *Act.9.a.

The qosprll of S. Jhon. 

Fo. crit}. theron, that I tolde you. But these thinges haue I not sayde vnto you from the begyn- nynge: For I was with you.

But now I go vnto him that sent me, « none of you axeth me: Whither goest thou ? but because I haue sayde these thinges vnto you, youre hert is full of sorowe. Neuer- theles I tell you the trueth, It is better for you y I go awaye: For yf I go not awaye that comforter commeth not vnto you: but yf I departe, £I wil sende hi vnto you. And whan he commeth, he shal rebuke the worlde of synne, and of righteousnes, ¢ of iudgment.
Of synne, because they beleue not on me. 
Of righteousnes, because I go to the father, and ye shal se me nomore. Of iudgmét, be- cause the ^prynce of this worlde is iudged allready.

I haue yet moch to saye vnto you, but ye|13 can not now beare it awaye: howbeit whan he (the sprete of trueth) commeth ‘he shal lede you in to all trueth. For he shal not speake of himself, but what soeuer he shal heare, that shal he speake: and he shall shewe you, what is for to come. He shal glorifye me: for he shal receaue of myne, and shal shewe vnto you. +All that the father hath, is myne. ‘Therfore haue I sayde: he shal receaue of myne, and shewe vnto you.

After a litle whyle, and ye shal not se me: and agayne after a litle whyle, and ye shal se me: for I go to the father. Thē saide some of his disciples amonge them selues: What is this that he sayeth vnto vs, After a litle whyle, and ye shal not se me: q agayne after a litle whyle, q ye shal se me: for I go to the father? ‘Then sayde they: What is this, that he sayeth: After a litle whyle? We can not tell what he sayeth. Then perceaued lesus that they wolde axe him, and he sayde vnto them: Ye enquyre of this amonge youre selues, that I sayde: After a litle whyle, and ye shal not se me: q agayne after a litle whyle, and ye shal se me.

Verely verely I saye vnto you: Ye shal|€ wepe and lamente, but the worlde shal reioyse:
Ye shal be sory, but youre sorowe shal be turned in to ioye. A woman whan she tra- uayleth, hath sorowe, for hir houre is come.
But whan she is delyuered of the childe, she 

Toba. 15. c. 1 Cor. 2. a. f Ioh.13.h. and 14.c. — & Ioh. 
14.c.and 15. c. — ^ Iob. 12. d. * Ioh. 14. c. Iohà. 12. f. f Mat. 11. e. Luc. 10. c. Ioh. 3. e.

D 

fo. critij. 

thinketh nomore of the anguyshe, for ioye that a man is borne in to the worlde. And now haue ye sorowe also: but I wil se you agayne, and youre hert shal reioyse, and youre ioye shal noman take from you. And in that daye shal ye axe me no question, “Verely verely I saye vnto you: Yf ye axe y father ought in my name, he shal geue it you.
Hither to haue ye axed nothinge in my name. 
Axe, and ye shal receaue, y youre ioye maye be perfecte. These thinges haue I spoken vnto you by *prouerbes. Neuertheles the tyme commeth, that Í shal speake nomore by prouerbes, but I shal shewe you planely of my father.

In that daye shal ye axe in my name. 
And I saye not vnto you, that I wyl praye vnto the father for you: for the father him- self loueth you, because ye haue loued me, q beleued that I am come out from God. +] wente out from the father, and came in to the worlde: Agayne, I leaue y worlde, and go to the father.

His disciples sayde vnto him: Beholde, now talkest thou planely, and speakest no prouerbe. Now are we sure y thou knowest all thinges, and nedest not that eny ma shulde axe the. Therfore beleue we, that thou camest out from God: Iesus answered them:
Now ye do beleue: ^Beholde, the houre draweth nye, and is come allready, that ye shalbe scatred, euery man in to his awne, and shal leaue me alone: “and yet am I not alone, for the father is with me.

These thinges haue I spoken vnto you, that in me ye might haue peace? In $ worlde haue ye trouble, but be of good com- forte, I haue ouercome the worlde.

The rij. Chapter. 

HESE thinges spake Iesus, and lift vp 

his eyes towarde heauen, and sayde: 
* Father, the houre is come, that thou glorifye thy sonne, that thy sonne also maye glorifye the. Like as thou hast geuen him power ouer all fleshe, /that he shulde geue euer- lastinge life to as many as thou hast geuen him. But this is the life euerlastinge, that they knowe the (that thou onely art the true
God) and whom thou hast sent, Iesus Christ. 

* Mat. 7. a. and 21. c. Mare, 11. c. Luc. 11. b. Iohà. 14. b. 

and 15, a. * Mat. 13. a. Marc. 4. a. t Ioh. 20, a. 
è Zach. 13. b. Mat. 26. c. Marc. 14. d. * Ioh. 14. b. 
4 Rom. 5.2. © TIohà. 12. c. aud 13, d. f Ioh. 5. b. 

The gospell of >. Shon, 

I haue glorified $ vpo earth, « $fynished y worke, y thou gauest me to do. And now glorifye me thou father by thine awne self, with y glory which I had or euer the worlde was. I haue declared thy name vnto y men, whom thou gauest me from the worlde. They were thine, and thou gauest them vnto me, and they haue kepte thy worde.

Now knowe they, that all thinges what soeuer thou hast geuen me, are of the. For y wordes which thou gauest me,’ haue I geué vnto them, and they haue receaued them, a knowne of a trueth, that I am come forth from the, and haue beleued, that thou hast sent me. I praye for them, and praye not for thell worlde, but for them whom thou hast geuen me, for they are thine. And all that is myne, is thine: and what thine is, that is myne. And I am glorifyed in them. And now am I nomore in the worlde, and they are in y worlde, and I come to the. Holy father, kepe in thy name, those whom thou hast geué me, that they maye be one, like as we are. Whyle I was with thé in the worlde, I kepte them in thy name. Those j thou gauest me, haue I kepte, and none of them is lost, but that lost childe,* that the ** scripture might be fulfylled. But now come I vnto the, and this I speake in the worlde, that they maye haue my ioye perfecte in them. I haue geuen them thy worde,tt and the worlde hateth the: for they are not of the worlde, euen as
I also am not of the worlde. I praye not that thou shuldest take them out of the worlde,
#tbut that thou kepe thé fro euell. They are not of the worlde, as I also am not of the worlde.

Sanctifye them in thy trueth. Thy worde is the trueth. Like as thou hast sent me in to the worlde, so haue I sent them in to the worlde: and for their sakes I sanctifye my self, that they also maye be sanctifyed in the trueth.

Neuertheles I praye not for them onely, but also for those, which thorow their worde shal beleue on me, that they all maye be one, like as thou father art in me, and I in y, that they also maye be$$one in vs: that the worlde maye beleue, that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gauest me, haue I geuen

ł Iob. 1.a. $1ohà.19.c. ^£ Ioh.4.e. |f 1 oh. 2.c. 
€ Esa.8.d. —^Ioh.18.2. ** Paal. 40. b. and 108. a. tt Ioh. 15. b. Sap. 2. c. 11 Mat. 6. b. §§ Gal. 3. d.

Chap. rij. 

B 

€ 

Chap, rhitj. them: that they maye be one, like as we are one. I in thé, and thou in me, that they maye be perfecte in one, and that the worlde maye knowe, that thou hast sent me and hast loued them, as thou hast loned me.

* Father, I wil, that they whom thou hast geuen me, be with me where I am, y they maye se my glory, which thou hast geué me: for thou hast loued me, or euer y worlde was made. ? Righteous father, the worlde hath not knowne y, but I haue knowne y: and these haue knowne, that thou hast sent me. And
I haue declared thy name vnto them, q wyl declare it, y the loue wherwith thou hast loued me, maye be in the, ¢ I in them.

The rotij. Chapter. 

a HAN Iesus had thus spoké,° he wéte 
M \ forth with his disciples oner the broke 
Cedron, where there was a gardé, in to the which lesus entred and his disciples. But
Iudas y betrayed hi, knewe the place also. 
For Iesus resorted thither oft tymes with his disciples. “Now whan ludas had také vnto him the copany, q mynisters of the hye prestes and Pharises, he came thither with creshettes, with lanternes, and with weapens. Jesus now knowinge all y shulde come vpon him, wēte forth, and sayde vnto thé: Whom seke ye?
They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. lesus sayde vnto them: I am he: Indas also which betrayed him, stode with the. Now whan lesus sayde vnto thé: I am he; they wéte bacwardes, and fell to the grounde. Then axed he the agayne: Whom'seke ye? They sayde: lesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered:
I haue tolde you, that I am he. Yf ye seke me, then let these go their waye. "That the

worde might be fulfylled, which he sayde: Of 

them who thou gauest me, haue I not lost one. ‘Then had Symon Peter a swerde, and drewe it out, and smote the hye prestes seruaitt, and cut of his right eare. And y seruaiites name was Malchus.

33| Then sayde Iesus vnto Peter: Put vp thy swerde in to the sheeth. Shal I not drynke of y cuppe, which my father hath geué me?
Then the company and the captayne « the officers of the lewes toke lesus, and bounde him, ¢ led him awaye first vnto Annas, that

a Toh, 12. e. and 14. a. and 16. a. * Mat. 26. a.
4 Mat. 26. e. 

5 Mat. 11.e. Ioh. 15.c. 
Mar.14.d. Luc. 22. c. 
* [oh. 17. b. 

Mar. 14. d. Luc. 22. d. 

The gospell of &. Jhon. 

So. mb. 

was fatherlawe vnto Caiphas, which was hye prest y same yeare. It was Caiphas/ which gaue coiicell ynto y Iewes that it were good, that one man shulde dye for the people.

As for Symon Peter, he and another dis- ciple folowed Iesus. ‘The same disciple was knowne vnto the hye prest, and wcte in with lesus in to the hye prestes palace. But Peter stode without at the dore. Then y other disciple which was knowne vnto the hye prest, wente out, and spake to the damsell y kepte the dore, and brought in Peter. Then the damsell that kepte the dore, sayde vnto
Peter: Art not thou also one of this mans disciples ? He sayde: I am not.

The seruauntes q officers stode, and had|€ made a fyre of coles (for it was colde) ¢ warmed thé selues. Peter also stode with them, and warmed him self. ‘The hye prest axed Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctryne. lesus answered him: “I haue spoken openly before the worlde, Y haue euer taught in the synagoge and in the teple, whither all the lewes resorted, q in secrete haue I spoke nothinge. Why axest thon me? Axe thé y haue herde, what I haue spoken vnto the: beholde, they can tell what I haue sayde. But whan he had thus spokē,* one of the officers that stode by, smote lesus on the face, and sayde: Answerest thou the hye prest so? lesus answered him: Yf I haue euell spoke, thé beare wytnesse of euell: but yf I haue well spoken, why smytest thou me? And Annas sent him bounde vnto Caiphas y hye prest.

i Symo Peter stode and warmed him self. 
Thé sayde they vnto him: Art not thou one of his disciples? He denyed, and sayde: I am not. A seruaut of the hye prestes, a kynszma of his, whose eare Peter had smytten of, sayde vnto him: Dyd not I se the in the garde with him ?

Then Peter denyed agayne. And imme-| B diatly the ‘cock crew. * Then led they Iesus from Caiphas in to the comon hall. And it was early in the mornynge. And they them selues wete not in to the como hall, lest they shulde be defyled, but y they might eate y
Pascall lambe. ‘Then wente Pilate out vnto the, and sayde: What accusacion brynge ye agaynst this man? They answered, and sayde

f Ioh. 11. e & oh. 7.b. — ^Iere.30.a. Mat. 96. g. 
Act. 23. a. i Mat. 26. g. Mar. 14. g. Luc. 22. d. 
* Toh. 13. d. * Mat. 27.a. Marc. 15. a. Luc. 23. a. 

£| Pilate answered: Am I a Iewe? 

a HEN Pilate toke lesus, and scourged 

Fo. erbi Cbr gospel! 

vnto him: Yf he were not an euell doer, we! had not delyuered him vnto the. Then sayde
Pilate vnto the: Take ye him, and iudge him after youre lawe. ‘Then sayde y lewes vnto him: It is not laufull for vs to put eny ma to death. That y worde of Iesus might be ful- filled,* which he spake, whan he signified, what death he shulde dye.

* Then entred Pilate in to the comon hall agayne, and called lesus, a sayde vnto him:
Art thou the kynge of the lewes? Iesus answered: Sayest thou that of thy self, or haue other tolde it the of me?

Th people and the hye prestes haue da] the vnto me. What hast thou done? Iesus answered: My kyngdome is not of this worlde.
Yf my kyngdome were of this worlde, my mynisters wolde fight therfore, ý I shulde not be delyuered vnto the Iewes. t But now is my kyngdome not from hence. ‘Thé sayde
Pilate vnto hr: Art thou a kynge the? Iesus answered: Thou sayest it, for I am a kynge.
For this cause was I borne, and came in to the worlde, that I shulde testifye the trueth.
Who so euer is of the trueth, heareth my voyee. Pilate sayde vnto hi: What is the trueth? ^And whan he had sayde that he wéte out agayne to the Iewes, and sayde vnto them:
I fynde no gyltinesse in him: + But ye haue a custome, that I shulde geue one vnto you lowse at Easter. Wyl ye now y I lowse vnto you the kynge of y lewes? The eryed they agayne alltogether, and sayde: Not him, but
Barrabas. Yet was Barrabas a murthurer. 

The rir. Chapter. 

him. And the soudyers platted a crowne 

of thornes, and set it vpon his heade, and put a purple garment vpon him, and sayde: Hayle kynge of the Lewes. And they smote him on the face. Then wente Pilate forth agayne, and sayde vnto thē: Beholde, I brynge him forth vnto you, y ye maye knowe, ý I fynde no faute in hi. So Iesus wente out, q ware a crowne of thorne and a purple robe. And he sayde vnto them: Beholde, the man. Whan the hye prestes q the mynisters sawe him, they cryed, q sayde: Crueifye, crueifye. Pilate
* Joh. 12.d. = Mat. 27. b. Marc. 15.a. Luc. 23. a. 

t Ioh. 6. b. ^ Mat. 27.c. Marc. 15. b., Luc. 23. b. 

1 Mat. 27. b. Marc. 15. a. Luc. 23. a. * Mat. 27. c. d. 
Marc. 15. b. Luc. 23. b. 3 Leui. 24. c. $ Iob. 5. b. 

of S, Shon. 

saide vnto thé: Take ye him, and crucifye him, for I fynde no giltynesse in him. ‘The
Iewes answered him: We haue a lawe,? a after oure lawe he ought to dye, $ because he made him self the sonne of God. Whan Pilate herde that worde, he was the more afrayed, and wente agayne in to the comon hall, and sayde vnto lesus: Whence art thou? But lesus gaue him no answere. The sayde
Pilate vnto him: Speakest thou not vnto me? 
Knowest thou not, y I haue power to crucifye y, q haue power to lowse $ ? Iesus answered:
Thou shuldest haue no power vpo me, yf it were not Ilgeué the from aboue. Therfore he that delyuered me vnto y, hath the more synne. From that tyme forth Pilate sought meanes to lowse him. But the Iewes cryed, q sayde: Yf thou let him go, thou art not the
Emperours frede. For *whosoeuer maketh himself kynge, is agaynst the Emperoure.

Whan Pilate herde y worde,/ he brought lesus forth, q sat hr downe vpó y iudgmét seate, in the place which is ealled the Paue- ment, but in the Hebrue, Gabbatha. It was the daye of preparinge of the Easter aboute the sixte houre. And he sayde vnto the lewes: Beholde youre kynge. But they eryed: Awaye with him, awaye with him, erucifie him. Pilate saide vnto the: Shal I erueifye youre kynge? The hye prestes answered: We haue no kynge but y Em- peroure. Thé delyuered he him vnto them, to be erueifyed.

They toke Iesus, and led him awaye. And he bare his erosse, and wente out to the place called y place of deed mens skulles, which in
Hebrue is named Golgatha, where they eru- cified him, and two other with him, on either syde one, but lesus in the myddes.** Pilate wrote a superscripeion, and set vpon the crosse. And there was wrytten: lesus of
Nazareth, kynge of the Lewes. This super- seripcion red many of the Iewes. For y place where Jesus was crucifyed, was nye vnto the cite. And it was wrytten in Hebrue, Greke q Latyn. ‘Then sayde the hye prestes of the lewes vnto Pilate: Wryte not kynge of the lewes, but y he sayde, I am kynge of the lewes. Pilate answered: What I haue wryt- ten, that haue I wrytten.
|| Sap.6.2. Iob.3.d. Rom. 13. a. 

f Mat. 27. d. Mar.15.c. Luc. 23. c. 
Heb. 13. b. ** Mat. 27. d. 

e Act. q Luc.
Marc. 15. c. Luc. 

Chap. rir. 

B 

‘Chap. Tr. The gospell of S. Hhon. 

€! The soudyers" whan they had crucifyed lesus, toke his garmentes, and made foure partes, to euery soudyer one parte, and the cote also. As for the cote, it was vnsowed fro aboue, wrought thorow and thorow. Then sayde they one to another: Let vs not deuyde it, but cast lottes for it, who shal haue it, that the scripture might be fulfilled, which sayeth:
*'Fhey haue parted my garmentes amonge them, and on my cote haue they cast lottes.
This dyd the sondyers in dede. 

There stode by the crosse of lesus, his mother, and his mothers sister Mary, the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. Now whan lesus sawe his mother, and the disciple stondynge by, who he loued, he sayde vnto his mother: Woman, beholde, that is thy sonne. ‘Then sayde he to the disciple: be- holde, that is thy mother. And from that houre the disciple toke her vnto him.

After that, whan lesus knewe that all was perfourmed, tthat the scripture might be ful- fylled, he sayde: I am athyrst. There stode a vessell full of vyneger. They fylled a sponge with vyneger and ^wonde it aboute with ysope, and helde it to his mouth. Now whan lesus had receaued the vyneger, he sayde: It is fynished, and bowed his heade, and gaue vp the goost.

D, ‘The Iewes then, for so moch as it was the daye of preparinge, that y bodies shulde not remayne vpon the crosse on the Sabbath, (for y same Sabbath daye was greate) besought

ilate, that their legges might be broken, and that they might be taken downe. Then came the soudyers, and brake the legges of the first, and of the other that was crucifyed with him. But whan they came to lesus, and sawe that he was deed allready, they brake not his legges, but one of the soudyers opened his syde with a speare. +And immediatly there wente out bloude and water.

And he that sawe it, bare recorde, and his recorde is true. And he knoweth that he sayeth true, that ye might beleue also. For this is done, y the scripture might be ful- fylled: $Ye shal not breake a bone of him.
And agayne, another scripture sayeth: Il They shal se him, whom they haue pearsed.

After that, Ioseph of Arimathia, which was 

5 Mat. 27. d. Marc. 15.c.— * Psal. 21. b, + Psal. 68. c. 
5 Mat. 27. e. Marc. 15.d. — fZach.13.a. $ Exod.12.g. 
| Zach. 12. c. — * Marc. 15. e. Mat. 27. g. Luc. 23. c. 

Fo. rbi. a disciple of Iesus (but secretly“ for feare of the Iewes) besought Pilate, ý he might take downe the body of Iesus. And Pilate gaue him lycence. There came also 1 Nicodemus,
(which afore came vnto Iesus by night) q brought of Myrre q Aloes mingled together, aboute an hüdreth poūde weight.

The toke they the body of Iesus, q wonde it with lynnen clothes, and with the spyces, as the maner of the Iewes is to burye. And by y place where Iesus was crucified, there was a gardé, and in the garden a new sepulchre, where in was neuer man layed: there layed they Iesus, because of the preparinge daye of y Iewes, for the sepulcre was nye at hande.

The rr. Chapter. 

V a one daye of the Sabbath, came 

Mary Magdalene early (whé it was yet darcke) vnto the sepulcre, q sawe that the stone was take from the sepulcre. Then ranne she, q came to Symon Peter, and to y other disciple, ** whom [esus loued, and sayde vnto them: They haue take awaye the
LORDE out of the sepulcre, q we can not tell where they haue layed him. "Thé wéte
Peter forth and the other disciple, and came to the sepulcre. ‘They rane both together, and that other disciple out rane Peter, and came first to the sepulere, and loked in, and sawe the lynnen clothes layed. But he wete not in. 'lhe came Symon Peter after him, and wente in to the sepulere, q sawe the lynné clothes lye, and the napkyn that was bounde aboute Iesus heade, not layed with the lynnen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Thé wéte 1 also y other disciple, which came first to y sepulere, q he sawe q beleued: for as yet they knewe not y scriptures,’ y it behoued hi to ryse agayne fro $ deed. Thé wéte y disciples againe together.

As for Mary, she stode before sepulcre q wepte without. Now as she wepte, she loked in to the sepulcre, and sawe two angels in whyte garmentes syttinge, y one at the heade, q the other at ¥ fete, where they had layed the body of Iesus. And they sayde vnto her:
Woma, why wepest thou? She saide vnto the: They haue taken awaye my LORDE, q

T Ioh. 3. a. ** Toh. 13. c. 19. c. 21. a. 4 Psal. 
15.b. Aet. 2. c. 13. d. 17. a. 

fo. erbij. 
I wote not where they haue layed hi. And whan she had sayde y, she turned her self ibaeke, q sawe lesus stondinge, a knewe not y it was lesus. lesus sayde vnto her: Woman, why wepest thou? Whom sekest thou? She thought y it had bene } gardener, q sayde vnto him: Syr, yf thou hast borne him hence: then tell me where thou hast layed him? and I wil fetch hi. lesus sayde vnto her: Mary. Then turned she her aboute, q sayde vnto him: Rabboni, y is to saye:
Master. lesus sayde vnto her: Touche me not, for I am not yet ascended vnto my father. But go thou thy waye vnto my
*brethre q saye vnto thé: I aseéde vp vnto my father and youre father: to my God, q youre God. “Mary Magdalene came, q tolde
| |y disciples:^ I hane sene the LORDE, q soch thinges hath he spoken vnto me.
|£| The same Sabbath at eue wha $ disciples were gathered together, and the dores were
‘shut for feare of y lewes, came lesus, and stode 1 y myddes, q sayde vnto thé: Peace be with you. And whà he had so sayde, he shewed thé his hades x his syde. +Thé were
ý disciples glad, y they sawe y LORDE. 
The sayde Iesus vnto thé agayne: Peace be with yon.? Like as my father sent me, eue so sēde I you. And whan he had sayde y, he brethed vpo thé, and sayde vnto the:
Receaue the holy goost. Whose synnes so- euer ye remytte, they are remytted vnto thé: and whose synnes so ener ye retayne, they are retayned.
But Thomas one of the twolue$ which is called Didimus, was not with the wha Iesus came. Thé sayde the other disciples vnto him: We haue sene the LORDE. But he sayde vnto thé: Excepte I se in his handes the prynte of the nales, and put my hàde in to his syde, I wil not beleue. i
D| And after eight dayes agayne were his dis- ciples with in, ¢ Thomas with the. Thé came
Iesus (whā $ dores were shutt) q stode in the myddes, a sayde: Peace be with you. After po he vnto Thomas: Reach hither thy ynger, and se my handes, and reach hither thy hade, and put it 1 to my syde, q be not faithlesse, but beleue. Thomas answered, q sayde vnto him: My LORDE, and my God. lesus sayde vnto him: Thomas, because thou

* Psal. 21. c. 
* Luc. 24. c. 

* Luc. 24. a. 
Mar. 16. b. 

a Toha. 16. d. 
+ Ioh. 16. c. 1 Esa. 61. a. 

CO NENNEN 1 — — 

The qosprll of 3. Jhon. 

Chap. rri hast sene me, thou hast beleued. Blessed are they, that se not, and yet belene.

Many other tokés dyd Iesus before his disciples, which are not wrytté in this boke.
But these are wrytté, y ye shulde belene, y lesus is Christ the sonne of God, q that ye thorow beleue might haue life in his name.

The rri. Chapter. 

FTER that shewed Iesus himself agayne| q 
A at the see of Tiberias. But on this wyse shewed he himself. There were together
Symó Peter, ¢ Thomas which is called Didi- mus, q l| Nathanael of Cana a cite of Galile,

q the sonnes of Zebede, q two other of his disciples. Symon Peter sayde vnto thé: I go a fyshinge. They sayde vnto hi: We also wil go with the. They wéte ont, q entred in! toa shippe straight waye. And y same night toke they nothinge. But wha it was now morow, lesus stode on the shore, but his dis- ciples knewe not y it was lesus. lesus sayde vnto the: Childre, haue ye eny thinge to eate? They answered hi: No. He sayde vnto thé: ^Cast ont the nett on ¥ right syde of the shippe, q ye shal fynde. "Thé they cast out, a eoulde nomore drawe it for y mul- titude of fishes. Thé sayde y disciple 1 who
Tesus loned, vnto Peter: It is the LORDE. 

Whan Simon Peter herde that it was the 
LORDE, he gyrde his mantell aboute him 
(for he was naked) and sprange in to ¥ see. 
But other disciples came by shippe (for they 
‘were not farre fro londe, but as it were two hundreth enbytes) and they drewe the net with the fiszhes. Now whan they were come ito londe, they sawe coles layed, and fysh theron, and bred. lesus sayde vnto thé:
“Bringe hither of the fyshes, that ye haue taken now. Symon Peter stepped forth, and drew the nett to the londe, full of greate fyszhes, an hundreth and thre and fyftie.
And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.

lesus sayde vnto them: Come, and dyne. 
But none of the disciples durst axe him: 
Who art thou? For they knewe, that it was the LORDE. Then came lesus, and toke y bred, and gaue it the: and the fyszhe like- wyse. This is now the thirde tyme that lesus

Luc. 4.a. loh. 17. c. $ Ioh. 11. h. || Ioh. 1. e. 
4 Luc. 5. a. G Ioh. 13. c. © Luc. 94. d. 

‘Chap. rri. appeared vnto his disciples, after that he was, rysen agayne from the deed.

Now wha they had dyned, Iesus sayde vnto 
Symon Peter: Symo Iohána, louest thou me more then these do? He sayde vnto him:
Yee LORDE, thou knowest y I loue the. 
He sayde vnto him: Fede my làbes. He sayde vnto him agayne the seconde tyme:
Symó Iohana, louest thou me? He sayde vnto him: Yee LORDE, thou knowest, y I loue y. He sayde vnto him: Fede my shepe.
He saide vnto him y thirde tyme: Symon 
Iohana, louest thou me? Peter was sory, because he sayde vnto him, louest thou me?
And he sayde vnto him: "LORDE, thou knowest all thinges, thou knowest, that I loue y. lesussayde vnto him: Fede my shepe.

Verely verely [ saye vnto the: Whan thou wast yoge, thou gerdedst thyselfe, and walkedst whither thou woldest. ^But wha thou art olde, thou shalt stretch forth thy handes, ^ and another shal gyrde the, and lede the whither thou woldest not. But this he sayde, to

a Toh. 16. d. è Toh, 12, d. 

The qospell of à. Jhon, 

Fo. erir. bh with what death he shulde glorifye] | o

Whan he had spoken this, he sayde vnto him: Folowe me. Peter turned him aboute, and sawe the disciple folowinge, whom Iesus loued, (*which also leaned vpo his brest at the supper, and sayde: LORDE, who is it that betrayeth the)? Wha Peter sawe him, he sayde vnto lesus: LORDE, but what shal he do? Iesus sayde vnto him: Yf I wil that he tary tyll I come, what is that to the?
Folowe thou me. Then wente there out a sayenge amonge the brethren: 'This disciple dyeth not. And Iesus sayde not vnto him :|
He dyeth not, but: Yf I wil that he tary tyll 
I come, what is that to the? This is the same disciple, which testifyeth of these thinges, and wrote these thinges, and we knowe that his testimony is true.

There are many other thinges also that 
Iesus dyd, which, yf they shulde be wrytté euery one, Í suppose the worlde shulde not contayne the bokes, that were to be wrytten.

9 des Ws en * Toha. 13. c. 

The ende of tbe Gospell of 3. Shon. 

The Actes of 

wryptten bp S. Luke the GCuangelist. 
What the Actes contepne. 

Chap. L—The ascension of Christ. Mathias is 

chosen in the steade of Iudas. 

Chap. 11.—The commynge of the holy goost.|@hap. XV.—Variaunce aboute circumcision, 

The sermon of Peter before the cogregacion at 
Ierusalem, and the increase of the faithfull. 

Chap. IIL—The halt is restored to his fete.|@hap. XVl.—Timothy is circumcised, Paul 

Peter preacheth Christ vnto the people. 

Chap. II1I.—The Apostles are take and brought before the councell. They are forbydden to preach, but they turne them vnto prayer, and are more obedient vnto God then vnto men.

Chap. V.—The dyssemblynge of Ananias and 
Saphira is punyshed. Miracles are done by the 
Apostles, which are taken, but the angel of God bryngeth them out of preson, They are brought before the councell, The sentence of Gamaliel.
The apostles are bett, they reioyse in trouble. 

Chap. VI.—Ministers (or deacons) are ordened in the congregacion to do seruyce in necessary thinges of the body, that the Apostles maye wayte onely vpo the worde of God. Steuen is accused.

Chap. VIl.—Steuen maketh answere to his ac- cusacion, rebuketh the hardnecked lues, and is stoned vnto death. NS

Chap. VIHI.—Saul persecuteth the Christe, The 

Apostles are scatred abrode. Philip commeth in 

to Samaria. Simon magus is baptised, he dys- 

sembleth. Philip baptiseth the chamberlayne. 

Chap. IX.—Paulis conuerted, and confoundeth 

the lues. Peter rayseth Tabitha. 

Chap. X.—The vision that Peter sawe. How 

he was sent to Cornelius. The Heithen also 

receaue the sprete, and are baptised. 

Chap. XI.—Peter sheweth the cause wherfore he wente to the Heithen. Barnabas and Paul preach vnto the Heithen. Agabus prophecieth derth for to come. f

Chap. XII.—Herode persecuteth the christe, kylleth lames, and putteth Peter in preson, who the LORDE delyuereth by an angell. The shamefull death of Herode.

Chap. XIII.—Paul! and Barnabas are called to preach amonge the Heithen. Of Sergius Paulus and Elymas the sorcerar. Paul preacheth at
Antioche. 

Chap. XIIII,—Paul and Barnabas preach at lconium : some beleue, some stere vp sedicion.
At Listra they wolde do sacrifice to Barnabas and 

| Paul, which refuse it, and exorte the people to 

worshipe the true God. Paul is stoned, after 

tbc Apostles, 

that commeth he to Derba, lystra, Iconium and to Antioche.

The Apostles pacifie the matter at lerusalé. 
Paul and Barnabas preach at Antioche. 

preacheth at Philippos, and there is he put in preson.

Chap. XVII.—Paul cometh to Thessalonica, where the Iues set the cite on a roore. Paul escapeth, and commeth to Athens, where he preacheth the true and vnknowne God.

Chap. XVIII.—Paul preacheth at Corinthum, contynuinge there a yeare and a half, goeth agayne in to Syria, commeth to Ephesus, Cesarea and Antioche. Of Apollos, Aquila and Priscilla.

Chap. XIX.—Of the xij. men whom Paul bap- tised at Ephesus, and what miracles were done by him. Demetrius moueth sedicion in the cite.

Chap. XX.—Paul goeth in to Macedonia and in to Grekelonde. At Troas he rayseth vp a deed body. At Ephesus he calleth the elders of the congregacion together, committeth the kepinge of Gods flocke vnto them, warneth the for false teachers, maketh his prayer with them, and departeth to shippe.

Chap. XXI.—Pauls iourneye by shippe. Of 
Philippe the Euagelist, and Agabus the Prophet, which warneth Paul not to go to lerusalem. He remayneth stedfast in his purpose, and is taken in the temple.

Chap. XXII.—Paul answereth the Iewes, is scourged, and layed in preson agayne.

Chap. XXIII.—Paul commeth before the coun- cell. Debate ariseth amonge the people, the captayne delyuereth him, God conforteth him,

Chap. XXIIIT.—Paul is accused before felix, he answereth for himself.

Chap. XXV.—The lewes accuse Paul before 
Festus, he appealeth vnto the Emperoure, and is sent vnto Rome.

Chap. XXVI.—Kynge Agrippa heareth Paul, which telleth him his callinge from the be- gynnynge.

Chap. XXVII.—Pauls shippinge towarde Rome, 
Julius the captayne intreateth Paul curteously, at the last they suffre shipwrake.

Chap. XXVIII.—The vyper hurteth not Pauls hande, he healeth Publius father, and preacheth
Christ at Rome. 

The Actes of the Apostics. 

The first Chapter. a HE first treatise (deare Theophilus)

T haue I made of all that Iesus beganne to do and to teache, vntyll ¥ daye that he was taken vp, after that he (thorow the holy goost) had geuen commaundementes to the
Apostles, whom he had chosen: to who also he shewed himself ^alyue after his passion, by many tokés, and appeared vnto them fourtye dayes longe, and spake vnto them of the kyngdome of God.

And whan he had gathered them together, he commaunded them that they shulde not departe from Ierusalem, but to wayte for the promyse of the father, wherof (sayde he) ye haue herde^of me :* For Ihon baptysed with water, but ye shalbe baptysed with y holy goost, q that within this few dayes.

Now whan they were come together, they axed him, and sayde: LORDE, shalt thou at this tyme set vp the kyngdome of Israel agayne? But he sayde vnto them: It be- longeth not vnto you to knowe the *tymes or seasons, which the father hath kepte in his awne power, but ye shal receaue the power of y holy goost, which shal come vpon you, md ye shalbe my witnesses at Ierusalem, and in all lewrye and Samaria, and vnto the ende of the earth.

B| And whan he had spoken these thinges, whyle they behelde, he was taken vp, and a
*cloude receaued him from their sight. And whyle they loked after him, as he wente in to heauen, beholde, there stode by them two men in whyte garmentes, which also sayde :
Ye men of Galile, Why stonde ye gasynge vp 
* Act. 11. b. Ioh. 5. b. 

Act. 2. d. t Dan. 7. b.

a Toh. 20. 21. b Joh. 14. c. 
* Mat. 24. c. 4 Luc. 24. d. Act. 2. a. 
* Mat. 28. b. Marc. 16. b., Luc. 24. d. 

f Mat. 10.a. Marc. 3.b. Luc.6.b.and 9. a. 

into heauen? This Iesus which is také vp from you in to heauen + shal come euen so as ye haue sene him go in to heauen.

Then turned they agayne from ¥ mount that is called Oliuete, which is nye to Ieru- salem, and hath a Sabbath dayes iourney.
And whan they came in, they wente vp in to a parler, where abode ‘Peter and Iames,
Thon and Andrew, Philippe and Thomas, 
Bartilmew and Mathew, lames the sonne of 
Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Iudas the sonne of lames. These all contynued with one acorde in prayer and supplicacion, with the wemen and Mary the mother of Iesu and with his brethren

And in those dayes Peter stode vp in the] qz myddes amonge the disciples, and sayde:
(The company of the names together, was aboute an hundreth and twentye.) Ye men and brethren, this scripture must nedes be fulfylled, which $ holy goost by the mouth of
Dauid spake before of Iudas, which was a gyde of thé that toke lesus: t for he was nombred with vs, and had opteyned the felashippe of this mynistracion. "This same trulye possessed the $ felde for the rewarde of vnrighteousnes, and hanged himself, and brast a sunder in the myddes, and all his bowels guszhed out. And it is knowne vnto all the that dwell at Ierusalem, in so moch that the same felde is called in their mother tonge Acheldema, that is to saye, the bloude felde.

For it is wrytten in the boke of psalmes:|33 
His habitacion be voyde, and noman be dwellinge therin. And: || His biszhoprike another take. Wherfore amonge these men

Mat. 24. c. Mare. 13. c. Luc. 17. c. and 21. d. 

t Mat. 10,2. 
| 

$ Mat. 27. a. || Psal. 68. d. Psal. 108. a. 

Fo. aij. 
‘which haue bene gathered together with vs 
{all the tyme that the LORDE Iesus wete 

out and in amonge vs, begyunynge from the 

baptyme of Ihon, vntyll ý daye that he was také vp from vs) must one be a wytnesse with vs of his resurreccion.

And they appoynted two (Ioseph* called 
Barsabas, whose syrname was lustus, and 
Mathias.) makinge their prayer and sayenge : 
Thou LORDE, ^which knowest the hertes of all men, shewe whether of these two thou hast chosen, that the one maye take the rowme of this mynistracion and Apostelshippe, from the which ludas by transgression fell, that he might go awaye in to his awne place. And they gaue forth the lottes ouer them, and the lot fell vpon Mathias. And he was counted with the eleuen Apostles.

{ 
| 

The ij. Chapter. 

a ND whan the * Whit sondaye was ful- 
A fylled, they were all with one acorde together in one place. And sodenly there came a sounde from heauen, as it had bene the comynge of a mightie wynde, and iti fylled the whole house where they sat. And. there appeared vnto them clouen tunges, like | as they had bene of fyre. And he sat vpon ech one of them, and they were all fylled with the holy goost. t And they beganne to preach with other tunges, euen as the sprete gaue them vtteraunce.

There were dwellinge at Ierusalem lewes, men that feared God, out of euery nacion that is vnder heauen. Now whan this voyce came to passe, the multitude came together, and were astonyed: For euery one herde, that they spake with his awne tunge. They wondred all and marueyled, and sayde amonge them selues: Beholde, are not all these which speake, of Galile? How heare we thé euery

one his awne tunge, wherin we were borne? 

Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and we 

that dwell in Mesopotamia, and in Iewry and 

Capadocia, Pontus, and Asia, Phrigia and. 

Pamphilia, Egipte, and in the partes of Lybia’ 

by Cyren, and straungers of Rome, lewes 

and + Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians: we 
|heare them speake with oure awne tunges the greate workes of God.

| 

| * Act. 4. d. 

| * Deut. 16. b. Leui. 
24. d. 

f Mat, 23. b. © Toel 2. f. 

è 1 Par. 29, c. t Mar. 16. c.

The Artes of the Apostles. 

* Luc. 9. f. Act. 21. b. $ Act. 10. b. and 16. b. pesmg. AL Tl. D — $ A66 10. be audiko Wl) NNNM

Chap. tj. 

They were all amased, and wondred, and|13 sayde one to another: What wil this be?
But other mocked them, and sayde: They are full of swete wyne. Then stode Peter vp with the elenen, and lift vp his voyce, and sayde vnto them:

Ye men of lewry, and all ye that dwell at lerusale, be this knowne vnto you, and let my wordes entre in at youre eares. For these lare not dronken, as ye suppose, for it is yet but the thirde houre of ¥ daye: but this is it, that was spoké before bs the prophet Ioel:
And it shal come to passe in the last dayes, sayeth God, I will poure out of my sprete vpon all flesh, and youre sonnes and youre doughters shal prophecye, and youre yonge men^ shal se visions $ and youre olde men shall dreame dreames, and on my seruauntes and on my handmaydens wyll I poure out o my sprete tm those dayes, q they shal prophecye.

And I wil shewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens on the earth beneth,^ bloude and fyre, and the vapoure of smoke. The Sonne shalbe turned in to darknesse, and the Moone in to bloude, before that greate and notable daye of the LORDE come. And it shall come to passe, / Who so euer shal call vpo the name of the LORDE, shalbe saued.

Ye men of Israel, heare these wordes: lesus of Nazareth, y man approued of God amonge you with miracles, and wonders and tokens, which God dyd by him in the myddes amonge you, as ye youre selues knowe also, {| him
(after that he was delyuered by the deter- minate councell and foreknowlege of God) haue ye taken by the handes of vnrighteous personnes, and crucifyed him, q slayne him, who God hath raysed vp,° and lowsed the sorowes of death, for so moch as it was vn- possyble that he shulde be holden of it. For
Dauid speaketh of him: ^A fore honde haue I set the LORDE allwayes before me, for he is on my right hode, that I shulde not be moued. ‘Therfore dyd my hert reioyse, and my tunge was glad: For my flesh also shal rest in hope. For thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nether shalt thou suffer thy Holy to se corrupcion. Thou hast shewed me the wayes of life, thou shalt make me full of ioye with thy countenaunce.

J Ro. 10. b. 
^ Psal. 15. b. 

* Mat. 27. f. Luc. 23. d. || Mat. 27. c. 

E Act. 10, e. 

Chap. iij. 

Ye men and brethren, let me frely speake vnto you of the Patryarke Dauid: For he is deed and buried," and his sepulere is with vs vnto this daye. Wherfore now seinge y he was a prophet, and knewe that God had

33| promised him with an ooth, that the frute of 

his loynes shulde syt on his seate,’ he sawe it before, and spake of the resurreccion of Christ: for his soule was not left in hell, nether hath his flesh sene corrupcion. This Iesus hath
God raysed vp,^ wherof we all are witnesses. 

Seynge now that he by the right hande of 
God *is exalted, and hath receaued of y father ¥ promyse of the holy goost, he hat shed forth this, that ye se and heare. For
Dauid is not ascended in to heauen, but he sayde: The LORDE sayde vnto my LORDE:
Syt thou on my righte hande,’ vntyll I make thine enemies thy fote stole. So therfore let allthe house of Israel knowe for a suertye, y
God hath made this same lesus (whom ye haue crucified) LORDE and Christ.

*Whan they herde this, their hert pricked them, and they sayde vnto Peter and to the other Apostles: Ye men and brethre, * What shal we do? Peter sayde onto them: Améde youre selues, and let euery one of you be baptysed in the name of Iesus Christ, for the remyssion of synnes, and ye shal receaue the gifte of the holy goost. For this + promyse was made vnto you and youre children, and to all that are farre of, who so euer the
LORDE oure God shal eall. And with many other wordes bare he witnesse, and exorted them, and sayde: Saue youre selues from this vntowarde generacion. "They that gladly re- ceaued his preachinge, were baptysed, q the same daye there were added vnto them aboute thre thousande soules.

"They contynued in the Apostles doctryne, and in the felashippe, and in breakynge of bred, and in prayer. And feare came vpo euery soule, and many wonders and tokens were done by y Apostles. But all they that beleued, were together, /and had all thinges commen. ‘They solde their goodes and pos- sessions, and parted them out amonge all, acordinge as euery mà had nede. And they contynued daylie with one acorde in the téple, and $ brake bred in euery house: they toke

* 3 Reg. 2. b. ? Psal. 131. b. * Act. 1. a. 
Ioh. 15. c. * Philip. 2. a. 4 Psal. 109. a. 
* Zach. 12, c. t Luc. 3. h. Act. 9. a. and 16. d. 

The Actes of tbe Apostles, Fo. erii.) 

their meate with ioye q synglenesse of hert, praysinge God, and had fauoure with all y people. And the LORDE added to the con- gregacion daylie soch as shulde be saued.

The (ij. Chapter. 

ETER and Ihon wente vp together in to the temple aboute the nyenth houre to praye. And there was a certayne man halt from his mothers wombe, whom they brought and layed daylie at the gate of the téple, which is called, the Bewtyfull, that he might axe almesse of them that wéte in to the temple.
Now whan he sawe Peter and Ihon, that they| wolde in to the temple, he desyred to receaue an almesse. Peter behelde him with Ihon, and sayde: Loke on vs. And he gaue hede vnto them, hopynge to receaue some thinge of them. Howbeit Peter saide: Syluer and golde haue I none: but soch as I haue geue
I the. lIn the name of lesus Christ of 
Nazareth ryse vp a walke. And he toke him by the righte hande and lifte him vp. Im- mediatly his legges q ancle bones were made stróge, and he sprange, stode and walked, and entred with them in to the téple, walkynge,

and leapinge and praysinge God. 

And all the people sawe him walke and|38 prayse God. And they knewe him, y it was he, which sat for almesse at the besoi gate of the temple. And they were fylled with wondrynge, and were astonnyed at that, which had happened vnto hi. But as this halt which was healed helde him to Peter and
Ihon, all the people ranne vnto them in to the f porche, which is called Salomés, and wondred.

Whan Peter sawe that, he answered vnto 
|the people: Ye men of Israel, why maruayle ye at this, or why loke ye so at vs, as though we by oure awne power or deseruynge, had made this man to walke? ‘The God of Abra- ham and of Isaae, and of Iacob, y God of oure fathers hath glorifyed his childe Tesus,** whom ye delyuered and denyed in the presence of Pilate, whan he had iudged him to be lowsed. But ye denyed the holy and iust, and desyred the murthurer to be geuen you, but ye slewe the prynce of life, whom God, € hath raysed from the deed, of the which we

1 Ioel 2. f. f Act. 4. d. $ Esa. 58. b. 
* 3 Re. 6. a. Ioh. 10. c. Act. 5. a. 

|| Act. 4. a. 
** Mat. 27. c. 

i 

:3 

So. erry. are witnesses. And thorow y faith in his name, hath he confirmed his name vpon this man, whom ye se and knowe: and_ faith thorow him, hath geué this man this health before youre eyes.

Now deare brethré, I knowe that ye haue done it * thorow ignoraunce, as dyd also youre rulers. But God, which by the mouth of all his prophetes had shewed before, y his Christ shulde suffre, hath so fulfilled it. Do penaunce now therfore and turne you, that youre synnes maye be-done awaye, whan the tyme o refreshinge shal come before the presence of the LORDE, and whan he shal sende him, which now before is preached vnto you, euen lesus Christ: which must receaue heauen vntyll the tyme that all thinges, which God hath spoken by the mouth of his holy pro- phetes sence y worlde beganne, be restored agayne.

For Moses sayde vnto y fathers: A prophet shal the LORDE youre God rayse vp vnto you,” euen from amóge youre brethren, like vnto me: him shal ye heare, in all that he shal saye vnto you. And it shal come to passe, what soule soeuer shal not heare the same prophet, shal be destroyed from amonge the people. And all the prophetes from Samuel and thence forth as many as haue spoken, haue likewyse tolde of these dayes.

Ye are the children of the prophetes and of the couenaunt, which God made vnto oure fathers, whan he sayde vnto Abraha : ^ ‘Thorow thy sede shal all y nacios of ¥ earth be blessed.
* First vnto you hath God raysed vp his childe Jesus, q sent hi vnto you, to blesse you y euery one shulde turne fro his wickednesse.

The tit}. Chapter. 
Bo as they spake to y people, there came vnto thé the prestes and the rulers of the teple, and the Saduces, who it greued y they taught the people, x preached in Iesu de. linia fró the deed and they layed andes vpon them, and put thé in holde tyll the morow: for it was now euentyde. How- beit many of thé which herde the worde, beleued, and the nombre of y men was aboute fyue thousande.
And it chaunced on $ morow, that their 

The Gites of the Apostles. 

Chap. (itj.| hye prest and Caiphas, and Ihon q Alexander, and as many as were of the hye prestes kynred) gathered them selues together at lerusalem, and set them before them, and axed them: By what auctorite, “Or in what name haue ye done this ?

Peter full of the holy goost, sayde vnto them: Ye rulers of the people, and ye Elders of Israel, Yf we this daye be examyned con- cernynge this good dede vpon the sicke mà, by what meanes he is made whole, be it knowne then vnto you and to all the people of Israel, ithat in y name of lesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom ye crucified, who God hath raysed vp from the deed, stodeth this man here before you whole. ^'This is the stone refused of you buylders, which is become the heade corner stone, nether is there saluacion in eny other:$ Ner yet also is there geué vnto me eny other name, wherin we must be saued.

They sawe the boldnesse of Peter ¢ Ihon and marueyled, for they were sure y they were vnlerned men and laye people. And they knewe thé also, that they were with lesu. As for the man y was made whole, they sawe hi stodinge by thé, ¢ coulde not saye agaynst it.
Then comaunded they thé to stode asyde out of ¥ councell, t comened amoge the selues, ¢
E l What shal we do to these me? for a manyfest token is done by them, and is openly knowne vnto the that dwell at Ierusalem, and we can not denye it. But that it breake out no farther amoge the people, let vs threaté them earnestly, that hence forth they speake of this name vnto noman.

Aud they called them, and cómaunded the, that in eny wyse they shulde not speake ner teache in the name of lesu. But Peter ¢
Ihon answered, and sayde vnto the: Iudge ye youre selues, whether it be right before
God, that we shulde be more obedient vnto you, then vnto God. We can not chose, but speake that we haue sene q herde. But they threatened them, and let them go, and founde nothinge how to punyshe them because of y people: for they all praysed God because of that, f which was done. For the man, vpon whom this token of health was done, was aboue fourtye yeare olde.

rulers and Elders and serybes (as Annas y And whan they were let go, they came tolg 

§ Mat. 1. c. 
T Act. 3. a. 

SI Cor 2.a. and 22. c.

5 Gen. 12. a. fAÀct.3.8. |

a Deut. 18. c. Áct. 7.6. 

,4 Psal. 117. c. Mar. 21.e. 1 Pet.2. a. t Mat. 10.8. © Mat. 21. c. Phil. 2. a.

|| Ioh. 11. e. 

Chap. b. The Artes of the Apostles. Fo. cyrb.| 

their folowes, and tolde them what y hye prestes and Elders sayde vnto them. Wha they herde that, they lifte vp their voyce with one acorde vnto God, and sayde: LORDE, thou that art the God which made heauen and earth, and the see, and all that therin is thou that by the mouth of Dauid thy seruaut hast sayde: Why do the Heythé rage? and y people ymagin vayne thinges? The kynges of the earth stonde vp,’ and the prynces haue gathered them selues together agaynst y
LORDE, and agaynst his Christ. Of a trueth agaynst thy holy childe lesus, whom thou hast anoynted, both Herode q Pontius
Pilate with the Heythen and people of Israel, haue gathered thé selues together, to do what soeuer thy hande and thy councell determyned before to be done. And now LORDE, beholde their threatenynges, and graunte vnto thy seruauntes with all stedfast boldnesse to speake thy worde: and stretch out thine hande, that healinge and tokés and wonders maye be done by the name of thy holy childe
Iesus. 

And wha they had prayed, the place moued where they were gathered together, q they were all fylled with y holy goost, q spake the worde of God boldly. The multitude of them that beleued, were of one hert and of one soule. Also none of them sayde of his goodes, that they were his awne, but had all thinges comen. And with greate power gaue the
Apostles witnesse of the resurreccion of the 
LORDE Iesu, and greate grace was with them all. Nether was there eny amonge them that lacked. For as many as were possessers of londes or houses, solde thé and brought y money of the goodes that were solde, and layed it at the Apostles fete. And distribu- cion was made vnto euery mà, acordinge as he had nede.

loses which was also called of y Apostles, 
Barnabas (that is to saye, the sonne of con- solacion) a Leuite, of the countre of Cypers, had londe, and solde it, q brought the money, and layed it at the Apostles fete.

The d. Chapter. 
UT a certayne man named Ananias with Saphira his wife, solde his posses- sion, and kepte awaye parte of the money (his wife knowinge of it) and broughte one parte,

a Psal, 2. a. * 3 Heg. 6.2. Iohā.10.c. Act.3.e. 

| 

t layed it at the Apostles fete. But Peter sayde: Ananias, Wherfore hath Sathan fylled thine hert, that thou shuldest lye vnto the holy goost, and withdrawe awaye parte of the money of the lyuelod? Mightest thou not haue kepte it, whan thou haddest it? And whan it was solde, the money was also in thy power: Why hast thou then conceaued this thinge in thine hert? Thou hast not lyed vnto me, bnt vnto God. Whan, Ananias herde these wordes, he fell downe, q gaue vp the goost. And there came a greate feare vpon all thé that herde of this. The yonge men rose vp, and put him asyde, and caried him out, and buried him.

And it fortuned as it were aboute y space of thre houres after, his wife came 1n, and knewe not what was done. Dut Peter answered vnto her. Tell me, solde ye the londe for somoch? She sayde: Yee, for so moch. Peter sayde vnto her: Why haue ye agreed together, to tempte the sprete of the LORDE? Be- holde, the fete of the which haue buried thy huszbande, are at the dore, q shal carye the out. And immediatly she fell downe at his fete, and gaue vp the goost. Then came in the yonge men, and founde her deed, and caried her out, and buried her by hir huszbade.
And there came a greate feare ouer the whole congregacion, and ouer all thé that herde it.

Many tokens and wonders were done amonge the people by the hades of the
Apostles (and they were all together with one acorde in * Salomons porche: but of other there durst no man ioyne him self vnto thé, neuer- theles the people helde moch of them. The multitude of the inen and wemen that beleued in the LORDE, grewe more and more) In so moch that they brought out the sycke in to the stretes, and layed them vpon beddes and barowes, that at the leest waye the shadowe of Peter (whan he came by) might ouer- shadowe some of the. ‘There came many also out of y cities rounde aboute vnto Ierusalem, and brought the sicke and the that were vexed with vneleane spretes, and they were healed euery one.

But the hye prest rose vp, and all they y were with him, ‘which is the secte of the
Saduces, and were fullof indignacion, q layed handes on the Apostles, and put them in the comon preson. But the angell of 3 LORDE*

> Act. 4. a. 

© Act. 12. b. 

Fo. erroi The Artes of the Apostles, Chap, bí. 

by night opened the preson dores, and brought Before these dayes rose vp one Theudas, thé out, and sayde: Go youre waye and steppe boostinge himself. (And there cleued vnto vp, and speake in the temple to the people him a nobre of me, aboute a foure hundreth) all the wordes of this life. Whan they herde| |which was slayne, and all they y enclyned that, they entred in to the temple early in the} | vnto him, were scatred abrode, and bronght mornynge : and taught. , to naught. "After this stode vp ludas of

But the hye prest came, and they y were| |Galile in y dayes of trybute, and drewe awaye with him, and called the councell together,| |moch people after him, q he also perished, q v all ¥ Elders of the children of Israel, and} jall they that enclyned vnto him, are scatred sent to the preson to fet them. The mynisters| |abrode. And now I saye vnto you: refrayne came and founde them not in the preson,| |youre selues fro these men, and let thé go. came agayne, and tolde, and sayde: ‘The tYf this councell or worke be of me, it wil preson founde we shut with all diligence, and} |come to naught: but yf it be of God, ye are the kepers stondinge without before the dores:| |not able to destroye it, lest ye be founde to but whi we had opened, we founde noman| |be the men, that wil stryue agaynst God. therin. Whan the hye prest, and the rulers) |'Then they agreed vnto him, and called the of the temple aud the other hye prestes herde| |Apostles, and bet them, and commaunded these wordes, they douted of them, wher vnto| |them, that they shulde speake nothinge in this wolde growe. B s the name of lesu, and let them go.

Then came there one, which tolde them: But they departed from the presence of 
Beholde, the men that ye put in preson, are] |the councell, reioysinge;" that they were worthy in the temple, stondinge and teachinge the] |to suffre rebuke for his names sake. And people. Then wéte ý rulers with their) |daylie in the temple and in euery house they mynisters, and fetched them without violence:| |ceassed not, to teache and to preache the
*for they feared the people, lest they shulde! |Gospell of Iesus Christ. haue bene stoned. And whan they had A brought them, they set thë before the coun- The bi. Chapter, cell. And the hye prest axed them, and I5 those dayes whan the nombre of the sayde: Dyd not we* cómaunde you strately, disciples increased, there arose a grudge that ye shulde not teache in this name. And} |amoge the Grekes agaynst the Hebrues, be- beholde, ye haue fylled lerusalem with youre| |cause their wyddowes were not loked vpon in doctryne,? and ye intéde to brynge this mans| |the daylie handreachinge. "Then the twolue bloude vpon vs. called the multitude of the disciples together,

But Peter and the Apostles answered, and! jand sayde: It is not mete that we shulde sayde: We ought more to obeye God then| |leaue the worde of God, and to serne at the men. The God of oure fathers hath raysed| |tables. Wherfore brethren, loke out amonge vp lesus, who ye slewe, and hanged on tre.| |you seué men, $that are of honeste reporte,
Him hath the righte hande of God exalted,| |and full of the holy goost and wyszdome, to be a prynce and Sauioure, to geue re-| |whom we maye appoynte to this nedefull pentaunce and forgeuenesse of synnes vnto| |busynes. But we wil geue oure selues vnto
Israel. And we are his recordes of these| |prayer, and to the mynistracion of the worde wordes, and the holy goost, who God hath| |of God. And the sayenge pleased the whole geuen vnto thé that obeye him. Wha they} |multitude. And they chose Steuen, a man herde that, it wente thorow the hertes of them,| |full of fayth and of the holy goost, and and they thoughte to slaye them. Philippe, and Procorus, and Nicanor, and
E| Then stode there vp in jy councell a| |Thimon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas the pharyse named Gamaliel, a scribe, had in| |Proselite of Antioche. li These they set greate reputacion before all ý people, and bad| |before M Apostles, and they prayed, and put the Apostles asyde a litle, and sayde vnto! |layed their handes vpon them. And the them: Ye men of Israel, take hede to youre} |worde of God increased, and the nombre of selues, what ye do as touchinge these men.) |the disciples multiplied greatly at lerusalem.

* Mat.21.e, t Áct.4. b. * Mat.27.c. — ^ Áct. 22, a. $1 Tim. 3. b. | Nu.27. d. Act. 1.d. 1Ti.4.b. 
© Luc. 13. a. 1 Mala. 1. a. Mat. 15. b. 4 Mat. 5. a. 2 Tim. 1. b. 

Chap. bi. 

And there were many prestes also obedient vnto the fayth.

Steuen full of faith and power, dyd wonders and greate tokens amonge the people. ‘Then arose there certayne of the synagoge, which is called (the synagoge) of y Libertynes, q o the Cyrenites, and of the Alexadrines, and of thé y were of Celicia and Asia, ¢ disputed with Steué, *and they coulde not resiste the wyszdome and the sprete, ont of the which he spake. Then sent they in certayne men, that sayde: ^ We haue herde him speake blasphemous wordes agaynst Moses, and agaynst God. And they moued the people, and the Elders and the scrybes, and came vpon him, q caught him, and brought him before the councell, and set false witnesses there, which sayde: This man ceasseth not to speake blasphemous wordes agaynst this holy place and the lawe. For we herde him saye: lesus of Nazareth shall destroye this place, and chaunge the ordinaunces which
Moses gaue vs. And all they that sat in the councell, loked vpo him and sawe his face as the face of an angell.

The bij. Chapter. 
HEN sayde the hye prest: Is it eué so? 
He sayde: Deare brethren and fathers, herken to, The God of glorye appeared vnto oure father Abraha, whyle he was yet in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran, and sayde vnto him: Get ý out of thy coütre, and fro thy kynred, and come in to a londe which I wil shewe y. Thé wente he out of the lande of the Caldees,’ and dwelt in Haran. *And from théce, whan his father was deed, he brought him ouer in to this londe (where ye dwell now) and gaue him no enheritauce therin, no not y bredth of a fote: and promysed him, that m wolde geue it him to possesse, “and to his sede after him, whan as yet he had no childe.

? But thus sayde God vnto him: Thy sede shalbe a. straunger in a straunge londe, and they shal make bonde men of them, and in- treate thé euell foure hundreth yeares: and y people whom they shal serue, wil I iudge, sayde God. And after that shal they go forth, and serue me in this place. And he

* Luc. 21. b a Mat. 26. f. * Gen. 11. d. t Gen. 12. a © Gen. 13. d. 4 Gen. 15. c.
* Gen. 17. b f Gen. 21. a. Gen. 25. c. t Gen. 29. f. 

€ Gen. 37. e. Sap. 10. c. $ Gen. 41.f. * Gen.4l.g. 

The Artes of the Apostles. 

gaue him the couenant of circūcision. And he begat Isaac, ‘and circiicised him the eight daye. And Isaac begat lacob tand Iacob begat the twolue Patriarkes.

And the Patriarkes had indignacion at loseph,? and solde hi in to Egipte. And God was with him, and delyuered him out of all his troubles, and gaue him fauoure ad wysz- dome 1 the sight of Pharao kynge of Egipte
$which made him prynce ouer Egipte and ouer all his house.

^ But there came a derth ouer all the londe of Egipte and Canaan, and a greate trouble, and oure fathers founde no sustenaunce.
But lacob herde that there was corne in 
Egipte, and sent oure fathers out the first tyme. llAnd at the seconde tyme was loseph knowne of his brethren, and losephs kynred was made knowne vnto Pharao. But
Ioseph sent out, and caused his father and all his kynred to be broughte, eué thre score and fyftene soules. ‘And lacob wente downe in to Egipte, and dyed, both he and oure fathers
"land were brought ouer vnto Siche, and layed in the sepulcre, ‘that Abraham boughte for money of the children of Hemor at
Sichem. 

‘Now wha the tyme of the promes drue nye 
(which God had sworne ynto Abraha) the people grewe and multiplied in Egipte, tyll there rose another kynge, which knewe not of loseph. The same dealte suttely with oure kynred, and intreated oure fathers euell and made them to cast out the yonge children, that they shulde not remayne alyue.

“At the same tyme was Moses borne, and was a proper childe before God, and was norished thre monethes in his fathers house.
But whan he was cast out, Pharaos doughter toke him vp, and norished him vp for hir awne sonne. And Moses was learned in all maner wyszdome of the Egipcians, and was mightie in dedes q wordes.

But whan he was fourtye yeare olde, it came in to his mynde to vyset his brethren the children of Israel. And whan he sawe one of them suffre wroge, he helped him, and delyuered him, that had the harme done vnto him, and slewe the Egipcian. But he thoughte that his brethren shulde haue

and 42. a. || Gen, 45. a. i Gen. 46. a. Gen. 49, e. q Ge. 50. b. Iosue 24. f. * Gen. 23. d. l Exod. 1.a.
Psal, 104, a. m Exod. 2. a. 

Fo. erroi. 

B 

€ 

jo. errbtyj. 

D 

vnderstonde, how that God by his hande shulde saue thé, howbeit they vnderstode it not.

And on the nexte daye he shewed himself vnto them as they stroue together, and wolde haue set them at one agayne, and sayde:
Syrs, ye are brethren, why hurte ye one another? But he that dyd his neghboure wronge, thrust him awaye, and sayde: “Who made the a ruler and iudge ouer vs? Wilt thou slaye me also, as thou slewest the Egip- cian yesterdaye ? But Moses fled at that sayeuge, and was a straunger in the lande of
Madian, where he begat two sonnes. 

^ And after fourtye yeares, the angell of y 
LORDE appeared vnto him vpon mount 
Sina, in a flamme of fyre in a buszhe. Wha 
Moses sawe it, he wondred at the sighte. 
But as he drue nye to beholde, y voyce of y 
LORDE came vnto him: I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. How- beit Moses trébled, and durst not beholde.
But $ LORDE sayde vnto hi: *Put of thy ue from thy fete, for y place where thou stondest, is an holy grounde. I haue well sene the trouble of my people in Egipte, and haue herde their gronynge, and am come downe to delyuer them. Aud now come, I wil sende the in to Egipte.

£| This Moses, whom they refused, and sayde: 

* Who made y a ruler and iudge ouer vs? him had God sent to be a ruler a delyuerer by the hande of the angell, that appeared vnto him in the buszhe. "The same broughte them out, and dyd wonders and tokens in
Egipte, and in the reed see, and in y wylder- nesse fourtye yeares. This is that Moses, which sayde vnto the children of Israel: ^A prophet shal the LORDE youre God rayse vp vnto you euen from amonge youre bre- thren, like vnto me. Him shal ye heare.
This is he," that was in the congregacion in 

the wyldernesse with the angell, which talked with him, vpo mount Sina, and with oure fathers. 'This man receaued the worde of

hfe to geue vnto vs, vnto whom onre fathers wolde not be obediét, but thrust him fro the, and in their hertes turned backe agayne in to
Egipte, and sayde vnto Aaron: ‘Make vs 

* Exod. 2.b. * Exod.3.a. * Iosue5.d. * Exod. 
9. b, 4 Deut. 18. c. Act. 3. d. * Exo. 19. a. Gal. 
8.6 J Exo. 32. a. t Rom. 1. d. 1 Amos 5, d. 

Thr Artes of the Apostles, 

goddes to go before vs, for we can not tell what is become of this Moses, y broughte vs out of the lande of Egipte. And they made a calfe at the same tyme, and offred sacrifice vnto the ymage, and reioysed in the workes of their awne handes.

But God turned himselfe, q *gaue them vp, so that they worshipped the hooste of heaué, as it is wrytten in the boke of the pro- phetes: +O ye honse of Israel, gaue ye me sacrifices and catel those fortye yeares in the wyldernesse? And ye toke vnto yon y taber- nacle of Moloch, and the starre of youre god Remphan, ymages which ye youre selues made to worshippe the. And I wil east you out beyonde Babilon.

Oure fathers had the tabernacle of witnesse in ¥ wyldernesse, like as he appoynted them,
$whan he spake vnto Moses, that he shulde make it (acordinge to the patrone, y he had sene.) which oure fathers also receaued, and brought it with Iosue in to the londe that the
* Heythe had in possession, whom God droue out before the face of oure fathers, vntyll the tyme of Dauid, which founde fauoure with
God, and desyred that he might fynde a tabernacle for the God of Iacob.

But Salomon buylte hi an house. I| How- beit y Hyest of all dwelleth not in temples that are made with handes: As he sayeth by the prophete:^ Heaué is my seate, and the earth is my fote stole. What house then wil ye buylde vnto me? sayeth the LORDE:
Or which is the place of my rest? Hath not my hande made all these thinges ?

Ye styffnecked q of vncircumcysed hertes and eares, ye allwaye resiste the holy goost :
Eué as youre fathers dyd, so do ye also. 
Which of the prophetes haue not youre fathers persecuted? And they slewe the, which tolde before of the comynge of y righteous, whose traytours and murthurers ye are now become. ‘Ye receaued the lawe by the mynistracion of angels, fand haue not kepte it.

Whan they herde this, it wente thorow ¥ hertes of thé, and they gnaszhed vpo him with their tethe. But he beynge full of the holy goost, loked vp towarde heauen, **and sawe the glorye of God, and Iesus stédinge

Tere. 7. c. § Exo. 25, d. Heb. 8. a. 5 Iosu. 3. a. 
|| 3 Re.6.a. Act.17.d. ^ ^ Esa.66.a. ' Deut. 9. d. j^ Act. 7. b. 9| Act. 15. b. = Mat. 16. c.

Chap. bý. 

F 

6 

Chap. biij. 

The Artes of the Apostles, 

Fo. rxrix. 

on the righte hande of God, and sayde: Be- holde, I se the heauens open, and the sonne of mà stondinge on y righte honde of God.
But they cried out with a loude voyce, a * stopped their eares, and rane violently vpon him all at once, and thrust him out of the cite, and stoned him. t And y witnesses layed downe their clothes at the fete of a yonge man, which was called Saul. And they stoned Steuen, which eryed, q sayde:
LORDE Iesu, receaue my sprete. And he kneled downe, q cried with a loude voyce:

The bij. Chapter. 

AUL had pleasure in his death, At ¥ 

same tyme there was a greate persecucion ouer the congregacion at lerusale. And they were all seatered abrode in the regions of lewrye a Samaria, excepte the Apostles. As for Steuen, men y feared God dressed him, and made greate lamentacion ouer him.
? But Saul made hauocke of the congregacion, entred in to euery house, and drue out men a wemen, q delyuered thé to preson. ‘They now y were scatered abrode wéte aboute q reached the worde. ‘Thé came Philippe in to a cite of Samaria, and preached Christ vnto them. And the people gaue hede with one acorde vnto y thinges that Philip spake, hearinge him, and seynge the tokes that he dyd. For the vneleane spretes cryed loude, and departed out of many y were possessed.
And many that were sicke of the palsie and lame, were healed. And there was greate loye in the same cite.

But afore there was in ý same cite a cer- tayne ma, called Simon, which vsed witche craft, and bewitched y people of Samaria, sayenge, that he was a man which coulde do greate thinges. And they all regarded him from the leest vnto y greatest, t sayde: This is the power of God which is greate. But they regarded him, because that of longe tyme he had bewitched them with his sorcery.
Howbeit whan they beleued Philips preach- inge of ý kyngdome of God, and of the name of Iesu Christ, they were baptysed both me t€ wemé. Then Symon himself beleued also,

a Luc. 23. c. 
Gal.i.b. } Act. 

t Act. 22. b. 
1 Cor. 15. a. 

* Psal. 57. a. 
? Act. 9. a, 22. a. 26, b. 

and was baptysed, and cleued vnto Philippe. 
And whà he sawe the dedes and tokens that were done, he wondred.

Whan the Apostles which were at Ierusa- lem, herde, that Samaria had receaued worde of God, they sent vnto the Peter and
Ihon. Which, wha they were come, prayed for the, y they might receaue the holy goost.
For as yet he was come vpon none of them but they were baptysed onely in the name of
Christ Iesu.+ Then layed they their hades on them, and they receaued the holy goost.

But whan Simon sawe, that by the layenge on of the Apostles hades ¥ holy goost was geuen, he offred thé money, and sayde: Geue me also this power, that, on whomsoeuer I put the hodes, he maye receaue the holy goost.
Howbeit Peter sayde vnto him: Perishe thou with thy money, $because thou thinkest that
Y gifte of God maye be optayned with money. 
Thou shalt haue nether parte ner felashipe in this worde, for thy hert is not righte before
God. Repente therfore of this thy wicked- nesse, and praye vnto God, yf happly the thought of thy hert maye be forgeué y.
For I se, y thou art full of bytter gall, and wrapped in with vnrighteousnesse.

Then answered Simon, q sayde: Il Praye ye vnto the LORDE for me, y none of these thinges wherof ye haue spoken, come vpon me. And they, wha they had testified and spoké the worde of the LORDE, turned agayne to lerusalem, and preached the Gos- pell in many townes of the Samaritanes.

But the angell of the LORDE spake vnto 
Philippe, and sayde: Aryse, t go towarde the South, vnto the waye that goeth downe from Ierusalem vnto Gaza, which is deserte.
And he rose, and wente on. And beholde, a mà of the Morians lode (a chamberlayne and of auctorite with Candace y quene of the londe of the Morians) which had the rule of all hir treasuries, ¥ same came to lerusalé to worshipe. And returned home agayne, and satt vpon his charet, and red the prophet Esay.

The sprete sayde vnto Philippe: Go neare, and ioyne thy selfe to yonder charet. ‘The ranne Philippe vnto him, aud herde him rede the prophet Esay, and sayde: Vnderstodest thou what thou readest? He sayde: How can I, excepte some mà enfourme me ?

1 Tim. 4. b. and 5. c. 2 Tim. i. b. 

| Nu. 21. b. 

13. a. and 19, a. 
$ Mat. 10. a. 

Fo. errr. 

And he desyred Philippe, that he wolde come vp, and syt with him. The tenoure of the scripture which he red, was this: * He was led as a shepe to be slayne, and as a lambe voycelesse before his sherer, so opened he not his mouth. In his humblenesse is his iudgment exalted. Who shal declare his generacion? for his life is taken awaye from the earth. Then answered the chamberlayne vnto Philippe, and sayde: I praye the, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himselfe, or of some other man?

Philippe opened his mouth, and beganne at this seripture, and preached him the Gospell of lesus. And as they wéte on their waye, they came to a water. And the chamberlayne sayde: Deholde, here is water, what hyndereth me to be baptysed? Philippesayde: Yf thou beleue from thy whole herte, thou mayest.
He answered, and sayde: I beleue, that lesus 
Christ is the sonne of God. And he com- maunded to holde styll the charet, and they wente downe in to the water, both Philippe and the chamberlayne. And he baptysed him. But whan they were come vp out of the water, the sprete of the LORDE toke
Philippe awaye. And the Chamberlayne sawe him nomore. But he wente on his waye reioysinge. As for Philippe, he was founde at Aszdod, and walked aboute, and preached the Gospell vnto all the cities, tyll he came to
Cesarea. 

The iy. Chapter. 

AUL was yet breathinge out threatnynges 

and slaughter? agaynst the disciples of the LORDE. And wente vnto y hye preste, and desyred of him letters to Damascon vnto the synagoges, that yf he foude eny of, this waye (whether they were men or wemen) he mighte brynge thé bounde vnto Icrusalem.
And as he was goinge on his iourney, it for- tuned, that he came nye vnto Damasco, and sodenly there shyned rounde aboute hi a light fro heaue, and he fell to the earth, aud herde a voyce, which sayde vnto him: Saul Saul twhy persecutest thou me? He sayde:
LORDE, who art thou? The LORDE! sayde: I am Iesus, who thou persecutest. It shalbe harde for y to kycke agaynst the prycke. And he odi tremblinge and a

* Esa. 53. b. f 4 Re. 19. d.

a Act. 26. b. 1 Cor. 15. a. Gal. 1. b. 
Zach.2.b. Mat. 25. d. f Act. 2. d. | 

The Artes of the Apostles, 

tonnyed, sayde: LORDE ¢what wilt thou that I shal do? The LORDE sayde vnto him: Aryse, and go in to the cite, there shal it be tolde the what thou shalt do.

As for y mē that ionrneyed with him, they stode anal were amased: for they herde a voyce, but sawe noman. Saul rose from the earth, and whan he had opened his eyes, he sawe noman. Nenertheles they toke him by the honde, q broughte him to Damascó: and he was thre dayes without sighte, and nether ate ner dranke. At Damascon there was a disciple named Ananias, and vnto him sayde the LORDE in a vision: Ananias
And he sayde: beholde, here am I LORDE. 
The LORDE sayde vnto him: Aryse, and go in to the strete which is called straight, and axe in the house of Iuda after one called
Saul of $'Tharsis: for beholde, he prayeth, q hath sene in a vision à mà named Ananias comynge vnto him, q layenge the hàde vpo him, that he mighte receane his sighte.

Ananias answered: LORDE, I haue herde by many of this man, how moch euell he hath done to thy sayntes at lerusalé. And here hath he auctorite of the hye prestes, to bynde all those y call vpon thy name. The
LORDE sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, ll for this man is a chosen vessell vnto me, that he maye beare my name before the Heythen, and before kynges, and before the children of
Israel. I wil shewe him, how greate thinges he must suffre for my names sake.

And Ananias wente his waye, and came in to the house,’ and layed the handes vpon him, and sayde: Brother Saul, the LORDE which appeared vnto y in the waye as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receaue thy sight, and be fylled with the holy goost. And immediatly there fell from his eyes as it had bene scales, and he receaued his sighte, and rose, and was baptysed, and toke meate, and was conforted.

Then was Saul a certayne dayes with the disciples that were at Damascon. And straight waye he preached Christ in the synagoges, how that he was y sonne of God. But all they that herde him, were ainased, and sayde:
Is not this he, which at Ierusalem spoyled all those that called on his name? and came hither to the intent that he shulde brynge

and 16. d. $ Act. 21. e. and 22. a. b 22. b

|| Gal. 1. c. 
Act. 22. b. 

B 

Chap. r. them bounde vnto the hye prestes? But
Saul increased in strength, q cofounded y lewes which dwelt at Damascon, and affirmed y this was very Christ.

And after many dayes the lewes helde a councell together to kyll him. But it was tolde Saul, that they layed wayte for him.
“And they wayted at y gates daye q night, that they might kyll him. *'Then the dis- ciples toke him by nighte, q put him thorow the wall, and let him downe in a baskett.

¿But whan Saul came to lerusalem, he assayed to ioyne himself to y disciples. And they were all afrayed of him, and beleued not, y he was a disciple. Neuertheles Bar- nabas toke him, and broughte him to the
Apostles, and tolde them how he had sene the 
LORDE in the waye, and how he spake to him, ¢ how he had done boldly at Damascon in the name of Iesu. And he was with them, and wente out and in at lerusalé, and quyte him selfe boldly in $ name of y LORDE lesu. He spake also, and disputed with y
Grekes. But they wéte abonte to slaye him. 
Whan the brethren knewe y, ^they brought him to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tharsis.
So the congregacions had rest thorow out all Iewry, and Galile, and Samaria, t were edified, and walked in the feare of the
LORDE, and were fylled with the comforte of the holy goost.

It chaunced that as Peter walked thorow all quarters, he came also vnto ¥ sayntes which dwelt at Lydda. There founde he a man named Eneas, which had lyen vpon his bedd eight yeares sicke of y palsye. And
Peter sayde vnto him: Eneas, lesus Christ make the whole, aryse, and make thy bedd for thy self. And he arose immediatly. And all they that dwelt at Lydda and at Sarona, sawe him, and turned vnto the LORDE.

At Toppa there was a certayne woman that was a disciple, named Tabitha, which by interpretacion is called Dorcas: y same was full of good workes and almesse dedes, which she dyd. But it chaunced at the same tyme, that she was sicke, and dyed. ‘Then waszhed they her, and layed her in a chaber. But for so moch as Lydda was nye vnto Toppa, and the disciples herde that Peter was there, they sent two men vnto him, and desyred

> Gal. 2. b. t Eccli. 35. b.

a 2 Cor.11.d. =» Iosu. 2, c. 1 Re. 19, c. 
* Act. 22. b. — t Some reade: She sat vp. 

Che Artes of the Apostles, 

Fo. rri him, ý he wolde take it for no grefe to come vnto them.

Peter rose, and came with thé. And whaldf he was come, they broughte him in to the chamber, and all the wyddowes stode rounde aboute him, wepynge, and shewed him the cotes and garmētes, which Dorcas made whyle she was with them. And whā Peter had put them all forth, he kneled downe, made his prayer, and turned him vnto the body, and sayde: Tabitha, ryse vp. And she opened hir eyes: and whan she sawe Petert she sat hir downe agayne. But he gaue her the hande, and lifte her vp, and called the sayntes and the wedowes, and shewed her there alyue.
And it was knowne thorow out all Ioppa, q many beleued on $ LORDE. And it for- tuned, ý he taried a lōge season at Ioppa by one Simō, which was a tanner.

The r. Chapter. 
HERE was a man at Cesarea, named|@ 

. Cornelius (a captayne of $ cépany, which is called y Eu a deui per q one that feared God with all his house, q gaue moch almesse to ¥ people, and prayed
God allwaye. The same sawe in a vision openly (aboute the nyenth houre of the daye) an angell of God entringe in to him, and sayenge vnto him: Cornelius He loked

on him, and was afrayed, and sayde: 
LORDE, what is it? He sayde vnto him: 
*'Thy prayers q thine allmesses are come vp in to remébraunce before God. And now sende men vnto Ioppa, q call for Simo, whose syrname is Peter, which is at lodginge with one Symon a tanner, whose house lyeth by y see syde: he shal tell y, what thou oughtest to do. And wha the angell which spake to
Cornelius, was departed, he called two of his housholde seruauntes, q a deuoute soudyer, of the that wayted vpon him: and tolde them all, and sent the to Ioppa.

On the nexte daye after whan these were] goinge on their iourney, and came nye vnto the cite, Peter $ wente vp in to a chamber to praye aboute the siste houre. And whan he was hogrie, he wolde hane eaté. But whyle they made ready for him, he fell in to a traunce, and sawe heaué open, and a vessell|13. comynge downe vnto him, as it had bene a

$4Re.4.d. Mat. 6.a. Luc. 6. b. | 

Fo. cere. 

greate lynné clothe, knytt at the foure corners, and was let downe to y earth, wherin were all maner of foure foted beestes of the earth, a wylde beestes, and wormes, and foules of the ayre. And there came a voyce vnto him:
Ryse Peter, slaye, q eate. But Peter sayde: 
Ob no, LORDE, * for I neuer ate eny com- men or vncleane thinge. And the voyce spake vnto him agayne j secode tyme: t What God hath clensed, y make not thou vncleane. This was done thryse. And y vessell was receaued vp agayne m to heauen.

But whyle Peter was combred in him selfe, what maner of vision this shulde be which he had sene, beholde, the men y were sent from
Cornelius, enquered after Simos house, and stode before the dore, and called, and axed whether Simon (whose syrname was Peter) were lodged there. Whyle Peter was musinge of the vision, the sprete sayde vnto him: be- holde, the men seke the. Aryse therfore, and get the downe, q go with thé, and doute not, for Í haue sent them.

Then wente Peter downe to the men, y were sent vnto him from Cornelius, and sayde: lo, I am he whom ye seke: what is y cause, wherfore ye are come? They sayde: Cor- nelius the captayne, a iust man and one that feareth God, and of good reporte amoge all the people of the Iewes, was warned by an holy angell, to sende for the in to his house, and to heare wordes of the. t Then called he them in, and lodged them.

The nexte daye after wente Peter forth with them, and certayne brethren of Ioppa bare him company. And y daye folowinge came they to Cesarea. Cornelius wayted for thé, and had called together his kynszfolkes and speciall frendes. And as it chaunced y
Peter came in, Cornelius mett him, and fell downe at his fete, q worshipped him. But
Peter toke him vp, and sayde: § Stonde vp, lamamanalso. And as he talked with him, he wente in, and founde many that were come together, and he sayde vnto them: Ye knowe, that it is not laufull for a man beynge a Iewe
^to ioyne him selfe or to come to a straunger. 
But God hath shewed me, y I shulde call no ma comen or vncleane. "Therfore haue I not douted to eome, as soone as I was sent for.

* Leuit, 11. a. Deut. 14, a. t Mat, 15. b. Ro. 14 b. 
1 Tim. 4.a. Tit. I. c. f Gen.19.a. and 24. d. 1 Pet. 

$ Act. 14. c. Apo. 19. b. and 22. b. — ^ Deut. 7. a. 
* Rom. 2. b. Eph.6.a. Col. 3. c. || Eaa. 56. b. 

Che Actes of the Apostles. 

I axe you therfore, for what intent haue ye sent for me?

Cornelius sayde: It is now foure dayes agoo, then fasted I, and at the nyenth houre
I prayed in my house, and beholde, there stode a mà before me in a bryghte clothinge, and sayde: Cornelius, thy prayer is herde, and thine allmesse dedes are had in remé- braunce in the sighte of God. Sende therfore to loppa, and call for one Simon (whose syr- name is Peter) which is at lodginge in y house of Simon y taner, by the see syde: y same wha he commeth, shal speake vnto y.
Then sent I vnto the immediatly, and thou hast done well, that thou art come. Now are we all here presente before God, to heare all thinges that are commaunded the of God.

Peter opened his mouth, q sayde: ^Now perceaue I of a trueth, that God hath no respecte of personnes, lbut in all people he y feareth him, and worketh righteousnes, is accepted vnto him. Ye knowe of } preach- inge that God sent vnto the children of Israel, preachinge thorow lesus Christ (which is
LORDE ouer all) which preachinge was published thorow out all lewry, * and begane in Galile after y baptyme that Ihon preached, how God **anoynted the same lesus of Nazareth with the holy goost and with power, which wente aboute, a dyd good, and healed all those that were oppressed of the deuell, for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all that he dyd in the londe of the Iewes, q at lerusalem. Whom they slewe, and hanged on tre.

Him God raysed vp on the thirde daye, and caused him be openly shewed, not to all the people, but to y chosen witnesses of God euen vnto vs, which ate q dronke with him, after he was rysen vp from the deed. And he commaunded vs to preach vnto the people,” and to testifye, that it 1s he which is ordeyned of God a iudge of the lyuynge and of the deed. *Of him beare all the prophetes wyt- nesse, that thorow his name all they y beleue in him, shal receaue remyssion of synnes.
Whyle Peter was yet speakynge these wordes, the holy goost fell vpo all the that herkened vnto the worde. And the faithfull of the circiicision which came with Peter, were

* Mat. 4. b. ** Esa. 61.8. * Luc. 24. d. Ioh. 21. b, 
4 Mat. 28. c. * Esa, 42. d. and 53. c. Iere. 50. d. 
Dani. 9. d. 

Chap. r. 

| Chap. ri. astonnyed, because that the gifte of $ holy goost was shed out also vpon the Heythen.
For they herde that they spake with tunges, and magnified God. ‘Thé answered Peter:
“Maye eny man forbydde water, that these shulde not be baptysed, which haue receaued the holy goost as well as we? And he com- maunded them to be baptysed in the name of the LORDE. Thé prayed they him, that he wolde tary there certayne dayes.

The ri. Chapter. 

HE Apostles and the brethren that were 
T in Iewrye, herde saye, that the Heythen also had receaued the worde of God. And whan Peter was come vp to Ierusalem, they that were of the circūcision, chode with him, and sayde: * Thou wentest in to men that are vncircumcysed, and hast eaten with them.
But Peter beganne, and expounded the thinge in order vnto thé and sayde: I was in ¥ cite of loppa prayége,’ and in a traunce I sawe a vision, a vessell commynge downe, as it had bene a greate lynnen clothe with foure corners, and let downe from heauen, and came vnto me. In to the which I loked, and considered, and sawe foure foted beestes of the earth, and wylde beestes, and wormes, and foules of the ayre. And I herde a voyce, which sayde vnto me: Ryse Peter, slaye, q eate. But I sayde: Oh no, LORDE, for there neuer entred eny commen or vncleane thinge in to my mouth. Neuértheles the voyce answered me agayne from heauen: What God hath clensed, that call not thou vncleane. This was done thre tymes, and all was taken vp agayne in to heauen.

And beholde, immediatly stode there thre men before the dore of the house that I was in, sent from Cesarea vnto me. But the sprete sayde vnto me, that I shulde go with thé and doute nothinge. “These sixe brethré also came with me, and we entred in to the más house.

And he shewed vs, how he had sene an angell stondinge in his house, which sayde vnto him: Sende men to Ioppa, and call for
Simon (whose syrname is Peter) he shall tell y wordes, wherby thou and all thy house shal be saued. But whan I beganne to speake,

a Act. 8. d. 
* Act. 10. c. 

* Deut. 7. a. t Act. 2.2. t Act. 1. a.

t Act. 10. b. 
4 Act. 8. a. 

The Artes of the Apostles. 

So. crrritj. the holy goost fell vpo them, +t like as vpon vs at y begynnynge. ‘Then thoughte I vpon the worde of the LORDE, how he sayde: tIhon baptysed with water, but ye shalbe baptysed with y holy goost. For as moch then as God hath geuen them like giftes, as vnto vs, which beleue on the LORDE Iesus Christ, who was I, that I shulde be able to withstode God ?
Whan they herde this, they helde their peace, and praysed God, and sayde: Then hath God also to the Heithen graunted repentaunce vnto life.

2 They that were scatred abrode thorow y trouble y rose aboute Steuen, walked on euery syde vntyll Phenices, and Cipers, and Antioche, and spake the worde vnto noman but onely vnto y lewes. Neuertheles some of thé were men of Cipers and Cyren, which came to
Antioche, and spake also vnto the Grekes, q preached the Gospell of the LORDE Jesu.
And y hande of the LORDE was with thé. 
And a greate nombre beleued, and turned vnto the LORDE.

This tydinges of them came to y eares of | € 

the cogregacion at lerusalem. And they sent 
Barnabas, that he shulde go vnto Antioche. 
Which whan he was come thither, « sawe the grace of God, he was glad, $and exorted them all, that with purpose of hert they wolde con- tynue in the LORDE. For he was a good man, full of the holy goost and faith. And there was a greate multitude of people added vnto the LORDE. But Barnabas departed vnto Tharsus, to seke Saul. And wha he had foude hi, he brought hi to Anthioche. It chaüced, that a whole yeare they were there cOuersaunte together in the cogregació, q taughte moch people, so that the disciples at
Antioche were first called Christen. 

In those dayes came there prophetes fro 
Ierusalem vnto Antioche. And one of them 
(whose name was ll Agabus) stode vp, and declared by the sprete a greate derth, that shulde come ouer the whole compasse of the earth: which came to passe vnder the Em- peroure Claudius. Dut the disciples cocluded
(euery one acordinge to his abylite) to sendef an handreachinge vnto y brethren that were in lewry: which thinge they also dyd, and sent it by the handes of Barnabas and
Saul. 

§ Act. 13. d. || Act. 21. b. 

q 1 Cor. 16. a. 
2 Cor. 8. a. and 9. a. : 

146 

Fo. errr. 

a 

The rij. Chapter. 

T the same tyme layed kynge Herode handes vpon certayne of the congre- gacion, to vexe them. As for * James the brother of lhon, him he slewe with the swerde.
And whan he sawe that it pleased the Iewes, he proceaded farther to take Peter also. But it was Easter. Now whan he had taken him, he put him in preson, and delyuered hin vnto
[foure quaternions of soudyers, to kepe him: land thought after Easter to bringe him forth to the people. And Peter was kepte in the preson. t But prayer was made without ceassinge of the congregacion, vnto God for him. And whan Herode wolde haue broughte him out vnto the people, in the same nighte slepte Peter betwene two soudiers, bounde with two cheynes. And the kepers before the

dore kepte the preson. 

And beholde, the angell of the LORDE was there presente, and a lighte shyned in the habitacion, and he smote Peter on the syde, and waked him vp, and sayde: Aryse vp quyckly. And the cheynes fell of from his hondes. And the angell sayde vnto him:
Gyrde the, and put on thy shues. And he dyd so. And he sayde vnto him: Cast thy mantle aboute the, and folowe me. And he wente out, and folowed him, and wyst not, that it was trueth that was done by y angell, but thoughte he had sene a vision. Neuer- theles they wente thorow the first and seconde watch, and came to the yron gate, that ledeth vnto the cite, which opened to the by his awne acorde, And they wente out, and passed thorow one strete, and immediatly the angell departed from him.

And whan Peter was come to himself, he sayde: Now I knowe of a trueth, that y
LORDE hath sent his angell, and delyuered me out of the honde of Herode, and from all the waytinge for of the people of the Iewes.
And as he considered the thinge, he came to the house of Mary the mother of one Ihon,
(which after his syrname was called Marke) where many were gathered together, and prayed. As Peter knocked at the entry dore, there came forth a damsell to herken, named
Rhoda. And whan she knewe Peters voyce, she opened not the entrye for gladnes, but rane 1n, and tolde, that Peter stode before y

* Mat.4.c. + Act.4.c. fAct. 1. b. $ Act. 13. b. 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

entrye. But they sayde vnto her: Thou art mad. Neuertheles she abode by it, that is was so. They sayde: it is his angell. But
Peter contynued knockinge. Whan they opened the dore, they sawe him, and were astonnyed. § But he beckened vnto them with the hande, to holde their peace, q tolde them, how the LORDE had broughte him out of the preson. And he sayde: Shewe this vnto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and wéte in to another place.

Whan it was daye, there was not a litle a doo amoge the soudyers, what was become of
Peter. Whan Herode had called for him, and founde him not, he caused the kepers to be examyned, and commaunded the to be caried awaye, and he wente downe fro lewry vnto
Cesarea, and there abode. But he was dis- pleased with them of Tyre and Sido. Neuer- theles they came vnto him with one accorde, and made intercession to Blastus the kynges chamberlayne, and desyred peace, because their countre was norished by the kynges londe.
But vpon a daye appoynted, Herode put on y kyngly apparell, sat him downe vpon the ludgment seate, and made an oracion vnto them. As for the people, they cried therto :
This is a voyce of God, and not of a man. 
Immediatly the angell of the LORDE smote him, because he gaue not God the honoure :
And he was eaten vp of wormes," and gaue vp the goost. But the worde of God grewe, and multiplyed. As for Barnabas and Saul, they came agayne to lerusalem, and delyuered || the handreachinge, and toke with them Ihon, whose syrname was Marke.

The rij. Chapter. 

HERE were at Antioche in the congre- gacion, prophetes and teachers, as Bar- nabas, and Simon called Niger, and Lucius of
Cyren, and Manahen Herodes the Tetrachas norsfelowe, and Saul. As they serued y
LORDE, and fasted, the holy goost sayde : 
Separate me out Barnabas and Saul for the worke," where vnto I haue called them. Then fasted they and prayed, and layed the handes on them, and let them go. And they beynge sent of the holy goost, came vnto Seleucia, from thence they sayled vnto Cypers. And whan they were come in to the cite Salamin, they shewed the worde of God in the syna-

T Act. 9. b. 

5 2 Mac. 9. b. | Act. 11. c. 

Chap. rij. 

B 

a 

Chap. rii. goges of ý Iewes. And they had *Ihon to their mynister.

And whan they had gone thorow out the yle vnto the cyte of Paphos, they founde a certayne Sorcerer and false prophete, a Iewe
(whose name was Bariesu) which was with 
Sergius Paulus the ruler of the countre, a mà of vnderstondinge. The same called Barnabas and Saul vnto him, and desyred to heare y worde of God. Then the tSorcerer Elimas
(for so was his name by interpretacion) with- stode thé, and songhte to turne awaye the ruler fro the faith. But Saul which is also called Paul, beynge full of the holy goost, loked vpon him, and sayde: O thou childe of the deuell, full of all suttyltie and all disceat- fulnesse, and enemye of all righteousnes, thou ceassest not to peruerte the straight wayes of y LORDE. And now beholde, the hàde of the LORDE commeth vpon the, and thou shalt be blynde, and not se the Sonne for a season. And immediatly there fell on him a myst and darknesse, and he wente aboute, and soughte them that shulde lede him by the hande. Whan the ruler sawe what was done, he beleued, and wodred at the doctryne of the LORDE.

Whan Paul and they that were with him, were departed by shippe fro Paphos, they came to Perga in the londe of Pamphilia. tBut Ihon departed from them, and wente agayne to Ierusalem. — Neuertheles they wan- dred thorow from Perga, and came to An- tioche in the londe of Pisidia, and wete in to the synagoge vpon the Sabbath daye, and sat downe. But after the lecture of the lawe and of the prophetes, the rulers of the synagoge sent vnto them, sayenge: Good brethren, yf ye haue eny sermon to exorte the people, saye on. Then stode Paul vp, and $ beck- ened with the hande (that they shulde holde their peace) and sayde:

Ye men of Israel, and ye that feare God, herké to: The God of this people chose oure fathers, and exalted the people, whan they were straungers in the lode of Egipte, and
“with a mightie arme broughte he them out of it. And by the space of fortye yeares suffred he their maners in the wyldernesse, and destroyed seuen nacions in the lande of

* Act. 12. d. + Exod. 7. b. and 8. b. Act. 8. a. t Act.15.e. — $ Act. 12.d. — * Exo.14.e. È Iosue
13.b. —*Indic.1.a. 41Reg.8.a. *1Re.10.2.| 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

Fo. rrr, 
Canaan,’ and parted their londe amonge them by lott. “After that gaue he them iudges by the space of foure hundreth and fiftye yeares, vnto the prophet Samuel. “And after that they desyred a kynge, and God gaue vnto them ‘Saul the sonne of Cis, a man of the trybe of Ben Iamin, fortye yeares longe.
/ And whan he had put him downe, he set vp 
Dauid to be their kynge, of whom he reported, sayenge: lI haue founde Dauid the sonne of lesse, a man after my hert, he shal fulfyll all my wyll

Of this mans sede hath God (facordinge to the promesse) broughte forth vnto the people of Israel, $ Sauioure lesus: whan
Thon had first preached before his cómynge the baptyme of repentannce vnto Israel. But whan Ihon had fulfylled his course, he sayde:
I am not he, that ye take me for. But beholde, there commeth one after me, whose shues of his fete I am not worthy to lowse.
Ye men and brethren, ye children of the generacion of Abraham, and they that feare
God amonge you, **ynto you is ý worde of this saluacion sent. For the inhabiters of Ierusa- lem, and their rulers, for somoch as they knewe him not,* ner yet the voyces of the prophetes (which are red euery Sabbath) haue fulfylled them in condemnynge him.
^ And though they founde no cause of death in him, yet desyred they Pilate to kyll him.
And whan they had fulfylled all that was wrytten of him, they toke him downe from the tre, and layed him in a sepulcre* But on y thirde daye God raysed him vp from the deed, and he appeared many dayes vnto the, that wente vp with him from Galile vnto lerusalem, which ttare his witnesses vnto the people.

And we also declare vnto you y promes, which was made vnto oure fathers, how that
God hath fulfylled the same vnto vs their children, in ý he raysed vp lesus agayne.
As it is wrytten in the seconde Psalme: Thou art my sonne, this daye haue I begotten the.
But that he hath raysed him vp fro the deed, now nomore to returne to corrupcion, he sayde on this wyse: *'The grace promysed to Dauid, wyl I faithfully kepe vnto you. Therfore sayeth he also in another place: Thou shalt

f 1Re.16.a. ||Psal.88.c. Psal.i31.a. 2 Re.7.c. 
** Mat. 10.a. £1 Cor.2.a. 4 Luc. 23. a. i Luc. 
23. e. tt Act. 1. a. k Esa. 55. a. 

| 
| 

fo. rrrrbt. 

not suffre thy Holy to se corrupcion. For 
Dauid, whan he in his tyme had serued the wyll of God, “he fell a slepe, and was layed by his fathers, & sawe corrupcion. But he who God raysed vp agayue, sawe no cor- rupcion.

Be it knowne vnto you therfore ye men and 

ibrethré, y thorow this man is preached vnto 

you $ forgeuenesse of synnes,’ and fro all j thinges, wherby ye mighte not be iustifyed in the lawe of Moses. But whosoeuer beleueth on this man, is iustifyed. Bewarre therfore, that it come not vpon you, which is spoken in the prophetes: Beholde ye despysers,’ and wonder at it, and perishe, for I do a worke in youre tyme, which ye shal not beleue, yf eny man tell it you.

Whan the lewes were gone out of the synagoge, the Heythen besoughte them, y they wolde speake y worde vnto them betwene the Sabbath dayes. And whà the cogregacion of the synagoge was broken vp, many Iewes and Proselites y serued God, folowed Paul and Barnabas, which spake to them, and texorted them, that they shulde contynue in the grace of God.

On $ Sabbath folowinge, came almost the whole cite together, to heare the worde of
God. But whan the Iewes sawe the people, they were full of indignacion, and spake agaynst that which was spoken of Paul, speakinge agaynst it, t blasphemynge. But
Paul and Barnabas waxed bolde, and sayde : dIt behoued first the worde of God to be spoken vnto you: but now that ye thrust it fro you, and counte youre selues vnworthy of euerlastinge life, lo, twe turne to the Gentyles.
For so hath the LORDE cómaunded vs: ‘I haue set the to be a lighte vnto y Gentyles, y thou be y Saluacion vnto the ende of the earth. Whan the Gentyles herde that, they were glad, and praysed the worde of the
LORDE, and beleued, eue as many as were ordeyned to euerlastinge life. And the worde of y LORDE was spred abrode thorow out all the region. /Howbeit the Iewes moued the deuoute and honorable wemen, and the chefe men of the citie, and raysed vp a per-
|jsecucion agaynst Paul and Barnabas and expelled them out of their coastes. But

* Paal. 15. b. 
* Abac. 1. a. 
1 Mat. 21. e. 

> Luc. 24. d. 
4 Mat. 10. a, and 15. c. 
Mat. 5. b. Luc.2. e. 

* 3 Reg. 2. b. t Act. 11. c.
* Esa. 49. b. 

The Artes of the Apostles, 

they $shoke of the dust of their fete agaynst them, and came to Iconium. And the dis- ciples were fylled with ioye and with the holy goost.

The riiij. Chapter. 

Chap. riiij. 

T fortuned at Iconium, that they wēte both|@ 

together in to the synagoge of the lewes, and spake so, that a greate multitude of the
Tewes q of the Grekes beleued. But the vnbeleuynge lewes moued and disquyeted the soules of the Heythé agaynst the brethre.
So they had their beynge there a loge season, and quyte them selues boldly in the LORDE, which gaue testimony vnto the worde of his grace, and caused tokens and ‘wonders to be done by their handes. Howbeyt the multi- tude of the cite was deuyded, some helde with the Iewes, and some with the Apostles.

But whan there rose vp an insurreccion of the Heythe and of y lewes, and of their rulers, to put them to shame, and to stone thé, they perceaued it, and lfled vnto lystra and Derba cities of ¥ countre of Licaonia, and vnto y region that lyeth rounde aboute, and there they preached the Gospell.

And amonge them of Lystra, there was a man, which sat beynge impotent of his fete, and was crepell fro his mothers wombe, and had neuer walked, the same herde Paul speake. And whan he behelde him, and perceaued that he had faith to be made whole, he sayde with a loude voyce: Stonde vp righte on thy fete. And he sprange vp and walked. But whan the people sawe what Paul had done, they lifte vp their voyce, and sayde in y speache of Lycaonia: ‘The goddes are become like vnto men, and are come downe vnto vs. And they called Bar- nabas lupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the: preacher. But lupiters prest which dwelt before their cite, broughte oxen and garlandes before the gate, and wolde haue done sacrifice with the people.

Whan y Apostles Barnabas and Paul herde that, they rent their clothes, and ranne in amonge the people, eryenge and sayenge:
^Ye mé, Why do ye this? We are mortall mē also like vnto you, q preach vnto you y
Gospell, that ye shulde turne from these 

/ 9 Tim. 3. b. 
£ Marc. 16. c. 

$ Mat. 10. b. Mar. 6. b. Luc. 9. a. 
| Mat. 10, c. — * Act. 10. c. 

€ 

B 

a 

Chap. rb. 

vayne thinges vnto y lyuynge God, which | made heaué and earth," and the see, and all | that therin is, which in tymes past suffred all
Cahn to walke after their awne wayes. 

euertheles he hath not left hi selfe without wytnesse, in y he hath shewed his benefites, and geuen ys rayne from heauen, and frute- full seasons, fyllynge oure hertes with fode and gladnesse. And whan they sayde this, they scarse refrayned the people, that they dyd not sacrifice vnto them.

But there came thither certayne Jewes from Antioche and Iconiii, and persuaded the people, and *stoned Paul, and drue him out of the cite, supposinge he had bene deed.
Howbeyt as y disciples stode rounde aboute him, he rose vp, q came in to the cite. And on the nexte daye he departed with Barnabas vnto Derba, and preached the Gospell vnto the same cite, and taughte many of them.
And they wéte agayne vnto Lystra, and Ico- nium and Antioche, strengthinge the soules of y disciples, and exortinge the to cotynue in the faith: and that we thorow moch tribu- lacion must “entre in to the kyngdome of
God. And wha they had ordeyned them 
Elders by eleccion thorow all the congre- gacions, they prayed and fasted, aud cō- mended them vnto the LORDE, on whom they beleued.

And they wente thorow Pisidia, and came to Pamphilia, and spake the worde at Perga, and wete downe to Attalia, and fro thence departed they by shippe vnto Antioche: from whence they were delyuered to the grace of
God vnto y worke, which they had fulfylled. 
Whan they came there, they gathered the congregacion together, q shewed them, how greate thinges God had done with thé, and how he had opened the dore of faithe vnto the Heithen. And there they abode a longe tyme with the disciples.

The ro. Chapter. 

ND there came certayne frö Iewry, aud 
A taughte the brethren: t Excepte ye be circumcysed after the maner of Moses, ye can not be saued. Now wha there rose a discésion, and Paul and Barnabas had set them selues harde agaynst them,t they ordeyned, that
Paul and Barnabas and certayne other of 

o Corse: 
1 Gal. 2. a. 

a Psal. 145.2. 
> Luc, 24. d. 

Act. 17.d. Apo. 14. b. 
1 Tim. 3, b, t Gal, 5. a. 

The Artes of tbe Apostles 

Fo. tyyrbij. them shulde go vp to lerusalem vnto the
Apostles and Elders, aboute this questio. 
And they were broughte on their waye by ¥ eógregacion, q wente thorow Phenices and
Samaria, and declared the $ conuersacion of the Heythen, and brought greate ioye vnto all the brethren. Whan they came to Ierusalé, they were receaued of y cogregacion, q of the
Apostles, and of the Elders, ¢ they tolde how greate thinges God had done with thé. Then rose there vp certayne of the secte of ý Pha- rises (which beleued) and sayde: "They must be cireumeysed and cómaunded, to kepe the lawe of Moses. But the Apostles and Elders came together, to reason vpon this matter.
Now whan there was moch disputinge Peter 33 rose vp, and sayde vnto thé: Ye men and brethren, ye knowe that a good whyle agoo,
God chose amonge vs, y the Heythe by my mouth shulde heare the worde of the Gospel, and beleue. And God the knower of hertes bare wytnesse ouer thé,ll and gaue thé the holy goost, like as vn to vs, q put no dyfference betwixte vs ¢ them, and purified their hertes thorow fayth. Now therfore why tempte ye
God, with layenge vpon y disciples neckes the yocke,¥ which nether oure fathers ner we were able to beare? But we beleue to be saued thorow the grace“ of the LORDE Iesu
Christ, like as they also. Then all y multi- tude helde their peace, and gaue audience| vnto Paul and Barnabas, which tolde how greate tokens and wonders God had done by thé amoge the Heythen. Afterwarde whan they helde their peace, Iames answered, and sayde: Ye men and brethren, herké vnto me,
Simo hath tolde, how God at the first vysited to receaue a people vnto his name from amonge the Heythen. And vnto this agree| € y wordes of the prophetes, as it is wrytté:
After this wyl I returne and wyl buylde agayne y tabernacle of Dauid, that is fallen downe, and that which is fallen in decaye therof, wyl
I buylde agayne, and wyl set it vp, that the residue of men maye seke after the LORDE: q also the Heythen vpo whom my name is named, sayeth the LORDE, which doth all these thinges. Knowne vnto God are all his workes from the begynnynge of y worlde.
Wherfore my sentence is, that they which from amonge the Heythen are turned vnto

q Act. 7. g. 

$ Some reade : conuersion. 
4 Amos 9. c. 

|| Act. 10. e. 
* Ephe. 2. a. 

Tit. 3. a. 

Fo. cryrbitj. 

God, be not disquyeted, but to wryte vnto them, that they absteyne them selues from fylthynesse of * Idols, from * whordome, and
‘from t strangled, and bloude. For Moses 
‘hath of olde tyme in euery cite them that 
(preach him: and he is red in the synagoges euery Sabbath daye. :

And the Apostles and Elders with the whole congregacion thoughte it good, to chose lont meu of them, and to sende them vnto
Antioche with Paul and Barnabas, namely $ 
Iudas, whose syrname was Barsabas, and Sylas 
(which were chefe men amóge the brethré) and gaue thé letters in their handes after this maner:

We the Apostles and Elders q brethren, wysh health vnto the brethré of the Heythe which are at Antioche, and Syria and Celicia.
For so moch as we haue herde that certayne of oures are departed," and haue troubled you, and combred youre myndes, sayenge: ye must
‘be cireumcysed, and kepe ¥ lawe (to whom we gaue no soch commaundemet) it semed good vnto vs, beynge gathered together with one accorde, to chose out men, and to sende them vnto you, with oure beloued Barnabas and Paul, men that haue || ioperded their y name of oure LORDE Iesus herfore haue we sent ludas and
Sylas, which shal also tell you the same with wordes. For it pleased the holy goost and vs, to laye no charge vpon you, more then these necessary poyntes: That ye absteyne from the T offeringes of Idols, and from bloude, and from strangled, and from whordome.
From the which yf ye absteyne youre selues, ye shal do well. Fare ye well.

Whan these were sent forth, they came vnto Antioche, and gathered the multitude together, and delyuered the epistle. Whan they had red it, they were glad of that cóso- lacion. As for Iudas q Sylas (which were prophetes also) they exorted y brethre with moch preachinge, and strégthed them. And whan they had taried there for a season, they were let go of the brethren in peace
%|vnto the Apostles. Notwithstondinge Sylas thoughte it good to byde there styll But
Paul and Barnabas cotynued at Antioche, teachinge and preachinge the worde of the
LORDE, vith other many. 

B 

* Exo. 20.a, 

t Epbe. 5.a. ¢ Gen. 9.a. 
* Gal. 9. a. 

$ Ioh. 14. b. 
|| Act. 13. e. and 14. c. 

€ 1 Cor. 8. a. 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

Neuertheles after certayne dayes Paul sayde vnto Barnabas: let vs go agayne, and vyset oure brethren thorow all the cities (wherin we haue shewed the worde of the LORDE) how they do. But Barnabas gaue councell, that they shulde take with the Ihon, whose syrname was Marke. Howbeit Paul thoughte it mete, not to take him with them, ** which departed from them in Pamphilia, and wente not with them vntothe worke. Andso sharpe was the strife betwene them, that they de- parted asunder $ one fro the other, and Bar- nabas toke Marke vnto him, and sayled vnto
Cypers. But Paul chose Sylas, and departed, beynge cómytted of the brethren vnto the grace of God. He wente thorow Syria and
Celicia, stablishynge the congregacions. 

The rbi. Chapter. 

E came vnto Derba and to Lystra, and 

beholde, a certayne disciple was there named Timotheus, the sonne of a Iewish woman, which beleued, but his father was a
Greke: $ same had a good reporte amonge the brethré of Lystra and at Iconium. Paul wolde that the same shulde go forth with him, and toke and tt cireumcysed him because of the lewes that were in those quarters. For they knewe all, that his father was a Greke.
But as they wente thorow the cities, they delyuered them the sentence to kepe, tt which was concluded of the Apostles and Elders at lerusalem. Thé were the congregacions stablyshed in the faith, and increased in nombre daylie.

But as they wente thorow Phrygia and the londe of Galacia, they were §§forbydden of the holy goost, to preache the worde in Asia.
Howbeit as they came in to Mysia, they proued to take their iourney in to Bithinia, and the sprete suffred them not.

Neuertheles whan they had passed thorow 
Mysia, they came downe to Troada, and there appeared a lll vision vnto Paul by night, that there was a man of Macedonia which stode and prayed him, and sayde: Come downe to Macedonia, and helpe vs. Whan he had sene ¥ vision, we soughte immediatly to go, vnto Macedonia, beynge certified, that y LORDE had called vs thither, to preach the Gospell vnto them. — The departed we

and 10.c. ** Act. 15. b. 
$$ Rom. 1. b. 

tt Gal. 2.a. ff Act. 15. d. 
||| Act. 18. a. and 23. b. 

Chap. rot. 

a 

B 

Chap. rbij. from Troada, and came the straight course vnto Samothracia, on the nexte daye to
Neapolis, and from thence to Philippis, which is the chefe cite of the londe of Macedonia, and a fre cite. In this cite abode we certayne dayes.

On the daye of the Sabbathes wéte we out of the cite besyde the water, where men were wonte to praye, and we sat downe, and spake vnto the wemen that resorted thither. And a deuoute woman (named Lydia) a seller of purple, out of the cite of Thiatira, herkened to, whose hert the LORDE opened that she gaue hede vnto the thinges that Paul spake.
Whan she was baptysed and hir housholde, she besoughte vs, and sayde: Yf ye thynke that I beleue on the LORDE, then come in to my house, and a byde there. And she * constrayned vs.

It fortuned whan we wente to prayer, y there met vs a dainsel, which had a sprete of soythsayenge, and broughte hir master and mastresse greate vauntage with soyth sayenge: y same folowed Paul and vs, and eryed, and sayde: These men are the seruauntes of the most hye God, which shewe vs ý waye of saluacion. This dyd she many dayes. But
Paul was not content with it, and turned him aboute, and sayde vnto the sprete: Icomaunde the in the name of Iesu Christ, that thou departe out of her. “Andhe departed out at the same houre.

But whà hir master and mastresse sawe that the hope of their vauntage was gone,’ t they toke Paul and Sylas, drue them in to the market place before ¥ rulers, q broughte the vnto the officers, and sayde: "These men trouble oure cyte, q are Tewes, and preach an ordynaunce, which is not laufull for vs to receaue, ner to obserue, seynge we are Ro- maynes. Andthe people rane on them, and the officers rente their clothes, and comaunded them to be beaten with roddes^ And whan they had beaten them sore, they cast thé in preson, and commaunded the iayler, to kepe them diligetly. Which whan he had receaued soch commaundement, he cast thé in to the ynner preson, and put their fete in the stockes.

But at mydnight prayed Paul and Sylas, and praysed God. And the presoners herde

@ Mar. 16. c. ^ Act. 19. c. 

€ 2 Cor. 11. c. 

* Gen. 19.a. t 1 Tess. 2. a.

The Actes of tbe Apostles, 

them. Sodenly was there a greate earth quake, so that the foundacions of the preson were shaken. And immediatly were all the dores open, q all their bondes lowsed Wha the keper of the preson waked ont of slepe, and sawe the preson dores open, he drue out his swerde, and wolde haue kylled him selfe ; for he thoughte ¥ presoners had hene fled.
But Paul cryed loude, and sayde: Do thy self no harme, for we are all here.

He called for a lighte, and sprange in, and trembled, and fell at the fete of Paul and
Sylas, and broughte them out, and sayde: 
Syrs, what must I do, to be saued? They sayde:^ Beleue on the LORDE Iesus, and so shalt thou and thy housholde be saued.
And they preached the worde of the LORDE vnto him, and to all that were in his house.

And he toke them to him in the same houre of the night, and waszhed their strypes. And immediatly was he baptysed, and all his. And he broughte them in to his house, and set them a table, and treioysed with'all his housholde, that he was become a beleuer on God.

And whan it was daye, the officers of the cite sent mynisters, and sayde: Let those men go. And the keper of the preson tolde this sayenge vnto Paul: The officers haue sent hither, that ye shulde be lowse. Now ther- fore get you héce, and go in peace. But
Paul sayde vnto them: "They haue beaten vs openly vncondempned (where as we are yet Romaynes) and haue cast vs in preson, and shulde they now thrust vs out preuely?
Not so, but let them come them selues, and brynge vs out. 'lhe mynisters tolde these wordes vnto the officers. And they feared, whan they herde that they were Romaynes, and came and besoughte them, and prayed thé to departe out of the cite. Then wente they out of the preson, and entred in to the house of Lydia. And whan they had sene the brethren and comforted them, they de- parted.

The rbij. Chapter. 

S they made their iourney thorow 
A Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagoge of the
Iewes. And Paul (as his maner was) wéte in vnto them, and vpon thre Sabbathes he

4 Toh. 6. f. Mar. 16. b. ¢ Luc. 5. d. and 19. a. 

Fo. errrir. 

E 

a 

So. ol. spake vnto them of the scripture, opened it vnto thé, and alleged, *that Christ must nedes haue suffred, q ryse agayne from the deed: and this lesus, whom I preach vnto you (sayde he) is ¥ same Christ. And some of the beleued, and were ioyned vnto Paul and Sylas, a greate multitude also of the deuoute Grekes, and of the chefe wemen not a fewe.

But the styffnecked Iewes had indignacion, and toke vnto them certayne euell men which were vagabundes, and gathered a company, and set the cite in a rore, and preassed vnto the house of lason, and soughte to brynge them out vnto the comon people. But whan they founde them not, they drue lason, and certayne brethren vnto the rulers of the cite, and cryed: These that trouble all the worlde, are come hither also, whom lason hath re- ceaued preuely. And these all do contrary to the decrees of the Emperoure, sayenge, that there is another kynge,* one lesus. They troubled the people, and the rulers of the cite, that herde this. And whan they had receaned a sufficient answere of lason and of the other, they let them go.

But the brethren immediatly sent awaye 
Paul and Sylas by night vnto Berea. Whan they came there, they wéte in to the synagoge of the Iewes (for they were the Eldest amonge thé at Thessalonica) which receaued the worde marvelous wyllingly, and t searched the scriptures daylie, whether it were euen so.
Then beleued many of them, and worshipfull wemen off the Grekes, and men not a fewe.t
But whan the Iewes off Thessalonica had knowlege, that the worde off God was preached off Paul at Berea, they came, and moued the people there also. Howbeit the brethren sent Paul awaye then immediatly, to go vnto the see. As for Sylas and Timotheus, they! abode there styll.
€| They that conueyed Paul, brought him vnto Athens. And whan they had receaued a commaundement vnto Sylas and Timotheus, that they shulde come vnto him in all the haist, they wente their waye. But whyle Paul wayted for them at Athens, hi$ sprete was moued in him, whan he sawe the cite geué so to the worshippinge of ymages. And he spake vnto the Iewes and denoute personnes in the,

* Luc. 24. d. Mat. 16. c. and 17. d. a Ioh. 18. e. and 19. a, t Ioh. 5. d. 1 1 Tess. 2. c. § Some}

The Actes of the Apostles. 

synagoge, v in ¥ market daylie vnto thé that came to him. But certayne Philosophers of y Epicurees and Stoikes disputed with him.
And some sayde: What will this babler saye? 
But some sayde: He semeth to be a tidinges brynger of new $goddes (‘That was, because he had preached vnto the the Gospell of lesus, ¢ of the resurreccion.) And they toke him, and broughte him before the councell house, and sayde: Maye we not knowe, what new doctryne this is that thou teachest ? For thou bryngest straüge tidinges to oure eares ?
We wolde knowe therfore, what this meaneth. 
As for all they of Athens, and straungers q gestes, they gaue thé selues to nothinge els, but either to tell, or to heare some newes.

Paul stode on the myddes of the comon place, and sayde: Ye me of Athens, I se that in all thinges ye are to supersticious. I hane gone thorow, q sene youre gods seruyce, and founde an altare, where vpo was wrytten: To the vnknowne God. Now shewe 1 vnto you y same, whom ye worshippe ignorauntly. God which made ¥ worlde,’ and all that therin is, for so moch as he is LORDE of heauen and earth, lldwelleth not in temples made of handes, nether is he worshipped with mens handes, as though he had nede of eny man, seynge he himself * geueth life and breth vnto all men euery where: and hath made of oue bloude all the generacion of men to dwell vps all the face of ¥ earth: and hath assygned borders appoynted before, how longe and farre they shulde dwell, that they shulde seke the
LORDE, yf they mighte fele and fynde him. l

And truly he is not farre from euery one of vs. Forin him we lyue, moue, and haue oure beynge, as certayne of youre awne
Poetes also haue sayde: We are his genera- cion. For as moch then as we are the genera- cion of God, we onghte not to thinke that the
Godheade is like vnto golde or syluer, or ymagery worke of the crafte or ymaginacion of man. “And truly God hath ouersene the tyme of ignoraunce: f But now he com- maundeth all men euery where to repente, because he hath appoynted a daye, in the which he wyl iudge the copasse of the worlde, with righteousnesse, by that one man in who he hath appoynted it: and offred faith vnto

è Psal. 145. a. Act. 14. c. 
€ Gen. 2. b. 4 Rom. 2.8. 

|| Esa. 

reade : deuyls. q Lu. 24. d.

66. a. Act. 7. f. 

Chap. rbitj. all men, after that he had raysed him vp from the deed.

Whan they herde of the resurreccion of the deed, some mocked. But some sayde:
We wyl heare the agayne of this matter. So 
Paul departed from amonge them. Howbeit certayne men claue vnto him, and beleued : amonge whom was Dionisius, one of the councell: and a woman named Damaris, and other with them.

The rbiij. Chapter. 

a FTER that departed Paul fro Athens, 

and came to Corinthum, and founde a lewe named * Aquila, borne in Potus, which was lately come out of Italy: and his wife
Priscilla (because the Emperoure Claudius had commaunded all Iewes to departe from
Rome) and he drue vnto thé. And because he was of the same crafte, he abode with the, and wronghte. Their crafte was to make tentes. And he preached in the synagoge euery Sabbath daye, and exhorted the lewes and the Grekes.

Whan Sylas and Timotheus were come fro 
Macedonia, Paul was constrayned by the sprete to testifye vnto ý lewes, that Iesus was very Christ. But whā, they sayde cotrary and blasphemed, the shoke his rayment, and sayde vnto them: Youre bloude be vpon youre awne heade. From hence forth I go blamelesse vnto the Gentyles. And he de- parted thence, and came in to the house of a man named lustus, which feared God, and
‘his house was nexte vnto the synagoge. How- beit Crispus the chefe ruler of the synagoge, beleued on $ LORDE with all his housholde.
And many of the Corinthiaus that gaue 
‘audience, beleued, aud were baptysed 

The LORDE spake vnto Paul by a vision in y nighte: Be not afrayed, but speake, and holde not thy peace, for I am with the: and noman shal inuade the that shal hurte the, for
I haue moch people in this cite. He con- tynued there a yeare and sixe monethes, and
|taught them the worde of God. 

But whan Gallio was ruler of the countre of Achaia, the Iewes made insurreccion with one acorde agaynst Paul, q broughte him before the iudgment seate, and sayde: This

2 Tim. 4, c. 
1 Num. 6. b. 

* Ro. 16. a. 
Act. 13. c. 

t Mat. 10. b. Luc. 10. a. 
$ Heb. 6. a. Taco. 4. b. 

Che Artes of the Apostles. 

felowe counceleth men to worshipe God cotrary to the lawe. Whan Paul was abonte to open his month, Gallio sayde vnto ý Iewes:
Yf it were a matter of wronge or an euell dede (O ye lewes) reason wolde that I shulde heare you: but yf it be a question of wordes, and of names, and of y lawe amoge you, loke ye to it youre selues, lone not to be iudge there ouer. And he droue them from the indgmét seate. ‘Then all the Grekes toke
Sosthenes the ruler of the Sinagoge, and smote him before the iudgment seate. And
Gallio cared for none of tho thinges. 

Paul after y he had taried a good whyle, toke his leue of the brethren, and sayled in to
Syria, Priscilla q Aquila bearinge him com- pany. And he shore his heade at Cenchrea
(for he had a + vowe) q came downe to Ephe- sus, q lefte them there. But he himselfe wéte in to the synagoge, and reasoned with the lewes. And they desyred him, that he wolde tary with them a longer season. And he cosented not, but bad them farwele, and sayde:
I must nedes in eny wyse kepe this feast that commeth, at lerusalem: but $ yf God wyl, I wil returne agayne vnto you.

And he departed from Ephesus, and came to Cesarea, and wente vp, and saluted $ con- gregacion, and toke his iourney downe to
Antioche, and taried there a certayne tyme, and departed, and walked thorow all ¥ countre of Galatia and Phrigia by ordre, and strengthed all the disciples.

There came ynto Ephesus a certayne Iewe, named ||Apollo (borne at Alexadria) an eloquent man, and mightie in the scriptures: the same was infourmed in the waye of the
LORDE, and spake feruently in the sprete, and taughte diligently the thinges of the
LORDE, and knewe but the baptyme off 
Thon onely. The same beganne to speake boldly in the synagoge. Whan Aquila and
Priscilla herde him, they toke him vnto thé, jand expounded the waye of God vnto him more perfectly. But whan he wolde go in to
Achaia, the brethren wrote, and exorted the 

disciples to receaue him. And whan he was, 

So. erli, 

come thither, he helped them moch which beleued thorow grace.
Iewes mightely, and shewed openly by y scripture, that lesus was Christ.

ll 1 Cor. 1. b. 3. a. 16. b. 

147 

For he ouercame the: 

€ 

Fo. erli 

The rir. Chapter. 

| UT it fortuned whan Apollo was at 

Corinthum, that Paul walked thorow the vpper coastes, and came to Ephesus, and founde certayne disciples, vn to whom he isayde: Haue ye reccaued y holy goost, sence ye beleued? ‘They sayde vnto hi: We haue not herde, whether there be an holy goost.
He sayde vnto them: Where with then were ye baptysed? They sayde: With the baptyme of Ihon. Panl sayde: “Ihon baptysed with the baptyme of repentaunce, and spake vnto y people, that they shulde beleue on him, which shulde come after him, that is, on Iesus, that the same is Christ. Whan they herde that, they were baptysed in the name of the
LORDE Iesu. And whan Paul layed the hades on thé, the holy goost came vpon them, and they spake with tunges, and prophecied.
And all the men were aboute twolue. 

He wéte in to ¥ synagoge, and preached boldly thre monethes longe, teachinge, and geuynge them exortacions of the kyngdome of
God. But whan dyuerse waxed herde herted, and beleued not, and spake euell of the waye of the LORDE before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the dis- ciples, and disputed daylye in the scole of one called Tyrannus. And this was done two yeares loge, so that all they which dwelt in
Asia, herde the worde of the LORDE Iesu, both lewes x Grekes. And God wronghte no small miracles by the handes of Paul, so that from his body there were broughte napkyns or partlettes vnto the sicke, and the diseases departed from them, and the euell spretes wente out of them.

But certayne of the vagabounde Jewes which were coniurers, vndertoke to name y name of the LORDE Iesus, ouer those that had euell spretes, and sayde: We charge you by lesus whom Paul preacheth. They were seuen sonnes of one Scena a lewe the hye prest, which dyd so. The euell sprete an- swered, and sayde: lesus I knowe, and Paul lknowe, but who are ye? And the mà in whó the euell sprete was, ranne vpon them, and ouercame them, and cast them vnder him, so that they fled ont of the same house naked and wounded. This was knowne vnto all the lewes and Grekes which dwelt at

* Mat.3.b. Mar.1.a.. Luc.S.c. [oh.1.c. 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

Ephesus, and there fell a feare vpon them all. 
And ¥ name of the LORDE Iesus was mag- nified. *Many of thé also that belened, came and cofessed, and shewed their workes. But many of them that had vsed enrious craftes, broughte the bokes together, and burnte them openly: and they counted the pryce of them, and founde it of money fiftye thousande pens.
So mightely grewe y worde of the LORDE, and prenayled.

Whan this was done, Paul purposed in|€ sprete to take his iourney thorow Macedonia and Achaia, and to go to lerusalé, and sayde:
After that I haue bene there, I must se Rome also. And he sent in to Macedonia two that mynistred vnto him, Timotheus and Erastus.
But he himselfe remayned in Asia for a season. At the same tyme there rose no litle a doo aboute that waye. For a certayne man named Demetrius a goldsmyth, which made syluer shrynes for Diana, and broughte them of the crafte no small vauntage. ‘Them he gathered together, and the feloweworkme of the same ocenpacion, and sayde: Syrs, ye knowe that by this erafte we haue vauntage, and ye se and heare, that not onely at
Ephesus, but almost also thorow out all Asia, this Paul turneth awaye moch people with his persnadynge, and sayeth: tThey be not goddes that are made with hondes. Howbeit it shal not onely brynge oure occupacion to this poynte to be set at naught, but also the temple of greate Diana shal from hence forth be despysed, and hir maiestye also shalbe destroyed, who neuertheles all Asia aud the worlde worshippeth.

Whan they herde this, they were full ofj 3 

wrath, cried out, and sayde: Greate is Diana of the Ephesians. And all y cite was on a roore, and they ruszhed in with one assent in to the open place, and toke Gaius and Aris- tarchus of Macedonia, Pauls companyons.
Whan Paul wolde haue gone in amonge the people, the disciples suffred him not. Cer- tayne also of ¥ chefe of Asia which were
Pauls good frendes, sent vnto him, and de- syred him, that he shulde not preasse in to the open place. Some cried one thinge, some another. And the congregacion was out of quyete, and the more parte knewe not wherfore they were come together. Some of the people drue forth Alexander, whan y lewes thrust

* Mat. 3. a. t Psal. 118. b. 

Chap. rir. 

Chap. rr. 

him forwarde. Alexader beckened with the hande, and wolde haue geuen the people an answere. But whan they knewe that he was a Iewe, there arose a shoute of all, and cried the space of two houres: Greate is Diana of the Ephesians.

Whan the towne clarke had stylled the people, he sayde: Ye men of Ephesus, what man is it which knoweth not, that the cite of y Ephesiis is a worshipper of the greate goddesse Diana, and of the heauenly ymage ?
Seinge now that this can not be sayde agaynst, ye ought to be contente, and to do nothinge without aduysement. Ye haue broughte hither these men, which are nether church- robbers ner blasphemers off youre goddesse.

But yff Demetrius and they that are eraftesmen with him, haue ought to saye vn to eny man, the lawe 1s open, and there are rulers, let them accuse one another. But yf ye wil go aboute eny other thinge, it maye be determyned in a laufull congregacion. For we stonde in ioperdy to be accused of this dayes vproure: and yet is there no man giltye, of whom we mighte geue a rekenynge of this vproure. And whan he had sayde this, he let the congregacion departe.

The rr. Chapter. a OW whan the vproure was ceassed,|
Paul ealled the disciples vnto him, and toke nis leue of them, and departed *to go in to Macedonia. And whan he had gone thorow those partes, and exhorted them with many wordes, he came in to Grekelonde, and there abode thre monethes. But whan the
Iewes layed wayte for him, as he was aboute to sayle in to Syria, he purposed to turne agayne thorow Macedonia. ‘There accompa- nied him in to Asia, Sopater of Berrea: and of Thessalonica, Aristarchus and Secundus : and Gaius of Derba, and Timotheus: bnt of
Asia, Tychicus and tTrophimus. These wente before, and taried for vs at Troada : but we sayled after the Easter dayes from
Philippos, vnto y fyfth daye, and came to them vnto Troada, and taried there seuen dayes.

Vpon one of the Sabbathes, whan the dis- ciples came together to breake bred, Paul preached vnto them, wyllinge to departe on the morow, and contynued the preachinge

? | Tim. 1.a. + Act. 21. d. 

2 Tim. 4. c. 

The Artes of the Apostles. 

vnto mydnight. And there were many lightes m the chamber, where they were gathered together. There sat a yonge man named Eutychos, in a wyndow, and fell in to a depe slepe (whyle Paul was speakinge) and was ouercome with slepe, and fell downe from the thirde lofte, and was taken vp deed. But
Paul wente downe, and fell on him, and enbraced him, and sayde: Make nothinge a doo, for his soule is in hi. Then wente he vp, and brake the bred, and ate, and talked moch with the, tyll the daye brake, and so departed. As for the yoge man, they broughte him alyue, and were not a litle conforted.

But we wente afore in to the shippe, and sayled towarde Asson, wyllinge there to re- ceaue Paul For so had he appoynted, and wolde himselfe go on fote. Whan he was come to vs vnto Asson, we toke him in, and came to Mitylenes, and sayled from thence, and came on the nexte daye ouer agaynst
Chios, and on the daye folowinge we aryued at Samos, and taried at Tragilion, and on the nexte daye came we to Mileton: for Paul had determed to sayle ouer by Ephesus, that he nede not to spende the tyme in Asia: for he haisted to be at lerusalem vpo the Whitson- daye, yf it were possible for him.

But from Mileton he sent vnto Ephesus, and called for the Elders of the congregacion.
Whan they were come to him, he sayde vnto them: Ye knowe sence the first daye that I came in to Asia, after what maner I haue bene with you at all tyme, and serued y
LORDE with all humblenesse of mynde, and with many teares and tentacions, which happened vnto me by y layenges of wayte of the Iewes, how y I haue kepte backe nothinge y was profitable, but that Í haue shewed you, and taughte you openly, and priuately from house to house. And haue testifyed both vnto the Iewes q to the Grekes the repent- aunce towarde God, and faith towarde oure
LORDE Iesus. 

And now beholde, I go bounde in ¥ sprete vnto Ierusale, not knowinge what shal happen there vnto me, but y the holy goost $witnes- seth in euery cite, and sayeth, that bondes and troubles abyde me there. But lI re- garde none of them, nether counte I my life dearer then my selfe, that I maye fulfyll my course with ioye, and the office y I haue

f Act. 19. a. 

§ Act. 21. b. [| 2 Tim. 2. a. 

fo. erii. 

l 

€ 

Fo. erlit. 
~ [receaued of the LORDE Iesu, to testifye the 

D| And now beholde, I knowe that ye shal se 

£ 

| 

(anem 

Gospell of the grace of God. 

my face nomore, all ye, thorow whom I haue gone, and preached the kyngdome of God.
Wherfore I take you to recorde this daye, that 
I am pure from the blonde of all men: For I haue kepte nothinge backe, but haue shewed you all the councell off God. Take hede therfore vnto youre selues, and to all the flocke, amonge the which the holy goost hath set you to be Bishoppes, to fede the congrega- cion of God, which he hath purchaced thorow his owne bloude. For this I knowe, * that after my departinge there shal enter in amonge you greuous wolues, which shal not spare the flocke. Yee eue t from amonge youre awne selues shal men aryse, speakynge peruerse doc- tryne, to drawe disciples after them. Ther- fore awake, and remembre, that by the space of thre yeares I ceassed not to warne euery one off you both nighte and daye with teares.

And now brethren I commende you vnto 
God, and to ¥ worde of his grace, which is mightie to edifye you, and to geue you the enheritaunce amoge all them that are sane- itified. ^I haue not desyred syluer, golde or rayment off eny off you. For ye youre selues knowe, that tthese handes haue mynistred vnto my necessities, and them that were with me. I haue shewed you all thinges, how that so labouringe ye oughte to receaue the weake, land to remembre the worde of the LORDE, how that he sayde: It is more blessed to
‘geue, then to receaue. 

And whan he had sayde this, he kneled downe, and prayed with them all. But there was moch wepynge amonge them all, and they fell aboute Pauls necke, and kyssed him, and were sory, most of all because of the worde which he had sayde, that they shulde se his face nomore. And they accopanied him vnto the shippe.

The rri. Chapter. 
OW whan it fortuned that we had launched forth and were departed from ithem, we came with a straight course vnto
Coon, and on the daye folowinge vnto the i Rhodes, and from thence vnto Patara. And whan we founde a shippe ready to sayle vnto
Phenices, we wente aborde and set forth. 

l 

I 
* 1 Tim. 4. a. 2 Pet. 2. a. 
2 Cor. 11. b. and 12. b, 

t Ioh. 13. c. 1 Ioh. 2. c. 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

t Gen. 3. d. 1 Cor. 9. b.| 

But whà we came within the sighte of Cypers, we lefte it on the lefte hande, and sayled vnto
Syria, and came vnto Tyre: for there the shippe shulde laye forth the ware. And whan we had founde disciples, we taried there seuen dayes. And they tolde Paul thorow the sprete, that he shulde not go vp to Ieru- salem. And it fortuned wha we had fulfilled those dayes, we departed, and wente oure wayes, and they all broughte vs on oure waye with wyues and childré, tyll we were come out of y cite, and we kneled downe vpo the shore, and prayed. And whan we had taken oure leue one off another, we toke shippe, but they turned agayne vnto theirs. As for vs we ended the course from Tyre, and came to
Ptolomaida, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one daye.

On the nexte daye we y were with Paul, departed, and came vnto Cesarea, q entred in to the house of $ Philippe the Euangelist
(which was one of the seue) and abode with him. The same had foure doughters, which were virgins, lland prophecied. And as we taried there mo dayes, there came downe from lewry a prophet, named TAgabus.
Wha he was come vnto vs, he toke Pauls gerdell, and bounde his hádes and fete, and sayde: Thus sayeth ¥ holy goost: ** The man whose gerdell this is, shal the Iewes bynde thus at Ierusalem, and shal delyuer him m to the handes of the Heythé. Whan we herde this, both we and they that were of the same place, besoughte him, that he wolde not go vp to Ierusalem. Then answered Paul and sayde: What do ye, wepynge, and breakynge my hert? For I am redye not onely to be bounde, but also to dye at lerusalem for y name of the LORDE Iesu. But wha he wolde not be persuaded, we ceassed, and sayde: tt'The will of the LORDE be ful- fylled. And after those dayes we were ready, q wente vp to Jerusalem: There came with vs also certayne of the disciples off Cesarea, and bronghte with them one of Cypers, named Mnason, an olde disciple, with whom we shulde lodge. Now wha we came to
Ierusalem, the brethren receaued vs gladly. 
But on the nexte daye Paul wente in with vs vnto Iames, and all the Elders came together.
And whan he had saluted them, he tolde by 

2 Tess. 3. a. 
Ç Act. 11. c. 

$ Act. 6. a. and 8. a. 
UO Act. E405 

|| Ioe! 2. f. tt Mat. 6. b.

Chap. rri. 

Chap. rri. order, what God had done amóge the Heythen by his mynistracion.

Whan they herde that, they praysed the 
LORDE, and sayde vnto him: Brother, thou seyst how many thousande lewes there are which beleue, and are all Zelous ouer y lawe.
But they are enfourmed agaynst the, that thou teachest all the lewes which are amoge| the Heythe, to forsake Moses, and sayest that they oughte not to cireumcyse their children, ner to walke after the same custome.
What is it therfore? The multitude must nedes come together, for they shal heare that thou artcome. Do this therfore that we saye vnto the: We haue foure men, which haue a
*vowe on them, take them vnto vy, and purifye thyselfe with them, and do the cost on them, that they maye shaue their heades : jand they shal knowe, that it is nothinge, wherof they are enfourmed agaynst the, but that thou also walkest and kepest the lawe.
For as touchinge them that beleue amonge the 
Heythen, t we haue wrytten, and concluded, that they shulde obserue no soch, but onely to kepe them selues from the offeringes of Idols, from bloude, from stragled, and from whor- dome. “Then Paul toke the men vnto him, and was purified with them on the nexte daye, and entred in to the temple, declaringe that he fulfviled the dayes of purificacion, tyll there was an offeringe offred for euery one of them.
3| But whan the seuen dayes were allmost fulfylled, the Iewes of Asia sawe him in the temple, and moued all the people, layed handes vpon him, and cryed: Ye men of
Israel, helpe, this is the man, that teacheth all men euery where agaynst oure people, the lawe, and this place. He hath bronghte
Grekes also in to the temple, and hath defyled this holy place. For they had sene + Tro- phimus the Ephesian with him in the cite, him they thoughte y Paul had broughte in to the temple. And all the cite was moued, and the people ranne together. And they toke
Paul, and drue him out off the temple, and forth with the dores were shut to.

But whan they wéte aboute to kyll him, tydinges came to the chefe captayne of the company, that all Ierusalem was moued.
Which immediatly toke soudyers and cap- taynes vnto him, and ranne in amoge them.

The Artes of the Apostles. 

* Num. 6. b. Act. 18. b. t Act. 20. a. 2 Tim. 4. c.

t Act. 15. d. 
§ Act. 21. b. 

* Act. 24. b. 
|| Luc. 23. b. 

fo. crib. 

Whan they sawe the captayne and the sou-| dyers, they lefte smytinge of Paul.

Whan the captayne came nye, he toke him, | £ and commaunded him $to be bounde with two cheynes, and axed what he was, and what he had done. One cried this, another that amonge the people. But whan he coulde not. knowe the certente because of the rumoure, he commaunded him to be caried in to the castell. And wha he came to the steppes, it fortuned that he was borne of ¥ soudyers because of the violence of the people. For the multitude off the people folowed after, and eryed: lAwaye with him. Whan Paul was now to be caried in to the castell, he sayde vnto y captayne: Maye I speake vnto the? Hesayde: Canst thou Greke? Art not thou the Egipcian, which before these dayes maydest an vproure, q leddest out in to the wyldernesse foure thousande preuy mur- thurers? Paullsayde: I am a man which am a lewe off " Tharsis, a citesyn of a famous cite in Celicia: I beseke the, suffre me to; speake vnto the people. Whan he had geuen him lycence, Paul stode on the steppes, and beckened with the hande vnto the people.
Now whan there was made a greate sylece, he spake vnto them in Hebrue, and sayde:

The rrij. Chapter 
E men, brethren, and fathers, heare|@ 

myne answere which I make vnto you. 
Whan they herde that he spake vnto them in the Hebrue, they kepte the more sylence.
And he sayde: I am a man which am a Iewe, borue at Tharsis in Celicia, and bronghte vp in this cite at the fete off ** Gamaliel, en- fourmed diligently in the lawe of the fathers, and was feruent mynded to God warde, as ye all are also this daye, tt and I persecuted this waye vnto the death. I bounde them and delyuered them vnto preson, both men and wemen, as y hye prest also doth beare me wytnesse, and all ý Elders: of whom I re- ceaued letters vnto the brethren, and wente towarde Damascon, that I mighte brynge them which were there, bounde to Ierusalem,

to be punyshed. 
But it fortuned as I made my iourney, and came nye vnto Damascon, aboute noone, sodenly there shone a greate lighte aboute

T Act. 9. b. and 22. a. 

** Act. 5. e. tt Act. 9. a.) and 26. b.

1 Cor. 15. a. Gal. 1. b. i 

| 

| ffo. cribi. 

me from heauen, and | fell to the earth, and] herde a voyce which sayde vnto me: Saull
Saull, why persecutest thou me? I answered: 
Who art thou LORDE? And he sayde vnto me: lam Iesus of Nazareth whom thou per- secutest. As for them that were with me, they sawe y lighte and were afrayed, but they herde not the voyce of him that spake with me. I sayde: LORDE, what shal I do?
The LORDE sayde vnto me: Aryse, and go in to Damascon, there shal it be tolde ¥ of all that is appoynted the to do. But whan I sawe nothmge for the bryghtnesse of the lighte, I was led by the hande of them that were with me, and came to Damascon.

There was one Ananias, a deuoute man after the lawe," which had a good reporte of all the Iewes that dwelt there, the same came, and stepte vnto me, and sayde: Bróther Saul, loke vp. And I loked vp vpon him the same houre. He sayde: The God of oure fathers hath ordeyned the before, that thou shuldest knowe his wyll, and se the thinge y is rightfull, and heare the voyce out of his mouth: for thou shalt be his wytnesse vnto all men, of tho thinges which thou hast sene and herde.
And noy why tariest thou? Aryse, and be baptysed, and wasze awaye thy synnes, and * call vpou the name of the LORDE.

But it fortuned, that whan I was come agayne to Terusalé, and prayed in the temple,
I was in a traunce, and sawe him. "Then sayde he vnto me: Make haist, t and get the soone out of lerusalem, for they wyl not receaue the witnesse that thou bearest of me.
And Isayde: LORDE, they the selues knowe that I put in preson and bett in euery syna- goge them that beleued on the. + And wha the bloude of Steué thy witnesse was shed,
I stode by also, q consented vnto his death, and kepte the clothes of them that slewe him.
And he sayde vnto me: Go thy waye, for $ 
I wil sende the farre amonge the Heythen. 

They gaue him audience vnto this worde, and litte vp their voyce, q sayde: Awaye with soch a felowe from the earth, for it is not reason that he shulde lyne. But as they cried, and cast of their clothes, a thrue dust in to the ayre, the captayne bad brynge him in to the castell, and commaunded him to be beaten with roddes and to be examyned, that

? Act.9.b. * Ro. 10, b, 

t Mat. 10. b. Act. 9. d, t Act. 
7.g. $ Act. 13. a. Gal. 1.c. Ephe. 3. a. 

j| Act. 94. b. 

| €br Actes of the Apostles, 

Chap. rrij. he mighte knowe, for what cause they cried so vpon him. And whan he bounde him with thonges, Paulsayde vnto the vndercaptayne that stode by: Is it laufull for you to scourge a man that is a Romayne, and vncondemned?
Whan the vndercaptayne herde that, he wéte to the vpper captayne, and tolde him, and sayde? What wilt thon do? This man isa
Romayne. Then came y vpper captayne, and sayde vnto him: Tell me, art thou a
Romayne? Hesayde: Yee. And the vpper captayne answered: With a greate summe optayned I this fredome. But Paul sayde:
As for me, I am a Romayne borne. Thé straight waye departed from him, they that shulde haue examyned him. And y chefe captayne was afrayed, whan he knewe that he wasa Romayne, and because he had bounde him. On the nexte daye wolde he knowe the certentye wherfore he was accused of the
Iewes, and he lowsed him from the bondes, and commaunded the hye prestes and all their councell to come together, and broughte Paul forth, and set him amonge them.

The prit}. Chapter 

AUL behelde the councell, and sayde: 
P Ye men and brethren,l I haue lyued with all good conscience before God vnto this daye: ‘But the hye prest Ananias com- maunded them that stode aboute him, to smyte hi on the mouth. Then sayde Paul vnto him: God shal smyte the thou paynted wall ^Syttest thou and iudgest me after the lawe, and commaundest me to be smytten cotrary to y lawe? And they that stode aboute hi, sayde: Reuylest thou Gods hye prest? And Paulsayde: Brethre, I wyst not that he was the hye prest. For it is wrytté:**
The ruler of thy people shalt thou not curse. 
But whan Paul knewe that the one parte was Saduces, and the other parte Pharises, he cried out in y councell: Ye men and brethren, I am a buts and the sonne of a
Pharise, *t Of hope and resurreccion of the deed am I iudged. And whan he had so sayde, there arose a dissencion betwene y
Pharises and the Saduces, and the multitude was deuyded: for the Saduces saye that there is no resurreccion, nether angell, ner

^ Deut. 17. a. * aro. 
Act. 4. a. 26. a. 98. c. 

Ioh. 18. a. tt Phil. 3. a.

€ Tere. 20. a. 
923, d. 

(Chap. petit). 

B 

sprete: * but the Pharises grante both. And there was made a greate crye. And y Serybes of the Pharyses secte, stode vp, and stroue, and sayde: We fynde no euell in this ma.
But yf a sprete or an angell haue spoke vnto him, let vs not stryue agaynst God.

But whan the discension was greate, y vpper captayne feared, that Paul shulde haue bene pluckte a sonder of them, and com- imaunded the soudyers to go downe, and to
,take him from them, and to brynge him in to the castell. But in the nighte folowinge, the
LORDE stode by him, and sayde : Be of good cheare Paul, for as thou hast testified of me at
Ierusalemt so must thou testifye at Rome also. 

Now whan it was daye, certayne of the lewes gathered them selues together, and made a vowe nether to eate ner drynke, tyll they had kylled Paul. They were mo then fortye, which had made this conspyracion.
These came to the hye prestes and Elders, and sayde: We haue bounde oure selues with a vowe, that we wil eate nothinge, tyll we haue slayne Paul. Now therfore geue ye knowlege to the vpper captayne and to the councell, that he maye brynge him forth vnto you tomorow, as though ye wolde heare him yet better: As for vs, we are ready to kyll him, or euer he come nye you.

But whan Pauls sisters sonne herde of their layenge awayte, he came, and entred in to the castell, and tolde Paul. So Paul called vnto him one of ¥ vnder captaynes, and, sayde: Brynge this yonge man to the vpper captayne, for he hath somewhat to saye to him. He toke him, and broughte him to the vpper captayne, and sayde: Paul the presoner called me vnto him, and prayed me to brynge | to the this yonge man, which hath somwhat to saye vnto the. ‘Then the hye captayne toke him by the hande, and wente a syde

The Actes of the Apostles. 

\ 
) 

with him out of the waye, and axed him: 
What is it, that thou hast to saye vnto me? 
He sayde: The lewes are agreed together, ito desyre the, to let Paul be broughte forth
‘tomorow before the councell, as though they wolde yet hearehim better. Butfolowe not thou their myndes, for there laye wayte for him mo then fortye men off them, which hane bounde
|them selues with a vowe, nether to eate ner drynke, tyll they haue slayne Paul: and euen now are they redye, and loke for thy promes.

* Mat. 22. c. Marc. 19. b. Luc. 20. d. + Ephe. 3. a. 

Then the vpper captayne let the yonge man departe, and charged him to tell noman,
‘that he had shewed him this. And he called vnto him two vndereaptaynes, and sayde:
Make redye two hundreth soudyers, that they maye go to Cesarea, and thre score and ten horsmen, and two hundreth speare men at the thirde houre of the nighte, and delyuer thé beastes, that they maye set Paul theron, and brynge him safe vnto Felix the debyte, and he wrote a letter on this maner:

Claudius Lysias, vnto the most mightie 
Debyte Felix, gretynge. t The Iewes had taken this man, and wolde haue slayne him, then came I with soudyers, and rescued him, and perceaued that he isa Romayne. And whan I wolde haue knowne the cause, wherfore they accused hi, I broughte him in to their councell: then perceaued I, that he was accused aboute questions of theirlawe. But there was no accusacion worthy of death or of bondes.
And whan it was shewed me, that certayne lewes layed wayte for him, I sent him straight waye vuto the, and commaunded the accusers also, that loke what they had agaynst him, they shulde tell the same before the. Fare well.

The soudyers (asit was commaunded them) toke Paul, and broughte him to Antipatras.
But on the nexte daye, they lefte $ horse men to go with him, and turned agayne to the castell. When these came to Cesarea, they delyuered the letter vnto the Debyte, q pre- sented Paul before him also. Whan the
Debyte had red the letter, he axed off what countre he was. And wha he vnderstode that he was of Celicia, he sayde: $ I wil heare the, whan thine accusers are come also. And he commaunded him to be kepte in Herodes iudgment house.

The rriiij. Chapter. 

FTER fyue dayes the hye prest Ananias 

came downe with the Elders, and with 

the Oratour Tertullus, which appeared before the Debyte agaynst Paul. Whan Paul was called forth, Tertullus begane to accuse him, and sayde: Seynge that we lyue in greate
|peace by the meanes of y, and that many good thinges are done for this people thorow: thy prouydence (most mightie Felix) that. alowe we euer and m all places with all

y 

thankes. Notwithstondinge y I be nomore| 

| 2Tim.1.b. +t Act. 21.4. § Deut. 17. 

Fo. crloy. 

| 

| 4fo. erlotiy. 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

Chap. rro. 

tedious vnto the, I praye the, that of thy | 

curtesy thon woldest heare vs a few wordes. 

We haue founde this man a pestilent felowe, and a sterer vp of sedicion amonge all the
Jewes thorow out all the worlde, and a manteyner of the secte of the Nazaretes, * and hath taken in hande also to suspende the temple, whom we toke, and wolde haue | iudged him acordinge to oure lawe. But] |
Lysias the hye captayne came vpō vs, and with greate violence delyuered him ont of oure handes, and commaunded his accusers to come vnto the: of whom (yf thou wilt enquyre) thou mayest haue knowlege of all these thinges, wherof we accuse him. The lewes likewyse affirmed and sayde, that it was euen so.

But Paul (whan the debyte had beckened ynto him, that he shulde speake) answered:
Seynge I knowe that thou hast bene iudge| now many yeares amonge this people, I wil not be afrayed to answere for my selfe, because that thou mayest knowe, that there are yet nomore but twolue dayes sence I came vp to lerusalem for to worshippe, and that they nether founde me in the temple disputinge with eny man, or makynge eny vproure amonge the people, ner in y synagoges, ner in the cite: nether can they proue the thinges, wherof they accuse me. But this It confesse vnto the, that after this waye which they call heresye, so worshippe I the God of my fathers, that I beleue all that is wrytten in the lawe and in the prophetes, and haue hope towardes
God, that the same resurreccion of the deed 
(which they them selnes loke for also) shalbe, both of the iust and vniust. Therfore studye
I to haue allwaye a cleare conscience towarde 
God and towarde men." 

^ But after many yeares I came and bronghte alhnesse vnto my people, and offeringes :+ whervpon they founde me purifyed in the temple without eny maner of rumoure or vnquyetuesse. Howbeit there were certayne lewes out of Asia, whieh shulde be here presente before the, and accuse me, yf they had oughte agaynst me: or els lett these same here saye, yf they hane founde eny vnrighteousnes in me, whyle l stonde here before d excepte it be for this one worde, that 1 cried stondinge amonge them: § Of the resurreccion off the deed am I iudged of you this daye.

4 

B 

a pud. t Mat. 10.d. Marc. 8. e. 

Luc. 12. €. a Act. 23.2. * Rom. 15. d... 2 Cor. 9. a.

1 Act. 21. c. 

then ten dayes, he wente downe to Cesarea. 

Whan Felix herde this, he dyfferred the|€ 
(for he knewe very well of that waye) and sayde: Whan Lysias the vpper captayne commeth downe, | wyl knowe y vttemost of youre matter. | But he commaunded the vndercaptayne to kepe Paul, and to let him haue rest, and that he shulde forbydde none of his acquauntaüce to mynister vnto him, or to come vnto him.

But after certayne dayes came Felix with his wife Drusilla, which was a lewesse, and ealled for Paul, and herde him of the faith in Christ. Howbeit whan Paul spake off righteousnesse, and off chastite and off the iudgment to come, Felix trembled, and an- swered: Go thy waye for this tyme. Whan
I haue a conuenyent tyme, I wil sende for the. He hoped also, that money shulde haue beue geuen him of Paul, therfore called he oft for him, and commened with him. But after two yeares came Portius Festus in to felix rowme. Yet Felix wyllinge to shewe the
Tewes a pleasure, left Paul bounde. 

The rrb. Chapter. 

OW whan Festus was come in to the countre, ouer thre dayes he wente vp from Cesarea to lerusalem. ‘Then appeared the hye prestes and the chefe of the lewes before him agaynst Paul, and intreated him, and desyred fauoure agaynst him, that he wolde sende for him to lerusalem, and layed wayte for him, that they might slaye him by the waye. Then answered Festus, that Paul shulde be kepte at Cesarea, but that he him- selfe wolde shortly go thither agayne. Let them therfore (sayde he) which are able amonge you, come downe with vs to accuse

the man, yf there be ought in him. 
Whan he had taried amonge them more 

And on the nexte daye he sat downe on the iudgment seate, and commaunded Paul to be broughte. Whan he was come, y lewes which were come downe from Ierusalem, stode rounde aboute him, and broughte vp many and greu- ous quarels agaynst Paul, which they coulde not proue, whyle he answered for himselfe :
I haue nether offended ought agaynst the lawe of the lewes, ner agaynst the teple, ner agaynst the Emperoure.
$ Act. 23. a. 

|| Iere. 39. b. Act. 27. a. and 28. b. 

Chap. rrbí. 

But Festus wyllinge to shewe the Iewes a pleasure, answered Paul, and sayde: Wilt thou go vp to Ierusalem, and there be iudged off these thinges before me? But Paul sayde:
I stonde at the Emperours indgmét seate, where I ought to be iudged: to the Iewes haue I done no harme, as thou also knowest very well. Yf I haue hurte eny man, or com- mitted eny thinge worthy off death, I refuse notto dye. But yf there are no soch thinges
‘as they accuse me off, then maye no man de- ilyuer me vnto them. I appeale vnto the Em- peroure. Then spake Festus with the Councell, aud answered: Thon hast appealed vnto the
Emperoure, to the Emperoure shalt thou go. 

After certayne dayes came kynge Agrippa and Bernice to Cesarea to welcome Festus.
And whan they had taried there many dayes, 
Festus rehearsed Pauls cause vnto the kyuge, 
Cand sayde: There is a man left bounde of 
Felix, for whose cause the hye prestes and 
Elders of the lewes appeared before me whan 
I was at lerusalem, and desyred a sentence agaynst him. Vnto whom I answered: * It is not the maner off the Romaynes to delyuer eny man that he shulde perishe, before that he which is accused, haue his accusers presente, and receaue libertye to answere for him selfe to the accusacion. Wha they were come hither together, I made no delaye, but sat the nexte
(daye in iudgment, and commaunded the man to be broughte forth. Of whom, whan the accusers stode vp, they broughte no accusacion of soch thinges as I supposed : But had certayne ques- tions agaynst him of their awne supersticions, and of one Iesus deed, whom Paul affirmed to be alyne. Howbeit because I vnderstode not the question, I axed hi, whether he wolde go to lerusale, and there be iudged of these matters. But wha Paul had appealed, that he might be kepte vnto the knowlege of the
Emperoure, I cómaunded him to be kepte, tyll I mighte sende him to the Emperoure.
D| Agrippa sayde vnto Festus: I wolde fayne heare the man also. He sayde: Tomorow shalt thou heare him. And on the nexte daye came Agrippa q Bernice with greate pompe, and wéte in to the comon hall with the captayues q chefe mē of the cite. And at
Festus comaundement, Paul was brought forth. And Festus sayde: Kynge Agrippa, and all ye men which are here with vs, ye se

* Dent. 17.a. * Act. 23.a. Phil. 3. a. 

The Actes of the Apostles. 

jauctorite of y hye prestes. ishulde be put to death, I broughte the

t Gen.3. c. 

Fo. cric. this man, aboute whom all the mnltitude of the Iewes haue entreated me, both at Ierusalé and here also, and cried, that he ought not to lyne eny lenger. But whan I perceaned that he had done nothinge worthy off death, and that he himselfe also had appealed vnto the Em- peroure, I determyned to sende him, of who
I haue no certayne thinge to wryte vnto my lorde. Therfore haue I caused hi to be broughte forth before you, specially before the
(O kynge Agrippa) that after examinacion had, I might haue somwhat to wryte. For| | me thynke it an vnreasonable thinge to sende| | a presoner, and not to shewe the causes which, | are layed agaynst him. |

The rroi. Chapter. 

GRIPPA sayde vnto Paul: Thou hast|& 

leue to speake for thy selfe. Thé Paul} | stretched forth the hande, and answered for himselfe : I thinke my selfe happye (O kynge
Agrippa) because I shal answere this daye before the, of all the thinges wherof I am accused of the Iewes: specially for so moch as thou art experte in all customes and ques- tions, which are amonge the Iewes. Wher-. fore I beseche the, to heare me paciently.

My lyuynge truly from youth vp (how it was led from the begynnynge amonge this people at Ierusale) knowe all the Iewes which knewe me afore at the first, yf they wolde testifye, for after the most strayte secte of oure lewysh lawe," I lyued a Pharise. And now stonde I, and am iudged because of the hope of the *promes, that was made of God vnto oure fathers, vnto the which (promes) oure twolue trybes hope to come, seruynge God instatly daye and nighte. For the which hopes |33

sake (O kynge Agrippa) I am accused of the 

|lewes. Wherfore is this indged amonge you not; 

to be beleued, that God rayseth vp the deed ? 

I also verely thoughte by my selfe, that I oughte to do many cótrary thiuges cleane agaynst the name off lesus off Nazareth,t which I dyd at lerusalem, whan I shut vp many sayntes in preson, whervpon I receaned
And whà they 

sentence. And thorow all the synagoges I punyshed them oft, and compelled thé to blaspheme, and was exceadinge mad vpon them, and persecuted them euen vnto straunge

and 22.c. Deut.18.c. Psal. 15. b. 

ł Act. 8. a. and 9. a. 

fo. cl. 

The Artes of the Apostles. 

cities. Aboute which thinges as I wente to-|* |I knowe that thou beleuest. Agrippa sayde 

warde Damascon with auctorite and lycence of the hye prestes, euen at myddaye (O kynge)
I sawe in the waye, that a lighte from heaué 
(clearer then the brightnesse of the Sonne) shyned rounde aboute me, and them that iourneyed with me.

€| But whan we were all fallen downe to the earth, 1 herde a voyce speakynge vuto me, and sayége in Hebrue: Saul Saul, why perse-
‘cutest thou me? It shalbe harde for the to kycke 
‘agaynst the prycke. But Isayde: LORDE, 

‘who art thou? He sayde: I am lesus, whom 

thou persecutest. But ryse vp, and stonde 

vpon thy fete, for therfore haue I appeared vnto the, that I mighte ordeyne the to be a mynister and witnesse of it that thou hast sene, and that I wyll yet cause to appeare vnto the. And I wil delyuer the from the people, and from the Heythen, amonge who
I wil now sende the, to ope their eyes, that they maye turne from the darknesse vnto the
* lighte, and from the power of y deuell vnto 
God, that they maye receaue forgeuenesse of synnes, and the enheritaunce with them that are sanctified by faith in me.
D| Wherfore (O kynge Agrippa) 1 was not 
| faithlesse vnto y heauély vision, but shewed 
| it first vnto them at Damascon, and at Iernsale, and in all the coastes of lewry, and to the
Heythen, that they shulde tdo pennaunce, and turne vnto God, and to do the righte workes of pennaunce. For this cause the
| lewes toke me in the temple, and wente aboute to kyll me. But thorow the helpe of
God lent vnto me, I stonde vnto this daye, and testifye both vnto small and greate, and saye no other thinge, the that prophetes haue sayde (that it shulde come to passe) and Moses,
| |that Christ shulde suffre, and be the first of the 
| [resurreccion from the deed, and shew light vnto the people, and to the Heythen.

Whan he thus answered for himselfe, Fes- itus sayde with a loude voyce: Paul, thou art
' \besydes thy selfe, moch lernynge maketh y 
3; madd. But Paul sayde: I am not madd 

(most deare Festus) but speake the wordes of 
| jtrueth and sobernesse: for ¥ kynge knoweth 
| |this well, vnto whom I speake frely. For I 

thinke that none off these thinges is hyd from him: for this was not done in a corner. Be- leuest thou the prophetes, O kynge Agrippa?

* Esa. 60. a. t Act. 2. d. 3. c. 17. e. 

vnto Paul: Thou persuadest me in a parte to become a Christen. Paul sayde: I wolde to
God, that (not onely in a parte but all- together,) I mighte persuade not the onely, but all them that heare me this daye, to be soch I am, these bondes excepte. And whan he had spoken this, the kynge rose vp, aud the Debyte, and Bernice, and they that sat with them, and wente asyde, and talked fos and sayde: This man hath done nothinge that is worthy of death or of bondes.
But Agrippa sayde vnto Festus: This man imighte haue bene lowsed, yf he had not lappealed vnto the Emperoure.

The rrbij. Chapter. B 

HAN it was concluded that we shulde 

sayle in to Italy, they delyuered Paul and certayne other presoners to the vnder- captayne named Iulius, of the Emperours soudyers. And whan we were entred in to a shippe of Adramitium, to sayle by Asia, we lowsed from londe. And there was with vs one t Aristarchus out of Macedonia off Thes- salonica, and on the nexte daye we came vnto
Sidon. And Iulius intreated Paul curteously, and gaue him liberty to go to his frendes, and to refresh himselfe. And from thence launched we, and sayled harde by Cypers
(because the wyndes were agaynst vs) and sayled ouer the see of Celicia and Pamphilia, and came to Myra in Lycia.

And there the vndercaptayne founde a shippe of Alexadria, ready to sayle in to Italy, and put vs therm. And whan we had sayled slowly, and in many dayes were scarcely come jouer agaynst Gnydon (for the wynde with stode vs) we sayled by Candy nye vnto the cite off Salmo, and came scarcely beyonde it.
Then came we to a place, which is called 
Goodhauen, nye where vnto was the cite 
Lasea. Now whan moch tyme was spent, and saylinge was now ioperdous, because that they also had fasted ouerlonge, Paul exhorted them, and sayde vnto them : Syrs, I se that this saylinge wyl be with hurte and moch dammage, not onely of the ladynge and of the shippe, but also of oure lyues.

Neuertheles y vndercaptayne beleued the gouernoure of the shippe and y master, more then it that was spoken of Paul. And for so

t Col. 4. a. 

Chap. rrbij. 

a 

B 

Chap. rrbíij. 

they supposinge to haue had 

coulde scarce get a bote. W 

fallen in to the *Syrtes, and vessell, and so were caried. had bydden a greate tépest, on

Sonne ner starres appeared i 

broughte vs this harme and loss 

For this night stode by me 
God (whose I am, a who I s 

vn to the all the that sayle wit fore syrs be of good cheare

tolde me. Howbeit we must certayne ylonde.

* Syrtes, are perlous places i the see. 

moch as the haué was not comodious to wynter in, the more parte off them toke councell to de-| |and let downe the bote in to the parte théce, yf by eny meanes they might come to Phenices to wynter there, which is an hauen| jof the fore shippe) Paul sayde of Candy, towarde the Southwest and North- west wynde. Whan the South wynde blewe,

But not longe after, there rose agaynst their purpose a flawe of wynde, which is called the Northeast. And whan the shippe was caught, and coulde not resist ¥ wynde, we let

vp, and vsed helpe, and bounde it vnder harde to the shippe, fearinge lest they shulde haue

hope of oure life was taken awaye. 

exhorte you to be of good cheare, for there shal none of ourelyues perishe, but the shippe onely.| |the see on both the sydes, the sh

God, y it shal come so to passe, as it was 

But whan the fourtenth night came, as we were caried in Adria aboute mydnight, y shipmen demed that there appeared some| |on broken peces of the shippe. countre vnto them, and they cast out the leade, and founde it twétye feddoms: and wha} |vnto londe. they were gone a litle farther, they cast out Er the leade agayne, and founde fyftene feddoms. Che rroitj. Chapter.

Then fearinge lest they shulde fall on some rocke, they cast foure anckers out of the sterne, and wyszhed for the daye. Whan the| |the people, they shewed vs no litle kyndnesse:

The Actes of the Apostles, 

their purpose,| | Then the soudyers cut of the r 

Fo. cli. 

shipmen were aboute to flye out of the shippe, 

see, (vndera 

coloure as though they wolde cast ankers out 

to y vnder- 

captayne and to the soudyers: Excepte these byde in the shippe, ye can not be saued.

ope from the 

lowsed vnto Asson, and sayled past all Candy. | |bote, and let it fall. And whan it beganne to be daye, Paul exhorted them all to take meate, and sayde: To daye is the fourtene daye that ye haue taried and contynued fastinge, and haue receaued nothinge: Wher- her go, and draue with the wedder. But we| |fore I praye you to take meate, for youre came to an Ile named Claudia, where we| |health: “for there shal not one h

eer fall from 

hich they toke| |the heade of eny of you. And whan he had 

let downe the| |begane to eate. ‘Then were the 
And whan we| |cheare, and toke meate also. 

thus spoken, he toke bred, and t gaue thankes to God before them all, and brake it, and

y all of good 
We were all 

the nexte daye| |together in the shippe two hundreth thre 

n many dayes, 

they made an outcastinge. Andon the thirde| |score and sixtene soules. And whan they daye with oure awne handes we cast out the

had eaten ynough, they lightened the shippe, tacklynge of the shippe. But wha nether

and cast out the wheate in to the see. 

Whan it was daye, they knewe not the) 32 and no small tempest laye vpon vs, all the! |londe. But they spyed an hauen with a banke, in to which they were mynded (yf it

And after longe abstinence, Paul stode| |were possible) to thrust in the s forth in the myddes of the, and sayde: Syrs, ye shulde haue herkened vnto me, and not to haue lowsed from Candy, and not to haue

hippe. And 

whan they had take vp the anckers, they commytted them selues to the see, and lowsed the rudder bandes, and hoyssed vp the mayne

e. AndnowI|, |sayle to the wynde, and drue towarde londe, 

And whan we chaunced on a place which had 

ippe daszhed 

the angell off! |vpon it. And the fore parte abode fast erue) q saide:| |vnmoued, but the hynder parte brake thorow

Feare not Paul, thou must be broughte before| the violence of the wawes. the Emperoure. And lo, God hath geuen

The soudyers councell was to kyll y pre- 

h the. Wher-| |soners, lest eny of them whan he had swymmed 
: for I beleue| jout, shulde flye awaye. But the vndercap- 

be cast in to a| |their purpose, and commaunde which coulde swymme, shulde

* Mat. 10, d. Luc. 12.a. tMar.6.e.and8.a. Ioh.6 

tayne wyllinge to saue Paul, keped them from 

d that they cast them

selues first in to the see, and escape vnto londe: and the other, some on bordes, some

And so it 

came to passe, that all the soules came safe 

ND wha we were escaped, we knewe that the Ile was called Melite. As for

.8. lTim. 4.a. 

So. rit. for they kyndled a fyre, and receaued vs all because of the rayne that was come vpo vs, aud because of the colde. Whan Paul had gathered a bondell of stickes, and layed them on the fyre, there came a vyper out of the heate, and leape on Pauls hande. Whan the people sawe the beest hange on his hande, they sayde amonge them selues: This man must nedes be a murthurer, who vengeaunce suffreth not to lyne, though he haue escaped the see. But he shoke of y beest in to the fyre, *and felt no harme. Howbeit they wayted, wha he shulde haue swollen, or fallen downe deed sodenly. But whan they had loked a greate whyle, and sawe y there hap- pened no harme vnto him, they chaunged their myndes, and sayde that he was a God.
In the same quarters the chefe man of the 
Ile whose name was Publius had a lordshipe : the same receaued vs, and lodged vs thre dayes curteously. It fortuned wha Publius father laye sicke of the feuers and of a bloudy fluxe, Paul wente in vnto him, and prayed, and layed the handes on him, and healed him.
Whan this was done, other also which had di- seases in the Ile, came, and were healed. And they dyd vs greate honoure. And whan we de- parted, they laded vs with thinges necessary.
After thre monethes we sayled in a shippe of Alexandria, which had wyntred in the Ile, and had a badge of Castor and Pollux. And whan we came to Syracusa, we taried there thre dayes. And whan we had sayled aboute, we came to Rhegium: and after one daye whan the south wynde blewe, we came to
Putiolus, where we founde brethre and were desyred of them to tarye there seué dayes, and so came we to Rome. And from thence whan the brethren herde of vs, they came forth to mete vs to Apiforum and to the Thre tauerns. Whan Paul sawe them, he thaked
God, and waxed bolde. But whà we came to Rome, the vnder captayne delyuered the presoners to y chefe captayne. As for Paul, he had leue to byde alone with one soudyer that kepte him.
€| After thre dayes it fortuned, y Paul called y chefe of ¥ lewes together. And wha they

t Act, 24. b. and 25, b. 
§ Luc. 2. c. 

* Luc. 10. b. t Act.26.a, 

The Artes of the Apostles. 

Che ende of the Artes of the Apostles, torptten bp S. Luke, which was present at the Dopngrs of them.

Chap. rroi. were come, he sayde vnto thé: Ye mē a brethré I haue comytted nothinge agaynst oure people, ner agaynst y lawes of y fathers, yet was I boüde, delyuered out of lerusalé in to y Romaynes hades: which wha they had examyned me, wolde haue let me go, for so moch as there was no cause of death 7 me.
But wha y lewes spake y cótrary, 1 was céstrayned to appeale vnto y Emperoure: not as though I had ought to accuse my people of.
For this cause haue I ealled you, ené to se you, q to speake with you: because y tfor y hope of Israel, I am bounde with this cheyne.
"They sayde vnto hi : We haue nether receaued letter out of lewry eGcernynge the, nether came there eny of the brethre, y shewed or spake eny harme of y. But we wyl heare of y, what thou thinkest: for we haue herde of this secte, that euery where $it is spoken agaynst. And wha they had appoynted hi a daye, there came many vnto hi in to his lodginge: vnto who he expotided ý kyngdome of God q preached vnto the of Iesu, out of y lawe and out of the prophetes, eue fro morn- ynge vntyll the eue. And some beleued y thinge y he sayde, but some beleued not.

But wha they agreed not amoge thé selues, they departed, wha Paul had spoké one worde:
Full well hath the holy goost spoké by y prophet Esay vnto oure fathers, q sayde: * Go vnto this people, and saye: With eares ye shal heare, q not vnderstode: q with eyes shal ye se, q not pereeaue, For y hert of this people is waxed grosse, q they heare hardly with their eares: q their eyes haue they closed, y they shulde not once se with their eyes, q heare with their eares, x vnderstode i their hertes, and be couerted, y I mighte heale thé. Be it knowne therfore vnto you, y this saluacio of God is sent vnto y Heythé, and they shal heare it. And wha ili sayde y, y lewes de- parted, q had a greate disputacton amonge thé selues. But Paul abode two whole yeares in his owne hyred dwellinge, q receaued all thé y came in vnto hi, preachinge j kyng- dome of God, and teachinge those thinges which concerne the LORDE Iesus with all boldnesse, vnforbydden.

a Esa. 6. b, Mat. 13, b. 

12.e. 

Marc. 4. a. 
Rom. 11. b. 

Luc.8.b. Ioh. 

The Byptstle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Romaynes.

The Summe of this Epistle. 

Chap. I. 

Paul declareth his loue towarde the Romaynes, sheweth what the gospell is with the frute therof, and rebuketh the beestlynesse of the flesh.

Chap. I. 

He rebuketh the Iewes, which as touchinge synne 

are like the Heythé, yee worse then they. 

Chap. III. 

He sheweth what preferment the lewes haue, and that both the Iewes and Gétiles are vnder synne, and are iustified only by the grace of
God in Christ. 

Chap. II. 

He declareth by the exaple of Abraha, that faith iustifieth, and not the lawe, ner the workes therof.

Chap. V. 

The power of faith, hope, and loue: and how death raigned fro Ada vnto Christ, by who only we haue forgeuenesse of synnes.

Chap. VI. 

For so moch as we be delyuered thorow christ from synne, we must fashion oure selues to lyue as the seruauntes of God, and not after oure awne lustes. The vnlike rewarde of righteousnes and synne.

Chap. VII. 
Christ hath delyuered vs from the lawe and death. 
Paul sheweth what the flesh and outwarde man is, and calleth it the lawe of the membres.

Chap. VIII. 

The lawe of the sprete geueth life. The sprete of 
God maketh vs Gods children and heyres with 
Christ. The abundaunt loue of God can not 

be separated. 

Chap. IX. 
Paul complayneth vpon the hard hertes of the lewes, that wolde not receaue Christ, and how the Heythe are chosen in their steade.

Chap. X. 
The vnfaithfulnes of the Iewes. righteousnesses.

Chap. XI. 

All the Iewes are not cast awaye, therfore Paul warneth the Gentiles that be called, not to be hye mynded, ner to despyse the Iewes, for the iudgmetes of God are depe and secrete.

Chap. XII. 
The swete conuersacion, loue, and workes of soch as beleue in Christ.

Chay. XIII. 
The obedience of men vnto their rulers. Loue fulfilleth the lawe. It is now no iyme to folowe the workes of darknesse.

Chap. XIII. 

The weake ought not to be despysed. No man shulde offende anothers conscience. Agayne, for outward thinges shulde no man condemne another.

Two maner of 

Chap. XV. 
The infirmite and fraylnesse of the weake ought to be borne with all loue and kyndnesse, after the ensample of Christ.

Chap. XVI. 

A chapter of salutacions. He warneth them to bewarre of mens doctryne, and commendeth vnto them certayne godly men, that were louers and brethren in the trueth.

The Byptstle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Romaynes.

The first Chapter. 

la Pu the seruaunte of lesus Christ, 

E 

called to be an Apostle, * put aparte to preach the Gospell of God (which the pro- mysed afore by his prophetes in y holy scriptures) off his sonne, which was begotte tof $ sede of Dauid after the flesh: and mightely declared to be the sonne of God after the sprete which sanctifieth, sence the tyme that he rose agayne from the deed, namely, lesus Christ oure LORDE, by whom we haue $receaued grace and Apostelshippe amonge all Heythen, to set vp the obedience of faith vnder his name, of whom ye are a parte also, which are called of Iesus Christ.

To all you that be at Rome, beloued of 
God, and sayntes by eallynge || Grace be with you and peace fro God oure father, and the
LORDE Iesus Christ. 

First, I thanke my God thorow lesus 
Christ for you all, that youre faith is spoken of thorow out all the worlde. For God is my witnesse (fwhom I serue in my sprete in the Gospell of his sonne) that without ceassynge I make mencion of you ** besekinge allwayes in my prayers, that I mighte once haue a prosperous iourney (tt by the will oft
God) to come vnto you. For I longe to se you, that I mighte bestowe vpon you some spirituall gifte to strégth you (that is) that I mighte be conforted with you, thorow youre faith a myne, which we haue together.

But I wolde ye shulde knowe (brethren) how that I haue often tymes purposed to come vnto you (but haue bene ttlet hither to)

7 Act. 13.2. + Deut. 18. c. Act. 26. d. i Mat.1.a. 
2 Tim. 2. a. $ Act. 9. c. || 1 Cor. 1. a. Gal. 1. a. 
T Ioh. 4. c. 2 Tim. t. a. S*SPIIL 123 (ok tee, tt lere. 10, d. 1t Act. 16. a. * Eccli. 41. c.

saf 

that I mighte do some good amonge you, like as amonge other Gentyles. I am detter both to the Grekes, and to the vngrekes, to the: wyse and to the vnwyse. Wherfore (as moch as i me is) I am ready to preach the Gospell vnto you at Rome also.

“For I am not ashamed of the Gospell of 
Christ: for it is the $$power of God, which saueth all that beleue theron, the Iewe first q also the Greke: for in it y righteousnes that is of value before God, is opened, which cometh out of faith 1 to faith. As it is wrytté:
?'The iust shal lyue by his faith. For y wrath of God is declared from heauen vpon all vn- godlynes and vnrighteousnes of mé, which witholde the trueth of God in vnrighteousnes: because that it, which maye be knowne of
God, is manifest with the. For God hath shewed it vnto the, that the inuisible thinges of God (that is, his euerlastinge power and
Godheade) mighte be sene lllwhyle they are considered by the workes from the creacion of the worlde: so that they are without ex- cuse, in as moch as they knewe, that there is a God, and haue not praysed him as God ner thanked him, but became vayne in their ymaginacions, and fftheir foolish hert was blynded. Whan they counted them selues wyse, they became fooles: and turned *** ý glory of the incorruptible God in to y symilitude of y ymage of a corruptible mà, « of byrdes, q of foure foted, t*ta of crepinge beestes ttt Wher- fore God likewyse gaue them vp vnto their hertes lustes in to vnclennes, to defyle their awne bodies in them selues, which turned the trueth of God vnto a lye, q worshipped and

2 Tim. 1. b. — $$1Cor.1.c. * Abac. 2.a. Gal. 3. b. 
Heb. 10. d. J| Psal. 18. a. TT Daut. 28. c. aee Psal, 105. c. Iere. 2.d. — ttt Beld.— 1112 Re.24.a.

Eze. 14. a. 

serued the creature more then the maker, which is blessed for euer. Amen.

33| Therfore God gaue thé vp vnto shameful lustes. * For their wemen chaunged the natural] vse in to the vnnaturall: likewyse y mé also lefte the naturall vse of the woman, and brent in their lustes one on another, and man with man wrought fylthines, and receaued in them selues the rewarde of their erroure, as it was acordinge. tAnd as they regarded not to knowe God, euen so {God gaue thé vp in to a lewde mynde, to do those thinges which were not comly, beynge full of all vnrighteousnes, whordome, wickednes, couet- ousnes, maliciousnes, full of enuye, murthur, strife, disceate, euell cddicioned whisperers, backbyters, despysers of God, doers of wronge, proude, boosters, bryngers vp of euell thinges, disobedient to their Elders, without vnder- stondinge, conenaunt breakers, vnlouynge, stubborne, vnmercifull: which men, though they knowe the righteousnes of God (that they which do soch, are worthy of death) yet not onely do the same, but also haue pleasure in those that do the.

The ij. Chapter. a HERFORE canst thou not excuse thy dé selfe (O mà) who soeuer thon be that iudgest:^ for §loke wherin thou iudgest another, thon condemnest thy selfe, in so moch as thou that iudgest, doest euen the same. For we are sure that the iudgment of
God is (acordinge to the trueth) ouer them that do soch. But thinkest thou this O thou man, that iudgest them which do soch thinges, and doest euen the very same thy selfe, that thou shalt escape $ iudgmét of God? Or despysest thou the riches of his goodnesse, pacience, and loge sufferinge? ll Knowest thou not, that y louynge kyndnesse of God leadeth the to repentaunce ?

But thou after thine harde and impenitent hert, heapest vnto thy selfe a treasure of wrath, agaynst the daye of wrath and of the openynge of the righteous iudgment of God, f which shal rewarde euery man acordinge to his dedes: namely, prayse q honoure, and vncor- rupcion, vnto them that with pacience in doinge good, seke euerlastinge life: But vnto

* Leui.18.e. tPro.1.c. f4Àct.7.e. * Mat.7.8. 
$2 Re. 12. b. || Esa. 30. c. Act. 17. e. € Psal.61. b. 
** 2 Thess. 1. b. tt Act. 10. d. Eph. 6. a. Gal. 2. a. 

The Epistle to tbe Romapnes. 

So. rib. 

them that are contencious ** q not obedient vnto the trueth, but obeye vnrighteousnes, shal come indignacion and wrath, trouble and anguysh vpo all the soules of mē that do euell, of the lewe first and also of the Greke:
But vnto all thé that do good (shal come) prayse and honoure, and peace, vnto the Iewe first, and also to the Greke.

tt For there is no respecte of personnes before God: Who so euer haue synned without lawe, shal perish also without lawe: and
|whosoeuer haue synned iu the lawe, shalbe indged by the lawe. tł For before God, they are not righteous, which heare ý lawe: but they that do the lawe, shalbe iustified. For yf the Gentyles which haue not the lawe, do of nature the thinges conteyned in the lawe, then they hauynge not the lawe, are a lawe vnto them selues, in that they shewe, that the worke of $ lawe is wrytté in their hertes: whyle their conscience beareth wit- nesse vnto thé, and also the thoughtes which accuse or excuse them amonge them selues, in the daye whan God shal indge the secretes of men by lesus Christ, acordinge to my
Gospell. 

But take hede,$$ thou art called a lewe, and trustest in the lawe, q makest thy boost of God, and knowest his will: q for so moch as thou art enfourmed out of y lawe, thou prouest what is best to do, and presumest to be a leader of the blynde: a lighte of them y arein darcknes: an enformer of y vnwyse: a teacher of y symple: which hast the ensample of knowlege q of the trueth in the lawe.

Now teachest thou other, and teachest not thy selfe. Thou preachest that a man shulde not steale, and thou stealest. Thou sayest, that a man shulde not breake wedlocke, and thou breakest wedlocke. Thou abhorrest ymages, and robbest God of his honoure.
|Lhou makest thy boost of the lawe, and thorow breakynge of the lawe thou dishonorest
‘God. For thorow you is the name of God euell spoken of amonge the Gentyles, lll as it is wrytten.

The cireücision verely avayleth, yf thou kepe the lawe: but yf thou breake the lawe, then is thy circumcision become vncircum- cision. Therfore yf the vncireumcision kepe

tt Mat.7.c. Luc.6.e. Tac $$ Ioh. 8. c. 

o. 1. c. 
||] Esa. 52. a. Eze. 36. d. 

The Epistle to the Romapues, 

the righte thinges conteyned in the lawe, shal not his vneireumcision be counted for cireum- cision? And so it that of nature is vneireum- cision, and fulfilleth the lawe shal iudge the, which vnder the letter and eireumeision tras- gressest the lawe. For he is not a Jew which is a Iewe outwarde: nether is that cir- cücision which is done outwardly in y flesh:
“But he is a Iewe, which is hydd within. 
And *the cireumeision of ¥ hert is the cir- eumcision, which is done in the sprete and not in the letter: whose prayse is not of men, but of God.

The iij. Chapter. 
HAT furtheraunce then haue the 
Tewes? Or what avauntageth circn- cision? Surely very moch. First t Vnto them was commytted what God spake. But where as some of them dyd not beleue theron, what then? shulde their vnbeleue make the promes of God of none effecte ? God forbyd. Let it rather be thus, that ^God is true,t and all me lyers. As it is wrytten: That thou mayest be iustified in thy sayenges, and shuldest ouercome, wha thou art iudged.

But yf it he so, that oure vnrighteousnes prayseth y righteousnes of God, what shal we saye? Is God then vnrighteous, that he is angrie therfore? (I speake thus after the maner off men) God forbyd. How mighte
God thé iudge ¥ worlde? For yf the trueth of God be thorow my lye the more excellent vnto his prayse, why shulde I thé be iudged yet as a synner? q not rather to do thus (as we are euell spoken of, and as some reporte, that we shulde saye) Let vs do euell, y good maye come therof. Whose danaeié is iuste.

What saye we then? Are we better then they? No, in no wyse: for we haue proued afore, y both the lewes and Grekes are all vnder synne. “As itis wrytté: ‘There is none righteous, no not one. There is none y vn- derstondeth, there is none that seketh after
God. They are all gone out of the waye, they are alltogether become vnprofitable: there is none that doeth good, no not one
Their throte is an open sepulere, with their tunges they haue disceaued,? the poyson off
Aspes is vnder their lippes. Their mouth is 

* Toh. 8. d. Rom. 9. a. * Col. 2. b. t Rom. 9. b. 
^ Ioh. 3. e. i Psal. 115. a. Psal. 50. a. t Psal. 13.a. and 52. a. § Paal. 5.b. 4 Paal, 139.a. j| Pro. 1. a.

Chap. th. 
Their fete 

Destruceion q wrechidnes are in their wayes, and y waye of

full of cursynge and bytternesse.|| are swifte to shed bloude. peace haue they not knowne. {There is no feare of God before their eyes.

But we knowe, y, what soeuer the lawe sayeth, it sayeth it vnto them which are vnder the lawe, y euery mouthe maye be stopped, q i all the worlde maye be detter vnto God, **

ecause y by $ dedes of the lawe no flesh 

maye be iustified in his sighte.tt For by the lawe commeth but the knowlege of synne.
But now without addinge to of y lawe is the righteousnes which avayleth belai God, de- clared, hauynge witnesse of y lawe and the prophetes: but I speake of y righteousnes before God, which cometh by the faith on lesus Christ, vnto all, and vpo all them that belene.

For here is no difference. For they are all | € synners, and wate the prayse that God shulde haue of thé, but without deseruynge are they made righteous eué by his grace, thorow the redempeion that is done by Christ Iesu, whom
God hath set forth for a ?+ Mercy seate thorow faith in his bloude, to shewe the righteousnes which avayleth before him, in that he for- geueth the synnes, which were done before vnder the sufferaunce of God, which he suffred, that at this tyme he mighte shewe y righteousnes which avayleth before him: y he onely mighte be righteous, q the righteous maker of him which is of the faith on Iesus.

Where is now then thy reioysinge? It is excluded. By what lawe? By the lawe ot workes? Nay, but by the lawe of faith. We holde therfore that a man is iustified §§ by faith, without the workes of the lawe. Or is
God the God of the Iewes onely? Is he not also the God of the Heythen? Yes verely the
God of the Heythen also, for so moch as he is the God onely that iustifieth the circum- cision which is of faith, and the vneireüeision thorow faith. Destroye we then the lawe thorow faith? God forbyd. But we mantayne the lawe.

The tit}. Chapter. 
HAT shal we saye thé, that Abraha oure father as pertayninge to ¥ flesh

Esa. 59, a. tt Exo. 25. c. onely.

T Paal. 35. a. 
Heb. 5. a. 

as Gal. 2. c. tt Heb.7.c. 
§§ Some reade: By faith 

Chap. b. — 

B 

€ 

dyd fynde? This we saye: Yf Abraham were 

made righteous thorow workes, then hath he wherin to reioyse, but not before God. But what sayeth y scripture ?* Abrahā beleued
God, q ý was counted vnto him for righteous- nes. Vnto hi ý goeth aboute with workes, is the rewarde not rekened of fauoure, but of dutye: Howbeit vnto him, ý goeth not aboute with workes, but beleueth on him y iustifieth the vngodly, is his faith counted for righteous- nes. Euen as Dauidsayeth also, that blessednes is onely that mans, vnto who God counteth righteousnes without addinge to of workes, where he sayeth: “Blessed are they, whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, and whose synnesare couered. Blessed isthe man, vnto whom the LORDE imputeth no synne.

Now this blessednes, goeth it ouer the cir- ieücision, or ouer the vncireumcision? We must nedes graunte, y Abrahas faith was
‘coiited vnto hi for righteousnes. How was it thé rekened vnto him? In the circücision, or in the vneireumeision ? Doutles t not in the eireücision, but in the vneircumcision. As for the toké of cireticision ł he receaued it for a seale off the righteousnes off faith, which he had yet in y vneireüsion, y he shulde be a father of all th& y beleue, beinge in y vncir- cücisio, y it might be coüted vnto thé also
(for righteousnes: ¢ that he might be a father jof circumcision, not onely of thé that are of

y circumcision, but of them also that walke in the fotesteppes of the faith, which was in the vneireumceision of oure father Abraham.

For the promes (that he shulde be $ heyre of the worlde) was not made vnto Abraham or to his sede thorow the lawe, but thorow the righteousnes of faith. § For yf they which are of the lawe be heyres, the is faith vayne, and the promes of none effecte, for so moch as the lawe causeth but wrath. For where the lawe is not, there is also no transgression.
Therfore was the promes made thorow fayth, that it myght come off fauoure, wherby the promesse myghte be made sure vnto all the sede: not onely vnto him which is off the lawe, but also vnto him that is of the faith of
Abrahal which is the father of vs all As it is wrytten: 1 I haue made the a father of many Heythé before God, whom thou hast

* Gen. 15. b. Gal. 3. a. t Gen. 15. b. iGen.17.d. $Gal.3.c.
Luc. 13. b. and 19. a. Ioh. 8. c. Gal. 3.a. 
** Gen. 15. a. tt Rom. 15. a. 

Iacob. 2. c. saDsal aia. 
|| Esa. 51. a. 

€ Ge. 17.a. tt1 Tim, 2. a.

= The Epistle to the Romapnes. 

fo. clot. 

beleued: which quyckeneth the deed, and calleth it which is not, that it maye be.

And he beleued vpó hope, where nothinge|D was to hope, that he shulde be a father of many Heythen. Acordinge as it was sayde vnto him: ** Euen so shal thy sede be. And he was not faynte in faith, nether cdsidred his awne body, which was deed allready, whyle he was almost an hundreth yeare olde, nether the deed wombe of Sara. For he douted not in the promes of God thorow vnbeleue, but was stróge in faith, and gaue
God the prayse: q was sure, that loke what 
God promyseth, he is able to make it good. 
And therfore was it rekened vnto him for righteousnes. tt But this is not wrytte onely for his sake, y it was counted vnto him, but also for oure sakes: vnto who it shalbe counted, yf we beleue on him, that raysed vp oure
LORDE Iesus from the deed. Which tt was geuen for oure synnes, and raysed vp for oure righteousnesse sake.

The b. Chapter. i 
ECAUSE therfore that we are iustified 4 by faith, we haue peace with God thorow oure LORDE Iesus Christ, by who also we haue an intraunce in faith vnto this grace, wherin we stonde, 15$ reioyse in the hope of y glorye for to come, which God shal geue. Not onely y, but we reioyse also 1 troubles, for so moch as we knowe, yll trouble bryngeth paciéce, paciéce bryngeth experiéce, experiece bryngeth hope: As for hope, is letteth vs not come to cofusion, because the loue of God is shed abrode in oure hertes, by the holy goost which is geuen vnto vs. For whan we were yet weake acordinge to the tyme, ’Christ dyed for vs vngodly. Now dyeth there scarce eny man for the righteous sake: Peraduenture for a good man durst one dye. 441 Therfore doth
God set forth his loue towarde vs, in y Christ dyed for vs, whan we were yet synners: Moch more then shal we be saued from wrath by him seynge we are now made righteous thorow his bloude.
For yf we were recocyled vnto God by y |33 death of his sone, wha we were yet enemies: moch more shal we be saued by him, now y we are reconcyled. Not onely that, but we| |

$$ Heb. 3. a. ||| Taco. 1. a. ^ Eph. 2.a. Col. 1. b. and 2. b. *ifi Ioh. 3. c. 1Pet.3.c. 1]1oh.4. b.
Heb. 9. c. d. i 

— —————- — 

149 

| 

| 

| 

Fo. rbit. 

| Iesus Christ, by whom we haue now receaued the attonement.

Wherfore *as by one man synned entred in to the worlde, and death by y meanes off synne: euen so wente death also ouer all men,
‘in so moch as they all haue synned. For synne was in f worlde vnto the lawe : but where no lawe is, there is not synne regarded. Neuer- theles death reigned from Adam vnto Moses, leuen ouer them also that synned not with like trangression as dyd Adam, which is y ymage lof him ý was to come.
| But it is not with the gifte as with the 
'synne: for yf thorow the synne of one many be deed, yet moch more plenteously came the grace and gifte of God vpon many tby the fauoure that belonged vnto one man lesus
Christ. 

And the gifte is not onely ouer one synne, as death came thorow one synne of one that isynned. For the iudgment came of one synne
|vnto condempnacion, but the gifte to iustifye fro many synnes. For yf by y synne of one,
‘death raigned by the meanes of one, moch more shal they which receaue the abiidaunce of grace and of the gifte vnto righteousnes, raigne in life by y meanes of one Jesus Christ.
|Likewyse the as by the synne of one, con- 
|demnacion came on all men, euen so also by the righteousnes of one, came the iustifienge off life vpon all men. For as by the diso- bedience of one, many became synners, euen so by the obedience of one shal many be made righteous.

“But the lawe in the meane tyme entred, that synne shulde increace.t Neuertheles where abundaunce of synne was, there was yet more plenteousnes of grace: that, like as synne had reigned vnto death, eué so mighte grace reigne also thorow righteousnes to euer- lastinge life by the meanes of Iesus Christ.

€ 

| The bi. Chapter. 
HAT shal we saye then? Shal we 
| contynue in synne, that thero maye be abundaunce of grace? God forbyd. How shal we lyue in synne, y are deed from it ?§
Knowe ye not, that all we which are baptysed in to lesu Christ, are baptysed in to his death?
Therfore are we buried with him by baptyme 

|a 

* Gen, 3. a, 
$ Gal. 3. d. 

* Toh. 1. b. 
Col. 2. b. 

s Gal. 3. c. 
1 Pet. 3. c. 

1 Luc. 7. b. 
|| Ephe. 4. c. 

ee Dæ 

The Epistle to tbe Romapnes. 
~ |reioyse also in God thorow oure LORDE 

Chap. bí. 

in to death, that, like as Christ was raysed Yp| from the deed by the glory of the father, il euen so we also shulde walke in a new life.
For yf we be grafted with him vnto like death, then shal we be like the resurreccion also: For so moch as we knowe, that oure olde man is crucified with him, that the synfull body mighte ceasse, that hence forth we shulde serue synne nomore. { For he that is deed, is made righteous fro synne.

? But yf we be deed with Christ, we beleue, that we shal lyue also with him, and are sure, ** that Christ raysed from the deed, dyeth no- more: Death shal haue nomore power ouer him. For as touchinge that he dyed, he dyed cocernynge synne once: but as touchinge that he lyueth, he lyueth vnto God. — Likewyse ye also, counte youre selues to be euen deed concernynge synne, and to lyne vnto God thorow lesus Christ oure LORDE. Let not synne reigne therfore in youre mortall bodye, that ye shulde obeye vnto the lustes of it.
Nether geue ye ouer youre membres vnto synne to be wapens of vnrighteousnes, but geue ouer youre selues vnto God, as they that off deed are become lyuynge, and youre mem- bres vnto God to be wapés off righteousnes.
For synne shal not haue power ouer you, in so moch as ye are not vnder the lawe, but vnder

ace. 

How then? Shal we synne, because we are not vnder y lawe, but vnder grace? God forbyd. +tKnowe ye not, that loke vnto who ye geue ouer youre selues as seruauntes to obeye, his seruauntes ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of synne vnto death, or of obediéce vnto righteousnes? But God be thanked, that though ye haue bene the ser- uauntes of synne, ye are now yet obedient of herte to the ensample off the doctryne, whervnto ye are commytted. For now that ye are made fre from synne, ye are become the seruauntes of righteousnes.

I wil speake grosly, because of the weaknes of youre flesh. Like as ye haue geuen ouer youre membres to the seruyce of vnclennesse, from one wickednesse to another: Eué so now also geue oner youre membres to the seruyce
‘of righteousnesse, that they maye be holy. For whan ye were the seruauntes of synne, ye

were lowse from righteousnes. What frute 
Col.3.a. Heh.9. c. € 1 Pet. 4. a. è 2 Tim. 2. b. 
** Apoc. 1. d. tt loh. 8. c, 2 Pet. 2.d. 

‘Chap. bij. 
| lhad ye at that tyme in those thinges, wherof ye are now ashamed? For the ende of soch thinges is death. But now that ye be fre from synne, and are become the sernauntes of God, ye hane youre frute that ye shulde be holy: but the ende is enerlastingelife. * For death is the rewarde of synne, but the gifte of God is euerlastinge life.

The bij. Chapter. 

NOWE ye not brethren (for I speake vnto them that knowe the lawe) how that y lawe hath power vpon a man as longe as he lyueth? “For the woman y is in sub- leccion to the man, is bounde vnto the lawe whyle the man lyueth: bnt yf the man dye, then is she lowsed from the lawe that con- cerneth the man. tYf she be now with another man, whyle the man lyueth, she shal be called a wedlocke breaker. But yf the man be deed, then is she fre from the lawe, so that she is no wedlocke breaker, yf she be with another man.
Enen so my brethren, ye also are deed vnto the lawe by the body of Christ, that ye shulde be with another (namely with him which is raysed vp from the deed) that we shulde brynge forth frute vnto God. For whan we were in the flesh, the synfull Instes (which were stered vp by the lawe) were mightie in oure membres to brynge forth frute vnto death.
But now are we lowsed from the lawe, and deed vnto it, that helde vs captyue, so that we shulde serue in a new conuersacion of the sprete, and

not in the olde conuersacion of the letter. 
What shal we saye then? Isthe lawe synne? 
God forbyd: Neuertheles I knewe not synne, but by ý lawe. For I had knowne nothinge of lust, yf the lawe had not sayde: t Thou shalt not lust. But then toke synne occasion at the commaundement, and stered vp in me all maner of lust. For without the lawe synne was deed. As for me, I lyued some tyme without lawe. Howbeit whan the commaunde- ment came, synne reuyued, but I was deed.
And the very same commaundement that was geuen me vnto life, was founde to be vnto me on occasion of death. For synne toke occasion at the cOmaundement, and disceaned me, and slewe me by the same commaundement.$
The lawe in dede is holy, and the commaunde- ment holy, iust and good. Is that then which

* Gen, 2. c, Rom, 5. b. t Exo. 20.c. Deut. 5.c.

?1Cor.7.d. t Mat. 5. d. 
$ Esa. 48. d. 1 Tim. 1. b. 

The €pístle to the Romapnes. 

is good, become death vnto me? God for- byd. But synne, that it mighte appeare how y it is synne, hath wroughte me death thorow good: that synne mighte be out of measure synfull by the commaundement. For we knowe, that the lawe is spiritnall, but 1 am carnall, I| solde vnder synne: because I knowe not what I do. For I do not y I vill, but what I hate, y do I. Yf I do now that which
I wil not, the graunte I, that the laweis good. 

So then it is not I that do it, but synne that dwelleth in me: for I knowe that in me (y is, in my flesh) there dwelleth no good thinge.
To wyll is present with me, but to perfourme y which is good, I fynde not. For good that I wyll, do I not: bnt the euell which I wil not, thatdol. Yf Ido now that I wil not, then is it not I that do it, but synne that dwelleth in me.

Thus fynde I now by the lawe, y whan I wyl do good, euell is present with me. For
I delite in the lawe of God after the inwarde man: but I se another lawe in my membres, which stryueth agaynst y lawe of my mynde, and taketh me presoner in y lawe of synne, which is in my membres. O wretched man that I am, who shal delyuer me from the body of this death? I thanke God thorow Iesus
Christ oure LORDE. So then with the mynde I serue y lawe of God, but with the flesh the lawe of synne.

The biij. Chapter. 

HEN is there now no damnacion vnto 

thé that are in Christ Iesu, which walke 

not after the flesh, but after y sprete. For y lawe of y sprete (y bryngeth life 1 Christ Iesu) hath made me ** fre fro the lawe of synne q death. ttFor what vnpossible was vnto y lawe
(in as moch as it was weake because of the flesh) y perfourmed God, q sent his sonne in y Er litade of synfull flesh, q by tt synne daned synne in y flesh: that the righteousnes requyred of the lawe, mighte be fulfylled in vs, which walke not after the flesh, but after the sprete. For they that are fleshly, are fleshly mynded: but they that are goostly, are goostly mynded. ‘To be fleshly mynded, is death: but to be goostly mynded, is life and peace. For to be fleshly mynded is enemyte agaynst God, $$syth it is not subdued vnto ¥ lawe of God, for it can not also. As for the

|| Esa. 52. a. tt Heb.?. c.

T Gen. 6.a. tt 2 Cor. 5. c.

** Ioh. 8. Gal. 4. a. 
$$ Esa. 55. c. 

fo. dir! 

€ 

4 

Fo. clr. 

5 

| 

| 

D| Likewyse the sprete also helpeth oure 

[that are fleshlye, they can not please God. 
Howbeit ye are not fleshly, but goostly, yf so be that the sprete of God dwell in you. But who so hath not the sprete of Christ, the same is not his. Neuertheles yf Christ be in rou, then is the body deed because of synne.
But the sprete is life for righteousnes sake. 

Wherfore yf the sprete of him, that raysed vp lesus from the deed, dwell in you, then shal euen he also that raysed vp Christ from the deed, quycké youre mortal bodies, be- cause y his sprete dwelleth in you. — Therfore brethre we are now detters, not to the flesh, to lyue after the flesh: for yf ye lyue after y fleshe, ye must dye: but yf ye mortyfye the
|dedes of the body thorow the sprete, ye shal lyue. For who so ener are led by the sprete
‘of God, are Gods childré:* for ye haue not 
|receaued the sprete of bondage to feare eny more, but ye haue receaued y sprete of adop- cion, wherby we crye: Abba, deare father.*
The same sprete certifieth oure sprete, that we are the ehildré of God. Yf we be childre, then are we heyres also, namely the heyres of
(God, and heyres annexed with Christ, yf so be that we suffer together, that we maye be
‘also glorified together. 
| For I suppose, that the affliccions off this tyme, ^are not worthy of y glorye, which shalbe shewed vpon vs + s the feruent loginge of y creature loketh for the appearinge of the children of God, because the creature is subdued vnto vanyte agaynst hir will, but for his wyll that hath subdued her vpon hope.
For the creature also shal be fre from the bond- age of corrupcion, vnto the glorious libertye of the childre of God. For we knowe, that euery creature groneth, and : trauayleth with vs in payne vnto the same tyme.

Not they only, but we oure selues also, which haue the first frutes of the sprete, grone within in oure selues for the child- shippe, and loke for y delyueraunce of oure bodye. For we are saued i dede, howbeit 1 hope: but y hope that is sene, is no hope: for how ean a man hope for that which he seyeth? But yf we hope for that which we se not, the do we thorow pacience abyde for it.

;weaknesse: for we knowe not what we shulde desyre as we oughte: $neuertheles $ sprete

* Gul. 4. a. 2 Tim. I. a. 

* 2 Cor. 1. c. and 5.a. Eph. la Ms * 2 Cor. 4. b.

ie SES + Ioh. 16. c, 

The Epistle ta the Romapnes, 

it selfe maketh intercession mightely for vs with vnoutspeakable gronynges. Howbeit he y searcheth the hert, knoweth what the mynde of the sprete is: for he maketh interces- sion for the sayntes acordinge to the pleasure of God. But sure we are, that all thinges serue for the best vnto them that loue of God, which are called of purpose. For those whom he knewe before, hath he ordeyned also be- fore, y they shulde be like fashioned vnto

shappe of his sonne, y he mighte be the first begotte amoge many brethre. As for those whom he hath ordeyned before, them hath he called also: and whom he hath called, thé hath he also made righteous: and whom he hath made righteous, them hath he glorified also.

What shal we saye then vnto these thinges? 
“Yff God be on oure syde, who can be agaynst vs. Which spared not his owne sonne, but hath geuen him for vs all: how shal he not

‚with him geue vs all thinges also? Who wy! 

laye eny thinge to y charge of Gods chosen ? 
Here is God that maketh righteous, who wil then condemne? Here is Christ that is deed, yee rather which is raysed vp agayne, which is also on y righte hande of God, and maketh intercession for vs.

Who will separate vs from the loue of God? 
Trouble? or anguysh? or persecuciG? or honger? or nakednesse? or parell? or swerde?
As it is wrytten: ^For thy sake are we kylled all the daye longe, we are counted as shepe appoynted to be slayne. Neuerthelesse in all these thinges we ouercome farre, for his sake that loued vs. For sure I am, that nether death ner life, nether angell, ner rule, nether power, nether thinges present, nether thinges to come, nether heyth, ner loweth, nether eny other creature shalbe able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesu oure
LORDE. 

The ir. Chapter. 

SAYE the trueth in Christ, and lyel¢ 

not (wherof my conscience beareth me witnesse iu the holy goost) that I haue greate heuynesse q contynuall sorowe in my hert. f I haue wyszhed my selfe to be cursed from
Christ for my brethren, that are my kynsmen after the flesh, which are off Israel: **vnto whom pertayneth the childshippe, and the glory, aud the couenauntes and lawe, aud the

5.c. * Nu.14.a. Esa.50.b. || Ge.22.c. Esa.53. c. 
€ Exo.31.g. ** Exo.19.a. Deut. 7. a. 

Chap. r. 

B 

seruyce of God, and the promyses: whose are also the fathers, off whom (after the flesh) comineth Christ, *which is God ouer all, blessed for euer. Amë, But I speake not these thinges, as though the worde of God were of none effecte: "for they are not all
Israelites, which are of Israel: tnether are they all children, because they are the sede of
Abraham: {but in Isaac shal the sede be called vnto the, that is, They which are children after the flesh, are not the children of God, but the children of the promes are counted for the sede. For this is a worde of the promes, where he sayeth: ^Aboute this tyme wyl I come, and Sara shal hane a sonne.

Howbeit it is not so with this onely, but also whan Rebecca was with childe' by one
(namely by oure father Isaac) or euer the childré were borne, q had done nether good ner bad (that the purpose of God might stóde acordinge to the eleccion, not by the deseruynge of workes, but by the grace of the caller) it was sayde thus vnto her: The greater shal serue the lesse. As it is wrytten:
$Iacob haue I loued, but Esau haue I hated. 

What shal we saye then? Is God then vnrighteous? God forbyd. For he sayeth vnto Moses: ^l shewe mercy, to whom I shewe mercy: and haue copassion, on who I haue compassion. So lyeth it not then in eny mans wyll or runnynge, but in the mercy of God. For the scripture sayeth vnto
Pharao: ‘For this cause haue I stered the vp, euen to shewe my power on the, that my name mighte be declared in all lodes. Thus hath he mercy on whom he wyl: and whom he wyl, he hardeneth.

Thou wilt saye then vnto me: Why blameth he vs yet? For who can resiste his will? O thou man, who art thon, that disputest with
God? Sayeth the worke to his workman: 
Why hast thou made me on this fashion? 
/ Hath not the potter power, out of one lompe of claye to make one vessell vnto honoure, and another vnto dishonoure? Therfore whan God wolde shewe wrath, and to make his power knowne, he broughte forth with greate pacience the vessels off wrath, which are ordeyned to damnacion: that he mighte declare the riches off his glorye on y vessels

* Rom.1.c. ^ Rom. 2. c. t Gal.4.c. t Gen. 21. b 
5 Gen. 18. b. © Gen.25. c. $ Mal. 1.a. 4 Exo. 3 
* Exo.9.c. f ]Iere.18. b. — Eccli.33.b. 2 Tim. 2. c 

The Cpistle to tbe Romapnes. 

|of mercy, which he hath prepared vnto glorye, whom he hath called (namely vs) not onely of the Iewes, but also of the Gentyles. As he sayeth also by Osee: *I wil call that my people, which is not my people: and my be- loued, which is not $ beloued. And it shal come to passe in y place, where it was sayde vnto them : Ye are not my people, there shal they be called the children of the lyuynge
God. But Esay crieth ouer Israel: Though the nombre of the children of Israel be as the sonde of the see, yet shal there but a rem- naunt be saned. For there is the worde, that fynisheth and shorteneth in righteousnes: fora shorte worde shal God make vpon earth. And

of Sabbaoth had lefte vs sede, we shulde haue bene as Sodoma, and like vnto Gomorra.

What shal we saye then? This wil we saye: The Heythen which folowed not right- eousnes, haue overtaken righteousnes; but I speake of the righteousnes that commeth of fath. Agayne, Israel folowed the lawe of righteousnes, and attayned not vnto the lawe of righteousnes. Why so? Euen because they soughte it not out of faith, but as it were out of the deseruynge of workes. For they haue stombled at the stomblinge stone. As it is wrytten: 'Beholde, I laye in Sion a stone to stoble at, and a rocke to be offended at: and ^who so euer beleueth on him, shal not be confounded.

The y. Chapter. 

RETHREN, my hertes desyre, q prayer 
B vnto God for Israel is, that they might be saued. For I beare them recorde, that they are zelous for Gods cause, but not with vnderstondinge. For they knowe not the righteousnes which auayleth before God, and go aboute to manteyne their awne righteous- nes: and thus they are not subdued vnto the righteousnes, that is off value before God. 1
For Christ is the ende of the lawe, vnto righteousnes for euery one y beleueth. ^ Moses wryteth of y righteousnes which commeth of the lawe, that the man which doth ¥ same, shal lyuetherin. But ¥ righteousnes SE cometh of faith, speaketh on this wyse:** Saye not in thine hert: Who wil go vp in to heaue?

€ Osee 1. b. and 2. c. 1 Pet. 2. b. 
Zach.13.b. ^ Esa. 1. b. ' Esa. 28. c. 
! Leui. 18, b. Gal. 3. b. 

|| Esa. 10. d. 
* Esa. 49. e. 
** Deut. 30. e. 

q Mat. 5. b. 

So. riri. 

as Esay sayde before: ^Excepte the LORDE|D 

a 

fo. hij. The Epistle to the Romapnes, Chap. ri. 

(that is nothinge els then to fetch Christ| |out his people, whom he knewe before. Or downe) Or who wyl go downe in to y depe? wote ye not what the scripture sayeth of
(that is nothinge els the to fetch vp Christ from Elias, how he maketh intercession vnto God the deed.) But what sayeth the scripture ? agaynst Israel, and sayeth: ^LORDE, they
The worde is nye the, euen in thymouthandin, |haue slayne thy prophetes, ¢ dydged downe thine hert. This is worde of faith y we preach. | thine altares, and I am lefte ouer onely, and
For yf thou knowlegest Iesus with thy, |they seke my life? But what sayeth the mouth, that he is the LORDE, and beleuest| |answere of God vnto him? ‘I haue reserued in thine hert, that God hath raysed him vp| |vnto me seuen thousande men, which haue from the deed, thou shalt be saued. For yf| |not bowed their knee before Baal. Eué so a man beleue from the hert, he shalbe made) |goeth it now at this tyme also with this righteous: and yf a ma knowlege with the, |remnaunt after y eleccion of grace.t Yf it mouth, he shal be saued. For the scripture, |be done of grace, thé is it not of deseruynge: sayeth: “Who so euer beleueth on him, shal| jels were grace no grace. But yf it be of not be confounded. deseruynge, then is grace nothinge: els were
Here is no difference, nether of the Iewe| |deseruynge no deseruynge. ner of the Gentyle. For one is LORDE of What the? Israel hath not optayned y all, which is riche vnto all y call vpo him.| |which he soughte, but the eleccion hat
For who so euer shal call vpon the name of the} joptaynedit. As for y other, they are blynded. 
LORDE, shalbe saued. But how shal they! |Asitis wrytten: God hath geuen them the call vpo him, on who they beleue not? How] |sprete of vnquyetnesse, ‘eyes that they shulde shal they beleue on him, of who they haue| |not se, and eares that they shulde not heare, not herde? How shal they heare without a| |eue vnto this daye. And Dauid sayeth: Let preacher? But how shal they preach, excepte| |their table be made a snare’ to take thé with they be sent? As it is wrytte: ^How beutyfull| jall, q an occasion to fall, q a rewarde vnto thé. are the fete of thé y preach peace, y brynge| |Let their eyes be blynded that they se not, good tidinges? But they are not all obedient| |and euer bowe downe their backes. vnto the Gospell. For Esayesayeth: LORDE, Isaye then: Haue they therfore stombled, who beleueth oure preachinge? So thé faith} |y they shulde cleane fall to naughte? God cometh* by hearynge, but hearinge cómeth Dd: but thorow their fall is saluacion by the worde of God. happened vnto y Heythen, that he mighte
But I saye: Haue they not herde? *No| |prouoke them to be zelous after them. For doute their sounde wéte out in to all lendes,| |yf their fall be the riches of the worlde, and and their wordes in to the endes of the worlde.| the mynishinge of the the riches of the Hey-
But I saye: Hath not Israel knowne ? First,| |then: how moch more shulde it be so, yf their 
Moses sayeth: ^I wil prouoke you to enuye,| |fulnesse were there? I speake vnto you Hey- by them that are not my people: q by aj |then: for in as moch as +] am y Apostle of foolish nacion wyl I anger you. Esaye after| |the Heythen, I wil prayse myne office, yf I him is bolde, and sayeth: ‘I am founde of| |mighte prouoke them vnto zele, which are my them, that sought me not: q haue appeared| |fleshe, and saue some of them. For yf the vnto them, that axed not after me. But vnto| |losse of them by the recocylinge of the worlde,
Israel he sayeth: / All the daye loge haue I| |what were that els, then as yf life were taken stretched forth my handes vnto a people y| lof the deed? Yf the begynnynge be holy, then beleueth not, but speaketh agaynst me. is all dowe holy:$ and yf the rote be holy,
: then are the braunches holy also. 
The pi. Chapter. But though some of y braunches now be 
I SAYE then: Hath God thrust out his| |broké, and thou, wha thou wast a wylde olyne people? God forbyd:: for I also am an] |tre, art grafte in amonge them, and made
Israelite, of the sede of Abraham out of the} |partaker of the rote and sappe of the ll olyue trybe of Ben Iamin. God hath not thrust} |tre, boost not thy selfe agaynst the braunches.

a Esa. 28. c. > Eaa, 59. b. * Some reade: By 13 Re. 19. d. + Deut. 9. a. * Eaa. 6. b. ' Paal. 68. d. preacbinge. — * Psal. 18.a, 4 Deut. 32. c. * Esa.| |i Rom.i.a. 1 Tim.2.b. 2 Tim. 1. b. $ Esa. 65. b.
|92. e. and 65.23. / Esa. 65.0. *lere.31.f. ^3 Re. 19.c. || lere. 11. c. 

Chap. rij. 

n 

i 

Yf thou boost thy selfe agaynst them, then bearest not thou the rote, but the rote beareth the. Thou wilt sayethen: the braunches are broke of, that I mighte be grafted in. Thou sayest well. ‘They are broken of because off their vnbeleue, but thou stondest thorow be- leue. * Be not thou hye mynded, but feare, seynge God hath not spared the naturall braunches, lest he also spare not the.

Beholde therfore the kyndnesse and rigor- ousnes off God: on them which fell, rigor- ousnes: but towarde the, kyndnes, yf thou contynue in the kyndnesse. Els shalt thou be hewe of: tand they, yf they byde not styll in vnbeleue, shal be grafted in agayne. For
God is of power to grafte the in agayne. 
For yf thou be cut out of the naturall wilde olyue tre, and grafted (contrary to nature) in the good olyue tre, how moch more shal they that are naturall, be grafted in their awne olyue tre agayne?

I wolde not that this secrete shulde be hyd from you brethré (lest ye shulde be wyse in your awne cósaytes) that partly blyndnesse is happened vnto Israel, so longe tyll the ful- nesse of the Heythen be come in, and so all
Israel shalbe saued. As it is wrytten: “There shal come out of Sion he that doth delyuer, and shal turne awaye vngodlynes from Iacob.
And this is my couenaüt with them, whà I shal take awaye their synnes. As concernynge the Gospell I holde them as enemies for youre sakes: but as touchinge the eleccion, I loue them for the fathers sakes.

For verely the giftes q callynge of God are soch, that it can not repente him of them. lor likewyse as ye also in tyme passed haue not beleued, but now haue optayned mercy thorow their vnbeleue: Euen so now haue they not beleued on the mercy which his hap- pened vnto you, that they also maye optayne mercy. For God hath closed vp all vnder vnbeleue, that he mighte haue mercy on all.

O the depenesse of the riches, both of the wyszdome and knowlege of God? How in- comprehensible are his iudgmentes,’ and his wayes vnsearcheable?$ For who hath knowne the mynde of the LORDE? Or who hath bene his councell geuer? Or who hath gené him ought a fore hande, that he mighte be

* Eccl. 7.c. + 2'Cor, 3. c. ł Luc. 21.c. ^ Psal. 
13.a. Esa. 59. e. 4 Sap. 17. a. §Sap. 9. b. 
Esa. 40. b. 1 Cor.2, b. Esa. 41. e. || Phil. 4. c. 

|geueth, let hi geue with synglenesse. 

= The Epistle to the Romapnes, 

Fo. erii. recompenced agayne? For of him, and thorow him, and in him are all thinges. To him be prayse for euer, Amen.

The rij. Chapter. 

BESEKE you brethré by the mercyful- 
I nesse of God, that ye geue ouer youre bodies for a lsacrifice, ý is quycke holy, and acceptable vnto God, which is youre reason- able seruynge off God. And fashion not youre selues like vnto this worlde, but be chaunged thorow the renewynge off youre mynde, y ye maye proue, what thinge that good, y accept- able, q perfecte wil of God is. For I saye thorow the grace y is geué me, vnto euery man amonge you:1 that no man esteme off him selfe more, then it becometh him to esteme: but that he discretly iudge of him- selfe, acordinge as God hath dealte vnto euery man the measure of faith. ‘For like as we haue many membres in one body, but all the membres haue not one maner of operacion :
Eueu so we beynge many are one body in 
Christ. But amonge oure selues euery oue is the membre of another, and haue dyuers giftes, acordinge to the grace that is geuen vnto vs.** Yf eny man haue the gifte of pro- phecienge, let it be acordinge to the faith.

tt Let him that hath an office, wayte vpo the office: let him that teacheth, take hede to the doctryne: Let him that exhorteth, geue attedaunce to the exhortacion. Yf eny mà
Let him that ruleth,^ be diligent. Yf eny man shewe mercy, let him do it with chearfulnesse.
Let loue be without dissimulacion. Hate that which is euell: Cleue vnto that which is good. Be kynde one to another with brotherly loue. In geuynge honoure go one before another.5$ Be not slouthfull in the busynesse that ye haue in hande. Be feruent in the sprete. Applye youre selues vnto the tyme.
Reioyse in hope, be pacient in trouble. Con- tinue in prayer. Distribute vnto the necessi- ties of the sayntes.ll Be glad to harbarow.
Blesse thé that persecute you. Blesse, ¢ curse not. Be mery with them that are mery and wepe with them that wepe.

Be of one mynde amonge youre selues.|¢ 
Be not proude in youre awne consaytes, but 

T Eccli.3.c. * 1 Cor.i2.b. Eph.4.b. **1 Co. 14.a. tt 1 Pet. 4. b. d Eccli. 32. a. tt Deu. 15. b.
§§ Eccli. 31. e. Ill Heb. 13. a. 

! fo. drii. 

q es euery soule submytte him selfe to 

B, 

make youre selues equall to them of y lowe sorte. Be not wyse in youre awne opinions.”
Recompése vnto no man euell for euell. Pro- uyde honestie afore hade towarde euery ma.
Yf it be possible (as moch as in you is) haue peace with all men.

Dearly beloued, auenge not youre selues, but geue rowme vnto the wrath off God.
For it is wrytté: “Vengeaunce is myne, and 
I wil rewarde, sayeth y LORDE. ili herfore yf thine enemye hunger, fede him: Yf he thyrst, geue him drinke. ^For in so doinge thou shalt heape coales of fyre vpo his heade.
Be not ouercome with euell, but ouercome thou euell with good.

The xij. Chapter. 

the auctorite off the hyer powers. t 
For there is no power but of God. The 
, powers that be, are ordeyned of God: so that 
‘who so euer resisteth the power, resisteth the jordinaunce of God. And they that resiste, ishal receaue to them selues danacion. For
‘rulers are not to be feared for good workes, but for euell. Yf thou wilt be without feare off the power, do well then, and thou shalt haue prayse of the same: for heis the minister off God for thy wealth. But yff thou do euell, then feare, for he beareth not the swerde for naughte. For he is the mynister of God, a taker of vengeaunce, to punyshe him that doth euell. Wherfore ye must nedes obeye, not onely for punyshmet, but also because of conscience. For this cause must ye geue
\trybute also. For they are Gods mynisters, i which mateyne y same defence.
Geue to euery man therfore his dutye: 
|^ tribute, to whom tribute belongeth: custome, jo whom custome is due: feare, to whom ies belongeth: honoure, to whom honoure
|pertayneth. Owe nothinge to eny man, but to loue one another. ^For he that loueth another, hath fultylled the lawe. For where it is sayde: (t Thou shalt not breake wed- locke: thou shalt not kyll: thou shalt not steale: thou shalt not beare false witnesse : thou shalt not lust) and yf there be eny other commaundement, it is comprehéded in this worde: § Thou shalt loue thy neghboure

* Pro. 20.c. 1 Pet.3. b. ^ Deut. 32. e. + Pro. 23.a. 
|t Sap. 6.2. 1 Pet. 2. b. * Mat. 17. d. and 22, c, 
4 Gal. 6.a. 1 Tim. 1. b. t Exo. 20.c. Deut. 5.c. 

The Epistle to the Romapnes, 

Chap. rij. as thy selfe. Loue doth his neghboure no euell. Therfore is loue y fulfillynge of the lawe.

And for so moch as we know this, namely the tyme Ilthat the houre is now for vs to ryse from slepe. (For now is oure saluacion nearer, then whan we beleued: the nighte is past, but the daye is come nye.) Let vs ther- fore cast awaye y ‘workes of darknesse, and put on the armoure of lighte. Let vs walke honestly:as in the daye, "not in excesse off eatmge and in dronkennesse, not in cham- burynge and wantonnesse, not in stryfe and enuyenge: but put ye on the LORDE Iesus
Christ, **and make not prouysion for ¥ flesh, to fulfill the lustes of it.

The rij. Chapter. 

IM that is weake in the faith, receaue 

vnto you, and trouble not the con- sciences, One beleueth that he maye eate all thinge: but he that is weake, eateth herbes. Let not him that eateth, despyse him that eateth not: and let not him which eateth not, iudge him that eateth: for God
|hath receaued him. ttWho art thou, that iudgest another mans seruant? He stondeth or falleth vnto his LORDE: Yee he maye well stode, for God is able to make hi stode.
Some man putteth differéce betwene daye q daye, but another man counteth all dayes alyke. ++ Let euery man be sure of his mean- ynge. He that putteth difference in the daye, doth it vnto the LORDE: q he that putteth no differéce in the daye, doth it vnto y
LORDE also. He y eateth, eateth vnto the LORDE, for he geueth God thakes: and he that eateth not, eateth not vnto y
LORDE, and geueth God thankes. For none of vs lyueth to him selfe, and none dyeth to him selfe. Yf we lyue, we lyue vnto the LORDE: Yf we dye, we dye vnto the
LORDE. Therfore, whether we lyue or dye, we are the LORDES.

For therto dyed Christ, and rose agayne, and reuyued, that he mighte be $5LORDE both of deed and quycke. But why iudgest thou thy brother? Or thou other, why despysest thou thy brother? We shal all be broughte before y iudgmét seate of Christ./
Foritis wrytté: As truly as I lyue, (sayeth 

* Col. 3. a. tt Taco, 4. b. f Gal. 6. a.

$ Leui. 19, e. Mat. 22. d. 
§ Luc. 21. d. 
1t Col. 2, c. 

l| 1 Tess. 5. a. ex Gall5.col) Peri? aib:
$$ Act. 2. d. Phil. 2. a. 

Chap. rb. The Epistle to the Romapnes. Fa. clrb. 

the LORDE) all knees shal bowe vnto me,’ 

G 

q all tuges shal knowlege vnto God. Thus shal euery oue of vs geue acomptes for him- selfe vnto God. Let vs not therfore iudge one another eny more. But iudge this rather, y noma put a stombling blocke or an occasion to fall in his brothers waye. *Iknowe, q am full certified in ý LORDE Iesu, ý there is nothinge comen of ıt selfe: but vnto him y iudgeth it to be cõmen, to him is it comen. But yf thy brother be greued ouer thy meate, thé walkest thou not now after charite. Destroye not with thy meate, him, for whom Christ dyed.

Se therfore that youre treasure be not euell spoké of. For the kyngdome of God is not meate and drynke, but righteousnes, q peace, and ioye in the holy goost. He that in these thinges serueth Christ, pleaseth God, q is comended of me. Let vs therfore folowe those thinges which make for peace, q thinges wherwith one maye edifye another. Destroye not y worke of God for eny meates sake. ^AII thinges truly are cleane, but it is euell for y ma, which eateth with hurte of his coscience.t
It is moch better y thou eate no flesh, and drynke no wyue, nor eny thinge, wherby thy brother stombleth, or falleth, or is made weake. Hast thou faith, haue it with thy selfe before God. Happye is he, that co- demneth not him selfe in y thinge which he aloweth. But he that maketh conscience of it and yet eateth, is dampned: because he doth it not of faith. For {what so euer is not of faith, that same is synne.

The rb. Chapter. 

E that are stronge Sought to beare y 

fraylnesse of them which are weake, and not to stonde in oure awne consaytes.
Let euery one of vs ordre himselfe so, that he please his neghboure vn to his welth, and edifienge: For Christ pleased not himselfe, but as it is wrytten: “The rebukes of them which rebuked the, are fallen vpon me. || What so euer thinges are wrytté a fore tyme, are wrytten for oure learnynge, that we thorow pacience and comforte off the scriptures, might haue hope. ‘The God of pacience and consolacion graunte you to be like mynded one towarde another, acordinge vnto Jesu
Christ, that ye beynge of one mynde, maye 

^ Esa. 45. c. Phil. 2. a. 

t 1 Cor. 8. b. 

D TO as flaco 

* 4 Cor. B.a. i $ Gal. 6. a.

TEIG 

with one mouth prayse God the father of oure 
LORDE Iesu Christ. 

Wherfore receaue ye one another, as Christ hath receaued you to the prayse off God.
But I saye that Christ lesus was a mynister of the circumcision for the trueth of God, to cofirme the promyses made vnto the fathers, and that the Heythen mighte prayse God because of mercy, as it is wrytten: “For this cause wyl I prayse the amoge the Getyles, and synge vnto thy name. And agayne he sayeth: * Reioyse ye Heythen with his people.
And agayne: f Prayse the LORDE all ye 
Gentiles, and laude him all ye nacios. And agayne Esay sayeth: ‘There shalbe the rote of lesse, and he that shal ryse to rule the
Gentyles, in him shal the Gentyles trust. 
The God off hope fyll you with all ioye and peace in beleuynge, y ye maye be plenteous in hope thorow y power of the holy goost.

I my selfe am full certified of you (my brethren) that ye youre selues are full of goodnes, fylled with all knowlege, so that ye are able to exhorte one another. Neuer- theles (brethre) I haue somwhat more boldly wrytten vnto you, as one that putteth you in remembraunce, for the grace that 1s geue me of God, that I shulde be a mynister of lesu
Christ amonge the Heythen, to declare the gospell of God, that the Heythen mighte be an acceptable offerynge vnto God, sanctified by the holy goost. ‘Therfore maye I boost myselfe thorow lesu Christ, that I medle

with thinges perteyninge vnto God. For I 

durst not speake ought, excepte Christ had wroughte the same by me, to make the Hey- then obediet thorow worde and dede, thorow the power of tokens and wonders, and thorow the power of the sprete of God, so that from lerusale, and roüde aboute vnto Illyricon, I haue fylled all with the Gospell of Christ. So hane I enforced my selfe to preach ¥ Gospell, not where Christes name was knowne, lest I shulde buylde on another mans foundacion, but as it is wrytteu: To whom he was not spoken of, they shal se: /and they that haue not herde, shal vnderstonde. ‘This is also the cause, wherfore I haue bene oft tymes let to come vnto you. But nowsyth I haue nomore place in these countrees, hauynge yet a de- syre many yeares sence to come vnto you,

* Psal. 68. b. 
* Deu. 32. f. 

|| Ro. 4. d. 4 2 Re.22. g. Psal. 17. e. 

J Esa. 52. c. 

q Psa. 116, a. 

150 

B 

Jo. cirvi The Epistle to the Romapnes, Chap. bt. 

Christ, ¢ Stachis my beloued. Salute Apelles approued in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobolus housholde. Salute Herodion my kynszman. Grete thé which are of Nar- cissus housholde in the LORDE. Salute
Tryphena q Tryphosa, which haue laboured iuy LORDE. Salute my beloued Persida, which hath laboured moch « $ LORDE.
Salute Ruffus y chosen in ý LORDE: q his mother q myne. Grete Asyncritus, Phlego,
Herman, Patrobas, Hermen, q y brethré with the. Salute Philologus q Iulia, Nerius q his sister, ¢ Olympa, q all the sayntes with thé.
Salute one another with an holy kysse. The cógregacions of Christ salute you.

*] beseke you brethren, marke them which cause deuysion q geue occasions of euell, con- trary to ¥ doctryne which ye haue learned, q avoyde them. For they y are soch, serue not the LORDE lesu Christ, + but their awne belly: ¢ thorow swete preachinges ¢ flateringe wordes, they disceaue y hertes of ý innocentes.
For youre obedience is published amonge all men, therfore am I glad of you.

But yet I wolde haue you wyse in that which is good, q symple in euell. ©The God of peace treade Sathan vnder youre fete shortly. The grace of oure LORDE Iesu
Christ be with you. $ Timotheus my helper, q 
| Lucius, q «/'Iason, ¢ ** Sopater my kynsmé salute you. I Tertius which haue writté this epistle in ý LORDE, salute you. tt Gaius myne ooste q y oost of y whole cogregacion saluteth you. Erastus y chaberlaine of i cite saluteth you q Quartus a brother salutet. you. The grace of oure LORDE Iesu Christ be with you all Ame.

To him y is of power to stablyshe you, acordinge to my Gospell q preachinge of Iesu
Christ, wherby is vttered y mystery which hath bene kepte secrete, sence y worlde begane, but now is opened, q shewed by the scriptures of ¥ prophetes, at the comaundemet of the euerlastinge God, to set vp y obediéce of the faith amonge all Heytheu:it to the same God, which alone is wyse, be prayse thorow lesus Christ for euer, Amen.

To the Romaynes. 

Sent from Corinthum, by Phebe, which was 

a mynister of the congregaciou at Cenchrea. 

whan I shal take my iourney in to Spayne, I wil come to you: for I trust that I shal passe y waye and se you, and to be broughte on my waye thitherwarde by you: but so, that I
| [first refresh my selfe a litle with you. — 

D| But now go I to Ierusalem, to mynister vnto the sayntes. For they of Macedonia and Achaia “haue wyllingly prepared a com- men colleccion together, for the poore sayntes at lerusalem. They hauedone it wyllingly, and their detters are they. *For yf $ Heythen be made partakers off their spiritual thinges, their dutye is to mynister vnto the in bodely thinges. Now whau I haue perfourmed this, aud haue broughte the this frute sealed, I wil take my iourney by you in to Spayne. But I am sure whan I come vnto you, that I shal come with y full blessynge of the Gospell of Christ.

I beseke you brethren thorow oure LORDE 
Iesu Christ, and thorow the loue of the sprete, y ye helpe me in my busynes with youre prayers vnto God for me, that I maye be delyuered from the vnbeleuers in lewrye aud that this my seruyce which I do to Ieru- salem, maye be accepted of the sayntes, y I maye come vnto you with ioye by ¥ wyll of
God, aud refreshe my selfe with you. The 
God of peace be with you all. Amen. 

The rbi. Chapter. 

a COMMENDE vnto you Phebe oure sis- ter, which is a mynister of the congre- gacion of Cenchrea, that ye receaue her in the LORDE, as it be cdmeth the sayntes, and that ye helpe her in what soeuer busy- nesse she hath neade off you. For she hath

succoured many, and myne awne selfe also. 
Grete Prisca and t Aquila my helpers in 
Christ Iesu, which for my life haue layed downe their awne neckes: vnto whom not I onely geue thankes, but all the congregacions of the Heythen. Grete the congregacion also in their house. Salute Epenetos my beloued, which is $ first frute amoge the of
Achaia i Christ. Grete Mary, which hath bestowed moch laboure on vs. Salute An- dronicus ç Iunia my cosens, q felowe presouers, which are awncient Apostles, t were before me in Christ. Grete Amplias my beloued in y LORDE. Salute Vrban oure helper in

$ Act. 16. a. Phil. 2. b. |j Act. 13. a. € Act. 17. a. 

? Áct. 11. c. 1 Co. 16. a. 2 Cor. 8.a. and 9. a. 
** Act. 20, a. tt 1 Cor. 1. a. tt Rom. 11. d, 

*1Co.9. b. Gal. 6. a. t Act. 18. a. 2 Tim. 4. c. 
PiCole abe llit.2. b: t Phil. 3. c. * Mat. 10. d. 

The first Lptstle of the Apostle ©. Paul, to the Corinthians.

The summe of this Epistle. 

Chap. I. 

He commendeth the Corinthians, exhorteth thé to be of one mynde, q rebuketh the diuysion that was amonge them. Wordly wysdome is foolishnes before God, yee there is no wysdome but in the despysed crosse of Christ.

Chap. IL. 

It is not eloquence and glorious paynted wordes of wordly wysdome, that can edifie and con- uerte soules vnto Christ: but the playne wordes of the scripture, for, they make men- cion of him and his crosse.

Chap. IH. 

Paul rebuketh the sectes and authores therof. 
Christ is the foudacio of his church. No man ought to reioyce in men, but in God.

Chap. III. 

The preachers are but ministers. belongeth onely vnto God.

Chap. V. 
After what maner Paul curseth the man, that had committed fornicacion with his mother in lawe.

Iudgment 

Chap. VI. 
He rebnketh thé for goinge to lawe together before the Heithen, and reproueth vnclen- nesse.

Chap. VII. 

Of mariage, virginite and wyddowheade. 

Chap. VII. 

He rebuketh the that vse their lyberte to the slaunder of other, t sheweth how men ought to behaue the towarde soch as be weake.

Chap. IX. 
Loue forbeareth the thinge that she maye do by the lawe. He exorteth them to runne on forth in the course that they hane begonne.

Chap. X. 
He feareth them with the ensamples of the olde 
Testament, and exorteth them to a godly conuersacion.

Chap. XI. 

He rebuketh the for the abnse and misordre that they had aboute the Sacramét of the body and bloude of Christ, and bringeth them agayne to the first institucion.

Chap. XII. 

The dinersite of the giftes of the holy goost, geuen to the coforte and edifienge of one another, as the membres of à mans body serue one another.

Chap. XIII. 

The nature and condicions of loue. 

Chap. XIII. 

Paul sheweth that the gift of prophecie, inter- pretinge, or preachinge, excelleth the gift of tunges, and how they ought both to be vsed.

Chap. XV. 
The resurreccion of the deed. 

Chap. XVI. 

He putteth thé in remembraunce of the gadder- ynge for the poore christé at Ierusalé, and concludeth his epistle with the salutacions of certayne louynge brethren. |

—————————————— 

——— MÀ —M—— 

The first Epistle of the Apostle 2. Paul, to the Corinthians.

The first Chapter. 
AUL, called to be an Apostle of Iesus 

Christ thorow y will of God, and 

brother * Sosthenes, vnto the congregacion off 

God which is at Corinthum, to them that are 

t sanctified in Christ Iesus, sayntes by callinge, 

with all them that call vpon the name of oure 

LORDE [Iesus Christ, in euery place both off theirs and oures. t Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, and from the
LORDE Iesus Christ. 

I thake my God allwayes on youre behalfe, for the fauoure of God which is geué you in
Iesus Christ, that in all poyntes ye are made ryche by him, in euery worde, and in all maner of knowlege (eue as y preachinge of
Christ is confirmed in you) so that ye wante nothinge in eny gifte, and wayte but for the appearinge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ: which shal strength you also vnto y ende, that ye maye be blamelesse in the daye of oure
LORDE Iesus Christ. $ For God is faithfull, by who ye are called vnto the fellishippe of

| |his sonne Iesus Christ oure LORDE. 

'3| But I beseke you brethré thorow the name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, that ye all
\speake one thinge, and let there be no discen- sion amonge you, but that ye be perfecte in jone meanynge. For itis shewed me (my

brethren) of you, by them which are of y 

/housholde of Cloes, that there is stryfe amonge 

you. I speake of that, which euery one of 

pon sayeth: I holde of Paul. Another, I 

olde of Il Apollo. The thirde, I holde of 

Cephas. The fourth, I holde off Christ. Is 

Christ then deuyded in partes? Was Paul 

a 

t2 Cor. 1. a, 

| * Act. 18. b. t Ioh. 17. c. Heb. 9. c. 
|| Act. 18. c. 

$ Num. 23. c. 1 Co. 10. b. 1 Tess. 5. c. 

crucified for you? Or were ye baptysed in y name of Paul? I thanke God that ĮI haue baptised none of you, but Crispus and Gaius: lest eny shulde saye, y I in myne awne name had baptised. I baptysed also $ housholde| of Stephana. Farthermore knowe I not, whether I baptysed eny other. For Christ sent me not to baptyse, but to preach the Gospell, not with wyszdome of wordes, lest y crosse of
Christ shulde haue bene made of none effecte. 
For the worde of ¥ crosse is foolishnesse to thé that perishe 1 but vnto vs which are saued, it is the power of God. For it is! wrytte: ** I wyl destroye the wyszdome of. the wyse, q wil cast away the vnderstondinge! of ¥ prudet. Where are the wyse? Where are y serybes? where are y disputers of this world Hath not God made the wyszdome of this worlde foolishnesse ? For in so moch as the worlde by the wyszdome therof knewe not God in his wyszdome, it pleased God thorow foolish preachinge to saue them y beleue. For ttthe Iewes requyre tokens, and the Grekes axe after wyszdome. But we preach Christ the crucified: to the Jewes an occasion off fallinge, and vnto the Grekes foolishnes. But vnto them that are called
(both Iewes and Grekes) we preach Christ the power of God and tt the wyszdome off God.
For the foolishnes of God is wyser then men: and the weaknes of God is stroger thé men. Brethren loke on youre callinge, how that $$ not many wysemé after the flesh, not many mightie, not many of hye degre are called: but that foolish is before the worlde, hath God chosen, that he mighte cófounde the wyse: And that weake is before y worlde,

T Rom. 1.b. "* Esa. 29. c. 
Ioh. 2. c. and 6. d. 

tt Mat. 12. d. Luc. 11. c. tt Col. 2. a.

hath God chosen, y he mighte confounde the mightye. And the vyle and despysed before the worlde hath God chosen, yee and that which is nothinge, that he mighte destroye that which is oughte, that no flesh shulde reioyse in his presence. Of the same are ye also in
Christ Iesu, whieh of God is made vnto vs wyszdome and *righteousnes, and t sancti- fienge and redépcion, that, acordinge as it is wrytten: + He that reioyseth, shulde reioyse in the LORDE.

The ij. Chapter. 

ND I brethre, wha I came vnto you 

came not with hye wordes or hye wysz- dome, to shewe vnto you the preachinge of
Christ. For I shewed not forth my selfe amonge you that I knewe eny thinge, saue onely Iesus Christ, euen the same that was crucified, And I was amonge you in weaknes, and in feare, and in moch tremblinge: $and my worde and my preachinge was not with entysinge wordes of mans wyszdome, but in shewinge of the sprete and of power: that youre faith shulde not stonde in the wyszdome of men, but in the power of God.

That we speake of, is wyszdome amonge the y are perfecte: not y wyszdome of this worlde, nether of the rulers of this worlde which go to naughte: but we speake of the wyszdome of God, which is in secrete and lyeth hyd: which God ordeyned before the worlde vnto oure glorye: lwhich none of y rulers of this worlde knewe. For yf they had knowne it, they had not crucified the
LORDE of glorye, but as it is wrytten: 
TiThe eye hath not sene, and the eare hath not herde, nether hath it entred in to the hert of man that God hath prepared for them that loue him.

But God hath opened it vnto vs by his sprete. ** For the sprete searcheth out all thinges, yee euen the depenesses of the God- heade. For what mà knoweth what is in man, saue the sprete of mà which is in him?
Euen so no man knoweth what is in God, saue y sprete of God. As for vs, we haue not receaued the sprete of this worlde, but the sprete which cometh of God, so that we cà knowe what is geue vs of God: which we

ishewed with fyre: and the tt fyre shal trye 

* Tere. 23. b. Iob. 17. c. t Esa. 65. c. t lere. 9. d. 
1Cor.11.a. $1 Tess.1.a. ||Mat.11.e. T Esa. 64. a. 
** Rom. 8 1t Pro. 28. a. ttSap.9.b. Esa. 40. b. 

Chap. tij. Che first Epistle to the Corinthians. fo. trir. 

also speake, not with connynge wordes of mas wyszdome, but with the cénynge wordes of the holy goost, and iudge spirituall matters spiritually. Howbeit the naturall man per- ceaueth nothinge of y sprete of God. It is foolishnes vnto him, and he can not perceaue it: for it must be spiritually discerned.tt But he that is spirituall, discusseth all thinges, and he is iudged of noman. ttFor who hath knowne ¥ mynde of the LORDE? Or who shal enfourme him? But we haue the mynde of Christ.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND I brethren, coulde not speake vnto you as vnto spirituall, but as vnto carnall, euen as vuto babes in Christ. $$I gaue you mylke to drynke, and not meate, for ye mighte not then awaye withall, nether maye ye yet euen now, in so moch as ye are yet fleshlye.
For Illlseynge there is enuyenge, stryfe, and discencion amonge you, are ye not fleshly, q walke after y maner of men? For whan one sayeth: “I holde of Paul: another, I holde of Apollo, are ye not thé fleshlye? What is
Paul? What is Apollo? Eué mynisters are they, by whom ye are come to the beleue, and the same, acordinge as the LORDE hath geuen vnto euery man. I haue planted,
Apollo hath watred, 19 but God hath geuen the inereace. So then nether is he that planteth, eny thinge, nether he that watreth, but God which geueth the increace. As for him that planteth, and he that watreth, y one is as the other: but yet shal euery one re- ceaue his rewarde acordinge to his laboure.
For we are Gods labourers, ye are Gods 

huszbandry, ye are Gods buyldinge. 
Acordinge to the grace of God which is geuen vnto me, as a wyse buylder haue I layed the foundacion, but another buyldeth theron. Yet let euery man take hede how he buyldeth theron. ***For other fotdacion can noman laye, then that which is layed, the which is lesus Christ. But yf eny man buylde vpon this foundacion, golde, syluer, precious stones, tymber, haye, stobble, euery mas worke shal be shewed. ttt For the daye of the LORDE shal declare it, which shal be

J 
Rom. 11. d. a ] Cor. 1.a. ttt Esa. 28. c.

§§ Heb. à. c. Ill Gal. 5. c. 
TT Iob.6.g. Act.2.c. —*** Mat. 16. c. ttt 1 Pet. 1. b. and 4. b.

Fo. rire. 

euery mas worke what it is. worke that he hath buylde theron, abyde, he shal receaue a rewarde: Yf eny mans worke burne, he shal suffre losse: but he shal be saued himselfe, nenertheles as thorow fyre.

* Knowe ye not that ye are the temple of 
God, and that the sprete of God dwelleth in you? Yf eny man defyle the téple of God, n shal God destroye. For the temple of
God is holy, which ye are. Let no ma dis- ceaue himselfe. Yf eny man thinke himselfe wyse amoge you, let him become a foole in this worlde, that he maye be wyse. For tthe wyszdome off this worlde is foolishnes with
God. For it is wrytten: + He compaseth the wyse in their craftynesse. And agayne:
$ The LORDE knoweth the thoughtes of the wyse, that they are vayne. Therfore let no man reioyse in men. For all is youres, whether it be Paul or Apollo, whether it be
‘Cephas or the worlde, whether it be life or 
‘death, whether it be presente or for to come. 
| All is youres, but ye are Christes, and Christ 

i Gods. 

The iiij. Chapter. 
ET euery man this wyse esteme vs, enen for the mynisters of Christ, and stewardes of the lsecretes of God. Now is there no more requyred of the stewardes, then, that they be founde faithfull. * It is but a small thinge vnto me, that I shulde be indged of you, or of mans daye, nether iudge
I myne awne selfe. I knowe nonghte by my selfe, ** yet am I not therby iustified. It is the LORDE that iudgeth me. Therfore iudge ye nothinge before y tyme, vntyll the
LORDE come, which shal brynge it to lighte that is hyd in darknesse, and opé the councels of y hertes, and thé shal euery one haue prayse of God.
These thinges brethren haue I described in 

[myne awne preson q in Apollos for youre sakes, that ye mighte lerne by vs, that noman counte hygher of him self, then aboue is
|wrytteu, that one be not puft vp agaynst 
(another for eny mans cause. For who pre- ferreth the? t^ What hast thou that thou hast not receaued? Yf thou hast receaued it, why makest thon thé thy boost, as though thou

* E Cor. 6.c. 2 Cor. 6. c. Heb. 3. a. t Rom. 1. c. tlobó.b. $ Psal. 93. b. «9 Cor. 6. a. || Deu. 29. d. f| lere. 93. c. Luc. 12. vis Mods Bey. tt Iaco. 1. a.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians. 

Yf eny mans | 

ttt Pro. 20. d. Tere. 10. d. 

Chap. iiij. haddest not receaued it? Now ye are full, now ye are made riche, ye raigne without vs, and wolde God ye dyd raigne, that we might raigne with you.

Me thynketh that God hath set forth vs 
Apostles for the lowest off all, tenen as those that are appoynted vnto death. For we are a gasynge stocke vnto y worlde and to the angels, and vnto men. We are fooles for
Christes sake, but ye are wyse in Christ: We weake, but ye stroge: Ye honorable, but we despysed. Kuen vnto this daye we hoger and thyrst, and are naked, and are boffetted with fystes, and haue no certayne dwellinge place,
S$and laboure and worke with oure awne handes. We are reuyled, llland yet we blesse: we are persecuted, and suffre it: We are euell spoken of, and we praye: We are become as it were the very ontswepinges of ¥ worlde, yee the of scowringe of all men vnto this tyme.

I wryte not this to shame you, but as my|€ deare childré I warne you. For though ye haue ten thousande instructours in Christ yet haue ye not many fathers. For I haue 14 þe- gotten you in Christ Iesu thorow ¥ Gospell ?
Wherfore I exhorte you, *** be ye my folowers. 
For this cause haue I sent vnto yon Timotheus 
(which 1s my deare sonne, and faithfull in the 
LORDE) that he maye put you in remem- 

|braunce of my wayes, which are in Christ, eué jas I teach euery where in all congregacions.
Some are puft vp, as though I wolde come nomore at you. But I wil come to you

[shortly (tttyf the LORDE wyl) and wyl knowe, not the wordes of thé that are puft vp, but y power. For the kyngdome of God is not i wordes, but in power. What wil ye?
Shal I come vnto you with the rodd, or with loue and the sprete of mekenesse ?

The b. Chapter. 

HERE goeth a commen reporte, that 

there is whordome amoge you, and soch whordome, as is not once named amoge the
Heythen, itithat one shulde hane his fathers wife. And ye are puft vp, and haue not rather sorowed, that he which hath done this dede, mighte be put fró amége you. For I verely as absent in body, but present in sprete,

tt Psal. 43. c. Rom. 8. e. 
$T Gal. 4. b. Taco. 1. b. 

$$ Act. 18. a. — ||| Ro. 12. b. v3 Co. 10.a. Phil. 3. c. ttt Leuit. 18. a.

Che first Epistle to the Corinthians. Fo. riyri.) 

Chap. bí. 

haue determyned allready as though I were present (cocernynge him that hath done this dede) in $ name of oure LORDE Iesus
Christ, wha ye are gathered together with my sprete, and with the power of oure LORDE lesus Christ, *to delyuer him vnto Sathan for the destruccion of the flesh, that the sprete maye be saued in the daye of the LORDE lesus.

Youre reioysinge is not good. t Knowe ye not that a litle leuen sowereth the whole lompe of dowe? Pourge out therfore the olde leuen, that ye maye be new dowe, like as ye are swete bred. For we also haue an ł Easter lambe, which is Christ, that is offred for vs.
Wherfore let vs $ kepe Easter, not in ¥ olde leuen, ner in the lenen of maliciousnes, and wickednes, but in the swete bred of purenesse and of the trueth.

I wrote vnto you in the Epistle, that ye shulde haue nothinge to do with whoremogers, t that meant I not at all of the whoremongers of this worlde, ether of the couetous, or of extorcioners, or of the that worshippe ymages, for then must ye nedes haue gone out of the worlde. || But now haue I wrytte vnto you, y ye shulde haue nothinge to do with them:
(Namely,) yf there be eny man that is called a brother, and is an whoremonger, or couetous, or a worshipper of ymages, ether a raylar, or a dronkarde, or an extorcioner, fl with soch shal ye not eate. For what haue I to do to iudge them that are without? Do ye not iudge thé that are within? As for them that are without, God shal iudge them. ** Put awaye frd you him that is euell.

The bí. Chapter. 

OW dare one off you hauynge busynes 

with another, go to lawe before the vnrighteous, and mot before the sayntes? ttDo ye not knowe that the sayntes shal indge the worlde? Yf the worlde then shalbe indged off you, are ye not good ynough to iudge small matters? Knowe ye not that we shal iudge the angels? how moch more thinges that pertayne to the téporall life? Therfore yf ye haue iudgmentes of temporall matters, take them that are despysed in the congrega-

E) 

* Mat. 18. b. 1 Tim. 1. c. t Gal Sa, t Esa. 53. b. 
Ioh.1.c. § Exo. 12.a. ||? Tea.3.a. €|Iere.16.a. 
+t Mat. 12. d. and 19, d. tt Mat. 5. e. | 

** Deut. 13.a. 

cion, and set them to be iudges. This I saye to youre shame. Is there vtterly no wyse man amoge you? What not one at all, that can iudge betwene brother q brother? but one brother goeth to lawe with another, and that before the vnbeleners?

Now therfore is there vtterly a faute amoge you, that ye go to lawe one with another.
# Why rather suffre ye not wronge? Why suffre ye not youre selues rather to be de- franded? but ye youre selues do wroge and defraude, and that euen the brethré. Knowe ye not that y vnrighteous shal not inheret the kyngdome of God? Be not disceaued.
"Nether whoremongers, ner worshippers off ymages, ner breakers off wedlocke, ner weaklinges, nether abusers of them selues with mankynde, ner theues, nether the coue- tous, ner drokardes, ner cursed speakers, ner extorcioners shal inheret the kyngdome of
God. And soch haue some of you bene, but ye are waszhed, ye are sanctified, ye are made righteous by the name of the LORDE Iesus, and by the sprete of oure God.

I maye do all thinges, but all S$thinges are not profitable. I maye do all thinges, but I wil be broughte vnder no mas power. Meates are ordeyned for y bely, q the bely for meates.
But God shal destroye both it and them. 
The body belongeth not vnto whordome, but vnto the LORDE, and the LORDE vnto the body. li|God hath raysed vp the LORDE, and shal rayse vs vp also by his power.
Knowe ye not that youre bodies are the mébres of Christ? Shal I now take the mem- bres of Christ, and make them the membres of an harlot? God forbyd. Or do ye not knowe, that he which cleueth vnto an harlot, is one body? For they shalbe two (1% sayeth he) in one fleszhe. But he that cleueth vnto the LORDE, is one sprete.

Fle whordome. All synnes y a man doth, are without the body. But he that commyt- teth whordome, synneth agaynst his awne body. *** Or knowe ye not that youre body is the temple of the holy goost? Whom ye haue of God, and are not youre awne? tttFor ye are dearly boughte. Prayse ye God ther- fore in youre body q in youre sprete, which are Gods.

a Gal. 5. c. Ephe. 5. a. $$ Ecchi. 37. d. 1 Co. 10. c. 
||| Rom. 8. b. TF Gen. 2. d. OOS 41 Cori3ub: 

2 Cor. 6. c. ttt 1Co.7. c. 1 Pet. 1. c. 

Fo. dri. 

| The bij. Chapter. a S concernynge the thinges wherof ye wrote vnto me, I answere: It is good for a man not to touche a woman. Neuer- theles to avoyde whordome, let euery man haue his awne wife, and let euery woman haue hir awne huszbande. Let the mà geue vnto the wife due beneuolence: likewyse also the wife vnto ý man. The wife hath not power ouer hir awne body, but the huszbande: q likewyse the man hath not power ouer his awne body, but the wife. * Withdrawe not youre selues one fro another, excepte it be with the consent. of both for a tyme, that ye maye geue youre selues vnto fastinge and prayer, and thé come together agayne, lest
Sathan tempte you for youre incontynécye. 
But this I saye of fauoure, and not of com- maundemét. Howbeit I wolde rather y all mé were as I am. Neuertheles euery one hath his proper gifte of God: one thus, another so. To them verely y are vnmaried and to wedowes I saye: It 1s good for the that they abyde also as I do. + But yf they can not absteyne, let them mary. For it is better to mary, then to burne.

3] Butvnto them that are maried, commaunde 

[not I, but the LORDE, tthat the wife se- 
|parate not her selfe from the huszbande: but yf she separate her selfe, y she remayne vn-
ER or be reconcyled to hir huszbande : and let not the huszbande put awaye his wife from him.

As for the other, vnto thé saye I, not y 
LORDE: Yf eny brother haue an vnbeleu- ynge wife, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not put hir awaye. And yf a woman haue an vnbeleuynge huszbande, and he is content to dwell with her, let her not put him awaye. For the vnbeleuynge huszbande is sanctified by the wife, and the vnbeleuynge wife is sanctified by the husz- bande: or els were youre children vncleane, but now are they holy. But yf the vnbeleu- ynge departe, let him departe. A brother or a sister Is not boüde in soch cases, but God hath called vs in peace. $For what knowest thou O woma, whether thou shalt saue y ma?
Or what knowest thou O man, whether thou shalt saue the woman? But euen as God

* Tob. 6. d. and 8. a. 
E Mat. 5. d. 

Ioel 2. c. 
$1Pet.3.a. || Ephe. 4.a. 

t 1 Tim. 5. b. 
€ 1 Tim. 

The first Epistle to the Corinthians. 

Chap. bij. hath distributed vnto euery one {land as the

LORDE hath called euery man, so let him walke : and so orden I in all congregacions.

Yf eny man be called beynge circumcysed | ¢ 

let him take no Heythenshippe vpon him. 
Yf eny man be called in the Heythenshippe, let him not be circumeysed. Circumcision is nothinge, and vncircumeision is nothinge, but the kepynge of the commaundementes of
God. Let euery one abyde in the callynge wherin he is called. Art thou called a ser- uaüt, care not for it: neuertheles yf thou mayest be fre, vse it rather. For he that is called in the LORDE beynge a seruaüte, is a fre man of the LORDE. Likewyse he that is called beynge fre, is a seruaüt of
Chris. **Ye are dearly boughte, be not ye the seruauntes of men. Brethren let euery one wherin he is called, therin abyde with God.

As concernynge virgins, I haue no com- maundement of the LORDE, nenertheles I saye my goodmeanynge, as I haue optayned mercy of the LORDE to be faithfull. I suppose it is good for ¥ present necessite: for it is good for a man so to be. Art thou bounde vnto a wife, seke not to be lowsed:
Art thou lowsed fro a wife, seke not a wife. 
But yf thou take a wife, thou synnest not. 
And yf a virgin mary, she synneth not. Ne- uertheles soch shal haue trouble in the fleszhe.
But I fauoure you. 

Howbeit this I saye brethren: ttthe tyme|33 is shorte. Farthermore this is the meanynge,
As which haue wyues, be as though they 

ad none: and they that wepe, be as though they wepte not: and they that reioyse, be as though they reioysed not: ¢ they that bye, be as though they possessed not: a they that vse this worlde, be as though they vsed it not. For the faszhion off this worlde passeth awaye. “But I wolde that ye shulde be without care. +tHe that is syngle, careth for the thinges of the LORDE, how he maye please the LORDE. But he that is maried, careth for the thinges of the worlde, how he maye please his wife, and is deuyded. A woman and a virgin that is syngle, careth for the thinges of the LORDE, that she maye be holy both in body ¢ also in sprete. But she that 1s maried, careth for M thinges of the worlde, how she maye please hir huszbande.

6. a. ** 1 Cor. 6. c. 

; tt Psal. 89, a. 
2 Pet. 3. b. 

tł 1 Tim. 5.a. 

1 Pet. 1.c. a Mat. 6.2. Luc. 12. c.

Chap. tr. 

This I saye for youre profit, not that I wil tangle you in a snare, but for that which is honest and comly vnto you, that ye maye cotynually cleue vnto the LORDE without hynderaunce. But yf eny man thinke that it is vncomly for his virgin yf she passe the tyme of mariage, and yf nede so requyre, let him do what he lyst, he synneth not, let thé be coupled in mariage. Neuertheles he that purposeth surely in his hert, hauynge no nede, but hath power of his awne wyll, and deter- meth so in his hert to kepe his virgin, doth well Fynally, he that ioyneth his virgin in mariage, doth well: but he that ioyneth not his virgin in mariage, doth better. *'The wife is bounde to the lawe, as longe as hir huszbande lyueth. But yf hir huszbande slepe, she is at liberty to mary vnto whom she wil, onely that it be done in the LORDE.
But she is happier yf she so abyde after my judgment. I thinke verely that I also haue the sprete of God.

The biij. Chapter. 

S touchinge thinges toffred vnto Idols 

i we are sure y we all haue knowlege. 
Knowlege puffeth a mà vp, but loue edifyeth. 
Neuertheles yf eny ma thinke ý he knoweth eny thinge, he knoweth not yet fow he oughte jto knowe. But yf eny man loue God, the same is knowne of him.

So are we sure now cOcernynge the meates offred vnto Idols, §that an Idoll is nothinge in the worlde, and that there is none other
God but one. And though there be that are called goddes, whether in heauen or in earth
(as there be goddes many and lordes many) yet haue we but one God, euen the father,
| of who are all thinges, and we in him: q one 
LORDE Iesus Christ, by who are all thinges, and we by him.

33| But euery man hath not knowlege: for 

some make yet ‘consciéce ouer the Idoll, and eate it as a thinge offred vnto Idols: and so their conscience beynge weake, is defyled.
Neuertheles meate furthureth not vs vnto 
God. Yf we eate, we shal not therfore be the better: yf we eate not, we shal not ther- fore be the lesse. But take hede that this

* Rom. 7. a. t Act. 15. d. 1 Ro. 14. b. 
$1 Co. 10. c. || Rom. 11. d. 9| 1 Co. 10. d. 
** Rom.14.c. ttAct. 9.a. tt Mar.3.b. Luc. 4. d. 

The first Cpistle to the Corinthians. 

Fo. clyrtt. youre liberty be not an oceasion of fallynge vnto y weake. For yf eny man se the (which hast knowlege) syt at the table in the Idols house, shal not his conscience whyle it is weake, be occasioned to eate of the Idoll- offeringes? And so thorow thy knowlege shal the weake brother perishe, for who Christ dyed. But whan ye synne so agaynst the brethren, and wounde their weake coscience, ye synne agaynst Christ. Wherfore ** yf meate offende my brother, I wyl neuer eate flesh, lest I offende my brother.

The ir. Chapter. 

M I not an Apostle? Am I not fre? 

*t Haue I not sene lesus Christ oure 
LORDE? Are not ye my worke in the 
LORDE? Yf I be not an Apostle vnto other, yet am I youre Apostle: for the seale of nae Apostelshippe are ye in the LORDE.
Myne answere vnto them that axe me, is this: 
Haue we not power to eate and drynke? 
Haue we not power also to leade aboute a sister to wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the LORDE, and tt Cephas?
Or haue onely I and Barnabas not power this to do? Who goeth a warfare at eny tyme vpon his awne wages? Who planteth a vyn- yarde, and eateth not of the frute therof?
Who fedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the mylke of the flocke ?

Saye I these thinges after the maner of men? Sayeth not the lawe the same also?
For $$it is wrytten in the lawe off Moses: 
Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the oxe that treadeth out the corne. Doth God take thought for the oxen? Or sayeth he it not alltogether for oure sakes? For no doute it is wrytté for oure sakes. For he that eareth, shulde eare vpon hope: and he y throszheth, shulde troszhe vpon hope, y he mighte be partaker of his hope. ill Yf we haue sowne vnto you spiritual thinges, is it a greate thige yf we reape youre bodely thiges? But yf other be partakers of this power on you, wherfore are not we rather? TT Neuertheles we haue not vsed this power, but suffre all thinges, lest we shulde hynder the Gospell off
Christ. Knowe ye not that they which laboure in the temple, haue their lyuynge of $ temple:

$$ Deut. 25. a. 

iTim.5.c. ||| Rom.15.d. Gal. 6.a. 
TT 2 Cor. 11. a. 

So. elyrtiy. and they that wayte at the altare, enioye the altare? * Eueu thus also hath LORDE ordeyned, that they which preach the Gospell, shulde lyue of j Gospell. t But I haue vsed none of these thinges.

€| Nether wryte I therof, that it shulde be done so vnto me: for I had rather dye, the that eny man shulde brynge my reioysinge to naughte. For in that I preach the Gospell,
I neade not boost my selfe, for I must nedes do it. And wo vnto me, yff I preach not the Gospell Yf I do it with a good wyll,
I shal haue my rewarde: but yff I do it agaynst my wyll, yet is the office commytted vnto me. Wherfore the shal I be rewarded ?
(Namely therfore) that I preach the Gospell, and do the same frely for naughte, that I abuse not my libertye in y Gospell. For though I am fre from all men, yet haue I made my selfe euery mans seruaunt, y I mighte wynne Eoi 1 Vnto the Iewes I am become as a lewe, to wynne y lewes. To them that are vnder the lawe, I am become as though I were vnder the lawe, to wynne them which are vnder the lawe.

B! Vnto them that are without lawe, I am 

become as though I were without lawe (where 

as yet I am not without the lawe of God, but am in y lawe of Christ) to wynne thé that are without lawe. To the weake, am I become as weake, to wynne the weake. §I am be- come of all faszhions vnto euery man, to saue some at y leest. But this I do for the Gos- pels sake, that I mighte be partaker therof.
Knowe ye not, that they which runne in a course, runne all, yet but one receaueth the rewarde? Runne ye so, that ye maye optayne.

Kuery one that proueth mastrye, absteyneth 

from all thinges, and they do it, that they 

maye optayne a corruptible crowne, but we 

to optayne an llvncorruptible crowne. I 

therfore so runne, not as at an vncertayne 

thinge: So fighte I, not as one y beateth y 

ayre: but I tame my body, and brynge it in 

to subieccion, lest whan I preach vn to other: 
I my selfe be a cast awaye. 

The r. Chapter. 

a Jos I wolde not that ye shulde be ignoraunt of this, I that oure fathers

* Mat.10.a. t Áct.20.e. 2Tess.3.a. + Act. 16.a. 
$ 1 Co. 10. d, || 1 Pet. 5. a. T Exo. 13. d. 
** Exo. 14. c. tt Exo. 16. c. tt Exo. 17. b. 
§§ Nu. 20.a. Mat. 16.c. — ||| Num. 14.c. — 9 Exo. 

The first Epistle to tbe Corinthians, 

were all vnder the cloude,** and all passed thorow the see, q were all baptised vnder
Moses in the cloude and in the see, ttand dyd all eate of one spirituall meate, and + dyd all drynke of one spirituall drynke: but they dronke of the spirituall Srocke that folowed the, which rocke was Christ. Neuertheles in many of them had God no delyte, lllfor they were smytten downe in the wyldernesse.

These are ensamples vnto vs, y we shulde not lust after euell thinges, as they lusted.
Nether be ye worshippers off ymages, as were some of them. Acordinge as it is wrytté:
11 The people sat downe to eate and drynke, aud rose vp to playe. Nether let vs commytte whordome, *** as some of them comytted whordome, and fell in one daye thre q twenty thousande. Nether let vs tempte Christ, tttas some of them tempted him, and were de- stroyed of serpetes. Nether murmur ye, tt! as some of them murmured, and were destroyed thorow the destroyer.

All these thinges happened vnto the for ensamples, but they are wrytté to warne vs, vpon whom the ende of y worlde is come.
Therfore let him that thinketh he stondeth, take hede, lest he fall. There hath yet no téptacion ouertaken you, but soch as foloweth the nature of man. Neuertheles $5$ God is faithfull, lll which shal not suffre you to be tempted aboue youre strength, but shal in the myddes of y temptacion make a waye to come out, that ye maye beare it. Wherfore my dearly beloued, fle from worshippinge of
Idols. I speake vnto them which haue dis- crecio, iudge ye what I saye. The cuppe of thakesgeuynge wherwith we geue thankes, is it not the partakinge of the bloude of Christ ?
The bred that we breake, is it not y par- takinge of y body of Christ? For we many, are one bred g one body, in as moch as we all are partakers of one bred.

Beholde Israel after the fleszhe. eate the sacrifices, are they not partakers of the altare? What shal I now saye then ? 111
Shal I saye that the [doll is eny thinge ? Or that it which is offred vnto the Idoll is eny thinge? Nay. But this I saye, that loke what the Heythen offre, that offre they vnto deuels, and not vnto God. Now wolde I not

32.b. *** Num. 25.a, Psali05.d. ttt Num. 21. a. iif Num. 11. g. $$$ 1 Cor. 1.a. 1 Thes. 2. c. iliil] € Pe. 2. b. A54 1 Cor, 8.a.

Chap. r. 

B 

They Y € 

p| Put 

Chap. rt. that ye shulde be in the fellishippe of deuels.
Ye can not drynke of the cuppe of the 
LORDE and of the cuppe of the denels. Ye can not be partakers of the LORDES table, and of the table of deuels. Or wyl we pro- uoke the LORDE? *I maye do all thinges, but all thinges are not profitable. I maye do all thinges, but all thinges edifye not. Let noman seke his awne profit, but let euery man seke anothers welth.

What soeuer is solde in the fleshmarket, that eate, and axe no question for conscience sake. + For the earth is the LORDES, and all y therin is. Yf eny of thé y beleue not, d. you to a feast, and yf ye be disposed to go, what soeuer is set before you, that eate, axinge no question for conscience sake. yf eny man saye vnto you: This is offred vnto Idols, thé eate not of it, for his sake that. shewed it, and for hurtinge of con- science. (The earth is the LORDES and all that therin is.) Neuertheles I speake of t consciéce, not thine, but of y other. For why shulde my liberty be iudged of another más cdscience? § For yf I take my parte with thankesgeuynge, why am I euell spoken of, for y thinge wherfore I geue thankes ?

| Therfore whether ye eate or drynke, or what so euer ye do, do all to y prayse of God.
Be not ye an occasion of alee, nether to the lewes, ner to the Gentyles, ner to the congregacion of God, Veué as I also please all men in all thinges, not sekinge myne awne profit, but the profit of many, that they mighte be saued. ** Folowe ye me, as I do

Christ. 

COMMENDE you brethren, that ye re- 
I membre me in all poyntes, and kepe the ordinaunces, eue as I delyuered them vnto you. But I certifye you, that Christ is the heade of euery man. tt As for y man, he is the heade of y woman, but God is Christes heade.
Euery man that prayeth or prophecieth, and hath eny thinge on his heade, shameth his heade. But euery woman that prayeth or prophecieth with vncouered heade, dishonest- eth hir heade. For it is euen a lyke moch as yf she were shauen. Yf the woma be not

The ri. Chapter. 

* 1 Cor.6. c. Eccli. 37, d. t Psal. 23. h. 11 Cor. 
8. h. $ 1 Tim, 4. h. || Cot. 3. b. 9 1 Cor. 9. d. 
** 1 Cor. 4, c. tt Ephe. 5. c. 11 Ephe. 4. c. 

The first Epistle to tbe Corinthians. 

couered, let hir heer also be cut of, But yf it be vncomely for a woman to haue hir heer cut of or to be shauen, then let hir couer hir heade. Neuertheles the man oughte not to couer his heade, tt for so moch as he is the ymage and glory of God: but the woma is the glory of the man. $$ For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.
Nether was the man created for the womans sake, but the woma for the mans sake. ’

Therfore ought the woman to haue a power vpon hir heade, for the angels sakes. Neuer- theles nether is the man without y woman, nether the woman without the ma in the
LORDE. For as the woman is of the man, euen so commeth the man also by the woman, but all of God. Iudge ye by youre selues, whether it be comly, y a woma praye before
God bare headed? Or doth not nature teach you, y it is a shame for a man yf he weere loge heer, q a prayse to y woma, yf she weere loge heer? For hir heer is geué heer to couer her withall. But yf there be eny man amoge you that hath lust to stryne, let him knowe, that we haue no soch custome, nether the congregacions of God. But this must I warne you of: I commende it not, that ye come together not after a better maner but after a worse. First, whan ye come together in the congregacion, I heare, that there are discensions amonge yon, and I partly beleue it. ll For there must be sectes amonge you, that they which are perfecte amonge you, mighte be knowne.

Now whan ye come together, the LORDES supper can not be kepte. For whan it shulde be kepte, euery mà taketh his awne supper afore. And one is hogrie, another is dronké.
Haue ye not houses to eate and drynke in? 
Or despyse ye y cogregacion of God, and shame them that haue not? What shal I saye vnto you? Shal I prayse you? in this prayse I you not. That which I delyuered vnto you, receaued I of the LORDE. 41 For the LORDE Iesus the same nighte in the which he was betrayed, toke the bred, q gaue thankes, and brake it, and sayde: Take ye, « eate ye, this is my body, which is broken for you. This do in the remembraunce of me.
After the same maner also he toke ¥ euppe 

1 Ioh. 2. c. 
Luc. 22. h. 

$$ Gen.2. d. lll Mat. 18. a. «€ Mat. 
26.c. M 

far. 14, c. 

Fo. clrrb. 

5 

€ 

B 

a S eoncernynge spirituall giftes (brethren) 

| 

fo. rlyrbt. 

whan supper was done, and sayde: This cuppe is the new Testament in my bloude, this do (as oft as ye drynke it) in the remé- braüee of me. For as oft as ye shal eate of this bred, q drynke of this euppe, ye shal shewe the LORDES death, vntyll he come.

Wherfore who soeucr shal eate off this bred, and drynke off this cuppe of the LORDE vnworthely, shalbe giltye of the body and bloude of the LORDE. * But let a man examen himselfe, and so let him eate of this bred, and drynke of this cuppe. For he that eateth and drynketh vnworthely, eateth q drynketh his awne damnacion, because he maketh no differéce of the LORDES body.
Therfore are there so many weake and sicke amóge you, and many slepe. tFor yf we iudged oure selues, we shulde not be iudged.
But whan we are iudged, we are chastened of $ LORDE, that we shulde not be daned with the iworlde. Wherfore my brethren, whan ye come together to eate, tary one for another. But yf eny man honger, let him eate at home, that ye come not together vnto cédempnacion. As for other thinges, I wil set them in order whan I come.

The rij. Chapter. 

I wolde not that ye were ignoraunt. 

Ye knowe that ye were Heythé and wente youre wayes vnto dome Idols, eué as ye were led. Wherfore I declare vnto you, $that no man speakynge thorow the sprete of God, defyeth lesus. And no man can saye that
Iesus is the LORDE, but by the holy goost. 
“There are dyuerse giftes, yet but one sprete: and there are dyuerse offices, yet but one LORDE: and there are dyuerse opera- cions ll yet is there but one God, which worketh allin all. The giftes of the sprete are geuen vnto euery man to profit the cogregacion. To one is geuen thorow the sprete the vtteraunce of wiszdome: to another is geuen the vtter- aunce of knowlege acordinge to the same sprete: to another, faith in the same sprete : to another, the giftes of healinge in the same
Isprete: to another, power to do miracles: to i another, prophecienge: to another, fiudg- ment to discerne spretes: to another, dyuerse jtunges : to another, the interpretacion of

13.b. t Eccli. 18. c. 

111oh.2.c. $ Marc. 
* Rom. 12. a. 

|? 2 Co. 
9. d. || Iob. 5. b. € 1 Ioh. 4.8. 

The first Epistle to the Corinthians. 

tunges. These all doth ¥ same onely sprete worke, and distributeth vnto euery man, acordinge as he will.

? For as the body is one, and hath yet many membres, neuertheles all the membres of the body though they be many, are yet but one body: euen so Christ also. For we are all baptysed in one sprete to be one body, whether we be lewes or Gentyles, whether we be bonde or fre, and haue all **dronke of one sprete.
For the body also is not one membre, but many. Yf the fote saye: I am not y hande, therfore I am not a membre of the body, is he therfore not a membre of y body? And yf the eare saye: I am not the eye, therfore am l not a membre of the body, is he therfore not a membre of the body? Yf all the body were an eye, where were then the hearinge ?
Yf all were hearinge, where then the smell- inge? But now hath God set the membres, euery one seuerally in the body, as it hath pleased him. Neuertheles yf all the mébres were one membre, where were then the body?
But now are the membres many, yet is the body but one.

‘The eye can not saye vnto the hande: I haue no nede of the: or agayne the heade vnto the fete, I haue no nede of you: but rather a greate deale the mébres of the body which seme to be most feble, are most neces- sary: and vpon those membres of the body which we thinke least honest, put we most honestie on: and oure vncomly partes haue most beutye on. For oure honest membres neade it not. But God hath so measured y body, and geuen most honoure vnto that mebre which had nede, that there shulde be no stryfe in the body, but that the membres shulde indifferently care one for another.
And yf one membre suffre, all the membres suffre with him: and yf one membre be had in honoure, all the membres are glad with him also. But ye are the body of Christ, and membres, euery one of another.

And God hath ordeyned in the congrega- cion, first the ttApostles, secodly prophetes, thirdly ++ teachers, then doers of miracles, after that the giftes of healinge, helpers, gouerners, dyuerse tunges. Are they all Apostles?
Are they all prophetes? Are they all teachers? 
Are they all doers of miracles? Haue they 

** Esa. 55.a. Toh. 7.d. 

? Rom. 12. a. Ephe. 4. b. 
Ephe. 4. a. tt Act. 13. a. 

tt Mat. 10, a. Luc. 9. a. 

Chap. rij. 

Chap. riii. all the giftes of healinge? Speake they all with tunges? Can they all interprete? But covet ye the best giftes. And yet shewe I you a more excellent waye.

The ritj. Chapter. 

HOUGH I spake with the tunges of men and angels, and yet had not loue,
I were euen as sowndinge brasse, or as a tynklinge Cymball, *And though I coulde prophecy, q vnderstode all secretes, and all knowlege, and had all faith, so * that I coulde moue moütaynes out of their places, and yet had not loue, I were nothinge. And though
I bestowed all my goodes to fede y poore, and though I gaue my body enen that I burned, and yet haue not loue, it profiteth me nothinge.
Loue is pacient q curteous, loue envyeth not, loue doth not frowardly, is not puft vp, dealeth not dishonestly, + seketh not hir awne, is not prouoked vnto anger, thynketh not euell, reioyseth not ouer iniquyte, but reioyseth in the trueth, beareth all thinges, beleueth all thinges, hopeth all thinges, suffreth all thinges.
Though prophecienges fayle, or tunges ceasse, or knowlege perishe, yet loue falleth neuer awaye. For oure knowlege is vnpar- fecte, and oure prophecienge is vnparfecte.
But whà that which is perfecte, commeth, then shal the vnparfecte be done awaye.
Whan I was a childe, I spake as a childe, I vnderstode as a childe, I ymagined as a childe.
But as soone as I was a man, I put awaye childishnes. Now we se thorow a glasse in a darke speakynge, but thé shal we se face to face. Now I knowe vnperfectly: but thé shal I knowe eué as I am knowne. Now abydeth faith, hope, loue, these thre: but the

greatest of these is loue. 

The riiij. Chapter. 

ABOURE for loue. Couet spirituall giftes, but specially that ye maye. pro- phecye. For he y speaketh with tunges, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God: for no man heareth him. Howbeit in y sprete he speaketh misteries. But he that prophecieth, speaketh vnto men to edifienge, q to exhorta- cion, and to coforte. He that speaketh with tunges, edifieth himselfe: but he that pro- phecieth, edifieth the cogregacion. I wolde that ye all spake with tunges, but rather that

* Mat. 7. b. t Luc. 17.8. ł Phil. 2. b, 

The first Epistle to the Corinthians. 

ye prophecied. For greater is he that pro- phecieth, then he that speaketh with tiges : excepte he also expounde it, that the congre- gacion maye haue edifienge. But now brethren yf I come vnto you, and speake with tunges, what shal I profet you, excepte I speake vnto you ether by reuelacion or by knowlege, or by prophecienge, or by doctryne ?

Likewyse is it also in y thinges that geue sounde, and yet lyue not: whether it be a pype or an harpe, excepte they gene distyncte soundes from them, how shal it be knowne what is pyped or harped? And yf the trope geue an vncertayne sounde, who wil prepare him selfe to the battayll? Euen so ye like wyse, whan ye speake with tunges, excepte ye speake playne wordes, how shal it be knowne what is spoké? for ye shal but speake in y ayre. So many kyndes of voyces are in the worlde, and none of them is without signifi- cacion., Yf I knowe not now what y voyce meaneth, I shalbe an aleaunt vnto him that speaketh: qhe that speaketh, shalbe an aleatt vnto me. Eue so ye (for so moch as ye couet spirituall giftes) seke y ye maye haue plentye to the edifienge of the congregacion. Wher- fore let him that speaketh with tunges, praye, that he maye interprete also. Yf I praye with tunges, my sprete prayeth, but my vnder- stodinge bryngeth no man frute. How shal it be then ? Namely thus: I wil praye with y sprete, and wil praye with the vnderstodinge also: I wil synge psalmes in the sprete, and wil synge psalmes with y vnderstondinge also.

But whan thou geuest thankes with ¥ sprete, how shal he that oceupieth the rowme of the vnlearned, saye Ame at thy geuynge of thankes, seynge he knoweth not what thou sayest? Thou geuest well thankes, but the other is not edifyed. I thanke my God, that
I speake with tunges more then ye all. Yet had I leuer in the cógregacion to speake fyue wordes with my vnderstondinge y I maye enfourme other also, rather then ten thousande wordes with tunges. $ Brethren be not children in vnderstondinge, howbeit as concerninge maliciousnes be childré, but in vnderstondinge be parfecte. In the lawe it is wrytten: With other tunges and with other lippes wyl I speake vnto this people, and yet shal they not so heare me, sayeth the LORDE. 4 Therfore are tunges for a token, not to thé that beleue,

§ Eph. 4. a. || Esa. 28. b. T Act. 2. b. 

So. clyrbij. 

z 

Fo. rroi. but to them that beleue not. Contrary wyse, prophecienge, not to them that beleue not, but to them which beleue.

Yf the whole cdgregacion now came to- gether in to one place, q spake all with tunges, and there came in they that are vnlearned, or they which beleue not, shulde they not saye, that ye were out of youre wyttes? But yff all prophecied, and there came in one beleueth not, or one vnlerned, he shulde be rebuked of them all, and iudged of all, and so shulde the secrete of his hert be opened, and so shulde he fall downe vpon his face, wor- shippinge God, and knowleginge, that of a trueth God isin you. Howis it then brethren?
Whan ye come together, euery one hath a psalme, hath doctryne, hath a tunge, hath a reuelacion, hath an interpretacion. Let all be done to edifyenge. Yf eny ma speake with tunges, let him do it him selfe beynge the seconde, or at the most him selfe beynge

thirde, and one after another, and Jet one interprete it. But yf there be not an inter- preter, then let him kepe sylence in the congregacion, howbeit let him speake to him- selfe and to God. As for the prophetes, let two or thre speake *and let the other indge.
But yf eny reuelacion be made vnto another that sytteth, then let the first holde his peace.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians, 

£| Ye maye all prophecye one after another that they all maye lerne, and that all maye haue comforte. And the spretes of the pro- phetes are subiecte vnto the prophetes. For
God is not a God off discension, t but off peace, like as in all congregacions off the sayntes. t Let youre wyues kepe sylence in the cogregacion, for it shal not be permytted vnto thé to speake, but to be vnder obedience,
$as ý lawe sayeth also. But yf they wyll lerne eny thinge, let them axe their huszbades at home. For it becommeth not wemé to speake in the congregacion. Or spronge the worde of God from amonge you? Or is it come vnto you onely? Yf eny man thynke himselfe to be a prophet, or spirituall, let him knowe what I wryte vnto you, for they are the commaundementes of the LORDE. But yf eny man be ignoraunt, let him be igno- raunt. Wherfore brethren, couet to prophecye, and forbyd not to speake with tunges. Let all thinges be done honestly and in order.

* 1 Ioh. 4. a. t Rom. 15. d. 

' t1 Cor. 11. a. 
1 Tim. 2. b. $ Gen. 3. c. 

Chap. rb. 

The rb. Chapter. 
I DECLARE vnto you brethren, the|@ 
Gospell that I haue preached vnto you 
(which ye haue also accepted, and in the which ye stode, by the which also ye are saued) after what maner I preached it vnto you, yf ye haue kepte it, excepte ye haue beleued in vayne. For first of all I delynered vnto you that which I also receaued, how that
Christ dyed for oure synnes acordinge to the scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose agayne y thirde daye acordinge to the scriptures, and that he was sene of Cephas, then of the twolue: after that was he sene of mo then fyue hundreth brethren at once, wherof there are yet many alyue, but some are fallen aslepe. Afterwarde was he sene of
Iames, then of all the Apostles. Last of all was he sene of me also, as of one borne out of due tyme. RFor I am y leest of the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle,
‘because I persecuted the congregacion of 
God. But by the grace of God I am that I am. And his grace in me hath not bene|3 vayne, but I haue laboured more then they all: howbeit not I but the grace of God which is with me. Now whether it be I or they, thus haue we preached, and thus haue ye beleued.

But yf Christ be preached, that he is rysen from the deed, how saye then some amdge you, that there is no resurreccion of the deed ?
Yf there be no resurrecci6 of the deed, then is Christ not rysen. Yf Christ be not rysen, then is oure preachinge in vayne, and youre faith is also in vayne: yee and we are founde false witnesses of God, because we haue testified agaynst God, that he hath raysed vp
Christ, whom he hath not raysed vp, yf the deed ryse not agayne. For yf the deed ryse not agayne, the is Christ also not rysen agayne. But yf Christ be not rysen agayne, then is youre faith in vayne, and ye are yet in youre synnes: they also that are falle a slepe in Christ, are perished. Yf in this life onely we hope on Christ, then are we of all men the most miserable.

But now is Christ rysen from the deed, and | € is become **y first frutes of them that slepe.
For by one man commeth death, and by one 
** Col. 1. h. 

|| Ephe. 3. b. T Act. 8. a. and 9. a. 

Chap. rbi, man the resurreccion of the deed. For as they all dye in Adam, so shal they all be made alyue in Christ, but euery one in his order. The first is Christ, then they that beloge vnto Christ, whan he commeth. Then the ende, wha he shal delyuer vp the kyng- dome vnto God the father, whan he shal put downe all rule, and all superiorite, q power.
* For he must raygne, tyll he haue put all his enemies vnder his fete. The last enemye that shal be destroyed, is death, for he hath put all thinges vnder his fete. But wha he sayeth, that all thinges are put vnder him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which put all thinges vnder him. Whan all thinges shalbe subdued vnto him, then shal the sonne him- selfe also be subiecte vnto him, which put all thinges vnder him, that God maye be all in all.

3| Or els what do they which are baptised 

ouer y deed, yf the deed ryse not at all? Why are they then baptysed ouer the deed? And why stonde we in ioperdy euery houre? By oure reloysinge which I haue m Christ Iesu oure LORDE, I dye daylie. That I haue foughte with beestes at Ephesus after ý maner of men, what helpeth it me, yf the deed ryse not agayne? t Let vs eate and drynke, for tomorow we shal dye. Be not ye disceaued.
Euell speakinges corruppe good maners. 
Awake righte vp, and synne not: for some haue not y knowlege of God. This I saye to youre shame.

But some man mighte saye: How shal the deed aryse? And with what maner off body shal they come? Thou foole, + y which thou sowest is not quyckened, excepte it dye. And what sowest thou? thou sowest not y body that shalbe, but a bare corne, namely of wheate, or of some other. But God geueth it a body as he wil, and vnto euery one of ý sedes his owne body.

É| All fleszhe is not one maner of fleszhe, but 

there is one maner fleszhe of men, another of beastes, another of fiszhes, another of byrdes.
And there are heauenly bodies, and there are earthy bodies: but the heauenly haue one glory, and y earthy another. The Sonne hath one clearnes, the Moone hath another clearnesse, and the starres haue another clear- nesse, for one starre excelleth another in clearnesse: Euen so the resurreccion of the

* Paal, 109, a. Heb. 2. b, tioh.12.c. $Gen.2. b.

t Esa. 22, b. Sap. 2. a. 
||1Tess.4.c. — € Phil.3.c. 

The first Epistle to the Corinthians, 

‘fro heaué, heauely. 

deed. It is sowne in corrupcion, and shal ryse in vncorrupcion: It is sowne in dis- honoure, ¢ shal ryse in glory: It is sowne in weaknesse, and shal ryse in power: It is sowne a naturall body, ¢ shal ryse a spirituall body.

Yf there be a naturall body, there is a spirituall body also. As it is wrytten: § The first man Adam was made in to a naturall life, and the last Ada in to a spiritual life.
Howbeit the spirituall body is not the first, but y naturall, and then the spirituall. The first man is of the earth, earthy : y seconde ma is
As the earthy is, soch are they also that are earthy: and as ý heauenly is, soch are they also y are heanenly.
And as we haue borne the ymage of the earthy, so shal we beare the ymage of the heauenly also. This I saye brethren, that flesh q bloude can not inheret y kyngdome of
God: nether shal corrupcion inheret vncor- rupcion.

Beholde, I saye vnto you a mystery: Il We shal not all slepe, but we shal all T be chaunged, and that sodenly and in the twink- lynge of an eye, at the tyme of the last trompe.
For the trompe shal blowe, and the deed shal ryse vncorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged.
For this corruptible must put on vncorrup- cion, and this mortal] must put on immortalite.
But whan this corruptible shal put on vn- corrupcion, and this mortall shal put on immortalite, the shal the worde be fulfylled that is wrytte: Death is swalowed vp in victory. ** Death, where is thy stynge? Hell, where is thy victory? ‘The stynge of death is synne: 'The strength of synne is the lawe.
But thankes be vnto God,tt which hath geue vs the victory thorow oure LORDE Iesus
Christ. Therfore my deare brethre, be ye stedfast, vnmoueable, q allwaye riche in the worke of the LORDE, for as moch as ye knowe, that youre laboure is not in vayne in the LORDE.

The roi. Chapter. 
ONCERNYNGE the t: gadderynge that is made for the sayntes, as I haue or- deyned in the congregacions of Galacia, euen so do ye also. Vpon some Sabbath daye let euery one of you put aside by him selfe, and laye vp what so euer he thinketh mete, that

** Ose.13.c. Heb.2.b. tt 1Ioh.5.a. t Rom. 15.d. d

Cor. 8. a. and 9. a, 

Fo. clyrür. 

F 

fo. clyyy. the colleccion be not to gather whan I come.
Whan I am come, whom so euer ye shal alowe by youre letters, thé wyll I sende to brynge youre liberalite vnto lerusalem. Neuertheles yf it be mete that I go thither also, they shal go with me. * But I wil come vnto you, whan I go thorow Macedonia: for thorow
Macedonia wyl I take my iourney. With you peraduéture wil ] abyde, or els wynter, that ye maye brynge me on my waye, whither so euer I go. ;

I wyl not se you now in my passage, for I hope to abyde a whyle with you, yf the
LORDE shal suffre me. t But J wil tary at 
Ephesus vntyll whitsontyde. For a greate and frutefull dore is opened vnto me, and there are many aduersaries. Yf Timotheus come, se that he be without feare with you, for he worketh $ worke of the LORDE, as 1 do. Let no man therfore despyse him, but conuaye him forth in peace, that he maye come vnto me, for I loke for him with the brethren.

As for brother Apollo, be ye sure, that I greatly desyred him to come vnto you with the brethré. And his mynde was not at all to come at this tyme, but he wyl come wha he hath oportunyte. Watch ye, stonde fast in
2 Cor. 1. c. 

* Act. 19.. 

The first Epistle to the Corinthians, 

Chap. rbí. 

the faith, quyte you like men, and be stronge: let all youre thinges be done in loue.

But brethren (ye knowe the house off|€ 

t Stephana, that they are the first frutes in 
Achaia, and that they haue appoynted thé selues to mynister vnto the sayntes) I exhorte you to be obedient vnto soche, and to all that helpe and laboure. Iam glad of the comynge of Stephana and Fortunatus, and Achaicus.
For loke what was lackynge vnto me on youre parte, y haue they suppleed: they haue re- freszhed my sprete and youres. Knowe them therfore that are soch.

The congregacions of Asia salute you. 
Aquila and Priscilla salute you moch in the 
LORDE, and so doth the cogregacion that is in their house. All the brethren salute you.
§ Salute ye one another with an holy kysse. 
The salutacion of me Paul with myne awne hande. Yf eny ma loue not the LORDE
Tesus Christ, the same be Anathema Maharan 
Matha. The grace of the LORDE lesus 
Christ be with you. My loue be with you all in Christ Jesu. Amen.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians sent out of Asia, by Stephana and Fortunatus, and
Achaicus, and Timotheus. 

t Act. 20. b. ł1 Cor. 1. b. § Rom. 16. b. 

The summe of this Cpistle. 

Chap. I. 

The consolacion of God in trouble. The loue of 
Paul towarde the Corinthians, and his excuse that he came not vnto them.

Chap. II. 

He sheweth the cause of his absence and exorteth the to forgeue the man that was fallen and to receaue him agayne with loue.

Chap. III. 

He prayseth the preachinge of the Gospell aboue the preachinge of the lawe.

Chap. HII. 

A true preacher is diligent, he corruppeth not the worde of God, he preacheth not himselfe, but seketh the honoure of Christ, yee though it be with the parell of his life.

Chap. V. 
The rewarde for suffringe trouble. 

Chap. VI. 

An exortacion to receaue the worde of God with thankfulnesse and amendmet of life. The diligence of Paul in the gospell, and how he warneth them to eschue the company of the

Heythen. 

The seconde 3zpietic 

of the Apostle S. Paul, to the Corinthians. 

Chap. VII. 

He exorteth thé to receaue the promises of , God thankfully. The Corinthias are commended for their obediéce and loue towarde Paul.

Chap. VIII IX. 

He putteth them in remembraunce to helpe the poore sayntes at lerusalem acordinge as the
Macedonians dyd. 

Chap. X. 

He toucheth the false apostles, and defendeth his auctorite and callynge.

Chap. XI. 

Paul (vnder sufferauce) comendeth himselfe, and defendeth his auctorite agaynst the false pro- phetes.

Chap. XII. 

Paul is take vp in to the thirde heauen, and heareth wordes not to be spoken off.

Chap. XIII. 

He promiseth to come vnto them, and exhorteth them so to ordre them selues that he maye fynde them parfecte, and of one mynde.

The first Chapter. 

a AUL an Apostle of Jesu Christ, by the 

will of God, and brother Timotheus. 

Vnto the congregacion of God which is at 

Corinthü, with all the sayntes which are 1 all 

Achaia. * Grace be with you, and peace fro 

God oure father, and from the LORDE lesus Christ.

Blessed be God the father of oure LORDE 
Iesus Christ, the father of mercy and y God of all comforte, which comforteth vs im all oure trouble: in so moch y we are able to comforte them that are in eny maner of trouble, with the same comforte wherwith we loure selues are comforted of God. For as
Ithe afflicciés of Christ are plenteous in vs, euen so is oure cósolacion plenteous by Christ.
| But whether we haue trouble or comforte, it 
‘is done for youre welth. Yf it be trouble, it 
‘is done for youre cóforte and health, which 

| health sheweth hir power, in that ye suffre the same affliccions which we suffre. Yf it be comforte, it is done also for youre comforte
‘and health. Therfore is oure hope fast for you, in as moch as we knowe, that, like as ye

| jare partakers of the affliccios, so shal ye be 

| |partakers also of the consolacion. 

‘B| Brethren we wolde not haue you ignoraunt 

| jof oure trouble, t which happened vnto vs in 
Asia, for we were greued out off measure passynge strength, so that we euen dispared of life, and had concluded in oure selues y we must nedes dye. But this was done, because we shulde not put oure trust in oure

| selues, but in God, which rayseth vp the deed to life agayne: which delyuered vs from so

* Gal.1.a. Ephe. 1.a, 1 Pet. 1. a. t Act. 19. c, f2 Cor4.c. $Phil2. b. 1Tess.2.c. *1Co.16. a.

| The seconde BZyptstle 
|. of the Apostle S. Paul, to the Corinthians. 

| 

| 

greate a death, and yet delyuereth daylie,, 
On whom we trust, that he wil delyuer vs, here after also, by the helpe of youre prayer for vst that on oure behalfe many thankes maye be geuen by many personnes, for the

gifte that is geuen vs. 

For oure reioysinge is this, euen the testi- 

mony of oure conscience, that in synglenes T, godly purenesse, not in fleshlye wyszdome, but in the grace of God, we haue had oure con- uersacion in the worlde, but most of all with you. For we wryte nothinge els vnto you, then that ye rede and also knowe. Yeeq I trust that ye shal fynde vs vnto the ende, euen

as ye haue founde vs partly. 

For we are youre reioysinge, eué as ye also are oure $ reioysinge in y daye of the LORDE lesus. And in this confidence was I mynded the other tyme to come vnto you (that ye mighte haue yet another pleasure more) ¢ “to passe by you in to Macedonia, q to come againe out of Macedonia vnto you q to be led forth to Iewrye warde of you.

Whan I thus wyse was mynded, dyd I vse lightnesse? Or are my thoughtes fleshly ?
Not so ll but with me yee is yee, and nay is naye.. O faitfull God, that oure worde vnto you hath not bene yee and naye. For Gods sonne Jesus Christ, which was preached amonge you by vs (namely, by me and Siluanus and
Timotheus) was not yee and naye, but in him it was yee. For all the promyses of God are yee in him, q are Ame in him, to the prayse of God by vs. But it is God which stably- sheth vs with you in Christ, and hath anoynted us, ^and sealed us, and geuen the ernest of the

sprete in oure hertes. 

l| Mat. 5. d. Taco. 5. c. 

^ Ephe. 4. c. 

Chap. ti. l 

The ij. Chapter. a UT I call God to recorde vnto my soule,

B that to fanoure you withall I came not agayne vnto Corinthum. Not that we are * lordes oner youre faith, but we are helpers of youre ioye, for ye stonde in faith. But I determyned this with my selfe, that I wolde not come agayne to you in heuynes. For yf
I make you sory, who is it that shal make me glad, but the same which is made sory by me? And the same hane I wrytten vnto you, lest wha I come, I shulde take heuynes of them, of whom I oughte to reioyse: for so- moch as I hane this confidence in you all, that my ioye is the ioye of you all. For in greate trouble and anguysh of hert wrote I vnto you with many teares: not y ye shulde be sory, but that ye mighte perceaue the loue, which I haue most specially vnto you.

But yf eny man haue caused sorowe, the same hath not made me sory, but partely, lest
I shulde grene you all. It is sufficient, that tthe same man is so rebuked of many, so that from hence forth ye oughte the more to forgeue him and to comforte him, lest he be swalowed vp in ouer moch henynesse. Wher- fore I exhorte you, that ye shewe loue vpo him. For therfore dyd I wryte vnto you also, that I mighte knowe the profe of you, whether ye were obediet in allthinges. But loke vnto who ye forgeue eny thinge, I forgene hi also.
For I also, yf I forgeue onght vnto eny ma, that forgeue I for youre sakes in the rowme of
Christ, lest we shulde be preuented ol Sathan. 
For his thonghtes are not. vnknowne vnto vs. 

But wha I eame to t Troada to preach y 
Gospell of Christ (and a dore was opened vnto me in y LORDE) I had no rest tn my sprete, because I founde not ‘Titus my brother: but I toke my leue of them, and wente awaye in to Macedonia. Yet thankes be vnto God, which allwaye geueth vs the victory in Christ, and openeth y sauoure of his knowlege by vs in euery place. For we are vnto God the good sanoure of Christ, both amonge thé y are saued, q amonge them y perishe.| To these, y sauoure of death vnto death: bnt vnto y other, the sauoure of life vnto life. And who is mete therto ? For we are not as many are,

? Rom. 9. a. * 1 Pot: 5.a. t 1 Cor. 5. b. fAÀct. 16. b. §Col.1.c. || Luc.2.c. € Exo.31. c.
** Tere. 31. e. tt Phil. 2. b. tt 1 Cor. 4. b. 2 Co. 6. a. 

The ý. Epistle to the Corinthians. 

Fo. elyrrti. which choppe q chaunge with the worde of
God, but ene out of purenesse, and ont of God, 

in y sighte of God, so speake we in Christ. 

The iij. Chapter. 

EGYNNE we then agayne to prayse onre|@ selues? Or nede we (as some other) of pistles of commedacion vnto yon or letters of commédacion from you? Ye are onre epistle wrytten in oure hertes: which is vnderstonde and red of all me, in that ye are knowne, how that ye are y epistle of Christ, mynistred by vs, and wrytte, not with ynke, but with the sprete of the lyuynge God: not in tables of stone,** but in fleshy tables of the hert.
Soch trust hane we thorow Christ to God warde, not that we are suffieient of onre selues to thynke eny thinge, as of onre selues,tt but oure ablenesse commeth of God, which hath made vs able, to be tt mynisters of the new 'lestament: not of the letter, but of the sprete. For the letter kylleth, but the sprete

geueth life. 

But yf the mynistracion y kylleth thorow 33 the letter, and was figured in stones, was glo- rious, $$ so that the childré of Israel mighte not beholde the face of Moses, for y clearnesse of his conntenaüce, (which glory nenertheles is done awaye) how shal not y mynistracion of y sprete be moch more glorious? For yf the office that preacheth damnacion be glo- rious, moch more doth the office that preacheth righteousnes exceade in glory. For y other parte that was glorified is nothinge glorie in respecte of this exceadinge glory. For yf that which is done awaye, be glorious, moch more shal y which remayneth, be glorious.

Seynge then that we haue soch trust, we] € vse greate boldnesse, and do not as Moses, Ill which put a vayle before his face, so that y children of Israel mighte not se the 1f ende of it, that is done awaye. But their myndes are, blynded. *** For vnto this daye remayneth: the same coueringe vntaké awaye in the olde
Testament, whan they rede it, which in Christ is put awaye. But euen vnto this daye whan moses is red, the vayle hangeth before their hertes: ttt Neuertheles wha they turne to the
LORDE, the vayle shalbe taken awaye. ttt For the LORDE is a sprete: q where the

||| Exo. 34. d. ttt Rom. 11. c.

$T Rom. 10. a. ttt Ioh. 4. c.

—————MÀAÓA——M——M—— a ye nn nn me fo. clerrtij. The ij. Epistle to the Corinthians. Chap. i

Oe e L a A sprete of the LORDE is, there is libertye.| |thinges do I for youre sakes, ttthat the plē-
But now the glory of ý LORDE apeareth in| |teous grace by the thakesgeuynge of many, vs all with open face, and we are chaunged| |maye redounde to the prayse of God. 'Ther- in to the same ymage, from one clearnes to fore are we not weery, but though oure out- another, eue as of the sprete of the LORDE., |warde man be corrupte, yet the inwarde is

renewed daye by daye. $$For oure trouble, 
The dij. Chapter. which is but temporall and lighte, worketh 
HERFORE seynge we haue soch an| |an exceadinge and an eternall weighte of office (euen as mercy is come vpon vs)| |glorye vnto vs, which loke not on the thinges we faynte not, but cast from vs the clokes of} |that are sene, but on them which are not vnhonestye, and walke not incraftines: nether| |sene. For y thinges which are sene, are corruppe we the worde of God but open the| |temporall: but the thinges that are not sene, trueth, and reporte oure selues to euery mans| jare eternall. conscyence in the sighte of God. | i
Yf oure Gospell be yet hyd, it is hyd in The b. Chapter. them that are lost: amonge whom the God W^" knowe surely, y yf oure lli earthy of this worlde *hath blynded $ myndes of house of this dwellynge were de- them which belene not, that $ lighte of the! |stroyed, we haue a buyldynge ordeyned of
Gospell of the glory of Christ (t which is the} |God, an house not made with handes, but ymage of God) shulde not shyne vnto them.| |euerlastynge in heauen. ‘TfT And in the same
For we preach not oure selues, but Iesus! |sighe we also after oure màsion, which is from 
Christ to be the LORDE, and oure selues| |heauen: and longe to be clothed therwith, so youre sernauntes for Iesus sake. yet, ***yf that we be founde clothed, and not
For God tthat cómaunded the light to| |naked. For as longe as we are in this taber- shyne out of darcknesse, $ hath geuen a cleare| |nacle, we sighe and are greued, for we had shyne in oure hertes, y by vs ¥ light of $| rather not be vnclothed, but to be clothed knowlege of the glory of God mighte come| |vpon, that mortalite might be swalowed vp forth, in the face of Iesus Christ. of life. But he that hath ordeyned vs for
But this treasure haue we in {| earthen ves-| |this, is God, *ttwhich hath geuen vs the earnest sels, that $ power which excelleth might be| jof the sprete. Therfore are we allwaye of of God, and not of vs. We are troubled on| |good cheare, and knowe, that as longe as we euery syde, yet are we not without shift. We} |dwell here in the body, we are not at home are in ponertie, but not vtterly without som-| |with the LORDE: for we walke in faith, and what. We are persecuted, but we are not! |se him not. Neuertheles we are of good forsaken. We are oppressed, neuertheles we ^ |comforte, and had leuer to be absent from the perish not. € We allwayes beare aboute in| |body, q to be at home with the LORDE. oure body the dyenge of the LORDE Iesus Wherfore, whether we be at home or fro y the life also of the LORDE Iesus might| |home, we endeuoure oure selues to please appeare in oure body. **For we which lyue,| |him. ttt For we must all appeare before the are alwayes delyuered vnto death for lesus| |iudgment seate of Christ, y euery one maye sake, that the life also of lesus might appeare| |receaue in his body, acordinge to y he hath in oure mortall flesh. done, whether it be good or bad. Seynge
Therfore is death now mightie in vs, but| |then that we knowe, how that the LORDE is life in you. But seynge that we haue the| |to be feared, we fare fayre with men, but we same sprete of faith (acordinge as it is wryt-| |are knowne well ynongh vnto God: I trust ten: tt I beleued, and therfore haue I spoké.)| |also, that we are knowne in youre consciences. we also beleue, q therfore we speake, for we| | We prayse not onre selues agayne vnto you, knowe that he, which raysed vp ý LORDE| |but geue you an occasion to reioyse of vs, y lesus, shal rayse vs vp also by ¥ meanes of} |ye maye haue to reioyse agaynst them, with lesus, and shal set vs with you. For all| |reioyse after the outwarde appearaunce, and

: t Col.1.b. Phil.2.a. Heh.1.a. tt2Cor.i.b. $$ Psal.29.2. Ro.8.c. ||| 2 Cor. 4.b, t Gen. 1. a. $ 2 Pet. 1. d. || 2 Cor. 5. a. TT Rom. 8. c. *** Apoc. 16. c. ttt Rom. 8. b.
§ Gal. 6. b. ** Hom. 8. c. tt Psal. 115, a, 2 Cor. 1. 6. ttt Mat. 25. c. Ro. 14. b. 

Chap. bij. 

ES] 

not after the hert. For yf we do to moch, we do it vnto God: yf we kepe measure, we do it for youre sakes. For the loue of Christ constrayneth vs, in as moch as we thus iudge, that yf one be deed for all, then are all deed.
*And therfore dyed he for all, that they which lyue, shulde not hence forth lyue vnto them selues, but vnto him, which dyed for them and rose agayne.

Therfore hence forth knowe we noman after y flesh: and though we haue knowne
Christ also after the flesh, yet knowe we him now so nomore. ‘Therfore yf eny man be in
Christ, he is a new creature. Olde thiuges are past awaye, tbeholde, all are become new. Neuertheles all thinges are off God, which hath reconcyled vs vnto himselfe by
Iesus Christ, and hath geuen vs the office to preach the attonement. t For God was in
Christ, and $ reconcyled the worlde vnto him- selfe, and counted not ther synnes vnto them, and amonge vs hath he set vp the worde of y attonemét. Now the are we messaungers in the rowme of Christ, euen as though God exhorted by vs. We beseke you now therfore in Christes steade, that ye be at one with God:
| for he hath made him which knewe no synne, to be «synne for vs, y we by his meanes shulde be that righteousnes, which before God is alowed.

The bí. Chapter. 

E as helpers therfore exhorte you, that 

ye receaue not y grace of God in vayne. For he sayeth: ** I haue herde the in the tyme accepted, and in the daye of salua- cion haue I succoured the. Beholde, now is the accepted tyme, now is the daye of salua- cion. Let vs geue no man occasion of euell, that oure office be not euell spoken of: but in all thinges let vs behaue oure selues as the ttmynisters of God: in moch pacience, in troubles, in necessities, in anguysshes, in strypes, in presonmentes, in vproures, in la- boures, in watchinges, in fastynges, in pure- nesse, in knowlege, in longe sufferynge, in kyndnesse, in the holy goost, in loue vnfayned, in the worde of the trueth, in the power of
God, by the armoure of righteousnes on the rightehande and on the lefte, by honoure and

* 1 Tess. 5. b. t Apoc. 21. a. t Col. 2. b. 
§ Rom.3.c. Col.1.b. 1 Ioh. 4. b. || Esa. 53. b. q Rom. 8. a. Heb.9.c. ** Esa.49.b. tt 1 Co.4. a.

Cbr ij. Epistle to tbe Corinthians, Fo. clrrrb. 

\dishonoure, hy euell reporte and good reporte: | as disceauers, t yet true: as vnknowne, and yet knowne: tias dyenge, and beholde, we lyue: as chastened, and not kylled: as sorow- ynge, and yet allwaye mery: as poore, q yet make many riche: as hauynge nothinge, q yet possessynge all thinges.

O ye Corinthians, oure mouth is open vnto you, oure hert is made large. Ye are in no straytnesse on oure behalfe: but where as ye are in straytnesse, that do ye of youre owne hertely meanynge. I speake to you, as to childre, that haue like rewarde with vs. Set youre selues therfore at large.

$§ Beare not a straunge yock with the vn- beleuers. For what fellishippe hath right- eousnes with vnrighteousnes? What com- pany hath lighte with darknesse? |l How agreeth Christ with Belial? Or what parte hath the beleuer with the infydele? How acordeth y téple of God with ymages? Ye are the temple of the lyuynge God, as sayeth
God: I wyl dwell in them, and walke in them, 
"and wyl be their God, q they shalbe my people. Wherfore come out from amóge them, and separate youre selues 11 (sayeth the
LORDE) and touche no vncleane thinge, so wyl I receaue you, q be youre father, q ye shalbe my sonnes and doughters, sayeth y
Allmightie LORDE. 

The bij. Chapter. 

EYNGE now that we haue soch promyses 

(dearly: beloued) let vs clense oure selues from all fylthynes of the flesh and sprete, and growe vp to full holynes in y feare of God.
Vnderstode vs righte. We haue hurte no mà, we haue corrupte no man, we haue de- frauded no man. I speake not this to cé- demne you, for I haue shewed you before, that ye are in oure hertes, to dye and to lyue with you. I am very bolde towarde you, I make moch boost of you, I am fylled with comforte, I am exceadynge ioyous in all oure tribulacion. *** For whan we were come in to Macedonia, oure flesh had no rest, but we were trouhled on euery syde: outwarde was fightinge, inwarde was feare. ^ Neuertheles
God that comforteth the abiecte,’ comforted vs by the cOmynge of Titus.

1 Cor. 3. a. tt Esa. 26. c. $5 Deut. 7. a. 
IIl] Math. 8. d. a Leui. 26. b. T Esa. 52. b. 
| *** Act. 16. b. D £2 (Ole, Slo fs 

| ffo. cIrrrbi. 

5 

G 

Not onely by his commynge, but also by the césolacion wherwith he was coforted of you, whan he tolde vs youre desyre, youre wepynge, youre feruct mynde for me, so y I now reioyse y more. For where as I made you sory by the letter, it repenteth me not, though I dyd repéte. For I se, that the same epistle made you sory (though it were but for a eeason) But now I reioyce, not that ye were sory, but that ye were sory to repent- aunce. Tor ye sorowed godly, so that in nothinge ye were hurte by vs. For godly sorowe causeth repentaunce vnto saluacion, not to be repented of: *but worldly sorowe causeth death. Beholde, where as ye haue had godly sorowe, what diligence hath it wrought in you? Yee a sufficiet answere, displeasure, feare, desyre, a feruét mynde, punyshment. For in all poyntes ye haue shewed youre selues, that ye are cleare in that matter.

Wherfore though I wrote vnto you, yet is it not done for his cause that dyd hurte, nether for his cause that was hurte, but that youre diligence (which ye haue for vs in the sighte of God) mighte be manifest with you
Therfore are we comforted, because ye are coinforted: but exceadingly the more ioyed we, for the ioye of Titus, because his sprete was refreszhed of you all. I am therfore not now ashamed, though I boasted my selfe vnto him of you: but like as all is trne that I haue spoke vnto you, euen so is oure boastinge vnto Titus founde true also. And his inwarde affeccion is more abundaunt towarde you, whan he remembreth the obedience of you all, how ye receaued him with feare and tréblynge. I reioyse, that I maye be bolde

ouer you in all thinges. 

DO you to wit (brethren) the grace of 
I God, which is geué in the congregacions of Macedonia. For their reioysinge was most abundaunt, whan they were tryed by moch trouble: q though they were exceadinge poore, yet haue they geué exceadinge richely, and that in synglenesse. For to their power (I beare recorde) yee and beyonde their power, they were wyllinge of their awne acorde, and prayed vs with greate instaüce, that we wolde

The biij. Chapter. 

= Eccli. 50. c. 
2 Cor. 9. a. 

t Act. 11. c. Rom. 15. d. 1 Cor. 16. a. t1 Pet. 4. b. Pro. 3. b.

$ Luc. 21. a. 

The ij. €pistie to tbe Corinthians. 

receaue their benefite and fellishippe of the thadreachinge that is done for the sayntes:
And not as we loked for, but gaue ouer them selues first to the LORDE, and afterwarde vnto vs by y wyl of God, so that we coulde not but desyre Titus, that like as he had be- gonne afore he wolde euen so accomplish the same beniuolence amonge you. Now as ye are riche in all poyntes, in faith and in worde, and in knowlege, and in all diligence, and in youre loue towarde vs, euen so se that ye be plenteous also in this benyuoléce. This I saye not as commaudynge, but seynge, other are so diligent, I proue youre lone also, whether it be perfecte or no. For ye knowe the liberalite of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which though he be riche, yet for youre sakes he became poore, y ye thorow his pouerte mighte be made en

And my councell herin I geue, for this is profitable for you, which haue begonne a yeare a goo, not onely to do, but also to wyll.
But now perfourme the dede also, that like as there is a ready mynde to wil, there maye be a ready mynde also to perfourme the dede tof that which ye haue. $ For yf there be a wyllinge mynde, it is accepted acordinge to that a man hath, not acordinge tío that he hath not. This is not done to the intent, that other shulde haue ease, and ye cobraunce, but that it bea lyke. Let youre abundaunce sucker their lacke in this tyme off derth, that their abundaunce also herafter maye supplee youre lacke, that there maye be equalite. As it is wrytten: “He y gathered moch, had not the more: and he that gathered little, wanted nothinge. ‘Thakes be vnto God, which put in the hert of Titus, the same diligence to- warde you. For he accepted the request in dede, yee he was rather so well wyllynge, that of his awne acorde, he came vnto you.

We haue sent with him that brother, whose prayse is in the Gospell thorow out all the congregacions. Not onely that, but he is chosen also of the congregacions, to be a felowe with vs in oure iourney, for this beny- uolence that is mynistred by vs vnto the prayse of the LORDE, and to stere vp youre prompte mynde, and to bewarre, lest eny mà reporte euell of vs because of this plenteousnes, which is mynistred by vs: lland therfore make

a Exo. 16. d. {| Rom. 12. c. 

Chap. bii. 

Chap. r. we prouision for honest thinges, not onely before the LORDE, but also before men.

We haue sent with them also a brother of oures, whom we haue oft proued diligét in many thinges, but now moch more diligent.
And this haue we done in greate hope towarde you, whether it be for Titus sake (which is my felowe and helper amonge you) or for oure brethr (which are Apostles of the cogregacions, q the prayse of Christ.) Shewe now the profe off youre loue and off oure boastinge of you, vnto these, and opély iu the sighte of the cogregacions.

Che iy. Chapter. 

F the *handreachinge vnto y sayntes, it is no nede for me to wryte vnto you: for I knowe youre redynesse of mynde, wherof
I boast my selfe amonge them of Macedonia, and saye: Achaia was ready a yeare agoo.
And youre feruentnesse hath prouoked many. 
Neuertheles yet haue we sent these brethren, lest oure reioysinge ouer you shulde be in vayne in this behalfe, that ye mighte be ready, as I haue reported of you: lest whan they of
Macedonia come with me, and fynde you vn- prepared, we (I wyl not saye ye) shulde be

ashamed in this presumpcion of boostinge. 
Wherfore I thoughte it necessary to ex- horte the brethren, to come before hande vnto you, for to prepare this blessynge promysed afore, that it mighte be ready, so that it be a blessynge, and not a defraudynge. This I thynke: that *he which soweth litle, shal reape litle also: and he y soweth plenteously, shal likewyse reape plenteously, euery one acordynge as he hath purposed in his hert, not grudgingly, or of compulsion. tł For God loueth a chearfull geuer. God is able to make you riche in all grace, y ye in all thinges hauynge sufficiet to the vttemost, maye be riche to all maner of good workes. As it is wrytte : “He hath sparsed abrode q geué to ý

poore, his righteousnes remayneth for euer. 
€| He that geueth sede vnto the sower, shal mynistre bred also for fode, and shal multi- plye youre sede, and increase the frutes of youre righteousnes, that in all thinges ye maye be made riche vnto all singlenesse, which causeth thorow vs, thankesgeuynge vnto God.
For the hàdreachinge of this collecciou not 

* Rom. 15. d. 1 Co. 16, a. 2 Cor. 8. a. 
Gal. 6. a. 

+ Pro. 31,0. 
¢ Exod. 25. a, and 35. a. Eccli. 35. a. 

The ij. Epistle to the Corinthians. 

onely suppleeth the nede off the sayntes, but also is abudaunt herin, that for this laudable mynistracion many mighte geue thakes ynto
God, and prayse God for youre obedient pro- fessynge of the Gospell of Christ, q for youre synglenesse in distributynge vnto thé, and to all men, and in their prayer for you, which longe after you, for the abundaunt grace of
God in you. Thankes be vnto God for his 

vnoutspeakeable gifte. 
I PAUL my selfe beseke you by the meke- nesse and softnesse off Christ, which when
I am present amonge you, am of small repu- tacion, but am bolde towarde you beynge absent. I beseke you that I nede not be bolde whan I am present, q to vse y boldnesse wherwith I am supposed to be bolde, agaynst some, which repute vs as though we walked after y flesh: for though we walke in the flesh, yet fighte we not after a fleshly maner.
For the $wapens of onre warre are not fleshly, but mightie before God to cast downe stroge holdes, wherwith we ouerthrowe ymaginacions, q euery hye thinge y exalteth it selfe agaynst the knowlege of God, and brynge in to cap-
|tiuyte all vnderstondinge to the obedience of 
Christ, t are ready to take vengeaunce on all disobedience, whan youre obediece is fulfylled.
Loke ye on thinges after Y vtter appearaüce ? 
Yf eny man trust D himselfe y he is 
Christes, let him thinke this also by himselfe, y like as he is Christes, eue so are we Christes also. And though I shulde boast my selfe somwhat more of oure auctorite ll which y
LORDE hath geué vs to edifye and not to destroye, it shulde not be to my shame. This
I saye, lest I shulde seme, as though I wente aboute to make you afrayed with letters. For the pistles (saye they) are sore and stronge, but his bodely preseuce is weake, and his speache rude. Let him y is soche, thinke on this wyse, that as we are in worde by letters whà we are absente, soch are we also in dede whan we are present. For we darre not reken or compare oure selues, vnto some that prayse them selues: Neuertheles whyle they measure them selues by them selues, and holde onely of them selues, they vnderstonde nothinge.

The r. Chapter. 

a Psal, 111. b. $ Ephe. 6. b. || 2 Cor. 13. b. 

Fo. clrrrbtj. 

ES 

a 

x 

po. clyrrbty. 
€| Howbeit we wil not boast oure selues aboue measure, but onely acordinge to the measure of the rule, wherwith God hath distributed vnto vs the measure to reach euen vnto you. lor we stretche not oure selues to farre as though we had not reached vnto you. For euen vuto you haue we come with the Gospell of Christ, and boast not oure selues out of measure in other meus laboures: Yee and we hope whan youre faith is increased in you, that we wil come farther (acordinge to oure measure) and preach the Gospell vnto them that dwell beyonde you, and not to reioyse in that, which is prepared with another mans measure.

The yi. Chapter. 

ET him that reioyseth, reioyse in the 
L LORDE: for “he y *prayseth him selfe, is not alowed, but he who y LORDE prayseth. Wolde God ye coulde suffre me a litle in my foloshnes, yet do ye forbeare me.
For 1 am gelous ouer you with godly gelousy. 
For I haue maried you vnto one ma, to brynge a chaste virgin vnto Christ. But I feare, lest t as y serpet begyled Eue with his sutteltie, eue so youre wyttes shulde be cor- rupte from the synglenesse that is in Christ.
For yf he that commeth vnto you, preach another lesus, whom we haue not preached, or yf ye receaue another sprete, y ye haue not receaued, or another Gospell which ye haue not accepted, ye might right well haue bene cótent. For I suppose that I am no lesse thé the hye Apostles are. And though
I be rude in speakynge, yet am I not rude in knowlege. Howbeit amoge you I am knowne to the vttemost. Or dyd I synne therin because I submytted my selfe, that ye mighte be exalted?

For I preached vnto you the Gospell of God tfrely, and robbed other cogregacions, and toke wages of thé, to preach vnto you. $And whan I was present with you, and had nede, I was greuous to no man: lfor y which was lackynge vnto me, the brethren which came fro Macedonia, suppleed. And in all thinges
I kepte myselfe so, y I shulde not be greuous to you, « so wyl I [^ my selfe. As surely as the trueth of Christ is in me, this reioys- inge shal not be taken fro me in the regions

* Esa, 65. c. t Gen. 3. a,

Tere. 9, d. 
1 1 Cor. 9, h. 

1 Cor. 1. d. 
$ Act. 20. c. 

"EBroSN297 87 
|| Phil. 4. c. 

The ij. Epistle to tbe Corinthians. 

Chap. rt. of Achaia. Wherfore? Because I shulde not| loue you? God knoweth. | Neuertheles what
I do and wyl do, that do I to eut awaye occa- sion, from the which seke occasion, that they mighte boast thé selues to be like vnto vs.
For soch false Apostles q disceatfull workers fashion them selues like vnto the Apostles of
Christ. And that is no maruell: for Sathan himselfe is chaunged in to $ fashion of an angell of light. ‘Therfore is it no greate thinge, though his mynisters fashion them selues as though they were the preachers of righteousnes, 1 whose ende shalbe acordinge to their dedes.

I saye agayne, lest eny man thynke that I| am folish: or els take me euen now as a fole, y I maye boast my selfe a litle also.
That I speake now, that speake I not after the LORDE, but as it were in folishnes, whyle we are now come to boastinge: Seynge that many boaste them selues after y flesh, I wil boast my selfe also. For ye suffre foles gladly, in so moch as ye youre selues are wyse. For ye suffre euen yf a man brynge you in to bondage, yf a man put you to dis- honesty, yf a man take ought fro you, yf a man exalte him selfe ouer you, yf a man smyte you on the face. I speake concernynge rebuke, as though we were weake.

Wherin so euer now eny man darre be bolde (I speake folishly) therin darre I be bolde also. They are Hebrues, so am I.
They are Israelites, euen so am I. They are the sede of Abraham, so am I. They are the mynisters of Christ (I speake as a fole) I am more: in laboures more abudaunt, in strypes aboue measure, in presonmentes more plen- teously, in death oft. ** Of the Iewes receaued
I fyue tymes fortye strypes, one lesse. ti'Thryse was I beaten with roddes. +I was once stoned,
S$I suffred thryse shypwracke: nighte and|® daye haue I bene in the depe of the see: I haue oft iourneyed: I haue bene oft in parels of waters, in parels amonge murthurers, in parels amonge the lewes, in parels amonge the Heythen, in parels in cities, in parels in the wylderners, in parels vpon the See, in parels amonge false brethré, in laboure q trauayle, in moch watchinges, in honger and thyrst, in moch fastinges in colde and naked- nesse: Besyde those thynges which are out-

J 2 Pet. 2. a. ^^ Deut, 25. a. tt Act. 16. d. 
11 Act. 14. c. $$ Act. 27. c. 

Chap. rii, 
| |warde, namely my daylie combraunce, my daylie care for all cogregacions. * Who is weake, and I be not weake? Who is offended, tI burne not? Yf I must nedes make my boast, I wil boast my selfe of myne infirmyte.
God y father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which is blessed for euer, knoweth that I lye not. tAt Damascon the gouernoure of y people vnder kynge Aretas, kepte y cite of the Damascenes, q wolde haue taken me, and at a wyndowe was I let downe in a basket thorow the wall, ¢ so escaped his handes.

The rij. Chapter. 

T profiteth me nothinge (no doute) to 

boaste. Neuertheles I wil come to y visions and reuelacions off the LORDE. I knowe a man in Christ aboue fourtene yeares a goo (whether he was in ¥ body, I can not tell: or whether he was out of the body, I can not tell, God knoweth.) the same was taken vp in to the thirde heauen: and I knowe the same man (whether he was in y body or out of the body, I can not tell, God knoweth) how that he was také vp in to
Paradise, and herde wordes not to be spoken, which no man can vtter. Here of will I boast, but of my selfe wil I make no boast, excepte it be of myne infirmyties. And though I wolde boast my selfe, I dyd not foolishly, for I wolde saye the trueth. But
I refrayne my selfe, lest eny ma shulde thinke of me aboue y he seyth in me, or heareth of me. tAnd lest I shulde exalte my selfe out of measure because of the hye reuelacions, there is a warnynge geuen vnto my flesh, euen y messaunger of Satan, to buffet me, that I shulde not exalte my selfe out off mea- sure: for y which I besoughte the LORDE thryse, that it mighte departe fro me. And he sayde vnto me: My grace is sufficiet for the. For my strength is made perfecte thorow weaknes. Very glad therfore wil I reioyse in my weaknesses, that the strength of Christ maye dwell in me.

Therfore am I contente in infirmities, in rebukes, in necessities, in persecucions, in anguyszhes for Christes sake: for wha I am weake, thé am I stróge. I am become a fole i boastinge my selfe: Ye haue cdpelled me.
For I oughte to be comended of you, § in so 

t Act. 9. d. 
$ 1 Cor. 9. a. 

* 1 Cor. 8. 12. 1 Iob 1. b. 

Cbr ij. Epistle to the Corinthians. 

moch as I am in nothiuge inferior to ¥ hye 
Apostles. Though I be nothinge, yet are y tokens of an Apostle wrought amóge you, with all paciéce, with signes, a with woders q with mightie dedes. For what is it, wherin ye are inferiours to the other congregacions ? excepte it be y I haue not bene greuous vnto you. Forgeue me this wroge. Beholde, I am ready the thirde tyme to come vnto you, and wyl not be chargeable vnto you. | For I seke not youres, but you. For y childré ought not to gather treasure for Ys elders, but the elders for the children. I wil very gladly bestowe, and wyl be bestowed for youre soules: though y more I loue you, the lesse am IJ loued agayne.

But let it be so that I greued you not, neuertheles for so moch as I was craftye, I toke you with gyle. Haue I defrauded you by eny of thé, who I sent vnto you? I desyred Titus, q with him I sent a brother: dyd Titus defraude you? Haue we not walked in one sprete? Wéte we not in like fotesteppes? Agayne, thynke ye y we excuse oure selues? We speake in Christ in the sighte off God. But all this (dearly beloued) is done for youre edifyenge. For I feare, lest whan I come, I shal not fynde you soch as I wolde: and lest ye shal fynde me soch as ye wolde not: lest there beamonge you, debates, envyenges, wrathes, stryuynges, bacbytinges, whysperinges, swellinges, vproures: lest whan
I come agayne, God bringe me lowe amóge you ¢ lest I be eonstrayned to bewayle many of the y haue synned before, q haue not repented ouer y vnclennesse and whordome, and wantonnes, which they haue comytted.

The viij. Chapter. 

OW come I the thirde tyme vnto you. 
| Y * In the mouth of two or thre witnesses shal euery matter be stabliszhed. I haue tolde you before, q tell you before as present y seconde tyme, a wryte it now beynge absent, vnto thé which in tyme passed haue synned, q to all other: q yf I come agayne, I wil not spare, seynge that ye seke experiéce of him,
** which speaketh in me, euen Christ, which amonge you is not weake, but is mightie amoge you. And though he was crucified in weaknes, yet lyueth he in the power of God.
** Mat. 10. c. 

|| Act. 20.c. — € Deut. 19. c. Mat. 18. b. 

153 

Fo. clyyrtr. 

€ 

So. cxt. 

The Epistle to the Galathians. 

Chap. 

I. 

w ————M ES SSS 

5 

And though we are weake in him, yet lyue we with him in the power of God amonge you.

* Proue youre selues, whether ye are in the faith, exame youre selues. Or knowe ye not youre selues, y Iesus Christ is in you? Excepte ye be cast awayes. But I trust ye knowe, y we are not cast awayes. I desyre before God y ye do no euell: not ý we shulde seme comendable, but y ye shulde do y which is good, q let vs be as cast awayes. For we maye do nothinge agaynst y trueth, but for y trueth. We are glad whan we are weake, q ye stronge: q the same also we wyszhe for, namely youre perfectnesse. Therfore wryte
I these thinges beynge absent, lest wha I am 

Of (Cae, File de 

present, I shulde vse sharpnesse, acordinge to the powert which the LORDE hath geué me to edifye, and not to destroye.

Fynally brethren, reioyse, be parfecte, coforte youre selues, be of one mynde, be peaceable, and the God of loue and peace shalbe with you. Salute one another with an holy kysse. All the sayntes salute you. The grace of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, a the loue of God, and the fellishippe of y holy goost be with you all. Amen.

The seconde Epistle to the Corinthians. Sent from Philippos in Macedonia, by Titus and Lucas.

t 2 Co. 10. b. 

The Bypistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Galathians.

Che summe of this Epistle. 

Chap. I. 

Paul rebuketh them, because they were fallen awaye from the gospell, sheweth his awne couersion, magnifieth his office and apostel- shippe, and declareth himself to be equall with the hye apostles.

Chap. Il. 
He withstondeth Peter in the face, and proueth, that the lawe and circumcision are not neces- sary to saluacion.

Chap. III. 

He rebuketh the vnstedfastnesse of the Gala- thians, shewinge the vnparfectnesse of the lawe, and declareth neuerthelesse that it was not geuen for naught.

Chap. lII. 

Paul sheweth that thorow Christ we be delyuered from the lawe, and rebuketh the vnthankful- nesse of the Galathians.

Chap. V. 

He laboureth to drawe them awaye from circu- cision, sheweth them the battayll betwixte the sprete and the flesh, and the frutes of them both.

Chap. VI. 

He exorteth them to brotherly loue, and one to! beare with another. In the ende he warneth them to bewarre of circücision. l

€ 

The € 

pistle 

of the Apostle S. Paul to the Galathians. 

The first Chapter. 

a AUL an Apostle (not of men, nor by 

35 

ma, but by lesus Christ t by God the father, which raysed him vp fro y deed) ¢ all the brethré which are with me. Vnto the cogregacios in Galacia. * Grace be with you, and peace fro God the father, and onre
LORDE lesus Christ, which gaue him selfe for oure synnes, that he mighte delyuer vs from this present euel worlde, acordinge to the wyll of God oure father, to whom be prayse for euer and euer. Ámen.

Y maruell y ye are so soone turned (from him that E you in the grace of Christ) vnto another Gospell: which is nothinge els, but that there be some, which ttrouble you, and intende to peruerte the Gospell of Christ.

Neuertheles though we oure selues, or an angell from heaué preach vnto you eny other
Gospel, thé y which we haue preached vnto yon, the same be acursed. As we haue sayde afore, so saye we now agayne: Yf eny ma preach vnto you eny other thinge, thé y ye hane receaued, y same be acursed. Preach I men now or God? Or go I aboute to please men? Yf I shulde yet please meu, I were not the seruaunt of Christ.

But I certifye you brethren, y the Gospell which is preached of me, is not of men. For
I nether receaned it ner lerned it of ma, but by the reuelacion of lesus Christ. For ye haue herde of my conuersacion afore tyme 1n the leweshippe, thow that beyode measure
I persecuted the cogregacion of God, and spoyled it, and preuayled in the Jeweshippe aboue many of my companyons in my nacion,

* 9 Cor. 1. a. Ephe. 1. a. 1 Pet. 1. a. t Act. 15. a. f Act. 8. a. 9. a. $ 2 Cor. 11. d.

q was a moch more feruent manteyner of the tradicions of the fathers.

But whan it pleased God which separated € me fro my mothers wombe, and called me by his grace, for to declare his sonne in me, that
I shulde preach him thorow the Gospell amonge the Heythen, immediatly I commened not of the matter with flesh and bloude: nether came I to Jerusalem vnto them which were Apostles before me: but wente my wayes in to Arabia, and came agayne to
Damascon. ‘Then after thre yeare I came to 
Ierusale to se Peter, and abode with him fyf- tene dayes. As for the other Apostles, I sawe none of them, saue Iames the LORDES brother.

The thinges that I wryte vnto you, beholde, 
§God knoweth, I lye not. After that wente 
I in to the coastes of Syria and Celicia: but of face I was vnknowne to y Christen con- gregacions iu lewrye. —Nenertheles they had herde onely, that: He that persecuted vs in tyme passed, preacheth now j faith which some tyme he destroyed: and they praysed
God in me. 

The ij. Chapter. 
HEN after fourtene yeares, lI wente vpi A agayne to Ierusalē with Barnabas, and toke Titus with me also. But I wente vp by reuelacion, and commened with the of
Gospell, which I preach amonge the Heythe: but specially with thé which were in reputa- cion, lest I shulde runne or had runne in vayne. f But Titus which was also with me, was not compelled to be cirencysed, though he was a Greke: and that because of certayne|

l| Act. 15. a. T Act. 16. a. 1 Cor. 9. c. 

|4fo. eei. The Epistle to 

incommers beynge false brethré, which came in amóge other, to spye out oure libertye, which we haue in Christ lesus, that they might brynge vs in to bondage: To whom we gaue no rowme, no not for the space of an houre, as concernynge to be broughte in to subieccion: y the trueth of the Gospell mighte contynue with you.

As for the that semed to be greate, what they were in tyme passed, it maketh no matter to me. *For God loketh not on the out- warde appearaunce of men. Neuertheles they which semed greate, taught me uothinge: but contrary wyse, whan they sawe that the
Gospell ouer the vncircumcision was comytted vnto me, as y Gospell ouer y circücision was

t UA commytted vnto Peter. (For he y was mightie with Peter to the Apostleshippe ouer the cir- cumcision, the same was mightie with me also amoge the Heythen) they perceaued the grace that was geuen vnto me.

Iames and Cephas and Ihon, which semed to be pilers, gaue me and Barnabas y righte handes, and agreed with vs, that we shulde preach amonge the Heythé, and they amonge the lewes: onely that we shulde remébre the poore, twhich thinge also I was diligent to do.

But wha Peter was come to Antioche, I withstode him in y face: for he was worthy to be blamed. For afore there came certayne from lames, he ate with the Heythe. But whà they were come, he withdrue and sepa- rated himselfe, fearinge thé which were of the circumcision. And the other Iewes dys- sembled with him likewyse, in so moch y
Barnabas was brought in to their symulacion also. But whan I sawe that they walked not right after y trueth of the Gospell, I sayde vnto Peter openly before all: Yf thou beynge a Iewe, lyuest after the maner of the Gentyles, and not as do the Tewes, why causest thou the
Gentyles then to lyue as do the lewes? 

i'Though we be lewes by nature, and not synners of the Gentyles, yet (in so moch as we knowe, that a man is not made righteous by the dedes off the lawe, but by the faith on lesus Christ) we haue beleued also ou Iesus
Christ, y we might be made righteous by the faith of Christ, and not by the dedes of the

NS 

* Act. 10. d. Rom. 2, b. Ephe. 6. a. t Act. 11. c. 
2 Co. 9. a. 1 Phil. 3.a. Kom. 3. b. $ Ephe. 5. a. 
| Gen. 15. b. Rom.4.a. Taco. 2. c. § Gen. 12. a. 

the Galathians, Chap. iij. 

jlawe, because that by the dedes of the lawe no flesh shal be iustified.

Yf we then which seke to be made righteous by christ, shulde be yet founde synners oure selues, is not Christ then the mynister of synne? God forbyd. For yf I buylde agayne y which I haue destroyed, then make I my selfe a trespacer. But I thorow the lawe am deed vnto the lawe, that I might lyue vnto
God. I am crucified with Christ, yet do I lyue: neuerthelesse now not I, but Christ lyueth in me. For y life which I now lyue in y fleszhe, I lyue in the faith of y sonne of
God $which loued me, and gaue himselfe for me. I cast not awaye the grace of God. For yf righteousnes come by the lawe, then dyed
Christ in vayne. 

The iij. Chapter. 

YE folishe Galathias, who hath be-| @ 

witched you, that ye shulde not beleue the trueth? ‘To who Iesus Christ was de- scrybed before the eyes and amonge you crucified. "This onely wolde I lerne of you:
Receaued ye the sprete by the dedes of the lawe, or by the preachinge of the faith? Are ye so vnwyse? Ye beganne in the sprete, wolde ye ende now thé in the flesh? Haue ye suffred so moch in vayne? Yf it be els in vayne. He that geueth you the sprete, and doth soch greate actes amoge you, doth he it thorow the dedes of the lawe, or by y preach- inge of the faith? || Euen as Abraha beleued
God, and it was counted vnto him for right- eousnes. Thus ye knowe, that they which are of faith, are Abrahams children.

The scripture sawe afore hade, that God) iustifieth the Heythen thorow faith. Ther- fore shewed it glad tydinges afore vnto
Abraham, and sayde: f In the shal all the 
Heytheu be blessed. So then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham.
For as many as go aboute with the workes of the lawe, are vnder y curse: For it is wrytté:
** Cursed be euery man, which cotynueth not in all thinges that are wrytte in the boke of the lawe, to do them. That no man is iustified by the lawe in the sighte of God, it is euydét: tt For ¥ iust shal lyue by his faith.
The lawe is not of faith, ttbut the mà that 

** Deut. 27. c. tt Abac. 2. s. Rom. 1. b. 
$+ Leuit. 18. a. 

and 22. c. 

€| Brethren, I wil speake after the maner of 

Thr Epistle to the &alatbíans. 

Chap. (itj. 

doth y same, shal lyue therin. But Christ hath delyuered vs from ¥ curse of the lawe, whan he became a curse for vs. (For it is

wrytté: *Cursed is euery man that hangeth 

on tre) y the blessynge of Abraham mighte come on the Gentyles in Christ Iesu, and y we might so receaue y promysed sprete, thorow faith.

men. Though it be but a mas Testamét, yet no man despyseth it, or addeth eny thinge therto, twhan it is confirmed. To Abraham and his sede were the promyses made. He sayeth not: In the sedes, as in many, bnt in thy sede, as in one, which is Christ. This
Testament (I saye) which afore was confirmed to Christ warde, is not disanulled (that the promes shulde be made of none affecte) by the lawe+ which was geuen beyonde foure hundreth ¢ thirtie yeares therafter. §Vor yf the enheritaunce be gotten by the lawe, then is it not geuen by promes. But God gaue it frely vnto Abraham by promes.

Wherfore thé serueth the lawe? | It was added because of transgression, tyll the sede caine, to the which the promes was made. €f And it was geuen of angels, by the hande of the **mediatoure. A mediatour is not a mediatour of one onely, but God is one.

Is the lawe then agaynst the promyses of God? God forbyd. Howbeit yf there had bene geuen a lawe which coulde haue geue life, thé no doute righteousnes shulde come of the lawe. ttBut y scripture hath shut vp all vnder synne, that y promes shulde come by the faith on Iesus Christ, geue vnto thé that beleue. Before faith came, we were kepte and shut vp vnder the lawe, vnto the faith which shulde afterwarde be declared.
Thus } lawe was oure scolemaster vnto Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith.
But now that faith is come, we are nomore vnder the scolemaster. łt For ye all are the children of God by the faith in Christ Iesu.
$$ For as many of you as are baptysed, haue put on Christ. Here is nether Iewe ner Greke: here is nether bode ner fre: here is nether man ner woman, for ye are all lone in Christ lesu. Yf ye be Christes, thé are ye Abrahas sede and heyres acordynge to the promes.

* Deut. 21. d. . 9. 
$ Act. 7. a. b Gh ff 
Deut 5 a. tt . 

t Iudith. 5. b. 
T Act. 7. e. 
11 Ioh. 1. a. 

Fo. creii. 

The iiij. Chapter. 
UT I saye: As longe as the heyre is a|& childe, there is no difference betwene him and a seruaunt, though he be lorde of all $ goodes: but he is vnder tuters and gouerners, vntyll the tyme appoynted of the father. Euen so we also, wha we were chil- dren, were in bondage vnder the outwarde tradicions. But whan the tyme was fulfylled,
God sent his sonne, borne of a woma, 1f and put vnder the lawe, to redeme them which were vnder the lawe, that we mighte receaue y childshippe. *** For so moch thé as ye are children, God hath sent the sprete of his! sonne in to oure hertes, which cryeth: Abba, deare father. Wherfore now, thou art not a seruaunt, but a sonne. Yf thou be a sonne, then art thou the heyre of God thorow Christ.
Notwithstondinge whan ye knewe not God, ye dyd seruyce vnto them, which by nature are no Goddes. But now seynge ye knowe
God (yee rather are knowne off God) how is it ttt that ye turne you backe agayne vnto the weake and beggerly tradicions, wher vnto ye! desyre agayne a fresh to be in bondage? |
Ye obserue dayes and monethes, and tymes and yeares. Iam in feare of you, lest I haue bestowed laboure on you in vayne. Brethré
I beseke you, be ye as I am, for I am as ye are. Ye haue not hurte me at all. For ye knowe how that in weaknes after y flesh I preached y Gospell vnto you at the first: and my tentacion which I suffred after the flesh, ye despysed not, nether abhorred, but receaued me as an angell of God, yee euen as Christ Iesus. How happy were ye then ?|
For I beare you recorde, that yf it had bene possible, ye had plucked out youre awne eyes, and geué them vnto me. Am I therfore become youre enemy, because I tell you $. trueth ? |
They are gelous ouer you amysse. Yee) they wolde make you to fall backe, that ye might be feruét to thé warde. It is good to be feruent, so y it be allwaye in a good thinge, and not onely whan I am present with you. My litle children (of whom I trauayle in byrth agayne, vntyll Christ be fashioned in you) I wolde I were with you now, and

ll] Yoh. 17. c. b. ttt Col. 2. c.|

$$ Rom. 6. e, and 13. b. Col. 2. b. 
8. 

€ *j Mat. 5. b. 

*** Rom. 

| 

do. uni. — be Cpistle to tbe Galathians. Chap. b. 

a 

coulde chaüge my voyce, for I stode ï doute of you.

Tell me ye that wylbe vnder the lawe, haue ye not herde the lawe? For it is wrytten, that Abraham had two sonnes * the one by a bonde mayde, t the other by a fre woman.
As for him that was of the bode mayde, he was borne after $ flesh: but he which was of the fre woman, was borne by promes. These wordes betoken somwhat. For these wemen are the two Testamentes: The one from the
‘mount Sina, that gendreth vnto bondage, 
{which is Agar. For Agar is called in Arabia 

H mount Sina, and reacheth vnto lerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with hir children.

t But Ierusalem that is aboue, is the fre woman, which is the mother of vs all. For it is wryttē: $ Reioyse thou baren, that bearest no childré: breake forth and crye thou y trauaylest not, for the desolate hath many mo childré, then she which hath an huszbaude. As for vs (brethren) we are the children of Isaac acordinge to the promes.

| But like as at that tyme, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him y was borne after the sprete, euen so is it now also.
But what sayeth the scripture? “Put awaye the bonde mayden and hir sonne: for the sonue of ¥ bondmayde shal not be heyre with y sonne of the fre woman. So now brethren, we are not children of the bonde mayde, but of the fre woman.

The b. Chapter. 

TONDE fast therfore in the libertye 

wherwith Christ hath made vs fre, and be not wrapped agayne in the yocke off bondage. Beholde, I Paul saye vnto you:
Yf ye be cireumeysed, Christ profiteth you nothinge at all. I testifye agayne vnto euery man which is cireumcysed, that he is bounde to kepe the whole lawe. Ye are gone quyte from Christ, as many off you as wylbe made righteous by the lawe, and are fallen from grace. But we wayte in the sprete off hope, to be made righteous by faith. For in
Christ lesu nether is circumcision eny thinge worth ner vncireumcision, but faith which **

by loue is mightie in operacion. Ye ranne 

* Gen. 16. d. 1 Gen. 21. a. 1 Apoc. 21. a. 
$ Esa. 54. a. || Gen. 27. g. a Gen. 21. b. 
T Gal.6.b. ^**1€Co.13.a. tt1 Cor. 5,8. tt Leuit. 

The Epistle to the Galathians. 

Chap. b. 

well, who was a let vnto you, that ye shulde not obeye the trueth? Soch councell is not of him that hath called you.tt A litle leuen sowreth the whole lompe of dowe.

I haue trust towarde you in y LORDE, that ye wylbe none otherwyse mynded. But he that troubleth you, shal beare his iudg- ment, what so euer he be. Brethren yf E yet preach circumcision, why do I suffre per- secucion? then had the slaunder off the crosse ceassed. Wolde God they were roted out fro amoge you, which trouble you. But brethre, ye are called vnto liberty, onely let not youre libertie be an occasion vnto the flesh, but by loue serue one another. For all the lawe is fulfylled in one worde, namely in this:*t loue thy neghboure as thy selfe. But yf ye byte and deuoure one another, take hede, that ye be not consumed one of another.

Isaye: Walke in the sprete, and so shal ye not fulfill the $$ lustes off the fleszhe. For the flesh lusteth agaynst the sprete, and the sprete agaynst the flesh. These are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do that which ye wolde: But and yf ye be led of the

sprete, then are ye not vnder the lawe. Illl "The dedes of y flesh are manifest, which are these:

Aduoutrye, whordome, vnclénes, wantanes, 
Idolatrye, witchcraft, hatred, variaunce, zele, wrath, stryfe, sche unn, sectes, envyenge, murthur, dronkennes, glotony, and soch like:

of the which I tell you before, as I haue tolde you in tyme past, 1T that they which commytte soch, shal not inheret the kyngdome of God.*** But the frute of the sprete, is loue, ioye, peace, longe sufferinge, gétlenes, goodnesse, faithfulnes, mekenesse, téper- aunce, ttt Agaynst soch is not ¥ lawe:ttt But they that are Christes, haue crucified their flesh, with the lustes and desyres.

The bi. Chapter. 

"n we lyue in the sprete, let vs walke 

also in the sprete. Let vs not be vayne glorious, prouokinge one another, and envy- enge another. Brethren, Yf eny ma be ouertaken of a faute, ye which are spirituall, enfourme him with a meke sprete: and con- sidre thine owne selfe, that thou also be not tempted. $$$ Beare ye one anothers burthé,

19.e. Ro, 13. b. 
$T 1 Cor. 6. b. e 13. b.

$$ 1 Pet. 2. b. 
*** Epbe. 5. b. 
1 Pet. 2. b. [f Gal6.b. **1Co.13.a. ttiCor Sa. ftLeuit.| [tt Ro. 13. b. 1 Pet.2.b. — $$$ Tob. 13. b. 

and so shal ye fulfyll the lawe of Christ. 
But yf eny man thinke himselfe to be som- what (whan in dede he is nothinge) the same disceaueth himselfe. Let euery man proue his owne worke, and thé shal he haue re- ioysinge in his awne selfe, and not in another.
For * euery one shal beare his owne burthen. t But let him that is taughte with the worde, mynister in all good thinges, vnto him that teacheth him. Be not disceaued, God wil not be mocked. + For what soeuer a man soweth, that shal he reape. He that soweth vpon the flesh, shal of the flesh reape de- struccion: But he that soweth vpon y sprete, shal of the sprete reape life euerlastinge.
§Let vs not be weery of well doynge: for wha the tyme is come, we shal reape without ceassinge. Whyle we haue tyme therfore, let vs do good vnto all men | but specially vnto thé which are of ¥ housholde of faith.
Beholde, with how many wordes I haue wrytten vnto you with myne awne hande.

1 Cor. 9. b. t Luc. 

| t Tim. 5. a. 

t Rom. 15. d. 
§ 2 Tess. 3. b. 

* Ro. 14. b. 
16 d. 

The Epistle to the Galathians. 

Fo. rreb.| 
They that wil please in the flesh, constrayne you to be circumcysed, onely lest they shulde be persecuted with the crosse of Christ. For eué they them selues which are circumcysed, kepe not the lawe, but wolde haue you cir- cücysed, that they mighte reioyse in youre flesh. But God forbyd that I shulde reioyse, saue onely in the crosse of oure LORDE lesus Christ, wherby the worlde is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the worlde. ‘For in
Christ lesu nether circücision avayleth eny thinge, ner vncircumcision, but a new crea- ture. ** And as many as walke acordynge to! this rule, peace and mercy be vpon thé, and vpon Israel of God. From hence forth let, no man put me to busynesse, ft for I beare iu my body the markes of the LORDE Iesu.
Brethren, the grace of oure LORDE Iesu 
Christ be with youre sprete Amen. 

Vnto the Galathians, sent from Rome. 

€ Gal. 5. a. ** Psal. 124. a. tt 2 Cor. 4. b. 

The Byptstie of the Apostle €. Paul to the Ephesians.

The summe of this Epistle. 

Chap. I. 

The euerlastinge ordinaunce and eleccion of God in sauynge all men thorow Christ lesus his sonne. We are ordened vnto good workes.
The dominion of Christ. 

Chap. Il. 
Paul sheweth them what maner of people they were before their conuersion, and what they are now in Christ.

Chap. I. 

He sheweth the cause of his presonment, desyreth them not to faynte because of his trouble, and prayeth God to make thé stedfast in his sprete.

Chap. III. 

He exhorteth them vnto mekenes, longe sufferinge, vnto loue and peace, euery one to serue and edifie another with the gifte that God hath geue him, to bewarre of straunge doctrine, to

laye asyde the olde conuersacion of gredy lustes, and to walke in a new life.

Chap. V 

He exhorteth them vnto loue, warneth them to bewarre of vnclennes, cuvetousnesse, foolish talkynge and false doctryne: to be circum- specte, to avoyde dronkennesse, to reioyse and to be thankful! towarde God, to submytt thé selues one to another, He teacheth how wemen shulde obeye their huszbodes, and how lou- yngly men ought to intreate their wyues,

Chap. VI. 

How children shulde behaue them selues towarde their fathers and mothers: Likewyse fathers towarde their children: Seruauntes towarde their masters: Agayne, masters towarde their seruaites. An exhortacion to the spirituall battayll, and what weapens christen men shulde fight withall.

The Lyptstle of the Apostle &. Paul to the Ephesians.

The first Chapter. a p^r an Apostle of lesus Christ by the will of God. To y sayntes which are at
Ephesus, q to thé that beleue on Iesus Christ. 

* Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, q fro the LORDE Iesus Christ.

Blessed be God the father of oure LORDE |. 

lesus Christ, which hath blessed vs with all maner of spirituall blessynge in heauenly thynges by Christ tacordinge as he had chosen

* 2 Cor. 1.8. Gal. 1. a. t Ioh. 15. b. 2 Tim. 1. b. 

vs by him, or euer the foundacion of the worlde was layed, that we shulde be holy and without blame before him in loue, q ordeyned vs before, to receaue vs as children thorow
Iesus Christ, acordinge to the pleasure of his will, vnto the prayse of the glory of his grace, wherby he hath made vs accepted in thet
Beloued, in whom we haue redempcion thorow his bloude (namely) the forgeuenes of synnes, acordynge to ¥ riches of his grace, which he hath shed vpon vs abundauntly in all wysz-

1 Mat. 3. b. and 17. a. 

B 

Chap. fj. The Cpistle to the Ephesians. So. erby. 

dome and prudéce: and hath opened vnto vs the mystery of his wil acordinge to his plea- sure, which he had purposed in himselfe, y it shulde be preached *wha the tyme was full come, that all thinges shulde be gathered together by Christ, both the thinges which are in heauen, and also the thinges that are vpon earth, euen by him, by whom also we are come to the inheritaunce twe that were therto predestinate before, acordinge to purpose of him, which worketh all thinges after y councell of his owne wyll, that we mighte be to the prayse of his glory, euen we that before beleued on Christ, on who also ye beleued, after that ye herde the worde of trueth, namely y Gospell of youre saluacion: wherin whan ye beleued, ye weret sealed with the holy sprete of promes, which is the ernest of oure inheritaunce to oure redempcion, that we mighte be his owne to the prayse off his glory.
€ | Wherfore I also, (in so moch as I haue herde of the faith which ye haue in ý LORDE lesu, and of youre loue vnto all y sayntes) ceasse not to geue thankes for you, and make mencion of you in my prayers, that y God of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, the father of glory maye geue vnto you the sprete of wysz- dome, and open vnto you the knowlege of himselfe, and lighten the eyes of youre vnder- stondinge, that ye maye knowe what is the hope of youre callynge, and what the riches of his glorious enheritaunce is vpon the sayntes, t what is the exceadinge greatnesse of his power towarde vs, which beleue acord- inge to y workynge of his mightie power, which he wroughte in Christ, whan he raysed him vp fro the deed,$ and set him on his righte hade 1 heauély thinges, aboue all rule, power, and mighte, and dominacio, and aboue all that maye be named, not onely in this worlde, but also in y worlde to come. ll And hath put all thinges vnder his fete, and hath made him aboue all thingesf the heade of the cogregacion, which is his body, and the fulnesse of him that fylleth all in all.

to the course off this worlde, and after the prynce that ruleth in the ayre namely, after y sprete, which now worketh in the children of vnbeleue,** amonge whom we also had oure conuersacion in tyme past in the lustes of oure flesh, and dyd the wyll of the flesh and of the mynde, and were naturally the children of wrath, euen as well as other.

But God which is riche in mercy thorow his greate loue wherwith he loued vs euè wha we were deed in synnes, hath quyckened vs in
Christ (ttfor hy grace are ye saued) and hath raysed vs vp with him, and set vs with him in heaucly thinges thorow Christ lesus, y in tymes to come he mighte shewe the exceadinge riches of his grace, in kyndnesse to vs warde in Christ lesu. For by grace are ye saued thorow faith, and that not of youre selues,
For itis y gifte of God, not of workes, lest eny mà shulde boast him selfe. For we are his workmanshippe, created in Christ Iesu tt vnto good workes, to $ which God ordeyned vs before, that we shulde walke in them.

Wherfore remébre, that ye (which afore tyme were Gentyles after the flesh, and were called vneireumeision, of thé that are called
$$ circumcision after the flesh, which circum- cision is made with the hande) that ye at the same tyme were without Christ, and reputed aleauntes from the comen welth of Israel, and were straungers from the Testamentes of promes, therfore had ye no hope, and were without God in this worlde. But now ye that be in Christ Iesu, and afore tyme were farre of, are now made nye hy the bloude of
Christ. 

For he is oure lll peace, which of both hath} ¢ made one, and hath broken downe the wall, that was a stoppe betwene vs, and hath also thorow his flesh put awaye the cause off hatred
(namely the lawe of the commaundemétes contayned in the lawe wrytten) that of twayne he mighte create one new man in him selfe, and make peace, and to reconcyle both vnto
God in one body thorow the crosse, and so he slewe y hatred thorow his owne selfe, and came Tand preached peace in the Gospell, vnto you which were afarre of, and to the that were nye. For thorow him we both haue intraunce in one sprete vnto the father.

The tj. Chapter. a ND quyckened you also, whan ye were deed thorow trespaces and synnes, in the which in tyme past ye walked, acordinge

* Gal. 4. a. f Rom. 8. d. t 2 Cor. 1. c. and 5. a. 
§ Psal. 109, a. || Psal. 8. b. T Ephe. 4. b. and 5. c. 
Col. 1. c. ** Col. 3-2: tt Esa. 25. b. Act. 15. b. 

TeTut32 dbs $$ Phil. 3. a. Col. 2. b. [|| Ess. 9. b. 
Col. 1. b. TT Esa. 57. c. 

fo. erebtt). 

Now therfore ye are nomore gestes and straungers, but citesins with the sayntes, q of the housholde of God, buylded vpon* y foundacton of y Apostles and prophetes t where lesus Christ is y heade corner stone in whom euery buyldinge coupled together, groweth to an holy temple in the LORDE, iu whom ye also are buylded together, to be an habitacion of God in the sprete.

The iij. Chapter. 
OR this cause I Paul am ta presoner of 

4 esus Christ for you Heythen, acordinge as ye haue herde of y office of the grace of
God which is geuen me to you warde. For by 4 reuelacion was this mystery shewed vnto me, as I wrote aboue in fewe wordes: wherby whan ye rede it, ye maye perceaue myne vnderstondynge in y mystery of Christ, which
(mystery) in tymes past was not opened vnto the childré of mé as it is now declared to his holy Apostles and prophetes by the sprete: namely, that the Heythen shulde be inherit- ours also, and of the same body, and par- takers of his promes in Christ by the Gospell, wherof I am made a mynister acordynge to the gifte of the grace of God, which is geué me acordinge to the workynge of his power.

Vnto me Ilthe leest of all sayntes is this grace geuen, that 1 shulde preach amonge the
Heythe y vnsearcheable riches of Christ, and to make all men se, what is the fellishippe of the
S mystery, which fro the begynnynge of the worlde hath bene hyd in God, which made all thiges thorow Iesus Christ: to the intent that now vnto the rulers and powers in heaue mighte be knowne by the congregacion the manifolde wyszdome off God, acordinge to y eternall purpose; which he hath shewed in
Christ lesu oure LORDE by whom we haue boldnesse and intraunce in all confidece thorow faith on him. Wherfore I desyre that ye faynte not because of my tribulacions, y I
** suffre for you, which is youre prayse. 

For this cause 1 bowe my knees vnto the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, which is the true father, ouer all that is called father in heauen and in earth, that he graunte you
(acordinge to I riches of his glory) to be strengthed with power by his sprete in y

* 1 Cor, 3. b. PT Pot32a; t Act. 21. d. 
$Gal.1.b. — (1 Cor.15.a2. € Col2.e. ** Col. fle Go tt Ro. 12. a. 1 Cor. 12. a. tt Psal. 67. c.

The Epistle to the Ephesians. 

Chap. iij. inwarde ma, that Christ maye dwell in youre hertes by faith, that ye beynge roted and grounded in loue, maye be able to coprehende with all sayntes, what is the bredth, and the length, and the deepth, and the heyth: and
(to knowe the loue of Christ, which loue yet passeth all knowlege: that ye maye be fylled with all maner of fulnesse of God.

Vnto him that is able to do exceadinge abundauntly, aboue all that we axe or vnder- stonde (acordinge to y power that worketh in vs) be prayse in the congregacion, which is in
Christ lesu, at all tymes for euer and euer, 
Amen, 

The (ij. Chapter. 
THERFORE which am presoner in the 
LORDE, exhorte you, that ye walke as it becometh youre callinge wherin ye are called, with all humblenes off mynde and mekenes, and longe sufferinge, forbearinge one another in loue, and be diligent to kepe the vnite of the sprete thorow the bonde of peace. One body and one sprete, eue as ye are called in one hope of youre callynge.
One LORDE, one faith, one baptyme, one 
God and father of vs all, which is aboue all, and thorow all, and in you all.

ttVnto euery one of vs is geuen grace, acordinge to the measure off the gifte off
Christ. Therfore sayeth he: tt He is gone vp an hye, and hath led awaye captiuyte captyue, and hath geué giftes vnto men. That he wente vp, what is it, but that he first came downe in to y lowest partes of y earth? $$ He that came downe, is euen the same which is gone vp aboue all heauens, to fulfill all. lll And y same hath set some to be Apostles, some to be prophetes, some to be Euange- listes, some to be shepherdes qœ teachers, wherby the sayntes mighte be coupled toge- ther thorow comen seruyce to the edifienge of ¥ body of Christ, tyll we all come vnto one maner of faith and knowlege of the sonne of God, and become a perfecte man in to the measure of the perfecte age of Christ 1% that we be nomore children, ***waueringe q caried aboute with euery wynde of doctryne thorow the wickednes of men and craftynes, wherby

they laye awayte for vs to disceaue vs. 

«€ 1 Cor. 14. 

$6 Ioh. 3. b. illl 1 Cor, 12. c. met Cole ay

Chap. b. 

all thinges growe in him, * which is the heade, euen Christ, in whom all the body is coupled together, and one membre hangeth by another thorow out all y ioyntes. + Wherby one mynistreth vnto another (acordinge to the operacion as euery membre hath his mea- sure) and maketh, that y body groweth to the edifienge of it selfe in lone.

This I saye therfore, and testifye in the 
LORDE, that ye walke nomore as y other 
Heythen walke in the vanite of their mynde, blynded in their vnderstondinge, beynge straungers fro the life which is in God thorow the ignoraunce that is in them, because of the blyndnes of their hert: which beynge past repentaunce, haue geue them selues ouer vnto wantonnes, to worke all maner of vn- clennes euen with gredynesse.

€| But ye haue not so learned Christ, yf so be 

that ye haue herde of him, q are taught in him, euen as the trueth is in lesu. So then as concernynge the conuersacion in tyme past t laye from you that olde man which marreth himselfe thorow disceauable lustes: but be ye renued in the sprete of youre mynde, and put on that new man, which is shapen after God, in true righteousnes and holynes. § Wherfore put awaye lyenge, and speake euery man the trueth vnto his neghboure, for as moch as we are membres one of another. || Be angrie, but synne not. Let not ¥ Sonne go downe vpo youre wrath: nether gene place to the bacbyter. He that hath stollen, let him steale nomore: T but let him laboure rather, and do some good with his hondes, that he maye haue to geue vnto him that nedeth.

Let no filthy communicacion proceade out of youre month, ^but that which is good to editye withall, whà nede is, that it be gracious to heare. And greue not the holy sprete of
God, wherwith ye are **sealed vnto ý daye of redempcion. Let all bytternes, and fears- nes, and wrath, and roaringe, q cursed speak- ynge be farre fro you with all maliciousnes.
But be ye curteous one to another, mercifull, tt and forgeue one another, eué as God hath forgeuen you in Christ.

* Ephe. 1. c. and 5. c. t Ro. 12.2, 1 Cor. 12. b. f Rom. 6.a. Col. 3. a, § Zach. 8. c. 1 Pet, 2. a.
| Psal. 4.a. 2 Tess.3.a. ^ Mat.12.d. Ephe. 5. a. 
**2 Cor.1.c. tt Mat. 6. b. Mat. 5.e. Ioh. 13. b. 
$6 Gal. 1. a. Ill] Eecti. 23. c. TT 1 Cor. 6. b. 

The Epistle to tbe Ephesians., 

B) But let vs folowe the trneth in loue, and in 

The b. Chapter. 
BD ye the #4 folowers therfore of God as|@ 

deare children, and walke in loue, euen as Christ loued vs, and $$ gaue him selfe for vs an offerynge and sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto God. As for whordome and all vnclen- nes, or couetousnes, let it not be named amōge you, asit becommeth sayntes: lllne- ther fylthines, ner folish talkynge, ner ieast- ynge (which are not comly) but rather geuynge of thakes. 4 For be sure, that no whore monger, or vncleane person, or couetous per- son (which is a worshipper off ymages) hath inheritaunce in the kyngdome of Christ and of God. *** (Let no man disceaue you with vayne wordes) for because of these commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of vn- beleue. Be not ye therfore companions with them. For sometyme ye were darknesse, ttt but now are ye lighte in the LORDE.

Walke as the children of lighte. 1:1 (For the frute of the sprete is all maner of goodnes, and righteousnes and trueth:) and proue what is pleasinge vnto the LORDE, and baue no fellishippe with y vnfrutefull workes of darknes, but rather e thé. For it is shame euen to name those thinges, which are done of them in secrete. But all thinges are manifest, whan they are rebuked of the lighte.
For what so ener is manifest, that same is lighte. ‘Therfore sayeth he: $$$ Awake thou that slepest, and stonde vp fro the deed, and
Christ shal geue the lighte. 

Illi Take hede therfore how ye walke cir- cumspectly, not as the vnwyse, but as y wyse, and redeme the tyme, for it is a miserable tyme.
Wherfore be not ye vnwyse, but vnderstonde what the wil of the LORDE is, $1 and be not dronken with wyne, wherin is excesse: but be full of the sprete, ****and talke amoge youre selues of Psalmes and ymnes, and spiritual] songes, synginge and makynge melody vnto the LORDE in youre hertes tttt geuynge thankes alwayes for all thinges vnto God the father, in the name of oure LORDE Iesus
Christ, submyttinge youreselues one to another in the feare of God.

* Let the wemen submytte them selues vnto 

Col. 3. a. SU (nb e eo ttt 1 Tess. 5. a. itt Gal. 5. c. — $$$ Esa. 60.a. Rom. 13.b. ||| Col.
4.8. TAF Eccli. 31. c. — **** Col.3.b. ttt 1 Tess. 

5. c. b Col, 3. c, 1 Pet. 3. a. 

Fo. ceir, 

So. rt. their huszbandes, as vnto the LORDE.
* For the hnszbande is the wyues heade, euc as Christ also is the heade of the congrega- cion, and he is the Sauioure of his body.
Therfore as the congregacion is in subieccion to Christ, likewyse let the wyues be in subiec- cion to their huszbandes in all thinges.

Ye hnszbandes loue youre wyues, euen as 
Christ loued the congregacion, t and gaue himselfe for it, to sanctifye it, tand clensed it in the fonntayne of water by the worde, to make it vnto himselfe a glorious congregacion, hauynge no spot ner wrynkle, ner eny soch thinge, but that it shulde be holy and without blame.

So oughte men also to loue their wyues, euen as their awne bodyes. He that loueth his wife, loneth him selfe. For no ma euer vet hated his awne fleszhe, but norisheth and cheriszheth it, euen as the LORDE doth also the congregacion. For we are membres of his body, of his flesh and of his bones. $ For this cause shal a man leaue father and mother, and cleue vnto his wife, and they two shal be one flesh: This is a greate secrete: but I speake of Christ and the congregacion. Ne- uertheles do ye so, that euery one of you loue his wife euen as himselfe: but let the wife feare hir huszbande.

The bi. Chapter. 
E lchildren, obey youre elders in the 
LORDE, for that is righte. Honoure thy father and thy mother (T That is the

that thou mayest prospere, and lyue longe vpon earth. And ye fathers, prouoke not youre children vnto wrath, but brynge thé vp in the nourtoure and informacion of the
LORDE. 

** Ye seruauntes, obey youre bodely mas- ters, with feare and tremblynge, in synglenes of youre hert, euen as vnto Christ, not with seruyce onely in the eye sighte, as men pleasers: but as the seruauntes off Christ, doynge the wyll off God from the hert with good wyll. Thynke that ye serue the LORDE and not mé: and be sure, that what good soeuer a man doth, he shal receaue it agayne of the LORDE, whether he be bonde or fre.

* 1 Co. 11. a. t Ephe.5. a. Gal.2.c. t Tit. 3. a. 
1 Pet. 5. c. § Gen. 2, d. Mat. 19.a. Marc. 10. a. 
|| Col. 3. c. § Exo. 20. b. s? Col.3. c. Titi b: 
1 Pet. 2. c. a Eccli. 33. d. Col. 3. c. tt Act. 10. d. 

The Epistle to the Ephesians. 

first commaundement, that hath eny promes) | 

Chap. bi. 

“And ye masters, do euen the same vnto thé, puttynge awaye threatenynges, and knowe that euen youre master also is in heauen, ttnether is there eny respecte of personnes with him.

Fynally my brethren, be stronge in the|B 
LORDE, and in the power of his mighte: put on the armoure of God, that ye maye stonde stedfast agaynst the craftie assautes off the deuell. For we wrestle not agaynst flesh and bloude, but agaynst rule, agaynst power namely, agaynst the rulers of the worlde, of the darknesse of this worlde, agaynst y spretes of wickednes vnder the heauen. For this cause take ye the armoure of God, y ye maye be able to resiste in the euell daye, and stonde perfecte in all thinges.

$+ Stonde therfore, and youre loynes gyrde aboute with the trueth, hauynge on the brest plate of righteousnes, and shod vpo youre fete with the gospell of peace, that ye maye be prepared: Aboue all thinges take holde of the shylde of faith, wherwith ye maye quenche all the fyrie dartes of the wicked.
And take the helmet of saluacion, q the swerde of the sprete, which is the worde of
God. 

$$ And praye allwayes with all maner of| € prayer and supplicacion in the sprete, and watch there vnto with all instaunce and sup- plicacion for all sayntes and for me, ‘that the worde maye be geuen me, that I maye open my mouth boldly, to vtter the secretes of the
Gospell, wherof 1 am a messaunger in bondes, that I maye speake therin frely, “as it be- commeth me to speake.

But that ye maye also knowe, what case 
I am in, and what I do, Tichicus my deare brother and faithfull mynister in the LORDE, shal shewe you all: whom I haue sent vnto you for the same cause, that ye mighte knowe what case I stonde in, and that he mighte comforte youre hertes.

Peace be vnto the brethré, and loue with faith, from God the father, ¢ from the LORDE
Iesu Christ. Grace be with all them that loue oure LORDE Iesus Christ. vnfaynedly.
Amen. 

Sent from Rome vnto the Ephesians, by 
Tichicus. | 

Rom. 2. b. Col. 5.c. 1 Pet. 5. b. tt Deut. 23. b.! 
Psal. 131. a. Esa. 11. a. 2 Cor. 10. a. Sap. 5. c. 
§§ Luc. 18. a. 1 Tess. 5. c. è Col. 4. a. 2 Tess. 3. a. 
* Act, 4. c. 

Chap. I. 

He exhorteth them to increace in loue, in know- lege and experience of godly thinges: maketh mencion of his presonment at Rome, is glad to heare Christ preached, is cotent ether to dye or lyue, and prayeth them to lede a godly conuersacion, to be of one mynde, and to feare no persecucion.

Chap. Il. 
He exhorteth them to vnite and brotherly loue, and to bewarre of strife and vayne glory:

The first Chapter. 

AUL and Timotheus the seruauntes of 

lesu Christ. Vnto all the sayntes in 

lesu Christ, which are at Philippos, with the 
Biszhoppes and * mynisters. 

Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, and from the LORDE lesus
Christ. 

t I thanke my God, as oft as I remébre you (which I allwayes do in all my prayers for you all, and praye with gladnesse) because of youre fellishippe which ye haue in the
Gospell from the first daye vnto now, and am surely certified of this, y he which hath begonne that good + worke in you, shal go forth with it vntyll y daye of lesus Christ: as it becommeth me to iudge of you all, be- cause I haue you in my hert, as those that are partakers with me of grace in my bondes, in defendinge and stablyshinge of the
Gospell. 

For God is my $ recorde, how I loge after you all euen fro the very hert rote in lesus
Christ. || And for the same I praye, y youre 

* Áct. 6. a. 

1 Tess. 1. a. 

t Col. 1. a. t Ioh. 6. d. 

The Lpistie of the Apostle S. Paul to the Philippians.

The summe of this epistle. 

And for a sure ensample he layeth Christ before them.
Chap. Ill. 

He warneth thé to bewarre of false teachers, whom he calleth dogges and enemies of Christ, and reproueth mas owne righteousnesse.

Chap. III. 

He saluteth certayne of them, exhorteth them to be of honest conuersacion, and thanketh them because of the prouysion, that they made for

him beynge in preson. 

loue maye increace more q more in all maner of knowlege and in all experience, y ye maye proue what is best, that ye maye be pure, q soch as hurte no mans conscience, vnto the daye of Christ: fylled with the frutes of right- eousnes, which come by lesus Christ vnto the glorye and prayse of God.

I wolde ye vnderstode brethren, that my busynes is happened vnto the greater fur- theraunce of the Gospell, so that my bondes in Christ are manifest thorow out all y iudg- met hall, and in all other places: In so moch that many brethren in the LORDE, are boldened thorow my bodes, and darre more largely speake the worde without feare. Some
(no doute) preach Christ of enuye and stryfe, but some of good wil. The one parte preacheth
Christ off stryfe and not purely, supposynge to adde more aduersite vnto my bondes. "The other parte of loue, for they knowe that I lye here for the defence of the Gospell.

What then? So that Christ be preached|€ all maner of wayes (whether it be done by occasion or of true meaninge) I reioyce therin, and wil reioyce. For I knowe that the same

$ 1 Tess. 2. a. || Ephe. 1. c. Col. 1.a. 2 Tess. 1. b. 

So. ce). shal chaunce to my saluacion, * thorow youre prayer and mynistrynge of the sprete of Iesu
Christ, as I loke for and hope, that in nothinge 
I shalbe ashamed: but y with all céfidence 
(as allwayes in tymes past, eué so now) Christ shalbe magnified in my body whether it be thorow life or thorow death. For Christ is to me life, q death is to me auaitage. But in as moch as to lyue in y flesh is frutefull to ine for the worke, I wote not what I shal chose, for both these thinges lye harde vpon me. tI desyre to be lowsed, q to be with
Christ, which thinge were moch better (for me) but to abyde in the flesh is more nedefull for you.

| And this am I sure of, that I shal abyde, and contynue with you all, for the fnrther- aunce and ioye of youre faith, that ye maye abundauntly reioyse in Christ Iesu thorow me, by my cómynge to you agayne. Onely let youre conuersacion be ? as it becommeth the Gospell of Christ, that whether I come q se you, or els be absent, I maye yet heare of you that ye cótynue in one sprete and one soule, labourynge (as we do) to mayntayne the faith of the Gospell, and in nothinge fearinge youre aduersaries, which is to them a token off perdicion, but vnto you of sal- uacion, and that of God. For vnto you it is geuen, not onely that ye shulde beleue on
Christ, but also suffre for his sake, and to haue euen the same fighte, which ye haue sene in me, and now heare of me.

The tj. Chapter. 

F there be amonge you eny consolacion 
Dd in Christ, yf there be eny comforte of loue, yf there be eny fellishippe off the sprete, yf there be eny compassion and mercy, fulfyll my ioye, that ye drawe one waye, hauynge one loue, beynge of one accorde, and of one mynde: that there be nothinge done thorow stryfe and vayne glory, but that thorow meke- nesse of mynde euery man esteme another better then himselfe: and let euery mà loke not for his awne profet, but for the profet of other.

Let the same mynde be in you, that was in Christ lesu: which beyinge in the shappe of God, thought it not robbery to be equall

1 2 Cor. 5. a. t Ephe.4. a. Col. 
§Heb.5.a. || Mat. 98. e. Heb.2.b. 
. Dan.7.c. Ro. 14. b. ** Deu. 8. d. 

The Epistle to the Philippians. 

Chap, i. with God, but made him selfe of no reputa- cion, and toke vpon him the shappe of a seruaunt, § became like another man, and was founde in his apparell as a man: he humbled himselfe, and became obedient vnto the death, euen vnto the death of the crosse.

ll Therfore hath God also exalted him, and geuen him a name, which is aboue all names,
{that in the name of Iesus euery kne shulde bowe, both of thinges in heauen, of thinges vpo earth, and of thinges vnder the earth, and that all tunges shulde confesse, that lesus
Christ is the LORDE vnto the prayse of 
God the father. 

Wherfore my dearly beloued, as ye haue allwayes obeyed (not onely in my presence, but now also moch more in my absence) enen so worke out youre awne saluacion with feare and tremblynge. — ** For it is God which worketh in you both the wyll and the deed, euen of his owne good wyll. Do all thinges without murmurynges and disputinges, that ye maye be fautles and pure, and the childre of God tt without rebuke, in the myddes of y croked and peruerse nacion, 1t amonge whom se that ye shyne as lightes in the worlde, holdinge fast the worde of life, vnto my reloysinge in the daye of Christ, that I haue not runne in vayne, nether laboured in vayne.
8$ Yee and though I be offred vp vpo the offerynge q sacrifice of youre faith, I am glad, and reioyce with you all: be ye glad also, and reioyce ye with me.

I trust in the LORDE Jesus, to sende Ti- motheus shortly vnto you, that I also maye be of good comforte, whan I knowe what case ye stonde in. For I haue no man that is so like mynded to me, which with so pure affeccio careth for you: for all other seke their awne, not that which is lesus Christes.
But ye knowe the profe of him: for as a childe vnto the father, so hath he mynistred vnto me in the Gospel. Him I hope to sende, as soone as I knowe how it wyll go with me. But I trust in the LORDE, that
I also my selfe shal come shortly. 

Neuertheles I thoughte it necessary to sende vnto you the brother Ephraditus, which is my companyon in laboure and felowe sou- dyer, and youre Apostell, and my mynister at

Ezec.36.e. 2 Cor. 3. a. 

tt Matb. 5. b. 

Heb. 13. d. 
$6 Col. 1. c. 

tt 1 Pet. 2. b. 

Chap. (itj. my nede, for so moch as he longed after you all, and was full of heuynes, because ye had herde that he was sicke. And no doute he was sicke, and that nye vnto death: but God had mercy on him, and not on him onely, but on me also, lest I shulde haue had sorowe vpon sorowe.

I haue sent him therfore the more haistely, that ye mighte se him, and retoyce agayne, and that I also mighte haue the lesse sorowe.
Receaue him therfore in the LORDE with all gladnes,* and make moch of soche: for because of the worke of Christ, he wente so farre, that he came nye vnto death, and regarded not his life, to fulfyll that seruyce which was lackynge on youre parte to- warde me.

The iij. Chapter. 

OROUER my brethren, reioyce in the 
| LORDE. Where as I wryte euer one thinge vnto you, it greueth me not, and maketh you the surer. Bewarre off dogges, bewarre of euell workers, bewarre off discen- sion: tfor we are the circumcision, euen we that serue God in the sprete, and reioyce in
Christ lesu, and haue no confidence in the flesh, though I haue wherof I mighte reioyce in y flesh. Yf eny other mà thynke that he hath wherof he mighte reioyce in the flesh, moch more I, which was circticysed on the eight daye, one of the people of Israel, of the trybe off Ben Iamin,an hebrue of the Hebrnes: as concernynge the lawe ta Pharise: as con- cernynge feruentnes $I persecuted the co- gregacion: and as touchinge the righteousnes which is in the lawe, I was vnrebukable.

l But the thinges that were vauntage vnto me, haue I counted losse for Christes sake.
Yee I thynke all thinges but losse, for that excellent € knowleges sake of Christ lesu my
LORDE: for whom I haue counted all thinge losse, and do iudge them but donge, that I mighte wynne Christ, q be founde in him, not hauynge myne awne righteousnes which commeth of the lawe, but by the faith of Christ (namely) the righteousnes which commeth of God in faith, to knowe him and the vertue of his resurreccion, and the fel- lishippe of his passion, **that I maye be con-

* Rom.15.d. Mat.10,a. 1 Tess. 5. c. t Rom. 2. c. 
Col. 2. b. t Act. 23. a. § Act.9,a. Gal. 1. b. 
|| Mat. 13. f. * Ioh.17.a. Col.2.a. ` ** Rom.6.a. 

The Epistle to the Philippians. 

Ho. eii. formable vnto his death, yff by eny meanes I[ mighte attayne to the resurreccion from the deed. Not that I haue attayned vnto it all ready, or that I am allready perfecte: but I folowe, yf I maye comprehende that, wherin
Iam comprehended off Christ Iesu. Brethren, 
I counte not my selfe yet that I haue gotten it: but one thinge I saye: I forget that which is behynde, and stretch my selfe vnto that which is before, q preace vnto y marck apoynted, to optayne the rewarde ge the hye callynge of God in Christ Iesu.

Let vs therfore (as many as be parfecte) be thus wyse mynded: and yf ye be otherwyse mynded, I praye God open euen this vnto you. Neuertheles in that wher vnto we are come, let vs procede by one rule, that we maye be of one accorde. tt Brethren, be ye y folowers of me, and loke on the which walke eué so as ye haue vs for an ensample. For many walke (off whom I haue tolde you often, but now I tell you wepynge) eue enemies of the crosse of Christ, whose ende is damnacion, tt whose God is the bely, q whose glory shalbe to their shame, which are earthly mynded.
$$But oure conuersacton is in heauen, from whence we loke for the Sauioure Iesu Christ i LORDE, llwhieh shal chaüge oure vyle

ody, y it maye be like fashioned vnto his glorious body, acordinge to $ workynge wherby he is able to subdue all thinges vnto himselfe.

The iiij. Chapter. 

WV tioned RE my brethré dearly beloued)@ q longed fur, my toye q my crowne con-

tynue so in the LORDE ye beloued. I praye Euodias, q beseke Syntiches, that they be of one mynde in the LORDE. Yee and
I beseke the my faithfull yock felowe, helpe the wemen, which haue laboured with me m the Gospell, with Clement q with my other helpers, (f whose names are in the boke of life. Reioyce in the LORDE allwaye, a agayne I saye, Reioyse. Let youre softnes be knowne vnto all men. The LORDE is euen at honde. Be not carefull, but in all thinges let youre peticions in prayer and sup- plicacion, with geuynge of thankes be knowne before God. And y ***peace of God, which

tt 1 Cor. 4. c. and 10. d. tt Ro. 16. b. $$ Col. 3. a. 
||| tCor.15.f. TT Luc.10.b. Apo.i17.b. ^ *** Ioh. 
14.c. Rom. 5.a. 

| fo. eeit. 

5 

passeth all vnderstodinge, kepe youre hertes and myndes in Christ Iesu.

Furthermore brethren, what soeuer thinges are true, what soeuer thinges are honest, what soeuer thinges are iust, what so euer thinges are pure, what soeuer thinges pertayne to loue, what soeuer thinges are of honest reporte: yf there be eny vertuous thinge, yf there be eny laudable thinge, haue those same in youre mynde, which ye haue both lerned and re- ceaued, and herde and sene in me: those thinges do, and the God of peace shal be with you. I reioyse greatly in ý LORDE, that now at the last ye are reuyned agayne to care for me, as ye cared for me afore, but ye lacked oportunyte. I speake not this because of necessite : for I haue lerned in what soeuer estate I am, *therwith to be contéte. I can be lowe, and I ca be hye. Euery where and in all thinges I am mete, both to be full, and to be hongrie: to haue plentye, and to suffre nede. I can do all thinges thorow Christ, which strégtheth me. Notwithstondinge ye haue done well, that ye bare parte with me 1n my tribulacion.

* 1 Tim. 6. b. 

The Epistle to tbe Colossians. 

Chap. f. 

But ye of.Philippos knowe, that in the| begynnynge of the Gospell whan I departed fro Macedonia, no congregacion bare parte with me concernynge geuynge and receauynge, but ye onely. For vnto Tessalonica ye sent once and afterwarde agayne vnto my necessite.
Not that I seke giftes, but I seke the frute, that it be abüdaunt in youre rekenynge. For
I haue all, and haue plentye. Í was euen fylled wha T receaued of Epaphroditus, that which came from you, an odoure of swetenes, ta sacrifice accepted q pleasaunt vnto God.
My God fulfyll all youre nede, acordinge to his riches in glory 1 Christ Iesu.

Vnto God and oure father be prayse for euer and euer Amen.

Salute all y sayntes in Christ Iesu. The brethré that are with me, salute you. All the sayntes salute you, but specially they that are of the Emperours house. The grace of oure LORDE Iesu Christ be with you all,

Amen. 
Wrytten from Rome by Epaphroditus. 

+ Rom, 12. a. Heb. 13. c 

“The Lypistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Colossians,

The summe of this Epistle. 

Chap. l 

He geueth thankes vnto God for their faith, loue, and hope: prayeth for their increase and sheweth how we are the kyugdome of God, optayned by Christ, which is the heade of the congregacion.

Chap. II. 

What greate care Paul toke for all congre- gacions. He exhorteth them to be stedfast iu
Christ, to bewarre of false teachers and worldly 

; wyszdome, and descrybeth the false prophetes, 

Chap. III. 

He putteth them in remembraunce of the spi- rituall resurreccio, to laye asyde all mauer of corrupte lyuynge, to be frutefull in all godly- nesse and vertue, and sheweth all degrees their dutye.

Chap. III. 

He exhorteth them to be feruent in prayer, to walke wysely vnto them that are not yet come to the true kuowlege of Christ, and so saluteth them.

Chap. ij. 

The first Chapter 

a Pra an Apostle of Iesu Christ by the 

will of God, and brother ‘Timotheus. 

To y sayntes which are at Colossa and brethren that beleue in Christ.

Grace be with you and peace from God oure father q fro the LORDE Iesus Christ.

*We geue thankes vnto God and the father of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, prayenge allwayes for you (sence we herde of youre faith in Christ Iesu, and of youre loue to all sayntes) for ¥ hopes sake which is layed vp in stoare for yon in heauen: of the which ye haue herde before by the worde of trueth in the Gospell, which is come vnto you, eue as it is in to all the worlde: and is frutefull, as it lis in you, sence y daye y ye herde and knewe ithe grace of God in y trueth, as ye learned of
+ Epaphras oure deare felowe seruaunt, which is a faithfull mynister of Christ for you, which also declared vnto vs youre loue in the sprete.

+For this cause we also, sence the daye y we herde of it, ceasse not to praye for yon, ¢

\desyre that ye mighte be fulfylled with the 

knowlege of his will, in all wyszdome and spirituall vnderstondinge, that ye mighte walke worthy off the LORDE, to please him in all thinges, $and to be frutefull in all good workes, and growe in the knowlege of God: q to be strengthed with all power acordinge to the mighte of his glory, to all pacience and long- sufferynge with ioyfulnes, and geue thankes vnto the father, which hath made vs mete for the enheritaunce of sayntes in lighte.

Which hath delyuered vs fro the power of darknesse, q translated vs in to the kyngdome of his deare sonne (llin whom we haue re- dempcion thorow his blonde, namely, the forgeuenes of synnes.) 1T Which is the ymage of the inuisyble God, first begotte before all creatures. “*For by him were all thinges created, that are in heanen and earth, thinges vysible and thinges inuysible, whether they be maiesties or lordshippes, ether rules or powers:
All thinges are created by him and in him, and he is before all thinges, and in him all thinges haue their beynge.

tt And he is the heade of the body, namely, of the cogregacion: tthe is the begynnynge

* Phil. 1. a. 1 Tess. 1. a. + Col. 4. b. 1 Ephe. 
L.e. Phil. 1. b. 2 Tess. L. b $ Ioh. 15. h. || Ephe. et.a. Heb. 1.a. ** Psal. 52.a. Heb.

E tt Ephe. I. c. and 4. b. 

tt 1 Cor. 15. c. Apoc. 1. a. 

The Epistle to the Colossians. 

and first begotten from the deed, that in all thinges he mighte haue the preemynence.
For it pleased the father, that in him shulde dwell all S$fulnesse, and that by him all thinges shulde be Illlreconciled vnto himselfe, whether they be thinges vpon earth or in heauen, that thorow the bloude on his crosse he mighte make peace euen thorow his owne selfe. And you (which were in tymes past straungers and enemies, because youre myndes were set in euell workes) hath he now recon- cyled in the body of his flesh thorow death, to make you holy, and vnblameable q with out faute in his awne sighte, yf ye contynue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moued awaye from y hope of the Gospell, wherof ye haue herde: which is preached amonge all creatures y are vnder heauen, wherof I Paul am made a mynister.

$€ Now ioye I in my sufferynges, which I suffre for you, aud fulfill that which is be- hynde of the passions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodyes sake, which is the congregacion,
*** wherof I am made a mynister, acordinge to y Godly office of preachinge, which is geuen vnto me amonge you, that Í shulde richely preach the worde of God, namely, that ttt mystery which hath bene hyd sence the worlde beganne, and sence the begynnynge of tymes: but now is #topened vuto his sayntes, to whom God wolde make knowne the glorious riches of this mistery amoge y
Heythen: which (riches) is Christ in you, eue he that is the hope of glory, who we preach, and warne all men, and teach all men in all wyszdome, to make euery man parfecte in Christ lesu: Wherin I also laboure, and stryue acordinge to the workynge of him which worketh mightely in me

The tj. Chapter. 

WOLDE ye knewe what fightinge I haue 
I for youre sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as haue not sene my personne in the flesh, that their hertes mighte be com- forted and knytt together in loue, to all riches of full vnderstodinge, $5$ which is in the know- lege of the mystery of God the father and of
Christ, lllllin whom are hyd all the treasures of wyszdome and knowlege.

$$ Col. 2. b. l| Rom. 3. c. 2 Cor.5.c. J 2 Co. 
1. a. Ephe. 3. b. Phil. 2. b. ESSE or 4. a. ttt Ephe. 3. b. ttt Math. 11. e. $$$ Ioh. 17. a. fill] 1 Cor. 1. c.

155 

So. rb, 

a 

Fo. sbi br Cpistlr to the Colossians, — — Chap. ifj. 

^ Wherfore yf ye be deed with Christ from the ordinaunces of the worlde, why are ye holden thé with soch tradicions, as though ye lyued after the worlde? As whan they saye:
Touch not this, taist not that, handle not that. 
All these thinges do hurte vnto men, because of the abuse of them, which abuse commeth onely of the commaundementes and doctrynes of men: lliwhich thinges haue a shyne of wyszdome thorow chosen spiritualtie and humblenes, and in that they spare not the body, and do the flesh no worshipe vnto his nede.

| * This ] saye, lest eny man shulde begyle lyon with entysinge wordes. t For though 1 be absent in the flesh, yet am I present with yon in the sprete: ioyenge, and beholdinge youre order and the stedfastnes of youre faith in Christ. As ye haue therfore receaued
Christ Iesu the LORDE, euen so walke in him, and be roted q buylded in him, and be stedfast in faith, as ye haue learned: q be plenteous in the same in geuynge thankes.

B| $Bewarre lest eny mà spoyle you thorow philosophy and disceatfull vanite after the tradicions of men, and after the ordinances of the worlde, and not after Christ. || For in
‘hin dwelleth all the fulnes of the Godheade bodely, and ye are complete in him, which is the heade of all rule and power: in whom
‘also ye are circumcysed with {circumcision 
‘without handes, by puttynge of the synfull body of the flesh: (namely) with the circum- cysion of Christ, **in that ye are buried with him thorow baptyme: in whom ye are also rysen agayne thorow faith, that is wrought by the operacion of God, which raysed him vp from the deed.
| "And with him he quyckened you, whan 
-ye were deed in synnes, and in the vneircum- cision of youre flesh, and hath forgeuen vs all synnes, and put out the handwrytinge that was agaynst vs (cotayned in the lawe wrytten)
,and that hath he taken out of the waye, and fastened it to the crosse: ##And hath spoyled rule and power, and hath made a shewe of them openly, and triumphed ouer them in his awne persone.

C| Let no man therfore trouble youre con- sciences aboute meate or drynke, or for a pece jof an holy daye, as the holy daye of ¥ newe
Mone, or of the Sabbath dayes, $$which are the shadowe of the thinges that were for to come: but the body selfe is in Christ. Let no man make you shote at a wronge mark, which after his owne chosynge walketh in humblenes aud spiritualtye of angels, thinges which he neuer sawe, and is vayne, and puft vp in his owne fleshly mynde: and holdeth
‘not himselfe to the heade, wherof the whole body by ioyntes and couples receaueth norish-
‘ment, and is knyt together, and so groweth to 

the greatnes that commeth of God. 

The iij. Chapter. 
F ye be rysen now with Christ, seke|& those thinges then which are aboue where Christ is, syttinge on the righte hande of God. Set youre mynde on the thinges which are aboue, not on y thinges that are vpon earth. For ye are deed, 1% and youre life is hyd with Christ in God. *** But whan
Christ oure life shal shewe hinmselfe, thé shal ye also appeare with him in glory.

ttt Mortifye therfore youre mébres which are vpon earth, whordome, vnclennes, vn- naturall lust, euell concupiscéce, and couet- ousnes, which is a worshippynge of Idols: ttt for which thinges sakes the wrath of God commeth vpon the children of ynbeleue: $$$in the which thinges ye walked some tyme, whan ye lyued in them.

Ill But now put all awaye fro you: wrath, fearcenesse, maliciousnes, cursed speakynge, fylthie wordes out of youre mouth. Lye not onetoanother. *** Put of ¥ olde mà with his workes, and put on y newe, which is renued in knowlege after y ymage of him that 1nade him: ****where there is no Greke, Iewe, cir- cumcision, vneircumcision, Barbarous, Sithian, bode, fre: but Christ is all and in all.

Now therfore as the electe of God, holy and beloued, put on tender mercye, kyndnes, humblenes of mynde, mekenesse, longe suffer- ynge, forbearinge one another, and forgeuynge one another, yf eny man haue a quarell agaynst another. Like as Christ hath forgeuen you, euen so do ye also. But aboue all thinges put on loue, which is the bonde of perfect- nesse. And the peace of God rule in youre

| * Ephe. 5. a. t 1 Gor, 5. a. 1 Gal 3. d. §§ Heb. 8. a. 8. b. 10. a. * Gal. 4. a. ||| 3 Tim. 4. b. 
I$ Ro. 16. h. {| 2 Cor. 5. c; q Rom. 2. c. 9971 Pet.1.a. ***Phil.5.c.1Iob.3.a. ttt Ephe.5. a. 
| Phil. eB. ** Rom. 6. a. tt Rom. 5. a. Ephe. 2. a. ttt Gen. 6. 19. 1 Cor. 10. a. $$$ Ephe. 2.a. [||| Rom 

| Col. 1. b tt Gen.3. c. Luc.11.c. Ioh.19.d.| [6.3. Ephe.4.c. TIT Rom.13.b. ^ **** Gal. 6. b. 

Chap. iiij. 

hertes, to the which (peace) ye are | Thertes, to the which (peace) ye are called also] |I maye vtter $ same, as it becommeth me to| _ in one body : and se y ye be thanfull.

Let ¥ worde of Clirist dwell in you plen- teously in all wyszdome. * Teach and exhorte youre awne selues with psalmes and ymnes, and spirituall songes which haue fauoure with them, synginge in youre hertes to the
LORDE. + And what soeuer ye do in worde or worke, do all in the name of the LORDE lesu, 1 and geue thankes vnto God the father by him.

$Ye wyues, submytte youre selues vnto youre huszbandes, as it is comly in the
LORDE. 

Ye huszbandes, loue youre wyues, and be not bytter vnto them.

l Ye children, obeye youre elders in all thinges, for that is well pleasynge vuto the
LORDE. 

Ye fathers, rate not youre children, lest they be of a desperate mynde.

1 Ye seruauntes, be obedient vnto youre bodely masters in all thinges, not with eye serityce as men pleasers, but in synglenes of hert, fearinge God. What so euer ye do, do it hertely, euen as vnto the LORDE and not vnto men. And be sure, that of the LORDE! ye shal receaue the rewarde of y enheritaunce:
For ye serue the LORDE Christ. But he that doth wronge, shal receaue for the wronge that he hath done, **for there is no respecte of persons (with God.)

tt Ye masters, do vnto youre sernauntes that which is iust and equall, and knowe, ý y ye also haue a master in heauen.

The tit}. Chapter. 
ONTYNUE in prayer, and watch in the same with thankesgeuynge,’ and praye also together for vs, that God open vnto vs the dore of the worde, to speake the mystery of Christ, (wherfore I am also in bodes) that

* Ephe. 5. b. t { Cor. 10. d. i Ephe. 5. b. 
§ Ephe.5. c. 1 Pet. 3. a. || Ephe. 6. a. T Ephe. 6. a. dtr raie ap fers tab ** Act. 10. d. Rom. 2. b.

tt Ephe. 6. a. ? Ephe. 6. c. 2 Tess. 3. a. tt Ecch. 

Chap. (ij. | Che Epistle to the Colossians, fo. erbij.) 

I maye vtter y same, as it becommeth me to speake. +} Walke wysely towarde them that are without, and redeme y tyme. Let youre speach be allwaye fauorable, seasoned with
$$salt, that ye maye knowe how to answere euery man.

Tichicus the deare brother and faithfull mynister q felowe seruaüt in ý LORDE, shal tell you what case I am in. Whom I Tewe sent vnto you for the same purpose, that he mighte knowe how ye do, q that he mighte comforte youre hertes, with one Illl Onesimus a faithfull and beloued brother, which is one of you: they shal shewe you of all thinges, which are adoynge here. 41 Aristarchus my preson felowesaluteth you, and *** Mareus Barnabasses sisters sonne, touchinge whom ye receaued commaundementes : Yf he come vnto you, receaue him, and Iesus, which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These onely are my helpers in the kyngdome of God, which were to my consolacion.

ttt Epaphras a seruaunt of Christ, which is one of you, saluteth you, q q allwaye laboureth feruently for yon in prayers, y ye maye stonde perfecte and full, in all that 1s the wil of God.
I beare him records that he hath a feruent mynde for you, and for thé at Laodicea, and at Hierapolis. Deare Lucas the Phisician saluteth you, and so doth +t Demas. Salute the brethré, which are at Laodicea, and salute
Nymphas, and the cogregacion which is in his house. And whan the epistle is red of you, cause it to be red also in the cogregacio at
Laodicea, a that ye likewyse reade the epistle of Laodicea. And saye to Archippus: Take hede to the office which thou hast receaued in the LORDE, that thou fulfyll it. My saluta- cion with the hande of me Paul. Remembre my bodes. $$$ Grace be with you, Amen.

Sent from Rome by Tichicus and Onesimus. 

27.a. Ephe.5.b. $$ Mat.5.b. Marc.9.e. ||| Philem. 
1.b. YG Act. 297. a. — *** 2 Tim. 4. b. — ttt Col. 1. a. tii 2 Tim. 4. a. $65 2 Teas. 3. b,

Fo. Chap. uj. Whe Epistle to the Colossians, fo. trbüj. 

B 

Chap. I. 

He thanketh God for them, that they are so stedfast in faith and good workes, and receaue the gospell with soch earnest.

Chap. Il. 

He putteth them in mynde of the godly con- nersacion that he led amonge them when he preached the gospell vnto them, thanketh God that they receaue his worde so frutefully, and excuseth his absence.

Chap. IH. 
He sheweth how greatly he was reioysed, whà 
Timothy tolde him of their faith and lone. 

The first Chapter. 

q AUL and Siluanus and Timotheus. 
Vnto the cdgregacion of the Tessa- 

lonyans, in God the father and in the LORDE 

Iesus Christ. 

Grace be with you, and peace from God oure father and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ. 

^We geue thankes vnto God allwaye for you all, makynge mésion of you in oure prayers without ceassynge, and call to remembraunce youre worke in the faith, and youre laboure in loue, q youre pacience in hope, "which is oure LORDE Iesus Christ before God oure father: Because we knowe (brethren, beloued of God) how that ye are electe: tfor oure Gospell hath not bene with you in worde onely, but both in power and in the holy goost, and in moch certayntie, as ye knowe after what maner we were amonge you for youre sakes.

* Phil. 1.a. Col. 1. a. * 1 Tim. 1, a. +1 Coro 

The first Lyptstle of the Apostle 2. Paul to the Tessalontans.

The summe of this Epistle. 

Chap. MI. 

He exhorteth them to stedfastnesse, to kepe them selues from synne and vnclenly co- nersacion, to loue one another: rebuketh ydil- nesse, and speaketh of the resurreccion.

Chap. V. 

He enfourmeth them of the daye of dome and comynge of the LORDE, exhorteth them to watch, and to regarde soch as preach Gods worde amonge them.

And ye became the folowers of vs and of 33 the LORDE: and receaued the worde in moch affliccion with ioye of the holy goost: so that ye were an example to all that beleued in Macedonia and Achaia. For fro you was the worde of the LORDE noysed ont, not onely in Macedonia ¢ Achaia, but 1 all quar- ters also is youre faith 1 God spred abrode so that it nedeth not vs to speake eny thinge at all. For they them selues shewe of you, what maner of entrynge in we had vnto yon, and how ye are turned vnto God from ymages, for to serue the lyuynge and true God, and to loke for his sonne tfrom heaue: whom he raysed vp from the deed, euen lesus, which hath delyuered vs fro the $wrath to come.

The ij. Chapter. 
OR ye youre selues (brethren) knowe of]@ oure intraüce vnto you, how that it was not in vayne, but as we had suffred afore, q llwere shamefully intreated at Philippos (as

and 4. c. f Act. l. b. & Ioh. 3. c. || Act. 16. c. 

Chap. iij. 

ye knowe) we were bolde in oure God, *to speake vnto you y Gospel of God with moch stryuynge. For oure exhortacion was not to brynge you to erroure ner yet to vnclennes, nether was it with gyle: but as we are alowed of God, that the Gospell shulde be commytted vnto vs to preache, euen so we speake, tnot as though we wolde please mé, but God, which tryeth oure hertes.

For we haue not gone aboute with flateringe wordes (as ye knowe) ner wayted for oure owne profit (1 God is recorde) nether soughte we prayse of men, nether of you ner of eny other, whan we mighte haue bene chargeable vnto you as the Apostles off Christ, but we were tender amonge you.

Like as a norsse cherisheth hir children, euen so had we hartely affeccion towarde you, and wolde with good wyl haue dealte vnto you, not onely the Gospell of God, but oure lyues also, because ye were deare vnto vs.

Ye remembre brethren oure laboure and trauayle. $For daye and nighte wroughte we (because we wolde not be chargeable vnto eny of you) and preached the Gospell of God amonge you. Ye are witnesses, and so is
God, how holyly and iustly and vnblameable we behaued oure selues amoge you that be- leue: as ye knowe, how that as a father his children, euen so exhorted we and comforted and besoughte euery one of you, that ye wolde walke worthely before God, which hath called you vnto his kyngdome q glory.

For this cause thanke we God without ceassynge, because that wha ye receaued of vs the worde of the preachinge of God, ye receaued it not as y worde of men, but (eue as it is of a trueth) the worde of God, which worketh in you that beleue.

For ye brethren are become the folowers off Ithe congregacions off God which in Iewry are in Christ lesu, so that ye haue suffred euen like thinges of youre kynsmen, as they haue suffred of the Iewes. Which as they put the LORDE Iesus to death, and their awne prophetes, euen so haue they persecuted vs also, and please not God, and are cótrary to all men, **forbyddinge vs to speake vnto the
Heythen that they mighte be saued, to fulfill their synnes allwaye: for the wrath is come vpon them allready vnto y vttemost.

* Act. 17. a. 
20. e. 

+ Gal. 1. b. 
2 Tess, 3. a, 

fPbhl.1. b. § Act. 
€ Mat. 23. d. 

|| Heb. 10. d. 

Che first Epistle to tbe Tessalonians. 

But we (brethren) for as moch as we haue bene kepte from you for a season, as con- cernynge the bodely presence, but not in the hert, we haue haisted the more with greate desyre to se you personally. "Therfore wolde we haue come vnto you, (I Paul) two tymes, ttbut Sathan withstode vs. For who is oure hope, or ioye, or crowne of ttreioysinge ? are not ye it in y sighte of oure LORDE Iesus
Christ at his commynge? Yes ye are oure prayse and ioye.

The iij. Chapter. 

HERFORE sence we coulde no longer 

forbeare, we thoughte it good to re- mayne at S$Athens alone, q sent Timotheus oure brother and mynister of God, and oure helper in ¥ gospell of Christ, to stablysh you and to comforte you in youre faith, that noman shulde be moued in these troubles:
(for ye youre selues knowe, that we are euen appoynted there vnto. And whan we were with you, we tolde you before, that we shulde suffre tribulacion, enen as it is come to passe, q as ye knowe.) For this cause seynge I coulde no longer forbeare, I sent, that I mighte haue knowlege of youre faith, lest happly the tempter had tempted you, and lest oure laboure had bene in vayne.

But now that Timotheus is come fro you vnto vs, and hath shewed vs of youre faith and loue, q how that ye haue allwaye good remembraunce of vs, desyringe to se vs as we also longe to se you: therfore brethren we haue consolacion in you in all oure trouble and necessite thorow youre faith. For now are we alyue, yf ye stonde stedfast in ¥
LORDE. For what thankes can we recom- péce to God agayne for you, because of this ioye that we haue concernynge you before oure God? We praye exceadingly daye and nighte, that we mighte se you presently, and fulfill that which is lackynge in youre faith.

God himselfe oure father q oure LORDE 
Iesus Christ gyde onre iourney vnto you. But the LORDE increace you, q make you flowe ouer in loue one towarde another, and towarde all men (euen as we do towarde you) that youre hertes maye be stable and vnblameable in holynes before God oure father, at the

tt Dan. 10. b. 
$$ Act. 17. c. 

GU Ass Ta Eo s if Phil. 2. b, 

Fo. cei. 

a 

B 

| fo. cer. 

a 

B 

| 

comnynge of oure LORDE lesus Christ with all his sayutes.

The iiij. Chapter. 
URTHERMORE we beseke you bre- thren and exhorte you in the LORDE lesus, that ye increace more and more, euen las ve haue receaued of vs how ye oughte
‘to walke and to please God. For ye knowe what commaundementes we gaue you by oure LORDE Iesus Christ. For this is the
* will of God, euen youre sanctifienge, that ye shulde absteyne from whordome, ty euery one of you shulde knowe how to kepe his vessell in holynes and honoure, q not in the lust of concupiscence, tas the Heythen which knowe not God. And that no man go to farre, ner defraude his brother 1n bargayninge.
For the LORDE is the auenger of all soch thinges, as we haue sayde q testified vnto you afore tyme. For God hath not called vs to vnelennesse, but vnto holynes. § He therfore
‘that despyseth, despyseth not man, but God, 
|Ilwhich hath geuen his holy sprete in to you. 
| But as touchinge brotherly loue, ye nede 
‘not that I wryte vnto you, ' for ye youre selues jare taught of God to loue one another: yee and that thinge ye do vnto all the brethre, | which are thorow out all Macedonia. But we beseke you brethren that ye increace yet more, and more, and that ye study to be quyete,
‘and to medle with youre awne busynesse, 
** and to worke with youre awne hades, as we | commaunded you, that ye maye walke honestly towarde thé that are without, and that no-
'thinge be lackynge vnto you. 

We wolde not brethren that ye shulde be ignoraunt concernynge them which are fallen
|a slepe, that ye sorowe not as other do which haue no hope. For yf we beleue that Iesus. dyed and rose agayne, euen so thé also which: slepe by lesus, shal God brynge with him.

For this we saye vnto you in the worde of, ' 

the LORDE, ttthat we which lyue and are remaynynge in the comynge of the LORDE, shal not come yer they which slepe. tł For the LORDE himselfe shal come downe fro heanen with a shoute and voyce of $ Arch- angell and with the trompe of God, and the: deed in Christ shal aryse first: then shal we

t Tob. 6. d, 1 Cor. 7. a. 
|| 1 Cor. 3. b. and 6. c. 
** Act. 20. e. 2 Tess. 3. b. tt 1 Cor. tt Mat. 24. c. Ioh. 5. c. Act. 1. b. 2 Tess. 2.a.

* Rom. 12, a. Ephe. 5. b. f Rom. 1. c. § Luc. 10. b.
§ Ioh. 6. e. 
15s 

The first Epistle to the Tessalonians. 

‘let vs watch, and be sober. 

dronken, are dronken in the nighte. 

which lyne and remayne, be caught vp with them also in the cloudes, to mete the LORDE iin the ayre, and so shal we euer be with the
LORDE. Wherfore comforte youre selues one another with these wordes.

The b. Chapter. 

BY of ¥ tymes and seasons (brethre) it is no nede to wryte vnto you. For ye youre selues knowe perfectly, that §§the daye of the LORDE shal come euen as a thefe in the nighte. For whan they shal saye: Tush,
It is peace, there is no daunger, Illlthen shall soden destruccion come vpo thé, euen as the payne of a woman trauaylinge with childe, and they shal not escape. But ye brethren are not in darknes, that that daye shulde come on you as a thefe. Ye are alltogether children of lighte, and children of the daye.
We are not of the night, nether of darknesse. 
14 Therfore let vs not slepe as do other, but 
For they that slepe, slepe in the nighte: and they that be
But let vs which are of the daye, be sober, armed with

the brestplate of faith and loue, and with y 

helmet of hope to saluacion. 

For God hath not appoynted vs vnto wrath, but to optayne saluacion by ¥ meanes of oure
LORDE Iesu Christ, which dyed for vs: that 

whether we wake or slepe, we shulde lyue together with him. Wherfore comforte youre selues together, and edifye one another, euen as ye do.

We beseke you brethren, ***that ye knowe them which laboure amonge you, and haue the ouersighte of you in the LORDE, and geue you exhortacion, that ye haue thé the more in loue for their workes sake, and be at peace with them. We desyre you brethré, warne them that are vnruly, coforte the feble mynded, forbeare the weake, be pacient to- warde all men. ttt Se that none recompence euell for euell vnto eny man: but euer folowe that which is good, both amoge youre selues and to all men.

teloyse alwaye, praye contynually, tttin all thinges be thankfull: for this is the wyll of
God in Christ Iesu towarde you. $$$ Quéch not y sprete: despyse not prophecieges:
$$ Mat. 24. d. 2 Pet. 3. b. Apoc. 5.a. ill] Iere. 15. b. 

TT Rom. 13. b. — *** Gal. 6. a. 1 Tim. 5 c. ttt Mat. 

Duc ttt Ephe.5.b. — $$$1 Co. 14. d. 

Chap. (iij. 

‘Chap. t. 

The d. Epistle to the Cessalontans. 

proue all thiges, & kepe y which is good. all the brethré with an holy kysse. I charge 

Abstayne frō all suspicious thinges. The very God of peace sanctifye you thorow out.
And I praye God, that youre whole sprete, soule q body be kepte blameles vnto y comynge of oure LORDE lesus Christ.
* Faithfull is he which hath called you, which wil also do it. Brethren, praye for vs. Grete

you by y LORDE, that this epistle be red vnto all ü holy brethren. + The grace of oure
LORDE Iesus Christ be with you, Amen. 

The first Epistle to the ‘Tessalonians, sent from Athens.

* | Cor. 1. a. and 10. b. t 2 Tess. 3. b. 

The seconde Eptstle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Tessalonians.

The summe of this epistle. 

Chap. I. 
He thanketh God for their faith and loue, and prayeth for the increase of the same.

Chap. II. 
He sheweth them that the daye of the LORDE shal not come, till the departinge fro the faith come first: and therfore he exhorteth them not

to be disceaued, but to stonde stedfast in the thinges that he hath taught them.

Chap. III. 

He desyreth them to praye for him that the gospell maye prospere, and geueth the warn- yuge to reproue the ydle, and yf they wil not laboure with their handes, that they shal not eate.

The first Chapter. 
AUL and Siluanus and Timotheus. 

To the congregacion of y Tessalonias in God oure father and in the LORDE Iesus
Christ. 

Grace be with you, and peace from God oure father, and from the LORDE Iesus
Christ. 

We are bounde to thanke God allwayes for you brethren, as it is mete: because that youre faith groweth exceadingly, and the loue of euery one of you increaseth towarde another amoóge youre selues, so that we oure

* Mat. 24. c. and 25. c. t 2 Pet. 3. a. 

selues make oure boast of you (in the congre- gacions of God) of youre paciéce and faith in all youre persecucions and troubles that ye suffre, which is a token of the righteous iudgment of God, that ye are counted worthy of the kyngdome of God, for the which ye also suffre.

For it is a righteous thinge with God, to recopence tribulacion vnto the y trouble you: but vnto you which are D rest with vs,
* wha the LORDE Iesus shal shewe himselfe from heauen, with the angels of his power, and with flammynge tfyre, to geue vengeaüce vnto them that knowe not God, tand to them

t Rom. 2. a. 

Fo. cert 

Fo. ttrij. 

that obeye not the Gospell of oure LORDE lesus Christ. * Which shalbe punyshed with euerlastiuge damnacion, *from y presence of the LORDE, and from the glory of his power, whan he shal come to be glorified in his sayntes, and to become maruelous in all them that beleue: because ye haue beleued oure testimony vnto you of the same daye.
Wherfore we praye allwayes for you, that oure God make you worthy of y callynge, and fulfill all delectacion of goodnes, and the worke of faith in power, that y name of oure
LORDE lesus Christ maye be praysed in you, and ye in him, acordinge to the grace of oure God, and of the LORDE Iesus Christ.

The ij. Chapter. 

E beseke you brethren by the com- mynge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, and in that we shal assemble vnto him, that ye be not sodenly moued fró youre mynde, and be not troubled, nether by spreto, nether by wordes, ner vet by letter, which shulde seme to be sent from vs, as though y daye of
Christ were at hande. Let noman disceaue you by eny meanes For the LORDE comineth not, excepte the t departynge come first, and that that Man of synne be opened, euen the sonne of perdicion, which is an aduersary, and is exalted aboue all y is called
God or Gods seruyce, so that he sytteth as 
God in the $temple of God, land boasteth 

himselfe to be God 
Remembre ye not, that whan I was yet with you, I tolde you these thinges? And now ye knowe what witholdeth it, enc that it mighte be vttered at his tyme. ($ For the mystery of the iniquyte worketh allready, tyll he which now onely letteth, be take out of the waye.) And then shal that wicked be vttered,
** whom the LORDE shal cosume with y sprete of his mouth, q shal destroye with the appearaunce of his commynge: euen him, whose commynge is after the workynge of
Sathan ttwith all lyenge power, and signes aud wonders, and with all deceauablenes of vnrighteousnes amonge them that perishe, because they receaued not the loue of $ trueth, that they might haue bene te i Therfore shal God sende them stroge delu-

faSap-5. t Esa. 2. b. f Dan.9. e. 1 Tim. 4. a. 
$ 1 Cor. 3. b. || Dan. 11. e. SITO Mcr 
** [ob 15. d. Esa. 11. a. Dan. 8. d, tt Deut. 13. a. | 

Cbr ij. Epistle to the 

Tessalonians, 

sion, that they shulde beleue lyes, y all they might be daned, which beleued not the trueth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnes.

But we are bounde to gene thankes allwaye vnto God for you, brethren beloned of the
LORDE, because that God hath from the begynnynge chosen you to saluacion in the sanctifienge of the sprete and in beleuynge of the trueth, whervnto he hath called you by oure Gospell, to optayne the glory of oure
LORDE Iesus Christ. 

Therfore brethren stonde fast, and kepe the ordinaunces which ye hauc lerned, whether it were by oure preachinge or by epistle. But oure LORDE Iesus Christ himselfe, and God oure father, which hath loued vs and geuen vs euerlastinge consolacion, and a good hope thorow grace, comforte youre hertes, and

stablysh you in all doctryne q good doynge. 

The (ij. Chapter. 

URTHERMORE brethren S$praye for 

vs, that the worde of God maye haue fre passage and be glorified as it is with you, and that we maye be delyuered from vnreasonable and euell me. [ll For faith is not euery mas.
But the LORDE is faithfull, which shal stablyshe you and kepe you from euell. We haue confidence in the LORDE to you warde, that ye both do and wyll do that which we comaunde you. The LORDE gyde youre hertes vnto the loue of God and pacience of
Christ. 

TT But we requyre you brethren, in the name of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, that ye withdrawe youre selues from euery brother that walketh inordinatly, and not after the institucion which he receaned of vs. For ye youre selues knowe, how ye oughte:to folowe vs: for we behaued not oure selues inordinatly amonge you, nether toke we bred of eny man for naughte *** but wrought with laboure and trauayle night and daye, lest we shulde be chargeable to eny of you. Not but that we had auctorite, but to geue oure selues for an ensample vnto you to folowe vs. And whan we were with you, this we warned you of, that yf there were eny which wolde not worke, Y same shulde not eate. For we heare saye, that there are some which walke amonge you

| 

Mat. 24. b. tt Zach. 5.a. Rom. 1. d. 
Ephe. 6. c. Col. 4. a. [Ill Ioh. 6. c. 
**"* Act. 18.a. and 20. e. ? Cor. 8. c. 

§§ Mat. 9. d. 
€€ 1 Cor. 5. b. 

Chap. iij. 

5 

‘Chap. f. inordinatly, and worke not at all, but are busy bodies. * But them that are soche, we com- maunde and exhorte by oure LORDE Iesus
Christ, that they worke with quyetnes, and eate their awne bred.

Neuertheles brethren, t be not ye weery of well doynge. : But yf eny man obey not oure sayenges, sende vs worde of him by a letter, and haue nothinge to do with hum, y he maye be ashamed. Yet counte him

1 Tess. 4, b. t Gal. 6. a. 

The first Epistle onto Timothy. 

Ho. cerit. not as an enemye, but warne him as a brother.

The very LORDE of peace geue you peace allwayes by all meanes. The LORDE be with you all. ‘The salutacion of me Paul with myne awne hande: This is the token in all epistles, So I wryte, The grace of oure
LORDE Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen. 

Sent from Athens. 

t 2Toh. 1. b. 

Che first Epistle of the Apostle &. Paul to Timothy.

The summe of this epistle, 

Chap. I. 

He exhorteth Timothy to wayte vpo his office: namely, to se that nothige be taughte but
Gods worde, tc. He sheweth also wherfore the lawe is good, and telleth these swete and glad tidinges, that Christ Iesus came in to the worlde to saue synners, example of himselfe.

Chap. Il. 

He exhorteth to praye for all men. He will not haue wemen to be ouer costly arayed, ner to teach in the congregacion, but to be in sylence, and obeye their huszbandes.

Chap. HI. 

What maner of man a byszhoppe or prest ought to be, and what condicions his wife and chil-

The first Chapter. 
AUL an Apostle of lesus Christ acord- inge to the * commaundement of God oure Sauioure, and of the LORDE Iesus
Christ, t which is oure hope. 

* Act. 9, b. t 1 Tess. 1, a. 

dren shulde haue. The properties also re- quyred in a deacon or mynister, and in his wife.
Chap. III. 
He prophecieth of the latter dayes, and ex- horteth Timothy to the diliget readynge of the

holy scripture. 
Chap. V. 

He teacheth him how he shal behaue himselfe in rebukynge all degrees. An ordre concernynge wyddowes.

Chap. VI. 

The dutye of seruauntes towarde their masters. 
Agaynst soch as are not satisfied with the worde of God, Agaynst euvetonsnes, A good lesson for riche men.

Vnto Timothy my naturall sonne in the faith.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God oure father, and oure LORDE Iesus Christ.

As I besoughte ¥ to abyde still at Ephesus 
(t whan I departed in to Macedonia) eué so 

1 Act. 19. 20. 
156 

ka Cerity. 

! Ido, that thou commaunde some, that they iteach none other wyse, * nether geue hede to fables and genealogies, which are endlesse, and brede doutes more then godly edifyenge, which is by faith.* For ý chefe summe of the commaundement is loue of a pure hert, and of a good cóscience, and of faith vnfayned.
From the which some haue erred, t haue turned vnto vayne iangelynge, wyllinge to be doctours of the scripture, and vnderstonde not what they speake, nether wher of they affirme.

3| + But we knowe that the lawe is good, yf a man vse it laufully, vnderstodinge this,
$ that the lawe is not geuen vnto the right- 
‘eous, but to the vnrighteous q dishobedient, to the vngodly q to syuners, to the vnholy a
|vncleane, to murthurers of fathers and mur- thurers of mothers, to manslayers, to whore-
|mongers, | to the that defyle them selues with mankynde, to menstealers, to lyars, to periured, q so forth yf there be eny other thinge y is cotrary to i wholsome doctryne, acordinge to y Gospell of $ glory of the

| [blessed God, which (Gospell) is comytted 

| |wnto me. 
And I thanke Christ Iesus oure LORDE, 
| which hath made me stroge, for he counted me faithfull, ¢ put me in office, wha before I was a blasphemer, 4 q a persecuter, q a ty- raunt: but I optayned mercy, because I dyd it ignorauntly in vnbeleue. Neuertheles the grace of oure LORDE was more abüdaunt thorow ¥ faith q loue which is in Christ Iesu.
€| Forthisis a true sayenge, and by all meanes 

worthy to be receaued, ** that Christ Iesus came in to ¥ worlde to saue synners, of whom
I am chefe. Notwithstondynge for this cause optayned I mercy, that Iesus Christ mighte pryncipally shewe in me all longe pacience, to the ensample of them which shulde beleue in him vnto eternall life. So then vnto God kynge euerlastinge, immortal] and tt invisible, and wyse onely, be honoure and prayse for euer and euer Amen.

This commaundement commytte I vnto the 
(my sonne Timotheus) acordinge to y pro- phecies which in tyme past were prophecied of the, that thou in them shuldest fighte a good fighte, hauynge faith q good conscience,

peeplimee. Com titissb. t Rom. 13. b. Gal. 6. a. 
1 Rom. 7. b Gal. 5. c. j| Rom. t. d q Act. 
9.a. Gal. 1. b ** Mat. 9. b. Iob.3. c. tt Col. 1. b. 
1t 2 Tim. 2. b $$ 2 Tim. 4. b Jl] 1 Cor. 5. a. 

|. Cbr first Epistle onto Timothy. 

which some haue put awaye fro them, and as concernynge faith haue made shypwrake: of whose nombre is +} Hymeneos and $$ Alex- ander, lll whom I haue delyuered vnto Sathan, that they might be taught, nomore to blas- pheme.

The ij. Chapter. 
EXHORTE therfore, ý aboue all thinges, 

prayers, supplicacions, intercessions and geuynge of thākes be had for all men 11 for kynges, and for all that are in auctorite, that we maye lyue a quyete q peaceable life in all godlynes and honestie. For that is good and accepted in y sighte of God oure Sauioure, which wil haue all men saued, and to come vnto the knowlege of y trueth. For there is one God, and *** one mediatour betwene God and men, (namely) the man Christ lesus, which gaue him selfe a raunsome for all men, that at his tyme it shulde be preached, where- vnto tit I am ordeyned a preacher q an Apostle
(I tell $ trueth in Christ and lye not) a teacher of the Heythé in faith and in the trueth.

I wil therfore that men praye łt in all places, liftinge vp pure hades without wrath or dowtynge. $$$ Likewyse also the wemen, that they araye them selues in comly apparell with shamfastnes and discrete behaueoure, not with broyded heer, or golde, or perles, or costly araye: but with soch as it becommeth weme that professe godlynes thorow good workes. lllLet the woman lerne in sylece with all subieccion. 1 suffre not a woma to
[teach 114 ner to haue auctorite ouer the man, but for to bein sylence. For Adam was first formed, and the Eue: Adam also was not disceaued, but the woman was disceaued, and hath brought in the trasgression. Notwit- stondynge thorow bearynge of children she shalhe saued, yf she contynue in faith and in loue q in the sanctifyenge with discrecion.

The ij. Chapter. 
HIS is a true saycge: Yf a ma covet y office of a Biszhoppe, he desyreth a good worke. Buta Biszhoppe must be blame-

lesse, **** the huszbade of one wife, sober, 
TT Iere. 29. b. Baruc.1.c. *** Heb.9.c. ttt Rom, 
1.3. 2 Tim, 1. b. ttt Joh.4.c. — $66 Tit.2.e. 1 Pet. 
3. a. [II 1 Co. 14. e. TTT Gen.3.c. Ephe.5.c. 
**** Leur, 21. b. Eze. 4f. d. Tit. 1. b. 

Chap. ij. 

a 

Chap. b. 

discrete, manerly, harberous, * apte to teach : 
Not geuen to moch wyne, no fighter, not geuen to filthy lucre: but gentle, abhorrynge stryfe, abhorrynge conetousnes: q one that ruleth his awne house honestly, hauynge obe- dient children with all honestye. (But yf a man can not rule his owne honse, how shal he care for the congregacion of God?) He maye not be a yoge scolar, lest he be puft vp, and fall in to the iudgment of Ẹ euell speaker.
He must also haue a good reporte of them which are without, lest he fall iu to the rebuke and snare of the enell speaker.

3| Likewyse must the * mynisters be honest, 

not double tonged, not geuen to mach wyne, nether vnto fylthie luere, but hauynge the mystery of faith in pure conscience. And let them first be proued, and then let them my- nister, yf they be blamelesse.

Euen so must their wynes be honest, not euell speakers, but sober and faithfull in all thinges. Let the mynisters be, euery one the huszbade of one wyfe, and soch as rule their children well, and their owne honsholdes. t For they that mynister well, get them selues a good degree and greate libertye in the faith which is in Christ lesu.

These thinges wryte I vnto the, trustinge shortly to come vnto the: but yf I tary loge, that then thou mayest yet haue knowlege, how thou oughtest to behaue thy selfe in
Gods house, which is the congregacion of the lyuynge God, the piler and grounde of trueth: and without naye, greate is that mystery of godlynes. $God was shewed in the flesh: was iustified in the sprete: || was sene of angels: was preached vnto the Heythen: was beleued on in the worlde:€ was receaned

vp in glory. 
The iiij. Chapter. 

alr | ‘HE sprete speaketh euydently, ** that in 

y latter tymes some shalttdeparte from the faith, and shal geue hede vnto spretes of erroure, and deuelish doctrynes, of them which speake false thorow ypocrysie, and haue their coscience marked with an whote yron, for- byddinge to mary, and comaundynge to ab- stayne fro the meates, which God hath ereated

to be receaued with geuynge thankes of them 
MO Nim E E t Act. 6, a. 
$ Ioh. 1. b. || Luc. 2. b. Epbe. 3. b. 
** 2 'Tim.3.a2. 2 Pet. 3.a. Iudic.1. c. it Gen. 1.d. Eccli. 39. f. Act. 10. b.

t Mat. 13. b. 25. b. c. 

| Phil. 2. a. tt 2 Tess, 2. a.
$$ 2 Tim. 3. b. 

The first Epistle bnto Timothy. 

which belene and knowe the trueth. tł For euery creature off God is good, and nothinge

|to be refused, y is receaned with thankes- 

geuynge : for it is sanctifyed by the worde of 
God and prayer. Yf thou shalt put the brethren in remembraunce of these thinges, thou shalt be a good mynister of Iesu Christ,
$$ which hast bene norished vp in the wordes of faith and of good doctryne, which thou hast folowed hither to.

Ill As for vngoostly and olde wyuesh fables, cast them awaye, but exercyse thy selfe vnto godlynes. ^ For bodely exercyse profyteth litle, but godlynes is profytable vnto all thinges, as a thinge which hath promyses of the life that is now, and of the life for to come.
This is a sure sayenge, q of all partes worthy to be receaued. For therfore we laboure and suffre rebuke, because we hope in the lyuynge
God, which is the Sanionre of all men, but specially of those that beleue. Soch thinges commaunde thon and teach. %{ Let no man despyse thy youth, *** bnt be thon vnto them that belene, an ensample, in worde, in cõuer- sacion, in loue, in ¥ sprete, in faith, in pure- nesse.

Gene attendaunce to readynge, to exhorta- cion, to doctryne, vntyll I come. Be not necligent in the gifte that is geuen the thorow prophecye, ttt with layége on of the handes of the Elders. These thinges exercyse, and geue thy selfe vnto them, that thine increace maye be manifest vnto euery man. Take hede vnto thy selfe, and to learnynge, cotynne in these thinges. For yf thou so do, thou shalt saue thy selfe, and them that heare the.

The b. Chapter. 

EBUKE not an Elder, but exhorte him 

as a father: and the yoger men as brethren: the elder wemen as mothers: the yonger as sisters with all purenes. Honoure wedowes, which are true wedowes. Yf eny wedowe haue children or neves, let them lerne first to rule their awne houses godly, and to recompence their elders. For y is good q acceptable before God. — tt: But she that is a right wedowe, ¢ desolate, putteth hir trast in
God, q cdtynueth in prayer and supplicacion nighte and daye. But she that lyueth in

«« Tit. 2. b. Exe Tit. 

Illl 1 Tim. 1.a. 2 Tim. 2. b. 
+3} Luc. 2. f. 

2.a. 1Pet.5.a. ttt Act, 6. a. and 8. b. 
1 Cor. 7. d. 

Fo. rerb. 

B 

a 

!jfo. cerbi 

5 

pleasures, is deed, euen yet a lyue. And these thinges commaunde, that they maye be with- out blame. * But yf there be eny man that
|prouydeth not for his awne, and specially for them of his houszholde, the same hath denyed the faith, and t is worse then an infydele.

Let no wedowe be chosen vnder thre score yeare olde, and soch one as was ¥ wife of one man, and well reported of in good workes, yf she haue brought vp children well, yf she haue bene tharberous, yf she haue wasshed the sayntes fete, yf she haue mynistred vnto thé which were in aduersite, yf she were con- tinually geuen to all maner of good workes.
But $ yonger wedowes refuse. For whan they haue begonne to waxe wanton agayust
Christ, then wil they mary, hauynge their 

damnacion, because they haue broke y first faith. Besydes this they are ydell, and lerne to runne aboute fro house to house. $Not onely are they ydell but also tryflinge q busybodies, speakynge thinges which are not comly.

|I wil therfore that the yonger wemen mary, beare children, gyde the house, to geue y aduersary no occasion to speake euell. For some are turned back allready after Satha.
Yf eny man or woman that beleueth haue wedowes, let them make prouysion for thé, and let not the congregacion be charged: that they which are righte wedowes, maye haue ynough.

The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honoure, most specially they which laboure in the worde q in teachinge. For y scripture sayeth: 1 Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of $ oxe y treadeth out y corne. And:
** The labourer is worthy of his rewarde. 

tt Agayust an Elder receaue none accusa- cion, but vnder two or thre witnesses. Thé that synne, rebuke in the presence of all, that other also maye feare.

I testifye before God and the LORDE lesus Christ, and y electe angels, that thou obserue these thinges without haistie iudg- ment, and do nothinge parcially. Laye hondes sodenly on no mà, nether be partaker of other més synnes. Kepe thy selfe pure.tt Drynke no lenger water, but vse a litle wyne for thy stomackes sake, and because thou art oft

*Gal. 6. b. 41 Pet.2.d. +1 Pet. 4, b. 
| 1 Cor. 7. a. € Deut. 25. a. 1 Cor. 9. b. tt Deut. 19. c. tt Eccli. 31. d.

$ Tit. 2. a. 

** Mat. 10. a. 
§§ Tit. 3. b. 

The first Epistle bnto Timothy. 

| 

tymes sicke. Some més synnes are opé, so that they maye be iudged afore hande: but some mens (synnes) shal be manifest herafter.
Likewyse also good workes are manifest afore hade: and they that are other wyse can not be hyd.

The bi. Chapter. 

ET as many seruauntes as are vnder the 

yocke, counte their masters worthy of all honoure, that the name of God and his doctrine be not euell spoken of. Se that they which haue beleuynge masters, despyse them not because they are brethré, but rather do seruyce, for so moch as they are beleuynge, and beloued, and partakers of the benefite.

These thinges teach and exhorte. Yf eny ma teach otherwyse, and agreeth not vnto the wholsome wordes of oure LORDE Iesus
Christ, and to the doctryne of godlynes, he is puft vp, and knoweth nothinge, but waysteth his brayne aboute questions and stryuynges of wordes: S$wherof sprynge envye, stryfe, rayl- inges, euell surmysinges, vayne disputacids of soch men as haue corrupte myndes,||ll and are robbed of the trueth, which thynke that god- lynes is lucre: From soch separate thy selfe.
Howbeit it is greate avaütage, who so is godly, 
1* and holdeth him content with that he hath. 
***For we broughte nothinge in to the worlde, therfore is it a playne case y we can cary nothinge out. ttt Whan we haue fode and rayment, let vs therwith be content. ttt For they that wylbe riche, fall in to the téptacion and snare, and in to many foliszhe q noysome lustes, which drowne men in destruccion and damnacion. For Couetousnes is the rote of all euell, which whyle some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and tangled them selues with many sorowes.

$$$ But thou man of God, flye soche thinges: folowe righteousnes, godlynes, faith, loue, pacience, mekenes: fighte a good fighte of faith: laye honde on eternall life, where vnto thou art called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses.

I geue the charge before God, Illlll which quyckeneth all thinges, q before lesu Christ, which vnder Pontius Pilate witnessed a good witnessynge, that thou kepe the commaunde-

949 Pro. 15. b. Heb. 13. a. ttt Ecchi. 29, d. ttt Pro. 23. a. lll] 1 Reg. 2. b. Act. 17. e.

lill 2 Teas. 2. b. ses Tobi Xe:
Mat. 13. c. $55 2 Tim. 2. c. 

Chap. bí. 

a 

LN 

Chap. n The ij. Epistle onto Timothp. fo. ccrbtj. 

ment, without spot, vnreproueable, vntyll the| |be rich in good workes: that they geue and appearynge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ, | | distribute with a good wyll: gatherynge vp which appearynge (at his tyme) he shal shewe} |treasure for them selnes, a good foundacion, that is blessed, and mightie onely, * the kynge| | agaynst y tyme to come, that they maye laye of all kynges, and LORDE of all lordes:| |honde on eternall life.

which onely hath immortalite, and dwelleth O Timothy, kepe that which is committed in a lighte, that no man can attayne: twhom|] |vnto the, and avoyde vngoostly vayne wordes, no man hath sene, nether canse. Vnto whom] |and opposicions of science falsly so called, be honoure and empyre euerlastinge, Amen. which whyle some professed, they hane erred
3| Charge thé which are riche in this worlde,| | as concernynge the faith. Grace be with the, that they be not proude, ner trust in the| | Amen.

vneertayne riches, bnt in the lyuynge God 

(which geneth vs abundauntly all thinges to} | Wrytten from Laodicea, which is the chefest enioye them :) That they do good: that they cite of Phrigia Pacaciana.

* Apo. 17. c. and 19. c. t Ioh. 1. b. 11Ioh. 4. b. 1 Mat. 6. c. 

The seconde Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to Timothy,

The summe of this epistle. 

Chap. I. Chap. III. 

Paul exhorteth Timothy to stedfastnesse and | He prophecieth of the parelous tymes, setteth pacience in persecucion, and to continue in the out ypocrites in their culours, telleth vs what doctryne that he had taught him. A com- they be within, for all their fayre faces out- mendacion of Onesiphorus. wardly. Persecucion for the gospell.

Chap. II. Chap. III. 

Like as in the first chapter, so here he exhorteth | He exhorteth Timothy to be fernét in the worde, him to be constant in trouble, to suffre manly, and to suffte aduersite: maketh mension of his and to byde fast in the wholsome doctrine of awne death, and byddeth Timothy come vnto oure LORDE Iesus Christ, him.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God the father and from Christ lesu oure LORDE.

I thanke God, * whome I serue fro my fore elders in a pure conscience, that without

The first Chapter. a Pr an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the wyll of God, to preach the promes of y

| [life which is in Christ Iesu. 
To my deare sonne Timotheus. 

Phil. 3. a. 

* Act. 22. a. 

[dfo. corbin. 
'eeassynge. I make mencion of the in my prayers night and daye: and longe to se the
(whan I remembre thy teares) so that I am fylled with ioye, whan I call to remembraunce the vnfayned faith that is in the, which dwelt
| first in thy graundemother Lois, and in thy 

mother Eunica: And am assured, that it dwelleth in $ also. Wherfore I warne the, that thou stere vp ¥ gifte of God which is in the by puttynge on of my handes. *For God hath not geuen vs the sprete of feare, but of power, and of loue, and of right vnder- stondynge.

t Be not thou aszhamed therfore of M tes- timony of oure LORDE, nether of me, twhich am his presoner: but suffre thou ad- uersite also with the Gospell, acordinge to the power of God $which hath saued vs, and called vs with an holy callynge: not acordinge to oure dedes, but acordinge to his owne pur- pose and grace, which was geuen vs in Christ lesu before the tyme of the worlde, but is now declared openly by the appearynge of oure
Sauioure lesu Christ. [| Which hath taken awaye y power of death, and hath brought life and immortalite vnto lighte, thorow the
Gospell: f whervnto I am appoynted a 

preacher and an Apostell, and a teacher of 

the Heythen: for the which cause I also suffre these thinges, neuertheles I am not ashamed.

For I knowe whom I haue beleued, and am 

sure that he is able to kepe that which I haue 

commytted vnto his kepynge agaynst that daye.

€| **Holde the after $ ensample of the whol- some wordes, which thou heardest of me, concernynge faith and loue in Christ Jesu.
This hye charge kepe thou thorow the holy 
(goost, which dwelleth in vs. This thou know- est, that all they which are in Asia, be turned

| (fro me, of which sorte are Phigelus and Her- 

| |mogenes. The LORDE geue mercy vnto the house of ttOnesiphorus: for he oft re-
| j|freszhed me, and was not aszhamed of my 
|cheyne: but whan he was at Rome tthe 

‘soughte me out very diligently, and founde 

ume. The LORDE graunte vnto him, that 

he maye fynde mercy with the LORDE in that daye. And how moch he mynistred vnto
| jme at, Ephesus, thou knowest very well. 

2 

* Rom. 8. b. — t Ro. 1. b. t Ephe. 3, a. $ Tit. 

REL || 1 Cor. 15. f. Heb. 1. c, f| Ro. 1,.a. 1 Tim. 

| 2.a ** 2 Tim. 3. b. tt 2 Tim. 4. c. tt Mat. 
| }Zonce §§ Tit. 1. b. l| 1 Cor. 9. b. TT Rom. 

The dj. Epistle onto Timothy. 

The ij. Chapter. 

HOU therfore my sonne, be stronge|& 
T thorow the grace which is in Christ lesu. And what thinges thou hast herde of me by many witnesses, {the same commytte thou vnto faithfull men, which are apte to teach other. ‘Thou therfore suffre affliccion as a good soudyer off Jesu Christ. No ma that warreth, tangleth him selfe with wordly busynesses, q that because he wolde please him, which hath chosen him to be a soudyer.
And though a man stryue for a mastrye, yet is he not crowned, excepte he stryue laufully. lll The huszbandman that laboureth, must first enioye the frutes. Consydre what I saye.
The LORDE shal geue the vnderstondynge in all thinges.

Remembre that lesus Christ, beynge $1 of the sede of Dauid, rose agayne fro the deed, acordynge to my Gospell, where in I suffre as an euell doer euen vnto bandes: but the worde of God is not bounde. ***Therfore suffre I all for the electes sakes, that they also mighte optayne the saluacion in Christ lesu with eternall glory.

This is a true sayenge: ttt Yf we be deed|13 with him, we shal lyue with him also: tit Yt we be pacient, we shal also raigne with him:
$8 Yf we denye him, he also shal denye vs: lI Yf we beleue not, yet abydeth he faithfull, he can not denye himselfe. Of these thinges put thou them in remébraunce, and testifye before the LORDE, that they stryue not aboute wordes, which is to no profit, but to peruerte the hearers.

Study to shewe thy selfe vnto God a lau- dable workman, that nedeth not to be ashamed, deuydynge the worde of trueth iustly. 111 As for vngoostly and vayne talkynges, eschue them: for they helpe moch to vngodlynes, and their worde fretteth as doth a canker:
Of whose nombre is **** Hymeneos ¢ Philetus, which as concernynge the trueth haue erred, sayenge, that the resurreccion is past allready, and haue destroyed the faith of dyuerse personnes.

But y sure grounde of God stondeth fast, | € and hath this seale: tttt The LORDE knoweth them that are his, and let euery mà that

1.8. *** Act. 20. c. Ephe, 3.a., Col.1.c. ttt Rom. 
6. b. tif Rom. 8. b. $$$ Luc. 12. a. MM Nu. 
25. ce. Rom. 3. a. G99 1 Tim. 1. a. 4. a. 6. a. 

n 1 Tim, 1. c. tttt Ioh, 10, b. 

Chap. (ij. ‘Che ü. Epistle onto Canothp. ffo. cert 

calleth vpon the name of Christ, departe from| |pacience, my persecucions, my aflliccions, iniquyte. Notwithstondynge *in a greate| |which happened vnto me **at Antioche, at house are not onely vessels of golde and off |Iconium, at Lystra, which persecucions I syluer, but also of wod and of earth: some for| |suffred paciently, and from thé all the LORDE honoure, and some to dishonoure. But yf a| |delyuered me. tt Yee and all they that wil man pourge himselfe from soch felowes, he| |lyue godly in Christ lesu, must suffre perse- shalbe a vessell sanctified vnto honoure, mete} |cucion. But the euell men and disceauers for the LORDE, and prepared vnto all good} |shal waxe worse and worse, disceauynge and workes. *Fle thou the lustes of youth, but| |beynge disceaued.

folowe righteousnes, faith, loue, peace, with tt But contynue thou in the thinges that all them that call vpon the LORDE with| |thou hast lerned, which also were comytted pure hert. +As for folish questions and soch| |vnto the, seynge thou knowest of who thou as teach not, put them fro the: for thou| |hast learned them, And for so moch as thou kuowest that they do but géder stryfe. Thej hast knowne holy scripture of a childe, the seruaunt of the LORDE ought not to stryue,| |same is able to make y wyse vnto saluacion but to be gentle vnto euery man: ^apte to! |thorow the faith in Christ lesu. $$ For all teach, one that can forbeare the euell, one y| scripture geué by inspiracion of God, is pro- can $with mekenesse enfourme them y resist:| |fitable to teach, to improue, to amende, and yf God at eny tyme wyl geue them repent-| |to iustructe in righteousnes, that a man off aunce for to knowe the trueth, and to turne| | God maye be perfecte, and prepared vnto all agayne from the snare of the deuell, which are| | good workes.

holden iu preson of him at his will. 

The tj. Chapter. 

UT this shalt thou knowe,^ that in the 

last dayes shal come parelous tymes. 
For there shalbe mé which shal holde of thé selues, couetous, boasters, proude, cursed speakers, dishobedient to their elders, vnthank- full, vngoostly, vnkynde, truce breakers, false accusers, ryatours, fearce, despysers of them which are good, traytours, heady, hye mynded, gredy vpon voluptuousnes more then the louers of God, hauynge a shyne off godly lynynge, but denyenge the power therof.
And soch avoyde. [Of this sorte are they which riine frō house to house, q brynge in to bondage wemé ladé with synne: which (wemen) are led with dyuerse lustes, euer lernynge, and are neuer able to come vnto the know- lege of the trueth.

* But like as Iamnes and làbres withstode 
Moses, euen so do these also resist the trueth: mé they are of corrupte myndes, and lewde as cocernynge y faith: but they shal preuayle no longer. For their folishnes shal be mani- fest vnto all men, as theirs was.

But thou hast sene the experience of my doctryne, my faszhion of lyuynge, my purpose, my faith, my longsufferynge, my loue, my

The iij. Chapter. 

TESTIFYE therfore before God q before the LORDE Iesu Christ, which shal come to iudge the lyuynge and the deed, at pes appearynge in his kyngdome: Preach thou the worde, be feruent, be it in season or ont of season: Improue, rebuke, exhorte with
‘all longe sufferynge and doctryne. For the tyme wil come, whan they shal not suffre wholsome doctryne, but after their awne lustes
|shal they (whose eares [nr get them an heape of teachers, and shal turne their eares from the trueth, and shalbe geuen vnto fables.
But watch thou in all thinges, suffre aduersite, do the worke of a preacher of the Gospell,

fulfyll thine office vnto the vttemost. lll For I am now ready to be offered, and the tyme of my departinge is at honde. I haue foughte a good fighte: I haue fulfylled

hence forth there is layed vp for me ffa crowne of righteousnes, which the LORDE the righteous iudge shal geue me in y daye:
Howbeit not vnto me onely, but vnto all them that loue his comynge. Make spede to come vnto me atonce.

For *** Demas hath lefte me, and loueth this present worlde, and is departed vnto

* Rom. 9. c. t1 Tim. 6. c. 11 Tim. 1. a. 4. a. 2 Cor. 1, b. ft Ecchi. 2. a Psal. 33. c. tt 2 Tim. 

6.a. 2 Tim.2.b. Tit.3.b. — *1 Tim.3.a. §Gal.| |1.c. $$ 2 Pet. 1. d. Ill 2 Pet. 1. c. TT 1 Co. 
6. a. 51 Tim. 4.a. 2 Pet.3.a, Iud. 1. c. litres 9,d. 1Pet.5. a. eer (Bbdhi. linis ns ils @ T Exod. 7. b. REA OCSIS a. and dena.

r. 

the course: I haue kepte the faith. From|3 

Fo. cerry. 

^ Tessalonica, Crescens in to Galacia, Titus ynto Dalmacia, Onely Lucas is with me.
‘Take * Marke, q brynge him with the: for he is profitable vnto me to the mynistracion.
‘Tichicus haue I sent to Ephesus. The cloke that | lefte at Troada with Carpus brynge with the whan thou commest: and the bokes, but specially the parchemet. t Alexader the coppersinyth dyd me moch euell, the LORDE
‘rewarde him acordynge to his dedes, of whom be thou ware also. For he withstode oure
| wordes sore. i 

IC] In my first answerynge no man assisted 

me, but all forsoke me. I praye God that it 

be not layed to their charges. — Notwitston- 

‘dynge the LORDE stode by me, q strégthed 

fulfylled to the vttemost, and that all the 

* Col.1.a. — tiTim.1.c. fÁct.18.a. Ro. 16.a. 

Chay. I. 

Paul exhorteth Titus to ordene prestes or biszhop- pes in euery cite, declareth what maner of men they ought to be that are chosen to that office, and chargeth Titus to rebuke soch as with- stonde the gospell

The first Chapter. a AUL the seruaunt of God, and an Apostle

Gods electe, and the knowlege of y trueth, 

* 2 Tim. 1. b. 

The Epistle onto Titus, 

me, that by me the preachinge shulde be. 

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul unto Titus

The summe ot this epistle. 

off lesus Christ, *to preach the faith off 

Heythe shulde heare. And I was delyuered out of the mouth of the lyon. And the
LORDE shal delyuer me from all euell doynge, and shal kepe me vnto his heauenly kyngdome. 'lo whom be prayse for euer and euer, Ámen.

Salute Prisca and + Aquila, and y housz- holde of Onesiphorus. $ Erastus shore at
Corinthum. But l Trophimus left 1 sicke at 
Miletu. Make spede to come before wynter. 
Eubolus, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren salute the. The LORDE lesus Christ be with thy sprete. Grace be with you, Amen.

The seconde epistle vnto Timothy, wrytten from Rome, wha Paul was presented the seconde tyme before the Emperoure Nero.

$ Ro.16.c. fj Act. 21.d. 

Chap. 1I. 
He telleth him how he shal teach all degrees to behaue them selues.
Chap. HI. 
Of obedience to soch as be in auctorite. He warneth Titus to bewarre of foolish and vn- profitable questious.

which ledeth vnto godlynes, vpon the hope of eternall life: which God tthat can not lye hath promysed before the tymes of the worlde: but at his tyme hath opened his worde thorow preachinge, which is commytted vnto me

t Rom. 3. a. 

Chap. iij. acordinge to the commaundemét of God oure
Sauioure. 

* Vnto Titus my naturall sonne after $ comen faith.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God the father, and fro the * LORDE lesu Christ oure Sauloure.

For this cause left I the in Creta, that thou shuldest perfourme that which was lack- ynge, and shuldest ordeyne Elders in euery cite, as I appoynted y. Yf eny be blamelesse, the huszbande of one wife, hauynge faithfull children, which are not slaundred of ryote, nether are dishobedient. + For a Bisshoppe must be blamelesse, as the $stewarde of God: not wylfull, not angrye, l not geuen vnto moch wyne, no fyghter, not gredye of filthye luere: but harbarous, one that loueth goodnes, sober mynded, righteous, holy, temperate, and soch one as cleueth vnto the true worde of doctryne: that he maye be able to exhorte with wholsome lernynge, ¢ to improue them that saye agaynst it.

T For there are many dishobedient, and talkers of vanite, and disceauers of myndes: namely they of the circucision, whose mouthes must be stopped: ** which peruerte whole houses, teachinge thinges which they oughte not, because of filthye lucre. One of them selues euen their awne prophet, sayde: tt The
Cretayns are alwayes lyars, euell beestes, and slowe belies. This witnesse is true. Wher- fore rebuke them sharply, y they maye be sounde in the faith, and not to take hede vnto
Iewes fables and commaundementes of men, which turne them awaye from the trueth. tt Vnto y cleane are all thinges cleane: $$ but to the vncleane q vnbeleuers, there is nothinge cleane, but both their mynde & conscience is defyled. ‘They saye that they knowe God, but with the dedes they denye him: for so moch as they are abhominable aud dishobe- dient, and vnmete to all good workes.

The ij. Chapter. 
UT speake thou that which becommeth wholsome learnynge. That y elder men be sober, honest, discrete, sounde in the faith, in loue, in pacience. And the elder wemen likewyse that they shewe them selues as it

* 2 Cor.8. c. 
§ Leui. 10. c. 

t Ephe. 1. c. Phil.1.a. 11 Tim. 3.a. 
|| Ephe.5. b. fi Act. 15.a. **2Tim. 
3. a. +t Epimenides, tt Mat. 12. a. and 23, c. 
[$F Ro.14.c. || Gen.3.e. {T 1 Tim. 4. b. 1 Pet. 5.a. 

The Epistle bnto Titus, 

becommeth holynes, that they be no false 

accusers, not geuen to moch wyne, that they teach honest thinges, that they enfourme the yonge wemen to be sober mynded, to loue their huszbandes, to loue their childré, to be discrete, chaste, huszwyfly, good, lll obedient ynto their awne huszbandes, that the worde of God be not euell spoken of. Exhorte the yonge men likewyse, that they be sober mynded. Aboue all thinge shewe thy selfe
T1 an ensample off good workes, with vncor- rupte doctryne, with honestye, with the whol- some worde which can not be rebuked: *** that he which withstodeth maye be ashamed, hau- ynge nothinge in you that he maye disprayse.

ttt Exhorte the seruauntes, to be obedient vnto their masters, to please in all thinges, not answeringe agayne, nether to be pykers, but to shewe all good faithfulnes, that in all thinges they maye do worshippe vnto the doctryne off God oure Sauioure. For the grace off God that bryngeth Saluacion vnto all men, hath appeared, and teacheth vs, that we shulde denye vngodlynes, and tttwordly lustes: and that we shulde lyue discretly, righteously, and godly in this worlde, lokynge for that blessed hope and appearynge of the glory of y greate God and of oure Sauioure lesu
Christ: $$$ which gaue him selfe for vs, to redeme vs fro all vnrighteousnes, and to pourge vs to be a peculiar people vnto him- selfe, to be feruently geuen lll vnto good workes. ‘These thinges speake and exhorte, and rebuke with all earnest. 1% Se that no man despyse the.

The ij. Chapter. 
NW AE them **** that they submytte them selues vnto Prynces and to the hyer auctorite, to obey the officers, to be read. vnto all good workes, that they speake call of no man, that they be no stryuers, but soft, shewynge all mekenes vnto all men. For we oure selues also were in tymes past, vnwyse, dishobedient, in erroure, seruynge lustes and dyuerse maners of voluptuousnes, lyuynge in maliciousnes and envye, full of hate, hatynge one another.
But after that y kyndnesse and loue of God oure Sauioure to man warde appeared, not ase 1 Ret 21b. and 3. b. ttt Ephe. 6.a. Col. 3. c.

1 Pet. 2. c. iti Ioh. 2, c, — $86 Rom. 8. a. Gal. 3. b. 
Illl Ephe.2. b. — «444 1 Tim. 4. b. — **** Rom. 13. a. 
1 Pet. 2. b. 

157 

Jo. turi 

a 

Jo. cerry. 
|for ý dedes of righteousnes which we wroughte, | 

|! but after his mercy he saued vs by the * foun- tayne of the new byrth, and renuynge of the holy goost, which he shed on vs abundauntly, thorow lesus Christ oure Sauioure: y we beynge made righteous t by his grace, shulde be heyres of eternall life acordynge to hope.
This is a true sayége. 

3| Of these thinges wolde I that thou shuldest speake earnestly, that they which are become beleuers in God, might be diligent to excell in good workes: for these thinges are good and profitable vnto me. + As for folysh questions, and genealogies, and braulynges and stryuynges aboute y lawe, auoyde the, for they are vuprofitable and vayne. § A ma that is geuen vnto heresye, after y first and

* Ioh, 3.a. — t Act. 15. b. Ephe. 2. a. 

and6.a. 2 Tim.2. c. 

{1 Tim. 1. a. 

The Epistle onto Philemon. 

Chap. t. seconde monicion, auoyde, and knowe, that he that is soch, is peruerted, « synneth euen damned by his awne iudgment.

Whan Í shal sende Artemas or Tichicus vnto y, make spede to come to me vnto
Nicopolis, for I haue determyned there to wynter. Brynge Zenas y Serybe and Apollos on their iourney diligently, that nothinge be lackynge vnto them. And let oures also learne to excell in good workes, as farre forth as nede requyreth, that they be not vnfrutefull.

All they that are with me, salute the. 
Grete them that loue vs in the faith. Grace be with you all, Amen.

Wrytten from Nicopolis in Macedonia. 

Mat, 18. b. 2 Tess. 3.a. Ro. 16. b. 

The summe of this Epistle. 

He reioyseth to heare of the faith and loue ot 
Philemon, whom he desyreth to forgeue his seruaüt Onesimus, and louyngly to receaue him agayne.

po the presoner of lesu Christ, and brother "Timotheus.

Vnto Philemon the beloned, and oure helper, and to the beloued Appia, and to
Archippus oure felowe sondyer, and to the congregacion in thy house.

Grace be with you, and peace from God oure father and ae the LORDE Iesus

hrist. 

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul onto Philemon.

I thanke my God, makynge mencion all| wayes of the in my prayers (for so moch as
I heare of thy loue and faith which thou hast on the LORDE Iesu, and towarde all sayntes) that oure comen faith maye be frutefull in the, thorow knowlege of all y good that ye haue in Christ lesu. Greate ioye and con- solacion haue I in thy loue. For by the
(brother) the sayntes are hertely refreszhed. 

Wherfore though I haue great boldnes in 
Christ to commaunde the that which becom- meth the, yet for loues sake I rather beseke y, though I be as I am, ené Paul aged, and now a presoner also of Iesu Christ. I beseke the for my sonne * Onesimus (whom I haue

* Col. 4. a. 

‘Chap. t. 

begotten in my bondes) which in tyme past was to the vnprofitable, but now profitable both to the and me. Whom I haue sent agayne: but receaue thou him (that is) euen myne awne hert. For I wolde haue kepte him styll with me, that in thy steade he might haue mynistred vnto me in y bondes of y
Gospell: Neuertheles withont thy mynde 
[wolde I do nothinge, that y good which thou doest, shulde not be of compulsion, but wyl- lingly.

i Uk he therfore departed for a season, that thou shuldest receaue him for euer: not now as a seruaunt, but aboue a seruaunt, euen a brother beloued, specially to me, but how moch more vnto y, both in y flesh and in the
LORDE? Yf thou holde me for thy com- panyon, receaue him then euen as my selfe.

The first Epistle of S. Peter, 

Fo. eerriý, 
But yf he haue hurte the, or oweth the oughte, that laye to my charge. I Paul haue wrytten it with myne awne hande, I wil recompence it: so that I do not saye vnto y, how that thou owest vnto me euen thine owne selfe. Euen so brother, let me enioye the in the LORDE: refresh thou my hert in the LORDE.

Trustinge in thine obediéce, I haue wrytten vnto the, for I knowe that thou wilt do more then I saye. Morouer prepare me lodginge, for I hope that thorow youre prayers I shalbe geuen vnto you. There saluteth the, Epa- phras my felowe presoner in Christ lesu,
Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my help- ers. The grace of oure LORDE Jesu Christ be with youre sprete, Amen.

Sent from Rome by Onesimus a seruaunt. 

The first Lptstle of the Apostle &. Peter.

The summe of this Cpistle. 

Chap. 1. 

He sheweth that thorow the abundaunt mercy of 
God we are begotten agayne to a lyuely hope: and how faith must be tried : how the salua- cion in Christ is no newes, but a thinge pro- phecied of olde. He exhorteth them to a godly conuersacion, for so moch as they are now borne a new by the worde of God.

Chap. Il. 

He exhorteth men to laye asyde all vyce, sheweth that Christ is the foundacion wher vpon they be buylt, prayeth them to absteyne fro fleshly lustes, and to obeye worldly rulers. How seruauntes shulde behaue them selues towarde their masters. He exhorteth to suffre after the ensample of Christ.

Chap. IIT. 
How wyues ought to ordre them selues towarde their huszbandes and in their apparell. The

dutye of me towarde their wyues. He exor- teth all men to vnite and loue, and paciently to suffre trouble. Of true baptyme.

Chap. HII. 

He exhorteth men to ceasse from synne, to spende no more tyme in vyce, to be sober and apte to prayer, to loue ech other, to be pacient in trouble, and to bewarre that no man suffre as an euell doer, but as a Cristen man, and not to be ashamed.

Chap. V. 

A speciall exhortacion for all bisshoppes or prestes to fede the flocke of Christ, and what their dutie is, and what rewarde they shal haue yf they be diliget. He exhorteth yonge per- sonnes to submytt the selues to the elder, enery one to loue another, to be sober, ¢ to watch, that they maye resist the enemye.

The first Lypistle of the Apostle & Peter.

The first Chapter. a ETER an Apostle of Iesu Christ, to the

P that dwell here and there as straungers thorow out Pontus, Galacia, Capadocia, Asia and Bithinia, electe acordinge to the fore- knowlege of God the father thorow sancti- fienge of the sprete, vnto obedience and
* sprenklynge of the bloude of Iesus Christ. 

Grace and peace be multiplied with you. 

t Blessed be God and the father of oure 
LORDE lesus Christ, which acordinge to his greate mercy hath begotten vs agayne vnto a lyuely hope łby the resurreccion of lesus
Christ from the deed, to an vncorruptible and vndefyled inheritaunce, which neuer shal fade awaye, but is reserued in heauen for you that are kepte by the power of God thorow faith to saluacion, which is prepared all ready to be shewed in the last tyme: in the which ye shal reioyse, though now for a litle season (yif nede requyre) ye are in heuynes thorow manyfolde temptacions: that youre faith once tryed
(beynge moch more precious then the corrupt- ible golde that is tryed thorow the fyre) might be founde vnto laude, glory and honoure at the appearynge of lesus Christ: whom ye haue not sene, and yet loue him: $in whom now ye beleue, though ye se him not. Euen so shal ye reioyce also with vnoutspeakable and glorious ioye, receauynge the ende of youre faith, euen the saluacion of youre soules.

Of which saluacion the prophetes haue enquyred and searched, which prophecied off the grace that shulde come vpon you: search- inge whan or at what tyme the sprete off
Christ that was in them, shulde signifye, which 
(sprete) testified before the passions that shulde come vnto Christ, and the glory that shulde folowe after. Vnto the which (prophetes) it was declared, that not vnto them selues, but

* Heb. 9. b. and 10. c. t£1Co.15.c. § Ioh. 20. d.
** Leuit. 11. g. and 19.a. 

42 Cor. 1. a, Ephe. 1. a. 
| Luc. 2. b. € Luc. 12. d. tt Mat. 25.c. tt 1 Cor. 6.c.

vnto vs ed shulde mynister the thinges which are now shewed vnto you, by them which thorow y holy goost sent downe from heauen, haue preached vnto you the thinges || which the angels delyte to beholde.

Wherfore gyrde op the f loynes off youre mynde, be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace that is brought vnto you, by the de- claryuge of Iesus Christ, as obedient. childré, not faszhionynge youre selues to youre olde lustes of ignoraunce: but as he which hath called you is holy, eue so be ye holy also in all youre conuersacion: for it is wrytté: ** Be ye holy, for I am holy.

And yf so be that ye call on the father, which without respecte of personnes iudgeth ttacordynge to euery mans worke, se y ye passe y tyme of youre pilgremage in feare :tt and knowe, that ye were not redemed with corruptible syluer and golde, from youre vayne conuersacion (which ye receaued by the tra- diciós of the fathers)5$ but with the precious bloude of Christ, as of an mnocét and vnde- fyled lambe, which was ordeyned before the worlde was made, but is declared in these last tymes ll for youre sakes, which thorow him beleue on God, that raysed him vp from the deed, Tf and hath geue him the glory, that ye might haue faith q hope in God: Euen ye which haue purifyed youre soules ***in obey- enge the trueth thorow the sprete, for to loue brotherly without faynynge, « feruently one to loue another with a pure hert. as they that are borne a new, not of corruptible sede, but of vncorruptible, eué by the lyuynge worde of
God, which endureth for euer. ttt For all flesh is as grasse, and all the glory of man is as the floure of grasse. The grasse withereth, q the floure falleth awaye, but the worde of the
LORDE endureth for euer. This is the worde, that is preached amonge you.

and 7. c. $6Heb. 9. b. 1 Iob. 1.b. Apo. 1. a. 
||| Esa. 9. b. Luc.2. b. 99 Phil. 2.a. *** Act. 15. b. ttt Esa. 40. a. Eccli. 14. b, aco. 1. b.

€ 

B 

Chap. tij. 

The tj. Chapter. a Y A J HERFORE laye asyde all malicious- nes and all gyle, and ypocrisye, and envye, and all bacbytinge, q *as new borne babes desyre that reasonable mylke, which is without corrupcion, that ye maye growe therin, yf so be that ye haue t taisted how frendly the
LORDE is Vnto whom ye are come, tas to the lyuynge stone, which is disalowed of men, but chosen of God and precious. And ye also as lyuynge stones are made a spirituall house, and an holy presthode, to offre vp
§spirituall sacrifices, acceptable vnto God hy lesus Christ. Wherfore it is conteyned in the scripture: || Beholde, I put in Sion an heade corner stone, electe q precious, and he that beleueth on him, shal not be cofounded.
Vnto you therfore which beleue, he is pre- cious: but vnto them that beleue not, is y same stone which the 1 buylders refused, made the heade stone in the corner,** and a stone to stomble at, and a rock to be offended at, namely in the which stomble at y worde, and beleue not that wheron they were set.

tt But ye are that chosen generacion, that kyngly presthode, that holy nacion, that pe- culier people, y ye shulde shewe the vertues of him, which hath called you out of dark- nesse in to his maruelous lighte: +? Euen you which in tyme past were not a people, but now are the people of God: which were not vnder mercy, but now haue optayned mercy.

Dearly beloued, I beseke you as straungers and pilgrems, $$absteyne fro the fleshly lustes, which fighte agaynst the soule, and lede an honest connersacion amonge the Heythen, lll that they which bacbyte you as euell doers, maye se youre good workes, and prayse God in the daye of visitacion.

“Submytte youre selues vnto all maner ordinaunce of men for the LORDES sake: whether it be vnto the kynge as vnto Y chefe heade, or vnto rulers, as vnto them that are sent of him, for the punyshment of euell doers, but for the prayse of thé that do well. For so is the will of God, that ye with well doynge shulde put to sylence the ignoraunce of folish- men: as fre, and not as hauynge the libertye

* Ephe. 4. a. Col. 3. a. Heb. 12. a. t Psal. 33. a. 
1 Ephe. 2. c. Rom. 12.a. || Esa. 28. c. Mat. 21. e. 
Ast. 4.a. "| Psal. 117.c. ** Esa. 8. c. tt Exo. 19. a. tt Ose. 2.c. Rom.9.c. §§ Rom. 13. b. Gal. 5. c. lill Mat. 5. b. 1 Pet. 3. b. a Rom. 13. a. Tit. 3. a.

The first Epistle of 3. Peter. 

So. eer. 

for a cloke of wickednes, but euē as the ser- uauntes of God. Honoure all men. Loue brotherly fellishippe. Feare God. 4141 Honoure the kynge.

*** Ye seruaütes, obey youre masters with all feare: not onely yf they be good and cur- teous, but also though they be frowarde.
For that is grace, yf a man for conscience towarde God endure grefe, and suffre wronge.
For what prayse is it, yf wha ye be buffeted for youre fautes, ye take it paciently ? ttt But yf whan ye do well, ye suffre wronge, and take it paciently, that is grace with God. For here vnto are ye called, for so moch as Christ also suffred for vs, leauynge vs an tit ensample, that ye shulde folowe his fotesteppes, which dyd no synne, nether was there gyle founde in his mouth: $$$. which whan he was reuyled, reuyled not agayne: whà he suffred, he threatened not: but commytted the cause vnto him, that indgeth righteously : M which his owne selfe bare oure synnes in his body vpon the tre, that we shulde be delyuered from synne, q shulde lyue vnto righteousnes: by whose strypes ye were healed.111_ For ye were as shepe goinge astraye, but now are ye turned vnto the shepherde and Biszhoppe of youre soules.

The iij. Chapter. 
IKEWYSE **** let the wyues be in sub- lecclon to their huszbandes, that euen they which beleue not the worde, maye without the worde be wonne by ¥ conersacion of the wyues, whan they beholde youre pure conuer- sacion in feare. Whose apparell ttttshal not be outwarde with broyded heer, q hanginge on of golde, or in puttynge on of gorgious araye, but let ý inwarde ma of ¥ hert be vncorrupte with a meke q a quyete sprete, which before
God is moch set by. For after this maner in the olde tyme, dyd ý holy wemé which trusted in God, tyer the selues, q were obedient vnto their huszbades: Euen as Sara obeyed
Abraham, ititand called him lorde: whose doughters ye are, as loge as ye do well, not

beynge afrayed for eny trouble. 
Likewyse ye men, dwell with them acord- inge vnto knowlege, geuynge honoure vnto

«€ Mat. 22, c. *** Epbe. 6.a. Col.3.c. Tit. 2. b. ftt Mat. 5. a. 1 Pet. 3. c. ttt Ioh. 13. b. Phil. 2.a.
$$$ Mat. 27. c. Ioh.8. c. ||| Esa. 53. b. 1 Ioh. 3. a. 
9199 Esa.53.b. Ezec.34.c. Luc. 15.a. ****1 Cor. 11.a. 
Ephe. 5. c. Col. 3. c. . ttt 1 Tim. 2. b. ttti Gen. 18. b 

Fo. crrrbt. the wife,* as to the weaker vessel: q as vnto thé y are heyres with you of the grace of life, that youre prayers be not let.

3| But in conclusion be ye all of one mynde, one suffre with another, loue as brethren, be

itefull, be curteous. + Recdpence not euell ie euell, nether rebuke for rebuke: but edtrary wyse, blesse: and knowe that ye are called therto, euen y ye shulde be heyres of ý
¢blessynge. For ae so listeth to lyue, and wolde fayne se good dayes, Let him re- frayne his tonge from euell, and his lippes Ý they speake no gyle. Let him eschue euel "
1 do good: Let him seke peace and ensue it. 
For ý eyes of the LORDE are ouer the righteous, t his eares are open vnto their prayers. But i face of the LORDE be- holdeth thé y do euell And who is it that
'ean harme you, yf ye folowe that which is good? Notwithstondinge Il blessed are ye, yf ye suffre for righteousnes sake. 1 Feare not ye their threatnynge, nether be troubled, but sanctifye the LORDE God in youre hertes. **Be ready allwayes to geue an answere to euery mà, that axeth you a reason of the hope that is in you, and that with mekenes ç feare, hauynge a good conscience,
\ttthat they which bacbyte you as euell doers, maye be ashamed, that they haue falsely accused youre good couersacion in Christ.

€| :tFor it is better (yf the wyll of God be 

so) that ye suffre for well doynge, the for 

euell doynge. For as moch as Christ hath once suffred for oure synnes, y iust for the vniust, for to brynge vs to God: q was slayne

‘after the flesh, but quyckened after the 

'sprete. 

| In the which sprete he also wente, and 

preached vnto y spretes that were in preson, 

which in tyme past beleued not, whan God once a bode and suffred paciétly in the tyme

‘of Noe, whyle the Arke was a preparynge: 

|$$ Wherin fewe (that is to saye eight soules) 

were saued by water. Which signifieth IIl bap- tyme y now saueth vs: not y puttinge awaye of the fylth of the flesh, but in y a good

\COsciéce cdsenteth vnto God by ¥ resurreccion 

of lesus Christ, which is on the righte hande 

| |of God, and is gone in to heané, angels, 
| [power aud mighte subdued vnto him. 

| 

| 

| 

1 Gen. 12. a. Mat. 25. c. $ Psal, 33. b. || Mat. 5. a. 
$ Esa. 8. c. Mat. 10. d. ** Psal. 118. f. Act. 4. a. 
Ig Bet o bo Tit 2. a. 1f 1 Pet. 2. c. Mat. 5. a. 

| * 1 Tess. 4. a, t Pro. 20.c. Mat. 5.e. Rom.12. c. 

Cbr first Epistle of 3. Peter. 

Chap. iii. 
The iiij. Chapter. 
OR as moch then as Christ hath suffred| A for vs in y flesh, arme youre selues like- wyse with the same mynde. ‘1 For he which suffreth in the flesh, ceasseth fro synne, y héce forth (as moch tyme as yet remaynet in flesh) he shulde not lyue after the lustes of mé, but after the wil of God. For it is ynough, y we haue spent ¥ tyme past of the life, after the will of $ Heythen, wha we walked in wantannesse, lustes, dronkenes, glotony, ryotous drynkynge, q 1 abhominable
Idolatrye. And it semeth to thé a straunge thinge, y ye runne not also with them vnto the same excesse of ryote, q speake euell of you. (Which shal geue acóptes vnto hi y is ready to iudge Y quycke ¢ y deed.) For vnto this purpose also was y Gospell preached vnto the deed, y they shulde be iudged like other mēiī ý flech, but shulde lyue vnto God in ý sprete. The ende of all thiges is at hāde.

*** Be ye therfore sober q watch vnto prayers: but aboue all thinges haue feruent loue amonge you one to another. ‘tt For loue couereth the multitude of synnes. Be ye herberous one to another without grudginge, q mynister one to another, euery one with the gifte y he hath receaued, as good stewardes of the manifolde grace of God. t1 Yf eny ma speake, let hi speake it as y wordes of God.
$$$ Yf eny man haue an office, let him execute it as out of the power ý God mynistreth vnto hi, y God maye be praysed in all thinges thorow lesus Christ, To who be honoure and domynion for euer and euer Amen.

Derely beloued, maruell not at this lll heate 
(which 1s come amoge you to trye you) as though some strauge thinge happened vnto you: but reioyce, in as moch as ye are par- takers of Christes passios, y wha his glory appeareth, ye maye be mery q glad. $$ Yf ye be reuyled for ¥ name of Christ, blessed are ye, for y sprete (which is y sprete of glory q of God) resteth vpon you. On their parte he is euell spoken of, but on youre parte he is praysed.

**** But se that none of you suffre as a murthurer, or as a thefe, or as an euell doer, or as a busy body in other mens matters. Yf

$$ Gen. 7. c. Il] Rom. 6. a. 1 Rom. 9. a. 
*** Mat. 24. d. ttt Pro. 10. b. ttt Iere. 23. b. 
$55 Ro. 12. b. 

Illl Luc. 12. £. 1 Cor. 3. b. 1 Pet. 1. b. 
*d d i i 1 

TTT Mat. 5. a. Pet. 2, c. and 3. c. 

Chap. í. 

eny man suffre as a Christen man, let him not be ashamed, but let him prayse God on this behalfe. * For ý tyme is come, that iudgmet must begynne at the house of God. Yf it first begynne at vs, what shal the ende be of thé which beleue not the Gospell of God?
‘|t And yf ¥ righteous scacely be saued, where shal y vngodly q synner appeare? — Wherfore let them that suffer acordynge to the will off
God, commytte their soules vnto him with well doynge, as to the faithfull creator.

The b. Chapter. a HE Elders which are amonge you I exhorte, which am also an Elder, ¢ and a witnes off the affliccions in Christ, and partaker of the glory that shal be opened.
$ Fede Christes flocke which is amonge you, and take the ouersighte of the, not as though ye were copelled therto, but wyllingly: not for the desyre of filthye lucre, but of a good mynde: not as though ye were lordes ouer the parishés, || but that ye be an ensample to the flocke: q whan the chefe shepherde shal appeare, ye shal receaue the vucorruptible crowne of glory.
Likewyse ye yóger submytte youre selues vnto the elder. Submytte youre selues euery

* Tere, 25. d. and 40, b, Ezec. 8. b. t Pro. 11. d. 
1 Act. 5. c. $ Act. 20. d. j Tit. 2. a. €| Pro. 11. a. 

Chap. I. 

For so moch as the power of God hath geuen them all thinges pertayninge vnto life, he ex- horteth the to flye the corrupcion of worldly lust, to make their callynge sure with good workes and frutes of faith. He maketh men- cion of his owne death, declaringe the LORDE lesus to be the true sonne of God, as he him- self hath sene vpon the mount.

Chap. H. 
He prophecieth of false teachers, and sheweth their punyshment.

Che d. Epistle of 3». Peter, 

man one to another, and knyt youre selues together in lowlynes of mynde. 1 For God resisteth the proude, but geueth grace to the humble. Submytte youre selues therfore vnder the mightie hande of God, that he maye exalte you whan the tyme is come. ** Cast all youre care on him, for he careth for you.

Be sober and watch, tt for youre aduersary y deuell, walketh aboute as a roaringe lyon, sekynge whom he maye deuoure, #!whom resiste stedfast in the faith, and knowe, that youre brethren in the worlde haue euen the same afHiccions.

But ¥ God of all grace, which hath called you to his euerlastinge glory in Christ Iesu, shal his owne selfe make you perfecte, which suffre $a litle season: eué he shal settle, strength, and stablish you. To him be prayse and domynion for euer and euer, Amen.

By Siluanus youre faithfull brother (as I suppose) haue I wrytte vnto you breuely, exhortinge and testifyenge, how that this is the true grace of God wherin ye stode. "The companyons of youre eleccion that are at
Babilon, salute you, and Marcus my sonne. 
Grete ye one another with the kysse of loue. 
Peace be with you all which are in Christ lesus, Amen.

** Mat. 6. c. Luc. 12. c. tt Iob 1, b. 
$$ Rom. 8. c. 1 Pet. 1. a. Heb. 10. d. 

Taco. 4. a. tt Iaco. 4. a.

The seconde 3zpistíe of the Apostle &. Peter.

The summe of this epistle. 

Chap. HI. 
He exhorteth men to bewarre of soch as wolde make the beleue, that the daye of the

.. ffo. corrby. 

5 

LORDE were slacke in commynge : prayeth |, 

them to lede a godly life, and to loke verely for the commynge of the LORDE, whose loge tarienge is saluacion, and because he wolde haue no man lost, but wolde receaue all me to repentaunce.

The ij. Cpistle of S. Peter. Chap. ij 

For we folowed not deceaueable fables, 
The first Chapter. whan we declared vnto you the power and a YMON Peter a seruaüt and an Apostle| |commynge of oure LORDE Iesus Christ: of lesus Christ. tbut with oure eyes we sawe his maiestie,
Vnto thé which haue optayned like faith| |whan he receaued of God the father honoure with vs in the righteousnes that commeth of| |q prayse, by a voyce that came vnto him from oure God, and Sauioure Iesus Christ. the excellent glory, after this maner: $'This
* Grace and peace be multiplied with you] jis my deare sonne, in whom I haue delyte. thorow the knowlege of God and of Jesus} | And this voyce herde we broughte downe fré
Christ oure LORDE. heauen, whan we were with him on the holy 
33| For so moch as his godly power hath geuen| |mount. vs all thinges (that pertayne vnto life and We haue also a sure worde of prophecie, godlynes) thorow the knowlege of him that| |and ye do well that ye take hede thervnto, as hath called vs by his owne glorie and power,| |vnto a lighte ! that shyneth in a darke place wherby the excellent and most greate pro-| |vntyll the daye dawne, and the daye starre myses are geué vnto vs: namely, that ye by| |aryse in youre hertes. And this shal ye the same shulde be partakers of the godly| |knowe first, that no prophecie in the scrip- nature, yf ye flye the corrupte lust of the} |ture is done of eny priuate interpretacion. worlde: Geue ye all youre diligence therfore| |* For the prophecie was neuer broughte by here vnto, and in youre faith mynister vertue:| |the wyl of man, but the holy men of God in vertue, knowlege: in knowlege, temper-| |spake, as they were moued of y holy goost. ancy: in temperancy, pacience: in pacience,

| fo. erri. 

godlynes: in godlynes, brotherly loue: in The ij. Chapter. brotherly lone, generall loue. For yf these UT there were false prophetes also/@ thinges be plenteous in you, they will not let amonge the people, ** euen as there you be ydle nor vnfrutefull in ý knowlege of| |shalbe false teachers amonge you likewyse, oure LORDE Iesus Christ. But he that| |which preuely shal brynge in damnable sectes, lacketh these thinges, is blynde, q gropeth for| |euen denyenge the LORDE that hath the waye with the hade, and hath forgotten,| |boughte them, and shal brynge vpon them that he was clensed from his olde syunes. selues swift damnacion: and tt many shal
Wherfore (brethrc) geue the more diligence| |folowe their damnable wayes, by who the to make youre callynge and eleccion sure:| |waye of the trueth shal be euell spoké of: for yf ye do soch thinges, ye shal not fall, and| |and thorow cuvetousnes shal they with fayned by this meanes shal there be plenteously| |wordes make marchaundise of you, vpō who mynistred vnto you an entrynge in vnto y| |the iudgment is not necligét in tarienge of euerlastinge kyngdome of oure LORDE andj |olde, and their damnacion slepeth not.
Sauioure lesus Christ. 1t For yf God spared not the angels that |33 

€| Therfore wil I not be necligét to put you} |synned, but cast them downe with the cheynes allwayes in remembraunce of soch thinges:| |of darknes in to hell, and delyuered thé ouer though ye knowe them youre selues, and be| {to be kepte vnto iudgment: $$ Nether spared stablished in the present trueth. Notwith-| |the olde worlde, but saued Noe the preacher stondinge I thinke it mete, as loge as I am| |of righteousnes himselfe beyuge y eight, and in this + tabernacle, to stere you vp by put-| |brought the floude vpo the worlde of the tinge you in remembraunce. For I am sure,| |vngodly: Ill And turned the cities of Sodom that I must shortly put of my tabernacle,| |and Gomor in to aszhes, ouerthrue them, euen as oure LORDE [Iesus Christ hath] |damned them, and made on them an en- shewed vnto me. Yet wyl I do my diligéce,| |sample, vnto those that after shulde lyue that allwaye after my departynge ye maye| |vngodly: And delyuered iust Loth which haue wherwith to kepe these thinges in re-| |was vexed with the vngodly conuersacion of ý membraunce. wicked. For in so moch as he was righteous

* | Pet. 1, a. *]oh.1.a. Col.2.b. t 2 Cor. 5. a. 2 Tim. 3. b. ** Mat. 24. a. Act.20.d. 1 Tim. 4. a. t Ioh. 1. b. 1 Ioh. 1. a. § Mat. 17. a. Marc. 9. a. tt Mat. 7. b. itlob.4.b. Apoc.20.a. $$ Gen.7.a. jLuc.9.d. — (2 Cor.4.b. — € Dan.9.b. Zach.7.b.| |I| Gen. 19. c.

Chap. ty. and dwelt amonge them, so that he must nedes se it and heare it, his righteous soule was greued from to daye to daye with their vnlaufull dedes. *The LORDE knoweth how to delyner the godly out of tentacion, and how to reserue the vniust vnto the daye of iudgment for to be punyshed: but specially them that walke after the flesh in y lust of vnclennes, and despyse the rulers: beynge presumptuous, stubborne, and feare not to speake euell of thé y are in auctorite t wha the angels yet which are greater both in power and might, beare not that blasphemous ludgment agaynst them of the LORDE.:
But these are as y brute beestes, which na- 

Che 6. Epistle of 3. Peter. 

turally are broughte forth to be také and destroyed: $speakynge euell of ý they knowe not, and shal perishe in their owne destruc- cion, and so receaue y rewarde of vnright- eousnes.

They counte it pleasure to lyue deliciously for a season: Spottes are they and fylthynes: lyuynge at pleasure and in disceaueable wayes: feastynge with that which is youres, hauynge eyes full of aduoutrye, and cà not ceasse from synne, entysinge vnstable soules: hauynge an hert exercysed with couetousnes: they are cursed children, and haue forsaken the righte waye, and are gone astraye: folowinge the waye of || Balaam the sonne of Bosor, which loued the rewarde of vnrighteousnes: but was rebuked of his iniquyte. The tame and domme beast spake with mas voyce, ¢ forbad the fool- ishnes of ¥ prophet.

B| These are welles without water, q f cloudes 

carled aboute of a tepest: to who $ myst of darknesse is reserued for euer. For they speake y proude wordes of vanite, vnto y vttemost, and entyse thorow wantannes vnto y luste of the flesh, euen them that were cleane escaped, and now walke in erroure: and promyse them libertye, where as they them selues are seruauntes off corrupcion.**
For off whom so euer a man is ouercome, vnto the same is he in bondage. tt For

they (after they haue escaped from the fyl- thynes of the worlde, thorow the knowlege of y LORDE and Sauioure lesus Christ) are yet tangled agayne therin and ouercome, tł

=a Cor 10. b: t Iudæ 1. b. + Iere. 12.a. 
§ Iudæ 1. b. || Num. 22. 23. 24. q Iudz 1. c. 
** Ioh. 8.c. Rom.6. b. t*Luc.9.f. t Mat. 12.c. 
Heb. 6. a. $$ Act. 5. a. ||| Pro. 26. b. Eccli. 
34. d. q9 1 Tim.4.a. 2 Tim. 3. a. Iudæ 1. c. 

then is the latter ende worse vnto them then the begynnynge. For it had bene better for them, not to haue knowne the waye of right- eousnes, then after they haue knowne it, $$ to turne from the holy commaundemét, that was genen vnto them. It is happened vnto them acordynge vnto the true prouerbe: lll
ý dogg is turned to his vomyte agayne: and y sowe that was waszhed, vnto hir walowynge in the myre.

The tj. Chapter. 

HIS is the seconde Epistle that I now 

wryte vnto you (ye dearly beloued) wherin I stere vp and warne youre pure mynde, that ye maye remembre the wordes, which were tolde before of the holy prophetes: and also the commaundement of vs, that be the Apostles of the LORDE and Sauioure.

This first vnderstonde, 1{ that in the last dayes there shal come mockers, which wyll walke after their awne lustes, q saye: *** Where is the promes of his commynge? For sence the fathers fell on slepe, euery thinge con- tynueth as it was from the begynnynge of y creature. This they knowe not (and that wylfully) how that the heauens were afore tyme also, and the earth out of the water, q was in the water by the worde of God, ttt yet was the worlde at that tyme destroyed by the same with the floude. But the heauens which are yet, and ¥ earth, are kepte in stoare by his worde, to be reserued it vnto fyre agaynst the daye of iudgment and damnacion of vngodly men.

Dearly beloued, be not ignoraunt of this one thinge, SSS how that one daye is with the
LORDE as a thousande yeare: and a thou- sande yeare as one daye. The LORDE is not slacke to fulfyll his promes (as some me counte slacknesse) but is lll paciét to vs warde, 111 and wyl not that eny ma shulde be lost, but that euery man shulde amende him- selfe. Neuertheles**** the daye of the LORDE shal come euen as a thefe in the night: in the which (daye) the heauens shal perishe with a greate noyse, and the Elementes shal melte with heate, and the earth and y workes that are therin, shal burne.

3** Eze, 12, d. ttt Gen, 7. d. 111 2 Tess. 1. b. 
$$$ Psal. 89. a. Eze. 12. d. 1Pet.4.a. [|||] Rom.2.a. 
TTT Eze. 18. d. !**** Mat. 24, d, 1 Tess. 5. a. 
Apoc. 3. a. 

Fo. eerrür. 

Fo. cerry. The first Cpistle of S, Sbon. Chap. f. 

| Yf all these thinges shal perishe, what| |oure dearly beloued brother Paul (acordinge maner persons then ought ye to be in holy| |to the wyszdome geué vnto him) wrote vnto couersacion and godlynes, lokynge for and} 'you: yee speakinge therof allmost in all hastynge vnto the commynge of the LORDE? | | Epistles, wherin are many thinges harde to
In the which the heauens shal perishe with| |be vnderstonde, which they that are vnlerned fyre, and the elementes shal melt with heate.| | and vnstable, peruerte, as they do the other
Neuertheles * we loke for a new heauen and| {scriptures also, to their awne dānacion. a new earth (acordynge to his promes) wherin Ye therfore beloued, seynge ye knowe it dwelleth righteousnes. before hande, bewarre, lest ye also be plucte
£| Wherfore dearly beloued, seynge that ye! |awaye thorow the erroure of y wicked, and loke for soch thinges, be diligent, M ye maye! |fall from youre owne stedfastnes. But growe be founde before him in peace without spot| |in grace, and in the knowlege ofoure LORDE and vndefyled: and counte the longsufferynge | |and Sauioure Iesus Christ. ‘To him be prayse of oure LORDE youre saluacion, Euen as| |now and for euer, Amen.

* Esa, 65. c. Apo. 21. a. 

The first 3Zpistic of the Apostle and Buangelist S. Phon.

The summe of this epistle. 

Chap. I. 
True wytnesse of the euerlastinge worde of God. 
The bloude of Christ is the purgacion from synne. No man is without synne.

Chap. III. 

Difference of spretes, and how the sprete of God maye be knowne from the sprete of erroure.
Of the loue of God and of oure neghbours. 

Chap. Il. it is tryed. To loue God, is to kepe his commaundemétes.
Chap. I. Faith ouercommeth the worlde. Euerlastinge 

The synguler loue of God to warde vs: and how 

life is in the sonne of God. Of the synne vnto we agayne oughte to loue one another.

| 
Christ is oure aduocate. Of true loue, and how Chap. V. death.

was with the father, and hath apeared vnto 

The first Chapter. vs. That which we haue sene q herde, 

a HAT which was from ¥ begynnynge, |declare we vnto you, that ye also maye haue 

which we haue herde, which *we haue| | fellishippe with vs, and that oure fellishippe 

sene with oure eyes, which we haue loked| |maye be with the father and with his sonne 

vpon, tand oure handes haue handled of the} |lesus Christ. And this wryte we vnto you, worde of life: and the life hath appeared, and| | {that youre ioye maye be full.

we haue sene, and beare wytnes, and shewe And this is the tydinges which we haue 

vnto you ¥ life that is euerlastinge, “which| |herde of him, q declare vnto you, that God 

* Ioh. 1. b. 2 Pet. 1. c. t Ioh. 20. d. 1 a Toh. 17.8. t Ioh. 17. b. 

Chap. ij. is lighte, and in him is no darknes at all.
Yf we saye that we haue fellishippe with him, and yet walke in darknes, we lye, and do not the trueth. But yf we walke in lighte, euen as he is in lighte, then haue we fellishippe together, * and the bloude of Iesus Christ his sonne clenseth vs from all synne.

t Yf we saye that we haue no synne, we disceaue oure selues, and the trueth is not in vs. + But yf we knowlege oure synnes, he is faithfull and iust to forgeue vs oure synnes, q to clense vs from all vnrighteousnes. Yf we saye, we haue not syuned, we make him a lyar, and his worde is not in vs.

The ij. Chapter. 

Y litle children, these thinges wryte I 

vnto you, that ye shulde not synne: and yf eny man synne, we haue an § aduo- cate with the father, euen lesus Christ which is righteous: land he it is that optayneth grace for oure synnes: not for oure synnes onely, but also for the synnes of all the worlde. And hereby are we sure that we knowe him, yf we kepe his comaundemétes.
* He that sayeth: I knowe him, and kepeth not his comaundemétes, is a lyar, and the trueth is not in him, Dut who so kepeth his worde, in him is the loue of God perfecte in dede. ** Hereby knowe we, that we are in him. He y sayeth he abydeth in him, oughte to walke euen as he walked.

Brethren, I wryte no new commaundement vnto you, but that olde commanndement, which ye haue herde from the begyunynge.
The olde comaundement is the worde, which ye haue herde from the begynuynge. Agayne, tta new cómaundemet wryte I vnto you, a thinge that is true in him q also in you: for the dark- nesse is past, and the true lighte now shyneth.

He that sayeth he is in lighte, and hateth his brother, is yet in darknesse. He y loueth his brother, abydeth im the lighte, and there is none occasion of euell in him. But he y hateth his brother, is in darknes, and walketh in darknes, and can not tell whither he goeth, for y darknes hath blynded his eyes.

Babes, I wryte vnto you, # that youre synnes are forgeuen you for his names sake.
I wryte vnto you fathers, how that ye haue 

* Heb. 9. b- i) RetalcesApoc. J) a. + Pro. 29. b. 

tlob13.b. Pro.28. b. Deut.7.c. Psa. 31. a. § IIeb. 
7. d. | Rom. 3. c. T Iob. 4. c. ** Tob. 13. d. 
1t lob. 13.d. zt Luc.24.d. Act.4. a. — $$ 1 Cor. 7. d. 

The first Epistle of S. Jhon. 

knowne him which is from y begynnynge. 
I wryte vnto you yonge mé, how that ye haue ouercome the wicked. I wryte vnto you htle children, how that ye haue knowne the father. I haue wrytten vnto you fathers, how that ye haue knowne him, which is fro the begynnynge. I haue wrytten vnto you yonge men, how that ye are stronge, and the worde of God abydeth in you, and ye haue ouercome that wicked.

Se that ye loue not the worlde, nether y thinges that are in the worlde. Yf eny man loue the worlde, the loue of the father is not in him: for all that is in the worlde (namely the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pryde of life) is not of the father, but of the worlde. And the $$worlde passeth awaye and the lust therof. But he that ful- fylleth the wyll of God, abydeth for euer.

Litle children, it is the last houre, and (as ye haue herde that ll Antechrist shal come) euen now are there many become Ante- christes allready: wherby we knowe, that it is y last houre. ‘They wente out $* fro vs, but they were not of vs: for yf they had bene of vs, they wolde no doute haue contynued with vs. But *** that they maye be knowne, how that they are not all of vs.

But ye haue the ttt anoyntinge of him y is holy, « ye knowe all thiges. I haue not wrytte vnto you, as though ye knewe not y trueth but ye knowe it, q are sure, y no lye cometh of y trueth. y ee is Christ? ‘The same is y Antichrist, y denyeth the father a y sonne. Whosoeuer denyeth the sonne, the same hath not the father. Loke what ye haue herde now from i begynnynge, let the same abyde in you.

rf y which he herde from the begynnynge shal remayne in. you, then shal ye also abyde in ¥ sonne and in the father. And this is the promes y he hath promysed vs, eué eternall life.

This haue I wrytté vnto you cócerninge thé that disceaue you. tt And the anoyntinge which ye haue receaued of him, dwelleth in you: q ye nede not y eny ma teach you, but as the anoyntinge teacheth you all thiges, euen so is it true, c is no lye. And as it hath tanghte you, eue so abide ye therin. And now babes, abyde in hi, y wha he shal

Iob. 5.d. TT Iob. 13. c. Act. 20, d. ttt Heb. 11. b. ttt Esa. 54. c.

iI Mat. 24. a. e Comb:
Tob. 6. e. 14. c. 16. b. 

Fo. cerryt, 

€ 

Who is a lyar, but he y denyeth 33 

Fo. terrrü. 

a 

B 

appeare, we maye be bolde, q not be made ashamed of him at his commynge. Yf ye knowe ý he is righteous, knowe also that he which doth righteousnes, is borne of him.

The iij. Chapter. 

EHOLDE what loue the father hath shewed on vs, y we shulde be called the ehildré of God. ‘Therfore y worlde knoweth you not, because it knoweth not him. Dearly beloued, we are now ¥ *childré of God, and yet hath it not appeared what we shalbe. t But we knowe y when he shal appeare, we shal be like him: for we shal se him as he is.
And euery man y hath this hope in him, pourgeth hin selfe, euen as he is pure. Who so euer comytteth synne, eomytteth vnright- eousnes also, and synne is vnrighteousnes.
+ And ye knowe that he appeared to take awaye oure synnes: and in him is no synne. Who so euer abydeth in him, synneth not: who soeuer syuneth, hath not sene him nether knowne him.

Babes, let noman disceaue you. He that doeth righteousnes, is righteous, euen as he is jrighteous. He that commytteth synne, is of the deuell: $for the deuell synneth sence ¥
|begynnynge. For this purpose appeared the sonne of God, to lowse the workes of the deuell. || Who so euer is borne of God, synneth not: for his ‘sede remayneth in him, q he cà not synne, because he is borne of God. ** By this are the children of God knowne çq the children of the deuell. Who so euer doeth not righteousnes, is not of God, nether he that loueth not his brother.

For this is the tydinges which ye haue 
‘herde from the begynnynge, that ye shulde loue one another, ttnot as Cain, which was iof the wicked, and slewe his brother. And wherfore slewe he him? euen because his awne workes were euell, and his brothers righteous. ++ Maruayle not (my brethren) though the worlde hate you. We knowe y we are traslated from death vnto life, because we loue the brethren. He that loueth not his brother, abydeth in death. $$ Who soeuer hateth his brother, is a mansleyer. And ye knowe that a mansleyer hath not eternall life abydinge in him.

c Hereby haue we perceaued loue, that he 

* Luc. 20. d. udiepbbren s Cor 15: fk Coina 
Phil. 3. c. i Esa. 53.d. 1Tim.1.c. Tit. 2. b. 
1Pet.2.c. §Ioh. 8. d. || 1 Ioh. 5.c. 1 Pet. 1.d. 
** Toh, 13. d. tt Gen. 4. b. tt Ioh. 15. b. 

The first Epistle of 3. Jhon, 

gane his life for vs, and therfore ought we also to geue oure lyues for the brethré. But he y hath this worldes good, a seyth his brother haue nede, and shutteth vp his hert fro him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? My litle children, Illet vs not loue with worde nether with tonge, but with y dede, and with the trueth. Hereby knowe we, that we are of the verite, and ean quyete oure hertes before him. But yf oure hert condemne vs, God is greater the oure hert, and knoweth all thinges.
Dearly beloued, yf oure hert condemne vs not, then haue we a fre boldnes to God warde.
TT And what so euer we axe, we shal receaue it: because wekepe his eómaundemétes, and do those thinges, which are pleasaunt in his sighte.
And this is his comaundement, that we belene on ¥ name of his sonne Iesus Christ, and loue one another, *** as he gaue com- maundement. And he that kepeth his com- maundementes, dwelleth in him, and he in him.
And hereby knowe we that he abydeth in vs; euen by the sprete which he hath geuen vs.

The iiij. Chapter. 

EARLY beloued, beleue not ye euery 

sprete, tttbut proue the spretes, whe- ther they be of God. For many false pro- phetes are gone out in to the worlde. Hereby shal ye knowe the sprete of God: Euery sprete which eonfesseth, that lesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: And euery sprete which confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not off God. And this is that sprete of Antechrist, off whom ye haue herde, how that he shal come, and euen now allready is he in the worlde. Litle children, ye are off God, and haue ouercome them: for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the worlde. They are off the worlde, therfore speake they off the worlde, and the worlde herkeneth vnto them. We are of God, ##tand he that knoweth God, herkeneth vnto vs: he that is not of God, heareth vs not. Hereby knowe we the sprete of trueth, and Ẹ sprete of erroure.

Dearly beloued, let vs loue one another, for loue commeth of God. And euery one y loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God.
He that loueth not, knoweth not God: for 
$$ Mat. 5. c. menus 

Ill laco. laco. 4.a. — *** Toh. 13. d. ttt Iob. 8. d.

qq Ioh. 16. c. 1 Ioh. 5. b. ttt 3 Reg. 13. d. Mat. 7. b.

Chap. ij. 

a 

5 

a HO so euer beleueth that lesus is 

Chap. b. 

God is lone. * By this appeared the loue of 
God to vs warde, because that God sent his onely begotten sonne in to this worlde, that we mighte lyue thorow him. Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, tand sent his sonne to make agremét for oure synnes. |

Dearly beloued, yf God so loued vs, we oughte also to loue one another. t No man hath sene God at eny tyme. Yf we lone one another, God dwelleth in vs, and his loue is perfecte in vs. Hereby knowe we that we dwell in him, and he in vs, because he hath geuen vs of his sprete. And we haue senc, q testifye that the father sent the sonne to be the
Sauioure of the worlde. $ Whosoeuer now con- fesseth y Iesus is the sonne of God in him dwell- eth God, and he in God: and we haue knowne and beleued the loue that God hath to vs.

God is loue, and he that dwelleth in loue dwelleth in God, and God in him. Here in is the loue perfecte with vs, that we shulde haue a fre boldnessein the daye of iudgment : for as he is, eue so are we in this worlde. Feare is not in loue, but perfecte lone casteth out feare: for feare hath paynefulnes. He that feareth, is not perfecte in loue.

Let vs lone him, for he loued vs first. Yf eny man saye: I loue God, q yet hateth his brother, he is a lyar. For he that loueth not his brother whom he seyth, how can he loue
God, whom he seyth not? And this comaun- dement haue we of him, ‘that he which loueth
God, shulde loue his brother also. 

The b. Chapter. 

Christ,** is borne of God. And who soeuer loneth him that begat, loueth him also which was begotten of him. By this we knowe that we lone Gods children, whan we loue God, and kepe his commaundementes.
For this is the lone of God, that we kepe his commaundementes, tt and his commaunde- métes are not grenous. For all that is borne of God, ouer commeth the worlde : and this is the victory that ouercommeth the worlde, eué oure faith. Who is it y ouercommeth the worlde, but he which beleueth that lesus is the sonne of God ?

* Toh. 3. c. Rom. 5. a. t2 Cor. 5.c. Col. 1. b. 
ł Exo. 33. d. Deut. 4. b. Ioh. 1. b. 1 Tim. 6.c. — $ Ioh. 
6. f. || Ioh. 2. a. {T Leuit. 10, e. Ioh. 13. d. | 

** Mat, 16.c. Ioh. 1.a. +t Mat. 11. e. 

tt Mat. 3. h.i 

The first Epistle of S. Jhon. 

| This is he that cOmeth with water and blonde, euen lesus Christ: not with water onely, but with water and bloude.tt And itis the sprete that beareth wytnes: for the sprete is the trueth. (For there are thre which beare recorde in heaneu: the father, the worde, and the holy goost, « these thre are one.) And there are thre which beare recorde in earth: the sprete, water and blonde, and these thre are one. l

Yf we receaue the witnesse of men, the witnesse of God is greater: for this is the wytnesse of God, which he testifyed of his sonne. $$ He that beleueth on y sonne of
God, hath the wytues in him selfe. He that beleueth not God, hath made hima lyar. And this is that recorde, euen y God hath geué vs euerlastimge life. lll And this life is in his sonne. He that hath the sonne of God, hath life: He that hath not the sonne of God, hath not life.

These thinges haue I wrytté vnto you, which beleue on the name of the sonne of
God, that ye maye knowe, how that ye haue eternall life, and that ye maye beleue on y name of the sonne of God. And this is the fre boldnesse which we haue towarde him, that yf we axe eny thinge acordinge to his wyll he heareth vs. And yf we knowe that he heareth vs what so euer we axe, then are we sure that we haue y peticions, which we haue desyred of him.

Yf eny man se his brother synne a synne not vnto death, let him axe, and he shal geue him life, for the y synne not vnto death.
There is a 1f synne vnto death, for the which saye I not that a man shulde praye. All vnrighteousnes is synne, aud there is synne not vnto death.

We knowe, that whosoeuer is borne off God, synneth not: but he that is begotte of God, kepeth himselfe, Cy wicked toucheth him not.
We knowe that we are of God, q the worlde is set alltogether on wickednes. But we knowe, that the sonne of God is come, ***and hath geuen vs a mynde, to knowe him which is true: and we are in him y is true, in his sonne lesu Christ. ‘This is the true God, and euerlastinge life. Babes kepe youre selues from ymages. Amen.

and 17. a. Ioh. 1. d. and 12. d. 

| Gal. 4. a. jli] Ioh. 1. a. es 8. b. *** Luc. 24. d.

$$ Ioh. 3.e. Rom. 8. b. 
TT Iere. 7. b. Mat. 12. c. 

! 

| 

So. cerrriy. 

B 

€ 

The summe of this epistle. 

He wryteth vnto a certayne lady, reloyseth that her children walke in the trueth, exhorteth the vnto loue, warneth them to bewarre of soch disceauers as denye that lesus Christ came iu the flesh, prayeth thera to contynue in the doctryne of Christ, and to haue nothinge to do with them that bringe not this lernynge.

HE Elder. To y electe lady and hir childré whom I loue in the trueth: « not I onely, but all they also that haue knowne the trueth, for the truthes sake which dwelleth in vs, and shalbe with vs for euer.

Grace, mercy, and peace be with you fro the LORDE Iesus Christ y sonne of the father in the trueth and in loue.

Iam greatly reioysed, that I haue founde amonge thy children, them that walke in y trueth, as we haue receaued a commaunde- ment of the father. And now lady I beseke the (not as though I wrote a new commaunde- ment vnto the, but the same which we haue had from the begynnynge) that we loue one

* 1 Ioh. 2. c. and 4. a. 

The summe of this epistle. 

He is glad of Gaius, that he walketh in the trueth : exhorteth him to be louynge vnto the poore christen in their persecucion, sheweth the vn- kynde dealynge of Diotrephes, and the good reporte of Demetrius.

HE Elder. To the beloued Gaius, 

whom I loue in the trueth. My be- loued, I wysshe in all thinges, that thou prospere and fare well euen as thy soule pros- pereth. I reioysed greatly, whan the brethren came, and testified of the trueth that is in M how thou walkest in the trueth. I haue no

The seconde 3zp(stic of S. FhHon. 

another. And this is the loue, that we walke after his commaundementes.

This is the commaundement (as ye haue herde fro the begynnynge) that we shulde walketherin. * For many disceauers are come in to the worlde, which confesse not y lesus
Christ is come in the flesh: this is a disceauer and an Antechrist. Take hede to youre selues, that we lose not that which we haue wrought, but that we maye receaue a full rewarde. Who so euer transgresseth, and abydeth not in the doctryne of Christ, hath not God: he that abydeth in ý doctryne of
Christ, hath both the father and the sonne. 

t Yf eny man come vnto you, and brynge not this doctryne, receaue him not in to the house, nether salute him: for he that saluteth him, is partaker of his euell dedes. I had many thinges to wryte vnto you: neuertheles
I wolde not wryte with papyre and ynke, but I trust to come vnto you, and to speake with you mouth mouth, that oure ioye maye be full. ‘The children of thy electe sister salute the. Amen.

t 2 Tess. 3. b. 

The thHirde Eptstle of S. Fhon. 

greater loye, thé to heare that my childré walke in the trueth.

My beloued, * thou doest faithfully what so euer thou doest to the brethren and to strangers, which haue borne witnesse of thy loue before the congregacion: and thou hast done well that thou dyddest brynge them for- warde on their journey, worthely before God.
For because of his names sake they wente forth, and toke nothinge of the Heythen.
We therfore oughte to receaue soch, that we mighte be helpers vnto the trueth.

I wrote to the congregacion, but Diotri- 

* Heb. 13. a. 

5 

Chap. f. 

phes, which loueth to haue the preemynence amonge them, receaued vs not. Wherfore, yf I come, I wil declare his dedes which he doeth, ieastinge vpo vs with malicious wordes: nether is he therwith cdtent. Not onely he himselfe receaueth not the brethré, but also he forbyddeth them that wolde, aud thrusteth them out of the congregacion.

My beloued, folowe not y which is euell, but that which is good. He that doeth well,

Che Epistle onto tbe 3ocbrurcs. 

Se. corer. 

is of God: but he that doeth euell, seyth not’ 
God. Demetrius hath good reporte of all men, and of the trueth: yee and we oure! selues also beare recorde, and ye knowe that! oure recorde is true. I had many thinges to wryte, but I wolde not with ynke, and pen wryte vnto the. But I trust shortly to se the aud so wyl we speake together mouth to mouth. Peace be with the. The louers salute the. Grete the louers by name.

Cbr Epistle of the Apostle S&S. Paul to the Mebrucs.

The summe of this epistle, 

Chap. I. 

How God dealt louyngly with the of the olde tyme in sendynge them his prophetes, but moch more mercy hath he shewed vs in that he sent vs his owne sonne, Of the most ex- cellent glory of lesus Christ, which in all thinges is like to his father.

Chap. II. 

He exhorteth vs to be obedient vnto the new lawe which Christ hath geuen vs and not to be offended at the infirmite and lowe degre of
Christ: q why? it was necessary that for oure sakes he shulde take soch an humble state vpon him, that he might be like vnto his brethren.

Chay. III. 

He requyreth vs to be obedient vnto the worde of Christ, which is more worthy then Moses.
The punyshment of soch as wyll nedes harden their hertes.

Chap. III. 

The Sabbath or rest of the Christen. Punyshment 

ofvnbeleuers. The nature of the worde of God. 
Chay. V. 

Christ is oure hye prest, the seate of grace, and more excellent then the hye prestes of the olde lawe.

Chap. VI. 

He goeth forth with the thige that he beganne in the latter ende of the fyfft chapter, and ex- horteth them not to faynt, but to be stedfast and pacient: for so moch as God is sure in his promesse,

Chap. Vil. 
He copareth the presthode of Christ vnto Mel- chisedech, but to be farre more excellent.

Chap. VIII. 
The office of Christ is more worthy then the prestes office of the olde lawe, which was vnperfecte, and therfore abrogate.

Chap. IX. 
The profit and worthynesse of the olde Testament, and how farre the new excelleth it.

Chap. X. 

The olde lawe had no power to clése awaye synne, but Christ dyd it with offerynge vp his body once for all. An exhortacion to receane this goodnesse of God thakfully with pacience and stedfast faith.

Chap. XI. 

What faith is, and a commedacion of the same. 

The stedfast beleue of the fathers in olde tyme. 

Chap. XII. 

An exhortacion to be pacient and stedfast in trouble and aduersite, vpon hope of euerlast- inge rewarde. A commedacion of the new
Testament aboue the olde. 

Chap. XIII. 

He exhorteth vs vnto loue, to hospitalite, to thinke vpon soch as be in aduersite, to man- teyne wedlocke, to avoyde cuvetousnesse, to make moch of the that preach Gods worde, to bewarre of straunge lernynge, to be content to suffre rebuke with Christ, to be thankfull vnto God, and obedient vnto oure heades.

Fo. eerrrbi 

The first Chapter. 

a OD in tyme past dyuersly q many wayes, 

spake vnto y fathers by prophetes, but in these last dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by his sonne, * whom he hath made heyre of all thinges, by whom also he made the worlde. tWhich (sonne) beynge the brightnes of his glory, a the very ymage of his substaunce, bearinge vp all thinges with the worde of his power, ł hath in his owne personne pourged oure synnes, and is set on the righte hande of the maiestie on hye: beynge eué as moch more excellét thé y angels, as he hath optayned a more excellét § name then they.

For vnto which of the angels sayde he at eny time: | Thou art my sonne, this daye haue I begotten the? And agayne: * I will be his father, q he shalbe my sonne: And agayne, wha he bryngeth in the fyrst begotté sonne in to the worlde, he sayeth: ** And all the angels of God shal worshippe him. ^And of the angels he sayeth: He maketh his angels spretes, q his mynisters flames of fyre. But vnto y sonne he sayeth: ttGod, thy seate endureth for euer q euer: the cepter of thy kyngdome is a right cepter. ‘Thou hast loued righteousnes, q hated iniquyte: wherfore God
(which is thy God) hath anoynted the with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy felowes.
5t And thou LORDE in $ begynnynge hast layed the foundacion of the earth, and y heaues are the workes of thy handes, 5$ they shal perishe, but thou shalt endure: they all shal waxe olde as doth a garmét, and as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou art y same, and thy yeares shal not fayle. Vnto which of the angels sayde he at eny tyme: lll Syt thou on my righte hade, tyll I make thyne enemies thy fote stole? Are they not all mynistrynge spretes, sent to mynister for their sakes, which shalbe heyres of saluacion ?

The ij. Chapter. 
A J HERFORE we ought to geue the more hede ynto the thinges which we haue herde, lest we periszhe. For yf the worde which was spoké by angels, was stedfast, and enery trasgression and dishobedience

* Mat. 28. c. + Sap. 7. d. 1 Ephe. 1. a. $ Luc. 
Clm EPN 2, a. || Psal. 2. a. « 2 Reg. 7. c. 
** Psal. 96, a. ? Psal. 103. a. tt Psal. 44. b. tt Psal. 101. d. $$ 2 Pet. 3. b. Ill Psal. 109. a.

The Epistle onto tbe 3Pebrurs. 

|receaued a iust recompence of rewarde, how shal we escape, yf we despyse so greate a saluacion: which 1f after that it beganne to be preached by the LORDE himselfe, *** was confirmed vpon vs, by them that herde it,
God bearynge witnesse therto, with tokens, wonders and dyuerse powers, and giftes of the holy goost acordinge to his awne wyll.

the worlde to come, wherof we speake. But one in a certayne place witnesseth q sayeth:

ttt What is man, that thou art myndefull of him? or the sonne of man, that thou vysitest him? After thou haddest for a litle season made him lower thé ¥ angels, thou erownedst him with hononre and glory, and hast set him aboue the workes of thy handes. "Thou hast put all thinges in subieccion vnder his fete.itt
In that he subdued all thinges vnto him, he lefte nothinge that is not put vnder him.
Neuertheles now se we not all thinges yet subdued vnto him. But him, which for a litle season was made lesse then the angels, we se that it is lesus: which is $$$ crowned with honoure and glory for the sufferynge of death, that he by the grace of God, shulde taist of death for all men. For it became him, for whom are all thinges, and by who are all thinges (after y he had broughte many children vnto glory) that he shulde make the
LORDE of their saluacion perfecte thorow sufferynge, for so moch as they all come of one, both he that sanctifieth, q they which are sanctified.

For the which causes sake, he is not ashamed to call them brethren, sayenge : III I will declare thy name vnto my brethren, and in the myddes of the cogregacion wil I prayse the. Andagayne: T11 I wyl put my trust in him. And agayne: **** beholde, here am I and my children, which God hath geuen me.

For as moch then as the children haue flesh and bloude, tttt he also himselfe likewyse toke parte with them, :::t y he thorow death, mighte take awaye ý power of him, which had lordshippe ouer death, that is to saye, i deuell: q that he mighte delyuer the whic thorow feare of death were all their life tyme in daüger of bodage. For he in no place taketh on him the angels, but $ sede of

© Marc. 1. b. *** Marc. 16. c. ttt Psal. 8. b. 
łtłł 1 Cor. 15. c. $$$ Phil. 2. a. lll Psal. 21. c. 
«9| Psal. 17. a. Esa. 12, a. **** Esa. 8.d. tttt Phil. 

1 Cor. 15.f. 2 Tim. 1. b. 

titt Ose. 13. c. 

gd. 

Chap. i. 

For vnto the angels hath he not subdued|33 

~ [Abraham taketh he on him. 

Chap. iii. 

Wherfore in all thinges it became him to be made * like vnto his brethren, that he mighte be mercyfull and a faithfull hye prest in thinges concernynge
God, to make agrement for the synnes of y people. * For in that he himselfe suffred and was tempted, he is able to sucker them that are tempted.

The íij. Chapter. 

Ve holy brethren, ye that 

are partakers of the heaucly callynge, consyder the Embasseatour and hye prest of oure profession, Christ lesus, which is faith- full to him that ordeyned him, euen as was t Moses in all his house. But this man is worthy of greater honoure then moses, in as moch as he which prepareth the house, hath greater honoure in it, then the house it selfe.
For euery house is prepared of some mi: 
Sbut he that ordeyned all thinges, is God. And 
Moses verely was faithfull in all his house as a mynister, |l to beare witnes of those thinges which were to be spoken afterwarde: But
Christ as a sonue hath rule ouer his house, 
T whose house are we, yf we holde fast the confidence and reioysinge of that ** hope vnto the ende.

Wherfore, as i holy goost sayeth: tt To- daye yf ye shal heare his voyce, harden not youre hertes, ftas in the prouokynke in the daye of temptacion in the wyldernes, where youre fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes fortye yeares longe. Wher- fore I was greued with that generacion, and sayde: They erre euer in their hertes. But they knewe not my wayes, so that I sware in my wrath, that they shulde not enter in to my rest.

'Take hede brethren, that there be not in eny of you an euell hert of vnbeleue, to de- parte from the lyuynge God: but exhorte youre selues daylie, whyle it is called to daye, lest eny of you waxe harde harted thorow y disceatfulnes of synne. For we are become partakers of Christ, yf we kepe sure vnto y ende the begynnynge of the substace, solonge as it is sayde: ‘Todaye, yf ye shal heare his voyce, hardé not youre hertes, as in the pro- uocació. For some whan they herde, pro- uoked. Howbeit not all they y came out of

* Phil. 2.a. + Heb. 5.a. f Num. 12.3. § Gen. fl. ge || Deut. 18. c. {T 1 Cor.3. b. ** Rom. 5.a. tt Psal. 94. b. 11 Exo. 17, a.

The Epistle bnto the 3hebrues, 

$$ Num. 14. c. 

Egipte by Moses. But with whom was he displeased fortye yeares longe? Was he not displeased with them y synned, whose carcases were ouerthrowne in y wyldernesse? §§To whom sware he, y they shulde not enter in to his rest, but vnto thé y beleued not? And we se y they coulde not enter in because of vn- beleue.

The iiij. Chapter. 

ET vs feare therfore, lest eny of vs for- sakynge the promes of entrynge in to his rest, shulde seme to come behinde: for it is declared vnto vs as well as vnto thé. But the worde of preachinge helped not the, wha they that herde it, beleued it not. (For we which haue beleued, enter in to his rest) acor- dynge as he sayde: Kuen as I haue sworne in my wrath, They shal not enter in to my rest.
And that (spake he) verely loge after that the workes fro the begyunynge of the worlde were made: For he spake in a certayne place of the seueth daye, on this wyse: lll And God rested on the seuenth daye frora all his workes. And in this place agayne: 1 They

shal not come in to my rest. 

Seynge it foloweth the, that some must enter there in to: and they, to whom it was first preached, entred not therin for vnbeleues sake, therfore appoynteth he a daye agayne after so longe tyme, and sayeth: "lodaye (as it is rehearsed by Dauid) ‘Todaye yf ye shal heare his voyce, then harden not youre hertes.
For yf Iosua had geuen them rest, thé wolde he not afterwarde haue spoken, of another daye. "lherfore remayneth there yet a rest vnto the people of God. For he that is entred in to his rest, ceasseth from his workes,
*** as God doth from his. 

Let vs make haist therfore to enter in to that rest, lest eny man fall after the same ensample of vnbeleue. For ý worde of God is quycke, and mightie in operacion, and sharper the eny two edged swerde, and ttt entreth thorow, euen to the deuydinge of the soule q the sprete, and of y ioyntes q the mary, and is a ludger of the thoughtes q intétes of the hert, nether is there eny creature invisible in
{ sighte of him. But all thinges are naked q 

are vnto y eyes of hi of who we speake. 
*** Gen, 2. a. 

{| Gen. 2. a. «4 Psa. 94. b. 

ttt Eccli. 12. c. 

159 

Fo. erryybij. 

5 

fo. crryrbtij. 

| 

5 

€ 

order of Melchisedech. 

The b. Chapter. 

EYNGE then that we haue a greate hye prest, eué lesus y sonne of God, which is entred in to heauen, let vs holde oure pro- fession. For we haue not an hye prest which ci not haue cópassion on oure infirmities, but was in all poyntes tépted, like as we are, but
* without synne. Let vs therfore go boldely vnto the tseate of grace that we maye re- ceane mercy, and fynde grace to helpe in

the tyme of nede. . Er 

For euery hye prest that is taken fro amoge men, is ordeyned for men in thinges pertayn- inge to God, + to offer giftes and sacrifices for synne: which can haue cópassion on the ignoraunt, and on them that are out of the waye, for so moch as he himselfe also is com- pased aboute with infirmyte. "lherfore is he bounde to offer for synnes, as well for him selfe as for y people. And noma taketh y honoure vuto himselfe, but he that is called of God, $as was Aaron.

Euen so Christ glorified not himselfe to be made hye prest, but he y sayde vnto him:
| Thou art my sonne, this daye haue I be- gotten the. As he sayeth also in another place: § Thou art a prest for euer after y
** And in ¥ dayes of his fleshe, he offred vp prayers « supplicacions, with stroge eryenge q teares vnto him y was able to saue him fro death: q was herde also, because he had God in honoure. tt And though he was Gods sonne, yet lerned he obedience, by those thinges which he suffred.
And he beynge made perfecte, became the cause of euerlastinge saluacié, vnto all thé y obeye him, and is called of God an hye prest after the order of Melchisedech. Wherof we haue many thinges to saye, which are harde to be vttered, because ye are dull of hearynge. itFor where as concernynge the tyme ye ought to be teachers, yet haue ye nede agayne, y we teach you the first pre- ceptes of the worde of God : and are become soch as haue nede of mylke, and not stronge meate. For euery one that is fed yet with mylke, is vnexperte in the worde of righteous- nes, for he is but a babe. But stronge meate belongeth vnto them y are perfecte, which

* Esa. 53. b. Rom.8.a. 2 Cor.5. c. t Ro. 3. c. t Leuit. 9. b § Exo. 28. a. || Psal. 2. a. *| Psal.
109. a. ** Luc. 23. c. Ioh. 17. a. tt Phil. 2, a. 

The Epistie buto the Hebrurs. 

Chap. 

Ithorow custome haue their wyttes exercysed to iudge both good and euell.

The bi. Chapter 

b. 

HERFORE let vs leaue the doctryne| 

pertaynynge to the begynnynge of a 
Christen life, and let vs go vnto perfeccion: and now nomore laye y foundacion of repé- taunce from deed workes, and of faith towarde
God, of baptyme, of doctryne, of layenge on of hades, of resurreccion of the deed, q of eternal iudgment. And so wil we do $$ yf
God permytte. ll For it is not possible, that they which were once lighted, and haue taisted of the heauely gyfte, and are become par- takers of the holy goost, a 11 haue taisted of y good worde of God, and of the power of the worlde to come, yf they fall awaye (and con- cernynge them selues crucifye the sonne of
God afreszhe, and make a mocke off him) that they shulde be renued agayne vnto re- pentaunce.

For the earth, that drynketh in the rayne, which commeth oft vpon it, and bringeth forth herbes mete for them that dresse it, receaueth blessynge of God: But y grounde which beareth thornes and thistles, is nothinge worth, and nye vnto cursynge: whose ende is to be brent. Neuertheles (ye dearly beloued) we trust to se better of you, and y saluacio is nyer, though we thus speake. *** For God is not vnrighteons, that he shulde forget youre worke and laboure of loue, which ye shewed in his name, whan ye mynistred vnto the sayntes, and yet mynister. Yee and we desyre, that euery one of you shewe the same diligence, to the stablyshinge of hope euen vnto the ende, that ye faynte not, but folowe them which thorow faith and paciece inheret the promyses. For whan God made promes to Abraham, because he had none greater to sweare by, ttthe sware by himselfe, and sayde:
Surely I wil blesse the and multiplye y in dede. And so he abode paciétly, and op- tayned the promes.

As for men, they sweare by him that is greater then them selues: tt and the ooth is the ende of all stryfe to confirme the thinge amoge them. But God, wyllinge very abun-

tt 1 Cor. 3. a. $$ Act. 18. c, Taco. 4. b. ill] Heb. 
10. c. «€ 2 Pet. 2. a. *** Mat, 25, d, tit Gen. 
22 %ce tit Exo. 22. b. 

B 

€ 

Chap. biij. dauntly to shewe vnto the heyres of promes the stablenes of his councell, added an ooth y by two immutable thinges (in the which it
1s vnpossible y God shulde lye) we mighte haue a stronge consolacion: euen we, which are fled to holde fast the hope that is set before vs, which (hope) we haue as a sure and stedfast anker of oure soule. Which (hope) also entreth in, in to those thinges that are within ¥ vayle, whither the forerüner is for vs entred m, eue lesus, which is made an hye prest for euer after y order of Melchisedech.

The bij. Chapter. 

HIS Melchisedech *kynge of Salem 
(which beynge prest of the most hye 
God, met Abraham as he returned agayne from the slaughter of the kynges, a blessed him, vnto whom Abraham also gaue tithes of all the goodes) first is by interpretacion kynge of righteousnes: after that is he kynge of
Salem also (that is to saye, kynge of peace) without father, without mother, without kynne, and hath nether begynnynge of dayes, ner ende of life: but is likened vnto the sonne of

God, and contynueth a prest for euer. 

But cosider how greate a man this was, to whom the Patriarke Abraham gaue tithes of the spoyles. t And verely the children of
Leui, whan they receaue the presthode, haue a commaundement acordynge to the lawe, to take the tithes of the people, that is to saye, of their brethré, though they also came out of the loynes of Abraham.

But he whose kynred is not counted amoge them, receaued tithes of Abraham and blessed him that had the promes. Now is it so with- out all naysayenge, that the lesse receaueth blessynge of ¥ better. And here men that dye, receaue tithes. But there he receaueth tithes, of whom it is witnessed that he lyueth.
And to saye the trueth, Leui himselfe also which receaueth tithes, payed tithes in Abra- ham: for he was yet in the loynes of his father Abraham, whan Melchisedech met him.

Yf now therfore perfeccion came by the presthode of the Leuites (for vnder the same
(presthode) the people receaued the lawe) what neded it then furthurmore, that another prest shulde ryse after the order of Melchise- dech, and not after the order of Aaron?

* Gen. 14. a. 1 
$ Mat. 1.a. 

Num. 18, d. 1 Mala, 2. b. 
* Psal. 109. a. — || 1 Iob. 2. a, 1 Tim. 2.a. 

The Epistle buto tbe Pebrurs. 

+For yf the presthode be traslated, thé of necessite must the lawe be translated also.
For he of whom these thinges are spoken is of another trybe, of the which neuer man serued at the altare.

For it is euidet, Sthat oure LORDE spronge of the trybe of Iuda, to the which trybe Moses spake nothinge cocernynge prest- hode, And it is yet a more euident thinge, yf after the symilitude of Melchisedech there aryse another prest, which is not made after y lawe of the carnall commaundement, but after the power of the endlesse life (^ For he testifieth : "'hou art a prest for euer after the order of Melchisedech) then the commaunde- ment that wente before, is disanulled, because of his weaknesse, and vnprofitablenes. For! the lawe made nothinge perfecte, but was an introduccion of a better hope, by y which hope we drawe nye vnto God. And for this cause is it a better hope, y it was not pro- mysed without an ooth. ose prestes were made without an ooth, but this prest with an ooth, by him that sayde vnto him: The
LORDE sware, and wyl not repente: Thoi art a prest for euer after the order of Mel- chisedech. Thus is Iesus become a stabliszher of so moch a better Testaméte.

And amonge them many were made prestes, because they were not suffred to endure by the reason of death. But this man, because that he endureth euer, hath an euerlastinge presthode. Wherfore he is able also euer to saue them, that come vnto God by him: « lyueth euer, || to make intercession for vs.

For it became vs to haue soch an hye prest as is holy, innocent, vndefyled, separate from synners, and made hyer then heauen: which nedeth not daylie (fas yonder hye prestes) to offre vp sacrifice first for his awne synnes, and then for the peoples synnes. For that dyd he once for all, whan he offered vp him selfe. ** For the lawe maketh men prestes which haue infirmitie: but the worde of the, ooth, that came sence the lawe, maketh the sonne prest, which is perfecte for euermore.

The biij. Chapter. 

Fo. terri. 

€ 

F the thinges which we haue spoken,| 8 

this is the pyth: ** We haue soch an hye prest, that is set on y righte hande of the
4 Leui. 9. b. 

** Heb. 5. b. tt Heb. 3. a. 6. c. 9. b. 

Jo. rerl. 
|seate of maiestie in heauc: and is a mynister of holy thinges, and of the true ‘Tabernacle, which God pitched, a not man. For euery hye prest is ordeued to offre giftes and sacri-
[Fees Wiot o of necessite, y this man 

haue somwhat also to offer. For he were not 

a prest, yf he were vpon earth, where are 

prestes y acordynge to the lawe offer giftes 

(which prestes serue vnto the ensample and 

shadowe of heauély thinges, euen as the an- 

iswere of God was geuen vnto Moses, whan he was aboute to fynish the Tabernacle: *' Take hede (sayde he) that thou make all thinges acordinge to the patrone shewed the in the

3 mount) But now hath he optayned a more 

excellent office, in as moch as he is the 

mediatour of a better Testament, which was made for better promyses. For yf that first

(Testament) had bene fautles, then shulde no 

place haue bene soughte for the secode. For 

in rebukyuge thé he sayeth: t Beholde, the 

dayes wyll come (sayeth the LORDE) that I 

wyl fynish vpo the house of Israel, and vpon 

the house off Iuda, a new Testament: not as the Testament which I made with their

‘fathers, in that daye whan I toke them by the 

lhandes, to lede them out of the londe of 

| Egipte: tfor they contynued not in my Tes- tament, and I regarded them not, sayeth the

LORDE. 

For this is the Testament, that I wil make with the house of Israell after those dayes, sayeth the LORDE. I wyl geue my lawes

in their mynde, and in their hertes wyl I 

wryte them: $And I wil be their God, and 

they shal be my people: and they shal not teach euery mà his neghboure, and euery man his brother, sayenge: knowe y LORDE, for they shal knowe me from the leest to the most of them: for I wil be mercifull ouer their vnrighteousnesses: And on their synnes q on their iniquyties wy] I not thynke eny more.

In that he sayeth: A new, he weereth out y 

olde. Now y which is worne out and waxed 

olde, is ready to vanish awaye. 

€ 

The ir. Chapter. 
HAT first Tabernacle verely had ordi- naunces, and seruynges off God and outwarde holynes. llFor there was made a

* Exo. 25. t lere. 31. c. PACC: § Zach, 
8.b. Apoc.?1.b || Exod. 25. a. T Leui. 24. b. 
** Exod. 25. b tt Exod. 16, f. tt Num. 17. a. 
$$ Exo. 50. b. Leui.16.g. Luc, 1.a. lll] Lob. 10. a. 

The Epistle bnto the 3oebrucs. 

Chap. tr. 

foretabernacle, wherin was y candilsticke, and the table, and the Sshewe bred: and this is

called y Holy. But behynde the seconde vayle was the Tabernacle which is called
Holiest of all, which had the golden censor, and the ** Arke of the Testament ouerlayed rounde aboute with golde, wherin was the ttgolden pot with Manna, and Aarons rodd that florished, and the tables of the Testa- ment: Aboue therin were the Cherubins off glory ouershadowynge the Méercyseate: Of which thinges it 1s not now to speake per- ticularly.

When these thinges were thus ordeyned, the prestes wente allwayes in to the first
Tabernacle, and excuted ¥ seruyce of God. 
8$ But in to the seconde wente the hye prest alone once in the yeare, not without bloude, i which he offred for himselfe and for the igno- raunce of the people. Wherwith the holy |3 goost this signifyeth, that the IIll waye of holy- nes was not yet opened, whyle as yet the first
Tabernacle was stondynge. Which was a symilitude for the tyme then present, in the which were offred giftes and sacrifices, and coulde not make perfecte (as partaynynge to the conscience) him, that dyd the Gods seruyce onely with meates and drynkes, and dyuerse waszhinges, and iustifienges of the flesh, which were ordeyned vnto the tyme of reformacion.

But Christ beynge an hye prest of good thinges to come, came by a greater and a more perfecte 11 Tabernacle, not made with haudes, that is to saye, not of this maner buyldynge: nether by the bloude of goates or calues : *** but by his owne bloude entred he once for all iu to the holy place, and hath founde eternall redempcion. For yff the bloude off oxen and off goates, tttand the aszhes off the cowe whan it is sprenkled, haloweth the vncleane as touchynge the puri- ficacion of the flesh, How moch more shal the bloude of Christ (which thorow the eternall sprete offred him selfe without spot vnto God) pourge oure conscience from deed workes, 11: for to serue the lyuynge God? And for this cause is he y $$$mediatour of the new Testa- ment, that thorow death which chaunsed for the redempcion of those trasgressions (that

and 14. a. TT Esa. 33. c. 2 Cor. 5. a. *** 1 Tob. 
1. b. 1 Pet. 1. c. Apoc. 1. a. ttt Num, 19. b. ttt Rom.6.a. 1Pet.4.a. $551 Tim. 2. a.

Chap. r. 

were vnder the first Testament) they which 

were called mighte receaue the promes of 

eternall inheritaunce. For where soeuer is a 

Testament, there must also be the death of 

him that maketh the testament. 

*For a Testamet taketh auctorite whan men are deed: for it is of no value, as longe as he that made it is alyue. l'or the which cause that first ''estamet also was not ordeyned without bloude. For whan all the commaun- dementes (acordinge to the lawe) were red of
Moses vnto all the people, he toke y bloude of calues and of goates, with water and purple woll and ysope, and sprenkled the boke and all the people, sayenge: This is the bloude of the Testament, which God hath appoynted vnto you. And the "l'abernakle and all the vessels of the Gods seruyce sprenkled he with

D bloudelikewyse. And allmost all thinges are pourged with bloude after the lawe : and with- out sheddynge of bloude is no remyssion. It is necessary then, that the symilitude of hea- uenly thinges be purified with soche: but y heauenly thinges them selues are purified with better sacrifices, then are those.

For Christ is not entred in to the holy places y are made with handes (which are but symilitudes of true thinges) but m to the very heauen, for to apeare now before the face of
God for vs: Not to offer himselfe offt tas the hye prest entreth in to the holy place euery yeare with straunge bloude: for the must he often haue suffred sence the worlde beganne. But now in the ende of the worlde hath he appeared once, to put synne to flight, by the offerynge vp of himselfe. And as it is appoynted vnto me y they shal ouce dye, and then cometh the iudgmét: + Eue so Christ was once offred, to take awaye the synnes of many.
And vnto them that loke for him, shal he appeare agayne without synne vnto saluacion.

The r. Chapter. 

a OR the lawe $which hath but the sha- dowe off good thinges to come, and not

the thinges in their awne fashion, can neuer by the sacrifices which they offer yeare by yeare continually, make the commers there vnto perfecte: Els shulde they haue ceassed to haue bene offred, because that the offerers once pourged, shulde haue had nomore con-

Rom. 5.a. 1 Pet. 
{T Psal. 59. b. 

* Gal. 5. c. 
3. c. &Col. 2. c. 

t Leni. 16. g. t 
|| Leuit. 19. e. 

Che Cpistle bnto tbe Hebrurs, 

Neuertheles in those sacrifices there is made but a remembraunce of synnes euery yeare. [| For it is vnpossible y the bloude of oxen and of goates shulde take awaye synnes. Wherfore whan he com- meth iu to the worlde, he sayeth: 1 Sacrifice a offerynge thou woldest not haue, but a body hast thou ordeyned me. Burntofferynges and synneofferynges hast thou not alowed. Then sayde I: Lo, I come. In the begynnynge of the boke it is wrytten of me, that I shulde do thy wyll O God. Aboue wha he had sayde:
Sacrifice and offerynge, and burntsacrifices q synofferynges thou woldest not haue, nether hast alowed (which yet are offered after lawe). 'lhé sayde he: Lo, I come to do thy wil O God: there taketh he awaye the first, to stablyszhe the latter: In the which wyll we are sanctified by the offerynge vp of the body of Iesus Christ once for all.

And euery prest is ready daylie mynistringe, and oftymes offereth one maner of offerynges, which can neuer take awaye synnes. But this man whan he had offred for synnes, one sacrifice which is of value for euer, sat him downe on the righte hande of God, and from hence forth tarieth, **tyll his foes be made his fote stole. For with one offerynge hath he made perfecte for euer, the that are sanctified.
And the holy goost also beareth vs recorde of this, euen whan he sayde before: tt This is the
Testament, that I wyl make vnto them after those dayes, sayeth y LORDE: I wyl geue my lawes in their hertes, and in their myndes wyl I wryte them, and their synnes and ini- quities wil I remébre nomore. And where remyssion of these thinges is, there is nomore offerynge for synne.

Seynge now brethre, that we haue a ttfre sure intraunce in to that Holy place, by the bloude of Iesu (which he hath prepared vnto vs for a new and lyuynge waye, thorow the vayle, that is to saye, by his flesh) and seynge also that we haue an hye prest ouer the house of God, let vs drawe nye with a true hert in a full faith, sprenkled 1n oure hertes from an euell conscience, and washed in oure bodies with pure water: and let vs kepe the pro- fession of oure hope without wauerynge (for he is faithfull that hath promysed) and let vs considre one another to y prouokinge of loue

science of synnes. 

Esa. 50.b. — ** Psal. 109. a. 

10.3. and 14. 

++ Tere. 31. c. 
Rom. 5. Heb. 9. b. 

tt Ioh, 

fo. un 

€ 

| fo. certi. and of good workes: and let vs not forsake the fellishippe that we haue amóge oure selues, as the maner of some is: but let vs exhorte one another, and that so moch the more, because ye se that the daye draweth uye.

*For yf we synne wylfully after that we haue receaued the knowlege of the trueth, there remayneth vnto vs nomore sacrifice for syunes, but a fearfull lokynge for iudg- ment, and violente fyre, which shal deuoure f aduersaries. tHe y despyseth Moses lawe, dyeth without mercy vnder two or thre wit- nesses: Of how moch sorer punyshment
(suppose ye) shal he be counted worthy, which treadeth vnder fote the sonne of God, and coüteth the bloude of y 'lestamet (wherby he is sanctified) an vnwholy thinge, q doth dishonoure to the sprete of grace? For we kuowe him that hath sayde:t Vengeaunce is inyne, I wil recompence, sayeth the LORDE.
And agayne: § The LORDE shal indge his people. It is a fearfull thinge to fall in to the handes of the lyuynge God.

But call ye to remébraiice ý dayes y are past, 1 ý which after ye had receaued lighte, ye adored a greate fighte off aduersities: partly whyle all mé wodred q gased at you for the shame and tribulacion that was done vnto you: and partly whyle ye became co- panyons of them which so passed their tyme.
For ye haue suffred with my bódes, and toke a worth y spoylinge of youre goodes, and that with Eisdem knowynge in youre selues, how that ye haue in heauen a better q an endur- inge substaunce. Cast not awaye therfore youre confidence, which hath so greate a rewarde. |i For ye haue nede of pacience, that after ye haue done the wil of God, ye mighte receaue the promes. ‘ For yet ouer a litle whyle, and then he that shal come, wy] come, and wyl not tary. ** But the iust shal lyue by his faith: And yf he withdrawe him- selfe awaye, my soule shal haue no pleasure in him. As for vs, we are not of those which withdrawe them selues to damnacion: but of them that beleue to the wynnynge of the soule.

The ri. Chapter. 

|e is a sure confidence of thinges which are hoped for, and a certaynte of

* Num. 15.6. Heb.6.a. t Deut. 17. b. 19. c. 
32.e. Rom.12.c. § Deu.32.e. {| Heb. 12. a. 
9^2. ** Gal. 3. b. tt Gene. 4. a. 

t Deu. 
T Abac. tt Gene. 5. c.

The Epistle Onto tbe Hebrues. 

thinges which are not sene. By it y Elders were well reported of. Thorow faith we vn- derstonde, that the worlde and all the thinges which are sene, were made of naughte by the worde of God.

tt By faith offered Abell vnto God a more plenteous sacrifice: by the which he optayned wytnesse, that he was righteous: God testify- enge of his giftes, by the which also he beynge deed, yet speaketh.

# By faith was Enoch také awaye, that he shulde not se death: and was not founde, because God had taken him awaye. For afore he was taken awaye, he had recorde that he pleased God. But without faith it is vn- possible to please God. For he that commeth|33 vnto God, must beleue that God is, q y he is a rewarder of them that seke him.

$$ By faith Noe honoured God, after y he was warned of thinges which were not sene, q prepared the Arke, to y sauinge of his hous- holde: thorow the which Arke he condemned the worlde, and became heyre of the right- eousnes, which commeth by faith.

“By faith Abraham (wha he was called) obeyed, to go out iu to the place, which he shulde afterwarde receaue to inheritaunce: and he wente out, not knowynge whither he shulde go.

By faith was he a straunger in the lode of promes as in a straunge countre, q dwelt in tabernacles: and so dyd Isaac q Iacob, heyres with him of the same promes: for he loked for a cite which hath a foundacion, whose buylder and maker is God.

By faith Sara also receaued strength to be|& with childe, and ’was delyuered of a childe whan she was past age, because she iudged him to be faithfull which had promysed. And therfore spronge there of one (yee euen off one which was as good as deed concernynge the body) so many in multitude lllas the starres off the skye, and as the sonde off the
See shore, which is innumerable. 

All these dyed acordinge to faith, and re- ceaued not the promyses, but sawe thé afarre off, and beleued them, and saluted them: and cofessed, that they were straungers q pilgrems vpo earth. For they that saye soch thinges, declare, that they seke a naturall

Sap. 4. b. Eccl. 44. b. 49. c. e Gen. 12. 13.
I Gen. 47. b. 

$8 Gen. 6. d. Eccli. 44. b. 
> Gen. 21. a. l| Gen. 15. a. 

Chap. rij. countre. And doutles yf they had bene myndefull off that countre from whence they came out, they had leysure to haue returned agayne. But now they desyre a better, that is to saye, a heauely. * Wherfore God is not ashamed of thé, eué to be called their God : for he hath prepared a cite for them.

i| By faith Abraha offered vp Isaac, wha he was tempted, and “gaue ouer his onely be- gotten sonne, in whom he had receaued the promyses, of whom it was sayde: In Isaac shal thy sede be called: For he considered, y
God was able to rayse vp agayne from the deed. Therfore receaued he him for an en- sample.

By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concernynge thinges to come.

By faith Iacob, whan he was a dyenge, blessed both the sonnes off Ioseph, t bowed himselfe towarde the toppe of his cepter.

By faith loseph whan he dyed, remembred y departynge of the childré of Israel, q gaue cémaundemét concernynge his bones.

^ By faith Moses wha he was borne, was 
` |hyd thre monethes of his Elders, because they sawe that he was a proper childe, nether feared they the kynges cómaundemet.

* By faith Moses whan he was greate, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaos doughter :
‘and chose rather to suffre aduersite with the people of God, then to enioye y pleasures of syune for a season: and estemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the treasure of
Egipte: for he had respecte vnto the rewarde. 

4 By faith he forsoke Egipte, and feared not the fearcenes of the kynge: for he endured, ené as though he had sene him which is inuisible.

+ By faith he helde Easter, and the effusion of bloude, lest he which slewe the firstborne, shulde touche them.

* By faith they passed thorow the reed See as by drye londe: which wha the Egipcians assayed to do, they were drowned.

By faith the walles of Iericho fell, whà they were compased aboute seuen dayes.

By faith the harlot Raab perished not with the vnbeleuers, whà she had receaued the spyes to lodginge peaceably

And what shal I more saye? y tyme wolde 

a Gen, 22, a. Eccli. 44. c. 
. © Exod. 2. b. 4 Exod. 12. f. + Exod. 12. b. 

1 Iudi. 7. 4. 14. 11. $ 1 Reg. 17. 
T Dan.3. ** 3 Re. 17. c. 4 Re. 4. d. 

* Exo. 3. c. Mat. 22. d. 

The Epistle onto tbe Pebrurs, 

be to shorte for me to tell of t Gedeon, of 
+ Barac, and of i Samson, q of + lepthae, 
$and of Dauid, and || Samuel, and of the prophetes, which thorow faith subdued kyng- domes, wroughte righteousnes, optayned ¥ pro- myses, stopped y mouthes of lyos § quenched the violéce of fyre, escaped y edge of the swerde, of weake were made stronge, became valeaunt in batayl, turned to flighte the armyes of the aleauntes, **the wemen receaued their deed agayne from resurreccion. But

"lother were racked, and accepted no delyuer- 

aunce, that they mighte optayne the resurrec- cion that better is.

Other taisted of mockinges and scourginges, of bondes also and presonment: tt were stoned, were hewen a sunder, were tempted, were slayne with the swerde, it wente aboute in shepe skynnes and goates skynnes, in nede, in tribulacion, in vexacion, which (men) the worlde was not worthy of: they wandred aboute in wyldernesses, vpon mountaynes, in dennes and caues of the earth. And these all thorow faith optayned good reporte, and receaued not y promes: because God had prouyded a better thinge for vs, that they without vs shulde not be made perfecte.

The rij. Chapter. 

HERFORE seynge we haue so greate a multitude of witnesses aboute vs
$$let vs also laye awaye all y presseth downe, and the synne that hangeth on, and let vs runne with pacience vnto the batayl that is set before vs, lokynge vnto lesus y auctoure and fyniszher of faith: ll'which whan the ioye was layed before him, abode the crosse, and despysed the shame, and is set downe on y righte hade of y trone of God. — Cosidre him therfore that endured soch speakinge agaynst hi of synners, lest ye be weery and faynte in youre myndes: for ye haue not yet resisted vnto bloude, stryuynge agaynst synne, and haue forgotten the consolacion, which speaketh vnto you as vnto children: 11 My sonne, despyse not the chastenynge off the LORDE, nether faynte whan thou art rebuked of him:
*** for who the LORDE loueth, him he chas- teneth, yee and he scourgeth euery sonne

that he receaueth. 

tt 3 Re.21. tf4Re.1.b. Mat.3.2. —$$Ephe.4. c. 
Col. 3. a. 1 Pet. 2. a. || Phil. 2. a. 44 Pro. 3. b. 
*** Apoc, 3. d. 

So. crrliij. 

F 

a 

Fo. cevttit. 

B 

€ 

pu 

Yf ye endure chastenynge, God offereth himselfe vnto you as vnto sonnes. What sonne is that, whom the father chasteneth not? Yf ye be not vnder correccion (wherof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes and not sonnes. Morouer seyenge we haue had fathers off oure flesh which corrected vs, & we gauc them reuerence, shulde we not then moch rather be in subieccion vnto y father of spirituall giftes, y we mighte lyue? And they verely for a few dayes nurtred vs after
‘their awne pleasure: but he lerneth vs vnto y which is profitable, that we mighte receaue of his holynes. No maner chastisynge for the present tyme semeth to be ioyous, but gre- uous: neuertheles afterwarde it bringeth the quyete frute of righteousnes, vnto them which are exercysed therby. * Lifte vp therfore the handes which were let downe, and the weake knees, and se that ye haue straight steppes vnto youre fete, lest eny haltinge turne you out of the waye, yee let it rather be healed.

Folowe after peace with all men, and holynes, without the which no man shal se the
LORDE, and loke well, that no man desti- tute of the grace of God, lest there sprynge
|vp eny bytter rote, and cause disquyetnes, and therby many be defyled: that there be no jwhoremonger, or vncleane person, as Esan, twhich for one meate sake solde his byrth righte. For ye knowe. how that afterwarde whan he wolde haue inhereted the blessynge, he was put by: for the foüde no place of repetaunce, though he desyred (y blessynge) with teares. For ye are not come to y mont that can be touched $ and burneth with fyre, nether yet to myst and darcknes, and tempest of wedder, nether to the sounde of the trompe, and y voyce of wordes: which they that herde, wyszhed awaye, that the worde shulde not be spoken to them, for they were not able to abyde that which was spoken.
And yf a beest had touched the mountayne, it must haue bene stoed, or thrust thorow with a darte. And so terrible was the sighte which appeared, that Moses sayde: I feare and quake. But ye are come to the mount
Sion, and to the cite of the lyuynge God, to the celestiall * Ierusalem, and to the multi-

tude of many thousande angels, and vnto the 
* Esa, 35. a. t Gen. 25. d. 1 Gen, 27. f. 
$Gen.19.c. |Exo.19.b. f Apo.21.b. ** Gen. 

jtAgg.2.b. — it1 Pet. 2. a. $$ Deut. 4. d. 

The Epistle bnto the Hebrues. 

Chap. rij. congregacion of the first borne, which are wrytten in heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the spretes of iust and perfecte men, and to lesus the mediatoure of the new
"Testament, and to the sprenklynge off bloude, that speaketh better then the bloude of
** Abel. 

Se that ye despyse not him that speaketh vnto you: for yf they escaped not which refused him that spake on earth, moch more shal we not escape, yf we turne awaye from him that speaketh from heaue: whose voyce shoke the earth at that tyme. But now pro- myseth he, q sayeth: tt Yet once more wyl I shake, not the earth onely, but also heaven.
No doute that same that he sayeth yet once more, signifieth the remouynge awaye of those thinges which are shaken, as off thinges which are made: that y thinges which are not shaké, maye remayne. Wherfore, seynge we receaue the vnmoueable kyngdome, we haue grace, ?twherby we maye serne God, q please

him, with reuerence and godly feare. $$For oure God is a consumynge fyre
The rij. Chapter. llBe not a

ET brotherly loue cótynue. forgetfull to lodge straungers : for therby

haue dyuerse receaued angels in to their houses vnawares. Remembre them that aie in bondes, eué as though ye were bounde with them: and be myndefull off them which are in aduersite, as ye which are also in the bodye. Let wedlocke be had in pryce in all poyntes, q let ý chamber be vndefyled. For whorekepers and aduouterers God wil iudge.
Let youre conuersacion be without couetous- nes, ffand be content with that ye haue allready, for he hath sayde : ***I wyl not fayle the nether forsake the, so that we maye boldely saye: ttt The LORDE is my helper, and I wyl not feare what man maye do vnto me.
Remeinbre thé which haue the ouersighte of you, which haue declared vnto you the worde of God. The ende of whose couersacion se that ye loke vpon, and folowe their faith. lesus Christ yesterdaye and itt Todaye, q the same cotinueth for euer. Be not caried aboute with dyuerse and straunge lernynges: for it is a good thinge that the herte be

||| Gen. 18.a. and 19. a. Ro. 12. b. 1 Pet. 4. b. 
99. d. *** Deut. 31. b. Iosue 1. a. and 117. a. iti Heb. 1. b.

19 Eccli. ttf Psal. 55. a.

‘Chap. i stablyszhed with grace, and not with meates, which haue not profited them, that haue had their pastyme in them. We haue an altare, wherof they haue no power to eate, which serue in the Tabernacle. For the bodies of those beestes, * whose bloude is broughte in to the holy place by y hye prest to pourge synne, are brent without the tétes.
Therfore Jesus also, to sanctifye y people by his awne bloude, tsuffred withont y gate.
Let vs go forth therfore out of the tentes, and suffre rebuke with him: t for here haue we no contynuynge cite, but we seke one to come.
$Let vs therfore by him offre allwayes vnto God the sacrifice of prayse: that is to saye, the frute of those hppes which confesse his name. To do good and to destribute forget not, lfor with soch sacrifices God is pleased. Obey them that haue the ouer- sighte off you, and submytte youre selues vnto them: for they watch for youre soules, euen as they that must geue accoptes therfore, that they maye do it with ioye, and not with grefe: for that is an vnprofitable thinge for

* Exo. 29. b. Num. 19. a. Leuit. 4. c. t Ioh. 19. b. 
¢ Phil. 3. c. $ Psal. 91. a. || Phil. 4. c. 

Chap. I. 

He exhorteth to reioyse in trouble, to be feruent in prayer with stedfast belene, to loke for all good thinges from aboue, to forsake all vyce : and thankfully to receaue the worde of God, not onely hearynge it and speakynee of it, but to do therafter iu dede. True religion or de- uocion what it is.

Chap. II 

He forbyddeth to haue eny respecte of personnes, but to regarde the poore as wel as the ryche, to be louynge and mercifull, and not to boast of faith where no dedes are: for it is but a deed faith, where no good workes folowe not.

Chay. III. 
What good and euell commeth thorow the 

Che Epistle of 3. James. 

you. Praye for vs. We haue confidence, because we haue a good cdscience in all thinges, and desyre to lyue honestly. But I desyre you ¥ more abundauntly, that ye so do, y l maye be restored vnto you the more quyckly.

The God of peace (that broughte agayne fro the deed oure LORDE Iesus the * greate shepherde of the shepe thorow the bloude of the euerlastinge Testament) make you per- fecte in all good workes, to do his wyll, workynge in you that which is pleasaunt in his sighte thorow lesus Christ, to whom be prayse for euer and euer Amen. I beseke you brethren, suffre the worde of exhortacion, for I haue wrytten vnto you in few wordes.
Knowe oure brother Timotheus, whom we haue sent from vs, with whom (yf he come shortly) I wil se you. Salute the that haue the ouersighte of you and all ¥ sayntes. The brethren of Italy salute you. Grace be with you all, Amen.

Sent from Italy by Timotheus. 
T Eze. 34. b. Ioh. 10. a. 1 Pet. 5. a. 

The Eptstle of S. James. 

The summe of this epistle, 

tonge. The dutye of soch as be lerned. The difference betwixte the wyszdome of the gospell and the wyszdome of the worlde.

Chap. III. 

Warre and fightinge commeth of volupteousnesse. 
The frendishipe of the worlde is enemyte be- fore God. An exhortacion to flye slaunder and the vanite of this life.

Chap. V. 
He threateneth the wicked rych mé, exhorteth 

vnto pacience, to bewarre of swearynge, one to| 

knowlege his fautes to another, one to praye for another, and one to laboure to brynge another to the trueth.

Fo. erro. 

Dn 

Fo. elbi 

| Che frst Chapter. 
A TAMES the seruaunt of God and of the 
I LORDE Iesus Christ, sendeth gretinge to the xij. trybes which are *scatered here q there. My brethren, counte it exceadyuge ioye whé ye fall in to diuers temptacions, for as moche as ye knowe, how y the t tryinge of youre faith bringeth pacience: and let pa- cience haue her parfeet worke, y ye maye be parfecte and sounde, lakinge nothinge. —

+ Yf eny of you laeke wyszdome, let him axe of God, which geueth to all men indifferentlie, and casteth no man in the teth: and it shal be geué him. But let him axe in faith and wauer not. Forhe that douteth, is lyke the wawes of
Y See, tost of the wynde, and caried with vio- 
Tice. Nether let y man thinke that he shal receaue eny thige of $ LORDE. A wauer- ynge mynded ma ys vnstable in all his waies.

Let the brother of lowe degre reioyce, in y he is exalted: and the rich, in y he is made lowe. For eué as the floure of ¥ grasse shal he vanyshe awaye. ‘The Sonne ryseth with

Pod 

falleth awaye, and the beautie of the fassion of it periszheth : euen so shal the ryehe man perisshe with his abundaunee.

“Happy is the man that endureth in tépta- eion, for when he is tryed, he shal receaue the erowne of life, which the LORDE hath promised to them that loue him.

Let no man saye when he is tempted, y he is tempted of God. For God tepteth not vnto euell, nether tépteth he eny man. But euery mà is tepted, drawne awaye, a entysed of his awne cdcupiseéce. Thé whé lust hath conceaued, she bringeth forth synne, q synne when it is fynished, bringeth forth deeth.

Erre not my deare brethre. $ Euery good gifte, t euery parfait gift, is from aboue, and jeometh downe from y father of light, with whom is no variablenes, nether is he chaunged vnto darcknes. || Of his awne will begat he vs with the worde of life, that we shulde be the fyrst frutes of his creatures.

* Wherfore deare brethren, let euery man be swifte to heare, slowe to speake, and slowe to wrath. For the wrath of mà worketh not that which is righteous before God.

Wherfore laye aparte all fylthines, all superfluite of maliciousnes, q receaue with

| * Act. 8. a t Ro. 5. a. 1 Pet. Il. b. Zach. 13. b. 
| t Pro. 2.a 2 jI)8 fox. [s $ Pro. 2. a. || Ioh. 1, a. 
3. d. 1 Pro. 17. d. Eccl. 5. b. 

The Epistle of S. James. 

heat and the grasse wydereth, q his floure|, 

** Rom. 2. b. 

meknes ¥ worde y is grafted in you, which is, able to saue youre soules. **And se that ye be doers of ¥ worde « not hearers only, de- ceauinge youre awne selues. tt For yf eny heare the worde, and do it not, he is like vnto a mà that beholdeth his bodily faee in a glasse.
For assone as he hath loked on himselfe, he goeth his waye, and forgetteth immediatly what his faszhion was. #4 But who so loketh in y perfect lawe of libertie, and continueth therin
(yt he be not a forgetfull hearer, but a doar of the worke) the same shalbe happie in his dede.

Yf eny man amonge you seme deuoute, ¢ refrayne not his tóge: but deceaue his awne herte, this mannes deuocion is in vayne.
Pure deuocion and vndefiled before God the father, is this: to visit the frendlesse and widdowes in their aduersite, and to kepe him selfe vnspotted of the $$worlde.

The ij. Chapter. 

RETHREN, haue not the faith of oure 
LORDE Iesus Christ ý LORDE of glory in ll respecte of persons. Yf ther come in to youre copany a ma with a goldé rynge and in goodly aparell, t ther come in also a poore man in vyle rayméet, q ye haue a re- specte to him y weareth the gaye clothinge a saye vnto hi: Sit thou here 1 a good place, ¢ saye vnto ý poore, stonde thou there or sit here vnder my fote stole: are ye not parciall in youre selues, and haue iudged after euyll thoughtes?

Harken my deare beloued brethré. 141 Hath not God chosen the poore of this worlde, which are ryehe in faith, and heyres of the kyngdom which he promysed to the that loue him? But ye haue despised the poore. Are not the rych they which oppresse you: q they which drawe you before iudges? Do not they speake euell of that good name after which ye be named.

Yf ye fulfill the royall lawe acordinge to the scripture whieh saith: ’Thou shalt loue thyne neghbour as thy selfe, ye do well. But yf ye regarde one person more then another, ye comit synne, and are rebuked of the lawe as trasgressours. *** Whosoeuer shal kepe the whole lawe, and yet fayle in one poynt, he is gyltie in all. For he that sayde: Thou shalt not commit adulterie, sayed also: thou shalt not kyll. Thongh thou do none adul-

tt Luc.6.e. tt Mat. 5.b. — $$ 1Ioh.2.c. ||| Leu. 
19.b. FY Mat.5.a. ^ ^Leuit. 19, e. — *** Ezec. 18. b. 

Chap. 

i. 

p] 

Chap. uj. 

terie, yet yf thon kill, thou art a transgresser of the lawe. So speake ye, and so do as they that shalbe iudged by the lawe of libertie.
* For ther shalbe iudgement merciles to him that sheweth no mercy, q mercy reioiseth against indgment.

+ What a vayleth it my brethré, though a 

man saye he hath faith, when he hath no dedes? Can faith saue him? t If a brother or a sister be naked or destitute of dayly fode, v one of you saye vnto them: Departe in peace, God sende you warmnes and fode: not withstodinge ye geue them not tho thinges which are nedfull to the body: what helpeth it them? Euen so faith, yf it haue no dedes, is deed in it selfe.
«| Ye ca man might saye: Thou hast faith, 
| [and I haue dedes: Shewe me thy faith by thy dedes: and I wil shewe the my faith by my dedes. Beleuest thou y ther is one God?
Thou doest well § The deuils also beleue and tremble.

Wilt thou vnderstode o thou vayne man that faith with out dedes is deed: Was not
Abraham oure father instified thorow workes when he offered Isaac his sonne vpon the aulter? Thou seist how y faith wrought with
| |his dedes, and through y dedes was the faith made perfect: q the scripture was fulfilled which saith: llAbrahà beleued God and it was reputed vnto him for rightewesnes: and he was called y frende of God. Ye se then how that of dedes a man is iustified, and not of faith only. Likewise also was not Raab the harlot iustified thorow workes, when she receaued the messengers, and sent them out another waye? For as the body, with onte the sprete is deed, euen so faith with out dedes is deed.

The itj. Chapter 

Y brethre, be not euery man a ** master, 
^ remébrynge how that we shall receaue the more damnacion: for in many thinges we synne all. “Yf a man synne not in worde, the same is a parfecte man, q able to tame all the body. Beholde, we put bittes into the horses mouthes y they shulde obeye vs, and we turne aboute all the body. Beholde also ¥ shyppes, which though they be so gret, and are dryuen of fearce windes, yet are they turned about with a very smale helme, whither

tMat.7.c. t1Iloh.3.c. 
|| Gen. 15. b. Rom. 4. b. 

ia 

* Mat, 18. d, 
Marc. 1. c. 

$ Mat. 8. d. q Gal. 3. a.

The Epistle of S. James. 

So. cerloty. 

soeuer the violence of the gouerner wyll. 
Euen so the toge is a lyttell member, and bosteth great thinges.

Beholde how gret a thinge a lyttell fyre kyndleth, and the tonge is fyre, and a worlde of wyckednes. So is the tonge set amonge oure membres, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth a fyre all that we haue of nature, and is it selfe set a fyre euen of hell.

All the natures of beastes, and of byrdes, and of serpentes, and thinges of the see, are meked and tamed of the nature of ma. But the toge can no man tame. Yt is an vnruely euell full of deedly poyson. Therwith blesse we God the father, and therwith cursse we men which tt are made after the similitude of
God. Out of one mouth proceadeth blessynge and enrsynge. My brethré these thinges ought not so to be. Doth a fountayne sende forth at one place swete water and bytter also?
Can the fygge tree, my Drethren, beare oliue beries: ether a vyne beare fygges? So can no fountayne geue bothe salt water and freszhe also. If eny man be wyse and endued with learnynge amonge you, let him shewe the workes of his good conersacion in meknes that is conpled with wiszdome.

But yf ye haue bitter enuyenge and stryfe in youre hertes, reioyce not: nether be lyars agaynst the trueth. This wiszdome descendeth not from aboue: but is erthy, and naturall, and dyuelishe. For where enuyenge and stryfe is, there is vnstablenes and all miner of euell workes. But the wiszdom that is fro aboue, is fyrst pure, thé peasable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good frutes, without iudgynge, and without simu- lacion: yee, and the frute of rightewesnes is sowen in peace, of thé that mayntene peace.

The iiij. Chapter. 

ROM whence commeth warre and fight- 

ynge amonge you: come they not here hence? euen of youre volupteonsnesses that rayne in youre mebres? Ye lust, and haue not. Ye envie and haue indignacion, and can not obtayne. Ye fight q warre, and haue not, because ye axe not. Ye axe q receaue not because ye axe amysse: eué to cosume it vpo youre voluptuousnes. Ye adnouterars, q wemé that breke matrimonie: knowe ye not tt how that the frenshippe of $ worlde is ennimite

KNNTIEIO dA 

? Eccli. 14. a, 19. c. 25. b. fifiloh.2.c. Gal.1.b.

tt Gen. 1. d, 

‘fo. crribiij. to godwarde? Whosoeuer wilbe a frende of the worlde, is made ¥ eneinie of god. Ether do ye thinke y the scripture sayth in vayne.
The *sprete y dwelleth in you, lusteth euen contrary to enuie: but geueth more grace. |

Submit youre selues to God, and * resist the deuell, q he wil flye fro you. Drawe nye to God « he wil drawe nye to you. Clense youre hondes ye synners, and pourge youre

B |hertes ye wauerynge mynded. Suffre afflie- cions: sorowe ye and wepe. Let youre laughter be turned to mornynge, and youre ioye to heuynes. “Cast downe youre selues before the
LORDE, and he shal lift you vp. Dackbyte not one another, brethren. He that back- byteth his brother, and he y iudgeth his bro- ther, backbyteth the lawe, and iudgeth the lawe. But and yf thou iudge the lawe, thou art not an obseruer of the lawe: but a iudge.
There is one lawe geuer, which is able to saue and to distroye. + What art thou that iudgest another man ?

§Go to now ye that saye: to daye ¢ to morow let vs go into soche a citie and con-
‘tinue there a yeare, and bye and sell, and 

wynne: q yet ca not tell what shal happé to 

morowe. For what thinge is youre life? It iis euen a vapoure that apereth for a lytell tyme, and the vanysheth awaye: For that ye ought to say: llyf the LORDE wil, and yf we liue, let vs do this or that. But nowe ye reioyee in youre bostinges. All soche reioysynge is euell Therfore T to him that knoweth how to do good, and doth it not, to him it is synne.

The b. Chapter. 

a OO to now ye riche men. Wepe, and howle on youre wretchednes^ that shal

come vpon you. Youre riches is corrupte, youre garmétes are motheaten. Youre golde qt youre siluer are cancred, q the rust of them shalbe a witnes vnto you, « shal eate youre fleszhe, as it were fyre. Ye haue heaped jtreasure togedder in youre last dayes: ** Be- holde, the hyre of the labourers which haue reped downe youre feldes (which hyer is of you kept backe by fraude) eryeth: and the eryes of the which haue reped, are entred in to the eares of the LORDE Sabaoth. Ye haue lined in pleasure^ on the earth and in

wantanues. Ye haue noryszhed youre hertes, | 
* Gal. 5.c. t1Pet.5.b. ^1 Pet.5.a. f Ro. 14.2.| 
$ Eze. 18. a. Luc. 12. b. || Act. 98. a. Heb. 6.a.| 

T Luc. 12. e. ^ 1 Tim. 6. b. 

The Epistle of 3. James, 

** Leui. 19. c.f 

Chap. b. 

as in a daye of slaughter. Ye haue co- dempned and haue killed the iust, and he hath not resisted you.

Be pacient therfore brethren, vnto the comynge of the LORDE. Beholde, the huszbade man wayteth for the precious frute of y earth, and hath longe pacience there vpon, vntill he receaue the erly and the latter rayne. Be ye also pacient therfore, and settle youre hertes, for the commynge of the
LORDE draweth nye. Grodge not one agaynst another brethren, lest ye be damned.
Beholde, the iudge stondeth before the dore. 
Take (my brethren) the prophetes for an ensample of sufferynge aduersitie, and of longe pacience, which spake in the name of the
LORDE. Beholde we counte them happy which endure. Ye haue hearde ttof $ pa- ciéce of Iob, and haue knowen what E the
LORDE made. For the LORDE is very pitifull and mereifull.

But aboue all thinges my brethre, sweare not, nether by heaué,’ nether by earth, nether by eny other othe. Let youre ye be ye, and youre naye naye: lest ye faule in to ypocricy.
Yfeny of you be euell vexed, let hi praye. 
Yf eny of you be mery, let him singe Psalmes. 
Yf eny be deseased amonge you, let him call for the elders of the congregacion, q let thé praye ouer him, and anoynte him with oyle in the name of the LORDE: and y prayer of faith shal saue the sicke, and the LORDE shal rayse him vp: and yf he haue comitted synnes, they shalbe forgeuen him.

Knowlege youre fautes one to another: and praye one for another, that ye maye be healed. The prayer of a righteous man auayleth moche, yf it be feruét. tt Helias was a mà mortall euen as we are, and he prayed in his prayer, that it might not rayne:
€ it rayned not on the earth by the space of thre yeares and sixe monethes. $$ And he prayed agayne, and y heaué gaue rayne, q y earth brought forth her frute.

Brethren, yf eny of you erre fro the trueth and another conuert him, let y same kuowe that he which conuerted the synner from goynge astraye out off his waye, shal saue a soule fro death, and shal hyde the multitude of synnes.

The ende of the epistle of S. Hames. 

Deut. 24.c. Tob. 4. c. — * Luc. 16.c. tt Iob 1. c. 2. b. 
4 Mat. 5. d. 113 Reg. 17. $$ 3 Reg. 18. 

pS) 

| 

The Bypistle 

The summe of this epistle. 

He rebuketh soch as beynge blynded with their owne lustes, resist the trueth, q that we maye knowe them the better, he sayeth they be soch as synne beastly agaynst nature, and despise rulers tc. He exhorteth vs to edifie one an- other, to praye in the holy goost, to continue in loue, to loke for the comynge of the LORDE, and one to helpe another out of the fyre.

UDAS the seruaunt of lesus Christ, the 

brother off lames. To thé which are called, and sanetified in God the father, and preserued in lesu Christ. Mercy vnto you, and peace and loue be multiplied.

Beloued, when I gaue all diligence to wryte vnto you of the commen saluacion: it was nede- full for me to wryte vnto you, to exhorte you, that ye shulde continually laboure in the faith which was once geué vnto the sayntes. * For there are certayne craftely crept in, of which it was wrytten afore tyme vnto soche iudgement.
They are vngodly, and turne the grace of oure 
| God vnto wantanes, and denye God the onely 
LORDE, and oure LORDE Iesus Christ. 
| My minde is therfore to put you in remē- bratice, for as moche as ye once knowe this, how that y LORDE (after that he had de- liuered the people out of Egipt) destroyed them which afterwarde beleued not." tThe angels also which kept not their first estate: but lefte their awne habitacion, he hath re- serued in euerlastinge chaynes vnder darck- nes vnto the indgement of the greate daye: euen as f Sodom and Gomor, and the cities aboute them (which in lyke maner defiled them selues with fornicacion and folowed straunge fleszhe) are set forth for an ensample, and suffre the vengeaunce of eternall fyre. Lykewyse these dremers defyle the fleszhe, despyse rulers, and speake euell of them that are in auctorite.

$Yet Michael the archangell when he stroue agaynst the deuell, q disputed aboute the body of Moses, durst not geue raylinge sentence, but sayde: the LORDE rebuke the. | But these speake euell off those thinges which they knowe not: and what thinges they knowe naturally, as beastes which are

*9 Pet.2.a. * Nu, 14. d. 
ł Gen. 19.c. $ Zach. 3. a. 

t Iob 4. b. Apo. 20. a. 
|| 2 Pe.2. c. * Gen. 4. a. 

of S. Jude. 

without reason, in tho thinges they corrupte them selues. ’Wo be vnto thé, for they haue folowed the waye of Cain, and are vtterly geué to the erroure of Balaam for lukers sake, and peryszhe in the treason of Core.

These are spottes which of youre kindnes|€ 

feast togedder, without feare, fedynge thé selues. “Cloudes they are withouten water, caried about of wyndes, and trees without frute at gadringe tyme, twyse deed and plucked vp by the rotes. They are the ragynge waues of the see, fominge out their awne shame.
They are wandrynge starres, to who is re- serued the myst of darcknes for euer.

‘ Enoch the seuenth from Adam prophe- cied before of suche, saienge: Beholde, the
LORDE shal come vith thousandes of sayntes, to geue iudgemét agaynst all men, and to rebuke all that are vngodly amonge thé, of all their vngodly dedes, which they haue vngodly committed, and of all their cruell speakynges, s vngodly synners haue spoken agaynst

im. 
These are murmurers, complaners, walk- ynge after their awne lustes, whose mouthes
|speake proude thynges. ‘They haue mé in greate reuerence because of avauntage. But ye beloued, reméber the wordes which were spoken before of the Apostles of oure LORDE Iesus
Christ, how that they tolde you y their shulde be begylers in the last tyme,” which shulde walke alter their awne vngodly lustes. ‘These are makers off sectes fleshlie, hauynge no sprete.

But ye derlye beloued, edifye youre selues in youre most: holy faith, prayenge in the holy goost, and kepe youre selues in the loue of
God, lokiuge for the mercy of oure LORDE 
Tesus Christ, vnto eternall life. cópassion on some, separatinge the: and other saue with feare, pullinge them ont of the fyre, and hate the fylthy vesture of the fleshe.

Vnto him that 1s able to kepe you, that ye 

faule uot, and to present you fautlesse before’ 

y presence of his glory with ioye, y is to save, to God oure saueoure which only is wyse, be glory, maiestie, dominion, q power, now and for euer. Amen.

Nu. 24. a. 
Esaad. 

Num. 16. * 9 Pet. 2, d. 

{T Apoc. 1. a. d ) Tim. 4.a. 2 Tim. 3.a.

2 Pet. 3. a. | 

And haue| ` 

D 

| 

The Apocalips 

or vcuclacion of S. Sjbon. 

The summe of the Reuelacion. 

Chap. I. 

Happie are they that heare the worde of God and kepe it. He wryteth to the seuen con- gregacios in Asia, seyth seue candilstickes, and in the myddest of them, one like vnto the sonne of man.

Chap. II. 

He exhorteth foure congregacions to amende, and sheweth the rewarde of him that ouer- commeth.

Chap. III. 

He instructeth and enfourmeth the angels of thre cogregacions, declaringe also the rewarde of him that ouercommeth.

Chap. HII. 

He seyth the heauen open, and the seate and 

one syttinge vpon it, and xxiiij. seates aboute it with xxiiij. elders syttinge vpon thé, and foure beastes praysinge God daye and night.

Chap. V. 

He seyth the labe openynge the boke, and therfore the foure beastes, the xxiiij. elders and the angels prayse the lambe and do him worshipe

Chap. VI. 
The lambe openeth the vi. seales, t many thinges folowe the openynge therof.

Chap. VII. 
He seyth the seruauntes of God sealed in their foreheades out of all nacions and people: which though they suffre trouble, yet the lambe fedeth the, ledeth them to the fountaynes of lyuynge water, and God shal wype awaye all

j teares from their eyes. 

Chap. VIII. 
The seuenth seale is opened, there is sylence in heauen: the foure angels blowe their trom- pettes, and greate plages folowe vpon the earth.

Chap. IX. 

The fifth and sixte angell blowe their trompettes ; the starre falleth from heauen: the locustes come out of the smoke: The first wo is past : the foure angels that were bounde are lowsed, and the thirde parte of me is kylled.

Chap. X. 
The angell hath the boke open, he sweareth there 

shalbe nomore tyme : he geueth the boke vnto 
Ihon, which eateth it vp. 

Chap. XI. 
The temple is measured, The seconde wo is past. 

Chap. XII. 

The seuenth angel bloweth his tropet: There apeareth in heauen a woman clothed with the
Sonne: Michael fighteth with the dragon, which persecuteth the woman.

Chap. XIII. 

À beest ryseth out of the see with seuen heades and ten hornes. Another beest commeth ont of the earth with two hornes.

Chap. XIII. 

The labe stondeth vpon the mount Sion, and the vndefyled congregacion with him: The angell exhorteth to the feare of God and telleth of the fall of Babilon.

Chap. XV. 
He seyth seuen angels, hauynge seuen vyalles 

full of wrath. 

The Reuelacion of S. Jhon., 

Chap. XVI. 
The angels poure out their vyalles. 

Chap. XVII. 
He descrybeth the woman syttinge vpon the beast with ten hornes.

Chap. XVIII. 
The louers of the worlde are sory for the fall off 
Babilon, but they that be off God, haue cause to reioyse for hir destruccion

Chap. XIX. 

Prayse and thankes are geue vnto God for iudginge the whore, and for auenginge the bloude of his seruaütes. The angel wyl not be worshipped. The foules and byrdes are called to the slaughter.

The first Chapter. 

HE reuelacion of lesus Christ, which 

God gaue vnto him, for to shewe vnto his seruaütes thiges which muste shortly come to passe. And he sent and shewed by his angel vnto his seruaunt Ihon *which bare recorde of the worde of God, and of the testi- mony of lesus Christe, and of all thinges that he sawe. Happy is he y readeth, and they that heare the wordes of the prophesy and kepe thoo thinges which are wrytten therin.
For the tyme is at honde. 

Ihon to the seuen cOgregacions in Asia. 
Grace be with you q peace, fro him which is and which was, and which is to come, q fro the seuen spretes which are present before his trone, and from Jesus Christ which is a faith- full witnes, and first begotten of the deed: q
LORDE ouer y kinges of the earth. Vnto him that loued vs and weszhed vs fró synnes in his awne tbloud, and made vs kinges q
Prestes vnto God his father, be glory, and dominion for euer more. Amen. Beholde, he commeth with cloudes, and all eyes shall se him: $q they also which peersed him. And all kinredes of the earth shal wayle. Euen so. Amen. J am Alpha and Omega, the be- gynninge and the endinge, lsayeth y LORDE almighty, which is and which was and which is to come.

* Joh. 19, d.^and 21, d. 

1 Cor. 15. c. Heh. 9. b, 
$ Zach.12. c. Ioh. 19. d. 

t Apo. 22.a. t Col.1. b. 
1Pet.1.c. 1 Toh. 1. h. 
|| Esa. 44. b. Apo. 22. c. 

Chap. XX. 

The dragon is boüde for a thousande yeares. 
The deed arise, and receaue iudgment, 

Chap. XXI. 

In this chapter is descrybed the new and spi- rituall Ierusalem.

Chap. XXII. 

The ryuer of the water of life, the frutefulnesse and light of the cite of God. The LORDE geueth euer his seruauntes warnynge of thinges for to come: The angel wyl not be wor- shipped. To the worde of God maye nothinge be added ner mynished there from.

I Ihon youre brother and cōpanyon in tribulacion, and in the kyngdome and paciéce which is in lesu Christe, was in the yle ot
Pathmos for the worde of God, and for y witnessynge of lesu Christe. 1 was in the sprete on a sondaye, and herde behynde me, a gret voyce, as it had bene of a trompe, sayenge: I am Alpha and Omega, the fyrst and $laste. That thou seist, write in a boke, and sende it vnto the cogregaeions which are in
Asia, vnto Ephesus and vnto Smyrna, and vnto 
Pargamos, and vnto Thiatira, and vnto Sardis, and vnto Philadelphia, and vnto Laodicia.

And I turned backe to se the voyce that spake to me. And whé I was turned: I sawe seué goldé candelstyckes, and in the myddes of the candelstyckes," one like vnto the sonne of man clothed with a lynnin garmét downe to the ground, and gyrd aboute the brest with a golden gyrdle. His heed, and his heares were whyte, as whyte woll, q as snowe: Tand his eyes were as a flamme of fyre: and his fete like vnto brasse, as though they brét in a fornace: and his voyce as the sounde of many waters. And he had in his right honde seue starres. ** And out of his mouth went a sharpe two edged swearde. And his +t face shone euen as the sonne in his strength,

And when I sawe him, I fell at his fete, euen as deed. And he layde his right honde

vpon me, sayenge vnto me: feare not. lam a Dan. 7. b. 10. a. T Apo. 2. c. 19. c.

** Apo. 19, c. tt Mat. 17. a.

fo. cli, 

n 

(ffo. celi. 

the fyrst, and the laste, and am alyue, and | 

was deed. And beholde, I am alyue for euer more *and haue the kayes of hell a of deth.
Wryte therfore the thinges which thou hast sene, and the thinges which are, and ý thinges which shalbe fulfylled here after: q the mistery of the seuen starres which thon sawest 1n my right honde, and the scuen golden candel- stickes. The seuen starres are the angels of the seué congregacions: And the senen can- delstyckes which thou sawest, are the seuen congregacions.

The ij. Chapter. 

NTO the angell of the congregacion of 
Ephesus wryte: These thinges sayth he that holdeth the seuen starres in his right honde, and walketh in the myddes of the senen goldé candelstickes: I knowe thy workes, and thy labour, and thy pacience, q howe thou cannest not forbeare them which are euell : and examinest them whieh saye they are
Apostles, and are not: a hast founde the lyars and hast suffred. And hast paciéce: and for my names sake hast laboured and hast not faynted. Neuerthelesse I haue somwhat agaynst the, for thou hast lefte thy fyrst loue.
Remember therfore fro whence thon art fallen, and repent, and do the fyrst workes. * Or elles
1 wyl come vnto the shortly, and wil remoue thy cádelstycke out of his place, excepte thou repent. But this thou hast because thou hatest § dedes of the t Nicolaitans, which dedes i also hate. Let him y hath eares, heare, what y sprete saith vnto the congrega- cions. To him that ouercommeth, will I
§gene to eate of the tree of life, which is in 

the myddes of y paradise of God. 

And vnto the angell of the congregacion of 
Smyrna wryte: These thinges saith he that lis fyrst, and the last, which was deed, and is aliue: 1 knowe thy workes and tribulacion and pouerte, but thou art ryche: And I knowe the blasphemy of them which call them selues lewes and are not: but are the cogregacion of Sathan. Feare none of tho thinges which thou shalt soffre. Beholde, y deuell shal cast of you in to preson, to tempte you, and ye shal haue tribulacion x. dayes. Be faithfull vnto the deeth, and I wil geue y a erowne of

life. Let him that hath ears, heare, what 
* Eaa. 22. d. Iob 12.b. Apoc. 3. b. t Luc. 13. a. fAct 6.8. $Gen. 2. b. — || Esa. 41. a. T Heb. 4. c.

Che Reurlacwn of 3». jhon. 

J 

Chap. i. the sprete saith to the congregacions: He that oner cometh, shal not be hurte of the seconde deeth.

And to the angell of the congregacion in 
Pergamos wryte: This sayth he which 4 hath the sharpe swearde with two edges: I knowe thy workes, and where thou dwellest, euen where Sathans seat is, and thou kepest my name, q hast not denyed my faith. And in my dayes Antipas was a faithfull witnes of myne, which was slayne amonge you, where
Sathan dwelleth. But I haue a fewe thinges agaynst the: that thou hast there, the that mayntayne the doctryne of ** Balaam, which taught in Balak, to put occasion of syn before the children of Israell, that they shulde eate of meate dedicat vnto ydoles, and to commyt fornicacion. Enen so hast thou them that mayntayne y doctryne of the Nicolaytans, which thinge I hate. But be conerted, or elles I wil come vnto the shortly, and wil fight agaynste thé with the swearde of my mouth.
Let him y hath eares, heare, what the sprete saith vnto the cégregacions: To him that ouercommeth, wil I geue to eate mana that is hyd, and wil geue him a whyte stone, q in the stone a newe name wrytté, which no man knoweth, sauinge he that receaueth it.

And vnto the angell of the cógregacion of 
Theatira write: This saith the sonne of God, 
‘which hath his eyes lyke vnto a flame of fyre, whose fete are like brasse: I knowe thy workes and thy loue, seruice, and faith and thy pacience, and thy dedes, which are mo at the last then at the firste. Not withstondinge
I haue a feawe thinges agaynst the, that thou sufferest that woman tt lesabell (which called her selfe a prophetisse) to teache and to deceaue my sernauntes, to make them com- mitt fornieacion, and to eate meates offered vp vnto ydoles. And I gaue her space to repét of her fornicacion, and she repented not.
Beholde, I wil cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornicacion with her, in to gret aduersite, excepte they turne from their dedes.
And I wil kyll her childré with deeth. And all the cogregacids shal knowe, y I am he which searcheth the reynes and hertes. And I wil geue vnto euery one of you acordynge vnto youre workes.

Vnto you I saye, and vnto other of thé of 

** Num. 25. a. and 31. c. a Apo, 1. c. 19. c. tt 3 Re. 

16.d. 4 Re, 9.e. 

Chap. (itj. 
Thiatyra, as many as haue uot this lernynge and which haue not knowen the depnes of
Sathan (as they saye) I wil put vpo you none other burthen, but y which ye haue already.
Holde fast tyll I come, and whosoeuer ouer- cometh and kepeth my workes vnto y ende, to him wil I geue power ouer nacions, "and he shal rule them with a rodde of yron: and as the vessels of a potter, shal he breake them to sheuers. Eué as I receaued of my father, so wil I geue him y mornynge starre. Let him y hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth to the cégregacions.

The iij. Chapter. 

ND wryte vnto the angell of the congre- gacion off Sardis: this sayth he that hath the seuen spretes of God, q the seuen starres. 1 knowe thy workes, thou hast a name that thou lyuest, and thou art deed.
Be awake, and strength the thinges which remayne, that are redy to dye. For I haue not founde thy workes perfecte before God.
Remember therfore how thou hast receaued and hearde, and holde fast, and repent. Yf thou shalt not watche, ^I wil come on the asa thefe, and thou shalt not knowe what houre I wil come vpon y. Thou hast a fewe names in
Sardis, which haue not defyled their gar- mentes: and they shal walke with me in whyte, for they are worthy. He that ouer- commeth, shalbe clothed in whyte araye, and
I wil not put out his name out of the boke ot life, *and 1 wil cofesse his name before my father, and before his angels. Let him y hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth vnto

the congregacions. 
And wryte vnto y augell of the cogregació of Philadelphia: this sayth he y is holy and true, which hath the keye of Dt which

topenyth and noman shutteth, and shutteth 

and no man openeth. I knowe thy workes. 
Beholde, I haue set before the an open doore, and no man can shut it, for thou hast a lyttell strength and hast not denyed my name.
Beholde, I shal geue some of the congrega- cion of Sathan, which call them selues Iewes and are not, but do lye: Beholde: I wil make them, that they shal come q worshippe before thy fete: and shal knowe that 1 haue loued the.

^ Mat. 24. d. 1 Tess. 5. a. t Esa. 22. d. Tob 12. b.

a Psal. 2, b. Apoc. 19. c. 
2 Pet. 3. b. SU aes TUIS e 

The Reuclacion of &. Jhon. 

Fo. relig. 

Because thou hast kept the wordes of my pacience, therfore wil I kepe the from the houre of temptacion, which will come vpon
‘all the worlde, to tempte them that dwell vpo ithe earth. Beholde, I come shortly. Holde that which thou hast, that no ma take awaye thy crowne. Him that ouer commeth, will I make a pyllar in the temple of my God, and he shal goo no more out.

And I will wryte vpou him, the name of my God, and the name of y cite of my God, newe lerusalem, which cometh downe out of heauen from my God, and I will wryte vpo him my newe name. Let him that hath eares, heare, what the sprete saith vnto the congregacions.

And vnto the angell of the cóogregacion, which is in Laodicia wryte: This sayth Amen the faithfull and true witnes, the begynnynge of ¥ creatures of God. I knowe thy workes, y uo art nether colde nor hot: I wolde thou were colde or hote. So then because thou art bitwene bothe, and nether colde ner hote
I wyll spew the out off my mouth: because thou saist thou art riche and ineresyd with goodes and hast nede of nothinge, and knowest not how thou art wretched q miserable, poore, blynde, and nakyd. me golde tryed in the fyre, that thou mayste be riche: and whyte rayment, that thou mayste be clothed, that thy fylthy nakednes do not apere: anoynt thine eyes with eye salue, y thou mayste se.

tAs many as I loue, I rebuke q chasten. 
Be feruent therfore and repent. Beholde, I stonde at the doore q knocke. Yf eny man heare my voyce and open the dore, I wil come in vnto him and will suppe with him, q he with me. ‘To him that ouer cómth, will I graüte$ to sytt with me on my seate, eue as
I ouer cam and haue sytté with my father on his seate. Let him that hath eares, heare, what the sprete saith vnto the cogregacios.

The (ij. Chapter. 

FTER this I loked, and beholde, a dore 

was open in heaué, and the fyrste voyce which I harde, was as it were of a trompet talkinge with me, which sayde: come vp hydder, and I wil shewe the thinges which must be fulfylled her after. And immediatly
ł Pro.1.b. Heb. 4. a. 

Apo. 1.d. § Luc. 22. b. 

161 

I counsell the to bye of|33 

So, citt. 
I was in the sprete: q beholde, aseate was set in heauen, and one sat on the seate. And he that sat, was to loke vpon like vnto a iaspar stone, and a sardyne stone: And there was a rayne bowe aboute the seate, in syght like to a smaragde. * And aboute the seate were xxiilj. seates. And vpon the seates xxi. elders syttinge clothed in whyte rayment, and had on their heades crownes of golde.

And out of ¥ seate proceded lightnynges, and thundrynges, q voyces, and there wer senen lapes of fyre, burninge before the seate, which are the seuen spretes of God. And before the seate there was a see of glasse like vnto crystall, and in the mydes off the seate, and rounde abonte the seate, were foure beastes full of eyes before and behynde. And the first beest was like a lion, the seconde beest like a calfe, and the thyrde beest had a face as a man and the fourth beest was like a flyenge egle. And the foure beestes had eche one off them vj. wynges aboute him, and they were full of eyes with in. And they had no rest daye nether night, sayenge: t holy, holy, holy, is the LORDE God almyghty, which was, and is, and 1s to come.

And when those beestes gaue glory and honour and thankes to him that sat on the seate, which lyueth for euer and euer: y xxiiij. elders fell downe before him that sat on the trone, and worshipped him y lyueth for euer, and cast their crounes before y trone, sayenge: thon art worthy LORDE to receaue glory, and honour, and power, for thou hast created all thinges, and for thy willes sake they are, and were created.

The b. Chapter. 

ND I sawe in the righte hode of him, tthat sat in the trone, a boke wrytten with in q on the backside, sealed with seué seales. And I sawe a stroge angell preach- inge with a londe voyce: Who is worthy to open the boke, and to loose the seales therof?
And no mà in heaue ner in earth, nether vnder y earth, was ahle to ope y boke, nether to loke thereon. And I wepte moch, because no man was founde worthy to open and to

rede the boke, nether to loke thereon. 
And one of the elders sayde vnto me: wepe not: $ Beholde, the lyon which is off

* Dan. 7. b. Apo. 20. b. 

t Esa. 6. a. 1 Mat 
§ Esa. 49. b. Esa. 31. b. 1 

^T. b. 
| Heb. 9. b. 1Pet. 1. c. 

The Reuclarion of ©. Jhon. 

Chap. b. 

the trybe of Iuda, y rote of Dauid, hath obtayned to ope the boke, and to lowse the seuc seales therof. And I behelde, q lo, in the myddes of the seate, and of y foure beastes, and in the myddes of $ elders, stode a lambe as though he had bene kylled, which had seuen hornes and seué eyes, which are the seué spretes of God, sent in to all the worlde. And he came and toke the boke out of the right hode of him that sat vpon the seate.

And when he had taken the hoke, the foure beestes and the xxiiij. elders fell downe before the lambe, hauinge harpes and golden vialles full of odoures (which are y prayers of the sayntes) and they songea newe songe saynge: thou art worthy to take the boke q to ope the seales therof: for thou |lwast kylled, and hast redemed vs hy thy bloud, ont of all kynreddes, and toges, and people, and nacions, .¢ hast made vs vnto oure God, kynges and prestes, and we shal raygne on y earth.

f And I behelde, and I herd the voyce of many angilles aboute the trone, and aboute the beestes and y elders, and I herde thou- sand thousandes, sayenge with a loude voyce :
Worthy is the lambe that was killed, to re- ceaue power, and riches q wiszdome, and strength, and honoure and glory, and bless- ynge. And all creatures, which are in heané, a on the earth, q vnder the earth, q in the see, q all y are in thé, herd I sayenge: bless- inge, honoure, glory, ¢ power, be vnto him, y sytteth vpo the seate, and vnto the labe for enermore. And the foure beestes saide: Ame.
And y xxiiij. elders fell vpon their faces, and worshipped him that lyueth for euermore.

The or. Chapter. 

ND I sawe when the labe opened one of 

the seales, q I herde one of the foure beestes saye, as it wer the noyse off thonder: come and se. And I sawe, and beholde
**there was a whyte horsse, and he y sat on him had a bowe, and a crowne was geuen vnto him, and he went forth conquerynge and for to ouercome. And whé he opened the seconde seale, I herde the seconde beeste saye: come and se. And there went out another horsse that was reed, q power was geuen to him that sat there on, to take peace

** Zach. 1. b. 

1 Ioh. t. b. Apo. 1. a. {T Dan.7. b. 

and 6. a, 

Chap, bij. 

from the earth, and that they shulde kyll one another. And there was geué vnto him a gret swearde.

And when he opened the thyrde seale, I herde the thyrde beeste saye: come qse. And
I behelde, and lo, a blacke horsse: and he that sate on him, had a payre of balances in his honde. And I herde a voyce in the myddes of the foure beastes saye: a measnre of whete for a peny, and thre measures of barly for a peny: and oyle and wyne se thou hurte not.

And when he opened the fourth seale, I herde the voyce of the fourthe beaste saye : come and se. And I loked, and beholde a pale horsse, and his name that sat on him was deeth, and hell folowed after him, q power was geué vnto them ouer the fourthe parte of the earth, to kyll with swearde, and with honger, and with deeth, of the vermen of the earth.

And when he opened the fyfte seale, I sawe vnder the aultre, the soules of them y were kylled for the worde of God, and for y testimony which they had, and they cryed with a lowde voyce sayége: How loge tariest thou *LORDE holy and true, to iudge q to auenge oure bloude on them that dwell on the earth? And longe whyte garmentes were geuen vnto euery one of them. + And it was sayde vnto them, that they shulde reste for a lyttle season, vntyll the nomber of their m and brethre, and of them that shulde be killed as they were, were fulfilled.

C| And I behelde when he opened the sixte 

seale, and loo, there was a grett earthquake, and $ sonne was as blacke as sacke cloth made of heare. And the mone wexed eue as bloude: and the starres of heauen fell vnto the earth, euen as a fygge tree castith from her her fygges, when she is shaken off a mighty wynde. And heauen vanyszhed awaye, as a scroll when it is rolled togedder. And all mountayns and yles, were moued out of their places. t And the kynges of y earth, and the grete men, and the riche men, and the chefe captaynes, and the myghte men, and euery free man, hyd them selues in dennes, and in rockes of y hylles, “and sayde to the hylles, and rockes: fall on vs, and hyde vs from the presence of him that sytteth on the seate, and from the wrath of the lambe, for the

grete daye of his wrath is come. And who ean endure it?
* 4 Esd. 15. b. Dan. 12. b. + Esa. 96. c. ¢ Esa. 2. c. 

Che Reurlarion of 2. Fhon. 

Ho. rrib. 

The bij. Chapter. 

ND after that sawe I foure angels 

stode on ý foure corners of the earth, holdinge ý foure wyndes of y earth, y $ wyndes shulde not blowe on ¥ earth, nether on y see, nether on eny tree. And I sawe another angel ascende fro the rysinge of the sonne: which had the seale of ¥ lyuinge God and he cryed with a loude voyce to the foure angelles (to whom power was geuen to hurt the earth and the see) sayenge: $ Hurt not the earth nether the see, nether the trees, till we haue sealed the seruaütes of oure God in their forheddes.

And I herde the nombre of them which|33 

were sealed, and there were sealed an c. and xliiij. M. of all the trybes of the children of
Israell. Of y trybe of luda were sealed xij. 
M. Of the trybe of Ruben were sealed xij. 
M. Ofthe trybe of Gad were sealed xij. M. 
Of the trybe of Asser were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Neptalym were sealed xij. M.
Of y trybe of Manasses were sealed xij. M. 
Of the trybe of Symeon were sealed xij. M. 
Of the trybe of Leui were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Isacar were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Zabulon were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Ioseph were sealed xij. M. Of the trybe of Beniamin were sealed xij. thousande.

| After this I behelde, and lo, a gret mul- titude (which no man coulde nombre) of all nacions and people, and tonges, stode before the seate, and before the lambe, clothed with longe whyte garmétes, and palmes in their hondes, and eryed with a loude voyce, sayenge: saluacion be asscribed to him y sytteth vpon the seate of oure God, and vnto the lambe.
And all the angels stode in the compase of| the seate, and of the elders and of the foure beastes, and fell before y seat on their faces, and worshipped God, sayenge, Amen: Bless- ynge and glory, wiszdome and thanks and honour, and power and might, be vnto oure
God for euermore Amen. 

And one of the elders answered, sayenge vnto me: what are these which are arayed in longe whyte garmétes, and whence cam they ?
And I sayde vnto him: LORDE thou wotest. 
And he sayde vnto me: these are they which cam out of gret tribulacion and made their garmentes large, and made thé whyte in the

a Apo. 9. b. 

$ Apo. 9. a. || 4 Esd. 2. f. 

€ | Wormwod. 

jo. celbi. 

bloude of the lambe: therfore are they in the presence of the seate of God, and serue him daye and night in his temple, and he that sytteth in the seate, wyll dwell amonge them.
They shal honger *no more, nether thyrst, nether shal the sonne lyght on them, nether eny heate: For the labe which is in the myddes of the seate, shal fede them, and shal leade them vnto fountaynes of lyuynge water, tand God shal wype awaye all teares from their eyes.

The biij. Chapter. 
ND when he had opened the senenth seale, there was siléce in heauen aboute the space of halfe an houre. And I sawe seué angels stondinge before God, and to them were geuen seuen trompettes. And another angell eam and stode before the aultre, hauynge a golden senser, and moch of odoures was geuen vnto him, that he shulde offre of the prayers of all sayntes vpon the golden anltre, which was before the seate.
^ And the smoke of the odoures which came of the prayers of all sayntes, ascended vppe
‘before God out of the angelles honde. And the angell toke the senser, and fylled it with fyre of the aultre, and caste it into the earth, and voyces were made, and thodrynges and lightuynges, and earthquake.
33| And the seuen angels which had the seuen trompettes, prepared them selues to blowe.
The first angel blewe, and there was made hayle and fyre, which were myngled with bloud, q they were cast in to the earth: and the thyrd parte of trees was burnt, and all grene grasse was brent. And the seconde angell blewe: and as it were a greate moun- tayne burnynge with fyre was cast in to the see, and the thyrde parte of the see turned to blond, and the thyrde parte of the creatures which had life, dyed, and the thyrde part of shippes were destroyed.
And the thyrde angell blewe, and there fell a greate starre from heauen, burnynge as it were a lampe, and it fell in to the thyrde parte of the ryuers, and in to fountaynes of waters, and the name of the starre is called
And the thyrde parte of the waters was turned to Wormwod. And many men dyed of the waters, because they were made bytter. And the fourth angel blew, and

* Esa. 49. c. 

t Esa.25. b. Apoc. 21.a. 

4 Psa. 140. c. 

The Aeuclacion of S. Jhon. 

Chap. biij. the thyrde parte of ý Sonne was smytten, and y thyrde parte of the mone, q the thyrde parte of starres: so that the thyrde parte of them was darckned. And the daye was smytte, that the thyrde parte of it shulde not shyne, and lyke wyse the nyght. And I be- helde, and herde an angel flyenge thorowe the myddes of heaué, and sayege with a lowde voyce: Wo, wo, wo to the inhabiters of the earth, because of the voyces to come of the trompe of the thre angels which were yet to blowe.

The iy. Chapter. 

ND the fyfte angell blewe, q I sawe a 

starre fall from heaué vnto ¥ earth. And to him was geué the kaye of the bottomlesse pytt. And he opened the bottomlesse pytt, and there arose the ^smoke of a greate fornace.
And the sunne and $ ayer were darkned by the reason of the smoke of the pytt. And there came out of the smoke locustes vpon the earth: and vnto thé was geuen power as the scorpions of the earth haue power. And it was sayde vnto them, that they shulde not hurt the grasse of the earth:^ nether eny grene thinge: nether eny tre: but onely those men which haue not the seale in their for- hedes, and to them was comaunded, that they shulde not kyll thé, but that they shulde be vexed fyue monethes, and their payne was as the payne that cometh of a scorpion, when he hath stonge a man. And in those dayes shal mē seke deeth, and shal not fynde it: "and shal desyre to dye, and death shal flye from them.

And the similitude of the locustes was lyke vnto horses prepared vnto battayll and on their heades were as it were crownes, lyke vnto golde: and their faces were as it had bene the faces of men. And they had heere as the heere of wemen. And their tethe were as the tethe of lyons. And they had habber- gions, as it were habbergions of yron. And the sounde of their wynges, was as y sounde of charettes whe many horsses runne together to battayle. And they had tayles lyke vnto scorpions, and there were stynges in their tayles. And their power was to hurt me fyue monethes. And they had a kinge ouer them, which is the angel of the bottomlesse pyt, whose name in the hebrew tonge, is Abadon :
5 Zach. 9. b. 

* Apoc. 7. a. 4 Osee 10. b. Apoc. 6. c. 

Chap. ri. but in the greke tonge, Apollion. One wo is past, and beholde two woes come yet after this.

€| And the sixte angel blewe, and I herde a voyce from the fonre corners of the golden aultre which is before God, sayenge to the sixte angel, which had the trompe: Lowse the foure angels, which are bounde in the greate ryner Eufrates. And y foure angels were lowsed, which were prepared for an houre, for a daye, for a moneth, and for a yeare, for to slee the thyrde parte of men.
And the nombre of horsmen of warre, were twenty tymes x M. And I herde y nombre of them. And thus I sawe the horses in a vision, and them that sat on the hauynge fyry habbergions of a yalowe and brymstony coloure, and the heades of ¥ horses werre as

B the heades of lyons. And ont of their mouthes went forth fyre, and smoke, and brymstone.
And of these thre was the thirde parte of men kylled: that is tosaye, of fyre, smoke, and brym- stone: which proceded out of the mouthes of thé: For their power was in their mouthes and in their tayles: for their tayles were like vnto serpetes, and had heades, and with thé they dyd hurt: And the remnaunt of the me which were not kylled by these plages, repéted not of the dedes of their hondes, y they shulde not worshippe deuels, and ymages of golde, and syluer, and brasse, q stone, and of wod, which nether can se, nether heare, nether go.
Also they repented not of their murthur, and of their witchcraft, nether of their whordome, nether of their thefte.

The r. Chapter. 

a ND I sawe another mightye angell come donne fro heauen, clothed with a cloude, and the rayne bowe vpon his heed. And his face as it were y Sonne, and his fete as it were pyllars of fyre: and he had in his honde a lytell boke opyn: and he pnt his right fote vpon y see, and his lifte fote on y earth.
And eryed with a lowde voyce, as when a lyon roreth. And when he had eryed, seué thondres spake their voyces. And when the seué thodres had spoke their voyces, I was abonte to wryte. And I herde a voyce from heauen sayenge vnto me: seale vp those thinges which the seuen thondres spake, and

wryte them not. 
“And the angel which I sawe stonde vpo 

e Dan, 12. b. 

* 4 Esd. 14. e. ? Eze. 40. 41. 42, 43. 

The Veuelacion of >. Jhou. 

Fo. rribij.! 

the see, and vpon the earth, lifte vppe his honde to heauen, and swore by him that lineth for enermore, which created heanen, and the thinges that there in are, and y see, and the thinges which are therin: that there shalbe nomore tyme: but in the dayes of the voyce of the seuéth angel, when he shal be- gynne to blowe, the mistery of God shalbe fyniszhed, as he preached by his seruauntes the prophetes.

And the voyce which I herde from heane, |3 spake vnto me agayne, and sayde: go and take the lytle boke which is open in the honde of the angel, which stondeth vpo the see, and vpon the earth. And I went vnto the angel, and sayde vnto him: geue me the lytle boke. And he sayde vnto me: * Take it, and eate it vp, and 1t shal make thy belly bytter, but it shalbe in thy month as swete as hony. And I toke the lytle boke out of his honde, and ate it vp, and it was in my mouth as swete as hony, and as sone as I had eaten it, my belly was bytter. And he sayde vnto me: thou muste prophesy agayne vnto the people, and to the Heythen, and tonges, and to many kynges.

The zt. Chapter. 
ND there was geuen me a rede lyke|à vnto a rodd, and it was sayde vnto me:
^Ryse and mete the téple of God, and the aultre, and them that worshippe therin: and the quyre which is within the temple, cast out, and mete it not: for it is genen vnto the
Gentyles, and y holy cite shal they treade vnderfote xlijj monethes. And I wil gene power vnto my two wytnesses, and they shal prophesy M. ij. c. and lx. dayes clothed in sacke cloth. “These are two olyue trees, and two candelstyckes, stondinge before the God of the earth.

And yf eny man wil hurt them, fyre shal procede out of their mouthes, and consume their enemyes. And yf eny mā wil hurt thé, | this wyse muste he be kylled. These haue power to shut heauen, that it rayne not in the dayes of their prophesyinge: and hane power ouer waters, to turne them to bloud, and to smyte the earth with all maner plages, as often as they will.

And when they haue fyniszhed their testi- mony, the beest that cam out of the bottom-

| 

¢ Zach. 4. a. 

Fo. ctibiij. lesse pytt, shal “make warre agaynst thé, and shal oner come them, and kyll thé. And their bodies shal lye in the stretes of the greate cite, which spiritually is called zodom and Egypte, where oure LORDE is crucified.
And some of the people and kynredes, and tonges, t of the nacids, shal se their bodies, thre dayes, and an halfe, and shal not suffre their bodies to be put in graues. And they that dwell vpó the earth, shal reioyce ouer them and be glad, and shal send giftes one to another: for these two prophetes vexed them that dwelt on the earth.

* And after thre dayes and an halfe the sprete of life from God, entred in to them.
And they stode vp vpon their fete: q tgreate feare came vpon them which sawe them.
And they herde a greate voyce from heaué, sayenge vnto them: Come vp hidder. And they ascended vp in to heané in a cloude, and their enemyes sawe the. And the same houre was there a greate earthquake, a the tenth parte of the cite fell, and in the earth- quake were slayne names of men seuen M. and the remnaunt were feared, and gaue glory to
God of heauen. ‘The seconde wo is past, and beholde, the thyrd wo wyl come anone.

The rij. Chapter. 

ND the seuenth angel blewe, and ther were made greate voyces in heauen, sayege: the kyngdoms of this worlde are oure LORDES and his Christes, and he shal reigne for enermore. And the foure and twentye Elders, which sat before God on their seatts, fell vpon their faces, and worshipped
God sayenge: we geue the thankes LORDE 
God allmyghte: which art and wast, and art to come, for thou hast receaued thy greate might, and hast raygned. And the Heythen were angry, q thy wrath is come, and the tyme of the deed that they shulde be iudged, and that thou shuldest geue rewarde vnto thy seruautes the prophettes and saynctes, and to thé that feare thy name, small q greate: and shuldest destroye them which destroye the earth. And the temple of God was opened in heauen, and there was sene in his temple the arcke of his testament: and there folowed lightnynges, and voyees, and thondrynges and

earth quake, and a greate hayle. 

p] 

* IDEs 362. loy, 
Dan. 11. f. 

* Dan. 7. d. Apoc. 13. b. t Dan. 11. f. 

t Apo. 12. d. 

The Reuelacion of S, Jhon. 

Chap. rij. 

And there appeared a greate token in heauen. A woman clothed with the Sonne, and the mone vnder her fete, and vpon her heed a crowne of twolne starres. And she was with ehilde, and eryed trauaillinge in byrth, and payned redy to be delyuered. And there appeared another token in heauen, and beholde a greate reed dragon, hauinge seuen heades, and ten hornes and seué crownes vpo his heades: and his tayle drue the thyrde parte of the starres, and east them to the earth.

And the dragon stode before the woma, which was ready to be delyuered: for to de- voure ner childe as sone as it were borne.
And she brought forth a man childe, which shulde rule all nacions with a rod of yron.
And her sonne was taken vp vnto God, and to his seate. tAnd the woman fled in to wyldernes, where she had a place prepared off
God, that they shulde fede her there a M. ij. 
C. and lx. dayes. 

And there was a greate batayll in heaué. 
Miehael and his angels foughte with the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, and preuayled not, nether was their place founde eny more in heauen. And the greate dragon that olde serpent (called the deuell and Sathanas) was cast out. Which disceaued all the worlde. ? And he was cast in to the earth, and his angelles were cast out with him also.

And I harde a lowde voyce, which sayde in heauen: Now is saluacion, and strength and the kyngdome become oure Gods, and ¥ power his Christes: For he is cast downe, which accused them before God daye and night. And they onercame him by the bloude of the lambe, and by the worde of their testi- mony, and they loued not their lynes vnto the deeth. ‘Therfore reioyce ye heauens, and ye that dwell in them. Wo to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the see: for the deuell is come downe vnto you, which hath greate wrath, because he knoweth, that he hath but a short tyme.

And when the dragon sawe, that he was cast vnto the earth, he persecuted the woman, which brought forth the man childe. And to the woman were geué two wynges of a greate egle $that she might flye in to the wylder- ues, in to her place, where she is noryszhed

^ Esa. 14, b. Luc. 10. b. 

$ Apoc. 12. c. 

Chap. riiij. for a tyme, two tymes, and halffe a tyme,” from the presence of the serpét. And the dragon cast out of his mouth water after the woma, as it had bene a ryuer, that he might cause her to be caught of y floud. And the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed vp the ryuer which the dragon east out of his mouth. And the dragon was wroth with the woma: and went and made warre with the remnaunt of hyr sede, which kepe the comaundementes of
God, and haue the testimony of Iesus Christ. 
And I stode on the see sonde. 

The viij. Chapter. 

ND I sawe a beest rise out of the see, 

hauinge seuen heades, and x. hornes, and vpon his hornes x. crownes, and vpo his heed, the names of blasphemy. *And the beest which I sawe was lyke a catt of the mountayne, and his fete were as the fete of a bear, ^and his mouth as the mouthe of a lyon.
And y drago gane him his power and his seate, and greate auctorite ; and I sawe one of his heades as it were wounded to death, and his dedly wounde was healed. — And all the worlde wodred at the beest, and they wor- shipped the dragon which gaue power vnto the beest, and they worshipped the beest, sayenge: who is like vnto the beest? who is able to warre with him?

And there was geuen vnto him a mouth to speake greate thinges q blasphemies, and power was geuen vnto him, to do xlij. monethes.
And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemy agaynst God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle and them that dwell in heauen.
* And it was geuen vnto him to make warre with the sayntes, and to ouercome them.
And power was geuen him ouer all kynred, tonge, and nacion: fand all that dwell vpon the earth worshipt him: whose names are not wrytten in the boke of life of the lambe, which was kylled from the beginnynge of the worlde.
Yf eny man haue an eare, let him heare. He that leadeth in to ecaptiuite, shal go in to captiuite: tHe that killeth with a swearde, must be killed with y swearde, § Heare is the pacience, and the faith of the saynctes.

And I behelde another beest commynge vp out of the earth, and he had two hornes

* Dan. 7. b. 
11, b. 

> Apa. 17. c. 
1 Dan. 11. f. 

* Dan. 7. a. 
$ Gen. 9.a. 

* Apac. 
Mat. 26. e. 

The Reuelacion of S. Jhon. 

Fo. reli. 

like a lambe, and he spake as dyd the drago. 
And he dyd all that the first beest coulde do in his presence, and he caused the earth, and them which dwell therin, to worshippe the fyrst beest, whose deedly woüde was healed.
And he dyd greate wonders, so that he made fyre come downe from heané in the sight ot men, And deceaued them that dwelt on the earth by y meanes of those signes which he had power to do in the sight of the beest, sayenge to them that dwelt on the earth: that they shulde make an ymage vnto the beest, which had the wounde of a swearde and dyd liue.

And he had power to geue a sprete vnto the ymage of the beest, and that the ymage of the beest shulde speake, and shulde cause, that as many as wolde not worshippe the ymage of the beest, shulde be kylled. Aad he made all bothe smale and greate, ryche and poore, fre and bond, to receaue a marke in their right hondes, or in their forheades.
And that no man might by or sell, saue he y had ¥ marke, or the name of the beest, ether the nombre of his name. Here is wiszdome.
Let him that hath wyt, count the nombre of the beest. For it 1s the nombre of a man, and his nombre is sixe hondred, thre score and sixe.

The riiij. Chapter. 

ND I loked, and lo, a lambe stode on 

the moüt Syon, and with him, C. and xlii thousande hauynge his fathers name wrytten in their forheades. And I herde a voyce from heauen, as the sounde of many waters, and as the voyce of a greate thondre.
And the voyce that I herde, was as the harpers that playe vpon their harpers. And they songe as it were a newe songe, before the seate, q before y foure beestes, and the elders, and no man coulde learne y songe, but the hondred and xlij M. which were redemed from the earth. ‘These are they, which were not defyled with wemen, for they are virgyns.
These folowe the lambe whither soeuer he goeth. l'Fhese were redemed from men, beynge the fyrst frutes vnto God and to the lambe, and in their mouthes was founde no

gyle. For they are with outé spot before the| - trone of God.
§ Apo. 14. c. || 1Cor.e c. Apo.5. b. 

So. cir. E 
B| And I sawe an angell flye in the myddes of heauen hauinge an cuerlastinge Gospell, to preache vnto them that syt and dwell on the earth, and to all nacions, kinreddes, and toges and people, sayége with a lowde voyce:
Feare God, and geue honour to him, for the houre of his iudgement is come : and worshippe him *that made heauen and earth, and the see, and the fountaynes off water. And there folowed another angell, sayenge: ^ She is fallen, she is fallen: eué Babilon that greate cite, for she made all nacions drynke off the wyne off hyr whordome.

And the thyrde angel folowed thé, sayenge with a loude voyce: Yf eny man worshippe the beest and his ymage, and receaue his marke in his forhed, or on his honde, the same shall drynke of the wyne of the wrath of
God, which is powred in the cuppe of his wrath. And he shalbe punyszhed in fyre and brymstone, before the holy Angels, and before the lambe.

* And the smoke of their torment ascendeth vp euermore, And they haue no rest daye ner nyght, which worshippe the beast and his n and whosoeuer receaueth the prynt of his name. {Here is the pacience of sayntes.
Heare are they that kepe the commaunde- mentes and the faith off lesu.

And I herde a voyce from heauen, sayenge vnto me: wryte: Blessed are y deed, which here after dye in the LORDE. Yee the sprete sayeth, that they rest from their la- boures, for their workes folowe them. And I loked and beholde, a whyte cloude, and vpo
Y cloude one syttynge like vnto the sonne of man, hauinge on his heed a golden erowne, and in his hode a sharpesykle. Andanother angell eame out of the temple, eryenge with a londe voyce to him' that sat on the cloude: tThruste in thy sycle and reepe: for the tyme is come to reepe, for the corne of the earth is rype. And he that sat on $ cloude thrust in his sykle on the earth, and the earth was reeped.

And another angell came out of the temple, which is in heauen, hauinge also a sharpe sykle, And another angel came out from the anltre, which had power oner fyre, and. eryed with a londe erye vnto hym that had the sharpe syekle, and sayde: "Phruste in thy

* Psal. 145, a. c. 

* Esa.21. b. Hie. 51. b. Apo. 18. a. 
^ Apo. 9. a. 19. a. 

tApo.13.b. fIoel3. b. Mat. 13. c. 

The Reuclacion of S. Shon. 

Isharpe syckle, and gather the clusters of ý 
‘earth, for hir grapes are rype. And the Eg 
[thrust in his syckle on the erthe, and cut downe the grapes of the vynyarde of the earth, and cast them in to the greate wynefat of ý wrath of God: q the wynefat was trodden without the cite, and bloude eame out of the fat, enen vnto the horsse brydles by the space of a thousande and sixe hundreth furlonges.

The yb. Chapter. 

ND I sawe another signe in heuen grett 
A a mervellous, vii. angells havinge the seven laste plages, for in thé is fulfylled the wrath of god. And I sawe as it were a glassye see, mingled with fyre, and them that had gotten victory of the beest, and of his ymage, and of his marke, and of the nombre of his name, stonde on the glassye see, hau- inge ý harpes of God: and they songe the songe of Moses the seruaunt of God, and the songe of the lambe, saynge: Greate and maruellous are thy workes LORDE God almyghty, iust and true are thy wayes, thou kynge of sayntes. § Who shal not feare the
O LORDE and gloryfie thy name? For thou only art holy, for all gétiles shall come and worshippe before the, for thy iudgmentes are made manyfest.

And after that, I loked, and beholde, the temple of the Tabernacle of testimony was open in heauen, and the seuen angelles came out of the temple, which had the seuen plages, clothed in pure and bryght lynné, and hauynge their brestes gyrded with golden gerdelles.
And one of the foure beestes gaue vnto the seuen angelles seuen golden vialles, full of the wrath of God which liueth for euermore. |
And the temple was full of smoke for the glory off God, and for his power, and no man was able to entre in to the temple, tyll the seuen plages of the seué angels were fulfilled.

The roi. Chapter. 

ND I herde a greate voyee out of the 
N temple, sayenge to the seuen angels: go youre wayes, poure out youre vialles of wrath vpon the earth. And the fyrst went, and poured out his viall vpon the earth, and there fell a noysom q a’ sore botch vpon the men which had the marke of the beest, and

§ Tere. 10. a. || Eze. 44. a. 

Chap. rb. 

a 

Chap. rbi. 

vpon them that worshipped his ymage. And the seconde angel shed ont his viall vpo the see, and it turned as it were in to the bloud of a deed man: and euery lyuinge thinge dyed in the see, And the thyrde angel shed out his vyall vpon the ryuers and fountaynes of waters, and they turned to bloude. And
I herde an angel saye: LORDE which art 

and wast, thou art righteous and holy, because 

thou hast geuc soche iudgmentes, for they shed the bloude of sayntes, and prophetes, and therfore hast thou geuen them bloude to drynke: for they are worthy. And I herde another angell out of the aulter, saye: euen so LORDE God almighty, true and righteous are thy iudgmentes.

And the fourth angell poured out his viall on the Sonne, and power was geuen vnto him to vexe men with heate of fyre. And the men raged in gret heate, and spake euell of the name of God, which had power ouer those plages, and they repented not, to gene him glory. And the fifte angell poured out his vyall vpon the seate of the beest, and his kyngdome wexed derke, and they gnewe their tonges for sorowe, and blasphemed the God of heaué for sorowe, and payne of their sores, and repented not of their dedes.

€| And the sixte angell poured out his vyall 

vpon the gret ryuer Euphrates, and the water dryed vp, that the waye of the kynges of the
Easte shulde be prepared. And I sawe thre vncleane spretes like frogges come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out off the mouth off the beest, and out off the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spretes of deuels workynge myracles, to go out vnto the kynges of the earth and of the whole worlde, to gaddre them to the battayle of that gret daye of God allmighty. * Beholde, I come asathefe. Happy is he that watcheth and kepeth his garmentes, lest he be founde naked, and men se his filthynes. And he gaddered them togedder in to a place, called in the hebrne tonge, Armagedon.

And the seuenth angell poured out his viall in to the ayre. And there came a greate voyce out of heauen from the seate, sayenge:
It is done. And there folowed voyces, thon- dringes, and lightnynges, and there was a gret earthquake, soch as was not sence me were vpon the earth, so myghty an earth-

* Mat. 24. d. Luc. 12. c. 1 Tess. 5. a. 2 Pet. 3. b. 

The Reuelacion of 3. Jobn. 

he muste continue a space. 

quake and so greate. And the greate cite was deuyded in to thre parties. And the cities of nacions fell. And greate Babilon came in remembraunce before God, to geue vnto hyr the cuppe of wyne of the fearcenes of his wrath. And euery yle fled awaye, and the monntaynes were not founde. And there fell a greate hayle, as it had bene talentes, out of heaué vpon the men, and the men blasphemed God, because of the plage of the hayle, for it was greate, and the plage of it sore. `
The rbij. Chapter. 

ND there cam one of the seué angels, 

which had the seuen vialles, and talked with me, sayenge vnto me: Come, I wil shewe the the iudgment of the, greate whore, that sytteth vpon many waters, with whom the kynges of the earth haue commytted whor- dome, and the inhabiters of the earth are dronken with the wyne of her fornicacion.
And he caryed me awaye into the wildernes in Y sprete. And I sawe a woman syt vpon arose colored beest, full of names of blas- phemie, which had seué heades q ten hornes.
And y woman was arayed in purple and rose color, and decked with golde, precions stone, and pearles, and had a cupp of golde in her honde, full of abhominacions, and fylthines of her wordome. And in her forhed was a name wrytte, a mistery: greate Babilon the mother of whordome, and abominacios of the earth.
And I sawe the wyfe dronke with the bloude of sayntes, and with the bloud of the wit- nesses of lesu. And when I sawe her, I wondred with greate mervayle.

And the angell sayde vnto me: wherfore meruayllest thou? I wyl shewe the the mis- tery of the woman, and of the beest that beerith her, whieh hath seuen heades, and ten hornes. The beest that thou seest, was, and is not, and shall ascende out of the bot- tomlesse pytt, and shal go in to perdicion, and they that dwell on the earth shal wondre
(whose names are not wrytten in the boke of life from the begynnynge of the worlde) when they beholde the beest that was, and is not.
And here is a mynde, that hath wiszdome. 

The seuen heades are seuen mountanes, on which the woman sytteth: they are also seuen kynges. Fyue are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come. When he commeth,
And the beest 

162 

Fo. reri 

€ 

I #fo. eclry. 

that was, and is not, is eué the eyght, and is of the seuen, and shal go in to destruccion.
* And ¥ ten hornes which thou sawest, are ten kynges, which haue not yet receaued the

kyngdome, but shal receaue power as kynges, 

at one houre with $ beest. ‘These haue one mynde, and shal geue their power and strégth vnto $ heeste. These shal fyght with the lambe, and the libe shal ouercome them:
For he is t LORDE of all lordes, and kinge of all kinges: and they that are on his syde, are called, and chosen and faithfull.

And he saide vnto me: The + waters which thou sawest, where ¥ whore sytteth, are people, and folke, and nacions, and tonges. And the ten hornes, which thou sawest vpon the beest, are they that shal hate the whore, and shal make her desolate, and naked, and shall eate hir fleszhe, and burne her with fyre., For
God hath put in their hertes, to fulfill his wyll, and to do with one consent, for to geue hir kyngdome vnto the beest, vntill the wordes of God be fulfylled. And the woma which thou sawest, is that greate cite, which raigneth ouer the kynges of the earth.

The roiij. Chapter. 

ND after that I sawe another angel 
A come downe fro heaué, hauinge greate power, and y earth was lyghtned with his bryghtnes. And he cryed mightely with a stronge voyce, sayenge:$ She is fallen, she is fallen, euen greate Babilon, and is become the habitacion of deuels, and $ holde of all fowle spretes, and a cage of all vncleane and hatefull bvrdes: for all nacios haue dronken of the wyne of the wrath of her whordome.
And the kynges of the earth haue committed fornicacion with her, and her marchauntes are wexed ryche of the abundaunce of her pleasures.

And l herde another voyce from heauen saye: lleome awaye from her my people, that ye be not partakers of her synnes, lest ye receaue of her plages. For her synnes are gone vp to heauen, and the LORDE hath remembred her wyckednes. Rewarde her euen as she rewarded you, and gene her dubble acordinge to her workes. And poure in dubble to her in the same cuppe, which she fylled vnto you. And as moche as she

* Dan. 7. b. Apo. 13. a. 

t 1 Tim. 6. Apoc. 19. 
? Esa. 8. b. § Esa. 21, b, 

Tere. 51.b. Apo. 14. b. 

The Reuclarion of S. Jhon. 

Chap. roii, 
!gloryfied her selfe and lyued wantanly, so moch poure ye in for her of punyszhmét, and sorowe, for she sayeth in her herte: TI syt beinge a quene, and am no wyddowe, and shall se no sorowe. ‘Therfore shal her plages come at one daye, death, and sorowe, and honger, and she shalbe brét with fyre: for stronge is the LORDE God which shal iudge her.

And the kynges of the earth shal bewepe her and wayle ouer her, which haue committed fornicacion and lyued wantanly with her, when they shal se the smoke of her burnynge, and shal stonde a farre of for feare of her punyszh- ment, sayenge: Alas, Alas, that greate cite
Babylon, that mighty cite: For at one houre is thy iudgment come. And the marchauntes off the earth shall wepe and wayle in them selues, because no man will bye their ware eny more, the ware of golde, and syluer, and of precious stones, off pearle, q sylke, and purple, and skarlet, q all Thynen wod, and all manner vessels of yuery, and all manner vessels of most precious wod, aud of brasse, and of yron, q synomom and odours, and oyntmentes, and frankynsence, and wyne, and oyle, and fyne floure, and wheate, and catell, and shepe, and horses, and charrettes, and bodies and soules of men.

And the apples that thy soule lusted after, are departed from the. And all thinges which were deyntie, and had in pryce, are departed from the, and thou shalt fynde them no more. The marchauntes of these thinges which were wexed ryche by her, shall stonde afarre of for feare of the punyszhment of her, wepynge and waylinge, and sayenge: alas alas, “that greate cite, that was clothed in sylke, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with golde, and precious stone, and pearles: for at one houre so greate ryches is come to naught.

And euery shippe gouerner, and all they that occupie shippes, and shippmen which worke in the see, stode a farre of, and cryed, when they sawe the smoke of her burnynge, and sayde: what cite is like vnto this greate cite? And they cast dust on their heades, and eryed wepynge, and waylinge, and sayde:
Alas, Alas the greate cite, wherin were made ryche all that had shippes in the see, by the reason of her wares: for at one houre is she made desolate.

f| Esa. 47.a. Dan.8.d. 2 Tess. 1. b. a Tere. 51. b.

|i Gen. 19. c. 

Chap. rtr. 

£| Reioyce ouer her thou heaué, and ye holy 

Apostles, and prophetes: for*God hath geuen youre iudgmét on her. And a mighty angell toke vp a greate stone lyke a mylstone, and cast it in to the see, sayenge: with suche violéce shal that greate cite Babylon be cast, and shalbe founde nomore. And the voyce of harpers, and musicions, and of pypers, and trompetters, shalbe herde no more in the: and no eraftes man (of what soeuer craft he be) shalbe founde eny more in the: and the sounde of a myll shalbe herde no more in the:* and the voyce of the brydegrome and of the bryde, shalbe herde nomore in the for thy marchauntes were prynces of the earth.
And with thyne inchantment were deceaued all nacions: and in her was founde the bloude of the prophetes, and of the sayntes, and of all that were slayne vpo the earth.

The rir. Chapter. 

ND after that, I herde the voyce of moch 
A people in heauen, sayenge: Alleluia. 
Saluacion and glory and honour, and power be ascribed to the LOR DE oure God, for true and righteous are his indgmentes, because he hath iudged the greate whore (which did corrupt y earth with her fornicacion) and hath auenged the bloud of his seruaiites of her hond. And agayne they sayde: Alleluia. “And smoke rose vp for euermore. And y xxiiij: elders, athe foure beestes fell downe, and worshipped
God that sat on the seate, sayenge: Amen: 
Alleluia. And a voice came out of the seate, sayenge; prayse oure LORDE God all ye that are his seruaütes, q ye that feare him both small and greate.

And I herde the voyce of moch people, eué as y voyce of many waters, t as y voyce of stronge thondrynges, sayenge: Alleluia, for God omnipotent raigneth. Let vs be glad and reioyce, and gene honour to him: for the mariage of the labe is come, and his wife made her selfe ready. And to her was graunted, that she shulde be arayed with pure and goodly sylke. (As for the sylke, it is the rightewesnes of sayntes.) And he sayde vnto me: t Dlessed are they which are called vnto the Lambes supper. And he sayde vnto me:

* Tere. 16. 25. * Apo. 9. c. 14. c. + Luc. 14. a. fÀct.10.c.14. c. Apo.29.c. S Apo.1.c.2.c. || Esa.
63. a. T Apoc. 1. c. ** Psal. 2, b. tt Dan. 12. a. 

The Reuelacton of 3. Jhon, 

these are the true sayenges of God. And 
I fell at his fete, to worshippe him. And he sayde vnto me: tSe thou do it not. For
I am thy felowe seruaunt, and one of thy brethren, and of them that haue the testimony of lesus. Worshippe God. For the testimony of lesus is y sprete of prophesy. And I sawe heaue open, q beholde, a whyte horsse and he y sat vpon him, was called faithfull and true, t in rightewesnes dyd iudge and make battayle.
His eyes $ were as a flame of fyre, and on his heade were many crounes: q he had a name wrytten, that noman knewe but him selfe.
| And he was clothed with a vesture dipt in blonde, and his name is called, Y worde of
God. And y warriers which were in heauen, folowed him vpon whyte horsses, clothed with whyte and pure sylke and Tout of his mouthe wente a sharppe swerde, that with it he shulde smyte the Heithen: **And he shall rule them with a rodde of yron, and he trode the wyne- fatte of the feareenesse and wrath of all- mightye God. And hath on his vesture and on his thyghe a name wrytten: tt Kynge of all kinges, and LORDE of all lordes.

And I sawe an angell stonde in the Sonne, and he eryed with a lowde voyce, sayenge to all the fowles that flye by the myddes vuder the heauen : Come and gaddre youre selues togedder vnto the supper of the gret God, that ye maye eate the tt fleszhe of kynges, and of hye captaynes, and the fleszhe of mighty men, and the fleszhe of horsses, and of the that syt on them, and the fleszhe of all free men and bond men, both of small and greate. And I sawe the beeste and the kynges of y earth, and their warriers gaddred togedder, to make battayle agaynste him that sat vpon the horsse, and agaynst his sowdiers.

And the beeste was taken, and with him that false prophet that wrought myracles be- fore him, with which he disceaued them that receaued th. beestes marke, and them that worszhipped his ymage. $$ These both were cast in to a ponde of fyre burnynge with brymstone: and the remnaunte were slayne with the lll swearde of him that sat vpon the horsse, which swearde proceded out of his mouth, and all the foules were filled with their fleszhe.

1 Tim. 6. Apo. 17. c. tt Ezec. 39. d. 

$$ Dan. 7. b. 
Apo. 20. c. Mat. 25. d. 

Ji] Heb. 4. c. 

Fo. erii. 

ES] 

! ffo. celu. 

| The rr. Chapter. 
4| A ND I sawe an angell come downe from 
AN heauen, hauinge the keye of the bottom- lesse pyt, and a gret chayne in his honde.
“And he toke the dragon that olde serpent 
(which is the deuell and Satanas) and he bounde him a thousand yeares: and cast him in to the bottomlesse pyt, and he bounde him, and set a seale on him, that he shuld disceaue the people nomoare, tyll the thousand yeares
Mese fulfilled. And after that muste he be 
| |lowsed for a littell season. 
3| tAnd I sawe seates, and they sat vpon them, and the iudgement was geuen vnto them: and
I sawe the soules of them that were beheaded for the witnes of lesu, and for the worde of
God: which had not worshipped the beest, nether his ymage, nether had taken his marke
|vpon their forheades, or on their hondes: and ithey lyued, and raygned with Christ a thou-
[sand yeare: but the other of the deed men llyued not agayne, vntill the thousand yeare were fyniszhed. This is that fyrst resurreccion.
' Blessed and holy is he that hath parte in the fyrst resurreccion. On soch hath the seconde deeth no power, but they shalbe the prestes of God and of Christ, and shall raygne with him a thousande yeare.

And when the thousand yeares are expyred, 
Sathan shalbe lowsed out of his preson, and shal go out to deceaue the people which are in the foure quarters of the earth. t Gog and
Magog, to gadder them togedder to batayle, whose nombre is as the sonde off the see: and they went vp on the playne of the earth, and compased the tentes of the sayntes aboute, and the beloued cite. And fyre cam doune from God out of heauen, and deuoured them:
$and the deuell that disceaued them, was cast in to a lake of fyre and brymstone, where the beest and the false prophet were, and shalbe tormented daye and night for euermore.
Ð| And I sawe a gret whyte seate, and him that sat on it, from whose face fled awaye both the earth and heauen, and their place was nomore founde. || And I sawe the deed, both gret and small stonde before God: And the bokes were opened, and another boke was opened, which is (the boke) of life, and the

e 

* Iob 4. b. 2 Pet. 2, b. 
1 Ezec. 5. a. and 39. 
|| Dan. 12. a. TE 

t Dan. 7. b. Apoc. 4 a. 
$Dan.7.a. Apo.19.b. Mat. 25. d. aa. 45, ** Eze. 43. a. tt Esa.

The Reuclacton of S. Jhon. 

Chap. rr. deed were iudged of tho thinges which were wrytten in the bokes accordinge to their dedes: and the see gaue vp her deed, which were in her, and deeth and hell delyuered vp the deed, which were in them: and they were iudged euery man accordynge to his dedes.
And deth and hell were cast in to the lake of fyre. ‘This is that second deeth. And who- soeuer was not founde wrytten in the boke off life, was cast in to the lake of fyre.

The rri. Chapter. 

ND I sawe af newe heauen and a newe earth. For the fyrst heauen, and the fyrst earth were vaniszhed awaye, and there was nomore See. And I Ihon sawe that h cite newe lerusalem come downe from God of heauen, prepared as a bryde garniszhe hyr huszband. And I herde a greate vo: from the seate, sayenge: beholde, the taber- nacle of God ** is with men, and he wil dwell with them. And they shalbe his people, and
God himselfe shalbe with thé, and shalbe their God.tt And God shal wipe awaye all teares from their eyes. And there shalbe nomore deeth, nether sorowe, nether shal there be eny more payne, for y olde thinges are gone. And he that sat vpon the seate, sayde:i* Beholde, I make all thinges newe.
And he sayde vnto me: wryte for these 

wordes are faithfull and true. 

And he sayde vnto me: itis done. I am 
Alpha and Omega, the begynnynge, and the ende. I wil geue to him that is a thyrst of the well of the water of life fre. He that ouercommeth, shal inheret all thinges lll I wil be his God, and heshalbe mysonne. But the fearefull and vnbeleuynge, and the abhomin- able, and murthurers, and whormongers, and sorcerers, and ydolaters, q all lyars, shal haue their parte in the lake, that burneth with fyre and brymstone, which is the seconde death.

And there came vnto me one of the seuen angels, which had the seuen vials full of the seuen last plages: and talked with me, say- enge: come hydder, I wil shewe the the bryde, y labes wyfe. And he caryed me awaye in ¥ sprete to a greate and an hye moutayne, and he shewed me the greate cite, holy ferusale descendinge out of heauen from

23.b. Apo.7.c. 

po. +} 2) Cor. 5. c: $$ Esa. 44. b. 
Apo. 1. b. 22. c. 

ill] Zach. 8. b. Heb. 8. c. 

Chap. rri. The Reuelacton of S. Jhon. So. cclyb. 

God, hauynge the brightnes of God. And her shynynge was lyke vnto a stone most precious, euen a laspar cleare as cristall: q had greate and hye walles, and had twolue gates, and at y gates twolue angels: aud names wrytten, which are the twolue trybes of Israel: on the est parte thre gates, and on the north syde thre gates, and towarde the south thre gates, and from the west thre gates: and the wall of the cite had twolue foundaciós, and in them the names of the lambes twolne Apostles.

* And he that talked with me, had a golden rede to measure the cite with all, and the gates therof, and the wall therof. And the cite was bylt fonre square, and the length was as large as the bredth of it, and he mea- sured the cite with the rede twolue M. fur- longes: and the length and the bredth, and y heyth of it, were equall. And he measured the wall therof, an exliij. cubittes, after y measure of a man, which the angel had. And the buyldinge of the wall of it was;of Iaspar.
And the cite was of pure golde, like vnto cleare glasse: and y foundacios of the walles and of y cite were garnyszhed with all maner of precious stones. The fyrst foundacion was a lasper, the seconde a Saphyre, $ thyrde a
Calcedony, the fourth a Smaragde: the fyft a Sardonix: the sixt a Sardeos: the seuenth a Crysolite, the eyght berall: the nynth a
Topas: the tenth a Crysoprasos: the eleuéth a Iacynete: the twelfte an Amatist.
| And the twolue gates were twolue pearles, and euery gate was of one pearle, and y strete of the cite was pure golde, as a thorowe- shyninge glasse. And I sawe no temple therin. For the LORDE God allmighty and the lambe is the temple of it, and the cite hath no nede of the Sonne, nether of the mone to lyghten it. For the bryghtnes of
God doth light it: and the lambe is the lyght ofit. And $ people which are saued, shal walke in the light of it: and the kynges of the earth shal brynge their glory vnto it. tAnd the gates of it shal not be shut by daye.
For there shalbe no nyght there. And there shal entre in to it none vncleane thinge: nether what soeuer worketh abhominacion: or maketh lyes: but they which are wrytten in the lambes boke of life.

The rrij. Chapter. 

ND he shewed me a pure ryuer of water |A 
A of life clere as cristall: *proceadinge out of the seate of God and of y lambe in the myddes of the strete of it, and of ether syde of the ryuer was there wod of life: which bare twolue maner of frutes: and gaue frute euery moneth: and the leaues of the wodd serued to heale the people with all.

And there shalbe no more cursse, but the seate of God and y labe shalbe in it: and his seruauntes shal serue him: And shal se his face, and his name shalbe in their for heades.
* And there shalbe no night there, and they nede no candle, nether light of the Sonne: for the LORDE God geueth thé light, and they shal reygne for euermore.

And he sayde vnto me: these sayenges are 33 faithfull, and true. And the LORDE God of the holy prophetes sent his angell to shewe vnto his seruauntes, the thinges which muste shortly be fulfylled. Beholde, I come shortly.
$ Happy is he y kepeth y sayége of $ prophes of this boke. 1 "i EDI d po thinges and herde them. And whé I had herde and sene thé, I fell downe to worshippe before the fete of the angell which shewed me these thinges. And he saide vnto me: ll se thou do it not, for I am thy felowe seruaunt and the felowe seruaüt of thy brethren the prophetes, and of them, which kepe the say- enges of this boke. Worshippe God.

And he sayde vnto me: seale not the say-|¢ enges of the prophesy of this boke. For the tyme is at hode. 4 He that doeth euell, let him do euell styll: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy styll: and he that is righteous, let him be more righteous: and he that is holy, let him be more holy. And beholde, I come shortly, and my rewarde with me, to geue euery ma acordinge as his dedes shalbe.
**Iam Alpha and Omega, ¥ beginnynge and the ende: the first x the last. Blessed are they that do his commaundementes, that their power maye be in the tree of life, and maye entre in thorow the gates in to the cite. tt For without are dogges and inchaunters and whormongers, and mortherers, and ydolaters, and whosoener loneth or maketh lesinges.

I Iesus haue sent myne angell, to testifie 

* Zach. 2. a. t Esa. 60. b. i Esa. 60. d. § Apoc. 1. a.

a Eze. 47.3. Zac. 14. b. 

{ Zach. 11. b. ** Apoc. 1. b. tt 1 Cor. 6. b. Gal. 
|| Apoc. 19. 

5.c. Epbe.5.a. 

The Reuelacion of S. Jhon. Chap. rrij. 

| [vnto you these thinges in the cógregacions.| |vnto him the plages that are wrytten in this 
I am the rote and the generacion of Dauid,| |boke. And yf eny man shal mynishe of the and the bright mornynge starre. And thej |wordes of the boke of this prophesy, God shal sprete and the bryde saye: Come. And let| |take.awaye his parte out of the' boke of life, him that heareth, saye also: Come.* And| |and out of the holy citie, and fro tho thinges let him that is a thyrst, come. And let who-| | which are wrytten in this boke. He which soeuer wyll, take of the water of life fre. ' |testifyeth these thinges, sayth: Yee I come
I testifye vnto euery man that heareth the} |quyckly, Amen. Euen so: come LORDE wordes of prophesy of this boke t yf eny man|-|lesu. The grace of oure LORDE Iesu shal adde vnto these thinges, God shal adde|. | Christ be with you all. Amen

| Fo. cclrbi. 

* Esa, 55.a. Ioh. 7. d. Du t Deut. 4. c. 

The ende of tbe neto testament. 

À faute escaped in pryntinge the new Testament. 
In the sixte chapter of S. Mathew, D. 
Seke ye first the kyngdome of heauen: &c. 
Reade. 
Seke ye first the kyngdome of God, &c. 

jPrpnten m the peare of oure LORDE W. D. XXXV. anv tpnishen the fourth pape of October.
