The Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Vol. 1 (George William Cox, 1870)
=====================================================================
Cox's Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Vol. 1. Completes the 2-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

ARYAN MYTHOLOGY

VOL. I.

’ ir-V n i c


\v

,r THE MYTHOLOGY'



THE

ARYAN NATIONS.

for SEP I*

geOege w. cos, m.a. L II\y\

= s j|.vr

IN TWO VOLUMES.

J’OTSfy

(' ' '-i"\ y

Ni z ^n />•!

'V<? '' :'1r /

; k '

LONGMANS, GKEEN, AND CO.

1870.

PEE FACE.

With a deep consciousness of its shortcomings, but
with, a confidence not less deep in the security of the
foundations laid by the Science of Comparative Mytho¬
logy, I submit to the judgment of all whose desire it is
to ascertain the truth of facts hi every field of inquiry
a work on a subject as vast as it is important. The
history, of mythology is, in a sense far beyond that
in which we may apply the words to the later de-
. velopements of religious systems, the' history of the
human mind ; and the analysis which lays bare the
origin and nature of Iranian dualism, and traces the
influence of that dualism on the thought and phi¬
losophy of other lands, must indefinitely affect our
conclusions on many subjects which may not appear to
be directly connected with it.

For myself I confess candidly, and with a feeling of
gratitude which lapse of time certainly has not weak¬
ened, that Professor Max Muller’s Essay on Com¬
parative Mythology first opened to me thirteen years
ago a path through ^, labyrinth which, up to that time,
had seemed as repulsive as it was intricate. I we.ll
remember the feeling of delight awakened by bis
analysis of the myths examined in that essay, of which

PREFACE.

it is but bare justice to say that by it the ground
which it traversed was for the first time effectually
broken for English scholars, and the fact established
that the myths of a nation are as legitimate a subject
for scientific investigation as any other phenomena.
The delight which this investigation has never ceased
to impart is strictly the satisfaction which the astn>
nomer or the geologist feels in the ascertainment of
new facts: and I have written throughout under a con¬
stant sense of the paramount duty of simply and
plainly speaking the truth.

Of one fact, the importance of which if it be well
ascertained can scarcely be exaggerated, I venture to
claim the discovery. I am not aware that the great
writers who have traced the wonderful parallelisms in
the myths of the Aryan world have asserted that the
epic poems of the Aryan nations are simply different
versions of one and the same story, and that this story
has its origin in the phenomena of the natural world,
and the course of the day and the year. This po¬
sition is, ill my belief, established by an amount of
evidence which not long hence will probably be re¬
garded as excessive. At the least I have no fear that
it will fail to carry conviction to all who will weigh the
facts without prejudice or partiality, who will carefully
survey the whole evidence produced before they form
a definite judgment, and who will fairly estimate the
cumulative proof of the fact that the mythology of the
Vedic and Homeric poerts contains* the germs, and in
most instances more than the germs, of almost all the
stories of Teutonic, Scandinavian, and Celtic folk-lore.
This common stock of materials, which supplements the

PREFACE. *°' L $i U

evidence of language for the ultimate affinity of all the
Aryan nations, has been mouldedinto an infinite variety
of shapes by the story-tellers of Greeks and Latins, of
Persians and Englishmen, of the ancient and modern
Hindus, of Germans and Norwegians, Icelanders, Danes,
Frenchmen, and Spaniards. On this common foundation
the epic poets of these scattered and long-separated
•children of one primitive family have raised their mag¬
nificent fabrics or their cumbrous. structures. Nay,
from this ■ common source they have derived even the
most subtle distinctions of feature and character for
. their jrortraits of the actors in the great drama which
in- some one or more of its many scenes is the theme
of all Aryan national poetry.

Momentous as this conclusion must be, it is one
which seems to me to be strictly involved in the facts
registered by all comparative mythologists; and while
I wish to claim for myself no more than the honesty
which refuses to adopt the statements of others without
testing their accuracy, I rnajr feel a legitimate con¬
fidence'in the assurance that in all important points I
am supported by the authority of such writers as
Grimm, Max Muller, Br4al, Kuhn, Preller, Welcker,

H. H. Wilson, Cornewall Lewis, Grote, and Thirlwall.

If in the task of establishing the physical origin of
Aryan myths the same facts have,been in some in¬
stances adduced more than once, I must plead not
merely the necessity of the case, but the reiterated
assertions of winters who seem to regard the pro¬
clamation of their views as of itself conclusive. The
broad statement, for example, that Hermes is primarily
and strictly a god of commerce, and of the subtlety and

PREFACE.

Vlll I

trickery which commerce is on this hypothesis sagpastid
to require, makes it necessary at every step, and at idle
cost of repetitions which would otherwise be needless,
to point out the true character of this divine harper.

In the wide field of inquiry on which I have entered
in these volumes, I need scarcely say that I have very
much more to learn, and that I shall receive with
gratitude the suggestions of those who may wish to aid
me in the task. Many portions of the subject are at
present little more than sketched out: and of these I
hope that I may be enabled to supply the details here¬
after. The evidence thus far examined justifies the
assurance that these details will not affect the main
conclusions already arrived at.

Some of the pages in the First Book have appeared
in articles contributed by me to the ‘ Edinburgh,’ the
‘ Fortnightly,’ and the ‘ Saturday ’ Reviews ; and I have
to thank the editors for the permission to make use of
them.

The Greek names in this work are given as nearly as
possible in their Greek forms. On this point I need
only say that Mr. Gladstone, who, standing even then
almost alone, retained in his earlier work on ‘ Homer
and the Homeric Age ’ their Latin equivalents, has in his
‘ Juventus Mundi’ adopted the method which may now
be regarded as universally accepted.

I have retained the word Aryan as a name, for the
tribes or races akin to Greeks and Teutons in Europe
and in Asia. Objections have,, been lately urged
against its use, on the ground that only Hindus and
Persians spoke of themselves as Aryas : and the tracing
of this name to Ireland Mr. Peile regards as very un-

PREFACE.

certain. To him the word appears also to mean not
‘ ploughmen,’ hut ‘ fitting, worthy, noble.’ If it be so,
the title becomes the more suitable as a designation for
the peoples who .certainly have never called themselves
Indo-Germanic.

But however sure may be the foundations of the
science of Comparative Mythology, and however sound
its framework, the measure in which its . conclusions
are received must depend largely on the accept¬
ance or rejection of its method in the philological
works chiefly used in our schools and universities.
Hence, in acknowledging thankfully the great improve¬
ment of the last OA’er the previous editions of the Greek
Lexicon of Dr. Liddell and Dr. Scott in the etymology
of mythological names, I express a feeling shared
doubtless by all who wish to see a -wide and fertile field
thoroughly explored. The recognition of the principle
that Greek names must be interpreted either by cognate
forms in kindred languages, or by reference to the
common source from which all these forms spring, is
the one condition without which it is useless to look
for any real progress in this branch of philology ; and
this principle is here fully recognised. The student is
now told that he must compare the Greek Charites
with ‘the Sanskrit Haritas, the coursers of the sun,’
and that both received their name from a root ghar, to
shine, or glisten. Zeus is referred to the Sanskrit
Dyaus, the brilliant being, Ouranos to Yarnna, and
Erinys to Saranyu. * It is only to be regretted that the
method has not been carried out more systematically.
In all doubtful cases a Lexicographer is fully justified in
keeping silence: but the affinity of Arcs and the Latin

■x' v '

PREFACE.

Mars with the Sanskrit Maruts, the Greek MoH8& f She
Teutonic Miolnir, and of Athene with the Sanskrit
Ahana and Bahana and the Greek Daphne, is, as well
established as that of Erinys and Saranyft, of Ouranos
and Yaruna. Yet under Ares we read that it is ‘ akin
to apo-iji/, as Lat. Mars to mas, perhaps also to

r,pwg, Lat. vir; ’ under Athene we are referred to avdsm,
where it is said that ‘ ai/9 is the root of perhaps

also of ’Afirjw) and dvrjvoO-.’ But to the Comparative
Mythologist the acceptance of his method will more
than atone for the few blemishes still remaining in a
great work, which must determine the character of
English scholarship.

I have said that the task of analysing and comparing
the myths of the Aryan nations has opened to me a
source of unqualified delight. I feel bound to avow
the conviction that it has done more. It has removed
not a few perplexities ; it has solved not a few diffi¬
culties which press hard on many thinkers.. It has
raised and strengthened my faith in the goodness of
God; it has justified the wisdom which has chosen to
educate mankind through impressions produced by the
phenomena of the outward world:

March 8, 1870.

CONTENTS

% 'h) ■

BOOK I.

POPULAR THEORIES ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH
OF MYTHOLOGY.

Method of Inquiry .....

The Nature of the Problem to be solved
Condition of Society in the <-rreek Heroic Age
Character of ‘ Homeric 5 mythology . -
Contrast between Mythological and Religious Belief
The Lyric and Tragic poets conscious of the Contrast
Historical Signification of Greek Mythology .

Conflicting Views as to its Origin .

Hypothesis of an Original Revelation

Extent of Original Revelation . ...

Its- alleged Perversion by the Greeks, as shown in the At

System of Secondaries ....

Inventive, as distinguished from'traditive, Deities .
Nature of the Doctrines perverted in Greek Mythology
Attributes of Athene and Apollon
Rations of will between Zeus and Athfenfe .

Peculiar forms of Greek Mythology .

Consequences involved 'in the Porversion of an original Rev
Comparison of the Homeric with the Vedic Mythology
Methods? of determining the Extent of Primitive Revelation
Evidenco of the Book of G enesis
Limits of this Evidence ....

tributes

Course of Revelation in the 01$ Testament .

Necessity of accounting for the Character of Greek Mythology

Conditions of the Inquiry
Allegorical interpretation of Myths .

Lord Bacon’s Method

Unscientific character of such Interpretations

CONTENTS OF

CHAPTER II.

THE DELATION OF MYTHOLOGY TO LANGUAGE.

Origin of abstract Words
Expansive power of sensuous Words .

Origin of Language ....
Immobility of Savage Races .

Historical Results of the Analysis of Language
Earliest Conditions of Thought

CHAPTER III.

THE SOURCE OF MYTHICAL SPEECH.

The Infancy of Mankind.39

Primary Myths . . . . . * . .42

Secondary Myths ........ 42

Polyonymy, as affecting the Growth of Mythology . . . .43

Use of abstract and concrete Names . . . . . 45

Myths arising from the Use of equivocal Words . _ . 47

Disintegration of Myths ....... 49

CHAPTER IV.

THE HEVELOPEMENT OF MYTHS.

Elasticity of Mythical Speech ....

Results of Mythical Language ....

Evidence of this Dovelopement furnished by the Rig-Veda .
Relative Age of Greek Myths . •

Solar Myths.

Changeful Action of the Sun .....
Repulsive Developements of solar Legends .

Origin of these Developements ....
Tendency to localize Mythical Incidents
Vitality of the Mythopceic Faculty ....
Constant Demand for new Mythical Narratives
Groundwork of the Mythology of Northern Europe .
Groundwork of the‘Homeric’Mythology .

Comparison of Greek and Norse Mythology . t .

Special Characteristics of Greek Mythology .

Full Developement of Greek Mythology-
Arrested Growth of Northern Mythology'

Light thrown on both by the Vedic Hymns .

Stages in the Growth of Mythical Systems .

57

72

»8.B*§

THE FIRST VOLUME.

xiii

CHAPTER Y.

GREEK CONCEPTION'S OF MYTHICAL TRADITION.

Gradual Assignment of an historical Character to Mythical Beings , 70

Each Clan or Tribe regarded its own Traditions as distinct from any other . 77

This Belief wholly without.Foundation . . . . .77

.Connection between the legends of Argos, Thebes, and Athens . .'78

The Imagery of these Legends . '. . . . .81

Significance of the Names employed in Greek Legends . . .82

Opinions of Greek Writers, and their Value . . . . , -83

CHAPTER, VI.

GREEK NOTIONS RESPECTING THE MORAL ASPECT OF
MYTHOLOGY.

Coarse Developement of certain Mythical Phrases . . . .84

Protests of Greek Writers . . . . . . .84

Limits of their Knowledge ....... 80

Explanations of the seeming Immorality of Aryan Mythology . . SO

, The Morality of the Hosiodic Poems . . . . . S 8

CHAPTER VII.

THEORY OF GREEK MYTHOLOGY AS AN ECLECTIC SYSTEM.

Reproduction of the same Myth under different Forms . . .90

No historical Conclusions to bo drawn from the Complications so caused . 91

Conclusions drawn from a Comparison of Greek with Teutonic Legends . 93

Theory of Dr. Dollinger on the Origin of Greek Mythology . . . 94

This Theory starts on an Assumption for which there is no Evidence . 96

Historical Speculations of Dr. Dollinger.98

They leave the real Difficulties of Greek Mythology unexplained . . . 98

CHAPTER VIII.

THE DIFFUSION OF MYTHS.

The common Element in Aryan Mythology .

The Greek Mythology of itself explains this common Element
The Teutonic Mythology points'™ precisely the samo direction
The missing Link supplied in the older Vedic Poems
The Key to all Aryan Mythology ....
Germs of mythical Tales . .

Groundwork of Aryan Mythology ....
Greek dynastic Legends .

Growth of popular Traditions ....

CHAPTER IX.

MODERN EUEMERISM.

The Method of Euemeros .

Its Antagonism with the Science of Language

THE FIRST VOLUME.

Residuum of historical Fact.in the Iliad
The Test of Homeric Credibility . .

Laws of Evidence . . ' .

Their Application in English Courts of Justice
Application to Homeric History
, Value of the historical Residuum in the Iliad
Difficulties involved in the traditional View .
Euemeristie Methods of Dealing with the Homeric Narn
Their irreconcilable Results ....
Value of traditional Impressions
The Legend of Roland and the Nibelungenlied
. Principles of Evidence ....
The Homeric Controversy
The Return of the Herafeleids
The Herakleid .Conquests not historical * . .

The Origin of the Traditions of the Herakleid Conquests
Materials of Epical Tradition
Materials of the Poems commonly called Homeric? .
Attempted Distinction between the Sciences of.Language
Assumed early Popularity of our Iliad and Odyssey .
The Evidence of the Case . . .

The Homer of the Greek Tragic Poets

Resulte of the Inquiry ....

CHAPTER X.

THE CHARACTER OF GREEK DYNASTIC AND POPULAR LEGENDS
IN RELATION TO TRIBAL AND NATIONAL NAMES.

Fertility of mythical Phrases .....
Legends of rival Greek Cities. . . . .

The Argive Story

The Theban Story . • . .

The Megarian StOTy . . . . ...

The Athenian Story . . . .

The Story of the Pelopids .....
Connexion of these Stories with the Tribal or Rational Names
The Athenians . . . ..

Iohians andPhenicians . ■ *

Argives and Arkadians .....
Delians and Lykians . ...

Ethiopians .......

D&naans and Achaians .....

Hellenes and Aiolians ■ ..

Greeks and Hcsperians .....
I talian and Teutonic tribal Names ....
Ethnological Inferences .....

219

220
223

CONTENTS OF

xvi

CHAPTER XI.

MYTHICAL PHRASES FURNISHING THE MATERIALS OF $BE
HOMERIC POEMS.

Extent of tho old Homeric Literature.241

Extent of Homeric Mythology.\ 242

The Tale of the Achillas.245

Tho Close of the Achillas.252

The whole Achillas a Solar Epic . . . . ■ .253

The Trojan War only one Scene of a long Drama .... 264
The Ilias as contrasted with the Achilleis . . - ' • 254

Groundwork of the Odyssey . . - . . .256

How much of the Iliad or the Odyssey belongs to the Invention of the Poet 258
The Portraits of the greater Chieftains and Heroes not true to national

Character . . . . . ... . 261

The Character of Odysseus.. • 264

How far was the Character of Odysseus a Creation of the Homer$Poet . 266
The Character of Odysseus not Achaian . . . • .271

CHAPTER XII.

MYTHICAL PHRASES FURNISHING MATERIALS FOR THE TEU¬
TONIC EPIC POEMS , AND THE LEGENDS OF ARTHUR AND
ROLAND,

Points of likeness between the Greek and Teut
The Volsung Tale ....
The Story of Sigurd ....
The Story of Gudrun ....
Belgi Sagas .....
The first Helgi ....
The second Helgi ....
The third Helgi ....
Sigurd, Siegfried, and Baldur
The Story of Hagen ....
The Vengeance of Kriemhild . •

Historical Element in the Nibelungenlied
The Story of Waltbar of Aquitaine .

Dietrich of Bern ....

The Great Rose Garden

The Romance of Roland . •

The Story of King Arthur .

The Birth and Youth of Arthur
The Round Table and the San Greal
Arthur's Knights ....
Lancelot and Guinevere ...

The Death of Arthur ....

273

276

283

286

286

291

295

297

302

308

312

315

THE FIRST VOLUME.

xvii

Guinevere and Diarmaid ....

Later Mediaeval Epics and Romances
.Saga Literature of Europe . . . .

The Grettir Saga . ;

The Character of Grettir

Materials of the Saga ....

Grettir and Boots .....
Parallelisms between the Grettir Saga and other Myths
The Avenging of Grettir ....

BOOK II.

CHAPTER I.

THE ETHEREAL HEAVENS.
Section I.— DYAUS.

Ideas of Heaven. .326

The glistening Ether ........ 327

Dyaus and Prithivl . ... . . . . 328

Ideas denoted by the name Dyu ...... 328

Section IL—VARUNA AND MITRA.

The solid Heaven ......

Moral Aspects of Varuna . . . .

Aryan Monotheism . .

Aditi and the Adityas .....

The physical and spiritual Varuna ....

The primary Conception of Indra purely physic
. Action of the Vedic and Achaian Deities
Indra a God of the bright Heaven
Mfeaning of the Name
The Might and Majesty of Indra
Indra the Rain-bringor. __

Physical Conflict between Light and Darkness
The Wife of Indra . . •

Section IV.—BRAHMA.
Place of Brahma in the Hindu Theogony

Praj&pati . .

VOL. I.

CONTENTS OF

xviii

Section V.—ZEUS.

The Dwelling of Zeus in Ethor
The unchanging Light
The Idea of Zeus suggested by physi
The Latin Jupiter

Zeus Ouranion

The mythical and spiritual Zeus
The Zeus of the Tragic Poets
The name Zeus, and its Transformations
The Zeus of local Traditions .

The Birth of Zeus .

The Iniquities of Kronos
The War of the Titans
Other Forms of this Struggle
The Loves of Zeus . .

The twelve Olympian Deities
The Cretau and Arkadian Zeus
Lykosoura and Lyk&on
The Dodonaian and Olympian Zeus .
Limits to the Power of Zeus .

The Messengers of Zeus
Zeus the Judge,

347

347

356

357

Section VI.—ODIN, WODEN, WUOTAN.
Characteristics of Teutonic Mythology

Teutonic Theogonies ......

Genealogy of Odin ..... i

Odin as the Creator of Man .....

The End of the Asas or JEsir . . ...

The Name Wuotan ......

The one-eyed Wuotan .....

Odin the Rain-giver ......

Odin the All-father ......

Tyr and Odin ......

Section VII.— THUNDER, DONAR, THOR.
The Name Donar . , , .

Thor the All-father . . - v *

His triple Functions

372

376

377

379

Section VIII.—FRO.

Relations of Fro to Freya . . * . . . - 381

Section IX.—HEIMDALL, BRAGI, AND OEGIR.

The Lord of Himinbiorg ' . . . . • .381

Bragi, the Lord of Day ....... 382

Oegir the Sea-god . . . . ■ ■ 382

gills

six

THE FIRST VOLUME.

CHAPTER II.

THE LIGHT.

Section I.—St'RYA AND SAVITAR.
Shrya, the pervading irresistible luminary .

The one-handed Savitar.

The Power of Savitar.

Section II.—SOMA.

The physical and spiritual Soma . . .

Powers of Soma.

Section III.— CORRELATIVE DEITIES.
Complementary Deities .....

The Dualism of Nature.

Functions of the Asvins .....

Parentage of the Asvins .....

The Twins.

Soma and Shryfc . . • . ■ .

Section IV.—THE DAWN.
The lonely Wanderer .

Developement of the Myth . . . 1

The Story of Urvasi . . . ...

Germs of the Story of Penelope
The Dawn and the Waters ....

Eros and Psyche . . .

The Search of the Dawn for the Sun .

The Search of the Sun for the Dawn .

Origin of these Myths ....

East of the Sun and West of the Moon
The Wanderers in the Forest
The Spell of Moonlight . .

The Seven Risbis .....
The Arkshas or Shiners ....

The Rishis and Manu ....

386

389

389

390

V.-DAWN GODDES

IJshaB and Eos

Sar&roi

TheCowsoflndra .
The Fidelity of Sarama
Saranyh

XX

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

Erin'ys . .

The. Harpies ......

Arjuni ... .

The Horses of the Sun .

Anisin ......

Snakes and Dragons .....

Sorcery and Witchcraft ....

The Story of Medeia .

The Myth of Prokris.

E6s and Tith6nos ;

mU and GranymMa.

The Story of Dido and Anna ....
Hero and Leiandros . .

■ The Brides of the Sun ...

The Arkadian Auge . ...

Eur6p& and the Bull .....
Althaia and the Burning Brand

Section VI.—ATHENE.
The original Idea of Athene purely physical .

Athene Tritogeneia .....

Birth and Parentage of Athfinfc

Athene Mother of Phoibos and Lychnos

Epithets of AthenS .....

Ath6n£ the Guardian of Heroes

The Latin Minerva . . . .

428

428

429

481

432

435

435

437

437

43$

439
44 6

443

444

445

APPENDICES.

I. The Antiquity of Written Poems

II. The historical Authority of Homer

III. The Myth of Oidipous .

IV. Swan-maidens ....

V. The name Helene

VI. Lykanthropy ....

447

454

456

458

THE MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK I.

CHAPTER I.

POPULAR THEORIES ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH
OE MYTHOLOGY.

"We cannot examine the Words by which we express our CSA1 ,
thoughts and our wants, or compare the stories which En- I.
glish children hear in their nurseries with the folk-talk of '
Germany and Norway, without speedily'becoming aware that inquiry, °
the inquiry on which we have entered must carry us back to
the very infancy of mankind. We have undertaken the
investigation of fact, and we must follow the track into which
the search for facts has brought us. If we have been accus¬
tomed to think that the race of men started in their great
career with matured powers'and with a speech capable of
expressing high spiritual conceptions, we cannot deny the
gravity of. the issue, when a science which professes to resolve
this language into its ultimate elements, asserts that for a
period of indefinite length human iSfpeech expressed mere
bodily sensations, and that it was confined to such expres¬
sions, because no higher thoughts had yet been awakened in
the mind. But unless, we choose to take refuge in assump¬
tions, we must regard the question as strictly and simply a
matter of fact: and all that we have to do, is to examine
VOL. I. I)

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook impartially the conditions of the problem, with the determi-
——;—- nation of evading no conclusion to which the evidence of
fact may lead us.

The nature This problem is sufficiently startling, on whatever portion

pr 'bTem to Ihe su bject we may first fix our minds. The earliest lite-

be solved, rature, whether of the Hindu or the Greek, points in the
direction to which the analysis of language seems to guide
us. In both alike we find a genuine belief in a living Power,
to whom men stand in the relation of children to a father;
but in both, this faith struggles to find utterance in names
denoting purely sensuous objects, and thus furnishing the
germ of a sensuous mythology. Hence the developement of
religious faith and of a true theology would go on side by
side with the growth of an indiscriminate anthropomorphism,
until the contrast became so violent as to call forth the in¬
dignant protests of men like Sokrates and Pindar, Euripides
and Plato. Yet this contrast, as throwing us back upon the
analysis of words, has enabled us to .unlock the doors before
which the most earnest seekers of ancient times groped in
vain, and to trace almost from their very source all the
streams of human thought.

Condition Tliis antagonism reached its highest point among the
of society Hellenic tribes. , Prom this point therefore we may most
Greek reasonably work back to that indefinitely earlier condition
heroic ago 0 y thought in which ‘ the first attempts only were being
made at expressing the simplest conceptions by means of a
language most simple, most sensuous, and most unwieldy .’ 1
The Hiad and Odyssey exhibit a state of society which has
long since emerged .from mere brutishness and barbarism.
,It has its fixed order and its recognised gradations, a system
jpf law with judges to administer it, and a public opinion
■Which sets itself against some faults and vices not amenable
to legal penalties. It brings before us men who, if they
retain, in their occasional ferocity, treachery, and malice,
characteristics which belong to the savage, yet recognise the
majesty of law and submit themselves to its government—
who are obedient, yet not servile—who care for other than
mere brute forces, who recognise the value of wise words and

1 .Max Muller, Chips from a German Workshop, vol. i. p. 354.

SOCIETY OP THE GREEK HEROIC AGE.

prodent counsels, and in the right of uttering them give the CHAP,
earnest of a yet higher and more developed freedom . 1 It
shows to us men who, if they regard all as enemies until by
an outward covenant they have been made their friends, yet
own the sanctity of an oath and acknowledge the duty of
executing true judgment between man and man; who, if
they are fierce in fight, yet abhor mutilation, torture, and
unseemly insult, and are willing to recognise merit in an
enemy not less readily than in a friend. Above all, it tells
us of men who in their home life are honest and truthful,
who make no pretension of despising human sympathy and
setting lightly by kindness, gentleness, and love. If here
and there we get glimpses of a charity which seeks a wider
range,* yet the love of wife and children and brethren is the
.rule and not the exception; and everywhere, in striking con¬
trast with Athenian society in the days of. Perikles and
Aspasia, we see men and women mingling .together in equal
and pure companionship, free alike from the arrogance and
servility of Oriental empires, and from the horrible vices
which, if even then in germ, were not matured till the so-
called heroic ages had long passed away . 3

But these epic poems tell us also of gods, soirie of whom Character
at least ■ had all the vices and few of the virtues of their ^ ei ?- 0 ,‘ ny .
worshippers. They tell us of a supreme ruler and father thology.

' It cannot, of course, be maintained
that this freedom was more than in its
germ. The king has his Boule or
Council, where he listens to the chief¬
tains whose judgment nevertheless he
can override. There is also the Agora,
where the people, hear the decisions of
their rulers on questions of state, and
in which justice is administered. The
case of Thersites is barely consistent
knowledged fight of oppo-

while the

Hesiodic poet show that a

ami allow the superiority of mind over
matter even in their chieftains. Mr.
Grote has brought out the imperfections

of the Homeric society both

of" (/fetor/ of "ft
90-101). Mr. Gladstone pres

Cfemcr ’rad *1™ Homeric*
122, &c.).

* It is the praise of the
Axylos (Vlio is slain liyDiomei

MYTHOLOGY

ARYAN NATIONS.

of gods and men who had not always sat upon liis throne,
of other gods deposed and smitten down to dark and desolate
regions, of feuds and factions, of lying and perjury, of fero¬
cious cruelty and unmeasured revenge. They tell us of godB
who delight in sensual enjoyments and care for little more
than the fat of rams and goats, , of gods who own no check to
their passions, and recognise no law against impurity and
lust. And even those gods who rise to a far higher ideal
exhibit characters the most variable and actions the most
inconsistent. The same being is at different times, nay,
almost at the same time, just and iniquitous, truthful and
false, temperate and debauched.

As describing the origin and attributes of the gods, the
whole series of Greek myths may be said to form a theology ;
and with the character of the people, this theology stands
out in marked contrast. It is impossible for us to determine
precisely the extent to which this mythical theology was
believed, because it is not in our power to throw ourselves
back wholly into their condition of thought; but if the ab¬
sence of all doubt or reflection constitute faith, then their
faith was given to the whole cycle of fables which make up
the chronicles of their gods. But if we look to its influence
on their thoughts at times when the human heart is stirred
to its depths, we can scarcely say that this huge fabric of
mythology challenged any belief at all: and thus we must
draw a sharp line of severance between their theology and
their religion, if we use religion in the sense attached to the
word by Locke or Newton, Milton or Butler. If the poet
recounts the loves of Zeus, the jealousies of Here, the feuds
and ,tbe factions in Olympos, it is equally certain that
Achilleus does not pray to a sensual and lying god who owns
no law for himself and cannot be a law for man. The con¬
trast is heightened if we turn to the poems known as the
Hesiodic. If the poet narrates p, theogony which incurred
the detestation or disgust of Pindar and of Plato, he tells us
also of a Divine King who is a perfectly upright judge, and
loves those who are clear of hand and pure of heart . 1 If he

1 The identity of authorship for the Dap is very doubtful: but the question
Hesiodic Theogony and the Works and • is immaterial. Both poems exhibit the

• DISTINCTION BETWEEN MYTHOLOGY AND EELIGION.'

tells of horrible banquets to which the more fastidious faith
of the lyric poet refuses to give credence , 1 he bids all to
follow after justice, because the gods spend their time, not
in feasting, but in watching the ways anduvorks of men . 2
If JSschylos in .one drama depicts the arrogant tyranny.of
Zeus as a usurper and an upstart, if the reiterated conviction
of the prophetic Titan is that the new god shall fall, yet in
others he looks up to the same Zeus (if indeed it be the
same ), 3 as the avenger of successful wrong, the vindicator of a
righteous law whose power and goodness are alike eternal.
If for Sophokles the old mythology had not lost its charm,
if he too Blight tell of the lawless loves and the wild licence
of Zeus and other gods, yet his heart is fixed on higher
realities, on that purity of word and deed which has its
birth, not on earth, but in heaven, and of which the im¬
perishable law is realised and consummated 'in a God as holy
and everlasting . 4 .

separated by no long interval; and in
the latter poem the action of Zens in
the legend of Pandora, (■which, is also i
related in the Thcogony) is utterly
unlike that of the Zeus who figures in :

Le of life based on a conscious
ssion to Divine Will and Lai
mg absolutely righteous, and i:
»: how far the Greek had such a.

pa yao-rpifiap-
•yov fianapvv rtv tixetr* tupiffr ajuai.

Pindar, Olymp. i. 82.
Pindar’s objection is a- moral' one;
but Herodotos proceeded to reject on
physical grounds the legend which told
of the founding of the Dodonaian oracle,
(ii. 57), as well as some of the exploits
of Herakles (ii. 45.) It was, however,
a moral reason which led him practi¬
cally to disbelieve the whole story of

o Grote, L
3 WotU and Days, 247-251

3 Zcfe tons wot' k

to dismiss. The acknowledged dislike

theology, can be explained only by their
•knowledge of a higher law. But if it
be maintained that the sense or the
sentiment, which lay at the root of this
dislike, is either some relic of earlier
and purer knowledge—in other words,

else a, wonderful ex.
reflective power,’ we
is not the only nlle:
us. When St Pan

he uses the word
which implicitly del

may reply that this
native left open to
speaks of Gentiles

* Oid. Tyr. 863-871. . The objection ;
that comparative mythology, wflile it i
explains the Greek myths, fails ' to
explain the Greek religion, or to explain
how the mythology and the religion got.
mixed up together, turns on the moaning j
of words. In one sense, their myf hology

religion; but if we regard religion as a

licitly demo
nowledge o:
> of tliei

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book: It would be difficult to discover a more marvellous com-

~—. binatiou of seemingly inexplicable contradictions, of belief in'
Tlw lyric the history- of gods utterly distinct from the faith which
pucts wm-6 guided the practice of men, of an immoral and impure
conscious theology with a condition of society' which it would be
contrast, monstrous to regard as utterly and brutally depraved. Tet,
in some way or other, this repulsive system, from which
heathen poets and philosophers learnt gradually to shrink
scarcely less than ourselves, had come into being, had been
systematized into a scheme more or less coherent, and im¬
posed upon the people as so much genuine history. What
this origin and growth was, is (strange as it may appear) one
of the most momentous questions which we can put to our¬
selves, for on its answer must depend our conclusions on the

ALLEGORY* IN MYTHOLOGY.

7

conditions of human life during the infancy of mankind. If CHAP,
the fragmentary narratives, which were gradually arranged --

into one gigantic system, were the work of a single age or of
several generations who devoted themselves to their fabrica¬
tion, then never has there. been seen in the annals -of
mankind an impurity more loathsome, an appetite more
thoroughly depraved, a moral sense more hopelessly blunted,
than in those who framed the mythology of the Greek or the
Hindu. Of the answers which have been given to this
question, it can be no light matter to determine which fur¬
nishes the most adequate solution.

The method which Mr. Grote, in his £ History of Greece,’ 1 Historical
■ has adopted for the examination of Greek legend, appears tion of a
rather to avoid the difficulty than to grapple with it. .There
is unquestionably much personification in their mythology; logy,
there is also undoubtedly a good deal of. allegory; but
neither allegory nor personification will furnish a real ex¬
planation of the whole. It may be true to say that Ouranos,

Nyx, Hypnos, and Oneiros are persons in the Hesiodie
Theogony, although it is probably erroneous to say that they
are just as much persons as Zeus or Apollon ; and the suppo¬
sition is certainly inadmissible ‘ that these legends could all
be traced by means of allegory into a coherent body of phy¬
sical doctrine.’ 2 But there are beyond doubt many things
even in the Hesiodie Theogony which have at least no human
personality; 3 nor does the assertion of personality, whether
of Zeus or Herakles or Apollon, in the least degree account
for the shape which the narrative of their deeds assumes, or
for the contradictory, aspects in which they are brought
before us. It does not in any way explain why Zeus and
Herakles should have so many earthly loves, and why in
every land there should be those who claim descent from
them, or why there should be so much of resemblance and of
difference between Phoibos and Helios, Gaia and Deinet&r,

Nereus and Poseidon. But Mr. Grote was examining the
mythology of Greece as an. historian of outward facts, not as

1 Part i. eh. i.-xvi. History of Christianity, i.

* Grote, History of Greece , part i. 3 For instance, oi>pta /.
eh. i. See'also Mure, Critical. History 129
if Greek Literature, i. 104; Milmau,

-Thcoff .

MYTHOLOGY OF THE J&YAN NATIOKS.

BCWK one -who is tracing out the history of the human miad; and

■- r —• from this point of view he is justified in simply examining

the legends, and then dismissing them as the picture 4 of a
past which never was present.’ To this expression Professor
Max Muller takes great exception, and especially protests
against Mr. Grote’s assertion of ‘ the uselessness of digging
for a supposed basis of truth ’ in the myths of the Greek
world . 1 But although it appears certain that the Greek
mythology points to an actual and not an imaginary past, a
past which must have for us a deep and abiding interest, it
would yet seem that Professor Muller has misinterpreted the
words of Mr. Grote, who by 4 truth ’ means the verification of
actual occurrences, and by a real past means a past of whose
events we can give an authentic narrative.’ In this sense,
to assert the truth of the lives and adventures of Zeus and
Herakles, after stripping away from them the clothing of the
supernatural, is to fall back on the system of Euemeros, and
to raise a building without foundation. But it is obvious
that this method leaves the origin of this theology and the
question of its contradictions, and still more of its im¬
purity and grossness, just where it found them. It carries
us no further back than the legends themselves, while it
fails to remove the reproach which heathen apologists
and Christian controversialists alike assumed or admitted
to be true . 3

Conflicting Two theories only appear to attempt a philosophical
to7ts 38 analysis of this vast system. While one repudiates the im-
°rigin. putation of a deliberate fabrication of impurities, the other
asserts as strongly the wilful moral corruption exhibited in
the theogonic narratives of the Greeks. In the inconsistent

THE RELIGIOUS SENStmimo* vuiLlB UMUU&

and repulsive adventures of Zeus or Herakles, it sees the chap.

perversion of high and mysterious doctrines originally im- __ . . .

parted to man, and discerns in the gradations of the Olym¬
pian hierarchy vestiges of the most mysterious doctrines
embraced in the whole compass of Christian teaching. By
this theory all that is contradictory, immoral, or disgusting
' in Greek mythology is the direct result of human sinfulness
and rebellion, and resolves itself into the distortion of. a
divine revelation imparted to Adam immediately after the
FalL

There are few subjects on which it would he more rash to Hypotiic-
give or withhold assent to any statement without the clearest
definition of terms. We may admit the truth of Bishop revelation.
Butler’s assertion that the analogy of nature furnishes no
presumption against a revelation when man was first placed .
upon the earth ; 1 hut it is obvious that they who agree in
asserting the fact of such a revelation may yet have widely
different conceptions of its nature and extent. And although
it is easy to see the place which Butler’s statement holds in
■ .the general connection of his argument, it is not so easy to
ascertain what on this point his own judgment may have
been. Human feeling recoils instinctively from any notion
that the Being who placed man in the world ever left him
. wholly to himself; hut the repudiation of such an idea hi
no way determines the amount of knowledge imparted to
4 him at the first. Nations have been found, and still exist,
whose languages contain not a single word expressive of
divinity, and into whose mind the idea of God or of any
religion seems never to have entered . 2 If it be hard to
measure the depth- of degradation to which the Abipones,
the Bushman, and the Australian may have fallen, it is im¬
possible to believe that the struggles of men like Sokrat-es
and Plato after truth had no connection with a guiding and
controlling power. If in the former we discern the evidence

'> Analogy, part ii. ch. ii. § 2.

dared that there were many India
who, on being asked whether during

thought of God, replied Ko, ‘never.’ dVJ

Midler, History of Sanscrit Literatim,
538. It is a miserable fact that Ihis
condition of thought, finds a parallel
among certain sections of Englishmen.
Sop also -Farrar, Chapters on Language,

10

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book of wilful corruption, we must recognise in the latter the
vigorous growth of a mind and spirit which seeks to obey
the law of its constitution . 1 In Bishop Butler’s philosophy,
the reason of man is the Divine Reason dwelling in him; the
voice of his conscience is the word of God. That these
gifts involved a revelation of divine truth, it is impossible
to deny; hut whether this is all that he meant by the asser- ’
tion of an original revelation, the Analogy does not enable
us to determine with precision. He does, however, assert
that the question of the extent of that revelation is to be
considered ‘ as a common question of fact; ’ and too great a
stress cannot be laid on these words . 2

Extent, of No such charge of ambiguity can be brought against the
view which Mr. Gladstone has maintained in his elaborate
work on ‘ Homer and the Homeric Age.’ In his judgment,
all that is evil in Greek mythology is the result* not of a
natural and inevitable process, when words used ■ originally
in one sense came unconsciously to be employed in an¬
other, but of a systematic corruption of very sacred and
very mysterious doctrines. These corruptions have, in his,
opinion, grown up not around what are generally called
the first principles of natural religion, but around dogmas
of which the images, so vouchsafed, were realised in a long
subsequent dispensation. In the mythology of the Hellenic
race he sees a vast fabric, wonderfully systematized, yet in
some parts ill-cemented and incongruous, on the composition,
of which his theory seems to throw a full and unexpected
light. In it he hears the key-note of a strain Whose music
had been long forgotten and misunderstood, but whose
harmony would never of itself have entered into mortal
mind. It could not be supplied by invention, for ‘ invention
cannot absolutely create, it can only work on what it finds
already provided to hand .’ 3 Rejecting altogether the position
that ‘ the basis of the Greek mythology is laid in the deifica¬
tion of the powers of nature ,’ 3 he hblds that under corrupted
forms it presents the old Theistic and Messianic traditions , 5

1 Butler, Sermons, ii. ‘ On Human 8 Homer and the Homeric Age, ii. 9.
Nature.’ * Ibid.10. » lb(4. 12.

* Analogy, part ii. ch: ii. § 2.

THEORY OF DEGRADATION.

11

that by a primitive tradition, if not by a direct command, it CHAR,
upheld the ordinance of sacrifice ; 1 that its course was from L .
light to darkness, from purity to uncleanness . 2 Its starting
point was ‘ the idea of a Being infinite in power and intellir
gence, and though perfectly good, yet good by an unchange¬
able internal determination of character, and not by the
constraint of an external law .’ 3 But the idea of goodness
can be retained only by a sound moral sense; the notion of
power is substituted when that sense is corrupted by sin . 4
But sin has no such immediate action on the intellect.

Hence the power and wisdom of the Homeric Gods is great'
and lofty, while their moral standard is indefinitely low . 5
But the knowledge of the Divine Existence roused the desire
to know also where He dwelt;'and, in the mighty agencies
and sublime objects of creation in which they fancied that they
saw Him,, Mr. Gladstone discerns the germs of that nature-
worship which was ingrafted on the true religion originally
imparted to mankind . 0 This religion involved (i), the Unity
and Supremacy of the Godhead; (ii), a combination with this
Unity, of a Trinity in which the several persons are in some
way of coequal honour; (iii), a Redeemer from the curse of
death, invested with full humanity, who should finally
establish the divine kingdom; (iv), a Wisdom, personal and
divine, which founded and sustains the world; (v), the con¬
nection of the Redeemer with man by descent' from the
woman. With this was joined the revelation of the Evil
One, as a tempting power among men, and the leader of
rebellious angels who had for disobedience been hurled from
their thrones in heaven . 7

12

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book Putting aside the question how far these ideas may reflect

--—- the thought of later ages, we must admit with Mr. Gladstone

Its alleged that from this shadowing forth of the great dogmas of the
by r tlie S On Trinity the next step might be into Polytheism, and from
Greeks, that of the Incarnation into anthropomorphism or the re¬
flection of humanity upon the supernatural world . 1 This
true theology, in the hands of the Greeks, was perverted into
a Trinity of the three sons of Kronos: Zeus, Hades, and
Poseidon. The tradition of the Redeemer is represented by
Apollon; the Divine Wisdom is embodied in Athene; a and
Lett, their mother, stands in the place of the woman from
whom the Deliverer was to descend. The traditions of the
Evil One were still further obscured. Evil, as acting by
violence, was represented most conspicuously in the Titans and
giants—as tempting by deceit, in the Ate of Homer, while
lastly, the covenant of the rainbow reappears in Iris . 3
as shown Eor these primitive traditions, which are delivered to us
tributes^of ‘ either in the ancient or the more recent hooks of the
theirGods. Bible ,’ 4 Mr. Gladstone alleges the corroborative evidence
furnished by the Jewish illustrative writings during or after
the captivity in Babylon . 5 These writings bear witness to
the extraordinary elevation of the Messiah, and to the intro¬
duction of the female principle into Deity, which the Greeks
adopted not as a metaphysical conception, but with a view
to the family order among immortals . 6 Thus in the Greek
AthSnd and Apollon respectively he distinguishes the attri¬
butes assigned by the Jews to the Messiah and to Wisdom-—
the attributes of sonship and primogeniture, of light, of
mediation, of miraculous operation, of conquest over the
Evil One, and of the liberation of the dead from the power
of hell, together with ‘ an assemblage of the most, winning
. and endearing moral qualities .’ 7

System of This theory Mr. Gladstone has traced with great minute-
ariep^" ness alK ^ ingenuity through the tangled skein of Greek
. ‘ ' mythology. The original idea he finds disintegrated, and a

the slightness of the modification which its logical results.

his theory has undergone, renders it > Homer and the Haruric, Age, ii. 43.

perhaps even more necessary to exhibit s Ibid. 44. ' * Ib%&Js. ‘ Mid. 48.

clearly the dilemmas and difficulties ‘ Ibid. 50. • iStd. .51. . ’ Hid. 53.

involved in this theory, if carried out to

IDEA. OP SECONDARY DEITIES. 13

system of secondaries is the necessary consequence. Far chap.
above all are exalted Apollon and Athenfi, in their personal L
purity 1 yet more than in their power, in their immediate
action, 2 in their harmony with the will of the Supreme
King, and in the fact that they alone, among the deities of
a second generation, are admitted to equal honour with the
Kronid brothers, if not even to higher. 3 But some of their
attributes are transferred to other beings, who are simply
embodiments of the attribute so transferred and of no other.

Thus ■ Athene is attended by Hermes, Ares, Themis, and?
Hephaistos;. Apollon by Paieon and the Muses; 1 as, simW
larly, we have in Gaia a weaker impersonation of Dfimfiter,i
and Nereus as representing simply the watery realm of
Poseidon. In Leto, their mother, Gs shadowed forth the
woman whose seed was to bruise the head of the serpent;:
for Let6 herself has scarcely any definite office in the Homeric
theology, and she remains, from any view except this one, an
anomaly in mythological, belief. 5 But the traditions -which
relate to the under-world, which is the realm of Hades, are
not less full than those which tell us of the heavenly order
of Olympos. Amidst some little confusion, Mr. Gladstone
discerns a substantial correspondence with divine revelation,
and finds in the Homeric poems the place of bliss destined
finally for the good, the place of torment inhabited by the
Evil One and his comrades, and the intermediate abode for
departed spirits, whether of the good or the evil. 6 But while
the prevalence of sacrifice attests the strength of primitive
tradition, of the Sabbatical institution there is no trace. 7 It
was an ordinance ‘ too highly spiritual to survive the rude
j shocks aid necessities of earthly life.’

Of the other deities some owe their existence to invention, inventive,
which has been busy in depraving and debasing the idea
‘ even of those which are traditive. 8 Thus H^rfi was invented from tra-
because Zeus must not live alone, and Bhea because he must ^cities,
have a mother; and a wtole mass of human adventure and
of human passion without human recognition of law is

1 /Tomer atiA the Homeric Age, ii. • Ibid. 61. ' jjy" ]' 2 ’i->

'• Ibid. 89-93. ’ Ibid. 67. * Hid. 173.

14

MYTHOLOGT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book heaped up round almost every deity (except the two who
--r—- stand out unsullied in their purity and goodness), not, how¬
ever, without occasional protests from the poet who had not
yet become familiar with the deification of vicious passion. 1
Nature of Thus, on the hypothesis of Mr. Gladstone, Greek mythology
trines per- is no distortion of primary truths which first dawn on the
Greek m °f a child or are imparted to it, and which, it might

thology. have been supposed, would form the substance of divine
truth granted to man during the infancy of his race. It is
t the corruption of recondite and mysterious dogmas which
were not to become facts for hundreds or thousands of years,
of doctrines which the speculations of Jewish rabbis may
have drawn into greater prominence, but which form the
. groundwork of Christian theology. Zeus, thp licentious
tyrant, the perjured deceiver, the fierce hater, the lover of
revelry and banqueting, who boasts of his immunity from all
restraint and law, is the representative of the Infinite and
Eternal Father. He with Hades and Poseidon represents
the Christian Trinity; but Hades represents also the power
of darkness, and Poseiddn shares the attributes of God with
those of the devil, 2 while all are children of the dethroned
Kronos, in whom again the evil power finds an impersonation. 3
When we survey the whole mass of mythological legend,
when we spread out before us the lives of Zeus and his
attendant gods (scarcely excepting even Athene and Apollon),
we stand aghast at the boldness of an inipiety which has
perhaps never had its parallel. The antediluvian records of
the Old Testament bring before us a horrible picture of brute
violence, resulting possibly from a deification of human will,
which, it would seem, left no room for any theology whatever;
but this is an astounding parody which would seem to be

find anything more hideous and revolt- renders it necessary to examine argu¬
ing,’ than the stories told of Kronos and monts which might otherwise be'passed
his offspring. ‘ It seems blasphemy,’ be by in silence,
adds, ‘to consider these fables of the

THE INQUIRY STRICTLY HISTORICAL. 15

founded not on dim foreshadowings of a true revelation, but chap.
on. the dogmatic statements of the Athanasian Creed. That
a theology thus wilfully falsified should be found with a
people not utterly demoralised, but exhibiting on the whole ^
a social condition of great promise and a moral standard ;
rising constantly higher, is a phenomenon, if possible, still
more astonishing. On the supposition that Greek mythology
was a corrupted religious system, it must, to whatever extent,
have supplied a rule of faith and practice, and the actions
and character of the gods must have furnished a justification
for the excesses of human passion. That no such justification
is alleged, and that the whole system seems to exercise no
influence either on their standard of morality or them common
practice, are signs which might appear to warrant the pre¬
sumption that this mythology was not the object of a moral
belief. The whole question, viewed in this light, is so utterly
perplexing, and apparently so much at.variance with the
conditions of Homeric society, that we are driven to examine
more strictly the evidence on which the hypothesis rests.

We remember that- we are dealing not with a theme for
philosophical speculation,- but with a common question of
fact,', and that Mr. Gladstone assumes not only that there
was a primitive revelation, but that it set forth certain
dogmas. With these assumptions the 'phenomena of my¬
thology must be made to fit: a genuine historical method
excludes all assumptions whatsoever.

If, however, hypothesis is to be admitted, then it must be Attributes
granted that the attributes and functions of the Hellenic
gods have seldom been analysed with greater force, clearness, Apollon,
and skill; nor csin it be denied that Mr. Gladstone's hypo¬
thesis, as in the case 'of Leto, furnishes a plausible explanation
of some things which appear anomalous. 2 But it introduces
the necessity of interpreting mythology so as to square with
a preconceived system, and involves a temptation to lessen

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

or to pass over difficulties which appear to militate against
it. The Homeric legends are not so consistent as for such a
purpose would seem desirable, and there are ttfe-gravest
reasons for not inferring from the silence of the poet that he
was ignorant of other versions than those which he has
chosen to adopt. 1 On the supposition that AthenS and
Apollon represent severally the Divine Redeemer and the
Divine Wisdom, their relation of will to the Supreme Father
becomes a point of cardinal interest and importance. But
when Mr. Gladstone asserts that, ‘ although Athene goes all
lengths in thwarting Jupiter ’ in the Iliad,* 4 yet her aim is
to give effect to a design so unequivocally approved in
Olympus, that Jupiter himself has been constrained to give
way to it,’ he places too far in the background certain other
Homeric incidents which imply a direct contrariety of will.
No weaker term can rightly characterise that abortive con¬
spiracy to bind Zeus, in which she is the accomplice of Here
and Poseidon. In this plot, the deliverance comes not from
Apollon, whose office it is to be ‘ the defender and deliverer
of heaven and the other immortals,’ but from Thetis, the
silver-footed nymph of the sea; 3 and by her wise counsels
Zeus wins the victory over one who is with himself a member
of the traditive Trinity. The same legend qualifies another
statement, that Athene and Apollon are never foiled, defeated,

MYTHICAL KRCWLEDGE OF THE HOMERIC

or outwitted by any other of the gods; 1 for Athene here is CHAP:
foiled by Thetis. Elsewhere we have Apollon, 2 like Poseidon, = J ; .
cheated by Laomeddn ‘whom he had served, and finding a
more congenial master, but yet a master, in Admetos; 3 while
the parentage of the three Kronid brothers 4 and the double
character of Poseidon s stand forth ,as the' most astounding
contradictions of all.

There are other legends which represent Athlne in a light Relations
inconsistent with the personification of the Divine Wisdom. twcenZeus
In the tale of Pandora, at the instigation of Zeus she takes 311 d ,
part in the plot which results in . the increased wickedness Atheue ‘
and misery of man; 6 in that of Prometheus, she aids in the
theft of fire.froni heaven against the will of Zeus, while one
version represents her as acting thus, not from feelings of -
friendship, but from the passion of love. These legends are
not found in our Homer, but it is impossible to prove that
the poet was unacquainted with them. He makes no refer¬
ence to some myths, which are at once among the oldest
and the most beautiful; and he certainly knew of the de¬
thronement of Eronos, as- well as of factions in the new
dynasty of the gods. 7

But if the theory of religions perversion, apart from its Peculiar
moral difficulties, involves some serious contradictions, it
altogether fails to explain why the mythology of the Greeks tfcology.'
assumed many of its peculiar and perhaps most striking
features. It does not show us why some of the gods should

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

be represented pure, others as in part or altogether immoral:
it does not tell us why Zeus and Herakles should he coarse
and sensual, rather than A then 6 and ApollAn; it does hot
explain why Apolldn is made to serve Admdtos, why Herahles
bears the yoke of Eurystheus, and Bellerophdn that of the
Kilikian king. It fails to show why Herakles should appear
as the type of self-restraint and sensuality, of labour and
sluggishness, why names so similar in meaning as Lykddn,
Helios and Phaethon, should be attached to beings whose
mythical history is so different. If for these and other
anomalies there is a method of interpretation which gives a
clear and simple explanation, which shows how such anoma¬
lies crept into being, and why their growth was inevitable—
if this method serves also as a key, not merely to the mytho¬
logy of Greece, but to that of the whole Aryan race, nay,
even to a wider system still, a presumption at least is fur¬
nished, that the simpler method may after all be the truest.

Yet more, the hypothesis of a corrupted revelation involves
some further consequences, which have a material bearing
on the question. That which is so perverted cannot become
clearer and more definite in the very process of corrupt
developement. Not only must the positive truths, imparted
at the first, undergo distortion, but the ideas involved in
them must become weaker and weaker. If the Unity of God
formed one of those primitive truths, then the personality
and the power of Zeus would be more distinct and real in
the earliest times than in the later. The ideas of the Tri¬
nity, of the Redeemer, and of the Divine "Wisdom, would be
more prominent in those first stages of belief in the case of a
people who confessedly were not sustained by new or con¬
tinued revelations. The personality of a Divine Wisdom is
not a dogma which men in a thoroughly rude society could
reason out for themselves; and if it formed part of an original
revelation, the lapse of time would tend to weaken, not to
strengthen it. If, again, this corrupting process had for its
cause a moral corruption going on in the hearts and lives of
men, then this corruption would be intensified in proportion
to the degree in which the original revelation was overlaid.'

force against the supposition that a by Mr. Gladstone preceded the age

-MORALITY OF THE HESIODTC POEMS. 19

In the Hellenic mythology, this process is reversed. Even CHAP.

as it appears in the poems which we call Homeric, it must L _.

have undergone a developement of centuries ; hut if it is im¬
possible to measure, by any reference to an older Greek lite¬
rature, the personality, and attributes of each god as com¬
pared with the conceptions of a previous age, it is obvious
that the general tone of feeling and action, and the popular
standard of morality had not been debased with the growth
of their mythology. Whether the Hesiodic poems belong to
a later period than our Iliad and Odyssey is a question into
which it is unnecessary here to enter: but it must be ad¬
mitted that if their -theology is more systematised, and
their theogony more repulsive, their morality - and philo¬
sophy is immeasurably higher and more true. The latter
may not' exhibit the same heroic strength, they may betray
a querulous spirit not unlike that of the Jewish preacher;
but they display a conviction of the perfect justice and
equity of the Divine Being, and an appreciation of good¬
ness, as being equally the duty and the , interest of man¬
kind, 1 which we could scarcely desire to have strengthened. 2
With the growth of a mythology and its more systematic
arrangement the perception of moral truth has become
more keen and intense; and the same age which listened
to the book of the generations of Zeus, Kronos, and
Aphrodite, learnt wisdom from the pensive precepts of the
‘Works and Days.’

20

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

boon It i s perhaps difficult to determine how far the characters

-2—• of Phoibos and Athene have been drawn out and systematised

m"'of tiie ^ ^e g en i us av >d moral instinct of the poet himself.' We
Homorio have no evidence, in any extant literature, of the precise
VedicMii - s ^ ,a te in which he found the national mythology; bat it seems
thology. unlikely that he had what may be termed a theological
authority for every statement which he makes and every
attribute which he assigns to the one or the other. It is
certain that Athene once conspired against the freedom of
Zeus ; 1 but we cannot tell how far the poet himself intensified
the general harmony of her will to that of the King of gods
and men, nor can we forget that Ushas is as dear to gods and
men as A thene herself, and that Ushas is undeniably nothing
but the morning. But language has furnished evidence, which
it is impossible to resist, of the gradual process which im¬
parted to these mythical deities both their personality and
their attributes. The literature of another branch of the same
Aryan race exhibits a mythology whose substantial identity
with that of the Greeks it is impossible to dispute; but in
that mythology beings, whose personality in the Homeric
poems is sharply drawn and whose attributes are strictly
defined, are still dim and shadowy. Even the great Olym¬
pian king has not received the passions and appetites, and
certainly not the form of man. Nay, in that older mythology
their persons and their attributes are alike interchangeable.
That which among the Greeks we find as a highly developed
and complicated system, is elsewhere a mere mass of floating
legend, nay, almost of mere mythical phrases, without plan
or cohesion. This difference, at first sight so perplexing,
may. itself enable us to discover the great secret of the origin
and growth of all mythology: but the fact remains indis¬
putable that in the Veda, to use the words of Professor Max
Muller, ‘the whole nature of these so-called gods is still
transparent, their first conception in many cases clearly
perceptible. There are as yet no genealogies, no settled
marriages between gods and goddesses. The father is some¬
times the son, the brother is the hpsband, and she who in
one hymn is the mother is in another the wife. As the
1 Iliad, i. 400.

EARLIER TEDIC LITERATURE.

conceptions of the poet vary, so varies the nature of these
gods. Nowhere is the wide distance which separates the
ancient poems of India from the most ancient literature of
Greece more clearly felt, than when we compare the growing
myths of the Veda with the full-grown and decayed myths
on which the poetry of Homer is founded.’ 1 But the un¬
formed mythology of the Veda followed in its own land a
course analogous to that of the mythology of Greece. There
was the same systematic developement, with this difference,
that in India the process was urged on by a powerful sacerdotal
order who found them interest in the expansion of the old
belief. In the earlier Vedas there is no predominant priest¬
hood, and only the faintest indications of caste; there are no
temples, no public worship, and, as it would seem, no images
of the gods; and (what is of immeasurably greater importance
in reference, to the mythological creed of the Homeric poets)
there are, in the words of Horace Wilson, ‘ no indications of
a triad, the creating, preserving, and destrcying power.-
Brahma does, not appear as-a deity, and Vishnu, although
named, has nothing in common with the Vishnu of the

Puranas: no allusion occurs to his Avataras. These

differences are palpable, and so far from the Vedas being the

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATION'S.

basis of tbe existing system, they completely overturn it.’ 1
The comparison is scarcely less fatal to the mythological'
Trinity of the Greeks.

f We come at length to the question of fact. What was the
measure of divine truth imparted to man on his creation, or
immediately after the fall, and under what forms was it con¬
veyed? If, when stated thus, the question should be one
which we cannot absolutely determine, we may yet ask, was
■it a revelation as explicit and extensive as Mr. Gladstone
represents it to have been ? To allege the rabbinical tradi¬
tions and speculations of comparatively recent times 2 as
evidence for the latent meaning of Greek mythology, is to
treat the subject in a way which would simply make any
solution of the problem impossible. The force of a current,
when its stream has been divided, will not tell us much about
the course or depth of kindred streams which have branched
off in other directions. Accordingly, although later traditions
appear to be blended in his idea of the primitive belief, 3 Mr.
Gladstone rightly insists that' the Homeric mythology must,
if his hypothesis be correct, show the vestiges of a traditional
^knbwlpd ge^depyeds fron£ Jhg ?ep'o'ch'"when the covenant of
^oS : 'wi?Bfr5ai^5Stf?iy ! 0?e promise of a Messiah, had not yet
fallen within the contracted forms of Judaism for shelter,’ 4
and that these traditions must ‘ carry upon them the mark
of belonging to the religion which the Book of Genesis
represents as brought by our -first parents from Paradise and
as delivered by them to. their immediate descendants in
general.’ 3 Thus the era of the division of races is the latest
limit to which we can bring down a common tradition for all
mankind; and for that tradition we are confined to the first
eleven chapters of the book of Genesis.

Prom these chapters we must derive our proof that our
first parents and their immediate • descendants possessed the
idea of an Infinite Being whose perfect goodness arose, not

‘Professor H. H. Wilson, in the. character of the Vedic religion deserve'the
Edinburgh Bcvicto for October 1860, deepest attention. They seem entirely
Ho. CCXXVIII. p. 382 ; and Vishnu to subvert the hypothesis which Mr.
Purana, p. ii., where he emphatically Gladstone has maintained,
denies that the old Vedic religion was * Gladstone, Homer, $c. ii. 50.

idolatrous. His remarks on the general * Ibid . 48. 4 Rid. 3. 4 Ibid. 4.

PRIMEVAL REVELATION'. , 23

from external restraints, but from an unchangeable internal CHAP,
determination of character 1 —of a Trinity of Co-equal Per- L
sons in the Divine. Unity—of a Redeemer who should here¬
after assume their nature and deliver from death and sin—of
a Divine Wisdom which was with Cod from the beginning,
and of an Evil One, who, having fallen from his throne in
heaven, had now become an antagonistic power, tempting-
men to their destruction. 2

. Whether these early chapters may contain this theological its charac-
scheme by just and legitimate inference, whether the words ter -
there written may contain the earnest and the warrant of the
full Christian revelation, are questions with which we are not
here concerned. It is not a question of doctrine or belief or
theological analysis. It is a simple question of fact which
must determine whether various races of mankind were or
were not guilty of wilful perversion of high and mysterious
doctrines. Here, if anywhere, that purification of the in¬
tellect would seem to be ne'eded, the lack of which tends to
a substitution of traditional teaching or association for an
impartial sifting of evidence. 3 There was a time when these
early records formed the whole literature of the people; and,
to adopt Mr. Gladstone’s expression, it would not be ‘ safe to
make any large assumption respecting a traditional know¬
ledge of any parts of early revelation ’ beyond what those
records actually contain. 4 Taken wholly by themselves, and
not interpreted by the light thrown on them by the thought
and belief of later ages, these records tell us of man as being
(in some, sense not explicitly defined) made, in the Divine
image and likeness—of one positive prohibition, the violation
of which was to be followed by immediate death—of a subtle
beast which tempts the woman to disobey the command, and
of a sense of shame which follows the transgression. They
tell us of flight and hiding when the man hears the voice of
God walking ip the garden in the cool of the day—of an at¬
tempt to transfer the blame from the man to the woman,

■ Gladstone, Homer, tfc. ii. 18. fall strictly under (his class. ReeGroie,

’ TAe'necessity of such a process in vufvm. ](^ <h '

all questions of foot will scarcely bo 4 Gladstone, Homer, <J*c. ii. -10.
disputed, and llic present would seem to

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book from the woman to the serpent—of a sentence ofi$ilutai$&tion

■-—- passed upon the latter, with the warning that ite kjial’fehould

he bruised by the woman’s seed—of a life of toil sisM.' labour
for the former, ending with a return to the dust ftrfrij which
he had been made. Besides this, they tell us bffijjwjr that
after some generations men began to call upon the home of
the Lord; that in the course of time they sank (with but one
exception) into brute lust and violence; and that on the
renovation of the earth men were made answerable for each
other’s, blood, and received the token of the rainbow as a
warrant for the future permanence of the course of nature,
But of any revelation before the fall, beyond a command to
till the garden and to abstain from the fruit of a particular
tree, these records give not the slightest indication,
limits of If the doctrines which, in Mr. Gladstone’s belief, made
dence.' 1 " U P ^e P r i m itive revelation, are contained in these chapters,
it is, he admits, by a dim and feeble foreshadowing. 1 They
tell us nothing of God in the perfection of His nature, or of
a Unity of Three Persons in the Godhead. They tell us of a
subtle serpent, not of a fallen angel, of the seed of the woman
, as bruising that serpent’s head, not of a Divine’ Redeemer

delivering from sin and spiritual death. Still less do they
tell us of a Divine Wisdom, of an institution of sacrifice, 3 or
of a spiritual communion in prayer as existing from the first
between man and God. All these doctrines may be legiti¬
mate deductions ; but if to us the record itself gives only
mysterious glimpses of a future fuller revelation, if to us
these inferences from its contents are the result of careful
comparison with the later books of the Old Testament, if
even to us their harmony with the belief of prophets and
righteous men of later ages seems clear only because we have
been taught to regard it as clear, then what evidence have
we that in the time of which the third chapter of Genesis
speaks to us, our parents had a full apprehension of what

. ALLEGED CORRUPTION OP REVELATION

even to U| apart from later associations would be faint and CHAP,
shadowy ? For if on the revelation made to them the vast
mass of Greek mythology grew up as a corrupt incrustation,
they must have received these truths not in their germ but
hi full dogmatic statement. It is difficult to understand
how such a statement would have been to them anything
more than a dead unmeaning formula, waiting to be quick¬
ened into life by the breath of a later revelation or by the
evidence of later facts.

If, again, there is any one lesson which may be • drawn Course of
before others from the character of the Old Testament
records, it is that ideas, dim and feeble at first, acquire Testament,
gradually strength and consistency, that the clearness of
revelation is increased as the stream widens, and that all
positive belief is the result of years and generations of disci¬
pline. But in some mysterious way, while the course of the
Jewish people was from the lesser to . the greater, they in
whose hands the Homeric theology was moulded started with
a fulness of doctrinal knowledge which was not attained by
the former until a long series of centuries had passed away.

If, further, an acceptance of the records of the book of GrseV cor-
Genesis involves no assumption of the previous existence of
traditions or doctrines not mentioned in those records, it
frees us not less from the necessity of supposing that in all
but the Jewish world a process was going on directly con¬
trary to that under which the Israelites were being trained..

But while we assent to Mr. Gladstone’s remark on the ease
with which these' foreshadowings of the Trinity and of
Redemption might pass into polytheism and anthropo¬
morphism, it would scarcely argue a spirit of irreverence if
we asked why doctrinal statements should have been given
which the receivers could not understand, and which under
these conditions rendered such a transition not merely likely
hut inevitable.

There is an'instinctive reluctance to accept any theory Nfmsiry
whicli heightens human depravity and corruption, unless
there are weighty reasons for doing so. 1 And, unquestion- Guinutw

2G

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK ably, on the hypothesis which has just been esaifSaef, the '
•—- mythology of the Greeks exhibits an instance of wffifhl and
profane perversion, tp which perhaps we can find no parallel.
But the character of that mythology still remains when we
have rejected this supposition. We have still before ns the
chronicles or legends of gods who not merely eat and drink
and sleep, but display the working of the vilest of human
. passions. Some process, therefore, either conscious or un¬
conscious, must have brought about a result so perplexing ;
and if even for conscious invention there must have been
some groundwork, much more must this be the case if we
take up an alternative which even less admits the exercise
of a creative faculty.

Conditions If then, apart from the controversies which have gathered
inquiry. round the documents which compose the book of Genesis,
we gain from the earliest Jewish records no knowledge of the
mode in which mythology was developed, it is clear that, if
the question is ever to be answered, we must seek the evi¬
dence in the history of language and of ancient civilisation.
If both alike seem to carry us back to a time in which the
condition of man resembled most nearly that of an infant,
we can but accept the evidence of facts, so far as those facts
are ascertained and understood. The results of archaeological
researches may not be flattering to human vanity. They
may reveal a coarse brutality from which during a long series
of ages man rose in the struggle for existence to some notion
of order and law. They may disclose a state of society in
which a hard apathy and a stupid terror seemed to render all
intellectual growth impossible, and in which a religion of fear
found its universal expression in human sacrifices. 1 Yet the

COMPARISON" OP LEGENDS.

27

picture, if- it be gloomy, introduces no new difficulties beside CHAP,
those with which philosophers or theologians have to contend
already in their attempts to explain the phenomena of the
material or moral world. The fact that there has been
growth, the fact that out of such poor elements there has been
developed a knowledge of the relations in which men stand
to each other and of the consequences which flow from these
relations, is of itself the evidence that at all times and in all
places, the Divine Spirit has been teaching and educating
the children of men, that always and everywhere God has
been doing the work of which we now see darkly but a very
small part, and of which hereafter we shall better understand
the nature and purpose.

If then the mythology of the Aryan nations is to be Allegorical
studied to good purpose, • the process applied to their
legends must be strictly scientific. In every Aryan land myths,
we have a vast mass of stories, some preserved in great epic
poems, some in the pages of mythographers or historians,
some in- tragic, lyric, or comic poetry, and some again only
in the oral tradition or folklore of the people. All these, it
is clear, must he submitted to that method of comparison
and differences- by which inductive science has achieved its
greatest triumphs. Not a step must be taken on mere con¬
jecture: not a single result must be anticipated by ingenious
hypothesis. For the reason of their existence we must
search, not in our own moral convictions, or in those of
ancient (Greeks or Romans, but in the substance and mate¬
rials of the myths themselves. We must deal with their
incidents and their names. We must group the former ac¬
cording to their points of likeness and difference; we must
seek to interpret the latter by the principles which have
been established an'd accepted as the laws of philological
analysis. It becomes therefore unnecessary to notice at

28

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK length any of those hypotheses or assumptions wlihjh resolve
v_—i—. the Aryan myths into allegories, or explain, theta as expres¬
sions of high truth in theology, morality, or art. It would
scarcely he necessary to notice such theories at all, were it
not that they are from time to time revived by writers who
from their manifest earnestness and sincerity, and from the
grea t good which they have done, may fairly claim to be
heard. It may, however, be enough to take some of these
theories, and to show that they are not true to the features
of the myths which they profess to explain, and that inter¬
pretations which twist some of the incidents and names of a
story and ignore others, while they treat each tale as stand¬
ing by itself, cannot be regarded as trustworthy.

Lord In the opinion of Lord Bacon, the story of the Sphinx was

method ' an e ^ e g' an ’t and instructive fable,’ ‘ invented to represent
science, especially as joined with practice.’ His reason for
so thinking was that ‘ science may without absurdity be
called a monster, being strangely gazed at and admired by
the ignorant and unskilful.’. The composite figure of the
Sphinx indicates ‘ the vast variety of. subjects that science
considers ’; the female countenance attributed to her denotes
the ‘ gay appearance ’ of science and her ‘ volubility of
speech.’ Her wings show that ‘ the sciences and their in¬
ventions must fly about in a moment, for knowledge, like
light communicated from one torch to another, is presently
caught and copiously diffused.’ Her sharp and hooked
talons are ‘ the axioms and arguments of science,’ which
‘ enter the mind, lay hold of it, fix it down, and keep it from
moving and slipping away.’ She is placed on a crag over¬
looking the Theban city, because ‘ all science seems placed on
high, as it were on the tops of mountains that are hard to
climb.’ Like her, ‘ science is said to beset the highways,
because, through all the journey and peregrination of human
life, there is matter and occasion offered of contemplation.’
If the riddles which the Sphinx receives from the Muses
bring with them trouble and disaster, it is because ‘ practice
urges and impels to action, choice, and determination,’ and
thus questions of science ‘ become torturing, severe, and
trying, and unless solved and interpreted, strangely perplex

29

LORD bacon’s method or dealing with myths.

and harass the human mind, rend it 'every way, and perfectly CHAP.

tear it to pieces.’ The fable, in Bacon’s judgment, adds with •_J;_.

the ‘ utmost elegance,’ ‘ that, when .Sphinx was conquered,
her carcass was laid upon an ass; for there is nothing so
subtle and abstruse but, after being once made plain, intelli¬
gible, and common, it may be received by the lowest capa¬
city.’ But he feels himself, bound not to omit that ‘ Sphinx
was conquered by a lame man and impotent in his feet, for
men usually make too much haste to the solution of Sphinx’s
riddles ; whence it happens that, she prevailing, their minds
are rather racked and tom by disputes than- invested with
command by works arid effects.’

A large number of the Greek myths are made by Lord Its conse-
Bacon to yield ‘ wisdom ’ of this kind, and it is quite pos- queucci ”
sible that the same process might be applied with equal
success to all Greek, or even all Aryan myths. Such inter¬
pretations certainly tend to show how great our debt of
gratitude must be to a set of mysterious philosophers, pro¬
phets, or politicians, who,, living before there were any con¬
stitutions, alliances, confederacies, and diplomacy, furnished
in the form of amusing stories a complete code for the
guidance of kings, members of parliament, cabinet ministers,
and ambassadors. It would be unfair to grudge to these
interpretations the praise of cleverness and ingenuity; but
the happy turns which they sometimes exhibit are more than
counterhalanced by misrepresentations of the myths them¬
selves. The comparison of the claws and talons of the
Sphinx to the axioms and arguments of science may be both
amusing and instructive; but the ass which carries her
carcass is seemingly a creature of his own imagining, and
Oidipous was neither lame nor impotent in his feet when he
came to the final conflict. The reason, also, by which Bacon
accounts for this fact, would be an argument for making
Oidipous not the conqueror, but only another of the victims
of the Sphinx. * •

But, ingenious as Bacon’s interpretations may have been, surD intci-
they were emphatically unscientific. To him these Greek j.,‘ : 1, !
stories were isolated or detached fables, whose growth it was tific.
superfluous to trace, and to each of which he might attach

30

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATO}®.

HOOK any explanation which might seem best to fit or to give most

-j—- significance to its leading incidents. In short, they were

things with regard to which he saw no need of following
rules which in all the processes of science and in all matters
of fact he would have held to be indispensable. Had he
followed these rules, he might, even without a knowledge of
the language or the myths of other cognate tribes, have seen
that the Hellenic legend of Oidipous and the Sphinx could
not be judged of rightly apart from a comparison with other
tales. He would have seen that Oidipous was not the only
child exposed on a mountain side, or rescued by a shepherd,
or doomed to slay his father or grandgire, and to conquer a
snake, dragon, or other monster. He would have seen that
these beings, with features more or less resembling each other
in all the stories, were yet each spoken of under a different
name, that the Sphinx of the Theban myth became the
Python or Echidna, the Gorgon or Minotaur or Chimaira or
Hydra of another, and that these names must be accounted
for not less than the incidents of the tale. He might have
perceived that the names in some or many of these legends
bore a certain analogy to each other, and that as the names
could not be the result of accident, the explanation which
would account for the myth must account also for them, and
that short of this result no interpretation could be accepted
as adequate. The discovery that Bacon’s mode of extracting
from myths the ‘ wisdom of the ancients ’ is thoroughly un¬
scientific, releases us from any further duty of examining in
detail either his explanations or even others, urged by more
recent writers, which may resemble them in theory or
method.

31

CHAPTER II.

THE RELATION OP MYTHOLOGY TO LANGUAGE.

The analysis of language has fully justified the anticipation CHAT,
of Locke, that ‘ if we could trace them to their sources, we - 1L -
should find in all languages' the 1 names which stand for Origin of
things that fall not under our senses to have had their first
rise from sensible ideas.’ So thoroughly, indeed, has this
conjecture'been verified, that the assertion is fast passing
into the number of trite and hackneyed sayings; and though
the interest and vast importance of the fact remains, few are
now tempted to question- the conclusion that every word -
employed to express the-highest theological or metaphysical
conceptions at first denoted mere sensuous perception.

‘ Spiritus,’ says Professor Max Muller ‘ is certainly derived r
from a verb spirare, which means to draw breath. The same
applies ia. animus. Animus, the mind, as Cicero says, is so
called from anima, air. The root is an, which in Sanskrit
means to blow, and which has given rise to the Sanskrit and
Greek words for wind an-ila and dn-emos. Thus the Greek
thymes, the soul, comes from tlvyein, to rush, to move violently,
the Sanskrit dim, to shake. Prom dhu, we have in Sanskrit,
dhuli, dust, which comes from the same root, and ‘ dhuma-,’
smoke, the Latin funms. In Greek the same root supplied
thyella, storm-wind, and thymos, the soul, as the seat of the
passions. Plato guesses correctly when he says (Crat. p.

' 419) that thymds, soul, is so called and %asa>s xa! £eVew?

■njt ifrvxqs.’ It is the same with the word soul. ‘ Soul is
the Gothic saivala, and this is clearly related to another
Gothic word, sdivs, which means the sea. The sea was
called saivs from a root si or siv, the Greek sciu, to shake; it

MYTHOLOGY OF

E AKYAIf NATfGKS.

meant the tossed-about water in contradistinctions to stfig-
- nant or running water. The soul being called earnala, we
seeArfiat it was originally conceived by the Teutonic nations
/•M a sea within, heaving up and down with every breath,
and reflecting heaven and earth on the mirror of the deep.’ 1

If to these primaeval sensuous words we are indebted for
all the wealth of human language, these words must neces¬
sarily have possessed a,n almost boundless power of expansion.
A single instance will amply suffice to prove this fact. The
old root which expressed the idea of crushing, grinding, or
pounding has given birth not only to its direct representatives
the Greek jU.dX.77, the Latin mola, the Irish meile, and the
English mill and meal ; but it may be traced through a vast
number of words between the meaning of vyhieh there is no
obvious connection. In the Greek p,dpvap.at , to fight, the
root has acquired that metaphorical meaning which is
brought out more clearly in-its intransitive forma. In these
it embodies naturally the ideas of decay, softening, or de¬
struction ; and so it furnished a name for man, as subject to
disease and death, the morbus • and mors of the Latins. If
again man was (3poTos or mortal, the gods were ap/Sporoi, and
drank of the amrita cup of immortality. 2 The grinding away
of time was expressed in the Latin mora, and in the French
demeurer, while the idea of dead water is perhaps seen in
mare, mer, the sea. The root was fruitful in proper names.
The Greeks had their gigantic Moliones, or Pounders, while
the Norseman spoke of the hammer of Thor Miolnir. So,
again, the huge Aloadai derived their name from dXanf, the
threshing-floor, a word belonging to the same root, as aXsvpov,
corn, existed in the form pdXsvpov. From the same source
came the Sanskrit Maruts, or Storms, the Latin Mars, the
Slavonic Morana, and the Greek apr}s and dps rt}. But the
root passes into other shades of meaning. Under the form
marj or mraj, it gave birth to the Greek pMXr/a, the Latin
mulgeo and mulceo, the English milk (all meaning, originally,
to stroke); and in these words, as well as in the Greek /SXdf,
/mXaicos, p,a\8da<jw, the Latin marcidus and mollis, the Greek

STAGES IN THE GROWTH OP LANGUAGE.

/•&.(, and Latin mel, it passed into the ideas of softness, cfap.
sweetness, languor, and decay. From the notion of melting . IL .
the transition was. easy to that of desiring or yearning, and
we find it, accordingly, in this sense, in the Greek
and 't\£ofuu (which may on good. ground be traced to an
older fih\&ofiat), and finally, in eAwtr, hope. Not less strange,
yet not less evident, is the passage of the root jam, from its
original force of making or producing (as shown in the San¬
skrit janas, the Greek yevo?, yovevs, and yovos, the English
kin ; in the Sanskrit janalca, the Teutonic konig, the English
king, in yvvq, and queen , and quean) to the abstract idea of
knowing, as seen in the Sanskrit jnd, the Greek yv&vai, the
Latin gnosco, the English know. The close relationship of
the two ideas is best seen in'the Teutonic kann (can) and
kenne (ken). 1

The facts which the growth of these words bring before us origin of
are in the strictest sense historical. The later meanings )an E M S e -
presuppose the earlier significations, and the stages are
reached in a chronological- as well as a philosophical order,
while the several developments mark an advance of human
thought, and a change in the conditions of human society.

From the highest conceptions of the profoundest thinkers,
we are carried back step by step to the rudest notions of an
intellect slowly and painfully awakening into consciousness;
and we realise the several phases of prim aval life, as vividly
as if they had been recorded by contemporary chroniclers.

But if the process invests the study of words with a sig¬
nificance which it is impossible to overrate, it completely
strips the subject of its mystery. No room is left for theories
which traced the origin of speech to a faculty no longer
possessed by mankind, 2 when the analysis of words exhibits
from the beginning the working of the same unvarying laws. 3
If thfe words denoting- purely spiritual ideas are all evolved
from roots expressing mere sensuous perceptions, if these

34

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book words are thus confessedly accidental or arbitrary or con-

-—_■ ventional signs, without any essential or necessary ration to

the notions signified, although they are a necessary growth
from the original verbal stem, the real question-at issue is
set at rest. The sensations expressed in these primary words
are felt by infants, by the deaf and dumb, by brute animals,
as well as by speaking men; they might therefore, rather
they must, have been felt by man before he made the first
attempt to acquaint his comrade with the thoughts which
were passing in his own mind. The word was needed not to
enable him to realise the perception for himself; but to give
him the power of awakening the same idea in another. It
mattered not, therefore, what sound conveyed the thought,
so long as the signal or message was understood; and thus,
where at the outset all was arbitrary, there might be many
signs for the same object or the same idea. ' The notions
which, as we have seen, found expression in words derived
from the roots ME or ML, might have been denoted as
easily by words derived from the stem GE. And in feet the
latter has been scarcely less fertile than the former. To it
we owe the words which denote the grating and grinding
sound of things rubbed forcibly against each other, the grain
which serves as grist for the mill, the gravel which the digger
scrapes up as he delves his grave, the groan of pain, the
grunt of indolence, the scribbling of the child and the deli¬
cate engraving of a Bewick or an’ Albert 'Durer. 1 We see,
further, that words drawn from imitations of natural sounds
have furnished names for impressions made on other senses
besides that of hearing, and that a presumption is thus
furnished for the similar origin of all words whatsoever.
Immo- It may seem a poor foundation for a fabric so magnificent
WHty of as the language of civilised mankind ; 1 but whatever belief
racef*. may be entertained of the first beginnings of articulate

To tliis
ic for I

i Scottish gimel, the Lithuanian
air nos, the Gothic quairnus , our quern.
Max Muller, ‘ Comparative Mythology/' .
Chip*,from a German Workshop, ii. 43.

3 ‘Never in the history of man has
there been a new language. What does

thht mean ? Neither more nor less than
that in speaking as we do, we aveChsing
the same materials, however broken up,
crushed, and put together anew, which
were handled by the first speaker, i.e.

Max Mullerj Chips, il 255.

LANGUAGE AND BACK . ~

speech, the gradual growth of language from its earliest
elements is disputed by none j and the examination of our
own language carries us back to a condition of thought not
many degrees higher than that of tribes which we regard as
sunk in hopeless barbarism.. Yet that this difference of
degree involved in this instance a difference of kind is proved
by the very fact that the one class of men has risen inde¬
finitely in the scale of being, while the other exhibits no
power whether of self-culture or of imitation. These' are facts
which, like other physical facts, we cannot gainsay, although
we may not be called on to determine the further question of
the unify or plurality of the human raeeJ The point with
which we are more immediately concerned,. is the light
thrown by the history of words on the social and political
history of the race, and'on the consequences which followed
the disruption or separation of tribes speaking dialects more
or less closely akin.

30

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK It can never be too often repeated that the fecfcs laid bare
V—• in the course of philological inquiry are as strictly historical
Historical as any which are recorded of the campaigns of Hannibal,
t,ho ana- Wellington, or Napoleon. The words possessed in common
langmf e ^y different Aryan languages point to the fact that these
now separated tribes once dwelt together as a single people,
while a comparison of these common words with others
peculiar to the several dialects furnishes evidence of the
material condition of the yet undivided race. Thus, from
the identity of words connected with peaceful occupations as
contrasted with the varying terms for war and hunting. Pro¬
fessor Max Miiller gathers ‘that all the Aryan nations
had led a long life of peace before they separated, and that
their language acquired individuality and nationality as each
colony started in search of new homes, new generations
forming new terms connected with the warlike and adventu¬
rous life of their onward migrations.’ 1 But these new terms
were evolved from the common stock of verbal stems, and
the.readiness with which these roots lent themselves to new
shades of meaning would not only render it easier to express
thoughts already nee^ng utterance, but would itself be a
fruitful source of new ideas and notions. This process would
be, in fact, a multiplication of living images and objects, for
all names in the earliest stages of language were either
masculine or feminine, ‘ neuters being of later growth, and
distinguishable chiefly in the nominative.’ Thus the forjns
of language would tend to keep up a condition of thought*
analogous to that of infants ; and the conscious life of all
natural objects, inferred at first from the consciousness of
personality in the speaker or thinker, would become an
article of belief sanctioned by the paramount authority of
names, and all descriptions of phenomena would bring before
them the actions of conscious beings. Man would thus be

1 So again from the fact that in us lessons more important than all the
Sanskrit, Greek,and Gothic, '/ know' is traditions put together, which tta in-
expressed by a perfect, meaning origin- habitants of India, Greece and«Ger-
ally ‘ I have perceived,’ Professor Max many, have preserved of their earliest
Muller infers that ‘ this fashion or idiom migrations, and' of the foundations of
had become permanent before the Greeks their empires, ascribed to their gods,
separated from the Hindus, before the orto the sons of theirgods and heroines.’
Hindus became unintelligible to the —Chips, ii. 2M.

Germans:’ Sach facts, he insists, teach

THE INFANCY OF -THE ARYAN RACE.

37

living in a magic circle, in which words would strengthen an CHAP,
illusion inseparable from the intellectual condition of child- . IL -
hood. Yet we can scarcely fail to see the necessity of his
being left to ascertain the truth or falsehood of his im¬
pressions.by the^oatient observatipn of facts, if he was ever
to attain to a real knowledge and a true method for its
attainment—if, in other words, he was to have an education,
such as the wisest teacher would bestow upon a child. Ages
may have been needed to carry him forward a single step in
the upward course; but the question of time can throw no
doubt on the source , from which the impulse came. The
advance made, whether quick or slow, would be as much the
work of God as the existence of man in the class of mam¬
malia. Until it can he shown that our,powers of sensation
and motion are self-originated, the developement of a higher
idea from a sensuous conception must he ascribed to the
Divine Spirit, as truly as the noblest thought which can be
embraced by the human mind. Hence each stage in the
growth of language marks the formation of new wants, new
ideas, and new relations. , c It was an event in the history of
man,’ says Professor Max Muller, ‘ when the ideas of father,
mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, were first conceived
and first uttered. It was a new era when the numerals from
one to ten had been framed, and when words like law, right,
duty, generosity, love, had been added to the dictionary of
man. It was a revelation, the greatest of all revelations,

'when the conception of a Creator, a Ruler, a Father of man,
when the name of God was for the first time uttered in this
world .’ 1 -

In that primaeval time, therefore, after he had learnt to Earliest
express his bodily feelings in articulate sounds, but before he

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN

had risen to any definite conception of a Divine man

could interpret the world around him through the medium
of bis own sensations. It was thus impossible that he could
fail to attribute sensations like his own to every object on
which his eyes rested in the material universe. His notions
about things external to himself would he the direct result
of his psychological condition; and for their utterance he
would have in, language an instrument of, boundless power.

39

CHAPTER III.

THE SOUBCE OP MYTHICAL SPEECH.

Ip the analysis of language and the researches of antiquarians CHAP,
bring before us, in the earliest annals of mankind, a state of . .

society which bears to our own a resemblance not greater The in-
than that of infancy to mature manhood, we shall scarcely mankind,
realise that primaeval condition of thought except by studying
closely the mind of children. Stubborn facts disclose as the
prominent characteristics of that early time the selfishness
and violence, the cruelty and slavishness of savages; yet the
mode in which they regarded the external world became a
source of inexhaustible beauty, a fountain of the most ex¬
quisite and touching poetry. So true to nature and so lovely
are the forms into which their language passed, as they spoke
of the manifold phases of the changing year; so deep is the
tenderness with which they describe the death of the sun-
stricken dew, the brief career of the short-lived sun, and
the agony of the earth-mother mourning for her summer-
child, that we are tempted to reflect back upon the speakers
the purity and truthfulness of their words. If the theory of
a corrupted revelation as the origin of mythology imputes to
whole nations a gross and wilful profanity which consciously
travesties the holiest things, the simplicity of thought which
belongs to. the earliest myths presents, as some have urged,
a picture of primaeval humanity too fair and flattering.

No deep insight into the language and ways of children is Earliest
needed to dispel such a /ancy as this. The child who will
speak of the dawn and the twilight as the Achaian spoke of an'i ia
Prokris and Eos will also be cruel or false or cunning. q„' ou 'fiii.
There is no reason why man in his earliest state should not
express his sorrow when the bright being who had gladdened

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATHS®,

him with his radiance dies in the evening, or ijsel a real joy
when he rises again in the morning, and yet be selfish or
oppressive or cruel in his dealings with his fellows. His
mental condition determined the character of his language,
and that condition exhibits in him, as in children now, the
working of a feeling which endows all outward things with a
life not unlike his own. Of the several objects which met
his eye he had no positive knowledge, whether of their
origin, their nature, or their properties. But he had life,
and therefore all things else must have life also. He was
under no necessity of personifying them, for he had for him¬
self no distinctions between conscioulness and personality.
He knew nothing of the conditions of his own life or of any
other, and therefore all things on the earth or in the heavens
were invested with the same vague idea of existence. The
sun, the moon, the stars, the ground on which he trod, the
clouds, storms, and lightnings were all living beings ; could
he help thinking that, like himself, they were conscious
beings also ? 1 His very words would, by an inevitable ne¬
cessity, express this conviction. His language would admit
no single expression from which the attribute of life was
excluded, while it would vary the forms of that life with
unerring instinct. Every object would be a living reality.

THE MYTHOPffilC STAGE OP LANGUAGE.

and every word a speaking picture. For him there would he
no bare recurrence of days and seasons, but each morning
the dawn would drive her bright flocks to the blue pastures
of heaven before the birth of the lord of day from the toiling
womb of night. Round the living progress of the new-born
sun there would be grouped a lavish imagery, expressive of
the most intense sympathy with what we term the operation
of material forces, and not less expressive of the utter absence
of even the faintest knowledge. Life would be an alternation
of joy and sorrow, of terror and relief; for every evening the
dawn would return leading her bright flocks,’ and the short¬
lived sun would die. Tears might pass, or ages, before his
rising again would establish even the weakest analogy; but
in the meanwhile man would mourn for his death, as for the
loss of one who might never return. For every aspect of the
material world he would have ready some life-giving ex¬
pression; and those aspects would be scarcely less varied
than his words. The same object would at different times,
or under different conditions, awaken the most opposite or in¬
consistent conceptions. But these conceptions and the words
which expressed them would exist side by side without pro¬
ducing the slightest consciousness of their incongruity; nor
is it easy to determine the exact order in which they might
arise. The sun would awaken both mournful and inspiriting
ideas, ideas of victory and defeat, of toil and premature death.
He would be the Titan, strangling the serpents of the night
before he drove his chariot up the sky; and he would also be
the being who, worn down by unwilling labour undergone
for men, sinks wearied into the arms of the mother who bare
him in the morning. Other images would not be wanting;
the dawn and the dew and the violet clouds would be not
less real and living than the sun. In his rising from the
east he would quit the fair dawn, whom he should see no more
till his labour drew towards its close. And not less would he
love and be loved by the*dew and by the morning herself,
while to both his life would be fatal as his fiery car rose
higher in the sky. So would man speak of all other things
also; of the thunder and the earthquake and the storm, not
less than of summer and winter. But it would be ho per-

42

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK sonificatibn, and still less would it be an allegory or mctapbcrp.

«- r —• It would be to him a veritable reality, which heexanSned

and analysed as little as he reflected on himself. It would
be a sentiment and a belief, but in no sense a religion.

Primary In these spontaneous utterances of thoughts awakened by
outward phenomena, we have the source of the myths which
must be regarded as primary. But it is obvious that such
myths would be produced only so long as the words em¬
ployed were used in their original meaning. While men
were conscious of describing only the departure of the sun
when they said ‘ Endymion sleeps,’ the myth had not passed
beyond its first stage; .but if once the meaning of the word
were either in part or wholly forgotten, the creation of a
new personality under this name would become inevitable,
and the change would be rendered both more certain and
more rapid by the very wealth of words which they lavished
on the sights and objects which most impressed their imagi¬
nation. A thousand phrases would be used to describe the
action of the beneficent or consuming sun, of the gentle or
awful night, of the playful or furious wind: and every word
or phrase became the germ of a new story, as soon as the
mind lost its hold on the original force of the name. 1
Secondary-. Thus in the Polyonymy which was the result of the earliest
my th s. f orm of human thought, we have the germ of the great epics
of later times, and of the countless legends which make up
the rich stores of mythical tradition. There was no bound
or limit to the images suggested by the sun in his ever
varying aspects; and for every one of these aspects they
would have a fitting expression, nor could human memory
retain the exact meaning of all these phrases when the men
who used them had been scattered from their original home.
Old epithets would now. become the names of new beings,
and the legends so framed would constitute the class of
secondary myths. But in all this there would be no disease

1 ‘.That Titanic assurance with-which servitude, chained for a time, and hound
we say, the sun must rise, was unknown to obey a higher will, but sure to rise,
to the early worshippers of nature, or if like Herakles, to a higher glory at the
they also began to feel the regularity end of their labours.’—Max Muller,
with which the sun and the other stars ‘ Comparative Mythology,’ Chips,
perform their daily labour, they still ii. 96.
thought of free beings kept in temporary

43

• THE PHENOMENA OP THE DAT.

of language. The failure would be that of memory alone,— chap.
a failure inevitable, yet not to be regretted, when we think ■ m ~ ■
of the rich harvest of beauty which the poets of many ages
and many lands have reaped from these half-remembered
words. 1

It mattered little, then, of what object or phenomenon they Polyono-
might happen to speak. It might be the soft morning light th 0
or the fearful storin-cloud, the wind or the thunder. In growth of
each case there would be Polyonymy, the employment of
many names to denote the same thing. In each.case, their
words would express truthfully the impressions which the
phenomena left on their senses, and their truthfulness would
impart to their language an undying beauty; but the most
fruitful source of mythical phrases would be found un¬
doubtedly in the daily or yearly course of the lord of day.

In the thonght of these early ages the sun was the child of
night, or darkness; the dawn came before he was bom, and
died as he rose in the heavens. He strangled the serpents
of the night; he went forth like a bridegroom out of his
chamber, and like a giant' to run his course. He had to do'
battle with clouds and storms. Sometimes his light grew
dim under their gloomy veil, and the children of men shud¬
dered at the wrath of the hidden sun. Sometimes his ray
broke forth only, -after brief splendour, to sink beneath a
deeper darkness ; sometimes he burst forth at the end of his
course, trampling on the clouds which had dimmed his

1 In his Lectures on Language, second
series, 358, Professor Max Muller asserts
that ‘•whenever any word, that was at
first new metaphorically, is new without
a clear conception of the steps that led
to its original metaphorical meaning,
there is danger of mythology; whenever
those steps are forgotten and artificial
steps put in their places, wc have
mythology, or, if I may so, we have
diseased langwigc, whether that lan¬
guage refers to religious or Ocular
interests/ The mythology thus pro¬
duced he terms the hnno of antiquity.
This view is opposed by M. Paudry
in his - able paper, Ik rhifcrpr/'ta-'
lion Myfhotogigue- After quoting the

langage accuse do maludie el do revoke,

fort injustemont a nofcro avis, car la

Max Muller and that of M. ttimlr
•With thefonm-r, mythology ar.Vs win
the stops which led Uy metaphor ;r

44

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,

BOOK brilliance and bathing his pathway with blood. Sometimes,
—‘—. beneath mountains of clouds and vapours, he plunged into
the leaden sea. Sometimes he looked benignly on the face
of his mother or his bride who came to greet him at his
journey’s end. Sometimes he was the lord of heaven and
of light, irresistible in his divine strength; sometimes he
toiled for others, not for himself, in a hard, unwilling servi¬
tude. His light and heat might give life or destroy it. His
chariot might scorch the regions over which it passed; his
flaming fire might burn up all who dared to look with prying
eyes into his dazzling treasure-house. He might be the
child destined to slay his parents, or to be united at the last
in an unspeakable peace to the bright dawn who for brief
space had gladdened his path in the morning. He might
be the friend of the children of men, and the remorseless foe
of those powers of darkness who had stolen away his bride.
He might be a warrior whose eye strikes terror into his
enemies, or a wise chieftain skilled in deep and hidden know¬
ledge. Sometimes he might appear as a glorious being
doomed to an early death, which no power could avert or
delay. Sometimes grievous hardships and desperate con¬
flicts might be followed by a longer season of serene repose.
Wherever he went, men might welcome him in love, or
shrink from him in fear and anguish. He would have many
brides in many lands, and his offspring would assume aspects
beautiful, strange, or horrible. His course might be brilliant
and beneficent, or gloomy, sullen, and capricious. As com¬
pelled to toil for others, he would be said to fight in quarrels
not his own ; or he might for a time withhold the aid of an
arm which no enemy could withstand. He migEt be the '
destroyer of all whom he loved, he might slay the dawn with
his kindling rays, he might scorch the fruits who were his
children; he might woo the deep blue sky, the bride of
heaven itself, and an inevitable doom might bind his limbs
on the blazing wheel for ever and ever. Nor in this crowd
of phrases, all of which have borne their part in the forma-
. tion Of mythology, is there one which could not be used
naturally by ourselves to describe Hie phenomena of the out¬
ward world, and there is scarcely one perhaps, .which has

GERMS OP EPIC POETRY. 45

riot thus been used by our own poets. There is a beauty in chap.
them, which can never grow old or lose its charm. Poets . IIL .
of all ages recur to them instinctively in times of the deepest
grief or the greatest joy; but, in the words of Professor Max
Muller, ‘ it is impossible to enter fully into the thoughts and
feelings which passed through the minds of the early poets
when they formed names for that far east from whence even
the early dawn, the sun, the. day, their own life seemed to
spring. A new fife flashed up every morning before their
eyes, and the fresh breezes of the dawn reached them like
greetings wafted across the golden threshold of the sky from
the distant lands beyond the mountains, beyond the clouds,
beyond the dawn, beyond the immortal sea which brought
ris hither ! The dawn seemed to them to open golden gates
for the sun to pass in triumph; and while those gates were
open, their eyes and their minds strove, in their childish
way, to pierce beyond the limits of this finite world. That
silent aspect wakened in the human mind the conception of
the Infinite, the Immortal, the Divine; and the names of
dawn became naturally the names of higher powers. ’ 1

But in truth we need not go back to that early time for tTse 0 f
evidence of the fact that language such as this comes natu-
rally to mankind. Abstract names are the result of long crete
thought and effort, and they are never congenial to ' the namos-
mass of men. They belong to a dialect which can never be
spoken by poets, for on such unsubstantial food poetry must
starve and die. Some of us may know now that there is
nothing in natural phenomena which has . any positive re¬
lation with the impressions, produced on our minds, that
the difference between the temperatures of Bake and Nova
Zembla is simply the difference of a few degrees more or less
of solar heat, as indicated by Reaumur or Fahrenheit; that
the beautiful tints of morning and evening are being pro¬
duced every moment, and that they are mere results of the
inclination which the earth at a particular moment may
have to the-sun. We may know that the whispering breeze
and the roaring storm are merely air moving with different
degrees of force, that thereds-no generic difference between ice

1 Lectures on Language, second series, p. SOU.

46 MYTHOLOGY OP T'HE ARYAN NATIONS.

•

BOOK and water, between fluids and Solids, between beast and cold.

•-. What if this knowledge were extended to all? Would it be

a gain if the language of men and women, boys and girls,
were brought into strict agreement with scientific facts, and
exhibit the exactness of technical definitions ? The question
is superfluous, for so long as mankind remain what they are,
such things are impossible. In one sense, the glorious hues
which spread over the heavens at sunrise and sundown, the
breeze and the hurricane, are to us nothing* The phenomena
of the outward world take ho notice of us. Shall it then be
said that there is not One who does take note of the. im¬
pressions which the sights or the sounds of nature make
upon our minds ? Must we not recognise the feelings which
those phenomena irresistibly evoke in us as not less facts
than the phenomena themselves ? We cannot rid ourselves
of these impressions. They are part of us; they grow with
our growth, and it is best for us if they receive a wholesome
culture. Modem science may show that our feelings are
merely relative; but there is still that within, us which
answers to the mental condition from which the mythical
language of our forefathers sprang. It is impossible for us to
look on the changes of day and night, of light and darkness,
of summer and winter, with the passionless equanimity
which our philosophy requires ; and he who from a mountain
summit looks down in solitude on the long shadows as they
creep over the earth, while the sun sinks down into the
purple mists which deaden and enshroud his splendours, can¬
not shake off the feeling that he is looking on the conscious
struggle of departing life. He is wiser if he does not
attempt to shake it off. The peasant who still thinks that
he hears the soft music of the piper of Hameln, as the leaves
of the wood rustle in the summer air, will be hone the better
if he parts with this feeling for some cold technical expres¬
sion. The result of real science is to enable us to distinguish
between our impressions and the facts or phenomena which
produce them, whenever it may be necessary to do so; but
beyond this, science will never need to make any trespass, on
the domain of the poet and the- condition of thought which

finds its natural expression in the phrases that once'grew up
into #, mythology. 1

To the primary myths which spring from phrases em¬
ployed in their original meaning to express the phenomena
. of the outward world, and to the secondary myths which
arose from a partial or complete forgetfulness of that mean¬
ing, must be added a third class, which came' into existence
from the use of equivocal words. If, as the tribes and
families of' men diverged from common centres, there was
always a danger that words expressing Sensuous ideas might
be petrified into personal appellatives, there was also the
more imminent danger that they might be confounded with
other words most nearly resembling them in sound. The
result would be, in grammatical phrase, false etymology:
the practical consequence would be the growth of a my¬
thology. Many of the tales belonging to the most compli¬
cated mythical systems arose simply from the misinterpre¬
tation of common words. From a root which meant to shine,
the Seven Shiners received their name; possibly or probably
to the same roots belongs the name of the Golden Bear
(aiepros and ursa), as the Germans gave to the lion the title
of Goldfusz; and thus, when the epithet had, by some
tribes, been confined to the Bear, the Seven Shiners were
transformed first into seven bears, then into one with
Arktouros (Arcturus) for their bearward. In India, too, the
meaning of riksha was forgotten; but instead of referring
the word to bears,' they confounded it with rishi, and the
Seven Stars became the abode of the Seven Poets or Sages,
who enter the ark with Menu (Minos), and reappear as the
Seven Wise Men of Hellas, and the Seven Champions of
Christendom. The same lot, it would seem, befell another
name for this constellation. They who spoke of the seven
triones had long forgotten that their fathers spoke of the
stars as taros (staras) or strewers of light, and converted the
bearward into Bootes, tl* ploughman, while the Teutonic
"nations, unconscious that they had retained the old root in
their word Stern or star , likewise embodied a false etymology

ri! Ill

48

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK in wagons or wains. But when we turn to the ArisUKon
— ' r —. tale, that Kallisto, the mother of the eponymous hero Affca s,
was changed into a bear by the jealousy of H&rS, and im¬
prisoned in the constellation, we find ourselves ia that
boundless region of mythology, the scenes of which are
sometimes so exquisitely fair, sometimes so gloomy, hideous,
and repulsive. The root vah, to convey (the Latin vehe), pp,ve
a name to the horse, to the flame of fire, and to the ray^'of
the sun. The magic wand of metaphor, without which
there can be no growth or expansion of language, soon
changed the rays of the sun into horses. But these horses,
vahni, had yet another epithet, Harif, which signified at first
the brilliance produced by fat and ointment. Like the Greek
words enyaXoeis and \vrrapos, applied to things anointed with
lard or oil, ghrita-prishthdh (glittering with fat) furnished
a title for the horses (or flames) of Agni, ignis, the firtf.
Thus the Harits became the immortal steeds who bear the
chariot of Indra across the sky and the car of Achilleus over
the plains of Hion. The Greek carried away the name at an
earlier stage; and the Charites, retaining simply the quali¬
ties of grace and brightness, became the lovely beings who,
with Himeros and the Muses, charm earth and heaven with
their song. But before the Hesiodic theogony had defined
their numbers and fixed their attributes, Charis remained a
mere name of Aphrodite, the radiant dawn who springs from
the sea before the rising of the sun. Still, though even at
that early time Aphrodite was the goddess of sensuous
beauty and love, she was yet, with a strange adherence to
the old meaning of her name, known as Enalia and Pontia,
the child of the sea foam. For yet another title which she
bore they could but frame a tale that Argynnis, the beloved
of Agamemnon, had died at Kephisos. Yet that title,
identified with the Sanskrit arjuni, spoke simply of dazzling
loveliness. By a similar process of metaphor, the rays of
the sun were Changed into golden hair, into spears and
lances, and robes of light. From the shoulders of Phoibos
Lykegenes, the light-bom, flow the sacred locM over which
no razor might pass. On the head of Nisos, as on that of

1 See further Max Muller, Rig Veda Sanhitd, vol. i. p. 26.

MULTIPLICITY. OF KAMES.

49

Samson, J they become a Palladion invested with, a my'ste- chap.
rious power. From Helios, the sun, who can scorch as well
as warm, comes-the robe of Medeia, which rea.ppears in the
poisoned garments of Deianeira. Under the form of spears
and arrows the rays of the sun are seen in almost every page
of all Aryan mythology. They are the invincible darts of
Phoibos, Achilleus, and Meleagros, of Herakles and Theseus,
of Artemis, Perseus, and Bellerophon, the poisoned arrows
which Philoktetes and Odysseus, the.model, as some will
have it, of Hellenic character, scruple not to use.

Thus the disintegration of the primary myths would be Dis ; i)tc _
insured by the wealth of synonyms which the earliest form gration of
of human thought had brought into existence. If the Greek mytlls ’

. mythographers had been conscious that Kephal'os and Prokris
meant only the sun and the dew, the legend would have con¬
tinued to belong to the same class with the myths of Indra
and his cloud-enemy Yritra. As it is, it stands midway
between these primary .legends and the later tales which
sprung up when the meaning of such .names as Lykafin,

Kordnis, and SarpMon had been wholly forgotten. The form
of thought which looked on all sensible phenomena as en- .
dowed with a conscious life, found utterance in a multi¬
plicity of names for the same object, and each of these names '
became or might become the groundwork of a new myth, as
in process of time they were confounded with words which
most nearly resembled them in sound.

1 Dean Stanley {Lectures on ■ the likeness between tie features of Samson .

Jewish Church, i. 368) points out tie and those of Herakl&s.

50

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAN NATHS®.

CHAPTER IV.

THE DEVELOPEMENT OF MYTHOLOGY.

book When in the Vedic songs we read of Indra, the sun-god, as
- L - fighting with Vritra, the dark power who imprisons the rain
Elasticity in the storm cloud, or with Ahi, the throttling snake, or as
eli'spccch. pursuing the beautiful Dahana, of the ‘dawn as the mother
or the bride of the sun, or. of the sun as slaying the dark
parent from whom he has sprung, we feel at once, that in
such language we have an instrument of wonderful elasticity,
that the form of thought which finds its natural' utterance in
such expressions must be capable of accommodating itself
to every place and every climate, and that it would have as
much room for its exercise among the frozen mountains of
the North, as under the most smiling sky and genial sun.
But the time during which this mythical speech was the
common language of mankind, would be a period of transition,
in which the idea of existence would be sooner or later
expanded into that of personality. Probably before this
change had taken place, the yet unbroken Aryan family
would be scattered to seek new homes in distant, lands; and
the gradual change of language, which that dispersion ren¬
dered inevitable, would involve a more momentous change in
their belief. They would carry away with them the old
words and expressions; but these would now be associated
with new ideas, or else be imperfectly or wrongly understood.
Henceforth, the words which had denoted the sun and moon
would denote not iperely living things but living persons.
Prom personification to deification the steps would be but
few; and the process of disintegration would at once furnish
the materials for a vast fabric of mythology. All the ex¬
pressions which had attached a living force to natural objects
would remain as the description of personal and anthropo-

localisation of mttiis.

51

morphous gods. Every word would become an attribute, chap.
and all ideas once grouped round a single object would ■ ^ -

branch off into distinct personifications. The sun had been
the lord of light, the driver of the chariot of the day; he
had toiled and laboured for the sons of men, and sunk down
to rest, after a hard battle, in the evening. But now the
lord of light would be Phoibos Apollon, while Helios would
remain enthroned in his fiery chariot, and his toils and labours
and death-struggles would be transferred to Herakles. The
violet clouds which greet his rising and his setting would
now.be represented by herds of cows which feed in earthly
pastures. There would be other expressions which would
still remain as floating phrases, not attached to any definite
deities. These would gradually be converted into incidents
in the life of heroes, and be woven at length into systematic
narratives. Finally, these gods or heroes, and the incidents
of their mythical career, would receive each ‘ a local habi¬
tation and a name.’ These would remain as genuine history,
when the origin and meaning of the words had been either
wholly or in part forgotten.

But in' such a process as this, it is manifest that the men of *

amongst whom it sprang up would not be responsible for the
form which it might assume. Words, applied at first simply
to outward objects or phenomena, would become the names
of personal gods; and the phrases which described those
objects would then be transferred to what were now deities
to be adored. But it would not follow that a form of thought
which might apply, not. only without harm but with a mar¬
vellous beauty, to things if living yet not personal, would
bear translation into the conditions of human life. If in the
older speech, the heaven was wedded to the earth, which
returned his love with a prodigal fertility, in the later time
the name of the heaven would be the name of a god, and
that god would necessarily jie earthly and sensual. But this
developement of a mythology, much of which would inevitably
be immoral and even repulsive, would not necessarily exercise
a similar debasing influence on-the morality and practice of
the people. It had started with being a- scntimAt, not; a
religion,—a personal conviction, but not a moral belie!';

52

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAIT NATIONS.

BOOK

Evidence

and the real object of the heart’s adoration would remain
not less distinct from the creations of mythology thah it had
been before. Nay, it might be that, with any given people,
the tone of thought and the character of society might be more
and more raised, even while the incongruous mythological
fabric assumed more stupendous proportions. But the first
condition of thought, which regarded every object in creation,
would have in itself, only two possible developements. ■ It
must issue either in an anthropomorphous polytheism, or in
a degrading fetish worship. 1 The character of the people
would in each case determine whethes the result for them
should be an idolatrous terror of inanimate things, or the
multiplication of deities with human 'forms and human
passions, mingling with men, and sharing their partialities
and their feuds.

For the proofs of these assertions, we shall look in vain to
the earliest Hellenic literature. But the Vedic poems furnish
indisputable evidence, that such as this was the origin and
growth of Greek and Teutonic mythology. In these poems,
the names of many, perhaps of most, of the Greek gods,
indicate natural objects which, if endued with life, have not
been reduced to human personality. In them Daphne is
still simply the morning twilight ushering in the splendour
of the new-born sun ; the cattle of HMios there are still the
light-coloured clouds which the dawn leads out into the fields
of the sky. There the idea of Herakles has not been sepa¬
rated from the image of the toiling and struggling sun, and
the glory of the life-giving Helios has not been transferred
to the god of Delos and Pytho. In the Vedas the myths of
Endymion, of Kephalos and Prokris, Orpheus and Eurydike,
are exhibited in the form of detached mythical phrases,
which furnished for each their germ. 2 The analysis may be
extended indefinitely: but the conclusion can only be, that in
the Vedic language we have the foundation, not only of the
glowing legends of Hellas, but of the dark and sombre

1 In tlie growth of a higher belief and
a purer morality by the side and in spite
of the poplar mythology, we can see

on the mind and heart of men.

Professor Max Muller’s essay on 1 Com¬
parative Mythology/ Chips from a
German Workshop, voL ii.

DEGREES IN THE DEVELOFEMENT OP MYTHS. 5‘

mythology of the Scandinavian and the Teuton. Both alike chap.
hare grown up chiefly from names which have been grouped IV '
around the sun; but the former has been gl-ounded on those
expressions which describe the recurrence of day and night,
the latter on the great tragedy of nature in the alternation
of summer and winter.

Of this vast mass of solar myths, some have emerged’ into. Relative
independent legends, others have furnished the groundwork
of whole epics, others have remained simply as floating tales myths,
whose intrinsic beauty no poet has wedded to his verse.
Whether the whole may be classified in order of priority,
may be doubtful; but the strong presumption would be, that
those which have not been systematised into coherent narra¬
tives are the oldest, as not having sufficiently lost their original
meaning. At the least, they exhibit to us the substance of
mythology in its earliest form. Thus the legends of Eephalos
and Proiris, of DaphnSj Narkissos, and Endymidn, have
come down to us in a less artificial form than that of
Herakles, while the myth of Heraklds has been arrested
at a less advanced stage than those of Zeus and Apollon.

But all alike can be translated back into mythical expressions,
and most of these expressions are found in the Yedas with
their strict mythical meaning. The marvellous exuberance
of this early language, and the wealth of its synonyms, may
well excite astonishment as we watch its divergence into
such myths as those of Eephalos and Endymion, Herakffis,

Daphne, the Pythian and Delian Apollon, Phaethon and
Meleagros, Memnon and Bellerophon.

That the form of thought which found utterance in myth- Solar
ical language would lead, to the accumulation of a vast
number of names for the same object, we have already seen ;
and so clearly does the mythology of the Aryan nations
exhibit the working of this process, that the task of tracing
it through the several legends of which it is composed
becomes almost a superflfious work. It'seems impossible
not to see that when the language of mythology was the
ordinary speech of daily life, the night laboured and heaved
with the birth of the coming day, and that his toil and labour
is reproduced in the Homeric hymn, in which Ldtd, the power

54 MTTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONB.

hook of forgetfulness and sleep, gives birth to the lord of light in
—- Delos. His coming was preceded by the pale twilight, who,
in mythical times, drove his cows to their pastores; but in
the Odyssey his herds feed at Tainaron or in Thrinakia far
away, where Phaethousa and Lampetie, the bright and gleam¬
ing daughters of Neaira, the early morning, tend them at the
rising and the setting of the sun. The old mythical feeling
is strikingly manifest throughout the whole legend, not
merely in the names and office of the wife and children of
Helios, but in the delight with which he gazes on his cattle
at the beginning and the close of his daily course, and in
the indignation which prompts him, when they are slain, to
hide his light in the regions of the dead. But the sun loves
not only the clouds, but the dawn who is their leader; and
so the dawn comes before us as followed by him, and flying
froni his love, or else as returning it. The former phrase
(‘ the dawn flies from the sun ’) is embodied in the legend of
Daphne, who flies from her lover and vanishes away as he
seeks to embrace her. In the tale of Orpheus she appears,
under the name of Eurydike, ^s the bride of file sun, loved
by him and returning his love, yet falling a victim to it, for
whether to Daphne or Eurydike the brightness of his glance
is fatal as he rises higher in the heaven. The same feeling
is manifest under a form, if possible, more intense, in the
tale of Kephalos and Prokris. ‘ The sun loves the dew, 3 was
the old mythical phrase; and it is reproduced in the love of
Kephalos (the head of the sun) for Prokris, the glittering
dewdrop. But ‘ the morning loves the sun. 3 Eos seeks to
win Kephalos for herself; and her jealousy of Prokris is at
once explained. But again the dewdrops each reflect the
sun, and Prokris becomes faithless to her lover, while she
grants him her love under a new disguise; and finally, when
her fault has been atoned, she dies by the spear of Artemis
(the fiery ray), with which the sun unwittingly strikes her
down. It is the old tale of Drfphne and Eurydike: and
Kephalos goes mourning on his solitary journey, labouring
not for himself, but for men who need his help, 1 until he
sinks to sleep beneath the western sea.

• 1 In this legend he goes to the aid of of course, be varied at will, so long as
Amphitryon; but such details might, the movements are still to westward.

MYTHS OP WANDERERS AND BONDMEN.

But, as we have seen, the sun may he spoken of as either
beneficent or destructive, as toiling for the good of men or
as slaying them. Sometimes he may sink to rest in quietness Cl
and peace, while the moon comes to give him her greeting
of love; or he may die after a battle with the struggling
clouds, leaving a solitary line of blood-red light behind him.

So in the Hellenic legend, Phoibos cannot rest in his birth¬
place of Lykia or Delos; he must wander far westwards over
many lands, through the fair vale of Telplioussa, to his
western home in Delphi. There the mighty power of his
rays is shown in the death of the great dragon, whose body
is left to rot at Pytho. 1 Yet it was strange that the sun,
whose influence' was commonly for life and gladness, should
sometimes vex and slay the sons of men; and so the tale
went that plague and pestilence came when Phaethon had
taken the place of Helios, and .vainly sought to guide aright
Ms fire-breathing horses. So again the legend of Meleagros
exMbits only the capricious action of the sun, and the alter¬
nations of light and shade are expressed in the sudden
exploits and moody sullenness of the hero; but his life is
bound up with the torch of day, the burning brand, and
when its last spark flickers out the life of the hero is ended.
More commonly, however, he is the mighty one labouring on
and finally worn out by an unselfish toil, struggling in his
hard task for a being who is not worthy of the great and
costly sacrifice. So Phoibos Apollon, with his kinsman
Herakles, serves the Trojan Laomedon; and so he dwells as
a bondman in the house of Admetos. So likewise, as Belle-
rophontes, he encounters fearful peril at the bidding of a
treacherous host, and dies, like Sarpedon and Memnon, in a
quarrel which is not his own. But nowhere is his unutterable
toil and scanty reward brought out so prominently as in th e
whole legend, or rather the mass of unconnected legend,
which is gathered round the person of Herakles. Doomed
before his birth to be the*slave of a weak and cruel Master,
he strangles, while yet in his cradle, the serpents of the night,

kies, and the (serpent which stings Eiiry- smitten by thJ spear oi Imka.
diki. It reappears in Norse niyths as

56

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYA$ NAUOlTS.

BOOK which stung to death the fair Eurydikft. His toils begin.

--;-- His limbs are endued with an irresistible power; and he has

a soul which knows no fear. He may use this power for
good or for evil, and his choice for good famishes the
groundwork for the apologue of-Prodikos. Other legends
there were which perverted this idea; and in these he is
exhibited under gross, uncouth, or repulsive forms.. But he
goes upon his way, and is hurried on through many lands.
In all he has mighty works to do, and he fails in none. The
remembrance of Iole may linger in his memory, but there
are others who claim his love in the days of his strength and
power, and it would seem as though he had forgotten the
daughter of Eurytos. But his time draws towards its close:
the beautiful maiden, whose face had gladdened him long ago,
returns to cheer him in the evening of his life. With her
comes the poisoned, robe (the mantle of cloud), which he
strives in vain to tear away from his bleeding limbs. In a
deeper and redder stream flows the life-blood, till, after a
. convulsive struggle, the strife is closed in the dead silence of

Repulsive But it is in the case of Herakles that the perfect truth of
meats of the old mythical language gave rise more especially to that
legends apparently strange and perplexing meaning which repelled
and disgusted even the poets and philosophers of Greece.
Pindar refuses to believe that any god could be a sensualist
or a cannibal; he might in the same spirit have rejected the
tales which impute something of meanness'or cowardice to
the brave and higli-souled Herakles. Eor Herakles fights
with poisoned arrows, and leaves them as his bequest to
Philoktetes. But the poisoned arrows are the piercing Tays
which burn in the tropical noon-day, and they reappear as
well in the poisoned robe of Deianeira as in that which' the
Kolchian Medeia professes to have received from her kinsman
Helios. , ,

Origin of A deeper mythical meaning, fiowever, underlies and ac-
'l crd ope- counts for the immorality and licence which was introduced
ments. into the transmuted legend of Herakles. The sun looks
down on the earth, and the earth answers to his loving
glance by her teeming and inexhaustible fertility. In every

REPULSIVE, ASPECTS OF MYTHS.

land she yields her special harvest of fruits and flowers, of
com and wine and oil. Her children are countless, but all
spring up under the eye of the sun as he journeys through
the wide heaven. It is easy to see what must be the. result
when the sun is transmuted into the human, yet god-like,
HeraHes, and how repulsive that myth must become which,
in its primitive form, only told how

The sunlight clasps the earth,

And the.moonbeams kiss the sea. 1

The same explanation removes the mystery of the even
greater degradation to which the Hellenic mythology reduces
Zeus himself, the supreme father of gods and men. He who
should be the very type of all purity and goodness becomes
the very embodiment of headstrong lust and passion, while
the holiness of the lord of life and light is transferred to
Apollon and his virgin sister, Athdnd. The difficulty is but
slight. Zeus, the Vedic Dyans, is but another form of
Ouranos, the veiling heaven or sky; and again, as in the
words of our own poet, who sings how
Nothing in the world is single,

All things by a law divine
In another’s being mingle,

and how

so Ouranos looked down on Gaia, and brooded over her in
his deep, unfailing, life-giving love. But these, are phrases
which will not bear translation into the conditions of human
life, without degrading the spiritual god into a being who
boasts of his unbounded and shameless licence.

The same process which insured this degradation insured a,t
the same time the local boundaries which were assigned to
mythical heroes or their mythical exploits. “When the ad¬
ventures of Zeus assumed something like consistency, the
original meaning of his name was less and less remembered,
until his birthplace was fixed in a Cretan, cave, and his
throne raised on a Thessalian Kill. So Apollon was born
in Lykia or in Delos, and dwelt at Patera, or Pytho. So
Endymibn had his tomb in Elis, or slept his long sleep on

helley, Loves Philosophy.

58

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK the hill of Latino's. So Kephalos first met Prokrifl on the
■_—^—- Hjmettian heights, and fell from the Leukadian cape into
the Western Sea. So, as she wandered westward in search
of her lost child, Telephassa (a name which, like those of
Phaethousa, Lampetie, and Brynhild, tells its own tale), sank
to sleep on the Thessalian plain in the evening,
vitality of Yet although much was forgotten, and much also, it may
the mytho be, lost for ever, the form of thought which produced the old
faculty. mythical language had not altogether died' away. Showing
itself sometimes in directly allegorical statement of historical
fact, sometimes in similar descriptions of natural objects or
of the incidents of common life, it still threw the halo of a
living reality over everything of which it spoke. So the
flight of Kaunos from Miletos to Lykia, and the sorrow of the
sister whom he had left behind, figured the migration of
colonists from the one land to the other. So in the Hesiodic
Theogony, Nyx (night) is the mother of Hypnos, (sleep,) and
Oneiros, (dream,) of Eris, (strife,) and Apate, (deceit,) and
Momos, (blame,) where we speak merely of sleeping and
dreaming, and of evil deeds wrought in secrecy and darkness . 1
Constant If again, the mythology of the Homeric poets,, as handed
for new down to us, points to an age long anterior to their own, yet
mythical the mythopceic faculty still exerted itself, if not in the
invention of myths altogether new, yet in the embellishment
and expansion of the old. It was not easy to satisfy the
appetite of an imaginative age which had no canon of
historical criticism, and which constantly craved its fitting
food. It was not easy to exhaust the vein opened in almost
every mythical theme. The sun as toiling and suffering, the
sky as brooding Over and cherishing the earth, the light as
gladdening and purifying all visible things, would suggest
an infinity of details illustrating each original idea. The
multiplication of miracles and marvels stimulated the desire
for. more ; and new labours were invented for Herakles, new
loves for Zeus, as easily as their forefathers uttered the words
to which the myths of Zeus and Herakles owed their
existence. The mere fact of their human personification

1 Max Muller, ‘ Comparative Mythology,’ Chips from a German Workshop,
>1. 64, ct seq.

ARTIFICIAL MYTHS.

insured the growth of innumerable.fictions. If Zeus had
the form and the passions of men, then the conditions of his
life must be assimilated to theirs. He must have wife and
children, he must have father and mother. The latter must
he no less divine than, himself; but as he is enthroned above
them; they must belong to a dynasty which he has over¬
thrown. Their defeat must have been preceded by a long
and fierce struggle. Mighty beings of gigantic force must
have fought on eatsh side in that tremendous conflict; but
the victory must belong to the side which, to brute • force,
added wise forethought and prudent counsel. 1 Here there
would be the foundation' for that marvellous supernatural
machinery of which we have some indications in the Iliad,
and Which .is drawn out with such careful detail in the
Hesiodie Theogony. But Zeus, to whom there were children
born in every land, must have his queen; and the jealousy
of Here against 16, or Semel6, or Alkm6n6 would follow as a
necessary consequence. The subject might be indefinitely
expanded, and each subject would of itself suggest others;
but there was no fear that the poet should weary the
patience of his hearers, if onty his additions, whether of
incident or detail, did not violate the laws of mythological
credibility. Nothing must be related of Herakles which was
repugnant to the fundamental idea of his toil and suffering
for a master weaker than himself; nothing must be told
of Athene which would rather call up associations of the
laughter-loving Aphrodite.

And, finally, there would be a constant and irresistible
temptation to sever historical incidents and characters from
the world of reality, and bear them into the cloudland of my¬
thology. Bound every hero who, after great promise, died
in the spring-time of his life, or on whom the yoke of an
unworthy tyrant lay heavy, would be grouped words and ex¬
pressions which belonged to the myth of the brilliant yet
quickly dying sun. The talb of Achilleus and Melon,gros may
be entirely mythical; but even if it be in part the story of
men who really lived and suffered, that story has been so inter¬
woven with images borrowed from the myths of a bygone age,

■ Hence tlio mythical Prometheus.

CO

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK as to conceal for ever any fragments of history -which may lie

____ beneath them. Names apparently historical have been intro-

• duced into the Nibelungen Lied which are not to be found
in the Edda. The great Theodoric at Verona is transmitted
into Dietrich of Bern; while Siegbert, the Austrasian king,
and the infamous Brunehault 1 have taken the place of Sigurd
and BrynHild.

Ground- But if the mythical phrases which gave birth to the legends
t™ m° f ho H era bL® s ) Endymion, and Orpheus, of Phaethon, Meleagros,

logy of and Bellerophontes, spoke of the daily course of the sun,
Europe™ ^ere were others which told of alternating seasons. For
the character of mythical speech must necessarily be modified,
and its very phrases suggested by the outward features and
phenomena of the country. The speech of the tropic’s, and
still more, of the happy zone which lies beyond its scorching
heat, would tell rather of brilliance than of gloom, of life
rather than decay, of constant renovation rather than pro¬
longed lethargy. But in the frost-bound regions of the
North, the speech of the people would, with a peculiar
intensity of feeling, dwell on the tragedy of nature. It
would speak not so much of the daily death of the sun (for
the recurrence of- day and night in other lands would bring
no darkness to these), but of the deadly sleep of the earth,
when the powers of frost and snow had vanquished The
brilliant king. It would speak, not of E6s rising from the
Titan’s couch, or of Helios sinking wearied into his golden
cup behind the sea, but of treasures stolen from the earth
and buried in her hidden depths beyond the sight and reach
of man. It would tell of a fair maiden, wrapped in a dream¬
less slumber, from which the touch of one brave knight alone
could rouse her; it would sing of her rescue, her betrothal.

MYTHS OF SUMMER AND WINTER.

and her desertion, as the sun, -who brought bach the spring, CEA]? ;
forsook her for the gay and -wanton summer. It would go . ^ .
on to frame tales of strife and jealousy, ending in the death
of ,tfie bright hero; it would speak of the bride whom he has
forsaken as going up to die upon his-funeral pile. This
woful tragedy, whose long sorrow called forth a deep and.
intense sympathy which we, perhaps, can scarcely realise, is
faintly indicated in the beautiful hymn to'DdmSter; but
winter, in the. bright, Hellenic land, assumed a form too fair
to leave any deep, impression of gloom and death on the
popular mythology. The face of nature suggested there the
■ simple tale which speaks of Persephone as stolen away, but
brought back to her mother by a covenant insuring to her
a longer sojourn on the bright earth than in the shadowy
kingdom of Hades., But how completely the tragedy, to
which this hymn points, forms the groundwork of the Yolsung
myth and of the Edda into which it was expanded, to what
an extent it has suggested the .most minute details of the
great epics of the North, Professor Max Muller has shown, -
with a force and clearness which leaves no room for doubt. 1
Like Achilleus, Sifrit or Sigurd can be wounded only in one
spot, as the bright sun of summer cannot grow dim till it is
pierced by the thorn of winter. Like Phoibos, who smites
the dragon at Pytho, the Northern hero slays the serpent

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN - NATIONS.

62

HOOK Fafnir, and wins back the treasure of the NifluOgar, while

■- r —- he rouses Brynhild from her long slumber. 1 This treasure

is the power of vegetation, which has been lulled to sleep by
the mists and clouds of winter; the seeds which refuse to
grow while Demeter sorrows for her child PersephonA The
desertion of Brynhild is the advance of spring into summer;
and from it follows of necessity the hatred of Brynhild for
Gudrun, who has stolen away the love of Sigurd. 2 A dark
doom presses heavily on him, darker and more woful than
that which weighed down- the toiling Herakles; for the
labour of Herakles issued always in victoiy, but Sigurd must
win his own wife Brynhild only to hand her over to Gunnar.
The sun must deliver the bright spring, whom he had wooed
and won, to the gloomy powers of cold and darkness. Gudrun
only remains ; but though outwardly she is fair and bright,'
she is of kin to the wintry beings, for the late summer is
more closely allied to death than to life. Yet Gunnar, her
brother, cannot rest; the wrath of the cold has been roused,
and he resolves to slay the bright and beautiful Sigurd. The
deed is done by Gunnar’s brethren—the cloud, the wind, and
the storm; and Brynhild, filled again with her early love,
lies down to die with him who had forsaken her. 3

HOMERIC MYTHOLOGY.

Phrases similar to those which gave birth to the legends chap.
of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs lie at the root of the IV -
epics to which Greek genius has imparted such wonderful Ground-
consistency and beauty. Tet it can scarcely be too often
repeated, that these poets adopted as much of the popular meric’my-
mythology as suited their purpose, and no more. If casual tM ° sy '
expressions throughout these poems leave no room to doubt
that they knew of wars among the heavenly beings, of the
dethronement of Kronos, the good service and the hard
recompense of Prometheus, and the early death of Achilleus,
it appears not less manifest, that the idea of Oiiion£ and of her
relations to, Paris could not have dawned for the first time
on the mind of a later age. It was not part of the poet’s
design to furnish a complete mythology; and the Iliad ex¬
hibits only that process of disintegration which was per-

e adventures of

difference between t
Odin and Zens is that, while those of
-the latter are chiefly erotic, the former

by differenci
Dasenfc, 1

from the Norse, Introduc

Whether the Beast epic of the North
had, or had not, its origin in a Nature-
worship, Mr. Dasent appears to include
in the various Beast epics of the Aryan

belong to them. Thus, as illustrating
the transformation of men into beasts,
he mentions Europe and her bull, Leda
and her swan —{Popular Tales, p. cxix).

aU such tr,
in a way which is completely subversive
of any hypothcsis of Nature-worship.
Such myths may all be traced -to mere
forgetfulness of the original meaning of

- J 8. In the Vedas the image of a

is very commonly employed as ex-
;ing the power and speed of the
sun, and this image reappears in the i
bull which bears Europe, the broad
.spreading light, to the Western land.
Thus also, as we have seen, the m»ton «

nd probably laid the foundations of a
uperstition which has, from time to
me, raged with disastrous fury. See
_ieeky, History of the Pise and Influence
of nationalism in Europe , vol. i. cb. i.,
and the article ‘Witchcraft,' in the
Dictionary of Sciciuc, LiUrahtrr, and
Art. But if the terrible delusion of
Lykanthropy arose from the mere use

such legends as evidence in favour of
Dr. Dasent’s hypothesis of a prinueral
belief that ‘men under certain conditions
could take the shape of animals.’ That
this belief prevailed in the time of

Iliad and Odyssey the power of assum-

nearly alike in‘'sound and origin as :
Xtwis, shining, and X.feov, a wof so i
named from the glossiness of its coat,

64

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK petually multiplying new tales and new beings from the old
L . mythical language. In no instance, perhaps, is this process
brought out with greater clearness than- in that of Paris.
This son of Priam, as leading away the beautiful Helen from
the far west and hiding her through ten long years in his
secret chambers, represents the dark power which steals the
light from the western sky, and sustains a ten-hours’ conflict
before he will yield her up again. Paris thus is Pani, the
dark thief of the Yedic songs, who hides the bright cattle of
Indra in his dismal caves ; in other words, he is Vritra, the
veiling enemy, and Ahi, the throttling serpent of night.
Such is he in his relations to Menelaos and the children of
the Sun, who come to reclaim the lost Helen. But among
his own people Paris is the most prominent actor in the great
drama which ends in the fall of Ilion. He is beautiful, he
is brave, and he is fated to bring ruin on his parents. In
these characteristics he resembled Perseus, Telephos, Oidi-
pous, and Theseus ; and at once the mass of floating phrases,
which were always at hand to furnish germs for new myths,
fastened on Paris until thd idea which had called him into
being is well nigh lost to sight. It is impossible to read the
story of Paris as given by Apollodoros without perceiving the'
double character thus assigned to the seducer of Helen. His
name, Alexandros, may certainly have borne at first a meaning
quite opposite to that which it afterwards assumed; but the
modification of his character had already been effected when
Paris was described as the helper of men. 1 Henceforth the
story assigns to him attributes which cannot be explained by
the idea of Night. Doomed to destroy his parents, the babe
is exposed on the slopes of Ida, like Oidipous on the slopes
of -Eithairon, as the rays of the newly risen sun rest level on
the mountain side. The child is nourished by a bear, hut
the bear carries us at once to the legend of the Seven Stars,

, and to the confusion of the name of the sun-god with that of
the wolf. He grows up beautiful in form; and if his love is

1 According to Apollodoros, vol. iii. . to describe him as the enemy of man,
11, 5, he is so named as' aiding the as 4\e{l*oaos denotes one who keeps off
herdsmen, or more strictly, the flocks,. evil, and 4\«{i7<tfios signifies one who
against robbers. But it is possible shuns or keeps off marriage,
that word itself might have been used .

AND 0IN6n£.

sensual, so also in .many myths is that ofHerakles.' If, again,
after the seduction of Helen, his former bravery gives place to
sullen or effeminate inaction, this feature only marks more
curiously the affinity between the later conception of Paris,
and the original idea of Meleagros and Achilleus. If he is
capricious, so are they ; and each sits burnishing his golden
armour in his tent or his secret chamber, making ready for
the fight, yet doing nothing. If, again, it is by the weapon
of Paris that Achilleus is to fall in the western gates, 2 the
arrow which slays Paris is drawn from.the quiver of Heraldes.
But with the fatal wound comes back the love of Paris for
the lost Oindnd; and not less forgiving than Prolcris to the
faithless Kephalos, Oinond stands before him. With a soft
and tender grief she gazes on the face which had once filled
the whole earth for her with beauty. She sees his life-blood
flowing away; but though she is of the bright race of the gods,
and though she has the power of the soft evening time to
soothe the woes of mortal men, she cannot heal the poisoned
wound which is slaying Paris as the deadly mistletoe slew
the bright and beautiful Baldur. But with the death of him
who once was called Alexandros, the light of her life is
gone. Paris rests in the sleep of death, and Oindne lies
down to die by his side. 3

The Iliad is, in short, the Volsnng tale, as wrought out by
the poets of a bright and fertile land. 1 Yet, if the harsh
climate of the north modified the Norse 'mythology, it also
moulded indefinitely the national character, and the two
acted and reacted on each other. Bred up to fight with
nature in a constant battle for existence, the Northman
became fearless, honest, and truthful, ready to smite aftd
ready to forgive, shrinking not from pain himself and care¬
less of inflicting it on others. Witnessing everywhere the
struggle of conflicting forces, he was tempted to look on life
as a field for warfare, and to own no law for those who were

the enemy *of gods ^Lnd m
embodying the idea of d

the idea of his beneficence, his toil, his
conflicts, and his early death. The
sun forsakes the dawn for the glare of
noonday, or the fair and blushing spring

summer-.Tiid thus far tlwTrojan Paris
is simply the counterpart of Sigurd or
of Theseus.

1 The Hellenic myths can no longer
be regarded as' exponents of abstract
physical truths or theories. There can
be.no doubt that (whatever appearance
of such a system may have been imparted
to it by the priests), the supposition

have again the solar legend. The spring

were in this respect more closely akm
to those of- Northern than of Southern
Europe.—See Milwan, History of
Christianity, vol. i. p. 13. Compare
also the Surtr of the Icelandic mytho¬
logy, Dasent’s ‘Norsemen in Iceland,’
Oxford Essays for 1858, p. 198.

The groundwork of the Volsunga
Saga, of the talcs of Helen, Alkcstis,
Sarpedon, and Memnon, reappears in
the legends and the worship of Adonis.

degree to which such legends may either
influence or be modified by national
characteristics or the physical conditions
of a country. Even in their worst

majesty and manly power; but in the
legend of Adonis, the idea of the sun as
calling tho earth back to life has been
sensualized to a degree far beyond the
sensuousness of Greek or Teutonic mv-
logy. In fact, the image of Demeter
has passed by a very easy transmutation
into that of Aphroditfe: but there not
only remains the early death of Adonis,

which cuts short the life of Aehilleus,
• Sigurd, Baldur, and Meleagros. The
, boar’s tusk, which reappears in the

legends the covenant is. the same as
that which is made with Dcraeter for
PersephonA In others, he remains foui
months with Hades, four with Aphrodite,
while the remaining four, being at his
own disposal, he chooses to speud with
the latter. But the myth had been noi
merely corrupted: it was poisoned by
the touch of oriental sensuality. Ii
the Volsung tale, Sigurd dies as pure as

Priapos. The mourning of the women for
Tammuz might well rouse the righteous
indignation' of the Hebrew prophet.
The hymn of Dernier would have called
from him a rebuke less severe.

TRADITIONS OF NORTHERN EUROPE.

not bound with him in ties of blood and friendship. Hence CIIAP.
there was impressed on him a stern and fierce character, ex- . I V ' .
aggerated not unfrequently into a gross and brutal cruelty;
and his national songs reflected the repulsive not less than the
fairer aspect of his disposition. 'In the Volsung tale, as in the
later epics, there is much of feud, jealousy, and bloodshed,
much which to the mind of a less tumultuous age must be
simply distasteful or even horrible. To what extent this may
be owing to their own character it may perhaps be difficult
to determine with precision.; yet it would seem rash to lay
to their charge the special kinds of evil dealing of which we
read in their great national legends. Mr. Dasent, who
accounts for the immoral or repulsive details of Greek
mythology entirely on moral and religious grounds, has
consistently assigned a purpose not less didactic to the
mythology of the North. In the Volsung tale he sees simply
men and women, whose history had never grown out of con¬
ditions not belonging to human life. It speaks to him of
love and hate, of‘all that can foster passion or beget reveDge.
Ill-assorted marriages .. . envyings, jealousies, hatreds,

murders, all the works of the natural man, combine together
to form that marvellous story which begins with a curse, the
curse of ill-gotten gold; and ends with a curse, a widow’s
curse, which drags down all on whom it falls, and even her
own flesh and blood, to a certain doom.’ 1 This picture of
mythology, the composition of which has been so strangely
and fully laid bare by comparative mythologists, is no fail-
representation of the Northman. It is not easy to believe
that the relations between Sigurd and Gunnar were (even
rarely) realised in the actual life of the Norwegian or the Ice¬
lander. But, in his eagerness to defend their domestic
morality, Mr. Dasent appears to be hurried into something
like injustice to the society of the Greek heroic ages. These
ages, to him, - are polished a,nd false, 2 a period in which
woman was a toy, whereas she was a helpmeet to the
Teuton, a time in which men lacked in general the feelings
of natural affection. If the words refer to a later age. the
■ Popular Tales from the. Norse, introduction, lxi. ’ JhM. Ituiv.

YTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,

hook comparison is scarcely relevant; and of the Homeric soeiety

-___ the picture is scarcely true. The feelings of friendship are

, even exaggerated in Achilleus; the pure freedom of domestic
equality is brought out with winning lustre in Nausika4 and
Penelope. But whether with the Greek or the Northman,
all judgment is premature until we have decided whether we
are or are not dealing with legends which, whether in whole
or in part, have sprung from the mythical expressions of a
forgotten language. We can draw no inference from the
actions of Zeus or Herakles as to the character of the Greeks;
we cannot take the fatal quarrels of Brynhild, Gunnar, and
Sigurd, as any evidence of the character of the Northman.
Special Living in a land of icebound fjords and desolate fells,
istics of hearing the mournful wail of the waving pine-branches,
mythology l°°king' on the stern strife of frost and fire,' witnessing year
by year the death of the short-lived summer, the Northman
was inured to sombre if not gloomy thought, to the rugged
independence of the country as opposed to the artificial
society of a town. His own sternness was but the reflection
of the land in which he lived; and it was reflected, in -its
turn, in the tales which he told, whether of the heroes or the
gods. The Greek, dwelling in sunnier regions, where the
interchange of summer and winter brought with it no feelings
of overpowering gloom, exhibited in his words and songs the
happiness which he experienced in himself. Caring less,
perhaps, to hold communion with the silent mountains and
the heaving sea, he was drawn to the life of cities, where he
could share his joys and sorrows with'his kinsmen. The
earth was his mother: the gods who dwelt on Olympos had
the likeness of men without their pains or.their doom of
death. There Zeus sat on his golden throne, and beside him
was the glorious Apollon, not the deified man, 1 but the sun-
god invested with a human personality. But (with whatever

COMMON ARYAN TRADITIONS.

69

modifications caused by climate and circumstances) botb CHAP,
were inheritors of a common mythology, which with much . IY ' .
that was beautiful and good united also much that was
repulsive and immoral. 1 Both, from the ordinary speech of
their common forefathers, had framed a number of legends
which had their gross and impure aspects, but for the gross¬
ness of which they were not (as we have seen), and they could
not be, responsible.

But if the mythology of the Greeks is in substance and in Full
developement the same as that of the North, they differed
widely in their later history. That of the Greeks passed of Greek
through the stages of growth, maturity, and decay, without w^°"
any violent external repression. 2 The mythical language of
the earliest age had supplied them with an inexhaustible
fountain of legendary narrative; and the tales so framed
had received an implicit belief, which, though intense and
unquestioning, could scarcely be called religious, and in no
sense could be regarded as moral. And just because the
belief accorded to it was not moral, the time came gradually
when thoughtful men rose through earnest effort (rather, we
would say, through Divine guidance) to the conviction
of higher and clearer truth. If even the Greek of the
Heroic age found in his mythology neither a rule of life
nor the ideal of that Deity whom in his heart he really

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

rook worshipped, still less would this be the case with the poets

■-;—- and philosophers of later times. To iEschylos, Zens was

the mere name 1 of a god whose actions were not those of the
son of Kronos ; to Sophokles it made no difference whethfer
he were called Zeus or by any other name, as long as he
might retain the conviction of His eternity and His righteous¬
ness. 2 If from his own moral perception Pindar refused to
credit charges of gluttony or unnatural crime against the
gods, no violent shock was given to the popular belief; and
even Sokrates might teach the strictest responsibility of
man to a perfectly impartial judge, even while he spoke of
the mythical tribunal of Minos, Bhadamanthys, and Aiakos. 3
He was accused indeed of introducing new gods. This
charge he denied, and with truth: but in no sense whatever
was he a worshipper of the Olympian Zeus, or of the Phoibos
who smote the Pythian dragon.

Arrested As compared with the Greek, the mythology of Northern
Northern^ Europe was arrested almost in its middle growth. After a
rnytlio- fierce struggle, Christianity was forced upon the reluctant

gy ' Northmen long before poets could rise among them to whom

the sensuality or ferocity of their mythology would be re¬
pulsive or revolting, long before philosophers could have
i evolved a body of moral belief, by the side of which the

popular mythology might continue peacefully to exist. By a
sudden revolution, Odin and the disir, the deities of the North,
were hurled from their ancient thrones, before the dread
Twilight of the Gods 4 had come. Henceforth they could
only be regarded either as men or as devils. The former
alternative made Odin a descendant of Noah; 5 by the latter,
the celestial hierarchy became malignant spirits riding on
the stormcloud and the whirlwind. If these gods had some¬
times been beneficent before, they were never beneficent now.
All that was beautiful and good in the older belief had been

• oS”t”“ W 903. 80 ‘

* Plato, Gargias, lxxx.

‘ This idea Mr. Dasent seems to

of*Teutonic mythology. {Popular Tail's
of the Horse, introduction, Ivii. lxxv.)

It seems to be embodied in the .Rschy
lean legend of Prometheus, although
other versions accounted for his deliver¬
ance without the deposition of Zeus.

s Grote, History of Greece, vol. i.
p. 2S4.

DEGRADATION OF M

IICAL BEINGS.

transferred to the Christian ideas of chivalry and saintliness, char
which furnished a boundless field and inexhaustible nourish-' - IV l -
ment for the most exuberant inventive faculty. 1 The demons
of Hesiod were the spirits of the good who had died the
painless death of the Golden Age; hut even in heathen times
they were gradually invested with a malignant character. 2
With Thor and Odin the transmutation was more rapid and
complete; and Frigga and Freya became beings full of a
wisdom and power which they used only for evil. The same
character passed to those who were, or professed to be, their
votaries; and the assumption of an' unlawful knowledge
paved the way for that persecution of a fictitious witchcraft
which has stamped an indelible disgrace on meditoval
Christendom. 3

So marvellous is that chronicle of heathen mythology, as Digit
it lies spread out before us in the light of the ancient speech, b^hby 0 "
marvellous not only as showing how nations, utterly severed
from each other, preserved their common inheritance, but as
laying bare that early condition of thought without which
mythology could never have had a being. Yet, if it has
much to astonish us, it has nothing to bewilder or even to
perplex, for the simultaneous developement of the same
myths by countless tribes unknown to each other would be a
marvel too vast even for the greediest credulity to swallow—
a standing miracle without pui'pose and without meaning.

To the earliest records of Aryan literature is due the dis¬
covery that the vehement accusations of Christian contro¬
versialists and the timid explanations of heathen apolo-

1 Grote, History of Greece, vol. i. p, Some valuable remarks on this subject

628. M. de Montalcmbert’s History, may be found in Mr.-Prioe’s preface to
les Moines d'Occident, is a storehouse Warton’s History of English Poetry.
of legends belonging to the ideal of (P. 57). It was Ibis ides cf u knowledge
saintliness. He appears, however, to gained unlawfully from evil spintswlneli,
treat some of them rather in the spirit of far more perhaps than a habit of stib-
Euemeros. See Edinburgh Review, No. mission to church authority, impeded or
ccxxxii., Oct. 1861, p. 399. repressed all researches in physical

2 Grote. Historv of Greece . i. 96. k science. Gerbert of Ravenna (Syb

* See Mr. llascnt’s sketch of the vaster II.)* nnd Roger Bacon alike

origin and developement of the modern acquired the reputation of dabbling in

(he moTe’dotSledaccoimt of Mif Lctby! simpUdimise of mi unlawful rose of
ill his History of the Mist emit hijturvee huniiin intellect.
of Rationalism in Europe, vol. i., c!l i.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATION^

HOOK gists were alike unfounded, 1 that the im'persifeMkitiS of the

---—■ old mythology had no substantial existence, and' that the

mythical narratives which grew up around them were Hot
wrought out by a vile and corrupt imagination deliberately
profaning the deposit of a revealed truth which it was hope¬
less that they should understand. To the language of the
early Yedic hymns we owe our knowledge that the develope-
ment of such a mythology was inevitable, and that the
phrases of that early speech, when their Original meaning
was once forgotten or misapprehended, would give rise to
just those coarse, sensual, and immoral images, from which
the purer feeling of later times would instinctively recoil.
Stages in Step by step this analysis of mythology leads us back to
what would seem to be the earliest condition of the human
tbical mind, and from that onwards through the mythopceic age to
systems. philosophy of historical Greece. On the general cha¬

racter of its course there can be no doubt, nor is the question
materially affected by the hypothesis that a period of pure
monotheism intervened between the earliest time and that
which, multiplied the mythical inhabitants of Asgard or
Olympos. 2 In one sense the supposition may be true: in
another it might be truer to say that the monotheism so
attained never died away. It was impossible that any real
fetish worship could arise while man had not arranged his
first conceptions with regard to the nature of all material
things, or even to his own. If from the consciousness of his
own existence he attributed the same existence to all out¬
ward objects, he did so, as we have seen, without drawing
any distinctions between consciousness and" personality. The
idea of their divinity in any sense would be an inference, not
a sensation; and the analysis of language, which shows that
all predicative words are the expression of general ideas, does
not show us that the human mind was immediately exercised
by any train of connected reasoning. If, however, this
earliest state was not followed by one which invested
outward things with a personal life, if in some way men

of Greece,

FETISH-WORSHIP.

coni! believe in a malignant yet unconscious and nonsentient
power residing in stones and rocks, there would at once be
developed a fetish worship, the most degrading and the most
hopeless, which, if expanded at' all, could issue only in a
polytheism of devils. Yet even here some faint perceptions
might remain of moral qualities, .unless we believe that the
Divine likeness might he wholly blotted out; but is it pos¬
sible to account for the loathsome earthliness of some forms
of heathenism, except by the hypothesis that on them the
idea of Deity has never dawned ? If, however, when grad-
ually awakened, the consciousness of their own. personality
might lead others to attribute the same personal life to
outward objects, the deification of these objects or powers
would not follow as an immediate or even as a necessary
consequence. For a long* time they might scarcely be
conscious of the degree to which they personified them;
or they might continue, to look upon them as beings con¬
demned to the same life, of toil and trouble with themselves.
Such a thought, it is- obvious, might lead at once to the
idea of One (distinct from all that they saw or heard),
who ordained this life of labour; and the conviction of a
Supreme God, the Maker of all things, might take posses¬
sion of the mind. 1 But it is not less clear that such a con¬
viction would not necessarily affect their ideas as to what
they saw in the world around them. The Sun in all his
various aspects, the Morning, the Evening, and the Night,
might become more and more personal, even while the belief
in a God exalted high above all might continue to gain
strength. In other words, the foundation of their moral
belief would at once be distinct from the foundation of their
future mythology. Still, except to the thoughtful few, the
personality of the great objects of the natural world would
be more and more exalted, even while it assumed more and
more a strictly human form. The result would be a poly¬
theism of anthropomorphous gods, in which the chief divini-

BOOK

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATlOfffi. _

j ties would be the'heaven and the sun. 1 To th® firmer, as

■- J -—• covering and shielding all things, would be assigned those

attributes which almost make us look on the.Olympian Zeus
and the Teutonic Alfadir as faint reflections of him who has
made and loves mankind.* But neither for the majesty of
Zeus or Odin, nor for the unsullied purity of Phoibos
Apollon, of Athene, or of Artemis, need we look further than
to mythical phrases, which spoke once of Dyaus, Varuna, or
Indra. .

Mytho- So might a mythology the most intricate and a moral
strictly a belief entirely independent of it, go on side by side. For
roligkms the former had not sprung up from any religious conviction ;

and the latter might advance beyond the stage of infancy,
before the corruption of the true mythical speech led to. the
multiplication of mythological Narratives. In the absence
of any historical sense or any written literaturS, these tales
would be eagerly welcomed and disseminated without a doubt
of their truth. But the national character might exhibit
many good and noble qualities, 'even while that of its
greatest mythical heroes stood indefinitely lower. The
moody sullenness, the implacable passion, and the ferocious
cruelty of Achilleus; the capricious jealousy, idleness, and
activity of Meleagros, are well-nigh incredible ; nor is there
any evidence either that those qualities were common
amongst the Greeks in the heroic age, or that they attracted
any great admiration or esteem. It can be no subject of
regret to learn that they were as little responsible for the
moral standard of Achilleus and Meleagros as for that of
Zeus and Herakles, and that the idea of each originated as
little with them as the conception of Odin and Baldur, of
Sigurd and Gunnar, originated in the mind of the Teuton.
So might the Spirit of God work in the human heart, even
while a vast fabric of mythology was assuming proportions
more and more colossal and systematic; so, in spite of
sensual gods, the thought of whom made the poet shudder,

n the sun as the :

stantial conviction of the Divine Unity seeing eye of day.
might co-exist with the worship of his . 2 Dasent, ‘ Norseman in Iceland,’ (

manifestation under the image of tire, ford Essays for 1858, p. 187.
the Vedic Agni, Ignis. This is again a

CHARACTER OF MYTHICAL HEROES. - 75

mighV the real faith both of the poet and his hearers in an chap.
unseen Father continue substantially unshaken. So, while . IY ' .
he cared not to avow any disbelief in mythical stories of
Niobe or Prometheus, Sokrates might tell of One who made
men and watches over them for their good, and by the aid of
that unseen God strive to keep his hands clean and his heart
pure.

76

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATTONa

CHAPTER V.

GREEK CONCEPTIONS OF MYTHICAL TRADITION.

BOOK The exuberant growth . of myths from a few roots ex-

v_. ^_. pressing originally mere bodily sensations or wants is .

Gradual almost less astonishing than the inability of the several
meufof an ^ r y an nations to see through the thin disguise which dif-
lustorieal ferences of name and local colouring had thrown over
to mythi- legends identical in all essential characteristics. In India,
cal beings, the old phrases retained in a high degree their primitive
significance ; but then these phrases remained comparatively
barren stocks. In the West, where their meaning was more
or less forgotten, the several sayings gave birth to indepen¬
dent legends which were all regarded as genuine and
veracious history. The names Theseus, Perseus, Oidipous,
had all been mere epithets of one and the same being; but
when they ceased to be mere appellatives, these creations of
mythical speech were regarded not only as different persons,
but as beings in no way connected with each other. Poli-
. tical alliances were made, and nationals quarrels excited or
appeased, by appeals to the exploits or the crimes of mythical
heroes. ' The Persian King, before setting foot on European
soil, secured, it is said, the neutrality of Argos by claiming
a national affinity with the son of Danae. 1 On the eve of
the fight at Plataiai, the Tegeatans did not scruple to waste
precious moments in support of a claim founded on the
exploits of the fabulous “Echenuys, while the Athenians held
that they rebutted this claim by bringing up their ancient
kindness to the banished Herakleidai. a The tale of Dthryades
was regarded by Sparta and Argos as a sufficient ground for

1 Herod, vu. 150. * Ibid: is. 26, 27.

TRIBAL LEG'ENDS.

inserting a special article, into a treaty made during the chap.
Peloponnesian war.’ v -

But if they were thus convinced of their historical truth, Each dan
they felt still more certain that the legends of one state or
city were essentially distinct from those of another. The its own
Athenian was sure that the tales which he had heard of
Erechtheus or Theseus had nothing in common with the Romany
legends of Argos, Thebes, or Pherai, beyond those incidents
of local intercourse which were acknowledged by the narra¬
tive. The Arkadian, when he told the tale of Zeus and Kallisto,.
never supposed that it was repeated by the. Thessalian in the
story of Phoibos and Koronis. Perseus, Kadmos, Iason,
Achilleus, moved each in their own circle, and had left
behind them .a history seemingly as distinct as that of
Athens and Sparta from the days of Pausanias and Themis-
tocles.

. This conviction was a dream.' But it has its parallel in This belief
the scornful assurance with which the British soldier would ™^‘ t °! ly
even now repudiate all affinity with the Hindu whom he founda-
holds in subjection. They, who can see a little further know tl0n '
that this kindred, is a fact too stubborn to be denied, while
they perceive also that the national traditions of Hellenes,
of Dorians and Ionians, with the political legends of
Athenians, Thebans, Thessalians, Spartans, Argives, move in
the same charmed circle, and revolve more or less closely
round the same magic point. The great family legend of
the Perseids is as magnificent a.subject for an epic as that
of the wrongs and woes of Helen. Its incidents a.re not less
marvellous, its action is scarcely less complicated. Like the
tale of Troy, it forms a coherent whole,' and exhibits an
equal freshness of local life and colouring. It serves, there¬
fore, the more completely to prove the extent to which the
Hellenic local legends sprung up from a common source, and
to furnish the means of detecting, the common element in
isolated traditions with whiMi they may seem to be not even
remotely connected.

To the citizen of the Peloponnesian Argos the mere name (vnwtim.

1 Thueyd. v. 41. Sir G. C. Lrwis as hislork'nl. CrcrlihilHy of mrly Jlo-
accepts tho groundwork of the lrgcud loan Hutory, ii. 516.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK of Perseus sufficed as a conclusive mark, separating' him

■- r —■ from all who traced their origin to TheseSs or to Kadmos.

Yet his designation as a destroyer of noxious things linked
ThebesT the son of Danae at once with other heroes of Greek mytho-
Atheas l°gy- If Perseus won or deserved his name because he slew
the deadly Gorgon or the Libyan sea-monster, Phoibos
Apollon had also killed the mighty serpent Python, and
Hipponoos received his title Bellerophontes as the slayer of
the fearful Belleros. It was the arbitrary sentence of the
cruel and cowardly Polydektes which sent Perseus oh his
weary errand to the caves of the Graiai and the Gorgons;
but it was no less the relentless hatred of the mean and false
Eurystheus which made the life of the high-souled Herakles
a long series of unrequited labours. Nay, Apoll&n himself
was driven forth to serve as a bondman in the house of the
kindly Admetos, and, with Herakles, to look in vain for a
recompense from the treacherous Laomedon. If, in doing
the bidding of the Seriphian king, Perseus encountered
overwhelming dangers, Theseus surmounted perils not less
appalling for the same reason and from the same motives,
while his victory over the .Minotauros only repeats the
slaughter of the Libyan dragon by Perseus. Thus, then, as
unwilling workers, as destroyers of unclean or hurtful things,
Perseus, Theseus, Hipponoos and Herakles are expressions
of the same idea. If, again, his name as the child of the
golden shower points to the splendour of his birth, so also
Phoibos springs to light, in Delos or in Lykia, while the
gloomy prison-house or cave in which, like Zeus or Krishna,
he is born, has its parallel in the sleep or death of Night,
which is the parent of the Delphian god. If it is the hope
and the boast of Perseus that before his life’s labour is done
he will bring back Danae to the home which she had left
when he was a babe, so also Herakles meets at the close of
his toils the maiden whofti he had wooed while his life was in
its morning. Prom the island in the Eastern sea Perseus
journeys through many lands to the dark home of the Graiai
in the far west; but Herakles also wanders from Argos to
the distant gardens of the Hesperides, Hipponoos is driven
from Lykia, the land of light, and dies^on the shore of the

MYTHICAL HEROES.

■western sea, while Kephalos seeks in the Leukadian gulf the CHAP,
love which he Ifed lost in Attica. In his attack on the . v - .
Gorgon maiden, Perseus is armed with the sword which slays
everything on which it falls; hut Apollon is also the in¬
vincible Chrysaor, and Artemis carries the unerring spear
which is fatal to the guileless Prokris and the less innocent
Koronis or Kailisto. On the golden sandals Perseus moves
through the air quicker than a dream; but the golden
chariot also bears Helios and Phaethon across the blue vault
of heaven, and when Achilleus tries his armour, it hears him
aloft like a bird upon the wing. 1 After slaying the sea-
dragon, Perseus wins Andromeda; after killing the Mino-
tauros Theseus wins Ariadne. Iu unselfishness of character,
and in the determination to face rather than to shrink from
danger, there is no difference between Perseus and Theseus,
until the latter returns from Crete; or again between Perseus
and Bellerophontes. Perseus is the strongest and the most
active among the people in all manly exercises. So, too,
none can vie with Apollon in the use of the bow, and the
children of Niobe fall not less surely than the Pythian
dragon. If, again, Perseus'is the child of a mother of whom
we know little more than the name, gentle, patient, and
long-enduring, the same neutral colouring is seen in lokaste
in the Theban legend of Oidipous ; in LSt6, who gives birth
to Apollon in 'Delos; and in Alkmene, from whom is born
the mightiest of heroes, Herakles. The’ life of Perseus
closes in darkness. He has slain his grandfather, and he
has not the heart to remain in his ancient home; but
Kephalos also cannot abide at Athens after he has un¬
wittingly slain Prokris, or Herakles in Kalydon after slaying
the boy Eunomos, and each departs to die elsewhere.

Without going furthei', we have here no very insufficient u™titv .>f
evidence, if we sought to prove a close connection, or even
a complete identity, between Perseus, Bellcrophdn, Theseus,
Kephalos, Herakles, and Apolldn. If we cease to confine
ourselves to a single legend, the coincidences might he inde¬
finitely multiplied, while any other legend may be submitted
to the same treatment which has just been applied to that of
' Iliad. W. 38G.

80

MYTHOLOGY

F. ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK Perseus. If Kephalos, having won the lpve of Prokris, is

■- r —- obliged to leave her for a time, Apolldn ifi like manner is

constrained to desert Koronis. If Prokris yields her affec¬
tion to one whom she almost believes to be Kephalos, the
guilt of Koronis is not many shades deeper; while both are
alike smitten by the fatal spear of Artemis. In the legends
of Thebes, Athens, Argos, and other cities, we find the
• strange yet common dread of parents who look on their
children as their future destroyers. Thus Oidipous is cast
forth to die on the slopes of Kithairdn, as Paris is abandoned
on those of Ida or Arthur to the mysterious Merlin, while
Perseus is entrusted to the mercy of the deep sea. Nay, the
legends interchange the method by which the parents seek
the death of their children ; for there were tales which
narrated that Oidipous was shut up in an ark which was
washed ashore at Sikyon. 1 In every case the child grows
up beautiful, brave, and strong. Like Apollon, Bellerophon,
and Herakles, they are all slayers of monsters. The son of
the gloomy Laios returns to destroy the dreaded Sphinx, as
Perseus slays the Gorgon, and the Minotauros falls by the
sword of Theseus. They have other features 'in common.
The fears of their parents are in all cases realised. Akri-
sios and Laios are killed by Perseus and Oidipous, as
Romulus and Cyrus bring ruin on Amulius and Astyages. 2
All of them love fair maidens and are somewhat prone to
forsake them; and after doing marvellous things, they return
to the maiden whom they loved at the beginning of their
'career, or to the mother from whom they had been parted
long ago. Herakles finds Iole by his funeral pile on Oita,
while in the myth which has invested his character with a
solar colouring Oindne cheers Paris in his last hour oh Ida.

SNAKES IN MYTHOLOGY.

Still more significantly, Oidipous marries lok'aste (the con-<
nection of the name with that of Iole is manifest), 1 and the
unwitting sin thus committed becomes the starting-point of
a more highly-complicated history.

Wonderful, again, as is the seeming variety of action and
incident in these legends, the recurrence of the same im¬
agery', freshened by ingenious modifications, is not less re¬
markable. If Herakles begins his career of marvels by
strangling the serpents who have twined round his limbs,
the youthful Apollon slays the huge snake Pytho, and Perseus
smites the snaky haired Medousa. The serpents, in their
turn,' win the victory when Eurydikg falls a victim on the
banks of the. Hebros, or assume a more kindly form in the
legends of Iamos and Melampous. 2 The former they shelter
in the thickets, because, as with Perseus, Oidipous, Romulus,
and Cyrus, his kinsfolk seek his death, while to Melampous,

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARY AH NATIONS.

bj cleansing his ears, they impart a new j>ower, so that he
may understand the voices and the song of birds. The
spotless white bull bears Europe across the waters of the
sea: the, glistening ram soars through the air with the
children of Nephelg, or the mist. Phaethousa and Lampetie
drive the cattle of Helios to their pastures, and Hermes
steals the herds of Apollon when he is scarce an hour old.
The cattle in their turn assume an unkindly aspect. The
Minotauros plagues the Cretans, the Marathonian bull ravages
the fields of Attica. The former is killed by the child of the
golden shower, the latter by the son of Aithra, the pure air.

The very names occurring in these tribal legends have
a significance which the Greek language itself interprets,
whenever they tell us of the great .heroes whose lives run so
strangely in the same magic groove. Oidipous loves Iokaste,
as Herakles loves Iole; but he is also the husband of Eury-
ganeia, who spreads the light, over the broad sky. The names
of Phaethon, of Phaethousa and Lampetie, the children of
jSTeaira/tell their own tales. In the obscure mythology of
Tegea, when the name of Herakles is introduced, the maiden
whom he chooses is Auge, the brilliant. 1 She too,‘ like
Danae, is driven away by the terror of her father, and in the
far eastern land becomes the mother of Telephos, who, like
Oidipous and Paris, is exposed on the rough hill-side, and
whose office as the bringer of light is seen again in the name
of Telephassa-, the mother of Europe. So, again, when the
genealogy of Phthia is to be mingled with, that of Elis, it is
Protogeneia (the earliest dawn) who becomes the mother of
Aethlios (the toiling and struggling sun), who is the father
of Endymion, the tired sun at his setting, in whose child
Eurydike we see again the morrow’s light restored to its
former brightness. 2

Thus in the marvellous tales which recounted the mighty

1 Pans. viii. 4, 6; Grcte, .History of
Greece , vol. i. p. 240. 01
s Paus. v. 12. Aethlios is the
husband of Xalyke, the night. By some
canon of probability, better known to
himself than to others, Pausanias
: chooses to marry Endyrai6n to Asterodia,
rather than to Selene, as the mother of
his fifty children. He was making a

mion are of late introduction, althdhgh
their connection with the Olympic games
undoubtedly was.

TAtUE OF POPULAR TRADITIONS. . 83

deeds of Perseus and Heraklls the people of Argos saw a chap.
coherent whole,—the chronicle of the great actions which . Y '
distinguished the founders of their state from those of any -writers,
other. Yet the tale of Perseus, and still more that of ™iu* e ' r
Herakles, is re-echoed in the Attic legends of Theseus; and
even more significant is the fact of their utter unconscious¬
ness that the life of Perseus is, in all its essential features,
repeated in that of his great descendant Herakles, through
whose career the epos of Argos is twisted into a complicated
chain with that of Attica. The conclusion is forced upon
us that, the Greeks knew no more about the historical facts
possibly underlying these traditions than they knew about
the names which occurred in them. We see at once that
Athenians, Thebans, Argives, Spartans, regarded as inde-
■ pendent narratives tales which are merely modified versions
of the same story. Hence their convictions furnish not
even the faintest presumption that the actors in the great
dynastic legends • ever had any historical existence, or that
the myths themselves point to any historical, facts.

84

MYTHOLOGY OF

ABYAff NATIOm.

CHAPTER VI.

GREEK NOTIONS RESPECTING THE MORAL ASPECT OP
MYTHOLOGY.

book The method, which has enabled us to compare the story of
*• . the Iliad with the Volsung Tale or the epic of Eirdusi, tends

Coarse to show that, in many instances at least, even the grossest
ment'of* m yths arose from phrases which were truthful and therefore
certain beautiful descriptions of phenomena. But it has also shown
phrase ^ 1 us ^kat these phrases, when translated into the conditions of
human life and morality, would inevitably give rise to pre¬
cisely those tales which, related boldly and nakedly, must
appear coarse, repulsive, or disgusting, fror can it be
denied, that if children or grown men are only to cram
their memories with a thousand tales which speak of Oidi-
pous as marrying his mother, of Tantalos. as roasting his ovra
son, of Lykaon as placing a meal of human flesh before Zeus,
of Hephaistos as defiling Athene, of Herakles as a creature of
unbounded and indiscriminate lust, it must be in every way
better to remain ignorant of such things in spite of all the
allusions of poets and the suggestions of painters and sculp¬
tors. If we are to know only these incidents or details, (and
the works which do not avowedly adopt the method of com- <
parative mythology attempt nothing more,) the knowledge
must be simply unwholesome. . .

Protests ot It is no wonder that a mythology which still drives some
writers critics to desperate^hifts in their efforts to account for such
strange developements, and which the Greek shared with
barbarians, whose minds he despised and whose language he
could not understand, should perplex and baffle the poets
and philosophers of Hellas. Some little suspicion they had
of the meaning of a few mythical names and phrases : how

PROTESTS

PHILOSOPHERS AND POETS.

85

the vast majority of them had come into being, they could chap.

, have no idea. Still less, therefore, could they surmise that . VL .
these names themselves had given rise to the tales which
charmed, bewildered, or horrified them. They knew that
Zeus sometimes meant the sky; they knew that Selene must
be the moon; they half fancied that Endymion must be the
sleeping sun : but they did not' know why Zeus and Herakles
must have many loves in many lands, why Kronos should
maim his father Ouranos and swallow his own children,
why Tantalos should place the limbs of his son on the
banquet table of the gods, why Oidipous should marry his
mother and bring unimaginable woes on her, on himself, and
on his children. From all these horrors their moral sense
shrank with an instinctive aversion. The Zeus whom they
■ worshipped was ' the all-seeing ruler and the all-righteous
judge. In him there was no passion and no .shadow of
turning. He was the fountain of all truth and goodness,
from which could flow nothing impure or foul. How then
should he be envious or jealous, capricious, lustful, and
treacherous ? The contradiction was ' glaring, and some
among them had trenchant methods of dealing with it.

Later philosophers condemned in a mass the glorious epics
which bear the name of Homer: later poets contented them¬
selves with rejecting every legend which was distasteful to
their moral sense. Plato would give no place to Homer in
his ideal commonwealth: Euripides, like Homeric heroes,
could tell Zeus to his face, that he and his kinsfolk had
done fearful things, or when he cast aside his mythological
faith, could assert unequivocally,

If the gods do aught unseemly,

Then they aro hot gods at all, 1

The power of resting content without seeking to account Limits of
for this portentous growth of an immoral theology seems ii n o«-!«lg\

86

BOOK

tion of the

=w

of Aryan

'fe-

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

to be reserved for modem minds. Examining (ibis subject
at greater length, Mr. Max Miiller remarks that tie Greeks
‘ would not have been Greeks, if they had not perceived that
the whole of their mythology presented a problem that re¬
quired a solution at the hand of a philosopher.’ But, how¬
ever great their efforts might be to explain its origin, the
same causes which prevented them from discovering the
affinity of their own language with that of Persians, Thra-
kians, or Italians,, must have placed insuperable barriers in
their way; and thus they were the more tempted to accept
a compromise, which saved them from antagonism with
‘ some of the most venerable institutions ’ of their country . 1

But if the examination of the most complicated epic
poetry discloses precisely the frame-work which we find even
in the most fragmentary legends , 2 if Theseus and Sigurd,

1 Lectures on Language, second series,

2 It is impossible to determine the
:d -which Comparative Mythology
L ight have received from the lost
Dems of the so-called epic cycle.

m poer

established.

truth of facts which, even

n poets deliberately drew the
ts and incidents of their dramas
which we called cyclic, in
nee to those which we regard as
ieserving to be called Homeric,
so-called Orphic hymns consist

beings .with which the old

exactly the knowL,. B
of the Iliad and Odys w .
which they have not mentioned or have
treated only incidentally. Tho epic
poem, which had for its subject simply
the capture of Oichalia by Herakles,
the Danais, the Europia, might have
added to our knowledge of the materials
with which all these poems were built
up. The Iliad and Odyssey have as¬
sumed in our eyes more than their
fair proportions, from the mere fact that
they alono have survived unhurt the

they alon
Iliad and Odyssey a

the present d

vledge which, the poets epithets which were held to be applic-
Odyssey had of legends able to them. Almost every one of
these epithets may be made the germ
of a mythical tale. Thus the hymn to
Protogonos (whose counterpart is Pro-

egg (of night), and having the faco of a
bull (Indra), as; Pbanes the brilliant,
and Antauges (Antigonfe). reflecting the
light of the Sun (vi.). Helios (viii.) is

of AsklSpiosTlie’iralfo'zeus.'a relic of
the interchangeable character of the
earlier Vedic gods, the moon being also
still male and female (ix.). HerakUs
(xii.) is ,the father of Time, benignant
and everlasting, producing and devour-
inf all things, yet helping all, wearing
the dawn and the night round his head.
Adonis (lvi.) dwells partly in Tartaros
and partly on Olympos. The rays of

the Charites, the HaritS or glistening
horses oflndra (lx.). AskUpios is Paian
the healer as well as Helios, and he has

ally the poerr

underth-

t. epic poems would have aided us
answering, and which must be ex-
ined by the aid of such materials
i evidence as we have at our disposal,
at the fact of their transmission to

meaning of eepulsiye legends.

87

Phoibos and Aehilleus, Odysseus, Oidipous, and Perseus CLAP
are, though different, yet the same,—if their adventures or . VJ ‘ .
their times of inaction are simply the fruit of an inevitable
process going on in all kindred languages, all charges of
immorality founded on the character of these adventures fall
completely to the ground. It is simply impossible to believe
- that the great Athenian poets were descended from a people
who, some centuries, earlier, had deliberately sat down to
invent loathsome or ridiculous fictions about the gods whom
they worshipped and the heroes whom they revered. To the
mind of JEschylos there was a depth of almost inexpiable guilt
in the sacrifice of Iphigenein,. The imagination of Sopho-
kles was oppressed by the unconscious incest of Oidipous
and all its frightful consequences, while Pindar turned aside
with contemptuous indignation from the stories which told
of gods devouring their own offspring. But we, to whom the
tale of Kronos points to the Time which consumes the years .
to which it has given birth,—we, for whom the early doom of
the virgin Iphigeneia, caused by the wrath of Artemis, is a
mere reflection of the lot which pressed alike on Dahana. and
Daphne, on lole, and Brynhild, and Oindne,—we, 'who can
read in the woeful tale of Iokaste the return of the lord of
day, the slayer of the Sphinx and of the Python, to the
mother who had borne him in the morning, must feel, that
if Greeks or Northmen who told of such things are to be
. condemned, they must be condemned on other grounds and
not because in Aehilleus or Sigurd or Odysseus they have
given us pictures of obstinate inaction or brutal revenge.

Possibly, to some among those old poets, the real nature of
the tales which they were telling was not so completely bidden
as we may deem. It is not easy to think that the writer of
the Hymn to Hermes knew nothing of the key which was
.to unlock all its secrets. The very form of their language
would warrant us in saying much more. But the words of
Kumarila prove, that among the Eastern Aryans the real
character of their mythology had not been forgotten. lie,

88 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN SATIOKEj. -

book too, had to listen to complaints like those whic^ Pindar and

■-—■ Plato bring against the follies or the vices of the gdies * His

answer is ready. '

‘ It is fabled that Prajapati, the Lord of Creation, did vio¬
lence to his daughter. But what does it mean ? PrajA-
pati, the Lord of Creation, is a name of the sun; and he is
called so because he protects all creatures. His daughter
Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he was in
love with her, this only means that, at sunrise, the sun
runs after the dawn, the dawn being at the same time
called the daughter of the sun, becauses she rises when he
approaches. In the same manner, if it is said that Indra.
was the seducer of Ahalya, this does not imply that the god
Indra committed such a crime; but Indra means the sun,
and Ahalya the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined
by the sun of the morning, therefore is Indra called the
paramour of Ahalya .’ 1

The mo- It is the legend of Oidipous and Iokaste, one of the most
HeSiod^ awful and, in some aspects, the most repulsive in the wide
range of Greek mythology . 2 If the real nature of this tale
is laid bare before us, we may at once assure ourselves that
these stories are not the fruit of depraved imaginations and
brutal lives. There is no longer any mystery in the strange
combination of repulsive legends with a sensitive morality in
the Hesiodic poems of the ‘Works and Days.’ We cease to
wonder, that the same poet who has recounted the tale of
Pandora should tell us that the eye of God is in every place,
watching the evil and the good ; 3 that the duty of man is to

•HESIODIC THEOLC

89

avoid the smooth road to evil,’ and to choose the strait path aMP.
of good, which, rough at the first, becomes easy to those who . V1,

walk in it.* •

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAN •NATIOH&

CHAPTER VII.

THEORY OF GREEK -MYTHOLOGY AS AN ECLECTIC SYSTEM.

Pew who have considered the subject at all will be disposed
to deny that the Argive legends which relate the exploits of
Perseus might well be expanded into a longer poem than the
Iliad. We have, therefore, the less reason to be surprised if
the Iliad itself, on examination, is found to relate part only
of a more extended legend, or to exhibit under a different
colouring modified versions of a single story. If in the
mythology of Argos alone we have the ideal of Perseus
recurring in the tale of Herakles, there is the less reason for
wonder if the Hellenic Achilleus is but the counterpart of
the Lykian Sarpedon and Memnon, the son of Eos,—nay, if
the character of Achilleus recurs in that of other,, Aehaian
heroes. The Iliad, or rather, as Mr. Grote would say, the
Achilleis , 1 sings of the wrath of the Phthiotic chieftain, who
is also the child of the sea-goddess Thetis, and this wrath
is followed by a time of gloomy and sullen inaction. The
glorious hero, the lightning of whose countenance struck
terror into his enemies, hangs up his weapons and.hides his
face. The sun has passed behind the veil of the storm-cloud.
The expression is literally forced from us: we cannot withhold
the metaphor. But so was it with the men of Kalydon while
Meleagros lay sullen and angry in his secret chamber with his
beautiful wife Kleopatra. So complete is the identity of the
two characters, so thoroughly does it rebuke his moody anger,
that the episode of Meleagros is recited at length by Phoinix,
in the hope that it jnay appease the fury of Achilleus . 5 But
the issue with both is the same. Meleagros comes forth at last

race, ii. 236.

1 History of Gr

* Iliad, ix. 529-599.

MYTHICAL COMPLICATIONS. 91

to the aid of his people, and Achilleus, after a long struggle, CHAP,
makes up his quarrel with Agamemnon to avenge' the death . VI1, .
of.Patroklos. Both again are doomed, after their time of
obstinate inaction, to an early and violent death, preceded hy
a brief outburst of their former splendour. That such was
to be the lot of his great hero, the Homeric poet knew well;
but, ignorant though he may have been of the source of the
materials of which he' made such splendid use, he chose,
with a poetical instinct rarely surpassed, to close his tale
when Achilleus grants the prayer of Priam, and yields to
him the body of his dead son, Hektor.

If, however, resemblances of‘ detail are not wanting to No his-
show that Eastern and Western legends have in the Iliad
been blended together, it would follow that such a blending sions can
of the mythology of different cities or countries must issue fron™™
in a flighly complicated story. But it is obvious, at the “mplica-
same time, that no historical inferences can be drawn from caused,
the mere fact of such a complication. Itightly convinced
that the tale of Troy, with its marvellously vivid details and
astonishing incidents, must have some foundation, Bishop
Thirlwall is disposed to refeT it to some great expedition in
which the chieftains of Western Hellas were combined against
an 'Asiatic power ruling in Hion . 1 The evidence of such a
fact may possibly be found in isolated statements contained
in the Iliad, but scarcely in the plot of the story. If it may
be assumed, from the form of the prophecy of Poseidon, that

History of Greece, vol. i. cli. v. Dr. They can do nothing, therefore, in spite

92

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIK ARYAN NATIONS.

princes claiming descent from Aineias ruled in- the poet’s
time in the Tread , 1 no light is thrown by it on the existence
of that chief, or on the reality of-the Trojan war. The
ruins of Tiryns attest to a certain extent the truthfulness of
Homeric description in the catalogue of the contending
forces ; 2 the walls of Mykenai bear out the statement that
it was once the seat of a powerful dynasty, but archaeolo¬
gical evidence tells us nothing of Perseids or of Pelopids.

But if we can tYace this recurrence of the same ideal in
different heroes and of the same imagery in the recital of
their adventures in Hellenic mythology alone, the marvel is
intensified a thousandfold when we compare this mythology
with the ancient legends of Northern Europe or of the far-
distant East. There is scarcely an incident in the lives of
the great Greek heroes which cannot be traced out in the
wide field of Teutonic or Scandinavian tradition; fSid the
complicated action of the Iliad, or rather of the whole legend
of which the Iliad forms a part, is reproduced in the Edda
and the lays of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs. It may
seem almost superfluous, and yet the persistency of traditional
opinion makes it necessary, to repeat, that if the Greek tales
tell us of'serpent-slayers and of destroyers Of noxious monsters,
the legends of the ice-bound North also sing of heroes <Vho
slay the dragons that lie coiled round sleeping maidens. If
the former recite the labours of Herakles and speak of the
bondage of Apollon, Sifrit and Sigurd are not less doomed
to a life of labour for others, not for themselves. If Herakles
alone can rescue Hesione from a like doom with Andromeda,
or bring back Alkestis from the land of Hades, it is Sigurd
only who can slay the serpent Fafnir, and Ragnar Lodbrog
alone who can deliver Thora from the Dragon’s grasp. If,
at the end of his course, Herakles once more sees his early
lo.ve; if Oinone comes again to Paris in his death hour, so

RESULTS OF MYTHICAL PHRASEOLOGY.

Brynhild lies down to die with. Sigurd who had forsaken her. CHAP.
If Achilleus and Baldur can only be wounded in a single . vn ' .
spot, Isfendiyar in the Persian epic can be killed only by the
thorn thrown into his eye by Bustem. If the tale of Perseus
is repeated in the career of Herakles, the legend of Bagnar
Lodbrog is also a mere echo of the nobler story which told
' of the sun-bright Sigurd. It is scarcely necessary to enter
into more minute detail. The chief features of Hellenic
mythology may be traced,in the mythical system of all the
Aryan nations.

But at this point we encounter a difficulty which, if not Co«cln-
removed, must prove fatal to the method which Comparative
Mythology applies to the legends of the East and West. If from a-
that science has guided us to any measure of the truth, it onS-eclT ” 1
has taught us something not merely of the growth of tales witJ> Nors °
which'recount the actions of deified heroes, but of the con¬
ceptions from which sprang the highest deities of Olympos—

Artemis, Demeter, Apollon, and Zeus himself. • It has iden¬
tified Phoibos with Helios, Herakles, Perseus,- Theseus, Oidi-
ppus, and many others. It' has traced the several aspects of
his character through the phases presented in the legends of
Theseus, Kephalos; Daphne, Endymion, Bellerophontes, and
Meleagros. It has taught us that he is the child of Zeus
and Leto, while the maiden Persephone is sprung from Zeus
and Demeter. It tells us of Ouranos looking down on Gaia,
and of Gaia returning the love of Ouranos by her unbounded
fertility. It speaks of the toiling sun, visiting all the regions
of the earth as he ascends or goes down the slope of heaven,
and of earth as yielding to him her fruits wherever his light
may exercise its beneficent power. It speaks of Zeus as the
son or the husband of Gaia, and of the tears which fell in rain¬
drops from the sky when he mourned for the death of his son
Sarpedbn. It sepms to tell us, then, of a mythological or
- religious system which, simple at the first, became at the last
excessively complicated, and further that this system was the
result not of philosophical generalisations, but of the con¬
sciousness of an exuberant life which was extended from
man to every object which he beheld in the visible creation.

It seems to show that once upon a time, while the ancestors

94

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook; of European nations and tribes were still comparatively
■——^— united, man had uttered as the simple phrases'Of eveiy day
speech sayings which became afterwards the groundwork of
elaborate religious systems; that once upon a time they
spoke of the dawn coming from the chambers of the night,
while the night herself was struggling with the birth of the
brilliant sun; that the new-born sun saw and loved and
pursued the dawn, which vanished at his touch. It seems
to teach us that from such phrases, which, slightly varied,
were expanded into the tales of Kephalos and Prokris, of
Koronis and Apollon, grew finally the more definite person¬
alities of Zeus and Phoibos, of Leto and Daphne, of Arte¬
mis and Herakles. Hence, whatever in the Greek religious
systems there was bf> direct anthropomorphism or of a fetish
nature-worship would be the result of later thought and of
attempts to arrive at philosophical abstractions, and not the
maimed and distorted relics of a higher knowledge once
possessed but now only not forgotten.

Theory of If the theory which makes the growth of Greek mythology
Dhllinger from the first a philosophical process can be established, then
on the ^ the results of Comparative Mythology must be abandoned as
Greek my- of no value, and we must be content to Idok on the points of
thology. resemblance between Greek,. Teutonic, Scandinavian, and
Eastern legends as a problem utterly beyond our powers to
solve or even to grapple with. In any case it is a question
of evidence; and the objections, .which seem to be conclusive
against the hypothesis of an original dogmatic revelation, of
such a kind at least as that of which Mr. Gladstone speaks,

. . have been considered already. But Dr. Dellinger’s position 1

lies open to no charges of fanciful extravagance; it needs,
therefore, to be the more carefully examined, as professing
to be a legitimate deduction from the state of religion, or
rather of religious cultus, among the Greeks in historical
times. This state "was, in the opinion of Dr. Dollinger, the
result of an attempt to reduce a variety of conflicting systems
and notions into one harmonious whole. In it were mingled
the mysticism of Egypt and the orgiastic ritualism of the
East, with the rude nature-worship of the older and less
1 The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Temple erf Christ, book ii.

ECLECTIC THEORIES.

civilised ages ; and his purpose is to trace the several ideas CHAP,
so amalgamated to their original sources. With this view . TIL
he is obliged to assume that in his primaeval innocence man
was enabled ‘ to conceive of the Divinity as a pure, spiritual,
supernatural, and infinite being, distinct from the world and
exalted above it.’ The loss of this conception, and the
yearning for something in its place, led to the deification of
material nature, which ‘ unfolded herself to man’s nature as
a boundless demesne, wherein was confined an unfathomable
plenitude of powers, incommensurable and incalculable, and
of energies not to be overcome.’ With this was developed a
sympathy for naturalism, ‘ and-thus man, deeper and deeper
in the spells of his enchantress, and drawn downwards by
their weight, had his moral consciousness overcast in pro¬
portion, and gave the fuller rein to impulses which were
merely physical .’ 1 This deification of natural powers led,
as Dr. Dollinger believes, first of all to the worship of the
elements—of ether as the vault of heaven; of the earth as its
opposite; of fire as the warming and nourishing, the con¬
suming and destroying power; of water as the element of
moisture separated from that of earth. To this succeeded
astrolatry in the East, and geolatry in the West, where the
idea of the earth as a susceptible and productive agent led
to the distinction of male and female divinities. But the
actual Greek religion of the heroic and later ages was a
blending of the several notions derived from supplanted
races—Leleges and Earians, Thrakians and Pelasgians—■
together with, importations from Asia and Egypt . 2 Thus
Gaia and Helios, Zeus and Here, belong to the Pelasgic
stock, while Poseidon' was introduced by Karian and Phoe¬
nician visitors of the coasts of Hellas . 3 Pallas Athene was
also Pelasgian, aS a goddess of nature and the elements.
Apollon, likewise Pelasgian, ‘ has so many features in common
with Athene, that in many respects one might call him an
Athene of the male species.’ Artemis was in continental
Greece Pelasgian, while at Ephesos she exhibits an Asiatic
character, and becomes ‘ a sort of Pantheistic deity.’ Prom

■ The. Gentile and the Jew in the C.mrh of the Temple of Christ, vol. i. p. 66.

1 Ibid. p. 68. - * Ibid. p. 80.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

the Pelasgians also came Hestia, Hermes, and Aphrodite;
but Ares was the god of the Thrakian race, ‘ which, having
penetrated into' Boeotia and the Peloponnese, took his wor¬
ship along with them.’ Of the rest, Demeter was Pelasgic,
Hephaistos came from the Thrakians of Lemnos, and Dionysos
from the more distant East; while Hades was almost an
afterthought, not much' worshipped, and not^greatly cared
for by the people . 1

The picture drawn by Dr. Dollinger of the great Olympian
deities may in all its particulars be strictly true. It is pos-
anassump- sible or probable that ideas utterly foreign to the Greek
^™ ch or mind may have been imported from Phrygia, Phoenicia, or
there is no Egypt, and that the worship so developed may have embodied
philosophical conceptions of nature and of the powers at work
in it. But the question which calls for an answer cannot be
determined by the most masterly portraiture of the great
gods of Olympos : and Dr. Dollinger’s hypothesis does not
enable us to answer it. It starts on an assumption for which
we have no evidence; and all the evidence furnished by the
book of Genesis and still more all that is furnished by the.
study of language, militates against the idea that man
started originally with a conception of God, ‘as a pure,
spiritual, supernatural, and infinite being, distinct from the
world, and exalted above it.’ How soon he might have risen
to this conception, had his lot been different from what it has
been, it is impossible ty say: but if we are to argue simply
from statements before us, we may affirm that men were
from the first conscious of the existence of a Being more
powerful than themselves, whom they were bound to obey,
but we can scarcely maintain more. This sense of duty, and
still more the sense of shame following on the violation of it,
would show that the groundwork of that relation was the
goodness and justice of the Being with whom they had to do.
But in this conviction there was nothing to determine their
ideas in the objects and phenofnena of tl^e natural world.
Feeling a conscious life in himself, man would, until cor-,
rected by experience, attribute the same conscious life to
everything he saw or felt. The sun find moon, the cloud and
1 The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Temple of Christ, 93.

96

ARYAN - AND SEMITIC MONOTHEISM.

the wind, would.be living beings not less than himself; but
he could not embody them in anthropomorphic forms so long
as the names by which he spoke of them retained their
real meaning. Still less could he start with a primary wor¬
ship of the elements until he had learnt to regard as abstrac¬
tions the objects or powers which, it would seem, he looked
upon only as living beings. Three ways lay before him.
He might, like Abraham in the old Arabian legend , 1 be led
by the rising and setting of the sun and stars to the convic¬
tion that they were simply passive instruments in the hands
of an almighty and righteous God;- or he might, as he forgot
his old language, invest with an anthropomorphic life the
deities with which he peopled the whole visible creation; or,'
lastly, he might bow down crushed beneath the dead weight
of nature, and yield himself a living slave to a loathsome
and degrading fetishism. Of these three courses the first
was chosen by the Hebrew people, and even by them feebly
and fitfully ; 2 the second was followed by the tribes of the
Hellenic stopk; the third has been rejected by every portion
of the great Aryan family of nations. These, as they journeyed
from their ancient home, carried with them the old langua ge
and the old morality; hut the measure in which the} r forgot
the meaning of proper names would determine the extent to
which new gods would he' called into existence. This de-
velopement, as the result, primarily, of a corruption of lan¬
guage, would not be in the strictest sense, a religion, and the
moral sense of the worshipper would not he darkened in pro¬
portion to the number of the gods whom he venerated. Dr.
DoUinger’s hypothesis, not less than the theory of Mr. Glad¬
stone, would require a continually increasing degradation;
but the history of language, apart from the growth of Aryan
epic poetry, furnishes conclusive evidence against any such
idea. There is no evidence that the Greeks of the seventh
or sixth centuries before the Christian era had their ‘ moral

MYTIIOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK consciousness more overcast ’ than the Greeks ©f the tenth
.___. or twelfth; there is much to lead us to the contrary con¬

clusion.

Historical But Dr. Dellinger's theory requires him to deal with
tionsofDr. Karians, Leleges, and Pelasgians; and the chain of his ar¬
il,jllinger. gument becomes weakest where it should have the greatest
strength. His speculations may be masterly, and his con¬
clusions forcible; but we lack the means of determining
their truth. Mr. Grote, in his History of Greece, hesitates
to speak of any events as historical facts before the first
recorded Olympiad, i.e. 776 b.o. Sir Comewall Lewis regards
the researches of scholars respecting the primitive history of
the Hellenic or Italian tribes as ‘ not less unreal than the
speculations concerning judicial astrology, or the discovery
of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life.” Dr. Dol-
linger must have, evidence not accessible to either of these
writers, to warrant the assertion that the chief seats of the
Pelasgians were Arkadia, Argolis, and Perrhoibia, and that
the immigration of the Doric and Aiolic races took place
precisely in the year 1104 b.q. ! ■ •

They leave His analysis thus leaves the Greek mythology, as he found
difficulties a strange and perplexing riddle. It omits all notice of
of Greek the marvellous likeness between Greek and Scandinavian
inythology j e g en( j s . y. d oeg no t even attempt to explain why each
plained. (Jreek god should have certain special attributes and not
others. It does not tell us why Herakles, and Perseus, and
Bellerophon, and Apoll6n should all be made to serve crea-
. tures meaner and weaker than themselves,—why Herakles
and Zeus should have a thousand earthly loves, and Artemis
and Athene, according to some legends, have none. Still less
does it explain why the character of Herakles and Hermes
should sometimes assume a comic aspect, which is never
allowed to weaken the serious majesty of Athene, Demeter,
or Apollon.

' Credibility of Early Homan History , i. 297.

1 Jew and Gentile, #c„ vol. i. pp. 68, 74.

99

CHAPTER VIII.

DIFFUSION OF MYTHS.

If in the legends of any people we find a number of names
which explain themselves, if further the exploits of the gods
or heroes who bear these names’ are in strict accordance with
those meanings, then at once we are warranted in conjectur¬
ing that other names in the same legends not yet interpreted
may be of the same nature, while at the same time a basis is
furnished for classifying the several stories. If further we
find that in the traditions of different Aryan tribes, or even
of the same tribe, the same characters reappear with no
other difference than that of title and local colouring, the
inference is justified that a search into the mythical stores
of all the Aryan tribes would disclose the same phenomenon.
If here too our conjectures are verified, it will be impossible
to withstand the conclusion that these tribes must have
started from a common centre, and that from their ancient
home they must have carried away, if not the developed
myth, yet the quickened germ’ from which might spring
leaves and fruits varying in form and hue according to the
soil to which it should be committed, and the climate under
which the plant might reach maturity. These variations in
the names, it may be, of all the actors, as well as in the
minor details of their career, would prove, in exact propor¬
tion to the fidelity with which the essential type was pre¬
served, that this germ was furnished by the every day speech
of the people, or, in other words, by their way of regarding
the phenomena of the outward world. If these facts are
established, two important consequences follow: I. The hypo¬
thesis of any conscious bomnting or adaptation of myths on
a large scale by one tribe from another after their separation

JOO

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAKT NATKJSS.

hook from the common home becomes untenable, unless we assume'
— r —- an amount of intercourse between them far in excess df any
for which we have the evidence of history; and the clearest
proof of direct importation in the case of any given story or
fable which does not belong to the genuine mythology of a
people fails to throw any suspicion on the latter. IL The
process of analysis and comparison will have deprived these
legends of all claim to the character of historical traditions;
and even if it were maintained in the last resort that the
myth as brought from the common home grew up from some
historical fact or facts, still no such title can be made out for
the same incidents when we find them repeated in the same
order and with the same issue in different ages and different
lands. If in the primaeval home there was a war brought
about by the carrying off of a beautiful woman, a strife be¬
tween two chieftains, and a time of inaction for the hero of
the story followed by his signal victory and his early death,
then unquestionably these incidents, with a hundred others
common to the background of these legends, did not repeat
themselves at Ilion and Delphoi, in Ithaka and Norway, in
Lykia and Iran.

The Greek This is the goal to which we must be brought if the track
™ntsdf Sy be of this kind; and the matter may perhaps be soonest
the mture brought to an issue if we take the most complicated myths
of this of the Hellenic tribes as our starting point. We can scarcely
element rea d the legends of Herakles and Demetey, of Theseus,
Kadmos, Perseus, and a host of other mythical heroes,
without feeling that a few simple : phrases might well have
supplied the germ for the most intricate of these traditions.
Every incident in the myth of the Eleusinian Demeter may
be accounted for, if only men once said (with the conviction
that the things of which, they spoke had a conscious life),
‘ The earth mourns for the dead summer. The summer lies
shut up in the prison of Hades, the unseen ’—or, as in the
language of the Northman, ‘ She sleeps in the land of the
, Niflungs, the cold mists, guarded by the serpent Eafnir;
and the dwarf Andvari keeps watch over her buried trea¬
sures.’ The tale of Endymion seems to speak for itself;
‘ The moon comes to gaze on her beloved, the sun, as he lies

COMMON ELEMENTS OF SOLAR MTTHS.

■down to sleep in the evening.’ In the story of Niobe, we
seem to see . the sun in his scorching power, consuming those
who dare to face his dazzling brightness ; in that of Orpheus,
wd seem- to hear his lamentation for the beautiful evening
which has been stung by the serpent of the night, and which
he brings back to life only to lose her at the gates of day.
In the myth of Europe we have the journey of the sun from
the far East to the Western land, until Telephassa, the far-
shining, sinks down wearied On the Thessalian plain. Still
more transparent appear the tales of Kephalos and Daphne.
Prokris, even in the mouth of the Greek, is still the child of
Hers6, the dew : Eos is still the morning, Kephalos still the
head of the bright sun. , In Daphne we seem to behold the
dawn flying from her lover and shrinking before his splen¬
dour, In the Homeric Hymn, Leto, the night, dark and
still as death, promises that Phoibos shall long abide in
Delos,' the bright land. Doubtless she made the same
promise to lykians, Argives, Arkadians, Athenians, and all
others who called themselves the children of the light; but
the sun cannot tarry, and in spite of her plighted word he
hastens onward to slay the serpent of darkness. In Herakles
we see the sun in other guise, loving and beloved wherever
he goes, seeking to benefit the sons of men, yet sometimes
harming them in the exuberance of his boisterous strength.
In the tale of Althaia we read the sentence that the bright
sun must die when the torch of day is burnt out. In
Phaethon we seem to see the plague of drought which made
men say ‘ Surely another, who cannot guide the horses, is
driving the chariot of the sun.’ • The beautiful herds, which
the bright and glistening daughters of early morning feed in
the pastures of Thrinakia, seem to tell us of the violet-
coloured clouds which the dawn spreads over the fields of the
blue sky. In Belleroplion, as in Perseus, Theseus, Phoibos,
and Herakles, we find again the burden laid on the sun, who
must toil for others, althcAigli the forms of that toil may
vary. Perseus goes to the dwelling of the Graiai, as men
. might have said, ‘The sun has departed to the land of the
pale gloaming.’ When Perseus slays Medousa, the sun
has killed the night in its solemn and death-like beauty,

102

MYTHOLOGY OF JIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

book while the wild pursuit of the immortal Gorgcms seems to be

■- 'r -— the chase of Darkness after the bright Sun who, with his

golden sandals, just escapes their grasp as he soarp into the
peaceful morning sky, the Hyperborean gardens, wfBch
sorrow, strife, and death can never enter. In the death of
Akrisios we have the old tale which comes up in many
another legend, where Oidipous and Theseus mourn that
they have unwittingly slain their fathers.

The Norse If the Greek legends by themselves thus exhibit, or seem
pwiits'iif y ex hibit, their ancient framework, the Norse tradition
precisely points with at the least equal clearness in the same direction.
direotiMi. H any now can he found to assert that the one set of legends
were copied from the other, he not only maintains a theory
which, in Dr. Dasent’s words, ‘ hangs on a single thread,’ 1
but he displays a credulity which needs not to shrink from
the avowal that the whole of the Arabian "Nights’ Entertain¬
ments is a genuine and veracious history. The wildest pre¬
judice can scarcely shelter itself behind these treacherous
and crumbling barriers, although it may urge that, whether in
Teutonic or in Greek mythology, the. dawn, the evening, and
the night, the toiling and capricious sun, are already persons
with human forms and a fixed local habitation. But even
this position would be greatly strained. Mr. Grote himself
allows that what he terms allegory is one of'the constituent
elements of Greek mythology. 2 But even if we admit the
objection in its full force, we lack but a single link to com¬
plete the chain of evidence and turn an overwhelming pro¬
bability into fact. Have we any records of that old time in
which men spoke as Greek and Norse myths'seem to tell us
that they spoke ? Have we any actual relics of that speech
in which men talke4 of Daphne as chased by Phoibos, even
while Daphne was still a common name of the dawn, and
Phoibos meant simply the sun ?

The mis- ■ The Vedic hymns of the Mantra period stand forth to give
supplied it! 118 answer, but they do so only to exhibit a fresh marvel,
the elder While they show to us the speech which was afterwards
poems. petrified into the forms of Greek and Norse mythology, they

1 Popular Tates from He Norse, introduction, p. xliii.

MYTHICAL PHRASES.

point to a still earlier time, of which no record lias come
down, and of which we can have no further evidence than
that which is furnished by the laws which determine the
growth of language. Even in the Mantra period, the earliest
in all Sanskrit, and therefore (as exhibiting the earliest form
of thought) the oldest in all human literature, 1 the whole
grammar is definitely fixed, and religious belief lias assumed
the character of a creed. And if in them man has not lived
. long enough to trace analogies and arrive at some idea of an
order of nature, he has grown into the strongest conviction
that behind all the forms which come before his eyes there
is a Being, unseen and all-powerful, whose bidding is done
throughout the wide creation, and to whom men may draw
nigh as children to a father.

When, therefore, in these hymns, Keplialos, Prokris,
Hermes, Daphne, Zeus, Ouranos, stand forth' as simple
names for the sun, the dew, the wind, the dawii, the heaven
and the sky, each recognised as such, yet each endowed with
the most perfect consciousness, we feel that the great riddle
of mythology is solved, and that we no longer lack the key
which shall disclose its most hidden treasures. When we
hear the people saying, ‘Our friend the sun is dead. Will
he rise ? Will the dawn come back again ? ’ we see the
death of Herakles, and the weary waiting while Leto strug¬
gles with the birth of Phoibos. ' When on the return of day
we hear the cry—

‘ Rise ! our life, our spirit is come hack, the darkness is
gone, the light draws near ! ’

—we are carried at once to the Homeric hymn, and we
hear the joyous shout of- all the gods when Phoibos springs
to life and light on Delos. 2 The tale of Urvasi and Puru-
ravas 3 (these are still the morning and the sun) is the tale
of Orpheus and Eurydike.' Pururavas, in his dreary' search,

104

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ABYAST U^TKJfcS.

hook. Lears, the voice of Urvasi saying ‘ I am gone Sks the feet sf

—.—■ the dawns; I am hard to be caught, like themfouL' i Set

she will come back to him at the close of the nighfc,£u2l a
son, bright and beaming, shall be bom to them. Yanma is
still the wide heaven, the god ‘ who can be seen by all j ’ the
lord of the whole earth: but in him we recognise at once
the Greek Ouranos, who looks lovingly on Gaia from his
' throne in the sky. Yet more, we read the praises of Indra,
and his great exploit is that ®

‘ He has struck the daughter of Dyaus (Zens), a woman
difficult to vaifquish—

‘ Yes, even, the daughter of Dyaus, the magnified, the
Dawn, thou, 0 Indra, a great hero hast ground to pieces.

‘ The Dawn rushed off from her crushed car, fearing that
Indra, the bull, might strike her.

‘ This her car lay there, well ground to pieces : she went
far away.’

The treatment is rude, but we have here not merely the
whole story of Da.phne, but the germ of that of Europe borne
by the same bull across the sea. More commonly, however,
the dawn is spoken of as bright, fair, and loving, the joy-of
all who behold her. °

‘ She shines upon us like a young wife, rousing every
living being to go to his work.

‘ She rose up, spreading far and wide (Euiyganeia, Eury-
dike), and moving towards every one. She grew in brightness,
wearing her brilliant garment. The mother of the cows (the
morning clouds, the Homeric herds of the sun), the leader
of the days, she shone gold-coloured, lovely to behold.

‘ She, the fortunate, who brings the eye of the god
(Kephalos, or the one-eyed Odin), who leads the white and
lovely steed (of the sun), the Dawn was seen revealed by her
rays ; with brilliant treasures she follows every one.

‘ Shine for us with thy best rays, thou bright Dawn, thou
who lengthenest our life, thou the love of all, who givest us
food, who givest us wealth in cows, horses, and chariots.

‘ Thou, daughter of the sky (Dyaus, Zeus), thou high-born
Dawn, give us riches high and wide.’ 1

1 Max Muller, History of Sanskrit Literatim, p. 561.

GERMS OF DAWN MYTHS.

105

Still more remarkable, as exhibiting the germs.of the CTT.-vp.
ideas which find their embodiment in the Hellenic Athdnd VIIL .
*H#the Latin Minerva, is the following hymn.

‘ The wise priests celebrate with hymns the divine, bright-
charioted expanded Dawn; worshipped with holy worship)
purple-tinted, radiant, leading on the sun.

‘The lovely Dawn, arousing man, goes before the Sun,
preparing practicable paths, riding’in a spacious chariot;
expanding everywhere she diffuses light.at the commence¬
ment of the days.

‘ Harnessing the purple oxen to her car, unwearied she
renders riches perpetual; a goddess praised of many, and
cherished by all, she shines manifesting the paths that lead
to good.

‘Lucidly white is she, occupying the two (regions, the
. upper and middle firmament), and manifesting her person
from the East: she traverses the path of the sun, as if
knowing (his course), and harms not the quarters of the
horizon.

‘Exhibiting her person like a well-attired female, she
stands before our eyes (gracefully) inclining like (a woman
who ha.s been) bathing (Apliroditd Anadyomene). Dispersing
the hostile glooms, Tishas, the daughter of heaven, comes
with radiance.

‘ Tishas, the daughter of heaven, tending to the West,
puts forth her beauty like a (well-dressed) woman; bestowing
‘precious treasures on the offerer of adoration, she, ever
youthful, brings back the light as of old.’ 1

We can but wonder at the marvellous exuberance of Gerais of
language, almost every expression of which may manifestly
serve as the germ of a mythical tale. We saj’, ‘ The fire
bums, the wood crackles and smokes.’ They said,

‘ Neighing like a horse that is greedy for food, it steps out
from the strong prison: then the wind blows after his blast:
thy path, 0 Agni (Ignis), it dark at once.’

The Latin carried with him the name of the Hindu Fire- Tratlifd-
god to little purpose. In the hands of the Greek similar inioa? H..-
phrases ‘on the searching breath of the wind grew up into
> H. H. Wilson, Rig Vein, StmhUa, vol. iii. p. SG9.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

the legend of Hermes. Nor can it be said that the instinct
of the Greek was less true than that of the old Vedie poet to
the sights of the natural world. If we recur with feelings of
undiininished pleasure to the touching truthfulness oi the
language, which tells of the Dawn as the bright being whom
age cannot touch, although she makes men old, who thinks
on the dwellings of men and shines on the small and great,
we feel also that the ‘ Homeric ’ poet, even while he spoke of
a god in human form boru in Delos, was not less true to the
original character of the being of whom he Sang. He thought
of the sun rising in a cloudless heaven, and he told how the
nymphs bathed the lord of the golden sword in pure water,
and wrapped him in a spotless robe. 1 Still, although the
stress of the hymn lies wholly on the promise of Leto that
her child shall have his chief home in Delos, the poet feels
that Delos alone can never be his home, and so he sang how
Apollon went from island to island, watching the ways and
works of men; how he loved the tall sea-cliffs, and every
jutting headland, and the rivers which hasten to the broad
sea, even though he came back with ever fresh delight to his
native Delos. 2

Thus the great mystery of Greek as of other mythology is
dispelled like mist from the mountain-side at the rising of
the sun. All that is beautiful in it is invested with a purer
radiance, while much, if not all, that is gross and coarse in
it is refined, or else its grossness is traced to an origin which
reflects no disgrace on those who framed or handed down
the tale. Thus, with the keynote ringing in our ears, we
can catch at once every strain that belongs to the ancient
harmony, although it may be heard amid the din of many
discordant voices. The groundwork of Greek mythology was

■ he* <re, jji-e Seal \oioo Mot.

Kadapm- ondp(ay S' h
•pdpei \tVK$

' vrryarecp. ,

Hymn to Apollo, 120.
This is the white and glistening robe
in which Cyrus and Arthur axe wrapped,
when they are carried away from the

SifojAar oplwy, vorapoi 0* l

oXXk <ri AitAy, Qolfe, yiAurr' ivtrfp-
. real (rop.— Hymn to Apollo, 140.

GROUNDWORK OF ALL MYTHOLOGY.

107

' the ordinary speech which told of the interchange of day and chap.
night, of summer and winter; but into the superstructure .
there may have been introduced any amount of local or
personal detail, any number of ideas and notions imported
froy foreign philosophical or religious systems. The extent
of such importations is probably far less than is generally
imagined; but however-this may be, the original matter
may still be traced, .even where it exists only in isolated
fragments. The bull which bears Europe away from Kadmos
(Kedem, the East), 1 is the .same from which the dawn
flies in the Vedic hymn.' The robe with which Medeia
poisons the daughter of Kre6n was a gift from Helios,
the burning sun, and is seen again as the poisoned robe
which Deianeira sends to the absent Heraldes, as the deadly
arrow by which Philoktetes mortally wounds the Trojan '
Paris, as the golden -fleece taken from the ram which
bears away the children of (Nepkel6) the mist, a.s the sword
which Aigeus leaves under the stone for Theseus, the son of
Aithra, the pure air; as the spear of Artemis which never
misses its mark; as the s'woi#l of Pei-seus -which slays all on
whom it may fall; as the unerring weapons of Meleagros;
as the fatal lance which Achilleus alone can wield. The
serpents of night or of winter occur in almost every tale,
under aspects friendly or unkind. The dragon sleeps coiled
round Brynhild or Aslauga, as the snakes seek to strangle
the infant Herakles or stiug the beautiful EurydikA If the
power of the sun’s rays is set forth under such different forms,
their beauty is signified by the golden locks of Phoihos, over
which no razor has ever passed ; 1 by the flowing hair which
streams from the head of Kephalos, and falls over the shoulders
of Perseus and Bellerophon. They serve also sometimes as a
sort of Palladion, and the shearing of the single golden lock
which grew on the top of his head leaves Nisos, the Megarian

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATJOUk.

.108

HOOK Icing, powerless tffe the shorn Samson in the arms of the

■- r —• Philistines. In many of the legends these images ate mingled

together, or recur under modified forms. In the tale of
Althaia there is not only the torch of day which measures
the life of Meleagros, but the weapons of the chieftain which
no enemy may withstand. In that of Belleroph&n there are
the same invincible weapons, while the horrible Chimaira
answers to the boar of Kalydon, or to that of Erymanthos
which fell by the arm of Herakles.

,? rCC Bt'c ^ ^ le £ rea ^ er number of Greek legeftds have thus been
legends. reduced to their primitive elements, the touch of the same
wand will lay open others which may seem to have been
fashioned on quite another model. Even the dynastic legends
of Thebes will not resist the method which has disclosed so
many secrets. For most other tales the work is done. There
is absolutely nothing left for further analysis in the stories
of Orpheus and Eurydike, of Kephalos and Prokris, of Selene
and Endymion, Niobe and Leto, Demeter and Persephone,
Kadmos and Europe, Daphne and' Apollon. Not an incident
remains unexplained in the legends of Herakles, of Althaia
and the burning brand, of Phaetlion, Memnon, and Belle¬
roph&n. If there are bypaths in the stories of Ariadne,
Medeia, Semele, Prometheus, or of the cows of the Sun in
the Odyssey, they have been followed up to the point from
which they all diverge.

Growth of If then in the vast mass of stories which make up the
traditions, mythology of the Aryan nations there seems to be evidence
showing that in some cases the legend has been- brought by
direct importation from the East to the West or from West
to East, the presumption of conscious borrowing cannot with
any fairness be extended to any tales for which such evidence
is not forthcoming. The great epic poems of the Aryan race
sprung into existence in the ages which followed the dis¬
persion of the tribes, and during which all intercourse between
them was an impossibility; yet these epic poems exhibit an
identical framework, with resemblances in detail which even
defy the influences of climate and scenery. But many of the
actors in these great dramas reappear in the popular stories
of the Aryan tribes, with subtle points of likeness and dif-

THEORY OF THE IMPORTATION OF MYTHS.

109

ference, which can be accounted for by conscious borrowing CHAP,
only on the supposition that the traditions of one country . YI1L .
were as intimately known to the people of another country
as the traditions of many, if not-most, of the Aryan nations are
now known to us through the long toil and vast researches of
comparative mythologisfcs, aided by the mighty machinery of
the printing press. In truth, the more that we examine this
hypothesis of importation as affecting the general stock of
mythical tradition in any country, the more scanty and less
conclusive will the evidence appear; and in the issue we
shall find'ourselves driven practically to reject it altogether,
or to suppose that the impulse of borrowing amounted to a
universal and irresistible mania. 'The dynastic legends of
Thebes do but reproduce those of Argos; the legends of both
alike do but repeat the career of Aehilleus or of Sigurd; and
the great heroes of these tales reappear as the Boots and the
disguised beggar of Teutonic and Hindu folklore. The sup¬
position of any deliberate borrowing attributes to Greeks,

Teutons, Scandinavians, and Hindus, a poverty of invention
not less amazing than their skill in destroying the evidence
of the theft, and wearing borrowed plumage as with an
inborn grace. Unless we are prepared to say that the ,

borrowing was wholesale, and to determine the source of
this exhaustless store of wealth, it is more prudent and
more philosophical to admit that in every , country the myths
which have their roots in phrases relating to physical phe¬
nomena have been kept alive by independent tradition from
the times of the first dispersion.

But if the story of Aehilleus, as .told in* the Iliad, is only Aryan
another form of the legend which relates the career of the fol3dolc '
Ithakan chief in the Odyssey; if this tale reappears in the
Saga of the Volsungs and the Nibelungen Lied, in the epical
cycles of Arthur and Charlemagne, in the lay of Beowulf and
the Shahnameh of Birdusi, and if further all these streams
of popular poetry can be traced back to a common source in
phrases which described the sights and sounds of the outward
world, the resemblances thus traced are nevertheless by no
means so astonishing as the likeness whiclrruns through a
vast number of the popular tales of Germany and Scandinavia,

110 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARY AX MJTOKS.

rook of Greece and Rome, of Persia and Hindustan. On the

_' r —. hypothesis of a form of thought which attributes conscious

life to all physical objects, we must at once admit that the
growth of a vast number of cognate legends was inevitable.
Nor is there anything bewildering in the fact, that phrases
which denoted at first the death of the dawn, or her desertion
by the sun as he rose in the heavens, or the stealing away of
the evening light by the powers of darkness, should give
birth to the legends of Helen and Guenevere, of Brynhild
and Gudrun, of Paris and of Lancelot, of Acflilleus and
Sigurd. All that this theory involves is that certain races
of mankind, or certain tribes of the same race, were separated
from each other while their language still invested all sensible
things with a personal life, and that when the meaning of
the old words was either wholly or in part forgotten, the
phenomena of the earth and the heavens reappeared as beings
human or divine, and the Pani, or Night, which sought to
lure Sarama, the Dawn, into his dismal cave, became the
Paris who beguiled Helen to Troy, and the Lancelot who
corrupted the faith of the wife of Arthur.

Legends The wonder becomes greater when from the necessary
ableTnto''" outgrowth of certain conditions of thought and speech we
phrases re- turn to popular stories which cannot be brought within this
pliysfcal class of epical legends, and which yet exhibit, in spite of
pheno- differences of detail and local colouring, a closeness of re¬
semblance which establishes their substantial identity. If,
among the stories which Hindu, Persian, Greek, or Teutonic
mothers recounted to their-children, we find tales which turn
- on the same incidents, and in their most delicate touches
betray the influence of precisely the same feelings, we must
conclude either that these legends were passed from the one
tribe or clan to the other, or that before these tribes separated
from their common home they not only possessed in-mythical
phrases relating to physical phenomena the germs of the
future epics of Europe and Asia, but had framed a number
of stories which cannot-be traced back to such phrases, which
seem to point rather to a storehouse of moral proverbs, and
which cannot be accounted for on any hypothesis of conscious
borrowing by one distinct people from another. It would.

STORIES OF TIIE MASTER THIEF. HI

indeed, be safer to affirm of any given story that it has not ohap.
been thus borrowed than to say that it cannot be traced back . vnL .
to the one source from which have sprung the great epic
poems of the world. The story of the Master Thief is a case
in point. It looks at first sight as though it had nothing to
do with the legends of the great Norse or Hellenic heroes,
and the resemblance of some of its incidents to those of a-
story told in the Hitopadesa suggests the conclusion that it.
found its way into Europe through the Arabic translation
known as the Kalila and Dimna. Professor Max Muller
plainly avowing this belief, says that ‘the story of the
Master Thief is told in the Hitopadesa.’ 1 The Sanskrit tale
is that of the Brahman who, on hearing from three thieves
■in succession that- the goat which he carried on his back was
a dog, throws the animal down' and leaves it as a booty for
the rogues who had hit upon this, mode of cheating him.

‘The gist .of the story,’ adds Professor Miiller, ‘is that a
man will believe almost anything, if he is told the same by
three different people.’ But, while a far greater resemblance
to the Egyptian tale is exhibited by the Hindu version of'the
Master Thief as told by Somadeva Bhatta, presently to be
noticed, it may fairly be asked whether this is either the
story or*the moral of the European ‘ Master Thief.’ In the
Teutonic version we find no incidents resembling those of
the Sanskrit tale. The Norse story exhibits some points of.
likeness, together with differences which rather force us to
think that it cannot have been suggested by the Eastern
fable. In the latter the Brahman is directly deceived by tv
others; in the Norse legend the peasant deceives himself,
and the moral seems to be, not that a man can be brought to
believe anything if he hears it asserted by several seemingly
independent witnesses, but tbat experience is thrown away
on one who will put his hand into the fire after he has been
burnt. In the Norse tale, the farmer intends to drive one of •
his three oxen to market, and the youth, who is a. postulant
for the novitiate in the worshipful order of thieves, is told
that his desire shall he granted if he can steal this ox on ihe
road, without the owner’s knowledge and without doing him

slit

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

]12

hook any harm. The lad accordingly puts a silver-buckled shoe

■- r '—• in the way. The man admires it, but passes on ‘without

picking it up, as an odd shoe would be of little use. Presently
he sees before him the same shoe, which the thief, having
run by another way, has again cast on the road, and tying
up his ox hastens back to pick up the fellow, while the lad
goes away with the beast. Determined to test him further, the
fraternity tell the boy that he shall be as good as any one of
them if, under the same conditions, he can steal the second
ox, which the man was now driving to market. As he goes
along, the peasant sees a lad hung under the armpits to a
tree, but passes on with little concern until he sees as he
supposes another lad in the same position on another tree.
Still not caring to give any help, he plods onwards until the
thief hangs himself up for the third time on his road. The
man, thinking that he is bewitched, resolves to. go back and
see whether the other two still hang where he saw them, and
the ox which he leaves tied up is the second sacrifice. The
thieves now tell the youth that if he can steal the third ox
he shall be their master. So he places himself in a thicket,
and as the man draws near with his last beast, imitates the
bellowing of cattle; and the peasant, his wits even more
flustered than before, hurries away to catch the lost oxen,
leaving his third animal a prey to the thief. 1 At this point
the resemblance of the Norse to the Brahman story ceases;
but the career of the Master Thief is as yet scarcely begun.
He has yet to overreach the society over which he now
presides. The thieves set out to see whether they cannot do
something surpassing all that he had done; and the lad,
taking advantage of their absence to drive the three oxen
into the road to the great delight of their owner, who sees
them return to the farm, carries off all the precious things
which formed the common store of the robbers. Thus far
the Norse story agrees in its main features with the Scottish
tale of the Shifty Lad, 2 although even here the points of
' difference are so great as to preclude the idea that the one
was derived from the other. . The sequel of the Norse tale is

1 Dasent, Norse Tales, ' The Master 2 Campbell, Papular Tales of the West

Thief,’ 268. Highlasiis, vol. i. p. 320.

RHAMPSINITOS AND THE MASTER THIEF. • 113

substantially the same as the Teutonic story of the Master CHAP.
Thief. This story has, therefore, really nothing to do -with VI11 ' .
the. fable of the Brahman and the goat, and it may fairly be
doubted whether, on the supposition that the idea was gained
from the Hitopadesa, ‘ nothing was easier than to invent the
three variations which we find in the Norse Master Thief’
and the Shifty Lad of Highland tradition.' Professor Max
Muller adds that ‘ the case would be different if the same
story occurred in Herodotos.’

‘ At the time of Herodotos,’ he continues, ‘ the translations
of the Hitopadesa had not yet reached Europe, and we should
be obliged to include the Master Thief within the most pri¬
mitive stock of Aryan lore. But there is nothing in the story
of the two sons of the architect who robbed the treasury of
Rhampsinitos which turns on the trick of the Master Thief.

There were thieves, more or less clever, in Egypt as well as
in India, and some of their stratagems were possibly the
same at all times. But there is a keen and well-defined
humour in the story of the Brahman and his deference to
public opinion. Of this there is no trace in the anecdote
told by Herodotos. That anecdote deals with mere matter
of fact, whether imaginary or historical. The story of
Rhampsinitos did enter into the popular literature of
Europe, but through a different channel. We find it in the
‘ Gesta Romanorum,’ where Octavianus has taken the place
of Rhampsinitos, and we can hardly doubt that there it came
originally from Herodotos.’ 1 But what are really the facts xhoWml
of the case ? The evidence which proves that the Herodotean ol . rr:iarn -
story was reproduced in the ‘ Gesta Romanorum ’ cannot be psm '
taken as of itself establishing the same origin for the Norse,
the Teutonic, and the' Irish legend. The incident of the
Brahman and the goat may be left on one side, as only
distantly resembling a very subordinate part of the Norse
version; but the real story of the Master Thief’s career is
precisely the story of the architect’s son in the legend of
Rhampsinitos. The possible affinity of thievish stratagems
in all countries can scarcely accoun t for a series of extraor-

• Chips from a German Workshop, ii. 231.

VOL. I.

114

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK dinary incidents and astounding tricks following each other
-*'_. in the same order,-although utterly different in their out¬
ward garb and colouring. Strangely enough, the Highland
version, which agrees with the Norse tale in making the
young thief cheat his master, agrees most closely with the
Egyptian myth. 1 In the latter, the younger of the two sons
who have learnt from their father the secret of entering the
treasure-house is caught in a trap placed there by the
king, when he found his gold and jewels dwindling away.
At his own request the elder brother cuts off his head, and
the king, astounded at finding a headless body, bids his
guards to impale it on a wall, with strict charge to bring
' before him anyone whom they might hear mourning for
the dead man. The mother, seeing her son’s body thus
exposed, threatens to tell the king everything unless the
body is brought safely home to her. Loading some asses
with skins full of wine, the elder son, as he approaches the
guard, loosens the string of two or three wine skins, and
the soldiers, rushing up at the sight of wine trickling on
the ground, try to soothe the seemingly distracted owner,
while they solace themselves by. the liquor which they catch
in their cups, until at length, overcoming the young man’s
reluctance, they sit down with him, and drink themselves to
sleep. The dead body is then taken away by the brother,
who, hearing of the new device by which the king pro¬
posed to ’ catch him, crowns his exploits by cheating the
king’s daughter, and leaving a dead man’s hand in hers.
His marriage with the princess follows, and he is held in

cave, Hie thieves'are done the wiser, lightning.— Curious Myths of the Middle
as hejs immediately killed. Here too Ages, second series, ‘Schamir.’

HINDU VERSION OF THE MASTER THIEF.

honour as the cleverest man of the cleverest people in the

World. 1

This story in some of its leading features agrees closely with •
the Adventure, of the Mason, related by Washington Irving :
in his ‘ Tales of the Alhambra.’ Probably Irving himself knew
nothing of the story of Rhampsinitos, and certainly was un¬
acquainted with the Tales of the Master Thief and his fol¬
lowers. Still a Spanish legend must be regarded with some
suspicion. In this case it must at least he admitted that the
traces of direct borrowing have been as skilfully hidden as if
the changes in the story had been the work of Hermes or
the Master Thief himself. Here the kiDg is turned into a
priest, who is so far wiser than Rhampsinitos that he guards
against the knowledge of the mason by keeping him blind¬
folded from the time of his leaving home to his return,
except while he is actually at work preparing the treasure-
■ chamber.- In this case, then, the mason knows the secret
of the hidden wealth, but cannot tell in what house it is
stored up. The priest dies: but not only have his riches
vanished, but his ghost haunts the house, arid no one will
become its tenant till .the'landlord chances to betake himself
to the poor mason, who declares that he is ‘ not to be
frightened by the - devil himself, even though he riioufd come
in the sbapeof a big bag of money.’ When he is led to the
house, he finds that it is the very one in which he had worked
for the priest, and discreetly keeps the secret to himself, till,
like the Egyptian architect, he reveals it on his deathbed to

The Hindu version of the story of Rhampsinitos is less in¬
genious than this Spanish story, and is in every way inferior
to the well-pointed legend of Herodotos. It is- related by
Somadeva Bha^ta of Cashmir in his ‘ Ocean of the Streams of
Narrative,’ aprofessed abridgement of the still older collection
called the Yribat Katha. In this tale the elder of the two
thieves simply makes a hole through the wall (which would
at once betray their mode of entrance) in order to reach the
chamber in which the king has placed not only his treasures
but his daughter. He remains with her too long, and being
> Herodotos, ii. 121, &c.; Tales of Ancient Grace, 386.

11(1 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

330OK caught in the morning, is hanged, but not before lie has by
signs bidden his brother Ga,ta to carry off and save the prin¬
cess. Gata therefore on the next night enters the chamber of
the princess, who readily agrees to fly with him. The body
of Karpara is then exposed, in order to catch the surviving
malefactor, who tricks them much after the fashion of the
Egyptian story, the chief difference being that Gata bums
the body of his brother Karpara, for whom he contrives to
perform the necessary amount of mourning by dashing on
the ground a karpara, or pot of rice, and then bewailing his
loss by the words, ‘ Alas for my precious Karpar^,’—words
which the guards of course apply to the broken pipkin, and.
not to the dead thief. The story winds up with a proclama¬
tion from the king, promising half his realm to the magician
who has done all this : but the princess bids him beware,
and Gata goes away with her to another country. 1
The story The mason’s secret is much more closely reproduced in the
phonics story which Pausanias tells of Trophonios and Agamedes,
and Aga the builders of the temple of Phoibos, after he had slain
me es ' the dragon at Delphoi. These two builders also raise the
treasury of Hyrieus, placing one of the stones so that they
could remove it from the outside. Hyrieus, astonished at
the lessening of his wealth, sets a snare, in which Agamedes
is caught, and Trophonios cuts off his head to save him from
torture and himself from discovery. The latter precaution
seems unnecessary, since Pausanias adds that the earth
opened and received Trophonios as in the myth of Am-
phiaraos.

The . In the Scottish story the Shifty Lad goes through his ap-

fshifty Lad. p re nticeship not among a company of thieves, but under the
sole charge of the Black Rogue, of whom he rids himself by
getting him to try the pleasant sensation of being hung by
the neck. The trick answers to that of the Norse thief, but

1 See Mr. Cowell’s Paper ‘ On the
Hindu Version of the. Story of Phara-
psinitoe,’ in the Journal of Philology,
No. I. p. 66. The imprisonment of the
king’s daughter in the treasure-ehamber
can scarcely fail to remind us of Bryn-
hild within her flaming walls; and thus
the myth seems to exhibit an affinity to

the legends which tell of unsuccessful
attempts to rescue the imprisoned
maiden, jgo is finally won only by the

who can leap the hedge of spears or
cross the fiery barrier. See also book ii.
ch..viii. sect. 2.

STORY OF THE SHIFTY LAD. 117

the mode of effecting it differs widely. Having disposed of CHAP,
his master, he engages himself to a carpenter whom he per- - Vni ' .
suades to break into the king’s storeho use. The advice of the
Seanagal whom the king consults is that a hogshead of soft
pitch should be placed near the entrance. The wriglit, again
making the venture, sinks into the pitch, and the Shifty Lad,
stepping in on his shoulders, takes as much as he can carry,
and then sweeping off' his master’s head, leaves the body in
the hogshead. Again the Seanagal is consulted, and his
answer is ‘ that they should set the trunk aloft on the points
of the spears of the soldiers, to be carried from town to town,
to see, if they could find any one at all that would take sorrow
for it.’ As they pass by the wright’s house, his wife screams,
but the Shifty Lad cutting himself with an adze leads the
captain of the guard to think that the cry was caused by
sorrow at his own hurt. The body is then by the king’s
order hung on a tree, the guard being ordered to seize any
one who should venture to take it down. The lad, driving-
before him a horse loaded with two kegs of whisky, ap¬
proaches the soldiers as though he wished to pass them .
stealthily, and when they catch the horse’s bridle, he runs
off, leaving the men to- drink themselves to sleep, and then
returning takes away the wright’s body. This exploit is fol¬
lowed by others which occur in no other version: but the final
scene is a feast, at which, according to the Seanagal’s predic¬
tion, the Shifty Lad asks the king’s daughter to dance. The
Seanagal upon this puts a. black mark upon him, but the lad,
like Morgiana, in the story of ‘ Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,’
discovering the mark, puts another on the Seanagal, and
on twenty other men besides him. The king is then advised
to say that the man who had done every trick that had been
done must be exceedingly clever, and that if he would come
forward and give himself up, he should have the princess for
his wife. All the marked men accordingly claim the prize ;
and the craft of the Shifty Lad is once more called into pra ctice,
to secure the maiden for himself. 1 Mr. Campbell, who relates

118

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYATT NATIONS..

hook this story, gives full weight to the suggestioa that the inci-

-^—- dents in which it resembles the version of HerodotoS may

‘ have been spread amongst the people by those members of
their families who study the classics at the Scotch Universi¬
ties,’ but he adds with good reason, that if the resemblances
to other stories not classical are to be accounted for in the
same way, it must be supposed ‘that these books have all
■been read at some time so widely in Scotland as to have
become known to the labouring population who speak Gaelic,
and so long ago as to have been forgotten by the instructed
who speak English and study foreign languages.’ 1
Point and In the Norse and Teutonic versions it seems impossible
thosr° f n °t 1° sfie the most striking incident of the Egyptian tale in
.‘tone*. a connection and under forms which force on us the conclu¬
sion that they are not related to each other in any other way
than by their growth from a common root. In these versions
the king is represented by a goodhumoured squire who
makes himself merry over the successful- devices of the
Master Thief, as he accomplishes the several tasks imposed
upon him. These tasks taken separately are much the same
in each, but the difference of order indicates that no one
was regarded at the first as essentially more difficult than
another. In none of them, however, does the humour
of the story turn on the force of public opinion. The whole
pcint lies in the utter inability ‘of any one to guard against
the thief, even when they know that they are going to be
robbed and have themselves pointed out the object to be
stolen. Here, as in the stories of Ehampsinitos and the
Shifty Lad, the means for achieving one of the tasks is wine:
but the thief has to take away not the dead body of a man,
but a living horse, on which sits a groom, or, as in the Norse
tale, twelve horses, each with a rider guarding them. The
disguise assumed by the thief is the dress of a beggar-
woman, and her wine, which in the German story is power-

neck, and so keeps watch all night, into the air and is never more seen.

He is assailed by evil demons, but be * Tales of the West Highlands, i. 352.
returns every blow with interest — a

THE THEFTS OF HERMES.

tally drugged, soon puts the guards to sleep as soundly a.s CITAr.
the soldiers of the Egyptian king. In this version the thief . YI1L .
swings the rider, saddle and all, in the air by ropes tied to
the rafters of the stable; in the Norse tale, the twelve
grooms find themselves astride the beams in the morning.

The theft of the sheet and ring from the persons of the squire
and his wife is an incident not found in either the Egyptian
or the Scottish stories; but the trick practised on the priest
occurs again in the Hindu tale of the nautph-girl Champa
Banee, under a disguise which cannot hide the common
source from which the stories have come down to ns, while it
leaves no room for the notion that the one version has been
suggested by the other. • .

But in truth the supposition is in this case wholly un- The
called for. The story of the Master Thief was told in Europe,
probably ages before the Homeric poems were put together, Thief.

• certainly ages before Herodotos heard the story of the
Egyptian treasure-house. In all the versions of the tale
the thief is a young and slender youth, despised sometimes
for his seeming weakness, never credited with his full craft
and strength. No power can withhold him from doing aught
on which he has set his mind : no human eye can trace the
path by which he conveys away his booty. It is the story of
the child Hermes, and. even under the most uncouth disguise
it has lost but little either of its truthfulness or its humour.

Bolts and bars are no defence against him; yet the babe
whom Phoibos can shake in his arms is the mighty marauder
who has driven off all his oxen from Pieria. When his work
is done, he looks not' much like one who needs to be dreaded;
and the soft whistling sound which closes his defence wakes
a smile on the face of Phoibos, 1 as the Teutonic squire
laughs on finding himself tricked in the northern story. In
each case the robber is exalted to the same high dignity.

‘ Well, friend,’ said Apollon with a smile, ‘ thou wilt
break into many a house, I <see, and thy followers after thee;

1 This is precisely reproduced by

incident which is not monlioncd in the
Homeric hymn, but is in c'osc agree-

nient with the spirit of the Horse talc:

To bovos ohm nisi rorldiclissrs.
Tor dulum pumun mi

Voce- tlum torn-l, viduus plmrci

. - ■

120 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATOS?. ■ 1

book and thy fancy for beef will set many a herdsraga grieving.

•—i—- But come down from the cradle, or this sleep will lie thy
last. Only this lionOur can I promise thee, tO%e ( eglleA'&fi
Master Thief for ever.’ 1 r .-

rfthe” 6 " 1 The ln the northern stories marries the squire’s

story of daughter, as the architect’s son marries the daughter of
Thief aSt<>r Rhampsinitos. The marriage represents the compact made
between Phoibos the all-seeing and Hermes the sweet singer.
In this peaceful alliance with the squire the Teutonic tale
leaves him; but there are other sides to the character of the
Master Thief, and each of these describes with singular fidelity
the action and power of air in motion. He is the child
breathing softly in the cradle, he is the giant rooting up trees
in his fury. No living thing can resist the witchery of his
harping. As he draws nigh, life is wakened where before he
came there had been stillness as of the dead. With him
comes joy or sorrow, health or the pestilence. His lyre is
the harp of Orpheus, and it discourses the music of the
Yedic Ribhus, or of the Finnic Wainamoinen, the son of
Ilmatar, the daughter of the Air, 2 whose singing draws the
sun and .moon from heaven. The beasts of the field come to
hear him, like the clouds which gather in the sky when the
wind blows ; the trees move along his track when he comes
in his sterner moods. Nothing can remain still when he
pipes. The leaf must wave on the hill-side, the Jew must
dance in the thorn-bush, while the music lasts. 3 He is the

all stories imported in later times from
one literature into another being se¬
condary or inorganic. The number of
stories belonging to the latter class is
probably much smaller than is generally
supposed.

2 As Hermes is one of the fire-

making or fire bringing gods, so Wai-
nambiuen catches the fish that has swal¬
lowed the fire, which, struck by Ukko,
the lord of the air, from the new sun
and moon, has fallen into the- sea.

3 This story of * The Jew among the
Thorns,’ in Grimm’s Household Tales, is
reproduced under a hundred forms; but
in few or none of these can it be main¬
tained with any show of reason that one
has been deliberately adapted from.
another. The fiddle which makes the
Jew dance,is reproduced in the form of

to the

PAUL PRY AND PEEPING TOM.

121

Writing-, whose mysterious harmony is heard by the • child CHAP,
nestled in his father’s arms. 1 He is the piper of Hameln, 2 . ^ n1, -
who drives away the noisome rats, but who also draws the
children of the town happy and joyous to the blue river,
where they leave all griefs behind them, as gently as the
Homeric Psychopompos guides the souls across the waters
of Lethe. But in all his offices he retains his character of
searching subtlety. The barred gates of the unseen land
cannot stay the harping breeze, whether he comes as Orpheus
or Wainamoinen: and his curious searching into every nook
and cranny, his mocking laugh at those who come to see the
mischief wrought by him, are reproduced under a strange
disguise in Paul Pry and peeping Tom of Coventry. . Nay,
the Hindu deity Kudra, the ‘ bountiful,’ the ‘ gracious,’ the
god ‘with braided hair’ (the streaming vapours), the ‘thou¬
sand quivered,’ appears sometimes in an aspect scarcely more
dignified.' Like Hermes and the Shifty Lad, he too is ‘ the
lord of thieves, the robber, the cheater, the deceiver, the lord
of pilferers and robbers.’ 3 ’ •

Thus, then, in the story of the Master Thief, the idea of any Limits to
lateral transmission becomes inadmissible. But as'this tale thesi's of"
in all its modifications can be traced back to phrases denot- conscious
ing physical phenomena, we have yet to see whether there olro ' ml “ i ?'
are other tales which apparently cannot be resolved into
such expressions, and for which the idea of any such borrow¬
ing is equally untenable or superfluous. If any such
stories are forthcoming, we cannot avoid the conclusion that
before the several branches of the Aryan race separated from
their common home, they not only had in their language the
germs of all future mythological systems, but carried with
them as nursery tales a number of stories not evolved from

122

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

look phrases descriptive of natural phenomena, the ideas' of "which
— were impressed on their minds not less firmly than the more
strictly mythical words and phrases were impressed oil their
memories. These stories were, however, little more than
outlines, for it cannot be too often repeated that even in
the tales which exhibit the closest likeness in their most
developed forms, the points of difference in detail and colour¬
ing are so striking as to leave no room for doubt that the
Aryan tribes carried away with them for these stories no
rigid types to which they were compelled to adhere.with
Egyptian slavishness, but living ideas which each tribe
might from timp to time clothe in a different garb. How
these ideas were furnished is a question which it may be by
no ■ means as easy to answer as it is to resolve the life of
Achilleus and Meleagros into the daily course of the sun
through the heavens. It becomes therefore of the utmost
importance in such an inquiry as this, to bring together and
compare the popular traditions of nations whose geographical
positions show that their parting when they left the common
home was for them a final separation. No one could have
the hardihood to maintain that the countrymen of Herman
had access to the pages of Pausanias, or that the soldiers of
Varus had,in their childhood listened to stories borrowed
from the epic of Wainamoihen. Yet the children’s tales
gathered during the last half-century have established the
general affinity of the folk-lore of Greeks, Romans, Germans
and Scandinavians, and a likeness not less astonishing runs
through the popular tales of these races, and those of the
Hindu.’ In India, as in Germany, old women, who doubtless
thought themselves fit for nothing, have preserved to us a
series of exquisite legends which pour a flood of light on
the early history of the human mind. The Hindu child is
still roused and soothed by the stories of the sweet Star-
Lady and the lovely ‘Queen of the Eive Flowers, just as the
young German and Norseman uted to listen to the tale of

TRANSMISSION OP POPULAR TALES.

123

the beautiful Briar-rose sleeping in death-like stillness until CHAP.

the kiss of the pure Knight rouses her from her slumber. . T]X _,

We are clearly debtors to the old women for the preservation
of thousands' of lovely and touching legends which have
never found their way into epic poetry. Had it not been for
the grandmothers of Hellas, we should in all likelihood never
have heard of the grief of Demet&r, as she sank down by the
fountain in Eleusis, or of the woe of Telephassa, which ended
as she sank to rest on the Thessalian plain in the evening.

Schools in Athens, Thebes, or Argos, doubtless did their in¬
evitable destructive work; but we can as little doubt that
many an Athenian mother pointed on the slopes of Hymettos
to the spot where , the glistening form of Prokris first met
the eye of Kephalos as he stepped forth on the shore, and
the young Delian learnt to be proud of the rugged island,
where the nymphs bathed the infant Phoibos in pure water
and swathed him in broad golden bands. Clearly we have
to thank old crones for the story of Narkissos who died for
love of his own fair face, and of Seldn6.gazing on Endymion
as he slept on the hill of Latmos.

Among these Hindu tales we' find a large class of stories Prame-
which have little or nothing in common with the epic poems p™'^
of the Aryan nations, but which exhibit a series of incidents stories,
in, striking parallelism with those of the corresponding
Teutonic versions. These incidents are in themselves so
strange, and the result is brought about by turns so unex¬
pected/ that the idea of their independent developement
apiong separated .tribes who had carried away with them
nothing but some proverbial sayings as the groundwork of ■
these stories becomes a wild extravagance. Whatever the
consequences may be, the conclusion seems irresistible that
these stories had been wrought out into some detail, -while
these tribes or nations still. continued to form a single
people; and if these tales can scarcely be resolved into phrases
denoting physical phenomena, they are perhaps more won¬
derful even than the epic poems, the growth of which from
common germs would bo inevitable if the theory of compara¬
tive mythologists he regarded as established. The resem¬
blances between these stories mn,y perhaps bring down the

124

YTnOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book time of separation to a comparatively late period; but the

--^—. geographical position of Hindu and German tribes most still

throw that time back to an indefinitely distant past; and
close as the parallelism may be, the differences of detail and
colouring are such that we cannot suppose these Aryan
emigrants to have carried away with them to their new
abodes more than the leading incidents grafted on the lead¬
ing idea. The fidelity with which the Hindu and the Ger¬
man tales adhere to this framework is indeed astonishing.
The story One of the most remarkable of these coincidences is fur-
afid'th?° S n i s bed by the story of the ‘ Dog and the Sparrow,’ in Grimm’s
Sparrow, collection, as compared with an episode in the ‘ Wanderings
of Vicram Maharajah.’ In both a bird vows to bring about
the ruin of a human being; in both the bird is the helper
and avenger of the innocent against wanton injury, and in
c> both the destruction of the guilty is the result of their own
voluntary acts. There are other points of likeness, the sig¬
nificance of which is heightened by points of singularly
subtle difference. In the German story, the sparrow is
offended because a carter, not heeding the warning which
she had given him, drove his waggon over a dog which she
had saved from starving.

‘You have killed my brother, the dog,’ she said, ‘and
that shall cost you your horsgs and your cart.’

‘ Horses and cart, indeed,’ said the carrier. ‘ What harm
can you do to me ? ’ and he drove on.

But presently the sparrow contrived to force out the cork
from the bunghole of one of the casks in the waggon, and all
the wine ran out on the ground. ‘ Ah me ! I am a poor
man now,’ cried the carter, when he saw it. ‘ Not poor
enough yet,’ said the sparrow, as she perched on the head of
one of the horses, and picked out his eye. The carter in his
rage took up his hatchet to kill the bird, but instead of it, he
hit his horse, which fell down dead. So it fared with the
second cask and the two remaining horses. Leaving his
waggon on the road, the carter found his way home, and
bemoaned to his wife the loss of his wine and his beasts.

‘Ah my husband,’ she replied, ‘and what a wicked
bird has come to this house; she has brought with her all

GERMAN AND HINDU STORIES.

125

the birds in the world, and there they sit among our corn, CHAP,
and are eating every ear of it.’ VIU -

‘ Ah me, I am poorer than ever,’ said the man, as he
beheld the havoc. ‘ Still not poor enough, carrier; it shall
■cost you your life,’ said the bird as she flew away. By and
by the sparrow appeared at the window-sill, and uttered the
same words, and the carrier, hurling his axe at it, broke the
window-frame in two. Every other piece of furniture in the
house was'demolished as he vainly attempted to hit the bird.

At length he caught her, and his wife asked if she should kill

‘ No,’ said he, ‘ that were too merciful; she shall die much
more horribly, for I will eat her alive.’ So saying, he
swallowed her whole; but she - began to flutter about in
his stomach, and presently came again into his mouth, and
cried out, ‘ Carrier, it shall cost you your life.’

Thereupon' the man handed the axe to his wife, saying,

‘ Kill me the wretch dead in my mouth.’ His wife took it,
and aimed a blow, but missing her mark struck her husband
on the head and killed him. Then the sparrow flew away
and was never seen there again. 1

In the Hindoo story the bird is a parrot, and the dog’s The story
place is taken by a poor woodcutter, from whom a dancing-
girl attempts to extort a large sum of money by deliberate girl ,md
falsehood. The girl thus represents the carter, and at once thc Parrot '
the framework of the tale is provided; but the method by
whidh the sparrow wreaks her vengeance on the man is
thoroughly awkward and unartistic when compared with the
simple scheme which brings about the ruin of the na.utch-
woman.- She, like the carrier, is rich; but she cannot resist
the temptation of making more money by charging the wood¬
cutter with the dowry which she said that he had promised
to pay on marrying her, the promise and the marriage being

MYTHOLOGY

OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

alike purely imaginary. The rajah, being eafieS fej give
judgement in the case, determines to abide by thocfgeisian of
a parrot famed for his wisdom, and belonging to a taerchant
in the town. When the woodcutter had given hia version of
the matter, the parrot bade Champa Eanee, the nautch-girlp
tell her story. After hearing it, he asked where the house
was to which her husband had taken her. ‘ Far away in the
jungles,’ was the reply. ‘ And how long ago ? ’ The day
was named, and twenty witnesses proved that Chafiipa was at
the time in the city. The parrot then gave judgement for the
woodcutter against the nautch-girl, as the sparrow had
befriended the dog against the carter. Great was the praise
bestowed on the wise parrot, but the incensed nautch-girl
said, ‘ Be assured I will get you in my power, and when I do,
I will bite off your head.’

Then follows the vow of the parrot, answering to the oath
of the sparrow; but he has no need to repeat it.

‘ Try your worst, madam,’ said he, ‘ but in return L tell
you this; I will live to make you a beggar. Tour house
shall be by your own orders laid even with the ground, and
you for grief and rage shall kill yourself.’

Time goes on, and the nautch-girl, summoned to the
merchant’s house, dances so well that he asks her. to name
her own reward; and the price which she demands is the
parrot. Taking the bird home, she ordered her servants to
cook it for her supper, first cutting off its head and bringing it
to be grilled, that she might eat it before tasting any other
dish. The parrot is accordingly plucked, but while the
servant goes to fetch water wherein to boil him, the bird,
who had pretended to be dead and thus escaped having his
neck wrung, slipped into a liole let into the wall for carrying
off the kitchen sewage. In this dilemma the maid grilled a
chicken’s head, and placed it before Champa Ranee, who, as
she eat it, said,

‘ Ah! pretty Polly, so here is fire end of you. This is the
brain that thought so cunningly and devised my overthrow;
this the tongue that spoke against me; this is the throat
through which came the. threatening words. Ha! ha! who
is right now, I wonder ? ’

THE STORY OF CHAMPA RANEE. 127

With some little fear the parrot heard her words, for the chap.
loss of his wing feathers had left him unahle to fly ; hut at . TlTL
length he contrived to find highway toaneiglibouring temple,
and to perch behind the idol.' It'was the favourite god of
Xlhanipa Ranee, who, in her. abject fear of death, had long
besought him to translate her to heaven without the process
of dying. So when she next came to offer her wonted sup¬
plication, the parrot spoke, and the nauteh-girl at once took
its words for the utterances of the god.

‘ Champa Rahee, nautch-girl, your prayer is heard, this is
what you must do; sell all you possess, and give the money
to the poor, and you must also give money to all your ser¬
vants and dismiss them. Level also your house to the
ground, that you may he wholly separated from earth. Then
you will he fit for heaven, and you may come, having done
all. I c'ommand you, on this day week to this place, and you
shall be transported thither body and soul.’ 1

The infatuated woman does as she is hidden, and after
destroying her house and giving away all her goods, she
returns to the temple, attended by a vast train of men and

128 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK women whom she had invited to be witnesses-of feet 1 giori-
_ fication.

As they waited, a fluttering of little wings was -heard, and
a parrot flew over Champa Eanee’s head, Calling out,
‘ Nautch-girl, nautch-girl, what have you done ? * Champa
Eanee recognised the voice as Yicram’s: he went on, ‘ Will
you go body and soul to heaven P Have you forgotten Polly’s
words? ’

Champa Eanee rushed into the temple, and falling on her
knees before the idol, cried out, ‘ Gracious Power, I have
done all as you commanded; let your words come true;
save me, take me to heaven.’

But the parrot above her cried, ‘ Good bye, Champa
Eanee, good bye; you ate a chicken’s head, not mine.
Where is your house now? Where are your servants and
all your possessions ? Have my words come true, think you,
or yours ? ’

Then the woman saw all, and in her rage and despair,
cursing her own folly, she fell violently down on the floor of
the temple, and, dashing her head against, the stone, killed
herself. 1

Origin It is impossible to question the real identity of these two
“W stories, and incredible that the one could have been invented
stories. apart from the other, or that the German and the Hindu
tale are respectively developements merely from the same
leading idea. This idea is that beings of no repute may be
avengers of successful wrongdoers, or to put it in the lan¬
guage of St. Paul, that the weak things of the earth may be
chosen to confound the strong, and foolish things to confound
the wise. But it was impossible that this leading idea
should of itself suggest to a Hindu and a Teuton that the
avenger should be a bird, that the wrongdoer should punish
himself, and should seal his doom by swallowing his per¬
secutor or by at least thinking that he was devouring him.
There is no room here for the argument which Professor
Max Muller characterises as sneaking when applied even to
fables which are common to all the members of the Aryan

Old Deccan Days, p. 127.

IMPORTATION OF MYTHS.

129

family . 1 A series of incidents such as these could never have [CHAP,
been thought out by two brains working apart from each VI,J ' .
other; and we are driven to admit that at least the
machinery by which the result was to be brought about had
been devised before the separation, or to maintain that the
story has in the one case or in the other been imported
bodily. Probably no instance could be adduced in which a
borrowed story differs so'widely from the original. In all
' cases of adaptation the borrower either improves upon the
idea or weakens it. - Here both the stories exhibit equally
clear tokens of vigorous and independent growth. 2

But the story of the nautch-girl is only one incident in a The stories
larger drama. The bird of the German tale is a common Her™
sparrow; the parrot which brings about the death of Champa “otimos.
Ranee is nothing less than the Maharajah Vicram, who has

there is scarcely one important
of the Hindu popular stories

Norwegians, Irishmen and Scottis
Highlanders, long before any systemati
attempt was made to commit to writin

to book-learning; and assuredly the
commercial intercourse which would ac-

a frequency of communication beyond
that of the most stirring and enter¬
prising nations of the jiraseut day. Mr.
Campbell, in his invaluable collection
of Popular Tales of the'West High¬
lands, dismisses the hypothesis

130

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN RATIONS. •

book received from the god of wisdom the power oftranefiorfeing
^—• his soul into any other body, while by an antidote lie beeps
his own body from corruption. And here we are brought to
a parallelism which cannot be accounted for on any.theory
of mediaeval importation. The story of Vicram is essentially
the story of Hermotimos of Klazomenai, whose soul wanders
at will through space, while his body remains undecayed at
home, until his wife, tired out by his repeated desertions,
burns his body while he is away, and thus effectually prevents
his resuming his proper form. A popular Deccan tale, which
is also told by Pliny and Lucian, must have existed, if only in
1 a rudimentary state, while Greeks and Hindus still lived as

a single people. But a genuine humour, of which we have
little more than a faint germ in the Greek legend, runs
• through the Hindu story. In both the wife is vexed by the
frequent absence of her husband: but the real fun of the
Deccan tale rises from the complications produced by the
carpenter’s son, who overhears the god Gunputti as t he
teaches Yicram the mystic words which enable him to pass
from his own body into another ; but as he could not see
the antidote which Vicram received to keep his tenantless
body from decay, the carpenter’s son was but half enlightened.
No sooner, however, had Vicram transferred his soul to the
parrot’s body, than the carpenter’s son .entered the body of
Vicram, and the work of corruption began in his own. • The
pseudo-rajah is at once detected by the Wuzeer Butti, who
stands to Vicram in the relation of Patroklos to Achilleus,
or of Theseus to Peirithoos, and who recommends the whole
court to show a cold shoulder to the impostor, and make his
sojourn in Vicram’s body as unpleasant as possible. Worn
out at last with waiting, Butti sets off to search for his friend,
and by good luck is one of the throng assembled to witness
the ascension of Champa Eanee. Butti recognises his friend,
and at once , puts him into safe keeping in a cage. On
reaching home it became necessary to get the carpenter’s
son out of Vicram’s body, and the Wuzeer, foreseeing that
this would be no easy task, proposes a butting match between
two rams, the one belonging to himself, the other to the
pseudo-rajah. Butti accordingly submits his own ram to a

MYTHS OF THE WINTER.

131

.training, which greatly hardens his horns; and so when the CHAP,
fight began, the pretended rajah, seeing to his vexation that . Yia ' .
his favourite was getting the worst in the battle, transported
his soul into the rain’s body, to add to its strength and reso¬
lution. No sooner was this done, than Vicram left the
parrot’s body and re-entered his own, and Butti, slaying the
defeated ram, put an end to the life - of the carpenter’s son,
by leaving hint no body in which to take up his abode. But
fresh troubles were in store for Butti; and these troubles
take us back to the legends of Brynhild and Persephone, of
Tammuz, Adonis, and Osiris. Not yet cured of his wandering
propensities, Vicram goes to sleep in a jungle with his mouth
open, into which creeps a cobra who refuses to be dislodged
—the deadly snake of winter and darkness, which stings the
beautiful Eurydike, and lies coiled around the maiden on the
glistening heath. The' rajah, in his intolerable misery, leaves
his home, just as Persephone is taken away from Demeter,
and Butti seeks him in vain for twelve years (the ten years
of the struggle at Ilion), as he roams in the disguise of a
fakeer. Meanwhile, the beautiful Buccoulee, who had recog¬
nised her destined husband under his squalid rags as Eury-
kleia recognises Odysseus, had succeeded in freeing Vicram
from his tormentor, and thus all three returned to the long
forsaken Anar Ranee. But before we examine incidents
which take us into the more strictly mythical regions of
Aryan folk-lore, it is necessary to show how large is that
class of stories to which the tale of the Dancing Girl and the
Woodcutter belongs. There are some which are even more
remarkable for their agreement in the general scheme with
thorough divergence in detail.

In the story entitled, ‘ The Table, the Ass, and the Stick ’ The Table,
in Grimm’s 1 collection, a goat, whose appetite cannot be
satisfied, brings a tailor into grievous trouble by leading him stick,
to drive his three sons away from their home on groundless
charges. At last, finding*that he had been cheated, he
scourges the goat, which makes the best of its way from his
dwelling. Meanwhile, the three sons had each been learning
a trade, and each received his reward. To the eldest son was
given a table, which at the words ‘ Cover thyself,’ at once

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK presented a magnificent banquet; the second Peet&ved a*

_^_donkey, which on hearing the word ‘ Brickl§bri<f’ mined

down gold pieces, 1 and both were deprived Of their gifts by a
thievish innkeeper, to whom they had in succession revealed
their secret. Op reaching home, the eldest son, boasting to
his father of his inexhaustible table, was discomfited by
finding that some .common table had been put. in its {dace;
and the second in like manner, in making trial of his ass,
found himself in possession of a very ordinary donkey. ' But
the youngest son had not yet returned, and to him they sent
word of the scurvy behaviour of the innkeeper. When the
time of the third son’s departure came, his master gave him
a sack, adding ‘In it there lies a stick.’ The young man
took the sack as a thing that might do him good service,
but asked why he should take the stick, as it only made the
sack heavier to carry. The stick, however, was endowed
with the power of jumping out of the sack and belabouring
any one against whom its owner had a grudge. Thus armed,
the youth went cheerfully to the house of the innkeeper, who,
thinking that the sack must certainly contain treasure, tried
to take it from the young man’s pillow while he slept. But
he had reckoned without his host. The stick hears the fatal
• word, and at once falls without mercy on the thief, who
roars out that he will surrender the table and the ass. Thus

1 This donkey is, in fact, Midas, at the power of becoming more beautiful
whose touch everything turns to gold — every day, and that a piece of gold shall
a myth which reappears in the Irish fall out of her mouth every word that
tradition of Lavra Loingsech, who had she speaks. But she has,a stepsister,
horse's ears, as Midas had those of an the winter, who, not having her kindly
ass. The reeds betrayed the secret in feelings, refuses to share her bread with
the case of Midas ; die barber of Lavra the dwarfs, who decree that she shall
whispered the secret in the Irish -story grow more ugly every day, and that
to a willow; the willow was cut down, toads shall spring from'her mouth
and .the harp mado of the wood mur- whenever she speaks. This is the
mured ‘Lavra Loingsech has horse's story, of ‘Busily Bride’ in Dasent's
ears.’ (Fergusson, The Irish before the Norse Tnhs. The dawn-children re-
Conquest.) The horse and the ass appear in the story of Hansel and
doubtless represent the Harits of Hindu' Grethcl, who, wandering into the forest,
mythology ; the production of gold (the (of night or winter ), come upon a house
golden light) by the nun or the dawn with windows made of clear sugar (ice),
recurs again and again in Aryan where they fall into the ppwer of a
legends. In Grimm's story of the witch (Hades), who, like the dwarfs,

‘ Three Little Men in the Wood,’ the guards the hoard of treasure. The old
kindly dawn-child shares her bread witch is destroyed b/Grethel after the

sung tale, guard' the treasures of the tale. (Max Miller, Chips, ii. 214.)

■ear.h, and in return they grant to her • .

GERMAN AND HINDU TALES. 183

. the thlee gifts reach the tailor’s house. 1 As for the goat, chat.

whose head the tailor had shaven, it ran into a fox’s house, —_.

where a bee stung its bald pate, and it rushed out, never to
be heard of again.

In- the Deccan tale we have a jackal and a barber in the The
place of the' goat and the tailor: .and the mischief is done, theJadai
not by leading the barber to expel his children, but by cheat- '™ l b tlle
ing him of the fruits of his garden. The parallel,-however,
is not confined to the fact of the false pretences : the barber
retaliates, like the tailor, and inflicts a severe wound on the
jackal. . A.s before, in the Herman story, the goat is a goat;
but the jackal is a transformed rajah, none other in short
than the Beast who is wedded to Beauty and the monster,
who becomes the husband of Psyche, and thus even this
story lies within the magic circle of strictly mythical tradi¬
tion. But before he wins- his bride, the jackal-rajah is
reduced to sore straits, and his adventures give occasion
for some sharp satire on Hindu popular theologjn Coming
across. a bullock’s' carcass, the jackal eats, his way into it,
while the sun so contracts the hide that he finds himself
unable to get out.' Tearing to be killed if discovered, or
to be buried alive if he escaped notice, the jackal, on the
approach of the scavengers,* cries out, ‘Take care, good. 1 ,
people, how you touch,me, for I am a great saint.’ The
mahars in terror ask him who he is, and what he wants.

‘ I,’ answered the jackal, ‘ am a very holy saint. I am also -
the god of your village, and I am very angry with you,
because you never worship me nor bring me offerings.’ ‘ 0
my lord,’ they cried, ‘ what offerings will please you ? Tell
us only, and we will bring you whatever you like.’ ‘ Good,'

■ said the jackal; ‘ then you must fetch hither plenty of rice,
plenty of flowers, and a nice fat chicken: place them as an
offering beside me, and, pour a great deal of water over them,
as you do at your most solemn feasts, and then I will forgive
you your sins.’ The wetting, of course, splits the drv
bullock*s skin, and the jackal, jumping out, runs with the
chicken in his month to the jungle. When again he was
* ' The Noreo (dory of 'The Lad who weal to tte North Wind' I urns on I.V

134

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. '

BOOK Hourly starved, he heard a Brahman bewailing his poverty,

-.——• and declaring that if a dog or a jackal were to offer to marry

one of his daughters, he should have her—an eagerness in
complete contrast with the reluctance of the merchant who
is obliged to surrender his child to the beast. The jackal
takes him at liis word, and leads his wife away to a splendid
subterranean palace, where she finds that each night the
jackal lays aside his skin, and becomes a beautiful young
man. Soon the Brahman comes to the jackal’s cave to see
how Ills child gets on; but just as he is about to enter, the
jackal stops him, and, learning liis’ wants, gives him a melon,
the seeds of which will bring him some money. A neighbour,
admiring the fruit produced from these seeds, buys some from
the Brahman’s wife, and finding that they are full of diamonds,
pearls and rubies, purchases the whole stock, until the Brah¬
man himself opens a small withered melon, and learns how
he has been overreached. In vain he asks restitution from
the woman who has bought them; she knows nothing of
any miraculous melons, and a jeweller to whom he takes the
jewels from the withered melon, accuses him of having stolen
the gems from his shop, and impounds them all. Again
the Brahman betakes himself to the jackal, who, seeing the
uselessness of giving him gold or jewels, brings him out a jar
Which is always full of good things.' The Brahman now
lived in luxury ; but another Brahman informed the rajah of
the royal style in which his once poorer neighbour feasted,
and the rajah appropriated the jar for his own special use.
When once again he carried this story of his wrongs to his
son-in-law, the jackal gave him another jar, within which
was a rope and a stick, which would perform their, work of
chastisement as soon as the jar was opened. Uncovering
the jar while he was alone, the Brahman had cause to repent
liis rashness, for every bone in his body was left aching.
With this personal experience of the powers of the stick, the
Brahman generously invited fhe rajah and his brother
■ This jnr is, of course, the horn of serycsjts ,he s “>' rc <“ of lift and wealth

theuever-failing table of the Ethiopians, come to analyse the myth of the divine
the cup of the Malee’s wife in the ship Argo. See the section on the
Hindu legend; hut the countless forms Vivifying Sun. Book n. ch. ii.
assumed by the mysterious Tessel which

G

135

Brahman to come and test the virtues of his new gift; and a chap.
belabouring as hearty as that which the wicked innkeeper . VIIL .
received in the German'tale made them yield up the dinner-
making jar. The same wholesome measure led to the re¬
covery of the precious stones from the jeweller, and the
melons from the woman who Had bought them. It only
remained now, by. burning the enchanted rajah’s jackal- skin,
the lion-skin of Herakles, to transform him permanently into
the most splendid prince ever seen on earth.' ■

The independent growth of these tales from a common The
framework is still more conclusively proved by the fact that ^ t wlw
the agreement of the Norse with the Hindu legend is far to the
more close and striking than the likeness which it bears to wind 1
the German story. In the Norse version we have not three
brothers, but one lad, who represents the Brahman; and in
the Norse and Hindu stories alike, the being who does the
wrong is the one who bestows the three mysterious gifts.

The goat in the German version is simply mischievous: in
the Norse tale, the North Wind, which blows away the poor
"woman’s meal, bestows on her son, the banquet-making cloth,
the money-coining ram, and the magic stick . 5 The jackal
and the cloth are thus alike endowed with the mysterious
power of the Teutonic Wish. This power is exhibited under
a thousand forms, among which crips, horns, jars, and basins
hold the most conspicuous place, and point to the earliest
symbol used for the expression of the idea.

The points of likeness and difference between the Hindu The B tx>rj
story of Punchkin and-tie Norse tale of the ‘ Giant who had jjfWndi-
no Heart in his Body ’ are perhaps still more striking. In the
former a rajah has seven daughters, whose mother dies while
they are still children; and a stepmother so persecutes them

td (Non. hcal-wr,r-

Europe the lion-sh

of Porphyry, Zulu
legislator of t)

'.VoLA, hi

136

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,

book that they make their escape. In the jungle t th&y asa found

■-' r — by the seven sons of a neighbouring king, who areba nfeig;

and each takes one of the princesses ais a wife, the haffldsomest
of course marrying the youngest. After a brief Jame of
happiness, the eldest prince sets off on a journey, and does
, not return. His six brothers follow him, and are seen no

more. After this, as Balna, the youngest princess, rocks her
babe in his cradle, a fakeer makes his appearance, and having
vainly asked her to marry him, transforms her into a dog,
and leads her away. As he grows older, Balna’s son learns
how his parents and uncles have disappeared, and resolves to
go in search of them. His aunts beseech him not to do so;
but the youth feels sure that he will bring them all back, and
at length he finds his way to the house of a gardener, whose
wife, on hearing his story, tells him that his father and uncles
have all been turned into stone by the great magician
Punchkin, who keeps Balna herself imprisoned in a high
tower because she will not marry him. To aid him in his
• task, the gardener’s wife disguises him in her, daughter’s
dress, and gives him a basket of flowers as a present for the
captive princess. Thus 1 arrayed, the youth is admitted to
her presence, and while none are looking, he makes himself
known to his mother by means of a ring which she had left
on his finger before the sorcerer stole her away. But the
rescue of the seven princes seemed to be as far off as ever,
and the young man suggests that Balna should now change
her tactics, and by playing the part of Delilah to Samson,
find out where his power lies, and whether he is subject to
death. The device is successful, and the sorcerer betrays the
secret.

‘ Far away, far away, liundredswof thousands of miles away
from this, there lies a desolate country covered with thick
jungle. In the midst of the jungle grows a circle of palm
trees, and in the centre of the jungle stand six jars full of
water, piled one above- another; below the sixth jar is a small
cage which contains a little green parrot; on the life of the
parrot depends my life, and if the parrot is killed I must die .’ 1

- 1 In the. Gaelic story of the ‘Young this story,, this puzzle is. thus put, C
King of Easaidh Ku&dh,’ which contains ‘There is a great* flagstone under the

HINDU AND ARABIAN STORIES. 137

But this keep is guarded by myriads of evil demons, and chap.
Bahia tries hard to dissuade her son from the venture. He . vl11 ' .
is resolute, and he finds true helpers in some eagles whose
young he saves by killing a large serpent which was making
its way to their nest. The parent birds give him their young
to be his servants, and. the eaglets, crossing their wings,
bear him through the air to the spot where the six water
jars are standing. In an instant he upsets the jar, and
snatching the parrot from his cage, rolls him up in his
cloak. The magician in his dismay at seeing the parrot in
the youth’s hands yields to every demand made by hiih, and
not only the seven princes but all his other victims are
restored to life—a magnificent array of kings, courtiers,
officers, and servants . 1 Still the magician prayed to have
his parrpt given to him.

‘ Then the boy took hold of the parrot, and tore off one of
his wings, and when he did so, the magician’s right arm fell
off.

£ Punchkin then stretched out his left arm, crying, “ Give -
me my parrot.” The prince pulled off the parrot’s second
wing and the magician’s left arm tumbled oif.

‘ “ Give me my parrot,” cried he, and fell on his knees. The
prince pulled off the parrot’s right leg, the magician’s right
leg fell off; the prince pulled off the parrot’s left leg, down
fell the magician’s left.

‘ Nothing remained of him save the limbless body and the
head; but still he rolled his eyes, and cried, “ Give me my
parrot!” “Take your parrot then,” cried the boy.; and
with that he wrung the bird’s neck, and threw it at the
magician, and as he did so, Punchkin twisted round, and
with a fearful groan he died/

138

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK

The Giant

In its key-note and its leading incidents tljis“Story is pre¬
cisely parallel to the Norse tale of the ‘ Giant who had no
Heart in his Body.’ Here, as in the Deccan legend, there is
a king who has seven sons, but instead of all seven being
sent to hunt or woo, the youngest is left at home; and the
rajah whose children they marry has six daughters, not
seven. This younger brother who stays at home is the
Boots of European folk-lore, a being of infinitely varied
character, and a subject of the highest interest for all who
wish to know whence the Aryan nations obtained the mate¬
rials 'for their epic poems. Seemingly weak and often
despised, he has keener wit and more resolute will than all
who are opposed to him. Slander and obloquy are to-him as
nothing, for he knows that in the end his truth shall be made
clear in the sight of all men. In Dr. Dasent’s words, ‘ There
he sits idle whilst all work; there he lies with that deep
irony of conscious power which knows its time must one day
come, and meantime can afford to wait. When that time
comes, he girds himself to the feat amidst the scoff and scorn
of his flesh and blood; but even then, after he has done some
great deed, he conceals it, returns to his ashes, and again
sits idly by the kitchen fire, dirty, lazy, despised, until the
time for final recognition comes, and then his dirt and rags
fall off—he stands out in all the majesty of his royal robes,
and is acknowledged once for all a king.” We see him in a
thousand forms. He is the Herakles on whom the mean

1 Dasent, Norse Talcs, cliv., Some of who tames the pride of the princess as
the stories told of Boots are very signi- Indra 6ul»dues DahanA ; or he is the

Grimm’s story of ‘ One who travelled to story of the ‘ Good Bargain.’ He is the
learn what shivering meant.’ The stupid young king of Easaidh Ruaclb in the

bride pours over him at. night a pail of mysterious bird alights to point, him out

water full of fv-h— in other wonby when as the father of the dawn-child. In the

Helios plunges into the sea asKndym on, story of the ‘Three Soldiers ’ in the same
Elsewhere, he is not only the wanderer collection, he is the poor'soldier who is

or vagabond, but the discharged soldier, wheedled of his three wish-gifts, but

or the strcflling player, who is really the recovering them in.the end is seen in his
king Thrushbcard in the German story, native majesty.

BOOTS AND CINDERELLA. 139

Eurystheus delights to pour contempt; he is Cinderella sit- CHAP,
ting in the dust, while her sisters flaunt their finery abroad; . V]JX .
he is the Didipous who knows nothing , 1 yet reads the myste¬
rious riddle of the Sphinx; he is the Plioibos who serves in
the houfee of Admetos and the palace of Laomedon; he is the
Psyche who seeks her lost love almost in despair, and yet
with the hope still living in her that her search shall not be
unsuccessful; above all, he is the Ithakan chief, clothed in
beggar’s rags, flouted by the suitors, putting forth his strength
for one moment to crush the insolent Arnaios, then sitting-
down humbly on the threshold , 2 recognised only by an old
nurse and his dog, waiting patiently till the time. comes that
he shall bend the unerring bow and having slain his enemies
appear once more in glorious garb by the side of a wife as
radiant in beauty as when he left her years ago for a long
and a hard warfare far away. Nay, he even becomes an
idiot, but .even in this his greatest humiliation the memory
of his true greatness is never forgotten. ' Thus the Gaelic
‘ Lay of the Great Pool ’ relates the

and the Helen of the story lias, of course, her Paris. The
fool goes to sleep, and as he slumbers a Gruagacli gives her a
kiss, and like Helen ‘ the lady was not ill-pleased that he
came.’ But his coming is for evil luck, and the deceiver shall
be well repaid when the fool comes to take vengeance.

140

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

Boots then acts the part of Balna’s son in the Hisdu story,
while the sorcerer reappears in the Norse tale as as giant, who
turns the six princes and their wives into stone. fl Tka inci¬
dent is by no means peculiar to this tale, and the examples
already adduced would alone warrant the assertion that the
whole mass of folk-lore in every country may be resolved into
an endless series of repetitions, combinations, and adapta¬
tions of a few leading ideas or of their developements, all
sufficiently resembling each other to leave no doubts of their
fundamental identity, yet so unlike in outward garb and
colouring, so thoroughly natural and vigorous under all their
changes, as to leave no room for any other supposition than
that of a perfectly independent growth from one common
stem. If speaking of the marvels wrought by musical genius.
Dr. Newman could say, ‘ There are seven notes in the scale;
make them thirteen, yet how slender an outfit for so vast an
enterprise ,’ 11 we may well feel the same astonishment as we
see the mighty harvest of mythical lore which a few seeds
have yieldedy and begin to understand how it is that ideas so
repeated,, disguised,, or travestied never lost their charm, but
find us as ready to listen when they are brought before us for
the hundredth time in a new dress, as when we first made
acquaintance with them.

In the modified machinery of the Norse tale, the remon¬
strances addressed to Balna’s son in the Hindu story are
here addressed to Boots, whose kindness’ to the brute crea¬
tures who become his friends is drawn out in the more full
detail characteristic of Western legends. The Hindu hero
helps eagles only; Boots succours a raven, a salmon, and a
wolf, and the latter having devoured his horse bears him on

Helen calls herself the dog-facod, so
Thill!a is transformed into a dog when

so many popular tales, are the bright
clouds who bear off little Surva Bai to
the nest on the tree top.

0

AGENCY OF BEASTS IN MYTHOLOGY.

its Back with the spe.ed of light to the house of the giant chap.
who has turned his brothers, into stone . 1 Then he finds, not . via ' -
his mother, like Balna’B son, but the beautiful princess who
is to be his bride, and who promises to find out, if she can,
where the giant keeps his heart, for, wherever it be, it is not
in his body. The colloquies which lead at length to the true ■

. answer exhibit the giant in the more kindly and rollicking
character frequently bestowed on trolls, dwarfs, elves, and'
demons, in the mythology of the Western Aryans. The
final answer corresponds precisely to that of Punchkin. ‘ Par,
far away in a lake lies an island; on that island stands a
church; in that church is a well; in that well swims a duck;
in that duck there is an egg; and in that egg there lies
my heart, you darling.’ His darling takes a tender farewell
of Boots, who sets off on the wolf’s back, to solve, as in the
Eastern tale, the mystery of the water and the bird. The
wolf takes him to the island; but the church keys hang high
on the steeple, and the raven is now brought in to perform
an office analogous to that of the young eaglets in the Deccan
legend. At last, by the salmon’s help, the egg is brought
from the bottom of the well where the duck had dropped it.

‘ Then the wolf told him to squeeze the egg, and as soon
as ever he squeezed it, the giant screamed out.

‘ “ Squeeze it again,” said the wolf; and when the prince
did so,'the giant screamed still more piteously, and begged
and prayed so prettily to be spared, saying he would do all

1 The constant agency of wolves and brother returns home is put on by hiin-
foxes in the German stories at once self. He has exchanged clothes with a
' suggests a comparison with the Myrmi- beggar; the fox is of course enchanted,
dons whom the' Homeric poet so elabo- and can only be freed by 'destroying the

himself as the • wolf-god of Hischylos, this idea of enchantment would inevi-
and with the jackal princes of eastern tably be suggested by the magic, power
story. In Grimm's story of ‘The^Two of Athene in seaming the faco of Odys-

142

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book that the prince wished if he would only not sqneezokis heart
__ J ;_- in two.

£ “ Tell him if he will restore to life again your sis brothers
and their brides, you will spare his life,” said the wolf.
Yes, the giant was ready to do that, and he turned the six
brothers into king’s sons again, and their brides into king’s
daughters.

‘ “ Now squeeze the egg in two,” said the wolf. So Boots
squeezed the egg to pieces, and the giant burst at once.’

The Two If the morality of myths be a fair matter for comparison,
Brotbeis. p; as p cm story has here the advantage. Balna’s son

makes no definite promise to the magician; but a parallel to
Punehkin, almost closer than that of the giant, is furnished
in Grimm’s story of the Two Brothers, where a witch is
forced to restore all her victims to life. ‘ The old witch took
a twig 1 and changed the stones back to what they were, and
immediately his brother and the beasts stood before the
huntsman, as well as many merchants, workpeople and shep¬
herds, who, delighted with their freedom, returned home;
but the twin brothers , 2 when they saw each other again,
kissed and embraced and were very glad .’ 3
Influence The supposition that these stories have been transmitted
literature laterally is tenable only on the further hypothesis, that in
on Folk- every Aryan land, from Eastern India to the Highlands of
Scotland, the folk-lore of the country has had its character
determined by the literature of written books, that in every
land men have handled the stories introduced fronf other
countries with the deliberate purpose of modifying and adapt¬
ing them, and that they have done their work in such a way 0
as sometimes to leave scarcely a resemblance, at other times
scarcely to effect the smallest change. In no other range of
literature has any such result ever been achieved. In these
stories we have narratives which have confessedly been re-.
ceived in the crudest form, if the fable of the Brahman and
the goat is to be taken as the Original of the Master Thief,
and which have been worked up with marvellous vigour and

THEORY OP BORROWED MYTIIS.

143

mader indefinitely varied forms, not by tbe scholars who im- chap.
ported the volumes of the Kalila and Dimna, or the Exploits . YI^ ^ .
of the Romans, but by unknown men among the people.

The tales have been circulated for the most part only among
those who have no books, and many if not most of them have
been made known only of late years for the first time to the
antiquarians and philologists who have devoted their lives
to hunting them out. How then do we find in Teutonic .or
Hindu stories not merely incidents which specially charac¬
terise the story of Odysseus, but almost the very words in
which they are related in the Odypsey ? The task of analys¬
ing.'and comparing these legends is not a light one even for
those who have all the appliances of books and the aid of a
body of men working with them for the same end. Yet old
men and old women reproduce in India and Germany, in Nor¬
way, in Scotland, and in Ireland, the most subtle turns of
thought and expression, and an endless series of complicated
narratives, in which the order of incidents and the words of
the speakers are preserved with a fidelity nowhere paral¬
leled in the oral tradition of historical events. It may
safely be said that no series of stories introduced in the form
of translations from other languages could ever thus have
filtered down into the lowest strata of society, and thence
have sprung up again, like Antaios, with greater energy and
heightened beauty, and ‘ nursery tales are generally the last
thingS to be adopted by one nation from another .’ 1 But it
is not safe to assume on the part of Highlaud peasants or
Hindu nurses a familiarity with the epical literature of the
•Homeric.or Yedic poets; and hence the production of actual
evidence in any given race for the independent growth of
popular stories may be received. as throwing fresh light on
questions already practically solved, but can scarcely be re¬
garded as indispensable. It can scarcely be necessary to
prove that the tale of the Three Snake Leaves was not
derived by the old German* storytellers from the pages of
Pausanias, or. that Beauty and the Beast was not suggested by
Appuleius. There is nothing therefore which needs to
surprise us in the fact that stories already familiar to the
1 Max Muller, Chips, ii. 216.

144

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARTAK NATIOHB. ■

book western Aryans have been brought to ns in. ilieir eastern
—— versions only as yesterday.

The stories Among such tales is the story, cited by Dr. Daseflt, of
Filtrate, King Putraka, who wandering among the Yindhya moun-
aml the tains finds two men quarreling for the possession of a bowl,
Princesses a staff, and a pair of shoes, and induces them to determine by
hill'd ''' 10 " runn ' n 8' a race whose these things shall be. No sooner have
they started than Putraka puts on the shoes, which give the
power of flight, and vanishes with the staff and bowl also.
The story, which in this form has only recently been made
known in Europe through the translation of the tales of
'Somadeva, is merely another version of the old Norse legend
* of the Three Princesses of Whiteland, in which three brothers
fight for a hundred years about a hat, a cloak, and a pair of
boots, until a king, passing by, prevails on them to let him
try the things, and putting them oh, wishes himself away.
The incident. Dr. Dasent adds, is found in Wallachian and
Tartar stories, 1 while the three gifts come again in the
stories already cited, of the Table, the Ass, and the Stick,
the Lad that went to the North Wind, and the Hindu tale
of the Brahman, the Jackal, and the Barber. But the gifts
themselves are- found everywhere. The shoes are the
sandals of Hermes, the seven-leagued boots of Jack the
Giant Killer; 2 the hat is the helmet of Hades, the Tam-
Kappe of the Nibelungen Lied; 3 in the staff we have the
rod of Kirke, and in the bowl that emblem of fertility and
life which meets us at every turn, from the holy vessel

QUESTION OF ADAPTATION.

145

which only the pure knight or the innocent maiden may CHAP,
touch, to the horseshoe'which is nailed for good luck’s sake ■.

to the wall. These things have not been imported into
Western mythology by any transitions of the folk-lore of the
East,- for they were as well known in the days of Perikles as
they are in our own; and thus in cases where there appears
to he evidence of conscious adaptation the borrowing must
be regarded rather as an exceptional fact than as furnish¬
ing any presumption against stories for which no such
evidence is forthcoming. It will never be supposed that
the imagery and even the language of the old Greek epics
could be as familiarly known to the Hindu peasantry as to
the countrymen of Herodotos : and hence the greater the
resemblance between the popular stories of Greeks, Germans,
and Hindus, the less room is there for any hypothesis of
direct borrowing or adaptation. Such theories do but create
and multiply difficulties; the real evidence points only to
that fountain of mythical language from which have flowed
all the streams of.Aryan epic poetry, streams so varied in
their character, yet agreeing so closely in their elements.

The substantial identity of stories told in Italy', Norway,
and India can but prove that the treasure-house of my¬
thology was more abundantly filled before the dispersion of
the Aryan tribes than we had taken it to be.

. Probably no two stories furnish more convincing evidence Fa,iQ>ful
of the extent to which the folk-lore of the Aryan tribes was 3o ' m '
developed, -while they still lived as a single people, than that
which we find in the German legend of Faithful John and
• the Deccan story of Bama and Luxman, who reflect the
Bama and Laxmana of Purana legends. A comparison of
these legends clearly shows that at least the following
framework must have been devised before Hindus and Ger¬
mans started on the long migration which was to lead the
one to the regions of the Ganges a.nd the Indus, and the
other to the countries watered by the Bliine and the Elbe.

Even in those early days the story must have run that a
king had seen the likeness of a maiden whose beauty made
him faint with love; that he could not be withheld from
seeking her; that his faithful friend wont with him and
VOL. I. L

MYTHOLOGY

E AltYAS RATIONS.

UC>

HOOK helped him to win'his bride; that certain wise birds pTe-
— dieted that the trusty friend should save his master from three
great dangers, but that his mode of rescuing him should
seem to show that he loved his master’s wife; that for his
self-sacrifice he should be turned into a stone, and should be
restored to life only by the agency of an innocent child.
That two men in two distant countries knowing nothing of
each other could hit upon such a series of incidents as these,
none probably will have the hardihood to maintain. Still
less can any dream of urging that Hindus and Germans
agreed together to adopt each the specific differences of
their respective versions. In the German story the prince’s
passion for the beautiful maiden is caused by the sight of
her portrait in a gallery of his father’s palace, into which
the trusty John had been strictly charged not to let the
young man enter. 1 Having once seen it, he cannot be with¬
held from going to seek her, and with his friend he embarks
as a merchant in a ship laden with all manner of costly
goods which may tempt the maiden’s taste or curiosity.
The scheme succeeds; but while the princess is making her
purchases the Faithful John orders all sail to be set, and
the ship is far at sea when the maiden turns to go home.
At cnce we recognise the form in which Herodotos at the
outset of his history has recorded the story of 16, and are
tempted to think that Herodotos did not in this instance
invent his own rationalistic explanation of a miraculous
story, but has adopted a version of the myth current in his
own day. The comparative freedom from supernatural in-

1 Tins is substantially the Rabbinical the case before the Rabbis, who decide
story of ‘ Tlie Broken Oath,’ the differ- that he must go back ; but on his per-

already in Fairy land, and finds in the suffer her to take leave of him and to
forbidden chamber, not the picture, but embrace him. ‘ He replied that she
the maiden herself. The sequel of this might, and as soon as she embraced
story exhibits the maiden as the Fairy him, she drew out his soul, and he
Queen, who lays the man under a died.’ Thus far the atorv runs like
pledse to remain with her. ' Aficr a tlmt of Fouqtrf’s Undine; but in the
while he feels a yearning to return to sequel the insensibility of the Jew to
his earthly home. He is suffered to do the ludicrous is shown in the words put
so on pledging his word that he will into the mouth of the fairy, who leaves
come back. But, the pledge redeemed her son Solomon in the keeping .of the
without murmuring by Thomas • of Rabbis, assuring them that he will pass
Ercihlounc is set at nought- by the hero examinations satisfactorily. Keightley, .
of this tale. The forsaken fairy carries Fairy Mythology, 605.

TEE STOKY OF FAITHFUL JOBS.

147

cidents would of course determine Ms elioice. The next chat.
scene in the drama is a colloquy between three crows, whose vl11 ’ .
language Faithful John understands, and who foretell three
great dangers impending over the prince, who can be saved
only at the cost of his preserver. On his reaching shore a
fox-coloured horse would spring towards him, which, on his
mounting it, would carry him off for ever from his bride.

No one can save him except by shooting the horse, but if
any one does it and tells the king, he will be turned into stone
from the toe to the knee. If the horse be Mlled, the prince
will none the more keep his bride, for a bridal shirt will lie
on a dish, woven seemingly of gold and silver, but composed
really of sulphur and pitch, and if he puts it on it will burn
him .to his bones and marrow. Whoever takes the shirt
with Ms gloved hand and casts it into the.fire may save the
prince ; but if, he knows and tells him, he will be turned to
stone from Ms knee to his heart. Nor is the prince more
safe even if the shirt be burnt, for during the dance wMch
follows the wedding the queen will suddenly turn pale and
fall as if dead, and unless some one takes three drops of
blood from her right breast she will die. But whoever
knows and tells it shall be turned to stone from the crown
of his head to the toes of Ms feet. The friend resolves to be
faithful at all hazards, and all things turn out as the crews
had foretold; but the king, misconstruing the act of Ms
friend in taking blood from his wife, orders him to be led to
prison. At the scaffold he explains Ms motives, but the act
of revelation seals his doom; and while the king intreats
for forgiveness the trusty servant is turned into stone. In
an agony of grief the king has the figure placed near his bed,
and vainly prays for the power of restoring him to life.

Tears pass on; twin sons are born to Mm, and one day, as
he gives utterance to the longing of Ms heart, the statue
says that it can be brought back to life if the king. will cut
off the heads of the twins and sprinkle the statue with their
blood. The servant is restored to life, and when lie places
the cMldren’s heads on their bodies they spring up and play
as merrily r as ever.

148

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK In truth and tenderness of feeling’ this story falls for short
—^—. of the Deccan tale, in which the prince Kama sees the
Rama ' image of his future bride, not in a picture, but -in a dream.
Luxman. Having won her by the aid of Luxman, he is soon after
attacked by the home-sickness which is common to the
heroes of most of these tales, and which finds its highest
expression in the history of Odysseus. During the journey,
which answers to the voyage of the king with Faithful John,
Luxman, who, like John, understands the speech of birds,
hears two owls talking in a tree overhead, and learns from
them that three great perils await his master and his bride.
The first willbe from a rotten branch of a banyan-tree, from
the fall of which Luxman will just save them by dragging
them forcibly away; the next will be from an insecure arch,
and the third from a cobra. This serpent, they said, Luxman
would-kill with his sword.

‘ But a drop of the cobra’s blood shall fall on her forehead.
The wuzeer will not care to wipe off the blood with his
hands, but shall instead cover his face with a cloth, that he
may lick it off with his tongue ; but for this the rajah will
be angry with him, and his reproaches will turn this poor
wuzeer into stone.

‘ “ Will he always remain stone ? ” asked the lady owl.
“ Not for ever,” answered the husband, “ but for eight long
years he will remain so.” “ And what then ? ” demanded
she. “ Then,” answered the other, “ when the young rajah
and ranee have a baby, it shall come to pass that one day
the child shall be playing on the floor, and, to help itself along,
shall clasp hold of the stony figure, and at that baby's touch
the wuzeer will come to life again.” ’

As in the German tale, everything turns out in accordance
with the predictions of the birds. When, therefore, Luxman
saw the cobra creep towards the queen, he knew that his life
must be forfeited for his devotion, and so he took from the
folds of his dress the record of the owl’s talk and of his
former life, and, having laid it beside the sleeping king, killed
the cobra. The rajah, of course, starts up just as his friend
is licking the blood from his wife’s forehead, and, drawing

• HISTORY OF RAMA AND LUXMAN. 149

the same inference with the German prince, overwhelms him CHAP,
with repro^hes. . VIIJ -

‘ The rajah had buried his face in his hands: he looked
up, he turned to the wuzeer; hut from him came neither
answer nor reply. He had become a senseless stone. Then
Rama for the first time perceived the roll of paper which
Luxman had laid beside him; and when he read in it of •
what Luxman had been to him from boyhood, and of the
end, his bitter grief broke through all bounds, and falling at
the feet of the statue, he clasped its stony knees and wept
aloud.’

Eight years passed on, and at length the child was bom.

A few months more, and in trying to walk, it ‘ stretched out
its tiny hands and caught hold of the foot of the statue.

The wuzeer instantly came back to life, and stooping down
seized the little baby, who had rescued him, in his arms and
kissed it.’ 1

There is something more quiet and touching in the silent Mythical
record of Luxman which stands in the place of Faithful
John’s confession at the scaffold, as well as- ‘in the doom stories,
which is made to depend on the reproaches of his friend
rather than on the mere mechanical act of giving utterance
to certain words. But the Hindu leg-end and the German
story alike possess a higher interest in the links which
connect them, like most of the popular stories already noticed,
with the magnificent epic to which we give the name of
Homer, with the songs of the Yolsungs and Nibelungs, with -
the mythical cycle of Arthur and Charlemagne, and the
Persian Rustem. The bridal shirt of sulphur and pitch,
which outwardly seemed a tissue of gold and silver, carries
us at once from the story of Faithful John to the rnvth of

150

miOLOGT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

rook Deianeira and the poisoned coat which put an end to the

•-^—• career of Herakles. We enter again the chaMned circle,

where one and the same idea assumes a thousand different
forms, where we can trace clearly the process by yjhich one
change led to another, but where any one disregarding the
points of connection must fail to discern their sequence,
• origin, and meaning. In the legend of Deianeira, as in that
of Iason and Glauke, the coat or shirt is laden with destruc¬
tion even for Herakles. It represents, in fact, ‘the clouds
which rise from the waters and surround the sun like a dark
raiment.’ This robe Herakles tries to tear off, but the ‘ fiery
mists embrace him, and are mingled with the parting rays of
the sun, and the dying hero is seen through the scattered
clouds of the sky, tearing his own body to pieces, till at last
his bright form is consumed in a general conflagration.’ 1
In the story of Medeia this robe is the gift of Helios, which
imparts a marvellous wisdom to the daughter of the Kolchian
king. It is the gleaming dress which reappears in story
after story of Hindu folk-lore. ‘ That young rajah’s wife,’
people said, ‘ has the most beautiful saree we ever saw: it
shines like the sun, and dazzles our eyes. We have no saree
half so beautiful.’ It is the golden fleece of the ram which
bears away the children of the Mist (Nephele) to the Eastern
land. In other words, it is the light of Phoibos, the splendour
of Helios, the rays or spears of the gleaming Sun. As such,
it is identified with the sword of Apollo the Chrysadr, with
the sword which Aigeus leaves to be discovered by Theseus
under the broad stone, with the good sword Gram which
Odin left in the tree trunk for Yolsung to draw out and
wield, with the lion’s skin of Herakles, with the jackal's
skin worn by the enchanted rajahs of Hindu story, with the
spear of Achilleus and the deadly arrows of Philoktetes, with
■ the invincible sword of Perseus and the sandals which bear
him through the air like a dream, with the magic shoes in
the story of King Patraka and of the Lad ■tfho went to the
Horth Wind, with the spear of Artemis and the unerring
darts of Meleagros. Whether under the guise of spears or
fleece or arrows, it is the golden hair on the head of Phoibos
’ Max Muller, Chips from a German Workshop, ii. 89.

THE STORY OF PRINCE AHMED.

151

Akersekomes, -which no razor has ever touched. It is the chap.
wonderful carpet of Solomon, which figures in the Arabian ^ V] , IJ '
Nights a8 the vehicle for relieving distressed lovers from
their difficulties, 1 and bears away the Princess Aldegonda by
the side of the Pilgrim of Love in the exquisite legend of the
Alhambra.

This story is, indeed,, only a more beautiful form of the ThoPi!-
German and Hindu tales. Here, as in the other legends, gj™ of
special care is taken to guard'tlie young prince .against the
dangers Of love, and the lad grows up contentedly under the
care of the sage Eben Boua.bben, until he discovers that he
wants something which speaks more to the heart than algebra.

.Like Bain a in the tower or Helen in Ilion, he is prisoned in
a palace from which he cannot get forth; but the sage Bon-
abben has taught him the language of birds, and when the
joyous time of spring comes round, he learns from a dove
that love is 1 the torment of one, the felicity of two, the strife
and enmity of three.’ The dove does more. She tells him
of a beautiful maiden, far away iu a delightful garden by the
banks of the stream from which Arethousa, Daphne, Athene,
Aphrodite, all are horn; but the garden is surrounded
liy high walls, within which none were permitted to enter.

Here the dove’s story, which answers to the picture seen in
the German tale and the dream of Kama, connects the
legends with the myths of Brynhild, Surya Bai, and other
imprisoned damsels, whom one brave knight alone is destined
to rescue. Once again the dove returns, but it is only to die
at the .feet of Ahmed, who finds under her wing the picture
seen by the prince in the German story. Where to seek the
maiden he knows not; but the arrow of love is within his
heart, ahd he cannot tarry. The princess too. to whom the
dove had carried the message of Ahmed, is yearning to see
him; hut she is surrounded by a troop of suitors as numerous
as those which gather round PenelopS, and she must appear at
a great tournament (the fight at Ilion) which is to decide who
shall be her husband. But Ahmed, like Aehilleus after the
death of Patroklos, is unarmed; how then can he think of
encountering the valiant warriors who arc hastening to tlie

152

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book contest ? In this dilemma he is aided by an owl (the white

-_;—- bird of Athene), who tells him of a cavern (the eave in which

Zeus, Mithra, and Krishna alike are born) ‘in one of the wildest
recesses of those rocky cliffs which rise around Toledo; none'
but the mousing eye of an owl or an antiquary could have
discovered the entrance to it. A sepulchral lamp of ever¬
lasting oil shed a solemn light through the place. On an
iron table in the centre of the cavern lay the magic armour;
against it leaned the lance, and beside it stood an Arabian
steed, caparisoned for the field, but motionless as a statue.
The armour was bright and unsullied as it had gleamed in
days of old; the steed in as good conditibn as if just from
the pasture, and when Ahmed laid his hand upon his neck,
he pawed the ground and gave a loud neigh of joy that
shook the walls of the cavern.’ Here we have not only the
magic armour and weapons of Achilleus, but the steed which
never grows old, and against which no human power can
stand. Probably Washington Irving, as he tolfl the story
with infinite zest, thought little of the stories of Boots or of
Odysseus : but although Ahmed appears in splendid panoply
and mounted on a magnificent war-horse, yet he is as inso¬
lently scouted by the suitors of Aldegonda as the Ithakan
chieftain in his beggar’s dress was reviled by the suitors of
Penelope. But-the same retribution is in store for both.
Ahmed bears the irresistible weapons of Odysseus. No sooner
is the first blow struck against the Pilgrim of Love (for
Ahmed again like Odysseus and Herakles must be a wan¬
derer) than the marvellous powers of the steed are seen.
‘At the first touch of the magic lance the brawny scoffer
was tilted from his saddle. Here the prince would have
paused; but, alas! he had to deal with a demoniac horse
and armour—once in action nothing could control them.
The Arabian steed charged into the thickest of the throng;

, the lance overturned everything that presented; the gentle
prince was carried pell-mell about the field, strewing it with
high and low, gentle and simple,, and grieving at his own
involuntary exploits. The king stormed and raged at this
outrage on his subjects and his guests. He ordered out all
his guards—they were unhorsed as fast as they came up.

MYTHS

THE KOOK-DAY.

153

The king threw off his robes, grasped buckler and lance, and CHAP,
rode forth to awe the stranger with the presence of majesty
itself. Alas ! majesty fared no better than the vulgar—the
steed and lance were no respecters of persons: to the dismay
of Ahmed, he was borne full tilt against the king, and in a
moment the royal heels were in the air, and the crown was
rolling in the dust.’ It could not be otherwise. The suitors
must all fall when once the arrow has sped from the how of
Odysseus; but although the Ithakan chief was earnest in
his revenge, the involuntary exploits of Ahmed are matched
by many an involuntary deed of Herakles or Oidipous or
Perseus. That the horse of Ahmed belongs to the same
stock with the steeds of Indra it is impossible to doubt as
we read the words of the Vedie poet:—

‘ These thy horses, excellent Vayu, strong of limb, youthful
and full of vigour, bear tliee through the space between
heaven and earth, growing in bulk, strong as oxen ; they are
not lost in the firmament, but hold on their speed, unretarded
by reviling ; difficult are they to be arrested as the beams of
the Sun.’ 1

The incidents which follow present the same astonishing The spr-lt
accordance with old Greek or Hindu traditions. No sooner
has the sun reached the meridian than ‘the magic spell
resumed its power; the Arabian steed scoured across the
plain, leaped the barrier, plunged into the Tagus, swam its
raging current, bore the prince breathless and amazed to tlie
' cavern, and resumed his station like a statue beside the iron
table.? The spell is, in fact; none other than that which
sends the stone jof Sisyphos rolling dowrn the hill as soon as
it has reached the summit; the Tagus is the old ocean stream
• into which Helios sinks at eventide, and the cave is the dark
abode from which the wandering Sun had started in the
morning, and to which he must come back at night. But
further, Ahmed appears in the sequel as Paieon, the healer.
Aldegonda is sick with lovj for the beautiful.prince who has
gladdened her eyes hut for a few brief moments. In vain do
hosts of physicians seek to cure her. The power to do so
rests with Ahmed only, and the owl, coming to his aid as
' Rig Veda Sanhita, H. H. Wilson, vol. ii. p. 51.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

zealously as Athene Glaukopis (the owl-eyed or bright-
faced) to that of Odysseus, advises him to ask as his reward
the carpet of Solomon, on which he soars away with Alde-
gonda, like the children of Nephele on the Golden Fleece.
The force of these astonishing parallelisms is certainly not
weakened by any suggestion that some of these incidents
may be found in legends of the Arabian Nights. The en¬
chanted horse reappears in the Dapplegrim of Grimm’s
German stories, in the steed which carries the Widow’s Son
in the Norse tales, and the marvellous horse of Highland
tradition. 1 . In a burlesque aspect, it is the astonishing horse
in the Spanish story of Governor Manco, 2 who is outwitted
by the old soldier precisely as the Sultan of Cashmere is
outwitted by the possessor of the Enchanted Horse in the
Arabian Nights story.

In the Hindu story, as in the Spanish tale, the bride of
Rama is won after an exploit which in its turn carries us
away to the deeds of Hellenic. or Teutonic heroes. When
the prince tells Luxman of the peerless beauty whom he has
seen in his dream, his friend tells him that the-priacess lives
far away in a glass palace. 3 ‘ Round this palace runs a large
river, and round the river is a garden of flowers. Round
the garden are four thick groves of trees. The princess is
twenty-four years old, but she is not married, for she has
determined only to marry whoever can jump across the river
and greet her in her crystal palace; and though many
thousand kings have assayed to do so, they have all perished
miserably in the attempt, having either been drowned in the
river or broken their necks by falling.’ The frequent recur¬
rence of this idea in these Hindu tales might of itself lead
any one who knew nothing of the subject previously to doubt '
whether such images could refer to any actual facts in the
history of any given man or woman. In the story of Rama
it has lost much of its old significance. The death-like cold
of a northern winter gives place th the mere notion of solitude
and seclusion. Running streams and luxuriant gardens show

’ Campbell, Talcs of the West High- Alhambra,
lands• The Young King of Easaidh J The glass or marble of the Hindu
Rundh.* tale answers to the ice of the Norse

2 Washington Irving, Tales of the legends.

FLOWERS.

THE QUEEN OF THE FIVE

that the myth has-been long transferred to a more genial CHAP,
climate; but it is scarcely necessary to say that the changes vm '
in the story indefinitely enhance its value, so long as the
idea remains the same. In some form or other this idea may
be said to run through almost all these legends. In the story
of ‘ Brave Seventee Bai ’ it assumes a form more closely akin
to the imagery of Teutonic mythology; and there we find a
princess who declares that she will marry no one who has not
leaped over her bath, which ‘ has high marble walls all round,
with a hedge of spikes at the top of the walls. 5 In the story
of Vicram Maharajah the parents of Anar Ranee ‘ had caused
her garden to be hedged round with seven hedges made of
bayonets, so that none could go in nor*out; and they had
published a decree that none should marry her but he who
could enter the garden and gather the three pomegranates
on which she and her maids slept.’ So, too, Panch Phul
Ranee, the lovely Queen of the Five Mowers, ‘ dwelt in a
little house, round which were seven wide ditches, and seven
great hedges made of spears. 5 The seven hedges are, how¬
ever, nothing'more than, the sevenfold coils of the dragon of
the Glistening Heath, who lies twined round the beautiful
Brynhild. But the maiden of the Teutonic tale is sunk in
sleep which rather resembles death than life, just as Ddmeter t
mourned as if for the death of Persephone while her child
sojourned in the dark kingdom of. Hades. This idea is
reproduced ..with wonderful fidelity in the story- of Little
Surya Bai, and the cause of her death is modified in a
hundred legends both of the East and the West. The little
maiden is. high up in the .eagle’s nest fast asleep, when an
evil demon or Rakshas seeks to gain admission to her, and
while vainly striving to force an entrance leaves one of his
finger-nails sticking in the crack of the door. When on the
following morning the maiden opened the doors of her
dwelling to look down on the world below, the sharp claw
ran into her hand, and immediately she fell dead. The
powers of winter, which had thus far sought in vain to
wound her, have at length won the victory; and at once we
pass to other versions of the same myth, which tell us of
Eurydike stung to death by the hidden serpent, of Sifrit

.150 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book smitten by Hagene (the Thorn), of Isfendiyar slain by the

'-^—• thorn or arrow of Rustem, of Achilleus vulnerable only in

his heel, of Brynhild enfolded within the dragon’s coils, of
Meleagros dying as the torch of doom is burnt out, of I^rldur
the brave and pure smitten by the fatal mistletoe, of the
sweet Briar Rose plunged in her slumber of a hundred years..
Origin of The idea that all these myths have been deliberately
relating 1 to transferred from Hindus or Persians to Greeks, Germans,
*ieepof an< ! Norsemen may be dismissed as a wild dream. 1 Yet of
beautiful their substantial identity in spite of all points of difference
maidens. „ n( j under all the disguises thrown over them by individual
fancies and local influences, there can be no question. The
keynote of any on# of the Deccan stories is the keynote
of almost all; and this keynote runs practically through the
great body of tales gathered from Germany, Scandinavia,
Ireland, and Scotland. It is found again everywhere in the
mythology of the Greeks, whether in the legends which have
furnished the materials for their magnificent epics, or have
been immortalised in the dramas of their great tragedians,
or have remained buried in the pages of mythdgraphers like
Pausanias or Diodoros. If then all these tales have some
historical foundation, they must relate to events which took
place before the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from their
* original home; If the war at Troy took place at all, as the
Homeric poets have narrated it, it is, to say the least,
strange that precisely the same struggle, for precisely the
same reasons, and with the same results, should have been
waged in Norway and Germany, in Wales and Persia. The
question must be more fully examined presently; but unless
we are to adopt the hypothesis of conscious borrowing in its
most exaggerated form, the dream of a historical Ilion and a
historical Carduel must fade away before the astonishing
multitude of legends which comparative mythologists haw

DEACONS AND SLEEPING MAIDENS. J.jT

■ traced to phrases descriptive of physical phenomena. At ODAP.
the least it must be- admitted that the evidence seems to . -

point in this direction. To take these stories after any
system, and arrange their materials methodically, is almost
an impossible task. The expressions or incidents worked into
these legends are like the few notes of the scale from which
‘great musicians have created each his own world, or like the
few roots of language which denoted at first only the most
prominent objects and processes' of nature and the merest
bodily wants, but out of which has grown the wealth of
words which feed the countless streams of human thought.

In one story we may find a series of incidents briefly touched,
which elsewhere have been expanded into a hundred tales,
while the incidents themselves are presented in the countless
combinations suggested by an exuberant fancy. The outlines
of the tales, when these have been carefully analysed, are
simple enough; but they are certainly not outlines which
could have been suggested by incidents in the common life
of mankind. Maidens do not fall for months or years into
deathlike trances, from which the touch of one brave man
alone can rouse them. Dragons are not coiled round golden
treasures or beautiful women on glistening heaths. Princes
do not everywhere abandon their wives as soon as they have
married them, to return at length in squalid disguise and
smite their foes with invincible weapons. Steeds which
speak and which cannot die do not draw the chariots of
mortal chiefs, nor do the lives of human kings exhibit.every¬
where the same incidents in the same sequence. Tet every
fresh addition made to our stores of popular tradition does
hut-bring before us new phases of those old forms of which
mankind, we may boldly say, will never grow weary. The
golden slipper of Cinderella is the slipper of Ehoddpis, which
an eagle carries off and droqis into the lap of the Egyptian
king as he sits on his seat of judgement at Memphis. 1 This
slipper reappears in the beautiful Deccan story of Sodewa
Bai, and leads of course to the same issue a,s in ilie legends
of Cinderella, and Ehoddpis. The dragon of the Glistening
Heath represents the seven-headed cobra of the Hindu story,

1 jElian, r. 27. liii. 33 ; Strabo, ivii. j>. 808.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,

and in the legend of Brave Seventee Bai the beautiful Bryn-
liild becomes his daughter, just as the bright Phoibos is the
child of the sombre Leto. In the Greek myth dragons of
another kind draw the chariot of Medeia, the child of the
sun, or impart mysterious wisdom to Iamos and Melampous,
as the cobras do to Muchie Lai. That the heroes of Greek and
Teutonic legends in almost every case are separated from, or
abandon, the women whom they have wooed or loved is well
known; and the rajahs and princes of these Hindu stories
are subjected to the same lot with Herakles and Odysseus,
Oidipous and Sigurd, Kephalos and Prokris, Paris and OinonA
Generally the newly-married prince feels a yearning to see
his father and his mother once more, and, like Odysseus,
pines until he can set his face homewards. Sometimes he
takes his wife, sometimes he goes alone ; but in one way or
another he is kept away from her for years, and reappears
like Odysseus in the squalid garb of a beggar.

Curiously enough, in these Hindu stories the detention of
the wandering prince or king is caused by one of those
charms or spells which Odysseus in his wanderings dis¬
creetly avoids. The Lotos-eaters and their magic fruit
reappear in the nautch-people or conjurors, whom the rajah
who has married Panch Phul Ranee, the Lady of the Five
Flowers, asks for rice and fire. The woman whom he ad¬
dresses immediately brings them. ‘ But before she gave
them to him, she and her companions threw on them a
certain powder, containing a very potent charm; and no
sooner did the rajah receive them than he forgot about his
wife and little child, his journey and all that had ever hap¬
pened to him in his life before: such was the peculiar
property of the powder. And when the conjuror said to.
him, “ Why should you go away ? Stay with us and be one
of us,” he willingly consented .’ 1 Unless the translator has
designedly modified the language of the Deccan tale-teller
(and in the absence of any admission to this effect we cannot

1 This forgetfulness of his first love the Gaelic story of the Battle of the
on the part of the solar hero is brought Birds neither man nor other creature is
about in many of the German stories by to kiss him, and the mischief is done by

one side of°his face, or on his lips. In Argos knows Odysseus. Campbell, i. 34.

THE BOD AND THE LOTOS. 15D

suppose this), we may fairly quote the words as almost a CHAP. -
paraphrase from the Odyssey:— , vnL .

Tiiv S’ 8s t IS Xu-fi'io rpdyOL KafnrSf,

ovk <er’ airayy(?\ai irdKiv ftQeXev oi>5e Vee<r0cu, i
* aXX 1 avrov &oti\ovro per ai-Spdt ti A<oro<pctyot<r(i'

Xvrby ipeirroptvoi peveptv vdcrrov re \ad4<x0at. 1

The nautcb-woman here .has also the character of Kirke,
and the charm represents the ^dp/mita \vypa which turn the
companions of Eurylochos into swine, while Kirke’s wand is
wielded by the sorcerers who are compelled to restore to life ■
the victims whom they had turned into stone, and by the
Rakshas from whom Ramobundra, in the story of Truth’s
Triumph, seeks to learn its uses. ‘The rod,’ she replies.

‘ has many supernatural powers; for instance, by simply
uttering your wish, and waving it in the air, you can conjure
up a mountain, a river, or a forest, in a moment of time.’ At
length the wanderer is found; but Panch. Phul Ranee and
Seventee Bai have the insight of Eurykleia, and discern his
true majesty beneath the fakeer’s garb . 2 ‘The rajah came

- This garment of humiliation appears Grimm’s collection, while Boots, -who
in almost innumerable legends. In the . grovels in the nshes, is the royal youth
German story of the Golden Bird the who rides up the mountain of ice in the
prince puts it. on when, on.approaching story of the Princess on the Glass Hill,
his father's house, he is told that his In another, Shortshanks, who by’himself
brothers are plotting his death. In the destroys all the Trolls opposed to him,
tale of the Knapsack, the Hat, and the is a reflection of Odysseus, not only in

orn P (ihe

orn J of U the'Ma-
strongest

ill down. He tht
vengeance precisely like that of Odys-
ms, and for the same reason. In the
ory of the Golden Goose, Hummling,

i despised for his wretchec
1 that of the Gold Child

peats the storv of King Bi
shows the Gold Child in a
nigged frock. Elsewhere he

. 0 . .. _ bodily forn..

Odysseus is Shortshanks when compared
with Menelaos (Mad iii. 210-11). In
the tale of the Best Wish (Dascnt), Boots

ICO

MYTHOLOGY OP

ARYAN NATIONS.

hook; towards them so changed that not even his own mother

--r—• knew him; no one recognised him but his wife. For

eighteen years he had been among the nautch-people; his
hair was rough, his beard untrimmed, his face thin and porn,
sunburnt, and wrinkled, and his dress was a rough eommon
blanket.’ Can we possibly help thinking of the wanderer,
who in his beggar’s dress reveals himself to the swineherd—
*•■*<«- 8}j 85’ aMs eV, KM* vo\\* iwyfaas.

or of his disguise, when Athene

£av8as it K«fta\ns 8\«cr€ Tfn'xis, apup\ 8i teppa
irdi'T«r<riv fiex4e<r<rt iraXaiov 07}«e yipovtos,

Kvifrffe* 54 oi tiia irdpos ntptKaXX? Uvrv
afiqn 54 fxiv {idxos &XXo Kat(bv fiaXfv $54
fnayaKia (Su>r8a»Ta, Kaitf ptpopiypiwa imny.'

and lastly of his recognition by his old nurse when she saw
the wound made by the bite of the boar who slew Adonis ?
So in the Vengeance of Chandra we see the punishment of
the suitors by Odysseus, an incident still further travestied
in Grimm’s legend of the King of the Golden Mountain. So
too as we read of the body of Chundun Rajah, which re¬
mained undecayed though he had been dead many months,
or of Sodewa Bai, who a month after her death looked as
lovely as on the night on which she died, we are reminded of
the bodies of Patroklos 3 and of Hektor 4 which Aphrodite or
Apollon anointed with ambrosial oil, and guarded day and
night from all unseemly things.

The Snake But though the doom of which Achilleus mournfully com-
Leaves. plaijied to Thetis lies on all or almost all of these bright
beings, they cannot be held in the grasp of the dark power
which has laid them low. Briar-Rose and Surya Bai start
from their slumbers at the magic touch of the lover’s hand,
and even when all hope seemed to be lost, wise beasts pro¬
vide an antidote which will bring back life to the dead. In the
story of Pancli Phul Ranee these beneficent physicians are
jackals, who converse together like the owls of Luxman or

THE SNAKE LEAVES.

161

the crows in the tale of Faithful John. ‘ Do you see this
tree?’ says the jackal to his wife. ‘ Well, if its leaves were
crushed, and a little of the juice put into the rajah’s two ears
and upon his upper lip, and some upon his temples also, and
some upon the spear-wound in his side, he would come to
hfe again, and he as well as ever.’ These leaves reappear in
Grimm’s story of the Three Snake Leaves, in which the
snakes play the part of the jackals. In this tale a prince is
buried alive with his dead wife, and seeing a snake approach¬
ing her body, he cuts it in three pieces. ' Presently another
snake, crawling from the corner, saw the other lying dead,
and going away soon returned with three green leaves in its’
mouth; then, laying the parts of the body together, so as to
join, it put one leaf on each wound, and the dead snake was
alive again. The prince applying the leaves to his wife’s
body restores her also to life. The following are the words
of Apollodoros in relating the story, also told by ,Elian, of
Glaukos and Polyidos‘ When Minos said that he must
bring Glaukos to life, Polyidos was shut up with the dead
body; and, being sorely perplexed, he saw a dragon approach
the corpse. This he killed with a stone, and another dragon
came, and, seeing the first one,dead, went away, and brought
some grass, which it placed on the body of the other, which
immediately rose up. Polyidos, having beheld this with
astonishment, put the same grass on the body of Glaukos,
and restored him to life .’ 1

These magic leaves become a root in the German story of Th<
the Two Brothers, a -tale in which a vast number of solar 1!rf
myths have been rolled together. The two brothers, ‘ as like
one another as two drops of water,’ are the Dioskouroi and
the Asvins, or the other twin deities which run through so
large a portion of the Aryan mythology. They are also the

1 Apollodoros, i
referring to this s
Fouque’s ‘ Sir I

idoc,’ places tlic-s^ treasure-seeker in h
u tlie largo class of fables Mr. Gould re

te which opens tile 'robbers’

hand of

162 MYTHOLOGY OF : THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK Babes in the Wood, although it is their fatherwho,

._ ]: _. at the bidding of his rich brother, thrusts them forth from

their home, because a piece of gold falls from the mouth of
each every morning. They are saved by a huntsman, who
makes them marksmen as expert as Kastor and Polydeukes.
When ;*t length they set out on their adventures, the hunts¬
man gives them a knife, telling them that if, in case of sepa¬
ration, they would stick it into a,tree by the wayside, he who
came back to it might learn from the brightness or the rnsting
of the blade whether the other is alive and well. If'the tale
thus leads us to the innumerable stories which turn on sym¬
pathetic trees, gems, and stones, it is not less noteworthy as
bringing before us almost all the brute animals, whose names
were once used as names of the sun. The two brothers lift
their weapons to shoot a hare, which, begging for life,
promises to give up two leverets. The hare is suffered to go
free, and the huntsmen also spare the leverets, which follow
■ them. The same thing happens with a fox, wolf, hear, and
lion, and thus the youths journey, attended each by five
beasts, until they part, having fixed tbe knife into the trunk
of a tree. Tbe younger, like Perseus, comes to a town where
all is grief and sorrow because the .king’s daughter is to he
given up on the morrow to be devoured by a dragon on the
summit of the dragon’s mountain. Like Theseus and Sigurd,
the young man becomes possessed of a sword buried beueath
a great stone, and, like Perseus, he delivers the maiden by-
slaying the dragon. Then on the mountain-top the youth
, rests with the princess, having charged his beasts to keep

watch, lest any one should surprise them. But the victory
of the sun is followed by the sleep of winter, and the lion,
overcome with drowsiness, hands over his charge to the bear,
the hear to the wolf, the wolf to the fox, the fox to the hare,
until all are still. The Marshal of the kingdom, who here
plays the part of Paris, now ascends the mountain, and,
cutting off the young man’s head, leads away the princess,
whom, as the dragon-slayer, he claims as his bride. At
length the sleep of the lion is broken by the sting of a bee,
and the beast rousing the bear asks the season of his failing
to keep watch. The charge is passed from one beast to the

THE

BROTHERS. ,

103

other, until the hare, unable to utter a word in its defence, CHAP,
begs for mercy, as knowing where to find a root which, like ■ VIIL ■■
the snake leaves, shall restore their master to life. A year has
passed away, and the young man,'again approaching the town
where, the princess lived, finds it full of merriment, because
she'is going on the morrow to be married to the Marshal.

But the time of his humiliation is now past. The huntsman
in his humble hostel declares to the landlord that he will
this da^ eat of the king’s bread, meat, vegetables, and
sweetmeats, and drink of his -finest wine. These are seve¬
rally brought to him by the five beasts, and the princess, thus
learning that her lover, is not dead, advises the king to send
for the master of these animals. The youth refuses to come
unless the king sends for him a royal equipage, and then,
arrayed in royal robes, he goes to the palace, where he convicts
the Marshal of his treachery by exhibiting the dragon’s tongues
which he had cut off and preserved in a handkerchief be¬
stowed on him by the princess, and by showing the necklace, of
which she had given a portion to each of his beasts, and
which is, in fact, the necklace of Freya and the Eestos or
cestns of Aphrodite. But the tale is not told out yet, and it
enters on another cycle of the sun’s career. The youth is no
sooner married to the princess than, like Odysseus or Sigurd,

‘ he is separated from her. Following a, white doe into a forest, -
he is there deceived by a witch, at whose bidding he touches
his beasts with a twig, and turns them into stones, and is then
cSanged into a stone himself. Just at this time the younger
brother retucns to the place where the* knife, now partially
covered with rust, remained fixed in the tree. He becomes,
of course, as in the myth of Baldur, the avenger of his
brother, and the witch undergoes the doom of Punchkin or of
the Giant who had no heart in his body; but when he fells the
younger brother that even his wife had taken him to he her
husband, and admitted him into her chamber, the latter cuts
off the elder’s head. The ma*gic root is again brought into
use, and he learns how faithful his brother had been when
his wife asks him why, on the two previous nights, he had
placed a sword in the bed between them. The story thus, in

104

MYTHOLOGY OF THE

i'AN NATIONS.

BOOK its last incident, runs into tlie tales of Sigurd and the Arabian
__!'_- Allah-ud-deen . 1

Myths of If we sought to prove the absolute identity of the great
li'lc m'™!; mass of Hindu, Greek, Norse, and German legends, we surely
mid ilio need go no further. Yet there are other points of likeness,
at leasti as striking as any that have been already noticed,
between the stories which in the East and West alike relate
to the phenomena of night. In the Hindu tale the disguised
wife of Logedas Rajah finds Tara Bai on a gold and ivory
throne. ‘ She was tall and of a commanding aspect. .Her
black hair was bound by long strings of pearls, her dress was
of fine-spun gold, and round her waist was clasped a zone of
restless, throbbing, light-giving diamonds. Her neck and
her arms were covered with a profusion of costly jewels, but
brighter than all shone her bright eyes, which looked full of
gentle majesty.’ But Tara Bai is the star (boy) child, or
maiden, the Asteropaios of the Hiad, of whom the Greek
myth said only that he was the tallest of all their men, and
that he was slain after fierce fight by Achilleus, whom he had
wounded . 2 Elsewhere she reappears as Polydeukes, the glit¬
tering twin brother of Kastor,. and more particularly as the
fairy Melusina, who is married to Raymond of Toulouse.
This beautiful being, who has a fish’s tail, as representing
the moon which rises and sets in the sea, vanishes away
when her full form is seen by her husband . 3 In another
phase she is Kalypso, the beautiful night which veils the
sun from mortal eyes in her chamber flashing with a thousand
stars, and lulls to sl^ep the man of many grief% and wander¬
ings . 4 Lastly, she is St. Ursula, with her eleven thousand
virgins (the myriad stars), whom Cardinal Wiseman, in a
spirit worthy of Herodotos, transforms into a company, or

1 The Norse .tale of Shortshanks Vedic ApsaraB, or water-maidens,' of
(Dasent) is made np in great part of Vedic mythology, and the swan maidens
the materials of this story. of Teutonic legend. She thus belongs

* It. xxi. 166, &c. to the race of Naiads, Nixies, and

• The name Melusina is identified by . Elves, the latter name denoting a

Mr. Gould with that of the Babylonian running stream, as the Elbe, the
Mylitta, the Syrian moon-goddess.— Alpheios. The fish’s or serpent’s tail
Cvrioits Myths of the MiddleAges, second is not peculiar to Melusina, and her
series, ‘ Melusina.’ . attributes are also shared with the

Mr. Gould, in his delightful chapter ■ Assyrian fish-gods, and the Hellenic
on this subject, connects Melusina, as Proteus,
first seen close to a fountain, with the 4 Od. v. 60, &c.

-MYTHS OP THE NIGHT.

.1.0 i>

rather two companies, of English ladies, martyred, by the CHAT.
Huns at Cologne, but whose mythical home is'on Horsel- . .

berg, where the faithful Eckhai-t is doomed to keep his weary
watch. Labouring on in his painful rationalism, Cardinal
Wiseman tells us of one form of the legend which mentions
a marriage-contract, made with the father of St. Ursula, a very
powerful king, how it was arranged that she should have
eleven companions, and each of these a thousand followers .’ 1
There are thus twelve, in addition to the eleven thousand
attendants, and these twelve reappear in the Hindu tales,
sometimes in dark, sometimes in lustrous forms, as the
twelve hours of the day or night, or the twelve moons of the
lunar year. Thus hi the story of Truth’s Triumph a rajah
has twelve wives, but no children. At length he marries
Guzra Bai, the flower girl, who bears him a, hundred sons
and one daughter; and the sequel of the tale relates the
result of their jealousy against these' children and their
mother. Their treacherous dealing is at last exposed, and
they suffer the fate of all like personages in the German and
Norse tales.

There is, in fact, no end to the many phases assumed by The
the struggle of these fairy beings, which is the warfare
between light and darkness. But the bright beings always darkness,
conquer in the end, and return like Persephone from the
abode of Hades to gladden the heart of the Mater Dolorosa . 2
The child in the Deccan stories appears not onty as Guzra
Bai, but as Panch Phul Ranee, as Surya Bai, as the wife of
Muehie Lai, ,the fish or frog-sun . 3 All these women are the

166

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK daughters of a gardener or a milkwoman, in whom we see
•——• the image of Demeter, the bountiful earth, who lavishes on
her children her treasures of fruits, milk, and flowers. In
her hand she holds her mystic cup, into which falls the ripe
mango, which is her child transformed, as the ripe fruit falls
on the earth. This cup, again, is the horn of Amaltheia, the
table of the Ethiopians, of which Herodotos speaks as laden
continually with all good things, the cup into which ‘Helios
sinks each night when his course is run, the modios of
Serapis, the ivory ewer containing the book of Solomon’s
occult knowledge, which Rehoboam placed im his father’s
tomb, the magic oil-bowl or lamp of Allah-ud-deen, and
finally the San-Greal which furnishes to the knights of
Arthur’s round table as splendid a banquet as their hearts
can desire.

Character It is scarcely necessary to go further. If we do, we shall
folklore” only be confronted by the same astonishing parallelism which
is exhibited by the several versions of the stories already
cited. The hypothesis of conscious borrowing is either
v/ superfluous or dangerous. It is unnecessary, if adduced to

the legend of Melaaina, -who also dies'

must alike sink -when they reach the
western sea. ‘This story,’ says Pro¬
fessor Max Muller, ‘was known at the
time when Kapila wrote his philo¬
sophical aphorisms in India, for it is
there quoted as an illustration. But
long before Kapila, the story of Bhoki
must bavegrown up gradually, beginning

as that iiheki, tho "sun, -will die at the
sight of water, as we should say that the

from^whiL^^oseTn The morning!’—
Chips from a German Workshop, ii. 248.
In the Teutonic version, the change of
tho sun into the form of a frog is the
result of enchantment; but the story of
the Frog Prince has more- than one
point of interest. The frog is compelled

only the youngest daughter of the king
has the power of drawing him. These
daughters again are the companions of
Ursula; tho daughters of the rajah who

hours of the night, sombre in their
.beauty/and envious of the youngest and

the fairest of all the hours, the hour of
the dawn, which alone can bring the
frog prince out of the pond. In the
German story the enchantment can be
ended only by -the death of the frog;

enchanted rajah’s 'jackal ftktn in the
Hindu tale. The sun leaping fully
armed into the heaven as Chrysaor
might well be another being, from*tbe
infVot whom the nymphs swatho with

Thl warrior Jom” s to life^nthe death of
the child, aud the frog on being dashed

GROWTH OP rOPULAU STORIES. ' 107

explain the distant or vague resemblances in one story, while CHAP
they who so apply it admit that it cannot account for the far --L 1 .—-
more striking points of likeness seen in many others. It is
dangerous because it may lead us to . infer an amount ■ of
intercourse between the separated Aryan tribes for which
we shall vainly seek any actual evidence. It is inadequate,
because in a vast number of instances the point to be ex¬
plained is not a similarity of ideas, but a Substantial identity
in ’the method of working them put, extending to the most
unexpected devices and the subtlest turns of thought and
expression.. That the great mass of popular tradition has
been thus imported from the Bast into the West, or from
the West into the East, has never been maintained; and
any such theory would rest on the assumption that the folk¬
lore of a country may be created by a few scholars sitting
over their books, and deliberately determining the form in
which their stories shall be presented to the people. It
would be safer to affirm, and easier to prove, that no popular
stories have thus found their way from learned men to the
common people. The ear of the people has in all ages been
dead to the charming of the scholars, charm they never so
wisely. Bookmen may, if they please, take up and adapt
the stories of the people; but the legend of ‘ the Carter, the
Dog, and the Sparrow ’ would never have found its way into
the nurseries of German peasants if written by Grimm
himself in imitation of some other Aryan tale. The im-
poxtation of one or two stories by means of written books is
therefore a matter of very slight moment, so long as it is
admitted that legends, displaying the most astonishing
parallelism in the . most distant countries of Europe and
Asia, canuot be traced to any intercourse of the tribes sub¬
sequent to their dispersion from a common home. We thus
hare before us a vast mass of myths, fables, legends, stories,
or by whatever name they are .to be called, some in a form
not much advanced beyond >he proverbial saying which was
their kernel, others existing apparently-only as nursery tales,
others containing the germs of the great epics of the Eastern
and the Western world. All these may bo placed together
in one class, as springing from phrases which at first denoted

168

MYTHOLOGY

ARYAN NATIONS.

book physical phenomena; and enough has perhapsbeen already
-—^—- said to show that this class includes a very large proportion
of strictly popular stories which seem at first sight to be in
no way connected with epical mythology. There remain
the comparatively few stories which seem to have had their
origin in proverbs or adages; and it is, of course^ possible
that some or all of these may belong to thbse more recent
times when men had attained to some notion of the order of
a moral world, to some idea of law and duty. But it is im¬
possible not to see that some at least of these stories turn on
notions suggested by the older mythical speech. The dog
and the paribt in the stories of the Carter and the Nautch-
girl are weak things which bring down the pride of those
who oppress the helpless; but this is simply the character
and the office of Boots in Teutonic stories, and Boots and
Cinderella, Oidipous and Herakles, alike represent the sun,
who, weak and powerless as he starts on his course, is at
length victorious over all his enemies. The phenomena of
nature present analogies to the order of the moral world,
which are perhaps closer than theologians have imagined.
If the words which we use to denote the most abstract ideas
were at first mere names of sensible things , 1 the phrases
which described the processes of nature must be capable of
receiving a moral meaning. The story of the sun starting
in weakness and ending in victory, waging a long warfare
against darkness, clouds, and storms, and scattering them all
in the end, is the story of all heroism, of all patient self-
sacrifice, of all Christian devotion. There is, therefore,
nothing to surprise us if the phrases which we use with a.
spiritual meaning, and the proverbs in which we sum up
our spiritual experience, should have been suggested by the
very phenomena which furnished the groundwork of Aryan
epic poetry. The tendency of physical science is to resolve
complex agencies into a single force: the science of language
seems to be doing the same work for the words and the
thoughts of men.

Historical But the story of the heroes of Teutonic and Hindu folk-
raloe of j ore ^ s t or i es 0 f Boots and Cinderella, of Logedas Rajah,

and Surya Bai, are the story also of Acliilleus and Oidipons, CHAP
of Perseus and Theseus, of Helen and Odysseus, of Baldur . YIIL ■
and Rustem and Sigurd. • Everywhere there is the search Aryan
for the bright maiden who has been stolen away, everywhere
the long struggle to recover her.. The war of Ilion has been
fought out in every Aryan land. Either, then, the historical
facts which lie' at the root of the narrative of the Iliad took
place’before the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from their
common home, or they are facts which belong to the beau¬
tiful cloudland, where the misty Ilion ‘ rises into towers ’ at
early dawn. In either case the attempts recently made to
exhibit the war in the plains of Troy to the south of the
Hellespont as an historical reality are rendered plausible
only by ignoring the real point at issue.

170

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

CHAPTER IX.

MODEM EUEMERISM.

The Whatever may have been the sins of Euemeros against ■
En&nerraf an d honesty, his method aimed simply at the extraction

of historical facts from the legends of li^s country by stripping
them altogether of their supernatural character, and rejecting
all the impossible or improbable incidents related in them.
Mating no pretence of access to documents more trustworthy
than the sources from which the poets had dr|wn their
inspiration, he claimed to be regarded as a historian, merely
because, after depriving him of all divine powers, he left Zeus
a mortal man, who, for benefits done to his fellows, was
worshipped as a god . 1

Its results. Although in more recent times this system has been

eagerly adopted and obstinately maintained, Euemeros was <
not popular among his countrymen. To them the process
- which reduced the gods to the level of mankind seemed to
resolve itself into mere atheism. Still, except as applying
his method to the stories of the gods as well as to the legends

duced in all its completeness or naked¬
ness in the article on Mythology inserted
in the Ewyclopadia Britannica. Having
told us that ‘ the adventures of Jupiter,
Juno, Mercury, Apollo, 'Diana, Minerva
or Pallas, Venus, Bacchus, Ceres, Pro¬
serpine, Pluto, Neptune, and the other
' descendants and coadjutors ’ of the
ambitious family of the Titans, furnish
by far the greatest part of the mytho¬
logy of Greece,’ the writer with pro¬
digious . assurance adds, * They left
Phoenicia, we think, in the days of
Moses; they settled in Crete, a large
and fertile island; from this region they

made their way into Greece.’ There
they introduced art, religion* law, cus¬
tom, polity, and good order ; but, oddly
enough, in spite of all these wholesome
and sobering influences, the Greeks re¬
mained a ‘ deluded rabble? who insisted
on paying them divine honours.’ The
mere enunciatiou of such absurdities is
disgraceful in any work which professes
to speak to educated readers, and would

aeferessed to the unlearned. But it is
altogether inexcusable, in an article to

of^GrO.^iiUer^MM MiilLr!

Hermann, and others. For the amusing

Euemerism of the Ab U Banier, see

Max Muller, Lectures , second series, 400.

171

EUEMERISM AND' PHILOLOGY.

. of the epical heroes, he. gave no ca,use of offpnce -which had CHAP.

not already, been given by Herodotos and Thucydides. To _1^1..-

the historian of the Persian war the legends of 16 and
Europe, of Medeia and Helen, were valuable simply as
supplying links in the chain of human causes which led to
that great struggle. For this purpose he either availed
himself of the least improbable versions of these myths '
current in'his own day, or he placed the myths, full as they
were of dragons and speaking heifers, into the crucible of
probabilities, and was rewarded with a residuum of plausible
fiction which would have gladdened the heart of De Poe.

This method, as applied by Thucydides to the story of the
Trojan war, produces results which make it difficult to believe
that his knowledge of that strife was obtained only from the
poems which told i>f the wrongs and woes of Helen. Yet so
it is. Although in these poems their career was inwoven
into the whole fabric of the narrative, Helen is gone, and ,

Paris and Achilleus; Hektor and Sarpedon have vanished,
with Memncm and Athene and Aphrodite ; and there remains
only a chieftain who undertakes the expedition not at all to
rescue a woman who may never have existed, and a war
which lasted ten years, not because Zeus so willed it, 1 but
because want of men made it necessary that part of the
forces should betake themselves to tilling the ground and
raising crops on the Thrakian Chersonesos, while the rest
carried on the siege. 2

That such a method should find favour at the present day its mia-
with writers who have made themselves .in any degree ae- *°ththe
quainted with the results of comparative grammar is indeed
astonishing. Argynnis and Phoroneus, Briseis and Achilleus,

Paris and Helen, names of persons in Hellenic legend, are in
the earliest songs of the Aryan family found still in their
original application as names of the morning, of the sun, or .
of darkness; and as it is with these, so is it also with Ker¬
beros and the Charites, with* Ortliros, with Varumi, and Zeus
himself. That these names and those tales could ha ve over¬
run the world from chance, or that the incidents which they
relate could have a distinct historical foundation in a series

172

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book of incidents occurring in the same sequence aM with the

v—,-. same results in every Aryan land, are positions which few

would now venture to maintain; yet such were the theories
which attempted, with some show of reason, to account for
their origin and diffusion before the sciences of comparative
grammar and mythology came into being. There can scarcely
be a greater extravagance of credulity than that which frames
an infinite series of the most astounding miracles in the vain
effort to solve mysteries which must all be opened by one and
the same key, or by none. No absurdity needs to startle us
if we are ready to believe that four or five independent writers
could describe a series of events in exactly the same, words; 1
•it is, if possible, even more absurd to suppose that tribes, savage
and civilised, many of them utterly unknown to each oth§r,
should hit upon the same stories, should disfigure them by
the same indecencies, should atone for these blots by the
same images of touching pathos and grace and beauty. Yet
some such demand is made on our powers of belief by a writer
who holds that ‘ they who literally accept Scripture cannot
afford to ridicule mythology,’ and who, looking about for
traces of an historical character in Greek mythical tradition,
concludes that ‘ there are the fairest reasons for supposing
that Hercules was not an allegorical hero, typical of ideal
prowess, endurance, and physical strength; but a real man,
who, living in very remote times, and in some part of the
World where the land was infested with savage beasts and
perhaps the sea with pirates, earned the gratitude of a
defenceless people by clearing earth and sea of monsters, as a
remarkably uniform tradition ascribes to him. The Cyclopes
were probably a race of pastoral and metal-working people
from the East, characterised by their rounder faces, whence

1 In the supposed case of a number his own original obserration.au English
of special correspondents sending home jury would sooner believe the whole

to English journals accounts of a battle party perjured than persuade themselves

or a campaign, the narrative of which that so extraordinary a coincidence
was in all nearly word for word the could have occurred .’—Short Studies on
same in several passages, Mr. Fronde Great Subjects,!. 246.
says that, ‘were the writers themselves, It is enough to say that the appli-

with their closest friends and com- cation of any such hypothesis of inde-

panions, to swear that there had been no pendent origination to the mythology of

intercommunication, and no story pre- the- Aryan nations involves difficulties,
existing of which they hid mode use, if possible, still more stupendous,
and that each had written bond fide from

geeek Mythical names.

arose the story of their one eye.’ In the myth of Atlas, the chap.’
same writer thinks it ‘ impossible to doubt that we have a .■ 1X1 .
tradition of the Garden of Eden.’ If it be said that these
traditions are common to many nations, he is ready with the
reply that the real Herakles or the real Theseus lived very-
long ago, and that the other nations got these, as they got
■most of their mythical heroes, from the Etruscans. We find
‘ Adrastus, Tydeus, Odysseus, Meleagros, Polydeuces, written
Atresthe, Tute, Utwye, Melacre, Pultuke; and similarly Aga¬
memnon, Thetis, Perseus, Polynices, Telephus, represented by
Achmien, Thethis, Pharse, Phulnike, Thelaphe. So Apollo
is Apulu, Hercules is Ercule, Alexander is Elchentre.’ It
might as well, be said that English names are French in
their origin because London and Dover are written Londres
and Douvres, and Sir Humphry Davy has been designated
‘ Sromfredeve.’ It can scarcely be maintained with serious¬
ness that that which is only in part obscure, and elsewhere
is wonderfully luminous, can be illustrated by what is utterly
dark. These names in their Etruscan dress have absolutely
no meaning; in their Greek form most of them are trans¬
parent. But when Achilleus is found in Greek and Aharyu in
Sanskrit tradition, when Briseis reappears as the child of Bri-
saya, Helen as Sarama, Ouranos as Yaruna, Orthros as Yritra,
and when the meaning of these names is perfectly plain, we
are .forced to the conclusion that no explanation can be
received which does not apply to Greek, Sanskrit, and Teu¬
tonic names' alike. It would be more reasonable, failing this,
to fall back upon the ingenious theory by which Lord Bacon,
in his ‘Wisdom of the.Ancients,’ converted the whole cycle
of Greek legend into wholesome advice for princes, cabinet
ministers, and heads of families. 1

174

MYTHOLOGY OF

AltYAN NATIONS,

HOOK

But the science which traces both the namea of Greek
mythical heroes and the incidents in their career to the
earlier forms in which their original signification becomes
apparent, completely strips of all historical character the
localised wars of Troy or Thebes, and the traditions which
speak of Kolehis as the scene of the exploits of Ias6n. It is
possible that there may have been a war undertaken to avenge
the wrongs of an earthly Helen; that this war lasted ten
years, and that ten years more were spent by the chiefs in
their return homewards; that the chief incident in this war
was the quarrel of the greatest of all the heroes with a-mean-
spirited king, a quarrel in which a truce of gloomy inaction
is followed by the magnificent victory and early death of the
hero. But if such a war took place, it must be carried back
to a time preceding the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from
their original home, and its scene can be placed neither in
the land of the Five Streams, nor on the plains of the Asiatic
Troy, not in Germany or Norway or Wales. The comparison
of the Aryan languages sufficiently establishes these con¬
clusions ; but the denial of any historical character to the
general narrative of the Trojan war, as given whether by the
Attic tragedians or by our so-called Homeric poems (be these
earlier or later than the days of iEschylos and Sophokles),
makes it a matter of justice to examine patiently and im¬
partially the arguments and alleged facts adduced by those
who still maintain the positions of Eu^meros with regard to
the story told in all its supernatural detail in the Iliad, and
pared down to the plausible prosiness of Robinson Crusoe bv
Thucydides.

At the outset it may be safely affirmed that undue stress
has been laid on the Wolfian theory respectingthe origin and
structure of the Hiad as affecting the attitude of historical
critics at the present day towards the momentous topic of
Homeric-credibility. There is really no ground for the notion
that doubts as to the historical''credibility of the poems to
which we give the name of Homer can be entertained, only
by those who accept the position of Wolf and his followers.
The Wolfian theory, to speak briefly, maintains that the
Hiad is made up of a number of songs which existed at first

THE THEORY OF WOLF.

175

as detached poems, and which were handed down from gene- CHAP,
ration to generation by a school of rhapsodists or professional . ^ .
minstrels. It was not, therefore, the work of any one man,
and possibly not even of any one age. This conclusion is
grounded partly on the absence of writing at and long after
the time when these poems first came into existence, and in
part on the incoherence and contradictions which an exa-mi- -
nation of the poems brings prominently into view. It follows
that there was no'one author of the Iliad, or in other words,
that Homer is a name, not a person. This hypothesis has
found its extreme expression in the £ Klein-lieder Theorie’ of
Kochly. . ' ,

But if this notion were exploded utterly, 1 the real question TIio real
at., issue would probably be in no dqgree afFected. Thus, 9“ s 0 tIon at
although Mr. Grote may have affirmed that ‘ Homer is no
individual man, but the divine or heroic father of the gentle
Homerids,’ 2 he nowhere argues from this statement as a pre¬
miss, while he is careful to add that the Odyssey is indubi¬
tably one poem written by one man, and that the Iliad in its
present form, although it contains an Ilias and an Achilleis
combined, is probably the work of one and the same poet,
who pieced together two compositions which he had wrought
out for two different purposes. If we further take his con¬
clusion, that the Odyssey in all likelihood was 'not composed
by the author of the Iliad, even then we have only two, or
at the utmost only three poets, to’ whom we are indebted for
the great Greek epics which have been handed down to us.
Whether these conclusions are hasty or extravagant, whether

170

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book they run counter to' the evidence of facts or are opposed to

--—• common sense, it is clear that the poems are not invested

with more of a historical character because we ljjsld that they
are the work of three or two authors, or of one. Such a
result is impossible, unless we can prove that the poet (or
poets) lived in or near to the time of which the history is
professedly narrated, and if his (or their) statements are
borne out by other contemporary writers. If the story which
the poet relates had come down from a period remote even in
his day—if its general character - , both in the causes and the
sequence of incidents, exhibits a close resemblance .to the
traditions of distant countries with which the Hellenic tribes
could not possibly have had any intercourse—if the very
names of the actors and the deeds attributed to them are
found in the legends of other lands or other ages—we are
obviously just where we were before, so far as the attainment
of historical fact is concerned, even when we have succeeded
in proving that there was only one Homer, and that he was
born at Smyrna. Whether we believe in twenty Homers or
in one is, in one sense, a matter of supreme indifference in
comparison with the inquiry which is to determine whether
the events recorded in the poems are to be considered his¬
torical.

Residuum On such a subject as this all reference to consequences is
«il feet hi ou t of place, and of itself suffices to show that we are not
the Iliad, actuated wholly and solely by a disinterested and unswerving
resolution to reach, so far as may be in our power, the truth
of facts. The question must be treated altogether as one of
evidence only, and no pain which we may feel at the possible
necessity of parting -with old associations should have the
slightest weight with us. Even if we had to abandon a rich
inheritance of poetical beauty, the sacrifice ought to be
cheerfully made. The fear that any such sacrifice will be de¬
manded of us is idle and groundless; but for those who deny
the historical credibility of the Eiad or Odyssey it is neces¬
sary to know how much of real history their opponents sup¬
pose these poems to contain. Happily, this question is
answered with most satisfactory clearness by the latest and
the most strenuous of the champions of the traditional theory.

HISTORICAL RESIDUUM OF THE ILIAD. 177

In the belief of Mr. Blaekie, the residuum of fact is, it seems, CHAP,
this: ‘That there was a kingdom of Priam, wealthy and ■ IX ' ■
powerful, on the coast of the Dardanelles; that there was a
great naval expedition undertaken against this Asiatic
dynasty by the combined forces of the European Greeks and
some of the Asiatic islanders, under the leadership of Aga¬
memnon,king of Mycenae; that there was a real Achilles,
chief of a warlike clan in the Thessalian Phthiotis, and a
real, quarrel betwixt him and the general-in-chief of the
Hellenic armament; that this quarrel brought about the
most disastrous results to the Greek host, in the first place,
and had nearly caused' the failure of the expedition; but that
afterwards, a reconciliation having been effected, a series of
brilliant achievements followed, which issued soon after in
tl^e capture of the great Asiatic capital.’ 1

If this outline of Homeric history were placed before one The test of
who had never heard of Homer, and if he were further told ^edibility
that the outline is the picture, what would be his reply ? Must
he not say, ‘ You do not ask me to believe much, and indeed
you have only sketched out some incidents of not uncommon
occurrence; I suppose, however, that you have obtained
them from some narrative which gives no ground for calling
its trustworthiness into question, and which is corroborated
by the testimony of competent witnesses. In other words,
you have doubtless gained this knowledge precisely in the
same way as I have learnt that some eight hundred years
ago there was'a great struggle which ended in the death of
the English king at Hastings, and the forced election of
William the Norman in his place ? ’

• The admission that he must look for nothing of the kind, Results r,t
and that the process by which these historical results are tlus u ’' 1 '
obtained is of a wholly different nature, would probably
cause him some perplexity, and might possibly waken in him
a vague feeling of distrust. If he were possessed of the
critical faculty, and still mere, if he had any acquaintance
with the applications of the laws of evidence to alleged facts

178

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

LOOK of the present day, he would naturally begin to examine with/
—r—/ some care the statements brought before him, and the grounds
on which they rest. The examination would be followed by
unfeigned astonishment, for he would find himself asked to
believe in political struggles between conflicting empires on
the authority of a narrative in which from’first to last there
is not a semblance of political motive, and where, instead of
a chain of causation like that which obtains in ordinary life,
there is throughout a thaumaturgic plot in which gods and
men are inextricably mingled together. He is intfoduced- to
a struggle which lasts ten years, because so it had been
ordained of Zeus according to the sign of the snake and the
sparrows, and which is brought about and turns solely on the
theft of the Spartan Helen by Paris, once or otherwise called
Alexandros. Apart from this, there is absolutely no motive
for the war, nor without it is there anything left of the story.
It is of the very essence of the narrative that Paris, who has
deserted Oinone, the child of the stream Kebren, and before
whom Here, Athene, and Aphrodite had appeared as
claimants for the golden apple, steals from Sparta the
beautiful sister of the Dioskouroi; that the chiefs are sum¬
moned together for no other purpose than to avenge her woes
and wrongs; that Achilleus, the son of the sea-nymph Thetis,
the wielder of invincible weapons and the lord of undying
horses, goes to fight in a quarrel which is not his own ; that
his wrath is roused because he is robbed of the maiden
Briseis, and that thenceforth he takes no part in the strife
until his friend Patroklos has been slain; that then he puts
> on the new armour which Thetis brings to him from the

anvil of Hephaistos, and goes forth to win the victory. 'The
details are throughout of the same nature; Achilleus sees
and conyerses with Athene; Aphrodite is wounded by Dio-
medes, and Sleep and Death bear away the lifeless Sarpedon
on their noiseless wings to the far-off land of light. 1

Laws of By what standard, then, or by what tests is this story to

JUDICIAL TESTIMONY,

179

be judged, and how are we to measure its historical value ? CHAP.
Mr. Blaekie pauses in some vehement denunciations of . IX - ..
modern sceptical tendencies, to refer us to Six- Cornewall
Lewis’s volumes on the Credibility of Early Roman History,

‘ a work distinguished by all that comprehensiveness of plan,
massive architecture, and substantial workmanship, so cha¬
racteristic of its author.’ The reader who is unacquainted
with the hook might well suppose, from the absence of all
other reference to it, that on the whole it hears out Mr.

Blackie’s method of dealing with the Homeric poems. He
would again he perplexed at finding there a merciless de¬
molition of all his theories and all his conclusions. But at
the least -he would be under no doubt as to Sir Cornewall
Lewis’s meaning, and he would find principles laid down
which claim to be of universal, application, and which must
be false if exceptions are to be admitted. ‘ It seems to be
often believed,’ says Sir G. C. Lends, ‘ and at all events it is
perpetually assumed in practice, that historical evidence is
different in its nature from other sorts of evidence. Until
this error is effectually extirpated, all historical researches
must lead to uncertain 'results. Historical evidence, like
judicial evidence, is founded on the testimony of credible
witnesses. Uxdess, therefore, a historical account can be
traced by probable proof to the testimony of oontemporaries,
the first condition of historical credibility fails.’

How then would a British jury deal with a charge brought Their ,-ip-
against the chief of one Scottish clan of murdering the chief
of another clan, in feuds which, if now unknowni, were -courts of
familiar enough not many generations ago ? What if the J ustice -
witnesses came forward to say that even before his birth the
slain chief had been marked as the future destroyer of his
kinsfolk; that deserting his own wife, he had requited the
hospitality of the accused by carrying off his young bride;
that 'thence had sprung a feud between their clans, winch
the seanagals or soothsayers had said should last for ten
years; that before the final conflict, in which the aggressor
was slain, strange sights were seen in the heavens, and
strange sounds were heard in the air; tljat in the battle
itself the progenitors of- the clans had been seen fighting

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

with the warriors of- flesh and blood, and that by the death
of the betrayer, according to the ancient tokens, the wrong
had been at length atoned ? According to the theory which
finds a real historical residuum in the Iliad, the verdict
ought to be one of guilty; for, although certain parts, nay,
indeed all parts, of the story were in, one sense incredible,
yet ‘the materials, so far as they assume the human and
narrative fornt, are in their root and scope historical mate¬
rials ; ’ 1 and therefore as there must be some foundation for
the tale, it may be fairly concluded that the one "chief had
killed the other, although there was strong reason for think¬
ing that the cause and duration of the quarrel were not at
all what they had been represented to be. This, however,
could make no difference, for so long as the existence of a
feud had been shown, it really mattered very little how it
had been brought about, or whether either chief had a wife
at all.

This process, which we laugh at as midsummer madness
when applied to recent incidents, becomes, it seems, not
only legitimate but indispensable, when we have to deal
with legends which have flowed down the sea of tradition
through centuries or even millenniums. No injustice is done
to Mr. Blackie in thus putting the matter.* It is his own

the traditional theories, . of Raymond of Toulouse and Melusina.

may be most conveniently termed, has supposed to be contained in thePpoera,
been applied to the unwieldy Hindu all these wonders are of course to be
epic, the MaMbMrata, by Professor rejected. Thus fax both critics are
Lassen and Mr. Wheeler. The results agreed: but for all practical purposes

EUEMERISM GP HERODOTCS.

181

assertion that ‘ whether the treacherous abduction of the fair CHAT 1 .
Helen was the real cause of the Trojan War or not, is a ■ IX ' ■
matter of the. .smallest moment. ' That there -were such
abductions in those times, and in those parts of the world,
is only too certain.’ It might well be thought that the
writer of these words had before him .some irrefragable
evidence of this fact; but the reader who is here referred
‘ particularly (to) what Herodotus says in the well-known.
Introduction to his History,’ is doomed to a fresh surprise. If
he is approaching the subject for the first time, he will read a
‘ perfectly probable, although somewhat dull, story of a young-
lady of Argos who went down to buy wares from a Phenieian
merchant-ship, and either with or against her own will was
carried off by the captain. The’ refusal of the Phenicians
to make reparation leads to retaliation, and the Argive chiefs
steal away Europe, the daughter of the Tyrian king. Thus
far the game was equal, for neither side would make amends;
but some time afterwards the quarrel was renewed by the
Greeks who took Medeia from Kolchis, and thus led to the
seduction of Helen by Paris. Thus was brought about the
expedition of Troy, in requital of which Xerxes invaded
.Europe, leaving it to Alexander the Great to clear off old
scores at Issos and Arbela. On turning to what are called
the original authorities for these events, the much-suffering
reader would find that the young Argive lady was one of the
many loves of Zeus, who changed her into a heifer; that in
this form, chased by the gad-fly of Herd, she wandered over
mountains and deserts, until she came to the desolate crags
where Prometheus was paying the penalty for his love of
man; that the Phenieian maiden is the sister of Kadinos
the dragon-slayer, and is borne on the hack of the white bull
across the western waters; that the daughter of the Kolchia.11

VTIIOLOOY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

king is the wise woman, who enables Ias6n to overcome the
fire-breathing bulls after destroying the offspring of the
dragon’s teeth, who is carried through the air in her (Jragon
chariot, and who possesses the death-dealing robe of Helios.
If on being thus brought into the regions of cloudland, the
reader asks whether Herodotos had not before him some
evidence. different in kind from that which has come down
to us, or from that which is given in his Introduction, the
answer is that he obtained his very prosaic and likely story
from precisely those legends and those legends only, with
which we are scarcely less familiar than he was.

The result then is briefly this, that Mr. Blackie has before
him a singularly circumstantial and complicate^ narrative,
in which the motives of the actors and their exploits' are
detailed with the most minute care, and in which no dis¬
tinction whatever is drawn between one kind of causation
and another. This narrative he reduces to the merest caput
mortal*. The causes of the war, the general character of
the struggle, the plans and objects of the combatants, all
vanish. Nothing remains but the bare fact that there was
a quarrel of some kind or other; and the conclusion forced
upon us is this,—that in all traditional narratives which in¬
volve thaumaturgic action, or which exhibit a causation dif¬
ferent from that which we see at work in the world around
us, the historical residuum, according to Mr. Blackie, must
be sought by rejecting all motives and incidents which tran¬
scend the course of ordinary experience. All such things
are the mere husk or shell, of no consequence whatever,
as long as we admit the naked fact which is supposed to lie
beneath. This is, in truth, to lay down a canon in com¬
parison with which the Wolfian hypothesis becomes weak
and almost pointless; and they who commit themselves
to this position must take the consequences which cannot
fail to follow the application of these principles to all records
whatsoever. •

s At once, then, two questions may be asked : (1) Why, if
we are thus to pick and choose, should we accept precisely
• the fare which Mr. Blackie puts before us, neither more nor
less ? (2) Why should we affirm the historical reality of the

TIIE PRESENCE

HELEN AT ILION.

residuum, merely because we decline formally to deny its CIIAP.
existence ? If tbe story of Jack the Giant-Killer be clipped — IX ' .
and pared as the traditionalists have pared down .the ‘tale of
Troy divine,’ the beanstalk-ladder to heaven, the giant, and
the giant’s wife, all go into thin air together, and there re¬
mains only some valiant John who overcomes and punishes
some tyrant or oppressor. Giants do not exist, and bean¬
stalk-ladders to the moon conflict with the theory of gravi¬
tation. . .Yet' it is not easy to see why out of such wealth
of materials we should retain so little, or why,.in the latter
case, we should not say boldly and candidly that we do not
believe any part of the story. This was the straightfor¬
ward and manly course adopted by the poet when he said
emphatically,

oh 5’ efi&s vpvtrlv eutreA./iois,

ov5' faeo ircpyana T poias.

That whole nations should fight year after year for the sake
of one woman, and that the Trojans should allow their city
to be beleaguered when her surrender Would have set every¬
thing straight at once, was to Herodotos simply incredible,
and therefore he caught eagerly at the version which said
that Helen, instead of being at Troy, was detained at the
court of Proteus, King of Egypt. 1 The same disbelief of the
Homeric legend led Thucydides quietly to ignore Helen, to
substitute a political for a personal motive. in the case of
Agamemnon, and to account for the length of the war by
the alleged fact that from lack of numbers the Achaians
were driven to divide their forces, some.betaking themselves
to agriculture in the Chersonesos, and others to piracy, while
the rest maintained the siege of Ilion. All that can be
said on this point is, that the scepticism of Thucydides is
far less than that of the modern Euemerists. ‘ If the great
historian,’ says Mr. Grote, ‘ could permit himself thus to
amend the legend in so many points, we might have ima-

Herodotos, i. 112. This Proteus, Lewis

184

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook gined that a simpler course would have been to include the
--r—- duration of the siege among the list of poetical exaggera¬
tions, and to affirm that the real siege had lasted onfy one
year instead of ten. But it seems that the ten years’
duration was so capital a feature in the ancient tale, that
no critic ventured to meddle with it.’ 1 If with Mr. Blackie
we set aside even the abduction of Helen as a matter of not
the slightest importance, we may very reasonably set aside
the period assigned to the war ; but having gone so far, why
should we not at once adopt the version of Dion Chryso¬
stom, which gives an account of the war diametrically op¬
posed to that of the Iliad, representing Paris as the lawful
husband of Helen, and Achilleus as slain by Hektor, while
the Greeks retire, disgraced and baffled, without taking Troy ?
It is hard to see why the residuum of modern Euemerists
should be preferred to that of a Greek writer certainly much
nearer to the time when the events took place, if they
ever took place at all. The ruins of Mykenai and Tiryns,
even if they attest the fidelity of Homeric epithets, and the
existence of an ancient and powerful state in the Pelopon-
nesos, 2 cannot of themselves prove that the kings or chiefs
of those cities were successful in all their expeditions, and

1 History of Greece, part i. ch. xv. • of Mr. Clark, "who, in his Peloponnesus,

2 With the geographical accuracy of p. 206, asserts that ‘Sometimes the
the Homeric poets of the Iliad and story and the language are in strict ac-
Odyssey we are only indirectly concerned, cordance with the observed facts of geo-
If the epithets so freely inserted in the graphy and topography; sometimes in
Catalogue and elsewhere themselves striking contradiction/ Mr. Clark adds
point to poems of which portions have the explanation of this fact. ‘Each city
been absorbed into our Homer, the com- has its own heroes and legends, and its
posite character of these poems is still own bards to celebrate them. A multi-
further established, and a fresh diffi- tude of smaller epics have been absorbed
culty placed in the way of those who in the Iliad and the Odyssey, and the
claim for them a definite historical epithets attached inalienably to this
value. And it may be fairly urged that city and that, are among the relics of
a great deal too mhch has been made of those perished songs: and the audience
this supposed exactness of description, required no more.’ This is as far ad-
The reviewer of Mr. Gladstone’s Homeric vanced as the scepticism-of Kochiy,
Studies; in the Edinburgh Review for while the reviewer’s conclusion (that the
October 18-58, p. 511, boldly avers that author of the Iliad was well acquainted
of any personal acquaintance on the with the region round Troy and with
part of the poet with the interior of parts of the Egean coast, and that the
Northern Greece, or the Peloponnesos, author of the Odyssey was personally
or many even of the principal islands, familiar with the western side) implicitly

epithets by which places- are described, two poems which seems to be conceded
and especially in the Catalogue ; and in by Mr. Grote.
support of this ^position quotes the words

AGAMEMNON AND ACHILLEUS.

183

therefore that they did not fail at Hion. The reality of 'CHAP,
the struggle is unaffected by the victory or the defeat of . ^ .
Agamemnon. If it be urged that the West ultimately
achieved a supremacy, it does not follow that the fall of
Ilion was the beginning, any more than that it was the
consummation of their triumphs.

But not only does Mr. Blackie (and here it must he re- Eueme-
peated that his arguments are cited only as the latest ™t“ oasof
and perhaps the most able defence of the conservative Sealing
theory) misrepresent or keep out of sight the real position Homeric
taken upon such subjects by the most rigorous historical narratives,
critics in this country : he also uses ambiguous words in
defining his own conclusions, or substitutes in later passages
expressions which alter or take away the force of statements
previously made. In one page we are-told that the Homeric
narrative sets forth some historical facts, as in the passage
already quoted, 1 one of these facts being that Achilleus had
a real quarrel with the general-in-chief of the Hellenic
armaments. 2 In another, the facts resolve themselves into
impressions which the facts may have left on the minds of
the poets, but which, far from being in accordance with the
incidents as they actually occurred, may, he admits, he
altogether at variance with them. 3 In another, the quarrel
itself of Achilleus fades away like every other feature of the
story, for ‘ whether we suppose Agamemnon and Achilles,
the representatives of southern and northern Greece, to have
actually set out together in the same expedition, or to be
the distinct captains -of two separate armaments confounded
in the popular imagination, so far as the essentials of history
are concerned, both the men and the facts remain.’ 4

Can anything be more amazing? We are told first that Thoirirrc-
the quarrel and the subsequent reconciliation of the two
chiefs form an essential part of the history of the Iliad, and
next, that it really makes no difference‘if we suppose that
the king and the hero never met at all. This is, iu truth,
to blow hot and to blow cold from the same mouth ; and all
that we can do is to oppose a determined front to such

■ Hewer and the JIM, vol. i. p. 177. ' 5 Hid. i. 31.

> Ibid. i. 33. 4 Ml. i. 7H.

180

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book . arbitrary demands on our credulity, or to surrender ourselves

•- r — bound band and foot to a despot who is to dictate to us from

moment to moment the essentials, as he is pleased to term
them, of historical tradition. We have a right to ask not
only what we are to receive as facts of history, but also by
what method these facts are ascertained. If the method be
worth anything, its working must be regular, and its appli¬
cation ought to yield the same results in every hand; but
we have already seen that the system (if it can be called
such) followed by the Euemerists has produced one version
of the Trojan war by Thucydides, another by Stesichoros
and Herodotos, another by Dion Chrysostom, and two more
by Mr. Blackie; every one of these being irreconcilable with
the rest. If we choose anyone of these summaries of his¬
torical residues at the expense of the others, what is this
but to cheat ourselves with the conceit of knowledge without
the reality ?

Value of But although it is impossible to grapple with canons of
imprcs- nal interpretation so supple and elastic, it is possible to show
sions. that they cannot be applied except on the basis of pure
assumption. The broad statement that the Iliad gives us an
account of certain incidents which really took place, resolves
itself in other passages into the assertion that the oral tradi¬
tion of a people may, after hundreds or even thousands of
years, ‘ be more true to the real character of the fact than
the written testimony of this or that contemporary witness.’
But a fact is one thing, and the impression produced by a
fact is another; and if the impression leads to the ascription
of an historical character to incidents which confessedly
never took place, then it is certain that we cannot from this
impression derive any historical knowledge. We can only
suppose that the impression was caused by something we
know not what, and cannot say when or how, unless we have
authentic contemporary narratives to explain it; but even in
this our knowledge is derived (anid too great a stress cannot
be laid on this fact) wholly from the historical document,
and not from the floating popular tradition. That this is so
will be made clear, by examining- those very instances which
Mr. Blackie brings forward in support of a different con-

VALUE OP POPULAR TRADITIONS. 187

elusion. The first is the tradition which points out the CJTAP.

summit of a flat-topped conical hill near Scarborough as the _

spot where Cromwell encamped during the siege of the castle
in the great rebellion. ‘This,’ he tells us, ‘ is the tradition
of the place. But on looting at the topographical autho¬
rities, we learn from Parliamentary papers that Cromwell
was not there at the period implied, and in fact never could
have been .there, as at that time he was conducting military
operations in another part of the country. Here is a plain
case of local and oral tradition at issue with . authentic
written evidence; but what points does the issue touch?

Only this, that at the siege of a particular castle, at a certain
date in the great civil war, the future head of, the great
English commonwealth and virtual king of the British em¬
pire was not bodily present. This, however,- is a compara¬
tively small matter; the triple fact remains, that there was-a
great civil war in England between the Crown and the Com¬
mons at the time specified; that in this war the castle of
Scarborough was an object of contention between the parties;
and that in the same war a man called Oliver Cromwell was
one of the principal generals of the popular party.’ 1 Htre
the tradition relates to a time for which we have confessedly
the most ample and minute contemporary information in
written documents: but we must suppose that our whole
knowledge of the great struggle in the time of Charles I. is
derived from the Scarborough tradition, before we can have
the slightest warrant for comparing it with the Homeric
story. How would, the case stand then? It would simply
assert an incident to be a fact which, as it so happens, -we
know to be not a fact, and we should have a vague idea- of
some contest without knowing anything about its causes, its
character, or its issue. All that can be said is that, as it so
happens, the known history of the time enables us to account
for the impression, but that from the impression itself wc
derive no historical knowledge whatever. It is the same
with'the next alleged instance of the two women, M'Laehlan
and Wilson, who are .said to have been exposed on the beach,
and drowned at the mouth of the Bladnoch water. 2 In this
' Hamer mid the Iliad. - Ibid.

188

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book case Mr. Blackie thinks it more likely that certain legal
•-—h—- documents may have been lost than that the sentence was
not carried out; but even admitting that the women were
reprieved, he thinks that nothing more is disproved than the
fact that they were drowned, ‘ not that there was no inten¬
tion to drown them, not that the act of drowning them, if
carried out, was not in harmony with the .whole character of
the government by whose minions they had been condemned.’
Here again we are thoroughly acquainted with the character
of the government from other sources; but if we were con¬
fined to the tradition or to others like it, we should have
before us only a string of incidents, none of which took place,
while we should be left to guess the causes which led to such
false impressions. But history is not a field for conjecture,
however ingenious.

The Nor is it more reasonable to dismiss the Carolingian epic

Roknd° f cycle as worth little, because in its ultimate form we see
NBef 6 ‘ that wanton play of fancy, and that intentional defiance of
gen Lied, all probability ’ which makes Ariosto useful to the student of
Homer only ‘ as presenting the greatest possible contrast.’ 1
The reality of this contrast is a mere assumption which, as
we have seen, was denied by Stesichoros, Herodotos, and
Dion Chrysostom. The very pith and marrow of the Iliad
lies in the detention of Helen at Troy while the ten years’
siege went on; and so great, and so thoroughly intentional
in their eyes was this defiance of probability, that they
altogether denied the fact. But the Carolingian legends,
like the Scarborough tradition, relate to a time for which we
have contemporary historical-information ; and in support of*,
the story of Roland, who fell at Roncesvalles, the statement
of Eginhard has been adduced that in a battle with the
Basques there was slain, along with others, ‘ Hruodlandus
Britannici limitis prsefectus.’ It is therefore argued that we
may expect to find in the Trojan legend about the same
amount of truth which the Canslingian myth is supposed to
contain. The answer to this is, that apart from the words
of Eginhard we could not affirm the death of Roland as a
fact, although we could not in terms deny it. But the slender
1 Homer and the Iliad, i. So.

THE LEGEND OF ROLAND. 189

trugt to be reposed even in tbe names preserved by popular CHAP,
tradition is brought out prominently by the remarkable song - IX ' .
of Attabiscar. 1 In this song (which seems to relate to the
fight at Roneesvalles, although the place is named Ibaneta),
the Frank king mentioned in it is called Carloman.

Fly, yo -who hare tlie strength: fly, ye trio have horses ;

Fly, King Carloman, -with thy sable plumes and scarlet mantle.

This, as Grimm and Michelet have supposed, was the real
name of Charles during his lifetime, Carolus Magnus being
merely the Latinised form of Carloman. But as Charles had
a brother named Carloman, who survived his father Pippiu
three years, it is possible that the Basque poet may have
confused the. names of the two brothers, although Carlomau
died seven years before the fight of Koncesvalles. But for '
the crucial instance of the fallacious nature of popular tra¬
dition we are forced hack upon the Nibelungen Lied, which
tells us of Gunther, the Burgundian king, conquered by the
Huns of Attila, and relates the murder of Siegberfc, king of
Austrasia, who defeated the Huns. From independent con¬
temporary historians we know that these persons actually
lived, and these deeds were actually done. The conclusion,
that here we may really separate the historical element from
the fictitious, seems at first sight irresistible. Yet every one
of these incidents and almost all the names are found, as we
have already seen, in the older Saga of the Yolsungs. We
can measure, therefore, the value to he assigned to the state¬
ment that ‘ the general character of this Teutonic epic is dis¬
tinctly historical.’ 3 The true facts are these. We have in
.the later poem the names which are supposed to denote
Siegbert, Brunhilt, Attila, Gunther, Swanhild, while in the
older lay we have Sigurd, Brynhild, Atli, Gunnar, Swanhild;
the incidents recorded of each being in both cases the same.

It is unnecessary bere to urge that the Yolsung story of'

Sigurd, Brynhild, and Gndrun is precisely the same as the
story of Paris, Helen, and Qimmfi, and-many others in tlie
Greek cycle, for even without this parallelism, close as it
seems to he, we see beyond all possibility' of doubt that our

' Michel, J* 'Patft JJnmjw, j>. 236. ' : Sec page 60.

1 lUaekie, Homer and the lHad.

300

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK knowledge of the supposed Austrasian actors in theNibelung
_— r —• song is in no way derived from that poem, and that in at¬
tempting to separate the historical from the mythical ele¬
ments we are only following a will of the wisp. Far, there¬
fore, from furnishing any warrant for the conclusion that
there was a real Agamemnon and a real Achilleus, the great
German epic justifies a strong suspicion even of the names
which are embodied in the oral traditions of a people. Far
from being able to extract any history from the Nibelung
tale, we should even be wrong in thinking that the legend
reflected the history of the age of Attila, Theodoric, and
Gundicar. The names and incidents alike recede into the
beautiful cloudland, where they mingle with the parallel
legends of Agamemnon and Odysseus, of Isfendiyar and
Feridun; and the distinction which some have sought to
establish between quasi-historical myths, as those of the
Trojan and Carolingian cycle, and those which, like those
of Herakles and Perseus, are termed quasi-theological, falls
to the ground, or at the least, becomes for all practical pur¬
poses worthless. 1 If we know that Hruodland died at Ron-
cesvalles, it is only because we happen to have for that fact
the testimony of the contemporary Eginhard; and the same
contemporary evidence shows that the popular tradition is
wrong in the very substance of the story which takes the
great Karl himself as a crusader to the Holy Land. But the
more ancient epics of the Aryan nations cannot be checked
by any such contemporary history; and the results as ap¬
plied to the Carolingian myths is not sufficiently encourag¬
ing to justify our regretting that the process is in the case
of the Trojan legends impossible. All the stories stand, in
short, on the same level. 2 The myth of Herakles enters into
the so-called history of Laomedontian Troy as much as that
of Agamemnon into the annals of the Troy of Priam; and
there is no reason why the capture of the city by Herakles
should not be as historical as il*s overthrow by the confede¬
rated Achaians. The quasi-theological myth of Herakles is

1 Fortnightly Review, No. XXIV. Max Muller, Lectures on
May 1, 1866. * seotaid series,'399.

* Grote, History of Greece, i. 636.

Language,

191

LAWS OF EVIDENCE.

thus also quasi-historical; and from both alike it is impossible CHAP,
to reap any harvest of historical facts. . IX '

> In reality, we have to go back to first principles. Sir Principles
Comewall Lewis has laid down certain canons of credibility deuce"
which are at the least intelligible, and which are exclusively
acted on in English courts. 1 The modern Euemerist lays
down none: and even in cases where he abandons existing
incidents as given in the popular tradition, even where he
admits that the legends contradict each other or.themselves,
even where he puts aside, as matters of no importance, the
cardinal facts on which they turn, he yet insists on retaining
what he calls the central fact, and on maintaining the gene¬
ral truth of popular impressions, while he imparts to that
fact and to those impressions the particular form which may
best suit his present purpose. All that can be said is, that
the application of such principles to alleged facts of the
present day would issue in the total collapse of justice, and
set up a reign of universal terror. Where narratives or.
chronological schemes, of whatever kind, or of whatever age,
contradict themselves or each other, we are bound, according
to Sir Cornewall Lewis, 2 to reject them all, unless we have-
good grounds for adopting one to the exclusion of the rest. A
mere isolated name, and a bare fact, can be of no use to us.

If the Homeric poems (and to this, after all, even Mr. Blackie
finds himself reduced) tell us no more than that there was a
king named Agamemnon, and a chief called Achilleus, who
may never have been at Troy, (for CromweE was not at Scar¬
borough), and that there was also a struggle of some sort,
although we know not what, at Hion, we have before us a
barren statement of which we can make nothing. Such a
war may be matched with that Arabian invasion which, ac¬
cording to Assyrian tradition, cut short the so-called Chal¬
dean empire. Of this invasion Mr. Rawlinson admits that
he can say hut little. ‘ Indeed, we do not possess any dis¬
tinct statement that it was by force of arms the Arabians
imposed their yoke on the Chaldean people. The brief

192

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK summary of Berosus’s narrative preserved to us in Eusebius

-^—. does but say that after the Chaldean dynasty which held the

throne for 458 years, there followed a dynasty of nine Arab '
kings, who ruled for 245 years. Still, as we can scarcely
suppose that the proud and high-spirited Chaldeans would
have submitted to a yoke so entirely foreign as that of Arabs
must have been, without a struggle, it seems necessary to
presume a contest wherein the native Hamltic race was at-
• tacked by a foreign Semitic stock, and overpowered so as to
be forced to accept a change of rulers. Thus, then, the
Chaldean kingdom perished.’ 1 Certainly, if ever therq was
such a kingdom, it may have so fallen; but to say that it
did so, is the purest guess-work; and it may be enough to
quote the words of the ‘Edinburgh Review,’* on a like re¬
construction of English history, after the narrative has been
lost. ‘The dynasty of the Stuarts,’ it may then be said,.

‘ seems to haye given four kings to England, and many more
to Scotland, when it was expelled by Dutch invaders. Of '
this invasion we have no details. Indeed, it is not distinctly .
stated that the Dutch yoke was imposed by force of arms
upon the English people. Still, we can scarcely think that
proud and high-spirited Englishmen would submit to so
foreign a nation as the Dutch without a struggle, especially
when we have reason for thinking that a rebellion, headed
by one who called himself Duke of Monmouth, was vigor¬
ously put down not long before. It seems necessary, then,
to presume a contest in which the native English population
was attacked and overpowered by the men of Holland. Thus,,
then, the Stuart dynasty perished.’ The conjecture would in
this instance be utterly false, although no objection on the
score of improbability could be urged against it. In such a
case, a genuine historian would simply suspend his judgment.
He would not deny that there was a Stuart dynasty, or that
it was expelled : he would only decline to lay down any con¬
clusions on the subject, adding that the alleged facts, thus
standing bare and isolated, could have for him no use. This
is all that the most sceptical of critics have affirmed in the

THE TROJAN WAR.

193

case of the Homeric and early Boman traditions; and it is chap.
a mere misrepresentation to-speak of them as denying the . lx -
possible occurrence of some contest on the plains of the Helles-
pontian Troy. Like them, the modern Euemerists reject all
the marvellous and supernatural incidents, and the mingling
of gods and men. The cause and character of the war, its
duration, and the mode in which it was carried on, they regard
as points of very slight consequence; and having thus destroyed
the whole story, they come forward with surprising assurance
to demand our acceptance of a'residue of fact which by some
divining process they have discovered to he historical, When
Sir Cornewall Lewis dismisses the accounts of the Decemviral
legislation at Borne as involved in inextricable confusion, he
does not deny the existence of Decemvirs; he merely says that
the narratives which have come down to us are self-contra¬
dictory from beginning to end,, and untrustworthy in all
their particulars. In like manner, of such a Trojan war as
that in which the Euemerists would have us believe, ? with¬
out Helen, without Amazons, without Ethiopians under the
beautiful son of Eos, without the wooden horse,’ nay, as they
admit, perhaps without a quarrel between Agamemnon and
Achilleus, and possibly without even their presence in the
Argive camp, Mr. Grote only says that ‘ as the possibility of
it cannot be denied, so neither-can the reality of it he
affirmed.’ One step further we may, however, take. What¬
ever struggle may have taken place within fifty miles of the
southern shores of the Sea of Marmora, that struggle is not
thesubject of the Homeric poems. History does not repeat
itself with monotonous uniformity in every country; and
the story of Helen and Achilleus is the subject of the popular
traditions in every Aryan land. If then the conflict, a. few
scenes of which are described in our Iliad, belongs to the
history of men and women of like passions with ourselves,
this conflict arose out of events which happened before the
separation of the Aryan nations from their common home.

To convert a hare possibility of this sort into an historical
fact is indeed to build a house on sand; mid while we are
wasting time on this worthless task, the early language of the
Aryan peoples pointa to that real conflict in the daily and
VOL. I. o

194

MYTHOLOGY OF

E ARYAN NATIONS.'

hook yearly drama of tlie outward world which must strike the
deepest chords of the human heart, so long as men continue
to he what they are. * *

Tim But the question must he carried still further into that

cou'tro™ domain of Hellenic tradition which is supposed to be the
■vcrsy. border land between mythology and history, and to exhibit a
larger amount of fact than of fiction. The inquiry may not
be wholly new: but if, in spite of all that has been said by
those who maintain the unity of the .Iliad and the Odyssey
and attribute to their narratives a historical character, their
opponents Are not satisfied, it is clear that the question can¬
not he regarded as settled, unless dogmatic assertion on the
one side is to overbear the patient statement of facts on the
other. If the conclusions of the modern Euemerists are to
be received, then, on the faith of a supposed general consent
of critics through a long series of centuries, we are hound to
believe that the events of which the Homeric poets sang were
historical incidents which materially affected the later his-'
tory of the Greeks, in spite of all contradictions' in the narra¬
tive, and in spite of all other difficulties which the literaimre
whether of the Greeks or of any other people may force on
our attention. If we are not as yet told that, the historical
foundation of the legends being established, we are bound to
receive all the marvellous details of the picture, with a ready
acquiescence, still the method by which the upholders of
the so-called Homeric history seek to sustain these conclu¬
sions may well appal the sober seekers after truth, who see
the havoc thus made in those canons of evidence which
should guide the statesman and the judge not less than the
scholar. When we have before us narratives full of extra¬
ordinary incidents and exhibiting throughout a super¬
natural machinery, when we see further that these narra¬
tives contradict themselves on vital points, it is our duty, it
seems, not to reject those narratives, but to pare away all
that is miraculous or hard to Relieve, and then to regard the
naked outline as fact. It cannot be too often of too earnestly
repeated, that by any such method the ascertainment of the
truth of facts becomes impossible. The Euemerists charge
their opponents with robbing us of large treasures of in-

HOMERIC CRITICISM.

195

herited belief; 1 but it is not too much to say that, their own wur.

criticism is far more unsettling and destructive, and that it __

tends to blunt that instinct of truthfulness, and that im¬
partial determination to seek truth only, without which all
criticism is worse than worthless. If we are to hold with
Mr. Blackie in one place that ‘ there was a real kingdom of
Priam oil the coast of the Dardanelles, and a real expedition of
the western Greeks against this kingdom,’ with a real Achil-
leus,and ‘ a real quarrel between him and the general-in-chief of
the Hellenic armament,’ and in another, that the impressions
left by the facts on the minds of the poets might be * alto¬
gether at variance with the incidents as they occurred,’ while
in a third we are to admit that the historical character of
the legend’is not,affected; even though Agamemnon and
Achilleus may never have met at all, and no Helen may have
existed to give cause to the war, then it is clear that all free¬
dom of judgment is gone. But no one can submit to be thus
hound, who believes that his powers of thought are given to
him as a sacred trust, and that, unless he seeks to know facts
as they are, he is chargeable with the guilt of wilfully blind¬
ing himself. It matters not how great may he the array of
authorities on the other side; he dares not to give his assent
to these conclusions, if facts in his judgment contradict or
appear to contradict them. To profess a belief in the pro¬
position that the Iliad and Odyssey moulded the intellectual
life of the Greeks from a time long preceding that of Hero-
dotos and Thucydides, would be to him an act of sheer'dis¬
honesty, if he is not convinced that the proposition is true :
and if, after a careful survey of the field, he still retains his
doubts, he is bound to state his reasons, and thus to do what he
can towards solving the problem. The attitude of all critics
towards this subject ought to be that of patient seekers after
truth, who are quite prepared-to receive an}' conclusions to
which the evidence may lead them. If wo wish only to
ascertain facts, we shall he ready to believe indifferently that
the Iliad and Odyssey were composed by one poet or by
twenty ; that they were written within a few years or many
centuries after the incidents which they profess to record :

■ I’.’iickir, liiml i

MYTlIOt.OGY OF THE ARY AX NATIONS. '

that their narratives are partly historical or wholly mythical,
if only the propositions are irrefragably established. Bat
whatever be the result, the statement of the grounds of
doubt calls lor gratitude rather than blame, and the tone
adopted by some who have lately taken part in these dis¬
cussions is a matter, to say the least, of very grave regret.
Thus in the book which he is pleased to call the ‘ Life of
Homer,’ Mr. Valetta has ridiculed those who range them¬
selves oii the side of Lachman, Edchly, or Mr. Grote, as
overshooting their mark, one condemning one third, another
another, and a third the remaining third of the twenty-four
books of the Iliad. Such assertions can gain at best but a
temporary advantage. Hone who go beneath the surface of
the question can fail to see that the critics thus censured do
not reject each a different portion of the Iliad; that the at¬
tribution of the first book of the Iliad to one poet, and of the
second book to another, is really no condemnation whatever,

' and that Mr. Grote at all events regards the Iliad as made
up of only two poems, both of which he believes to be the
work of the same poet. In fact, the points on which these
critics fasten are not in each case different. The same
difficulties have forced themselves on the attention of all,
and some of the most strenuous asserters of Homeric unity
are not slow in acknowledging their force. Even Mr.
Blackie admits that Homer composed the Iliad ‘ in piece¬
meal,’ and strung his songs together ‘with a distinct know¬
ledge that they would be used only in separate parts,’ and
that ‘ not only the separate materials, hut the general scheme
of the Iliad existed in the Hellenic mind before Homer. ” It
is hard to see how this position differs materially from that of
the writer in the Edinburgh Review, who, while maintaining
the Unitarian hypothesis, asserts that ‘ the text was handed
down in fragments from remote antiquity, that those frag¬
ments were dast and recast, stitched together, unstitched
again, handled by uncritical an£ unscrupulous compilers in
every possible way.’ 2 Like Mr. Blackie, Colonel Mure allows

’ Blacky 1 , Iliad, i. 206,222. Odyssey. As Mr. Grote insists, it is

2 No. eexx. October 1858, p. 503. impossible to shut our eyes to the unity
It is unnecessary to entei* at, length into of plan which pervades th s poem. In
the question relating to the unity of the the Mad we look in vain for any such '

tliat ‘ the circumstances under which the texts were trans¬
mitted,.render it next to impossible but that their original
purity must have suffered,’ 1 and that Homer was probably
, ‘ indebted to previous traditions for' the original sketches of
his principal heroes.’ 2 Bishop Tliirlwall, while he refused .to
commit himself to any positive conclusion on the subject,
saw long ago, with his usual sagacity, that the unity of
Homer,* even if universally conceded, ■ would add little or
nothing to the value ofthe Hiad or Odyssey as historical
records. In his words, ‘ the kind of history for which Homer
invoked the aid of the Muses to strengthen his memory was
not chiefly valued as a recital of real events,’ and £ if in de¬
tached passages the poet sometimes appears to be relating
. with the naked simplicity of truth, we cannot ascribe any
higher authority to these episodes than to the rest of the
poem.’ With a singular anticipation of the course into which
the discussion has now drifted,- he adds that J: the campaigns
of Nestor, the wars of Calydon, the expeditions of Achilles,
probably appear less poetical than the battles before Troy, .
only because they stand in the background of the picture,
and were perhaps transfei-red to it from other legends in
which, occupying a different place, they were exhibited in a
more, marvellous and poetical shape.’ 3 Thus, in Bishop
Thirlwall’s judgment, every incident nakedly recorded in the
Iliad received its full clothing of the supernatural in other
epic poems now' lost; and since to incidents so clothed no
gredit is to be given, the tissue of wonders in wliiph all are
involved puts completely out of sight any possibly historical
incidents on which they may have been founded, and makes
them for us as though they had never been. This emphatic
verdict scatters to the wind all inferences respecting the age
of Homer drawn from the silence of the Homeric poems as
to the return of the Herakleids. These inferences involve the

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

assumption tliat the return of the Herakleids was a cause of
such thorough change in the Greek dynasties as well as in
Asia Minor, that if the poet had written after that event, his
language must have exhibited some knowledge of its results.
TJie argument is commonly urged by writers who further
assume that Homer wrote within a generation or two of the
Trojan war,' and that Thucydides has assigned the right date
for the conquest of Peloponnesos by the Herakleidg. Thus
the whole Iliad, as we have it now, was composed within
eighty years at furthest from the fall of Hion, .and perhaps
much earlier. Here then we are enabled to measure at once
the value of that ancient tradition which, it is said, no Greek
author of note has disputed or doubted, when it is submitted
to the fast and loose method of critics who maintain the
unity of Homer. The whole character of the tradition is
essentially changed, if in one statement the poet is a con¬
temporary writer, and in another is separated by a vast •
interval of time from the events which he professes to
describe. In the one view, the composition of the Iliad
within eighty years after the recovery of Helen is indispens¬
able to the historical authority of Homer. According to the
other, which is adopted by Thucydides, Homer lived ‘ a very
long time ’ after the Trojan war; 2 while the poet, who may
surely he allowed to tell his own tale, clearly speaks of the
actors in his great drama as belonging to an order of men
no longer seen upon the earth.'* The special pleading of Mr.
Gladstone limits the meaning of the phrase to a period of at
most forty or fifty years. Few, probably, will attach mull
weight to the argument. All that Nestor says in the passage
on which Mr. Gladstone 4 relies for the truth of his interpre-'
tation, is that none then living could fight as Perithoos and
other heroes had fought in the days of his youth. 5 In all

1 Gladstone, Homer and the Homeric To Thucydides the absence of all
Age, i. 37. inference to the Herakleid conquests in

* Time. i. 3. The contradiction can- our Rind and Odyssey (if he ever saw
not be laid to the charge of Tlmcydidos, c those poems), involved no sort of
•who clearly regarded Homei'' as living necessity for supposing that, the poet
at a time long subsequent, to the return lived before the so-called Dorian settle-
of the H'\rakleids. A statement so clear ment of the Peloponnesos.
can scarcely be set aside with' con- *’ 11. r. 304.

sistency by critics who tfre eager on all * Homer, and the Homeric Age , i. 37.
possible occasions to shelter themselves • * ll i. 272.

under ‘ the authority of the ancients.’

VALUE- OF HOMERIC TRADITION.

199

the other passages where a like phrase occurs, the poet in chap.

his own person ascribes to Aias, or Hoktor, or Aineias the _^_.

■ power of hurling boulders, scarcely to be lifted by two men,

, as easily as a child might throw a pebble. 1 The change of
which Nestor speaks is only one of degree. The poet, had
he lived in times so close to the events which he relates, .
would rather have gloried in the exploits of his own kinsmen,
and allowed their fame to shed some portion' of its lustre on his
living countrymen.

But if the alleged event which is called the return of the The mum
Herakleids led, as we are told, to such thorough changes in Hera-
the (historical) dynasties of Eastern and Western Greece, kleitis -
and if this event, the belief of Thucydides to the contrary
notwithstanding, occurred within a century after the fall .of '

Troy, and. if the Iliad and Odyssey, as we now have them,
were composed in the interval between these two events, the
upholders of Homeric unity have fairly established then-
position. What then is the value of the traditions which
relate this so-called historical event ? In plain-, speech, they
are narratives which exhibit a singular parallelism with
other incidents in the mythical history of Hellas, and from
which the residuum of historical fact, if it can be extracted
at a,11, must be extracted by the same method which Thucy¬
dides, Herodotos, Dion Chrysostom and tliemodern Eucmerists .
apply to the story of Troy, namely, by stripping off the whole
clothing of the supernatural which has been thrown around
them, and by ingenious conjectural arrangement of the little
ftiat then remains. In truth, argument here becomes really
superfluous. It may be fairly said, and it should be said.at
once,, that.'the most vehement defenders of the historical
character of the Iliad have themselves acknowledged that
we can get nothing out of it which deserves the. name of
history. The whole tliaumaturgy of the poem they shatter
at a blow: and although we are told in one breath Hi at there
was a real expedition from* Myk£ma,i to Troy, with a real
Achilleus and a real Agamemnon, whose quarrel was an
actual fact, we are told in another that Agamemnon and
Achilleus may have been leaders of successive expeditions
1 LI. xii. SSC. -HO; >:x. 2S7.

200

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIK ARYAN NATIONS.

JiOOK and may never have met at all, and that there may, t&ere-
•— l —• fore, have been no quarrel and no Helen to give cause for
the war. This, according to their own admissions, is no
caricature, and hence it may be said that the critics who
are represented by Mr. Blackie have torn to shreds the
historical character of the Iliad. Bishop Thirlwall, while
he accepts the fact of some war as the basis of the story,
has dealt not less cruelly with the narrative. He has swept
away all belief in the detailed narratives of the Hiad and the
Odyssey, while his statements that the incidents cursorily
noticed in these poems were exhibited in full mythical garb
in other epics destroy all belief in the remainder. It must
therefore be emphatically repeated that on the historical
character of the Trojan war, the Unitarians are in substan¬
tial agreement with their antagonists. There may have been
a war at Ilion on the Propontis : but as we cannot deny, so
we cannot say that there was, and about it we know nothing.
The Hera- D 0 we know anything more about the return of the Hera-
quests^ot, kleids ? Mr. Grote, it is true* asserts that at this point we
historical, ag jif touched by the wand of a magician, from mythical

to historical Greece. 1 But he connects the myth with the
subsequent historical distribution of the Greek states, only
because it happens to come latest in order of sequence, and
the story itself he at once-banishes to the region of myths.
The traditions again are contradictory, and Bishop Thirlwall
especially notes that, while one version represents Pamphylos
and Dymas as falling in the expedition by which their
countrymen made themselves masters of the Peloponnesos,
another speaks of Pamphylos as still living in the second
generation after the conquest. If then we say that in
Greece, when it becomes historical, we find a certain ar¬
rangement of Dorian, Ionian, and other tribes, but that' we
know nothing of the events which led to it, our conclusion is
simply that of Dr. Thirlwall, aud Dr. Thirlwall is commonly
■ regarded as free from the scepticism of Mr. Grote. ‘It is
much less probable,’ in his judgment, ‘ that the origin of the
Dorian tribes, as of all similar political forms which a nation
has assumed in thp earliest period of existence, should have
1 History of Greece, part i. ch. xviii. § 1.

THE KETOKH OP THE HERAKHEIHS.

201

been distinctly remembered, than that it should have been CHAP,
forgotten, and have, then been attributed to imaginary 1X '
persons.’ 1 Have we then any adequate grounds for be¬
lieving that there was any historical reconquest of the
Peloponnesos by the Herakleids? Mr. Grote, who accepts
the fact, although he rejects the legends which profess to
account for it, urges that no doubt is expressed about it
even by the best historians of antiquity, and that ‘ Thucy¬
dides accepts it as a single and literal event, having its
assignable date* and carrying at one blow the acquisition of
Peloponnesos.’ 2 But no one has shown more forcibly than
Mr. Grote himself the utter worthlessness of the method of
Thucydides when applied to the Trojan war, which also has
its assignable date, for Thucydides marks it as preceding
the, return of the Herakleids bj r eighty years. When, a gain,
Thucydides sets down the expulsion of the Boiotians from the
Thessalian Arne as an event occurring sixty years after the
wax at Troy, Mr< Grote rejects his statement summarify, on
the ground that he ‘ only followed one amongst a variety of
discrepant legends* none of which there were any means of
verifying.’ 3 But this remark applies with equal force to the
traditions of -the return of the Herakleids, and it has been
well said that ‘ the tendency of the Greeks in the historic
age to assign definite dates to uncertain events was very
likely to .lead them into statements not chronologically
correct,’ 4 and that the dates assigned by Thucydides, for
example, to the various immigrations into Sicily ‘ must surely
be received with great caution.’ They are, at the least, as
trustworthy as the tabulated results of Chaldeean and As¬
syrian chronology by M. Gutschmid and Mr. Rawlinson;
and they all rest alike • on the shifting sands of ingenious
conjecture. 5 ' The last argument of Mr. Grote for the his¬
torical return of the Herakleids has been refuted by Sir
Cornewall Lewis. This event, if it be an event, does not lead
us at once from mythical to historical Greece. The whole
history of Athens for many centuries later either is a blank.

MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook or exhibits a series of fables ; and the conclusion is that ‘ it
. seems quite impossible to fix any one period for the com¬
mencement of authentic history in all the different Greek
states.’ Of the string of dates assigned to the various
alleged immigrations from Western Hellas, some may pos¬
sibly he correct; but ‘ how far these dates are authentic, we
have little means of judging, but the colonial legends con¬
nected with the early foundations are for the most part
fabulous.’ It follows that ‘ a connected account of the affairs
of the principal Greek States begins about a century before
the birth of Herodotus, and that a continuous narrative of
the principal transactions is carried on from the time of
Croesus and Cyrus, when the Ionic Greeks first became
subject to the Lydian and Persian kings. As soon as we
ascend beyond the memory of the generation which preceded
Herodotus and his contemporaries, we find the chronology’
uncertain, the order of events confused, and the narrative
interspersed with legend and fable. . As we mount higher
the uncertainty increases, until at last the light of history is
almost quenched, and we find ourselves in nearly total dark¬
ness.’ 1 To this region of the Graiai and the Gorgons we
must, therefore, assign the return of the Herakleids, with all
the incidents which are said to have preceded it, and not
a few which are said to have followed it. If any real facts
underlie the tradition—if any names of real Aehaian or
Hellenic chieftains have been preserved in it, we cannot
separate them from the fictions beneath which they are
buried. To us they are lost beyond recall: and for us,
therefore, the tales of Troy and of the return of the Hera¬
kleids are not history, and cannot possess any historical

' Credibility of Early Roman UiMory,
ch. xiv. | 18.

5 Unl ess it. ean be shown that we have

respecting \,he Iliad or the Odyssey.
These poems know nothing of'indi¬
vidual eponymoi named Hellen, Ion, or
Achaios, andAiolos is mentioned simply

as a son of Hippotas, dwelling in the is¬
land Aioliit ( Odyssty, x. 2). Hence Mr.
Grote (History of Greece, part i. ch. v'\.)

i\ these poems is a well-defined though
mall district, while of Aiolians and Io-
tians it can scarcely be said that they
lave any local habitation. It is, there-

are to be regarded, as Ionic or Aiolic.

NEGATIVE

RESULTS. . 203

' Here, then, the inquiry ends so far as it belongs to the chap.
province of historical credibility; and it must never be IX - .
forgotten that the negative conclusions thus reached are TLo origin
the result of mere historical criticism, and that they can in traditions
no way be affected by the failure of any theories which may uf

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

‘204

BOOK profess to account for tlio origin and growth of these tradi-
•—— tions, although the fact that their historical character has
been disproved already must tend to strengthen any theory
which gives a consistent explanation of the whole, and which
rests on a comparison of these traditions with the myths of
other countries. ‘ The siege of Troy is,’ in Professor Max
Muller’s words, ‘ a repetition of the daily siege of the East by
the solar powers that every evening are robbed of their
brightest treasures in the West.’ 1 Few—probably none—
will venture to deny that the stealing of the bright clouds of'
evening by the dark powers, the weary search for them
through the long night, the battle with the robbers as the
darkness is driven away by the advancing chariot of the lord
of liglik are favourite subjects with the poets to whom we
owe the earliest Vedic songs. How far the names occurring
in this most ancient Hindu literature are found in Hellenic
legends, how far the incidents connected with these names
are reproduced in the so-called Homeric poeins, may be
gathered in some measure from what has been said already.
But whether the old Yedic hymns contain the germ of the
Iliad and Odyssey, or whether they do not, it seems im¬
possible to shut our eyes to the fact that the whole mythical
, history of Hellas exhibits an alternation of movements from
the West to the East, and from the East back to the West
again, as regular as the swayings of a pendulum. In each
case either something bright is taken away, and the heroes
, who have been robbed, return with the prize whibh, after a
long struggle, they have regained; or the heroes themselves
are driven from tlieir home eastward, and thence return to
claim their rightful ^heritage. The first loss is that of the
Golden Fleece ; and the chieftains led by Iason set forth in
the speaking ship on their perilous voyage to the shores of
Kolchis. Before the fleece can be regained there are fearful
tasks to be done: but the aid of the wise Medeia.enables
Ias6n to tame the fire-breathing bulls, and to turn against
each other the children, of the dragon’s teeth. Then follows
the journey homeward, in which Medeia again saves them
■from the vengeance of Aietes, and Iason reigns gloriously in

y Lectures on the Science of Language, second series, p. 471.

Iolkoa after his long wanderings are ended. This tale is
repeated again in the»story of the wrongs and woes of Helen.
She, too, is stolen, like the Golden Fleece, from the western
land, and carried far away towards the gates of the morning,
Snd a second time the Achaian heroes are gathered together
to avenge the disgraoe, and to bring back the peerless queen
whom they have lost. Here again is the weary voyage,
lengthened by the wrath of the gods, and the perilous war¬
fare which must precede the ruin-of Ilion. But the aid of
Athene, answering to that of Medeia, wins the victory at
last for Achilleus, and then follow again the wanderings of
the heroes as they return each to his home in the far west.
Here, too, the help of Athdnd, when her first anger has
passed away, supports Odysseus ■ on his toilsome pilgrimage,
and heats down his enemies beneath his feet. With the
scene in which Odysseus and Penelope appear in all the
splendour of, their youthful beauty after the fall of the
suitors, the second westwai’d movement comes to an end.
But the enmity which darkened the life of Herakles con¬
tinued to cast its shadow over his children; and if we follow
the mythographers, we have before us, in a series many
times repeated, the expulsion of the Herakleids and their>
attempts to return aiid take possession of their inheritance. 1

206

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

ROOK The so-called Dorian migration is the last in the long series

- r —• of movements from east to west. «The legends which

profess to relate its history have doubtless lost in great
degree the freshness and charm of the myths which had
gathered round the fair-haired Helen and the wise Medeia.
This poverty may arise from their comparative nearness to
an historical age, and from the intermixture of real incidents
on which the floating myths of earlier times had fastened
themselves. That this may have occurred again and again
is a matter not of mere conjecture, hut of certainty, although
the fact of the intermixture furnishes, as we have seen, no
ground of hope for those who seek for history in mythology.
Unless they are known to us from contemporary writers, the
real events, whatever they may have been, are disguised,
distorted, and blotted out as effectually as the stoutest trees
in American forests are killed by the parasitical plants
which clamber up their sides. But, meagre as these later
myths may be, the ideas and incidents of the older legends :
• not unfrequently reappear in them. The disasters which
befall the Herakleid leaders before they gain a footing in
the ■ Peloponnesos answer to the troubles and losses which
Odysseus undergoes on his homeward voyage. The story
of the soothsayer Karnos, whose death draws down on them
the wrath of Apollon, car-ries us to the legend of Chryses in
the tale of Troy: and the three sons of Hyllos answer to the
three sons of Arkas in the Arkadiun stories, and to the three
sons of Mannus in the mythology of the Teutonic tribes.
Whether the eastward migrations, which are described as
the consequences of the return of the Herakleids, represent

RECURRING LEGENDS. 207

any real events, we cannot tell, although we cannot in terms CTTAP.

deny it; but the fact remains that they are movements .__

eastward, corresponding in many of their features to other
movements which are said to have preceded them. All that
'can be said further about these legends as a whole is that
‘ matter of fact (if any there be), is so intimately combined
with its accompaniments of fiction as to be undistinguishable
without the aid of extrinsic evidence; ’ 1 and no such evidence
is forthcoming. The pendulum which had marked the lapse
of the mythopcoic ages is here arrested in its even heat. The
mighty stream, which had brought down on its waters the
great epical inheritance of mankind, is lost in the sands of
the barren centuries which intervene between the legend-
making age and the period of genuine contemporary history.

Thus, then, we have before ns a cycle of legends many Materials
times recurring, with differences of local colouring, but with lotion
a general agreement in essential features. The search for a
stolen treasure, and the homeward return either of the con¬
querors who have smitten the robbers, or of the heroes who
come to claim their rightful kingdom, form the burden of all.

In other words, we are brought back to the favourite theme
of the Vedic pOets—to the hymns which tell us of the Sun-
god robbed of his cows in the west, of the mission of Sarama, ■
to discover the fastnesses where the thieves have hidden
■ them, of their resistance until Indra draw's nigh with his
irresistible spear, of his great vengeance and his beneficent
victory. Carrying us back yet one step further, these legends,
it must he repeated, resolve themselves into phrases which
once described, with a force and vividness never surpassed,
the several phenomena of the earth and the heavens. The
stream is thus traced to its fountain-head, and at once we
are enabled .to account for the beauty and majesty, the gross¬
ness'and unseemliness, of the great body of legends which
make up the genuine mythology of the world. The charge
of monotony which has by ^ome been adduced in summary
condemnation of the method and results of comparative my¬
thology, may be urged with as much and as little reason
against the life of man. If there is monotony in the thought

20S

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK

of the daily toil of the sun for beings weaker than himself—
of his wrath as he hides his face behind the dark cloud, of
his vengeance as he tramples on the vapours which crowd
around him at his setting, of the doom which severe him
from the dawn at the beginning of his journey to restore her
at its close—there is monotony also in the bare record of
birth and love and toil and death, to which all hnman life
may be pared down. But where there are eyes to see and
hearts to feel, there is equally life in both; and we are
driven to admit that the real marvel would be, not the
multiplication of magnificent epics, but the absence of these
epics from a soil on which the seeds had been so lavishly
scattered; not the production of characters differing from and
resembling each other—as those of Meleagros and Achilleus,
of Hektor and Paris, of Herakles and Theseus, of Perseus
and Apollon, of Athene and Danae, of Helen and 16 and
Medeia—hut the absence of such beings from the common
stories of the people.

The historical character of the Argonautic, the Trojan,
and the Herakleid legends has been swept away; and Com¬
parative Mythology steps in to account for the nature, growth,
and extent of the materials which the Homeric or other poets
found ready to their hands. , That they worked on some
materials provided by ancient tradition, is allowed by all ; 1
and the admission involves momentous consequences. The
earliest mythical' phrases tell us of a hero whose chariot is
drawn by undying horses, and who is armed with an unerring
spear; who is doomed to toil for beings gleaner than himself,
or to die an early death after fighting in a quarrel which is'
not his own ; who must be parted from the woman to whom
he has given his heart, to be united to her ag%in only when
his days are drawing to an end; in whom may be seen
strange alternations of energy and inaction, of vindictiveness
and generosity; who, after a king struggle, and just when he
seemed to be finally conquered, scatters his enemies on every
side, and sinks, when the battle is ended, into a serene and
deep repose. The outline is but vague, but it involves all the
essential features jn the careers of Achilleus and Odysseus,

' Gladstone, Homer and the Homeric Age , ii. 9.

ARYAN EPIC POEMS.

20!)

of Meleagros and Herakles, of Perseus, Theseus, and Belle- oitap.

■ rophfin; and not only of these, but of the great heroes of the IX '
lays of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs, of the romance of
Arthur, and the epic of Firdusi. In some cases the very
names are the same, as well as the incidents; in others tliey
translate each other. There is thus the closest parallelism
between the great'epics of- the Hellenic and Teutonic tribes,
of the Persians and the Hindus ; and thus also the narrative
of the Trojan war is not only divested of all local historical
character, but finds its place as one among the many versions
of the tale which relates the career of the great mythical
heroes of all lands. At once, then,, we are brought round to
the conclusion (which Dr. Thirlwall had reached by another
path) that a source so rich in mythical elements must yield
an abundant harvest of great epic poems, and that our Iliad
and Odyssey must be but a very small part of the inheritance
left by the mythopoeic ages, even if this conclusion were not
supported by the general , testimony of ancient writers and
the phenomena of Greek literature. These great epics, at
whatever time they may have be.en brought into their present
shape, are but two epics which were not the most popular
(even if they were known) during the most flourishing period
of Greek literatm-e. They are but varying forms of the wide¬
spread tradition which has come down from a source common
to all the tribes of the Aryan race. A purely historical
inquiry stripped them of all historical character; a philo¬
sophical analysis has resolved their materials into the earliest
utterances of human thought, when man first became capable
of putting into words the impressions made on his mind by
the phenomena of the outward world.

The method by which these results have been obtained Attempted
must be either wholly rejected, or carefully followed without
the slightest regard to consequences, unless it can be shown the scicnee
in special instances and by tangible evidence to be unsound. g l!ag(!

The expression of vague fears»either is'thrown away or does
mischief, by encouraging an unscientific fashion of looking
at a subject which must be handled systematically or not at.
all. Nothing can be clearer than that if the name Zeus is
confessedly another form of Dyaus, Ouranos of Varuna, Azi-
vol. I. p

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARY AS NATIONS.

dahaka of Zok&k, the method which has yielded these results
must be applied to all names, nay, to all words; aad that, in
all instances where the laws which govern the method are
not violated, the result must be admitted as established.
The child who can swim may dread to plunge into a stream,
because he thinks that the water may be beyond his depth;
the dogmatist may hesitate to admit conclusions which he
cannot refute, because he fears tha t- they may lead to other con¬
clusions subversive of his traditional belief; but such evasions
are unworthy of men who seek only to know the truth of facts.
It is no longer possible for any who allow that Dyaus must
be Zeus and Ouranos must be Yaruna, to ask with any con¬
sistency why the Greek Charites should be the Yedic Harits, or
Eros the Sanskrit Arvat. In either case it is a mere question
of fact, and the answer is that the words are etymologically
identical, and that Charis and Erinys can no more be ex¬
plained by any Greek word than can Zens or Ouranos. Ho
room is left for captious questions which ask why, though
Apollon be certainly the sun, all other mythical heroes should
represent the sun also. It has probably never been thought,
and certainly never been said, that all the actors in the great
epic dramas of the Hellenic and Teutonic tribes, of the
Persians and Hindoos, are solar heroes. Such a statement
would strike at the very root of Comparative Mythology,
which teaches that the mythical treasures of the Aryan race
have been derived from phrases expressing the genuine feelings
of mankind about all that they saw, felt, <5r heard in the world
around them. Assuredly neither Odysseus, Herakl^s, Oidi-
pous, nor any other can be the sun, unless their names, their
general character, and their special features, carry us to this
conclusion. Whether they do so or not can be determined
only by the analysis and comparison of the legends. To
those who hold that the Greek yivos and the old English cyn
are the same, the identity of Aeshma-Daeva and Asmodeus,
of Ormuzd and Ahura-mazd&o, of Arbhu and Orpheus, of
Orthros and Yritra, cannot possibly be a matter of faith.
The identification must stand or fall, as it fulfils or violates
the canons which determine that the Greek Ovydryp and the
German tochter represent the English daughter, the Sanskrit

LANGUAGE AND MYTHOLOGY.

211

duhdtar, and the Persian docht. It is absurd to make ex- CHAP,
ceptions unless some philological law has been broken. It IX ' .
is not less unreasonable to draw distinctions between the
sciences of Comparative Philology and Comparative Mytho¬
logy on the ground that in the one case the phenomena of
language are made to explain themselves, in the other case’
they are made to explain something quite different. The
meaning of this objection is that Comparative Mythology
brings before us a struggle between Phoibos and Python,

Indra and Vritra, Sigurd and Pafnir, Achilleus and Paris,
Oidipous and the Sphinx, Ormuzd and Ahriman, and from
the character of the struggle between Indra and Vritra, and
again between Ormuzd and Ahriman, infers that a myth,
purely physical in the land of the Five Streams, assumed a
moral and spiritual meaning in Persia, and, as indicating the
fight between the co-ordinate powers of good and evil, gave
birth to the dualism which from that time to the present
has exercised so mighty an influence throughout the East
and the West. Language has thus been made to explain a
very difficult problem in moral philosophy, which is some¬
thing quite different from language; and such an office as this
is never, it is urged, discharged by Comparative Philology.

The former, therefore, must be regarded with greater sus¬
picion than the latter. Here again we are dealing with a
mere ma tter of fact, and we find at once that the objection '
brought against the one • science applies with equal force to
the other. Words cognate to our ear are found in the Greek,
Teutonic, and Indian dialects, the inference being that the
plough was known to the ancestors of Hindus, Greeks, and
Teutons, while they still lived together as a single people.

Here, then, language is made to throw light on the history
of agriculture; and we must therefore infer either that agri¬
culture is the same thing as language, or that the distinction
is wholly baseless. In the Aryan names for father, brother,
sister, daughter, we have the* proof that the words existed
for an indefinite length of time before they assumed the
meanings which we now assign to them, and we are forced
to conclude that the recognition of family .relations was not
the first step in the history of mankind. Here, then, lan-

212

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

HOOK

gnage is made to throw light on the growth of morality;
and unless we say that morality and language are the same
thing, it follows that in both these sciences language is made
to explain something different from itself, and that no dis¬
tinction can on this ground be drawn between them. 1

There is more of plausibility than of truth in the words
of Mr. Gladstone, that ‘ he who seems to impeach the know¬
ledge and judgment of all former ages, himself runs but an
evil chance, and is likely to be found guilty of ignorance and
folly.’ 2 Yerdicts unanimously given and obstinately upheld
are not always just; and in the great battle for the ascer¬
tainment of fact, and more especially in the struggle against
false methods, one man is not unfrequently called upon to
face the world, unsupported by any of his own age. For hun¬
dreds if not for thousands of years, the world was convinced
of the reality of witchcraft; the belief is now denounced
on all sides as a gross and deadly delusion. Aristarchos of
Samos opposed his heliocentric theory of the universe to all
others ; 3 but many a centpry had yet to pass before that
theory superseded the Ptolemaic. In truth, nothing is
gained by appeals to majorities or to parties, or by hyper¬
bolical laudation of poems ancient or modem. Whatever
may be the beauty or the magnificence of Homeric or any

had been faced, and were handed down

more remarkable is the certainty with
which the difference of Aryan names for
wild beasts and weapons of war, con¬
trasted with the similarity of their
peaceful names, shows that the great
Aryan family ‘ had led a long life of
peace before they separated.’ A similar
analysis proves that although they were

determine; but the interval which separ¬
ates the dispersion of these tribes from
the dawn of contemporary history is
probably far greater than we are gene¬
rally disposed to imagine.

8 Gladstone, Homer , $c. i. 2.

Beview, July 1862, p, 94. ^

THE HOMERIC POEMS.

FORM

!13

other poetry, this beauty and magnificence will still remain, CHAP.

whether it be the work of one man or of a hundred men, of _^_

one age or of many. Exaggerated theories, springing- from
exaggerated praises, have wrapped the whole field of Homeric
inquiry in mists, out of which we cannot easily find our way;
and statements are boldly made, and unhesitatingly accepted,'
without the faintest misgiving that, after all, facts may
point in quite another direction. In Colonel Mure’s opinion,
the poems known to us as the Iliad and Odyssey were ‘ the
acknowledged standard or digest, as it were, of early
national history, geography, and mythology.’ 1 With a
generalisation still more sweeping, Baron Bunsen assures
us that ‘ the Hiad and Odyssey, especially the former, are
the canon regulating the Hellenic mental developement in
all things spiritual, in faith and custom, worship and re¬
ligion, civil and domestic life, poetry, art, science. Homer
is not only the earliest poet, hut the father of all succeeding
poets. The Hiad is the sacred groundwork of lyrical poetry
no less than of the drama.’ 2 '

These are either very important facts or very great delu- The eri-
sions; and to accept them Without rigid scrutiny must lead
to widespread and fatal mischief. Our business is simply
with the evidence on which these conclusions are said to be
based, and all impartial and unprejudiced thinkers owe a
debt of gratitude to Mr. Pa,ley for bis masterly analysis of
this evidence, and for the single-minded honesty which has
led him to discuss this question in a book intended especially
for young scholars. 3 The cry raised against the unsettlement

1 History of Grech Literature, bookii. Thucydides, (he positive assertions of
eh. ii. § 5. Colonel lire and Baron Bunsen fall to

* God m History , book iv. ch. viii. the ground ; and it, follows that, these

’ ‘The Iliad of Homer,’ Bibliotheca poems, as -we have (hem, were not tile
Clmsica, introduction ; sec also Mr. work of a poet earlier than Pindar—in
I'aley's paper on ‘The Comparatively other words, not of tbo Pindaric or
late Sate and the Composite Character rEsehyloan Homer. Who the author or
of our Iliad and Odyssey,’ in the Trims- rather compiler of our Iliad and Odyssey
actions of the CamhrUye Philosophical f may have been, we arc not concerned t'o
Society, vol. xi. part ii. For our present inquire. The task of Bentley was done

wmjwsition* of’our JIM and Phahtris werc’not written b/ Phulari".

the' Oily

214

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book of their minds is both disingenuous and irrelevant. If the

_. Iliad and Odyssey really moulded the mental life of Greek

lyric and dramatic poets, the fact must be as clear as the
sun at noonday; and counter-statements can but serve to
establish that fact more firmly. But, in the first place, the
* composers of our Iliad and Odyssey do not speak of them¬
selves as the first poets. Not only do they tell us of bards
who had won their fame at an earlier time, but the Odyssey 1
shows that an account of the wrath of Aehilleus, wholly
different from that which we have in the Iliad, was both
current and popular. 'If it does not show this,’ adds Mr.
Paley, £ it at least shows that there were other ballads on
Trojan affairs in existence before the Odyssey was composed
or compiled.’ 2 Colonel Mure naturally lays great stress on
the alleged familiarity of later poets with our Iliad and
Odyssey; 3 and if Baron Bunsen’s statement has any measure
of truth, the Attic drama must be steeped in the sentiment,
if not in the language, of our Iliad and Odyssey. But in
fact, c although two Greek plays, and two only, are taken
directly,—the one from our Iliad, the other from our Odyssey
•—the allusions to these poems are singularly few, and those
few often uncertain, in the writers previous to the time of
Plato.’ 4 Nay, although these earlier writers speak not un-
’ frequently of Homeric poems and Homeric subjects, we find
in far the larger number of instances, that the epithet is
applied to poems which no longer exist, or to subjects which
are not treated in our Hiad or Odyssey. 5 ‘ Out of at least

invented by any compiler of these the history of Athenian thought and

poems after the close of the Pelopon- feeling.

ncsian war, than they were invented 1 Odyss. viii. 72, &c.

"by our Homer four hundred years 2 Paley, Iliad of Homer, introduction,
before Herodotos. The only sacrifice xxx.

to he made is that of the ingenious 3 History of Greek Literature , book ii.
reasoning which pretends to account cli. ii. § 4.

for the alleged degradation of Homeric * Paley, Iliad of Homer, introd. xxvi.
characters as shown by the contrast ' 5 I avail myself without scruple of the

between the Helen and Odysseus of our results of Mr. Paley’s labours on a field
Iliad and Odyssey and the game person- < which is wholly his own—the evidence,
ages as painted by .flSschylos and namely, that our Homer was not the
Sophokles. (Gladstone, Homer and the Homer of the great Attic tragedians. In
Homeric Age , iii. 555). But no great this portion of Ms task he has demolished
regrot needs to be felt at giving up the verbal fallacy which lies at the root
an anomaly which would be strange of all the arguments of Mure and
and perplexing in any literature, and Bunsen; and the whole burden of proof
which is rendered doubly perplexing by • lies on those who maintain them. ‘ As

AGE OF THE HOMERIC POEMS.

thirty-five such references in Pindar, only about seven have
a distinct reference to our present Iliad or Odyssey: ’ 1 and
even in some of these the reference is very vague, -while the
lyric poet speaks of the madness of Aias, his midnight
attack on the herds, and his suicide, as Homeric subjects.
A line, perhaps two or three lines, in the Hesiodic Theogony
and the Works and Days may point to our Homer; but of
the Trojan legend generally ‘ very scant mention is made in
the poets preceding Pindar and the Tragic writers.’ 2 One
of the three passages in Theognis cannot be referred to our
Eiad, and a- fragment of Simonides speaks, of Homer ‘ as
describing Meleager in terms not now occurring in the
Iliad.’ 3 Of the Homeric or Trojan subjects carved on
the chest of Kypselos, 4 five are not in the Iliad, and some
refer to versions wholly different from our Homeric story.
Colonel Mure will have it that. Tyrtaios was familiar with
our Homer. 5 In the only passage. which can be cited in
proof of this assertion it is most difficult to discover even
a distant allusion. Twice only does Herodotos name the

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

Iliad; and although the former of. thlse two passages
may be set aside as ambiguous, in the second be distinctly
rejects the Homei'ic authorship of the Kypriaa verses on
the ground that the hitter speak of Paris as reaching Troy
on the third day after leaving Sparta, while the Iliad
describes his long wanderings to Sidon, Egypt and other
places, for which in our Iliad we look in vain. The reason
given by Kleisthenes for the stopping of the rhapsodist3
at Sikjmn Mr. Blakesley regards as ‘ quite inapplicable to
the Iliad or the Odyssey.’ Equally inconclusive are the few
references in Thucydides for any evidence in favour of
the identity of our Iliad and Odyssey with the Iliad and
Odyssey of the age of Perikles. The references of Aristo¬
phanes are of the same kind, sometimes tending to prove
that passages in our Iliad have been altered since his time,
sometimes ascribing to Homer passages which we do not
find in our texts.

The case, then, may be stated thus:—A vast number of
incidents belonging to to Tpmuca, not mentioned or barely
noticed in our Iliad and Odyssey, were treated of in epic
poems current in the days of the great Attic tragedians.
All these epic poems. Colonel Mure emphatically asserts,
were ‘ vastly inferior, both in design and execution, to their
two prototypes.’ 1 Nevertheless from this vastly inferior
literature AEsqhylos, Sophokles, and Euripides * drew. so
largely, that at least sixty of their known plays axe taken
directly from it, while only two are taken from the Iliad and
Odyssey.’ 8 We are left to wonder with Mr. Paley ‘how it
came to pass that the Greeks, in the best ages of their poetic
genius, preferred to take their themes from the inferior and
secondary, to the neglect of the superior and primary,’ and
‘ that the authors of the Cypria, the Little Iliad, the Nosti,
should have won all the credit, an<J left little or none for
their great master and predecessor, Homer.’ Our Iliad and
Odyssey then (even if they were in existence), had not in
the days of AEschylos and Sophokles the popularity which
they have since attained; and the theories of Baron Bunsen',

1 History of Greek Literatur
* Paley, Iliad, introd. xxsvii

WRITTEN POEMS.

Colonel Mure, and Mr. Gladstone fall to tie ground. These chap.
poems did not ‘ regulate the mental developement of the IX '
Greeks,’ nor were they ‘.the acknowledged standard of early
' national history, geography, and mythology.’ The historical
character of these poems being, therefore, definitely dis¬
proved, the time of their composition and the method of
their transmission, although they remain subjects of great
interest, become points of secondary importance. The
knowledge of writing (if the fact he proved) even from an
age earlier than that which has been assigned to the Homeric
poets, will explain hut very few of thd difficulties which
surround the question. A few words scratched on stone
and wood furnish slender grounds indeed for assuming the
existence of voluminous manuscripts during centuries pre¬
ceding the dawn of contemporary history. 1

The conclusion, put briefly and nakedly, is this—that if Results of
any real facts underlie the narrative of the Iliad and Odys- t! J?
sey, they axe so completely buried beneath the mythical
‘overgrowth as to make the task of separation impossible :
that the legend of the Trojan - war is unhistorical; that we
have no grounds for asserting that Agamemnon, Achilleus,
or any other of the actors in the tale were real persons ;
that the story of the -return of the Heraldeids is as mythical
as that of the war of Troy; that the sequence of these myths
throws no light on the time of the composition of our Iliad
and Odyssey; that no historical knowledge can he gained
from the legends of Hellenic colonisation in Asia Minor:
that the mythical history of Greece exhibits a succession of
movements from west to east, and from the east hack to
the west again; that these movements are for the pun-pose
of recovering a stolen treasure or a rightful inheritance-;
that this heritage is the bright land where the sun sinks
to rest after his journey through the heaven; that the stolen
treasure is the light of day carried off by the powers of
darkness, and brought back again, after a hard battle, in
the morning; that the materials of the Iliad and Odyssey
*are taken from the vast stores of mythical tradition common
to all the Aryan nations; that these traditions can be traced
1 Paley, Iliad, xli. 6rc. See Appendix A.

ARYAN NATIONS.

218 MYTHOLOGY OF THE

BOOK back to phrases indicating physical phenomena of whatever
-—^—. kind; that these phrases furnish an inexhaustible supply of
themes for epic poetry; that the growth of a vast epical
literature was as inevitable as the multiplication of myths,
when the original meaning of the phrases which gave birth
to them was either in part or wholly forgotten; that the
substance of the Iliad and the Odyssey existed from an
indefinitely early time; that these poems were not composed
at once, and as a coherent whole ; that they exercised little
influence on the mental developement of the Greek lyric and
tragic poets; and that their present form cannot be traced
to any age mufch earlier than that of Plato. 1 But these
conclusions give us far more than they take away. If the
fabric of the so-called Homeric history has been shattered,
its ruin must be laid to the charge of the Euemerists not
less than to the assaults of Comparative Mythologists. The
former have left us nothing but the barest outline of possible
incidents, for which no evidence can be adduced, and which
can have for us no interest. The latter, if they have dealt
rudely with some arbitrary assumptions and scattered some
dearly cherished but unreasonable fancies, have at least
made ample compensation. No charm which might have
attached to the human characters of Helen and Hektor,
Paris and Achilleus (had the, Euemerists spared us the old
story of their lives),—no pathos which lay in the tale of
Sarpedon’s early death or • of the lieart-piercing grief of
Priam can equal that infinitely higher charm which takes
its place, when we see in these legends the hidden thoughts
of our forefathers during those distant ages when they knew
nothing of an order of nature, and the fading twilight of
every evening marked the death of the toiling and short¬
lived sun. We can well afford to part with the poor resi¬
duum of historical tradition which, possibly underlies the
story of the expedition from Mykenai to Ilion, when we
find that the myth reveals to us r a momentous chapter in the
history of the human mind, and tells us what in that olden
time men thought of God, of the world, and of themselves. 2

1 Tlie limit may bo assigned as b.c. 450 at the earliest.

’ See Appendix B.

219

- CHAPTER X.

THE CHARACTER OF GREEK DYNASTIC AND POPULAR LEGENDS
IN RELATION TO THEIR TRIBAL AND’NATIONAL NAMES.

If the Homeric poets -wrote as historians, they might well chap.
have prayed to he saved from their friends, had they foreseen x ~ .
the way in which their poems were to be treated by the Fertility of
modem Euemerists. After the hard blows dealt by these p h y *^ 8 al
professed champions of Homeric unity and credibility, it is
clear that nothing can restore to the stories of the Argonantic
voyage, of the sieges of Ilion and Thebes, and the return of
the Herakleids, any measure of their supposed historical
character, unless some content porary evidence can be forth-
■ coming, apart from the poems which contain the mythical
narratives of those events. But for such evidence we must
look in vain; and the inquiry which has proved that if any
real strife between mortal men lay at the root of the legends
which relate the story of Achilleus or Sigurd, it must be a
strife preceding the first separation of the Aryan tribes, would
of itself suffice to take away all interest from the search. But
the process of analysing and comparing the stories common
to all the Aryan nations has exhibited to us a form of
thought resulting in phrases which could not fail to become
an inexhaustible source of mythical narratives. We have
seen that from this fountain-head might flow a thousand
streams, while they who drank of their waters might be quite
unconscious of the spring from which they came. We have
seen that, the simple elements of which these stories wen;
composed were, like the few notes of the musical scale. 1
'capable of endless combination; that the polyonymy result¬
ing from this early phase of language yiuldth a vast number

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN' NATIORB.

220

hook of names for the same object, and that each of these names
- J ' . might become, and in most cases actually became, the names
of anthropomorpliosed gods or heroic men. Round each of
these, beings a number of mythical legends would, as we have
seen, group themselves, and impart to each actor a marvel¬
lous individuality. Yet all these beings, at first glance so
different, would be really the same; and the keenest political
rivalry and even animosity might be fed on the merest fancy.
Legends of If then the several Hellenic cities, like other Aryan folk,
took pride in their own peculiar legends, and were obstinately
cities. convinced that these legends had an existence wholly inde¬
pendent of the traditions of other cities or states, this is only
' what we might expect. If, again, these stories, when resolved
into their simplest forms, impress us with a feeling of some¬
thing like monotonous repetition, we have here no cause for
perplexity or surprise. The form of thought which attri¬
buted a conscious life to all sensible objects would find expres¬
sion in phrases denoting all kinds of phenomena. It would
exhibit no narrowness and no partiality ; but regarded as a
whole, the phenomena of day and night and of the changing
seasons would assume the form of great struggles, in which a
bright hero strove for the mastery of the dark beings opposed
to him, and achieved in the end a dearly bought victory. This
hero would naturally be the favourite subject of national song
in every country, and in this beneficent conqueror we have,
it needs scarcely to be said, the sun. The dynastic legends
of the Greek cities precisely answer to this expectation. All
without exception exhibit under forms the most varied that
daily and yearly struggle between Indra and Yritra which!
assumed a moral aspect in the Iranian land.

> The At- The national story of the Argives is made up, we may
give story. now f a i r ]y sa y, 0 f a solar myth, which is recounted at length
in the adventures of Perseus, and repeated in the career of
Herakles without the slightest consciousness that the two
stories are but versions of one. and the same myth. Perseus
is the child of the Golden Shower, and of Danae, Daphne,
Dahana, the dawn, and he is doomed, like other solar
children, to be the flayer of the sire to whom he owes his life.
His weapons are those of Apollon and Hermes. The sword

MYTHS OF. THE DAY AND NIGHT.

<>{ .Clirysaor is in liis hand, the golden sandals of the Nymphs CHAP,
are on his feet. His journey to the land of the Graiai, the .

dim twilight, is only another form of the journey of Herakles
to the garden of the Hesperides. When from the home of
the Graiai he went to the cave of the Gorgdns, the story
sprang from the mythical phrase, ‘ The Sun has gone from
the twilight land to fight with the powers of darkness.’ But
night has a twofold meaning or aspect- There is the dark¬
ness which must yield to the morning light and die, and
there is the absolute darkness which the sun can. never
penetrate. The former is the mortal Medousa, the latter
her deathless sisters. The story ran that Medousa compared
her own beauty with that of Athi§n6, but the starlit night in its
solemn grandeur could be no rival for the radiant goddess on
whom rested the full glory of Zeus and Phoibos. When from
the, Gorgon land Perseus wandered to the shores of Libya,
the story introduced an adventure which recurs in a hundred
forms. Andromeda, Ariadne, Brynhild, Aslauga, Hesione,
beianeira, Philonod, Medeia,, AugS, Iokast4, were all won
after the slaughter of monsters or serpents, while the trium¬
phant return of Dana6 with her son to Argos, after his toil
is ended, is but the meeting of Herakles with Iole, the return
of the sun in the evening to the mother that bore him in the
morning.

In the Theban legend the solar character of the hero is none The The-
the less apparent for the ethical tone which, as in the story of ban stor - v '
Crcesus and in the great trilogy of iEschylos, has converted
the myth into something like a philosophy of life. When
*once the results of old mythical phrases were submitted to a
moral criticism,' the new turn so given to the tale could not
fail to give birth to an entirely new narrative; but the earlier
part of the legend exhibits the framework of many another
tale of Aryan mythology. Oidipous is the son of Iolcaste,
whose name suggests those of Iole, Iamos, or debates. Laios,
like Akrisios, Priam, and.Aleos, dreads his own child,
exposes him on the rough hill side, 1 while his gloomy and

' As the tale of Paris went, on Ha. 11s the jnythr’al phrase, ‘ The sun at
But the Sanskrit IdA is the Earth, the ita hirth rests on the earth or on the
wife of Dviiua; and so we have before hill sido.’

222

MYTHOLOGY OP

E ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK negative character is in complete accord with that of Hekabd
-—\—■ or Leto. But the prophecy of Apollon must be fulfilled.

Oidipous, like Teleplios or Perseus, Romulus or Cyrus, grows
up far away from his home, and like them, remarkable for
strength, beauty, and vigour. The suspicion that be is not
the child of his supposed mother, Merope, sends him forth to
Delphoi, and the homicide of Laios is the death of the parent
of the sun, as the latter starts in his career. Then, like
Perseus, Theseus, and Belleroplion, Oidipous in his turn
must destroy a monster which vexes the land of Kadmos;
but with the strength of Herakles he unites the wisdom of
Medeia and Asklepios, and the Sphinx, baffled by the solution
of her riddle, leaps from the rock, and dies. This monster
belongs, beyond doubt, to the class of which Python, Typhon,
Vritra, Zohak, Pafnir, Cacus are examples. Pew of these,
however, represent precisely the same impressions. Pafnir
is the dragon of winter, who guards the treasures of the
earth within his pitiless folds. The Sphinx is the dark and
lowering cloud, striking terror into the hearts of men and
heightening the agonies of a time of drought, until Oidipous,
who knows her mysterious speech—as the sun was said, in a
still earlier age, to understand the mutterings of the grum¬
bling thunder—unfolds her dark sayings, and drives her from
her throne, just as the cloud, smitten by the sun, breaks
into rain, and then vanishes away. His victory is won. The
bright being has reached his goal, and the fair Iokaste
becomes his bride. 1 This point marks the close of the ori¬
ginal myth; but Iokaste, his wife, is also his mother, and
the morality of Greeks could not recognise a form of speech*
in which the same person might at once be*tlie son and the
husband of another. The relations of anthropomorphous
gods were no longer interchangeable, as they appear in
Yedic Hymns. From the union of a mother with her son,

OIDIPOUS AND IOKASTfi.

the moral sense of the Greek would turn with horror,’
and unconscious of the real nature of the incident so related,
he would look at once for an awful recompense from the
sleepless Erinys of the murdered Laios. Iokaste dies in
her marriage-chamber, and in something of the spirit of the
old tale, Oidipous must tear out his own eyes, as the light of
,the setting sun is blotted out by the dark storm-cloud.
Henceforth the story is the expression of Greek ethics, until
in the last scene (in the company of Theseus, the solar hero
• of Attica) he goes forth to die amid the blaze of the lightning
in the sacred grove of the Eumenides. The blinded Oidipous
dies unseen; but in his last hours he has been cheered by
the .presence of. Antigone, the fair and tender light which
sheds its soft-hue over the Eastern heaven as the sun sinks
in death beneath the western waters. Throughout the tale,
whether in the slaughter of his father, or in his marriage
with Iokaste, Oidipous was but fulfilling his doom. These'
things must be so. Herakles must see Iole in the evening,
Odysseus must journey homeward, Belleropkcra must wander
westward to the Aleian plain, Kephalos must meet liis doom
at the Leukadian cape, as surely as the sun, once risen, must
go across the sky, and then sink down into his bed beneath
the earth or sea. It was an iron fate from which there was
no escaping, and this teaching of the outer world evoked the
awful ’Avdyxj), the invincible necessity, which urges on the
wretched Oidipous, and explains'the origin of that theological
belief which finds its mightiest expression in the dramas
which tell us of the sin of Agamemnon and the vengeance of
Klytaimnestra.

The Megarian stories, like those of Attica, form a tangled

Like Iokaste, she is the' wife of t,\vo and'with it mo may eiira]i:mi tbo origin
the legend should not have made her tionary of Literature, Science and Art, s.v.

224

MYTHOLOGY OK THE ARYAN NATIONS. .

BOOK skein in which several threads of solar legend have been
—' r —• mingled. Minos is himself a son of Zeus, and the husband
1 of Pasiphac, whose name speaks of her at once as the daughter
of Helios. The daughter of Nisos is smitten with the
glorious beauty of his countenance, as is Echidna with that
of Herakles; but the golden lock of her father, while it
remains unshorn, is an invincible safeguard to the city
against the assaults of the Cretan king. The love of Skylla
is not thus to be disappointed. The lock is shorn; and the
name of the maiden (as the rending monster) shows how well
she has served the enemy of her father and her kinsfolk.

The Athe- In the Athenian story the same elements of solar legend
U1 ‘ in 6 01} ' are conspicuous. The myth of Kephalos is reproduced in
that of Theseus, as the career of the Argive Herakles repeats
that of his ancestor Perseus. Like these* Theseus is a slayer
of monsters, and more especially of robbers and evil-doers,
while, like Herakles, he forsakes those whom he loves, and
has many loves in many lands. 1 Armed with a sword
(Sigurd’s good sword Gram) welded of thj same metal with
the sword of Apollon and the spear of Achilleus, he, like
Skythes, in the tale of Echidna, 2 wins the inheritance of his
fathers, and becomes a companion of Meleagros, whose life is
bound up with the burning brand. His descent to Hades is
indeed disastrous; but the mishap is repaired by another
solar legend. It is Herakles who delivers the wooer of
■ Persephone.

The story A still more transparent solar tale is brought before us in
Pelopkls the myth of the hero who gave his name to the Peloponnesos;

but. it tells us not so much of the might and exploits of the
being who represents the sun-god, as of his wealth and his
wisdom and the fearful doom inflicted for his sin. The
palace of the Phrygian king is but the golden house of
Helios, from which Phaethon went forth on his ill-starred
journey. His wisdom is that keen insight into the counsels
of Zeus which Phoibos cannot .impart even to Hermes, the

1 Bishop Tliirlwall (History qf Greece, Hercules, for not only is there a strong
vol. i. ch. v.) lays stress on the sob- tesemblance between them in many
stantial identity of the leeends of particular features, but it also seems
Theseus and Herakles., ‘It was not dear that Theseus was to Attica what
without reason that Theseus was said to Hercules was to the east of Greece.’
have given rise to the proverb another 2 Herodotos, iv. 9,10.

STORY OP THE PELOPIDS.

messenger of. the gods. His frequent converse with the king CHAP,
of gods and men is an image of the daily visit of Helios to ■ X '
the dizzy heights of heaven. The theft of nectar and am¬
brosia 1 finds its parallel in the stealing of the fire hy Pro¬
metheus; and the gift thus bestowed on his people is hut
the wealth which the sun brings from the sky, and bestows
lavishly on the children of men. The slaughter of Pelops,
and the serving up of his limbs to Zeus at the banquet, is as
horrible as the tale which relates the birth of Erichthonios, 2
but its meaning is as clear and as innocent. The genial
warmth of the sun brings to light and life the fruits .of the
earth, which is his bride ; his raging heat kills the very off¬
spring in which he had delighted, and offers it up a scorched
and withered sacrifice in the eyes of Zeus, the sky. The ,
sentence passed upon him is in still closer accordance with
the old mythical language. When Hermes first kindled a
fire by rubbing together the dried branches of the forest,
and slew one of the oxen of Plioibos in solemn sacrifice, he
appeased not his hunger, 3 for the wind may kindle the fire,
but it cannot eat of that which the fire devours. So, too,
Tantalos may gaze on sparkling waters and golden fruits;
but if he stoops to drink, or puts forth his hand to the laden
branches, the water is dried up as by the scorching wind of
the desert, and in the words of the poet, 4 only black mud
and gaping clay remain in place of flowing streams, and the
leaves wither away beneath the fierce glare of tropical noon¬
day. In the rock which threatens to crush him, we see
again only the Sphinx brooding over the devoted city, or the
misshapen Polyphemos hurling down huge crags on the ships
of Odysseus—the unsightly offspring of the stormy sea, the
huge cumulus cloud whose awful blackness oppresses both
eye and heart as an omen of impending doom.

The Attic legend of Theseus is connected with the story The story
of Ixion through his son Peirithoos, but this myth brings 0 * 10 "'
before us only the action' of the sun under another phase.

It belongs perhaps to the least attractive class of Hellenic
stories; but its origin is as simple as that of the repulsive

• Ilymv lo llntnrr. 130-135.

• 187.

Q

{

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN' NATIONS.

legend of Erichthonios. The wheel of the sun is mentioned
in many of the Yedio hymns, which speak of the battle waged
by Dyaus, the heaven, to snatch it from the grasp of night.
So Ix'1611 loves Here, the queen of the ether, the pure heaven,
because Indra loves the Dawn and Plioibos longs for Daphne.
But he is also wedded to the mist, and becomes the father of
the Kentaurs, perhaps the Sanskrit Gandliarvas, the bright
clouds in whose arms the sun reposes as he journeys through
the sky. And so the tale went that in the clouds he saw the
image of the lady Here, and paid the penalty of his unlawful
love. The idea of toil unwillingly borne, as by Herakles or
Apollon, again comes in ; for the wheel of Ixi6n can never
rest, any more than the sun can pause in .his daily career.
The legend is almost transparent throughout. As the wealth
of Tantalos was the fruit which the genial sunshine calls up
from the earth, the treasure-house of Ixion is the blazing
orb of Helios, the abyss of consuming fire which devours the
body of Hesionens. 1 The darkness and gloom which follow
the treacherous deed of Ixion represent a time of plague and
drought, during which the hidden sun was thought to bow
himself before the throne of Zeus. But even yet the doom
pursues him. He has scarcely sought pardon for one offence
before he suffers himself to be hurried into another. Here,
the queen whose placid majesty reflects the solemn stillness
of the blue heaven, fills with a new love the heart which had
once beaten only for Dia. Each day his love grows warmer,
as the summer sun gains a greater power. But the time of
vengeance is at hand. As he goes on his way, he sees a
form as of Here, reposing in the arms of the clouds; but
when he draws nigh to embrace her she vanishes, like
Daphne from the gaze of Phoibos, or Eurydike from that of
Orpheus; and he shares the doom of the Phrygian Tantalos
and his counterpart, the crafty Sisyphos, in the traditional
stories of Corinth.

In all these legends and tales of cities and states whose
rivalry was not always friendly, we trace precisely the same
elements. The Argives and Athenians each regarded their
own traditions as<of independent growth; we have seen that

1 tis 06dpov vvpbs fi*<rr6v, —Diod. iv. 69.

TRIBAL AND NATIONAL NAMES.

their belief was groundless. Differences of names and of
. local colouring prevented .their eyes from discerning- the sub¬
stantial identity of stories in which the very names, when
they do not translate each other, have received their ex¬
planation from languages not known to Greeks or Romans!
At once then we are driven to ask whether the same process
which has explained the legends may not also throw light on
the names of the cities or states themselves. If the former
have been divested of all historical character, is it not possible
that the latter may be really destitute of either historical or
geographical value ? The Ionians looked on the Dorians as
on men of an antagonistic race; the Argives who fought
with Agamemnon were arrayed against the Lykians who
were ranged on the side of Hektor. But did their names in
themselves betoken or warrant the feuds which had sprung
up among them ? The question is one in which it is im¬
possible to do more than argue from the known to the un¬
known;' and something is gained if facts which all would
allow to be fairly ascertained justify the suspicion that the
tribal or national names of the Aryan peoples have, in very
few instances, any geographical significance, ,or furnish any
grounds for drawing distinctions of blood between one tribe
or clan and another. The few names belonging to the former
class refer to the most prominent physical features of the
country, or to the position of one part as distinguished from
another. The Tlirakians are plainly the inhabitants of a.
rough and rugged country. They are the Highlanders of
the Greek regions, and may be ranged with the Albanians or
dwellers among the Alps and hills; and their name falls into
the same class with the names of certain Attic divisions, as
of the Mesogaian and Diakrian tribes ascribed to the times
of King Kranaos, and of the Pediaioi, Paraloi, and Hyper-
akrioi, the men of the plains, the sea-coast, and the Hills.

But if some of the local tribes had names generally de¬
scribing the nature of their pbsition, the name of the whole
Athenian people had no such geographical meaning. Their
title can be explained only through the meaning of tlni.t of
Athene ; and the process which has stripped of all historical
value the traditions of the Argonautic expedition, of the tale

MYTHOLOGY OF THIS ARYAN NATIONS.

of Troy, the Aiolic migrations, the Herakleid conquests,
leaves the origin of this name, and of all similar titles, if
there should be any such, a purely philological question.
Pew probably will be unwilling to allow that this question
may be regarded as settled. The name AthenS, in its Doric
form Athana, is the name also of the Sanskrit Ahan& and
Dahana, the morning, and of the Greek DaphnS, who flies
from the pursuit of the sun-god Phoibos. 1 With scarcely an
exception, all the names by which the virgin goddess of the
Akropolis was known point to this mythology of the Dawn.
The morning flashes up in full splendour from the eastern
sky; and the phrase not only grew up into the story that
Athene sprang fully armed from the head of Zeus (Dyaus,
the sky), hut was represented by many epithets of which her
worshippiers had forgotten the meaning. Her name Trito-
geneia was referred by grammarians to an Aiolic word, trito,
denoting a head; but the myth is in no way affected if the
name is to he referred to a Vedio god of the waters and the
air. 2 Athene thus is but Aphrodite Anadvomene, the dawn
springing from the sky and the sea; and we see her at once
as the Argive Akria, the Messenian Koryphasia, the Roman
Capta, the goddess of the heights of heaven. The same
idea is embodied in the name Kranaai, and in the eponymos
Kranaos, who was invented to explain it. But the strength
of the mythical tradition is shown most clearly in the feelings
which centred in another epithet throughout probably the
whole history of the Athenian people. It was hard for
Athenians to turn a deaf ear to any one who spoke of them
as the men of the bright and glistering city.® When the
comic poet twitted Ms countrymen with taking pleasure in a

1 Max Muller, Lectures on the Science de Bacchus. Qu.nnd le dieu Tritos cessa

of language, second scries, xi. The d’etre eonnu, le mot. TpiroveVeio deviut
origin and meanings of the name Danae une enigme, et les (Soliens, qui dans leur
must he treated separately. dialecte appelaient Tpird ia tete, comrae

2 ‘ A thene s’appelle aussi Tptroyti'tto, l’attestent le scoliaste d’Aristophane et

ATHENIANS, IONIANS, AND PnENICIANS.

229

name fit enough for marking the shining of fish preserved in chap.
oil, he -was unconsciously goiug bach to the root which has . x -
supplied a name for the most beautiful beings of his own
mythology. According to the old Vedic phrase, the horses
of the Sun and the fire alike glisten with oil or are covered
with fat; and the root liar, modified from ghar, is seen in
the Sanskrit Halits, the Greek Charites, and the Latin
Grathe.' The common origin of these names would be
enough to show how Athens came to be so called, and why
the epithet took so strong a hold on Athenian sentiment.

But if the Athenian- name thus proclaimed them simply The
the children of the morning or the dawn, another epithet to
which they clung with a jealous tenacity carries us to the nicinns.
title which, as they supposed, marked a generic distinction
between themselves and the Spartans.

Heretofore when the States’ commissioners
Came trilh an eye to bamboozle the town,

Did they ever fail to address you

Straight at the, word you were up in your seats. 2

But to call the Athenians lostephanoi was hut to call them
Ionians; and. we cannot refuse to connect this name with
the names of 16, Iole, Iohios, Iobates, Iokaste, Iason, Iamos,
and others—names which without exception belong to legends
which are more, or less transparent. In To, the mother of
the sacred bull, the mother also of Perseus and of Herakles;
in Iole, the last comforter of the greatest of all the solar
heroes; in Iokaste, the mother and the bride of Oidipous,
we see the violet-tinted morning from which the sun is born,
and who may he said either to fly from, or to be slain by, or
wedded to her child. In Iol&os we have only a faint image
of his kinsman Herakles; in Iobates we see the king of the
far-off eastern land, at whose bidding Hipponoos goes forth
to do battle with the monsters of darkness. Iason again is
the husband of Medeia, the daughter of the Sun, endowed
with the sun’s mysterious wisdom and magic robe. 3 In the

1 See p. 48, at sea. myf.h to pugga c t llic notion. The p'.-.-.vrs

* Arist. Aeh. 002, translated byL.H. of healing ami (D-sf nirlit.n arc rxeivw-il

2 The Greek explanation made lasi'm plnnnliou is worth as much or n« litila
the healer; bnt there ie nothing in the as the attempts lo account for awli

MYTHOLOGY OF THE AKYAN NATIONS.

book story of Iamos, tlie violet crown of Athens has become ft bed

__. of violet flowers ; but Iamos is himself the child of the sun-

god Phoihos, and he receives his wisdom from the keen-
sighted beings who draw the chariot of Medeia.' In the
name Ionians we have, then, a word strictly denoting colour
and nothing more; and the colour is the tint which over¬
spreads the sky before the rising of the sun. The word is
thus identical in meaning with the name Phoinike (Hhe-
nicia), and Phenicia is accordingly the purple or blood-red
land, where Europe is born, and whence she is borne on the
back of the snow-white hull westwards to Delphoi. The
name is purely Greek, and exhibits its full meaning when
taken along with that of Telephassa, the mother of the broad
day, who dies in the far west weary with searching for her
_ child* The same purple colour is embodied in Phoinix, the
^^larly teacher of Acliilleus, who recites to the wayward chief
the story of the short-lived hero whose life is bound up with
" t " <5, the torch of day. No distinction of race is therefore denoted
hj r the names whether of Ionians or Phenicians.

Argil es lu historical Hellas the Argives were a people inhabiting
and Ar- about a fifth part of the Peloponnesos. If the Iliad is to be
regarded as throwing any light on the conditions of an
earlier time, the name Argos had a far more extensive
application. It was a territory rather than a city or a state,
and with the exception of the islands over which he ruled,
it formed the whole of the dominion of Agamemnon. But
the name itself was not confined to the Peloponnesos ; and
whatever be the explanation to be given of it, it must be
applicable to every extra-Peloponnesian Argos, and . to the
ship which earned the Achaian chieftains on the quest of the
Golden Fleece. The word reappears in the title of Aphro¬
dite Argynnis, and in Argennos the supposed favourite of

/

names as Odysseus and Oidipous. A
similar confusion between lew an arrow,
and lbs poison, fastened on Herakles and
Philoktetes 1 he practice of using poisoned
arrows (Max Muller, Lectures, second
series, 292). It is, therefore, quite
likely that the worship of Iaso, as the
daughter of Asklepios, may be the result
of the same forgetfulness of the meaning

of words which turned Lykaon into a
wolf or JCallisto into a bear. Another
form of the name appears in Iasion, the
beloved of D6ra£ter.

1 "When the word Dragon, which is
only another form of Dorkas, the clear-
eyed gazelle, became the name for ser¬
pents, these mythical beings were ne¬
cessarily transformed into snakes.

ARGIVES AND AKKADIANS.

231

Agamemnon, anil this epithet has been identified with the chap.
Sanskrit Arjnui, the brilliant, a name for the morning. 1 . X '
Here again, then, we have a name denoting brilliancy, and
we see at once that Argos Panoptes, the guardian of Io, is
with his thousand eyes only another image of St. Ursula
and her eleven thousand maidens, or of Tara Bai in the
folk-lore of southern India, 2 while the word itself carries us
to the shining metal, the Greek argyros and the. Latin
argentum, silver. Whatever then the Argo may be, it is
clearly the bright vessel in which the children of the sun go
to seek the lost light of day, and in which they return
possessed of the golden robe in the morning. It is in short,
the Sanskrit arcln, light, and ark&h, the sun himself; 3 and
thus the process which has explained the name of the Argive
people explains also that of the Ax-kadians, whose mythology
runs riot in the equivocal uses of words all originally de-...
noting brilliancy. The eponym Arka.s, is like Argos, a son
of Zeus, Eallistd being the mother of the former, Niobd of
the latter. But in the story of Kallisto we have precisely
that same confusion of thought which in India convei'ted
the seven shiners, or sti’ewers of, light, into seven sages, and
in the West changed them into bears or waggons. The root,
in short, furnished a name for stars, bears, and poets alike;
and when its first meaning faded from the mind, the myth
took the forms with which we are now familiar. 4 In the
west, the old word ai-ksha as a name for star became con¬
fused with the Greek arktos, the Latin Ursa, the name for

the golden bear, (the names Argos and Ursula being thus
etymologically the same), and the stoi-y went that ICallisto,
the most brilliant of a11 the daughters of Zeus, was changed
into a bear by Hdre, as she changed 16 into a heifer. The
version given by Hyginus brings before us another trails-

MYTHOLOGY OP TIXE ARYAN NATIONS.

changed into a wolf for his impiety in offering human flesh
as food to Zens. The story is simply another version of the
myth of Tantalus and Pelops, and the solar character of the
one must be extended to the other. The confusion between
Leukos, brilliant, and Lukos, a wolf was as' natural and
inevitable as between arksha and arktos, and the readiness
with which the one name would suggest the other is shown
in the passage where iEschylos makes, the Theban maidens
pray that the Lykian or bright god might jbecome a very
Lykeian or wolf to their enemies. 1

We come to a class of names, the original significance of
which is even less disguised. Unless we are prepared to
maintain that Phoibos received his name Delios because he
was born in Delos, we are compelled to account for the
name of the island from the myth of the god for whom it is
said to have furnished a birth-place. But this myth is so
indisputably solar that all further discussion on- the character
of the legend becomes superfluous. The word itself denotes
the kindling of the heaven which goes before • the sunrise;
and although it is possible that the coincidence between the
local name and the myth may in any one given case be
accidental, such a supposition becomes desperate when we
find the same coincidence running through many myths in
many countries. If the lord of light is bom in Delos, he is
born also in the Lykian land. Phoibos is Lykegenes, light-
born, not less than Delian: and through that far off-eastern
land flows the golden stream of Xanthos, watering the realm
in which Sarpedon and Glaukos bare rule. But Sarpedon is
a name which has been traced to the same root with the
names of Hermes and Helen, of Saramit, Saranyu and Erinys,
and it expresses the flushing of the heaven after dawn, as
the name of his friend Glarrkos also denotes the brightening
light of Athene Glaukopis. 2 Another chieftain of this morn-

BELIAKS AND LYKIANS.

233

ing-land is locates, whose name, as wc have seen, has the chap.
same meaning as that of Phoinix; and Phenicians and . x ~
Lykians alike existed only in the terminology of the Greeks.

If we are to follow Herodotos,’ the people of the country to
which he gave the name of Lykia, called themselves Termilai,
and the name of the Athenian Lykos the son of Pandion was
drawn in to explain the origin of the new title, as the name
of the Arkadian Lykilon might have "been used, had the
Attic mythical genealogy failed to supply one. Thus Delians
and Lykians are also, like the Athenians and the Lucauians
of southern Italy,' the people of the dawn land • hut the ver¬
sions of the myth are countless, and they all carry us hack to
mythical phrases of the like kind. According to one story,
Artemis, like Phoibos, is bom in Delos; according to another,
in Asteria the starland; in others Asteria and Ortygia are
other names for Delos itself. But the name Ortygia points
in Greek to the word Ortyx, a quail, and there was no lack
of myths to be localised, whether in the Egean island or in
the islet off the eastern shore of Sicily near to Syracuse.

In one Zeus changes Ldto into a quail, from the same motive
which led him to transform Id into a heifer : in another he
himself becomes a quail in order to approach the goddess, as
for the same reason he assumes the form of a, golden shower
in the story of Danad. In yet another, the children are
bom in Asteria, and Ldtd takes them thence into Lykia,
where she vainly tries to bathe them in the fountain of
Melite: but by the same confusion which produces the myth
of Lykaon and possibly all the modern superstitions of
Lykanthropy, wolves come to the aid of the goddess, and
carry her to the stream of Xanthos . 2 In all these legends
the only name which calls for any comment is that of
Ortygia, and Ortygia itself is only the da,wn-la.ud. ‘ 'Hie
quail in Sanskrit is called Yart.ikd, i.e. the returning
bird, one of the first birds that return with the return of
spring .’ 3 The name, it is» obvious, might be applied to
the dawn, as naturally as the setting sun might become

MYTHOLOGY OF

ARYAN NATIONS.

in the Sanskrit Bheki and the frog-princess of the German

The myth of the Lykian Sarpedon has a close affinity with
that of the Ethiopian Memnon; and in the Ethiopians
■vvho fight at Troy we have another people for whom it
becomes impossible to find a local earthly habitation. The
story explains itself. The tears which Eos sheds on the
death of her child are morning dew. The men who follow
him are, according to the Herodotean stor^ exempt from
the ills of humanity; and their tables are always loaded
with banquets which no labour of theirs has provided. It
may amuse historians to regard this mysterious people as the
invaders and conquerors of the so-called Chaldaean empire;
but no historical inference can be drawn from any mention
of them in the Iliad or Odyssey. The name itself is as purely
Greek as are the names of the Phenicians and the Lykians,
and any explanation given of it must also explain the names
Aithon, Aithylla, Aithra, Aithrios, Aithousa. But when
we have done this, we shall find the Ethiopians dwelling,
not as Mr. Rawlinson believes, on the south coast both of
Asia and Africa, and as divided by the Arabian Gulf into
Eastern and Western, Asiatic and African , 2 but in the bright
Aither, the ethereal home of Zeus himself, far above the
murky air of our lower world.

There remain yet two names, which, according to Thucy-

^ 1 See page 165. The. story of the exult when they look oi

a golden ball, which, like Endyinio

appears as a Tone! in Grin
the Iron Stove. Tn the Nix
pond the man and his wife

the twilight fade beneath the waters.
In the Man of Iron the golden ball with
which the king’s son is playing rolls, not
into the water but into the cage in which
the wild man (the Winter) is confined;

golden locks. In the story of the Old
Griffin the ball takes the, form of golden
apples, which instantaneously restore the
king’s daughter to health, as the nymphs

other stories. In the legend of Bria

thatVb/'shaU have daughter, ''inrtui
of the Three Feathers, Dummling. tvhes
exploits reveal him like Theseus as an
other Hera kies, receives the beautifu
carpet (of clouds—the web of Penelope
from the Prog who is now underground
in other words, after sundown. In th
Faithful Beasts it is again the Prog wh

le (the orb of the Sun

2 Eastern M<marchies,

DANAANS AND ACHAIANS.

dides , 1 were applied in tlie time of the Homeric poets, to the chap.
tribes afterwards known collectively as Hellenic. In Mr. ■ X ' -
Gladstone’s judgment, the followers of Agamemnon were
called Danaans in their military capacity, the name Argive
being used as a geographical designation,' while that of
Achaians was confined to the ruling tribe . 2 How vague the
name Argive is as a local term, we have already seen; and
even if the other two names are used in these senses, we are
obviously no jparer to their original meaning. The quantity
of the first salable is urged as a reason for not identifying
the term Danaans with Ahand, Dahana, and Daphne, names
of the dawn. At the least, it must he admitted that the
word must he taken along with the stories of Danad the
mother of Perseus, and of Danaos with his fifty daughters.

Of these the former is throughout strictly solar . 3 If, how¬
ever, Niebuhr he right, the one reason for not holding
Danad and Daphne to be different forms of the same name
loses its force, for in his judgment the word reappears in
Italy under a form more closely allied to Daphne than to
Danad, and the Latins who regarded themselves as if coming
of the pure Trojan stock, bore precisely the same name with
the enemies of Priam and of Hektor . 4 So unsubstantial, in
all that relates to names, are the bases on which distinctions
of race and political attractions and animosities have been
made to depend, that we might well look with patience on
the arguments by which Mr. Gladstone 5 seeks to connect the
names of the Western Achaians and the Persian Achaimeni-
dai, if the names were not adduced as the evidence of ethno-

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

logical affinity. Certainly it is not much more surprising
that Persian and Hellenic tribes should bear the same name,
than that the Hindu of the Vedic age and the Persian of
our own day should both speak of themselves as Aryans.'
But the Achaian name is too manifestly linked 'with that of
Achilleus to allow any explanation to pass unchallenged
which does not apply alike to both. It is enough to say
that, so far as we may form a judgment, it must be placed
in the class of tribal names which had origg^ally the same
meaning with those of Phenicians, Lykians, Delians, Arka-
dians, Athenians, and Ionians . 2

We reach at last the great name which imparted some¬
thing like a national character to the centrifugal tribes
known to us as Greek: and at once it may be said that the
name Hellenes was no more distinctive than that of Ionians
or Dorians, Delians and Ortygians, Arkadians and Lykians.
Under another form it expresses only the same idea of
brightness, with a reservation which limits it to the bright¬
ness of the sun. Whether there be, as Mr. Gladstone sup¬
poses , 3 the same ethnical connection between the Hellenes of
the West and the Eelliats of Persia, which, following the
popular Argive tradition , 4 he assumes between the men of
Argos as descended from Perseus and the people of the Eteo-
Persian province of Ears, is a question with which we need
not concern ourselves. Although the possibility of such a
connection cannot be denied, the reality of it cannot be
inferred from names which carry us into the regions of
eloudland. But of the philological identity of the names
Hellen, Hellas, Helle, Helloi and Selloi , 5 Selleeis, and

COLLECTIVE NAMES OF THE GREEK TRIBES. 237

Helldtis as a name of Athene, or again of these names with chap,

Helios, Eelios, and the Latin Sol, there can be no question. „_ X '__

Here then we have another group of names, every one of
which resolves itself into the idea of solar brightness,

' f° r the root swr, to glitter, furnished the special Sanskrit
name for the Sun whether male or female . 1 Hence, as we
might expect, the mythical genealogy of the Hellenes plays
throughout on the ideas of light and darkness. For Hellen
himself is in ,^ne form of the legend the son of Deukalion
and Pyrrha, names which connect themselves with such words
as Polydeukes, Phoinix, and Ion; in another, he is the child
of Zeus, the gleaming heaven, and Dorippe.' Of his children
one is the dusky Xouthos, another the flashing Aiolos, a
name which must be traced seemingly to the same root with
the Aither of Zeus and the Aithiopians (Ethiopians) of the
Odyssey. The two sons of the dark Xouthos are the epo-
nyms of the Ionian and Achaian clans ; but Ion shares his
name with other violet-coloured mythical creations, and
Achaios with Achilleus must, it would seem, be referred to
the Yedic solar hero Aliaryu. Thus, with the Delians, '
Lykians, and Orty'gians, the Hellenes are, like the people of
Khorassan, simply the children of the light and the sun, and
the Hellespont marks their pathway . 2

By this name all the tribes and clans who traced their Greeks
descent from Hellen and Deukalion acknowledged the bonds
of affinity which, as they supposed, connected them with
each other. A strictly local or geographical name it never
became. Wherever the Hellenes went, they carried Hellas
with them. It might be scattered among the islands of the
Egean; it might be fixed on the mainland between that sea
and the Hadriatic; it might be transferred to the soil of
Italy; but the dwelling-place of the children of the Sun
retained everywhere the same name . 3 As Hellenes they

* iSuryi is ‘a female Surya. i.c. the $4v6os t fiaOos. —M.'e: IMiiller, Cmjhira-

eommrntator, the Dawn again
diflerent name. In the Rig-T
the Dawn is called the wife .

husbands of SuiyA.’—Mai M"

238

MYTHOLOGY OF TilF, ARYAN NATIONS.

book hail a bond of union, which was the nearest Greek approach
—^—. to the modern idea of nationality, and which in greater or
less degree counteracted or softened the animosities of
Dorians and Ionian s, of Athenians and Spartans, of Argives
and Ac.hai;l,ns. And yet the name which thus served to link
them together with some sort of friendly or even national
feeling was a word of precisely the same meaning with the
tribal or local names which were supposed to denote some
real distinctions of blood. But this was not the title by
which they were known in Western Europe. It never came
into common use among the Latins, who spoke of them as
Graii, and Grieci or Greeks. Of any such people to the east
of the Hadriatic the earliest notice is in the statement of
Aristotle, that the people dwelling round the Thesprotian
Dodona were called Graikoi before they were called Hel¬
lenes.’ Following the path in which the names thus far
examined assuredly lead us, we should expect to find in
Western Hellas some names denoting the gloaming or doubt¬
ful light of eventide. As Perseus journeyed westward, he
came to the land of the Graiai, or gray beings, before he
reached the gloomy dwelling of the Gorgons. To the in¬
habitants of Thessaly, Epeiros was the gray land of the
setting sun, and here accordingly we find the Graioi. But
this name, it would seem, must have been accepted as a local
name for the country to the west of mount Pindos, before
the Latin tribes had any knowledge of their Eastern neigh¬
bours. The name Hesperia, which the Hellenes applied
to Italy, the Latins never acknowledged for themselves;
and with Virgil the use of it is due merely to the poet’s
fancy. Grain,ns and Hesperians are thus alike the people oi
the dusky land, the Epeirot tribes acknowledging the name
because it was applied to them by their immediate kinsfolk,
the Italians ignoring it, or possibly not knowing it as a word
belonging to another language .' 2

Italian But if the Latin name has* any connection with that of
tonic 1 ™ ^ ie Danaoi, it becomes at the least possible that other tribal

ITALIAN AND TEUTONIC TRIBAL NAMES.

names of the countries east of the Hadriatic may he found
on the great Italian peninsula: and thus, following the law
which modifies the Sanskrit apa, water, into the Greek
Acheloos, Acheron, and Axios, and the Latin aqua,, we should '
erpect that the name of the Achaians, if it reappeared at all,
would undergo a similar change. Apulians and iEquians we
do find; and it remains to be proved whether the coincidence
be or be not accidental. That the same names should be
used in common by tribes whose dialects ■ are so closely akin
as those of the Greeks and Latins, is assuredly not ante¬
cedently improbable: and thus some colour is furnished for
the inferences of Niebuhr, who traces to these two forms a
very large proportion of the tribal names of the Italian
peninsula . 1 Such a name as that of the Rutulians forces
on us a comparison with that of Argives, Arkadians, and
Phenicians: and the mythology of Virgil points in the same
direction . 2 Whether this identity be established or not, the
instances already adduced suffice to show that, with scarcely
an exception, the Greek tribal names are. merely words
denoting colour, and all pointing in the same direction of
mythopceic or radical metaphor. That the same process
should go on among all peoples speaking kindred dialects, is
no more than we should expect; and the expectation will be
fully justified. The English Baldringas are children of the
Sun not less than the Hellenes, the Athenians, and the Lyld-
ans, and they still have their home at Baldringham. An¬
other Teutonic Sun-god, the Eddie Tyr, the English Tiw,
had his dwelling and his children at Tewing and Tewesley.
The sons of Thunder and grinding War gave their names to

1 It must be remembered that tile the intermediate forms Opicus, Opscas,

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE AKTAU NATIONS.

2 10

BOOK Tliorington and Eormington. Nay, the very names of Yng
1 and Iseo, the two sons of Man the son of Tiw, are merely
words denoting the ash tree, from which, according to both
'German and Hellenic notions, some of the human raees had
sprung . 1

EtJmo- From all these names no further ethnological conclusion
inferences. carL drawn than that all the nations and tribes speaking
Aryan dialects are sprung from ancestors who once dwelt
somewhere as a single people. As evidence for narrower
distinctions they are worthless. Argives and Athenians,
Ionians and Arkadiaus, may have regarded each other as
aliens, but their names have all the same meaning; and all
their legends of prehistoric migrations and conquests resolve
themselves into the great journey and the mighty battle
which is repeated every morning and evening through all the
seasons of the rolling year. We can no longer look to move¬
ments of Aioliaus, Argives, or Herakleids as throwing light
on the distribution of the Hellenic tribes in historical times . 2
The facts of that distribution must be received as they are
given to us by the most trustworthy contemporary histo¬
rians : to reason back from history into the regions of myth
is an occupation not more profitable than the attempt to fill
a sieve with water.

241

CHAPTER XI.

MYTHICAL PHRASES’ FURNISHING THE MATERIALS OE THE
HOMERIC POEMS.

Ip the history of Greek literature to the close of the CHAP.

Peloponnesian War shows that the poems to which we give ___-

the name of Homer did not constitute the Homer of the Exteni of
lyric, tragic, or comic poets, and that our Iliad and Odyssey
were, in the precise form transmitted to us, either unknown literature,
to them, or (what is altogether improbable), unpopular if
known, these conclusions, it must not be forgotten, are only
negative. The most zealous Euemerists of the present day
admit that ‘ the general scheme of the Iliad existed before
the days of Homer; ’ the most advanced sceptics have never
supposed that the later poets of the Iliad and the Odyssey
invented the materials of which they have made use. It is
even likely that large portions of our Iliad and Odyssey may
have existed substantially in their present shape long before
the days of JEschylos and Sophokles; and even if we say
that these two poems were thrown into their final form not
long before the time of Plato, we do but say that from the
vast mass of Homeric literature the poets chose those por¬
tions which from their general tone of thought and feeling
were most congenial to the sentiment of the age in which
they lived, that from the stories so chosen they removed
unpleasant roughnesses and archaisms, and kept as much
in the background as they could the ruder and more savage
features of the traditions followed by the great tragic poets . 1

242

MVTHOI.OGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book In short, ns soon as we have dismissed all speculations on

__. possible historical quarrels fought out on the shores of the

Propontis, as soon as we allow that if the Homeric poems
turn on any historical quarrel at all, that quarrel must be
• carried back to an age indefinitely.preceding- the first dis¬

persion of the Aryan tribes, we are at once left free to account
for the origin and the growth of Homeric materials; and
the shutting up of all other pathways shows, that if the ques¬
tion is ever to be answered, it can be answered only by follow¬
ing the track of Comparative Mythology.

Extent of But the evidence which disproves the assertion of Bunsen,
jii.v't'hc- C that our Iliad is ‘ the sacred ground-work of lyrical poetry

logy- no less than of the drama,” invalidates at the same time all
those arguments from the silence of our Homeric poems, on
which some recent writers have been disposed to lay much
stress. These arguments at best cannot reach very far. The
epithet which speaks of Zeus as a son of Kronos implies a
knowledge of dynasties among the gods ; and the weight of
proof lies therefore with those who maintain that the framer
of the Iliad, had never heard the story of Prometheus. An¬
other epithet implies the knowledge that Achilleus was to
die young, even if we put aside the passage which speaks of
his death in the Odyssey. The poet of our Iliad knew that
Paris was called Alexandras ; and it is impossible to show
that he was unacquainted with the myths which professed to
explain the origin of this name. He also knew that the
whole expedition of the Achaians against Troy was but an
incident in the epical history of Paris, for the very cause of
the war is that Paris came and stole Helen from the house
of Menelaos. He. knew further, for he tells us plainly, that
the inaction of Achilleus had its counterpart in the inaction
of Paris; and if he tells us how, after his long fit of sullen
anger, Achilleus came forth in all his old energy, he also
knew that Paris was not to be always idle, and that from him
Achilleus himself was to receive his death-wound . 2 Nothing

evidence exists of any new Homer having
superseded the old Homer,’ but it follows
that the poets would 4 retain the general
archaic type of the heroic manners and

God in History, book iv. ch. riii.
fj/MTi Tty St € KfU ere Ilipi? «ol $o?ftos

4<r6\bv 4ivr okecrwcriv 2icatp<n
7rv\r}cu>. IX. xxii. 359.

MYTHOLOGY OP THE HOMERIC POETS.

243

less than the dearest proof that our Homer was the Homer CHAP,
of Pindar, iEschylos, and Sopliokles, can weaken the conclu- . x] - .
sion that our poems are compilations, made for a purpose,
from the vast existing mass of Homeric'literature. If this
purpose was to supply, ‘ in a convenient ■ and symmetrical
form, the most celebrated and most engrossing incidents of
the war ,’ 1 it is unreasonable to look to the Iliad for notices
of myths which lay-beyond the region of the poet’s immedi¬
ate subject, and it clearly did not concern him to go through
the genealogies of the Hesiodic theogony even if he knew
them. His task was to exhibit a few incidents in the special
career of Paris' on the one side and of Achilleus on the
other; and if he knew that these incidents were linked with
others of which he does not speak, it only remains to point
out resemblances which probably escaped his notice, and to
account for their occurrence. It is of the very essence of
mythology that the original signification of the names which
serve as the groundwork of its narratives should be only in
part remembered. The author of the hymn to Hermes had
at best only an intermittent consciousness that he'was simply
relating the rivalry of the wind and the sun ; but he knew
enough of the attributes of Hermeias to write a poem,
almost every line of which points to the mythical speech of
which the tale is a petrifaction. The author of the Iliad
may not have felt that Achilleus was but a reflection of
Tantalos and Ixion, Sisyplios and Lykaon : but his language
throughout the poem harmonises strangely with the mythical'
phrases which speak of the lord of day when he hides away
his face behind the clouds. He could not know that the
Northman, even then wandering in regions which for the
Achaian had no existence, was framing the tale which grew
up into the epic of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs, and that
in that tale Achilleus and his mother Thetis were repre¬
sented by Sigurd and his mother Hjordis. With the cause
of the expedition to Troy he had no immediate concern. Ho
tells us, in passing, the cause of the war; but bis theme is
the wrath of the great chieftain from Phthia, aud be lias
kept to that theme with wonderful fidelity, if not to Ihc
■ Paloy, On the late Date :f nnr Iliad and Odyssey, 8.

‘244

MYTHOLOUY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

rook Greek nature, yet to the old mythical speech. For after the
L , admission of critics opposed to the hypothesis of Wolf, that
the fragments in which the Homeric text was handed down
from remote antiquity ‘were cast and recast, stitched to¬
gether, unstitched again, handled by uncritical and un¬
scrupulous compilers in every possible way ,’ 1 it is impossible
to dispute the conclusion that those portions of the poem
which relate exclusively to the independent exploits of the
other chiefs were at some later time embodied into a poem
which may conveniently be termed an Ackill&s.® Nor, if it
be necessary to account for this insertion, have we far to go
for a reason. The theme chosen by the author of the
Achilleis confined him to a period of comparative inaction.
The valour of the Achaians could only be asserted by an
independent poem which showed that they were not helpless 3
even without the aid of the great son of Peleus. It is not
surpx-ising that the two poems should, with others which
fitted in with the general plan, have been gradually blended
together . 4

1 Edinburgh, Review, October, 1!

unn “essaly KX" 1 * m effort^fo^recondliatSi” 8 S^Muh!
which the several portions of the Iliad Sanskrit Texts , part iv. ch. ii. sect. 3,
have been pieced together. It is enough where the like reasons are urged for
to say that, when the whole narrative of regarding certain passages in the Mah&~

later alleged events have also be-
shown to possess no historical value, t
burden of proof rests with those w!
affirm, not with those who deny, t.
original unity of a poem which,, it

may Stedf how“
'gumenfs of Colonel

1 Mure, strangely enough,
- '^‘ing but a catalogue

Grit. Hist^Gr.
vol. i. p. 256. Mr. Grote, far
•e. truly, says that the great chiefs
‘ in full force at the beginning of the
oiith book.’— History of Greece ,

rgive hosts.

(Homer and the Hon
fail altogether to n
urged by Mr. Grote

continuity of the poem m its present Drmgi
form. Mr. Grote’s remarks (History of The q
Greece , part i. ch. xxi.} on the embassy ' impor
to Achilleus dispose conclusively c"
every attempt to -

iem into their present sha|
on loses much of thefactitio

ative of the Iliad hi

THE ACHILLfilS.

Thus was produced an epic as magnificent as it is com¬
plicated; but through all its intricacy may be traced the
thread of the original myth : and the fact that it may be so
traced becomes the more remarkable as we realise the extent
to which the process of disintegration has been carried on.
If the poem does not exhibit the systematised theogony of
Hesiod, still Phoibos is in it a person distinct from Helios,
Artemis, or Athfine. HekabS is no longer identified with
Selen6 or Let6: Zeus is no longer one with Ouranos. Only
a few signs remain of that interchangeable character which
is so prominent in the gods of the earlier Vedic poems. And
further, the Hiad, by the admission alike of those who uphold
and of those who reject the Wolfian theory, necessarily
exhibits the later elements which must spring up with the
growth of a definite religion, and the developoment of some¬
thing like civil government. Still, on the Trojan shore,
facing the island of Tenedos, the old tale is repeated, which
assumes a gloomier form in the mythology of the North. The
mighty Achillens, over whose childhood had watched Phoinix
(the purple cloud), is there to fight, but, like Bellerophon, as
he insists emphatically, in no quarrel of his own. 1 A hard
toil is before him, but, as with Herakles, the honour which
he wins is not to be his own. 2 Like Herakles, again, and
Perseus and Theseus, his limbs are strong, and his heart
knows no fear. In place of the sword of Apolldn, the
Chrysafir, or the Teutonic Sigurd, he has the unerring spear
which no mortal can wield but himself. 3 Still, like Herakles
and Apolldn and Perseus and Bellerophon, he is practically
the servant of one on whom he looks down with a deserved
contempt. 4 On him falls all the labour of war, but the spoil
which he wins with his bow and spear must pass into the

24G MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book hands of Agamemnon, 1 as those of Herakles fall to the lot of

-r_. Eurystheus. Still he lias his consolation. He is cheered by

the love of Hippodomeia* (the tamer of the horses of the
Son). But even Briseis he must now give up, as Herakles
was compelled to part from lole. At the very thought of
losing her, his passion overleaps all barriers; but his rage is
subdued by the touch of Athene, the daughter of Zeus, the
sky. 3 He must yield, but with Briseis vanishes the light of
his life, and he vows a solemn vow that henceforth in the
war the Achaians shall look in vain for his aid. 4 He hangs
up his sword and spear in his tent, takes off his glittering
armour, and the Argive warriors see the face of the bright
hero no more. Yet even the fierceness of his wrath cannot
avail to keep entirely in the background another feature in
which he resembles Herakles, Sigurd, Theseus, and Iason.
Briseis is gone, but Diomede, the daughter of Phorbas, sup¬
plies her place, as Oinone gives way to Helen, and the wise
Medeia to the daughter of the Argive Kre6n. But the mind
of Acbilleus remains unchanged. His wrath is terrible as
the wrath of the angry sun, and he bids Thetis, his mother,
go to the throne of Zeus, who dwells in the bright ether, and
pray him to send such a storm as may well make the
Achaians rate their king at his true value. 6 The darkness
thickens, but at first the Achaians care not. Zeus alone
knows and proclaims that the fortunes of the Argives them¬
selves must remain under the cloud until Achilleus again
goes forth to battle. 6 His words are soon accomplished.
The knowledge that the great Champion of the Argives no
longer takes part in the war inspires the Trojans with fresh
strength. The storm-clouds rise with greater volume when

1 T b n'ev irKeTov woturai'icor iroXepoio Diomede, who takes her place, belongs

X*‘f>«s e>«l Sieraw’ • Strap tjy wore to the south-western Lesbos. II. ix. 658.

Sav/ati &7,rat, So Oinbue lives on Ida, but Helen in the

toXrhyipasinkbiuSiov. 17. i. 167. far west. Iole is the daughter of Eu-

troiiymic. The father of Briseis is the c gaueia,' &c.\ in the eastern island of
Vedic Brisaya. ‘Destroy, Sara.swa.ti, Euboia; DManeira lives in the western
the revilers of the gods, the. offspring Kalydon.
of the universal deluder, Brisaya.’— 1 II. i. 240.

II. H. Wilson, R. N. 8. jii. 515. * II. i. 407-412.

* It is at the least worthy of note « 11. viii. 477-

that, while Brisois comes from Lyrnessos,

THE DEATH OF PATROKLOS.

247

the light of the sun is blotted out of the sky. Still the great chap.
chiefs of the Argives stand forth in unabated confidence ; 1 • Xl ' ■
but Agamemnon, Odysseus, and Diomedes are soon wounded
in the fight, and the Achaians begin to realise their grievous
loss. Their misery excites the compassion of Patroklos, in
whom the character of Achilleus is reflected, as is that of
Helios in Phaethon, or that of Odysseus in Telemaclios. 2
Melted by the tears of his friend, Achilleus gives him his own
armour, and bids him go forth to aid the Argives. But with
this charge he joins a caution. Phaethon must not touch
with his whip the horses of Helios. 3 Patroklos must not
drive the chariot of Achilleus on any other path than that
which has been pointed out to him. 4 But although Patroklos
can wear the armour of Achilleus, he cannot wield his spear. 5
The sword and lance of Apollon and Perseus, of Theseus and
Artemis, maybe touched by no other hands than their own.
Patroklos is ready for the fight, and yoked to the car of
Achilleus stand the immortal horses. Xauthos and Balios
(golden and speckled as a summer sky), which Podarge, the
glistening-footed, bare to Zepihyros, the strong west wind,
near the shore of the Ocean stream. 0 The sun is breaking-
out for a moment through' the mist. Like hungry wolves,
the Myrmidons (the streaming rays) stand forth to arm
themselves at the bidding of their chieftain. 7 For a time
the strength of Achilleus nerves the arm of Patroklos, so that

1 If. ix. 55. which may well mourn for the hero who

2 Mr. Grote has remarked this. ‘ Pa- took him from king Hialprek’s stall and

troklos has no substantive position; he is rode on him through the flames when lie
the attached friend and second of Achil- went to recover the stolen treasures,
leus, but nothing else .’—Bistory of This horse, Grimm remarks, appears
Greece, ii.- 238.' Colonel Mure, however, in the Swedish and Danish folk-lore
discerns in the contrast between the two under the name Black, a word which, it
strong evidence of Homers ‘ knowledge can scarcely bo necessary to say, may
of human nature.’— Orit. Hist. Gr. Lit. signify whiteness and light not less than
i. 285. gloom aud darkness. The sanm power

* These heavenly steeds of Achilleus of speech belongs iu the Servian legend
and Indra are not less prominent in the to Scharatz, who speaks to Marlio

speech which Xanthos
golden or gleaming be
itself, while it is dome
mottled or speckled, ste

warns Achilleus of Ins impending doom.
For otherinstanoes sec Grimm’s jbentwhe
Mytholofjie , 365.

248

MYTHOLOGl

TUB ARYAN NATIONS.

book he can smite Sarpcdbu, the great chief of the LyMans, in
•—\—• whose veins runs the Mood of Belleroph&n, and for whom
the bitter tears of Zeus fall in big drops of rain from the sky . 1
But the transient splendour is soon dimmed. It was bntthe
semblance of the sun looking out from the dark cloud; and
Patroklos, therefore, meets his doom. But the poet recurs
unconsciously to the old myth, and it is Apollon who disarms
Patroklos, 2 although it is Hektor who slays him. The im¬
mortal horses weep for his death and the fall of their
charioteer Automedon, while Zeus mourns that ever he
bestowed them as a gift on so mean and wretched a thing
as man. 3 In the fearful struggle which follows for the body
of Patroklos, the clouds are seen fighting a fierce battle over
the sun, whose splendour they have for a time extinguished.
The ragged and streaming vapours which rush across the
sky have their counterpart in the throng of Trojans who
fling themselves like hounds on the wounded boar. 4 But a
fiercer storm is raging behind the dark veil. Beneath the
‘black cloud of his sorrow’ the anguish of Achilleus is pre¬
paring an awful vengeance. 5 The beauty of his countenance
is marred, but the nymphs rise from the sea to comfort him, 6
as folk still say, ‘ the sun drinks,’ when the long rays stream
slantwise from the clouds to the waters beneath. One desire
alone fills his heart, the burning thirst for vengeance; but
when Thetis warns him that the death of Hektor must soon
be followed by his own, 7 his answer is that the destruction
of his great enemy will be ample recompense for his own
early doom. Even Herakles, the dearest of the sons of Zeus,

THE VOW

ACHILLEUS.

tad submitted to tbe same bard lot.’ His mind is made up.
He retains still the unerring spear. It remains only that he
should wait for the glistening armour wrought on the anvil
of the fire-god Hephaistos. But, although the hour of his
. vengeance is not yet come, his countenance still has its
terrors, and the very sight of his form 2 fills the Trojans with
■ dismay, as they hear his well-known war-cry. His work is
in part done. The body of Patroklos is recovered as the sun
goes down unwillingly into the stream of ocean. 3 Then fol¬
lows the awful vow of Achilleus. There shall be a goodly
mourning for Patroklos. The life-blood of twelve Trojans
shall gush in twelve streams on the altar of sacrifice, 4 like
the tom and crimsoned clouds which stream up into the
purple heaven when the angry sun has sunk beneath the sea.
But the old phrases, which spoke of Helios or Herakles
as subject to death, still spoke of both as coming forth con¬
querors of the power which had seemed to subdue them;
and, true to the - ancient speech, the poet makes Thetis
assure her son that no hurtful tiling shall touch the body
of Patroklos, and that, though it should lie untended the
whole year round, his face should wear at its close a more
glorious and touching beauty. 6 • The end draws nigh. The
very helmsmen leave the ships as they hear the cry of
Achilleus calling them once again to battle. 6 His wrongs

2 J». ivii'i
unclouded,
head a golde
the glory str
going up to

SU “ XViih

250 MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATION'S. .

book shall be redressed. Agamemnon, the king, will yield to him

._^_ the maiden whom he had taken away, and with her shall

come other maidens not less fair, and gifts of priceless beaaty . 1
But, with a persistency which, except by a reference to the
sources of the myth, is at best a dark riddle, Agamemnon
asserts his own innocence. ‘ I am not guilty,’ he said.

‘ The blame rests with Zeus and Moira (who fixes the lot of
man), and Erinys, who wanders in the air.’ So the old wrong
is atoned. The gifts a,re placed before him. The fair
maidens come forth from the tent, but, with a singular
fidelity to the old legend, Briseis comes last of all,* beautiful
and pure as in the hour when he parted from her, 3 even as
Oinone in her unsullied loveliness appears by the side of the
dying Paris, or Iole by the pyre of Herakles. Then it is that
Achilleus forgives the wrong done to him, but repeats the
riddle which lurked in the words of Agamemnon. It was
not anything in the son of Atrcus that could really call forth
his wrath. ‘ He could never, in his utter helplessness, have
taken the maiden from me against my will; but so Zeus would
have it, that the doom of many Achaians might be accom¬
plished.’ 4 So he bids them go and eat, and make ready for
the fight; but when Agamemnon would have Achilleus him¬
self feast with them, the answer is that the time for the
banquet is not yet come. His friend lies unavenged, and of
neither meat nor drink will he taste till his last fight is
fought and won. 5 The same truthfulness to the old idea
runs through the magnificent passage which tells of the
arming of Achilleus. The helmets of the humbler warriors
are like the cold snow-flakes which gather in the north. 6
But when Achilleus dons his armour, a glorious light flashes
up to heaven, and the earth laughs at its dazzling radiance. 7

he not only acquits himself of guilt. (86),
hut, in order to fix the blame on Zeus,
recites a tale which is essentially a se¬
parate poem, and may have existed long
before, or apart from, the Bias or the
ArhilKis, as may have been the case

«rr\ AtA p oyhodrT]y BpurytSa uaWi-
irttpjtov. It. xix. 245.

1 Ih. xix. 261. v
lb. xix. 274.

1 lb. xix. 210.

' i>s S’ Sre racial vnfASe! Albs 7*™-

tyvxpat, birb pufrjt aiOfmyeMos &opioj>.

Ib. xix. 358.

’ atyki\ S’ obpavbv Ue, yt \awe 5e
vara irepl _

THE VICTORY OF ACHILLEU?

251

His, shield gleams like the blood-red moon, as it rises from CHAT.’,
the sea.' His helmet glitters like a star, and ea,ch liair in . XI '
the plume glistens like burnished gold. When he tries the
armour to see whether it fits his limbs, it bears him like a,
bird upon the wing/ Last of all, he takes down his spear,
which none but himself can handle, while Alkimos and
Antomedon (the strong and the mighty) harness his immor¬
tal horses. As he mounts the chariot, he bids them bear
him safe through, the battle, and not leave him to die as they
had left Patroklos. Then the horse Xanthos bows his head,
and warns him of the coming doom. Their force is not
abated. They can still run swifter than the swiftest wind,
and their -will is only to save the lord whom they serve and
love. But the will of Zeus is stronger still, and Achilleus
too must die. 3 It is a kindly warning, and the hero takes it
in good part. ‘ I know/ he says, ‘ that I shall see my father
and my mother again no more ; but the work of vengeance,
must be accomplished/ Then, before the great strife begins,

Zeus bids all the gods (the powers of heaven) take each his
side. He alone will look down serenely on the struggle as
it rages beneath him/ Many a Trojan warrior falls by the
spear of Achilleus, and the'battle waxes fiercer, until all the
powers of heaven and earth seem mingled in one wild turmoil.

The river Skamandros is indignant that the dead body of
Lyka&n, the (bright) son of Priam, should be cast into its
waters, and complains to Achilleus that his course to the sea.
is clogged by the blood which is poured into it. 5 But
Achilleus leaps fearlessly into the stream, and Skamandros
calls for aid to Simoeis. The two rivers swell, aud Achilleus
is almost overborne. 6 It is a war of elements. . The sun is
almost conquered by the raging rain. But another power
comes upon the scene, and the flood yields to Hephaistos,
the might of the fiery lightning. 7 Piercer yet grows the

252

MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book strife. The gods themselves struggle wildly in the fray,

•-;—• while Zeus laughs at the sight. 1 Artemis fells, smitten by

Here, and her arrows (the sun’s rays) are gathered up by
Leto and carried to the throne of Zeus. 8 But throngh all
the wild confusion of the strife Achilleug hastens surely to
his victory. Before him stands his enemy; but the spell
which guarded the life of Hektor is broken, for Phoibos has
forsaken him. 3 In vain he hurls his spear at Achilleus, in
vain he draws his sword. Still Achilleus cannot reach him
through the armour of Patroklos, 4 and the death wound is
given where an opening in the plates left his neck bare.
The prayer of Hektor for mercy is dismissed with contempt,
and, in his boundless rage, Achilleus tramples on the body, 5
as the blazing sun seems to trample on the darkness into
which it is sinking.

The close At this point, in the belief of Mr. Grote, the original
tchiTleis Achilleis ended. ‘The death of Hektor satisfies the exi¬
gencies of a coherent scheme, and we are not entitled to
extend the oldest poem beyond the limit which such necessity
prescribes.’ 6 The force of the objection depends on the idea
by which the poet, either consciously or unconsciously, was
guided in his design. The sudden plunge of the sun into
the darkness which he has for a moment dispelled would he
well represented by an abrupt ending with the death of
Hektor. The ‘ more merciful temper ’ which Achilleus dis¬
plays in the last book would not only be necessary ‘to create
proper sympathy with his triumph,’ but it would he strictly
in accordance with the idea of the sun setting in a broad
blaze of generous splendour after his victory over the black
mists, even though these are again to close in fierce strife

1 4y4\a<T<r* oi <pi\ov %rop
yrt6o<rivr), '66' 6pa.ro 6eob$ cpiSi {vrt-

6vras. II. xxi. 300.

The ether looks clown in grim serenity
on the wild l.attle in the air beneath.

2 Jl. xxi. 490-505.

3 Ih. xxii. 213 : XiW $4 6 *oh3os
’AirtfXXwp. Too much stress can scarcely
be laid on these words. In the first
place, they make the slaying of Hektor
quite as much an act of^ butchery us
Colonel Mure represents the death of

1NC0KKUPTIBLE BODIES.

553

■when he is dead. 1 It is this transient gleam of more serene CHAP,
splendour which is signified by the games over which Aehil- . X1, .
leus presides genially after the slaughter of the Trojan
captives, whose blood reddens the ground, just as the torn
streamers rush in crimsoned hands across the sky after a
storm. Yet it is not easy to suppose with Mr. Grote that
the Achilleis ended with the twenty-second book as it now
stands, for that book closes with the mourning of Andro¬
mache for Hektor, which, even in the eyes of a Greek, would
hardly heighten the glory of the conqueror; and the author
of it certainly knew of the visit of Priam which is related in
the last book, for he makes the old man express his intention
of going to Achilleus when he first learns that his son is
dead. 2 But the feeling of the old solar myth is once more
brought out prominently in the case of Hektor. With the
aid of Apollon he had been the great champion of his country.

The desertion of the sun-god left him at the mercy of his
enemy. But his -body, like the body of Patroklos, must be
preserved from all corruption. The ravenous dogs and birds
sire chased away by AphroditS, 3 and Apollon bimself wraps
it in mist and covers it with a golden shield. 4 Prom the
Odyssey we learn that the idea underlying the story of the
death of Achilleus was that of an expiring blaze of splendour,
followed by the darkness of the storm. Over his body the
Achaians and Trojans struggle in mortal conflict, like the
clouds fighting over the dead sun; and only the might of
Zeus puts an end to the strife, for the winds alone can drive
away the clouds. Then the sea-nymphs rise, fair as the
skies of tranquil night, and wrap the form of the dead hero
in a spotless shroud.

Thus the whole Achilleis is a magnificent solar epic, telling The viwin
us of a sun rising in radiant majesty, soon hidden by the
clouds, yet abiding his time of vengeance, when from the c»nt solnr
dark veil he breaks forth at last in more than his early op ' c '
strength, scattering the mists and kindling the ragged clouds
which form his funeral pyre, nor caring whether his brief
splendour shall bo succeeded by a darker baffle as the vapours

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

close again over his dying glory. The feeling of the oM tale
is scarcely weakened when the poet tells ns of the great
cairn which the mariner shall see from afar on the shore of
the broad Hellespontos. 1

If this then be the common groundwork of the Achillas
and the epics of Northern Europe, the arguments of Mr.
G-rote against the original continuity of the Iliad in its
present form are indefinitely strengthened. The Trojan war
itself becomes simply a scene in a long drama, 2 of the other
acts of which the poet incidentally betrays his knowledge.
The life of Achilleus runs in the same groove with that of
Odysseus and Bellerophon; the personality of Patroklos
dimly reflects that of Achilleus, while the tale of Meleagros
is simply an echo of the legend which, in its more expanded
form and with heightened colours, relates the exploits of the
son of Peleus.

With this groundwork, the original Achillas may have
ended with the twenty-second book of our Iliad, or have been
extended to the twenty-fourth. Apart from considerations
of style, there is nothing in the story to militate against
either supposition. If it ended with the earlier book, the
poet closed his narrative with the triumphant outburst of the
sun from the clouds which had hidden his glory. The poet
who added the last two hooks was inspired by the old phrases
which spoke of a time of serene though short-lived splendour
after the sun’s great victory. But with this tale of the
Achilleis, whatever may he its close, the books which relate
the independent exploits of Agamemnon and his attendant
chiefs cannot possibly be made to fit. They are the expression
of air almost unconscious feeling that a son of Peleus and
Thetis was a being not sufficiently akin to Achaians to satisfy
the' instincts of national pride and patriotism. 3 It is of

1 Oil. xxiv. S2. sequence is one of phenomena, not of

- Much bln mo, perhaps not altogether facts in human history,
undeserved, lias been bestowed on the 3 Both Colonel Mure and Mr. Glad-
critics who formed the so-called epic stone search vigorously for every vestige
cycle and sought to find the sequence of or patriotism in the character of Achilleus.
tiie several legends on which the poems It is very hard to find any, and harder
included in that cycle were founded. So still to see any in the passages which
far as they sought an historical sequence, they adduce. It does exist in Hektor,
they were wrong. Yet «tlieir feeling and the reason why it should exist in
that there was a sequence in these tales him is manifest,
was not without foundation. But the

ILIAD.

255

course possible—in tlie opinion of Mr. Grote, it may be even chap.
probable—that the same poet who sang the wrath of Acliil- . XL .
leus afterwards recounted the exploits of Odysseus, Aias, and
Diomedes. The question is, after all, not material. If Mr.

Grote is right in. thinking that the last two books are an
addition,’ then the closing scene, which exhibits Acliilleus in
his more genial aspect, existed as a distinct poem, and the
final complement of this lay is found far apart in the closing-
book of the Odyssey. The perfect harmony of that picture
of the hero’s death with the spirit and language of the
Achilleis may possibly be adduced as an argument for as¬
cribing both Iliad and Odyssey to the siame author; but it
furnishes a much stronger warrant for asserting that move
than one. poet derived his inspiration from the mythical
speech, which, even in the Greek heroic age, still retained
more than half its life. Naj-, in the Ilias itself, the legend
of Meleagros, recited (it must be remembered) by the same
Phoinix who guarded Acliilleus in his earlier years, exhibits
still more forcibly the method in which phrases but partially
understood, and incidents which had each received a local
colouring and name, -were wrought into the tales, whether of
the Kalydouian chieftain, or .Perseus, or Acliilleus. In times
which even then were old, such phrases formed the common
speech of the people, such incidents expressed the phenomena
of their daily life; and this language was strictly the language
of poetry, literally revelling in its boundless powers of creation
and developement. In almost every word lay the germ of an
epic poem or a romance. 2 It is the less wonderful, therefore,
if each incident was embodied in a separate legend, or even
reproduced in the independent tales of separate tribes. A

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

256

BOOK hundred Homers may well have lit their torch front this
-— living fire.

Ground- Nor can we well shut our eyes to the fact that in the main
odyssey h ° stol y of the Odyssey the poet has set the same solar Strain
in another lcey. When Odysseus goes to Troy, he is simply
a chieftain in the great host which went to recover the
treasure taken from the West, like the Argonauts in then-
search for the Golden Fleece. But all these . eastward ex¬
peditions are successful. The rohber or seducer is despoiled
of his prey, and the victors must journey back to their distant
home. Thus, round the chieftain of each tribe would gather
again all the ideas suggested hy the ancient myths; and the
light reflected from the glory of the great Phthiotic hero
might well rest on the head of Odysseus as he turns to go
from Ilion. Thus would begin a new career, not unlike that
of Heraldes or Perseus in all its essential features. Through¬
out the whole poem the one absorbing desire which fills the
heart of Odysseus is to reach his home once more and see
the wife whom, like most other mythical heroes, he had been
obliged to leave in the spring-time of his career. There are
grievous toils and many hindrances on his way, but nothing
can turn him from his course. He has to fight, like Herakles
and Perseus, Theseus and Belleroplion, with more than mortal
beings and more than earthly powers, but he has the strength
which they had to overcome or to evade them. It is true
that he conquers chiefly by strength of will and sagacity of
mind; hut this again is the phase which the idea of Helios,
the great eye of day, as surveying and scanning everything,
assumes in Medeia, Prometheus, Asklepios, Oidipous, Iamos,
and Melampous. The other phase, however, is not wanting.
He, too, has a how which none but he can wield,' aud he
wields it to terrible purpose, when, like Achillens, after his
time of disguise, he bursts on the astonished suitors, as the-

THE ODYSSEY.

257

Kip breaks from the stormcloud before he sinks to rest. So, chap.
again, in his westward wanderings (for this is the common ■ XL
path of the children of Zens or Helios), he mast encounter
fearful dangers. It is no unclouded sky which looks down
on him as he journeys towards rocky Ithaka. He has to
fight with Kyklopes and Laistrygonians; he has to shun the
snares of the Sevens and the jaws of Skylla and Charybdis,
as Perseus had to overcome the Gorgons, and Theseus to do
battle with the Minotauros. Yet there are times of rest for
him, as for Herakles and Belleroplion. He yearns for the
love of Penelope, but his grief can be soothed for awhile by
the affection of Kirke and Kalypso, as Achilleus found solace
in that of Diomede, and Herakles awhile in that of Deianeira.

Hay, wherever he goes, mortal kings and chiefs and undying
goddesses seek to make him tarry by their side, as Menelaos
sought to retain Paris in his home by the side of the Spartan
Helen, and as Gtunnar strove to win Sigurd to be the husband
of his sister. 'So is it with Allriuoos; but, in spite of the
loveliness and purity of Nausikaa, Odysseus may not tarry in
the happy land of the Phaiakians, even as he might not tarry
in the palace of the wise Kirk6 or the sparkling cave of the
gentle Kalypso. At last he approaches his home; but he
returns to it unknown and friendless. The sky is as dark as
when Achilleus lay nursing his great wrath behind the veil
of his sorrow. Still he too, like Achilleus, knows how to
take vengeance on his enemies ; and in stillness and silence
he makes ready for the mortal conflict in which he knows
that in the end he must be victorious. His foes are many
and strong• and, like Patroklos against Hektor, Telemaclios 1
can do but little against the suitors, in whom are reflected
the Trojan enemies of the Achaians. But for him also,
as for Achilleus, there is aid from the gods. Athene, the
daughter of the sky, cheers him on, and restores him to the
glorious beauty of his youth, as Thetis clothed her child in
the armour of Hephaistos, a.ftd Apollon directed his spear
against Hektor. Still in his ragged beggar’s dress, like the
sun behind the rent and tattered clouds, he appears in his
own hall on the day of doom. The old bbw is taken down

' Grote, History of Grrece, vol. ii. p. 238.

MYTHOLOGY

T11E ARYAN NATIONS.

from the wall, and none but he can be found to stretch
it. His enemies begin to fear that the chief hfts indeed
returned to his home, and they crouch in terror before the
stranger, as the Trojans quailed at the mere sight and war-
cry of Achilleus. But their cry for mercy falls as rain as
that of Lykaon or of Hektor, who must die to avenge the
dead Patroklos; for the doom of the suitors is come for the
wrongs which they had done to Penelope. The fatal bow is
stretched. The arrows fly deadly and unerring as the spear
of Artemis, and the hall is bathed in blood. There is nothing
to stay his arm till all are dead. The sun-god is. taking
vengeance on the clouds, and trampling them down in his
fury. The work is done; and Penelope sees in Odysseus the
husband who had left her long ago to face his toils, like
Herakles and Perseus. But she will try him still. If indeed
he be the same, he will know his bridal chamber and the
cunningly carved couch which his own hands had wrought.
Iole will try whether Herakles remembers the beautiful net¬
work of violet clouds which he spread as her couch in the
morning. The sun is setting in peace. Penelope, fair as
Oinone and as pure (for no touch of defilement must pass on
her, or on Iole or Daphne or Briseis), is once again by his
side. The darkness is utterly scattered; the corpses of the
suitors and of the handmaidens who ministered to them
cumber the hall no more. A few flying vapours rush at
random across the sky, as the men of Ithaka raise a feeble
clamour in behalf of the slain chieftains. Soon these, too,
are gone. Penelope and Odysseus are within their'bridal
chamber. Oinone has gone to rest with Paris by her side;
but there is no gloom in the house of Odysseus, and the hero
lives still, strong and beautiful as in the early days. The
battle is over. The one yearning of his heart has been ful¬
filled. The sun has laid him down to rest

In one unclouded blaze of living light.

But unless the marvellous resemblance (may it not be said,
the identity?) of the Greek, the Trojan 1 and the Teutonic

1 The stories of J>aris, Hektor, epics. The extent to which solar
Saqrolon, Memnhn are all subjects imagery is introduced into these tales
which might be expanded into separate is very remarkable. Paris as the seducer

HOMERIC MATERIALS.

259

epics can be explained away, it follows that in Achilleus and CHAP,
in Paris, in Meleagros and Sigurd, in Ragnar Lodbrog and - X1, .
Theseus, in Telephos, Perseus 1 , Keplialos, Heraldes, Bellero- or t h e
phdn and Odysseus, we have pictures drawn from the same od y 9S6 y
ideal as regarded under its several aspects. It mattered not the?!? t#
which of these aspects the poet might choose for his theme.

In each case he had much more than the framework of his
story made ready to his hand. The departure of Achilleus
from his own land to fight in a quarrel which was not liis
own—the transfer of the spoils won by him to a chief of
meaner spirit than his own—his unerring spear and im¬
mortal horses—the robbery of Briseis or Hippodameia—
the fierce wrath of Achilleus which yet could leave room
for the love of another in her place—the sullen inaction
from which he refuses to be roused—the dismay of the
Achaians and the exultation of the Trojans at his absence
from the fight—the partial glory spread over the scene
by the appearance of Patroldos, only to close in the deeper
gloom which followed his overthrow—the furv of Achilleus
behind the dark cloud of his sorrow—the sudden outburst of
the hero, armed -with his irresistible spear and clad in armour
moTO dazzling than that which he had lost—the invincible
might which deals death to Hektor and his comrades—the
blood which streams from'the human victims on Iris altar of
sacrifice—his forgiveness of Agamemnon for that which
Agamemnon of himself would have been powerless to do—
of Helen is indubitably the dark robber of tbe Lykians, and Glaokos. bis friond,

200 MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK the warning of his own early death which he receives from
•—— r — the horse Xanthos—the battle of the gods, a§ they take part
in the storm which rages in the heavens and on the earth—
the swelling of the waters, their brief mastery over the hero,
their conquest by fire—the generous splendour which follows
the accomplishment of his vengeance—the sudden close of his
brilliant but brief career—the fierce battle, fought over his
dead body—the beauty which cannot be marred or dimmed
by death—a.re incidents which the poet might introduce or
omit at will, but the spirit of which he was not free to alter.
The character of Achilleus was no more his own creation
than were the shifting scenes in the great drama of his life.
The idea of his picture no more originated in himself than
the idea of Sigurd in the mind of the more rugged poet of
the north. The materials were not of his own making ; and
the words of Mr. Gladstone acquire a stronger meaning,
though not the meaning which he designed to convey, when,
insisting that there must be a foundation for the Homeric
theology and for the chief incidents in the war of Troy, he
said that poets may embellish, but cannot invent. 1 Their
course was marked out for them, but the swiftness with

HOMERIC CHARACTERS.

2(51

which each ran his race depended on his own power.
The genins of the Homeric poets was shown, not in the
creation of their materials, bnt in the truthful and mag¬
nificent colouring which they threw over a legend which in
weaker hands might exhibit bnt a tinsel glitter.

But if there is this affinity between the character of the
Achaian and the Teutonic heroes, it folkrws that the cha¬
racter is neither strictly Achaian nor strictly Teutonic. It
cannot be regarded as expressing the real morality either of
the one or of the other. Any attempt to criticise these as
genuine pictures of national character 1 must be followed by

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATION'S.

2G2

BOOK

that feeling of repulsion whicli Mr. Dasent openly avows for
the Greek mythology, and which he also feels in part for the
Teutonic.’ In either case, this moral indignation is thrown
away. There was doubtless quite enough evil in the cha¬
racter of the Northman and the Greek; but it never would
have assumed that aspect which is common to the heroes of
their epic poetry. We look in vain in the pages of ac¬
knowledged contemporary writers for an instance of the
same unbounded wrath arising from a cause which the
Achaian would be rather disposed to treat too lightly, of an
inaction which cares not though all around him die, of a
bloody vengeance on meaner enemies when his great foe has
been vanquished, of the awful sacrifice of human victims,—a.
sacrifice completely alien to the general character of the
Acliaians, so far as they are known to us historically. But
every one of these characteristics is at once exhaustively
explained, when they are compared with those of all the
other great legendary heroes. The grave attempt to judge
them by a reference to the ordinary standard of Greek, or
rather of Christian and modern morality, has imparted to the
criticism of Colonel Mure an air almost of burlesque. In
his analysis of the Iliad, the motives which sway Achilleus
are taken to pieces as seriously as if he were examining the
conduct of Tliemistokles or Arehidamos. It might be well
to speak of.the ‘defective principles of heroic morality,’ 2 of
the sarcasms of Achilleus against Agamemnon in the first
hook as ‘unwarranted at this stage of the discussion,’ 3 of
the ‘respectful deference to the sovereign will of.Agamem¬
non ’ a.s a duty ‘ inculcated by the poet ’ and ‘ scrupulously
fulfilled by the other chiefs,’ 4 if the poet were telling us of a

HOMERIC CHARACTERS.

straggle not with gods and heroes, Amazons and Aithiopians, chap.
but carried on after the sober and prosy fashion of the Trojan . XJ ’ .
war of Thucydides. Colonel Mure lays great stress on the
‘ ethic unity ’ with which the incidental references to the
' early death of Achilleus invest the whole poem, and he finds
a deep ‘ knowledge of human nature ’ ‘ in the adaptation to
each other of the characters of the hero and his friend,’
where Mr. Grote sees little more than a reflection.' But his
anxiety to exalt the character of Achilleus has led him, in
one instance of no slight moment, to vilify unduly that of
his antagonist. ‘ The proudest exploit of Hektor, his
slaughter and spoliation of Patroklos, is so described as to
he conspicuous only for its ferocity.. The Greek hero, after
being disabled by Apollon, is mortally wounded by another
Trojan, when Hektor steps in with the finishing blow, as his
butcher rather than conqueror.’ 2 The remark is simply dis¬
ingenuous. The incidents of the slaughter of Patroklos by
Hektor are essentially identical with incidents attending the
death of Hektor by the hands of Achilleus, and where there-
is any difference, it lies in the additional ferocity and bru¬
tality of the latter. If it be to the disparagement of Hektor
that he should have the "aid of a god, the poet is not. less
careful in saying that Achilleus could not slay Hektor until
Phoibos Apollon had deserted him. But if Colonel Mure
anxiously seeks out apologies for the wrath, 3 the inaction,
and the furious revenge of the hero, his criticism utterly fails
to explain the very incidents which seem most deeply to have
impressed him. It does not explain why he should choose
inaction as the particular mode of avenging himself against
Agamemnon. 4 It does not show why during his absence
‘ the gods had, at his own request, decreed victory to Hektor,
rout and slaughter to the Greeks,’ 5 why in him ‘no affection

264.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book amiable or the reverse ’ should ‘ exist but in overpowering

__, excess, 1 —why he should be ‘ soothed by the fulfilment of his

duties as mourner/ why the games should ‘usher in an
agreeable change/ or why ‘ we should part with Achillens at
the moment best calculated to exalt and purify- our impres¬
sion of his character.’ 2 Still less does it explain why, before
the final struggle, the gods should be let loose to take which¬
ever side they might prefer. Colonel Mure seems to imply
that they were all sent to take the part of the Trojans. 3 Mr.
Grote, with a far keener discernment of the character of this
part of the poem, insists that ‘that which chiefly distin¬
guishes these books is the direct, incessant, and manual,
intervention of the gods and goddesses, formally permitted
by Zeus, and the repetition of vast and fantastic conceptions
to which each superhuman agency gives occasion, not omit¬
ting the battle of Achilles against Skamander and Simois,
and the burning up of these rivers by Hephaestus.’ In his
judgment this interference mars the poem and ‘ somewhat
vulgarises ’ the gods. 4 But while he thinks that the poet
has failed in a task where success was impossible, he has not
explained why the poet should feel himself compelled to un¬
dertake it.

The elm- But if Mr. Gladstone strains every nerve to save the cha-
odysstras. racter of Achilleus, Colonel Mure is not less zealous in behalf
of the chieftain of Ithaka. If Achilleus ‘ represents ' the
grandeur of the heroic character as reflected in the very
excess of its noblest attributes/ Odysseus, in his belief, re¬
presents its virtue, possessing as he does, in greater number
and in higher degree than any other chief, the qualities
which in that age constituted the accomplished king and
citizen.’ 5 The matter is brought to a plain issue. The
Odyssey is ‘ a rich picture-gallery of human life as it existed
in that age and country/ 11 and we are to see in Odysseus a
favourable specimen of the manners and habits of his people.
It is quite possible, by Colonel Mure’s method, so to repre¬
sent him. But if we speak of him as one whose ‘habitual

1 Grit. Hist. Gr. Lit. vol. i. p. 289. 4 History of Greece, vol. ii. p. 264.

• lb. p. 291. * s Crit. Hist. Gr. Lit. vol. i. p. 391.

* lb. p. 287. . * lb. p. 389.

ODYSSEUS.

prudence was modified, or even at times overcome, by bis CHAU
tmrat for glory, and by an eager pursuit of the marvellous,» . XL
we sa .T that he never uttered an untruth or practised a
manoeuvre for a base object,*—if we speak of him as incul-
' eating in his adventures c the duty incumbent on the most
vigorous minds not only to resist but to avoid temptation,’ 3
are we really speaking of the Odysseus of the Homeric poet ?

If such a method may account for some features in his
character, will it in the least explain his character as bound
up with the whole structure of the poem ? Will it not leave
the groundwork of the tale and its issue a greater mystery
than ever ? Will it explain why Odysseus, like He’rakles
and Pliiloktetes, should use poisoned arrows 1 —why. without
scruple, he. should tell lies while he desires to remain un¬
recognised, why he should never depart from the truth when
speaking in his own character—why he hesitates not to lurk
m ambush for an unarmed man 5 and stab him behind his
back and speak of the deed without shame—why he should
wish to pry into everything in heaven or on earth, or
m the dark land beneath the earth—why nothing less than
the slaughter of all his enemies will satiate a wrath not
much more reasonable than that of AchiUeus ? Still more
will it explain why Penelope weaves and unweaves her web, 6

2(10 * MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

rook —-why, when Odysseus returns, she is restored by Athene
- L „ (the daughter of the Sky, the Dawn who makes the world
young), to all her early loveliness,' while on him rests once
more all the splendour of his ancient majesty,—why the
nursewlio recognises him should be Eurykleia, 2 and the maiden
who reviles him should be Melantho, 3 —why his dog Argos,
although forsaken and untended, still retains something of his
noble qualities and at once recognises his old master 4 —why,
when Penelope wishes to speak with him on his return, she is
charged to wait until the evening 5 —why, in his wanderings
he should fight not so much with human enemies as with
mighty beings and monsters of the earth and sea—why his
long voyage and the time of gloomy disguise should be fol¬
lowed by a triumph so full of blood, ending with a picture of
such serene repose ?

How In truth, the character of Odysseus was not, in any greater

thechmac- degree than that of Achilleus, an original creation of the
Odysseus Homeric poet. In all its main features it came down ready
a creation to his hand. His wisdom is the wisdom of Athene, and
Homeric Prometheus, and Medeia, of Iamos and Asklepios and
poet. Melampous: his craft is the craft of Hermes, his keen

sagacity is the piercing eye of Helios or of Odin, and
from Hermes comes the strange inquisitiveness which must
pry into everything that he comes across in his path. 6 If
he uses poisoned arrows, it is not because Achaian chieftains
were in the habit of using them, but because the weapons

THE CHARACTER OF ODYSSEUS.

207

of Herakles were steeped in venom and the robe of Medeia, CHAT’.

Bcorcbed the body of Glauke: if be submits to be tbe lover of ._

Kirke and Kalypso, it is because Acbilleus solaced liimself
with Diomede for the loss of Briseis, and Herakles awhile
' forgot his soitows in the house of Deianeira.. If he can be
a secret stabber, it is not because the heroic ideal could stoop
to such baseness, but because Phoibos can smite secretly as
well as slay openly, and because it matters not whether the
victim be but one man or the fifty who fall by the spear of
Bellerophon. If at the end he smites all his enemies, it is
not because they have committed an offence which, according
to the standard of the age, would deserve such punishment,

. but because the wrath of Achilleus could be appeased only
by the blood of his enemies, as the blazing- sun tramples on
the dark clouds beneath his feet. We may be well assured
that such as these wex-e not the habits of the men who dwelt
at Tiryns or in Ithaka—that such as these wei-e not the
characteristics of the chieftains who dwelt in Myk&nai. But
if the character of Odysseus is not strictly Aeha.ian, so, like
that of Achilleus, it is not, in strictness of speech, human.

Mr. Grote has truly said that the aim of the poet is not ethical
or didactic either in the-Iliad or in the Odyssey; 1 and an
examination of the latter poem scattei-s to the winds all
fancies which see in Odysseus an image of the Christian
warrior fighting the good fight of faith, yet yearning for his
rest in heaven. 2 The ideal is indeed magnificent, and it
has never been more magnificently realised, but it is not
the ideal either of Christianity or even of humanity; it is
the life of the sun. At the outset of his return from the
east, Odysseus has to encounter superhuman foes; and
the discomfiture of the Kylilops rouses the wrath of the
sea-god Poseidon, as the clouds rise from the waters and
curl round the rising sun. Still Zeus is on his side, and

208

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

ROOK Poseidon himself shall not be able to cut short.his course , 1

—i__ though all his comrades should fall by the way, as tjie

morning clouds may be scattered before the noonday. But
while he moves steadily towards his home, that home is
dark and gloomy. From it the sun is still far distant, and
only from time to time a faint reflected light is shed upon
it as Telemachos strives to maintain the honour of his
father’s house. 2 So Penelope remains quiet in her home.
Forbidding forms crowd around her, but her purity remains
unsullied. The web begun is never ended; the fairy tracery
of cirri clouds is blotted out from the sky every night, and
must be wrought again during the coming day. There are
others too who have not forgotten the hero, and Eurykleia
strives to retain Telemachos, when he would go forth to
seek his father. 3 But he cannot stay. The slant rays
vanish from the sky, and the house of Laertes is shadowed
with deeper gloom. Meanwhile Odysseus is hastening on.
For awhile he tarries with Kirke and Kalypso, and makes
a longer sojourn in the house of Alkinoos, even as Sigurd
abode long time in the house of G-unnar. The Pliaiakian
chieftain would have him stay for ever. His land is as fair

natural in attributing to Poseidon the Hyperia, the upper land. i. e. heaven,
affection of a parent for his offspring. iVhtil the legend transplanted them both
But, in truth, nothing could show more to the Western horizon.’— Indo-Evropcan
clearly than these words Colonel Mure’s Folk-lore, p. 32.

inability to enter fairly into the spirit of 2 The merely secondary character of
Greek mythology. It was simply im- Telemachos has been already noticed,
possiblo that the poet could make use of p. 247.

THE RETURN OP ODYSSEUS.

260

as summer : but tbe sun may not tarry, and Odysseus cannot CHAP,
a^jfle there, even with NausikaA So he hastens home, . * T ' .
sometimes showing his might, as the sun breaks for a
moment through a rift in the clouds; but the darkuess is
.greatest when he lands on his own shores.’ He is sur¬
rounded by enemies and spies, and he takes refuge in craft
and falsehood. 1 The darkness itself must aid him to win
the victory, and AthSnfi takes all beauty from his face, and
all brightness from his golden hair. 2 These ideas, with
all the others which had come down to him as a fruitful
heritage from the language of his remote forefathers, the
Homeric poet might recombine or develope; but if he brought
him to Ithaka under a cloud, he could not but say that
Athene took away his glory, while yet his dog Argos, the
same hound who couches at the feet of Artemis or drives the
herds of the sun to their pastui'es, knows his old master
in all his squalid raiment, and dies for joy at seeing him. 3
When on his return Telemachos asks whether the bridal
couch of Odysseus is covered with spiders’ webs, he could
not but say in reply that Penelopd still remained faithful to
her early love; 4 and when Telemachos is once more to see
his father, he could not but make Athene restore him to
more than his ancient beauty. 5 So the man of many toils
and wanderings returns to his home, 6 only to find that his
son is unable to rule his house, 7 as Phaethon and Patroklos
were alike unable to guide the horses of Helios. Still
Penelope is fair as Artemis or Aphrodite, 8 although Melan-
tlio and Melantliios, 9 the black children of the crafty (Dolios)

Night, strive to dash her life with gloom, .and Odysseus
stands a squalid beggar in his own hall. 10 Thenceforth the
poet’s path was still more distinctly marked. He must
make the arm of Odysseus irresistible, 11 he must make
Athene aid him in storing up weapons for the conflict, 13 its

270

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK Thetis brought the armour of Hephaistos to Achilleus, and

.__, Hjordis that of Begin to Sigurd. He must make Penelope

tell how often she had woven and undone her web while he
tarried so long away. 1 When Penelop& asks tidings of
Odysseus, the poet could not but give an answer in which the
flash of gold and blaze of purple carries us directly to the
arming of Achilleus. 2 A.s Eurykleia, the old nurse, tends
him at the bath, he must make her recognise the wound
made by the wild boar, 3 who wrought the death*of the fair
Adonis, and tell how her foster-child came to be called
Odysseus.' Then, as the day of doom is ushered in, he
must relate how as the lightning flashed from the sky 8
the rumour went abroad that the chieftain was come again
to his home. So Penelope takes down the bow which
Iphitos, the mighty, had given to Odysseus, 6 and bids the
suitors stretch it; but they cannot, and there is no need that
Telemachos should waste his strength now that his father has
come home. 7 Then follows the awful tragedy. Zeus must
thunder as the beggar seizes the bow. 8 The suitors begin to
fall beneath the unerring arrows; but the victory is not to be
won without a struggle. Telemachos has left the chamber
door ajar and the enemy arm themselves with the weapons
which they find there. 9 It is but another version of the
battle which Achilleus fought with Skamandros and Simoeis
in the war of elements; and as then the heart of Achilleus
almost failed him, so wavers now the courage of Odysseus. 10
Por a moment the dark clouds seem to be gaining mastery over

THE CONFLICT WITH TIIE SUITORS.

the sun. But Athene comes to his aid, 1 as before she had CHAP,
come to help Achilleus, and the arrows of the suitors are in yj ' .
Y«in aimed at the hero, 2 although Telemachos is wounded, 3
though not to the death, like Patroklos. Yet more, Athene
must show her Aigis, 4 dazzling as the face of the unclouded
sun; and when the victory is won, the corpses of the slain
must be thrust away, 5 like the black vapours driven from
the sky. Only for Melanthios he reserves the full measure
of indignity which Achilleus wreaked on the body of the
dead Hektor. 6 Then follows the recognition in which,
under another form, Prokris again meets Kephalos, and lole
once more rejoices the heart of Heraldes. For a little while
the brightness rests on Laertes, and the old man’s limbs
again grow strong; but the strength comes from Athene. 7

Whatever light the progress of Comparative Mythology Tlw chu-
may hereafter throw on the growth of Aryan epic poetry,
one conclusion, at the least, is forced upon us by this not
analysis, and Odysseus is found to be as much and as little Aeha ’ an '
an Achaian chieftain as Achilleus or Meteagros. The poems
may remain a mine of wealth for all who seek to find in
them pictures and manners of the social life of a pre-historic
age; but all the great chiefs are removed beyond d criticism,
which starts with attributing to them the motives which
influence mankind under any circumstances whatsoever.

1 Odyss. xxii. 205. 2 Ibid. xxii. 257. 3 Ibid. xxii. 277. 4 Ibid. xxii. 297.

‘. Ibid. xxii. 460. 3 Bid. xxii. 475. ’ Bid. xxiv. 367.

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

CHAPTER XII.

MYTHICAL PHRASES AS FURNISHING MATERIALS FOR THE TEU¬
TONIC EPIC POEMS, AND THE LEGENDS OF ARTHUR AND
ROLAND.

BOOK The results obtained from an examination of Greek epic
I ’ poetry, so far as it has come down to ns, have a direct and
Points of important bearing on the mythology of northern Europe,
bitween and 011 estimate which we must take of it. Of the general
the Greek character of the Hellenic tribes we can form a notion more
tonic epics, or less exact from the evidence of contemporary documents,
as soon as we reach the historical age ; but, whatever may
be its defects or its vices, we are fully justified in saying
that it is not the character of the great Achaian chieftains
as exhibited either in the Iliad or the Odyssey. We have
absolutely no warrant, for the belief that the ancestors of
Perikles or Tliemistokles, within ten or even more generations,
were men who would approve the stabbing of enemies behind
their hacks, the use of poisoned arrows, and the butchery of
captives deliberately set apart to grace the funeral sacrifices
of a slain chief. Nay, more, we shall look in vain in any
historical record for any portrait which will justify the bdlief
that the picture of Acliilleus in the Iliad is the likeness
of an actual Achaian chieftain, while on any psychological
analysis we seem to be driven to the conclusion that the
character is one removed altogether from the hounds of
humanity. If the analysis already made of the character of
Odysseus and Acliilleus shows» that almost every feature is
traditional, and that the portraits, as a whole, are not of the
poet’s making, that the wisdom and the falsehood, the truth¬
fulness and the sullenness, whether of the one hero or the
other, were impressed upon each by a necessity which no

LIKENESS BETWEEN GREEK AND TEUTONIC EPICS. 273

poet could resist, and that these conclusions are proved by CHAP,
the evidence, overwhelming in its amount, which shows that . XI1, .
Achilleus and Odysseus are reflections of Perseus, Theseus,
Herakles, and these, again, of Phoibos and Helios, or of other
.deities who share their attributes—if the whole story which
has gathered round the names of these great national heroes
resolves itself into the cloudland of heaven with its never
ceasing changes, we are at. once justified in thinking that
the history of the Teutonic heroes may be of much the same
kind; and if on examining it we not only find this suspicion
borne out, but discern in it some of the most important
incidents and sequences which mark the Greek legends, the
conclusion is forced upon us that the Teutonic epics, like
the Hellenic, are the fruit of one and the same tree which
has spread its branches over all the Aryan lands, and that
the heroes of these epics no more exhibit the actual character
of Northmen and Germans than the portraits of the heroes
in the Iliad and Odyssey- are pictures of actual Achaian chief¬
tains. When we find further that the action in each case
turns on the possession of a beautiful woman and the trea¬
sures which make up her dowry, that this woman is in each
case seduced or betrayed, while the hero with his invincible
weapons is doomed to an early death after the same stormy
and vehement career, we see that we are dealing with mate¬
rials which under different forms are essentially the same;
and our task becomes at each stage shorter and simpler.

Hence as we begin the story of Volsung (who is Diogenes The Vol-
or the son of Odin, his father Berir and his grandfather s ™ s lale '
Sigi being -the only intermediate links), we suspect at once
that we are carried (away from the world of mortal men,
when we find that he is one of those mysterious children
whose birth from a mother destined never to see them 1 por¬
tends their future greatness and their early end; and as we
read further of the sword which is left for the strongest in

274 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK the rooftree of Volsung’s hall, no room is left for doubt that
we have before us the story of Theseus in another dress. The
one-eyed guest with the great striped cloak and broad flapping
hat, who buries the sword up to its hilt in the huge oak stem , 1
is Odin, the lord of the air, w r ho in Teutonic mythology is like
the Kyklops, one-eyed, as Indra Savitar is one-handed. Bnt
Aigeus in the Argive story is but one of the many names of
Zeus Poseidon, and as the husband of Aithra, the ether, he
also is lord of the air. In vain, when Odin has departed, do
Siggeir, the husband of Volsung’s daughter Signy, and the
other guests at her marriage-feast, strive to draw the sword.
It remains motionless in the trunk until it is touched by
Sigmund, 2 the youngest and bravest of Volsung’s sons—a
repi'oduetion in part of Volsung himself, as Odysseus is of
Autolykos. To Sigmund’s hand, as to Arthur, the sword
yields itself at once, without an effort. Theseus lifts the
huge stone beneath which Aigeus had placed his magic sword
and sandals. The weapon of the Greek story is the sword of
Chrysaor ; that of the Teutonic legend is the famous Gram,
the Excalibur of Arthur and the Durandal of Roland, and
Sigmund thus becomes, like Achilleus, the possessor of an
irresistible arm. In truth, the whole myth of Yolsung and
his children is but a repetition, in all its phases, of that
great drama of Greek mythology which begins with the loss
of the golden fleece and ends with the return of the Hera-
kleidai. This drama represents the course or history of the
sun in all its different aspects, as ever young or growing old,
as dying or immortal, as shooting with poisoned weapons or
as hating a lie like death, as conquering the powers of dark¬
ness or as smitten by their deadly weapons ; and thus in the
defeat of Sigmund we have an incident belonging as strictly

1 This tree grows through the roof of heroes

the hull and spreads its branches faraud wears t
wide in the upper air. It is manifestly many 01
the counterpart of Yggdrasil. be worn

2 The Sigmund of Beowulf and the ‘body,
Volsung Tale bears a name which is an his ham
epithot of Odin, the giver of victory, shall ha
He is drawn by Begin from the truuk ber tha
of a poplar tree, he i* loved by the tho orae
Valkyrie Brynhild, and instructed by Mytholo

c taught by Choir
* invisible helmet,

ided only in one part of his
If again Fafnir, when dying by
1, tells him of the things which
.ppen hereafter, we must remem-
t the Pythian dragon guarded
le of Delphi.—Grimm, Deutsche

THE S )

THE YOLSUHGS.

275

to the solar mytli as the- victory of Achilleus over Hektor, CHAP,
or the slaughter of the Sphinx by Oidipous. It could not he XIL .
otherwise. Odin and Plioibos live while Baldur and Askle-
pios die, hut these rise again themselves or live in their
children. So, too, there must be a struggle between Siggeir
and Sigmund for the possession of Gram, for Siggeir stands
to Sigmund in the relation of Polydektds to Perseus, or of
Paris to Menelaos. But he is the dark being regarded for
the present as the conqueror, and Sigmund and his ten
brothers, the hour's of the sunlit day, ar’e taken and hound.

The ten brothers are slain; Sigmund himself is saved by his
sister Signy, and with his son Sinfiotli, now runs as a were¬
wolf through the forest, the Lykeian or wolf-god wandering
through the dark forest of the night—a dreary picture which
the mythology of sunnier lands represented under the softer
image of the sleeping Helios sailing in his golden cup from
the western to the eastern ocean. But the beautiful Signy
is no' other than Penelope, and Siggeir’s followers are the
suitors who eat up the substance of Sigmund, 'as they had
deprived him of his armour. There remains therefore to he
wrought again a vengeance like that of Odysseus: and when
Sinfiotli is, like Telemachos, strong enough to help his
fathei - , the two, like the Ithakan chieftains, bum up Siggeir
and. all his followers, the mode in which they are slain
pointing to the scorching heat of the sun not less clearly
than the deadly arrows which stream from the how of
Odysseus. Sigmund now regains his heritage, and for him, as
for Odysseus, there follows atimeof serenerepose. LikeNestor,
who is exaggerated in Tithonos, he reaches a good old age :
but as Odysseus must yet go through the valley of death, so
Sigmund has to fight the old battle over again, and is slain
in a war with the sons of King Hunding-, in whom are
reflected the followers of Siggeir. But Achilleus is slain
only when Apollon guides the spear of Paris; and so when
Sigmund’s hour is come, tha*one-eyed man with the flapping
hat and the blue garment (of ether) is seen again. As he
stretches out this spear, Sigmund strikes against it his good
sword Gram, and the blade is shivered in’twain.. The hero
at once knows that Odin stands before him, and prepares to

MYTHOLOGY OP THU ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK die on the battle-field. But Iole stood by the funeral pile

. T - of HeraMes, and Sigmund dies in the arms of his young’
wife Hjordis, youthful as Daphne or Arethousa, ‘ refusing all
leechcraft and bowing his head to Odin’s will,’ as in the
Trojan myth Paris cannot be healed even though Oinone
would gladly save him.

The .story So ends the first act of the great drama; but the wheel

of Sigurd. j ias 0)1 ]y j :0 mri p e another turn, and bring back the same
series of events with slight differences of names and colour¬
ing. Sigmund leaves Hjordis the mother of an unborn babe,
the Phoibos who is the child of Leto, and of the Sun who
sank yestereve beneath the western waters. This child,
who receives the name of Sigurd, is born in the house of
Hialprek, who is localised as King of Denmark, but who
represents Laios or Akrisios in the Theban and Argive
legends; and these, we need not say, are simply reflections of
Vritra, the being who wraps all things in the veil of dark¬
ness. Sigurd himself is the favourite hero of northern tra¬
dition. Like Achilleus, he is the destined knight who ,
succeeds where all others have failed before him. Troy
cannot fall if the son of Peleus be absent; Fafnir cannot be
slain, nor Brynhild rescued, except by the son of Sigmund.
Physically, there is no difference between them. Both have
the keen blue eyes, and golden locks, and invincible weapons
of Phoibos and Athene; on both alike rests the glory of a
perfect beauty; and to both their weapons and their armour
come from the god of fire.' But in the Norse story there is-
a connection between Begin, the mysterious smith of King
Hialprek, and the dragon Fafnir, which cannot be traced
between Hephaistos and the Delphian Python, but which is;
fully explained by the differences of a northern and a medi¬
terranean climate. In the Norse story, there is enmity
between Fafnir and Begin, between the serpent who has
coiled round the treasure of Brynhild (as the Panis hide the
cows of Indra), and the faculties of life and growth repre¬
sented by the dwarfs to whose race Begin belongs. 1 Begin,.

1 ‘ Tlio dwarfs of Teutonic mythology but tlio contrivance and wonderful pro-

REGIS' AND FAFNIR.

jn short, is one of that class of beings who supply warmth
and vigour to all living things ; Fafnir is the simple darkness
or cold, which is the mere negation of life and light. Hence
from Regin comes the bidding which charges Sigurd to slay
-Fafnir; but the mode in which this enmity-is said to have
been excited is singularly significant. In their wanderings,
Odin, Loki, and Hahnir, the gods of the glistening heaveus,
■come to a river where, nigh to a ford, an otter is eating a
salmon with its eyes shut. Loki, slaying the beast with a
•stone, boasts that at one throw he has got both fish and flesh.
This is the first blow dealt by the lords of light to the powers
■of cold and darkness : but the way is as yet by no means
open before them. Many a day has yet to pass, and many a
hero yet to fall, before the beautiful summer can be brought
•out from the prison-house hedged in by its outwork of spears
or ice. The slain otter is a brother of Fafnir and Regin,
and a son of Reidmar, in whose house the three gods ask
shelter, showing at the same time their spoil. At Reidmar’s
bidding his two surviving sons bind Loki, Odin, and Hahnir,
who are not' set free until they promise to fill the otter’s
skin with gold, and so to cover it that not a white hair shall
be seen—in other words, the powers of the bright heaven are
pledged to loosen the ice-fetters of the earth, and destroy
•every sign of its long bondage. But the gold is the glisten¬
ing treasure which has been taken away when Persephone
was stolen from her mother Demeter and Brynhild left to
sleep within the walls of flame. Hence Loki must discharge
the office of Hermes when he gcles to reclaim the maiden
from the . rugged lord of Hades ; and thus Odin sends Loki
to the dwelling of the dark elves, where he compels the
dwarf Andvari to give up the golden treasures which he had
hoarded in the stony caves, whose ice-like walls answer to
the. dismal den of the Yedic Panis. One ring alone Andvari
seeks to keep. It is the source of all his wealth, and ring
•after ring drops from it. H* wishes, in other words, to keep)

278

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK ]iis hold of tlie summer itself as represented by the symbol of
_^_the reproductive power in nature. The ring is the magic neck¬
lace of Harmonia and Eripliyle, the kestos of Aphrodite, the
ship of Isis and Athene, the Yoni of Vishnu, the Argo which
bears within itself all the chieftains of the Achaian lands.
Andvari prays in vain, but before he surrenders the ring, he
lays on it a, curse, which is to make it the bane of every man
who owns it. It is, in short, to be the cause of more than
one Trojan war, 1 the Helen who is to bring ruin to the
hosts who seek to rescue her from thraldom. The beauty
of the ring tempts Odin to keep it, but the gold he yields
to Beidmar. It is, however, not enough to hide all the
white hairs of the otter’s skin. One yet remains visible,
and this can be hidden only by the ring which Odin is thus
compelled to lay upon it, as the ice cannot be wholly melted
till the full warmth of summer has come back to the earth.
Thus the three iEsir go free, but Loki lays again on the ring
the curse of the dwarf Andvari. The working of this curse
is seen first in the death of Beidmar, who is slain by Begin
and Fafnir, because he refuses to share with them the gold
which he had received from the iEsir. The same cause
makes Begin and Fafnir enemies. Fafnir will not yield up
the treasure, and taking a dragon’s form he folds his coils
around the golden heaps upon the glistening heath, as the
Python imprisons the fertilising streams at Delphoi. Thus
foiled, Begin beseeches Sigurd to smite the dragon; but"
• even Sigurd cannot do this without a sword of sufficient

temper. Begin forges two, but the blades of both are
shivered at the first stroke. Sigurd exclaims bitterly that
the weapons are untrue, like Begin and all his race,—a phrase
which points with singular clearness to the difference between
the subterranean fires and the life-giving rays of the sun,
which alone can scatter the shades of night or conquer the
winter’s cold. It is clear that the victory cannot be won
without the sword which Odin (drove into the oak trunk, and
which had been broken in the hands of Sigmund. But the

1 This ring reappeans with precisely Europe; and it is absurd to suppose'
in many of the sagas of Northern stantly recurring in actual history.

SIGURD’S VICTORIES.

pieces remain in the keeping of Hjordis, the mother of CIIA.P.
"Sigurd, and thus the wife of Sigmund plays here precisely . XIJ '
the part of Thetis. In each case the weapons with which '
the hero is to win his victory come through the mother, and
in each case they are forged or welded hy the swarthy fire-
god ; hut the Norse tale is even more true than the Homeric
legend, for the sword which smites the darkness to-day is
the same blade which the enemies of. the sun yestereve
snapped in twain. With the sword thus forged from the
shattered pieces of Gram Begin bids Sigurd smite the
Dragon : but the hero must first avenge his father’s death,
and King Hunding, his sons, and all his host are slain,
like the suitors by the arrows of Odysseus, before Sigurd
goes forth on his good steed Gran, which Odin had brought
to him as Athdnd brought Pegasos to Belleroplion, to en¬
counter the guardian of the earth’s treasures. But no
sooner is the Dragon slain than Begin in his turn feels the
desire of vengeance for the very deed which he had urged
Sigurd to do, and he insists that the hero shall bring him
his brother’s heart roasted. Then filling himself with Faf-
nir’s blood, Begin lies down to sleep, and Sigurd, as he
roasts the heart, wonders .whether it be soft, and putting a
portion to his lips, finds that he understands the voices of
the birds, who, singing over his head, bid him eat it all and
become the wisest of men, and then, cutting off Begin’s head,
take possession of all his gold. This is manifestly the legend
of Iamos and Melampous, while the wisdom obtained by eat¬
ing the heart of Fafnir has a further connection with the
Python as the guardian of the Delphic oracle. 1

1 Grimm regards the words Python possessor of the ring hoard which ho

and Fafnir as standing to each other in may enjoy at pleasure. Like I lie Norse

the relation of 8bp and ‘Die Sigurd, Sigmund is ‘of wanderers hy

Erlegung dos Drachm Fafnir gemahnt far the greatest throughout, the human

an riiitW, den Apollo bosiegte, und vie' race : ’ he is, in short, the Odyssens who
Python das delfischa Orakel hiiteto, wanders very far over many hurls, after
weissagt-dersterbcndcFafnir .’—Deutsche t.ho fall of Jlion, which again answers
Mythotogie, 345. In the lay of Beowulf to the slaying of the dragon. The

this serpent or dragon appears underlie Fitela of Beowulf is clearly the SinlUitli

name Grendel; and, in fact, the whole of the Volsung talc. For some remarks

story of Sigurd is in that poem related on the. comparative antiquity of these

substantially, although not with the two legends see Ludlow, Dojmlnr J-jiics

same fulness of detail, of Sigmund the nf the M'uhtlc Ages, -i. 41. The sub-

fether of Beowulf, the Waelsiug, who, stantial identity of the two myths

having slain the worm, becomes the renders Iho question of date of com-

280

MYTHOLOGY OK THE ARYAN NATIOKS.

With this exploit begins the career of Sigurd as Chrys&or.
As Acliilleus is taught by Clieiron, so is Sigurd instructed
by Gripir, the wise man, and thus in the fulness of wisdom
and strength, with his golden hair flowing over his shoulders,
and an eye whose glance dazzled all who faced it, he rides over
the desolate heath, until he comes to the circle of flame
within which sleeps the Valkyrie Brynhild. 1 No other horse
but Gran can leap that wall of fire, no knight but Sigurd
can guide him across that awful barrier: but at his touch
the maiden is roused from the slumber which had lasted
since Odin thrust the thorn of sleep or winter into her cloak,
like the Baksbas’ claw which threw the little sun-girl of the
Hindu tale into her magic trance. At once she knows that
before her stands the only man who never knew fear, the
only man who should ever have her as his bride. But
Brynhild also has the gift of marvellous wisdom, and as
the Teutonic Alrune, 2 she reflects the knowledge of the
Greek Athene and the Latin Minerva. From her Sigurd
receives all the runes, but these scarcely reveal to him so
much of the future as had been laid bare for him in the
prophecies of Gripir. 3 By the latter he had been told that

sagas of the three Helgis, and of Baldur,
and thus also with the myths of Adonis,
Dionysos, Sarpedon, Mcmnon, and other
gods and heroes of Hellenic tradition.

In one version, Fafnir predicts that
Sigurd will die drowned. The prophecy
is not fulfilled, but it points clearly to
the myth of Endymion.—Ludlow, (-

th/story of Strong Hans (Grimm), sho
is the chained maiden who is guarded
dwarf (Ai.

hero, Sigurd is the theme of the story
of the ‘Prince who was afraid of
Nothing,’ and whose fortunes are
much like those of the deliverer of
Brynhild.

* The Aurinia of Tacitus, Germ. 8.—
Bunsen, God in History , ii. 454.

3 With the runes lie also receives a
great deal of good advice, pointing pre¬
cisely to those features in the myths of
Phoibos. Helios, Hermes, and Herakles,
which, when translated into

; Helios

Hans (Sigv

P, the.

.__imediately fa_ - .

In the story of the True Bride, the
prince is as faithless ns Sigurd, but
the princess recovers him in the end
with the happier lot of Penelope. In
tbo story of the Woodcutter’s Child the
Knight has to cut his e way through
the thorny hedges, as Sigurd fyasto ride
through the flames. As the fearless

scruple or shame, but Sigurd
must, uui do this, nor must he be, like
Indra and Paris, yvvcufiavris, nor a liar
like Odysseus. The warnings which she
adds are much of the same sort.

The winter sleep of Brynhild is tra¬
vestied in the. later story of Dietrich and
Sigenot (Ludlow, Popular Epics, i. 263.)
Dietrich is here the Sigurd or bright hero,
who wears the helmet of Grein whom
he has slain, and who is the nephew of
the giant Sigenot. Sigenot now carries
off Dietrich and shuts him up in a hollow

BKYNHIIjD and

281

BrynliiM (like Helen) would work laim mucli woe: hut
Brynhild doubtless knew not, as Sigurd rode on to tlie kali
•of Giuki the Niflung, that her jflace was now to ke taken by
another, and that her own lot. was to ke that of Ariadne,
Aitlvra, or Oinone. It is the old tale, repeated under a
thousand different forms. The bright dawn who greeted
the newly risen sun cannot be with him as ke journeys
through the heaven; and the bride whom he weds in her
stead is nearer and more akin to the mists of evening or the
cold of winter. Thus Gudrun, loving and. beautiful as she
is, is still the daughter of the Niflung, the child of the mist,
and stands to Sigurd precisely in the relation of Deianeira
to Her&kles, as the unwitting cause of her husband’s ruin.
But Bilynhild yet lives, and Gunnar, who, like Hogni or
Hagengj is a son of the Niflung and brother of Gudrun, seeks
to havej her as his wife. His desire can be satisfied only
through Sigurd, who by the arts and philtres of Grimkild
has been made to forget his first love and betroth himself to
Gudrun. 1 In vain Gunnar 1 strives to ride through the
Barnes that encircle Brynkild, until at last, by the arts of
Grimkild) Sigurd is made to change shapes and arms with
Gunnar, slid, mounting on Gran, to force Brynkild to yield.
'Thus Sigkrd weds the Valkyrie in Gunnar’s form, and lies
•down by hir side with the unsheathed blade of Gram between
them. 2 In the morning he gives to Brynkild the ring which

.stone or tower. Where, like Hagnar Lod- year, is it sister of the dark Gunnar, and
Itrog, he is attacked by many a strong though now married to the bright
worm or serpeni-the snakes of night. Sigurd, she. belongs herself to the
One of his followers tries to raise him nebulous regions.’—Max Muller, Chips,
by a rope, whiek breaks, and Dietrich ii. 110.

tells him that thlwounds which ho has 2 This incident recurs in Grimm’s
received cannot be healed. Things, storv of the Two Brothers. In the
however, turn oit better than ho ex- Norse legend of the Big Bird Dan, who

JC '™Gunnar GjnkLn seems to signify
darkness, and thi we see that the
awakening and budbug spring is gone, <
carried away by Guitar, like Proserpine
by Pluto; like Sitaiby B&vnna. Gud¬
run, the daughter ^f Grimhild, and
sometimes herself (called Grimhild,

<cf. Gharma in SamLit), or the earth

MYTHOLOGY OF

E ARYAN NATIONS.

was under the double curse of Andvari and Lola, receiving-
from her another ring in return. This ring is necessarily
connected with the catastrophe; but in the mode by which
it is brought about, the Northern poets were left free to
follow their fancy. In the Volsung tale, Gudrun and Bryn-
hild are washing their hair in the same stream, when Bryn-
hild says that no water fro m Gudrun’s head shall fall upon
her own, as her husband is braver than Gudrun’s. When
Gudrun replies that Sigurd, to whom she was wedded, had
slain Fafnir and Begin and seized the hoard, Brynhild
answers that Gunnar had done yet a braver deed in riding
through the flames which surrounded her. A few words
from Gudrun show her how things really are, and that the
seeming Gunnar who had placed on her finger the ring won
from the spoils of Andvari was really Sigurd who had trans¬
ferred to Gudrun the ring which he had received from
Brynhild. Thus her old love is re-awakened, orly to be
merged in the stinging sense of injustice whieh makes
Oinone in one version of the myth refuse to heal th3 wounded
Paris, and leads Deianeira to resolve on the death of Hera-
kles. The three instances are precisely the same, although
Oinone; is of the three the most gentle and the most merciful.
But in all there is the consciousness of betrayal and the
determination to punish it, and the feeling whieh animates
them is reflected again in the hate of Helen fa- Paris after
he has shut her up in Ilion. Thus Brynhild rrges Gunnar
to avenge her on Sigurd, like the evening twlight allying
itself with the darkness of night to blot out th; glory of the
sun from the heavens. But Gunnar and his brothers cannot
accomplish her will themselves : they have mule a compact
of friendship with Sigurd, and they must rot-break their
oath. But Guttorm their half-brother is inder no such
covenant, and so this being, who represeits the cold of
winter, plunges a sword into the breast of Sigurd, who is
sleeping in the arms of Gudrun. This weawn is the thorn
which is fatal to the Persian Bustem and he gentle Surya
Bai of modem Hindu folk-lore. But Sigud is mighty even

worth noting that the incident is related also of Allah-d-deen in the Arabian.
Nights’ legend.

THK DEATH OP SIGURD.

283

in death, and the blade Grain, hurled by his dying hand, CHAD,
cleaves Guttonn asunder, so that the upper part of his bodj r ■ •

fell out of the chamber, while the lower limbs remained in
the room. The change which his death causes in the mind
of Brynhild answers precisely to the pity which Oinone feels
when her refusal to heal Paris has brought about bis death.

Like Helen, who hates herself, or is hated, for bringing ruin
on ships, men, and cities, she bewails the doom which
brought her into the world for everlasting damage and grief
of soul to many men. Like Ddianeira, and Oindnd, and
Kleopatra, she feels that without the man whom she loves
life is not worth living for, and thus she lies down to die on
the funeral pile of Sigurd.

The' sequel reproduces the . same incidents under other The Story
names, and with different colours. ‘As Sigurd, like Theseus ofGu<;lnm -
and Herikles, first woos the Dawn, and thus has to dwell
with the maiden who represents the broad and open day, so
Gudrun, the loving companion of the Sun in his middle
journey, has to mourn liis early death, and in her widowhood
to become the bride, first of the gloaming, then of the dark¬
ness. Between these there is a necessary enmity, but then-
hatred only serves the more thoroughly to avenge the death
of Sigurd. Atli, the second husband of Gudrun, claims all
the gold which Sigurd had won from the dragon, but which
the chieftains of Niflheim had seized when he died. In fair
fight he could never hope to match them; so Atli invites
Hogni (Haugn or Hagen) and Gunnar to a feast, in which he
overpowers them. Hogni’s heart is then cut out, an incident
which answers to the roasting of the heart of Fafnir; and as
the latter is associated with the recovery of the golden
treasure, so the former is connected with the subsequent loss
which answers to the coming on of the night when the sun
has reached the end of his glorious course. When Sigurd
died, Gunnar and his brothers had thrown the hoard into
the Rhine—the water whicl# receives Endymidn as he plunges
into his dreamless sleep; and the secret of it is lost when
they in their turn are cast into a pit full of snakes, all of
whom, like Orpheus, Gunnar lulls to sle'ep by his liarping,
except one which flies at his heart, and kills him—a tale told

284

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK over again in the transparent myth of Thora, Aslauga, and
Ba.gnar Lodbrog. Thus the beings who, though they might
be akin to the mist and cold of night, had made a covenant
of peace and friendship with Sigurd, are all gone, and to
Gudrun remains the task of avenging them. The story of
her vengeance is practically a repetition of the legend of
Medeia. Like the Kolchian woman, she slays the two sons
whom she had borne to Atli; but the ferocity of the North¬
ern sentiment colours the sequel in which we see a sunset as
blood-red and stormy as that in which Herakles rose from
earth to the mansions of the undying gods. Gudrun makes
Atli eat the flesh and drink the blood of his sons; and then,
having slain him as he sleeps, by the aid of the son of her
brother Hogni, she sets fire to the hall, and consumes every
thing within it. The shades of evening or of autumn are
now fast closing in, and Gudrun, weary of her life, hastens
to the sea shore to end her woes by plunging into the deep.
But the waters carry her over to the land of King Jonakr,
who makes her his bride, and she now becomes the mother of
three sons, Saurli, Hamdir, and Erp, whose raven black hair
marks them as the children of clouds and darkness. Once more
the magic wheel revolves, and in the fortunes of Svanhild,
the daughter of Sigurd and Gunnar, we see the destiny of
the fateful Helen. Like her, Svanhild is the most beau¬
tiful of women, and Hermanric, the Gothic king, sends his
son Bandver to woo her for him; but the young man is
advised by the treacherous Bikki to woo her for himself, and
he follows the counsel which chimes in only too well with
his own inclinations, as with those of Svanhild. Her¬
manric orders that his son shall be hanged. Presently he
receives a plucked hawk which Bandver had sent to show
him the weakness of parents who deprive themselves of the
support of their children, and he gives orders to stop the
execution. The messenger comes too late, Bandver is already
slain; and Svanhild is trampled to death by the steeds of
Hermanric’s horsemen as she combs out her golden locks.
But Hermanric must pay the penalty for his ill-doing not
less than Sigurd 6r Atli. Gunnar’s command goes forth to
her three Niflung sons, Saurli, Hamdir and Erp, to avenge

STORY OP GUDRCX.

'285

Svanhild; and thus, armed with helmets and cased in mail CHAP,
which no weapons can pierce, they take the way to the house . XIL .
of Hermanric. As they go, the Niflungs quarrel among
themselves, and Saurli and Hamdir slay Erp, because he is
his mother’s darling. 1 But Hermanric, although he may be
mutilated, cannot be slain. The two brothers cut off his
hands and feet; but Erp is not there to.smite off his head,
and Hermanric has strength to call out to his men, who
bind the Niflungs and stone them to death, by the advice of
a one-eyed man who tells them that no steel can pierce their
panoply. Here the one-eyed man is again the stranger wlio
had left the sword in the oak tree of Volsung’s hall, and
the men of Hermanric answer to the Achaians in their
struggle with the robbers of Jlion. It was time, however,
that, the tale should end, and it is brought to a close with
the death of Gudrun, for no other reason probably than that
the revolutions of the mythic wheel must be arrested some¬
where. The difference between the climates of northern and
southern Europe is of itself enough to account for the more
cheerful ending of the Hellenic story in the triumphant
restoration of the Herakleidai.

The very fact that in all this story there is, as we have Helgi
seen, scarcely an incident which we do not find in the tradi- Sn S ,,s -
tions of other Aryan nations or tribes, renders it impossible
to judge of the character of Northmen or Germans from the
legends themselves. It is possible, of course, and even likely

28ft

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

HOOK

that the poets or narrators have in each case thrown over
the characters and events of their tale a colouring borrowed
from the society of the time ; but that as portraits of actual
manners they are gross and impossible exaggerations we are
justified in concluding not only from the story itself, but from
the recurrence of the myth in many lands unchanged in its
essence, aud even in its most prominent features. It is thrice
repeated in the legends of the three Helgis, who, it is scarcely
necessary to say, are mere reflections, the one of the others.
These are the holy ones, or saviours, who make whole or restore
life, like the Paiedn or Asklepios of Greek mythology . 1

Of these Helgis, the first is called the son of Uiorvardur,
and he is loved by Swava, the daughter of King Eilimir.
But his brother Hedin makes a vow on the yule eve that
Swava shall be his wife, not the bride of Helgi. He has been
misled by the sorceress Hrimgerda, who seeks to make him
her own, as Kirke and Kalypso use all their arts to detain
Odysseus; hut the northern hero is more scrupulous than
the Itliakan chieftain, and he not only rejects her love, but
compels her to prophesy till the day dawns and her power is
at an end,—a sufficiently clear token of her nature. Soon,
however, he repents him of the oath which the sorceress had
led him to take, and he confesses his guilt to Helgi, who,
foreboding his own death in the coming struggle with AJfur,
the son of Hrodmar, promises that when, he is slain Swava
shall be Hedin’s. When he has received the death-wound,
he tells Swava of this promise; hut she refuses to abide by it
or to have any other husband hut Helgi, add Helgi in his
turn declares that though he must now die, he will come
hack again when his death has been avenged. This is mani¬
festly the avenging of Baldur, and Helgi is thus another form
of Adonis, or Memndn, or Dionysos. The younger brother is
the waning autumn sun, who thinks to obtain his brother’s
wife when the sun of summer has lost its power.

At the birth of the second Helgi, known as Hundingsbana,

THE HELGI SAGAS.

the Nornas came and fixed the lot of the bahe, like the
Moirai in the legend of Meleagros. 1 When fifteen years
old, he slays King Hnnding and his sons, and afterwards
wins the love of Sigrun, daughter of Hogni, who, like Swava,
is a Valkyrie and a sister of Bragi and Dag, the brilliant hea-
Ven and the day. She promises Helgi that she will be his
wife if he will vanquish the sons of Granmar, the bearded
spirit, to one of whom she had been betrothed. Thus again
we have the woman whom two heroes, seek to obtain, the
Helen for whom Menelaos and Paris contend together. In the
battle which follows, Sigrun, as a Valkyrie, cheers him on,
and Dag alone is spared of all the sons of Granmar. But
although Dag swears allegiance to the Volsungs, he yet trea¬
cherously stabs Helgi (another of the many forms of Baldur’s
death), and tells Sigrun that he is dead. The sequel,
although essentially the same, shows the. working of a new
vein of thought. Sigrun ciu-ses Dag as one who had broken
his oath, and refuses to live

Unless a glory should break' from the prince's grave,

And Vigbiar tlio horso should spoed thither with him ;

The gold-bridled steed becomes him whom X fain would embrace.

Her tears disturb the repose of Helgi in his grave, and he
rebukes her as making his wounds burst open afresh. But
Sigrun is not to be scared or driven away. She prepares a
common resting-place for him and for herself, a couch free
from all care, and enters of her own free will the land of the

' Nothing I now declare
At ScfafiSU
Since in a corpse’s
Hogni’s fair daughter,
And thou art living,

Unlooked for,

AmsVoulke cst
In" mound, eePCS,t ’
Daughter of kings.

Time ! tis for me to :
Lot the rale horse

Ere Lalgofnir

The third Helgi ? Haddingaheld, is but a reproduction of

1 He is also identified as Hermodhur,* 2 Second Lay of Helgi Hundings-
Heermuth. the son of Odin, who is sent liana, 46. -17. This is the legend of Le-
to fetch up Haldur from the under now,of which Dmisou says that, 4 Burger
world and is thus the returning or con- caught the soul of the story ns it was on
uuering sun who comes hack after the the point of extinction, and lent it a new
winter solstice.—Bunsen, God in His- and immortal lift* among the German

288

MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book the second Helgi, while Kara, the daughter of Halfgam, takes

— T ;_. the place of Swava or Sigrun. In all these tales the heroes

and the heroines stand in precisely the same relations to
each other; 1 and thus, having seen that the myths of these
heroes merely reproduce the legends of Baldur and of Sigurd
the Volsung, we are prepared for the conclusion that the story
of Siegfried, in the Lay of the Eibelungs, is only another
form of the oft-repeated tale. For the most part the names
are the same, as well as the incidents. The second Helgi is
a son of Sigmund, his mother also being called Sigurlin; and
so Sigurd of the Volsung and Siegfried of the Nibelung Saga
are each the son of Sigmund. The slaying of Hundiug by
Helgi answers to the slaughter of Fafnir and Begin by
Sigurd, Siegfried being also a dragon-slayer like Phoibos, or
Oidipous, or Herakles. So too, as Sigurd first won the love of
Brynhild and then marries Gudrun, for whose brother he
finally wins Brynhild as a wife, so Siegfried in his turn marries
Eriemhild, sister of the Burgundian Gunther, having wooed
Brynhild for his brother-in-law. ’ If, again, Brynhild causes
the death of Sigurd, the man in whom she has garnered up
her soul, so Siegfried is murdered at Brynhild’s instigation.
If in the Helgi Saga the son of Hogni bears the news of
Helgi’s death to Sigurd, so in the Volsung tale Hogni informs
Gudrun of Sigurd’s death, and in the Kibelung song Hagen
brings to Eriemhild the tidings of the death of Siegfried.
Like Swava and Sigrun, Brynhild kills herself that her body
may he burnt with that of Sigurd; and as in the story of
the Volsungs, Atli (who appears as the comrade of the first
Helgi) gets possession of Gunnar a,nd Hogni and has them
put to death, so Eriemhild in the Nibelungenlied marries
Etzel, who catches Gunther and his brothers in the same trap
in which Gunnar and Hogni had been caught by Atli. 2

THE NIBE!

289

LUNGfiH LAY.

_ That the later forms into which the Volsung story has CHAP,
been thrown may contain some incidents which may he either XIL .
truly told or else travestied from real history, it is impossible The Nihc-
to deny. When at the best they who insist most on the liisto-
,rical character of these poems can but trace a name here and
there, or perhaps see in the account of some fight a reference
to- some actual battle with which it has no likeness beyond
the fact that men fought and were killed in both, as the
fishes swim in the streams of Macedon and Monmouth, it
seems useless to affirm it. When the motives are alike in all,
when in each case there is a wealthily dowered maiden whose
hoard is stolen, a robber who refuses to disclose the secret of
the lost treasure, and bloody vengeance by those who lay
claim to this wealth, when thousands are .murdered in a
single hall, and men lie down contentedly in flaming cham¬
bers floating in blood, treading out the falling brands in the
gore and recruiting their strength by sucking tire veins of
. the dead, we can scarcely regard it as a profitable task to
search amidst such a mass of impossibilities the materials
for a picture of society as existing -whether amongst Northmen
or amongst Greeks. That the colouring thrown over them
is in part reflected from the manners of the age, there is no
room to doubt; but when the groundwork of the story has
been shown to be purely mythical, this fact will not carry us

290

MYTHOLOGY OK

ARYAN NATIONS.

ROOK

J.

Siegfried

Baldur.

far. We are confined to mere names or mere customs; and
the attempt to advance further lands us in the region of
guesswork. Thus to Mr. Kemble’s assertion that Attila
‘ drew into his traditional history the exploits of others, and
more particularly those of Chlodowic and his sons in the
matter of the Burgundian kingdom/ and that this fact will
be patent to any one who will look over the accounts of the
Burgundian war in Gregory of Tours, Mr. Ludlow replies
that the search yields only two names, Godegiselus namely,
and Theudericus, answering to the Giselher and Dietrich of
the Nibelungen Lay. 1 Nor do we gain much if we find
Gundicar, the Burgundian king, as one of the sovereigns
conquered by Attila, if the Atli of the Volsung story be¬
longed to the myth long before the days of the Hunnish-
devastator. The name of the Bishop Pilgrim seems to be
more genuinely historical; but even if he can be identified
as a prelate who tilled the see of Passau in the tenth century,
we know no more about him from the poem than we learn
of Hruodlandus from the myth of the Boland who fell at
Boncesvalles.

The points of difference between the Norse'and the German
traditions are simply such as the comparison of one Greek
myth with another would lead us to expect. Phoibos may
be called the child of the darkness, as strictly as he may be
said to be bom in Delos or Ortygia. The offspring of Chry-
sadr, the lord of the golden sword of day, is the three-headed
Geryoneus; and Echidna, the throttling snake, who is united
with Herakles, is the daughter of Kallirhoe, the fair-flowing
stream of the ocean. Hence there is nothing surprising in
the fact that in the one set of myths Sigurd fights with, or is
slain by, the Niflungs, while in the other he is said to be a
Niflung himself. 2 The real difference between the Teutonic
and the Greek epics lies, not so much in the fact that a
complex poem exhibits a being like Paris, sometimes in the
garb of the Panis, sometimes with all the attributes of Helios,
as in the greater compass of the northern poems. The Iliad
relates the incidents only of a portion of a single year in the

1 Ludlow, Popular Epics of the Middle Ages, i. 180.
* Ibid,, i. 137.

SIGURD AND SIEGFRIED.

291

Trojan war; the Nibelung lay adds two or three complete CHAP,
histories to the already completed history of Siegfried. The . -

antiquity of these several portions of a poem, which hy the con¬
fession of all has certainly been pieced together, is a question
into which we need not enter. It is possible, as Mr. Ludlow
thinks, that the portion which relates to Siegfried was added
at a later time to explain the intense hatred of Kriemhild for
her brothers, and that this maybe the most modern addition!
to the Nibelungenlied; but it is not less certain that the-
myth of Siegfried is the myth of Baldur, and has existed in.
many shapes in every Aryan land. The Volsuug story may
represent the rougher songs of Norse sea-rovers, while the-
Nibelung song may introduce us to the more, stately life and
elaborate pageants of German kings and princes; but the
heroes have changed simply their conditions, not their mind
and temper, by crossing the sea or passing into another land,

The doom of perpetual pilgrimage is laid on Perseus, Theseus,
Bellerophon, Herakles, Odysseus; and Sigurd and Siegfried
are not more exempt from it. 1 In their golden locks and
godlike countenances, in their flashing swords and unerring
spears, there is no difference between them; and every
additional point of likeness adds to the weight of proof that
these epic poems represent neither the history nor the na¬
tional character of Northmen, Greeks, or Germans. In each
case the spirit of the tradition has been carefully preserved,,
but there is no servile adherence. In the Yolsung story,

Gudrun becomes the wife of Siegfried; in the Nibelung song,
her mother Kriemhild takes her place. The Hogni of the

singular clearness in the Gaelic story, neying; there was blackening on his
where tlic Dame of the Fine Green soles, and holes in his shoes; the
Kirtle 3ays the Fair Graagnch under black clouds of night, coming, and the
her spcllj that he shall not rest by bright quiet clouds of Iho day going
night or by day (Ixic~ . J n;.

not tby supper, in whatsoever place* bos, Dionysos,
thou be, until thou findest out in what Indra. Oidipc
place 1 may be under the four brown necessary to
quarters of the world” becomes the

.‘So it was in the morning of the tho Fine Gr
morrow’s day he went away without dog, other than ]U

MYTHOLOGY OP THE AH VAN NATIONS.

former tale becomes in the latter the Hagen of Tronege,
against whom Siegfried is warned when he desires to marry
Kriemhild, the sister of Gunther, Gemot, and.Giselher, and
who recognises Siegfried as the slayer of the Niblungs, the
conqueror of their magic sword, Balmung, and of all their
treasures, and the possessor of the tamkappe, or cape of
darkness—all of them features with which the earlier legend
has made us familiar. The story of Thetis or Demet^r
plunging Achilleus and Triptolemos into the bath of fire is
here represented by the myth that Siegfried cannot be
wounded, because, he had bathed himself in the blood of a
dragon whom he had slain—the Fafnir or Python of the
Norse and Delphic legends. 1 At the first glance Kriemhild
is filled with love for Siegfried, but the latter cannot see her
until he has sojourned for a year in the country of King
Gunther—a condition which answers to that under which
Hades suffered Orpheus to lead away Eurydike. Here, like
Sigurd in the Yolsung myth, Siegfried wins Brynhild for
Gunther or Gunnar; but though there is here not the same
complication, the narrative scarcely becomes on this account
the more human. Like Perseus with the helmet of Hades,
Siegfried can make himself invisible at will, and like Apollon
Delphinios, he pushes a ship through the sea—a myth in
which we recognise also the Wish breeze. 2 Here also, as in
the Norse story, the ring and girdle of Brynhild come through
Siegfried into the possession of Kriemhild; and at this point
the myth assumes a form which reminds us of the relations of

and two to be put into
2 necessary consequence
Oman has two golden

_. re simply such as must children who, mounting on the two

arise in myths dereloped independently golden foals of the mare, represent the
from a common source. The essential Asvins and the Dioskouroi, the pieces
part of it is the connection between the put into the ground producing two golden
dragon and the power derived from it: lilies on which the lives of the children
and this connexion is manifest in the depend. In the tale of the Fisher™"
myths of Iamos, Medeia, and Phoibos. and his Wife, the fish aeeomplishe;

*•> mi.. - t ] ie pjgh g un Wishes 0 f the ’ 1

the ground. 'I

n and his Wife. In the form

a lady, then queen, then
>f the universe, the floundor

KRIEMHILD AND BRYNHILD.

293

Herakles with Eurystlieus. Like Here in the Greek tale, CHAP.
Brynhild holds that Siegfried ought to do service to Gunther, ■

as Herakles did to his lord, and thus urges him to summon
Siegfried to Worms. The hero, who is found in the Nifhmg’s
.castle on the Norwegian border, loads the messengers with
treasures, and Hagen cannot suppress the longing that all
this wealth may yet come into the hands of the Burgundians. 1
No sooner has Siegfried, with his father Sigmund and his
wife Kriemhild, reached Worms, than Brynhild hastens to
impress on Kriemliild that Siegfried is Gunther’s man, and
that, like Theseus to Minos, he must pay tribute. In deep
anger Kriemliild resolves to insult her adversary, and when
they go to church, she presses on before Brynhild, who bids
her as a vassal stand back, and taunting her as having been
won by Siegfried, shows him her girdle and ring as the
evidence of her words. Gunther, urged by his wife, rebukes
Siegfried for betraying the secret, but his anger is soon
appeased. It is otherwise with Hogni,.or Hagen, who here
plays the part of Paris, by whose spear Achilleus is to fall.

He sees his sister weeping, and, swearing to revenge her,
spreads false tidings of the approach of an enemy, and when
he knows that Siegfried is ready to set out against them, he
asks Kriemhild how he may best insure her husband’s safety.

Not knowing to whom she spake, she tells him that when
Siegfried bathed himself in the dragon’s blood a broad
linden leaf stuck between his shoulders, and there left him
vulnerable, this place between the shoulders answering to
the vulnerable heel of Achilleus. To make still more sure,

Hagen asks Kriemliild to mark the spot, and the wife of the
hero thus seals his doom. The narrative at this point be¬
comes filled with all the tenderness and beauty of the Odyssey.
Kriemhild is awakened to her folly in betraying Siegfried’s
secret to Hagen. Still, in vain she prays him not to go. He
is the knight who knows no fear, aiid without fear he accom¬
panies Hagen, doing marvellous things, until one day he

portion of tile epic are often spoken of different, legends.’—- Ityiiilar Epics of /he
us Niblungs, as mythically they assuredly Middle .-fi/t.«,.i- 133. At. the most., it
are. The fact evidently shown, in Mr. would hr-'hut one of two versions of
Ludlow's opinion, ‘ tliat flic poem in its the legend.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

asks Hagen why he has brought no wine to drink, when
Hagen offers to show him the way to a good spring. Sieg¬
fried hastens thither with him, and as he stoops to drink
Hagen shoots him through the back on the spot marked by
the silver cross. It is scarcely necessary to compare this with
the vast number of myths in which the death of the sun is
connected with water, whether of the ocean or the sea. In
the spirting out of Siegfried’s blood on Hagen, in the wonder¬
ful stroke with which he almost smites his betrayer dead, in
the death wrestle which covers the flowers all around with
blood and gore, we have the chief features of the blood-stained
sunset which looms out in the legend of the death of Herakles.
The body of Siegfried, placed on a golden shield, is borne to
the chamber of Kriemhild, who feels, before she is told, that
it is the corpse of her murdered husband. ‘ This is Brynhild’s
counsel,’ she said, ‘this is Hagen’s deed; ’ and she swears to
avenge his death by a vengeance as fearful as that of Achilleus.
As Siegfried had spoken, so should Hagen assuredly rue the
•day of his death hereafter. She gives orders to awaken
•Siegfried’s men and his father Sigmund; but Sigmund has
not slept, for, like Peleus, he has felt that he should see his
son again no more. Then follows the burial of Siegfried,
when Gunther - swears that no harm has come to the hero
■either from himself or from his men: but the lie is given to
his words when the wounds bleed as Hagen passes before the
•dead body. When all is over, Sigmund says that they must
return to their own land; but Kriemhild is at last persuaded
to remain at Worms, where she sojourns for more than three
years in bitter grief, seeing neither Gunther nor Hagen.
The latter now makes Gemot press Kriemhild to have her
hoard brought from the Niblung land, and thus at length
gaining possession of it, he sinks it all in the Ehine. In
■other words, Adonis is dead, and the women are left mourning
■and wailing for him; or the maiden is stolen away from
Demeter, and her wealth is carried to the house of Hades;
or again, as in the Norse tale, the dwarf Andvari is'keeping
watch over the treasures of Brynhild: and thus ends the
first of the series of mythical histories embodied in the
Nibelung Lay. Whether this portion of the great Ten-

HAGEN.

tonic epic be, or be not, older than the parts -which follow it, CHAJ?
it is indubitably an integral narrative in itself, and by no . XIi ' -
means indispensable to the general plan of the poem, except
in so far as it accounts for the implacable hatred of Kriem-
hild for her brothers.

The second part of the drama begins with the death of The stray
Helche, the wife of Etzel or Atli, who longs to marry Hagen.
Kriemhild, and who is restrained only by the recollection
that he is a heathen while the widow of Siegfried is a Chris¬
tian. This objection, however, is overruled by the whole
council, who, with the one exception of Hagen, decide that
Etzel shall marry Kriemhild. Hagen is opposed to it,
because Siegfried swore that he should rue the day on
which he touched him, and on account of the prophecy that
if ever Kriemlield took the place of Helche, she would bring
harm to the Burgundians, as Helen did to the fleet, the
armies, and the cities of Hellas. But as the forsaken Ariadne
was wedded to Dionysos, so the messengers of Etzel tell
Kriemhild that she shall be the lady of twelve rich crowns,
and rule the lands of thirty princes. Kriemhild refuses to
give an immediate answer; and the great struggle which
goes on within her answers to the grief and sickness of soul
which makes the mind of Helen oscillate between her affec¬
tion for her husband Menelaos and the unhallowed fascina¬
tions of the Trojan Paris. So is brought about tbe second
marriage of the bride of Siegfried, a marriage the sole in¬
terest of which lies in the means which it affords to her of
avenging the death of Hagen’s victim. This vengeance is .
now the one yearning of her heart, although outwardly she
may he the contented wife of Etzel, just as Odysseus longed
only to be once more at home with Penelope even while he
was compelled to sojourn in the house of KirkS or the cave of
Kalypso; and if the parallel between Etzel and Paris is not
close, yet it is closer than the likeness between the Etzel of
the Hiblungs’ Lay and the Attila of history. The poet declares
that her deadly wrath is roused by the reflection that at
Hagen’s instigation she has given herself to a heathen ; but
throughout it is clear that her heart and her thoughts are
far away in tbe grave of the golden-haired youth who bad

2!><3 ’ MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATTOSS. .

HOOK, wooed and -vvon her in the beautiful spring-time, and that of
1 . Etzel she took lieed only so far as it might suit her purpose

to do so. Her object now is to get Hagen into hfir power,
and she sends messengers to Gunther bidding him bring all
his best friends, whom. Hagen can guide, as from-his childhood
he has known the way to the Huns’ land. 1 All are ready
to go except Hagen, and he is loth to put his foot into the
trap which he sees that Kriemhild is setting for him; but he
cannot bear the taunts of his brother Gunther, who tells him
that if he feels guilty on the score of Siegfried’s death he had
better stay at home. Still he advises that if they go they
should go in force. So Gunther sets out with three thousand
men, Hagen, and Dankwart, his brother, and other chiefs with
such as they can muster; and with them goes Yolker, the
renowned musician, who can fight as well as he can play. 2
Hagen necessarily discerns evil omens as they journey on.
The waters of the Danube are swollen, and as he searches
along the banks for a ferryman, he seizes the wondrous ap¬
parel of two wise women who are bathing, one of whom pro¬
mises that if he will give them their raiment, they will tell
how he may journey to the Huns’ land. Floating like
birds before him on the flood, they lure him with hopes
of the great honours- which are in store for him, and thus
they recover their clothes—a myth which feebly reflects the
beautiful legends of the Swan maidens and their knights. No
sooner, however, are they again clothed, than the wise woman
who has not yet spoken tells him that her sister has lied, and
that from the Huns’ land not one shall return alive, except
the king’s chaplain. To test her words, Hagen, as they are

1 Mr. Ludlow hero remarks that ‘ (his of material which the poets of the
is one of the passages which imply the Nibelung song, like those of the Iliad
legend contained in “Walthar of and Oth/ssn/, found ready to their hand.
Aquitaine,” where Hagen is represented The close agreement, of the framework
as a fellow hostage with Waltlmr at of the poem with that of the VoLsung
Et eel's court .'—Popular Epics, i. 130. story andthe legends of the Helgis, and

the Panis know their way to the land is, therefore, quite unnecessary to giro
whence they steal the cattle of Indra. an abstract of the poem throughout, a

- I must confine myself to those task which has been performed already
portions of the epic which call for a by many writers, and among them by
comparison with other legends, and Mr. Ludlow, Popular Epics, i.
which, taken together, show tho amount

THE GRIEF AND VENGEANCE OF KEIEMHILd”* 0 "

crossing the river, throws the priest into the stream; hut CHAP,
although he tries to push him down under the water, yet the . XIL .
chaplain" although unable to swim, is carried by Divine aid
to the shore, and the doomed Burgundians go onwards to
meet their fate. In the house of Rudiger they receive a genial
welcome; but when Rudiger’s daughter approaches at his
bidding to kiss Hagen, his countenance seemed to her so
fearful that she would gladly have foregone the duty. On
their departure Rudiger loads them with gifts. To Gernot
he gives a sword which afterwards deals the death-blow to
Rudiger himself, who resolves to accompany them; while
Hagen receives' the magnificent shield of Nuodung, whom
Witege slew. The ominous note is again sounded when
Dietrich, who is sent to meet the Burgundians, tells Hagen
that Kriemhild still weeps sore for the hero of the Niblung
land; and Hagen can but say that her duty now is to Etzel,
as Siegfried is Buried and comes again no more. It is the
story of the Odyssey. When Dietrich is asked how he knows
the mind of Kriemhild, ‘ What shall I say ? ’ he answers;

‘ every morning early 1 hear her, Etzel’s wife, weep and wail
full sadly to the God of heaven for strong Siegfried’s body.’ 1
It is the sorrow of Penelope,' wlio mourns for the absence of
Odysseus during twenty weary years, though the suitors, like
Etzel, are by her side, or though, as other versions went, she
became a mother while the wise chief was far away fighting
at Ilion or wandering over the wine-faced sea.

At length Hagen and Kriemhild stand face to face: but The ven-
when the wife of Etzel asks what gifts he has brought,

Hagen answers that one so wealthy needs no gifts. The kild.
question is then put plainly, ‘ Where is the Niblungs’ hoard ?

It was my own, as ye well know.’ Hagen answers that at
his master’s bidding it has been sunk in tlie Rhine, and
there it must remain till the day of judgment. But when
Kriemhild tells the Burgundians that they must give up
their arms before going iryto the hall, Hagen begs to be

' Compare the Gaelic story of the the gold and silver cap, as Penelope
Eider of Grianaig (Campbell, iii. 18), is delivered from her sailors by (ho
where the dawn-maidens moarn he- man who vronghL the bed in her bridal
cause they have to marry the giant, chamber,
hut are rescued by the man who made

1298

MYTHOLOGY OK TUB ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK excused. The honour is greater than he deserves, and he
L . will himself be chamberman. Kriemhild sees that he has
been warned, and learns to her grief and rage® that the
warning has come through Dietrich. 1 But the time for
the avenging of Siegfried draws nigh. Etzel’s men see
Kriemhild weeping as through a window she looks down on
Hagen and Volker, and when they assure her that the man
who has called forth her tears shall pay for his offence with
his blood, she bids them avenge her of Hagen, so that he
may lose his life. Sixty men are ready to slay them, but
Kriemhild says that so small a troop can never suffice to
slay two heroes so powerful as Hagen and the still more
mighty Volker who sits by his side,—words which at once
show that we have before us no beings of human race, and
that Hagen is akin to the Panis, while Volker is the
whispering breeze or the strong wind of the night, whose
harping, like that of Orpheus, few or none may withstand.
Kriemhild herself goes down to them: but Hagen will not
rise to greet her. On his knees she sees the gleaming sword
which he had taken frpm Sigfried, the good blade Gram,
which Odin left in the house of Volsung. The words
which burst from her bespeak the grief of a Penelope who
nurses her sorrow in a harsher clime than that of Ithaka.
She asks Hagen how he could venture into the lion’s den,
and who had sent for him to the Huns’ country. To his
reply that he had come only by constraint of the masters
whose man he was, she rejoins by asking why he did the
deed for which she bears hate to him. He has slain her be¬
loved Siegfried, for whom if she weeps all her life long she
could never weep enough. It is useless to deny the deed,
and Hagen does not care to disown it. He tells the queen
that he is in truth the man who slew Siegfried and has
done to her great wrong ; and the preparations for the last
struggle go on with more speed and certainty. It is im¬
possible not to think of the suitors in the house of Odysseus,
although the bearing of Hagen and his men is altogether

1 It is at this point that the passago in our present inquiry than as showing
is inserted which connects the Nibe- the composite character of the great
lungenlied with the story of Waltlmr Teutonic epic.—Ludlow, Popular Ifyks,
of Aquitaine. Itisof no further interest, i. 146.

THE HALL OF SLAUGHTER. 299

More dignified. The very weakening of the myth, which chap.
was too strong to allow the Homeric poet so to paint them, . XI1, .
has enabled the Teutonic hard to ascribe to the slayers of
Siegfried a character of real heroism. But here, as in the
Odyssey, the scene of vengeance is the great hall; and we
have to ask where the roof has ever been raised under
which thousands have fought until scarcely one has been
left to tell the tale of slaughter. In this hall the Burgun¬
dians are left to sleep on beds and couches covered with silks,

•ermine, and sable. But they are full of misgivings, and
Hagen undertakes with Volker to keep watch before the
door. Yolker, the Phemios of the Odyssey, does more. With
the soft and lulling tones of the harp of Hermes or of Pan,
he lulls to'sleep the sorrows of the men who are soon to die.

Through all the house the sweet sounds find their way, until
all the warriors are asleep; and then Yolker takes his
shield and goes out to guard his comrades against any
sudden onslaught of the Huns. The tragedy begins on the
morrow with the accidental slaying of' a Hun by Volker at
the jousts which follow the morning mass; and the fight
grows hot when Dankwart .smites off the head of Blodel,
whom Eriemhild had sent' to slay him because he was
Hagen’s brother. But Hagen survives to do the queen more
mischief. Her son Ortlieb is being carried from table to
table in the banqueting hall, and Hagen strikes off the boy’s
head which leaps into Kriemliild’s lap. The hall runs with
blood. Seven thousand bodies are flung down the steps ;
but Hagen is still unconquered, and Irinc who had charged
himself with the office of Blodel, and succeeded in wounding
him in the face, falls in his turn a victim to his zeal. A
fresh thousand are poured in to avenge his death: the
Burgundians slay them all, and then sit down to keep
watch with the dead bodies as their seats. The tale goes
on with increasing defiance of likelihood and possibility.
Kriemhild and Etzel gather before the hall twenty-thousand
men; but still the Burgundians maintain the strife deep
into the night. When at length they ask for a truce, and
Giselher tells his sister that he has never done her harm,
her answer is that he is the brother of Siegfried's murderer,

,"00 MYTHOLOGY OF TUB ARYAN NATIONS.

rook vnid therefore he and all most die unless they will yield tip

^_. Hh.gen into her hands. This they refuse, and Kriemhild

sets fire to the hall, an incident which occurs in other sagas,
a,s those of Njal and Grettir. Drink there is none, unless
it be human blood, which is gushing forth in rivers; but with
this they slake their thirst and nerve their arms, while the
burning rafters fall crashing around them, until the fire is
extinguished in the horrid streams which gush from human
bodies. Thousands have been slain within this fated hall;
six hundred yet remain; the Huns attack them two to one.
The fight is desperate. Rudiger, compelled to take part iu
it sorely against his will, is slain with his own sword by
• Gemot; and at length Yolker the minstrel is killed by
Hildebrand, who strives in vain to wound Hagen, for he is
the master of Balmung, Siegfried’s sword, the Gram of the
Volsung story. Dietrich is at length more successful, and
the slayer of Siegfried is at last brought bound into the
presence of the woman who lives only to avenge him. With
him comes Gunther - , the last of the Burgundian chiefs who is
left alive. Once more, in this last dread hour, the story
reverts to the ancient myth. Kriemhild places them apart,
and then coming to Hagen, tells him that even now he may
go free if he will yield up the treasure which he stole from
Siegfried. Hagen’s answer is that he cannot say where
the hoard is as long as any of his masters remain alive.
Kriemhild now takes to him the head of Gunther, the last
of his liege lords, and Hagen prepares to die triumphantly.
She has slain the last man who knew the secret besides
himself, and from Hagen she shall never learn it. Frantic
in her sorrow, Kriemhild cries that she will at least have
the sword which her sweet love bore when the murderer
smote him treacherously. She grasps it in her hand, she
draws the blade from its sheath, she whirls it in the air, and
the victory of Acliilleus is accomplished. Hagen is slain,
like Hektor. Her heart’s desire is attained. What matters
it, if death is to follow her act of dread revenge, as Thetis
told the chieftain of Phthia that his death must follow
soon when he has slain Hektor ? The night is not far off.
when the sun appears like a conqueror near the horizon

FACTS OF THE XIBELUNTi STORY.

after his long battle with the clouds. The sight of the
dead Hagen rouses the grief of Etzel and the fury of Hilde¬
brand who smites Kriemhild and hews her in pieces.

If we put aside the two or three names which may belong
to persons of whose existence we have other evidence, the
idea that- this story of ferocious and impossible vengeance
represents in any degree the history of the age of Attila
becomes one of the wildest of dreams. Etzel himself is no
more like the real Attila that the Alexandras of the Iliad is
like the great son of the Macedonian Philip. The tale is,
throughout, the story told, in every Aryan land, of the death
of the short-lived sun, or the stealing of the dawn and her
treasures, and of the vengeance which is taken for these
deeds. It is but one of the many narratives of the great drama
enacted before our eyes every year and every day, one of the
many versions of the discomfiture of the thieves who seek to
deceive the beautiful Sarama. But if this great epic poem
contains no history, it is remarkable as showing the extent
to which the myth has been modified by the influence of
Christianity and the growth of an historical sense in the
treatment of national traditions. There is a. certain awk¬
wardness in the part played by Etzel, a part ludicrously
unlike the action of the historical Attila; and the pitiable
weakness or inconsistency -which leads him throughout to
favour the schemes of his wife, and then, when Hagen is
slain, to mourn for him as the bravest and best of heroes, '
serves only to bring out more prominently the fact that it is
Kriemhild who fights single-handed against all her enemies,
and that she is in truth- a Penelope who trusts only to her¬
self to deal with the ruffians who have dashed the cup of
joy from her lips and stolen away her beautiful treasures.
But the religious belief of the poets would not allow them to
make use of any other method for bringing about the terri¬
ble issue. The bards who recounted the myths of the three
Helgis would have brought # back Siegfried from the grave,
and added another to the heroes who represent the slain and
-risen gods, Balduv. Dionysos, and Adonis or Osiris. In
no other way could Siegfried have been brpught back to Hie
aid of bis wife, unless like Odysseus lie bad boon represent'd

302 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook not as slain, but as fulfilling the doom which compelled him

__ r i _. to fight, or to wander far away from his home for twenty

years. The closeness with which the bards of the Niblnng
legend followed the Saga of Sigurd rendered this alternative
impossible, and it remained only to leave Kriemhild to ac¬
complish that which no one else had the strength or the will
to achieve on her behalf. But the myth had been farther
weakened in other directions. The slayer of Sigurd in the
Volsung tale and his kindred alike belong with sufficient
clearness to the dark powers who steal the cattle of Indra
or Herakles, and thus they attract to themselves but little
sympathy and no love: hut the Christian feeling which
could brand Hagen as a murderer refused to make his
brothers or his kinsfolk or his liege lords partakers of his
guilt, and thus the cowards of the first part of the story
become, the dauntless heroes of the second. 1 But when Mr.
Ludlow goes on to remark that ‘ Kriemhild’s preferring to-
reside in the neighbourhood of her husband’s murderers
remains perfectly unaccountable,’ we can but say that the
difficulty is confined to the hypothesis which would regard
the story as a picture of human character and human
society. Kriemhild was under the same necessity which
kept Penelope in Ithaka, and the length of time during
which the vengeance was delayed is due to the same cause.
The sword which slays the darkness cannot fall until the
ten long hours of the night have come to an end. Hence
the many years during which Kriemhild makes ready for
the last dread act, and the many years which go before the
fall of Ilion. Nor can we well say that the prominence
given to Kriemhild’s love for Siegfried as the motive for
vengeance over and above the desire to recover the hoard is
‘ the refinement of a later age.’ 2 The Odyssey shows precisely
the same connection between the desire to avenge Penelope
and the wish to save the substance wasted by the suitors j
and we have more than faint^ signs of the same mingled
feeling in the Saga of the Yolsungs.

The story The story of "Walthar of Aquitaine, a version of the
tliar of same myth given by a monk of the eighth or ninth century,

Aquitaine.. 1 Ludlotv, Popular Epics, i. 172. 2 Jhid. i. 176.

WALTIIAR OF AQUITAINE.

ia noteworthy chiefly as mating the hero bear away both CHAP,
the bride and her hoard, and giving him a tranquil and a . XI1, .
happy close to his troubled and stormy life. Here also we
have the names of Gibicho, Gunther, Etzel: but the Sigurd
of this version is Walthar, while the part of Brynhild is
played by Hildegund, who declares her readiness to obey her
lover’s bidding, when he charges her, as the guardian of the
treasure, to take out for him a helmet, a coat of mail, and a
breastplate, and to fill two chests with Hunnish rings or
money. Thus we have the same magic armour and weapons
which we find in all such legends, while the war horse, ap¬
pearing here under the name Lion, bears away the hero and
his love. The king pursues with Hagen, who is by no
means so doughty as in the Niblung Song, and who is not
reassured when he finds Walthar performing a series of
exploits which reproduce those of Herakles, Perseus, and
Theseus. In the end he decides that he can have a chance
of grappling successfully with Walthar only if he pretends
to withdraw. His plan succeeds, and he is enabled to come
up with Walthar as he is journeying on with Hildegund.

In the fight which follows, Walthar smites off a portion of
Hagen’s armour, and brings Gunther to his knees with a
stroke of his sword; but just as he is about to deal him the
death-blow, Hagen interposes his helmeted head and the
blade is shivered in pieces. Walthar in his impatience and
anger throws away the hilt, and Hagen avails himself of the
time to smite off Waltliar’s right hand, the right hand so
fearful to princes and people. Here again it is the cap of
darkness which is fatal to the gleaming sword, while the loss
of Walthars right hand carries us' to the myth of Indra.

Savitar. The closing scene curiously reflects the death of
Sigurd. With failing breath, Walthar deals a. blow which
strikes out Hagen’s right eye; but whereas in the genuine
myth Walthar’s death ought here to follow, to be avenged
afterwards by that of' Ha.gep, here the two heroes, thus
sorely bested, make up their quarrel, and Walthar bids
Hildegund bring wine and offer the cup to Hagen, who
will not drink first, because Walthar is the. better man. In
short, the story ends with an interchange of courtesies,

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

304

HOOK -which have an air of burlesque not unlike that which Euri-

•_—• pides has thrown over the Herakles of his Alkestis, and the

bridal of Hildegund has all the joy and brightness which
mark the reunion of Penelope with Odysseus. 1

* The later lay of Giidi-mi, of which is simply that of Orpheus and nothing
Mr. Ludlow has given a summary, more, while the old tradition is further

objection can be taken only as it seems tangle of popular traditions and fancies,
to look upon the incident as an original The form in which these myths arc
conception of the poets of the G-udrun exhibited iu the Danish ballads, agrees
Lay. From Mr. Ludlow’s words no one so closely with the general character of
■would necessarily gather that the myth the Volsung and Nibelung legends, that

DIETRICH OF BERN.

305

As we approach the later legends or romances, we find, as chap.
we. might expect, a strange outgrowth of fancies often utterly - -

incongruous, and phrases .which show that the meaning of Dietrich of
the old myths was fast fading from men’s minds. Still we Eem '
cannot fail to see that the stories, while they cannot by any
process be reduced into harmony with the real history of any
age, are built up with the materials which the bards of the
Volsungs and the Nibelungs found ready to their hand. Thus
in the story of Dietrich and Ecke, the latter, who plays a part
something like that of Hagen or Paris, is exhibited in more
lustrous colours than the Trojan Alexandros in the Iliad,
although his nature and his doom are those of the Yedic
Panis. Three knights, discoursing at Kdln. of brave war¬
riors, give the palm to Dietrich of Bern, and Ecke who hears
his praise swears that he must search through a,11 lands till
he finds him, and that Dietrich must slay him or lose all his
praise. The incidents which follow are a strange travesty of
the Volsung myth. Three queens hear the three knights talk¬
ing, and the beautiful Seburk is immediately smitten with a
love as vehement and lasting as that of Kriemliild in the Ni-
belung Song. Her one longing is to see Dietrich of Bern
and to have him as her husband; but the means which she
adopts to gain this end is to send Ecke in search of him,
armed with a breastplate, which answers to the coat of mail
wrought for Achilleus by Hephaistos. This breastplate had
belonged to the Lombard king Otnit, to whom it had been a
fatal possession, for as he slept before a stone wall (the wall
of glass in the Hindu fairy tale) a worm found him and
carried him into the hollow mountain—the tower in which
Dietrich is confined, in the story of the giant Sigenot. This
breastplate was recovered by Wclfdietrieh of Greece, in
whom it is hard not to see a reflection of the Lykeian god of
Delos, the Lupercus of Latin mytholog}'; and it is now'
given by Seburk to Ecke on the condition that if he finds
Dietrich he will let him live., It is the Dawn pleading for
the life of the Sun. ‘ Could I but see the hero, no greater
boon could be bestowed upon me. His high name kills me.

306

MYTHOLOGY OF

E ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK I know not, what, lie hath (lone to me, that my heart.so longs

_^_, after him.’ It is the language of Selene and Echo as they

look upon Endymion and Narkissos ; and all that is said of
Dietrich recalls the picture of the youthful Herakles as given
in the apologue of Prodikos. He is the father of the afflicted ;
what he wins he shares; all that is good he loves. Where-
ever he goes, Ecke hears the people recount the exploits and
dwell on the hea.uty and the goodness of Dietrich. Under a
linden tree he finds a wounded man, and looking at his
wounds, he cries out that he had never seen any so deep, and
that nothing remained whole to him under helmet or shield.

‘ No sword can have done this; it must be the wild thunder¬
stroke from heaven.’ Ecke is soon to see the hero who smote
down the wounded man; but no sooner is he confronted with
the valiant knight, than he forgets the part which he ought
to play if he means to appear as a messenger of Seburk and
to do her bidding. He now speaks in his own character, as
the Pani who.bears an irrepressible hate for his adversary,
while Dietrich is as passive in the matter as Achilleus when
he declared that the Trojans had never done him any mis¬
chief. 1 1 will not strive with thee,’ he says, ‘ thou hast done
me no harm ; give my service to thy lady, and tell her I will
always be her knight.’ But Ecke is bent only upon fighting,
and while he refuses to be the bearer of any message, he calls
Dietrich a coward and dares him to the contest. Nor can we
avoid noting that although Dietrich prays him to wait till
the sun shines if fight they must, Ecke by his intolerable
scoffs brings on the battle while it is yet night, and the strife
between the powers of light and darkness is carried on
amidst a storm of thunder and lightning until the day
breaks. Ecke then thinks that he has won the victory; but
just as he is boasting of his success, Dietrich is filled with
new strength, and when Ecke refuses to yield up his sword,
he runs him through. But he himself is sorely wounded,
and as he wanders on he finc^ a, fair maiden sleeping by a
spring, as Daphne, Aretliousa, Melusina, and the nymphs are
all found near the running waters. The being whom Die¬
trich finds is gifted with the powers which Oinone cannot or
will not exercise for the benefit of Paris. She heals him with

THE GREAT ROSE GARDEN.

a wonderful salve, and tells him that she is a wise woman, CHAT',
like Brynhild and Medeia, knowing the'evil and the good, . xn ' .
and dwelling in a fair land beyond the sea. But the story
has been awkwardly put together, and of the fair Seburk we
hear no more. This, however, is but further evidence of the
mythical character of the materials with which the poets of
the early and middle ages for the most part had to deal.

The poem of the Great Bose Garden is a still more clumsy a?ln- curai
travesty of the myth of the Phaiakian or Hyperborean f 0 °* c G '‘ n "
gardens. The birds are there, singing so sweetly that no
mournful heart could refuse to he solaced by them; but the
cold touch of the north is on the poet, and his seat under
the linden tree is covered with furs and samite, while the
wind which whispers through the branches comes from
bellows black as a coal. In this garden is waged the same
furious fight which fills Etzel’s slaughter hall with blood in
the Nibelung Lay: but the battle assumes here a form so
horrible and so wantonly disgusting that we need only mark
the more modem vein of satire which has used the myth for
the purpose of pointing a jest against the monastic orders.

The monk Hsan, who, putting aside his friar’s cloak, stands
forth clad in impenetrable armour and wielding an unerring
sword, is Odysseus standing in beggar’s garb among the
suitors; but the spirit of the ancient legend is gone, and
Ilsan appears on the whole in a character not much more
dignified than that of Friar Tuck in Ivanhoe.

The same wonderful armour is seen again in the beautiful Tim ro-
romanee of Boland. How thoroughly devoid this romance is j>Xnd° f
of anv materials of which the historian may make use, has
perhaps already been shown ; that many incidents in the
legend may have been suggested by actual facts in the life¬
time of Charles the Great, is an admission which may be
readily made. When Charles the Great is made to complain
on the death of Boland that now the Saxons, Bulgarians,
and many other nations, as tho^e of Palermo and Africa, will
rebel against him, it is possible that the story may point to
some redoubtable leader whose loss left the empire vulnerable
in many quarters: but we do not learn this> fact, if it be a
fact, from the romance, and the impenetrable disguise

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

-which popular fancy lias thrown over every incident makes
the idea of verifying any of them an absurdity. What¬
ever may have been the cause of the war, Boland plays in
it the part of Achilleus. The quarrel was none of his
making, hut he is ready to fight in his sovereign’s cause;
and the sword Durandal which he wields is manifestly the
sword of Chrysadr. When liis strength is failing, a Saracen
tries to wrest the blade from his hand, but with his ivory
horn Roland strikes the infidel dead. The horn is split with
the stroke, and all the crystal and gold fall from it. The
night is at hand, hut Roland raises himself on his feet, and
strikes the recovered sword against a rock. ‘ Ha! Durandal,’
he cries, ‘ how bright thou art and white! how thou shinest
and flamest against the sun! Charles was in the vale of
Mauricane when God from heaven commanded him by-his
angel that he should give thee to a captain 5 wherefore the
gentle king, the great, did gird thee on me.’' This is the
pedigree of no earthly weapon, and to the list of conquests
wrought by it in the hands of Roland we may add the
exploits of the good brands Excalibur, and Gram, and Bal-
mung, and in short, the swords of all the Hellenic and
Teutonic heroes. We are thus prepared for the issue when
Alda (Hilda), to whom he has been betrothed, falls dead
when she hears that Roland is slain. Kleopatra and Bryn-
hild cannot survive Meleagros aud Sigurd. 2

As useless for all historical purposes, and as valuable to
the comparative mythologist, is the magnificent romance of
King Arthur. Probably in no other series of legends is
there a more manifest recurrence of the same myth under
different forms. The structure of the tale is simple enough.
Arthur himself is simply a reproduction of Sigurd or Per¬
seus. Round him are other brave knights, and these, not
less than himself, must have their adventures; and thus
Arthur and Balin answer respectively to Achilleus and
Odysseus in the Achaian hos(»s. A new element is brought
into the story with the Round Table, which forms part of the

1 The address of Roland to his sivor
is more magniloquently given in tl
‘ Chronicle of Turpin/ Ludlow, Ibid.
425.

a This is the story of Lord Nann and
the Korrigan, Keightley, Fairy Mytho¬
logy, 433.

ROMANCE OF ARTHUR.

'309

dowry of Guinevere; and the institution of the Knights CHAP,
furnishes the starting-point for a, series of exploits on the •—
part of each knight, which are little more than a clog to the
narrative, and may easily be detached from the main thread
of it. They answer in fact to those books in our Iliad which
relate the fortunes of the Achaian chieftains during the
inaction of Achilleus. A third series of narratives, rising
gradually to a strain of surpassing beauty and grandeur,
begins with the manifestation of the Round Table in the form
of the holy Grail; and the legend of the quest for the sacred
vessel, while it is really an independent story, is in its essen¬
tial features a mere repetition of some which have preceded
it. In short, the original meaning of these myths had been
completely forgotten by the mediaeval romancers ; but, like
the Homeric poets, they have felt the irresistible spell, and
have adhered to the traditional types with marvellous
fidelity.

Stripped thus of its adventitious matter, the poem assumes The birth
a form common to the traditions and folk-lore of all the
Teutonic or even all the Aryan nations. Not only is the
wonderful sword of Roland seen again in the first blade
granted to King Arthur, but the story of the mode in which
Arthur becomes master of it is precisely the story of the
Teutonic Sigurd and the Greek Theseus. We might almost
say with truth that there is not a single incident with which
we are not familiar in the earlier legends. The fortunes of
Igraine, Arthur’s mother, are precisely those of Alkmene,

TJther playing the part of Zens, while Gorlois takes the place
of Amphitryon. 1 As soon as he is horn, Arthur is wrapped in
a cloth of gold, the same glittering raiment which in the
Homeric hymn the nymphs wrap round the new-born Phoi-
bos, and like the infant Cyrus, who is arrayed in the same
splendid garb, is placed in the hands of a poor man whom the
persons charged with him, like Harpa gos, meet at the postern-
gate of the castle. In his house the child grows like Cyrus

1 The scene in which Sigurd personates romance. This power of transformation
Gunnar in order to win Brynliild for the is n. special nltrilmto of the gods of the
latter is hut slightly different, from tho heaven ami the light, end ns such is
story of Uthor as told liy Jeffrey of exercised hy I linihos I lie, fish god, and
Monmouth or in tho more detailed Dionysos tile lion uml bear.

MYTHOLOGY OF

ARYAN NATIONS.

and Romulus and others, a model of human beauty, and like
them he cannot long abide in his lowly station. Some one
must be chosen king, and the trial is to be that which Odin
appointed for the recovery of the sword Gram, which he had
thrust up to the hilt in the great rooftree of Volsung’s hall.

' There was seen in the churchyard, at the east end by the
high altar, a great stone formed square, and in the midst
thereof was like an anvil of steel a foot high, and therein
stuck a fair sword naked by the point, and letters of gold were
written about the sword that said thus, “ Whoso pulleth out
this sword out of this stone and anvil is rightwise born king
of England.” ’ The incident by which Arthur’s title is made
known answers to the similar attempts made in Teutonic
folk-lore to cheat Boots, the younger son, of his lawful
inheritance. Sir Kay, leaving his sword at home, sends
Arthur for it, and Arthur not being able to find it, draws
the weapon imbedded in the stone as easily as Theseus per¬
formed the same exploit. Sir Kay, receiving it, forthwith
claims the kingdom. Sir Ector, much doubting his tale,
drives him to confess that it was Arthur who gave him the
sword, and then bids Arthur replace it in the solid block.
None now can draw it forth but Arthur, to whose touch it
yields without force or pressure. Sir Ector then kneels to
Arthur, who, supposing him to be his father, shrinks from
the honour; but Ector, like the shepherds in the myths of
Oidipous, Romulus, or Cyrus, replies, ‘ I was never your
father nor of your blood, but I wote well ye are of an higher
blood than I weened ye were.'" But although like the play¬
mates of Cyrus, the knights scorn to be governed by a boy
whom they hold to be baseborn, yet they are compelled to
yield to the ordeal of the stone, and Arthur, being made
Icing, forgives them all. The sword thus gained is in Arthur’s
first war so bright in his enemies’ eyes that it gives light like
thirty torches, as the glorious radiance flashes up to heaven
when Achilleus dons his armour. But this weapon is not to
. be the blade with which Arthur is to perform his greatest
exploits. Like the sword of Odin in the Volsung story, it is
snapped in twainpn the conflict with Pellinore ; but it is of
course brought back to him in the form of Excalibur, by a

THE HOUND TABLE.

maiden who answers to Thetis or toHjordis. 1 Arthur, riding CHAP,
with Merlin alon g a lake, becomes ‘ ware of an arm clothed in . X!J ' .
white samite that held a fair sword in the hand.’ This is the
fatal weapon, whose scabbard answers precisely to the panoply
. of Achilleus, for while he wears it Arthur cannot shed blood,
even though he be wounded. Like all the other sons of
Helios, Arthur has his enemies, and King Rience demands
as a sign of homage the beard of Arthur, which gleams with
the splendour of the golden locks or rays of Phoibos Akerse-
komes. The demand is refused, but in the mediasval romance
there is room for others who reflect the glory of Arthur, while
his own splendour is for the time obscured. At Camelot
they see a maiden with a sword attached to her body, which
Arthur himself cannot draw. In the knight Balin, who
draws it, and who c because he was poorly arrayed put him
not far in the press,’ we see not merely the humble Arthur
who gives his sword to Sir Kay, but Odysseus, who in his
beggar’s dress shrinks from the brilliant throng which crowds
his ancestral hall. 2

On the significance of the Round Table we must speak TheRoimd
elsewhere. It is enough for the present to note that it
comes to Arthur with the bride whose dowry is to be to him Oraii.
as fatal as the treasures of the Argive Helen to Menelaos. In
the warning of Merlin that Guinevere ‘ is not wholesome for
him’ we see that earlier conception of Helen in which the Attic
tragedians differ so pointedly from the poets of the Iliad and
the Odyssey. As Helen is to be the ruin of cities, of men,
and of ships, so is Guinevere to bring misery on herself and
on all around her. Dangers thicken round Arthur, and he
is assailed by enemies as dangerous as Kirkc and Kalvpso to
Odysseus. The Fay Morgan seeks to steal Bxcalibur, and
succeeds in getting the scabbard, which she throws into a
lake, and Arthur now may both bleed and die. 3 At the

1 ‘ The Hanks h
had a sword with i
buin.’—Campbell,

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

liamis of another maiden he narrowly escapes fee doom
which Medeia and Doiancira brought upon GlauM and On
Herakles. The Lady of the Lake warns him not to put on
this vesture until he has first seen the bringer wear it.
This accordingly he makes the maiden do, ‘ and forthwith
she fell down, and was brent to coals.’'

The story now ceases practically to be the romance of
Arthur, until it once more exhibits him in all the majesty of
Christian long-suffering and holiness; but, as we might
expect, those portions of the romance which less immediately
relate to Arthur are founded on old Teutonic or Hellenic
myths. In the three sisters which meet Sir Marhaus, Sir
Gawain, and Sir Ewain by the fountain, we can scarcely fail
to recognise the three weird sisters, whose office, as belong¬
ing to the past, the present, and the future, seems to be
betokened by their age and the garb which distinguish them
from each other. The eldest has a garland of gold about
her hair, which is white with the sorrows- of threescore
winters; the second, thirty years of age, with more brilliant
ornaments, marks the middle stage in which the main action
of life lies ; while in the younger sister of fifteen summers,
crowned with luxuriant flowers, we have the Norn whose
business is only with the time to come. 2 In the good
knight Tristram we have another of those fatal children
whose mother’s eyes may not be long gladdened with the
sight of their babes. Like Asklepios and Dionysos, like
Macduff and Sigurd, Tristram is the son of sorrow; nor
did he fail to justify the popular conviction that all such
children are born to do great things. 3 In the madness which
comes upon Lancelot when Guinevere rebukes him for the love
of Elaine we see the frenzy of Herakles and other heroes, a
frenzy which is naturally healed by the San Greal. 4 In the
story of the Perilous Seat we have simply another form of a
myth already' twice given in this romance. ‘ Then the king
went forth and all the knights unto the river, and there they
found a stone floating, as if it ifad been of red marble, and
therein stuck a fair and a rich sword, and in the pommel

1 La Mortc d’Arihure, ed. Coneybeare, s See p. 273.
book iii. cb. v. ' * Coneybeare, La Morte iArthun,

1 a. book iv. ch. iii. book x.

THE HOLY GRAIL.

'313

thereof were precious stones wrought with subtle letters of chap.

gold, which said, “ Never shall man take me hence hut he by _.

whom I ought to hang; and he shall be the best knight of
the world ” ’■—bravery and goodness being thus made the prize
instead of an earthly kingdom as in the case of Arthur. The
king tells Lancelot that this sword ought to he his, hut it is
the prize which, like the princess for whom the unsuccessful
suitors venture their bodies, brings ruin on those who fail to
seize it. The hero who is to take it is revealed, when an old
man coming in lifts up the cover that is on the Siege Peri¬
lous, and discloses the words, ‘ This is the siege of Sir Galahad
the good knight.’ The story of this peerless hero is intro¬
duced with an incident which is manifestly suggested by the
narrative of Pentecost. As the Knights of the Round Table
sat at supper in Camelot, ‘ they heard cracking and crying
of thunder, that they thought the place should all-to rive.

And in the midst of the blast entered a sunbeam more clear
by seven times than ever they saw day, and all they were
alighted by the grace of the Holy Ghost. Then began every
knight to behold other; and each saw other by their seeming-
fairer than ever they saw afore. Then there entered into
the hall the holy Grail covered with white samite, and there
was none that might see it nor who bear it. And then was
all the hall full filled with great odours, and every knight
had such meat and drink as he best loved in the world.’

The wonderful vessel is suddenly borne away, and the
knights depart on a search which answers precisely to the
quest of the Golden Fleece or the treasures of Helen the
fair. The myth of the sword, already thrice given, is pre¬
sented to us once more on board the ship Faith, on which
there was ‘ a fair bed, and at the foot was a sword, fair
and rich; and it was drawn out of the scabbard half a foot
or more.’ ‘Wot ye well,’ says a maiden to Sir Galahad,

‘ that the drawing of this sword is warned unto all men
' save unto you.’ This ship is the same vessel which csirries
Helios round the stream of Ocean during the hours of dark¬
ness. In other words, it becomes the ship of the dead,
the bark which carries the souls to the layid of light which
lies beyond the grave. This ship carries to the Spiritual

MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

Place tlie body of Sir Percival’s sister, who dies to save
the lady of the castle by giving her a dish fall of her own
blood—a myth which reflects the story of Iphigeneia who
dies that Helen, the lady of the castle of Menelaos, may
be rescued, and of Polyxena, whose blood is shed that
Achilleus may repose in the unseen land. From the quest
of the Grail Lancelot comes back ennobled and exalted.
Arthur longs for the return of the good knight Galahad,
of Percival, and Borsbut the face of the purest of all
men he may never see again. When at length the eyes
of Galahad rest on the mystic vessel, he utters the Nunc
Dimittis, and Joseph of Arimatbsea says to him, ‘ Thou hast
resembled me in two things ; one is, that thou hast seen the
San Greal, and the other is that thou art a clean maiden as I
am.’ Then follows the farewell of Galahad to his comrades,
as he charges Sir Bors to salute his father Sir Lancelot and
bid him remember this unstable world. ‘ And therewith he
kneeled down before the table and made his prayers, and
then suddenly his soul departed unto Jesus Christ. And a
great multitude of angels bare his soul up to heaven that his
two fellows might behold it; also they saw come down from
heaven a hand, but they saw not the body, and then it came
right to the vessel and took it and the spear, 1 and so bare it
up into heaven. Sithence was there never a man so hardy as
to say that he had seen the San Greal.’

The sequel which tells the story of the final fortunes of
Lancelot and Guinevere presents perhaps the most wonderful
instance of the degree to which a myth may be modified,
and in this case the modifying influence is strictly and
purely Christian.' In the Trojan legend, Paris, who-plays
the part of Lancelot in the seduction of Helen, is invested
with some’of the qualities of Achilleus, and with many of
the attributes of Phoibos; hut Lancelot is Paris purified of
his sensuality, his cruelty, and his cowardice. It is true that
he estranges the love of Guinevere from her lord Arthur,
and that even the sanctifying influence of the holy Grail,
which makes him proof against the heart-rending sorrow of
Elaine, cannot qvail to repress his unconquerable affection

LANCELOT AND GUINEVERE. ' 81 5

for the brightest and the fairest of women. But although chap.
the romance throughout speaks of it as Ms great sin, the . ' ,n : --
love is one which asks only for her heart as its recompence,
and enables him to say even at the last, that Guinevere is
worthy of the love of Arthur. But the same Christian
influence which makes Arthur slow to believe any evil of his
dear friend Lancelot, could not allow Guinevere to end her
days in peace with Arthur, as Helen returns to live and die
in the house of Menelaos. Like Paris, whom Menelaos ad¬
mitted to an equally tfustful friendship, Lancelot had done a
great wrong; and even when Arthur has closed his brief but
splendid career, Guinevei'e tells Lancelot that all love on
earth is over between them. Their lips may not meet even
in the last kiss which should seal the death-warrant of their
old affection. Arthur is gone. When he will come back
again, no man may tell; but Guinevere is more faithful now
to the word which she had pledged to him than she had
been while his glorious form rose pre-eminent among the
bravest knights of Christendom. Tet in spite of all that
Christian influence has done to modify and ennoble the
story, the myth required that Guinevere should be separated
from Lancelot, as Helen is torn away from Paris; and the
narrative presents us from time to time with touches which
vividly recall the old Greek and Teutonic myths. Thus Sir
TJrre of Hungary has wounds which only Lancelot can heal,
as Oinon6 alone can heal Paris; and the last battle with
Modred is begun when a knight draws his sword on an
adder that has stung Mm in the foot, like the snake which
bit EurydikA So again, Excalibur is, by the hands of the
reluctant Sir Bedivere, thrown into the lake from which it
had been drawn, as the light of Helios is quenched in the
waters from which he sprung in the morning; arid the barge,
which lmd borne away the fair maid of Astolat and the
sister of Sir Percival, brings the three queens (seemingly the
weird sisters who have already been seen in another form) to
carry off the wounded Arthur.

But even at the last the story exhibits the influence of the Thr ..Yntl,
old myth. Neither Arthur himself nor^my others think l " ul '
that he is really dying. His own words are, ‘I will unto

310

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook the vale of A.vilion, to heal me of my grievous wound.’

T ; . There, in the shadowy valley in which Endymion sinks to
sleep, the thought of the renewed life in store for Memnfin
or Sarp&lon or Adonis showed itself in the epitaph

* Hie jncet Arthuius, rex quondam rexque futurue.’

Giiini'rcre Of the story of Arthur and Guinevere, Mr. Campbell says
mall 11 ' 11 " that, ‘ when stripped to the bones,’ it ‘ is almost identical
with the love story of the history of the Eeinne,’ the tradition
embodied in the poems which hear the name of Ossian, with
not less justice perhaps than the Iliad and Odyssey bear the
name of Homer, and the Finnish epic Kalewala that of
Wainamoinen. To Grainne, the wife of Fionn, Diarmaid
stands in the relation of Lancelot to Guinevere, or of Paris
to Helen. Guinevere loves Lancelot at first sight: Diar¬
maid, when first he meets Grainne, ‘ shows a spot on his
forehead, which no woman can see without loving him.’ But
if Lancelot follows Guinevere willingly, Grainne compels
Diarmaid to run away with her. In the sequel the conduct
of Fionn precisely matches that of Arthur, and Diarmaid is
as fearless a knight as Lancelot—the conclusion being that
‘ here are the same traditions worked up into wholly different
stories, and differently put upon the stage, according to the
manners of the age in which romances are written, but the
people go on telling their own story in their own way. 1
Later It is unnecessary to examine the poems or romances which

epiesTiid some writers are fond of arranging under sub-cycles of the
romances, main cycle of the Carolingiau epics. These epics Mr.

Ludlow 2 pronounces ‘historical.’ The sort of history con-

mythology, iv. 267. J must content * Popular Epics of the Middle Ages,
myself with calling attention to Mr. vol. ii. p. 13.

Campbell's very valuable section on the

GARIN AND BERTHA.

'317

tained in them we may take at his own estimate of it. ‘ The chap.

history of them is popular history, utterly unehronological, _-

attributing to one age or hero the events and deeds of quite
another.’ In other words, it is a history from which, if we
had no other sources of evidence, we could not by any possi¬
bility learn anything. Possessing the genuine contemporary
history of the time, the critic has a clue which may here and
■there furnish some guidance through the'labyrinth; but it
is the genuine history which enables him in whatever mea¬
sure to account for the perversions of the poems, not the
perversions which add a jot to our knowledge of the facts.

But it is more important to remember that these poems are
of a quite different class from the general epics of the Aryan
nations. They are the result of book-work, or, as Professor
Max Muller has expressed it, they are not organic; and to
the stories spun by men sitting down at their desks, and
mingling mythical or historical traditions at their will,
there is literally no end. Yet even in these poems it
is remarkable that some of the most prominent or mo¬
mentous incidents belong to the common inheritance of the
Aryan nations. The story of Garin the Lorrainer repeats in
great part the story of Odysseus. Thierry’s daughter, the
White Flower (Blanche Flor), is the Argive Helen. ‘ That
maiden,’ says the poet, ‘ in an evil hour was born, for many
a worthy man shall yet die through her.’ The death of Bego,
after the slaying of the boar, is the death of Achilleus after
the fall of Hektor. But whatever travesty of real history
there may be in parts of this poem, or in the epics of William
of Orange and Ogier the Dane, there is next to none in the
story of Bertha Largefoot, which simply reflects the myth of
Cinderella, Penelope, Punchkin, and perhaps one or two
more. 1 In short, it is mere patchwork. As in' the case of
Cinderella and Rhodopis, the time queen is made known by
her feetthe only difference being that with Bertha it is the

MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHYAN NATIONS.

(Treat size of lier feet -which determines the issue, not their
smallness. To coin a word, she is Eurypous, instead of
Europe; and there was a version which spolce of her as
Queen Goosofoot, a personage over whom Mr. Ludlow thinks
it impossible that a poet could become sentimental. Yet the
goose-footed queen is simply a swan-maiden, one of the most
beautiful creatures of Aryan mythology. Mr. Ludlow seldom
or never speaks as if he knew that the substance of these
later poems has been given again and again in earlier myths.
Thus he does not pause to notice that in the ‘ sub-cycle of
William of Orange,’ Rer.ouart, the king’s son, who ‘ must
keep the kitchen, make the fire, skim the meat,’ while he
should be heading a host of a hundred thousand men, is
only the Teutonic Boots, grown bulky and clumsy, like the
Herakles of the ‘ Alkestis.’ And yet these parallelisms must
be noted, if the mythical or historical value of these romances
is to be accurately measured. With the character of the
men and women portrayed in the mediaeval epics, Mr.
Ludlow is seemingly much perplexed. The type especially
which is seen in Brynhild, Gudrun, or Kriemhild, he regards
as ‘ foreign to the truth of woman’s nature.’ 1 It is so, and
it must be so ; and it is better to avow it than to twist such
stories as the legends of Helen and Achilleus in the despe¬
rate attempt to judge by human standards the inhabitants
of the Cloudland.

The same materials will probably be found to have fur¬
nished the framework of at least the greater part of the
Saga literature of Northern Europe. If here and there a
name or an incident belonging to real history be introduced
into them, this cannot of itself raise the story above the level
of plausible fiction. Far too much, probably, has been said
of these Sagas as a true picture of society and manners.
That the writers would throw over their narrative a colour¬
ing borrowed from the ways and customs of their own time
is certain ; but the acts which t^hey record are not proved to
be deeds which were constantly or even rarely occurring, if
and Gaelic are all versions of^the same the ‘Sharp Grey Sheep,’ Campbell, ii.

common stock from which all these 1 Popular Epics, ii. 386.
races sprang.’ See also the story of

THE GBETTIR Si

3 ] 9

they involve either a direct contradiction or a physical im- CHAP,
possibility. To say that all incidents involving such diifi-
culties are to be at once rejected, while we are .yet to give
faith to the residue, is to lay ourselves as bondmen at the
feet of Euemeros and his followers, and to hid farewell to
truth and honesty. Even in pictures of life and manners
there is a certain limit beyond which we refuse to credit tales
of cruelty, villainy, and treachery, when they are related of
whole tribes who are not represented as mere savages and
ruffians; and unless we are prepared to disregard these limits,
the history of many of these Sagas becomes at once, as a
whole, incredible, although some of the incidents recorded in
them may have occurred.

This is especially the case with the Grettir Saga, for The
which a high historical character has been claimed by the g^ t,r
translators. 1 Yet the tale from beginning to end is full of
impossibilities. In his early youth Grettir, being set by his
father to watch his horses, gets on the baclr of one named
Keingala, and drawing a, sharp knife across her shoulders
and then all along both sides of the back, flays off the whole
strip from the flank to the loins. When Asmund next strokes
the horse, the hide to his surprise comes off in his hands, the
animal being' seemingly very little the worse for the loss.

After this impossible result of his exploit, Grettir, having
lost a mealbag, finds Skeggi in the same predicament, and
joins him in a common search. Skeggi comes across Grettir’s
bag and tries to hide it. When Grettir complains, Skeggi
throws his axe at him and is slain in requital. It can
scarcely be pretended that we are reading the true story of
‘ an interesting race of men near akin to ourselves,’ when
instead of a fair field and no favour we find that six men do
not hesitate to fall upon one. 2 Thorfin, walking away from
his boat with a leather bottle full of drink on his back, is
assaulted from behind by Thorgeir, who thinks that he has
slain him when he has only cijt the bottle. He is jeered at
next day for his blunder; but the act is no more blamed for
its treachery than is the same base, deed when Odysseus

■ Eirikr Mugnfisson and William Morris.

2 Profuse, pp. i. and 94.

320

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book boastingly relates it of himself. Thorgeir Bottle-jack is

.__ slain soon afterwards in a bloody fight over the carcass of a

whale, in which hn,lf the population of the village seems to be
slaughtered. Thorbiorn Oxmain thinks it a goodly exploit
to knock at a man’s door and then to thrust him through
with a spear when he comes to open it. The same honour¬
able champion, wishing to slay Grettir, discourses thus to
liis comrades :—

‘ I will go against him in front, and take thou heed how
matters go betwixt us, for I will trust myself against any
man, if I have one alone to meet; but do thou go behind
liim, and drive the axe into him with both hands atwixt
his shoulders; thou needest not fear that he will do thee
hurt, as his back will be turned to thee.’ 1

When at a later time Grettir had slain Thorir Redbeard,
Thorir of Garth assails the solitary outlaw with eighty men.
Grettir slays eighteen and wounds many more, and the rest
take to flight. 2

The cha- This last incident brings us to the main question. It is,
Grettir 01 course > a s ^ eer impossibility: and if, as such, it is to be
regarded as lying beyond the pale of human history, we are
at once driven to ask wherein lies the real value of a narra¬
tive in which such incidents form the staple of the story.
The translators tell us that throughout the tale ‘ the Saga-
man never relaxes his grasp of Grettir’s character, that he is
the same man from beginning to end, thrust this way and
that by circumstances, but little altered by them; unlucky in
all things, yet made strong to bear all ill-luck; scornful of
the world, yet capable of enjoyment and determined to make
the most of it; not deceived by men’s specious ways, but
disdaining to cry out because he must needs bear with them;
scorning men, yet helping them when called on, and desirous
of fame: prudent in theory, and wise in foreseeing the in¬
evitable sequence of events, but reckless even beyond the
recklessness of that time and people, and finally capable of
inspiring in others strong affection and devotion to him in
spite of his rugged self-sufficing temper.’ 3 It is one thing
if this is to be regarded as the portrait of a man who really
lived and died on this earth, or as the picture of some in-
1 P. 141. ! P. 169. » P. xiv.

MATERIALS OF THE GRETT1E SAGA.

habitant of the Phaiakian cloudland. The translators raise
a vital issue when they say that ‘ to* us moderns the real
interest in these records of a past state of life lies principally
in seeing events true in the main treated vividly and dra¬
matically by people who completely understood the manners,
life, and above all the turn of mind of the actors in them.’ 1
If we have any honest anxiety to ascertain facts, and if we
are prepared to give credit to a narrative only when the facts
have been so ascertained, then everything is involved in the
question whether the events here related are true in the
main or not. The genealogies given in the earlier part of
the Saga agree, we are told, with those of the Landnama-bdk
and of the other most trustworthy Sagas; yet such names
tell us as much and as little as the names in the genealogy
of the tale-maker Hekataios. A catalogue of names belong¬
ing to real persons cannot impart authority to a narrative of
fictitious events, if they are fictitious; and when we have put
aside these genealogies and the names of one or two kings,
as of Olaf, Hacon, and Harold Fairha.ir, we have numbered
all the historical elements in the book: nor is it necessary
to say that some safeguard is wanted when we remember
that the Carolingian romances take the great Karl to
Jerusalem. ' .

If then we have before us a story, some of the incidents of
which are manifestly impossible or absurd, we are scarcely
justified in accepting, on the mere authority of the Saga,
other portions which involve no such difficulties. We have
the alternative of rejecting the whole story without troubling
ourselves to examine it further, or we may take it to pieces,
reducing it to its constituent elements, and then seeing
whether these elements are to be found in any other narra¬
tives. If this should be the case, the character of the narra¬
tives in which these common elements are seen will go far
towards determining the credibility of the story. Clearly
the latter course is the mor^ philosophical and. the more
honest. That the translators had the clue in their own hands,
is clear from the sentence in which, speaking of the events
which followed Grettir’s death, they tell ug that ‘ the Snga-

VOL. I.

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

DOOJC

nyths.

man here lias taken an incident, with little or HO change,
from the romance of Tristram and Iseult .’ 1 If, as they
think, the chapters in which this incident is related were
added to the tale, and if this part of the story be substan¬
tially the same as that of a romance which is known to be
mythical; if further, as they say, the whole Saga, ‘ has no
doubt gone through the stages which mark the growth of
the Sagas in general, that is, it was for long handed about
from mouth to mouth until it took a definite shape in men’s
minds,’ 2 a presumption, to say the least, is furnished that
other incidents in the Saga may be found to be of a like
nature.

If we take the sentences which tell us of Grettir’s child¬
hood, how he had scant love from his father who set him to
watch his home-geese, how he was fair to look on, red-haired
and much freckled, how he would do no work or spoilt all
that he did; how, when placed on board a boat, he ‘ would
move for nought, neither for baling, nor to do aught for the
sail, nor to work at what he was bound to work at in the
ship in even share with the other men, neither would he buy
himself off from the vvork,’ 3 how, when he does some great
thing, the remark is ‘we wotted not that thou wert a man of
such powers as we have now proved thee,’ 4 how he goes dis¬
guised to the ■ wrestling match, and when Thorbiom Angle
pushes and tugs hard at him, moves not a' whit but sits
quiet, yet wins the victory,—we have before us the Goose-
girl and the Boots of Teutonic story, the Boots who sits
among the ashes in the ‘ irony of greatness,’ biding his time,
—the disguised Odysseus, patiently enduring the gibes of the
suitors and the beggar Arnaios.

When the Saga tells us that on coming back from a
Thing, ‘ Grettir lifted a stone which now lies there in the
grass and is called Grettir’s heave,’ and how ‘ many men
came up to see the stone and found it a great wonder that
so young a man should hearm aloft such a huge rock,’ it
relates a well-known legend in the myths of Theseus and of
Sigurd in the Yolsung tale. When Grettir is driven forth
from his home Tyitimnt arms and his mother draws forth
1 P. xii. » P. xv. » P 41. * P. 58.

THE MIGHT AND EXPLOITS OP GRETTIR. 323

from her cloak the fair sword which has gained many a day, we CHAP,
see before us Thetis and Hjordis bestowing on their children xn - .
the magic weapons which reappear in the hands of Arthur
and of Roland. In the horrible smiting of the bearsarks,
who are shut up in a barn, we have the awful hall of
slaughter in the Odyssey and the Nibelung Lay. In the
marvellous story of the demon who is vainly assailed first by
Glam who becomes a demon himself, then by Thorgaut,
but is finally slain by Grettir, we see the common type of the
popular story in which the youngest son, or Boots, wins the
day, when his two brothers or comrades fail. In 'the beaks
of the ship which is so full of weather-wisdom that the one
whistles before a south wind and the other before .a north
wind, we have a reminiscence of the divine Argo. 1 In the
errand on which, when his companions have no fire, Grettir
is sent to bring fire from a distant cliff, although ‘ his mind
bids him hope to get nought of good thereby,’ we see the
myth of Prometheus and his recompense. The conflict of
Grettir and Snsekoll is related in words so nearly resembling
those of the narrative of David’s fight with Goliath, that
it is hard to resist the suspicion that we may have here an
instance of mere copying,’ or that we have a travesty of the
story of Samson, as we read' that ‘ on a day as Grettir lay-
sleeping, the bonders came upon him, and when they saw
him they took counsel how they should take him at the
least cost of life, and settled so that ten men should leap on
him while some'laid bonds on his feet; and thus they did,
and threw themselves on him; but Grettir broke forth so
mightily that they fell from off him.’ 3 In his enormous
strength, in his fitful action, which is as often mischievous
as it is beneficent, in the lot which makes him a servant of
beings meaner than himself, which stirs up enemies against
him in men whom he has never injured, in the doom which
he foresees and which he has not the power, and indeed
takes no pains, to avert, hf> is the very counterpart of
Herakles and Achillens. When he slays afresh Glam who
has been long dead, the demon tells him c Hitherto thou
hast earned fame by thy deeds, but henceforth will wrongs

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

noojc and man slayings fa,ll upon thee, and the most part of thy

_j 1 ;_. doings will turn to thy woe and illhap; an outlaw shalt thou

be made, and ever shall it be thy lot to dwell alone abroad.’
Henceforth he is ‘the traveller,’ who can know no rest, who
seeks shelter of many great men; ‘ but something ever came
to pass whereby none of them would harbour him.’ This,
however, is the doom of Indra and Savitar in many Vedic
hymns, of Wuotan Wegtam in Teutonic mythology, of
Sigurd, Perseus, Bellerophon, Oidipous, Odysseus, Phoibos,
and Dionysos. These are all wanderers and outlaws like
Grettir, and there is scarcely an incident in the life of
Grettir which is not found in the legends of one or more of
the mythical beings just named. The overthrow of the
eighty assassins led on by Thorir of Garth is the defeat of
the Lykian ambuscade by Bellerophontes. After this the
wounded hero goes to a cave under Balljokul, where the
daughter of Hallmund heals his wound, and treats him well.

‘ Grettir dwelt long there that summer,’ like Odysseus in
the cave of Kalypso, or Tanhaiiser in the Yenusberg, or
True Thomas in the coverts of Ercildoune; but we look to
find him chafing, as these did, at the enforced rest. We
turn over the page and we read, ‘ Now as the summer wore,
Grettir yearned for the peopled country, to see his friends
and kin.’ 1 It is Odysseus longing; to see Penelope once
more. But he is rmder a doom. As Olaf says, ‘ If ever a
man has been cursed, of all men must thou have been.’ 2 It
is the curse which is laid on Ision and Sisyphos, and
singularly enough his father Asmund says of his son, ‘ Me-
thinks over much on a whirling wheel his life turns.’ 3 Hence
also he dreads the darkness like a child, for Herakles, Helios,
and Achilleus can do nothing when the sun has gone down.
Hence too, the old mother of Thorbiorn lays on him the
fate ‘ that thou be left of all health, wealth, and good hap,
all good heed and wisdom,’ the very fate of which Achilleus
complains again and again tp Thetis in the very bitterness
of his heart. If again Grettir has his brother Hlugi in
whom he has garnered up his soul, this is the story of
Aehilleus and .Patroklos, of Peirithoos and Theseus, of

■ P. 171. “P.121. » P. 126.

GKETTIR AND ODYSSEUS.

Herakles and Ipliitos, of the Dioskouroi, and a host of ciTAr.

others. Nineteen years he is an outlaw. ‘ Then said the ._

lawman that no one should be longer in outlawing than
twenty winters in all,’ and so Grettir was set free, as
Odysseus returns home in the twentieth year. The incident
which led to the death of Grettir is simply the myth of
Philoktet&s and of Bustem. .The cutting off of Grettir’s
hand is an incident in the myth of Indra Savitar and of
Walthar of Aquitaine. When again it is said of him that
‘he is right-well ribbed about the chest, but few might
think he would be so small of growth below,’ 1 we cannot
avoid a comparison with the story of Sliortshanks in
Grimm’s collection, or of Odysseus who, when sitting, is
far more majestic than Menelaos who, when standing,
towers above him by head and shoulders.

In short, the Saga, as a whole, ceases practically to have Tlie
any distinctive features, and even in the sequel which relates *£ sSttfr.
the story of Thorstein, Dromund, and Spes, the incident
which the translators compare with the romance of Tris¬
tram is not the only point of likeness with other legends.

The ■ closing scenes in the lives of the two lovers precisely
reproduce the last incidents in the myth of Lancelot and
Guinevere. Of the avenging of Grettir by Thorstein we
need only say that the same issue belongs to the stories of
Sigurd and the Three Helgis, and that all these have their
type and find their explanation in the avenging of Baldur.

MYTHOLOGY OF TUB ARYAN NATIONS.

326

BOOK II.

CHAPTEE I.

Section I.—DYATJS.

. book The ancient Vedic mythology exhibits in a state of fusion
IL the elements which the Hellenic legends present to ns in
Ideis of forms more or less crystallised; and precisely on this account
the heaven, it has for ns an inestimable value as throwing light on the
process by which the treasure-house of Aryan mythology
was filled. The myths of Achilleus and Sigurd point clearly
enough to the idea of the sun as doomed to an early death:
hut the Yedic hymns bring before us a people to whom the
death of the sun is a present reality, for whom no analogy
• has suggested the idea of a continuous alternation of day
and night, and who know not, as the fiery chariot of the sun
sinks down in the west, whether they shall ever see again
the bright face of him who was their friend. 1 All their
utterances were thus the utterances of children who knew
little of themselves and nothing of the world without them,
and thus also they could not fail to apply to the same objects
names denoting very different relations or characteristics. The
heaven might be the father of the dawn, or he might be the
child of the earth. The morning might be the parent of the
sun, or she might be his sister, or his bride; and we should
expect (as we find), that, if the names denoting these ideas
came to be employed as names of deities, the characters and

1 See p. 41, ct seq.

powers of these gods -would show a constant tendency to run
into each other.

- But the attribution to all sensible objects of a life as per¬
sonal and conscious as their own would lead to the thought
of one common source or origin of the life of all; and this
source could be found only in the broad bright heaven which
brooded over the wide earth and across which the sun made
his daily journey to cheer the children of men. Thus- Dyaus,
the glistening ether, 1 became to the Hindu, as Zeus was to
the Greek, a name for the supreme God; but although some
mythical features entered gradually into the. conception of
this deity, the name retained its original significance too
clearly to hold its ground in Hindu theology. Dyaus, like
the Hellenic Ouranos and Kronos, must be displaced by his
child, who at the first had brought out more prominently
the supremacy of his' father; and thus Indra became to the
Hindu what Zeus was to the Hellenic tribes, while the Yedic
Varuna retained in the east a spiritual character which
Ouranos never acquired in the west. 2

MYTITOLOfiV OF TIIE

VAN JTATIOITS.

hook Dyn, tlien, in tlie land of the five streams was at once a

__ []: _: name for the sky and a name for God, Dyans pit&r, Dyaus"

.DvaiiH iimi the Father, answering to the Zeus Pater of the Greeks and
l’jitlmi. t j )(J jupj+ej. anc p Janus Pater of the Latins. AslBuch, he was
Visvakarman, the great architect of the universe, who knows
all spheres and worlds, 1 janita (• ysvcTrjp ), the parent of all
things, Prithivi, the broad earth, being the mother of his
children. 2 As, again, with the Greeks Zeus is both the god of
rain and the being to whom all who are in pain and sorrow
address their prayer, so the Maruts or storms go about in
dyn, the sky, while their worshippers on earth invoke the
mercy of Dpmus, Prithivi, and Agni. But the Indian land
under its scorching sun depends wholly on the bounty of the
benignant rain god; and hence Indra, who is the child of
Dyu, and who from Dyu receives his might, becomes more
immediately tlie fertiliser of the earth and is regarded as
more powerful than his father. But Dyu, although his
greatness is obscured by that of his son, still wields the
thunderbolt; and the original meaning of the name reap¬
pears in the myth which represents him as the father of
the dawn who is invincible by all but Indra.

Ideas Thus Dyaus is to Prithivi what Ouranos is to Gaia in the

filename^ Hesiodic tlieogony, the Greek myth differing from the
Dyu. former only in deciding that Gaia herself produced Ouranos
to be coextensive with herself. The Hindu had not so far
solved the difficulty; and the doubt expressed on this subject
shows the peculiar attitude of the Indian mind to the pro¬
blems of the sensible universe. The Greek was at once con¬
tented with answers suggested by the old mythical phrases,
or by the phenomena which he might be describing. The
Hindu, ever dwelling on the thought of an unseen world.

HINDU AND GREEK THOUGHT.

'320

strove to gain some insight into the nature of things, and to chap.

unlock secrets for which the material world could never fur- _

nish a key. Hence Dyu was for him sometimes the supreme
God, sometimes the heaven which with the earth had been
fashioned by 'the gods and strengthened with undecaying
supports, and which trembled and bowed down in the pre¬
sence of the deities. Sometimes he was the all-pervading
spirit, sometimes a material and tangible firmament; and
thus again the question arose of the origin of matter. Of his
own ignorance the Hindu was perfectly conscious, and he had
already begun to think that this ignorance extended even to
the gods themselves; ‘Who can tell whence this creation
arose? The gods are subsequent to its production. Who
then knows whence it sprung ? He who in • the highest
heaven is its ruler, he knows, or perhaps not even he.’ 1 So
far as this question was answered at all, it was answered, as
Dr. Muir has well remarked, by Greek and Hindu in the
same way. Hi the Hesiodic theogony, Chaos, Gaia, and
Tartaros are beings apparently self-existent; or at the least
the scheme begins with Chaos, and no parents are assigned
to Gaia and Tartaros, or to Eros, who immediately follows,
and precedes the birth of Erebos a,nd Nyx, of Aither and
Hemera. The Hellenic poet had brought with him from
his primeval home the tradition which he shared with the
Hindu: hut having given utterance to it, he bestowed no
further thought upon it. With the latter the position of
Kama, the representative of the Hesiodic Eros, determines
the character of his philosophy. The desire (Spelts), which
in the Aristotelian Ethics must precede all moral action, is
as essential to the divine as to the human mind, and thus
Kama is the .being through whom the world is fashioned,
when as yet there existed only the one. 2 The Wish of Teu¬
tonic mythplogy answers more closely to the Hesiodic Eros
than to the Yedic Kama. The Homeric poet knew that men
always have a need of the gpds; 3 but he was not, lilre the
Hindu, always conscious of the need, always striving to know

MYTHOLOGY OF

ARYAN NATIONS.

more of t.liat mysterious power, always yearning for the time
when he should no more see through the glass darkly.

Section IT.—VARTTNA and MITRA.

As Dyaus is the god of heaven in its dazzling purity and
brightness, so is Varuna also the heaven as serving, like the
Hellenic Ouranos, to veil or cover the earth. It is true that
in the Hesiodio theogony Ouranos is united with Gaia,
whereas it is not Varuna but Dyaus who in the Vedic
hymns is mentioned as having Prithivi for the mother of his
children. The difference is, perhaps, only in appearance.
Gaia is really wedded to Zeus not less than to Ouranos, if
Demeter he but Gaia viewed as the mother of all living
things. Varuna, then, as the solid heaven, which is spread
over the earth, is strictly a creation of mythical speech and
is embodied in a visible form. He sits on his throne, clothed
in golden armour, and along with Mitra dwells in a palace
which, like that of Helios, is supported by a thousand
columns, while his messengers stand around to do his bid¬
ding. But his mythical characteristics are in the Rig Veda
perpetually suggesting the idea of an unseen and almighty
Being who has made all things and upholds them by his
will. In many of the Vedic hymns we are carried altogether
out of the region of mythology, and we see only the man
communing directly with his Maker. In these hymns
Varuna, in the words of Dr. Muir, ‘ dwells in all worlds as
sovereign; indeed, the three worlds are embraced within
him. The wind which resounds through the firmament is
his breath. He has placed the sun in the heaven, and
opened up a boundless path for it to traverse. He has hol¬
lowed out the channels of the rivers. It is by his wise con¬
trivance that, though all the rivers ipour out their waters
into the sea, the sea is never filled. By his ordinance the
moon shines in the sky, and tbp stars which are visible by
night disappear on the approach of daylight. Neither the
birds flying in the air, nor the rivers in their sleepless flow,
can attain a knowledge of his power or his wrath. His spies
(or angels) behold both worlds. He himself has a thousand

VARUNA THE ALL-SEEING.

331

eyes. He knows the flight of birds in the sky, the path of CJIap.
ships on the sea, the course of the far-sweeping wind, and 1 .

perceives all the hidden things that have been or shall be

All these are,phrases which may be suggested directly by
the phenomena of the heaven; but the chariot in which
Vanina is borne over the earth, 2 is, like the eye of Zeus, lost
in the purely spiritual thought of One who has no body and
no passions, who, as seeing all things, sees also that which is
evil, and who, as having nothing that is evil in himself,
must punish and finally destroy it in the sinner. In some
hymns, however, the two lines of thought seem, to be blended
strangely together; in other words, we see in them the
process by which men rose from the lower conception to the
higher. That sense of sin, which, as distinguished from the
transgression of a positive law, can scarcely be said to have
been present to' the Greek mind, weighs heavy on the spirit
of the Hindu, even while his conception of the Deity whom
he addresses may be almost coarse in its familiarity. Va-
runa has received in the sacrifice the choice jiortions which
please him most, and the worshipper may fairly demand
that the question between them may be discussed reasonably
as between friends. 3 But whatever may be said of the theory
of the nature of sin, a pure monotheistic conviction is pre¬
eminently seen in the following prayer.

' ‘ Let me not yet, 0 Yaruna, enter into the house of clay ;

have mercy, almighty, have mercy.

‘ If I go along trembling like a cloud driven by the wind,
have mercy, almighty, have mercy.

‘ Through want of strength, thou strong and bright god,

Frimpal

s of B.V. 558. In do TAntiguiU:—

tliarva Veda, quoted Aryas.’

and Professor Max “ Tills chariot

i. 42, the same thought radiance at the break
t in language which . is sunset, assumes the co

Religion des

5 with a golden
of day, and at
our of iron.’—

precisely reproduced in the 139th
Psalm, and which also carries us 1«f
expressions and sentences in the Sermon
on the Mount, and in other parts of the
New Testament. The parallelism be¬
tween the expressions of Aryan and
Semitic monotheism is further traced
out by M. Maury, Cromnocs d IJyendcs

Muir, ib. 557.

a Max Muller, History of Rrutsl'rit
Literature, 637. It is scarcely necessary
to compare this languago with the
similar tone of familiar expostulation
which runs through many of file Hebrew

i of

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook have I gone to the wrong shore: have mercy, almighty, hare
._ l!- _- mercy.

‘ Thirst came npon the worshipper, though he stood in
the midst of the waters: have mercy, almighty, have mercy.

‘ Whenever we men, 0 Varuna, commit an offence before
the heavenly host, whenever we break thy law through
thoughtlessness, have mercy, almighty, have mercy.’ 1
Aryan mo- If the singular purity and unselfishness of the Hesiodic
uotlu-iim. morality, as compared with that of the poems to which we
give the name of Homer, suffice of themselves to prove the
essential distinction between mythology and religion, these
simple utterances of the Vedie poets show even more forcibly
that the genuine belief in one almighty Being who is at once
our Father, our Teacher, and our Judge, had its home first
in the ancient Aryan land. It was a conviction to which
they were guided by all that they saw or could apprehend of
outward phenomena as well as by. the irrepressible yearnings
which stirred their hearts. For such yearnings and for such
a consciousness in the Hebrew tribes we look in vain, before
the Babylonish captivity. Among them we have at best
only the warnings of a few isolated teachers, who saw things
hidden from other eyes, and whose words, although they
sounded in the ears of their countrymen like parables, would
have conveyed a familiar meaning to the Aryans of northern
India. 2 It matters little then whether Varuna be in these
hymns mentioned almost invariably in conjunction with
Mitra and sometimes with other gods. Like these, he is
Aditya, Eronion, if Aditi be time ; but the mythical notion

■ MaxMailer,iB»t<>/S«wij;«.540. many names for one and the same
2 These words were written before Being; but of course ‘every new name
tho appearance of Professor Max threatened,’ to use Professor Muller's
Muller’s article on Semitic Monotheism words, ‘to obscure more and more the

THE SPIRITUAL

thus introduced sate so loosely on tliose who held it, that crtAr.
their language ceased to show any sign of its influence in
times of real anguish-and sorrow. 1 It was enough that they
could realise at once the righteousness of God, and His
readiness to forgive those who disobeyed his laws so soon as
they repented them of their sin. 2

The process which converted the physical Varuna into a Adit! nnd
spiritual God is carried to its extreme results in the concep- ty° & Ad ‘‘
tion of Aditi, ‘the unbound, the unbounded,’ or even, as
being expressed by the negation of diti, a bond, ‘ the Abso¬
lute.’ This indefinite term was naturally used to denote the
source from which all life, even the life of the gods, springs;
and thus Aditi, the Infinite, became the mother of all the
gods. The fact is startling; but, in Professor Muller’s
words, ‘ the thoughts of primitive humanity were not only
different from our thoughts, but different also from what we
think then- thoughts ought to have been. Tbe poets of tbe
Veda indulged freely in tbeogonie speculations without being
frightened by any contradictions. They knew of Indra as
the greatest of gods, they knew of Agni as tbe god of gods,
they knew of Varuiia as the ruler of all; but they were by
no means startled at the idea, that their Indra had a mother,
or that their Agni was born like a babe from the friction of
two fire-sticks, or that Varuna and his brother Mitra were
nursed in the lap of Aditi.’ Hence Aditi was contrasted

MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

334

hook with Diti, the unbounded with the definite, while it became

.__, more and more a name for the distant east from which all' '

the bright gods seem to come, and for the boundless space
beyond the oast, drawing a sharp distinction between ‘ what
is yonder, and what is here.’ But the process could not be
stopped at this point. The gods had been called daksha-
pitar, the fathers of strength, the mighty; and the same
equivocation, which made Odysseus spring from Autolykos
converted the epithet Daksha into the father of the gods.

It followed that Aditi was sprung from Daksha, or Daksha
from Aditi, who also owed his existence to Bhu, being, and
the conclusion was reached that ‘ Not-being and Being are
in the higher heaven, in the birth-place of Daksha, in the
lap of Aditi.’ . But more especially Aditi became the mother
of the bright gods, of yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman, and, in fact,
of the seven Adityas, although their names are not definitely
given in the hymns of the Rig Veda. 1 On the one side,
then, Diti was growing into ‘ a definite person, one of the
daughters of Daksha, the wife of Kasyapa, the mother of
the enemies of the gods, the Daityas ’ (such, Professor
Muller remarks, being ‘ the growth of legend, mythology,
and religion),’ while on the other, Aditi herself was fast
becoming £ one of those deities, who would best remove
the bonds of sin or misery.’ Thus the poet prays to Agni,—

‘ Whatever, 0 youthful god, we have committed against
thee, men as we are, whatever sin through thoughtlessness,
make us guiltless of Aditi, loosen the sins on all sides.’

All this, however, simply reproduces the Hesiodic theo-
gony, in -which Eros precedes Ouranos, to be represented
again in Himeros.

Thophy- Some light is thrown on the relations of Yaruna with
sAritual Mitra by the Hesiodic description of Ouranos as the lover of
Varuna. the earth over which he broods each night; 2 and thus Ya-

LATER NOTIONS OF V i

rnna, like Ouranos, is specially the veiling heaven whose CHAP.

• presence is most felt at nightfall, when the sky seems to . L .
descend nearest to the earth, while Mitra, like Dyu and
Zens, represents the firmament glistening with the splendour
of noon-day. But although the same root which furnished
the names of Varuna and Ouranos yielded a name also for
the evil power, first of physical, and afterwards of moral
darkness, still the idea of Varuna has nothing in common
with that of Yritra. His destructive nooses are prepared
for the wicked only. They ensnare the man who speaks lies
and pass by the man who speaks truth. 1 Like the Greek
Poseidfin Pylaochos, he holds the unrighteous fast in prison:
but it is as the punisher of iniquity which cannot be hidden
from his piercing eye, 2 and not as the gloomy and inflexible
Hades Of the nether world. He is the omniscient Asura or
spirit who props up the sky, 3 and this epithet may almost
suffice to identify him with the Zendic Ahura who appears
commonly in conjunction with Mithras, as Va,runa is linked
with Mitra. 4 Prom the simple germ thus afforded by
mythical phrases which described the various changes of the
heaven, sprung the metaphysical refinements of later Hindu
philosophers, and the wild and cumbrous developements of
later Hindu mythology. The true greatness of Varuna be¬
longs to the earliest phase of Hindu thought. He is eclipsed
first by Indra, and at. length is overthrown by Krishna
beneath the waters of the ocean. 5

33G

MYTHOLOGY

THE AKYAN NATIOHS.

Section III.—INDRA.

book If Hyaus a,nr] Varuna were alike doomed to lose their an-
. J1 ' . . cient majesty, a, brighter lot was in store for Indra; and the

The pri- picture which the oldest Yedic hymns present to us of this
wpifan or god l ias a special value as enabling us to determine the
Ind™ measure in which religion and mythology affected each
physical, other. That a moral or spiritual element may be discerned
in some of the characteristics of this deity, is beyond ques¬
tion : that the whole idea of the god can be traced to the
religious instinct of mankind, the boldest champions of the
' theory which ascribes the growth of all mythology to the
direct action of religious impulse or revelation will scarcely
venture to affirm. The true religious instinct must point to
the absolute rule of one righteous God, and cannot itself
originate the idea of many independent centres of action.
If this instinct furnished the true germ of all mythology,
then the mythology of the Iliad and Odyssey is far older
than that of the Yeda; in other words, the crystallised
granite is older than the ingredients of which it is composed.
In our Homeric poems, in the midst of abundant signs indi¬
cating the later growth of the notion, we have an acknow¬
ledged King of heaven, from whom all the Olympian gods
derive their power, or whose will they are at least hound to
perform, and who alone retains unimpaired his full charac¬
teristics as lord of the bright heaven. Although Phoibos
still bears his unerring weapons, yet his arrows lie within
the quiver until some wickedness of man compels him to
draw them forth. The superhuman action of the Iliad and
Odyssey, in short, has reference strictly to the deeds and
fortunes of men ; the age of conflicts between the gods has
almost passed away. Tire conspiracy of Herd, Poseidon and
Athdne to hind Zeus, is amongst the latest of those struggles
which had culminated in the wars of the Titans, for when in
the last great battle of Achilleus the gods turn against each
other in the fray, there is stffl no thought of assailing the
great King who sits in his serene ether far above the turmoil
raging beneath him. v

THE WARS OP THE GODS. 337

The true mythical action of the Achaian deities is thus CHAP,
intermittent. In the hymns of the Rig Veda it is continuous, L .
and their action is hut remotely concerned with human Action of.
interests. Lite the Hesiodic Zeus, they lore the savour of
burnt-offerings, and hasten to receive their share of the Achat™
sacrifice: but as soon as the rites are over, they return to cllK ' s '
their own proper wort as wielding the forces which are.
manifested in the changing heavens. The Vedic gods are
thus, pre-eminently, transparent. Instead of one acknow¬
ledged ting, each is lord in his own domain; each is ad¬
dressed as the mater of all visible things, while their •
features and characteristics are in almost all cases inter¬
changeable. 1 Dyaus and Indra, Varuna and Agni are each
in his turn spoken of as knowing no superior, and the objects
of their chief care are not the children of men, but the winds,
the storms, the -clouds, and the thunder, which are constantly
rising in rebellion against them. No sooner is one conflict
ended than another is begun, or rather the same conflict is
repeated as the days and seasons come round. Whenever
the rain is .shut up in the clouds, the dark power is in revolt
against Dyaus and Indra. In the rumblings of the thunder,
while the drought still sucks out the life of the earth, are
heard the mutterings of theirhateful enemy. In the light¬
ning flashes which precede the outburst of the pent-up
waters are seen the irresistible spears of the god, who is
attacking the throttling serpent in his den; and in the
serene heaven which shone out when the deluging clouds
had passed away, men beheld the face of the mighty deity

VOL. i.

MYTHOLOGY OP

B ARYAN NATIONS.

who was their friend. So completely does the older mytho¬
logy of the Veda, carry us away from the One idea which
must be first awakened by the genuine religions instinct of
mankind.

No stronger evidence than that which is furnished by this
contrast could be adduced to show that in no single feature
is the mythology of our Homeric poems borrowed from the
people who betook themselves to the itanks of the Indus and
the Ganges. The Vedic Dyaus may in all essential features
he reproduced in the Hellenic Zeus. Like Phoibos Chry-
saor, Indra may bear a lance or an arrow, which can never
miss its mark : but in the one case we have a mere sketch,
in the other a finished picture; and the differences in the
character of the detail preclude all idea that for either Zeus
or Hermes, Helen or Paris, Erinys or Achilleus, the Acliaian
poets were indebted to the Vedic Dyaus or Sarameya, to
Pani or Sarama, to Saranyu or Aharyu. To one common
source they do indeed point; and the several stages of
developement which mark the early mythologies of India
and Hellas leave us in no doubt of the nature of the germ
from which they spring.

At once, then, we turn away from the cumbrous and com¬
plicated mythology of the later Vedic literature, 1 as from
the uncouth outgrowths of the Orphic theogony we turn to
the earlier phases in which the Greek epic and lyric poets
exhibit their ancestral deities. We are not concerned with
the later conflicts of Indra, which end in his being bound
by Indragit, 2 while we have before ns a series of songs
wliich speak of him simply as the invincible god of the
bright heaven. Vet, although there still remains a large
difference between Indra and Apollon, too great stress can
scarcely he laid on the fact that as we trace the Vedic gods
as far back as the Veda itself will carry ns, the essential
likeness between the Hindu and the Hellenic deities becomes
more and more striking. If fvirther we find that, when thus
examined, their functions become, if the expression may be

' See the remarks quoted by Professor . i A summary of the story of Indra
Mas Muller from Professor Roth (Sans~ and Indrasrit is given by‘Dr. Muir.
lent Literature 60). Sans/erit Texts, iv. p. 422.

INDRA THE BAIN-GIVER.

HSed, more and more atmospheric,—if they become the c:

powers which produce the sights of the changing sky,—if ._

their great wars are Waged in regions far above the abodes of
men, the last' blow is given to the theory which by the most
arbitrary of assumptions finds the root of all mythology in
. the religious instincts of mankind.

In the “Medic Indra jhere is this further peculiarity, that, Me
although hit name ceased, like that of Dyaus, to he chiefly
a name for the sky, and although the straggle in which he
is constantly engaged has indefinitely affected the faith of
Christendom, yet the deity hihiself has hut little of a purely
moral or spiritual element in his character. It is true that
he is sometimes invoked as witnessing all the deeds of men
and thus as taking cognisance of their sins ; hut the warfare
which he has to wage is purely a physical conflict, and it is
chiefly in the phrases by which his adversary is described,
that we find the germs of the dualistic creed which hears
the name of Zoroastet. Nowhere then, in the oldest monu¬
ments of Hindu thought, is the real character of Indra lost
sight of. His home is in the bright heaven; hut, as his
name denotes, 1 he is specially the bringer of the most
precious of all boons to a thirsty and gaping land. He is
the giver of the rain which falls on the earth when the
tyranny of the scorching wind is overpast.

In vain is Indra assailed in his career by the same enemies Th
which seek to destroy the infant Herakles. The Eakshasa ™
fares no better than the snakes. I«<

‘ Vyansa, exulting and striking hard blows, smote thee,
Maghavan, upon the jaw; whereupon, being so smitten,
thou provedst the stronger and didst crush the head of the
slave with the thunderbolt.’ 2 •

Like Herakles and Phoibos again, he has to go in search
of lost or stolen cattle. With the conveying Maruts, ‘ the
traversers of places difficult of access,’ he discovers the cows
hidden in their caves.

‘ Great is thy prowess, Indra, we are thine. Satisfy,

340 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook Magliavan, tlie desires of thy worshipper. The vast heaven
- - 1 , 1 ' . has acknowledged thy might; this earth has been bowed
down through thy vigour.

‘ Thou, thunderer, hast shattered with thy bolt the broad
and massive cloud into fragments, and hast sent down the
waters that were confined in it, to flow at will: verily thou
alone jiossessest all power.’ 1

So, again, addressing Indra as Pai5knya the rain-bringer,
the poet says,

‘ The winds blow strong, the lightnings flash, the plants
spring up, the firmament dissolves; earth becomes fit for
all creatures, when Parjanya fertilises the soil with shower^.’ 2

‘ Master of tawny steeds, the remotest regions are not
remote for thee.’ 3

‘ At the birth of thee who art resplendent, trembled the
heaven and trembled the earth through fear of thy wrath:
the mighty clouds were confined: they destroyed (the dis¬
tress of drought), spreading the waters over the dry places.’ 4
Lastly, as the solar god, he is the Wanderer, like the Teutonic
Wegtarn, like Odysseus, Sigurd, Dionysos, Phoibos, Theseus,
Bellerophon, Oidipous, Herakles and Savitar.

‘ Wonderful Indra, wanderer at times, thou art verily the
granter of our desires.’ 5

Indra the Indra then is the lord of the heaven, omnipotent and all-
bringer seeing; hut so had been, or rather was, his father Dyu;

and thus some epithets which in the west are reserved for
Zeus are in. the east transferred to Indra, and the Jupiter
Stator of the Latins reappears as the Indra sthatar of the
Hindu. 6 The rain-bringer must be younger than the sky
in which the clouds have their birthplace; but however
sharply his personality may be defined, the meaning of the
name is never forgotten. As the Maruts, or winds, are said

V. Sanhiia , H. H. Wilsoi

The Latins, it wt
iordiimire

. H. Wilson, ses

IXDKA AMD THE HABITS.

541

sometimes to course through Dyaus (tlie heaven), so the chap.
clouds sometimes move in Indra (the slcy). In all tlie phrases - L .
which describe this god, the local colouring arising from
the climate of northern India may he plainly discerned.
Although the Delian Phoibos soon belts his golden sword
to his side, yet for sometime after his birth he lies in the
white and spotless robe in which the nymphs had wrapped
him. The Vedic Indra awakes sooner to the consciousness
of his power, and as soon as he is horn, the slayer of Vritra
asks his mother, ‘ Who are they that are renowned as fierce
warriors ? ’* Like the Hellenic ApoTlbn, he has golden locks
and a quiver of irresistible arrows ; but tbe arrows have a
hundred points and are winged with a thousand feathers.

In his hand he holds the golden whip which Phoibos gives
to Hermes as the guardian of his cattle; and like Helios, he
is borne across the heavens in a flaming chariot drawn by
the tawny or glistening steeds called the Harits, whose
name and whose brightness alone reappear- in the Charites
of the Hellenic land, but who still retain the form most
familiar to the Hindu in the Xanthos and Balios who are
yoked to the car of Achilleus. Like the streaming locks from
the head of Phoibos, so the heard of Indra flashes like light¬
ning, as he speeds on his journey through' the heaven. As
looking down on the wide earth spread beneath, he is
possessed, like Apollbn, of an inscrutable wisdom. Like
him also, he chases the Dawn, Dahanfi, or Daphne, of whom
he is said to be sometimes the father, sometimes the son,
and sometimes the husband ; and as Phoibos causes the
death of Daphne, so Indra is said to shatter the chariot of
Dahana. 2

The prayers addressed to this god show that the chief Physical
idea associated with him was that of an irresistible material
power. The Hindu, as he comes before the deity to whom light .•mil
he looks for his yearly harvest, assumes unconsciously the

1 Muir, Principal Deities of R. V. 560.

! In this myth Daltanh is regarded as
hostile to Indra and ns meditating
mischief, a thought which might easily
be suggested bv the legends of Arethousa
and Daphnh. Her shattered ear reposes,

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN SAT10K8.

attitude of the Baal-worshipper of Syria . 1 , But ihe real
prayer of the heart is addressed to Varuna, as tire Greek in
his hour of need prays always to Zeus. The cry for mercy
from those who through thoughtlessness hare broken the
law of God is never sent up to Indra, although, like Hera-
kles, ‘he engages in many conflicts for the good of man
with overwhelming power.’ 2 It was impossible that it
should be so, while the great work for which Indra might
be said to exist was the battle for life or death with the
hateful monster who imprisons the rain-clouds in his dun¬
geons. This battle is brought before us under a thousand
forms. His great enemy Vritra, the hiding thief, is also
Ahi, the strangling snake, or Pani the marauder.

‘ Ahi has been prostrated beneath the feet of the waters
which the Vritra by his might had obstructed.’ 3

He appears again as Atri, a name which may perhaps be
the same as the Atli of the Volsung tale and the Etzel of
the Nibelung song.

‘Thou, Indra, hast opened the cloud for the Angirasas:
thou hast shown the way to Atri who vexes his adversaries
by a hundred doors.’ 4

He is also Namuki (the Greek Aniykos), and Sambara.

‘ Thou, Indra, with thy bolt didst slay afar off the deceiver
Namuki.’ 6

‘ Thou hast slain Sambara by thy resolute self.’ 6

' The power of Indra is the one The stanza known as the Hansavati
theme of the praise accorded to him in Eich is noteworthy as exhibiting the
ft. V. vii. 32. The worshipper calls on germs of more than one myth. Indra
him who holds the thunderbolt with ‘is Hansa (the sun) dwelling in light:
his arm, whom no one can check if he Vasu (the wind) dwelling in the firma-
wishes to give, who makes mortal men meat: the invoker of the gods (Agni)
obtain spoil in fighting, who is the dwelling on the altar: the guest (of the
benefactor of everyone, whatever battles worshipper) dwelling in the house (as
there he, who is the rich of old and to the culinary fire): the dweller amongst
be called in every battle. Max Miiller, men (as consciousness): the dweller in
Sanskrit Literature, 543. the most excellent (orb, the sun): the

‘ This contest, with the clouds,’ says dweller in truth, the dweller in the sky
Professor H. H. Wilson ( Introduction (the air), bom in the waters, in the

INDR A AND HIS ENEMIES. '343

‘ Verily thou hast made me, Indra, thy associate, when CHAP.

• grinding the head of the slave Namuki like a sounding and- J ;__

rolling cloud.’'

In the same way Indra is the slayer of Bala, of Chumuri,

Dhuni, Pipon, Sushna, and many others, 2 and against him
the strength of the Rakshasas is concentrated in vain, for
Indra scatters them ‘ with his friend the thunderbolt.’ On
. the issue of this conflict depends, it is true, the welfare
of all human creatures. The victory of Indra brings with
it wealth of com and wine and oil, hut the struggle and its
issue are alike external to the human spirit.. In other words,
the religious instinct found little scope in the phrases which
described the offices of Indra, and most assuredly had nothing
to do with, suggesting them. It was not on the soil of
Hindustan that the momentous physical struggle between
Indra and his enemy'was to become a spiritual struggle of
still more fearful proportions.

, The wife of Indra. is Indi-anl, who alone of the goddesses The wife
who bear the names of the gods is associated with her ofIudra -
husband. Like the rest, she has but a vague and shadowy
personality. But although the goddesses who are not thus
simply developed from the names of their consorts are far
more prominent, yet even these are spoken of in terms little
resembling the language addressed to the supreme god
under his many names. Ahand is a daughter of Dya-us,
and her might is great, but Indra is mightier still. Tishas
is hard to vanquish; but Indra shatters her chariot, while
Saranyu, the Harits, and the Rohits are rather beings who
do his will than deities possessed, of any independent power.

In this respect a vast gulf separates the later from the early
mythology of the Hindus; and although Mahildeva. retains
a nominal supremacy, yet the popular mind dwells less on
the god than on the awful terrors of his wife, whether
known as TJma, Durga, or Kali. 3 In an inquiry designed
chiefly to bring out the points of resemblance and difference
between cognate mythologiJal systems, we are not called
upon to enter tbe unwholesome labyrinth in which a morbid
■ H. II. Wilson. B. V, SanhUn, i. 270.

2 lb. ii. 41S, 419. " Muir, Principal Mtiicsofll. V. '>77.

MYTHOLOGY OP THE . ARYAN NATIONS.

hook philosophy has bewildered and oppressed a race once more

_!*;_ simple and perhaps more truthful in their faith than the fore- •

lathers of the Hellenic and even of the Teutonic nations.
The more modern Hindu traditions may have an interest for
the theologian or the philosopher, while the ingenious sym¬
bolical interpretations which make anything mean anything
may be as noteworthy in the pages of Brahmanic commen¬
tators as in those of Chrysostom, Gregory, or Augustine.
But they lead us away into a world of their own, where it
becomes scarcely worth while to trace the faint vestiges of
earlier thought which may be here and there discerned in
the rank crop of cumbrous and repulsive fancies. Nor is
there much profit in lists even of earlier deities in whom we
have little more than a name or an epithet. If the earth
is called Nishtigri, we have only another word denoting
Prithivi the wife of Dyaus. In Sarasvati, the watery, we
have, first, a name given to the river which with the Indus
and the waters of the Penjab made up the seven streams of
the ancient Hindu home, aud then to a goddess who, as
inspiring the hymns composed in her honour, became identi¬
fied with Vach, 1 Voice, and was invoked as the muse of
eloquence. As such, she is produced on the mountain-top,
as Athene Akria springs from the forehead of Zeus. 2 Much
in the same way, Nirriti, 3 the western land, to which Tama
had first crossed the rapid waters, became first the land of
death, and afterwards a personification of evil. In Sraddhd
we have nothing more than a name for religious faith. 4

Section IV.—BRAHMA.

Place of If an examination of the Vedic theology tends to prove that

i^tl™'' if was wholly one of words and names, the impression is not
iho^ony weakened as we survey the ponderous fancies of later times.

The fabric of Brahmanic sacerdotalism may have reached
gigantic proportions, and may exhibit a wonderful ingenuity

Gr. eiros, tlvw, hu&ttv, Latin T05, Annected with that of the Ithakan

FLEXIBLE CHARACTER OP BRAIIMA.

in the piecing together of its several parts, but it cannot be
Regarded as the result of a logical system. The properties of
Vishnu are those of Agni, Vayu, and Surya; and as Agni is
all the deities, so also is Vishnu. The character of Brahma
is not less flexible. At first the word is but a name for the
self-existent principle, and the various mythical acts recorded
of him are not only susceptible of a spiritual or metaphysical
interpretation, but are actually so interpreted in all the Hindu
comments on the sacred literature of the country. As in the
Orphic theogony, the generation of Brahma begins sometimes
with the great mundane egg; but it is Brahma who therein
produces himself. The self-existent lord, ‘ desiring to pro¬
duce various creatures from his own body, first, with a
thought, created the waters, and deposited in them a seed.
This seed became a golden egg, resplendent as the sun, in
which he himself was born as Brahma, the progenitor of all
worlds.’ 1 He is the first god of a later Indian Ti'imurtti;
but the threefold deity of Yasha is Agni, Vayu, and Surya,
and thus Dr. Muir concludes that the conjunction of Brahma,
Vishnu, and Rudra (? Siva) was unknown to that ancient
commentator. 2 Even in the MaMbh&rata, Brahma is both
created and uncreated. In that poem Ma-Mdeva (/isyar foor,
the great god), is the creator, of Brahma, Vishnu, and Indra.
‘ Erom his right side he produced Brahma, the originator of
the worlds, and from his left side Vishnu, for the preserva¬
tion of the universe, and when the end of the age had

34G

MYTHOLOGY OF TJIE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook arrived, the mighty go<l created Rudra.’ 1 But MaMdeva is

•_^—■ is identified by the poets of the MaMbh&rata with Rudra,

Siva, Agni, Surya, Varuna, the Asvins, and a host of other
deities, and, as the originator of all life, even assumes the
forms and functions of the Hellenic Priapos. 2 Mah&deva,
again, is himself also the destroyer Siva, and like Vishnu he
wields a dreadful bow made by Visvakarman. These bows
are used by the two gods in a terrible battle, the result
being that the bow of MahMeva is relaxed and Vishnu is
esteemed the superior. 3 Elsewhere it is said that Brahma
and Mahadeva are both sprung from Krishna, the one from
the lotus issuing from his navel, the other from his forehead,
like Dahana and Athene from the head of Dyaus or Zeus. 4
Prajfipati. As Prajapati, Brahma offers violence to his own daughter;

and from this myth of Indra and Ahalya a story is produced
much resembling that of the Hellenic Erichthonios. 5 He is
also a worshipper of the Linga, and acts as the charioteer of
Mahadeva or of Rudra, who springs from his forehead (as he
does also from that of Krishna), glorious as the noon-day

Yisra- Like Brahma, Visvakarman, the Creator, is one of the

karman. mall y names which may be applied to almost any of the
gods at the will of the worshipper. Wise and mighty in
act, Visvakarman orders all things, and men desire the at¬
tainment of good in the world where ‘he, the One Being,
dwells beyond the seven Rishis.’ 7 He is the maker of the
region Sutala,' where by his will, as in the Greek Elysion,
‘ neither mental nor bodily pains, nor fatigue, nor weariness,
nor discomfiture, nor diseases afflict the inhabitants.’ 8 He
is also the son of Bhuvana, the first of all beings who sprang
into existence from the earth. 9

THE DWELLING OP ZEDS.

'347

Sectioh V.—ZEUS.

In the conception of the poets known to us by the name of CHAP.

Homer, the earth on which we tread is. covered with a gross •-7—■

and thick air, through which course the clouds, and in which T!w
the winds work their will. Above this air rises the serene Znis in
Aithdr or Ether, the abode of Zeus, never sullied by mists or Etller -
vexed with storms. Here he dwells, surrounded by the gods
of Olympos; but while these can visit the earth and take
part in the quarrels of mortal men, Zeus alone may not
descend for this purpose from the clear heaven whence he
looks down on all that is being done beneath him. It is true
that there are on the earth some whom he loves, and others
whom he hates; and when his son Sarpedon is smitten by
the spear of Patroklos, the tears of Zeus fall in large rain¬
drops from the sky. But that which he wills must be done
by others, and in their toils he can have no share. So when
the hour for the battle between Achilleus and Hektor is
come, Zeus tells the gods, the streams, and the nymphs,
who sit around his throne, that they may go down and
choose each his side, while for himself, though he cares for
the mortals whose death-struggle is at hand, the sight of all
that is done on the plains of llion will none the less gladden
his eyes as he looks down from Olympos. When, after the
conflict of Achilleus with the burning river, the gods turn
their weapons on each other, the mind of Zeus remains un¬
ruffled, and he listens in silence to the charge brought against
Herd by Let6, as she lays before his feet the arrows of her
child Artemis. 1

Thus for the poets of the Hiad and the Odyssey, Zeus, The nn-
though he might be called the gatherer of the dark -clouds, 2 ijgh!“ n ' s

348'

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

HOOK was pre-eminently tlie lord of the bright heaven, and the
- - thought most closely associated with the name was that of a

serene and unchangeable splendour. As the heavy masses
of vapour were cloven by the rays of the sun, the blue heaven
was seen smiling on the havoc wrought by storms and tem¬
pest, itself undimmed by the years which devoured the
generations of men. From the face of this heaven the
morning sprang to scatter the shades of night. Beneath
it the lightning flashed, the rain fell, the winds blew; but
above them all shone still the light which can know no
change.

Tlie idea Without referring, therefore, to the legends of other na-
suggestod tions, we a:re brought at once by the language even of our
Ly pby- Homeric poets to that earliest form of thought in which
mmenaT words now used to denote spiritual conceptions conveyed
only the impression left on the human mind by the pheno¬
mena of the outward world. As man awoke gradually to a
conscious perception of the things around him, the sensation
most comforting in the alternations of a day and night alike
uncomprehended would be that of the pure and bright heaven
which broods over the earth as the sun speeds on his journey
across the sky. If, then, in the names which were afterwards
used to denote the supreme God we have words which in all
Aryan dialects convey this primary idea of brightness, a clear
light is at once shed on the first stages in the mental and
moral education of mankind. The profound splendour of the
unclouded heaven must mark the abode of the Being who
made and sustains all things; and thus names denoting at
first only the sky became in the West as in thg Bast names
of God, the Zeus Pater (the Father) of the Greeks corres¬
ponding to the Dyauspitar of the Hindu. If even in the
Yedic hymns the most prominent deity is Indra, still Indra
was himself worshipped as the god of the bright sky, and as

l’autre les mots «orai{, earaiyit, tem- primitif vcho) : plus tard, on t.raduisit le
pete. De la uue nouvelle serie d’images Vjeu qui porte Vigidc. Homcre sernblc
et de fables oil la chevrr joue le role se souvenir de la premiere signification,
principal. L’llgide, avant d’etre mi quand il nous montre, au seul niouve-
bouclier fait en peau de cLGrre, Gait meat du bouelier, le tonnerrc qui eclate,
le ciel au moment de l’orage; Jupiter l’lda qui se couvre de nuages, et les
alyloxo: etait le dieu qui tnvoie la tom- lommes . frappes de terreur.’—Breai,
pete (il faut entendre dans son sens Hcrcule et Cacus, 116.

ZEUS A NAME FOR THE SUPREME GOD. 349

the son of the brilliant Dyu. As in the Hellenic land Kronos CIM P.
was displaced by Zeus, so in the country of the seven rivers,

Dyu gave way to the lord of the wealth-bringing rain clouds.

The process (even if we assign a very late origin to the
mythical Kronos) was in both cases the same. The epithet
could not become or be long retained as a personal name
until its original meaning had been obscured or forgotten.

The Greek had his Aer, his Aitlier, and his Ouranos to express
the visible heavens, and Zeus became to him more and more
the personal God whose hand is seen in his works. In India
the name Dyaus retained, as we have seen, its appellative
force, and as a designation for the supreme God, was sup¬
planted by the less significant Indra.

But in the West, as in the East, the original character of Thu Latin
the god is in close accordance with the etymology of the Jll P ltcr -
word. The Athenians called on Zeus to rain on their land;
the. Latin poet spoke of the glistening heaven which by all
is named Jove, while the phrases ‘ sub dio vivere,’ ‘ sub Jove
frigido,’ and even ‘ malus Jupiter ’ remained common expres¬
sions in every day speech. 1

The idea of brightness was, however, not the only one Zeus On-
suggested by the sight of the clear heaven. If the sky beams ranlcm -
with light, it is also spread as a covering over the earth
which lies beneath it, and Zeus was thus Ouramion who
spread his veil over his bride; but before he came to be
spoken of as son of Kronos, the attribute had suggested the
idea of a person, and the Western Ouranos corresponded
with the Yedic Varuna. In this case the name remained
more transparent in the West than in the East. The Vedie
Varuna becomes the moral ruler of the universe, and the
Father and friend of man; but in the Hellenic land the
starry Ouranos is the son to whom Gaia gives birth in order
that he may cover everything and be a steadfast seat
for the blessed gods, 2 and we look in vain for the spiritual
attributes which belong to Vjiruna in the hymns of the Rig
Veda. *

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

But the devolopement of a personal Zens was followed
necessarily by two results, which long continued astonish¬
ingly distinct the one from the other. The thought of Zens
as the one God and Bather gave birth to a religion. The
many names employed to denote the varying phases of the
sky became each the germ of a myth, and every one of these
myths,-when translated into the conditions of human life,
tended to degrade the idea of the god as much as the idea of
his changeless perfection, rising more and more in the mind,
tended to raise it. According to the latter, he would be the
righteous Judge, seen by none, yet beholding all, looking
down from, heaven on the children of men to see if they will
understand and seek after God, appointing to them a life of
labour for their highest good, and finally recompensing to
all men after their works. By the other process he would
become all that names applied to outward phenomena must
denote when used to signify the actions of a personal and
conscious being. As in every land the dews of heaven fer¬
tilise the earth, Zeus must be the husband of many brides,
the father of countless children in every country. As looking
down on the havoc caused by drought or pestilence, storm or
war, he would be a god of merciless indifference and disinte¬
rested cruelty. He must smile alike over the wealth of a
teeming harvest or the withered fruits of a sun-scorched
land. But the blighting of a spring-tide fair in its promise
is his work, and he would thus become capricious as well
as treacherous, wliile the interchangeable characteristics
of the earliest gods would heighten still more the repul¬
sive features of the anthropomorphised Zeus. If the old
hymn had ' praised Aditi as ‘ mother, father, and son,’
Zens must become at once the brother and the husband,
and his own daughters through many generations would
become the mothers of his children. The transference of
these phrases to the relatiotis of human life has its neces¬
sary result in the fearful horrors of the tale of Oidipons and
lokaste.

That the two streams of religion and mythology ran on
side by side, or rafher'that the same words are used to ex¬
press two wholly different lines of thought, is abundantly

HESIODIC MORALITY AND THEOLOGY. 351

proved by Greek not less tlian by Hindu literature. The chap.
result was that the same man might seem to speak two ..

languages, and perhaps delude himself into the notion that
under the name of Zeus he spoke of one person, and of one
person only. This would be the case especially with the
classes, which, although familiar, or because they- were fami¬
liar, with the complicated mythical lore of their country,
might not care to analyse their own thoughts, or fairly to
face the difficulties involved in many or most of these ancient
stories. But there would be a lower class who, as being
perhaps practically ignorant of these narratives, would be
saved in great measure from this traditional influence. 1
However imperfect his conceptions may have been, it is
certain that the swineherd Eumaios did not derive his
religious convictions from mythical phrases, when he told
Odysseus that God gives and withholds according to his
pleasure and in the plenitude of his power. Nor can too
great a stress be laid on the fact that, as the mythology
grew more complicated and more repulsive, ideas of morality
and religion became more reasonable and more pure. No¬
where is this conclusion so clearly forced upon us as in the
Hesiodie Works and Days. In this poem the teacher
who bids his friend to deal with all men after the rule of
righteousness which comes from, Zeus, 2 who tells that justice
and truth shall in the end prevail, 3 and that they who do
evil to others inflict evil on themselves, 4 who is sure that
the eyes of God are in every place, that the way of evil is
broad and smooth, and the path of good rough and narrow
at the first, tells us also how Zeus bade the gods to make
Pandora fair to look upon but all evil within; .and laughed
at the thought of the miseries which should overtake man¬
kind when all the evils should be let loose from her box,
while, to crush them utterly, tope should remain a prisoner

1 ‘What,’ lists Professor Max Muller, higher powers that rule it, Eumaios
‘did the swineherd Eumaios know »*; knows only of just gods, ‘‘who hate
the intricate Olympian theogony ? H:tl cruel deeds, lint honour jusiieo and the
he ever.heard the name of the Chnritcs righteous works of men.'"—Lectures an
or tile Harpyias? Could he have told Language, second series, loo.

were her husbands and her children? 3 215. •

I doubt it; and when Homer introduces ‘ 253.
him to us, speaking of this lifo and the

MYTHOLOGY OB’ THE ARYAN' NATIONS.

hook within it. So conscious apparently is the poet that the
__■ Zeus who thus cheats mankind is not the Zeus who com¬
mands them to do justice and mercy, that he can use the
same name without a thought that he .is dishonouring the
just and holy God whom he reverences. It seems impos¬
sible to ignore a distinction without which the Hesiodic
poem becomes unintelligible. With our Homeric poets the
contrast is not so marked, simply because their thoughts
were not so earnest and their hearts were not so wakened
by the sterner experiences of human life. With these
moral indifference would naturally find expression in con¬
fusion of language, and they might lead others to think,
as they themselves may have fancied, that the Zeus to whom
they prayed in moments of real anguish was the Zeus who
laughed at the wretchedness and the ruin of mankind.
Still less can it be said that the mythology of India choked
the growth of a right faith. The Hindu might in his prayer
employ the names of Yaruna or Dyaus, bnt he knew well
that these were only names for One whose nature, infinite
and incomprehensible, yet corresponded with his own, and of
whose aid he felt himself to stand in the deepest and most
constant need.

The Zens But if it be true generally that the Greek, especially in
Tragic the prehistoric ages, ‘ was not aware that there were dif-

poete. ferent tributaries which entered from different points into

the central idea of Zens,’ 1 it was far otherwise with t^ few
to whom a belief in the righteousness of God was no empty
phrase hut a profound and practical conviction. The fact
that national and political institutions were intertwined
inextricably with the old mythology, if they were not actually
based upon it, only brought out its repulsive features more
prominently before all who could not bring themselves to
believe that the righteous God could issue to men immoral
commands or himself do the things which he condemned in
them. Whether the difficulties thus involved in the tra¬
ditional creed should lead them to covert opposition or to
open antagonism, would depend much on the temper and
the. circumstances of those who felt them. There are some
' Max Muller, Lectures on Language , second series, H2.

IDEAS OF THE POETS.

who, like Sophokles, are well content if they can express
their own convictions without assailing popular ideas: there
are others who, like Euripides, cannot rest until they bring
others to see inconsistencies which to themselves are palpable
and glaring. Yet it cannot be denied that the thoughts of
Sophokles are as true and high as those of the younger
poet. There is nothing in the latter more outspoken than
the words in which Sophokles tells us that the laws of
righteousness are established in heaven and that in them
God is great and cannot grow old. But where there is an
earnest yearning for truth, this happy condition of mind will
not probably last long. The thought of the mischief which
the popular creeds inflict on ordinary minds will lead them
openly to condemn a system which they might otherwise
treat with indifference or contempt; and to this sense we
may ascribe the protests of Xenophanes and Protagoras, of
Anaxagoras and Heraldeitos, of Pindar and of Plato. The
controversy was brought to an issue, when Euripides said
plainly that if the gods are righteous, the stories of the poets
are wretched falsehoods, and that if they do the things which
the poets ascribe to them, then they are not gods at all: and
this issue was anticipated by tbe conviction- of JEschylos that
Zeus was a mere name, one of many names, for the One true
God, which might serve to convey some faint notion and in¬
adequate idea of his goodness and his greatness.

Hindu and Greek, then, alike worshipped the same God,
of whom they also spoke sometimes under other names. But
these names were in no. case borrowed the one from the other.
The analysis of language has proved that in some instances
Greeks, Latins, or Lithuanians have preserved older forms
than any which are exhibited in Sanskrit, while the varia¬
tions in the incidents and local colouring of the myths carry
us back to one common source for all in the home of the yet
undivided Aryan tribes. The seed, however, could not ger¬
minate while as yet there was po failure of memory; and if,
when the meaning of words "S’as in part or wholly forgotten,
expressions not less graceful once than true became coarse
and mischievous, we may learn to curb our .indignation when

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIK ARYAN NATIONS.

book we find that both the process and the result were alike in-
lr ' . evitable.

[ S imns- But the name Zeus is not confined to Greeks and Hindus.

.rm;iiions. Tli0 2 ens p at( ' ir 0 f f,i ie former and the Dyaus-pitar of the
latter represent the Jupiter of the Latins, and the Tuisco,
Zio, Tyr and Tiw of the German nations. The etymological
changes of the word are indeed almost numberless. The
brightness of the heaven reappears in the Latin dies, the
Sanskrit dyu, and our day : and from the same root spring
the Greek Theos, the Latin Deus, and the Lithuanian
Diewas. These changes bare been fully traced by Professor
Max Muller ; l but we must here note that the Greek Zen,
Zenos answers to the Latin Janus, Jauuspatsr; that Janus
again, resolved into Dianus and Diana, carries us to the
Greek digammated forms At of, AiFa, and appears again in
the word divine. With these may be taken the forms con¬
nected with Zeus by the transition of dy (Dyaus) into j
(Jupiter, Janus, Juno), or dj, as in the Djovis of Oscan in¬
scriptions and the old Italian deity Vedjovis (Vejovis). Akin
to all these is the Sanskrit deva, a word which like Dyaus
denoted only splendour, but was afterwards as a name for the
gods; but although it had thus acquired the general notion
of deity, it was never applied to any but the bright gods who
were the companions of Indra. The evil powers of night or
darkness are Adeva, atheists, or enemies of the devas; and
thus even on Indian soil we find the germ of that moral and
spiritual meaning which was imported into a myth purely
physical in its origin. While the adeva grew, like Asmo-
deus, 2 into malignant demons, Vritra the cloud enemy of
Indra was gradually passing into the evil god of Iranian
theology. If the Diabolos of the New Testament, a word
not found in the Septuagint, is to be referred to forms like
Dyavan and Diovis, the name deva had lost in the West the
meaning of brightness which it retained in the East, 3 though
the evil spirit was still regarded as the prince of the powers
of the air. The Teutonic devil'is thus traced to that Iranian

1 Lectures on Language, second series, 2 Eshem-dev.neshma-daeva,‘le demon
453. For Mr. PeilVs remarks on the de la concupiscence.’—Breal, Hermit et
connection of Theos and< Deus see note Cocks, 138.

p. 327. 1 Grimm, Deutsche Mythologic, 939.-

LOCAL TRADITIONS.

source from which the Jews derived their later complicated CH

’demonology. That the term Diabolos, as applied to Satan, ._

should be regarded as identical with the Greet word denoting
a slanderer, is a confusion precisely similar to that which
turned Lvkaon and his sons into wolves and the seven
arkshas or shiners into bears.

If from the Greek conceptions of Zeus we separate all The
those which, springing from the idea of his relations to men ^
as a Father, grew up into a moral and religious faith, the
rest may all be traced to mythical phrases which describe
the varying appearances of the heavens and the manifold
influence of the atmosphere on the earth and its fruits. Of
the countless names thus employed the most transparent
would remain as attributes, while the greater number would be
localised either as places or as persons. Hence would spring
up distinctions between the Zeus of Arkadia, Dodona, Olym-
pos and Crete, distinctions arising wholly from a forgetful¬
ness of the original meaning of words, but fixed irrevocably
by the real or apparent identity of the mythical epithets
with any mythical names which had become geographical. 1
The sun as Endymidn plunges into Latmos, the land of
sleep; but the presence of the Latmian hill was a conclusive
answer to any who might dare to call in question the veracity
of the local legend. The old mythical speech had its Phaia-
kian or cloudla.nd geography. It had its Arkadia and Delos,
the birthplace, of the light, its Phoinikia and Ortygia, the
purple land of the quail and the dawn, its bright Lykia.n
regions with its golden stream of Xanthos, its Ida or earth
on which rest the rays of the newly risen sun, its Graian or
Hesperian lands where the light dies out in the evening.
Carrying with them the treasures of their common inherit¬
ance, the Aryan tribes could not fail to give to the hills and
streams of their new homes the names which had mice de¬
scribed only the morning, the heaven, or the sun. The lord
of day sinks to sleep in the gjowing west: and the tomb of
Endymidn could therefore b£ only in Elis. The god of the
blue ether is throned in light: so also must the sent of the
anthropomorphised Zeus be on some hill whose name, like

MYTHOLOGY OF

E ARYAN NATIONS.

the Delos of Apollon and the Athens of his virgin sister,
expresses the one idea of splendour; and thus he was made
to dwell on the summit of the Arkadian Lykaios and the
Olympian heights of Mysia and Thessaly. As the veil of
night is slowly withdrawn, the clear heaven is first seen in
the east, and thus Zeus must be bom in Lyktos or in Dikte;
but the Cretan who could point to a Diktaian cave in his
own land clung tenaciously to the notion that the child who
was there nourished by Amaltheia was not the Zeus of
Arkadia and Olympos.

The story of his birth and exploits is to be gathered not
so much from the Iliad and Odyssey as from the Hesiodic
and Orphic theogonies; but unless we find manifest contra¬
dictions between the accounts which they set before us, it is
unsafe to infer that the poets whom we style, Homeric were
unacquainted with details or incidents about which they are
silent, even if it be assumed that their poems in their present
shape are more ancient than those which bear the names of
Hesiod or Orpheus. That the theogony of the former was
far less complicated and retrospective than that of the latter,
there can scarcely be a doubt. The prison to which they
assign Kronos is proof that they looked on Zeus as one who
had not always been supi'eme in power; but the names with
which their theogony begins are not those of Chaos and
Gaia, but those of Tethys and Okeanos. 1 The struggle be¬
tween Zeus and the Titans may be inferred from the fact
that Here and Hephaistos speak of them as thrust away
under Tartaros; 2 but the Polyphemos of the Odyssey who
feeds his flocks in broad pastures has nothing but his size
and his one eye in common with the Hesiodic Kyklopes who
forge the thunderbolts of Zeus. 3

THE VORACITf OF JCROXOS.

The lateness of many at least among the Hesiodic ideas CIlAr.

seems to be manifested not so much in the allegorical ._ J :_,

elements introduced, 1 as in the transparent meaning of the The ini-
names. Zeus and Hades, Phoibos and IAto already denoted Krono/^
the conflicting powers of light and darkness, of day and
night; but these words had in great part lost their original
force, and the poet who wished to frame a systematic
tkeogouy felt constrained to speak of Aither (ether) and
Hemera as children of Nyx and JErebos. In some important
points the story of Ouranos is told over again in the myths
of Kronos and Zeus. Prom Ouranos and Gaia, according
to the Hesiodic theogony, spring Koios and Krios, Hyperion
and Iapetos, the Kyldopes and other monstrous beings,
together with Bhea the mother of Zeus. All these Ouranos
hid away in the secret places of Gaia who called on Kronos
to avenge her wrongs and his own. Prom the blood of the
mutilated Ouranos which fell on the broad sea was born the
laughter-loving AphroditA 2 Thus the goddess of love and
beauty is, like the Kyld&pes, older than the Father of
gods and men; nor can anything show more clearly how
thoroughly the mythology of the Aryan world was in con¬
flict with its religion. Kronos and Bhea, then, became tlie
parents of Hestia, D6met@r, H6re and Hades ; but these are
all swallowed by Kronos, who knows that some day he will
be dethroned by some child of bis own. In grief of heart,

Bhea, shortly before the birth of Zeus, betakes herself to
Ouranos and Gaia, who send her to the Cretan Lyktos, and
there Zeus, like Mithras and Krishna, was horn in a cave
which Apollodoros calls the cave of DiktA A stone wrapped
in swaddling-clothes was presented to Kronos, who, taking

All this explains itself. The liammei- the poets of the Hind and Orfi/sso/. Hut

hills/ ‘the pleasant dwellings of the '>»<• ‘ il0 «"<•>-

goils,’ are reckoned among the children hnl.es winch mail.: her the vehement,
of Gaia.—Giyw, ii. 06. lover of Ailonis. IVhb I Ins epilhrl we

- This is probably the only meaning may compare that ol'Fullas (tlie Phalliej
which the word t/uko/i/ietSlis conveyed to Athene.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN KATIOSB.

book it for the new-horn babe, swallowed it as he had swallowed
IJ ’ . the others. Deceived at length by Gaia, Kronos disgorged
them all, the stone first and the living children afterwards. 1
The stone was set up by Zeus for a memorial in Pytho.
But Zeus, when he became the husband of Metis, felt the
same strange desire which had led Ouranos and Kronos to
consume their children; and thus, by the advice again of
Ouranos and Gaia, he swallowed Metis before she became
the mother of Athene. In these exaggerations of a late
age we trace the same thought which made the Vedic poet
speak of the Dawn as making men old, yet as ever young
herself. The light of the heaven calls all things into life;
but the heaven retains its unchangeable beauty while gene¬
rations spring up on the earth and pass away. The
children swallowed are thus produced again; and so the
Heaven or the Dawn, regarded as Time, might be spoken
of as l'elentless and cruel, and as rightly punished by their
injured children. 2

The wnr of A hard fight now awaited Zeus, who, by delivering the

the Titans. c kjpj rell 0 f Ouranos, had been armed for the struggle with
thunder and lightning. 3 On his side against the Titans and
the offspring of Kronos were ranged Kottos, Gyas, and
Briareos, who cast the Titans into Tartaros and there left
them chained. The struggle itself is described in language
which shows how little the poet cared about-the subject.
Thunders, lightning, and earthquake attest the majesty of

THE TITANS AND THEIK KINSFOLK.

Zens, by whose thunderbolts hind and ocean are wrapped in
seething fire; the din of the conflict is as though the earth
and the solid heavens were crashing together; and nine
days would pass before a brazen anvil (Akrndn) let down
from the earth could fathom the depths of Tartar-os. 1
Above this gloomy prison-house are the roots of the earth
and the barren sea, and there within walls and gates built
by Poseidon dwell the three sons of Ouranos who befriended
Zeus in his hour of need.

Yet this struggle which, like that between Zeus and
Typhdeus the latest-born child of Gaia' and Tartaros, is
related with so much pomp of high sounding but empty
words, is the conflict which runs through all mythology and
which, in its more human forms, has a singular and unfailing
interest. It is the battle of Phoibos with the Pythian
monster, of Indra with the throttling snake Yritra, of Sigurd
with the dragon of the Glistening Heath, of Oidipous with
the Sphinx, and in the earlier phase of the legend, of
Achilleus and AgamemnSn with Paris.

Having related the story of Typlideus, the Hesiodie
Theogony recounts the loves of Zeus with Metis, Themis,
Eurynome, Demeter, Mnemosynd, Letd, and with Herd, who
,in this scheme is the latest of his brides and has fallen far
below the majesty with which she is invested in the Iliad
and the Odyssey. Of these names some are the growth of
a comparatively late age. The dawn-goddess of the far east
is described as waking all men and receiving praise from
every thinker; and the character here faintly attributed to
her is brought out more clearly in the Hellenic Athene,
and finds its utmost developement in the Latin Minerva.
Athdnd, then, as the goddess of the morning, must have a
mother with qualities corresponding to her own, and this

."GO MYTHOLOGY OF THE' ARYAN NATIONS.

rook parent was found in the Wisdom which is wedded to Zeus.

. n ' . To this class of invented names belong those of the Hdrai,' ~
or Hours, and their mother Themis; but the name cf
Eurynome, the mother of the Charites, is more true to the
original character of these beautiful maidens. The broad
spreading light is the parent of the glistening beings who in
the form of horses draw' the chariot of Indra, and in the
west are the maidens who attend on Aphrodite. But as the
dawn may be regarded as springing from the face of the
sky, so in another and an earlier myth Athene springs
armed from the forehead of Zeus, and the dark powers of
night at once retreat before her. The same idea rendered
it necessary to assign to Here some offspring of her own
unaided power wdiether in the person of Typhoeus, 1 or, as
the Hesiodic theogony relates, of HSphaistos also.

The twelve Thus the number of the kinsfolk and the children of Zeus
deities.'' 11 i s already large ; but of the class of deities specially known
at Athens in the days of Thucydides as the twelve Olympian
gods neither our Homeric poems nor the Hesiodic theogony
know anything. In the latter, Zeus and Poseiddn are the
shakers of the earth and sea, while Hades dwells in the
regions under the earth; but of a threefold partition of the
Kosmos between the three Kronid brothers we have no
formal mention. Of Poseidon the Theogony tells us only
that he built the walls within which Briareds guards the .
Titans : nor is there any difference of rank between Ares
and his sisters Hebe and Eileitkyia, or again between
Demeter and Eurynome. Prom the number of the so-called
twelve. Hades is excluded; hut in the Iliad and Odyssey he
appears at will in the Olympian home of Zeus, and moves as
an equal among the gods who are there assembled..

The iu- The myth as related by Apollodoros has received some
cf amplifications. The child Zeus in the Diktaian cave is
nourished by the nymphs Adrasteia and Ida with the milk
of Amaltheia, and the armed Kouretes clash their shields
and spears lest the cry of the bate should reach the ear of his

' ‘ Typhoons, the whirlwind or Ty- He belches fire, that, is, lightnings issue
phoon, lms a hundred dragon or serpent from the clouds, and his roaring is like
heads, the. long writhing stfciae .of vapour the howling of wild dogs.’—S. B. Gould,
which run before the hurricane-cloud. The Were Wolf, p. 174.

THE AKKADIAN LYJKOSOURA.

361

father Kronos. In the war with the Titans the Kyklbpos CHAP.

give to Zeus their thunder and lightning, to Hades the - —•

helmet which in the Iliad renders the wearer invisible, and
to Poseidon a trident. The struggle is followed by the
casting of lots between the three Kronid brothers for the
partition of the heaven above, of the earth beneath, and of
the hidden regions under the earth. There was no need of
any such method. The old mythical phrase rendered it
impossible that any hut Zeus could be the lord of the bright
heaven. In other points also the account of the mytlio-
grapher is at variance with that of the Hesiodic poet.
According to the latter Aphrodite is the offspring of Oura^
nos; the former . represents her as the child of Zens and.

Dionl, and makes the scheme of things begin with Ouranos
himself instead of Chaos.

That Zeus should be nursed by Ida is an incident for The
which we are at once prepared when in the Eastern myth 'n’jci'o™
we find that Idd is a name of the earth, and that she is tau Zms
assigned as a wife to Hyaus. That he should have a
sanctuary specially sacred on the Lykaian. heights in Arka-
dia was, a.s we have seen, as indispensable as the birth of
Phoibos in Delos. But the Arkadian legend is noteworthy
as showing the fantastic forms which spring up in rank
luxuriance from mythical phrases when either wholly or
partially misunderstood. The blue heaven is seen first in
the morning against the highest mountain tops, and on these
the rays of the sun rest before they light up the regions
beneath; and as it had been said that Zeus dwelt on high
Olympos and that his palace was the first building which
the sun ever saw, so in strict fidelity to the old phrases the
Arkadians insisted that their own Lykosoura was the most
ancient of all cities, and the first which Helios had ever be¬
held, and that Zeus had been nourished by the nymphs
Theisoa, Neda, and Hagno on the Lykaian bill hard by the
temple of our Lady (Despoiua). Nay, as Pausanias tells
us, 1 the hill was also called Olympos, and in it there was a
spot named Kretea, and hence, as some would have if,
here Zeus was horn, and not in Crete, .the island of the

MYTHOLOGY OF TUB ARYAN NATIONS.

Egca.n sea. Cretans and Arkadians were doubtless alike
sincere in their convictions ; but, had they remembered the
meaning of the words which they used, they would have
known that Zeus had his Olympian and Lykaian hills, his
Crete, his Dikte, his Arkadia, his Phoinikian home wher¬
ever the sun sent forth his long train of light 1 across the
sky. Bnt in the minds of Achaians and Hellenes the old
phrase had associated with the abode of Zeus the idea of
an ineffable splendour; and the tenacity with which they
clung to this idea is singularly exhibited in the strange
superstition which made the Lykeian sanctuary an object of
wondering dread. As the Hebrew of old said that none
might look on the face of God and live, so the Aryan held
that the doom of death was on the man who dared to look
on the unveiled splendour of Zeus. The Arkadian localised
this faith in his Lykaian Temenos, and averred not only
that all living things which might enter it would die within
the year, hut that not a single object within it ever cast a
shadow. The idea, being once suggested, ran out into the
wildest fancies, and the liunstman, who drew back at the
inelosure when a hunted beast entered it, failed not to see
that its body no longer cast a shadow after it had entered
the charmed circle. The science of the geographer does
hut heighten his faith in the local tradition. When the
sun is in the sign of the Crab, he knows that at the
Ethiopian Syeng there are no shadows at midday; but the
marvel was that in this Arkadian sanctuary there was never
any shadow the whole year round. Pausanias admitted the
fact as readily as the Royal Society set to work, it is said, '
to explain why a vessel of water with a fish in it was no
heavier than it would have been without the fish: hut he
could not know that in the real Lykosoura there could be no
shade, although this Lykosoura was not to be sought in
Peloponnesos or in any land of human habitation. In the
bright heaven, through which travels the unclouded sun,
there can be no darkness at all. 2

• AvK6aovpa. , of the golden race, he was simply saying

the Olympian temple was built by men be, by Lykians or men of light.' ^

i.ykAon and tantalos.

303

. But the •word which supplied the name of the shadowless CHAP.
Lykaian sanctuary was confused in their mind with the - -. - ■
name of the wolf, so called for the same reason which led the LjUosom-a
German to speak of the hear as Goldfuss: and at once it
became necessary to show how the idea of wolves was linked
with the fortunes of LykSon. This son of Pelasgos was the
builder of Lykosoura, and he called Zeus Lykaios,* after his
own name, instituting in his honour the Lykaian festival
which answered to the Dawn festival in the city of the
Athenians. But his wisdom, as Pausanias testifies, was not
equal to that of his contemporary Kekrops, who felt that
no living thing should be offered up to the Zeus whom he
reverenced as the most high. The zeal of Lykafin was more
vehement, and the blood of an infant, or, as some said, of
his own child, flowed on the altar of sacrifice. At once the
human form of Lykafin was changed into that of a wolf. It
was the just recompense of his iniquity in a time when men .
wer'e linked in a close intercourse with the gods ; but to the
grief of Pausanias the increasing wickedness of mankind had
put an end to the age of miracles, and the true story of
LyM6n had been overlaid by miserable falsehoods, which
affirmed that men turned into wolves at the Lykaian sacrifice
were restored to their old shape after ten years, if they
abstained from human flesh,, but that, if they tasted it, then
they remained wolves for ever.

We have here more than, the germ of mediaeval Lykan- Lyfan-
thropy, and little more is needed to bring before us the tu '° ry '
Were-wolf or Vampire superstition in its full deformity.

That superstition has been amongst the most fearful scourges
of mankind; but here, as elsewhere, it is something to learn
that a confusion between two words identical in sound, and
springing from the same root, laid the foundations of this
frightful delusion. The myth of Lykaon is in this incident
nothing more than a repetition of the story of Tantalos.

His name is but one of a thousand epithets for the sun, who
in times of drought offers up on the altar of Zeus (the
heaven) the scorched and withered fruits which owed their
life to liis own vivifying heat; and Ipr him, as for the

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

Phrygian king, the .sin and its punishment inevitably fol¬
lowed the translation of mythical phrases into the conditions
of human life.

Like the god of Arkadi a, the Zeus of Dodona is nourished
by nymphs, who in this instance are called Hyades, the
bringers of moisture from the blue heights of heaven. That
the Cretan story is but another version of the Arkadian, the
identity of names alone sufficiently proves. The Lykaian hill
had its Crete, and the Eleutherai, to which unintentional
trespassers into the Temonos of Zeus were conveyed, re¬
appears in the mythical geography of the Egean island. 1
But although Zeus must be wherever there is an Olympian
city, yet the greatness of the Eleian Zeus overshadowed the
majesty' of the Zeus who abode in Crete, Lykosoura, or
Dodona, when his temple at Olympia became the sanctuary
of the great Panhellenie festival. But here, too, the local
legend gives names with which the Cretan and Arkadian
myths have already made us familiar. Here, too, it was
said that Rhea entrusted the infant Zeus to the care of the
Idaian Daktyloi. 2 If the name given to these mysterious
beings be akin to the DiktS and Lyktos of the Cretan tale,
to Artemis Diktynna and Diktys of Seriphos, we have in it
only a general designation which applies to each of the
Daktyloi, Herakles, Paionios, Iasios and Idas. This Idas is
hut the counterpart of the nymph Ida, the companion of
Adrasteia; and Ida, as we have seen, is but tbe eartb, wbicb
may be regarded as either the nurse, or, as in the Vedic
hymns, the bride of Zeus. The name of Herakles, like that
of Here, indicates simply' the splendour of the risen sun, and
in Iasios, as in Iasion, Iamos, Iole and others, we have the
violet tint with which the heaven is flushed in early morning.
The olive branch, which Herakles made the prize of Victory',
itself came from the Hyperboreans, whence Achaia, the
mother of the Zeus-horn Acliaians, journeyed to Delos.

That the relations of Zeus to other mythical beings were
very variously described, a comparison of our Hesiodic and
Homeric narratives has already shown us. In the latter, he
is the father not oi\ly of Aphrodite, who in the former is his
1 Hesiod, Theog. 54. 2 Pans. v. 7, i.

THE POWER OP ZEUS.

sister, but of Ares and Hephaistos, who, according to another CHAP,
legend, were like Typhoeus the children of Here only. In. I '
one story he is the father also of Phoibos, who in another is
the son of Athene. The power with which he is invested
varies in like manner according to the point of view from
which he is regarded. The Zeus who is the'father of all
living things, knows neither weakness, change, nor passion;
the Zeus who is the growth of mythical phrases, is beneficent
or treacherous, just or capricious, pure or lustful, according
to the character of the phenomena to he described. By
himself he is styled all-powerful: but Hdrd too, as the
sovereign queen of heaven, can know no higher authority,
and thus they are represented as acting sometimes with and
sometimes against each other- Nay, even AtMnd, the
maiden who stands by his side to do his will, is sometimes
an accomplice with Herd and Poseidon in plots to circum¬
scribe his power. But although he can do much, he cannot
arrest the course of the sun, he cannot lighten his toils for
beings meaner than himself, he cannot avert the early doom
which awaits him when his short career across the heaven is
ended. Hence he can but bring up to Olympos from the
dead the beautiful Memnon for whom the tears of Eds fall
in dewdrops from the sky; he can hut rescue the body of
the brave Sarpedon, and give it to Phoibos to bathe in
Simoeis, and to the powers of sleep and death to bear' it to
the glistening home which they cannot reach until the
morning. 1 Heraklds may toil for Eurystheus and have no
profit at all of his labour; but Zeus can only look down on
his brave, son until the flames ascend to heaven from his
funeral pile on Oita. There is, in short, no one phrase
which might be said to describe the varying aspects of the
sky, which is not petrified into some myth characteristic of
the Kronid Zeus; and the smile of the blue heaven, wlien all

300

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

hook the brightness of day bursts upon it, becomes the rapture of

-_,'— Zeus when Here comes to him armed with the kestos

(cestus) of Aphrodite, and the lulling spells of Hypnos. 1
Thus also the serene height in which Zeus dwells, and from
which he cannot descend, explains his indifference and
seeming immorality in the great conflict at Hion. At the
prayer of Thetis he may be induced to help the Trojans until
Agamemnon has repaired the wrong done to Achilleus, or
his inaction may be secured by the devices of H6r6; but
with Here herself there can be no such uncertainty or
vacillation. Her name is but one of many names for the
sun, and she must take part steadily with the Argives and
Danaans, the children of the Dawn. To her Paris, the
seducer of the fair Helen, is strictly the evil Pani who
tempts Sarama to betray the trust reposed in her by Iudra;
and hence she may employ without scruple the power of her
beauty, aided by the magic girdle of Aphrodite, to turn the
scale in favour of Agamemnon and his Ackaian warriors.

The mcs- But if Zeus cannot himself descend to the regions of the
Zeus™ ° f m urky air, he has messengers who do his bidding. Foremost
among these is Hermes, the god who flies on the breezes
and the storm; but Iris of the flashing feet is more truly
the minister who joins the ether to the lower atmosphere of
the earth. Whatever be the origin of the name Iris, the
word was used by the poets of the Hiad to denote not only
the divine messenger, but the rainbow itself. Thus the
dragons on the breastplate of Agamemnon are likened to
the Irises which Zeus has set in the heavens as a marvel to
mortal men; 2 and more plainly Iris is the purple arch or
bow which Zeus stretches from one end of heaven to the
other, to give warning of war or deadly drought. 3 She is a
daughter of Thaumas and Elektra, the wonderful amber tints,
and a sister of the Harpyiai, the rent and ragged clouds
against which those tints are seen; and she would be the
golden-winged messenger, not only because the rainbow can
come and vanish with the speed* of lightning, but because its
arch seems to join the heaven and the earth, as a ladder by
which the angels may descend and rise up again into their

THE TRIBUNAL OF ZEUS.

• 367

home above. Hence the phrase was that the rainbow spread CHAP.

■ its glorious path across the sky, whenever the gods wished .

to send their messenger to do their bidding. In this office
Iris carries out the behests sometimes of Zeus, sometimes of
Here or of Phoibos, while sometimes she comes of her own
free act. She is, in short, the counterpart of Hermes, whose
staff she bears in her hand. 1 If, again, in some myths she
may be spoken of as always a maiden, it may not less truly
bfe said that the winds love her exquisite tints, while the
earth lies enraptured at her feet; and this accordingly is the
tale which makes her the bride of Zephyros and the mother
of Eros, the darling of the gods. But the name of this
lovely being soon became a mere general title of messengers
or errand-carriers, and reappears in Iros the beggar of the
Odyssey, who resembles her in no other way.

Lastly, as seeing from his throne in heaven all that is zrastho
done on earth, Zeus must be the punisher of all iniquity. Jrud s e -
But the judgments of a god, whose characteristics depend on
ha.lf-forgotten mythical phrases, or on words wholly mis¬
understood, will not be always equitable. The sentences
passed will have reference often to his mythical rights, while
they may be designed generally to redress wrongs between mail
and man. The punishments of Tantalos and Ixion, of Lykaon
and Sisyphos are involved in the very idea of these beings.

The sun, who woos the dawn, yet drives her from him as he
rises ip the sky. He loves the dew which his rays burn up ;
and if he shine on. the earth too fiercely, its harvests must
be withered. If his face approaches the stream too closely,
the water-courses will soon be beds of gaping slime. The
penalty paid by Tantalos is bound up with the phrases which
described the action of the sun, while that of Lykaon, sprung,
as we have seen, from a confusion between two words derived
from the same source. If, again, the sun, as rising into the
dizzy heights of heaven, might be said tp gaze too boldly
on the bride of Zeus, his downward course is not less certain
than his ascent, and at middily he must revolve like Ixion on
his blazing wheel; while the stone which Sisyphos has with
huge toil rolled to the mountain summit (the zenith) must

1 ‘ Per weibliebe Hermes.'—Preller, (irkchitchc Mt/lhtdogit, i. 390.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -

flip from liia grasp and da.sh down again into tfee valley
below. Still more must Zeus punish the insults done to him-
as lord of the fire-laden thunder clouds ; and Prom&tbeuS, as
teaching men how to kindle a flame and cheat the gods with
offerings of fat and hone, is an offender less easily pardoned
than chiefs who sacrifice their children on his altars. In
this Promethean legend alone we seem to have a glimpse of
that future twilight of the gods which is so prominent a
characteristic of Northern mythology. But it is only in the
tragedy of ZGschylos that the liberation of Prometheus in¬
volves the humiliation of Zeus. In the summary of Apollo-
doros, it is mentioned only as one among the countless
exploits of Herakles; and we may owe. to the mind of
iEschylos alone a notion which we are perhaps not justified
in connecting with the idea developed by the Northmen into
a common doom awaiting Odin and all the JSsir.

Section VI.—ODIN, WODEN, WUOTAN.

The Teutonic belief in the twilight or final extinction of
the gods is of itself evidence that the mythology of the
German and Scandinavian nations belongs to an earlier form
of thought than that of the Hindu or the Greek. 1 The gods
of the latter are essentially free from decay and death.
They live for ever in Olympos, eating ambrosial food and
drinking the nectar of immortality, while in their veins flows
not mortal blood, hut the imperishable ichor. Nor can it be
said that even the myth of Prometheus points to any com¬
plete suppression of the present order of things. It does
hut say that Zeus should he put down, and a more righteous
ruler set up in his place. But iu the Teutonic legends
Odin himself falls and Thor dies, and the body of the

LIFE OF TIIE TEUTONIC GODS. ' 369

beautiful Baldur is consumed in the flames. In other words, chat.

these deities answer not to the Olympian gods, hut to the ._^_•

mortal Herables or Perseus or Asklepios. But the links
which connect the belief of the one race with that of the
others may be traced readily enough. The Yedic gods, like
the Hellenic, live for ever. The Soma inspires them with
fresh vigour, as the soul of Zeus is refreshed and strength¬
ened by heavenly banquets; but the draughts, which only
add to their inherent force, give to the Teutonic deities a
new. lease of life. 1 Thus the Soma draught becomes in
northern Europe the cup of honey mingled with the blood of
Qvasir, the wisest of all beings, who during his life had gone
about the world doing the work of Prometheus for the
wretched children of men. His wisdom, however, could not
save him from the dwarfs Pialar and Galar, who, mingling
his blood with honey, made a costly mead, the taste of which
imparted the eloquence of the bard and the wisdom of the
sage. 2 In other respects the Teutonic deities exhibit the
closest likeness to the Greek. The rapidly acquired strength
and might of Zeus, Phoibos, and Hermes simply express the
brief period needed to fill the heaven with light, to give to the
sun its scorching heat, to the wind its irresistible force ; and
the same idea is expressed by the myth of Yali, the son of
Wuotan and Bind, who, when only a night old, comes with
his hair untouched by a comb, like Phoibos Akersekomes, to
take vengeance on Hodr for the death of Baldur, and again
in the story of Magni, the son of larnsaxa, who, when three
days old, rescued his father Thor as he lay crushed beneath
the foot of the gigantic Hrungnir. 3 There is the same
agreement in the size of their bodies and in the power of
their voices. The roaring of the waves and the crash of the
thunder are louder than any din of mortal warfare or the
cries of any earthly monsters ; and thus at once -we have the
gigantic size of Ares, and the roar of Poseidon louder than
the noise'of a myriad warriors in close conflict. Thus, also,
as Herd lays one hand on th% earth and the other on the sea,
so Thor drinks up no small part of the ocean with his hom
which reaches from heaven to its surface—a ponderous
1 Grimm, Deutsche JSfythvlogk, 296. 1 Ibid. 855. 3 Ibid. 298.

370

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK

image for the clouds or the rays of the sun os they drink
from the sea. But neither the Greek nor the Teutonic'
deities have the monstrous forms of the four-armed Yishnu
or the four-headed Brahma — these fearful combinations
being confined to beings like Briareos and Gerydn and the
giants of northern mythology, unless an exception is to be
made of the three-handed Hekate, who, however, can scarcely
be reckoned among the Olympian gods, and the four-armed
Lakedaimonian Apollon. 1 The two-headed Janus is a Latin
deity. But if the Teutonic gods are never monstrous, they
are sometimes maimed ; and in the one-eyed Odin we have
the idea which called the Hellenic Kyklops into existence ;
while in the one-handed Tyr we see Indra Savitar; and in
the limping Loki, the lame Hephaistos. But whatever may
be their office, these are all bright and radiant deities; Hel
alone, like the rugged king of Hellenic mythology, has a
dark and repulsive aspect. 2 The very expressions used hi
speaking of them are transparent. The flowing locks of the
Wish-god and of Baldur are those of Zeus and Phoibos ; the
fair-haired D&neter of the Greek becomes the fair-haired Lif
of the Teuton. 3 The power of Zeus is seen again in that of
Thor, and the golden glory which surrounded the head of
Phoibos or AsklSpios, and became the aureole of Christian
saints, is not less a mark of the German deities, and ap¬
pears on the head of Thor as a circlet of stars. 4

But when we turn to the theogony set forth in the
Voluspa Saga, we can as little doubt that it marks a com¬
paratively late stage of thought, as we can suppose that the
Hesiodic theogony is older than the simple and transparent
myths which tell us of Prokris or Tithonos or Endymion.
The myth of Baldur, at least in its cruder forms, must be far
more ancient than any classification resembling that of the
Hesiodic ages. Such a classification we find in the relations
of the Jo tun or giants, who are conquered by Odin as the

i Grimm, Deutsche Myihologic, 298. • Grimm, 1). M. 289. She is the hungry

= Hel, the daughter of loki, and And insatiable goddess, the greedy
sister of the wolf Fenris and the horrible Polydektes and Polydegraon of Greek

worm or serpent, is half black and half myths (Grimm,
human in appoarance. Her dwelling is Tr i * 1 '"*" T

in Niflheim, far down in the depths of the
earth, beneath the roots of Yggdrasil:

ODIN’S BUNK SONG.

Titans ate overthrown by Zeus; and this sequence forms chap.
part of a theogony which, like that of Hesiod, begins with
chaos. From this chaos the earth emerged, made by the " '

gods out of the blood and bonfes of the giant Ymir, whose
name denotes the dead and barren sea. This being is sprung
from the contact of the frozen with the heated waters, the
former coming from Mflheim, the region of deadly cold at
the northern end of the chaotic world, the latter from
Muspelheim, the domain of the devouring fire. The Kosinos
so called into existence is called the ‘ Bearer of God ’—a
phrase which finds its explanation in the world-tree Ygg-
drasil, on which Odin himself hangs, like the Helend
Dendritis of the Cretan legend :—

Nino whole nightsf
And to Odin offered,

On a wind-rocked tree
"With a spear wounded,
Myself to. myself,

Of which no one knows

This mighty tree, which in Odin’s Rune Song becomes a
veritable tree of knowledge, and whose roots are undermined
by Hel or death and by the Hrimthm-sen or frost-giants,
rises into Asgard, the highest heavens where the gods dwell,
while men have their abode in Midgard, the middle garden
or earth, embraced by its branches.

The giant Ymir was nourished by the four streams which Genealogy'
flowed from the treasure of moisture, the cow Audhumla, 2 odm -
which belongs to Zoroastrian not less than to Teutonic
mythology, and is there found with the meaning both of
cow and earth. 3 This earth afforded salt, without which no
life can be vigorous, and from Audhumla, as she fed on the
salt of the blocks of ice, there came forth a perfect man,

Buri, the fashioner of the world, whose son, Bor, 4 had as his
wife Besla, or Bettla, 5 the daughter of the giant Bdlthom,

of the

372

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK

II.

the Creato:

the root or kernel of the earth. From Buri proceeded eg*-,
parently Odin himself, and also the race of the gaffe. or ■
Asas, the self-existent beings, 1 who dwell in Asgard or
Aither, while the middle air, between the upper and under
worlds, the atjp of the Greeks on which Zeus looks down, is
Yanaheim, the home of the Vanen, or spirits of the breath¬
ing wind. 5 To this race belong Freyr and Freya, the deities
of beauty and love, ‘the children of Mordur, the sea-god
who dwells in the sea-city (jN’oatun), and whose spouse,
Skadi (Elster?) is the daughter of the giant Thiassi, for he
is indeed himself the shore.’ 3

The idea of the composite nature of man must have pre¬
ceded the rise of the myth which assigns the creation of the
soul to Odin, of the mind to Hahnir, of the blood and outward
complexion to Lodur. This Hahnir is probably the same
word as halm, the cock, ‘ in its wider import the bird, the
animal belonging to the air; ’ 4 and thus possibly the framers
of this theogony may have intended to set forth their belief
that a Trinity, consisting of Ether, Air, and Fire, was con¬
cerned in the creation of man, Lodur being certainly fire,
and in fact only another form of Loki, the shining god.
But we approach the regions of pure mythology when we
read that when Odur sets forth on his wanderings, his bride,
the beautiful Freya, 3 sheds gold-gleaming tears—‘ an image
of the bright gleams shooting across the rugged morning
sky.’ 6 From these parents springs Hnossa, the jewel, the
world under the aspect of beauty, while Frigga, as the wife
of Odin, doubtless only another form of Odur, is the mother
of Jord, the earth, in the character of the nourishing
Dem&ter.

But all this visible Kosmos is doomed to undergo a cata¬
strophe, the results of which will be not its destruction but
its renovation. The whole world will be consumed by fire,
kindled by Lodur, (der Lodemde, the glowing god), the Loki

1 From tie r6ot as, to be; tie wort
is thus simply another form of Wcsen.

3 The original form of the wore
Asen connects it immediately with
Atman as a name of Brahman, and the
Latin animus, &e.—Btfnsen, God in

‘ For the several changes through
illicit the names Freyr and Freya have
lassed, see Grimm, D. M. 276, &re.

6 Bunsen, God in History, ii. 401.

IDEAS OF THE DIVINE WILL.

.who brought about the death of Baldur. The life or the
reign of the Asas themselves -will come to an end, but a new
earth rising from this second chaos will resemble that of the
golden age in the Hesiodic tradition. Of this Teutonic
theogony we may say without the least misgiving that it
exhibits not the slightest sign of any Christian influence.
It would be almost as reasonable to trace such an influence
in the Hesiodic poems, where, if we could get over the in¬
surmountable difficulties of chronology, such an attempt
might be made with far greater 1 plausibility. Nor can we
charge Bunsen with speaking too strongly, when he says
that we must be brought to this negative conclusion, unless
‘ we are to set above facts a preconceived opinion, taken up
at random on the slightest grounds, or indolently to decline
scrutiny of those facts, or profound reflections on what they
indicate. 51

The idea which the Aryans of India sought to express
under the names Brahman and Atman, the Aryans of Europe
strove to signify by the name Wuotan. That idea centred in
the conception of Will as a power which brought all things
into being and preserves them in it, of a will which followed
man wherever he could go and from which there was no
escape, which was present alike in the heavens above and in
the depths beneath, an energy incessantly operating and
making itself felt in the multiplication as well as in the
sustaining of life. Obviously there was no one thing in the
physical world which more vividly answered to such a con¬
ception than the wind, as the breath of the great Ether, the
moving power which purifies the air. Thus the Hindu
Brahman denoted originally the active and propulsive force
in creation, and this conception was still more strictly set
forth under the name Atman, the breath or spirit which
becomes tbe atmosphere of the Greeks and the athem of
the Germans. Atman is thus the breathing, in other words,
the self-existent being,—the actual self of the universe ; and
the meaning thus assigned to the word was so impressed
upon the minds of the Aryans of India, that no mythology
ever grew up round it. In Professor ^fuller’s words ‘ the

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

HOOK idea of the Atman or self, like a pure crystal, was too feoao-.

■- r —- parent for poetry, and therefore was handed down to phi¬

losophy, which afterwards polished, and turned, and watched
it as the medium through which all is seen and in which all
is reflected and known.’ 1 The conception of the Teutonic
Wuotan was at first not less exalted. Like Brahman and
Atman, it is the moving strength and power of creation, and
the word in Grimm’s belief carries us to the Latin vad-ere,
to go or move, the Bavarian wueteln, to stir or grow. Thus
Grimm remarks that of Wuotan it may be said as Lucan says
of Jupiter—

the pure spiritual deity. The word itself is therefore a par¬
ticiple of the old verb watan, whose cognate forms vata, 6d,
account for the dialectical variations which converted it into
the Saxon Wuodan, Wodan, Woden, Odin, the Frisian Weda,
the Norse OlSinn; and its meaning is in perfect analogy with
that of the Latin Minerva as connected with mens and the
Greek /xhos, spirit or strength. 2 But the ideas thus ex¬
pressed by the name were necessarily lost when the Christian
missionaries taught the people to look on Wuotan or Odin
as the archfiend ruling over troops of malignant demons;
nor is it improbable that the process may have begun at an
earlier period. The name is connected closely with the
German wuth, in which the notion of energy has been ex¬
aggerated into that of impulse uncontrolled by will. Such
a limitation, of meaning was quite in harmony with the ten¬
dency of all the German tribes to identify energy with ve¬
hement strife, and thus Wuotan became essentially the armed
deity, the god of war and of battles, the father of. victory. 3
As such, he looks down on the earth from his heavenly home
through, a window, sitting on his throne with Freya by his
side, as Herd sits by Zeus in Olympos. In the strange
story which is to account for the change which converted
the Winili into the Lombards; 4 this attribute of Wuotan is

1 Chips, 4'C. i. 71. ■ death. With the conversion to Christi-

2 Grimm, Deutsche Mgthdogie. 120. anity these expressions which spoke

3 Sigfadr, Siegfater, Grimm, ih. 122. of men as going home to Odin beeame
Hence the phrases, Zu 6«inn fahren, maledictions, consigning them to per-
OSinusheim suchen, denoted simply, dition.

connected witli tlie rising of the sun, the great eye of day.
As the giver of victory, the greatest of all blessings in Teu¬
tonic eyes, he was necessarily the giver of all other good
things, like the Hermes of the Greeks with whose name his
own is identical in meaning. 1 As such, he is Osci, Oski, the
power of Wish or Will, so often exhibited in the mythology
of northern Europe, the Wunsch to whom the poets of the
thirteenth century 2 assign hands, eyes, knowledge, blood,
with all the appetites and passions of humanity. This power
of Wuotan is seen in the oska-stein, or wishing stone, 3 which
the Irish localise in Blarney and which Grimm connects with
the wishing-rod or staff of Hermes, 4 in the Osluneyjar or
Wishmaidens or Valkyries who guide to Valhalla all heroes
slain in battle, and who are the wish or choice children of
Wuotan, and more especially in the Oska-byrr, or Wish-wind,
in which we recognise both in name and in the thing the
iK/uvos ovpos of our Hiad. s It is this power doubtless which
is denoted by the Sanskrit Kama,, as the force which first
brought the visible Kosmos into being,' 1 and by the Eros
of the Hesiodie theogouy.

> This attribute of Wuotan, which Frog Prince or Fisli Sun) brings up

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

37G

book The single eye of Odin points beyond all doubt to iis
. sun, the one eye which all day long looks down from heaaren
Tii0 one- upon the earth. But when he was figured as an old
ton or 10 man with a broad hood and a wide-flowing robe, the myth
Odin. necessarily sprung up that he had lost an eye, a story which
answers precisely to the myth of Indra Savitar, while it also
throws further light, if any such were needed, on that of the
Ky Hopes. 1 But as the sun is his eye, so his mantle is the
vapour which like the cloud-gathering Zeus Odin wraps
around himself, and thus becomes Hakolberend, the wearer of
the veil, or Harbard, the bearded god. In his hand he bears
the marvellous spear Gungnir, in which we 3ee the lance of
Phoibos or Artemis. By his side are the two wolves Gari
and Freki, with whom he hunts down his victims, wolves like
the Myrmidons whom Achilleus lets loose upon the Trojans,
wolves like those from which Phoibos was supposed to derive
his name Lykeios. On Ms shoulders sit the two ravens,

• Huginn and Muninn, who whisper into his ears all that
they see or hear, as the serpents by their mysterious whisper¬
ings impart more than human wisdom to the infant Iamos. 1
They are the ravens who bring to Apollon the tidings of the
faithlessness of Koronis, as in the shape of a raven Aristeas
tells the Metapontines that he followed Phoibos when he
came to their country. 3

Odin the A- 8 the bearded god, Odin becomes the giver of the rain,
laingivor. the Zeus Ombrios of the Greeks, the Jupiter Pluvius or
flowing Jupiter of the Latins, as well as their Neptunus or

ODIST AND TVB. '§77

cloud-deity. As such, he is Hnikar, the Anglo-Saxon Nicor ciiap.

or water-god, whose offspring are the Nixies or water-sprites, ._^__

as the Hellenic Naiads are the children of Zeus. 1 In this
character he is the Bihlindi, or drinker (the Latin bib-ere)
of the Eddas. Like Phoibos again, or Askldpios, he is the
healer, who alone can restore strength and vigour to the
maimed horses of Baldur; and as the Muses are the daugh¬
ters of Zeus, so is Saga the daughter of Wuotan, the source
of all poetry, the inspirer of all bards. In his hunts he rides
the eight-footed horse Sleipuir, the white stee’d which bears
him also through the thick of battle, like the rudderless and
oarless ships which carry the Phaiakians across the blue
seas of heaven.

Wuotan, the Allfather 2 and the Psyckompompos, who Odin tho
takes all souls to himself when their earthly journey is done, Allfatller -
has become for the nations of northern Europe a mere name;
but the mark of his name he has impressed on many places.

If our Wednesdays remind us of him, he has also left his
relics in Onslew, 3 in the island Odinse, in Odinfors, Oden-
skalla and Wednesbury.

The close connection of the name Tyr with the several Tyr and
forms developed from the root dyu, to shine, would of itself odm '
lead us to expect that the word would remain practically a
mere appellative for gods whose names might again betray a
relation to the same root. Accordingly we meet with Sigtyr,
the victorious god, as a name for Wuotan, and Beidartyr or
Eeidityr, the riding or driving Tyr, as a name for Thor. .

Nor can it be said that any real mythology has gathered
round this word, for the Stauros which is specially connected
with his name belongs rather to the region of symbolism
than of mythology, although the conjunction of this emblem
with the circle (the kestos of Aphroditd and the necklace of
Harmonia and Eripliyle) is in itself a subject of some in¬
terest. Hence we should further be led to expect that the

?,7<C > MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK special emblem under which Tyr would bo worshipped would
v —be the sword : and to this fact Grimm traces the ngmap, no f
only of the Saxons, but of the Cherusci as pointing to the
old Cheru, Heru—a sword.

Section VII.—THUNDER, DONAR, THOR.

Thor the
AUfiilhel

Englishmen lijay not unnaturally be tempted to think
that our word Thunder is the older and more genuine form
of the name given to the god 'who wields the lightnings, and
that this name was chosen to express the loud crash which
echoes across the heaven. Yet the word in its first meaning
has no reference to noise and din. The root denotes simply
extension as applied whether to sound or to any other ob¬
jects, and from it we have the Greek and Latin words t eivto
and tendo, to stretch, tovos, tone, i.e. the stretching and
vibration of chords, tonitru, thunder, as well as tener and
tenuis, the Sanskrit tanu, answering to our tender and thin.
Hence the dental letter which has led to the popular miscon¬
ception of the word is found to be no essential part of it;
and the same process which presents the English tender and
the French iendre as an equivalent for the Latin tener, has
with us substituted thunder for the Latin tonitru Thus the
several forms Donar, Thunor, and perhaps Thor are really
earlier than the shape which the word has assumed in our
English dialect.

As the lord of the lightning, the thunder, and the rain,
Donar is as closely allied, and, indeed, as easily identified
with Wuotan, as Vishnu with Indra, or Indra with Agni.
But although 1 , most of their characteristics are as inter¬
changeable as those of the Vedic gods generally, each has
some features peculiar to himself. Thus, although Thor is
sometimes said to move in a ohariot like other deities, yet
he is never represented as riding like Odin. He is essen¬
tially, like Vishnu, the walking or striding god, who moves
amidst the lightnings like He?j>haistos in his workshop of

ThTSionfbrtwi*t7K"rt/i,'twl ia^M^tat'beries, 350.

thunder -would bo hard to be established,

tub tiiundeh-god.

379

subterraneous fires. But in his power of penetrating an<l chap
piercing the heavens or the earth, and in his ceaseless and J -
irresistible energy, he is simply Wuotan in another form, and '
the conception of the deity has varied hut little among the
Aryan nations. The name itself is found in the name of the
Gallic thunder-god Tavanis, preserved to us by Lucan, and
more nearly in its other -form Tanarus, while the idea is
expressed in the Jupiter Tonans of the Latins, and the Zeus
Kerauneios of the Greeks, . He is, in short, the great lord of
heaven in his most awful manifestation, hut he is; neverthe¬
less, the maker and the father of mankind. Hence, like
Odin, he is the Allfather, a title. which Procopius tells us
that the Slavonic nations gave only to the creator of the
lightnings. 1 The deity thus worshipped was named Perkunas
or Pehrkons by the Lithuanian tribes,, and by the Slaves
Perun, Piorun, and Peraun, a form which Grimm is in¬
clined to connect with the Greek icepawos 2 and more con¬
fidently with the Sanskrit Parjanya, a name of Indra as the
bringer of the fertilising rain. 3 If, again, Sophokles speaks
of Gd or Gaia as the mother of Zeus. 11 so is the earth the
parent of Donar; and as Zeus and ’Wuotq.n are severally
enthroned on Olympos and Wuotansberg, so has Thor or
Donar his Donersperch, Tb.unresberg or Donnersberg, and
Donnerskaute, while the oak, the special tree of the Thun¬
dering Jupiter of the Latins, is not less sacred to the
Teutonic deity. Like Dyaus or Jupiter, Thor is bearded,
but his beard is fiery red, like the lightnings which flash
across the heaven. 3

But his appearance varied with liis functions, which were His triple
concerned with three things—the lightning flash, the tlmn-
derclap, and the thunderbolt. As using the first, he always

■ Grimm, 1). M. 15G.

2 By a change analogous to
which makes the Latin syquoi

is with the Greek Qipxw,
ems scarcely less obvious, and
ellenic deity has as much to do '
iter as tho Vrdic Parianya. TJio n
' the god Pikollos, who is assorii

with Peril
hat form in E
and Deutsch o
and =Pnci;Ie

ku- Pickled ”

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

walks or strides ; as producing the thunderpeal, he is borne
along in his chariot; as wielding the bolts, he is,.like
Wuotan, the armed god who hurls his irresistible weapons.
These are sometimes called his spears and arrows; bnt more
especially the thunderbolt is his hammer, the mighty club
which, when hurled from his hand, comes back to him again
after doing its deadly errand. As wielding this weapon, he
is Miolnir or Tydeus, the pounder and crusher, the father of
the Aloadai and the Molionids : but the word hamar meant
not only a mallet, but a rock, and thus carries us to the
weapons employed by the giants and the Titans. 1 When
this hammer is stolen, Loki, in the Lay of Thrym, asks
I’reyja if she will lend him her feather-garment, that he may
go and find it. With this dress Loki, as the god of light,
flies to the abode of Thrym the giant, who has hidden the
weapon in the depths of the earth, and will not give it up
unless, like Hades, he has the maiden as his wife. When
Loki returns to Asgard with this message, Freyja refuses to

g°-

Of .iEsir brightest, '
Like other Vanir,

He is now Dionysos, Achilleus, or Theseus in their woman¬
ly forms; and like Theseus, he speedily avenges himself on
those who take liberties with him. Having come to Jotun-
heim, he astonishes Thrym by devouring an ox and eight
salmons, but the serving-maid lulls his fears.

Then said Thrym, The Tlrarsar's lord,

1 See note 6, p. 265. This hammer is
said to have been stolen by a giant who
hid it eight miles beneath the surface of
the earth. In as many years it ascended
into heaven again, accomplishing one
mile in each year ; and thus-it was re¬
stored to Thor by Thrym, which however
is only another name for thunder, and
answers to Thrumketffi, the proper
name, as ThorketyU, Thurketil, answers
to Thor. It is scarcely necessary to say

that the thunder god has given his name
to a vast iiumber of places, the forms
Doimersberg, Thorrsberg, and Torslunde

tohicli they i

may be classed. OurThurs-
abbreviation of Thunresdag;

mar, and Thor. A long list
nes is given by Grimm, B. M.

381

FRO AND FREYA.

Section Yin.— FRO.

In the oldest Teutonic mythology we find a" god Fro or Relations
Friuja, which is worshipped as the lord of all created things, jvq™ to
. If we may judge from the name, the conception of this deity
was probably far above the ideas formed of any of the Yedic
or Olympian gods. If the word is connected with the
modern German froh, it expresses an idea which is the very
opposite of the Hebrew tendency to worship mere strength
and power. For Fro is no harsh taskmaster, but the
merciful and eternal god. He is, in short, the beneficence
and long-suffering of nature. Fro is thus the power which
imparts to human life all its strength and sweetness, and
which consecrates all righteous efforts and sanctions all
righteous motives. FTor can we doubt that Freya stands to
Fro in precisely the relation of Liber and Libera in the'
cultus of Ceres, the connection between these deities being
precisely that of Fro and Freya with the goddess whom Tacitus
call Nerthus, the Teutonic Mordr. In this aspect Freya is
the bringer of rain and sunshine for the fruits of the earth,
while the worship of Fro runs parallel with that of Priapos.

To this deity belongs the wonderful ship Skidbladnir, which
can be folded up like a cloth,—in fact, a vessel much like
the magic barks of the Phaiakians. But though this ship
could carry all the Asas, yet these beings do not belong to
their exalted race. They are Vanir, whose abode is in
Yanaheim, as the Alfar or Elves live in Alfheim or Elfiand
and the Jotnar in Jotunheim.

Section IX.—HEIMDALL, BRAGI, and 0EG1R.

The Hellenic Iris is represented by Heinula.ll in the my- The I.or.1
thology of northern Europe. This deity, who like Boldur
> Uy of TUym, 10, 17, 31, 32. Thorp* Tranrfnli™ of Kdilv.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

is a white or light-giving god, is the guardian of the bridge
which joins heaven and earth (bif-rost, the waving resting*'
place), 1 and his abode is in Himinbiorg, the hill of heaven,
the Latin Mons Coclius, the first syllable of his name being,
like himin, only another form of himmel. In other respects
he resembles Argos Panoptes. Like him, he needs less sleep
than a bird ; by night as by day he can see a hundred miles,
and so keen are his senses that he can hear the com grow¬
ing on the earth and the wool lengthening on the sheep’s
back. 2 As the watcher and warder of the gods, he carries
a horn, the point of which sticks in Niflheim at the root of
Yggdrasil; and it was easy to add that he rode a horse with
a golden mane and that his own teeth were of gold. He
speaks of himself as the son of nine mothers, a phrase which
in Bunsen’s opinion has nothing to do with the watches of
the night, and must be referred to the nine mythological
worlds of the Voluspa Saga, of which Niflheim is the ninth
and the lowest; and thus the myth would mean that ‘ the
sun-light is the common divine child of all these worlds.’ 3

Another god of the gleaming heaven is Bragi, the brilliant,
while, like Donar or Baldur, he is a son of Odin. As the
god of poetry and eloquence, he is the guardian and patron
of bards and orators, and his name, like that of Vach or
Saga, passes from the signification of light to that of fluent
and honied speech. Thus bragr Karla was simply an
eloquent man, and a further step degraded the name of dm
bragr, the chief among the gods, and left it as an epithet of
vain boasters.

The name of the god Oegir, with whom Bragi is some¬
times associated in the Jidda, has shared a similar fate.
Used first as a name for the sea, it has come to denote the
Ogres with which nurses frighten children. If, as Grimm
supposes, the word belongs to the same root with the

> Bebende Bistatte, Bunsen, God »i hear everything, even to the growing of

OEGIR.

•3S3

Gothic agas and 6g, the Anglo-Saxon ege, egesa, Old High CHAP.

■ German aid, eki, fear, dread, horror, the later meaning is J '
quite in accordance with its original form. But however
this may be, the word Oegir as a name for the sea carries
ns to the Greek stream which surrounds the earth. The
phrase S61 gengr i oeginn simply spoke of the sun going
down into the sea, as Helios sinks into the ocean. The
other forms Ogen, Ogyges, approach still more closely to the
Teutonic Oegir. We find the idea of fear as attached to the
name more fully developed when we come to the Oegishialmr,
or helmet of dread, which the dragon Fafnir wears as he lies
on the golden treasures, to strike terror into those who
may dare to gaze on him, and again in the Eckesax or
Hokesahs, the fearful sword tempered by the dwarfs in the
Yilkina Saga,—weapons which, although there may be no-
affinity between the names, must remind us of the Aigis of
Athene and the helmet of Hades. Oegir’s wife Han is the
mother of nine children, who become the eponymoi of foun¬
tains and streams.

384-

mythology OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

CHAPTER II.

THE LIGHT.

Section I.—SUKYA and SAVITRI.

BOOK Neither Dyaus nor Varuna, Indra nor Agni, occupies that

--^—- precise place which is filled by Helios in Greek mythology

Suryii, the a s the dweller in the globe of the sun, or by Nereus as the
Irresistible actual inhabitant of the sea. This place in the Veda is
luminary', reserved for Surya or Savitri, the former name being ety¬
mologically identical with that of Helios or Here. Like
Helios and Heinidall, Surya sees all things and hears all
things, noting the good and evil deeds of men. Like Indra
and Agni, he is sometimes independent, sometimes the ser¬
vant of others; but he is never, like Dyaus, without a
parent. His light is his own, and yet it has been given to
him by Indra or by Soma, who is often spoken of as his
father. He is the husband of the Dawn, but the Dawn is
also his mother, as Iokaste is both mother and wife of
Oidipous. In all such phrases it was impossible to lose
sight of his real character. He is the most active of all
the active gods, he is the third in the earlier trimurtti in
which he is associated with Agni and Vayu, he has measured
the worlds with their undecaying supports, he is- the divine
leader of all the gods ; but as such, he is still ‘ the pervading
irresistible luminary.’ 1 His chariot is drawn by seven
mares, and he ‘ comes with them self-hamessed.’ Like
Ixion, Tantalos, and Sisyphos, he is the ‘lord of all trea¬
sures.’ 2 He is the eye of Mitra., Varuna and Agni. 3 Some¬
times again he is * without steeds, without stay, borne

1 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, part iv. p. 9fl. 3 R. H. IVilson, E. V. i. 189.

B. Y. viii. 90, 12. 3 H>. i. 304.

ONE-HANDED GODS.

swift-moving and loud-sounding, he travels ascending higher chad.

' and higher, 1 and when his daily course is run, he sinks, like n -
Endymion or Kephalos, into the waters.

‘ I have heheld the permanent orb of the sun, your dwell¬
ing-place, concealed by water where (the hymns of the pious)
liberate his steeds.’ 2

Savitar, the inspirer, from the root sw, to drive or stimu- The oue-
late, is especially the glistening or golden god: he is golden-
eyed, golden-tongued, and golden-handed; and in the later < "‘ U ' r '
Bralimanic mythology such epithets might furnish a ground¬
work for strange and uncouth fancies. Thus the story,

(which probably started as' the myth of Midas and ended
with the ass which poured out gold from its mouth on hear¬
ing the word Bricklebrit) went that once when’ Savitar cut
off his hand at a sacrifice, the priests gave him instead a
hand of gold; and in the same spirit the commentators in¬
terpreted the epithet as denoting not the splendour of the
sun but the gold which he carried in his hand to lavish on
his worshippers. 3 The Teutonic god Tyr is also said to have
lost one hand; but the German story ran that Tyr placed
his hand as a pledge in the month of the wolf and that the
wolf bit it off. 4 In the latter tale we have an instance of
that confusion of homonyms which converted Lykd&n into a
wolf, Kallisto into a bear, and the Seven Arkshas into seven
sages.

The power and strength of Savitar are naturally repre- The pon-cr
sented as irresistible. Hot even Indra, or Vai-una, or any of f
other being can resist his will; and the verse which is re¬
garded as the holiest in the Yeda is addressed to Savitar. 5
He is- a Tithdnos who waxes not old.

MYTHOLOGY OF TOE ARYAN NATIONS.

' Skining forth, he rises from the lap of the Dawn, praised
by singers; he, my god Savitar, stepped forth, who never
misses the same place.

‘ He steps forth, the splendour of the sky, the wide-seeing,
the far-shining, the shining wanderer; surely, enlivened by
the sun, do men go to their tasks and do their work.’ 1

‘ May the golden-eyed Savitri come hither.

‘ May the golden-handed, life-bestowing, well-guarding,
exhilarating, and affluent Savitri be present at the sacrifice.’

These, phrases which seem to have no reference to the
later myth, carry us to the myth .of the one-eyed Odin,
who like Savitar, is also Wegtam, or the wanderer, the broad
heaven looking down on the earth with its one gleaming
eye, the sun. 2 Like Indra, Varuna, and Vishnu, he is
Skambha, the supporter.

‘ Savitri has established the earth by supports; Savitri has
fixed the sky in unsupported space; 3 he has milked the
atmosphere, restless (or noisy) as a horse; Savitri, the son
of the waters, knows the place where the ocean, supported,
issued forth.’ 4

Section II.—SOMA.

The ninth book of the Rig Veda consists wholly of hymns
written in praise of Soma, who is lauded as the source of life
and vigour, of mental power and bodily strength both to
gods and men, the generator or parent of Agni, Surya,
Indra, and Vishnu. ' Of the phrases employed in describing

2 H. H. Wilson, It. V. Sankita, i. 99.

" Dr. Muir points out the inconsis¬
tency of this phraso with the later my¬
thology, which spoko of the earth as
resting on the head of the serpent
S’osha, or on other supports, and re¬
marks that the Siddhanlas, or scientific

that the earth is unsupported. In these
it is said plainly that,, * if the earth were
supported by any material substance or
mature, then that would require
upporter, and for that second
muld bo .required. Here we

day and night is produced by the rota¬
tion of the earth on its own axis. Sans¬
krit Texts, part iv. p. 97. It is remark¬
able that the Copernican system should
thus hare been anticipated in the East,
as by Aristarchos of Samos in the West,
without making any impression on the
thought of the age.

* B. V. x. 149, 1. Muir, Sanskrit
Texts, part iv. p. 97.

THE VIVIFYING SOMA.

887

the nature and functions of Soma, many relate exclusively to CHAP,
the juice of the Soma plant, and to the process by which 1L '
that juice is converted into an intoxicating drink. These
phrases are often curiously blended with expressions which
speak of a god exalted higher even than Varuna or Indra,
while others show clearly that, like almost all other names
of Hindu mythology. Soma was a word which might he
applied alike to the gladdening power of wine and to the
life-giving force from which the sky and sun derive their
strength and brilliance. In the latter sense. Soma imparts
to Indra the power which enables him to overcome Vritra,
and, like Indra, is the conqueror of demons and the de¬
stroyer of cities. All things are in his hand, for Soma rules
over gods and men, and, like the other deities known as
Skambha, supports the heaven and earth in his hands. In
short, there are no powers attributed to Yaruna, Indra, or
Yislinu, which are not, if it be possible, exceeded by those
which are inherent in Soma. Yet Soma is also the drink of
the gods, the Olympian nectar, the beverage which gives im¬
mortality. Soma is Indu, the sap which flows for Indra.—
the stream which is purity itself, and the cleanser of all de¬
filement. In the symbolical interpretations of later times
Soma is a mere name, which may denote physical, moral, or
spiritual life, a name strictly of the one everlasting God.

‘ Soma purifies, [he who. is] the generator of hymns, the
generator of the sky, the generator of the earth, the generator
of Agni, the generator of Surya, the generator of Indra, and
the generator of Vishnu.’ 1

Soma is the Beatific .Vision to which the pilgrims of this
earth aspire.

‘ Where there is eternal light, in the world where the sun

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

is placed, in that immortal imperishable world place me, O
Soma. .....

‘Where life is free, in the third heaven of heavens, where
the worlds are radiant, there make me immortal. . . .

‘.Where there is happiness and delight, where joy and
pleasure reside, where the desires of our desire are attained,
there make me immortal.’. 1

In some hymns of the Big Yeda, all creatures are said to
spring from the divine seed of Soma. All things are under
his control, and he is, like Varuna and other deities, the
divine sustainer (Skambha) of the world. He is an omni¬
scient ocean, and his are the stars and the sun. He too,
like Indra, is the slayer of Vritra.

‘ This divine Soma, with Indra for its ally, crushed, as
soon as generated, Ifeni by force : thou, Soma, didst baffle
the devices and weapons of the malignant secreter of the
(stolen) wealth (the cattle).’ 2

But at once the poet recurs to metaphors suggested by the
process of preparing the Soma juice.

‘ In the filter, which ^s the support of the world, thou,
pure Soma, art purified for the gods. The Usijas first
gathered thee. In thee all these worlds are contained.’ 3

‘ The Soma flowed into the vessel for Indra, for Vishnu;
may it be honied for Vayu.’ 4

‘ Pouring forth streams, the Soma hastens to Indra, Vayu,
Varuna, the Maruts, and to Vishnu.’ s

‘ Indu, do thou flow sweet to Indra, to Vishnu. Preserve
from sin the men who praise thee.’ 6

‘Soma, Indu, purified, thou exhilaratest Varuna, thou
exhilaratest Mitra,.thou exhilaratest Indra, thou exhilaratest
Vishnu,' thou exhilaratest the troop of the Maruts, thou
exhilaratest. the gods and the great Indra that they may be
merry.’ 7

When in the later mythology, Mahadeva had thrown the

s S. V. ix. 65, 20; Muir,
Texts, part. iv. p. 80.

* E V. ix. 56, 4; Muir,
Texts, part iv. p. 80. .

7 li. V. ix. 90, 5; Muir,
Texts, part iv. p. 80.

IDEAS OF DUALISM.

•»«,. Ullli

older deities into the shade; Vishnu, Sonia, and Agni became chap.
■ different parts of his bow and arrow‘ for all the' world,’ we . IL
are told, ‘ is formed' of Agni and Soma, and is said to be
composed of Vishnu, and Vishnu is the soul of Mahadeva of
boundless power.’ 1 So with Uma, as divine knowledge,

Soma; as the supreme spirit, falls into the ranks of correla¬
tive deities. 3

With the change which came over later Hindu thought Pot™-?
the popularity of Soma passed away; but the hymns of the Somi -
Rig Veda suffice to show how great a charm the Soma drink
had possessed for the- people. It was to them life in health,
strength in weakness, medicine in sickness, the restoration
of youth in old age; and the vigour which it imparted to
human beings was imparted with unstinting lavishness to
the gods. The exultation of Indra is the exultation of
Polypliemds when he has drunk the wine given to him by
Odj'sseus.

Section III.—CORRELATIVE DEITIES.

A very slight acquaintance with the language of the Vedic Complc-
kymns will suffice to show that the idea of any one deity Jjdfies.'
rarely failed to suggest to the mind of the worshipper the
idea of another god, whose attributes answered to, or were
contrasted with, his own. The thought of Dyaus, the sky,
was bound up with that of Prithivi, the earth, who was his
bride; and their very names, blended into one word Dyava-
prithivi, denoted their inseparable union. The idea of Va-
runa, the veiling heaven, brought up that of Mitra, the light-
illumined sky.

The connection was forced upon them by the phenomena The dmil-
of the outward world. We cannot sever in our minds the
thought of day from that of night, of morning from evening,

1 Muir. Sami' j
p. 189. Uma is a!

respecting Ur
et seg. Of gei
of Uma, if i

dirine knowledge; thou who existcsl
with her, 0 Soma, supremo spirit,. &.<■.’
Hence her alti-ibnrcs nro plastic, enough,
and thus she becomes identified. with
Ambika, the sister of Rudra, a being
not much more clearly dolined than
Uma herself.

- Max Miiller, Lectures on Language,

MYTHOLOGY OF THE AllYAN NATIONS.

of light from darkness; and ‘ tliis palpable dualism of nature ”
lias loft its most marked impression on the mythology of the •
Veda. The dawn and the gloaming, the summer and the
winter may, it is obvious, be described as twins or as sisters,
standing side by side or dwelling in tlie same house. Thus,
not only are Dyava-prithivi, heaven and earth, described as
twins, but Indra and Agni are spoken of in the dual as the
two Indras, Indragni, not only nshasanakta, the dawn and
the night, but ushasnu, the two dawns, 2 and the two
Varunn,s. Like Indragni again, the twin Asvins, or horse¬
men, are called Vritrahana, destroyers of Vritra.

These Asvins have been made the subject of a somewhat
lengthened controversy. Their features are not very definite,
but in tbe oldest bymns they are worshipped with a peculiar
reverence, as able not merely to heal sicknesses but to restore
the aged to youth. Their relations to each other and to
their worshippers are placed in a clearer light by a reference
to Greek mythical phraseology. Speaking of these beings,
the commentator Yaska says that their sphere is the heaven,
and remarks that some regard them as heaven and earth, as
day and night, or as son and moon, while they who antici¬
pated the method of Euemeros affirmed that they were two
deified kings. But when he adds that their time is after
midnight, whilst the break of day is yet delayed, all room for
doubt seems taken away. The two Allans, or Dawns, Day
and Night, are born, it is said, wben the Asvins yoke their
horses to their car. The twins are born ‘ when the Night
leaves her sister, the Dawn, when the dark one gives way
to the bright.’ After them comes Ushas, the Greek Eos,
who is followed first by Surya, a feminine, or sister of Surya,
the sun, then by Vrisbalrapayi, then by Saranyu, 3 and lastly
by Savitar. They are ihehujdte, born here and there, either
as appearing in the East and in the West, or as springing
up on the earth and in the air; and this epithet may explain
the alternate manifestations of the Dioskouroi, who stand to
Helen in the same delation whiclj the Asvins bear to Sarama
or Ushas.

‘ Max Muller, Lectures on Language, second series, 486.

2 Lb. 487, 496. * 10. 492.

THE TWIN DEITIES.

■ 391

. The Asvins are thus the conquerors of darkness, the lords CHAP,
of light: ever youthful, swift as thought, and possessed, like ■ I1, -

. Indra, Agni, and Phoibos, of a profound wisdom. If the Parentage
poet needs to give them a father, he must assign them a Asvins.
parent in the clear heaven, or say that they are the children
of Prajapati, Tvashtar, or Savitar, names for the Creator.

Their mother must be the Bast or West, from which they
spring, regarded not as a place, but as the being who
imparts to them their mysterious life. 1 As ushering in the
healthful light of the sun,' they are, like Asklepios and his
children, healers and physicians, and their power of restoring
the aged to youth reappears in Medeia, the daughter of the
Sun. They are adored at morning and evening tide as
Budrau, the terrible lords of wealth, a,nd are thus identified
or connected with another deity who became of supreme
importance in the later Hindu mythology. 2 Like the Kou-
r&tes and TelcMnes, like Proteus, Thetis, and the other fish-
gods, they have the power of changing them shape at will.

‘ The twin pair adopt various forms; one of them shines
brightly, the other is black; twin sisters are they, the one
black, the other white,’ 3 —phrases which bring before us the
rivalry not only of the Dioskouroi, but of the Theban Eteokles
and Polyneikes, and perhaps the black and white eagles in
the Agamemnon of JSschylos. 4 Like Phoibos the healer,
and like Asklepios and his sons Podaleirios and Machabn,
the Asvins are ‘ physicians conversant with all medicaments. ,s
In the Norse tale of Dapplegrim we have the Asvins in their
original form as horses; for when the lad, who, having won
on his wonderful steed the victories of Indra, Herakles, and
Bellerophon, is told that he must produce its match or die,
complains to the' horse that the task is not easy, ‘ for your
match is not to be found in the wide world,’ the steed replies
that he has a match, although it is hard to get at him, for
he abides in Hell.

In Indra and in Agni, Mitra and Vanina, and in' the ThcTwii.s.
Asvins we have three sets* of twins, Yaman, Gemini, each

1 Mai Muller, Lectures on Language, 3 H. ILWilson, It. V, S. iii. 97.

6e »°Muir, Sanskrit Texts, part. iv. eh. 3, 1 lb. 101,

sect. 1, p. 265.

392

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NAtlONS. V

BOOK being spoken of as Yama or Yami, tbe twin brother or the

-^-• twin sister. These Yaman are the children of Vivasvat, who is '

wedded both to the morning and to the evening; and their
sister, the night, prays her brother to become her husband.
In this Yama we have probably the Hindu god of the dead,
whose two dogs with four eyes and wide nostrils go about
among men as his messengers. As both are children of Vi¬
vasvat, Professor Max Muller thinks it unnecessary to assume
that two Yivasvats were each the father of Yama. The twin
who represented the evening would naturally become the lord
or .judge or guide of the departed. As from the East came all
life, so in the West lay the land of the dead, the Elysian
fields, the region of Sutala; and thither the sun hastens as
he sinks down from the heights of heaven. Thus ‘ Yama is
said to have crossed the rapid waters, to have shown the way
to many, to have first known the path on which our fathers
crossed over; 1 and the gulf is not wide which separates the
functions of the Psychopompos from those of Hades. Like
Varuna, Yama has his nooses, and he sends a bird as a token
to those who are about to die. But although a darker side
is not wanting to his character, Yama remains in the Veda
chiefly the god of the blessed in the paradise where he dwells
with Varuna. This Yama reappears in the Yima of the
Avesta, his father Vivasvat being reproduced as Vivanghvat;*

- and in Yima we have an embodiment of the Hesiodic golden
age free from heat and cold, from sickness and death, an
image of the happy region to which Krishna Consigns his
conquered enemy. In a grotesque myth of the later Yamen,
the death of men in youth as well as in old age is accounted
for by a mistake made by the herald of Yamen after the
latter had been restored to life by Siva who had put him to
death. While Yamen lay dead, mankind multiplied so that
the earth could scarcely contain them. Yamen on returning
to life sent his herald to summon at once all the old men, for
none others had ever been called away before. The herald,
getting drunk, proclaimed instead that henceforth all leaves,

1 Max Mijiler, Lectures, second series, 515 ; Muir, Principal Deities of R. V. 575.

1 Max Muller, Lectures, second series, 522.

EROS AXD ANTEHOS.

• 393

fruits, and flowers, should fall to the ground, and thus men of CITAP.
all ages began to yield to the power of death. . Ir -

The connection of Soma with Uma has been already Sonmand
noticed. Another couplet of deities is found in Soma and R,l, ' y “'
Surya, the daughter of Surya the Sun; and here the twin
Asvins stand by the side of Soma as the friends of the .bride¬
groom. A later version, which says that, although Savitar
had destined his daughter Suryi to be the wife of Soma, she
was nevertheless won by the Asvins,' repeats the story of
Pelops and Hippodameia, which represents the- maiden as
becoming the prize of the hero who can overtake her in a
foot race. So again, Arjuna, the Argennos of the -myth of
Agamemnon, stands to Krishna, who is represented as de-
• daring him to be his own half, in that dual relation which
links Phaethon with Helios, Patroklos with Achilleus, Theseus.
with Peirithoos, Telemachos with Odysseus, and which is
seen again in the stories of Pelias and Neleus, Romulus and
Remus, Prometheus and Epimetheus, Hengest ■ and Horsa,
and in the Teutonic tales of the Two Brothers and of the
Faithful John who guards his prince as carefully as the Lux-
man of Hindu' folk-lore guards Rama. This dualism we find
again in the Hellenic Eros and Anteros, and still more plainly
in the myth of Hermaphrodites:® The tale which describes
Arjuna. as receiving from Mahadeva the Pasupata (or sceptre
which guides the cows) under a strict charge not to use it
rashly as it might destroy the whole world, 3 carries us to the
ill-omened gifts which brought destruction to Phaethon and
Patroklos. In the same way Rama is linked with his brother
Laxmana, and one myth which regards Rama as a mortal
hero speaks of both as wounded and rendered senseless by
a cloud of serpents transformed into arrows. 4

394 '

MYTHOLOGY

ARYAN NATIONS.

Section IV.—THE DAWN.

book T° the poets of all a ges' and countries the phenomena, of
D- morning and evening are full of pathos and sadness. The
The lonely c °wse of the day itself is but brief, and the Career of the
wanderer, bright being who bears it across the heaven may be little
more than a series of struggles -with the vapours which strive
to dim his splendours. All his life long he must toil for the
benefit of the mean thing called man, and look -on clear
streams and luscious fruits without daring to quench his
thirst or appease his hunger. He may be armed with in¬
vincible weapons; he may be the conqueror of all his
enemies: but the doom is upon him; he must die in the
flower of his age. Still there is for him a grief yet more
bitter than this. Throughout almost the whole of his long
journey he must go alone. ' The beautiful being who cheered
him when his heart beat high and his limbs were fresh was
parted from him almost as soon as he had found her, and
there remains of her grace and loveliness only a consoling
memory. He has hard toils before him, and there are
■ grievous perils to be encountered. Still for him, as for the
sons of men,

’Tis better to have loved and lost,

Than never to have loved at all.

But although he cannot go back to the bright land where he
saw his early love, she may yet be restored to him when the
hour of his death has come. The sight of that beautiful
form, the tender glance of that loving countenance, will be
more than a compensation for his long toil and his early
death. He will die looking on her face. But in the mean¬
while his heart is filled with an irrepressible yearning. He
must hasten on until his eye has seen its desire, even though
the shadow of death must immediately fall upon him. He
may have been early severed from her; but she is his bride,
pure and incorruptible, though'the mightiest of the land
seek to taint her faith and lead her aside into a new love.
Her dwelling is his home, and to it he must hasten across the
blue seas of heaven,'although monsters may seek to scare him.

DISGUISED HEROES.

a-nd beautiful beings may beseech him to tarry a^vbile with chap.

them in their luxurious chambers. ,_-

Under this thin disguise we see at once the story of Dm-lopc-
Odysseus and Penelope; but this is, after all, one' only of ™ cl,t
almost a thousand forms which the legends of Phoibos and
Dionysos, of Perseus and Bellerophontes, may assume. The
doom of the Dawn is as woeful as that of the Sun who has
loved her. The glance of both is fatal. The Sun looks upon
the tender dew, and under his rays the sparkling drops vanish
away. The evening turns to gaze upon the setting sun, and
the being on whom' ber life depends is snatched from her
sight. They can remain together only on the condition that
the one shall not see the form and face of the other; and so
when, after the rising of the sun, the violet hues of morning
faded from the sky, the phrase would run that Indra, or
Pboibos, or Orpheus had fixed their eyes on L. aaud, or
Daphne, or Eurydike, and their love had passed away from
them like the fleeting colours of a dream. But the myth
itself might be developed in many ways. The disappearance
or death of Daphnd, or Prokris, or Arethousa would mark
the moment of the great catastrophe; but the disaster was
only the interruption of a union which had been continued
during the long hours of the night, and at once we have in
* this fact the suggestion of disguise. If the being whose
glance scorched even tbe object of his love could keep her
near him without doing her hurt, this could only be because
he had shrouded his splendour in darkness, or because he
had assumed some other form. Either he might hide his
limbs behind the skin of a lion, as in Greek stories, or of a
fox or a jackal in Hindu folk-lore, or he might himself assume
their form. Such an idea would prompt the tale that the
beautiful Dawn had been given by her father in marriage to
a hideous monster; or that she, the youngest and loveliest of
his daughters, had been frightened by her gloomy sisters, the
earlier hours of the night, into the belief tliat she was
wedded to a loathsome being. The natural growth of the '
story would frame the more minute details, that before this
■terrible union the mother of the Dawn was dead ; that the
beautiful maiden was sacrificed by a new bride, who took
part with her elder sisters; and that,' as she sought to verify

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

tlioir words, she discovered the beauty and majesty of her
husband only to see it vanish from her sight. Then over the
heart of the forsaken Dawn would come that irrepressible
yearning which filled the soul of Odysseus. For her life
would now have nothing worth living for but the hope that
one day she should be reunited to him whom she had lost;
and until she should so recover him, she could know no rest
or peace. She must follow him through all lands, she must
seek him a,t all 6osts and at every sacrifice. To the utter¬
most bounds of the earth, and far beyond the clouds which
veil the distant mountains, beyond the mists which brood on
the restless sea, she must journey on, buoyed up by the ever
undying longing to see his face once more. There are fearful
da ngers to be encountered and overcome. She is surrounded
by awful shapes, who blot out all brightness from the sky;
but the powers of light are on her side. The beautiful clouds
which sail on the pure ether will bear her up above the
murky vapours, and carry her, as on swan’s wings, across the
mysterious vaults of heaven. Her heart is full of sadness ;
but the tenderness of her beauty is not lessened, and as she
moves on her weary way, helpless creatures feel her kindness,
and declare that their gratitude shall not end in words. She
may be doomed to scale a mountain of ice, or remove heaps
of enormous stones ; but the winds are content to be her
ministers, and their warm breath melts the ice, and drives
away the massy storm-clouds. Still the malignant influence
of one powerful enemy rests upon her, the influence of that
witching sorceress who seeks to win for herself the love
which Odysseus bears to Penelope. But the tasks imposed
upon her by her unpitying rival are at last accomplished;
and as the clouds break away from the heaven, the Dawn,
or the E6s, who closes the day in our Homeric poems, sees
before her the form of him whom she has sought with un¬
daunted and untiring devotion.

In these simple phrases relating to a drama acted before
us every day, we have the framework of a vast number of
stories, some of which have furnished subjects for epic
poems, while others have assumed strange and grotesque
forms in the homely lore of popular tradition. One of the

URVASi A

PURURAVAS.

simplest versions of the myth is found in the story of Urvasi, 1 CHAP
although even here the artificial influence of a growing cere- n '
monial system is manifest. The personification of Urvasi
herself is as thin as that of Eos or SelSnA Her name is
often found in the Veda as a mere name for the morning,
and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns
which passing over men bring them to old age and death.

Urvasi is the bi-ight flush of light overspreading the heaven
before the sun rises, and is but another form of the many
mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names take us
back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the
Yedic hymns is called UruM, the far-going (Telephassa,
Telephos), so is she also Uruasi, the wide-existing or wide-
spreading ; as are Europe, Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and
many more of the sisters of Athene and Aphrodite. As such
she is the mother of Yasishtlia, the bright being, as Oidipous
is the son of Iokast<3; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous,
has become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of
Mitra and Yanina, of night and day. Her lover, Pururavas,
is the counterpart of the Hellenic Polydeukes; 2 but the
continuance of her union with him depends on the condition
that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas,
impatient of her long sojourn among mortal men, resolved to
bring her back to their bright home; and Pururavas is thus
led unwittingly to disregard her warning. A ewe with two
lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas stole one
of them. ‘ Urvasi said, “ They take away my darling, as if'

I lived in a land where there is no hero and no man.” They
stole the second, and she upbraided her husband again.

Then Pururavas looked and said, “ How can that be a land
without heroes or men where I am ? ” And naked he sprang
up; he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then
the Gandharvas sent a flash of lightning, and Urvasi saw
her husband naked as hv daylight. Theu she vanished.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

“ I come back,” she said, and went. Then he bewailed hist
- vanished love in bitter grief.’ Her promise to return was
fulfilled, but for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and
Pururavas in vain beseeches her to tarry longer.’ ‘"What
shall I do with thy speech ? ’ is the answer of Urvasl. ‘ I
am gone like the first of the dawns. Pururavas, go home
again. I am hard to be caught like the winds.’ Her lover
is in utter despair; but when he lies down to die, the heart
of Urvasl was melted, and she bids him come to her on the
last night of the year. For that night only he might be
with her; but a son should be born to him. 1 On that day
he went up to the golden seats, and there Urvasl told him
that the Gandharvas would grant him one wish, and that
he must make his choice. ‘ Choose thou for me,’ he said ;
and she answered, ‘ Say to them, Let me be one of you.’ So
the Gandharvas initiated Pururavas into their mysteries, and
he became one of the Gandharvas.

In the story thus related in the Brahmana of the Yagur-
Veda we have a maiden wedded to a being on whose form
her eyes may not rest, although she dwells in his house;
and the terms of the compact are broken practically by
herself, for although it is Pururavas who springs up, still it is
Urvasl who provokes him to do so. Finally, she is impelled
so to tempt him by beings who wish to obtain her treasures;
and thus the element of jealousy enters into the legend.
These leading ideas, of a broken pledge or violated secret,
of beings jealous of her purity and happiness, and of imme¬
diate separation to be followed by reunion in the end, furnish
the groundwork of a large group of stories belonging chief!y
to the common lore of the people. They resolve themselves
into the yet more simple notion of brief union broken by an

1 Tliis child may be the first sun of * Go and be happy with the prince, my

love I gladly left the
monarch tfras declared K

His father for my loss, he is restored.

I may no longer tarry.’ .

See the analysis of this play by Professor

ODYSSEUS

PEIfELOPfi.

599

early parting and a long absence, and this notion is the germ CITAP.
of the Odyssey. In the very spring-time of their joy the . u ' .
chieftain of Ithaka is parted from his bride. While lie is
away, shfe has to undergo hard trial at the hands of men
who seek rather her riches than herself; and even when the
twenty years are over, and Odysseus sees PenelopS once
mdre, the poet still speaks of a time soon coming when they
must again be parted. Here also the myth of Pururavas is
in close agreement with that of Odysseus, for he too must
be again parted from his love. She who, ever young, yet
making men old, can know neither age nor change, cannot
avert the doom which falls alike on Phaethon, Mem non, and
Sarpedon, on Achilleus, Baldur, and Sigurd. But {ill have
the same work to do; and if the dawn cannot save them
from death, she can restore them to life, and thus through
her they become immortal. Thus Pururavas, who was
created especially to do battle with and to conquer the
powers of darkness, addresses TJrvasi as the immortal among
the mortals ; and says of himself. that he, as the brightest
sun, holds her who spreads the sky and fills the air with
light. The very rite for the sake of which the Brahmans
converted the simple myth into an institutional legend,
points to the true nature of Pururavas. He can become
immortal only by devising the mode of kindling fire by
friction; and thus like Bhuranyu and Phoroneus, Hermes and
Prometheus, he falls into the ranks of those who are the
first to bestow the boon of fire on man. Nor is it without
significance that in the play of Kalidasa Pururavas, when
first he rescues TJrvasi from the beings who have carried her
away, has already a wife, who, seeing her husband wasting
away with love for another, makes a vow to treat with
kindness the object of liis love, whoever she may bo.
Pururavas has not indeed for his first wife the love which
Kephalos is said to bear to Prokris; but here TJrvasi, who
hesitates not to take her rival’s place, is so far the exact
counterpart of Eos, while Si the first wife we ha.vo all the
self-devotion which marks the beautiful daughter of Jlerse.

In most of these legends the meeting and the severance Tlio n.i-™
of these lovers take place by the side of the stream or

400 MYTHOLOGY OK THE ARYAN NATIONS,

BOOK the water from which .Aphrodite rises, and in which the

--—■ nymphs bathe the newly-born Apolldn. It is on the

river’s bank that Eurydike is bitten by the fatal snake,
and Orpheus is doomed to the same weary search as Puru-
ravas, for the love which lias been lost. On the heights
which overhang Peneios, Phoibos sees and chases the beauti¬
ful Daphne, and into the blue stream the maiden plunges
when she almost feels the breath of her pursuer. So again
Arethousa commits herself to the waters as she flies from
the huntsman Alpheios, who wins her love only when they
meet again upon the shore of Ortygia, the dawn-land. The
Greek river is but the Teutonic Elbe, the running stream,
and in the huntsman of Mainalos we see only an image of
the sun as he rests on the waters in the morning or the
evening, in other words, the Prog-prince of the German
legend. 1 In the Sanskrit story Bheki, the frog, is a maiden
who consents to marry a king on condition that he never
shows her a drop of water. ‘ One day being tired, she asked
the king for water; the king forgot his promise, brought
water, and Bheki disappeared.’ 2 As in the story of Urvasi

1 In tbo mythology of Assyria, Bheki, Onnes. But she is wooed also by
or the frog-sun is represented by the Ninos, and thereupon Onnes slays him-
fish-sun, who, as Berosus says-, rose up self. After a life full of marvels she
from the sea each morning, and plunged wings her way to heaven in the form of
into it every evening. Mr. G-ould a-dove, as Komulus vanishes in the
remarks (Curious Myths , second series, storm cloud, and Aineias disappears in

UNDINE AND MELUSINA.

401

tiie husband is the actual delinquent, but he is hurried into CHAP,
the fatal act by the words of his wife. If instead of the IL
promise not to show her water we substitute a pledge that
the lover shall not look upon his bride while she is bathing,
the myth remains essentially the same; and in this form
we see at once the germ of the story of Melusina. If Mr.

Gould is right in connecting this name with that of the
Babylonian moon-goddess Mylitta, we have an instance
of an imported title parallel to those of the Semitic Mel-
karth and Adonai, the Hellenised Melikertes and Adonis.
Melusina is found by Count Raymund, as Daphne is found
by Apollon, near running water, and like Bheld or Urvasi,
she readily consents to marry her human lover on the con¬
dition that he shall never attempt to see her on one day of
each week. When at length the promise is broken, Ray-
mund sees his beautiful wife in the water, the lower portion
of her body being now in the form of a fish,. But Melusina
did not know that her husband had thus seen her, and, as
in Fouque’s story of Undine, the catastrophe comes only
when Baymund calls lier a serpent and bids her depart from
his house. 1

402

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK The idea, common to all these tales, of beings who though
.——- united in the closest love may not look upon each other, is
EiAa and but little modified in the story of Eros and Psychd. ' The
version given by Appuleius is commonly spoken of as an
allegory. It deserves the name as much and as little as the
Odyssey. Here, as in the tales already referred to, no
liquid must come near the mysterious being to whom the
love of the mortal husband or wife is given. The old phrase
that the sun must die at the sight of water, 1 has retained its
hold on the storytellers of all the Aryan nations; but the
version of Appuleius assigns reasons where the earlier
Sanskrit myth is content to relate incidents. If like TJrvasi
Psyche brings about her own punishment, she does so
because she is under a doom laid on her by Venus. But
Venus is Aphrodite Auadyomene, the mother, the wife, or
the child of the sun; and the notion that the love of the sun
for another must excite her jealousy and anger was one
which must sooner or later be imported into the myth.
With its introduction the framework of the story was com¬
pleted ; and so the tale ran that Venus charged her son to
fill Psyche with the madness which made Titania fall in love
with the enchanted Bottom. But Psyche, the dawn with its
soft breath, is so beautiful that Eros (Amor, Cupido) falls in
love with her himself and taking her to a secret cave (the
cave of Dikte or of Lyktos), Visits her as Pururavas comes to
TJrvasi. Stirred up by Venus, her sisters tell Psyche that
she is wedded to a hideous monster, and at length her

jf ]\o scruples not to say how hideoii

he thinks her, is more merciful: hut
the Loathly Lady (for it is the same
myth) becomes as exacting as the little
Frog in Grimm’s story. She has not
been long at the"fire when she insists on
coming uuder Diarmid’s plaid. He
turns a fold of it between them; and
presently he finds by his side ‘the most

She is the Dawn-maiden, and she raises
for his dwelling that palace of the sun
which the Arabian storyteller delights
to describe in the tale of Allah-ud-decn.
The same being appears as the ‘foul
wight’ in Chaucer’s tale of the Wife of
Bath, Keiglitley. Fairy Mythology, 323.

1 Max Muller, Chips, ii. 248.

EROS AKD PSYCHE.

40r;

curiosity is^ so roused that, taking a lamp, she gazes upon CHAP,
her lover and beholds before her the perfection, of beaut}'. 1L
But a drop of oil falls from her lamp on the sleeping-
god, and the brief happiness of Psyche is ended. She is
left desolate like Pururavas, and like him she must go in
search of her lost love. Eos has looked on Helios, and he
has plunged beneath the sea. If she seek him, it must be
through .the weary hours of the night, amidst many perils
and at the cost of vast labour. In every temple Psyelit;
looks for her lover until at last. she reaches the dwelling- of
Venus, under whose spell he lies like Odysseus hi the home
of Eirkd or Kalypso. At her bidding' she accomplishes
some hard and degrading tasks, under which she must have
died hut for the love of Eros, who, though invisible, still
consoled and cheered her. By his a.id she at last made her
i peace with Venus, and becoming immortal, was united with
| her lover for ever. Of all these incidents not one has been
J invented by Appuleius ; and all that can be said is that he
; has weakened rather than strengthened the beauty of the
myth by adapting it to the taste of a thoroughly artificial age.

Having taken up a story which had not yet been brought
within the charmed circle of epic or lyric poetry, he has
received credit for an originality to which the familiar tale
of Beauty aud the Beast, with which it is substantially
identical, may lay an equal claim.’

The idea which underlies these tales runs through a large Tho soardi
class of legends, whic-li carry us into almost every Aryan fw
land and make the hypothesis of conscious borrowing or the Sun.
importation as perilous as we have seen it to he iu the story

404

MYTHOLOGY OF TUB ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK

11.

The Sea

of the Master Thief. In almost all these legends the youngest
and most beautiful of three (sometimes of twelvd) daughters
is married or given np to some unsightly being or monster,
or to some one whom she is led to suppose hideons or re¬
pulsive. In some instances, as in the common English nursery
tale, the enchantment is ended when the maiden confesses
her love for the disguised being in his unsightly shape : 1 in
the version which Appuleius followed, the maiden has a lover
who is' marvellously beautiful, hut whose beauty she. has
never seen. In all cases, however, there are jealous sisters
or a jealous mother who insist that the lover is hideous, and
incite her to look upon him while he is asleep. Thus goaded
on, she disregards the warnings in each case given that such
eui'iosity cannot be indulged without causing grievous dis¬
aster, and in each case the sleeping'lover is awakened by a
drop of oil or tallow from the torch or lamp in the maiden’s
hand, and instantly' vanishes or is transformed, generally
into a bird which tells her that she must wander in search
of him through many weary years, and do the bidding of
some harsh mistress into whose power her fatal curiosity has
brought her. In some versions, as in that of Appuleius, this
mistress is the mother of the lost lover. 5 Then follow the
years of wandering and toil, which can be brought to an end
only by the achievement of tasks, generally three in number,
each utterly beyond human powers. In these tasks the
maiden is aided by brute creatures whom she has befriended
in their moment of need, and who perform for her that
which she could not possibly accomplish herself. The com¬
pletion of the ordeal is followed by the happy union of the

maiden with her lover.

It is scarcely necessary to say that there ii

he converse of this incident is
in the legend of the Loathly Lady.
Lso Fouquc’s Sintram.
n Grimm’s Story of the Two!

and Gret

of the king fortun;
who marries the dawn-maiden, i. e. she Jn the
is Venus. She reappears a? his second hell,
wife in the tales of The Little Brother
and Sister, of the Six Swans, who fly
away like tho children of Nephole, and
of Little Snow White.' The Little
Brother and Sister (Phrixos and Helle)

pond (Hellespontos); but the
ho represents Helle is more
than the daughter of Athamas.
Blic story of The Chest, Camp-
1, she disguises herself as a

lover. This story contains also the
myth of the judgment of Portia iu the
Merchant of Vmkr,, ib. 6, 13.

.THE MINISTERS OP ER6S AND PSYCH®.

' 405

one feature in these stories which does not reappear in the chap.
tales told of Boots, or the youngest son, in his search for the . iL
enchanted princess who has been tom away from him, or
whom after a long toil he is to win as his bride. It could
not be otherwise, when the stories turn in the one case on
the search of the dawn for the sun, in the other on the
search of the sun for the dawn. As we might expect in
popular tales, the images drawn from myths of the day and
night are mingled with notions supplied by myths of summer
and winter. The search is always in comparative gloom or
in darkness. 1 Either it is Odysseus journeying homeward
among grievous perils, clad in beggar’s raiment, or it is
Orpheus seeking Eurydike in the awful regions of Hades.

The toil or the battle which precedes the victory is common
to all the traditions, whether epical or popular; but' in the
wildest forms of Aryan folk-lore the machinery of the most
complicated tales can be broken up into its original parts.

In nortbern countries especially, tbe powers of frost, snow,
and cold, must, be conquered before Phoibos can really win
Daphnd, or Psyclid recover Eros. Hence there are moun¬
tains of glass (glaciers) to be scaled, huge castles of ice to be
thrown down, or myriads of- icebergs or boulders to be re¬
moved. In these tasks the youth or the maiden is aided by
bears, wolves, or foxes, by ducks, swans, eagles, or by. ants,
the Myrmidons of Achilleus; hat all these are names under
which the old mythical language spoke of the clouds or the
winds, or of the light which conquers the darkness. Tbe
bear appears in tbe. myth of the seven shiners as ■ well ■
as in that of Arkas and Kallistd, the wolf in the stories of
Phoibos Lykeios, of Lykadn, and the Myrmidons. The
clouds assume the forms of eagles and swans alike in Eastern
or Western traditions. The eagles bear Surya Bai on their

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

wings through the heaven, and the swans, or white cirri
cJonds, are seen in all the stories which tell of Swan maidens
and the knights who woo and win them. 1 These creatures,
who are as devoted to the youth or the maiden as the
Myrmidons are to Achilleus, speedily remove the mighty
heaps of grain, stones, or ice, and leave the battle-ground
clear for their joyous meeting. In the German story of the
White Snake, the flesh of which, like the serpents of Iamos
and the heart of Ilogni in the Volsnng tale, imparts to him
who eats it a knowledge of the language of birds, the labour
falls on the lover, while the maiden plays the part of Aphro¬
dite in the legend of PsychS. The animals here befriended
by the trusty servant, who is Eros, or Boots, or Odysseus, or
a thousand others, are fishes, ants, and ravens—-names which
carry us to the fish, or frog sun, to the Myrmidons and
the clouds; and the tasks are the recovery of a ring,* the
picking-up of some bags of millet seed, and the finding of
the apple of life (the sun’s orb). The first is accomplished
by the fishes, one of which, as in the story of Polykrates,
brings the ring in its mouth, the second by the ants, and
the third by the ravens.

That these tales, of which the most familiar type for
English children is that of Beauty and the Beast, have been
borrowed directly from the apologue of Appnleius, no one
probably will venture to maintain. With as little likelihood
can it he said that they were suggested by the Vedic myth
of Urvasi and Pururavas. Their relationship to the latter is
precisely that of the Latin and Greek dialects to the ancient
Sanskrit; and thus they must be placed in the class of
organic myths. They spring up on all soils from the seed
which the Aryan tribes carried away with them when they
left their common home, and every variation may therefore
be noted as exhibiting the power of growth inherent in the
old mythical ideas. In few 7 cases is there even a plausible
ground for saying that any one tale, is copied or consciously
adopted from another; in none,- is there any necessity for
the assumption. The Teutonic nurse was as little conscious

* See Appendix D. Mac Iain Direach, Campbell, Tales of

2 Compare also the Gaelic story of the West Highlands, ii. 369.

LOVEK.

• 407

that the Frog Prince and Boots were one and the same per- chap.
son, as the grandams .of the Punjab were that Blieki was . 11
but another form of Urvasi. As ah example of the measure
in which the myth, retaining still the essential idea, may
become modified, we may take the tale of the Soaring Lark. 1
In this story, the maiden knows that the being who, like
Herakles with the lion’s skin on his back, is during the day
a lion is at night a man, but no ray of light must fall upon
him while he is in his human shape.. At her entreaty, how¬
ever, he goes to the bridal feast of the elder sister, where a
single ray of light streams in upon him through a chink in
a door made of unseasoned wood, , and the maiden entering
the room finds a dove, which says that for seven years he
must fly about in the world, but that at every seventh mile
he will let fall a drop of blood and a feather, to guide her in
her quest of him. 2 At last this guidance fails her, and she
asks the sun and moon to tell her whither the dove had
gone. As in the tale of Demeter and Persephone,, they are
unable to say: but they give her a casket and an egg which
may one day be of use. She then asks aid of the North
Wind, who bears her over the world until she rescues her
lover, who has resumed his lion’s shape, from a caterpillar
who is an enchanted princess.' But the latter, when disen¬
chanted, seizes on the maiden’s lover, and bears him away.

The maiden follows to the place in which she hears that
the wedding is to be celebrated, and then opening the
casket, finds a dress which glistens like the sun and
which the princess seeks to buy. But it can be given
only for flesh and blood, and the maiden demands access
to the bridegroom’s chamber as her recompense. During
the first night her lover sleeps by force of a potion, but
her voice sounds in his ears like the murmuring of the
wind through the fir-trees. On the next day, learning
the trick, he refuses the draught, and the maiden, availing

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

lierself of the gift bestowed by the moon, is reunited to him
at last . 1

The Norse tale ‘ Bast of the Sun and West of the Moon,’
approaches more nearly to the form of Beauty and tbie Beast.
A white bear (we are at once reminded of the process which
converted the seven shiners into seven bears) taps at a poor
man’s window on a cold winter night, and promises him
boundless wealth, on condition that he receives his daughter
as his wife. The man is willing, but the maiden flatly says
nay, until, overcome by the thought of her father’s poverty,
she agrees to live with the beast. The bear takes her to a
palace in which the rooms gleam with silver and gold; but
the being who comes to her at night is a beautiful youth
who never allows her to see him. The woman who acts the
part of Yenus in this tale is the mother, not of the lover, but
of the maiden, and as she could scarcely be represented as
jealous of her daughter’s happiness, we are told that, while
suggesting the same doubts which brought Psyche to her
trouble, she warned her child not to let a drop of oil fall on
her husband while she stooped to look upon him. The
sequel of the story presents no features materially different
from that of the Soaring Lark, except that the oil dropped
from the maiden’s lamp is made to bring about the cata¬
strophe. The prince is, of course, under the power of the
sorceress, who wishes to marry him, like Odysseus in the
house of Kirke or the cave of Kalypso; but when on the
wedding morning he displays a fine shirt with three drops of
tallow on it, and declares that he will marry only the woman
who can wash them out, the Trolls, vainly attempting the
task, see the prize snatched from their hand by the maiden
whom they had despised as a stranger and a beggar . 2

1 In the German story of the Iron she is confined like the Arrive Danae.
Stove (Grimm), the part- of Eros is In the legends of the True Bride and of
played by a king’s son, who is compelled the Drummer the maiden recovers her
by a -witch to sit in a great iron stove lover as in the story of the Soaring
which stood in a wood. This is mani- Lark. See also ch. viii. sect. 2 of this
festly a reversing of the myth of Bryn- book.

hild, in which the flame surrounding In the German story of Bearskin,
the maiden on the Glistening Heath the soldier is not turned into a beast,
answers to the fiery stove in which the but is under compact with the evil one
prince is imprisoned. In the tale of not to comb his hair of wash his face
Strong Hans (Grimm), it isopsyche who for seven years, but to wear a bear sark
is rescued from a tower or well in which or cloak. In this disguise he compels

THE DARK FOREST.

409

The myth passed into other forms. In every case the chap.
bonds of true love were severed; but the persons thus sepa- n - .
rated were sometimes brothers and sisters, sometimes parents The Wnn-
and children. In the German story of the Twelve Brothers,
the sister goes forth to search for the lost children in that
great forest which reappears iii almost all tales of Teutonic
folk-lore, the forest of the night- or the winter, in which the
huntsman or the king’s daughter, or the two babes, or
Ta-nhauser or True Thomas, the prince, the tailor, or the
soldier, lose their -way, to fall in every instance into the
hands of witches, or robbers, or magicians, sometimes malig¬
nant, sometimes merciful and almost genial. It is perhaps
no exaggeration to say that under this type of solar legend
(for, as turning on the presence or the absence of light and
warmth, these are all solar legends), four-fifths of the folk¬
lore of northern Europe may be ranged. The inhabitants of
this dark forest are the Panis, by whom the wanderers are
sometimes welcomed, sometimes slain. These wanderers, or
stolen youths or maidens, can he recovered only through
much suffering on the part of those who seek'them. In the
tales of the Twelve Brothers and the Six Swans, the sister
must not utter a word for seven or for six years, an incident
which, in the story of the Woodcutter’s Child, is changed
.into loss of voice, inflicted as a punishment by the angel who
has charged her not to look into the thirteenth door of the
palace in the land of Happiness, or in other words, into the
treasure-house of Ixion or Tantalos. But the appetite for
mythical narratives was easily gratified. Incidents repeated
a thousand times, with different names and sligh^ differences
in their sequence or arrangement, never palled upon it. If
Psych& has hard tasks to perform before recovering Eros,
the Greek was as well content to listen to the story of the
same tasks as they are performed by Eros before he can
recover Psyche. Thus the part of the latter in the legend of
Appuleius is played by the former in the German stories of

the king to give him one of his daughters tbestory of Hens the Hedgehog, whoso

whidi^basi^boen made must be kept, of tiie enchanted rajah.

The transformation is more complete in

410

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book the White Snake and the Golden Bird, the Queen Bee,

•-- Strong Hans, the Drummer, and many others.’

l’ho spell The common element of all these stories is the separation
light. of two lovers by the intervention of a third person, who is
represented sometimes as the mother, more often as another
lover of the youth whose heart is given to the maiden from
whom he is to be parted. In the latter case, her great object
is to prolong the separation for her own benefit; and we
have at once the framework of the tales which relate the
sojourn of Odysseus in the abodes of Kirke and Kalypso.
Penelope, like Psyche, is far away, and though Odysseus has
not forg-otten her and longs to be with her, still he cannot
escape from his irksome bondage. While the time of slum¬
ber lasts, he must tarry with the beautiful women who seek
to wean him from his early love. The myth is but the fruit
of phrases which spoke of the sun as sojourning in the land
of sleep, freed from all woes and cares , 2 and but dimly re¬
membering the beautiful hues of morning under the magic
charm of night. Thus in Kirke and Kalvpsd alike we have
the moon-goddess beneath whose spell the sun may be said
to slumber, and in the palace of the one and the flashing
• cave of the other we see the wonderful home of Tara Bai,
the Star-maiden, the Ursula or Selene of the modern Indian
tale. Girt with her zone of stars, the beautiful being who
can neither grow old nor die sings the lulling song whose
witching power no mortal may withstand. If she seeks for’
sensuous enjoyment, still her desire is not for the brutal
pleasures which turn men into swine ; 3 but to see before her

THE FAIRY QUEER.

' 411

the wise chief whose glory is in all lands is a happiness for CHAP,
which she is ready to sacrifice all her wealth and splendour. . 1L
Still her abode is full of a strange mystery. Its magnificence
is not the magnificence of the open sunshine, its pleasures
are not the wholesome pleasures of the outer air. If then
the sun tarries in her chambers, it is because he is under a
spell, because Selene has cast her deep sleep upon Endy-
mion, and Zeus has not yet sent Hermes to bid Kalypso let
Odysseus go. Thus in these Greek myths we have the
germ and the groundworkof all- those countless stories
which speak of mortal men carried away from their homes
to dwell with unseen beiugs beneath the earth. These beings
are in each story headed by a beautiful queen, .whose will it
is impossible to resist. This power is prominent in the myth
which tells us that Thomas the Rhymer was carried off in
his youth to Fairyland, where he became possessed of vast
and mysterious knowledge. At the end of seven years he
was suffered, to go back to the upper , earth on condition of
obeying the summons to return to Elfland whenever it might
be given. The bidding came while Thomas was making
merry with some friends in the Tower of Ercildoune. A hart
and a hind, it was said, had come from the neighbouring
forest and were slowly moving up the street of the village.
Thomas immediately rose, left the house, and following the
animals to the wood was never seen again . 1 The story of
Thomas is substantially identical with Chaucer’s Rhyme of
Sir Thopas, in whom the beauty of, the Fairy Queen excites
the same desire which the sight of Helen awakened in the
Athenian Peirithoos . 2 This fairy queen sometimes, assumes
the form of the Echidna who for a time made Herakles

412

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK sojourn in her dwelling: but the Tailor’s son of Basle in the
——. mediaeval story had the courage neither of Herakles nor of
Sir Gawain, and he'was so terrified by the writhing of her
tail that in spite of the beauty of her face he fled after giving
her only two of the three kisses which she had bargained
for . 1 Such a myth as this, it is obvious, would, if subjected
to Christian influence, exhibit the fairy queen a§ a malignant
demon who takes delight in corrupting the faith of true
believers by plunging them into a horrible sensuality. Thus
modified, the myth of Odysseus and Kalypsd appears as the
story of Tanhaiiser, whom Venus entices into her magic cave,
within the Horselberg (Ercildoune) or mountain of Ursula.
After a time the sensuous enjoyment of the place palls upon
him as upon Odysseus, and he makes his escape to the earth
with a weary, load of sin upon his heart, for which he vainly
seeks to obtain absolution . 2 At last he comes before pope
Urban IV., who tells him that his pastoral staff will put
forth leaves and blossoms sooner than God should pardon him.
Tanhaiiser has scarcely departed when the staff is seen to
bloom; but it is too late. The minnesinger cannot be found,
and he re-enters the Horselberg in despair, never to leave it
again. Another modification, not less obvious and more in
accordance with the spirit of the mediaeval myth, would be
that of mere sleep, and Endymion would thus become the

>f personal 'beauty, bad
rendered him proof against disease, and
supplied him with a fruit which was to
satisfy his hunger, and of which he par¬
took only once a month. He was,
moreover, endowed with a miraculous

knowledge was universal, and an un¬
usual visitation of prophetic fervour
enabled him to unfold the hidden secrets

never-failing purse, and in the tale of
Oberon and Huon of Bordeaux. This
>n is the dwarf king Elberich of

e discharged by Oberon

is only another form of the legend of
Ogier the Dane* who is Tithouos re¬
stored to a youth, which, like that of
Meleagros, is to last as long as a brand
which the fairy gives him remains un¬
consumed.— Keightley.. Fairy Mythology,

THE

LL-BOUND SLEEPERS.

413

type of other slumberers to -whom a century was but as a CHAP,
day. Among such is Epimenides, who while tending ■ IL ■
sheep fell asleep one day in a cave, and did not wake until
more than fifty years had passed away. But Epimenides
was one of the Seven Sages, who reappear in the Seven
Manes of Leicester,' and in the Seven Champions of Chris¬
tendom; and thus the idea of seven sleepers was at once
suggested. This idea finds - expression in the remarkable
legend of the seven sleepers of Ephesus; and the number
seven is further traced by Mr. Gould through other mediseval
stories. ‘ Barbarossa changes his position every seven years.
Charlemagne starts in his chair at similar intervals. Olger
Dansk stamps his iron mace on the floor every seven year's.’

To the number of these sleepers must be added Arthur who
slumbers in Avallon, waiting for the time when he shall
wake up to free Britain once more; Sebastian of Portugal;
the three Tells of Rirtli; the priest of the Church of Hagia
Sophia, who bides the day when the Turk shall be driven
from Constantinople; and Boabdil, the last of the Moorish •
kings of Spain, who lies spell-bound within the hill of the
Alhambra in a slumber broken only on the eve of St. John , 2
who himself slumbers at Ephesus.

The same mystic number is found in the seven Rishis of The Serec
ancient Hindu traditions. These Rishis are the media or Elbhls -
instruments through which the divine Yeda was imparted
to mankind. In its widest meaning the word was taken to
denote the priestly bards who conducted the worship of the
gods; but they are spoken of sometimes as the poets who
compose the songs and present them to the deities whom
they celebrate, and sometimes as the mere mouthpieces of
these gods. They are mortal, and yet they are united with
immortals, and are rivals of the gods. But although the idea
most promptly associated with them is that of wisdom, they
are sometimes mentioned hi language which carries us back
to the etymolbgical meaning of the name. With their true
hymns, we are told, they caused the dawn to arise and the

414

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book sun to slime for the afflicted Yayu and Manu.’ The names

■-^—• of' the Rishis are variously given, Manu with Bhrigu,

Angiras and others, being sometimes reckoned among them:
hut of the whole number seven attained a pre-eminent dig-
nity. With Manu, according to one version, they entered
into the ark while the earth lay beneath the waters of the
flood, and therein abode with him until the vessel rested on
the peak called Naubandhana from the binding of the ship.
In the account of this flood the Brahmana story introduces a
fisli which guides the ark as the Delphian Apollon guides
the vessel of the Cretan mariners to Krisa . 2
The Ark- The main story connected with the Rishis has already
Shiners. been noticed as the result of an equivocal word . 3 The notion
of making bright conveyed also the idea of gladdening and
cheering, and hence arksliah became a name not only for the
sun, but for a hymn or song of praise, and the makers or
singers of these hymns were naturally termed Rishis or
gladdeners.. It was not less natural that, as the Rishis or
sages took a stronger hold on the imagination of the people,
the seven arkshas or stars should be converted into rishis,
and that the rishis should be said to have their abode in
them. Among the Western Aryans, as lyTcos, the glistening,
denoted the wolf, arktos became a name for the bear, and
stood to the Sanskrit riksha in the relation of the Greek
tsktwv, a carpenter, to takshan, and the Latin pectus, a
breast, to vakshas ; 4 and then the seven stars were ne¬
cessarily converted into seven bears, while the sages whom
the Hindu placed in those, shining orbs survived as the seven
wise men of Hellas, to reappear under different forms, as we
have already seen, elsewhere.

The Rishis In the name of Manu, the friend of the Rishis, we have
and Manu. s j m piy and strictly man, as the measurer or the thinker.

The same root has also yielded names for the moon and the
month , 5 while in Europe, as hi Asia, there arose the idea of

THE EVER YOUTHFOL DAWN. ' 415

a man of whom they spoke as the son of heaven and earth. CHAP.
In India he was known as Manu Svayambhuva, the child of - IL -
Svayambhu, the self-existent, or, like the Hellenic Minos,
the son of Eur6p§, the dawn, as Yaivasti, the worshipper or
child of Vivasvat, the sun, whose wife Saranyu, having home
the twin Asvins, the steeds or' horsemen, left in her place
another like herself,' Savarna, who became the mother of
Mann. 1 But Manu is also not unfrequently called the son
of Dyaus or of Brahma, just as the German tribes spoke of
their ancestor Mann as the son of Tiw or Tuisco.

Section V.—DAWN GODDESSES.

The name TJshas reappears in the Greek Eos, and Ushas, Usli:
like Eos, is the goddess of the dawn or morning. 2 The E6s '
! language addressed to her betokens a more distinct person-
‘ ality'than that even of Varuna and Indra, because the wor-
| shipper in addressing her speaks always from the heart, and
'' his words are the manifest utterances of love. She is the
' daughter of the heaven, who brings with her light and life
and joy; she drives away pain and anguish; she is the
image of undying youth, for day by day she appears in
unfading beauty, although they who look upon her grow
daily older and at last die. 3

416

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

book ‘ Ushas, nourishing all, comes daily like a mateim, con-
—— r ~—• ducting all transient (creatures) to decay.’ 1 ’

‘ The divine and ancient Ushas, bom again tod again tod
bright with unchanging hues, wastes away the life of a
mortal, like the wife of a hunter cutting up the birds .’ 2

‘ How long is it that the dawns have risen ? How long
will they rise?.

* Those mortals who beheld the pristine Ushas dawning
have passed away : to us she is now visible, and they ap¬
proach who will behold her in after times.’ 3

Like the Greek Athene, she is pure and unsullied, the
image of truth and wisdom. .

‘ Ushas, endowed with truth, who art the sister of Bhava,
the sister of Varuna, be thou hymned first of the gods.’

‘ Unimpeding divine rites, although wearing away the ages
of mankind, the Dawn shines the likeness of the mornings
. that have passed, or that are to be for ever, the first of those
that are to come.’ 4

In all this, although it determines the source of later
myths beyond all possibility of question, there is little or no
mythology; and we have advanced scarcely more than half¬
way on the road to a full-formed myth even when we read
that ‘ the night, her sister, prepares a birth-place for her
elder sister (the day), and having made it known to her
departs; ’ 6 that the night and dawn ‘ of various complexions,
repeatedly bom but ever youthful, have traversed in their
revolutions alternately from a remote period earth and heaven
—night with her dark, dawn with her luminous limbs,’ 6 or
that of all the sisters who have gone before a successor
daily follows the one that has preceded.’ 7 It is this very
transparency of meaning which imparts value to almost
every expression of praise in the hymns addressed to her.

‘ She shines upon us like a young wife, rousing every
living being to go to his work. The fire had to be kindled
by men: she brought light by striking down darkness.

' H. H. Wilson, if. V. Sanhi/a, i. 129. spiing from her is closely allied to the

1 lb. i. 2/4. 1 lb. i. 298. myth of Kronos, and seems to lie at the

* lb. 'ii. 8, 10. 5 lb. ii. 12. riot of the many popular German and

* lb. i. 109. Norse stories, in which the bride of the

’ lb. ii. 12. The idea Sf Ushas as king is accused of being a murderess

bringing to an end the days which who destroys her own children.

THE DAWH LIGHT.

417

She lose up, spreading far and wide, and moving towards cit.ap.
every one she grew in brightness, wearing her brilliant , n - .
garment. The mother of the cows, the leader of the dcgs,
she shone gold-coloured, lovely to behold.

‘ She, the fortunate, who brings the eye of the god, who
leads the white and lovely steed (of the sun), the Dawn was
seen revealed by her rays, with brilliant treasures she follows
every one.

‘ Thou, who art a blessing when thou art near, drive far¬
away the unfriendly; make the pastures wide, give us safety.

Remove the haters, bring treasures. Raise up wealth to the
worshipper, thou mighty Dawn.

‘ Shine for us with thy best rays, thou bright Dawn, thou
who lengthenest our life, thou the love of all, who givest us
food, who givest us wealth in cows, horses, and chariots.’ 1

The hymns speak especially of the broad-spreading light of Uslias the
Tishas; and this flush of dawn suddenly passing across the ,

heaven takes us at once to the many names of like meaning
which belong to the Hellenic solar beings. She ‘ shines
wide’ (Urvasi), like Euryphassa and Eurydike, like Eury-
ganeia, Eurynoml, and Europe. As the daughter of Dyaus,
who chases away the darkness of the night, she goes before
Indra, Savitar, and Surya. She reveals mysteries and opens
the ends of heaven, where the Panis had hidden away the
cows of which she is the mother. She tells the Angiras
where they are to be found, and as she lightens the sky she
is said to drive her own herds to their pastures. She is sent
especially to awaken men; but she is charged to let the
Panis (the dark powers) sleep. She is the beloved of all
men and the darling of the god of love, Aniruddha, the
resistless, 2 who thus receives the name Ushipati, lord of the
dawn ; and finally, we have in Ushas the germ of the idea >

which found its most graceful expression in the Hellenic
Athene, and its most majestic developement in the Latin
Minerva. The Sanskrit budh means both to wake and to
know, and vayund has the» double meaning of light and
knowledge, jpst as the notions of knowledge and of creative
power are both expressed by the root jan and the English
1 X. V. vii. 77. * h"! 4nW« nix™.— Soph. Ant. 7SI.

VOL. J. EE.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

cm and ken. Hence Ushas is said to enable men to cross
the frontier of darkness, and, as the seer, to give light far
and wide. ‘ Waking every mortal to walk about, she receives
praise from every thinker.’ Thus, as the Day, she is the
mother of the Divine Night, who reveals all her splendour
after she has driven away her sister the Twilight. 1 Of the
birth of Athene fully armed from the head of Zeus, when
cloven by the axe of Hephaistos, the poets of the Iliad and
Odyssey say nothing; but the presence of the story in the
Hesiodic Theogony is a conclusive argument against any
inference which might be drawn from their silence, even if
Ushas were not, as she actually is, spoken of in the Yeda as
sprung from the forehead of Dyaus, the sky. 2

But TJshas is only one of many names for the light of early
morning. As Ahana, she plays the part as well as bears the
name of Athene and of Daphne. The word expresses the
idea of burning light; and although it occurs only once in
the Big Veda, 3 the flexibility of the old mythology justifies
us in attributing to Ahana all that is told us of Ushas or of
Sarama. 4 If then we apply to Dahana the phrases which
spoke of Ushas as pursued by the' Sun, who slays though
he loves her, or as dying in his arms, we see at once an off¬
shoot from the parent stem which in the West yielded the
myths of Daphne and of Prokris. Daphne too is loved by
Phoibos, and, like Ahana, she flies from his face until she
takes refuge in the Peneian stream. But in some passages
of the Veda the idea of her might remains too prominent
to allow much room for that of love.

‘ This strong and manly deed also thou hast performed, 0
Indra, that thou struckest the daughter of Dyaus, a woman
difficult, to vanquish.

1 The benignant aspect of night, must,
he carefully borne in mind, as the germ
of the myths of Astoria, Asterodia,
lCulypsh, 'and other Fairy Queens.
Under all these forms we have tho
(piX'ia fitydXwv KdtrpMv ‘ Krcdrcipa of
jEschylos, Again. 366. As such, Night
is invoked in the Veda to.* drive away
the wolf and tho thief, and carry her
■worshippers safely across’ (to the light).
_ R. v . X. 127 ; Muir, Sanskrit Texts,

‘Dyotana (the dawn), th<
enjoys always the first of all e

* ‘ Athene, as far as letters g
pond to a Sanskrit Ahkn
t a slightly differing vs
1.’—Max Muller, Lecture,

E CHARIOT OF

410

‘Yes, even the daughter of Dyaus, the magnified, the chap.
Dawn, thou, O Indra, a great hero, hast ground to pieces. ]1 '

‘ The Dawn rushed off from her crushed car, fearing that
Indra, the bull, might strike her.

‘ This her car lay there, well ground to pieces. She went
far away/ 1

More commonly, however, she is beloved by all the gods,
and the Asvins bear her away, triumphant in her chariot.

But it is to the phrases which speak of the dawn under SiU , am4
the name of barama. that we must look for the germ of the
great epics of. the western Aryans. It is indeed only the
germ, and no fancy can be more thoroughly groundless than
that which would regard the Hellenic representative of
Saramd as derived from the dawn-goddess of the Hindu.
Identity of names and' of attributes can prove nothing
more than the affinity of legends, which, as differing not
only in local colour but also in the form of thought, must
point to some common source in a past yet more remote.
Whatever may be the precise meaning of the name, whether
Sarama or Saranyu be taken to denote the storm-cloud or
the morning, there is no doubt that the root of the word is
sar, to creep or go, which we find in serpent as well as in the
Greek Erinys and Sarpeddn. In the Rig Yeda, Sarama is .
especially the guardian of the cows of Indra, and as his
messenger she goes to the Panis, who have stolen them
away. She, too, like Uslias, is said to be the first to spy
out the cleft in the rock where the Panis; like Cacus, had
hid the plundered cattle, and, like Herakles, she is the first
to hear their lowings. Like Ushas also, she walks in a
straight path : but when she comes to the stronghold of the
Panis, a conference follows in which we see unmistakably
the dawn peering about through the sky in search of the
bright clouds, and restoring them in all their brilliance and
beauty to the broad pastures of the heaven.

‘The Panis said, “ With what intention did Sarama reach
this place? for the way if^ far, and leads tortuously away.

What was your wish with us ? How was the night ? How
did you cross the waters of the Rasa ? ”

OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

rook ‘ The Panis : “ What kind of man is Indra, O Saramfl,

—_^_ what is his look, he as whose messenger thou comest from

afar ? Let him come hither, and we will make friends with
him, and then he may he the cowherd of our cows.”

‘ Saramd, : “ I do not know that he is to he subdued, for it
is he himself that subdues, he as whose messenger I came
hither from afar. Deep streams do not overwhelm him;
you, Panis, will lie prostrate, killed by Indra.”

‘ The Panis: “ Those cows, 0 Saramd, which thou desirest,
fly about the ends of the sky, 0 darling. Who would give
them up to thee without fighting ? for our weapons too are
sharp.”

‘ Saramd: “ Though your words, 0 Panis, be unconquer¬
able, though your wretched bodies be arrowproof, though
the way to you be hard to go, Brihaspati will not bless you
for either.”

‘ The Panis: “ That store, O Sarama, is fastened to the
rock, furnished with cows, horses, and treasures. ' Panis
watch it who are gobd watchers; thou art come in vain to
this bright place.”

‘ Sarama : “ Let the Rishis come here fired with Soma,
Ahasya (Indra), and the ninefold Angiras: they will divide
the stable of cows; then the Panis will vomit out this
speech.”

‘ The Panis: “ Even thus, 0 Sarama, thou art come hither,
driven by the violence of the gods; let us make thee our
sister, do not go away again; we will give thee part of the
cows, 0 darling.”

‘ Saramd : “ I know nothing of brotherhood or sisterhood :
Indra knows it, and the awful Angiras. They seemed to me
anxious for their cows when I came : therefore get away
from here, 0 Panis, far away.

“ Go far away, Panis, far away; let the cows come out
straight, the cows which Brihaspati found hid away. Soma,
the stones, and the wise Rishis.” ’ 1
The cows This hymn, seemingly so transparent in its meaning, be-
of indra. CO mes unintelligible if interpreted of any other being than

1 Max Muller) Lecture a an Language, second series, 465.

USHAS AtfD SAEAMi. ' 421

the Dawn in her struggle with the powers of darkness: and CHAU
hence it seems a superfluous task to show that all the essential - ]i '

features of Ushas reappear in Sarama; that like Tishas Sarama
is followed by Indra, and that walking first she reveals the
treasures which had been hidden away; that both alike go
to the uttermost ends of heaven; that both break the strong¬
holds of the Panisboth are the mothers and deliverers of
the cows; both drive forth their cattle to the pastures; both
walk in the right path and bestow wealth and blessings upon
men. Every phrase tells us of some change in the heaven
from the time when the sun sinks to sleep in the west to the
moment when his face is first seen again in the east. As
the light of evening dies away, the power of the darkness is
restored, and the Panis extinguish the bright-coloured clouds
which have looked down on the death of the Sun, or in other
words they steal the cows of Indra, the cattle which Phae-
thousa and Lampetie feed in the rich pastures of Helios. Du¬
ring the weary hours of night they are shut up in the demon’s
prison-house; hut at length the messenger of the day comes to
reclaim her children. With a faint flush she starts slowly
from the doors of the east. Her light, creeping along the
dark face of the sky, seems to ebb and flow like the sea-
tide ; and so might Sarama be said to hold parley with the
Panis who refuse to-yield up then- plunder. But the Dawn
is only the messenger of one far mightier than herself, and
if they will not yield to her, they shall feel the force of the
arm of Indra; and the conference with the Panis, which
answers to' the spreading of the Dawn, ends in their over¬
threw, as soon as Indra appears in his chariot—in other
words, when the Sun is risen.

In the Rig Veda, Saramd steadily refuses the bribes offered Tho.
to her by the Panis. Another turn was given to the tale gf^mL° f:
when the faithfulness of Sarama was represented as not in¬
vincible. Sarama, we are told in the Annkramanika, was
sent as the dog of the gods to seek for the strayed or stolen
herds, and when she espiefl them in the town of Vala, the
Panis strove to make her an accomplice in tlicir theft. But
although she refused to divide the booty, she yet drank a,
cup of milk which they gave her, and returning to Indra

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,

denied that she had seen the cows. On this Indra kicked
her, and the milk which she vomited np gave the lie to her
words. Here, then, we have in its germ the faithlessness of
the Spartan Helen, who in name as in her act is Sarama, 1
and who speaks of herself as the dog-eyed or dog-faced,
althongh by none else is the name ever applied to her. Thng
the Greek carried away with him the root of the great Tro¬
jan epic from the time when he parted from his ancient
kinsfolk, he to find his way to his bright Hellenic home,
they to take up their abode in the land of the seven streams.
For him, Helen and Paris, Briseis and Achilleus were already
in existence. For him Phoibos already dwelt in Delos, and
Sarpedon ruled in the land of the golden river. So, again,
it makes but little difference whether the Sarameya, some¬
times but rarely mentioned in the Rig Veda, be definitely
the son of Sarama, or whether the word remained a mere
epithet for any one of the gods who might denote the
morning. The name itself is etymologically identical with
that of Hermes; and the fact that he is addressed as the
watchdog of the house 2 may have led to the notion which
made him in later times the hound which served as the mes¬
senger of the gods, and which in the story of Prokris reap¬
pears at the feet of Artemis. 3

Another name from the same root which has furnished

SARANYC

ERINYS.

423

those of Sarama, Helen, Hermes, and Sarpedcin, is found in ojtae.

Saranyu (a feminine of Saranyu), in whom some discern the _

dark and impetuous stormcloud. 1 The phrases employed
when the poet addresses her all seem to point in another
direction. Like Ushas, she is spoken of as the mare, and as
the mother of twins. The male Saranyu is in like manner
called a horse, and the goddess herself is the mother of the
twins Tama and Yami, and again of Nasatya and Dasra, the
twin Asvins or steeds, who represent the Dioskouroi. The
persons with whom this dualism connects her indicate at
once her real nature, and with Saranyu she takes her place
by the side of the two Ahans or Dawns, of Indra, the two
Indras, of Dyava, the double Dyans, of Ushasau, the two
mornings, of Agni, the two Agnis, of Yanina, the two
Varunas.

But as Sarama is Helen, so Saranyu is Erinys; and here Erinys.
too the seed, which in the East sprang up only to wither
away, shot up in the West to a portentous growth. It was
certainly no Euphemism which spoke of the Erinyes as the
gentle beings or EnmeUides, and there was no incongruity
in giving the name to the Dawn-mother Demeter. 2 Hence
in spite of all the failure of memory, and of the fearful cha¬
racter which Erinys had assumed, the poet who tells the
terrible tale of Oidipous could not but make him die in the
sacred grove of beings who, however awful to others, were
always benignant to him—in . groves which to the storm-
tossed wanderer were the Hyperborean gardens into which
grief, and fear, and anguish could never enter. The change
which converted the beautiful Saranyu. into the avenging
furies of jEscbylos has excited the wonder of some who
hesitate on this account to believe that Erinys and Saranyu
can come to us from a common source. It is more than
probable that their scepticism arises from the notion that
comparative mythologists derive the Greek from the Sanskrit
deity. It is enough to say that they do not.

The change itself is otoe which could scarcely fail to be The

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

brought about. The Harpies, who in our Homerio poems
are the beautiful daughters of Thaumas and Elektra, appear
in the iEneid of Virgil as foul monsters, who do the work of
vultures. The Ara, or prayer of the longing heart , 1 became
more and more the curse which the weak uttered against
their tyrants. Indra and Phoibos, who, as the sun-gods, see
and hear all things, become almost more dreaded for their
destructive power, than loved for their beneficence. As
representing the day with its searching light, Varuna and
Indra are the avengers of all iniquity; and in this sense it
could not fail to be said of evil-doers that Saranyu would
find them out. The old phrase survives with its clearness
scarcely dimmed in the Hesiodic Theogony. Night there is
the mother of Strife (Eris), and of all the evils that come of
Strife ; 2 but she is also the mother of righteous recompense
(Nemesis). In other words, the evil deeds done in the night
will receive their reward when brought to light in the day;
and thus, according to JEschylos the Erinyes also are
daughters of the Night, who, like the Drukhs, the Vedic
Ate, track out the sins of men. It was in truth impossible
that, the germ once given, its developements should fail to
be modified by time and place, by power of imagination and
failure of memory. The Ate of the Iliad is the spirit merely
of mischievous folly, and as such, she is hurled by Zeus from
Olympos, for postponing the birth of Herakles to that of
Eurystheus ; the Ate of JEschylos is the sleepless doom
which broods over a house until the vengeance for the
shedding of innocent blood has been exacted to the utter¬
most farthing. There is nothing wonderful therefore in the
process which changed the lovely Saranyu of the Veda into
the awful goddesses 3 of Athens; and if the Erinys of the
Iliad is called hateful, yet she wanders in the air and hears
the summons addressed to her from the land of darkness. 4
In the fact that at Athens there were statues only of two
Erinyes, we have perhaps a memory of that early dualism
which is so marked a feature in tke mythology of the Veda.

But if Eds and Zeds remained to the Greeks what Ushas

s. Thttx/. 2

THE HORSES OF THE SUN.

and Dyaus were to the Hindu, there were other names which
seem to have been transplanted to Hellenic soil only to die.
Among these is Argennos in whose honour Agamemnon
is said to have built a temple to Aphrodite Argynnis on
the banks of Kepliisos. The name in the West had no
meaning: but in the Vedic Arjuni we have simply an
epithet denoting the brilliance of the dawn, while in the
later Hindu mythology, Arjuna comes before us as standing
to Krishna in the relation of Luxman to Rama, of Phaethon
to Helios, or of Patroklos to Achilleus.

The analysis of all these myths proves convincingly that
for human thought in its earliest stages the clanger lay not
in the poverty of language, but in its superabundant wealth.
The heaven, the sun, the dawn, the clouds, might he de¬
scribed by a thousand names, all truthfully and vividly
denoting the thing spoken of in one of its countless aspects.
But the characteristic features so marked were found in
more than one object. If the sun shone brightly or moved
rapidly, so did the horse. If the clouds gave nourishment
to the thirsty earth, so did the cows bestow a gift scarcely
less necessary for man. The words which told of the one
would serve also to designate the other ; and so in fact we
find that they did. The cow received its name as the moving
animal; the horse was named from its speed, asvan, or from
its colour, harit, the glistening—rohit, the brown: and all
these names were of necessity applied to the sun, the dawn,
and the sky, first in their strictly etymological sense, but
insensibly, and by an inevitable result, in the meaning to
which usage gradually confined each word. Thus, when the
name asvan was reserved especially for the horse, the sun,
who had been hitherto called asvan simply as speeding
through the sky, now himself became the steed who hurries
across the broad heaven. 1 The impulse once given issued in
an almost incredible wealth of metaphor. The horse as the
bearer of burdens was called vahni; 2 but the flames also
bore their burdens into the air, and the rays of the sun

■ The pro.
by Professor
Mythology,’

» The roe

'ss is completely analysed vohero, tin* Grco
fax Muller, ‘Comparative pound words ns
hips, dc. ii.i32, &c, carrying th« head

MYTHOLOGY

OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

brought his light to man. Thus the flame of fire and the
solar rays, being both alike vahni, became vehement and
fiery horses. So, too, the morning and the evening, the
gloaming and the dawn, became, as we have seen, twin
steeds—the Asvins—joined together in a mysterious bond
which made it impossible to draw a line between the ap¬
proach of the one and the vanishing of the other. But this
step taken rendered another step necessary. The glorious
being whose light wakes a sleeping world to life must be
enthroned in a burning cliariot, of which the rays that
stream across the heaven must be the gleaming steeds ; and
thus the sun who had himself been Hari, the flashing, now
became Indra, or Surya, or Savitar, whose car was drawn by
the glistening Ha.rits. Where we say that ‘the sun is
rising,’ or that ‘he is high in the heaven,’ they said, ‘the
sun has yoked his steeds for his journey,’ or that ‘ his horses
have borne his chariot to the house of Dyaus.’ But how
little the name Harit had lost its original meaning, is clear
from. the many terms which are used in describing them.
The Vedie poet knew well the differences of meaning in the
words which he uttered when he spoke of them as Harits,
or Rohits, or Arushis; yet under each of these names was
growing up a distinct personality, and thus the Harits,
whose number is given sometimes as seven, sometimes as
ten, become sisters who fly on beautiful wings. 1 But while
even in India, the idea of loveliness was beginning to predo¬
minate over that of mere animal strength, among the West¬
ern Aryans the glistening Harits became the lovely Charites
whom the Latins called the Gratice and we the Graces. Yet
by the side of these fair creations of human thought, the
root which yielded these names was discharging a more
homely function: and the grease with which our wheels are
rubbed is but another form of the names of Charis in the
Iliad, and the Graces of Canova.

Arushi, however, is only the feminine form of arvan, a horse;
and the masculine arusha is a colnmon Vedic epithet for the
sun. But this name is applied to him only at his rising.
He is arusha, when ‘ Night goes away from her sister the
1 Max Muller, Chips, $c. ii. 131.

ARUSHA AND EliOS. ' 427

(lawn, and the dark one opens the path for the bright god.’ CHAP.
But arusha is also a child. ‘The seven sisters have nursed u '
him, the joyful, the white one, as he was horn, the Arusha
with great might.; as horses go to the foal that is born, so
did the gods bring up his son when he was bom.’ >, He has
the eyes of a man, and he is also Sapamas, with beautiful
wings. More evidence can scarcely be needed to show that
in this picture we have the Hellenic god of love, the bright
and winged Eros. But further, as Professor Max Milller
has noted in his exlmistive analysis of this myth, Arusha is
called the young child of Dyaus, the child of heaven, the sun '
of strength. He is the first of the gods, as coining at the
point of the days; and of his two daughters (the Snow-
White and Bose-Red of German folk-lore), the one is clad in
stars, the other is the wife of Svar, the sun. He moves
swift as thought, longing for victory : he is the love or
desire, Kama, of all men ; and as irresistible, in his strength,
he is Ushapati, lord of the dawn. With all these phrases
the mythology of the Greeks is in thorough harmony. Al¬
though, according to later poets, Eros is a son of Zens and
of Gaia, or Aphrodite, or Artemis, we may fairly assert that
in the Hesiodic fkeogony, as’in the Veda, he is ‘ the first of
the gods/ for with Chaos, Gaiai, and Tartaros, he makes up
the number of self-existent deities. Still, although appearing ,
thus in the awful silence of a formless universe, he is the
most beautiful of all the gods, and he conquers the mind and
'will both of gods and of men. The transition was-easy to
the thought of Eros, ever bright and fair as (like Yavishtka
or Hephaistos) the youngest of the gods, as the companion
of the Charites, as the child of the Ckaris Aphrodite : and
this association of Eros and Charis brings us hack to Arusha
and t-he glistening Harit-s, who bear him across the wide seas
of heaven. 2 -

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

■128

hook The brilliant steeds reappear in the myth of Medeia as

--^—. the dragons who bear her mysterious chariot through the

Smikus air. The name dragon, indeed, denotes simply any keen-
dragons. sighted thing, and in its other form, Dorltas, is applied to a
gazelle. t We shall presently see that a sharp distinction is
drawn between the serpent as an object of love and affection,
and the snake which is regarded (whether as Ahi, Vritra, or
Ahriman) with profound hatred. But the serpent-worship
of the Bast and West is founded on the emblem of the
Linga,' and belongs to a class of ideas altogether different
from those which were awakened by the struggle of darkness
against the light and the sun. This darkness is everywhere
described as a snake or serpent: but the names applied to
Alii and Vritra do not imply keenness of sight, and the
enemy of Indra and Phoibos becomes on Hellenic soil a
dragon, only because the beast had there received this as its
special name. The tradition, however, survived that the
steeds of the sun were also Drakontes or keen-eyed things,
and thus they not only draw the chariot of Medeia, but
reveal to Iamos the knowledge of things to come. These
snakes who nurse the infant prophet on the violet beds are
the flashing-eyed messengers of morning, not the devouring
serpents of darkness who seek to slay the new-born Herakles
in his cradle.

Sorcery. As possessing this gift of the dragon-chariot bestowed on
craft WitC ' " ^er ky Helios, Medeia is emphatically the wise woman; and
in this myth we have probably the groundwork of those no¬
tions which were finally developed into the system of sorcery
and witchcraft. The knowledge of Medeia came to her
from the same superhuman source with the inspiration of
the Pythian priestess of Delphoi; the Latin witch derived her
power from a secret compact with Hekate. Christianity
converted Phoibos and his sister into demons ; and at once
the Canidias of the empire were regarded as trafficking with
devils for the acquisition of unlawful powers. In the transi¬
tion from the idea of a wisdom which, although not naturally
attainable, might be conferred on some by the bright being
whose eye pierces all space, to the notion of compacts made
1 See Section XII. of this chapter.

MEDEIA

GLAUKfi.

' 429

between witches and the devil we have a developement or chap.
corruption in close 'analogy with that confusion between . 1L .
Leukos, bright, as a general epithet, and the same word
Lukos, as a special name for the wolf, from which sprung
first the myth of the transformation of Lvkaon, and then
probably the wide-spread superstition of Lykanthropy. 1

As the wise woman, Medeia is the child of the ocean The story
nymph Idyia, or, in another version, of HekatS (the female ofM’’ 15 ™-
correlative of Hekatos or Phoibos), who is herself the daughter
of Asteria, the starlit night. Her father is Aietes, the Kol-
chian king, but he is a son of Helios who leaves to him and
his descendants the magic wreath and robe by which Medeia
revenges herself on Glauke. 2 This robe is, indeed, only
another form of the golden fleece, the mantle of burnished
cloud seen at sunrise and sunset. As such, it eats into the
flesh not only of Gla.uke, the fair daughter of the Corinthian
Kreon, but of Herakles himself, when his toils come to an
end on mount Oita. Of her share in .the victory of Jason at
Aia, it is enough here to say that in the taming of the fire¬
breathing bulls, and in the. discomfiture of the men sprung
from the dragon’s teeth, she plays the part of Ariadne and
receives Ariadne’s reward. "Whether faithful or treacherous,
the sun can never remain with his first love, and even Odys¬
seus, whose one longing is to return to his home, is parted
from Penelope during the weary hours which pass between
sunset and sunset. But before the time of her great sorrow
comes, Medeia avenges the wrongs done to Iason long ago at
Iolkos. During her sojourn there in the house of Pelias,
she persuaded his daughters to cut up his body and boil his
limbs in a cauldron, in the belief that he would thus be
restored to youth. 3 Medeia purposely failed to pronounce
the spell at the right time, and the limbs of Pelias were
consumed by the fire. Then follows her escape with Iason
in her dragon chariot to Corinth, where his love is trans-

in the legend of the Goose-girl
Well (the Pawn-maiden with hei

MYTHOLOGY

THE ARYAN NATIONS.

ferred to Glauke, after whose death Medeia, like Gudrun in
the Yolsung story, slays her own children—a crime closely re¬
sembling the slaughter of Pelops by Tantalos. Such are the
chief features of the myth of Medeia, to which some added
that she became the wife of Aigeus, the Athenian king, or
of the Corinthian Sisyphos. Some, again, made her return
with Iason to Kolchis, while others took her to Italy, and
described her as acquiring the name Anguitia from her power
of fascinating serpents. Finally, she is said to have been
wedded to Achilleus in Elysion.

The involuntary departure of the sun from the dawn or
his capricious desertion of her is exhibited in the myths of
a. long series of maidens wooed and forsaken, whether by
Phoibos himself or by heroes on whose head rests his light
and majesty. With the story of Koronis the mother of
Asklepios the myth of Prokris is in close accordance. Her
birthplace is Athens, the city of the Dawp, and her mother
is Herse, the Dew, while her own name denotes also simply
the sparkling drops. 1 ' We are thus prepared for the myth
which tells us that Eephalos, a Phokian chief, coming to
Athens, won her love and plighted his faith to her. But
Kephalos was loved also by Eos, who sought to weaken his
love for Prokris with a purpose so persistent that at last
she induced him to make trial of her affection. He there¬
fore deserts Prokris, to whom after a time he returns in
disguise. When in this shape he has won her love,
he reveals himself, and Prokris in an agony of grief and
shame flies to Crete, where she obtains from Artemis tlie
gift of a spear .which shall never miss its mark and of a
hound which can never fail to seize its prey. 2 With these

to sprinkle, use
‘ The same r<
languages

x Muller, refers Pro- tliology,’ Chips, cf c. ii. 87.
rit prush and prish, 2 In the myth of Ikaros, or Ikarioi
chiefly of raindrops, tins dog appears under the name Mair
f. in the Teutonic (the glistening), who helps Erigone tb

1 41 .* daughter of Ikarios in her search to

the body of her father, who has bee

and Bopp identifies prush with
tue u. H. G-. frus, frigere. In Greek
we must refer to the same root v
irpwKts, a dewdrop, and also Prokris,
the dew. Thus the wife of Jvephalos is
only a repetition of Herse, her mother—
Hers£, dew, being derived from Sanskrit
prish, to sprinkle.'—‘ Comparative My-

Anygros (the parched). Her

' n *un

gifts she returns to Kephalos, who after seeing her success
in the chase longs to possess them. But they can he yielded
only in return for his love, and thus Prokris brings home to
him the wrong done to herself, and Eds is for the time
discomfited. But Prokris still fears the jealousy of Eds and
watches Kephalos as he goes forth to hunt, uutil, as one
day she lurked among the thick bushes, the unerring dart
of Artemis hurled by Kephalos brings the life of the gentle
Prokris to an end. This myth explains itself. Kephalos is
the head of the sun, and Kephalos loves Prokris,—in other
words, the snn loves the dew. But Eds also loves Kephalos,
i.e. the dawn loves the sun, and thus at once we have the
groundwork for her envy of Prokris. So again when we are
told that, though Prokris breaks her faith, yet her love is
still given to the same Kephalos, different though he may
appear, we have here only a myth formed from phrases
which told how the dew seems to reflect many suns which
are yet the same sun. The gifts of. Artemis are the rays
which flash from each dewdrop, and which Prokris is de¬
scribed as being obliged to yield up to Kephalos, who slays
her as unwittingly as Phoihos causes the death of Daphne
or Alpheios that of Arethousa. The spot where she dies is
a thicket, in which the last dewdrops would linger before
the approach of the midday heats.

The various incidents belonging to the life of Eds are so
transparent that the legend can scarcely he said to he a
myth at all. Her name is, as we have seen, that of the
Yedic' dawn-goddess TJshas, and she is a daughter of Hy¬
perion (the soaring sun) and of Euryphassa (the broad
shining), and. a sister of the sun and inoon (Helios and
Selene). If Ovid calls her a child of Pallas, this is only
saying again that she is the offspring of the dawn. Like
Phoihos and Herakles, she has many, loves; but from all she
is daily parted. Every morning she leaves the couch of
Tithdnos, 1 and drawn by the gleaming steeds Lampos and
Phaethon, rises into heaven to announce to the gods and to
mortal men the coming of the sun. In the Odyssey she
closes, as she began, the day. Her love, which is given to

■‘"»P

Tithunys.

MYTHOLOGY OP ^HE ARYAN NATIONS,

Tithonos and Kephalos is granted also to Ori^n (the son m
liis character as the hunting and far-shooting god), whom
according to one version she conveys to Delos, the bright
la,nd, but who in another is slain by the arrow of Artemis.
She also carries to the home of the gods the beautiful
Kleitos. Her children are born in many lands. As united
with Astraios, the starry, she is the mother of Zephyros,
Boreas, and Notos, the breezes or winds of morning, and
of Heosphoros, the light-bringer. Another son of Eds is
Phaethon, whom mythographers made the father of the luck¬
less son of Helios, hut who is really the same being with his
son. Finally, she is the mother of Memnon, the chieftain
from the glistening land of the Aithiopians (Ethiopians),
who falls by the spear of Antilochos, and on whose death she
weeps tears of morning dew, and obtains from Zeus the
boon that he shall rise again to renewed and endless life.

Another form of Eds is the beautiful Hebe, ever young,
on whom is bestowed without any drawback the youthful¬
ness of the maimed Hephaistos. She is the daughter neces¬
sarily of Zeus and Herd. Like the Yedic Ahana or Ushas
she can make the old young again, and she ministers to
the gods the life-giving nectar and ambrosia. But Hebe,
though the bride of the deified Herakles, or the mother of
his children Alexiares and Aniketos, the invincible deliverers,
remains little more than a name. She is Ganymede, the
brilliant; and thus what Iris is to Hermes, that is Hebe to
Ganymddes, the lovely Trojan youth who is borne away on
the eagle’s wing to the Olympian heaven, where he also
became the immortal cup-bearer of the gods. Thus in both
alike we see the morning light carried up into heaven on
the wings of the sunlit cloud.

The same story of unrequited love which has been em¬
bodied in the myths of Ariadne and Medeia, of Selene and
Echo, meets us again in the legends which the Latin poets
modified to suit their own traditions, or their prejudices and
fancies. But although Virgil h*s chosen to mix up the
story of Dido with that of ASneas (Aineias), he has intro¬
duced into it little or nothing which is not found in the
myth as related by Justin. In fact, the story of Aphrodite

DIDO AND

433

or Daphne is twice told in. the life of Dido, for the Sichasus CHAP

or Acerbas whose death she bewails is the Adonis who, like ._ijj__

Sichaeus, is slain by the dark being or power of night. As
the Panis look greedily on the cattle of Indra; Pygmalion
covets the' vast treasures which Sichseus possesses with
Tantalos, Sisyphos, Helen and Brynhild, or Ixion; and thus
is the husband of Dido murdered, her first and, according to
the version of Justin, her only love, and his wealth is in
the hands of his destroyer. But the idea of dwelling with
Pygmalion is as hateful to her as Paris. became to the
Helen whom he had stolen with her treasures. As faithful
to the memory of her lost love as is Sarama to Indra, Dido
pretends to listen to the traitor, while she makes ready for
flight. In her new home another suitor appears in the
Libyan Hiarbas, who repeats the importunities of the Itha-
kan suitors, until Dido, wearied out, promises to do as he
wishes; but having made a huge pile for the, offering of a
hecatomb, she slays herself upon it, declaring that now she
is going, as her people and the Libyans desired it, to her
husband. The version of Virgil differs from this in little
more than a name. iEneas is only another form of the bright
being with whom Dido would willingly have .dwelt for ever;
but he is the sun-god who cannot pause to bestow on her
his love, or who must hasten away after a brief mockery
of gladness. Li the former case, the myth answers to the
legends of Adonis, Endymion, or Harkissos; in the latter
the desertion of Dido is hut the desertion of Prokris, Ariadne,
or Koronis; and the Tyrian Elissa dies, like Herakles,
amid the flames of a fiery sunset. The same story is re¬
peated yet again in the myth of Anna, the sister of Dido,
whom Latin tradition identified with the sroddess Anna
Perenna . 1 After her sister’s death Anna follows fEneas to

1 This name n-as naturally referred to puma, who is described by Talers*
the words aanys and percnnls by a people ‘of ruddy complexion, her win

VOL. I.

MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.

BOOK Italy where, though she is kindly received by him, she finds •

■_1.,-—- in Lavinia a Prokris, whom she, like Eds, must regard with

deadly jealousy. But her arms are turned not upon her
rival but upon herself; and the second woman who has
lavished her affections on iEneas casts herself into'the same
Numician stream in which iEneas afterwards disappears from
the sight of men. The same repetitions mark the story of
iEneas, who, although fighting (reluctantly, as some versions
have it,) on the side of the thief who steals Helen, is yet a
being like the Lykian Sarpedon or the Aithiopian Memndn.
Like them, he is the child.not of a mortal mother, but of the
brilliant goddess of the dawn, and in the Trojan army he
plays the part of Acliilleus in the Achaian host. Like the
son of Thetis, he is the possessor of immortal horses, and
like him he' is at feud with the king, for Priam fails to do
him honour, as Agamemnon heaps disgrace on Achilleus.
Prom the flames of the ruined Ilion he escapes bearing on
his shoulders his father Anchises, the aged man who, while
yet he had the youth and beauty of Tithonos, had been the
darling of Aphrodite. His wife Creusa (Kreiousa, a name
answering to that of Euryanassa, the wide-ruling, and being
simply the feminine form of Kreon or Kreion), comes behind
him like the twilight following the sun who is hastening
on into the land of night. But the twilight must vanish
before the sun can be seen again, and Creusa dies or dis¬
appears, like Helle,—the converse of the myth of Hero and
Leiandros (Leander). But iEneas like Herakles has other
loves before him ; and the fortunes of Dido and Anna are
brought before us again in the legend of the Italian Lavinia.
She too is the bright Helen for whom kings and nations are
ready to fight and die; but although iEneas wins her, there
remain yet other dangers and other enemies, and in the
final strife with the Butulians the dawn-child vanishes in
the stream of Nnmicius, as Arethousa and Daphne plunge
into the waters from which Anadyomene comes up in the
mornino'. The true feeling ofcthe people who recounted

The title A;
root ap (aqua

the apparently from the .same stem -with
t by the Latin pario, to produce. Nork,
>mes Beal-Wbrterbuch, i. 89.

lOKASTfi AND AITHBA. ' 435

this myth is shown in the title which they accorded to him. citap.
Henceforth he is Jupiter Indiges, the father from whom - U ' .
they spring, and who bestows upon them all that makes life
worth living for.

The Bame story of disastrous love is presented under other Her6 and
names in the legend of Leiandros (Leander), a myth which I ' elantlroE -
exhibits the sun as plunging through the waters to reach the
beautiful morning, who holds out -her gleaming light in the
east; for Hero (whose name is identical with that of H§r6)
is the priestess of the dawn-goddess Aphrodite, and the road
which separates her lover from herself is the Hellespontos,
the Lykabas or path of light, the track of Helld the dawn-
maiden. Htiro, again, dwells in the eastern Lesbos, while
Leiandros'has his home in Abydos. He is thus the Phoibos
Delpliinios, the fish or frog-sun, who dies in. the furious
storm; and through grief for her lost love Hero casts herself
into the waters, like Kephalos from the Leukadian cliff after
the death of Prokris.

Not less sad than that of Prokris or of Dido is the lot of The Brides
Iole, Iokaste, Aithra, Auge, Danae, or AriadnA In the first of tl10 Sun '
two of these forsaken wives or desolate mothers we see the
violet tints of morning, which reappear in Iamos, Iolios,
and Iasfin. Prom Herakles, Iole is parted almost at the
moment when she meets him. Her, beautiful form is seen
near his funeral pile, as the violet-tinted clouds may be seen
among the flaming vapours lit up in a blood-red sunset;
and as the blaze of the fire which consumes the body of
Herakles rises to the heavens, she is left alone in her sorrow
to vanish before the cheerless gloaming. The fate of Iokaste
had for the Greeks of the age of Perikles a more terrible
significance. She is not only the mother of Oidipous, but
his wife. As his mother, she had been tortured by seeing
her child torn from her arms, to be cast away on Mount
Kithairon; and the shame of finding herself his wife after
his victory over the Sphinx drives her to end her misery
with her own hands. 1 AccA'ding to the version of Hygiuus,
the life of Aithra (the pure air), the mother of Theseus, had

436 MYTHOLOGY OP TIIK ARYAN NATIONS.

book the same end. Long ago she had been loved by Bellerophdn;

-, '—- but when he was driven from Corinth, she became the wife

of the Athenian Aigeus, who left her with the infant Theseus
at Troizen, having, like the father of Sigurd, placed his
invincible weapons under a large stone, that his son might
become possessed of them only when he had reached his full
strength. Later still, the Dioskouroi, it is said, carried her
away to Sparta, where she became the slave of Helen, and
whence with Helen she was taken to Troy, to be brought
back again through the prayers of her grandson Demophon.
By the same hard fate, Auge, the (brilliant) daughter of
Neaira, who, as the early morning, reappears as the mother
of the nymphs Pliaethousa and Lampetie in the Odyssey, no
sooner becomes the mother of Telephos (the being who shines
from far) than she is deprived of her child, who is exposed
on Mount Parthenion. The story of Ariadne exhibits much
the same outlines. She is the daughter of Minos, the son of
Zeus, and the all-brilliant Pasiphae, who is the mother of the
Minotauros, as the bright Here is the mother of Typhaon. In
the slaughter of this monster she has a share corresponding
to that of Medeia in the conquest of the bulls and the
dragon-sprung men; like Medeia, she accompanies the con¬
queror, and like her she is deserted by him. Ariadne then
either slays herself, like lokaste and Auge, Dido or Anna, or
becomes the wife of Dionysos, who places her among the stars.
In substance this is also the story of the Argive Danad, who
is shut up by her father Akrisios in a brazen dungeon, 1 which
Zeus enters in the form of a golden shower, as the light of
morning pierces the dark chambers of the night. She thus
becomes the mother of Perseus; but, as in the case of Oidi-
pous, the oracle had foretold that if she had a son, he would
become the slayer of her father Akrisios, and Akrisios,
anxious like Laios to preserve his own life, placed Danae
and her child in a chest, as according to one version Oidi-
pous also was placed and borne away to Brasiai. The story
of her sojourn in the house of Polydektes at Seriphos, of his
persecutions and the more benignant treatment of his brother
Diktys, of her rescue on the return of her son, and her restor-
1 The Iron Stove of the German story. (Grimm.)

AUGE AND. EUROPE.

437

ation to her native land, belongs rather to the mythical history cSap.
of Perseus. The myth of Andromeda, the beautiful daughter IT -
of the Aithiopian king Keplieus, is less gloomy; but although
her woes seem to end with her deliverance from the dragon,
she had up to that time had her full shkre of sorrow. Her
mother Kassiopeia had, like Niobe, boasted that her child
was more beautiful even than the daughters of Nereus, who
prayed to Poseidon to avenge the insult, as Leto called on
Phoibos to requite the wrong done to her by Niobe. Poseidon
accordingly brought the waters of the sea over the land, and
with them a sea-monster who, like the Sphinx or the Mino-
tauros, can be satisfied only with human blood. The former
fills the streets of Thebes with corpses; the latter exacts the
yearly tribute of the-dawn-children. But the solitary An¬
dromeda, abandoned to the huge sea-dragon, takes a firmer
hold on the popular imagination, and is reproduced in a
thousand forms, from the women rescued by Oidipous and
Theseus down to Una and her Bed Cross Knight. All these
deliverers are men unknown to fame ; but they are all en¬
dowed with powers for which they who see them give them
no credit, and they all exhibit the manly type of generous
chivalry which finds its consummation in the pure Sir Gala-
had.

The same idea is the groundwork of the myth of the TheArkn-
Arkadian Auge, the clear atmosphere of the land of light. d,an
Hence the local myth necessarily related that Herakles came
to her whenever lie visited Tegea, and thus she becomes the
mother of one of the fatal children whose life begins and
ends in disaster. No sooner is her son horn than her father
Aleos. decrees her death and the .exposure of the child. But
Auge is saved to become the wife of the Mysian Teuthras, or,
according to another version, to escape narrowly the fate of
the Theban Iokastfi, and in the end to he brought back to
Tegea by her sou Telephos, as Perseus brings his mother
back to Argos.

The story of Eur6p6 bfings before us the dawn, not as Euriipi
fleeing from the pursuit of the sun, but as borne across the
heaven by the lord of the pure ether. Zeus here, like Indra,
himself assumes the form of a hull, anil takes away the child

438

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.

uooic as she plays with her brother in her Phenician home. 1

-- r -—• Almost every name in the myth tells its own tale, although

we may perhaps have to put aside the names of Ag&nor and
Kadmos as merely Hellenised forms of the Semitic Kedem
and Chnas. Europe herself is simply the broad-spreading
flush of dawn, which is seen first in the Phoinikia, or pnrple
region of the morning, and whose name belongs to the same
class with Eurylcleia, Eurydike, Euryganeia, and Euryphassa.
She is the child of Telephassa, the being whose light streams
from afar; “ and in her first loveliness she is lost to those who
delight in her, when she is snatched away to her western
exile. Then follows the long journey of Kadmos and Tele-
phassa, the weary search of the sun through the livelong
day for his early lost sister or bride. There were obviously
a thousand ways of treating the myth. They might recover
her in the end, as Alpheios is reunited to Aretliousa and
Perseus comes again to Danae; but as it might be said that
they might behold her like hereafter, so the tale might run
that the being who had delighted them with her beauty should
he seen herself again no more. The myth of Europe sets
forth the latter notion. Telephassa sinks down and dies far
in the west on the plains of Thessaly, and Kadmos, journeying
westward still, learns at Delphoi that he is to seek his sister
no longer.

Aithaia The myth of Althaia sets forth the dawn or morning as
burn'itg tl le mother of a child whose life is bound up with a burning

Brand. brand. As soon as the brand is burnt out her son will die,

according to the inexorable doom pronounced by the Moirai.
This brand is the torch of day, which is extinguished when
the sun sinks beneath the western horizon. From'this con-

1 This bull reappears in the Norse Aietes, not the laving search' of Kadmos
tale of Katie "Wooden-cloak (Dasent), and Telephassa; and the bull has to go
endowed with the powers of Wish. In through fearful conflicts with the Trolls,
its left ear is a cloth which, when spread before the happy end is brought about

the'dawn-maiden, who has been thrust stories of Cinderella and ‘'SdeTOBai.* 6
out of her father’s house ; but when the 2 Pindar {Fifth. iv.) speaks of Europe
stepmother says that she cannot rest as aflaughter of Tityos, a gigantic being,
until she has eaten the Pun Bull’s flesh, who is slain by the swift arrow of

maiden that, if she wills, he will carry penalty with Ixion, Sisyphos, Tantalos,
her away. The pursuit of Katie on her and Prometheus,
bull is the chase of Iason by the angry

THE BURNISH BRAND. ' ■ 439

ccption of the sun’s course sprung the idea that his mother CHAP,
kept him alive by snatching the log from the fire. But ■ 1J ' ■

although Meleagros is, like Plioibos and Achilleus, invincible
and invulnerable, the words of the Moirai must be accom¬
plished; and as the mother of the sun may be either the
dark night or the nourishing dawn (Althaia), so the wife of
Oineus has her kinsfolk among the dark beings; and when
these are slain by Meleagros, she thrusts the brand again
into the fire, and the life of her brilliant child smoulders
away. But his death brings with it the death alike of his
mother and his bride, for the tints of the dawn or the
gloaming cannot linger long' after the sun is down. The
• names introduced into this myth are found for the most part
in a host of other stories. She is the daughter of Eury-
themis, a reflection of Europd or Euryganeia, and a sister of
Leda, the mother of the brilliant Dioskouroi; and among
her own children is DSianeira, whose union with Heraldes is
fatal to the hero. 1 Of Kleopatra, the beautiful wife of
Meleagros, there is little more to say than that she is,
like DaplinS and Aretkousa, a child of the waters, the
Euenos being her father, and that, like Oinone and Bryn-
liild, she dies of grief when the chequered life of the being
wbom she loves has been brought to an end.

Section VI.—ATHENE.

The name Athene is practically a transliteration of the The ori-
Yedic Ahana, the morning, which in a cognate form appears
as Daliana, the Greek Daphne. 2 The myths which have P| lroi .. v ^
clustered round this greatest of Hellenic dawn-goddesses 1 '

differ indefinitely in detail, but all may manifestly be traced
back to the same source, and resolved into the same mythical
phrases. She is pre-eminently the child of the waters, she
springs from the forehead of the sky, and remains fresh,
pure, and undefiled for ever. In her origin the virgin deity

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

of" the Athenian Akropolis was strictly physical; bat the
notion of the being who wakes up the world after the dark¬
ness of night might soon pass into that of wisdom, the con¬
nection between light and knowledge (the <pms and 71 >&<ns of
the Fourth Gospel) being of the closest kind. Thus, in one
of the Vedic hymns we have already had the phrase that the
dawn as waking every mortal to walk about receives praise
from every thinker. But as being sprung from the forehead
of the sky, she may he expected to know the secrets of hea¬
ven ; and thus we have in Athene a being who, like Phoibos,
is filled with all the wisdom of Zeus. In the earlier form of
the myth neither the Vedic Ahana nor the Hellenic AthenS
has any mother. In the Eig Veda, ‘Ushas, the dawn, sprang
from the head of Dyu, the murddhadivah, the East, the fore¬
head of the sky.’ 1

But if Athene is Zeus-bom, the poet, when he tells us this,
speaks of her as Tritogeneia, the child of Tritos. 2 It is
strange that this god, whose name differs so slightly from
that of the water-god Triton, should have so far disappeared
from the memory of the Greeks as to leave them at a loss to
account for the epithet except by connecting it with places
hearing a similar name, as among others the Libyan lake
Tritonis, and the Boiotian stream Triton, on whose banks, as
on those of the Attic stream, towns sprung up called Athenai
and Eleusis. 3 In short, every stream so named became a birth¬
place for Athene, although the meaning of the old phrase
was not lost, until an attempt was made, by referring the
myth to the alleged Eolic word for a head, to resolve it into
the story of her springing from the head of Zeus. But the
fact that in the Veda Trita rules over the water and the
air, establishes the identity of Trito or Tritos, the father of

1 Max Miillor, ib. • Homer knows of kite!.™, asks permission to take up
no mother of Athene, nor does the Veda water for the prince, who will receive

dawn, though her parents are spoken of Next day she appears at the palace on a
in the. dual.’ ' splendid steed, and to his question

2 Hes. Thcog. 924. whence she comes, her reply is ‘I’m

1 This connection of the dawn with fronr Bath ; ’ the next day she is from

water runs through almost every legend Towel-land, the third day from Comb¬
ing. Thus ill the Norse tale of Katie- the dawn-maidens always comb their
Wooden-cloak the dawn-maiden, while golden locks by the water-side,
working humbly like Cinderella in the

441

ATHENE.

Athene, not only -with that deity, hut with Triton, Ampin- CIIAP.
trite, and the Tritopatores or lords of the winds.' The 11 .

theory which, from the supposed Libyan birthplace of Athene,
infers a relation between Egyptian and Hellenic mythology
calls for no notice.

The Hesio.dic Theogony assigns Metis (a name akin to that Birth of
of the wise Medeia) as a mother to Athdnd; but this story is Atll6n6 -
reconciled with the other myth by saying, that by the counsel
of Ouranos and Gaia Zeus swallowed Metis before her child
was born. In the saying of Pindar, that Hephaistos at her
birth split the forehead of Zeus with a brazen axe, we see
the sudden stream of light shooting up in the morning sky,
which it seems to cleave; and in the golden shower which
falls at her birth, we have only a repetition of the mode
in which Danae became the mother of Perseus. 2 When
Apollodoros and others say that the forehead of Zeus,
was cloven by Prometheus or Hermes, we have only to
remember that these are both spoken of (together with the
Argive Phordneus) as the first givels of the boon of fire
to mankind. 3

As springing from the forehead of Zeus, Athdne was known Parentage
as Eoryphasia in Messene, as Akria in Argos, while Minerva of Athens.

1 at. Breal, who traces tin's identity, cites as setting it aside. This story is
Tlcrcule ct Cacus, 17, cites the words of that ‘the slaves of Dirghotomas, when be
Suidas, ‘ rpiTOirdropcs • A-hp.wv ivrfi was old and blind, became insubordinate,

’ArtfiSt (p7)a\v avepovs elvai rovs Tpiroird- and attempted to destroy him, first by
Topas. ’ .It is said of Indra that ‘ animated throwing him into the fire, whence he
by the sacrificial food, he broke through was saved by the Asrins, then into
the defences of Vala, as did Trita water, whence he was extricated by the
through the coverings of the well.’— same divinities; upon which Trnitana, . •

H. H. Wilson, It. V. S. vol. i. p. 141. one of the slaves, wounded him on the
Professor AV’ilson • here remarks that ‘head, breast, and arms, and then
‘ Ekata, Dwita, and Trita [the first, inflicted like injuries on himself, of
speond, and third] were three men pro- which he perished.’ This story becomes
ducod in water, by Agni, for the purpose clear throughout when compared with
of removing or rubbing off the reliques the myth of E6s, who, like the slaves of
of an oblation of clarified butter. The Eirgh'otnmn, shut up the -decrepit

442 •

MYTHOLOGY OF TIIE ARYAN NATIONS.

rook was called Capta (capita) at Rome.' But there were' also

■-^— traditions which spoke of her as a child not of Zeus, but of

the giant Pallas, 2 who attempts to violate her purity, and is
therefore slain by her. Here we have the dawn regarded
as springing from the night, and the night as seeking
to mar or to destroy his offspring. It is, in short, the
myth which makes Laios, Akrisios, and Astyages hate their
children, who are in their turn doomed to slay their sires,
as Athene slays the monster Pallas. The legend which
makes her a daughter of Poseidon is merely a statement
that the morning is born from the waters. But as with the
dawn there comes generally the morning breeze (Sarameya,
Hermeias, Hermes, the child of Sararna) with its sweet and
soothing tones, so when, by the aid of Athene, Perseus
has slain the dark Gorgon, Athene is said, like Hermes,
to have invented the flute in order to imitate the plaintive
sounds in which the Gorgon sisters mourned the slain
Medousa.®

Athene But pure and undefiled though the dawn may be, she is
Phoibos yet followed by the sun, who may therefore be regarded as
and Lych- i ler offspring; and thus Phoibos Apolldn was sometimes
called a son of Hephaistos and Atheng, while another version
expressed the same idea by making them the parents of
Lychnos (the brilliant), another Phaethon. 4 As the dawn-
goddess, she can keep men young, or make them old. She
rouses them to fresh vigour from healthful sleep, or as the
days come, round she brings them at last to old age and
death. Prom her come the beauty and strength, the golden
locks and piercing glances of Achilleus and Odysseus. But
when for the accomplishment of the great work it becomes
needful that Odysseus shall enter his own house as a toil-
worn beggar, it is Athene who dims the brightness of his
eye, and wraps him in squalid raiment, 5 and again she

IX Midler, Lectures on Language,
» ' is manifestly only

emple. On this Mr. Grotc, History of '

Greece, i. 75. remarks, 1 It was altogetb
impossible to make Ereelitheus the s<
of Athene: the type of the goddess f„
bade it.’ Rather, it was forbidden on
by the form which the idea of Alius
assumed in the minds of the Athenian.

and the reason is obvious.

* Orf.xiii. 430. See vol. i. p. 160.

ATHENE GLAUKOPIS.

■ 443

restores his former majesty when once more he is to meet chap.
his son Telemachos. 1 So, again, she preserves to Penelope . IL .
all the loveliness of her youth, and presents her to Odysseus
as beautiful as when he left her twenty years ago, when the
Achaian hosts set out for Ilion, while she restores Laertes
also to something of his ancient vigour. 2

Of the vast number of names by which she was known Epiiicisof
and worshipped, the earliest probably, and certainly the A,ha ’ 6 -
most common, denote simply , the light. She is especially
the goddess of the grey or gleaming face, Glaukdpis. She is
Optiletis, Oxyderkes, Ophthalmitis, the being of keen eyes
and piercing vision; but these epithets might, it is plain, be
made to bear a moral or intellectual meaning; and thus a
starting point would he furnished for the endless serifes of
names which described her as full of wisdom and counsel, as
enforcing order and justice, as promoting the tillage of the
earth, and as fostering all science and all art. Thus the
epithets Akria and Akraia, which can he rightly interpreted
only after a comparison with her other names, Koryphasia
and Capta, might he taken to denote her protection of cities
and fortresses, while her name Ageleia, as the driver of the
clouds whom Sarama leads forth to their pastures, might
be regarded as denoting her care for those who till the soil
or keep herds. But her physical character is never kept out
of sight. She is the goddess especially of the Athenians,
and of the dawn city which received her name after the
contest in which she produced the olive against the horse
created by Poseidon, for so it was decreed by Zeus that the
city should be called after the deity who should confer the
greatest boon on man, and the sentence was that the olive,
as the emblem of peace, was better than the horse, whose
chief use was for war. But the city so named after her was
emphatically the glistening city (\nrapal ’A Or/vai), although
the epithet it seems was so little applicable to it in its out¬
ward aspect that the Athenians of the historical ages prized
it with a jealous earnestness, and were ready to grant any
prayer made by people who addressed them as citizens of
brilliant Athens.

MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS.'

' She is, however, the guardian not of Athenians only but
of all the solar heroes; in her Bellerophontes, Achilleus,
Herakles and Perseus, Odysseus and Diomedes, find their
unfailing friend and comforter. From her come all wealth
and prosperity, and accordingly we find the special emblems
of wealth and fertility intimately associated with her wor¬
ship. Her sacred serpent was fed on- the Akropolis, and
yearly in her great procession the sacred ship, covered with
the peplos woven by Athenian maidens, was carried to her
shrine. 1 In one of the so-called Orphic hymns, she is said
to be both male and female, and thus to remain unwedded.
Doubtless the dawn- may be regarded as of spotless purity
and unfading loveliness, and this idea might give rise to
images of transcendent holiness and majesty; but she may be
thought of also not only as giving birth to children, but as
being sensible to passion, and we are not justified in leaving
out of sight those myths which present Athene in this light.
On the one hand, according to one story, she blinds Teiresias
because he had looked upon her unclothed form (a myth
closely akin to that of the dazzling treasures of Ixion, which
no man might look upon and live), and shrinks with loathing
from Hephaistos when he seeks to lay hands upon her. On
the other, the myth of Prometheus exhibits her as aiding
him in his theft of fire against the will of Zeus, while one
version represents her as so acting from feelings not of
friendship but of love. In general, however, the harmony
between the dawn and the sky from which it springs, in
other words, between Zeus and Athene, is undisturbed; and
thus when Zeus is determined to take vengeance for the
deceit put upon him by Prometheus, Athene lends herself as
a willing accomplice in his scheme. She is to teach Pandora
the skilful use of the loom, while Aphrodite is to adorn her
with all the enticements of physical beauty, and Hermes is
to give her a crafty and thievish mind and temper. 3 But
even in the Iliad where she is generally represented as being

He on Pandora and made her
l 1 may be regarded as another
of the myth. It is certainly not

MINERVA.

445

in perfect accord with the will of Zeus, she engages, as we chap.
have seen, in an abortive, conspiracy to bind Zeus, in which
she is the accomplice of Here and Poseidon. 1

In all her essential attributes, the Hellenic Athene is re- The Latin
presented by the Latin Minerva, a name which Professor Miaorra '
Max Muller connects with mens, the Greek fiivos, and the
Sanskrit manas, mind, and compares it with mane, the
morning. Mania, an old name of the mother of the Lares,
and the verb manare as applied especially to the sun, while
Matuta and other kindred words denote the dawn. 2 What¬
ever may be the connection between Minerva and Matuta,
we can scarcely fail to see the affinity of the name with the
verb promenervare, used in the Carmen Saliare as an equiva¬
lent to the kindred moneo, to admonish. The Latin Minerva,
as embodying a purely intellectual idea, is thus a being even
more majestic than the Hellenic Athene; and to so intellec¬
tual a conception we should scarcely expect that many fables
would attach themselves. Hence the Latin Minerva can
scarcely be said to have any mythology. Like Ceres she
stands alone in incommunicable sanctity and in unfathomable
wisdom.

1 n. i. 400. to Juno as the guardian of the mint on

2 Lectures on Lanquagc, second series, the Capitoline hill. See also note i., p.

50 5. To the same root, probably, must 115.

be referred the epithet moneta, applied

E-NO CONTENTS)

448

append'ix.

et qui, sons lc feu d’une egale inspiration, ont pu produire des frag¬
ments, reuriis plus tard en un merveilleux edifice, d’une h&rmonis,
d’une proportion, d’une symetric, d’une solidite sans pareilles!
Quoi! C’est la expliquer la composition de l’lliade! C’est se
rendro comptc cn critique, e’est-a-dire en juge cciaire et competent
de ce elief-d’oouvrc, dont la beautc ne peut epuiser ni l’admiration
de la foule ni cede des philosophes! ’ (introduction, xxxiv). On
arguments of much the same weight as these M. St.-Hilaire rests
his conclusion that the Iliad and Odyssey were poems not merely
composed, but written down on a soft material, by a single poet.
Every story about Lykourgos, Solon, or other legislators is taken
as indubitable fact; and the priority of Laios to Proitos furnishes
evidence precisely the same in kind with the priority of William the
Conqueror to Henry I. The times of Bellerophon are certainly
historical, and Bellerophon lived two generations before the Trojan
war. But letters were written in his days: and therefore letters-
were in use in the time of the poet who wrote about him and the
Trojan war. The question turning on the phrase aii/iara Auypa,

‘ the woful signs,’ is barely noticed. It must have been an alpha¬
betical writing, for the other supposition would ascribe to painting
a perfection which it had not attained (intr. xlvi). The difficulty
has probably been rarely felt in savage life. But again, writing was
familiar to the heroes of the Trojan war, for they mark the lots
which they throw into a helmet {Iliad, v. 171, et seq.) M. St-
Hilaire’s conclusion may well take away our breath : ‘ Chacun des
guerriers trace sa marque: on agite toutes ces marques dans le
casque d’Agamenmon, et Nestor, qui les secoua, tire eelle d’Ajax,
fils de Telamon, que toute l’armee desirait. On montre la marque
favorisee du sort a chacun des concurrents. Aucun ne la reconnait:
mais quand elle arrive a celni qui l’avait ecrite ou tracee, aussitot
Ajax, plein de joie, declare qu’elle est la sienne. . . Qu’est-ce au
’to que cette marque ? H n’est pas aise de le dire avec precision.

■ comme Homere se sert du m6me mot qui, pour la missive du
">a paru signifies l’ecriture, tout porte a croire qu’ici encore
de l’ecriture qu’il s’agit, et non d’une marque queleonque
'gne grapliique n’eut etc trace ’ (introd. xlviii). As
° main question of an Iliad written from the first, a-n
y on a word scratched by ten or a dozen men would
ere can, however, he no sort of doubt that in a
n would have inscribed his own name, and that
once have named the man who had been
'he herald has to carry the lot about the
1, not to read (for it has never been pre-
n l^e iscd in this sense) but to recognise

AUTHORITY OF ‘ HOMER.’

449

Kis particular mark. It would be impossible for the poet to show
more clearly that the marks were not letters or words, but mere
arbitrary signs. This is literally the whole of the evidence adduced
from our Homeric poems, on which M. St.-Hilaire rests his con¬
clusions that those poems wore from the first written compositions.
It becomes a superfluous task to follow M. St.-Hilaire through his
remarks on. the alleged abundance of writing materials in the
Homeric age, or on the libraries of Osymandyas and Peisistratos.
The real question is not whether poems were written centuries
before the time of Herodotus, but whether the (Greeks had any
written literature before the Persian wars. Mr. Paley has expressed
his conviction that no such literature existed in the times of Pindar,
and the subject has been further examined by Mr. Pennell, in a
paper on the ‘First Ages of a written Greek Literature,’ Trans¬
actions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 1868.

APPENDIX B.—Page 218.

The Historical Value of ‘ Horner/

Since this chapter was written, Mr. Gladstone has published his
‘ Juventus Mundi,’ in which he states his present convictions with
regard to the authorship and historical credibility of our Iliad and
Odyssey, which alone he regards as the poems of Homer. These
convictions are substantially what they were ten years ago, but the
discussion has really advanced' beyond the point at which Mr.
Gladstone leaves it; and the only reason for repeating objections
to arguments which might well he left to themselves, is the weight
which in the opinion of some they may receive from his name and
authority. Instead of noting the result of recent Homeric criticism,
whether conservative or destructive, Mr. Gladstone has chosen the
simpler and easier task of asserting that to himself his old conclu¬
sions on the subject of Honler are thoroughly satisfactory. Homer
is still with him undoubtedly an historical person, and the Iliad and
Odyssey are emphatically historical poems. The poet was born, he
thinks, before or during the Trojan war, and was probably familiar
with those who had fought in it. These conjectures or convictions
are supported by a series of propositions which certainty prove' his
point if' they are suffered to pass unchallenged, but of most of which
it must he said that the}' niujprcre assertion or hypothesis for which
no evidence whatever is adduced.

The ambiguity of much of Mr. Gladstone’s language introduces a
further element of difficulty into the discussion. When, for instance

• 450

APPENDIX.

he says that, ‘ A cardinal argument for placing the date of tho poet
near that of his subject is, that he describes manners from first to last
with the easy, natural, and intimate knowledge of a contemporary
observer,’ there is a sense in which the most sceptical critics will
agree with him. No one doubts that the Homeric poet (or poets)
threw over his (or their) narrative a colour borrowed from the
society in which he (or they) lived. Here there was every motive
for the poet to be truthful, none to depart from the truth; and
the exactness with which all customs of peace and war, of arts
and games, of public and private life were reproduced in the poem,
would inevitably impart an air of reality to the events related,
whatever these might be. This is probably true of the genuine epic
poetry of all nations ; but for the historical character of the incidents
which they relate, it obviously proves nothing. The society of the
age in which the poet lives may be described with indefinite
accuracy, though the house which he builds may be raised on sand.
In this sense certainly ‘ it cannot he too strongly affirmed that the
song of Homer is historic song,’ or even that he has ‘ told us more
about the world and its inhabitants at bis own epoch than any
historian that ever lived.’'—(P. 7.) But unless, with Mr. Gladstone,
we are prepared to infer facts from the ‘ tone and feeling ’ of a poet,
or from his knowledge of human nature generally and of his own
countrymen in particular, we are bound to say plainly that we
speak only of his pictures of life and manners. This limitation will
not satisfy Mr. Gladstone. With him the ‘ subject ’ of Homer is
not so much the picture of society existing in his own time as the
war of which he relates some of the most important incidents.
Here then we are brought face to face with the question of facts ;
and it is, to say the least, most unfortunate that Mr. Gladstone
has not told us plainly and candidly what the ‘chief persons
and events’ are with regard to which we are to look upon
‘ Homer ’ as ‘ historical.’ Mr. Blackie has done this; and we have
seen how the confidence with which be first enunciates the result
of his analysis is modified until the supposed substance vanishes
into thin air, and how, after asserting in one place that there
was one real war, and a real quarrel between AchiUeus and Aga¬
memnon, he admits in another not only that there may have been
no Paris and no Helen, but that it makes no difference to the
history if Agamemnon and Acbilleus never met at all and were
‘ distinct captains of two separate armament's ’ (see p. 185). What
would Mr. Gladstone think of an English history which should tell
us that it made no difference to the essential character of the narra¬
tive whether we suppose that Land and Strafford were joint con¬
spirators against the liberties of England, or the leaders in two

ACTHOKITT OF ‘ HOMEK.’

451 '

several attempts made in successive centuries p We must be par¬
doned if we refuse altogether to admit the historical character of
narratives to which the champions of their veracity obviously give
no real credit. Mr. Gladstone leads us through a region of mists,
in which he would have us follow paths not pointed out to us by
our best historical guides. Thus his first reason for accepting as
historical the chief events of our Iliad and Odyssey is that' It is the
chief business of the poet or bard, as such, in early times, to record
facts, while he records them in the forms of beauty supplied by his
art.’

If we write with the sole aim and hope of discovering the truth,
if truth and truth alone is our single object, we are bound to refuse
any leap which must be taken in the dark. Mr. Gladstone’s reason
is a mere assumption. Why are we to believe that the recording of
facts was the business of the poet in early times, until we know
what their ideas of a fact were, and, indeed, until we have proved
what is here merely asserted ? Against Mr. Gladstone’s dogmatic
assertion we may set the conclusion Of Mr. Grote, that the early
poets and bards dealt with ‘the entire intellectual stock of the age
to which they belonged,’ and that the value of this was measured
by its power of satisfying that ‘ craving for adventure and appetite
for the marvellous which has in modern times become the province
of fiction proper ’ (History of Greece, part i. ch. xvi.), as well as
the deliberate judgment of Bishop Thirlwall that 1 the kind of
history for which Homer invoked the aid of the Muses was not
chiefly valued as a recital of real events,’ and that ‘ if in detached
passages the poet sometimes appears to be relating with the naked
simplicity of truth, we cannot ascribe any higher authority to these
episodes than to the rest of the poem.’ How completely Bishop
Thirlwall sweeps away the whole ‘ Homeric ’ narrative of the Trojan
war, we have seen already, p. 197.

On Mr. Gladstone’s second reason that the truthful recording of
events is especially the business ‘ of the bard who lives near the
events which he professes to sing,’ it is unnecessary to say more
than that Thucydides denies as positively as Mr. Gladstone affirms,
that Homer lived near to the Trojan war (p. 198). Mr. Gladstone’s
fourth reason (the third is a mere inference from the first and
second), is that the poems were always viewed as historical by the
Greeks. This assertion is practically identical with the opinions of
Colonel Mure and Baron Bunsen, which we-have been already
compelled to reject as not offiy resting on no evidence, but as being
altogether opposed to such Evidence as we possess (p. 213). This
summary of evidence I had published in the Fortnightly Review for
May 1, 1867 ; and I must maintain with,all earnestness that it was

(and it is not necessary that are should concede) that this may
possibly account for the choice of the later poets in a Tory few
instances, perhaps five or six, Mr. Gladstone’s admission is in com¬
plete conflict with the position of unparalleled honour and authority
which he attributes to our Iliad and Odyssey throughout the his¬
torical ages. But no political sympathies or antipathies could render
necessary that systematic degradation of characters like Odysseus,
Aias, Hektor, to say nothing of Helen, to account for which Mr.
Gladstone felt himself driven to devise a theory in his ■ Homeric
Studios (vol. iii. p. 555). Nor can they explain the phenomena of
Greek literature already adduced (p. 214). Mr. Gladstone is com¬
pelled to admit that Thucydides speaks of the Hymn to Apollon as
Homeric, and that ‘ doubtless he represents a tradition of his day.’
But these hymns are, in Mr. Gladstone's opinion, very inferior to
‘Homer,’and, therefore, Thucydides jmd his contemporaries were
mistaken ; and thus the unparalleled honour and authority of our
Iliad and Odyssey are modified into the statement that no other
poems were regarded as Hpmeric ‘ by the general and unhesitating

AUTHORITY OP ‘ HOMER.’ 453 '

opinion of the Greeks.’ We do not know enough of this general
opinion to warrant any- very positive statements with regard to it;
hut until it can he proved that the lyric and tragic poets were
acquainted with our Iliad and Odyssey, it can scarcely he affirmed
that the general opinion of the Greeks regarded those poems as
Homeric at all. But, further, what is the actual evidence that the
poems to which alone-Mi - . Gladstone will give the name of Homer,
were ‘always viewed as historical by the Greeks’? All that
Herodotos and Thucydides leave of the story is the solitary fact
of a war which lasted ten years; but if they reject its motive and
incidents, the hinges on which the whole action turns together with
all the action itself, in what sense can it be said that they regarded
the Homeric tale of Troy as historical ? The fact is, that neither
of these great historians could receive that tangled skein of mar¬
vels, miracles, and prodigies, which are inextricably intertwined in
the supernatural machinery of these mythical tales. Hence they
summarily rejected the whole, having thus ‘judged on its own
grounds ’ Homer’s ‘ intermixture of supernatural agency with
human events,’ although Mr. Gladstone insists that this intermix,
ture ‘cannot by the laws of historical criticism he held of itself to
overthrow his general credit ’ (p; 9).. Mr. Gladstone does not tell
ns what are the laws of historical criticism ; but his conception of
them appears to differ widely from that of Bishop Thirlwall, whose
judgment I have more than once been obliged to cite.

It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that all the reasons adduced
by Mr. Gladstone for regai-ding the Iliad and Odyssey as narratives
of real events are of the same shadowy and intangible kind. We
are told that the singular correspondence of the genealogies in these
poems strongly attests the historical trustworthiness of Homer. But
although the lowest links may possibly, in any given case, represent
real persons, these lists all run up to some god or deified hero ; and
Mr. Grote has long since asked by what method we are to deter¬
mine the point at which history ends and fable begins in the links
between the real Hekataios and his divine progenitor (History of
G-reece, part i. eh. iv.). In the same spirit the prophecy of Poseidon
(p. 4) is taken as proving, not that a family calling themselves
Aineiadai were reigning in Troas at the time when this portion of
the Iliad (p. 92) was composed or recited, hut that the then ruling
chief was the actual grandson of the child of Anchises and of Aphro¬
dite, who visibly interferes to rescue her son on the field of battle.
Mr. Gladstone assures usXbat ‘Homer often introduces curious
legends of genealogy, and in a manner which is palpably inoppor-
tune for the purposes of poetry, and which is, on the other hand,
fully accounted for by the historic aim.’ It is enough to say

'454

APPKNDIX.

that these episodes and digressions may he as legitimately need to
prove the composite character, of the poems as to nphold their
historical authority.

Of the. personality of Homer, and the purity or preservation of onr
Homeric text, I need here say hut little. On the former Mr. Glad¬
stone admits that ‘ nothing is known of his person ’ (p. 2), nothing
of the time of his birth, or his place of abode, or of any event in his
life (p. G). The most determined of the separatists could scarcely
desire a thicker darkness; but to the historical critic, these, as we
have already seen (pi174 et seg.), are points of supreme indifference.
Of the text Mr. Gladstone still thinks that ‘ we may, as a general
rule, proceed to handle it with a reasonable confidence that the
ground is firm under our feet,’ in spite of the evidence adduced by
Mr. Paley for questioning that it was known to the great lyric and
tragic poets of Hellas. Its integrity was guaranteed by ‘ the intense
love of the song of Homer felt by every Greek’ (p. 23), although
the evidence is unfortunately scanty on which to rest the conclusion
that their Homer was our Homer, neither less nor more.

In short, after an interval of more than ten years, during which
the phase of the controversy has been wholly changed, Mr. Glad¬
stone has simply repeated the confession of his old Homeric faith.
Doubtless, his appeal is not to the credulity, but to the judgment of
his countrymen, and if I say that his criticism as little upholds the
historical character of our Homeric poems as that of Mr. Blackie,
I do so because the evidence of facts seems to me to preclude any
other conclusion.

APPENDIX C.—Page 222.

The Myth of Oidipous.

A vigorous attempt to overthrow M. Breal’s explanation of the
myth of Oidipous, Le mythe d’CEdipe, 1863, and so to bring dis¬
credit on the method and results of Comparative Mythology, has
been made by M. Comparetti, Edipo e la mitologia comparata. Pisa,
1867. His chief argument seems to be the composite nature of this
myth (as of others), which compels him to regard the episode of
the Sphinx as a mere formula and in no way an essential part of
the legend, and to conclude that at the first this incident had nothing
to do with the story of Oidipous. Ireproof of this assertion, he
lays stress on the silence of the Homeric poet (Odyssey, xi. 270)
on this subject, while speaking of the woeful fortunes of Epikaste
(lokasle), and again of the Hesiodic poet (Works and Days, 163)

THE MYTH OF OIDIPOOS.

455 •

■when referring to the feuds of the sons of Oidipous about' their
father’s treasures (whether these be sheep or apples). To this argu¬
ment M. Breal in his answer to M. Comparetti, Revue critique d’Sis-
toire et de Litterature, Jan. 22, 1870, replies that in the Ilesiodic
Theogony the Phix (Sphinx) is expressly mentioned as inflicting’
deadly woes on the Kadmeians, and thus the connexion of the
Sphinx with the mythical history of Thebes is established beyond
question. He adds that if so capital an incident be left out of the
story of Oidipous, any other myth may be pared down to the
Euemeristie level of plausible fiction. At the same time there is a
sense in which M. Comparetti’s remark that this episode might he
replaced by any other tale of prowess is perfectly true. There is no
reason why Oidipous should not be the slayer of Geryon or Echidna
or Chimaira, or why the Sphinx should not fall by. the sword of
Hipponoos, the slayer of Belleros. The assortment of exploits from
which we may make choice is large, but they are all equally mythical
and equally transparent in their meaning.

Having disposed of the Sphinx, M. Comparetti, with the usual
assurance of Euemerists, asserts that Oidipous is a purely human
person, in the story of whose life we shall look in vain for the
marvellous adventm-es which usually grace the traditions of the gods
or demigods. Here the answer is obvious, and M. Breal joins issue
on the plain fact that the whole story is full of mai-vels from the
moment of his birth. . His infancy is that of Perseus, Cyrus, Romu¬
lus, or Semiramis, his grave in the gardens of the Merciful Beings
represents the treasures of the Nibelungs; and even if we get rid of
the Sphinx, his victory over the fox of Teumessos, an exploit of the

M. Comparetti’s reason for thus banishing the Sphinx from the
story is, that he may thus exhibit the myth as designedly setting
forth the horrors of incest, and so as being purely didactic in its first
intention. But he adheres to this conclusion not much more con¬
sistently than Mr. Blackie to his historical residuum in the Iliad.
Iokastfi is not the only wife assigned to Oidipous, and M. Comparetti
hastens to say that the other wives were a later invention, and were
introduced to take away the feeling of disgust excited by the idea of
the incest. This plea M. Breal rightly dismisses in very few words :
1 Si tout le recit, comme le suppose M. Comparetti, est destine a
produire une impression morale, un ehangement do cetto nature (ot
les autres femmes d’CEdipe sont deja mentionees dans l’CEdipodie)
ya contre l’intcntion du niffrateur.’

Having demolished the ophinx, M. Comparetti goes on to say
that, far from blinding himself and departing into exile, Oidipous,
according to the oldest form of the legend, continued to reign at

APPENDIX.

' 456

Thebes. But on this supposition, the idea of a moral intention is
still more completely shut out. What sort of Nemesis is it that
would allow the doer of such things to go unpunished ?

With the failure of the attempt to reduce the myth to a caput
Inortuum of historical facts the question is carried hack into the pro-
vince of Comparative Mythology, and M. Breal rightly urges that
the problem to be solved is the recurrence of the incidents, or as M.
Comparetti styles them, the formulae which characterise the myth of
Oidipous, in the stories of other Aryan nations during times which
altogether preclude the idea of any borrowing or artificial adapter

APPENDIX D.—Page 406.

Swan-Maddevs.

Many of these myths have been gathered together in the Chap¬
ters on Swan Maidens and the Knight of the Swan, by Mr. Baring
Gould (Curious Myilis , second series), who follows them also into the
mythology of tlie Turanian tribes. The coincidences thus pointed
out call for the same consideration which should he given to the
traditions of American native tribes when they exhibit any striking
features in common with those of Aryan races. Some of these
traditions, which resemble the myths of Pandora, Pyrrha and the
dolphin or fish god, have been already referred to. But it would be
as dangerous to assume that myths circulating among Turanian
tribes have been imported by them through intercourse with Aryan
nations, as to assume that these American traditions are the result of
Jesuit teaching. Of the substantial identity of the Turanian myths
cited by Mr. Gould with the stories belonging to Germany and
India there can he no question. In a Samojed story, a man, find¬
ing seven maidens swimming on a lake, takes up from the bank the
Swan’s dress belonging to one of them, and refuses to yield it up
except on the condition that she becomes his wife and gets for him
the hearts of seven brothers which are hung up by them every night
on their tent pegs. When she brings them, he dashes all hut one. on
the ground, and as each falls, the brother to whom it belongs dies.
When the eldest whose heart has not been broken awakes and
begs to have it restored, the Samojed says that he must first bring
back to life his mother who had been killgd by him. The man then
bids him go to the place where the deaciMie, and there he should find
a purse in which is his mother’s soul. ‘ Shake the purse over the
dead woman’s bones, and glie will come to life.’ The Samojed,

SVTAN-MAIDENS.

457 -

having thus recovered his mother, dashes the remaining heitrt on
the ground, and the last of the seven dies. This is the groundwork
of the story of Punchkin, and of the Giant who had no Heart in his
Body (book i. chap. viii.). The difficulty iu finding the magician’s
heart is here transferred to the discovery of the purse containing
the murdered woman’s soul.

Mr. Gould adds that among the Minussinian Tartars the swan-
maidens assume loathsome as well as beautiful forms, and appear in
fact, like the Hellenic Harpyiai, the black storm-clouds which sweep
furiously across the sky, the swan-shaped daughters of Phorkys
(JEsch. Prom. Y. 795). In the hymn addressed to Delos by Kalli-
machos the Muses- are still nymphs or watermaidens, the Apsaras
(apa, water, and sar, to go), which have acquired a faint personality
in the Veda (Max Muller, Chips, ii. 202), and can scarcely be dis¬
tinguished from the swans which attend upon them.

lySSopaKis irepl Aipor, Iwipuaav 8e

fwvtrauv IjpviSes, aHOtharoi irereviw. 249-252.

The same phrases which spoke of clouds as swans have given
birth to the myths of Kykiios transformed into a swan by Plioibos,
and of Leda wooed by Zens iu the guise of a wlrite swan (a white
mist- answering to the.golden shower in the legend of Danae). Mr.
Gould, having cited among other northern tales that in which
Volund, or Wayland the Smith, wins as his wife the maiden Augel-
burga, whose dress of dove’s feathers he had stolen as she was bath¬
ing, thinks that to such beings we must trace hack the angels with
flowing white robes and large pinions, which Christendom has
derived immediately from the later Greek and Homan representa¬
tions of Victory. In his chapter on the Knight of the Swan, Mr.
Gould has brought together some medireval versions of the myth
which Southey has versified in his ballad of Rudiger. These ver¬
sions turn on the main incident in the stories of Urvasi andkPsyclie.
The bride must never ask her husband’s name; aud the old sug¬
gestion that the lover is in reality a monster is travestied into the
remark of the Duchess of Cleves: ‘ This Lohengrin (the Purfiravas
of the tale) may be a strong man and a Christian ; hut who knows
whence he has sprung ? ’ These words awaken the curiosity of the
Duchess of Brabant, who pays the penalty of Psyche. Lohengrin
accordingly leaves to his children his horn aud his sword, and lohis
wife the ring which had been given to him by his mother, and de¬
parts never to return- Th^story of Matabrune in the romance of
Helias, the Knight of the Swan, is that of many jealous stepmothers
who seek the death of the light-children (Gould, ibid. 315 ; Frc-rc,

This Helias becomes Duke of Bouillon, aasd las
tlier of the heroic Godfrey. So pertinaciously
nymphs and harpies and Erinyes keep their hold
historical age.

f the Swan to that of the Phaiakian ship, which

that Scild

mg, and when he saw that he was about to die, he bade
ay him fully armed in a boat, and thrust him out to sea.
the same is told of Baldur.’—Gould, ibid. 336. The inci-
peated in the case of Elaine and Arthur.

' APPENDIX E—Page 422.

debted to Professor Max Muller for the following nc
ily objection which might be made by those who a

tial digamma (of. Tryph.
§ 11; Priscianus, i. p. 21, xiii. p. 574; Ahrens, De Or. Ling.
, lib. i. pp. 30, 31). Now because the so-called dig:
the old vau, the Latin P) corresponds in most case:

c (in Kuhn s Zeitschnft
. 331,) pointed ont that
called digamma in Greek,

certain Greek words are sjtid to have bad an initial di gamma, we
must be prepared to find, corresponding to this so-called digamma,
not only the ®, but also the s, and y, in Sanskrit and Latin. Greek

scholars are apt to put F, whereas the metre proves the former
presence of some one initial consonant. When however we find
F £ £, the F here represents a lost s, approved by the Latin sex,
Sanskrit shat. When we find in Homer (hoc (5c, the ocis lengthened
because (5c had an initial ip as proved by the Sanskrit yat. In

LYKANTHROPY.

459 •

the same manner, the fact that grammarians quote FtXsVa, nay; even
the occurrence of Fe\eia in ancient inscriptions, would by no means
prove that Helene was originally Yelena, and was derived from the
root svar, but only that Helene might in the cognate languages
begin with v, s, or y. The statement of Priscianus, 1 Sciendnin tamen
quod hoc ipsum (digamma) iEoles quidem ubique loco aspirationis
ponebant, effiigientes spiritus asperitatem,’ is more correct than was
at one time supposed even by comparative grammarians; and as the
asper in Greek commonly represents an original s or y, the A3olic
digamma became the exponent of s and y, as well as of the v for
which it stood originally.’

APPENDIX E.—Page 429.

Lyhanthropy.

I am speaking, of course, of, the special form of the superstition,
not of enormities of which depraved appetites and unbridled passions
may have made men guilty. The question to be. answered is, whence
came the notions that men were changed into wolves, bears, and
birds, and not into lions, fishes, or reptiles; and to this question
Comparative Mythology seems to me to furnish a complete answer;
nor can I disavow my belief .that this loathsome vampire supersti¬
tion was in the first instance purely the result of the verbal equivo¬
cation which, as we have seen, has furnished so fruitful a source of
myths. I cannot, in the face of this evidence, believe that the
choice of the wolf or the bear as the form to be assumed by the
patient is ‘a mere matter of taste,’ as Mr. Gould says in a work
which will be most regretted by those who most value his volumes
on the myths of the middle ages. Whether there he, as Mr. Gould
maintains, ‘an innate craving for blood in certain natures,’ is a point
which little concerns ns here, although we might sujjpose that if
such an impulse be according to the hypothesis innate (i. e. placed
there by God himself), the impulse could not he wrong, and that
hence such persons were not fit subjects for punishment. But the
evidence for the case breaks down, and much of the evidence adduced
by Mr. Gould is really no evidence at all. Thus he tells us that, ‘as
every one knows, Jupiter changed himself into a bull, Hecuba became
a bitch, Actaeon a stag, the comrades of Dlysses were transformed
into swine, and the daughters ofProetus fled through the fields,
believing themselves to h^yjows, and would not allow any one <n
come near them lest they should ho caught and yoked.’—‘Werewolf,’
p. 12. These myths belong to a different class. The persons so