Spiritualism Answered by Science (Edward W. Cox, 1872)
======================================================
Edward W. Cox — Serjeant Cox's report of his experiments with Crookes-era mediums — the skeptical jurist's landmark verdict. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (spiritualismansw00coxe) — 1872 second edition.

Book__ 

h  .    r. 

..  w  7C76±/& **~ 

SPIRITUALISM 

ANSWERED    BY 

SCIENCE. 

BY 

V 

EDWARD  W.  COX,  S.L.,  F.R.G.S. 

NEW  YORK : 
HENRY  L.  HINTON,  PUBLISHER,  744  BROADWAY. 

1872. 

PEEFACE. 

Some  of  the  Critics  of  the  scientific  experiments  in  Psychic  Force, 
conducted  with  the  aid  of  certain  mechanical  tests  by  Mr.  Ceookes, 
F.R.S.,  in  the  presence  of  Db.  Hitggins,  F.R.S.,  and  myself,  have 
erroneously  assumed  that  we  were  converted  by  the  results  of  those 
experiments  to  the  creed  of  Spiritualism.  The  fact  was  the  very 
reverse.  Those  experiments  proved  conclusively  that  the  Force, 
supposed  by  many  to  be  spiritual,  is  in  fact  a  Force  proceeding  from 
the  human  organism. 

But  the  anonymous  writer  of  the  article  in  the  Quarterly  Review, 
entitled  "Spiritualism  and  its  Recent  Converts,"  cannot  plead 
merely  a  mistake.  He  is  guilty  of  deliberate  falsehood  in  making 
that  assertion,  for  he  cites  a  passage  from  my  letter  to  Mb.  Cbookes 
(so  that  he  must  have  read  it),  in  which  letter  I  expressly  thus 
state  : — 

Allow  me  to  add  that  I  can  find  no  evidence  even  tending  to  prove  that  the 
force  is  other  than  a  force  proceeding  from  or  directly  dependent  upon  the  human 
organization,  and  therefore,  as  all  other  forces  of  nature,  wholly  within  the  pro- 
vince of  that  strictly  scientific  investigation  to  which  you  have  been  the  first  to 
subject  it. 

The  crucial  tests  applied  by  the  skill  and  science  of  Mr.  Crookes 
confirmed  the  results  of  a  series  of  other  experiments,  conducted 
with  care  and  caution,  which  had  been  instituted  for  the  purpose  of 
investigating  if  any  and  what  of  the  alleged  phenomena  were  real : 
and,  if  real,  whether  they  are  physical  or  spiritual,  natural  or  super- 
natural. 

The  conclusion  from  that  patient  inquiry  has  been,  that  many  of 
the  alleged  phenomena  are  real,  though  some  are  delusions  and 
others  impostures  ;  that  the  Power  dignified  by  the  title  of  Spiritual, 
because  attributed  to  the  presence  and  action  of  spirits  of  the  dead, 
is  in  fact  a  Psychic  Force  proceeding  from  the  human  structure  and 
directed  by  the  human  intelligence. 

But  from  what  part  of  the  human  structure  that  Force  proceeds— 
whether  from  nerve,  ganglion,  or  brain — if  it  be  the  "vital  force," 
or  the  "nerve  ether"  of  Dr.  Bichardson — if  the  directing  intel- 

3 

IV  „     PEEFACE. 

Hgence  is  the  "Unconscious  Cerebration"  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  or 
if  there  be  a  Soul  (or  spirit)  inhabiting  the  body  and  distinct  from 
it,  by  which  those  effects  are  produced — are  problems  remaining  for 
close,  patient,  and  extensive  research,  by  steadily  pursuing  the 
course  of  scientific  investigation  which  Me.  Ckookes  has  so  success- 
fully begun. 

I  am  pleased  to  be  enabled  to  state  that,  to  promote  this  inquiry 
by  discussion,  disquisition  and  experiment,  a  Society  is  in  progress 
of  formation,  to  be  called  The  Psychological  Society  of  Great  Britain, 
which  should  be  joined  by  all  who  are  interested  in  a  subject  the  im- 
portance of  which  at  this  time  it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate. 

For  Theology  and  modern  Science  are  directly  at  issue  as  to  the 
existence  of  a  Soul  in  Man.  Theology  affirms  and  Science  either 
denies  or  doubts,  demanding  proofs.  If  Psychic  Force  be  the 
reality  that  they  who  have  scientifically  examined  and  tested  it 
assert,  it  shakes  to  its  foundation  the  materialism  of  modern  Science, 
by  the  probability  it  raises  that,  as  a  fact  in  Nature,  there  is  in  us  an 
entity,  distinct  from  the  corporeal  structure,  which  can  exercise  an 
active  force,  directed  by  ink.':  gence,  beyond  the  limit  of  the  bodily 
powers,  and  which  is  not  material,  but  something  other  than  that  the 
scalpel  carves  and  the  microscope  reveals. 

The  purposes  of  this  brief  treatise  is  to  state  fully  and  frankly  the 
facts  and  arguments  that  have  conducted  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  is  such  a  Force,  and  a  non-corporeal  something  in  us  that  con- 
trols it,  and  that  Science  may  yet  be  enabled  to  restore  the  faith  Sci- 
ence has  shaken  in  the  existence  of  the  Soul  and  the  consequent  pros- 
pect of  immortality. 

November  25,  1871. 

CONTENTS 

Page. 
Introductory 7 

The  Phenomena 26 

Investigation  by  the  Sub-Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  27 

Is  it  Delusion  or  Fraud? 27 

Is  it  Unconscious  Muscular  Action  ? 28 

Additional  Experiments 35 

Are  the  Spectators  Biologised? 41 

"What  is  the  Psychic  Force  ? 43 

The  Theory  of  Spiritualism 46 

The  Scientific  Theory  of  Psychic  Force 49 

The  Argument  for  the  Psychic  Theory 53 

Characteristics  of  the  Force 64 

Conclusion 70 

How  to  Investigate 75 

Postcript 78 

INTKODUCTOKY. 

Science  is  the  natural  enemy  of  Superstition. 

A  superstition  is  always  founded  on  a  fact.  It  is 
never  wholly  fanciful.  Men  note  some  facts  in  Nature 
they  cannot  at  once  explain  and  call  them  mysteries. 
These  are  the  materials  with  which  the  imagination 
constructs  a  fabric  of  which  one  part  is  real  and  nine 
parts  are  visionary. 

But  a  superstition  founded  on  facts  can  only  be 
overthrown  by  sapping  its  foundation,  recognising  the 
realities  on  which  it  rests,  dragging  them  into  the 
domain  of  Nature  and  Science,  tearing  away  the  veil  of 
mystery,  and  showing  that  the  facts,  about  wdrich  so  much 
of  the  marvellous  has  been  attracted,  are  in  strict 
accordance  with  natural  laws. 

Science  can  successfuly  combat  Superstition  only  by 
strict  observance  of  the  great  principle  whose  enun- 
ciation by  Bacon  made  Science  what  it  is — first,  find 
the  fact,  then  the  conditions  of  its  existence,  and  from 
this  basis  proceed  to  inquire  into  causes. 

The  argument  d  priori  is  equally  foolish  and  fallacious. 
Modern  Science  was  supposed  to  abjure  it  utterly. 
Her  boast  has  been,  that  assertion  that  a  thing  cannot 
be  because  it  is  apparently  opposed  to  some  established 
law  of  nature,  can  never  be  accepted  as  an  answer  to 
averments  of  facts  by  credible  persons  which,  according 
to  the  rules  of  evidence,  would  be  accepted  by  any 
7 

8  SPIRITUALISM   ANSWERED 

judge  or  jury.  But  Science  is  not  bound  to  believe  on 
the  testimony  of  witnesses,  however  competent  and 
credible.  The  duty  that  devolves  upon  her  in  such 
cases  is  to  test  by  patient  and  careful  examination  the 
truth  of  the  fact  so  asserted ;  if,  upon  such  fair  and  im- 
partial trial  it  be  found  to  be  a  fact,  to  proclaim  it  and 
to  show,  as  always  may  be  shown,  how  that  new  fact 
accords  with  the  other  facts  of  nature. 

If  such  is  the  profession  of  modern  Science,  such  is 
not  the  practice.  On  the  contrary,  hers  is  one  long 
history  of  practice  in  direct  defiance  of  principle.  She 
has  met  almost  every  new  discovery  by  the  old  and,  as 
it  was  supposed,  exploded  argument  a  priori,  instead  of 
by  the  Baconian  rule  of  first  ascertaining  the  fact  and 
then  arguing  upwards  from  it.  As  the  necessary  con- 
sequence she  has  been  put  to  shame  continually.  The 
circulation  of  the  blood,  vaccination,  express  trains, 
Atlantic  steaming,  and  a  host  of  other  novelties,  were 
as  vehemently  opposed  by  the  scientific  authorities  in 
their  time  as  now  is  Mr.  Crookes's  announcement  of 
certain  physiological  facts  observed  by  him,  and  by  the 
self-same  argument  a  priori — that  they  are  inconsistent 
with  recognised  natural  laws  and  therefore  cannot  be. 

Mr.  Crookes  does  not  ask  their  acceptance  on  his  own 
authority ;  he  asks  only  that  the  experiments  he  has 
tried — and  which,  if  established,  are  of  the  highest  in- 
terest and  importance  to  Science — may  be  tried  by 
others.  He  describes  them  in  plain  words  made  more 
plain  by  engravings.     He  says  : — ■ 

The  answer  to  this,  as  to  all  other  objections,  is,  prove  it  to  be  an 
error  by  showing  where  the  error  lies  ;  or,  if  a  trick,  by  showing 
how  the  trie  :  is  performed.     Try  the  experiment  fully  and  fairly. 

BY  SCIENCE.  9 

If  then  fraud  be  found,  expose  it ;  if  it  be  a  truth,  proclaim  it.  This 
is  the  only  scientific  procedure,  and  this  it  is  that  I  purpose  steadily 
to  pursue." 

Not  one  of  the  many  objectors  to  his  demonstration 
of  the  existence  of  a  Psychic  Force  has  ventured  to 
answer  him  by  saying,  "  I  have  tried  the  experiments 
described  by  Mr.  Crookes,  carefully  and  patiently,  and 
the  results  he  stated  did  not  appear."  All  have  shrunk 
from  this  only  philosophical  treatment  of  the  question. 
The  warfare  has  been  wholly  by  suppression  of  one 
half  of  the  facts  stated  by  him  and  misrepresentation 
of  the  other  half;  and  some  have  even  condescended 
to  personal  abuse  and  vilification,  for  the  purpose  of 
discrediting  testimony  they  are  unable  to  rebut.  A  few 
instances  must  suffice. 

The  Quarterly  Review  answers  a  series  of  experiments 
made  with  instruments  ingeniously  constructed  by  a 
scientific  man  to  secure  delicate  tests  that  should  not  be 
open  to  the  objection  that  would  have  been  made  to  any 
evidence  of  the  senses  alone,  by  the  unworthy  process 
of  discrediting  the  experimentalist  and  observers.  Mr. 
Crookes,  F.R.S.,  the  discoverer  of  the  metal  thallium, 
the  Editor  of  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  and  of 
the  Chemical  News,  is  declared  to  be  incompetent  to 
devise  a  simple  test  apparatus ;  Dr.  Huggins,  F.R.S., 
a  Yice-President  of  the  Royal  Society,  the  foremost 
spectroscopist  in  the  world  and  almost  its  greatest  as- 
tronomer, is  wanting  in  power  of  vision  and  capacity 
of    judgment ;     (a)   and   my   much    humbler   self,    a 

(a)  Dr.  Huggins  is  actually  condemned  by  the  Quarterly  Review  for 
having  dared  be  a  witness  to  some  mechanical  experiments  without- 
having  first  studied  Dr.  Carpenter's  theory  of  "Unconscious  Cere- 

10  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

Lawyer  of  some  little  experience  in  dealing  with 
witnesses  and  evidence,  am  called  "  gullible  "  (a).     We 

bration."  "  To  him;"  says  the  Reviewer,  "seeing  is  believing  ;  but 
to  those  who  have  qualified  themselves  for  the  study  of  Psychic 
Force  by  a  previous  course  of  investigation  into  the  class  of  occult 
phenomena,  of  which  this  is  the  latest  manifestation,  seeing  is  any- 
thing but  believing." 

(a)  The  silly  story  referred  to  as  the  sole  foundation  for  this  in- 
sulting attack  is  simply  that  many  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  Law  Stu- 
dent, mesmerism,  which  is  now,  under  the  name  of  somnambulism, 
accepted  by  all  physiologists  as  a  fact,  was  as  fiercely  supported  and 
opposed  as  is  Psychism  at  present.  There  was  a  boy  called  Goble, 
who  was  a  somnambulist,  and  in  his  sleep-walking  exhibited  some 
of  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  of  that  condition — such  as  doing 
delicate  work,  writing,  and  seeming  to  read,  in  the  dark  with  his 
eyes  closed.  A  friend  who  shared  my  chambers  had  taken  great  in- 
terest in  the  subject,  and  thither  the  boy  was  brought  for  experiment 
if  somnambulism  could  be  artificially  produced.  He  was  speedily 
thrown  into  the  sleep,  and  in  this  state  of  artificial  somnambulism, 
he  not  only  did  all  that  had  been  observed  in  his  natural  sleep-walk- 
ing state,  but  much  besides  equally  curious.  He  was  subjected  to 
experimental  examination  for  some  weeks  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  Dr. 
Marsden,  and  many  other  physiologists,  who  were  satisfied  of  the 
genuineness  of  his  condition.  Frequently  he  read  words  enclosed  in 
five  or  six  envelopes  of  thick  brown  paper,  each  one  being  sealed; 
and,  with  a  handful  of  cotton  wool  over  each  eye,  and  two  handker- 
chiefs bound  over  that,  he  read  the  advertisements  in  the  Times  with 
perfect  ea<*e  and  fluency.  In  fact,  he  did  in  the  somnambulist  con- 
dition artificially  produced  what  he  had  done  in  his  natural  sleep- 
walking condition.  Dr.  Forbes,  hearing  of  the  case  from  his  scien- 
tific friends,  expressed  a  great  wish  to  see  the  boy,  and  asked  us  as  a 
favour  to  procure  for  him  an  interview.  Confiding  in  fair  dealing, 
this  was  done,  and  Dr.  Forbes  came,  bringing  with  him  Mr.  Shar- 
pey.  No  intimation  was  given  that  they  had  designed  a  trap.  Dr. 
Forbes  had  asked  only  to  try  a  test.  They  brought  with  them  a  box. 
The  boy  was  told  by  them  that  it  contained  some  writing,  and  that 
if  he  would  read  it  they  would  give  him  a  sovereign.  The  box  was 
placed  in  his  hand.     Not  improbably  there  were  some  arrangements 

BY  SCIENCE.  11 

are,  in  fact,  three  fools,  and  all  this  dirt  is  thrown  for  the 
paltry  purpose  of  discrediting  our  attestation  to  the 
good  faith  with  which  certain  experiments  were  tried  by 
Mr.  Crookes,  and  to  which  Dr.  Huggins,  as  a  man 
peculiarly  versed    in    the    construction    and    use    of 

within  the  box  which  affected  the  conditions  necessary  to  percep- 
tion ;  or  it  may  be  no  writing  there  at  all.  However  that  may  have 
been,  the  boy,  after  long  trial,  said  that  it  was  useless — he  could  not 
"  see"  (that  was  his  term  for  the  perceptive  power  he  had)  what  was 
in  the  box.  Upon  this  his  two  visitors  plied  him  the  more  with  pro- 
mises ;  if  he  would  but  try  again  and  read  the  writing,  they  would 
give  him  two  pounds— they  would  publish  his  name  in  all  the  papers, 
and  make  his  fortune.  Having  thus  stimulated  him  to  the  utmost, 
they  proposed  that  we  should  retire  and  leave  him  alone,  telling  him 
that  he  should  have  a  quarter  of  an  hour  by  himself  to  make  it  out. 
He  was  left  alone.  The  box  appeared  easy  to  open — only  a  sliding 
cover.  Tempted  by  the  great  reward  offered  to  him,  and  the  power 
failing,  he  tried  to  open  the  box.  This  was  what  the  visitors  had 
desired  and  designed.  They  had  made  a  trap  and  baited  it.  The 
cover  so  temptingly  left  unfastened  was  held  by  a  thread  which,  by 
its  severance,  marked  any  attempted  opening  of  it.  It  was  plain 
that  he  had  made  the  attempt.  To  those  who  had  seen  him  times 
out  of  number  read  words  in  sealed  envelopes  that  had  not  been 
broken,  and  could  not  have  been  broken  without  detection,  one  endea- 
vour to  draw  back  an  apparently  unfastened  cover  under  the  stimu- 
lus of  lavish  promises  was,  of  course,  no  proof  whatever  that  every- 
thing he  had  before  done,  under  the  conditions  that  made  peeping 
impossible,  was  imposture  ;  and  Dr.  Forbes  was  called  upon,  as  a 
matter  of  justice  to  the  boy  and  to  science,  to  make  further  trial  in 
a  manner  more  fair  and  under  the  same  conditions  of  sealed  envel- 
opes of  paper  which  had  satisfied  the  many  other  scientific  men  who 
had  tested  him.  But,  fearing  to  have  his  verdict  reversed  on  a  new 
trial,  he  refused  it. 

And  this  is  the  incident,  that  happened  nearly  thirty  years  ago, 
for  which  I  am  declared,  in  the  most  insulting  language,  to  be  now 
an  incompetent  witness  to  the  motion  of  an  index  to  which  a  board 
was  suspended. 

12  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

scientific  apparatus,  and  myself  as  a  person  ex- 
perienced in  the  art  of  testing  truth  and  detecting 
falsehood,  were  invited  to  be  witnesses,  merely  to 
observe  and  to  detect  whatever  results  might  be  ex- 
hibited by  certain  machinery.  Surely  this  was  not  an 
offence  calling  for  personal  vilification.  The  Old  Bailey 
practice  "  If  you  cannot  answer  the  facts,  abuse  the 
prosecutor  and  his  witnesses,"  ought  not  to  be  admitted 
into  scientific  controversy.  When  Mr.  Crookes  an- 
nounced his  discovery  of  a  new  metal,  when  Dr. 
Huggins  published  his  observations  of  the  new  lines  in 
the  spectrum,  they  were  not  met  by  the  assertion  that 
they  were  incompetent  or  untrustworthy,  their  apparatus 
worthless,  their  ejes  deceivers,  and  their  senses  and 
judgments  befooled;  but  the  men  of  science  hastened 
to  try  the  same  experiments,  and  ascertain,  by  their  own 
investigation,  what  truth  there  was  in  what  Dr. 
Huggins  and  Mr.  Crookes  had  asserted.  Why,  there- 
fore, are  these  gentlemen  to  be  maligned  and  vilified 
now  for  asserting  that  other  experiments  had  exhibited 
other  new  facts,  and  for  asking  that  Science  should  deal 
with  the  alleged  discovery  of  Psychic  Force  precisely  as 
it  had  dealt  with  the  discoveries  of  the  spectroscope. 

It  has  been  stated  in  some  of  the  newspapers  that  Dr 
Carpenter  is  the  author  of  the  article  in  the  Quarterly 
Review.  I  am  reluctant  to  believe  it.  He  is  reputed 
to  be  a  gentleman,  and  certainly  no  person  pretending 
to  that  title  could,  even  in  the  conflict  of  rival  theories, 
have  forgotten  that  the  intellectual  reputation  of  scien- 
tific men  is  very  dear  to  them,  and  should  not  have 
been  thus  vilified  by  another  scientific  man  for  so  paltry 
an  object  as  the  discrediting  of  one  of  their  experiments. 

BY  SCIENCE.  13 

Dr.  Carpenter,  moreover,  is,  least  of  any  man,  entitled 
so  to  treat  other  propounders  of  new  theories.  If  Dr. 
Carpenter  rejects  and  ridicules  Mr.  Crookes's  demon- 
strations of  Psychic  Force,  at  least  an  equal  amount  of 
ridicule,  is  cast  by  other  physiologists  on  Dr.  Carpenter's 
conjectural  theory  of  "  Unconscious  Cerebration."  The 
evidence  that  supports  the  assertion  of  a  Psychic  Force 
by  Mr.  Crookes  is  vastly  more  trustworthy  and  demon- 
strative than  that  adduced  by  Dr.  Carpenter  in  support 
of  what  so  many  of  his  brother  Scientists  call  his  "  gobe- 
moucherie."  He  forgets  that  in  their  estimation  he  is 
himself,  if  not  the  most  gullible  (for  that,  he  says,  am  I), 
the  most  gullible  save  one,  for  accepting  as  facts  the 
wonderful  stories  on  which  he  founds  his  much  boasted 
theory  of  "  Unconscious  Cerebration."  (a)  For  the 
honour  of  science,  I  hope  yet  to  be  assured  that  Dr. 
Carpenter  was  not  the  writer  of  the  article  in  question, 
or  that  no  unworthy  jealousy  of  the  reputation  of  broth- 
er Scientists  prompted  a^personal  attack  upon  them,  so 
ungenerous,  so  unjust,  and  so  uncalled  for. 

The  Saturday  Review  was  even  more  unfair  alike  to 
the  experiments  and  the  experimentalists.  It  indulged, 
on  this  occasion,  beyond  its  wont,  in  the  sippressio  veri 
as  well  as  in  the  suggestio  falsi.  It  did  not  describe  the 
experiments  truly.  It  sought  to  discredit  them  by  the 
familiar  process  of  misrepresenting  them.  This  could 
not  have  been  mere  misunderstanding,  for  the  descrip- 
tor) For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  share  the  ridicule  showered  by- 
physiologists  on  Dr.  Carpenter  and  his  discovery.  I  entirely  accept 
his  theory,  and  I  think  I  see  in  it  a  solution  of  the  problem  how  the 
Psychic  Force  demonstrated  by  Mr.  Crookes  is  controlled  and 
directed. 

14  SPIKITUALISM  ANSWERED 

tions  were  m  plain  words,  made  more  plain  by  engrav- 
ings. 

Here  also  the  contrivance  was  resorted  to  of  endeav- 
ouring to  discredit  the  experiment  by  disparaging  the 
experimentalist  and  his  witnesses.  Here,  too,  the  un- 
scientific practice  was  adopted  of  answering  a  fact  as- 
serted by  honourable  and  intelligent  men  by  the  argu- 
ment— "  it  is  apparently  opposed  to  something  which  I 
(the  writer)  accept  as  truth,  therefore  it  cannot  be ;  and 
you,  the  asserters  of  it,  are  liars  or  fools,  wilfully  de- 
luding others  or  weakly  self-deluded." 

The  Athenceum  was  not  far  behind  its  fellows  in  this 
species  of  warfare.  It  was  not,  like  them,  abusive — it 
was  even  civil  in  tone  and  language.  But  it  went  be- 
yond them  in  misrepresentation,  misquotation,  and  fal- 
lacious reasoning.  It  would  take  many  pages  to  expose 
all  the  errors  of  that  article,  but  one  will  suffice  as  a 

specimen  of  the  whole : 

» 

The  story  of  the  dining-room  table  is  told  in  two  different  ways  ; 
the  drawers  of  the  report  give  one,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  gives  another 
version  of  the  affair.  .  .  .  .  The  dimensions  of  the  tables  ope- 
rated on  by  the  committee  are  thus  given  in  the  report:  "The 
smallest  of  them  was  5ft.  9in.  long  by  4ft.  wide,  the  largest  9ft.  3in. 

long  by  4i|ft.   wide,  and  of  proportionate  weight Mr. 

Serjeant  Cox,  on  the  contrary,  states  the  dimensions  of  the  top  of 
the  table  to  be  12ft.  by  5ft. 

Now  what  is  the  fact  f  If  the  reviewer  had  read 
what  he  was  reviewing,  he  would  have  seen  that  the 
contradiction  existed  only  in  his  own  brain.  The  ex- 
periment referred  to  by  Mr.  Sergeant  Cox  is  dated  in 
his  memorandum,  appended  to  the  report  of  sub-com- 
mittee No.  1,  and  was  made  at  a  different  date  and  place 
from  the  experiments  reported  by  the  committea     The 

BY    SCIENCE.  15 

latter  closed  in  May,  1869,  the  former  took  place  in 
January,  1871,  and  the  table  was  not  the  same  as  those 
referred  to  by  the  committee.  Moreover,  all  the  re- 
viewers conveniently  omit  the  fact,  stated  in  the  report, 
that  Dr.  Edmonds,  whose  authority  they  use  so  eagerly 
as  a  dissentient  from  the  report  of  the  investigation 
sub-committee,  was  not  present  at  any  one  of  their 
meetings,  and  did  not  witness  any  one  of  the  forty  ex- 
periments which  convinced  all  who  did  witness  them  ; 
his  objections  being,  like  those  of  the  reviewers,  merely 
an  argument  why  the  alleged  facts  could  not  be,  instead 
of  the  only  answer  Science  can  approve,  "  I  attended 
with  you,  and  watched  the  experiments  yon  describe, 
and,  after  a  full,  fair,  and  patient  trial,  I  failed  to  find 
the  results  you  assert." 

Another  part  of  the  article  in  the  Athenceum  cannot 
be  passed  without  notice.  Eleven  persons  of  intelli- 
gence, social  position,  in  full  possession  of  their  senses, 
in  the  light  of  gas>  and  in  the  dining-room  of  Dr. 
Edmonds,  saw  his  dining-table,  which  is  unusually 
long  and  heavy,  moved  many  times  in  succession  over 
a  space  of  several  feet,  without  contact,  or  possibility  of 
contact,  by  any  person  present,  and  in  one  of  these 
lurches,  by  the  force  of  its  motion,  it  knocked  down  a 
lady  who  chanced  to  be  standing  in  its  way.  Yet  the 
Athenceum  resorts  to  the  wretched  explanation  of  this 
well-attested  phenomenon  that  all  the  eleven  persons 
present  were  deceived  by  their  senses,  and  that  the  table 
did  not  really  move  at  all !  Could  scientific  dogmatism 
further  go  ?  I  should  like  to  see  the  writer  of  this 
piece  of  nonsense  addressing  his  argument  to  a  jury  in 
a  court  of  justice.     "  Gentlemen,  eleven  witnesses  have 

16  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

told  us  that  they  were  standing  together  in  a  well- 
lighted  room,  at  a  distance  of  three  feet  from  a  dining- 
table,  twelve  feet  long  and  five  feet  wide,  and  that  this 
table  swung  round  untouched  by  any  of  them,  and 
knocked  down  a  lady  who  was  in  its  way.  I  cannot 
impute  to  these  witnesses  intentional  falsehood,  but  I 
contend  that  they  were  mistaken — that  the  table  never 
moved  at  all,  and  I  ask  you  to  find  a  verdict  accord- 
ingly." What  a  shout  of  derisive  laughter  would  greet 
such  an  argument  in  the  court,  and  what  ridicule  would 
be  cast  upon  it  in  the  journals.  Yet  that  which  would 
be  scouted  from  any  court  of  justice  in  the  world  is 
gravely  advanced  by  men  who  call  themselves  "  scien- 
tific," and  think  themselves  sensible,  and  is  accepted 
and  printed,  without  consciousness  of  its  utter  absurdity, 
by  the  editor  of  a  literary  journal ! 

It  is  due  to  another  class,  of  which  the  Spectator  is  an 
eminent  example,  to  acknowledge  the  fairness  and  the 
gentlemanly  tone  of  commentaries,  which  were,  in  sub- 
stance— "  We  cannot  accept  the  fact  as  determined  by 
your  experiments,  but  you  have  stated  enough  to  re- 
quire from  competent  persons  a  careful  and  patient 
scientific  examination,  with  further  tests  and  under 
other  conditions." 

And  this  is  all  that  Mr.  Crookes  asks  for  himself,  and 
that  the  report  of  the  Dialectical  Society  recommends. 

I  pass  now  to  the  question  to  which  this  little  treat- 
ise is  devoted. 

Is  there  a  Force  which,  in  the  presence  of  certain  per- 
sons, without  corporeal  contact  or  connection,  can  cause 
motion  in  heavy  bodies,  and  produce  audible  sounds, 

BY    SCIENCE.  17 

as  by  impact,  which  appears  sometimes  to  be  directed 
by  intelligence  ? 

If  there  be  such  a  Force  in  fact,  whence  does  it 
proceed  ? 

Is  it,  as  Spiritualism  asserts,  the  operation  of  spirits 
of  the  dead  ? 

Or  is  it,  as  contended  by  Mr.  Crookes  and  other 
scientific  experimentalists,  a  force  emanating  from,  or  in 
some  manner  directly  dependent  on,  the  humaji  organ- 
isation ? 

The  following  pages  propose,  first,  to  state  the 
proved  phenomena,  and  then  to  set  forth  the  reasons 
that  have  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  force  is  a 
purely  Psychic  Force,  and  not  the  work  of  spirits  of  the 
dead. 

It  is  objected  to  this  inquiry  that,  if  proved,  the 
knowledge  would  be  worthless.  I  answer  by  asking — 
Is  any  knowledge  of  a  new  fact  in  nature  without  its 
use  ?  Does  any  fact  staud  alone  ?  Does  not  the  dis- 
covery of  one  fact  invariably  lead  to  the  discovery  of 
an  endless  series  of  other  facts  that  grow  out  of  it? 
Are  we  so  far  advanced  in  our  knowledge  of  Psycho- 
logy, or  even  of  Physiology,  that  it  can  be  no  help  to 
these  sciences  to  learn  that  the  Force  which  performs 
all  the  functions  of  organisation  operates  in  certain 
cases  beyond  the  boundary  of  the  living  body?  If 
this  fact  be  established,  it  needs  no  stretch  of  imagin- 
ation to  anticipate  its  multifold  application  to  the  solu- 
tion of  many  of  the  now  insoluble  problems  connected 
with  the  relationship  of  mind  and  body,  the  laws 
of  life  and  health,  and  the  science  and  practice  of 
medicine. 

18  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

It  Las  "been  gravely  asked  "by  some  of  our  critics, 
what  right  have  I,  a  practical  Lawyer,  to  concern  my- 
self about  science?  My  authority  as  a  witness  to  a 
simple  mechanical  experiment  has  been  impugned  on  a 
plea  of  the  incapacity  of  a  Lawyer  to  understand  the 
principles  or  observe  the  phenomena  of  science.  I 
answer  this  objection  by  reference  to  Mr.  Grove, 
Q.  C,  at  once  a  great  lawyer  and  a  great  Scien- 
tist; to  Mr.  Gwyn  Jeffrey,  who  has  devoted  his 
leisure  to  natural  history ;  to  Lord  Brougham,  who 
wrote  on  optics,  and  others  whom  it  is  not  necessary  to 
enumerate.  It  might  be  permitted  to  a  very  much 
humbler  man  than  they  to  give  some  of  his  hours  of 
leisure,  as  I  have  preferred  to  do,  to  the  study  of  the 
sciences  that  relate  to  the  mind — to  Mental  Philosophy 
and  Psychology.  However  that  may  be,  the  practical 
knowledge  of  the  principles  of  evidence,  the  daily  habit 
of  looking  for  the  very  truth,  without  prejudice,  fear  or 
favour,  combined  with  long  practical  experience  in  the 
art  of  sifting  and  weighing  proofs  before  forming  an 
opinion,  might  by  some  be  deemed  rather  a  qualification 
than  otherwise  for  careful  observation,  and  arriving  at 
a  fair  judgment  of  what  fact  is  true,  what  false,  what 
real  and  what  imagination  or  imposture. 

I  can  only  say,  as  an  expert,  that  if  the  evidence  of 
the  existence  of  Psychic  Force,  produced  under  so  many 
and  various  conditions,  with  such  careful  experiments 
and  under  tests  so  often  repeated,  is  not  to  be  deemed 
a  sufficient  proof  of  the  fact  that  motions  c  f  heavy  bodies 
and  audible  sounds  of  impact  upon  them  are  produced 
without  contact  or  material  connection  with  any  person 
present  (for  that  is  all  we  assert),  however  that  fact  may 

BY    SCIENCE.  19 

be  explained,  the  pursuit  of  truth,  must  be  abandoned 
as  hopeless.  If  the  senses  of  honest  and  intelligent 
observers  are  not  to  be  trusted  for  a  fact  so  obvious  to 
the  eye  as  that  of  a  table  being  moved  untouched  over 
spaces  of  several  feet,  how  is  the  common  business  of 
life  to  be  conducted?  We  must  close  our  courts  of 
justice,  for  upon  evidence  infinitely  more  disputable 
than  that  attested  by  the  scientific  experimentalists  and 
the  Investigation  Committee,  liberty  and  property  are 
daily  dealt  with  by  all  our  tribunals.  If  the  argument 
of  the  critics  be  right,  we  must  henceforth  banish  the 
witnesses  who  depose  to  what  they  have  seen  and  heard, 
and  try  men  for  life  and  liberty  on  d  priori  argument 
alone,  ignoring  the  evidence  of  facts  and  reasoning  on 
what  can  or  cannot  be,  according  to  the  conjectures,  the 
assumptions  and  the  theories  of  Scientists. 

Much  prejudice  has  been  raised  against  the  ex- 
periments that  have  demonstrated  the  existence  of 
Psychic  Force  by  a  prevalent  belief  that  the  phenomena 
occur  only  in  the  presence  of  a  few  professional 
Psychics,  and  the  suspicion  of  imposture  thus  suggested. 
This  popular  error  will  probably  account  for  much  of 
the  unreasoning  abuse  that  has  been  cast  upon  its 
assertors,  such  as  was  not  displayed  towards  the  in- 
vestigators of  any  other  of  the  forces  of  nature,  however 
strange  and  novel  were  the  phenomena  described  and 
in  their  first  aspect  inexplicable.  But,  in  fact,  Psychics 
are  frequent  in  private  life.  There  are  few  family 
circles  in  which  some  of  the  phenomena  of  Psychism 
might  not  be  exhibited  on  patient  trial.  All  the  forty 
experimental  meetings  of  the  sub-committee  of  the 
Dialectical  Society,   and  almost  all    the  further    ex- 

20  SPIEITUALISM  ANSWEKED 

periments  here  reported,  were  conducted  with  Psychics 
found  in  private  life,  among  personal  friends  and 
acquaintances,  and  not  with  professional,  paid,  or  public 
Psychics,  as  it  has  been  wrongly  assumed.  Psychic 
Force  is  often  developed  to  an  extraordinary  extent  in 
children  too  young  to  be  capable  of  contriving  or  con- 
ducting an  elaborate  fraud,  and  too  weak  to  possess  the 
requisite  muscular  power  to  move  a  heavy  table.  With 
all  Psychics  the  phenomena  simply  occur  in  their 
presence,  without  effort  of  their  own  will  to  promote 
or  check  them,  and,  as  all  agree,  without  the  slightest 
consciousness  of  any  attendant  sensation,  bodily  or 
mental. 

And  by  whom  are  the  facts  thus  powerfully  attested 
denied?  By  those  only  who  have  never  tried  and  proved 
them.  If  they  are  not  facts,  but  delusions  and  im- 
postures, how  comes  it  that  not  a  single  investigator  of 
repute,  after  patient  and  honest  examination,  has  failed 
to  be  convinced  that  the  phenomena  are  real,  or 
ventured  to  assert  that  he  has  discovered  a  trick  and 
shown  how  it  was  effected  ?  It  is  probable,  nay, 
possible,  that  if  they  were  really  the  feats  of  conjurors, 
the  manner  of  performing  them  would  not  have  been 
discovered  by  some  one  of  the  many  witnesses  eager 
to  dissipate  a  delusion  ?  Half-a-dozen  visits  suffice  to 
enable  even  a  stupid  spectator  to  detect  the  modus 
operandi  of  the  cleverest  conjurors  ever  seen  among  us  ; 
and  every  trick  is  to  be  found  fully  described  in  books, 
and  may  be  successfully  performed  by  any  person 
willing  to  take  a  little  trouble  in  the  learning.  But 
Psychics  of  all  classes,  of  both  sexes,  and  of  all  ages, 
have  been  observed  for  thirty  years  by  thousands  of 

BY  SCIENCE.  21 

persons,  sitting  at  the  same  table  with,  them  and 
holding  their  hands  and  feet,  and  in  no  single  instance 
has  ingenuity  or  accident  discovered  the  contrivance 
(if  it  be  one)  by  which  what  is  seen  and  heard  is  per- 
formed. Has  it  never  occurred  to  the  critics  that  if 
Psychics  can  do  by  slight  of  hand  or  mechanical 
agency  what  any  person  may  daily  witness  if  he  pleases, 
they  have  no  need  to  remain  for  a  day  unknown  and 
poor.  The  skill  that  could  accomplish  what  takes 
place  in  their  presence,  under  the  vigilant  eyes  with 
which  they  are  encompassed,  would  speedily  secure  for 
them  an  enormous  fortune  as  mechanicians,  or  an 
unbounded  popularity  and  profit  as  prestidigitateurs. 

Not  only  is  the  evidence  by  which  the  phenomena  of 
Psychic  Force  are  established  stronger  than  any  upon 
which  the  criminal  courts  daily  convict  and  punish 
even  with  death ;  it  is  at  least  equal  to  the  evidence 
upon  which  most  of  the  other  sciences  are  founded. 
The  experiments  with  Psychic  Force  are  in  all  respects 
as  perfect  and  trustworthy  as  those  exhibited  by 
Professor  Tyndall  at  the  Eoyal  Institution.  They  are 
as  plain  to  the  eye,  as  palpable  to  the  touch,  as  audible 
to  the  ear,  as  any  witnessed  in  that  famous  lecture  room. 
If  the  senses  can  deceive  in  the  one,  so  are  they  equally 
liable  to  be  deceived  in  the  other,  and  the  argument  of 
imposture  would  be  found  equally  applicable  to  both. 
The  experiment  of  the  Psychic  Force  requires  certain 
conditions  for  its  production  ;  so  do  Dr.  Tyndall's  ex- 
periments. Those  conditions  failing,  the  experiment 
fails,  alike  with  the  Psychic  and  with  the  Professor.  It 
is  a  favourite  argument  with  opponents  of  Psychic 
Force,  "If  it  can  be  done  thus,  why  not  thus  F"     Put 

22  SPIRITUALISM   ANSWERED 

the  same  question  to  Professor  Tyndall ;  he  would  con- 
fess that  his  experiments  also  are  subject  to  conditions, 
and  that  he  could  not  engage  to  perform  one  of  them  if 
conditions  other  than  his  own  were  imposed  upon  him. 
Occasional  failure  is  a  frequent  objection  to  Psychic 
Porce.  But  the  Professor  also  fails  often.  Many  a 
time  I  have  heard  him  say  to  his  audience,  after  a 
failure  which  opponents  might  call  suspicious,  "  I  tried 
this  experiment  in  my  laboratory  just  before  the 
lecture  and  it  succeeded  admirably.  It  fails  now,  I 
know  not  why.  There  are  some  unfavourable  con- 
ditions I  cannot  discover.  These  disappointments  are 
frequent  in  science.  Nature  dictates  her  own  con- 
ditions ;  we  cannot  impose  them  upon  her."  But  when 
the  like  failure  occurs  with  an  experiment  in  Psychism, 
and  the  same  reason  is  assigned  for  it,  opponents  ex- 
claim at  once — "  Manifest  imposture  !  It  failed  when 
we  sceptics  determined  the  conditions.  If  it  could 
be  done  at  one  time,  it  could  be  done  at  another  time." 
Yet  in  what  single  particular  does  the  case  of  the 
Psychic  differ  from  that  of  the  Professor?  What 
better  assurance  have  we  that  the  experiments  we 
behold  with  so  much  amazement  from  the  benches  of 
the  Royal  Institution  are  genuine?  Nothing  would 
be  so  easy  as  imposture  there.  With  his  attendant  for 
a  confederate,  a  little  sleight  of  hand,  and  some  in- 
genious mechanism,  all  that  Professor  Tyndall  declares 
that  he  does  might  be  imposed  upon  us,  and  a  clever 
trick  passed  off  as  a  new  fact  in  nature.  You  ask  what 
could  be  the  motive  for  such  a  deceit  ?  The  answer  is 
that  the  Professor  is  paid  for  lecturing ;  that  is  the  ob- 
jection made  to  experiments  with  Psychics  as  honest 

BY  SCIENCE.  23 

and  honourable  as  Professor  Tyndall.  But  most  of  the 
Psychics  are  in  fact  unpaid,  and  therefore  they  arc 
really  less  open  to  the  suspicion  of  unworthy  motive 
than  is  the  Professor. 

It  is  not  expected,  it  is  not  asked,  of  any  person  to 
accept  the  existence  of  Psychic  Force  on  faith  of  the 
sufficiency  of  the  experiments  by  which  conviction  of 
its  reality  was  carried  to  those  who  witnessed  them. 
They  ask  only  that  other  competent  observers  should 
pursue  a  similar  course  of  patient  examination,  and  re- 
port if  they  also  find  the  phenomena  to  be  facts,  and  if 
the  facts  they  find  point  to  the  like  conclusion,  or  what 
other  explanation  of  them  suggests  itself  to  their  minds. 
The  first  step  in  science  is  to  ascertain,  without  fear  or 
favour,  what  are  the  facts,  satisfied  that,  however  strange 
or  conflicting  with  established  theories  these  facts  may 
appear  at  first,  they  will  assuredly  be  found,  on  further 
investigation,  to  be  in  strict  accordance  with  every 
other  fact,  and  to  square  with  every  truthful  theory. 

Who  would  have  supposed  that  in  these  days  of  free 
inquiry  such  extreme  irritability  could  be  exhibited 
by  the  Professors  of  Physical  Science  at  the  bare  sug- 
gestion of  the  possible  existence  of  something  in  man 
that  cannot  be  carved  by  the  scalpel,  seen  by  the  mi- 
croscope, and  analysed  in  the  laboratory  ?  Who  could 
have  anticipated  the  virulence  of  hostility  with  which 
they  pursue  all  who  venture  to  assert  that  there  may  be 
psychological  facts,  dependent  on  psychological  condi- 
tions and  governed  by  psychological  laws,  distinct  from, 
and  but  imperfectly  controlled  by,  those  material  laws 
to  which  alone  their  useful  labours  are  devoted.  Un- 
happily there  is  a  fanaticism  of  scepticism  as  well  as  a 

24  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

fanaticism  of  faith.  Dogmatism  is  at  least  as  rampant 
in  science  as  in  theology.  A  true  Materialist  would 
be  sorely  vexed  if  it  could  be  demonstrated  to  him 
that  he  has  an  immortal  soul.  I  cannot  help  suspect- 
ing that  this  endeavour  to  deter  even  from  inquiry  by 
anticipatory  denunciation  as  fools  or  rogues  of  all  who 
dare  to  inquire,  is  prompted  by  a  suspicion  lurking  in 
a  corner  of  the  minds  of  the  Materialist  Philosophers 
that  there  may  be  some  truth  after  all  in  this  evidence 
of  a  Psychic  Force :  and  that,  if  a  truth,  it  will  go  far 
to  disturb  their  favourite  dogma,  that  mind  is  a  secre- 
tion of  the  body ;  that  life  is  an  arrangement  of  particles  ; 
that  there  is  nothing  of  us  but  doth  perish  and  pass 
away ;  that  we  are  only  animated  machines  that  per- 
form a  prescribed  task,  fall  to  pieces,  and  there  end. 
I  cannot  disguise  from  them,  from  the  reader,  or  from 
myself,  that  if  the  existence  of  a  Psychic  Force  is  the 
fact  which,  after  most  careful  and  anxious  examina- 
tion, I  am  satisfied  that  it  is,  and  of  which  I  ask  others 
to  satisfy  themselves  by  a  like  investigation,  it  does  go 
very  far  indeed  to  disturb  the  Philosophy  of  Material- 
ism which  has  taken  so  strong  a  hold  of  the  scientific 
world,  by  the  probability  it  raises  that  there  is  a  some- 
thing in  man,  other  than  the  visible  material  body, 
from  which  that  Force  proceeds,  or  with  which  it  is  in- 
timately associated. 

But,  however  adverse  may  be  the  Materialists  to 
investigations  into  facts  in  nature,  tending  to  prove  that 
they  and  we  have  an  anima,  soul  (whatever  name  be 
given  to  it),  and  the  probability  of  a  future  existence 
which  such  a  possession  would  undoubtedly  go  far  to 
confirm,  not  merely  as  a  dogma  in  theology,  but  as  a 

BY    SCIENCE.  25 

fact  in  nature,  the  question  will  be  admitted  to  be  of 
overwhelming  interest.  Apart  from  the  new  light 
which  the  existence  of  Psychic  Force,  if  proved,  must 
throw  upon  many  of  the  obscurities  of  physiology  and 
medicine,  the  establishment  of  its  truth  will  open  a  new 
field  to  psychological  science,  give  to  religion  a  new 
strength,  and  encourage  in  millions  hopes  and  aspira- 
tions which,  reluctant  though  they  may  be  to  confess  it 
even  to  themselves,  have  been  painfully  shaken  by  the 
materialism  of  modern  science. 

To  conclude  this  long,  but  I  hope  not  irrelevant,  in- 
troduction, I  add  a  summary  of  the  argument : 

A  protracted  series  of  careful  experiments  has  proved 
the  existence  of  certain  phenomena. 

These  phenomena  appear  to  indicate  the  existence  ot 
a  Force,  hitherto  unrecognised,  proceeding  from  the 
human  organisation. 

The  asserted  phonomena  are  true  or  false. 

If  true,  they  demand  investigation  in  order  to  ascer- 
tain their  origin ;  if  they  sustain  the  suggestion  of  a 
Psychic  Force,  or,  if  not,  to  what  other  source  can  they 
be  traced? 

If  false,  they  should  be  exploded  for  ever,  not  by 
mere  denial,  but  by  detection  and  exposure  of  the  con- 
trivances by  which  they  are  produced. 

In  the  one  case,  the  world  will  profit  by  an  enor- 
mous addition  to  human  knowledge. 

In  the  other  case,  it  will  be  benefited  by  the  banish- 
ment of  a  vast  amount  of  superstition  and  imposture. 

For  either  end,  the  duties  of  Science  are  the  same — 
a  careful,  extensive,  patieut  and  unprejudiced  examina- 
tion. 

26  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

THE  PHENOMENA. 

When  the  London  Dialectical  Society  resolved  to 
appoint  a  committee  to  examine  and  report  upon  the 
pretensions  of  Spiritualism,  I  entered  upon  its  duties, 
in  common  with  five -sixths  of  the  members  of  that 
committee,  having  the  most  firm  conviction  that  we 
should  detect  a  fraud  or  dissipate  a  delusion.  I  hoped 
that  long  experience  in  the  work  of  sifting  and  weighing 
evidence,  and  resolving  what  does  or  does  not  constitute 
proof  of  asserted  facts,  would  enable  me  to  do  good 
service  in  detecting  imposture  and  discovering  its  contri- 
vances. And  such  were  the  aims  and  the  expectations 
of  the  great  majority  of  my  colleagues,  comprising  men 
of  various  pursuits  and  capacities,  ingenious  lawyers, 
practised  scientists,  skilful  doctors,  authors,  artists,  and 
shrewd  men  of  business — all  of  them  persons  with 
keen  senses,  proved  powers  of  observation,  suspecting 
and  looking  for  imposition,  and  therefore  more  than 
commonly  vigilant  with  eye  and  ear  and  rigid  in  the 
application  of  tests. 

Before  we  commenced  to  examine,  it  was  our  confi- 
dent belief  that  the  alleged  phenomena  were : 

1.  Self-delusion  by  tbe  spectator ;  or, 

2.  Imposture  by  the  Psychic  ;  or, 

3.  Involuntary  and  unconscious  muscular  action. 
With  our  minds  thus  prejudiced  against  the  reality 

of  the  phenomena,  we  proceeded  to  their  investigation. 

by  science.  27 

Investigation  by  the  Sub-committee  of  the  Dia- 
lectical Society. 

It  was  resolved  that  we  should  meet  only  at  the 
private  residences,  of  members  of  the  committee,  so  as 
to  preclude  all '  possible  pre-arrangement  of  mechanism 
or  other  contrivances. 

That  no  professional  medium  should  be  employed. 

That  careful  notes  should  be  taken  of  each  experi- 
ment and  signed  for  verification  by  all  present. 

A  Psychic  was  found  in  the  person  of  a  Lady,  the 
wife  of  one  of-  the  members  of  the  general  committee, 
of  high  professional  and  social  position.  In  this  we 
were  pre-eminently  fortunate,  for  .the  Lady  in  question 
had  never  witnessed  any  of  the  phenomena  with  others, 
and  therefore  could  not  have  mastered  the  sleight  of 
hand,  requiring  the  practice  of  a  life  for  its  mastery, 
which  would  be  necessary  for  the  successful  performance 
of  a  trick,  if  trick  it  was.  In  truth,  she  had  dis- 
covered their  production  in  her  own  presence  only  by 
chance,  a  few  weeks  previously  to  acceding  to  the  re- 
quest of  the  sub-committee  to  assist  them  in  their  in- 
vestigations. 

But  three  or  four  only  of  the  forty  experimental 
meetings  of  the  committee  were  held  at  this  Lady's 
house  ;  all  the  other  meetings  were  held  at  the  houses 
of  members,  and  some  of  them  at  my  own  residence ; 
so  that  I  can  affirm  positively  the  absence  of  any  me- 
chanical or  other  pre  arranged  contrivances  by  which 
the  phenomena  there  witnessed  could  have  been  pro- 
duced. 

Is  it  Delusion  or  Fraud  ? 

"We  were  speedily  satisfied  that  it  was  not  a  delusion 

28  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

of  the  senses.  The  sounds  were  distinctly  audible  to 
the  ear,  the  vibrations  palpable  to  the  touch,  and  the 
motions  obvious  to  sight.  It  was  not  a  question  of 
doubtful  mental  impression  only,  but  of  actual  measure- 
ment. The  table  and  other  pieces  of  furniture  had 
changed  their  position  by  so  many  inches,  feet,  yards. 
There  could  be  no  possible  mistake  as  to  this  fact  of 
motion.  We  were  compelled  to  dismiss  our  theory 
that  it  was  a  self-delusion. 

But  the  motion  and  sounds  may  have  been  produced 
by  trickery  and  fraud.  That  was  our  second  theory. 
Accordingly  we  assumed  the  office  of  detectives.  We 
sat  under  the  table  while  the  motions  and  sounds  were 
most  vigorous.  We  held  the  hands  and  feet  of  the 
Psychic.  Every  hand  in  the  circle  was  held  by  its 
neighbour ;  the  gas  was  bright  above  us ;  not  a  finger 
could  have  stirred  without  being  perceived  by  some  of 
the  many  eyes  that  were  keeping  watch.  Our  inge- 
nuity was  exercised  in  the  invention  and  application  of 
tests.  After  trials  often  repeated  we  were  compelled  to 
confess  that  imposture  was  out  of  the  question.  The  mo- 
tions and  sounds  were  undoubtedly  real,  and  were  cer- 
tainly not  caused  by  any  trickery. 

Is  it  Unconscious  Muscular  Action? 

We  retreated  then  upon  the  third  theory,  boasting 
Faraday  as  its  parent,  and  repeated  ever  since  by  object- 
ors, who  had  not  seen  them,  as  the  easy  and  sufficient 
explanation  of  the  phenomena  we  were  witnessing — 
namely,  involuntary  and  unconscious  action  of  the 
muscles  of  those  by  whom  the  heavy  body  was  touched. 
"  Here,"  we  said,  "  are  eight}^  fingers  upon  the  table. 

BY  SCIENCE.  29 

If  each  one  exerts  but  a  pressure  so  slight  as  to  be  im- 
perceptible even  to  themselves,  the  aggregate  sum  of 
pressure  will  be  very  considerable.  Apply  these  multi- 
plied pressures  at  the  edge  of  the  table,  and  every  fin- 
ger is  converted  into  a  lever  of  which  the  centre  of  the 
table  is  the  fulcrum.  Make  trial  of  it  and  it  will  be 
found  so  to  be.  That  the  muscles  will  act  unconsciously 
there  can  be  no  doubt;  and  after  a  lengthened  resting  of 
the  hand  in  a  constrained  position  there  is  involuntary 
contraction  of  the  muscles  sufficient  by  the  accumulated 
force  to  cause  motion  of  the  table,  even  though  every 
person  present  should  scrupulously  endeavour  to  avoid 
pressure." 

Such  was  the  reasonable  argument  tha.t  led  us  to  look 
to  involuntary  muscular  action  as  the  explanation  of 
the  motions  and  sounds  that  were  continually  being 
made.  To  ascertain  if  this  hypothesis  was  correct,  we 
devised  a  series  of  tests  that  should  place  the  matter 
beyond  all  possible  doubt.  First,  all  hands  were  laid 
upon  the  table ;  then  one  hand  only  of  each  person ; 
then  the  table  was  touched  by  the  tips  only  of  all  the 
fingers ;  then  by  the  fingers  of  one  hand  alone ;  then 
with  one  finger  only.  Still  the  motions  and  sounds 
continued  with  but  slightly  diminished  force.  If  our 
theory  of  involuntary  pressure  was  correct,  the  force 
should  have  diminished  in  precise  proportion  to  the 
lessened  points  of  contact.  Moreover,  it  did  not  ex- 
plain the  fact,  continually  before  our  eyes,  of  the  table 
being  raised  several  inches  from  the  floor  on  one  side 
only,  the  muscular  action  of  the  fingers  upon  that  side 
of  the  table  being  antagonistic  and  not  contributory  to 
such  a  motion !     We  continued  our  exrjeriments  with 

30  SPIRITUALISM   ANSWERED 

lessened  faith  in  our  foregone  conclusion.  First,  one 
person  withdrew  from  all  contact ;  then  a  second,  and  a 
third,  until  one  finger  of  one  person  only  touched  the 
table.  Nevertheless  it  moved,  the  sounds  continued  to 
come  from  it,  and  a  frequent  motion  was  the  lifting  up 
of  the  table  at  the  side  on  which  the  finger  was  pressing 
down,  if  exercising  any  pressure  whatever.  I  should 
state  that  at  all  of  these  test  experiments  the  tables  em- 
ployed were  the  large  and  heavy  dining  tables,  some 
nine  feet  and  some  twelve  feet  long,  with  six  legs,  in 
common  daily  use  in  the  dining-room  of  members  of 
the  committee,  standing  upon  Turkey  carpets,  there- 
fore not  easily  slid  and  difficult  to  move  by  the  arm. 
We  next  tried  a  more  decisive  test.  All  hands  were 
joined  and  held  over  the  table  at  the  height  of  three 
inches  from  it,  no  part  of  any  hand  touching  it,  the  room 
being  well  lighted  with  gas  and  all  eyes  keeping  care- 
ful watch  over  the  lifted  hands.  The  sounds  were 
heard  and  the  motions  produced  as  before.  It  was  sug- 
gested that*  possibly  the  feet  might  be  at  work  ;  so  two 
of  the  members  seated  themselves  under  the  table  to 
observe.  The  motions  and  sounds  continued,  but  not  a 
foot  stirred.  Then  all  the  persons  present  stood,  so  that 
no  foot  could  touch  the  table  unseen.  Still  it  moved. 
Lastly  we  devised  a  test  that  conclusively  settled  the 
question  as  to  the  possible  agency  of  muscular  action, 
conscious  or  unconscious.  It  was  contrived  thus :  All 
present  turned  the  backs  of  their  chairs  to  the  table, 
and  kneeling  upon  the  chairs,  placed  their  arms  upon 
the  backs  of  the  chairs,  their  hands  being  extended 
above  the  table,  but  without  possibility  of  contact  with 
it.     The  chairs  were  first  placed  six  inches  from  the 

BY    SCIENCE  31 

table,  with  which,  as  the  reader  will  readily  under- 
stand, neither  foot  nor  hand,  nor  any  part  of  the  person, 
of  any  of  those  present  could  possibly  come  into  con- 
tact unseen.  In  this  position  the  table  moved  eight 
inches  over  the  carpet  and  tilted  several  times.  The 
chairs  were  then  withdrawn  further  from  the  table,  on 
each  trial  to  an  increased  distance,  and  with  the  same 
results.  At  the  distance  of  two  feet  from  it  the  motions 
were  continued,  with  but  slightly  diminished  power.  I 
must  repeat  that  this  was  tried  in  the  dining-rooms  01 
members,  some  of  them  in  my  own  house,  with  none 
present  but  the  Committee  and  the  Psychic.  These 
experiments  of  motion  without  contact  were  repeated 
many  times  at  different  meetings  in  different  houses, 
and  with  the  same  results.  Thus  was  our  third  and  last 
explanatory  conjecture,  which  we  had  eagerly  accepted 
on  the  authority  of  Faraday,  completely  demolished 
by  the  facts,  and  we  were  compelled  reluctantly  to 
the  conclusion  that  there  is  a  Force  apparently  proceed- 
ing from  the  human  organisation  by  which  motion  is 
produced  in  heavy  substances  without  the  employment 
of  any  muscular  force,  and  without  contact  or  material 
connection  of  any  kind  between  such  substances  and 
the  body  of  any  person  present.  We  agreed  also  that 
these  sounds  and  motions  were  directed,  frequently  by 
some  intelligence ;  but  as  the  duty  of  the  committee 
was  merely  to  ascertain  the  facts,  and  not  to  inquire 
into  causes,  with  these  conclusive  proofs  of  the  physical 
facts  we  closed  ■  the  investigation  and  reported  accord- 
ingly. 

As  many  of  the  reviewers  have  suppressed  the  most 
interesting  and  important  part  of  the  volume,  the  report 

32  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

of  the  sub-committee,  No.  1,  appointed  to  examine  the 
phenomena  experimentally  and  'test  it  carefully,  and 
which  held  no  less  than  forty  meetings  for  that  pur- 
pose, of  each  of  which  meetings  a  report  appears  in  the 
appendix,  I  introduce  here  the  entire  of  that  Eeport : — 

Since  their  appointment  on  the  16th  February,  1869,  your  sub- 
committee have  held  forty  meetings  for  the  purpose  of  experiment 
and  test. 

All  of  these  meetings  were  held  at  the  private  residences  of  members 
of  the  committee,  purposely  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  pre-ar- 
ranged mechanism  or  contrivance. 

The  furniture  of  the  room  in  which  the  experiments  were  con- 
ducted was  on  every  occasion  its  accustomed  furniture. 

The  tables  were  in  all  cases  heavy  dining  tables,  requiring  a  strong 
effort  to  move  them.  The  smallest  of  them  was  5ft.  Din.  long  by  4ft. 
wide,  and  the  largest,  9ft.  3in.  long  and  4ift.  wide,  and  of  propor- 
tionate weight. 

The  rooms,  tables,  and  furniture  generally  were  repeatedly  sub- 
jected to  careful  examination  before,  during,  and  after  the  experi- 
ments, to  ascertain  that  no  concealed  machinery,  instrument,  or 
other  contrivance  existed  by  means  of  which  the  sounds  or  move- 
ments hereinafter  mentioned  could  be  caused. 

The  experiments  were  conducted  in  the  light  of  gas,  except  on  the 
few  occasions  specially  noted  in  the  minutes. 

Your  committee  have  avoided  the  employment  of  professional  or 
paid  mediums,  the  mediumship  being  that  of  members  of  your  sub- 
committee, persons  of  good  social  position  and  of  unimpeachable 
integrity,  having  no  pecuniary  object  to  serve,  and  nothing  to  gain 
by  deception. 

Your  committee  have  held  some  meetings  without  the  presence 
of  a  medium  (it  being  understood  that  throughout  this  report  the 
word  "medium  "  is  used  simply  to  designate  an  individual  without 
whose  presence  the  phenomena  described  either  do  not  occur  at  all, 
or  with  greatly  diminished  force  and  frequency),  purposely  to  try  if 
they  could  produce,  by  any  efforts  effects  similar  to  those  witnessed 
when  a  medium  was  present.  By  no  endeavours  were  they  enabled 
to  produce  anything  at  all  resembling  the  manifestations  which  took 
place  in  the  presence  of  a  medium. 

BY    SCIENCE.  33 

Every  test  that  the  combined  intelligence  of  your  committee  could 
devise  has  been  tried  with  patience  and  perseverance.  The  experi- 
ments were  conducted  under  a  great  variety  of  conditions,  and  in- 
genuity has  been  exerted  in  devising  plans  by  which  your  committee 
might  verify  their  observations  and  preclude  the  possibility  of  im- 
posture or  of  delusion. 

Your  committee  have  confined  their  reports  to  facts  witnessed  by 
them  in  their  collective  capacity,  which  facts  were  palpable  to  the 
senses,  and  their  reality  capable  of  demonstrative  proof 

Of  the  members  of  your  sub-committee  about  four-fifths  entered 
upon  the  investigation  wholly  sceptical  as  to  the  reality  of  the  alleged 
phenomena,  firmly  believing  them  to  be  the  result  either  of  imposture 
or  of  delusion,  or  of  involuntary  muscular  action.  It  was  only  by  irre- 
sistible evidence  under  conditions  that  precluded  the  possibility  of 
either  of  these  solutions,  and  after  trial  and  test  many  times  re- 
peated, that  the  most  sceptical  of  your  sub-committee  were  slowly 
and  reluctantly  convinced  that  the  phenomena  exhibited  in  the 
course  of  their  protracted  inquiry  were  veritable  facts. 

The  result  of  their  long-continued  and  carefully-conducted  experi- 
ments, after  trial  by  every  detective  test  they  could  devise,  has  been 
to  establish  conclusively  : 

First :  That  under  certain  bodily  or  mental  conditions  of  one  or 
more  of  the  persons  present,  a  force  is  exhibited  sufficient  to  set  in 
motion  heavy  substances,  without  the  employment  of  any  muscular 
force,  without  contact  or  material  connection  of  any  kind  between 
such  substances  and  the  body  of  any  person  present. 

Second  :  That  this  force  can  cause  sounds  to  proceed,  distinctly 
audible  to  all  present,  from  solid  substances  not  in  contact  with,  nor 
having  any  visible  or  material  connection  with,  the  body  of  any  per- 
son present,  and  which  sounds  are  proved  to  proceed  from  such  sub- 
stances by  the  vibrations  which  are  distinctly  felt  when  they  are 
touched. 

Third  :  That  this  force  is  frequently  directed  by  intelligence. 

At  thirty-four  out  of  the  forty  meetings  of  your  committee  some  of 
these  phenomena  occurred. 

A  description  of  one  experiment,  and  the  manner  of  conducting 
it,  will  best  show  the  care  and  caution  with  which  your  committee 
have  pursued  their  investigations. 

So  long  as  there  was  contact,  or  even  the  possibility  of  contact, 
by  the  hands  or  feet,  or  even  by  the  clothes  of  any  j>erson  in  the 

34:  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

room,  with  the  substance  moved  or  sounded,  there  could  be  no  per- 
fect assurance  that  the  motions  and  sounds  were  not  produced  by 
the  person  so  in  contact.  The  following  experiment  was  therefore 
tried : 

On  an  occasion  when  eleven  members  of  your  sub-committee  had 
been  sitting  round  one  of  the  dining-tables  above  described  for  forty 
minutes,  and  various  motions  and  sounds  had  occurred,  they,  by 
way  of  test,  turned  the  backs  of  their  chairs  to  the  table,  at  about 
nine  inches  from  it.  They  all  then  knelt  upon  their  chairs,  placing 
their  arms  upon  the  backs  thereof.  In  this  position,  their  feet 
were  of  course  turned  away  from  the  table,  and  by  no  possibility 
could  be  placed  under  it  or  touch  the  floor.  The  hands  of  each  per- 
son were  extended  over  the  table  at  about  four  inches  from  the  sur- 
face. Contact,  therefore,  with  any  part  of  the  table  could  not  take 
place  without  detection. 

In  less  than  a  minute  the  table,  untouched,  moved  four  times  ;  at 
first  about  five  inches  to  one  side,  then  about  twelve  inches  to  the 
opposite  side,  and  then,  in  like  manner,  four  inches  and  six  inches 
respectively. 

The  hands  of  all  present  were  next  placed  on  the  backs  of  their 
chairs,  and  about  a  foot  from  the  table,  which  again  moved,  as 
before,  five  times,  over  spaces  varying  from  four  to  six  inches.  Then 
all  the  chairs  were  removed  twelve  inches  from  the  table,  and  each 
person  knelt  on  his  chair  as  before,  this  time  however  folding  his 
hands  behind  his  back,  his  body  being  thus  about  eighteen  inches 
from  the  table,  and  having  the  back  of  the  chair  between  himself 
and  the  table.  The  table  again  moved  four  times,  in  various  direc- 
tions. In  the  course  of  this  conclusive  experiment,  and  in  less  than 
half-an-hour,  the  table  thus  moved,  without  contact  or  possibility  of 
of  contact  with  any  person  present,  thirteen  times,  the  movements 
being  in  different  directions,  and  some  of  them  according  to  the  re- 
quest of  various  members  of  your  sub-committee. 

The  table  was  then  carefully  examined,  turned  upside  down  and 
taken  to  pieces,  but  nothing  was  discovered  to  account  for  the  phe- 
nomena. The  experiment  was  conducted  throughout  in  the  full 
light  of  gas  above  the  table. 

Altogether,  your  sub-committee  have  witnessed  upwards  of  fifty 
similar  motions  without  contact  on  eight  different  evenings,  in  the 
houses  of  members  of  your  sub-committee,  the  most  careful  tests 
being  applied  on  each  occasion. 

BY    SCIENCE.  35 

In  all  similar  experiments  the  possibility  of  mechanical  or  other 
contrivance  was  further  negatived  by  the  fact  that  the  movements 
were  in  various  directions — now  to  one  side,  then  to  the  other  ;  now 
up  the  room,  now  down  the  room— motions  that  would  have  re- 
quired the  co-operation  of  many  hands  or  feet ;  and  these,  from  the 
great  size  and  weight  of  the  tables,  could  not  have  been  so  used 
without  the  visible  exercise  of  muscular  force.  Every  hand  and 
foot  was  plainly  to  be  seen,  and  could  not  have  been  moved  without 
instant  detection. 

Delusion  was  out  of  the  question.  The  motions  were  in  various 
directions,  and  were  witnessed  simultaneously  by  all  present.  They 
were  matters  of  measurement,  and  not  of  opinion  or  of  fancy. 

And  they  occurred  so  often,  under  so  many  and  such  various  con- 
ditions, with  such  safeguards  against  error  or  deception,  and  with 
such  invariable  results,  as  to  satisfy  the  members  of  your  sub-com- 
mittee by  whom  the  experiments  were  tried,  wholly  sceptical  as 
most  of  them  were  when  they  entered  upon  the  investigation,  that 
there  is  a  force  capable  of  moving  heavy  bodies  without  material  contact,  and 
which  force  is  in  some  unknown  manner  dependent  upon  the  presence  of  human 

Your  sub-committee  have  not,  collectively,  obtained  any  evidence 
as  to  the  nature  and  source  of  this  force,  but  simply  as  to  the  fact  of  its 
existence. 

There  appears  to  your  committee  to  be  no  ground  for  the  popular 
belief  that  the  presence  of  sceptics  interferes  in  any  manner  with 
the  production  or  action  of  the  force. 

In  conclusion,  your  committee  express  their  unanimous  opinion 
that  the  one  important  physical  fact  thus  proved  to  exist,  that 
motion  may  be  produced  in  solid  bodies  without  material  contact,  by  some 
hitherto  unrecognised  force  operating  within  an  undefined  distance  from  the 
human  organism,  and  beyond  the  range  of  muscular  action,  should  be  sub- 
jected to  further  scientific  examination,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  its 
true  source,  nature,  and  power. 

The  notes  of  the  experiment ;  made  at  each  meeting  of  your  sub- 
committee are  appended  to  this  report. 

Additional  Experiments. 
But  although  as  a  committee  our  work  was  ended, 
the  phenomena  we  had  witnessed,  and  of  whose  reality 
we  were  assured  by  the  most  conclusive  evidence,  could 

36  SPIEITUALISM  ANSWERED 

not  bat  induce  in  the  most  thoughtful  of  the  members 
various  conjectures  as  to  the  nature  and  origin  of  the 
Force  whose  existence  had  thus  been  exhibited  to  them, 
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  wide  differences  of  opinion 
should  have  prevailed  among  us  as  to  its  source.  For 
my  own  part,  I  resolved  to  hold  my  judgment  in  sus- 
pense, and  to  continue  the  investigation  with  a  view  to 
learn,  if  possible,  the  causes  of  the  phenomena  I  had 
so  unexpectedly  witnessed.  Accordingly,  the  experi- 
ments were  resumed  under  new  conditions  and  with 
further  tests. ' 

It  would  be  tedious  and  needless  to  describe  fully 
each  of  these  experiments.  Those  of  the  sub-commit- 
tee are  fully  set  forth  in  the  appendix  to  the  published 
report  (a)  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  to  which  the 
reader  is  referred.  I  will  merely  state  briefly  the  most 
interesting  results  of  these  investigations,  premising 
that  all  but  three  of  them  were  made  with  unpaid  and 
unprofessional  Psychics. 

1.  The  hand  of  the  Psychic  being  held  over  it,  a 
musical  box  upon  the  table,  untouched,  turned  half 
round  by  four  movements. 

2.  A  sheet  of  paper  was  suspended  by  one  corner 
from  a  pin  which  the  Psychic  held  at  the  ends  between 
the  thumb  and  fingers,  so  that  the  hand  could  not 
touch  the  paper.  Many  taps,  as  if  made  with  the 
point  of  a  needle,  were  distinctly  heard  upon  the 
paper. 

3.  The  sounds  frequently  seemed  to  be  directed   by 

(a)  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical  So- 
ciety, on  the  asserted  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  p.  407. 

BY  SCIENCE.  37 

intelligence.  Tbej  were  made  often  in  pursuance  of 
and  in  answer  to  requests — as  that  so  many  blows 
should  be  struck,  that  the  tappings  should  beat  time 
to  music,  that  they  should  be  loud  or  soft,  quick  or 
slow. 

4.  So  also,  in  like  manner,  the  motions  of  the  table, 
when  untouched  as  well  as  when  touched,  were  in  ex- 
act accordance  with  requests,  such  as  that  it  should 
tilt  on  this  side  or  on  that  so  many  times.  This  was 
so  frequent  an  occurrence  that  it  was  impossible  to 
attribute  it  to  accidental  coincidence.  So  far  from 
obedience  being  rare,  as  some  scientists  have  conjec- 
tured, failure  was  the  rare  exception.. 

5.  Occasionally  the  phenomena  continued  after  the 
departure  of  the  Psychic  from  the  room,  but  in  such 
cases  they  gradually  diminished  in  power  until  they 
ceased  entirely. 

All  the  above  phenomena  were  witnessed  by  the 
Investigation  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  in 
the  course  of  their  experiments.  The  following  experi- 
ments were  witnessed  by  myself  elsewhere  : 

6.  The  next  experiment  was  with  the  same  Psychic, 
in  the  house  of  Dr.  Edmunds,  with  a  dining-table  of 
unusual  weight  and  size.  The  same  test,  by  turning 
the  backs  of  the  chairs  to  the  table  and  the  experi- 
mentalists kneeling  upon  them,  produced  the  same 
results,  but  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  we  had  be- 
fore witnessed.  In  that  position  of  the  entire  party, 
a  heavy  dining-table  moved  six  times — once  over  a 
space  of  eight  inches  at  a  swing.  Then  all  the  party 
holding  hands  stood  in  a  circle  round  the  table,  at 
the  distance   from   it  first,    of  two  feet,  and   then  of 

38  SPIKITUALISM  ANSWERED 

three  feet,  so  that  contact  by  any  person  present  was 
physically  impossible.  In  this  position  the  table  lurched 
four  times,  once  over  a  space  of  more  than  two  feet,  and 
with  great  force.  The  extent  of  these  movements  with- 
out contact  will  be  understood  when  I  state  that  in  the 
course  of  them  this  ponderous  table  turned  completely 
round,  that  is  to  say,  the  end  that  was  at  the  top  of  the 
room  when  the  experiment  began  was  at  the  bottom  Of 
the  room  when  it  concluded.  The  most  remarkable 
part  of  this  experiment  was  the  finale.  The  table  had 
been  turned  to  within  two  feet  of  a  complete  reversal 
of  its  first  position,  and  was  standing  out  of  square 
with  the  room.  The  party  had  broken  up  and  were 
gathered  in  groups  about  the  room.  Suddenly  the 
table  was  swung  violently  over  the  two  feet  of  distance 
between  its  then  position  and  its  proper  place,  and 
set  exactly  square  with  the  room,  literally  knocking 
down  a  lady  who  was  standing  in  the  way,  in  the  act 
of  putting  on  her  shawl  for  departure.  At  that  time 
nobody  was  touching  the  table,  nor  even  within  reach  of 
it,  except  the.  young  lady  who  was  knocked  down  by  it. 

7.  The  next  experiment  was  with  another  Psychic, 
in  another  place,  but  at  the  house  of  a  personal  friend, 
so  that  I  have  the  best  assurance  that  there  could  have 
been  no  such  pre-arrangement  of  mechanism  in  the 
room  as  would  have  been  necessary  to  produce  the 
effects  I  describe. 

It  was  a  double  drawing-room,  in  one  of  which  was 
a  table  of  considerable  weight.  The  Psychic  (a  Lady 
who  was  unpaid,  but  known  to  be  a  Psychic),  was 
taking  tea  in  one  room,  and  I  had  gone  with  three 
friends — one  of  whom  had  never  before  witnessed  the 

BY  SCIENCE.  39 

phenomena — into  the  other  'room  to  look  at  some 
pictures.  "While  we  were  thus  engaged,  very  loud 
sounds,  as  of  violent  blows,  came  from  a  large  loo 
table,  which  stood  -alone  in  the  centre  of  the  room — rco- 
body  being  near  it.  We  turned  to  look  at  the  table,  and 
untouched  it  tilted  up  almost  to  an  angle  of  45$,  and 
continued  in  that  position  for  nearly  a  minute.  Then 
it  fell  back.  Then  it  repeated  the  movement  on  the 
other  side.  None  of  us  were  standing  within  rive  feet 
of  it  at  that  time.  The  room  was  well  lighted  with 
gas.  There  was  no  cloth  upon  the  table,  and  all 
beneath  it  was  distinctly  visible.  Only  four  persons 
were  in  the  room,  and  no  one  touched  it,  nor  was  near 
enough  to  touch  it  had  he  tried.  The  Psychic  was  six 
feet  from  it. 

8.  Alterations  in  the  weight  of  tables  and  other 
furniture  have  been  frequently  exhibited.  Bidding  the 
table  to  be  light,  a  finger  lifted  it ;  the  next  moment, 
bidding  it  to  be  heavy,  the  entire  force  of  the  body 
was  required  to  raise  it  from  the  floor.  It  was,  how- 
ever, suggested  by  myself  and  others  who  were  engaged 
in  the  scientific  investigation  of  the  phenomena  of 
Psychic  Force,  that  possibly  this  change  in  the  weight 
of  the  subject  of  the  Force  might  be  merely  in  our 
own  sensations,  and  not  an  actual  change  in  the  gravity 
of  the  wood  or  the  operation  of  any  pressure  upon  it. 
To  test  this,  a  weighing  machine  was  constructed  with 
a  hook  to  fix  to  the  table,  the  index  accurately  marking 
the  weight  of  whatever  was  attached  to  it.  Applying 
this  machine  to  the  table  and  other  bodies,  we  found 
that  the  change  was  really  in  them,  and  not  sensational 
merely,  as  we  had  suspected.     This  simple  experiment 

40  SPIRITUALISM    ANSWERED 

was  tried  so  often,  and  with,  so  many  precautions,  as  to 
establish  it  beyond  doubt.  The  weights  varied  at 
every  trial,  but  all  proved  the  reality  of  the  Force  that 
was  operating.  One  instance  will  suffice.  Weighed  by 
the  machine,  the  normal  weight  of  a  table,  raised  from 
the  floor  18  in.  on  one  side,  was  81b. ;  desired  to  be 
light,  the  index  fell  to  51b. ;  desired  to  be  heavy,  it 
advanced  to  eighty-two  pounds ;  and  these  changes  were 
instantaneous  and  repeated  many  times. 

9.  Not  only  is  motion  communicated  to  the  table  or 
other  article  of  furniture  where  the  Psychic  is,  but 
everything  within  some  definite,  though  as  yet  un- 
defined, distance  from  the  Psychic  appears  to  be  sub- 
jected to  the  Force.  The  smaller  furniture  of  the 
room  is  frequently  attracted  to  the  place  at  which  the 
Psychic  sits.  Chairs  far  out  of  reach  and  untouched 
may  be  seen  moving  along  the  floor  in  a  manner  sin- 
gularly resembling  the  motion  that  may  be  observed  in 
pieces  of  steel  attracted  by  a  magnet,  which  rise  a  little, 
fall,  move  on,  stop,  until  fully  within  the  influence  of 
the  magnetic  force,  and  then  jump  to  the  magnet  with 
a  sudden  spring.  The  chairs  that  are  so  often  seen  to 
come  across  a  room  to  the  Psychic  usually  approach 
by  irregular  motions,  gliding  for  a  short  space,  stopping, 
moving,  and  so  on,  until  fully  within  the  influence,  and 
then  the  last  movement  is  by  a  rapid  jump.  Larger 
articles  of  furniture  are  attracted  in  like  manner 
according  to  weight ;  chairs  move  easily  the  whole 
length  of  a  large  room,  a  sofa  will  advance  2ft.  or  3ft. 
only.  Plainly  the  Force  is  limited  in  power ;  it  can 
move  only  a  certain  weight ;  bulk  is  no  impediment  to 
its  exercise.     Nor  is  this  phenomenon  at  all  dubious  to 

BY  SCIENCE.  41 

the  spectator.  It  cannot  be  fanciful ;  it  is  not  a  delusion. 
However  it  may  be  done,  the  fact  is  indisputable  that  it 
is  done.  The  chairs  start  from  the  wall  against  which 
they  are  placed;  the  sofa  rolls  forward;  the  smaller 
tables  approach.  This  occurs  in  the  light  of  gas,  in 
the  private  room  of  any  person  who  makes  trial  of  it, 
is  seen  by  all,  and  often  gives  inconvenient  proof  of  the 
fact  by  encompassing  the  seated  circle.  At  one  ex- 
periment six  drawing-room  chairs  were  attracted  from 
the  other  side  of  the  room  over  distances  ranging  from 
6ft.  to  10ft,  and  thrust  themselves  against  the  circle ; 
two  large  easy  chairs  advanced  3ft. ;  a  large  settee  ad- 
vanced about  2ft.  No  person  was  near  either  of  them. 
In  another  experiment  in  my  own  lighted  drawing-room, 
as  the  Psychic  was  entering  the  door  with  -myself,  no 
other  person  being  there,  an  easy  chair,  of  great  weight, 
that  was  standing  14ft.  from  us,  was  suddenly  lifted 
from  the  floor,  and  drawn  to  him  with  great  rapidity, 
precisely  as  a  huge  magnet  would  attract  a  mass  of 
iron. 

Aee  the  Spectatoes  Biologised? 

There  yet  remained  one  solution,  often  advanced,  but 
always  by  those  who  have  never  witnessed  the  pheno- 
mena,— that  the  spectators  are  under  the  influence  of 
electro-biology  (whatever  that  may  be),  and  imagine 
they  see  what  the  operator  wishes  them  to  see ;  that, 
precisely  as  the  biologised  patient  believes,  at  the  will 
of  the  operator,  that  his  chair  is  on  fire,  so  the  persons 
about  the  Psychic,  in  obedience  to  the  influence  of  his 
will,  suppose  that  they  see  and  near  what  is,  in  fact, 
only  a  waking  dream  suggested  by  him. 

42  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

Improbable  as  is  this  ingenious  explanation  of  the 
phenomena  described,  it  is  not  altogether  impossible. 
We  certainly  believed  ourselves  to  be  very  wide  awake ; 
the  same  things  were  seen  and  heard  by  all  at  the  same 
moment;  actual  measurement  showed  changes  in  the 
position  of  the  bodies  moved ;  the  vibration  caused  by 
the  sounds  we  heard  were  distinct  to  the  touch  also. 
Nevertheless,  we  were  most  desirous  to  apply  some 
mechanical  test,  which  would  preclude  the  possibility 
of  this  or  any  other  mental  delusion.  There  is  no 
passion,  prejudice,  or  capacity  for  self-delusion  in  wood 
and  brass,  and  to  that  conclusive  test  it  was  determined 
to  resort  Accordingly  Mr.  Crookes,  F.K.S.,  con- 
structed the  apparatus  which  he  has  described  so  fully, 
whereby  not  only  could  the  existence  of  any  Force  be 
demonstrated  by  delicate  tests,  but  the  amount  and 
direction  of  it  measured  with  perfect  accuracy. 

Mr.  Huggins,  F.E.S.,  the  astronomer  and  spectro- 
scopist,  as  one  practically  skilled  in  the  construction 
and  working  of  the  most  delicate  scientific  apparatus, 
and  myself  as  having  great  experience  in  the  sifting 
and  weighing  of  evidence,  were  invited  to  witness  a 
trial  of  these  experiments.  The  results  have  been  given 
to  the  world  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  and 
they  completely  establish  the  existence  of  a  Force, 
operating  within  an  undefined  but  not  indefinite  dis- 
tance from  certain  persons  having  some  unknown 
specialty  of  organization,  and  to  which  the  appropriate 
name  has  been  given  of  Psychic  Force,  to  distinguish 
it  from  Muscular  force ;  the  latter  operating  only  with, 
but  the  former  without,  actual  personal  contact 

BY    SCIENCE.  43 

WHAT  IS  THE  PSYCHIC  FOECE? 

A  Fokce  is  visibly,  palpably,  audibly  operating  be- 
fore us.  It  is  manifest  to  three  of  our  senses.  Can  all 
of  these  be  deceived  ?  Is  it  possible  that  the  three 
senses  of  ten  persons,  seeing,  hearing,  and  feeling  the 
same  thing  at  the  same  moment  in  the  same  manner, 
can  be  the  dupes  of  a  mere  imagination  ?  Were  the 
motions  we  witnessed  real  or  fanciful ;  were  the  sounds 
we  heard  actual  or  ideal  ?  If  what  we  saw  and  heard 
was  not  sufficient  proof  of  the.  fact,  all  evidence  is 
worthless  and  truth  is  unattainable.  On  similar  evi- 
dence a  jury  would  instantly  convict  of  murder  and  a 
judge  would  hang  without  hesitation.  All  the  business 
of  life  is  conducted  in  reliance  upon  less  evidence  of 
the  same  senses.  If  we  are  to  reject  the  testimony  of 
such  experiments  as  these,  we  must  reject  all  testimony 
of  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  the  touch.  Three-fourths  of 
the  sciences  are  based  upon  experiments  infinitely  more 
open  to  doubt  and  question  than  those  which  establish 
the  existence  of  the  Force,  whatever  it  may  be,  that 
moves  and  makes  audible  sounds  on  heavy  bodies  with- 
out physical  contact  or  connection.  Its  existence  is  de- 
monstrated by  evidence  as  certain  and  perfect  as  that 
which  proves  the  existence  of  electricity,  magnetism, 
and  other  invisible  and  intangible  forces  of  nature.  It 
was  impossible  for  us,  with  such  evidence,  repeated 

44  spikituAlism  answebid 

thirty-eight  times,  under  various  tens*  cad  divers  con- 
ditions, to  do  other  than  acknowledge  the  existence  of 
the  Force  we  had  thought  by  oiu  experiments  to  dis- 
prove, although  we  fail  id  to  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion  with  respect  to  the  sour  ~e  and  nature  of  that 
Force.  Upon  these  points  very  wide  differences  of 
opinion  prevailed,  some  deeming  it  to  be  a  spiritual 
presence,  others,  and  the  scientific  observers  especially, 
coinciding  with  my  own  conviction  that  it  is  a  purely 
physical  force,  proceeding  in  some  as  yet  untraced  man- 
ner from  the  nerve  organization — probably  the  nerve 
atmosphere  which  Dr.  Eichardson  contends  is  envelop- 
ing all  of  us, — extended  in  Psychics  to  an  abnormal 
distance  from  the  extremities  of  the  nerves,  and  di- 
rected by  the  same  intelligence  that  governs  the  action 
of  the  nerves  themselves ;  the  motive  power  being  fre- 
quently that  unconscious  action  of  the  brain  which  Dr. 
Carpenter  has  investigated  with  so  much  ability  and 
success,  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  "  Uncon- 
scious Cerebration,"  and  for  asserting  which  he  has  been 
so  mercilessly  accused  of  gullibility  by  his  brother 
Scientists. 

But  it  will  be  just  to  state  fairly  the  contention  on 
either  side  among  those  who  acknowledge  the  existence 
of  the  Force  but  differ  in  opinion  as  to  its  origin. 

The  most  numerous,  though  not  the  most  scientific, 
section  are  they  who,  unable  to  explain  the  phenomena 
upon  the  instant,  have  adopted  the  time-honoured  prac- 
tice of  solving  a  scientific  problem  by  the  easy  process 
of  assigning  it  to  the  convenient  region  of  the  super- 
natural. As  it  ever  was,  so  it  is  now.  Each  one  of 
Nature's  Forces  has  in  its  turn  been  attributed  to  angels 

BY    SCIENCE.  45 

or  demons,  before  Science  condescended  to  recognise 
its  facts  and  give  them  a  place  in  its  own  domain.  As 
soon  as  the  fact  is  seized,  stripped  of  all  that  fancy  has 
thrown  about  it,  investigated,  measured,  and  found  to 
fit,  as  all  facts  do,  with  the  natural  order  of  things,  that 
fact  has  instantly  ceased  to  be  the  subject  of  super- 
stition. 

So  it  will  be  with  the  Psychic  Force.  When  recog- 
nised by  Science  as  one  of  the  natural  forces,  it  will 
speedily  cease  to  be  a  superstition  itself  or  the  parent 
of  superstition.  All  honour  to  the  man  who  has  bad  the 
courage  to  grapple  with  it  and  drag  it  out  of  the  pos- 
session of  Superstition  into  the  domain  of  Science. 

Wherefore  do  we  call  it  Psychic  Force  ?  To  distin- 
guish it  from  Muscular  Force. 

Distinctly  associated  with  the  human  organisation,  it 
may  be,  probably  it  is,  that  it  exists  in  all  human  beings 
in  greater  or  less  degree ;  but  so  far  the  evidence  is,  that 
it  is  possessed  to  an  extraordinary  extent  by  certain 
persons,  to  whom  the  appropriate  name  of  Psychics  is 
proposed  to  be  given.  It  is  not  exhibited  save  within 
an  undefined,  bu  t  still  limited,  circle  about  a  Psychic. 
It  varies  from  day  to  day,  from  hour  to  hour,  almost 
from  minute  to  minute,  according  to  the  nervous  condi- 
tion of  the  Psychic.  It  issues  in  pulsations,  as  was 
plainly  manifested  in  the  experiments  made  with  Mr. 
Crookes's  mechanism,  and  minutely  described  in  the 
Quarterly  Journal  of  Science.  Whatever  affects  the 
Psychic  instantly  affects  the  Force.  It  comes  with  him 
and  goes  with  him.  All  the  conditions,  more  fully  to 
be  set  out  hereafter,  point  directly  to  the  Psychic  as  the 
source  of  it 

46  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

And  that  is  the  conclusion  of  the  scientific  section  of 
the  investigators,  with  few  exceptions. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  majority  of  the  unscientific 
relieve  their  minds  from  the  disagreeable  condition  of 
doubt  by  assuming  the  Force  to  be  spiritual.  This  is 
so  easy  a  solution  of  every  problem  in  nature  we 
are  unable  to  solve  at  once,  that  it  has  ever  been  the 
favourite  means  of  accounting  for  the  unaccountable. 

The  Theory  of  Spiritualism. 

The  "  Spiritualists,"  for  that  is  the  name  they  have 
assumed  in  accordance  with  their  theory,  have  exercised 
considerable  ingenuity  in  moulding  that  theory  to  the 
facts.  Their  creed,  as  I  gather  it  from  the  most  intelli- 
gent of  its  votaries,  may  be  thus  briefly  described  : — 

Man,  they  say,  is  composed  of  body,  mind,  and  spirit. 
A  blow  will  extinguish  the  mind,  and  the  body  in- 
habited by  the  spirit  may  continue  to  live.  When  the 
body  dies,  the  spirit  which  occupied  it  in  life  passes  into 
a  new  existence,  in  which,  as  it  was  here,  it  is  sur- 
rounded by  conditions  adapted  to  its  structure  as  a 
being  which  by  earthly  senses  is  deemed  immaterial 
because  impalpable  to  them,  but  which  is  really  very 
refined  matter.  Into  this  new  existence  it  passes  pre- 
cisely as  it  left  the  present  life,  taking  with  it  the  men- 
tal, but  not  the  bodily,  characteristics  it  had  on  earth, 
so  far  as  these  are  adapted  to  the  altered  conditions  of 
that  new  existence.  The  intellect  is  enlarged  to  the 
extent  only  of  the  increased  power  of  obtaining  intelli- 
gence necessarily  resulting  from  exemption  from  the 
laws  of  gravitation  and  the  conditions  of  time  and  space 
that  limit  the  powers  of  the  spirit  while  it  is  in  the  flesh. 

BY    SCIENCE.  47 

The  reason,  say  the  Spiritualists,  why  we  are  not 
always  conscious  of  the  presence  of  the  spirits  that  are 
thronging  everywhere  about  us  is  that  our  senses  are 
constructed  to  perceive  only  the  coarse  material  of  this 
earth,  and  therefore  we  cannot  perceive  the  refined  mat- 
ter of  which  a  spirit  is  composed.  If  a  spirit  touches 
us,  we  can  no  more  feel  the  touch  than  we  can  feel  the 
particles  of  musk  that  another  sense  tells  us  are  filling 
the  room.  The  disembodied  spirit  has  no  means  of 
communication  with  us  in  ordinary  circumstances,  be- 
cause its  substance  is  not  perceptible  by  our  senses. 

A  Psychic  (or  Medium,  as  the  Spiritualists  call  him) 
is  a  person  possessing  an  abnormal  amount  of  animal 
magnetism  (which  is  the  name  they  give  to  what  tve  call 
the  Psychic  Force).  This  is  something  that  proceeds 
from  the  human  body — matter  of  some  kind  projected 
from  the  whole  or  part  of  the  structure,  and,  like  the  other 
forces  of  nature,  is  perceptible  to  our  senses  only  when 
it  meets  with  some  obstacle.  All  possess  it,  more  or  less. 
The  medium  has  it  more,  and  thus  attracts  it  from  those 
with  whom  he  is  in  communication.  When  this  afflu- 
ent substance  is  sufficiently  abundant,  the  spirits,  which 
are  always  about  us,  are  enabled  to  use  it  as  a  medium 
of  communication  between  themselves  and  human 
beings.  They  have  power  to  seize  and  shape  it  into  a 
substance  palpable  to  our  senses.  Hence  the  need  for 
the  presence  of  a  medium.  Hence  the  uncertainty  of 
the  manifestations.  Hence  the  continual  fluctuations 
of  the  magnetic  material,  according  to  external  con- 
ditions of  health,  atmosphere,  temperature,  and  other 
influences. 

A  spirit,  say  the  Spiritualists,  of  necessity  can  mani- 

48  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

fest  itself  to  our  senses  only  by  assuming  a  substance 

sufficiently  solid  to  make  an  impression  upon  some  one 

of  them.     We  might  be  surrounded  by  spirits  and  yet 

be  utterly  unconscious  of  their  presence.     The  air  may 

be  so  thronged  with  them  that  we  could  never  lift  an 

arm  without  touching  or  passing  through  a  spirit,  and 

yet  we  might  live  and  die  in  perfect  ignorance  of  their 

presence,  because  our  senses  are  incapable  of  perceiving 

the  impressions  made  by  matter  more  refined  than  that 

which  they  are  constructed  to  2^erceive. 

In  this  Spiritualist  creed  there  is  nothing  absolutely 

impossible.     It  may  be  that,  as  Milton  sings : 

Millions  of  spiritual  creatures  walk  the  earth, 
Unseen  both  when  we  wake  and  when  we  sleep. 

As  Lord  Lytton  says,  seeing  how  life  teems  in  all  the 
visible  creation,  it  may  be  a  not  unreasonable  presump- 
tion that  the  vast  interspaces  between  the  worlds  are 
not  altogether  void  of  life,  and  it  is  conceivable  that 
spirit,  in  its  infinite  immateriality,  may  find  there  a 
dwelling-place. 

But,  however  ingenious  this  creed  may  be,  the  ques- 
tion is,  if  it  be  not  purely  speculative — a  merely  fanci- 
ful creation,  unsupported  by  any  solid  facts?  True, 
that  it  explains  all  the  phenomena  of  Psychism,  but  so 
it  would  explain  every  other  problem  in  science — and 
it  has,  in  fact,  been  invoked  for  that  purpose  in  all 
ages  and  countries.  All  of  the  many  marvels  of  science 
were  sought  to  be  explained  at  first  by  the  easy  process 
of  referring  them  to  supernatural  (or  spirit)  power,  until 
sober-minded  men  investigated  them,  and  proved  them 
to  be  purely  natural,  and  then  they  ceased  to  be  the 
subjects  of  wonder  and  the  basis  of  superstition. 

BY    SCIENCE.  49 

So  it  will  be  with  the  speculations  of  Spiritualism. 
Touched  by  Science  its  visions  will  vanish,  and  the 
facts  that  lie  at  the  bottom  of  it  will  become  a  solid  and 
invaluable  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  physiology 
and  psychology  of  Man, 

The  Scientific  Theory  of  Psychic  Force. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  scientific  theory  of  the  Psychic 
Force  whose  existence  may  now  be  deemed  to  be  de- 
monstrated, may  be  shortly  stated  thus : — 

There  is  a  Force  proceeding  from,  or  directly  asso- 
ciated with,  the  human  organisation,  which,  in  certain 
persons  and  under  certain  conditions,  can  cause  motion 
in  heavy  bodies,  and  produce  audible  and  palpable 
pounds  in  such  bodies,  without  muscular  contact  or 
any  material  connection  between  any  person  present 
and  the  heavy  body  so  moved  or  on  which  the  sounds 
are  produced. 

This  Force  appears  to  be  frequently  directed  by  some 
■  intelligence. 

For  the  reasons  presently  to  be  specified,  we  conclude 
that  this  Force  is  generated  in  certain  persons  of  pecu- 
liar nervous  organisation  in  sufficient  power  to  operate 
beyond  bodily  contact.  To  these  persons  the  Spiritual- 
ists have  given  the  name  of  "mediums,"  on  the  assump- 
tion that  they  are  the  means  of  communication  between 
disembodied  spirits  and  the  living  ;  but  they  who,  with 
myself,  dispute  the  theory  of  Spiritualism,  have  given 
to  those  persons  the  more  appropriate  name  of  Psychics. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Force  is  possessed 
by  every  human  being, — that  it  is  a  necessary  condition 
of  the  living  nerve,  if,  indeed,  it  be  not  the  vital  force 

50  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

itself;  but  that  it  is  possessed  by  Psychics  in  extraordi- 
nary degree.  In  ordinary  persons  it  ceases  to  operate 
at  or  near  the  extremities  of  the  nerves ;  in  Psychics  it 
flows  beyond  them  in  waves  of  varying  volume  and 
power.  Mr.  Crookes,  indeed,  has  recently  constructed 
an  instrument  of  extreme  delicacy,  which  seems  to 
indicate  the  existence  of  the  Psychic  Force  more  or 
less  in  every  person  with  whom  he  has  made  trial 
of  it. 

The  existence  of  such  a  Force  is  asserted  by  Dr. 
Eichardson,  in  a  recent  article  in  the  Popular  Science 
Review,  in  which  he  contends  that  there  is  a  nerve  fluid 
(or  ether),  with  which  the  nerves  are  enveloped,  and  by 
whose  help  it  is  that  the  motion  of  their  molecules 
communicates  sensations  and  transmits  the  commands 
of  the  will.  This  nerve  ether  is,  he  thinks,  no  other 
than  the  vital  force.  It  extends  with  all  of  us  some- 
what beyond  the  extremities  of  the  nerve  structure, 
and  even  beyond  the  surface  of •  the  body,  encompassing 
us  wholly  with  an  envelope  of  nerve  atmosphere,  which 
varies  in  its  depth  and  intensity  in  various  persons. 
This,  he  contends,  will  solve  many  difficult  problems  in 
Psychology  and  throw  a  new  light  on  many  obscurities 
in  Physiology  and  Mental  Philosophy. 

If  Br.  Eichardson  be  confirmed  in  this  discovery, 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Psychic  Force  is  that 
nerve  ether  or  nerve  atmosphere. 

But,  say  the  Spiritualists,  your  Psychic  Force  is 
directed  by  some  intelligence.  How  is  that  to  be 
accounted  for  ?  Whence  and  what  is  that  intelligence  ? 
Unless  you  can  show  that  it  proceeds  from  the  Psychic, 
or  some  person  present,  you  must  conclude  that  it  is  the 

BY  SCIENCE.  51 

product  of  some  other  being,  and  as  no  other  being  is 
visibly  present  that  being  must  be  a  spirit 

To  this  argument  of  the  Spiritualists,  urged  in  a 
tone  of  triumph,  the  advocates  of  a  Psychic  Force  have 
an  answer,  which  appears  to  be  complete. 

We  contend  that  the  intelligence  that  directs  the  Psy- 
chic Force  is  the  intelligence  of  the  Psychic  and  no  other. 
The  reasons  for  such  a  conclusion  will  be  set  forth 
presently  a  ad  will  be  admitted  by  the  impartial  to  be 
overwhelming.  All  the  conditions  requisite  to  the 
production  and  exercise  of  the  Force  are  consistent 
with  its  origin  in  and  direction  by  the  Psychic  and 
inconsistent  with  any  conceivable  action  of  the  dis- 
embodied spirits  of  the  dead. 

But  for  the  manner  in  which  the  force  may  be 
governed  I  must  turn  to  Dr.  Carpenter  ;  as  for  its  source 
I  have  referred  to  the  authority  of  Dr.  Eichardson. 

The  explanation  will  be  found  in  Dr.  Carpenter's 
theory  of  "  unconscious  cerebration,"  or,  in  less  learned 
language,  the  capacity  of  the  brain,  under  certain  con- 
ditions, to  work,  not  only  without  the  will,  but  without 
the  consciousness,  of  the  individual.  A  familiar  in- 
stance of  this  is  seen  in  the  case  of  a  person  stunned. 
He  will  walk,  talk,  return  to  his  home,  undress,  go  to 
bed,  although  consciousness  is  annihilated,  and  when 
he  " recovers  his  senses"  as  it  is  called,  he  has  no 
memory  of  anything,  not  even  of  time,  from  the 
moment  when  the  blow  was  received  to  the  moment  of 
consciousness  revived.  Another  instance  is  the  frequent 
one  of  somnambulism,  natural  and  artificial,  in  both  of 
which  states  the  brain  acts  perfectly  and  often  more 
powerfully  than  in  the  normal  state,  while  consciousness 

52  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

is  suspended.  Numerous  instances  are  collected  by  Dr. 
Carpenter,  who  attributes  to  this  curious  condition  most 
of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  electro-biology,  and 
other  hitherto  mysterious  mental  states  which  scientific 
men,  unable  to  explain,  have  contented  themselves 
with  denying  or  ignoring,  and  unreflecting  persons  have 
attributed  to  supernatural  influences,  as  the  solution 
nearest  at  hand.  Bat  if  this  be  the  true  cause,  nothing 
is  more  simple  and  obvious  than  the  application  of  it 
to  the  facts  that  have  so  long  perplexed  physiologists 
and  mental  philosophers,  and  for  accepting  which  as 
facts  (though  they  could  not  explain  them)  so  many 
honest  observers  have  been  called  dupes  or  knaves. 

This  is  probably  the  Intelligence  that  directs  the 
Psychic  Force.  It  is  the  brain  of  the  Psychic  in  that 
condition  of  "  unconscious  cerebration  "  of  which  Dr. 
Carpenter  has  demonstrated  the  existence,  and  which 
he  has  dared  to  maintain  in  defiance  of  the  accusations 
of  being  gullible  made  by  his  scientific  brethren,  al- 
ways jealous  of  those  who  claim  the  honour  of  a  new 
discovery. 

The  Scientific  theory,  then,  which  I  venture  to 
oppose  to  the  Spiritualist  theory  of  phenomena,  whose 
existence  is  demonstrated  by  evidence  as  conclusive  as 
any  that  establishes  the  other  facts  of  Science,  is  that 
the  Force  whose  operations  are  seen  in  the  motion  of 
heavy  bodies  when  untouched  and  heard  in  the  audible 
and  palpable  sounds  that  come  from  them,  is  the  Force 
which  Dr.  Eichardson  contends  to  be  always  existing 
in  the  nerve  system,  and  that  the  Intelligence  which  as 
certainly  often  directs  that  Force  is  the  "  Unconscious 
Cerebration  "  of  Dr.  Carpenter. 

by  science.  53 

The  Argument  foe  the  Psychic  Theory. 

I  now  propose  to  set  forth  the  facts  that  appear  to  me 
to  give  consistent  support  to  the  Scientific  theory 
thus  stated,  and  to  be  entirely  inconsistent  with  the 
Spiritualist  theory.     These  are — 

L  The  necessity  for  the  presence  of  a  human  being 
having  some  unascertained  peculiarity  of  constitution, 
whom  the  Spiritualists  call  "  a  Medium,"  but  to  whom 
the  Scientists  have  preferred  to  give  the  more  scientific 
title  of  "a  Psychic." 

II.  A  Psychic  is  a  person  possessing  no  known 
superiority  of  mind  or  body.  He  differs  in  no  per- 
ceptible manner  from  other  persons.  The  faculty  is  not 
associated  with  any  special  intelligence  or  virtue,  nor 
with  any  condition  of  health  or  of  disease,  nor  with 
any  sex,  age,  complexion,  or  form.  A  child  is  usually 
a  more  powerful  Psychic  than  a  man.  The  possessor 
of  the  Psychic  Force  has  no  consciousness  of  its 
existence  in  himself  until  an  accident  discovers  it 

III.  The  Psychic  is  an  unconscious  agent  He  can 
neither  command  nor  control  the  Force.  It  does  not 
come  nor  depart  at  his  will.  He  has  no  more  know- 
ledge of  its  presence  than  has  any  of  the  spectators, 

IV.  Psychic  Force  is  always  exhibited  within  a 
limited  range  from  the  person  of  the  Psychic.  Its 
power  appears  to  decline  according  to  distance,  but  at 
what  ratio  remains  to  be  determined.  It  is,  however, 
certain  that  usually,  if  not  always,  it  operates  far  be- 
yond the  reach  of  his  muscular  powers. 

V.  It  is  sometimes)  but  rarely,  exhibited  when  the 
Psychic  is  alone.  As  a  rule,  the  presence  of  other  per- 
sons promotes  the  operations  of  the  Force. 

54  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

VI.  For  this  purpose  such  other  persons  must  be 
within  the  range  of  the  Force  proceeding  from  the 
Psychic. 

YII.  It  is  found  to  be  advantageous,  though  bj  no 
means  necessary,  that  the  persons  present  with  the 
Psychic  should  form  a  circle  after  the  manner  of  the 
electric  chain.  The  Force  is  promoted  by  the  joining 
of  hands,  but  almost  the  same  erfect  is  produced  by 
laying  the  hands  on  a  table  or  on  any  other  solid  body, 
such  body  appearing  to  be  in  the  nature  of  a  conduc- 
tor, and  possibly  of  a  collector,  of  the  Force. 

VIII.  The  persons  forming  the  chain  may  be  of  any 
age,  sex,  intelligence,  or  virtue.  Scepticism  in  no  ivay 
impedes  the  manifestation  of  the  Force.  But  there  are 
certain  persons  whose  presence,  from  some  cause  not 
yet  ascertained,  operates  precisely  as  does  the  inter- 
position of  a  non-conducting  substance  in  the  electric 
chain.  They  impede  the  flow  of  the  Force,  but  how 
or  why  we  are  wholly  ignorant.  This,  however,  is  of 
unfrequent  occurrence,  and  is  no  way  connected  with 
belief  or  disbelief.  Believers  are  non-conductors  equally 
with  others. 

IX.  It  is  not  known  how  the  Psychic  Force  is  affected 
by  the  presence  of  such  a  person.  One  probable  con- 
jecture is  that  all  human  bsings  possess  Psychic  Force 
in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  and  that  the  greater  Force 
of  the  Psychic  attracts  to  itself  the  lesser  Psychic 
Force  of  the  persons  with  whom  he  is  sitting,  the  use 
of  the  circle  or  chain  being  to  collect  and  convey  the 
Psychic  Force  of  the  whole  party. 

X.  The  Force  is  materially  affected  by  the  conditions 
attendant  on  the  formation  of  the  circle.      Whatever 

BY  SCIENCE.  55 

tends  to  bring  all  the  minds  present  into  harmonious 
action  obviously  promotes  the  action  of  the  Force. 
General  conversation  on  a  common  topic,  prayer,  re- 
citation, and,  above  all,  music,  are  marked  and  uni- 
versal in  their  effect  of  increasing  the  flow  and  power 
of  the  Force.  On  the  contrary,  whatever  directs  the 
various  minds  in  the  circle  into  diverse  action,  as  talk- 
ing on  different  matters,  or  on  themes  creating  discord- 
ant opinion  or  exciting  rival  emotions,  operates  invari- 
ably to  weaken,  and  often  to  extinguish,  the  Force 
during  the  continuance  of  such  diversity  of  mental 
action :  and  it  is  revived  on  recourse  to  music,  or  what- 
ever has  the  effect  of  restoring  harmonious  brain 
action. 

Note.  — If  there  be,  as  many  physiologists  contend,  a  stream  of 
waves  of  vital  force  incessantly  thrown  off  by  the  nerve  centres,  and 
to  which  the  name  of  "brain  wave"  has  been  given,  it  is  readily 
intelligible  how  discordant  discussion  should  dissipate  the  Psychic 
Force  and  music  promote  it.  When  all  the  brains  present  are  work- 
ing in  harmony,  the  waves  thrown  off  are  synchronous,  and  all 
swell  the  flow  of  the  stream  through  the  conductor  to  the  attracting 
Force  of  the  Psychic.  But  if  the  actions  of  the  brains  are  dis- 
cordant, the  brain  waves,  by  a  well  known  law,  fall  foul  of  each 
other,  and  being  thus  partially  neutralized,  the  flow  of  the  stream  is 
diminished,  and  even  destroyed. 

XL  The  condition  of  the  Psychic  is  found  largely 
to  affect  the  exhibition  of  the  Force.  Its  presence  and 
power  are  dependent  upon  the  state  of  mind  and  of 
body  in  the  Psychic,  and  vary  from  time  to  time  with 
that  state.  Often  a  headache  will  destroy  it ;  a  cup  of 
tea,  that  revives  the  nerve  energy,  revives  also  the 
Psychic  Force.  The  state  of  the  atmosphere  visibly  in- 
fluences it.  Accordingly  as  it  is  wet  or  dry,  cold  or 
hot,  so  is  the  power  lesser  or  greater.      But  the  state  of 

56  SPIRITUALISM    ANSWERED 

the  weather  does  not  affect  all  Psychics  alike.  That 
which  gives  power  to  some  takes  it  away  from  others. 
I  know  two  powerful  Psychics  in  private  life,  in  one  of 
whom  the  force  is  at  zero  in  hot  and  moist  weather, 
vigorous  in  cold  and  dry  weather ;  in  the  other,  it  is 
powerful  in  the  former,  almost  powerless  in  the  latter. 
But  in  both  the  weather  that  thus  differently  affects 
their  Psychic  Force  affects  also  their  general  health. 

XII.  The  degree  of  the  Force  varies  continually 
during  the  experiments,  not  merely  from  hour  to  hour, 
but  almost  from  minute  to  minute.  The  opening  of  a 
door  will  sometimes  produce  an  immediate  flow  of  it ; 
the  change  of  two  or  three  degrees  of  temperature  will 
raise  qr  depress  it.  In  fact,  whatever  affects  the 
Psychic  personally,  and  to  a  less  extent  the  persons 
with  him,  affects  the  power  of  the  Force. 

XIII.  The  communications  made  by  the  intelligence 
that  undoubtedly  often  directs  the  Force  are  character- 
istic of  the  Psychic ;  as  he  is  so  they  are.  The  lan- 
guage, and  even  spelling,  are  such  as  he  uses;  the 
ideas  are  such  as  he  would  be  likely  to  possess — neither 
better  nor  worse.  If  he  were  to  communicate  avowed- 
ly with  his  own  bodily  organs,  it  would  be  done  in 
precisely  the  same  manner.  Thus  the  communications 
in  the  presence  of  an  English  Psychic  are  in  English 
phrase,  of  a  Scotch  Psychic  in  Scotticisms,  of  a  pro- 
vincial in  his  own  provincialisms,  of  a  Frenchman  in 
French.  The  ideas  conveyed  are  those  of  the  Psychic. 
If  he  is  intellectual  so  are  the  communications.  If  vul- 
gar or  uneducated  so  are  they.  Their  religious  tone 
varies  with  the  faith  of  the  Psychic.  In  the  presence 
of  a  Methodist  Psychic,  the  communications  are  Meth- 

BY   SCIENCE.  57 

odistical ;  of  a  Eoman  Catholic,  decidedly  Papistical ; 
with,  a  Unitarian,  free-thinking  views  prevail.  If  the 
Psychic  cannot  spell,  the  communications  are  faulty  in 
the  spelling ;  if  the  Psychic  is  ignorant  of  grammar,  the 
defect  is  seen  in  the  sentences  spelled  by  the  Force. 
If  the  Psychic  is  ill-informed  on  matters  of  fact,  as  in 
science,  and  such  like,  the  alleged  spirit  messages  ex- 
hibit the  same  errors,  and  if  the  communication  has 
relation  to  a  future  state,  the  descriptions  given  of  that 
sphere  of  existence  are  in  strict  accordance  with  the 
notions  which  such  a  person  as  the  Psychic  might  be 
expected  to  entertain  of  it 

Note. — I  am  aware  that  the  answer  of  the  Spiritualists  to  this 
patent  objection  is  the  ingenious  one,  that  when  the  spirit  quits  its 
mortal  tenement,  it  carries  with  it  all  the  mental  qualities  and  facul- 
ties it  possessed  here — the  same  knowledge  and  no  other,  and  that 
in  its  new  sphere  of  existence  it  can  obtain  further  intelligence  only 
by  the  same  process  of  instruction  as  in  this  world.  Hence  its  in- 
ability to  give  any  new  knowledge.  It  is  further  asserted  that  we 
who  are  in  the  flesh  are  attended  only  by  spirits  who  sympathize 
with  our  own  mental  condition,  and  hence  the  resemblances  I  have 
stated  between  their  communications  and  the  mental  condition  of 
the  Psychic.  But  the  reader  will  say  if  this  is  not  more  like  a  clever 
theory,  invented  to  explain  the  facts,  than  the  natural  deduction 
from  the  facts  themselves.  It  appears  to  me  to  be  incredible  that 
the  soul,  having  passed  from  this  world  into  a  new  stage  of  exist- 
ence, with  powers  enlarged  to,  at  least,  the  extent  necessarily  conse- 
quent upon  the  condition  of  immateriality,  and  its  resulting  exemp- 
tion from  the  laws  of  gravitation,  and  from  time  and  space  as  con- 
ceived by  the  material  brain,  should  not  be  better  informed  than  we 
who  are  in  the  flesh  can  be  as  to  which  of  many  religions  is  the 
true  one.  Yet  do  we  find  different  communications,  eq  lally  alleged 
to  be  spiritual,  differing  essentially  as  to  what  is  the  truth,  each  de- 
claring with  the  same  positiveness  that  its  own  creed  is  the  only 
true  one,  and  that  creed  being  always  the  creed  of  the  Psychic. 

XIY.  The  Force  exhibits  itself  in  pulsations  or  un- 

58  SPIRITUALISM    ANSWERED 

dulatioDS.  It  is  never  steadily  continuous.  Moreover 
it  is  rhythmical  in  its  exhibitions,  coming  at  equal 
intervals.  The  rappings  are  very  regular ;  the  motions 
of  heavy  bodies  observe  perfect  time.  The  tremors  of 
the  table,  of  the  chair,  of  the  floor  of  the  room,  are  as 
rapid  and  as  regular  as  the  waves  of  light  or  sound. 
When  a  table  or  a  chair  rises  from  the  floor,  it  does  not 
ascend  with  a  jerk,  as  if  pushed  up,  nor  descend  with  a 
thump,  as  if  a  sustaining  hand  had  been  removed  from 
it.  It  soars  and  sinks  like  a  balloon,  precisely  as  if  it 
had  been  released  from  the  force  of  gravity,  and  was 
going  upward  by  its  own  levity.  The  difference  of  the 
sensation  between  the  operation  of  the  Psychic  Force 
and  of  muscular  force  is  in  this  particular  so  manifest 
as  to  be  palpable  instantly  to  everybody  who  witnesses 
it.  When  solid  bodies  are  seen  to  rise  without  contact, 
the  motion  is  very  peculiar  and  always  the  same. 
They  do  not  dart  straight  up,  like  a  balloon,  but  with  a 
swinging  motion,  much  like  that  of  a  pendulum.  They 
do  not  remain  still  when  at  the  highest  ascent,  but  quiver 
with  immense  rapidity  or  continue  the  pendulous  mo- 
tion, and  return  with  an  irregular  hesitating  descent, 
after  the  manner  of  a  parachute.  In  Mr.  Crookes's 
experiments  with  the  mechanical  board,  this  pulsatory 
motion  was  very  distinctly  marked,  the  indicator  at-, 
tached  to  the  balance  showing  an  incessant  tremulous 
up  and  down  movement  throughout  the  operation  of 
the  Force,  such  movement  being  manifestly  the  flow  of 
the  Force  in  synchronous  waves  varying  in  intensity. 

XV.  The  Force  is  materially  influenced  by  the  elec- 
tric and  magnetic  conditions  of  the  atmosphere  and  of 
surrounding  bodies ;  by  heat  and  cold,  by  moisture  and 

BY  SCIENCE.  59 

dryness,  and  still  more  by  the  nervous  condition  of  the 
persons  present,  and  especially  of  the  Psychic. 

Note. — These  conditions  are  precisely  such  as  would  be  likely  to 
affect  the  flow  of  the  Force  from  the  Psychic,  but  difficult  to  assert 
as  being  likely  to  affect  disembodied  spirits.  It  cannot  be  said  to 
be  impossible,  but  it  is  certainly  highly  improbable  that  spirits,  ac- 
cording to  any  reasonable  conception  of  their  nature,  could  be  im- 
peded in  their  action,  by  a  shower  of  rain,  a  close  room,  the  order  in 
which  people  sit,  the  headache  of  one  person  and  the  toothache  of 
another.  But  these  incidents  would  necessarily  affect  a  Psychic 
Force. 

XYI.  The  Force  is  not  exhibited  immediately,  save 
in  rare  instances.  There  is  an  interval  of  more  or  less 
duration,  frequently  above  half  an  hour,  before  any 
symptoms  of  its  presence  are  shown.  Let  a  stetho- 
scope be  then  applied  to  the  table,  and  faint  creakings 
are  audible  in  the  body,  not  at  the  surface,  of  the  wood, 
as  if  a  pin  was  striking  its  fibres.  The  sounds  grow 
louder  by  degrees,  and  occasionally  are  so  loud  as  to  be 
audible  in  distant  rooms,  and  they  proceed  from  the 
wall,  the  ceiling,  and  pieces  of  furniture  far  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  Psychic,  as  well  as  from  the  table  at  which 
the  party  is  seated.  Wherever  heard  they  appear  to 
proceed  from  within,  rather  than  from  the  surface.  The 
vibrations  are  distinctly  felt  by  the  hand,  insomuch 
that  a  deaf  person  can  usually  discover  the  blows  and 
their  communications  as  readily  as  they  who  have  the 
use  of  their  ears.  The  motions  also  grow  in  vigour  ; 
they  begin  with  a  faint  tremor,  then  a  violent  shaking 
of  the  entire  fabric ;  then  tiltings,  now  on  this  side,  now 
on  that,  and  then  rising  from  the  ground,  all  which  con- 
ditions  indicate   the  operation   of  a  purely  mundane 

60  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

force.  The  process  is  similar  to  that  seen  in  the  gather- 
ing of  the  electric  force  ;  it  must  be  accumulated  before 
it  becomes  powerful,  or  even  sensible  to  as — at  least, 
there  is  waiting  for  an  indefinite  time,  and  then  a  slow 
but  steady  growth  of  the  Force,  and  ultimately  the 
Psychic  becomes  exhausted  by  the  process. 

XVII.  Anything  that  strongly  diverts  the  mind  of 
the  Psychic  or  the  thoughts  of  the  persons  present 
always  diminishes  the  Force. 

XVIII.  The  presence  of  a  sceptic  is  no  obstacle  to 
the  exhibition  of  the  Force.  It  is  otherwise  with  posi- 
tive antagonism.  By  disturbing  the  mind  of  the  Psy- 
chic, and  perhaps  of  others,  it  probably  destroys  that 
harmonious  action  of  the  brain  which  appears  to  be 
essential  to  the  operation  of  the  Psychic  Force. 

Note. — All  of  the  above  conditions  are  wholly  inconsistent  with 
the  spiritual  theory,  and  entirely  consistent  with  the  physical 
theory,  of  the  origin  of  this  Force. 

XIX.  So  far  as  I  have  found  in  my  own  experi- 
ments, and  by  the  reported  experience  of  others,  it  ap- 
pears that  the  intelligence  of  the  communications  is 
measured  by  the  intelligence  of  the  Psychic.  Nothing 
is  conveyed  by  them  that  is  not  in  the  mind  of  the 
Psychic  or  of  some  person  present. 

XX.  There  is  nothing  in  the  character  or  substance 
of  the  communications  indicating  an  intelligence  higher 
than  our  own,  or  a  larger  knowledge.  They  are  often 
useless  and  purposeless  ;  they  are  rarely  absolute  non- 
sense ;  but  as  rarely  do  they  exhibit  anything  beyond 
ordinary  intelligence.  They  consist  mainly  of  moral 
platitudes ;  both  the  thoughts  and  the  language  reflect 
precisely  the  thoughts  and  language  of  the  Psychic. 

BY    SCIENCE.  61 

XXI.  Not  unfrequently  the  communications  are 
false  in  point  of  fact.  They  are  often  tentative,  as  if 
the  directing  intelligence  had  an  imperfect  perception 
of  the  object  or  subject,  or  as  if  it  were  guessing  rather 
than  knowing  the  answer  to  be  given. 

XXII.  The  descriptions  of  the  future  life  are  pre- 
cisely such  as  the  Psychic  would  form.  By  a  child 
Psychic  they  are  painted  according  to  a  child's  notion 
of  heaven  ;  and  when  the  Psychic  is  a  man  or  a  woman, 
they  are  described  in  accordance  with  the  particular 
conceptions  of  a  heaven  entertained  by  that  Psychic. 

Note. — These  differences  as  to  the  process  of  death  and  the  con- 
ditions of  a  future  life  prove  that  the  descriptions  do  not  proceed 
from  any  intelligence  actually  acquainted  with  them,  and  therefore 
not  from  the  spirits  of  the  dead. 

XXIII.  The  movements  of  solid  bodies,  as  pre- 
viously described,  when  made  without  contact,  are,  if 
not  always,  almost  always  towards  the  Psychic :  and, 
as  if  by  some,  attractive  force  in  him,  the  chairs  and 
other  furniture  that  appear  to  move  spontaneously  from 
their  places,  at  whatever  distance  from  the  Psychic,  in- 
variably advance  towards  him  in  a  direct  line,  if  some 
obstacle  is  not  interposed.  When  a  chair,  for  instance, 
comes  to  the  side  of  the  table  that  is  opposite  to  him,  it 
is  because  the  table  stands  in  the  path  of  a  straight  line 
from  the  spot  whence  it  started  to  the  Psychic. 

Note. — I  am  informed  that  this  attraction  to  the  Psychic  is  not 
always  seen,  but  that  sometimes,  though  rarely,  solid  bodies  appear 
to  be  repelled,  and  to  move  from  him.  I  am  narrating  only  my  own 
experiments,  and  I  have  never  witnessed  an  instance  of  a  repulsive 
motion.  Every  spontaneous  movement  of  furniture,  within  my  own 
observation,  has  been  in  a  direction  towards  the  Psychic.     "What  can 

62  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

raise  a  stronger  presumption  than  this,  that  the  attractive  force  is 
in  the  Psychic  ?  Indeed,  the  Spiritualists  find  themselves  compelled 
to  admit  the  existence  of  a  Psychic  Force  (calling  it  magnetic),  but 
they  account  for  the  facts  stated  above  by  the  ingenious  but  wholly 
conjectural  explanation  that  the  disembodied  spirits,  by  whom  the 
motions,  sounds,  and  communications  are  believed  by  them  to  be 
made,  gather  up  and  employ  the  magnetism  of  the  Psychic  as  the 
material  by  which  they  are  enabled  to  manifest  themselves  to  mortal 
senses,  and  that  thence  arises  the  remarkable  similarity  which  the 
acts  done,  and  the  communications  made,  invariably  bear  to  the 
mental  character  and  intelligence  of  the  Psychic. 

Such  being  some  of  the  principal  conditions  that  I 
have  noted  as  attending  the  manifestations  of  the  Psy- 
chic Force,  what  are  the  conclusions  to  which  they 
point  ? 

First,  that  the  Psychic  Force  itself  proceeds  from,  or 
in  some  unknown  manner  is  associated  with,  the  human 
organisation. 

Second,  that  it  is  controlled  and  directed  by  the  in- 
telligence of  the  Psychic. 

The  manner  in  which  this  is  effected  is  undiscovered, 
because  as  yet  it  has  not  been  examined  scientifically. 

That  it  is  the  result  of  an  unconscious  action  of  the 
brain,  the  ganglion,,  or  the  nerves,  will  probably  be 
deemed  by  those  who  have  closely  noted  the  pheno- 
mena to  be  sufficiently  established.  The  attention  of 
the  Psychic  does  not  require  to  be  fixed  upon  what  is 
going  on.  Answers  are  given  to  questions  while  the 
Psychic  is  conversing  on  other  subjects,  and  even  when 
the  questions  are  put  so  faintly  that  he  could  not  hear 
them  had  he  been  listening  instead  of  talking. 

And  not  only  are  all  of  these  ascertained  conditions 
consistent  with  the  scientific  conclusion,  that  the  Force 
both  proceeds  from,  and  is  directed  by  the  intelligence 

BY    SCIENCE.  63 

of,  the  Psychic,  but  they  are  inconsistent  with  the 
Spiritualist  theory,  that  they  are  the  doings  of  the  dis- 
embodied spirits  of  the  dead.  All  is  precisely  as 
might  be  anticipated  of  the  Psychic  that  he  would  act 
and  speak  in  such  case ;  nothing  is  done  or  commu- 
nicated in  any  fashion  such  as  might  reasonably  be 
supposed  that  a  disembodied  spirit  would  do  or  say. 

In  such  circumstances,  the  course  prescribed  alike  by 
Science  and  common  sense  is  to  accept  the  near  and 
natural  solution  in  preference  to  the  distant  and  the 
supernatural.  There  is  a  Force  visibly,  audibly,  and 
palpably  at  work,  and  it  is  undoubtedly  directed  by  in- 
telligence. Whence  does  it  come  ?  Either  from  one 
or  more  or  all  of  the  persons  present,  or  from  some  in- 
visible being.  If  all  the  conditions  attending  the  ope- 
rations of  the  Force  are  consistent  with  the  former  and 
inconsistent  with  the  latter  hypothesis,  science,  reason, 
and  common  sense  direct  us  to  prefer  the  former — to 
accept  the  theory  of  Psychism  in  preference  to  the 
theory  of  Spiritualism. 

64  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

CHAEACTEEISTICS  OF  THE  FOECE. 

The  term  Psychic  Force  has  been  employed  to  de- 
scribe the  power  or  influence  that  either  proceeds  from 
or  is  intimately  associated  with  the  human  organisation, 
not  as  being  a  perfect  name  for  it,  but  for  want  of  a 
fitter  one.  We  call  it  a  Force  because  many  of  the 
phenomena  present  the  results  of  force.  But  it  must  not 
therefore  be  taken  as  an  affirmation  on  the  part  of  those 
who,  with  myself,  assert  the  theory  of  its  human  origin, 
and  contend  that  it  falls  within  the  proper  domain  of 
science,  that  it  necessarily  resembles  the  other  powers  in 
nature  to  which  science  has  given  the  name  of  "  forces." 
The  notion  of  the  forces  of  heat,  light,  magnetism, 
electricity,  galvanism  (be  they  the  same  or  many),  is 
that  of  particles  in  motion,  making  themselves  percepti- 
ble to  our  senses  when  they  strike  against  some  opposing 
matter,  though  that  is  very  difficult  to  comprehend, 
seeing  that  magnetism,  like  Psychic  Force,  operates, 
although  a  solid  body  is  interposed  between  the  mag- 
net and  the  object  it  attracts.  But  it  does  not  follow 
that  in  this  particular  Psychic  Force  should  resemble 
those  other  forces.  We  call  it  a  force  for  convenience, 
and  for  lack  of  a  better  term ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if, 
strictly  speaking,  it  be  &  force — if  it  be  not  more  in  the 
nature  of  an  influence  than  of  motion  of  particles  pro- 
jected and  impinging  on  other  bodies  and  by  the  im- 

BY  SCIENCE.  65 

pact  causing  motions  and  sounds  on  the  bodies  struck. 
The  subject  is  extremely  obscure,  very  little  endeavour 
having  been  made  to  examine  it  patiently,  with  experi- 
ments and  tests  guided  by  sagacity,  as  Science  has  in- 
vestigated other  phenomena,  and  with  a  sincere  desire 
to  learn  the  very  truth,  however  disturbing  that  truth 
may  be  to  accepted  principles  and  opinions. 

With  this  protest  against  a  possible  misunderstand- 
ing of  our  meaning  when  we  talk  of  Psychic  Force,  I 
ask  a  short  consideration  of  its  foremost  characteristics. 

I.  The  force,  or  influence,  comes  in  waves  that  are 
in  rapid  motion,  rising  and  falling  continually.  The 
waves  are  generally  synchronous,  but  of  uneven  magni- 
tude. They  are  more  or  less  tremulous  to  the  percep- 
tive sense.  The  things  moved  by  it,  whatever  they  may 
be,  with  rare  exceptions  quiver,  in  this  particular  differ- 
ing in  a  very  marked  manner  from  muscular  force, 
which  is  exercised  either  by  sudden  impact  in  the  shape 
of  a  push  or  blow  or  by  steady  pressure.  This  differ- 
ence in  the  character  of  Psychic  Force  at  once  distin- 
guishes it  from  muscular  force,  and  is  of  itself  satisfactory 
proof  that  the  phenomena  are  not  the  result  of  muscular 
action,  either  designed  or  unconscious. 

II.  In  another  respect  the  Psychic  Force  operates 
upon  the  bodies  subjected  to  it  in  a  manner  altogether 
unlike  muscular  force.  It  is  neither  a  blow,  a  push, 
nor  a  pressure.  If  the  subject  of  the  experiment  be  a 
table,  for  instance,  the  sounds  are  not  upon  the  surface, 
as  if  something  had  struck  the  wood,  but  as  if  they 
were  produced  in  the  fibrous  centre  of  the  slab.  The 
vibration  is  more  palpable  to  the  touch  than  when  a 
blow  of  equal  loudness  is  made  upon  the  table.     The 

t>0  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

sound  differs  much  from  that  produced  by  the  finger  or 
by  any  instrument  of  wood  or  metal,  insomuch  that  a 
very  brief  experience  suffices  to  enable  the  ear  instantly 
to  discover  the  difference  between  artificial  sounds  and 
the  true  sound  of  the  Psychic  Force. 

So  it  is  with  motions  of  solid  bodies  caused  by  the 
Psychic  Force.  They  have  a  special  character.  In 
addition  to  the  curious  tremulousness  or  quivering  that 
attends  these  motions,  they  appear  to  be  caused  by 
power  exercised  in  a  manner  differing  widely  from 
that  of  muscular  action.  An  arm,  for  instance,  applies 
its  force  to  one  part  of  the  subject  only,  and  by  no  con- 
trivance can  extend  that  force  equally  over  the  whole 
body.  To  refer  again  to  the  familiar  instance  of  a  table. 
Muscular  -force,  as  of  an  arm,  might  raise  or  depress  the 
table  on  the  side  at  which  it  is  used — by  application 
above,  it  would  be  depressed;  by  application  below, 
it  would  be  raised — but  only  at  the  point  of  contact ; 
and  the  foot  applied  to  the  leg  of  the  table  might  lift  it 
on  that  side,  but  could  not  possibly  depress  it.  The  table 
could  not  be  raised  entirely  from  the  floor  by  any  one 
or  more  persons  applying  muscular  pressure  on  one  side 
only,  because  of  the  inability  to  diffuse  muscular  force 
equally  throughout  the  entire  body  to  be  moved.  A 
table  could  be  raised  from  the  floor,  preserving  its  hori- 
zontal position,  only  by  the  application  of  the  equal 
muscular  force  of  two  persons,  at  the  least,  standing  on 
opposite  sides.  This  is  another  proof  that  Psychic 
Force  is  not  muscular  force,  for  scarcely  an  experiment 
can  be  tried  with  a  Psychic  without  motions  of  the 
table  being  produced  on  the  side  of  the  table  opposite 
to  that  at  which  he  is  seated,  and  in  a  position  which 

BY    SCIENCE.  67 

makes  the  application  of  muscular  force  by  Mm  to  that 
part  of  the  table  a  sheer  impossibility. 

III.  The  Psychic  Force  appears  to  diffuse  itself  over 
the  entire  of  the  body  to  which  it  is  applied,  and  to 
exercise  itself  in  any  part  of  that  body  with  equal 
power  and  facility.  The  sides  of  the  table  opposite  to 
the  Psychic,  far  out  of  reach  of  muscular  contact  by 
him,  are  raised  or  depressed,  and  the  sounds  proceed 
from  those  parts  quite  as  frequently  and  as  vigorously 
as  at  the  side  of  the  table  at  which  he  is  sitting,  or 
within  the  reach  of  his  muscular  powers. 

IV.  The  Psychic  Force,  unlike  muscular  force,  does 
not  appear  to  operate  by  pressure ;  it  is  more  in  the 
nature  of  diffusion  and  inflation ;  it  is  apparently  a 
Force  the  material  of  which  is  wholly  unknown  to  us. 
The  bodies  moved  by  it  are  not  moved  by  a  jerk,  or 
by  upward  or  downward  continuous  pressure  applied 
to  one  portion  of  the  subject  only  ;  the  Psychic  Force 
seems  to  diffuse  itself  through  the  whole  substance  of 
the  thing  moved.  Thus,  if  it  be  a  table,  it  is  raised, 
not  as  by  a  force  applied  below,  but  as  if  by  the  levi- 
tation  of  the  material  of  which  it  is  composed.  When 
it  rises  from  the  floor  it  mounts  like  a  balloon.  If 
the  hand  is  pressed  upon  it  in  its  ascent,  instead  of 
depressing  it  on  that  side  and  feeling  a  counter- 
pressure  of  resistance  in  some  special  part  of  it,  the 
sensation  to  the  touch  is  that  of  a  floating  body  rising 
because  it  is  lighter  than  the  air :  a  sensation  that 
will  be  at  once  recognised  by  those  who  have  ever 
amused  themselves  with  toy  balloons.  It  hovers  in 
the  air  like  a  floating,  not  like  a  lifted,  body,  and  it  de- 
scends generally  with   more  or  less   of  a  pendulous 

68  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

motion,  as  in  a  descending  balloon,   or  a  parachute. 
It  never  falls  down  like  a  solid  mass. 

V.  From  these  characteristics  of  the  action  of  Psychic 
Force,  I  am  inclined  to  the  conjecture  (for  as  yet  it  is 
little  more),  that  it  is  a  force  antagonistic  to  gravita- 
tion, or  in  some  unknown  manner  exempt  from  the  in- 
fluence of  gravitation,  or  at  least  that  it  operates  to 
counteract  the  force  of  gravitation  on  the  bodies  in 
which  it  is  diffused. 

VI.  This  conjecture  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Psychic 
Force  appears  to  derive  some  confirmation  from  the 
process  required  for  its  exhibition.  Muscular  force 
needs  no  preparation  for  its  exercise.  An  arm  or  a 
foot  can  be  raised  and  will  app]y  the  same  amount 
of  force  in  an  instant  as  in  an  hour.  It  cannot  be 
accumulated  in  any  body.  The  continued  pressure 
of  the  hands  upon  a  table  does  not  increase  the 
amount  of  muscular  force  applied  to  the  table.  That 
which  enters  at  the  point  of  contact  is  absorbed  by  the 
force  of  gravitation  as  fast  as  it  is  evolved,  and  at  the 
end  of  half-an-hour  the  table  cannot  be  moved  more 
easily  than  at  the  end  of  a  minute. 

But  the  Psychic  Force  is  evidently  capable  of  ac- 
cumulation. It  grows  by  slow  degrees.  A  lapse  of 
time,  varying  according  to  many  conditions  not  yet 
examined,  is  requisite  before  a  sufficiency  of  it  is  in- 
fused into  the  subject  to  produce  any  perceptible  effect. 
First  come  delicate  sounds,  audible  only  by  help  of  a 
stethoscope  ;  then  these  grow  louder,  and  can  be  heard 
by  the  ear  and  felt  by  the  hand  ;  and  then  come  the 
motions  that  no  person  who  has  once  witnessed  them 
can  either  imagine  or  mistake.     But  all  this  is  mani- 

BY    SCIENCE.  69 

festly  the  evidence  of  an  accumulation  of  force,  as 
electricity  is  accumulated  in  a  battery,  or  magnetism 
in  a  coil ;  and  the  sitting  with  the  hands  upon  the 
table  is  the  process  of  charging  it  (if  I  may  use  the 
term)  with  the  Psychic  Force,  which  all  human  beings 
possess  in.  a  greater  or  lesser  degree,  but  which  the 
Psychic  possesses  in  an  abnormal  degree,  combined 
with  the  power  of  directing  it,  when  so  accumulated, 
in  some  manner  as  yet  unknown,  but  which  it  should 
be  the  business  of  Science  to  discover. 

70  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

CONCLUSION. 

From  the  above  experiments  it  is  not  unreasonable 
that  thej  who  witnessed  them  should  have  concluded — 

I.  That  there  is  a  Force  other  than  the  Forces  of 
Nature  hitherto  recognised.  But  whether  it  is  the  one 
Force  which  is  said  to  change  merely  its  form  according 
to  the  substance  in  which  it  is  exhibited,  or  a  Force 
entirely  distinct  from  the  known  Physical  Forces,  and 
subject  to  other  laws  associated  with  vitality,  there  is 
not  as  yet  sufficient  evidence  to  determine. 

II.  That  this  Force  produces  positive  sounds  and 
motions  in  solid  bodies  brought  within  the  radius  of  its 
influence. 

III.  That  this  Force  is  found  to  operate  at  an  un- 
defined, but  not  indefinite,  distance  from  the  human 
body. 

IY.  That  it  is  developed  (so  as  to  be  perceptible  to 
the  senses  by  its  effects)  in  certain  persons  only,  to 
whom  the  name  of  Psychics  has  been  given. 

V.  That  Psychics  are  not  distinguished  from  other 
persons  by  any  perceptible  peculiarity  of  mental  or 
bodily  organisation.  They  are  of  either  sex,  of  all 
ages,  of  all  degrees  of  intelligence,  of  varying  physical 
powers,  of  all  degrees  of  bodily  health,  of  all  countries 
and  races. 

VL  That  there  is  some,  but  not  sufficient,  evidence, 

BY    SCIENCE.  71 

that  the  power  of  a  Psychic  is  a  special  faculty  (such 
as  is  a  genius  for  music,  poetry,  &c.)  and  that  it  is  often 
inherited. 

VIL  That  it  is  probable  (but  not  yet  proved),  that 
this  Force  proceeds  from,  or  is  intimately  associated 
with,  the  nerve  organisation,  and  is  possessed  by  all 
human  beings  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  but  in  their 
ordinary  conditions  producing  no  external  effects  per- 
ceptible by  the  senses  ;  that  when  possessed  to  an  ex- 
traordinary extent,  this  Force  is  projected  beyond  the 
body,  and  causes  motions  and  sounds  in  the  objects 
permeated  by  it,  or  upon  which  it  impinges. 

VIIL  That  there  is  some,  but  not  yet  sufficient, 
evidence,  that  Psychic  Force,  and  what  physiologists 
have  termed  "  vital  force,"  and  Dr.  Bichardson  the 
"  nerve  ether,"  are  identical. 

IX  That  in  some  manner,  as  yet  not  investigated  and 
therefore  not  ascertained,  a  concurrence  of  the  Psychic 
Forces  of  several  persons  promotes  the  activity  of  the 
Force  exhibited  by  the  Psychic. 

X.  That  it  is  as  yet  undetermined  whether  it  is  the 
possession  of  Psychic  Force  in  a  rare  degree  that 
makes  itself  perceptible  by  its  operation  upon  solid 
bodies,  or  if  a  Psychic  is  only  a  person  who  has  not 
in  himself  a  greater  amount  of  the  Force  than  others, 
but  who  possesses  the  power  of  attracting  the  combined 
Psychic  Forces  of  the  persons  who  are  within  a  certain 
undefined  radius  from  himself. 

XL  That  the  Psychic  Force  is  controlled  and  directed 
by  the  intelligence  of  the  Psychic.  That  this  in- 
telligence frequently  acts  without  consciousness  by  the 
Psychic.     But  if  such  action  is  that  of  the  brain,  or  of 

72  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

an  individuality  distinct  from  the  brain  and  incorporeal, 
there  is  as  jet  no  sufficient  evidence. 

XII.  That  the  condition  of  the  Psychic  during  such 
unconscious  direction  of  the  Force  is  generally  similar 
to,  if  not  identical  with,  that  of  the  somnambulist, 
whose  intelligent  acts  are  the  result  of  unconscious 
action  of  the  brain,  which  not  only  dreams,  but  causes 
the  patient  to  act  the  dream. 

These  are  the  results,  concisely  stated,  obtained  to 
the  present  time,  of  a  scientific  investigation  into 
Psychic  Force.  It  will  be  seen  that  they  are,  as  from 
the  recency  of  the  procurement  of  proofs  of  the 
existence  of  the  Force  might  have  been  surmised,  as 
yet  very  imperfect.  A  few  facts  have  been  ascertained, 
but  many  more  are  yet  in  a  dubious  stage,  awaiting 
further  examination.  The  conditions  under  which  the 
Psychic  Force  exists  and  is  evolved  and  directed  have 
been  insufficiently  examined,  and  there  are  numerous 
points  in  the  wide  field  thus  open  to  investigators  to 
which  their  attention  may  be  advantageously  directed. 
I  venture  to  state  a  few  of  these,  in  the  hope  that  they 
will  stimulate  some  readers  to  a  course  of  experiment 
and  test,  with  a  view  to  obtain  satisfactory  solutions. 

I.  What  are  the  precise  measured  distances  from 
the  Psychic  to  which  the  Psychic  Force  is  found  to 
extend  ? 

-  II  Does  the  Force  diminish,  according  to  distance 
from  the  Psychic,  and  if  so,  in  what  ratio  ? 

III.  What  relationship  do  heat,  moisture,  electricity, 
and  terrestrial  magnetism  severally  bear  to  the  amount 
of  the  Force  exhibited? 

BY  SCIENCE.  73 

IV.  To  what  extent  is  the  Force  affected  by  the  num- 
ber of  persons  forming  the  chain  ? 

Y.  Is  there  any,  and  how  much,  increase  in  the  Force 
by  the  formation  of  a  chain  of  nerve  organizations,  and 
in  what  degree  by  extension  of  the  chain  ?  Is  the  effect 
the  same  if  the  same  persons  are  merely  grouped  to- 
•gether  near  to  the  Psychic  without  forming  a  circle  or 
in  any  manner  uniting  the  Psychic  Force  possessed  by 
each  person,  except  by  the  common  link  of  the  floor  on 
which  they  stand  ? 

YI.  Is  the  concentration  or  direction  of  the  Force 
affected  to  any  extent  by  the  material  of  which  is  form- 
ed the  table  or  other  body  used  as  a  conductor  or  col- 
lector of  the  Force  ?  Is  metal  more  or  less  favourable 
to  the  exhibition  of  the  Force  than  wood ;  and  is  one 
kind  of  wood  more  favourable  than  another  kind  ? 

YIL  Does  any  advantage  accrue  in  fact  from  actual 
contact  of  the  persons  present :  and  does  not  the  table 
or  other  conductor  employed  equally  serve  for  conduct- 
ing or  collecting  the  Force  ? 

YIIL  By  what  process  is  it  that  the  unconscious 
action  of  >the  brain,  asserted  by  Dr.  Carpenter,  directs 
the  Psychic  Force  to  intelligent  purposes  ? 

I  shall  esteem  it  an  obligation  if  any  reader  pursuing 
this  interesting  and  most  important  investigation  into 
the  nature  and  operations  of  Psychic  Force  will  com- 
municate to  me  the  results  of  his  experiments ;  for  it  is 
only  by  a  large  accumulation  of  facts,  and  a  multitude 
of  observations,  made  under  a  variety  of  conditions,  that 
this  branch  of  the  science  of  Psychology  can  be  ad- 
vanced.    Careful  note  should  be  taken  of  all  trials,  and 

74  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

whatever  is  capable  of  actual  measurement  should  be 
determined  by  rule  or  by  scales. 

/  Let  it  once  be  recognised  that  this  is  a  s abject  for 
Science,  and  not  a  mere  structure  of  imagination  nor  a 
superstition  erected  upon  a  basis  of  fact,  and  there 
will  be  an  end  to  the  strange  aversion  now  felt  to  the 
examination  of  phenomena  which,  if  established,  musj 
throw  a  blaze  of  light  on  many  of  the  obscurities  of 
Physiology  and  mysteries  of  medicine. 

Brought  within  the  domain  of  Science,  the  facts  re- 
cognised, examined,  and  traced  to  their  sources,  so 
much  as  is  true  will  be  added  to  the  store  of  know- 
ledge ;  so  much  as  is  false,  or  which  fancy  may  have 
erected  upon  the  facts,  will  be  dissipated.  It  is  thus, 
and  only  thus,  that  Science  can  effectually  banish 
Superstition. 

BY    SCIENCE.  75 

HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE. 

To  those  who  maybe  desirous  to  aid  the  investigation 
now  in  progress,  a  few  suggestions  of  the  best  means  of 
doing  so  will  doubtless  be  welcome. 

There  is  an  erroneous  impression  that  none  but 
professional  Psychics  are  to  be  found.  In  truth, 
Psychics  are  frequent  in  private  life,  and  especially 
among  children.  There  are  few  family  circles  in  which 
they  may  not  be  discovered  by  patient  experiment 
As  there  is  nothing  in  mind,  person,  or  manner  to  in- 
dicate an  organisation  having  such  an  excess  of  Psychic 
Force  as  to  produce  the  phenomena  of  Psychism,  its 
existence  can  only  be  discovered  by  trials  repeatedly 
made  with  the  same  circle.  The  process  is  very  simple. 
Not  less  than  five  nor  more  than  nine  should  form  a 
party,  who  should  meet  twice  or  thrice  a  week  (the  more 
frequently  the  better).  Instead  of  lounging  before  the 
fire,  they  should  seat  themselves  at  a  table,  lay  their 
hands  upon  it,  and  in  that  position  continue  their  chat, 
mingled  with  music  and  song.  It  is  as  easy  to1  enjoy  a 
social  gathering  seated  thus  as  in  any  other  grouping. 
If  there  is  neither  sound  nor  motion  in  the  table  in  an 
hour,  break  up  the  circle,  take  tea,  talk,  and  in  half  an 
hour  re-form  it — that  is,  if  none  are  weary,  for  in  such 
case  the  trial  should  end  at  once.  There  should  be  no 
disappointment  if  nothing  comes,  but  it  should  be  tried 
again  and  again,  always  preserving  the  same  circle.     If 

76  SPIRITUALISM  ANSWERED 

one  of  the  party  is  a  Psychic,  signs  of  it  will  probably 
appear  by  the  sixth  sitting,  and  then  it  can  be  readily 
ascertained  who  the  Psychic  is  by  each  one  in  turn 
quitting  the  circle,  and  thus  discovering  whose  presence 
is  necessary  to  the  action  of  the  Force.  As  soon  as 
sounds  and  motions  are  presented,  careful  note  should 
be  taken  of  the  phenomena  occurring  at  every  future 
meeting,  and  experiments  and  tests  devised  and  tried 
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  conditions  under 
which  the  phenomena  appear,  and  thus  to  aid  the 
inquiry  into  their  cause  which  is  now  being  so  ex- 
tensively and  actively  pursued  in  all  parts  of  the 
country. 

It  has  been  calculated  that  about  one  person  in  thirty 
is  a  Psychic  in  England,  and  about  one  person  in 
twenty  in  Scotland  and  America,  the  faculty  being  ob- 
viously much  more  powerfully  developed  in  certain 
races  of  men  than  in  others.  As  I  have  stated  above, 
it  is  very  frequent  with  children,  and  often  disappears 
from  them  entirely  at  pnberty.  Infants  in  arms  are 
sometimes  Psychics,  and  there  is  said  to  be  an  instant 
and  marked  increase  of  the  Force  when  they  are  taken 
into  the  circle  or  even  brought  into  the  room.  In  one 
instance  within  my  own  observation  the  entry  of  a  servant 
with  a  message  was  instantly  followed  by  a  manifest 
access  of  the  Force,  shown  as  the  door  opened,  continu- 
ing while  she  was  in  the  room,  and  declining  when  she 
left  it.  Where  a  child  is  a  Psychic,  it  will  be  desirable 
to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  that  then 
directs  the  Force — if  it  is  that  of  a  child — and  in  the 
case  of  an  infant  Psychic  if  any  intelligence  what- 
ever   is    exhibited  by  the    Force — and    I   shall    be 

BY    SCIENCE.  77 

greatly  obliged  by  information  of  actual  experiences  on 
these  points,  whose  importance  will  be  obvious  at  a 
glance. 

A  table  is  not  necessary  to  the  operation  of  the 
Force.  Any  solid  body  that  connects  the  persons  forming 
the  chain  is  equally  efficient.  But  a  table  is  found  to 
be  the  most  convenient  subject  for  experiment,  as  it 
enables  the  party  to  be  comfortably  seated  and  to 
converse  at  ease. 

78  SPIRITUALISM   ANSWERED 

POSTSCRIPT. 

Since  these  pages  were  printed,  the  Quarterly  Review 
has  made  a  second  edition  an  occasion  for  publishing 
what  is  probably  intended  to  be  a  confession  of  errors 
and  an  apology;  or  rather  an  excuse  for  its  unjustifi- 
able personal  attacks  upon  the  constructor  and  wit- 
nesses of  a  scientific  experiment.  It  frankly  admits 
the  falsity  of  its  assertion  that  Dr.  Huggins  and  myself 
are  converts  to  the  creed  of  Spiritualism,  but  it  has  not 
the  grace  to  express  regret  for  the  vilification  in  which 
it  had  indulged  on  that  utterly  false  assumption. 

The  writer  endeavours  to  excuse  himself  by  stating 
that  he  was  misled  by  an  article  in  The  Spiritualist 
But  how  unjustifiable  is  the  carelessness  that  could  per- 
mit a  man  to  write  and  print  two  pages  of  virulent  per- 
sonal abuse  and  insult  of  three  gentlemen,  based  on  no 
better  authority  than  an  anonymous  paragraph  in  an 
obscure  journal,  when  the  writer  had  before  him  the 
original  publication  by  Mr.  Crookes  himself,  a  glance 
at  which  would  have  shown  him  not  only  that  his  as- 
sumption was  false  but  that  the  fact  was  the  very 
reverse. 

But  even  this  lame  excuse  cannot  be  accepted,  for,  in 
the  abusive  article,  the  reviewer  actually  cites  a  pas- 
sage from  the  very  letter  in  which  I  expressly  and  em- 
phatically assert  that  the  result  of  the  investigation  had 
been  to  satisfy  me  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  sup- 
port the  theory  of  Spiritualism ;  thus  proving  beyond 

BY  SCIENCE.  79 

question  that  he  had  read  my  letter,  and  therefore  must 
have  known,  and  did  know,  that  I  had  repudiated  the 
theory  of  Spiritualism  when  he  deliberately  dared  to 
call  me  a  convert  to  it. 

But  the  carelessness — to  use  the  mildest  term — of  the 
reviewer,  is  such  that  he  cannot  even  correct  one  error 
without  falling  into  other  blunders.  He  states  now  that 
I  reject  both  Spiritualism  and  the  Psychic  Force.  The 
letter  he  cites  is  throughout  a  declaration  of  conviction 
that  the  Force  exists  as  a  fact,  though  its  source  is  yet 
to  be  ascertained,  and  the  proposal  which  gave  it  the 
name  which  has  been  universally  accepted  for  it  was 
mine! 

I  am,  however,  delighted  to  find,  by  a  note  appended 
to  this  "apology/'  " confession, "  "explanation,"  or 
whatever  it  may  be  termed,  that  the  authorship  of  the 
article  has  been  erroneously"  attributed  to  Dr.  Carpen- 
ter. I  had  already  ventured  to  express  a  doubt  of  its 
reported  paternity,  because  I  could  not  believe  that  a 
man  of  his  scientific  and  professional  status  could  so 
forget  the  gentleman  as  in  a  purely  scientific  contro- 
versy to  be  guilty  of  the  mingled  mendacity  and  mean- 
ness that  pervade  the  personalities  of  the  article  in  the 
Quarterly  Review. 

12th  December,  1871. 

STEREOTYPED    BY     LOVEJOY,   SON   *   CO. 
*5    VANDEWATER     ST.,    NEW     YORK. 

JEFFERSON  EDITION. 

Irving's  Legend  Illustrated. 

WITH  ORIGINAL  DESIGNS  BY  EMINENT  ARTISTS, 

AND 

PHOTOGRAPHS  OF  JEFFERSON 
AS     RIP     VAN     WINKLE. 

8ro.  cloth.    Black  and  Gold.    Price  $2.50. 

STANDARD  DRAMA, 

ADAPTED    FOR    SCHOOL    READING. 
The  Text  mostly  as  Played  by  EDWIN  BOOTH. 

Printed  in  Lar^e  Type,  with  Foot-notes  and  a  Glossary. 
Large  12mo.    Paper,  30a    Flexible  Cloth,  50c. 

No.  1-Bichard  III. 
"  2-Macbelh. 
"  3— Merchant  of  Venice. 
"  4— Fool's  Revenge. 

Ho.  5— Romeo  and  Juliet. 
"  6-Brntus. 
"•7— Lady  of  Lyons. 
w  8-Othello. 

HEXRY  L,.  HINTON.  Publisher, 

744  Broadway,  New  York. 

2% 

A  Memento  of  the  Old  Winter  Garden. 

The  Text  as  arranged  for  the  Grand  RcYival  by  EDWIN  BOOTH,  at 
the  late  Winter  Garden  Theatre, 

AND   WITH 

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  SCENES. 

Eoyal  Svo,  cloth,  full  gilt,  $1. 

Passages,  Incidents,  and  Anecdotes  in  the  Life  of 

JUNIUS  BRUTUS  BOOTH, 

(THE  ELDER.) 

BY  HIS  DAUGHTER. 

ILLUSTRATED     WITH     A     STEEL     ENGRAVING 

OF 

BOOTH  AS  SICHAED  III, 

12mo,  1S4  pp.,  paper,  50c 

Upon  the  receipt  of  the  price,  any  of  the  above  books  will  be  mailed 
to  any  part  of  the  United  States. 

HENRY  L.  HltfTOX,  Publisher, 

744  Broadway,  New  York.
