The Mystic Rose: A Study of Primitive Marriage (Ernest Crawley, 1902)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/mysticrosestudyo00crawuoft). Crawley's pioneering study of sexual taboo and primitive marriage - contagion, seclusion, and the religious roots of prohibition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

By Dr. J. G. FRAZER. 

THE GOLDEN BOUGH. A Study in Magic and 
Religion. Second Edition, revised and enlarged. 
Three volumes. 8vo. 365. net. 

By Dr. E. WESTERMARCK. 

THE HISTORY OP HUMAN MARRIAGE. With 
Preface by Dr. A. R. WALLACE. Third Edition 
(1901). 8vo. 145. net. 

By Prof. BALDWIN SPENCER and F. J. GILLEN. 

THE NATIVE TRIBES OP CENTRAL AUS- 
TRALIA Fully Illustrated. 8vo. 2 is. net. 

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED. 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

A STUDY OF PRIMITIVE 
MARRIAGE 

BY 

ERNEST CRAWLEY, M.A. 

rb /j,va"rripiov TOVTO [dya 
Sacramentum hoc magnum est 

iLontion 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 

NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
1902 

QN 

Cs 

TO 

J. G. FRAZER 

IN 

GRATITUDE AND ADMIRATION 

PREFACE 

THE present theory was outlined about seven years 
ago, and a preliminary portion was published in the 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute for 1895 
(vol. xxiv.). In that paper the main lines of the 
argument were laid down, and it was suggested that 
the explanation of marriage ceremonies and systems 
was to be developed thereon. The subsequent loss of 
a good deal of my materials, not yet all recovered, has 
been balanced by the publication of Messrs. Spencer 
and Gillen's valuable researches amongst the Central 
Australian natives, which confirm my conclusions in 
many ways. 

These conclusions were originally completed without 
reference to the prevalent doctrines, originated by 
Bachofen and McLennan, and developed by Morgan, 
Bastian, Lubbock, G. A. Wilken, Robertson Smith, 
Giraud-Teulon, Fison, Howitt, Tylor, Post, Lippert, 
and others, concerning the origin and development 
of marriage, such as the Matriarchate (Bachofen), 
Marriage by Capture (McLennan), Primitive Promis- 
cuity and Communal Marriage, comprising the 

a 2 

viii THE MYSTIC ROSE 

hypotheses that some marriage ceremonies are intended 
to make the husband and wife of the same tribal or 
blood - kinship, and that others are " expiation for 
marriage" (Sir J. Lubbock) ; that is to say, these 
ceremonies are a compensation to the tribe or kin, 
individual marriage being an infringement of communal 
rights. These theories had to be taken into considera- 
tion. Previous study of the psychology of the lower 
races, starting from Professor Tylor's Primitive Culture, 
and Dr. Frazer's Golden Bough, to both of which I owe 
a great intellectual debt, made it evident that these 
prevalent theories of marriage origins were based on an 
imperfect understanding of primitive custom and 
thought. It also appeared a mistake, in view of the 
undifferentiated character of early thought, to separate 
the study of marriage systems and marriage ceremonies. 
I have here attempted to supply a more adequate basis 
for the enquiry by an analysis of the simplest and most 
elemental aspects in which the individual appears in 
relation to society. The ultimate appeal in these 
questions is to universal facts of human physiology 
and psychology. In illustration, it is perhaps worth 
mentioning that I was led from a general study of 
primitive culture to the study of marriage, by an 
investigation into the curious custom of exchange of 
dress between men and women, which occurs in the 
most dissimilar connections and the strangest places. I 
found that all cases of the custom yielded on analysis 

PREFACE 

IX 

the same psychological components as do the relations 
of the sexes generally, and marriage in particular. 

In 1889 Professor E. B. Tylor first applied statistics 
to the study of these questions (Journ. Anthro$. Inst. 
vol. xviii.). This was an important departure. It is 
first necessary, however, thoroughly to analyse every 
custom and its adhesions in the light not only of the 
whole culture of the given peoples, but of all primitive 
and elemental psychology ; otherwise, tabulation leads 
to the pruning of facts, and a resulting neglect of 
essential characteristics which are apparently accidents. 
As MM. Langlois and Seignobos, our highest authorities 
on the methods of history, observe, the defect of 
statistical methods is that "they do not rest on a 
knowledge of the whole of the conditions under which 
the facts occur " (Introduction to the Study of History^ 
p. 291, Eng. Trans.). So far as the data are correctly 
assigned and analysed, Professor Tylor's main results 
are, that there is a causal connection between (i) the 
mother-in-law avoidance custom and residence of the 
husband with the wife's family, (2) these and the 
custom of teknonymy (naming the parents after the 
child), (3) the couvade (the custom by which the 
husband pretends to lie-in) and temporary residence of 
the husband with the wife's family, (4) this temporary 
residence and marriage by capture. The cause, however, 
which he provisionally assumes is still the old Maternal 
system, arising out of communism, with marriage by 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY 

Method of enquiry — Typical problems — Primitive thought and 
culture — Religion in the relations of the sexes, both in ordinary 
life, marriage ceremonial, and sexual crises — Taboo pp. I — 14 

THE TABOO IMPOSED, CHAPTERS II.— IX. 

CHAPTER II 

TABOO 

Taboo — Social and sexual taboo — Evil influences — The unknown 
and abnormal — The strange and new — The supernatural 
character of death and sickness, of functions, of pain, of 
emotions, and of irregular bodily and mental states — Super- 
natural danger in human relations .' ' . pp. 15 — 32 

CHAPTER III 

SEXUAL TABOO 

Man and woman — Sexual taboo — Solidarity of sex — Antagonism 
of sex — Sex in religion — Influence of sex upon language — 
Sexual taboos on names — Sex and occupations — Sexual taboo 
in social life and at sexual crises — Preliminary analysis of 
sexual taboo ..... pp. 33 — 58 

xiv THE MYSTIC ROSE 

CHAPTER IV 

HUMAN RELATIONS 

\ 

Evil spirits and material evil influences not distinguished — Anthro- 
pomorphism— Possession — Personification — The real and the 
ideal not distinguished — The memory-image — Human and 
spiritual influence not distinguished — Human influence under- 
lies spiritual, in social and sexual relations . pp. 59 — 75 

CHAPTER V 

HUMAN RELATIONS 

Contact the test of human relations, both social and sexual — Sub- 
stance and accidents — Material transmission of states and 
properties — Basis of social and sexual taboo — Contagion of 
various human qualities and states — Sin* and death are 
contagious — Destruction of property — Death and evil 
conducted by the soil — Human properties transmitted — 
Cannibalism — Transmission of qualities by means of flesh and 
blood, various parts of the body, functional emanations, 
garments, food, milk, and by various forms of contact, stepping 
over or walking round a person, by the touch, shadow, sight, 
and mere proximity — The intention — Transmission of ill-will 
and of love — Oaths — Magic use of anything that has been in 
connection with a person . . . pp. 76 — 132 

CHAPTER VI 

HUMAN RELATIONS 

Care of functions and organs — The mutilation of organs — Disgust, 
uncleanness, and shame in connection with social and 
sexual taboo — Summary of the conceptions which underlie 
human relations — Their result in primitive morality and 
etiquette ..... pp. 133 — 147 

CONTENTS xv 

CHAPTER VII 

COMMENSAL RELATIONS 

Contact by means of food — Importance of nutrition — The custom 
of eating in solitude — Contagion by food and drink — Fasting — 
Forbidden food — Transmission of properties by food — Magic 
by means of food — Taboos against eating with others — Taboos 
against eating with the opposite sex, both at critical times and 
in ordinary life . . . pp. 148 — 178 

CHAPTER VIII 

SEXUAL RELATIONS 

Contact by sexual intercourse — Intercourse in secret — Magic and 
the sexual organs — Love-charms — Contagion of effeminacy and 
weakness — Sexual intercourse regarded as enervating — Loss of 
strength — Rules of continence — The seed is the strength — 
The rupture of the hymen — Beliefs as to the origin of men- 
struation— The serpent — Seduction by evil spirits in human 
form — Sun - taboos and their origin — Sexual taboo and 
purification ..... pp. 179 — 201 

CHAPTER IX 

SEXUAL RELATIONS 

Transmission of male and female properties — Woman regarded as 
weak and timid — Priests dressing as women — Transmission of 
female weakness by contact — Customs of dressing weak, 
effeminate, and impotent men in women's clothes — Trans- 
mission by blood cannot account for all the phenomena — 
Summary of sexual taboo — Its results in separating the young, 
both within and without the house — Incest and pro- 
miscuity ..... pp. 202 — 223 

xvi THE MYSTIC ROSE 

THE TABOO REMOVED, CHAPTERS X.— XIV. 
CHAPTER X 

THE BREAKING OF TABOO 

The breaking of taboo — Avoidance of the dangers of taboo — 
The use of barriers, veils, dummies, and substitutes — The 
sacrifice of a part to preserve the whole — Fasting — Purifica- 
tion from taboo — Methods of removing taboo — Inocu- 
lation . . . . pp.224 — 235 

CHAPTER XI 

THEORY OF UNION 

Mutual inoculation and union — The relation of ngia ngiampe — Its 
use in love, hospitality, and friendship, for making peace and 
settling disputes — Exchange of wives — Guilds — Its results in 
mutual respect and assistance — The basis of the ngia ngiampe 
relation — The taboo resulting from it — Summary of the 
ngia ngiampe relation — The categories of union and 
identity — The primitive conception of relationship — Bars to 
marriage ..... pp. 236 — 266 

CHAPTER XII 

THEORY OF CHANGE AND EXCHANGE 

Disguise — Wearing the dress of the opposite sex — Change of name 
and of identity — The idea of new life, after sickness, at puberty, 
at periodic festivals — New food — Representatives — New dress — 
Disguise and change pass into exchange — Exchange of identity 
— Saturnalia — Exchange of wives — The breaking of taboo — 
Union — Duplicates and proxies — Promiscuity — Funeral 
festivals — Scapegoats — War-dances — The principle of make- 
believe in custom, etiquette, and punishment pp. 267 — 293 

CONTENTS xvii 

CHAPTER XIII 

CONFIRMATION AND ENGAGEMENT 

§ I. Puberty and initiation — The dangers of puberty — Taboos 
against the opposite sex — Change of identity — Initiation — The 
gift of strength — Food-taboos and, fasting — Woman's food — 
Tutelar deities — The use of the bullroarer — Physical pre- 
paration for marriage — Inoculation and introduction to the 
other sex — Sympathetic practices — Connection of initiation 
and marriage. 

§ 2. Taboos between engaged couples — Betrothal by proxy 

pp. 294—317 

CHAPTER XIV 

MARRIAGE AND ITS CEREMONIES 

Marriage ceremonies, their meaning and origin — Marriage an in- 
dividualistic not a tribal or communistic act — Neutralisation of 
danger — Purification — Weddings at night — Customs of hiding 
and seclusion — The bride and bridegroom may not see each 
other — The bridal veil — Seclusion of bride and bridegroom — 
Sympathy between those of the same sex — Disguise and 
change of identity — The False Bride — Doubles — Groomsmen 
and bridesmaids — Marriage by proxy — Marriage to trees — 
Various forms of abstinence — Deferring of consummation — 
Ceremonial defloration — The carrying of bride and bridegroom 
— Sexual antagonism — Sexual resistance and complementary 
violence the basis of connubial and formal capture — The 
Flight and the Return — Destruction of property — Criticism of 
the theory of " marriage by capture " — Marriage customs 
of assimilation — Mutual inoculation and union — Criticism 
of the blood - kinship theory — Eating and drinking to- 
gether — Bridal gifts — Criticism of " marriage by pur- 
chase " ..... pp. 318 — 390 

xviii THE MYSTIC ROSE 

SECONDARY TABOO, CHAPTERS XV.— XVII. 

CHAPTER XV 

HUSBAND, WIFE, AND MOTHER-IN-LA W 

Marriage as a state of ngia ngiampe — Analysis of its duties and their 
sanctions — The custom of avoidance between a man and his 
mother-in-law — Criticism of theories — Meaning and origin of 
the custom . . . . pp. 391 — 414 

CHAPTER XVI 

PARENTS AND CHILD 

Sexual taboo at child-birth — Saturnalia — Twins — The Couvade — 
True and false Couvade — Criticism of theories — The meaning 
and origin of the custom — Connected customs — Teknonymy — 
Criticism of explanations — Meaning and origin of the custom 
— Renewal of marriage — Customs allied to Teknonymy — 
The giving of the name — Taboos between the father 
and mother and child — Godparents — Other people's 
children ..... pp. 414 — 441 

CHAPTER XVII 

THE MARRIAGE SYSTEM 

The Marriage System — Exogamy — Marriage of near kin — Criticism 
of theories — Prohibition of incest the origin of exogamy — 
Terms of relationship — Relationships — The Matriarchal theory 
— Temporary residence with the wife's family — Reasons 
for it — Classificatory systems — Criticism of the theory of 
"group -marriage" — Individual Marriage — Deities of Mar- 
riage . pp. 442—485 

INDEX . . . . . ' . pp. 487 — 492 

CHAPTER I 

ALL study of the origins of social institutions must be 
based on what ethnology can teach us of the psychology 
of the lower races and on the primitive conceptions of 
human relations which are thus established. It is only 
in early modes of thought that we can find the explana- 
tion of ceremonies and systems which originated in 
primitive society ; and, if ceremony and system are the 
concrete forms in which human relations are expressed, 
an examination, ethnological and psychological, of 
human relations, is indispensable for enquiry into 
human institutions. It is necessary to lay stress upon 
this principle, for students of the history of marriage 
have hitherto ignored it, or rather, while using the facts 
of ethnology, have shown no sympathy with primitive 
thought. They have interpreted primitive custom by 
ideas which are far from primitive, which, in fact, are 
relatively late and belong to the legal stage of human 
culture. The attribution of legal conceptions to primi- 
tive thought has had the usual effect of a priori theory, 
and has checked enquiry. 

In his History of Human Marriage^ Dr. Wester- 
marck made a much-needed protest, and refuted several 
of these pseudo-syntheses. In the constructive portion 
of his work he uses the biological argument. This was 

1 E. Westermarck, The History of Human Marriage (1891). 
B 

2 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

also necessary ; the facts of biology must supply the 
preliminaries of investigation. But he goes too far 
with biology in one direction, and in another not far 
enough. The latter line of enquiry is sex. One of 
the most remarkable defects of the legal school of 
anthropology is its neglect to take sexual relations into 
account when discussing a sexual relation like that of 
marriage. 

In the following pages I have followed the principle 
that marriage, both in ceremony and in system, is 
grounded in primitive conceptions of sexual relations. 
Many collateral phenomena will be discussed, which 
illustrate and are themselves explained by these concep- 
tions ; and though the lines of the argument lead from 
human relations through sexual relations to meet in 
marriage, yet by the way they will touch upon the 
connection of morality and religion with the social life 
of mankind. 

At the outset it may be well to bring forward a few 
striking facts of custom, as types of the problems to be 
solved, and as a help towards clearness. .Such are the 
following, which may be put, after the fashion of 
Plutarch, as questions : — 

(1) Why, according to a very general custom, are 
husbands and wives, brothers and sisters, respectively, 
required to avoid each other in one or more ways, and, 
in particular, may not eat together ? 

(2) Why do engaged couples also, as is frequently 
the case, avoid each other with religious caution ? 

(3) Why, again, do men and women generally, 
practise the same religious avoidance of each other ? 

(4) Why, according to a common custom, is it 
necessary for the bridegroom to take his bride by 
violence ? (" Marriage by capture.") 

i QUESTIONS 3 

(5) Why are the bride and bridegroom in Bengal 
first married to two trees ? 

(6) Why did the bride in ancient Argos wear a 
beard in the bridal chamber, and why in Kos was the 
bridegroom arrayed in women's clothes when he received 
his bride ? 

(7) Why, according to a widely spread custom, 
which, like the next, has excited the laughter of man- 
kind, should a man and his mother-in-law religiously 
avoid each other, to the extent of hiding the face and of 
being " ashamed " ? 

(8) Why, as is the practice in several parts of the 
world, and as was reported of the Tibarenoi by Greek 
writers and of the King of Torelore by the jogleor who 
wrote Cest Daucassin et Nicolete, does the husband lie- 
in and pretend to be a mother when his wife is confined ? 
(Couvade.} 

The primitive mental habit in its general features is 
best described negatively by the term unscientific, and 
positively by religious, in the ordinary connotation of 
that term. Superstitious would be preferable, were it 
not too narrow ; as to magic, I do not here distinguish 
— magic being simply the superstitious or religious 
method as opposed to the scientific. This primitive 
thinking does not distinguish between the natural and 
the supernatural, between subjective and objective 
reality. Primitive man regards the creations of his 
own imagination as being no less real than the exist- 
ences for which he has the evidence of sense-perception, 
in a sense more real, precisely because they elude sense- 
perception, though dealt with in the same way as 
objective reality.; and, while the latter is always chang- 
ing, these ideal existences, like the ideas of Plato, never 
pass away. Objective reality also takes on some 

4 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

properties of ideal reality, so that for primitive man the 
supernatural and the natural interchange, or rather, are 
not distinguished. This philosophy is truly monistic, 
and is neither materialist nor idealist, but undiffer- 
entiated. " Matter" is spiritual, and " spirit " is 
material, though sometimes invisible. Primitive logic 
corresponds to this metaphysic; it is likewise undiffer- 
entiated, and is chiefly guided by " material fallacies " 
and a Realism more pronounced than that of the School- 
men. Such inference necessarily includes true results, 
inductive and deductive, but no less necessarily these 
results were not distinguished from the false ; inex- 
tricably confused with fallacy, which often owed its 
continuance to the association, truth was held but was 
not recognised as a distinct species. As to " survivals " 
of primitive speculation and custom into civilised 
periods, the term is misused when it is implied that 
these are dead forms, surviving like fossil remains or 
rudimentary organs ; the fact is that human nature 
remains potentially primitive, and it is not easy even 
for those most favoured by descent to rise above these 
primitive ideas, precisely because these ideas " spring 
eternally " from permanent functional causes. Every 
one would still be primitive were it not for education, 
and the importance of education in the evolution of the 
soul can hardly be over-estimated. 

The undifferentiated character of primitive culture, 
its reference of all departments of thought and practice 
to one psychological habit, the superstitious or religious, 
may be illustrated from higher stages. " The political 
and religious Governments of the Kaffir tribes are so 
intimately connected that the one cannot be overturned 
without the other ; they must stand or fall together." * 

1 Maclean, Compendium of Kaffir Lazus and Customs, 107. 

i PRIMITIVE CULTURE 5 

The great pagan civilisations show exactly the same 
homogeneity. The ideal society of early Christians and 
Puritans alike, was one where there should be no separa- 
tion between Church and State, where public and private 
life and thought, politics and domestic affairs, individual 
and social morality, speculation and science, should all 
be subsumed under religion, and directed by the 
religious method. Such an ideal differs in degree only 
from the actual condition of primitive society ; whatever 
term be used to describe this, it is homogeneous and 
monistic in practice and theory ; one method is applied 
to its philosophy of nature and of man, its politics and 
public life, its sociology and human relations, domestic 
and social, its medical science and practice, its ethics 
and morality, its ordinary thought and action in every- 
day life, its behaviour and etiquette. Thus, as will also 
be shown by the way, there is a religious meaning 
inherent in the primitive conception and practice of all 
human relations, which is always ready to become 
actualised ; and the same is true of all individual pro- 
. cesses of sense and emotion and intellection and, in 
especial, of those functional processes that are most 
easily seen in their working and results. Not only 
" the Master knot of Human Fate," but all human 
actions and relations, all individual and social pheno- 
mena, have for primitive man, always potentially and 
often actually, a full religious content. So it is with 
that sub-division of human nature and human life 
caused by sex ; all actions and relations, all individual 
and social phenomena conditioned by sex, are likewise 
filled with a religious meaning. Sexual relations and 
sexual processes, as all human relations and human 
processes, are religious to the primitive mind. The 
conception of danger, neither material nor spiritual, but 

6 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

both, which is the chief characteristic of early religious 
thought and practice, and is due to the unscientific 
character of early speculation, is here intensified by the 
importance, psychical and physiological, of the sexual 
life. As we proceed, this characteristic of sexual re- 
lations and sexual life will be made clear ; it is seen in 
the phenomena of the individual life and of social 
relations, both in ordinary circumstances and, naturally 
intensified, in sexual crises. Thus, birth and baptism, 
confirmation and marriage, are attended by religious 
ceremonies. There is indeed a tendency amongst 
enquirers, due to the legal method of investigation, to 
ignore the religious character of the marriage ceremony ; 
but it is only in later culture that marriage is a " civil 
act," and though in early Catholic times marriage was 
not necessarily performed by the Church, it was still in 
essence a religious rite, and had been so before Chris- 
tianity, as it was so in the earliest ages. One of the 
crudest modes of marriage known, that of the Arunta 
and other Central Australian tribes, is proved by a note 
of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen to be a religious act,1 
though to all appearance this would seem impossible. 
As we shall see, even the ordinary intercourse of man 
with woman has for primitive man this religious 
meaning. 

The primitive conception of danger, which leads to 
those precautions, religious or superstitious, so char- 
acteristic of early ritual, appears in two main forms, the 
predication of evil influences and the imposition of 
taboos. Let us take a few instances, from ordinary life 
and sexual crises. 

In the Marquesas Islands, the use of canoes is pro- 
hibited to the female sex by tabu ; the breaking of the 

; 1 B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, TAe Native Tribes of Central Australia, 93. 

SEX AND RELIGION 

te is punished with death. T^p^-making belongs 
:lusively to women ; and it is tabu for men to touch 
it/ The Kaffirs will not from superstitious motives 
allow women to touch their cattle.2 Amongst the 
Dacotas custom and superstition ordain that the wife 
must carefully keep away from all that belongs to her 
husband's sphere.3 In New Zealand, a man who has 
any important business on hand, either in peace or war, 
is tapu, and must keep away from the female sex.4 

The fear of evil spirits shows itself from time to 
time during the long and wearisome marriage cere- 
monies of South Celebes, and methods are used to 
frustrate their evil intentions against the happiness of 
the young pair. There is also a fear that the soul of 
the bridegroom may fly away for sheer happiness.5 
In China, a new bride is apt to be attacked by evil 
spirits causing her to be ill ; hence the figure of " a 
great magician " (a Taoist priest), brandishing va sword, 
is painted on the sedan-chair she uses on the wedding- 
day.6 The sedan-chair in which a Manchu bride goes 
to the house of the bridegroom is " disinfected " with 
incense, to drive away evil spirits, and in it is placed a 
calendar containing the names of idols who control the 
spirits of evil.7 The Druses " have a superstition that 
leads them to suppose that Gins or evil spirits are more 
than usually busy on the occasion of marriage " and 
may interfere with the happiness of the pair.8 In 
English folklere " the malevolence of witchcraft seems 
to have taken the greatest pleasure in subtle assaults 

1 H. Melville, The Marquesas Islands, 13, 245. 

2 Journal of the Anthropological Institute, x. II ; xvi. 119. 

3 Waitz-Gerland, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii. 100. 4 Id. vi. 349. 

5 B. F. Matthes, Bijdragen tot de Ethnologic van Zuid-Celebes, 30, 39, 33 ; van 
Eck, in De Indische Gids for 1881, 1038. 

6 Doolittle, Social Life of the Chinese, i. 95. 7 Lockhart, in Folklore, i. 487. 
8 G. W. Chasseaud, The Druses of the Lebanon, 168. 

8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

upon those just entering the married state." In 
Russia, all doors, windows, and even the chimney, are 
closed at a wedding, to prevent malicious witches fly- 
ing in and hurting the bride and bridegroom.2 The 
Chuvashes honour their wizards (iemzyas) and always 
invite them to weddings, for fear that an offended 
iemzya might destroy the bride and bridegroom.3 

Savages and barbarians, and, we may add, mankind 
in general, are very secretive concerning their functional 
life. This attitude is naturally emphasised when the 
sexual act is in question. Thus amongst the natives of 
the Ceramlaut Archipelago, between Celebes and Papua, 
where there is a veneer of Islam, it is the custom for 
both man and wife to say the well-known formula of 
good Moslems before the sexual act.4 This is a general 
rule in Islam, especially on the first night of marriage.5 
The old Romans similarly invoked Dea Virginensis, 
while ceremonially loosing the zone.6 The natives of 
Amboina believe in a witch, Pontianak, who steals away 
not only infants, but the genital organs of men.7 In 
South Celebes, the evil spirit most feared by the male 
sex is one that makes a man incapable of performing 
his marital duties.8 A similar belief is very common in 
European folklore. 

Again, as soon as a Nicobarese woman shows signs 
of pregnancy, dancing and singing are interdicted in 
the village.9 Pregnant women in the island Kisar, or 
Makiser, take a knife with them, when they leave the 

1 Brand, Popular Antiquities, iii. 305. 

2 W. Ralston, Songs of the Russian People, 381. 

3 Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxiv. 156. 

4 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 173. 

5 A. Bastian, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, iii. 293. 

6 Augustine, De Civitate Dei, iv. n. 7 Riedel, op. cit. 58. 

8 Matthes, op. cit. 97. 

9 A. Featherman, Social History of the Races of Mankind, ii. 246. 

i SEX AND RELIGION 9 

house, in order to frighten away evil spirits.1 The 
same practice is found in Amboina, and the Watubella 
Islands.2 In the Ceramlaut Islands, pregnant women 
use charms to protect themselves against evil influences, 
and in Ceram (Nusaina) they dread the evil spirit 
Putiana or Pontianak? Among the Basutos pregnant 
women are subject to witchcraft, and they wear skin- 
aprons to protect them.4 In New Zealand and New 
Caledonia, for instance, they are tabu ; 5 amongst the 
latter people also, and in Siam, the Marianne, Gilbert 
and Marshall Islands, amongst the Pshawes and some 
Transcaucasian tribes6 they are "unclean," i.e. taboo. 
Turning to the other side of the taboo state, we find 
that amongst the natives of Costa Rica, a woman who 
is for the first time pregnant, " infects the whole neigh- 
bourhood " ; all deaths are laid to her charge, and the 
husband pays the damages. This remarkable influence 
" seems to be an evil spirit, or rather a property 
acquired " by women in that state.7 

At child-birth, more than at any other functional 
crisis, woman is taboo, and in that state where religion 
develops' evil spirits. Amongst the Alfoers, before a 
birth, the husband sets a naked sword in front of the 
house, to keep off evil spirits who might bring ill-luck 
to the delivery.8 In the Philippine Islands, there is an 
evil spirit, which causes painful labour. It is to be 
recognised by its voice, and when the husband hears it, 
he locks up the house, closing every chink, and goes 
round with a sword thrusting and parrying all night. 
In the morning he takes a well-earned rest, because " he 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 417. " Id. 72, 207. 3 Id. 173-74, 134. 

4 E. Casalis, The Basutos, 251. 5 H. Ploss, Das Kind, i. 20. 

6 H. Ploss u. M. Bartels, Das Weib, ii. 603. 

7 W. M.'Gabb, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society for 1875, 505. 

8 J. G. F. Riedel, in Zeitschr if t fur Ethnologic for 1871, 403. 

io THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

has saved his wife."1 Amongst the Ovaherero the 
woman at child-birth, and the special hut which she 
occupies, are both zera, holy.2 More often, women in 
child-bed and for some time after, are called " unclean/' 
frequently tabu, but "holy," tabu and unclean are 
so far not differentiated. Amongst peoples who use 
special terms like tapu, as the Polynesians, she is tapu ; 
elsewhere, as a rule, " unclean." 

Especially is this the case after child-birth. The 
infant also is taboo, and comes under the same category.3 
In the islands Amboina and Uliasser the new-born babe 
is subject to the attacks of evil spirits, and is put by 
the fire to protect him.4 In East Central Africa, when 
the child is seven days old, the parents believe that it is 
past its greatest dangers, and in order to prevent evil 
spirits from doing it further mischief, they strew t^e 
place with dressed victuals by way of appeasing them.5 

At puberty also, religious ideas are found. Amongst 
the Kurnai of Gippsland "the initiatory ceremony, 
which introduced the young of both sexes to member- 
ship in the community, is a commemoration — even a 
species of rude worship — by the tribe, of the eponymous 
ancestors, Yeerung and Djeetgun. It forms the great 
central idea of Kurnai society." 6 Amongst the Narrin- 
yeri boys at initiation are narumbe, sacred in a special 
sense, of which more hereafter.7 Amongst the Chiri- 
guanos the girl at puberty fasts, and is secluded, while 
women beat the floor and walls with sticks, by way of 

1 Bowring, The Philippines, 120 j A. Bastian, Die Volkern des Qstl'ichen Asien, v. 
270. 

2 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 63. 

3 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 51. 

4 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 73. 
8 D. Macdonald, Ajricana, i. 224. 

6 L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, 199. 

7 Native Tribes of South Australia, 18. 

i SEX AND RELIGION n 

finding and driving away " the snake that has wounded 
the girl." The Siamese, who imagine that evil spirits 
swarm in the air, believe that these enjoy the first fruits 
of their girls, and that they cause the " wound " which 
renews itself every month.2 On the religious state of 
girls at puberty Dr. Frazer gives many details.3 

The same religious fears are connected with men- 
struation generally. Amongst the Vedahs of Travan- 
core the wife at her monthly periods is secluded for 
five days in a hut, a quarter of a mile away, which is 
also used by her at child-birth. The next five days are 
passed in a second hut, half-way between the first and 
the house. On the ninth day the husband holds a 
feast, sprinkles his floor with wine, and invites his 
friends. Until this evening he has not dared to eat 
a"iy thing but roots, for fear of being killed by " the 
devil." * Here, as in the next case, the dangerous side 
of taboo is prominent. Amongst the Maoris, if a man 
touched a menstruous woman, he would be tapu ; if he 
had connection with her, or ate food cooked by her, he 
would be " tapu an inch thick." 5 

In all these relations and functional crises connected 
with sex, a religious state is, as it were, entered upon. 
There is not needed, to prove this, the major premiss, 
that all primitive practice and belief are essentially 
religious ; the particular instances themselves point 
clearly to a connection with religion. Though further 
evidence of this is to be found in most races from 
China to Peru, and even in higher civilisations, while 
European folklore is full of such evidence, yet a few 
typical examples may suffice. 

1 Lettres edif antes et curieuses, viii. 333 j J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough"*, iii. 
214. 2 Loubere, Slam, i. 203. 3 Frazer, op. cit. iii. 204 ff. 

4 F. Jagor, in Ze ttschrift fur Ethnologic, xi. 164. 

5 E. Tregear, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xix. 101. 

12 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

It may be objected that the presence of evil spirits 
in some of the above cases proves nothing. But all I 
wish to point out just now is the actual presence of evil 
or danger. I am far from wishing to imply that the 
evil spirits or dangerous influences present on all these 
occasions are those against which the ceremonies of 
marriage, baptism, and the like were instituted as safe- 
guards. In some of these cases the evil influence stated 
is that which has caused the rite or the taboo ; in others 
it is not so ; other cases again are selected as examples 
of a belief in the process of crystallisation into cere- 
mony, superimposed upon an already crystallised cere- 
mony of similar origin, such as the cases of marriage 
taken from South Celebes, Manchuria, and Russia ; 
whilst others show an original ceremony in the process 
of development from belief, as in the case of the Indian 
girl at puberty and the Vedahs at menstruation, and in 
those of the Muhammadan and Roman bridegrooms, 
where the Roman ceremony is obviously the crystallisa- 
tion of an idea similar to the Muhammadan. In the 
higher stages of culture it is hardly necessary to quote 
instances to prove that marriage, baptism, confirmation, 
and " the churching of women " are religious cere- 
monies, but it is important to mark the continuity of 
these with the ritual of early man. A long array of 
facts might be given to show that the main line of 
development in ritual is from the propitiation or insula- 
tion of evil influences to the conciliation of beneficent 
powers. The change is effected in this way : the 
dangers feared are originally insulated before and 
during the progress of the function, as is the natural 
course, then at the end of the function, the expulsion of 
the dangers is performed for the last time, and often 
shows a twofold character, purification and propitiation, 

i ANIMISM AND TABOO 13 

such as, to take the case of child-birth, the purification 
of the woman with water, and the propitiation of the 
spirits by food. The practice of performing the chief 
ceremony at the end of a functional crisis was more sure 
of continuance, precisely because the danger is then 
usually over, and the ceremony therefore cannot be 
discredited. Further, keeping the same instance, puri- 
fication after child-birth, the deliverance from danger is 
naturally ascribed to some beneficent spirit, and the 
water with which the woman is purified of that danger 
takes on the character of " holy " accordingly. The 
examples drawn from the Vedahs, and from an East 
Central African tribe, are here instructive, as showing 
the necessary components of a ceremony and illustrating 
its origin. 

We must next point out the fact that the rules and 
restrictions (taboos) imposed in these sexual relations or 
sexual crises, some of which are expressly called tabuy 
are identical with those imposed in other tabu states, 
such as hunting, war and the preparation therefor, 
mourning, also in the case of those sacred persons, 
priest-kings, incarnate gods, at once more and less than 
man, of whom Dr. Frazer treats in his great work. 
But the plurality of causes, which makes it unsafe to 
infer similarity of cause from similar effects, necessitates 
an analysis of particular results. 

The ideas underlying the above-cited examples of 
taboo are in some cases connected with " spiritual " 
dangers, and, to that extent, are religious. In the 
further analysis of these and other cases, the religious 
character of practice and belief will be made more clear, 
and the precise nature of the danger will be investigated. 
For the present, let us take one or two of the above 
cases, which might be multiplied indefinitely, to show 

i4 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, i 

the identity of the ideas underlying Polynesian tabu and 
similar religious states elsewhere. A Maori woman at 
menstruation is tafu^ and any one touching her is tapu. 
Now, according to the Siamese belief about this function, 
the danger is due to evil spirits which cause a wound, 
of which the menstrual blood is the result and proof, 
and it is contact with this blood of which the Maori 
male is so afraid. Add to this the fact that the Maoris 
themselves not only identify menstrual blood with an 
evil spirit, Kahukahu, but also hold that the tapu state 
generally is due to the influence of ancestral spirits,1 and 
identification of taboo and " spiritual " influence is so 
far complete. 

Now, if behind any sexual relation or sexual func- 
tional crisis and the relations between the sexes resulting 
in connection with it, there are found ideas identical 
with those underlying any taboo or religious condition, 
we may infer for all such ideas in primitive thought, not 
only correlation but identity of origin. 

As we proceed we shall find evidence not only for 
identifying this religious state of "spiritual" danger 
with the dangers underlying taboo, and with those pro- 
ceeding from evil agencies, material, spiritual, or both, 
but also for ascribing this state to the functional crises 
of sex and the ensuing sexual attitude, and even to the 
ordinary relations of the sexes. 

^ * E. Shortland, Southern Districts of New Zealand, 67, 68. 

CHAPTER II 

WE have seen reason to suppose that men and women at 
marriage, women during menstruation, pregnancy, and 
child-birth, infants, boys and girls at puberty, not to 
mention other critical conditions, are regarded by early 
man as being in that mysterious religious state which 
necessitates the imposition of restrictions and safe- 
guards, or taboos, and to which mourners and kings, 
warriors and priests alike are called. In the last case 
cited from the Maoris we see very clearly the twofold 
nature of the state in which these sacr<e -persons find 
themselves. They are dangerous and are themselves in 
danger. Dr. Frazer has here applied most happily 
the language of electricity. The person charged with 
this electric force, which is both dangerous and bene- 
ficent, must be insulated by various taboos. 

The Polynesian tabu, especially in Hawaii and 
New Zealand, was the basis of society ; it was the 
support of all religious, moral, and social institutions, 
for all of which it supplied a supernatural sanction. 
The system was indeed a good example of the religious 
character of early society. Used by priests and nobles 
for their own ends and no less for the good of the 
community, it early divided into religious, political, and 
social tabu. Every priest and every gentleman was 
tabu, " sacred." The opposite state was noa, "com- 
mon." This was the system after a long development. 

1 6 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Here I wish to deal rather with the ideas underlying 
taboo, in its human aspect. These are universal 
human ideas, arising directly from the simplest human 
relations and physical functions, and I therefore propose, 
after having shown cause why the identity should be 
recognised, to apply the term taboo to all similar 
phenomena throughout mankind, and not only to the 
restrictions but to the whole series of persons, beliefs, 
and practices. All these are potentially what the Poly- 
nesian tabu was actually. Also, as will be seen, taboo 
as thus extended is identical with a considerable part of 
religion in the sense already described as characteristic 
of primitive culture. I am, of course, far from wish- 
ing to imply that these ideas underlying taboo have 
developed the whole of religion ; and, as in this enquiry 
we have to discuss. the relations of man with man and 
of man with woman, that is, Taboo in its social aspect, 
the terms Social Taboo and Sexual Taboo may well be 
used. They will serve both to avoid misconceptions 
as to religion in general, and to mark the fact that here 
we meet with some fundamental religious ideas which 
lie beneath the relations of man with man and the 
system of morality derived from those relations. In 
these ideas may be seen the basis of Evolutionary 
Ethics. 

Primitive Taboo exists now in all its pristine 
strength, though it has split into religious, moral, and 
social habits, each distinguished by a more or less 
different terminology. To illustrate the continuity of 
culture and the identity of the elementary human ideas 
in all ages, it is sufficient to point to the ease with 
which the Polynesian word tabu has passed into modern 
languages. There is no more interesting or more im- 
portant study than to trace the continuity of culture, 

ii TABOO 17 

and when we take any taboo custom of early man and 
follow it up to modern times, we generally find at this 
end not a mere survival but a living duplicate, often 
identical in form and content with its prototype. 
Many cases of this will appear in the following pages. 
As an example I may quote a common feature of 
primitive tabu in its social aspect, the placing of a cloth 
or stick or other mark on a piece of property to show 
that it belongs to some one and is therefore sacred. 
This widely spread custom shows the religious basis of 
the rights of property. Well, at our end of the chain, 
we find the same thing in the familiar piece of un- 
written law which respects the seat thus tabooed in a 
railway carriage. The only difference is that in the 
Polynesian case there was a deep religious meaning 
behind the form and a terrible supernatural sanction to 
support it, while behind the modern custom there is 
human courtesy only ; behind both, there is the uni- 
versal sense of human nature. Indeed, as we shall 
see later, such an example points to the fact that 
ordinary universal human ideas, chiefly connected with 
functional needs, produce the same results in all ages ; 
and many so-called survivals, which have on the face of 
them too much vitality to be mere fossil remains, at 
once receive a scientific explanation which is more than 
antiquarian. 

Having found that the persons with whom we have 
to deal are, so far, taboo, in danger and dangerous, 
and concern us in their human relations, social taboo, we 
now proceed to investigate the nature of this danger 
other than the vague but ubiquitous evil spirits. The 
omnipresence of evil spirits according to early thought 
has been illustrated by Dr. Frazer, but to point the 
case, I may give some evidence of this here. 

c 

1 8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

An excellent observer says of the Indian of British 
Guiana that his "whole world swarms with beings. 
He is surrounded by a host of them, possibly hurtful. 
It is therefore not wonderful that the Indian fears to 
be without his fellow, fears even to move beyond the 
light from his camp-fire, and when obliged to do so 
carries a firebrand with him, that he may have a chance 
of seeing the beings among whom he moves. Nor is it 
wonderful that occasionally the neighbourhood of their 
settlement seems to the Indians to become so oppres- 
sively full of gathering beings, that the peatman who 
has the power of frightening those beings, even when 
they are invisible, is employed to effect a general clear- 
ance of the air." l Amongst the Sonthals evil spirits 
are ubiquitous, and offerings of grain are placed on the 
paths to appease them.2 In Egypt the Ginn pervade 
everything ; they inhabit rivers, ruined houses, wells, 
baths, ovens, and latrines. When pouring water or 
anything on the ground, it is the custom to exclaim, 
" Permission," by way of craving pardon of any Ginnee 
that may be there.3 The Karalits believe that the air 
is peopled with invisible " spectres," which the angekoks 
only can discern and catch while they are hovering 
about.4 The New Caledonians imagine that demon- 
agencies pervade the universe, and that they haunt 
their huts to trouble their sleep and are the original 
cause of sickness and death.5 In Siam evil spirits are 
thought to swarm in the air. The people believe that 
they enjoy the first fruits of their girls.6 " In one 
respect the life of the Kurnai was a life of dread. He 

1 E. F. im Thurn, Among the Indians of Guiana, 372. 

2 V. Ball, Jungle Life in India, 235. 

3 E. W. Lane, Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, i. 284. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 444. 

5 Id. ii. 91. 6 Loubere, op. cit. i. 203. 

ii EVIL INFLUENCES 19 

Jived in fear of the visible and invisible. He never 
knew the moment when the lurking Brajerak might 
not spear him from behind, and never knew the 
moment when some secret foe among the Kurnai might 
not succeed in passing over him some spell, against 
which he could not struggle, or from which the most 
potent counter -charms given him by his ancestors 
could not free him." x The natives of Hatam in New 
Guinea had a great dread of poison infused in the 
atmosphere.2 The last two cases form a link between 
the natural and the supernatural. 

We thus see that in the thought of some peoples, 
man's whole environment is more or less full of the 
agencies or influences of evil, and as we may presuppose 
the same psychological material for all mankind, we 
infer a similarity of psychological result, potential if not 
actual, for all peoples at a certain stage of culture. 
The term " evil spirit " is often misused ; many evil 
influences, which are not anthropomorphic at all, are 
too readily called " spirits." Supernaturnal personifi- 
cations will not cover all the cases of primitive spirit- 
ualism. These dangers are still undifFerentiated and 
combined in one genus in which there is no distinc- 
tion between natural and supernatural, real and ideal, 
nor between persons and other existences or entire ; 
these " spirits" are really material, though unseen, and 
many are simply " influences," states of matter, imper- 
sonal forces. The atmosphere is thus charged with 
" spiritual " electricity, with bacteria of invisible mischief. 
Man needs to walk warily ; at any time he may be 
subjected to dangers coming from this hylo-idealistic 
force. The conduction or induction, contagion or 
infection, may result in death or sickness, spiritual or 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. at. 259. 2 L. M. D'Albertis, New Guinea, i. 122. 

20 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

material danger, real or but vaguely apprehended, the 
subjective notion being often stronger than objective 
presentation from its very elusiveness. 

These influences are of the kind which produce the 
state -of religious peril, or Taboo. When we take our 
attention from the mysterious force of taboo and 
analyse its subject, we find first that it is the " spiritual " 
danger which makes him taboo and dangerous to others, 
as soon as it descends upon him and fills him with virus 
or electric force. It is no inconsistency that a man is 
often taboo before the danger attacks him, for he is 
expecting it, or that people like Dr. Frazer's incarnate 
gods, or even the ordinary Maori gentleman, are always 
taboo. These sacra person* have the religious con- 
dition imposed upon them every day, they are cottidie 
feriat*. It is a natural extension with persons on 
whom the safety of the world depends, as in the case of 
the incarnate gods, and no less with persons like the 
Maori, who has been led by the development of a 
system which combined the characteristics of Roman 
Catholicism with those of Feudalism, to .believe, like 
many a modern aristocrat, that he is somewhat more 
than the salt of the earth. 

The next commonest form in which the danger, 
resulting in taboo, is presented, is that of contagion of 
a sickness neither real nor imaginary, neither natural or 
supernatural, but both. This predication of " spiritual " 
sickness, though almost universal, and, as will be seen 
later, of very great importance in the history of human 
relations, does not cover all the facts, and we want to 
know the origin of this idea also. We have found the 
danger to come from the environment of the individual, 
and then to settle upon him. We may then look for 
its original character in the actual environment, not as 

IT THE UNKNOWN 21 

it may really be, but as it is conceived to be, that is, 
conditioned by the individual's conception thereof; and 
secondly, where the environment is humanity, in the 
characteristics attributed to such persons by the indi- 
vidual. Now we find, after examining the facts, that 
there is one characteristic which inheres in all these 
manifold dangers. Things and persons are potentially 
dangerous, acts and functions are potentially liable to 
danger, which are strange, unfamiliar, unusual, abnormal, 
in a word, more or less unknown. Man's ignorance is 
the occasion of his fears, and he fears anything or 
everything which he does not understand. Of the 
savage it may most truly be said, omnia exeunt in 
mysterium. Man's superstitious fears are found to be 
in the exact ratio of man's ignorance. To all these 
potential dangers he naturally ascribes the results which 
he knows to ensue from real physical danger, and of 
course this wide generalisation includes cases of real 
injury inextricably confused with a thousand empty 
terrors. As man's earliest thinking is anthropomorphic 
and in terms of himself, he attributes to agencies which 
he does not understand, not only the conscious power 
and methods of human beings, but the involuntary 
influence or deleterious properties of dangerous men, 
such as enemies or diseased persons ; and these imagin- 
ary results coming from things and persons feared 
because they are not understood, are actually accentu- 
ated by the very fact that the persons or things do not 
harmonise with man's knowledge of himself. Wonder 
becomes uneasiness, and eventually produces an attitude 
of religious caution. Again, man's fears are for himself, 
and especially for those parts and functions of his 
organism which are most important for life and health 
and are actually most liable to injury. Here there 

22 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

falls to be considered what may be called physiological 
thought, subconsciously arising from and concentrating 
upon physiological functions. Especially important in 
human psychology is the physiological thought arising 
from the two chief physical functions of nutrition and 
sex. For these and other complex and delicate func- 
tions, man's ignorance creates many potential dangers, 
and this leads to various attitudes of religious caution 
in their performance. 

Let us take some cases which illustrate this poten- 
tiality of danger, inhering, through man's subjective 
conceptions, in things and acts and states which are 
different from what is usual and ordinary, which more 
or less break the comfortable routine of life, or which 
he cannot explain. From this point of view, the 
original idea behind the Maori term noa, for instance, 
which means common as opposed to tapu, is what we 
should call normal or regular. In South Celebes the 
Buginese word pemdli (i.q. Polynesian tabu) denotes all 
things unusual, and such are supposed to bring evil 
consequences in their train.1 In the Marquesas any- 
thing different from ordinary custom is called taboo.2 
The Dyaks perform mystic ceremonies "for the most 
frivolous causes ; when they have a bad dream, if a 
tree falls, or a basket of rice be upset." Pamali (tabu) 
is imposed on practically any occasion when something 
unusual or important is about to or has taken place.3 
Strangeness, potential danger, and spiritual power go 
together in the savage mind. " The Masai conception 
of deity (ngai) is vague," as Joseph Thomson pointed 
out. " I was ngai ; my lamp was ngai ; whatever struck 
them as strange or incomprehensible they supposed to 

1 Matthes, op. cit. 108. 2 Melville, The Marquesas Islands, 248. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. 278, 282. 

n THE ABNORMAL 23 

have some connection with ngai" l The Cadiacks 
believed that every act was under the influence of some 
object, stone, or the like, especially if the said object 
was curious in appearance.2 Of the Guiana Indian, 
Mr. im Thurn states that, " he always sees a spirit in 
any instrument which does him harm. When he falls 
on a rock, he attributes the injury to it. If he sees any- 
thing in any way curious or abnormal, and if soon after 
an evil befall him, he regards the thing and the evil as 
cause and effect. Just as some rocks, viz. the more 
peculiar, are more malignant than others, so it is not 
every river, but every bend and portion of a river that 
has a spirit ; spirits of falls and rapids are still more 
dreaded, therefore people are more frequently drowned 
there. Spirits consist of harmless and harmful. The 
former are quite inactive. The good that befalls an 
Indian he takes as a matter of course, as the result of 
his own exertions, and all the evil as the work of evil- 
wishing spirits. He performs no acts to attract the 
goodwill of spirits, but he constantly does act or avoid 
action to arrest the ill-will of other spirits." 3 When 
animals act contrary to their ordinary habits, the Kaffirs 
regard them as omens.4 So in Chinese and European 
folklore, the crowing of a hen is ominous of something 
unusual about to happen.5 Amongst the Patagonians 
any unfamiliar object was supposed to possess an evil 
spirit ; and any boy or girl who was odd or peculiar, 
was marked out for the profession of wizard.6 So the 
Kaffirs of Natal honoured persons who were subject to 
fits, but they refused to eat out of such a person's 

1 J. Thomson, Through Masai Land, 260. 

2 U. Lisiansky, A Voyage Round the World, 243. 

3 im Thurn, op. cit. 370, 377, 379. 4 J. Shooter, The Kaffir* of Natal, 165. 

5 Doolittle, op. cit. ii, 328. 

6 G. C. Musters, At Home -with the Patagonians, 181, 182. 

24 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

vessels.1 Kaffirs begin the career of diviner or doctor 
by being ill, and especially the appearance of epileptic 
symptoms in a Kaffir show that he is becoming a seer.2 
Neuropaths are much honoured in the islands of Leti, 
Moa, and Lakor.3 The Bakgalagali, a weak and 
timorous race, are protected by the notion that it is 
uncanny to meddle with them.4 Amongst the com- 
monest cases are those where potentiality of danger is 
ascribed to strangers. The Guaranis suspected every 
stranger of hostility.5 D' Albertis was requested by the 
Alfoers opposite Ramoi to leave their village because 
his presence brought bad luck. " The people began to 
die," they complained, " as soon as you looked at us. 
Five have died in three days."6 The Samoans fear 
evil influence from strangers.7 On entering a strange 
country the Maoris perform a ceremony to make it noa, 
as it may have been tapu, that is, potentially dangerous.8 
When an Australian tribe approaches another that is 
unknown, they carry burning sticks "to purify the 
air."9 Strange meats, such as are for instance non- 
indigenous, are feared by the Indians of Guiana, and they 
are rendered eatable by the peatman, or even occasion- 
ally an old woman blowing on them certain times, so 
as to expel the "spirit."10 In German folklore there 
is the custom of blowing thrice into a strange spoon, 
before eating with it.11 The Indians of Guiana are 
afraid of the food of strangers, or of anything belonging 

1 Shooter, op. cit. 218. 

2 Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu, 299 j Shooter, 191. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 378. 4 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 32. 

6 Dobrizhoffer, The Abipones, 163. 6 D 'Albertis, op. cit. i. 53. 

7 G. Turner, Samoa a Hundred Tears Ago, 291. 

8 Shortland, Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders, 103. 

9 R. Brough Smyth, The Aborigines of Victoria, i. 134. 

10 im Thurn, op. cit. 368. 

11 F. Panzer, Beitrag zur Deutschen Mythologie, 257. 

ii THE NEW 25 

to such.1 The Zulus taboo all foods that are strange 
or unknown.2 A similar idea underlies the common 
diffidence about beginning an act or doing something 
for the first time, or handselling a new object. Before 
shooting a cataract for the first time, on the first sight 
of any new place, striking rocks, etc., the Guiana Indian 
arrests the ill-will of the spirits. The dreaded objects 
are not mentioned, are not looked at more than is 
necessary, and artificial means of blinding the eyes with 
pepper juice are used to avoid the dreaded sight.8 The 
Sandwich Islanders prayed before they ate, before tilling 
the ground, before building houses, launching boats, or 
casting nets.4 Before starting on a hunting expedition, 
the Hurons consulted their tutelar spirits to ascertain 
whether the time was propitious.5 This kind of thing 
is world- wide. In the Luang Sermata Islands enquiries 
are made as to whether the new house will be unlucky. 
In the Babar Islands, before entering a new house, 
offerings are thrown inside, that the spirit, Orlou, may 
not make the inmates ill.6 In the Sandwich Islands, 
before the owner entered a new house, the priest 
performed ceremonies and slept in it, to prevent evil 
spirits resorting thereto, and to secure the inmates from 
the effects of incantation.7 A similar practice is found 
in Persia and China.8 Amongst the Nicobarese sorcerers 
are employed to drive away evil spirits from the site 
selected for the building of a house. When a new 
boat is launched, a fire is lighted round it to expel the 
evil spirits.9 Similarly, when an interval has elapsed, 

1 W. H. Brett, The Indian Tribes of Guiana, 363. 

2 D. Leslie, Among the Zulus and Amatongas, 197. 

3 im Thurn, op. cit. 380. 4 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches. \. 350. 
5 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 54. 6 Riedel, op. cit. 318, 343. 

7 W. Ellis, A Tour in Hawaii, 293 j Polynesian Researches, iv. 322. 

8 Pinkerton's Voyages and Travels, ix. 260 j Doolittle, op. cit. ii. 325. 

9 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 250. 

26 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

dwelling-houses become dangerous. Thus the Bashkirs, 
on returning from their nomadic life of the summer to 
their winter -quarters, approach these dwellings with 
reluctance, believing that Sheitan has taken up his abode 
there. The women therefore are sent forward first, 
armed with sticks, with which they strike the doors, 
uttering curses ; when they have made their round, the 
men ride forward at full speed, with terrific shouts, to 
banish the dreaded demon from his hiding-place.1 We 
may also compare the common belief that danger 
attaches to the first of any fruits or meats, as in the 
ceremony of first-fruits amongst the Kaffirs 2 and many 
other peoples, such " holiness " as attaches thereto being 
undistinguished from any kind of potential danger. 
Again, there is an almost universal belief that sickness 
and death are unnatural and abnormal. Being strange 
conditions of which the savage cannot solve the 
mystery, he often attributes them to the influence of 
evil spirits. Amongst the Zulus no one is believed to 
die a natural death except in battle or a row.3 Among 
most Congo tribes death is seldom regarded in the light 
of a natural event.4 Amongst the Dieri and neigh- 
bouring tribes of South Australia, " no native contracts 
a disease or complaint from natural causes ; the disease 
is supposed to be caused by some enemy." In any 
serious case, the Koonkies or doctors are called in, to 
beat " the devil " out of the camp. " This is done by 
the stuffed tail of a kangaroo, by beating the ground in 
and out of the camp, chasing him away for some 
distance." 5 The Kurnai could not conceive of death 
by disease. It was regarded as due to the magical 

1 A. Erman, Reise urn die Erde, i. 103. 2 Shooter, of. cit. 25, 27. 

3 Leslie, op. cit. 48. « H Ward? in journ^ Anthrof. Inst. xxiv. 287. 

6 S. Gason, in jfourn. Anthrop. Intt, xxiv. 170. 

ii DEATH SUPERNATURAL 27 

influence of enemies or evil spirits. Death, according 
to their ideas, could only occur through accident, open 
violence, or secret magic.1 Amongst the tribes of 
Central Australia " no such thing as natural death is 
realised by the native ; a man who dies has of necessity 
been killed by some other man, or perhaps even by a 
woman, and sooner or later that man or woman will be 
attacked. However old or decrepit a man or woman 
may be when death takes place, it is at once supposed 
that it has been brought about by the magic influence 
of some enemy." 2 All deaths, sicknesses, and calamities 
are attributed by the Andamanese to evil spirits.3 The 
Navajos ascribe death to Chinde, "the devil," who 
remains in the vicinity of the dead. Those who per- 
form the burial protect themselves from the evil in- 
fluence by smearing their naked bodies with tar.4 Death 
has always been a mystery, and it is no wonder that 
savage and barbarous peoples should have regarded it as 
an abnormal event. This conception is illustrated by 
the numerous myths invented to explain the abnormality 
of death. An interesting case, repeating the idea of 
"death and his brother sleep," is the myth of the Yaos 
and Wayisa of East Central Africa. They say that 
death is largely caused by wizards ; it was originally 
brought into the world by a woman, who taught two 
men to go to sleep. One day, while they slumbered, 
she held the nostrils of one of them, till his breath 
ceased and he died.5 Sickness, in a lesser degree, is 
also mysterious. With such unusual states, as is gener- 
ally the case, we find connected evil spirits or taboo or 
both, and may trace these predications back to man's 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 251, 258. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 48, 476. 

3 E. H. Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Insf. xi. 288, 289. 

4 First Report of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington), 123. 

5 J. Macdonald, in Jown. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. in, 112. 

28 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

conceptions of what is unusual and not understood, in 
combination with his instinctive desire for life, health, 
and strength. All illness and bodily evil in British 
Guiana is the work of spirits, occasionally supposed 
to act in human form, but generally not, "therefore 
disease is more common than assault by bodily foes." 1 
Amongst the Basutos sickness is attributed to ill- 
wishers who bewitch one.2 In the last examples, we see 
how human and supernatural agencies may meet. 

Again, in the case of normal functions, which are 
unusual in so far as they are periodic, it is natural that 
danger from spiritual agencies should be thought of 
chiefly when the crisis is worse than usual. Thus in 
the Aru Islands it is at difficult labour that means are 
taken against evil spirits, for instance, the banging of 
drums ; so in the island Wetar and the Ceramlaut 
Archipelago.3 If labour is difficult, the Chinese suppose 
it is due to an evil spirit that prevents the child's 
appearance ; 4 and in the Philippines, when the birth is 
delayed, witches are supposed to be responsible, and are 
driven away by exploding gunpowder from a mortar 
improvised out of a bamboo.5 If the new-born child 
howls, the Babar natives attribute it to the influence of 
an evil spirit, and food is spread for it outside the 
house.6 This case is somewhat surprising, but perhaps 
it is excessive squalling that is referred to. More 
naturally, if a Chinese child will not suck nor cry and 
appears lifeless, the belief is that it is exposed to evil 
influences.7 

The Andamanese and Maoris ascribe internal pains 
to evil spirits ; and amongst the latter people, when a 

1 im Thurn, op. cit. 366. 2 Casalis, op. at. 277. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 265, 449, 175. 4 Doolittle, op. cit. i. 118. 

5 Bowring, op. cit. 144. 6 Riedel, op. cit. 354. 7 Doolittle, op. cit. \. 120. 

ii EMOTIONS SUPERNATURAL 29 

chief is in pain, he is thereby accounted tapu.1 Also 
when a Maori warrior was afraid, the tohunga. invoked 
a friendly spirit to repulse the evil spirit causing the 
fear.2 It will be remembered that the Maori tapu 
implies that one is under the influence of the ancestral 
spirits ; and the apparent inconsistency, that a Maori 
gentleman, who is always tapu, can become tapu at 
various crises, and, as will be seen later, can contract 
such tapu as to injure his inherent tapu, is quite natural 
and needs no explanation. Further, the Battas attri- 
bute not only diseases, but such phenomena as anger, 
to evil spirits, which also force men to do murder and 
commit crimes.3 Such states as idiocy, hysteria, and 
various forms of neurosis are, as is well known, ex- 
plained by savages in the same way. We still have the 
phrase " an inspired idiot." Intoxication is similarly 
explained, also such apparently irregular conditions as 
ecstasy and enthusiasm. In the same way, popular 
thought and language prove this to be so with love, no 
less than with other periodic emotional crises. Both 
the Yoruba and the Ewe -speaking peoples attribute 
sexual desire to possession by the god of love (JLegba}? 
It is very natural that savage ignorance should ascribe 
to possession by supernatural influences those strong 
impulses which carry a man away and render him for 
the moment a blind automaton. The very word 
" passion " preserves the primitive idea that such states 
are due to external agency ; yet these facts limit still 
further primitive man's knowledge of himself. 

Again, if we survey the whole of human life and 
human relations, we find that all states in which there 

1 Man, op, at. xi. 84 j Shortland, op. cit. 82 ; W. Yate, New Zealand, 104. 

2 Shortland, Southern Districts of New Zealand, 67, 68. 

3 F. Junghuhn, Die Battalander auf Sumatra, ii, 156. 

4 A. B. Ellis, The Eive-speaking Peoples of West Africa, 41. 

30 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

is danger to be apprehended or something unusual or 
unusally important to be done or suffered are taboo. 
Every one is taboo in time of war, at the arrival of 
strangers, at the planting of the new seed, and at other 
periodic performances. Dr. Frazer has given examples 
of these. We shall also find later that occasions, where 
the performance of bodily functions is in question, 
are frequently taboo, and practically always when the 
functions are sexual or nutritive. We have also seen 
that even emotional states, such as pain, anger, fear, 
and love, which are apparently so abnormal, are ascribed 
to supernatural agencies and are taboo states ; and at 
last the remarkable fact becomes clear, that in primitive 
thought, most of what a man or woman does is actually, 
and all is potentially taboo. It is not merely the in- 
carnate god, the king and the priest, the sick and the 
mourner, the warrior and hunter, the boy and girl at 
puberty, the infant, the mother in child-bed, and the 
like, that are in this religious condition, but all human 
beings, as such, are potentially taboo, dangerous and in 
danger, all alike are, as it were, kings and .priests. This 
tendency arising from subjective conceptions as to the 
danger of acts and things unfamiliar, out of the routint 
or not understood, grows out of man's egoistic sensi- 
bility, that animal form of the instinct of self-preserva- 
tion and the will to live, which causes the individual 
insulate himself from potential danger. Such dangei 
centres in particular upon the organs of sense and 
function, the mysterious and complex working of whicl 
produces in the thinking organism a subconscious 
impulse, in the ratio of their importance and com- 
plexity, towards their preservation, and thereby the 
preservation of the individual himself. This sul 
conscious impulse develops into ideas, which 

ii BASIS OF TABOO 31 

religious in their character, and in their turn suggest the 
various methods of taboo. These ideas are religious 
in their content of " spiritual," as not distinguished 
from material danger, and these dangers are conceived 
of materially and dealt with as such. In all these facts, 
also, the identity of the taboo state and the dangerous 
condition caused by evil spirits can be seen between the 
lines. Turning now to the other side of these states, 
in which the person concerned is dangerous as well as 
in danger, we are told by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen 
that they "were constantly impressed with the idea 
that one black fellow will often tell you that he can 
and does do something magical, whilst all the time he 
is perfectly well aware that he cannot, and yet firmly 
believes that some other man can really do it. In 
order that his fellows may not be considered in this 
respect as superior to himself, he is obliged to resort to 
what is really a fraud ; but in course of time he may 
even come to lose sight of the fact that it is a fraud 
which he is practising upon himself and his fellows." 1 
In fact amongst savages it is not only professional 
sorcerers who possess magic power and influence, every 
man has this more or less. For instance, most of the 
old men amongst Australian natives are sorcerers, and a 
sorcerer " is able both to cause and cure, disease, rain, 
wind, thunder, and hail." 2 

Thus, all persons are potentially dangerous to others, 
as well as potentially in danger, in virtue simply of 
the distinction between a man and his fellows. The 
individual qua individual is potentially in danger from 
other individuals and dangerous to them. This egoistic 
sensibility and caution is intensified when things or 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 130. 
2 E. J. Eyre, Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia^ ii. 359, 384. 

32 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, n 

persons present some unexplained strangeness, and we 
may conclude that the mere fact of sexual differentia- 
tion is enough to form the basis of a similar religious 
caution between men and women. In the second place, 
functional crises are accentuated forms of this sexual 
differentiation, and their apparent abnormality causes 
uneasiness to the individual and to the other sex also. 
The following case sums up the argument ; the Indians 
of Costa Rica believe that the ceremonial " unclean- 
ness" called bu-ku-ru is very virulent. It is most 
dangerous from a woman in her first pregnancy. " She 
infects the whole neighbourhood, and all deaths are 
laid at her door." Also, " a place which has not been 
visited for a long time, or one approached for the first 
time, is infected with bu-ku-ru." 1 Here then we have 
an ultimate origin for the religious precautions used 
not only at birth, puberty, and pregnancy, but at the 
entering upon a new relation, and that a sexual rela- 
tion, such as marriage. 

The whole series of phenomena, as may especially 
be seen in the ideas and practices concerned with things 
new and unusual, with the handselling of such, and 
with the entering upon strange or important acts and 
functions, illustrates well a characteristic of early man 
in the animistic stage, which may be described as 
diffidence, lack of initiative and incapacity for responsi- 
bility, and is the general result of ignorance and inex- 
perience. This mental and moral habit has, as the 
material on which it works, the very ignorance with 
which it is associated in origin. Later, this interesting 
stage of human development will be shown to have 
developed moral ideas which have profoundly influenced 
the progress of man. 

1 W. M. Gabb. op. dt. 504. 

CHAPTER III 

" IN the beginning, when Twashtri came to the creation 
of woman, he found that he had exhausted his materials 
in the making of man, and that no solid elements were 
left. In this dilemma, after profound meditation, he 
did as follows. He took the rotundity of the moon, 
and the curves of creepers, and the clinging of tendrils, 
and the trembling of grass, and the slenderness of the 
reed, and the bloom of flowers, and the lightness of 
leaves, and the tapering of the elephant's trunk, and the 
glances of deer, and the clustering of rows of bees, and 
the joyous gaiety of sunbeams, and the weeping of 
clouds, and the fickleness of the winds, and the timidity 
of the hare, and the vanity of the peacock, and the 
softness of the parrot's bosom, and the hardness of 
adamant, and the sweetness of honey, and the cruelty 
of the tiger, and the warm glow of fire, and the cold- 
ness of snow, and the chattering of jays, and the cooing 
of the kokila, and the hypocrisy of the crane, and the 
fidelity of the chakrawdka, and compounding all these 
together, he made woman and gave her to man. But 
after one week, man came to him and said : Lord, this 
creature that you have given me makes my life miser- 
able. She chatters incessantly and teases me beyond 
endurance, never leaving me alone ; and she requires 
incessant attention, and takes all my time up, and cries 
about nothing, and is always idle ; and so I have come 

D 

34 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

to give her back again, as I cannot live with her. So 
Twashtri said : Very well ; and he took her back. 
Then after another week, man came again to him and 
said : Lord, T find that my life is very lonely, since I 
gave you back that creature. I remember how she 
used to dance and sing to me, and look at me out of 
the corner of her eye, and play with me, and cling to 
me ; and her laughter was music, and she was beautiful 
to look at, and soft to touch ; so give her back to me 
again. So Twashtri said : Very well ; and gave her back 
again. Then after only three days, man came back to 
him again and said : Lord, I know not how it is ; but 
after all I have come to the conclusion that she is more 
of a trouble than a pleasure to me ; so please take her 
back again. But Twashtri said : Out on you ! Be off! 
I will have no more of this. You must manage how 
you can. Then man said : But I cannot live with her. 
And Twashtri replied : Neither could you live without 
her. And he turned his back on man, and went on 
with his work. Then man said : What is to be done? 
for I cannot live either with her or without her." l 

This extract from a beautiful Sanscrit story illustrates 
a conception of the relations of man and woman, which 
often recurs in literature. The same conception, due 
ultimately to that difference of sex and of sexual 
characters which renders mutual sympathy and under- 
standing more or less difficult, is characteristic of 
mankind in all periods and stages of culture. Woman 
is one of the last things to be understood by man ; 
though the complement of man and his partner in 
health and sickness, poverty and wealth, woman is 
different from man, and this difference has had the same 
religious results as have attended other things which 

1 A Digit of the Moon, trans, by F. W. Bain, 13-15. 

in SEXUAL TABOO 35 

man does not understand. The same is true of 
woman's attitude to man. In the history of the sexes 
there have been always at work the two complementary 
physical forces of attraction and repulsion ; man and 
woman may be regarded, and not fancifully, as the 
highest sphere in which this law of physics operates ; in 
love the two sexes are drawn to each other by an 
irresistible sympathy, while in other circumstances there 
is more or less of segregation, due to and enforced by 
human ideas of human relations. 

The remarkable facts which follow show the primitive 
theory and practice of this separation of the sexes. Both 
in origin and results the phenomena are those of Taboo, 
and hence I have applied to these facts the specific term 
of Sexual Taboo. At first sight this early stage of the 
relations of men and women may cause surprise, but 
when one realises the continuity of human ideas, and 
analyses one's own consciousness, one may find there in 
potentiality, if not actualised by prejudice, the same con- 
ception, though perhaps emptied of its religious content. 

In Nukahiva if a woman happens to sit upon or even 
pass near an object which has become tabu by contact 
with a man, it can never be used again, and she is put 
to death.1 In Tahiti a woman had to respect those 
places frequented by men, their weapons and fishing 
implements ; the head of a husband or father was sacred 
from the touch of woman, nor might a wife or daughter 
touch any object that had been in contact with these 
tabued heads, or step over them when their owners were 
asleep.2 In the Solomon Islands a man will never pass 
under a tree fallen across the path, because a woman 
may have stepped over it before him.3 In Siam it is 

1 D'Urville, Voyage pittoresque autcur du Monde, i. 505. 
2 C. Letourneau, Sociologie, 173. 3 H. B. Guppy, The Solomon Islands, i. 4. 

36 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

considered unlucky to pass under women's clothes hung 
out to dry.1 It is degrading to a Melanesian chief to 
go where women may be above his head ; boys also are 
forbidden to go underneath the women's bed-place.2 
Amongst the Karens of Burmah going under a house 
when there are females within is avoided ; and in 
Burmah generally it is thought an indignity to have a 
woman above the head ; to prevent which the houses 
are never built with more than one storey.3 This 
explanation of an architectural peculiarity is doubtless 
ex post facto. Amongst the people of Rajmahal, if a 
man be detected by a woman sitting on her cot and she 
complains of the impropriety, he pays her a fowl as 
fine, which she returns ; on the other hand, if a man 
detects a woman sitting on his cot, he kills the fowl 
which she produces in answer to his complaint, and 
sprinkles the blood on the cot to purify it, after which 
she is pardoned.4 In Cambodia a wife may never use 
the pillow or mattress of her husband, because " she 
would hurt his happiness thereby." 5 In Siam the wife 
has a lower pillow " to remind her of her inferiority." 6 
This reason is possibly late. Amongst the Barea man 
and wife seldom share the same bed, the reason they 
give is, that if they sleep together the breath of the 
wife will render her husband weak.7 Amongst the 
Lapps no grown woman may touch the hinder part of 
the house, which is sacred to the sun.8 No woman 

1 Bastian, op. cit. iii. 230. 

2 R. H. Codrington, The Melanesians, 233. 

3 Journal of the American Oriental Society, iv. 312 j Bastian, op. cit. ii. 150. 

4 Colebrooke in Asiatick Researches, iv. 88. 

5 E. Aymonier, Les coutumes et croyances superstitieuses des Cambodgiens, 162. The 
Cambodians also say that a used pillow should be washed at once, or taken care of, 
for sorcery is easily performed by its means against one who has used it. 

8 Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 585. 

7 W. Munzinger, Ostafrikanische Studien, 526. 8 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 435. 

in SEXUAL TABOO 37 

may enter the house of a Maori chief.1 Amongst the 
KafFas of East Africa husband and wife see each other 
only at night, never meeting during the day. She is 
secluded in the interior portion of the house, while he 
occupies the remainder. " A public resort is also set 
apart for the husband, where no woman is permitted to 
appear. A penalty of three years' imprisonment 
attaches to an infringement of this rule." 2 Observers 
have noted " the haughty contempt " shown by Zulus 
for their wives. Men and women rarely are seen 
together ; if a man and his wife are going to the same 
place, they do not walk together.3 In some Redskin 
tribes and amongst the Indians of. California a man 
never enters his wife's wigwam except under cover of 
the darkness ; and the men's club-house may never be 
entered by women.4 The Bedouin tent is divided into 
two compartments for the men and women respectively. 
No man of good reputation will enter the women's part 
of the tent or even be seen in its shadow.5 In Nukahiva 
the houses of important men are not accessible to their 
own wives, who live in separate huts.6 Amongst the 
Samoyeds and Ostyaks a wife may not tread in any part 
of the tent except her own corner ; after pitching the 
tent she must fumigate it before the men enter.7 In 
Fiji husbands are as frequently away from their wives 
as with them ; it is not, in Fijian society, thought well 
for a man to sleep regularly at home.8 Another account 

1 R. Taylor, Te ika a Maui, 165 j Tregear, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 118 j 
id. Maori Comparative Dictionary, s.v. Kahukahu ; Shortland, Maori Religion, 101 ; id. 
Southern Districts of New Zealand, 295. 

2 J. L. Krapf, Eighteen Tears in Eastern Africa, 58. 

3 Shooter, op. cit. 81, 82. 

4 Lafitau, Maeurs des sauvages Ameriquains, i. 576 j S. Powers, The Tribes of 
California, 24. 5 Featherman, op. cit. v. 357. 

6 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 504. 7 J. Georgi, Les nations Samoyedes, 15, 137. 

8 T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, i. 137. 

3 8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

states that "it is quite against Fijian ideas of delicacy 
that a man ever remains under the same roof with his 
wife or wives at night." He may not take his night's 
repose anywhere except at one of the public bures of his 
town or village. The women and girls sleep at home. 
" Rendezvous between husband and wife are arranged 
in the depths of the forest, unknown to any but the 
two." All the male population, married and unmarried, 
sleep at the bures, or club-houses, of which there are 
generally two in each village. Boys till of age have a 
special one.1 From another account we learn that 
women are not allowed to enter a bure, which is also 
used as a lounge by the chiefs.2 In New Caledonia a 
peculiarity of conjugal life is that men and women do 
not sleep under the same roof. The wife lives and 
sleeps by herself in a shed near the house. "You 
rarely see the men and women talking or sitting 
together. The women seem perfectly content with the 
companionship of their own sex. The men, who loiter 
about with spears in a most lazy fashion, are seldom 
seen in the society of the opposite sex.3 No Hindu 
female may enter the men's apartments.4 In New 
Guinea the women sleep in houses apart, near those of 
their male relatives. The men assemble for conversa- 
tion and meals in the marea, a large reception-house, 
which women may not enter.5 Amongst the Nubians 
each family has two dwelling-houses, one for the males, 
the other for the females.6 In the Sandwich Islands 
there were six houses connected with every great estab- 
lishment ; one for worship, one for the men to eat in, 

1 B. Seeman, Viti, no, 191. 

2 Wilkes, U.S. Exploring Expedition, iii. 97, 352. 

3 J. Gamier, Oceanic, 186 j J. W. Anderson, Fiji and New Caledonia, 232. 

4 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 441. 5 D'Albertis, op. cit. i. 282, 320, 390, 391. 
6 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 485. 

in SEXUAL TABOO 39 

another for the women, a dormitory, a house for kapa- 
beating, and one where at certain intervals the women 
might live in seclusion.1 In the Caroline Islands a 
chief's establishment has one house for the women, a 
second for eating, and a third for sleeping.2 In the 
Admiralty Islands there is a house reserved in each 
village for the use of women, both married and single, 
while the single men live together in a separate 
building.3 The Shastika Indians of California have a 
town-lodge for men and another for women. Other 
Californian tribes possess the first institution ; the 
women may not enter the men's lodges.4 The centre 
of Bororo life is the Baitb^ the men's house, where all 
the men really live ; the family huts are nothing more 
than a residence for the women and children. Amongst 
the Bakairi and the Schingu tribes generally, women 
may never enter the men's club-house, where the men 
spend most of their time.5 In the Solomon Islands 
women may not enter the men's tambu house, nor even 
cross the beach in front of it.6 In Ceram women are 
forbidden to enter the men's club-house.7 In New 
Britain there are two large houses in each village, one 
for men, the other for women : neither sex may enter 
the house of the other.8 In the Marquesas Islands the 
ti where the men congregate and spend most of their 
time is taboo to women, and protected by the penalty 
of death from the imaginary pollution of a woman's 
presence ; the chiefs never trouble about any domestic 
affairs.9 In the Pelew Islands there is " a remarkable 

J. J. Jarves, The Hawaiian or Sandwich Islands, 208. 

C. E. Meinicke, Die Inseln des Stillen Oceans, ii. 370. 

Journ. Anthrop. Inst. vi. 413. 4 Powers, op. cit. 244, 24. 

K. von den Steinen, Unter den Natur-Volkern Zentral-Brasiliens, 480. 

Guppy, op. cit. i. 67. 7 Riedel, op. cit. no. 

W. Powell, Wanderings in a Wild Country, 84. 

Melville, op. cit. 101, 210. 

4o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

separation of the sexes." Men and women hardly live 
together, and family life is impossible. The segrega- 
tion is political as well as social.1 In the Society 
and Sandwich Islands the female sex was isolated and 
humiliated by tabu^ and in their domestic life the women 
lived almost entirely by themselves.2 In Uripiv (New 
Hebrides) there is a curious segregation of the sexes, 
beginning, at least in one respect, soon after a boy is 
born.3 In Rapa (Tubuai Islands) all men are tabu to 
women.4 In Seoul, the capital of Corea, " they have 
a curious curfew law called pern -y a. A large bell is 
tolled at about 8 P.M. and 3 A.M. daily, and between 
these hours only are women supposed to appear in 
the streets. In the old days men found in the streets 
during the hours allotted to women were severely 
punished, but the rule has been greatly relaxed of late 
years." " Family life, as we have it, is utterly un- 
known in Corea." 5 The Ojebway, Peter Jones, thus 
writes of his own people : "I have scarcely ever seen 
anything like social intercourse between husband and 
wife, and it is remarkable that the women, say little in 
the presence of the men." 6 In Senegambia the negro 
women live by themselves, rarely with their husbands, 
and their sex is virtually a clique.7 In Bali to speak 
tete-a-tete with a woman is absolutely forbidden.8 In 
Egypt a man never converses with his wife, and in the 
tomb they are separated by a wall, though males and 
females are not usually buried in the same vault.9 

1 J. S. Kubary, Journal des Museum Godeffroy, iv. 43, 53 j id. Die socialen Einrich- 
tungen dcr Pelauer, 33, 148 j Meinicke, op. cit. ii. 380 j K. Semper, Die Palau Inseln, 
318, 319, 366. 2 W. Ellis, op. cit. i. 129 j id. Tour Through Hawaii, 369. 

8 B. T. Somerville, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 4. 4 Letourneau, op. cit. 174. 

6 H. S. Saunderson, in Journ. Anthrop. List. xxiv. 305, 306. 

6 P. Jones, History of the Ojebway Indians, 60. 

7 L. J. B. Berenger-Feraud, Les peuplades de la Se'ne'gambie, 373. 

8 Junghuhn, op. cit. ii. 340. 9 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 455. 

in SEXUAL SOLIDARITY 41 

Some cases of this complementary result, solidarity 
of sex, have been noticed, and others will occur in 
various connections. It is practically universal in all 
stages of culture, even the highest. Amongst the 
Bedouins of Libya women associate for the most part 
with their own sex only.1 In Morocco women are by 
no means reserved when by themselves, nor do they 
seek to cover their faces.2 Amongst the Gauchos of 
Uruguay women show a marked tendency to huddle 
together.3 Sexual solidarity is well brought out in 
the following. Amongst the extinct Tasmanians, if 
a wife was struck by her husband, the whole female 
population would come out and bring the " rattle of 
their tongues to bear upon the brute." 4 When ill- 
treated, the Kaffir wife can claim an asylum with her 
father, till her husband has made atonement. " Nor 
would many European husbands like to be subjected to 
the usual discipline on such occasions. The offending 
husband must go in person to ask for his wife. He is 
instantly surrounded by the women of the place, who 
cover him at once with reproaches and blows. Their 
nails and fists may be used with impunity, for it is the 
day of female vengeance, and the belaboured delinquent 
is not allowed to resist. He is not permitted to see his 
wife, but is sent home, with an intimation of what 
cattle are expected from him, which he must send before 
he can demand his wife again." 5 Amongst the Kunama 
the wife has an agent who protects her against her 
husband, and fines him for ill-treatment. She possesses 
considerable authority in the house, and is on equal 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 645. 

2 A. Leared, Morocco and the Moors, 119. 

3 D. Christison, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xi. 43. 

4 J. Bonwick, Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians, 73. 

5 Maclean, op. cit. 53. 

42 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

terms with her husband.1 Amongst the Beni-Amer 
women enjoy considerable independence. To obtain 
marital privileges, the husband has to make his wife a 
present of value. He must do the same for every 
harsh word he uses, and is often kept a whole night out 
of doors in the rain, until he pays. The women have a 
strong esprit de corps ; when a wife is ill-treated the 
other women come in to help her ; it goes without 
saying that the husband is always in the wrong. The 
women express much contempt for the men, and it is 
considered disgraceful in a woman to show love for her 
husband.2 

The first of these examples shows the length to 
which religious ideas may carry this segregation, the 
last is one of many cases in which the solidarity of sex 
is seen. This is well brought out in examples of club- 
life, and there is here a close parallel to be found, not 
merely humorous, in the institution and etiquette of the 
modern club. The same biological tendency is behind 
both the modern and the primitive institution, though 
the later one is no longer supported by religious ideas. 
Again, sexual differentiation often develops into real 
antagonism. The attempts of the Indians of California 
to keep their women in check show how the latter 
were struggling up to equality.3 An account of the 
Hottentots represents that the women, though ill- 
treated and forced to do harder work, can defend them- 
selves and avenge their wrongs.4 A Poul (Fulah) 
governs his wives by force, but they recoup themselves 
when they get the chance.5 The Indian of Brazil has 
a wholesome dread of his wives, and " follows the 

1 Munzinger, op. cit. 387. 2 Id. 324, 325. 

3 Powers, op. cit. 406. 4 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 341. 

8 Histoire universelle des voyages, xxviii. 439. 

in SEXUAL ANTAGONISM 43 

maxim of laissez faire with regard to their intrigues." J 
Amongst the Wataveita fire-making is not revealed to 
women, " because," say the men, " they would then 
become our masters." 2 The Miris will not allow their 
women to eat tiger's flesh, lest it should make them too 
strong-minded.3 The Fuegians celebrate a festival, 
Kina, in commemoration of their revolt against the 
women, " who formerly had the authority, and possessed 
the secrets of sorcery." 4 In the Dieri tribe of South 
Australia men threaten their wives, should they do any- 
thing wrong, with the " bone," the instrument of 
sorcery, which, when pointed at the victim, causes 
death ; " this produces such dread among the women, 
that mostly instead of having a salutary effect, it causes 
them to hate their husbands." 5 The Porno Indians of 
California "find it very difficult to maintain authority 
over their women." A husband often terrifies his wife 
into submission by personating an ogre ; after this she 
is usually tractable for some days.6 Amongst the Tatu 
Indians of California, the men have a secret society, 
which gives periodic dramatic performances, with the 
object of keeping the women in order. The chief 
actor, disguised as a devil, charges about among the 
assembled squaws.7 The Gualala and Patwin Indians 
have similar dances, performed by the assembled men, 
to show the women the necessity of obedience.8 In 
Africa the anxious attempts of the men to keep the 
women down have been noted.9 The adult males in 
South Guinea have a secret association, Nda, whose 
object is to keep the women, children, and slaves in 

1 Ploss u. Bartels, Das Weib, ii. 424. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xv. 10. 

3 E. T. Dalton, Ethnology of Bengal, 33. 

4 Giraud-Teulon, Les origmes du mariage et de la famille, 448. 

5 Native Tribe* of South Australia, 276. 6 Powers, op. cit. 154, 161. 

7 Id. 141. 8 Id. 193, 224. 9 Bastian, San Salvador, 182. 

44 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

order.1 The Mumbo-Jumbo of the Mandingos is well 
known. The same performer, who represents Mumbo- 
Jumbo, has also the duty of keeping the sexes apart for 
the forty days after circumcision.2 Other instances of 
associations to keep the women in subjection are the 
Egbo in Calabar, Oro in Yoruba, the Purro, Semo, and 
varieties of Egbo on the west coast, the Eundu amongst 
the Bullamers.3 Women in their turn form similar 
associations amongst themselves, in which they discuss 
their wrongs and form plans of revenge. Mpongwe 
women have an institution of this kind, which is really 
feared by the men.4 Similarly amongst the Bakalais 
and other African tribes.5 

The way in which each sex is self-centred is also 
illustrated by the natural practice that women worship 
female, and men male deities. This needs no illustra- 
tion, but a very instructive case may be quoted, which 
comes from ancient Roman life. When husband and 
wife quarrelled, they visited the shrine of the goddess 
Viriplaca on the Palatine. After opening their hearts 
in confession, they would return in harmony. This 
" appeaser of the male sex " was regarded as domestic* 
pads custos? Similarly, Bakalai women have a tutelar 
spirit, which protects them against their male enemies 
and avenges their wrongs.7 According to the Green- 
landers, the moon is a male and the sun a female spirit ; 
the former rejoices in the death of women, while the 
latter has her revenge in the death of men. All males, 
therefore, keep within doors during an eclipse of the 

1 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, 396.' 2 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 118. 

3 Bastian, op. cit. 179 ; Waitz-Gerland, op. at. ii. n8 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. vi. 121. 

4 Bastian, op. cit. 180 ; id. Der MenscA in der Geschichte, iii. 294 ; id. Loango Ku'ste, 
ii. 24 $ J. L. Wilson, op. cit. 397. 

6 P. B. Du Chaillu, Equatorial Africa, 296. 

6 Valerius Maximus, ii. 16. 7 Du Chaillu, op. cit. loc. cit. 

in SEX IN RELIGION 45 

sun, and all females during an eclipse of the moon.1 
In the Pelew Islands the kalids of men are quiet and 
gentlemanly ; it is those of women that make disturb- 
ances, and inflict disease and death on members of the 
family.2 The same hostility makes use of the system 
of sex-totems. In the Port Lincoln tribe a small kind 
of lizard, the male of which is called Ibirri^ and the 
female Waka, is said to have divided the sexes in the 
human species, " an event which would appear not to 
be much approved of by the natives, since either sex 
has a mortal hatred against the opposite sex of these 
little animals, the men always destroying the Waka and 
the women the Ibirri" 3 In the Wotjobaluk tribe it is 
believed that the " life of Ngunungunut (the bat) is the 
life of a man, and the life of Yartatgurk (the nightjar) 
is the life of a woman " ; when either is killed, a man 
or woman dies. Should one of these animals be killed, 
every man or every woman fears that he or she may be 
the victim ; and this gives rise to numerous rights. 
" In these fights, men on one side, and women on the 
other, it was not at all certain who would be victorious, 
for at times the women gave the men a severe drubbing 
with their yam-sticks, while often the women were 
injured or killed by spears." 4 In some Victorian 
tribes the bat is the man's animal, and they " protect 
it against injury, even to the half-killing of their wives 
for its sake." The goatsucker belongs to the women, 
who protect it jealously. " If a man kills one, they are 
as much enraged as if it was one of their children, and 
will strike him with their long poles." The mantis 
also belongs to the men and no woman dares kill it.5 

1 Cranz, Greenland, i. 213. 

2 J. S. Kubary in Bastian's Allerlel aus Volh- und Menschenkunde, i. 22. 

3 Native Tribes, of South Australia, 241. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 58. 
5 Dawson, Australian Aborigines, 53. 

46 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Such segregation of the sexes has influenced language. 
In Madagascar there are terms proper for a woman to 
use to her own sex, others for women to men, and for 
men to women.1 Amongst the Guaycurus the women 
have many words and phrases peculiar to themselves, 
and never employed by men ; the reason being that the 
women are " barred " by the men.2 So in Surinam.3 
The proper Fijian term for a newly circumcised boy is 
teve> which may not be uttered when women are pre- 
sent, in which case the word kula is used ; and there are 
many words in the language which it is tambu to utter 
in female society.4 In Micronesia many words are 
tabooed for men when conversing with women.5 In 
Japan female writing has quite a different syntax and 
many peculiar idioms ; the Japanese alphabet possesses 
two sets of characters, katakana for the use of men, and 
hiragana for women.6 In Fiji, again, women make their 
salutations in different words from those of the men.7 
In the language of the Abipones some words vary 
according to sex.8 The island Caribs have two distinct 
vocabularies, one used by men and by women when 
speaking to men, the other used by women when speak- 
ing to each other, and by men when repeating in oratio 
obliqua some saying of the women. Their councils of 
war are held in a secret dialect or jargon, in which the 
women are never initiated.9 It has been suggested that 
this inconvenient custom, according to which a Carib 
needs to know, like Ennius, three languages, is due to 

1 J. Sibree in Journ. Antbrop. Inst. ix. 48. 

2 Waitz-Gerland, op. at. iii. 472. 3 pioss U- BarteiSj Op, c}tt j. 1IO< 
4 Williams, op. cit. i. 167 j Anderson, op. cit. 89. 

6 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. v. 147. 

6 I. Bird, Unbeaten Tracks in Japan, i. 133 ; Siebold, Manners and Customs of the 
Japanese, i. 299. 

7 Wilkes, op. cit. iii. 326. 8 Dobrizhoffer, of. cit. ii. 197. 
9 im Thurn, of. cit. 186 ; Brett, op. cit. 131. 

in SEX IN LANGUAGE 47 

exogamy, husband and wife retaining the languages of 
their original tribes respectively. This explanation, 
however, does not account for the martial dialect, and 
has been refuted by Mr. im Thurn on other grounds.1 
Even in cases where this explanation may hold, this 
cause is not the ultimate origin of the custom, but 
merely carries on an existing practice. Thus in some 
tribes of Victoria, the marriage -system is organised 
exogamy, but the inconvenience of sexual taboos has led 
to the use of an artificial language or " turn-tongue." 2 
Similar phenomena occur in all stages of culture, and 
in modern Europe sexual separation to some extent still 
influences popular language, women and men respectively 
using certain terms peculiar to each sex. 

In connection with names, sexual taboo has developed 
a prohibition which has had a particular influence upon 
many languages. A Hindu wife is never allowed to 
mention the name of her husband. She generally 
speaks of him, therefore, as "the master" or "man of 
the house." 3 Amongst the Barea the wife may not 
utter her husband's name.4 Amongst the Kirgiz the 
women may not utter the names of the male members 
of the household, to do so being " indecent." 5 A 
Zulu woman may not call her husband by his name, 
either when addressing him or when speaking of him 
to others ; she must use the phrase u father of so-and- 
so." This particularly applies to the i-gama (real 
name). Further, the women may not use the inter- 
dicted words in their ordinary sense. Consequently 
they are obliged to alter words and phrases which con- 
tain the prohibited sounds. This has had considerable 
influence upon the language, and the women have a 

1 Loc. at. 2 Dawson, op. cit. 40. 3 Ward, The Hindoos, ii. 337. 

4 Munzinger, op. cit. 526. 5 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. i. in. 

48 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

large vocabulary of their own. Any woman transgress- 
ing the rule is accused of witchcraft by the " doctor/' 
and punished with death. This prohibition on names 
belongs to the hlonifa system, and the altered vocabu- 
lary of the women, which is unintelligible to the men, 
is called ukuteta kwabapzi, " women's language."1 In 
the Solomon Islands men show considerable reluctance 
to give the names of women, and when prevailed upon 
to do so, pronounce them in a low tone, as if it were 
not proper to speak of them to others.2 In the Pelew 
Islands men are not allowed to speak openly of married 
women, nor to mention their names.3 Amongst the 
Todas there is some delicacy in mentioning the names 
of women at all ; they prefer to use the phrase " wife 
of so-and-so."4 A Servian never speaks of his wife 
or daughter before men.5 Amongst the Nishinams of 
California a husband never calls his wife by name on 
any account ; should he do so she has the right to get a 
divorce. In this tribe no one can be induced to divulge 
his own name.6 Dr. Frazer has explained this wide- 
spread reluctance 7 ; the name is a vital part of a man, 
and often regarded as a sort of soul. Sexual taboo has 
used this idea to form a special duty as between men 
and women, especially husbands and wives. In one or 
two cases feelings of proprietary jealousy have doubt- 
less had some influence, but as a rule the religious fears 
as to sexual relations have played the chief part in the 
prohibition. 

1 Callaway, e£. cit. 316 j Shooter, op. cit. 221, 222 j Waitz-Gerland,To/>. at. ii. 388. 

2 Guppy, op. cit. i. 47. 

3 J. S. Kubary in Bastian's Allerlei aus Volh- und Memchenkunde, i. 20 ; Id. Die 
socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer, 90. 

4 Marshall, A Phrenologist amongst the Todas, 73. 

5 Maxwell in Folklore, ii. 71. « powers, op. cit. 315. 
7 J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough 2, i. 403 sq. 

in SEX IN OCCUPATIONS 49 

Evidence drawn from the respective occupations of 
the two sexes throws further light upon sexual taboo. 
Sexual differentiation in primary and secondary sexual 
characters necessitates some difference of occupation, and 
the religious ideas of primitive man have emphasised 
the biological separation. 

Amongst the Dacotas custom and superstition ordain 
that the wife must carefully keep away from all that 
belongs to her husband's sphere of action.1 The 
Bechuanas never allow women to touch their cattle, 
accordingly the men have to plough themselves.2 So 
amongst the Kaffirs, " because of some superstition." 3 
Amongst the Todas women may not approach the 
tirieri, where the sacred cattle are kept, nor the sacred 
faldls? In Guiana no women may go near the hut 
where ourali is made.5 In the Marquesas Islands the 
use of canoes is prohibited to the female sex by tabu ; 
the breaking of the rule is punished with death. Con- 
versely, amongst the same people, /#/>#-making belongs 
exclusively to women ; when they are making it for 
their own head-dresses it is tabu for men to touch it.6 
In Nicaragua all the marketing was done by women. 
A man might not enter the market or even see the 
proceedings, at the risk of a beating.7 In New Cale- 
donia it is considered infra dig. for the men to perform 
manual labour, at any rate in the neighbourhood of the 
settlement ; such work is done by women only.8 In 
Samoa, where the manufacture of cloth is allotted solely 
to the women, it is a degradation for a man to engage 
in any detail of the process.9 In the Andaman Islands 

1 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 100. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. x. II. 

8 Id. xvi. 119. 4 Marshall, op. cit. 137. 

5 im Thurn, op cit. 311. 6 Melville, op. cit. 13, 245. 

7 H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States, iii. 145. 

8 Anderson, op. cit. 231. 9 W. T. Pritchard, Polynesian Reminiscences, 131. 

E 

50 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the performance by men of duties supposed to belong 
to women only, is regarded as infra dig} An Eskimo 
thinks it an indignity to row in an umiak, the large 
boat used by women. The different offices of husband 
and wife are also very clearly distinguished ; for ex- 
ample, when he has brought his booty to land, it would 
be a stigma on his character if he so much as drew a 
seal ashore, and, generally, it is regarded as scandalous 
for a man to interfere with what is the work of women.2 
In British Guiana cooking is the province of the women ; 
on one occasion when the men were perforce compelled 
to bake, they were only persuaded to do so with the 
utmost difficulty, and were ever after pointed at as old 
women.3 Exactly the same feelings subsist in the 
highest civilisations. 

The chief occupations of the male sex in those 
stages of culture with which we have principally to deal 
are hunting and war. The supreme importance of 
these occasions has been referred to above, and is 
expressed by such terms as the Polynesian tabu. These 
terms generally imply rules and precautions intended to 
secure the safety and success of the warrior or hunter, 
which form sometimes a sort of system of " training." 
Among these regulations the most constant is that 
which prohibits every kind of intercourse with the 
female sex. Thus in New Zealand a man who has any 
important business on hand, either in peace or war, is 
tapu and must keep from women. On a war party 
men are tapu to women, and may not go near their 
wives until the fighting is over.4 In South Africa 
before and during an expedition men may have no 

1 Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 286. 

2 F. Nansen, The First Crossing of Greenland, 192 j Cranz, op. cit. i. 138, 154. 

3 im Thurn, op. cit. 256. 

4 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vi. 349 ; Tregear, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. in. 

in SEXUAL TABOO 51 

connection with women.1 Nootka Indians before war 
abstain from women.2 In South-East New Guinea for 
some days before fighting the men are " sacred," helega, 
and are not allowed to see or approach any woman.3 A 
Samoyed woman is credited with the power of spoiling 
the success of a hunt.4 Amongst the Ostyaks harm 
befalls the hunter either from the ill-wishes of an enemy 
or the vicinity of a woman.5 Amongst the Ahts whale- 
fishers must abstain from women.6 A Motu man 
before hunting or fishing is helega ; he may not see his 
wives, else he will have no success.7 North American 
Indians both before and after war refrain " on religious 
grounds " from women. " Contact with females makes 
a warrior laughable, and injures, as they believe, his 
bravery for the future." Accordingly the chiefs of the 
Iroquois, for instance, remain as a rule unmarried until 
they have retired from active warfare.8 The Damaras 
may not look upon a lying-in woman, else they will 
become weak and consequently be killed in battle.9 
In the Booandik tribe if men see women's blood they 
will not be able to fight.10 In some South American 
tribes the presence of a woman lately confined makes 
the weapons of the men weak,11 and the same belief 
extends amongst the Tschutsches to hunting and fish- 
ing implements.12 Amongst the Zulus women may 
not go near the army when about to set out. Old 
women, however, who are past child-bearing may do 
so ; for such " have become men " and " no longer 

1 Macdonald, in Journ. Antlrop. Inst. xix. 284. 

2 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 189. 

3 Chalmers, Pioneering in New Guinea, 65. 

4 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 433. 5 Erman, op. cit. ii. 55. 

6 G. M. Sproat, Scenes and Studies of Savage Life, 227. 

7 Chalmers, op. cit. 186. 8 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 158, 159. 
9 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 63. 10 J. Smith, The Booandik Tribe, 5. 

11 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 26. 12 Id., op. cit. loc. cit. 

52 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

observe the customs of hlonipa in relation to the 
men." 1 

Woman has generally been debarred more or less 
from the public life and civil rights of men. This is an 
extension of the biological difference of occupation, 
sometimes exaggerated into seclusion amongst poly- 
gamous races, and into somewhat of inferiority in 
martial and feudal societies. We may instance, to go 
no further, the Australian natives, the Fijians, who have 
religious grounds for the exclusion, the Sumatrans, the 
Hindus and Muhammadans, and most civilised nations.2 

Again, women are more often than not, excluded 
from the religious worship of the community. The 
Arabs of Mecca will not allow women religious instruc- 
tion, because " it would bring them too near their 
masters." According to some theologians of Islam, 
they have no place in Paradise.3 The Ansayrees con- 
sider woman to be an inferior being without a soul, and 
" therefore compel her to do all the drudgery and 
exclude her from religious services." 4 In the Sandwich 
Islands women were not allowed to share in worship or 
festivals, and their touch " polluted " offerings to the 
gods.5 If a Hindu woman touches an image, its 
divinity is thereby destroyed and it must be thrown 
away.6 The Australians are very jealous lest women or 
strangers should intrude upon their sacred mysteries : 
it is death for a woman to look into a bora? In Fiji 
women are kept away from all worship ; dogs are 
excluded from some temples, women from all.8 In the 

1 Callaway, op. cit. 441-43. 

2 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vi. 775, 627 ; Junghuhn, op. cit. ii. 97. 

3 Letourneau, op. cit. 180. 4 Featherman, op. cit. v. 495. 
B W. Ellis, op. cit. i. 129 j Meinicke, op. cit. ii. 300. 

6 Ward, op. cit. ii. 13. 7 Ridley, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ii. 271. 

8 Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, i. 232, 238 j Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vi. 627. 

Ill 

SEXUAL TABOO 53 

Gilbert and Marshall Islands and in Tonga, women are 
excluded from worship.1 The women of the hill tribes 
near Rajmahal may not sacrifice nor appear at shrines, 
nor take part in religious festivals.2 Amongst the 
Tschuwashes women dare not assist at sacrifices.3 
Bayeye women may not enter the place of sacrifice, 
which is the centre of tribal life.4 Amongst the Gallas 
women may not go near the sacred woda-trzz where 
worship is celebrated.5 On the east of the Gulf of 
Papua women are not allowed to approach the temple.6 
In New Ireland women may not enter the temples.7 In 
the Marquesas Islands the hoolah-hoolah ground, where 
festivals are held, is tabu to women, who are killed if 
they enter or even touch with their feet the shadow of 
the trees.8 

Festivals and feasts, dances and entertainments of 
various character, are similarly often prohibited to 
women. In the Schingu tribes of Brazil women may 
not be present at the dances and feasts.9 In New 
Britain women are not allowed to be present at the 
festivals, and when men are talking of things which 
women may not hear, the latter must leave the hut.10 
Amongst the Ahts women are never invited to the 
great feasts.11 Amongst the Aleuts the women 
have dances from which the men are excluded ; the 
men have their dances and exclude women. It is 
regarded as a fatal mischance to see on these occasions 

1 Meinicke, op. cit. ii. 338 } Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vi. 348. 

2 Asiatick Researches, iv. 51, 101. 3 M. P. S. Pallas, Voyages, i. 135. 

4 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 36. 

5 W. C. Harris, The Highlands of Ethiopia, iii. 56. 

6 Chalmers and Gill, New Guinea, 140, 150. 

7 H. H. Romilly, The Western Pacific and New Guinea, 44. 

8 Melville, op. cit. 100. 9 Von den Steinen, op. cit. 214. 

10 R. Parkinson, Im Bismarck Archipelago, 300 j Romilly, op. cit. 29. 

11 G. M. Sproat, op. cit. 60. 

54 THE MYSTIC ROSE . CHAP. 

one of the opposite sex.1 Similar exclusion of women 
from what is regarded as not being their sphere is 
indeed very widely spread, and is of course found in the 
highest civilisations. 

Where the prohibition is not needed to be carried 
out, the ideas which underlie these customs are satisfied 
by separating the sexes, as is the case still in many 
Catholic churches. Much in the same way the sexes 
never mingle together at the dances in the Hervey 
Islands.2 Amongst the Nufoers of New Guinea men 
and women are separated on the same occasions ; 3 and 
at entertainments of every kind amongst the Green- 
landers men and women sit apart.4 

In the next place we have to consider the very 
widely spread rule which insists upon the separation of 
the sexes, so far as is possible, at those functional crises 
with which sex is concerned. It is a special result of 
the ideas of sexual taboo applied to the most obvious 
sexual differences, primary sexual characters. 

During pregnancy there is sometimes avoidance 
between the wife and the husband, as in. the Caroline 
Islands, where men may not eat with their wives during 
pregnancy,5 and in Fiji where a pregnant woman may 
not wait upon her husband.6 Lenape women as soon 
as they were pregnant separated from their husbands.7 
So also amongst the Coroados, Puris, and Coropos.8 

At birth, though there are a few cases where the 
husband attends or assists his wife, the general rule 
throughout the peoples of the world is that only the 

1 W. H. Dall, Alaska and its Resources, 389 5 Bancroft, op. cit. iii. 145. 

2 W. W. Gill, Life in the Southern Isles, 65. 

8 Van Hasselt, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, viii. 186. 

4 Cranz, op. cit. i. 158. * Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vii. 106. 

6 Williams, op. cit. i. 137. 7 Featherman, of. cit. iii. 107. 

8 Spix and Martius, Travels in Brazil, 247. 

in SEXUAL CRISES 55 

female sex may be present. Thus in Buru only old 
women may be in the room.1 In South Africa the 
husband may not see his wife while she is lying-in.2 
Amongst the Basutos the father is separated from 
mother and child for four days, and may not see them 
until the medicine man has performed the religious 
ceremony of " absolution of the man and wife." If this 
were neglected, it is believed that he would die when he 
saw his wife.3 

At puberty it is a widespread rule that neither sex 
may see the other. Amongst the Narrinyeri boys 
during initiation are called narumbe, i.e. sacred from 
the touch of women, and everything that they possess 
or obtain becomes narumbe also.4 Amongst the Basutos 
no woman may come near the boys during initiation.6 
In New Ireland girls may not be seen by any males 
except relatives from puberty to marriage, during which 
time they are kept in cages.6 No man may come near 
the girls of Ceram while they are being subjected to the 
ceremonies necessary at puberty.7 

During menstruation generally, the separation of the 
sexes is most prominent, and is most widely spread. 
As examples, there are the Pueblo Indians, amongst 
whom women must separate from the men at menstrua- 
tion, and before delivery, because if a man touch a 
woman at those times he will fall ill.8 An Australian, 
finding that his wife had lain on his blanket during 
menstruation, killed her, and died of terror in a 
fortnight.9 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 24. 

2 Macdonald, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 267. 

3 Griitzner, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic for 1877, 78. 

4 Native Tribes of South Australia, 69. 

5 K. Endemann, in Zeitschrift fur Etknologie for 1874, 37. 

6 B. Danks, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 284. 7 Riedel, op. cit. 138. 
8 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 549. 9 W. Ridley, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ii. 268. 

56 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Even at marriage there is a good deal of separation 
of the sexes, and actually of the bride and bridegroom 
for as long as possible. Thus in Amboina none but 
women may enter the room where the bride sits in 
state.1 In the Watubella Islands the men stand on one 
side with the groom and the women on the other with 
the bride. The feast is in two parts ; the groom and 
the men eat their " breakfast " separately, and then the 
bride and the women fall to.2 At marriage -feasts 
amongst the Jews of Jerusalem the men sit on one side 
with the bridegroom, while the bride and the women 
occupy the opposite side of the room.3 And generally, 
at marriage, the bride is escorted by women, and the 
bridegroom by men. 

In these cases there is avoidance between the sexes at 
sexual crises, as a rule more emphasised than that 
during ordinary life. The question may be asked — is 
the latter prohibition merely an extension of the former ? 
When we penetrate to the ideas lying behind both, we 
shall find these to be identical, and of such a specific 
character and universal extension that we must suppose 
the sex-taboos imposed at sexual crises to be simply 
emphasised results of these ideas, though, as always, 
such results become through the very continuance of 
the phenomena to which they apply, further causes for 
the support of these ideas. Not to anticipate what will 
be treated of later, it may be pointed out first that 
perhaps the most widely spread and the most stringent 
of all sex-taboos has nothing to do with sexual functions 
— this is the prohibition against eating together. In the 
second place, in order rightly to estimate the whole of 
the evidence, it must be borne in mind that these sexual 

1 A. S. Bickmore, East Indian Archipelago, 276. 
3 Riedel, op. cit. 205. 3 Featherman, op. cit. v. 140. 

in ANALYSIS OF SEXUAL TABOO 57 

functions are parallel to the various occupations of the 
respective sexes : in biology and in primitive thought 
child-bearing is as much a feminine occupation as is the 
preparation of meals, and the confirmation of a boy as 
much of a male occupation as is warfare or the chase. 
Also, it is clear from a survey of the various cases of 
sexual taboo, first, that the avoidance is of the religious 
and taboo character; secondly, that men and women 
are afraid of dangerous results from each other — the 
fact that we see more of the man's side of the question 
is an instance of the way in which the male sex has 
practically monopolised the expression of thought ; and 
thirdly, that where one sex or the other is particularly 
liable to danger, as men at war, or women at child-birth, 
more care is naturally taken to prevent injury from the 
other sex. 

In the taboos against eating together, we shall see an 
expression of that almost universal preference for 
solitude, while important physiological functions are 
proceeding, due ultimately to the instinct of self- 
preservation in the form of subconscious physiological 
thought arising from those functions ; and in the 
taboos against one or the other sex in sexual crises the 
same preference is seen, commuted by sexual solidarity 
to a preference for the presence of the same sex ; and 
in all forms of the taboo it is evident that to a religious 
regard for personal security, there has been applied a 
religious diffidence concerning persons who are more or 
less unknown, different from what is normal, different 
from one's self. 

So far, then, we may take it that the complementary 
difference of sex, producing by physiological laws a 
certain difference of life no less than of function, came 
in an early stage of mental development to be accentu- 

58 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, m 

ated by religious ideas, which thus enforced more 
strongly such separation as is due to nature. The 
separation thus accentuated by religious conceptions as 
to sexual difference, is assisted by the natural solidarity 
of each sex, until there is, as we find so very generally, 
a prohibition or sex-taboo more or less regularly imposed 
throughout life. Man and woman, as such, are ignorant 
of each other, as if they were different species ; they are 
constantly tending to become, what they never can 
become, two divided castes ; every woman and every 
man are, as men and women, potentially taboo to each 
other. 

All living religious conceptions spring from more or 
less constant functional origins, physiological and psycho- 
logical. Now when we look at mankind in general, 
and in particular at civilised societies, we find that men 
as a rule prefer to associate with men, and women with 
women, except on those occasions when the functional 
needs of love, for instance, call for union and sympathy 
between the sexes. We may thus realise that the same 
biological causes, working through human ideas of 
primary and secondary sexual difference, produce this 
subconscious preference which we find in the civilised 
man, and with more primitive expression in the modern 
boy, no less than the religious segregation we find 
amongst early peoples. 

CHAPTER IV 

BEFORE passing on to the discussion of primitive ideas 
of human relations, there is the problem of the connec- 
tion of human persons with the spiritual agencies of 
taboo in its social aspect to be considered. 

Primitive science is materialistic, and the fact is 
evident in every case cited, that evil or harm — even 
when due to evil spirits — is of a material nature. Evil 
spirits in the first place are warded off by material 
methods. Thus the Khonds prevent the approach of 
Joogah Permit, the goddess of small-pox, by barricading 
the paths with thorns and ditches, and boiling caldrons 
of stinking oil.1 Amongst the Bechuanas, to arrest 
disease or prevent it from entering a village, a pointed 
stone is planted at the middle of the entrance, or a 
cross-bar smeared with " medicine." 2 

In the next place, there is a vagueness as to the 
distinction between spirits and material evil influence. 
Amongst the natives of Central Australia Arungquiltha 
is the term applied to persons or things possessed of 
magical power. For instance, " a pointing stick used 
by a medicine man is Arungquiltha ; it is applied indis- 
criminately to the magical influence itself, and to the 
object in which it is resident. It is a vague term, and 
sometimes can be best expressed by saying that a thing 

1 Macpherson, Memorial* of Service in India, 370. 
2 South African Folklore Journal, i. 34. 

60 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

is possessed by an evil spirit." l In the Luang Sermata 
Islands sickness is caused by bad food, " bad wind/' the 
influence of evil persons or evil spirits.2 Amongst the 
Indians of Costa Rica there are two kinds of ceremonial 
uncleanness, nya and bu-ku-ru. The former is con- 
nected with death, the latter, which is the more 
virulent, is most dangerous from a woman in her first 
pregnancy. She infects the whole neighbourhood, and 
all deaths are laid at her door. People going from her 
house carry the contagion with them. Arms and 
utensils transmit it, and therefore the people beat 
things with a stick before using, or sweep the house. 
A place which has not been visited for a long time, or 
one approached for the first time, is infected with 
bu-ku-ru. "It is an evil spirit, or rather a property 
acquired." 3 The personification of various evils and of 
diseases and plagues is so well known as to need no 
illustration. In the following cases there is a confusion 
between evil spirits and contagious matter, real or 
imaginary. Amongst the Dieri and neighbouring 
tribes of South Australia, no one is believed to contract 
a disease or complaint, or even to die, from natural 
causes. The disease or death is caused by some enemy, 
of their own or neighbouring tribe, and in any serious 
case the Koonkies or doctors are called in, to beat out 
the devil, Cootchie. " This is done by beating the 
ground in and out of the camp, chasing him away for 
some distance." Also, " many an innocent man has 
been condemned to death through this superstition, 
being believed to have in his possession the small bone 
of a human leg." 4 Amongst the Vedahs of Travancore, 

1 Spencer and Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia, 548. 

2 Riedel, op. cit. 327. 3 W. M. Gabb, op. cit. 504. 
4 Gason, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 170. 

iv SPIRITS MATERIAL AND CONTAGIOUS 61 

the wife at menstruation lives in a separate hut for five 
days, at a good distance from the home. The next five 
days she spends in another, half-way distant. During 
these ten days, the husband dares not eat in his house 
anything but roots, for fear of being killed by " the 
devil." J The Maoris believed that the spirits of dead 
ancestors could send a kahukahu to a man ; this would 
enter his body and feed on vital parts. In a Maori 
poem the statement occurs, " should the kahukahu 
gnaw spitefully, it will be certain death." The kahukahu 
is the personification of the germs of a human being, 
supposed to be contained in the menses, and the Maoris 
avoid contact with menstrual blood as if it were a 
poison.2 Again, in Manchuria the sedan-chair in which 
the bride goes to the home of the groom is " disin- 
fected " with incense, to drive away " evil spirits." 3 
They seem therefore to be regarded as material influ- 
ences resembling germs of a disease. The properties of 
the taboo state are in fact always material and trans- 
missible, and are removed by material methods as if 
they were a physical secretion or emanation. Thus in 
Fiji, when tabu is removed, the tabooed persons wash 
in a stream ; they then take an animal, a pig or turtle, 
on which they wipe their hands, and this animal becomes 
sacred to the chief. The tabu is now ofF, and they are 
free to work, to feed themselves, and to live with their 
wives.4 In Borneo and South Celebes evil spirits, after 
a funeral for instance, cling to one's body "like a 
burr."5 The Friar Roman Pane described a native 
sorcerer in the West Indies " pulling the disease off the 

1 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 435. 

2 Shortland, Southern Districts of New Zealand, 294-95. 

3 Lockhart, in Folklore, i. 487. 4 Wilkes, op. cit. ii. 99. 

6 M. J. F. Perelaer, Ethnographische Beschrijving der Dajaks, 44, 54, 252 j 
Matthes, op. cit. 49. 

62 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

patient's legs as one pulls off a pair of trousers." 
In the New Hebrides, ceremonial " uncleanness," for 
instance from death or child-birth, is taken off by 
sweeping a branch over the body.2 To cure a sick 
person, the Navajo priest pressed bundles of stuff to 
different parts of the body from head to foot. Each 
time after pressing them on the body, he "held them 
up to the smoke-hole, and blew on them in that direc- 
tion a quick puff, as if blowing away some evil influence 
which the bundles were supposed to draw from the 
body." They were then buried.3 

We see then that evil spirits are not always clearly 
distinguished from the transmissible properties of matter. 
The latter are no doubt often regarded logically enough 
as the emanations of the " evil spirit," the trail or 
slime of the serpent ; but the points to be stressed are, 
first, that where evil spirits are predicated of tabooed 
persons the evil can be transmitted by contagion and 
infection ; secondly, that many so-called " evil spirits " 
are not supernatural persons at all, but evil material 
properties of natural things or of human persons. 
Further, this latter notion is a factor in the process of 
anthropomorphic personification, of which more is to be 
said ; and the whole set of phenomena illustrates the 
importance of material contact as leading to transmission 
of material evil. 

In fact, the inherent materialism of human thought, 
which so hardly allows of progress to idealism, is even 
more in evidence among primitive men than it is now. 
Primitive man believes in the supernatural, but super- 
natural beings and existences are to him really material 
— the supernatural is a part of and obeys the laws of 

1 E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture3, ii. 129. 2 D. Macdonald, Oceania, 184. 

3 Washington Mathews, in Fifth Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 420. 

iv ANTHROPOMORPHISM 63 

nature. How difficult it is to conceive of immaterial 
existence, except by a negation of thought, is well 
seen in popular conceptions of the nature of the 
soul, especially those of modern spiritualism. In the 
last analysis of these conceptions, the soul is gener- 
ally found to be simply attenuated or etherealised 
matter. Similar are the conceptions of early man, 
not only of the soul, but of all supernatural beings, 
existences, and influences ; and they are well illus- 
trated by the methods used in dealing with such, 
being generally those that would be used in dealing 
with matter. 

In the next place, there are the familiar facts of 
anthropomorphism. " Man never knows how anthropo- 
morphic he is." Goethe's epigram applies most com- 
pletely to early man, for he is more anthropomorphic 
in his ideas, and is less aware of the fact. He thinks of 
everything in terms of himself, and his ideal creations 
of supernatural beings are generally in his own image, 
or in the image of animals which for him are man-like 
as possessing such close similarities of structure and 
function. The modern theory of descent would have 
been easily understood in its general outline by early 
man, who has, by the way, several conceptions which 
foreshadow it. The Digger Indians of California say 
that their ancestors derived their existence from coyotes ; 
these became Indians, but as one died the body was 
changed into a number of little creatures which were 
gradually developed into deer, elks, and antelopes ; 
others took wings and flew about in the air. Men 
originally went on all fours, and gradually progressed 
to a higher organisation. While in a state of transition, 
' they were in the habit of sitting upright, and from this 
cause, having worn off their tails, they now appear 

64 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

without this appendage.1 The Central Australians have 
the theory of man's descent from animals.2 

There is often a natural confusion between the person 
who is possessed or obsessed by spirits and the spirits 
themselves, as in the case of him whose name was 
Legion. Thus, according to the Cambodians, the Arak 
are spirits, dwelling in trees or houses. Grou are 
sorcerers, men or women, who invoke the Arak, and 
are possessed by them. During the period of posses- 
sion they are themselves called Arak, the latter being 
incarnate in them.3 The Nickol Bay natives believe in 
an evil spirit, Juno, who kills men ; when a man of the 
tribe prowls about seeking to kill other blacks, he is 
said to be a Juno for the time.4 

A -priori it would be expected that in cases where a 
dangerous condition or taboo state arises in close con- 
nection with a man's fellow -men, he should have 
inferred from his experience of all human relations that 
the danger was due to one or more of his fellows, and 
psychology bears this out. 

In the psychology of personification there are two 
processes to be observed. First, there are the pheno- 
mena of ideation, especially when visualised. The fact 
that the memory-image is formed below the threshold 
of consciousness, and suddenly emerges complete in 
outline, is one of great importance for the origin and 
development of animistic thought. As a simple illus- 
tration, let us take the case of a man who is in fear of 
another. For this, by the way, we often use the instruc- 
tive phrase "bodily fear." Such a man will chiefly 
avoid personal contact, as likely to result in personal 
injury, and all ill that happens to him he will ascribe to 

1 Featherman, op. at. iii. 215. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 392. 

3 Aymonier, of. at. 176. 4 E. M. Curr, The Australian Race, i. 298. 

IV 

IDEATION 65 

the influence of his enemy ; while in the secret depths of 
his soul, the image of his foe, impressed upon his brain, 
is lying dormant, ready at any moment to rise above the 
threshold. Whenever he closes his eyes to shut out 
the thought of his enemy, the image of him appears. 
His brain is, in a word, " obsessed " by the image of his 
foe. This memory-image, presented to complete con- 
sciousness, I believe to be a factor in the origin of 
anthropomorphic animism, of no less importance than 
its subconscious appearance in sleep. The man's own 
soul has thus acquired an image of his foe, a tiny but 
evil spirit, which appears within him, he knows not how 
nor whence. Its presence helps to explain " possession," 
and certain conceptions of personal influence and of the 
supernatural powers of man. The actual result to the 
subject, apart from actual violence at his enemy's hands, 
might be illness from fear. There are many cases on 
record where similar fear has killed a man. If the man 
did fall ill in this way, he would be perfectly justified in 
inferring his enemy to have caused the illness ; there 
are besides numerous cases where illness is attributed to 
potential, in default of knowledge of actual human foes. 
Early man knows little of bacteriology, but he has the 
great principle of contagion very strongly outlined and 
extended all round the circle of human relations. If a 
man who is sick is conscious of having made an enemy, 
he generally attributes his sickness to him ; for to his 
mind man can do everything, and everything he does 
is potentially transmissible. In cases such as drowning, 
injury from lightning, and from various natural forces 
or objects other than man, of course other agencies are 
inferred, though many such are anthropomorphic ; but 
where a man, as in social relations is generally the case, 
can ascribe his troubles to human agency, he does so. 

66 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Again, our supposed subject does not distinguish the 
real and the ideal, and from this would arise a crowd 
of ideas and precautionary measures against the ubiqui- 
tous evil image of his foe, as well as against his actual 
self. And there will be thus a constant interchange 
between his natural and supernatural dangers. Now, 
fear is the main cause of the precautions of taboo, and 
though I do not insist that ideas concerning -contact 
obtained a religious connotation before the creation of 
evil spirits, yet there is no doubt that the two sets of 
ideas are, in reference to human relations, correlative, 
and work together. Just as in artistic criticism one 
comes back in the end to the personality behind a work, 
so in human relations the beginning and the ending is 
personality and personal contact. In these relations the 
danger, which is both real and ideal, proceeds from man 
and to man returns — the link between, say, the first 
meeting with an enemy, and the second, being that 
veritable Erinys, the visualised image of him in the 
other's brain. 

1 now proceed to give actual cases from the relations 
of man with man, in which ideas of physical and spiritual 
danger combine in persons. There is a large mass of 
such facts, and we find that the attribution of human 
ills and sicknesses to human agency is more pronounced 
in the lower and less in the higher stages of culture, 
while modern science brings us back to the view of the 
lower races. 

In Ceram-laut sickness is caused through the 
influence of evil spirits or " poisoning " by evil persons, 
suwanggi. The two methods are practically inter- 
changeable, and appear throughout the islands between 
Celebes and New Guinea.1 In the Aru Islands such 

1 Riedel, op. clt. 178, 265, 304, 305, 341. 

iv HUMAN INFLUENCE 67 

persons are able to extract men's souls. They can 
make themselves invisible, or take the shape of bats, 
pigs, dogs, crocodiles, or birds.1 Amongst the Dieri, 
Auminie, Yandrawontha, Yarawuarka, and Pilladapa 
tribes of Australia, " no person dies a natural death, 
death is supposed to be caused by some evil-disposed 
person of their own or neighbouring tribe ; they 
religiously believe this superstition, it is called ' Mookoo- 
elieduckunaj (translation : Mookoo, ' bone ' ; duckuna^ 
' to strike,7 i.e. struck by a bone). Many an innocent 
man has been condemned to death through this super- 
stitious custom, believing that he had in his possession 
the small bone of a human leg." 2 Amongst the tribes 
of North- West Australia, no man can die unless he has 
been bewitched. " Some one is supposed to come at 
night and take away the fat out of the man's belly ; 
and his friends must find out who did it, to kill him." 3 
The natives in the district of Powell's Creek, in the 
northern territory of South Australia, ascribe " death or 
illness to some strange black - fellow, belonging to 
another tribe, who has doomed a certain man or woman 
to die or suffer from ill-health. It is not unusual, such 
is their superstitious belief, that a man, apparently in 
good health, will in a very short time lose condition 
and die, under the impression that he has been doomed 
by a member of some other tribe ; " 4 the people of the 
Belyando tribe believe that no strong man dies except 
as the consequence of witchcraft. " That should A 
and B, two strong blacks of the same tribe who were 
s quite friendly, go out hunting together, and A, on 
returning to the camp, be suddenly taken ill and die, 

1 Riedel, 253, 327. 2 Gason, op. clt. xxiv. 170. 

3 Bassett Smith, in Journ. Anthrof. Insf. xxiii. 327. 

4 Journ. Anthrof. Inst. xxiv. 178. 

68 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the tribe would believe that B had killed him by 
means of witchcraft, and demand his life accordingly." 
Amongst the Murray River natives, at the funeral of a 
dead person, some relative generally attempted to spear 
some one, till it was explained that the deceased did not 
die by sorcery.2 Messrs. Spencer and Gillen remark of 
the Central Australians, "the undercurrent of anxious 
feeling, which, though it may be stilled, and indeed 
forgotten for a time, is yet always present. In his 
natural state the native is often thinking that some 
enemy is attempting to harm him by means of evil 
magic, and, on the other hand, he never knows when a 
medicine-man in some distant group may not point him 
out as guilty of killing some one else by magic. It is, 
however," they add, " easy to lay too much stress upon 
this. ... It is not right to say that the Australian 
native lives in constant dread of the evil magic of an 
enemy. The feeling is always, as it were, lying dor- 
mant, and ready to be called up by any strange or 
suspicious sound."3 " All ailments of every kind, from 
the simplest to the most serious, are without exception 
attributed to the malign influence of an enemy in either 
human or spirit shape." 4 " Amongst most Congo 
tribes death is seldom regarded in the light of a natural 
event. In most cases the charm doctor accuses an old 
person, or a slave, of having been the cause. The 
accused is forthwith secured, and at an appointed time 
is submitted to a poison ordeal." 5 In Tongareva 
death is ascribed to witchcraft.6 The Kurnai believed 
that death only occurred from accident, open violence, 
or secret magic. The magical influence of enemies was 

1 Curr, op. cit. iii. 27, 28. 2 Eyre, op. clt. ii. 349, 353. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 53, 54. 4 Id. 530. 

5 H. Ward, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 287. 

' W. W. Gill, Jottings from the Pacific, 225. 

iv HUMAN INFLUENCE 69 

the ordinary cause of natural death, though sometimes 
attributed to evil spirits.1 The Abipones thought that 
no one would die if the jugglers and Spaniards were 
banished. They attributed every death to these. Man 
could only die by magic, and a sick man often suspected 
some person of making him ill, and accordingly would 
go for him.2 Amongst the Bongos old women are 
especially suspected of alliance with wicked spirits, and 
are accused if sudden death occurs.8 Amongst the 
Gonds the fear of witchcraft and the evil eye is so great, 
that " there is nothing they will not do to guard them- 
selves against these influences." 4 " So deeply rooted in 
the Indian's bosom is the belief concerning the origin of 
diseases " (from sorcery) " that they have little idea 
of sickness arising from other causes." The Indians 
of Guiana attribute all disease to sorcery. The sorcerer 
is credited with the power of causing as well as curing 
illness.5 Amongst the Yorubas witchcraft is the chief 
cause of sickness and death.6 Amongst the tribes 
of East Central Africa disease and sudden death are 
attributed to witchcraft. The notorious "smelling 
out " of the guilty person follows, and if found 
he is put to death.7 In Hawaii disease could be 
caused by the prayers of an enemy.8 The Chiquitos 
often attributed disease to the female "jugglers" or 
lady -doctors.9 The Guarani magicians could inflict 
or ward off disease and death.10 In Siam disease is 
attributed to sorcery.11 When a death occurs among 

Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 251, 258. 2 Dobrizhoffer, op. cit. ii. 84, 223, 227. 
G. Schweinfurth, The Heart of Africa, 307. 
H. B. Rowney, Wild Tribes of India, 15. 
W. H. Brett, The Indian Tribes of Guiana, 365. 

A. B. Ellis, The Toruba- speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa, 118. 
Macdonald, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 104. 

Ellis, Tour in Hawaii, 258. 9 Dobrizhoffer, op. cit. ii. 264. 

10 Id. i. 71. u Loubere, op. cit. i. 206. 

70 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the Dacotas that cannot be reasonably accounted for, it 
is supposed to have been caused by the mischievous 
action of a neighbouring clan by sorcery. Constant 
feuds are thus caused.1 When a sudden death occurs, 
the people of the New Hebrides ascribe it to sorcerers.2 
Amongst the Bannars every misfortune is attributed to 
the malice of persons who have the power of influencing 
their fate.3 Among the Maoris a belief in witchcraft 
almost universally prevailed. If a chief, or his wife or 
child fell ill, it was attributed to witchcraft. Those 
possessing the art were often hired to bewitch people.4 
In the Babar Islands evil persons make others ill by 
magic. When such are found out they are put to 
death.5 Reality and imagination sometimes coincide, 
as in East Central Africa, where " the doctor " who can 
kill by magic will administer real poison for a fee.6 
There are also interesting cases showing how zoo- 
morphism and reality correlate. In Tenimber and 
Timor-laut various illnesses are due to evilly disposed 
persons or evil spirits, taking the form of birds.7 

In the following cases, we may see the actual meeting- 
place and reconciliation of two theories as to the origin 
of the moral law, from supernatural and human sanctions. 
For these are cases where, behind the spiritual, there is 
a human agent at work. Amongst the Yorubas the 
god Egungun becomes incarnate from time to time, in 
this way : a man dressed up like the god goes about, 
and carries off people who are troublesome to their 
neighbours. " He is thus a kind of supernatural 
inquisitor, who appears from time to time to inquire 
into the conduct of people, particularly of women, and 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 290. 2 Id. ii. 77. 

3 H. Mouhot, Travels in Indo-China, ii. 28. 

4 Yate, op. cit. 95. « Riedel, op. cit. 358. 
6 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 105. 7 Riedel, op. cit. 305. 

iv INCARNATION 71 

to punish misdeeds. Although it is well known that 
Egungun is only a disguised man, yet it is popularly 
believed that to touch him, even by accident, causes 
death."1 In British Guiana blood-revenge is closely 
connected with the system of sorcery. If a man dies, 
and it is supposed that an enemy has killed him by 
means of an evil spirit, they employ a sorcerer to find 
him. A near relative is then charged with the duty of 
vengeance ; he becomes a Kanaima, i.e. he is possessed 
by the destroying spirit so called, and has to live apart, 
according to strict rules, and to submit to many priva- 
tions, till the deed of blood is done. When the man is 
killed, the murderer must pass a stick through his body, 
to taste the victim's blood. Not until this is done does 
he become an ordinary man once more, but wanders 
about, and madness comes upon him through the 
agency of the disappointed spirit. The family of the 
victim, to prevent the Kanaima getting at the body, 
sometimes manage to bury it in a secret place, or take 
out the liver and put a red-hot axe in its place. Then, 
if the Kanaima visit the corpse, the heat of the axe-head 
will pass into his body and consume him. Sometimes 
they put ourali poison on the body, for the purpose of 
destroying the Kanaima. In cases of secret enmity 
poison is used, and, in consequence of all this, the 
Indians seldom consider themselves safe. He against 
whom or whose near relative wrong has been done, 
becomes a Kanaima, and all injury which befalls an 
Indian is the workvof such. The Kanaima may assume 
any shape, often that of the jaguar (which by the way 
is the most dangerous animal the Indian knows), often 
an inanimate shape ; for instance, the peatman will 
extract from his patient a stick or stone, which is the 

1 Ellis, of. cit. 107. 

72 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

bodily form of the Kanaima causing illness.1 Very 
similar is the practice of Kurdaitcha amongst the Central 
Australians.2 

Is there any similar correlation of " spirits " and 
human beings, or spiritual and human influence, in the 
relations of the one sex with the other ? We may well 
expect that there should be, and there are facts which 
show it. 

The Porno Indians find it difficult to maintain authority 
over their women. A husband often terrifies his wife into 
submission by personating an ogre.3 Amongst the Tatu 
Indians of California the men have a secret society which 
gives periodic dramatic entertainments with the object of 
keeping the women in order. The chief actor, disguised 
as a devil, charges about among the assembled squaws.4 
The Mumbo Jumbo of the Mandingoes is a well-known 
case. The periodic impersonation is intended to frighten 
the women. The same performer who represents Mumbo 
Jumbo has also the duty of keeping the sexes apart for 
the forty days after circumcision.5 Amongst the Krumen, 
when a wife dies, the husband is believed to have caused 
her death by witchcraft.6 In Congo widows and widowers 
are charged with the same.7 In Loango, when a man is 
ill, his wife is accused of causing the illness by witchcraft, 
and must undergo the cassa ordeal.8 The Chiquitos 
used to kill the wife of a sick man, believing her to be 
the cause of his illness.9 In Luzon wives are sometimes 
bewitched by their husbands.10 In China a man's illness 
is often attributed to the spirit of a former wife.11 In 

1 Brett, op. cit. 357-60 ; im Thurn, op. cit. 368. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 47. * Powers, op. cit. 154, 161. 

4 Id. 141. » Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 118. 
6 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, 115. 7 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 120. 
8 Bastian, Lcango-Kuste, i. 46. 9 Dobrizhoffer, op. cit. ii. 264, 

10 De Tavera, in Globiu, xlvii. 314. u Doolittle, cp. cit. i. 146. 

iv SEXUAL INFLUENCE 73 

Halmahera women who die in child-bed are supposed to 
become evil spirits, oputiana, who emasculate men, and 
cause injury to pregnant women.1 This belief is found 
among the Malays.2 Among the Kei islanders if a 
woman dies in child-bed they kill the unborn babe, to 
prevent the woman becoming a Pontianak, in which case 
she would haunt her husband and emasculate him.3 It 
is easy to see how this sort of belief correlates with, if it 
does not arise from, a common phase of sexual fear. 

In the next examples there is no hint of spiritual 
influence at all, human influence alone has the deleterious 
result. The Cambodians have the following belief in 
the case of a young married pair, neither of whom have 
been married before. When the wife is enceinte for the 
first time, the husband is able to take from her the fruit 
of her womb, by magic influence over her. Accordingly, 
the parents of the bride never trust their son-in-law, and 
will not let the young couple go out of their sight. In 
Cambodia the married pair live with or near the bride's 
parents.4 When a Halmahera woman is three months 
pregnant, she uses protective charms to prevent evil men 
destroying the babe. She may not eat the remains of 
her husband's food, " because that would cause difficult 
labour." 5 In Amboina and the Aru Islands men are 
not allowed to see a woman confined, because "their 
presence would hinder the birth." 6 Conversely, at the 
feast to celebrate the birth in the Luang Sermata Islands, 
only women may be present. If men partook of even 
the slightest morsel they would be unlucky in all their 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, in Ze itschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 85. 

2 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, 434. 

3 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 239. 

4 Aymonier, op. cit. 187. 

B Riedel, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 79. 

6 Id. De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selelet en Papua, 73, 263. 

74 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

undertakings.1 Next there is an extension of the idea, 
which has had much influence upon morality in the 
theory that sickness is due to sin. The people of Luang 
Sermata believe that prolonged pains in child-birth are 
due to the woman having had forbidden intercourse.2 
In Cambodia, if a child is born with two locks of hair, 
husband and wife suspect each other of infidelity.3 In 
Wetar sickness may be caused to the injured person, 
wife, husband, or lover, by infidelity.4 If birth is 
difficult, the Samoyeds suspect the woman of adultery.5 

Lastly, this kind of magical deleterious human in- 
fluence is clearly seen in all the various phenomena of 
sexual taboo, such as those already reviewed, and others 
to be dealt with later. 

Thus in the phenomena of social taboo, human and 
spiritual agencies meet in persons. With the special 
cases described, we may compare the facts of incarnation, 
the evidence of ghost phenomena (in which the ghost 
possesses the form and characteristics of the person it 
once tenanted, in more or less exact resemblance), the 
ideas which led to the preservation of the dead body, as 
by the Egyptians, in order to save the soul, and the 
evidence of the psychology of ideation. We have 
reached the conclusion, then, that in social taboo the 
" spiritual " dangers feared come from a man's fellow- 
men, and thus of the evil " spirits " or influences which 
surround him some are simply spiritualised persons or 
their qualities ; and in sexual taboo the " spiritual " 
dangers feared come from the other sex, and the evil 
" spirits " or influences connected with sexual acts and 
functions are spiritualised persons of their own sex or 
their sexual characters materialised. The connection, of 

1 Riedel, 326. 2 Id. 325. 3 Aymonier, op. cit. 169. 

4 Riedel, op. cit. 451. 5 Qeorgi, op. cit. 14. 

iv SPIRITUALISED PERSONS 75 

course, is mostly subconscious, but the importance of 
subconscious thought can hardly be over-estimated, 
though man cannot trace back the origin of his own 
ideas into their various associations. With the great 
mass of mankind in any age, this direct connection of 
sexual danger with actual living influence of the other 
sex, has perhaps never risen into consciousness ; with 
the majority of human beings such danger is and has 
been attributed to external vague " spiritual " agencies ; 
but the patent evidence of biology upon the comple- 
mentary nature of sex, and that of psychology as to the 
development of emotional attitudes from functional 
phenomena, especially in connection with sex, prove 
conclusively that we are to find the ultimate origin of 
idea and practice relating to sex in actual sexual difference 
embodied in persons. And conversely, there is the 
romantic fact that human persons who are mysterious 
or not understood, as is the case with woman and man 
in their mutual aspect, i.e. potentially dangerous, can be 
regarded as spiritual persons, supernatural existences : 
indeed with primitive man there is often no clear distinc- 
tion drawn between those who are made lower than the 
angels and the angelic hosts themselves. These con- 
siderations assist us to see not only the correlation of 
taboo and " spiritual," or rather hylo-idealistic, danger, 
but also the religious character, whether magical or 
superstitious, of human relations in primitive thought. 

CHAPTER V 

GENERAL ideas concerning human relations are the 
medium through which sexual taboo works, and these 
must now be examined. If we compare the facts of 
social taboo generally or of its subdivision, sexual taboo, 
we find that the ultimate test of human relations, in 
both genus and species, is contact. An investigation of 
primitive ideas concerning the relations of man with 
man, when guided by this clue, will lay bare the prih- 
ciples which underlie the theory and practice of sexual 
taboo. Arising, as we have seen, from sexual differen- 
tiation, and forced into permanence by difference of 
occupation and sexual solidarity, this segregation re- 
ceives the continuous support of religious conceptions 
as to human relations. These conceptions centre upon 
contact, and ideas of contact are at the root of all 
conceptions of human relations at any stage of culture ; 
contact is the one universal test, as it is the most 
elementary form, of mutual relations. Psychology 
bears this out, and the point is psychological rather 
than ethnological. 

As I have pointed out before and shall have occasion 
to do so again, a comparative examination, assisted by 
psychology, of the emotions and ideas of average 
modern humanity, is a most valuable aid to ethno- 
logical enquiry. In this connection, we find that desire 
or willingness for physical contact is an animal emotion, 

CH.V CONTACT IN HUMAN RELATIONS 77 

more or less subconscious, which is characteristic of 
similarity, harmony, friendship, or love. Throughout 
the world, the greeting of a friend is expressed by con- 
tact, whether it be nose - rubbing, or the kiss, the 
embrace, or the clasp of hands ; so the ordinary expres- 
sion of friendship by a boy, that eternal savage, is 
contact of arm and shoulder. More interesting still, 
for our purpose, is the universal expression by contact, 
of the emotion of love. To touch his mistress is the 
ever-present desire of the lover, and in this impulse, 
even if we do not trace it back, as we may without 
being fanciful, to polar or sexual attraction inherent in 
the atoms, the <j>i\La of Empedocles, yet we may place 
the beginning and ending of love. When analysed, 
the emotion always comes back to contact. As Clough 
puts it : — 

"Well, I know, after all, it is only juxtaposition. 
Juxtaposition, in short, and what is juxtaposition ? " 
Further, mere willingness for contact is found univer- 
sally when the person to be touched is healthy, if not 
clean, or where he is of the same age or class or caste, 
and we may add, for ordinary humanity, the same sex. 

On the other hand, the avoidance of contact, whether 
consciously or subconsciously presented, is no less the 
universal characteristic of human relations, where simi- 
larity, harmony, friendship, or love is absent. This 
appears in the attitude of men to the sick, to strangers, 
distant acquaintances, enemies, and in cases of difference 
of age, position, sympathies or aims, and even of sex. 
Popular language is full of phrases which illustrate this 
feeling. 

Again, the pathology of the emotions supplies many 
curious cases, where the whole being seems concentrated 
upon the sense of touch, with abnormal desire or dis- 

7 8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

gust for contact ; and in the evolution of the emotions 
from physiological pleasure and pain, contact plays an 
important part in connection with functional satisfaction 
or dissatisfaction with the environment. 

In the next place there are the facts, first, that an 
element of thought inheres in all sensation, while sensa- 
tion conditions thought ; and secondly, that there is a 
close connection of all the senses, both in origin, each 
of them being a modification of the one primary sense 
of touch, and in subsequent development, where the 
specialised organs are still co-ordinated through tactile 
sensation, in the sensitive surface of organism. Again, 
and here we can see the genesis of ideas of contact, it is 
by means of the tactile sensibility of the skin and 
membranes of sense-organs, forming a sensitised as well 
as a protecting surface, that the nervous system conveys 
to the brain information about the external world, and 
this information is in its original aspect the response to 
impact. Primitive physics, no less than modern, recog- 
nises that contact is a modified form of a blow. These 
considerations show that contact not only plays an 
important part in the life of the soul, but must have 
had a profound influence on the development of ideas, 
and it may now be assumed that ideas of contact have 
been a universal and original constant factor in human 
relations, and that they are so still. The latter assump- 
tion is to be stressed, because we find that the ideas 
which lie beneath primitive taboo are still a vital part 
of human nature, though mostly emptied of their re- 
ligious content ; and also because, as I hold, ceremonies 
and etiquette such as still obtain, could not possess such 
vitality as they do, unless there were a living psycho- 
logical force behind them, such as we find in elementary 
ideas which come straight from functional processes. 

v CONTACT IN HUMAN RELATIONS 79 

These ideas of contact are primitive in each sense of 
the word, at whatever stage of culture they appear. 
They seem to go back in origin and in character to 
that highly developed sensibility of all animal and even 
organised life, which forms at once a biological monitor 
and a safeguard for the whole organism in relation to 
its environment. From this sensibility there arise sub- 
jective ideas concerning the safety or danger of the 
environment, and in man we may suppose these sub- 
jective ideas as to his environment, and especially as to 
his fellow-men, to be the origin of his various expressions 
of avoidance or desire for contact. 

Lastly, it is to be observed that avoidance of contact 
is the most conspicuous phenomenon attaching to cases 
of taboo when its dangerous character is prominent. 
In taboo the connotation of " not to be touched " is 
the salient point all over the world, even in cases of 
permanent taboo such as belongs to Samoan and Maori 
chiefs, with whom no one dared come in contact ; and 
so we may infer the same aversion to be potential in all 
such relations. 

In connection with the phenomena of ideation and 
with the next question, there comes in the familiar piece 
of elementary metaphysics which has played so great 
a part in religion from the days of primitive man, the 
idea of substance and accidents. The distinction is 
quite familiar to savages ; they can tell you how the 
god eats only the essence of a sacrifice, leaving behind 
the properties of colour, shape, taste, and the like for 
the priest or worshippers. In East Central Africa the 
people give an offering of flour to the ancestral spirits, 
when a person is ill. The spirits regale themselves 
with the " essence " of the flour.1 The Galelas and 

1 Macdonald, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 104. 

8o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Tobelorese of Halmahera hold that spirits eat the 
" essence " of food.1 The Hill Dyaks place choice 
morsels before their gods, who extract the " essence " 
of the food.2 Amongst the Yorubas evil spirits are 
supposed to cause illness in young children. They 
enter them and eat their food, so that they pine away. 
The spirit is supposed to eat the " spiritual " part of 
the food.3 

So with regard to man's ideas of his fellow-men. 
The visual image and similar appearances, such as a 
man's shadow, are his essence, soul or second-self, and 
the ideas a man forms of another's characteristics are 
the properties. On the other hand, the reference of 
all the characteristics of a man to him, as so many 
predicates to one subject, forms a correlative method 
by which the soul or essence of a man is thought of. 
For instance, in the New Hebrides the word for soul 
connotes the essence of a man ; 4 the Wetarese poeti- 
cally liken the soul to the smell of a flower.8 Here 
again we see the materialism of early thought ; even 
" essence " is material, and is sometimes visible. There 
is no distinction between the substantial nature of 
"soul," a man's properties, physical and spiritual, 
magical influence whether of man or spirit, the con- 
tagious properties of disease, the mystical character of 
" taboo," the wholesome or deleterious influence of men 
and evil spirits — they are all alike material and trans- 
missible. 

Now it is this material transmissibility that makes 
contact of such importance, and it is transmission of 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, in Zeitschriftfur Ethnologic, xvii. 67. 

2 H. Low, Sarawak, 251. 

3 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. in, 113. 

4 D. Macdonald, Oceania, 180. 

6 J. G. F. Riedel, De duik-en kroesharige rassen tusscAen Selebes en Pafua, 453. 

v TRANSMISSION OF PROPERTIES 81 

properties, whether of nature, man, or spirits, that lies 
behind the avoidance or desire for contact. 

Potentially always and actually often, it is true of all 
men and conditions of men and natural objects, that 
their properties can be transmitted by all possible 
material methods, and even by actio in distans. For 
practical purposes we may speak of contagion^ and in so 
far as the properties transmitted are evil, all contact is 
contagion. The wide generalisation of early man, of 
course, covered real cases of infection of disease, or 
transmission of strength, and the affirmative instances, 
as usual, helped to perpetuate the negative, though 
what Messrs. Spencer and Gillen state of the Central 
Australians, applies to all early peoples. In connection 
with the disease Erkincha and its contagion, the natives 
do not reason " from a strictly medical point of view ; 
their idea in a case of this kind is, that a man suffering 
from Erkincha conveys a magic evil influence, which 
they call Arungquiltha, to the women, and by this 
means it is conveyed as a punishment to other men." 
This Arungquiltha is a typical example of the primitive 
ideas of contact, and may preface a set of cases which 
show the meaning and application of these ideas. The 
same people say when the sun is eclipsed, that "Arung- 
quiltha has got into it," this being an "evil or malignant 
influence, sometimes regarded as personal and at other 
times as impersonal." Here the idea is applied to a 
strange, unusual phenomenon. They have also a tradi- 
tion of a thin, emaciated man ; " where he died arose a 
stone, the rubbing of which may cause emaciation in 
other people. This stone is charged with Arungquiltha, 
or evil influence." Again, there is a myth of an old 
man who plucked boils from his body, each of which 
turned into a stone. This group of stones is still to be 

G 

82 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

seen, and they are called stone-sores. Men who desire 
to harm others, hit these stones with spears ; which are 
then thrown in the direction of the victim. The spears 
carry away with them Arungquiltha from the stones, 
and this produces an eruption of painful boils in the 
victim. And similarly, any stones marking the spot 
where men died from magical influence, are themselves 
credited with magical powers.1 This principle may be 
illustrated from Maori and Red Indian science. The 
latter say that " Nature has the property to transfuse 
the qualities of food, or of objects presented to the 
senses, into men." 2 The former hold that anything 
placed in contact with a sacred object acquires the 
sacred nature of that object, and anything thus made 
sacred cannot be eaten or used for cooking.3 " Unclean- 
ness " attaches to mourners, enchanters, and murderers, 
amongst the Kaffirs. The murderer washes to remove 
the contagion of his guilt, the mourner to remove the 
contagion of death, and the enchanter washes when he 
renounces his art.4 This " uncleanness " is the con- 
tagious property of taboo and is not distinguished from 
" sacredness," whether in the case of kings, priests, 
Maori gentlemen, infants, women during pregnancy, 
child-birth, and menstruation, boys and girls at puberty, 
or other especially taboo characters. The Polynesian 
word parapara means, " first, a sacred place ; secondly, 
the first fruits of fish ; thirdly, a tree ; fourthly, defiled 
or unclean, from having touched sacred food ; cf. para, 
dross, sediments ; parapara, dirt, soilure, stain ; parare^ 
food." 5 It is noticeable that Kaffir words for " un- 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 412, 566, 441, 550, 552. 

2 J. Adair, History of the American Indians, 133. 

3 Shortland, Southern Districts of New Zealand, 292-94. 

4 H. Lichtenstein, Travels in Southern Africa, \. 257. 
6 E. Tregear, Maori Dictionary, s.v. 

TRANSMISSION OF PROPERTIES 83 

cleanness " connote " rubbing " and that which is 
"rubbed off."1 Lucian, speaking of the sacred pigs 
of Hierapolis, the touch of which rendered one " un- 
clean," says that some thought they were " unclean," 
others "sacred." In other words, they were taboo. 
When lightning strikes a Kaffir kraal or individual 
or object, the persons connected therewith are " un- 
clean." Animals struck by lightning are never eaten.3 
Amongst the Malays " not only is the king's person 
considered sacred, but the sanctity of his body is 
believed to communicate itself to his regalia, and to 
slay those who break the royal taboos." Again, " the 
theory of the king as the divine man, is held perhaps 
as strongly in the Malay region as in any other part 
of the world, a fact which is strikingly emphasised 
by the alleged right of Malay monarchs to slay at 
pleasure without being guilty of a crime." 4 So with 
the materialised dignity of chiefs and the like persons. 
No one in Samoa dared come in contact with a chief,5 
and in New Zealand such contact caused transmission 
of tapu? Again, in Melanesia, where we see ideas of 
taboo attaching to men generally, a fact which shows 
its derivation from subjective conceptions of a man's 
own importance and power, and in more primitive form, 
his egoistic caution, mana^ which combines personal 
ability, influence, strength, and luck, is the regular 
term for any result of such, and is of a supernatural 
character. Mana comes from communication with 
spirits, and from eating human flesh. All men of any 
importance have large supplies of man a. To give a 

1 Dbhne, Zulu-Kaffir Dictionary. 2 Lucian, De dea Syria, 54. 

3 Maclean, op. cit. 86, izi. 4 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, 23. 

5 Wilkes, op. cit. ii. 103. 

6 R. Taylor, Te ika a Maui, 165 ; Shortland, Southern Districts of New Zealand, 
292-94. 

84 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

boy a start in the world, a kind man will put his hand 
on the boy's head to impart the mysterious force.1 The 
transmission of " virtue" ends in the lay ing -on of 
hands, as it began in man's ideas connected with con- 
tact. The civilised man still subconsciously gains 
solace, comfort, and strength, from the contact of a 
friend, and at the other end of the chain, the same is 
true of animals. 

In the Solomon Islands, again, inland people are 
thought to have more mana than coast people. When 
they go down to the coast, they avoid spreading out 
their fingers, for to point the fingers at a man is to 
shoot him with a charm.2 In this example, we may 
note the extension of the idea that a man's qualities are 
transmitted by touch ; the outstretched hand and spread- 
ing of the fingers signify " intention," and the hand is 
the organ of touch, far excellence. The last religious 
phase of this idea is seen in the Catholic gesture of 
benediction. 

" Badi is the name given to the evil principle which, 
according to the view of Malay medicine-men, attends 
(like an evil angel) everything that has life, and inert 
objects also, for these are regarded as animate." It is 
also described as " the enchanting or destroying influence 
which issues from anything, e.g. from a tiger which one 
sees, from a poison-tree which one passes under, from 
the saliva of a mad dog, from an action which one has 
performed ; the contagious principle of morbid matter.'* 
It is applied to " all kinds of evil influences or principles 
such as may have entered into a man who has un- 
guardedly touched a dead animal or bird, from which 
the badi has not yet been expelled, or who has met the 

R. H. Codrington, in Jcurn. Anthrop. Imt. 279, 285, 303. 
2 Id. op. cit. 301. 

v TRANSMISSION OF PROPERTIES 85 

Wild Huntsman in the forest." There are one 
hundred and ninety of these " mischiefs." Mr. Skeat 
compares the English word " mischief" in the phrase 
" it has the mischief in it." Illness is ascribed by the 
Malays to accidental contact with badi. A man also 
contracts badi when another practises magic on him by 
means of a wax image.1 In Malay medicine neutralis- 
ing ceremonies are used to destroy the evil principle, 
and also expulsory ceremonies to cast it out. The 
Malays also use counter-charms to neutralise the active 
principle of poison, and this is " extended to cover all 
cases where any evil principle (even for instance a 
familiar spirit) is believed to have entered the sick 
person's system." 2 Amongst the Arunta, when a 
man is ill, " he will sometimes have a stone churinga 
belonging to his totem brought from the storehouse. 
With the flint flake of his spear-thrower, he will scrape 
off some of the edge of the churinga, mix the dust with 
water and drink it, the mixture being supposed to be 
very strengthening. The idea evidently is, that in some 
way he absorbs part of the essence of the stone, there- 
by gaining strength, as it is endowed with the attributes 
of the individual whom it represents." 3 The Iroquois 
believed that sorcerers used an impalpable, invisible 
poison that carried infection through the air and pro- 
duced death.4 The Kurnai were afraid of white men, 
and believed that their eyes possessed a supernatural 
power. One would say to another, "Don't look, or 
he will kill you ! " A white man could " flash death " 
upon a man. Death could only occur from accident, 
open violence, or secret magic. The last was met by 
counter -charms. "Every individual, though doubtful 

1 Skeat, op. cit. 427-29, 430. 2 Id. 410, 425. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 135. 4 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 43. 

86 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

of his own magic powers, has no doubt about the 
possible powers of any other person. If the individual 
himself fails, he supposes that he is not strong enough. 
Nearly every one carries a round black pebble of magic 
power. For instance, if it is buried with a man's 
excreta, that person receives the magic bulk in his 
intestines and dies. The touch of it is supposed to be 
highly injurious to any but its owner. It is believed 
that a bulk has the power of motion ; for instance a 
man once saw a bulk, in the shape of a bright spark of 
fire, cross over a house. From all this we may infer 
that some secret influence passes from the magic sub- 
stance to the victim." Further, the magic influence, 
"may, they suppose, be communicated from this to 
some other substance, as a throwing-stick, spear, or 
club. Death also occurred through a combination of 
sorcery and violence : this combination was called 
barn." It is clear from the above that subjective hate 
and malice, the influence or will of a person, is regarded 
as materalised and visible.1 

The material character of these properties is evident 
in all cases, and the last quotation gives a remarkable 
instance of magical property or human " intention " 
being visible. The common method of curing illness 
by cupping, or sucking out the " bad " blood, as used 
by the people of the Kei Islands,2 is scientific in a way, 
but not to be distinguished from other early methods. 
Some curious developments of the materialistic concep- 
tion are these. The Laplanders attributed disease to 
spiritual birds. They flew to the shaman (noid} and 
shook out of their feathers a multitude of poisonous 
insects, like lice, called magic flies, Ian. If these flies 

1 Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, 248-49, 251-52. 
2 Riedel, of. cit. 419. 

v VARIETIES OF CONTAGION 87 

fell on men or beasts, they brought sickness and other 
misfortunes. The noids carefully gathered up these 
insects, but never touched them with bare hands ; they 
kept them in boxes, using them to do injury.1 This 
is a curious coincidence with the fact that germs of 
disease are known to be carried about by flies. They 
also used a magic axe, with which they touched people, 
and a disease thus caused could only be cured by the 
noid who caused it.2 In the same way, the Encounter 
Bay tribes believed that if a person was lightly tapped 
upon the breast with the magic knobbed-stick, he would 
sicken and die. A similar magic weapon was a hatchet 
of black stone, of which the sharp end was used to 
bewitch men, and the obtuse end was only efficacious 
when women were the victims.3 Again, Australian 
sorcerers extract from their own bodies by passes and 
manipulations a magical essence called boylya, which 
they can make to enter the patient's body.4 The East 
Central Africans practice counter-irritation by making 
incisions in which ashes and roots are rubbed. This is 
called " killing the disease." 5 These ideas have pro- 
duced the " sucking cure," with which the " cupping " 
of the Kei Islanders may be compared, and the concep- 
tion, such as is found in Australia, that pain in any 
part of the body is due to the presence of some foreign 
substance. The Central Australians not only project 
into a sick man crystals to counteract the evil influence, 
but extract things from his body by sleight-of-hand. 
Avengers carry churinga like those kept as sacred 
objects, filled with souls of ancestors ; " they are supposed, 
as usual, to impart to them strength, courage, accuracy 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 149. 2 Id. Lc. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 179. 4 E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture8, ii. 146. 

5 Journ, Anthrop. Inst. xxii, 104. 

88 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

of aim, and also to render them invisible to their 
enemies, and in addition they act as charms to prevent 
their wearers being wounded." A man injured by an 
avenger, was cured by a doctor extracting from his 
body a number of pieces of a churinga, which is used 
as the magical weapon, actually thrown. The stick has 
been " sung over " and is charged with magic and evil 
influence (Arungquiltha}.1 

Again, amongst the Maoris, a slave entering a sacred 
place, wahi tapu, had to take off his clothes first, else 
they would be rendered useless.2 In this case we see 
that the sanctity of taboo is contagious, but does not 
agree with one of low rank. In Efate (one of the New 
Hebrides) the word namim means ceremonial " unclean- 
ness." One sort is of death, another of child-birth. If 
a " sacred man " comes in contact with namim , it 
destroys his own " sacredness." 3 Again, amongst the 
modern Egyptians, if any one in a state of religious 
" uncleanness " enters a room where there is a person 
afflicted with ophthalmia, the incident aggravates the 
disease.4 Many other cases of this cross -contagioi 
could be mentioned. All the various sorts are the tab< 
force, while the fact that there are different varieti< 
and that these sometimes cross, gives an opportunity 
inferring their- special origin. The Indians of Cc 
Rica, as we have noted before, know two kinds 
ceremonial " uncleanness," nya and bu-ku-ru. Dead 
and its concomitants are nya. Bu-ku-ru is the moi 
dangerous and can kill. The worst kind of bu-ku-n 
is that of a woman in her first pregnancy. She infe< 
the whole neighbourhood. People think of it as ai 

1 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. 531, 480, 486-88, 489. 

2 Shortland, op. cit. 293. 3 Macdonald, Oceania, 181. 

4 Lane, op. cit. i. 333. 

v VARIETIES OF CONTAGION 89 

evil spirit, or a property acquired. Any one going 
from her house carries the infection, and all deaths are 
laid to her charge ; her husband pays the damages. 
Bu-ku-rii is also found in new houses and places visited 
after an interval, or for the first time.1 The Zulu word 
unesisila means' "you have dirt" or " are dirty," that 
is to say, you have done or said something, or some 
one has said or done something to you, which has 
bespattered you with metaphorical filth. Mr. Leslie 
compares the Scriptural " defile," and our expression 
" his hands are not clean." If a woman has been called 
the worst possible thing, viz. omka ninazala, i.e. 
" you will bear children to your father-in-law," she 
makes a great to-do ; she goes to the hut of the 
person who used the phrase, and kills an animal, 
which is eaten by old women or little children, but by 
none of marriageable age. It takes over the insila 
which has now left the woman who was abused.2 The 
Zulus, again, use two kinds of " medicine," black and 
white. Black wipes off " the black," which causes a 
man to be disliked, white causes him to be " bright," 
and therefore liked. The black is drunk and the body 
washed with it. It is emetic, and is vomited into a 
fire, and thus the " badness" is burnt and consumed. 
Or the contents of the stomach may- be ejected on 
pathways, that others may walk over it, and take away 
the " filth" that is the cause of the offence. The 
" white " is thus used : if a man has been rejected by a 
girl, he adds to it something which she has worn next 
her skin, especially beads. Then he drinks it after 
sprinkling it on his head and over his body. Homce- 
pathy is the principle of this method.3 We can clearly 

1 Gabb ot>. cit. I.e. 2 Leslie, op. cit. 169, 174-75. 

3 Callaway, op. cit. 142-43. 

9o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

see from this case how personal properties are regarded 
as transmissible. 

In these miscellaneous examples there are combined 
many features of contact which will be developed here- 
after, and it will be noticed that these various " influ- 
ences" are essentially of the kind which underlies the 
phenomena of taboo; whether they are ceremonial 
u uncleanness," evil influence of man or spirit, or 
" sacredness," each may be the property of the taboo 
character, either in its specialised form or as belonging 
to the ordinary individual. All are simply results of 
human characteristics, properties, and states. 

Personal properties are what others suppose them to 
be, according to their estimate of the person in question ; 
or, on the other hand, they are what their possessor 
supposes them or himself to be. He believes that he 
can transmit himself or his properties to others, with 
results according to the estimate he holds of his character 
at the time, and either with or without " intention " ; 
and his fellowmen also believe that he can transmit 
himself to them, with results according to their estimate 
of him. Thus, in love-charms we find that the lover 
believes he can transmit his feelings or rather himself, 
full of love as he is, to his mistress, an idea arising 
straight from animal contact and ideas about it ; and 
in sorcery, we find that men transmit their feelings 
of envy, hatred, and malice to the person concerned. 
These ideas are justified to their holders by such 
phenomena of contact as are scientifically true. Accord- 
ingly, a man can transmit his strength, his ability, and 
his personal influence, his crimes and his degradation, 
his splendour or his shame, voluntarily or involun- 
tarily. 

As illustrating the continuity of culture we may point 

v PERSONAL CONTAGION 91 

out that similar ideas exist now, though considerably 
lightened of their crude religious materialism, which, 
however, is preserved in language. When we say that A 
and B cannot abide each other, we are at the bottom of 
such institutions as Caste, Club, Clique, and such 
emotional attitudes as prejudice and insularity. We 
avoid the company of " publicans and sinners " ; we say, 
we do not wish to be contaminated by their presence ; 
we speak of moral influence in terms which are still 
materialistic ; we talk of being poisoned by a man or by 
a book. Such constant human ideas need only to be 
accentuated by religion to produce exactly the same 
results of subjective feeling which gave rise to the 
phenomena of social taboo. 

Using the language of contagion, as more convenient, 
for primitive man does not distinguish between trans- 
mission of disease and transmission of all other states 
and properties, we find that practically every human 
quality or condition can be transferred to others. 
Where evil influence or dangerous properties are not 
differentiated, we have seen many cases of their con- 
tagion and infection. Very often the force of taboo, 
when thus vaguely conceived, has correspondingly vague 
results in transmission, such as sudden death, sickness, 
or other supernatural visitations. Similar vague results 
follow the ill-wishes of an enemy, unless he specifies the 
effect he desires, but this will, of course, be sickness or 
death as a rule. This vagueness of result is naturally 
found most in the conception of the persons who receive 
the contagion, as they do not know the " intention," to 
use the term in its liturgical sense, of the dangerous 
person. 

Degradation, as is well seen in Caste countries, is 
contagious. Thus, in ancient India, a Brahmin became 

92 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

an outcast by using the same carriage or seat or by eat- 
ing with an outcast.1 The touch of an inferior still 
contaminates a high-caste Hindoo.2 In Burma a man 
may be defiled by sitting or eating with a low-caste 
Sandala.3 The black Jews of Loango are so despised 
that no one will eat with them.4 In Travancore 
courtiers must cover the mouth with the right hand, 
lest their breath should pollute the king or other 
superior. Also at the temples, a low-caste man must 
wear a broad bandage over his nose and mouth, that 
his breath may not pollute the idols.5 In Egypt the 
Jews are regarded as so unclean by the Moslems that 
their blood would defile a sword, and therefore they are 
never beheaded.6 The name of the Rodiya caste in 
Ceylon means " filth." No recognised caste could deal 
or hold intercourse with a Rodiya. Their contact was 
shunned as " pollution," and they themselves acquiesced. 
On the approach of a traveller they would shout, to 
warn him to stop till they could get off the road, and 
allow him to pass without the risk of too close proximity 
to their persons. " The most dreadful of all punish- 
ments under the Kandyan dynasty was to hand over the 
offender, if a lady of high rank, to the Rodiyas. She 
was ' adopted ' by the latter thus : a Rodiya took betel 
from his own mouth, placed it in hers, and after this 
till death her degradation was indelible. As if to 
demonstrate that within the lowest depths of degrada- 
tion there may exist a lower still, there are two races of 
outcasts in Ceylon who are abhorred and avoided, even 
by the Rodiyas." The latter would tie up their dogs, 
to prevent them prowling in search of food to the 

1 Laws of Manu (ed. Biihler), xi. 181. 

2 Ward, op. cit. ii. 149 ; Colebrooke, in Asiatick Researches, vii. 277. 

8 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 173. 4 Bastian, Loango- Ku'ste, i. 278. 

6 S. Mateer, Native Life in Tra-vancore, 129. 6 Lane, op. cit. ii. 346. 

v CONTAGIOUS PROPERTIES 93 

dwellings of these wretches.1 Dulness can be trans- 
mitted ; thus the Red Indians will not eat animals of a 
gross quality, because such food conveys " dulness " to 
the system.2 The Indians of Equador believe that eat- 
ing " heavy " meats produces unwieldiness.3 Timidity 
can be transferred, as amongst the Dyaks, where young 
men are forbidden to eat venison, because it would make 
them timid as deer.4 The Hottentots will not eat the 
flesh of hares, because it would make them faint-hearted.5 
Stupidity, according to the people of Morocco, is the 
chief characteristic of the hyaena. A dull man is said 
to have eaten the brains of an hyaena. A woman can 
make her husband stupid by giving him hyaena meat.6 
Weakness is transmissible ; amongst the Barea man and 
wife seldom share the same bed. The reason they give 
is, " that the breath of the wife weakens her husband.'' 7 
Effeminacy is transmissible ; amongst the Omahas if a 
boy plays with girls he is dubbed "hermaphrodite" ;8 
in the Wiraijuri tribe boys are reproved for playing 
with girls — the culprit is taken aside by an old man, 
who solemnly extracts from his legs some " strands of 
the woman's apron " which have got in.9 Pain, also, 
can be transmitted or transferred. Thus the Australians 
apply a heated spear-thrower to the cheek of one who is 
suffering from toothache, and then throw it away, be- 
lieving that the toothache is transferred to it.10 In old 
Greek folklore, if one who had been stung by a scorpion 
sat on an ass, the pain was supposed to be transferred 

1 J. E. Tennent, Ceylon, 188-91. 2 Adair, op. cit. 133. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. vii. 503. 

4 Spenser St. John, Life in the Forests of the Far East, i. 186. 

5 T. Hahn, Tsuni-Goam, 106. 6 Leared, op. cit. 304. 

7 Munzinger, op. cit. 526. 

8 J. O. Dorsey, Third Report of Bureau of Ethnology, 266. 

9 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiii. 448. 10 Dawson, op. cit. 59. 

94 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

from him to the ass.1 The taboo state resulting from 
sin and crime has material properties. At the purifica- 
tion ceremony of the Cherokees, they threw their old 
clothes into the river, supposing thus their impurities to 
be removed.2 Similarly the Incas shook their clothes 
for the same purpose, and passed the hands over head 
and face, arms and legs, as if washing. It was. done to 
drive evil and maladies away.3 At the installation of a 
king in the Sandwich Islands, the priest struck him on 
the back with a sacred branch, by way of purifying him 
from all defilement and guilt he may have contracted.* 
Consequently, it is transmissible by contagion. Thus 
in East Central Africa, when a wife has been guilty of 
unchastity, her husband will die if he taste any food she 
has salted ; when preparing his food, she asks a little 
girl to put the salt in it. A guilty wife may be forgiven 
by her husband, but in this case he cannot live with the 
faithless one till a third party has been with her.5 
Amongst the Falashas a visit to an unbeliever's dwelling 
is considered a sin, and subjects the transgressor to the 
penance of submitting to a thorough ablution before he 
is permitted to enter his home.6 A Brahman embraced 
the Rajah of Travancore, undertaking to bear his sins 
and diseases.7 The idea is well brought out in the 
familiar practice of "sin-eating." It is well known 
that the highest religions have found it difficult, and in 
view of the materialism of human thought not altogether 
desirable, to rise beyond a material conception of " sin." 
The savage conceives of the results of sin, such as break- 
ing of taboo, as material, and clinging to his person, and 

1 Getpcmca, xiiL 9 j xv. i. * Frazer, op. «/.*, iiL 74. 

3 Id. I*. * Ellis, Pdjnctian Researches, iiL no. 

5 Macdonald, African*, i. 173 5 Jour*. Anthrop. Lot. xxiL no. 

• Featherman, op. cit. v. 635. » Matter, of. cit. 136. 

v SIN AND DEATH CONTAGIOUS 95 

at both ends of the chain of culture sin is washed away 
by water, and can be transmitted by "contagion" in 
early culture, by " influence " in later. 

Early man is only too well aware of the contagion 
and infection of certain sicknesses and diseases. Of 
sickness we need no instances, but of the interesting 
fact that death not only causes sickness but is in itself 
contagious, we may cite illustrations. 

Beginning with the correlation of evil spirits and 
dangerous human properties, we find that where spirits 
are thought of, the fear is that others may be attacked 
by them in the same way as the dead man. They are 
naturally supposed to hang about their quarry, and 
often the dead man is identified with the angel of death 
who killed him. In Halmahera after a death, fire is set 
round the house to keep the evil spirits from the body.1 
In Cambodia a dead body is carried away feet foremost 
that it may not see the house, in which event other 
sicknesses and other deaths would result.2 On Teressa 
Island, one of the Nicobars, the mourners shave their 
heads, and drown their grief by drinking hard. On the 
day of death they are not allowed to go to the jungle, lest 
they might be killed by the demons, and they abstain 
from the food which was most relished by the deceased 
in his lifetime.3 Amongst the Yorubas death is generally 
attributed to witchcraft. Enquiry is made whether any 
other member of the family is threatened with the like 
fate, and also whether the soul of the dead is likely to 
be further molested by the evil spirits.4 The Navajos 
ascribe death to the devil, Chinde, who remains about 
the dead man. Those who bury him, protect their 
bodies from the evil influence by smearing themselves 

1 Riedd, in Zotscknft fSr Etkadvpt, xvii. 84. * Aymonkr, s$. tit. 202. 

* Feathennan, tf. ctt. u. 247. 4 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 155. 

96 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

with tar.1 The Kamchadales abandoned the cabin in 
which a man died, because the judge of the under- 
world had been there and might cause the death of 
others. Those who buried a corpse feared being pursue 
by death, and to avoid him they took certain precautions.' 
At Batta funerals men march behind the coffin brandish- 
ing swords to drive away the begus or demons.3 Amonj 
the Clallams and Twanas there is a superstitious feai 
about going near the dead body, for fear the evil spirit 
who killed the man may kill them also.4 Here we see 
how the idea of the contagion of death is connected 
with evil spirits. Men fear that they may meet with 
the same fate as the dead man. Amongst the Koosa 
Kaffirs there is a general fear that illness or misfortune 
may fall upon others if a dying person is not removed 
from the kraal. From the same motive if they see a 
person drowning, or in danger of his life in any way, 
particularly if he should utter a scream of terror, the] 
always run away from him.5 The latter idea is world- 
wide and obtains amongst ourselves. 

Passing to transmission of the state or influence oi 
death, we find that immediately after a death has occurred 
the Karalits carry out every movable article, " that it 
may not be contaminated and rendered unclean." 6 There 
is a Swiss superstition that the dress of a child that dies 
will kill any child it is given to.7 Amongst the Talmud 
Jews "whenever a death occurs in a house, all the water 
is poured out ; for it is supposed that the Angel of 
Death defiles the water by washing off the poison drops 
that adhere to his sword." The corpse is carefully 

First Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 123. 2 Georgi, op. cit. 91, 92. 

Featherman, op. cit. ii. 330. 

First Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 176. 

Lichtenstein, op. at. i. 258. 6 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 437. 

Ploss, Das Kind, i. 240. 

v DEATH CONTAGIOUS 97 

washed ; and after the funeral the mourners wash their 
hands.1 At a death all members of a Zulu kraal eat 
" medicine " to protect them from evil influences. When 
the king's mother died he was begirt with charms " to 
keep the evil from him/' 2 "To prevent death from 
entering " the food and drink iron used to be put in 
them by the Northern Scots. Whisky has been spoiled 
by neglect of this.3 In the Babar Islands after a burial 
no one may go back to his house until he has washed 
his hands and eaten some food.4 The Northern Indians 
were " unclean " after murder ; all concerned in it could 
not cook any kind of victuals for themselves or others. 
They could not drink out of any other dish, or smoke out 
of any other pipe than their own, and none other would 
drink or smoke out of theirs. For a long time they would 
not kiss their wives or children.5 In Samoa those who 
attended upon a dead person were careful not to handle 
any food, and for days were fed by others, as if they were 
helpless infants ; while the dead body was in the house, 
no food was eaten inside, the family took their meals out 
of doors.6 Amongst the Central Eskimo, " when a child 
dies, women who carried it in their hands must throw 
their jackets away if the child has urinated on them." r 
Among the Navajos of New Mexico and Arizona the 
person who touches or carries the dead body takes off 
his clothes afterwards, and washes his body before 
mingling with the living.8 The Ilavars of Travancore 
ascribe "pollution" to the house after a death.9 The 
Greenlanders believe that if a man when whale-fishing 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 156. 2 Leslie, op. cit. 197, 252. 

3 W. Gregor, Folklore of the North-East of Scotland, 206. 

4 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 360. 

5 S. Hearne, Journey to the Northern Ocean, 204-5. 6 Turner, op. cit. 145. 

7 F. Boas, The Central Eskimo, 612. 

8 First Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 123. 9 Mateer, op. cit. 90. 

H 

98 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

wears a dirty dress, especially one that is contaminated 
by touching a corpse, the whales will retire.1 Amongst 
the Bechuanas death is believed liable to come upon all 
the cattle when a widow is mourning her husband.2 In 
the Aru Islands the humours of a decaying corpse are 
used sometimes to make a man ill, by the help of the 
soul of the dead man. During the first night after 
getting rid of the dead body, no one will sleep in the 
house for fear of being made sick by meeting the soul 
of the dead man in their dreams.3 The ceremonial " un- 
cleanness," then, so generally ascribed to the dead, is the 
property of taboo, and is based on the ideas of contact 
which underlie social taboo. 

Hence the custom of destroying the personal property 
of the dead. The Zulus burn this " because they are 
afraid to wear anything belonging to a dead man." 4 The 
Nicobarese never use any object belonging to one who 
has been murdered, unless it has been previously purified 
by the sorcerer.5 The Greenlanders throw out of the 
house everything belonging to the dead man, else they 
would be polluted and their lives unfortunate ; the 
danger remains until the smell of the corpse has passed 
away.6 Here, as in other examples, there is seen the 
obvious connection of the idea of contagion with smell. 
The practice of cremation originated in the same way. 

Another reason for this destruction of property, 
namely, to provide the dead man with utensils and 
furniture in the next world, is well known, and often 
combines with the present explanation, though probably 
it is later in origin. 

Another result is the common practice of deserting 

1 Cranz, op. cit. i. 120. 2 South African Folklore Journal, i. 34. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 267. 4 Callaway, op. cit. 13. 

5 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 250. 6 Cranz, op. cit. i. 217. 

THE SOIL A CONDUCTOR 

99 

the house, or destroying it, after sickness or death. A 
common reason for this practice in sickness is to mislead 
the evil spirits by removing the sick man to another 
house. With this may be compared the custom of 
pretending that the sick man is dead, by performing 
funeral rites over a dummy corpse. Burial places are 
notoriously of evil omen, because they are infected by 
death and by the dead. The Gorngai and Tungu are 
afraid to visit the places where the dead are buried, for 
fear the spirits may make them ill.1 The ground is 
often regarded as a good conductor of evil and disease. 
In Tenimber and Timorlaut strangers are not buried, for 
fear that sickness may thus spread over the country.2 
From this idea comes the common objection to burial 
among early peoples, no less than in modern times 
when cremation is becoming fashionable. The Masai 
do not bury people, because, as they say, the body 
would poison the soil.3 Exactly the same practice and 
belief is found in East Central Africa.4 This idea, com- 
bined with fear of ghosts, has helped to form the relatively 
late phenomena of ancestral and Chthonian hierology. It 
is also one factor in the formation of the common idea 
that the ground is dangerous. We shall not, perhaps, 
be wrong in adding the multifarious dangers in the 
shape of snakes, scorpions, and other things that creep 
upon the ground. On this hypothesis we may explain 
the rule that people in certain taboo states may not 
touch the ground, -because there is the abode of evil, 
material and spiritual. Combined with this is the 
other side of the idea, namely, that " virtue " is apt to 
be conducted into the soil by contact, as has been worked 
, out by Dr. Frazer.5 As to spirits there residing, in 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 271. 2 Id. 306. 3 Thomson, op. cit. 211, 259. 

4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 113. 6 Op. cit. iii. 2O2 sqq. 

ioo THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Ethiopia you should never throw fluid on the ground, 
lest you hurt the dignity of some unseen elf.1 The 
natives of Kola and Kobroor fear the spirit who lives in 
the ground.2 The Bedouins never throw an object to 
the ground without saying Tesdur, " Permission." 3 In 
the Punjab spirits are thought to be in the habit of 
upsetting bedsteads ; accordingly, bride and groom may 
not sleep on bedsteads for several days before and after 
marriage.4 In spiritualistic seances held by Guiana 
sorcerers, the rule is that one must not put one's feet to 
the ground, for the spirits are swarming there.5 

From the belief in the contagion and infection of 
death, combined with the belief in and fear of the 
ghosts of the dead, the origin of which I would explain 
on the lines used above in the account of personal 
agents, arises the taboo upon mourners, who are, from 
their proximity, in danger from the dead and also 
dangerous to others. I would also attribute to this 
contagion of death the rule of the ancient Romans, that 
patrimi and matrimi only, boys and girls whose parents 
respectively both live, may be acolytes in ceremonies. 

Turning to the beneficent side of the taboo state, 
where the individual is benevolent : he can transmit his 
beneficence or good qualities, and others believe that 
they can receive them from him, with the same limita- 
tions connected with " intention." Rajah Brooke was 
regarded by the Dyaks, because of what he had done 
for them, as a supernatural being. He was believed 
" to shed influence over them." Whenever he visited 
a village, the people used to bring some of the padi 
seed they were going to sow, for him to make it produc- 

1 Harris, op. cit. ii. 296. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 271. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. v. 424. 4 Panjab Notes and Queries, i. 214. 

6 im Thurn, op. cit. 335. 

v TRANSMISSION OF PROPERTIES 101 

tive ; and women bathed his feet, preserving the water 
to put on the fields and make them fertile.1 Here is 
the vague sort of beneficent influence materially trans- 
mitted. In Melanesia, mana^ which is a man's character, 
ability, influence, and power combined, in other words, 
himself and his attributes materialised, can be transferred 
to young men or others by the laying -on of hands.2 
Amongst love-charms, the transmission by the lover 
of his loving qualities, of himself impregnated with 
love, to his mistress, to inspire her with affection, is 
world-wide. Thus in European folk-custom, a lover 
applies a piece of his hair, drops of his blood or sweat, 
or water in which he has washed his hands, to the 
garments of the girl whose affection he desires.3 In 
this kind of thing we reach down to the origin of ideas 
of contact in physiological thought. Similarly, friend- 
ship and friendly feelings are transmissible, as will be 
seen in the ceremonies common at making peace or 
consolidating friendship. 

Again, world-wide customs attest the belief that 
properties such as strength, courage, swiftness, and the 
like, can be transmitted by contact with those possessing 
them, or by assimilating separable parts of such persons. 
Hence, as is at last becoming well known, the origin 
and chief meaning of cannibalism. The flesh and blood 
of a man are, by a natural fallacy, regarded as the best 
means for transmission of his properties. The flesh of 
a slain enemy is eaten and his blood drunk by the 
savage in order to acquire his strength and courage. 
The Bechuanas have a solemn ceremony of eating the 
flesh of an enemy killed, " following the ancient super- 
stition that eating human flesh inspires courage, and by 

1 Low, op. cit. 247, 259. 2 Codrington, in Journ, Anthrop. Inst., I.e. 

3 Ploss u. Bartels, of. cit. ii. 442 ff. 

102 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

degrees renders the warrior invincible. So far from 
liking it, they feel abhorrence, and yield to it only from 
superstition/' l The flesh of a slain enemy is eaten in 
Timorlaut to cure impotence.2 The New Caledonians 
eat slain enemies to acquire courage and strength.3 
Before battle the Zulus " ceremoniously eat cattle to 
get their qualities, that they may be brave."4 The 
Amaxosa drink the gall of an ox to make themselves 
fierce.5 The notorious Matuana drank the gall of 
thirty chiefs, believing it would render him strong.6 
The Pinya, or armed band of the Dieri, by whom 
offences are punished, after putting a man to death, 
wash their weapons, " and, getting all the gore and 
flesh adhering to them off, mix it with some water ; a 
little of this is given to each to swallow, and they 
believe that thereby they will be inspired with courage 
and strength. The fat of the murdered man is cut off 
and wrapped round the weapons of all the old men." 7 
The people of Halmahera drink the blood of slain 
enemies, in order to become brave.8 In Amboina 
warriors drink the blood of enemies they have killed, t< 
acquire their courage.9 The Muskogees ate the hearl 
of enemies to get courage, and their brains to get 
intellect.10 The Battas greedily drink the blood anc 
eat the flesh of prisoners of war and condemnec 
criminals.11 The people of Celebes drink the blood 
enemies to make themselves strong.12 

The idea is further generalised amongst the nativ< 

Lichtenstein, of. cit. ii. 290. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 279. 

Gamier, Nou-velle Caledonie, 347. 4 Callaway, op. cit. 438. 

Shooter, op. cit. 216. 8 Id. I.e. 7 Curr, op. cit. ii. 53. 

Riedel, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 86. 
Id. De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, $2. 
10 J. Adair, op. cit. 135. n Featherman, op. cit. ii. 335. 

12 Riedel, in Bijdragen tot de Taal Land en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indl 
xxxv. 5, i. 90. 

v TRANSMISSION OF PROPERTIES 103 

of Central Australia. " When starting on an avenging 
expedition or Atninga, every man of the party drinks 
some blood, and also has some spurted over his body, 
so as to make him what is called uchuilima, that is, lithe 
and active. The elder men indicate from whom the 
blood is to be drawn, and the men so selected must not 
decline, though the amount drawn from a single 
individual is often very great ; indeed, we have known 
of a case in which blood was taken from a young and 
strong man until he dropped down from sheer exhaus- 
tion." x In the Luritcha tribe of Central Australia 
" young children are sometimes killed and eaten, and 
it is not an infrequent custom, when a child is in weak 
health, to kill a younger and healthy one, and then to 
feed the weakling on its flesh, the idea being that this 
will give to the weak child the strength of the stronger 
one." 2 The natives of the Dieri and neighbouring 
tribes will eat a man and drink his blood in order to 
acquire his strength ; the fat is rubbed on sick people.3 
In Tasmania a man's blood was often administered as a 
healing draught.4 South Australian women will rub 
their gums till they bleed, and give the blood to be 
swallowed by their husbands, to cure sickness.5 Many 
peoples, for instance the Yorubas, believe that the 
" blood is the life." 6 The Shoshones believed that they 
became animated by the spirit of a fallen foe if they 
partook of his flesh.7 From this comes the idea that 
inspiration can be effected by drinking blood. 

Similarly the flesh and blood of animals are taken to 
acquire their characteristics. Hottentots will not eat 
the flesh of hares, for fear it might make them timid, 

1 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. 461. 2 Id. 475. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 172, 178, 179, 182. 4 Bonwick, of. cit. 89. 
6 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 178. 6 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 68, 

7 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 206, 

io4 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

but they will eat a lion's flesh and drink its blood, in 
order to get its courage and strength.1 Among the 
Motu boys eat pigs and other animals to acquire their 
strength.2 The men of Buru and the Aru Islands eat 
dogs to become bold and nimble.3 In Morocco it is 
believed that eating lion's flesh makes cowards brave. 
On the same principle ants are given to lethargic people, 
an excellent practical application of the proverb. If a 
woman meets an hyaena she becomes stupid, for the 
hyaena is the most stupid of animals ; of a dull man 
one says, " he has eaten the brains of an hyaena." A 
woman will sometimes administer such brain-sauce to 
her husband, who thus becomes stupid, and her ascen- 
dancy over him is rendered complete.4 

Every part of a man's body is regarded by primitive 
science as impregnated with his properties ; but such 
parts are especially so considered which themselves are 
held to have a special connection with the life and soul ; 
and these are chiefly important organs and centres. 
From each and any of these parts of the organism, 
transmission of properties can be effected,, with beneficent 
or maleficent results according to circumstances or the 
subjective estimate held at the time. Instructive 
examples are found in folk-medicine.5 

Various modes of transmission have appeared already. 
Others will be seen in the following examples. The 
most certain method of acquiring properties is by eating 
and drinking, but any mode of contact will suffice, 
and in such modes primitive thought includes sight, 
proximity, and similar connections ; " intention " even 
can form the link by actio in distant. We have also 

1 Hahn, op. cit. 106. 2 Chalmers, Pioneering in New Guinea, 166. 

3 Riedel, De s/uik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 10, 262. 

4 Leared, op. cit. 281, 304. 6 W. Black, Folk Medicine, passim. 

v MEANS OF TRANSMISSION 105 

seen cases of transmission by the most obvious vehicle, 
flesh and blood, and we now proceed to pass others in 
review. The people of Wetar make especial use of the 
blood and the head of slain enemies to acquire their 
properties.1 The head is naturally supposed sacred by 
most peoples, the Siamese and the Maoris, for instance ; 
if a Maori touched his head he had to put his fingers 
to his nose " and snuff up the sanctity which they had 
acquired by the touch, and thus restore it to the part 
from which it was taken." Also he could not blow the 
fire, for his breath being sacred communicated sanctity 
to the fire, and any one using it for cooking might die.2 
The Malays still regard the head as "sacred."3 A 
New Zealand chief would eat the eyes of a dead enemy 
to improve himself.4 In the island Wetar the men 
during war eat the tongue, heart, and liver of slain 
enemies, believing that in these parts the soul resides. 
They also drink their blood mixed with kalapa water.5 
In Buru they eat the hearts of dogs in order to become 
brave and swift.6 After the Italones of Luzon have 
killed an enemy, they drink his blood and eat raw the 
lungs, brain, etc., supposing that this gives them spirit 
and courage.7 The Kamilaroi ate the heart and liver 
of a brave man in order to obtain his courage.8 In 
Uganda the liver is regarded as the seat of the soul, 
and by eating liver one may improve one's powers.9 
The Shire Highlanders eat the heart of a brave man to 
acquire his courage.10 

Another mode of transmission is rubbing the stuff 
into the skin or anointing. Australians rub themselves 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 445. 2 Loubere, of. at. \. 175$ R. Taylor, Te ika a Maui, 165. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 43. 4 Taylor, op. cit. 352. 6 Riedel, op. cit. I.e. 

6 Id. 10. 7 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 501. 8 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 160. 

9 Felkin, Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, xiii. 218. 

10 J. Buchanan, The Shire' Highland, 138. 

106 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

with the fat of a slain enemy, believing that his qualities 
are thus transferred to themselves ; they rub sick persons 
also with it. Human fat is used to grease weapons, 
which thus gain additional power.1 The fat of a pig 
is melted and poured over and rubbed into the body of 
the Andamanese boy at puberty ; this " makes him 
strong." 2 We may compare such cases as that in the 
Homeric hymn, where Demeter anointed Demophoon 
with ambrosia, " breathed sweetness over him, and held 
him in her arms " and " he waxed like a god." 3 
Another method of the Andamanese is mere pressure 
of the animal on to the person's body.4 Or again, a 
powder may be made of the substance. The Yorubas 
sacrifice a slave to ensure success in war. The heart is 
made into a powder, which mingled with rum is sold 
to those who " wish to be endowed with courage." 
They drink this, believing that the " heart is the seat 
of courage, and the qualities with which it is inspired 
can be taken into the system." 5 Amongst the Northern 
Indians the genital organs of any beast killed are eaten 
by men and boys ; they must not be cut with an edge 
tool, but are torn to pieces with the teeth. They 
believe that if a dog should eat any part of them, it 
would have the same effect on their success in hunting 
that a woman crossing their hunting track at an im- 
proper period would have. The same ill-success is 
supposed to attend them if a woman eat any of those 
parts.6 Primitive thought by a natural fallacy attri- 
butes strength to these parts and their secretions, just 
as it attributes life to blood. The Central Australians 

1 Brough Smyth, op. cit. ii. 313"} Journ. Anthrop. Just. xxiv. 178 ; Eyre, of. cit. 
»• 3r5- 2 E. H. Man, The Aborigines of the Andaman Islands, 66. 

8 Hymn to Demeter, 236. * Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xii. 134. 

6 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 69. 6 Hearne, op. cit. 319. 

v VEHICLES OF TRANSMISSION 107 

administer blood from the genital organs in cases of 
severe sickness.1 The people of Mowat believe that 
the penis of great warriors slain in battle possesses 
" virtue," and it is therefore worn by the victor to 
increase his strength.2 In South Africa during a pro- 
tracted war, the soldiers are frequently " doctored " in 
order to stimulate their courage. The heart, liver, and 
testicles of the slain enemies are made into a broth, 
which is taken internally, and also used as a war-paint.3 
The Woloffs carry the prepuce, removed at circum- 
cision, as an amulet, believing that it will make them 
strong in procreation.4 

Here may be mentioned a common case of primitive 
argument from analogy, the idea, namely, that any 
object resembling a part of the body, may possess the 
virtues of such part. In this is probably to be found 
the origin of the beliefs concerning beans and vegetables 
of similar shape. Their obvious resemblance to the 
testes is perhaps the ultimate explanation of the well- 
known taboo, as enforced by the Pythagoreans. The 
frequent prohibition against the eating of snakes, eels, 
and similarly shaped animals has a similar origin. 

In Devon and Scotland, to cure whooping-cough, a 
hair from the child's head is put between slices of bread 
and butter and given to a dog. If the dog cough 
while eating it, the whooping-cough is transferred to 
the animal and the child is cured.5 In Devonshire 
you can give a neighbour ague by burying a dead 
man's hair under his threshold.6 Pliny mentions the 
use of hair to cure various sicknesses.7 The Kaffir 
charm, isiko lobulunga, consists in tying the long hair 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 4.64. 2 Journ. Anthrop, Inst. xix. 462. 

3 Id. xix. 416. 4 Revue d' Anthropologie for 1881, 292. 

5 Black, op. cit. 35. s Id. 27. 7 Pliny, Historia Naturally xxviii. 20. 

io8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

drawn from the tail of a cow round one's neck, to 
prevent any kind of evil. " Each family has certain 
cattle set apart for this purpose, and which are to a 
certain extent considered sacred." When a woman is 
married, she takes with her the ox which has been 
consecrated for her protection, and from the tail of 
which the lobulunga or long hair was taken which is 
tied round her neck.1 After circumcision a Dieri boy 
has wrapped round his waist a rope of hair taken from 
the heads of the men, women, and children.2 Amongst 
the Central Australians the use of the hair of others is 
a developed system ; every one is entitled to acquire 
hair from some one else, and the claim is arranged 
according to relationship. The intention of this use 
of hair is shown clearly by the following practice. The 
natives, when " avenging blood," " wear round the 
waist the kirra-urkna or girdle made from the hair 
which has been cut from a warrior after his death, and 
which is supposed to add to the wearer all the warlike 
virtues of the dead man."3 

Amongst many peoples bones are used for healing 
diseases and preventing danger, and for causing such. 
The idea is that human virtue permanently resides in 
them. Amongst the extinct Tasmanians the ashes of 
a burnt body, human bones attached to the parts 
affected, a child's skull hung round the neck, were 
all efficacious means to stop the progress of disease.4 
In order to be invulnerable in war, the men of Timor- 
laut wash in holy water, and use amulets. By way of 
protection in battle, they use the epistropheus of a slain 
enemy. The water in which it is placed is drunk and 

1 Maclean, op. at. 92, 93. 2 Curr, op. cit. ii. 56. 

8 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 480, 539. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 106 j J. G. Bourke, Scatalogic Rites of all Nations, 
378-79- 

v VEHICLES OF TRANSMISSION 109 

the body washed with it.1 Pliny mentions the custom 
according to which the first tooth shed by a child was 
worn as an amulet, and protected him from pain ; some- 
times this cured toothache.2 

Finger-nail clippings are used in folk-medicine to 
transmit strength. Human skin, flesh, and " mummy " 
are used for the same purpose.3 The Manicheans 
sprinkled their eucharistic bread with human semen, a 
custom followed by the Albigenses.4 Human semen, 
as medicine, is used by many peoples, as by the 
Australians, who believe it an infallible remedy for 
severe illness.5 It is so used in European folk-custom, 
where we also find it used as a love-charm,6 on the 
principle of transmission of qualities.7 Menstrual blood 
is also used in medicine and as a love-charm.8 Pliny 
states that if door-posts are touched with menstrual 
fluid, all spells of witchraft are dissolved.9 The men- 
strual fluid is used in Angola to cure bites of centipedes.10 
The Ovaherero believe that to add one's urine, even 
unintentionally, to the food of another, bewitches that 
person and does him grievous harm.11 Urine is very 
commonly used in folk-medicine.12 Amongst the ex- 
tinct Tasmanians the urine of women was thought to 
possess specific virtues.13 Amongst most Australians 
aspersion of female urine was held to be a panacea for 
nearly all ailments.14 

The Kaffirs hold it a capital crime to ease nature in 
a cattle-fold, or in a river, as it pollutes the water.15 In 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 298. 2 Pliny, op. cit. xxviii. 7, 12. 

8 Bourke, op. cit. 256, 346-47 j Pliny, op. cit. xxviii. 10. 

4 Picart, Coufumes et ceremonies religieuses, viii. 79. 

5 Beveridge, The Aborigines of Victoria and Riverina, 55 j Bourke, op. cit. I.e. 

6 U. 343, 355- 7 Id. 219. 8 Ut 354. 

9 Pliny, xxviii. 24. 10 Bourke, op. cit. 351-52. u Id. 376. 
12 Id. 300, 338 5 Eyre, op. cit. ii. 300. 13 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 106. 
14 Id. ii. 177. 15 Lichtenstein, op. cit. i. 289. 

no THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

this case we see the deleterious aspect of a taboo sub- 
stance, and the action of disgust. 

Again, the smell of a man contains his properties. 
Thus when a Central Australian black-fellow is eating, 
he must take care that certain relatives by marriage do 
not see what he is eating, lest they should spoil it by 
what is called Equilla timma, which means " projecting 
their smell into it." Should a man eat meat which 
has been killed or seen by any of these persons, the 
food would disagree with him, and he would sicken 
and suffer severely.1 

Human qualities are transmitted by the breath. 
Chiquito doctors fill themselves with dainties, chickens, 
hens, and partridges, etc., to render their health whole- 
somer and stronger, for blowing the body of patients.2 
Healing by the breath is a common idea in the East.3 
Blowing on a person is a common method of " bewitch- 
ing " him. A Maori could not blow the fire, for his 
breath being sacred, communicated his sanctity to it, 
and some one might use the fire for cooking and be 
thus injured.4 Health is transmitted by breathing 
amongst the Columbians.5 The common people of 
Timor place the hand before the mouth when they 
address the Rajah, that their profane breath may not 
pollute him.6 

Pliny notes that the Greeks used the scrapings of 
the bodies of athletes to cure rheumatism, sprains, and 
uterine troubles.7 

Folk-medicine has examples of the transference of 
disease by putting one's sweat on a dog.8 The Nubians 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 469. 2 Dobrizhoffer, op, cit. ii. 263. 

3 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 200 ; Skeat, op. cit. 430 j R. F. Burton, The Arabian 
Nights, v. 30. 4 Taylor, op. cit. 165. 

6 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 286. 6 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 465. 

7 Pliny, op. cit. xxviii. 18. 8 Bourke, op. cit. 349. 

v VEHICLES OF TRANSMISSION in 

" suppose it will give them strength to apply the sweat 
of their horses to their own bodies. After a ride they 
scrape off the sweat from their horses' backs with the 
hand, and rub it about their persons as if it were one of 
their ordinary greasy ointments. A horse is not an 
unclean animal, and cannot defile." These people have 
a practice which shows well the ideas of transmission 
of properties. Before the tongue of any animal is 
eaten, the tip is cut off; on human analogy they believe 
that "here is the seat of curses and ill-wishes/'1 

Some Queensland tribes used to flay a slain enemy 
and preserve the skin as powerful "medicine." They 
would cover their patients with it as with a blanket.2 
This case forms a link with those in which a man's 
garments contain his properties, and accordingly can 
transmit them through the bodily exhalations remaining 
therein. In early thought a man's dress is a real part 
of him, and can be used as a substitute for him. Thus 
in Tonga, when the office of high priest was vacant, his 
dress was put on his chair, and yams were offered to it. 
It was supposed to be an exact equivalent.3 The Zulus 
call in " the lightning-doctor " to avert hail-storms. If 
he is not at home, they take his blanket, and spread it 
out before the storm. It is regarded as an equivalent.4 
On the principle of transmission, the Mikado's clothes, 
if worn by any one else, would cause the wearer pain 
and produce swellings. His taboo " sanctity " was such 
that his eating and drinking vessels were destroyed after 
being used once ; any one eating from them would be 
seriously injured.5 

Transmission of properties for good or evil, and 

1 Schweinfurth, op. cit. ii. 326, 327. 2 Fison and Howitt, of. cit. 223. 

3 S. S. Farmer, Tonga and the Friendly Islands, 130. 

4 Callaway, op. cit. 278. 5 Frazer, op. cit? iii. 233. 

H2 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

assimilation of various kinds, are effected by eating food 
which a person has touched with his hands or any part 
of his body, or by eating with him or in his presence, 
or even by using the same kind of food and drink. 
This is a large subject, and will be separately discussed 
later. The connection of saliva with eating leads up to 
the next vehicle of transmission. The Masai asked 
Joseph Thomson to spit on them, believing his saliva to 
" have sovereign virtues." With these people spitting 
is a regular "expression of goodwill," and is customary 
at meetings and partings.1 A curious instance, showing 
how this method of transmission can be extended, is 
found amongst the Zulus. The Amatongo (ancestral 
spirits) cause men to be sick ; if a man dreams of one, 
the " doctor " tells him to spit out the spittle which is 
in his mouth when he dreams, and throw it behind his 
back ; should he look behind him, the dream will 
recur.2 The practice of using saliva for healing purposes 
and for love-charms is very common.3 The trans- 
mission or projection of hatred, contempt, and other 
feelings by spitting is world-wide, and leads back to an 
animal practice. To spit in a man's face is the grossest 
form of insult throughout mankind,4 and, like similar 
acts of animals, it is physically the modification of a 
blow, as is all contact itself. 

Woman's milk is often used in folk-medicine to 
transmit health and strength. Conversely, a Bondei 
infant may not drink any milk but that of relatives, for 
fear of usawi witchcraft ; 5 and the Garos abhor milk as 
" diseased matter." 6 A similar fear of human contagion 
is seen in the Kaffir custom. Milk is the chief article 

1 Thomson, op. cit. 165, 166. 2 Callaway, op. cit. 161. 

3 Bourkc, op. cit. 348. * Rjedel, op. cit. 259, 295, 406. 

6 G. Dale, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst, xxv. 183. 

6 H. B. Rowney, Wild Tribes of India, 193. 

VEHICLES OF TRANSMISSION 113 

of food for all classes among the Kaffirs. One man 
only is allowed to touch the milk-bag.1 

Again, remoter forms of connection can effect trans- 
mission. The natives of the Mary River and Bunya- 
Bunya country had a great fear of persons stepping over 
their bodies while lying down. " When camping out 
with a black boy I have unthinkingly stepped over him, 
and have known him involuntarily to cry out with fear 
and to denounce the ignorance and stupidity of white 
people." They also " had a strange dread of passing 
under a leaning tree or even under the rails of a fence. 
Their reason for this was that a female might have been 
upon the tree or fence, and that some blood from her 
might have fallen upon it, and might fall from it on 
them." Amongst other Australian tribes, a woman 
stepping over a man whilst asleep on the ground raises 
serious apprehensions.3 The Bedouins believe that a 
person stepping over another who lies prostrate on the 
ground transfers to him all the maladies to which he is 
subject, or from which he may be suffering at the time.4 
When the son of Babar was lying at the point of death, 
and the doctors could do nothing, " it was suggested 
that nothing could save him but some supreme sacrifice 
to God. Babar eagerly caught at the hope, and resolved 
at once to lay down his life for his son. He entered 
his son's chamber, and, going to the head of the bed, 
walked gravely three times round the sick man, saying 
the while : ' On me be all that thou art suffering/ 
* I have prevailed,' at last he was heard to cry, ' I have 
taken it.' " 5 In Tenimber it is a great insult to step 
over a man who is lying on the ground. As an insult 

1 Maclean, op. cit. 152. 2 Curr, op. cit. iii. 179. 

3 Id. i. 50. 4 Featherman, op. cit. v. 424. 

5 Lane Poole, Babar : the Founder of the Mughal Dynasty. 

I 

1 14 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

it is coupled with spitting in a man's face.1 In Ceram, 
when passing by a person who is sitting down, one must 
bow.2 Mere touch or proximity even is quite enough. 
The sensitive part of a Kaffir " doctor" is his shoulders. 
No one may touch him there. If a man merely stands 
behind a doctor, he sends him off with the cry, " Get 
away ! you are hurting me ; it is as if you sat upon 
me."3 

Further, in Ethiopia disease can be caused by the 
shadow of an enemy falling upon one.4 Amongst the 
Hawaiians people may not let their shadows fall upon 
the chief.5 The Malays and West Africans regard a 
man's shadow as a soul.6 

The mere act of sight can also transmit qualities. 
Thus Kolosh women during menstruation and child- 
birth live in a special hut. They are avoided by the 
men, and wear at menstruation a peculiar hat, that they 
<c may not defile heaven with a look." 7 Similarly 
amongst the Aleuts.8 When Kaffirs have killed the 
" sacred " lion, to avert " danger " they rub their eyes 
with his skin, before they look at his dead body.9 The 
natives of Borneo are afraid lest Europeans, by looking 
at them, should make them ill.10 Some Papuans com- 
plained to an explorer that they began to die "as 
soon as you looked at us." 11 Guiana Indians, before 
approaching a dangerous place, rub their eyes with 
pepper to make them fill with water, by way of not 
seeing the dreaded object.12 

I Riedel, op. cit. 295. 2 Id. 129. 

3 Callaway, op. cit. 159. 4 Harris, op. cit. ii. 158. 

5 C. de Varigny, S^uatorze An& aux lies Sandwich, 13. 

6 Skeat, op. cit. 575 j W. Reade, Savage Africa, 539. 

7 Erman, op. cit. ii. 318. 8 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 434. 

9 Arbousset and Daumas, Tour to the North-East Colony of the Cape of Good Hope, 
214. 10 Schwaner, Borneo, ii. 167. 

II D'Albertis, op. cit. 53. 12 ;m Thurn, op. cit. 369. 

VEHICLES OF TRANSMISSION 115 

Similar phenomena are connected with the sense of 
sight throughout the world. As are all the senses, so 
sight is a form of contact, both in modern physics, 
primitive belief, and still to some extent in ordinary 
civilised ideas. The " power of the human eye " is a 
case of this, and we still fear " influence " by being 
looked at or by seeing persons and things. We prevent 
a child from seeing a dead person for sentimental 
reasons — early man did so for the more practical 
purpose of avoiding contagion.1 So I would explain 
the common rule which forbids one to look back* after 
performing a dangerous thing or visiting a dangerous 
place. An interesting feature of these beliefs appears 
in the above- cited cases ; to the savage, the same result 
ensues from seeing a dangerous thing and from being 
seen by it. The sense of sight is both active and 
passive, and contact through it can be effected from 
either end. The myth of the ostrich, which is supposed 
to bury its head in the sand in the idea that it thus 
becomes invisible, is repeated in human thought, both 
the savage shuts his eyes to avoid seeing a dreaded 
ling, as an equivalent to not being seen by it, and 
rhen we shut our eyes to escape from a sight we are 
dd of, or a thought that we would expel. The 
>rld-wide belief in the " evil eye," and the fact that 
influence is most easily exerted by the look, 
lustrate these ideas. (It is especially envy that is here 
insmitted. Lane mentions the case of an Egyptian 
Fusing to buy meat from a well-patronised butcher's 
lop, because it would be poisonous to eat meat which 
hung in the street before the eyes of the public, so 
iat every beggar who passed envied it.2 
Lastly, a man's words — heard, reported, or read — can 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 361. 2 Lane, op. cit. i. 326. 

'when 

n6 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

transmit his " influence," both in our sense and in the 
primitive material sense of the word ; and here we 
have another curious illustration of the really scientific 
materialism of early men. A man's kind words trans- 
mit his kind feelings ; the civilised man and the 
uncivilised alike recognise the result in their own 
consciousness when they hear such words, but in the 
latter case material transmission has been effected. In 
the same way, a man's hatred is projected by a curse, 
and a man's general character can be transmitted, as 
will be seen hereafter, by taking his name. The name 
in savage thought is a real part of a man, or rather it 
is his " essence," the " real J> sum of his characteristics. 
But so it is to us, if we consider the matter ; the only 
difference is that to the savage the idea is " real " in the 
scholastic sense, to us it is " nominal." 

Modern Egyptians cure sickness by writing a pas- 
sage from the Koran on the inside of an earthern bowl ; 
water is poured in and stirred till the writing is worked 
off ; the patient drinks the water with the sacred words 
thus infused.1 The Malays write charms on paper or 
cloth and wear them on the person ; sometimes they 
are written on the body itself, especially on the part to 
be affected ; occasionally they are written on a cup, 
which is then used for drinking purposes.2 These 
cases serve to show what is a natural extension, trans- 
mission of properties effected from objects such as 
fetishes and charms, which are endowed by man's ideas 
with virtue and power, a conception well illustrated by 
the people of Surinam who wear iron, the " strong sub- 
stance," in order to acquire strength,3 or from things 

tl Lane, of. at. i. 328. 2 Skeat, op. cit. 567. 

s Martin, in Bijdragcn tot de Taal Land en Volkenkur.de van Nederlandsch Indiey 
xxxv. 5, i. 24. 

VEHICLES OF TRANSMISSION 

117 

rhich have a connection with gods or sacred objects, 
ich as holy water and consecrated substances. The 
Andamanese, before leaving home, get a medicine man 
to give them charms to keep off harm at the hands of 
those they are going to visit. He applies an ointment 
to their bodies and weapons. Hence they bear a 
charmed life, and their weapons are sure to kill.1 
When going to war, the Tenimberese are sprinkled 
with holy water ; they also eat snakes in order to be 
brave. As charms against danger in war, they wear 
the vertebra of a slain foe, as a necklace ; also they steep 
this in water, then drink, and wash their bodies with it.2 
Transmission of properties can thus be effected by 
any portion of the organism, or by anything that, in 
the wide view taken by the savage, belongs to the 
personality ; but, conversely, as each and all of these are 
instinct with the life and character of the possessor, it 
follows that any result produced upon any of them, is 
regarded as done to the whole man. In primitive 
thought, the individualistic conception of personality is 
so sensitive, and so materialistic, that anything which 
has once formed part of the man, or anything that has 
been in but momentary contact with him, is held to 
retain its connection, and, when acted upon, to affect 
the original owner, whose substance it still preserves. 
From this derive two widely spread ideas, which are, 
like so many early thoughts, complementary to each 
other. The first is that of the external soul, as to 
which I need but refer to Dr. Frazer's account ; 8 the 
second is the common belief that a part of one's self 
may be used as a substitute for the whole, or sacrificed 
to preserve the rest of the personality. The Fijians 

1 Journ. Anthrof. Inst. xii. 275. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 298. 

8 J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bougk\ iii. 353 ff. 

n8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

performed acts of devotion at mourning. They cut 
their hair short, burned the skin, and lopped off the 
end joints of the little toe and little finger.1 To secure 
success in an undertaking the Mandans lop off one of 
the phalanges of their fingers, and preserve it in a 
bundle of absinthium.'2' 

The idea that detachable portions of the organism 
retain the substance and life of the possessor, and, as 
such, bring upon him any injury they may receive, 
explains a common set of beliefs and practices con- 
cerned with the placenta, umbilical cord, and the " caul." 
In Amboina the placenta is hidden away in a tree.3 In 
the Babar Islands women hang it in a tree ; on their 
way they carry weapons, " because evil spirits might, if 
they got hold of the placenta, make the child ill." 
The remains of the umbilical cord are sacred in New 
Zealand, Tahiti, Fiji, and many parts of the world.5 
In Iceland the caul is supposed to contain a part of the 
child's soul. It is kept safe, therefore, and sometimes 
buried under the threshold. Whoever destroys it, 
"robs the child of its soul."6 The sacred character 
of the caul is well known in European folklore.7 A 
particular point in connection with these appurtenances 
of the new-born child is, that as they preserve the sub- 
stance of the possessor, they can give him health and 
strength in after-life. If a child is born with a caul, 
Amboinese women preserve this, and when the child is 
ill, dip it in water and give this water to the child to 
drink.8 In Ceram the remains of the umbilical cord 
are kept, and hung round the child's neck to keep off 
sickness, or are otherwise used when the child is ill.9 

1 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 205. 2 Id. op. cit. Hi. 303. 3 Riedel, op. clt. 23. 

4 Id. 355. B Ploss, Das Kind, i. 15. « Id. i. 13. 

7 Id. i. 14, » Riedel, at. cit. 74. 9 Id. 135. 

THE BROTHER AND SISTER 

In the Watubela Islands the placenta is buried under a 
tree. The remains of the umbilical cord are preserved, 
to be used as medicine for the child.1 In the islands 
Leti, Moa, and Lakor the child's navel-string is kept, 
and used by him later as an amulet in war or when 
travelling.2 It is used as an amulet by the Somalis, 
Kalmucks, Chinese, Soongars, and Alfoers of Celebes.5 
In Greenland it cures the child's sicknesses. In ancient 
Peru and modern Europe it cures the child to whom it 
is given to suck.4 Similarly with the " caul " with 
which an infant is sometimes born.5 The Central 
Australians work the navel-string into a necklace 
which the child wears round its neck. " This makes it 
grow, keeps it quiet, and averts illness." 6 The connec- 
tion, already noticed, between these appurtenances and 
the idea of the external soul, is also seen in the follow^ 
ing cases : the Fijians buried the umbilical cord with a 
cocoa-nut, the last being intended to grow up by the 
time the child reached maturity.7 It is interesting to 
compare the modern custom of planting a tree as a 
record of the birth of a child. The navel-string and 
the placenta are in South Celebes called the " brother " 
and "sister" of the child.8 

We have seen the transmission, chiefly involuntary, 
of a man's properties through contact with him or with 
any part of him, or object that has had connection with 
him, and we now come to what is a development of 
these ideas of contact, in cases where the individual 
transmits his own properties or his feelings by means of 
contact with himself or by putting detachable parts of 
himself in contact with others, by an act of will or 

1 Id. 208. 2 Id. 391. 

4 Id. 17, 1 8. 5 Id. 392. 

7 Williams, op. cit. i. 175. 

3 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 16, 17. 
6 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 46: 
8 Matthes, op. cit. 57. 

120 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

CHAP. 

" intention." To impart " virtue " or ability, the 
Melanesian who is full of it (mana) lays his hands on 
the recipient.1 The latter, of course, consciously or 
subconsciously would here perform an act of faith. So 
the lover imparts his love to his mistress by all kinds 
of methods — he sends a lock of hair, or food he has 
touched, in the hope that his personality contained 
therein will soften her heart, that is, that she may be 
assimilated to him by contact with him. 

Enemies, on the other hand, can do the same by all 
these methods, but it is not surprising that they seldom 
use them. The reason is that they would thus put 
themselves in the power of the very man they wish to 
hurt, by giving to him a part of themselves, for he may 
injure them by magic treatment of it, which his owi 
virus contained in the part might not be strong enoug] 
to overcome. The best course is then naturally foun< 
to be, either to use the mere act of will, or to get hole 
of some detachable part of the man, or anything tl 
has been in contact with him, and by working the 
" intention " on that, to do him hurt. The idea is, 
stated above, a man is not distinguished from his 
separate parts, and injury done to them is done to hi] 
The easy analogy which leads the savage to " mak< 
believe," assists him here. It will be convenient t< 
give to this widely spread method and theory the nai 
it has in Australia, where its development is v< 
complete, that of ngadhungi. Both the act of wil 
assisted sometimes by a make-believe process, and als 
the method of ngadhungi are, as will be. obvious 
developments of the ideas of contact ; and botl 
it is hardly necessary to premise, are often used foi 
benevolent purposes. The following cases show hoi 

1 Supra, 83, 84. 

1THE INTENTION 121 

e " intention ".or subjective attitude may produce the 
.rious results connected with taboo. In order to 
ward off a danger from themselves, or to send evil 
to another person, the Zulus squirt water containing 
medicine from the mouth.1 To cause a person to 
become thin and weak, the Arunta puts spittle on the 
tips of his fingers, which are then bunched together 
and jerked in the direction of the victim. This is 
called Puliliwuma or spittle-throwing.2 A string-whip 
associated with magic is carried by Central Australian 
men. " The sight of one is alone enough to cause 
the greatest fright to a woman who has offended her 
husband, while the stroke is supposed to result in 
death, or at least in maiming for life. In addition to 
this use, the ililika is sometimes unwound and cracked 
like a whip in the direction of any individual whom it 
is desired to injure, when the evil influence is supposed 
to travel through the air, and so to reach the victim." 3 
In many Amboina villages there are persons who anoint 
their eyes daily with certain ingredients, in order to 
increase their keenness of sight, and to acquire "a warm 
eye." Such are greatly feared, for they can by con- 
centration of a look make any one ill and poison 
food.4 Amongst the Nicobarese there are sorcerers, 
who possess the power not only of curing diseases 
but of afflicting people with various ailments, and can 
even cause death by a mere act of power.5 Sorcerers 
are very dangerous in Cambodia, in that they can en- 
chant people by a mere act of will.6 Hidatsa sorcerers 
can injure persons at a distance.7 In Tenimber and 
Timor-laut a common method of causing a man to be 

1 Callaway, op, cit. 435. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 552. 

3 Id. 540. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 61. 5 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 248. 

6 Aymonier, op. cit. 182. 7 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 322. 

122 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

ill is to place objects, such as thorns and sharp stones, 
on the ground where he is likely to pass. Over these 
curses have been muttered. The person walking over 
these objects will fall ill. Another method is to use 
curses, and blow in a special way under a man's house.1 
This illustrates a principle of savage " make-believe," 
viz. a fear of direct action. Amongst the Orang 
Benuas are sorcerers who have the art of tuju, which is 
the power of killing an enemy at a distance ; this is 
done by pointing a dagger or a sumpitan in his direc- 
tion.2 The Australians have a well-known method of 
injuring persons at a distance, by pointing a bone at 
them.3 Being the bone of a dead man, it has in it 
both human qualities and the contagion of death, but 
apart from these accidents, the essence of the practice 
is this ; the man first sings curses and evil wishes over 
it, e.g. " may your heart be rent asunder," and his will 
or " intention " of hatred and malice enters materially 
into the bone, and veritably " informs " it. As the 
natives explain, " any bone, stick, spear, etc., which has 
been ' sung/ is endowed with Arungquiltha, magical 
poisonous properties," but these are the man's tempor- 
ary characteristics of hate materially conceived.4 There 
are actual cases where a man who has been hit by a 
" sung " spear, or knows that a man has pointed " the 
bone " at him, has pined away and died of fear.5 For 
a very different object, that of inspiring love, the same 
method is used. Women " sing " over necklets of fur, 
which they place round the man's neck, or "sing" 
over some food which they then give him to eat.6 
They transfuse, in fact, their " intention" of love 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 304. 2 Featherman, op. cif. ii. 441. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 188. 4 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. 534, 537- 

8 Id. l.c. 6 Idm 54g. 

TAKING THE OATH 

123 

into the substance, and thus it passes to the person 
intended. 

The same conception is the essential feature of a 
common class of oaths and ordeals, which in primitive 
practice are identical. The formula of the oath passes 
materially into the thing sworn by, which, as Greek 
reminds us, was the original oath^ and as the following 
cases show, is of such a character as to do that injury 
to the perjurer which he invokes upon himself. The 
" oath " is held, or eaten or drunk, so as to ensure 
assimilation, and if perjury or treachery results, the 
wish has its effect and renders the substance of the 
" oath " deleterious. Thus in Madagascar parties 
taking an oath pray that the liquor drunk, which is 
the material " oath," may turn into poison for him 
who breaks it.1 In Ceram an oath is taken by eating 
food in which a sword has been placed.2 In Tenimber 
the oath-taker invokes death, and drinks his own blood 
in which a sword has been dipped.8 The Tunguses 
drink the blood of a dog, which is then burned, and 
the wish made is c< may I burn as this dog if I break 
my oath." 4 When the Timorese take an oath they 
drink water mixed with gunpowder and earth, saying, 
" May I die of sickness, by powder or the sword, if I 
swear falsely."5 Amongst the Malays, when swearing 
fidelity, alliance, etc., water in which daggers, spears, or 
bullets have been dipped, is drunk, the drinker saying, 
" If I turn traitor, may I be eaten up by this dagger or 
spear."' A Balinese when giving evidence takes in 
his hand a basin of water, and pronounces these words, 
" May I perish with my whole generation if what I say 
is not true," and in confirmation of this sacramental 

1 D'Urville, op. clt. 181. a Riedel, op. cit. 129. 8 Id. 284. 

4 Georgi, op. cit. 48. 6 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 466. 6 Skeat, op. cit. 528. 

i24 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

declaration he drinks the water.1 The terms of a 
Sumatran oath are, " If what I now declare is truly and 
really so, may I be freed and cleared from my oath ; 
if what I assert is wittingly false, may my oath be the 
cause of my destruction." 2 The same material trans- 
mission of " intention " is the motive power behind the 
practice of setting /#£#-marks on property. The in- 
dignation of the injured party informs the notice, just 
as the power of the law is behind the name on a 
modern warning to trespassers. For the security of 
property in the Luang -Sermata Islands, they place 
marks thereon to warn people from trespassing. Any 
person found trespassing, becomes ill or dies. They 
are of various kinds : a notice made of hen-feathers 
causes pains in the thief's back ; one sort causes him 
to be struck by lightning, another to be eaten by 
sharks.3 Similarly, sickness follows trespassers on 
property thus protected in the island Makiser.4 

The method of n?adhun?i is well known. On the 

o o 

principle stated above, a man can work injury or any 
result according to his " intention " on another, by 
treating parts of him in various ways. It will be 
remembered that a man's food is especially connected 
with him, from the mere fact of the important results 
of food to the organism, and it will be noticed that 
such detachable portions of personality as food, hair, 
nail-parings, clothes, and the like, are peculiarly easy to 
get hold of. Amongst the aborigines of Queensland 
any food left over from the meal is always burnt, to 
prevent the possibility of sorcerers getting hold of it 
and injuring them by means of the food.5 The western 
tribes of Victoria " believe that if an enemy gets 

1 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 408. 2 W. Marsden, Sumatra, 238. 

a Riedel, op. cit. 317. 4 Id. 414. 5 C. Lumholtz, Among Cannibah, 298. 

NGADHUNGI 125 

>session of anything that has belonged to them, even 
such things as bones of animals which they have eaten, 
broken weapons, feathers, portions of dress, pieces of 
skin, or refuse of any kind, he can employ it as a charm 
to produce illness in the person to whom they belonged. 
They are, therefore, very careful to burn up all rubbish 
or uncleanness before leaving a camping-place. Should 
anything belonging to an unfriendly tribe be found at 
any time, it is given to the chief, who preserves it as a 
means of injuring the enemy. This wuulon is lent to 
any one of the tribe who wishes to vent his spite against 
any one belonging to the unfriendly tribe. When used 
as a charm, the wuulon is rubbed over with emu fat 
mixed with red clay, and tied to the point of a spear- 
thrower, which is stuck upright in the ground before 
the camp-fire. The company sit round watching it, 
but at such a distance that their shadows cannot fall 
on it. They keep chanting imprecations on the enemy 
till the spear-thrower turns round and falls in his 
direction."1 "The whole community of the Narrinyeri 
is influenced by disease -makers. Their method is 
called ngadhungi) and is practised in the following 
manner. Every adult black-fellow is constantly on the 
look-out for bones of ducks, swans, or other birds, or 
fish, the flesh of which has been eaten by anybody. 
When a man has obtained a bone, he supposes that he 
possesses the power of life and death over the man, 
woman, or child who ate its flesh. Should circumstances 
arise calculated to excite the resentment of the disease- 
maker towards the person who ate the flesh of the 
animal from which the bone was taken, he immediately 
sticks the bone in the ground near the fire, firmly 
believing that it will produce disease in the person for 

1 Dawson, op. at. 54. 

126 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

whom it was designed, however distant he may be. 
Death also may result. All the natives, therefore, are 
careful to burn the bones of the animals which they eat, 
so as to prevent their enemies from getting hold of 
them. When a person is ill, he generally regards his 
sickness as a result of ngadhungi, and tries to discover 
who is the disease-maker. When he thinks that he has 
discovered him, he puts down a ngadhungi to the fire, 
for the purpose of retaliating, that is, if he possesses 
one made of an animal from which his enemy has eaten. 
And if he has not, he tries to borrow one. Frequently, 
when a man has got the ngadhungi of another, he will 
go to him and say, ' I have your ngadhungi, what will 
you give me for it ? ' Perhaps the other man will say 
that he has one belonging to the person who asks him, 
and in that case they will make an exchange, and each 
destroy the ngadhungi. The constant seeking for 
revenge caused by this belief produces an atmosphere 
of suspicion among the natives. It is often the case 
that they will trust none but relatives ; all others are 
regarded as possible enemies." * In the Encounter Bay 
tribe the same superstition is rampant. If a man has 
not been able to get a bone of an animal eaten by his 
foe, he takes an animal, and cooks and offers the meat 
in a friendly manner to his intended victim, having 
previously taken from it a piece of bone.2 In Tanna 
the disease-makers injure a man by burning his nahak, 
that is, the refuse of his food, or any article that has 
been in close contact with his body. When a person is 
taken ill, he believes that it is occasioned by some one 
who is burning his nahak ; and if he dies, his friends ascribe 
it to the disease-maker as having burnt the refuse to the 
end. All the Tannese carry small baskets about with 

1 Native Tribes of South Australia, 24, 25, 26, 136. 2 Id. 196. 

; 

NGADHUNGI 127 

.em, into which they put banana skins, cocoanut husk, 
or any refuse from that which they may have been 
eating, in order to avoid its discovery by an enemy, 
until reaching and crossing a stream of running water, 
which alone has the power of annulling such con- 
tingency. "It is surprising how these men are dreaded, 
and how strong the belief is that they have in their 
hands the power of life and death." The belief " has 
so strong a hold in Tanna that all the continual fights 
and feuds are attributable to it." * The practice of 
burning a man's food in order to injure him flourishes 
in New Britain ; the islanders are therefore careful to 
hide or burn their leavings.2 In the Banks Islands one 
man can injure another by charming some bit of food, 
hair, or nail-parings, anything in fact that has been in 
close connection with his body ; they are consequently 
at pains to hide all such.3 In Pululaa (Solomon Islands) 
guests bring their own food to feasts, as they may not 
eat the food set out. The belief is that if a visitor 
should purposely or accidentally retain a morsel of food 
of his host, he can thereby exercise a mysterious influence 
over the giver of the feast. In such a contingency the 
host will redeem the lost fragment at as high a figure as 
he can afford.4 In the Solomon Islands, again, an enemy 
will throw scraps of his victim's food into a sacred pool, 
of which he knows the spirit or Tindalo. If the food 
is eaten by a fish or snake the man will die.5 Through- 
out Melanesia it is believed that one man may harm 
another by taking bits of his food into a sacred place, 
upon which the victim's lips will swell and his body 
break out with ulcers.6 In the New Hebrides, when 

1 G. Turner, Nineteen Tears in Polynesia, 89 ; B. T. Somerville, in Journ. Anthrop. 
Inst. xxiii. 19, 20. 2 W. Powell, Wanderings in a Wild Country, 171. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. x. 283. 4 Coote, Wanderings South and East, 177. 

5 Journ, Anthrof. Inst. x. 309. 6 R. H. Codrington, The Melanesians, 188. 

128 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the mae snake carries away a fragment of food into the 
place sacred to a spirit, a man who has eaten of that 
will sicken as the fragment decays.1 The Malays take 
great care in disposing of the clippings of hair, as they 
believe that "the sympathetic connection which exists 
between himself and every part of his body continues to 
exist, even after the physical connection has been severed, 
and that he will suffer from any harm that may befall 
the severed parts of his body, such as the clippings of 
his hair or the parings of his nails. Accordingly he 
takes care that these severed portions of himself shall 
not be left in places where they might either be exposed 
to accidental injury or fall into the hands of malicious 
persons who might work magic on them to his detriment 
or death." Charms are used by the Malays for an 
infinity of purposes. They are worked by " direct 
contact, sometimes by indirect, sometimes without." 
To charm a person, take soil from the centre of the 
foot-print of the person you wish to charm, and " treat 
it ceremonially " for about three days. Another Malay 
method of charming a person is to scrape off some of 
the wood of the floor from the place where your 
intended victim has been sitting ; then mould it with 
wax into a figure resembling him ; the figure is scorched 
over a lamp, while the following words are repeated, 
" It is not wax that I am scorching, it is the liver, 
heart, and spleen of so-and-so that I scorch." The 
Malays use clippings of the victim's hair, his saliva, and 
parings of his nails, etc., in making the well-known wax 
image, into which pins are stuck, and "which is still 
believed by all Malays to be a most effective method of 
causing the illness or death of an enemy." To work 
dissension between a husband and wife, a Malay makes 

1 R. H. Codrington, The Melanesia™, 203. 

v NGADHUNGI 129 

two wax figures resembling them ; he breathes upon 
them, and puts them back to back, so that they look 
away from one another.1 The Mandans believe that 
a person at a distance may be injured or killed by 
sticking a needle in the heart of a figure made of clay 
or wood representing him.2 In Luang-Sermata one can 
cause swellings of the head or hands of an enemy by 
burning his hair.3 In Buru, as a love-charm, one 
" speaks over " oil the woman uses for her hair, or 
over a hair of her one finds. Or one buries a piece 
of ginger where she will pass.4 The natives of the 
Mary River and Bunya-Bunya country believe that if 
you can procure some hair or excrement of an enemy, 
his life will decay while they are in your possession.5 
In the Babar Islands the method is used to make people 
ill, of burning their hair or sirih they have used. This 
is also done by rejected lovers.6 Witchcraft prevailed 
amongst the Tasmanians. They procured some object 
belonging to the person, and, having enveloped it in 
fat, they laid it before the fire, and they supposed that 
as the fat was gradually melting, the health of their 
enemy would by degrees decline and that he would 
thus be doomed to perish.7 The Cambodians say that 
a traveller must not throw away fragments of his 
garments when in a foreign country. If he does not 
wish to be unlucky, he must keep them.8 The Gipps- 
land tribes "practised sorcery, with a view to taking 
the lives of their enemies. The mode of proceeding 
was to obtain possession of something which had 

1 Skeat, op. cit. 44, also quoting Frazer's Golden BougA1, i. 193 j Skeat, 569, 570, 45, 
573- The words of the Malay charm are identical with those used by the sorceress 
in Theocritus ii. 2 Featherman, of. cit. iii. 303. 

8 Riedel, op. cit. 328. 4 Id. op. cit. 10, n. 

6 Curr, op. cit. iii. 179. 6 Riedel, op. cit. 377. 

7 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 109. 8 Aymonier, op. cit. 166. 

130 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

belonged to the person whose death was desired, such 
as some of his hair, excrement, or food ; or to touch 
him with an egg-shaped piece of stone which was called 
bulk, and was thought to be possessed of magic powers. 
At other times they would charm by means of the 
makthar (real name of the person) ; or several of them, 
retiring to some lonely spot, and drawing on the ground 
a rude likeness of the victim, would sit around it and 
devote him to destruction with cabalistic ceremonies. 
Such was their dread of proceedings of this sort that, 
not unfrequently, men and women who learnt that they 
had been made the subjects of incantation, quickly pined 
away and died of fright." * The Central Australians 
use the method of drawing a portrait of the intended 
victim, and stabbing it.2 In Wetar one can make a 
man ill by getting hold of some of his saliva, hair, betel 
he has chewed, a piece of his clothes, or anything 
belonging to him. These objects are put in a place 
haunted by evil spirits, who are then called upon to 
kill the man or make him ill.3 Sorcerers amongst the 
Karalits injure or slay persons by magic use of any 
part of the victim's body, or part of an animal killed 
by such.4 Before a battle, a Zulu chief sits on a circlet 
of " medicines," containing some object belonging to 
the hostile chief, and he says, " I am overcoming him ; 
I am now treading him down ; he is now under me. I 
do not know by what way he will escape."5 The 
Zulus also use a vessel of medicines which one churns 
like a Chinese praying-machine. A young man will 
use it as a love-charm ; if it froths, he knows he has 
prevailed over the girl. Something belonging to her is \ 

1 Curr, op. cit. iii. 547. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 550. 

8 Riedel, op. cit. 451. 4 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 437. 

5 Callaway, op. cit. 342. 

NGADHUNGI 131 

put in it. The churn is used before war, with some- 
thing in it belonging to the hostile chief, so as to kill 
or weaken him. Any disease may be caused by walk- 
ing over " medicines " placed, to that end, in the path.1 
Another account of the Zulus says that before the army 
sets out, the king makes " medicine " in which is some 
personal article belonging to his enemy. "The belief 
in this is so strong, that when a chief is forced to retreat, 
the floor of his hut is scraped, and for this reason 
Dingan, when he fled from the Boers, burnt his hut." 2 
The method is used with saliva, as well as other vehicles, 
in Ceylon and Nukahiva ; 3 and throughout the islands 
between Celebes and New Guinea the method flourishes 
in many forms, both for injury and for producing love.4 
A very common form is the injuring of a person by 
means of his name. To injure a person, the Amboinese 
use some of his sirih he has thrown away, a piece of his 
hair, or clothing ; also one writes his name on a piece 
of paper, which is put in a gun and fired ofF, or else 
one puts it in the highest branch of a tree.5 The 
Gippsland blacks objected strongly to let any one 
outside the tribe know their names, lest their enemies, 
learning them, should make them vehicles of incantation, 
and so charm their lives away. As children were not 
thought to have enemies, they used to speak of a man 
as " the father, uncle, or cousin of so-and-so," naming 
a child, but on all occasions abstained from mentioning 
the name of a grown-up person.6 In many Australian 
tribes " the belief obtains that the life of an enemy may 
be taken by the use of his name in incantations. The 
consequence of this idea is, that in the tribes in which 

1 Callaway op. at. 343, 346, 35. 2 Shooter, op. cit. 343. 

3 Tennent, op. cit. ii. 544 j D'Urville, op. cit. i. 502. 4 Riedel, op. cit. passim. 
5 Id. op. cit. 6 1, 79. 6 Curr, op. cit. iii. 545. 

132 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, v 

it obtains, the name of the male is given up for ever at 
the time when he undergoes the first of a series of 
ceremonies which end in conferring the rights of man- 
hood. ' In such tribes a man has no name, and, instead 
of calling a man by name, one addresses him as brother, 
nephew, or cousin, as the case may be, or by the name 
of the class to which he belongs." 1 Sorcery is one of 
the most heinous crimes in Bali. A man is guilty of it 
if he writes the name of any one on the winding-sheet 
of a corpse, or on a dead man's bier, or if he makes an 
image of paste of the person he intends to bewitch, or if 
he hangs from a tree a slip of paper on which his name 
is written, or if he buries such a paper in the ground, or 
in a haunted place.2 In Abyssinia it is believed that 
the sorcerer can cause no injury to a person unless he 
knows his true name, and it is the custom for mothers 
to conceal the baptismal name of their children, and to 
substitute for it, Son of St. George, Slave of the Virgin, 
Daughter of Moses, and the like.3 In modern Europe 
there is still to be found, especially amongst children, 
some diffidence about revealing the Christian name. 

1 Curr, op. cit. i. 46. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 408. 3 Id. v. 6, 8. 

CHAPTER VI 

WITH this sensibility to contact there is always closely 
connected the instinctive care of functions and organs, 
which are, of course, but specialised channels of contact, 
both in use and origin, and this care is common to 
all highly organised life. It is a good instance of 
physiological thought. Throughout the world it is the 
general rule for the performance of human functions to 
take place in secret, and this secrecy is closer in primi- 
tive than in civilised custom.1 As will be shown later, 
one important function, that of eating and drinking, 
though no longer secret in civilised periods, was so in 
early society. Prayer before such functions testifies to 
this caution, and the custom of the Babar islanders, who 
pray to the ancestral spirits before eating, drinking, and 
sleeping, or of the people of Timorlaut, who pray to 
Dudilaa before such functions as sexual intercourse, 
eating, and drinking, is typical of the generality of 
mankind.2 Hence also the general ascription of the 
taboo character to the various functions, especially the 
nutritive and sexual. When called "unclean," the 
term originally is equivalent to taboo, still undiffer- 
entiated, though later it becomes specialised by other 
associations. The Hindu and Muhammadan rules of 
" uncleanness " in connection with physical functions, 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusscAen Selebes en Papua, 96, 406. 

2 Id. 338, 28l. 

134 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

are examples of a general human practice.1 The 
universal desire for solitude during the performance of 
certain physical functions, shared by man with the 
higher animals, is an extension of the organic instinct 
for safety and self-preservation. These functions, 
especially the nutritive, sexual, and excretory, are not 
only of supreme importance in organic life, but their 
performance exposes the individual to danger, by ren- 
dering him defenceless for the time being. Ideas 
formed straight from this instinct invest such functions 
at once with a potential sacredness, and assist towards a 
religious concealment of them. Again, this impulse for 
solitude is emphasised, as psychology proves, in illness 
and in critical states, a fact which shows the origin of 
many taboos on their subjective side. 

In the development of these ideas, each principle of 
contact has its share, and the biological caution is 
intensified by religious conceptions. The very com- 
plexity and importance of functions intensifies both the 
biological and the religious care of them. The indi- 
vidual avoids, in the first place, the dangers resulting to 
himself from contact with others ; and secondarily, from 
knowledge of these dangers, he concludes that the 
material secretions and emanations are in every case 
dangerous, even apart from personal properties, and 
accordingly avoids his own, for his own sake and, 
altruistically, for the sake of his fellows. This altru- 
istic feeling is later, and is connected with disgust. 

While it is the functions and external organs con- 
nected with nutrition and sex that are most guarded, 
and the senses of taste and touch that are here most 
sensitive, yet the instinct to preserve and insulate from 
danger all the channels of sense is seen in savage custom. 

1 Vambery, Sketches of Central Asia, 190. 

vi CARE OF FUNCTIONS 135 

This insulation is effected sometimes by wearing amulets 
upon the external organs, sometimes by means of the 
painful processes of tattooing, boring, and scarification. 
It is erroneous to attribute these practices to the 
desire for ornament. There is ample evidence that 
" savage mutilation " is never due to this desire ; the 
savage does not hold with the maxim — il faut souffrir 
pour etre belle ; on the contrary, he is extremely averse 
to pain, except for the purpose of preserving his life, 
health, and strength. Accordingly, when we find that 
the mouth and lips, the teeth, nose, eyes, ears, and 
genital organs are subjected to such processes, we may 
infer that the object is to secure the safety of these 
sense-organs, by what is practically a permanent amulet 
or charm. 

The idea behind the mutilation of organs is complex. 
Let us take the common practices of piercing an organ, 
filing the teeth, knocking out a tooth, circumcision, 
and perforation of the hymen. The first part of the 
idea is to obviate possible difficulty in function, sug- 
gested by an apparent closure of the organ ; this possi- 
bility of difficulty is to the savage a potentiality of evil, 
and is connected with the fear of doing a thing for the 
first time, a fear which, as we have seen, creates a 
material dangerous substance attaching to the thing in 
question, and needing removal before contact can safely 
take place. The Pepos state that the object of knock- 
ing out one or more teeth at puberty is to assist breath- 
ing.1 Shortly after a birth the Malays administer to 
the child " the mouth-opener " ; " first you take a green 
cocoa-nut, split it in halves, put a grain of salt inside 
one half of the shell, and give it to the child to drink, 
counting up to seven, and putting it up to the child's 

1 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 424. 

136 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

mouth at the word seven." l This account is important 
as suggesting that the first taking of food, the first 
employment of the mouth, is a dangerous crisis. When 
we take into account the importance of food in savage 
life, and the care of the mouth and teeth resulting, also 
the fact that this knocking out of teeth, like the similar 
process of teeth-filing, is regularly performed at puberty, 
when as a rule there are certain food taboos removed, 
and a boy is initiated to " man's food," it is a fair 
conjecture that its object is to secure in some way the 
safety of that important function. When a Dieri boy 
has had the teeth knocked out, he may not look at the 
men who performed the operation, or " his mouth would 
close up and he would be unable to eat." 2 Mr. Skeat 
was invariably told that the Malay practice of teeth- 
filing not only beautified but preserved the teeth from 
decay.3 The idea of ornament is later. With the 
particular imaginary danger already mentioned all 
danger of material contact of course combines, includ- 
ing that of disease in the wide range .of reality and 
imagination with which early man regards disease. 
Amongst the Cadiacks a hole is bored through the 
septum of the child's nose, when it is washed after birth. 
These people have also the practice of piercing the 
septum in cases where venereal disease attacks the nose.4 
The connection is obvious. The Yorubas call circum- 
cision " the cutting that saves." 5 Amongst the Central 
Australians there is a causal connection between the 
practice of sub -incision and the common disease 
Erkincha. It is not, as has been proved, intended to 
prevent impregnation, nor does it have this result.6 

1 Skcat, op. cit. 337. 2 Howitt, in Journ. Anthrop. last. xx. 80. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 359.) 4 U. Lisiansky, op. cit. 200, 201. 

15 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 66. 6 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 405, 264. 

vi MUTILATION 137 

The ceremony of head-biting performed on Central 
Australian boys at puberty is supposed to make the 
hair grow strong.1 Now it is prevention of future 
harm, illness and weakness, and transmission of strength 
and life that are one special object of ceremonies at 
puberty. Again, it has been conclusively proved that 
circumcision does not prevent disease, and it is probable 
that there was no sanitary intention in its origin, except 
such as forms part of the explanation here given.2 The 
ceremony amongst the Semites was originally "religious" 
in the primitive sense, but here, as elsewhere, when the 
religious habit becomes rational, the fallacy of sanitary 
intention in circumcision became prominent, and may 
often have been the reason for the continuance of the 
practice. The last factor in the principle behind these 
mutilations is one very closely connected with ideas of 
contact, and applies especially to such practices as circum- 
cision. The deleterious emanation from strange or new 
things is identical in theory with human emanations, not 
only from strange or unhandselled beings, but from 
characteristic parts of such, and in later thought, from 
such parts of one's own personality. This dangerous 
emanation is any physical secretion religiously regarded, 
and its retention is prevented by cutting away separable 
parts which would easily harbour it, as the teeth retain 
morsels of food. This primitive notion is the same 
with those of personal cleanliness and of the removal of 
separable parts of a tabooed person. Dr. Frazer points 
out the idea of destroying separable parts of tabooed 
persons ; thus, in Rod the first hair of a child " is not 
his own, and unless cut off will make him ill." When 
the part is cut off, there result the ideas, first of securing 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. clt. 251. 
2 Joseph Jacobs, in Journ. Anthrop. Intt. xv. 32. 

138 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the safety of the rest by sacrificing a part, a practice 
well illustrated by the custom of cutting off the little 
finger ; and secondly, of sacrificing such part to a deity 
so as to consecrate the rest, by making it less " impure " 
or "taboo" Thus, Sir A. B. Ellis infers that circum- 
cision amongst the Yorubas and Ewe peoples is a sacri- 
fice of a portion of the organ, which the god inspires, 
to ensure the well-being of the rest. The rite is there 
connected with the worship of Elegbra.1 And for the 
earlier notion, the Jews and Egyptians regarded it as a 
" cleansing." 2 

Circumcision and artificial hymen-perforation thus 
originated in the intention both to obviate hylo-idealistic 
danger resulting from apparent closure, and to remove 
a separable part of a taboo organ, on the above-stated 
principles. This removal also explains the practice of 
excision. The other ideas follow later, and the safety 
both of the individual and of those who will have con- 
tact is the more necessary because that contact is with 
the other, the dangerous sex. 

As to the insertion of plugs and sticks and the like, 
in the nose, lips, and ears, it is probable that the original 
object was to keep off evil from the organs by a mark, 
an idea connected with the widely spread belief that the 
attention of the evil influence is thus diverted from the 
organ as lightning is diverted from an object by the 
lightning-rod. 

Here is to be considered the psychology of disgust. 
The emotion in its origin is caused by the presence or 
contact of what is dangerous or useless to the individual 
organism, chiefly in connection with the nutritive and 
sexual functions. It is part of the natural law of 

1 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 66. 
2 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 345 j Trusen, Die Sitten u. Gebraucke der alien Hebraer, 115. 

DISGUST— IMPURITY 139 

economy, ultimately chemical, which produces an im- 
pulse for what one needs and an avoidance of what one 
does not need, or has cast away. Food that is needed 
is the object of man's fiercest desire, and, on the other 
hand, food after satiety or the excreta from food pro- 
duce the strongest loathing ; in each case the feeling is 
part of the primary nutritive impulse. The same desire 
and loathing belong to the sexual functions and emotions, 
the development and complement of the nutritive. The 
sensitive instinct of self-preservation and of self-realisa- 
tion which insulates a man from other organisms, ac- 
centuates the emotion of disgust when the cast-off sub- 
stances-are from others, and makes those from himself 
more tolerable. Further, where there is no desire, there 
is potential disgust, especially at the sight of another's 
function. Disgust correlates with satiety and is the 
opposite pole to desire and satisfaction, and ultimately 
its connection is with the alimentary functions alone, 
from which the sexual and other are developed. Desire 
and disgust are the final expression of chemical laws of 
combination and rejection. Desire and disgust are 
curiously blended when with one's own desire unsatis- 
fied one sees the satisfaction of another ; and here we 
may see the altruistic stage beginning ; this has two 
sides, the fear of causing desire in others, and the fear of 
causing disgust, in each case personal isolation is the 
psychological result. 

The ideas of impurity and ceremonial " uncleanness " 
are closely connected with these phenomena, and in 
primitive thought are concerned with the nutritive no 
less than with other functions. Theoretically, if we 
carry primitive ideas to their logical conclusion, the 
perfectly " pure " person is one who should not only 
avoid contact with the functional effluvia of others, but 

1 40 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

all contact with persons also ; and moreover, to obviate 
pollution from his own functions, should abstain not 
only 'from sexual but from nutritive processes as well. 
It is the ascetic ideal of the perfect Buddhist. This 
practice (ao-^o-t?) has probably assisted man considerably 
towards attaining a higher than animal culture. 

Again, the feeling of shame is closely connected with 
these functional phenomena ; it is produced by ideas 
which arise from the importance and sensibility of 
functions, tending towards diffidence and mistrust of 
them, and is expressed originally upon any external 
interference with a function. Later it becomes altruistic. 
We may also observe that amongst early men it is also 
to an important extent concerned with alimentary pro- 
cesses. It is at first sight surprising to read the follow- 
ing statement, but a slight acquaintance with primitive 
habit shows how inevitable such facts are, and observa- 
tion of the lower classes in modern times reveals the 
same phenomenon. Amongst the Bakairi every man 
eats by himself; when one eats in the presence of 
another, it is the custom to do so with head averted, 
while the other turns his back and does not speak till 
the meal is over. When the German explorer, not 
knowing of this, ate his lunch without giving notice, they 
hung their heads and showed on their faces real shame.1 

All these emotions and the ideas connected there- 
with are part of the foundation of social and of sexual 
taboo. Closely connected as they are with contact and 
with functional sensitiveness, they at once, when in the 
altruistic stage in which one conceals or refrains from 
functions to avoid causing others to feel disgust or 
shame, vary in intensity according to the distance of the 
person whose feelings are being considered. A man 

1 K. von den Steinen, Unter den Natur-folkern Zentral-Srasiliens, 66. 

vi SHAME— PERSONAL ISOLATION 141 

certainly would avoid performing such acts as involve 
these emotions before an entire stranger, for to primitive 
thought a stranger is a potential foe, and in such a case 
we see the original cause of such secrecy ; but on the 
other hand, amongst acquaintances and friends, he is 
less ready to insist upon secrecy than he is with closer 
connections, such as those with whom he lives. The 
reason is the accentuation, first of the danger, and later 
of altruistic consideration, produced in each case by the 
very closeness of the contact. Add to this the religious 
caution between the two sexes, and we get a potential 
avoidance of all such functions in the presence of the 
other sex generally, and especially in the presence of 
those with whom a man is in closest daily contact. Not 
only civilised ideas and habits of decency and personal 
cleanliness, but human systems and institutions of the 
most important character are built on these founda- 
tions. 

These ideas of contact, which are found all over the 
world, give to human relations generally a religious 
meaning, such as we can hardly realise by imagination. 
Every individual, as such, is surrounded by a taboo 
of personal isolation ; and for communication between 
him and his fellows there is in theory needed a go- 
between. A type of this may be seen in the New 
Hebridean custom, where the last man to " take the 
book" (i.e. turn Christian), was a "sacred man," whose 
sanctity was such that anything given to him by a 
white man had to be passed through the hands of a 
go-between.1 Secondly, to take the dangerous side of 
the taboo character, all human and sexual properties, 
states of mind and of emotion, even acts and thoughts, 
are so material that they exude, sans phrase , from the skin. 

1 Journ, Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 12. 

142 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

In civilised stages of society, moral and social 
systems which are themselves closely connected in 
origin with this early view of contact, have so defined 
and safeguarded human relations that these ideas have 
almost disappeared. They exist still, however, in one 
or two special forms, as in the still rampant belief in 
the evil eye throughout Southern Europe, and in the 
refinement always kept in civilisation, which reveals its 
material origin in more or less dainty avoidance of the 
lower classes, of " publicans and sinners." 

Primitive man has some differences in his code of 
morals, but on the whole, he is more moral in the 
social sense than is civilised man. A few examples will 
illustrate this basis of early morality. The immaturity 
of the human " will " is a characteristic of early man. 
What is said of the Fijians applies still more to earlier 
peoples. "We have to bear in mind the absolute help- 
lessness of the Fijian, in fact, the Polynesian generally, 
when anybody has acquired a moral ascendancy over 
him."1 Death often occurs from this moral fear. 
Sorcery is so dreaded by Australians that individuals 
have been known to die through fear of it.2 As we 
have seen, amongst the Australians a great motor power 
is the belief in sorcery or witchcraft. In the everyday 
life of the black, a pressure originating in this source 
may be said to be always at work.8 Of the Kurnai 
it is said that "the gratification of self is choked in 
them, as in us, by a sense of duty or by affection. 
Speaking to a Kroatun young man about the food 
prohibited during initiation, I said, ' But if you were 
hungry and caught a female opossum, you might eat 
it if the old men were not there ' ; he replied, ' I could 
not do that : it would not be right/ Although I 

1 Secmann, op. cit. 190. 2 Curr, op. clt. i. 49. * Id. i. 45, 46. 

vi PRIMITIVE MORALITY 143 

tried to find out from him some other reason, he could 
give no other than that it would be wrong to disregard 
the customs."1 In New South Wales the universal 
reprobation which followed a breach of ancient customs, 
preserved a strict observance of morality.2 Amongst 
the Maoris tapu was law, and far more observed and 
feared than the latter, as such, ever has been in higher 
culture.3 So it has been said of the Fijian tambu; "the 
taboo is a religion in itself, and without doubt has 
helped to prevent savages from allowing their naturally 
depraved natures to have full scope to carry out their 
intentions. The law-givers who introduced the tambu 
must have done so with the idea of promoting the 
happiness of the community, and of encouraging 
morality among the people." 4 The Leh-tas, according 
to the Karens, have no laws or rulers, and do not require 
any, as they never commit any evil among themselves 
or against other people. "The sense of shame amongst 
this tribe is so acute, that on being accused of any evil 
act by several of the community, the person so accused 
retires to a desolate spot, digs his grave and strangles 
himself." 5 Amongst the Hiir Dyaks crime is so rare 
that its punishments are only known from tradition. 
They have a complete system similar to the Polynesian 
tabu.6 In New Britain marriage within the totem-clan 
would bring instant destruction upon the woman, and 
the man's life would never be secure. Her relatives 
would be so ashamed, that only her death could satisfy 
them. " However, such a case never occurs in a 
thickly populated district. If a man should be accused 
of adultery or fornication with a woman, he would at 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 256, 257. 2 Wilkes, op. cit. ii. 193. 

8 Id. ii. 383. 4 Anderson, op. cit. 89. 

6 A. R. Colquhoun, Among the Shans, 76. 6 Low, op. cit. 247, 248. 

I44 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

once be acquitted by the public voice, if he could say 
' she is one of us' ; i.e. she belongs to my totem." l In 
Timor "the custom of fomali is general, fruit-trees, 
houses, crops, and property of all kinds being protected 
from depredation by this ceremony, the reverence for 
which is very great. A palm branch stuck across an 
open door, showing that the house is tabooed, is a more 
effectual guard against robbery than any amount of 
locks and bars." 2 The same is true of most primitive 
races. In Hawaii a "wicked person" was one who 
broke tabu? Amongst the Indians of Guiana any 
breach of the marriage system is "wicked."4 Amongst 
the Zulus umtakati means "witch, wizard, or evil-doer," 
i.e. murderers, adulterers, one who violates rules of 
consanguinity ; also one who does secret injury to 
another, by using " medicine," e.g. human remains, or 
poison. Evil-doers can injure health, destroy life, cause 
cows to become dry, prevent rain, occasion lightning.5 
Turning to the question of deterrents, amongst the 
Bangerang it was believed that the sorcery of other 
tribes could be counteracted by their own incantations. 
On the other hand, they sometimes feel that the incan- 
tations of their own doctors can be neutralised by 
stronger ones on the part of their enemies ; and so they 
" frequently revenge a death in the tribe — which is of 
course attributed to sorcery, though in effect the result of 
sickness or accident — by attacking at night a hostile camp 
and massacring the sleepers." 6 In Hawaii violators 
of taboo were seized by the priests and killed.7 Mr. 
Curr says of the Australian tribes with which he was 

1 B. Danks, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 282, 283. 

2 A. R. Wallace, The Malay Archipelago, 450. * Ellis, Tour in Hawaii, 279. 
4 Brett, op. cit. 98. 5 Shooter, op. cit. 141. 

6 Curr. op. cit. i. 47, 49. 7 Wilkes, op. cit. iv. 40. 

vi SANCTIONS OF MORALITY 145 

acquainted, " we find our blacks, male and female, 
submitting for years loyally and without exception to 
a number of irksome restraints, especially in connection 
with food, just as we Roman Catholics do to the fasts 
and abstinences imposed by the Church. Now the 
question is, what is the hidden power which secures 
the black's scrupulous compliance with custom in such 
cases? What is it, for instance, which prompts the 
hungry black boy, when out hunting with the white 
man, to refuse (as I have often seen him do) to share 
in a meal of emu flesh, or in some other sort of food 
forbidden to those of his age, when he might easily do 
so without fear of detection by his tribe ? What is it 
that makes him so faithfully observant of many trying 
customs ? The reply is, that the constraining power in 
such cases is not government, whether by chief or 
council, but education ; that the black is educated from 
infancy in the belief that departure from the customs 
of his tribe is inevitably followed by one at least of 
many evils, such as becoming grey, ophthalmia, skin 
eruptions, or sickness ; but above all, that it exposes the 
offender to the danger of death from sorcery." l The 
Luang Sermata islanders hold that sickness is due to 
" sin " ; 2 and this is a common human idea, a phase 
of which is the belief that evil physical results follow 
breaches of the system or principle of marriage, and, 
we may add, of sexual taboo generally. Amongst the 
Australians old people are mostly sorcerers ; " and 
custom holds the weak and the young in willing sub- 
jection to the old." 3 In speaking of the power of the 
old men, and the enforcing of moral laws by them, 
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen show that the influence 
which supports custom is far from being impersonal. 

1 Curr, of. cit. i. 54, 55. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 325. 3 Eyre, op. cit. ii. 384. 

L 

146 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

In the Central Australian tribes which they examined, 
they found that offenders were regularly dealt with by 
the elder men, and that offending natives were perfectly 
well aware that they would " be dealt with by some- 
thing much more real than an impersonal power." 
In reference to the dying -out of native races upon 
contact with Europeans, they remark of the Central 
Australian tribes, that "the young men under the 
new influence become freed from the wholesome 
restraint of the older men, who are all-powerful in 
the normal condition of the tribe. The strict moral 
code, which is certainly enforced in their natural state, 
is set on one side, and nothing is adopted in place 
of it."1 

Early men have also an elaborate etiquette based on 
these ideas. Amongst the Northern Indians when two 
people met, they would stop when within twenty yards, 
and generally sit or lie down, without speaking for some 
minutes.2 The origin of such may be seen in the 
Australian practice ; when a tribe approaches another, 
that is unknown to it, they carry burning sticks to 
purify the air.3 In the Dieri and neighbouring tribes, 
when a man reaches home, no notice at first is taken, 
until he sits down ; then " the friends or relations sit 
around, and the news is whispered, whatever it may be, 
and repeated in a loud voice to the whole camp." Also, 
when an influential native arrives, he is received thus :— 
" On approaching the camp, the inmates close in with 
raised arms, as in defence ; then the person of note 
rushes at them, making a faint blow as if to strike them, 
they warding it off with their shields ; immediately after 
they embrace him and lead him into the camp, where 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 15, 8. 
2 Hearne, op. cit. 332. 3 Brough Smyth, op. cit. i. 134. 

PRIMITIVE ETIQUETTE 147 

ie women bring him food." 1 The Malay, says Mr. 
Wallace, is " particularly sensitive to breaches of etiquette, 
or any interference with the personal liberty of himself 
or another. As an example, I may mention that I often 
found it very difficult to get one Malay servant to 
, waken another. He will call as loud as he can, but will 
hardly touch, much less shake his companion." 2 In the 
islands of Leti, Moa, and Lakor, and the Babar Islands 
no one may without important reason wake a sleeping 
man.3 The greatest possible insult to a man in 
Tenimber and Timorlaut is to spit in his face, or to step 
>ver his body when on the ground.4 In New Caledonia 
is an elaborate system of etiquette. Politeness 
[uires one to walk in front of the person to whom 

jpect is due ; to enter first on introducing him ; to 
>ass in front and not behind him.5 The Fijians observe 
scrupulously certain rules of etiquette.6 The Javanese 
are distinguished for the formal observance of etiquette.7 
The Tagalas of Luzon and Mindanao are remarkable 
Tor a sentiment of personal shamefulness, called hya, 
which renders them very susceptible of insult, and 
:auses them to respect the feelings of others.8 The same 
^esults of the taboo of persona] isolation are constant in 
ill stages of culture. The whole series of phenomena, 
astly, helps to disprove the common idea that early 
.ociety possessed a communistic and socialistic character. 
The " rights " of the individual in property, marriage, 
!md everything else, were never more clearly defined 
:han by primitive man. 

1 Gason, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 173 j id. in Curr, op. cit. ii. 50. 

2 Wallace, op. cit. 443. 3 Riedel, of. cit. 378. 
4 Id. 295. 5 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 85. 

6 Id. ii. 200. 7 Id. ii. 382. 8 Id. ii. 481. 

CHAPTER VII 

THERE are still to be described the two most im- : 
portant forms of contact, contact by means of food 
and by sexual intercourse. I have deferred their i 
description because they have so close a connection 
with sexual taboo, the further developments of which I 
chiefly take the lines marked out by ideas concern- i 
ing these two functions of eating and of sexual con- 
gress. 

Biologically, the sexual impulse is a development 
from the nutritive, and the primary close connection of j] 
the two functions is continued in thought, subconscious 
and physiological, and appears sometimes above the< 
threshold of consciousness. We find further, that many 
primary human conceptions are not only based on the > 
connection but express it clearly. One of the most ! 
obvious links between the two is the kiss, and much 
popular thought and language preserves similar concep- 
tions. 

Various rules attest the importance of " man's bread 
and oil and wine." The natives of the Baram district 
of Borneo feed alone ; " they are very particular about 
being called away from their meals, and it takes a great 
deal to make a man set about doing anything before he 
has concluded his repast." To such an extent is this 
practice observed that it is considered wrong to attack 
even an enemy whilst he is eating, but the moment he 

CHAP. 

AP. vii EATING AND DRINKING 149 

has finished it is legitimate and proper to fall upon him.1 
The custom of eating in silence is found amongst the 
Ahts, Maoris, Siamese, and the ancient Hindoos.2 The 
Arabs of Syria mutter a bismillah before eating, and 
take their meals in silence.3 In Siam it is a maxim of 
1 the Buddhist priests that " to eat and talk at the same 
time is a sin." 4 The Tahitians offered a prayer before 
they ate their food.5 The Mois of Cochin China invoke 
a superior power before eating and drinking.6 The 
Malayalam Sudras of Travancore bathe and put sacred 
ashes on the forehead before each meal.7 In origin, the 
custom of prayer before eating was not an expression of 
thankfulness. The object was to avert any deleterious 
influence that the food might possess. On this is super- 
imposed the wish that the food may be good and bene- 
i ficial, may be " blessed," which passes into an invocation 
to a superior power to so bless it, and also, for the older 
idea often remains, to cleanse the food from harmful 
properties. 

The savage realises better than most civilised men 
that his life, his health and strength, and general well- 
being depend chiefly upon what is ultimately the most 
necessary of human functions. It is not surprising, 
! therefore, that so many customs and beliefs attach to 
'the processes of eating and drinking. " The procuring 
of food is the great business of the Australian's life," 
says a good observer, " and forms one of the principal 
itopics of his conversation." 8 Custom and belief in 
ithis connection are based upon the egoistic physical 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 160. 

2 Sproat, op. cit. 61 ; Thomson, New Zealand, 160 ; Bowring, Siam, i. no; 
Manu, iii. 236, 237. 

:; Featherman,'o/>. cit. v. 448, 451. 4 Bowring, op. cit. i. 328. 

5 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i. 350. 6 Cochinchine Jran^aise, viii. 12. 

7 Mateer, op. cit. 112. 8 Curr, op. cit. i. 81. 

1 5o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

sensibility of man, applied to the object of his fiercest 
desires, and with this there combine later all his concep- 
tions of matter and of material and human contact. | 
Thus the savage as a rule prefers to eat alone, as he 
prefers to be alone for the performance of similar func- j 
tions, from egoistic caution and fear of interruption. 
The Karajas always eat by themselves, with back turned.1 ;! 
Amongst the Bakairi every man eats by himself ; when ; 
one has to eat in the presence of another it is the custom I 
to do so with head averted, while the other turns his^i 
back and does not speak till the meal is over. When i 
von den Steinen ate before them they hung their heads I 
and were " ashamed." 2 The Zafimanelos of Madagascar 
eat alone with locked doors.3 The Maori gentleman | 
eats in solitude.4 The rule is common in Polynesia and ! 
Africa. It is naturally still more emphasised in the case 
of kings and chiefs. The King of Abyssinia always \ 
dines alone.5 Amongst the Niam-niam the king takes $ 
his meals in private ; no one may see the contents of hisi 
dish, and everything that he leaves is carefully thrown i 
into a pit, set apart for the purpose. All that hd 
handles is held as " sacred," and may not be touched ; ; 
and a guest, though of higher rank, may not so much 
as light his pipe with embers from the king's fire.6 A j 
carved and gilt wooden screen was always placed inn 
front of Montezuma at his meals, that no one might seej 
him while eating.7 In Loango the king is sacred ; from 
his birth he is forbidden to eat with any one, and various 
foods are prohibited to him. He eats and drinks alone, 
in huts devoted to the purpose. The covered dishes 
containing his food are preceded by a crier, at whose 

1 K. von den Steinen, Unter den Natur-Volkern Zentral-Brasiliens, 67. 

2 Id. 66. 3 Antananarivo Annual, ii. 219. 

4 Yate, op. cit. 20. 5 Harris, Highlands of Ethiopia, iii. 171, 172, 322. 

6 Schweinfurth, ot>. cit. ii. 98. 7 Bancroft, op. cit. iii. 129. 

EATING IN SECRET 151 

proclamation all get out of the way and bolt their doors ; 
for any person seeing the king eat is put to death. A 
privileged few may be present, but they are bound to 
conceal their faces, or the king places a robe over his 
head. All that leaves his table is at once buried.1 A 
crier proclaimed when the King of Cacongo was about 
to eat or drink, that the people might cover their faces 
or fall to the ground with down-turned eyes.2 When 
the King of Canna was offered a glass of rum by Mr. 
Win wood Reade, he hid his face and the glass under a 
Turkish towel.3 In Dahomey it is death to see the king 
eat ; if he drinks in public, a curtain is held up to con- 
ceal him.4 The King of Susa at meals is concealed by 
a curtain from his guests.5 The King of the Mon- 
buttoo always takes his meals in private, and no one 
may see the contents of his dish.6 The King of Congo 
eats and drinks in secret. If a dog should enter the 
house while he is at table, it is killed. On one occasion 
the king's son having accidentally seen his father drink- 
ing was executed on the spot.7 A Pongo chief never 
drinks in the presence of others without a screen to 
conceal him ; on the Pongo coast it is believed that one 
is more liable to witchcraft when eating, drinking, or 
sleeping.8 In Ashantee a man of consequence never 
drinks before his inferiors without hiding his face from 
them. The belief is that an enemy can then " impose a 
spell on the faculties " of the man who is drinking.9 
So in Tonga no one may see the king eat ; therefore 
those present turn their backs upon him. Nor may 

1 Bastian, An der Loango Kuste, i. 220, 262, 263. 

2 Id. San Salvador, 58. 3 W. Reade, Savage Africa, 184. 

4 J. L. Wilson, op. cit. 202 j Reade, op. cit. 53 j Burton, Dahomey, i. 244. 

5 Harris, op. cit. iii. 78. 6 Schweinfurth, op. cit. ii. 98 
7 Reade, op. cit. 359. 8 Wilson, op. cit. 308, 310. 

9 Bowdich, Cape Coast Castle to Ashanti, 438. 

152 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

one eat in his presence without averting the face. It 
is also forbidden to eat in the presence of a superior 
relation without turning the back.1 

The basis of this preference for eating in solitude is 
the animal egoistic impulse ; later it becomes altruistic, 
and also is combined, as we have seen this egoistic sensi- 
bility always combined, with general ideas about contact 
and transmission of properties. The modern small boy 
who eats his cake in a corner still shows the most 
primitive form of the custom. 

The savage is extremely careful that what he eats 
and drinks shall be free from deleterious properties, 
inherent or acquired. Such properties are all those 
which, as we have seen, the savage attributes to material 
substances, and especially to dangerous persons, and are 
neither spiritual nor material but both, and can be im- 
parted by all possible forms of material transmission. 
In this wide generalisation there would of course occur 
from time to time cases in which food possessed some 
harmful property, whether of poison or disease, and 
such cases corroborated the general precautions. The 
people of Kumaun use a special room for eating, 
into which nothing "unclean" may come. The cook 
has to put on clean clothes before cooking, and he is.' 
not allowed to touch any one after he has begun, nor to 
leave the room. No one is allowed to touch him when 
at work.2 Maoris do not eat inside the house.3 
Bulgarians before drinking make the sign of the cross, 
to prevent the devil entering the body with the liquor.4 
Similarly, devout Russians have been observed to blow 
on the glass in order to neutralise " the Satanic opera- 

1 W. Mariner, The Natives of the Tonga Islands, ii. 235 j Cook and King, Voyage, 
'• 232. 2 Panjab Notes and Queries, iii. 2. 454. 

3 D'Urville, op. at. ii. 411. 4 Sinclair and Brophy, A Residence in Bulgaria, 14. 

vii TAKING OFF THE FETISH 153 

tion of spirituous liquors. ' ' Amongst the Eskimo, when 
a new spring of water is found, it is usual for the oldest 
man present, failing an angekok, to drink first, in order 
to rid the water of any evil influence it may possess.2 
In Eastern Central Africa, when a chief has a beer- 
drinking, his priest or captain brings out the beer to the 
guests and tastes it to show that it is not poisoned.3 So 
amongst the Damaras the chief must first taste the 
provisions before they are eaten by the rest of the 
assembly.4 Amongst the Iddahs5 the same custom is 
found, and amongst the Zulus it is not etiquette to offer 
beer without first tasting it ; u it is meant to ensure the 
receiver against death in the pot ; " while another is 
eating, it is wrong to spit.6 Amongst the Krumen at a 
palm wine-drinking the goodwife of the house has to 
take the first and last draught herself, to show the 
guests that she has not been dealing in poison or 
witchcraft. This is called "taking off the fetish."7 
Amongst the Basutos, when food or drink is offered 
to a man, and he is not sure that it is not poisoned, he 
lets the host taste it first.8 These customs are widely 
spread in Africa. In the Banks Islands on presenting 
food to a visitor the host first takes a bite himself to 
show that it is not charmed, or to take the risk upon 
himself.9 In New Guinea it is a mark of friendship to 
offer water to a stranger. Before presenting it, the 
natives first drink themselves to prove that the water is 
not poisoned.10 These cases show the idea that things 
new or strange possess a dangerous property. 

The history of fasting forms a curious chapter in the 

Erman, Siberia, i. 416. 2 Cranz, op. cit. i. 193. 

Macdonald, Africana, i. 191. 4 C. J. Anderson, Lake Ngami, 224. 

Schon and Crowther, Expedition up the Niger, 82. 6 Leslie, of. cit. 205. 

J. L. Wilson, of. cit. 124. 8 Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, vi. 34. 

Codrington, op. cit. 204. 10 Rosenberg, Der Malayhche Archipel, 470. 

i54 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

development of the human soul. In origin it was a 
method used by primitive man to avoid the possibility 
of any injurious influence entering his body. The 
savage never fasts because he likes it, but simply to 
avoid danger. This painful process is not gone through 
unless for some very important reason ; for instance, 
when a primitive crisis is at hand, when the food-supply 
is to be coaxed by magic, or the success of a hunt or a 
war to be secured, or a dangerous period of life to be 
passed through, such as puberty and mourning. In 
some of these cases the mere practice develops the 
further idea that fasting is useful as a training of the 
body and a discipline for the nerves. It is worth 
noting that the practice of fasting was referred to a 
primitive reason by the early Christians, namely, to 
prevent u evil spirits" entering the body.1 The subject 
of taboos upon certain foods is a large one. The 
practice of forbidding certain kinds of food during a 
dangerous state is very widely spread ; it includes cases 
of real dietetic science, embedded in fallacious instances 
based on analogy. Sometimes the choice is arbitrary, 
as it often is in an interesting extension of the custom, 
according to which an individual is throughout life, or 
for some particular period, forbidden a certain food. 
Thus, amongst the Bakalai, to every man some particular 
food is roondah ; if he were to eat it, his wives would 
give birth to children resembling it.2 Every man and 
woman in the Andaman Islands is prohibited all through 
life from eating some one or more fish or animal. It is 
generally one which in childhood was observed or 
imagined by the mother to occasion some functional 
derangement. When the child is old enough, the 

1 Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History, i. 116, 262. 
Du Chaillu, op. cit. 308 j cf. Bosnian, Description of Guinea, 400. 

vii FASTING AND FOOD TABOOS 155 

reason is explained, and, cause and effect being clearly 
demonstrated, the individual avoids it carefully.1 The 
principle behind this custom is that of savage make- 
believe. If a particular food is taboo to a man, he 
believes that thereby his ordinary food will never hurt 
him. The practice correlates in principle with the 
arbitrary selection of fetishes and the like, and is con- 
nected with the beliefs and customs concerning external 
souls. The following cases are instructive in this 
connection ; in Halmahera and Wetar sickness is often 
ascribed to eating forbidden foods.2 Icthyosis and 
leprosy are regarded in Halmahera as due to eating 
forbidden food ; and one may become a suwanggi by 
eating it. These suwanggis have the power of sorcery, 
and were often killed by the community for causing 
death.3 Ordinary illness is ascribed in the Luang 
Sermata Islands to " bad winds " and bad food. Severe 
illnesses are ascribed to evil spirits.4 Malay like 
modern European medicine is chiefly concerned with 
dieting.5 

Further, the principles of primitive thought con- 
cerned with contact and material transmission find full 
development here, in all the forms of custom and belief 
relating to human relations and social taboo. Material 
contact leaves its impress for good or bad upon food, as 
upon everything else. Food that a man has touched is 
permeated by his properties, and accordingly can 
transmit these to others ; it is also on the same principle 
a part of himself, and any injury done to it is believed 
to affect himself. The belief extends to any food, not 
that he has touched, but of the same kind as he usually 

1 Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 354. 

2 Riedel, in Zeltschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 83 j and in De sluik-en kroesharige rassert 
tusschen Selebes en Pafua, 452. 

3 Id. I.e. and 66. 4 Id. op. cit. 327. 5 Skeat, op. cit. 408. 

156 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

eats. The connection of food with human attributes is 
well seen in the following example. The natives of the 
Mary River and Bunya-Bunya country have many idioms 
attributing the passions to the state of the stomach.1 
This is true of many languages, and in all ages men 
have more or less realised the fact, but early man 
realises this connection most keenly. It is natural that 
the nearer man is to his animal ancestors, the more 
his life should be guided by the chief process of animal 
life. 

Food possesses the characteristics of that from which 
it is taken, and the savage avoids foods that are thus 
harmful, and prefers those that are thus nutritious. 
The Masai eat beef to make them strong, and a man 
will eat bullock's flesh for a whole day to get up 
courage for a battle.2 We have seen how this obvious 
principle is extended to the eating of human flesh in 
order to acquire human courage and strength. 

The method of injuring a man by magic use of 
remnants of his food is an extension of ideas of contact 
already described. In Tanna, as we saw, the disease- 
makers injure a man by burning his nahak, that is the 
refuse of his food, or any article that has been in 
close contact with his body. When a person is taken 
ill, he believes that it is occasioned by some one who 
is burning his nahak ; and if he dies, his friends ascribe 
it to the disease-maker as having burnt the refuse to 
the end.3 

In the next phase, that of involuntary transmission, 
the specific contagion of human influences is the object 
of precaution. Uncivilised man regards strangers with 
feelings of hostility and suspicion. These feelings ex- 
tend to food that they have touched or tasted. Thus 

1 Curr, op. cit. iii. 191. 2 Thomson, op. cit. 264. 3 Sufra, 126. 

vii DANGERS OF EATING 157 

the Papuans of Humboldt Bay would not touch any 
food which their European visitors had previously 
tasted, nor even drink the water offered to them. 
This aversion was " due to superstitious ideas." l The 
Yule islanders refused to accept a share of anything 
which their visitors ate.2 The black-fellows of Victoria 
regard as wholesome any food that is not poisonous or 
connected with superstitious beliefs, but they will not 
touch any food which has been partaken of by a 
stranger.3 The Basutos were afraid to eat anything 
which a white man had touched.4 The Poggi islanders 
would not touch the food offered them by Europeans 
until it had first been tasted by one of the ship's 
company.5 This instance is a link with the last set of 
customs. Hence the Atiu islanders refused to eat with 
the missionaries,6 and the Indians with the Prince of 
Wied.7 

We have now arrived at the prohibition against 
eating with certain persons. In Tanna no food is 
accepted if offered with the bare hands, " as such 
contact might give the food a potency for evil." 8 In 
New Zealand one can be " bewitched " by eating or 
drinking from the calabash of an ill-wisher, or by 
smoking his pipe. Personal misfortunes are attributed 
to such indiscretions. When a man is sick, he is in- 
variably questioned by the doctor, for example, whose 
pipe he smoked last.9 In ancient India a Brahmin 
might not eat the food of an enemy or an ungrateful 
man, or that offered by an angry, sick, or intoxicated 
person.10 In the Mulgrave Islands those who are not 

1 Rosenberg, op. cit. 478. 2 D'Albertis, cp. cit. i. 261. 

3 Dawson, op. cit. 18. 4 Arbousset, op. cit. 149. 

5 Crisp, in Asiatick Researches, vi. 8 1. 6 Gill, Jottings from the Pacific, 42. 

7 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 166. 8 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 76. 

9 Polack, New Zealand, i. 280, 263. 10 Manu, iv. 213, 214, 207. 

158 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

initiate ought never to drink from the same cup with 
sorcerers.1 In Fiji persons who suspect others of 
plotting against them avoid eating in their presence.2 
The Fijians consider it objectionable, just as we do, for 
several persons to drink out of the same vessel.3 No 
respectable Zulu would eat in the company of Ama- 
tongas, who are regarded as " evil-doers" (wizards).4 
In New Zealand no one dare eat the food of a " tafued 
person " (gentleman), " for this is equivalent to eating 
his sacredness." On one occasion a slave ate his chief's 
dinner by mistake ; when told of what he had done he 
was seized with convulsions and cramp in the stomach, 
and died at sundown.5 Similarly, if any one ate the 
Mikado's food, his mouth and throat would swell up 
and death would ensue.6 Cadiack whalers are con- 
sidered " unclean," and no one will eat out of the 
same dish with them, or even approach them, for that 
reason.7 In Fiji the sick are credited with malignant 
properties; they are supposed to " pollute" objects 
which they touch, and food, by means of their saliva. 
Great care is always taken that no one touches the 
king's cup-bearer.8 In Tahiti, all who were employed 
in embalming the dead were during the process care- 
fully avoided by every one, as " the guilt of the crime 
for which the deceased had died was supposed in some 
degree to attach to such as touched the body. They 
did not feed themselves, lest the food, defiled by the 
touch of their polluted hands, should cause their own 
death, but were fed by others." 9 In New Zealand 

1 D'Urville, op. cit. ii. 408. 2 Williams and Calvert, Fiji, i. 249. 

3 Wilkes, op. cit. iii. 349. 4 Shooter, op. cit. 115. 

5 Shortland, Maori Religion, 26 ; New Zealand, by a Pakeha Maori, 114. 

6 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 386. 7 Lisiansky, op. cit. 174. 

8 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 620 j Wilkes, op. cit. iii. 115. 

9 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, iv. 388 ; so in Fiji, Meinicke, op. cit. iii. 40, Hawaii 
and Samoa, id. ii. 300, 276. 

vii CONTAGION BY FOOD 159 

one who has touched a dead body may not use his 
hands to eat, but is either fed by others or picks up 
his food with his teeth from the ground or the food- 
basket. Those who feed such a person offer the food 
with outstretched arm, and are careful not to touch 
him.1 In Samoa, while a dead body is in the house, 
no food may be eaten under the same roof ; meals are 
taken outside or in another house. Those who attend 
upon the dead dare not handle their food, but are fed 
for some days by others. The penalty for breaking 
this rule is baldness and loss of teeth.2 In Fiji any 
one who has touched a chief, living or dead, becomes 
tabu ; he cannot handle food, but must be fed by 
others. Hence barbers are continually in this case.3 
In Tonga, when a man has touched a superior chief, or 
anything belonging to him, he may not feed himself 
with his own hands. Should he do so, he will infallibly 
swell up and die.4 To take examples of another sort 
of contagion. In Burma one is denied by sitting or 
eating with the " impure " caste of Sandalas.5 The 
ancient Brahmin who ate the food of " outcasts " be- 
came thereby an "outcast" himself.6 In modern India 
members of different castes will not eat food cooked 
in the same vessel ; if a person of another caste touch 
a cooking vessel, it must be thrown away.7 The food 
of a Fijian chief may not be carried by boys who have 
not been tattoed, lest the meat be rendered "unclean" ; 
boys being "unclean" until then.8 A New Zealand 
gentleman must eat apart from his friends in solitude.9 
The Tuitonga might not eat in the presence of older 

1 Brown, New Zealand, n. 

2 Turner, Samoa, 145 ; id. Nineteen Tears in Polynesia, 228. 

8 Erskine, Western Pacific, 254. 4 Mariner, op. cit. i. 150, ii. 80. 

B D'Urville, op. cit. \. 173. 6 Manu, xi. 176, 181 ; Ward, Hindoos, ii. 149. 

7 Ward, op. cit. ii. 317. 8 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 166. 9 Yate, op. cit. 20. 

160 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

members of his family.1 The King of Loango from 
his birth may never eat with any one.2 On the Loango 
coast, among numerous restrictions upon food, occurs 
a prohibition against eating in company with others.8. 
Amongst the Alfoers of Celebes the priest who is 
responsible for the growth of the rice may not during 
his office eat or drink with any one, nor drink out of 
another's cup.4 In Cambodia people will not eat with 
a priest.5 In the Sandwich Islands no one could eat 
with the chief, who was "sacred."6 In Tonga inferiors 
and superiors may not eat together.7 In New Zealand 
a slave may not eat with his master, nor even eat of : 
the same food or cook at the same fire.8 In some parts 
of Polynesia a man will never eat with another out of 
the same basket.9 It is extremely unusual for Nubians , 
and the Niam-niam to take any meals in common.10 • 
This taboo is the main feature in certain systems of 
caste. In Tonga there are ranks and orders that can j 
neither eat nor drink together.11 In Uripiv (New- 
Hebrides) the males are divided into ten " castes " 
corresponding to age in life. Promotion is marked by a 
change of name. The members of each " caste " mess j 
together and may not eat with others. Unmarried j 
mess-mates also sleep together.12 In India " eating to- ! 
gether is one of the grand tests of identity of caste.'* 
A Hindoo must take precautions " to insulate himself, 
as it were, during his meal, lest he be contaminated by 
the touch of some undetected sinner who may be! 
present." 13 In Ceylon, under the Kandyan dynasty, , 

I D'Urville, op. cit. ii. 77. 2 Bastian, Loango-Kuste, i. 172. 3 Id. I.e. 

4 Mededeelingen *van ivege het Nederlandsch Zendeling-Genootschap, xi. 126. 

5 Aymonier, op. cit. 170. 6 Varigny, op. cit. 13. 7 D'Urville, op. cit. I.e. 

8 Shortland, Traditions and Superstitions of Neva Zealand, 106. 

9 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. \. 54. 10 Schweinfurth, op. cit. 447. 

II Mariner, op. cit. ii. 234. 12 Somerville, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 6, 7. 
13 Mateer, op. cit. 331 j Colebrooke, op. cit. vii. 277. 

, 

CONTAGION BY FOOD 161 

the most dreaded punishment for erring ladies was to, 
hand them over to the low-caste Rodiyas. A Rodiya 
thereupon was ordered to put betel from his mouth 
into the mouth of the delinquent, after which her 
" degradation " was indelible. There were two lower 
castes than the Rodiyas, who were so despised that no 
human being would touch rice cooked in their houses.1 
The Black Jews of Loango are so despised that no one 
I will eat with them.2 The Santhals hate the Hindus, 
and will not receive food which comes from their 
hands.3 The Paharias regard themselves as superior 
to the Keriahs, with whom they may neither eat nor 
' drink.4 

We next are met by familiar extensions of the 
principle of contagion. The prohibition against eating 
and drinking before the eyes of others is an outcome 
of that universal appreciation of the power of the 
human gaze which has reached its most superstitious 
development in the belief in the Evil Eye. The idea 
'is still that of contagion, for facts show the belief that 
,malignance and other properties can be conveyed by a 
look as certainly as by other methods of infection, 
and thus taint the food and drink of the individual 
who fears. The Oriental belief that food is rendered 
poisonous by the Evil Eye is a luminous instance. In 
Abyssinia, the doors are carefully barred before meals 
to exclude the Evil Eye, and a fire is lighted, otherwise 
i" devils " will enter, and " there will be no blessing on 
the meat." The king always dines alone.5 Amongst 
the Nubians no food is carried without being carefully 
covered, for fear of the Evil Eye. No one is ever seen 

1 Tennent, op. cit. ii. 189. 2 Bastian, op. cit. i. 278. 

3 Rowney, Wild Tribes of India, 74. 4 V. Ball, Jungle Life of India, 89. 

5 Harris, of. cit. iii. 171, 172, 322. 
M 

1 62 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

eating.1 The Zafimanelo of Madagascar lock the doors 
before every meal, and no one ever sees them eat.2 A 
Khol will leave off eating if a man's shadow passes 
across the dishes.3 

It is clear that men believe human properties to be 
transmitted not only by contact with the food of others, 
but by eating with them or in their presence. The 
same idea lurks subconsciously in the modern mind ; 
the objection against eating with " publicans and sinners" 
is still strong, and is based on the same " primitive " 
conception. 

The altruistic development of these ideas is to be 
observed in such practices as the following. The 
Niam-niam are very particular at their meals, and when 
several are drinking together, they may be observed to 
wipe the rim of the cup before passing it on.4 As 
always in connection with contact, the tendency is for 
any human emanation to be regarded as in itself un- 
desirable, and with the growth of intellect and refine- 
ment such are, as animal characteristics, brought intoS, 
the sphere of disgust, not only altruistic but individual- 
istic also. Amongst the Natchez it was considered a 
great offence to drink out of the same cup or eat out 
of the same dish set apart for the chief.5 It is for- 
bidden in Wetar to eat or drink anything out of vessels 
used by the chiefs.6 Young Bedouin boys show defer- 
ence to their father by never presuming to eat out of 
the same dish, nor even in his presence.7 The altruistic 
form is in principle, it will be observed, closely con- 
nected with the ideas of ngadhungi ; to eat another's 
food is a real injury to him, in all the primitive sense 

1 Schweinfurth, op. cit. ii. 326. 2 Antananarivo Annual, ii. 219. 

* Rowney, op. cit. 65. 4 Schweinfurth, op. cit. ii. 19. 

5 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 138. 6 Ricdel, op. cit. 455. 

7 Featherman, op. cit. \. 363. 

vii EATING WITH OTHERS 163 

of the word " real." In New Zealand to eat a man's 
food was a gross insult, it was equivalent to eating the 
man himself, or his " sacredness." l 

In sexual as in social taboo generally these beliefs 
have had a remarkable influence. The widely spread 
rule of sexual taboo that men and women may not eat 
together, is, as are taboos of commensality generally, in 
origin a form of egoistic sensitiveness with regard to 
the most important vital function ; sexual separation 
and sexual solidarity build upon this, and the general 
ideas of contact applied to sexual relations develop a 
superstitious fear that the contact, whether by contagion 
or infection, or otherwise, of food with the person, or 
influence of the female, transmits to the male the pro- 
perties of woman, and, though this is not so much in 
evidence, food " infected " by males transmits to the 
female the properties of the male, and the rule becomes 
a complete taboo. 

It is to be observed that the prohibition has several 
variations : for instance, women may not enter the 
cooking-house of the men, and men may not eat those 
kinds of food used by women, in some cases, by a 
natural extension, not even female animals. 

To begin with some special circumstances — 

In Ceram men during mourning may not eat the 
females of deer and certain other animals.2 Amongst 
the Motu of New Guinea when a man is helega^ for 
example after touching a dead body, he lives apart from 
his wife, and may not eat food that she has cooked.3 
A Yucatan "Captain" during his three years of office, 
might know no woman, nor might his food be served 
by women.4 The cook of the King of Angoy was 

1 Shortland, Maori Religion, 26. - Riedel, op. tit. 142. 

3 Lawes, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. viii. 370. 4 Bancroft, op. cit. ii. 741. 

164 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

expected to keep himself pure, and might not even live 
with a wife.1 Algonkin priests, who are ordained to a 
life of chastity, may not even eat food prepared by a 
married woman.2 Buddhist monks in Burma may not 
eat food cooked by female hands ; if a female offers 
rice, they may accept but not eat.3 Individuals in a 
state of danger or solemn service, in other words 
" under taboo," have especial reasons to avoid female 
contagion. 

The fact that the prohibition occurs at puberty 
serves to bring into relief the idea that danger from the 
other sex is apprehended at this period. Amongst the 
Kurnai of Gippsland a " novice " may not eat female 
animals ; he becomes free of the forbidden food by 
degrees, in this way : an old man suddenly comes 
behind him and without warning smears the fat of the 
cooked animal over his face.4 Amongst the Narrin- 
yeri boys during the progress of " initiation," which is 
not complete until the beard has been pulled out three 
times, and each time has been allowed to grow to the 
length of two inches, are forbidden to eat any food 
which belongs to women. Everything that they possess 
or obtain becomes narumbe, sacred from the touch of 
women, a term also which is applied to themselves. 
They are forbidden to eat with women, " lest they 
grow ugly or become grey."5 This belief is in- 
structive, as showing how the superstitious fear of the 
other sex may exist side by side with a desire to please, 
or even give rise to means thereto. 

The prohibition also applies to young men generally. 
The Dyaks of North- West Borneo forbid their young 

1 Bastian, Loango-Kuste, i. 216. 2 Bancroft, op. cit. ii. 212. 

3 Shway Yoe, The Burman, i. 136. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiv. 316. 

5 Native Tribes of South Australia, 17, 69. 

: 

SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 165 

en and warriors to eat vension, which is the food of 
women and old men, because it would make them as 
timid as deer.1 In the tribes of Western Victoria boys 
are not allowed to eat any female quadruped. If they 
are caught eating a female opossum, for instance, they 
are severely punished ; the reason given is that such 
food makes them peevish and discontented,2 in other 
words, it gives them the failings which a black-fellow 
ascribes to the female sex. In the Andamans bachelors 
may only eat with the male sex, and spinsters with 
females.3 

Amongst the Kurnai of Gippsland men may only 
eat the males of the animals which they use for food.4 
The Port Lincoln tribe observes certain laws about 
animal food, the general principle of which is this : 
that the male of any animal should be eaten by grown- 
up men, the female by women, and the young animal 
by children only.5 

In special circumstances, here as elsewhere, the in- 
tensified sexual property then acquired is believed to be 
transmissible by the agency of food. In Western 
Victoria a menstruous woman may not take any one's 
food or drink, and no one will touch food that has 
been touched by her, " because it will make them 
weak." 6 In Queensland menstruous women are " un- 
clean," and no one will touch a dish which they have 
used.7 Amongst the Maoris, if a man touched a men- 
struous woman, he would be tapu ; if he had connection 
with her or ate food cooked by her, he would be 
" tapu an inch thick." 8 In the Aru Islands menstruous 

1 St. John, op. cit. i. 186, 206. 2 Dawson, op. cit. 52. 

'•"' Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xi. 344. 4 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 197. 

5 Native Tribes of South Australia, 22O; 6 Dawson, op. cit. ci. cii. 

7 Lumholtz, op. cit. 119. 8 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 101. 

1 66 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

women may not plant, cook, or prepare any food.1 In 
Ceram-laut and Gorong, amongst the Samoyeds and 
Kalundas, wives at the catamenia may not prepare their 
husband's food.2 At menstruation a Chippeway wife 
may not eat with her husband ; she must cook her 
food at a separate fire, since any one using her fire will 
fall ill. The same rule is enforced at child-birth.3 A 
Kaniagmut woman is " unclean " for some days both 
after delivery and menstruation ; no one in either case 
may touch her, and she is fed with food at the end 
of a stick.4 Amongst the Omahas and Ponkas women 
during the monthly periods may not eat with their 
husbands. These tribes have a belief that if one eats 
with a menstruous woman, the lips dry up, the blood 
turns black, and consumption is the final result. It is : 
but fair to add that it is mainly children who believe 
this, the old people have no fear of the kind.5 A 
Brahmin might not allow himself to be touched by a! 
menstruous woman, or eat food offered by a woman.6 
Amongst the Vedahs of Travancore the wife at men- 
struation is secluded for five days, in a hut a quarter of 
a mile away, which is also used by her at child-birth. 
The next five days are passed in a second hut, half-way 
between the first and her house. On the ninth day her 
husband holds a feast, sprinkles his floor with wine, and 
invites his friends to a spread of rice and palm -wine. 
Until this evening he has not dared to eat anything but 
roots, for fear of being killed by the " devil." On the 
tenth day he must leave his house, to which he may 
not return until the women, his and her sister, have 
bathed his wife, escorted her home and eaten rice 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 178. 2 Id. op. cit. 209 j Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. i. 273. 

3 Id. ii. 354. 4 Dall} qf cftt 40 3 . Bancroft, op. cit. i. 1 1 1. 

5 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 275. 6 Manu, iv. 208, 211. 

vii SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 167 

.together. For four days after his return, moreover, 
he may not eat rice in his own house, nor have 
connection with his wife.1 

In Fiji a wife when pregnant may not wait upon 
her husband.2 In the Caroline Islands men may not 
eat with their wives when pregnant, though small boys 
are allowed to do so.3 The Indians of Guiana believe 
that if a pregnant woman eat of game caught by hounds 
they will never be able to hunt again.4 Amongst the 
tribes on the Amazon, if a pregnant woman eat any 
particular meat, it is believed that any animal partaking 
of the same will suffer ; a domestic animal will die, a 
hound will be rendered incapable of hunting, and a 
man who eats such food will never again be able to 
shoot that particular animal.5 Amongst the Chippe- 
ways a lying-in woman may not eat with her husband, 
and must cook her food at a separate fire ; 6 a Kirgis 
woman when lying-in is " unclean " and may not give 
her husband his food.7 In the islands Luang and 
Sermata the husband gives a feast after a birth, at 
which only women may be present. It is believed that 
any man tasting the food will be unlucky in all his 
undertakings.8 Amongst the tribes of the Oxus valley 
the mother is " unclean " for seven days, and no one 
will eat from her hand, nor may she suckle her infant 
during that period.9 

The examples of the prohibition in ordinary life are 
arranged geographically. 

The Warua of Central Africa, when offered a drink, 
put up a cloth before the face while they swallow. 

1 Jagor, in Zeitschrift fo'r Ethnologic, xi. 164. 2 Williams, op. cit. i. 137. 
3 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. i. 514. 4 im Thurn, op. cit. 233. 

5 Wallace, The Amazons, 501. 6 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 353. 

7 Id. ii. 351. 8 Riedel, op. cit. 326. 

9 Biddulph, The. Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, 81. 

1 68 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

They will not allow any one to see them eat or drink,, 
especially those of the opposite sex. " I could not," 
says Cameron, "make a man let a woman see him 
drink." Hence every person has his own fire, and 
every man and woman must cook for themselves.1 On 
the Loango coast both bridegroom and bride must 
make a full confession of their sins at the marriage 
ceremony of Lemba ; should either fail to do so, or 
keep anything back, they will fall ill when eating 
together as man and wife. Only such marriages as are 
performed in the presence of this fetish Lemba are 
legitimate ; a negro dares not let any of his wives, 
except the one thus married, cook his food, or look 
after his wardrobe. This fetish also serves to keep the 
wives in order and to punish them for infidelity.2 In 
Eastern Central Africa, when a wife has been guilty of 
unchastity, her husband will die if he taste any food 
that she has salted. As a consequence of this super- 
stition, a wife is very liable to be accused of killing 
her husband. Accordingly, when a wife prepares her 
husband's food, she will often get a little girl to put 
the salt in.3 Amongst the Braknas of West Africa 
husbands and wives do not eat together.4 Fulah 
women may not eat with their husbands.5 In Ashanti 
and Senegambia, amongst the Niam-niam and the 
Barea, the wife never eats with the husband.6 Amongst 
the Beni-Amer a wife never eats in the presence of 
her husband.7 Amongst the Krumen the chief wife 
only may eat with the husband.8 In Eastern Central 
Africa each village has a separate mess for males and 

1 Cameron, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. vi. 173. 

- Bastian, Loango Kuste, i. 170, 172. 3 Macdonald, op. cit. i. 173. 

4 Giraud-Teulon, op. cit. 107. 5 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 471. ., 

6 J. L. Wilson, op. cit. 182 } W. Reade, op. cit. 453 j Macdonald, op. cit. i. 227 j 
Munzinger, op. cit. 526. 7 Id. 325. 8 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. no. 

1 

. 

SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 169 

females.1 This prohibition is very general throughout 
Africa. 

In Egypt the wives and female slaves are not 
allowed to eat with the master.2 Amongst the Aeneze 
Arabs husband and wife do not eat together.3 Amongst 
the Wahabees and Syrian Arabs the women may not 
eat with the male members of the family.4 So with 
the Druses of Lebanon.5 The Beni-Harith would not 
eat or drink at the hands of a woman, and "would 
rather have died of hunger than break the rule."6 
Herodotus states that Carian women did not eat with 
their husbands, nor would they address them as 
"husband."7 

Amongst the Kurds husband and wife never eat 
together.8 A Samoyed woman may not eat with men, 
much less with her husband, whose leavings form her 
meals.9 

A Hindu wife never eats with her husband, " if his 
own wife were to touch the food he was about to eat, 
it would be rendered unfit for his use."10 So in ancient 
India ; to quote Manu, "let him not eat in the company 
of his wife." n A Brahmin might not eat food given 
by a woman, or by those " who are in all things ruled 
by women," nor might he eat the leavings of women.12 
In Travancore the women must eat after the men.13 
Amongst the Khonds the wife and children wait upon 
the master while he eats, then they may take their 
meal. Women may not eat hog's flesh, and may only 

I Macdonald, op. cif. i. 151. 2 Lane, of. cit. i. 236, 243. 

3 Burckhardt, Notes on the Bedouins and Wahabys, i. 64. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. v. 451, 393. 5 Chasseaud, op. cit. 77. 
*' W. R. Smith, Kinship and Marriage in Ancient Arabia, 312. 

7 Herodotus, i. 146. 8 Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 15. 

9 Bastian, Der Mensch, iii. 295. 10 Colebrooke, op. cit. 166. 

II Manu, iv. 43. 12 Id. xi. 153 ; iv. 217. 
13 Mateer, op. cit. 204 j id. The Land of Charity, 65. 

170 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

taste liquor at festivals.1 The men and women of 
Kumaun eat separately.2 Amongst the hill tribes near 
Rajmahal in Bengal the women are not allowed to eat 
with the men.3 Amongst the Todas men and women 
may not eat together.4 At a Santhal wedding the 
bride and bridegroom eat together after fasting all 
day ; this is the first time she has ever eaten with a 
man.5 In Cochin a wife never eats with her husband.6 
A Siamese wife prepares her husband's meals, but dines 
after him.7 In the Maldive Islands husband and wife 
may not eat together.8 The same rule is in force 
amongst the Khakyens.9 In China by marriage a 
woman "only changes masters " ; the wife neither eats 
with her husband nor with her male children ; she 
waits upon them at table ; she may not touch what her 
son leaves.10 In Corea men and women have their 
meals separately, the women waiting on the men. 
" Family life is utterly unknown in Corea." n 

Amongst the Indians of Guiana husbands and wives 
eat separately.12 Macusi women eat after the men.18 
Amongst the Bororo women and children eat after the 
men, and finish their leavings.14 Amongst the Arau- 
canians only the chief wife may eat with her husband.15 
In ancient Mexico each person had a separate bowl for 
eating ; the men ate first and by themselves, the women 
and children afterwards.16 In Yucatan men and women 

1 Macpherson, Memorials of Service in India, 72. 

2 Panjab Notes and Queries, iii. 2. 454. 

3 T. Shaw, in Aslatick Researches, iv. 59. 4 Marshall, op. cit. 82. 

5 E. T. Dalton, Ethnology of Bengal, 216. 

6 A. Bastian, Allerlei aus Mensch- und Volkenkunde, ii. 160. 

7 Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 585. 8 Jcurn. Anthrop. Inst. xvi. 168. 
9 Anderson, op. cit. 137. 10 Hue, L' empire chinois, i. 268. 

11 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 306. 

12 im Thurn, op. cit. 2565 Brett, op. cit. 28. 13 Id. I.e. 

14 Von den Steinen, op. cit. 215. 15 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 516. 

16 L. H. Morgan, Houses and House Life of the American Aborigines, 101. 

VII 

SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 171 

ate apart.* "So far as I have yet travelled," says 
Catlin, " in the Indian country, I have never yet seen 
an Indian woman eating with her husband. Men form 
the first group at the banquet, and women and children 
and dogs all come together at the next." 2 Amongst 
the Iroquois tribes the men ate first and by themselves, 
then the women and children took their meal alone. 
Of these people it has been said that the women " must 
approach their lords with reverence ; they must regard 
them as most exalted beings, and are not permitted to 
eat in their presence." 3 Mandan women may not eat 
with the men.4 So amongst the Abenaques, Seminoles, 
and Northern Indians.5 The Seneca Indians relate of 
the changes in their customs resulting from the innova- 
tions of the whites, "that when the proposition that 
man and wife should eat together, which was so contrary 

1 to immemorial usage, was first determined in the affir- 
mative, it was formally agreed that man and wife should 
sit down together at the same dish and eat with the 
same ladle, the man eating first and then the woman, 
and so alternately until the meal was finished." 6 
Amongst the Natchez the husband used a respectful 
attitude towards his wife, and addressed her as if he 
were her slave ; he did not eat with her.7 An Eskimo 

'wife "dares not eat with her husband."8 Amongst 
the Indians of California husbands and wives eat 
separately; they may not even cook at the same 
fire.9 Karalit and Kutchin women may not eat with 
men.10 

1 L. H. Morgan, op. cit. 103. 2 Catlin, North American Indians, i. 202. 

3 Morgan, op. cit. 99 j Robertson, History of America, 178. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 297. 5 Id. iii. 94, 169 j Hearne, op. cit. 90. 

6 Morgan, op. cit. 100. 7 Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle France, iii. 423. 

8 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 308. 9 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 390. 

10 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 420, 384. 

' 

172 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Amongst the extinct Tasmanians husband and wife ate 
separately.1 The rule is general throughout Australia ; 
the gin never eats till the man has finished, and then she 
eats his leavings.2 In Victoria males and females have 
separate fires at which they cook their own food. 
Many of the best kinds of food are forbidden to 
women.8 In Queensland also the husband reserved the 
best of the food for himself.4 In Central Australia the 
men and women eat and camp separately.5 

Amongst the Arfaks of New Guinea the men and 
women eat apart.6 Amongst the Kayans and Punans 
of Borneo the men feed alone, attended on by the 
women.7 Amongst the Battas of Sumatra husband 
and wife may not eat from the same dish.8 In the j 
Mentawey Islands the man eats alone in the house ; 
the women are forbidden to use many kinds of food.9 
In the islands Wetar and Dama women may not eat 
with the men ; in Romang husband and wife take their 
meals at the same time but separately.10 Men and 
women may not eat together in Halmahera.11 

In Melanesia generally, women may not eat with 
men.12 In the Solomon Islands husband and wife do « 
not eat together ; she prepares his meal, and when he 
has finished she eats what he has left.13 In the Banks \ 
Islands all the adult males belong to the men's club, | 
Suqe, where they take their meals, while the women 
and children eat at home.14 In Tanna women may not ! 
eat with men, they may not drink kava, nor share in 

I Featherman, op. cit. ii. 105. 2 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vi. 777. 
3 Brough Smyth, op. cit. \. 134. 4 Lumholtz, op. cit. 161. 

5 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 467, 469. 6 D'Albertis, op. cit. i. 218. 

' Hose, in jfourn. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 160. 8 Ellis, op. cit. i. 117. 

9 Rosenberg, op. cit. 196. 10 Riedel, op. cit. 458, 464. 

II Id. in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 59. 

12 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. vi. 676 ; Meinicke, op. cit. \. 67. 

13 Guppy, op. cit. i. 41. 14 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. x. 237. 

SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 173 

the £0<p#-drinking feasts of the men.1 In the New 
Hebrides generally, women always eat apart from the 
men.2 In Uripiv "the most noticeable features of 
domestic life will be found in the curious segregation 
of the sexes and the superstitious dread of eating any- 
thing female. A few days after birth a killing of pigs 
takes place and the child is * rated a man/ Hence- 
forward he must cook his own meals at his own fire, 
| and eat with men alone, otherwise death will mysteri- 
ously fall upon him. The fact of his being suckled, 
however, which often goes on for two years, is quite 
overlooked. " 3 In Malekula men and women cook 
their meals separately, and even at separate fires, and 
all female animals, sows, and even hens and eggs are 
forbidden articles of diet. A native told Lieutenant 
Somerville that a mate of his had died from partaking 
!of sow.4 In New Caledonia women may not eat with 
the men.5 In Fiji husband and wife may not eat 
together, nor brother and sister, nor the two sexes 
^generally. Young men may not eat of food left by 
women. Boys, as being " unclean " until they have 
been tatooed, may not carry food to the chiefs, for 
their touch would render it " unclean." 6 

In Ponape the men take their meals in the club- 
house.7 In Kusaie women may not eat with men 
owing to the tabu? In Rarotonga the women ate 
apart from the men.9 In the Hervey Islands husband 
,and wife never eat together, and the first-born child, 
boy or girl, may not eat with any member of the 
family.10 In Paumotu the women may not eat with 

1 Turner, Nineteen Tears In Polynesia, 85. 2 Meinicke, op. cit. \. 197. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 4. 4 Id. 381. 5 Meinicke, op. cit. i. 231. 

6 Williams, op. cit. i. 167, 136 j D'Urville, op. cit. ii. 102. 

7 Waitz-Gerland. op. cit. v. 2. 72. 8 Meinicke, op. cit. ii. 377. 

Id. ii. 143. 10 Gill, Life in the Southern Isles, 94. 

I74 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the men, and are not allowed to eat several kinds of 
food, such as large fish and turtles. These laws are 
enforced by the tabu} So in Tubuai tabu forbids the 
women to eat with men, or to use as food turtles and 
pigs.2 In the Marquesas Islands to each dwelling 
there is attached a special eating-house for the men, 
which the women are forbidden to enter.8 In Nuka- 
hiva, according to another account, the rich have 
separate buildings for dining-rooms on particular 
occasions of feasting which women are not permitted 
to enter ; so strict is the rule, that they dare not even 
pass near them. Women are forbidden kava and 
certain foods.4 In Rurutu men and women do not eat 
together, " owing to superstitious fear ; they believe 
that in such case the wife would be destroyed by a^ 
spirit." 5 In Bow Island the men threw the remains 
of their meals to their wives.6 In Rotumah the men 
of the family eat first ; when they have finished, the! 
women and children begin their meal at a separate 
table.7 In New Zealand, where every man eats by 
himself away from his friends, women and slaves may 
not eat with men. Men may not eat with their wives 
nor wives with their male children, " lest their tapu on 
sanctity should kill them." 8 In the Sandwich Islands 
the king's wives were not allowed to enter his eating- 
house.9 In Hawaii the women were forbidden to eat 
in company with men, and even to enter the eating- 
room during meals. Three houses necessarily belonged 
to each family, the dwelling-house, a house for the 

1 Meinicke, op. cit. ii. 219. 2 Id. ii. 199. 3 Id. ii. 249. 

4 Lisiansky, op. cit. 87 ; Meinicke, of. cit. ii. 252, 247. 

5 Ellis, of. cit. iii. 97, 98. 6 Beechey, of. cit. i. 242. 

7 D'Urville, of. cit. ii. 440. 

8 Thomson, The Story of New Zealand, i. 60 ; Taylor, op. cit. i. 1 68. 
y Kotzebue, Voyage to the South Sea, i. 305. 

SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 175 

repasts of the men, and another for the meals of the 
women. The residence was common ; the women's 
house was not closed against our sex, but a decorous 
man would not enter it. The eating-house of the men 
was tabooed to women. "We ourselves saw the corpse 
of a woman floating round our ship, who had been 

' killed because she had entered the eating-house of her 
husband in a state of intoxication." The raison d'etre 

: of the two eating-houses belonging to each family was 
because the two sexes might not eat together. Women 
dared not be present at the meals of the men, on pain 
of death. Each sex had to dress their own victuals 
over a separate fire. The two sexes were not allowed 
to use the flesh of the same animal. Hog's flesh, 
turtle, several kinds of fruit, cocoa, bananas, etc., were 
prohibited to the women.1 From another account of 
the Sandwich Islands we gather the following : women 
might not eat with men ; their houses and their labours 
were distinct ; their aliment was prepared separately. 
A female child from its birth until death was allowed 
no food that had touched the father's dish. " From 
childhood onwards no natural affections were incul- 
cated ; no social circle existed." 2 Ellis' account of the 
state of things in the Society and Sandwich Islands is 
as follows : — "The institutes of Oro and Tane inexor- 
ably require not only that the wife should not eat those 
kinds of foods of which the husband partook, but that 
ishe should not eat in the same place or prepare her 
ifood at the same fire. This restriction applied not 
only to the wife with regard to her husband, but to 
ill individuals of the female sex, from their birth to 

1 Lisiansky, op. cit. 127, 126 ; Kotzebue, op. cit. iii. 249, i. 310; Meinicke, op. 
•it. ii. 300 j H. T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, 24. 

2 Jarvis, History of the Hawaiian or Sandwich Islands, 94, 95 5 Varigny, op. cit. 42. 

176 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

their death. The children of each sex always ate apart. 
As soon as a boy was able to eat, a basket was provided 
for his use, and his food was kept distinct from that 
of the mother. The men were allowed to eat the flesh 
of the pig, of fowls, every variety of fish, cocoa-nuts, 
and bananas, and whatever was presented as an offering 
to the gods ; these the females, on pain of death, were 
forbidden to touch, as it was supposed they would 
pollute them. The fires at which the men's food was 
cooked were also sacred, and were forbidden to be used 
by the females. The basket in which the provision 
was kept, and the house in which the men ate, were 
also sacred, and prohibited to the females under the 
same cruel penalty. Hence the inferior food for the 
wives and daughters was cooked at separate fires, 
deposited in distinct baskets, and eaten in lonely soli- 
tude by the females in little huts erected for the 
purpose." The whole custom was known as the at 
tabu or " sacred eating." l Cook observed of the 
Sandwich islanders, that "in their domestic life, the 
women live almost entirely by themselves." This 
condition of family life was most noticeable in Tahiti. 
The Tahitians forbade men and women to eat together; 
they " had an aversion to holding any intercourse with 
each other at their meals, and they were so rigid in the 
observance of this custom that even brothers and sisters 
had their separate baskets of provisions, and generally 
sat some yards apart, when they ate, with their backs 
to each other, without exchanging a word." 2 To 
resume the previous account : " their domestic habits 
were unsocial and cheerless. This is probably to be 
attributed to the invidious distinction established by j 

1 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i. 116, 129, 263, iv. 386 j id. Tour in Hawaii, 368. 

2 Cook and King, op. cit. iii. 130 j Vancouver, Voyage of Discovery, i. 105, 139. 

vii SEXUAL TABOO IN EATING 177 

their superstitions, and enforced by tabu between the 
sexes. The father and mother, with their children, never, 
as one social happy band, surrounded the domestic 
hearth, or assembling under the grateful shade of 
the verdant grove, partook together, as a family, of 
the bounties of Providence. The nameless but delight- 
ful emotions experienced on such occasions were un- 
known to them, as well as all that we are accustomed 
to distinguish by the endearing appellation of domestic 
happiness. In sickness or pain, or whatever other 
circumstances the mother, the wife, the sister, or the 
daughter, might be brought into, tabu was never re- 
laxed. The men, especially those who occasionally 
attended on the services of idol-worship in the temple, 
were considered ra, or sacred ; while the female sex 
was considered noa, or common : the most offensive 
and frequent imprecations which the men were accus- 
tomed to use towards each other, referred also to this 
degraded condition of the females. c Mayest thou 
become a bottle, to hold salt water for thy mother/ 
or ' mayest thou be baked as food for thy mother/ 
were imprecations they were accustomed to denounce 
upon each other." l Making due allowance for mission- 
ary prejudice, the action of sexual taboo in these islands 
, had considerable results, and its meaning is shown in 
. a marked fashion. King Kamehameha " broke " the 
tabu by eating with his wives.2 

Cases of this taboo have even been found in modern 
(Europe. At a Servian wedding the bride for the first 
,and only time in her life eats with a man, and is served 
instead of serving. In Brandenburg it is believed that 
'.lovers and married people who eat from one plate or 
drink from one glass will come to dislike each other, 

1 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i. 129. 2 Varigny, op. cit. 42. 

N 

I78 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, vn 

and in the district of Fahrland, near Potsdam, there is 
a prohibition, which is observed, against such persons 
biting the same piece of bread.1 

It was suggested by Robertson Smith that the pro- 
hibition against husbands and wives eating together 
may have been due to the fact that by exogamy 
they were of different tribes, and therefore could not 
eat the same food. But on the present showing this 
is impossible. In later thought, this idea may occasion- 
ally have been developed, but that it was never original 
is shown not only by the present evidence but by the 
facts that the system of tribal, totemic, and " classifica- 
tory " foods is rare, while sexual taboo in eating is 
almost universal, and that the taboo is no less common 
between brothers and sisters, who are of the same tribe, 
and also, except in rare cases, of the same totem-clan 
or marriage-class. 

1 Reinsberg Duringsfeld, Hochxeitsbuch, 81, 217. 

CHAPTER VIII 

IF contact of the two sexes is always potentially danger- 
ous, owing to fear of the chief result of contact, con- 
tagion of properties, it is to be expected that to savage 
thought the dangers of contagion should be multiplied 
and deepened when the contact is of the most intimate 
kind possible. The savage regards intercourse com- 
mensal and sexual as the closest, and especially in 
marriage, of which state the sharing of mensa and thorus 
'is the chief feature for ordinary thought. As com- 
mensality is regulated by this fear of contact, so is 
sexual intercourse. The ideas beneath each form of 
-, contact are the same. The supreme biological import- 
ance of the nutritive impulse, of which the sexual is an 
extension or complement, and the delicate mechanism 
of the organs of generation, have determined in the 
usual ratio man's psychological attitude towards this 
function. As all primitive psychological attitudes arise 
from what may be called physiological thought, the 
actual process of functions producing directly ideas 
concerning them, more or less reflex and subconscious, 
so as to be practically inherent in the human mind, so 
:he depth of such ideas varies as the importance of the 
function. The impulse of sex is only less strong than 
':hat of hunger. Periodicity has assisted to make its 
Dsychological character less ordinary, and less of an 
everyday concern, and hence more shrouded in secrecy 

i8o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and more surrounded by mystery and fear. The 
instinct, as it may be truly called, for performing 
important functions in secret is of course due to anxiety 
concerning their unimpeded performance, and to fear 
of interruption. This principle can be traced right 
down to the lower animals. The savage is far more 
secretive in this function than is civilised man ; what 
Riedel states of the Ceramese, is true of the generality 
of savage and barbarous peoples. In Ceram, he says, 
all natural functions, especially that of coitus, are per- 
formed in secret, by preference in the forest.1 In Fiji, 
from motives of delicacy, " rendezvous between hus- 
band and wife are arranged in the depths of the forest, 
unknown to any but the two." 2 Bowdich stated that 
in Western Africa if a man cohabited with a woman 
without the house, or in the bush, they both became 
the slaves of the first person who discovered them, 
but could be redeemed by their families.3 This less 
common rule presupposes more or less publicity in the 
forest. In the Aru Islands and Wetar intercourse is 
not performed in the house, but in the forest.4 In 
Makisar all bodily functions are performed in secret, 
and exposure is reprehensible.5 The savage is also , 
more refined in language with regard to this subject I 
than are most civilised men ; thus in Ceram it is for- j 
bidden to speak of sexual matters in the presence of a 
third person ; 6 and obscenity, that fungus-growth of 
civilisation through degeneration or wrong methods of 
- education, is either unknown amongst savages or re- 
garded as a heinous sin. Ethnology supplies many 
cases of apparent obscenity, but the expressions are not; 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Pafua, 96. 

2 Seeman, of. cit. no, 191. 

3 Bowdich, Mission from Cafe Coast Castle to Ashantee, 259. 

* Riedel, op. cit. 250, 448. 5 Id. 406. 6 Id. 96. 

SEXUAL INTERCOURSE 181 

scene, they express a man's righteous and religious 
indignation, and have much the same force as " infidel " 
and " blasphemer " when used seriously. 

Again, the phenomena , of modesty in the female 
deepen this reserve. Dr.TEllis, who has given the best 
account of the origin of the feeling of modesty, points 
out the impulse in female animals and women " to 
guard the sexual centres against the undesired advances 
of the male. The naturally defensive attitude of the 
female is in contrast with the naturally aggressive 
attitude of the male in sexual relationships." This 
impulse for defence is carried on into the state of 
desire, and female animals are known to run after the 
male, and " then turn to flee, perhaps only submitting 
with much persuasion." There is the well-known case 
of a hind running away from a stag, but in a circle 
round him. " Modesty thus becomes an invita- 
tion." l 

Sexual taboo has emphasised the ideas arising from 
this functional process, by filling them with a content 
of religious fear. As to the psychological attitude of 
the male sex, we often find, especially in European 
folklore, the fear of possible ligature or impotentia con- 
jugalis at marriage, an anxiety coming straight from 
function and closely connected with the universal care, 
often passing into religious fear, about doing something 
for the first time, or something unusual or important. 
Witches are often supposed to be able to cause this, as 
in South Celebes.2 

This feeling of egoistic sensibility, again, connects 
closely with the widely spread idea underlying contact, 
that injury may be caused by the ill-will or dangerous 

1 Havelock Ellis, Studies in the Psychology of Sex, ii. 29. 

2 B. F. Matthes, Bijdragen tot de Ethnologic van Zuid-Celebes, 97. 

1 82 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

habit of another, either with or without intention, 
either by the means of sympathetic magic or of what 
may be called sympathy. This form of sympathetic 
magic to which I apply the term ngadhungi, is, as we 
have seen, a natural development of that simple idea of 
contagion which may be called sympathy, man using 
nature's " bacteriological " or " electrical " means for 
his own ends. As is the case with every physical 
function and organ, so against the organs of genera- 
tion this method can be used. In Ceram difficult 
labour for woman, and in men, impotence, are caused 
by putting disease-transmitting articles where people 
may tread on them.1 In Tanna aud Malekula "the 
closest secrecy is adopted with regard to the penis, not 
at all from a sense of decency, but to avoid narak, the 
sight even of that of another man being considered 
most dangerous. They therefore wrap it round with 
many yards of calico, winding and folding them until 
a preposterous bundle eighteen inches or two feet long 
is formed."2 We have here the not .infrequent con- 
verse of the " evil eye " ; to see a thing is a method by 
which one may contract its contagious properties. Of 
the Arunta Messrs. Spencer and Gillen report, " as a 
general rule, women are not supposed to be able to 
exercise much magic except in regard to the sexual 
organs, but we have known of a woman being speared 
to death by the brother of her husband, who accused 
her of having killed the latter by means of a pointing 
stick. Women exercise peculiar powers in regard to 
the sexual organs. To bring on a painful affection in 
those of men, a woman will procure the spear-like seed 
of a long grass (Inturkirra), and having charmed it by 
singing some magic chant over it, she waits an oppor- 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 140. 2 Somerville, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 368. 

[ii THE SEXUAL ORGANS AND MAGIC 183 

mity to point and throw it towards the man whom 
she desires to injure. Shortly after this has been done 
the man experiences pain, as if he had been stung by 
ants, his parts become swollen, and he at once attri- 
butes his sufferings to the magic influence of some 
woman who wishes to injure him. A woman may also 
charm a handful of dust which she collects while out 
digging up yams or gathering seeds, and having 
c sung ' it brings it into camp with her. She takes 
the opportunity of sprinkling it over a spot where the 
man whom she wishes to injure is likely to micturate. 
If he should do so at this spot he would experience a 
scalding sensation in the urethra^ and afterwards suffer 
a great amount of pain. Women may also produce 
disease in men by * singing ' over and thus charming a 
finger, which is then inserted in the vulva ; the man 
who subsequently has connection with her will become 
diseased and may lose his organs altogether, and so 
when a woman wishes to injure a man she will some- 
times after thus * poisoning ' herself, seek an oppor- 
tunity of soliciting him, though he be not her proper 
Unawa. Syphilitic disease amongst the Arunta is, as a 
matter of fact, very frequently attributed to this form 
of magic, for .it must be remembered that the native 
can only understand disease of any form as due to evil 
magic, and he has to provide what appears to him to be 
a suitable form of magic to account for each form of 
disease." The disease Erkincha, as we have noticed, 
is transmitted in the same way. The natives do not 
reason " from a strictly medical point of view ; their 
idea in a case of this kind is that a man suffering from 
Erkincha conveys a magic evil influence which they call 
Afungquiltha to the women, and by this means it is 

1 Spencer and Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia, 547, 548. 

i84 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

conveyed as a punishment to other men." * As in 
other forms of contact, so in this, the transmission of 
disease is included in the hylo-idealistic contagion of 
properties, though it is not the origin of these ideas. 
Similarly, amongst the Zulus, a man suspicious of his 
wife's fidelity gets " medicine " from a doctor, and 
takes it internally. By cohabiting with his wife he 
gives her the seed of disease, and any one cohabiting 
with her afterwards, acquires it, while she remains un- 
injured. They have also a " medicine " which can 
make a man sensitive to the existence of that state in a 
woman which can produce disease ; it is rubbed into a 
scarification on the back of the left hand. If a woman 
whom he approaches is in this state, a spasmodic con- 
traction attacks his fingers when he touches her, and he 
therefore abstains. " It is from dread of this ' disease ' 
that a man will not marry a widow till she has had 
medical treatment to remove all possibilities of com- 
municating it." 2 The " intention " is in this example 
well illustrated, being aimed at a third party, and 
leaving the intermediary free, and also being clearly 
a man's vengeance materialised and transmitted. 

As has been pointed out, ngadhungi (narak) and 
beneficent transmission are exactly the same except in 
the character of the " intention," which is evil in the 
first case and good in the second, and love -charms 
proper, used to inspire love, are frequently based on this 
method. A man or woman in the Arunta and other 
tribes can charm another's love by " singing " a head- 
band, which is then given to the person to wear ; a 
man can inspire a woman's love by " singing " the shell 
ornament he wears from his girdle. As they express 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 4.12 
2 Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu, 287, 288. 

viii LOVE CHARMS 185 

the result, the woman sees " lightning " on it, and it 
makes "her inwards shake with emotion." The 
idealism of love and its physiological accompaniments 
are here put in a way worthy of any high culture. It 
is to be observed that this same method is used to cure 
sickness, the shell ornament being placed on the sick 
man's chest.1 To inspire love, the people of Makisar 
place secret charms in the footprints of a man or a 
woman.2 In the Kei Islands herbs mixed with women's 
hair and hung in a tree are used for this. The women 
arouse love in men by charming betel which they have 
themselves prepared.3 Sympathetic charms are used by 
men and women in Buru to excite love. One takes 
some betel or tobacco, and after speaking a charm over 
it, places it in the betel-box. When the man or woman 
against whom the charm is directed makes use of this 
1 betel, he or she falls in love with the owner. The same 
effect is produced by muttering charms over the oil 
which the woman uses for her hair, or over a piece of 
thair one has got from a woman. The most potent 
method, however, is the burying of a piece of prepared 
ginger, with the muttering of one's desire, in some spot 
where the woman usually passes.4 In Tenimber the 
men make considerable use of charms to engage the 
women's affections. To this end they place a mixture 
of roots and lime on some spot where the woman has 
urinated. It is believed that the woman after a short 
time will fall madly in love with the man. Young men 
jire therefore forbidden to use lime.5 In the Babar 
[slands when a quarrel occurs between lovers, the man 
jtvenges himself by keeping a piece of her hair, or some 
Sit of betel she has thrown away. Afterwards, as a 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 54$. 2 Rieclel, op. clt. 414, 

3 Id. 223. 4 U. it. 5 Id. 302. 

1 86 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

result, her children by another man will die. Lovers 
in these islands have full intimacy, but it must be kept 
secret, for there is a fine attaching. It is believed that 
men, if fined, are ungallant enough to make the woman 
ill and unlucky by curses.1 Lovers in the Aru Islands 
give each other gifts, but never a lock of hair, for fear 
that if they quarrelled the one might make the other ill 
by burning it.2 For love-charms Arunta women also 
" make and ' sing ' special okinchalanina or fur-string 
necklets, which they place round the man's neck, or 
they may simply charm a food such as a witchetty-grub 
or lizard and give this to the man to eat." To promote 
desire, a man will give a woman to eat a part of the 
reproductive organs of a male opossum or kangaroo. 
In the case of a delicate woman, a husband tries to 
strengthen her by " singing " over such part of a male 
animal, which she then eats.3 This instance shows thej 
identity of such love-charms and the transmission of 
strength already described. 

In the love-charms quoted, there are cases not only 
of ngadhungi but of transmission by ordinary contact. 
Leaving now this transmission of evil purpose and of 
love, we come to the general ideas of transmission of 
properties by ordinary contact. As one fears the 
malicious intention of an enemy which results in sickness 
or death by transmission of his malevolence, and 
welcomes or disdains, as the case may be, the feelings of 
love transmitted by material methods, so one fears or j 
invites the involuntary transmission of another's qualities • 
by contact. The lover is concerned with both sides of 
the taboo state in its beneficent aspect, he hopes to , 
transmit his own love to his mistress and to receive hers , 
by contact. But if, as is generally the case with i 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 358, 370. 2 Id. 262. 3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 548. i 

CONTAGION OF WEAKNESS 187 

.„, 

uncivilised man, the imperious instinct of love is crossed 
or conditioned by presuppositions concerning female 
character derived from the experience of ordinary life, 
the caution which he shares with the animals in the 
satisfaction of love will be accentuated by somewhat of 
fear of the contagion of female properties in the closest 
sort of contact. We shall see that the male sex, with an 
unanimity which is practically universal, ascribe to the 
female a relative inferiority in physical strength. This 
is a physiological idea arising straight from a sexual 
secondary difference which is practically universal. If 
savage man then fears that in ordinary association with 
women he may be infected with their relative weakness, 
and if the more civilised fear the moral " infection " of 
effeminacy, it is quite natural that in the closest form 
of contact this fear should be accentuated. 

The conception is also based on what is the comple- 
ment of the idea of female weakness, namely, the 
practically universal physiological belief that sexual 
intercourse is weakening. This is a conception that 
may be called instinctive, inasmuch as it arises straight 
from a peculiarity of the function. This peculiarity is 
the fact that sexual intercourse is followed by a 
temporary depression, resulting from increased blood- 
pressure. The idea, then, that contact with women 
entails weakness, thus arises in two ways which meet by 
a remarkable coincidence in the sexual act. 

In further illustration we may note the idea, probably 
universal, and correlative with the above mentioned 
physiological conception, that strength resides in the 
male seminal fluid. It is an interesting case of effect 
put for cause. In ordinary human thought the seed is 
the strength, as much as the blood is the life. The 
folk-medicine of most countries, especially Europe, is 

1 88 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

full of cases where human semen is used to cure sickness. 
Primitive man most practically, it is to be noted, 
correlates weakness and sickness ; and there are also 
numerous examples of semen being administered in 
order to produce strength. The idea is then carried 
on to the organs of generation, as has been already 
described. Zulus think the testes the seat of strength.1 

Much indirect evidence from savage custom has 
already appeared showing the universal belief that sexual 
intercourse is enervating, a belief based on this double 
idea. The Seminoles believed that carnal connection 
with a woman exercised an enervating influence upon 
men and rendered them less fit for the duties of a 
warrior.2 In Halmahera men must practice continence 
when at war, " otherwise they will lose their strength." 
In South Africa a man when in bed must not touch his 
wife with his right hand ; " if he did so, he would have 
no strength in war, and would surely be slain." 4 

The explanation of the rule, which forbids to 
warriors and hunters any sort of intercourse with 
women before and during their expeditions, may now| 
be completed. The main feature of such rules is the 
injunction of continence, and the idea which prompts 
this is that while contact with women transmits female 
weakness, the retention of a secretion, in which strength 
is supposed to reside, ensures vigour and strength. A 
Congo belief is here instructive ; when the Chitome goes 
out to make his judicial circuit, criers "proclaim a fast 
of continence, the penalty for breaking which is death. 
The belief is that by such continence they preserve the 
life of their common father." 5 Similarly in the Kei 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xx. 116. 2 Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes, v. 272. 

3 Riedel, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 69. 

4 Macdonald, in Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xx. 140. 5 W. Reade, op. cit. 362. 

viii THEORY OF CONTINENCE 189 

Islands men before going to war may have no intercourse 
with women, and those who remain behind must practice 
the same continence.* In New Caledonia, to abstain 
from carnal connection with women is considered a 
meritorious act, and is strictly observed on all solemn 
occasions, especially when going to war.2 Strict chastity 
is observed by Malays in a stockade, else the bullets of 
the garrison will lose their power.3 In Ceramlaut it is 
a sin not to cleanse the person after intercourse with a 
woman, when a man is about to go to war.4 After 
killing his first man, the young Natchez warrior was 
required to abstain for six months from all sexual 
intercourse, and was prohibited from tasting meat.5 A 
seven-days' taboo amongst the Malays, when fishing, is 
the scrupulous observance of chastity.6 During the 
pilgrimage to Mecca which every Mussulman must 
perform once in his life, he has to abstain from all 
sexual intercourse.7 The celibacy of warriors was a 
chief feature of Zulu and Fiji militarism. Tchaka 
based it on an existing custom and belief.8 The Fijians 
had a custom identical with that of the ancient Thebans.9 
I In practice, doubtless, an unmarried man may make a 
better soldier, precisely because there is no tie to render 
death more terrible. 

Further, just as many detachable portions of the 
organism are regarded as parts of a man's soul, being 
filled with his life and character, and sometimes, for his 
safety, as external souls, so those secretions which have 
in fact the closest connection with life and strength 
might naturally be regarded in thought as having 

1 Riedel, De slulk-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 223. 

2 Featherman, of. cit. ii. 92. 3 Skeat, Malay Magic, 524. 

4 Riedel, of. cit. 168. 5 Featherman, op. cit. Hi. 146. 

6 Skeat, op. cit. 315. 7 Burckhardt, Travels in Arabia, i. 163. 

8 Shooter, of. cit. 47. 9 Williams, of. cit. i. 45 ; Polyaenus, ii. 5. i. 

i 

1 9o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, 

inherent in them a considerable part of the life and soul, 
or sometimes as being identical therewith. The widely 
spread belief that the blood is the life is well known : 
it is also often regarded as containing the soul ; soul, 
life, and strength are essentially identical in savage 
thought. We also find, not only the universal idea 
that the seed is the strength, but, as might be expected, 
also cases where the soul is actually believed to be con- 
tained in the organs of procreation. Thus, in the 
islands Leti, Moa, and Lakor, when a man is very ill, 2 
ram is killed, and its genitals given him to eat. The 
people believe that " the principle of life resides in those 
parts."1 Similarly, the Naudowessies believe that the 
father gives the child its soul, the mother its body only.! 
This is quite logical from the elementary notions oj 
procreation. Now when we apply to these ideas the 
physiological fact that a temporary depression follows 
the sexual act, we may infer as probable a more or less 
constant physiological idea that in that act the mar 
transmits some of his best strength, a part of his sou 
or life. We have had occasion to notice how primi- 
tive thought often anticipates modern scientific theor) 
in some rough generalisation, and here is a concep- 
tion on a par with other early conceptions, whicl: 
anticipates somewhat the latest theories of the Germ- 
plasm. 

In the next place, there is the preliminary part ol 
the function, the perforation of the hymen. Here w( 
have an instructive instance of the diffidence, anxiety 
and caution with which the savage not only approaches 
things and acts unfamiliar or met with for the first time, 
but makes preparation for the due and proper perform- 
ance of important functions, not by way of improving 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 393. 2 Carver, North America, 378. 

RUPTURE OF THE HYMEN 

191 

upon Nature, but of making sure of the working of 
Nature's mechanism. Deferring for a moment the 
latter consideration, we can estimate here the female 
attitude. There is in the female sex a universal 
physiological anxiety concerning this act. Savages 
cannot feel so much pain or so much pleasure as men 
of a more complex and highly organised brain, but their 
precautions against, and fear of, pain are far more 
elaborate and anxious. Like the higher animals, the 
savage is very diffident and timid by nature, except 
when a strong physical impulse is in full progress. 
Now we find that the savage uses more or less direct 
methods to avoid this preliminary act of handselling ; 
the avoidance is due to a vague religious fear based on 
the ideas of sexual taboo, also to the anxiety about a 
difficulty and, doubtless, to consideration for the female. 
Thus in the Dieri and neighbouring tribes it is the 
universal custom when a girl reaches puberty to rupture 
the hymen? In the Portland and Glenelg tribes this is 
done to the bride by an old woman ; and sometimes 
white men are asked for this reason to deflower 
maidens.2 The artificial rupture of the hymen is a very 
widely spread custom. In the practice we see clearly the 
double idea of ridding the function of such difficulty as 

' is identified by the savage with a spiritual -material 
result, and of removing the first and therefore most 
virulent part of female contagion, as the West African 

j " takes off" the fetish " from a strange liquor by getting 

j some one to " handsel "it. 

Again, ignorance of the nature of female periodicity 

;. leads man to consider it as the flow of blood from a 

< wound, naturally, or more usually, supernaturally pro- 
duced. We must also bear in mind the connection 

1 jfourn. Anthrop. Inst., xxiv. 169. 2 Brough Smyth, op. cit. ii. 319. 

192 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

often made between the menstrual flow and the blood 
shed at the perforation of the hymen. The two results 
appear so similar that man often infers more or less 
exact identity of cause. 

An obvious inference was that the menstrual blood 
was caused by the bite of a supernatural animal, or by 
congress with such or with a supernatural human agent 
or evil spirit. The first of these is a fairly common 
idea. Certain Australian tribes believe that menstrua- 
tion comes from dreaming that a bandicoot has scratched 
the parts.1 In New Britain it is traced to the bite of a 
supernatural bird,2 and in Portugal to that of a snake.3 
Messrs. Ploss and Bartels reproduce in illustrations ! 
wooden figures from New Guinea, one representing a ! 
crocodile biting a woman's vulva, another, a crocodile 
shaped like a snake emerging therefrom, and a third, a 
snake, in shape like the male organ, at the entrance of 
the vagina.* In Portugal, according to another account, | 
it is believed that during menstruation women are j 
" liable to be bitten by lizards, and to guard against this 
risk they wear drawers during this period."5 In 
Abyssinia there is a belief that if the bride leaves her j 
home in the interval between the betrothal and the 
marriage she will be bitten by a snake.6 At the first 
menstruation of a Chiriguano girl old women run about 
the hut with sticks, " striking at the snake which has 
wounded her." 7 " In a modern Greek folk-tale the 
Fates predict that in her fifteenth year a princess must 
be careful not to let the sun shine on her, for if this 
were to happen she would be turned into a lizard."1 

1 Journ. Anthop. Inst. xxiv. 177. 2 Ploss u. Bartels, Das Weib*, ii. 330, 334.! 

3 Id. I.e. 4 Id. i.e. 5 H. Ellis, op. cit. ii. 237. 

6 M. Parkyns, Life in Abyssinia, ii. 41. 7 Lettres edifiantes et curieu^es, viii. 333. | 

8 J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough 2, iii. 220. 

THE SERPENT 

1 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 175. 2 Ploss u. Bartels, cp. clt. ii. 334. 

3 Ellis, I.e. * Clifford, In C.urt and Kamfong, 189. 

5 T. Bent, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 125. 

fi Gill, op. clt. 279. 7 Curr, The Australian Race, ii. 425. 

8 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 471, 472, 473. 

O 

i94 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the inference is naturally to a spiritualised man. Such 
is also the case with the widely spread belief in incubi 
and succubi, which is due to a similar inference from a 
common phenomenon of the early days of sexual life. 
The result is ascribed to a supernatural nocturnal visitor. 
Amongst the Yorubas erotic dreams are attributed to 
Elegbra, a god who, either as male or female, consorts 
sexually with men and women in their sleep.1 In the 
particular question before us, we find a link between 
the serpent and a human agent in a common folk-tale 
motive. The old Sanskrit story tells of a beautiful 
girl who killed a cobra to get the jewel from its head. 
To avenge this, the king of the snakes assumed the 
form of a handsome youth, and after winning the girl's 
affections, married her. "At last the day came, and 
the nuptial ceremony was over, and the bridegroom 
went with his bride into the nuptial chamber. And he 
lifted her on to the marriage-bed, and called her by 
her name. And as she turned towards him, he ap- 
proached her slowly, with a smile on his face. And 
she looked and saw issuing from his mouth and dis- 
appearing alternately, a long tongue, thin, forked, and; 
quivering like that of a snake. And in the morning 
the musicians played to waken the bride and bridegroom. 
But the day went on, and they never came forth. 
Then the merchant, her father, and his friends, after 
waiting a long time, became alarmed, and went and 
broke the door, which was closed with a lock. And 
then they saw the bride lying dead on the bed, alone, 
and on her bosom were two small marks. And they 
saw no bridegroom. But a black cobra crept out of 
the bed, and disappeared through a hole in the wall." 
In Siam evil spirits are believed to make " the wound " 

1 Ellis, op. cit. 67. 2 A Digit of the Moon, 93, 94, 95. 

viii THE DEMON LOVER 195 

which causes the monthly flow of blood.1 The idea is 
further extended. In the Aru Islands the women fear 
;the evil spirit Boitai, when traversing the forest, because 
he takes the semblance of their husbands, and has inter- 
course with them there, shown afterwards by bleeding 
from the vagina? So in Kola and Kobroor the women 
'avoid going alone in the forest, so as not to be ap- 
proached by sisi, evil spirits, the result of which is the 
growth of stones in the uterus and subsequent death.3 
In the Babar Islands there are evil spirits in the shape 
of men who approach young women, in the form of 
their husbands, and make them pregnant. These are 
Identified with the well-known suwanggi, who are 
actual persons versed in sorcery.4 In the island of 
Wetar there is an evil spirit, named Kluantelus, who 
takes the form of a handsome man, and has intercourse 
with women ; accordingly, women never go unaccom- 
panied into the forest.5 The Jews of the East believe 
:hat male spirits form alliances with women, while the 
female spirits " entangle in their cunning meshes of 
wedded love the young men of earth." 6 According to 
:he Javanese the air is peopled by wandering genii of 
ivil. Ghostly demons often disguise themselves in 
luman form, and appear as counterfeit husbands to 
wives whom they mislead by their deceptive allure- 
ments.7 In Nias the seducer is fined and the woman 
milled. A pregnant woman often asserts that she was 
•avished by a spirit, and she thus saves her life and 
that of her child.8 The Malays suppose that Pontianak 
s the ghost of a woman dying in child-birth, which 
presents itself at midnight to men and emasculates 

1 Loubere, I.e. 2 Rieclel, op. cit. 252. 8 Id. 271. 

4 Id. 340. 5 Id. 439. 6 Featherman, op. cit. v. 129. 

7 Id. ii. 396. 8 Id. 356. 

196 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

them.1 The natives of Amboina and Uliase believe in 
evil spirits, male and female, who practise the following 
trick. When a man and a woman have made an 
assignation in the forest, one of these evil spirits is apt 
to take the shape and place of the man or the woman, 
and whoever has intercourse with such dies in a few 
days. These people also believe that Pontianak, who 
in these islands is feared by women in child-birth, steals 
away infants and the genital organs of men.2 The 
correlation of evil spirits with human beings is here 
well illustrated. 

To these ideas is partly due the common estimate 
of woman as a mysterious being who has communica- 
tion with the world of spirits. The other factor in the 
belief is the hysteria which is more or less frequent in 
the sexual life of woman. Thus, in Buru hysterical 
prophetesses are believed to have had intercourse with 
evil spirits.3 The idea further develops into the widely 
spread belief that women, especially about the time 
of puberty, have communication with gods, a belief 
emphasised by the common practice of secluding them 
at that time. This idea has been made much of by 
various systematised cults, and has resulted in many 
phenomena of religious parthenogenesis. In Cambodia 
it is sacrilege to abuse a young girl who is not of an 
age to marry. They are called the wives of Prah En 
(Indra). During the seclusion called " the shade " 
which is necessary at puberty, young girls are called 
the wives of Re a, and it is a sin to abuse them. On 
leaving their retreat, they become the wives of men.4 

Another agent sometimes connected with these 
phenomena of periodicity is the sun. Dr. Frazer has 

1 Featherman, op. cit. 434. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 57, 58. 

8 Id. 9. 4 Aymonier, op. cit. 192, 193. 

SUN AND MOON 197 

en many examples of girls at puberty being forbidden 
to see the sun, or fire, in connection with the idea that 
the sun can cause impregnation, as in the familiar story 
of Danae. He also points out that boys at puberty, 
mourners, warriors who have slain a foe, and other 
tabu persons may not look upon the sun or the fire. 
Associated with the fear is the belief that the tabued 
girl might 'pollute the sun, as Samoyed women can 
pollute the fire ; i.e. make it dangerous from taboo 
qualities to others. This is the objective aspect of 
taboo. From the subjective aspect, the point of view 
of the person in danger, there is the belief that impreg- 

i nation can be effected by the sun. Early thought 
speculated deeply on die connection of the sun with 
the fertility and growth of vegetable and animal life. 
Not only the gentle rain from heaven, but also the 

1 kindly rays of the warm sun were credited, not un- 
scientifically, with the power of impregnating Mother 
Earth and her offspring. Inference from growth under 

1 the warm sun would naturally lead to the belief that 
women could thus be influenced by it. The moon also 
was sometimes credited with this power over women. 
Here we come to the interesting question how far early 
roannaJ observed the rhythmical connection of female 

! periodicity with the moon. That monthly periodicity 
belongs to women and moon alike could not fail to be 
marked, and there are indications that it was. Hence 
conceptions of an anthropomorphic kind concerning 
the connection of women with the moon. The " faith- 
ful witness in Heaven," by the way, is more often than 

. not masculine in primitive thought. In both of these 

' correlative ideas, as also in the case of fire, often 
identified more or less with the sun, as the earthly 
phenomenon of the heavenly idea, we have now to 

198 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

consider whether they connect with any functional 
peculiarity of women, especially at puberty. In the 
case of mourners and the like, the potential danger of 
fire, as a beneficent but somewhat dangerous essence, 
not to be trifled with, is enough reason for the taboo, 
and applies also to girls and boys at the beginning of 
the sexual life. There is, however, a further coincid- 
ence arising, as so often, from a function. A peculiarity 
of puberty which passes on into the phenomena of love, 
is sudden accession of bodily heat, by which the whole 
frame from time to time feels filled with fire. It is in 
ideas arising from this functional phenomenon that we 
are to find the ultimate explanation of this fear of the 
sun. In all these taboos at puberty, it is the dangerous 
results of association with the other sex that are i 
guarded against, and so characteristic a symptom as 
accession of heat could not fail to be noticed and 
avoided as far as possible. The " patient," using the 
primitive connotation of this term, must keep cool. 
Parallel ideas from savage psychology, bring this out. ! 
Anger, which is physiologically connected with an 
accession of heat, is often attributed by savages to i 
possession by an evil spirit, as amongst the Battas.1 
More precisely there is a universal connection, seen in 
all languages, between love and heat. Malay physio- 
logy, for instance, states that love is made of fire.2 
We saw in a Greek folk-tale the connection between 
the sun at puberty and the lizard, a symbol of mascu- 
linity. A Central Australian myth of the origin of fire , 
states that it came from the penis of a euro, which 
contained " very red fire." 3 Again, and the idea is : 
natural enough in tropical countries, there is a frequent 

1 Junghuhn, op. tit. ii. 156. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 427. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 446. 

vin HEAT 199 

connection made between heat and evil spirits. To 
keep cool is one of the points of savage comfort in a 
hot climate, a wish which naturally would pass into the 
spiritual life. In Ceram and Watubella a house which 
is filled with evil spirits is called a " warm " house ; l 
and sickness is often identified with heat, and the 
patient is before all things to be made cool ; while 
health and soundness are identified with coolness. For 
forty-four days after birth the Malay mother may not 
eat foods which have a heating effect on the blood, and 
the Malay infant is bathed with cold water every four 
hours " in order that it may be kept cool." 2 Especi- 
ally fever is, of course, connected with heat. In the 
Wyingurri tribe of West Australia the sun is Tchintu. 
A stone of that name contains the heat of the sun, and 
is used to give a man fever by placing it where he will 
tread.3 Here, as in so many cases before mentioned, 
there comes in the interesting question whether primi- 
tive man observed the connection of the temperature 
of the body with health and illness. As before, the 
case stands thus ; man's unanalysed experience of 
temperature in sickness is included under an excessively 
wide generalisation, which has within it, though con- 
cealed in fallacy, a scientific truth, destined to emerge 
after a training in analysis and experiment. 

This connection between illness, evil spirits, and heat 
is an adequate explanation of the rule whereby many 
persons in various kinds of danger may not see the sun 
or fire. Pamali (tabu) amongst the Hill Dyaks is 
imposed on all kinds of occasions. People subjected to 
it are not allowed to bathe, to touch fire, or follow 
ordinary occupations.4 The heir to the throne of 

1 Riedel, op. at. 141, 210. 2 Skeat, op. cit, 343. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 541. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 278. 

200 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Bogota might not see the sun, nor converse with a 
woman.1 When a Pima kills a man, he has to fast 
sixteen days, is cut off from all social intercourse, and 
may not look at a fire.2 

Further, it is natural that on these ideas sexual 
intercourse should be especially forbidden at sexual 
crises, such as menstruation, pregnancy, and for some 
time after child-birth. Woman's subconscious physical 
fear of man here correlates with an instinct of physio- 
logical thought caused by the discomfort of the func- 
tion, and for the male sex, his fear of female contagion 
is intensified by the presence of female " disease." It 
is not long since the medical world gave up the primi- 
tive idea that menstrual blood is deleterious. In the 
present connection this hylo - idealistic "disease" is 
identical with the property of the sexual taboo state'; 
on these occasions woman is more of a woman than in7 
ordinary circumstances, and the danger of contagion is' 
accordingly intensified. 

Such are the dangers connected with the sexual act 
in the mind of primitive man, and to remove the 
material contagion there was used, with more than the 
mere idea of cleanliness, a religious purification. The 
bath taken by a Cadiack bridegroom and bride after 
the wedding night, " for the purification of himself and 
his partner," is one instance of a universal practice.3 
The fear of transmission of female properties, here 
intensified, is also indirectly connected with female 
sexual secretions, such as menstrual blood, a special 
form of ceremonial "unclean ness." Moreover, when 
ideas of shame and disgust and, later, of religious 
purity, are brought in, the old undifFerentiated spiritual- 

1 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iv. 359. 2 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 240. 

3 Lisiansky, op. cit. 199. 

L 

VIII 

SEXUAL DANGERS 

201 

material secretions, as they may be called, which com- 
bined contagion of female weakness, and imaginary 
disease and poison on the one hand, and on the other 
hand, of materialised physical fear of the male sex, in 
the virus which made contact dangerous, were split 
into specialised forms. 

CHAPTER IX 

THESE ideas concerning contact regulate in social taboo 
human relations generally, and in sexual taboo those of 
men and women. The sexual properties whose trans- 
mission renders contact dangerous or beneficent may 
now be recapitulated, and further proof given of their 
character and of the fact of their transmission. We 
have seen that where sympathy, desire, or love appears, 
contact between persons otherwise mutually dangerous 
becomes beneficent. Sympathy, aided by a common 
human impulse, which may be called allopathic, some- 
times regards sexual difference as in itself efficacious to 
cure disease. For instance, the Australians employ the 
urine of the opposite sex as a cure for sickness. In 
very serious cases blood from a woman's sexual organs 
is given to a man, and his body is rubbed with it ; or 
blood from a man is given to a woman.1 From a 
similar idea comes a custom found in the Aru Islands, 
where a battle can be instantly stopped if a woman 
throws her girdle between the armies.2 But apart from 
cases like these and the methods of contact employed 
in love-charms and marriage ceremonies, sexual contact 
is usually, on the principles of sexual taboo, regarded 
as deleterious. The Central Australians believe that to 
put a man's hair necklet or girdle near a woman would 

1 Eyre, op. cit. ii. 300 j Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 464. 
2 Riedel, op. cit. 261. 

CHAP, ix SEXUAL CONTAGION 203 

be productive of serious evil to her. They believe that 
sterility may be brought about by a girl in her youth 
playfully or thoughtlessly tying on a man's hair waist- 
band. The latter so used, if only for a moment or 
two, has the effect of cramping her internal organs and 
making them incapable of the necessary expansion, and 
this is the most frequent explanation of sterility given 
by the natives.1 

Owing to the monopoly of thought by the male sex 
it is rarely we hear of transmission of masculine pro- 
perties to the female. It is more often a vague dele- 
terious result that is thought of; for instance, Maori 
men may not eat with their wives, nor may male 
children eat with their mothers, "lest their tapu, or 
4 sanctity/ should kill them." 2 This male tapu is, of 
course, male characteristics, such as relative superiority 
of strength. The Miris will not allow their women to 
eat tiger's flesh, " lest it should make them too strong- 
minded." 3 We have noticed cases where men are not 
allowed to be present at lying-in, because their presence 
would hinder the birth. Another case is from Halma- 
hera, where a pregnant woman is afraid to eat food left 
by her husband, for it would cause painful labour.4 
European folklore illustrates this masculine contagion, 
and the general idea that contact produces assimilation. 
In Hannover- Wendland and the Altmark, if a boy and 
girl are baptised in the same water, the boy becomes a 
woman-hunter, and the girl grows a beard. In Neu- 
mark if a girl is baptised in water used for a boy she 
will have a moustache. In Lower Saxony and Meck- 
lenburg a boy must not be baptised in water which has 
been used for a girl, else he grows up beardless ; while 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 539, 52. 2 Taylor, op. cit. 168. 

3 Dalton, op. cit. 33. 4 Riedel, in Zeitschrlft fur Ethnologic, xvii. 78. 

204 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

a girl if baptised in water used for a boy becomes mis- 
chievous like boys. In Scotland if Jeanie is baptised 
before Sandie, she grows a beard and Sandie is beardless.1 
Hessian lads think they can escape conscription by carry- 
ing a baby-girl's cap in their pocket.2 Lastly, when 
females are of a masculine temperament they often assume 
male attire, an interesting practical method of assimilation.3 
What, then, are the chief female properties the 
transmission of which is feared as deleterious? First 
of all, mere difference is regarded by the savage as 
dangerous, simply because it is unknown. In the second 
place, the difference is specialised as inferiority of 
physical strength and stature, relatively, that is, to the 
male standard. It is a universal conception amongst men 
of all stages of culture that woman is weaker than man. 
As a rule, man forgets the relativity of this character- 
istic, and regards woman as more or less absolutely 
weak. That this idea is practically inherent in human 
male nature, as a physiological inference of the simplest 
kind, is proved by its regular expression in the life and 
literature of all ages. The use and connotation of the 
word " effeminate " illustrates this well. This evidence 
taken with that of ethnology is overwhelming. Primi- 
tive man agrees with the most modern of the moderns, 
for instance, with a Nietzsche, who regards woman as 
a slight, dainty, and relatively feeble creature. The 
ethnological evidence for this masculine belief is very 
extensive.4 General inferiority is sometimes found as a 
secondary result. 

1 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 217. 2 A. Wuttke, Deutsche Aberglaube, 100. 

3 Masculine females assume male attire — Brooke, Ten Tear 3 in Sarawak, i. 131 } 
Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 7 j G. A. Wilken, in De Indhche da's for 1 88 1, 263 5 
W. Reade, op. cit. 364; Bastian, San Salvador, 177 ff. ; Giraud-Teulon, of. cit. 
309 ff. (Amazons). 

4 Darwin, Descent of Man, 117, 597; Bastian, Der Mensc/i in der Geschichte, iii. 

ix THE WEAKER VESSEL 205 

In the savage mind the belief has been corroborated 
by the fallacies that woman's periodic loss of blood 
marks enfeeblement — an idea which often correlates 
with the notion that woman is a chronic invalid, sick- 
ness and weakness being identified, — and that sexual 
intercourse is weakening. 

In the next place is the relative timidity of women.1 

292 j H. Ellis, Man and Woman, 395 ; Tasmanians, Bonwick, op. clt. 10 ; Aus- 
tralians, Eyre, op. at. ii. 207, Journ. Anthrop. Inst.^ xvi. 205,^ Lumholtz, Among 
Cannibals, 100, 163, Native Tribes of South Australia, ii, Waitz-Gerland, op. clt. vi. 
774, 775, Letourneau, Sociologie, 169 j Polynesians, D'Urville, op. clt. \. 520, 
Beechey, op. clt. i. 238, 241, Meinicke, op. clt. ii. 219, 198, Ellis, Polynesian Re- 
searches, iii, 199, 293, 294, 257 ; Fijians, Williams, op. clt. \. 156, 169, Wilkes, op. 
clt. iii. 332, Meinicke, op. cit. ii. 45, Waitz-Gerland, op. clt. vi. 627 ; New Caledonians, 
Meinicke, op. clt. i. 231, Gamier, Oceanic, 186, 350, 354, Waitz-Gerland, op. clt. vi. 
626, Anderson, Fiji and Neiv Caledonia, 218, 232 ; New Hebrides, Meinicke, op. cit. 
i. 203, Journ. Anthrop. last, xxiii. 7 j Queen Charlotte Islands, Meinicke, op. cit. i. 
177 j Solomon Islands, id. i. 166} Melanesia generally, id. i. 67, Parkinson, Im 
Bismarck- Archipel, 98, 99, Codrington, op. clt. 233, Powell, Wanderings In a Wild 
Country, 545 Papuans, Rosenberg, op. clt. 454, 532 j Sumatra, Marsden, op. clt. 382, 
Junghuhn, op. clt. ii. 135, 81 $ Bali, id. ii. 339 5 Nias, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- 
Land-en Volkenkunde, xxxvi. 3055 Sarawak, Brooke, op. clt. i. 101 j Japan, Alcock, 
The Capital of the Tycoon, i. 265 j Corea, Ploss u. Bartels, op. clt. ii. 434, Griffis, 
op. clt. 245 ; China, M. Hue, L'empire chinois, i. 268 j India, Missionary Records 
(India), xviii. D'Urville, op. cit. i. no, Asiatick Researches, iv. 95, Histoire unl- 
verselle des voyages, xxxi. 3525 Siam, Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 379 j Afghans, Letourneau, 
op. cit. 179; Samoyeds, Georgi, op. cit. 14, 15 ; Circassians, Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 1425 
Russians, Ploss, op. cit. ii. 448 ; Ansayree, Featherman, op. cit. v. 495 j Egyptians, 
Ploss, op. cit. ii. 455, Lane, op. cit. i. 252; Africa, Shooter, op. cit. 79, 80, 81, 
Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 387, 471, Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 426, D. Macdonald, 
Afrlcana, i. 137, 141, 35, C. New,L//£ In Eastern Africa, 359, Ploss, Das Kind, 442, 
Letourneau, op. cit. 172, P. B. Du Chaillu, Equatorial Africa, 52, 377, Harris, 
Highlands of Ethiopia, iii. 58, Proyart, Loango, 93, W. Bosman, Description of Guinea, 
320, Bastian, San Salvador, ji, Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiii. 465, xvi. 86, xxii. 118, 119, 
xxiv. 289, C. J. Anderson, Lake Ngami, 231 ; Madagascar, Waitz-Gerland, op. cit.1 
ii. 438 ; Central and South America, Letourneau, op. cit. 175, Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. 
iii. 515, 308, 382, iv. 130, Brett, op. cit. 353, Bancroft, op. cit. iii. 494, Dobrizhoffer, 
op. cit. ii. 155 ; North, America, Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 99, 101, Bancroft, op. cit. 
i. 511, Peter Jones, History of the Ojelrway Indians, 60, Charlevoix, Journal, vi. 44, 
Powers, op. cit. 20, Sproat, op. cit. 91, Hearne, op. cit. 90, 310. 

1 The following are typical cases: Lumholtz, op. cit. 91 ; Featherman, op. cit. 
v. 495 j Kotzebue, Voyage to the South Sea, ii. 56, Asiatick Researches, vi. 82 ; Gamier, 
op. cit. 328, 349; Coote, op. cit. 163, 164; Hearne, op. cit. 3105 Waitz-Gerland, 
op. cit. vi. 775 j Melville, The Marquesas Islands, 76 ; Wilkes, op. cit. iii. 232 ; K. von 
den Steinen, op. cit. 332 ; D'Albertis, op. cit. i. 15, 189, 200, 292, 318, 337, 342. 

206 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

This characteristic and that of weakness are the com- 
plement of masculine courage and strength, and are 
connected with a physical subconscious fear of men. 
When associated with hysterical phenomena, timidity 
is merged in another conception of woman, as a 
" mysterious " person. The mystery is based on sexual 
differentiation, in particular on the sexual phenomena 
of menstruation and child-birth. As we have seen, this 
mystery is deepened by further ideas it creates, such as 
the ascription of taboo properties to woman, and the 
beliefs that woman has intercourse with the spiritual 
world at menstruation, and that she is more or less of 
a potential witch. The whole reasoning is clinched by 
the fact of a temporary depression, identified with loss 
of strength, following upon intercourse with this weak 
but mysterious creature, and the imperious demands of 
nature which enforce association with the female sex, 
inevitably cause a continuous repetition of sexual taboo 
and of the ideas which underlie it. These organic 
characteristics not only make woman peculiarly sus- 
ceptible to religious influences, but have fitted her to 
be a useful medium for priestcraft, and often to hold 
the priestly authority herself. The priestess is a 
frequent feature of savage worship. Here is to be 
found the explanation of one set of cases of priests 
dressing as women. For example, amongst the Sea 
Dyaks some of the priests pretend to be women, or 
rather dress as such, and like to be treated as females.1 
Patagonian sorcerers, who are chosen from children 
who have St. Vitus' dance, wear women's clothes.2 
Amongst the Kodyaks there are men dressed as women, 
who are regarded as sorcerers and are much respected.3 

1 St. John, op. cit. i. 62. 2 Bastian, Der Mensch, iii. 310. 

3 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 313. 

ix CONTAGION OF WOMAN 207 

Doubtless the idea is to assume such emotional peculiari- 
ties of women as are useful to the priest. To the 
savage mind, the donning of another's dress is more 
than a token of the new position : it completes identity 
by communicating the qualities of the original owner. 
There is also the desire to command attention by eccen- 

'tricity if not by mystery, for both of which ends change 
of sex is a time-honoured method. 

It remains to add direct evidence for the belief, 
which is the chief factor in sexual taboo, that contact 
with women causes transmission of female character- 

; istics, femininity, effeminacy, weakness, and timidity 

In South Africa a man must not, when in bed, touch 
his wife with his right hand ; " if he did so, he would 
have no strength in war, and would surely be slain." 
If a man touch a woman during menstruation, " his 

1 bones become soft, and in future he cannot take part in 
warfare or any other manly exercise." Stepping over 
another's person is highly improper ; while if a woman 

, steps over her husband's stick " he cannot aim or hit 
any one with it. If she steps over his assegai, it will 
never kill or even hit an enemy, and it is at once 
discarded and given to the boys to play and practise 
with/'1 The Galela and Tobelorese are continent 
during war, " so as not to lose their strength." 2 The 
Seminoles believed that " carnal connection with a 
woman exercised an enervating influence upon men, 
and rendered them less fit for the duties of the I warrior." 3 

j In British Guiana cooking is the province of the women. 
On one occasion, when the men were compelled to 
bake some bread, they were only persuaded to do so 

1 J. E. Macdonald, in Jcurn. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 140, 119, 130. 

2 J. G. F. Riedel, in Zeit schrift fiir Ethnologic, xvii. 69. 

3 Schoolcraft, op. cit. v. 272. 

208 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

CHAP. 

with the utmost difficulty, and were ever after pointed 
at as old women.1 North American Indians, both 
before and after war, refrain " on religious grounds " 
from women. Contact with females, some of them 
hold, " makes a warrior laughable, and injures his 
bravery for the future." 2 One of Hesiod's maxims is 
a prohibition against washing in water used by a 
woman.3 In Homer, Odysseus fears lest he be 
" unmanned," and therefore susceptible to Circe's j 
influence if he ascend her couch.4 Assimilation to 
the female character from such connection is illustrated 
by a Cingalese myth.5 In the Solomon Islands a man 
will never pass under a tree fallen across the path, for 
fear a woman may have stepped over it.6 Amongst 
the Bongos stools are only used by women ; the men 
avoid such seats as effeminate.7 In Central Australia, 
during his period of initiation, a medicine-man must 
sleep with a fire between him and his wife ; " if he did I 
not do this his power would disappear for ever." 
Amongst the Barea man and wife seldom share the 
same bed ; the reason they give is " that the breath ! 
of the wife weakens her husband." 9 In Western 
Victoria a menstruous woman may not take any one's I 
food or drink, and no one will touch food that she has 
handled, " because it will make them weak." 10 Among 
the Dyaks of North- West Borneo young men are for- 
bidden to eat venison, which is the peculiar food of 
women and old men, " because it would render them 
as timid as deer." n A Zulu, newly married, dares not 

I im Thurn, op. cit. 256. 

A Hesiod, Works and Days, 79' 
5 Asiatick Researches, vii. 439. 
7 Schweinfurth, op. cit. \. 28 j. 
9 Munzinger, cp. cit. 526. 

II St. John, c/>. «r. i. 186. 

2 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 158. 

4 Odyssey, x. 301, 339-41. 

6 Guppy, op. cit. i. 4. 

8 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 529. 

10 Dawson, op. cit. cii. 

CONTAGION OF WOMAN 209 

out to battle, for fear he should be slain ; should he 
so and fall, the men say " the lap of that woman is 
lucky." l A Fan so weak that he could hardly move 
>ut, was supposed to have become so by seeing the 
of a woman who had been killed. " The weak 
irit of the woman had got into him." 2 Amongst the 
imaras men may not see a lying-in woman, " else they 
become weak and will be killed in battle." 3 In 
•am menstruous women may not approach the men, 
it the latter should be wounded in battle.4 In some 
>uth American tribes the presence of a woman just 
mfined makes the weapons of the men weak.5 The 
belief obtains among the Tschuktsches, who 
>rdingly remove all hunting and fishing implements 
>m the house before a birth.6 In the Booandik tribe 
men see women's blood they will not be able to 
ight.7 In the Encounter Bay tribe boys are told from 
nfancy that if they see menstrual blood their strength 
nil fail prematurely.8 In the Wiraijuri tribe boys are 
'eproved for playing with girls ; the culprit is taken 
side by an old man, who solemnly extracts from his 
sgs some " strands of the woman's apron " which have 
;ot in.9 Amongst the Omahas, if a boy plays with 
;irls he is contemptuously dubbed u hermaphrodite." 10 
•n Brandenburg the peasants say that a baby boy must 
jiot be wrapped in an apron, else it will, when grown 
up, run after the girls. In Mecklenburg a new-born 
j;irl must be first kissed by the mother and a boy by 
ihe father, else the girl will grow whiskers and the 

1 Callaway, op. cit. 441, 443. 2 M. H. Kingsley, Travels in West Africa, 447. 

3 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 63. 

4 Rieclel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 139. 

5 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 26. 6 Id. I.e. 

7 J. Smith, The Booandik Tribe, 5. 8 Native Tribes of South Australia, 186. 

9 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiii. 448. 

i 10 J. O. Dorsey, in Third Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 266. 

P 

210 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

boy's face be hairless.1 The Khyoungthas have a 
legend of a man who reduced a king and his men to 
a condition of feebleness by persuading them to dress 
up as women and perform female duties. When they 
had thus been rendered effeminate, they were attacked 
and defeated without a blow. " That," say the 
Khyoungthas, " is why we are not so brave as 
formerly." The advice given to Cyrus by Croesus 
was identical with that of the Hillman, and the result 
was the same.3 Contempt for female timidity has 
caused a curious custom amongst the Gallas ; they 
amputate the mamm<e of boys soon after birth, believ- 
ing that no warrior can possibly be brave who possesses 
them, and that they should belong to women only.4 
From such ideas is derived the custom of degrading 
the cowardly, infirm, and conquered to the position 
of females. At the " initiation " of a Macquarrie boy 
the men stand over him with waddies, threatening 
instant death if he complains while the tooth is being 
knocked out. He is afterwards scarified : if he 
shows any sign of pain, three long yells announce the 
fact to the camp ; he is then considered unworthy to 
be admitted to the rank of men, and is handed over to 
the women as a coward. Thenceforward he becomes 
the playmate and companion of children.5 Amongst 
the Lhoosais, when a man is unable to do his work, 
whether through laziness, cowardice, or bodily in- 
capacity, he is dressed in women's clothes and has to 
associate and work with the women.6 Amongst the 
Porno Indians of California, when a man becomes too 

1 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 202, 205. 2 Lewin, Wild Races of South- Eastern India, 136. 

3 Herodotus, i. 155-57. 

4 H arris, op.cit. iii.58. The cauterisation of the mamma by Amazons is to beicompared. 

5 G. F. Angas, Sa-vage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand, ii. 224. 

6 Lewin, op. cit. 255. 

EFFEMINACY 

warri 
squaws.1 

1 Powers, op. cit. 160. 

2 Bastian, Der Mensch, iii. 313, 314 j cf. Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 472. 

8 L. H. Morgan, The League of the Iroquois, 16. 4 Powers, op. cit. 132, 133. 

5 Bastian, op. cit. iii. 311. 6 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ii. 406. 

7 Lewin, op. cit. 280. 8 Herodotus, i. 105, iv. 67 ; Hippocrates, i. 561. 

212 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

With regard to the particular circumstances of 
menstruation and child-birth, the obvious vehicle of 
contagion is blood. But it is not the fear of woman's 
blood which is the primary cause of avoidance ; this 
would not account, except by the most strained analogy, 
for most of the facts ; nor is there any flux of blood 
during pregnancy, when woman is regularly taboo ; 
woman's hair, nail-parings, and occupations can hardly 
be avoided from a fear of woman's blood ; and there 
is also the female side of the question to be taken into 
account. It is necessary to note this, because an 
attempt has been made to build up for savage thought 
a shrine of mystery round woman, cemented with 
blood, and that not her own, but ordinary human 
blood.1 The savage indeed regards blood, as he does 
flesh and other human substance, as containing the life> 
but sentimental ideas of the sacredness of blood in 
itself, as apart from its containing human or sexual 
properties, are not to be found in early thought ; nor 
in early thought are there any such strong notions 
of the blood-tie of kindred, as is generally supposed. 
Blood is only one of many vehicles by which 
contact influences relation. Blood is freely used by 
savages to assuage thirst, as well as to produce 
strength. The prohibition against letting it fall on 
the ground has led to an erroneous idea of its, 
" sacredness," and in most cases may be more simply 
explained. When slaying a hog for a feast, the 
Niasese plunge the knife into the heart, so as to lose 
as little blood as possible. Each person cooks his 
piece carefully, so as to retain the blood ; some eat it 
raw.2 Amongst the Karalits seal's blood is preserved 

1 As by E. Durkheim, " La prohibition de 1'inceste et ses origines," in UAnnec 
Soclologitjue for 1898. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 350. 

BLOOD 213 

balls, and, to prevent the escape of the blood when 
animal is killed, the wound is immediately closed 
-1 To savages who do not know the use of salt, 
lood is an excellent substitute. In the Central 
oistralian tribes " blood may be given by young 
icn to old men of any degree of relationship, and at 
any time, with a view to strengthening the latter." 
Again, blood is not infrequently used to assuage thirst 
and hunger ; indeed, when under ordinary circum- 
stances a black-fellow is badly in want of water, what 
he does is to open a vein in his arm and drink the 
blood.2 Other Australian tribes " have no fear of 
blood or of the sight of it " ; they drink it freely to 
acquire strength.3 The Wachaga and Koos delight in 
drinking warm blood fresh from a slaughtered animal.4 
At the Dieri ceremony of Wilyaru blood drawn from 
men is poured on the novice's back " to infuse courage, 
and to show him that the sight of blood is nothing." 5 
The latter reason is secondary. Woman's blood is 
feared or desired, just as are other parts of woman, 
because it is a part of woman and contains feminine 
properties. 

The contagion of woman during the sexual crises of 
menstruation, pregnancy, child-birth, is simply intensified, 
because these are occasions when woman's peculiar 
characteristics are accentuated, these are feminine 
crises when a woman is most a woman. This is the 
only difference between contact then and contact in 
ordinary states, a difference of degree only. 

We may now conclude the description of the ideas 
which have produced sexual taboo. We have traced 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 420. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op, cit. 461, 462. 

8 Jour. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 172-79. 4 Id. xviii. 13 ; Rowney, op. cit. 31. 
5 Howitt, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 82. 

2i4 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

its origin from sexual differentiation, difference of 
occupation, and a resulting solidarity in each sex ; 
this biological material is then informed by religious 
ideas concerning human relations, which are regulated 
by contact. Thus the usual working motive in sexual 
taboo is that the properties of the one sex can be 
transmitted to the other by all methods of contact, 
transmission, or contagion, and by various vehicles. 
Animal-like, the savage fears weakness more than any- 
thing else. Two remarkable facts have emerged — first, 
that it is dangerous, and later, wrong, for men to have 
anything to do with women ; intercourse commensal and 
sexual being especially dangerous because especially 
intimate, but there is a tendency against all living 
together ; and secondly, that sexual intercourse, even 
when lawful morally and legally, is dangerous first, and 
later, sinful. To primitive thought all intercourse has 
one connotation of material danger, which later split 
into ideas of sins, such as incest and fornication, for 
any intercourse is the breaking of a personal taboo and 
a sexual taboo, and the material results of such breaking 
develop into moral sin. 

Sexual taboo would seem to have had the useful 
results not only of assisting Nature's institution of the 
family and of producing the marriage system, by 
preventing licence both within and without the family 
limits, keeping men from promiscuity and incest, de- 
gradations which were never primitive — the early 
efforts of human religious thought being in the 
direction of assisting, not of checking, Nature — but 
also of emphasising the characteristic qualities of each 
sex by preventing a mixture of male and female 
temperaments through mutual influence and associa- 
tion, and, as the complement to this, of accentuating 

SEXUAL TABOO 215 

>y segregation the charm each sex has for the other in 
love and married life, the charm of complementary 
lifference of character. Man prefers womanliness in 
roman, and woman prefers manliness in man ; sexual 
iboo has enhanced this natural preference. 

Where sexual taboo is fully developed, the life of 
msband and wife is a sort of divorce a mensa et thoro^ 
id the life of men and women is that of two divided 
:astes. The segregation is naturally emphasised as 
between young persons of the opposite sex, most of 
all between those who, as living in the somewhat close 
contact of the family, are more strictly separated, both 
because parents prevent the dangerous results obviated 
by sexual taboo with all the more care since their own 
children are in danger, and because, subsequently, a feel- 
ing of duty in this regard is combined with the natural 
affection of brothers and sisters, which is due to early 
association. The biological basis of this separation is 
the universal practice by which boys go about with the 
father as soon as they are old enough, and the girls 
remain with the mother. This is the preparatory educa- 
tion of the savage child, beginning about the age of 
seven. Girls and boys till the age of seven or eight, and 
sometimes till puberty, are often classed as " children," 
with no distinction of sex, as amongst the Kurnai.1 
In Leti, Moa, and Lakor children are brought up to- 
gether till about ten years old. The girls then begin 
to help the mother, and the boys go about with the 
father. So in the Babar Islands.2 Amongst the Kaffirs, 
as amongst most peoples, boys and girls till seven or 
eight live with the mother. As soon as they are old 
enough, the boys are taken under the father's charge.3 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 189. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 392, 355. 

3 Lichtenstein, op. cit. \. 260. 

216 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

In Samoa the boys leave their mother's care at seven 
years of age, and come under the superintendence of 
their father and male relatives. They are now circum- 
cised and receive a new name.1 This case combines an 
" initiation " ceremony placed at a date earlier than 
usual. In Patagonia the sons begin to go about with 
the father at ten, and the girls with the mother at 
nine.2 Amongst the Jaggas boys have to live together 
as soon as they can do without a mother's care.3 Of 
some Australian tribes Mr. Curr reports that "from 
a very early age the boys begin to imitate their fathers, 
and the girls their mothers, in their everyday occupa- 
tions. When the boy is four or five years of age 
the father will make him a miniature shield, spear, 
and wommera, with which the little fellow fights 
his compeers and annoys his mother and the dogs. 
About seven or eight years of age commences in 
earnest the course of education. At eight or ten 
the boy has to leave the hut of his father and sleep 
in one common to the young men and boys of the 
tribe."4 

The following cases show how sexual taboo empha- 
sises this. In the Society and Sandwich Islands "as 
soon as a boy was able to eat, his food was kept distinct 
from that of his mother, and brothers and sisters might 
not eat together from the earliest age." 5 In Uripiv 
boys from a few days after birth are supposed to eat 
with the male sex only, else " death would mysteriously 
fall upon them. The fact of suckling, however, is 
overlooked." 6 In Fiji brothers and sisters may not 
speak to each other, nor eat together. The boys sleep 

1 Globus, xlvii. 71. 2 Musters, op. cit. 177. 

3 Krapf, op. cit. 243. 4 Curr, op. cit. i. 71. 

5 Ellis, Tour in Hawaii, 368 5 id. Polynesian Researches, i. 263 j Cook and King, 
op. cit. ii. 156. 6 Jown. Antrop. Insf. xxiii. 4. 

BROTHER AND SISTER 217 

a separate room. The relationship between brothers 
id sisters is termed ngane, which means " one who 
>huns the other." l In some Australian tribes brother 
id sister are not allowed even to converse.2 Amongst 
11 the Indian tribes of California brothers and sisters 
:rupulously avoid living together.3 In Melanesia 
there is a remarkable avoidance between a boy and his 
jisters and mother, beginning when he is first clothed, 
ind in the case of the sister when she is first tatooed. 
[e is also forbidden to go underneath the women's 
id-place, just as a Melanesian chief thinks it a degra- 
iation to go where women may be above his head.4 
[n Fiji, again, brothers and sisters may not converse, 
:he boys' sleeping-room is separated from that of the 
jirls, and boys may not eat with a female.6 In New 
dedonia brothers and sisters after having reached 
years of maturity are no longer permitted to entertain 
any social intercourse with each other ; they are pro- 
hibited from keeping each other's company, even in the 
presence of a third person, and if they casually meet, 
they must instantly go out of the way, or, if that is 
impossible, the sister must throw herself on the ground 
with her face downwards. Yet, if a misfortune should 
befall one of them, they assist each other to the best of 
their ability through the medium of a common friend.6 
In Japan young princes are prohibited from all inter- 
course with the opposite sex. According to the moral 
code of the same country, " parents must teach their 
daughters to keep separate from the other sex. The 
old custom is : man and woman shall not sit on the 
same mat, nor put their clothing in the same place, 

1 Williams, op. cit. i. 136, 167. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 142. 

3 Powers, op. cit. 412. 4 Codrington, op. cit. 232, 233. 

5 Williams, op. cit. i. 167 j W. Coote, Wanderings South and East, 138. 

6 V. de Rochas, Ncuvelle Caledonie, 239. 

218 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

CHAP. 

shall have different bathrooms, shall not give or take 
anything directly from hand to hand. On walking 
out, even in the case of families, the men must keep 
separate from their female relatives." l In the Hervey 
Islands the first-born son is forbidden to kiss his sister ; 
" she may not cross his path when the wind which 
has passed over her is likely to touch his most sacred 
person." 2 Amongst the Nairs of Malabar a man 
honours his eldest sister ; he may never stay in the 
same room with his other sisters, and his behaviour 
to them is most reserved.3 In the Nanburi caste of 
Travancore "women are guarded with more than 
Moslem jealousy ; even brothers and sisters are separ- 
ated at an early age." 4 In Tonga a chief pays the 
greatest respect to his eldest sister, and may never enter 
her house.5 In Ceylon a father is forbidden to see his 
daughter at all after she has arrived at puberty, so also 
in the case of mother and son.6 Amongst the Todas 
near relations of different sexes consider it a " pollution" 
if even their garments should touch, and a case is men- 
tioned of a girl expressing horror when handled by her 
father.7 A Corean girl is taught that the most dis- 
graceful thing a woman can do is to allow herself to be 
seen or spoken to by any man outside her own family 
circle. After the age of eight, she is never allowed to 
enter the men's quarters of her own home. "The 
boys in the same way are told that it is unbecoming 
and undignified to enter the portion of the house set 
apart for females. The men and the women have their 

1 Siebold, op. cit. 208 ; Bird, op. cit. i. 323. 

2 Gill, Life in the Southern Isles, 46, 47, 9. 

3 Giraud-Teulon, op. cit. 153. 4 Mateer, Native Life in Tra-vancore, 144. 
5 Mariner, op. cit. ii. 156. 6 Trans. Ethnol. Soc. iii. 71. 

7 H. Harkness, Description of the Aboriginal Race inhabiting the Neilg/ierry 
Hills, 72. 

SEPARATION OF THE YOUNG 219 

meals separately, the women waiting on their husbands. 
Thus family life as we have it is utterly unknown in 
Corea." l 

With the approach of puberty, the sexual question 
appears which emphasises the separation, both natural 
and taboo, and at the ceremonies of initiation boys 
are formally taken away, as they have practically already 
been taken away, from the mother's sphere and female 
associations. The danger, now enhanced by a new 
instinct, produces the very common custom that from 
this time boys may not sleep even in the house or with 
the family. A common form of this custom is the 
institution of public buildings, which combine the 
features of a dormitory and a club, for the use of the 
young men. In Annam these are called morongs. 
The custom is found, for instance, amongst the Niam- 
niam and Bongos, the Dyaks, in the islands between 
Celebes and New Guinea, in New Guinea, Tonga, 
the Andaman Islands, South and West Africa, and 
amongst the Pueblos, in the New Hebrides, and Indo- 
China.2 

The separation of the young outside the family is 
a fairly regular social rule. On Eraser's Island " a young 
man will not sit down on the same stool or box, or in 
fact anywhere where a young woman has been sitting 
at any time. They imagine that the young man would 
sicken and die. The shadow of young women must 
not pass over the sleeping - places of young men."3 
Among the Iroquois young men could have no inter- 

1 Griffis, Corea, 244 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 305, 306. 

2 Schweinfurth, op. tit. i. 303, ii. 21 j Low, op. cit. 247 j Riedel, of. cit. 12, 250, 
287, 443 j Gill, op. cit. 240 5 Farmer, op. cit. 47 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xi. 137 j 
Shooter, op. cit. 15 j A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 97 ; Featherman, op. cit. iii. 230; Journ. 
Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 273 j Ball, op. cit. 646 j and especially S. E. Peal, in Journ. 
Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 249. 

3, Curr, op. cit. iii. 145. 

220 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

course with girls, nor even conversation ;* and amongst 
most North American tribes, " the chastity of girls is 
carefully guarded." 2 " The separation of the immature 
youth of the two sexes is a feature strongly insisted upon 
in the social practice of all the North- Western Ameri- 
can tribes."3 Amongst the Northern Indians "girls are 
from the early age of eight or nine years prohibited by 
custom from joining in the most innocent amusements 
with children of the opposite sex. When sitting in 
their tents, or even when travelling, they are watched 
and guarded with such an unremitting attention as 
cannot be exceeded by the most rigid discipline of an 
English boarding-school."4 Amongst the Omahas a 
girl may not speak to a man, except very near relations.5 
In Madagascar the tribes of the forest and East Coast 
have a higher morality than the Hovas, girls being 
scrupulously kept from any intercourse with the male 
sex until marriage.6 Amongst the Greenlanders single 
persons of both sexes have rarely any connection ; for 
instance, a maid would take it as an affront were a 
young fellow to offer her a pinch of snuff in company.7 
Eusofzye women consider it indecent to associate with 
the men.8 In Loango a youth dare not speak to a girl 
except in her mother's presence.9 Amongst the Hill 
Dyaks the young men are carefully separated from the 
girls.10 In New South Wales unmarried youths and 
girls may not speak to each other.11 In some Victorian 
tribes the unmarried adults of both sexes are kept care- 

I Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 103. 2 Id. iii. in. 

3 W. H. Dall, in Third Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 81. 

4 Hearne, op. cit. 311. 

5 J. O. Dorsey, in Third Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 270. 

6 Sibree, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 43. 7 Cranz, op. cit. i. 145. 

8 Elphinstone, Account of the Kingdom of Cabul, \. 241, 243, 313. 

9 Pinkerton, op. cit. xvi. 568. 10 H. Low, Sarawak, 300. 

II Brough Smyth, op. cit. ii. 318. 

SEPARATION OF THE YOUNG 221 

fully apart. Amongst the same people the seducer of 
in unmarried girl is beaten to death, and the girl is 
punished and sometimes killed.1 In South Nias both 
the seducer and the girl are put to death.2 In the 
Tenimber Islands (Timorlaut) it is taboo for a boy to 
touch a girl's breast or hand, and for her to touch his 
dr.3 Amongst the Leh-tas of Burma boys and girls 
when they may have occasion to pass each other, avert 
their gaze, so that they may not see each other's 
faces." 4 In Cambodia the girls are carefully secluded, 
and the reserve which they show is remarkable. " The 
stringency of custom prevents the intercourse of the 
young. Accordingly, the role of village Don Juan is 
scarcely possible." 5 In the Andaman Islands bachelors 
may only eat with men, spinsters with women.6 In 
Tasmania " the young men and lads moved early from 
the camp in the morning so as not to interfere with 
female movements at rising. Unmarried men never 
wandered in the bush with women ; if meeting a party 
of the other sex, native politeness required that they 
turned and went another way." 7 An Australian 
woman, in most tribes, is not allowed to converse or 
have any relations with any adult male save her 
husband. Even with a grown-up brother she is almost 
forbidden to exchange a word.8 Here the proprietary 
jealousy of husbands is a factor in the rule ; but the 
common Australian custom, as in the Central tribes, 
where no man as a general rule may go near the 
Erlukwirra (" women's camp ") and no woman may 
approach the Ungunja (" men's camp "),9 brings us 

1 Dawson, op. cit. ci. 2 Rosenberg, op. cit. 167. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 300. 4 Fytche, Surma, i. 343. 

5 Aymomeri'mCocAincAinefranfaisejVi. 191, 198. 

6 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 344. 7 Bonwick, op. cit. n. 

8 Curr, op. cit. i. 109. 9 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 178, 467. 

222 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

back to sexual taboo, and reminds us that this separa- 
tion of the young is due to all the ideas of this taboo, 
and not to the fear of sexual intercourse only. Such 
rules as usual become further causes, and have per- 
petuated the separation of the sexes. 

In the examples of separation of brother and sister, 
we have been really reviewing the process of preventing 
" incest/' and in those of the separation of young 
persons generally, the process of preventing " pro- 
miscuity." Neither of these needed prevention, for 
neither was ever anything but the rarest exception in 
any stage of human culture, even the earliest ; the 
former is prevented by the psychological difficulty with 
which love comes into play between persons either 
closely associated or strictly separated before the age of 
puberty, a difficulty enhanced by the ideas of sexual 
taboo, which are intensified in the closeness of the 
family circle, where practical as well as religious con- 
siderations cause parents to prevent any dangerous 
connection. We saw that in many cases, not merely is 
the intercourse of husband and wife not practised in the 
house, but even the performance of ordinary functions, 
such as eating, is prohibited there, as in New Zealand 
and the Sandwich Islands. Parents bring up their 
children by the same rule, which is, put briefly, that all 
close connection between the sexes is dangerous, and 
especially between those who are in close contact. 
Marriage of man and woman is theoretically a forbidden 
thing, both outside and inside the family circle. The 
very word "incest" originally meant simply "unchaste," 
connoting a merely general infringement of sexual taboo, 
such infringement being more reprehensible between 
those who are not likely to make it. As to the fictions of 
primitive " incest " and " promiscuity," both in popular 

INCEST 223 

[ition and scientific theories of primitive marriage, 
it is natural that marriage systems should be explained 
as intended to put a stop to a prevailing practice, by 
those who do not know how religion simply assists 
nature, but the explanation does not at all go to show 
iat these practices ever existed. 

Lastly, as will be discussed hereafter, it is the 
plication of sexual taboo to brothers and sisters, who, 
jcause they are of opposite sexes, of the same genera- 
:ion, and are in close contact, and for no other reasons, 
are regarded as potentially marriageable, that is the 
foundation of exogamy and the marriage system. 

CHAPTER X 

WE have seen the complication of the eternal drama of 
sex, and now approach the denoument as expressed in 
certain features of the ceremonies at puberty, and 
generally in love-practices and marriage ritual. The 
taboo is now to be broken. 

The general removal of taboo takes many forms, 
some of which we have observed in passing. In all 
these forms alike the idea is to get rid of the material 
taboo substance, the " sacredness " or " uncleanness " 
with which the body has been, as it were, permeated 
and infected from contact of some sort with danger, 
religiously conceived, coming from spiritual or human 
agents, and, in human relations, especially from human 
agents sometimes spiritualised, sometimes conceived of 
abstractly, or embodied in concrete persons. As the 
dangers are, whether spiritual or material, conceived of 
materially, so the methods used to obviate or remove 
them are such as would be used in dealing with 
matter. 

First, we may briefly refer to some of the com- 
monest means of avoiding the dangers of taboo, used 
before these dangers have descended and in expectation 
of them. Persons in this state of expectation are 
already taboo, as we have seen, but no confusion need 
attach to the double meaning. Again, when a person 
is guarding himself against these dangers, their pre- 

AP. x HIDING FROM EVIL 225 

ce, potential or actual, causes other persons to avoid 
, for fear of coming in for the same. So much 
being premised, we may instance the method of hiding 
from danger ; thus sick people are frequently hidden 
so as to escape, if possible, from the evil influence.1 
People often change their house to avoid evil,2 and it is 
a common practice after a death to burn the house 
down, or desert it.3 When a man is sick, the Aru 
islanders fire off guns round the house, to drive away 
the evil spirits. If this fails, they take him to another 
house, to deceive them.4 The Ceramese take a sick 
man to another house, to deceive evil spirits.5 The 
Watubela natives remove a sick man from his house, 
" because it is a * warm ' house, or in order to deceive 
the evil spirits." 6 The latter is the object of this 
practice in the Kei Islands.7 When a sick man is about 
to die, the Eskimo family gather up all their posses- 
sions, close up the hut, and seek another abode.8 
When death occurred amongst the Yumas, the site of 
the village was altered.9 

Various forms of seclusion carry out the same idea. 
Taboo persons dwell in special huts, so as to protect 
themselves and to isolate themselves from others. A 
garb of woe is both appropriate to the feelings of the 
fearful soul and diverts the attention of evil. A sick 
Basuto sits under a rock, where, clothed with miserable 
rags, he eats the coarsest food ; he never washes ; and 
continually curses the person who has bewitched him.10 
A good instance of dressing in rags for the practical 
purpose of exciting pity in human hearts is the custom 
as used by defendants in ancient Rome. 

1 Bastian, Allerhi, i. 437. 2 Riedel, op. at. 265, 266, 267. 

3 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 160 ; Spix, op. cit. ii. 251. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 266. 

5 Id. 141. 6 Id. 210. 7 Id. 238. 

8 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 406. 9 Id. iii. 190. 10 Casalis, op. cit. 277. 

Q 

1226 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Evil is again barred by drawing a line, or by making 
a barricade. Barriers of water or fire are often used. 
To drive away evil from the infant, the Timorlaut 
natives place it by the fire.1 Next there is the use of 
protecting garments, and veils, the latter with special 
reference to the danger of being seen by or seeing the 
dreaded influence ; there is also in this practice a desire 
not to infect others with the evil to which one is sub- 
ject. Amongst the Wa-taveta pregnant women wear 
veils.2 The veil is commonly worn by women at men- 
struation, as by other taboo persons, such as mourners. 
The King of Susa eats behind a screen.3 The use of 
sacred umbrellas probably goes back to the same idea. 
Amongst the Dyaks an umbrella is placed over a sick 
person.4 The common use of amulets to keep off" evil 
needs no illustration. By the use of dummies one per- 
suades the evil influence that one is dead already, or 
engages the attention of evil agents, while escape is 
being effected. The natives of Timorlaut cheat the 
evil agents, by using puppets to represent the sick.5 
The Burmese believe that the patient will recover if he 
is buried in effigy.6 In Celebes the sick man is taken 
to another house and a dummy is left on his bed.7 To 
prevent a dead mother taking her child, the Melanesians 
place a dummy in her arms.8 A similar method is 
to pretend that the sick man is already dead ; the 
friends hold a mock funeral with this object in 
East Central Africa.9 To avoid sickness, the Babar 
natives set adrift dummies of themselves in a boat, 
wherein they also place bowls in which their sick 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 303. 2 J. Thomson, op. cit. 61. 

3 Harris, op. cit. iii. 78. 4 Brooke, op. cit. \. 95. 

5 Riedel, op. cit. 304. 6 Shway Yoe, op. cit. ii. 138. 

7 N. Graafland, De MinaAassa, i. 326. 8 Codrington, op. cit. 275. 

9 Bastian, op. cit. i. 437 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 114, 115. 

VEILS— DUMMIES— SACRIFICE 227 

•iends have spat. They will also change houses to 

•e illness.1 

i 

Similar is the use of proxies or substitutes, to keep 
the danger from the person concerned. Once a year, a 
bull is killed by the Zulus on behalf of the king ; the 
strength of the bull enters him, thereby prolonging his 
life and health.2 In Tonga a human victim was slain 
to " avert the wrath of angry gods from the king." 3 
Before the chief's son was circumcised, the Manyuema 
first tried the operation on a slave.4 

Again, there is the common practice of giving up to 
the evil influence a part of one's self, in the large sense 
in which the savage conceives of such, a piece of one's 
hair, food, clothing, or the like ; the idea being to 
sacrifice a part to preserve the whole, sometimes the 
whole man, at other times the whole of a particular 
organ or sense-process. In the Central provinces of 
India, when cholera is about, the priest takes a straw 
from each house and burns these. Chickens are also 
driven into the fire and burnt ; the idea is that the 
straws and chickens are substitutes.5 In Tonga people 
cut off a little finger to avert calamity. To propitiate 
the gods they would cut off a finger-joint, and holding 
up their hands confess " they had done wrong, but were 
sorry." Another account says that they would cut off 
a little finger on the occasion of illness, as a propitiatory 
offering to the gods.6 This idea of sacrificing a part 
seems to be the meaning of cutting off a finger-joint or 
lock of hair at the grave of a dead person, or during 
mourning.7 Connected with this is the no less logical 

1 Riedel, op. at. 357. 2 Leslie, op. cit. 91. 

3 Farmer, op. cit. 53. 4 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 363. 

5 Punjab Notes and Queries, i. 418. 6 Farmer, op. cit. 128 ; Mariner, op. cit. i. 454. 
7 Fiji, Wilkes, op. cit. iii. 100 ; Pimas, Comanches, Wichita, Minnetarrees, 
Pinos, Blackfeet, Crows, and Sioux, First Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 99 ff. ; 

228 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

method of making believe that one's soul is in some 
object, which is then put safely away, as an external 
soul. 

Another most widely spread method is fasting, the 
idea of which is to avoid swallowing food which may be 
tainted by the dangerous influence — to prevent evil 
entering a man. Parallel to this is the method of 
continence, the object being to retain the source of 
strength within the body, for if it be allowed to leave 
the body, the individual will lose strength which he may 
need for the ghostly conflict, and also the ghostly 
enemy may use the person's strength thus detached from 
him to injure him by the method of ngadhungi. 

Then in cases of actual taboo, where the person 
concerned is actually infected with danger, or probably 
has been, for the primitive mind makes no distinction 
in its wide generalisation, the commonest method of 
removing the contagion is " purification." The taboo 
essence, as if exuding from the pores, and clinging to 
the skin, like a contagious disease, is wiped ofF with 
water, the universal cleanser, or similar substances. 
After menstruation and child-birth, and sickness gener- 
ally, the contagion is got rid of by a bath. In Shoa 
" defiled " men, who had eaten forbidden food, were 
sprinkled with water.1 The contagion of death is 
removed in the same way, and so is the stain of sin 
from penitents.2 At a later stage, the water used may 
be rendered more efficacious, by being itself " holy " or 
" medicinal." Or the patient is purified so as by fire, 
the other great cleanser, or by disinfectants of various 
sorts, smoke and incense, which are to fire as the offering 

Tasmanians, Australians, Eyre, op. cit. ii. 343 ; Ellice Islands, Cooper, Cera! Islands, 
ii. 256 j New Caledonia, Anderson, op. cit. 220. 

1 Harris, op. cit. iii. 147. 2 First Report of the Bureau ofEthndogy, 123. 

PURIFICATION 229 

incense is to a burnt sacrifice. The chair in which a 
[anchurian bride goes to the house of the bridegroom 
" disinfected " with incense, to drive away evil 
>irits.1 Or again it is taken off by a rougher method 
-wiped off with the hands, or a scraper of wood, a 
icred strigil, as it were. The following is the descrip- 
ion of a Navajo medicine-man's method : he pressed a 
indie of stuff to different parts of the body, each time 
lolding up this " receiver " to the smoke-hole, blowing 
rith a quick rAiff, as if blowing away the evil influence 
•awn from the body.2 After births and deaths 
defilement " is taken off by the New Hebrideans 
ms : cocoa-nut milk is poured over the body, or a 
•anch is drawn down body and limbs so as to sweep 
the substance away.3 The Maoris remove tapu by 
water or by passing over the body a piece of wood, 
which is then buried.4 Where the evil clings closer, it 
is beaten off. The method of beating is also used to 
drive out evil spirits, and there is a natural and easy 
confusion between the two ideas, as would be the 
obvious double inference from sickness, for instance. 
Infected clothes are removed and destroyed. The 
Navajo who has touched a dead body, takes his clothes 
off afterwards and washes himself before he mingles 
with the living.5 The Cherokees flung their old clothes 
into the river, " supposing then their own impurities to 
be removed." 6 The Maori slave who took his clothes 
off before entering a sacred place which would have 
infected him with its " sanctity," was wiser in his 
generation.7 

Again, the virus can be taken off and transferred by 

1 Folklore, i. 487. 2 Fifth Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 420. 

a Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 12. 4 Yate, op. cit. 104, 137. 

5 First Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 123. 6 Frazer, op. cit? Hi. 74. 

7 Shortland, Southern Districts of Neiv Zealand, 293. 

230 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

contact to some one who is more or less always taboo, or 
is a corpus vile, in which case the savage infers that the 
virus leaves the original sufferer entirely. He infers 
this because he desires it ; when he does not so desire, 
as in the case of a man's mana, the good quality that 
can be transferred, it passes, but not away. If a Maori 
chanced to touch any one's head, he received its 
" sacredness " by the contact, and had to rub his hands 
on fern-root, which was then eaten by the head of the 
family in the female line. Thus his hands became noa 
again.1 The various Maori methods of " lifting " tapu 
are called Whangaihan. The Tongan method is in- 
teresting. If a man contracted tabu from touching a 
chief, he ceremonially touched the soles of the feet or 
a superior chief with his hands, and then washed him- 
self. If a man ate food with tabued hands, he avoided 
dangerous results by putting the foot of a chief on 
his stomach. The idea is that by contact the tabu 
substance is transferred from the man's organs to the 
chief.2 A tabued Maori would free himself from tapu 
by touching a child, and by taking food from its hands. 
The man was thus free, but the child was tapu for a 
day.3 Of the Maoris it has been said that the " most 
marked peculiarities of their customs can be traced to 
the principle that food which has once touched a sacred 
object becomes itself sacred, and must not be eaten 
except by the sacred object."4 Some of the previous 
cases show how food is used to remove taboo. In 
Fiji the taboo persons wash, and then wipe their hands 
on some animal, e.g. a pig. The latter thus becomes 
sacred to the chief, and they lose the tabu, and are free 
to work, to feed themselves, and to live with their 

1 Shortland, op. cit. 68. 2 Mariner, op. at. ii. 220, 82. 

3 Dieffenbach, New Zealand, ii. 105. 4 Shortland, op. cit. 294. 

x REMOVAL OF TABOO 231 

wives. When a chief wishes to remove tabu from 
himself, he transfers it to a priest.1 It is an important 
fact that where the ideas of contact underlying social 
taboo are most thoroughly worked out, as for instancev 
amongst the Maoris and Zulus, the connection of food 
plays an important part, not only in taboo but in its 
removal. The savage believes not only that what 
comes out of a man defiles him, but that what enters 
him does so also, and especially is this so with food. 
It is food that gives a man his life and strength, and 
that also may, by forming his very substance, transmit 
evil to him in the most certain way. By a natural 
analogy, the evil can best be removed from him by the 
use of food. Later we shall see how the taking of new 
food is connected with this. The connection of fasting 
and silence with taboo is well shown by some methods 
of removing it, which at the same time remove the 
obligation to abstinence and the ban of silence. The 
fast incumbent upon mourners is ended in the Nguria 
tribe by some one touching the lips of the mourner 
with meat. In this case, as in others, there is combined 
the idea of rendering the freedom to eat or speak, safe, 
by a rehearsal of the action.2 The common ban of 
silence imposed in various ceremonies by the Central 
Australians is removed by touching the lips with food, 
or some sacred object.3 

There is another important method — inoculation. 
The idea is earlier than Jenner and Pasteur ; it is one of 
the oldest and most far-reaching conceptions of man- 
kind. As with all primitive ideas, however, it must be 
remembered that it has a religious connotation, and is 
generalised round a much wider circle than even our 

1 Wilkes, op. at. ii. 99, 100. 2 Curr, op. tit. \. 289. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. clt. 248, 381 ft". 

232 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

metaphorical use of the word. As with other early 
theories, so with this, a successful positive instance 
ensures the general continuance of the method. When 
the savage inoculates for nearly every danger, as did 
the Zulus, there might well occur cases where, for 
instance, small-pox was thus successfully combated. 
In Abyssinia, when small-pox is raging, they take a 
boy and inoculate him, and with the lymph supplied 
by him every one is inoculated against the disease.1 
There is a curiously strong superstitious fear of 
lightning amongst the Zulus, doubtless the result of 
a peculiarity of their climate. A Zulu has explained, 
" it is this that causes fear in men ; the dreaded thing 
comes from above and not from below. They are 
afraid of something that looks down upon all of us, 
not that it will really strike, but the fear arises from 
thinking that it is a thing above us ; we cannot defend 
ourselves from it, as from a stone thrown by another." 
The somewhat incoherent statement would apply well 
enough to the more timid individuals in a civilised and 
scientific age. Now the Zulu theory is, that anything 
struck by lightning has in it the "power" of the light- 
ning. The " doctors " make themselves proof against 
it by " inoculation," and are thus also brought into 
" sympathy " with electric forces, and know when it 
is going to thunder. To protect the people, the 
priests sometimes give orders that an ox struck by 
lightning must be eaten. After this preventive homoeo- 
pathic dose they take emetics and wash.2 Similarly, 
when a Zulu is about to cross a river full of crocodiles, 
he will chew some crocodile's excrement, and spatter it 
over his person, in the belief that this will protect him 

1 Harris, op. cit. ii. 159. 

2 Callaway, op. cit. 403, 380, 402. 

x INOCULATION 233 

against them.1 The idea is clearly protection by 
assimilation through inoculation. In West Africa the 
blood of a slain enemy is drunk by all who have never 
killed an enemy before.2 When Kaffirs have killed 
a lion, they rub their eyes with his skin before they 
look at his dead body.3 The people of New Britain 
believe that after eating enemies they have slain they 
cannot be injured by the friends of the latter.4 In 
South Africa warriors are inoculated before battle with 
a powder made from slain enemies. This is placed by 
the medicine-man in an incision on the forehead of 
each soldier, and gives him strength.5 To avoid the 
evil effects of a stranger's eye who enters a house where 
an infant is, a Mentawey father will take off its head- 
covering and give it to the stranger, who after holding 
it a while returns it.6 Amongst the Zulus, if a man 
wishes to obtain a favour from a chief or great man, or 
when he is accused of some crime and has to appear 
before the chief, he tries to get something belonging 
to the latter, and this he wears next his skin. So, if a 
man has an illness, caused, as he thinks, by some animal, 
the animal's flesh is administered to him.7 The 
Malays regard the spines of a certain fish as poisonous, 
but believe that if the brain of the fish is applied to 
the wound it will act as a complete antidote to the 
poisonous principle.8 This principle of the " hair or 
the dog that bit you " is inoculation after the event, 
the principle of homoeopathy, assimilation to the object 
which causes injury. This extension brings out the 
identity of inoculation with other cases of assimilation 
by contact. The following examples, in which a sort 

1 Shooter, op. at. 218. 2 Bowdich, op. cit. 300. 

3 Arbousset, op. cit. 214. 4 Powell, op. cit. 92. 

5 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xx. 133. 6 Rosenberg, op. cit. 198. 

9 Callaway, op. cit. 142. 8 Skeat, op. cit. 309. 

234 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

of " reverse inoculation " takes place, also show this 
clearly. Gipsy thieves in Servia put their own blood 
into the food of one who they suspect knows of their 
offence. They believe that this prevents him from 
betraying them, and makes him friendly.1 Negro 
Indians believe that a dog will be faithful to his master 
if he gives it some bread soaked in his own sweat.2 A 
Magyar maiden believes that if she rubs some of her 
blood in a young man's hair he will love her.3 A 
Cherokee bridegroom, if jealous, will rub his saliva on 
the breast of his sleeping wife, to induce her to be 
faithful.4 

There is often a difficulty about inoculation, viz., 
the procuring of lymph. Where this can be sur- 
mounted, however, many kinds of dangers and 
spiritual and material " diseases " are prevented from 
having their fullness of ill result by inoculating the 
patient against them. As is sometimes the case now, 
in connection with small-pox, so amongst savages 
inoculation is chiefly used, sometimes only used, when 
no other methods avail. The risk due to passing 
through even a reduced form of the particular danger 
is one that early man would not lightly undertake. As 
a rule, he takes no risks and undergoes no pains that i 
he can help, and never except for some serious purpose. 
It is especially when one is, as it were, in an infected 
area from which one cannot escape, and among infected 
or dangerous persons with whom one must to some 
extent associate, that inoculation is seen by the savage, 
as by us, to be the best method of safety. 

Inoculation is the infusion of diseased matter from a j 
diseased person into a healthy person, who by contract- 

1 Am Urquell, iii. 64. 2 Owen, Old Rabbit, 142. 

3 Am Urquell, iii. 269. 4 Seventh Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 380. 

INOCULATION 235 

the disease in a very mild form, escapes the full 
Fects which would result in the ordinary course of 
infraction. In other words, it is a form of contagion, 
it is the deadly method of Nature used against herself. 
It is the avoiding of the dangers of taboo by boldly 
courting them ; taboo is minimised by breaking it. It 
will be obvious now, first, that the principle of inocu- 
lation is the same (differing only in intention) as that of 
involuntary contagion and of ngadhungi^ which is only 
" contagion " developed. Comparing it with such 
typical cases as those in which one is involuntarily 
tainted or " inoculated," using the word to sharpen 
the point, with the dangerous qualities of another, 
we see its identity with all these ideas of contact. 
Secondly, it is identical with those love-charms and 
similar practices in which you take or receive a portion 
of the desired person, in order to receive into yourself 
his desirable properties, or transmit your own hate or 
love to another. Here are the passive and the active 
aspects of inoculation. 

It is natural that such transmission should be 
especially effective when performed through the 
medium of food, for thereby the transmitted pro- 
perty is most surely taken into the system. Of 
this method in various forms we shall find illustration 
in ceremonies at puberty and marriage. 

CHAPTER XI 

THE last and most important method of breaking 
taboo remains to be described. In it the whole cycle 
of ideas of contact which underlie human relations 
generally and the relations of the sexes in particular, 
is completed, and thus the principles on which the 
ceremonies of marriage and the marriage system are 
based receive their full description. 

Inoculation was the last method reviewed, and two 
forms of it were seen — inoculation of one person with 
the properties of another, and reverse inoculation, by 
which one person assimilates another to himself by 
inoculating him with himself. The method now to be 
described is simply mutual inoculation of two indi- 
viduals with each other. A and B being mutually 
taboo, desire to remove the dangers of their relation ; 
being destined to live together, or to perform some 
dangerous act together, or to be in more or less close 
and therefore potentially dangerous connection, their 
best method is, as we have seen, inoculation. A 
therefore inoculates himself against B by taking a 
part of B into his own system, and B does the same ; 
but this is equivalent to reverse inoculation, for A has 
practically given B a part of himself, and B has done 
the same ; the two methods here coincide. The 
results are those which belong to reciprocity ; each has 
a part of the other in his keeping, and this part not 

CHAP 

only 

HAP. xi MUTUAL INOCULATION 237 

nly assimilates each to the other by transmission of 
properties, but is a pledge, deposit and hostage. Thus 
identity of interests is secured, and the possibility of 
mutual treachery or wrong is prevented, not only by 
the fact that injury done to B by A is equivalent to 
injury done by A to himself, but also by the fact that 
if B is wronged, he may work vengeance by injuring 
through his malicious properties or by the method of 
ngadhungi the part of A which he possesses ; and not 
only this, but, theoretically at least, in such an event, 
the part of B possessed by A may punish A by the 
sympathy it still retains with B, its original owner. 
Each has " given himself away " to the other in a very 
real sense. Taboo against connection is broken by 
making the connection, just as Kamehameha broke the 
tabu by eating with his wives ; and the result is simply 
union, in the most vital sense, effected by assimilation 
and passing into identification. But the ideas we have 
just described underlie all union of this kind, not only 
in early thought, but implicitly always ; it is simply the 
psychological principle of union analysed into its com- 
ponent parts. The relation is the full development of 
contact, which it is unnecessary to trace again in detail. 
Of the various parts of one's self each and every one 
may be used. Hair, blood, garments, and names are 
common instances. The idea is also satisfied by each 
party partaking of the same thing, such as food and 
drink, flesh and blood, by smoking together, or 
by dividing a " token," familiar instances being the 
vvpfioXov and split sixpence. In one of the most 
striking cases this is the umbilical cord of one party. 
This is often preserved, as has been seen, and is re- 
garded as very sacred and as possessing part of the 
" life " of the original owner. 

238 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

The Narrinyeri have the following custom. The 
remains of a child's umbilical cord are carefully pre- 
served by the father in a bunch of feathers. The relic 
is called kalduke. This he will give to a man in 
another tribe who has children, by which act his child 
and the other man's children become ngia ngiampe 
to each other. The duties of this relation are that 
they may not touch or come near each other, nor speak 
to one another, and the usual object of the custom 
is that these children when grown may be entrusted 
with the barter of commodities between the two tribes. 
During such commercial transactions the ngiampe per- 
sons of course may not speak to each other, a third 
person does the talking. Moreover any two individuals 
may and often do enter this relation for a time, one 
cutting his own kalduke in two and each keeping half. 
They are ngia ngiampe as long as they each retain his 
piece. This relation is often imposed on two indi- 
viduals to prevent them marrying.1 The above is so 
typical an example, that I may be allowed to use the 
term ngia ngiampe hereafter to express this relation. 

It is hardly necessary to give a multiplicity of 
examples which show each and every one of the pos- 
sible vehicles of the mutual transmission ; most of 
these have been mentioned already in cases of contact 
and of single inoculation. The latter practice, as the 
one-sided application of the principle, should be borne 
in mind when reviewing the following cases. First of 
all, lovers not merely symbolise their desire for union 
by this means, but really effect identification. In Wetar 
engaged couples exchange locks of hair, gifts, especially 
clothes that have been worn, in order to have the smell 
of the loved one near them. Lovers in Amboina ex- 

1 G. Taplin, in Native Tribes of South Australia, 32. 

1 

NGIA NGIAMPE 239 

ange hair, rings, and clothes they have worn. After 
their first meeting, a Timor-laut girl takes the girdle of 
the young man, in order to make him faithful to her. 
In Amboina lovers drink each other's blood ; " it is a 
real sacrament." Peasant lovers in France used to 
pledge their affections by spitting into each other's 
mouths.2 The practice is most common between lovers, 
and as a marriage ceremony, effecting union, satisfying 
love, and producing the responsibilities of reciprocity. 

The next most common uses are for hospitality and 
friendship, the making of alliances and covenants be- 
tween man and man or tribe and tribe, the so-called 
"blood brotherhood"; also as a method of making 
peace, the compact being sealed in various ways, 
especially by eating together (just as now a bargain is 
sealed " over a drink "). Throughout the world the 
closest bond is produced by the act of hospitality, 
the sharing of one's bread and salt with the stranger 
within the gates. In the countless examples of this 
it is often quite naturally found that one side only is 
concerned (single inoculation), but practically the act, 
even when no commensality takes place, has all the 
effect of a reciprocal process. Thus, in the Mentawey 
Islands when a stranger enters the house, the father, by 
way of avoiding the ill effects of the stranger's eyes 
upon his child, takes from it its head-covering and 
gives it to the visitor, who after holding it a while 
returns it.3 This case brings out well the fear and 
caution underlying acts of hospitality. Amongst the 
Koniagas visitors are presented with a cup of water, 
as a ceremonial act marking friendship.4 In Java a 
superior pays to an inferior the highest compliment 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 447, 67, 300, 41. 2 F. Liebrecht, Germ ase von Tilbury, 72. 

3 Rosenberg, of. cit. 198. 4 Featherman, of. cit. iii. 454. 

24o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

if he offers him his half-chewed betel.1 Amongst the 
Iroquois the regular act of courtesy towards any visitor 
was to present him with a dish of hominy. To neglect 
this was a breach of good manners.2 In Sumatra the 
guest who pays a visit to his friend is presented with 
betel as a token of hospitality. This is an act of 
common politeness which can neither be omitted nor 
refused.3 

The biological origin of the whole of the phenomena 
is shown by these cases. The Timorese salute each 
other by touching noses and drawing a deep breath.4 
When meeting friends and acquaintances, the Eskimo 
greet each other by rubbing noses together, and then 
they spit into their hands and mutually pass them over 
each other's face. When they wish to give assurance 
of mutual friendship they eat together, and mutually 
rub each other's breast, saying, Ilaga, "let us be 
friends." 5 The biological origin is also clear when the 
method is the giving of food to a person, and the 
Greek fashion of drinking a health is a good type of 
these ideas. The fashion coincides naturally with the 
practice* illustrated above, of drinking first to show 
that the drink is not harmful. Such satisfaction of the 
senses, again, predisposes the consciousness to amity 
and goodwill ; this is an innate human idea. The 
following illustrates it. Amongst the Knisteneaux the 
rite of smoking the calumet begins all public discussion. 
It dissipates all differences, and no one who entertains 
feelings of enmity towards another can smoke the pipe 
with him without being previously reconciled. No 
one is allowed to participate in the sacred rite who has 
not abstained from cohabiting with his wife for twenty- 

1 Featherman, op, cit. ii. 383. 2 Id. iii. 14. 3 Id. op. cit. ii. 303. 

4 Id. ii. 461. 5 Id. iii. 405. 

I HOSPITALITY 241 

r hours previously. Contracts solemnised by smok- 
ing the calumet are held to be inviolable.1 The phrase 
of hospitality in the Society and Sandwich Islands is 
"let us eat together/' Amongst the North American 
Indians tobacco-smoking, and in the East Indies the 
chewing of betel^ have naturally taken over all the ideas 
attached to food. The passing round of the calumet is 
the regular North American custom of making peace 
and alliances, and smoking together is a mark of hospi- 
tality and friendship. In principle, of course, the act 
itself produces these results. The Powhattans observed 
ceremonial forms in receiving a stranger or visitor. 
The most influential man brought the calumet or pipe 
of peace, lighted it, and having drawn a few puffs, he 
handed it to the stranger, who, if he were friendly 
disposed, accepted it ; the pipe then went alternately 
from mouth to mouth until each one present had 
inhaled the smoke.3 Amongst the Druses hospitality 
is one of the sacred duties whose implied obligations 
they never disregard or violate. No consideration of 
interest, no dread of power, can ever induce them to 
betray or deliver up to an enemy the stranger or 
fugitive with whom they have contracted the sacred 
engagement of " bread and salt." 4 Amongst the 
Bedouin Arabs, as is well known, a guest once received 
in the tent becomes "one of the family," and the duty 
of protecting him is sacred. All members of the tribe 
are also tacitly pledged for the security of his life and 
property. It is considered discourteous, if not an 
insult, to ride up to the front of a man's tent with- 
out stopping and eating his bread.5 Amongst the 
tribes of the Nedjed it is customary to pour a cup of 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 269. 2 W. Ellis, Tour in Hawaii, 357. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 115. 4 Id. v. 475. 5 Id. v. 371. 

R 

242 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

melted butter on the head of the guest who partakes 
of the hospitality of the tent.1 

Limbus who wish to form an alliance of " brother- 
hood " exchange ceremonially their scarves and some 
money, and smear each other's foreheads with rice paste.2 
The Kumis, when making a contract, kill a goat, and 
smear the head and feet of the parties with its blood.3 
The Tindeko (" blood brotherhood ") is very common 
on the Upper Congo. The blood of the two parties is 
mingled and put on a leaf, which is then divided and 
eaten by the pair. " It is a form of cementing friend- 
ship and a guarantee of good faith, which is respected 
by the most unscrupulous ; and it possesses a religious 
significance." 4 In the Kayan ceremony a drop of 
blood from each party is mixed with tobacco and 
smoked in a cigarette.5 Amongst the Ardras drinking 
together forms a bond of friendship.6 In Madagascar 
" brotherhood " is produced by the two parties drink- 
ing each other's blood, in which a piece of ginger is 
dipped. They then each drink a mixture from the 
same bowl, praying that it may turn into poison for 
him who fails to keep the oath.7 The most indissoluble i 
tie of friendship that can exist between one Dyak and 
another is called sobat^ or the tie of " brotherhood." A 
vein is opened in the arm of each of the parties, and 
the blood is dropped into two cups. The two then( 
exchange cups and drink each other's blood. Next, j 
another cup, containing a mixture of the blood of both, 
is emptied in divided parts by each.8 

The practice of exchanging names in order to sealj 
friendship is universal throughout Polynesia andj 

1 Featherman,o/>.«>. v. 372. 2 H. H. Risley, The Tribes and Castes of Bengal,\.\vul\ 
3 Lewin, op. cit. 228. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 292. 

5 Id. xxiii. 166. 6 R. F. Burton, Mission to Dahomey, 245. 

7 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 81. 8 Featherman, op. cit. H. 264. 

I TIES OF FRIENDSHIP 243 

lanesia.1 The Australian natives form permanent 
of friendship and " brotherhood " -by exchanging 
names.2 For mutual protection and as a token of 
friendship the Vanikoros of the La Perouse Islands 
form ties of " brotherhood " with one another, and even 
with strangers whose favour they wish to secure. " To 
effect this the parties mutually exchange names ; and 
each one first striking his own breast and calling 
himself by his friend's name, strikes next the breast 
of his comrade and gives him his own name. In 
confirmation of this indissoluble alliance, they mutually 
offer presents to each other." 3 Amongst the Chippe- 
ways, as with most North American Indians, the 
smoking together of the calumet confirmed alliance 
of friendship and treaties, and made the agreement 
so sacred that its violation would have had fatal 
consequences.4 Amongst the Seminoles the drinking 
, together of their favourite beverage, " the black drink," 
was the regular method of forming a tie of friendship.5 
Amongst the Dyoor mutual spitting is used as a 
salutation, a token of goodwill, a pledge of attachment, 
or oath of fidelity. It is the proper way to give 
solemnity to a league of friendship.6 The same 
practice is used regularly by the Masai.7 Amongst 
the Khamptis "exchange of clothes gives birth to 
or is a sign of amity ; and by exchange of weapons 
even the most deadly enemies become fast friends, 
and if one falls in fight, it is the duty of the other to 
avenge him." s The Kingsmill islanders rub noses and 
exchange names as a mark of friendship.9 The well- 

1 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 161. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 139. 

3 Id. ii. 95. 4 Id. iii. 246. 

5 Id. iii. 172. 6 Schweinfurth, op. cit. i. 205. 

7 Thomson, op. cit. 165, 166. 8 Rowney, op. cit. 162. 

9 Wilkes, op. cit. iv. 51. 

244 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

known taio system, in Tahiti, for instance, is a good 
example of this. When voyagers arrived, they were 
expected each to choose a taio ; one exchanged names 
with him, and thus the two became protector and 
protege, with " all things in common." In the 
Marquesas friends are tabu? The same principles 
underlie the giving and receiving of presents ; this 
is in essence an exchange of one's self. In Buru the 
interchange of gifts is a regular method of making 
friendship,3 as indeed it has been and still is all over the 
world, since Achilles and Diomed exchanged " gold for 
bronze/* In Central Celebes the same bond of friend- 
ship is used.4 In New Guinea the exchange of presents 
and of names with visitors makes the latter sacred and 
secure from harm.5 The Dusuns of North Borneo 
exchange weapons to become sworn friends.6 In Pata- 
gonia there is an elaborate etiquette amongst chiefs; 
one may not enter the toldo of another until presents 
have been exchanged.7 A Timorese woman bestows 
the highest mark of attachment upon her lover, when she 
gives him the flower garland which adorns her hair, or 
the scarf pin from her bosom. A superior who wishes 
to show goodwill to a subordinate, presents him with a 
portion of the betel he has chewed, which the inferior 
then chews. Young girls send a dose of chewed betel 
wrapped in a banana leaf to the young men to whom 
they are favourably disposed, and receive a similar gift 
in exchange.8 Friendship is made between villages in 
Leti, Moa, and Lakor by eating flesh and drinking 
blood together.9 The following case resumes many 

1 Melville, Omoo, 154 j D'Urville, op. cit. i. 527. 

2 Melville, The Marquesas, 155. 3 Riedel, op. cit. 19. 

4 Bijdragen tot de Indhche Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indie, xxxv. 

5. I. 79. 5 Gill, op. cit. 233. 6 F. Hatton, North Borneo, 196. 

7 Musters, op. cit. 184. 8 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 461. 9 Riedel, op. cit. 396. 

COVENANTS 245 

(ils, and is among many which prove the present 
anation. In Timor-laut friendship is ceremonially 
sealed thus : the parties offer each other a present, 
and then take the ravnoru kida oath ; a mixture of 
water, palm wine, and sea-water is prepared, in which a 
stone or a tooth is placed ; the chief washes the hands 
of the two parties, and pricks a hand of each, letting 
the blood drop into the mixture. A prayer is offered 
to Dudilaa, as witness, that the one who breaks the oath 
may pass away like water, become weak like one who 
has drunk too much palm wine, or sink into the sea 
like a stone. The two then drink of the liquor, and 
the stone or the tooth is split in two to be kept by the 
parties as a testimony. Similar covenants between 
whole villages are sealed by eating together the flesh of 
a slave.1 

In the next place, it is a common method of settling 
disputes, and of making peace, and in these cases we 
see clearly the fear of danger which underlies and in- 
duces the practice, as we have seen manslayers inoculate 
their dead foe with themselves, or themselves with the 
dead foe, to secure immunity from his friends or from 
his ghost. A case may be prefixed, which sums up 
much of the primitive conception. In Buru when a 
man has been detected in adultery, he has to pay a fine 
of a pig, with which a feast is prepared for the relatives 
of both parties. The guilty persons, however, before 
this can be partaken of, must " drink the oath." So in 
the same island the manslayer has to pay compensation, 
something for the head, something for the body, arms, 
legs, and so on, and also one or more pigs to make a 
family feast. At the feast he sits apart with a relative 
* of the dead man, before a wooden bowl, in which are 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 284. 

246 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

two plates of food. While eating, the pair exchange 
plates, and so the wrong is atoned for and peace is made.1 
Amongst the Barea, when " blood vengeance " is satisfied, 
there results (we may well suppose on the same prin- 
ciples) " a sort of relationship " between the murderer 
and the family of the murdered man.2 The Arab 
manslayer kills a camel before the tent of his adversary 
(the avenger of blood), and the blood is supposed to 
wipe away that of the person slain (the original idea 
being that the camel is a gift and a substitute for 
the murderer's life) ; the flesh of the camel is im- 
mediately eaten by the friends of the parties.3 In 
Amboina peace is made between villages by a feast.4 
In Buru, once more, when a family quarrel concerning 
a divorce has taken place, the ill-feeling is ended by 
a family feast. Before setting to, the father of the 
divorced woman puts on the shoulders of her late hus- 
band some clothes belonging to his (the father's) estab- 
lishment ; the husband simultaneously puts on the 
father a cloth which he has himself brought. Then 
the father and the husband exchange plates of food. 
" All this marks reconciliation, and will prevent any 
further quarrel." 5 Amongst the Tagalogs of the 
Philippines peace or an alliance of friendship was made 
by mingling blood and wine, and then drinking the 
mixture.6 The Wakamba make peace by slaying an 
animal and eating its flesh together.7 Oaths in the 
Watubella Islands are taken to terminate quarrels, or to 
make friendship. The " oath " is drunk. Peace is 
made after war by eating food mingled with the blood 
of the parties.8 The people of Luang-Sermata make 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 18. 2 Munzinger, op. cit. 502. 8 Featherman, op. cit. v. 374. 
4 Riedel, of. cit. 52. 5 Id. 23. 6 Featherman, of. cit. ii. 473. 

7 Krapf, of. cit. 313. 8 Riedel, of. cit. 198, 202. 

t RECONCILIATION 247 

e by drinking together.1 In the Babar Islands the 
blood of the two parties is mingled with liquor and 
drunk, both when peace is made between two villages 
and when two persons form a league of friendship, and 
also when a man and wife are divorced.2 In the islands 
Leti, Moa, and Lakor, when a man has cursed another, 
the injury is put away by the two eating together at a 
feast made for the purpose.3 Amongst the Kyans, if 
two enemies meet in a house, they will refuse to recog- 
nise each other, and a reconciliation can only take place 
after a fowl has been killed and a part of the blood has 
been sprinkled over them.4 In forming alliances and 
making peace amongst the Battas the heart of a slain 
animal is divided into as many pieces as there are 
persons present, and eaten by all.5 In New Caledonia, 
when two enemies become reconciled, they mutually 
cut each other's beard as a pledge that the hatred which 
they entertained for each other is extinct. The same 
ceremony is observed when two friends meet after a 
long absence.6 The Nootka Indians ratified treaties 
by smoking the calumet. Safe conduct was guaranteed 
to ambassadors who carried the pipe of peace.7 At 
peacemaking in Wetar the parties exchange presents 
and eat together. When a bond is made between two 
individuals or villages, the parties drink each other's 
blood as a mark of union. The members of such 
villages may not after this ceremony intermarry.8 To 
make a bond of mutual assistance the Timor-laut 
natives kill a slave, and the two parties eat his flesh.9 
At making peace the Kei islanders ceremonially sever a 
kalapa leaf in two, and each party takes home half.10 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 324. 2 Id. 342. 3 Id. 379. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 281. 5 Id. ii. 333. 6 Id. ii. 85. 

7 Id. iii. 351. 8 Riedel, op. cit. 446, 447. 9 Id. 279. 10 Id. 234. 

248 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

In Leti, Moa, and Lakor, at the making of peace, a stick 
is broken in two, and each party keeps a piece. In the 
ceremonial words uttered on the occasion, this phrase 
is used, "our women shall be sisters and our men 
brothers." Quarrels between individuals are settled by 
mutual kisses, and drinking together.1 In the last few 
cases we have the " split token," the kalduke. The 
Ceramese habitually make alliance of friendship by 
exchanging presents, especially of food. Moreover, 
quarrels between two villages are settled, and peace 
made after war, in the following way. Gifts are ex- 
changed, and a feast made in one village, to which 
members of the other are invited. The chiefs of both 
parties drop some of their own blood into a dish of 
food, in which swords and other weapons are dipped. 
This food they now alternately eat. (Here by the 
way is clearly seen the meaning of the primitive oath.) 
Then the other village celebrates a feast identical in 
details with the former, and thus the bond is sealed. 
Many villages have been through the ceremony. The 
ceremony is called pel a, and " those who have taken 
part therein may not intermarry, but must help each 
other in war." A similar process is gone through by 
parties who are going "head-hunting" together.2 

Another form of the relation of ngia ngiampe is the 
fairly frequent practice of lending or exchanging wives. 
A wife, in early thought, is a part of the man. Some- 
times it is a case of hospitality, but always it is a very 
sacred act, and produces the religious results of this 
relation, as is shown by the Australian taboo between 
those who have exchanged their partners.3 Hospitality, 
of course, is identical with ngiampe relations generally. 
I shall discuss the practice later, and there point out 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 389. 2 Ut I28> I29 3 Eyre> ^ ^ » ^ 

:, 

WIVES EXCHANGED— GUILDS 249 

particular reason for it. Timorese who have made 
a pact of friendship in the usual way of ngiampe^ may 
lend each other their wives.1 In theory, of course, the 
lending will in its turn continue the ngiampe relation 
already begun, as it does in Australia. The Eskimo 
frequently offer their wives to strangers, and the women 
are not loath to perform this act of hospitality.2 The 
Yumas, by way of hospitality, lent their wives to their 
guests.3 A case which shows the principle of the 
custom is the following : in New South Wales when 
two tribesmen had quarrelled and wished to be re- 
conciled, one would send his wife to the other, and 
a temporary exchange of partners was made.4 The 
Northern Indians sometimes exchanged wives for a 
night. It was esteemed as one of the strongest ties of 
friendship. If either man died, the other was bound to 
support his children, a rule which was never broken.5 

Very commonly this bond results when persons pass 
through the same ordeal or ceremony together. Thus 
amongst the Basutos the boys who have been "initiated" 
together, as also the girls, form a guild of friends.6 
Amongst Congo tribes the boys who are " initiated " 
together, practically form a " society " ; " through after 
life there exists a bond of union between individuals 
who have been members of this strange fraternity."7 
The same thing is found in the case of Australian 
boys "initiated" together.8 There, also, they are 
generally made " members of the totem," a sort of 
"mystical body," which is itself in effect a con- 
tinuous ngiampe relation. There is also a similar bond 

1 Riedel, in Deutsche Geographische Blatter, x. 230. 

2 Featherman, op, cit. iii. 405. 3 Id. iii. 189. 

4 Cameron, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiv. 353. 5 Hearne, op. cit. 129. 

6 Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic for 1874, 37. 7 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 289. 

8 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 198. 

250 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

between the operators and the boys they have operated 
upon.1 

The chief result of the mutual act is the duty of 
mutual respect and mutual assistance. The primitive 
form of this twofold duty is a taboo against physical 
personal contact, combined with an obligation, for 
instance, to assist in war. In many cases, of course, 
circumstances render the assistance one-sided, becoming, 
for instance, protection. Amongst the Tacullis, or 
Carrier Indians, the cabin of the chief is a place of 
refuge, where the homicide is secure. He is also con- 
sidered as being under the protection of the chief if he 
wears any article of his dress.2 Amongst the Kabyles 
there is a universal institution called anaya, a kind of 
freemasonry, with all the inviolability of the protecting 
guardianship which it guarantees. It is a bond of union 
which makes all Kabyles brothers, and when once in 
possession of the well-known token or pledge of security, 
the stranger or fugitive may travel anywhere, and the 
passport will be recognised. A violation of the anaya 
would be regarded as a grievous insult, and give rise to 
an inveterate feud. The respect and consideration to 
which the anaya is entitled depend in a great measure 
on the reputation and character of the patron who 
confers the privilege. The anaya of a celebrated mara- 
bout is most extensive in its practical bearing and most 
certain in its conciliatory effects.3 " Zaid-al-Khail re- 
fuses to slay the thief who has surreptitiously drunk 
from his father's milk-bowl the night before."4 The 
protection is produced by eating " even the smallest 
portion of food belonging to the protector." A case is 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 248 ; Eyre, op. cit. ii. 338, 339 ; Journ. Anthrop, 
lust, xx. 84, 85. 2 Featherman, op. cit. Hi. 381. 

3 Id. v. 306. 4 Robertson Smith, op. cit. 149, 150. 

PROTECTION 251 

given by Burckhardt of an Arab proving that he had 
eaten of the same date with a member of the tribe.1 A 
natural concomitant to the sacred duty of hospitality 
amongst the Bedouins is the no less important relation 
which exists between the protector and the protected 
(dakheil and dakhal), which involves mutual obliga- 
tion religiously observed, and good faith fully guarded 
against all violations and shortcomings. To reproach a 
man with having broken his dakheil is to touch him on 
the most tender point of honour, for it constitutes the 
grossest insult in the social ethics of Arab manners. 
Various acts are employed to confer dakheil. Amongst 
the Shamars, if a man can seize a thread or string, one 
end. of which is held by his enemy, he immediately 
becomes his dakheil. He acquires the privilege of 
dakheil if he only touches the covering of the tent, or 
even if he can hit it by throwing a weaporf at it ; and 
this right of claiming protection has been carried so far 
that by spitting upon a man one becomes his dakheil. 
Amongst the Arabs of Sinai, the dakheil is only con- 
sidered effective if the fugitive has contrived to eat or 
sleep in the tent. If two enemies unexpectedly meet, 
and the salam passes between them, this is regarded as 
a signal of truce, and they will refrain from every 
hostile act, although the salutation may have been 
exchanged by mistake.2 Another custom which exists 
among some Arabs, in particular the tribes of the 
Nedjed, is that of guardian, wasy. This institution, 
which makes a Bedouin who accepts the responsibility 
the special friend and protector of the family of an 
Arab even after the death of the latter, is principally 
designed for the security of minor children, women, 
and old men. The obligation of wasy and the claim of 

1 Burckhardt, op. cit. 186, 187. 2 Featherman, op. at. v. 372. 

252 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the protected are generally mutual, and descend by 
hereditary succession. Almost every Arab is a pro- 
tector, and is in turn the protected. The means of 
effecting this is by the present of a camel.1 

Further, it is clear that while it is this obligation 
of mutual assistance which is the object of forming this 
relation, yet the taboo against physical contact is an 
essential concomitant, which helps us to see the origin 
of the whole method. The reason for the resulting 
taboo is that A and B are become identical by trans- 
mission of personality, and therefore A avoids all 
physical contact with B, because it is through physical 
contact ultimately that all personal injury is effected, 
and by such contact he might injure himself in B ; B 
on his side has the same feeling. The idea is well 
brought out in a Maori belief; if another person ate 
a man's food, he was regarded as " having eaten the 
man," and the insult was gross.2 And so A avoids all 
physical contact with B, primarily for fear of injuring 
himself; he will not eat with B, lest he eat himself, 
nor touch B lest he injure himself by the harm inherent 
in contact. The feeling is deepened by the fact that it 
is mutual, and therefore each fears injuring the other, 
as well as himself, by physical contact. The breaking 
of the taboo of personal isolation has thus produced 
a fresh taboo of even greater force, yet still because 
egoism is its chief factor ; in the original taboo 
one feared lest one should be injured by the con- 
tact of others, in this one fears lest one injure one's 
own self as well. The kalduke is identical with the 
ngadhungi. 

That this is the origin of the taboo and also of the 
binding force of the ngiampe relation is shown by the 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 373. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 107. 

BASIS OF NGIA NGIAMPE 

253 

towing examples. The object of making men who 
to go on an expedition drink each other's blood is 
said by the Central Australians to be the prevention of 
treachery.1 In New South Wales when two tribesmen 
had quarrelled and wished to be reconciled, they made a 
temporary exchange of wives.2 In Africa, when a wife is 
unfaithful, her husband will die if he eat food she has 
salted.3 On the Loango coast bridegroom and bride 
are required to make a full confession of their sins 
at the marriage ceremony ; should either fail to do so, 
or should keep anything back, they will fall ill when 
eating together as man and wife.4 In Victoria friends 
exchange hair as a mark of affection. It is very un- 
lucky to lose this ; should one do so, he asks the other 
to cancel the exchange by returning his hair. If this 
were not done, the loser might die. So strong is this 
belief that persons in such circumstances have been 
known to fall into bad health, and sometimes actually 
die.5 In the Moluccas a man going to war is at 
pains to make up any quarrel he may have, for fear 
the ill- wishes of his adversary may injure him in battle. 
Should a man have had an affaire, and have given up 
the woman, he goes to ask her forgiveness before 
setting out, and offers a present. If she will not be 
conciliated, he does not go on the expedition, for fear 
of the results.6 Lovers in the Aru Islands give each 
other gifts. Hair, however, is not exchanged, for fear 
that in case of a quarrel the one may make the other 
ill by burning it.7 When a lover is jilted in the Babar 
Islands, he will avenge this by hiding a piece of the girl's 
hair, or betel that she has used, in a tree. When she 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiv. 353. 

3 Macdonald, Africana, i. 173. 4 Bastian, Loango Kiiste, i. 172. 

5 Dawson, op. cit. 55. 

6 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 387. 7 Id. 262. 

254 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

becomes a wife and mother, her children will then die.1 
In Brandenburg it is believed that lovers and married 
people who eat from one plate or drink from the same 
glass will come to dislike each other.2 A similar fear 
was seen in the illustrations of the primitive oath. 

Some typical instances of this resulting taboo are 
these. Between husbands who have lent each other 
their wives there is, in Australia, a taboo of a very 
stringent character, and in other parts of the world a 
duty enjoining the protection of the children of the 
lender after his death.3 Amongst the Dieri boys may 
not speak to those who have operated upon them at 
" initiation " until a present has been given.4 At the 
" initiation" ceremony of the Central Australians a taboo 
is set between the man who performs the operation and 
the boy who undergoes it. This is removed by the 
boy making him an offering of food. The final 
" initiation " ceremonies are ended by each initiate 
bringing an offering of food to his abmoara man who 
decorated him, and with whom there is up to now a 
taboo. It is called man's meat. At this ceremony 
also the old men are sprinkled with blood from the 
young men, sometimes into their mouths ; the idea 
being to strengthen the older men at the expense of 
the younger. The removal of the taboo is thus : 
" the man receiving food sat down, and the young man 
brought it and put it before him. The old man took 
it up and held it, and then put it to the young man's 
mouth. Thus the ban of silence was removed." 
Previously the ban of approach may be removed by 
the abmoara rubbing him with red ochre.5 Amongst 

1 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 358. 

2 Reinsberg Diiringsfeld, op. cit. 81. 3 Eyre, op. cit. ii. 338, 339. 

4 Howitt, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 84, 85. 

5 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 248, 381, 382, 383, 386. 

I THE SECOND TABOO 255 

natives of the Murray River, those who have 
dated at the initiation ceremony never afterwards 
mention the names of the boys, nor do the latter men- 
tion the names of those who have operated upon them. 
Also, if one gives food or anything else to another, it is 
either laid on the ground for him to take, or is given 
through a third person " in the gentlest and mildest 
manner possible, whereas to another native it would be 
jerked." l In serious cases of illness amongst the Central 
Australians, a woman's blood is given to a male patient 
and a man's to a woman. When the patient recovers, 
he or she may not speak to the person whose blood was 
given, nor may the latter speak to the convalescent, 
until a gift of food has been presented. Again, a 
woman " sings " a mixture of fat and red ochre, 
which she then rubs on the body of a sick man. On 
recovery he may not speak to her until he has " given 
her food." 2 Amongst the Munda Kols there is a 
relation of dutifulness between the child and the 
person who gives it its name.3 Blood is regularly 
given by men of the Central Australian tribes to each 
other in order to produce strength ; the man whose 
blood has been taken " becomes tabu to him until 
he releases him from the ban of silence by ' singing ' 
over his mouth." Blood is drunk at meetings of 
reconciliation ; and in connection with the giving of 
blood to a man to strengthen him, e.g. when he is 
going on an avenging expedition, there is the belief 
that " this partaking together of blood prevents the 
possibility of treachery." 4 Here we come back to the 
duty implied by the process, and the sanction which 
supports it ; it is clearly seen also in the pela ceremony 

1 Eyre, I.e. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. clt. 464. 

3 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 163. 4 Spencer and Gillen, l.c. 

256 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

of the Ceramese, which produces the obligation of mutual 
assistance in war. The preparation of a young man 
for marriage in New Britain is identical with a sort 
of " initiation." He has to hide in the forest from all 
his female relatives for three, sometimes six, months. 
Should he happen to meet a female relative, " he does 
not run away from her, but keeps on his way until 
they meet, when he will step aside from the road, and 
hold out to her anything he may have in his possession. 
She takes it without a word, and they part. It now 
becomes the duty of the young man's friends to 
redeem for him that which he may have given to her." 
Until this pledge is redeemed, he is considered to be in 
disgrace and is much ashamed.1 Chiefs in Patagonia 
will not enter each other's tents till presents have been 
exchanged.2 For touching the head of a Maori chief 
whom he was treating for illness, Mr. Yate was asked 
to make a payment. He never administered a dose of 
medicine to a Maori without such a demand from the 
patient.3 These are cases of the taboo of personal 
isolation which is implicit in all human relations. In 
the following case it is seen as self-respect, which is 
injured through the breaking of the taboo by an insult. 
Amongst the Zulus the term unesisila (" you have 
dirt ") implies that you have done or said something, 
or some one has done or said something to you, which 
has " bespattered you with metaphorical dirt, in Scrip- 
tural phrase, c has defiled you.' ' The writer compares 
the expression, "his hands are not clean." To use 
this term to another is a gross insult. If a woman has 
received the worst possible insult a woman can, omka 
ninazala^ which means " you will bear children to your 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 287. 2 Musters, op. cit. 184. 

3 Yate, op. cit. 104, 105. 

1 

FIRST AND SECOND TABOO 257 

Ler-in-law," she makes a great to-do, and goes to 
the kraal of the offending person, and kills an animal 
belonging to him. This is eaten by old women or little 
children, but not by any one of marriageable age. " The 
beast has received into its substance the insila which 
has now left the woman who received the insult." l 

The balance is set right by reparation, the receipt of 
a present being identical in principle with the taking 
of something from the other party. The various 
methods of breaking the taboo of personal isolation 
reproduce the state of taboo once more. The taboo 
is broken, and the breaking produces another taboo, 
which in its turn may be broken. This is inevitable 
from the principles which underlie the practice, and the 
fact also proves those principles. These cases naturally 
lead up to what may be called continuous ngiampe. A 
principle of contact is, once in contact always in contact ; 
and this is actualised in permanent relations, ngiampe 
in theory, such as between friends and lovers, between 
husband and wife, parent and child, brother and sister. 

When we remember the pregnant meaning which 
personal contact has in all its forms amongst primitive 
men, it becomes less difficult to realise the superlative 
importance of such a relation as this. It is, without 
doubt, in primitive thought, a bond of such transcen- 
dent strength and inviolability, owing to the sensitive 
individualism of early man, who practically regards 
every part of himself as sacred, that we may look in 
vain through history for a tie of equal power. Cer- 
tainly no ordinary ancient or modern conception of 
the duties of kinship has such force, nor even modern 
principles of honour and similar moral ties ; the 
•primitive bond is the most binding Categorical Impera- 

1 Leslie, op, cit. 169, 174, 175. 
S 

258 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

tive invented by man, and in its origin and results 
alike, seems on a par with laws of nature ; it is a kind 
of physical " identity in difference." The theory of 
Maine, that status precedes contract, and that contract 
is unknown in primitive culture, needs revision. His 
evidence applies to barbarism, not to savagery. 

Further, the same idea, though not developed to its 
logical conclusion, though this is always ready to 
become actual instead of potential, runs through all 
ideas of contact, especially when consciously mutual. 
In eating together, the kalduke is the food ; in sexual 
intercourse there is a similar conception. Sometimes 
the kalduke is split in two — and here we have the world- 
wide practice of dividing a " token " — of which each of j 
the two parties keeps a piece. All who have anything j 
in common, even a common aim or sympathy, are j 
potentially in this relation, and the idea of ngia ngiampe \ 
is inherent in their reciprocal attitude. The thief and { 
his partner, the confessor and his penitent, those who 
share the same dwelling, the same trade, those who are 
of the same sex or the same age, those who have the 
same totem, the same kindred, the same god1 — all .! 
these are potentially bound by the same principle, j 
The idea goes all round the circle of human relations, j 
and is potentially existent wherever there is mutual j 
connection. The more subtle sort is found where con- 
tact is continuous. To husband and wife, the kalduke 
is the marriage-bed, the living together, the child, born 
or unborn ; this is illustrated by the phrase, common to 
many languages, which describes the child as a " pledge." 
True, it is often as a pledge of wifely chastity, but j 
this is not merely an extension, but is the same idea J 

1 In Fiji, when distant towns have the same gods, the inhabitants have the \ 
privilege of doing as they please in each others' town (Pritchard, op. cit. 364). 

HUMAN RELATIONS 

259 

only half expressed. The fidelity of the wife is the 
chief attitude required of her by the ngia ngiampe 
relation. Between lovers, besides love-tokens, lovers' 
knots, and so-called charms and the like, the relation 
of ngia ngiampe underlies the kiss, the embrace, and 
any contact. Between friends also, the clasp of hands, 
the embrace, the savage rubbing . of noses, show the 
principle. " Freemasonry " is an interesting case of an 
institution based on this. 

These psycho - physical ideas continue into the 
psychical phenomena of emotion and cognition ; they 
are here more subtle, but no less enduring, whatever 
the refinement of culture may be. In connection with 
the phenomena of ideation, we spoke of the memory- 
image of a man's foe impressed upon his brain ; 
another instance would be the memory-image of a 
loved person. In both, and any similar cases, the 
memory-image is identical in kind, though necessarily 
less material in degree, with the kalduke of the 
Australian black-fellow. The image is the man's 
self in the keeping of another ; in the one case it 

' is an Erinys, the spiritual image of one who is hated 
and feared, in the other that of one who loves. In 
both cases it is a man's self transferred to another, 
and bringing with it all the ideas of hostage and 
pledge ; and when the matter is reciprocal, there is 
the complex reciprocity which is seen in all mutual 
contact and personal relation. Again, the same 
applies, though necessarily the occurrence is sporadic, 
to the reflection of a person's image which he himself 
can see in the retina of the other. In the connection 
of love, this is a favourite commonplace of poetical 

land popular thought. " And she said : * See, thy 
image is reflected a thousand times in these gems that 

260 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

reflect thee ; yet look in my eyes, and thou shalt see 
thyself through their reflection in my heart.' Then 
the king looked into her eyes, and saw himself reflected 
in them like the sun in a deep lake. And he whispered 
in the shell of her ear : ' Thou hast robbed me of my- 
self, give me back myself in thy form.' ' Again, in 
connection with the idea we saw reason to attribute to 
primitive man, namely, that all apparently abnormal 
or unusual states of emotion, such as sudden anger or 
ecstasy, or the surging of love, when close contact with 
another attends these states, as, for instance, in the case of 
love, both in popular language and in psychology there 
is recognised the idea that, if the emotional state is 
" transmitted," if, as we say, A is " infected " with B's 
enthusiasm or love, A is " inspired " with B, then B is 
transferred to him, and so we come to the kalduke again. 
Lastly, the whole set of ideas is of course the 
psychological basis of union, physical and spiritual, 
and well shows the materialistic workings of the human 
brain. Mutual inoculation, ngia ngiampe, is union 
looked at from within. It should be noted also that 
the next category to that of union is identity, and \ 
it is interesting to trace in the thought and practice | 
of mankind, as we may in these phenomena, both 
the recognition of this metaphysical truth and the 
attempt to realise it in human intercourse. As 
Aristophanes puts it of lovers in the Symposium : j 
" Suppose Hephaestus with his instruments to come 
to the pair who are lying side by side, and say to 
them, * What do you people want of one another ? ' 
they would be unable to explain. And suppose, 
further, that when he saw their perplexity, he said, 
' Do you desire to be wholly one, always day and 

1 A Digitloj the Mcou, 117. 

LOVE AND IDENTITY 261 

night to be in one another's company ? for if 
this is what you desire, I am ready to melt you into 
one/ they would confess that this becoming one instead 
of two was their exact desire." And he visualises 
the whole psychology of love-practices and marriage- 
ceremonial in the mythos, worthy of the poet of the 
Clouds, in which the earliest man was a bisexual 
hermaphrodite being, " having a name corresponding 
to this double nature, which had once a real existence, 
but is now lost, and the name is only preserved as 
a term of reproach." ..." The primeval man 
was round, his back and sides forming a circle ; and 
he had four hands and four feet, one head with two 
faces, looking opposite ways, set on a round neck, and 
precisely alike. He could walk backwards or for- 
wards, and could also roll over at a great rate, turning 
on his four hands and four feet like tumblers going 
i over and over with their legs in the air ; this was 
when he wanted to run fast." Primeval man became 
proud, and would have laid hands on the gods, and 
Aristophanes now gives his version of the Fall : " and 
Zeus said, ' Methinks I have a plan which will humble 
their pride and mend their manners ; they shall con- 
tinue to exist, but I will cut them in two, and then 
they will be diminished in strength and increased in 
numbers ; this will have the advantage of making them 
more profitable to us. They shall walk upright on 
two legs, and if they continue insolent and will not be 
quiet, I will split them again, and they shall hop about 
on a single leg.' He spoke, and cut men in two, like a 
sorb-apple which is halved for pickling, or as you might 
divide an egg with a hair. After the division, the two 
parts of man, each desiring his other half, came together, 
and throwing their arms about one another, clung, and 

262 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

in their eagerness to grow into one were perishing from 
hunger without ever making an effort, because they did 
not like to do anything apart." " Human nature was 
originally one, and we were a whole, and the desire and 
pursuit of the whole is called Love." 

This reintroduction of a state of taboo, connoting 
mutual caution, respect and religious responsibility, 
has had a profound influence on the development of 
morality. In it we can see the religious nature of 
human relations, and the connection between morality 
.and religion, in any sense of the latter term. It illus- 
trates clearly the growth of the conception of responsi- 
bility to others, and marks the psychological process 
whereby altruism emerges from egoism, the two im- 
pulses being indeed but two sides of one idea, for man 
is both an individual and a social creature. As to the 
new taboo, the primitive form of the idea of mutual 
responsibility, the characteristics of the state are of 
course somewhat different from the original taboo of 
isolation ; the dangers there were those arising from 
ignorance ; these, now the original taboo has been 
removed by breaking it, a removal which forms union, 
a completion as it were of some magnetic circuit, or a 
double inoculation, these are the dangers which will 
result from breaking a bond which is as strong as death, 
for it is a bond made by giving one's own life in pawn, 
and thus they are the basis of duty. 

When the mind has completed its inference of a 
superior power, this power is set up as the judge and 
upholder of such relations, and a friend may say to his 
friend or lover, as the token is exchanged, " Mizpah. 
The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are 
absent one from another." Taking another feature, 

1 Plato, Symposium, 190, 192 (Jowett's translation). 

IDENTITY AND DUTY 263 

t primitive " oath " is first, the man's self, then his 
bstitute " or " pledge " in the " thing " administered, 
and later, the god who exacts vengeance on the perjured. 
To return, — the brief statement that in the Mar- 
quesas " friends are tabu " gives the whole case in a 
nutshell. They are taboo to each other as the result 
of their intercourse, their contact, in fine, the kalduke. 
We can see the idea of the original taboo combined 
with the later one of mutual duty, in the taboo result- 
ing in Australia between the men who perform the 
operation at puberty and the boys who undergo it. 
They have been in a peculiarly intimate relation, body 
and soul as it were have been exposed and made naked 
to each other's eyes, a dangerous service has been per- 
formed, and its results may be dire. Therefore, they 
may not speak to each other. The ban is removed 
by a present of food.1 This act of union removes the 

, original dangers but introduces a relation of sympathy 
and duty. We also saw that the ngia ngiampe of the 
Narrinyeri are taboo in that they may not speak, but 
their mutual responsibility is such that they are ex- 
pressly made in order to conduct barter, their fairness 
has been, that is, rendered above suspicion. Exactly 
the same relation is induced between godparents 
and the like, and their proteges, as between the black- 
fellow and boy. The sponsors or " bridesmen " of a 
Beni-Amer bride have a peculiar relation with her. 
They may not speak to her for the rest of her life, but 
they are sworn to defend her and protect her, and 
actually do so when her husband's conduct requires it.2 
We observed above that the forming of alliances by 
eating together prevented the possibility of treachery 

• on the part of either concerned. The ceremony is 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 248. 2 Munzinger, op. cit. 325. 

264 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

often performed for this purpose only, just as is single 
inoculation. For a man will not betray his own flesh ; 
just as duty is shown by not eating one's own totem or 
even looking at it. 

These cases lead up to two results, most important 
for our present purpose. In the first place, I put it 
that, taking into account all the evidence, psychological 
and ethnological, concerning human relations, we have 
here the most important primitive conception of re- 
lationship. The biological tie is not so obvious as are 
those of physical contact, nor is the idea of " blood- 
kinship " at all an early conception. Those who hold 
that the "blood-covenant" is the original of which all 
these other cases are " deteriorations," are obliged to 
use the most forced analogies, and I do not think it 
necessary to point these out, for they are quite obvious. 
Nor is there, in any example quoted, any primary idea 
of making a man of the same kin ; the idea is to 
identify two individuals, qua individuals. Again, close 
daily contact is for the savage a more important tie 
than that of kinship, except in the case of parent, 
especially mother and child ; blood-kinship is only one 
form of human relations, and that not the most patent. 
The tie or kalduke of having the same mother is the 
basis of the " maternal system," the tie or kalduke of 
physical close contact is the basis of all primitive kin- 
ship ; as opposed to later ideas of " blood " the basis is 
this daily contact, which is a continuous ngiampe rela- 
tion. To the savage mind blood is only one variety of 
human substance, though an important one. Enquirers 
often, it is to be noted, confuse the care taken of blood 
as being a part of an individual with the later idea of 
" blood " as a term for kinship. Lastly, all these cases 
of ngiampe may be in theory, as in practice they are, 

t RELATIONSHIP 265 

en under the category of friendship, and friendship 
, far stronger psychological tie than kinship of blood, 
hall return to this conception of relationship later, 
and also to the next result. This is that very interest- 
ing detail in the Narrinyeri, Wetarese, and Ceramese 
customs. In the first of these persons are sometimes 
placed in the ngia ngiampe relation for the express 
purpose of preventing them from marrying. In the 
two latter cases, all who have been through the pela 
ceremony of eating together, such as accomplices in 
head-hunting, and members of two villages who have 
thus made peace, are bound to help each other in war, 
but may not intermarry. To these may be added the 
fact that " sponsorship " and " gossipry " in European 
custom are bars to marriage, both between the sponsors 
themselves and between them and the family, for a 
member of which they have been acting. 

These facts supply the second part of the reason 
why brothers and sisters and those who live together 
may not marry. Before the sexual taboo is removed, 
that taboo prevents intercourse of all kinds, including 
marriage, between such persons; when it has been 
removed, either by a definite ceremony, as at " initia- 
tion/* or by a recognition of continuous ngia ngiampe 
in living together, eating together, and the like, the 
resulting principles of this new relation also prevent 
intercourse, including marriage. The same fears which 
led up to and which enforce ngia ngiampe, now, in the 
form of duty, prevent what the original taboo pre- 
vented ; and the prohibition, being superimposed on a 
continuous biological relation, becomes strengthened 
when the latter is fully recognised. Put shortly, the 
ngiampe relation prevents all physical contact, and 
marriage is a permanent form of physical contact. 

266 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, xr 

More as to this hereafter ; meanwhile I may note that 
the Narrinyeri, Wetarese, and Ceramese customs have 
not yet, so far as I am aware, been employed by the 
supporters of the theory that primitive kinship was 
welded by a conception of the " blood-tie," which in 
its legal pedantry is quite unprimitive. They would 
doubtless explain the rules of the Narrinyeri, Wetarese, 
and Ceramese as analogies from the " blood-covenant," 
but if so, why should there be a taboo preventing the 
two parties, when of the same sex, from speaking to 
each other or having any physical contact ? Blood- 
relations do not usually send each other to Coventry. 
Why again should a " godfather " and a " godmother " 
not marry, though theoretically married ? It is more 
scientific to argue for the development of the concep- 
tion of blood - relationship and blood - covenant alike 
from the elementary ideas of human relations. The 
cause which prevents these people from marrying is 
identical with that which prevents others in the like 
relation both from betraying one another, and from 
having any physical contact, the relation of marriage 
being in primitive thought a dangerous one ; and 
between those who are identified with each other by 
exchange of personality, no reciprocal act which may 
injure either through the other, and thus poison the 
connection, may be performed. 

CHAPTER XII 

A DIGRESSION, in which another application of the 
ideas of contact will be brought out, is necessary to 
throw further light on some particular features of the 
subject. The common practice of disguise is used to 
avoid both real and imaginary danger. Thus the 
New Caledonians, when about to murder a man, put 
on grotesque masks so as not to be recognised,1 just 
as the highwayman of romance was wont to wear a 
black mask. In war the Tongans change their war- 
costume at every battle, by way of disguise.2 Dr. 
Frazer has shown that mourning is disguise, being 
generally the reverse of ordinary wear.3 Again, in 
Zanzibar parents paint the faces of their children to 
look like " little devils, " so as to preserve them from 
" the evil eye." 4 For the same reason Persian parents 
would paint their children's faces black, and German 
parents put mud on their children's heads and dress 
them in mean clothes.5 In Egypt the children who 
are most beloved are the worst clad. One may often 
see a fine lady walking in a magnificent dress, and by 
her side a boy or girl, her own child, its face smeared 
with dirt, and wearing clothes which look as if they 
had not been washed for months. The intention is to 

1 Anderson, op. cit. 222. '2 Wilkes, op. clt. Hi. 10. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Ins:, xv. 73, 98 ff. 4 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 134. 

5 Id. I.e. 

268 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

avoid " the evil eye." l The Chinese believe that 
certain evil spirits attempt to ruin the health of 
bright and promising children. To delude the spirit, 
they shave the child's head, and call him "little 
priest," treating him as a worthless child and of no 
more consequence than a despised Buddhist priest. 
They also use derogatory epithets and names, so 
as to make the evil spirits think that they care 
little about the child. Sometimes they have it adopted 
into another family, for the same reason.2 A 
Javanese woman in the seventh month of preg- 
nancy bathes and has cocoa-nut milk poured over 
her ; also she has to change her dress seven times 
a day.3 

An interesting form of disguise, which is found in 
early custom as well as in modern romance, is the 
wearing of the dress of the other sex ; it is generally 
the male sex who adopt this disguise, and no doubt in 
many cases the same idea is present as that which leads 
to the wearing of rags and dirty clothes ; evil influences 
are more likely to pass over the sex which, from the 
male point of view, is the less important. The ancient 
Lycians were ordered by their law to wear women's 
dress when they mourned a dead relative. Plutarch 
explains it as " by way of showing that mourning is 
effeminate, that it is womanly and weak to mourn. 
For women are more prone to mourning than are 
men, barbarians than Greeks, and inferior persons than 
superior. Among barbarians again, it is not the most 
manly races such as Kelts and Gauls, but Egyptians, 
Syrians, and Lydians who indulge most in mourning. 
The latter when mourning go into pits and will not 

1 Lane, op. at. \. 60. 2 Doolittle, op. at. ii. 229. 

3 Feather man, op. at. ii. 386. 

CHANGE OF SEX 269 

k upon the sun." When an Egyptian boy is cir- 
mcised, at the age of five or six, he parades the 
treets, dressed as a girl in female clothes and orna- 
ments, borrowed from some lady. In front of him 
also a school friend walks, evidently taking his place as 
a " proxy," for he wears round his neck the boy's own 
writing-tablet. A woman sprinkles salt behind the boy 
to counteract " the evil eye " ; this is doubtless the 
reason why he is dressed as a girl.2 Possibly the story 
of Achilles in Scyros, living as a girl with the daughters 
of King Lycomedes, is connected with some such idea. 
Achilles also had his name changed, another method 
of disguise ; Issa and Pyrrha being mentioned as the 
name taken. Similarly, to conceal the infant Dionysus 
from Hera, Zeus gave him to Hermes, who took him 
to I no and Athamas with orders to nurse him as a 
girl.3 In the Babar Islands a party of women bury 
the placenta. If the child is a boy, they wear male 
girdles, if a girl, female sarongs.4" Here the idea is 
sympathy. When Zulus undertake the "black ox 
sacrifice " which produces black rain, the chief men 
put on the girdles of young girls.5 The same idea is 
extended amongst the same people into a method of 
keeping off sickness from the cattle by changing their 
keepers, thus : when cattle disease is prevalent and 
expected, it is kept off by the umkuba, the custom of 
the girls herding the cattle for a day. All the girls 
and unmarried women rise early, dress themselves 
entirely in their brothers' clothes, and taking their 
brothers' knobkerries and sticks, open the cattle-pen 
and drive the cattle to pasture, returning at sunset. 

1 Plutarch, Consolatio ad Apolloniuni, 22 ; Valerius Maximus, xii. 6. 13. 

2 Lane, op. cit. i. 61, 62 ; ii. 279. 

3 Ptolemaeus, Nor. Hist. i. j Apollodorus, Bibliotheca, iii. 3 ; Nonnus, 

"• 19. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 354. 5 Callaway, op. cit. 93. 

270 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

No one of the opposite sex dares to go near them on 
this day, or speak to them.1 Here the principle is, 
as it were, allopathic, change of sex is a method of 
changing the luck or averting bad luck. 

Any sort of change or substitution may be used to 
escape danger. In Java the infant was carried about 
in the arms of female relatives until the navel was 
perfectly closed, and a stone cylinder dressed up as a 
baby took the place of the child in its basket cradle. 
When the child reached the age of seven months its 
feet were for the first time allowed to touch the ground, 
and to commemorate this a feast was given by the 
parents.2 In Amboina, if a couple have lost several 
children, they will give the next to another woman to 
suckle.3 Change of name is a common method of 
avoiding danger or of altering luck. A barren woman 
in Ceramlaut changes her name.4 Amongst the Lopars 
every time the child fell ill the christening was repeated 
and the name changed.5 Similarly amongst the Kings- 
mill islanders.6 If a Malay child falls ill after receiv- 
ing its name, it is temporarily adopted by another 
family who give it a different name.? In Nias a 
youth's name is changed at marriage, a girl's at 
puberty.8 Tuscarora boys received a new name at 
puberty, and another when they became warriors.9 
The custom is very common throughout the world, 
and we may begin the next argument with this 
practice. 

The savage boy receives a new name at puberty and 
gives up his old one, just as does the Catholic novice 

1 Car butt, in South African Folklore Journal, ii. 12, 13. 

2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 386, 387. 8 Riedel, op. at. 75. 

4 U. 176. 5 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 148. 

6 Wiikes, op. cit. v. 102. 7 skeat, op. cit. 34. 

8 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 354. 9 Id. iii. 128. 

(CHANGE OF IDENTITY 271 

I the Catholic priest.1 What is the idea behind the 
ctice? It is part of a very widely spread human 
x)ulse to change one's personal identity, and the 
possibility of the change is more than half believed. 
As the infant at baptism was rescued from Satan, and 
became by the washing away of the " old Adam " a 
new creature, receiving a name as the symbol of its 
new life, as the warrior who has slain a foe takes his 
name to add to his own personality the properties of 
the owner, and sometimes to avoid reprisals by so 
doing, and as the novice turns his back on the old life 
and begins a new life, so there are occasions in every 
man's existence when he would gladly for various 
reasons become " another man," and in early society 
this was thought possible. These things that are 
changed to effect the transformation are parts of the 
man's life or soul, such as names and garments, and 
represent his whole being. Let us take some cases 
which prove this belief in change of personality. When 
a Central Australian is made a medicine -man, he is 
supposed to be killed by a spirit, who removes all his 
internal organs and supplies him with a new set. After 
this the man returns to life.2 The Kaffir word used 
to express the initiation of a priest to his office, "means 
* renewal,' and is the same that is used for the first 
appearance of the new moon, and for the putting forth 
of the grass and buds at the commencement of spring. 
By which it is evidently intended to intimate that the 
man's heart is renewed, that he has become an entirely 
different person from what he was before, seeing with 
different eyes and hearing with different ears." 3 The 

1 So the Yoruba novice at the end of his novitiate for the priesthood takes a 
new name, A. B. Ellis, op. at. 97. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 523, 524. 8 Maclean, op. cit. 79. 

272 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

closing ceremony of the " initiation " of Kaffir boys is 
that they are chased to the river, where they wash off 
the white clay they have been smeared with during 
their separation ; then everything connected with their 
stay is collected in the hut they have lived in, and the 
whole is burned. The boys are smeared with fat and 
red clay, and are given new harasses. They then 
depart, being careful not to look back upon the burn- 
ing hut, lest some supernatural evil should befall them, 
and they therefore cover their heads.1 After the 
initiation to manhood of Powhattan boys, it was pre- 
tended that a veil of oblivion had been cast over their 
past life. " Forgetting that they had been children, 
they entered by suffering and increased knowledge into 
their new career of manhood." 2 Amongst the Congo 
negroes boys and girls are " initiated " at puberty, each 
set of boys and each set of girls forming a sort of 
secret society, called N'Kimba and Fua-Kongo. The 
rite is commonly precipitated when it is supposed that 
the women are not bearing enough children. The 
person being " initiated " is supposed to die and rise 
again. At the end of the ceremonies the " initiates " 
take new names and pretend to have forgotten their 
former life ; they do not even recognise their parents 
and friends.3 In Corea, on the fourteenth day of the 
first month of the year, any one who is entering on a 
" critical year of his life/' makes an effigy of straw, 
dresses it in his own clothes, and casts it on the road, 
and then feasts all night. Whatever happens to the 
cast-out image is supposed to happen to the man's 
former self, now gone into the past, and " Fate is 
believed to look upon the individual in new clothes as 

1 Maclean, op. cit. 99. 2 Featherman, op. cit. Hi. 116. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 289. 

I NEW LIFE 273 

ther man."1 "At the end of the year all the 
men of certain Zulu tribes procure a strong emetic 
which they swallow. No special reason is given for 
the custom, except that it * clears away all the 
evil humours of the body.' ' A Dyak will change 
his name after recovering from a severe illness, in 
the hope, as we may suppose, of thus getting rid 
of his former personality and its liability to disease.3 
Dr. Frazer has already pointed out that boys at 
"initiation" are often supposed to die and come to 
life again.4 

As will be seen when " initiation " is discussed, " the 
old life " put away by the boy at puberty is that of 
women, the life of the nursery ; and we may suppose 
that the ideas of sexual taboo fixed somewhat of the 
same belief upon the purification of infants, that is to 
say, the infant is baptized or purified from the taboo 
state in which child-birth left it and the mother, a state 
of ceremonial uncleanness arising from the breaking-up, 
as it were, of woman's organism, and the diffusion of 
her sexual properties. 

Further, this desire to efface the past, to put off 
" the old man " and to put on the new, is very clearly 
brought out in those " festivals," generally annual and 
often coinciding with the beginning of the new year, 
celebrated by whole communities. Thus, in old Peru 
the people held an annual ceremony, the object of 
which was to banish all ills. They would shake their 
clothes, pass their hands over their faces and arms, as if 
in the act of washing. They bathed, exclaiming that 
their maladies should leave them. The Iroquois had 

1 Griffis, op. cit. 298. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 132. 

3 St. John, op. cit. i. 73 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 165. 

4 Frazer, The Golden Bough2, Hi. 422. 

T 

274 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

an annual expulsion of evils, preceded by a general 
confession of sins.1 Once a year the members of an 
Eskimo tribe assemble. The angekok offers up an 
invocation on behalf of the people for their happiness ! 
and prosperity during the coming year. Next day 
they form a circle round a vessel of water, and each 
member in turn eats a small piece of meat which he 
brings with him, wishing meanwhile for good things ; j 
then he dips a cup of water and drinks, thinking of 
his guardian divinity.2 The Talmud Jews of Poland 
celebrate the New Year's festival on the first day of 
Tisri. On this day they believe that God sits in judg- 
ment over angels and men, to make a record of their ! 
deeds done during the last twelve months ; their acts i 
are weighed and scrutinised, the sentence is pronounced j 
which is sealed on the great day of Atonement, and all j 
are predestined for the coming year either unto life or j 
death. Worshippers of both sexes are dressed in white j 
burial-robes. In the evening they all go to a running | 
stream, into which each one throws some crumbs of! 
bread, that the water may carry away his sins. On the ! 
day preceding the day of Atonement, a cock is swung \ 
round the head of each male and a hen round the head I 
of each female, and then killed and eaten as an ex- 
piatory offering to redeem the sinner from death.3 j 
The Cherokees had a new year's festival ; one day 
was the general cleaning day ; old clothes were burnt, j 
the pots, pans, and other utensils were broken, the j 
town and all the cabins were swept clean, and every j 
kind of filth or dirt was banished out of sight. Even j 
the remaining provisions were destroyed, and all fires i 
were extinguished. The warriors after they had taken \ 
the war-medicine fasted for three days, and during this ; 

1 Frazer, op. «V.2iii. 72 sqq. 2 Featherman, op. cit. Hi. 407. 3 Id. v. 159. 

xii NEW LIFE 275 

period abstained from all sexual intercourse. Malefac- 
tors and exiles were pardoned. On the festival day 
the people dressed up in new apparel ; new fire was 
lighted, and new corn cooked and eaten. In the even- 
ing music and dancing enlivened the proceedings. 
The festivities lasted three or four days. This was also 
the time for receiving and making visits, and friends 
from neighbouring villages interchanged courtesies and 
congratulated each other on having been favoured with 
a new lease of life for another year.1 

In these examples of the common notion that a 
change of life best coincides with a new year, we see 
how the old personality is as far as possible cast away, 
and the new one put on with rejoicings. Certain 

! " climacteric " seasons and biological crises in human 
life are also very natural periods for this impulse to 
show itself. One or two of these crises have been 
mentioned. In organised religions the practice is made 
the most of. At the monthly religious festivals in 
Bali, the priest distributes holy water to the wor- 
shippers.2 Periodic feasts amongst totemic peoples, 

< at which the totern is eaten, are similar in intention. 
Periodic " confession " in Catholic countries introduces 

i a periodic " turning of a new leaf/' After child-birth 

mother and child are purified, and dressed in new 

garments, after menstruation the woman is cleansed ; 

mourners put away their sorrow by newness of life. 

The prominence of food and feasting in some of these 

examples is a fact liable to be overlooked, but of great 

importance. It is not merely the new corn and wine 

brought out and used for the first time at some of 

, these annual Saturnalia that is to be noted, though this 

i is a particularly instructive case, but the use of any 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 157. 2 Id. ii. 410. 

276 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

food, in these festivals and in others, at religious periods 
and biological crises, or even every day. The wine that 
" maketh glad the heart of man " and the " bread that 
strengthen^ man's heart" are naturally, as is to be 
gathered from the previous account of food-customs, 
the best means of giving new life and strength. And 
in savage philosophy the laying-hold upon life and the 
preservation of strength, is the main duty of existence ; 
it is so much more important to him than it is to us in 
an age where physical disabilities are so greatly reduced. 
We still use the phrase " to feel a new man " after a 
meal, and to the savage the phrase is more of a reality, 
and we may conclude that on certain occasions, when 
circumstances were suitable, primitive man did thus feel 
that his personal identity was more or less changed, as 
his natural force was renewed, by meat and drink. The 
Masai and the Wa-kwafi are the most practical beef- 
eaters in the world. A man will sit all day by a bullock 
gorging himself with its meat, in order to strengthen 
himself for battle.1 During the " initiation " period 
the boys of many North American tribes, such as the 
Shawanese, besides observing dietary regulations, took 
a violent emetic at regular intervals.2 This is a practical 
way of getting rid of one's original personal substance, 
and it has to be brought into connection with the 
common taboos upon various foods at and before 
puberty, removed when the boy is "initiate" and able 
to receive them. The intention of building up the 
lad's strength is expressly stated in many such cases. 
At the Seminole New Year festival, the " black drink " 
was drunk, and war-medicine taken. The latter was i 
also taken, as it is in so many lands, before a battle, in 
order to inspire the warriors with strength and courage.3 

1 Thomson, op. cit. 264. 2 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 182. 3 Id. iii. 173. 

I NEW LIFE 277 

is " black drink " is the Seminole national beverage, 
its excellent qualities have helped to bring out in 
everyday practice the idea of beginning afresh and 
acquiring new life and strength. "The Seminoles 
drank every morning a kind of tea called ' the black 
drink/ a decoction of the leaves of the C as sine bush. 
It is slightly exhilarating, and the drinking of it was 

i considered a solemn ceremonial act ; it was supposed 
that it had a purifying effect upon their life, and effaced 
from their minds all the wrongs and injustice they had 
committed, that it possessed the power of imparting 
courage to the warrior and of rendering him invincible, 
and that it had a tendency of binding closer the ties of 
friendship."1 Amongst the Zulus at the opening of 

! the new year with the feast of first-fruits the men are 
"doctored'* in order " to make them strong, healthy, 
and prosperous for the coming year." 2 

During and after sickness, again, the system is built 
up by new food. In Tasmania a sick man was given 
human blood to drink.3 The Zulus give sick persons 

^ the gall of a he-goat.4 Amongst the Dyaks sick per- 
sons are sprinkled with blood by the priest.5 The 
Beni-Amer cure their sick by bathing them in the blood 
of a girl or of some animal. The blood of a goat is 
thus poured over a man's head and body.6 Such cases 
often correlate with the idea of a substitute and with 
the common double idea, as in the Mithraic taurobolium, 
that blood both washes away sins and gives ghostly 
strength. On this principle the Zulus once a year kill 
a bull ; " its strength is supposed to enter into the 
king, thereby prolonging his life and strength. In 

1 Featherman, op. at. iii. 171. 2 L. Grout, Zulu Land, 161. 

3 Bonwick, op. cit. 89. 4 Callaway, op. cit. 368, 372. 

5 Featherman, op. cit. \\. 283. 6 Munzinger, op. cit. 310. 

278 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

some tribes a chief on his accession is washed in the 
blood of some near relative, who is put to death for 
the purpose." 1 In Tonga human victims were slain to 
deter angry gods from destroying the king.2 

The universal desire for "representatives" and 
" substitutes," due partly to irresponsibility and partly 
to convenience, may be referred to here in a few ex- 
amples. Amongst the Motu to ensure a good harvest 
some leading man becomes helaga (taboo).3 In New 
Caledonia, when a great chief is ill, or when some great 
calamity befalls them, they select the best-looking girl, 
and stretching her out prostrate on the ground inflict 
on her a severe castigation, which is intended to act as 
a charm, in order to avert the impending evil.4 In 
Shoa, to save the king's life, an animal is led round his 
bed and then slaughtered.5 In Chrysee a straw man is 
burned as a substitute when one is ill.6 The Arabian j 
custom of killing a sheep at a birth is explained by | 
them " as averting evil from the child by shedding 
blood on its behalf." 7 The Acaxees before taking the j 
war-path select a maiden of the tribe, who secludes her- 
self during the whole period of the campaign, speaking j 
to no one, and eating nothing but a little parched corn 
without salt.8 The practice is common with kings as j 
the representatives of their people. Thus the Mikado I 
had to sit on the throne for some hours every morning, 
with his crown on, motionless, so as to preserve peace 
and tranquillity in the empire.9 

Again, " purification " is ended on all occasions by 
taking food, or otherwise assimilating new strength. 

1 Leslie, op. cit. 91 ; Shooter, op. cit. 216. 2 Farmer, op. cit. 53. 

3 Chalmers, op. cit. 181. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 92. 

5 Harris, op. cit. iii. 385. 6 A. R. Colquhoun, Across Chrysee, 384. < 

7 W. R. Smith, op. cit. 153, 154. 8 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 581. 

9 Kaempfer, History of Japan, i. 1 50. 

-. 

NEW LIFE 279 

e link between this and "washing off" the past, 
whether " contagion " or " sin," is seen in cases like 
this : sextons and mourners alike are " purified " 
amongst the Zulus from the " uncleanness " by being 
sprinkled with the gall of an animal sacrificed, or by 
drinking fresh milk.1 After expelling all disease and 
ills, the Incas rubbed themselves with a paste of blood, 
to take away all weakness and infirmity.5 The gall 
and the blood, of course, introduce new strength into 
the system. 

New clothes form another method of starting afresh ; 
a man feels more or less " new " when wearing a new 
dress, and this universal practice on great occasions of 
feasting, ceremonies, and marriage has this idea behind 
it. The link between washing, "purification/' and 
new garments is made by such early toilet-practices as 
anointing the body with oil, fat, and paint. The 
" purification of a Kaffir woman after child-birth is 
completed by smearing her with fat and red clay.3 For 
her this is a renewal of " decent apparel." 

We have thus traced the passage of disguise into 
change, and of change into newness of life ; in the next 
place change passes into exchange, exchange of identity, 
with the same ideas behind the practice. The idea of a 
disguise is often latent in this, but seldom emerges, 
for it is fused with more important aims. It may be 
discerned in this account of the notorious Feast of 
Fools, an account which may be here placed first, as 
this exchanging of identity is most prominent in 
festivals of the Saturnalia type. " The priests were the 
principal actors ; their faces were blacked, and they 
were dressed as clowns or women, and ate blood- 

1 Shooter, op. cit. 241, 247. 2 Frazer, op. cit? Hi. 74. 

3 Maclean, op. cit. 94. 

28o THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

puddings on the altar. Obscene songs were sung in 
the choir. Many other actors took part, both men 
and women, the men being disguised as women, and 
the women as men." This festival took place at 
Christmas. Similar practices were followed in the 
carnival on Shrove Tuesday, at which men dressed up 
as women and women as men.1 The idea is also latent 
in an ancient Argive festival, the 'T^pum/cd, held every 
year, at which women dressed in men's garments, and 
men in women's robes and veils ; 2 and also in many 
Saturnalian festivals, such as the Saturnalia of ancient 
Rome, at which slaves exchanged position and dress 
with their masters, and men with women. These cases 
are explained by the Zulu custom, according to which, 
to avert a cattle plague, the girls herd the cattle for a 
day. The idea is to change the luck by an exchange, 
which emphasises the interval thus placed between the 
old state and the new. So in New South Wales wives are 
exchanged, not only for reconciliation, but to escape some 
calamity.3 The tribes on the Murray River practised 
temporary exchange of wives " in order to avert some 
great trouble which they fancied was coming ; for 
instance, they heard once that a great sickness was 
coming down the Murray, and the cunning old men 
proposed to each other that they should exchange wives 
to ensure safety from it." 4 It is a simple method, but 
actually it has been interpreted as a proof of primitive 
" promiscuity." A detail used to corroborate the 
interpretation is that the old men thought it necessary 
to revert to "the old customs of the tribe" ; but the 
old custom to which they returned was surely this 

1 Dulaure, Des di-vinites generatrices, xv. 315 ; Brand, op. at. i. 36, 66. 

2 Plutarch, Mulierum Virtutes, 245 E. 3 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xiv. 353. 
4 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 290. 

EXCHANGE OF IDENTITY 281 

iporary exchange of wives, not promiscuity. The 
>tion proves too much. The sexual licence of the 
Janga in Fiji was practised when any person fell ill.1 
lie Kurnai, when alarmed at the appearance of an 
lurora Australis, tried to send it away by magic, and 
also exchanged wives.2 An Eskimo prescription for 
sickness is exchange of wives ; if a child is ill, it changes 
its parents.3 

The chief ideas in these ceremonial practices of 
exchange, whether of wives or other possessions, are, 
primarily, the wish for a preliminary interval before 
starting a new life, a sort of vital pausa or artificial 
gulf between the old and the new, while there is implicit 
in the exchange an act of disguise ; and secondarily, 
a desire for union with one's fellows, which is actually 
effected by exchange of identity. The latter, it will be 
noticed, is identical with union, and is the final prin- 
ciple of contact seen in the relation of ngia ngiamfe. 
We saw that the " black drink " of the Seminoles has 
the property of uniting hearts, and the human expres- 
sion of mutual friendliness by eating and drinking 
together has been fully described. This explains the 
characteristic feature in festivities of the type of the 
Saturnalia, held once a year as a rule, and conceived as 
a means of starting life afresh. The wild pranks and 
general misbehaviour often associated with these festivals 
are doubtless to a great extent the expression of re- 
joicing at putting away the troubles of the past, but 
there is a method in the madness, a psychological reason 
behind it. Restraints are indeed broken, but the breaking 
of them is, first, a break with the old life, and, secondly, 
a method of union, not merely the result of over-feeding 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xiv. 28. 2 Id. xiii. 189. 

3 Sixth Annual Report, Bureau of Ethnology, 593. 

282 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and excessive drinking. Take the case of the so-called 
" promiscuous " intercourse often found on these occa- 
sions ; it is exactly parallel to the exchange of wives we 
have already noticed. Each is the expression of a desire 
for union with one's fellows. The very fact that the 
lending of wives is frequent as an act of hospitality 
connects the principles together. Hospitality is a close 
form of union. Exchange of wives, of dress, of names, 
of positions, or of anything belonging to a man, alike 
produces union. This secondary result of the common 
practice of men and women dressing up in the garments 
of the other sex, followed in Alsace at vintage festivals,1 
and on many similar occasions elsewhere, is that the 
two sexes are united, just as they are united in theory 
and in practice in the so-called licence used on such 
occasions. As showing how assimilation in dress and 
the like is a form of the desire for union, the following 
case is instructive. At a dance of girls amongst the 
Rejangs several young men were observed to show 
excitement. At last they joined in the dance ; and the 
postures they assumed were quite similar to those of 
the maidens. "It is on such occasions that marriage 
contracts are generally made." 2 This impulse towards 
assimilation is seen now when 'Arry and 'Arriet ex- 
change hats. Similar methods of effecting union by con- 
tact are also brought back to one physiological impulse, 
by comparing with them the Eskimo method of salutation. 
They salute each other by licking each other's hands, 
and then drawing them over their own faces and bodies 
first, and afterwards over the face and body of the 
other.3 

Again, all taboos are removed for a while to form an 

1 W. Mannhardt, Der Baumkultus, 314. 2 Bickmore, op. at. 496. 

3 Beechey, op. cit. i. 391. 

:n UNION 283 

iterval between the old and the new, while the very 
:t of breaking them produces the chief result aimed at, 
inion, and this union is a Dionysiac form of the ngia 
vgiamfe relation. Such union is effected by masters 
ind slaves exchanging positions and attire, by men and 
romen exchanging the garments of their sex, by eating 
together, by mutual feastings, by exchange of presents 
and of friendly visits, and the like. All these are 
methods of union, but they are no less exchanges of 
identity ; all in fact are acts of the ngiampe type. Thus 
old wounds are healed, old quarrels patched up ; the 
licence is simply a method of cementing union. New 
food and drink meanwhile renew man's strength, and 
food shared with others in feasts, or the flesh and blood 
of the totem or god sacramentally eaten, cement the 
union of one with another. 

Man's desire for social union and harmony is very 
keen, and the fact that he has these ceremonial methods 
of producing it, as those others used to produce 
harmony and union between individuals, is one which 
tells strongly in favour of the view that, as man was 
perhaps not always gregarious, so in early society he 
had none of the solidarity of clan, tribe, or kin, 
which is often attributed to him. Why these anxious 
methods of welding together the body politic, if the 
" tie of blood " was instinctively so strong ? Man's 
individualism, though diffident and shy of responsibility, 
was in primitive times by no means lost in socialism. 
Individual diffidence and the " desire for company," as 
it may be phrased, for the desire of children and of the 
average sensual man in every age is of the same nature 
as their primitive brother's desire, may be seen in what 
Ellis states of the Polynesians. " One of the reasons 
which they gave why so many slept in a house was 

284 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

their constant apprehension of evil spirits, which were 
supposed to wander about at night and grasp or strangle 
the objects of their displeasure, if found alone ; great 
numbers passing the night under the same roof removed 
this fear and inspired confidence of security." l So the 
Nicobarese never bathe nor go to the burial-ground 
except in company, from superstitious fear.2 The 
feeling has given rise to a common practice observed 
with " sacred " persons whose safety is either threatened 
or is important to the community. When the King of 
Boni in Celebes sits, all sit ; when he rises, all rise ; 
should he ride and fall from his horse, all must fall 
from their horses likewise ; when he bathes, all the 
courtiers must bathe too.3 The same custom is used 
in Fiji, and is known as bale muri* In Abyssinia there 
are four officers called Lika Mankuas, who have to 
clothe themselves exactly like the king, so that the 
enemy may not be able to distinguish him. A Mr. 
Bell, an Englishman, once held this post.5 In Uganda, 
if the king laughs, all the courtiers laugh, if he sneezes, 
all sneeze, and so on.6 Amongst Kaffir tribes the " king 
has a sort of valets, who appear to wear his cast-off 
clothes ; when he is sick, they are obliged to allow them- 
selves to be wounded, that a portion of their blood may 
be introduced into the king's circulation, and a portion 
of his into theirs. They are usually killed at his death."7 
This case leads to those of " mock kings " and the like, 
who are often substitutes and proxies for the real 
monarch, as well as for the people, whose " pawns " they 
are. In the Yoruba country the king's eldest son 

1 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, \. 341. 2 Featherman, op. at. ii. 250. 

3 Mundy, Narrative of Events in Borneo and Celebes, i. 30. 

4 Williams, op. cit. i. 39. 5 Krapf, op. cit. 454. 

6 Felkin, op. cit. 711. Athenaeus (249) and Strabo (xvii. 2, 3) give similar accounts 
of barbaric kings. 7 Shooter, op. cit. 117. 

EXTENDED IDENTITY 285 

governs jointly with him. He has to commit suicide 
when the king dies.1 In connection with the fear of 
handselling, it is noteworthy that such persons are used 
to do acts for the first time, so as to remove the danger. 
Thus in the Hindoo Koosh the rajah begins the plough- 
ing and sowing. The Todas employ the low -caste 
Curumbas to guide the first plough, sow the first seed, 
and reap the first sheaf.2 

Let us now take some miscellaneous illustrations of 
these principles, occurring in these periodic festivals of 
renewal and of union, and on other occasions. During 
the winter season the Koniagas make and return visits ; 
insults are forgiven and enemies reconciled by inviting 
each other to entertainments.3 At the Saturnalia festival 
of the Mundaris the masters feast their labourers.4 The 
Karalits celebrate an annual festival at the winter 
solstice. It is a time of general rejoicing, and is 
connected with the reappearance of the sun. Eating 
is the most conspicuous part of the entertainment. 
Frequently they lend their wives to each other.5 There 
is some idea of securing an infant's safety in the practice, 
common throughout the Archipelago between Celebes 
and New Guinea, of giving a feast to a number of 
village children, when a child is born or receives its 

name.6 

Amongst the Dieri and neighbouring tribes on 
occasions of making peace, covenants, and alliances, 
occasions, of course, which have in common with 
Saturnalia the intention of union, and also at tribal 
festivals generally, there is an exchange of wives all 
round and what is wrongly called "promiscuous" 

1 A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 167. 2 Biddulph, of. tit. 106 j Harkness, op. tit. 56. 

3 Featherman, op. tit. iii. 453. 4 Dalton, op. cit. 196. 

5 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 432. 6 Riedel, op. tit. 75. 

286 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

sexual intercourse.1 It is a sacred method of union as 
I have shown. The fact that jealousy is forbidden on 
these occasions, does not prove, as has been asserted, 
either that the custom is a return to previous commun- 
ism, or that the Australian has no marital jealousy. 
If he has none, why forbid it ? In the case of forming 
alliances the exchange is, of course, a factor in making 
the union, such contact sympathetically assists it. At 
the Saturnalia of the Hos c * promiscuous " intercourse 
takes place.2 The people of Leti, Moa, and Lakor 
hold an annual feast, at which free intercourse takes 
place.3 

Amongst the Hawaiians "promiscuous" sexual 
intercourse takes place at the feast after a death.4 In 
Mangaia, at the same feast, all exchange presents.5 At 
the annual funeral feast on Nancowry Island, one of 
the Nicobars, numerous hogs are killed and eaten, and 
all the guests daub their faces with the blood.6 The 
Battas celebrate a feast after a death, at which a number 
of animals are killed and eaten.7 The Samoyeds kill a 
reindeer over the grave, the Arinzes a horse, and the 
mourners eat it there.8 After a Chippeway funeral the 
" offering to the dead " is prepared, consisting of meat- 
soup or brandy, which is handed round to those present ; 
while the portion reserved for a burnt-offering is thrown 
into the fire, and is supposed to have been accepted by 
the ghostly self of the departed.9 

On such occasions there is to be seen the working 
of these principles ; a desire for union among the 
survivors and a desire for new strength and life, both 

1 yourn. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 173, 169. 

2 Dalton, op. cit. 196. 3 Riedel, op. at. 373. 
4 Lisiansky, op. cit. 122. 5 Gill, op. cit. 77. 

6 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 247. 7 Id. ii. 329. 

8 Georgi, op. cit. 16, 31. 9 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 251. 

UNION AFTER DEATH 287 

>mpted by the sad example of the dead person ; the 
impulses are satisfied simultaneously by eating 

rether, exchanging gifts, or similar acts of union, 
such as sexual intercourse. Again, as may be seen 
when the mourners eat the offerings of the dead, there 
is the further and most natural idea, retained by 
Catholicism in the feast of All Souls, of effecting union 
with the departed. This desire for the impossible is a 
psychological necessity in real mourning, and is well 
shown by such customs as that of widows in the 
Hervey Islands, who will wear the dress of their dead 
husbands. A widower may be seen walking about in 
a gown of his departed wife. " Instead of her shawl, a 
mother will wear on her back a pair of trousers belong- 
ing to a little son just laid in his grave."1 Andamanese 
widows carry about the skulls of their dead husbands.2 
Red Indian mothers carry a doll, representing a dead 
child, and Australian women carry about the rotting 
remains of their dead husbands.3 In Timorlaut as 
mourning the widow wears a piece of her dead 
husband's clothing in her hair ; this is also done by 
widowers.4 Communion with the dead is most exactly 
reached, and the identity of eating with a person 
and eating him most clearly shown, in the common 
Australian practice in which mourners drink the 
humours of the decaying corpse, or eat its flesh. The 
Kurnai anoint themselves with decomposed matter from 
the dead.5 It is done in the Kingsmills " to remember 
him."6 So in Timorlaut mourners smear themselves 
with the fluids of the corpse.7 The Aru islanders 
drink them "to effect union with the dead man." 

1 Gill, op. at. 78. 2 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 300. 

3 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 243. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 307. 

5 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 243. 6 Id. I.e. 7 Riedel, op. cit.. 308. 

288 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Some is kept in order to injure enemies (by the con- 
tagion of death, we may well suppose).1 This case 
resumes in itself all the principles of contact, and 
shows the fallacy of supposing such practices to be 
intended to keep " the life in the family." Of course, 
the idea correlates with the notion of getting a dead 
man's strength, as we have seen, but the impulse is 
individual. When Artemisia drank the ashes of 
Mausolus,2 it was for love of him, and not to satisfy 
family pride. Here we once more reach the idea of 
receiving a man's properties by eating his flesh ; and 
conversely in these mourning customs, there is some- 
times to be seen a desire to avoid injury from the 
departed spirit, by inoculating oneself with him, an 
idea translated by many peoples into a fear that the 
ghost will be offended if he is not mourned for 
properly. 

Another feature of these festivals is a practice which 
is very common in all early religious custom, and is a 
good illustration of that general habit of "make- 
believe," which is connected with sympathetic magic 
on the one hand, and on the other with primitive 
diffidence in action, and fear of close-quarters, an early 
stage in the growth of character which is not easily 
passed. At the Saturnalia of the Hos, sons and 
daughters revile their parents, and their parents revile 
them.3 This method of showing the reality of the 
change of life by emphasising the interval between the 
new and the old may lead up to the feature we are 
to discuss. In Upper Egypt on the loth of September 
of each year, there is a festival at which each town 
chooses a temporary lord, who is dressed up as a clown.4 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 267. 2 A. Gellius, x. 18 j V. Maximus, iv. 65. 

3 Dalton, op. cit. 196. 4 Klunzinger, Bilder aus Obsr-Agypten, 180. 

(MAKE-BELIEVE 289 

'his, as in the case of most mock kings collected, 
e is a double idea. The mock king is a " proxy " 
for the people, he is their substitute, who bears their 
calamities away as a scapegoat ; and he is reviled and 
mocked. He represents them, on the principles of 
substitution and make - believe ; he takes away their 
troubles, on the same principles, and because of the 
desire for a periodic change of life and of personal 
identity. Why is he mocked and ill-treated? The 
actual word "mock," with its double meaning, preserves 
the answer. They deserve the reviling for their sins, 
but he as their proxy will receive it ; it is a convenient 
method of substitution, of transference of responsibility. 
Moreover, by a natural confusion, he represents these 

; evils, in particular those which admit of easy personifi- 
cation, such as diseases and the like ; as such, he is to 
be scourged and mocked as they would gladly treat the 
actual evils. He is thus a proxy for two sets of 
persons. 

The war-dance and similar sympathetic processes, 
which assist the real result by imitating it, show how 

» the above mentioned idea is connected with sympathetic 
magic. These practices have a true psychological basis 
and subjective use ; they resemble " rehearsals " ; by 
previously going through the result, man ensures its 
successful issue, just as one runs over in his mind 
something he is about to do. In the Chippeway war- 
dance the warriors imitated the actions of surprising 
the enemy, of tomahawking, scalping, and drinking the 
blood of the foe.1 In the Algonquin war-dance before 
an expedition each man in turn branished his toma- 
hawk, and furiously struck the post round which they 
stood, in a manner as if he were killing a foe, whom 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 256. 
U 

290 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

he then fictitiously scalped by a characteristic mimic 
action.1 The Mandans before a buffalo hunt go 
through a dance imitating the various stages of the 
hunt. One man represents a buffalo, and he is slain 
in pantomime, skinned, and cut up.2 

In some cases these fights, contests, and riotings are 
intended to drive away actual evil influences, in others 
the potentiality of evil is driven away, before it can 
become actualised ; and this is naturally done on 
occasions when excessive joy by psychological law 
induces a fear of vague imminent danger, as seen in 
ideas of Nemesis. The practice is also followed to 
avenge some wrong, fancied or real, with a half serious, 
half " make-believe " feeling. Thus, in New Britain, 
when a boy and girl who are betrothed, are grown up, 
and part of the " price " has been paid, he builds a little 
house in the bush, and elopes with his bride. Her 
father sallies out with friends, apparently in anger, to 
kill the groom. They do not really wish to find him, 
but they burn the house. On their return they find 
the pair installed in their home.8 Amongst the same 
people, when a widower marries, the female relatives of 
the dead wife assemble near his place. It is a day of 
liberty and fun with them. They take their husbands' 
or brothers' weapons, or any article of male attire they 
can find, and have the liberty of daubing with red 
paint any man they can catch. If a woman approaches 
a man he moves off. At a given signal they throw 
themselves on his house, fences, and property, and 
destroy as far as they can. The owner has no power 
to interfere. The custom is called Varagut. The only 
explanation they give is that " the women are angry on 
account of the first wife, they do not care to see the 

1 Featherman, op. at. iii. 78. 2 Id. Hi. 298. a Romilly, op. cit. 27. 

xii MAKE-BELIEVE 291 

labour of the first wife go to benefit the second." l 
Similarity at Fijian funerals, the women whip the men 
with long whips, and the men flip clay bullets at the 
women.2 On the other side, savage " make-believe " is 
connected with diffidence, and with an interesting 
notion that the " intention " is everything. Amongst 
the Maoris a blow given by proxy is regarded as if 
, it actually were dealt to the person intended, and is 
spoken of as such. A man, for instance, struck the 
ground close to his enemy, who was lying ill ; Mr. 
Shortland on hearing an account of this was given 
to understand that the sick man had actually been 
thrashed.3 A mourner in the Andaman Islands will 
shoot arrows into the jungle, evil spirits who cause 
death being supposed to dwell there ; he also will 
pierce the ground with a spear all round the dead 
*man, "hoping to inflict a mortal wound on an unseen 
, enemy."4 In Maori warfare a part of the stockade is 
called after a hostile chief and then fired at by the 
garrison. One often hears a chief complain that he 
has been shot at, when it was only his effigy.5 South 
Australians when about to attack Europeans beat their 
weapons together, threw dust in the air, spat, etc., and 
made gestures of defiance.6 All this kind of thing is 
well seen in the habits of children and of animals, and 
is due to fear of direct action. Now, in some of these 
mnual festivals and on other occasions there are mock 
:ontests, which are explained by these ideas. We saw 
low parents and children revile each other at their 
kturnalia ; the same principle is behind the football 
natch played at the annual festival in Shoa, first 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 292. 2 Wilkes, op. cit. iii. 99. 

3 Shortland, Southern Districts, 21, 22. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xi. 146. 

5 Shortland, op. cit. 26, 27. 6 Eyre, op. cit. ii. 225. 

292 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

between men, and then between women. The victori- 
ous side abuses the defeated, and riot and debauchery 
end the day.1 After a successful fishing expedition 
Fijian women were seen to meet the returning men 
with dancing and songs and with a smart volley of 
bitter oranges, this the men returned by driving the 
women from the beach.2 This simple case of delight 
expressed in recrimination is no custom, but a psycho- 
logical result, quite common in human nature, which, 
however, is instructive here as illustrating the origin of! 
customs which resemble it. 

The same method is also used in primitive etiquette^ 
which is based on fear and the taboo of personal 
isolation. When Krapf arrived at a Pemba village, 
the king was very friendly, but ordered his musketeers 
to fire a volley, " to expel evil spirits." 3 In Tonga 
presents are made to a new arrival, visitor, or native \ 
who has been away, but there is a curious proviso. 
The new-comers can be challenged by any one, and a 
sort of sham fight must take place. The visitors! 
always get a thorough beating, but it is all done in I 
a friendly way.4 Mr. New was always received in the I 
African villages he reached, with war -dances.5 Thej 
Indians of the Yukon, on meeting Mr. Dall, advanced 
on him firing blank cartridge.6 So amongst the Maoris] 
mock fights were performed at all visits, reeds and 
rail-fencing being used instead of weapons.7 

In savage as in other etiquette indirectness is uni-j 
versal. In East Africa a mistake in etiquette towards 
the chief is severely punished, and amongst the Waganda 
the offender may be slain on the spot. A man will] 

1 Harris, op. cit. Hi. 198. 2 Williams, op. cit. i. 92. 

3 Krapf, op. cit. 269. 4 Mariner, op. cit. 346. 

5 C. New, Life in Eastern Africa, 80, 301. 6 Dall, op. cit. 93. 

7 Polack, New Zealand, i. 86, 87, ii. 170. 

hare 

MAKE-BELIEVE 

293 

rdly address another directly as " you," nor will he 
use a direct negative if he can avoid it. The expres- 
sions are " the master knows/' etc., and for a negative, 
" I will see if that happens." l 

The " make-believe " method is often used in punish- 
ment. Amongst Australians and Tasmanians the 
offender against the customs was required to, stand 

1 while spears were thrown at him, which he avoided as 
best he could by contortions of the body.2 In the 
Milya-uppa tribe, when a man had given another some 
cause of complaint, custom required that he should 
allow his head to be struck by the individual offended, 
till blood came.3 In some Australian tribes a culprit 
was provided with a shield, and " the prosecutors stand- 
ing at a certain distance hurled spears at him. If he 
succeeded in warding off the weapons, he was dis- 
charged." 4 The Malays settle disputes between tribes 
thus ; a certain number of combatants for each tribe 
beat each other with sticks till one or other cries 
enough, and the victors claim the right for which they 

, contested.5 The Fijian act of reparation to obtain for- 
giveness was called soro ; it was the offering of a present 
in certain attitudes of humiliation.6 

In many of the above-mentioned customs there is 

\ clearly brought out the subconscious feeling, so charac- 
teristic of the religious relations of man with man in 
primitive culture, that it is human persons who cause 
trouble and evil, human agencies that are to be punished 
or propitiated. In others the fiction of primitive 
" promiscuity " is exposed ; others, again, illustrate 
the primitive conception of relationship. 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xxii. 119. 2 Curr, op. cit. iii. 596. 

3 Id. ii. 179. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 142. 

5 Id. ii. 429. (> Id. ii. 214. 

CHAPTER XIII 

SECT, i 

AT the beginning of the chain of culture appear one 
or two simple precautionary and educational measures 
applied to boys and girls on reaching the age of puberty, 
at our end of the chain are confirmation and a more or 
less lengthy period of education. In both of these, 
and in all intermediate stages and developments, the 
chief ideas behind the ceremonies of so-called " initia- 
tion " are concerned with the going-out of childhood 
and the entering -upon the state of manhood and 
womanhood. The putting -a way of the old life of 
childhood and sexlessness, and the taking -up of the 
responsibilities, social and sexual, of the new, and also j 
the education imparted, were often dramatised amongst 
early peoples by "sympathetic" processes. As noticed 
before, this kind of rehearsal was meant to ensure the j 
proper performance of the duties represented in the .1 
mystery-play. We also find useful instruction given 
as to the duties of manhood and womanhood, the j 
sexual relation and marriage ; girls are entrusted with 
such feminine lore as the women possess, while the j 
boys are entrusted with the tribal history and secrets by ' 
the old men, the repositories of power, and the real 
and responsible guardians of the State. , The excellence 
not only of the military and political, but also of the 

IAP. xiii CONFIRMATION 295 

>ral instruction given at " initiation " has often been 
^marked. 

Leaving this aspect of primitive confirmation, we 
>roceed to examine the dangers spiritual and material, 
of the old life, which are cast aside, and of the new life, 
which are to be faced, to both of which the ceremonies 
at puberty have reference. 

To take the case of girls first. There is nothing in 
the old life that is likely to be dangerous to her, for 
she will still find her best comfort and companionship 
with her mother and female friends, but she has to 
meet the dangers of the other sex, now that she is 
marriageable. These dangers we have already re- 
viewed ; there is the natural timidity, and subconscious 
physical fear of the male sex, deriving from the natural 
passivity and functional nervous characteristics of 
woman, and expressed in that coyness and shrinking, 
which are so potent a sexual charm ; often, however, 
especially at marriage, and sometimes at child-birth, the 
latent fear comes out as direct fear of the male sex. 
We have seen how menstruation is regarded as the 
result of a supernatural act of violence or rupture of 
the hymen, and here too there is a functional timidity 
to be reckoned with, as also in the same act at marriage. 
All these functional ideas focus, as a rule subconsciously, 
into fear of the other sex, and consciously into vague 
fear of " spiritual " danger, all originally deriving from 
the psychological and physical change of the organism 
at puberty. On the other side, in the male view of 
female confirmation, there is the usual fear of a taboo 
state, emphasised here by the fact that it is the charac- 
teristic female condition, connoting loss of strength 
and transmitting weakness. In regard to male con- 
firmation, the chief feature is that the old life with the 

296 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

women is given up, but the irony of nature insists 
that though the man may cast aside his life with 
women, he must soon return to it, in a more dangerous 
form. As for the casting -away of the life of the 
nursery, the Damaras reckon a man's age from his 
circumcision, not counting the previous years at all.1 
Amongst the Kurnai a part of the initiation is the 
following ceremony. The mothers stand in a line 
facing their sons, and each mother and son sprinkle 
each other with water ; this signifies that they are no 
longer under their mothers' control.2 

The dangers of this taboo state, that is, the dis- 
abilities of the old life and the responsibilities of the* 
new, are neutralised by various means. Tests of 
endurance are gone through, fasting and purification ; 
candidates are beaten, sometimes to increase their 
strength, at others to get rid of the dangerous sub- 
stance of taboo ; they are fumigated and purified, 
secluded and concealed.3 

More precisely each sex is tabooed to the other, for, 
it is against the dangers of sexual contact that thej 
process is directed. So the maiden at puberty must 
not see males, or be seen by them, nor have any 
association with them whatever ; first, for her safety, 
because it is the male sex in the abstract which causes 
her trouble and danger, and contagion from them is 
dangerous ; secondly, for the safety of men, who by 
contagion of her accentuated femininity would be 
injured. In the same way, boys at puberty may not 
see nor have any association with females ; first, for 
their own safety, because it is the female sex in the 
abstract which produces these dangers, and contact with 

1 South African Folklore Journal, i. 44. 
2 Fison and Howitt, op. at. 197, 198. 3 See Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 424 ff. 

ti DANGERS OF PUBERTY 297 

m is dangerous, causing weakness and effeminacy ; 
i secondly, we may infer that the girls are to be 
considered, and that when men are attaining their 
manhood some fear of manly contagion is present 
to the female mind, as it is at marriage. The 
Kurnai hold that sickness mutually results if women 
touch boys who are being initiated.1 Kaffir girls 
at puberty are placed in a separate hut, and none but 
females are allowed to see them.2 At the ceremony 
of excision of South Celebes girls no man may be 
present.3 When a Cambodian girl enters " the shade," 
the rules she has to observe in <{ the shade " are : 
not to let herself be seen by a strange man ; not to 
look at men, even furtively ; not to bathe till night, 
lest any one should see her, nor alone, but accompanied 
by her sister. Many kinds of food also are forbidden 
her.4 Loango girls at puberty are secluded in a hut in 
, the forest, and no man may go near them. From the 
first day until they are given in marriage, they are called 
nkumbi (hymen). They are instructed in the duties 
of married life and motherhood.5 Girls of New Britain, 
while in the " cages " where they are imprisoned from 
puberty to marriage, may not be seen by men ; so with 
those of New Ireland. In both New Britain and New 
Ireland boys at initiation may not be seen by women.6 
The New Hebridean boy at puberty, when he is cir- 
cumcised and receives a new name, may not see the 
face of woman.7 Boys of the Irwin River and 
Murchison River tribes are separated from the women 
i for several weeks after circumcision. A boy was once 
killed for being found in a woman's company.8 In 

] Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiv. 306. a Maclean, op. cit. 101. 

:i Matthes, op. cit. 71. 4 Aymonier, op. cit. 193. 

5 Ploss, op. cit. \\. 439. 6 Danks, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 284, 287. 

•" Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 4. 8 Curr, op. cit. i. 369. 

298 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

New Caledonia no woman may see the boys while 
recovering from circumcision.1 Amongst the Masai, 
Wakamba, Wanika, and Wakikuyu boys are circum- 
cised in bands together ; they are carefully kept from 
the girls and women.2 Only men may be present at 
the circumcision of Mandingo boys.3 At initiation 
Australian boys may not see women.4 Ceramese boys 
at puberty may not be seen by women.5 Special 
developments of this have been already noticed, such as 
the prohibition to look upon the sun or fire. 

The boy's renunciation of the old life of the 
" nursery," woman's life, may be illustrated by the 
following cases. Boys amongst the Central Australians 
are called " children," as are girls, until the initiation, 
which begins between the ages of ten and twelve.6 
Swahili boys leave their mothers' care when circum- 
cised at the age of seven.7 Songo boys are initiated 
between the ages of eight to ten. Their mothers may 
not see them during this period ; they are secluded in 
special huts.8 

Frequently initiation is put earlier, and very often, 
as has been observed, the boy begins to go about 
with his father before the ceremony takes place. As 
a matter of convenience a boy has often to wait, but 
there is always to be borne in mind the distinction 
between the beginning of boyhood and of manhood. 
A Zuni boy is " initiated " any time after he is four 
years old. Previously he has been called " baby," now 
he receives a name. He has a " godfather," who 
breathes upon a wand, which he then extends to the 
child's mouth. The initiation is " mainly done by the 

1 Ploss, op. cit. i. 360. 2 Id. i. 362. 3 Id. i. 365. 

4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 181, 183 j Eyre, op. cit. ii. 133. 

5 Riedel, op. cit. 130. 6 Spencer and Giilen, op. cit. 215. 
7 Ploss, op. cit. i. 361. 8 /j j 364> 

:m THE NEW LIFE AND THE OLD 299 

sponsors, and the boy must personally take the vows as 
>on as he is old enough." * Here we have a prototype 
>f our baptism, and the distinction is made, as it often 

where circumcision, for instance, takes place at five, 
>ix, or seven years of age, between reception into the 

iks of boys and of men. 

After initiation there is the almost universal rule 
that boys sleep and mess and live together, most often 
outside of the family dwelling. This we have already 
described. 

The change of life is marked and assisted by various 
methods of altering identity, and it is important to 
notice that personal identity undergoes a very real 
transformation, physiological and psychical, at puberty. 
Wanika boys are smeared all over with white earth, so 
that they cannot be recognised. At the end of the 
initiation they wash.2 The name being a universal 
mark of identity, and often conceived of, on the 
principles we have described, as a part of the organism, 
is thus changed at puberty. The new name — some- 
times there has not been a previous one — is practically 
a new life. A Haida youth changes his name four 
times.3 In Nias men take a new name at marriage.4 
The Aino receives a new name at puberty.5 So with 
the Iroquois.6 The extinct Tasmanians initiated their 
boys into the rights and duties of manhood with 
certain ceremonial forms. A secret name was whispered 
into the boys' ears at the conclusion of the ceremony.7 
In West and East Australia the boy's new name is 
whispered to him by the " sponsor." 8 In the 
Narrinyeri, Dieri, and Port Lincoln tribes boys 

1 Fifth Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 553. 2 Krapf, op. cit. 147.' 

3 G. M. Dawson, Geological Survey of Canada, 1 3 1 . 4 Rosenberg, op. cit. 154. 

5 Ploss, op. cit. i. 160. 6 Morgan, Ancient Society, 79. 

7 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 105. 8 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 417. 

300 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

receive a new name at initiation.1 So with the 
Basutos, Nufoers of New Guinea, the Samoyeds, 
South Americans, New Hebrideans, and the Indians 
of Nootka.2 When a Japanese boy reached puberty, 
a " godfather " cut off his forelock and gave him a 
new name.8 Girls in Nias and Sierra Leone receive 
a new name at puberty.4 In the Andamans these 
names for girls are beautifully called " flower names." 5 
Again, there is here practised the common custom 
of sacrificing a part of the body, by way of ensuring 
the security of the rest and of assisting, by casting 
it away, the renunciation of the " old man." Mandan 
boys have the little finger cut off at puberty " as a 
sacrifice to their patron deity." 6 Aino boys have their 
hair cut at puberty ; 7 the same is done to Warrau 
girls ; Carib girls have it burnt off. Siamese girls and 
boys and Hindu boys have their hair cut.8 The 
practice of knocking out one or more teeth at 
initiation has already been referred to. It probably 
is originally intended to secure the rest of the teeth, 
in especial reference to the adult's food which is now 
to be eaten. Sennar boys and girls have a tooth 
knocked out.9 The Wakikuyu knock out both front 
teeth of the bottom row at puberty.10 The Pepos of 
Formosa knocked out an eye-tooth of boys " to assist 
their breathing." n At the initiation of Macquarrie 
boys a tooth is knocked out ; if the boy cries, the 
women taunt him for being a girl.12 An Australian 

1 Native Tribes of South Australia, 51, 268, 224. 

2 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 423, 424, 445 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 5 j R. Andree, 
Etknographiscke Parallelen, i. 174. 

3 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 436. 4 Id. I.e. ; Featherman, op. cit. ii. 354. 

5 Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 128. 

6 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 301 ; Ploss, op. cit. ii. 431. 7 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 436. 
8 Id. ii. 435, 426. » Id. ii. 437. " 10 Id. i. 306. 

11 ld.\. 306, ii. 424. 12 IJ.ii. 416. 

:m THE NEW LIFE AND THE OLD 301 

>y, after having had two teeth knocked out, is told 
lat no one may see him, nor must he see any one, 
else his mouth will close up and he will die of 
lunger." 1 Here, and in the Formosan case, we may 
a further reason for the practice, that is, to 
icilitate eating. Probably this is an essential part 
>f the reason, as with the practice of filing the teeth at 
iberty, the East Indian parallel of the Australian 
custom.2 In Ceram after the filing of the teeth all 
kinds of food are given to the child.3 In the Goul- 
bourn tribe, near Melbourne, two teeth are struck out 
and are given to the boy's mother, who places them 
on the highest bough of a young gum tree.4 Here, 
lastly, we have a secondary result of the custom ; 
the tooth, being a part of the personality, is instinct 
with the boy's life, and may be used as a sort of 
external soul. 

As the initiation of boys removes them from the 
effeminate and weakening sphere of woman's life, so it 
also provides for a renewal of strength. The great 
ceremony of Engwura is supposed by the Central 
Australians to have the effect of strengthening all who 
pass through it. Shortly after the beginning of the 
performances, which sometimes last from September 
to January, the men are separated from the women 
until the end.5 The boys are told during initiation 
that the ceremony will promote their growth to man- 
hood, and they are also told by tribal fathers and elder 
brothers that in future they must not play with the 
women and girls, nor must they camp with them as 
hitherto. They have up to now gone out with the 

1 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 418. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 228, 437 j Skeat, op. cit. 359. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 137. 4 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 417. 

5 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 271-74. 

302 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

women hunting for food, now they begin to accom- 
pany the men.1 

We have seen how a man's strength can be trans- 
mitted to another by contact. This is the object of 
the following customs. The first ceremony of the 
initiation of boys in the Adelaide tribes is the covering 
them with blood drawn from a man's arm.2 In 
Western and Eastern Australia the "sponsor" opens a 
vein in his arm, which the boy sucks, and the blood is 
also dripped upon the boy's back.3 So in many other 
tribes of Australia, as the Dieri, men are bled and the 
blood is allowed to stream over the boy ; "it gives him 
courage."4 On the same principle the young Masai 
for some time after initiation, eats nothing but beef and 
drinks nothing but blood and milk. The initiate 
become the warriors, and the whole system is very like 
the training of young knights in mediaeval Europe.5 

" Man's meat " and the food of adults is naturally 
tabooed till maturity is reached. Andamanese boys 
and girls have a long list of foods they may not eat 
until initiated. The taboo on each food is taken off 
ceremonially. For instance, the " pig taboo " is taken 
off by pressing a pig on to the boy's body " in token of 
his becoming strong and brave." The "honey taboo" 
with girls is not removed till after the birth of the 
first child. The turtle " taboo " is thus removed ; the 
chief boils turtle fat, and when cool pours it over the 
boy's head and body, and rubs it into him. He is 
then fed with turtle and nothing else for three days.6 

The common rule of fasting at puberty is to prevent 
dangerous influences entering the system with food. It 

1 Spencer and Gillen, of>.cif.2i6. 2 Eyre, op. tit. ii. 333. 3 Ploss, of. cit. ii. 417. 
4 Id. ii. 421 j Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 82. 5 Thomson, op. cit. 187. 

6 Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 134, 130. 

MALE AND FEMALE FOOD 303 

prepares for the reception of the new food. A 
Tequent concomitant of fasting is the taboo against 
eating with other persons. Thus, during the initiation 
of Kaffir boys no one is allowed to eat with them.1 
Boys or girls at puberty must fast amongst the Guay- 
quiris, Uaupes, Passes, Mandans, Andamanese, Tobas, 
Mataguayos, Chiriguanos, and Australians.2 

Again, the ideas of sexual taboo regulate the diet ; 
the most common prohibition is, of course, against 
eating with the other sex, for fear of contagion. The 
idea is extended thus. Women and children of the 
Powell's Creek tribe may not eat bandicoot, snake, or 
iguana ; 3 the reason for the two former being doubt- 
less that they are connected with the origin of menstrua- 
tion. For boys, women's food, either what they have 
touched, or simply the species used for women's diet, 
is often tabooed, for feminine weakness would be trans- 
mitted by eating them. None but women and boys 

1 not grown up are allowed by the Dyaks to eat venison, 
the deer being a timid animal.4 Amongst the Central 
Australians a boy not circumcised may not eat large 

i lizards, nor may women ever do so, else they will have 
an abnormal craving for sexual intercourse.5 In New 
South Wales a boy at initiation may not eat the emu, 
this being " the woman " ; and he may not even look at 
a woman ; and for some time must cover his mouth 
with his rug when a woman is near. The forbidden 
food is finally allowed to him, by giving him some to 
-eat, or rubbing him with its fat.6 This introduction to 
the forbidden food is a regular part of the ceremonies 

1 Maclean, op. cit. 98. 

2 Ploss, op. cit. 11. 429, 431, 427 ; Eyre, op. cit. ii. 293, 294. 

3 yourn. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 179. 4 Low, op. cit. 266. 

5 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 471, 473. 

6 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiii. 455. 

3o4 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

which end " initiation " ; and it is to be observed how 
youths are inoculated against the dangers even of 
eating with women and of eating women's food. 

Another method of emphasising the newness of life 
is that the boy receives an external soul in various 
forms, a tutelar divinity, or guardian angel ; this is 
perhaps connected with the idea that the soul may 
escape in the act of union with women, as it is un- 
doubtedly based on a psychological characteristic of 
puberty, that desire for the new and the strange, that 
romantic aspiration after ideals and guiding-stars, which 
is part of the blossoming of love, and has such an 
important connection with religion. It is here, indeed, 
that the psychological dependence of the religious 
faculty on the sexual first appears. Thus, the Iroquois 
boy fasted, until he dreamt of the spirit that was to be 
his good angel. The figure in which he appeared was 
tattooed upon the body of the boy, and rules were to 
be observed in order to obtain the favour and avoid the 
displeasure of the tutelar spirit.1 The North Carolina 
boy at puberty looked for a tutelar spirit in his dreams. 
Anything that struck him particularly was chosen. He 
took his name from it.2 The young Chippeway at 
puberty fasts and watches, in order to find his guardian 
manitou? The Salish boy at puberty went into the 
forest, where he remained secluded, until some animal, 
bird or fish, appeared to him in a dream. This became 
his tutelary deity, and a claw, feather, or tooth of such 
was used as a protecting talisman.4 In many of these 
cases there is found, as Dr. Frazer has pointed out,5 the 
idea that the boy receives into himself the divine person. 
But this is a form of new life, and it thus correlates with 

1 Featherman, op. clt. iii. 42. 2 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 431. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 260. 4 Id. iii. 368. 5 Frazer, of. cit? iii. 422. 

PATRONS— BULLROARERS 305 

I idea of obtaining new life and strength by new food 
similar methods. Thus, in the Arunta tribe, while 
umcision is being performed, bullroarers are con- 
tinuously sounded, so as to be easily heard by the 
women and children. By them it is supposed that the 
roaring is the voice of the great spirit Twanyirika, 
who has come to take the boy away. This spirit only 
appears when a boy is initiated. He enters his body 
after the operation, and leaves him after his seclusion. 
The same belief is found in most Australian tribes.1 
The Arunta explanation of impregnation is that an 
ancestor is re-incarnated in the form of a " spirit child," 
who enters a woman ; when this takes place a churinga 
(a sacred object identical with the bullroarer used at 
initiation by most Australians) is found at the place. 
Each churinga — the tribe possesses a collection — is 
identified with an ancestor. Messrs. Spencer and Gillen 
infer that they are a modification of the common idea 
of the " external soul," by which the man's life is 
secured by being hidden away in a material object. 
The Kurnai identify the bullroarer used at initiation 
' with a great ancestor, Turndun. When the old men 
reveal these objects to the boys, they say " we will 
show you your grandfather/' 2 Considerable mystery 
is attached by the Arunta to their sacred objects, 
churinga, " a mystery which," say Messrs. Spencer and 
Gillen, " has probably had a large part of its origin in 
the desire of the men to impress the women of the 
tribe with an idea of the supremacy and superior power 
of the male sex." " The churinga is supposed to 
endow the possessor with courage and accuracy of aim, 
and also to deprive his opponent of these qualities. So 
. firm is their belief in this that if two men were fighting 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 246. 2 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 198. 

X 

306 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and one of them knew that the other carried a churinga 
while he did not, he would certainly lose heart at once 
and without doubt be beaten." 1 Now amongst the 
Australians of the Arunta and neighbouring tribes, and 
the Yaroinga tribe, a man can charm a woman to love 
him, and a woman can do the same to a man, by 
making a noise with a bullroarer. The humming 
seems to be a sort of spiritual invitation ; the belief, at 
least, is that the man or woman thus charmed, immedi- 
ately comes to the person using the charm. This is. 
actually a marriage ceremony.2 We may suppose, then, 
that the use of the bullroarer at initiation is concerned 
with this new life in its sexual aspect, and that sexual 
strength for procreation is imparted by the ancestral 
spirits. The suggestion is corroborated by the Dieri 
custom and belief. A bullroarer is given to each boy 
at puberty. If a woman were to see it, the people 
would have no snakes or lizards. The boy on receiv- 
ing it " becomes inspired by Murauma, who makes the-, 
noise, and it causes a supply of snakes." 3 The connec- 
tion of the serpent and the male organ seems thus to 
explain the well-known initiation custom of the use of 
the bullroarer. 

Initiation makes men and women, and prepares boys 
and girls for the responsibilities of contact with the; 
other sex. The two quotations which follow illustrate 
this. In South Australia a stupid old man whom the 
natives have not deemed worthy " of receiving the 
honours of their ceremonies" was still called a boy.4 
In Australia universal law forbids a man to marry until 
after the ceremonies are performed by which the status 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 137, 130. 

55 Id. 541, 542, 545 5 W. E. Roth, Aborigines of 'North-West Central Queensland, 162. 

8 Howitt, in Journ, Anthrop. Imt. xx. 83. 4 Eyre, op. cit. ii. 20 i. 

;: 

i PREPARATION FOR MARRIAGE 307 

young men is reached.1 Instruction in future duties 
is often imparted ; thus Swahiii girls at puberty are 
instructed in matters relating to sex.2 Apache girls on 
arriving at a marriageable age were instructed by the 
chief in the duties and responsibilities of married life.3 

But there are other methods of preparing each 
sex for their mutual relations. The artificial rupture 

, of the hymen sometimes takes place in infancy, but 
generally at puberty.4 The reason for this we have 
already given ; the idea of a possible impediment is 
associated by the savage with certain physical peculiari- 
ties, such as the hymen. By removing this, both physical 
difficulties are removed, and the spiritual dangers that 
arise from the contemplation of the physical fact are 
also obviated. Fears of female contamination and of 
the performance for the first time of dangerous acts are 
also thus removed, and the material property of taboo 

, which emanates from such is taken off by handselling. 
It is often combined, as in Australia, with a cere- 
monial act of intercourse which has the same object 
of preparing the woman for married life by removing 
imaginary dangers.5 

Other peoples satisfy these fears by a " rehearsal " of 
the act, for the safety both of the male and of the 
female. At the puberty ceremonies performed on 
girls in Ceram no man may enter the house. One of 
the old women takes a leaf, and ceremonially perforates 
it with her finger, as a symbol of the perforation of the 
hymen. After the ceremony the girl has free liberty of 
intercourse with men ; in some villages old men have 
access to her the same evening.6 Amongst the Galelas 

1 Curr, op. cit. i. 106. 2 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 437. 3 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 190. 

4 Jonrn. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 168, 169 (Australian tribes). 

5 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 93 ff. j Ploss, op. cit. i. 376. 

6 Riedel, op. cit. 138. 

308 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and Tobelorese of Halmahera, boys are initiated at 
puberty in the festival oi osi (G.) imalauhu or mahoiki 
(T.). A number are brought into a large shed, in 
which are two tables, one for the men and one for the 
women, who must be separated while eating. An old 
man solemnly rubs a piece of wood, which makes water 
red, into a vessel of water, imitating while doing this, 
the act of coitus. This is done for each boy, whose 
name is called out. The red water represents the 
blood which results from the perforation of the hymen. 
The faces and bodies of the boys are smeared with this 
red water. Red is regarded as the colour of life and 
well-being. The boys then go to the woods, where 
they must expose themselves to the sun as much 
as possible.1 The second feature of this Halmahera 
ceremony leads us to a further point. The religious 
importance of women's blood has been described by 
Dr. Frazer. The object of smearing the boys withv 
the red water, symbolical of the blood shed at the per- 
foration of the hymen, is to secure them from the 
harm, which the ideas treated of in this book explain, 
that may arise from sexual intercourse. The method 
is the familiar one of " inoculation." External appli- 
cation is a method of transmission, as we have seen, 
and sympathetic inoculation is a form of this. There 
is also to be observed the injunction that the boys must 
expose themselves to the sun. This fact taken in 
conjunction with the sun-taboo common at puberty, 
goes to show the origin of this idea, namely, 
that heat, natural or artificial, is a concomitant 
of sexual desire. The connection between fire and 
sex is also emphasised by the similarity in colour 
of fire and blood, and by the combination in one 

1 Riedel, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 81, 82. 

xin INOCULATION 309 

ceremony of painting the body red and exposure to 
the sun. 

This " sympathetic " rehearsal is obviously intended 
to " initiate " the youths into the mystery of sexual 
union, and also to neutralise its dangers. I cannot see 
in the Halmahera custom any trace of a symbolical 
pretence of begetting them anew, as Dr. Frazer thinks 
is the meaning.1 

The origin of circumcision has been already sug- 
gested. There is also often to be traced the idea that, 
by removing a part of the organism, dangerous and in 
danger as it is, these dangers are neutralised ; this 
passes later into the notion that thus its "impurity" 
is removed, and the sexual act made less gross. A 
common practice, corresponding to circumcision of 
males, is the "excision" of girls at puberty, as 
amoligst the Amakosa and Loan da tribes, the Masai 
and Wakuasi,2 and the same idea is doubtless the 
origin of the practice. 

There is next to be noticed in a remarkable set of 
customs a practice which also shows the object of these 
precautions ; this is, in its simpler form, the introduc- 
tion of the " initiate " to the opposite sex ; in its com- 
pleter form, there is sexual or other intercourse. The 
idea is of the same nature as that of " inoculation," as 
seen in the Halmahera custom, and is parallel to a 
" trial " of sexual relations. Now that the individual 
is prepared to meet the complementary sex, he must do 
so ; for, however strong sexual taboo may be, men and 
women must meet, in marriage at least ; and thus the 
two sexes make " trial " of each other, as if the prepara- 
tion necessitated putting it to the test ; and thereby 
. each sex is practically " inoculated " against the other, 

1 Frazer, op. cit? in. 441. 2 Ploss, op. cit. i. 384. 

310 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

by being " inoculated " with each other, in view of the 
more permanent alliance of wedlock. We saw this 
practice followed in Australia after the ceremonial rup- 
ture of the hymen. So, immediately after circumcision, 
a Ceramese boy must have intercourse with some girl, 
it matters not with whom, " by way of curing the 
wound." This is continued till the blood ceases to 
flow.1 In certain tribes of Central Africa both boys 
and girls after initiation must as soon as possible have 
intercourse, the belief being that if they do not they 
will die.2 Narrinyeri boys during initiation after the 
preliminary rites had complete licence as regards un- 
married females, not only such as they might lawfully 
marry, but even those of their own clan and totem.8 
After the seclusion of a Kaffir girl at puberty, she is 
allowed to cohabit with any one during a festal period 
which follows ; and Kaffir boys after being circumcised 
are allowed to seize any unmarried women they please, 
and have connection with them.4 A similar custom is 
found on the Congo.5 The Muhammadan negroes of 
the Senegal are circumcised at fourteen. They are 
looked after for a month, during which time they walk 
about in a procession. "They may commit during 
this period any violence against girls, except rape and 
murder." After the month is up, they are men.6 A 
Zulu girl at puberty goes through a ceremonial process. 
Secluded in a special hut, she is attended by twelve or 
fourteen girls. " No married man may come near the 
dwelling, and should any one do so he is beaten away 
by the girls, who attack him most viciously with sticks 
and stones. During her seclusion the neophyte must 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen iusscken Selebes en Papua, 139. 

2 Macdonald, Africana, i. 126. 3 Howitt, in Journ. Anthrop. last. xii. 37. 
4 Maclean, op. cit. 101, 98. 5 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. 100. 

6 Reade, op. cit. 451. 

INOCULATION 311 

on no account see or address any man, married or 
unmarried." At the end of the period a number of 
girls and unmarried men have intercourse in the hut. 
After a further period of seclusion the girl bathes and 
is " clean," and after the perforation of the hymen by 
two old women, she is a woman.1 After initiation to 
the warrior's set, El-Moran, the Masai young men 
associated freely with girls ; in fact each El-Moran had 
a lady who went about with him, and the practice was 
very similar to that known in the Europe of Chivalry, 
—the girl, for instance, puts on the warrior's armour 
for him.2 

The introduction to adults' food contains the same 
idea, and often is " inoculation " against contagion of 
women's food and eating with women. Before their 
initiation Halmaherese boys may not eat fisang or 
fowls. At the end of the initiation feast women give 
to the boys pisang and fowl's flesh to eat.3 The idea 
was illustrated in connection with the removal of food- 
taboos at puberty. 

The idea also assumes other forms in which we see 
both the savage impulse towards " make-believe," and 
the recognition that certain characteristics of puberty 
and puberty ceremonies alike have relation to sexual 
complementary function, a recognition developed, as so 
often by sexual taboo, into sexual antagonism. This 
sexual hostility appeared in some of the last few 
examples. Bamangwato girls at puberty go about in 
bands, and beat boys of their age with whips. The 
latter are not considered men until they have endured 
this ordeal without flinching. The girls also in their 

1 Macclonald, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 117, 118. 

2 Thomson, op. cit. 187. 

3 J. G. F. Riedel, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 82. 

312 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

turn have to endure certain ill-usage from the boys.1 
This is also done by proxy. At the feast to celebrate 
the puberty of a Mura boy men and women beat each 
other with whips until the blood comes. It is an " act 
of love." 2 As often in such cases, especially when 
general licence takes place, the sympathy of others is 
shown in the most practical way. What is in effect 
the last phase of the Engwura, or final initiation 
ceremony of the Arunta, is a dance performed by 
young women, by way of invitation to men ; and " at 
this period of the ceremonies a general interchange 
and also a lending of women takes place, and visiting 
natives are provided with temporary wives." This 
woman's dance goes on every night for two or three 
weeks.3 Here we can see " sympathy " at work, and 
the union of society effected, not by " promiscuity," 
but by a sacred exchange, which assists the future 
union of the young people. This sexual sympathy 
passing into antagonism is sometimes fulfilled by one 
sex assuming the apparel of the other. Amongst the 
Basutos the initiation both of youths and girls at 
puberty was called polio. It was not held at the same 
time for both sexes. The ceremony was incumbent 
upon every member of the community at the proper 
age. All who passed through it together, formed " a 
guild of friends." The candidates went out into the 
country — here we speak of the boys' polio — and no 
woman dared come near them. Their food was pre- 
pared by the men in charge, who instructed them in 
male duties, and put them through tests of endurance. 
They were circumcised, and after the operation wore 
aprons for three months. The girls likewise were taken 

] Ploss, op. at. i. 381, 382. a Id. ii. 427. 

8 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 381. 

SYMPATHY 313 

to the country, and were instructed by the women in 
male duties. They were smeared with ashes. No 
ale might come near them. " The women folk acted 
like mad people during this time ; they went about 
performing curious mummeries, wearing men's clothes, 
and carrying weapons, and were very saucy to men 
they met." l At the second initiation ceremony of the 
Arunta there are women who dance, carrying shields 
(the men's property) ; shields are never carried by 
women except on this occasion.2 

Lastly, as the ceremonies of initiation prepare • the 
two sexes for contact with each other, and are followed 
by introduction and intercourse, the practice is, so far, 
a preliminary marriage ceremony, in which a boy or 
girl is married to the other sex in extenso ; more than 
this, however, is often the case, and " initiation " is 
actually marriage. Savage women, and to some extent 
men also, are marriageable and married at puberty, 
and the combination of ceremonies is a natural one. 
The ideas of sexual taboo, I take it, have caused the 
deferring of marriage to a later date. There are 
several examples which show the link between initiation 
ceremonies and marriage, which it is hardly necessary 
to quote. For instance Loanda girls eight days before 
marriage are excised, by a medicine-man.3 Amongst 
the Central Australian tribes the ceremony performed 
on girls at puberty is actually their marriage rite, 
though as Messrs. Spencer and Gillen point out, it 
serves as an initiation for the girls.4 For the boys the 
initiation means more than this, but it also includes a 
reference to marriage ; for instance after the first of 

1 Endemann, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic for 1874, 37 ft. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 220. 

3 Ploss, op. cit. i. 384. 4 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 93. 

3 14 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the initiatory ceremonies the boy is painted by the man 
who is Umbirna to him, i.e. brother of the woman he 
may marry. Also the woman who will be the boy's 
mother-in-law, runs off with him, but the men bring 
him back again.1 Amongst the Kamilaroi the novice 
is taken from the women by the men of that " clan " 
to which belong the women he may select his wife 
from. Each novice has a " guardian " of that clan.2 

SECT. 2 

In primitive society the young man and maiden are 
required to avoid each other from their engagement 
until marriage. This taboo is a repetition for two 
particular individuals of the taboo at puberty between 
the two sexes generally. The principle here also is to 
prevent all intercouse until the particular ceremonies 
which obviate the dangers of the new relation, mutual 
" contagion" between two particular persons, have been 
performed, and to prepare them for these and for the 
new state of life, — the taboo of avoidance being thought 
to be in itself some guarantee of future safety. The 
dangers are those of sexual taboo, here naturally 
emphasised, for the two sexes are now to meet ; they 
coincide, as they are in origin connected, with that 
mutual diffidence arising from complementary sexual 
difference and accentuated at the awakening of love, — 
the shyness of sex. The young people are about to 
enter upon a critical state, that of living in more or 
less close contact with each other, and as that state 
derives its dangers from their reciprocal influence, a 
taboo is set between them until it is removed by the 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 215, 443. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 420. 

ENGAGEMENT TABOO 315 

ceremony which unites them while rendering them 
mutually innocuous. 

The practice naturally coincides with the desire of 
parents to keep the couple waiting till arrangements 
are completed, and to prevent union until they are 
bound together, such premature union being thought 
especially dangerous, and in later culture sinful, while 
in all stages it leaves repudiation open to the man with 
consequent injury to the woman. Amongst the Nickol 
Bay natives girls promised in marriage are not allowed 
to speak to their future husbands, and are said to be 
torka to them.1 So in the Newcastle tribe, when an 
old man promises a young friend that he shall have his 
wife after his death, the husband-expectant is forbidden 
to speak to his future wife or sit in a hut in which she 
is.2 After betrothal in Nias, Borneo, and the Watubella 
Islands, no communication between the pair is allowed 
till the wedding.3 In Buru, Ceram, and Luang Sermata, 
a youth when engaged may not go near his fiancee^ 
look at her, or speak to her.4 In Abyssinia during 
the time of betrothal, generally three or four months, 
the girl is strictly confined to the house. Intercourse 
with her friends is not interrupted, but she remains 
entirely invisible to the young man, who meanwhile 
frequently visits her father.5 The lover in South 
Arabia sends his father or some near relative to ask 
for the lady's hand, and from the moment the proposal 
is accepted the girl can no longer go abroad unveiled, 
and she and her betrothed are no longer permitted to 
visit or to have any other personal relations with one 
another.6 Amongst the Dorahs children are betrothed 

1 Curr, op. cit. i. 298. 2 Id. i. 324. 

3 Rosenberg, Het eiland Nias, 38 j Perelaer, op. cit. 50 ; Riedel, De sluik-en 
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 205. 

4 Id. 21, 134, 324. 5 Featherman, op. cit. v. 604. 6 Id. v. 421. 

316 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

at an early age, and part of the " purchase-money " is 
paid then. Henceforth all intercourse between the two 
families is interrupted, and they are prohibited from 
speaking to one another, and the bride and bridegroom 
are not allowed to see each other, or even pronounce 
each other's name. Similarly amongst the Ayamboris 
of New Guinea.1 Elsewhere in New Guinea betrothed 
persons may not see each other. Should they meet 
on the road, the girl must hide behind a tree until 
the young man has passed.2 Amongst the Lampongs 
and Menangkabauers of Sumatra no communication is ! 
allowed between betrothal and marriage.3 " The Malay ! 
fiancee^ unlike her European sister, is at the utmost ! 
pains to keep out of her lover's way, and to attain 
this object she is said to be as watchful as a tiger." 
The Wataveta bridegroom pays the " bride-price " in 
bullocks, sometimes by instalments. After one payment 
the bride is " sealed " to him. She is not allowed to go 
out of the house, and may on no account see a man, not 
even her betrothed. If the latter is poor, the engage- 
ment may last, as it often does in civilised races, for 
years.5 Amongst the Jews of Morocco the pair never 
see each other from the engagement to the marriage.6 

It is a curious fact, which will later be shown to 
have considerable importance, that the taboo between 
engaged couples reproduces the common taboo between 
a brother and sister ; in other words, their state is a 
re-presentation of life in the family, where sister and 
brother are kept apart, and the " sanctity " of the 
home, in the primitive sense, is preserved by the mother 
on the principles of sexual taboo. 

1 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 33, 383. 2 Zeitschrlft fur Ethnologic, viii. 180. 
3 Horst, in De Indhche Gids (1880), 978 j Van Hasselt, Volksbeschrij'ving Midden- 
Sumatra s, 275. 4 Skeat, op. cit. 366. 
5 Thomson, op. cit. 61. 6 Leared, op. cit. 34. 

xin BETROTHAL BY PROXY 317 

Lastly, these principles also supply the reason why 
betrothal is generally carried out by proxies, and why 
sometimes a man does not even woo his lady-love in 
person. Thus amongst the Kaffirs, when the suitor 
calls to make the acquaintance of the girl, the latter 
speaks to him through her brother, for she will not 
speak to him direct.1 Amongst the Yao and allied 
tribes there is an institution which we might call 
" surety " or " god-parent." Every girl has a surety ; 
and when her hand is sought in marriage it is this 
official who is approached and not her parents. He 
makes the necessary arrangements and sees what pro- 
vision is to be made for her and her children, and also 
in the event of her being sent away without just cause, 
he interferes, and generally redresses her wrongs.2 
" Representatives " of the Malay suitor visit the girl's 
parents to perform the betrothal. After matters are 
arranged, one of these presents some betel, brought for 
the purpose, to the people of the house, saying " This is 
a pledge of your daughter's betrothal." The father 
replies : " Be it so, I accept it." 3 Sometimes the 
mothers perform this office ; amongst the Iroquois 
the young girl was led by her mother to the bride- 
groom's lodge, and on entering she presented to her 
mother-in-law a few cakes of maize. The mother of 
the groom returned the compliment by offering some 
venison to the bride's mother. " This interchange of 
bread and meat gave final sanction to the marriage, 
and the young couple were now looked upon as man 
and wife."4 

1 Shooter, op. cit. 56. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. nS. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 365. 4 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 28. 

CHAPTER XIV 

FEW peoples, if any, of those known to us, are without 
some marriage ceremony. As to those who are said 
to possess none, it will generally be found that there is 
some act performed which is too slight or too practical 
to be marked by an observer as a " ceremony," but 
which when analysed turns out to be a real marriage 
rite. Two common modes of marriage amongst the 
Arunta and other Central Australian tribes illustrate 
this, and also go to prove the correctness of the view 
here put forward, that marriage rites of union are 
essentially identical with love-charms, and that other 
marriage rites coincide with precautions taken to lessen 
the dangers of contact between the sexes, not only in 
ordinary life, but at the critical stage of puberty. A 
man or woman in the Arunta tribe can charm a person 
of the other sex to love, by making music with a bull- 
roarer. If he or she soon comes to the musician, the 
marriage is thereby complete.1 This method is a love- 
charm in the Yaroinga tribe.2 The other method is 
the perforation of the hymen , at once an initiatory and a 
marriage ceremony.3 In fact, the mere act of union 
is potentially a marriage ceremony of the sacramental 
kind, and as the ideas of contact develop directly from 
physiological functions, one may even credit the earliest 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 541, 542. 2 Roth, of. tit. 182. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 93 ff. 

CHAP, xiv MARRIAGE CEREMONIES 319 

animistic men with some such vague conception before 
any ceremony became crystallised. 

Marriage being the permanent living-together of a 
man and woman, what is the essence of a marriage 
ceremony ? It is the "joining together " of a man and 
a woman, in the words of our English Service " for 
this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and 
shall be joined unto his wife ; and they two shall be 
one flesh." At the other side of the world, amongst 
the Orang Benuas, these words are pronounced by an 
elder, when a marriage is solemnised : " Listen all 
ye that are present ; those that were distant are now 
brought together ; those that were separated are now 
united." Marriage ceremonies in all stages of culture 
may be called religious with as much propriety as any 
ceremony whatever ; but this religious character in 
most cases, and practically always except in the highest 

i stages, concerns the human relations of the human pair. 
I have shown above how in primitive thought human 
relations contain the essentials of a religious character. 

. I need not recapitulate here the principles of human 
relations as expressed in ideas of contact, or their 
application to relations between the two sexes. Before 
marriage, and in many cases also after marriage, the 
sexes are separated by these ideas of sexual taboo ; at 
marriage, they are joined together by the same ideas, 
worked out, in the most important set of rites, to their 
logical conclusion in reciprocity of relations. Those 
who were separated are now joined together, those who 
were mutually taboo, now break the taboo. In the 
higher stages the ceremony lifts the union into the 
ideal plane, as, for instance, symbolising the mystic 
union of Christ and His Church ; or, as in Brahmin 

1 New bold, British Settlements in Malacca, ii. 407. 

320 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

marriages, where the bridegroom says to the bride, " I 
am the sky, thou art the earth ; come let us marry," 
words referring to " the two great parents of the Aryan 
race, as the Rig -Veda calls them, Dyaushpitar and 
Prthivi matar} It is also unnecessary to recapitulate 
the various dangers which have been shown responsible 
for the taboo between the sexes and the various sexual 
properties of which the contagion is feared, all of which 
lead to the implicit idea that not only all contact of 
man and woman, but the state of marriage itself, is 
harmful and later, sinful, in fact theoretically for- 
bidden. Hence the conception that marriage ceremonies 
" prevent " this danger and this sin. It is sufficient 
merely to state that the ceremonies of marriage are 
intended to neutralise these dangers and to make the* 
union safe, prosperous, and happy. With this is con- 
nected the wish to bind the one to the other, so as to 
prevent, if possible, later repudiation. This, by the 
way, is exactly the idea held by the average man still. 
I may also point out here that the object of marriage 
ceremonies is not and never was, to join together the- 
man or the woman, as the case may be, with " the life, 
or blood, or flesh of the tribe"'' There is no trace of 
this sentimental socialism in primitive society, though 
there are facts which look like it, no more than there 
is or ever was a community of wives ; marriage is 
between individuals and is an individualistic act. The 
mere existence of the egoistic impulse, not to be casually 
identified with jealousy, is enough to discredit the 
suggestion ; and the tendency of society from primitive 
animalism upwards has been from individualism to 
socialism. It is a perversion of history and of psycho- 
logy as well, to make man more communistic the more 

1 Tylor, Primitive Culture? i. 327. 

ONE FLESH 

321 

Itive he is. There may be a few isolated cases in 
es whose tribal solidarity has become pronounced, 
where the later legal notion has arisen, but since in 
nearly all such cases, marriage is allowed within the 
tribe (exogamy nearly always sanctioning cousin - 
marriage), there can be no original intention of making 
tribe - fellows of two persons who are already tribe - 
fellows. Nor did any man ever yet marry a tribe, 
although in the humorous side of life, relatives are 
sometimes found to act as if he did ; no man ever yet 
felt the tribal blood surge through his veins as he 
drank wine with his wife in the marriage ceremony. 
True, a new relationship is formed, a new member 
enters the family or tribe (rarely the latter), but this 
idea is secondary, and does not touch the marriage 
ceremony except in a few cases as referred to, in which 
it is very probable that the report is half inference, in 
any case it is a pseudo-scientific piece of myth-making, 
whether on the part of observer or native informant. 
The Church in her marriage service shows more insight 
than many ethnologists, when she repeats the words 
" for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother 
and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be 
one flesh." The word " flesh," by the way, does not by 
any means refer to kinship or tribal union, as who 
should say in late human parlance "one blood." Even 
in the Hebrew the individual meaning is the primary 
one. This is also recognised by our Service ; " So 
ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies. 
He that loveth his wife loveth himself, for no man 
ever yet hated his own flesh." Lastly, is it fear of 
the tribe that makes a maid veil her face before her 
intended husband, or a bridegroom dress up as a 
woman ? The inadequacy of the theory is evident in 

Y 

322 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

every kind of marriage rite. We shall recur to this 
when discussing " group-marriage " and relationships. 

Marriage ceremonies neutralise the dangers attaching 
to union between the sexes, in all the complex meaning 
of those dangers. The ritual may be divided into two 
classes, corresponding to the two divisions of ideas con- 
cerning contact, those namely that obviate or neutralise 
the dangers of taboo (i) by one or more of the simple 
methods, (2) by one or more of the double or complex 
methods, typified by ngia ngiampe or mutual inocula- 
tion. The first breaks taboo by removing or neutralis- 
ing the taboo property, the second breaks taboo between 
two persons by breaking it, i.e. by assimilating the two 
persons, inoculating them with each other, the principle 
coinciding with that of union. Marriage sums up all 
the principles and practice of sexual taboo, as any close 
union between any two persons sums up those of social 
taboo, and in the details it will frequently be obvious 
how some ceremony answers to some taboo, as a positive 
to a negative. 

Lastly, when we find only one or two sorts of 
ceremonies referring directly to sexual intercourse, while 
the others refer to ordinary contact, with special refer- 
ence to eating together, and generally to the state of 
living together in contact, we need not refer marriage 
ceremonies generally to fear of danger from sexual 
intercourse alone, or from female periodicity ; these 
take their place as parts of the whole, as they do in 
sexual taboo. 

It is interesting to note the materialistic power 
attached to the marriage rite, as shown, for instance, 
in Burmah. It is believed in that country that when a 
wife dies in child-bed she becomes a maleficent demon. 
Accordingly, when a wife does die thus, the husband 

BASIS OF THE RITUAL 323 

at once gets a divorce.1 In Java if a man wishes to be 
divorced, the priest cuts the * ' marriage- cord " before 
witnesses, and this simple act severs the nuptial tie.2 
We may also note that with many peoples, and the 
fact is instructive, there is less ceremonial when a widow 
is married.3 In cases where the " paternal system " is 
followed, there should on the tribal theory of marriage, 
DC no ceremony at all when a widow is married, because 
;he has already the life of the tribe flowing in her 
yeins ; but there is some ceremony. It is reduced 
precisely because she has been through the same thing 
Defore, and is therefore less in danger from men and 
ess dangerous. She has been handselled. 

For practical purposes, as is hardly necessary' to 
remise, the complex fears of men and women are 
)ften subconscious, or are only expressed as a feeling 
)f diffidence with regard to the novel proceedings, and 
ilso are not always focussed on the personality of either 
)arty with its inherent dangerous properties nor stimu- 
ated by conscious realisation of particular dangers. 
Dotentially the consciousness has knowledge of all the 
Principles, and cross-examination might elicit most, but 
ctually the fears are vague, they are fears of vague 
trangeness and danger. We have, however, seen cases 
/here the individual in marriage is consciously aware 
bat it is his human partner who is to be feared, and 
thers will occur as we proceed. Amongst the Mord- 
ins, as the bridegroom's party sets out for the house 
f the bride, the " best man " marches thrice round the 
arty with a drawn sword or scythe, imprecating curses 
pon ill-wishers. In Nizhegorod the "best man" walks 
irice round the party, against the sun, holding an 

, 

1 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 173. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 383. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 382 j Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. n ; Lane, op. cit. i. 195. 

\ 
324 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAI 

eikon. Then he places himself in front of them, an 
scratches the ground with a knife, cursing evil spiril 
and evilly disposed persons.1 In the county of Durhar! 
men with guns used to escort the bridal party tj 
church. The guns were fired at intervals over tbi 
heads of the bride and bridesmaids. In Cleveland gur 
were fired over the heads of the newly married pair a| 
the way from church.2 In China it was supposed the; 
when a new bride in her chair passed a certain plac«: 
evil spirits would approach and injure her, causing h<i 
to be ill ; hence the figure of a great magician (a Taoi 
priest) riding a tiger, and brandishing a sword, w;! 
painted in front.3 In Manchuria, when the brid 
sedan-chair arrives at the bridegroom's house, the docj 
is shut and crackers are fired to keep off" "evil spirits. 'j 
Again, in South Arabia the bride goes in procession 1 
the bridegroom's dwelling, her turban ornamented i 
front with a bouquet of garlic as a protection against tlj 
" evil eye." 5 In Manchuria the bride is taken in pr<j 
cession to the bridegroom's house. Two men run j 
front, each holding a red cloth, by which it is intends 
to ward ofF evil influences ; 6 an excellent application • 
the man with the red flag. Also the sedan-chair 
which she goes to the bridegroom's house is "di: 
infected " with incense, to drive away evil spirits, ar 
in it is put a calendar containing names of idols wl 
control the demoniacal hosts. Again, before a bride 
taken out of her sedan-chair, on arriving at the brid 
groom's house, he fires three arrows at the blind: 
Amongst the Bechuanas the bridegroom throws ; 
arrow into the hut before he enters to take his brid<, 

1 Folklore, i. 445. 2 W. Henderson, Folklore of the Northern Counties, 

3 Doolittle, op. cit. i. 95. 4 Folklore, i. 487. 5 Featherman, op. cit. v. 42 .! 

6 Folklore, I.e. 7 Id. I.e. 8 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xvi. i 

, 

EVIL INFLUENCES 

325 

50 the Andamanese bridegroom when introduced to his 
)ride has some arrows put in his hand.1 Amongst the 
3heels and Bheelalahs the groom touches the "marriage- 
;hed " with a sword.2 Thus is to be explained, and 
lot as a survival of " marriage by capture," the old 
Ionian custom, in which the bridegroom combed the 
Bride's hair with a spear, the c<elibaris hasta? 

The practice of throwing rice originated in the idea 
)f giving food to the evil influences to induce them to 
3e propitious and depart, but in many cases it seems to 
lave developed into a sympathetic method of securing 
~ertility, and on the other hand is regarded by some 
Deoples as an inducement to the soul to stay. In 
Celebes, for instance, there is a belief that the bride- 
groom's soul is apt to fly away at marriage, and rice 
s therefore scattered over him to induce it to remain.4 
Flour and sweetmeats similarly in old Greek custom 
were poured over the new bridegroom.5 Where, as 
Dften in folk-custom, such things are flung about 
imong the onlookers, the idea was originally of the 
:ype first described. The nuts used thus at old Roman 
Weddings are a well-known instance.6 

A common class of preliminary ceremonial includes 
various kinds of lustration or purification, the inner 
meaning of which is to neutralise the mutual dangers 
of contact. Before the wedding the bridegroom in 
South Celebes bathes in holy water. The bride is 
ilso fumigated.7 Shortly before the wedding day the 
Abyssinian girl has a thorough ablution and her diet is 
restricted.8 When the Matabele bride arrives at the 

1 Featherman, op. cit. u. 232. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 404. 
3 Festus, 44 5 Plutarch, <%u<estiones Romance, 87. 4 Matthes, op. cit. 33. 

5 Scholiast on Aristophanes, Plutw, 768. 6 Festus, 183. 

7 Matthes, op. cit. 21. 8 Featherman, op. cit. v. 604. 

326 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP! 

bridegroom's house she pours water over him.1 Puri 
fication by water forms "an integral part of Malav 
customs at birth, adolescence, marriage, sickness, death 
and, in fact, at every critical period of the life of j; 
Malay."2 In all these it is called tepong tawar^ whicK 
properly means " the neutralising rice-flour water 
neutralising being used almost in a chemical sense, i.e 
in the sense of c sterilising ' the active element 01 
poisons, or of destroying the active potentialities ol 
evil spirits." Amongst the Malays lustrations arc 
continued by the newly married pair for three days, 
The first ceremonies at a wedding consist in fumigating 
the bride and groom with incense, and then smearing 
them with "neutralising paste" which averts "ill-luck."^ 
Here the idea emerges into conscious realisation of the I 
persons to be feared. 

We saw that initiation practices are theoretically 
marriage ceremonies by which the individual is married 
in abstract to the other sex — that is, prepared for the* 
dangers of intercourse. Naturally the two are often ; 
combined or show similarity of rite. Thus in British -i 
Guiana a young man before marriage undergoes an I 
ordeal ; his flesh is wounded, and he is sewn into aj 
hammock full of fire-ants.4 Amongst the Sakalavas; 
and Betsileo the aspirant to a lady's hand has to be shot! 
at with spears ; he is expected to show cleverness and j 
courage by avoiding them.5 In Fiji girls are tattooed 
at puberty or immediately after marriage. During the 
process of healing they are tabu siga, " kept from the 
sun."6 In connection with this, we have seen the mean- 
ing of the prohibition and may note that, as danger 

1 jfourn. Anthrop. lust, xxiii. 84. 2 Skeat, op. cit. 278. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 77, 385, 376. 4 im Thurn, op. cit. 221. 

5 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 42. 6 Williams, op. cit. i. 170. 

LIGHT AND DARKNESS 

327 

obviated by refraining from such exposure, in the 
le way as by abstinence at marriage, superstition and 
;lf-control alike being thus satisfied, so, when the 
idividual is spiritually prepared, exposure or satis- 
iction becomes safe and even beneficial. After 
litiation Halmahera boys must expose themselves to 
ie sun.1 Similar was the custom amongst the Hindus, 
which the bride had to look at the sun on the 
iy before marriage.2 In Central Asia the young 
>air greet the rising sun. Similarly amongst the 
Chacos.3 The fertilising power of the sun is 
now useful and a blessing. We may compare our 
proverb, " Happy is the bride on whom the sun 
shines." 

Weddings very commonly take place in the evening, 
or at night, a custom natural enough for its convenience 
and its obviation of dangers, such as that of the evil 
eye and those connected with human, and especially 
with female, shyness and timidity. Taken in con- 
nection with the last custom, we may without excess 
of fancifulness note the coincidence with nature's 
method of shrouding her processes of production in 
mystery and darkness, and of revealing their results 
in the light. Amongst the Santhals marriages take 
place at night, and the bride is conveyed to her 
husband in a basket.4 In Morocco and the Babar 
Islands, amongst the Maoris, the Copts, and Polish 
Jews, to take a few cases, marriages are made after 
sunset or at night.5 Amongst the ancient Romans the 
bridegroom had to go to his bride in the dark, a 
custom on which Plutarch speculates in his " Roman 

1 J. G. F. Riedel, in Zeitschr iff fur Ethnologie, xvii. 82. 

2 Frazer, op. cit? iii. 222. 3 Id. I.e. 4 E. G. Man, Sonthalia, 98, 99. 

5 Leared, op. at. j J. G. F. Riedel, De duik-en kroesharige rassen tmschen Selebes, 
en Papua, 350 j Shortland, op. cit. 140 ; Featherman, op. at. v. 509, 153. 

328 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Questions." * Amongst the Zulus it is against etiquette 
for the bridal party to enter the bridegroom's hut in 
the day-time.2 

In the next place, we find various customs by which 
the young people hide, from vague evil, or from each 
other. In these customs, which pass into various sorts 
of seclusion, concealment, and veiling, the real meaning 
of such marriage ceremonial is often very clearly seen. 
Sexual shyness not only in woman but in man, is inten- 
sified at marriage, and forms a chief feature of the dan- 
gerous sexual properties mutually feared. When fully 
ceremonial, the idea takes on the meaning that satisfaction 
of these feelings will lead to their neutralisation, as in fact 
it does. The bridegroom in ancient Sparta supped on 
the wedding-night at the men's mess, and then visited his 
bride, leaving her before daybreak. This practice was 
continued, and sometimes children were born before the 
pair had ever seen each other's faces by day.3 At weddings 
in the Babar Islands the bridegroom has to hunt for his 
bride in a darkened room. This lasts a good while if 
she is shy.4 In South Africa the bridegroom may not 
see his bride till the whole of the marriage ceremonies 
have been performed.5 In Persia a husband never sees 
his wife till he has consummated the marriage.6 At 
marriages in South Arabia the bride and bridegroom 
have to sit immovable in the same position from noon 
till midnight, fasting, in separate rooms. The bride is 
attended by ladies, and the groom by men. They may 
not see each other till the night of the fourth day.7 In 
Egypt the groom cannot see the face of his bride, even 
by a surreptitious glance, till she is in his absolute pos- 

1 Plutarch, £>. R. 65 j Servius on Virgil, Eclog. viii. 29. 

a Leslie, op. cit. 115. 3 Plutarch, Lycurgus, xv. 48. 

4 Riedel, op. cit. 351. 5 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 271. 

6 Chardin, in Pinkerton, ix. 154. 7 Featherman, op. cit. v. 422. 

xiv MAY NOT SEE EACH OTHER 329 

session. Then comes the ceremony, which he performs, 
of uncovering her face.1 In Egypt, of course, this has 
been accentuated by the seclusion and veiling of women. 
In Morocco, at the feast before the marriage, the bride 
and groom sit together on a sort of throne ; all the 
time the poor bride's eyes are firmly closed, and she sits 
amid the revelry as immovable as a statue. On the 
next day is the marriage. She is conducted after dark 
to her future home, accompanied by a crowd with 
lanterns and candles. She is led with closed eyes 
along the street by two relatives, each holding one of 
her hands. " Such is the regard to propriety on this 
solemn occasion, that the bride's head is held in its proper 
position by a female relative who walks behind her." 
She wears a veil, and is not allowed to open her eyes 
until she is set on the bridal bed with a girl friend 
beside her.2 Amongst the Zulus the bridal party 
proceeds to the house of the groom, having the bride 
hidden amongst them so that no one can see her. 
They stand facing the groom, while the bride sings 
a song. Her companions then suddenly break away, 
and she is discovered standing in the middle with a 
fringe of beads covering her face.3 Amongst the 
people of Kumaun the husband sees his wife first 
after the joining of hands.4 Amongst the Bedui of 
North-East Africa the bride is brought on the evening 
of the wedding-day by her girl friends to the groom's 
house. She is closely muffled up.5 Amongst the Jews 
of Jerusalem the bride at the marriage ceremony stands 
under the nuptial canopy, her eyes being closed that 
she may not behold the face of her future husband 

1 Lane, op. cit. \. 197. 2 Leared, op. at. 36, 38. 

3 Leslie, op. cit. 116. 4 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. 244. 

5 Munzinger, op. cit. 148. 

330 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

before she reaches the bridal chamber.1 In Melanesia 
the bride is carried to her new home on some one's 
back, wrapped in many mats, with palm-fans held 
about her face, " because she is supposed to be modest 
and shy.": Amongst the Damaras the groom cannot 
see his bride for four days after marriage. When a 
Damara woman is asked in marriage, she covers her 
face for a time with the flap of a head-dress made for 
this purpose.3 At the Thlinkeet marriage ceremony 
the bride must look down and keep her head bowed all 
the time ; during the wedding-day she remains hiding 
in a corner of the house, and the groom is forbidden 
to enter.4 At a Yezedee marriage the bride is covered 
from head to foot with a thick veil, and when arrived 
at her new home she retires behind a curtain in the 
corner of a darkened room, where she remains for 
three days before her husband is permitted to see her.5 
In Corea the bride has to cover her face with her long 
sleeves when meeting the bridegroom at the wedding.6 
The Manchurian bride uncovers her face for the first 
time, when she descends from the nuptial couch.7 As 
has already been shown, it is dangerous even to see 
dangerous persons. Sight is a method of contagion 
in primitive science, and the idea coincides with the 
psychological aversion to see dangerous things, and 
with sexual shyness and timidity. In the customs 
noticed we can distinguish the feeling that it is dan- 
gerous to the bride for her husband's eyes to be 
upon her, and the feeling of bashfulness in her which 
induces her neither to see him nor to be seen by him. 
These ideas explain the origin of the bridal veil and 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 140. 2 Codrington, op. cit. 242. 

3 South African Folklore Journal, i. 49 j C. J. Anderson, op. cit. 22$. 

4 Dall, op. cit. 415. 5 Featherman, op. cit. v. 62. 
6 Journ. Antrop. Inst. xxiv. 305. " Folklore, i. 489. 

xiv THE BRIDAL VEIL 331 

similar concealments. Dobrizhoffer wrote of Abipone 
women as often hiding in the woods before marriage, 
many " seeming to dread the assaults of tigers less than 
the untried nuptials." When the bride was led to the 
groom's tent, eight girls held a carpet in front of her.1 
Amongst the Bedouins of Ethiopia the bride is con- 
cealed under a canopy carried by girls.2 At Druse 
marriages the bride is hidden in a long red veil, which 
is removed by the groom in the bridal chamber.3 The 
bridal veil is used, to take a few instances, in China, 
Burmah, Corea, Russia, Bulgaria, Manchuria, and 
Persia ; in all these cases it conceals the face entirely.4 
Cases where a sacred umbrella is held over the head, as 
amongst the Chinese,5 are connected with the sanctity of 
the head, the idea being to prevent evil coming down 
upon that sensitive part of the body. Thus when the 
King of Dahomey drank with Burton, a parasol was 
placed over him to prevent his being seen.6 

Various methods of seclusion both from each other 
and from external danger, are illustrated by the 
following. In some Victorian tribes the young man, as 
soon as he had passed the ceremonies of initiation, was 
introduced to the bride, already assigned to him, to 
gaze at her, for he was forbidden to converse with her. 
She was then sent to her mother-in-law, who took care 
of her until the marriage had taken place, but the young 
man had no access to his future wife. At sunset the 
bride took her seat in front of her relatives and friends, 
being separated by a large fire from the bridegroom, 
who was seated in front of a group of his own friends. 

1 Dobrizhoffer, op. cit. ii. 208. 2 Harris, op. cit. i. 287. 

3 Chasseaud, op. cit. 166. 

4 Doolittle, op. cit. i. 79 j Anderson, op. cit. 141 ; Griffis, op. cit. 249 ; Ralston, 
op. cit. 280 ; Sinclair and Brophy, op. cit. 73 ; Folklore ', i. 489. 

5 Folklore, i. 365. 6 Burton, op. cit. i. 244. 

332 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

He was then introduced by the groomsmen to the bride, 
who received him with downcast eyes and in perfect 
silence. After some feasting the pair were escorted to 
their future home, but they were still sequestered for 
two moons, sleeping on different sides of the fire and 
watched over by a female and a male guardian, who 
provided them with food. After this period the bride 
stayed with her parents for a fortnight and then went 
to her husband.1 Amongst the Arabs of Mount Sinai the 
bride is required by decency to remain secluded in her 
tent for a fortnight, and the rule is that she may only 
leave it at night, so as not to be seen by men.2 In 
certain South African tribes the girl is put in a hut 
alone. After some days she is taken to another hut, 
and then to her husband.3 In New Britain the bride 
stays in the hut of her intended five days alone, while 
his relatives bring her food. Meanwhile he is in one of 
the hiding-places (known only to the men) in the 
forest, or hidden in tall grass.4 In Port Moresby 
the groom sleeps with the bride, but must leave her 
before dawn, because "he is ashamed to be seen coming 
from his wife in daylight." 5 The Tipperah youth 
serves the bride's father for three years, during which 
time he uses her as a wife. But on the wedding-night 
he has to sleep with her surreptitiously ; he leaves the 
house before dawn, and absents himself for four days.6 
Amongst the Nufoers the bride and groom may not 
meet each other alone till the fifth day, but even then 
only by night, and for four days more he must leave 
his wife's chamber before day.7 Parallel to the New 
Britain custom is an extension of this idea, illustrated 

1 Feather man, op. cit. ii. 142. 2 Id. v. 368. 

3 D. Livingstone, South Africa, 412. 

4 R. Parkinson, Im Bhmarck-Archipel, 98. 5 Chalmers, op. cit. 163. 

6 Lewin, op. cit. 203. 7 F. H. Guillemanl, The Cruise of the Marchesa, ii. 287. 

xiv SECLUSION AND FLIGHT 333 

by the custom of Bedouin brides. At night the bride, 
before consummation of the marriage, runs away to the 
hills and hides. There her friends bring her food, 
while the husband looks for her. This is repeated the 
next night, and when he finds her he must consummate 
the marriage, and remain all night with her in the hills.1 
Conversely in Egypt on the day after marriage the man 
who carried the bridegroom upstairs takes him to an 
" entertainment " in the country, where they spend the 
whole day. This ceremony is called el-hooroobeh, " the 
flight." He returns in the evening.2 In Corea after 
three days of marriage the young husband goes away 
for a time.3 Again, both bride and groom are secluded 
within the house ; for ten days in Luzon, during which 
no one may enter ; 4 among the Minahassas for three 
days and nights in a dark room ; amongst the Bedui 
for forty days.5 It is said that amongst some of the 
Bedui, the wife may not leave the house for three years 
nor touch any work ; 6 in Bulgaria they are shut up for 
a week, during which they may not go out nor receive 
visitors.7 The newly wedded pair in the Aru Islands 
are shut up for four days, and are looked after by the 
bride's mother.8 In Ceramlaut the young pair may not 
go out of the house for three days.9 This applies often 
to the bride only, as amongst the Bedouins, where she 
stays in the tent for a fortnight.10 In the Kingsmill 
Islands the house is screened with mats for ten days, 
and the bride may not go out.11 For forty days after 
marriage the Javanese bride was secluded.12 Amongst 
the Copts she may not go out, even to see her parents, 

I Burckhardt, Bedouins and Wahabees, i. 269. 2 Lane, op. cit. i. 214. 

3 Griffis, op. cit. 251. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 498. 5 Id. ii. 611. 

6 Munzinger, op. cit. 148. 7 Sinclair and Brophy, op. cit. 73. 

8 Riedel, op. cit. 262. 9 Id. 172. 10 Burckhardt, op. cit. i. 268. 

II Wilkes, op. cit. v. 101. 12 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 384. 

334 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

till the delivery of her first child, or until the end of a 
year.1 Wataveta brides " are set apart for the first 
year as something almost too good for earth. They 
are dressed, adorned, physicked, and pampered in every 
way, almost like goddesses. They are screened from 
vulgar sight, exempted from all household duties, and 
prohibited from all social intercourse with all of the 
other sex except their husbands. They are never left 
alone, are accompanied by some one wherever they may 
wish to go, and are not permitted to exert themselves 
in the least ; even in their short walks they creep at a 
snail's pace, least they should overstrain their muscles. 
Two of these celestial beings were permitted to visit 
me/' They wore veils of iron chain, hanging to below 
the lips. " They honoured me only with their eyes ; 
they did not let me hear the mellow harmony of their 
voices. They had to see and be seen, but not to be 
heard or spoken to. Brides are treated in this manner 
until they present their husbands with a son or 
daughter, or the hope of such a desired event has 
passed away. In the former case the goddess falls to 
the level of an ordinary housewife ; in the other well 
for her if she be not despised or even discarded." 2 
Here the practice passes into care for the unborn child 
and avoidance of risks on the part of the young wife. 
On the other hand, in Java again, neither bride nor 
groom may go out of the house, or perform any hard 
work, for forty days before the wedding.3 

Behind these customs there is sexual shyness, and the 
ideas that association with women is improper as well as 
dangerous, leading to effeminacy, and that for women, 
association with men is improper ; but, further, these 

1 Lane, op. cit. ii. 333. 2 New, op. at. 360, 361. 

3 Raffles, History of Java, i. 325. 

SEXUAL SOLIDARITY 

335 

coincide with that solidarity of sex, which respects 
id sympathises with the sexual shyness of each party, 
xordingly amongst the Bedui the bride spends the 
:dding-day with her girl friends and the bridegroom 
nth young men.1 At Watubella marriages the men 
take their place by the bridegroom, and the women by 
the bride.2 The Babar bride is attended by women 
friends.3 Amongst the Barbary Arabs the young wife 
is escorted to the dowar of her husband by all the 
women of the neighbourhood.4 During the marriage 
feast of four days amongst the Damaras she may only 
sleep with the girls, behind her mother's house. He is 
not allowed to see his bride or even to enter the werft, 
during these four days, but stays somewhere behind it. 
When the pair go to his home, her mother and other 
women go with them to see her safely installed.5 In 
Amboina the marriage takes place in the house of the 
young man's parents, but no men may be present. 
After a week a feast takes place at the house of the 
bride's parents, but at this only men may be present.6 

Returning to the subject of disguise, used as a 
concealment from danger, " spiritual," personal, and 
sexual, vaguely conceived or clearly realised in a 
member of the other sex, we may note the practice of 
Muhammadans in the north-west provinces of India ; 
for some days before marriage both bride and groom 
wear dirty clothes.7 The common custom by which the 
bride's hair is shaven or a lock cut off is doubtless 
connected with the ideas which cause this practice in 
other taboo states. Something, some part of one, must 
be given up by way of propitiating evil influences, a 

1 Munzinger, of>. clt. 147. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 205. 8 Id. 350. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. v. 530. 5 South African Folklore} Journal, i. 49. 
6 Riedel, op. cit. 69. 7 Crooke, in Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. 960. 

336 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

part must be sacrificed for the whole. The idea is 
sometimes merged in the principle of change of identity, 
by supposing a part of the person to be instinct with 
the properties of the whole ; in other cases it becomes 
later a sacrifice to some deity, as Greek brides cut 
off a lock of hair. In some of the Fiji Islands the 
bride cut off a long lock of her hair, in others all 
her hair was shaven off.1 The head of a KafHr bride 
was shaved.2 

There are some interesting customs which show both 
the taboo character of bride and bridegroom and also an 
attempt at disguising them by fictitious change of 
identity. " The Malay wedding ceremony, even as 
carried out by the poorer classes, shows that the 
contracting parties are treated as royalty, that is to say, 
as sacred human beings, and if any further proof is 
required, in addition to the evidence which may be 
drawn from the general character of the ceremony, I 
may mention first the fact that the bride and bridegroom 
are actually called Raja sari (i.e. c the sovereigns of a 
day '), and secondly, that it is a polite fiction that no 
command of theirs, during their one day of sovereignty, 
may be disobeyed." 3 During the first week of marriage 
the Syrian pair play at being king and queen ; they sit 
on a throne, and the villagers sing songs.4 Wetzstein 
conjectures that " the Song of Songs " is a collection of 
such.5 

Somewhat similar is the idea underlying the habit of 
wearing finery or new clothes for a new or important 
event. On the same plane is the common custom of 
erecting a " marriage -bower," well known amongst 

1 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 203. 2 Shooter, op. cit. 75. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 388. 4 Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic for 1873, 270. 

5 S. R. Driver, Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament, 452. 

xiv MOCK BRIDES 337 

Hindu peoples, and once common in Spain.1 For 
Abyssinian weddings a dass or bower of green branches 
is erected in the courtyard- Here bride and groom sit 
in state on opposite sides, each surrounded by friends.2 

Next comes the very interesting custom of substitut- 
ing a mock bride for the real one. Thus, amongst the 
Beni-Amer the groom and his friends are often mocked 
when they come to take the bride, her people substitut- 
ing a false bride for the true one. The substitute is 
carefully disguised and allows herself to be taken, and 
at last when the procession is well outside the village, 
she reveals herself and runs back laughing. This may 
be done more than once.3 Amongst the Saxons of 
Transsylvania the bride is concealed with two married 
women behind a curtain, on the evening of the wedding- 
day, and the husband has to guess which is his wife ; 
all three try to mislead him.4 This kind of thing is 
common in European folk - custom. Amongst the 
Moksha an old woman dressed up as a bride dances 
before the company.5 Amongst the Esthonians the 
bride's brother dresses up in woman's clothes, and 
personates the bride. In Brittany the substitutes are 
first a little girl, then the mistress of the house, and 
lastly the grandmother. In Poland an old woman, in 
Polonia a bearded man personate the bride.6 

Bride or groom is sometimes attended by one or 
more persons dressed up to resemble him or her. 
These persons are intended to be duplicates, and the 
idea is " safety in numbers," combined with similarity 
of costume, much as the sacred shield of Roman worship 
was kept safe by being placed amongst a number of fac- 

1 Th. Moore, Marriage Customs, 56. 2 Featherman, op. cit. v. 604, 605. 
3 Munzinger, op. cit. 324. 4 Gerard, The Land beyond the Forest, i. 185. 

5 Folklore, i. 446. , 6 Folklore, iv. 147. 

Z 

338 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP 

: 

similes. The bale muri of Fiji has the same origi 
The modern Egyptian bridegroom walks between two 
friends dressed exactly like himself.1 Amongst the 
Abyssinians, when a princess is married, she is accom- 
panied in the procession by her sister, dressed exactly 
like herself.2 

The very natural practice of being accompanied on 
^ these, as on other important occasions, by a friend of 
I one's own sex, has crystallised into the institution of 
\ groomsmen, bridesmaids, and the like. They resemble 
generally persons like the Roman advocati, who were 
witnesses to character and general supporters of a 
litigant. In marriage ceremonial their original function 
is sympathy and assistance in a trying ordeal more or 
less fraught with " spiritual " danger, but sometimes 
their duty becomes more specialised. At Egyptian 
weddings the bride is attended by several girls who 
cluster round her under the same canopy.3 We may? 
compare the Zulu custom of surrounding the bride 
with a throng of maidens. At Malay weddings the 
bride is attended by one or more girl-companions, anc| 
the bridegroom by two pages.4 During the first fe\w 
days after a wedding the South Celebes bride is attended 
by eight girls, and also is accompanied by a lady of her 
own age, who is dressed exactly like her. The bride- 
groom is also accompanied by a young man of his own; 
age, dressed like himself.5 The Abyssinian bridegroom 
is attended by six to twelve bridesmen, called arkees, 
" to whom particular functions are assigned and extra- 
ordinary privileges are allowed." Boys of the same 
social class unite together and form a kind of society, 
binding themselves to act as arkees for each other. At 

1 Lane, op. cit. i. 212. 2 Harris, op. cit. ii. 225. 

3 Lane, op. cit. i. 217, 200. 4 Skeat, op. cit. 375. 5 Matthes, op. cit. 29. 

I BRIDESMAIDS AND BEST MAN 339 
marriage ceremony they pledge themselves to fulfil 
Awards the bride the part of " brethren'' ; they wait 
on her, and furnish her with meat should she hunger, 
and with milk should she thirst. During the first few 
weeks of marriage the arkees sleep in the bridal chamber 
and supply the pair with anything they may want in 
the night ; and one arkee keeps constant watch during 
this period over the bride.1 In these examples is well 
seen the way in which the women stand by the bride 
and the men by the groom, a fact which indicates the 
real origin of marriage ceremonies. The last case shows 
a chivalrous perversion of sympathy. Again, in Russia^ 
on the wedding -night a man called a klyetnik wasl 
appointed to watch round the bridal chamber.2 Similarly ' 
in ancient Greece one of the bridegroom's friends was 
called Bvpwpos ; he used to stand at the door and prevent 
the women assisting the bride when she screamed.3 The 
hardy suggestion which has been made, that our " best 
man " was originally the strongest of the bridegroom's 
friends who assisted him in capturing the bride from 
the foreign tribe is well refuted by this as by all the 
1 evidence. It is sex, not the tribe, that is concerned. 

It is a very general custom that as many pre- 
liminaries as possible, including the proposal of marriage 
and the arrangement of the contract, should be per- 
formed not by the bride and bridegroom-elect, but by 
friends or sponsors. The reason is obvious after what 
has been said. Thus, in Egypt the marriage contract 
is performed between the bridegroom and the bride's 
deputy (wekeel). These two join hands which are cere- 
monially covered with a cloth.4 We thus arrive at 
proxies in the marriage rite. Amongst the Karens it is 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 606. 2 Ralston, Songs of the Russian People, 281. 

3 Pollux, Onomasticon, iii. 42. 4 Lane, op. cit. i. 200. 

340 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the sponsors of the pair who offer the cup to each other, 
drinking out of which forms the ceremony.1 In Persia 
marriage by proxy is the rule, and the groom never 
sees his wife till he has consummated the marriage.2 
An interesting parallel is found in Cingalese custom. 
An astrologer has to decide if the horoscopes of the 
suitor and the girl suit each other. Once when the- 
bridegroom's horoscope was not suitable, he produced 
that of his infant brother, which was satisfactory. This 
child personated the groom and was married to the 
bride.3 The bride and bridegroom in South Celebes 
have each a " representative," doeta ; if the bride's 
representative is a man, that of the groom is a woman, 
and vice versa. The South Celebes bride does not 
appear at the wedding. She is represented by her 
deputy, and is herself secluded in an inner room. After \ 
the ceremony, at which the bride is not present, the i 
bridegroom may not see her yet, but goes home, leaving j 
his sword as his representative. After being separated 1 
from his bride for three days, he returns to take his * 
sword ; he gets it back by giving a present.4 A link 
with other customs is the following. At the weddings j 
of Creek Indians the bridegroom ceremonially stuck 
a reed into the ground, and the bride did the same, 
placing her reed close to his. They then each took the i 
other's reed, and by this act became man and wife.5 

The interesting custom by which one of the pair, or 
both, are married to trees, is a good instance of the j 
primitive fashion of " make-believe," by which an effigy ; 
does duty for a person, all risks thus being obviated. . 
Amongst the Mundas, after a mimic fight for the i 

1 Macmahon, The Karens of the Golden Chersonese, 322. 

2 Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 154. 3 Forbes, Eleven Years in Ceylon, i. 328. 
4 Matthes, op. cit. 22, 27, 29, 30. 5 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 160. 

(PROXIES— TREE MARRIAGE 341 
e, the pair are anointed with turmeric and wedded 
to two trees, the bride to a mahwa, the groom to a 
mango, or both to mangoes. They touch the tree with 
sindur, clasp it, and then are tied to it. Subsequently 
he touches her forehead with sindur.1 This case brings 
out the point, that the mock ceremony is intended to 
ensure the harmlessness or success of the real ceremony. 
, Amongst the Kumis the bridegroom is first married to 
a mango tree. He embraces it, and is tied to it with 
thread, and he daubs it with red lead. The bride also 
is wedded to a mango. She is brought to her home in 
a basket, and the groom is carried thither on a platform 
supported by men.2 It is a Hindu custom, when mis- 
fortune in marriage is foretold by the astrologers, for 
the person concerned to be first married to an earthen 
vessel.3 Again, the Hindus consider it dangerous to be 
a man's third wife ; accordingly in such a case the bride- 
, groom is betrothed first to a tree, which is supposed to 
die in the woman's stead.4 Another account states that 
when a Hindu takes a third wife, he is married first to a 
'itree, "to avoid the danger of being married for the 
'third time." 5 These last three examples throw light on 
the practice in Bengal, and the two last show that the 
danger is mutual. In the so-called "child-marriage" 
of the Nayars of Travancore, a sword may represent 
the bridegroom.6 At Malay marriages the ceremony 
is actually performed with the bridegroom alone. The 
priest says to him, "I wed you, A, to B, daughter of 
C, for a portion of two bharas"~ This instance may 
serve to show the marriage rite developing into a civil 
'act. 

I1 Dalton, op. ch. 194. 2 Id. 319. 

3 Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, liii. i: 100. 

4 Ward, op. cit. i. 134, ii. 247. 5 Punjab Notes and Queries, ii. 252. 

6 Journ. Anthrof. Inst. xii. 293. 1 Skeat, op. cit. 382. 

342 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

The next class of marriage ceremonies includes 
various kinds of abstinence. Bride and bridegroom 
must maintain silence for a certain period. This is a 
common taboo upon persons passing through a critical 
period, and the principle behind it is a natural impulse 
of egoistic sensibility, a sort of recognition of the 
importance of the occasion, combined with more or less 
of spiritual fear, either of general danger or, in this case, 
danger from each other. It is dangerous to speak to 
dangerous persons, and the principle here combines 
with sexual shyness. Some such practice is doubtless < 
responsible for the Greek name of the wedding-night, 
vvg fjuvcTTiicr). The bride and groom amongst the 
Andamanese are introduced to each other, after sitting ! 
apart in silence for some time. They then remain | 
silent until the evening. Often the pair pass several i 
days after marriage without exchanging a single word, j 
and even avoid looking at one another. " One might 
suppose they had had a serious quarrel." 1 In Corea 
the bride is expected to keep absolute silence on the 1 
wedding-day and in the nuptial chamber.2 

Again, they must keep awake, for the same reasons '! 
of sexual taboo. In New Guinea after the ceremony j 
bride and groom sit up all night. If sleep threatens ! 
they are at once aroused ; the belief being that by 
remaining awake they will have a happy life. This j 
goes on for four nights. Not until the fifth day may j 
they meet each other alone, but even then only by j 
night, and for four days more the husband must leave j 
his wife's chamber before daybreak.3 Amongst the 
Sumatrans the pair sit up all night in state.4 After the 
marriage ceremony of the Dorahs the guests pass the 

1 Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 138. 2 Griffis, op. cit. 247. 

3 Guillemard, op. cit. ii. 287. 4 Marsden, op. cit. 269. 

343 

KTHE MYSTIC NIGHT 
it in feasting ; the young couple take no part, and 
are not allowed to go to sleep for one moment, because 
it is supposed that this nightly vigil can alone secure 
their future happiness.1 The young pair in Borneo may 
not go to sleep, " else evil spirits would make them ill." 2 
The pair frequently are obliged to fast, with the 
object of preventing evil influences entering the system 

• by means of food. Thus amongst the Wa-teita the 
bride and groom are shut up for three days without 
food.3 The young Macusi bridegroom-elect fasts from 
meat for some time before marriage.4 Amongst the 
Thlinkeets they are required to fast for two days, " in 

.1 order to ensure domestic concord and happiness." At 
the expiration of that time they are allowed to partake 
of a little food, when a second fast of two days is 
added, after which they are allowed to come together 
for the first time.5 Here is seen the curious association 

i between commensal and sexual intercourse, which derives 
from the biological connection between the nutritive 
and sexual impulses, and is often expressed in physio- 
logical thought. 

A very frequent rule is that the consummation of 
the marriage is deferred for a time. This points to the 
dangers already reviewed of this close physical connec- 
tion, in which, as in eating together, the ideas of sexual 

! taboo are concentrated, and illustrates a principle which 
runs through all these practices of abstinence, as from 
sleep and eating, and is seen in all similar taboos, that a 

i temporary self-denial of a dangerous satisfaction will ' 

j obviate the risks of its ordinary fulfilment. There is 
also later developed in this rule the idea that sexual 

1 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 32. 2 Perelaer, op, cit. 53. 

3 J. Thomson, op. cit. 57. 4 im Thurn, op. cit. 222. 

5 Bancroft, op. cit. i. ill. 

344 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

intercourse, as such, is improper. The Chinese practice 
of putting a charm-sword, made of " cash," on the 
bridal bed, illustrates the danger of this union.1 
Amongst the Narrinyeri it is "a point of decency for 
the couple not to sleep close to each other for the first 
two or three nights ; on the third or fourth night the 
man and his wife sleep together under the same rug." 

The result is often attained by placing a person 
between the pair, as Sigurd placed his sword between 
himself and Brynhild. For three nights after a wedding 
in the Kei Islands, an old woman sleeps between the 
pair, sometimes a child is used for this.3 In Luzon the 
pair sleep on the first night with a space of two ells 
between them, in which lies a boy, six or eight years 
old.4 Elsewhere certain persons are deputed to keep 
them apart. The Southern Slav bridegroom has a 
djever, " bride -car Her," who sleeps during the first 
night beside the bride, the bridegroom not being 
allowed to sleep with her for two nights.5 After the 
mock flight and pursuit in the bridal chamber, the 
South Celebes couple are attended during the night 
by women called " bridesmothers," who prevent all 
intimacy between them.6 In Achin the young couple 
may not come together for seven nights, and they are 
kept awake by old women.7 In the Babar Islands the 
pair during the first few nights sleep in the same room, 
but the bride sleeps with some female relatives and the 
bridegroom with some male relatives.8 In Endeh for 
four nights old women sit up with the pair to prevent 
them from approaching each other.9 Amongst the 

1 Doolittle, op. at. ii. 313. 2 Curr, op. cit. ii. 245. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 236. 4 Blumentritt, Ethnographic der Philippimn, 38. 

5 F. S. Krauss, Sitte u. Branch der Sudslaven, 608. 6 Matthes, op. cit. 35. 

7 Kruyt, Atjeh en de Atjehers, 193. 8 Riedel, op. cit. 351. 

9 Tijdschrift -voor Indische Taal Land-en Volkenkunde, xxiv. 525. 

xiv CONTINENCE 345 

Nahuas in the feasting, drinking, and dancing, the 
bride and groom took no part ; they now had four 
days' fasting and penance, in the strict retirement of 
their own room, where they were closely guarded by 
old women. On no account might they leave the 
room. The time was to be passed in prayer ; " and 
on no account were they to allow their passions to get 
the better of them or indulge in carnal intercourse." l 
Amongst the Mayas the pair had to remain quite still, 
until the fire burnt out, and not until then could they 
consummate the marriage.2 The Thlinkeet bridegroom 
could not claim his marital rights until four weeks 
after marriage.3 Amongst the Nootkas no intercourse 
may take place between the pair for ten days.4 In the 
Frazer Island tribe of Queensland they do not come 
together for nearly two months after marriage.5 In 
Persia the husband does not consummate the marriage 
for several days.6 Amongst the Dyaks the pair may 
not come together for two or three nights and days. 
The groom feasts with his friends, the bride is with 
her mother and female relatives.7 Amongst the Soen- 
danese the bridegroom has no access to his bride for 
four days. She will not look at him or speak to him.8 
Amongst the Madoerese the marriage is not consum- 
mated till the third night.9 Amongst the Nufoers this 
takes place on the fifth day ; on the first night they are 
set back to back, so as not to see each other. This is 
repeated each night. When he leaves her each of these 
mornings, they must not see each other, " a sign of her 
maiden shame." 10 Amongst the Tengger of Java the 

1 Bancroft, of. cit. ii. 261. 2 Id. ii. 676. 

3 Id. op. cit. i. in. 4 Id. \. 198. 

5 Brough Smyth, op. cit. i. 84. 6 Pinkerton, op. cit. ix. 154. 

7 Perelaer, op. cit. 53. 8 Ritter, jfa-va, 29. 

9 Veth, Java, i. 635. 10 Van Hasselt, in Zeltschrlft fitr Ethnologie, viii. 181 ff. 

346 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

marriage is not consummated for five days after the 
wedding.1 In Egypt it is customary for husbands to 
deny themselves their conjugal rights during the first 
week after marriage with a virgin bride.2 In the last case 
we see the consideration produced by the actual inten- 
sity of maidenly feelings, which is the usual psycho- 
logical phenomenon at the first union ; sexual taboo 
regards this as an especial property of woman, and com- 
bines with it the other idea that first contact with a virgin 
is more dangerous than with other women. This latter 
point is clearly brought out in the next group of customs. 
Before proceeding to these, we may notice an 
excellent example of the way in which these principles 
develop religious abstinence as a meritorious act. 
There is a story in the Syriac Judas Thomas s Acts of 
a bride and a bridegroom who were converted by an 
apparition of the Lord in the bridal chamber, and 
passed the night in continence. Next morning the 
king, the bride's father, came in and found them sitting, 
the one opposite the other ; and the face of the bride 
was uncovered, and the bridegroom was very cheerful. 
" The mother of the bride saith to her : ' Why art thou 
sitting thus and art not ashamed, but art as if, lo ! thou 
wert married a long time and for many a day ? ' And 
her father too said, "Is it thy great love for thy 
husband that prevents thee from even veiling thyself? " 
And the bride answered and said, " Truly, my father, 
I am in great love, and am praying to my Lord that I 
may continue in this love which I have experienced this 
night. I am not veiled because the veil of corruption 
is taken from me, and I am not ashamed because the 
deed of shame has been removed far from me." 

1 Featherman, op. at. ii. 399. 2 Lane, op. cit. ii. 273. 

3 Wright, Apocryphal Acts, ii. 156 ff. For the idea that coitus in marriage is 
sinful, see id. ii. 122, 155, 191, 223, 233, 234. 

DEFLORATION 347 

ual intercourse, summing up as it does in primitive 
ought all the dangers of sexual taboo, especially the 
nger of weakness and effeminacy, produced by con- 
agion from women and by loss of strength (both of 
body and soul) on the part of the man by emission, is 
rendered more safe by certain ceremonies, the meaning 
of which is very obvious, though enquirers have curiously 
missed it. These ceremonies are not to be confused 
with the so-called jus frim^e metis, which has occurred 
sporadically in history, though mis -termed. That 
practice is simply a barbarous assertion of despotic 
authority of the patriarchal sort, appearing for instance 
in feudal or similar stages of society. With it these 
customs have nothing to do. 

This marriage ceremony consists in perforation ot 
the hymen by some appointed person other than the 
husband ; it is most common in the lowest stages of 
culture, especially in Australia. Tribes which have 
this rite are commonly said to practise no marriage 
ceremony. This statement is of course erroneous ; to 
primitive thought this ceremony is a very real mar- 
riage rite. The best examples come from the Arunta 
and connected tribes of Central Australia, and have 
been well described by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen.1 
The ceremony, rude and practical as it may seem, is 
nevertheless sacred and even religious, as is shown by 
the facts that the natives regard it as a ceremony, and 
that the operators are painted with charcoal, a sacred 
custom followed in magical rites, and especially when 
an avenging party is being sent out. The tribes of 
Central Australia who have this ceremony are the 
Arunta, Ilpirra, Kaitish, Warramunga, Iliaura, Waagai, 
Bingonguia, Walpari, and Luritcha. When a girl 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 93 ff. 

348 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

arrives at puberty she is, owing to the convenient 
classificatory system, already marked out as the poten- 
tial wife of the men of the proper complementary 
division, and has been, or is then, allotted to a par- 
ticular suitor. The ceremony is performed by persons 
who vary according to the tribe ; sometimes it is done 
by a sister ; the important point is that the prospec- 
tive husband never undertakes it. The hymen is arti- 
ficially perforated, and then the assisting men have 
access (ceremonial, be it observed) to the girl in a 
stated order, and in some tribes it is men of a division 
which has no intermarriage with the girl's division, who 
have this access. The object of the custom is clearly 
to remove the danger of sexual intercourse for the 
husband, and perhaps also for the wife, by a ceremonial 
previous rehearsal of it. The danger partly coincides, 
as we have seen, with the apparent physical impediment 
to intercourse. The act is in two parts, perforation 
and intercourse. The men who have access do not 
possess the right as an " expiation " for individual mar- 
riage, or anything like it ; it is a religious act, and 
altruistic at that ; it is not done as a reminder that 
they, as "communal" or "group -husbands," have 
really as much right to the woman as her husband 
has ; the mere fact that men of forbidden groups 
sometimes have access proves this. It is simply a 
removal of the danger by proxy, and the rite may 
be classed with other proxy-marriages. The next point 
to be observed has been already referred to, namely, 
that here " initiation " and marriage are one.1 This 
economy shows that " initiation " ceremonies of this 
kind are marriages to the other sex in abstract, and is 
itself due to the convenience of the classification, which 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 93. 

t DEFLORATION 349 

ides what persons are marriageable to each other, 
longst the Wataveta the bridegroom seizes his bride 
force ; in this he is aided by four friends, who have 
access to her during the five days' festivities of the 
wedding.1 Amongst the Wa-teita she hides, and the 
groom with four friends catch her. The four friends 
have intercourse with her.2 This last fact has been 
used as a proof of primitive promiscuity and the like. 
It is nothing of the kind. Comparing it with the 
Central Australian custom, we see in it the same service, 
which is the last act of subjugation as it were, the last 
detail in the preparation of the bride for her husband. 
It may, and to some extent doubtless does, develop 
into a kind of reward given on the part of the husband 
to the friends who have assisted him, but such a de- 
velopment is quite secondary. The Kurnai suitor was 
assisted by some friends, who had intercourse with the 
bride.3 This religious service is often performed by 
such persons in Australian tribes. An important 
preliminary of marriage amongst the Masai is the 
performance of this operation on the girl.4 This de- 
floration is performed by the father of the bride amongst 
the Sakais, Battas, and Alfoers of Celebes.5 In the \ 
Philippines there were certain men whose profession 1 
it was to deflower brides, in case the hymen had not 
been ruptured in childhood by an old woman who was 
sometimes employed for this.6 The defloration of the 
bride was amongst some Eskimo tribes entrusted to 
the angekok, or priest.7 The idea sometimes develops 
later into a belief that the contact of a holy person 
renders marital contact safe, or will ensure fertility. 

1 Journ, Anthrop. Inst. xxi. 365. 2 J. Thomson, op. cit. 51. 

3 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 202. 4 J. Thomson, op. cit. 258. 

5 Ploss u. Bartels, op. cit. ii. 490. 6 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 474. 
7 Id. iii. 406. 

350 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

In childless families the Karalits often invite the angekok 
to have connection with the wife.1 

There is next a large class of marriage customs 
which in the first place bring out very clearly sexual 
solidarity ; the women, as it were, make marriage an 
opportunity for showing their mutual sympathy writh 
each other as women, and they take the side of the 
bride in her bashfulness or resistance, as if the occasion 
were a test case between the two sexes, as indeed it is. 
We have seen the same sort of thing in connection 
with birth, and have noticed how the women cling 
together at marriage till the last moment. These pheno- 
mena also show how marriage ceremonies have inherent 
in them, as binding the pair together, or neutralising 
each other's dangerous influence, the intention and 
power to make their life harmonious and sympathetic. 
In the second place, these customs are one of the best 
guides to the ideas of sexual taboo in their relation 
to marriage ritual. We here see one of the chief 
factors of sexual taboo, woman's shyness, timidity, 
and modesty, accentuated by the physiological sensibility 
which resists physical subjugation, chiefly in connection 
with the act of intercourse, but appearing more or less 
throughout all the proceedings. It is an instance of 
the taboo of personal isolation. The phenomena all lead 
up, by the way, to the correct understanding of so-called 
"marriage by capture." There is also to be noted the 
diffidence characteristic of both sexes upon entering a 
new and strange state, a diffidence psychologically identical 
with that produced on other similar and taboo occasions. 

Hence the common practice of carrying bride or 
groom or both ; amongst the Kumis the groom is 
carried to the bride's house on men's shoulders.2 In 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 432. 2 Dalton, op. cit. 319. 

BRIDE LIFTING 351 

ypt it is considered right that the groom as well 
the bride should exhibit some bashfulness, and a 
friend therefore carries him up to the hareem.1 In 
Honduras and amongst the Miaos the bride was 
conveyed to her husband on a man's shoulders.2 In 
Guatemala and Salvador the pair were carried by 
their friends to their new house, and shut in a room.3 
The Nahua bride was borne upon a litter or on the 
back of a brideswoman or sponsor.4 In civilised 
societies a brougham is used on what is really the same 
principle, an especial arrangement for an especial 
occasion, in which convenience combines with cere- 
monial. There is no survival, in these cases, of 
"marriage by capture," though they sometimes of 
course coincide with the desire to checkmate female 
resistance, as they have been found to coincide with 
a prevention of results from bashfulness, both these 
feelings being part of the foundations of taboo. The 
innate tendency to what may be called polar or com- 
plementary opposition between the sexes is well brought 
out in a Kurnai practice. If the men were backward 
in marrying, the girls would kill some of the yeerung, 
the birds that were the sex- to terns of the men. This 
led to a fight with sticks between the two sexes. Next 
day the young men killed some djeetgun^ the sex-totems 
of the women ; a second fight was the result. The 
ultimate issue was a marriage or two.5 Fighting 
makes friends sometimes amongst savages as amongst 
modern boys. At betrothal amongst the Kamchadales 
when the man takes hold of the girl, the married 
women ceremonially beat him.6 Amongst the Mos- 

1 Lane, op. cit. \. 214. 

2 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 730 ; Colquhoun, Across Chrysee, 383. 

3 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 703. 4 Id. ii. 255. 

5 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 201. 6 Georgi, op. cit. 89. 

352 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

quitos the bridegroom has to charge into a circle of 
women who surround the bride ; "he shoulders her 
like a sack and trots off for the mystic circle (of men), 
into which the women may not enter, and reaches it, 
urged on by the frantic cries of the women, before the 
crowd can rescue her." l This may be called " capture," 
but it is capture from the female sex. The Makuana 
suitor has to throw the girl in a wrestling bout in order 
to secure her hand. Also the father and mother give 
him a few ceremonial blows with a stick, "as if to 
assure themselves that he sincerely loves their daughter." ! 
In Sumatra the bride is not surrendered to her husband 
immediately after the marriage ceremony of the joining 
of hands, for custom requires that the young girl 
should show at least a feigned reluctance to sacrifice 
her virginity, and in this resistance she is aided by 
the old matron who is her ceremonial attendant and 
was the messenger sent by the bridegroom with his 
proposal of marriage. The bride sits in state all night 
for two or three nights, carefully guarded.3 The 
Wakamba groom, after paying the bride-price, has to 
carry off the bride by force, the parents not surrender- 
ing her without a struggle.4 

Of the same origin is the common practice of 
abusive language at weddings. Amongst the Kaffirs 
the bride insults the groom, showing thereby that the 
moment of her submission has not yet come.5 In the 
Punjab it is a general custom for the relatives of the 
bride to hurl abusive epithets at the bridegroom.6 
This has actually been supposed to be a relic of 
" marriage by capture " ! The Fescennina locutio is a case 

1 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 733. 2 Arbousset, op. cit. 249. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 306. 4 Krapf, op. cit. 354. 

5 Shooter, op. cit. 74. 6 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. 976. 

„. 

SEXUAL RESISTANCE 353 

in point. In many instances, of course, as in European 
folk-custom, the abuse is directed against the "evil 
eye " and possible external danger to the young couple. 
We have noticed the impulse in animals and man- 
kind to guard the sexual centres against the un desired 
advances of the male. " This is carried on into desire, 
and female animals are known to run after the male 
and then turn to flee, perhaps only submitting with 
much persuasion. Modesty thus becomes an invitation. 
The naturally defensive attitude of the female is in 
contrast with the naturally aggressive attitude of the 
male in sexual relationships." Such maiden coyness or 
physiological shrinking, as has been explained before, is 
accentuated at marriage, especially in connection with the 
act of union. Amongst the Bedouins the bride cries loudly 
while the marriage is being consummated.2 In Sumatra 
when the young couple are left together, custom 
demands that she shall defend herself; the struggle 

1 often lasts some days.3 " Husbands have told me of 
brides who sob and tremble with fright on the wedding- 
night, the hysteria being sometimes alarming. E, aged 

'twenty-five, refused her husband for six weeks after 
marriage, exhibiting the greatest fear of his approach. 
Ignorance of the nature of the sexual connection is often 
the cause of exaggerated alarm. In Jersey I used to hear 
of a bride who ran to the window and screamed ' murder ' 
on the wedding-night/' 4 Now in primitive thought this 
characteristic has to be neutralised, and it is done by a 
ceremonial use of force, which is half real and half 
make-believe. General cases of force used in connubial 

'" capture," so called, will illustrate this, as of course 
the violence there used has the same meaning, though 

1 H. Ellis, op. cif. ii. 29. 2 Burckhardt, op. cit. i. 266. 

3 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 184. 4 H. Ellis, op. cit. ii. 25. 

2 A 

354 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

generalised. Returning to more general developments 
of bashfulness and timidity as against the other sexj 
leading up to acts of mock half-real violence, we find; 
that at Kaffir weddings, the " principal idea seems to be; 
to show the great unwillingness of the girl to be trans-, 
formed into a wife." After the reception of the bride's 
party, the bride creeps up to the bridegroom's wives, iff 
he has any, or his mother, and says she has come to; 
stay and hopes they will be good to her, otherwise she 
will go back to the father, mother, and relatives who; 
were so loath to part with her. They reply that they 
do not know — they are not sure — they will see how1 
she behaves herself, and so on. She then pretends to 
run away, but a female relative of the groom brings her; 
back. In the evening she runs about the kraal with aj 
following of girls crying after her. She is supposed to 
be running back to her old home, and the girls are 
supposed to be preventing her. Next day she hlonipas 
(hides) from the male sex, but in the afternoon she 
comes out with some girls, and commences the cere- 
mony of hlanibeesa (literally, "washing"). She takes 
water and throws it about the men.1 . The neutralising! 
of evil influences from the other sex by the use of water 
is seen in the last detail. The various stages of the 
following ceremonial show well how it is the maiden 
who is to be conciliated. In Fiji the first act of wooing, 
to obtain the girl's consent, was called " mutual attach- 
ment." The next step was "nursing"; the girl was 
conducted to the bridegroom's house. As she wept 
copious tears at being torn from the parental home, the 
friends of the groom endeavoured to assuage her sorrow 
by offering presents. This was called " the drying of 
tears." The next step was the "warming," and con- 

1 Leslie, op. cit. 196, 117, 118. 

SEXUAL RESISTANCE 355 

sisted in the sending of food to the bride by the bride- 
groom. For the next step, the groom and his friends 
arrived and the girl served them with food she had 
prepared, and she and the bridegroom ate together. 
This was known as " the bathing," for before it the 
bride bathed in the sea.1 Cases of " connubial capture " 
have nothing whatever to do, it need hardly be observed, 
.with so-called "marriage by capture." Among the 
Karens the candidate for a maiden's hand has to escalade 
her cabin, and is expected to overthrow a strong man 
placed for her defence.2 The stock description of 
Australian marriage, for instance at Botany Bay, that 
the man knocks the woman down with a club, and 
carries her off, is exaggerated.3 An Australian girl, 
when made over to her husband, goes to his hut with 
reluctance, and when that feeling does not occur, it is 
the fashion to assume it, and occasionally the husband 
uses violence and compels his wife to enter his camp, 
" a circumstance," adds Mr. Curr, who knew the natives 
well, " which has been much burlesqued by some 
writers."4 Aelian states of the Sacae that the bride- 
groom had to do battle with his intended, and naively 
adds, "they do not go so far as to kill each other."5 
Amongst the Tunguzes and Kamchadales a marriage is 
not definitely " arranged and concluded until the suitor 
has got the better of his beloved by force, and has torn 
her clothes.6 The Makuana suitor has to wrestle with 
his bride.7 Amongst the Samoyeds the groom has to 
take his wife by force, because she resists strenuously.8 
In Greenland two old women are sent to negotiate with 
the parents of the girl. The latter, on hearing the 

1 Williams, op. at. i. 169, 170. 2 J. Bowring, Siam, ii. 45. 

3 As by Bastian, Der Mensch, Hi. 292. 4 Curr, op. cit. i. I JO. 

5 Aelian, xii. 38. 6 Erman, op. cit. ii. 442. 

7 Arbousset, op. cit. 249. 8 Georgi, op. cit. 13. 

356 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAPJ 

proposal, runs out of doors, tearing her hair ; for single; 
women " affect bashfulness and aversion to any proposal! 
of marriage, though their betrothed are well assured of1 
acquiescence." Sometimes they swoon, or run off to] 
some deserted spot. Women go in search of the 
refractory maiden, and drag her forcibly to the suitor's 
house, where she sits for some days disconsolate and 
refuses nourishment. When friendly exhortation is; 
unavailing, she is compelled by force and even blows to 
receive her husband.1 At the ceremony of uncovering! 
the face of an Egyptian bride, the groom has to give 
her a present of money therefor, and she does not 
allow the uncovering without some reluctance, if not 
violent resistance, in order to show her maiden modesty.; 
He then sees her face for the first time.2 Marriages 
amongst the Nestorians are solemnised in church ani 
hour after midnight. Standing before the altar hr 
separate groups, each surrounded by their respective; 
friends, the bride refuses to join hands with the bride- 
groom, and some degree of force is necessary to accom- 
plish the object.3 When asked in marriage the Karalit 
maiden feigns the greatest bashfulness. Sometimes her 
resistance is of a serious nature ; she often escapes' 
and hides in the mountains. The two matrons who 
negotiated the betrothal for the bridegroom go out to 
find her, and drag her to the house of the suitor. Here 
she remains for days in a sullen and dejected mood,! 
with dishevelled hair, and refusing to eat. She is some- 
times compelled by blows to accept her new position.4! 
Amongst the Thlinkeets the bridegroom gives valuable 
presents to the father of the bride. On the wedding- •, 
day the guests sing and dance, in order to induce thej 

1 Cranz, op. clt. i. 146. 2 Lane, op. cit. i. 214. 

3 Featherman, op. at. v. 75. 4 Featherman, iii. 434. 

, 

SEXUAL RESISTANCE 

357 

bride to leave her hiding-place in the corner of the 
room. She at last comes forth, and with a downcast 
countenance takes her seat by the side of the bride- 
groom.1 Amongst the Eastern Tinnes the woman who 
is asked in marriage affects an unwillingness to change 
her condition ; but the suitor takes hold of the hair of 
his betrothed and drags her out of her father's dwelling.2 
K. O. Miiller explains the form of " capture " in ancient 
Sparta more correctly than do ethnologists ; " it indi- 
cates," he says, " that a girl could not surrender her 
freedom and virgin purity unless compelled by the 
violence of the stronger sex." 3 In ancient Rome at 
plebeian marriages the groom and his friends invaded 
the house and carried off the bride with feigned violence 
from her mother's lap.4 The Khonds hold a feast at 
the bride's house. Far in the night " the principals in 
the scene are raised by an uncle of each upon his 
i shoulder and borne through the dance. The burdens 
are suddenly exchanged, and the uncle of the youth 
disappears with the bride. The assembly divides into 
two parties ; the friends of the bride endeavour to 
arrest, those of the bridegroom to cover her flight, and 
men, women, and children mingle in mock conflict." 
" I saw a man bearing away upon his back something 
enveloped in an ample covering of scarlet cloth ; he was 
surrounded by twenty or thirty young fellows, and by 
them protected from the desperate attacks made upon 
him by a party of young women. The man was just 
married, and the burden was his blooming bride, whom 
he was conveying to his own village. Her youthful 
friends, as it appears is the custom, were seeking to 
regain possession of her, and hurled stones and bamboos 

1 Featherman, iii. 390. 2 Id. iii. 248. 

'•'' K. O. Miiller, The Dorians, IV. iv. 2. 4 Appuleius, Metamorphoses, iv. 

35 8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

at the head of the devoted bridegroom until he reached; 
the confines of his own village. Then the tables were; 
turned and the bride was fairly won ; and ofF her young 
friends scampered, screaming and laughing, but not 
relaxing their speed till they reached their own village/'1 
The Kalmuck bridegroom, when the " price " is fixed, 
goes with some friends to carry off the bride. "A 
sham resistance is always made by the people of her; 
camp, in spite of which she fails not to be borne away 
on a richly caparisoned horse, with loud shouts and feuxi 
de joie."2 A century ago in Wales, "on the morningi 
of the wedding-day the groom with his friends 
demanded the bride. Her friends gave a positive: 
refusal, upon which a mock scuffle ensued. The bride, j 
mounted beside her nearest kinsman, is carried off and I 
is pursued by the groom and his friends with loud; 
shouts. When they have fatigued themselves and their 
horses, he is suffered to overtake his bride, and leads i 
her away in triumph." 3 The Fuegian suitor, as soon 
as he is able to maintain a wife, obtains her relatives' i 
consent, and does work for them. Then he watches 
for an opportunity to carry her off. If she is unwilling, 
she hides in the woods until her admirer is tired of 
looking, but this seldom happens.4 The Aeneze groom, 
soon after sunset, goes to a tent pitched for him at a 
distance from the camp ; there he shuts himself up 
and awaits the arrival of the bride. The bashful girl 
meanwhile runs from the tent of one friend to another 
till she is caught at last, and conducted in triumph by 
a few women to the bridegroom's tent ; he receives her 
at the entrance, and forces her into it.5 Amongst the 

1 Macpherson, Report upon the Khonds, 55 j Campbell, Personal Narrative of Service 
in Khondistan, 44. 2 De Hell, Travels on the Steppes of the Caspian Sea, 259 

8 Kames, Sketches of the History of Man, i. 449. 
4 Fitzroy, Voyage of the Adventure and Beagle, ii. 182. 5 Burckhardt, op. cit. i. 107. 

,, 

SEXUAL RESISTANCE 359 

Bedouins of Sinai the bride is met in the evening by the 
groom and two of his young friends, and carried off by 
force to her father's tent. " She defends herself with 
stones, and often inflicts wounds on the young men, 
even though she does not dislike her lover, for according 
to custom the more she struggles, bites, kicks, cries, 
and strikes, the more she is applauded ever after by her 

1 own companions." There follows the throwing over 
her of the abba, or man's cloak, and a formal announce- 
ment of the name of the husband. Then she is dressed 

: in bridal attire, and, still struggling, is led two or three 
times round and finally into the groom's tent. The 
resistance is continued to the last.1 In New Zealand 
" even where all were agreeable, it was the custom for 
the groom to go with a party and appear to take her 
away by force, her friends yielding her up after a feigned 
struggle." 2 The Baca custom is this : " A young 

i man first tells some of his friends that he admires a 
certain girl, and after a stated period he speaks to her 
and says he would like to twala, i.e. carry her off. 
If she is agreeable to this twala, he carries her off by 
stealth to his parents' village." On the third day she is 
returned to her father's house with the dowry cattle.3 
Some of the following cases are of the same class as the 
practice of hiding already noted. On an appointed day 
the Ayetas send the prospective bride to the forest to 
hide herself. If she is favourably inclined to the match, 
she takes care that her place of concealment shall be 
easily discovered. If she is found by the groom before 
sunset, and is brought back to her parents, the marriage 
is completed.4 Amongst the Hos after three days of 
marriage, the bride has to leave her husband, and he 

1 Burckhardt, of. dt. i. 263, 264. 2 R. Taylor, op. cit. 163. 

3 Jcurn. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 138. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 33. 

360 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

has to carry her home again, while she strenuously 
resists, kicking, screaming, and biting. " It should be 
done as if there were no shamming about it." 
Amongst the Orang-Benuas of Malacca the bride runs 
away into the forest during the wedding ceremonies ; 
the groom chases her, and if he falls or returns unsuc- 
cessful, " he is met with the jeers and merriment of the 
whole party, and the match is declared off. It gener- 
ally happens though, that the lady contrives to stumble 
over the root of some tree friendly to Venus, and falls 
(fortuitously of course) into the outstretched arms of 
her pursuer."2 In the Mezeyne tribe of the Sinai 
peninsula the girl after betrothal is furnished with pro- 
visions by her female friends, and is encouraged to run 
away and fly to the mountains. If the bridegroom 
succeeds in finding her retreat, he is bound to con- 
summate the marriage on the spot, and pass the night 
in the open country. He brings her home, but she 
repeatedly escapes and only consents to live in her 
husband's tent after she is far advanced in pregnancy. 
After remaining with her family about a year, she 
rejoins her husband, though she may not be expecting 
a child.3 Amongst the Digger Indians of California, 
after the parents' consent to the marriage has been 
obtained, the girl leaves the paternal home and conceals 
herself, and if the suitor succeeds in finding her twice 
out of three times, he is entitled to claim her as his 
own.4 The same kind of thing is sometimes seen on 
the part of the bridegroom, sexual bashfulness not 
always being confined to the female sex. It is the 
Egyptian custom that the bridegroom as well as the 
bride should exhibit bashfulness ; and he is carried up 

1 Ball, op. cit. 479. 2 Newbold, British Settlements in Malacca, ii. 407. 

3 Burckhardt, op. cit. i. 269. 4 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 212. 

SEXUAL RESISTANCE 361 

I he hareem by a friend.1 In the Andamans the bride 
among the matrons, and the groom among the 
htelors. The chief approaches him in order to lead 
him to the bride, but he assumes a modest demeanour 
and simulates reluctance to move ; after encouragement 
he allows himself to be led slowly, sometimes he is 
dragged, up to the girl, who, if young, displays much 
modesty, weeping and hiding her face ; her female 
attendants straighten her legs, and the groom is then 
made to sit on her thighs, and thus they are married.2 
Amongst the Kaffirs the groom, no less than the bride, 
runs away, but is brought back by the women.3 In the 
above cases we have seen the maiden " captured," if the 
term be kept, but from herself, from her innocent, shy, 
and timid personality, by a rough but half-kind method 
of violence, which has the effect of obviating her bash- 
fulness by conquering it, and of neutralising its results, 
which, being part of the basis of sexual taboo and a 
peculiar property of the female sex, are dangerous to 
men, by a make-believe or sympathetic process. 

In some of the following examples we see the bride 
" captured " and taken away from her sex also, who, 
by psychological necessity, take her part, as previous 
examples have shown. Ceremonial or mock fights 
here naturally signify both the sexual opposition and 
the need of force to ensure the safety of the union. 
Amongst the Bedouins of South Arabia the bridegroom 
and his young friends go to the dwelling of the bride's 
father to demand the lady. They are gravely informed 
that she has fled to unknown parts. They then pro- 
ceed to search, and find a cavern guarded by a troop of 
young girls, and on approaching it they are met with a 
shower of stones. They endeavour to storm the place, 

1 Lane, op. cit. i. 214. 2 Joiirn. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 137. 8 Shooter, op. cit. 76. 

362 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and in the end the young women take to flight, leaving 
the bride to the assailants. The bridegroom enters the 
cavern and takes possession of his bride, and after a 
short time they come out together, the bride having 
her face veiled in the manner of married women.1 At 
a Druse wedding the bride, closely veiled, is conducted 
in solemn procession to the house of the bridegroom. 
Modesty, whether real or feigned, on the part of the 
bride requires that the moving column should proceed 
but slowly, to indicate to her future husband that she is 
not over-anxious to enter upon the duties of the 
married state, and a halt is made at short intervals, 
when the weary march is enlivened by songs and the 
exhibition of the sword-dance. On passing the thres- 
hold of the bridegroom's house, the bride sticks firmly 
to the door-post a lump of yeast. At this moment her 
intended husband is standing on the housetop exactly 
above the door, holding a drawn sword over her head, 
" emblematical of the absolute authority which he is to 
exercise over her." 2 The inference which ends this 
account may give the modern explanation of the 
custom, but does not reach its original meaning. 
The detail is parallel to those cases, previously men- 
tioned, where a weapon is presented or thrown. At 
the marriage of sheikhs amongst the Druses the bride 
and her party on their way to the bridegroom's home 
are met by a party representing the bridegroom. A 
mock fight takes place, in which the bridegroom's party 
is generally driven back, and after a vigorous resistance 
the bride forces her way in, and is safely lodged in the 
hareem. When the bridegroom is about to enter, she 
throws a massive veil of muslin and gold over her head, 
covering her face, neck, and shoulders, and reaching to 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 422. a Id. v. 480. 

:iv SEXUAL RESISTANCE 363 

ie waist. The noise of footsteps is then heard, and 
the bridegroom enters, lifts her veil, and after a hurried 
glance at her, replaces it and retires. While the groom 
sits in state, his brother returns thanks for congratu- 
lations in his stead.1 Amongst the Dorahs of New 
linea the bride is conducted by her female relatives to 
:he house of the bridegroom, where she places herself 

;hind a mat-screen so as not to be seen by the men. 
Here the dowry of the bride is given to the groom's 

irents. She is then led back to her own house, where 

ic awaits the arrival of the bridegroom. When 
he makes his appearance with his friends, he finds the 
door shut against him, and it is only at the earnest 

imonstrance of the father of the young woman that 
:he portals of the nuptial chamber are opened.2 When 

le Malay bridegroom arrives at the bride's house, there 
is a mimic conflict for the person of the bride. In 

>me cases a rope or piece of red cloth is stretched 
across the path to bar the progress of the bridegroom's 
•ty, and a stout resistance is made till the groom 

lys a fine. He enters the house amid volleys of 
•ice, and fights his way to the reception room.8 After 
the three days' separation which follows the South 
Celebes wedding, the bridegroom, on coming to 
claim his bride, finds the house barricaded, and the 
inmates fire muskets. Entrance is allowed after a 
payment. Later on he enters the bridal chamber, 
where the bride sits on the bed concealed by curtains, 
and when he is about to open the curtains, he is resisted 
by the women who are in attendance on the bride. 
When this difficulty is surmounted, the bride pretends 
to run away ; however, she stays for the ceremony in 
which one sews the pair together by their clothes. 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 481. 2 Id. ii. 31, 32. 3 Skeat, op. cit. 381. 

364 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

This is followed by the ceremony of placing one 
garment, a sarong, over the pair, who are then con- 
sidered united. The rite is called ridjala-sampoe, 
" catching the bride with a sarong as with a fishing- 
net." 1 It is a curious coincidence that, while the 
bridegroom is on his way to the bride's home, his 
escort fish the air for evil spirits with nets.2 Further, 
when the pair are released from the sarong which is 
about them both, the bride pretends to run away again ; 
she is followed by the bridegroom, and pushes him 
off with her fan. The next night and for two nights 
more the running away is repeated with variations. 
The whole business is ended by a final ceremony called 
" reconciliation." 3 In small towns and villages of 
modern Egypt the bridegroom visits the mosque, and 
meanwhile the bride and her party take possession 
of his house. He is conducted home in procession 
by his friends, who carry lighted torches, and perform 
sham fights. When he reaches his dwelling the women 
are summarily turned out, and he is ushered in as it 
were by main force. Here a lighted lamp reveals 
to him the face of his bride, which he pretends never 
to have seen before.4 In Soemba a sham fight takes 
place between the men who act for the bridegroom 
and the female relatives of the bride, until the former 
manage to seize her.5 Amongst the Mundas and 
Oraons there is a mimic fight for the bride.6 Such 
mock fights and "captures" are very common in 
the peasant-customs at marriage throughout Europe.7 
Amongst the Saxons of Transsylvania, a crowd of 

1 Matthes, op. cit. 31, 33, 34. 2 Id. 31. 

3 Id. 35, 37, 42. 4 Featherman, op. cit. v. 563, 564. 

5 Verhandelingen 'van het Catav. Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, 
rxxvi. 53. 

Dalton, op. cit. 194, 253. 7 Reinsberg-Duringfeld, Hochxeitsbuch, passim. 

:iv THE FLIGHT 365 

masked figures attempt to separate the newly wed 
pair. If they succeed, the bridegroom has to win her 
back by a fight or a ransom ; it is a bad omen if they 
are separated.1 This is a good example, as showing 
how force on the part of the husband is in all these 
customs intended to make the union secure. 

There are a few cases where destiny is propitiated 
by a retreat after the ceremony. This coincides with 
the natural desire to escape from a more or less trying 
ordeal. In some cases the escape is to one's old home. 
On the night of the third day after a Malay wedding 
there is a very curious ceremony. The relatives of 
the groom assemble and make a bonfire of rubbish 
under the house of the newly married couple. Such 
a smoke is raised that presently the bridegroom conies 
down, ostensibly to see what is the matter, but as soon 
as he appears he is seized and carried off bodily to his 
own parents' house. These proceedings are known as 
"the stealing of the bridegroom." Next day he is 
escorted back in a grand procession. On his arrival 
the pair are sprinkled with water to avert ill-luck, and 
with holy water to bring good luck.2 The day after 
marriage the Egyptian bridegroom is taken into the 
country, by the man who carried him up to the hareem ; 
this is called "the flight."3 Amongst the Wa-teita, 
after the three days' fast and seclusion which follow 
marriage, the bride is conveyed to her old home again 
by a procession of girls.4 Amongst the Larkas she 
runs home after three days and tells her parents she is 
not happy. The groom has to come and take her 
back by force.5 Other cases have been mentioned 
incidentally. 

1 Gerard, op. cit. i. 186. 2 Skeat, op. cit. 385, 386. 

3 Lane, op. cit. i. 214. 4 J. Thomson, op. cit. 51. 5 Rowney, op. cit. 67. 

366 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

There is a curious custom, with one or two varia- 
tions, which is found occasionally. It is the custom 
of drubbing the newly wedded pair, or " ragging their 
rooms." It is not an " expiation " for marriage, but is 
induced by that common human feeling which prompted 
the superstitious Greek to throw away something of 
value so as to avoid Nemesis. It is a sort of sacrifice 
to propitiate destiny, combined with the idea that 
people who have been thus rendered more or less 
destitute will be passed over by jealous powers of evil. 
It is done by the Maoris, who swoop down upon the 
dwelling of the newly wed couple, and plunder and 
destroy their goods. The practice is also followed 
on all great occasions as a mark of respect. It is 
instructive to note that it is performed when one has 
broken tapu (as, by the way, a married pair have 
broken sexual taboo), and when one has had an 
accident.1 Another account states, " as soon as the 
marriage is consummated, the nearest relatives of both 
attack the hut, rob it, and give the pair a sound 
thrashing. This ceremony is also performed on the 
occasion of misfortune happening to a person." 2 The 
same idea . is..tO- be .seenJn the common practice of 
breaking something at a wedding, such as~a~piece~oT 
crockery, jis amongst the Saxons of Transsylvania, 
who still say it is to keep off misfortune.3 It is the 
Dyak custom, when two tribes make peace, for each 
in turn to invade and plunder each other's land. It 
is done ceremonially.4 This half-real revenge is 
intended to satisfy one's feelings, in accordance with 
the savage instinctive habit of make-believe. This 
sacrifice of property has become a regular thing 

1 Yate, op. clt. 86, 97, 104, 237. 2 Polack, op. cit. i. 141. 

8 Gerard, op. clt. ii. 35. 4 Brooke, op. cit. i. 368. 

MARRIAGE BY CAPTURE 367 

mgst the Haidahs, who make a potlatch on every 
jible occasion, the system being in fact a sort 
stock-exchange gamble and settling up.1 Cases 
such as the following, which are often misunderstood, 
are explained in the same way : when a Kurnai girl 
elopes (the recognised method of getting married), 
she is beaten by her relatives, not as a punishment, but 
" simply to follow an ancestral custom," which, it may 
be added, is not " expiation for marriage." 2 The idea of 
the parents is, by a make-believe beating, with somewhat 
of reality in it, to relieve their parental feelings. 

Few theories of primitive society have had such 
vogue as that of Marriage by Capture, yet few theories 
have been built on such slender foundations. The 
tinge of romance belonging to the hypothesis has 
no doubt had something to do with its popularity. 
Its general unscientific nature, however, has been 
demonstrated by Mr. Fison and Dr. Westermarck ; 
it remained to examine the types of formal and con- 
nubial " capture." The explanation of these forms 
as not being survivals, as not indeed having anything 
to do with " marriage by capture " proper, but arising 
in a natural way from normal human feelings, destroys 
what was the chief support of the old theory of 
" capture." The theory, then, that mankind in 
general, or even any particular section of mankind, . 
ever in normal circumstances were accustomed to / 
obtain their wives by capture from other tribes, may | 
be regarded as exploded. There have been, of course, 
and still are, sporadic cases of capture of wives from 
hostile tribes or others, but such cannot prove a rule. 
A useful illustration may be drawn from Australian 
custom. It has often been asserted that marriage by 

1 G. M. Dawson, op. cit. 126, 127. 2 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 259. 

368 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

capture is a common practice amongst the natives. 
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen note this, and point out 
that it is of the rarest occurrence amongst the Central 
Australians, and that when it does occur, it arises out 
of an expedition of vengeance against a hostile tribe.1 
Mr. Curr also states that it is very rare throughout the 
continent.2 The capture of women is naturally an 
attendant circumstance of invasion. Further, the 
"marriage by capture" so often attributed to the 
Australians simply amounts to this, that the woman 
to be married, according to peaceful tribal custom and 
classificatory arrangement, is sometimes forcibly taken 
by the bridegroom for obvious reasons, as we have seen, 
or, as in all ages happens, elopement take place. In 
Ceram, for instance, we are told that " marriage by 
capture (sic) takes place usually when the girl's parents 
are opposed to the match."3 When carefully examined,, 
most of the old examples adduced as instances of mar- 
riage by capture turn out to be either mere inferences of 
such, or cases of connubial and formal capture, or, as the 
last case and many of McLennan's examples, elope- 
ments. 

" Capture " proper, that is, hostile capture from 
another tribe, has never been, and could never be, a 
mode of marriage, it is only a method of obtaining a 
wife. These two have often been confused. Con- 
nubial and formal capture are very widely spread, but 
are never survivals of real capture. The former is 
often found as a matter of fact proceeding to secure 
the person of the wife, and sometimes occurs side by 
side with formal capture. In fact, formal capture far 
from being itself a survival, either of connubial or of 
hostile capture, is the ceremonial mode of which con- 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. '2 Curr, of. cit. i. 108. 3 Riedel, op. clt. 133. 

„ 

MARRIAGE BY CAPTURE 369 

nubial capture is the non-ceremonial ; each is a living 
reality, the one being material and the other ideal, 
the one practical and the other ceremonial. If, as 
Prof. Tylor holds with McLennan, formal capture is a 
survival of real capture (hostile or connubial), there 
ought to be no cases of formal capture in the maternal 
stage. But there are such. The people of New Britain 

, who reckon genealogy by female descent have marriage 
by " formal capture." l Again, what precise bearing, 
we may ask, on this question have cases where the 
bridegroom is captured ? Such a practice (formal) is 
followed by the Garos, a maternal people.2 Is this a 
record of the passage from a paternal to a maternal 
system? For Prof. Tylor regards "capture" as being 
the way by which " paternal " households gradually 
superseded " maternal." 3 The young bridegroom cer- 
tainly is often under this, perhaps more often than 

, under the paternal system, more or less looked after by 
his parents-in-law, but it is because of paternal and 
maternal feelings, not because of the maternal system. 
But there is no evidence that the maternal system was 
ever general or always preceded the paternal system ; 
such evidence as the common practice of a man living 
with his bride's parents for a short time, before setting 
up house for himself, proving nothing except that they 
wish to look after their daughter's welfare until a child 
is born, and to see that permanence is thereby assured 
to the tie ; or in many cases that it is a convenient 
arrangement until the pair get a house. As to capture 
setting on foot paternal institutions, we may here see 
another way in which misconceptions may arise as to 
the maternal system. This is, after all, except in rare 

' cases, simply a method of genealogy, and has nothing 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 294 ff. 2 Rowney, op, cit. 195. 3 J.A.I, xviii. 260. 

2 B 

370 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

to do with the husband's authority in the family ; yet, 
under any system, and in any age, sexual difference 
makes the wife the housekeeper with some control 
within the house, while the husband is guardian of the 
family and has general control. This is well seen in 
those Australian tribes which have the maternal system, 
but the husband is master and guardian of the family, 
and has a taboo with his mother-in-law. I mention 
the last detail, because that has been adduced as a 
proof of marriage by capture, the mother it is sup- 
posed being so indignant at the heartless " capture " 
of her daughter that she will not even speak to 
her son-in-law. Of course such cases may have 
occurred. 

Lastly, exogamy is by no means a result of real or 
any sort of capture. To attempt to show that it is 
would be as hardy as to try, with McLennan, to prove 
the practice of capture as resulting from infanticide of j 
female children. Capture cannot be proved universal 
enough to have given rise to so widely spread a system | 
as exogamy ; also the real meaning of the term exogamy 
is often misunderstood. 

It is now perhaps evident that it is not the tribe ! 
from which the bride is abducted, nor, primarily, her | 
family and kindred, but her sex. A second class of | 
cases are those where woman's sexual characters of 
timidity, bashfulness, and passivity are sympathetically i 
overcome by make-believe representation of male 
characteristic action. A third class combines these j 
two, and potentially, they may always merge in each 
other. Connubial capture and formal capture are 
identical, but the latter is on the spiritual plane. 

The ceremonies to be next mentioned form a link 
between neutralising ceremonies and those which actually 

- 

INOCULATION 371 

and materially unite the man and woman. The prin- 
ciple behind them is that of inoculation. That principle 
has been described, and its use to lessen sexual danger 
has been seen in the account of initiatory rites. Being 
one-sided only, it is useful for marriage in abstract or 
in extenso, as initiation may be called, but is naturally 
not common as a sacramental method of marrying two 
individuals. As the initiatory practice is in essence 
identical with love -charms of similar character, so is 
this marriage ceremony. A case which shows the 
identity of principle is from Morocco. On the evening 
before the marriage, the " henna night/1 the bridegroom 
visits the bride. He applies henna to her hands, and 
removes a ring from her finger and a bracelet from her 
arm, and wears the one or the other until the nuptials 
are finally celebrated.1 He thus assimilates himself to 
her, and brings himself into communion with her, 
satisfying his instincts of love and his subconscious fear 
'of union at the same time. The example is also in- 
structive as being on the way to become a double 
inoculation in the fact that he applies something to her. 
'The common Indian practice of sindur^ by which the 
groom touches the bride with red ochre, sugar and 
water, and the like, is inoculation of her with himself. 
The Bheel ceremony in which the bride does this as 
well, shows inoculation become mutual.2 

There are some interesting cases in which the prin- 
ciple of inoculation is expressed by one or other of the 
pair wearing the dress of the opposite sex. It is in- 
oculation and assimilation effected by wearing the same 
kind of clothes as the loved and dreaded person, and 
is paralleled by many cases in which a lover wears a 
, bracelet or some article of clothing of his mistress. 

1 Leared, op. cit. 35, 36. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. ix. 402. 

372 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, j 

Thomson says of Masai weddings : " Strangest of all, 
and strikingly indicative of the fact that he had ex- ' 
changed the spear for the distaff, the bridegroom had j 
actually to wear the garment of a ditto (girl) for one j 
month ; just imagine what fun it would be in this staid I 
and dignified country of ours, if a young man had to | 
spend his honeymoon in a cast-off suit of his wife's! 
maiden clothes." In ancient Cos, according to 
Plutarch, the bridegroom was dressed in women's; 
clothes when he received his bride.2 The story of> 
Heracles and Omphale may have some similar origin. • 
Plutarch connects the custom and the myth ; but in ; 
the old fashion makes the myth the origin of the 
custom. On the other hand, in ancient Argos there j 
was a law, that brides " should wear beards when theyi 
slept with their husbands."3 The Spartan bride was, 
clothed in a man's cloak and shoes, and put on her bed 
in the darkness by her bridesmaid, to wait for the 
entrance of the groom.4 It may be noted that there 
are some cases in European custom, as in Wales, where j 
the bride is disguised in men's clothes.5 The chief 
point in these is the disguise, and in origin the Euro- 
pean customs may be nothing more. 

We now reach the ceremonies which, more than any 
others, unite the man and woman. The principle of 
their action is double or mutual " inoculation," which 
renders the union innocuous on either side. Having 
already fully described this method of ngia ngiampe, we ; 
need here only repeat that it is the completion of ideas ! 
of contact. Mutual inoculation is, when looked at, 
from the other side, union ; each of the two parties \ 

1 Thomson, op. cit. 258. 2 Plutarch, Qutestiones Gr<ec<e, 58. 

8 Id. Mulierum Virtutes, 245 E, F. 4 Id. Lycurgus, xv. 48. 

5 T. Moore, Marriage Customs, 37. 

UNION 

373 

gives to the other a part of himself, and receives from 
the other a part of him ; this part, on the principles of 
contact, may be, as it is in love-charms, a lock of hair, 
a piece of clothing, food that has been touched or not, 
blood, and the like. This effects union by assimilating 
the one to the other, so as to produce somewhat of 
identity of substance. When the act is done simultane- 

' ously, its sacramental character is intensified. The 
union thus effected has, in accordance with the ideas 
behind it, a most binding force, each party as having 
given part of himself into the other's keeping is 
thereby bound, and as having received part of the 
other has thereby a hold over the other ; and the act 
is the materialised expression of a desire for union, 
identical in principle with physical contact, especially 
with contact in love. It sums up and recapitulates the 
whole cycle of conceptions as to human relations, which 
are latent in human nature. 

First we find the very general ceremony of joining 
hands and the like. Here mere mutual contact fulfils 

j the union. It is a ceremonial pre-representation of the 
actual union in marriage, assisting that union by making 
it safe and by making it previously, and as it were 
objectively. In Fiji the chief marriage ceremony is the 
joining of hands, as it is amongst the Algonquins, 
Egyptians, and many another people, including our- 
selves.1 At Abyssinian weddings the bride and groom 
crook their little fingers together under a cloth which 
is held over them.2 The Puttooas tie the thumbs of 
the pair together.3 The Egyptian bride and groom 
stand face to face, grasp each other's right hands and 
press the thumbs together, a handkerchief being put 

1 Wilkes, op. at. iii. 9 1 ; Featherman, of. clt. iii. 74 j Lane, op. cit. i. 200. 

2 Featherman, of. cit. v. 606. 3 Rowney, op. cit. 93. 

374 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP.; 

over the clasped hands.1 A curious example of the 
close connection the pair sometimes have with their- 
attendant sponsors, combined with ideas of sexual soli- 
darity, is from the Bondei. The bride and groom 
hold hands, each takes his and her kungwi by the hand, I 
each kungwi holds the hand of a child, the male kungwi \ 
that of a boy, and the female that of a girl.2 

In Nias, again, mutual contact is expressed in another l 
way. The chief marriage ceremony is the pressing! 
together of the heads of the young pair.3 The Anda- ' 
manese marriage ceremony is this : the bridegroom is 
made to sit down on the bride's legs, which are, some- : 
times forcibly, straightened out for the purpose.4 The 
pressing together of two things is an obvious method ! 
of union and of inoculation ; and the marriage cere- 1 
mony is curiously paralleled by the Andamanese method ! 
of making a boy at initiation " free " of a forbidden 
food, pig, for instance. A pig is pressed down upon 
him, and brought into contact with most of his person.5 

Another method of joining the pair together is by 
throwing a garment over them to cover them both ; j 
the same method has been noticed as applied to the • 
joining of hands. At marriage amongst the Jews of 
Jerusalem a white cassock is thrown over the pair, j 
" to indicate that they now belong to one another." 
All present exclaim, " May it be a good sign ! " 6 The 
same is done by the Hovas.7 In Tahiti the pair 
were enveloped in a cloth.8 So in the south-east of j< 
Borneo, North Nias, and amongst the Battas of Sumatra.9 ! 

1 Lane, of. cit. i. 200. 2 Dale, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxv. 199. 

3 Featherman, of. cit. ii. 354. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 137. 

5 Id. 135. 6 Featherman, op. cit. v. 140. 

7 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 41. 8 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i. 117. 

9 Audand for 1885, 785; Sundermann, in Allgemein. Missions- Zeitschrift, xi. 
443 ; van der Tuuk, Bataksch Woordenboek, s.v. abis. 

t UNION 375 

3ne would expect to find cases of double " inocula- 
" by means of dress, each wearing the dress of the 
other sex. In European folk-custom there are several 
traces of this, bride and groom exchanging head-dresses 
and the like.1 After betrothal the Ainu boy and girl 
wear each other's clothes.2 This method of union is a 
common phenomenon in love - practice, and when a 
modern 'Arry and 'Arriet exchange hats, the fact is no 
coincidence, but is due to the same principle inherent in 
the human consciousness. To the same order of ideas 
belongs an Andamanese custom. " They address young 
married people in a strange way, calling the husband 
by the name of the wife."3 

The commonest of all marriage ceremonies of union 
is eating and drinking together. This mutual inocula- 
tion by food is the strongest of all ties of the ngia 
ngiampe sort, and breaks the most important of sexual 
taboos, that against eating together. Eating food 
together produces identity of substance, of flesh, and 
thereby introduces the mutual responsibility resulting 
from eating what is part of the other, and giving the 
other part of oneself to eat ; each has the other in 
pledge, and each is in pawn to the other ; any ill- 
feeling later, or sin, will produce bad results between 
the pair. The closest union is produced with the 
closest of responsibilities. Its binding force has been 
already traced to its origin, as is shown by the Loango 
custom, that bride and groom must make a full con- 
fession of their sins at the marriage ceremony, else they 
will fall ill when eating together.4 The practice is of 
course identical with those we have surveyed in con- 
nection with hospitality, the sharing of " bread and 

1 Reinsberg-Dtiringsfeld, op. cit. passim. 2 Batchelor, The Ainu, 142. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. last. xii. 129. 4 Bastian, Loango Ku'ste, i. 172. 

376 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

salt," a large class of love-charms, and acts of ngiampe. 
It goes back to the animal expression of sympathy 
by contact and by a gift of food. The practice has 
nothing to do originally with transferring the groom or 
the bride to the other's kin ; food produces flesh, and 
flesh is connected with blood, but the " tie of blood " 
is an inference not very prominent in early thought, 
the tie of eating together is recognised earlier both in 
practice and in theory. The bride and groom become 
" one flesh," but this is union of two individuals only ; 
it is only late in culture, and then but rarely, that 
kinship assumes such superiority over individualism. 
For instance, the exogamous Melanesians say that the 
wife never becomes one of her husband's " clan," but 
is " at the door," " half-way across." * The pair are 
brought into a close relation, but not relationship, 
although in primitive thought the latter is a relation. 
The theory that the " blood covenant " and the similar 
marriage ceremony are intended to cause the blood of 
the tribe to flow in the veins of the new member, is 
based on late legal fictions. Exchange of blood is 
commoner between lovers than as a marriage ceremony, 
and lovers are not likely to think of tribal union ; the 
act in Amboina, for instance, is regarded as a real sacra- 
ment of affection.2 Also, on the theory relatives by 
marriage should not marry as they do. Again, are all 
the cases where husbands and wives do not eat together 
to be explained by the fact that, owing to exogamy, 
they are of different tribes ? Robertson Smith made a 
further suggestion that it was because they were of 
different totems, and therefore had different systems 
of forbidden food ; 3 but the latter system is rarely 
applied to marriage. This theory of tribal communion 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. x. 314. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 41. 8 Op. cit. 312. 

UNION OF INDIVIDUALS 377 

I^lves too many inconsistencies, and we need some 
lanation more in accordance with human nature, 
and with primitive thought. Well, as to this sex- 
taboo and marriage ceremony alike, exogamy rarely 
implies that the husband and wife are of different 
tribes. They more often than not are of different 
families only, and often cousins. Again, brothers and 
sisters are often forbidden to eat together. They are 
actually of the same family, of the same totem, and of 
the same tribe. What does the taboo imply but sex ? 
Lastly, it has been overlooked that in most cases one 
person only is added to the tribe, namely, the new 
wife or the new husband. This being so, it should not 
be necessary, if the idea is simply to make that person 
a member of the tribe, for more to be done than that 
he or she only should eat some tribal food or drink 
some tribal blood ; but in most cases the other party 
also eats and drinks — why? To cause the tribal 
blood of the stranger's tribe to flow in his or her 
veins ? This seems supererogatory. It may be said, 
the idea is to knit the two tribes together, but that is 
another story. Here I will only observe that primarily 
it does nothing of the kind, and that the theory breaks 
down before such cases as the following, in which the 
ceremony has for its sole object this knitting together 
of two tribes. The ceremonial communion, by which 
two tribes or villages in Ceram and Wetar form 
alliance, is intended to join them together for mutual 
help in war.1 It will be allowed that such covenants 
form as important a bond, for treachery is thereby 
neutralised, as that made by an intermarriage. Now, 
after this ceremony, it is expressly forbidden for them 
to intermarry. Here we may remember that married 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 128, 129, 446, 447. 

378 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

couples do not always live together as such, but, as has 
been shown, often do not eat together. On the present 
theory, this apparent contradiction, and the curious 
result of the Ceramese and Wetarese tribal covenants 
both receive a satisfactory explanation. 

The offering of a gift of food, which is part of 
the biological basis of the custom, is often used as a 
proposal of marriage. In Halmahera and Borneo a 
proposal is made by offering betel to the girl. She 
shows her acceptance by receiving it.1 In Samoa the 
suitor offers her a basket of bread-fruit ; or he asks her 
parents for her hand. If they are friendly and eat 
with him, his addresses are sure to be favourably re- 
ceived.2 Here is seen the ordinary use of the method 
as a test of friendliness. At the betrothal ceremony of 
the Yezedees the sheikh delivers to the bridegroom 
a loaf of consecrated bread, half of which is eaten by 
each of the betrothed.3 The very common practice of 
a love-gift thus passes into a proposal of marriage, and 
in the last case it is seen in the process of becoming 
a marriage rite. This marriage rite may indeed be 
described as a crystallisation of the love -charm of 
exchange of food. 

At marriage there are some interesting variations. 
In the Duke of York Islands a cocoanut is broken 
over the heads of the pair, and its milk poured over 
them.4 Amongst the Barbary Arabs the parents of the 
groom present the young wife on her arrival with milk 
and honey.5 Amongst the Koosa Kaffirs the relatives 
of the groom hand milk to the bride, reminding her 
that it is from the cows which belong to the bride- 

1 Riedel in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 75 j St. John, op. cit. i. 54, 161. 

2 Wilkes, op. cit. ii. 138. 3 Featherman, op. cit. v. 62. 

4 Journ. Anthrop. Jnst. xviii. 290. 5 Featherman, op. cit. v. 530. 

xiv EATING TOGETHER 379 

groom. Of this milk she may not drink while the 
bridegroom is her suitor only, but now she is to drink 
it, and from this moment the union is indissolubly con- 
cluded. The people shout, " She drinks the milk ! She 
hath drunk the milk ! " l This case, of course, is one- 
sided " inoculation " ; the bride eats the bridegroom's 
food, that is, she eats his 'substance in both senses of the 
word. In the next two cases, sexual shyness has played 
its part. At weddings in Ceram-laut the bride does 
not appear, being hidden in her chamber ; the bride- 
groom eats with her people.2 In Amboina an old 
woman puts " food of the house " (the wedding 
being in the bridegroom's dwelling) in the bride's 
mouth.3 The South Celebes bridegroom is offered 
the fate I -box of his bride, from which he takes 
some betel.* In Ceram the bride eats a male 
opossum, and the bridegroom a female of the same 
animal.5 

A Servian bride ate with her husband on the 
wedding-day, the first and last occasion in her life on 
which she ate with a man.6 Niam-niam women never 
eat with men, but at the marriage ceremony they eat 
with their husbands.7 At Hova marriages the pair eat 
together, and then a lamb a is thrown round them both.8 
The joining of hands is used in the Malaccas, where 
it is followed by eating together ; 9 so in Nias and 
Timor, and amongst the Orang-Sakai of Perak.10 
Amongst the Topantunuasu of Celebes the pair are 
placed on one mat, and the bridegroom places his 

1 Lichtenstein, op. cit. i. 262. 

2 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 172. 

3 Id. 70. 4 Matthes, op. cit. 30. 5 Riedel, op. cit. 133. 

6 Reinsberg-Dviringsfeld, op. cit. 81. 7 Schweinfurth, op. cit. ii. 28. 
8 jfourn. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 41. 9 Journal of tie Indian Archipelago, i. 338. 

10 Rosenberg, op. cit. 385 Miiller, Rei-zen en onderz-oekingen in den Indischen Archipel, 
"• 25^ 5 Journ. Ind. Archipelago, iv. 431. 

380 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

right leg on the left leg of the bride. They then eat 
rice together.1 Santhal couples fast on the wedding- 
day, but after the sindur dan they eat together. 
This is the first and last time she eats with a man.2 
In the Kei Islands, the young couple eat together and 
exchange betel ; this forms the wedding ceremony. In 
Ceram after these words are repeated by an elder, "what 
the husband wishes the wife must wish, and what the 
wife wishes the husband must also wish, and let them 
not forget their parents/' the couple eat together. The 
young couple in Timorlaut eat together out of one 
dish at the wedding. When the Babar bridegroom has 
found his bride, after the search in the dark, his friend 
places their heads together, and then the pair eat 
together out of the same dish.3 The Batta bride and 
groom sit together and eat rice from the same dish.4 
So in Rao, "as a token of friendship." 5 Eating 
together is the marriage ceremony in Palembang, 
Tebing-Tinggi, and Ranau, and amongst the Orang- 
Mantra ; in Borneo we have the same ceremony, some- 
times varied by smoking the same cigarette.6 In 
Mindanao and Celebes there is the same ceremony 
of marriage, and also in Bali, Flores, and the Sawu 
Islands.7 In many of the above cases betel is chewed 
together by the pair. In New Guinea the rite is 
common.8 The Navajo couple ate maize -pudding 

1 Bijd. T.L.V.K. Ned. Ind. iii. 5. i. 90. 2 Dalton, op. cit. 216. 

:i Riedel, op. cit. 236, 133, 301, 351. 

4 Tijdschrift -uocr Nederlandsch Indie, i. 846, ii. 179. 

5 Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-Land en Volkenkunde, xxviii. 578. 

6 Pratorius, in De Indische Bij. i. 429 j Tijdschrift <voor Nederlandsch Indie (1873), 
2. 295 5 Forbes, Eastern Archipelago, 219; Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-Land en 
Volkenkunde, x. 428 5 St. John, op. cit. 50, 51. 

7 Tijdschrift vdor Nederlandsch Indie (1840), i. 122 ; Tijdschrift *voor Indische Taal- 
Land en Volkenkunde, xviii. 383 ; Globus, xliii. 60 ; Graafland, De Minahassa, i. 319 j 
Veth, Java, i. 634 ; Riedel, in Revue Coloniale Internationale (1885), i. 308, (1886), 
i. 70. 8 Rosenberg, Der Malayisch Archipel, 455. 

EATING TOGETHER 381 

>m the same plate.1 In Russia and Scandinavia the 
lir used to drink from the same cup ; so in Brazil and 
Japan.2 Amongst the Ghonds and Korkus the garments 
>f the pair are tied together, and they interchange 
lings and eat together.3 At Dorah weddings the 
Idest man present joins the right hands of the young 
>uple, reminding them of their mutual duties and 
[pressing his best wishes. A pot filled with sago- 
tush is then placed before them, of which they serve 
each other three mouthfuls in alternate succession.4 
the Kingsmill Islands the pair sit on a new mat, and 
priest presses their foreheads together, and sprinkles 
icir faces with water. They then eat together some 
>h and bread-fruit.5 At Dyak marriages the bride 
and groom eat together, and are sprinkled with rice.6 
In the Manuahiki Islands the priest gave the man a 
cocoanut to drink and he, after sipping the milk, gave 
it to the woman and she drank.7 In Fiji the marriage 
ceremony was the eating by the pair out of the same 
dish.8 In Madagascar bride and groom eat together, 
and thus become man and wife. It is " apparently a 
symbol of the future unity of their interests." 9 At a 
wedding in the Philippines the young couple were 
required to eat from the same plate and drink from 
the same cup.10 At a Malay wedding friends put in 
the hands of bride and bridegroom handfuls of rice, 
and with this the two feed each other simultaneously.11 
Amongst the Larkas rice and meat are offered to her, 
" by partaking of which she becomes of her husband's 

1 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. iii. 105. 

2 Wester mar ck, History of Human Marriage, 419. 

3 Forsyth, The Highlands of Central India, 149. 

4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 32. 5 Wilkes, op. cit. v. 101. 
6 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 266. 7 Turner, Samoa, 276. 

8 Williams and Calvert, op. cit. i. 170. 9 Sibree, op. cit. 193. 

10 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 474. n Skeat, op. cit. 383. 

382 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

caste " (sic). Later, a cup of beer is given to each, these 
are mingled and the pair drink ; this " completes the 
marriage." l At marriages in Java the groom offers 
the bride some rice which they eat together out of the 
same dish, or the pair take betel out of the same box, 
"to indicate their union.1'2 In the valleys of the 
Hindoo Koosh the marriage ceremony is that the 
pair eat together a cake of bread.3 In Ceylon the 
pair have their little fingers tied together. They then 
eat out of the same dish, "to show they are now of 
equal rank" (j/V).4 In Mangaia the marriage ceremony 
was that bride and groom ate together ; 5 so amongst 
the Sarae.6 The Khyoungtha bride and groom are 
tied together, and fed by the priest with rice, each 
receiving seven alternate helpings.7 Amongst the 
Chukmas the pair are tied together and in that position 
they feed each other, the best man and bridesmaid 
guiding their hands.8 In Dardistan the pair eat together, 
this being the marriage ceremony.9 Eating together is 
a common marriage custom amongst European peasants. 
In Germany the pair eat off the same plate.10 In ancient 
Rome at marriage by confarreatio, the bride and groom 
ate together fani s farreus, in the presence of the Flamen 
Dialis and Pontifex Maximus.11 In South Slavonia the 
bride eats half an apple and gives the other half to the 
bridegroom.12 If we can isolate the folk-lore element 
in the story of Eve's apple, it seems most probable that 
some such love -practice or marriage rite as this is 
behind it. There is an unmistakable reference to sexual 

I Rowney, op. cit. 67. 2 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 385. 
3 Biddulph, op. cit. 79. 4 Forbes, op. cit. i. 331. 

5 Gill, Life in the Southern Isles, 63. 6 Munzinger, op. cit. 384. 

7 Lewin, op. cit. 129. 8 Id. 177. 

9 G. W. Leitner, in Asiatic Quarterly Review, v. 153. 

10 A. Wuttke, Der deutscke Volksaberglaube, 560. 

II Gaius, i. 108 ff. 12 Krauss, op. cit. 276, 459. 

xiv DRINKING TOGETHER 383 

relations in the story, the serpent being the zoomorphic 
presentment of virility, which, as has been noticed, is a 
widely spread way of explaining certain sexual pheno- 
mena. Further, there is the knowledge of evil as dis- 
tinguished from the state of innocence, a fact curiously 
paralleled by the psychological analysis of the result of 
the ngia ngiampe relation, of which eating together it 
the most typical form. The symbolism of the apple, 
as found in Greek and Latin folk-lore, is of course later. 

I Drinking wine is no substitute for or survival of 
drinking blood ; each has the same effect, but wine is 
primarily liquid nourishment. The taking together of 
the Communion is in Catholic countries an essential 
part of the marriage ceremony. It is so in the English 

I Church, according to the rubric. Some examples of 
drinking together have been already noticed. In the 
island Romang the pair drink together out of one 
cup ; this is the wedding ceremony.1 At marriages in 
Morocco the priest hands to the couple a glass of wine 
after blessing it, and each drink of it. The glass is 
then smashed on the ground by the groom, "with a 

' covert meaning that he wishes they may never be 
parted until the glass again becomes perfect."2 The 
idea is originally to prevent others making magic use 
of the vessel to the harm of those who have drunk, 
and, later, to prevent any undoing of the rite. At the 
marriage ceremony of Polish Jews the Rabbi hands a 
goblet of wine, over which he pronounces a blessing, to 
the pair, who sip each in turn of the wine.3 Amongst 
the Hos, Lepchas, and Tipperahs, the bride and groom 
drink beer together out of the same cup.4 In China 

1 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 460. 

2 Leared, op. cit. 37. 3 Featherman, op. cit. v. 154. 
4 Dalton, op. cit. 193 ; Risley, op. cit. ii. 8 ; Lewin, op. cit. 202. 

384 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and Corea they drink wine out of two cups which are 
tied together by red thread.1 Amongst the Nestorians 
the final act of the marriage ceremonial is the taking of 
the Communion together.2 

Various national narcotics, sedatives, and the like, 
are used in the same practice, as has been seen already. 
The Aru bride is carried to the wedding, and the 
ceremony is the partaking together of betel? The 
Sibuyou bride and bridegroom sit side by side on two 
crowbars ; their heads are knocked together, and they 
then put betel in each other's mouth. Previously to 
the last rite, the priest waves a pair of fowls above 
their heads. After the exchange of betel^ the fowls are 
killed, and from the appearance of the blood the priest 
predicts the future fortunes of the newly wedded pair. 
The Balans at marriage chew betel together. The 
Sintahs rub the chest, forehead, and hands of the pair 
with a paste of saffron, gold-dust, and fowls' blood. 
Lastly, a string of beads is bound round the wrist of 
each of the pair.4 Amongst the Minahasses of Celebes 
the young couple sit side by side, and, betel being placed 
in the hand of each, they exchange it and chew it., 
They are thus legally married.5 In the Natchez wedding 
ceremony the pair ate together out of the same dish. 
Afterwards the bridegroom smoked the calumet andi 
" wafted the first fumes towards the parents of his wife, 
and then towards his own parents in token of the 
alliance."6 

Drinking each other's blood has no real pre-eminence 
in early custom over other means of assimilation ; blood 
is simply a part of one's self. Where the practice is 

1 Doolittle, op. cit. i. 86 ; Griffis, op. at. 249. 2 Featherman, op. cit. v. 75. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 262. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 267. 

5 Id. ii. 64. 6 Id. iii. 139. 

§ BLOOD COMMUNION 385 

owed, it is not relationship that is the result, but 
relation, — of ngia ngiampe^ just as is effected by food 
and other vehicles of contact. It is rather a rare 
custom, far more rare than the " blood covenant," and 
a corollary of the blood covenant between two tribes 
was actually found to be that they may not intermarry. 
This was explained in the account of ngia ngiampe. It 
is in fact commoner as used by lovers than as a marriage 
ceremony, and lovers are the last persons to think of 
tribal union. In Amboina lovers drink each other's 
blood, mixed with food, "to show their close attach- 
ment," and the custom is said to have a sacramental 
binding force.1 This practice of lovers is very common 
in Europe and elsewhere.2 

At marriages amongst the Wukas the young couple 
mutually make a slight cut in their foreheads sufficiently 
deep to let the blood flow, and the other members of 
both families follow their example. " This binds 
together all the relatives on both sides in the closest 
fraternal alliance." 3 A common variation is anointing 
with blood. Amongst the Bengal tribes the marriage 
ceremony is the sindur dan> in which the groom marks 
the bride's forehead with red lead. Red lead is possibly, 
but not certainly, a substitute for blood.4 The Birhor 
ceremony is that bride and groom smear each other 
with blood drawn from their little fingers.5 The Kewat 
ceremony of marriage is the sindur dan^ after which 
blood is drawn from the hands of bride and groom and 
mingled with food which is then eaten by the pair. 
Similarly amongst the Rajpoots.6 

The same principles of relation, of ngia ngiampe, 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 41. 2 Ploss u. Bartels, Das Weib, ii. 442 ff. 

3 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 32. 4 Dalton, op. cit. 160, 216, 252, 273, 321. 

5 Id. 220. 6 Risley, op. cit. i. 456 j ii. 189. 

2 C 

386 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

more subconscious indeed, but still inherent and always 
liable to pass from potentiality to actuality, are behind 
the practice of feasting at weddings. We have found 
this kind of thing in connection with Saturnalia festivals. 
So at marriage the friends of both feel somewhat bound 
together by the union of the pair, and expression is 
given to this by eating and drinking together. Here 
indeed the new member is united to the family, so far 
as sharing in a feast effects this. Just as two men 
nowadays are more or less brought into friendly union 
by taking wine together or " having a drink," and 
members of societies are united in closer sympathy by 
a dinner or a feast, so the husband and wife are joined 
together by communion, and to some extent also their 
friends by mutual feasting. These happen to be 
different families, but rarely different tribes ; their 
union, however, is not primarily a fiction of blood- 
kinship, but a more general relation of friendliness, as 
persons who have the same interests and a mutual 
acquaintance in the happy bride or bridegroom, but, 
originally, as persons who eat together. The connec- 
tion of feasting with the importance of food is shown 
at Huron weddings, where there was a feast of every 
kind of game, including fish, and meat for dogs.1 As 
to other expressions of joy and good feeling, we may 
say of wedding dances what an old Motu-Motu man 
said to Mr. Chalmers : " No drums are beaten uselessly, 
there are no dances that are merely useless." 2 

The same ideas are behind the common practice of 
gifts from bride to groom and from groom to bride, 
and between the friends and relatives of the pair ; just 
as they are behind the identical practices of love-gifts 
and gifts from man to man. A gift means far more 

1 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 56. 2 Chalmers, op. at. 181. 

§ BRIDAL GIFTS 387 

rimitive man than, it does to us ; it is part of him- \ 
self. A Patagonian chief is prevented by custom from 
entering the tent of another till presents have been 
exchanged.1 This case shows the principles of ngia 
ngiampe. Amongst the Khakyens there seems to be 
little more of marriage ceremonial than interchange of 
presents, this is essential, and really seems to constitute 
marriage.2 The importance of gifts in this connection 
is shown by the Kaffir custom that the bride may not 
eat food from the bridegroom's kraal until the " presents " 
have duly arrived.3 The marriage gifts in South 
Celebes between bride and groom are very numerous 
and most of them are variously symbolical of marriage, 
amongst them are ginger -roots which have grown 
together.4 In Japan the sending of presents to the 
bride by the groom is one of the most important parts 
of the marriage ceremony. When done, the contract 
is complete, and neither party can draw back.5 It is 
not, as Dr. Westermarck thinks,6 a relic of a previous 
custom of marriage by purchase ; the latter is, on the 
contrary, a development from this. 

The explanation of bride-gifts is really the explana- 
tion of what is mis-called " marriage by purchase." In 
many peoples, of course, as commercial instincts ripen, 
md daughters are found to have their price, the old 
dea fades into the " light of common day," and buying 
md selling become connected with marrying and giving 
n marriage. But originally it was not so. The so- 
railed bride-price was originally of the same class as 
:he kalduke, a pledge, a part of one's self, given to 
mother and received from him. Buying and selling 

1 Musters, op. cit. 184. 2 Anderson, op. cit. 30. 

3 Shooter, op. cit. 54. 4 Matthes, op. cit. 15-18, 22-26, 25. 

5 Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, xiii. 120. 6 Op. cit. 395. 

388 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

with primitive peoples have not the same sordid con-, 
notation as they now have. The principle involved is I 
more personal, more religious ; there is less of price and j 
more of value, more of the pledge than of profit and; 
loss. As showing something of the early idea of pay- 
ments and purchase, the following case is useful. When 
two villages in the New Hebrides make peace, the} 
offending village is mulcted in a sum of pigs. There; 
is, however, a sham fight, in which the village which 
has to pay the pigs is defeated, thus giving a pretext! 
for the payment.1 

In the Banks Islands, when all the " purchase- 
money" for the bride has been paid, the women come 
forward and refuse to let the bride go until a further; 
sum is put down.2 The harta^ or bride-price, amongst 
the Minahasses of Celebes " should not be considered 
as a price, it has rather the nature of a compensation1 
paid to the bride's family for the loss of one of itsi 
working and child -producing members."8 Amongst; 
the Todas and Osages the marriage contract " resembles, 
but is not, an act of barter." The Osage bride is! 
stripped of all her clothes and ornaments, which become; 
the property of the groom's mother ; but she receives ini 
exchange a new suit equally valuable. The ceremonies: 
are concluded by a family feast;4 much as amongst 
the Chippeways, whose weddings were ended by a feast 
at which presents were exchanged between the bride- 
groom and the relatives of the bride.5 As to the 
bride-price amongst the Kaffirs a good observer states, 
a the transaction is not a mere purchase. The cattle? 
paid for the bride are divided amongst the male 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 17. 2 Codrington, op. cit. 237. 

3 Hickson, A Naturalist In North Celebes, 282. 

4 Marshall, op. cit. 211 ; Featherman, op. cit. iii. 308. 
8 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 249. 

THE BRIDE-PRICE 389 

ttions, and are considered by the law to be held in 
t for the benefit of herself and children, should she 
[eft a widow. She can accordingly legally demand 
assistance from any of those who have partaken of her 
dowry."1 At Kaffir betrothals a goat is killed at the 
kraal of the suitor, or if he has no goat, a present of 
beads is made to the girl. Until the one or the other 
> is done, she may not eat at the kraal, where she remains 
a few days. Besides the cattle he has to " pay " for 
• his wife, he must give a cow to the bride's mother ; 
this is called ukutu, referring to the thongs made from 
an ox-hide, and hung round the bride during infancy. 
This ox is thus " repaid " by the groom. Again, there 
is " the ox of the girl " to be slain at the marriage ; 
this is given by the bride's father to the groom. It is 
also called " the ox which has a surplus," and represents 
these ideas : (i) it stands for the value of the girl, (2) 
it gives an assurance to the recipient that the spirit of 
the father — I-hloze — will not after his death come to 
disturb the place where his daughter lives, and (3) that 
his girl will bear many children. On arriving at the 
bridegroom's kraal after sunset, she gives him a present 
of beads, but does not speak ; she receives also a present 
from him which she hands to her brother. Next day, 
the friends of the bride go to the kraal to demand from 
the bridegroom the ox called um-goliswa. The groom 
says he has no ox, and is thereupon informed that the 
bride will be taken away. After remaining concealed 
for a time, he now tries to run away, but is prevented 
by a company of women, a smile on his face showing 
that his efforts are merely formal. The um-goliswa is 
now brought and given to the bride's friends. The 
father of the bride delivers a lecture to the groom, on 

1 Maclean, op. cit. 53 j Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 270. 

390 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, 

the duty of behaving well to her, and warns him of the 
impropriety of beating his wife. Then the slaughter 
of " the ox of the girl " takes place ; this is the " fixing 
point of the ceremony," previously the bride could be 
removed.1 This account brings out clearly the religious 
importance of " bride-gifts," and is instructive as show- 
ing the identity of the " purchase-money " with these. 
It is to be noted lastly that there underlies the practice 
an idea that the "ox of the girl" is a substitute forj 
her, and the ox of the bridegroom a substitute fori 
him, securing safety, both religious and practical, to 
both parties.2 There is also to be noted the sexual 
shyness on the part of the bridegroom, as shown by the 
formal attempt to escape. 

To conclude this sketch of marriage ceremonies, it! 
is to be observed that the reason why marriage ritual is, 
often excluded from religion proper by enquirers, andj 
why much of it is apparently secular, is precisely the 
fact that the subconscious fear of the one sex towards; 
the other is here so liable to emerge into consciousness, ! 
when a man and a woman stand face to face. Much of i 
religion begins with, as it returns to, human person-! 
alities. 

1 Shooter, op. cit. 54, 71, 72. 

2 The Damara custom may be compared ; a special part of the ox sacrificed at a 
wedding may only be eaten by young girls. With the fat therefrom the brides- 
maids deck the hair of the bride. — South African Folklore Journal, i. 49. 

CHAPTER XV 

'USBAND and wife are thus in the relation of ngia 
ngiampe, emphasised by its being a sexual form ; they 
have been brought into that relation by a special cere- 
mony of union, and remain in it both as a result of 
that ceremony, of which permanence of union is not 
the least important object, and as a result of living 
together, which is itself a potential mode of ngia 
ngiampe. This continuous contact introduces once 
more all the original dangers of sexual taboo, as it were 
in spite of the act of ngia ngiampe ; in other words, 
the factors of contact which produce the taboo remain, 
after the taboo is broken by union, so as to give that 
union its sanction or binding force. The resulting 
taboo, that of responsibility, is thus emphasised by the 
original ideas of contact. We saw how this new taboo 
of responsibility arises, and that it is the psychological 
basis of altruism ; of this and of the original sexual 
taboos between husband and wife, which also now 
recur, not inconsistently, as a result of the ngia 
ngiampe relation, it is unnecessary to quote instances, 
but a few illustrations will be given to show how the 
mutual responsibility of married persons is based on 
the original ideas of contact. The duty resulting is 
primarily between husband and wife, then between 
parents and children, and between the children them- 
selves, secondarily between either of the married pair 

392 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and those brought by the marriage into relation with 
each. Many details, such as the following, show how 
conscious application of the ideas of contact supplement 
such biological relations. A Zulu mother, when about 
to leave her baby for a few minutes, will squeeze her 
milk over its hands, breast, and back, or spit on it, 
" as a protective charm " to ensure its safety during 
her absence.1 Amongst the Maoris if the mother's 
breasts give no milk, she and her husband are kept 
apart for a night, to allow the karakia (incantation), 
which has been employed as cure, to take effect.2 In 
Luang Sermata, if a woman's children have died while 
being suckled, the next born is given to other people 
to be nursed.3 Amongst the people of the Loango 
Coast the bridegroom and the bride before the marriage 
ceremony have to confess their sins to the priest ; if 
they fail to do so, or if either keep back anything, evil 
and misfortune " will result when they eat together." 
This example is an excellent illustration of all these 
ideas. In South-East Africa a guilty wife may be for- 
given but the husband cannot live with her till a third 
party has been with her. If a guilty woman were to 
put salt in her husband's food, and he were to eat it, 
he would surely die, therefore many women ask a 
little girl to put in the salt.5 We see here and in the 
following how the adhesive substance of guilt which 
may injure the wronged party is prevented from acting, 
by the use of an intermediary. After divorce an 
Egyptian husband cannot legally take his wife again, 
till she has been married and divorced by another man. 
They employ a poor, ugly, or blind man for this, 

1 Leslie, op. cit. 147. 2 Shortland, Maori Religion, 30. 

3 Ricdel, op. cit. 327. 4 Bastian, Loango Kiiste, i. 170, 172. 

* Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxii. no. 

INGIA NGIAMPE IN MARRIAGE 393 
led moostahhill. Many rich Turks keep a special 
ck slave for this purpose, generally one who has not 
ched puberty.1 Amongst the Samoyeds, if birth 
is difficult, one suspects the woman of adultery.2 
Amongst the Druses, if a wife leave her husband's 
abode without an injunction to return, this is equivalent 
to divorce. However willing both are to unite, they 
cannot come together till she has first been married to 
a third party, who must then divorce her ; after this 
she can return.3 Again, when a Chiquito man fell ill, 
they used to kill the wife thinking her to be the cause 
of his sickness, and imagining when she was removed 
that he would recover.4 Amongst the Krumen when a 
wife dies, the husband is believed to have caused her 
death by "witchcraft."5 In Congo tribes widows and 
widowers are similarly accused.6 In Madagascar the 
widow is reviled and informed that it is her fault that 
her Vintana (fate) [has been stronger than that of her 
husband, and that she " is virtually the cause of his 
death." 7 When a Zulu woman has lost her husband 
and is married by a brother or other man, the spirit of 
her late husband follows her continually. If she is 
pregnant and the spirit comes to her, she falls ill and 
miscarries. By placing in an ant-heap some spittle, 
collected in her mouth while dreaming of him, the 
ghost is laid.8 In China it is believed that when 
members of a family are sick one after the other, there 
is a mysterious and injurious influence existing between, 
for example, husband and wife, or father and son.9 In 
Samoa, when one was sick, the priest assembled all the 

1 Lane, op. cit. \. 228. 2 Georgi, op. cit. 14. 

3 Chasseaud, op. cit. 186. 4 Dobrizhoffer, op. cit. ii. 264. 

5 J. L. Wilson, of. cit. 115. 6 Waitz-Gerland, op. cit. ii. 120. 4 

7 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 45. 8 Callaway, op. cit. 161. 

9 Doolittle, op. cit. i. 143. 

394 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

family round the sick-bed, and made them confess 
their sins. " The requisition was always implicitly 
obeyed, and each one confessed everything he or she 
had ever at any time done. Whether it were theft, 
adultery, seduction, lying, or invoking a curse upon 
the sick person, however long concealed, all was openly 
and with solemn contrition confessed." 1 Here is 
evident the idea of danger inherent in all contact, 
emphasised by the very closeness of the relation, in 
spite of the friendliness of a united life ; it is to be 
compared with the Loango rule that husband and wife 
must confess their sins, else they will be injured by 
eating together. Amongst the Samoyeds at a Shaman's 
performances, his wife " as an unclean thing, must keep 
out of the way." 2 In New Guinea when a man is 
taboo he lives apart from his wife, and his food is 
cooked by his sister.3 

The same ideas are somewhat differently expressed ! 
in the following. In Timor-laut a married man's hair 
may not be cut, else his wife will die.4 A Sarawak man 
will put himself under pamali to cure a sick child.5 
The conduct of one connected by contact reacts upon 
the other, when either is absent. No water may be 
boiled inside a Mahlemut house while the deer-hunt 
continues.6 If a Hottentot goes out hunting, his wife 
kindles a fire. " She may not do anything else but watch 
the fire and keep it alive. If the fire should be extin- 
guished, the husband will not be lucky." She may 
throw water about instead ; if she gets tired, her servant 
must do it. If neglected, the same result follows.7 
When absent on a journey Acaxee men refrained from 

1 Pritchard, op. cit. 147. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 141. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. viii. 370. 4 Riedel, of. cit. 292. 

6 Low, of. cit. 402. 6 Dall, op. cit. 147. 1 Hahn, op. cit. 77. 

NGIA NGIAMPE IN MARRIAGE 395 

>ing salt ; they said : " Perhaps our wives are not 
jhaving well in our homes and we shall die."1 
.mongst the Kaffirs, should a man's wife, while he 
on a journey, anoint herself with the oil or fat in 
laily use, she will not only suffer herself but bring 
lamity upon her husband ; should she dream during 
iis absence, she must offer a private gift for herself and 
icr absent lord.2 When a Malay is at war, his pillows 
md sleeping-mat at home are kept rolled up. If any 
one else were to use them, the " absent warrior's courage 
would fail, and disaster would befall him." His wife 
and children may not have their hair cut during his 
absence.3 Not only was the traveller obliged, according 
to the Nahua superstition, to abstain from baths during 
his absence, but even his family during the same period, 
while allowed to bathe the body, might not wash the 
head or face oftener than once in eighty days.4 In East 
Central Africa while a woman's husband is absent on 
an expedition, she goes without anointing her head or 
washing her face ; she must not bathe, she scarcely 
washes her arms. She must not cut her hair ; her oil- 
vessel (chisasi) is kept full of oil till his return, and 
may be hung up in the house, or kept by the side of her 
bed.5 In time of war, amongst the Tshi-speaking 
peoples, the wives of the men who are with the army 
paint themselves white, and decorate themselves with 
beads and charms, and make a daily procession through 
the town, invoking the protection of the gods for their 
absent husbands. " This ceremony is called Mohbor-meh, 
a word compounded of mohbor, ' pity,' and meh> ' me,' 
and which may be freely translated, ' Have mercy upon 

1 Bancroft, op. at. i. 581. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xx. 116. 

3 Skeat, op. at. 524. 4 Bancroft, op. tit. ii. 392. 

5 Macdonald, Africana, i. 81. 

396 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

us ! ' Besides the daily procession, Mohbor-meh women, 
painted white from head to foot, dance publicly in the 
streets, uttering howls and shrieks, leaping and ges- 
ticulating, and brandishing knives and swords. On 
the day upon which a battle is expected to take place 
they run to and fro with guns, or sticks roughly carved 
to represent guns, and pierce green paw -paws with 
knives, in imitation of the foemen's heads. This 
ceremony is generally performed in a complete state 
of nudity, and frequently some of the principal women 
appear with two hen's eggs fastened above the pudenda. 
Any man, except the aged and infirm, who may be 
discovered in the town or village, is at once assailed with 
torrents of abuse, and charged with cowardice, taunted 
with want of manliness, assaulted with sticks, and 
driven out of the town. Mohbor-meh Women appear 
to be regarded in some respects as female warriors, who 
guard the town in the absence of the men." 1 The 
impersonation of the male sex is doubtless intended 
to complete identification, and so make sympathetic 
action more certain. In the Babar Islands, when the 
men are at war, the women must fast and abstain from 
sexual intercourse.2 In Timor-laut, when a ship is at 
sea, the girls of the village are bound to sing and dance 
daily on the beach, by way of bringing the men back 
speedily.3 

In other connections there are instructive cases like 
the following. The foreskin removed at the circum- 
cision of an Arunta boy is swallowed by the younger 
brother of the initiate ; the idea is that it will 
strengthen him, and make him grow tall and strong. 
The blood is rubbed over his elder sisters, and they 

1 A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the West Coast of Africa, 226, 227. -: 

2 Rieclel, of. cit. 341. 3 Id. 290. 

NGIA NGIAMPE IN MARRIAGE 397 

:ut locks of his hair.1 Here there is doubtless the 

itention of strengthening those with whom one is in 
responsible relation, and perhaps the contact thus 
intensified helps to intensify the particular taboo of sex 

iere involved. In the Central Australian tribes an 
important right and duty is the giving and receiving of 

lair. It is often given in return for a favour ; and the 
principle behind the custom has been already described. 
A man's chief supply comes from his mother-in-law ; 
he also gets hair from his son-in-law and brother-in- 
law.2 

Marriage being an act of danger is on these principles 
tabooed between certain persons. As we saw in Ceram 
marriage between different tribes is allowed, and even 
between " upper and lower classes," the only restriction 
is that villages which have performed the pela ceremony 
of eating together sacramentally, which necessitates 
alliance in war, may not intermarry.3 The principle 
is well illustrated by this : in the islands Leti, Moa, 
and Lakor, Dere and Lull are the protecting deities of 
the village, the former is male, the latter female. They 
are the spirits of the founders of the village, and 
their lineal descendants are employed as go-betweens, 
muani riesre and puata riesre, between these gods 
and the villagers, procuring, for instance, help in 
sickness for the latter. If the muani riesre dies, 
his sister's son succeeds him ; the puata riesre is 
succeeded by her sister or daughter. Both man and 
woman have equal privileges, but they may never 
marry.4 

Cases have already been cited to show how a dan- 
gerous service produces a taboo of the ngia ngiampe 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. z$i. a Id, 465. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 134. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 375. 

398 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

species. The taboo between the operators and those 
operated upon in puberty ceremonies, is identical with 
the common taboos between men who have exchanged 
wives, between sponsors and god-children, and between 
a married person and the assistant in the act, and in 
each case it is one of duty and responsibility. The 
last-mentioned custom may be well illustrated from the 
Beni-Amer. When a wife quarrels with her husband 
and seems inexorable, one of her bridesmen is called in. 
She cannot resist this intervention ; "for between the 
bride and the companions of the groom there exists an 
eternal friendship, which never fails, though they may 
not see each other.''1 The duty of natural affection 
similarly renders a brother and sister in New Caledonia 
most ready to help each other though they are taboo to 
each other,2 and generally between husbands and wives 
the same result is regular, both for psychology and for 
religious custom. 

The general principle that persons closely connected 
by contact must avoid dangerous contact, which would 
lead to personal as well as mutual harm, is illustrated 
by totemic customs. The Bakalai believe that if a man 
ate his totem, the women would miscarry, or give birth 
to animals of the totem kind.^ The Omahas think that 
eating the totem, which is forbidden food, will cause 
sickness to the man's wife and children.4 Here, as so 
often, a man's conduct affects his intimates, through the 
continuous contact he has with them. 

The same conception of danger combined with 
intimacy appears very clearly in a Central Australian 
belief. A man is obliged to supply his wife's relatives 
with a certain amount of food ; but he is always cautious 

1 Munzinger, op. cit. 325. 2 De Rochas, op. cit. 239. 

3 Du Chaillu, op. cit. 309. 4 James, Expedition to the Rocky Mountains, ii. 50. 

NGIA NGIAMPE IN MARRIAGE 399 

that these people should never see him eating, "else 
their smell would get into the food and make him ill." l 
The results of contact generally, of dangerous services 
and dangerous relations, are all taboos of the same 
order. 

Accordingly, we may decide that in primitive society, 
as now, individualism still shows itself above any con- 
nection of marriage or relationship. Owing to the 
taboo of personal isolation and egoism, all society, as 
such, is dangerous. The ties of intermarriage and of 
blood-kinship are special cases of ngiampe, and in early 
society they have not superseded this general conception 
of relationship. 

There is perhaps no savage custom, if we except the 
Couvade, which has so increased the gaiety of civilised 
nations as the common taboo between a man and his 
mother-in-law. Amongst early peoples, this custom 
forms a real part of the marriage system, and is a result 
of the ngia ngiampe relation of marriage. The taboo 
is also found between wives and their fathers-in-law, 
and, though far less commonly, between other relations 
' by marriage, as between the husband and his sisters-in- 
law, the wife and her brothers-in-law, and in a few 
cases irrespective of sex, but by far the commonest form 
is the mutual avoidance of husband and wife's mother. 
The mother-in-law almost assumes the role of a super- 
natural person. A Zulu swears by his mother-in-law.2 
When we examine complete accounts of the custom, it 
is clear that the prohibition is one of extraordinary 
strength and conceals no ordinary meaning. It also 
becomes evident that the relation is one of the ngia 
ngiampe sort, that it is a particularly intense expression 
of the ideas of sexual taboo, and that the feelings con- 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. clt. 469. 2 Shooter, op. cit. 101. 

4oo THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

cerned are religious in their character, the sentiment 
connected with the breaking of the rule being one of 
religious horror. 

In many cases the avoidance begins, naturally 
enough, with betrothal, as amongst the Bondei.1 In 
the tribes of New South Wales there is a taboo between 
a man and the mother of his promised wife, but not so 
pronounced as it is after marriage.2 In some Victorian 
tribes the girl's mother and aunts may not look at 
the suitor nor speak to him from betrothal till 
death. When they speak in each other's presence 
they have to use a " turn-tongue." He may never 
mention his mother-in-law's name.3 Some typical 
examples follow, in which various ideas of contact 
occur, and the connection with sexual taboo is seen. 
The Zulu system of uku-hlonipa is a network of 
sexual taboos ; of this particular case the following 
account is given. " This is a very singular custom, j 
and in its nature and tendencies presents insuperable j 
difficulties to the introduction of civilised habits into I 
the domestic circle, and especially to the exercise of 
those kindly offices which Christianity inculcates. By ! 
this strange custom, a daughter-in-law is required to 
hlonipa her father-in-law, and all her husband's male j 
relations in the ascending line, that is, to be cut off 
from all intercourse with them. She is not allowed to 
pronounce their names even mentally. Hence this 
custom has given rise to an almost distinct language 
among the women. The son-in-law is placed under cer- 
tain restrictions towards his mother-in-law. He cannot 
enjoy her society, or remain in the same hut with her, 
nor can he pronounce her name. The daughter-in-law 
must to a certain extent hlonipa her mother-in-law 

1 Journ. Anthrop. last. xxv. 198. 2 Op. cit. xiv. 353. 8 Dawson, op. cit. 29. 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 

401 

1 Another account states that the husband must 
>t speak to, look at, or eat with his mother-in-law, 
id neither husband nor wife may utter the names of 
ich other's relatives. " This is hlonipa. When a 
mother-in-law meets her son-in-law, she will not speak 
to him, she will hide her head and the breasts that 
suckled his wife. If she meets him on the road, where 
she cannot turn away, and where she has no covering, 
she will tie a piece of grass round her head as a sign 
that she hlonipas. All correspondence has to be carried 
on between third parties. ... A woman does not 
mention her father-in-law, and she hides from her son- 
in-law. She says it is not right that he should see the 
breasts which suckled his wife." 2 Amongst the Fijians 
" a free flow of the affections between members of the 
same family is prevented by the strict observance of 
national or religious customs, imposing a most un- 
natural restraint. Brothers and sisters, husbands and 
wives, fathers and sons-in-law, mothers and daughters- 
in-law, brothers and sisters-in-law are thus severally 
forbidden to speak to each other or to eat from the 
same dish." 3 This account is not very explicit, but is 
important as connecting these customs with the taboos 
between husbands and wives, and brothers and sisters. 
Amongst the Sarae and Barea the mother-in-law con- 
ceals herself from her son-in-law.4 Amongst the 
Arawaks the son-in-law might not see the face of his 
mother-in-law, and if they lived in the same house, 
they were obliged to keep on opposite sides of a parti- 
tion.5 Mr. Curr, speaking of the mutual avoidance of 
son-in-law and mother-in-law, " a singular and widely 

1 Maclean, op. dt. 95, 96. 2 Leslie, op. dt. 102, 141. 

3 Williams, op. dt. i. 136. 4 Munzinger, op. dt. 388, 526. 

5 Tylor, Early History of Mankind, 285. 
2 D 

402 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

spread custom in Australia," says, " when a girl has 
been promised to a man in marriage, or when he is 
married, the man and the mother of his wife or be- 
trothed scrupulously avoid each other's presence. Should 
the mother-in-law require to pass even within a hundred 
yards of her son-in-law, she covers herself, if the tribe 
wears clothes, from head to foot with her cloak. Also 
they never exchange words together except in cases of 
necessity. I have often noticed the awkward occur- 
rences to which this custom leads, but I could not get 
the blacks satisfactorily to explain its design. Never- 
theless the object of the practice seems to lie on the 
surface."1 It was criminal for a son-in-law and 
mother-in-law to look at one another, in the tribes 
of the Mary River and Bunya-Bunya country.2 On 
Eraser's Island " the mother-in-law must not look upon 
her son-in-law at any time : they believe that if she 
did he would go mad, and would go and live in the 
bush like a wild man." 3 Amongst the Banyai a man 
must sit with his knees bent in the presence of his 
mother-in-law, and may not put out his feet towards 
her.4 In Central Celebes the son-in-law may not speak 
to his mother-in-law privately.5 Amongst the Omahas 
and Hidatsas a man does not speak to his wife's 
mother.6 The prohibition of intercourse of the slightest 
sort between a man and his mother-in-law is practically 
universal throughout Australia. The taboo between 
a man and his father-in-law is there probably rare. 
Mr. Howitt asserts that it does not exist.7 Amongst 
the North American Indians, however, it seems fairly 

1 Curr, op. at. i. 97. 2 Id. iii. 163. 

3 Id. iii. 145. 4 Livingstone, op. cit. 622. 

5 Eijdragen tot de Taal Land-en Volkenkunde Nederlandsch Indie, xxxv. 5. I. 91. 

6 J. O. Dorsey, in Third Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 262; Featherman, 
op. cit. iii. 329. 7 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 5°3* 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 403 

on, though not so common as the ordinary 

Amongst the Bondei the prospective bridegroom 
does not eat with his betrothed after betrothal, nor 
with his father-in-law or mother-in-law, nor does the 
girl with him or his parents. At the wedding ceremony 
the pair eat together, and the groom eats with his 

, father-in-law, but neither then nor on any occasion 
may he eat with his mother-in-law.1 In Amboina the 
son-in-law may not eat with the mother-in-law ; 2 so 
also in Buru ; 3 in Halmahera the son-in-law when in 
his wife's house may not eat out of vessels used by her 
parents, and the same prohibition applies to her when 
in his.4 A Congo proverb runs : " My mother-in-law 
is angry with me, but what do I care? We do not 
eat from the same dish." 5 

In Ceram the son-in-law may not come near his 

, mother-in-law. She may not utter his name, nor he 
hers. He calls her "mother/*6 This prohibition 
against uttering each other's name is found in the 
Torres Straits, amongst the Sioux and Omahas, the 
Kaffirs, in Buru, the Aru Islands, the Kei Islands, 
and Wetar.7 In the Banks Islands a man will not 
name his wife's father, but will sit with him and con- 
verse ; as to his wife's mother, he will not come near 
her, nor mention her name ; he and she avoid each 
other, though if necessary they will talk at a distance. 
No person can be induced to mention his own name.8 
This mutual taboo on names is a real duty, the utter- 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxv. 200. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 43. 3 Id. 23. 

4 Id. in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 69. 5 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 296. 

6 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rasseu tusschen Selebes en Papua, 102. 

7 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 338 ; Schoolcraft, op. cit. li. 196 ; Harmon, Travels 
' in Interior of North America, 341 5 Leslie, op. cit. 172 ; Riedel, op. cit. 5, 263, 236, 

448. 8 Coote, op. cit. 138. 

4o4 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

ance of another's name being equivalent to putting him 
in danger. Accordingly, in Amboina, the son-in-law 
calls his mother-in-law "mother." People are never 
called by their names.1 In Ceram the son-in-law 
may not mention his mother-in-law's name, and he 
therefore calls her "mother." In Wetar the son- 
in-law calls his mother-in-law " mother," and father- 
in-law "father."3 The same titles are used by the 
Kaffirs. Amongst the latter people the wife is called 
" daughter of so-and-so." 4 Similar results are found 
where the common prohibition occurs against husband 
and wife mentioning each other's name. In Buru the; 
father-in-law of Jadet is called "father of Jadet"* 
In the Aru Islands the son-in-law calls his mother-in-law, 
his wife's name being Madamar^ " mother of MadamarM 
and his father-in-law " father of Madamar" 6 

Where the classificatory system is well developed, 
the taboo is extended to persons who potentially mayj 
or might have come into this relation. Thus, in the 
Urabunna tribe the mother of a man's wife is called his 
" nowillie (equivalent to father's sister), and any woman 
of that relationship is mura to him and he to her, and| 
they must not speak to one another." 7 

Three explanations have been attempted. The first 
is that of Mr. Fison,8 and has been suggested by others. 
It is that the rule is due to a fear of intercourse which 
is unlawful, though theoretically allowed on some classi- 
ficatory systems. This seems to be corroborated by 
such traditions as that of the Gaboon natives, who say 
the rule was founded "because of an incest,"9 and by 
a few recorded cases, due to special circumstances, in 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 43. 2 Id. 102. 3 Id. 448. 

4 Leslie, op. cit. 172, 173. 5 Riedel, op. cit. 5. 

6 Riedel, op. cit. 263. 7 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 61. 

8 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 103. 9 Bowdich, op. cit. 437. 

xv THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 405 

which a man has married mother and daughter at 
once. This explanation also is one most likely to 
occur to explorers, who have personal knowledge of 
savages ; for there is no doubt at all that the horror 
felt by the savage at infringement of the taboo between 
himself and his mother-in-law is of the same character 
as that inspired by the idea of incest, among savage and 
civilised peoples alike, a horror religiosus rather than 
naturalis. But against this explanation, it is enough 
to point out the antecedent improbability of any man, 
not to mention a savage, ever falling in love with 
a woman old enough to be his mother or mother-in- 
law, and the improbability of so many peoples concur- 
j ring in being afraid of this, while there is a general 
I preference amongst savages for marriage within the 
same generation. Moreover, technically such connec- 
• tion is not incest, except in the four -class system. 
I What truth there is in the theory i^ this, that the 
practical man is apt to focus sexual taboo upon sexual 
intercourse, and, while theoretically the mother-in-law is 
marriageable in many systems (and so there would be 
' no " incest " except in so far as the idea of incest in 
> primitive thought was not differentiated from any 
sexual connection, all such being theoretically danger- 
ous), yet, this general intercourse being feared may 
be referred to in this special way. Still the question 
remains, why should this be so feared ? 

The second explanation is that of Sir J. Lubbock, 

who traced it to " marriage by capture."1 "When 

! the capture was a reality, the indignation of the parents 

! I would also be real ; when it became a mere symbol, •, 

the parental anger would be symbolised also, and would 

be continued even after its origin was forgotten." This 

^ Origin of Civilisation, 114. 

406 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

theory has been assisted by one or two mistaken 
accounts of explorers ; but, in the first place, " mar- 
riage by capture " was never more than a rare sporadic 
result ; in the second place, the preponderance of sex 
is overlooked. Why should the " indignation "be so 
generally expressed by the mother only ? Thirdly, no 
fact ever remained as a symbol or ceremony without 
some real psychological impulse to inspire it. 

The third explanation is that of Prof. E. B. Tylor, 
who thinks that the custom is simply the familiar one 
of " cutting," and is due to the idea that the hus- 
band for instance, when coming to live with his wife's 
parents, is regarded as an outsider, not one of the 
family, and is therefore " not recognised." This is 
altered, however, when the first child is born. Now, 
having contributed to the formation of a new member 
of the family, he is recognised at last and the taboo is' 
over.1 Prof. Tylor, indeed, shows some probability that 
the custom by which the husband is " cut " is causally 
connected with the practice according to which the 
husband resides with his wife's family. This, however, 
would go without saying, as would the converse also, 
precisely because the person chiefly concerned is a 
stranger, and is one amongst many. The explanation 
is simply a restatement of the problem. He adds, 
however, that there are no cases of avoidance between 
the wife and the husband's family, where the husband 
lives with the wife's family. But there are such cases, 
as in Ceram ; 2 though such are naturally uncommon, 
precisely because only one member of the husband's 
family is on the spot. Mr. Howitt also, while assert- 
ing that there is a taboo throughout most of Australia 
between a man and his mother-in-law, denies that there 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 246 ff. 2 Riedel, op. cit, 102. 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 407 

is a taboo between a man and his father-in-law.1 Why 
should the cutting fall to the mother? Prof. Tylor 
does not take into account the preponderance of sex in 
these customs. In each and every case the prohibition 
is focussed on the husband and the mother-in-law, 
or, more rarely, on the wife and the father-in-law, 
though it may include various relations of either sex. 
Again, though it is, so far, " cutting " and non-recog- 
nition, yet such terms fail to explain the religious 
horror with which the rule is connected, nor does there 
seem to be any warrant for such an extraordinary in- 
tensity of family exclusiveness. Moreover, such cases 
as the following are in principle quite opposed to 
" cutting." In Central Celebes a man may not speak 
privately to his mother-in-law.2 When typical cases 
are examined the feeling behind the custom is widely 
different from that behind the practice of " cutting " a 
person, whether a non-relative or otherwise ; also the 
avoidance is mutual in the generality of cases. Still 
less does this explanation explain the no less intense 
horror found between a man and his mother-in-law 
amongst peoples where the wife resides from the first 
at her husband's home ; on his theory, this would be 
a survival from the practice in the maternal stage, but 
such survival shows too much life, and the hypothesis 
that the maternal system always preceded the paternal 
is itself untenable. The taboo ceases in a few cases 
when a child is born ; what usually happens is, that the 
pair who live with the wife's parents set up a house for 
themselves when a child is born, the birth of a child 
being a common signal that the union is to be perma- 

1 "Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 503. 

2 Riedel, in Bijdrcgen tot de Taal Land-en Volkenkunde -van Nederlandsch Indie, 
xxxv. 5. i. 91. 

4o8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

nent, in other words, that the marriage is complete ; as 
we shall see, there is reason for the cessation, but it is 
not that the man is now become a member of the family. 
It is clear that the custom cannot be explained by 
ordinary modern conceptions either of incest or of 
family exclusiveness. The custom is, in fact, part of 
the great system of ideas which has produced both the 
marriage system with its various bars, and the solidarity 
of the family. On the face of it the taboo in typical 
cases seems analogous to the phenomena of sexual 
taboo. This has been indicated by its connection with 
engagement taboos. Amongst the Zulus the mother- 
in-law taboo is but one detail of an intricate system of 
social and sexual taboo, the latter predominating. We 
have seen that the ideas underlying sexual taboo have 
produced amongst other things mutual avoidance 
between engaged couples, and between the married man 
and his wife. If a man avoids his own wife so care- 
fully, why in the name of probability should he avoid 
or be avoided by his mother-in-law as well, if the 
reason be either fear of incest or social non-recognition ? \ 
It seems to be causally connected with a man's avoid- 
ance of his own wife. Now when we rid our minds of 
associations, it becomes relevant to ask, why should she 
be called the man's mother at all ? It is at least strange, 
in spite of the suffix " in-law." The theoretical primitive 
f form of the family in its bi-sexual character was, as we 
'•\ have seen, separation of man and wife, except when the 
needs of love require satisfaction, and separation of the 
'iboys and girls as soon as puberty drew near. The 
young boy went about with his father as soon as 
possible, and at puberty was formally weaned from 
association with the nursery and its feminine atmosphere, 
and his life became masculine. He no longer was to 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 409 

e in the house where, as he might remember, he was 
so early separated from his sisters, a separation naturally 
ascribed to the mother, being an older person, with 
authority, of the same sex as the girls in her care. The 
sex so dangerous to man, because of those qualities 
which spoil a man, was taboo to him — for a season. 
Soon, however, the inevitable came — love drove him to 
the dangerous sex, and he must needs obey. Similar 
was the case of the primitive girl, in regard to the sex 
dangerous to her. The taboo has to be broken, the 
two tabooed persons must be joined together. In other 
words, the young man has to enter once more that 
feminine sphere from which he was so early taken 
away ; he has to live with a woman again, no longer 
in the innocent ignorance of childhood, but with full 
knowledge of the dangers and responsibilities of the 
union. His female comrade is not now his sister, as in 
the old days, but his wife ; and in the ages before the 
importance of blood -kinship, when living together or 
any close contact was the obvious bond, there was no 
hard conventional distinction between women of the 
same age. Poetry and popular language preserve this 
vagueness ; the lover in the Song of Songs cries " My 
sister, my spouse," and the savage lover uses the same 
phrase. As showing the re-entrance into the feminine 
sphere, an initiation custom may be cited. At a 
certain stage of the proceedings of initiation amongst 
the Arunta, the boy's prospective mother-in-law runs 
off with the boy, but the men fetch him back.1 Again, 
the new female companion of our hero also has a 
mother, who is not indeed his own mother, but the 
mother of his partner or quasi-sister, as who should say 
" mother- in -law." The analogy between the two 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 443. 

4io THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

states is complete. This new life with a new woman 
whose mother is in a position, as mother, to guard 
her daughter and see to her new son's behaviour, is a 
reproduction of the old life, when his mother-in-blood 
regulated the household and separated the children. It 
is the same picture with higher lights and deeper 
shadows. He again lives under one roof with that 
dangerous creature, a woman, but in the new relation of 
wife ; he again has a mother controlling to some extent 
the new relation which is a new version of the old, but' 
she is a mother-in-law. His attitude towards the wife, 
when love is not upon him, will be what it was to his 
sister, but he now knows the reason, and his attitude 
towards the mother-in-law will be what it was to his 
mother, but the connotation of that term has altered. 
She might rather be called his " spiritual mother," his- 
" mother-in-religion," if we may pervert the meaning 
such terms would have now. All the religious principles 
of sexual taboo inform the relation, and between 
husband and wife there is a taboo pregnant with] 
religious meaning, the more so in proportion to the 
closeness of the sexual tie, closer than that between? 
brother and sister. The relation between the husband 
and his wife's mother is also full of religious meaning ; 
it is to begin with an embarrassing one, for she is neither 
his mother, though of that age, nor his sister, nor his 
wife, though a woman. Yet she is his u mother " 
in a religious sense. As he, from sexual taboo, 
ngiamfe duty, and inequality of age, would avoid 
all physical intimacy with his own mother, so does 
he a fortiori avoid it with his mother-in-law. 
For the taboo is enhanced, and here Prof. Tylor's 
theory has some truth, by the fact that the woman 
is not the man's real mother, and is to that extent less 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 

411 

liliar, as is also the case with his wife in relation to 
imself. 

When the practical aspect of the relation is con- 
lered, the mother-in-law is responsible for her 
laughter's safety, and oversees the husband's behaviour, 
but in primitive custom this also renders his attitude 
towards her one of religious respect ; in the case of 
taboo between the wife and her father-in-law, the same 
applies, and the attitude is strengthened by her religious 
fear of the male sex. There are many facts which show 
the practical side of this relation, the natural anxiety of 
the mother concerning her daughter's welfare, and here 
the preponderance of sex in these customs and the 
causal connection with residence are explained. This 
anxiety concentrates upon child-birth, and is often con- 
cerned with the prevention of repudiation on the part 
of the husband, a question settled by the birth of a 
child. Amongst the Damaras, when the pair go to 
their home, the bride's mother and other women go 
with her to see her safely installed.1 Identity of sex 
increases affection between mother and daughter ; and 
here there is naturally some indignation at the loss of a 
loved daughter. Abipone mothers " could hardly bear 
to part with their daughters."2 In modern Egypt a 
man prefers that his mother-in-law should live with him 
to protect his wife's honour, and consequently his own. 
The mother-in-law is called " protector/' 3 Mr. Yate 
gives the following statement as to a Maori Christian 
wedding. The bride's mother came to him and told 
him she was pleased that her daughter was going to be 
married to Pahan, but " that she must be angry about 
it with her mouth." On returning with the bridegroom 

1 South African Folklore Journal, i. 49. Dobrizhofter, op cit. ii. 208. 

3 Lane, op. cit. i. 219. 

4i2 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

and bride the procession was met by her. " She began 
to assail us all furiously. She put on a most terrific 
countenance, threw her garments about, and tore her 
hair like a fury ; then said to me : ' Ah, you white 
missionary, you are worse than the devil ; you first 
make a slave lad your son by redeeming him from his 
master, and then marry him to my daughter. I will 
tear your eyes out ! ' The old woman, suiting the 
action to the word, feigned a snatch at my face, at the 
same time saying in an undertone, that it was ' all 
mouth/ arid that she did not mean what she said." 
In the case of a young married pair in Cambodia, 
neither of whom have been married before, it is 
believed that when the wife is enceinte for the first 
time, the husband is able to take from her by magic 
the unborn babe. Accordingly " the parents of the 
bride never trust their son-in-law, and will not let the 
young couple go out of their sight." 

There is another element already hinted at, which 
enters the question. It will be found that the mother- 
in-law taboo tends to disappear when the taboos between 
husband and wife are intensified, and vice versa. The 
other element is this ; as sexual taboo must be kept up 
for safety, all the more so because of close union and 
especially until a child is born, for the pair are con- 
tinuously breaking the rule and all their conduct affects 
the child, a substitute to receive the onus of taboo is 
useful, and the best substitute is the mother-in-law ; if 
j the husband avoids her, his relations with his wife will 
j be secure, and if the mother-in-law avoids him, her 
daughter's safety will be secured likewise. This idea 
coincides with filial and maternal duty, and is a good 
instance of savage make-believe in shifting responsi- 

1 Yate, op. at. 97. 2 Aymonier, op. cit. 187. 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 413 

lity. The embarrassing relation of a mother who is 
mother assists in the formation of the conception. 

igain, the principles of contact find here their full 
development ; the wife is the link between the mother- 
in-law and the husband, she belongs to and is a part of 
each, she is the kalduke as well as the " mediator " 
between them, and this important form of connection 
produces the most intensified responsibility, and taboos 
the two parties. The ngia ngiampe relation is shown 
by the Central Australian custom, according to which 
a mother-in-law and son-in-law are bound to supply 
each other with hair and game,1 and by the neces- 
sary result in all cases of the taboo that a third 
party is the medium of communication, as in the 
Torres Straits, and amongst the Omahas,2 the wife 
being the intermediary for conversation and com- 
munication. 

This explanation finds a parallel and a proof in 
what is the same thing in modern society. The avoid- 
ance by a man of his mother-in-law is a well-known 
feature of bourgeois manners, and is a frequent subject 
of humorous anecdote. The Germans have the 
proverbial phrases " Schwiegermutter — Teufelsunter- 
futter," " Schwiegermutter — Tigermutter," and English 
has the expression " mother-in-law and daughter-in-law 
are a tempest and a hailstorm. " In the practical 
sphere^ the taboo still obtains in civilisation. The 
reason underlying both the primitive and the civilised 
form of this phenomenon is the same, though the 
religious meaning has evaporated from the latter. The 
modern husband resents her interference, to which he 
half-consciously knows she has a right, as being of the 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. at. 26, 40, 465. 

2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 3385 Third Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 262. 

4H THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP, xv 

same sex as his wife, an older woman and her mother ; 
and she does not quite trust him, in her anxiety for her 
daughter's welfare. Both now and then the mother- 
in-law is avoided, precisely because she is the mother- 
in-law. 

CHAPTER XVI 

No general account of customs and beliefs concerning 
child-birth is here attempted ; some of the more im- 
portant have been referred to, and one or two others 
will be discussed. As a dangerous crisis child-birth is 
attended by evil influences ; as a sexual crisis these, as 
we have seen, are sexual. Direct attribution of the 
danger to the agency of the opposite sex often appears, 
while conversely that sex especially fears the contagion 
of femininity at a crisis when the female organism is, as X 
it were, broken up. Men, and even the husband, are 
prohibited from being present, as in the Marianne 
Islands, Wetar, New Caledonia, amongst the Zulus, 
Damaras, and Dyaks.1 In the Aru Islands and 
Amboina, the reason is given that the presence of 
men would hinder the birth.2 Similar reference to the 
origin of these taboos in sexual ideas is seen in such 
beliefs as that of the Aleuts, who suppose that difficult 
labour is due to misconduct on the wife's part, a belief 
that sometimes causes domestic discord.3 In Samoa all 
the pains of child-birth are imputed to the fault of the 
husband.4 This idea of mutual responsibility between 
persons in close contact is illustrated by a Maori 
practice. If the mother's breasts give no milk, both 

1 D'Urville, cp. cit. ii. 494 ; Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes 
en Papua, 449 ; Gamier, op. cit. 183 ; Shooter, op. cit. 88 ; South African Folklore 
Journal, ii. 62 ; Low, op. cit. 307. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 263, 73. 

3 Featherman, op, cit. iii. 467. 4 Globus, xlvii. 70. 

4i 6 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

husband and wife are sprinkled ceremonially with 
water, and kept apart to allow the charm to have its 
effect.1 

The Saturnalia practices already referred to, occur 
at child-birth and with the same meaning. Thus in 
Abyssinia after a birth the women rush out into the 
courtyard singing and shouting, and if a man dares to 
approach them, he is invariably caught and retained 
captive until he purchases his freedom with a ransom 
in money or beer.2 In Fiji at the feast to celebrate a 
birth the men paint on each other's bodies the tattoo 
marks used by women.3 This is the same in principle 
as wearing the dress of the other sex. 

The customs and beliefs relating to the birth of 
twins are both numerous and interesting. Here I will 
merely point out that the chief idea behind such super- 
stitions is that not only is the occurrence abnormal, but 
one of the infants is the offspring of a spirit or god. 
Twins are very sacred amongst the Damaras, all 
present at the feast are called " twins," and afterwards , 
form a sort of guild.4 Amongst the Yorubas the god 
Elegbra, who is a patron of Love, is also the tutelar ! 
god of twins. One of twins is always called after him. \ 
This god is supposed to consort with men and women 
during sleep, and so fulfils the function of the incubus •. 
and succubus? The twin children of Amphitryon are a 
case in point. Many peoples on the other hand kill '\ 
one of twin infants. 

The most interesting practice in connection with 
child-birth is the curious custom to which Prof. Tylor 
has given the name of Couyade. In its perfect form 

1 Shortland, Maori Religion, 30. 2 Featherman, op. cit. v. 607. 

3 Williams, op. cit. i. 175. 4 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 107. 

5 A. B. Ellis, The Toruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa, 80, 67. 

xvi TWINS— COUVADE 417 

the husband takes to his bed and pretends to be lying- 
in, while the wife goes about her usual employments as ( 
soon as may be after delivery. Some connect it with 
the world-wide belief that the conduct of the mother 
before and also after birth affects the child. The 
Hottentots believe that if a pregnant woman eats lion's 
or leopard's flesh, the child will have the characteristics 
of those animals.1 In European folklore the belief 
occurs that if a pregnant woman walks over a grave 
her child will die ; 2 in Transsylvania, if one throws a 
flower in her face, the child will have a mole on that 
part of its face.3 

Further, it is quite natural in view of the closeness 
of the tie, which, as ngia ngiampe, is regulated by 
contact, that the conduct of the father also should X 
affect the welfare of the child. The biological tie is 
enforced by the ideas of contact. In the Andamans a 
pregnant woman abstains from pork, turtle, honey, 
iguana, and paradoxurus, and after a while her husband 
also abstains from the last two foods, believing that 
the embryo would suffer if he ate them.4 Similarly 
'amongst the Coroados, Puris, and Coropos.5 Amongst 
• the Californian Indians the old women washed the 
child as soon as born, and " although the husband did 
not affect the sufferings of labour, his conduct was 
supposed in some measure to affect the unborn child, 
land he was consequently laid under certain restrictions, 
such as not being allowed to leave the house or eat fish 
and meat."6 At Suan the husband shuts himself up 
for some days after the birth of his first child, and will 
eat nothing.7 During the forty-four days of " unclean- 

1 Hahn, op. cit. 88. 2 Panzer, op. at. 262. 

3 Gerard, op. cit. i. 191. 4 Journ. Antkrop. Inst. xii. 355. 

5 Spix, Ethnographic Sud-Amerikas, ii. 247. 6 Bancroft, op. cit. i. 412. 

7 Chalmers, op. cit. 165. 
2 E 

4i 8 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

ness," taboos are imposed on the Malay husband as 
well as on his wife. He may not, e.g. shave his head ; 
may not hurt or kill anything.1 Amongst the Piojes 
both father and mother fast for three days after the 
birth.2 The Niasese wife and husband both refrain 
from certain foods before the birth.3 In Greenland, if 
the husband works just before the birth, the child will 
die.4 Amongst the Dyaks the number of foods for- 
bidden to the pregnant woman is increased during the 
last month ; and even the father of the expected child 
is put under the same restrictions ; neither may light a 
fire, nor approach one, else the child will be born 
spotted ; they may not eat fruit, else the child will 
have stomach-ache ; they may not make holes in wood, 
else it will be born blind, nor dive under water, else the 
child will be suffocated in the womb and be still-born.5 
This kind of thing is common in Ne\v Guinea.6 
Amongst the Indians of Guiana the father abstains 
from certain kinds of animal food. If he eats tne 
flesh of a water-haas ', which has protruding teeth, the 
child will have the same ; if he eats the spotted labba, 
the child will have spots. Mr. im Thurn says, " there 
is some idea that if the father eats strong food, washes, 
smokes, handles weapons, it would have the same result 
as if the babe did so." 7 

Couvade proper is combined with these practices by 
the last -mentioned people. "The woman works as 
usual up to a few hours before birth ; she goes to the 
forest with some women, and there the birth takes 
place. In a few hours she is up and at work, and 
suffers little. As soon as the child is born, the father 

1 Skeat, op. cit. 345. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. viii. 222. 

3 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 36. 4 Id. i. 35. 

5 Perclaer, op. cit. 38, 39. 6 Chalmers, op. cit. 165. 

7 jfourn. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 462 j im Thurn, The Indians of British Guiana, 218. 

tcOUVADE 419 

:s to his hammock, and abstains from work, from 
t, and all food but weak gruel of cassava meal, 
from smoking, from washing himself, and above all 
from touching weapons of any sort, and is nursed and 
cared for by all the women of the place. He may not 
scratch himself with his finger-nails, but may use a 
splinter of cokerite palm. This goes on for days, 
, sometimes weeks." Amongst the Digger Indians, 
when the wife is about to be delivered, the husband 
plays the invalid ; he stretches himself on his couch, 
grunts and groans as if oppressed with pain, and is 
attended to and nursed for several days.2 Amongst the 
Dyaks the family is interdicted (fomali) for eight days ; 
and during this time the husband plays the invalid. He 
is fed on rice and salt, that the infant's stomach may 
not swell, and is required to keep out of the sun, and 
abstain from bathing.3 Amongst the Passes he paints 
. himself black, and stays in his hammock fasting, until 
the navel-string of the child has fallen off.4 In Zar- 
dandan, and amongst the Ainus, Miris, and Miaos, the 
Lagunero and Ahomama, the Caribs, and in Martinique, 
Surinam, Guiana, Brazil, amongst the Jivaros, Mun- 
durucus, Macusis, Arawaks, and Arecunas, and in 
Wanga, Malabar, and the Nicobars, the father lies-in 
after the birth.5 In Celebes and California he lies-in 
and is attended by his wife.6 Amongst the Erukala- 
Vandhu of Southern India " directly the woman feels 
the birth-pangs, she informs her husband, who immedi- 
ately takes some of her clothes, puts them on, places 
on his forehead the mark which the women usually 
place on theirs, retires into a dark room, where there is 

1 im. Thurn, The Indians of British Guiana, 217. 

2 Featherman, op. cit. Hi. 213. 3 Id. ii. 268. 

4 Martius, Ethnographic Siid-Amerikas, i. 511. 

5 H. Ling Roth, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxi. 228 ff. 6 Id. I.e. 

420 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

only a very dim lamp, and lies down on the bed, cover- 
ing himself up with a long cloth. When the child is 
born, it is washed and placed on the cot beside the 
father, assafoetida^ jaggery, and other articles are then 
given, not to the mother but to the father. During 
the days of ceremonial uncleanness, the man is treated 
as the other Hindus treat their women on such occa- 
sions. He is not allowed to leave his bed, but has 
everything needful brought to him." l 

Two explanations of the practice have been sug- 
gested, one by Bachofen, supported by Prof. Tylor ; and 
the other by Prof. Tylor, which he afterwards abandoned 
for the former. Bachofen " takes it to belong to the 
turning-point of society when the tie of parentage, till 
, then recognised in maternity, was extended to take in 
paternity, this being done by the fiction of representing 
the father as a second mother. He compares the 
Couvade with the symbolic pretences of birth which in 
the classical world were performed as rites of adoption. 
To his significant examples may be added the fact that 
among certain tribes the Couvade is the legal form by 
which the father recognises a child as his." 2 In other 
words, it is a piece of symbolism whereby the father 
asserts his paternity, and accordingly his rights as a 
father, as against the maternal system of descent and 
inheritance. Prof. Tylor finds it most frequent in what 
he calls the maternal -paternal stage, represented by 
peoples with whom the husband lives for a year with 
the wife's family, and then removes. As a record 
of the change from a maternal to a paternal system, 
and a means whereby that change was effected, it should 
not, as he points out, occur in the purely maternal 

1 J. Taylor, in Indian Antiquary, May 1874, p. 151. 

2 E. B. Tylor, in Jou'-n. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 256. 

COUVADE 421 

According to his tables it does not, but, as 
Mr. Ling Roth has shown, cases of the Couvade are 
actually found in the maternal stage ; viz. amongst the 
Arawaks and Melanesians, both of whom have maternal 
descent. Further, the custom would be too much of a 
legal fiction if it meant all this originally ; and early 
man has not, as may easily be shown, any such lawyer- 
like love of formality in matters of descent and inherit- 
ance ; like the animals, he attaches himself to those 
with whom he happens to be born ; and as to inherit- 
ance, there is nothing to inherit. Doubtless in certain 
cases, as amongst the Mundurucus, the Couvade may 
have come to be used as a method whereby the father 
recognises the child as his ; but this, besides being 
secondary, is not the same thing as a legal fiction 
asserting the father's rights as against the maternal, 
system. It is rather a case of paternal pride. It would 
be expected that a people should themselves be aware 
of the fact, if assertion of paternal rights as against 
maternal were the object of the custom, the maternal 
system and counter-assertions being so obvious, but no 
tribe actually holds this meaning of the Couvade. 

The second explanation, proposed and later aban- 
doned by Prof. Tylor, may be also given in his words. /J^ 
He laid stress on the " magical-sympathetic nature of a 
large class of Couvade rites as implying a physical bond 
between parent and child : thus, an Abipone would not 
take snuff lest his sneezing might hurt his new-born 
baby, and a Carib father must abstain from eating sea- 
cow lest his infant should get little round eyes like it. 
This motive, which is explicitly or implicitly recognised 
by the savages themselves, certainly forms part of the 
explanation of the Couvade. It is, however, secondary, 
being due to the connection considered as subsisting 

422 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

between parent and child, so that these sympathetic 
prohibitions may be interpreted as originally practised 
by the mother only, and afterwards adopted by the 
father." This explanation covers more facts than does 
the other ; it is also more scientific than the other, 
in its application of primitive psychology rather than 
later legalism to a primitive custom. But it does not 
apply at all to Couvade proper. 

Each of these explanations, however, like many 
another explanation of marriage customs and systems 
on legal lines, really errs in not taking into account the 
woman's side of the question. They show a sympathy 
with the father and with the child, but forget the 
mother, and are thus a modern document illustrating 
the history of woman's treatment by man. 

On examining the facts, we can distinguish two 
classes of Couvade customs, which often combine, but 
are essentially distinct. We have first a very widely 
spread group of customs, in which the father, as well 
as the mother, must avoid certain acts and certain 
things for fear of injuring the unborn or new-born 
child. These have been illustrated, and show a result 
of the ngia ngiampe relation. They are a good example 
of the principles of contact underlying human relations 
and relationships. Things and persons that have been 
or are in contact of any sort, or between whom there is 
any tie of contact or connection, retain the connection 
in a material form, and either party can thereby sympa- 
thetically influence the other. As Mr. Ling Roth 
points out, there are cases where the child affects the 
father.1 On Bachofen's theory, this would be an asser- 
tion of paternity by the child ; but on the principles 
of ngiampe it is natural enough. The child's substance 

1 H. Ling Roth, in Journ. Anthrop. last. xxi. 234. 

xvi COUVADE 423 

is part of the father and the mother alike, both in 
biological fact and in primitive inference from this and 
from the principles of contact, and parental affection 
and responsibility apply the principles of contact, which 
are the material basis of affection and responsibility, in 
order to ensure the child's welfare. All such connection 
being potentially of the ngiampe species, the sympathy 
is a result of that relation, and shows the material 
nature of the bond. Similar phenomena have already 
been noted, such as the conduct of women when their 
husbands are absent. Thus, in South East Africa, if a 
man's wife while he is on a journey anoints herself 
with the oil or fat in daily use, she will not only suffer 
herself but bring calamity upon her husband.1 On the 
same principle in Paraguay, when a child is ill, all its 
relatives fast, abstaining from such foods as are supposed 
to be injurious to the child.2 In the East Indies it is a 
common thing for a father to become helaga^ i.e. put 
himself under taboo, in order to cure a sick child.3 
When a Thlinkeet medicine-man is about to give an 
exhibition, his relatives who form the chorus must fast 
and take emetics previously.4 At the circumcision of a 
Madagascar boy both the parents fast, and also the 
nurse and those who prepare the boy's food.5 

The dangers of contact which underlie the relation, as 
between husband and wife, assist towards the husband's 
duty. When a Kaffir woman is pregnant, he should 
not bathe " because he will quickly be carried away by 
water." 6 When a Guatemala wife was barren, she 
confessed her sins ; if that had no effect, her husband 
also confessed, and his cloak was laid on his wife.7 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Imt. xxii. 116. 2 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 150. 

3 St. John, op. cit. i. 175. 4 Dall, op. cit. 426. 

. W. Ellis, Madagascar, i. 187. 6 Callaway, op. cit. 443. 

7 Bancroft, op. cit. ii. 678. 

424 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Here the connection we are speaking of is almost 
developed into Couvade. So in a case of difficult 
labour, which was believed due to some breaking of 
tapu, the Maori husband plunged in the river, while 
the priest pronounced a charm.1 By extension of the 
ngiampe relation we get a case like that of the Chiri- 
guanos, with whom not only the father but the other 
children lie-in and fast at the birth.2 Such an example 
does not fit with Bachofen's theory, for on that theory 
the children would be claiming paternity. 

Any connection with residence that may remain 
after distinguishing true and false Couvade, is due to 
the cause behind that residence. In real Couvade the 
husband lies-in ; the simulation by the father of the 
mother's part is obviously the essence of the custom. 
If we examine the phenomena of Couvade proper, and 
apply to them the principles of primitive religion, we 
have but to explain why the father should pretend to 
be a mother, or, for this is apt to be ignored, though it 
inheres in the definition of Couvade and is its explana- 
tion, why does he pretend to be his wife ? Any account 
of birth-customs, or of the religious ideas connected 
with this important event, will show sufficient reason. 
Birth is an occasion of religious peril, witness the evil 
spirits and evil influences which ever lie in wait to 
injure both child and mother ; and who so proper a 
person to defend mother and child from them as the 
father and husband ? He does do so in many ways, as 
in the island Serua, where the husband prays when his 
wife is confined ; 3 or in the Philippines, where he walks 
round the house all night fighting the demons with a 
drawn sword.4 The Miaos recognise the husband's 

1 Shortland, Maori Religion and Superstition, 30. 2 Globus, xlviii. 35. 

3 Riedel, op. cit. 468. 4 Bowring, The Philippines, 120. 

xvi COUVADE 425 

duty, when they explain that the husband's going to 
bed for forty days is on the principle that he should 
bear the same hardships as his wife.1 In the other set 
of cases, the most prominent feature is the sympathy 
between father and child, but in Couvade proper the 
chief feature is the taking over by the father of the ? 
personality of the mother. He defends mother and; 
infant, by pretending to be the mother. The idea is 
the familiar one of substitution ; if he pretends to be 
ill, and if his wife makes no fuss, but goes about her 
work quietly, the evil influences and agencies may 
possibly be deceived and think that the pretended 
mother is their real victim. They do not know that 
the poor invalid is a strong and healthy man, and the 
natural guardian and protector of the family besides. 
The result is a happy issue from the peril, — the husband 
has done his duty. A case which is decisive is that of 
the Erukala-Vandhu, already noted. As soon as birth 
approaches, the husband puts his wife's clothes upon 
himself, and makes the woman's mark on his forehead 
and lies-in. He is treated as the mother during the 
whole period of " uncleanness." 2 A German peasant 
woman, in the same way, will wear her husband's 
coat, " in order to delude the evil spirits who are 
liable to attack her " from the time of birth till the 
" churching."8 

As has been shown already, sympathy expressed by j 
contact is always tending to pass into substitution and 
exchange of identity. This is notably the case in 
Couvade, where no doubt in most cases of the husband's \ 
lying-in, the idea is sympathy only, and though it is not 
always extended to its logical conclusion as amongst 

1 Colquhoun, Across Chrysee, 335. 2 Indian Antiquary (1874), 151. 

3 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 123. 

426 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

the Erukala-Vandhu, yet subconsciously and potentially 
the final form is there. 

A remarkable instance of the Saturnalia customs 
referred to as practised at birth, shows this sympathy 
practised by another than the husband, and may be 
compared with the cases where the children also lie-in. 
The matrons of certain East Central African tribes 
sing and dance to celebrate the approaching birth ; 
one of them pretends, by dressing up for the part, 
to be a woman with child.1 Such a case seems to 
dispose of the legal explanation of the Couvade, 
for the Couvade here is performed by a woman. 
When the Mohbor-meh women of the Tshi peoples 
dress up as men, and pretend to be their soldier- 
husbands, we see the same principle which is behind 
the Couvade. 

Many cases show not complete substitution, but the 
idea that the father's influence helps the mother by 
contact, effected in various ways. Often there is but aj 
slight step needed to make the substitution complete. 
In the Watubella Islands, if the wife's delivery is 
difficult, some of her hushand's clothes are put under 
her.2 The father's personality thus transmitted by his 
clothes assists the mother. In primitive thought, as 
has been shown, dress contains the properties of the! 
wearer, as the mantle of Elijah contained his virtue, 
and thus imparts to others the health, strength, anct^ 
power of resistance belonging to the owner. In Central 
Australia, when the labour is difficult, a man takes the 
husband's hair-girdle, and ties it round the woman's 
breasts ; if after a time the child is not yet born, the 
husband walks once or twice slowly past the Erlukwirra 
(women's camp) to induce the unborn child to follow 

1 D. Macdonald, Africana, i. 129. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 207. 

xvi COUVADE 427 

him.1 In Lechrain a mother before the churching has 
taken place puts on her husband's hat when she goes out, 
" to prevent evil happening to her." In Brandenburg 
on a similar principle of contact, if a woman is anxious 
about her husband, he burns a piece of his stocking and 
rubs the ashes on her, before his departure. The idea, 
as the peasants say, is that then she will not be afraid.3 

The child is often protected in this way by the 
garments of either parent. After the birth of a Chinese 
baby its father's trousers are hung up in the room, " so 
that all evil influences may enter into them instead of 
into the child." 4 In Thiiringen the child is protected 
against evil spirits by hanging a man's shirt before the 
window, or a woman's dress in front of the door.5 In 
Hungary and South Germany the father's smock is 
laid upon the child to protect it against fairies.6 In 
KCnigsberg it brings luck to the child to wrap it in his 
father's smock ; also, to prevent its being carried off 
by the evil Drud before baptism the mother puts on it 
her clothes.7 Amongst the Basutos, if a child vomits, 
the medicine man cuts a piece from the father's setsiba 
garment, and binds it on the child. This helps towards 
a cure.8 In Silesia a sick child is wrapped in the 
mother's bridal apron, to make it well ; a Bohemian 
mother ties a piece of her dress on a sick child.9 In 
Bern a child is wrapped in its father's shirt to make 
him strong.10 Ideas of sexual taboo influence this 
custom sometimes, as in a German custom of wrapping 
a boy in his father's smock after birth, to bring him 
luck, but never in his mother's.11 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 467. 2 Ploss, op. cit. i. 254. 

3 Id. i. 30. 4 Doolittle, op. cit. i. 122. 

5 Ploss, op. cit. i. 123. 6 Id. I.e. 7 Id. I.e. 

8 Griitzner, in Zeitxhrift fur Ethnologic for 1877, p. 78. 

9 Ploss, op. cit. ii. 217, 221. 10 Id. i. 62. n Id. ii. 40. 

428 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Is Couvade intended, as anthropologists assert, to 
preserve the infant only ? It may be so, but when we 
consider the man who dresses up as his wife, and cases 
where the protection of the wife is explicit, and when 
we remember also that the savage is a better man 
than he is generally painted, and has a real altruism 
and marital responsibility, we may give him credit 
for the intention to protect his wife no less than his 
child. 

A custom parallel to those in which father and 
mother, or both, take the child under their protection 
by putting part of themselves in contact with it, is the 
common practice whereby the parents assume the name 
of the child. Thus, amongst the Babar islanders, who 
have the maternal system of descent, the parents change 
their names at the birth of the first child, thus, Rahajana 
umleey father, and Rahajana rile, mother, of Rahajana.1 
In Wetar the parents are called after the name of the 
first child—" father of A B," " mother of A B "— 
" because they are now become more important than 
the barren and unmarried." 2 Parents in the Aru 
Islands take the name of their first child, thus, Kamis 
aema, father, and Kamis djina, mother, of Kamis.8 In 
Leti, Moa and Lakor, and the Kei Islands, the parents 
are called by the name of the first child, " father of 
A B," "mother of A B."4 Forty days after the 
birth of a child in Java its head was shaved, and the 
name was given and announced by the father, who, and 
the mother, henceforth bore the name of their son.5 
In Buru, Ceram, and Ceramlaut, the parents are called 
" as a title of respect " by the name of the oldest child.6 
In Halmahera the parents change their names thus at 

1 Riedel, op. clt. 353. 2 Id. 450. 3 Id. 260. 

4 Id. 392, 238. 8 Veth, Java, i. 642. 8 Riedel, op. cit. 5, 137, 152. 

tTEKNONYMY 429 

birth of their first child.1 Both parents take the 
naiiie of the first child in Celebes, Sumatra, and amongst 
the Patagonians.2 The Dyaks are very fond of children. 
Parents sink their own names on the birth of the first 
child, and are called by its name with the prefixes Pa 
and Ma. "It illustrates their family pride." Should 
the eldest child be dead or lost, they are called after 
the next surviving one. Thus, Pa-Jaguen was called 
Pa-Belal till his daughter Jaguen was restored from 
slavery by the assistance of the Rajah of Sarawak.3 In 
some Australian tribes, " numerical names are given to 
children in the order of birth, the suffix showing sex. 
Thus the first child, if a boy, is called Kertameru, if a 
girl, Kertanya ; the second child in the same way is 
called Warritya, or Warriarto. Soon afterwards 
another name is added from some plant, animal, or 
insect. This name continues until after marriage and 
the birth of the first child, when the father and mother 
take the name of the child, with the affix binna or 
spinna (adult) for the father, ngangki (female) for the 
mother ; thus, Kadli being the child's name, the father 
1 is called Kadlispinna, the mother Kadlingangki. The 
names of both father and mother are thus changed at 
the birth of every child."4 Amongst the Bechuanas 
" the parents take the name of the child." " Our 
eldest boy," says Livingstone, " being named Robert, 
Mrs. Livingstone was after his birth always addressed 
as Ma-Robert, instead of Mary, her Christian name." 5 
Prof. Tylor explains it thus ; 6 the husband is 
"treated as a stranger till his child, being born a 
member of the family, gives him a status as father 

1 Riedel, in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, xvii. 80. 

2 G. A. Wilken, in De Indhche Gids (1881), p. 284 ; Musters, op. cit. 177. 

3 Low, op cit. 197 j Perelaer, op. cit. 42. 4 Eyre, cp cit, ii. 324, 325. 
5 Livingstone, South Africa, 126. 6 Op. cit. 249. 

430 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

of a member of the family/' whereupon he ceases 
to be " cut." But if the father in the same way 
as Prof. Tylor suggests concerning the Couvade, 
borrowed the idea from the mother, it is hardly likely 
that the mother originally practised the custom for a 
quite different reason. If she did it for the same 
reason, that is, to assert her maternity, this ought to 
presuppose a previous paternal system, and if she con- 
tinued to do it for the same reason, the result is a 
strange competition. Prof. Tylor's explanation fails to 
take into account the fact that in almost every case, 
even, as amongst the Babar islanders, in maternal 
systems, the mother also takes the child's name. 
Again, why, as amongst the Mayas, should the father 
call himself by the name of his son, and the mother 
call herself by the name of her daughter ? the son being 
Ek, and the daughter being Can, the father was named 
" father of Ek," and the mother " mother of Can." 1 
This example shows what is not uncommon, an attempt 
to supersede relationship by sex. 

There is, without doubt, in the practice a sort of 
assertion both of paternity and maternity, but not as 
against the opposing system. This assertion is, as the 
savage himself has explained, a paternal and maternal 
expression of pride, just as in the highest stages of 
civilisation, a man or woman who has a distinguished 
son likes to be referred to as the " father or mother of 
so-and-so." Amongst the Thlinkeets, if a son acquire 
a reputation, the father will drop his own name and 
call himself " father of N or M." 2 In Madagascar 
parents sometimes assume the name of their children, 
especially should they rise to distinction in the public 
service, as Raini Mahay , father of Mahay, Raini 

1 Bancroft, op. cit. ii. 680. 2 Featherman, op. cit. iii. 391. 

TEKNONYMY 431 

ika, father of Maka." l The Malagasy have the 
lar custom also ; both parents take the name of 
ic eldest child, Raini Soa, father of Soa, Rent Soa, 
mother of Soa.2 But when we take into consideration 
the religious importance of the name in primitive 
thought, we may confidently infer that this feeling of 
pride is only secondary, and is combined with the more 
vital reason, namely, that the parents, father and mother 
alike, take the child under their protection by taking 
its name, that vital part of him as it is supposed to be, 
thus protecting him from those who might take this 
name in vain or work worse mischief against it, and by 
significantly calling themselves father and mother of 
the child, profess in the most material way their 
responsibility for it, and their relation to it. The 
practice is an instance of ngia ngiampe, but naturally 
one-sided and not a mutual exchange, for the child is 
an " infant " still. The method is exactly half of that 
common form of ngiampe^ which consists in mutual 
exchange of names to effect identity and mutual respon- 
sibility between two persons. Further, this taking 
over of the child's personality or part of his soul, so as 
practically to form a religious surname for the parents, 
renders them in a real sense the child's "spiritual" 
parents and protectors, as they are already its biological 
guardians. They are now its godparents also. There 
is another result however. As the child on the prin- 
ciples of relation is the pledge, the kalduke between 
father and mother, this simultaneous adoption by the 
pair of its name, renews, as between themselves, the 
relation of ngia ngiampe which has been performed at 
marriage, and which is also inherent in their continuous 

1 Ellis, History of Madagascar, i. 154. 
2 Sibree, Madagascar and its People, 198, 199. 

432 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

living together. If we may say so, the act confirms 
their "spiritual " wedlock, and is a sort of re-marriage. 
This is natural enough when we consider the fact that 
the birth of the first child (and it is usually the name 
of the first child only that is thus assumed) in savage 
custom seals finally the marriage alliance, as it is indeed 
a signal of permanence in the tie and psychologically 
binds the pair together in the joy that a man is born 
into the world. This is corroborated by such facts as 
the Zulu practice. The wife in Zululand is not 
designated a wife until she has borne a child.1 The 
idea is seen from another side in the not unfrequent 
custom that the husband does not gain incontrolled 
possession of his bride until she has become a mother. 
Amongst the Nubians the husband is not till then 
allowed by custom to build a separate house for him- 
self.2 So amongst the Knisteneaux the husband lives 
with his wife's parents until the first child is born. 
" The birth gives full sanction to the marriage, and the 
wife henceforth calls him by the honorary title of 
'father of her child/"3 The Chippeway bridegroom 
lives with his father-in-law until the first child is born.4 
This is part of the explanation of the common practice 
whereby the husband lives till then with his wife's 
parents. As this custom is not part of a matriarchal 
system, so the assumption of the name is no assertion 
against such, it is simply the completion of the 
marriage. There are also found actual instances of 
this potential renewal of marriage at the first birth. 
Amongst the Todas it is not uncommon for the pair to 
separate until a second marriage ceremony has taken 
place. " When it is apparent that they are likely to 

1 Shooter, op. cit. 74. 2 Featherman, op. clt. v. 260. 

3 Id. iii. 261. 4 Id. iii. 248. 

xvi THE SECOND MARRIAGE 433 

have a family, this second ceremony ensues. In most 
respects this corresponds with the preceding one" ; the 
husband ties another tali round the neck of his bride. 
"It is seldom that disunion takes place after this." * 
Just before lying-in the South Celebes wife is practically 
married again to her husband, she and he being cere- 
monially covered with one garment, as they were at 
marriage.2 The idea here is to secure safety to the 
woman by reasserting the mutual responsibility of the 
pair, as in Couvade, and is a very natural practice now 
: that the trinity of father, mother, and child is about to 
: be actualised. A case already cited shows the principle 
of ngiamfe between husband and wife in connection 
with names, combined with the ngiampe relation between 
parent and child. The Andamanese call a young husband 
by his wife's name ; when she is pregnant, he is called 
by her name with the name of the child prefixed (it is a 
common practice in early races to name the child before 
birth), and now the wife also has the child's name pre- 
fixed to her own.3 

The custom is also found rarely at puberty. 
Amongst the Alfoers when a boy named, for instance, 
Taleamie, arrives at puberty, his father, named Sapialeh^ 
now calls himself Sapialeh-Taleamie-amay ; when his 
second son reaches puberty he adds his name also, thus, 
Sapialeh-Taleamie-Karapupuleh-amay.4 The custom 
thus merges in the practice of changing the name at 
puberty. It also is found in marriage. Thus in Buru 
the father-in-law of Jadet, for instance, is called " father 
of Jadet." 5 The mother-in-law, as we have seen, com- 
nly makes a ngiampe relation with the son-in-law. 

1 Harkness, op. clt. 116. 2 Matthes, op. tit. 51. 

* Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 129. 4 Ploss, Das Kind, ii. 424. 

5 Rieclel, De sluik-en krcesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 5. 
2 F 

434 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Here we come back again to sexual taboo as between 
husband and wife. The practice naturally coincides 
sometimes with the taboo on the names of husband and 
wife. In savage custom, as we have seen, rarely is any 
one addressed by his real name, to do so is to place" 
such an one in danger, it is a wrong done to his 
personality. Responsibility between husband and wife 
emphasises this rule. Thus amongst the Barea and 
Beni-Amer the wife may not utter her husband's name.1 
Perak women in talking of their husbands use a peri- 
phrasis which means " house and house-ladder," and is 
tantamount to saying " my household " instead of " my 
husband." Amongst the Tuyangs a man will speak 
of his wife as " my dull thorn," or " the thorn in my\ 
ribs," or " the mean one of the inner room." 3 The 
idea is not so much contempt as a desire to protect her 
personality. Amongst the natives of the New Hebrides 
a woman after marriage is called " wife of so-and-so," a 
practice common everywhere, and identical in principle 
with the modern European custom.4 The custom of 
calling the parent " father " or " mother of the child '; 
is a convenient way of avoiding the use of the personal 
name, both generally and as between husband and wife. 
Amongst the Zulus there is the rule in connection with 
hlonipa, that all females related to the girl's family may 
never call her husband by name, but " father of so-and- 
so " ; if there are no children they call him umkwenianA 
" They think it not respectful to call him by his name, 
and so with all young persons to old ones." The son- 
in-law will not call his mother-in-law by name, but 
simply mother, and the wife is called " so-and-so of so- 
and-so," " child of her father." A woman must not 

1 Munzinger, op. clt. 526, 325. 2 Skeat, op. clt. 369. 

3 Colquhoun, op. cit. 250. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiii. 7. 

NAME TABOOS 

435 

call her husband by name, either to him or of him, but 
"father of so-and-so." 1 Amongst the Zulus the child 
often has its name given before birth, " probably 
because it is not considered etiquette for the people of 
the bridegroom's kraal to speak to or of the bride by 

. her own name," and she is therefore frequently known 
as " the mother of so-and-so," before the marriage has 
taken place, although women more correctly take the 
name or surname of their father on marriage, e.g. a 
woman whose father's name is Jiba is Oka-Jiba — " she 
of Jiba" i.e. daughter of Jiba. If a woman is known 
as " mother of Nobatagati" her first child will receive 
that name if it be a girl ; if a boy, the masculine form, 
Matagati, will be used.2 

As has been already noted, the parents protect the 
child by taking its name into their keeping. The 
ideas so prevalent as to the importance of the name 
and the dangers that may threaten it may be referred 
to once more. The Dyaks alter the name of a sick 
child to deceive the evil spirits.3 The Tonquinese give 
children horrid names to frighten away evil spirits.4 

» Amongst the Cingalese the name of the child never 
transpires ; it is known to the father and astrologer 
alone. The father gives it by whispering it in the 
child's ear. At puberty it receives a new name.5 In 
Abyssinia one's baptismal name is concealed to prevent 
evil spirits from, injuring one thereby.6 The name of a 
child is never mentioned in Guiana, " because those 
who know the name would thus have the child in their 
power."7 The Pulayers of Malabar dare not even 

1 Leslie, op. cit. 173 j Callaway, op. cit. 316. 

2 South African Folklore Journal, ii. 15. 3 St. John, op. cit. i. 197. 

4 Bastian, Kambodja, 386. 5 Forbes, Eleven Years in Ceylon, i. 326. 

6 M. Parkyns, Life in Abyssinia, 301. 7 im Thurn, op. cit. 220. 

: 

436 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

call their children " children," but term them 
" monkeys." 1 

( The name-giving is therefore naturally regarded as 
an important business. It is practically always a 
religious act, as it gives the child a personality, a soul. 
Sexual taboo here finds a place, as in Luang Sermata 
and Ceram, where the father names the boys and the 
mother the girls.2 In Hawaii a son, when hardly 
weaned, took the father's name, and the mother was no 
longer allowed to eat with the child or touch its food.3 
The importance of the ceremony is brought out in 
the Narrinyeri belief that it is unlucky to name a child 
before it can walk,4 in the custom of giving up the 
name when a person bearing it dies, and in the 
Egyptian method of giving the name. The Kadi 
sucks a sweetmeat, and lets it trickle into the child's 
mouth. He thus " gives the name out of his mouth," 
a practical method of showing the material nature of 
the name in early thought. 

The giving of a name, as of anything else, also pro- 
duces no less than the taking of a name, the ngiampe 
relation ; the gift is, as such, a real part of one's self. 
Thus the Koosas have the custom of giving a man a 
new name, which no one knows but he who gives it. 
It is regarded as a very great honour.6 Amongst the 
Munda-kols a relative or friend gives the child its 
name, and between the two there is throughout their 
lives a "relation of dutifulness." 7 The already sub- 
sisting ngiampe relation between parent and child is 
thus emphasised when the parent gives it a name, as it 

1 Ploss, op. cit. i. 1 68. 2 Riedel, op. cit. 327, 135. 

3 D'Urville, op. cit. i. 475. 4 Featherman, op. cit. ii. 145. 

5 Ploss, op. cit. i. 164. 

6 Lichtenstein, op. cit. i. 258. Compare Revelation, ii. 17, xix. 12. 

7 Ploss, op. cit. i. 163. 

CHRISTENING 437 

when he takes it. In European folklore there is a 
tmon belief, natural as a result of ideas of contact, 
tat the characteristics of the person who gives the 
lild its name, or of those who bear the same name, or 
of godparents generally, affect the child.1 There is 
a Sioux custom called " the transfer of character " ; 
a brave and good man breathes into the infant's 
mouth,2 Lastly, the idea that the name is an external 
soul may be illustrated from the Todas. From fear of 
the " evil eye," an infant may not be seen by any one 
except its parents until it receives a name. Then at 
last it may be shown to outsiders ; 3 the idea being that 
it is rendered secure by having a double personality, 
part of which can be easily concealed or withheld. 

The ceremonial " uncleanness " attaching to the 
mother is one of the most universal results of sexual 
taboo. The separation between husband and wife after 
a birth is often prolonged until the child is weaned, the 
idea being that milk, as a female secretion, is a specially 
dangerous vehicle for transmission of her effeminate 
properties. Hence the infant from contact with the 
mother is also " unclean," that is, " dangerous," in the 
taboo sense, no less than it is in danger. To this idea 
is due the practice, which is fairly common, of taking 
boys away from the mother as soon as possible. The 
interest taken by all women in a birth, as well as in a 
baby, and the diffidence found in the male sex concern- 
ing the same, arise straight from sexual differentiation ; 
the next development of this is the common psycho- 
logical phenomenon that women both resent indiffer- 
ence as to the event, and for a time express diffidence, a 
sort of fear of causing disgust, in connection with the 

1 Ploss, op. clt. i. 159, ii. 226. 2 Eleventh Rep. Bur. Ethn. 482. 

3 Harkness, op. cit. 99. 

438 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

first showing of the child to the father. Amongst the 
Northern Indians the mother is " unclean " for five 
weeks after birth, and remains in a separate hut. No 
male may approach her, not even her husband ; if he 
were to see mother and child, it is feared that " he 
might take a dislike to the latter." 1 The recognition 
of the child by the father follows as a matter of course 
upon such a principle. Conversely in Egypt the father 
dares not see his child till the seventh day, " for fear he 
might injure it unwillingly by a look." The Kurnai 
infant is first taken to the father's brother, and then to 
the father.3 The object is doubtless to make the 
former a go-between, and so to facilitate the natural 
course of paternal emotion. Amongst the Basutos the 
father is separated from mother and child for four days. 
He is introduced to them thus : the medicine -man 
performs a ceremony called "the helping, or the 
absolution of the man and wife." If this is not done, 
the husband will swell up, or, if he goes to his wife, he j 
will die. The lepheko, a log four or six feet long, 
which is laid in front of the door when any one is sick, 
is brought, and she is set on it, and the husband put 
opposite her so that their legs touch. The medicine- 
man then rubs them all over with a preparation of roots 
and fat. Healing water is also drunk first by the 
husband and then by the wife.4 The name and nature 
of this ceremony well show the ideas of taboo behind 
it, and also point to the inference that it is another 
renewal of the marriage tie, similar to the South Celebes 
custom. 

The ideas of sexual taboo are responsible for such 

1 Hearne, op. at. 93. Cf. Crooke, op. cit. \. 277. 

2 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 132. 3 Fison and Howitt, of. cit. 204. 
4 Griitzner, in Zeitschnft fir Ethnologie for 1877, p. 78. 

I ABSOLUTION OF PARENTS 439 

:oms as this of the Zulus. The first-born and 
second-born sons cannot inherit, " because," say the 
Zulus in a vague way, "they are the sons of the 
womb." This is an interesting detail in the history 
of primogeniture. 

As to the taboo on the infant, the Roti belief that 

the first hair of a child is not his own, and unless cut 

t off will make him weak, is explainable ultimately as 

being due to connection with the mother.2 All the 

contagious matter, however, is removed from mother 

and child by the usual purification ceremonies. The 

churching of women is a development of this. In 

; Malay ceremonial " lustration is generally accomplished 

; either by means of fire or of water." " Infants are 

> purified by fumigation, and women after child-birth are 

half-roasted over the purificatory fire." 3 

The principles of responsibility in ngia ngiampe have 
I, in this connection an interesting result. For instance 
| in Wetar the parents may not name their child, " for it 
j would thus be liable to illness." 4 Such parental anxiety 
I k for the child's safety, combined with the primitive 

impulse to shift responsibility as the best way of meet- \ 
[ ing it, is the ultimate raison d^etre of godparents. 
The principle is similar to that of the relation of 
parents-in-law. In primitive thought both sets of 
persons are religious representatives. The godparents j 
are proxies for the real parents, and as such render the I 
responsibilities of the latter easier. Similar relations 
are those formed between the operators and the boys 
operated upon at initiation ceremonies, and between the 
bridesmen and the bride, and the taboo there resulting 

1 Arbousset and Daumas, op. cit. 149. 

'2 Tijdschrift -voor Neer lands- Indie, ii. 635. 

3 Skeat, op. cit. 77. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 449. 

440 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

is often paralleled by a taboo between godparents and 
children. Amongst the Haidas at the ceremony of 
naming the child a sister of the father's holds it and 
becomes its godmother.1 At the circumcision of a 
Hova boy the parent or other person who holds it, and 
also the operator, are called rani jaza, " father of a 
child." A woman also acts as mother on the occasion, 
and is called " mother of a child." " They are a kind of 
godfather and godmother." Godparents are found 
amongst the Mayas, Caribs, and Japanese.3 Their 
representation of the parents is shown in European 
folklore, as in Thiiringen, where they receive each a 
half of the christening cake.4 In Altmark bread and 
cheese are given to the godparents, who divide it 
between themselves.5 All over Europe it is the practice 
for them to give each other presents.6 Their responsi- 
bilities are illustrated by the German notion that they 
must be chosen carefully, because all their qualities, 
especially moral, pass to the child. In Voigtland and 
Franconia the godfather must be careful to wash, else 
the child will be unclean in habits. In the Erzgebirg 
he may not carry a knife, for fear the child may 
develop suicidal mania. Godparents must fast, that 
the child may not be greedy.7 The taboos are illus- 
trated by the prohibition regular in Europe, that god- 
parents may not marry either their godchildren or 
each other. 

Lastly, there is an interesting case of that method of 
securing safety by spreading one's identity over a 
number of similar persons, which has been illustrated in 
connection with Saturnalia. Union, as was seen, is a 

1 G. M. Dawson, op. dt. 131. a Journ. Anthrop. Imt. ix. 40. 

3 Ploss, cp. cit. i. 191, 293, 291. 4 Id. i. 232. 5 Id. i. 234. 

6 Id. i. 241. 7 Id. i. 159 5 ii. 226. 

GODPARENTS 

441 

result of this. In the Kei Islands after the name- 
giving the parents entertain all the children of the 
village.1 After the infant has been bathed the parents 
in Ceram-laut feast some children of the village.2 
Shortly after a birth in Amboina three to five children 
are brought into the chamber and there feasted.3 The 
reason behind these customs is shown by the following 
cases. In Amboina, if a child does not thrive, the 
parents gave a feast to the children of the village ; these 
latter are supposed to give presents to the sick child.4 
In other words a ngiampe relation is established. The 
next cases show the principle of securing safety by 
substitution. Soon after a birth the Watubella mother 
bathes in the sea, accompanied by eight or ten children 
out of the village. If she is too weak to go, another 
woman takes her place. On the way these children 
have to shout continually, " in order to divert the 
attention of the evil spirits from the child."5 The 
Thlinkeets hold festivals " in honour of children." 
Slaves to the number of the children for whom the 
celebration is made receive their liberty. The operation 
of boring the ears of the children is performed on this 
occasion.6 

1 Riedel, op. at. 238. 2 Id. 174. s Id. 73. 

4 Id. 75. 5 Id. 207. 6 Dall, op. cit. 420. 

CHAPTER XVII 

THE study of the marriage system has been blocked, 
owing to the neglect of students to use primitive data 
of custom and thought for the explanation of rules 
invented by primitive man. By using modern or 
relatively late conceptions of relationship, generally 
legal in character, and by ignoring the significant series 
of facts which show the primitive relations of men and 
women, and on which, rather than on later legal ideas, 
primitive marriage and primitive relationship rest, they 
have explained the origin of marriage ceremonies and 
the marriage system on legal lines, and have thus been 
led to attribute to early man such monstrosities of 
improbability, as the general practice of female infan- 
ticide and of marriage by capture, promiscuity of wives, 
"group -marriage," and general incest. Moreover, 
they have been compelled on their theory to explain 
certain ceremonial acts, the religious character of which 
is obvious, as being legal fictions. The reconstruction, 
however, of primitive society cannot be effected with 
" bricks of law," but only with bricks of human nature 
mortared by religion. 

In order to explain the origin of the marriage 
system, i.e. the relation of marriage to relationship, we 
must first penetrate to the ideas which underlie human 
relations generally, and sexual relations in particular. 
This has been done ; and as a result we have worked 

CHAP, xvii THE MARRIAGE SYSTEM 443 

out the primitive conception of marriage and its respon- 
sibilities, and the origin of the marriage ceremonies and 
practices which arise from that conception. Secondly, 
we must reach the ideas behind the primitive conception 
of relationship. This also has been done. Relationship 
comes from relation, and the primitive conception of 
relationship is identical with the primitive conception 
of human relations. As Messrs. Spencer and Gillen 
remark of Australian relationship, we must, in order 
to understand it, first disabuse our minds of the modern 
conception of kinship. 

The chief characteristic of the primitive marriage \ 
system, as is well known, is exogamy. But it is no 
less the characteristic of all marriage systems in every 
age. For what is exogamy ? It is often strangely 
misunderstood ; but obviously the one invariable ante-i 
cedent in all exogamous systems, indeed in all marriageN| 
systems, is the prohibition of marriage " within the ] 
house." This prohibition is the essence of exogamy i 
and of all bars to marriage. I have shown how sexual 
taboo produces a religious separation of children in the 
home ; originally based on the sexual difference which 
leads the father to take the boys about with him, while 
the mother takes the girls, it is afterwards enforced by 
the principles of sexual taboo, and its extension by the 
use of relationships produces the various forms of 
exogamy. Robertson Smith set the question in the 
right direction when he said, "whatever is the origin 
of bars to marriage, they certainly are early associated 
with the feeling that it is indecent for housemates to 
intermarry."1 If we apply to the word "indecent" the 
connotation of sexual taboo, which gave rise amongst 
other things to the especial meaning of this word, and 

1 W. Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia, 170. 

444 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

if we understand by " housemates " those upon whom 
sexual taboo concentrates, we have explained exogamy. 

It is unscientific to have recourse to an hypothesis of 
primitive incest or promiscuity. The frequent myths 
which seem to countenance the suggestion are easily 
explained by the ideas of sexual taboo, which attach 
potential " sin " to any sexual relation. All the facts 
are distinctly opposed to any probability that incest or 
promiscuity was ever really practised at all. I shall 
return to this point when discussing " group-marriage." 

On the other hand, Dr. Westermarck's explanation 
of the prohibition against the marriage of near kin is 
equally mistaken. He supposes that there is a general 
human " instinct " against inbreeding, resulting from 
the survival of those peoples who have avoided it, in- 
breeding being assumed to be deleterious. In the first 
place, this presupposes in some remote period a general 
use of the very practice which elsewhere he argues was 
never general. In the next place, though many attempts 
have been made, it has never yet been rendered even_ 
probable that inbreeding, as such, is deleterious to the 
race. Evidence drawn from animals in domesticity, or 
from civilised peoples, proves nothing with regard to 
primitive man, the conditions being so entirely different. 
The.u.tmost that can be shown by such eyj rjgn c£.J^T..tl]^ 
inbreeding perpetuates or reproduces congenital taints,. 
This result is important enough, but it was other con- 
siderations that led man to avoid " incest," not in- 
breeding, for the latter has rarely been avoided at all. 
The well-known statistics of Professor G. H. Darwin 
really left the question undecided. Dr. Wes£ermarck 
considers that they proved the injurious results, while 
most enquirers consider that they proved the contrary. 
A satisfactory statistical proof requires a higher per- 

MARRIAGE OF NEAR KIN 

445 

itage than this, little short in fact of a hundred 
>usand to one. On the other hand, there is at least 
ic case of a people living more or less in a state of 
lature, who actually seem to be physically benefited by 
inbreeding, viz. certain Fijian stocks, with whom first 
cousins are required to marry. Mr. Basil Thomson 
has shown that these Fijians are considerably the 
superiors in all the usual physical tests, of those who 
forbid cousin -marriage.1 Mr. Curr states that the 
Australian natives he knew were well aware that the 
aim of the marriage system was to .prevent the union 
of nearly related individuals ; but he could not discover 
on what ground consanguineous marriages were held to 
be objectionable.2 As to disadvantages of inbreeding, 
the Australians whom he knew were quite ignorant.3 
Certain South American tribes give no other reason for 
avoidance of marriage between near relatives except 
"shame."4 Huth gives much evidence to show that 
there is no innate horror of incest in man.5 The 
peasants of the Government of Archangel say that 
marriages between blood-relations are " blessed with a 
rapid increase of children." 6 

Again, in nearly all the exogamous systems known, 
that is, in the common type of two exogamous classes, 
and also in the less common type of two exogamous 
classes each split into two sub-classes, it is necessitated 
by the system that first cousins, when children of a 
brother and sister, may marry, and where the system is, 
as is generally the case, rigidly followed, are expected to 
marry. This, however, is no more a proof of primitive 
inbreeding and incest, than is the Archangel notion. 

1 Jcurn, Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 383 ff. 
Id. i. 236. 

2 Curr, op. clt. i. 112. 
4 Westermarck, op. cit. 318, 320. 
6 A. H. Huth, The Marriage of Near Km, 10-14. 6 Folklore, i. 469. 

446 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

If then there is an " instinct " against inbreeding, it 
stultifies itself in a very curious way. Also the 
evidence which Dr. Westermarck cites necessarily con- 
cerns cousin-marriage chiefly, and yet he is forced to come 
back to an "instinct" against marriage between house- 
mates, though cousins are rarely such. It would be 
^ more correct to say that there is an " instinct "for in- 
( breeding, which is checked by human religious ideas. 
He does not make allowance, in connection with the 
prohibition between housemates, for the common pro- 
hibition of marriage between first cousins (when 
children of two brothers or of two sisters), who do not 
live together, and between totemic tribe-fellows, for 
instance, who have never seen each other ; nor does he 
explain the common fact that persons entirely unrelated, 
though living together, may marry (the " instinct " 
against inbreeding would here show the wonderful 
insight that " instinct " was once supposed to possess),, 
or the more common fact that persons entirely 
unrelated who live together may not marry (here the 
" instinct" would seem to have been easily duped). 

There is also the remarkable fact, as has been seen, 
that to no little extent brothers and sisters, mothers 
and sons, fathers and daughters, do not live together. 
This is a result of sexual taboo, and is originally a part 
of the cause why such marriage is avoided, and not a 
result of the avoidance of incest. 

Lastly, it is not scientific to use the term " instinct " 
of this kind of thing. Instoct proper is only con- 
cerned with immediate processes of function ; it is 
physiological thought, and has nothing in its content 
except response of function to environment.' Instinct 
possesses neither tradition nor prophecy. 

The present hypothesis gives the reason why brothers 

ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 447 

ind sisters in some cases do not live together, which 
>n is also the chief factor in producing what is 
•eally a complex feeling, the subconscious or conscious 
aversion " to love and marriage, first, between those 
are in continuous contact, and secondly, between 
lose who are not. In the simple form of the aversion 
re have seen the intensification of sexual taboo in the 
loseness of the family circle, where no dangerous acts 
lay be performed, such as eating in some cases, to the 
:tent that parents prevent brothers and sisters from 
iting together, speaking together, or having any 
ordinary physical relations. These prohibitions are an 
accentuated form of the taboo of personal isolation, 
inherent in human relations. They of course include 
the dangerous act of marriage. They are not due 
originally to a fear of incest, as such, but to the fear of 
sexual contagion of properties, of which the idea of 
incest is one particular result. Practically all sexual 
relations, and not merely intercourse, are " incest " for 
primitive man, in his sense of the word — the breaking 
of a taboo instituted to prevent the dangerous results 
of physical contact between persons who are, qua sexual, 
mutually dangerous ; and it would be easy to show that, 
psychologically, the belief in the injurious results of 
inbreeding is of religious origin, and parallel to the 
belief that sickness is due to sin or violation of taboo. 

As showing that sexual intercourse is not the chief 
or only relation that is feared, it is to be observed that 
amongst several peoples illicit connections between the 
young before they are of age to marry are allowed, 
though illicit marriage is strictly forbidden. Licence 
before marriage is very common in the East Indies.1 It 

1 G. A Wilken, in Bijdragen tot de Taal-Land en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsck 
Indie, xxxviii. 3, 438 ff. 

448 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

is allowed between members of " classes " that may not 
intermarry in some Australian tribes, of the Lower 
Murray, Lower Darling, and perhaps the Port Lincoln 
and Kunandaburi tribes,1 but it is probable that these 
Australian cases, if all the facts were known, would 
bear another explanation. Here, as in marriage itself, 
it is the living together, the permanent contact, the 
sharing of life at bed and board, together with the 
procreation of children, that are the important things. 

The other factor in the simple form of the pro- 
hibition is a psychological result of sexual solidarity 
and sexual taboo. The bringing-up of children in this 
manner produces what is a psychological impossibility 
of sexual love between brothers and sisters. Separation 
before the sexual instinct shows itself, has in effect set 
the consciousness outwards by the time puberty arrives, 
and then, when the sexual instinct has appeared, it is 
biassed towards realisation out of the " house," and this 
is what actually occurs ; for out of the house the 
prohibition is not so stringent nor so carefully enforced, 
while love is produced by chance meetings with 
acquaintances. This coincides with the psychological 
fact that lovers awakening turns the mind away from 
what is familiar and known towards what is strange and 
1 romantic. 

We may now pass to cases where the children are 
not strictly separated. Here, when living together 
becomes a sentiment, we have reached the complex 
form of the prohibition. It is the relation of ngia 
ngiampe once more. Living together, especially where 
commensality is allowed, forms one of the closest bonds 
of mutual respect and duty. Originally the feeling of 

1 J. G. Frazer, Totemism, 59 j Brough Smyth, op. cit. i. 37 j Native Tribes of South 
Australia, 222. 

xvn ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 449 

duty is one of reciprocal caution, if not of fear, for 
each person has part of the other in his or her keeping ; 
but this conception soon merges into that of mutual 
responsibility, and between the parties concerned any 
dangerous relation such as marriage is out of the 
question. It is not convenient, it is improper, it is an 
offence against the harmony of the house for such 
dangerous relations to occur, and parents prevent such 
occurrences. The case is identical with that of eating 
together. As we have seen, such dangerous functions 
are often not permitted in the house or family circle at 
all, where in the confined space and personal proximity 
their dangerousness would be intensified. Moreover, 
it is natural that parents should apply their own experi- 
ence for the advantage of their children. They know, 
if not the responsibilities, at least the superstitious 
dangers attaching to any relations between the sexes, 
and in particular, accustomed as they are to refer all 
mutual disagreements, perils of the soul and body alike, 
in sexual and other crises, to their own reciprocal 
action and mutually dangerous relations, that is, to the 
principles of mutual contact (ngia ngiampe\ they will 
naturally prevent any repetition of such between their 
children. 

In this question we see fully developed once more 
the primitive ideas of contact in relation, and, in 
particular, how physical relations of any sort, including 
that of marriage, are tabooed, first between persons 
different enough or distant enough to be spiritually 
or physically dangerous ; and secondly, between persons 
near enough and closely enough connected to be 
mutually responsible, that is, potentially dangerous in 
a more complex way, to each other. In the former, 
danger is intensified, in the latter, duty. 

2 G 

450 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Of the former, the typical result is the Ceramese 
and Wetarese practice of forbidding marriage between 
members of villages who have made a military alliance 
by the pela ceremony, the nature of the ceremony 
preventing treachery, while it brings them into the 
second class of persons ; of the latter the prohibition of 
marriage between brothers and sisters is the typical 
result. 

In the former, again, there is implied the impulse to 
endogamy, as seen in the constant marriage of cousins, 
in the latter the impulse to exogamy, which, in its 
lowest terms, is the avoidance of marriage between 
brothers and sisters. 

Lastly, at puberty the separation between brothers 
and sisters is stereotyped, both by natural and artificial 
means. Where ceremonies of " initiation " obtain, the 
bond of initiation, simultaneous or otherwise, connects 
the boys of the community together on the one hand, 
and the girls on the other, by a close tie of the 
ngiampe species, and thus the way is prepared for an 
extension of the prohibition. Fellow-initiates become 
" brothers "or " sisters." Thus, amongst the Kurnai 
all the young men who have been initiated at the same 
time are "brothers" and address each other's "wives" 
as " wife " ; * this is identical with those cases where 
fellow-initiates form " guilds." 

Such and all terms of relationship, it is to be noted, 
are in primitive thought also terms of relation. They 
are both terms of kinship and terms of address. Here 
may be reconciled a somewhat bitter controversy 
between those who hold the former and those who 
hold the latter connotation of classificatory terms. In 
all ages terms of relationship are terms of relationship, 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 198. 

xvii RELATIONSHIP 451 

but no less are they, secondarily, terms of address. 
Of primitive times this is especially true, for "kinship" in 
primitive thought is a vaguer term than in later culture, 
not because of any primitive promiscuity, but because 
the tie of blood had not attained prominence over 
looser ties of contact and identity of age. To the 
primitive man such a term as " brother " includes men 
of his own age, who are in more or less close contact 
with him, and " sister " includes women in the same 
way. So with terms like " husband " and " wife." 
There is also often to be seen a very natural confusion 
between these two sets of terms. A "wife" is a 
woman of one's own generation, but so is one's sister ; 
the same applies to "husband" and "brother," mutatis 
mutandis. This is brought out by the very widely 
spread use of the words " brother " and " sister " by 
young people and even by lovers. In Ceram-laut 
young people call each other " brother " or " sister." l 
Friends in the Aru Islands call each other " brother." 2 
In the Babar Islands, lovers call each other u brother " 
and " sister." 3 Indeed, it seems that early man finds 
it difficult to rise above the confused notion that all 
women of his own age are potential " sisters," just as 
we may infer from many facts cited above a similar 
difficulty in surmounting the similar idea that any con- 
nection with any women of that age is equivalent to 
marriage. Thus, potentially, brothers and sisters are, 
in primitive thought, already married through having 
lived together, and therefore, as it were, cannot be 
married actually. This confusion between " wife " and 
" sister " is shown by a Kurnai explanation of a practice 
at initiation. Behind each youth there sits a girl called 

1 Riedel, De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tustchcn Selebes en Papua, 153. 
2 Id. 260. 3 Id. 350. 

452 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Krau-un. She is a " comrade " and not a wife ; the 
Kurnai " carefully pointed out that they were like 
sisters and not like wives." Such girls are often 
cousins of the boys.1 

Next as to relationships, beginning with those persons 
who live together more or less, it is to be noted that 
habitual proximity and contact is the strongest and 
most ordinary tie, and is earlier in thought than the tie 
,of blood. The strong conception of the tie of blood, 
best seen in feudal and semi -civilised societies, is by 
no means so strong in primitive culture. Identity of 
" flesh " if not of food, that is, commensality, are both 
earlier in thought than that of blood. A test case for 
psychology is perhaps that closest of ties between 
mother and child ; here in all stages of human culture, 
the idea of the tie of blood is psychologically the last to 
appear ; mutual affection and the relations of help and I 
dependence result from that tie, but psychologically 
that tie is ignored. Psychologically speaking, relation- 
ship develops originally from relations, and in primi- 
tive thought, relations are the test of kinship and not , 
vice versa. The relative lateness of the idea of the ^ 
blood-tie is also indicated by the views held by such 
early races as the Central Australians, for instance, 
upon the facts of conception and birth. In the Arunta 
tribe every member is born " as a reincarnation of the 
never-dying spirit-part of one of these semi-animal 
ancestors." This principle is revealed to boys at the 
second initiation ceremony, and pantomimically acted. 
The child is not the result of intercourse, which only 
prepares the mother for its reception. The sacred 
Erathi-pa stone ( = " child ") has a hole through which 
spirit-children look Out for women who may pass, and 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 195. 

xvn RELATIONSHIP 453 

it is believed that visiting the stone will result in con- 
ception. " If a young woman has to pass near the 
stone, and does not wish to have a child, she will care- 
fully disguise her youth, distorting her face and walk- 
ing with the aid of a stick. She will bend herself 
double like a very old woman, the tones of whose 
voice she will imitate, saying, 'Don't come to me, I 
am an old woman.' ' A black line is painted above 
the hole, and is always renewed by any man who visits 
it. A similar black line, called by the same name, is 
painted above the eye of a new-born child to prevent 
sickness. A man may cause women to be pregnant, 
even at a distance, by rubbing the stone and repeating 
a charm. Or, if a man wants to punish his wife for 
supposed unfaithfulness, he rubs it, saying, " Go quickly 
and hang on tightly." That is, the child is to remain 
so long in the woman as to cause her death. If a man 
and wife desire a child, he ties his hair-girdle round it.1 
The Arunta, who hold these views, count descent 
through the father. The old superstitious ideas still 
obtain, though the biological fact is practically ad- 
mitted. Another indication that the tie of blood is 
late, is the fact that in some Australian tribes the boys 
follow the father in " descent," and the girls the 
mother.2 Lastly, it is the name, and not the " blood," 
that in most early societies is the chief test of classifi- 
catory or totemic relationship, in maternal and paternal 
descent alike ; 3 and also these very relationships have 
as their essential purpose not relationship but preven- 
tion of marriage. 

If one thinks over the matter, it is obvious that the 
inference of identity of flesh and blood would be a later 

1 Spencer and Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia, 228, 229, 265, 337, 
338. 2 Infra, 456. 3 Westermarck, op. cit. ill. 

454 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

achievement than the inference of vague connection 
between a mother or father and child ; and though the 
biological ties were certain, with the increase of know- 
ledge, to supersede other conceptions and practically 
were always used, yet there are many facts which point 
to attempts on the part of other ideas of relation to 
become conceptions of relationship. It is to be noted 
also that the idea of the blood-tie cannot explain most 
of these, except by such forced analogy as is quite 
impossible. 

In the account of ngia ngiampe we reviewed the 
more artificial forms of "relationship." Of other 
forms, firstly, identity of sex very commonly amounts 
to a relationship, and where sexual taboo is well- 
developed, it is perhaps the strongest tie of all. It is 
a result of sexual solidarity, and assumes various 
forms. For instance, in several Australian tribes each 
sex has a totem ; in the Port Lincoln tribe a small 
kind of lizard, the male of which is called Ibirri, and 
the female Waka^ is said to have divided the sexes in 
the human species ; " an event that would appear not 
to be much approved of by the natives, since either 
sex has a mortal hatred against the opposite sex of 
these little animals, the men always destroying the 
Waka and the women the Ibirri."1 In the Wotjo- 
baluk tribe it is believed that " the life of Ngunungunut 
(the bat) is the life of a man, and the life of Tartatgurk 
(the night-jar) is the life of a woman " ; when either is 
killed, a man or woman dies. Should one of these 
animals be killed, every man or every woman fears 
that he or she may be the victim ; and this gives rise 
to numerous fights. "In these fights, men on one 
side and women on the other, it was not all certain 

1 Native Tribes of South Australia, 241. 

xvn RELATIONSHIP 455 

who would be victorious ; for at times the women gave 
the men a severe drubbing with their yam-sticks, while 
often the women were injured or killed by spears."1 
In some Victorian tribes the bat is the men's animal, and 
they " protect it against injury, even to the half-killing 
of their wives for its sake." The goatsucker belongs 
to the women, who protect it jealously. " If a man 
kills one, they are as much enraged as if it was one of 
their children, and will strike him with their long 
poles." The mantis also belongs to the men, and no 
woman dares kill it.2 In the Ta-ta-thi tribes of New 
South Wales the men have the bat for their sex-totem, 
and the women the small owl. They address each 
other as Owls and Bats.3 In the Mukjarawaint tribe 
of Western Victoria the bat is the men's totem and 
the night -jar the women's.4 The Kulin tribe of 
Victoria has two pairs of sex-totems, the bat (male) 
and night-jar (female), and the emu-wren (male) and 
superb-warbler (female).5 Amongst the Coast Murring 
people the men's totem is "man's brother," the women's 
" woman's sister," phrases which recur in North- West 
Victoria.6 The best example is from the Kurnai. All 
men are descendants of Teerung (emu- wren), and all 
women of Djeefgun (superb-warbler). Emu-wrens are 
the men's brothers, and superb-warblers the women's 
sisters. Sometimes if young men were slow to marry, 
the women went out in the forest and killed some 
emu-wrens, and casually showed them to the men. An 
uproar followed. The men were very angry ; the 
yeerungs their brothers had been killed ; men and girls 
got sticks and attacked each other. Next day the 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Itist. xviii. 58. 2 Dawson, op. at. 53. 

8 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xiv. 350. 4 Id. xii. 45. 

6 Id. xv. 416. 6 Id. xv. 416. 

456 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

young men went and killed some of the women's 
sisters, the birds djeetgun^ superb -war biers, and the 
result was a worse fight than before. By and by, an 
eligible young man would meet a marriageable girl, 
and would say "Djeetgun," she replied, "Yeerung! 
What does the Yeerung eat ? " This would lead to a 
marriage. Sons of course follow the father's totem, 
Yeerung) and daughters the mother's, Djeetgun.1 

Sex also supersedes kinship in other ways. A 
Maori boy inherits the father's, a girl the mother's 
property.2 So for teknonymy amongst the Mayas.3 
In Victoria a boy's "nearest relative" is his father, a 
girl's her mother.4 In the Ikula tribe, which has four 
totem-clans, the sons of a Budera man and a Kura 
woman are Budera, and the daughters are Kura.5 

One of the earliest ties of relationship is that of 
sharing food together, a natural variation, though not 
widely spread, being that those to whom the same food I 
is taboo are akin. Such cases form good examples of 
the action of the principles of contact, and are often 
connected with the practice according to which young 
men initiated together, or otherwise associated, habitu- 
ally take their meals in common. Thus amongst the 
New Hebrideans there are sets of initiated boys, 
arranged according to age, and each set mess together i 
and sleep together, and may not eat with other persons.6 
The connection between food and kinship is very clear 
in early thought, and it is natural that it should be 
so ; the inference being that food produces flesh, and 
identity of food produces identity of flesh. Amongst i 
the Kamilaroi all things in heaven and earth are? 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 201, 215. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 99. 

3 Supra, 430. * Dawson, op. cit. 38. 

5 J.A.I, xii. 509. 3 Id. xxiii. 6, 7. 

xvii RELATIONSHIP 

457 

assigned to the clan-divisions of the tribe, and to such 
a question as " What division does a bullock belong 
to ? " the answer is, " It eats grass, therefore it is 
Boortwerio" l So the answer to what is practically a 
proposal of marriage on the part of a young Kurnai 
was, we saw, " Teerung ! (the male totem). What 
does the yeerung eat ? " Amongst the Dieri Murdoo, 
which means taste, is the term for " family," and the 
first question asked of a stranger is "What Murdoo ?" 2 
Again, in the tribes of the Belyando River the "classes" 
or divisions for purposes of marriage are allowed to eat 
certain foods only.3 Amongst the Damaras the word 
for "marriage division " is oruzo, which refers to food, 
and these divisions are described as "dietaries."4 
Another account states that the "clans" of the 
Damaras are distinguished by food-taboos. One, for 
instance, may not eat sheep without bones, another, 
oxen with certain spots. They will not even touch 
vessels in which such have been cooked, or go near 
the smoke of the fire used to cook it.5 The Gaelic 
names for family, teadhloch and cuedich, mean, first, 
having a common residence, and, secondly, those who eat 
together.6 The Arabic and Hebrew words for " flesh " 
have also the connotation of " kindred " or " clan." 7 

The connection in totemic tribes between identity 
of food and relationship by totem, those who have the 
same totem being regarded as akin, is shown in the 
Narrinyeri tribe. The totems here are called ngaitye, 
which means " friend." All members of a totem-clan 
are regarded as " relations." This, as is well known, 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 169. 2 Curr, op. cit. ii. 49. 

3 Id. Hi. 27. 4 South African Folklore Journal, i. 40. 

5 C. J. Andersson, Lake Ngami, 222 ff. 

6 McLennan, Studies in Ancient History, 123. 

7 Robertson Smith, op. cit. 148, 176. 

458 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

is the case with all totem-clans. In some Australian 
tribes, however, it is to be noted, totemism has nothing 
to do with marriage. " The ngaitye of the Narrinyeri 
may be killed and eaten by those who possess it, but 
they are always careful to destroy the remains, such as 
bones, feathers, etc., lest an enemy should obtain them 
and use them for purposes of sorcery. They never 
marry one who belongs to the same ngaitye" l When 
boys are initiated together they become "tribal 
brothers," and the marriage-bar is thus extended out- 
side the family. In the Torres Straits "initiation 
mates " may not marry each other's sisters.2 

Lastly, in connection with food-kinship there is the 
widely spread custom of forming a tie of " brotherhood " 
by eating and drinking together. This is a common 
form of the relation of ngia ngiampe, and I need not 
quote again the examples we have already reviewed. 
Later than this there arises the same practice with 
blood as the kalduke^ and here relations and relationship 
meet. I may add that amongst the Arabs and else- 
where milk-kinship is equivalent to real kinship.3 This 
is due originally not to analogy from motherhood, but 
to primitive ideas about food. Milk is regarded as 
equivalent to flesh by the Arabs, and milk -kinship 
forms one of Muhammad's forbidden degrees. 

Again, when friends in the Aru Islands and Ceram- 
laut call each other " brother " or " sister," and whei 
lovers in the Babar Islands call each other " brother " 
and " sister," 4 we see another form of primitive relation- 
ship, based on contact and combined with identity of 
age. It is no analogy, except in terminology, from the 
real relationship, nor yet does it point to primitive 

1 G. Taplin, in Curr, op. cit. ii. 245. 2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xix. 411. 

8 Robertson Smith, op. cit. 149. 4 Riedel, op. cit. 260, 153, 350. 

xvn RELATIONSHIP 

459 

incest or promiscuity. When lovers and married 
persons call each "brother and sister''1 we see that 
love and marriage are another form of primitive 
relationship, i.e. of ngiampe. And here is to be found 
one reason for the common misconception that marriage 
ceremonies were intended to make the pair of one kin. 
In primitive thought relationship is not our relationship. 
It is rather relation. Relation and relationship are not 
yet differentiated, that is all. The Cherokees " recko|i 
a friend in the same rank with a brother, both with 
regard to marriage and any other affair in social life.2 
Amongst the Seminoles two young men would agree to 
be life-friends, " more than brothers." 8 This is a very 
common thing in early races. 

Again, any form of the ngia ngiampe relation is, as 
we have seen, equivalent to relationship. The disciples 
of a Buryat Shaman are his " sons." 4 Adoption, so 
common in early peoples, is frequently a bar to 
marriage, as amongst the Eskimo, Greenlanders, and 
Andamanese.5 In European folk-religion there is the 
rule, sanctioned by the Catholic Church, that god- 
parents become kin to the family, and marriage may not 
take place between the godparents themselves, between 
them and members of the family, or the godchildren.6 
Godparents are proxies for the parents, and as such 
ought to marry, or at least to be married already ; the 
fact that they may not marry proves the primitive ideas 
both of sexual relation and of relationship, and shows 
the impossibility of analogy from kinship. 

Lastly, there is the well-known form of kinship by 
name. It is parallel to kinship by totem, and is too 

1 Wright, op. cit. ii. 224, 229. 2 Adair, op. cit. 190. 
3 Fifth Rep. Bur. Eth. 508. 4 J.A.I, xxiv. 135. 

6 Ninth Rep. Bur. Eth. 419 j Cranz, op. cit. i. 146 ; J.A.I, xii. 126. 
6 Ploss, Das Kind, i. 198 ff., 291. 

460 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

familiar to need illustration. Dr. Westermarck has 
shown that this is the important point in both maternal 
and paternal descent.1 In other words, those who have 
the same name are ngia ngiampe and may not marry. 

Primitive relationship, it is clear, is at once stronger 
and weaker than the civilised tie ; weaker, because the 
bond of blood has not assumed a superiority over other 
relations, close contact being the test ; stronger, because 
the ideas of contact which characterise these relations 
have so intense a religious meaning and enforce duty 
so stringently. 

The famous Matriarchal Theory was as exaggerated 
in its early forms as was the Patriarchal. It is now 
coming to be recognised that it is simply the tracing 
of descent through the mother and giving the children 
her name, though there are a few cases where inherit- 
ance of property has later come under the rule, some 
of these being due to sex. It is a method of tracing 
genealogy, more convenient in polygamous societies, and 
more natural in primitive times, when the close connec- 
tion of mother and child during the early days of 
infancy emphasises the relation. The system was 
explained by Bachofen as due to the supremacy of 
women, and by McLennan as due to doubtful paternity 
/ and primitive promiscuity. It is not, however, doubt- 
ful paternity which causes maternal genealogy ; Dr. 
Westermarck has shown this, and also that the hypo- 
thesis of primitive promiscuity is without any founda- 
tion whatever.2 The last position of the theory of 
promiscuity will be taken when we discuss " group- 
marriage " so-called. He has also proved that, though 
common, "maternal descent*' cannot have been eithc 
universally or generally a stage through which man 

1 Op. cit. in. 2 Op. cit. chapters iv. v. vi. 

MATRIARCHY 461 

issed. Amongst the lowest tribes in the scale, those 
>f Australia, paternal descent is nearly as common as 
iternal. It is interesting to notice that the reckoning 
of descent exclusively through either the maternal or 
the paternal line, is an example of the influence which 
sex must necessarily have upon relationships. In those 
cases where the sons follow the father's clan, and the 
daughters the mother's, there was a similar phenomenon ; 
here, there is an attempt to make relationship for both 
sexes follow one sex to the exclusion of the other. In 
maternal descent, no less than in paternal, however, the 
relation to the unrepresented side of the house is of 
course easy to trace. In the islands of Leti, Moa, and 
Lakor, there is seemingly an attempt to adjust the 
balance in unisexual relationship, by making the sons 
follow the mother and the daughters the father,1 but 
this is doubtless due to considerations of caste. 

Why did not early peoples trace descent in the 
apparently obvious way, from both father and mother ? 
For the same reason that we, for instance, use the 
paternal name to trace descent. In the ages before 
writing, the use of both parents' names and their 
application to children would be too complicated, as it 
still is found. This consideration has much to do with 
" classificatory relationship." But here too sexual taboo 
has had its influence, and by dividing the family into 
two parts indefinitely postponed the trial of solutions. 
A Zulu custom shows the connection of sexual taboo 
with the paternal system, and has more than a merely 
casual interest as a savage Salic law. The first-born 
and second -born sons of the king cannot inherit, 
because, say the Zulus in a vague way, " they are the 
sons of the womb." 2 A similar idea shows itself in the 

1 Riedcl, op. cit. 392, 384. 2 Arbousset and Daumas, of. cit. 149. 

462 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

objection held by some peoples to the children of two 
sisters marrying, while they do not object to marriage 
between the children of two brothers ; for instance, 
in Leti, Moa, Lakor, and Madagascar. With the 
latter people such marriage is regarded as " incest."1 
Such marriage is of course prevented by the usual 
exogamous system, whether maternal or paternal, and 
so is marriage between brothers' children, but the ideas 
of sex have asserted themselves. It is as if female 
influence rendered " nearness " of kin too near, while 
crossing of sex adjusts the balance. 

Prof. Tylor has connected the maternal system with 
the practice whereby the husband takes up his residence 
with his wife's people. He regards this as the earliest 
form of setting up an establishment, followed by a 
transitional method, by which the couple begin married 
life in the wife's house, but eventually remove.2 In the 
first place, Messrs. Spencer and Gillen assert, that as far 
as they know, it is not the custom in any Australian 
tribe, maternal or otherwise, for the husband to reside 
with his wife's people.3 In the Kunandaburi tribe 
Messrs. Howitt and Fison remark that, though the 
maternal system is used, yet the wife goes to her 
husband's people.4 In Guinea the maternal system is 
followed, but the wife goes at once to the husband's 
home, so in New Britain, and amongst the Arawaks.5 
Again, as to the " transitional " method, it seems at 
least improbable that the inconvenience of setting up 
one's residence amongst the wife's people and then 
setting up another, should have been undergone in 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 385 j J. Sibree, Madagascar, 248. 

2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 247 ff. 

3 Op. cit. 470. 4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 35. 

5 Bosman, Description of Guinea, 392, 420 ; Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 293, 294 j 
id. xxi. 230 j Brett, op. cit. 101. 

xvn RESIDENCE 463 

order to satisfy the maternal system. The incon- 
venience is certainly put up with, but in most cases it 
will be found that it is put up with in order to satisfy 
certain universal feelings of human nature, stronger and 
more important than is an arbitrary system of kinship. 
In the first place, it is natural that the marriage should 
take place, as it often does, both in primitive and 
modern times, at the " residence " of the bride's 
parents. Womanly and maternal feelings are not to be 
denied to the primitive mothers of the race. In many 
cases early marriage is not a momentary act, but a long 
process, extending sometimes over several weeks, and 
during this period the bridegroom resides with his wife's 
people. 

We have seen how in Cambodia a girl's parents are 
so careful of her happiness that for some time they 
keep a very strict watch over the son-in-law ; * also, 
this natural human feeling often concentrates upon the 
first delivery of the young bride, and mothers show 
especial anxiety concerning this. The genial Dobriz- 
hofFer reported of his Abipones : " Mothers are careful 
of their daughters, and can hardly bear to part with 
them. Parents after satisfying themselves of the 
probity of the son-in-law allow the pair to live in a 
separate house." 2 The Malay bridegroom is " nomin- 
ally expected to remain under the roof and eye of his 
mother-in-law for about two years," after which he 
may remove to a house of his own.3 The Omaha wife 
remains for some time with her parents, the husband 
visiting her, before she goes to live with him ; 4 so 
amongst the Sarae.5 We have also seen in connection 
with " marriage by capture " how girls cling to their 

1 Supra, 412. 2 Op. cit. ii. 208. 8 Skeat, op. cit. 384. 

4 James, Expedition to the Rocky Mountains, ii. 47. 5 Munzingcr, op. cit. 387. 

464 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

home, a feeling naturally enhanced when child-birth 
approaches — the young wife wishes to be with her 
mother.1 

Amongst the Barea the wife returns to her mother's 
house for her first delivery and there stays three 
months.2 Amongst the Adel Bedouin the wife re- 
mains in her father's house till she has borne three 
children.3 Amongst the Luhtongs the wife lives at her 
mother's house, the husband sleeping there. After the 
birth of the first child she goes to his house.4 Amongst 
the Bedouins of Sinai the wife stays with her parents 
till the child is born.5 So amongst the Khyens and 
Ainus, Shawanese, Abipones, and Chippeways.6 

It should be noted here that marriage is often not 
regarded as complete until a child is born. A birth is 
indeed a very natural sign of the completion of the 
marriage tie, and this needs no explanation, though it 
explains this residing with the bride's parents till the 
birth, when we take into ^consideration the affection 
between mother and daughter, and suspicions of the 
other sex fostered by sexual taboo. Taboos between 
the newly married show this, as between themselves ; 
the Miao bride and groom occupy separate bedrooms 
until the first child is born, afterwards they use one 
bed.7 The birth relieves anxiety both maternal and 
connubial. The Knisteneaux case showed this com- 
pletion of the marriage.8 Amongst the Nubians tem- 
porary mat huts make a part of every family dwelling. 
These are occupied by people recently married, for it is 
" only after the young wife has become a mother that 

1 Supra, 354. 2 Munzinger, op. cif. 527. 3 Harris, op. cit. i. 288. 

4 Colquhoun, Across Chrysee, 394. 6 Burckhardt, of. cit. 153. 

6 Rowney, op. cit. 203 ; Siebold, Ethnologische Studien uber die Aino, 31 j Klemm, 
Culturgeschichte, ii. 75 j Featherman, op. cit. iii. 248. 

7 Colquhoun, Across Chrysee, 373. 8 Supra, 432. 

RESIDENCE 465 

ic husband can gain uncontrolled possession of his 
•ide, and he is then allowed to build a stone house for 
limself in any locality he may choose."1 As a result 
a similar feeling, the ceremony of marriage amongst 
the Hovas is first celebrated at the house of the bride's 
parents, then at that of the bridegroom's.2 The same 
practice occurs in Nepal.3 

As to the bride's affection for her old home, which 
coincides with sexual taboo, we find it commonly 
satisfied by returning thither. Amongst the Hindus, 
after a few weeks the bride returns to her paternal 
home for a visit.4 Amongst the Bheelalahs the bride's 
parents take her from her husband back to their house, 
where she stays for a week.5 The Turkoman bride 
returns to her parents after six weeks, to spend a year 
with them.6 Amongst the Wa-teita the bride after the 
three days' seclusion and fasting at her husband's house, 
which form part of the marriage ceremonial, is con- 
veyed back to her parents' home by a procession of 
girls. After a while she returns.7 I do not think that 
Prof. Tylor allows for these cases. 

Jn more religious form this feeling is satisfied 
amongst the Larkas by the wife running home after 
three days of married life. " The most modest course 
for the wife to follow is to run away from his house 
and tell her friends that she cannot love him ; and the 
husband must show great anxiety for her, and convey 
her back by force." 8 Other instances of the same sort 
of thing we have reviewed when treating of so-called 
marriage by capture. In more primitive form still, in 
South Australia the Powell's Creek bride is taken away 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 260. 2 Jcurn. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 41. 

8 Oldfield, Sketches from Nepal, i. 410. 4 'Jottrn. Anthrop. Inst. ix. 404. 
5 Id. ix. 404. 6 Fraser, Journey into Korkasan, ii. 375- 

7 J. Thomson, op. cit. 51. 8 Rowney, op. cit. 67. 

2 H 

466 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

to a considerable distance after being " purchased or 
captured " (sic) and kept isolated with her husband for j 
some months, until she " settles down to the new order 
of things." The pair then rejoin the tribe.1 

Temporary residence with the bride's parents, then, | 
is no survival of continuous residence, but is due tJT 
various forms of sexual taboo and parental care. For 
continuous residence the Ainu practice is, instructive ; if 
the girl or her parents propose the match, the pair live i 
in the bride's village, and vice versa.2 

Nor is the change of residence a transitional method. | 
It takes place, firstly, after the satisfacton of the feelings 
we have discussed. The Siamese bridegroom builds a 
room off the house of his wife's parents and there they 
live for some months, after which he builds a house of his 
own.3 In Nukahiva the bridegroom lives with his bride's 
f parents ; if, after a time " the pair are still attached to 
(each other," they set up a separate establishment.4 An 
Egyptian does not always become a householder at 
marriage, but may live with his wife in her parents' house.5 
Amongst the Soomoos the groom lives with the bride's 
people until the girl is old enough to be married.6 
And in New Britain the girl, if very young, stays with 
her parents ; if full-grown, she goes to her husband's 
house. In New Britain, by the way, descent is through 
the mother.7 In Samoa, " a woman does not become a 
man's wife until he takes her to his own house." 8 

Secondly, the change of residence is due to a very 
obvious circumstance. In some of the Fiji Islands, 
after the ceremony of eating together, the girl returned 
to her parents, where she remained until the marriage 

1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 177. 2 Batchelor, op. cit. 140. 

3 Loubere, op. cit. i. 157. 4 Lisiansky, op. cit. 83. 

5 Lane, op. cit. ii. 269. 6 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxiv. 205. 

7 Id. xviii. 289. 8 Pritchard, op. cit. 134. 

RESIDENCE 

467 

was consummated, or rather until the bridegroom had 
built his house.1 In Leti, Moa, and Lakor, the husband 
lives with his wife's parents, till he has built a house.2 
In Wetar, the husband lives with his wife's people till 
he gets a house of his own.3 Economic causes indeed 
have always had a good deal to do with marriage. 
Amongst the Barea a man is " in the power " (sic) of 
his wife's father until he builds a house of his own.4 
Amongst the Cadiacks the bridegroom " pays " for his 
wife by working for her parents, living with them until 
the full amount is worked off.5 The same practice is 
found amongst the Aleuts, the Arruans of New Guinea, 
the Klamaths, in Timorlaut, the Kei Islands, Amboina, 
and the Watubela Islands.6 Amongst the Arawaks the 
bride's father expects his son-in-law to do some work 
for him ; the young couple often live with him " until 
an increasing family renders a separate establishment 
necessary." These Indians, it is to be noted, are a 
" maternal " people.7 Though in origin the " bride- 
price" is not purchase-money, yet, as commercialism 
develops, we find cases like that of the Watubela 
islanders, with whom the children " belong " to the 
wife's family until the bride-price is fully paid.8 Many 
peoples in the East Indies, such as the Battas and 
Malays, have; three forms of marriage:9 (i) the 
groom pays " purchase-money " ; (2) if he is poor, he 
works for her parents, living in their house ; (3) 
elopement. In Amboina and Ceram, if the bride- 
groom cannot pay the " price," he lives with her in her 
parents' house, and works for them. If he can pay it, 

1 Featherman, op. clt. ii. 203. 2 Riedel, op. at. 390. 3 Id. 448. 

4 Munzinger, op. cit. 447. 5 Lisiansky, of. at. 198. 

6 Featherman, op. clt. iii. 467 ; ii. 33 J in. 329 } Riedel, op. cit. 301, 236, 68, 132. 

7 Brett, op. clt. 101. 8 Riedel, op. cit. 205. 

9 Junghuhn, op. clt. ii. 132, 350. 

468 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

she goes to his house.1 Lastly, amongst the extinct 
Tasmanians, supposed to have been the lowest race in 
the scale known, the husband took his bride to his own 
wirlie, and the system of descent was maternal.2 The 
usual Australian custom is for the man to take his wife 
to his own tribe ; and the exception which sometimes 
occurs amongst the Arunta is natural enough ; they 
are a " paternal " people, but men of other tribes some- 
times join them, taking a wife from them and setting 
up their abode.3 

We may now proceed to notice the well-known 
machinery by which exogamy is worked in so many 
early societies, the " classificatory system." Its origin 
is perfectly clear. It is in its simplest form of two 
exogamous intermarrying divisions, consistent with 
either the paternal or maternal system of descent. It 
is unnecessary to describe it fully, or to show what has 
been well shown by Messrs. Fison and Howitt, Spencer 
and Gillen, that the terms are terms of kinship and not 
terms of address. As we have seen, however, they are 
in origin terms of relation, and accordingly, so far, 
terms of address also. For instance, the term Ipmunna 
in Central Australia, which is that used between 
members of the two subclasses which make up one of 
two exogamous divisions, would be better described as a 
term of relation.4 Relation and relationship are not 
differentiated in primitive thought. Again, all of the 
terms can be used as terms of address, just as our 
terms of relationship can be so used, " aunt " and 
" uncle " for instance, that is, instead of the personal 
name. In connection with the account of relations 
already given, an instance typical of all mankind 

1 Riedel, op. cit. 68, 132. 2 Bon wick, op. cit. 72. 

3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 250 j Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 60. * Id. 71. 

xvn MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 469 

is the modern Egyptian practice ; women address 

aged female friends as " mother," young ones as 

it • . "i 
" sister. 

The commonest form of classificatory exogamy is 
that where the members of the tribe are divided into 
classes for purposes of marriage, members of one class 
being forbidden to marry in that class, but bound to 
marry into the other. Taking the Urabunna tribe as 
as example, the scheme is as follows, Matthurie and 
Kirarawa being the two exogamous classes, and descent 
being through the mother 2 : — 

Matthurie (male). 
Kirarawa (female). 

i.K.f. 

,1., 

3. K.m. 

4. K.m. 

M.m. 

M.m. 

M.f. 

M.f. 

! 

1 

1 

1 

5- 

1 I 
K.m. 6. K.f. 

1 1 
7. K.m. 8. K.f. 

1 1 
9. M.m. 10. M.f. 

1 I 
1 1. M.m. 12. M, 

The main point here is, of course, that brothers and 
sisters may not marry ; the system presupposes this 
when putting them under the same name. The next 
point is that first cousins, when children of two 
sisters, as 5 and 8, 6 and 7, or of two brothers, as 
9 and 12, 10 and n, may not marry, this being 
an accident of the system. Thirdly, first cousins, 
when children of a brother and sister, as 7 and 10, 
8 and 9, may marry, they being of different 
classes, and in most systems they are indeed expected 
to marry, as in Australia and Fiji. This species of 
cousin -marriage Prof. Tylor has well called "cross- 
cousin-marriage/* When this is the case, the system 
is endogamous as well. Primitive exogamy is in fact 
also endogamous ; and when it is understood that the 

1 Featherman, op. cit. v. 265. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 60. 

470 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

essential object of exogamy is to prevent marriage 
between "brothers" and "sisters," there is no need to 
tabulate exogamous peoples, for exogamy is practised 
by every race of mankind, as it is by ourselves, or to 
search for its origin. As to Prof. Tylor's suggestion 
that exogamy was due to a desire to secure the survival 
of the tribe by forming alliances outside, the choice 
being between marrying -out or dying -out,1 this is 
another kind of " exogamy," and one indeed that is 
sporadic only, though a natural enough practice, as it is 
between European royal families. Early exogamy 
proper is a family and not a tribal matter, and is also 
somewhat too endogamous to include a political 
exogamy in its origin, and savages do not possess such 
political insight as would warrant the inference that 
such was a general cause of exogamy. 

Further, each of these marriage - classes is sub- 
divided into several totem -classes, and there is an 
arrangement as to which totems may intermarry, 
descent being still through the mother.2 Thus : — 

Matthurie Dingo, m. 

Kirarawa Waterhen, f. 

I 

K.W., m. K.W., f. 

M.D., f. M.D., m. 

The next form of the classificatory system is one 
which is common in Australia. Here each of the two 
exogamous classes is divided into two subclasses. 
Thus, in the Kamilaroi tribe the two exogamous classes 
are Dilbi and Kupathin ; Dilbi is divided into Muri 
and Kubi, Kupathin into Ipai and Kumbo. Muri must 
marry Kumbo, and Kubi Ipai, no other intermarriage 

1 Jcurn. Anthrop. Inst. xviii. 267. 2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 6 1. 

xvn MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 471 

being allowed. There is the further arrangement that 
the children belong to the companion subclass of the 
mother, descent being maternal.1 Dr. Frazer calls this 
" indirect female descent." 2 Thus : — 

Male. Marries. Children. 

f Muri Kumbo Ipai. 

\ Kubi Ipai Kumbo. 

f Ipai Kubi Muri. 

Kupathin ] Kumbo Muri Kubi> 

The same system is found in the southern division of 
the Arunta, though in process of further subdivision 
as in the northern tribe,8 and in the Kiabara tribe, 
both these tribes having paternal descent.4 When this 
system is tabulated, it will be found that one difference 
is produced by it. In the Kiabara tribe Dilebi is 
divided into Baring and Turowine y Cubatine into Bundah 
and Bulcoin^ and the marriages and descent are as 
follows : — 

Baring, m. 
Bundah, f. 

l — — — 

Turowine, f. Turowine, f. Turowine, m. Turowme, m. 

Bulcoin, m. Bulcoin, m. Bulcoin, f. Bulcoin, f. 

I I I ! 

Jndah, m, Bundah, f. Bundah, m. Bundah, f. Baring, m. Baring, f. Baring, m. Baring, f. 
king, f. Baring, m. Baring, f. Baring, m. Bundah, f. Bundah, m. Bundah, f. Bundah, m. 

The difference is this — the system obviously keeps the 
marriages within the same generation, Turowine and 
Bulcoin alternating with Bundah and Baring. The 
children of a given father being put in a separate class, 
of course, amounts to this. 

This result can hardly be counted as accidental when 
we remember that the savage no less than other men 

1 Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, 37- 2 Frazer, Totemim, 73. 

» Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 70. 4 J^n. Anthrop. Init. xiii. 336. 

472 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

prefers the natural marriage with one of the same 
generation. That this feeling should have been codi- 
fied, as it were, is an instance of the way in which early 
man tries to assist nature. The vague fear of the 
possibility of sexual relation with the mother-in-law, 
for instance, which sometimes emerges above the com- 
plex feelings brought by sexual taboo into that relation, 
is a case in point ; another is the fact, that in some 
codified marriage -systems, as in our own "Table of 
Kindred and Affinity," a man is forbidden to marry his 
grandmother, a grandfather his granddaughter, and so 
on, each case being one never likely to occur. 

There is nothing in these systems except identity of 
name to prevent children of brothers or of sisters 
marrying, though some peoples, as the Malagasy, allow 
children of brothers to marry, but not children of 
sisters, ideas of sexual taboo probably causing this 
result ; and though other peoples, especially those 
higher in the scale, often prohibit all cousin-marriage. 
The old Canon Law of the Church, for instance, did 
so.1 In these cases descent is reckoned from father 
and mother together, cross-cousin marriage being thus 
prevented as well as the other form. 

The third development of the classificatory system 
is that found in the Northern Arunta tribe, and de- 
scribed by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen.2 It is a further 
subdivision of the last form mentioned, and the 
difference in result produced by it,- is clearly that it 
also prevents cross-cousin marriage. In the Southern 
Arunta tribe the four subclasses are Panunga and 
Bulthara, Purula and Kumar a ; in the Northern, 
Panunga is divided into Panunga and Uknaria, Purula 

1 Du Cange, Gtossariu-n mediae et infinite Latinitatis, s.v. generatio. 
2 Op. cit. 71 ff. 

XVII 

MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 

473 

into Purula and Ungalla, Bulthara into Bukhara and 
Appungerta, Kumara into Kumara and Umbitchana. 
The system is thus given by Messrs. Spencer and 
Gillen :— 

i. 2. 3. 

Panunga Purula Appungerta 

Uknaria Ungalla Bukhara 

Bukhara Kumara Uknaria 

Appungerta Umbitchana Panunga 

4- 

Kumara. 
Umbitchana. 
Purula. 
Ungalla. 

Reading across the page, Panunga m. (i) marries 
Purula f. (2), and the children are Appungerta (3), 
Purula m. (2) marries Panunga f. (i), and the children 
are Kumara (4), and so on. By tabulating the system, 
we see how cross-cousin marriage is prevented : — 

Panunga, 
Purula, f. 

1 

m. 

m. 
, f. 

Appungerta, f. 
Umbitchana, m. 

1 

I 
Appungerta, 

Umbitchana 

1 

f. 
, m. 

1 
Appungerta, m. 

Umbitchana, f. 
1 

Appungerta, 
Umbitchana 

1 

(B~ ii ii ii i 

tUngalla,m. Ungalla, f. Ungalla, m. Ungalla, f. Panunga, m. Panunga, f. Panunga, m. Panunga, f. 
Uknaria, f. Uknaria, m. Uknaria, f. Uknaria, m. Purula, f. Purula, m. Purula, f. Purula, m. 

A further point of interest in the Central Australian 
system is this ; in the Urabunna tribe nupa women, i.e. 
women who are marriageable on the system to a 
particular man, are daughters of his mother's elder 
brothers, blood or tribal, or of his father's elder sisters, 
and none others ; a man's wife must belong to the 
senior side of the tribe. This rule is evidently a 
codification of the practice found so generally amongst 
savages, that elder sisters have a prior right to marriage 
over younger, and is an instance of wise consideration 
on the part of primitive man.1 It is a sort of attempt 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 64, 65. 

474 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

to assist nature, and is parallel to the preference for 
marriage within the same generation. In Nias, Halma- 
hera, Java, and China, for example, a younger sister is 
not allowed to marry before an older one.1 It is to be 
noted, that in the Arunta tribe there are, as happens in 
other classificatory systems, distinct names for elder 
and younger brothers and sisters, and that when two 
brothers in blood marry two sisters in blood, the elder 
brother marries the elder sister ; and further, a man 
may speak freely to his elder sisters in blood, but to 
tribal elder sisters only at a distance. To younger 
sisters, blood and tribal, he may not speak.2 In the 
Arunta tribe, that is, there is a taboo against women of 
the junior side, but no fixed rule forbidding marriage 
with them ; in the Urabunna tribe there is such a rule, 
and we hear of no taboo. 

An interesting example of the way in which age 
influences such relations occurs amongst the Khyoungtha 
and other Indian hill -tribes, and the Andamanese. 
With the former, a younger brother may touch and 
speak to his elder brother's wife ; " but it is thought 
improper for an elder brother even to look at the wife 
of his younger brother. This is a custom more or less 
common among all hill-tribes ; it is found carried to a 
preposterous extent among the Santals." 3 An Anda- 
manese may not speak directly but only through a 
third person to a married woman who is younger than 
himself. Women are restricted in the same way in 
relation to their husband's elder brother. Till an 
Andamanese reaches middle age, he evinces great shy- 
ness in the presence of the wife of a younger brother or 

1 Rosenberg, Der Malay hche Archipel, 155; Riedel, in Zeitschriftfur Ethnologic, xvii. 
76 ; Winter, in Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indfe (1843), i. 566 j Gray, China, i. 190. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 88, 89. 3 Lewin, op. cit. 130. 

xvii MARRIAGE SYSTEMS 475 

cousin, and the feeling is reciprocated. His elder 
brother's wife receives from him the respect due to a 
mother.1 In the first case, superiority of age in the 
male induces the idea of a potentiality of sexual control 
of a younger female, and with an older woman there is 
the analogy of the mother, suggested by her greater 
age. In the second case, the custom is combined with 
taboos of the mother-in-law species. 

We may now consider the last position of the theory 
that promiscuity was once prevalent amongst early 
peoples; this is the so-called " group -marriage" of 
several Australian tribes. Morgan, McLennan, and 
Lubbock were supported in their hypothesis of primi- 
tive promiscuity or community of wives by Messrs. 
Fison and Howitt, who first adduced the phenomena 
of "group-marriage." Dr. Westermarck has so ably 
shown the unscientific character of the promiscuity 
theory, that it would be unnecessary to add to what 
he has said, were it not for the fact that Messrs. 
Spencer and Gillen in their important work have, I 
think, too easily given their assent to Fison and 
Howitt 's interpretation of " group-marriage " as prov- 
ing early promiscuity. Indeed they assert that there 
is no such thing as individual marriage in the Urabunna 
tribe. It will be clear after we have examined these 
facts, that Messrs. Spencer and Gillen have misunder- 
stood their origin and meaning, and that their criticism 
of Dr. Westermarck's condemnation of the promiscuity 
theory is therefore mistaken. In one detail, that of the 
so-called jus prim* noctis^ Dr. Westermarck is wrong, 
but so are Messrs. Spencer and Gillen. 

They say that the facts of the Urabunna system 
" can only be explained on the theory of the former 

1 Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xii. 136, 355. 

476 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

existence of group-marriage which has necessarily given 
rise to the terms of relationship." 1 Now, on the 
Urabunna system of two exogamous intermarrying 
classes, the term mia for instance, includes not only the 
meaning of our " mother " but that of " tribal mother," 
being applied to all women of the same generation in 
the class to which a man's real mother belongs.2 But 
this is an obvious result of the classificatory system, 
and, apart from the system, it is the regular result of 
the primitive theory of relationship ; the system codifies 
a combination of relation and relationship, " address " 
and age. It is the system and not group -marriage, 
which has given rise to these terms of relationship ; 
these do not in themselves necessarily point to a 
previous promiscuity or even to a present group- 
marriage. This " marriageableness " is found also in 
Fiji, but we do not either there or in Australia find 
any " right " exercised upon it. We have seen that 
relation and relationship were not differentiated, and 
here the classificatory system has stereotyped this con- 
fusion. And so when the women of the same genera- 
tion and class to which a man's real mother belongs 
are called " mother," and the sisters of his wife in like 
manner are called "wives," and the brothers of his 
father are called "father," it no more follows that a 
man once practised promiscuous marriage with all such 
" wives," or that he now possesses the right to do so, 
than that a man once was begotten by all the men who 
were thus his " fathers," or was born of all the women 
who were thus his " mothers." Amongst the Kurnai 
the wife's sister though called " wife " would not sleep 
in the man's hut, and a brogan though calling a man's 
wife "wife" and though she called him "husband" 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 59. 2 Id. 58. 

xvii GROUP-MARRIAGE 477 

would have to camp with the young men.1 So much 
for the ordinary type of group-marriage. But further, 
in the Urabunna tribe each man has living with him 
(Messrs. Spencer and Gillen do not term them wives) 
certain nufa women, that is, women who on the system 
are tribal-sisters of his wife, and therefore potentially 
marriageable to him. But this is nothing but actual 
polygamy. The inference that all such nufa women 
are or once were married to all the men, as group to 
group, or to one man, is unwarranted ; they are simply 
" marriageable " because of the system. It is possible 
that a legal-minded savage might draw the inference, 
but this would not prove such marriage to have been 
ever actual ; there are limits to the polygamous im- 
pulse, and the elaborate character of the system is 
not consistent with a previous confused promiscuity. 
Promiscuity would not leave, as its results, a system so 
exact that intermarriage with the wrong class is con- 
sidered a crime. 

Again, there are other women in the relation of 
Piraungaru to every man, like the Pirauru of the 
Dieri tribe, " to whom he has access under certain 
conditions." 2 The result is, Messrs. Spencer and 
Gillen state, " that every woman is the special nupa of 
one man, but he has no exclusive right to her, as she is 
the Piraungaru of certain other men who also have 
the right of access to her" (i.e. as Piraungaru). 
"There is no such thing as one man having the 
exclusive right to one woman. Individual marriage 
does not exist either in name or in practice in the 
Urabunna tribe." 3 

In this connection they speak of a "rudimentary 

1 Fison and Howitt, op. cit. 210. 
2 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 62. * Id. 63. 

478 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

custom " ; 1 that is to say, they seem to regard the 
present system of " rights as a survival of a fully 
developed promiscuity. As to this, I would submit 
that the Urabunna group -marriage has never been 
more fully developed than it is now, that it is no 
modified survival, and that it is far from being > a 
' ' rudimentary " custom. The essence of a "rudi- 
mentary " custom should surely be that of a " rudi- 
mentary " organ, that is to say, a " rudimentary " 
custom is one that exists but has no present meaning 
or use. Now the Urabunna custom seems to have a 
good deal of meaning still, and to be used in rather a 
regular way. The term " rudimentary " in this con- 
nection both begs the question and stultifies their 
theory. Again, since Prof. Tylor's Primitive Culture, 
and Darwin's Origin of Species were given to the world, 
there has been too indiscriminate and careless a use of 
the terms " survival " and " rudimentary " ; customs 
and beliefs of the greatest vitality have been described 
and condemned as " survivals " or " rudimentary 
customs " ; the form in such cases being of course a 
survival, but within the form there is a living content, 
not separable from it, though often changed from its 
earliest connotation. 

As to the Piraungaru women of the Urabunna to 
whom a man has " the right of access " ; they have 
been called " accessory wives," but the term is as mis- 
leading as it would be if applied to the wives whom 
husbands amongst many peoples occasionally "lend" 
to their guests by way of hospitality. Let us take a 
similar practice of the Arunta, of which the Urabunna 
is evidently a development. " Under ordinary circum- 
stances in the Arunta and other tribes," individual 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. clt. 105 ff. 

xvn PROMISCUITY 479 

marriage exists, but at certain times a man may have 
access to other women, sometimes even women of a 
forbidden class.1 What are these occasions? First, 
the well-known savage custom just referred to, by 
which a man lends his wife to a friend or guest as an 
act of friendship, gratitude, or hospitality.2 This is 
not lightly undertaken, but is an act involving a really 
religious obligation, as we have seen, and where it is 
reciprocal it is the highest form of the ngia ngiampe 
relation. In these cases the wife lent has to be of the 
class marriageable to the man who receives her from 
his friend. Secondly, a general exchange of wives takes 
place at certain important festivals.3 This custom has 
been already explained. It has nothing whatever to do 
with the marriage system, except as breaking it for a 
season, women of forbidden degrees being lent, on the 
same grounds as conventions and ordinary relations are 
broken at festivals of the Saturnalia type, the object 
being to change life and start afresh, by exchanging 
everything one can, while the very act of exchange 
coincides with the other desire, to weld the community 
together. Thirdly, right of access holds at the cere- 
mony whereby young women are made marriageable, 
that is, is physically prepared for her husband, and 
which is identical with a marriage ceremony.4 In the 
Arunta tribe and others where group -marriage, they 
say, exists in a " modified form," this right of access 
does hold, but it simply amounts to a religious duty, 
whereby the bride is physically prepared for her husband. 
Various persons in various tribes perform this prelimin- 
ary act, which is neither^ prim* noctis nor "religious 
prostitution" of the Babylonian type. Here their 
criticism of Dr. Westermarck is sound, but their own 

1 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. 95. 2 Id. 98. 3 Id. 96. 4 Id. 92-97. 

480 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

inference that it is a " rudimentary right of marriage " 
surviving from primitive promiscuity, is more beside 
the mark still. The act is intended to remove the 
danger attaching to union (and that the dangerous one 
of sexual intercourse) for the first time (a dangerous 
time), with a woman, a dangerous person, — the whole 
business, in idea and practice, being of the primitive 
religious stamp, and of the same character as " priestly 
defloration," and it is quite opposed in theory to the 
so-called jus prim^e noctis which, if it ever obtained in 
Europe (it probably never obtained elsewhere), was 
simply a barbarous application of feudal rights, and 
also to religious prostitution. Finally, it is not an 
" expiation for marriage/' as Lubbock thought. 

On examining Mr. Hewitt's careful description of 
the Dieri marriage system and the Pirauru practice, to 
which the Urabunna Piraungaru practice is compared, 
we find that in that tribe " license prevails between 
the intermarrying classes at certain ceremonial times," 
namely, at initiation ceremonies, and when a marriage 
takes place between members of different tribes. As 
to the Piraurus, called " paramours " by the white 
settlers, if a man's own wife is absent he may have 
marital relations with his Pirauru, "but he cannot 
take her away (from her real husband) unless by his 
consent, excepting at the above-mentioned ceremonial 
times." No other occasion of access is mentioned. 
He adds that the system is not complete promiscuity, 
for the Pirauru " are allotted at some great initiation 
ceremony."1 The first part of the above has the same 
explanation as the Arunta customs ; and the \Pirauru 
custom is evidently a polyandrous extension, which is 
often found, of the custom of lending wives, namely, 

1 Journ. Anthrop. last. xx. 53, 56. 

xvn PROMISCUITY 481 

when a husband is absent a particular man may live 
with her, as in the Cicisbeate of South Europe.1 

The following is Messrs. Spencer and Gillen's 
account of the Piraungaru of the Urabunna. " To 
women who are the Piraungaru of a man (the term is 
a reciprocal one), the latter has access under certain 
conditions, so that they may be considered as accessory 
wives. There is no such thing as one man having the 
exclusive right to one woman ; the elder brothers, or 
Nuthie, of the latter, in whose hands the matter lies, 
will give one man a preferential right, but at the same 
time they will give other men of the same group a 
secondary right to her. Individual marriage does not 
exist, either in name or in practice, in the Urabunna 
tribe. The initiation (jzV) in regard to establishing the 
relationship of Piraungaru between a man and a woman 
must be taken by the elder brothers, but the arrange- 
ment must receive the sanction of the old men of the 
group before it can take effect. As a matter of actual 
practice, this relationship is usually established at times 
when considerable numbers of the tribe are gathered 
together to perform important ceremonies, and when 
these and other matters of importance which require 
the consideration of the old men are discussed and 
settled. A man may always lend his wife, that is, the 
woman to whom he has the first right, to another 
man, provided always he be her Nupa, without the 
relationship of Piraungaru existing between the two, 
but unless this relationship exists, no man has any 
right of access to a woman. Occasionally, but rarely, 
it happens that a man attempts to prevent his wife's 
Piraungaru from having access to her, but this leads to 
a fight and the husband is looked upon as churlish. 

1 Th. Moore, of. cit. 64. 
2 I 

482 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

When visiting distant groups where, in all likelihood, 
the husband has no Piraungaru^ it is customary for 
other men of his own class to offer him the loan of 
one or more of their Nupa women, and a man, besides 
lending a woman over whom he has the first right, 
will also lend his Piraungaru" l " The relation of 
Piraungaru is established between any woman and men 
to whom she is Nupa — that is, to whom she may be 
lawfully married, by her Nuthie or elder brothers. If 
a group be camped together, and as a matter of fact 
groups of individuals who are Piraungaru to one 
another do usually camp together, then in the case of a 
particular woman her special Nupa man has the first 
right to her, but if he be absent the Piraungaru have 
the right to her ; or, if the Nupa man be present, the 
Piraungaru have the right to her, subject to his 
consent, which is practically never withheld."2 

The very fact that the husband's consent must be 
obtained proves that he is the woman's husband, 
and that individual marriage exists, though slightly 
modified. The Piraungaru^ like the Pirauru practice, 
is a development, in one aspect, of the practice of 
lending wives, coinciding with a polyandrous and 
polygamous tendency, and, in another, of the religious 
exchange of wives, as is made probable by its con- 
nection with tribal meetings. Polyandry, if not poly- 
gamy, is an abnormal practice, though found sporadi- 
cally even in Southern Europe, where the Cicisbeate is 
a close parallel to one side of the Urabunna institu- 
tion. Lastly, it may be noted that even if this poly- 
andry and polygamy were real "group-marriage," it 
by no means proves the previous existence of wilder 
promiscuity for the Urabunna, much less for the rest 

1 Spencer and Gillen, op. cit. 62, 63. 2 Id. no. 

xvir INDIVIDUAL MARRIAGE 483 

of mankind, as a stage through which man has passed. 
Everything points, on the contrary, to the inference 
that the Dieri and Urabunna practices are abnormal 
developments, which have never been more complete 
than they are now. 

Other facts that have been used in the attempt to 
prove primitive promiscuity and incest have been fully 
dealt with by Dr. Westermarck. Endogamy and the 
marriage of cousins have also been so used. It seems 
unnecessary to refute this. The system of morongs^ or 
bachelor -houses, in which the young men live and 
sleep, has also been used in favour of the promiscuity 
theory ; x but there is no ground whatever on which it 
may be so used ; even the illicit intercourse sometimes 
allowed to boys, is merely either youthful love-making, 
which is more or less common in all societies, or a 
custom sanctioned by religious ideas as to its necessity. 

It may be confidently assumed that individual 
marriage has been, as far as we can trace it back, the 
regular type of union of man and woman. The 
Promiscuity theory really belongs to the mythological 
stage of human intelligence, and is on a par with many 
savage myths concerning the origin of marriage, and 
the like. These are interesting but of no scientific 
value. They are cases of mental actualisation of appar- 
ently potential states which were really impossible 
except as abnormal occurrences. When men medi- 
tated upon marriage ceremonial and system, they would 
naturally infer a time when there was not only no rite, 
but no institution of marriage. Hence the common 
idea of which the Promiscuity theory is a result, that 
marriage was ordained to prevent illicit intercourse ; 
this, of course, it does prevent, but it invents it first. 

1 By S. E. Peal, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. xxi. 255. 

484 THE MYSTIC ROSE CHAP. 

Taboo and law when they sanction a human normal 
practice produce the possibility of sin. There was of 
course a time when there was no marriage ceremony, 
but the ideas of such were latent in the actual union of 
man and woman. 

The survey of marriage and of sexual relations in 
early races suggests many thoughts. For instance, one 
is struck by the high morality of primitive man. Not 
long ago McLennan could assert confidently that the 
savage woman was utterly depraved ; but a study of 
the facts shows quite the contrary. The religious 
character of early human relations, again, gives a sense 
of tragedy ; man seems to feel that he is treading in 
slippery places, that he is on the brink of precipices, 
when really his foot standeth right. This sensitive 
attitude would seem to have assisted the natural 
development of man. We have also seen the remark- 
able fact that most of these primitive customs and 
beliefs are repeated in the average civilised man, not as 
mere survivals, though their religious content has been 
narrowed, but springing from functional causes con- 
stant in the human organism. Further, it seems to be 
a probable inference that the functional impulses, not 
only of man but of at least all higher organisms, have 
latent in them a potential religious content. This has 
been noted as especially actualised in the social relations 
of the individual. The history of psychological pro- 
cesses is the history of the religious consciousness. 
Lastly, in connection with the main subject, marriage, 
this diffidence and desire for security and permanence 
in a world where only change is permanent, has led to 
certain conceptions of eternal personalities who control 
and symbolise the marriage tie. Psychologically, the 
union of man and woman amounts to identification and 

xvii GODS OF MARRIAGE 485 

combination of the two sexes ; and in the theological 
development of this idea, as the Philippine islanders, 
Chinese, and Yorubas, to quote from what is a large 
list,1 have deities who combine the attributes of both 
sexes, so the Greeks and Romans sometimes included 
male characteristics in their conception of the Goddess 
of Love,2 and lifted marriage to the ideal plane in the 
conception of the iepb<? 7^0?. More simply, many 
peoples have thought of a divine trinity of persons to 
symbolise the family of husband, wife, and child ; 
Christian Europe, for instance, has worshipped the 
Holy Family for many^ hundred years. For the male 
sex an ideal of the Eternal Feminine often satisfies such 
aspirations, and this survey may fittingly close with a 
reference to the most prominent ideal personality for 
modern Europe in this connection, the Maiden-Mother, 
the Mystical Rose, for her figure enshrines many 
elemental conceptions of Man and Woman and their 
relations. 

1 Bowring, op. cit. 158 j Doolittle, op. cit. \. 261 j A. B. Ellis, op. cit. 41. 

2 Photius, Bibliotheca, 151, b. 55 Lydus, De Mensiius, ii. 10, iv. 955 the 
Bearded Venus in Cyprus, Macrobius, iii. 8, Servius on Virgil, Aeneid, ii. 632, the 
same in Pamphylia, Lydus, of. cit. iv. 44. 

INDEX 

Abnormal, the, 22 sqq. 

Abuse, 267 sq., 288, 291 sq., 352 

Adoption, 459 

Age, 405, 458 sq. 

Allopathy, 202, 270 

Altruism, 134, 139, 262 sq. 

Amulets, 135, 226 

Anaya, 250 

Animism, 65 

Annual feasts, 273 sqq. 

Anointing, 105 sq. 

Anthropomorphism, 63, 192 sqq. 

Arkees, 338 sq. 

Arungquiltha, 59 sq., 8 1 sq., 88, 122, 183 

Asceticism, 140 

Assimilation, 371 sq. 

Associations, male and female, 44 

Bachofen, J, vii, 420, 422, 424, 460 

Badi, 84 sq. 

Bale muri, 284, 338 

Baptism, 6, 12, 299 

Barriers, 226 

Best man, 339 

Betrothal, 317 

Biology, xi, i sq. 

Birth, 6, 9, 54 sq., 464 

Blood, 10 1 sqq., 2O2, 212 sq., 264, 

384 sqq. 

Blood-brotherhood, 239, 242 
Blood-covenant, 264 sqq., 376 sqq. 
Blood-kinship, 264 sq., 376 sqq., 452 

sqq., 458 

Body, parts of, 120 sqq. 
Boitai, 195 
Bones, 108 sq., 122 
Breath, no 

Bride, 3, 7 57., 100, 194, 263, 318 sqq. 
Bridegroom, 3, 7 sq., 100, 194, 318 sqq. 
Bride-price, 387 sqq. 
Bridesmen, 263, 398 
Brother and sister, 2, 35, 216 sqq., 316 

sq., 444 sqq., 450 sqq., 469 
Brotherhood 239, 242 sq. 
Bu-ku-ru, 60, 88 sq. 

Bulk, 86, 130 
Bullroarers, 305 sq., 318 
Burial, 98 sq. 

Caelibaris hast a, 325 

Calumet, 240 sqq. 

Cannibalism, 101 sqq. 

Canon law, 472 

Capture, marriage by, ix, 2, 325, 350 

sqq., 367 sqq. 

connubial, 353 sqq. 368 sq. 
formal, 368 sq. 
Caste, 1 60 sq. 
Caul, 118 sq. 
Ceremonies, xi, 318 sqq. 
Change of identity, 271 sq., 299 *qq>-, 

336 

Change of life, 299 sqq. 
Child-birth, 9 sq., 212 sq., 411, 415 sqq. 
Christening, 436 sq. 
Churching, 12 
Churinga, 85, 87, 305 sq. 
Cicisbei, 481 sq. 
Circumcision, 136 sqq., 309 
Classificatory system, 348, 468 sqq. 
Clothes, new, 279 
Coitus, 8, 179 sqq., 258, 307 sq., 343 

sqq., 346 sqq. 

Commensahty, 157 sqq., 214, 456 sqq. 
Communion, 383 sq. 
Communism, 348 
Community of wives, 475 sqq. 
Confarreatio, 382 
Confession, 275 
Confirmation, 6, 12, 294 sqq. 
Consummation deferred, 343 sqq. 
Contact, 51, 66, 76 sqq., 88, 90 sqq. 

134 sq., 140 sqq., l8l sqq., 187 sq., 

202 sqq., 223, 236 sq., 250 sqq., 

252, 372 sqq., 449 
Contagion, 19, 60 sqq., 65, 8 1 sqq., 155 

sqq., 183 sq., 191, 2OO, 2O2 sqq., 

235 

sexual, 203 sqq., 296 sq., 307 
Continence, 188 sq., 228, 343 5^. 

488 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

Courage transmitted, 101 sqq. 
Cousin-marriage, 445 sq., 469, 483 
Couvade, 3, 416 sqq. 
Covering, 373 sq. 

Cross-cousin-marriage, 469, 472 sq. 
Curr, E. M., 144, 216, 355,368,401, 
445 

Dakheil, 251 

Darwin, C., 478 

Darwin, G. H., 444 

Dead, offerings to, 286 sq. 

Dead, union with, 286 sqq. 

Death, 26 sqq., 60, 67 sqq., 95 sqq. 

Defloration, 347 sqq. 

Degradation, 91 5^., 161 

Descent of man, 63 sq. 

Desire, 139 

Difference, 21, 31 sq. 

Diffidence, 32 

Dirty clothes, 335 

Disease-makers, 125 sqq. 

Disguise, 267 sq., 279, 281, 335, 372 

Disgust, 109, 138 sqq., 437 

Disinfection, 229 

Djeetgun, 351 

Dreams, 194 

Dress, in, 204, 210 sq., 229, 268,313, 

371 sqq. 

exchange of, 371 sq., 419 sq. 
Drinking, in, 148 sqq. 
Drinking together, 383 
Dulness, 93 
Dummies, 99, 220 
Duplicates, 337 
Duty, 262 sqq., 391 sqq. 

Eating, 56 sq.,nz, 133 

Eating with others, 148 sqq., 157 sqq., 

.239 m-* 258, 375 *??•, 403 
with women, 163 sqq. 
Education, 307 

Effeminacy, 93, 187, 204, 207 sqq. 
Effigy, 291 
Egbo, 44 
Egoism, 30 sqq. 
Elegbra, 138, 194 
El-hooroobeh, 333 
Elopement 368 
Emotions, 29 sq. 
Endogamy, 469, 483 
Engaged couples, 2, 314 sqq. 
Engtvura, 301, 312 
Erathipa, 452 sq. 
Erkincha, 136 sq., 182 
Erluknvirra, 221 
Essence, 79 sq. 
Ethics, 1 6 
Etiquette, 146 sq., 293 sq. 

Evil influences, 6, 18 sqq., 80 sqq., 290 
Exchange, 242 sq., 248 sq., 266, 279, 

375 m> 

of dress, viii, 282, 375 
of identity, 279 sq. 
of parents, 281 

of wives, 280 sq., 285 sq., 312, 479 
Exogamy, 178, 223, 321, 369 sq., 376 

^sqq., 443 sqq., ,468 sqq. 
Expiation for marriage, viii, 480 
Extended identity, 284 sq., 424 sq., 
440 sq. 

Family, 485 

Fasting, 153 sq., 228, 302 sqq., 343 

Feast of Fools, 279 

Feasts, wedding, 386 

Female contagion, 163 sqq., 207 sqq. 

properties, 204 sqq. 
Fescennina locutio, 352 
Fever, 199 

Finger-joints, 118, 227 
Fire, 197 sqq., 226, 228 
First-born, 438 sq. 
Fison, L., 367, 404, 462, 468, 475 
Flesh, 10 1 sqq., 319 sqq. 
Flight, 365 

Food, 112, 124 sq., 136, 148 sqq.) 230 
5?., 302 s?q., 311, 343»378^->456 

forbidden, 154 sq., 417 sqq. 

new, 275 sq., 302 sqq. 
Frazer, J. G., viii, x sq., u, 13, 15, 

17, 3°, 48,99» "7, I28» !37» '97 
sq., 267, 273, 304, 308 sq., 471 
Freemasonry, 259 
Friendship, 243 sqq., 265, 459 
Functions, 21, 28, 54 sqq., 133 sqq., 484 

Generation, marriage in same, 47 1 sq. 
Gifts, 247 sqq., 257, 378 

bridal, 386 sqq. 
Gillen, F. J., vii, 31, 68, 81, 145, 182, 

3°5> 3J3» 347, 368, 443, 462, 468, 

472^,475,477,481 
Go-between, 141, 217, 238, 413, 438 
Godparents, 263, 266, 439, 459 
Groomsmen, 338 sq. 
Group-marriage, 348, 476 sqq. 
Guilds, 249 

Hair, 107 sq., 178, 184 sqq., 2O2 sq., 

227, 253» 336 
Handselling, 323 
Heat, 198 sq., 308 
Heracles, 372 
Hermaphrodite deities, 485 
Herodotus, 169, 211 
Hesiod, 208 
Hiding, 225, 328 sq., 337, 359 sqq 

INDEX 

489 

Hippocrates, 211 

Hlanibeesa, 354 

Hlonipa, 48, 52, 354, 400 sq., 434 sq. 

Holiness, 10 

Homer, 208 

Homoeopathy, 89, 232 sq. 

Hospitality, 239 sqq. 

Howitt, A. W., 401, 406, 462, 468, 

475, 480 

Human influence, 66 sag., 90 sgg. 
Huth, A. H., 445 
Hya, 147 
Hymen, rupture of, 138, 190 sq., 307 

*?•* *3l8, 347 W- 
Hysteria, 196 

Ideation, 64 sq., 259 

Identity, change of, 271 sq., 299 sq., 336 

exchange of, 279 sq. 

extended, 440 
fejpds yd/jLos, 485 
Ililika, 121 

im Thurn, E. F., 47, 418 
Impotence, 181, 210 
Impurity, 139 
Inbreeding, 444 sqq. 
Incarnation, 70 sq., 305 
Incest, 214, 222 sq., 483 
Incubi, 194 

Indirect female descent, 471 
Individualism, 147, 257, 283 sq., 320 

*?•> 399, 475, 483 
Infants, 10 
Influences, 12, 13, 19, 31 sq., 59 sqq., 

65, 67 sqq., 90 *£., 95, Il6 
Initiation, 10, 273, 276, 294 sqq., 450 
Inoculation, 231 sqq., 236 sqq., 308 

*?£•» 371 m- 

Insila, 89, 256 sq. 

Instinct, 444, 446 

Intention, 90 sq., 120 sqq., 184, 291 

Intimates, 141 

Ipmunna, 468 

Isolation, 141, 255 sqq. 

I-'wa-musp, 2H 

Joining hands, 373 sq. 

Jus prim<£ noctis, 347, 475, 479 sq. 

Kahukahu, 14, 6 1 

Kalduke, 238 sqq., 252, 258 J^., 387 

Kenaitna, 71 j^. 

Kluantelus, 195 

Krau-un, 452 

Kurdaitcha, 72 

Language, sex in, 46 j^. 

Lemba, 168 

Lending wives, 478 j^. 

Leslie, D., 89 

Licence, 281, 447 sq. 

Life, new, 273 sqq., 304 j?. 

Lightning, 232 

Lika mankua, 284 

Ling Roth, H., 421 sq. 

Lizards, 193 

Love, 261 sq., 448 

Love-charms, 101, 120, 122, 184 sqq.r 

235, 238 sq., 318, 371 
Lovers, 253, 259 sqq. 
Lubbock, ]., viii, 405, 475, 480 
Lymph, 232, 234 

Magic, 3, 67 sqq., 120 sqq., 182 sqq. 

Maine, H., 258 

Make-believe, 120, 122, 288 sqq., 311 

'?•» 340, 366 sq. 
Mammae, 210 
Mana, 83 sq., 101 
Manicheans, 109 
Marriage, 6 sqq., 12, 56, 143, 222, 265, 

290, 313 sq., 320 
Marriage bars, 265, 443 sqq. 
Marriage-bower, 336 sq. 
Marriage by capture, 350 sqq., 354 sqq. 
367 sqq. 

ceremonies, 6, 239, 306, 318 sqq. 

gods of, 484 sq. 

renewal of, 432 sq., 464 

state of, 391 sqq. 

system, 214, 222 sq., 442 sqq. 
Maternal system, 369, 420 sqq., 460 

sqq. 

Maternal-paternal system. 420 sqq. 
Matriarchal theory, ix, 369 
Matrimi, 100 

Matter, 4, 19, 59 sqq., 94 sq., 141 
McLennan, J. F., vii, 368 sqq., 460, 

475, 484 
Men and women, mutual avoidance of, 

2, 35 m- 

Men dressing as women, 282, 313, 419 
Menstruation, u, 55, 109, 165 sq.r 

191 sq., 197, 200, 212 sq. 
Metaphysics, 4 
Mia, 476 

Milk, 112 sq., 437 
Milk-kinship, 458 
Mithraism, 277 
Mizpah, 262 
Mock brides, 337 

fights, 361 sqq. 

kings, 288 sq. 
Modesty, 181, 353 
Mohbor-meh, 395 sq. 
Monism, 4 sq. 
Moon, 197 
Moostahhill, 393 

490 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

Morality, 32, 142 sqq., 262, 484 

Morgan, L. H., 475 

Mcrongs, 219, 483 

Mother, 460 

Mother-in-law, ix, 3, 314, 317, 331, 

369> 399 *W; 463 
Mourners, 100 
Miiller, K. O., 357 
Mumbo-jumbo, 44, 72 
Mummy, 109 
Mutilation, 135 sqq. 

Nahak (narak\ 126 sq., 156, 182 
Nail-parings, 109, 128 sq. 
Names, 47 sj., 132, 242 sq., 270 sqq., 
403 sq., 428 sqq., 433 sqq., 459 57. 
changed, 299 sq. 
exchanged, 242 sqq. 
Namim, 88 
Nanga, 281 
Narumbe, 164 
Navel-string, 118 ^. 
Near kin, marriage of, 444 sqq. 
Nemesis, 290 
New, the, 25 sq. 
clothes, 336 
life, 304 
names, 270 sq. 

Ngadhungi, 120, 124 sqq., 162, 182 sqq., 
192 sq., 2I9, 228, 235, 237, 244, 
252 

Ngia ngiampe, 238 sqq., 2 $2 sqq., 258 
sqq., 264 sqq., 283, 322, 372 sqq., 
385 j£., 391 sqq., 413, 417 jyy., 
422 sqq., 433, 436, 441, 448 sq., 

454, 458 ^. 

Night, marriage at, 327 sq. 
Noivillie, 404 
Nupa, 473, 477, 481 sq. 
Nya, 88 

Oaths, 123 sq., 245 5^., 248 

Occupations of the sexes, 49 sqq. 

Omphale, 372 

Ordeals, 123 sq. 

Organs, 104 sqq., 133 sqq., 178, 227 

Pain, 93 

Part for whole, 117 sq., 227 

Parthenogenesis, 196 

Paternal system, 369, 461 

Patrimi, IOO 

Peace-making, 245 sq. 

Pela, 248, 255, 397, 450 

Personality, 117 

Persons, 59, 62, 64, 66 5^., 74 sq., 390 

Physiological thought, 22, 57, 179, 200 

Piraungaru, 477 5^., 480 jy. 

Pirauru, 477, 480 

Placenta, 118 ttf. 

Pledges, 237 

Ploss, H., 192 

Plutarch, 268, 327, 372 

Polio, 312 sq. 

Polyandry, 480 sqq. 

Polygamy, 477, 482 

Pomali, 144, 199 

Pontianak, 8, 195 sq. 

Pot latch, 367 

Prayer, 133, 149 

Pregnancy, 8 sq., 54, 73, 212 sq. 

Priests dressing as women, 206 

Primitive thought, 3 sqq. 

Promiscuity, 214, 222 sq., 280 sqq., 312, 

460, 475 sqq. 
Properties, 80 sqq., 323 
transmitted, 437 sqq. 
Property, destruction of, 98 sq., 366 sq. 
Proposal of marriage, 378 
Proxies, 227, 289, 317, 339 sqq., 348 sq. 
Proximity, 114 

Proxy, marriage by, 339 sqq., 348 sq. 
Psychology, xi, 433, 484 
Puberty, 10 sq., 55, 164, 196, 219, 270 

sq., 294 sqq. 
Pulllnuuma, 12 1 
Purchase, marriage by, 387 sqq. 
Purification, 200, 228 sq., 278 sq., 325 sq. 
Purity, 139 sq. 
Pythagoreans, 107 

Rags, 225 

Realism, 4 

Red, 308 

Refuse of food, 124 sqq. 

Relations, human, 76 sqq., 258 sqq. 

Relationship, terms of, 476 

Relationships, 264 sq., 376 sqq., 399, 

442 sq., 452 sqq., 468 
Religion, 3, 5, 44 sq., 49, 58, 304, 484 
Representatives, 317 
Residence, change of, 466 sqq. 

with wife's people, ix, 369, 406,411, 

420, 432, 462 sqq. 
Responsibility, 391 sqq. 
Rice, 325 

Ridjala-sampoe, 364 
Riedel, J. G. F., 180 
Ritual, 12 sq. 

Sacraments, 318 
Sacrifice, 227 sq. 

of a part, 138, 300, 336 
Saliva, 112, 12 1 
Saturnalia, 279 sqq., 285 sq., 416, 426, 

479 

Seclusion, 225 sq., 328 sqq. 
Separation, 331 sq. 

INDEX 

491 

Sex, 2, 5, n, 22, 148, 339, 370, 454 

sqq., 460 sq. 
change of, 268 sq. 
solidarity of, 41 sq., 335, 350 
Sex-totems, 45, 454 sq. 
Sexual antagonism, 42 sq., 291 sq., 311 

sq., 361 sqq., 416 
dangers, 295 sqq. 
functions, 133 
influence, 72 sqq., 202 sqq. 
intercourse, 8, 179 sqq., 200, 214, 258, 
307 sq., 310 sq., 322, 343 sqq., 346 

•91- 

properties, 323 
resistance, 353 sqq. 
taboo, 35 sqq., 153 sqq., 181, 213 
sqq., 296 5??., 313, 322, 375, 399 

*??•» 434> 437 *??'» 447 *?•» 465 SV- 
Sham fights, 292 
Shyness, 314, 328 sqq., 354 sqq. 
Sickness, 20, 26 j^., 60, 66 jyy. 
Sight, 114 J^., 182, 226, 328 sqq. 
Silence, 231, 342 
Sin, 74, 94 sq., 145, 214, 279, 320, 346, 

484 

Sindur-dan, 341, 380, 385 
Sisters and brothers, 2, 316 sq,, 444 sqq., 

450 sqq. 

Skeat, W. W., 85, 136 
Skin, in 
Sleep, 342 sq. 
Smell, no 

Smith, W. Robertson, x, 178, 376, 443 
Snakes, 107, 192 sq., 303, 306 
Socialism, 147, 283 sq. 
Soil, 98 sq. 
Solitude, 134 
Soul, 63, 80, 189 sq. 
external, 117, 228 
Spencer, B., vii, 31, 68, 81, 145, 182, 

3°5> 3J3» 347> 368» 443, 462, 468, 
_ ^472 sq., 475, 477, 481 
Spirits, evil, 10 sqq., 17 sqq., 59 s$q., 62 

sq., 74 sq., 154 

Spiritual, the, 4, 13 sq., 19 sqq., 31 
Sponsors, 263, 265, 298 sq., 3 17, 339 sq., 

374 

Statistics, ix. 
Stepping over, 114, 219 
Strange, the, 21 sqq., 24 sqq. 
Strangers, 141, 156 
Strength, 101 sqq., 106 sqq., 137, 187 

sq., 306 

new, 276 sqq., 301 sq., 311 sqq. 
Stupidity, 95 

Substitutes, 227, 270, 278, 337 sq., 441 
Succubi, 194 

Sun, 192 sq., 196 sqq., 308, 327 
Supernatural, the, 4, 19, 62 sq., 66, 192 

Survivals, 4, 367 sqq., 478, 484 
Suivanggi, 66, 155, 195 
Sweat, no 
Swiftness, 101 sqq. 
Sympathy, 202, 232, 269 
Sympathy of father, mother, and child, 
417 sqq. 

Taboo, 6 sqq., 9 sqq., 13, 15 sqq., 2O 
sqq., 29 sq., 35 sq., 47, 49 sq., 56 
sqq., 74 sq., 78 sq., 82 sq., 90 J£., 
121, 132, 140 sq., 144, 236 sq., 252 

*??•» 484 
breaking of, 223 sqq., 282 jy., 319 

sqq., 322, 375 57. 
sexual, 1 6, 35 sqq., 49 j^., 56 sqq., 

74 j?., 140 sq., 213, ^., 322, 375 
Tabu (tapu), 6 sq., 9 sqq., 13 5^., 15 ^., 

22,40,49,61, 143, 158, 165, 173 

sqq. 

Tabu marks, 122, 144 
Tabu siga, 326 
Taio, 244 
Taurobolium, 277 
Teeth, 108 sq., 135 sq., 300 J^. 
Teeth-filing, 136 
Teknonymy, ix, ^zZjqq. 
Tepong-taiuar, 326 
Terms of relationship, 450 sqq. 
Testicles, 188 
Theocritus, 129 
Thomson, B., 445 
Thought, physiological, 21 sq., 57, 58 

sq., 138 sq., 148 
Thrashing, mock, 366 sq. 
Ties, 257 

Timidity, 93, 205 sq., 209 sq., 370 
Tokens, 237 sqq. 
Totems, 249, 398, 457 
Totem clans, 470 
Transmission of properties and states, 

80 sqq., 90 sqq., 104 sqq., 119 sqq., 

155, 162,186 ^.,200,235,302 sqq. 
Tree-marriage, 340 sq. 
Trespassing, 124 
Tribal theory, 320 sq., 376 sqq. 
Turndun, 305 
Turn-tongue, 47, 400 
Tutelar deities, 304 
Tivala, 359 
Twins, 416 
Tylor, E. B., viii, xi, 369, 406 sq., 410, 

416, 420 sq., 429 sq., 462, 465, 469 

sq., 478 

280 

Uku-hlonipa, 400 sq. 
Umbilical cord, 237 sq. 
Umbirna, 314 

492 

THE MYSTIC ROSE 

Umbrellas, 226, 331 

Umkuba, 269 sq. 

Uncleanness, 10, 62, 82, 133 j^., 137 

sqq., 224 
Ungunja, 221 
Union, 237 sqq., 260 sqq., 281 sqq., 318 

*??•» 372 *??• 
Unknown, the, 21 sqq. 

Varagut, 290 
Veils, 226, 330 sqq. 
Venus, the bearded, 485 
Virginiensis, Dea, 8 
Viriplaca, Dea, 44 

War-dance, 289 
Warm eyes, 121 

houses, 225 
Way, 251 sq. 
Water, 226, 228 
Wax-images, 128 sq. 

Weakness, 36, 51, 93, 187 sq., 204 sqq. 

279, 296 sq. 
Westermarck, E., x 57., i sq., 367, 387,. 

444, 460, 475, 479, 483 
Whangaihan, 230 
Wickedness, 143 sq. 
Widows, 323 

Wife and husband, 2, 35 sqq., 391 sqq 
Wilken, G. A., x. 
Wilyaru, 213 
Wives exchanged, 248 sq., 280 sq., 285 

sq., 312 

Women and men, 2, 35 sqq. 
Women dressing as men, 282, 290, 313, 

396, 419, 426 sq. 
eating with, 303, 311 
Women's language, 48 
Words, 115 sq. 
Wuulon, 125 

Yeerung, 351 

THE END 

Printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh. 

t-f' 

&•• 

GN Crawley, Alfred Ernest 
4.80 The mystic rose. 
C8 

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
