Philosophy of the Practical: Economic and Ethic (Benedetto Croce (Douglas Ainslie, trans.), 1909)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/philosophyofthep00crocuoft). Croce's philosophy of action: the economic and the ethical as the practical forms of spirit.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

H

\iVW


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  PRACTICAL
ECONOMIC  AND  ETHIC


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

NEW YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO. OF  CANADA,  LTD.

TORONTO


PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE
PRACTICAL yi

ECONOMIC  AND  ETHIC


TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN OF
BENEDETTO CROCE


BY


DOUGLAS AINSLIE

B.A.  (OxoN.),  M.R.A.S.


>


*,ir

V


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON

1913


COPYRIGHT


NOTE

CERTAIN  chapters  only  of  the  third  part  of  this
book  were  anticipated  in  the  study  entitled
Reduction  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law  to  the  Philo
sophy  of  Economy,  read  before  the  Accademia
Pontaniana  of  Naples  at  the  sessions  of  April
21  and  May  5,  1907  (Acts,  vol.  xxxvii.)  ;
but  I  have  remodelled  them,  amplifying  certain
pages  and  summarizing  others.  The  concept  of
economic  activity  as  an  autonomous  form  of  the
spirit,  which  receives  systematic  treatment  in
the  second  part  of  the  book,  was  first  maintained
in  certain  essays,  composed  from  1897  to  1900,
and  afterwards  collected  in  the  volume  Historical
Materialism  and  Marxist  Economy  (2nd  edition,
Palermo,  Sandron,  1907).

B. C.

NAPLES,
IQ//&  April  1908.


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

"  A  noi  sembra  che  1'  opera  del  Croce  sia  lo  sforzo  piu  potente
che il pensiero italiano abbia compiuto negli ultimi anni."-
G. DE  RUGGIERO  in  La  Filosofia  contemporanea,  1912.

"  II  sistema  di  Benedetto  Croce  rimane  la  piu  alta  conquista
del  pensiero  contemporaneo." — G.  NATOLI  in  La  Voce,  iQth
December  1912.

THOSE  acquainted  with  my  translation  of  Bene
detto  Croce' s  Esthetic  as  Science  of  Expression
and  General Lingiiis tic  will  not  need  to  be  informed
of  the  importance  of  this  philosopher's  thought,
potent  in  its  influence  upon  criticism,  upon
philosophy  and  upon  life,  and  famous  throughout
Europe.

In  the  Italian,  this  volume  is  the  third  and  last
of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit,  Logic  as  Science
of  the  Pitre  Concept  coming  second  in  date  of
publication.  But  apart  from  the  fact  that  philo
sophy  is  like  a  moving  circle,  which  can  be
entered  equally  well  at  any  point,  I  have  preferred
to  place  this  volume  before  the  Logic  in  the
hands  of  British  readers.  Great  Britain  has  long


viii TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

been  a  country  where  moral  values  are  highly
esteemed  ;  we  are  indeed  experts  in  the  practice,
though  perhaps  not  in  the  theory  of  morality,  a
lacuna  which  I  believe  this  book  will  fill.

In  saying  that  we  are  experts  in  moral  practice
I  do  not,  of  course,  refer  to  the  narrow  conven
tional  morality,  also  common  with  us,  which  so
often  degenerates  into  hypocrisy,  a  legacy  of
Puritan  origin ;  but  apart  from  this,  there  has
long  existed  in  many  millions  of  Britons  a  strong
desire  to  live  well,  or,  as  they  put  it,  cleanly  and
rightly,  and  achieved  by  many,  independent  of
any  close  or  profound  examination  of  the  logical
foundation  of  this  desire.  Theology  has  for
some  taken  the  place  of  pure  thought,  while  for
others,  early  training  on  religious  lines  has  been
sufficiently  strong  to  dominate  other  tendencies
in  practical  life.  Yet,  as  a  speculative  Scotsman,
I  am  proud  to  think  that  we  can  claim  divided
honours  with  Germany  in  the  production  of
Emmanuel  Kant  (or  Cant).

The  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  wit
nessed  with  us  a  great  development  of  materialism
in  its  various  forms.  The  psychological,  anti-
historical  speculation  contained  in  the  so-called
Synthetic  Philosophy  (really  psychology)  of
Herbert  Spencer  was  but  one  of  the  many  power-


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE  ix

ful influences  abroad,  tending  to  divert  youthful
minds from the  true  path  of  knowledge. This
writer, indeed, made himself  notorious by his
attitude of  contemptuous  intolerance  and  ignor
ance  of  the  work  previously  done  in  connection
with  subjects  which  he  was  investigating. He
accepted  little  but  the  evidence  of  his  own  senses
and  judgment,  as  though  he  were  the  first  philo
sopher. But  time  has  now  taken  its  revenge,  and
modern criticism has exposed the Synthetic
Philosophy  in  all  its  barren  and  rigid  inadequacy
and  ineffectually. Spencer  tries  to  force  Life  into
a  brass  bottle  of  his  own  making,  but  the  genius
will not go into his bottle. The names and
writings  of  J.  S.  Mill,  of  Huxley,  and  of  Bain  are,
with  many  others  of  lesser  calibre,  a  potent  aid  to
the  dissolving  influence  of  Spencer. Thanks  to
their  efforts,  the  spirit  of  man  was  lost  sight  of  so
completely that I can well remember hearing
Kant's  great  discovery  of  the  synthesis  a  priori
described  as  moonshine,  and  Kant  himself,  with
his  categoric imperative,  as  little better  than  a
Prussian  policeman. As for Hegel, the great
completer and developer of Kantian thought,
his  philosophy  was  generally  in  even  less  esteem
among  the  youth  ;  and  we  find  even  the  contem
plative  Walter  Pater  passing  him  by  with  a  polite

b


x  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

apology  for  shrinking  from  his  chilly  heights.  I
do  not,  of  course,  mean  to  suggest  that  estimable
Kantians  and  Hegelians  did  not  exist  here  and
there  throughout  the  kingdom  in  late  Victorian
days  (the  names  of  Stirling,  of  Caird,  and  of  Green
at  once  occur  to  the  mind) ;  but  they  had  not
sufficient  genius  to  make  their  voices  heard  above
the  hubbub  of  the  laboratory.  We  all  believed
that  the  natural  scientists  had  taken  the  measure
of  the  universe,  could  tot  it  up  to  a  T — and  con
sequently  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  other  appeals.

Elsewhere  in  Europe  Hartmann,  Haeckel,  and
others  were  busy  measuring  the  imagination  and
putting  fancy  into  the  melting-pot — they  offered
us  the  chemical  equivalent  of  the  wings  of  Aurora.
We  believed  them,  believed  those  materialists,
those  treacherous  neo- Kantians,  perverters  of
their  master's  doctrine,  who  waited  for  guileless
youth  with  mask  and  rapier  at  the  corner  of  every
thicket.  Such  as  escaped  this  ambush  were
indeed  fortunate  if  they  shook  themselves  free  of
Schopenhauer,  the  (personally)  comfortable  philo
sopher  of  suicide  and  despair,  and  fell  into  the
arms  of  the  last  and  least  of  the  Teutonic  giants,
Friedrich  Nietzsche,  whose  spasmodic  paragraphs,
full  of  genius  but  often  empty  of  philosophy,
show  him  to  have  been  far  more  of  a  poet  than  a


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE  xi

philosopher.  It  was  indeed  a  doleful  period  of
transition  for  those  unfortunate  enough  to  have
been  born  into  it :  we  really  did  believe  that  life
had  little  or  nothing  to  offer,  or  that  we  were  all
Overmen  (a  mutually  exclusive  proposition  !),  and
had  only  to  assert  ourselves  in  order  to  prove  it.

To  the  writings  of  Pater  I  have  already
referred,  and  of  them  it  may  justly  be  said  that
they  are  often  supremely  beautiful,  with  the  quality
and  cadence  of  great  verse,  but  mostly  (save
perhaps  the  volume  on  Plato  and  Platonism,  by
which  he  told  the  present  writer  that  he  hoped
to  live)  instinct  with  a  profound  scepticism,  that
revelled  in  the  externals  of  Roman  Catholicism,
but  refrained  from  crossing  the  threshold  which
leads  to  the  penetralia  of  the  creed.

Ruskin  also  we  knew,  and  he  too  has  a  beauti
ful  and  fresh  vein  of  poetry,  particularly  where
free  from  irrational  dogmatism  upon  Ethic  and
^Esthetic.  But  we  found  him  far  inferior  to  Pater
in  depth  and  suggestiveness,  and  almost  devoid
of  theoretical  capacity.  Sesame  for  all  its  Lilies
is  no  Open  Sesame  to  the  secrets  of  the  world.
Thus,  wandering  in  the  obscure  forest,  it  is  little
to  be  wondered  that  we  did  not  anticipate  the
flood  of  light  to  be  shed  upon  us  as  we  crossed
the  threshold  of  the  twentieth  century.


xii TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

It  was  an  accident  that  took  me  to  Naples  in
1909,  and  the  accident  of  reading  a  number  of
La  Critica,  as  I  have  described  in  the  introduction
to  the  ^Esthetic,  that  brought  me  in  contact  with
the  thought  of  Benedetto  Croce.  But  it  was  not
only  the  Esthetic  ^  it  was  also  the  purely  critical
work  of  the  philosopher  that  appeared  to  me  at
once  of  so  great  importance.  To  read  Hegel,  for
instance,  after  reading  Croce's  study  of  him,  is  a
very  different  experience  (at  least  so  I  found  it)
to  reading  him  before  so  doing.

Hegel  is  an  author  most  deeply  stimulative
and  suggestive,  but  any  beginner  is  well  to  take
advantage  of  all  possible  aid  in  the  difficult  study.

To  bring  this  thought  of  Hegel  within  the
focus  of  the  ordinary  mind  has  never  been  an
easy  task  (I  know  of  no  one  else  who  has  success
fully  accomplished  it) ;  and  Croce's  work,  What
is  living  and  what  is  dead  of  the  Philosophy  of
Hegel,  as  one  may  render  the  Italian  title  of  the
book  which  I  hope  to  translate,  has  enormously
aided  a  just  comprehension,  both  of  the  qualities
and  the  defects  of  that  philosopher.  This  work
appeared  in  the  Italian  not  long  after  the  ALsthetic,
and  has  had  an  influence  upon  the  minds  of  con
temporary  Italians,  second  only  to  the  Philosophy
of  the  Spirit.  To  clear  away  the  debris  of  Hegel,


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE xiii

his  false  conception  of  art  and  of  religion,  to
demonstrate  his  erroneous  application  of  his  own
great  discovery  of  the  dialectic  to  pseudo-concepts,
and  thus  to  reveal  it  in  its  full  splendour,  has
been  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  Croce's  inestim
able  contributions  to  critical  thought.

I  shall  not  pause  here  to  dilate  upon  the  immense
achievement  of  Croce,  the  youngest  of  Italian
senators,  a  recognition  of  his  achievement  by
his  King  and  country,  but  merely  mention  his
numerous  historical  works,  his  illuminative  study
of  Vico,  which  has  at  last  revealed  that  philo
sopher  as  of  like  intellectual  stature  to  Kant ;  the
immense  tonic  and  cultural  influence  of  his  review,
La  Critica,  and  his  general  editorship  of  the
great  collection  of  Scrittori  d?  Italia.  Freed  at
last  from  that  hubbub  of  the  laboratory,  from  the
measures  and  microscopes  of  the  natural  scientists,
excellent  in  their  place,  it  is  interesting  to  ask  if
any  other  contemporary  philosopher  has  made
a  contribution  to  ethical  theory  in  any  way  com
parable  to  the  Philosophy  of  the  Practical.  The
names  of  Bergson  and  of  Blondel  at  once  occur  to
the  mind,  but  the  former  admits  that  his  complete
ideas  on  ethics  are  not  yet  made  known,  and
implies  that  he  may  never  make  them  entirely
known.  The  reader  of  the  Philosophy  of  the


xiv TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

Practical  will,  I  think,  find  that  none  of  Bergson's
explanations,  " burdened,"  as  he  says,  with  "geo
metry,"  and  as  we  may  say  with  matter,  from  the
obsession  of  which  he  never  seems  to  shake  him
self  altogether  free,  are  comparable  in  depth  or
lucidity  with  the  present  treatise.  The  spirit  is
described  by  Bergson  as  memory,  and  matter  as
a  succession  of  images.  How  does  the  one
communicate  with  the  other  ?  The  formula  of
the  self-creative  life  process  seems  hardly  sufficient
to  explain  this,  for  if  with  Bergson  we  conceive
of  life  as  a  torrent,  there  must  be  some  reason
why  it  should  flow  rather  in  one  channel  than  in
another.  But  life  is  supposed  to  create  and  to
absorb  matter  in  its  progress  ;  and  here  we  seem
to  have  entered  a  vicious  circle,  for  the  intuition
presupposes,  it  does  not  create  its  object.  As
regards  the  will,  too,  the  Bergsonian  theory  of
the  Ego  as  rarely  (sometimes  never  once  in  life)
fully  manifesting  itself,  and  our  minor  actions  as
under  the  control  of  matter,  seems  to  lead  to  a
deterministic  conception  and  to  be  at  variance
with  the  thesis  of  the  self-creation  of  life.

As  regards  Blondel,  the  identification  of  thought
and  will  in  the  philosophy  of  action  leads  him
to  the  position  that  the  infinite  is  not  in  the
universal  abstract,  but  in  the  single  concrete.  It


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE xv

is  through  matter  that  the  divine  truth  reaches
us,  and  God  must  pass  through  nature  or  matter,
in  order  to  reach  us,  and  we  must  effect  the
contrary  process  to  reach  God.  It  is  a  beautiful
conception  ;  but,  as  de  Ruggiero  suggests,  do  we
not  thus  return,  by  a  devious  and  difficult  path,
to  the  pre- Hegelian,  pre- Kantian,  position  of
religious  platonicism  ? l

This,  however,  is  not  the  place  to  discourse
at  length  of  other  philosophies.  What  most
impresses  in  the  Crocean  thought  is  its  profundity,
its  clarity,  and  its  completeness, — totus  teres  atque
rotundus.  Croce,  indeed,  alone  of  the  brilliant
army  of  philosophers  and  critics  arisen  in  the
new  century,  has  found  a  complete  formula  for
his  thought,  complete,  that  is,  at  a  certain  stage  ;
for,  as  he  says,  the  relative  nature  of  all  systems
is  apparent  to  all  who  have  studied  philosophy.
He  alone  has  defined  and  allocated  the  activities
of  the  human  spirit ;  he  alone  has  plumbed  and
charted  its  ocean  in  all  its  depth  and  breadth.

A  system  !  The  word  will  sound  a  mere  tinkling
of  cymbals  to  many  still  aground  in  the  abstract
superficialities  of  nineteenth-century  scepticism  ;
but  they  are  altogether  mistaken.  To  construct
a  system  is  like  building  a  house  :  it  requires  a

1  G.  de  Ruggiero,  La  Filosqfia  contemporanca,  Laterza,  Bari,  1912.


xvi TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

good  architect  to  build  a  good  house,  and  where
it  is  required  to  build  a  great  palace  it  requires
a  great  genius  to  build  it  successfully.  Michael
Angelo  built  the  Vatican,  welding  together  and
condensing  the  works  of  many  predecessors,
ruthlessly  eliminating  what  they  contained  of  bad
or  of  erroneous  :  Benedetto  Croce  has  built  the
Philosophy  of  the  Spirit.  To  say  of  either
achievement  that  it  will  not  last  for  ever,  or  that
it  will  need  repair  from  time  to  time,  is  perfectly
true ;  but  this  criticism  applies  to  all  things
human  ;  and  yet  men  continue  to  build  houses—
for  God  and  for  themselves.  Croce  is  the  first
to  admit  the  incompleteness,  the  lack  of  finality
of  all  philosophical  systems,  for  each  one  of  them
deals,  as  he  says,  with  a  certain  group  of  problems
only,  which  present  themselves  at  a  definite
period  of  time.  The  solution  of  these  leads  to
the  posing  of  new  problems,  first  caught  sight  of
by  the  philosopher  as  he  terminates  his  labours,
to  be  solved  by  the  same  or  by  other  thinkers.

And  here  it  may  be  well  to  state  very  briefly
the  basis  on  which  rests  the  Philosophy  of  the
Spirit,  without  attempting  to  do  anything  more
than  to  give  its  general  outline.  The  reader
should  imagine  himself  standing,  like  bold  Pizarro,
on  his  "peak  of  Darien,"  surveying  at  a  great


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE xvii

distance  the  vast  outline  of  a  New  World,  which
yet  is  as  old  as  Asia.

The  Spirit  is  Reality,  it  is  the  whole  of
Reality,  and  it  has  two  forms  :  the  theoretic  and
the  practical  activities.  Beyond  or  outside  these
there  are  no  other  forms  of  any  kind.  The
theoretic  activity  has  two  forms,  the  intuitive
and  individual,  and  the  intellectual  or  knowledge
of  the  universal :  the  first  of  these  produces
images  and  is  known  as  Esthetic,  the  second
concepts  and  is  known  as  Logic.  The  first  of
these  activities  is  altogether  independent,  self-
sufficient,  autonomous  :  the  second,  on  the  other
hand,  has  need  of  the  first,  ere  it  can  exist.
Their  relation  is  therefore  that  of  double  degree.
The  practical  activity  is  the  will,  which  is  thought
in  activity,  and  this  also  has  two  forms,  the
economic  or  utilitarian,  and  the  ethical  or  moral,
the  first  autonomous  and  individual,  the  second
universal,  and  this  latter  depends  upon  the  first
for  its  existence,  in  a  manner  analogous  to  Logic
and  to  ^Esthetic.

With  the  theoretic  activity,  man  understands
the  universe,  with  the  practical,  he  changes  it.
There  are  no  grades  or  degrees  of  the  Spirit
beyond  these.  All  other  forms  are  either  without
activity,  or  they  are  verbal  variants  of  the  above,


xviii TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

or  they  are  a  mixture  of  these  four  in  different
proportions.

Thus  the  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit  is  divided
into  Esthetic,  Logic,  and  Philosophy  of  the
Practical  (Economic  and  Ethic).  In  these  it
is  complete,  and  embraces  the  whole  of  human
activity.

The  discussion  of  determinism  or  free  will  is
of  course  much  more  elaborated  here  than  in  the
Esthetic,  where  exigencies  of  space  compelled
the  philosopher  to  offer  it  in  a  condensed  form.
His  solution  that  the  will  is  and  must  be  free,
but  that  it  contains  two  moments,  the  first  con
ditioned,  and  that  the  problem  should  be  first
stated  in  terms  of  the  Hegelian  dialectic,  seems
to  be  the  only  one  consonant  with  facts.  The
conclusion  that  the  will  is  autonomous  and  that
therefore  we  can  never  be  obliged  to  do  anything
against  our  will  may  seem  to  be  paradoxical,
until  the  overwhelming  argument  in  proof  of  this
has  been  here  carefully  studied.

Croce's  division  of  the  practical  activity  into
the  two  grades  of  Economic  and  Ethic,  to  which
Kant  did  not  attain  and  Fichte  failed  fully  to
perceive,  has  for  the  first  time  rendered  com
prehensible  much  that  was  hitherto  obscure  in
ancient  history  and  contemporary  history.  The


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE xix

"  merely  economic  man  "  will  be  recognised  by
all  students  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Practical,
where  his  characteristics  are  pointed  out  by  the
philosopher  ;  and  a  few  years  hence,  when  Croce's
philosophy  will  have  filtered  through  fiction  and
journalism  to  the  level  of  the  general  public,  the
phrase  will  be  as  common  as  is  the  "  merely
economic  "  person  to-day.

For  indeed,  all  really  new  and  great  discoveries
come  from  the  philosophers,  gradually  filtering
down  through  technical  treatises  and  reviews,
until  they  reach  the  level  of  prose  fiction  and  of
poetry,  which,  since  the  ^Esthetic,  we  know  to  be
one  and  the  same  thing  with  different  empirical
manifestations.  In  truth,  the  philosophers  alone
go  deeply  enough  into  the  essence  of  things  to
reach  their  roots.  Thus  some  philosophy,
generally  in  an  extremely  diluted  form,  becomes
part  of  every  one's  mental  furniture  and  thus  the
world  makes  progress  and  the  general  level  of
culture  is  raised.  Thought  is  democratic  in  being
open  to  all,  aristocratic  in  being  attained  only  by
the  few — and  that  is  the  only  true  aristocracy  :
to  be  on  the  same  level  as  the  best.

Another  discovery  of  Croce's,  set  forth  in  this
volume  for  the  first  time  in  all  the  plenitude  of
its  richness,  is  the  theory  of  Error.  The  proof


xx TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

of  the  practical  nature  of  .error,  of  its  necessity,
and  of  the  fact  that  we  only  err  because  we  will
to  do  so,  is  a  marvel  of  acute  and  profound
analysis.  Readers  unaccustomed  to  the  dialectic
may  not  at  first  be  prepared  to  admit  the  necessary
forms  of  error,  that  error  is  not  distinct,  but
opposed  to  truth  and  as  such  its  simple  dialectic
negation,  and  that  truth  is  thought  of  truth,  which
develops  by  conquering  error,  which  must  always
exist  in  every  problem.  The  full  understanding
of  the  Crocean  theory  of  error  throws  a  flood  of
light  on  all  philosophical  problems,  and  has
already  formed  the  basis  of  at  least  one  brilliant
study  of  contemporary  philosophy.

To  the  reduction  of  the  concept  of  law  to  an
economic  factor,  which  depends  upon  the  -priority
and  autonomy  of  Economic  in  relation  to  Ethic,  is
devoted  a  considerable  portion  of  the  latter  part
of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Practical,  and  it  is  easy
to  see  that  an  elaborate  treatment  of  this  problem
was  necessary,  owing  to  the  confusion  as  to  its
true  nature  that  has  for  so  long  existed  in  the
minds  of  thinkers,  owing  to  their  failure  to  grasp
the  above  distinction.  In  Great  Britain  indeed,
where  precedent  counts  for  so  much  in  law,  the
ethical  element  is  very  often  so  closely  attached
as  to  be  practically  indistinguishable  from  it,  save


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE xxi

by  the  light  of  the  Crocean  analysis.  In  the  Logic
as  Science  of  the  Pure  Concept  will  be  found  much
to  throw  light  upon  the  Philosophy  of  the  Practical,
where  the  foreshortening  of  certain  proofs  (due
to  concentration  upon  other  problems)  may
appear  to  leave  loopholes  to  objection.  Thought
will  there  be  found  to  make  use  of  language  for
expression,  though  not  itself  language ;  and  it
will  be  found  useless  to  seek  logic  in  words,  which
in  themselves  are  always  aesthetic.  For  there
is  a  duality  between  intuition  and  concept,  which
form  the  two  grades  or  degrees  of  theoretic
knowledge,  as  described  also  in  the  Esthetic.
There  are  two  types  of  concept,  the  pure  and  the
false  or  pseudo-concept ',  as  Croce  calls  it.  This
latter  is  also  divided  into  two  types  of  representa
tion — those  that  are  concrete  without  being
universal  (such  as  the  cat,  the  rose),  and  those
that  are  without  a  content  that  can  be  represented,
or  universal  without  being  concrete,  since  they
never  exist  in  reality  (such  are  the  triangle,
free  motion).  The  first  of  these  are  called
empirical  pseudo-concepts,  the  second  abstract
pseudo-concepts :  the  first  are  represented  by
the  natural,  the  second  by  the  mathematical
sciences.

Of  the  pure  concept  it  is  predicated  that  it  is


xxii TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

ineliminable,  for  while  the  pseudo-concepts  in
their  multiplicity  are  abolished  by  thought  as  it
proceeds,  there  will  always  remain  one  thought
namely,  that  which  thinks  their  abolition.  This
concept  is  opposed  to  the  pseudo-concepts  :  it  is
ultra  or  omni-representative.  I  shall  content
myself  with  this  brief  mention  of  the  contents  of
the  Philosophy  of  the  Practical  and  of  the  Logic
upon  which  I  am  now  working.

Since  the  publication  of  Esthetic  as  Science  of
Expression  and  General  Linguistic,  there  has  been
some  movement  in  the  direction  of  the  study  of
Italian  thought  and  culture,  which  I  advocated  in
the  Introduction  to  that  work.  But  the  Alps
continue  to  be  a  barrier,  and  the  thought  of
France  and  of  Germany  reaches  us,  as  a  rule,  far
more  rapidly  than  that  of  the  home  of  all  the  arts
and  of  civilization,  as  we  may  call  that  Italy  which
contains  within  it  the  classical  Greater  Greece.
A  striking  instance  of  this  relatively  more  rapid
distribution  of  French  thought  is  afforded  by  the
celebrated  Lundis  of  Sainte-Beuve,  so  familiar  to
many  readers  ;  yet  a  critic,  greater  in  depth  than
Sainte-Beuve,  was  writing  at  the  same  period —
greater  in  philosophical  vision  of  the  relations  of
things,  for  the  vision  of  Sainte-Beuve  rarely  rose
above  the  psychological  plane.  For  one  reader


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE xxiii

acquainted  with  the  History  of  Italian  Literature
of  De  Sanctis,  a  hundred  are  familiar  with  the
Lundis  of  Sainte-Beuve.

At  the  present  moment  the  hegemony  of
philosophical  thought  may  be  said  to  be  divided
between  Italy  and  France,  for  neither  Great  Britain
nor  Germany  has  produced  a  philosophical  mind
of  the  first  order.  The  interest  in  Continental
idealism  is  becoming  yearly  more  keen,  since  the
publication  of  Bergson's  and  of  Blondel's  treatises,
and  of  Croce's  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit.  Mr.
Arthur  Balfour,  being  himself  a  philosopher,  was
one  of  the  first  to  recognise  the  importance  of  the
latter  work,  referring  to  its  author  in  terms  of
high  praise  in  his  oration  on  Art  delivered
at  Oxford  in  the  Sheldonian  Theatre.  Mr.
Saintsbury  also  has  expressed  his  belief  that  with
the  Esthetic  Croce  has  provided  the  first  in
strument  for  scientific  (i.e.  philosophical,  not
"  natural  "  scientific)  criticism  of  literature.  This
surely  is  well,  and  should  lead  to  an  era  of  more
careful  and  less  impartial,  of  more  accurate
because  more  scientific  criticism  of  our  art  and
poetry.

I  trust  that  a  similar  service  may  be  rendered
to  Ethical  theory  and  practice  by  the  publication
of  the  present  translation,  which  I  believe  to  be


xxiv TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

rich  with  great  truths  of  the  first  importance  to
humanity,  here  clearly  and  explicitly  stated  for
the  first  time  and  therefore  (in  Vico's  sense  of
the  word)  "  created,"  by  his  equal  and  compatriot,
Benedetto  Croce.

Then leaning  upon  the  arm of  time came Truth, whose

radiant  face,
Though never so  late  to the feast she  go, hath  aye the

foremost  place.

DOUGLAS  AINSLIE.


ATHENAEUM  CLUB,  PALL  MALL,
January  1913.


CONTENTS

FIRST PART
THE  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY  IN GENERAL

FIRST SECTION

THE PRACTICAL ACTIVITY IN ITS RELATIONS
I

THE  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY  AS  A  FORM  OF  THE  SPIRIT

Practical  and  theoretic  life-Insufficiency  of  descriptive  distinctions
—Insufficiency  of  the  psychological  method  in  philosophy-
Necessity  of  the  philosophical  method-Constatation  and  de
duction—Theories  which  deny  the  practical  form  of  the  spirit-
The  practical  as  an  unconscious  fact  :  critique- Nature  and
practical  activity  -  Reduction  of  the  practical  form  to  the
theoretical:  critique-The  practical  as  thought  in  action-
Kecognition  of  its  autonomy.

II

NEGATION  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  FORM  OF  FEELING

The  practical  and  the  so-called  third  spiritual  form:  feeling-
Various  meanings  of  the  word  :  feeling,  a  psychological  class-
Feeling  as  a  state  of  the  spirit-Function  of  the  concept  of
feeling  in  the  History  of  philosophy :  the  indeterminate-Feeling
as  forerunner  of  the  cesthetic  form-In  Historic  :  preannounce
it  of  the  intuitive  element-In  philosophical  Logic  •  pre-


21


XXV


xxvi  CONTENTS

announcement  of  the  pure  concept — Analogous  function  in  the
Philosophy  of  the  practical— Negation  of  feeling— Deductive
exclusion  of  it.


Ill

RELATION OF THE PRACTICAL ACTIVITY WITH THE

THEORETICAL ....  33

Precedence  of  the  theoretical  over  the  practical — The  unity  of  the
spirit  and  the  co-presence  of  the  practical— Critique  of  prag
matism —  Critique  of  psychological  objections  —  Nature  of
theoretic  precedence  over  the  practical :  historical  knowledge —
Its  continual  mutability  —  No  other  theoretic  precedent  —
Critique  of  practical  concepts  and  judgments  —  Posteriority  of
judgments  to  the  practical  act — Posteriority  of  practical  concepts
— Origin  of  intellectualistic  and  sentimentalistic  doctrines —
The  concepts  of  end  and  means — Critique  of  the  end  as  plan
or  fixed  design — Volition  and  the  unknown — Critique  of  the
concept  of  practical  sciences  and  of  a  practical  Philosophy.


IV

INSEPARABILITY  OF  ACTION  FROM  ITS  REAL  BASE  AND

PRACTICAL  NATURE  OF  THE  THEORETIC  ERROR . 53

Coincidence  of  intention  and  volition — Volition  in  the  abstract  and
in  the  concrete  :  critique— Volition  thought  and  real  volition  :
critique — Critique  of  volition  with  unknown  or  ill-known  base
— Illusions  in  the  instances  adduced — Impossibility  of  volition
with  erroneous  theoretical  base — Forms  of  the  theoretic  error
and  problem  as  to  its  nature — Distinction  between  ignorance
and  error  :  practical  origin  of  latter — Confirmations  and  proofs
— Justification  of  the  practical  repression  of  error — Empirical
distinctions  of  errors  and  the  philosophic  distinction.


V

IDENTITY  OF  VOLITION  AND  ACTION  AND  DISTINCTION

BETWEEN  VOLITION  AND  EVENT . . .  73

Volition  and  action  :  intuition  and  expression — Spirit  and  nature —
Inexistence  of  volitions  without  action  and  inversely — Illusions
as  to  the  distinctions  between  these  terms — Distinction  between


CONTENTS  xxvii

PAGE

action  and  succession  or  event — Volition  and  event — Successful
and  unsuccessful  actions  :  critique — Acting  and  foreseeing  :
critique — Confirmation  of  the  inderivability  of  the  value  of
action  from  success — Explanation  of  facts  that  seem  to  be  at
variance.


VI

THE  PRACTICAL  JUDGMENT,  HISTORY  AND  PHILOSOPHY

OF  THE  PRACTICAL 86

Practical  taste  and  judgment  —  Practical  judgment  as  historical
judgment — Its  Logic — Importance  of  the  practical  judgment —
Difference  between  practical  judgment  and  judgment  of  event
— Progress  in  action  and  progress  in  Reality— Precedence  of
the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  over  the  practical  judgment —
Confirmation  of  the  philosophic  incapacity  of  the  psychological
method.


VII

PRACTICAL  DESCRIPTION,  RULES  AND  CASUISTIC  . .103

Justification  of  the  psychological  method  and  of  empirical  and
descriptive  disciplines — Practical  Description  and  its  literature
— Extension  of  practical  description — Normative  knowledge  or
rules  :  their  nature— Utility  of  rules — The  literature  of  rules
and' its  apparent  decadence— Relation  between  the  arts  (collec
tions  of  rules)  and  philosophic  doctrines — Casuistic  :  its  nature
and  utility — Jurisprudence  as  casuistic.


VIII

CRITIQUE  OF  THE  INVASIONS  OF  PHILOSOPHY  INTO  PRAC
TICAL  DESCRIPTION  AND  INTO  ITS  DERIVATIVES . 121

First  form  :  tendency  to  generalize — Historical  elements  that  persist
in  the  generalizations— Second  form  :  literary  union  of  philo
sophy  and  empiria— Third  form  :  attempt  to  put  them  in  close
connection— Science  of  the  practical,  and  Metaphysic  :  various
meanings — Injurious  consequences  of  the  invasions — ist,  Dis
solution  of  empirical  concepts — Examples:  war  and  peace,
property  and  communism,  and  the  like — Other  examples —
Misunderstandings  on  the  part  of  the  philosophers — Historical


i/


xxviii  CONTENTS

significance  of  such  questions — 2nd,  False  deduction  of  the
empirical  from  the  philosophic— Affirmations  as  to  the  con
tingent  changed  into  philosophemes— Reasons  for  the  rebellion
against  rules — Limits  between  philosophy  and  empiria.


IX

HISTORICAL  NOTES .  • i44

I.  Distinction  between  history  of  the  practical  principle  and  history
of  liberation  from  the  transcendental— II.  Distinction  of  the
practical  from  the  theoretical— III.  Minglings  of  the  Philosophy
of  the  practical  with  Description— Vain  attempts  at  a  definition
of  empirical  concepts — Attempts  at  deduction — IV.  Various
questions  —  Practical  nature  of  error — Practical  taste— V.
Doctrines  of  feeling — The  Wolfians— Jacobi  and  Schleiermacher
—  Kant  — Hegel — Opponents  of  the  doctrine  of  the  three
faculties.  Krug — Brentano.


SECOND SECTION

THE PRACTICAL ACTIVITY IN ITS DIALECTIC
I

NECESSITY  AND  FREEDOM  IN  THE  VOLITIONAL  ACT . 173

The  problem  of  freedom— Freedom  of  willing  and  freedom  of
action  :  critique  of  such  distinction — The  volitional  act,  both
necessary  and  free — Comparison  with  the  aesthetic  activity —
Critique  of  determinism  and  arbitrarism — General  form  of  this
antithesis  :  materialism  and  mysticism — Materialistic  sophisms
of  determinism — Mysticism  of  doctrine  of  free  will — Doctrine
of  necessity-liberty  and  idealism — Doctrine  of  double  causality  ;
of  dualism  and  agnosticism— Its  character  of  transaction  and
transition.

II

FREEDOM  AND  ITS  OPPOSITE. GOOD  AND  EVIL  . .192

Freedom  of  action  as  reality  of  action — Inconceivability  of  the
absolute  absence  of  action  —  Non-freedom  as  antithesis  and
contrariety— Nothingness  and  arbitrariness  of  non-liberty—


/


CONTENTS  xxix

PAGE

Good  as  freedom  and  reality,  and  evil  as  its  opposite — Critique
of  abstract  monism  and  of  dualism  of  values — Objections  to
the  irreality  of  evil — Evil  in  synthesis  and  out  of  synthesis —
Affirmative  judgments  of  evil  as  negative  judgments — Con
firmations  of  the  doctrine — The  poles  of  feeling  (pleasure  and
pain) ;  and  their  identity  with  the  practical  opposites — Doctrine
relating  to  pleasure  and  happiness  :  critique — Empirical  con
cepts  relating  to  good  and  evil — To  have  to  be,  ideal,  inhibitive,
imperative  power — Evil,  remorse,  etc.  ;  good,  satisfaction,  etc.
—Their  incnpacity  for  serving  as  practical  principles — Their
character.

Ill

THE  VOLITIONAL  ACT  AND  THE  PASSIONS . . .215

The  multiplicity  of  volitions  and  the  struggle  for  unity — Multiplicity
and  unity  as  good  and  evil — Excluded  volitions  and  passions  or
desires — Passions  and  desires  as  possible  volitions — Volition
as  struggle  with  the  passions  —  Critique  of  the  freedom  of
choice — Meaning  of  the  so-called  precedence  of  feeling  over
the  volitional  act — Polipathicism  and  apathicism — Erroneity  of
both  the  opposed  theses — Historical  and  contingent  meaning  of
these — The  domination  of  the  passions,  and  the  will.


IV
VOLITIONAL  HABITS  AND  INDIVIDUALITY . . .229

Passions  and  states  of  the  soul — Passions  understood  as  volitional
habits — Importance  and  nature  of  these — Domination  of  the
passions  in  so  far  as  they  are  volitional  habits — Difficulty  and
reality  of  dominating  them — Volitional  habits  and  individuality
— Negations  of  individuality  for  uniformity  and  criticism  of  them
— Temperament  and  character— Indifference  of  temperament
— Discovery  of  one's  own  being — The  idea  of  "  vocation  "-
Misunderstandingof  the  right  of  individuality — Wicked  individu
ality — False  doctrines  as  to  the  connection  between  virtues  and
vices — The  universal  in  the  individual,  and  education.


V

DEVELOPMENT  AND  PROGRESS ..... 246

Multiplicity  and  unity  :  development — Becoming  as  synthesis  of
being  and  not -being — Nature  as  becoming.  Its  resolution  in
the  Spirit  —  Optimism  and  pessimism  :  critique  —  Dialectic


xxx  CONTENTS

optimism— Concept  of  cosmic  progress— Objections  and  critique
—  Individuals  and  History  — Fate,  Fortune,  and  Providence
— The  infinity  of  progress  and  mystery— Confirmation  of  the
impossibility  of  a  Philosophy  of  history— Illegitimate  trans
ference  of  the  concept  of  mystery  from  History  to  Philosophy.


VI

Two EXPLANATIONS RELATING TO HISTORIC AND

^ESTHETIC ....  .262

Relation  between  desires  and  actions  ;  and  two  problems  of  Historic
and  Esthetic— History  and  art— The  concept  of  existentiality
in  history— Its  origin  in  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  :  action
and  the  existing,  desires  and  the  non-existent — History  as
distinction  between  actions  and  desires,  and  art  as  indistinction
— Pure  fancy  and  imagination— Art  as  lyrical  or  representation
of  feelings— Identity  of  ingenuous  reality  and  feeling — Artists
and  the  will — Actions  and  myths— Art  as  pure  representation
of  becoming,  and  the  artistic  form  of  thought.

VII

HISTORICAL  NOTES .  .273

I.  The  problem  of  freedom — II.  The  doctrine  of  evil— III.  Will
and  freedom — Conscience  and  responsibility — IV.  The  con
cept  of  duty — Repentance  and  remorse — The  doctrine  of  the
passions — Virtues  and  vices — V.  The  doctrine  of  individuality  :
Schleiermacher — Romantic  theories  and  most  modern  theories
— VI.  The  concept  of  development  and  progress.


THIRD SECTION

UNITY  OF  THE  THEORETICAL  AND  THE  PRACTICAL

Double  result  :  precedence  of  the  theoretical  over  the  practical,
and  of  the  practical  over  the  theoretical— Errors  of  those  who
maintain  the  exclusive  precedence  of  the  one  or  the  other —
Problem  of  the  unity  of  this  duality— Not  a  duality  of  opposites

Not  a  duality  of  finite  and  infinite— Perfect  analogy  of  the

two  forms  :  theoretic  and  practical — Not  a  parallelism,  but  a
circle — The  circle  of  Reality  :  thought  and  being,  subject  and
object — Critique  of  the  theories  as  to  the  primacy  of  the


CONTENTS  xxxi


I'AGE


theoretical  or  of  the  practical  reason — New  pragmatism  :  Life
conditioning  Philosophy — Deductive  confirmation  of  the  two
forms,  and  deductive  exclusion  of  the  third  (feeling).


SECOND PART
THE PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY IN ITS SPECIAL  FORMS

FIRST SECTION

THE  TWO  PRACTICAL  FORMS: ECONOMIC  AND  ETHIC


DISTINCTION OF  THE  TWO  FORMS  IN  THE  PRACTICAL

CONSCIOUSNESS 309

The  utilitarian  or  economic  form,  and  the  moral  or  ethical  form —
Insufficiency  of  the  descriptive  and  psychological  distinction —
Deduction  and  necessity  of  integrating  it  with  induction — The
two  forms  as  a  fact  of  consciousness — The  economic  form — The
ethical  form — Impossibility  of  eliminating  them — Confirmations
in  fact.

II

CRITIQUE  OF  THE  NEGATIONS  OF  THE  ETHICAL  FORM 323

Exclusion  of  materialistic  and  intellectualistic  criticisms — The  two
possible  negations — The  thesis  of  utilitarianism  against  the
existence  of  moral  acts— Difficulty  arising  from  the  presence  of
these — Attempt  to  explain  them  as  quantitative  distinctions
— Criticism  of  it — Attempt  to  explain  them  as  facts,  either
extraneous  to  the  practical  or  irrational,  and  stupid — Associa-
tionism  and  evolutionism.  Critique  —  Desperate  attempt :
theological  utilitarianism  and  mystery.

Ill

CRITIQUE  OF  THE  NEGATIONS  OF  THE  ECONOMIC  FORM 337

The  thesis  of  moral  abstractionism  against  the  concept  of  the  useful
—The  useful  as  means,  or  as  theoretic  fact— Technical  and


xxxii  CONTENTS

hypothetical  imperatives— Critique  :  the  useful  is  a  practical  fact
— The  useful  as  the  egoistic  or  the  immoral — Critique  :  the
useful  is  amoral— The  useful  as  ethical  minimum — Critique  :
the  useful  is  premoral  —  Desperate  attempt :  the  useful  as
inferior  practical  conscience— Confirmation  of  the  autonomy  of
the  useful.


IV
RELATION  BETWEEN  ECONOMIC  AND  ETHICAL  FORMS  . 348

Economic  and  ethic  as  double  degree  of  the  practical — Errors  arising
from  conceiving  them  as  co-ordinated — Disinterested  actions  :
critique  —  Vain  polemic  conducted  with  such  supposition
against  utilitarianism — Actions  morally  indifferent,  obligatory,
supererogatory,  etc.  Critique — Comparison  with  the  relation
between  art  and  philosophy — Other  erroneous  conceptions  of
modes  of  action — Pleasure  and  economic  activity,  happiness
and  virtue — Pleasure  and  pain  and  feeling — Coincidence  of
duty  with  pleasure  —  Critique  of  rigorism  or  asceticism  —
Relation  of  happiness  and  virtue— Critique  of  the  subordina
tion  of  pleasure  to  morality — No  empire  of  morality  over  the
forms  of  the  spirit — Non-existence  of  other  practical  forms  ;
and  impossibility  of  subdivision  of  the  two  established.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ECONOMY AND THE SO-CALLED

SCIENCE  OF  ECONOMY ...... 364

Problem  of  the  relations  between  Philosophy  and  Science  of  economy
— Unreality  of  the  laws  and  concepts  of  economic  Science — •
Economic  Science  founded  on  empirical  concepts  but  not
empirical  or  descriptive— Absoluteness  of  its  laws— Their  mathe
matical  nature — Its  principles  and  their  character  of  arbitrary
postulates  and  definitions — Its  utility — Comparison  of  Economy
with  Mechanic,  and  reason  for  its  exclusion  from  ethical,  aesthetic,
and  logical  facts — Errors  of  philosophism  and  historicism  in
Economy — The  two  degenerations:  extreme  abstractism  and
empiristical  disaggregation— Glance  at  the  history  of  the  various
directions  of  Economy — Meaning  of  the  judgment  of  Hegel  as
to  economic  Science.


CONTENTS  xxxiii


VI

PAGE

CRITIQUE OF THE CONFUSIONS BETWEEN ECONOMIC

SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ECONOMY . . 382

Adoption  of  the  economic  method  and  formulae  on  the  part  of
Philosophy — Errors  that  derive  from  it — ist,  Negation  of  philo
sophy  for  economy— 2nd,  Universal  value  attributed  to  empirical
concepts.  Example  :  free  trade  and  protectionism — 3rd,  Trans
formation  of  the  functions  of  calculation  into  reality — The
pretended  calculus  of  pleasures  and  pains  ;  and  doctrines  of
optimism  and  pessimism.


VII

HISTORICAL  NOTES

I.  Greek  Ethic  and  its  ingenuousness — II.  Importance  of  Christianity
for  Ethic — The  three  tendencies  that  result  from  it :  utili
tarianism,  rigorism,  and  psychologism  —  Hobbes,  Spinoza —
English  Ethic— Idealistic  Philosophy— III.  E.  Kant  and  his
affirmation  of  the  ethical  principle— Contradictions  of  Kant  as
to  the  concept  of  the  useful,  of  prudence,  of  happiness,  etc. —
Errors  that  derive  from  it  in  his  Ethic— IV.  Points  for  a  Philo
sophy  of  Economy— The  inferior  appetitive  faculty — Problem  of
politics  and  Machiavellism — Doctrine  of  the  passions — Hegel
and  the  concept  of  the  useful— Fichte  and  the  elaboration  of  the
Kantian  Ethic— V.  The  problem  of  the  useful  and  of  morality
in  the  thinkers  of  the  nineteenth  century — Extrinsic  union  of
Ethic  and  of  economic  Science,  from  antiquity  to  the  nineteenth
century — Philosophic  questions  arising  from  a  more  intimate
contact  between  the  two— VII.  Theories  of  the  hedonistic
calculus  :  from  Maupertuis  to  Hartmann.


SECOND SECTION

THE ETHICAL PRINCIPLE
I

CRITIQUE  OF  MATERIALISTIC  AND  OF  FORMALISTS  ETHIC  425

Various meanings of "formal" and "  material "  —  The ethical
principle  as  formal  (universal)  and  not  material  (contingent)—


xxxiv  CONTENTS

PAGE

Reduction  of  material  Ethic  to  utilitarian  Ethic — Expulsion  of
material  principles— Benevolence,  love,  altruism,  etc.  ;  and
critique  of  them — Social  organism,  State,  interest  of  the  species,
etc.  Critique  of  them — Material  religious  principles.  Critique
of  them—"  Formal "  as  statement  of  a  merely  logical  demand-
Critique  of  a  formal  Ethic  with  this  meaning  :  tautologism —
Tautological  principles  :  ideal,  chief  good,  duty,  etc.  Critique
of  them — Tautological  significance  of  certain  formulse,  material
in  appearance — Conversion  of  tautological  Ethic  into  material
and  utilitarian  Ethic— In  what  sense  Ethic  should  be  formal ;
and  in  what  other  sense  material.


II

THE  ETHICAL  FORM  AS  ACTUALIZATION  OF  THE  SPIRIT

IN  UNIVERSAL ....  • 44°

Tautological  Ethic,  and  its  partial  or  discontinuous  connection  with
Philosophy — Rejection  of  both  these  conceptions — The  ethical
form  as  volition  of  the  universal — The  universal  as  the  Spirit
(Reality,  Liberty,  etc.) — Moral  actions  as  volitions  of  the
Spirit — Critique  of  antimoralism— Confused  tendency  of  tauto
logical,  material,  religious  formulae  in  relation  to  the  Ethic  of  the
Spirit — The  Ethic  of  the  Spirit  and  religious  Ethic.

Ill

HISTORICAL  NOTES ...  .  • 45 2

I.  Merit  of  the  Kantian  Ethic — The  predecessors  of  Kant— Defect
of  that  Ethic :  agnosticism — Critique  of  Hegel  and  of  others —
Kant  and  the  concept  of  freedom — Fichte  and  Hegel — Ethic  in
the  nineteenth  century.

i

THIRD PART
LAWS

I
LAWS  AS  PRODUCTS  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL .  .465

Definition  of  law — Philosophical  and  empirical  concept  of  society —
Laws  as  individual  product  :  programmes  of  individual  life —


CONTENTS  xxxv

PAGE

Exclusion  of  the  character  of  constriction  :  critique  of  this
concept — Identical  characters  of  individual  and  social  laws —
Individual  laws  as  the  sole  real  in  ultimate  analysis — Critique  of
the  division  of  laws  into  judicial  and  social,  and  into  the  sub
classes  of  these.  Empiricity  of  every  division  of  laws — Extension
of  the  concept  of  laws .

II

THE CONSTITUTIVE ELEMENTS OF LAWS. CRITIQUE

OF  PERMISSIVE  LAWS  AND  OF  NATURAL  LAW . 481

The  volitional  character  and  the  character  of  class— Distinction  of
laws  from  the  so-called  laws  of  nature — Implication  of  the
second  in  the  first — Distinction  of  laws  from  practical  principles
— Laws  and  single  acts — Identity  of  imperative,  prohibitive,  and
permissive  laws — Permissive  character  of  every  law  and  im-
permissive  character  of  every  principle — Changeability  of  laws
— Empirical  considerations  as  to  modes  of  change — Critique  of
the  eternal  Code  or  natural  right — Natural  right  as  the  new
right — Natural  right  as  Philosophy  of  the  practical — Critique
of  natural  right — Theory  of  natural  right  persisting  in  judicial
judgments  and  problems.

Ill

UNREALITY OF LAW AND REALITY OF EXECUTION.

FUNCTION  OF  LAW  IN  THE  PRACTICAL  SPIRIT . 497

Law  as  abstract  and  unreal  volition — Ineffectually  of  laws  and
effectuality  of  practical  principles — Exemplificatory  explanation
— Doctrines  against  the  utility  of  laws — Their  unmaintain-
ability — Unmaintainability  of  confutations  of  them — Empirical
meaning  of  these  controversies  —  Necessity  of  laws — Laws
as  preparation  for  action — Analogy  between  practical  and
theoretical  Spirit  :  practical  laws  and  empirical  concepts — The
promotion  of  order  in  reality  and  in  representation — Origin  of
the  concept  of  plan  or  design.

IV

CONFUSION  BETWEEN  LAWS  AND  PRACTICAL  PRIN
CIPLES.  CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  LEGALISM  AND
OF  JESUITIC  MORALITY  .  .  .  .  .  .  5 1 1

Transformation  of  principles  into  practical  laws  :  legalism — Genesis
of  the  concept  of  the  practically  licit  and  indifferent — Its  con-


xxxvi  CONTENTS

sequence  :  the  arbitrary — Ethical  legalism  as  a  simple  special
case  of  the  practical — Critique  of  the  practically  indifferent —
Contests  of  rigorists  and  of  latitudinarians  and  their  common
error — Jesuitic  morality  as  doctrine  of  fraud  on  moral  law —
Concept  of  legal  fraud — Absurdity  of  fraud  against  oneself  and
against  the  moral  conscience — Jesuitic  morality  not  explainable
by  mere  legalism — Jesuitic  morality  as  alliance  of  legalism
with  theological  utilitarianism — Distinction  between  Jesuitic
practice  and  doctrine.


JUDICIAL  ACTIVITY  AS  GENERICALLY  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY

(ECONOMIC) ........ 526

Legislative  activity  as  generically  practical — Vanity  of  disputes  as
to  the  character  of  institutions,  whether  economic  or  ethical  :
punishment,  marriage,  State,  etc.  —  Legislative  activity  as
economic — Judicial  activity  :  its  economic  character  :  its  con
sequent  identity  with  economic  activity — Non -recognition  of
economic  form,  and  meaning  of  the  problem  as  to  distinction
between  morality  and  rights — Theories  of  co-action  and  of  ex
teriority,  as  distinctive  characteristics :  critique  of  them —
Moralistic  theories  of  rights  :  critique— Duality  of  positive  and
ideal  rights,  historical  and  natural  rights,  etc.  ;  absurd  attempts
at  unification  and  co-ordination — Value  of  all  these  attempts  as
confused  glimpse  of  amoral  character  of  rights — Confirmations  of
this  character  in  ingenuous  conscience — Comparison  between
rights  and  language.  Grammar  and  codes — Logic  and  language  ;
morality  and  rights — History  of  language  as  literary  and  artistic
history — History  of  rights  as  political  and  social  history.


VI

HISTORICAL  NOTES . . . . . . -543

I.  Distinction  between  morality  and  rights,  and  its  importance  for
the  history  of  the  economic  principle — Indistinction  lasting  till
Tomasio  —  II.  Tomasio  and  followers  —  Kant  and  Fichte —
Hegel— Herbart  and  Schopenhauer — Rosmini  and  others — III.
Stahl,  Ahrens,  Trendelenburg  —  Utilitarians  —  IV.  Recent
writers  of  treatises — Strident  contradictions.  Stammler — V.
Value  of  law — In  antiquity — Diderot — Romanticism — Jacobi —
Hegel — Recent  doctrines — VI.  Natural  rights  and  their  dissolu
tion — Historical  school  of  rights — Comparison  between  rights
and  language — VII.  Concept  of  law,  and  studies  of  comparative


I/


CONTENTS  xxxvii

PAGE

rights  and  of  the  general  Doctrine  of  law — VIII.  Legalism  and
moral  casuistic — Probabilitism  and  Jesuitic  morality — Critique
of  the  concept  of  the  licit — Fichte — Schleiermacher — Rosmini.


CONCLUSION 586

The  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit  as  the  whole  of  Philosophy — Corre
spondence  between  Logic  and  System — Dissatisfaction  at  the
end  of  every  system  and  its  irrational  motive — Rational
motive  :  inexhaustibility  of  Life  and  of  Philosophy.


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

THIS  translation  of  Benedetto  Croce's  Philosophy
of  the  Practical  (Economic  and  Ethic)  is  com
plete.


FIRST PART

THE  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL


FIRST SECTION
THE  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY  IN  ITS  RELATIONS


THE PRACTICAL ACTIVITY AS A FORM OF
THE SPIRIT

A  GLANCE  at the  life that  surrounds us  would  Practical  and

theoretic  life.

seem  more  than  sufficient  to  establish,  without
the  necessity  of  special  demonstration,  the  exist
ence  of  a  circle  of  practical  activity  side  by
side  with  the  theoretical.  We  see  in  life  men
of  thought  and  men  of  action,  men  of  con
templation  and  of  action,  materially  distinct,  as
it  were,  from  one  another :  here,  lofty  brows
and  slow  dreamy  eyes ;  there,  narrow  brows,
eyes  vigilant  and  mobile  ;  poets  and  philosophers
on  the  one  side ;  on  the  other,  captains  and
soldiers  of  industry,  commerce,  politics,  the  army,
and  the  church.  Their  work  seems  to  differ  as
do  the  men.  While  we  are  intent  upon  some

3


4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

discovery just announced,  in chemistry or in
physic,  or  upon  some  philosophy  that  comes  to
shake old beliefs,  upon  a  drama  or  a  romance
that  revives  an  artist's  dream,  we  are  suddenly
interrupted  and  our  attention  is  called  to  spectacles
of  an  altogether  different  nature,  such  as  a  war
between  two  states,  fought  with  cannon  or  with
custom-house  tariffs  ; or  to  a  colossal  strike,  in
which thousands upon thousands of workmen
make  the  rest  of  society  feel  the  power  of  their
numbers  and  of  their  strength,  and  the  importance
of  their  work  in  the  general  total ;  or  a  potent
organization which collects and  binds  together
the  forces  of  conservative  resistance,  employing
interests and passions, hopes and fears, vices
and  virtues, as  the  painter  his  colours,  or  the
poet  his  words,  sometimes making  like  them  a
masterpiece,  but  of  a  practical  nature. The  man
of  action  is  from  time  to  time  assailed  as  it  were
with  nausea  at  his  orgies  of  volitional  effort  and
eyes  with  envy  the  artist  or  the  man  of  science
in  the  same  way  as  polite  society  used  to  look
upon  the  monks  who  had  known  how  to  select
the  best  and  most  tranquil  lot  in  life. But  as  a
general  rule  they  do  not  go  beyond  this  fleeting
feeling, or if they do resolve to cease their
business  on  the  Ides,  they  return  to  it  on the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  5

Kalends.  But  the  contemplative  man  in  his  turn
also  sometimes  experiences  this  same  nausea  and
this  same  aspiration  ;  he  seems  to  himself  to  be
idle  where  so  many  are  working  and  bleeding,
and  he  cries  to  the  combatants  :  "  Arms,  give  me
arms,"1  for  he  too  would  be  a  miner  with  the
miners,  would  navigate  with  the  navigators,  be
an  emperor  among  the  kings  of  coal.  How
ever,  as  a  general  rule,  he  does  not  make  more
out  of  this  than  a  song  or  a  book.  Nobody,
whatever  his  efforts,  can  issue  from  his  own
circle.  It  would  seem  that  nature  supplies
men  made  precisely  for  the  one  or  for  the
other  form  of  activity,  in  the  same  way  as  she
makes  males  and  females  for  the  preservation  of

-*•*>*>-• «

the  species.  /oLvi-rT^  /-£  *t*< '  ^4  *

(But  this mode  of  existence  'with which the  insufficiency  of

*,&  .r  1r .  ,.r  descriptive

practical  .activity mamfests^itseli;  in .lite, as  distinctions.
'  tioLgh^ysicallyv  limited,  has'  no  certainty,  when
separ-ated  from  the  theoretical  life,  nor  is  it,  as
might be believed, a fact that imposes itself.)
Facts never impose themselves, save meta
phorically  :  it  is  only  our  thought  which  imposes
them  upon  itself,  when  it  has  criticized  them  and
has  recognized  their  reality. That  existence  and
that distinction, which seem so obvious that

1  Allusion  to  a  verse  of  Leopardi  in  Canzone  all'  Italia.


6 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

one  can  touch  them  with  one's  hand,  are  at
bottom  nothing  but  the  result  of  primary  and
superficial  philosophic  reflection,  which  posits  as
essentially  distinct  that  which  is  so  only  at  a
first  glance  and  in  the  mass.  Indeed,  if  we
continue  to  meditate  with  the  same  method  and
assumptions  as  in  the  first  instance,  we  shall  find
that  those  very  distinctions,  which  reflection  had
established,  are  by  reflection  annulled.  It  is  not
true  that  men  are  practical  or  theoretical.

The  theoretical  man  is  also  practical ;  he
lives,  he  wills,  he  acts  like  all  the  others.  The
so-called  practical  man  is  also  theoretical ;  he
contemplates,  believes,  thinks,  reads,  writes,
loves  music  and  the  other  arts.  Those  works
that  had  been  looked  upon  as  inspired  entirely  by
the  practical  spirit,  when  examined  more  closely,
are  found  to  be  exceedingly  complex  and  rich
in  theoretic  elements — meditations,  reasonings,
historical  research,  ideal  contemplations.  Those
works  on  the  other  hand  that  had  been  assumed
to  be  manifestations  of  the  purely  artistic  or
philosophic  spirit,  are  also  products  of  the  will,
for  without  the  will  nothing  can  be  done  ;  the
artist  cannot  prepare  himself  for  his  masterpiece
for  years  and  years,  nor  the  thinker  bring  to
completion  his  system.  Was  not  the  battle  of


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  7

Austerlitz  also  a  work  of  thought  and  the
Divine  Comedy  also  a  work  of  will  ?  From
such  reflections  as  these,  which  might  be  easily
multiplied,  arises  a  mistrust,  not  only  of  the
statement  first  made,  but  also  of  the  inquiry
that  has  been  undertaken.  It  is  as  though  one
had  filled  a  vessel  with  much  difficulty  and  were
then  obliged  to  empty  it  anew  with  a  like  effort,
to  find  oneself  again  facing  the  vessel,  empty
as  before.  Or  one  adheres  to  the  conclusion
that  neither  the  theoretic  nor  the  practical  exists
as  distinct,  but  that  they  are  one  single  fact,
which  is  one  or  other  of  the  two,  or  a  third  to
be  determined,  manifesting  itself  concretely  in
infinite  shades  and  gradations,  which  we  arbitrarily
attempt  to  reduce  to  '"£fcer  or  more  classes,
separating  and  denominating  them  as  distinct
in  a  not  less  arbitrary  manner.

By  describing  this  process  of  ordinary  reflec-  insufficiency  of

.  the  psycho-

tion,  in  relation  to  reality  and  by  demonstrating  logical  method

in  philosophy.

its  philosophic  impotence,  has  at  the  same  time
been  demonstrated  the  nature  and  the  impotence
of  ti\z  psychological  method,  applied  to  philosophical
problems.  For  psychological  philosophy,  though
contained  in  ponderous  treatises  and  in  solemn
academical  lectures,  does  not  really  achieve  more
than  ordinary  reflection,  or  rather,  is  nothing


8 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

but  ordinary  reflection.  Having  classified  the
images  of  the  infinite  manifestations  of  human
activity,  placing,  for  instance,  will  and  action
side  by  side  with  thought  and  imagination,  it
looks  upon  this  classification  as  reality.  But
classes  are  classes  and  not  philosophical  distinc
tions  :  whoever  takes  them  too  seriously,  and
understands  them  in  this  second  sense,  finds
himself  eventually  obliged  to  admit  that  they
possess  no  reality.  Thereupon  he  declares  with
shouts  and  protestations  the  non-existence  of
the  faculties  of  the  soul,  or  rather  their  existence
as  a  mere  mental  artifice,  without  relation  to
reality.  He  may  do  more  than  this  and  throw
overboard  the  criterion  or  distinction  itself,  to
gether  with  those  false  distinctions,  proclaiming
that  all  spiritual  manifestations  are  reducible  to
a  single  element.  This  element  turns  out  in  the
end  to  be  precisely  one  of  the  rejected  classes  ;
hence  the  attempt  to  show  that  facts  of  volition
are  nothing  but  facts  of  representation,  or  that
those  of  representation  are  nothing  but  facts  of
volition,  or  that  both  are  nothing  but  facts  of
feeling,  and  so  on.
Necessity  of  the  We  must  then  remain  perfectly  indifferent

philosophical

.method.  to  the  affirmations  or  negations  of  this  psycho

logical philosophy. If it affirm the existence


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  9

of  the  practical  activity,  we  must  not  put  faith
in  it  until  we  have  recognized  its  existence  by
the  philosophical  method,  and  equally  so  in  case
it  should  deny  it.  (The  philosophical  method
demands  complete  abstraction  from  empirical  data
and  from  their  classes,  and  a  withdrawal  into  the
recesses  of  the  consciousness,  in  order  to  fix
upon  it  alone  the  eye  of  the  mind.)  It  has
been  affirmed  that  by  this  method  the  individual
consciousness  is  made  the  type  and  measure  of
universal  reality,  and  it  has  been  suggested,  with
a  view  to  obviate  this  restriction  and  danger,
that  we  should  extend  observations,  so  as  to
include  the  soul  of  other  individuals,  of  the
present  and  of  the  past,  of  our  own  and  of  other
civilizations,  thus  completing  (in  the  accustomed
phrase)  the  psychological  with  the  historical  and
the  ethnographical  methods.  But  there  is  no
need  to  fear,  because  (the  consciousness  which  is
the  object  of  the  philosophical  inquiry  is  not  that  ^
of  the  individual  as  individual,  but  the  universal
consciousness,  which  is  in  every  individual  the
basis  of  his  individual  consciousness  and  of
that  of  other  individuals.  )  The  philosopher  who
withdraws  into  himself  is  not  seeking  his  own
empirical  self:  Plato  did  not  seek  the  son  of
Aristo  and  of  Perictione,  nor  Baruch  Spinoza


to PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  poor  sickly  Jew ;  they  sought  that  Plato  and
that  Spinoza,  who  are  not  Plato  or  Spinoza,  but
man,  the  spirit,  universal  being.  The  remedy
proposed  will  therefore  seem  not  only  useless,
but  actually  harmful ;  for  in  an  inquiry  whose
very  object  is  to  surpass  the  empirical  ifcself,  is
offered  the  aid  of  a  multiplicity  of  selves,  thus
increasing  the  tumult  and  the  confusion,  where
there  should  be  peace  and  silence ;  offering,  in
exchange  for  the  universal  that  was  sought,
something  worse  than  the  individual,  namely,
the  general,  which  is  an  arbitrary  complex  of
mutilated  individualities.

It  may  seem,  however,  that  the  result  of  such

and  deduction.  ,  .  , .

an  inquiry  as  to  the  form  and  the  universality
of  consciousness  would  merely  possess  the  value
of  a  statement  of  fact,  not  different  from  any
other  statement,  as  when  we  say,  for  instance,
that  the  weather  is  rainy,  or  that  Tizio  has
married.  If  these  two  last  facts  be  indubit
able,  because  well  observed,  in  like  manner
indubitable,  because  likewise  well  observed,  will
be  an  affirmation  concerning  the  universal  con
sciousness.  And  since  both  affirmations  are  true,
there  is  certainly  no  difference  between  them,
or  between  truth  and  truth,  considered  as  such.
But  since  single  and  contingent  facts,  like  the


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  n

two adduced in the example, are single and
contingent,  precisely  because  they  have  not  their
own reason in themselves, and because the
universal  is  the  universal,  precisely  because  it  is
a  sufficient  reason  to  itself,  it  clearly  results  that
we  cannot  assume  that  truth  has  been  definitely
established  from  the  universal  standpoint  of  con
sciousness,  save when the reason for  this also
has  been  seen,  that  is  to  say  until that aspect
has  been  simply  enunciated  and  asserted,  as  in
the  case  of  a  single  fact. To  affirm  the  existence
of  the  practical  form  of  activity,  side  by  side  with
the  theoretical,  means  to  deduce the  one from
the  other,  and  both  from  the  unity  of  the  spirit
and  of  the  real. We  do  not  intend  to  withdraw
ourselves  from  this  duty  and  exigency; and  if
we  limit  ourselves  here  at  the  beginning  to  the
assertion  of  its  existence  and  to  the  demonstra
tion  that  the  arguments brought  against  it  are
unfounded, we do so for didascalic reasons,
certain  that in due  course  we shall  be  able  to
free  this  assertion  from  what  it  may  contain  of
provisional,  that is to  say,  from the character
itself  of  assertion.

The  doctrines  which  deny  the  practical  form  Theories -which

r ,1  • •  -i  deny  the  prac-

oi the spirit are and cannot but be of two  ticaifon*  of
fundamental kinds, according to the double


12 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

possibility  offered  by  the  proposition  itself  which
they  propose  to  refute.  The  first  doctrine  affirms
that  the  practical  form  is  not  spiritual  activity ;
the  second  that  although  it  be  spiritual  activity,
yet  it  is  not  in  any  way  distinguishable  from  the
already  recognized  theoretic  form  of  the  spirit.
The  second,  so  to  speak,  denies  to  it  specific,  the
first  generic  character.
The  practical  Those  who  maintain  the  first  of  these  theses

as  a  fact  of  .

unconsciousness,  say  i — We  are  unconscious  of  the  will  at  the
moment  of  willing  and  during  its  real  develop
ment.  This  consciousness  is  only  attained  after
one  has  willed,  that  is  to  say,  after  the  volitional
act  has  been  developed.  Even  then,  we  are  not
conscious  of  the  will  itself,  but  of  our  repre
sentation  of  the  will.  Therefore  the  will,  that
is  to  say  the  practical  activity,  is  not  an  activity
of  the  spirit.  Since  it  is  unconscious,  it  is
nature  and  not  spirit.  The  theoretic  activity
which  follows  it  is  alone  spiritual.

critique.  Were  we,  however,  to  allow  this  argument  to

pass,  the  result  would  be  that  none  of  the
activities  of  the  spirit  would  belong  to  the  spirit,
that  they  would  all  be  unconscious  and  all,  there
fore,  nature.  Indeed,  the  activity  of  the  artist,
at  the  moment  when  he  is  really  so,  that  is  to
say  in  what  is  called  the  moment  of  artistic


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  13

creation,  is  not  conscious  of  itself:  it  becomes
conscious  only  afterwards,  either  in  the  mind
of  the  critic  or  of  the  artist  who  becomes  critic
of  himself.  And  it  has  also  often  been  said  of
the  activity  of  the  artist,  that  it  is  unconscious ;
that  it  is  a  natural  force,  or  madness,  fury,  divine
inspiration.  Est  Deus  in  nobis ;  and  we  only
become  conscious  of  the  divinity  that  burns  and
agitates  us  when  the  agitation  is  ceasing  and
cooling  begun.  But  what  of  the  activity  of  the
philosopher  ?  It  may  seem  strange,  but  it  is
precisely  the  same  with  the  philosopher.  At  the
moment  in  which  he  is  philosophizing,  he  is
unconscious  of  his  work ;  in  him  is  God,  or
nature ;  he  does  not  reflect  upon  his  thought,
but  thinks ;  or  rather  the  thing  thinks  itself  in
him,  as  a  microbe  living  in  us  nourishes  itself,
reproduces  itself  and  dies :  so  that  sometimes
the  philosopher  has  also  seemed  to  be  seized
with  madness.  The  consciousness  of  his  philo
sophy  is  not  in  him  at  that  moment ;  but  it  is  in
the  critic  and  in  the  historian,  or  indeed  in  him
self  a  moment  after,  in  so  far  as  he  is  critic  and
historian  of  himself.  And  will  the  critic  or  the
historian  at  least  be  conscious?  No,  he  will  not
be  so  either,  because  he  who  will  afterwards
criticize  the  historico-critical  work  is  conscious


14 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

of  it,  or  he  himself,  in  so  far  as  he  criticizes  him
self,  and  by  objectifying  himself  occupies  a  place
in  the  history  of  criticism  and  of  historiography.
In  short,  we  should  never  be  conscious  in  any
form  of  the  spiritual  activity.

But  this  negation  is  founded  on  a  false  idea
of  consciousness :  spontaneous  is  confused  with
reflex  consciousness,  or  that  which  is  intrinsic
to  one  activity  with  that  which  is  intrinsic  to
another,  which  surpasses  the  first  and  makes  of
it  its  object.  In  such  a  sense  we  can  certainly
not  be  conscious  of  the  will,  save  in  the  repre
sentation  which  follows  it,  as  we  are  not  conscious
of  a  poem,  save  at  the  moment  of  criticizing  it.
But  there  is  also  consciousness  in  the  act  itself
of  him  who  reads  or  composes  a  poem,  and  he
"  is  conscious  "  (there  is  no  other  expression)  of
its  beauty  and  of  its  ugliness,  of  how  the  poem
should  and  of  how  it  should  not  be.  This
consciousness  is  not  critical,  but  is  not  therefore
less  real  and  efficacious,  and  without  it  internal
control  would  be  wanting  to  the  formative  act
of  the  poet.  Thus  also  there  is  conscious
ness  in  the  volitional  and  practical  act  as
such  :  we  are  not  aware  of  this  act  in  a  reflex
manner,  but  wre  feel,  or,  if  you  will,  we  possess
it  Without  it  there  would  be  no  result.  It  is


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  15

therefore  developed  in  moments  or  alternatives
of  happiness  and  of  unhappiness,  of  well-being
and  of  malaise,  of  satisfaction  and  of  remorse,
of  pleasure  and  of  pain.  If  this  be  uncon
sciousness,  we  must  say  that  unconsciousness  is
consciousness  itself.

The  practical  activity  may  appear  to  be  nature  Nature  and

r ,  ,  -11  practical

in  respect  of  the  theoretical, but not  as  some-  activity.

thing  without  the  spirit  and  opposed  to  it,  but  as

•

a  form  of  the  spirit  opposed  to  another  form.
^Esthetic  contemplation  has  in  like  manner,  as
has  already  been  mentioned,  appeared  to  be  a
natural  force  creating  the  world  of  intuition,
which  the  philosophical  activity  of  man  afterwards
understands  and  recreates  logically.  Hence  art
can  be  called  nature  (and  has  indeed  been  so
called),  and  conversely  philosophy  has  been
called  spirituality.  This  gives  rise  to  the
further  problem  :  whether  it  be  correct  to  con
sider  nature  (it  is  convenient  so  to  call  it)  that
which  has  afterwards  been  recognized  in  sub
stance  as  spiritual  activity ;  or  whether  the
concept  and  the  name  of  spirit  should  not  be
reserved  for  that  which  is  truly  altogether  outside
the  spirit,  and  whether  this  something  placed  ,
altogether  outside  the  spirit  truly  exists.  This
point  does  not  concern  us  here,  although  we


16 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.


Reduction  of
the  practical
form  to  the
theoretical.


are  much  disposed  to  admit  that  one  of  the
mainstays  of  that  absurd  conception  of  nature  as
of  the  extra-spiritual  is  precisely  the  practical  or
volitional  form  of  the  spirit,  so  conspicuously
different  from  the  theoretical  form  and  from  the
subforms  of  the  same.  We  do  not  therefore  hold
those  philosophers  to  have  been  so  completely
in  the  wrong,  who  have  identified  nature  and
will,  for  they  have  thus  at  any  rate  discovered
one  aspect  of  the  truth.

Passing  to  the  second  thesis,  which  does  not
place  the  will  outside  the  spirit,  but  denies  to
it  the  distinction  between  practical  and  the
theoretical  forms  and  affirms  that  the  will  is
thought,  there  is  nothing  to  be  objected  to  it,
provided  that,  as  is  often  the  case,  "  thought "
be  taken  as  synonymous  with  "  spirit."  In  this
case,  as  in  that  where  it  is  affirmed  that  art  is
thought,  we  need  only  inquire,  what  form  of
thought  is  the  will,  as  in  the  other  what  form
of  thought  is  art.  It  is  not,  for  instance,  logical
or  historical  thought,  and  the  will  is  neither
imaginative,  logical  nor  historical  thought :  if
anything,  it  must  be  volitional  thought.

But  we  have  the  genuine  form  of  this  thesis
in  the  affirmation  that  the  will  is  the  intelligence
itself,  that  to  will  is  to  know,  and  that  action


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  17

practically  well  conducted  is  truth.  This  thesis
would  not  have  arisen,  had  it  not  found  support
in  the  real  situation  of  things  (and  what  this
support  is  will  be  seen  when  studying  the
relation  of  the  practical  with  the  theoretic  activity,
and  the  complicated  process  of  deliberation).
But,  when  tested  here  independently,  it  proves
to  be  unsustainable.

We  must  not  oppose  to  it  the  usual  observa-  critique.
tions  as  to  the  lack  of  connection  between  great
intellectual  and  great  volitional  development,  or
the  cases  of  those  theoreticians  who  are  practically
quite  ineffectual,  of  philosophers  who  are  bad
governors  of  States,  of  the  "very  learned"  who
are  not  "men"  and  the  like;  for  the  reason
already  given,  that  an  observation  is  not  a  philo
sophical  argument,  but  a  fact  which  itself  has
need  of  an  explanation,  and  when  this  has  been
done,  it  may  serve  as  proof  of  the  philosophical
theory,  but  can  never  be  substituted  for  it.  But
it  is  well  to  recall  to  memory  the  quite  peculiar
character  of  the  will  and  the  practical  activity  in
respect  of  knowledge.  Intellectual  light  is  cold,
the  will  is  hot.  When  we  pass  from  theoretic
contemplation  to  action  and  to  the  practical,  we
have  almost  the  feeling  of  generating,  and  sons
are  not  made  with  thoughts  and  words.  With


i8 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  greatest  intellectual  clearness,  we  yet  remain
inert,  if  something  does  not  intervene  that  rouses
to  action,  something  analogous  to  the  inspiration
that  makes  run  a  shiver  of  joy  and  of  voluptuous
ness  through  the  veins  of  the  artist.  If  the
will  be  not  engaged,  every  argument,  however
plausible  it  may  seem,  every  situation,  however
clear,  remains  mere  theory.

The  education  of  the  will  is  not  effected  with
theories  or  definitions,  aesthetic  or  historical
culture,  but  with  the  exercise  of  the  will  itself.
We  teach  how  to  will  as  we  teach  how  to  think,
by  fortifying  and  intensifying  natural  disposi
tions,  by  example,  which  suggests  imitation,  by
difficulties  to  be  solved  (practical  problems),  by
rousing  energetic  initiative  and  by  disciplining
it  to  persist.  When  an  act  of  will  has  taken
place,  no  argument  will  extinguish  it.  As  an
illness  is  not  to  be  cured  with  reasons,  so  an
affective  and  volitional  state  cannot  be  altered
by  these  means.  Reasoning  and  knowledge
may  and  certainly  do  assist,  but  they  do  not
constitute  the  ultimate  and  determining  moment.
The  will  alone  acts  upon  the  will,  not  in  the
sense  that  the  will  of  one  individual  can  act  upon
that  of  another  (which  is  merely  a  fact  among  the
facts  perceived  by  him),  but  in  the  sense  that


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  19

the  will  of  the  individual  himself,  causing  the
previous  volition  to  enter  upon  a  crisis,  dissolves
it  and  substitutes  for  it  a  new  practical  synthesis,
with  a  new  volition.

The evident paradox of the thesis which  The  practical

as  thought

identifies without any distinction thought and  which  realizes

itself. Recog-

will, theory and  practice, has caused it to be  «*'«>»  */**

autonomy.

modified  and  to  be  produced  in  another  form,
expressed  in  the  definition ;  [that  the  will  is
thought  in  so  far  as  it  is  translated  into  act,  ±_
thought  in  so  far  as  it  is  imprinted  upon  nature,
thought  when  held  so  firmly  before  the  mind
as  to  become  action,  and  so  on.)  Now  it  remains
to  determine  what  may  be  the  relation  between
thought  and  will,  and  when  this  has  been  done,
we  shall  see  what  is  exact  and  what  inexact  in
the  above  formulae,  of  translating,  imprinting,
and  holding  fast.  These  formulae  are  all  logically
vague,  however  imaginative  they  may  be.  But
what  is  important  to  note  here  is  that  with  the
new  turn  given  to  the  thesis  that  denies  the
peculiarity  of  the  practical  activity,  this  same
peculiarity  is  unconsciously  affirmed,  because  that
transforming,  that  imprinting,  that  holding  fast,
which  did  not  exist  in  the  simple  theory,  conceal
precisely  the  will.  Thus  the  ultimate  form  of  the
negation  comes  to  join  hands  with  that  of  the


20 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

affirmation,  and  we  can  consider  undisputed  the
existence  of  a  particular  form  of  the  spirit,
which  is  the  practical  activity.  We  must  now
examine  the  relation  of  this  form  with  the  other
from  which  it  has  been  distinguished.


II

NEGATION OF THE SPIRITUAL FORM OF FEELING

IN  affirming  the  existence of  the  practical  form  The  practical

activity  and

of  activity,  we  have  had  in  view  only  the  theoretical  *fa  so-caiied

third  spiritual

form  and  have  demonstrated  that  the  one  cannot  form:  feeling,

be  absorbed  and  confused  in  the  other,  and  we

have  referred  only  to  the  theoretic  form,  when

announcing our intention of  determining the

relations  of  the  practical  with  the  other  forms  of

the  spirit. This  seems  but  little  correct,  and  in

any  case not  exhaustive,  because  there are or

may  be  other  non-theoretical  forms  of  the  spirit,

into  which  the  practical  form  could  be  resolved.

Of  these  it  would  be  necessary  to  take  account.

And not to beat too long about the bush,

that  of  which  in  this  case  it  is  question,  is  the

form  vi  feeling^ the  last  or  intermediary  of  the

three  forms  into  which  it  is  customary  to  divide

the spiritual activity : representation, feeling,

tendency  ;  thought,  feeling,  will. Attempts  have

not  been  wanting  to  reduce  tendency  or  will  to

21


22 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

feeling,  or,  as  is  said,  to  a  sentimental  reaction
from  perceptions  and  thoughts.  In  fact  there
is  hardly  a  treatise  of  philosophy  of  the  practical
without  a  preliminary  study  of  the  relations
between  the  will  and  feeling.  We  cannot,  then,
escape  from  the  dilemma ;  either  we  must
recognize  the  omission  into  which  we  have  fallen
and  hasten  to  correct  it,  or  else  make  explicit
the  supposition  that  may  be  contained  in  that
omission  (which  would  thus  be  intentional  and
conscious),  that  a  third  general  form  of  the  spirit,
or  a  form  of  feeling,  does  not  exist.  We  have
adopted  precisely  this  last  position,  and  it  there
fore  becomes  incumbent  upon  us  briefly  to  expose
the  reasons  for  which  we  hold  that  the  concept
of  feeling  must  disappear  from  the  system  of  the
spiritual  forms  or  activities.
Various  mean-  Feeling  may  and  has  been  understood  in

ings  of  the  .  .

•word feeling,  as  various  ways,  some  of  which  do  not  at  all  concern

a  psychological

class.  our  thesis. In  the  first  place,  the  word  "  feeling  "

has  been  used  to  designate  a  class  of  psychical
facts  constructed  according  to  the  psychological
and  naturalistic  method.  Thus  it  has  happened
that,  with  various  times  and  authors,  all  the
most  rudimentary,  tenuous,  and  evanescent
manifestations  of  the  spirit  have  been  called
"  feelings,"  slight  intuitions  (or  sensations  as


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  23

they  are  called),  not  yet  transformed  into  percep
tions,  slight  perceptions,  slight  tendencies  and
appetites,  in  fact  all  that  forms,  as  it  were,  the
base  of  the  life  of  the  spirit.  The  name  has  thus,
on  the  other  hand,  also  been  given  to  psychical
processes  and  conditions,  in  which  various  forms
follow  one  another  or  alternate  in  relation  to  a
material  empirically  limited.  Such  are  what  are
called  feelings  of  "  fatherland,"  "  love,"  "nature,"
"the  divine."  Nothing  forbids  the  formation  of
such  classes  and  the  use  of  that  denomination,
but  as  has  already  been  declared  in  relation  to
the  psychological  method,  they  are  of  no  use  to
philosophy,  which  not  only  does  not  receive  them
within  its  limits,  but  does  not  occupy  itself  with
them  at  all,  save  to  reject  them  when  they  pre
sent  themselves,  as  philosophical  psychology  or
psychological  philosophy.  To  classify  is  not  to
think  philosophically,  and  philosophy  on  the  one
hand  does  not  recognize  criteria  of  small  and
great,  of  weak  and  strong,  of  more  and  of  less,
and  a  small  or  smallest  thought,  a  small  or
smallest  tendency,  is  for  it  thought  and  tendency
and  not  feeling  at  all ;  on  the  other,  it  does  not
admit  complicated  processes  without  resolving
these  into  their  simple  components.  Thus  the
feeling  of  love  or  of  patriotism,  and  the  others


24 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

made  use  of  in  the  example,  are  revealed  to
philosophy  as  series  of  acts  of  thought  and  of
will,  variously  interlaced.  Let  the  psychologists,
then,  keep  their  classes  and  sub-classes  of  feeling.
We,  for  our  part,  not  only  do  not  dream  of  dis
possessing  them  of  such  a  treasure,  but  shall
continue  to  draw  from  it,  when  necessary,  the
small  change  of  ordinary  conversation.
Feeling  as  a  There  also  exists  another  meaning  of  the

state  of  the

spirit.  word  "feeling,"  of  which,  at  present  at  any  rate,

we  do  not  take  account.  This  appears  when  the
word  is  used  to  designate  the  state  of  the  spirit  or
of  one  of  the  special  forms  of  the  spirit  ;  we  should
indeed  term  these  more  correctly  the  states,  since
the  spirit  in  this  case,  as  is  known,  is  polarized
in  two  opposite  terms,  usually  denominated
pleasure  and  pain.  Indubitably  these  two  terms
can  also  be  taken  as  psychological  (and  are  thus
included  in  the  preceding  case).  Hence  it  results
that  pleasure  and  pain  are  represented  by  psycho
logists  as  the  two  extremes  of  a  continuous  series,
in  which  there  is  a  passage  from  the  one  to  the
other  term  by  insensible  increases  and  gradations.
But  we  must  also  recognize  that  this  psycho
logical  representation  is  not  the  only  one  possible,
and  indeed  is  not  truly  the  real  one,  and  that  the
two  terms  have  their  place  and  their  proper


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  25

meaning  in  the  philosophy  of  the  spirit.  They
are,  as  has  been  said,  opposites ;  and  are
differentiated,  not  only  by  a  more  and  a  less,  by
a  greatest  and  a  least,  but  also  by  the  special
character  of  distinction  that  opposites  possess.
The  doctrine  of  opposites  and  of  opposites  in  the
practical  activity  of  the  spirit  does  not,  however,
appertain  to  this  part  of  our  exposition.  In
denying  feeling,  we  do  not  here  deny  the
doctrine  of  opposites,  and  that  psychology  of  the
states  of  the  spirit  which  is  founded  upon  it,  but
the  doctrine  of  feeling  considered  as  a  particular
form  of  activity.

The  conception  of  feeling  as  a  spiritual  activity  Function  of  the

.  concept  of  fee  l-

has  answered  to  a  want  of  research,  which  may  be  ing  in  the

History  of

described  as  provisional  excogitation. Whenever  philosophy.-  the

in de term  inate.

thought  has  found  itself  face  to  face  with  a  form
or  subform  of  spiritual  activity,  which  it  was  not
possible  either  to  eliminate  or  to  absorb  in  forms
already  recognized,  the  problem  to  be  solved  has
been  endorsed  with  that  word  "  feeling."  With
many  this  has  passed  for  a  solution.  Feeling,  in
fact,  has  been  the  indeterminate  in  the  history  of
philosophy,  or  rather  the,  not  yet  fully  deter
mined,  the  half-determined.

Hence  its  great  importance  as  an expedient
for  the  indication  of  new  territories  to  conquer,


26 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

and  as  a  stimulus  against  remaining  obstinately
shut  up  in  old  and  insufficient  formulae.  But
hence  also  its  fate  :  the  problem  must  not  be
exchanged  for  its  solution,  the  indeterminate  or
semi  -determinate  must  be  determined.  When
ever  the  determination  of  the  forms  and  subforms
of  the  spirit  has  not  been  given  in  a  complete
manner,  the  category  of  feeling  will  reappear
(and  it  will  be  beneficial)  ;  but  at  the  same  time
will  reappear  the  duty  of  exploring  it  and  of
understanding  what  is  concealed  beneath  it,  or
at  least  what  unsolved  difficulty  has  caused  it
to  reappear  afresh.

Now  we  have  already  met  with  the  concept  of
feeling  on  more  than  one  occasion,  when  investi
gating  the  philosophy  of  the  theoretic  spirit,  as
something  supplying  a  theoretical  need  outside
the  theoretic  forms  generally  admitted,  or  as  a
special  form  of  theoretic  activity.  Every  time
that  we  have  done  this,  an  attentive  examination
has  caused  it  to  disappear  before  our  eyes,  and
has  generally  helped  us,  either  to  discover  some
thing  previously  unknown,  or  to  confirm  the
necessity  of  contested  categories.
Feeling  as  Thus  it  happened  that  when  a  special  (Esthetic

herald  of  the

function  was  not  recognized  and  it  was  attempted
to  explain  it,  either  intellectualistically,  as  nothing


orm


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  27

but  an  inferior  form  of  philosophy,  or  historically,
as  a  reproduction  of  the  historical  and  natural
datum,  or  almost  as  the  satisfaction  of  certain
volitional  wants  (hedonistic  theory),  the  view  of
art  as  neither  a  form  of  the  intellect  nor  of
perception  nor  of  will,  but  of  feeling,  was  an
advance,  as  also  was  the  appeal  to  men  dl feeling
to  recognize  and  to  judge  it.  As  a  result  of  this
insistence,  it  was  eventually  discovered  that  art
possessed  an  absolutely  simple  and  ingenuous
theoretic  form,  without  either  intellectual  or
historical  contents,  the  form  of  the  pure  intuition
which  is  that  of  the  aesthetic  and  artistic  activity.
Whoever  returns  to  treat  of  art  as  a  product  of
feeling,  after  this  discovery  of  the  pure  intuition,
falls  back  from  the  determinate  to  the  semi-
determinate,  and  is  at  the  mercy  of  all  the
dangers  which  arise  from  it.

The  theory  of  historiography  owes  its  progress  AS  herald  of

the  intuitive

in like  manner  to the demonstration that it  is  element  in

Historic-

impossible  to  deduce  the  historical  statement
from  concepts,  but  that  we  must  deduce  it  in
final  analysis  from  an  immediate  feeling  of  the
real,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  intuitive  element,
which  inevitably  exists  in  every  historical  recon
struction,  as  in  every  perception.  On  the  other
hand,  and  in  altogether  another  sense,  reacting


28 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

against  the  false  idea  of  an  extra  -  subjective
historical  objectivity,  to  be  found  in  the  mere
reproduction  of  the  datum,  it  was  made  evident
that  no  historical  narration  is  possible  without
the  reaction  of  feeling  in  respect  to  the  datum.
Thus  was  discovered  the  indispensability  of  the
intellective  element  in  the  historical  affirmation.
Whoever  has  recourse  to  feeling  as  a  factor  in
historiography,  after  this  complete  constitution  of
the  historical  judgment,  returns  from  the  clear
to  the  confused,  from  light,  if  not  to  darkness,
then  to  twilight.
Feeling  as  The  concept  of  feeling  has  also  been  of  capital

herald  of  the

pure  concept  in  importance in the progress of the Logic of

philosophical

Logic.  philosophy. For how could we begin to ex

plain  that  philosophy  is  constructed  with  a
method  altogether  different  from  that  of  the
exact  disciplines  (natural  sciences  and  mathe
matics),  without  denying  to  those  sciences  the
capacity  of  conquering  the  supreme  truth,  the
true  truth,  full  reality,  and  recognizing  such
capacity  on  the  other  hand  to  a  special  function
called  feeling  or  immediate  knowledge  ?  That
function  was  void,  that  is  to  say,  undetermined,
because  defined  in  a  negative  and  not  in  a
positive  manner  :  feeling  was  something  different
from  the  abstract  and  arbitrary  procedure  of  the


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  29

exact  sciences,  from  the  abstract  intellect,  but
its  true  nature  was  unknown.  When  this  was
at  last  known  it  was  discovered  that  it  was
not  a  question  of  "  feeling "  or  of  "  immediate
knowledge,"  but  of  the  intellect  itself,  in  its
genuine  and  uncontaminated  nature,  its  pure  and
free  activity,  of  intellect  as  reason,  of  thought  as
speculative  thought,  of  that  "  immediate  know
ledge,"  which  is  true,  intrinsic,  perpetual  media
tion.  Whoever  henceforth  returns  to  feeling,
after  the  discovery  of  the  pure  or  speculative
concept,  and  believes  it  to  be  the  creator  of
philosophy  and  of  religion,  fighting  with  it
against  the  natural  and  mathematical  sciences,
behaves  as  he  who  should  wish  to  return  to-day
to  the  flint-lock,  for  the  excellent  reason  that  it
was  an  advance  upon  the  bow  and  the  catapult.
Thus  those  who  invoke  feeling  in  philosophy  are
henceforth  a  little  ridiculous.  This  does  not
imply  that  they  were  not  at  one  time  to  be  taken
seriously,  for  this  concept  has  been  of  great  pro
visional  assistance  and  has  been  as  it  were  the
compass  of  the  new  idea  of  philosophy.

The  same  will  be  the  case  in  the  investigation  Analogous

function  in

that  we  have  begun  of  the  practical  form  of  the  the  Philosophy

of  the  practical.

spirit  and  of  the  problems  to  which  it  gives  rise.
This  concept  of  feeling  has  been  mingled  with


30 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

them  all,  and  propositions  have  been  formed,  of
which  we  shall  indicate  the  true  significance  in
the  proper  places.  Beginning  at  once  and  limit
ing  ourselves  solely  to  the  question  of  the  exist
ence  of  a  peculiar  practical  form,  it  is  easy  to
understand  why  it  has  so  often  been  maintained
against  the  intellectual  and  theoretical  exclusivists,
that  the  will  consists,  not  of  knowledge,  but  of
feeling ;  that  the  principle  of  action,  far  from
being  an  intellectual  principle,  is  sentimental
emotion ;  that  in  order  to  produce  a  volition,
reason,  ideas,  and  facts  perceived  do  not  suffice,
but  that  it  is  necessary  that  all  these  things
be  transformed  into  feelings,  which  must  take
possession  of  the  soul ;  that  the  base  of  life
lived,  that  is,  of  practical  life,  is  not  thought,
but  feeling,  and  so  on.  With  these  formulae
was  recognized  the  peculiarity  of  the  practical
activity.  The  theory  of  feeling  in  respect  of
the  practical  represents  progress  as  compared
with  the  intellectualistic  theory,  because  the
appearance  of  indeterminateness  is  progress
as  compared  with  bad  determinateness,  and
contains  in  itself  the  new  and  more  complete
determinateness.

Negation  of But  in  this  very  way  of  ours  of  understanding
the value  of these formulae, is implied their


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  31

resolute  negation,  when  they  tend  to  persist,
after  having  accomplished  their  function,  and  to
maintain  side  by  side  with  the  theory  of  the
practical  a  third  general  form  of  the  spirit,  namely
feeling.  No  spiritual  fact  or  manifestation  of
activity  can  be  adduced,  which,  examined  without
superficiality,  is  not  reducible  to  an  act  of  fancy,
intellect  and  perception,  that  is,  of  theory  (when
it  is  not  at  once  revealed  as  an  abstraction  or  as
a  merely  psychological  class  of  these  acts) ;  or  to
an  act  of  utilitarian  or  ethical  volition  (when  it
is  not  here  too  a  psychological  class,  variously
designated  as  aspirations,  passions,  affections,
and  the  like).  Let  him  who  will  search  his
spirit  and  attempt  to  indicate  one  single  act,
differing  from  the  above,  as  something  new  and
original  and  deserving  of  the  special  denomina
tion  of  feeling.

This constatation of fact (we repeat the  its  deductive

exclusion.

warning)  is  but  the  first  step  in  the  complete
philosophical  demonstration,  which  demands  that
we  show  not  only  that  a  third  form  does  not
exist,  but  that  it  cannot  exist.  This  demonstration
will  be  given  further  on,  and  will  coincide  with
that  of  the  demonstration  of  the  necessity  of  the
two  forms,  theoretical  and  practical ;  a  duality
that  is  unity  and  a  unity  that  is  duality.


32 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.I

Recognizing  the  legitimacy  of  the  demand  for  a
philosophical  deduction  of  the  forms  of  the  spirit,
and  therefore  of  a  deductive  exclusion  of  those
that  are  spurious  and  wrongly  adopted,  it  seems
that  if  it  be  somewhat  delayed,  such  a  mode  of
exclusion  will  also  yield  clearer  results.


Ill

RELATION OF THE PRACTICAL TO THE
THEORETIC ACTIVITY

FREED  from  the  equivocal  third  term,  which is  Precedence  of

r 1  •  j  .  the  theoretical

ieelmg,  and  now  passing  to  the  problem  of  the  activity.
relation  between  the  theoretical  and  the  practical
activity  enunciated,  (we  must  in  the  first  place
declare  the  thesis  that  the  practical  activity
presupposes  the  theoretical.  )  Will  is  impossible
without  knowledge;  as  is  knowledge,  so  is  will.

In  recognizing  this  precedence  of  knowledge  The  unity  of

•  •\i /  -i  . i  the  spirit  and

to will,  (we  do not wish  to posit as thinkable  the  co-presence

,  .  of  the  practical.

a  theoretical  man  or  a  theoretical  moment
altogether  deprived  of  will,  This  would  be  an
unreal  abstraction,  inadmissible  in  philosophy,
which  operates  solely  with  real  abstractions,  that
is,  with  universal  concretes.  The  forms  of  the
spirit  are  distinct  and  not  separate,  and  when
the  spirit  is  found  in  one  of  its  forms,  or  is
explicit  in  it,  the  other  forms  are  also  in  it,


33


34 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

but  implicit,  or,  as  is  also  said,  concomitant,  j  If
theoretical  and  cogne0£itive  man  were  not  at
the  same  time  volitional,  he  would  not  even  be
able  to  stand  on  his  feet  and  look  at  the  sky,
and,  literally  speaking,  if  he  were  not  alive,  he
would  not  be  able  to  think  (and  thinking  is
both  an  act  of  life  and  an  act  of  will,  which
is  called  attention).  Were  he  not  to  will,  he
would  be  unable  to  pass  from  waking  to  sleep
and  from  sleep  to  waking.  (Thus  in  order  to  be
purely  theoretical,  it  is  necessary  to  be  at  the
same  time  in  some  degree  practical ;  the  energy
of  pure  fancy  and  of  pure  thought  springs  from
the  trunk  of  volition. )  Hence  the  importance
of  the  will  for  the  aesthetic  and  intellectual  life  ;
the  will  is  not  theory,  nor  is  it  the  force  that
makes  grain  to  grow  or  guides  the  course  of
rivers,  but  as  it  assists  the  culture  of  grain  or
restrains  the  destructive  impetus  of  rivers,  so  it
assists  and  restrains  the  force  of  fancy  and  of
thought,  causing  them  to  act  in  the  best  way,
that  is,  to  be  as  they  really  ought  to  be,  namely,
fancy  and  thought  in  their  purest  manifestation.
The  practical  activity,  therefore,  acts  in  this  way,
and  as  it  drags  the  man  of  science  from  his  study
and  the  artist  from  his  studio,  if  it  be  necessary
to  defend  his  country  or  to  watch  at  the  bedside


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  35

of  his  sick  father,  so  it  commands  the  artist  and
the  man  of  science  to  fulfil  their  special  mission
and  to  be  themselves  in  an  eminent  degree.

All  the  arguments  that  have  been  used  in  the  critique  of

, ,  1-1  •  pragmatism.

past  and  .that  are  used  in  the  present,  to  maintain
the  dependence  of  the  theoretical  upon  the
practical  activity,  are  of  value  for  what  of  truth
they  contain,  that  is,  only  to  demonstrate  this
unity  of  the  spiritual  functions  that  we  have
recognized,  and  the  indispensability  of  the  voli
tional  force  for  the  health  of  the  cognoscitive
spirit.  But  the  passage  from  this  thesis  to  the
other,  that  the  true  is  the  production  of  the  will,
is  nothing  but  a  sophism,  founded  on  the  double
signification  of  the  word  "  production."  It  should
be  clear  that  to  assist  the  work  of  thought  with
the  will  is  one  thing  and  that  to  substitute  the
will  for  the  work  of  thought  is  another.  To
claim  to  substitute  the  will  for  the  work  of
thought,  is  equivalent  to  the  negation  of  that
force  that  should  be  assisted ;  it  is  the  most
open  proclamation  of  scepticism,  the  most  com
plete  distrust  of  the  true  and  of  the  possibility
of  attaining  to  it.  This  attempt  is  now  called
pragmatism,  or  is  at  any  rate  one  of  the  meanings
of  the  word,  with  which  the  school  of  the
greatest  confusion  that  has  ever  appeared  in


36 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

philosophy  adorns  itself  in  our  day.  This  school
mixes  together  the  most  divergent  theses — that
of  the  stimulating  effect  that  the  will  has  upon
thought,  that  other  of  the  volitional  or  arbitrary
moment,  by  means  of  which  perceptions  and
historical  data  are  reduced  to  abstract  types  in
the  natural  disciplines,  or  postulates  laid  down  for
the  construction  of  mathematical  classes.  The
third  form,  which  might  be  called  the  Baconian
prejudice,  maintains  the  exclusive  utility  of  the
natural  sciences  and  mathematics  for  the  well-
being  of  life.  The  fourth  thesis  is  positivistic  :
here  it  is  maintained  that  we  cannot  know  any
thing  save  what  we  ourselves  arbitrarily  com
press  into  the  formula  and  classes  of  mathematics
and  of  naturalism.  The  fifth  thesis  is  a  romantic
exaggeration  of  the  principle  of  creative  power
in  man,  substituting  the  caprice  of  the  individual
for  the  universal  spirit.  The  sixth,  something
between  silliness  and  Jesuistry,  recommends  the
utility  of  making  one's  illusions  and  believing
them  to  be  true.  The  seventh  is  superstitious,
occultist  and  spiritistic — and  there  are  others  that
we  omit.  If  pragmatism  has  had  and  preserves
any  attraction,  it  owes  this  to  the  truth  of  its  first
and  second  theses  and  to  the  half  truth  of  the
fifth.  All  the  ithree  are  however  heterogeneous


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  37

in  themselves  and  unreconcilable  with  the  others,
which  are  most  fallacious.  But  we  repeat  with
the  old  philosophers  that  whoever  in  thinking
says,  ''Thus  I  will  it,"  is  lost  for  truth.

Certain reservations that are made to the  critique  of

,  , r  i  r  r i  psychological

above  truth  from  the  point  of  view  of  that  philo-  objections.
sophy,  which  we  have  called  psychological,  are
scarcely  deserving  of  brief  mention.  We  find  in
treatises  of  Psychology  that  knowledge  does  pre
cede  the  practical  act,  but  only  in  the  higher
forms  of  volition,  whereas  in  its  lower  forms  are
found  only  impulses,  tendencies,  appetites,  al
together  blind  of  any  knowledge.  Thus  they
are  able  to  talk  of  involuntary  forms  of  the
practical  activity,  of  a  will  that  is  not  a  will,
when  once  the  true  will  has  been  defined,  as
precisely  appetition  illumined  by  previous  know
ledge.  The  blind  will  of  certain  metaphysicians
is  derived  from  such  excogitations  of  psycho
logists,  who  make  of  it  a  practical  act  without
intelligence.  They  have  here  attributed  the
value  of  reality  to  a  crude  concept  of  class,  a
thing  that  happens  not  infrequently.  A  blind
will  is  however  unthinkable.  Every  form  of  the
practical  activity,  be  it  as  poor  and  rudimentary
as  you  like  (and  let  as  many  classes  and  gradations
as  you  will  be  formed),  presupposes  knowledge


38 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

of  some  sort.  In  animals  too?  will  be  asked.
In  animals  too,  provided  they  be,  and  in  so  far
as  they  are  centres  of  life,  and  so  of  perceptions
and  of  will.  This  is  also  true  of  vegetables  and
of  minerals,  always  with  the  above  hypothesis.
We  must  banish  every  form  of  aristocracy  from
the  Philosophy  of  the  practical,  as  we  have
banished  it  from  ^Esthetic,  from  Logic,  from
Historic,  esteeming  it  most  harmful  to  the
proper  understanding  of  those  activities.  The
aristocratic  illusion  is  closely  allied  to  that  one
which  makes  us  believe  that  we,  shut  up  in  the
egotism  of  our  empirical  individuality,  are  alone
aware  of  the  truth,  that  we  alone  feel  the  beautiful,
that  we  alone  know  how  to  love,  and  so  on.  But
reality  is  democratic.

From  the  psychological  point  of  view  yet
another  objection  has  been  raised.  Knowledge
(it  is  affirmed)  cannot  be  the  indispensable  base  of
the  will,  if,  as  is  the  case,  the  ignorant  are  often
far  more  effective  than  many  learned  men  and
philosophers.  These  latter,  they  say,  although
possessing  very  great  knowledge,  and  no  less  a
stock  of  good  intentions,  yet  do  not  know  how  to
direct  their  lives  successfully.  But  it  is  evident
that  in  these  cases  the  so-called  ignorant  possess
just  that  knowledge  which  is  necessary  for  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  39

purpose  and  is  lacking  to  the  learned  and  to
the  philosopher,  who  would  themselves  be  the
ignorant  in  such  a  case.  Nicholas  Macchiavelli
was  ignorant  as  compared  with  Giovanni  dalle
Bande  Nere,  when  he  kept  the  spectators  waiting
two  hours  in  the  sun,  while  he  was  attempting  to
dispose  three  thousand  infantry  according  to  the
directions  that  he  had  written.  This  he  would
never  have  succeeded  in  doing,  had  not  Signer
Giovanni,  with  the  help  of  drummers  and  in  the
twinkling  of  an  eye  caused  them  to  execute  the
various  manoeuvres  and  afterwards  carried  Master
Nicholas  to  dine,  who,  save  for  him,  would  hot
have  dined  at  all  that  day.1

The  knowledge  required  for  the  practical  act  Nature  of  the

theoretical

is  not  that  of  the  artist, nor  of  the  philosopher,  precedence  of

the  practical  :

or  rather,  it  is  these  two  also,  but  only  in  so  far  historical

knowledge.

as  both  are  to  be  found  as  elements  co-operating
in  that  ultimate  and  complete  knowledge  which
is  historical.  If  the  first  be  called  intuition,  the
second  concept,  and  the  third  perception,  and  the
third  be  looked  upon  as  the  result  of  the  two
preceding,  it  will  be  said  that  the  knowledge
required  for  the  practical  act  is  perceptive.  Hence
the  common  saying  that  praises  the  sure  eye
of  the  practical  man  ;  hence,  too,  the  close  bond

1  Bandello,  Novelle,  i.  40,  intro.


40 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

between  historical  sense  and  practical  and  political
sense ;  hence,  too,  the  justifiable  diffidence  of
those  who,  unable  to  grasp  effectual  reality,  hope
to  attain  to  it  by  force  of  mere  syllogisms  and
abstractions,  or  believe  that  they  have  attained  to
it,  when  they  have  erected  an  imaginary  edifice.
They  prove  by  so  doing  that  they  can  never  be
practical  men,  at  least  in  the  sphere  of  action
at  which  they  are  then  aiming.

Such  knowledge  is  not  of  itself  the  practical
act.  The  historian  as  such  is  a  contemplative,
not  a  practical  man  or  politician.  If  that  spark
which  is  volition,  do  not  spring  forth,  the  material
of  knowledge  does  not  catch  fire  and  is  not
transformed  into  the  material  of  the  practical.
But  that  knowledge  is  the  condition,  and  if  the
condition  be  not  the  conditioned,  yet  one  cannot
have  the  conditioned  without  the  condition.  In
this  last  signification,  it  is  true  that  action  is
knowledge,  will,  and  wisdom,  that  is  to  say,  in
the  sense  that  willing  and  acting  presuppose
knowledge  and  wisdom.  In  this  sense,  and
considered  solely  in  the  stage  of  the  cognos-
citive  investigation  which  will  form  the  base
of  action,  the  deliberation  is  a  theoretical  fact.
The  customary  expressions  of  logical,  rational,
judicious  actions,  are  metaphors,  because  action


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  41

may  be  weak  or  energetic,  coherent  or  in
coherent  ;  but  it  will  not  have  those  predicates
which  are  proper  to  theoretical  acts  that  precede
actions,  on  which  the  metaphors  aforesaid  are
founded.  As  are  these  acts,  so  originate  the
practical  act,  will,  and  action.  We  can  act  in  so
far  as  we  have  knowledge.  Volition  is  not  the
surrounding  world  which  the  spirit  perceives  ;  it
is  a  beginning,  a  new  fact.  But  this  fact  has  its
roots  in  the  surrounding  world,  this  beginning  is
irradiated  with  the  colours  of  things  that  man
has  perceived  as  a  theoretical  spirit,  before  he
took  action  as  a  practical  spirit.

It  is  important  to  observe,  as  much  to  pre-  its  continual

changeability.

vent  an  equivoke  into  which  many  fall,  as
because  of  the  consequences  that  will  follow  from
holding  it,  that  we  must  not  look  upon  the
perceptive  knowledge  of  reality  that  surrounds
us  as  a  firm  basis,  upon  which  we  act,  by  trans
lating  the  formed  volition  into  act.  For  were
this  so,  we  should  have  to  assume  that  the
surrounding  world,  perceived  by  the  spirit,  stops
after  the  perceptive  act,  which  is  not  the  case.
;That  world  changes  every  second,  the  perceptive
act  perceives  the  new  and  the  different,  and  the
volitional  act  changes  according  to  that  real
and  perceived  change.  Percp^tion  and  volition


PT.


Precedent.


Critiqite  of
concepts
and  practical
judgments.


42 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

alternate  every  instant ;  in  order  to  will,  we  must
touch  the  earth  at  every  instant,  in  order  to  resume
force  and  direction.
NO  other  Continuous  perception  and  continuous  change,

theoretic

that  is  the  necessary  theoretic  condition  of  voli
tion.  It  is  necessary  and  unique.  No  other
theoretical  element  is  needed,  because  every
other  is  contained  in  it,  and  beyond  it  no  other
is  thinkable.

But  if  this  be  true  and  no  other  theoretic
element  save  that  precede  the  volition,  then  we
find  in  the  aforesaid  theory  the  criticism  of  a
series  of  other  theories,  generally  admitted  in  the
Philosophy  of  the  practical,  not  less  than  in
ordinary  thought,  none  of  which  can  be  retained
without  alterations  and  corrections.

Or  better,  there  are  not  so  many  various
theories  to  criticize  ;  there  is  rather  one  theory,
which  presents  itself  under  different  aspects  and
assumes  various  names.  This  theory  consists
substantially  in  affirming  that  with  the  complex
of  cognitions,  of  which  we  have  hitherto  treated
(all  of  which  are  summed  up  in  the  historical
judgment),  we  do  not  yet  possess  that  one  which
is  necessary,  before  we  can  proceed  to  volition  and
action.  A  special  form  of  concepts  and  judgments
which  can  be  called  practical,  must,  it  is  said,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  43

appear ;  these  render  the  will  possible,  by  inter
posing  themselves  between  the  previous  merely
historical  judgment  and  the  will.  Is  it  not
indubitable  that  we  possess  practical  concepts,  that
is,  concepts  of  classes  of  action  or  of  supreme
guides  to  action,  concepts  of  things  good,  of  ideals,
of  ends,  and  that  we  effect  Judgments  of  value  by
the  application  of  those  concepts  to  the  image  of
given  actions  ?  Is  it  not  indubitable  that  those
judgments  and  those  concepts  refer,  not  to  the
simple  present  fact,  but  to  the  future?  How
could  we  will,  if  we  did  not  know  what  is  good
to  will,  and  that  a  given  possible  action  corre
sponds  to  that  concept  of  good  ?

Now  it  is  undeniable  that  we  in  fact  possess  Posteriority  of

,  i • i  judgments  to

the above-mentioned concepts and judgments,  the  practical

act.

But  what  we  must  absolutely  deny  is  that  they
differ  in  any  respect  from  other  concepts  and  theo
retical  judgments,  and  that  they  deserve  to  be
distinguished  from  these  as  practical  and  that
they  have  the  future  for  their  object.  The  future,
that  which  is  not,  is  not  an  object  of  knowledge  ;
the  material  of  the  judgment,  whether  it  con
cern  actions  or  thoughts,  does  not  alter  its
logical  and  theoretical  character ;  the  concepts
of  modes  of  action  are  concepts  neither  more  nor
less  than  those  of  modes  of  thought.  With  this


44 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

negation  we  at  the  same  time  deny  the  possibility
of  their  interposing  themselves  between  know
ledge  and  will.  Those  judgments,  far  from  being
anterior  to  the  will,  are  posterior  to  it.

Let  us  state  a  simple  case  and  observe  the
course  of  analysis  on  the  lines  of  the  theory  here
criticized.  It  is  winter-time;  I  am  cold;  there
is  a  wood  close  by,  and  I  know  that  by  cutting
wood  one  can  light  a  fire  and  that  fire  gives  heat :
I  therefore  resolve  to  cut  wood.  According  to
that  theory,  the  spiritual  process  would  be  ex
pressed  in  the  following  chain  of  propositions  :
I  know  the  actual  situation,  that  is  to  say,  that  I
am  cold,  that  wood  gives  fire  and  fire  heat,  and
that  there  exists  wood  that  can  be  cut ;  I  possess
the  concept  that  it  is  a  good  thing  to  provide  for
the  health  of  the  body ;  I  judge  that  with  heat  I
shall  procure  health  during  the  winter,  and  that
in  consequence  heat  is  a  good  thing  and  the
cutting  of  wood,  without  which  I  cannot  pro
cure  heat,  is  also  good.  Having  made  all  these
constatations,  I  set  in  motion  the  spring  of  my
will,  and  I  will  to  cut  the  wood. — The  process
as  above  described  seems  real  and  controllable  by
every  one  ;  but  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  illusory.  The
practical  judgment:  "I  shall  act  well  in  cutting
the  wood"  really  means,  "I  will  to  cut  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  45

wood  ;  "  "  this  is  a  good  thing  "  really  means,  "  I
will  this."  I  may  change  my  will  a  moment  after,
substituting  for  this  volition  one  that  is  different  or
contrary,  that  does  not  matter.  At  the  moment
that  I  formed  that  judgment,  I  must  have  seen
myself  in  the  volitional  attitude  of  a  man  cutting
wood  ;  the  will  must  have  come  first.  Otherwise
the  judgment  would  never  have  existed.  Given
the  first  actual  situation  and  its  complete  expres
sion  in  the  judgment,  no  other  judgment  can  arise,
if  the  actual  situation  do  not  change  and  nothing
new  supervene.  This  new  thing  is  always  my
will,  which,  when  the  situation  changes  (as  in  the
example,  if  I  walk  from  the  house  to  the  tree,
or  if  I  simply  move  my  body  in  an  imperceptible
manner  in  the  direction  of  the  action  willed),
by  adding  to  the  actual  reality  something  that
was  not  there  before,  provides  material  for  a  new
judgment.  This  judgment  is  called  practical,
but  it  is  theoretical,  like  the  others  that  precede
it  ;  a  judgment  believed  to  precede  the  volition,
whereas  in  reality  it  follows  it ;  a  judgment
believed  to  condition  a  future  act  of  will,  whereas
it  is  in  reality  the  past  act  of  will  looking  at  itself  \j
in  the  glass;  a  judgment  that  is  not  really
practical  but  historical.

The  illusion  that  things  happen  differently  is


46 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

caused  by  the  fact  that  we  possess  judgments
concerning  our  past  volitions,  which  are  after
wards  collected  into  abstract  formulae,  such  as
that  "it  is  well  to  cut  wood."  But,  on  the  one
hand,  those  formulae  and  judgments  are  in  their
turn  formed  from  previous  volitions,  and  on  the
other,  those  formulae  do  not  possess  any  absolute
value  in  the  single  and  concrete  situation,  so  that
they  can  be  modified  and  substituted  for  others
that  affirm  the  opposite.  The  question  is  not
whether  cutting  wood  has  been  as  a  rule  a  good
thing  for  me  in  the  past,  nor  whether  I  have
generally  willed  it  in  the  past  :  the  question  is  to
will  it  at  this  moment,  that  is,  to  posit  the  cutting
of  wood  at  this  moment  as  a  good  thing.
Posteriority  of  As  is  the  case  with  the  pretended  practical

the  practical

concepts.  judgments  and  concepts  of  classes  formed  upon
them,  so  the  concepts  that  they  imply,  of  things
good>  of  ideals^  of  ends,  of  actions  worthy  of  being
willed,  and  so  on,  do  not  precede,  but  follow  the
volition  that  has  taken  place.  These  concepts
are  the  incipient  reflection,  scientific  and  philo
sophical,  upon  the  spontaneous  acts  of  the  will,
and  we  cannot  practise  science  nor  philosophize
save  about  facts  that  have  already  taken  place  :
if  the  fact  do  not  precede,  there  can  be  no
theory.  Certainly  theory  does  not  do  other  than


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  47

seek  out  the  already  created  and  give  the  real
principles  of  actions  in  the  form  of  thought
principles,  in  the  same  manner  as  Logic  dis
covers  those  principles  that  live  and  operate
in  logical  thought.  But  since  the  formula  of  the
principle  of  contradiction  is  not  necessary  for
thinking  without  contradiction,  but  presupposes
it,  so  the  concepts  of  ends,  of  things  good,  and
of  ideals  are  not  necessary  for  volitions,  but  pre
suppose  them.

The thesis  of  the  will as knowledge  draws  origin  of

intellectual!  st

support  from  the  mistaken  belief  in  the  practical  andsenti-

mentalist

principles  and  judgments  that  precede  volition,  as  doctrines.
also  does  the  proposition  that  he  who  knows  what
is  good  for  him  also  wishes  it,  and  that  he  who
does  not  wish  it  does  not  know  it.  This  thesis
is  to  be  inverted,  because  to  know  what  is  good
for  one  means  that  one  has  willed  it.  From  the
opposite  point  of  view,  the  other  thesis,  of  the
impossibility  of  volition  unless  feeling  be  inter
posed  between  what  is  known  and  the  will,  is  to
be  attributed  to  a  like  mistaken  belief.  Feeling
is  held  to  give,  as  it  were,  a  particular  value  to
facts,  and  to  cause  them  to  be  felt  as  they  should
be  felt,  or  to  be  changed.  The  customary  merit
possessed  by  theories  of  feeling  is  to  be  recognized
in  this  thesis  :  that  is  to  say,  it  has  awakened  or


48 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

reawakened  consciousness  of  the  peculiarity  of
the  practical  act  in  respect  to  intellectualistic
reductions  and  identifications.  This  merit  is  not
altogether  lacking  to  the  general  theory  of
practical  judgments  itself.  These,  although  called
judgments,  were  classified  differently  to  all  the
others,  precisely  because  they  were  practical.
The  concepts  Having  thus  shown  that  it  is  not  true  that

of  end  and

means.  man  first  knows  the  end  and  then  wills  it,  it  is

possible  to  establish  with  greater  precision  what
is  to  be  understood  by  end.  The  end,  then,  in
universal,  is  the  concept  itself  of  will.  Con
sidered  in  the  single  act,  as  this  or  that  end,  it  is
nothing  but  this  or  that  determinate  volition.
Hence  is  also  to  be  derived  a  better  definition  of
its  relation  to  the  means,  which  it  is  usual  to  con
ceive  empirically  and  erroneously  as  a  part  of
volition  and  action  at  the  service  of  another  part.
An  act  of  will  is  an  infrangible  unity  and  can  be
taken  as  divided  only  for  practical  convenience.
In  the  volitional  act,  all  is  volition  ;  nothing  is
means,  and  all  is  end.  The  means  is  nothing
but  the  actual  situation,  from  which  the  volitional
act  takes  its  start,  and  is  in  that  way  really
distinguished  from  the  end.  Distinction  and
unification  take  place  together,  because,  as  has
been  remarked,  the  volition  is  not  the  situation,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  49

yet,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  volition,  so  the
situation  :  the  one  varies  as  a  function  of  the
other.  Hence  the  absurdity  of  the  maxim,  that
the  end  justifies  the  means.  This  maxim  is  of
an  empirical  character  and  has  sometimes  been
employed  to  justify  actions  erroneously  held  to
be  unjustifiable,  and  more  often  to  make  pass  as
just  actions  that  were  unjustifiable.  As  the  end,
so  the  means,  but  the  means  is  what  is  given
and  has  no  need  of  justification.  The  end  is
what  has  been  willed  and  must  be  justified  in
itself.

The  idea  that  we  generally  have  of  finality  is  critique  of

.  .11  the  end  as  plan

to  be  eliminated,  owing  to  the  continual  change-  or  as  fixed

design.

ability  of  the  means,  that  is,  of  the  actual  situation,
which  would  posit  the  end  as  something  fixed,
as  a  plan  to  be  carried  out.  The  difference
between  the  finality  of  man  and  that  of  nature
has  recently  been  made  to  reside  in  nature :  which
has  seemed  to  act  upon  a  plan  which  she  changes,
remakes,  and  accommodates  at  every  moment,
according  to  contingencies,  so  that  the  point  of
arrival  is  not  for  her  predetermined  or  predeter-
minable.  But  the  same  can  be  said  of  the  human
will  and  of  its  finality.  The  will  too  changes  at
every  moment,  as  the  movement  of  a  swimmer
or  of  an  athlete  changes  at  every  moment,


50 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

according  to  the  motion  of  the  sea  or  of  the  rival
athlete,  and  according  to  the  varying  measure  or
quality  of  his  own  strength  in  the  course  of  the
volitional  process.  Man  acts,  case  for  case  and
from  instant  to  instant,  realizing  his  will  of  every
instant,  not  that  abstract  conception  which  is
called  a  plan.  Hence  also  arises  the  confirmation
of  the  belief  that  there  do  not  exist  fixed  types
and  models  of  actions.  He  who  seeks  and
awaits  such  models  and  types  does  not  know
how  to  will.  He  is  without  that  initiative,  that
creativeness,  that  genius,  which  is  not  less
indispensable  to  the  practical  activity  than  to  art
and  philosophy.
The  win  and  It  will  seem  that  the  will  thus  becomes  will  of

the  unknown.  .  .  i • i

the  unknown  and  is  at  variance  in  too  paradoxical
a  manner  with  the  sayings,  so  clearly  evident,
that  voluntas  quae  non  fertur  in  incognitum  and
ignoti  nulla  cupido.  But  those  sayings  are  true
only  so  far  as  they  confirm  the  fact  that  without
the  precedence  of  the  theoretical  act,  the  practical
act  does  not  take  place.  Apart  from  this  significa
tion,  it  should  rather  be  maintained  that  noti
nulla  cupido  and  that  voluntas  non  fertur  in
cognitum.  What  is  known  exists,  and  it  is  not
possible  to  will  the  existence  of  what  exists :  the
past  is  not  a  content  of  volition.  The  will  is  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  51

will  of  the  unknown,  that  is  to  say,  is  itself,
which,  in  so  far  as  it  wills,  does  not  know  itself,
and  knows  itself  only  when  it  has  ceased  to  will.
Our  surprise  when  we  come  to  understand  the
actions  that  we  have  accomplished,  is  often  not
small  ;  we  realize  that  we  have  not  done  what  we
thought  we  had  done,  and  have  on  the  contrary
done  what  we  had  not  foreseen.  Hence  also  the
fallacy  of  the  explanations  that  present  volitional
man  as  surrounded  with  things  that  he  does  or
does  not  will  ;  whereas  things,  or  rather  facts
are  the  mere  object  of  knowledge  and  cannot  be
willed  or  not  willed,  as  it  is  unthinkable  to  will
that  Alexander  the  Great  had  not  existed,  or  that
Babylon  had  not  been  conquered.  That  which
is  willed  is  not  things  but  changes  in  things,  that
is  to  say,  the  volitions  themselves.  This  fallacious
conception  also  arises  from  the  substitution  of
abstractions  and  classes  of  volitions  for  the  real
will

It  is  to  be  observed,  finally,  that  the  erroneous  critique  of

the  concept  of

concept  of  a  form  of  science  called  the  practical  practical

sciences  and

or  normative  has  its  roots  in  the  concept  of  the  of  a  practical

philosophy.

end,  of  the  good,  of  concepts  and  judgments  of
value  as  original  facts.  When  practical  concepts
and  judgments,  as  a  special  category  of  concepts
and  judgments,  have  been  destroyed,  the  idea  of


52 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

a  practical  and  normative  science  has  also  been
destroyed.  For  this  reason,  the  Philosophy  of  the
practical  cannot  be  practical  philosophy,  and  if  it
has  appeared  to  constitute  an  exception  among
all  philosophies  and  that  above  all  others  it  should
preserve  a  practical  and  normative  function,  this
has  arisen  from  a  verbal  misunderstanding  that
is  most  ingenuous  and  most  destructive.  For
our  part  we  have  striven  to  dissipate  it,  even
in  the  title  of  our  treatise,  which,  contrary  to
the  usual  custom,  we  have  entitled  not  practical,
but  of  the  practical.


IV

INSEPARABILITY  OF  ACTION  FROM  ITS  REAL  BASE
AND  PRACTICAL  NATURE  OF  THE  THEORETICAL
ERROR

THE  connection  between  the  actual  situation  and  coincidence
will, means and end having been made  clear,  and  volition.
no  distinction  that  it  may  be  desired  to  establish
between  general  and  concrete  volition,  ideal  and
real  volition,  that  is  to  say  between  intention  and
volition, is acceptable. Intention and volition
coincide  completely,  and  that  distinction,  generally
suggested  with the  object  of  justifying  the un
justifiable, is altogether arbitrary in both the
forms  that  it  assumes.

The  first  form  is  that  of  the  distinction  between  volition  in

i  i  .  .  . the  abstract

abstract  and  concrete,  or  better,  between  general  and  in  the

••  1  T  .  concrete:

and  particular. It is maintained, that we can  critique.
will the  good  in  the  abstract  and  yet  be  unable
to  will  it  in  the  concrete,  that  we  may  have  good
intentions and yet behave badly. But  by  our
reduction of the thing willed to the volition,

53


Thought
volition  and
real  "volition
critique.


54 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

to  will  the  abstract  is  tantamount  to  willing
abstractly.  And  to  will  abstractly  is  tantamount
to  not  willing,  if  volition  imply  a  situation  histori
cally  determined,  from  which  it  arises  as  an  act
equally  determined  and  concrete.  Hence,  of  the
two  terms  of  the  pretended  distinction,  the  first,
volition  of  the  abstract,  disappears,  and  the
second,  concrete  volition,  which  is  the  true  and
real  volition  and  intention,  alone  remains.

The  second  form  abandons,  it  is  true,  the
abstract  for  the  concrete,  but  assumes  two  different
volitional  acts  in  the  same  concrete :  the  one
real,  arising  from  the  actual  situation,  the  other,
thought  or  imagined,  side  by  side  with  the
former :  this  would  be  the  volition,  that  the
intention.  According  to  such  a  theory,  it  is
always  possible  to  direct  the  intention,  that  is,  the
real  volition  can  always  join  with  the  volitional
act  imagined  and  produce  a  nexus,  in  which
the  volition  exists  in  one  way,  the  intention  in
another ;  the  first  bad  and  the  second  good,  or
the  first  good  and  the  second  bad.  Thus  the
honourable  man  approved  by  the  Jesuit,  of  whom
Pascal  speaks,  although  he  desire  the  death  of
him  from  whom  he  expects  an  inheritance  and
rejoice  when  it  takes  place,  yet  endows  his  desire
with  a  special  character,  believing  that  what  he


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  55

wishes  to  attain  is  the  prosperity  of  his  affairs,
not  the  death  of  his  fellow -creature.  Or  the
same  man  may  kill  the  man  who  has  given  him
a  blow  ;  but  in  so  doing  he  will  fix  his  thought
upon  the  defence  of  his  honour,  not  upon  the
homicide.  Since  he  is  not  able  to  abstain  from
the  action,  he  at  least  (they  say)  purifies  the
intention.  The  worst  of  this  is  that  the  real
situation,  the  only  one  of  which  we  can  take
account,  is  the  historical,  not  the  imaginary
situation.  In  the  reality  of  the  consequent
volition,  it  is  not  a  question  of  his  own  prosperity
and  nothing  more,  but  of  his  own  prosperity
coupled  with  the  death  of  another,  or  of  false
prosperity.  It  is  not  a  question  of  his  own
honour  and  nothing  more,  but  of  his  own  honour
in  conjunction  with  the  violation  of  the  life  of
another,  that  is,  of  false  honour.  Thus  the
asserted  fact  of  prosperity  and  honour  is  changed
into  two  qualified  bad  actions,  and  what  was
honourable  in  the  imaginary  case,  becomes  dis
honourable  in  the  real  case,  which  is  indeed  the
only  one  of  which  it  is  question.  It  is  of  no  use
to  imagine  a  situation  that  differs  from  reality,
because  it  is  to  the  real  situation  that  the
intention  is  directed,  not  to  the  other,  and
therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  direct,  that  is  to  say,


Critique  of
"volition  with
base  either
unknown  or
imperfectly
known.


56 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

to  change  the  intention,  if  the  actual  situation  do
not  change.

The  antipathy  that  has  been  shown  for
good-hearted  and  well-intentioned  men  in  recent
centuries,  and  for  practical  doctrines  with  intention
as  their  principle  (the  morality  of  intention,  etc.),
arises  from  the  sophisms  that  we  have  here
criticized.  But  since  it  is  henceforward  clear  to
us  that  those  so-called  well-intentioned  and  good-
hearted  people  have  neither  good  hearts  nor
good  intentions  and  are  nothing  but  hypocrites,
and  because  we  do  not  admit  any  distinction
between  intention  and  will,  we  are  without  fear
or  antipathy  in  respect  to  the  use  of  the  word
"  intention,"  understanding  it  as  a  synonym  for
"  volition."

But  it  will  be  said  that  we  have  here  considered
the  case,  in  which,  while  the  real  situation  is
known,  there  is  a  hypocritical  pretence  of  not
knowing  it,  in  order  to  deceive  others  and  maybe
oneself,  and  that  we  have  justly  here  declared
that  in  such  a  case  the  will  and  the  intention
were  inseparable.  But  there  is  another  case,  in
which,  though  the  situation  of  affairs  be  not
known,  yet  it  is  necessary  both  to  will  and  to  act
at  once.  Here  the  concrete  will  is  separated
at  the  beginning  from  the  intention  :  the  will


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  57

is  what  it  can  be,  the  intention  is  as  the  action
would  wish  to  be.

But  this  instance  is  equally  or  even  more  in
conceivable  than  the  preceding.  It  has  been
clearly  established  that  if  we  do  not  know,  we
cannot  will.  Before  arriving  at  a  resolution,
man  tries  to  see  clearly  in  and  about  him,  and
so  long  as  the  search  continues,  so  long  as  the
doubt  is  not  dissipated,  the  will  remains  in  sus
pense.  Nothing  can  make  him  resolve,  where
the  elements  for  coming  to  a  resolution  are
wanting  ;  nothing  can  make  him  say  to  himself
"  I  know,"  when  he  does  not  know  ;  nothing  can
make  him  say  "it  will  be  as  if  I  knew,"  because
that  "  as  if  I  knew  "  would  introduce  the  arbitrary
method  into  the  whole  of  knowledge,  and  would
cause  universal  doubt  to  take  the  place  of  doubt
circumscribed.  This  would  disturb  the  function
of  knowledge  itself,  against  which  an  act  of
real  felony  would  be  committed.  From  nothing
nothing  is  born.

There  are  no  exceptions  to  this  law,  and  those  illusions

,  j  j  i  among  the

that  are  adduced  can  be  only  apparent. A  man  cases  that  arc

cited.

is  cautiously  descending  the  dangerous  side  of  a
mountain,  covered  with  ice  :  will  he  or  will  he
not  place  his  foot  on  that  surface,  of  which  he
does  not  and  cannot  know  the  resistance  ?  How-


58 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

ever,  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost :  he  must  go  on
and  take  the  risk.  It  seems  evident  that  in  a  case
like  this  he  wills  and  operates  without  complete
knowledge.  But  the  case  is  not  indeed  unique
or  of  a  special  order :  every  act  of  life  implies
risk  of  the  unknown,  and  if  there  were  not  in  us
(as  they  say)  potestas  voluntatem  nostram  extra
limites  intellectus  nostri  extendendi^  it  would  be
impossible  to  move  a  step,  to  lift  an  arm,  or  to
put  into  one's  mouth  a  morsel  of  bread,  since
omnia  incerta  ac  periculis  sunt  plena.  What  must
be  known  in  order  to  form  the  volition  is  not  that
which  we  should  know  if  we  were  in  a  situation
different  from  that  in  which  we  are  (in  which  case,
also,  the  volition  would  be  different),  but  that
which  we  can  know  in  the  situation  in  which  we
really  find  ourselves.  The  man  on  the  glacier  has
neither  time  nor  means  to  verify  the  resistance  of
the  surface  of  the  ice  ;  but  since  he  is  obliged  to
proceed  further,  he  does  not  act  in  a  rash,  but  in
a  very  prudent  manner,  in  putting  his  foot  trust
fully  on  the  ice  that  may  be  unfaithful  to  him.
He  would  be  acting  rashly  if,  having  the  means
and  the  time,  he  failed  to  investigate  its  resist
ance,  that  is  to  say,  if  he  were  in  another  and
imaginary  situation,  not  in  that  real  and  present
situation,  in  which  he  finds  himself.  If  I  knew


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  59

the  cards  of  my  adversary,  as  the  cheat  knows
them,  I  should  play  differently,  but  it  cannot
be  argued  that  because,  as  an  honest  player,
I  know  only  my  own,  I  am  therefore  playing
inconsiderately  :  I  am  playing  as  I  ought,  with
the  knowledge  that  I  possess,  that  is,  with  full
knowledge  of  the  real  situation  in  which  I  find
myself.

With  this  very  simple  observation  is  also
solved  an  old  puzzle  of  the  theory  of  volition.
How  does  it  happen  that  a  man  can  choose
between  two  dishes  of  food  at  an  equal  distance
and  moving  in  the  same  manner,1  or  between  two
objects  altogether  identical,  offered  for  sale  to
him  at  the  same  time,  at  the  same  price,  by  the
same  individual  ?  First,  we  must  correct  the
hypothesis,  for  as  two  identical  things  do  not
exist  in  nature,  so  the  two  objects  in  question
and  the  two  possible  actions  of  the  example  are
not  identical.

Indeed  the  refined  connoisseur  always  dis
covers  some  difference  between  two  objects,
which  to  the  ignorant,  the  absent-minded,  and
the  hasty  seem  to  be  the  same.  The  question,
then,  is  not  of  identical  objects  and  actions,  but
of  those  as  in  which  there  is  neither  time  nor

1  This  was  an  example  used  by  the  Schoolmen  and  by  Dante.


6o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

mode  (majora  premunt)  of  recognizing  the  differ
ence.  For  this  reason,  therefore,  we  take  no
account  of  this  difference,  or,  as  is  said,  they  are
looked  upon  as  equal  in  this  respect.  But  the
adiophora,  the  indifferent,  do  not  exist,  and  owing
to  that  abstraction,  we  do  not  take  account  of
other  differences  that  always  exist  in  the  real
situation,  owing  to  which  my  volition  becomes
concrete  in  a  movement  that  causes  me  to  take
the  object  on  my  right,  because  (let  us  suppose)
I  am  wont  to  turn  to  the  right,  or  because,  owing
to  a  superstition  that  is  not  less  a  matter  of  habit,
I  prefer  the  right  to  the  left,  or  because,  through
sympathy  due  to  dignity,  I  prefer  the  object  that
is  offered  to  me  with  the  right  hand  to  a  similar
object  offered  with  the  left,  which,  if  only  for  this
reason,  is,  strictly  speaking,  not  the  same,  but
different,  and  so  on.  These  minute  circumstances
are  absent  from  consciousness  and  are  not  felt  by
the  will,  not  because  they  escape  as  a  rule  reflec
tion.  If  we  neglect  them  in  analysis  as  non
existent,  this  always  occurs,  because  we  substitute
for  the  real  situation  another  unreal  situation
imagined  by  ourselves.  Thus  it  has  also  been
remarked,  as  a  proof  of  the  irrationality  believed
to  exist  in  our  volitions  and  to  be  the  cause
of  our  acting  without  precise  knowledge,  that


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  61

no  reason  nor  any  theoretic  precedent  can  be
adduced  as  to  why,  when  fixing  legal  punish
ments,  or  in  the  application  of  sentences,  we
give  forty  and  not  forty-one  days'  imprisonment,
a  hundred  lire  fine  instead  of  a  hundred  and
one.  But  here,  too,  it  is  clear  that  the  detailed
facts  are  not  wanting,  the  knowledge  of  which
causes  us  to  will  the  punishment  to  be  so  and
so.  This  knowledge  is  to  be  found  in  traditions,
in  the  sympathy  that  we  have  for  certain
numbers,  in  the  ease  with  which  they  can  be
remembered  or  calculated,  and  so  on. — To  sum
up,  man  forms  the  volitional  act,  not  because
he  possesses  some  portentous  faculty  of  ex
tending  his  will  outside  the  limits  of  the
intellect,  but,  on  the  contrary,  because  he
possesses  the  faculty  of  circumscribing  himself
within  the  limits  of  his  intellect  on  each  occasion
and  of  willing  on  that  basis  and  within  those
limits.  That  he  wills,  knowing  some  things  and
ignorant  of  infinite  other  things,  is  indubitable.
But  this  means  that  he  is  man  and  not  God,  that
he  is  a  finite  and  not  an  infinite  being,  and  that
the  sum  of  his  historical  knowledge  is  on  each
occasion  human  and  finite,  as  is  on  each  occasion
the  act  of  will  which  he  forms  upon  it.  Psycho
logists  would  say  that  this  arises  from  narrowness


62 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.


Impossibility
of  volition
with,  a  false
theoretic  base.


of  consciousness,  but  Goethe,  on  the  contrary,
remarked  with  metaphor  more  apt  and  thought
more  profound,  that  the  true  artist  is  revealed
in  knowing  how  to  limit  himself.  God  himself,
as  it  seems,  cannot  act,  save  by  limiting  himself
in  finite  beings.

If  the  intention  cannot  be  separated  from
the  volition,  because  this  belongs  to  the  real
and  not  to  the  imaginary,  and  proceeds  from  the
known  and  never  from  the  unknown,  there  yet
remains  a  third  possibility,  which  is,  that  the
will  results  differently  from  the  intention,  owing
to  a  theoretical  error ;  as  when  we  are  said  to  err
in  good  faith  as  to  the  actual  situation,  that  is,
we  do  not  indeed  substitute  the  unknown  for
the  known,  nor  do  we  substitute  the  imaginary
for  the  known,  but  we  simply  make  a  mistake
in  enunciating  the  historical  judgment  to  our
selves  :  intending  to  perform  one  action,  we
perform  on  the  contrary  another.

This  third  possibility  is  also  an  impossibility,
because  it  contradicts  the  nature  of  the  theo
retical  error,  which,  precisely  because  it  is  a
question  of  error  and  not  of  truth,  cannot  be
in  its  turn  theoretical  and  must  be  and  is
practical,  conformably  to  a  theory  of  error  of
which  many  great  thinkers  have  seen  or  caught


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  63

sight  and  which  it  is  now  fitting  to  restore  and
to  make  clear.

We  have  elsewhere  amply  demonstrated  how  Forms  of  the

theoretical

theoretical errors arise from the undue trans-  error  and

problem  con-

ference of  one theoretical form to another, or  cemingits

nature.

of  one  theoretical product into  another  distinct
from it. Thus,  the  artist  who  substitutes  for  the
representation of the affections, reasoning on
the  affections,  mingling  art  and  philosophy,  or  he
who  in  the  composition  of  a  work,  fills  the  voids
that his fancy  has  left  in  the  composition,  with
unsuitable elements taken from other works,
commits  the  artistic  error, ugliness. Thus  too,
the philosopher, who solves a philosophical
problem in  a  fantastic  way,  as  would an artist,
or, instead of a philosopheme, employs the
historical, naturalistic or mathematical method,
and so produces a myth,  or  a  contingent  fact
universalized,  or  an  abstraction  in  place  of  con-
creteness,  that is to say, a  philosophical  error.
It is also a philosophical error to transport
philosophical  concepts  from  one  order  to  another
and  to  treat  art as  though  it  were  philosophy,
or morality as  though it  were economy. This
also  happens in  an  analogous manner  with  the
historian,  the  natural  scientist,  and  the  mathema
tician,  all  of  whom  are  wrong,  if  they  interweave


64 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

extraneous methods with those that are their
own, and with the views, conceptions, and
classification of  one  order,  those of  another.—
But  if  this  be  the  way  in  which  particular  errors
and  general  forms  of  theoretical  error  arise,  what
is  the  origin  of  the  theoretical  error  in  universal  ?
We have not asked this question explicitly
elsewhere,  because  only  now  can  it  receive  the
most  effective  reply.
Distinction  Error is not ignorance, lack of knowledge,

between

ignorance obscurity or doubt. An error of which we

and  error  :

practical are altogether without consciousness is not

genesis  of  the

latter.  error at all, but that inexhaustible field which

the  spiritual  activity  continues  to  fill  to  infinity.
True  and  proper  error  is  the  affirmation  of
knowing  what  we  do  not  know,  the  substitution
of  a  representation  for  that  which  we  do  not
possess,  an  extraneous  conception  for  the  one
that  is  wanting.  Now  affirmation  is  thought
itself,  it  is  truth  itself.  When  an  inquiry  has
been  completed,  a  process  of  cogitation  closed,
the  result  is  the  affirmation  that  a  man  makes
to  himself,  not  with  a  new  act  added  to  the
foregoing,  but  with  the  act  itself  of  thought
that  has  thought.  It  is  therefore  impossible
that  in  the  circle  of  the  pure  theoretical  spirit
error  should  ever  arise.  Man  has  in  himself


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  65

the  fountain  of  truth.  If  it  be  true  that  on
the  death -bed  there  is  no  lying,  because  man
transcends  the  finite  and  communicates  with  the
infinite,  then  man  who  thinks  is  always  on  his
bed  of  death,  the  death -bed  of  the  finite,  in
contact  with  the  infinite.  We  may  know  that
we  are  ignorant,  but  this  consciousness  of
ignorance  is  the  cogitative  process  in  its  fieri,
not  yet  having  attained  to  its  end,  certainly  not
(as  has  been  said)  error.  Before  this  last  can
appear,  before  we  can  affirm  that  we  have
reached  a  result,  which  the  testimony  of  the
conscience  says  has  not  been  reached,  some
thing  extraneous  to  the  theoretical  spirit  must
intervene,  that  is  to  say,  a  practical  act  which
simulates  the  theoretical.  And  it  simulates  it,
not  indeed  intrinsically  (one  does  not  lie  with
the  depth  of  oneself  or  on  one's  death-bed),
but  in  taking  hold  of  the  external  means  of
communication,  of  the  word  or  expression  as
sound  and  physical  fact,  and  diverting  it  to  mean
what,  in  the  given  circumstances,  it  could  not
mean.  The  erroneous  affirmation  has  been
rendered  possible,  because  something  else  has
followed  the  true  affirmation,  which  is  purely
theoretical,  something  that  is  improperly  called
affirmation  in  the  practical  sense,  whereas  it  is


66 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

only  communication,  which  can  be  substituted
in  a  greater  or  less  degree  for  the  truth  and
falsely  represent  it.  Thus  the  theoretical  error
in  general  arises,  as  do  its  particular  forms  and
manifestations,  from  the  substitution  for,  or  the
illegitimate  mating  of  two  forms  of  the  spirit.
These  cannot  be  both  theoretical  here,  but  must
be  the  theoretical  and  the  practical  forms,  precisely
because  we  are  here  in  the  field  of  the  spirit  in
general  and  of  the  fundamental  forms  of  its
activity.  We  are  ignorant,  then,  because  it  is
necessary  to  be  ignorant  and  to  feel  oneself
ignorant,  in  order  to  attain  to  truth  ;  but  we  err
only  because  we  wish  to  err.
Proofs  and  Like  all  true  doctrines,  this  of  the  practical

confirmation.  .  .  _

nature  of  the  theoretical  error,  which  at  first
sight  seems  most  strange  (especially  to  professed
philosophers),  is  yet  found  to  be  constantly
confirmed  in  ordinary  thought.  For  all  know
and  all  continually  repeat  that  (immoderate)
passions  and  (illegitimate)  interests  lead  in
sidiously  into  error,  that  we  err,  to  be  quick  and
finish  or  to  obtain  for  ourselves  undeserved
repose,  that  we  err  by  acquiescence  in  old  ideas,
that  is  to  say,  in  order  not  to  allow  ourselves  to
be  disturbed  in  our  repose  that  has  been  unduly
prolonged,  and  so  on.  We  do  not  mention  those


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  67

cases  in  which  it  is  a  question  of  solemn  and
evident  lies,  the  brazen-faced  manifestation  of
interests  openly  illegitimate.  Let  us  limit  our
selves  to  the  modest  forms  of  error,  to  the  venial
sins,  because  if  these  be  proved  to  be  the
result  of  will,  by  so  much  the  more  will  this
be  proved  of  the  shameless  forms,  the  deadly
sins.  It  is  also  said  that  we  err  in  deafening
ourselves  and  others  with  words,  with  the  verse
that  sounds  and  does  not  create,  with  the  brush
that  charms  but  does  not  express,  with  the
formulae  that  seem  to  contain  a  thought  but
contain  the  void.  In  this  way  we  come  to
recognize  that  will  has  been  rendered  possible,
owing  to  the  communication  being  a  practical
fact,  of  which  a  bad  use  can  be  made  by  means
of  a  volitional  act.  For  the  rest,  if  this  were
not  so,  what  guarantee  would  truth  ever  possess  ?
If  it  were  possible  to  err  even  once  in  perfect
good  faith  and  that  the  mind  should  confuse  true
and  false,  embracing  the  false  as  true,  how  could
we  any  longer  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other  ?
Thought  would  be  radically  corrupt,  whereas  it
is  incorrupt  and  incorruptible.

It  is  vain,  therefore,  to  except  the  existence
or  the  possibility  of  errors  of  good  faith,  because
truth  alone  is  of  good  faith,  and  error  is  always


68 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL „.

in  a  greater  or  less  or  least  degree,  of  bad
faith.  Were  this  not  so,  it  would  be  in
corrigible,  whereas  it  is  by  definition  corrigible.
Consequently,  the  last  attempt  to  differentiate
intention  from  volition  fails,  since  it  posits  an
intention  that  is  frustrated  in  the  volition,  as  the
effect  of  a  theoretical  error,  a  good  intention
that  becomes,  through  no  fault  of  its  own,  a
bad  volition.  The  intention,  being  volition,  takes
possession  of  the  whole  volitional  man,  causing
the  intellect  to  be  attentive  and  indefatigable
in  the  search  for  truth,  the  soul  ready  to  accept
it,  whatever  it  be,  pure  of  every  passion  that  is
not  the  passion  for  truth  itself,  and  eliminates
the  possibility,  or  assumes  the  responsibility  of
error.

A  proof  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  fact  that
to  exquisite  and  delicate  souls,  to  consciences
pure  and  dignified,  even  what  are  called  their
theoretical  errors  are  a  biting  bitterness,  and  they
blame  themselves  with  them.  On  the  other  hand,
in  the  presence  of  the  foolish  and  the  wicked,
one  is  often  in  doubt  as  to  whether  their  folly
and  wickedness  come  from  the  head  or  from  the
heart,  whether  it  be  madness  rather  than  set
purpose.  The  truth  is  that  all  this  evil,  which
seems  to  arise  from  defective  vision,  comes  really


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  69

from  the  heart,  for  they  have  themselves  forged
those  false  views  with  their  sophisms,  their
illegitimate  internal  affirmations  and  suggestions,
that  they  may  be  more  free  in  their  evil  inclina
tions,  thus  obtaining  for  themselves  and  for  others
a  false  moral  alibi.  We  must  applaud  the  former
and  exhort  them  to  continue  to  persevere  in
their  scruple,  the  condition  of  theoretical  and
practical  health  :  we  must  inculcate  to  the  second
a  return  to  themselves  and  the  removal  of  the
mask  that  they  have  assumed  as  a  disguise  from
themselves,  before  assuming  it  towards  others.

A  consequence  of  the  principle  established  is  justification

t . .r  r -,  r  ,  of  the  practical

the  justification  ol  the  use  of  practical  measures  repression  of

error.

to  induce  those  who  err  theoretically  to  correct
themselves,  castigating  them,  when  this  is  of
assistance,  for  admonition  and  example.  It  will
be  replied  that  these  are  measures  of  other  times,
and  that  we  are  now  in  an  epoch  of  liberty,
when  their  use  is  no  longer  permissible,  and  that
we  should  now  employ  only  the  persuasive  power
of  truth.  But  those  who  say  this  are  without
eyes  to  look  within  upon  themselves.  The  Holy
Inquisition  is  truly  holy  and  lives  for  that  reason
in  its  eternal  idea.  The  Inquisition  that  is  dead
was  nothing  but  one  of  its  contingent  historical
incarnations.  And  the  Inquisition  must  have


70 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

been  justified  and  beneficial,  if  whole  peoples
invoked  and  defended  it,  if  men  of  the  loftiest
souls  founded  and  created  it  severely  and  im
partially,  and  its  very  adversaries  applied  it  on
their  own  account,  pyre  answering  to  pyre.  Thus
Christian  Rome  persecuted  heretics  as  Imperial
Rome  had  persecuted  Christians,  and  Protestants
burned  Catholics  as  Catholics  had  burned
Protestants.  If  certain  ferocious  practices  are
now  abandoned  (are  they  definitely  abandoned,
or  do  they  not  persist  in  a  different  form?),
we  do  not  for  that  reason  cease  from  practically
oppressing  those  who  promulgate  errors.  No
society  can  dispense  with  this  discipline,  although
the  mode  of  its  application  is  subject  to  practical,
utilitarian  and  moral  deliberation.  We  begin  with
man  as  a  child,  whose  mental  education  is  at
once  and  above  all  practical  and  moral  education,
education  for  work  and  for  sincerity  (and  no  one
has  ever  been  seriously  educated  who  has  not
received  at  the  least  a  provident  slap  or  two  or
had  his  ears  pulled).  This  education  is  continued
with  the  punishments  for  culpable  negligence  and
ignorance  threatened  in  the  laws,  and  so  on  until
we  reach  the  spontaneous  discipline  of  society,  by
means  of  which  the  artist  who  produces  the  ugly
and  the  man  of  science  who  teaches  the  false  are


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  71

rebuked  by  the  intelligent,  or  fall  into  discredit
with  them.  Such  illegitimate  and  transitory
applause  as  they  may  sometimes  obtain  at  the
hands  of  the  unintelligent  and  of  the  multitude
is  but  a  poor  and  precarious  recompense  for  them.
Literary  and  artistic  criticism  always  has  of
necessity,  and  the  more  so  the  better  it  under
stands  its  office,  a  practical  and  moral  aspect
reconcilable  with  the  purest  aestheticity  and
theoreticity  in  the  intrinsic  examination  of  works.

We certainly have good empirical reasons  Empirical

r  ,..  .,.  .  r i i r • i distinctions  of

tor  distinguishing between errors of  bad taith  errors  and

philosophical

and  errors  of  good  faith,  errors  that  are  avoidable  distinctions.
and  errors  that  are  unavoidable,  pardonable  and
unpardonable,  mortal  and  venial.  No  one  would
wish  to  deny  that  there  is  a  wide  difference  be
tween  a  slight  distraction  that  leads  to  a  wide
erroneous  affirmation,  and  such  malice  as  gives
rise  to  a  small  and  almost  imperceptible  error,
to  a  lie,  which,  externally  considered,  is  almost
harmless.  We  should  be  as  indulgent  in  respect
to  the  former  as  we  are  severe  in  respect  to
the  latter.  And  from  the  empirical  standpoint
we  should  recommend  in  certain  cases  tolerance
and  indulgence  in  respect  to  the  theoretical  error,
which  should  be  looked  upon  rather  as  ignorance
than  as  sin.  We  cannot  but  take  count  of  all


72 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

those  affirmations,  which,  while  they  do  not  re
present  the  firm  security  of  the  true,  are  yet
offered  as  points  of  support,  or  as  provisional
affirmations,  like  those  tibicines,  props  or  stakes,
those  bad  verses  that  Virgil  allowed  to  remain  in
the  Aeneid,  with  the  intention  of  returning  to
them  again.  But  it  was  needful  to  record  the
true  bases  of  the  theory  of  error  against  the
illusions  arising  from  empiricism,  the  more  so
since  the  general  tendency  of  our  times  (for
reasons  that  we  need  not  here  inquire  into)
has  led  to  their  not  being  recognized.  Those
bases  are  in  the  practical  spirit,  and  the  practical
theory  of  error  is  one  of  the  justified  forms  of
pragmatism,  although  perhaps  it  be  that  very
truth  against  which  the  pragmatists  sin.


IDENTITY OF VOLITION AND ACTION AND DISTINC
TION BETWEEN VOLITION AND EVENT

SUCH are the relations between the practical

action  :

activity  and  the  theoretical,  which  precedes  and  intuition  and

expression.

conditions  it.

Asking  ourselves  now,  what  are  the  relations
of  this  same  activity  with  that  which  seems  to
follow  it  and  to  be  outside  the  spirit,  in  company
with  corporeality,  naturality,  physic  and  matter
(or  however  else  it  may  be  called)  ?  we  find
ourselves  face  to  face  with  a  problem  which  we
have  already  treated  and  solved  in  another  part
of  the  system  of  the  spirit,  and  which  we  shall
solve  here  in  an  analogous  manner.  What  we
may  now  designate  as  the  problem  of  the  relation
between  volition  and  action,  formerly  appeared  in
the  theoretical  philosophy  as  the  problem  of  the
relation  between  intuition  and  expression. — Are
then  volitions  and  actions  two  distinct  terms  that
may  appear  now  together,  now  separate  ?  Can

73


74 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

volition  remain  for  its  part  isolated  from  action,
whereas  action  is  not  able  to  separate  itself  from
volition,  or  is  the  opposite  true  ? — We  reply,  as
we  did  on  the  former  occasion,  by  denying  the
problem  itself  and  by  identifying  intuition  with
expression,  in  such  a  manner  that  effective
intuition  became  at  the  same  time  expression,
and  it  was  declared  that  a  so-called  expression,
which  was  not  at  the  same  time  intuition,  was
declared  to  be  non-existent. — We  reply  in  like
manner  on  this  occasion,  that  volition  and  action
are  one,  and  that  volition  without  action  or  action
without  volition  is  inconceivable.

spirit  and  Indeed,  the  relation  between  spirit  and  nature
(which  is  a  general  relation,  including  the  other
particulars  between  intuition  and  expression,  or
between  volition  and  action),  understood  in  the
way  that  it  is  here,  is  a  relation,  not  between  two
entities,  but  only  between  two  different  methods
of  elaborating  one  unique  reality,  which  is
spiritual  reality :  thus  it  is  not  truly  a  relation.
Nor  are  the  two  modes  of  elaboration  two  co
ordinated  modes  of  knowledge,  for  that  would
lead  back  to  a  duplicity  of  objects,  but  the  first
is  cognoscitive  elaboration  and  true  science,  or
philosophy,  in  which  reality  is  revealed  as  activity
and  spirituality,  while  the  other  is  an  abstract


nature.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  75

elaboration  for  practical  convenience,  without
cognoscitive  character.  When  this  has  been
posited,  the  spiritual  act  of  volition  has  not
another  reality  face  to  face  with  it,  with  which  it
must  join  or  combine,  in  order  to  become  concrete,
but  is  itself  full  reality.  That  which  is  called
matter,  movement,  and  material  modification  from
the  naturalistic  point  of  view,  is  already  included
in  the  volitional  spiritual  act,  of  which  it  might
be  said  without  difficulty  (as  was  once  said  amid
much  scandal  of  the  Ego)  that  it  is  heavy,  round,
square,  white,  red,  sonorous,  and,  therefore,
physically  determinable.  The  volition  is  not
followed  by  a  movement  of  the  legs  or  arms  ;  it  is
those  movements  themselves  that  are  material
for  the  physical,  spiritual  for  the  philosopher,
extrinsic  for  the  former,  at  once  intrinsic  and
extrinsic  for  the  latter,  or  better,  neither  extrinsic
nor  intrinsic  (an  arbitrary  division).  As  poetry
lives  in  speech  and  painting  in  colours,  so  the
will  lives  in  actions,  not  because  the  one  is  in
the  other  as  in  an  envelope,  but  because  the  one
is  the  other  and  without  the  other  would  be
mutilated  and  indeed  inconceivable.

We cannot affirm the distinction between

of  volitions

volition  and  action,  save  in  force  and  as  a  proof  without  actions

and  vice  versa.

of  a  dualistic  metaphysical  view,  of  an abstract


76 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

spiritualism,  with  matter  as  being  and  substance
for  correlative  term.  But  this  point  of  view  is
eliminated  by  the  idealist  view,  which  recognizes
only  one  unique  substance,  and  that  as  spirituality
and  subjectivity.  Without,  however,  now  basing
ourselves  upon  such  considerations,  and  according
to  the  order  that  we  follow,  applying  ourselves
to  the  examination  of  the  facts  of  consciousness,
we  affirm  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  adduce
one  volitional  fact  that  should  not  be  also  a
movement  called  physical.  Those  volitional
acts,  which  according  to  some  philosophers  are
consumed  within  the  will  and  are  in  that  way
distinguished  from  external  facts,  are  a  phantasm.
Every  volition,  be  it  never  so  small,  sets  the
organism  in  motion  and  produces  what  are  called
external  facts.  The  purpose  is  already  an
effectuation,  a  beginning  of  combat ;  indeed,
simple  desire  is  not  without  effects,  if  it  be
possible  to  destroy  oneself  with  desires,  as  is
in  effect  maintained  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
not  possible  to  indicate  actions  without  volitions.
Instinctive  or  habitual  acts  that  have  become
instinctive  are  adduced ;  but  these  too  are  not
set  in  motion,  save  by  the  will,  not  one  by  one,
in  their  particulars,  but  as  a  whole,  in  the  same
way  as  a  single  hand  sets  in  motion  a  most


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  77

complicated  machine  which  a  thousand  hands  have
previously  constructed.  There  cannot  then  be
volition  without  action,  nor  action  without
volition,  as  there  cannot  be  intuition  without
expression  or  expression  without  intuition.

It  is  well,  however,  to  indicate  one  among  the  illusions  as  to

.  .  -11 • the  distinction

many  sources  from  which  is  derived  the  illusion  between  these

terms,

of  this  distinction  and  separation,  effectively  in-
existent.  A  volitional  act,  which  is  a  process  of
some  duration,  may  be  interrupted  and  substituted
for  other  volitional  acts ;  it  may  declare  itself
again  and  again  begin  its  work  (although  this  will
always  be  more  or  less  modified),  and  this  may
give  occasion  to  new  interruptions  and  new
beginnings.  It  seems  that  in  this  way  the  will
stands  on  one  side,  as  something  formed  and
definite,  and  that  on  the  other  execution  pursues
its  way  and  is  subject  to  the  most  varied  accidents.
But  volition  and  execution  proceed  with  equal
and  indeed  with  one  single  step.  What  we  will
we  execute  ;  the  volition  changes  as  the  execution
changes.  In  the  same  way,  when  we  are  en
gaged  upon  a  work  of  art,  on  a  long  poem  for
instance,  the  illusion  arises  of  an  abstract  con
ception  or  plan,  which  the  poet  carries  out  as  he
versifies.  But  every  poet  knows  that  a  poem  is
not  created  from  an  abstract  plan,  that  the  initial


78 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PI.

poetical  image  is  not  without  rhythm  and  verse,
and  that  it  does  not  need  rhythm  and  verse
applied  to  it  afterwards.  He  knows  that  it  is  in
reality  a  primitive  intuition-expression,  in  which
all  is  determined  and  nothing  is  determined,  and
what  has  been  already  intuified  is  already  ex
pressed,  and  what  will  afterwards  be  expressed
will  only  afterwards  be  intuified.  The  initial
intuition  is  certainly  not  an  abstract  plan,  but  a
living  and  vital  germ  ;  and  so  is  the  volitional  act.
Distinction  When,  therefore,  it  is  affirmed  that  a  volition

between  action

and  succession  is  truly  such,  only  when  it  produces  effects,  or

or  event.

that  a  volition  is  to  be  judged  by  its  results,  it  is
impossible  not  to  assent,  as  we  assent  that  an
unexpressed  expression  or  an  unversified  verse
is  neither  an  expression  nor  a  verse.  But  in
this  signification  only,  because  those  propositions
have  sometimes  assumed  another,  which  on  the
contrary  it  is  needful  resolutely  to  reject.  This
is  that  in  them  action  (will -action)  has  been
confused  with  succession  or  event.  Now,  if
volition  coincide  with  action,  it  does  not  and
cannot  coincide  with  event,
volition  and  It  cannot  coincide,  because  what  is  action  and

event.

what  is  event  ?  Action  is  the  act  of  the  one  event,
is  the  act  of  the  whole :  will  is  of  man,  event  of
God.  Or,  to  put  this  proposition  in  a  less


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  79

imaginary  form,  the  volition  of  the  individual  is  as
it  were  the  contribution  that  he  brings  to  the
volitions  of  all  the  other  beings  in  the  universe,
event  the  aggregate  of  all  the  wills  and  the
answer  to  all  the  questions.  In  this  answer  is
included  and  absorbed  the  will  itself  of  the  in
dividual,  which  we  have  taken  and  contemplated
alone.  If,  then,  we  wished  to  make  the  volition
depend  upon  event,  action  upon  succession,  we
should  be  undertaking  to  make  one  fact  depend
upon  another  fact,  of  which  the  first  is  a  con
stituent  part,  placing  among  the  antecedents  of
action  what  is  its  consequence,  among  things
given  those  to  be  created,  the  unknown  with
the  known,  the  future  in  the  past.

The  concepts  of  actions  that  are  successful  and  successful  and

unsuccessful

of  those that are  unsuccessful,  of  actions  that  actions:

criticism.

become  fully  concrete  in  the  fact,  and  of  those
that  become  concrete  only  in  part  or  not  at  all,
are  therefore  inexact.  No  action  (not  even
those  that  are  empirically  said  to  be  most
successful,  not  even  the  most  obvious  and
ordinary)  succeeds  fully,  in  the  sense  that  it
alone  constitutes  the  fact :  every  action  diverges
by  necessity  and  by  definition  from  succession  or
happening.  If  I  return  home  every  day  by  the
usual  road,  my  return  home  is  every  day  new


8o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

and  different  from  that  which  might  have  been
imagined.  This  often  amounts  to  a  diversity  of
particulars  which  we  may  call  of  least  importance,
but  which  yet  are  not  for  that  reason  the  less
real.  On  the  other  hand,  no  action,  however
vain  it  be  held  (if  it  be  action  and  not  velleity
of  action  and  intrinsic  contradiction,  or  by  as
much  as  it  is  action  and  not  imagination  and
contradiction),  passes  without  trace  and  without
result.

If  any  action  could  be  rendered  altogether  vain,
this  same  rendering  vain  would  invade  all  other
actions  and  no  fact  would  happen.
Action  and The  current  proposition that  we cannot  act

foresight :

critique,  without  foreseeing  is  also  incorrect.  Since  the
conception  of  foreseeing  is  contradictory,  and
since  we  cannot  know  a  fact  if  it  be  not  first  a
fact,  that  is,  if  it  have  not  happened ;  if  the
contradictory  hypothesis  held,  it  would  be  im
possible  to  act.  But  the  truth  is  that  what  is
called  foreseeing  is  nothing  but  seeing ;  it  is
to  know  the  given  facts  and  to  reason  upon
them  with  the  universals.  That  is  to  say,
it  is  the  invariable  theoretical  base  of  action,
already  illustrated.  When  we  will  and  act,  what
we  will  and  do  is  our  own  action  itself,  not
that  of  others  or  of  all  the  others,  and  so  is


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  81

the  resulting  event.  Voluntas  fertur  in  incog-
nitum,  but  the  all  intent  upon  itself  does  not
take  count  of  the  unknown,  which  is  in  this
case  relatively  unknowable  and,  therefore,  rela
tively  non-existent.  The  individual  is  aware  that
when  he  acts,  he  does  not  aim  at  anything  but
the  placing  of  new  elements  in  universal  reality.
He  takes  care  that  they  shall  be  energetic  and
vital,  without  nourishing  the  foolish  illusion  that
they  must  be  the  only  ones,  or  that  they  alone
produce  reality.  A  popular  little  tale  tells
how  God,  who  had  at  first  granted  to  men  to
know  their  future  lives  and  the  day  of  their
death,  afterwards  withdrew  this  knowledge  from
them  altogether,  because  He  perceived  from
experience  that  such  knowledge  made  them  lazy
and  inert.  The  new  ignorance,  on  the  other
hand,  revived  and  impelled  them  to  vie  with
one  another  in  activity,  as  though  it  had  been
granted  them  to  obtain  and  to  enjoy  everything.1
How  can  we  doubt  that  our  good  and  energetic
work  can  ever  be  rendered  nugatory  in  the
event  ?  That  is  unthinkable,  and  the  saying  fiat
justitia  et  pereat  mundus  is  rectified  by  that  other
saying  :  fiat  justitia  ne  pereat  mundus.  Bad  is
not  born  from  good,  nor  inaction  from  action.

1  Arch.  p.  lo  st.  d.  trad,  pop.,  of  Pitre  (1882),  pp.  70-72.


82 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

Every  volitional  man,  every  man  active  in  good
ness,  is  a  contradiction  to  that  one-sided  attitude
in  which  the  will  is  suppressed  to  give  place  to
happening,  a  world  unmade  is  believed  to  be
already  made,  arms  are  crossed  or  the  field
deserted.  But  it  also  contradicts  the  fatuous
security  that  the  future  world  will  conform  to  the
ends  of  our  individual  actions  taken  in  isolation  ;
saying  with  the  good  sense  of  the  Florentine
statesman,  that  we  ourselves  control  one  half  of
our  actions,  or  little  less,  Fortune  the  other  half.
Hence  our  trust  in  our  own  strength  ;  hence,  too,
our  apprehension  of  the  pitfalls  of  Fortune,  con
tinually  arising  and  continually  to  be  conquered.
This  constitutes  the  interior  drama  of  true  men  of
action,  of  the  political  geniuses  who  have  guided
the  destinies  of  man.  While  the  unfit  is  all
anxiety,  or  bewilderment  and  depression,  the
fatuous  is  all  over-confidence  or  expectation  of  the
impossible,  also  losing  himself  in  bewilderment
when  he  finally  discovers  that  the  reality  is  not  what
he  imagined.  Hence  also  the  serenity  of  the  sage,
who  knows  that  whatever  happen  there  will  always
be  opportunity  for  good  conduct.  Si  fractus  ilia-
batur  orbis,  there  will  always  be  a  better  world  to
construct.  Hope  and  fear  are  related  to  action  itself
in  its  becoming,  not  to  its  result  and  succession.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  83

We  can  illustrate  the  fact  that  no  one  seriously  confirmation

.  of  the  inderiva-

thmks ot valuing an action according to its  biutyofthe

value  of  action

success,  but  that  all  value  it  at  its  intrinsic  value  from  its

success.

as  action,  from  the  circumstance  that  no  one
recognizes  any  merit  to  the  action  of  a  marks
man  who  hits  the  bull's-eye,  when  shooting
at  the  target  with  closed  eyes ;  whereas  no
little  merit  is  recognized  to  him  who,  after  having
taken  careful  aim,  does  not  hit  the  mark  but  goes
very  near  it.  We  are  certainly  often  deceived  in
our  practical  judgments,  and  fortunate  men  are
continually  praised  to  the  skies  as  men  of  great
practical  capacity,  while  the  unfortunate  are
hurled  into  the  mire  as  incompetent ;  for  we
do  not  distinguish  exactly  between  action  and
success.  This  is  not  only  so  as  to  judgments
of  the  present  life  :  it  is  also  true  of  the  life  of
the  past,  of  the  pages  of  history,  where  imbeciles
are  made  heroes  and  heroes  calumniated ;  to
the  worst  of  leaders  is  attributed  the  honour
of  victories,  ridiculous  statesmen  credited  with
ability.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sins  of  madmen
are  attributed  to  the  wise,  or  they  are  accused  of
faults  that  are  nobody's  fault,  but  the  result  of
circumstances.  In  vain  will  the  Pericleses  of
all  time  ask,  as  did  the  ancient  Pericles  of  the
people  of  Athens,  that  the  unforeseen  misfortunes


84 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

of  the  Peloponnesian  war  should  be  attributed
to  him,  provided  that  by  way  of  compensation
he  might  have  praise  for  all  the  fortunate  things
that  should  also  happen  irapa  \6yov.1  All  this
depends  upon  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  facts
more  than  upon  anything  else  :  hence  the  neces
sity  of  criticism.  Just  as  the  work  of  the  poet  and
of  the  painter  is  not  materially  to  be  laid  hold
of  in  the  poem  or  in  the  picture,  but  requires
a  re-evocation  that  is  often  very  difficult,  so  the
work  of  the  man  of  action,  which  is  in  part  fused
in  events  and  partly  contained  in  them,  as  a
bud  that  will  open  in  the  future,  asks  a  keen  eye
and  the  greatest  care  in  valuation.  The  history
of  men  of  action  and  of  their  deeds  is  easily
changed  into  legend,  and  legends  are  never
altogether  eliminable,  because  misunderstanding
or  error  is  never  altogether  eliminable.
Explanation  On  the  other  hand,  certain  commonplaces

of  apparently

conflicting  seem  to  be  in  opposition  to  the  criterion  itself:
for  example,  that  men  are  judged  by  success  and
that  it  matters  little  what  we  have  willed  and
done,  when  the  result  is  not  satisfactory.  There
are  also  certain  popular  customs  that  make
individuals  responsible  for  what  happens  outside
their  own  spheres  of  action,  not  to  mention  the

1  Thuc.  ii.  64.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  85

well  -  known  historical  examples  of  unfortunate
leaders  crucified  at  Carthage  and  guillotined  at
Paris,  for  no  other  cause  in  reality  than  that  of
not  having  won  the  victory.  And  there  is  also  the
insistence  of  certain  thinkers  upon  the  necessity
of  never  distinguishing  the  judgment  of  the  act
from  that  of  the  fact.  But  such  insistence  is
nothing  but  a  new  aspect  of  the  implacable
struggle  that  it  has  been  necessary  to  conduct
against  the  morality  of  the  mere  intention  and
against  the  sophisms  and  the  subterfuges  that  arise
from  it ;  an  insistence  that  has  expressed  itself  in

^^

paradoxical  formulae,  as  are  also  paradoxical  the
trivial  remarks  of  ordinary  life  that  have  been
mentioned.  As  to  the  customs  and  condemna
tions  narrated  by  history,  these  were  without  doubt
extraordinary  expedients  in  desperate  cases,  in
which  people  had  placed  themselves  in  such  a
position  that  it  was  impossible  or  most  difficult
to  verify  intentions  and  actions,  and  to  distinguish
misfortunes  from  betrayals  ;  and  as  all  expedients
born  of  like  situations  sometimes  hit  the  mark,
that  is  to  say,  punish  bad  faith,  so  will  others
increase  with  irrationality  the  evil  that  they  would
have  wished  to  diminish,  since  in  those  cases
there  has  not  been  any  bad  faith  to  punish  and
to  correct.


VI


THE PRACTICAL JUDGMENT, THE HISTORY AND
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE PRACTICAL

WITH  these  last  considerations,  we  are  conducted
to  the  theory  of  practical  judgments,  that  is,  to  those
judgments  of  which  we  have  demonstrated  the
impossibility,  when  their  precedence  to  the  voli
tional  act  was  asserted  ;  but  their  conceivability
as  following  it,  indeed  their  necessity,  is  clear,  by
the  intrinsic  law  of  the  Spirit,  which  consists  in
always  preserving  or  in  continually  attaining  to
full  possession  of  itself.
Practical  But  we  must  not  confound  the  practical

taste  and

judgment,  judgment  with  what  has  been  called  practical
taste^  or  the  immediate  consciousness  of  value,  or
the  feeling  of  the  value  of  the  volitional  act.
None  can  doubt  that  such  a  taste,  consciousness,
or  feeling  is  a  real  fact.  The  practical  act
brings  with  it  approbation  and  disapprobation,  joy
and  sorrow,  and  like  facts  of  consciousness  that
are  altogether  unreflective.  By  these  we  explain

86


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  87

the  immediate  sympathy  that  certain  actions
afford  us,  and  the  enthusiasms  that  are  often
spread  through  wide  circles  of  society,  and  the
force  of  example,  which  is  most  successful  in
arousing  imitative  efforts.  Thus  at  certain
moments  the  soul  of  all  seems  to  vibrate  in
unison  with  the  soul  of  one,  and  the  actions  of
many  to  be  prepared  and  carried  out,  as  though
with  one  accord,  without  its  being  possible  to
say  at  those  moments  what  is  willed,  what
abhorred  and  what  admired.  That  taste,  or
consciousness,  or  feeling  is  not,  however,  dis
tinct  from  the  volitional  act,  and  is,  indeed,  the
volitional  act  itself.  It  is  that  internal  control
of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  that  immediate
feeling  of  oneself,  that  immediate  consciousness,
which  makes  of  it  a  spiritual  act.  Abstract  it
from  the  volitional  act  and  the  volitional  act  itself
disappears  from  before  you.

If  it  can  take  place,  not  only  in  the  individual
who  is  acting,  but  also  in  him  who  contemplates
the  action,  that  is  because  the  individual  who
contemplates  becomes  unified  in  that  moment
with  the  individual  who  acts,  he  wills  imitatively
with  him,  with  him  suffers  and  enjoys,  as  the
disc-thrower  watches  with  his  eye  and  with  his
whole  person  the  disc  that  has  been  thrown,


88 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

follows  its  rapid  and  direct  course  and  the  dangers
in  the  form  of  obstacles  that  it  seems  to  be  about
to  strike,  its  turns  and  deviations,  and  seems  to
become  himself  a  running  turning  disc.  The
denomination  "  practical  taste "  is  very  well
chosen,  because  the  analogy  with  the  theoretic
activity  and  with  aesthetic  taste  is  here  most  full.
But  since  aesthetic  taste  is  not  aesthetic  judgment,
as  the  mere  reproduction  of  the  aesthetic  act  is  not
the  criticism  of  it,  as  the  listener  to  a  poem  who
sings  within  himself  with  the  poet,  must  not  be
confused  with  the  critic,  who  analyses  and  under
stands  it,  any  more  than  the  contemplator  of  a
picture,  of  a  statue,  or  of  a  piece  of  architecture,
who  paints  with  the  painter,  sculptures  with  the
sculptor,  or  ideally  raises  airy  masses  with  the
architect ;  so  we  must  distinguish  practical  taste
and  sympathy  (or  antipathy)  from  the  practical
judgment.  Without  taste  (aesthetic  or  practical),
judgment  (aesthetic  or  practical)  is  not  possible  ;
but  taste  is  not  judgment,  which  demands  a
further  act  of  the  spirit.
The  practical  The  practical  judgment  is,  as  has  already  been

judgment  as  17.  ...1  /  i  • i

historical observed,  3.  historical  judgment ;/  so  that  to  judge

judgment.  .  . ''< .  .

^  practical  acts  and  to  give  their  history  is  really
the  same  thing.)  What  occurs  here  is  analogous
to  what  was  demonstrated  of  the  theoretic  and


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  89

aesthetic  act,  when  we  illustrated  the  coincidence
of  literary  and  artistic  criticism  with  literary
and  artistic  history.  Criticism,  be  it  practical  or
theoretic,  cannot  consist  of  anything  but  deter
mining  whether  a  spiritual  act  has  taken  place
and  what  it  has  been.  The  differences  between
the  one  and  the  other  criticism  arise  only  from
the  diversity  of  content  present  in  each  case,
asking  different  categories  of  judgment,  but  not
of  logical  procedure,  which  is  in  both  cases  the
same.  Every  other  conception  of  the  judgment,
which  should  make  it  consist,  not  of  a  his
torical  judgment,  but  of  heaven  knows  what
sort  of  measurement  upon  transcendental  models,
separated  from  the  real  world  by  a  measure
ment  of  which  the  measure  is  extraneous  to  the
measured,  indeed  (as  though  it  were  something
of  the  other  world)  extraneous  to  the  real  itself,
runs  against  insuperable  contradictions,  and  makes
judgment  arbitrary  and  history  grotesque  ;  history
would  thus  have  value,  not  in  itself,  but  outside
itself,  enjoying  it  as  a  loan  from  others,  a  gracious
concession.  But  even  these  contradictions  cannot
appear  in  all  their  crudity,  nor  the  opposite  theory
in  all  its  unshakable  truth,  save  from  what  will  be
seen  further  on,  and  we  must  here  be  satisfied
with  the  enunciation.


90 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

its  logic.  In  order  to  avoid  repetition,  we  must  refer  to
the  analysis  of  the  single  or  historical  judgment
already  given  and  assume  its  result,  namely,
that  it  is  the  only  judgment  in  which  there  is
a  true  and  proper  distinction  between  subject
and  predicate,  and  that  it  is  composed  of  an
intuitive  element  (subject)  and  of  an  intellectual
element  (predicate).  In  like  manner  the  practical
judgment  is  not  possible  without  a  clear  repre
sentation  of  the  act  to  be  judged  and  a  con
ception  not  less  clear  of  what  the  practical  act  is
in  its  universality  and  in  its  particular  forms,  and
so  on,  specifying  in  its  various  subforms  and
possibilities  of  individuation.  The  judgment  is
the  compenetration  of  the  two  elements,  the
historical  synthesis  which  establishes  :  Peter  has
accomplished  a  useful  act  in  tilling  a  piece  of
land  of  such  and  such  dimensions ;  Paul  has
accomplished  an  action  that  is  not  useful  in
opening  a  new  manufactory  of  boots,  more  costly
and  not  better  than  those  already  on  the  market ;
—Pope  Leo  III.  acted  wisely,  as  custodian  of
the  universal  character  of  the  Church  of  Rome,
in  consecrating  Charles  the  Frank  emperor,
thus  restoring  the  empire  of  the  West ; — Louis
XVI.  acted  foolishly  in  not  deciding  upon  a
prompt  and  profound  change  of  the  French


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  91

political  constitution,  and  in  allowing  himself  to
be  afterwards  dragged  unwilling  whither  he  had
not  known  how  to  go  of  his  own  will.  And  so
on.  There  are  therefore  two  ways  of  sinning
against  the  exactitude  of  the  practical  judgment  :
either  by  not  having  exact  information  as  to  the
content  of  the  volitional  act  to  be  judged  and
understood,  or  by  not  having  an  exact  criterion
of  judgment.  The  first  of  these  errors  can  be
exemplified  by  those  judgments  that  are  so
frequently  pronounced,  without  knowledge  as  to
the  true  sequence  of  events  or  without  placing
oneself  in  the  precise  conditions  in  which  the
person  to  be  judged  found  himself.  Hence  it
happens  not  less  often,  that  when  the  facts  are
really  known,  the  precise  conditions  understood,
and  the  defence  of  the  accused  has  been  heard,
the  judgment  must  be  altered.  A  cause  of
the  second  error  is  the  substitution  (likewise  a
very  common  occurrence)  of  one  category  of
judgment  for  the  other,  as  when  a  moral  act
is  praised  and  admired  for  its  cleverness,  or
the  gestures  and  the  felicitous  utterance  of  a
practical  man  are  praised,  as  though  it  were  a
question  of  judging  an  actor  or  reciter.  As  in
art,  so  in  life,  differences  of  judgment  arise,  not
so  much  from  difference  of  understanding,  as


92 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

from  these  oscillations  and  undue  transpositions
of  judgments  and  concepts.

It  is  likewise  superfluous  to  enter  into  disputes
as  to  the  absoluteness  or  relativity  of  the  practical
judgment,  because  these  have  been  superseded
by  the  concept  of  the  historical  judgment,  which
is  both  absolute  and  relative :  absolute  for  the
categories  that  it  applies,  relative  for  the  matter,
always  new,  to  which  it  applies  them.
importance  of  The  importance  of  the  practical  judgment  for

the  practical  • i i-r • *• i  11

judgment.  practical  lite  is  of  the  greatest,  and  when  we  are
warned  :  nolite  judicare  or  noli  nimium  judicare,
what  are  meant  are  not  true  acts  of  judgment,
but  certain  psychical  conditions,  which  reveal
slight  spiritual  seriousness.  /And  the  importance
is  of  the  greatest,  precisely  because  the  nature
of  the  judgment  is  historical,  and  as  we  know
already,  historical  knowledge,  knowledge,  that  is,
of  actual  situations,  is  the  basis  of  future  actions^
For  this  reason  every  man  who  is  strongly  voli
tional  is  continually  submitting  himself  and
others  to  judgment ;  for  this  reason  we  feel  the
need  of  talking  to  others  about  our  own  actions,
in  order  to  be  upheld  by  the  spirit  of  others  in
forming  a  just  judgment.  This  is  the  origin  of
such  social  institutions  as  the  confessional,  or  of
poems  such  as  the  Divina  Commedia.  The  only


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  93

judgment  without  meaning  is  that  final  judgment
made  in  the  valley  Jehoshaphat,  because  what
object  can  there  be  in  giving  oneself  the  trouble
of  judging  a  world  looked  upon  as  ended  ?  We
judge  in  order  to  continue  to  act,  that  is,  to  live,
and  when  universal  life  is  at  an  end,  judgment
is  vain  (vain  praise  or  paradise,  vain  cruelty  or
hell).

The  value  of  the volitional act is  therefore,  Difference

between  the

as  has  been  demonstrated,  in  the  act  itself,  and  practical

judgment  and

we  must  not  expect  and  derive  it  from  succession  the  judgment

of  the  event.

or  event.  The  practical  judgment  always  con
cerns  the  volitional  act,  the  intention,  the  action
(which  are  all  one),  and  never  the  result  or
happening.  With  this  distinction  we  annul  one  of
the  most  disputed,  intricate,  and  difficult  questions:
if  it  be  possible  to  judge,  or  as  they  say,  to  try
history.  Since  we  know  well  that  judgment  and
historical  narrative  coincide,  we  must  reply  in
general,  as  we  have  replied,  in  the  affirmative.
We  must  in  consequence  deny  all  the  absurd
claims  of  an  objectivity,  which  is  the  irrealizable
aspiration  to  the  abstention  from  thought  and
from  history  itself.  We  must  also  deny  to  the
historian  that  frivolous  privilege  by  which  he
is  allowed  to  judge,  almost  tolerating  in  him  an
original  sin  or  an  incorrigible  vice,  provided


94 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

he  clearly  distinguish  between  the  serious  and
the  facetious,  between  the  narrative  and  the
judgment,  as  though  the  distinction  were  ever
possible.  But  the  prejudice  against  those  who
make  out  a  case  against  history  on  the  ground
that  it  should  have  happened  in  a  manner
different  from  what  actually  took  place,  and
describe  how  this  should  have  been,  is  well
justified.  Whoever  possesses  historical  sense,  or
even  simple  good  sense,  cannot  but  agree  to  this.
The  question  should  in  reality  be  asked  differently,
and  in  this  manner  :  Is  it  correct  to  apply  to
history  the  categories  of  judgment  that  we  apply
to  volitions  and  single  acts?  Is  it  correct  to
judge  in  a  utilitarian  or  moral  manner  historical
events  and  the  whole  course  of  history  ?  Rectified
in  these  terms,  the  question  becomes  clear,  and
requires  a  negative  answer.  When  we  narrate
artistic  or  philosophical,  economic  or  ethical
history,  we  place  ourselves  at  the  point  of  view
of  the  individual  activity.  As  we  expose  aesthetic
or  philosophical  products,  useful  or  moral  actions,
we  judge  them  at  the  same  time  aesthetically,
philosophically,  economically,  morally,  and  we
know  in  every  case  if  the  action  has  been  such  as
it  ought.  Who  would  hesitate  to  affirm  that
(at  least  as  an  affirmative  method)  the  Africa


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  95

of  Petrarch  was  not  what  he  wished  it  to  be,
a  poetic  work ;  or  that  Emmanuel  Kant  did
not  succeed  in  establishing  from  his  practical
postulates,  according  to  his  intention,  the  exist
ence  of  a  personal  God  and  the  immortality  of
the  soul ;  or  that  Themistocles  behaved  in  an
undecided  manner  as  regards  Xerxes,  not  know
ing  how  to  resolve  to  sacrifice  his  ambitions  to
the  safety  of  Greece,  nor  to  inflict  a  grave  loss
upon  his  country,  in  order  to  satisfy  his  desire
for  vengeance ;  or  that  Napoleon  ignored  the
rights  of  man,  and  behaved  as  one  without
scruples,  when  he  ordered  the  arrest  and  shooting
of  the  Due  d'Enghien  ?  But  what  can  be  the  ad
vantage  of  asking  if  the  arrest  of  the  Persian
expansion  in  Europe  were  a  bad  thing  or  a
good?  if  the  creation  of  the  Roman  Empire
deserve  blame  ?  if  the  Catholic  Church  were
wrong  in  concentrating  Western  religion  in  her
self?  if  the  English  revolution  of  the  seventeenth
century,  the  French  of  the  eighteenth,  or  the
Italian  of  the  nineteenth,  could  have  been
avoided  ?  if  Dante  could  have  been  born  in  our
day  and  have  sung  the  Kantian  rather  than  the
Thomist  philosophy  ?  if  Michael  Angelo  might
have  painted  the  victories  of  the  modern  in
dustrial  world,  which  Manzotti  has  made  into  a


96 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

ballet  in  his  Excelsior,  instead  of  the  visions  of
the  Last  Judgment?  Here  we  have  before  us,
not  individual  spirits,  whose  work  we  examine  in
given  circumstances,  but  facts  that  have  happened,
and  these  are  the  work,  not  of  the  individual,  but
of  the  Whole.  They  are  (as  has  already  been
said)  the  work  of  God,  and  God  is  not  to  be
judged,  or  rather  He  is  to  be  judged,  but  not
from  the  visual  angle  at  which  individual  works
and  actions  are  to  be  judged.  He  is  not  to  be
judged  as  a  poet  or  as  a  philosopher,  as  a
statesman  or  a  hero,  as  a  finite  being  working  in
the  infinite.  The  contemplation  of  His  work  is  at
the  same  time  judgment.  Die  Weltgeschichte  das
Weltgericht :  the  history  itself  of  the  world  is  the
judgment  of  the  world,  and  in  recounting  the
course  of  history,  while  not  applying  the  judg
ment  of  the  categories  above  indicated,  which  are
inapplicable,  we  do,  however,  apply  a  judgment,
which  is  that  of  necessity  and  reality.  That
which  has  been  had  to  be ;  and  that  which  is
truly  real  is  truly  rational.

But  we  cannot  give  the  justification  of  this
supreme  judgment,  of  this  world-embracing  judg
ment  (we  repeat  the  refrain),  until  further  on.
Let  it  suffice  for  the  present  that  in  discussing
the  practical  judgment  we  have  limited  it  to  all


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  97

that  part  of  history  which  contemplates  actions,
that  is,  to  individual  activity,  to  biography  and  to
the  biographical  element,  which  is  the  material  of
all  history.  In  it,  the  practical  judgment  is  active
and  energetic,  but  is  silent  before  the  event,  and
every  history  is  like  an  impetuous  river  of
individual  works,  which  flows  into  a  sea,  where
it  is  immediately  restored  to  calm  serene.  The
rush  of  actions  and  of  their  vicissitudes,  of  victory
and  of  defeat,  of  wisdom  and  of  folly,  of  life  and
of  death,  are  set  at  rest  in  the  solemn  peace  of
the  "  historical  event."

As  we  have distinguished  the  practical  judg-  Progress  of

action  and

ment from the judgment of the event, the  progress  of

Reality.

historical-individual  from  the  historical- cosmic,
so  we  must  distinguish  the  concept  of  progress,
as  the  progress  which  belongs  to  the  volitional
act  and  that  which  belongs  to  the  event.  The
concept  of  progress  (according  to  the  explana
tions  given  elsewhere)  coincides  with  the  con
cept  of  activity.  There  is  progress  whenever
an  activity  declares  itself,  whenever  (not  to  leave
the  circle  of  the  practical)  we  pass  from  irresolu
tion  to  resolution,  from  conflict  to  the  volitional
synthesis,  from  suspense  to  action.  But  the
event,  which  is  no  longer  action  but  result,  that

is  to  say,  is  action,  not  of  the  individual  but  of

H


98 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  Whole,  is  not  to  be  judged  with  that  concept
of  progress,  and  in  it  progress  coincides  with  the
fact.  That  which  follows  chronologically,  if  it  be
truly  real,  represents  a  progress  upon  what  pre
cedes.  Even  illness  is  progress,  if  there  were
a  latent  crisis  of  health,  and  getting  over  it  gives
rise  to  more  vigorous  health.  Even  apparent
regression  (invasion  of  barbarians)  is  progress,  if
it  lead  to  the  ripening  of  a  wider  civilization.
What  is  death  for  the  individual  is  life  for  the
Whole. — Hence  the  insipidity  of  the  question,
often  proposed  and  still  discussed  by  writers  of
treatises,  whether  there  be  practical  progress,
or  as  is  said  when  limiting  the  question,  moral
progress.

From  the  individual  point  of  view,  at  every
new  volitional  act,  practicality  and  the  relative
impulse  of  progress  are  once  more  born,  and  they
are  extinguished  with  that  act,  to  be  born  again
in  a  new  one,  and  so  on  in  a  circle  of  infinite
changes.  As  to  cosmic  reality,  we  must  declare,
as  in  the  previous  example  of  the  course  of  history,
that  it  is  itself  progress  (which  is  also  confirmed
by  the  positivist  philosophy,  when  it  declares  that
reality  is  evolved),  but  this  is  progress  of  reality
and  therefore  progress  without  adjective,  or  at
least  without  practical  or  moral  adjective.


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  99

The  intellectual  element,  which  is  constitutive  Precedence  of

the  philosophy

in the practical judgment as in every other  of  the  practical

J  over  the

historical  judgment,  can  also  be  called  the  philo-  p™ticai

,  judgment.

sophical  element.  C  Hence  the  consequence  that
a  philosophy  of  the  practical  activity  is  a  necessary
condition  of  every  practical  judgment.)  This  is
another  thesis  of  paradoxical  appearance,  which,
however,  it  is  not  difficult  to  make  plausible  with
suitable  reflections,  plausible  at  least  to  those
who  do  not  refuse  to  reflect.  For  what  is
philosophy  but  the  thinking  of  the  concept,  and
in  this  case  the  concept  of  the  practical  ?  The
conclusion,  then,  that  a  philosophy  is  necessary
for  a  judgment  is  irrefutable.  The  difficulty  in
admitting  it  comes  from  the  false  association  of
ideas,  for  which  the  sound  of  the  word  "  philo
sophy  "  suggests  the  disputes  of  the  schools,  the
treatise,  the  manual,  or  the  academic  lecture,
whereas  we  should  think  of  philosophy  in  all
its  extension  and  profundity,  inborn  in  the  human
spirit  (we  have  elsewhere  called  this  ingenuous
philosophy]  before  its  more  complicated  forms.
Every  man  has  his  own  philosophy,  more  or  less
developed  or  rudimentary,  more  or  less  defective;
no  one  is  without  any  philosophy.  The  first
judgment  on  the  practical  activity  is  already
guided  by  the  light  of  a  philosophical  concept,


ioo PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

which,  if  it  does  not  give  a  light,  gives  at  least
a  glimmer,  if  not  straight  and  certain,  at  the  least
undulating  and  tremulous,  producing  therefore
tremulous  and  undulating  judgments.  Ingenuous
philosophy  and  philosophy  in  the  specific  sense
are  not,  therefore,  separable  from  one  another
with  a  clear-cut  distinction,  and  if  there  exist
a  disability  in  pronouncing  a  judgment  as  to
many  people  and  to  many  actions,  that  arises
from  difficulties  consequent  upon  the  philosophy
of  the  time,  which  must  first  of  all  be  solved,
before  passing  to  the  effective  judgment.  Hence
long  researches  into  doctrine  are  sometimes
necessary.  Thus  it  is  difficult  to  do  justice  to
the  work  of  a  rebel  or  of  a  revolutionary,  with
out  first  clearing  away  prejudices  and  understand
ing  what  a  revolution  is,  and  the  relative  value
of  what  is  called  obedience  to  the  existing  order
of  things.  Thus  it  would  be  naive  to  condemn  as
faithless  the  Saxon  regiments  which  deserted
Napoleon  on  the  field  of  Leipzig,  or  Marshal  Ney,
who  returned  to  the  service  of  Napoleon  from
that  of  Louis  XVIII.,  unless  we  previously  make
clear  the  meaning  and  the  limits  of  the  political
treaty  and  of  the  military  oath,  which  cannot  be
the  only  unconditioned  things  in  a  world  where
nothing  is  unconditioned  save  the  world  itself.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 101
From  the  recognized  precedence  of  philosophy  confirmation

.  ...  .  of  the  phi lo-

over  the  practical  judgment arises  the  confirma-  sophicai

incapacity

tion of  the impossibility of the psychological  °fthe

psychological

method  as  the  foundation  of  a  Philosophy  of  the  method-
practical.  Descriptive  psychology  is  based  upon
practical  facts  historically  ascertained,  or  upon
practical  judgments.  Hence,  by  proceeding  from
particular  to  particular,  it  is  not  only  incapable
of  exhausting  the  infinite  and  of  attaining  to
the  real  universal,  but  by  the  very  choice  of
particular  examples,  which  should  be  the  founda
tion  of  philosophical  research  relating  to  the
practical,  it  is  under  the  necessity  of  first  possess
ing  a  concept  of  the  practical.  Hence  it  stands
between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  between  a  vicious
progressus  ad  infinitum  and  a  not  less  vicious
circle.

In  this  way  is  eliminated  the  problem,  mon
strous  from  whatever  point  of  view  it  may  arise,
as  to  the  historical  origin  of  the  practical  activity
(economy  or  morality).  If  these  activities  be
categories,  which  constitute  fact  and  judge  it
reflected  in  the  spirit,  they  cannot  have  arisen
historically,  as  contingent  facts.  When  we  prove
the  historical  origin  of  anything,  with  that  very
proof  we  destroy  its  universal  value.  The  fears
of  certain  moralists  lest,  with  the  indication  of


102 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.I

the  historical  origin  of  morality,  its  value  should
come  to  be  denied,  have  therefore  been  wrongly
mocked.  Certainly,  if  morality  had  a  historical
origin,  it  would  also  have  an  end,  like  all  historical
formations,  even  the  most  grandiose,  the  Empire
of  the  East  or  the  Empire  of  the  West,  the
Hunnish  Empire  of  Attila  or  the  Mongolian
Empire  of  Gengiskhan.  The  fear  manifested  by
the  moralists  in  question  was  then  an  instinctive
horror  of  the  incorrect  method  of  philosophical
psychology,  which  now  presupposes,  now  destroys
the  categories  that  it  would  wish  to  establish.


VII

THE PRACTICAL METHOD, RULES AND CASUISTRY

IN  repeatedly  rejecting  the  psychological  method,  Justification
as  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter,  we  have  been  logical  method

and  of


very  careful to  make  use  of  a  cautious  phrase-

descriptive

ology.  Thus  we  have  employed  such  expressions  dtsciPhnes-
as  "  psycho-philosophical  method,"  "speculative-
descriptive  method,"  and  the  like,  in  order  to
make  it  quite  clear  that  our  hostility  is  directed
against  that  mixture,  or  rather  against  its  intro
duction  into  Philosophy,  but  is  not  directed
against  Psychology  itself,  that  is,  descriptive
psychology.  This  psychology  has  always  been
practised,  since  the  world  was  world,  and  we
all  practise  it  at  every  instant,  and  could  not
propose  to  banish  it  from  the  spirit,  save  at  the
risk  of  going  mad.

If  indeed  we  know  that  the  true  and  proper
knowledge  of  theoretical  philosophy  is  resolved
into  the  cycle  of  art,  philosophy,  and  history,
and  that  we  possess  no  other  means  of  knowing


101


104 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  individual,  both  ingenuous  and  reflective,
outside  the  knowledge  of  the  universal  given
by  philosophy,  then  we  also  know  that  the  spirit
needs  to  arrange  and  to  classify  the  infinite
intuitions  and  perceptions  given  to  it  by  art  and
history,  and  to  reduce  them  to  classes,  the  better
to  possess  and  to  manipulate  them.  We  also
know  that  the  method  called  naturalistic  or
positive  performs  this  function,  and  that  hence
arise  natural  disciplines  or  sciences.  These  do
not,  as  is  the  popular  belief,  deal  only  with
so-called  inferior  reality  (minerals,  vegetables,  and
animals),  but  with  all  manifestations  of  reality,
including  those  most  strictly  termed  spiritual.

Thus  we  can  at  this  point  reduce  to  a  more
correct  meaning  a  claim  that  has  been  usually
maintained  by  those  who  have  treated  of  the
Practical  and  of  the  Ethical  in  our  day.  They
demand  that  a  science  of  the  practical  and  of
morality  should  be  preceded  by  a  wide  historical
inquiry  and  have  a  great  mass  of  facts  as  its
foundation.  If  such  science  be  understood  as
a  Philosophy  of  the  practical  and  as  an  Ethic,
such  a  demand  is  an  irrational  pretension,
because  the  true  relation  is  exactly  the  opposite  :
from  philosophy  to  history,  not  from  history  to
philosophy.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  this


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 105

science  be  understood  as  a  naturalistic  and
empirical  discipline,  the  claim  is  rational,  because
it  is  not  possible  to  construct  a  discipline  of  that
sort,  save  with  material  that  has  been  historically
verified.

The  practical  discipline  that  arranges  in  groups  Practical

1 1 -r  i  • • 1 r  •  description

and  classifies  the  spiritual  facts  concerning  man,  and  its

literature.

is  Psychology.  But  the  writer  or  the  professor
is  not  the  only  psychologist.  Man  himself  is
a  psychologist ;  even  the  savage  constructs  in
some  sort  of  way  his  psychology  of  types  and
classes.  And  to  remain  within  the  circle  of
volitional  acts,  their  psychology  or  description
by  types  has  always  existed.  A  conspicuous
example  of  this  was  the  Comedy  of  Menander
or  the  New  Comedy  in  Greece.  This  partly
received  and  gave  artistic  form  to  the  results
of  the  observations  of  the  moralists  and  partly
served  as  material  for  the  elaboration  of  treatises,
to  such  an  extent  that  the  Characters  of  Theo-
phrastus  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  repertory
or  summary  of  theatrical  types.  In  the  Rhetoric
of  Aristotle,  a  whole  book  is  devoted  to  a
description  of  affections,  passions,  and  habits.
In  modern  times,  Descartes  lamented  the  in
sufficiency  of  ancient  treatises  on  the  subject,
and  presented  as  quite  a  new  thing  his  Trait^


io6 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

des  passions.  In  this  treatise,  six  primitive
passions  being  distinguished  (admiration,  love,
hate,  desire,  joy,  and  sadness),  he  maintained
that  all  the  others  were  derived  from  them :
esteem,  contempt,  generosity,  pride,  humility,
baseness,  veneration,  disdain,  hope,  fear,  jealousy,
certainty,  desperation,  irresolution,  courage,  hardi
hood,  emulation,  cowardice,  terror,  remorse,
mockery,  piety,  satisfaction,  repentance,  favour,
gratitude,  indignation,  anger,  glory,  shame,  and  so
on.  Spinoza,  following  the  example  of  Descartes
and  correcting  his  theories,  devoted  the  third
part  of  his  Ethic  to  the  affections  or  passions,
considering  them  perinde  ac  si  quaestio  de  lineis
planis  aut  de  corporibus  esset.  Let  it  suffice  to
mention  the  Anthropologia  of  Kant  among  the
other  most  celebrated  treatises  upon  the  argu
ment.
Extension  But  although  we  have  recorded  as  examples

of  practical

description,  these  general  treatises  on  the  passions,  it  would
be  impossible  to  continue  the  enumeration,
because  descriptive  psychology  is  carried  out,
so  to  speak,  with  the  widest  divergences  and
is  infinitely  subdivided.  An  ample  bibliography
would  not  suffice  to  catalogue  all  the  books  deal
ing  with  this  discipline.  These  are  sometimes
arranged  in  chronological  divisions  (Psychology


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 107

of  the  Renaissance,  of  the  eighteenth  century,  of
the  Middle  Ages,  even  including  prehistoric  man!).
Sometimes  they  contain  geographical  divisions
(Psychology  of  the  Englishman,  of  the  French
man,  of  the  Russian,  of  the  Japanese,  and  so  on),
with  subdivisions  according  to  regions.  Some
times  they  combine  the  two  methods  (Psychology
of  the  ancient  Greek,  of  the  Roman  of  the
Decadence),  and  sometimes  according  to  their
psychical  content  (Psychology  of  the  priest,  of
the  soldier,  of  the  politician,  of  the  poet,  of
the  man  of  science),  and  so  on.  And  when
the  treatises  that  bear  a  title  of  the  kind  above
mentioned  had  been  catalogued,  it  would  be
also  necessary  to  trace  a  great  mass  of  descriptive
psychology  (and  of  the  best  sort)  in  the  books
of  historians,  novelists,  dramatists,  in  memoirs
and  confessions,  in  maxims  and  advice  for  the
conduct  of  life,  in  the  sketches  of  satirists
and  caricaturists.  And  when  all  these  had
been  catalogued  (a  very  difficult  task),  it  would
be  necessary  to  take  account  of  all  the  other
psychology,  which,  formed  in  the  spirit  of  in
dividuals  who  are  not  writers,  is  poured  forth
in  speech.  This  is  found,  but  in  small  part,
in  collections  of  proverbs.  It  would  also  be
necessary  not  to  neglect  (an  altogether  desperate


io8 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.


Normative
knowledge  or
rules :  their
nature.


enterprize)  everything  that  each  one  of  us  does
and  forgets  and  substitutes  continually  in  life,
according  to  his  own  needs  and  experiences.
Tantae  molis  would  be  a  complete  account,  pre
cisely  because  psychological  construction,  having
for  its  object  actions  and  individuals  in  action,
is  of  such  common  use.

There  is  another  class  of  mental  forms  in
timately  connected  with  Psychology,  and  of  this
also  we  have  denied  the  justification  in  the
foregoing  chapters,  but  only  in  the  philosophical
field,  and  not  at  all  outside  it.  These  are  the
norms,  or  normative  knowledge  and  science,
maxims,  rules,  and  precepts.  In  truth,  if
philosophy,  which  commands  and  wills  and
judges,  when  its  task  is  on  the  contrary  to
understand  willing  and  commanding,  and  to
make  possible  correct  judgment  —  if  such  a
philosophy  be  a  contradiction  in  terms,  there
is  yet  nothing  to  prevent  our  taking  the
psychological  classes,  of  which  we  have  indicated
the  formation,  and  separating  them  from  one
another,  according  as  they  do  or  do  not  lead
to  certain  other  classes,  which  are  called  ends
and  are  abstract  ends.  This  is  done  when  those
classes  are  selected  which  are  more  efficacious  for
practical  action.  Psychological  classes  and  rules


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 109

are  therefore  the  same,  save  that  in  the  second
the  character  possessed  by  knowledge  as  prior
to  action  is  placed  in  relief,  that  is  to  say,  its
technical  character.  This  is  proved  by  the  easy
convertibility  of  rules  into  psychological  observa
tions,  and  of  the  latter  into  the  former.  It  suffices
to  add  the  imperative  to  the  first  and  to  remove
it  from  the  second.  "  Do  everything  so  as  to
seem  good,  for  that  helps  in  many  things  ;  but
since  false  opinions  do  not  last,  you  will  have
difficulty  in  seeming  good  for  a  long  period,  if
you  are  not  so  in  reality."  That  is  a  rule  of
Francesco  Guicciardini *  (or  rather  of  the  father
of  Guicciardini,  quoted  by  him).  Now  if  we
transfer  this  proposition  from  the  imperative  to
the  indicative  mood  and  remove  the  predicate
of  exhortation,  we  have  a  mere  psychological
observation  :  "To  seem  good  helps  in  an  infinite
number  of  things ;  but  since  false  opinions  do
not  last,  it  is  difficult  to  seem  good  for  long,
unless  one  really  be  so."  Here  is  a  psychological
observation  of  Vico  upon  seeming  and  being :
"  It  happens  naturally  that  man  speaks  of  nothing
but  what  he  affects  to  be  and  is  not."  This  can
be  turned  into  a  maxim  :  "  Watch  yourselves,  in

1  (l)  Ricordi  politici  e  civili,  n.  xliv. (in  Opere.  inedite  (2), Firenze,

1857 ;  p-  97).

2  Scritti  ineditii  ed.  Del  Giudice,  Napoli,  1862,  p.  12.


no PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

order  that  by  talking  too  much  of  a  given
advantage,  you  may  not  let  it  be  seen  clearly
that  you  do  not  possess  it."  Or  in  relation  to
moral  classes  it  can  be  turned  thus :  "  Try  to  be
that  which  you  would  like  to  appear  to  others,''
and  so  on.
usefulness  of  Of  rules  it  can  be  said  that  they  do  not

rules.

possess  absolute  value.  This  is  to  be  found
written  at  the  beginning  of  one  of  the  best  books
of  rules  :  Peu  de  maximes  sont  vraies  a  tons  dgards
(Vauvenargues),  and  he  might  have  said,  "  no
maxim  "  ;  for  if  it  were  ever  possible  to  produce
one  that  was  absolutely  true,  by  that  alone  would
it  be  demonstrated  not  to  be  a  true  maxim.
But  criticism  prevails  against  the  distortion  of
empirical  rules  into  philosophical  principles,  or
against  the  confusion  between  the  psycho
logical  and  the  speculative  methods,  to  which
attention  has  already  been  drawn.  If  this
distortion  be  not  committed,  then  rules  are
altogether  innocuous.  Not  only  are  they  innoc
uous,  they  are  indispensable.  Each  of  us  is
constantly  making  them  for  use  in  his  own  life.
To  live  without  rules  would  be  impossible.
Certainly,  the  man  of  action  makes  no  practical
rule,  nor  does  he  indicate  how  we  should  will
and  act  in  definite  circumstances,  nor  does  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL in

poet  make  any  rule  of  Poetic.  Guicciardini
himself,  whom  we  have  just  quoted,  and  who
formulated  stupendous  maxims,  warns  us  :
"  These  memories  are  rules  that  can  be  written
down  in  books  ;  but  special  cases,  which,  since
they  have  a  different  cause,  ask  a  different
treatment,  can  ill  be  written  down  elsewhere
than  in  the  book  of  discretion."  Action  depends
upon  the  quickness  of  the  eye,  upon  the  per
ception  of  the  situation  historically  given,  which
has  never  occurred  before,  and  never  will  occur
again,  precisely  identical.  But  it  is  useful  to
possess  these  types  of  actions  to  encourage  and
of  actions  to  avoid,  in  order  to  sharpen  the
attention  and  to  find  one's  way  in  the  world  of
action,  to  facilitate  and  to  discipline  the  examina
tion  of  the  concrete  fact.  If,  therefore,  individual
rules  are  more  or  less  transitory,  the  formation
of  rules  is  immortal.

The  condition of  literature in recent times  The  literature

11  1-1-  -11- Of™1"  and

would seem to be in disagreement with this  a*  apparent

decadence.

affirmation,  since  as  a  fact  there  is  a  great
falling  off  in  the  appearance  of  books  of  rules,
compared  with  the  enormous  mass  that  remains
in  our  libraries  as  an  inheritance  of  the  past.
At  one  time  rules  of  conduct  were  compiled
for  everything,  not  only  for  the  moral  life,  in


ii2 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  multiplication  of  treatises  relating  to  vice
and  virtue,  to  merits  and  to  sins,  to  things  good
and  evil,  to  duties  and  to  rights,  dividing  these
and  entering  into  minutiae,  and  again,  summaries,
catechisms,  and  various  "  decalogues,"  relating
to  every  part  of  life.  The  literature  of  the
Cinquecento  gives  rules  even  for  the  procuress
and  the  courtesan,  in  most  elegant  little  books,
which  bear  the  names  of  Piccolomini  and  of
Aretino.  In  this  same  century,  too,  Ignatius
of  Loyola  formulated  rules  for  ''tying  up"
the  will,  and  for  the  reduction  of  the  docile
individual  perinde  ac  cadaver,  for  the  ends  of
"  sanctity."  We  must  further  remark  that  all
rules,  including  those  on  poetry  and  the  arts,
have  at  bottom  a  practical  character.  That
is  to  say,  they  are  directed  to  the  will,  if
only  as  intermediary.  Thus  it  is  necessary  to
add  to  the  great  mass  of  practical  rules  the  un
numbered  and  innumerable  treatises  of  Grammar,
Rhetoric,  Poetry  of  the  figurative  arts,  of  music,
of  dancing,  and  so  on.  But  it  is  a  fact  that
there  are  now  hardly  any  treatises  containing
rules,  either  for  morality,  politics,  or  for  the  arts.
Has  the  world  by  chance  become  learned  on  the
subject,  through  inherited  aptitude,  or  rather  has
the  inutility  of  rules  been  discovered  ?


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 113

Neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  The  rules
still  live  in  books  and  treatises ;  they  have  only
changed  their  literary  form.  In  literature  they
have  reabsorbed  that  imperative  which  they
used  at  first  to  display  and  to  boast  of,  not
only  mentally  but  literally.  That  has  been
made  possible  by  the  already  established  con
vertibility  of  rules  into  psychological  classes.
Hence  in  modern  times  the  literary  form  of  the
psychological  observation  is  preferred  to  that  of
rules.  This  was  indeed  redundant,  pedantic,  and
at  the  same  time  ingenuous,  as  for  instance  in
the  Italian  Seicento.  It  is  difficult  to  restrain
a  smile  when  reading  the  many  books  on  what
was  called  the  reason  of  State,  elaborated  by  the
Italians  of  that  day  and  imitated  by  foreigners,
especially  Spaniards  and  Germans.  Those  arcana
imperil,  those  "  secret  strokes,"  those  impostures,
mysteriously  inculcated  on  the  printed  page,  are
a  true  and  real  aesthetic  contradiction.  The
eighteenth  century  therefore  began  to  give  up
this  form  of  treatise,  and  as  it  happens  that  men
are  accustomed  to  attribute  to  moral  virtue  that
which  is  necessity  or  virtue  of  another  kind,  the
writers  of  that  century  boasted  of  the  moral  pro
gress  which  had  set  them  free  from  the  pernicious

and  immodest  maxims  of  the  "  reason  of  State."

i


ii4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

It  is  very  amusing  to  assist  at  the  acts  of
repulsion  and  of  exorcism,  which  a  man  like
the  Abbe*  Galiani  believes  himself  obliged  to
make  in  his  treatise  Dei  doveri  dei  principi
neutrali  (1782).  When,  having  amply  discussed
this  matter  from  the  point  of  view  of  morality,
he  goes  on  to  discuss  it  from  the  point  of  view
of  politics  and  of  the  reason  of  State,  he
despatches  it  in  a  few  pages,  abhorring,  as  he
says,  that  "  insidious  and  wicked  science  "  which
formed  "the  delight,  first  of  Italian  and  then  of
almost  all  European  minds  of  the  fifteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries."  He  protests  at  every  step
that  he  is  "tired  of  repeating  and  of  develop
ing  teachings  of  cunning  and  wickedness."  But
what  the  Abbot  Galiani  really  abhorred  was  the
robed  scholastic  treatment  of  a  matter  that  he
who  was  termed  Machiavellino  by  his  French
friends,  and  declared  that  he  did  not  admit  in
politics  anything  but  le  machiave'lisme  pur,  sans
melange,  cru,  vert,  dans  toute  son  dprete1?  handled
with  very  different  ability  and  elegance  in  his
conversations  in  Parisian  salons  and  in  his  witty
letters  to  Madame  d'Epinay.  The  rules  of
the  eighteenth  century  are  to  be  sought  in  the
speeches,  essays,  political  opuscules,  tragedies,

1  Letter  to  the  d'Epinay,  5th  September  1772.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  115

plays  dealing  with  the  life  of  citizens,  fiction,
history,  and  books  of  memoirs.  If  Aretino
and  Piccolomini  provided  for  the  necessities  of
the  respectable  courtesans  and  procuresses  of
the  Cinquecento,  in  the  Settecento,  Giacomo
Casanova  constructed  the  type  of  the  perfect
adventurer.  He  began  with  the  rules  to  be
followed  as  a  system  of  life,  the  se  laisser
alter  au  gr^  du  vent  qui  pousse,  and  passed  to
those  that  were  more  special  and  yet  funda
mental,  such  as  that  one  should  have  no  scruples
de  tromper  des  dtourdis,  des  fripons  et  des  sots,
because  they  dtfient  I  esprit  and  on  venge  r  esprit
quand  on  trompe  un  sot.  There  should  be  still  less
scruple  in  deception  in  affairs  of  love,  for,  pour
ce  qui  regarde  les  femmes,  ce  sont  des  tromperies
rtciproques,  quon  ne  met  pas  en  ligne  de  compte ;
car,  quand  I  amour  sen  m£le,  on  est  ordinairement
diipe  de  part  et  dautre?  Let  us  leave  to  the
reader  to  investigate,  if  he  please,  the  rules  of
life  that  are  concealed  beneath  the  most  modern
forms  of  literature ;  these  are  a  continuous,  if
not  always  beneficent,  guide  for  daily  life.

Another  circumstance  that  has  led  to  the  belief  Relation

\  r  between  the

in  the  disappearance of  books  of  rules is the  arts  (collections

>  of  rules}  and

observation  that  from  those  books  dealing  with  philosophical

doctrines.
1  Mtmoires,  ed.  Paris,  Gamier,  s. a.,  i pp.  3-4.


ii6 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  so-called  arts,  there  has  come  to  be  a  treat
ment  of  the  philosophy  of  their  subject-matter,  in
which  those  treatises  have  been  dissolved.  Thus
from  Poetics  and  Rhetorics  has  come  ^Esthetic,
from  Grammatic  the  Philosophy  of  language,
from  the  Art  of  teaching  and  of  reasoning  Logic
and  Gnoseology,  from  the  historical  Art,  Historic,
from  the  Arts  of  economic  government,  the
Science  of  Economy,  from  the  treatises  on
Natural  Law,  the  Philosophy  of  Law.

When  such  philosophies,  then,  had  appeared,
treatises  upon  the  Arts  seemed  to  have  become
superfluous,  and  to  this  is  attributed  the  cause  of
their  diminution  or  disappearance.  But  although
it  be  impossible  not  to  recognize  the  historical
process  above  described  from  books  on  the  arts  to
books  of  systems,  it  is  necessary  to  be  careful  to
interpret  it  exactly  and  not  to  confuse  it  with  a
passing  from  empiria  to  philosophy.  Thus  it
will  be  seen  that  the  part  absorbed  and  dis
solved  in  philosophy  has  been  precisely  those
philosophical  attempts  that  were  mingled  with
such  collections  of  rules  and  precepts.  For  it
was  very  natural  that  the  writers  who  put  them
together  and  had  ideas  as  to  what  should  be  done
and  what  avoided,  were  often  led  to  investigate
the  principles  from  which  sprung  the  particular


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 117

rules.  Believing  that  they  were  strengthening,
they  really  came  to  surpass  them,  that  is,  they
passed  unwittingly  from  one  form  of  treatment  to
another,  from  Psychology  to  Philosophy.  But
not  even  here  has  empiricism  been  refined  into
philosophy  (a  refinement  which,  strictly  speaking,
is  impossible),  but  a  more  perfect  philosophy  has
been  substituted  for  one  less  perfect.  The
dissolution,  then,  has  not  been  of  the  rules,  but
of  that  imperfect  philosophy,  a  chemical  process
which  has  left  the  rules  in  what  they  possess  of
original  as  residuum.  Hence  their  persistence,
and  indeed  the  impossibility  that  they  should  not
persist,  side  by  side  with  the  most  pure  and
perfect  of  philosophies.

Casuistic  has  had  the  same  fate  as  the  rules,  Casuistic:  its

nature  and

and  was  also  at  one  time  responsible  for  a  very  utility.
copious  literary  production.  Now  it  is  cultivated
as  literature  only  by  a  few  Jesuits,  who  carry  on
the  glories  of  Escobar  and  of  Sanchez,  read  only
by  priests  preparing  themselves  for  the  post  of
confessor,  whose  studies  are  based  for  the  most
part  upon  old  books  (such  as  the  Theologia
moralis  of  the  Neapolitan  Sant'  Alfonso  de'
Liguori).  At  one  time  Casuistic  was  not  confined
only  to  profane  or  theological  morality,  to  the
casus  conscientiae.  There  were  also  books  of


n8 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

casuistry  composed  for  all  aspects  of  life,  for
politics,  for  the  life  of  the  courtier  ("  the  Wise  Man
at  Court  "),  for  the  art  of  love.  When  the  literary
form  of  rules  fell  into  discredit,  that  of  Casuistic
fell  with  it.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  it  is
dead  ;  it  lives  and  will  live  as  long  as  rules  live.
For  Casuistic  is  nothing  but  the  process  of  reason
ing  by  which  rules  are  made  always  more  precise,
passing  from  more  general  cases  to  those  more
particular,  so  that  no  one  will  ever  be  able  to
do  without  them. — If  we  take  for  rule  of  life  this
maxim  :  to  avoid  scientific  polemics,  because  they
constitute  a  waste  of  time,  adding  little  to  the
progress  of  knowledge  ;  in  what  way  must  we
behave  if  a  polemic  be  such  that  it  enables  us
to  gain  on  the  one  hand  the  time  it  makes  us
lose  on  the  other  ?  Shall  we  maintain  the
general  rule,  or  shall  we  waive  it  on  this  occasion,
if  for  no  other  reason  than  to  give  variety  to  our
occupations  ?  And  how  shall  we  behave  if  not
only  we  retrieve  the  time  lost  but  avoid  losing
more  time  in  the  future  ?  Shall  we  wish  to  enter
upon  the  polemic  at  once  ?  But  if  our  future  be
looked  upon  as  uncertain,  if  we  be  far  advanced
in  years  or  in  bad  health,  will  it  not  be  better  to
renounce  the  uncertain  gain  of  the  future  for  the
certain  gain  of  the  present  ? — This  is  a  very


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 119

simple  example  of  Casuistic,  which  a  critic  and
writer  (let  us  suppose  that  he  is  the  writer  of  these
pages)  is  obliged  to  propose  to  himself  and  to
solve.  Naturally,  no  Casuistic  will  ever  furnish
the  concrete  solution  (which  is  the  only  one  that
counts),  since,  as  has  been  said,  no  rule  can  ever
furnish  it.  Rules  and  casuistry  do  not  reach
the  individuality  omnimodo  determinates,  which  is
the  historical  situation  ;  yet  if  Casuistic  aid  my
action,  this  will  always  differ  from  that,  as  con
crete  from  abstract ;  or  better,  my  action  will
always  truly  possess  the  form,  the  definiteness
that  abstract  casuistry  cannot  possess.  Woe  to
practical  men  who  rely  upon  collections  of  maxims
and  casuistical  reasonings,  and  woe  to  those  who
rely  upon  them.  Those  who  argue  at  length
upon  practical  matters  and  draw  subtle  distinc
tions,  are  to  be  avoided  in  the  world  of  affairs  and
in  the  world  of  action.  If  they  have  not  yet  pro
voked  some  disaster,  they  are  on  the  road  to  /
doing  so  now.  This,  at  least,  is  a  good  rule  ;
like  the  supreme  rule  (which  is  not  a  rule
but  philosophical  truth),  namely,  that  we  must
abandon  rules,  that  is,  face  the  individual  case,
which,  as  such,  is  always  irregular.

But  if  a  further  proof  be  wanted  of  the  neces-  jurisprudence

as  casuistry.

sity  and  perpetuity  of  maxims  and  of  casuistry,


120 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

observe  how  these  also  persist  in  literary
form,  as  laws,  where  this  form  is  not  eliminable.
Laws,  as  we  have  seen,  are  not  simple  rules,
but  are  based  upon  formulae  of  rules,  and  must
of  necessity  make  explicit  in  them  decisions
as  to  doing  and  not  doing.  Jurisprudence
is  the  Casuistic  of  law,  or  all  the  labour  of  so-
called  interpretation,  which  is  at  bottom  the
excogitation  of  new  rules.  All  know  that  not
only  is  Jurisprudence  not  of  itself  legislative,
but  that  it  cannot  even  determine  the  volitional
act  of  the  Statesman,  nor  the  sentence,  or
decision  upon  the  particular  case,  a  decision
which  the  judge  creates  upon  each  occasion.
But  no  one  would  seriously  think  of  suppressing
the  work  and  the  function  of  those  casuists,  or
judicial  experts,  a  function  which,  since  it  has
always  existed  and  continues  to  exist,  cannot
but  answer  to  a  social  need.  It  is  possible  to
predict  a  form  of  social  life,  less  complicated  and
weighty,  in  which  that  function  would  have  less
scope,  but  whatever  be  the  case  as  regards  this
prediction,  the  casuistry  of  judicial  experts  will
continue  so  long  as  there  are  laws  and  rules,
that  is  to  say,  always.


VIII

CRITIQUE  OF  THE  INVASIONS  BY  PHILOSOPHY  OF
THE  DOMAIN  OF  PRACTICAL  DESCRIPTION  AND
OF  ITS  DERIVATIVES

IN  demonstrating  the  legitimacy  and  necessity
of  practical  description  and  of  its  derivatives,
Regolistic  and  Casuistic,  we  have  not  fulfilled,
as  it  were,  our  whole  knightly  duty,  which  binds
us  to  that  discipline,  which  we  have  been  obliged
to  maltreat  so  exceedingly,  and  shall  further
maltreat,  when  it  has  been  or  shall  be  presented
as  a  philosophical  method.  It  is  now  necessary
to  defend  its  existence  against  the  invasion  of
philosophy,  or  rather  of  philosophers.  We  must
make  it  obvious  that  if  the  empiricists  and
psychologists,  who  swell  themselves  out  to  philo
sophers,  are  bunglers,  those  too  are  bunglers
who  claim  to  solve  empirical  questions  philosophic
ally.  Perhaps  they  are  bunglers  less  worthy  of
pardon,  because  it  is  part  of  philosophy  to  know
itself  clearly,  and  consequently  its  own  limits.


121


122 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

First  form:  The  first  bad  effect  that  philosophy  has  upon
generalize,  practical  description  is  the  tendency  to  change
it  from  description  and  collection  of  particular
descriptions  into  something  that  has  the  air  of
generality  and  comprehensiveness.  Because,  if
practical  description  be  closely  connected  with  the
historical  conditions  of  definite  individuals  and
societies  and  with  their  wants,  the  more  specific
and  near  to  the  concrete  it  is,  the  better  it
will  be,  and  the  more  useless  by  as  much  as  it  goes
wandering  toward  the  general.  We  owe  to
the  evil  influence  of  philosophy  those  verbose
treatises  upon  psychological  classes,  such  as
virtue,  duties,  things  good,  affections,  passions,
and  human  types,  to  read  which  nourishes  less
than  fresh  water,  which  at  least  refreshes.

Let  him  who  wishes  to  be  convinced  compare
the  books  of  rules  and  observations  that  we  owe
to  men  of  experience  and  to  men  of  the  world,
such  as  the  Ricordi  of  Guicciardini,  the  Maximes
of  Larochefoucauld,  and  the  Oraculo  Manual
of  Balthazar  Gracian,  with  the  Traitt  des  passions
of  Descartes,  with  that  section  of  the  Ethica  of
Spinoza  that  relates  to  this  matter,  with  the  -
Anthropologia  and  the  Doctrine  of  Virtue  of
Kant  (we  prefer  to  record  great  names).  He
will  then  see  on  whose  side  is  the  advantage,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 123

an  advantage  of  originality,  of  importance,  and
even  of  style,  which  is  in  this  case  a  revelation.
Those  books  by  philosophers  contain  for  the
most  part  definitions  of  vocabulary  and  of  words
which  there  is  no  need  to  define,  because  every
body  knows  them  to  such  an  extent  that  the
definitions,  rather  than  make  them  more  clear,
make  them  obscure.  Who,  for  example,  can
resist  the  philosophical  triviality  of  the  Aphorisms
for  the  Wisdom  of  Life  of  Arthur  Schopenhauer  ?
Take  the  trouble  to  open  a  book  to  learn  that
good  things  are  to  be  divided  into  personal,
wealth  and  imagination,  or  reputation,  and  that
the  first  (such  as  good  health  and  a  gay  tempera
ment)  are  pre-eminent  over  the  others.  Do  we
not  learn  more  and  with  greater  rapidity  and
efficacy  from  such  proverbs  as  "  God  helps  the
merry  man  "  ?  It  is  superfluous  to  observe  that
those  books,  in  so  far  as  they  generalize,  can
never  attain  to  philosophy.  They  remain  at
bottom  more  or  less  historical.

The good and generous  wine of  the born  Historical

elements

psychologists and precept-makers is  diluted in  persisting  in

generaliza-

a  great  deal  of  water,  but that  water,  however  *
much  there  be of  it, never  becomes  pure and
is  always  discoloured  and  of  an  unpleasant  taste.
Thus in classifications of ancient Ethic the


i24 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

idea  of  "  virtue"  or  of  "good"  was  announced
as  the  most  important,  in  Christian  Ethic  that
of  "duty,"  in  the  same  way  as  in  ancient  Ethic
the  political  character  was  dominant,  in  the
modern  the  individualistic,  according  to  the
different  character  of  the  corresponding  civiliza
tions.  Historical  elements  differentiate  the  Ethic
of  Aristotle,  impregnated  with  sane  Greek  life,
from  that  of  the  Stoics,  in  which  is  foretold
the  decadence  of  the  antique  world  and  the
germs  of  the  future  discovered  (for  instance,
cosmopolitanism,  which  precedes  the  Christian
idea  of  the  unity  of  the  human  race).  The  four
Platonic  virtues  retain  the  name,  but  are  filled
with  a  new  content,  in  the  four  cardinal  virtues  of
the  Christian  Ethic  ;  the  seven  deadly  sins  are
not  to  be  explained  in  all  their  settemplicity
without  the  ascetic  ideal  of  the  Middle  Ages.

Among  the  various  writers  of  treatises,  the
foreground  is  filled,  now  with  the  idea  of  effort
or  of  duty,  now  with  that  of  enjoyment  and  satis
faction  ;  ideas  are  now  despotic  masters,  now
smiling  friends;  the  dominant  idea  is  in  turn
that  of  justice,  of  benevolence,  of  enthusiasm,  and
so  on.  In  the  systems  of  Catholic  Ethic  are
reflected  political  absolutism  and  semi -feudal
economy ;  in  those  of  Protestant  Ethic,  constitu-


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 125

tionalism,  liberalism,  the  industrial  and  capitalistic
world ;  a  strict  probity,  not  indeed  without
utilitarianism,  and  a  hardness  of  heart,  not  indeed
without  austerity.  Modern  Ethic  is  concerned
with  property,  with  the  struggle  of  classes,  with
proletarianism  and  communism.  These  are  all
historical  facts  and  as  such  most  worthy  of
attention,  but  for  that  very  reason  they  should
be  examined  in  all  their  force  and  value  and
not  through  the  medium  of  the  pale  categories
of  a  universal  doctrine,  which  they  disturb  and
falsify  and  by  which  they  are  very  often  disturbed
and  falsified.  Whoever  undertakes  to  write
general  treatises  upon  the  passions,  upon  the
virtues,  and  upon  the  other  practical  classes,
will  always  show  the  signs  of  his  time  in  the
categories  that  he  establishes,  and  the  result  will
be  at  once  banal  and  empirical,  that  is  to  say,
badly  empirical.

But  hitherto  the  chief  ill  has  been  that  useless  second  form:

literary

and  tiresome  books  are  written. Matters  begin  ««**»</

philosophy

to  look  graver  when  an  approach  is  attempted  andemPiria-
between  philosophical  theories  and  empirical
classifications  and  they  are  united  in  one  treatise,
as  the  general  part  and  the  particular  part,  the
abstract  and  the  concrete  part,  the  theoretical  and
the  historical  part.  We  do  not  wish  to  refuse


i26 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

recognition  to  an  occasionally  just  sense  of  the
intimate  relations  between  philosophy  and  history
as  among  the  motives  that  lead  to  such  unions,
the  first  of  which  flows  into  the  second,  revives
it  and  is  by  it  in  turn  revived.  But  the  history,
to  which  philosophy  applies  the  torch,  is  all
history  in  its  palpitating  reality ;  it  is  history
represented  by  all  histories  that  historians  have
written  and  will  write,  and  also  by  those  that
they  have  not  written  and  will  not  write.  The
history  offered  by  these  empirical  descriptions
is  only  a  very  small  part  of  history  and  (what
is  worse)  abstract  and  mutilated.  This  would,
however,  be  an  injury  of  not  too  grave  a  nature,
even  at  this  point,  provided  the  incongruity  were
limited  to  literary  unfitness  ;  in  which  case,  it  is
true,  would  be  added  to  inutility  the  ugliness  of
a  union  capricious  and  artificial,  but  fortunately
extrinsic.  But  by  means  of  that  extrinsic
approach,  the  way  is  opened  to  the  attempt
at  an  intrinsic  approach,  and  thus  to  the  third
form  of  the  undue  invasion  of  practical  descrip
tion  by  philosophy,  which  constitutes  the  morbus
pkilosophico-empiricus  in  all  its  harmfulness.
Third  form-.  The  attempt  at  intrinsic  approach  takes  place

attempt  to  rr  "

place  them  in  when  empirical  classes  are  placed  in  connection

intimate

with the philosophical concepts or categories,


connexion.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 127

with  pure  thought.  Nearly  all  philosophers
have  fallen  into  this  error,  since  it  is  very
natural  that  they  should  not  have  wished  to
leave  a  hiatus  between  the  first  and  second
parts  of  their  books  of  Philosophy  of  the  prac
tical,  between  the  general  and  particular  parts,
and  that  they  should  have  striven  to  connect
the  one  with  the  other  by  passing  logically  from
the  concepts  of  the  first  to  those  of  the  second.
The  mistake  was  indubitably  increased  owing
to  their  small  degree  of  clearness  as  to  the
logical  nature  of  the  two  orders  of  concepts
(concepts  and  pseudo-concepts),  which  is  funda
mentally  diverse,  and  we  shall  not  further  insist
upon  this  matter.

Rather  let  us  note  that  sometimes  there  has  science  of  the

.  ....  .  _  practical  and

been  something  rational in the  minds  of  those  Metaphysic:

various

who  have  required  the  Science  of  the  practical  significations.
or  Ethic  to  be  constructed  independently  of
all  Metaphysic.  In  truth,  that  programme  of  the
independence  of  the  Science  of  the  practical  or
Ethic  of  Metaphysic  has  had  various  meanings
that  it  will  be  well  to  enumerate  briefly.  The
first  meaning  was  that  the  Science  of  the
practical,  in  so  far  as  it  was  philosophy,  should
be  independent  of  the  aggregate  of  the  philo
sophical  system  (Metaphysic).  In  this  case


PT.


Damaging
consequences
of  the
invasions.


128 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

the  claim  was  not  acceptable,  as  we  shall  see,
because  it  was  at  variance  with  the  nature
itself  of  philosophy,  which  is  unity.  The  second
meaning  was  that  the  Practical,  as  science,
should  be  kept  remote  from  every  form  of  faith,
or  feeling  or  fancifulness  (which  has  sometimes
been  called  "  Metaphysic ") ;  and  in  this  case
the  proposition  was  inexpugnable,  however  con-
testable  may  have  seemed  the  opportunely  of
the  meaning  given  to  that  word.  The  third
meaning  was  that  the  Science  of  the  practical,
in  so  far  as  it  was  descriptive,  should  stand
by  itself,  in  order  to  afford  a  base  for  philo
sophical  induction.  Use  was  here  made  of  the
erroneous  idea,  already  rejected  several  times,
of  philosophy  as  an  intensification  of  the  psycho
logical  method,  or  as  a  carrying  of  it  on.  But
in  a  fourth  sense,  it  was  desired  finally  to
withdraw  practical  description  from  the  perilous
care  of  the  philosophers,  and  it  seems  to  us
that  with  this  fourth  meaning  was  expressed
a  very  just  demand.

What  are,  in  fact,  the  consequences  of  the
care  that  philosophers  have  bestowed  upon
practical  description?  We  would  not  wish  to
use  an  over-coloured  simile,  but  what  happens
is  very  much  what  would  happen  if  a  man  were


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 129

given  a  baby  to  suckle.  He  would  press  it
violently  against  his  dry  and  arid  breast,  incap
able  of  nourishing,  but  well  capable  of  tormenting
it.  Philosophy,  when  it  approaches  the  empirical
classes,  will  either  begin  to  criticize  their  dis
tinctions  and  abolish  them,  reducing  several
classes  to  one,  and  then  reducing  the  reduced
classes  in  their  turn  to  a  less  number,  until  none
are  left  at  all  and  it  finds  itself  in  company
with  the  universal  philosophical  principle  alone,
or  alone  with  itself; — or  it  will  contrive  to
preserve  them  as  classes,  deducing  them  philo
sophically,  and  will  thus  make  them  rigid  and
absolute,  removing  from  them  that  elasticity  and
fluidity  which  they  derive  from  their  historical
character,  and  converting  them  from  useful
classes  that  they  were,  into  bad  philosophemes,
concepts  contradictory  in  themselves.

Both these consequences  have occurred, for
the  books of  philosophers  are  full  of  examples,  empirical

concepts.

now  of  destruction,  now  of  corruption  of  the
empirical  classes  of  the  Practical.  The  treat
ment  of  the  doctrine  of  the  virtues  or  of  so-called
natural  rights  affords  examples  of  destruction.
Striving  to  distinguish  courage  from  prudence,
or  justice  from  benevolence,  or  on  the  other

hand, egotism from  wickedness, they  ended by

K


1 30 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

recognizing  that  true  courage  is  prudence,  true
prudence  courage;  that  benevolence  is  justice,
justice  benevolence  ;  that  egotism  is  wickedness,
wickedness  egotism,  and  so  on.  In  this  way,  all
the  virtues  became  one,  the  virtue  of  being
virtuous,  the  will  for  the  good,  duty.  In  like
manner,  by  giving  philosophical  form  to  the
natural  rights  of  life,  of  liberty,  of  culture,  of
property,  and  so  on,  they  ended  by  recognizing
that  all  rights  merge  in  one  single  right,  which
is  that  of  existence ;  which  latter,  indeed,  is
not  a  right,  but  a  fact.  The  passions  were
reduced  from  seventy  or  eighty  classes  to  six
or  seven  fundamental,  but  these  six  or  seven
were  in  their  turn  reduced  to  two  only,  pleasure
and  pain,  and  of  these  two  it  was  finally  dis
covered  that  they  constituted  one  only — life,
which  is  pleasure  and  pain  together.  But
virtues,  rights,  passions,  possess  value  in  practical
description  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  multiplicity
— their  value  is  always  plural,  never  singular.
To  reduce  them  to  a  single  class  signifies  to
annul  them,  as  to  blow  upon  a  candle  signifies
to  extinguish  it  and  to  remain  in  darkness  ;
darkness  is  to  be  understood  as  without  empirical
light.  Now  the  philosopher  should  certainly
destroy  empirical  ideas,  but  only  in  so  far  as


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 131

they  present  themselves  as  philosophical  dis
tinctions,  that  is,  in  so  far  as  they  are  empirico
philosophical :  and  in  that  case  it  suffices  him
to  show  that  they  are  empirical,  without
pretending  to  annul  them  in  their  own  domain
also :  debellare  superbos,  but  parcere  subjectis ;
that  is,  he  should  spare  strangers  who  remain
quietly  in  their  own  house.

It might seem desirable to pass in review  Examples:

.......  ,  .  -war  and  peace,

all these empirical distinctions and questions  property  and

communism,

which  the  philosophers  have  thought  that  they  and  the  like,
had  satisfactorily  solved,  when  they  had,  on  the
contrary,  passed  beyond  them.  But  the  theme
is  inexhaustible,  and  we  cannot  here  give  even
a  rich  selection,  comprising  the  most  frequent
and  important  cases.  We  must  limit  ourselves
to  brief  mention. — People  discuss  every  day :
whether  war  be  an  evil,  and  if  it  be  possible
to  abolish  it ;  if  community  of  goods  should
take  the  place  of  private  property ;  if  rational
government  be  that  of  liberty  or  of  authority,
of  democracy  or  aristocracy,  of  anarchism  or  state
organization ;  whether  the  State  should  be  in
the  Church  or  the  Church  in  the  State,  or  side
by  side  and  independent ;  if  freedom  of  thought
should  be  admitted  or  restrained  ;  if  instruction
should  be  free  or  undertaken  by  the  State ;


:32 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

and other similar problems. Now behold the
philosopher  applying  himself  to  the  study  of  these
ideas. Having  tested  them,  he  is  astonished  that
people can find in them opposing terms, and
make  them  argument  for  dispute. In  truth  (he
says), war is intrinsic to reality,  and peace is
peace in  so far  as  by making an end  of one
war  it  prepares  another;  as  Socrates  demonstrated
in  the  Phaedo, when, scratching  his leg in the
place  where  it  had been pressed by  the  chain,
he  realized  that  he  could not have  experienced
that  pleasure  had  he  not  previously  experienced
the  pain. Nor is  property  different from  com
munism  : the individual declares  himself  by  an
individual taking possession of things and
becoming their owner ; but by so doing he
enters into  relations and into  communion  with
other  individuals,  and  does  business  with  them.
And  liberty excludes subjection  the  less,  since
sub  lege  libertas ; nor  does aristocracy exclude
democracy,  since  the  true  aristocrat  is  the  bearer
of  those  universal  values  that  are  the  substance
of  democracy ;  hence  the  more  we  are  aristocratic
the more we are democratic, and inversely.
Nor  does  anarchism  exclude  State  organization,
because a collection of  men, however  free  we
suppose it to be, must nevertheless govern


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 133

itself  according  to  some  laws,  and  these  laws
are  the  State.  Then,  the  ideal  State,  being  the
best  government  of  men  for  their  perfection-
ment,  both  material  and  spiritual,  accomplishes
the  work  of  the  Church  itself,  which  is  neither
above,  nor  below,  nor  beside  the  State,  because
it  is  the  State.  Thus  in  like  manner,  no  one
can  grant  or  abolish  freedom  of  thought,  since
thought  is  by  definition  freedom,  and  the  restraint
is  thought  itself,  because  liberty  coincides  with
necessity.  And  finally  State  instruction  cannot
but  correspond  with  rational  demands,  and  the
free  instruction  of  citizens,  if  it  be  really  so  and
not  arbitrary  and  capricious,  will  be  the  same
as  that  of  the  State,  or  will  be  changed  into
the  instruction  of  the  State.

Passing  to  other  orders  of  fact  that  are less  other

1- • 1 1  1  r  1 examP!es-

political,  but  are  also  argument  for  practical
discussions,  we  shall  refer  to  the  so-called  con
flicts  between  duty  or  interest,  as  symbolized  in
the  legendary  Titus  Manlius,  when  offered  the
alternative  aut  reipublicae  aut  sui  suorumque
obliviscendi ; — or  to  the  so-called  question  of  the
two  moralities,  private  and  public,  in  support
of  which  the  not  legendary  Camillo  Cavour
said  in  1860,  that  if  he  had  done  in  his  private
interest  what  he  had  done  for  Italy,  he  would


i34 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

have  deserved  the  galleys  ; — or  we  can  refer  to
questions  of  classification,  and  ask  whether  the
kind  of  man  who  is  socially  harmless  should
be  placed  side  by  side  with  the  criminal ; — or
to  those  others,  famous  in  Casuistic,  relating
to  capital  punishment,  homicide,  suicide,  lies,
whether  and  when  they  should  be  permitted,
and  other  similar  questions.  Here,  too,  the
philosopher  will  smilingly  observe  that  duties
and  interests  can  never  be  in  conflict,  because
in  every  given  case  duty  is  always  one  only,
and  interest  is  always  one  only,  that  of  the
given  case  ; — he  will  deny  that  there  is  one  public
and  one  private  morality,  because  in  man,  the
private  person  and  the  citizen,  family  relations,
or  those  of  friendship,  and  those  of  political
life,  are  inseparable  and  indistinguishable  ; — that
every  man  is  bad  and  good,  inoffensive  and
criminal,  and  that  in  the  so-called  criminal
there  must  also  be  the  non-criminal,  if  he  be
given  the  name  of  man  ; — that  every  punish
ment  is  a  punishment  of  death,  that  is,  it  causes
something  to  die,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to
find  a  clear  distinction  between  shutting  a  man
up  in  prison  and  thus  taking  from  him  a  more
or  less  large  slice  of  physical  life,  and  taking
it  from  him  altogether  by  hanging  or  shooting


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  135

him;  —  that  homicide,  as  such,  is  so  little  a
crime  that  in  war  it  is  a  duty  to  commit  it ;
—  that  a  lie,  which  is  silence  as  to  what  one
knows,  is  in  itself  so  innocent  that  no  one  in  the
world,  save  a  foolish  prater,  tells  all  he  knows,
and  that  if  it  be  admitted  that  one  can  and
should  be  silent,  that  is  to  say,  let  others  be
deceived  by  our  silence  (though  this  is  eloquent),
there  is  no  reason  for  not  admitting  that  we
can  also  betray  them  with  speech  (often  less
eloquent),  as  is  done  with  children  in  order
to  send  them  to  bed,  and  with  sick  persons
in  order  to  comfort  them  ; — that,  finally,  culpable
suicide  is  not  the  material  act  of  depriving
oneself  of  physical  life  (a  thing  done  without
incurring  blame,  and  indeed  with  praise  and
glory,  by  those  who  sacrifice  themselves  for
others  in  war,  in  epidemics,  in  dangers  of  all
sorts,  and  by  every  one  who  consumes  his  own
vital  strength  in  a  worthy  cause),  but  the  killing
of  the  moral  life  in  oneself.

In all  these answers to  questions, we  have  Misunder
standing  on
not made our imaginary philosopher commit  the  part  of

philosophers.

any  blunder;  we  have  indeed  put  into  his  mouth
things  that  we  believe  to  be  all  of  them  most
true  and  irrefutable,  because  we  believe  them
ourselves.  And  we  hold  that  it  is  necessary


136 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

to  profess  them  against  those  who  arbitrarily
make  questions  philosophical  whose  terms  are
not  philosophical.  But  when  the  philosopher
offers  those  solutions  to  the  empirical  disputants,
he  behaves  like  him  who,  hearing  a  speech  in
a  language  of  which  he  knows  little,  makes
a  reply  that  is  in  itself  most  reasonable,  but
without  relation  to  the  previous  speech.  The
empiricist,  if  he  have  studied  philosophy,  will
be  able  to  reply,  as  did  King  Theodore,  worn
with  misery,  in  the  old  opdra  bouffe  of  the
Abbe  Casti,  to  him  who  recalls  to  him  the
miseries  suffered  by  Marius,  Themistocles,  and
Darius  :—

Good  my  son,  I  know  them  well,

For  I  have  heard  these  tales  before  ;

But  just  at  present,  truth  to  tell,
'Tis  money  interests  me  more.

Historical  Money, that is, ready money to spend in

significance  of

the  aforesaid definite  situations  historically  given,  in  order  to

questions.  J °

find  one's  way  in  them;  for  all  those  questions
are  without  universal  signification,  but  have
arisen  from  political  and  individual  problems,
to  which  they  do  and  must  belong.  Certainly
they  are  insoluble  in  the  abstract,  and  this  is
the  defect,  or  rather  the  nature  of  empirical
questions,  which,  if  they  admitted  of  rigorous


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 137

solution,  would  not  be  any  longer  empirical.
Therefore  it  is  a  foolish  thing  to  discuss  them
philosophically,  as  is  seen  in  the  conspicuous
example  of  certain  casuistical  enquiries  (the
homicide  of  the  unjust  aggressor,  the  lie,  incest,
etc.)  which  have  been  treated  by  nearly  all  philo
sophers  and  have  been  dragged  about  for
centuries  in  discussions  on  Ethic,  although  every
century  has  left  them  at  the  same  point  as  they
were  in  the  one  preceding.

But  if  it  be  not  possible  to  solve,  we  can
at  least  state  them  in  abstract  terms,  in  the
same  way  as  drill  and  the  sham -fight  are
abstract,  though  certainly  of  use  when  the
battle  is  really  fought.  We  can  and  we  should
bear  in  mind  these  abstract  solutions,  in  order
that  we  may  be  the  better  able  to  solve  a
series  of  concrete  cases,  which  are  not  identical,
certainly,  because  identical  cases  do  not  exist,
but  more  or  less  similar,  and  therefore  require
solutions  that  are  more  or  less  similar. — Can
war  be  done  away  with  ?  This  question  refers
not  to  the  elimination  of  the  category  "war,"
but  to  the  possibility  or  the  reverse  of  avoiding
in  the  twentieth  century  and  in  European
countries  that  empirical  war  which  is  waged
with  cannons  and  cruisers,  that  costs  milliards


138 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

when  it  is  not  waged,  and  tens  of  milliards
when  it  is  waged,  and  out  of  which  the  conqueror
comes  conquered.  It  is  well  understood  that
some  form  of  war  will  always  continue,  because
war  is  inherent  to  life. — Can  private  property
be  done  away  with  ?  This  does  not  mean
to  ask  if  it  be  possible  to  prevent  man  from
taking  possession  of  things,  of  his  food,  or  of
the  material  that  he  requires  for  dress,  or
from  inhabiting  a  house ;  but  whether  it  be
possible  to  alter,  to  the  advantage  of  mankind,
the  proportion  that  now  obtains  between  pro
duction  with  private  capital  and  production  with
collective  capital,  giving  the  preference  to  the

latter.

And  so  on,  for  it  would  be  tiresome  to  con
tinue  to  state  the  historical  problems  that  are
grouped  beneath  each  of  the  recorded  formulae,
which  indeed  are  easily  to  be  found.  Thus  when
we  absolutely  forbid  the  telling  of  lies,  as
indecorous  and  degrading,  as  that  which  severs
the  ties  of  human  community  and  of  reciprocal
faith,  as  the  vice  (said  Herbart)  that  has  the
special  faculty  of  stirring  up  against  it  all  the
five  moral  ideas — justice,  benevolence,  equity,
perfection,  and  internal  liberty — the  intention
is  to  forbid  what  is  usually  called  lying ;  but  it


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 139

is  certainly  not  intended  to  institute  a  speculative
enquiry  as  to  the  relation  between  knowing  and
making  known,  between  the  theoretic  act  of
thought  and  the  practical  act  of  its  communi
cation  to  other  individuals.  Thus  again,  the
prohibition  of  suicide  has  in  view  suicide  through
egoism,  which  is  the  most  frequent  form,  and
it  is  therefore  useless  to  identify  this  with  the
universal  relation  between  death  and  life,  and
with  the  proposition  that  life  is  preserved  by
means  of  death.  Thus  too,  finally,  the  con
ception  of  the  delinquent  has  been  a  beneficent
rectification  of  common  prejudices  relating  to
the  efficacy  of  certain  laws  and  penalties  applied
to  certain  classes  of  individuals  who  are  led  to
crime  as  though  through  unrestrainable  natural
tendency.  For  the  rest,  the  wisdom  of  life  teaches
us  usually  to  take  individuals  as  we  find  them,
with  their  virtues  and  vices,  and  without  claiming
to  set  them  violently  right,  and  to  remake  them
from  top  to  bottom.  We  should  rather  adapt
them  in  the  best  way  possible  for  our  own
ends,  or  for  those  of  society.  This  does  not,
however,  imply  that  they  are  fixed  beings,  and
that  each  of  those  classes  is  heterogeneous  in
respect  of  the  others.  If,  with  the  help  of  a
foolish  positivist  philosophy,  we  make  of  the


PT.


2#. False
deduction  of
the  empirical

from  the

philosophical.


Affirmations
relating  to  the
contingent
changed  into
philosophemes.


140 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

idea  of  the  delinquent  something  necessary,  a
natural  being,  as  it  is  called,  confounding  natural
istic  with  natural  and  incorrectly  hypostasizing
gnoseological  procedure,  then,  and  then  alone,
are  we  right  in  reacting  and  in  denying.

And  yet  those  solutions  of  philosophers,  who
think  that  they  are  solving  empirical  questions  by
annulling  or  ignoring  them,  do  not  yet  represent
the  worst  that  happens  when  philosophy  usurps
the  function  of  empiria.  Such  misunderstanding,
such  hardness  of  hearing,  may  be  proof  of  a
spirit  so  energetically  directed  to  universals  that
it  is  unable  to  see  anything  else,  and  may  even
for  that  reason  possess  some  sympathetic  quality.
The  worst  of  the  worst  is  the  entering  upon
empirical  questions,  not  in  order  to  annul,  but
to  take  sides  in  them  and  to  solve  them  philo
sophically.

This  cannot  be  done,  save  by  supporting
empirical  concepts  with  rigorous  and  philo
sophical  concepts,  confounding  the  one  with  the
other  by  a  trick  of  thought,  and  sometimes  of
words,  making  use  of  synonyms  and  homonyms,
and  pronouncing  in  the  name  of  philosophy
arbitrary  solutions  suggested  only  by  caprice  or
self-interest.  This  is  the  complete  corruption,
alike  of  philosophy  and  of  empiria.  Not  satisfied


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 141

with  making  practical  classes  follow  philosophical
concepts  of  the  practical,  it  is  then  sought  to
deduce  the  former  from  the  latter,  and  behold
them  now  deriving  virtues  and  duties  from
the  universal  concept  of  practical  moral  activity,
by  means  of  the  divisions  of  internal  and
external,  of  part  and  whole,  of  individual  and
society.  These  are  concepts  of  relations,  not
susceptible  of  division,  and  therefore  incapable
of  serving  as  base  for  empirical  divisions.
Or  they  have  recourse  to  the  triad  of  thesis,
antithesis,  and  synthesis,  which  is  the  uni
versal  concrete  itself,  constituting  unity,  and
therefore  incapable  of  serving  as  basis  for
division.  Or  they  will  deduce  the  moral  virtues
according  to  the  three  faculties,  as  virtues  of
representation,  feeling  and  thought,  or  according
to  the  two  of  the  will  and  the  intellect,  as
dianoetic  and  ethical  virtues ;  as  though  the  base
of  the  division  of  the  practical  could  be  that  of
theoretical  and  practical.  Empirical  concepts
become  in  this  way  all  false,  whereas,  in  their
real  nature,  they  are  neither  false  nor  true.

There  is  no  thesis,  however  absurd,  which
cannot  be  defended  with  such  a  method.  All
know  that  there  are  aristocratic  and  demo
cratic  philosophers,  libertarian  and  authoritarian,


i42 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

anarchical  and  organicist,  socialistic  and  anti-
socialistic,  bellicose  and  pacific,  feminist  and
antifeminist ;  and  there  are  others  who  maintain
the  right  to  lie,  the  right  to  suicide,  the  right
to  prostitution,  the  right  to  incest,  to  making
of  themselves  caterers  for  the  scaffold,  the
right  to  the  penalty  of  death.  These  solutions
can  be  morally  and  politically  justified  in  certain
definite  and  particular  cases.  There  are  other
solutions  rationally  unjustifiable  in  the  individual
case  and  put  forward  only  through  passion,
wickedness,  or  prejudice,  but  in  both  hypotheses,
they  are  outside  philosophy  and  within  it  so  false
as  to  be  odious,  as  that  is  odious  which  is  main
tained,  not  by  means  of  intrinsic  reason,  but  by
imposition  altogether  extrinsic  and  external.
Reason  of  the  Such  hatefulness  explains  the  rebellion  against
against  rules,  moral  rules  and  concepts  that  has  often  taken
place.  This,  together  with  that  against  literary
classes  and  rules  and  others  of  the  same  sort,
forms  part  of  the  vast  movement  of  rebellion
against  empirical  or  empiricized  philosophy.  In
truth,  when  those  rules  and  ideas  are  taken  by
themselves,  no  rebellion  is  possible,  because  they
do  not  exert  any  pressure  and  obey  the  orders
of  the  man  who  has  made  them.  But  it  happens
otherwise,  when  they  become  rigid  and  philo-


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 143

sophical,  and  as  is  said,  absolute,  claiming  to
substitute  themselves  as  such  for  philosophy  and
to  provide  a  base  for  judgments.  In  addition
to  this,  from  the  enforced  union  of  philoso-
phemes  with  rules,  has  arisen  the  false  idea  of
philosophizing  about  the  practical  (about  an
Ethic,  for  example),  which  showed  itself  to  be
practical,  or,  as  is  said,  normative.

Philosophy,  by  taking  part  in  empirical  ques-  Limits  between

.  philosophy  and

tions,  ruins  both  itself  and  them,  because  it
loses  the  serenity,  the  dignity,  and  the  utility
that  are  intrinsic  to  it.  In  like  manner,  the
empirical  disciplines  ruin  themselves  and  philo
sophy  when  they  claim  to  philosophize  with
their  classes,  which  are  not  categories,  with
their  pseudo-concepts,  which  are  not  concepts,
with  their  generalia,  which  are  not  universalia.
Here  too,  safety  lies  in  distinction  :  the  observa
tion  of  distinction  alone  makes  possible  beneficent
co-operation.


IX

HISTORICAL ANNOTATIONS

A  HISTORY  of  the  general  theories  relating  to
the  practical  activity  is  still  to  write,  although
we  have  several  relating  to  particular  theories
of  Ethic.  The  mode  in  which  such  a  historical
narration  should  be  conducted  results  from  the
historical  explanations  themselves,  which  we  have
exposed  and  shall  continue  to  expose.  Here  we
cannot  even  offer  a  rapid  summary.  We  shall
limit  ourselves  to  making  a  few  remarks  on
the  subject,  and  we  shall  give  some  historical
account  of  certain  problems  of  the  philosophy
of  the  practical,  that  have  had,  to  some  extent,
profound  treatment,  or  have  at  least  been  suffi
ciently  discussed  (for  not  a  few  others  are  virgin,
or  almost  so),  with  the  sole  object  of  serving  as
a  guide.
/.  Distinction  I.  A  first  warning  to  bear  in  mind  concerns

between

history  of  the  the  historical  inquiry  as  to  the  varying  recog-
principie  and  nitiOH  of,  or  failure  to  recognize  the  practical
lthertra™fr°m  reason  m  respect  to  the  other  forms  of  the  spirit.

cendental.  144


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 145

This  series  of  thoughts  is  not  to  be  confounded
with  that  other  historical  process,  so  long  and
so  intricate,  which  had  its  origin  in  the  debate
between  St.  Augustine  and  Pelagius  (or  per
haps  rather  in  the  opposition  between  Platonic
mysticism  and  Aristotelian  humanism),  and
through  analogous  debates,  arising  afresh  during
the  Middle  Ages  and  onward  to  modern  times,
culminating  in  the  strife  for  the  independence
of  morality  and  the  practical  reason  in  general
from  religion,  which  took  place  in  the  seventeenth
century.  The  account  of  the  various  incidents
of  that  debate  perhaps  occupies  a  larger  space
and  a  different  place  in  the  special  histories  of
Ethic  than  it  deserves.  For  it  is  not  concerned
with  an  entirely  ethical  or  practical  problem,  but
with  that  general  philosophical  movement  which
produced  the  progressive  elimination  of  the  tran
scendental  and  founded  the  immanentistic  con
sideration  of  the  real :  a  necessary  condition  for
the  conceivability  of  philosophy  itself.  In  this
lay  the  great  importance  of  the  affirmation  that
the  practical  and  the  moral  spirit  of  man  reveals
itself  as  constant  in  the  midst  of  the  most  various
and  opposed  religious  beliefs.  This  amounts  to
saying  that  it  is  independent  of  religion  and
knowable  naturally  and  humanly,  without  the


146 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

necessity  of  having  recourse  to  the  authority  of
revelation  and  of  making  shipwreck  in  mystery.
It  is  customary  to  say  that  in  the  seventeenth
century  free-thought  definitely  won  the  victory
upon  the  point  most  ardently  contested,  and
in  this  connection  are  recorded  the  names  of
Charron,  Grotius,  Spinoza,  and  Pierre  Bayle.
To  these  could  be  added  that  of  G.  B.  Vico,
who  conceived  of  Providence  as  immanent  and
considered  that  morality  arose  from  "a  sense
common  to  all  men,"  from  a  judgment  "without
any  sort  of  reflection,"  foundation  of  the  natural
rights  of  man.  But  should  the  word  ''definite"
be  really  used  here?  Whenever  the  idea  of
the  transcendental  reappears,  even  in  the  timid
form  of  agnosticism,  the  autonomy  of  the  practical
reason  is  denied,  or  at  least  again  put  in  doubt
(and  with  it  that  of  the  whole  human  spirit).

Two  examples  only  of  this  must  suffice,  but
they  are  conspicuous.  Emmanuel  Kant,  not
having  been  able  to  surpass  the  mystery  that
he  had  formulated — the  principle  of  the  practical
reason — the  categoric  imperative  remained  sus
pended  in  the  void,  and  in  that  void  it  invokes
in  relation  to  itself  faith  in  a  personal  God
and  in  a  transcendental  future  life,  which  shall
conciliate  virtue  and  happiness,  at  variance  in


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 147

the  life  lived  upon  earth.  This  scrap  of  mystery
which  Kant  allowed  to  remain  in  his  system,
suffices  to  obscure  that  autonomy  of  the  practical
reason  and  that  concept  of  spiritual  productivity
which  he  had  affirmed  with  so  much  energy.
Another  example,  perhaps  even  more  character
istic,  is  furnished  by  the  Ethic  that  was  pre
valent  for  three  centuries  in  the  English  School.
It  was  a  utilitarian  Ethic  and  therefore  incapable
of  truly  founding  moral  reason.  What  was  the
consequence  of  that  incapacity  when  recognized
as  such?  Nothing  but  the  renewed  introduction
of  mystery,  the  explanation  obtained  by  means
of  the  idea  of  a  personal  God,  assuming  that
most  extravagant  form  known  as  "  theological
utilitarianism."  By  this  theory,  moral  actions
that  in  this  life  do  not  receive  adequate  recom
pense  and  seem  to  be  unjustified  from  the  utili
tarian  point  of  view,  are  rewarded  by  God  in
another  life,  thus  finding  their  economic  motive
for  being  carried  out  in  the  present  life.  In
our  theoretic  treatment  of  the  subject,  we  do  not
concern  ourselves  with  the  controversy,  already
mooted  in  the  Eutyphron,  as  to  whether  sanctity
be  loved  by  the  gods  as  sanctity,  or  whether  it  be
sanctity  because  it  is  beloved  by  the  gods l — a

1  Eutyphron>  10.


148 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

question  that  in  the  Middle  Ages  was  transformed
into  that  other  one,  differently  solved  by  Abelard,
Thomas  Aquinas,  Duns  Scotus :  whether  the
moral  law  be  given  by  divine  decree,  or  whether
the  idea  of  God  does  not  of  necessity  coincide
with  the  idea  of  moral  law.  We  do  not  treat
of  this,  since  we  are  qccupied  with  the  practical,
not  with  theology  or  antitheology,  and  consider
that  the  contest  between  philosophy  and  theology
has  been  already  solved  and  surpassed  in  the
theory  of  knowledge.  For  the  same  reason,  it
seems  to  us  that  we  should  not  trace  its  history
in  the  History  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Practical.1
//.  Thedis-  II.  The  true  and  proper  history  of  the  practical

tine 't 'ion  of  the

practical  from  principle,  conceived  as  autonomous,  and  of  the

the  theoretical.

problem  concerning  the  identity  or  the  distinc
tion  of  the  practical  from  theory,  has  a  different
line  of  development.  As  a  rule  this  problem
is  referred  back  to  the  celebrated  sayings  of
Socrates,  that  virtue  is  knowledge  and  vice
ignorance,  and  to  the  corrections  that  Aristotle,
while  accepting,  proposes  in  them,  when  he
takes  note  of  the  part  that  belongs  to  the  non-
cognoscitive  element.  But,  as  often  happens,

1  The  history  of  the  enfranchising  of  Ethic  from  Religion  has  been  done
with  especial  care  by  Jodl,  Gesch.  d.  Ethik  als  philos.  Wissensch.  vol.  I2.
(Stuttgart  — Berlin,  1906).  For  Vico,  cf.  my  book,  The  Philosophy  of
G.  B.  Vico  (Bari,  1911).


ACTIVITY IN  GENERAL 149

those  sayings  and  those  corrections  have  been
taken  as  being  more  profound  than  they
genuinely  were  and  could  be.  This,  if  it  have
not  aided  the  exactness  of  historical  interpreta
tion,  has  nevertheless  stimulated  and  fecundated
thought.  On  reading  without  prejudice  the
parts  of  the  Memorabilia,  of  the  Platonic
dialogues,  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics,  and  of
the  Magna  Moralia  that  relate  to  it,  it  appears
evident  that  what  is  treated  of  in  them  is  the
altogether  empirical  question  of  the  importance
that  mental  development  has  for  practical  life,
and  whether  knowledge  suffices  for  this,  or
natural  dispositions  and  discipline  of  the  passions
be  not  also  necessary.  Aristotle  replied  to
Socrates,  who  had  insisted  upon  the  element
of  knowing,  conceiving  virtue  as  knowledge
(XOYO?),  by  modifying  the  statement  with  the
assertion  that  virtue  is  not  indeed  simply
knowledge,  but  is  with  knowledge  (/xera  ^0701;).
In  these  very  ingenuous  considerations  is  to  be
found  at  the  most  implicitly,  but  certainly  not
explicitly,  the  problem  that  was  only  stated
later  on ;  and  it  would  be  rash  to  classify
Socrates  as  an  intellectualist  and  Aristotle  as  a
voluntarist.  It  is  certain  that  the  Aristotelian
philosophy,  in  accordance  with  good  sense,


150 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

preserved  the  distinction  between  the  two  forms
of  the  spirit,  the  theoretical  and  the  practical,
the  reason  and  the  will,  a  distinction  that  has
also  passed  into  the  scholastic  philosophy  (ratio
cognoscibilis,  ratio  appetibilis)  and  into  that  of  the
Renaissance.  But  it  remained  always  vague,
sometimes  brought  into  prominence,  some
times,  on  the  other  hand,  attenuated.  Almost
dissipated  in  those  who  conceive  the  principles
of  the  practical  as  something  similar  or  ana
logous  to  mathematical  truths  (Cudworth,  Clarke,
Wollaston,  etc.),  it  always  reaffirms  itself  when
importance  is  given  to  the  affections  and
passions,  as  is  the  case  with  many  thinkers
of  the  seventeenth  century  (Bacon,  Descartes,
Spinoza,  Vico) ;  and  the  doctrines  of  the
Scottish  school  of  sensationalists  contributed
not  a  little  to  keep  it  alive.

It  seems  indubitable  that  Emmanuel  Kant  is
to  be  connected  to  some  extent  rather  with  this
last  tradition  than  with  that  of  the  intellectualists  :
with  Kant  the  practical  reason  possessed  a
domain  of  its  own  altogether  distinct  from  and
almost  antithetical  to  the  domain  of  the  theo
retical.  But  it  is  erroneous  to  present  the
successors  of  Kant  as  forgetful  of  the  practical
reason  and  as  resolving  every  spiritual  manifesta-


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL  151

tion  in  the  theoretical  form  of  the  spirit.  For
instance,  Fichte,  who  had  a  very  strong  con
sciousness  of  the  peculiarity  of  the  practical
activity,  did  not  do  this,  nor  did  Hegel,  though
as  commonly  as  unjustly  accused  of  being  a
cold  intellectualist.  It  should  suffice  to  recall
how  Hegel  always  opposed  that  view  of  Plato
and  of  other  thinkers  (for  example  Campanella)
who  assigned  the  government  of  the  State  to
philosophers,  a  view  in  which  the  resolution  of
the  practical  into  the  theoretical  spirit  and  of
the  will  into  knowledge  seemed  to  become
concrete.  For  Hegel,  on  the  contrary,  the
domain  of  history  is  different  from  that  of
philosophy ;  history  is  indeed  the  idea,  but  the
idea  that  shows  itself  in  a  natural  and  unconscious
manner,  and  philosophical  genius  is  not  political
genius.  Nor  must  we  forget  the  importance
that  he  accorded  to  passion,  to  custom,  to  what
is  called  the  heart  and  is  wont  to  be  opposed
to  the  brain  and  to  argument.  For  Hegel,
the  will  is  not  thought,  but  a  special  kind  of
thought,  that  is  to  say,  thought  which  trans
lates  itself  into  existence,  the  impulse  to  give
oneself  existence.  Whereas  in  the  theoretical
process,  the  spirit  takes  possession  of  the  object
and  makes  it  its  own  by  thinking,  that  is


152 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

by  universalizing  it,  in  the  practical  process  a
difference  is  also  stated  and  determined,  which
on  the  other  hand  consists  of  its  own  determina
tions  and  ends.  The  theoretical  is  contained  in
the  practical,  since  there  cannot  be  will  without
intelligence ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the
theoretical  contains  the  practical,  since  to  think
is  also  to  act.  Hegel,  in  short,  distinguishes  the
practical  from  the  theoretical  and  unifies  them,
while  retaining  the  distinction.1  What  is  not
perhaps  altogether  clear  to  him,  notwithstand
ing  his  view  that  history  is  the  idea  in  a
natural  and  unconscious  mode,  is  the  unreflective
character  of  willing.  To  have  given  relief  to
this  character,  although  in  the  exaggerated  and
inacceptable  form  of  the  will  as  blind  and  uncon
scious,  is  the  merit  of  Arthur  Schopenhauer,
who  is  indeed  far  from  standing  alone  in  assign
ing  an  eminent  place  to  the  will,  but  connects
himself  with  all  the  Kantian  and  post-Kantian
philosophy,  and  in  the  first  place  with  Fichte
and  Schelling.
///.  The  III.  The  mixture  of  philosophical  concepts

mixtures  of

philosophy  of with  empirical  concepts  and  with  rules  is  a  vice

the  practical

ati?ndescrip~ common  to  nearly  all  treatises  of  the  Philosophy
of the practical, beginning with the Nico-

1  Phil.  d.  Rechts,  §  4,  Zus.  ;  Gesch.  d.  Philos.  ii.  pp.  66,  169.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 153

machean  Ethic,  which,  although  in  certain  places
loftily  philosophical,  should  be  placed  in  greater
part  rather  at  the  head  of  the  history  of  the  works
of  the  moralists  and  of  writers  on  the  practical,
than  of  Ethic.  The  author  himself  recognized
this  practical  character  when  he  wrote,
Trepl  TWV  TTpaKT&v  \0709  TVTTO)  Kal  ovtc  a/cpifta)?  o
\eyeo-0ai.1  And  in  this  appears  the  prejudice  that
practical  philosophy  should  be  occupied  with  the
practical  :  eVet  ovv  fj  irapovaa  Trpay/jLareia  ov  Oecopias
eveicd  eaTiv  WGirep  al  a\\at,  (ou  jap  LVO,  elSw/Aev  TL
€(mv  TI  aperrj  (TKeTTTO/jieOa  aXX'  lv*  ajaOol  ywd)/jie6a,
eVel  ovftev  av  r}V  o<f>e\os  avr^?),  icr\.2  Even  the
greatest  thinkers  of  modern  times  are  not  exempt
from  that  characteristic.  Emmanuel  Kant,  while
recognizing  that  the  division  and  treatment  of
duties  do  not  belong  to  the  Critique  of  the
Sciences  (he  should  therefore  have  excluded
them  from  philosophy,  which  is  always  criticism),
finally  relegates  them  to  what  he  calls  the
"  system "  (and  is  in  truth  the  anti-systematic) 3
and  writes  the  Metaphysic  of  Customs,  divided  into
the  doctrines  of  law  and  of  the  virtues.  Fichte,
in  his  System  of  Ethic,  makes  the  applied  follow
the  theoretical  part.  Hegel  gives  the  doctrine

1  Eth.  Nicom.  1 103.  2  See  above.

3  Kritik  d,  prakt. Vern.,  ed.  Kirchmann,  pp.  7-8.


i54 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

of  duties  in  the  third  part  of  his  Philosophy  of
Law,  which  is  entitled  Of  Ethicity  (Sittlickkeit).
The  Ethic  of  Herbart  is  intrinsically  descriptive,
for  the  author  himself  professed  to  wish  simply
"to  describe  the  ideal  of  virtue,"1  and  the  five
practical  ideas  that  he  takes  as  principles  were
at  bottom  nothing  but  classes  of  virtue  refined
into  ideas.  Treatises  of  to-day  are  overflowing
with  empirical  elements,  as  can  be  seen  from
those  in  English  by  Ladd  and  Seth,  and  by  those
in  German  of  Paulsen,  Wundt,  and  Cathrein.
Sometimes  a  more  concrete  historical  element
is  coupled  in  those  treatises  with  the  empirical
classification  of  practical  examples'and  institutions:
as,  for  instance,  in  Cathrein,  a  modernized  Jesuit,
who  exposes  at  length  the  moral  views,  not  only
of  civilized  people,  ancient  and  modern,  but  also
of  the  savages  of  Oceania,  of  Asia,  of  Cochin
China,  of  the  Hottentots  and  Boschimans,  of  the
Botocudis,  and  so  on.  Questions  of  casuistry  also
survive  in  these  treatises,  such  as  whether  and  on
what  occasions  it  is  permissible  to  tell  a  lie  ;  this
question  is  notably  represented  in  the  history
of  ideas,  from  the  Socrates  of  the  Memorabilia
to  Kant  and  Schopenhauer.2  Kant  added

1  Allg.  prakt.  Phil.,  ed.  Hartenstein,  p.  107.

2  Memor.  iv.,  c.  2,  §§  14-16.  Schopenhauer  also  exhaustively,  Grundl.
d.  Moral,  in  Werke,  ed.  Grisebach,  iii.  pp.  603-607.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 155

questions  of  casuistry  to  the  various  sections
of  the  Mctaphysic  of  Customs,  as  scholia  to
the  system  and  examples  of  the  way  in  which
the  truth  of  particular  questions  should  be
sought.1

But  the  efforts  of  ancient  and  modern  philo-  vain  attempts

at  definitions

sophers  rigorously  to  define  empirical  concepts  of  empirical
afford  more  interest  than  the  external  form  of
treatment,  as  do  their  efforts  to  modify  or  to
simplify,  or  indeed  finally  to  deduce  them
rationally.  The  Platonic  dialogues,  such  as  the
Charmides,  the  Lachetes,  the  Protagoras,  are
most  instructive  in  this  respect.  Here  it  is
sought  to  define  sophrosune,  andreia  and  the
other  virtues,  without  arriving  at  any  precise
result,  or  rather  arriving  at  the  contradictory  one,
that  each  of  these  virtues  is  the  whole  of  virtue,
whereas  it  should  only  be  a  part  of  it.  In  the
Republic  is  sought  the  relation  of  the  four
virtues,  or  rather  of  three  of  them,  prudence,
temperance,  and  fortitude,  with  justice,  which
forms  as  it  were  the  foundation  and  unity  of  the
whole.  From  such  discussions  arose  the  affirma
tion,  to  be  found  also  in  Cicero,  that  the
virtues  are  inseparable  from  one  another :
virtutes  ita  copulatae  connexaeque  sitnt,  ut  omnes

1  Metaphys.  d.  Sitten,  ed.  Kirchmann,  p.  248.


156 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

participes  sint,  nee  alia  ab  alia  possit  separari.1
The  difficulty  of  the  Platonic  inquiry  is  renewed
with  all  those  who  have  given  definitions  of  the
virtues  and  of  the  other  empirical  concepts,
because,  when  they  have  achieved  with  much
labour  a  definition  which  appears  satisfactory,
it  is  afterwards  always  found  to  be  too  narrow
or  too  wide.  Thus  the  definition  given  by
Kant  and  by  others  (Fichte,  Schopenhauer)
of  egoism,  consisting  in  their  view,  of  con
sidering  other  individuals  as  means  and  not
ends,  is  the  definition,  not  of  egoism,  but  of  any
form  of  immorality  which  debases  the  Spirit  that
should  be  the  end,  by  means  of  its  own
caprices.  The  same  is  to  be  said  of  the  defini
tions  given  by  Fichte  as  to  the  duties  inherent
to  this  or  that  condition  and  state  :  the  duties,  for
instance,  of  the  learned,  who  should  love  truth,
communicate  it  to  others,  rectify  errors,  promote
culture,2  and  so  on.  These  are  all  things  that
form  part  of  the  duty,  not  only  of  the  learned,
but  of  every  man.  The  simplifiers  are  not  more
fortunate  in  their  attempts  to  reduce  the  number
of  empirical  concepts,  for  the  concepts  excluded
by  them  have  neither  more  nor  less  right  to

1  De  Finibus,  v,  c.  23.
2  System  der  Sittenkhre,  §  29,  in  Werke,  iv.  346-347.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 157

recognition  than  the  others  that  they  have
accepted.  Schopenhauer,  for  instance,  when  he
rejects  the  class  of  duties  toward  oneself,1  should
also  reject  that  of  duties  toward  others.  For
others  and  ourselves  are  correlative  terms,  and
we  cannot  be  benevolent  to  others  and  malevolent
to  ourselves,  just  to  others  and  unjust  to  our
selves.  If  this  be  met  with  the  objection  that
the  empirical  self  is  not  the  object  of  duties,  we
must  reply  that  neither  are  the  empirical  "  others,"
but  only  that  Spirit  which  is  in  all  and  constitutes
all.  In  reacting  against  these  unifiers  and
simplifiers,  other  philosophers  (as  for  example
Herbart)  have  maintained  the  indeducibility  of
the  virtues  or  duties  from  a  single  principle,
which  means  that  they  have  received  those  con
cepts  into  their  philosophy  atomistically,  and  left
them  there  as  something  not  digested  and  not
digestible,  an  extraneous  element.  If  they  had
openly  admitted  this  and  drawn  from  it  the
legitimate  consequence,  and  for  that  reason
excluded  those  concepts  from  philosophy,  they
would  really  have  contributed  toward  simplifying
and  unifying,  by  making  it  homogeneous.  But
Herbart,  if  he  have  no  other  merit,  has  at  any  rate
declared  that  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  is  not

1  Grundl.  d.  Moral,  ed.,  cit.,  iii.  pp.  506-508.


158 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

capable  of  solving  all  the  problems  that  occur  in
life,  and  that  we  must  always  rely  upon  the
answer  of  the  heart,  upon  the  delicacy  of  in
dividual  tact.  And,  therefore,  while  Kant  still
preserved  casuistic  questions  in  Ethic  and  pro
fessed  to  solve  them  rationally,  Herbart  showed
that  they  lack  the  determinations  that  are  of
true  importance  in  real  cases,  and  that  such
questions  are  therefore  as  a  rule  either  without
meaning  or  insoluble  (entweder  gar  keiner  Fragen,
oder  im  Allgemein  unaufloslichY
Attempts  at  As  concerns  the  attempt  to  connect  and  to

deduction.

deduct  the  empirical  part  of  treatises  from  the
philosophical,  the  first  example  is  the  Aristotelian
division  of  the  virtues  into  the  dianoetic  and
ethic,  with  their  consequent  determination  by
means  of  the  concept  of  mediacy  (/-teo-or???)  be
tween  two  extremes.  But  this  Aristotelian
method,  which  was  continued  by  the  Scholastics,
seemed  to  others  (as  for  example  Schleiermacher)
nothing  but  "a  heap  of  virtues,"  without  any
rule  and  without  any  certainty  ;  hence  he  made
constant  attempts  at  new  classifications  and  new
deductions.  Kant  recognized  that  the  ethical
obligation,  that  is,  respect  for  the  law,  is  some
thing  unique  and  indivisible,  and  that  to  attain

1  Allg.  prakt.  Philos.,  ed.  Hartenstein,  pp.  29-30.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 159

from  that  to  duties  or  ethica  officia,  which  are
many,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  the  considera
tion  of  objects.1  Here  he  should  have  stopped,
because  objects  have  infinite  determinations,  are
infinite.  Hence  the  enumeration,  division  and
deduction  of  duties,  should  be  simply  pronounced
impossible.  Instead  of  doing  this,  he  passed  at
a  bound,  how  far  logical  we  know  not,  from  the
general  ethical  obligation,  to  the  division  of  duties
into  two  great  classes :  of  man  toward  man,  and
of  man  toward  beings  that  are  not  human.  He
divided  the  first  into  duties  toward  oneself  and
duties  toward  other  men,  the  second  into  that  of
the  duties  toward  beings  beneath  man  (animals)
and  those  toward  beings  above  him  (God).2  The
strangeness  of  these  divisions,  which  sometimes
verge  on  the  comic,  can  already  be  seen,  though
abridged,  in  the  first  class  of  the  duties  toward
oneself,  subdivided  in  its  turn  into  duties  toward
oneself  as  an  animal  or  physical  being,  and  duties
toward  oneself  as  a  moral  being ;  as  though
human  duties  are  not  always  to  be  referred  to
spirituality  and  can  ever  concern  physicality  or
animality.  In  their  first  aspect  they  receive  a
tripartite  division,  into  the  duty  of  self-preserva-

1  Metaphys.  d.  Sitten,  pp.  247-248.
2  Op.  cit.  p.  251.


160 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

tion,  which  is  violated  by  suicide,  by  allowing
oneself  to  be  castrated  (in  order  to  sing  soprano,
as  used  to  be  done  at  that  time  at  the  San
Carlo  of  Naples  and  at  the  Opera  of  Berlin),
by  allowing  a  healthy  tooth  to  be  pulled  out  in
order  to  sell  it  (as  does  poor  Fantine  in  the
story  of  the  Mistrables) ;  into  the  duty  of  pre
serving  the  species  (violation  :  unnatural  use  of
the  sexual  impulse) ; — into  the  duty  of  preserving
the  use  of  one's  own  strength  (violation :  gluttony).
The  duty  of  preserving  the  dignity  of  man  is
contained  beneath  the  second  heading  (violation,
lying,  covetousness,  abjection,  etc.1).  The  fact
is  that  the  duty  of  preserving  the  dignity  of  man
comprises  in  itself,  not  only  the  class  that  stands
first,  of  duties  toward  oneself,  but  also  all  the  other
duties  toward  men,  animals,  or  gods.  Fichte  feels
the  difficulty,  because  he  sees  that  conscience
is  that  which  determines  our  duty  on  each
occasion  ;  but  he  adds  :  "  This  is  not  enough  for
science :  either  we  must  be  able  to  determine
a  priori  that  which  our  conscience  will  affirm  in
universal,  or  we  must  admit  that  an  Ethic,  as
a  pure  applied  science,  is  impossible."2  The
second  horn  of  the  dilemma  was  precisely  that

1  Metaphys.  d.  Sitten,  p.  255  sgq.
2  System  d.  Sittenlehre,  pp.  208.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 161

of  the  truth,  but  Fichte,  like  Kant,  bowed  to  the
supreme  power  of  tradition  and  clung  to  the  first.
He  divides  duties  into  mediate  and  conditioned
(toward  oneself)  and  immediate  and  unconditioned
(toward  others),  and  into  general  and  special
(those  of  various  states  and  conditions),  deducing
from  this  the  fourfold  division,  resulting  from  the
meeting  of  general  conditioned  duties,  particular
conditioned,  general  unconditioned,  and  particular
unconditioned.  Hegel,  who  in  his  youthful  writ
ings  had  denied  absolute  value  to  the  virtues,
and  consequently  the  possibility  of  collisions
between  the  virtues  (for  example,  in  the  Life
of  Jesus,  recently  published),  well  defines  the
altogether  empirical  character  of  that  treatise,
calling  it,  by  reason  of  its  natural  element  and
of  the  quantitive  considerations  upon  which  it  is
founded,  "  a  natural  history  of  the  spiritual  world  "
(eine  geistige  Naturgeschichte] ;  but  since  he  did
not  perceive  the  identity  of  the  concept  of  duty
with  that  of  virtue,  he  believes  in  the  possibility
of  a  philosophical  theory  of  duties.1  This  is
developed  by  him,  as  has  been  said,  in  the
section  of  Ethicity,  applying  to  it  the  dialectical
rhythm  proper  to  the  philosophical  universal,
and  distinguishing  in  it  three  moments :  of  the

1  Philos.  d.  Rechts,  §§  148,  150.

M


i62 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

immediate  natural  spirit,  which  is  the  family,
of  the  dissension  from  which  arises  civil  society,
and  of  conciliation,  whence  arises  the  State.
But  notwithstanding  the  external  dialectical
form,  there  is  to  be  found  in  all  this  section  of
the  Ethicity  at  every  point,  not  so  much  the
philosopher  properly  so-called,  as  the  historian
who  describes  and  narrates,  the  acute  and  well-
balanced  politician  and  moralist.  The  merit
of  such  a  treatise  resides  precisely,  therefore,
in  the  abhorrence  of  a  sham  philosophy ;  with
but  slight  modifications  of  literary  form,  it  could
be  developed  into  a  series  of  excellent  historico-
political  essays.  Certain  of  the  propositions  of
the  writing  on  Natural  Law  (i  802-3) T  would
tend  to  show  that  Hegel  inclined  to  look  upon
the  treatment  of  duties  and  institutions  as  nothing
more  than  a  provisional  classification  of  historical
and  changeable  material,  a  thought  that  is  in  any
case  suggested  by  his  whole  system.  Schleier-
macher  was  among  the  philosophers  of  that  time
who  laboured,  perhaps,  with  the  greatest  tenacity
upon  the  empirical  classes,  with  a  view  to  re
ducing  them  to  philosophical  form ;  but  the
results  were  unhappy,  only  revealing,  by  their
contradictions  persisting  after  such  efforts,  the

1 Werke,  i.  323-423.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 163

impossibility  of  the  task.  In  fact,  Schleier-
macher  sees  and  does  not  see  the  unity  of  the
three  spheres  of  things  good,  of  duties,  and  of
virtues  ;  hence  they  appeared  to  him  to  be  three
aspects  of  the  same  object,  and  he  strangely
placed  them  in  analogical  connection  with  three
spheres  of  the  natural  world,  the  mechanical,
the  chemical,  and  the  organic.  He,  too,  starting
from  a  double  division  and  a  double  antithesis,
ideal  and  temporal,  of  knowledge  and  exposition
(Darstellen),  arrived  at  a  quadruple  division  of
the  virtues,  into  wisdom  and  love,  discretion  and
perseverance,  which  seemed  to  him  to  coincide
with  the  four  Platonic  virtues,  of  ^>p6vrjcr^,
Si/caioavvrj,  aw^poavvij,  and  dvbpeia,  or  with  the  four
cardinal  virtues  derived  from  them,  to  which
would  correspond  the  four  duties :  of  right,
of  vocation,  of  love,  and  of  conscience.1  After
this,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  proceed  to
enumerate  the  ethical  systems  of  contemporary
philosophy,  noteworthy  neither  for  the  ingenuity
of  their  artificial  deductions  nor  for  the  grandeur
of  their  paradoxes.2

IV.  The  very  copious  empirical  element  that  /r.

questions.

fills  the  books  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical

1  In  the  Entwurf  e.  Systems  d.  Sittenlehrc  (in  Werke,  sec.  iii.  vol.  v.),
and  cf.  the  collected  writings  in  Werke,  iii.  I.

3  For  example,  F.  Paulsen,  System  der  Ethik,  Leipzig,  1906.


1 64  PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL  FT.
and  the  attempt  to  treat  it  philosophically  have
also  had  the  injurious  effect  of  distracting  their
authors  from  entering  deeply  into  the  problems
of  true  and  proper  philosophy,  to  which  the
practical  activity  gives  rise.  Thus  a  history  of
the  aforesaid  aberrations  would  be  as  rich  as
a  history  of  the  speculation  as  to  the  will  would
be  poor.  The  problem  of  the  theoretic  element
in  the  volitional  act,  or  of  the  theoretic  phase
of  deliberation,  has  not  been  developed  as  it
deserved,  and  as  the  important  pages  of  the
third  and  seventh  books  of  the  Ethica  Nico-
machea  seemed  to  augur.  The  question,  too,
of  the  priority  of  the  will  over  the  concepts  of
the  useful  and  of  the  good  and  of  the  practical
judgments,  is  hardly  touched  by  a  philosopher
here  and  there,  and  the  Herbartian  theory  of
practical  judgments  failed  to  excite  any  fervour
of  examination,  criticism,  or  opposition.  The
concept  of  good  will  and  of  good  intention,  to
which  Kant  gave  a  prominent  place,  is  not
discussed  profoundly,  save  by  Hegel,  who  goes
deeply  into  the  difficult  problems  of  abstract  and
concrete  intention  in  the  introduction  and  in  the
second  section  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law.  The
other  problem,  as  to  the  possibility  or  impossi
bility  of  willing  without  full  knowledge,  was


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 165

not adequately treated after Descartes and
Spinoza.

In Descartes  are  also  to  be  found  the  most  The  practical

nature  of  error m

acute  observations  as  to  the  practical  nature  of
error.  After  having  stated  that  it  is  impossible
that  God  should  have  given  to  man  any  faculty
that  was  not  perfect  of  its  kind,  he  asks  himself:
"  D'ou  est-ce  done  que  naissent  mes  erreurs?
Cest  a  savoir,  de  cela  seul  que  la  volonte',  ttant
beaucoup  plus  ample  et  plus  e'tendue  que  lentende-
ment,  je  ne  la  contiens  pas  dans  les  memes  limites,
mais  que  je  Intends  aussi  aux  choses  que  je
nentends  pas  ;  auxquelles  ttant  de  soi  indifferent e,
elle  sdgare  fort  aisdment,  et  choisit  le  faux  pour
le  vrai  et  le  mal  pour  le  bien :  ce  qui  fait  que  je
me  trompe  et  je  peche"  Errors  arise  from  the
concourse  of  two  causes,  the  faculty  of  knowing  .
and  the  faculty  of  choice:  " car  pour  Pentendc-
ment  seul  je  n  assure  ni  ne  nie  aucune  chose,
mais  je  concois  seulement  les  idtes  des  choses  que
je  puis  assurer  ou  nier" 1  For  Descartes  the
affirmation  was  an  act  of  the  will,  and  here
perhaps  lies  his  mistake  and  the  mistake  of
those  who  have  followed  him  in  this  theory
(Rosmini  for  example) ;  that  is  to  say,  they  have
mistaken  the  affirmation,  which  is  theoretical,

1  Mtdit.  iv.  ;  and  Rlponses  aux  3™"  et  aux  5™'  object.


166 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PI.

for  the  communication,  which  is  practical,  or  they
have  taken  as  being  of  the  same  degree  the
general  will  that  is  in  affirmation  through  the
unity  of  the  spirit,  and  the  particular  will  that
is  in  error.  Spinoza  opposes  Descartes'  theory
of  error,  but  in  conformity  with  the  deter
ministic  nature  of  his  philosophy,  his  criticism
relates  only  to  the  point  as  to  whether  the  will
can  be  the  cause  of  error  when  it  is  not  more
than  a  mere  abstraction  or  ens  rationis ;  hence
errors  or  the  p articular es  volitiones  can  be  deter
mined,  not  indeed  by  the  will  and  by  liberty,
but  a  causis  externis.1  The  consciousness  of
the  introduction  of  the  will  into  the  theoretical
spirit  as  production  of  error  has  been  affirmed
by  Schleiermacher  as  well  as  by  Rosmini : 2  "It
is  the  will  (he  writes)  that  conceals  men  from
themselves  :  the  judgment  cannot  err  if  it  turn
its  gaze  really  upon  itself."3  Baader  frankly
reduced  incredulity  to  ill-will  and  moral  cor
ruption.4

Practical  taste. As to the concept of an immediate form
of  practical discrimination, independent of  the


1  Epist.  in  Opera>  ed.  Gfrorer,  p.  523.

2  Cf., among other places, Logica, §§  p, 278 sq.  ; FiL d. diritto
(Napoli,  1844),  I.  p.  50.

3  Afonologen,  in  Werke,  i.  363.

4  Cf.  Jodl,  Gesch.  d.  Eth.  ii.  pp.  131-132.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 167

intellectual  judgment,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that
the  faculty  of  taste  in  Gracian  and  in  other
thinkers  of  the  seventeenth  century l  has  a  prac
tical  rather  than  a  theoretical  origin,  and  that  the
sentimentalists  of  Ethic  (Shaftesbury,  Hutcheson,
and  others)  were  led  to  posit  a  moral  tact  or
sense.  Before  Herbart  talked  of  a  moral  taste
(sittlicher  Geschmack*)  Jacobi,  who  saw  better
than  others  the  analogy  between  practical  and
aesthetic  facts,  had  written :  "  The  science  of
the  good,  like  the  science  of  the  beautiful,  is
subject  to  the  condition  of  taste,  without  which
nothing  can  be  decided,  and  beyond  which
nothing  can  be  carried.  The  taste  for  the  good,
like  that  for  the  beautiful,  is  formed  by  means
of  models  of  excellence,  and  original  acts  are
always  the  work  of  genius.  By  means  of  genius,
nature  gives  laws  to  art,  both  as  regards  the
good  and  the  beautiful.  Both  are  liberal  arts  ;
they  do  not  allow  themselves  to  be  lowered  to
the  level  of  mechanical  arts  and  placed  at  the
service  of  industry."  3

V.  With the mention of a few facts and  v.  The
names,  it  can  be  proved  that  the  function  of  the  feeling.
term "  feeling " in the history of  philosophy

1  Estelica  4,  p.  222.

2  Allg.  pract.  Phil.  pp.  9-22.

3  Woldemar  (1779,  1794-95),  in  Werke,  v.  p.  78.


1 68 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

has  been  as  shown  above.  We  have  already
said  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  practical  form
has  been  asserted  by  the  use  of  the  word  "  feel
ing  "  or  similar  denominations  ("moral  sense,"
"  conscience,"  and  the  like),  especially  by  the
Scottish  School,  in  opposition  to  intellectualist  re
ductions.  Jacobi  appealed  to  the  feeling  of  duty
(Gefuhl  der  Pflichf)  or  conscience  in  his  ethical
discussions.  In  our  day,  too,  it  has  been  affirmed
(by  Simmel *  and  others),  in  opposition  to  abstract
and  imperative  Ethics,  that  the  practical  decision
is  the  product  of  feeling  and  is  not  definable  by
theoreticians.  But  the  principal  cause  of  the
importance  attached  to  feeling  in  the  eighteenth
century  was  the  aesthetic  problem.  This  is  seen
in  Dubos's  book,  in  the  English  sentimentalists
(who  approach  the  ideas  of  virtue  and  of  beauty,
treating  of  the  moral  sense  and  of  the  beautiful),
and,  finally,  in  the  doctrines  of  Leibnitz  himself
and  of  his  school,  as  to  confused  cognition,  which
led  to  the  Aesthetica  of  Baumgarten.  We  owe
The  the  word  and  the  concept  of  feeling  (Gefuhl
and  sometimes  also  Empfindung)  principally  to
the  Leibnitzian  -  Wolfians  and  to  the  German
thinkers  under  the  influence  of  Wolff  (Mendels
sohn,  Tetens,  Sulzer,  Riedel).  By  means  of  the

1  Einleitung  in  die  Moralwissenschaft,  Berlin,  1892-93.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 169

speculation  of  Jacobi,  on  the  other  hand,  feeling

Schlcier-

was  called  upon  to  fulfil  the  functions  of  a  true  mocker.
and  proper  metaphysical  organ.  He  had  demon
strated  in  a  rigorous  and  irrefutable  manner  that
the  form  of  the  empirical  sciences  and  of  the
abstract  intellect,  since  it  proceeds  by  nexus  of
cause  and  effect,  is  incapable  of  attaining  to  the
infinite,  and  had  assigned  the  affirmation  of
God  to  the  "  sense  of  the  supersensible,"  to
"  immediate  knowledge,"  and  to  "  feeling."  After
Jacobi,  the  same  position  was  assumed  by
Schleiermacher,  who  maintained  that  it  was  im
possible  to  know  God  by  means  of  the  intellect
and  to  treat  Him  as  an  object,  since  He  is  in
difference  of  thought  and  being.  He  can  be
known  only  by  feeling,  which  is  indifference
of  all  determinate  functions  of  ideal  and  real,
of  thought  and  being.  The  neocriticists  and
agnostics  of  to-day,  with  their  appeal  to  feeling
in  all  truly  philosophical  questions,  are  followers,
often  unconscious  and  certainly  less  coherent,  of
Jacobi  and  Schleiermacher.

The  concept  of  feeling  in  the  Kantian  philo-  Kant.
sophy can be said to derive its importance
from the meeting of two unsatisfied wants,
namely, that which sought a concept for the
aesthetic activity and that which sought a


1 7o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PI.

forma  mentis  proper  to  philosophy.  Indeed,
the  Critique  of  Judgment  corresponds  to  feeling,
the  first  part  of  which  consists  of  an  inquiry
into  the  nature  of  the  beautiful  and  of  art.
The  second  part  (critique  of  the  theological
judgment)  is  an  anticipation  of  the  concrete
concept,  or  of  that  organ  of  speculative  thought
which  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  had  not  dis
covered.

Feeling,  therefore,  cannot  but  lose  importance
in  the  Hegelian  philosophy,  which  makes  of
art  a  form  of  knowledge,  and  of  the  teleological
judgment  the  logic  of  the  idea  or  philosophical
logic,  resolving  also  in  it  the  demand  of  Jacobi,
whose  feeling  or  immediate  knowledge  is  shown
to  be  logical  knowledge  and  supreme  mediation.
In  Hegel  feeling  is  nothing  but  a  class  of
spiritual  facts,  the  lowest  of  all,  that  in  which
theory  and  practice  are  still  indistinct.  But
this  class  has  a  merely  psychological  value  in
his  system,  not  philosophical  and  real  (which
is  not  clearly  recognised  by  him).  Indeed,  feel
ing,  which  was  absolute  knowledge  for  Jacobi
and  for  Schleiermacher,  is  placed,  not  in  the
sphere  of  the  absolute  spirit,  nor  in  that  of
the  objective  or  practical  spirit,  but  in  the
subjective  spirit,  or  Psychology.  The  "  doctrine


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 171

of  the  three  faculties "  (Dreivermogenslekre],
as  was  called  that  elaborated  from  Mendelssohn
to  Kant  and  promulgated  in  the  Kantian  philo
sophy,  did  not,  however,  remain  without  oppo
nents  in  the  nineteenth  century  ;  from  Krug
(1823)  to  the  youthful  Fichte,  and  in  more  opponents  of

the  doctrine

recent  times  Brentano  (1874). Krug's  confuta-  of  the  three

faculties.

tion  is  wrongly  combated  by  Hamilton  and  Krus-
discredited  by  Brentano,  for  it  proceeds  with
perfect  correctness,  and  is  founded  on  the
correct  philosophical  principle  that  there  are
no  other  activities  of  the  spirit  conceivable,
save  those  directed  either  inwardly  or  outwardly
(immanent  or  theoretical  and  transcendent  or
practical),  and  that  therefore  there  is  no  place
for  feeling,  which  would  be  a  mixture  of  the
two  activities,  and  consequently  a  failure  of
direction  or  inactivity,  nothing,  therefore,  but
a  poor,  rudimentary  knowing  or  willing,  that
is,  a  psychological  class,  not  a  philosophical
category.

Brentano,  returning  in  a  measure  to  Descartes,
constructs «  the  doctrine  of  the  three  faculties
in  a  different  way,  determining  them  as  represen
tation  (to  which  he  makes  art  and  the  aesthetic
activity  correspond),  judgment  (to  which  corre
sponds  science),  and  love  and  hate  (to  which


i;2 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

corresponds  the  practical).  Feeling,  therefore,
does  not  find  a  place  of  its  own  in  the  psyche,
and  that  which  is  wont  to  be  called  feeling
is  either  representation,  or  love  and  hate.
Brentano  shows  himself  inferior  to  Krug  in
the  philosophical  demonstration  of  the  incon
ceivability  of  this  form  of  the  spirit,  but  he
has  the  merit  of  having  substituted  certain
positive  elements  for  the  indeterminate  word
"  feeling,"  although  the  function  exercised  by
feeling  in  the  development  of  philosophical
thought  is  more  important  than  Brentano
succeeds  in  perceiving,  for  among  other  things
he  ignores  and  fails  to  recognize  the  relation
of  the  concept  of  feeling  to  the  demands  of
speculative  thought.1

1  For  the  doctrine  of  feeling  see,  chiefly,  Volkmann,  Lehrb.  d.  Psychol.
(Cothen,  1885),  ii.  pp.  301-311  ;  F.  Brentano,  Psychol.  (Leipzig,  1874),  i.,  ii.
c.  5;  cf.  Ursprzmg  sitt.  Erkennt.  (Leipzig,  1889)  pp.  51-55;  A.  Palme,
Sulzer's  Psychol.  ^i.  d.  Anjange  d.  Dreivermogenslehre  (Berlin,  1905).  Cf.
also  Croce,  Estetica,  pp.  226-228,  4th  ed.


SECOND SECTION

THE  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY  IN  ITS  DIALECTIC

I
NECESSITY  AND  LIBERTY  OF  THE  VOLITIONAL  ACT

THE relations of the practical form with the  The  problem

freedom.

other  forms  of  the  spirit  having  been  examined,
it  is  now  necessary  to  re-enter,  so  to  speak,  the
interior  of  the  volitional  activity,  and  enclose  our
selves  within  it,  that  we  may  study  its  mode  of
development,  its  rhythm,  its  dialectic.  We  shall
no  longer  ask,  therefore,  whether  the  practical
activity  precede  or  follow  knowledge,  or  exactly
what  knowledge  it  follows  and  what  it  precedes,
what  the  volition  is  in  relation  to  events,  what  the
practical  concept  or  judgment,  and  the  like.  But
we  shall  ask  what  are  good  and  evil,  the  passions
and  the  forces  that  dominate  them,  desires  and
aspirations  ;  and  in  the  first  place  (this  being  the
problem  that  opens  the  series  and  gives  the  key
for  the  solution  of  the  others)  what  are  the
freedom  and  necessity  of  the  volitional  act.

173


Freedom  of
willing  and
freedom  of
action  :  criti
cism  of  such
distinction.


174 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

This  problem  of  freedom  and  necessity  (that  is
to  say,  whether  the  will  be  free  or  determined)
has  seemed  to  be  and  is,  from  a  certain  point  of
view,  most  weighty  and  complicated,  and  we  shall
soon  see  why  this  is  so.  But  at  this  point,  owing
to  the  premises  that  we  have  already  laid  down
in  our  preceding  treatises,  and  also  in  the  part
of  the  present  treatise  that  has  already  been
developed,  it  will  be  convenient  to  solve  it  with
relative  expedition.

First  of  all,  we  have  been  able  to  eliminate  the
distinction  that  is  wont  to  be  made  between
freedom  of  willing  and  freedom  of  action,  with
the  duplicity  of  the  problem  thus  entailed.  I  ndeed
we  know  that  volition  and  action  coincide,  and
that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  either  a  volition
which  is  not  at  the  same  time  action,  or  an  action
which  is  not  at  the  same  time  volition,  and  that  in
consequence  there  cannot  be  freedom  of  willing
on  the  one  hand  and  freedom  of  action  on  the
other.  All  the  instances  of  the  one  that  are
brought  forward  can  be  reduced  to  the  other,
provided  that  the  word  "  freedom  "  be  not  used
in  an  improper  and  metaphorical  manner.  For
example,  a  paralytic  (they  say)  wills  to  get  up  and
run  ;  his  spirit  is  free,  but  his  action  is  restrained  ;
he  has  freedom  of  willing,  but  not  of  action.  But


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 175

in  reality  the  paralytic  does  not  seriously  will  to
get  up  and  run  ;  that  is,  he  does  not  really  will
anything  at  all.  Were  he  really  and  seriously  to
will,  that  might  happen  to  him  which  happened
to  a  paralytic  gentleman  in  the  Neapolitan  revolt
of  1547.  This  gentleman  had  himself  carried
into  the  square  on  the  arms  of  his  servants,  but
he  was  found,  after  the  tumult,  to  the  great
astonishment  of  all,  on  the  top  of  the  campanile
of  San  Lorenzo,  whither  he  had  climbed  with  his
own  legs  ;  such  had  been  his  terror  and  such  his
will  to  be  saved.1  As  a  rule,  on  the  other  hand,
the  paralytic  does  not  will,  because  he  knows  that
he  cannot ;  at  the  most,  he  would  wish  or  desire
to  find  himself  in  different  conditions  to  those  in
which  he  finds  himself,  in  order  that  he  may  be
able  to  will  otherwise  than  he  does  now,  which
is  to  remain  quiet.  This  confirms  the  identity
of  volition  and  action,  and  proves  that  the  two
supposed  freedoms  are  one  only.  Thus,  he  who
is  threatened  and  yields  to  the  threat  declares  that
he  is  deprived  of  freedom  of  action,  but  that  this
is  not  exact  is  already  affirmed  in  the  formula :
coacti  tamen  volunt.  Enforced  actions  not  only
do  not  exist,  but  are  not  even  conceivable.  The


1  Summonte,  Historia  di  Napoli,  ed.  1675,  iy-  2O5> "Miracle  caused
by  fear."


1 76 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

demand  for  greater  freedom  of  action,  such  as
new  political  liberties,  is  nothing  but  the  demand
for  certain  new  conditions  of  fact  for  future
volitions  and  actions.  But  it  is  a  question  of
more  or  less,  since,  as  we  know,  no  countenance
of  imminent  tyrant  can  extinguish  the  freedom  of
the  soul ;  no  ruler,  be  he  ever  so  strong  and
violent,  can  prevent  a  rebellion,  or,  when  all  else
fails,  a  fine  death  that  affirms  externally  the
freedom  within.  "  The  will  that  wills  not  can
not  be  subdued."
The  volitional  The  question  that  we  have  here  to  treat  is,  then,

act:  both

free  and single,  and  concerns  only  the  will,  which,  as  such,

necessary.

includes  in  itself  action.  In  replying,  however,
we  cannot  accept  the  dilemma,  that  the  volitional
act  must  be  free  or  determined,  and  cling  to
one  of  the  two  horns  :  we  must  on  the  contrary
deny  the  form  of  the  question  itself  and  say  that
%  ( the  volitional  act  is  at  once  free  and  determined,  j
(Volition,  in  fact,  as  has  been  seen,  does  not
arise  in  the  void,  but  in  a  definite  situation,  in
unchangeable  historical  conditions,  in  relation  to
an  event,  which,  if  it  be,  is  necessary.  The
volition  corresponds  to  that  situation  and  it  is
impossible  to  separate  it :  when  the  situation
changes,  the  volition  changes  ;  as  the  situation,

1  Dante,  Farad,  iv.  76.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 177

so  the  volition.  This  amounts  to  saying,  that  it
is  necessitated^  always  conditioned  by  a  situation,
and  precisely  by  that  situation  in  which  it  arises.  )

But  this  also  means  that  the  volition  is  free.
Because  if  the  actual  situation  be  its  condition,
the  volition  is  not  the  condition,  but  the  con
ditioned,  for  it  does  not  remain  fixed  in  the  actual
situation,  nor  repeats  and  makes  a  duplicate  of  it,
which  would  be  superfluous  and  therefore  imposs
ible  in  the  effective  development  of  the  real,
which  does  not  allow  of  superfluity.  (  The  volition
produces  something  different,  that  is,  something
new,  something  that  did  not  exist  previously  and
that  now  comes  into  existence :  it  is  initiative,
creation,  and  therefore  act  of  freedom. )  Were
this  not  so,  volition  would  not  be  volition,  and
reality  would  not  change,  would  not  become,
would  not  grow  upon  itself.

And  since  without  necessity  there  cannot  be
liberty,  because  without  an  actual  situation  there
cannot  be  volition,  so  without  liberty  there
cannot  be  necessity,  the  actual  situations  are
not  formed,  which  are  always  new  and  always
necessary  in  respect  to  the  new  volitions.  Actual
situations  are  events,  and  events  are  the  result  of
the  concourse  of  individual  volitions.  The  two
terms  cannot  be  separated,  for  if  one  be  removed,

N


178 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

so  is  the  other  ;  but  neither  can  they  be  looked
upon  as  identical  or  synonymous.  They  are  the
two  moments  of  the  volitional  act,  distinct  and
united,  which  act  is  the  unity  of  both,  and  there
fore,  as  was  said,  is  at  once  free  and  determined.
This  consciousness  of  necessity  and  liberty
inseparably  united  is  found  in  all  men  of  action,
in  all  political  geniuses,  who  are  never  inert  or
reckless :  they  feel  themselves  at  once  bound
and  unbound  ;  they  always  conform  to  facts,  but
always  to  surpass  them.  The  fatuous,  on  the  other
hand,  oscillate  between  the  passivity  of  the  given
situation  and  the  sterile  attempt  to  overleap  it,
that  is,  to  leap  over  their  own  shadow.  They
are  consequently  now  inert,  now  forward.  They
do  not  therefore  fix  or  conclude  anything,  they  do
not  act  ;  or,  if  they  do,  it  is  always  according
to  what  of  the  actual  situation  they  have  under
stood,  and  what  of  initiative  they  have  displayed.
Comparison  The  best  comparison  is  afforded  on  this  occasion

with  the

(esthetic also  by  the  aesthetic  activity. No  poet  creates

activity.

his  poem  outside  definite  conditions  of  space  and
time,  and  even  when  he  appears  to  be  and  is
proclaimed  "  a  soul  of  other  times,"  he  belongs  to
his  own  time.  The  historical  situation  is  given
to  him.  The  world  of  his  perceptions  is  such,
with  those  men,  those  customs,  those  thoughts,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 179

those  works  of  art. But  when  the  new  poem  has
appeared,  there  is  in  the  world  of  reality  (in  the
contemplation  of  reality)  something  that  was  not
there before, which, although connected with
the  previous situation,  yet  is not  identical  with
it,  is indeed a  new  form,  and  therefore  a  new
content,  and  so  the  revelation  of  a  truth  previously
unknown. So  true  is  this,  that  in  its  turn  the
new poem conditions a spiritual and practical
movement,  becomes  part  of  the  situation  given
for  future  actions  and  for  future  poems. He  is  a
true  poet  who  feels  himself  at  once  bound  to  his
predecessors  and  free,  conservative  and  revolu
tionary,  like Homer, Dante, and Shakespeare,
who  receive  into  themselves  centuries  of  history,
of thought and of poetry, and add to those
centuries something that is the present and
will be the future : charges du  passg,  gros  de
ravenir. The  false  poet,  on  the  other  hand,  is
now  a  blind follower  of  tradition  and  imitator,
now  a  charlatanesque innovator,  and if  in the
vacuity  in  which  he  labours  he  sometimes  does
produce  a  fragment  of  poetry,  this  happens  only
when  he  is made  to  look  into himself  and  to
have  a  vision,  be  it  great  or  small,  of  a  world  that
arises. — But  the  comparison  instituted  is  rather
an analogy than a comparison,  for  that  which


i8o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

happens  in  the  practical  sphere  happens  in  that  of
poetry  and  in  all  the  other  spheres  of  the  spiritual
activity.  The  Spirit  is  freedom,  and  in  order  to
be  so,  not  in  the  abstract,  but  in  the  concrete,  it
must  also  be  necessity.
critique  of  This  indissoluble  connection  of  necessity  and

determinism

and  of liberty  confutes  both  the  partial  theories  which

arbitrarism.

dispute  the  field  in  the  problem  of  freedom  :  the
deterministic  theory  and  that  of  free  will.  The
determinists  do  not  see  in  the  volitional  act
anything  but  the  actual  situation ;  the  followers
of  the  theory  of  free  will  see  nothing  but  the
moment  of  freedom.  These  conceive  a  volition
that  is  as  it  were  a  duplication,  triplication,
quadruplication  of  the  given  fact,  and  so  on  to
the  infinite ;  those  a  volition  that  bursts  forth
from  nothing,  or  rains  down  from  above  and  then
inserts  itself,  no  one  knows  how,  into  the  course
of  the  real.  Both  exaggerate,  and  since  exaggera
tions  are  called  in  science  errors  in  sense,  both
err,  and  being  one-sided  are  proved  false.  But
since,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  quality  of  errors
opposed  to  one  another,  to  become  identified  and
to  pass,  the5  one  into  the  other,  it  is  given  to  us
to  assist  at  a  like  spectacle  in  this  case  also,  and  to
see  the  determinists  change  into  arbitrarists  and
the  believers  in  free  will  into  determinists.  The


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 181

first,  in  fact,  passing  from  cause  to  cause,  abandon
the  concept  of  cause  at  the  end  of  the  chain,  as
though  (to  use  the  expression  of  Schopenhauer),
they  were  dismissing  the  hired  carriage,  made
use  of  during  the  day  for  their  own  affairs,  and
return  to  free  will.  The  others,  being  unable  to
justify  freedom  in  the  world  of  reality  and  of
experience,  justify  it  in  a  transcendental  way,  as
the  effect  of  a  divine  cause,  which  excludes  free
will,  and  excludes  it  also  when  it  concedes  it  ;  for
by  the  very  fact  of  conceding,  it  determines,
limits,  and  produces  it.

But  with this  explanation  of  our  thesis,  and

r 1  1  -  i °fthis

of  the  two  theses  opposing  it,  we  are  transported  antithesis:

materialism

into  the  heart  of  one  of  the  greatest  problems  an(t
of  Gnoseology,  so  great  in  fact  as  to  appear  to
contain  in  it  the  whole  problem  of  philosophy.
In  fact,  that  which  is  called  determinism  and
free  will  in  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  is
the  same  antithesis  that  in  Gnoseology  is  called
materialism  and  mysticism.  And  that  which  we
here  oppose  to  the  two  one  -  sided  theses,  as
theory  of  that  liberty  which  is  also  necessity,
is  called  in  Gnoseology,  idealism.  The  thesis
and  antithesis  are  therefore  to  be  found  in  all
the  particular  problems  of  philosophy,  since  they
concern  the  logical  form  in  universal.  This,


182 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

then,  is  the  reason  why  the  question  of  freedom
of  willing  has  become  so  grave  and  complicated
as  to  appear  insoluble.  To  obtain  a  solution,
it  was  necessary  to  construct  a  Logic  of  philo
sophy,  and  intrinsically  necessary  to  renew  the
whole  system  of  philosophy.  Herbart  wisely
counselled  never  to  discuss  the  freedom  of  the
will  with  the  laity,  in  order  not  to  be  misunder
stood.1

Had  this  advice  been  followed,  we  should
not  have  seen  both  determinism  and  free  will
torn  asunder  by  advocates  in  the  law  courts,
dragging  in  the  one  or  the  other  to  suit  their
purposes,  and  thus  insulting  good  sense,  which
should  alone  rule  in  those  places.  The  freedom
of  the  will  is  doubted  and  discussed  among
philosophers,  as  the  reality  of  the  external  world
is  doubted  and  discussed,  but  this  is  not  done
because  it  is  wished  to  set  in  doubt  the  exist
ence  of  the  boots  of  this  gentleman  or  of  that
gentleman's  overcoat.  If  a  confirmation  be
sought  that  the  question  of  the  freedom  of
willing  is,  as  was  said,  the  universal  gnoseo
logical  or  metaphysical  question,  let  it  be
observed  how  the  determinists  and  the  advocates
of  free  will  affirm  or  deny  the  freedom  of  willing,

1  Einleit.  in  die  Phil  §  128,  trad.Vidossich,  p.  169.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 183

not  only  in  that  field,  but  in  all  fields.  Indeed,
whoever,  for  instance,  should  admit  spiritual
activity  to  knowledge  and  deny  it  to  the  will,
would  not,  properly  speaking,  be  a  determinist,
but  an  intellectualist  or  an  aesthetician.  That
is  to  say,  he  would  be  a  theoretician,  who,  in
denying  the  freedom  of  the  will,  would  simply
mean  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  practical  activity
side  by  side  with  the  theoretic ;  for  freedom  is
the  very  essence  of  every  spiritual  form,  and
with  the  denial  of  the  freedom  of  that  form  is
denied  the  form  itself.  Determinism,  arbitrar-
ism,  libertarianism  reflect,  then,  the  universal
gnoseological  thesis  of  naturalism  and  mechani-
cism  in  the  special  practical  field.

Determinism  of  the  will,  like  materialism  and  The  material.

istic  sophisms

mechamcism  in  general,  consists  in  nothing  but  of  determinism.
the  transference  to  philosophical  speculation  of
the  form  proper  to  the  physical  disciplines.  By
dint  of  classifying  practical  facts  and  presenting
them  as  empirical  concepts,  and  thus  as  merely
related  by  cause  and  effect,  they  end  by  for
getting  that  those  formulae  are  not  thoughts
and  that  their  content  is  not  real  reality ;  and
causes  or  motives  (abstractive  transformation  of
the  actual  situation)  are  given  as  agents  of  the
will,  and  thus  the  agent  is  destroyed  for  the


1 84 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

cause,  the  form  for  the  abstract  material.  Hence
these  timid  phrases  that  on  close  inspection
turn  out  to  be  tautologies  or  mistakes  :  "  Freedom
is  an  illusion  ;  what  prevails  is  always  the
strongest  motive."  But  if  we  ask  what  is  the
strongest  motive,  we  are  told  (and  no  other
reply  is  possible)  it  is  that  which  prevails.  This,
translated  into  our  language,  amounts  to  saying
that  the  actual  situation  is  the  actual  situation,
and  conditions  the  will,  which  is  what  it  is  and
can  be  no  other  than  it  is. — Virtue  is  a  mere
product,  like  vitriol.  Certainly,  vitriol  is  also
in  its  way  a  creation,  a  manifestation  of  the
spirit,  as  is  virtue,  and  if  it  be  permitted  to
falsify  vitriol  by  changing  it  into  something
material  and  mechanical,  nothing  forbids  doing  the
same  for  virtue.  Virtue,  too,  can  be  produced
just  like  vitriol,  that  is  to  say,  by  setting  in  motion
the  spontaneous  forces  of  the  spirit  and  of  so-
called  nature,  which  itself  is  also  spirit,  and
nothing  forbids  endowing  educators  with  the
title  of  chemists  and  apothecaries  of  virtue.

But  metaphors  are  not  arguments — Statistics
prove  the  determinism  of  human  actions,  which
always  reappear  in  the  same  way  and  in  the
same  quantity  whenever  certain  actual  circum
stances  appear. — But  Statistics,  if  they  collect


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 185

and  simplify  facts  and  construct  views  and  tables
that  are  more  or  less  useful,  do  not  thus  prove
anything ;  for  neither  are  the  instances  that  they
give  as  equivalent,  really  so,  nor  the  relation  that
they  declare  between  certain  facts  a  real  relation.
If  we  turn  from  artificial  formulae  to  the  immediate
observation  of  the  real,  we  find  ourselves  con
fronted  with  nothing  but  individuated  volitional
acts,  resulting  from  necessity  and  liberty. — The
individual  has  a  constant  character,  of  which  action
is  the  consequence  :  operari  sequitur  esse. —  But
the  constant  character  is  nothing  but  the  abstrac
tion  of  the  single  acts  done  by  the  individual.
It  is  therefore  natural  that  the  actions  should
appear  to  be  referable  to  the  character  which  is
derived  from  them ;  but  it  is  not  correct  to
say  that  there  is  equivalence,  for  abstraction  is
not  equivalent  to  concretion. — The  individual,  .
even  if  he  can  be  conceived  as  free  in  respect
to  his  external  environment,  would  be  always
subject  to  the  law  of  his  own  nature. — But  the
law  of  his  own  nature  is  not  a  contingent  thing,
but  the  law  itself  of  the  Spirit,  or,  precisely,
freedom,  and  it  is  quite  clear  that  freedom
is  not  free  not  to  be  free. — The  social  organism
has  its  natural  laws,  which  govern  the  action  of
the  individual. — The  social  organism  is  also


i86 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

an  abstraction,  which  is  turned  into  a  being
only  by  the  false  interpretation  of  a  metaphor.
In  all  these  examples,  and  in  the  many  others
that  could  be  brought  forward,  the  error  is  always
the  same  as  has  been  said :  the  substitution
of  the  naturalistic  for  the  speculative  construction,
Physic  for  Metaphysic.  And  since  physical  or
naturalistic  construction  has  no  material  other
than  given  historical  facts,  the  doctrines  above
mentioned,  when  they  are  not  false,  are  always
tautological  and  lead  to  the  affirmation  that
the  volitional  fact  is  a  fact,  or  that  in  it  is  the
moment  of  necessity.
The  mysticism  Arbitrarism,  on  the  other  hand,  arises  in

of  arbitrarism.

the  same  way  as  mysticism,  from  distrust  of
thought ;  being  unable  to  dominate  the  fact
that  should  be  explained,  recourse  is  had  to
the  inconceivable,  to  the  absurd,  to  miracle ;  sub
jective  and  individual  ignorance  is  hypostasized  and
of  it  is  made  a  metaphysical  reality.  Arbitrarism,
like  mysticism,  has  its  element  of  truth,  in  the
negation  of  determinism,  that  is,  in  the  recogni
tion  of  the  impotence  of  the  naturalistic  method
and  in  the  affirmation  that  the  truth  lies  beyond
that  method,  in  the  concept  of  creation  and  of
freedom.  But  freedom  separated  from  its  logical
and  necessary  moment  becomes  transformed  into


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 187

will,  just  as  in  mysticism  in  general  God  is  trans
formed  into  the  mystery,  ready  to  receive  all
individual  caprices  into  himself,  and  to  confer
upon  them  an  appearance  of  truth.

The concept of  freedom (necessity- liberty),  The  doctrine

of  necessity  -

which is  at  once  scientific  and not mechanical,  Merty,  and

idealism.

and  if  it  surpass  the  categories  of  Physic,  does
not  surpass  those  of  Metaphysic,  is  opposed  to
both  these  views.  As  idealist  philosophy,  it
tends  in  general  to  conciliate  the  ideal  with
the  actual,  thought  with  complete  reality,  philo
sophy  with  the  whole  of  experience.  With  the
concept  of  freedom  is  eliminated  the  inertia
of  determinism,  and  the  unstable  springing  about
of  arbitrarism.  The  gross  material  conception
of  the  real  disappears,  because  that  which  seems
to  be  matter  is  revealed  as  spirit,  the  fact  as
creation,  necessity  as  the  product  of  liberty.
But  miracle  disappears  with  them.  For  if  the
spirit  be  the  eternal,  omnipresent,  continuous
miracle,  unattainable  by  the  physical  method,—
a  continual  miracle,  omnipresent  and  eternal,
is  no  longer  a  miracle,  but  the  same  simple
and  ordinary  reality,  which  each  one  of  us  con
tributes  to  create  and  each  one  of  us  can  and
does  think.

Strict  determinism  and  strict  arbitrarism are


i88 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

The  doctrine not,  however,  the  sole  adversaries  of  the  concept

of  double  m  .

causality; of  liberty-necessity,  as  rigorous  materialism  and

dualism  and

agnosticism,  mysticism  are  not  the  only  adversaries  of  idealism.
There  exists  another  which  must  be  called
more  dangerous  (if  misunderstanding  be  more
dangerous  than  error).  This  doctrine,  since  it
goes  by  the  name  of  dualism,  spiritualism,  and
neocriticism  in  general  philosophy,  could  be
called  the  doctrine  of  double  practical  causality,
in  the  field  of  the  practical  problem.  The
supporters  of  this  line  of  thought,  despite  many
individual  differences,  are  all  agreed  in  positing
two  distinct  series  of  facts :  one  which  obeys
mechanical  causality,  another  which  is  initiative  and
creation,  or  (as  they  say)  obeys  causality  through
freedom.  There  are  thus  two  series  that  inter
penetrate  one  another  or  alternate  at  every  instant
and  are  mutually  blended,  the  one  in  the  other.
Hence  there  is  something  of  each  in  the  voli
tional  act,  something  of  the  strongest  motive
and  something  of  free  choice.  Such  a  solution
has  some  external  resemblance  with  that  which
we  maintain,  but  is  intrinsically  most  different.
Our  solution  is  fusion  of  liberty  and  necessity,
while  this  is  juxtaposition ;  our  solution  is
conciliation,  this  transaction.  Like  every  juxta
position  and  transaction  it  displeases  both  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 189

contending parties, and falls into the power,
now of  the one, now  of  the  other. Thus,  if,
according to  the theories  of  that tendency, it
be maintained that freedom exists, but that
there are also causes tending to diminish it,
or  that  there  exist volitional acts,  but  that  in
voluntary  acts  also  exist,  one  does  not  understand
how  a  series  of  facts  that has  its  own law in
itself (freedom, the will) can ever be subor
dinated to facts that obey a different law
(diminution  of  freedom,  involuntariness  of  acts).
If this happen sometimes or many times,
we must suspect that it happens always, and
that  the  surviving  freedom  is  a  mask  of  freedom,
illusion. Thus,  if  it be  affirmed  that side by
side  with causality,  with equivalence  of  causes
and  effects,  or  with  the  possibility  of  foreseeing
the effect by means of the cause, there is
another causality, in which the effect is not
equivalent to the cause, and that not only
is it not to be foreseen, but is such that
only after it has happened does it allow its
cause  to  be  discovered ; then  the  doubt arises
that  one  of  the  two  causalities does not  exist,
because either the effect is equivalent  to the
cause, and  so it must  always  be, or it is not
equivalent to it, and  so it will never be ; or


190 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

it  can  be  foreseen  by  means  of  the  cause,
and  so  it  will  always  be,  or  it  cannot  be  foreseen,
and  never  will  be  foreseen.  The  strict  deter-
minists  and  arbitrarists  have  the  loyalty  of  error,
and  they  are  rare,  because  energetic  spirits
are  rare,  but  the  doctrine  of  double  causality  is
tinged  with  some  of  the  rouge  of  truth,  and
thus  seduces  the  many,  and  is  proper  to  weak  and
irresolute  spirits,  as  indeed  are  dualism,  spiritu
alism,  agnosticism,  neocriticism,  of  which  this
doctrine  forms  a  particular  case.  When  the
absurdity  of  determinism  and  of  arbitrarism  has
been  recognized  (and  their  very  presence  is
an  autocriticism),  it  is  necessary  to  satisfy  with
a  new  and  single  concept  the  claim  that  they
represent,  certainly  not  with  the  sum  of  two
errors,  and  the  new  single  concept  is  that  of
true  freedom.
its  character  The  doctrine  of  double  causality  has  had

of  transaction

and  transition,  its  historical  importance,  not  because  it  is  a
transaction,  but  rather  because  it  is  a  transition  \
that  is,  a  gradual  approximation  to  the  true
concept,  with  the  introduction  into  the  naturalistic
concept  of  an  element  of  ferment  and  dissolution  :
the  concept  of  a  causality  by  means  of  freedom,
that  is,  of  a  causality  that  is  so  only  in  name.
The  concept  of  freedom  cannot  tolerate  that  of


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 191

causality  at  its  side,  and  of  the  two  series
posited,  one  of  the  two  is  not  real  in  itself,
but  simply  a  particular  product  of  the  other  :
mechanical  causality  is  not  a  fact,  nor  a  con
ception,  but  an  instrument  created  for  its  own
ends  by  spiritual  freedom  itself.  And  only  in
this  sense  can  it  be  admitted  that  freedom  avails
itself  of  causality  for  its  effectuation,  and  the
truth  of  the  observation  be  realized,  that  the
classifying  of  the  perceptions  in  series  of  cause
and  effect  becomes  itself  also  a  presupposition  of
will  and  action.  The  historical  knowledge  as
to  the  actual  situation  that  precedes  the  volition,
since  it  includes  of  necessity  philosophical  uni-
versals  in  itself,  so  it  can  also  include  empirical
universals,  concepts,  and  pseudo- concepts  :  the
consciousness  of  the  productivity  of  the  spirit
and  the  mnemonic  formulae  in  which  this  produc
tivity  is  fixed,  and  for  which  it  certainly  appears
to  be  mechanical,  but  only  to  him  who  forgets
that  the  formulae  themselves  are  mechanical.


II

FREEDOM AND ITS OPPOSITE. GOOD AND EVIL

Freedom  of SINCE, then, the  volitional act is  freedom,  the

action  as

reality  of question as to whether in a given case an

action.

individual  has  or  has  not  been  free,  is  equivalent
to  this  other  question :  Has  there  really  been
volition  (action)  in  that  case  ?  This  question  can
have  and  has  (as  any  one  who  lends  an  ear  to
such  discussions  as  are  frequently  heard  can  verify)
but  two  meanings.  The  first  is,  whether  the  case
under  discussion  be  action  or  event,  and,  there
fore,  if  it  be  or  be  not  accurate  to  present  it  as  an
individual  act.  For  example  : — Was  Jacobinism
the  crime  or  the  glory  of  Voltaire  and  Rousseau  ?
Was  the  defeat  of  Waterloo  the  fault  of  Marshal
Grouchy  ?  The  second  is,  if  it  be  really  a  question
of  action,  what,  precisely,  has  that  action  been  ?
For  example : — What  were  the  respective  parts
of  Voltaire  and  of  Rousseau  in  the  propaganda  of
the  revolutionary  spirit  and  of  the  Jacobin  mode

of  thought  ? What  did  Marshal  Grouchy  really

192


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 193

know  and  [will  when,  instead  of  listening  to
Exelmans  and  to  others  of  his  generals  and
marching  whither  the  cannon  was  thundering,  he
obeyed  to  the  letter  the  order  he  had  received
and  attacked  the  Prussian  army  corps  of
Thielman  ?

There  is  a  third  meaning  that  is  to  be  excluded  :  inconceiv
ability  of  the
namely,  as  to  whether  at  a  given  moment  of  time  absolute  absence

of  action.

there  has  been  any  sort  of  action  or,  on  the
contrary,  a  void  and  total  absence  of  action.  For
the  only  case  in  which  the  individual  does  not
act  is  that  in  which  he  is  dead  or  partially  dead,
be  the  death  physiological  or  spiritual,  that  of  a
corpse  or  of  a  madman.  The  glory  of  putting
poor  madmen  on  a  level  with  the  guilty  and  the
delinquent  is  to  be  left  to  the  thinkers  of  the  "  new
school  of  penal  law."  (jn  every  other  case,  man
always  acts,  always  wills,  and  is  always  responsible  ,.
and  free,  because  life,  so  long  as  it  lasts,  is  nothing
but  a  web  of  volitions  and  therefore  of  free  acts.1)
He  is  also  responsible  for  the  acts  that  contribute
to  put  man  in  such  conditions  as  amount  to
madness  more  or  less  transitory,  and  so  of
irresponsibility  :  such  is  the  case  of  drunkenness
and  of  moral  dangers  imprudently  sought,  and  so
on.  At  no  point  of  life  does  the  practically  in
different  exist.


i94 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Those  actions,  too,  that  appear  to  be  neither
willed  nor  free,  because  they  have  become
habitual,  mechanicized,  instinctive,  are  willed  and
free,  not  indeed  because  (though  this  be  true
enough  in  itself)  habitual  acts  were  once  acts  of
will,  but  because  (as  we  have  already  had  occasion
to  remark),  although  they  have  become  facts
almost  external  to  the  individual  willing,  yet  it  is
always  the  will  that  permits  them  to  act  and  can
always  arrest  their  action :  they  are  therefore  to  be
looked  upon  as  conditions  of  fact  that  every  new
volition  modifies,  even  when  it  accepts  them.  A
machine  is  not  the  work  of  the  arm  that  moves  it,
but  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of  other  arms  that
were  previously  moved  in  order  to  construct  it.
But  once  constructed,  that  which  sets  in  motion
the  machinery  is  always  the  work  of  one  arm,  an
act  of  will,  just  as  an  act  of  will  can  stop  its  move
ment  and  finally  cause  its  disaggregation  and
destruction.
Non-freedom  But  excluding  the  absolute  absence  of  freedom

as  antithesis

of  action  (and  of  existence  in  so  far  as  it  is  action),
and  on  the  other  hand  the  presence  of  something
different  from  it  called  causality  having  been
previously  excluded  from  the  idea  of  freedom,  it
remains  nevertheless  indubitable  that  in  the  very
bosom  of  freedom,  there  is  non-freedom.  Every


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 195

volition  is  at  the  same  time  nolition,  as  every
affirmation  is  negation.  Volition  is  love,  nolition
hate  ;  and,  as  we  know,  every  love  is  hate,  and
the  more  we  love,  the  more  we  hate.  Antigone
was  born  to  love  intensely,  and  for  that  very
reason,  to  hate  profoundly.  What  can  be  that
which  we  hate  in  love  and  abhor  in  volition  ?
What  can  this  internal  enemy  be,  which  does  not
consist  either  in  the  absence  of  volition  or  in
the  presence  of  an  extraneous  and  indifferent
element  ? — Since  it  is  neither  absent  nor  in
different,  it  cannot  be  anything  but  the  opposite  or
contrary  of  freedom,  antifreedom,  which  constitutes
the  contradiction  in  its  effective  concretion.

Freedom  is  an  indissoluble  nexus  of  necessity  Numt

~^~  arbitrariness  of

and  freedom  :  the  force  that  tends  to  annul  it  non-freedom.
is  antifreedom,  the  scission  of  that  nexus,
the  analysis  of  that  synthesis.  On  the  one
hand  it  aims  at  making  liberty  fall  into  nothing
ness,  by  compelling  it  to  the  inertia  of  the
fact,  and  on  the  other,  to  make  a  leap  into
the  void,  by  impelling  it  to  will,  a  sterile
endeavour — two  movements  that  are  one-sided
and  absurd,  and  become  identified  through  the
considerations  already  established  in  relation  to
determinism  and  arbitrarism.  Therefore  the
opposite  of  freedom  is  qualified  indifferently,  either


ig6 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

as  the  passive,  taken  by  itself,  opposed  to  the
active,  the  fact  that  resists  the  new  creation,  or
as  the  active,  taken  by  itself  and  abstract,  opposed
to  the  passive  :  will  opposed  to  liberty.  Anti-
freedom  is  either  the  material  fact  or  arbitrary
choice,  but  the  first  is  resolved  into  will,  the
second  into  material  fact.  Only  by  an  act  of
will  can  the  fact  that  should  continue  to  develop
be  fixed  as  a  fact  and  so  appear  as  a  material
fact,  and  only  by  a  persistence  in  that  fact,  which
should  be  surpassed,  can  will  give  itself  the
appearance  of  a  content.  The  undertaking  is
contradictory,  and  the  solution,  the  absence  of
freedom,  is  a  contradiction.
Good  as  Freedom  and  its  opposite,  freedom  and  its

freedom  and

reality,  and  internal  contradiction,  freedom  and  will,  are  what

evil  as  Us

opposite.  is  designated  by  the  terms  good  and  evil.  With
us  these  terms  are  given  an  altogether  generic
meaning,  as  they  are  taken  as  the  representatives
of  all  the  other  couples  of  opposites  that  are  wont
to  be  enunciated  in  the  field  of  practical  activity,
as  helpful  and  harmful,  useful  and  useless,  honest
and  dishonest,  meritorious  and  blameworthy,  pious
and  impious,  lawful  and  sinful,  and  so  on.  All
these  formulae  either  answer  to  the  subdistinc-
tions  of  the  practical  activity  (which  we  shall
study  further  on),  or  are  the  same  distinction,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 197

variously  formulated,  with  reference  to  psycho
logical  classes.  But  all  are  to  be  reduced  to  those
of  good  and  evil  for  the  purposes  of  the  philo
sophical  study  of  the  practical  activity  in  general,
without  ulterior  determinations  of  them  as  moral
or  utilitarian  good,  moral  or  utilitarian  evil,  or
any  other  form  there  may  be,  and  without  regard
to  the  various  empirical  material,  with  which  they
may  be  filled.

That  practical  good  and  evil  are  to  be  conceived  critique  of

abstract

as  will  and  anti-will,  and  the  good,  therefore,  as  monism  and

of  the  dualism

the  reality  and  the  bad  as  the  irreality  of  the  will,  of  values.
the  good  as  something  positive  and  the  bad  as
something  negative, — is  the  solution  imposed  by
the  impossibility  of  thinking  the  two  others  that
differ  from  it :  namely,  that  which  considers  the
distinction  between  good  and  bad  as  inexistent
(abstract  monism  of  values),  and  that  which
considers  the  good  as  transcendent  in  respect  of
reality,  which  is  always  evil,  unless  the  good
deign  to  descend  and  modify  it  (abstract  dualism
of  values).  For  the  criticism  of  the  abstract
monistic  view,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish
between  those  doctrines  that  deny,  not  only  the
distinction  between  good  and  evil,  but  also  all  the
analogous  distinctions  in  every  field  of  activity,
including  that  of  thought,  and  the  doctrines  that


198 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

allow  the  distinction  to  subsist  in  other  fields,  but
deny  it  in  that  of  the  practical.  The  first,  which
deny  the  distinction  between  true  and  false,  are
the  suicide  of  Philosophy,  the  second,  which  deny
it  only  between  good  and  evil,  are  the  suicide  of
the  Philosophy  of  the  practical :  that  is  to  say,
both  are  founded  upon  errors  that  we  have  already
criticized  and  surpassed,  and  upon  which  it  would
therefore  be  otiose  to  insist.  As  to  the  dualistic
view  (still  common  among  right-thinking  pro
fessors  of  philosophy,  that  is,  among  the  lazy  and
the  most  lazy)  it  will  be  requisite  to  discuss  this
point  seriously,  when  it  has  been  demonstrated  in
what  way  Reality  can  place  itself  beneath  the
yoke  of  Value  and  of  Goodness,  which  would  be
inferior  to  it  by  hypothesis,  through  the  very
fact  that  they  were  unreal'.  Reality  living,  these
others  dead  ;  Reality  like  "  the  four  bedevilled  "
of  Giusti  bent  upon  doing  so,  they,  like  the  "two
hundred  simpletons  "  of  the  same  poet,  bent  upon
saying  no.  For  if  Value  and  Goodness  be  real,
they  will  be  the  true  Reality  ;  and  that  which  was
first  called  by  the  name  will  be  feigned  reality,
altogether  identical  with  what  we  have  indicated
as  the  moment  of  contradiction  and  of  will,  arising
in  the  very  bosom  of  the  practical  activity.

An instance that is always formidable has


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 199
certainly  been  cited  against  the  thesis  of  evil  as  objections  to

J  . the  reality

something  negative  and  unreal,  and  of  good  as  it-  o
self  the  only  positive  and  real:  it  has  actually  been
affirmed  that  this  thesis  offends  against  good  sense.
What  ?  Is  evil  unreal  ?  Is  it  nothing  ?  Unreality
and  nothingness  are  then  the  knavish  trick  of  some
wicked  person  who  starts  a  calumny,  which,  being
received  and  believed,  injures  an  honest  man  ?
Unreality  and  nothing,  the  passion  that  drags  the
gambler  into  economic  ruin  and  moral  abjection  ?
So  the  world  is  all  good,  all  rose-coloured,  all
sweet ;  and  crimes,  cowardice,  foolishness,  and
baseness  are  illusions,  and  there  is  no  reason  to
lament ;  so  the  feeling  of  life  should  be  expressed
with  a  perpetual  smile,  like  that  upon  the  lips  of
the  wounded  warriors  in  the  marbles  of  Aegina  ?
— But  let  good  sense  and  its  advocates  remain
tranquil.  If  evil  be  a  nothing,  that  does  not
mean  that  it  is  nothing  ;  if  the  vanity  that  seems
to  be  a  person,  be  vanity  and  not  a  person,  that  does
not  mean  that  it  has  not  really  the  appearance  of
a  person  and  should  not  be  really  combated  and
dissipated.  The  wise,  who  having  defined  evil,
deny  toothache,  or  like  the  stoical  Posidonio
forget  the  gout  that  transfixes  them,  need
Giambattista  Vico  to  remind  them  how  no
philosophy  is  able  to  save  them  from  anxiety  on


200 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

behalf  of  "  their  wives  in  childbirth "  and  of
"  their  sons  who  languish  in  disease "  !  The
world  is  precisely  that  mixture  of  good  and
evil,  which  good  sense  says  it  is,  and  the  sweet  is
always  tempered  with  the  amari  aliquid.  It
cannot  be  adequately  expressed  either  with
lamentations  only,  or  only  with  laughter.  The
thesis  that  we  have  enunciated  wishes  to  abolish,
not  the  consciousness  of  evil,  but  the  false  belief
that  this  is  something  substantial,  and  thus
prevent  one  evil  from  being  increased  by  another,
evil  by  error,  moral  trouble  by  mental  confusion.
Evil -within  Evil  is  either  felt  as  evil,  and  in  this  case

and  without

synthesis.  it  means  that  it  is  not  realized,  but  that  in  its
place  is  realized  the  good.  The  gambler  of  the
example,  at  the  moment  he  knows  he  is  doing
himself  economic  harm,  does  not  play  ;  his  hand
is  held ;  and  it  is  held,  because  to  know,  in  the
practical  sense,  equals  to  will\  and  to  know  the
harm  of  gambling  means  to  know  it  as  harm,  and
so  to  dislike  gambling.  If  he  take  to  dice  or
cards  again,  this  arises  because  that  knowledge
is  obliterated  in  him,  that  is,  because  he  changes
his  mind ;  and  in  this  case  play  is  not  looked
upon  any  longer  as  harmful ;  it  is  willed,  and  so
at  that  instant  again  becomes  the  good  for  him,
because  it  satisfies  one  of  his  wants.  The


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 201

calumniator,  if  he  understand  the  idea  that  is
passing  through  his  mind,  or  rather  the  impulse
that  has  seized  him,  as  calumny,  is  for  that  very
reason  repugnant  to  it  and  does  not  pronounce
those  evil  words  :  in  that  case  indeed  he  is  not
a  calumniator,  but  an  honest  man  who  resists  a
temptation  (and  no  other  definition  of  an  honest
man  can  be  given).  But  if  he  pronounce  them,
this  means  that  the  opposing  repugnance  was
not  present  or  is  no  longer  present :  and  there
fore  those  words  are  no  longer  for  him  a  wicked
act  of  calumny,  but  a  simple  satisfaction  of  a
desire  to  amuse  himself,  or  to  reject  the  evil  that
has  been  done  to  him,  and  therefore  a  good.
In  the  same  way,  he  who  asserts  what  is  false,
he  who  renders  himself  guilty  of  error,  if  he  be
aware  of  himself  as  frivolous  or  a  charlatan  or
disloyal,  would  be  silent :  if  he  talk  and  write
and  print  false  insinuations,  this  happens  either
because  the  will  for  truth  does  not  exist  in  him,
or  is  for  the  time  being  suppressed,  and  with  it
the  desire  to  seek  it  out  and  to  diffuse  it ;  that
is  to  say,  for  that  will  has  been  substituted
the  other  of  withdrawing  from  a  painful  labour,
or  of  obtaining  easy  praise  and  gain  ;  so,  for  one
good  has  been  substituted  another.  As  a  rule,
it  is  admitted  that  we  will  the  good  and  do


202 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

evil.  "  I  do  not  do  the  good  that  I  will,  and  I
do  the  evil  that  I  do  not  will "  (ov  jap  b  0e\co
iroiS)  ayaOov,  d\\,a  b  ov  OeXco  fca/cbv  TOVTO  Trpdcr&coj,
said  St.  Paul.1  But  it  is  a  question  of  psycho
logical  confusion,  owing  to  which  a  series  of
moments  and  alternatives  is  simplified  into  one
single  act,  inexistent  because  contradictory.
Affirmative  Thus  evil,  when  real,  does  not  exist  save  in

judgments  of

eviiasnega- the  good, which  opposes and conquers it, and

five  judgments.

therefore  does  not  exist  as  a  positive  fact.
When  on  the  contrary  it  exists  as  a  positive  fact,
it  is  not  evil,  but  good  (and  in  its  turn  has
for  shadow  an  evil,  with  which  it  strives  and
conquers).  The  judgments  that  we  give  when
we  judge  an  action  to  be  foolish  or  wicked,  a
statement  false,  a  work  of  art  ugly,  are  all
metaphorical.  In  delivering  them  we  do  not
mean  to  say  that  there  is  an  existence  called
error,  ugliness,  foolishness,  but  only  that  there
is  a  given  existence  and  that  another  is  wanting.
He  who  has  launched  a  calumny,  dissipated
his  property,  soiled  a  canvas,  printed  a  worth
less  book,  does  not,  strictly  speaking,  deserve
negative  denominations,  because  to  judge  means
to  place  oneself  in  the  conditions  of  the  person
judged,  and  in  those  conditions  there  was

1 Rom.  vii.  19.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 203

neither  evil  nor  ugliness  nor  error  nor  folly ;
otherwise  the  acts  that  are  the  objects  of  the
judgment  would  not  have  been  accomplished,
and  in  so  far  as  they  are  accomplished  they
deserve  positive  judgment.  But  what  is  meant
by  the  negative  form  of  those  judgments  is  that
such  an  act  is  this  and  not  another,  that  it  is
utilitarian  and  not  moral,  a  commercial  and  not
a  literary  or  scientific  fact,  and  so  on.

There  is  a  very  ancient  saying  to  the  effect

&  of  the

that  every  one  seeks  his  own  good  and  that  no  doctrine.
one  deliberately  wills  his  own  evil,  and,  therefore,
that  if  the  practically  good  man  be  the  wise,  then
the  bad  man  can  but  be  the  ignorant.  Now  if
we  remove  from  the  thesis  its  intellectualist
veneer,  and  translate  wisdom  and  ignorance  into
practical  terms,  we  see  that  wickedness  is  here
looked  upon  as  a  limit,  as  a  tendency  toward
the  good,  that  has  failed,  not  as  the  will  for  an
evil.  The  dispute  as  to  who  sins  the  more,  he
who  is  conscious  of  the  evil,  or  he  who  has  no
consciousness  of  it,  is  also  illumined  by  the
theory  that  we  have  here  exposed,  which  declares
that  both  parties  to  the  dispute  are  right  and
wrong.  For  instance,  he  who  is  completely
without  moral  consciousness,  is  morally  innocent,
whereas  he  who  is  more  or  less  possessed  of  one,


204 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

is  also  more  or  less  of  a  sinner,  for  the  law  itself
makes  him  SO  (T//Z>  a^apriav  OVK  eyva)v  €i  fir)  Sta
vopov,  also  said  St.  Paul  *).  But  with  this  saying
it  is  not  desired  to  put  the  innocent  above  the
sinner,  but  the  contrary.  That  declaration  of
ignorance  is  the  gravest  condemnation,  for  it  is
thus  recognized  that  the  individual  in  question
is  unable  to  sin,  and  therefore  unable  to  do
right,  since  the  possibility  of  sinning  is  all  one
with  that  of  doing  right.  The  poet  inspires
admiration,  but  he  who  does  not  know  how  to
be  anything  but  a  poet,  and  is  therefore  unable
to  reason  and  to  act,  is  deficient.  The  shrewd
man  is  praised,  but  he  who  is  only  shrewd  cannot
be  praised.  The  animal  is  a  being,  worthy  of  all
esteem,  but  to  call  a  man  an  animal,  that  is,  to
tell  him  that  he  is  nothing  but  an  animal,  is
to  do  him  a  great  injury.  In  other  words,  while
we  recognize  as  good  all  that  a  man  effectively
does,  we  do  not  intend  to  cancel  the  distinction
between  one  form  and  another  of  human  activity,
and  between  one  act  and  another,  between  the
utilitarian  and  the  moral  man,  between  fanciful
and  logical  production,  between  animal  and  man.
Nor  do  we  mean  that  those  emphatic  expressions
of  negative  character  that  we  continually  utter

1  Rom.  vii.  7.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 205

to  one  another  and  to  ourselves,  and  by  means
of  which  we  urge  ourselves  and  others  to  more
lofty  modes  of  existence,  are  to  be  abandoned.

Here  occurs  an  opportunity  of  tying  a  thread  The  poles  of

feeling  (plea-

that  we  had  left  loose  when  discussing  the  theory  sure  and  pain)

J and  their

of  feeling, or rather the distinction of feeling  ^entity  with

3 their  practical

into  the  two  poles  of  pleasure  and  pain,  under-  °PP°sites-
stood,  not  as  a  psychological  distinction  of  greater
or  less,  or  of  mixed  states,  but  as  a  philosophical
distinction  of  pure  states,  or  of  terms  that  are
truly  opposed.  When  the  vague  and  inde
terminate  term  of  "  feeling  "  is  directed  toward
theoretical  facts  and  is  determined  by  theoretical
philosophy  as  aesthetic  activity  or  speculative
thought,  or  in  some  other  way,  the  terms  of  pleasure
and  pain  are,  strictly  speaking,  not  applicable  to
it.  The  pure  theoretic  activity  considered  in
itself,  cannot  be  polarized,  as  has  been  seen  ;  it
will  always  attain  to  the  beautiful,  always  to  the
true.  Only  in  so  far  as  the  theoretic  activity  is
also  practical  activity,  by  the  law  of  the  unity  of
the  spirit,  will  the  polarization  of  good  and  evil,
which  in  that  case  are  called  beautiful  and  ugly,
true  and  false,  take  place  through  it  if  not  in  it.
If  the  term  "  feeling  "  be  on  the  contrary  directed
to  practical  facts,  and  its  synonymity  with  the
practical  activity  (of  which  feeling  would  be  a


206 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

distinguishing  characteristic)  made  clear  by  the
Philosophy  of  the  practical,  it  is  clear  that  to  it
belongs  immediately  and  no  longer  mediately  that
polarity  of  good  and  evil.  Good  and  evil  then
become  what  theoreticians  of  feeling  call  pleasure
and  pain.  These  terms  are  identical  with  the
preceding,  as  feeling  is  a  fact  identical  with  the
practical  activity,  generically  considered.
Doctrines  This  theory  of  pain  and  pleasure,  as  the

concerning  ....  .

pleasure  and  synonyms  of  the  practical  positive  and  negative,

happiness  :

critique.  helps  to  put  an  end  to  a  long  series  of  questions
arising  in  connection  with  such  concepts.  Above
all,  the  dispute  as  to  whether  pleasure  be  positive
or  negative  will  appear  to  be  unfounded,  and,
therefore,  whether  pain  have  a  positive  or  a
negative  value,  or,  finally,  whether  both  be
negative  :  unfounded,  since  "  pleasure "  means
"  positive"  and  "pain"  "negative."  At  the
most,  it  may  be  admitted  that  pain  has  also  a
positivity,  which  is  however  nothing  but  the
positivity  of  the  negative,  that  is  the  real
existence  of  the  negative  pole. — The  theory
that  man  always  proposes  to  himself  pleasure
as  an  end  is,  on  the  contrary,  not  only  not
unfounded,  but  of  such  evident  truth  as  not  to
require  enunciation,  much  less  efforts  to  prove  it.
If  pleasure  be  nothing  but  activity,  it  is  natural


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 207

that  man  should  have  no  other  end  save
pleasure,  that  is,  activity,  life  itself.  The
correction  that  has  been  suggested  by  others,
to  the  effect  that  man  wills,  not  indeed  pleasure,
but  activity,  of  which  the  outcome  is  pleasure,
has  but  slight  exactitude,  for  the  two  terms
are  not  distinguishable,  and  the  result  is  not
separable  from  the  activity ;  the  pleasure  of
travelling  is  not  separable  from  travelling.  That
polemic  has  value  at  the  most  against  empiricism,
which  limits  pleasure  to  an  arbitrarily  determined
group  of  pleasurable  facts,  that  is  to  say,  circum
scribes  activity  to  certain  particular  manifestations
of  activity,  collected  in  groups  or  classes,  and
substituted  for  the  universal  concept.  Finally,
by  means  of  the  identification  of  pleasure  and
pain  with  good  and  evil  in  general  which  we  have
given,  all  disputes  as  to  the  concept  of  happiness
disappear,  as  to  whether  it  be  or  be  not  distinct
from  that  of  the  good  action,  practically  coherent,
and  if  man  propose  to  himself  happiness  as  an
end.  "  Happiness  "  is  equal  to  "  pleasure,"  and
"pleasure"  is  equal  to  "  activity."  To  will  the
good  (that  is,  to  will  well  and  energetically),  and
to  be  happy,  are  the  same.  The  objection
raised  by  some,  that  man  does  not  will  happiness,
but  a  certain  happiness,  that  he  does  not  will


208 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

pleasure,  but  a  certain  pleasure,  not  the  good,
but  a  certain  good,  is  valid  ;  but  this  only  amounts
to  distinguishing  volitional  man  in  the  act,  from
the  theory  of  the  will,  constructed  by  the
philosopher.  If  Tizio  wishes  at  this  moment  to
go  to  bed  and  Caio  to  take  a  moonlight  walk,
bed  and  walk  are  the  affairs  of  Tizio  and  of  Caio  ;
for  the  philosopher  there  is  no  Tizio,  no  Caio,
but  man  in  universal ;  there  is  neither  bed  nor
moon,  but  pleasure  and  the  good.
Empirical  con-  The  practical  activity,  the  will,  which  is

cepts  relating

to  good  and also strife between good and evil, can be

evil.

illuminated  now  from  this  side  and  now  from
that  by  that  indivisible  unity,  according  to  the
accidents  of  discourse  and  the  varying  situations
of  life.  In  this  way  arises  a  series  of  concepts
which,  in  so  far  as  they  are  unilateral,  are
empirical,  and  only  become  again  philosophical
in  the  thought  of  the  unity  of  which  they  form
part.  Thus,  to  make  use  of  a  comparison,  space
in  geometry  can  be  analyzed  and  split  up  into
a  first,  second,  and  third  dimension ;  but  as
spatiality,  it  is  a  unicum,  which  does  not  possess
either  one  or  two  or  three  dimensions ;  and
when  in  measuring  or  constructing  plans  of
measurement,  we  proceed  to  think  one  of  these
dimensions,  we  become  aware  that  we  cannot


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 209

think  them,  save  all  three  together,  or  not  as
three,  but  as  one.  The  empirical,  practical
concepts  that  arise  upon  the  antithetical  and
dialectical  nature  of  the  will,  have  had  much
importance,  and  it  is  fitting,  therefore,  that  we
should  mention  and  explain  at  least  the  principal
among  tjiem.

If  the  situations  of  life  lead  to  the  directing  Duty  of  being,

ideal,  in-

of  the  attention  chiefly  to  the  aspect  of  the  will  inbitive,  and

imperative

striving  against  inaction  and  arbitrary  choice,  P°™er-
it  is  posited  in  this  strife,  in  this  becoming,  as
something  that  is  not  but  must  be,  not  as  real,
but  as  ideal.  If  the  greatness  of  the  ideal
that  is  to  be  and  to  fill  the  soul  with  joy,  be  set
in  relief  in  this  struggle,  then  the  ideal  appears
sweet  and  smiling,  as  a  joy-bringing  and  beatific
vision.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  effort  of  its
becoming  be  set  in  relief,  the  ideal  can  be  made
into  a  metaphor,  ,as  will  opposed  to  will,  as
legitimate  against  rebellious  will  ;  and  then  it
assumes  a  sour,  rough,  and  hard  appearance,  and
the  names  of  inhibitive  or  imperative  power,  in
so  far  as  it  impedes  the  will,  or  promotes  liberty.

There  is  no  less  opportunity  and  interest  in  EVU,  remorse,


etc "  pood

making clear that relation, from the point of  satisfaction,
view of the negative term, or of evil. A
series  of  descriptive  concepts  then  appears,  which


p


210 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

present  the  consciousness  of  evil,  now  as  obstinate
blindness (cor  induratum), now as disquiet and
scruple,  which  induce  vigilance  and  circumspec
tion, now as humility, which does not permit
forgetting  how  easy  it  is  to  slip  into  evil. But
it  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  series  of  words  and
empirical  concepts that serve to  illuminate  the
satisfaction of  the good, the victory won over
oneself,  tranquillity  of  conscience,  is  far  less  rich.
Perhaps  this  arises  precisely  because  there  is  less
practical  interest in  celebrating the  pleasure  of
victory  than  in  the inculcation  of  the  necessity
for strife and the abhorrence of evil. Why
draw  attention  to  joy  and  to  repose  when  man
is already  too much inclined to allow himself
joy and repose ; does not Life allow them
to itself and cause other problems to follow
on each solution, new perils to follow perils
overpast,  and  the  necessity  for new  struggles?
It  is  therefore  of  importance  to  direct  the  greater
sum of attention to  those aspects from which
the  eye  is  most  frequently  turned  aside. Finally,
these  various  aspects  can  be  placed in  relation
with the  greater  or  less frequency with which
each  appears  in  individuals,  thus  arriving  at  the
construction  of  the  concepts  of  virtue  and  vice,
and  of  the  models  of  the  virtuous  man,  the  honest


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 211

man,  the  deliberate  man,  the  clever  man,  and  their
opposites,  the  vicious,  the  dishonest,  the  unreflective ,
the  incapable  man,  and  so  on.

The  same  thing  happens  with  these  empirical  Their  in
capacity  for
practical  concepts  as  with  all  the  other  empirical  seringas

practical

concepts,  of  which  we  have  spoken  in  general,  principles.
They  have  been  stiffened  into  philosophical  con
cepts,  for  the  hasty  satisfaction  of  the  philosophical
need  of  man.  Hence,  among  others,  many  of  the
disputes  as  to  the  principle  of  the  Philosophy
of  the  practical.  Some  indeed  maintain  that
such  a  principle  is  to  be  found  in  duty  or  the
imperative ;  others  in  the  idea  or  the  ideal,  others
in  the  joy  of  good,  others  in  the  abhorrence  of
pain,  others  in  virtue,  others  in  enthusiasm,  and
so  on.  Each  of  the  above-mentioned  theoreti
cians  has  the  sharpest  eyes  for  the  discovery
of  the  defects  in  the  theories  of  others,  but  is
short-sighted  as  regards  his  own.  Those  who
maintain  the  ideal  satirize  the  form  of  the
categoric  imperative  as  suggestive  of  police  or
gendarmerie  ;  those  of  the  imperative  and  of  duty
deride  the  quietist  form  and  the  insipid  ecstasy
proper  to  the  contemplation  of  ideals  ;  those  of
the  avoidance  of  pain  do  not  spare  their  sarcasms
for  the  hunters  of  joy ;  those  of  joy  call  these
plunged  in  sorrow  hypocrites,  who  also  obtain


212 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

enjoyments  for  themselves,  if  in  no  other  way,
then  secretly :  si  non  caste,  caute.  The  truth
is  that  all  are  wrong  as  philosophers,  because
they  all  find  the  principle  of  the  will,  not  in
itself  but  in  an  empirical  concept,  which  gives
to  it  an  abstract  and  mutilated  appearance.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  all  are  right,  because
those  aspects  are  all  real,  and  in  each  one  of  them
the  others  can  be  implicitly  shown.  The  cate
goric  imperative,  for  instance,  contains  in  itself
both  the  will,  which,  in  so  far  as  it  commands
itself,  is  the  true  will,  the  joy  of  being  and
the  sorrow  of  not  being  what  we  wish  to  be,
the  ideal,  and  the  necessity  of  self-realization,
and  so  of  entering  into  strife  against  irreality,
thus  becoming  imperative,  and  so  on.
its  char-  If  none  of  the  formulae  given  above,  owing

acteristics.

to  their  empirical  character,  be  able  to  indicate
with  precision  the  principle  of  the  Philosophy
of  the  practical,  and  all  are  more  or  less  con
venient  synecdoches,  for  this  reason  none  of
those  concepts  are  to  be  treated  as  rigorous
concepts.  If  they  be  so  treated,  there  is  not
one  of  them,  however  justified  it  may  seem  to
be,  that  is  not  able  to  cause  rebellions  and  has
not  done  so.  The  type  of  the  dutiful  man  has
been  reproached  with  being  so  much  preoccupied


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 213

with  duty  that  he  does  not  really  perform  it,-
because  he  forgets  the  impulse  of  the  heart ;
of  the  type  of  the  virtuous  man  it  is  said  that
he,  as  it  were,  ceases  from  being  so  by  the  very
fact  that  virtue  becomes  in  him  a  profession  ;
of  the  type  of  the  honest  man,  that  there  is
nothing  more  base  than  the  race  of  honest  men  ;
of  the  type  of  the  pious  Aeneas,  that  his  piety
is  egoism ;  and  in  general  of  all  these  cases
it  has  been  recalled  that  a  little  vice  is  necessary
for  virtue,  as  alloy  for  metals.  Repentance  and
remorse,  too,  although  they  be  highly  recom
mended  as  means  of  purification,  have  had  their
detractors  ;  does  it  not  suffice  (they  say)  that
an  evil  deed  has  been  committed  ?  Must  the
offence  be  aggravated  by  losing  time  over  it,
as  though  anything  could  be  remedied  with
sorrowing  and  lamentation  ?  But  others  have
replied  that,  given  human  iniquity,  it  is  better
to  exceed  in  the  matter  of  remorse  than  to  pass
rapidly  over  it.  Humility  has  been  opposed
with  the  sume  superbiam  as  being  more  virile,
and  with  the  laudum  immensa  cupido  as  being
more  noble ;  the  habit  of  self-tormenting  with
the  servile  domino  in  laetitia,  as,  on  the  other
hand,  the  over-confident  has  been  admonished
with  that  other  not  less  biblical  dictum  :  beatus


214 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

homo  qui  semper  est pavidus.  These  are  objections
and  replies  that  may  all  of  them  have  value  for
the  empirical  situations  to  which  they  refer ;
but  they  have  neither  truth  nor  value  in  philo
sophy,  for  which  they  are  all  of  them  false,
because  the  distinctions  from  which  they  derive
are  not  philosophical.  Remorse,  for  instance,  has
a  value,  not  in  itself,  but  as  a  passage  to  activity,
without  which  such  passage  would  not  take  place ;
the  virtuous  habit  has  a  value,  not  in  itself,  but
in  so  far  as  it  is  practised  and  constantly  pre
served  ;  duty  cannot  differ  from  the  aspiration
of  the  soul,  and  both  cannot  differ  from  the
volitional  act ;  confidence  is  at  the  same  time
trepidation,  and  humility  must  be  one  with  the
pride  of  merit.  To  sum  up,  for  the  philosopher,
the  dialectic  of  the  will  is  all  in  the  concept  of
will,  with  its  polarization  of  good  and  evil,  which
is  the  actuality  and  concreteness  of  that  concept.


Ill

THE VOLITIONAL ACT AND THE PASSIONS

IF the volitions followed one another, so to  The  multi
plicity  of
speak  monadistically,  each  one  shut  up  in  itself,  volitions  and

J  the  struggle

simple,  impenetrable,  indecomposible,  it  would  ^  for  unity.
impossible  to  understand  the  moment  that  there
is  in  them  of  arbitrary  choice,  of  evil,  of  con
tradiction.  But  it  is  not  so.  The  individual
is  solicited  simultaneously  by  many  or,  more
exactly,  by  infinite  volitions,  because  the  in
dividual  is  at  every  moment  a  microcosm  and
in  him  is  reflected  the  whole  cosmos,  and  he
reacts  against  the  whole  cosmos  by  willing  in
all  directions.  This  infinity  of  volitions  that
is  in  every  individual,  can  be  proved  by  a  very
obvious  fact :  by  what  occurs  in  the  contempla
tion  of  works  of  art,  in  which  the  same  individual
is  able  to  reconstruct  in  himself  the  most  various
actions  and  psychological  situations,  and  to
feel  himself  in  turn  mild  and  sanguinary,  austere

and  voluptuous, Achilles and Thersites. This

215


216 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

would  not  happen,  had  he  not  to  some  extent
in  himself  the  experience  of  all  these  various
volitional  attitudes.  But  even  if  we  wish  to
restrict  ourselves  to  those  volitions  that  are  the
most  closely  connected  with  the  historical  situa
tion,  thus  limited  as  well  as  may  be  (every
historical  situation  is  in  reality  a  cosmic  situation),
restricting  ourselves  to  what  are  called  volitions
of  the  moment,  we  have  always,  if  not  a  chaos,
certainly  a  multiplicity,  or  at  the  least  a  duality,
of  volitions.  Were  the  individual  to  abandon
himself  to  that  chaos,  to  that  multiplicity,  to  that
duality,  he  would  instantly  be  lacerated,  broken
in  pieces,  destroyed.  But  he  does  not  abandon
himself  to  it,  for  he  is  an  individual,  volitional
and  operating  just  because  he  renounces  that
feigned  richness  of  the  infinite  and  that  pernicious
richness  of  multiplicity  or  duality,  limiting  him
self  on  each  occasion  to  one  single  volition,
which  is  the  volition  corresponding  to  the  given
situation.
Multiplicity  This  volition  is  consequently  the  result  of  a

and  unity  as

bad  and  good,  struggle  in  which  the  individual  drives  back  all
the  other  infinite  volitions,  to  attach  himself  to
that  one  alone  which  the  given  situation  must
and  does  arouse  in  him.  And  when  the  given
volition  does  not  affirm  itself  fully  in  this  struggle,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 217

he  falls  a  victim  to  multiplicity,  in  which  is
found  that  arbitrary  choice  attached  to  a  volition
which  is  not  the  one  that  should  be  willed,
which  he  feels  he  wills  and  that  he  does  will
in  a  way.  Hence  the  will  becomes  split  up
in  different  directions  and  contradictory,  action
not  positive  but  negative,  not  truly  action,  but
rather  passivity.

The  multiplicity  of  volitions  explains  then
the  moment  of  arbitrary  choice,  of  evil,  in  the
practical  activity.  This  could  be  defined  as  the
volition  that  conquers  the  volitions,  as  its  contrary
arbitrary  choice  is  the  contest  of  volitions  with
volition.

The  volitions  that  are  driven  back  on  every  Excluded

volitions  and

occasion and excluded, to make way tor the  the  passions

or  desires.

volitional  act,  are  variously  denominated  in
ordinary  speech  and  by  psychologists  as  appetites,
tendencies,  impulses,  affections,  wishes,  velleities,
desires,  aspirations,  passions.  But,  as  is  usual
with  us,  we  do  not  intend  to  compose  and  defend
such  classes  in  a  naturalistic  and  psychological
sense,  nor  consequently  to  distinguish  appetite
from  desire,  or  affection  from  passion,  with
boundaries  that  must  of  necessity  be  arbitrary
and  undulating.  What  is  of  real  importance  is
only  the  distinction  and  the  precise  boundary,  not


218 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

arbitrary  but  real,  between  the  volition  and  voli
tions,  or,  as  we  can  now  say,  the  relation  between
true  and  proper  volition  and  the  passions  or  desires,
Passions  and  Passions or  desires are and are not  volitions  :

desires  as

possible they  are  not  volitions  in  respect  to  the  volitional

volitions.

synthesis,  which,  by  excluding,  annuls  them  as
such ;  they  are  on  the  other  hand  volitions,  if
considered  in  themselves,  for  they  are  capable
of  constituting  the  centre  of  new  syntheses  in
changed  conditions.  It  has  been  said  that  we
cannot  will  the  impossible,  but  that  we  can
perfectly  well  desire  it.  That  is  not  exact,
because  the  impossible,  the  contradictory,  cannot
even  be  the  object  of  desire.  No  one  wishes  to
find  himself  at  the  same  moment  in  two  different
places,  or  to  construct  a  triangle  that  should
be  at  the  same  time  a  square  :  and  even  if  such
absurd  wishes  be  manifested  in  words,  the  words
will  be  absurd,  but  the  desires  will  either  be
different  from  what  is  stated,  or  they  will  not
exist  even  as  desires.  In  a  certain  aspect  all
desires  are  desires  of  the  impossible  (and  not
only  some  of  them),  if,  that  is  to  say,  we  consider
them  as  volitions  that  have  not  been  realized  and
which  cannot  be  realized  at  that  moment :  but
from  another  point  of  view,  they  are  all  possible,
and  can  indeed  be  precisely  defined  as  possible


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 219

volitions.  This  is  proved  by  their  becoming
gradually  actual  as  the  actual  situation  changes.
If  (to  choose  a  very  simple  illustration)  an  in
dividual  engaged  in  a  certain  work  repel  the
desire  for  food  and  sleep  with  his  volition  and
action,  that  desire  is  nothing  at  that  point,  as
actual  volition  ;  but  it  does  not  for  that  reason
lose  its  intrinsic  volitional  character,  for  when
the  hour  for  the  repast  or  for  sleep  has  struck,  it
passes  from  possibility  to  actuality  and  becomes
the  will  for  food  and  sleep.  The  sophism
previously  criticized,  by  means  of  which  a  bad
and  unsuccessful  act,  that  is  to  say  one  that  is
dominated  by  passion  and  caprice,  is  justified  by
proving  that  it  has  had  a  legitimate  motive  and
answers  to  a  good  intention,  appeals  to  this
character  of  possibility,  possessed  by  all  desires,
and  artfully  changes  it  into  a  character  of
actuality,  thus  substituting  for  the  given  the
imagined  situation.

The relation that  we have  defined between  volition  as

, . .  ,  .  ,  .  conflict  with

volition  and  passions  or  desires  explains  why  the  passions.
the  will  has  often  seemed  to  be  nothing  but  a
conflict  with  the  passions,  and  life  itself  a  battle
(vivere  militare  est\  and  at  other  times  itself
nothing  but  passions.  The  will  is  indeed  homo
geneous  with  the  passions,  and  is  opposed,  not


220 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

to  the  nature  of  the  passions,  which  is  its  own
nature,  but  to  their  multiplicity.  For  this  reason,
it  has  been  said  that  only  passion  acts  upon  the
passions  :  for  the  will  is  a  passion  among  passions.
Even  the  poet  or  the  philosopher,  who  frees  him
self  from  the  passions  by  objectifying  them  and
making  them  material  for  aesthetic  contempla
tion  or  for  speculative  research,  succeeds  in  so
doing,  only  because  he  is  able  to  affirm  the
passion  over  the  passions  :  the  passion  for  poetry
or  for  philosophy.
critique  of  We  must  however  beware  of  enunciating

the  freedom

of  choice.  this  relation  in  a  false  form,  as  happens  with
the  theory  called  freedom  of  choice,  where  the
will  is  conceived  as  the  faculty  that  chooses
one  volition  from  among  others  and  makes  it  its
own.  The  will  does  not  choose  a  volition  (save
metaphorically),  but  so  to  speak  chooses  the
choice  itself,  or  makes  itself  will  among  the  desires
which  are  not  will.  Nor  should  the  possible
actions  that  are  excluded  be  looked  upon  as  con
stituting  a  graduation  in  respect  to  the  spirit,
which  should  will  a  and  not  b,  c,  d,  e,  and  so  on,
attributing  to  them,  nevertheless,  different  values,
which  can  be  symbolized  by  the  declining  series
of  numbers,  passing  downward  from  the  will  which
is  10,  to  9,  8,  7,  6,  and  so  on.  In  reality,  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 221

volitions  that  are  excluded  (b,  c,  d,  e]  have  no
actual  value,  for  the  very  reason  that  they
are  excluded.  They  may  acquire  it  in  other
situations  different  from  the  one  analyzed,  but  it
is  not  possible  to  present  the  various  situations
together  in  one,  and  far  less  to  determine  them
quantitatively  and  numerically,  otherwise  than  in
a  symbolical  manner.  The  propositions  that
present  the  will  sometimes  as  the  strongest
volition  in  respect  to  the  passions  or  desires,
and  sometimes  as  the  weakest  in  respect  to  the
passions,  which  seem  to  be  the  strongest,  that  is,
according  as  we  consider  the  active  or  the  passive
moment  of  the  will,  its  victory  or  defeat,  are  also
metaphorical  and  symbolical.

The  relation  established  receives  further  light  significance  of

the  so-called

from  the  generally  admitted  theory  of  the  necessary  precedence  of

feeling  over  the

precedence  of  the  feelings  as  condition  for  the  volitional  act.
volitional  act.  The  volitional  act  is  preceded  by
a  jostling  multiplicity  of  volitions,  by  a  swarm  of
passions  and  desires,  which  it  dominates  ;  and
therefore  it  may  seem  that  it  follows,  not  the
volition,  but  something  different  from  the  volition,
to  be  called  feeling.  It  is  certainly  different,  but
only  because  it  is  the  plural  of  that  singular.
The  nature  of  the  passions  and  desires  in  respect
to  the  volitional  act  has  not  been  clearly  elucidated,


222 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

and  this  is  another  of  the  reasons  that  have  caused
the  customary  category  of  "feeling"  to  appear
and  to  be  retained.

Finally  and  always  through  the  established
relation,  the  two  opposed  theories  concerning
the  passions  are  excluded :  that  which  makes
the  efficacious  explanation  of  practical  life  to
consist  in  giving  free  course  to  the  passions,
holding  them  all  to  be  sacred  as  such :  this
theory  could  be  called  polipathicism  ;  the  other,
which  makes  it  consist  of  the  eradication  and
destruction  of  all  the  passions,  in  order  to  give
place  to  the  exclusive  domination  of  reason,  of
rational  will,  or  of  the  will  that  really  is  will,  and
could  therefore  be  called  apathicism.

Polipathicism  has  the  defect  of  not  taking
account  among  the  passions  of  that  which  is
passion  par  excellence,  and  which  alone  becomes
actual,  driving  away  the  others :  the  will.
Apathicism  naturally  possesses  the  opposite
defect  and  takes  account  only  of  the  will,  and
therefore  not  of  that  either,  for  the  will  becomes
impotent  when  alone,  just  as  in  the  other
case  it  becomes  a  chaotic  jumble  of  all  the
passions.

Such  views  as  these  are  so  openlv  unsustain-

of  both  opposed  L  J

theses.  able that they hardly appear at all in their


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 223

strictness  and  purity,  in  the  course  of  the  history  of
philosophy,  and  then  fugitively.  But  it  is  desir
able  to  be  attentive  not  to  identify  the  theoretic
formulae  given  above  with  the  programmes  of
certain  groups,  sects,  associations,  or  individuals
who  have  verbally  proclaimed  polipathicism  and
apathicism,  whereas  they  have  implied  something
very  different,  and  could  not  have  done  otherwise.
Complete  polipathicism  and  complete  apathicism
could  only  be  attained  by  the  individual  at  the
cost  of  disaggregation  and  annihilation.  At  the
most,  sects,  groups,  societies,  and  individuals
have  been  able  to  conform  to  those  formulae  as
the  simple  expression  of  tendencies ;  or  those
formulae  are  applicable  to  them  by  hyperbole,  in
the  condemnation  that  it  has  been  held  desirable
to  inflict  upon  certain  unhealthy  tendencies.
Certainly  there  are  individuals  whose  passions
are  in  such  slight  control  as  to  suggest  the
absence  of  will ;  they  run  after  every  one  of
their  desires,  or  leave  their  soul  open  to  the
onset  of  the  passions  that  devastate  it  as  the
wind  and  the  hail  do  the  fields.  Lorenzo  the
Magnificent  (symbolizing  with  his  wonted  finesse
a  profoundly  philosophical  conflict)  said  to  his  son
Piero,  who  was  addicted  to  every  pleasure  and
caprice  :  "  And  I  never  have  any  wish  but  you


224 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

realize  it  for  yourself."1  The  young  rake  whose
adventures  were  sung  by  De  Musset  may  afford
an  example  of  the  same  disaggregation,  composed
of  the  most  violent  kind  of  passions  :

Ce  n'etait  pas  Rolla  qui  gouvernait  sa  vie  :

C'etaient  ses  passions ;  il  les  laissait  aller,

Comme  un  patre  assoupi  regarde  1'eau  couler. . .  .

But  even  in  these  extreme  and  typical  cases
the  will  and  the  dominion  of  the  passions  are
never  altogether  absent :  otherwise  it  would  be
impossible  to  live,  not  only  a  lifetime,  but  a  day,
an  hour,  a  minute.  Thus  too  on  the  other  hand,
no  individual,  be  he  ever  so  apathetic  and  ascetic,
ever  frees  himself  altogether  from  the  dominion  of
the  passions  and  the  desires.  We  read  in  the  life
of  some  saint  or  beatified  personage,  whose  name
escapes  me,  how  he  had  attained  to  so  great  a
degree  of  perfection  that  whatever  food  he
put  into  his  mouth,  he  tasted  nothing  but  dry
straw.  Leaving  to  specialists  the  inquiry  as  to
how  a  stomach  of  so  slight  a  capacity  for  dis
tinguishing  one  aliment  from  another  could  per
form  its  function,  and  also  as  to  the  consequences
for  social  productiveness  of  so  strangely  perfected
an  individual,  it  is  certain  that  in  order  to  nourish

1  L.  Domenichi,  Delia  scelta  dc  motti,  burle  et  f acetic  (Firenze,  1566),
p.  14.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 225

himself  and  live,  the  saint  in  question  must  have
had  the  periodical  appetite  or  desire  of  straw  for
his  food,  if  for  nothing  else.  Apathy  too  is  often
nothing  but  a  most  violent  and  tenacious,
though  disordered,  passion  for  ease.  Activity
in  any  case  reasserts  itself  with  the  dissolving  of
apathy,  a  state  nigh  to  inertia  and  to  death,  when
it  dissolves  grata  vice  veris  et  Favoni,  that  is,  with
the  appearance  of  the  desires,  of  those  "  suave
impulses,"  those  "  heart-beats,"  that  pain,  and
that  pleasure,  which  Giacomo  Leopardi  depicted
in  his  RisorgimentO)  overcome  with  astonishment,
as  though  face  to  face  with  the  mystery  of  life.

The  formulae  of  polipathicism  and  of  apathicism  Their

,  111  •  -i i •  • i  historical  and

have  had  other  contingent  and  historical  mean-  contingent

meanings.

ings,  but  of  a  positive  nature,  which  it  is  fitting
to  examine,  in  order  to  prevent  the  usual
passage,  so  fruitful  of  errors,  from  philosophical  to
empirical  theses.  The  return  to  the  world  and
to  nature,  which  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of
the  Renaissance  and  of  the  Reformation  itself  ;
the  rights  of  the  passions,  which  is  one  of  the  traits
of  Romanticism  in  its  initial  period  ;  neo-paganism,
which  has  given  to  the  Italy  of  our  day  its  most
lofty  poetry  in  the  work  of  Giosue  Carducci,  were
each  in  their  turn  nothing  but  beneficial  reactions
against  the  lazy  monastic  life  of  the  Middle  Ages,


226 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

against  Protestant  pedantry,  against  degenerate
Romanticism,  which  despised  the  real  world  and
dreamed  of  contradictory  ideals.  On  the  other
hand,  in  different  times  and  circumstances,
Christian  ascesis,  Franciscan  poverty,  and  Puritan
strictness  were  beneficial  reactions.  So  true  is
this,  that  we  are  wont  to  unite  in  our  admiration
heroes  of  abstinence  and  heroes  of  the  passions,
assertors  of  the  spirit  and  assertors  of  the  flesh,
for  all,  in  different  ways,  because  in  different
historical  situations,  willed  always  the  elevation
of  humanity.  Every  one  of  those  historical
manifestations  can  be  and  has  been  blamed  and
satirized,  but  only  in  its  decadence,  where  it  has
exhausted  its  proper  function,  and  is  no  longer
truly  itself,  but  its  own  mask.  The  friars  of  the
stories  of  the  sixteenth  century  are  not  the
companions  of  St.  Francis,  as  the  indecent  Italians
of  the  late  Renaissance  are  not  the  active  mer
chants,  philologists,  and  artists  who  promoted  it,
nor  is  there  a  greater  lack  of  historical  sense  than
the  transference  of  the  characteristics  of  the  one
to  the  other,  as  is  the  way  of  vulgar  detractors
and  apologists.  One  and  the  same  historical  fact
(as  has  been  brilliantly  said)  always  shows  itself
twice :  the  first  time  as  tragedy,  the  second  as
comedy.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 227
The  cases  that  we  have  recorded,  which  have

tionofthe

seemed to represent unbridled or exhausted  passions  and

the  will.

passion,  possess  not  a  pathological  but  a  physio
logical  character,  in  so  far  as  they  really  consist  of
a  domination,  a  volitional  synthesis,  which  conquers
and  contains  divergent  and  ruinous  passions.
And  with  this  we  have  answered  the  question
as  to  whether  or  no  the  passions  can  be  domin
ated,  and  whether  man  be  slave  or  free.  We
can  dominate  them,  and  in  that  domination  is  life  ;
if  we  do  not  dominate  them,  we  advance  to  meet
death  ;  to  dominate  or  not  to  dominate  them  are  the
very  poles  of  the  will,  positive  and  negative,  and
we  cannot  think  of  the  one  as  being  abolished
without  thinking  of  the  other  as  also  abolished.

But  the  labour  of  dominating  them  is  hard,  as
all  life,  "  sweet  life,"  is  hard.  The  passions,  driven
back  and  restrained  again  and  again  by  the  will,
yet  rage  within  us,  tumultuous,  though  conquered.
We  tear  out  the  cumbersome  plants,  but  not
their  roots  and  seeds.  The  man  who  considers
himself  hardened  to  the  trials  of  life,  still  feels  and
suffers  :  the  man  who  seems  calm  is  yet  always
agitated  within.  As  the  labour  that  is  called
physical  deposits  poison  at  the  base  of  the
organism ;  so  does  the  labour  called  spiritual
in  the  depths  of  the  soul.  Hence  the  bitterness


228 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

in  those  men  who  have  willed  and  laboured  much  ;
hence  their  cupio  dissolvi,  their  aspiration  for  that
bourne  where  all  is  peace.  The  poet  sublimely
imagines  old  Luther,  after  his  victories,  in  the
midst  of  the  people  awakened  by  him  to  a  new
life  :

Yet  with  a  backward  look,  he  sighed  :
Call  me,  O  God,  to  thee,  for  I  am  tired,
Nor  without  malediction  can  I  pray  !


IV

VOLITIONAL HABITS AND THE INDIVIDUALITY

JUST  because  the  passions  are  possible  volitions  Passions  and

states  of  the

and  therefore  always  have  a  definite  content,  it  soui.
is  no  slight  error  on  the  part  of  writers  of
treatises,  to  consider  joy  and  sorrow,  enthusiasm
and  depression,  content  and  discontent,  tranquillity
and  remorse,  and  other  antithetical  couples,  as
passions.  These  couples  are  empirical  concepts
constructed  upon  the  dialectical  distinction  of
freedom  and  anti-freedom,  of  good  and  evil ;  but
the  groups  of  the  passions  must  on  the  contrary
be  empirical  concepts  formed  upon  the  basis  of
the  varying  determination  of  the  volitional
activity,  according  to  objects,  that  is  to  say,  in  its
particular  determinations.  Thus  we  can  talk  of
the  passion  for  celebrity,  for  science,  for  art,
for  politics,  for  riches,  for  luxury,  for  women,
for  the  country,  for  the  city,  for  sport,  for  fish
ing,  and  so  on,  with  infinite  subdivisions  and

complications.

229


I'T.


Passions
understood  as

volitional
habits.


Their
importance.


23o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

The  distinction  usually  drawn  between  the
affections,  the  impulses,  the  desires  on  the  one
hand  and  the  passions  on  the  other,  is  on  the
contrary  justified,  though  it  always  has  an
empirical  character  ;  these  being  considered,  not
as  the  single  and  instantaneous  desire  or  impulse
that  prompts  to  a  single  action,  but  as  an  in
clination  or  habit  of  wishing  and  of  willing  in
a  certain  direction.  In  this  sense,  passion  would
be  a  generic  concept  (always  empirical),  which
could  be  divided  (empirically)  into  the  classes  of
the  virtues  and  vices  ;  for  virtue  is  nothing  but
the  passion  or  habit  of  rational  actions,  and  vice
the  contrary.

These  passions  and  volitional  habits  are  not
rigidly  fixed,  for  nothing  in  the  field  of  facts  is
rigidly  fixed.  As  the  bed  of  the  river  regulates
the  course  of  the  river  and  is  at  the  same  time
continuously  modified  by  it,  so  is  it  with  the
passions  and  volitional  acts,  which  reality  keeps
forming  and  modifying,  and  in  modifying,  forms
anew  and  in  forming  modifies.  For  this  reason
there  is  always  something  arbitrary  in  defining
habits  as  though  they  corresponded  to  a  distinct
and  limited  reality ;  and  for  this  reason  the
concepts  of  them  are  arbitrary  and  empirical.
Habits  are  not  categories,  nor  do  they  give  rise


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 231

to  distinct  concepts ;  but  they  are  the  like  in
the  unlike,  unlike,  itself  also,  in  itself,  although
discernible  in  a  certain  way  from  other  groups
of  dissimilar  facts.  Their  importance  is  great,
because  they  constitute,  as  it  were,  the  bony
structure  of  the  body  of  reality.  In  them  in
dividuality  understood  as  an  empirical  concept,
has  its  foundation,  for  which,  if  it  be  not  sub
stance,  neither  is  it  a  complex  of  casually
divergent  states.

The  nature  of  the  passions  as  volitional  habits  The  control

of  the  passions

to  be  both  fixed  and  mobile,  that  is  to  say,  only  in  so  far  as

they  are

relatively  fixed  and  relatively  mobile,  is  the  v°^ft°snal
principle  that  aids  the  solution  of  several  much-
debated  and  certainly  important  questions  of  the
Philosophy  of  the  practical.  And  in  the  first
place,  the  passions  being  understood  as  habits,  the
answer  to  the  question  as  to  whether  or  no  they
can  be  controlled,  and  if  the  answer  be  in  the
affirmative,  then  in  what  limits,  receives  a  some
what  different  meaning,  which  explains  the  interest
which  that  question  has  always  aroused.  Nothing,
in  fact,  removes  our  consciousness  of  freedom
and  personality  in  so  brutal  a  manner  and
makes  us  feel  our  impotence  and  misery  in  so
depressing  a  way,  as  to  find  ourselves  with  our
good  intention  and  action  hardly  begun,  face  to


232 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

face  with  the  unchained  forces  of  our  passions
and  of  the  habits  that  oppose  it,  which  drown
with  their  deafening  clamour  the  weak  and  timid
voice  of  the  incipient  action,  vex  it  with  their
arrogance,  and  drag  it  along  paths  well  known
and  abhorred.  We  fall  then  into  mistrust  and
baseness,  believe  ourselves  lost  for  ever  ;
freedom  and  will  seem  to  be  fables  for  the
adornment  of  sermons  and  the  books  of  moralists.
The  sage  who  recalls  to  man  the  absolute  empire
that  he  possesses  over  his  passions  and  exhorts
him  never  to  be  troubled  and  to  repeat  the  twenty
or  four-and-twenty  letters  of  the  alphabet,  so
that  the  spirit  may  have  time  to  recuperate  its
strength,  to  resist  and  to  conquer,  seems  to  utter
the  insipid  babble  of  one  who  has  never  truly
loved  and  hated,  and  to  measure  the  full  and
overflowing  souls  of  others  on  the  model  of  his
own  empty  or  almost  empty  soul.  We  laugh
freely  at  the  "  short  legs "  of  ideals  and  good
intentions,  and  read  again  with  satisfaction  not
undiluted  with  bitterness,  some  little  story  like
Voltaire's  Memnon  ou  la  sagesse  humaine,  which
bears  as  motto  the  very  appropriate  epigraph  :

Nous  tromper  dans  nos  entreprises,
C'est  a  quoi  nous  sommes  sujets  :
Le  matin  je  fais  des  projets,
Et  le  long  du  jour  des  sottises ;


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 233

or  at  the  most  they  conclude  that  there  is  no  way
to  free  oneself  from  a  bad  passion  save  with
another  one  equally  bad,  from  a  vice  with  a  vice,
"  as  from  a  plank  we  pluck  with  nail  a  nail."

Nevertheless,  he who  torments himself  and  Difficulty  and

reality  of

gets  angry,  or  laughs  and  draws  such  conclusions  dominating
as  these,  is  not  in  the  right.  That  is  to  say,  he
is  right  to  laugh  at  ingenuous  sages  and  at  odious
preachers  and  moralists,  for  their  theories  are
certainly  simplicist  and  false.  But  he  is  wrong
in  not  understanding  that  his  own  theory  is  also
simplicist  and  false,  for  it  runs  into  the  opposite
extreme. — Habits  and  passions  are  habits  and
passions,  because  slowly  formed  :  it  is  therefore
a  vain  illusion  to  attempt  to  destroy  them  at  a
blow.  Perhaps  it  is  believed  that  the  passions
are  tender  flowerets  or  grasses  that  a  child  has
attached  to  the  surface  of  the  soil  ?  They  are  a
rank  growth,  strong  oaks  whose  roots  dive  deep
into  the  earth  ! — That  is  most  true,  but  it  is  not
for  this  reason  impossible  to  modify  and  destroy
them.  They  are  indeed  actually  modified,  for
that  very  pain,  that  very  disappointment,  are  a
beginning  of  modification ;  since  we  do  not
persist  in  what  we  abhor  and  follow,  dragged
along  by  force  ;  and  little  by  little  we  end  by
freeing  ourselves.  The  process  of  freeing


234 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

ourselves  from  the  passions,  or  from  vicious
habits,  then,  is  effective,  but  slow,  as  the
formation  of  those  habits  has  been  slow.  We
do  not  cure  an  illness  with  a  sudden  act  of  will,
but  nevertheless  the  will  guides  and  directs  the
process  of  healing,  and  can  open  or  close  the
entrance  to  the  medicinal  forces  of  nature.  Now
the  passions  or  vicious  habits  are  maladies  that
must  follow  their  course,  which,  in  order  to  be
beneficial,  must  coincide  with  the  cure.  The
sages  who  give  receipts  for  freeing  ourselves
from  them  immediately  are  the  Dulcamaras  of
moral  maladies ;  but  the  existence  of  the
Dulcamaras  should  not  impel  us  to  deny  the
existence  of  doctors,  and  above  all  of  ourselves
as  doctors  of  ourselves.  And  we  should  certainly
adopt  a  very  bad  and  illusory  method  of  cure,  were
we  to  accept  the  method  so  often  recommended,
of  destroying  passion  with  passion,  or  vice  with
vice,  thus  adding  vice  to  vice,  as  those  who  treat
the  illnesses  of  the  body  with  narcotics  or  with
stimulants  often  add  malady  to  malady.
Volitional  Habits,  then,  not  less  than  single  volitional

habits  and

individuality,  acts,  of  which  they  were  and  are  composed,  can
be  and  are  continually  conquered  and  modified,
in  so  far  as  they  are  opposed  to  the  new  volitional
syntheses.  This  confirms  what  has  already  been


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 235

said  in  criticizing  the  polipathetic  view,  which
ignores  the  volition  for  the  volitions,  as  the
virtuous  habit  is  ignored  in  favour  of  vicious  habits.
But  the  theory  of  apathicism  is  also  to  be  found
in  this  field,  and  it  is  needful  to  assert  in
opposition  to  it,  the  great  importance  proper  to
the  volitional  habits  in  giving  concrete  form  to
virtue.  This  second  critical  thesis  is  that  which
affirms  the  value  of  individuality  or  peculiarity
in  the  practical  field.

Every individual is furnished by mother  Negations  of

individuality

nature  with  certain  definite  habits,  according  \.Q  for  uniformity

and  their

the  contingencies  of  reality  among  which  he  critique.
enters  the  world  ;  and  he  acquires  yet  others  in
the  course  of  life,  owing  to  the  actual  condi
tions  through  which  he  passes  and  to  the  works
that  he  accomplishes.  Those  habits  which  he
has  from  birth  are  called  aptitudes,  disposi
tions,  natural  tendencies :  the  others  acquired.
The  individual  in  his  reality  is,  as  has  been
said,  nothing  but  these  groups  of  habits  and
changes  as  they  change.  Now  is  it  rational  and
possible  (the  two  questions  here  form  one)  that
the  individual  in  his  willing  and  acting  should  rid
himself  of  such  habits?  Is  it  possible  to  consider
them  as  things  without  value  ?  Is  it  possible
to  establish  an  antithesis  between  individu-


236 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

ality  and  rational  action,  as  between  good  and
evil  ?• — The  levellers  who  claim  to  impose  the
same  task  upon  all  and  wish  to  make  of  the
female  a  male,  of  the  poet  a  reasoner,  of  the
man  of  science  a  warrior,  of  the  saint  a  man
of  business,  and  thus  to  give  to  every  one  a
part  of  the  task  of  others  ; — the  dreamers  of  a
future  society,  in  which  all  this  shall  have  been
done,  and  the  poet  should  attend  to  his  poem,
after  having  played  the  philosopher  for  a  couple
of  hours,  for  another  couple  of  hours  the  tailor,
and  for  yet  another  two  the  waiter  at  an  inn  ; —
all  the  pedants  of  abstract  regularity,  whom  we
meet  to  our  great  annoyance  in  life ; — behold
the  apathicists  appear  anew,  for,  as  in  the  theory
of  the  volitional  act,  they  advocated  an  abstract
action,  conducted  by  the  rational  will  alone  in
the  void  of  the  passions ;  so  here,  they  advocate
an  abstract  rational  habit,  in  the  theory  of
volitional  habits,  a  model  of  human  activity,  to
which  all  individuals  would  be  obliged  to  con
form.  Perhaps  some  such  sensible  observation
as  this  of  Vauvenargues  should  suffice  to  confute
them  :  //  ne  faut  pas  beaucoup  de  reflexion  pour
faire  cuire  un  poulet ;  et,  cependant,  nous  voyons
des  hommes  qui  sont  toute  leur  vie  mauvais
rotisseurs :  taut  il  est  ndcessaire  dans  tous  les


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 237

metiers,  dy  etre  appeld  par  ^m  instinct  particulier
et  comme  incttpendant  de  la  raison.  But  since
it  might  be  said  that  we  wish  to  solve  a  grave
question  with  a  joke,  we  will  recall  that  the
volitional  acts  and  the  passions,  volition  and
the  volitions,  are  of  the  same  nature  (though
the  one  is  actual  and  the  others  only  possible),
and  that  the  nature  of  willing  implies  actual
definite  situations,  and  that  for  this  reason  we
never  will  in  universal  but  always  in  particular.
In  the  same  way  virtue,  the  virtuous  habit  of
the  will,  is  not  of  a  different  nature  to  the
volitional  habits  in  general,  to  the  passions,
but  is  particular  and  individual  as  they  are.
Those  who  make  war  upon  individual  habits
never  succeed  in  substituting  for  them  a  universal
habit,  which  is  inconceivable,  but  at  the  most
other  habits,  equally  particular  and  individual.
The  poet  who  will  play  the  farmer,  the  tailor,  and
the  waiter,  in  the  imagined  society  of  the  future,
will  do  all  these  things  as  a  poet.  This  may
perhaps  be  an  advantage,  but  may  also  perhaps
be  the  contrary,  as  future  consumers  of  grain,
of  garments,  and  of  repasts  will  become  aware.
For  the  rest,  do  we  not  even  now  see  women
devoting  themselves  to  the  severe  studies  of
philology,  of  philosophy,  and  of  mathematics  ?


238 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

But  with  the  rarest  exceptions,  they  remain
always  women  :  their  production,  which  is  with
out  originality,  is  not  like  that  of  man,  done
with  the  complete  dedication  of  the  whole  being  to
the  search  for  truth  and  of  artistic  perfection  ;
and  if  in  the  midst  of  the  most  abstruse  inquiry,
the  image  of  themselves  as  wife  or  mother  pass
through  their  minds,  they  desert,  at  the  critical
moment,  the  philosophical  categories,  the  formulae
of  flexions,  the  ruled  or  tangential  spaces,  and  sigh
for  their  unborn  sons  and  for  the  husband  that
they  have  not  found.  Is  this  distortion  of  natural
habits  useful  ?  Generally  speaking,  it  is  not.
It  is  a  doing  and  an  undoing,  a  despisal  of
the  riches  wisely  accumulated  and  capitalized  by
Reality  in  the  course  of  its  evolution.
Temperament  Certainly  the  disposition  natural  or  acquired

and  character. .  .

indi/erence  of  is not  virtue,  and  the temperament  (since  tem-

temperament.

perament  is  nothing  but  the  sum  of  habits  and
aptitudes)  is  not  character.  But  virtue  and
character  presuppose  habits  and  passions,  of
which  they  give  the  rational  and  volitional
synthesis :  they  are  the  form  of  that  matter.
And  as  matter  considered  in  the  abstract  is
neither  good  nor  bad,  so  the  habits  and  the
passions  (as  has  been  very  well  observed)  are
not  in  themselves  either  virtues  or  vices :  they


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 239

are  facts.  And  it  is  necessary  to  take  account
of  facts ;  otherwise,  they  revenge  themselves.
On  the  other  hand,  habits  and  passions  certainly
change  ;  but  not  all  of  a  sudden  and  capriciously,
rather,  little  by  little,  and  always  on  the  basis
of  existing  habits  and  passions.

The  first  duty  of  every  individual  who  wishes  The  discovery

of  the  proper

to  act  effectively,  consists,  therefore,  in  seeking  self.
for  himself,  in  exploring  his  own  dispositions,  in
establishing  what  aptitudes  have  been  deposited
in  him  by  the  course  of  reality,  both  at  the
moment  of  his  birth,  and  during  the  develop
ment  of  his  own  individual  life :  in  knowing,
that  is  to  say,  his  own  habits  and  passions,
not  in  order  to  make  of  them  a  tabula  rasa,
but  to  use  them.  The  search  is  not  easy  and
the  preparatory  part  of  life,  namely  youth,  is
spent  upon  it.  Few  are  the  fortunate  individuals
who  have  at  once  a  clear  and  certain  knowledge
of  their  own  being  and  of  their  duty;  the
majority  seek  and  find  it  after  many  wanderings  ;
and  if  such  wanderings  sometimes  (as  is  written
in  the  dedication  of  the  Scienza  nuovd)  "seem
misfortunes  and  are  opportunities,"  at  others  they
are  but  a  fruitless  moving  to  and  fro ;  hence
those  that  are  undecided  during  the  whole  of
their  lives,  the  eternal  youths,  those  who  aspire


24o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

to  all  or  to  many  of  the  directions  of  human
activity  and  are  incapable  in  all.  But  when
our  own  being  unveils  itself  and  we  see  our
path  clearly,  then  to  disordered  agitation  suc
ceeds  the  calm  of  sure  and  regular  work,  with
its  defeats  and  victories,  its  joys  and  sorrows,
but  with  the  constant  vision  of  the  Aim,  that
is,  of  the  general  direction  to  be  followed.
Vainly  will  he  who  is  endowed  and  prepared
for  guiding  mankind  in  political  strife  and  has
a  clear  and  lively  perception  of  human  strength
and  weakness,  of  what  can  and  of  what  cannot
be  done,  and  is  furnished,  so  to  speak,  with
practical  sense  (with  the  sense  of  complications
and  slight  differences),  will  try  (save  in  the
rarest  and  most  exceptional  cases,  and  this
reserve  is  to  be  understood  in  all  that  we  are
saying  here)  to  acquire  a  place  among  those
who  cultivate  the  abstract  and  universal,  opera
tions  demanding  almost  opposite  aptitudes ;
vainly  will  he  who  was  born  to  sing  attempt
to  calculate  ;  vainly  will  he  whose  mind  and
soul  were  made  to  accentuate  dissensions  in
their  bitter  strife  bend  himself  to  be  a  con
ciliator  and  a  peacemaker.  It  is  worse  than
superfluous,  it  is  stupid  to  weep  over  one's
choleric  or  phlegmatic  temperament.  There


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 241

have  been  choleric  saints  that  have  even  used
the  stick,  and  phlegmatic  saints  who  have  suc
ceeded  admirably  in  patient  persuasion :  the
mild  Francis,  "  all  seraphic  in  his  ardour,"  and
the  impetuous  Dominic  "  whose  blows  fell  on
the  boughs  of  heresy."  Reality  is  diversity  and
has  need  of  both,  and  each  is  praiseworthy  if
he  do  that  well  to  which  he  has  been  called.

This  concept  of  the  vocation  has  a  mystical  and  The  idea  of

"  vocation."

religious  origin  and  preserves  that  form  ;  but  it  is
clear  that  by  means  of  the  previous  considerations
we  have  divested  it  of  that  form  and  reduced
it  to  a  scientific  concept.  The  individual  is
not  a  "  monad  "  or  a  "real,"  he  is  not  a  "soul"
created  by  a  God  all  in  a  moment  and  all  of  a
piece ;  the  individual  is  the  historical  situation
of  the  universal  spirit  at  every  instant  of  time,
and,  therefore,  the  sum  of  the  habits  due  to
the  historical  situations.  Those  modes  of  con
ceiving  and  talking  of  one  and  the  same  individual
in  two  different  situations,  or  of  two  different
individuals  in  the  same  situation,  are  to  be
avoided,  because  individual  and  situation  are
all  one.  But  when  the  individual  has  been
thus  defined,  it  remains  none  the  less  true
that  each  individual  must  direct  his  life  according
to  pre-existing  habits  and  personal  dispositions,


242 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

and  thus  we  discover  the  true  meaning  of  the
mythologies  and  religions  that  have  been  men
tioned,  and  the  struggles  to  find  the  suitable
employment  can  be  expressed  with  the  words
that  religion  has  taught  us  when  we  were  children  :
the  "  vocation  "  and  the  special  "  mission  "  that
is  allotted  to  us  in  life,  until  the  last  giving  of
accounts  and  the  words  of  dismissal  and  repose  :
Nunc  dimitte  servum  tuum,  Domine  !  We  are
the  children  of  that  Reality  which  generates  us
and  knows  more  than  we,  the  Reality  of  which
religions  have  caught  a  glimpse  and  called  it
God,  father,  and  eternal  wisdom.

The affirmation of the rights that belong

standings  as  to

the  rights  of to  individuality  in  the  practical  field  has  several

individuality.

Evil  times assumed and still assumes  (in our time,

individuality.  v

more  than  in  the  past,  owing  to  materialism
and  naturalism)  a  form,  no  longer  symbolical
and  mystical,  but  wrong  and  irrational,  that
it  is  desirable  to  remark  upon  here,  always  in
order  to  avoid  possible  equivoques.  Indeed
many  look  upon  the  respect  due  to  their  own
beings  as  due  to  their  caprice,  that  is  to  say,
to  what  is  on  the  contrary  the  negation  of
being  :  the  right  of  the  individual  as  the  right
to  commit  follies,  or  to  a  disaggregate  individu
ality.  The  declared  necessity  of  temperament


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 243

for  character  is  exchanged  for  admiration  of
temperament  considered  in  itself,  which,  as
such,  is  neither  admirable  nor  blameworthy ;
but  when  separated  from  character  becomes
vice  and  folly.  Hence  the  admiration  that
has  even  become  a  literary  fashion,  for  the
dissolute,  for  the  violent,  for  homicides,  for  the
criminals  of  the  public  prisons,  illustrated  by
a  few  courageous  and  energetic  souls  among
them,  whereas  they  are  as  a  rule  weak,  vile,
and  turbid.

Various  theories  are  also  erroneous,  in  which  False  doctrines
it has been sought to establish the relation  connection  of

virtues  and

between  the  passions  and  the  will,  temperament  vices-
and  character,  passions  and  temperament  being
understood  as  vicious  passions  and  evil  tempera
ment  ;  that  is,  not  in  themselves,  but  in  their
antithesis  to  the  rational  will :  hence  the  vain
arid  paradoxical  attempts  to  join  together  and
harmonize  virtue  and  vice.  Thus  it  has  been
maintained  that  in  certain  vices  are  foreshadowed
the  virtues  which  will  or  can  be  developed  from
them  ;  for  instance,  military  valour  in  ferocity,
industrial  capacity  in  greed ;  whereas  ferocity
and  greed  are  wilful  acts  and  contradictions
incapable  of  generating  any  virtue,  as  is  seen
in  the  customary  cowardice  of  the  ferocious  and


244 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

the  ineptitude  of  the  greedy  and  covetous.  Such
a  connection  of  virtues  and  vices  has  on  other
occasions  been  presented  as  a  mixture  or  co-
temperament,  and  it  has  been  affirmed  that
the  vices  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  virtues,
as  do  poisons  into  the  composition  of  medicines.
Finally,  virtue  and  vice  have  been  placed  in
causal  relation,  and  the  causes  of  civil  progress
have  been  found  in  human  vices.  But  the  vices,
as  they  are  not  the  antecedents,  so  are  they
neither  the  ingredients  nor  the  causes  of  the
virtues.  These  are  strength,  those  the  lack  of
strength.  It  is  generally  affirmed  that  in  every
individual  the  virtues  are  accompanied  by  their
correlative  vices,  but  if  this  possess  some
approximate  value  as  an  empirical  observation,
strictly  speaking  it  has  none,  because  men  can
be  conceived  and  are  actually  found,  whose
virtue,  far  from  yielding  to  excesses  and  to  vices,
is  eurythmic  and  temperate.  But  perhaps  that
common  saying  aims  at  something  else  that  it
fails  of  explaining  well ;  namely,  that  every  power
has  its  impotence  and  every  individual  his  limit ;
but  this  does  not  mean  vice  or  defect ;  it  is  nothing
but  the  tautological  affirmation  that  the  part  is
not  the  whole  and  the  individual  not  the  universal.
But  if  the  individual  do  not  exhaust  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 245
universal, the universal lives in individuals  ;  The  universal

in  the

Reality  in  each  of  its  particular  manifestations,  individual  and

education.

Therefore  the  affirmation  of  the  right  of  indi
viduality  does  not  deny  the  right  of  universality  ;
or  it  denies  it  only  in  that  abstract  form  in  which,
to  tell  the  truth,  it  is  by  itself  denied.  The
individual  is  under  the  obligation  to  seek  himself,
but  in  order  to  do  this  he  has  also  the  obligation
of  cultivating  himself  as  man  in  universal.  A
school  that  represented  simply  a  cultivation  of
individual  aptitudes,  would  be  a  training,  not
an  education,  a  manufactory  of  utensils,  not  a
nursery  of  spiritual  and  creative  activities.  The
true  specialism  is  universalism,  and  inversely,
which  means  that  if  the  universal  do  not  act
without  specializing  itself,  yet  specialization  is  not
really  specialization  if  it  do  not  contain  uni
versality.  If  the  two  terms  that  are  by  nature
indissoluble  be  divided,  there  remains  only  fruit
less  generalization  or  stupid  particularization,  and
if  our  times  have  sinned  in  this  latter  respect,
other  times  have  sinned  in  the  opposite.  He  is
well-balanced  who  between  these  two  forms  of
degeneration  both  knows  and  fills  his  own  proper
and  individual  mission  so  perfectly  that  he  fulfils
at  the  same  time  with  it  and  through  it  the
universal  mission  of  man.


DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRESS

Multiplicity  THE  demonstration  hitherto  developed,  that  evil

and  unity  ;

development.  [s  negativity  or  contradiction,  and  that  this  con
tradiction  takes  place  owing  to  the  multiplicity  of
the  desires  in  respect  to  the  singleness  of  char
acter  of  the  volitional  act,  gives  rise  to  the  further
question:  Why  should  there  be  such  a  multiplicity,
concurrent  with  the  demand  for  unity,  and  thus
be  generated  strife  and  contradiction  ?  Here  it
would  be  fitting  to  observe  that  we  must  have
filled  our  mouths  very  uselessly  for  a  century
with  the  word  evolution,  if  such  a  question  as
this  be  renewed,  or  we  remain  bewildered  and
embarrassed  before  it.  For  the  reason  of  that
fact,  which  seems  without  a  reason,  is  to  be  found
precisely  in  the  concept  of  "evolution"  This
concept  resumes  most  ancient  views,  and  has
been  substituted  in  modern  times  for  that  of  an
immovable  Reality,  of  a  God  who  exists  perfect

and  satisfied  in  himself,  and  creates  a  world  for

246


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 247

his  own  transitory  pleasure  ;  or  for  a  complex  of
beings,  eternally  the  same,  with  variations  that
are  only  apparent.  The  concept  of  evolution
has  entered  so  profoundly  into  the  blood  and  bones
of  modern  man  that  even  those  repeat  it  who
would  be  incapable  of  analyzing  and  understand
ing  it  ;  even  the  least  acute  of  all,  the  positivist
philosophers  who  like  to  call  themselves  "  philo
sophers  of  evolution."

But  before  it  acquired,  as  a  vague  and  confused  Becoming  as

....  .  synthesis  of

formula,  so  great  a  publicity  as  quite  to  amount  to  being  and  not-
being.
popularity,  a  philosopher  of  genius  had  analyzed

and  synthetized  it,  induced  and  deduced  it  in
an  unsurpassable  manner,  with  the  speculative
formula  of  reality  as  becoming ;  that  is,  as  syn
thesis  of  being  and  not-being,  being  and  not-
being  being  thus  unthinkable  separately,  and
only  thinkable  in  their  living  connection,  which
is  becoming  and  development  (evolution).  Reality
is  development,  that  is,  infinite  possibility  that
passes  into  infinite  actuality  and  from  the  multi
plicity  of  every  instant  takes  refuge  in  the  one,
to  break  forth  anew  in  the  multiple  and  produce
the  new  unity.  The  inquiry  into  the  dialectic  of
the  volitional  act  enters  in  this  way  into  the  very
heart  of  reality.  In  order  to  deny  multiplicity,
contradiction,  evil  and  not-being,  it  would  be


248 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

necessary  to  deny  at  the  same  time  unity,  coher
ence,  good  and  being.
Nature  as  But  if  by  the  theory  that  has  been  recorded

becoming. Its

resolution  in  we  have  explained  the  necessity  of  evil  for  good,
or  the  necessity  of  the  not  necessary  for  the
necessary  in  the  volitional  act  of  man,  the  identi
fication  of  the  volitional  act,  which  is  man's,  with
reality  which  is  of  the  universal  whole,  might
seem  to  be  too  audacious.  For  (it  will  be  said)
the  complex  of  other  beings,  that  we  are  wont  to
separate  from  the  complex  of  human  beings  and
to  oppose  to  it  as  nature,  either  is  motionless
and  does  not  develop,  or  develops  without
any  consciousness  of  good  and  evil,  of  pleasure
and  pain,  of  value  and  disvalue.  Both  theses
have  been  maintained  and  nature  has  been
represented,  now  as  without  history,  now  as  develop
ing  itself  in  an  unconscious  or  mechanical  manner.
But  the  contradictions  and  absurdities  of  both
theses  have  been  together  perceived.  "  Motion
less  beings  "  is  a  phrase  without  meaning,  to  such
a  degree  that  even  empirical  science  has  every
where  pushed  its  way  into  history,  and  has  talked
of  the  evolution  of  animals  and  vegetables,  of  the
chemical  elements,  and  even  of  a  history  of  light
and  heat.  The  other  expression,  "  unconscious
beings,"  is  not  less  empty,  because  being  and


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 249

activity  are  not  otherwise  conceivable  save  in
the  way  that  we  know  our  being,  which  is
consciousness ;  and  although  empirical  science
certainly  points  to  more  and  more  rudimentary
and  tenuous  forms  of  consciousness  in  beings,
always  differently  individualized,  yet  it  has  never
been  able  to  demonstrate  the  absolutely  uncon
scious.  If  so-called  nature  be,  it  develops,  and
if  it  develop,  cannot  do  so  without  some  con
sciousness.  This  deduction  is  not  a  matter  of
conjecture,  but  a  logical  and  irrefutable  con
sequence.  What  is  there,  then,  that  persists  in
men's  souls,  as  an  obstacle  to  the  acceptance
of  this  consequence,  in  accordance  with  the  pro
found  belief  of  humanity  in  a  community  of  all
beings  with  one  another  and  with  the  Whole,
as  manifested  in  philosophies  and  in  religions,  in
the  speculations  of  the  learned  and  in  ingenuous
popular  beliefs?  A  scholastic  prejudice,  an  idol
of  the  intellect,  the  hypostasis  of  that  concept  of
"nature"  that  Logic  has  taught  us  is  nothing  but
the  abstract,  mechanicizing,  classifying  function  of
the  human  spirit ;  a  prejudice  arising  from  the
substitution  of  the  naturalistic  method  for  reality,
by  which  a  function  is  changed  and  materialized
into  a  group  of  beings.  Those  idealists  were
also  slaves  of  the  error  of  a  like  hypostasis,


250 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

who,  though  they  thought  everything  as  an
activity  of  the  spirit,  yet  stopped  when  face  to
face  with  Nature,  making  of  it  an  inferior  grade
of  the  Spirit,  or,  metaphorically,  a  spirit  alienated
from  itself,  an  unconscious  consciousness,  a
petrified  thought,  and  creating  for  it  a  special
philosophy  (as  though  all  the  other  did  not
suffice),  entitled  precisely,  Philosophy  of  nature.
But  modern  thought  knows  henceforth  how  man
creates  for  his  use  that  skeleton  or  mannequin  of
an  immobile,  external  mechanical  nature,  and
he  is  no  longer  permitted  to  fall  back  into
equivoque  and  substitute  this  for  entity  or  for  a
complex  of  entities.  Nor  should  he  find  any
difficulty  in  discovering  everywhere  activity,
development,  consciousness,  with  its  antitheses
of  good  and  evil,  of  joy  and  sorrow.  Certainly
the  stars  do  not  smile,  nor  is  the  moon  pale  for
sorrow  :  these  are  images  of  the  poets.  Certainly
animals  and  trees  do  not  reason  like  men  ;  this,
when  it  is  not  poetry,  is  gross  anthropomorphism.
But  nature,  in  her  intimate  self,  longs  for  the
good  and  abhors  the  evil,  she  is  all  wet  with
tears  and  all  a-shiver  for  joy ;  strife  and  victory
is  everywhere  and  in  every  moment  of  universal
life.

This  conception  of  reality,  which  recognizes  the


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 251
indissoluble  link  between  good  and  evil,  is  itself  optimism  a

pessimism  :

beyond  good  and  evil,  and  consequently  surpasses  critique.
the  visual  angles  of  optimism  and  pessimism — of
optimism  that  does  not  discover  the  evil  in  life  and
posits  it  as  illusion,  or  only  as  a  very  small  and
contingent  element,  or  hopes  for  a  future  life  (on
earth  or  in  heaven)  in  which  evil  will  be  suppressed  ;
and  of  pessimism,  that  sees  nothing  but  evil  and
makes  of  the  world  an  infinite  and  eternal  spasm
of  pain,  that  rends  itself  internally  and  generates
nothing.  It  confronts  the  first  with  the  fact  that
evil  is  truly  the  original  sin  of  reality,  ineliminable
so  long  as  reality  exists,  and  therefore  absolutely
ineliminable  as  a  category :  the  second,  with
the  other  category  the  good,  equally  ineliminable,
for  without  it  evil  could  not  be.  And  it  is  easy
to  show  how  the  optimist  declares  himself  a
pessimist,  the  pessimist  an  optimist,  out  of  their
own  mouths.  The  setting  free  from  individuality
and  from  will,  which  the  pessimist  proposes  as
a  radical  remedy,  is  the  remedy  that  reality
itself  applies  at  every  moment,  for  we  free  our
selves  from  the  contradiction  of  individuality  and
of  wilfulness  by  the  affirmation  of  the  rational
will,  with  which  the  same  pessimist  cannot  dis
pense,  for  the  effectuation  of  his  programme  of
ascesis  or  of  suicide,  which,  according  as  it  is


252 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

understood,  is  either  not  a  programme,  or  a
programme  altogether  capricious  and  without
universal  value.  In  truth,  there  is  no  need  to
oppose  a  eulogy  of  Life  with  a  eulogy  of  Death,
since  the  eulogy  of  Life  is  also  a  eulogy  of
Death ;  for  how  could  we  live,  if  we  did  not  die
at  every  instant  ?
Dialectic  The  dialectic  conception  of  reality  as  develop-

optimism,

ment,  that  is,  as  a  synthesis  of  being  and  not-
being,  can  certainly  be  termed  optimistic,  but
in  a  very  different  signification  to  that  of  abstract
optimism.  The  synthesis  is  the  thesis  enriched
with  its  antithesis,  and  the  thesis  is  the  good,
being,  not  the  bad  or  not-being.  But  who  will
wish  seriously  to  oppose  this  logical  consequence?
Is  it  not  a  fact  that  men  hope  and  live,  although
in  the  midst  of  their  sorrows  ?  Is  it  not  a  fact
that  the  world  is  not  ended  and  does  not  appear
to  have  any  intention  of  ending  ?  And  how
would  that  be  possible,  if  the  moment  of  the
good  did  not  prevail,  just  because  the  positive
prevails  upon  the  negative  and  Life  constantly
triumphs  over  Death  ?
Concept  of  This  continuous  triumph  of  Life  over  Death

cosmic  progress,

constitutes  cosmic  progress.  Progress,  from  the
point  of  view  whence  we  have  hitherto  regarded
it,  that  of  individualized  activity,  is  identical


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 253

with  activity  ;  it  is  the  unfolding  of  this  upon
passivity.  Every  volitional  act,  like  every
theoretical  act,  is  therefore  to  be  considered  in
itself,  that  is,  only  in  relation  to  the  given  situa
tion  from  which  it  breaks  forth.  In  every  new
situation  the  individual  begins  his  life  all  over
again.  ^  But  from  the  cosmic  point  of  view,  at
which  we  now  place  ourselves,  reality  shows  itself
as  a  continuous  growing  upon  itself;  nor  is  a  -T*
real  regress  ever  conceivable,  because  evil  being
that  which  is  not,  is  irreal,  and  that  which  is  is
always  and  only  the  good.  ]  The  real  is  always
rational,  and  the  rational  is  always  real.  Cosmic
progress,  then,  is  itself  also  the  object  of  affirma
tion,  not  problematic,  but  apodictic.

The  difficulties  that  can  be  and  are  opposed  objections  and

critique  of

to  this  thesis  all  arise  from  the  confusion  of  the  them.
truly  rational  with  that  which  is  falsely  so  called,
between  the  true  real  and  that  which  improperly
assumes  this  name,  that  is,  between  the  real
and  the  unreal.  Thus  will  be  remembered  the
instance  of  the  end  of  the  great  Grseco-Roman
civilization,  without  adequate  parallel  in  universal
history,  followed  by  the  return  of  barbarism  in
the  Middle  Ages ;  or  the  common  example  of
the  shipwreck  of  noblest  enterprises ;  or  (to
remain  in  the  field  that  more  nearly  interests


254 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

us)  the  philosophic  decadence,  owing  to  which,
a  mean  positivism  was  able  to  follow  the  idealism
of  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  which
stands  to  the  former  as  the  eloquence  of  an  Attic
orator  to  the  stuttering  of  an  ignorant  school
boy.  Did  the  Middle  Age,  then,  represent  an
advance  upon  that  Rome,  whose  memory  lingered
in  the  fancy  as  an  image  of  lost  dignity  during
that  same  Middle  Age  ?  Was  the  victory  of
European  reaction  over  the  citizen  civilization  of
the  Revolution  and  of  the  Empire  progress?  and
in  Lombardy,  the  new  Austrian  domination
following  upon  the  Kingdom  of  Italy?  or  in  the
Neapolitan  provinces  the  Bourbon  restoration
after  the  Republic  of  1799  and  the  French
Decanate  ?  Was  Comte  an  advance  upon  Kant,
Herbert  Spencer  upon  Hegel  ?  But  different
points  of  view  are  confused  under  the  same  name
in  these  questions,  and,  therefore,  we  do  not
succeed  in  immediately  arranging  those  facts
beneath  the  principle  that  has  been  established.
It  is  therefore  necessary  to  analyze.  It  will  then
be  immediately  seen  that  ancient  civilization,  in
what  it  possessed  of  truly  real,  did  not  die,  but
was  transmitted  as  thought,  institutions,  and
even  as  acquired  aptitudes ;  hence  it  kept  re
appearing  in  the  course  of  the  centuries  and  still


ACTIVITY  IN GENERAL 255

keeps  reappearing  :  it  certainly  died  in  what  it
had  of  unreal,  that  is  to  say,  in  its  contradictions,
for  instance,  in  its  incapacity  to  find  political  and
economic  forms  answering  to  the  changed  con
ditions  of  spirits.  In  like  manner,  the  Middle
Age,  which  was  evidently  in  part  progress,
because  it  solved  problems  left  unsolved  by  the
preceding  civilization,  posed  others  that  it  did
not  solve  and  that  were  solved  in  the  succeeding
centuries ;  but  if  the  posing  of  these  new
problems,  which,  while  destroying  the  old,  failed
to  substitute  provisionally  anything,  was  apparently
not  progress,  neither  was  it  regress,  but  the  begin
ning  of  new  progress.  The  same  is  to  be  said  of
precursors,  conquered  in  their  time,  but  conquerors
in  history,  of  the  restorations  and  reactions  that
are  so  only  in  name,  because  they  contain  in
themselves  that  with  which  they  contend,  if  for  no
other  reason,  then  for  the  very  reason  that  they
contend  :  of  heroes  and  initiators,  who  were  con
quered  and  martyrized,  yet  knew  that  they  were
triumphing  and  did  triumph  in  dying  ;  the  cross
and  the  pyre  will  become  symbols  of  victory :  in
hoc  signo  vinces.  And  finally,  if  the  positivism
of  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  seem
as  a  whole  so  greatly  inferior  to  idealism,  that
comes  from  its  not  being  philosophy  at  all,  but  a


256 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

hybrid  jumble  of  natural  sciences  and  metaphysic,
thus  intensifying  an  error  that  already  existed  in
germ  in  idealism,  and  fecundating  the  problem
for  a  better  solution.  Many  philosophers  living
to-day  are  inferior  to  Socrates,  because  they
have  not  even  risen  to  the  knowledge  of  the
concept ;  but  those  who  in  our  day  have  attained
to  the  level  of  Socrates,  are  superior  to  him,
because  besides  his  thought  they  contain  in
themselves  something  that  Socrates  had  not ;  and
those  philosophers  who  are  logically  on  a  level
with  Protagoras,  surpass  him,  just  because  they
are  the  Protagorases  of  the  twentieth  century.
There  is  therefore  never  real  regression  in
history ;  but  only  contradictions  that  follow  upon
solutions  given,  and  prepare  new  ones.
individuals  The  solutions,  once  attained,  are  acquired  for
and  History.  ^^ .  ^  problems  that  have  once  been  solved,
do  not  again  occur,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,
they  recur  in  a  different  way  to  those  of  the  past.
The  web  of  History  is  composed  of  such  labours,
to  which  all  individuals  collaborate  ;  but  it  is  not
the  work  and  cannot  be  the  purpose  of  any  of
them  in  particular,  because  each  one  is  exclusively
intent  on  his  particular  work,  and  only  in  rem
suam  agere,  does  he  also  do  the  business  of  the
world.  History  is  happening,  which,  as  has  been


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 257

seen,  is  not  to  be  judged  practically,  because  it
always  transcends  individuals,  and  to  these  and  not
to  history  is  the  practical  judgment  applicable.
The  judgment  of  History  is  in  the  very  fact  of  its
existence  :  its  rationality  is  in  its  reality.

This  historical  web,  which  is  and  is  not  the  Fate.,  Fortune,
work  of  individuals,  constitutes,  as  has  been  Providence.
said,  the  work  of  the  universal  Spirit,  of  which
individuals  are  manifestations  and  instruments.
In  this  way  are  implicitly  excluded  those  views
which  attribute  the  course  of  things  to  Fate,  to
Fortune,  or  to  Chance,  that  is,  to  mechanism  or
caprice,  both  of  them  insufficient  and  one-sided,
like  determinism  and  free  will,  each  one  invok
ing  the  other  when  it  becomes  aware  of  its  own
impotence.  The  idea  of  mechanical  origin,  of  an
evolution  that  takes  place  by  the  addition  of  very
minute  elements,  is  now  being  abandoned,  even
for  that  fragment  of  history  called  History  of
Nature  (the  only  true  and  possible  Philosophy
of  Nature),  in  which  is  beginning  to  reappear
the  theory  of  successive  crises  and  revolution,
and  the  idea  of  freedom,  whose  creations  are
not  to  be  measured  or  limited  mathematically.
But  the  supreme  rationality  that  guides  the  course
of  history,  should  not,  on  the  other  hand,  be  con
ceived  as  the  work  of  a  transcendent  Intelligence


258 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

or  Providence,  as  is  the  case  in  religious  and
semi-fanciful  thought,  which  does  not  possess
other  value  than  that  of  a  confused  presentiment
of  the  truth.  If  History  be  rationality,  then  a
Providence  certainly  directs  it  ;  but  of  such  a
kind  as  becomes  actual  in  individuals,  and  acts,
not  on,  but  in  them.  This  affirmation  of  Provid
ence  is  not  conjecture  or  faith,  but  evidence  of
reason.  Who  would  feel  in  him  the  strength  of
life  without  such  intimate  persuasion  ?  Whence
could  he  draw  resignation  in  sorrow,  encourage
ment  to  endure  ?  Surely  what  the  religious
man  says,  with  the  words  "  Let  us  leave  it
in  God's  hands,"  is  said  also  by  the  man  of
reason  with  those  other  words  :  "  Courage,  and
forward  "  ?
The  infinity  The  Spirit,  which  is  infinite  possibility  passing

of  progress

and  mystery.  jnto  infinite  actuality,  has  drawn  and  draws
at  every  moment  the  cosmos  from  chaos,  has
collected  diffused  life  into  the  concentrated  life  of
the  organ,  has  achieved  the  passage  from  animal  to
human  life,  has  created  and  creates  modes  of  life
ever  more  lofty.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  not
finished  and  never  will  be  finished.  Our  yearn
ing  for  something  higher  is  not  vain.  The  very
yearning,  the  infinity  of  our  desire,  is  proof  of  the
infinity  of  that  progress.  The  plant  dreams  of


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 259

the  animal,  the  animal  of  man,  man  of  superman  ;
for  this,  too,  is  a  reality,  if  it  be  reality  that  with
every  historical  movement  man  surpasses  himself.
The  time  will  come  when  the  great  deeds  and
the  great  works  now  our  memory  and  our  boast
will  be  forgotten,  as  we  have  forgotten  the
works  and  the  deeds,  no  less  great,  of  those
beings  of  supreme  genius  who  created  what
we  call  human  life  and  seem  to  us  now  to  have
been  savages  of  the  lowest  grade,  almost  men-
monkeys.  They  will  be  forgotten,  for  the
documents  of  progress  is  in  forgetting ;  that  is,
in  the  fact  being  entirely  absorbed  into  the  new
fact,  in  which,  and  not  in  itself,  it  has  value.
But  we  cannot  know  what  the  future  states  of
Reality  will  be,  in  their  determined  physiog
nomy  and  succession,  owing  to  the  "  dignity"
established  in  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical,
by  which  the  knowledge  of  the  action  and  of
the  deed  follows  and  does  not  precede  the
action  and  the  deed.  Mystery  is  just  the  infinity
of  evolution :  were  this  not  so,  that  concept
would  not  arise  in  the  mind  of  man,  nor  would
it  be  possible  to  abuse  it,  as  it  has  been  abused
by  being  transported  out  of  its  place,  that  is  to
say,  into  the  consciousness  of  itself,  which  the
spiritual  activity  should  have  and  has  to  the


26o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

fullest  degree,  that  is,  the consciousness of  its

eternal  categories.

illegitimate  The  neglect  of  the  moment  of  mystery  is  the

fof  ^concept' true  reason  of  the  error  known  as  the  Philosophy

of  mystery  11

from  history Of  history ',  which  undertakes  to  portray  the  plan

to  philosophy.

of  Providence  and  to  determine  the  formula  of
progress.  In  this  attempt  (when  it  does  not
affirm  mere  philosophemes,  as  has  very  often
happened),  it  makes  the  vain  effort  to  enclose  the
infinite  in  the  finite  and  capriciously  to  decree
concluded  that  evolution  which  the  universal
Spirit  itself  cannot  conclude,  for  it  would  thus
come  to  deny  itself.  In  Logic  that  error  has
been  gnoseologically  defined  as  the  pretension  of
treating  the  individual  as  though  it  were  the
universal,  making  the  universal  individual ;  here
it  is  to  be  defined  in  other  words  as  the  pretension
of  treating  the  finite  as  though  it  were  the  infinite,
of  making  the  infinite  finite.
confirmation  But  the  unjustified  transportation  of  the  concept

of  the  impossi
bility  of  a of  mystery  from history, where it indicates  the

Philosophy  of

history.  future  that  the  past  prepares  and  does  not  know,

into  philosophy,  causes  to  be  posited  as  mysteries
i  which  give  rise  to  probabilities  and  conjectures,
problems  that  consist  of  philosophical  terms,  and
should  therefore  be  philosophically  solved.  But
if  the  infinite  progress  and  the  infinite  perfectibility


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 261

of  man  is  to  be  affirmed,  although  we  do  not
know  the  concrete  forms  that  progress  and  per
fectibility  will  assume  (not  knowing  them,  because
now  it  imports  not  to  know,  but  to  do  them),  then
there  is  no  meaning  in  positing  as  a  mystery
the  immortality  of  the  individual  soul,  or  the
existence  of  God  ;  for  these  are  not  facts  that
may  or  may  not  happen  sooner  or  later,  but
concepts  that  must  be  proved  to  be  in  themselves
thinkable  and  not  contradictory,  or  to  determine
in  what  form  they  are  thinkable  and  not  contra
dictory.  Their  thinkability  will  indeed  be  a
mystery,  but  of  the  kind  that  it  is  a  duty  to
make  clear,  because  synonymous  with  obscurity
or  mental  confusion.  What  has  so  far  been
demonstrated  has  been  their  unthinkability  in  the
traditional  form.  Nor  is  it  true  that  they  corre
spond  to  profound  demands  of  the  human  soul.
Man  does  not  seek  a  God  external  to  himself  and
almost  a  despot,  who  commands  and  benefits
him  capriciously  ;  nor  does  he  aspire  to  an  im
mortality  of  insipid  ease  :  but  he  seeks  for  that
God  which  he  has  in  himself,  and  aspires  to  that
activity,  which  is  both  Life  and  Death.


TWO ELUCIDATIONS RELATING TO HISTORIC AND
AESTHETIC

The  relation FROM  the  consideration  of  the  practical  activity

of  desires  and  .....  ,.  • i r  i  i

actions;  and in  its  dialectic,  and  in  particular  from  the  theory

two  problems  of

Historic  and  of  relating  to  desire  and  to  action,  shines  tortn,  it

^Esthetic.

we  mistake  not,  the  full  light  that  has  hitherto
perhaps  been  invoked  in  vain  upon  certain  capital
points  of  Historic  and  Esthetic,  which,  when
treating  of  those  disciplines,  we  were  obliged
either  hardly  to  touch  upon,  or  to  develop  in  a
manner  altogether  inadequate.  The  reason  of
this  was  that  an  adequate  development,  to  be
convincing,  demanded  as  presupposition,  a  minute
exposition  as  to  the  nature,  the  relations  and  the
constitution  of  the  practical  activity,  all  of  them
things  that  could  not  be  treated  incidentally.
History  and  History  or  historical  narrative  is,  as  we  know,

very  closely  related  to  art,  in  contradistinction  to

the  abstract  sciences,  since  both  art  and  history

262


art.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 263

do  not  construct  concepts  of  class,  but  represent
concrete  and  individuated  facts.  History,  how
ever,  is  not  art  pure  and  simple,  but  is  dis
tinguished  from  it,  because  artistic  representation
is  in  it  continually  illuminated  with  the  critical
distinction  between  the  real  and  the  possible,
what  has  happened  and  what  has  been  imagined,
the  existing  and  the  inexisting,  with  the  conse
quent  determinations  connected  with  them,  as  to
this  or  that  particular  mode  of  reality,  event,
and  existence,  that  have  taken  place.  In  every
historical  narrative  are  always  to  be  found,
understood  or  implied,  the  affirmations  that  the
narrative  is  real,  that  a  different  narrative  would
be  imaginary,  that  the  reality  of  the  event  in
question  properly  belongs  to  this  or  that  concept
of  politics,  rights,  war,  diplomacy,  economy,  and
so  on.  All  this  is  quite  absent  from  art,  which
is  by  nature  ingenuous  and  free  of  critical
discernment ;  so  much  so,  that  hardly  have
its  representations  become  objects  of  reflection,
than  they  are  dissolved  as  art,  to  reappear  with
a  changed  appearance  (no  longer  youthful,  but
virile  or  senile),  as  history.

But  if  this  distinction  between  art  and  history  The  concept  of

existentiality

be  precisely  determined  gnoseologically,  when  it  *»  history.
has  been said that  in history  the  predicate of


264 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

existentiality  is  added  to  mere  representation
(and,  therefore,  all  the  other  predicates  con
nected  with  the  case,  referring  to  the  various
forms  of  existence),  and  that  therefore,  the  re
presentative  and  artistic  form  of  history  contains
in  itself  rational  and  philosophical  method  as
precedent,  yet  there  always  remains  the  ulterior
philosophical  problem  :  What  is  the  origin  of  that
predicate  of  reality  or  existentiality  on  which  all
the  others  lean  ?  We  have  already  demonstrated
that  it  was  altogether  inadmissible  to  derive  it
from  a  mysterious  faculty  called  Faith,  or  to
consider  it  as  the  apprehension  of  something
extraneous  to  the  spirit  in  universal,  as  a  datum
or  position.  And  we  also  stated  that  if  the  spirit
recognize  its  existence,  yet  it  cannot  attain  to
the  criterion  elsewhere  than  from  itself;  which
criterion  was  nothing  but  the  first  reflection  of
the  spirit  upon  the  practical  activity  itself,  giving
rise  to  the  duplication  of  reality  that  has  happened
and  reality  only  desired,  or  of  reality  and  irreality,
of  existing  and  inexisting.
in  All  this  now  becomes  a  simple  consequence

the  Philosophy

of  the  practical:  of  the connection that has been made clear

action  and  the

existing, between desire and action. The cognoscitive

desires  and

the  unexisting.  spirit,  when  it  apprehends  and  ideally  remakes  this
connection,  has,  in  enunciating  it,  also  enunciated


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 265

for  the  first  time  the  couples  of  terms  that
we  have  already  mentioned  and  that  variously
express  the  criterion  of  existence.  To  distinguish
desires  from  actions  is  tantamount  to  distinguish
ing  the  unreal  from  the  real,  the  existing  from
the  unexisting,  and  to  think  the  practical
act  is  tantamount  to  thinking  the  concept  of
existence  and  of  effectual  reality.  For  the
determination  of  the  relation  between  desire
and  action,  and  only  for  that,  the  criterion  of
existence  is  not  necessary,  because  that  relation
is  itself  that  criterion.  To  say  "  this  is  a  desire  "
means,  "this  does  not  exist";  to  say  "this  is  an
action  "  means,  "  this  exists."  The  desires  are
possibility ;  the  resolutive  and  volitional  act  or
action,  is  actuality.  And  it  is  also  evident  that  exist
ent  and  inexistent  are  not  separable,  as  though
the  inexistent  were  heterogeneous  to  the  existent ;
the  inexistent  exists  in  its  way,  as  possibility
is  possible  reality ;  the  phantasm  exists  in  the
fancy  and  desire  in  the  spirit  that  desires.  Thus
the  posing  of  the  one  term  is  also  the  posing  of
the  other,  as  correlative.  What  is  repugnant
and  contradictory  is  the  introduction  of  the  one
term  into  the  other.  This  takes  place,  for
instance,  when  in  narrating  the  history,  reality
that  has  happened  is  mingled  as  one  single


266 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

thing with reality  dreamed  of  or desired, and
history  is  turned  into  legend.
History  as  It  can  be  said  that  history  always  represents

distinction

between  actions  actions,  and  in  this  is  implicit  that  it  represents

and  desires,

and  art  as at the same  time  also  desires, but  only  in  so

indistinction.

far  as  it  distinguishes  them  from  actions :  history,
therefore,  is  perception  and  memory  of  percep
tion,  and  in  it  fancies  and  imaginations  are  also
perceived  as  such  and  arranged  in  their  place.
And  it  would  also  be  possible  to  say  that  art
represents  only  desires,  and  is  therefore  all  fancy
and  never  perception,  all  possible  reality  and
never  effectual  reality.  But  since  to  art  is  wanting
the  distinctive  criterion  between  desires  and
actions,  it  in  truth  represents  actions  as  desires  and
desires  as  actions,  the  real  as  possible,  and  the
possible  as  real ;  hence  it  would  be  more  correct
to  say  that  art  is  on  the  near  side  of  the  possible
and  the  real,  it  is  pure  of  these  distinctions,  and
is  therefore  pure  imagination  or  pure  intuition.
Desires  and  actions  are,  we  know,  of  the  same
stuff,  and  art  assumes  that  stuff  just  as  it  is,
careless  of  the  new  elaboration  that  it  will
receive  in  an  ulterior  grade  of  the  spirit,  which
is  indeed  impossible  without  that  first  and  merely
fantastic  elaboration.  Likewise  when  art  takes
possession  of  historical  material,  it  removes


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 267

from  it  just  the  historical  character,  the  critical
elements,  and  by  this  very  fact  reduces  it  once
more  to  mere  intuition.

It must further be noted that the purely  The  purely

fantastic  and

fantastic,  which  is  the  representation  of  a  desire,  the  imaginary.
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  mechanical
combination  of  images,  that  can  be  made  idly,
for  amusement,  or  for  practical  ends.  This
operation  (analogous  to  that  of  the  intellect
upon  the  pure  concepts  and  representations,
when  it  arbitrarily  combines  them  in  the  pseudo-
concepts),  is  secondary  and  derivative  ;  and  it
presupposes  the  first,  which  provides  it  with
the  material  that  it  cuts  up  and  combines.
Nothing  is  more  extraneous  and  repugnant  to
poetry  than  this  artificial  imagining,  precisely
because  it  is  external  and  repugnant  to  reality.
Hence  his  would  be  a  vain  objection  who  should
coldly  and  capriciously  combine  the  most  different
images  and  ask  for  an  explanation  of  the  whole,
with  desire  as  the  fundamental  principle.  Such
combinations  as  these,  since  they  do  not  belong
to  poetry,  are  void  of  real  psychical  content.

But  if  the  relation  between  desire  and  action  Artasiyricai

or  representa-

be  the  ultimate  reason  for  the  distinction  between  Hon  of  feelings.
art  and  history,  and  this  distinction  be  the  theo
retical  reflection  of  that  real  relation,  the  concep-


268 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

tion  of  art  as  representation  of  volitional  facts,
taken  in  their  quite  general  and  indeterminate
nature,  in  which  desire  is  as  action  and  action  as
desire,  reveals  why  art  affirms  itself  as  repre
sentation  of  feeling,  and  why  a  work  of  art  does
not  seem  to  possess  and  does  not  possess  value,
save  from  its  lyrical  character  and  from  the
imprint  of  the  artist's  personality.  The  work  of
art  that  reasons  or  instructs  as  to  things  that
have  happened,  and  finds  a  substitute  for  intimate
and  lyrical  connections  in  historical  reasonings
and  connections,  is  justly  and  universally  con
demned  as  cold  and  ineffectual.  We  do  not  ask
the  artist  for  a  philosophical  system  nor  for  a
relation  of  facts  (if  all  this  is  to  be  found  in  his
work  it  is  per  accidens),  but  for  a  dream  of  his
own,  for  nothing  but  the  expression  of  a  world
desired  or  abhorred,  or  partly  desired  and  partly
abhorred.  If  he  make  us  live  again  in  this
dream  the  rapture  of  joy  or  the  incubus  of  terror,
in  solemnity  or  in  humility,  in  tragedy  or  in
laughter,  that  suffices.  Facts  and  concepts,  and
the  question  as  to  the  metaphysical  constitution
of  reality  and  how  it  has  been  developed  in
time,  are  all  things  that  we  shall  ask  of  others.
identity  of  It  may  seem  that  in  this  way  the  field  of  art

ingenuous

reality  and  has been much restricted and the ingenuous

feeling.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 269

representation  of  the  real  excluded  from  it.  But
this  ingenuous  representation  is  just  the  repre
sentation  of  reality  as  dream.  For  reality  is
nothing  (as  we  henceforth  know)  than  becoming,
possibility  that  passes  into  actuality,  desire  that
becomes  action,  from  which  desire  springs  forth
again  unsatiated.  The  artist  who  represents  it
ingenuously,  produces  the  lyric  for  this  very
reason.  For  him  there  is  no  necessity  to  reach
it  from  without,  as  a  new  element :  if  he  do
this,  he  is  a  bad  artist,  and  will  be  blamed  as
a  hunter  of  emotions,  emphatic,  convulsive,  weari
somely  sentimental,  forcedly  jocose,  an  introducer
of  his  own  caprice  into  the  coherence  of  the  work,
a  confounder  of  his  empirical  with  his  artistic  per
sonality,  which  exists  in  the  empirical  individual,
but  is  not  equivalent  to  it.  The  feeling  that
the  true  artist  portrays  is  that  of  things,  lacrymae
rerum  ;  and  by  the  identity  of  feeling  and  volition,
of  volition  and  reality  already  demonstrated  in  the
Philosophy  of  the  practical,  things  are  themselves
that  feeling.  The  characteristic  that  Schelling
and  Schopenhauer  noted  in  music,  of  reproducing,
not  indeed  the  ideas,  but  the  ideal  rhythm  of  the
universe,  and  of  objectifying  the  will  itself,  belongs
equally  to  all  the  other  forms  of  art,  because  it  is
the  essence  itself  of  Art,  or  of  pure  intuition.


2;o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL rr.

An  obvious  confirmation  of  this  theory  is  also
the  empirical  observation  often  made,  that  the
men  who  lose  themselves  in  desires  are  rather
poets  than  men  of  action,  dreamers  rather  than
actors ;  and  in  respect  to  this,  that  poets  who
seem  to  have  the  soul  overflowing  with  energetic
plans,  magnanimous  loves,  and  fierce  hatreds  are
the  most  incapable  in  the  field  of  action,  and  the
worst  of  captains  in  practical  struggles  ;  because
those  plans,  those  loves  and  hates,  are  not  will,
but  desires,  and  desires  already  weakened  as
such,  because  they  are  no  longer  in  process  of
volitional  synthetization,  but  have  become  the
objects  of  contemplation  and  of  dream.  He
who  reads  the  biographies  of  artists,  or  has
dealings  with  artists  in  daily  life,  almost  always
has  the  impression  that  their  gusts  of  passion
are  nothing  but  poetry  about  to  break  forth,  as
a  green  bud  that  opens  and  breaks  the  brown
sheath.  And  if  this  process  be  painful,  that  is
because  every  travail  of  birth  is  painful.  One
sees,  indeed,  how  everything  generally  ends  par
des  chansons.  A  fine  poem  and  the  sufferer  is
calm  again.

This  also  explains  why  individual  actions  and
practical  collective  movements  are  accompanied
with  hopes,  beliefs,  and  myths.  These  have  no


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 271

logical  or  historical  truth,  but  it  is  on  the  other
hand  impossible  to  criticize  them,  because  they
are  not  error,  but  fantastic  projection  of  the
state  of  soul  of  individuals  and  groups  of  indi
viduals  in  action,  and  testify  to  the  existence
of  desires  ready  to  transform  themselves  into  will
and  action.  Utopias  are  poetry,  they  are  not
practical  acts ;  but  beneath  that  poetry  there  is
always  the  reality  of  a  desire  that  is  a  factor  of
future  history.  Hence  it  also  happens  that  poets
are  thought  of  as  seers,  when  the  Utopia  of  to-day
becomes  the  reality  of  the  morrow.  The  Utopian
and  semipoetic  Address  of  the  Italian  patriots  to
the  Directory  of  June  18,  I799,1  the  not  less
Utopian  Proclamation  of  Rimini  of  1815,  the  song
of  Manzoni,  in  which  rang  out  the  fateful  verse,

We  shall  not  be  free  if  we  are  not  one,

will  become,  for  the  Italians  of  1860,  effective
action  and  historical  event.

Pure intuition, ingenuous representation Q{  Art  as  the  pure

representation

reality, representation of  feeling, lyricism and  of  becoming
personal intonation, are then all equivalent  artistic  form

of  thought.

formulae,  all  of  them  definitions  of  the  aesthetic
activity  and  of  art.  And  it  would  be  superfluous
to  repeat  that  art  thus  characterized  remains

1  B. Croce, Relazioni dei  patrioti napoletani col Direttorio e col
Consolato  e  F  idea  delF  unita  italiana,  Napoli,  1902,  pp.  69-73.


272 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

the  concrete  form  of  the  superior  theoretical
grades  of  the  spirit.  In  fact,  logical  thought
or  concept  is  also  volition,  owing  to  the  unity
of  the  spirit,  and  the  representation  of  such  voli
tion  is  the  logos  made  flesh,  the  concept  that
incorporates  itself  in  language,  palpitating  with
the  drama  of  its  becoming.  What  word  of  man
is  there  that  is  not  personally  and  lyrically
coloured,  whether  he  communicate  the  truth
of  science  or  narrate  the  incidents  of  life  ?
And  how  could  we  deny  a  place  among  the
dramas  that  agitate  human  life  and  art  portrays,
to  that  drama  of  dramas,  which  is  the  drama  of
thought  and  of  the  historical  comprehension  of
the  real  ?


VII

HISTORICAL ANNOTATIONS

I. FOR  the  reasons  stated  in  their  place,  a  history  The  problem

of  freedom.

of  the  concept  of  freedom  would  end  by  becom
ing  almost  a  general  history  of  philosophy.
Denied  in  different  ways  in  the  mechanistic  and
deterministic  conceptions  (from  the  Stoics  to
Spinoza),  and  in  the  theological  and  arbitraristic
(from  Epicurus  to  St.  Augustine  and  the  mystics),
that  concept  afterwards  continually  assumed  a
more  and  more  conciliatory  form ;  an  indica
tion  that  the  question  must  be  put  in  an  alto
gether  different  way.  This  movement  culminated
in  the  Kantian  theory,  in  which  freedom,  de
fended  against  the  psychologists,  is  withdrawn
from  natural  causality  and  affirmed  a  priori,  as
causality  by  means  of  freedom  ;  but,  at  the  same
time,  Kant  did  not  succeed  in  fully  justifying
it,  owing  to  his  failure  in  the  solution  of  the
antitheses,  the  defect  of  the  Kantian  philosophy,
which  never  really  became  a  system.  The

273  T


274 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

embarrassments and absurdities to which the
unsolved  antithesis  between  liberty  and  causality
gives  rise,  are  sufficiently  exemplified  in  a  pro
position  to  be  found  in  the  Critique  of  Practical
Reason  :  "  It  would  be possible  to  foresee  what
man  will  do  in  the  future,  if  we  possessed  all  the
facts; yet he would be perfectly free."1 But
notwithstanding these contradictions and em
barrassments, the energetic affirmation of  the
principle of freedom by Kant (which had an
altogether  special  certitude  in  Kant,  in  respect  to
the  other  two  postulates  of  the  practical  reason,
God  and  immortality,  from  which  in  this  respect
it  was  distinguished)  helped  to  make prevalent
the  conviction  of  the  impossibility  of  eliminating
that  concept  or  of  escaping  from  it,  and  made  of  it
the  field  of  battle,  where  the  fortunes  of  philosophy
were  decided. The problem  of  the*  freedom  of
willing  is  really  solved  or  near  to  a  solution, in
those  philosophies which do not fatigue them
selves  with  it  as  a  particular  problem,  but  treat
of  it as something  to  be understood of  itself,
provided  there  be  a  non- mechanistic  conception
of reality, such as would not need special
defence. This happens, not only with senti
mentalists and mystics such as Jacobi and

]  Kr.  d.  prakt. Vern.  p.  119.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 275

Schleiermacher,  but  also  and  above  all  in  the
Hegelian  philosophy.  Perhaps  no  philosopher
has  been  less  occupied  with  the  problem  of  liberty
than  Hegel,  just  because  he  was  always  occupied
with  it.  The  will  is  free  (he  contents  himself
with  saying) ;  freedom  is  the  fundamental  de
termination  of  the  will,  as  gravity  is  of  matter  ;
thus  as  gravity  is  matter  itself,  so  is  freedom
the  will.  Hegel  consequently  saw  true  in  the
contest  between  arbitrarism  and  determinism,
recognizing  in  determinism  the  merit  of  having
given  its  value  to  the  content,  the  datum,  in
opposition  to  the  certainty  of  abstract  auto-
determination,  so  that  freedom  understood  as
free  will  is  considered  to  be  illusion.  Free  will
is  both  determined  and  indetermined.1  But  how
Hegel  could  conciliate  this  theory  of  freedom  with
the  mechanistic  concept  of  nature  that  per
sists  in  him  is  another  question.  His  failure  to
attain  to  this  conciliation  was  perhaps  among
the  reasons  that  made  his  profound  solution  of
the  antithesis  between  determinism  and  indeter-
minism  seem  a  vain  playing  with  words.

After  Hegel,  a  return  was  made  to  the
Kantian  doctrine,  variously  modified,  in  which
is  posited,  now  a  double  causality,  now  a  com-

1  Phil.  d.  Rechtes,  §§4,  15.


276 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

position  of  diverging  forces,  now  a  double
point  of  view,  now  two  worlds,  the  one  in
cluded  in  the  other  and  dominated,  the  one  by
the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  the
other  by  that  of  increase.  Such  contradictory
doctrines  are  to  be  found  for  example  in  Lotze
and  Wundt,  to  the  latter  of  whom  belongs  the
formula  that  the  causal  explanation  is  certainly  to
be  applied  to  spiritual  facts,  but  a  parte  post,  not
a  part e  ante ^  The  philosophy  of  Bergson  repre
sents  in  a  certain  way  a  return  to  the  sound
idealistic  view,  which  declares  that  the  dilemma
of  determinism  and  indeterminism  is  surpassed.2
The  doctrine  II.  The  conception  of  the  relation  between
bad  and  good,  as  reality  opposed  to  reality,  is
mythological  and  religious  (Parseeism,  Manich-
aeism,  Jewish-Christian  doctrine  of  the  devil,  etc.).
But  evil  had  already  begun  to  reveal  itself  to  the
philosophical  reflection  of  the  ancients  as  the
unreal,  the  not  being ;  and  this  is  explicitly
affirmed  in  Neoplatonism.  It  was  not,  however,
possible  to  understand  this  function  of  unreality,
real  in  its  way,  without  a  general  dialectical
conception,  which  became  very  slowly  mature.
Without  a  dialectic  conception,  evil,  conceived

1  Lotze,  Grundzuge  der  Ethik  (Leipzig,  1884),  pp.  26,  30-31  ;  Wundt,
Ethik^  (Stuttgart,  1892),  pp.  463-464.

2  Essai  sur  les  donntes  immtdiates  de  la  conscience  (Paris,  1898).


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 277

as  unreality,  becomes  mere  illusion,  not  so  much
a moment of the real as an equivocation of
man  philosophizing. This  is  clearly  to  be  seen
in  Spinoza,  who  opposes  the  full  laws  of  reality
to the narrow  laws  of  human nature,  saying :
Quidquid  nobis in  natura ridiculum, absurdum
aut  mahim  videtur,  id  inde  venit  quod  res  tan-
turn  ex  parte  novimus,  totiusque  natiirae  ordinem
et cohaerentium maxima ex  parte ignoramus,
et quod omnia ex usu nostrae rationis dirigi
volumus,  cum  tamen  id,  quod  malum  esse  dictat,
non  malum  sit  respectu  ordinis  et  legum  universae
naturae ;  sed  tantum  solius  nostrae  naturae  legum
respectu. For  indeed,  if  evil,  error  and  wicked
ness  were  something  that  had  essence,  God,  who
is  the  cause  of all  that  has  essence  (continues
Spinoza),  would  also  be  the  cause  of  evil,  of  error,
and  of  wickedness. But  this  is  not  so,  because
evil is nothing real. Neronis  matricidium  (he
observes) quatenus aliquid  positivum compre-
hendebat,  scelus  non  erat :  nam  f acinus  externum
fecit,  simulque  intentionem  ad  trucidendam  matrem
Orestes  habuit,  et  tamen,  saltern  ita  uti  Nero,  non
accusatnr. Quodnam  ergo  Neronis  scelus  ? Non
ahud  q^lam  quod  hoc  facinore  ostendit  se  ingratum,
immisericordem ac inobedientem esse. Certum
autem  est,  mhil  horum  aliquid  essentiae  exprimere,


278 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

et  idcirco  Deum  eoruni  non  fuisse  causam,  licet
causa  actus  et  intentionis  Neronis  fuerit}  But
Spinoza  was  not  able  to  determine  in  what  sense
Nero  was  really  ungrateful,  implacable,  and  dis
obedient,  nor  in  what  way  such  a  judgment  could
be  justified,  owing  to  his  idea  of  Substance,  not
as  subject,  spirit,  activity,  but  as  cause.

Kant  did  not  succeed  in  understanding  the
nature  of  evil ;  for  him  good  and  evil  were  "the
categories  of  freedom,"  2  and  the  view  of  Fichte
who  makes  the  radical  evil  to  be  vis  inertiae,
laziness  (Tragkeit),  which  is  in  nature  and  in
man  as  nature,3  represents  progress  in  respect
to  the  Kantian  position.  But  only  with  the
Hegelian  dialectical  view  of  evil,  understood  as
negation,  is  evil  at  the  same  time  given  its  right
place  ;  and  its  unreality,  contradiction,  which  is
no  longer  the  product  of  illusion  of  thought,  but
of  things  themselves,  in  intimate  contradiction
with  one  another,  if  it  be  a  blemish,  is  shown  to
be  the  blemish,  not  of  human  thought,  but  of
reality.4
Decision  and  III.  Free  will,  too,  is  not  considered  as  a

freedom.

1  Tract, theol.  -pol. vi.  c. 6  ; Ethica,  p.  iv.  intr.  ;  Epist. 36  ( Opera,
pp.  208,  378,  597).

2  Kr.  d.  pr. Vernf.  p.  79.

8  System  der  Sittenlehre,  in  Werke,  iv.  pp.  198-205.
4  See  my  study :  do  che  e  vivo  e  cib  che  e  morto  della  filosofia  di  Hegel
(Bari,  1907).


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 279

quality  and  character  of  complete  liberty,  but  as
its  negation,  will  as  contradiction,  in  the  Hegelian
philosophy.  It  was  preceded  in  this  respect,  not
only  by  Kant,  but  also  by  Descartes.  Descartes
wrote  of  the  decision  of  indifference  :  Cette  in-
difference  que  je  sens  lorsque  je  ne  suis  point  porte1
vers  un  cote  plutot  que  vers  un  aiitre  par  le
poids  daucune  raison  est  le  plus  bas  degrd  de  ma
liberty  et  fait  plutot  paraitre  un  dtfaut  dans  la
connaissance  quune  perfection  dans  la  volontd :  car
si  je  connaissais  toujours  clairement  ce  qui  est  vrai
et  ce  qui  est  bon,  je  ne  serais  jamais  en  peine  de
de'libe'rer  quel  jugement  et  quel  choix  je  devrais
faire;  et  ainsi  je  serais  entierement  libre,  sans
jamais  etre  indifferent?

Among  the  false  formulae  of  the  freedom  of
choice  can  be  mentioned  that  of  Rosmini,  who
calls  it  bilateral  freedom,  or  that  of  performing  or
not  performing  a  given  action.2  But  since  the
spirit  cannot  be  reduced  to  complete  passivity,
not  to  perform  a  given  action  is  equivalent  to
performing  a  different  one  ;  and  if  this  other
action  that  presents  itself  before  us  be  also  not
willed  by  us,  then  it  will  be  another,  and  so
on.  Thus  it  is  not  a  question  of  bilaterality,  but

1  Medit.  iv.
2  For  example,  Compendia  di  Etica  (Roma,  1907),  p.  56.


28o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

of  multiplicity  of  tendencies  : not  of  the  choice
between two  volitions,  but of  the  synthesis  of
many  appetites in one, which is the will or
freedom.
conscience  and We may mention the disputes that have

responsibility

been  preserved  in  the  Memorabilia  as  to  the
greater  responsibility  of  him  who  knows  more
(or  wills  more),  as  compared  with  him  who  knows
less  (or  wills  less),  as  to  whether  he  that  acts
voluntarily  be  more  unjust  than  he  who  acts  in
voluntarily  (o  e*:a>i>  ^7  o  aicwv).  In  this  connection
it  is  to  be  observed  that  he  who  voluntarily  does
not  write  or  read  well  is  certainly  more  gram
matical  than  he  who  reads  and  writes  ill  through
ignorance  ;  and  therefore  that  he  who  commits
injustice  while  knowing  what  is  just,  is  more  just
than  he  who  commits  it  because  he  does  not  know
what  is  just  ;  and  that  he  is  better,  who  says
what  is  false  when  he  knows  what  is  true,  than  he
who  says  what  is  false,  not  knowing  what  is  true.
The  dispute  leads  to  the  celebration  of  know
ledge  of  self,  or,  as  we  should  say,  of  knowing
and  possessing  oneself.1

These  thoughts  are  discussed  anew  in  the
Hippias  minor,  where  the  multiple  difficulties  are
placed  in  relief  and  a  conclusion  reached  that

1  Memor.  iv.  c.  2,  §  19  sqq.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 281

does  not  even  satisfy  those  who  propose  it.1  It
is  henceforward  clear  that  the  question  must  be
solved  in  the  sense  that  he  who  is  conscious  of
sinning  is  certainly  a  sinner,  whereas  he  who  is
not  conscious  of  so  doing,  does  not  sin  at  all ;  but
this  being  even  incapable  of  sinning  is  in  itself  a
sin,  and  places  the  man  who  is  in  such  a  condition
yet  a  degree  lower.  In  the  polemic  of  Pascal
with  the  Jesuits — who  maintained  that  in  order
to  sin  it  was  necessary  to  be  conscious  of  one's
own  infirmity  and  of  the  suitable  remedy,  the
wish  to  be  healed  and  to  ask  it  of  God — the
Jesuits  were  theoretically  on  the  side  of  reason.
Croira-t-on,  sur  votre  parole  (wrote  Pascal),  que
ceux  qui  sont  ploughs  dans  I  avarice,  dans  limpu-
dicitd,  dans  les  blasphemes,  dans  le  duel,  dans  la
vengeance,  dans  les  vols,  dans  les  sacrileges,  aient
ve'mtablement  le  de"sir  dembrasser  la  chastete1,
t  humilit^  et  les  autres  vertus  chrdtiennes  ?
Nevertheless,  it  is  inevitably  so,  if  those  acts
of  theirs  are  to  be  judged  to  be  vices  (and  if  they
really  are  so).  Hegel  places  himself  on  the  side
of  Pascal,  who  accepts  and  refers  to  the  follow
ing  argument  and  reduction  to  the  absurd  :  Us
seront  tous  damne's  ces  demi-pe'cheurs  qui  ont  quel-
que  amour  pour  la  vertu.  Mais  pour  ces  francs-

1  Hifpias  minor,  375.


282 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

ptcheurs,  sans  melange,  pleins  et  acheve's,  lenfer  ne
les  tient  pas  :  Us  out  trompd  le  diable  a  force  de  sy
abandonner.1

A  reduction  to  the  absurd  which  is  not  such  :
because  the  formula  given  as  absurd  expresses
at  bottom  a  very  simple  truth,  which  Hegel  too
stated  in  his  own  way,  when  he  said  that  it  was
necessary  to  prefer  self-will,  evil,  the  erring
Spirit,  to  the  innocence  of  plants  and  animals,  or
of  Nature.2
The  concept  IV.  A  classical  example  of  the  disputes  as  to

of  duly.

the  principle  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical,
arising  from  the  consideration  of  this  principle
in  its  empirical  formulations,  can  be  furnished
from  the  polemic  of  Herbart  against  Kant  on  the
subject  of  duty.  Herbart  demonstrated  that
duty  is  not  an  original  but  a  derived  concept,
and  that  it  appears  only  when  there  is  disagree
ment  between  the  practical  ideas  and  the  will?
But  it  would  be  possible  to  demonstrate  with
the  same  method  that  the  practical  ideas  are
derived  concepts,  because  they  do  indeed  pre
suppose  the  moral  will,  from  the  manifestations  of
which  they  are  constituted  by  means  of  abstrac-

1  Pascal,  Provinc.  I,  iv.  ;  Hegel,  PhiLd.  Rechtes,  §  40.

2  Enc.  §  248.

3  Allg.  prakt.  Phil. pp. 121-122; Einl.  i. d.  Phil.  (trad, ital.),  pp.
118 171,  224.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 283

tion.  Herbart  was  in  the  right  against  Kant,
but  he  afterwards  let  the  axe  fall  on  his  own  feet.
The  hard  formula  of  the  imperative  preferred  by
Kant  had  already  been  combated  by  Frederick
Schiller,  who  accentuated  the  moment  of  pleasure,
sympathy  and  enthusiasm  in  the  good  action.

As  to  the  other  concepts  and  to  the  disputes  Repentance

and  remorse.

to  which  they  gave  rise,  it  will  be  opportune  to
mention  repentance  and  remorse.  Spinoza  does
not  see  that  it  has  value  as  a  necessary  negative
moment,  for  he  declared  :  Poenitentia  virtus  non
est,  sive  ex  ratione  non  oritur ;  sed  is  qui  facti
poenitet  bis  miser,  seu  impotens  est.  Nam  primo
prava  cupiditate,  dein  tristitia  vinci  se  patitur\
and  he  concludes  by  assigning  to  it  value  for
altogether  empirical  motives.  Men  rarely  live
(he  says)  ex  dictamine  rationis ;  and  yet  re
pentance  and  other  similar  affections  do  more
good  than  harm,  and  if  it  be  necessary  to  sin  in
istam  partem  potius  peccandum.  Terret  vulgus,
nisi  metuat}  But  it  was  Hegel  who  instituted
a  regular  persecution  of  the  concept  of  repent
ance  and  remorse.  There  are  certain  passages
in  his  works  that  should  be  read  in  connection
with  this  question,  in  order  that  we  may  clearly
see  how  he  had  an  eye  to  contingent  and  histori-

1  Ethic,  iv.  prop.  54,  p.  480.


284 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

cal  events  in  his  criticism.  "  In  the  Christian
world  in  general  (he  writes)  there  is  in  force
an  ideal  of  the  perfect  man,  who  cannot  exist  as
multitude  in  a  people  ;  and  if  this  ideal  is  found
realized  in  monks,  quakers,  and  such-like  pious
folk,  it  must  be  remarked  that  a  mass  of  these
sad  creatures  does  not  constitute  a  people,  just
as  lice  and  parasitic  plants  cannot  exist  by  them
selves,  but  only  on  an  organic  body.  In  order
to  constitute  a  people,  it  would  be  above  all
desirable  to  destroy  that  lamblike  gentleness  of
theirs,  that  vanity  which  is  occupied  solely  with
their  own  persons,  the  caring  for  them  and
holding  them  dear,  and  has  always  before  it  the
image  and  consciousness  of  its  own  excellence.
For  life  in  the  universal  and  for  the  universal
demands,  not  such  vile  and  listless  gentleness,
but  an  energetic  gentleness,  not  a  thinking  of
oneself  and  one's  own  sins,  but  of  the  uni
versal  and  of  what  should  be  done  for  it.  To  him
who  nourishes  so  false  an  ideal,  men  must  always
appear  to  be  affected  with  weakness  and  corrup
tion,  and  that  ideal  to  be  so  constituted  that  it
can  never  be  translated  into  reality.  They
attribute  importance  to  trifles,  to  which  no
reasonable  person  pays  special  attention,  and
believe  that  such  weaknesses  and  defects  exist,


i  ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 285

even  when  they  are  not  remarked.  Nor  should
we  admire  their  greatness  of  soul,  but  note  rather
that  their  corruption  lies  precisely  in  standing
still  and  looking  at  that  which  they  call  weak
nesses  and  errors,  and  in  making  out  of  nothing
something  that  exists.  A  man  with  such  weak
nesses  and  defects  is  immediately  quit  of  them,
if  he  do  not  attach  to  them  importance."  The
observations  that  Hegel  makes  in  his  ^Esthetic,
regarding  the  type  of  the  Magdalen  in  Italian
art,  are  in  this  respect  especially  curious.  "  In
Italian  painting  the  Magdalen  appears,  both
within  and  without,  as  the  beautiful  sinner  ;  sin
in  her  is  as  seductive  as  conversion.  But  here
neither  sin  nor  sanctity  are  to  be  taken  too
seriously.  She  was  pardoned,  because  she  had
loved  much  ;  she  sinned  through  love  and  beauty;
and  the  affecting  element  lies  in  this,  that  she  has
scruples  about  her  love,  and  beautiful  and  sen
sible  as  she  is,  sheds  torrents  of  tears.  But  her
error  is  not  that  she  has  '  loved  so  much ;  her
beautiful  and  moving  error  is  precisely  that  she
believes  herself  to  be  a  sinner,  whereas  her
sensitive  beauty  gives  the  impression  that  she
could  not  have  been  otherwise  than  noble  and
of  lofty  senses  in  her  love."  *

1  Gesch.  d.  Phil.  ii.  240-241  ; Varies,  iib.  Aesth.  ii.  162-163.


286 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

The  doctrine V. The relation between the passions or

of  the  passions.

desires  and  the  will  has  rather  been  studied  at
the  moment  of  strife  between  the  will  and  the
passions,  than  for  itself  and  within  its  two  terms,
although  Aristotle  had  already  begun  an  analysis
as  to  the  diversity  of  appetites  or  ySouX^o-t?  in  re
spect  to  the  intention  or  Trpoalpeo-is,  observing  that
the  intention  relates  only  to  what  can  be  done,
whereas  the  appetition  relates  also  to  things  that
are  impossible.1  The  opposed  schools  of  the
Cynics  and  Cyrenaics,  Stoics  and  Epicureans,
and  others  such,  were  chiefly  concerned  with  the
antithesis  of  the  passions  and  the  rational  will ;
but  the  formulae  of  all  these  schools,  if  they  have
some  empirical  value  as  precepts  of  life  more  or
less  suitable  for  definite  individuals,  classes  and
times,  possess  none  or  very  little  for  philosophy.
Cynics  and  Cyrenaics,  Stoics  and  Epicureans,
they  seem  rather  to  be  monks  following  this  or
that  rule  than  philosophers.  The  question  as  to
the  mode  of  freeing  oneself  from  the  passions  and
of  dominating  them,  which  lingered  till  the
treatises  of  Descartes  and  Spinoza,  has  also  a
chiefly  empirical  character.  G.  B.  Vico  took  up  a
position  opposed  to  the  two  opposed  degenerations
arising  from  those  practical  tendencies,  that  of

1  Eth.  Nicom.  Bk.  iii.  cc.  2-3,  1111-1113.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 287

"  quenching  the  senses,"  and  of  "  making  a  rule
of  them."  He  despised  both  Stoics  and  Epi
cureans  as  "monastic  or  solitary  philosophers,"
and  maintained  as  "  a  philosopher  politician,"
that  it  is  needful  "  not  to  tear  away  his  own
nature  from  man,  nor  to  abandon  him  in  his
corruption,"  but  "  to  moderate  the  human  passions
and  to  make  of  them  human  virtues."  Rarely
has  the  defence  of  the  passions  enjoyed  an  equally
limpid  philosophical  enunciation  ;  as  a  rule,  and
even  in  Hegel,  it  has  been  directed  chiefly  against
certain  social  tendencies,  rather  than  against
philosophical  doctrines.2  The  absolute  abandon
ment  to  the  passions  or  their  absolute  destruction,
are  theories  that  have  not  had  true  and  proper
representatives. — The  confusion  between  the
various  meanings  of  the  word  "  passion,"  under
stood  now  as  appetition,  or  concrete  and  actual
passion,  now  as  a  state  of  the  soul  (joy  and
sorrow),  now  as  volitional  habit,  is  to  be  found
in  the  various  treatises  that  we  have  already
had  occasion  to  record.  It  is  natural  that  their
character  of  indifference  when  understood  as
habits  should  have  often  been  observed.  Thus
for  Descartes,  elles  sont  toutes  bonnes  de  leur

1  Scienza  nuova  seconda,  degn.  5.

2  Phdn. d. Geistes,  pp. 484-486  ;  Encycl. §  474  ;  Phil. d. Rechtes,
§  124  ;  Phil.  d.  Gesch.  pp.  39-41.


288 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

nature  et  nous  riavons  rien  a  dviter  que  leurs
mauvais  usages  ou  leur  exces.1

On  the  other  hand,  the  erroneous  form  of  the
defence  of  the  passions,  consisting  of  making
them  the  preparation  or  cause  of  the  virtues,  is
already  to  be  found  in  the  English  philosophers  of
the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  (More,
Shaftesbury,  etc.) ;  and  in  the  celebrated  Fable
of  the  Bees  6"f  Mandeville,  it  assumes  the  aspect
of  a  paradoxical  theory,  in  which  the  vices  are
looked  upon  as  promoters  and  factors  of  progress,
morality  as  inefficacious  and  harmful  for  this
purpose.  And  La  Rochefoucauld  had  written  :
"  Les  vices  entrent  dans  la  composition  des
vertus  comme  les  poisons  dans  la  composition  des
The  doctrine  remedes"  All  these  are  false  or  crude  forms,  in

of  individu-

which  is  involved  the  doctrine  of  the  right  to
individuality,  and  they  have  always  constituted
and  still  constitute  its  danger.  This  doctrine
received  its  most  energetic  expression  in  the
romantic  and  preromantic  period,  thanks  above
all  to  Schleiermacher,  after  it  had  been  referred
to  in  a  rather  vague  way  by  Jacobi.3

"For  some  time"  (writes  Schleiermacher  in
the  Monologues]  "  I  too  was  satisfied  that  I  had

1 Trait^  des  passions,  iii.  §  211.

2  Maximes,  n.  182  (Ed.  Gamier,  p.  43).

3 Woldemar,  pp. 112-113.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 289

discovered  Reason  ;  and  venerating  equality  with
the  Unique  Being  as  that  which  is  most  lofty,  I
believed  that  there  was  one  single  measure  for
every  case,  that  action  should  be  in  all  of  them
the  same,  and  that  each  one  is  distinguished  from
the  other  only  in  so  far  as  it  occupies  a  place  of  its
own  in  space.  I  believed  that  humanity  manifested
itself  differently  only  in  the  variety  of  external
facts  ;  but  that  the  internal  man,  the  individual,
was  not  a  being  peculiarly  (eigenthiimlicK)  con
structed,  and  that  each  was  everywhere  equal  to
the  other."  "  But  afterwards  was  revealed  to  me
that  which  instantly  raised  me  to  a  high  state  of
exaltation  :  it  became  clear  that  every  man  must
represent  humanity  in  his  own  way,  in  an  alto
gether  individual  combination  of  its  elements,  in
order  that  it  may  manifest  itself  in  every  mode,
and  that  everything  most  different  may  issue  from
its  bosom  and  become  effectual  in  the  fulness
of  time  and  space.  .  .  .  Owing  to  this  thought,
I  felt  myself  to  be  a  work  individually  willed  and
therefore  elected  by  the  Divinity  and  such  that
it  must  enjoy  a  particular  form  and  culture  ;  and
the  free  act  to  which  this  thought  belongs  has
collected  and  intimately  joined  together  the
elements  of  human  nature  in  a  peculiar  existence."
"  While  I  now  do  whatever  I  do  according  to  my


29o PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

spirit  and  sense,  my  fancy  places  before  me  as
very  clear  proof  of  the  internal  determination,  a
thousand  other  modes,  in  which  it  would  be
possible  to  act  otherwise  without  offending  the
laws  of  humanity  :  I  rethink  myself  in  a  thousand
different  forms,  in  order  to  discover  with  the
greater  certainty  that  which  is  especially
mine."1
Romantic  and  But  this  peculiarity  (Eigenthumlichkeit\  oppor-

•very  modern

theories.  tunely  placed  in  relief  by  Schleiermacher,
and  a  thought  much  loved  by  the  Romantics
(Herder,  Jacobi,  G.  Humboldt,  the  Schlegels,
etc.),  is  often  seen  to  degenerate  into  individual
caprice,  even  in  those  times,  as  may  be  ob
served  in  the  sort  of  caricature  which  Frederick
Schlegel  made  of  the  Fichtian  I,  become
the  individual  I,  and  in  the  notorious  Lucinde,
to  which  the  same  Schleiermacher  inconsider
ately  devoted  a  series  of  letters  of  comment  and
defence.  The  last  offshoots  of  the  Romantics
were  Max  Stirner  and  Frederick  Nietzsche:
in  the  former  the  value  of  individuality
becomes  changed  into  an  affirmation  of  spasmodic
egotism ;  in  the  second  there  is  a  continuous
mixture  of  true  and  false,  of  good  and  of  bad
individuality,  as  is  natural  in  a  writer  whose

1  Monoiogen,  in  Werke,  i.  366-368,  372.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 291

Eigenthilmlichkeit  was  rather  that  of  a  poet  than
of  a  thinker.

VI.  We have discussed elsewhere Hegel's  The  concept  of

development

concept  of  development,  and  his  thought  as  and  progress.
synthesis  of  opposites,  which  essentially  belongs
to  the  Hegelian  philosophy  and  has  been  super
ficially  treated  and  adopted  by  other  philosophical
schools,  and  this  is  not  the  place  either  to  retrace
their  history  or  to  demonstrate  into  what  errors
Hegel  fell  through  abusing  the  truth  that  he  had
discovered.  Among  the  errors  of  that  philosophy
(as  for  that  matter  of  all  contemporary  philo
sophies  and  of  those  that  have  followed  one
another  down  to  our  own  day),  is  to  be  noted
the  persistence  of  the  concept  of  Nature  as  a
mode  of  reality  opposed  to  the  mode  of  the
Spirit,  whence  came  a  dualism  that  was  not
effectually  surpassed,  save  in  appearance.  The
doctrine  of  development  by  opposites  is  to  be
understood  as  accepted  and  maintained  here,
with  the  correction  of  the  concept  of  nature,  and
also  the  doctrine  of  the  synthesis  of  opposites,  free
from  the  use  or  abuse  of  it  by  Hegel  for  distinct
concepts  (and  worse  still,  for  empirical  concepts).
As  for  the  concept  of  Providence,  which  is
neither  Fate  nor  Fortune,  nor  the  work  of  a
transcendent  God,  this,  in  its  modern  form,  goes


292 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

back  to  the  Scienza  nuova  of  Vico  and  is  not
to  be  confounded  with  the  personal  religious
beliefs  that  Vico  held  and  kept  distinct  from  his
philosophical  concept  as  to  immanent  Providence.
The  same  concept  reappears  in  the  Hegelian
philosophy  under  the  form  of  the  Idea,  or  of  the
astuteness  of  Reason,  which  avails  itself  of  men  as  its
instruments  and  managers  of  business.1  Finally,
the  conception  of  cosmic  progress  was  extraneous
to  the  oriental  world,  to  the  Graeco- Roman,  and
to  the  Christian  worlds,  prevailing  in  turn  in
the  latter  that  of  decadence  from  an  original
state  of  perfection  and  of  circles  or  returns.  In
its  modern  form  it  takes  its  origin  from  thinkers
free  of  these  religious  views,  who  merge  in  the
philosophies  of  becoming  and  of  evolution.  But
the  concept  of  progress  destroyed  itself  in  many
of  these  rationalistic  philosophies,  the  "  disappear
ance  of  evil "  being  posited  as  possible  (Spencer),
and  a  definite  state  of  perfection  conceived
(though  transferred  from  the  past  into  the  future),
that  is  to  say  a  Reality  that  should  be  Reality,
indeed,  perfect  Reality  having  ceased  to  be
development,  that  is  to  say,  itself.

1  See  the  study  of  Hegel  mentioned.


THIRD SECTION

UNITY OF THE THEORETICAL AND THE
PRACTICAL

THE  study  of  the  practical  activity  in  its  relations  Double  result  .•

precedence  of

that  we  made  in the  first section  has  removed  the  theoretical

over  the  prac-

all doubt as to the thesis that the practical  tical  and  °f 'the

practical  over

activity  presupposes  the  theoretical,  or  that  know-  the  theoretical.
ledge  is  the  necessary  precedent  of  volition  and
action}  But  the  succeeding  study  of  the
practical  activity  in  its  dialectic  having  led  to
the  result  that  the  practical  activity  is  reality
itself  in  its  immediacy,  and  that  no  other  reality  (or
we  may  say  other  nature]  is  conceivable  outside
will-action,  compels  us  also  to  affirm  the  opposite
thesis,  that  the  theoretic  activity  presupposes
the  practical,  and  that  the  will  is  the  necessary
precedent  of  knowledge?1  And  it  is  a  precedent,
not  indeed  in  the  sense  admitted  from  the
beginning,  of  the  necessary  implication  of  the
will  in  every  theoretical  act,  as  will  to  know,  by
means  of  the  unity  of  the  Spirit3  (for  this  will  is

1  Section  I.  2  Section  II.  3  Section  I.  c.  3.

293


294 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

subsidiary  and  not  constitutive ;  but  if  it  become
constitutive  it  produces,  as  has  been  seen,
wilfulness  and  the  theoretical  error1),  but
precisely  in  the  sense  of  a  constitutive  will,
without  which  no  knowledge  would  be  thinkable.
Knowledge,  indeed,  is  knowledge  of  some
thing  :  it  is  the  remaking  of  a  fact,  an  ideal
recreation  of  a  real  creation.  If  there  have
not  previously  been  a  desire,  an  aspiration,  a
nostalgia,  there  cannot  be  poetry ;  if  there  have
not  been  an  impulse  or  a  heroic  deed,  the  epic
cannot  arise ;  if  the  sun  do  not  illumine  a
landscape,  or  a  soul  invoke  a  ray  of  sunlight
upon  the  countryside,  the  picture  of  a  luminous
landscape  cannot  exist.  And  if  there  be  not  a
world  of  reality  that  generates  a  world  of  re
presentations,  Philosophy,  which  is  the  search  for
the  universal,  is  not  conceivable,  nor  History,
the  understanding  of  the  individual.
Error  of  those  (  The  indubitability  of  this  affirmation,  which  no

•who  maintain %  .

the  exclusive force  of  sophistry  can  destroy,  renders  fallacious

precedence  of  .  , . , ,  i

either.  ^  both  the  opposite  theses,  which  have  several
times  been  variously  proposed  and  maintained  :
the  exclusive  priority  of  the  theoretic,  and  the
exclusive  priority  of  the  practical.^

Those who maintain them enter into so

1  Section  I.  c.  4.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 295

desperate  a  contest  with  reality,  that  in  order
to  issue  from  it  without  too  much  dishonour,
they  are  finally  compelled  to  call  in  the  aid  of
a  third  term,  which  is  in  turn  either  thought
that  is  not  thought,  or  will  that  is  not  will,
or  something  grey  that  contains  in  itself  thought
and  will,  without  being  either  the  one  or  the
other,  nor  the  unity  of  that  duality.  On  the
one  hand  is  postulated  a  Logos,  a  thought  in  se
(one  does  not  understand  how  this  can  ever  think
and  be  thought),  and  it  is  made  to  adopt  the
resolution  (which  one  does  not  understand  how
it  can  ever  adopt)  of  coming  forth  from  itself  -&n&
creating  a  nature,  in  order  to  be  able  to  return
finally  to  itself,  by  means  of  this  alienation,
and  to  be  henceforth  per  se,  that  is  to  say,  able
to  think  and  to  will.  The  defect  of  this  artificial
construction,  its  mythological  and  religious  origin,
can  be  said  to  have  been  already  revealed,  in
the  comparison  employed  with  reference  to  it
by  the  author  who  maintained  it  (Hegel),  to  the
effect  that  the  Logos  is  God  before  the  creation
of  the  world :  a  God,  that  is  to  say,  altogether
unreal  and  absurd.  On  the  other  hand,  the
excogitation  of  a  blind  Will  (Schelling,  Schopen
hauer)  completely  tallies  with  this  Thought  that
does  not  think  because  it  has  not  previously


296 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

willed,  and  that  does  not  truly  will  because
it  has  not  previously  thought,  and  all  of  a
sudden  fashions  for  itself  the  instrument  of
knowledge,  to  succeed  in  surpassing  itself  in
this  alienation  from  itself,  by  means  of  libera
tion  from  willing  obtained  in  the  contemplation
of  the  ideas  and  in  asceticism.  Here,  too,  we
must  repeat  that  the  one  error  passes  over  and
converts  itself  into  the  other,  and  this  inevitable
conversion  causes  the  other  secondary  and  hybrid
forms  of  theory  to  have  but  slight  interest,
those  in  which  the  priority  has  been  conceived
as  that  of  fancy,  or  feeling,  or  the  uncon
scious,  or  the  indifferentiated,  and  the  like,  all
of  which  represent  vain  efforts  to  suppress  one
of  the  two  fundamental  forms  of  the  spirit,  or
to  derive  them  from  a  third,  which  conscious
ness  does  not  reveal.
Problem  of  This  however  does  not  mean  that  the  demand

the  unity  of

this  duality,  to  conceive  the  link  of  that  duality,  or  the  unity
of  the  theoretical  and  the  practical,  manifested
in  all  these  erroneous  attempts,  is  not  legitimate.
But  in  order  to  conceive  this,  it  is  necessary
to  insist  above  all  upon  the  reality  of  this  duality,
of  which  is  sought  the  connection  and  the  unity.

Not  the  duality This connection cannot be the relation or

of  opposite s.  .

synthesis ot opposites. 1  he theoretical is  not


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 297

the  opposite  of  the  practical,  nor  the  practical
the  opposite  of  the  theoretical :  the  opposite
of  the  theoretical  is  error  or  the  false,  as
the  opposite  of  the  practical  is  the  volitional
contradiction  or  evil.  The  theoretical,  far
from  being  negative,  is  positive,  not  less  than
the  practical,  and  inversely.  Neither  form  can
therefore  be  in  any  way  debased  to  a  simple
opposite.  Opposition  is  intrinsic  to  the  spirit
and  is  to  be  found  in  each  one  of  its  forms :
hence  the  general  value  of  the  spirit  (activity
against  passivity,  rationality  and  reality  against
irrationality  and  unreality,  being  against  not-
being)  and  that  of  its  special  forms  (beautiful
against  ugly,  true  against  false,  useful  against
useless,  good  against  evil).  But  precisely  for
this  reason,  it  cannot  constitute  the  character  of
one  form  in  respect  to  the  other :  neither  that
of  the  true  against  the  good,  nor  that  of  the
beautiful  against  the  useful,  and  so  on.

Nor  can the  connection be thought  as are  Not  duality

of  finite  and

thought  the  subdivisions  of  the  theoretic  and  infinite.
the  practical  forms,  or  according  to  the  relations
of  individual  ^to  universal,  of  finite  to  infinite,
the  first  of  which  terms  conditions  the  second,
but  is  conditioned  by  it  only  in  an  implicit
manner.  Of  the  two  theoretical  forms  (and


298 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

we  shall  see  further  on  that  the  forms  of  the
practical  are  also  two),  the  aesthetic  precedes
the  logical  and  is  autonomous  :  a  song,  a  story,
a  statue,  do  not  express  any  concept ;  but  the
philosophy  that  gives  the  concept,  is  at  the
same  time  fancy,  expression,  word :  the  prose
of  the  philosopher  is  his  song.  The  aesthetic
form  is  the  knowledge  of  the  individual ;  the
logical  that  of  the  universal,  which  is  also
individual.  But  this  relation  that  arises  within
the  theoretic,  as  within  the  practical  form,
cannot  be  transported  to  the  relation  of  the  two
forms  without  logical  incoherence  :  the  subdivi
sion,  so  to  speak,  is  not  the  division.  Thought
is  not  the  finite  in  respect  of  willing,  which  is
the  infinite  ;  nor  is  the  will  the  finite  in  respect
of  thought,  which  is  the  infinite.  Thought  and
will  are  both  of  them  at  once  finite  and  infinite,
individual  and  universal.  He  who  passes  from
action  to  thought,  does  not  limit  his  own  being
by  becoming  finite ;  nor  does  he  limit  it  by
passing  from  thought  to  action ;  or  better,  in
both  cases  he  makes  himself  finite  to  attain  to
the  infinite  ;  poet  to  open  to  himself  the  way  to
the  thought  of  the  eternally  true  ;  man  of  action,
that  he  may  dedicate  his  work  to  the  eternal
good.


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 299

The  two  forms,  theoretical  and  practical,  both  Perfect  analogy

of  the  two

positive,  both  a  connection  of  finite  and  infinite,  forms,  theoretic

and  practical.

correspond  in  everything,  as  has  already  appeared
from  our  exposition,  in  which  the  appeal  to
the  one  from  the  problems  of  the  other  has
always  aided  a  better  penetration  of  the  nature
of  such  problems  and  the  finding  of  their  solution.
Thus  in  both  there  is  genius  and  creation
(geniuses  of  art  and  of  thought,  and  geniuses
of  action) ;  in  both,  reproduction  and  judgment
take  place  in  the  same  way  (aesthetic  taste,
practical  taste ;  history  of  art  and  history  of
philosophy,  history  of  actions) ;  in  both  arise
representative  concepts  and  empirical  rules.  The
analogy  will  be  better  illustrated  by  what  is  to
follow,  when  will  be  demonstrated  the  corre
spondence  between  art  and  economic,  logical
thought  and  ethicity,  historical  discrimination
and  ethical  discrimination,  empirical  concepts  and
laws  of  action,  and  so  on.

I  f  this  analogy  exclude  the  possibility  of  the  two  Not  a

parallelism,

forms  being  unequal,  it  must  not,  on  the  other  tut  a  circle.
hand,  be  perverted  with  the  object  of  conceiving
them  parallel,  as  would  perhaps  be  pleasing
to  the  parallelists  of  spirit  and  nature,  soul
and  body ;  this  is  an  expedient  that  is  certainly
easy,  but  certainly  not  satisfying.  They  are  not


;oo PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.


The  circle  of
Reality  :
thought  and
being,  subject
and  object.


parallel,  but  are  on  the  contrary  bound,  the  one
to  the  other,  in  such  a  way  that  the  one  proceeds
from  the  other.  From  the  aesthetic  apprehension
of  reality,  from  philosophical  reflection  upon
it,  from  historical  reconstruction,  which  is  its
result,  is  obtained  that  knowledge  of  the  actual
situation,  on  which  alone  is  formed  and  can  be
formed  the  volitional  and  practical  synthesis,
the  new  action.  And  this  new  action  is  in  its
turn  the  material  of  the  new  aesthetic  figuration,
of  the  new  philosophical  reflection,  of  the  new
historical  reconstruction.  In  short,  knowledge
and  will,  theory  and  practice,  are  not  two
parallels,  but  two  lines,  such  that  the  head  of
the  one  is  joined  to  the  tail  of  the  other ;  or,
if  a  geometric  symbol  also  be  desired,  such
that  they  constitute,  not  a  parallelism,  but  a
circle.

They  constitute  therefore  the  circle  of  reality
and  of  life,  which  is  duality- unity  of  thought
and  being,  of  subject  and  object,  in  such  a  way
that  to  think  the  subject  is  the  same  as  to  think
the  subject  of  an  object,  and  to  think  an  object
is  the  same  as  to  think  the  object  of  a  subject.
In  truth,  it  sometimes  seems  strange  and  almost
impossible  that  such  hard  and  difficult  questions
should  have  arisen  as  to  the  objectivity  of  know-


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 301

ledge,  and  as  to  whether  thought  attains  to  being,
or  whether  there  be  a  being  beyond  thought.
Thought  is  such,  precisely  because  it  affirms
being,  and  being  is  such,  precisely  because  it
is  generated  by  a  thought.  It  is  only  when  we
remember  that  in  those  questions  were  included
others  of  a  very  difficult  and  intricate  nature,
concerning  divine  transcendency  and  the  content
of  the  concept  of  nature  (gnoseological  questions,
which  it  is  the  glory  of  modern  philosophy  to
have  asked  and  solved) ; — it  is  only  then  that  we
understand  how  the  relation  of  thought  and
being,  of  knowing  and  of  willing,  has  also  become
obscure.  Kant  was  forced  to  come  to  a  stop
before  the  mystery  of  reality,  because  he  had
not  altogether  conquered  transcendency,  nor
altogether  surpassed  the  false  conception  of
nature  as  ens,  given  by  the  naturalists.  It
revealed  itself  to  him,  not  as  a  circle,  but  as
an  assemblage  of  lines  diverging  or  joining  to
infinity.  Hegel  made  two  of  will  and  nature,
owing  to  the  insufficiency  of  his  gnoseological
theory  relating  to  the  natural  sciences,  and  was
led  to  posit  a  Philosophy  of  nature  in  opposition
to  a  Philosophy  of  the  spirit,  thus  permitting
to  exist  a  form  of  non- mediate  dualism,  after
he  had  destroyed  so  many,  or  making  it  mediate


302 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

in  the  artificial  manner  to  which  we  have  referred.
The  shadows  of  that  gnoseology  having  been
dispersed,  the  relation  between  theory  and
practice,  subject  and  object,  appears  in  full  light ;
and  the  answer  becomes  very  simple  to  the
question  as  to  how,  when  everything  is  uncon
vertible  relation  of  condition  and  conditioned,
thought  and  being  are  reciprocally  condition  and
conditioned,  and  as  to  how  the  vicious  circle
is  avoided.  The  criticism  of  vicious  circles
includes  in  itself  and  affirms  the  idea  of  a  circu
larity  that  is  not  vicious ;  thought  and  being  are
not  a  succession  of  two  finites,  but  an  absolute
relation,  that  is,  the  Absolute  itself.  To  ex
press  ourselves  mythologically,  if  the  creation
of  the  world  be  the  passage  from  chaos  to  cosmos,
from  not-being  to  being,  this  passage  does  not
begin  either  with  the  theoretic  or  with  the
practical,  with  the  subject,  or  with  the  object,
but  with  the  Absolute,  which  is  the  absolute
relation  of  the  two  terms.  In  the  beginning  was
neither  the  Word  nor  the  Act ;  but  the  Word  of
the  Act  and  the  Act  of  the  Word.

critique  of  the It  is  well  to  state  again  that  in  consequence
the  primacy  of  of  the  relation  and  correlation  established,  all  the

theoretical  or

of  practical questions  as  to  the  primacy  of  thought  or  will,

reason.

of  the  contemplative  or  active  life,  and  speaking


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 303

more  empirically,  of  the  thinker  or  the  man  of
action,  disappear.  To  pose  such  problems  is  as
though  one  were  to  ask  which  of  the  two  semicircles
of  a  circle  has  precedence.  Similar  questions,
always  insoluble  or  badly  solved,  have  their  origin
in  internal  obscurity  as  to  the  fundamental  cor
relation.  When  man  has  attained  to  the  summit
of  knowledge  (a  summit  that  is  certainly  not  Art,
nor,  strictly  speaking,  Philosophy,  but  History,
the  knowledge  of  the  concrete  real,  that  is,  the
actuality  of  philosophy),  when  he  has  completely
penetrated  the  actual  situation,  can  he  perhaps
stop  at  this  point  and  say  hie  manebimus  optime  ?
Can  he  arrest  life  which  is  raging  and  demanding
to  be  continued  ?  And  if  he  succeed  in  suspend
ing  it  for  an  instant  in  thought,  why  has  he
suspended,  if  not  to  continue  it?  Knowledge
is  not  an  end,  but  an  instrument  of  life  :  know
ledge  that  did  not  serve  life  would  be  superfluous
and  harmful. — On  the  other  hand,  when  a  man
has  willed  and  has  thrown  himself  into  action,
when  he  has  produced  another  piece  of  life,  can  he
blindly  continue  to  produce  life  for  ever  ?  Would
not  blindness  impede  the  production  itself?
Therefore  he  must  rise  from  life  to  knowing,  if
he  wish  to  look  in  the  face  the  product  that  he
has  lived,  and  surpass  it  with  thought,  for  which


New  prag
matism  :  life
conditioning
Philosophy.


304 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

life  is  now  means  and  instrument.  Knowledge
serves  life  and  life  serves  knowledge  ;  the  con
templative  life,  if  it  do  not  wish  to  become  insipid
ease,  must  lead  to  activity,  and  that  activity,  if  it
do  not  wish  to  become  an  irrational  and  sterile
tumult,  must  lead  to  contemplation.  Reality,  in
specifying  aptitudes,  has  formed  men  of  thought
and  men  of  action,  or  of  prevailing  thought  or
prevailing  action,  these  not  superior  to  those,  for
they  are  collaborators. — Thus  the  discussions  as  to
whether  human  progress  be  moral  or  intellectual,
or  whether  the  propelling  force  be  the  practical
and  economic  activity,  or  philosophy,  or  religion
(Buckle,  Kidd,  etc.),  are  shown  to  be  vain.

It  is  rather  to  be  considered  that  from  this
bond  between  theory  and  practice  is  obtained
a  pragmatism  of  a  new  sort,  of  which  the  prag-
matists  have  never  thought,  or  at  least  have  not
been  able  to  distinguish  from  the  others  and  to
give  it  value.  If  Life  condition  Thought,  we
have  in  this  the  apodictic  demonstration  of  the
always  historically  conditioned  form  of  every
thought  ;  not  only  of  Art,  which  is  always  the
art  of  a  time,  of  a  soul,  of  a  moment  ;  but
also  of  Philosophy  which  can  solve  only  those
problems  presented  by  Life.  Every  philosophy
reflects  and  cannot  but  reflect  the  preoccupations,


ACTIVITY  IN  GENERAL 305

as  they  are  called,  of  a  definite  historical  moment;
and  this,  not  in  the  quality  of  its  solutions  (in
which  case  it  would  be  and  is  indeed  bad
philosophy),  but  in  the  quality  of  its  problems.
Thus  it  is  at  once  contingent  and  eternal,  mortal
and  immortal,  extratemporal  and  living  only  in
time  and  history.

Finally,  with  the  establishment  of  the  duality-  Deductive  con-

firmation  of

unity  of  the  theoretical  and  the  practical,  we  have  the  two  forms

and  deductive

demonstrated that which at the beginning Q{  exclusion  of  the

third  (feeling}.

the  exposition  had  only  been  asserted  and  pre
supposed  :  namely,  why  a  practical  form  of  the
spirit  must  be  placed  beside  the  theoretical,1  and
why  there  is  no  third  form  beyond  these,  whether
it  be  called  feeling  or  by  any  other  name.2  The
theoretical  form  postulates  the  practical,  because
the  subject  postulates  the  object ;  but  the  spirit
does  not  postulate  a  third  form  intermediate
between  the  two,  or  unity  of  the  two,  because  it
is  itself  precisely  mediator  and  unity  of  itself,
subject-object.

1  Section  I.  c.  I.  2  Section  I.  c.  2.


X


SECOND PART

THE  PRACTICAL  ACTIVITY  IN ITS
SPECIAL  FORMS


307


FIRST SECTION

THE TWO PRACTICAL FORMS:  ECONOMIC
AND ETHIC


DISTINCTION OF THE TWO FORMS IN THE
PRACTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS

ALL  that has  been developed in  the  preceding

.....  or  economc

book  concerns  the  practical  activity  in  general :  form,  and  the

moral  or

therefore  no  account  has  been  taken  of  the  ethical  form.
special  distinctions  of  the  practical  forms,  as
though  there  were  none,  or  they  have  only  been
alluded  to  as  something  problematical ;  and  when
exemplifications  have  been  given,  recourse  has
been  had  indifferently  to  one  or  to  the  other  of
the  forms  commonly  admitted,  whether  or  no
they  are  to  be  held  philosophically  distinguishable.
Now,  on  the  contrary,  we  affirm  in  an  explicit
manner  that  the  spirit,  which  we  have  seen
distinguished  as  theoretical  and  practical,  is  sub-
distinguished  as  practical  spirit,  into  two  forms,

309


3io PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

of  which the first may  be called utilitarian or
economic,  the  second  moral  or  ethical.
insufficiency  of In affirming this sub -distinction, we are

the  descriptive  111

and psyckoiogi-  obliged  to  renounce (as  we  have  already  done

cal  distinction.

for  the  practical  in  respect  to  the  theoretical)
a  ^demonstration  by  the  psychological  method,
which  has  already  shown  itself  to  be  vicious.  If
indeed  it  were  applicable  in  this  field,  we  should
doubtless  be  able  to  strike  the  intellect  and
persuade  the  soul  for  a  moment,  by  pointing  to
the  .spectacle  of  life  as  a  demonstration  of  the
two  forms,  economic  and  ethic,  showing  on  the
one  hand,  farmers,  commercial  men,  speculators,
conquerors  of  men  and  of  territories,  wielders
of  the  word  or  of  the  sword  as  instrument  of
dominion ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  educators,
Benefactors,  disinterested  and  self-  sacrificing
men,  martyrs  and  heroes ;  on  the  one  hand,
economic  institutions  (manufactories,  mines,  ex
changes,  exploration  companies),  and  on  the
other  moral  institutions  (educators  and  schools,
charitable  societies,  orders  of  Sisters  of  Charity,
or  red,  white,  or  blue  Cross  Companies,  and  so
on).  What  can  be  better  proof  of  the  reality  of
the  bipartition  enunciated  ?  Cannot  we  touch  it,
as  with  the  hand  ?  However  (as  already  in  the
case  of  the  distinction  between  the  theoretical


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  311

and  the  practical),  what  is  touched  with  the  hand
is  not  on  that  account  seized  by  the  intellect,
and  indeed  in  a  little  while  it  also  escapes
the  hand  which  had  thought  to  be  its  master.
For  when  we  better  observe  the  individuals
who  seemed  to  be  merely  economic,  they  seem
to  be  also  moral,  and  inversely ; — moral  institu
tions  are  also  economic,  and  economic  moral.
The  benefactor  calculates  and  wishes  to  attain
his  object  with  the  same  cupiditas  as  the  peasant,
all  intent  upon  gain ;  and  the  peasant  in^  his
turn  is  ennobled  in  his  chase  after  lucre  by  the
dignity  of  labour  and  by  the  moral  impulses
that  sustain  it ; — all  charitable  institutions  are
economic  undertakings,  and  economic  undertak
ings  are  subject  to  moral  laws,  so  that  in  drawing
up  accounts  there  is  no  knowing  where  is  thaf
material  distinction  between  the  economic  and
the  ethical  activities.  The  truth  is  that  here  too
it  is  not  possible  to  start  from  contingent  facts
and  from  their  classes  with  empirical  limitations,
to  attain  to  philosophical  distinctions,  but  that
it  is  necessary  to  start  from  these,  in  order  to
interpret  contingent  facts,  and  finally  to  under
stand  also  the  mode  of  formation  of  empirical
classes.  For  this  reason  the  psychological  method
revolves  in  a  circle  that  is  effectively  vicious.


3i2 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL „.

Deduction  and Neither is it possible to proceed with the

the  necessity  of

integrating  it method  that  we  shall  call  deductive  solely  ; that

•with  induction.

is,  we  see  the  necessity  of  the  two  sub-forms  of
the  practical  activity,  which,  being  the  object  of  the
subject  and  therefore  in  every  way  analogous
to  the  activity  of  the  subject,  that  is,  to  the
theoretical,  must  have  a  duplication  of  forms
answering  to  the  duplication  of  the  theoretical
activity  into  aesthetic  and  logical,  and  cannot
posit  the  universal  practical  without  positing  the
individual  that  shall  be  its  vehicle.  This  deduc
tion,  although  in  every  way  correct  and  rigorous,
cannot  be  convincing,  save  when  it  is  also
demonstrated  that  it  responds  to  fact  as  revealed
by  observation,  that  is,  when  deduction  is  also
induction,  as  the  speculative  method  demands.
The  two  forms  Leaving,  therefore,  on  this  occasion  also,  the

as  a  fact  of

consciousness,  deductive  proof  to  the  complete  development
of  the  theory,  we  shall  begin  by  appealing  to
observation  of  self,  in  order  that  every  one  may
verify  in  himself  the  existence  of  the  two  different
forms  of  volitional  acts,  termed  by  us  economic
and  ethic.  £The  economic  activity  is  that  which
wills  and  effects  only  what  corresponds  to  the
conditions  of  fact  in  which  a  man  finds  him
self;  the  ethical  activity  is  that  which,  although
it  correspond  to  these  conditions,  also  refers  to


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  313

something  that  transcends  them.  To  the  first
correspond  what  are  called  individual  ends,  to
the  second  universal  ends ;  the  one  gives  rise
to  the  judgment  concerning  the  greater  or  less
coherence  of  the  action  taken  in  itself,  the  other
to  that  concerning  its  greater  or  less  coherence
in  respect  to  the  universal  end,  which  transcends
the  individual. )

If  we  wish  to  recognize  only  the  moral  form  of  The  economic

• .  .  . ,  form.

activity,  we  soon  perceive  that  it  draws  with  it
the  other,  from  which  it  is  distinct  ;  for  our
action,  although  universal  in  its  meaning,  cannot
but  be  something  concrete  and  individually
determined.  What  is  put  in  practice  is  not
morality  in  universal,  but  always  a  determinate
moral  volition  :  as  Hegel  remarked  in  a  different
connection,  we  do  not  eat  fruit  in  general,
but  cherries,  pears,  plums,  or,  these  cherries,
these  pears,  these  plums ;  we  hasten  to  comfort
in  this  or  that  way  an  individual,  made  in  this
or  that  way,  who  finds  himself  in  this  or  that
state  of  misfortune ;  we  do  justice  at  this  or
that  point  of  time  and  space  to  individual  beings
on  a  definite  matter.  If  a  good  action  be  not
solely  our  individual  pleasure,  it  must  become  so  :
otherwise,  how  could  we  carry  it  out  ?  Thus,  by
closer  examination,  we  realize  that  our  action


3i4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

always  obeys  a  rational  law,  even  when  its  moral
law  is  suppressed,  so  that,  when  every  inclination
that  transcends  the  individual  has  been  set  aside,
we  do  not  on  that  account  remain  the  prey  of
caprice.  We  shall  desire  only  our  own  will,  we
shall  follow  only  our  own  individual  inclination  ;
but,  even  so,  it  is  necessary  to  will  this  will
and  this  inclination  coherently,  not  to  undulate
between  two  or  more  volitions  at  the  same  time.
And  if  we  succeed  in  really  obtaining  our  desire,
if,  while  the  moral  conscience  is  for  a  moment
suspended  within  us,  we  abandon  ourselves  to  the
execution  of  a  project  of  vengeance  and  attain
to  it  in  spite  of  many  obstacles,  thus  executing
a  masterpiece  of  ability,  a  practical  masterpiece  ;
even  when,  in  this  case,  populus  non  plaudit,  we
for  our  part  certainly  nos  nobis  plaudimus,  and
feel  most  satisfied,  at  least  so  long  as  lasts  the
suspension  of  the  moral  consciousness  ;  for  we
have  done  what  we  willed  to  do,  we  have  tasted,
though  but  for  a  little  while,  the  pleasure  of  the
gods.  Whereas  if,  although  we  follow  our
desire,  we  do  something  different  from  it,  or
mingle  several  mutually  exclusive  desires  with
one,  and  having  decided  not  to  drink  wine,  for
example,  in  order  to  obey  the  advice  of  the  doctor
and  to  remain  in  good  health,  we  yet  yield  to


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  315

the  wish  to  drink  it,  that  pleasure  is,  so  to  say,
poisoned  by  preoccupation,  the  taste  is  at  the
same  time  distaste,  unless  we  succeed  in  forgetting
for  some  moments  the  advice  of  the  doctor,  or
think  that  very  possibly  he  does  not  know  what
he  is  saying.  We  continually  apply  the  same
criterion  to  the  incidents  of  life  ;  actions  and
individuals,  of  whom  we  cannot  morally  approve,
drag  from  us  sometimes  cries  of  admiration  for
the  ability  with  which  they  have  conducted  them
selves,  for  the  firmness  that  they  display,  worthy
(as  is  said)  of  a  better  cause.  The  Epicurean
Farinata,  who  raised  himself  erect  on  his  red-hot
bed,  or  the  impious  Capaneus  who  cursed  Jove
beneath  the  rain  of  punishing  fire,  obtain  from  us
that  esteem  which  we  refuse  to  those  sad  souls
who  lived  without  infamy  and  without  praise.
Art  has  celebrated  in  tragedies  and  poems  the
strong  characters  of  great  criminals,  but  it  has
turned  to  ridicule  in  comedies  little  criminals,
the  violent  who  show  themselves  timid,  the
astute  who  let  themselves  be  cheated.

As  we  cannot  fail  to  recognize this form  of  The  ethical

form.

the  practical  activity,  quite  individual,  hedonistic,
utilitarian,  and  economic,  and  the  importance  that
it  possesses,  joined  to  or  separated  from  morality,
as  the  case  may  be,  and  the  special  practical


316 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

judgments  that  have  their  origin  in  it  (the
judgment  of  convenience,  whether  it  be  called
utilitarian  or  economic),  so  it  would  be  impossible
not  to  recognize  the  moral  form.  Yes,  the
volitional  act  satisfies  us  as  individuals  occupy
ing  a  definite  point  of  time  and  space,  but  if  it
fail  to  satisfy  us  at  the  same  time  as  beings
transcending  time  and  space,  our  satisfaction  will
be  ephemeral  and  will  rapidly  be  changed  into
dissatisfaction.  To  one  desire  succeeds  another,
and  to  this  another,  and  so  on  to  infinity ;  but  the
one  is  different  from  the  other,  and  the  new  either
condemns  the  old  or  is  by  it  condemned.  If
we  succeed  in  arranging  our  pleasures  in  series
and  classes,  and  in  subordinating  and  connecting
them,  certainly  there  will  be  some  gain  ;  but
the  gain  will  not  have  been  a  true  one  on  this
occasion  either.  We  shall  at  the  most  be  able  to
guide  our  life  according  to  some  plan,  and  for
a  certain  time  that  has  not  the  exactitude  of  the
moment ;  instead  of  the  instantaneous  will  to
which  succeeds  a  different  will,  we  shall  have
general  ends  for  which  we  shall  work.  We  shall
propose,  for  instance,  to  do  certain  work  and  to
abstain  from  doing  certain  other  work,  in  order
to  marry  a  loved  one,  to  win  a  seat  in  Parliament,
or  to  obtain  literary  fame.  But  those  ends  are


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  317

also  merely  contingent  (they  are  general,  not
universal),  and  consequently  cannot  assuage  our
thirst.  When  we  all  have  attained  to  them,  we
shall  experience  le  cttboire  that  la  cueillaison  dun
reve  au  occur  qui  fa  ciieilli  always  leaves  behind.
The  company  of  the  fair  beloved  will  weary,  the
political  ambition  realized  will  leave  the  soul
empty,  literary  fame  will  seem  the  shadow  of
vanity.  Perhaps  too,  we  shall  change  our  side,
like  the  sick  man  who  cannot  rest  on  his  bed  of
feathers,  and  begin  to  follow  other  ends ;  the
lover  deluded  with  matrimony  will  turn  to  other
loves ;  the  ambitious  man,  weary  of  political  life,
will  think  of  new  ambitions,  or  of  that  of  not
having  any,  and  of  retiring  to  so-called  domestic
peace  ;  the  seeker  for  literary  fame  will  long  for
ease,  silence,  and  forgetting.  But  in  vain  :  dis
satisfaction  persists.  (  And  it  will  always  persist,
and  pallid  Care  will  always  sit  behind  us,  on  the
croup  of  our  horse,  if  we  are  not  able  to  tear  from
the  contingent  its  character  of  contingent,  breaking
its  spell,  and  bringing  ourselves  to  a  full  stop  in
that  progressus  ad  infinitum  from  thing  to  thing,
from  pleasure  to  pleasure,  to  which  it  impels  us,
if  we  be  not  able  to  place  the  eternal  in  the
contingent,  the  universal  in  the  individual,  duty
in  desire. \  Then  only  do  we  acquire  that  internal


318 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

peace,  which  is  not  in  the  future,  but  in  the
present,  because  eternity  is  in  the  moment,  for
him  who  knows  how  to  place  it  there.  Our  actions
will  always  be  new,  because  reality  always  places
new  problems  before  us,  but  if  we  accomplish
them  with  lofty  souls,  and  with  purity  of  heart,
seeking  in  them  that  which  surpasses  them,  we
shall  on  every  occasion  possess  the  Whole.  Such
is  the  character  of  the  moral  action,  which  satisfies
us,  not  as  individuals,  but  as  men,  and  as  in
dividuals  only  in  so  far  as  we  are  men ;  and  in  so
far  as  we  are  men,  only  by  means  of  individual
satisfaction.
impossibility  Those  men  in  whom  the  moral  consciousness

of  eliminating

a.  is wanting, or is confused and intermittent,

make  us  fearful — fearful  for  ourselves,  obliged
to  be  on  our  guard  against  them  and  to  ward
off  their  snares  and  injuries,  and  fearful  for
them,  for  if  they  have  not  already  fallen  the
prey  to  the  most  terrible  torments,  they  certainly
will  do  so.  They  are  like  people  dancing  uncon
sciously  upon  ground  that  has  been  mined ;  the
conscious  spectator  trembles  for  them,  they  do
not ;  but  if  by  chance  they  escape  the  danger,
they  will  be  retrospectively  horrified  when  they
look  back.  The  inebriation  evaporates  and  the
clear  outlines  of  reality  reappear,  but  that  which


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  319

restores  form  to  those  outlines  is  the  eternal,  not
the  contingent,  morality,  not  desire.  We  see
this  take  place  in  an  intense  form  in  what  are
called  conversions,  followed  by  the  intention  of
leaving  the  world  and  its  false  joys  and  retiring
to  a  cloister ;  or,  without  metaphor,  of  becoming
regenerated,  of  beginning  a  new  life  with  new
ideal  presuppositions.  But  intensive  conversions
are  catastrophes  which  occur,  like  popular  revolu
tions,  when  continuous  evolution  is  impeded.
The  wise  man  is  converted  and  renewed  at  every
moment,  without  the  solemnity  of  a  conversion,
and  with  the  memorare  novissima  he  retains  in  the
contingent,  his  contact  with  the  eternal.  He
knows  that  he  must  love  things  and  creatures  one
by  one,  each  in  its  individuality,  for  he  who  does
not  love  thus  is  neither  good  nor  bad,  not  even
being  a  man.  He  will  wish  for  literary  fame,
political  power,  matrimony,  according  to  his  apti
tudes  and  to  the  conditions  in  which  he  finds
himself;  but  he  will  wish  for  all  these  things
without  wishing  for  them  ;  he  will  wish  for  them,
not  for  themselves,  but  for  that  which  they
contain  of  universal  and  constant ;  he  will  love
them  in  God,  ready  to  abandon  them  immediately
their  ideal  content  shall  have  left  them ;  he  will
seriously  desire  them  with  all  ardour  for  them-


320 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

selves,  but  only  when  their  self  is  also  "his
other  self."  No  thing,  no  creature  possesses
unconditioned  value,  which  belongs  only  to  that
which  is  neither  thing  nor  creature.  The  value
of  our  individual  life  is  conditioned  for  each  of  us,
and  we  must  guarantee  and  defend  it  as  vehicle
of  the  universal,  and  we  must  be  ready  to  throw
it  away,  as  a  useless  and  pernicious  thing,  when
it  does  not  serve  this  end,  or  rebels.  But  the
value  of  every  being  dear  to  us  is  not  less  con
ditioned,  and  Jesus  said  with  reason,  when  pre
paring  himself  for  his  divine  mission,  that  he
had  come  to  separate  men  from  their  wives,
their  sons,  their  friends,  and  from  their  native
land.  That  separation  in  union,  that  union  in
separation,  is  the  moral  activity,  individual  and
universal.

confirmed  by  Thus  it  happens  that  art,  which  has  celebrated
strong  characters,  able  men  and  affairs  well
conducted,  has  also  celebrated,  and  with  greater
liveliness,  those  strong  men  who  have  placed
their  strength  at  the  service  of  that  other
strength  which  surpasses  them  and  makes  them
eternal.  For  this  reason,  no  embittered  soul,
no  sceptic  and  pessimist  remains  long  firm  in
his  negation  of  all  moral  light ;  such  negations
are  indeed  as  a  rule  true  amantiiim  irae.  The


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  321

singer  of  the  lesser  Brutus  who  had  thus  fero
ciously  imprecated  :

Foolish  Virtue,  hollow  mists  and  fields

Of  restless  ghosts

Are thy schools, and Repentance turns her back upon
thee,  .  .  .

is  the  same  who,  on  witnessing  a  slight  act  of
generosity,  exclaims  with  emotion  :

Fair  Virtue,  when  my  spirit  becomes  aware  of  thee,
It  exults,  as  at  a  joyous  event.  .  . .

The  coldest  and  most  self-contained  philosophers,
when  they  speak  of  it,  find  themselves  sometimes
impelled  to  adopt  a  poetic  tone,  and  Aristotle
will  say  of  Justice  that  it  is  "a  more  wonderful
thing  than  Hesperus  or  the  Morning  Star,"1  and
Emmanuel  Kant  will  compose  an  apostrophe  to
Duty,  and  will  write  at  the  end  of  the  Critique
of  Practical  Reason  :  "  Two  things  fill  the  soul
with  ever  new  and  ever  increasing  veneration
and  admiration  the  more  often  and  the  longer
reflection  is  occupied  with  them :  the  starry
heaven  above  me,  and  the  moral  law  within  me."
And  even  the  great  mass  of  rhetoric  that  has  for
its  object  virtue  or  the  moral  law  is  a  homage
rendered  to  this  supreme  force  of  life,  reality  of
reality.

1  Eth.  Nicom.  \.  v.  c.  I,  1129  b.


322 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.H

The  impossibility  of  suppressing  the  economic
or  the  moral  form  of  the  activity  in  our  practical
consciousness,  the  continual  appeal  that  the  one
makes  to  the  other,  the  revolving  of  our  practical
judgment  about  the  two  aspects,  both  of  them
necessary,  of  the  useful  and  the  honest,  energy
and  goodness,  pleasure  and  duty,  explain  why
the  Psychology  and  the  Description  of  practical
life  have  constituted  the  two  kinds  of  types
and  classes,  of  economic  and  of  moral  men,  of
economic  and  of  moral  institutions.  Such  rough
and  approximate  distinctions  have  however  at
bottom,  in  this  as  in  other  cases,  an  intimate
and  rigorous  distinction,  which  every  one  will
find  evident  in  himself,  if  he  look  inward  upon
himself  and  fix  his  gaze  persistently  on  the
universal  forms  of  the  spirit  that  acts  within  him.


II


CRITIQUE  OF  THE  NEGATIONS  OF  THE  ETHICAL  FORM

THE  distinction of  the  two  forms,  well known  Exclusion  of

materialistic

to the inner consciousness, will appear more  andofintei-

lectualistic

clearly  when  we  examine  the  reasons  for  which  criticisms.
the  one  or  the  other  of  them  has  been  denied.
We  say  the  one  or  the  other,  because  we  have
now  freed  ourselves  from  the  obligation  of  refuting
the  theses  that  have  their  origin  in  presupposi
tions,  both  materialistic  and  intellectualistic,  and
therefore  deny  the  moral  and  economic  activi
ties,  either  because  they  do  not  admit  the  con
cept  of  spiritual  activity  itself,  or  because  they
do  not  admit  the  more  special  conception  of
practical  activity.  The  greater  number  of  those
who  deny  morality  are  nothing  but  mechanicists,
empiricists,  materialists,  and  positivists,  to  whose
brains  not  only  do  economy  and  morality  appear
inconceivable,  but  also  art  and  science  and,  in
short,  every  spiritual  value.  They  ask :  Where
is  this  moral  principle  of  which  you  discourse  ?

323


324 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

Point  it  out  to  us  with  your  finger.  But  they
also  ask  :  Where  are  the  categories  or  the  pure
concept?  Where  is  the  aesthetic  synthesis  and
the  pure  intuition  ?  Where  is  the  a  priori  of
perception  and  of  history  ?  Where  are  all  these
fine  things  you  talk  of  as  though  they  existed,
and  that  we  neither  see  nor  touch  ? — And  for
our  part,  we  can  henceforth  let  them  say  what
they  will,  only  praying  in  our  hearts  that  God
may  illuminate  them  and  make  them  discover  (at
least  when  they  are  near  to  death  and  the  dense
veil  of  their  bodies  has  become  more  thin)  that
if  the  universals  were  things  that  it  was  possible
to  perceive  as  we  do  individual  things,  they
would  not  be  universals.

When  the  double  assumption  of  a  spiritual
activity  and  of  a  practical  form  of  it  has  been
admitted,  it  is  not  possible  to  do  otherwise
than  either  to  deny  the  economic  for  the  moral
form,  or  the  moral  for  the  economic.  What
might  seem  to  be  a  third  possibility,  that  of
denying  the  two  forms,  is  reducible  to  the  first,
because,  when  the  distinction  of  the  terms  has
been  suppressed,  there  remains  nothing  but  the
practical  activity  considered  in  general,  which  co
incides  with  the  individual  and  economic  activity.
We  shall  begin  then  with  the  examination  of  the


,i ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  325

negation  of  morality  for  economy,  which  is  the
thesis  of  utilitarianism.  Those  same  materialists
have  recourse  to  utilitarianism  when  they  wish  to
present  some  sort  of  a  Philosophy  of  the  practical,
but  with  what  little  right  they  avail  themselves
of  such  aid,  is  clear  from  what  has  already  been
said  :  the  useful  is  always  value  and  teleology,
and  materialism,  in  all  its  sub-forms  and  varieties,
is  incapable  of  positing  the  smallest  concept  of
value  and  finality.

Utilitarianism affirms  that no  other  volition  The  thesis  of

utilitarian  ism

exists save that  which answers  to  the merely  against  the

existence  of

individual  determination,  or,  as  it  is  also  ex-  moral  acts,
pressed,  to  the  pleasure  of  the  individual,  under
standing  by  pleasure,  not  the  generic  pleasure
that  also  accompanies  moral  satisfaction  in  the
individual,  but  that  which  is  exclusively  individual.
Actions,  therefore,  as  it  says,  are  what  concern
it,  not  their  motives,  that  is,  the  motive  of  the
individuality  of  the  act  abstractly  conceived,  not
that  of  the  spirit  become  concrete  in  it ;  thus,  not
killing  for  fear  of  punishment  and  not  killing
because  repugnant  to  one's  own  conscience,
become  the  same  thing.  They  are  the  conse
quences  of  different  conditions,  but  in  both  cases
of  the  same  motive,  which  is  personal  con
venience.  And  as  there  does  not  exist  a  pleasure


326 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

that  cannot  be  and  is  not  substituted  for  a
different  pleasure,  so  there  is  not  an  action,
however  moral  it  be  called,  that  cannot  be  inter
rupted  and  changed,  when  different  conditions
present  themselves.  Every  action,  every  man
has  his  price  :  it  is  all  a  matter  of  discovering
what  that  price  is.  He  who  seems  to  place  the
glory  of  his  country  above  all  other  aspirations,
although  he  cannot,  for  example,  be  corrupted
by  money,  by  vanity,  or  by  pleasure,  will  yet
always  have  in  him  some  weak  point  that  a  more
expert  corrupter  will  discover  or  be  able  to  dis
cover  ;  and  when  the  discovery  has  been  made
and  the  suitable  transaction  proposed,  the  glory
of  his  country  will  be  abandoned,  because  it  has
been  well  compensated  for  by  something  else.
This  way  of  looking  upon  human  actions  has
appeared  to  be  concrete,  exact,  rational ;  and  the
utilitarian  theory,  if  it  have  often  been  called
hedonistic,  and  sometimes  even  (esthetic  (under
standing  by  aesthetic,  individual  pleasure),  is  also
wont  to  be  decorated  with  the  name  of  ethical
or  practical  rationalism,  rational  morality.
Difficulties  All  would  go  very  well,  and  the  practical

arising  from  ..  i  i • i •  i  • i  i • 1

the  presence activity  would  in  this  way  be  entirely  explained

of  these.

and  unified,  if  we  did not  at  every  moment  of
life run against the distinction between mere


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  327

pleasure  and  duty,  between  the  useful  and  the
honest  action,  and  if  there  did  not  arise  in  our
conscience  an  invincible  distinction  between
the  things  that  have  a  price  and  those  that
have  none,  and  if  an  abyss  did  not  differentiate
among  apparently  similar  actions  that  which  has
a  merely  utilitarian  from  that  which  has  a
moral  motive.  The  utilitarians  even  (who,
although  bad  philosophers,  are  men,  and  as  such
carry  at  the  bottom  of  their  souls  a  far  better
philosophy  than  they  profess  in  books  and  in  the
schools)  are  not  able  to  suppress  that  distinc
tion  in  themselves  and  to  deny  all  recognition  to
the  power  of  morality,  to  which,  as  men,  they
submit  at  every  moment.  How  then  are  they
to  behave  ?  How  are  they  to  explain  the  genesis
of  that  distinction  which,  by  the  premises  that
they  have  posited,  cannot  be  other  than  illusion  ?
What  is  there  that  gives  effective  existence  to
the  fallacious  category  of  morality,  side  by  side
with  the  veracious  one  of  utility  ?

There have been several  attempts to  solve  Attempt  to

. .  explain  them

that  hard  resisting  term  of  morality. The  first,  as  quantitative

distinctions.

which  was  logically  bound  to  present  itself,  was
that  of  considering  facts  called  moral  as  nothing
but  empirical  groups  of  utilitarian  facts,  and  of
explaining  the  false  category  as  an  hypostasis


328 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

of  those  empirical  groups,  arbitrarily  reduced  to
a  rigorous  and  philosophical  concept.  Banking,
usury,  commerce,  industry,  agriculture,  and  labour
are  empirically  distinguished,  yet  are  all  eco
nomic  facts.  Courage,  prudence,  temperance,
chastity,  justice,  modesty  are  empirically  dis
tinguished,  yet  are  all  moral  facts.  Why  not
unite  the  two  series,  and  recognize  the  unity
and  continuity  of  nature  by  the  insertion  among
them  of  other  types  and  terms  ?  Morality
is  also  utility,  but  the  utility  of  the  greater
number\  interest  is  interest,  but  well  understood-,
pleasure  is  pleasure,  but  pleasure  of  greater
duration  and  quantity,  preferred  to  another  less
intense,  or  more  fugitive ;  egoism,  egoism  of  family,
of  race,  of  human  race,  egoism  of  species,  altruism  ;
eudemonism,  but  social  eudemonism,  enjoyment,
but  enjoyment  of  sympathy,  utility,  but  utility  of
conforming,  not  to  one's  own  individual  judgment,
but  to  that  of  public  opinion.  Thus  are  moral  facts
included  in  utilitarian,  in  the  same  way  as  the
number  a  hundred  thousand  is  not  less  a  number
than  two  or  three  and  the  others  inferior  to  it,
because  it  is  composed  of  three  and  of  two  and
of  other  numbers  less  than  itself.  Csesar  Borgia
murders  his  brother  and  thus  gets  rid  of  a  rival
both  in  love  and  in  politics,  that  is,  he  seeks


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  329

his  advantage  ;  but  Giordano  Bruno  also  seeks
his  own  advantage,  and  nothing  else,  when  he
allows  himself  to  be  burned  in  order  to  assert
his  philosophy,  because,  for  one  constituted  as
he,  with  that  demoniacal  fury  of  his  for  philo
sophical  truth,  the  pyre  must  have  seemed  a
very  miserable  and  negligible  thing,  just  as
his  brother's  blood  seemed  to  Caesar  Borgia.
Call  the  one  of  these  actions  utility  of  a  com
plexity  of  ten  and  the  other  utility  of  a  complexity
of  a  hundred,  or  give  to  the  complexity  a
hundred  the  name  of  morality,  of  well-understood
self-interest,  of  sympathy,  of  altruism,  and  so  on,
and  to  the  complexity  of  ten  that  of  utility,  of
individual  interest,  of  egoism  :  the  two  actions
will  not  thus  have  been  declared  of  a  different
nature.

But  the  fact  is  that  they  have  already  been  critique.
declared  of  a  different  nature  by  the  utilitarians
themselves.  No  one,  indeed,  will  have  been
deceived  with  the  ingenious  phraseology  ex
cogitated  :  well-understood  interest  is  no  longer
mere  self-interest ;  the  egoism  of  species  is  not
egoism,  durable  pleasure  is  not  mere  pleasure.
The  difference  between  the  one  term  and  the
other  is  not  quantitative,  and  even  where  a  greater
quantity  is  talked  of,  a  greater  duration,  a  greater


330 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

number,  arithmetical  definitions  are  not  posited,
but  symbols  pointing  to  qualitative  differences.
There  is  a  difference,  not  of  complexity  but  of
nature,  between  the  action  of  Caesar  Borgia  and
that  of  Giordano  Bruno ;  there  is  no  common
measure  between  baseness  and  moral  elevation
as  there  is  between  undulating  plains  and  moun
tains.  The  two  series,  of  empirical  utilitarian
concepts  and  of  empirical  moral  concepts,  are
not  only  irreducible  to  a  single  series,  but
remain  obstinately  distinct  and  irreducible.  All
that  can  be  done,  and  has  been  done,  is  to  unify
them  verbally  ;  and  in  this  the  utilitarians  have
shown  themselves  as  bold  as  it  was  possible
to  be  in  so  miserable  an  enterprise.  But  the
identity  or  similarity  of  words  does  not  suffice  to
cancel  the  profound  distinctions  of  things.
Attempt  to  There  would  have  been  an  immediate  passage

explain  them  .

as  facts  either from  the  consciousness  of  the  puerility  01  such

extraneous  to

the  practical  or  identifications to the recognition of  a distinct

irrational  and

stupid,  ethical  form,  if  purpose  and  prejudice  had  not  made

resistance,  prompting,  on  the  contrary,  the  search
for  new  expedients  for  setting  themselves  free  in
theory  from  the  tedious  and  recurring  phantom  of
morality.  On  this  occasion  also  these  expedi
ents  must  have  been  just  two  :  that  is,  to  declare
morality  i£r  concept  extraneo^ls  to  the  practical,  or


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  331

intrinsic  to  it  indeed,  but  contrary.  The  first  was
attempted,  but  feebly,  when  morality  was  spoken
of  as  the  fantasticality  of  poets,  as  the  dream  or
rosy  illusion  caressed  in  life.  No  attention  was
paid  to  the  fact  that  what  the  poet  imagines
cannot  be  contradictory  and  absurd,  but  must
indeed  be  founded  in  the  reality  of  life  and  in  the
nature  of  things  ;  and  that  morality  is  not  the
aesthetic  form  in  which  it  is  reproduced  and
represented,  but  practical  form  or  action.  But
the  unmaintainability  of  this  attempt  was  too
evident  for  its  success.  The  other  expedient,
on  the  contrary,  has  always  had  and  still  has
great  success.  This  turns  morality  into  a  prac
tical  contradictory  concept,  that  is,  into  some
thing  certainly  practical,  but  without  motive,
incoherent,  and  in  contradiction  to  the  healthy
development  of  the  practical.  It  is  true  that  it
is  usually  enunciated  in  very  different  words  from
those  used  by  us.  They  speak  as  follows  :  What
is  called  a  good  and  virtuous  action  is  nothing
but  the  product  of  the  association  between  certain
acts  that  are  for  us  the  means  to  a  pleasure,  and
that  pleasure  itself;  so  that  gradually,  even  where
the  primitive  pleasure  is  absent,  those  acts  are
sought  and  repeated  for  themselves,  as  though
in  themselves  pleasurable.  The  savage  fought


332 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

against  the  enemies  who  assailed  his  tribe,  that
he  might  not  be  made  a  slave  or  sacrificed  to
the  idol  of  another  tribe,  that  is  to  say,  in  order
to  defend  his  personal  liberty  or  his  life ;  but
later  on,  man,  forgetting  that  the  tribe  or  the
city  or  the  State  were  simple  means  for  protecting
life  and  goods,  defends  them  for  themselves  and
allows  himself  to  be  despoiled  and  slain  for  his
country.  In  the  same  way  (to  employ  the
classical  example),  money  is  first  sought  as  a
means  to  enjoyment,  and  to  form  a  supply  for
procuring  a  life  more  comfortable  and  secure ;
but  by  degrees  he  who  amasses  money  turns  in
his  soul  the  means  into  the  end,  and  becomes
avaricious,  that  is,  he  finds  delight  in  the  mere
possession  of  money,  and  sacrifices  for  that  all  his
other  joys,  even  an  easy  life,  food,  house  and
sleep,  which  he  originally  intended  that  money
should  obtain  for  him.  Morality  arises  entirely
from  a  similar  process  of  association  between
means  and  end,  and  the  case  of  the  miser
explains  by  analogy  every  act  of  virtue  that
cannot  be  directly  reduced  to  simple  pleasure  and
individual  utility.
ionism  Now  the  association  here  discussed  is  neither

and  evolution
ism.  Critique,  that  of  logic  nor  of  aesthetic,  nor  valid  association,

synthesis, but irrational  and fallacious associa-


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  333

tion.  It  is  only  possible  to  exchange  means  for
end  as  the  result  of  a  bad  association  of  ideas  :
therefore  that  association  is  folly  and  stupidity,
as  the  miser  adduced  as  an  example  is  stupid  and
foolish,  being  called  "  miser "  precisely  for  this
reason,  with  the  intention  of  blaming  him  (for  this
word  does  not  mean  "  economic  "  or  "  provident  ").
And  behold  !  morality  should  be  defined  as  that
which  is  practically  irrational,  foolish,  stupid,  the
product  of  illusion  and  confusion,  or  the  contrary
of  the  practical  activity,  which  is  clear-sightedness,
rationality,  wisdom.  Thus  defined,  it  is  at  the
same  time  annulled.  Indeed,  irrationality  is  that
which  is  condemned  to  be  perpetually  subjected
to  the  rational ;  and  what  is  called  the  moral  man,
if  he  were  nothing  but  a  false  associator  of  ideas,
would  be  constantly  confuted  by  the  man  of
good  sense,  by  the  utilitarian,  who  would  prevent
him  from  committing  the  stupidity  of  sacrificing
himself  for  his  children,  for  his  country,  or  for
knowledge  ;  or,  were  he  to  persist,  would  cover
him  with  contempt  and  ridicule.  The  fear  that
to  discover  its  origin  would  be  tantamount  to
abolishing  morality  would  therefore  be  perfectly
justified  in  this  new  sense  also;  or  better,  it
would  not  be  a  question  of  a  fear,  but  of  a  fact :
morality  would  be  in  a  state  of  progressive


334 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

annulment,  as  the  effect  of  increasing  instruction,
both  in  the  individual  and  in  society.  It  has
been  replied  that  neither  this  fear  nor  this  fact
arises,  because  that  false  association  is  indissoluble,
being  a  product  of  heredity,  or,  to  speak  of  it  in
proper  terms,  it  is  hereditary  stupidity  (evolution-
istic  utilitarianism).  But  whether  inherited  or
acquired,  it  is  so  dissoluble  as  to  be  dissolved  in
the  theory  proposed  :  lux  facia  est,  and  no  one
succeeds  in  obscuring  it  any  longer.  If,  not
withstanding  that  pretended  light,  morality  be
not  dissipated,  if  recourse  be  had  to  the  miserable
subterfuge  of  insuperable  heredity  (which  is
surpassed  at  the  very  moment  in  which  its  origin
is  made  clear),  this  means  to  say  that,  for  the
moralist  himself,  morality  is  not  the  irrational,
but  something  very  rational.  He  does  not  suc
ceed  in  identifying  it  with  the  merely  individu
ally  useful,  but  neither  can  he  reject  it  as  the  pure
and  simple  negative  of  this.  And  since  he  does
not  wish  to  abandon  the  utilitaristic  hypothesis,
there  is  no  other  path  open  to  him  but  that  of
recourse  to  mystery.

A  desperate  This is precisely what  happens in  the last

theological form  of  utilitarianism,  which  has  seemed  to  be

utilitarianism

and  mystery, capricious  and  extravagant,  but  is  on  the  contrary
profoundly auto  -  critical, since it reveals the


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  335

ultimate  essence  and  defect  of  the  doctrine  :  what
is  known  as  theological  utilitarianism.  Human
actions  are  always  inspired  by  what  is  merely
useful  to  the  individual,  and  if  a  number  of  these
seems  to  diverge  from  this  criterion,  this  happens
because  account  is  not  taken  of  an  actual  fact,  by
means  of  which  even  the  actions  which  seem  to  be
divergent  are  reduced  to  the  common  measure.
This  given  fact  is  the  life  beyond  this  world,  in
which  God  rewards  or  punishes  him  who  has
obeyed  or  disobeyed  his  will,  in  the  life  of  this
world.  He  who  in  this  life  seems  to  resist  the
impulse  of  his  personal  advantage  and  performs
sacrifices  of  every  sort,  even  to  that  of  his  own
life,  follows  equally  with  the  others  his  personal
advantage ;  and  believing  in  God,  in  the  im
mortality  of  the  soul,  and  in  the  reward  and  the
punishment  that  await  him,  he  regulates  his
action  according  to  these  actual  facts.  Intuition-
istic  Ethic,  which  places  a  moral  duty  at  the  side
of  individual  pleasure,  but  indeducible  from  it,
is  in  reality  deduced  from  individual  pleasure,
and  is  likewise  turned  into  rational  or  utilitarian
Ethic  by  means  of  the  transcendental  datum.
In  this  way  the  solution  makes  shipwreck  in
mystery  ;  since  God,  immortality,  the  other  life,
the  divine  command,  punishments  and  rewards,


336 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

cannot  be  defined  and  justified  by  means  of
thought  and  concept.  When  utilitarianism  be
comes  theological,  it  abandons  the  philosophical
field,  confessing  by  so  doing  its  philosophical
defeat.  And  to  philosophical  consideration  the
distinction  between  the  individually  useful  and
that  which  is  also  superindividual  shines  out
ever  more  clearly  after  the  many  vain  attacks
of  utilitarianism,  the  affirmation  of  the  moral
form,  as  united  and  distinct  from  the  utilitarian  ;
the  autonomy  of  Ethic  against  every  form  of
utilitarianism  and  every  heteronomous  Ethic.


Ill


CRITIQUE OF THE NEGATIONS OF THE ECONOMIC

FORM

IF  in the course of philosophical history, the  The  thesis  of

moral  abstract-

theory  of  utility  has sought to  cause the dis-  *«•"»  against

the  concept  of

appearance  of  the  other  practical  term,  which  is  the  useful
morality,  by  swallowing  it  up,  we  are  not  to
believe  that  morality  has  been  for  its  part
more  modest  and  discreet  and  has  not  in  its
turn  attempted  to  devour  its  companion.  One
exaggeration  has  been  met  with  another ;  to
utilitarianism  has  been  opposed  that  error  which
may  be  called  moral  abstracticism,  by  means  of
which  is  refused  to  the  concept  of  utility  the
place  that  belongs  to  it  in  the  organism  of  the
spirit.

Such  a  refusal  (analogous  to  our  analysis  of
the  utilitarian  theory)  cannot  take  place,  save
in  three  ways :  that  is,  in  so  far  as  value  is
denied  to  the  useful,  either  -as practical  concept,  or
as  positive  concept,  or  as  philosophical  concept.

337 '  Z


338 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

Here  too  we  naturally  do  not  take  count  of  the
theses  of  the  materialists  or  of  the  intellectualists,
which  (especially  those  of  the  former)  have  raged
in  the  field  of  Economy  not  less  than  in  that
of  Ethic,  giving  rise  to  insane  attempts  to
explain  the  useful  on  mechanical  principles,  or
with  the  contingencies  of  historical  evolution.
The  mefui  as  The  useful  (it  has  been  said)  is  nothing  but

the  means  or  .  •  j T?  1

as  theoretical the  means  to  obtain  a  certain  end. r  or  example,

fact.

if  I  take  a  walk  every  day  with  a  view  to  keeping
myself  in  good  health,  the  daily  walk  is  the
suitable  means  and  is  therefore  useful ;  if,  on
the  contrary,  I  find  that  it  makes  me  ill,  this
means  that  it  is  not  the  suitable  means  and
it  would  be,  and  I  should  declare  it  to  be,
useless  or  harmful.  Now  by  the  demonstration
given  above,  it  is  known  that  means  and  end
are  indistinguishable  in  the  practical,  for  what
is  called  means  is  nothing  but  the  actual  situation
(and  the  knowledge  of  it),  from  which  arises  the
practical  act,  and  to  which  that  act  corresponds.
Thus  it  is  most  possible  to  separate  the  means
from  the  end ;  but  in  so  doing,  the  consideration
of  the  practical  act  is  abandoned,  and  we  pass
to  that  of  its  theoretical  antecedent ;  and  if  the
mere  theoretical  antecedent  be  called  "useful"
or  "  practical"  in  ordinary  speech  (remembering


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  339

the  practical  act,  to  which  it  has  been  or  it  is
presumed  that  it  may  be  united)  then  a  metaphor
is  employed,  against  which  there  is  nothing  to
be  said.  Those,  then,  who  define  the  useful  as
the  means  should  once  for  all  realize  that  with
such  a  definition  they  remove  that  concept  from
the  circle  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  and
transport  it  into  Logic,  where  the  relation  of
means  and  end  is  the  very  same  as  that  of  cause
and  effect,  and  it  again  becomes  part  of  the
theory  of  empirical  concepts,  in  which  cause  and
effect  are  wont  to  be  posited  as  terms  separately
conceivable.  This  has  been  more  or  less  con
sciously  recognized,  when  the  useful  has  been
defined  as  the  technical,  for  we  know  that  the
technical  is  nothing  but  knowledge  thus  made
into  a  metaphor,  owing  to  the  relation  that  it
has  or  is  presumed  to  be  capable  of  having,
with  an  action  that  has  been  done  or  is  about
to  be  done.

The  theoretical  character  of  the  technical  has,  Technical  and
on  the contrary,  been  obscured,  when  technical  imperatives.
knowledge  has  received  the  name  of  hypothetical
imperatives, distinct and ranged beside the
categorical. The imperative is will, and is
therefore  always  both  categoric  and  imperative  :
a is  willed (categorically), but a  would not be


340 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

willed  if  the  condition  of  fact  and  situation  b
did  not  exist  (hypothetically).  The  merely
hypothetical  imperative  is  the  knowledge  that
remains  when  abstraction  is  made  of  the  practi
cal  act  or  of  the  will ;  and  is  no  longer  an
imperative,  but  a  theoretic  affirmation.  Where
effective  will  is  not,  imperatives  cannot  be
talked  of.

critique:  the  Having  made  clear  that  the  definition  of  the
practical  fact,  useful  as  means  implies  the  negation  of  the  useful
as  a  practical  fact  and  its  reduction  to  a  theoretical
category  already  known,  we  must  exclude  the
possibility  of  such  a  reduction,  for  in  the  useful,
the  practical  character,  the  effectivity  of  the  will,
is  ineliminable.  "  It  is  useful  for  me  to  take  a
walk"  means,  "It  pleases  me  to  take  a  walk,"
"  I  will  to  do  it."  It  is  a  question,  not  of  con
templation  or  of  reasoning,  but  of  volitional
movement.  The  knowledge  that  precedes  the
utilitarian  act  is  one  thing,  the  act  itself  is
another.  The  old  man  has  the  same  knowledge
as  the  young  man,  he  has  indeed  much  more  (si
jeunesse  savait,  si  vieillesse  poiwait  /),  but  he  does
not  will  what  the  young  man  wills  :  he  knows
that  by  traversing  so  many  kilometers  he  will
arrive  at  a  certain  definite  point ;  but  it  is  not
useful  for  him  to  go  there,  because  it  is  not


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  341

useful  for  him  to  traverse  those  kilometers,  or
to  submit  to  that  exertion  at  the  risk  of  an
illness.  The  utilitarian  will  is  expressed,  not  in
merely  hypothetical  imperatives,  but  in  those
categoric  imperatives  that  are  at  the  same  time
hypothetical.  The  general  formula  is  "  will !  "  or
"  will  that  you  will !  "  or  "  be  coherent  in  your
willing  !  "  as  the  individuated  forms  are  those  that
we  are  continually  repeating  to  ourselves,  "  now,
to  bed!"  "now,  up  you  get!"  and  the  like;
which,  when  developed,  mean:  "go  to  bed"  (if
you  wish  to  rest  yourself),  "  get  up  "  (if  you  wish
to  work),  and  so  on.  The  distinction  between
the  cognoscitive  and  the  volitional  theses  is  here
evident.

Since  then,  owing  to  the  unalterably  practical  The  useful  as

i  r i  M- •  r  -11 ^e  egoistic

character  of  the  utilitarian  fact,  it  was  not  possible  or  immoral.
to  insist  upon  its  reduction  to  the  technical,  and
since,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  not  desired  to
recognize  it  as  a  practical  category  side  by  side
with  the  practical  category  of  morality,  they
have  tried  to  think  of  it  as  .something  certainly
practical,  but  at  the  same  time  of  little  value,  to
beware  of  it,  to  combat  it,  to  free  ourselves  from
it.  "Useful"  has  in  this  way  become  synonymous
with  wilfulness,  with  individual  caprice,  with
will  more  or  less  perverted,  and  (looking  upon


342 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

immorality  as  the  individual  I,  shut  up  in
itself  and  rebelling  against  the  universal)  with
egoism.  This  theory  is  supported  by  certain
common  modes  of  speech,  in  which  the  moral
man  is  opposed  to  the  man  intent  upon  what
is  useful  to  him  as  an  individual,  the  ethical  to
the  economic  life.  But  it  is  a  question  of  phrases,
true,  perhaps,  in  a  certain  sense,  but  inexact  when
understood  or  interpreted  as  affirmations  of  a
contest  between  morality  and  utility.
critique:  We  discover  at  once  that  the  contest  is  in-

the  useful

is  amoral,  existent,  by  merely  thinking  of  the  case  already
mentioned,  of  the  man  in  whom  the  moral  con
science  is  not  developed  or  has  been  suppressed,
or  of  the  case  -  limit  called  innocence.  What
is  done  in  innocence  responds,  no  doubt,  to
individual  pleasure,  and  so  to  what  is  useful  for
the  individual,  as  he  feels  it  in  the  given  circum
stances  :  were  this  not  so,  what  is  done  would
not  be  done.  But  innocence  is  not  immoral  on
this  account.  It  will  be  amoral,  because  it  is
merely  individual  volition  deprived  of  the  light  of
the  eternal ;  it  will  never  be  immoral.  Thus  (to
make  use  of  the  comparison  and  analogy  of  the
theoretic  activity)  the  images  that  the  poet  creates
will  be  without  philosophy,  but  will  not  for  this
reason  be  antiphilosophical.  Because,  were  that


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  343

so,  they  would  have  to  be  partially  philosophical,
that  is  to  say,  to  enter  into  strife  with  philosophy  ;
but  there  is  no  such  strife,  and,  therefore,  those
images,  although  philosophically  not  true,  are
none  the  less  not  philosophically  false.  Yet
they  are  theoretical  acts,  in  the  same  way  that
philosophy  is  a  theoretical  act.  The  philo
sophical  innocence  of  the  poet  does  not  change
his  intuitive  knowledge  into  bad  philosophical
knowledge,  into  a  negativeof  philosophy. — Further,
the  useful  not  only  is  not  the  negative  of  morality,
but,  as  we  know,  is  also  a  fact  that  unites  itself
very  well  with  morality,  as  the  word  is  joined  to
the  thought,  making  it  concrete  and  palpable,  so
much  so  that  thought  without  words  is  impossible.
What  honourable  man  would  tolerate  being
judged  disuseful  ?  What  moral  action  would  be
truly  moral,  were  it  not  at  the  same  time  useful  ?
The  good  action  is  good,  because  it  is  not  bad,
that  is,  it  absolutely  excludes  the  bad  at  the  point
in  which  it  becomes  effective  ;  but  certainly  it
is  not  so,  because  disuseful ;  indeed,  in  being
good,  it  is  also  useful,  because  it  absolutely  com
prehends  the  useful  in  itself  at  the  point  in  which
it  becomes  effective.  The  union  of  morality  with
utility  suffices  to  eliminate  the  concept  of  the  useful
as  a  negative.  Certainly  negative  and  positive


344 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

do unite to give rise to becoming and to
development; but their  union is  that  of  strife,
not  of  concord.
The  useful  as The  third  way  of  eliminating  the  concept  of  the

ethical

minimum.  useful  from  Philosophy,  or  from  the  Philosophy  of
the  practical,  is  that  which  makes  of  it  a  concept
of  ethical  description,  or  an  empirical  and  psycho
logical  concept  designating  certain  groups  of
very  minute  ethical  facts,  the  rudimentary  ethical
consciousness.  Hence  the  illusion  of  the  existence
of  volitional  acts  indifferent  in  respect  to  morality.
These  acts  are  really  indifferentiated  for  the  mind
that  is  examining  them,  which  sometimes  does  not
take  the  trouble  to  do  so  minutely,  save  when  such
an  examination  is  seriously  undertaken,  and  then
they  are  always  differentiated  into  good  or  bad.
Thus  it  is  generally  said  that  eating  and  sleeping,
playing  at  cards  or  at  billiards,  are  things  that
appertain,  not  to  morality,  but  to  individual
utility,  and  that  each  one  may  conduct  him
self  as  he  wills  in  respect  to  them,  whereas
individual  choice  is  excluded  when  it  is  necessary
to  fulfil  one's  own  obligations  of  social  work  or  of
respecting  the  life  of  one's  neighbour.  But  if  we
observe  attentively,  we  see  that  also  in  eating
or  in  sleeping,  in  playing  cards  or  billiards,  one
acts  morally  or  immorally,  since,  for  example,  it  is


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  345

immoral  to  ruin  one's  health  with  eating  too  much,
or  with  sleeping  too  little,  or  to  corrupt  soul  and
intellect  with  card-playing  and  dawdling  in  billiard-
rooms,  when  one  can  do  something  better.

But  the  useful  is  none  of  all  these  things  ; it  critique:

,  ,  r ,  . ,  .  9 the  useful

is  not  the  complex  01  ethical  micro-organisms,  in  ispnmorai.
which  we  discover  with  the  microscope  the  same
facts  of  life  and  of  death  that  we  observe  with  the
naked  eye  in  macro-organisms.  No  microscope
will  ever  discern  in  it  the  oppositions  of  moral
good  and  evil,  because  these  oppositions  are  not
really  there  ;  there  are  only  those  of  utilitarian  or
economic  good  and  evil.  For  the  useful  is  not  the
moral  minimum,  but  the  premoral.  In  this  case
it  is  a  question,  not  of  approximative,  but  of
rigorous  difference  ;  not  psychological,  but  philo
sophical.

Finally,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  attempt  A  desperate

attempt:  the

to  present  the  utilitarian  conscience  as  a  moral  useful  as  in

ferior  practical

conscience,  different  and  inferior  to  another  moral  conscience.

Confirmation

conscience placed over it,  not  as  a  new  mode  of  the  autonomy

1  of  the  useful.

of  eliminating  the  concept  of  the  useful,  by
absorbing  it  in  that  of  morality,  but  as  a  confession
of  the  autonomy  of  that  moment  of  the  spirit.  It
would  be  moral,  because  there  is  no  contradiction
to  be  found  in  it  that  can  cause  it  to  be  judged
immoral,  and  if  it  be  so  judged,  this  happens


346 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

because  it  is  looked  at  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  superior  conscience,  or  because  the  superior
conscience  is  erroneously  transported  into  the
inferior.  But  this  has  importance  precisely
because  it  is  not  moral,  and  because  the  value
that  it  is  admitted  to  possess,  far  from  being
morality,  is  spirituality ;  that  is  to  say,  it  con
stitutes  a  peculiar  spiritual  value,  different  from
morality.  "  Better  a  will  of  some  sort  than  no
will  at  all "  is  a  common  saying  which  means  that
prior  to  morality,  there  is  another  and  more
elementary  spiritual  demand.  The  distinction  of
the  two  consciences,  then,  is  philosophical,  not
one  of  more  or  less,  a  distinction  of  degrees,  but
not  of  empirical  degrees,  which  coincides  with  our
conclusion.  Thus,  to  return  to  the  usual  com
parison,  the  poetical  figuration  is  true,  and  can  only
be  judged  false  by  him  who  looks  upon  it  from  a
philosophical  point  of  view,  or  himself  falsifies
it  by  turning  it  into  a  bad  philosopheme.  But
the  truth  of  that  figuration  is  not  philosophical,  and
remains  purely  and  simply  poetical  truth.  It
will  be  said  that  morality  is  implied  in  utilitarian
volition,  because,  when  the  individually  useful  is
posited,  the  universal,  which  will  dominate  and
correct  it,  is  promoted,  in  the  same  way  as  it
has  been  said  that  philosophy  is  implied  in  the


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  347

aesthetic  intuition,  since  by  positing  the  in
dividual  imagination  is  posited  the  claim  of
the  universal,  which  surpasses  and  renders  it
untrue.  But  since  the  aesthetic  conscience  is
distinguished  from  the  philosophical,  precisely
because  that  which  in  the  latter  is  explicit  is  only
implicit  in  the  former,  so,  in  like  manner,  the
utilitarian  conscience  is  distinguished  from  the
moral  conscience,  because  that  morality  which  be
comes  explicit  and  effective'in  the  second,  is  only
implicit  or  actually  inexistent  in  the  first.  The
difference  between  implicit  and  explicit  is  another
way  of  enunciating  the  distinction  between  the  two
consciousnesses  or  practical  forms,  the  autonomy
of  both  being  thus  recognized.


IV


RELATION BETWEEN THE ECONOMIC AND ETHICAL
FORMS

Economic  and THE  respective  distinction  and  autonomy  of  the

ethic  as  the  -  ,  * .  i

double  degree  of  two forms, economic and ethic, as we nave

the  practical. . . ,  .  , .  .  ,  1

hitherto  been  expounding  it,  and  as  results
from  the  words  "inferior"  and  "  superior"  just
now  used,  is  that  of  two  degrees,  at  once  distinct
and  united,  such  that  the  first  can  stand  without
the  second,  but  the  second  cannot  stand  without
the  first.  The  moment  of  distinction  lies  in  that
possibility  of  existence  independent  of  the  first ;
the  moment  of  unity  is  in  the  impossibility  of
independent  existence  of  the  second.  If  the
first  were  wanting,  there  would  be  identity ;  if
the  second,  there  would  be  abstract  distinction
or  separation.  For  this  reason  we  have  insisted
upon  showing  that  there  are  actions  without
morality,  yet  which  are  perfectly  economical,
whereas  moral  actions  that  are  not  also  perfectly

useful or economical do not exist. Morality

348


PT.II  ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  349

lives  in  concrete,  in  utility,  the  universal  in  the
individual,  the  eternal  in  the  contingent.)  Hence
our  reason  for  reducing  the  theses  that  denied
the  distinction  between  the  two  practical  forms
to  an  exclusive  affirmation  of  the  economic  form,
this  latter  being  as  it  were  the  general  form,
which  of  itself  involves  both  itself  and  the
other.

Even  when  both  the  practical  forms,  economic  Errors  arising

from  conceiving

and  ethic,  utility  and  morality,  are  admitted,  the  them  as  co
ordinated.
gravest errors  arise  from failing  to  understand

the  connection  of  unity-distinction  that  exists
between  them,  conceiving  them  as  juxtaposed
or  parallel,  and  the  respective  concepts  as
coordinated.

In  truth,  if  utility  and  morality  were  coordinate  Disinterested
concepts,  each  included  as  species  beneath  the  critique.
general  concept  of  practical  activity,  the  first
consequence  that  could  be  drawn  from  this  (and  it
has  been  drawn)  is  that  morality  is  conceivable
without  utility.  This  has  given  rise  to  the  absurd
concept  of  disinterested  actions,  that  is,  of  those
moral  actions  that  should  hold  themselves  aloof
from  any  sort  of  impure  contact  with  utility.
But  disinterested  actions  would  be  foolish  actions,
that  is  to  say,  wilful  acts,  caprices,  non-actions.
Every  action  is  and  must  be  interested  ;  indeed,


350 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

the  more  profoundly  it  is  interested,  so  much
the  better.  What  interest  is  stronger  and  more
personal  than  that  which  impels  the  man  of
science  to  the  search  for  truth,  which  is  his  life  ?
Morality  requires  that  the  individual  should,  in
every  case,  make  his  individual  interest  that  of
JLL  the  universal ;  and  it  reproves  those  who  engage
themselves  in  an  insoluble  contradiction  between
the  individual  interest  of  the  universal  and  that
which  is  merely  individual/)  But  it  cannot  claim
to  suppress  the  interest,  that  is,  itself,  in  the
same  way  that  the  volitional  act  dominates  the
passions,  but  cannot  eradicate  them  without
eradicating  itself.  Hence,  as  the  volitional  act
triumphs  over  the  passions  as  the  supreme
passion,  so  morality  triumphs  over  interests  as
the  supreme  interest.
vain  polemic  The  polemic  of  autonomous  Ethic  against  the

conducted  f .

with  such  an heteronomous  E  thic  of  utilitarianism  has  had  a  false

assumption

against  ancj  fruitless  beginning,  owing  to  this  fiction  of

utilita  ria  nism.

disinterested  actions.  In  the  belief  of  conquering
and  more  than  conquering,  it  has  been  attempted
to  show  that  man  accomplishes  some  actions
without  any  personal  interest,  whereas  on  the
contrary  an  easy  victory  has  in  this  way  been
prepared  for  the  adversary.  Utilitarianism,  in
fact,  has  always  been  able  triumphantly  to  make


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  351

the  counter -demonstration  that  there  is  no
action,  be  it  as  lofty  as  you  will,  that  does  not
answer  to  a  personal  end.  It  is  evident  that
the  hero  has  his  personal  interest  in  the  pro
patria  mori,  just  as  the  saint,  who  wishes  to
direct  his  soul  toward  humility,  finds  his  own
account  in  allowing  himself  to  be  abused,  beaten
and  splashed  with  mud  ("in  this  is  perfect  joy,"
said  Francesco  of  Assisi  to  Frate  Leone).
Correct  polemic  should  not  enter  upon  the
useless  task  of  denying  this  evidence  ;  it  should
on  the  contrary  admit,  as  was  admitted  above,
that  there  is  no  action  which  does  not  answer
to  an  individual  desire,  since  it  is  the  individual
that  performs  it,  and  the  universal  is  always
obliged  to  avail  itself  of  individuals.  But  when
this  point  has  been  conceded  and  admitted,  it
will  prove,  as  was  proved  above,  that  the  useful
action  can  either  remain  merely  personal  or
progress  to  the  action  that  is  universal-personal,
ethical -useful.  And  the  ethical -useful  action
itself  is  precisely  the  new  spiritual  category
that  the  utilitarian  does  not  see.

A second erroneous but unavoidable con-  Actions
sequence  of  the  conception  of  useful  and  moral  indifferent,

v  i  -i  1-1  1-  obligatory,

as  coordinated  concepts  is  that  while,  according  supererogatory,

etc. Critique.

to that theory, there can be ethical actions


352 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL „.

economically  disinterested  or  indifferent,  so  there
can  be  actions  that  are  useful  and  morally
indifferent.  The  indifferent  would  not  be  those
that  are  merely  economic,  and,  therefore,  neither
moral  nor  immoral,  which  we  have  recognized
as  the  necessary  precedent  of  moral  actions,  re
appearing  always  when  a  return  is  made  to  the
state  of  innocence,  or  as  soon  as  the  moral
conscience  is  abolished  or  suspended.  They
would  on  the  contrary  be  economic  actions  that
should  persist  as  such,  that  is,  as  ingenuous  and
amoral,  when  the  moral  consciousness  is  already
kindled,  and  consequently  in  the  very  circle  of
such  a  conscientiousness.  They  are  altogether
inadmissible  when  thus  conceived,  and  to  have
admitted  them  is  equivalent  to  annulling  morality,
as  the  recognition  of  the  right  of  subjects  to
rebel  at  their  pleasure  would  be  to  annul
sovereignty,  or  a  burlesque  contract  containing
the  clause  that  each  party  should  be  free  not
to  observe  the  other  clauses  agreed  upon,  at
his  pleasure.  Indifferent  actions  do  not  exist,
either  for  economy  or  for  morality,  and  those  to
which  such  a  character  is  generally  attributed  are,
as  we  know,  indifferentiated,  not  indifferent,  and
always  differentiable  when  more  closely  examined.
Only  he  who  places  the  useful  and  the  moral,  side


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  353

by  side  with  one  another,  separate  and  impene
trable,  is  of  necessity  led  to  conceive  of  useful
actions  morally  indifferent,  and  as  such  licit  or
permissible.  Hence  it  also  happens  that  moral
actions  also  seem  to  be  obligatory  compared  with
the  first ;  and  that,  in  order  to  obtain  equilibrium
at  the  other  extremity,  ultramoral  or  more  than
moral  actions,  called  meritorious  or  supererogatory ',
are  placed  side  by  side  with  obligatory  actions  that
hold  the  mean.  But  morality  does  not  grant
leave  not  to  do,  nor  prizes  for  doing  more  than
was  required:  it  simply  imposes  doing,  doing
always  what  is  morally  good,  always  realizing
the  universal,  in  ordinary  as  in  extraordinary
life,  on  the  occasions  that  occur  every  day,  every
hour,  every  minute,  as  in  those  that  occur  every
year,  every  ten  years,  every  century.  Nothing
is  indifferent  to  economy  in  its  sphere  and
nothing  to  morality  in  its  sphere :  in  it,
economic  actions  with  their  premoral  character
do  not  persist,  but  only  moral  actions  subsist.
Economicity  is  certainly  the  concrete  form  of
morality ;  but  it  is  never  an  element  that
possesses  a  value  of  its  own  in  the  moral  life.

A  comparison  with  the  theoretic  activity  will  comparison

.  .  with  the  re
serve  to  make  clearer  this  criticism  of  the  licit  lotion  of  art

and  philosophy*

or morally indifferent. Artistic intuitions or

2  A


354 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

expressions  are  neither  true  nor  false  philo
sophically,  so  much  so  that  Philosophy,  if  it
wish  to  exist,  must  also  become  concrete  itself,
as  living  speech,  aesthetic  form,  intuition- expres
sion,  and  place  itself  as  an  intuition  among
intuitions,  though  it  be  an  intuition  portans
mysteria,  that  is,  enclosing  in  itself  the  universal.
But  the  appearance  of  philosophy  reacts  upon
the  pure  intuitions,  or  upon  the  poetic  representa
tion  of  the  world,  in  which  existent  and  inexistent
were  indistinct ;  and  the  world  of  intuition  trans
forms  itself  into  the  world  of  perceptions,  in
which  those  that  once  were  poetic  intuitions,
are  now  all  of  them  critical  or  reflective  images
penetrated  by  the  concepts,  divided  into  images
of  existence  and  images  of  possibility.  In
the  world  of  perception  or  of  history,  no  poetical
element  can  subsist  as  such ;  what  was  a
bewitching  truth  in  the  field  of  art,  were  it
introduced  into  history,  would  give  rise  to  dis
harmony  and  become  changed  into  a  repugnant
lie,  as  we  see  is  actually  the  case  in  history
mingled  with  inventions  and  fables.  History  too
assumes  artistic  form  ;  but  it  cannot  tolerate  in
its  bosom  art  as  an  element  standing  alone.
Utilitarian  or  economic  volitions  and  the  moral-
economic  volitions  (universal  and  historical  per-


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  355

ceptions  or  representations  of  the  practical)  pro
ceed  in  a  manner  perfectly  analogous  (intuitions
of  the  practical).  Moral  indifference  belongs  to
the  first,  when  they  are  on  this  side  of  the  moral
conscience,  but  within  this  conscience  they  lose
the  right  to  innocence,  as  in  history  the  pure  in
tuitions,  when  they  have  become  perceptions,  lose
the  privilege  that  they  possessed  as  pure  intuitions.
The  ethical  discrimination  of  the  economic  voli
tions,  which  takes  place  through  the  moral
conscience,  is  then  in  full  correspondence  with
the  historical  discrimination  of  the  aesthetic  intui
tions,  which  takes  place  through  the  logical
conscience.

We  owe  to  the  false  conception  by  coordination,  other  erroneous

conceptions  of

not  only  the  two  monstrous  little  concepts  of  modes  of  action,
disinterested  actions  and  of  those  that  are  morally
indifferent,  licit,  or  permissive,  but  others  also,
which  have  been  deduced  by  means  of  a  some
what  different  casuistic  from  the  same  general
hypothesis.  Indeed,  in  the  preceding  case,  useful
and  moral,  posited  as  apart  and  parallel,  were
maintained  one  extraneous  to  the  other  and  at
peace  between  themselves.  But  nothing  forbade
that  warlike  plans  should  be  attributed  to  those
two  entities,  just  as  when  two  coordinate  animal
species  are  posited,  we  may  suppose,  either  that


356 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

the  individuals  of  each  one  mind  their  own
affairs  and  allow  the  individuals  of  the  other
species  to  live  and  to  prosper  in  peace,  or
that  the  one  takes  to  persecuting  the  other,
sometimes  injuring  or  destroying  it  and  some
times  being  by  it  injured  or  destroyed.  Thus
were  and  are  obtained  concepts  of  moral  anti-
economic  actions  and  of  anti-economic  moral  actions,
of  immoral  economic  actions,  and  of  economic
immoral  actions,  four  concepts  which  are  all  four
to  be  rejected.  Moral  action  can  never  be  accom
plished  at  a  loss  :  morality  is  for  the  moral  man
the  supreme  advantage  in  the  situation  in  which
he  finds  himself,  and  it  would  be  erroneous  to
measure  it  by  comparison  with  what  an  individual
without  morality  would  do  in  the  same  situation,
for,  as  we  know,  individual  and  situation  are  all
one,  in  such  a  way  that  a  like  comparison  is  im
possible.  In  a  similar  manner,  an  anti-economic
action  can  never  be  moral ;  at  the  most  it  will
not  even  be  amoral,  or  will  not  even  posit  the
primary  and  generic  condition  of  morality,  that
is,  it  will  not  be  action,  but  inert  contemplation.
An  immoral  action  can  never  be  economic,  because
immorality  implies  internal  disagreement  and
strife  between  one  volition  directed  to  the
universal  and  another  directed  to  the  merely


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  357

individual,  hence  the  result  will  be  practical
inconclusion  and  infecundity,  dissatisfaction  and
remorse  ;  that  is  to  say,  just  the  opposite  of
utility  and  economicity.  In  like  manner,  an
economic  action  can  never  be  immoral  :  at  the
most  (when  it  is  merely  an  economic  action),  it
will  be  amoral.

The  bond  of  unity  and  distinction  that  exists  pleasure  and

between  the  concepts  of  the  useful  and  the  moral  activity,  happi
ness,  and
and the  consequent negation  of  the  formula  of  virtue.

coordination,  help  to  solve  in  a  definite  way
the  intricate  questions  relating  to  pleasure  and
morality,  happiness  and  virtue.

First  of  all,  we  can  here  give  yet  another  mean-  pleasure,  pain

, . ,  .  r r T  • i and  feeling.

ing  to  the  indeterminate  category  of  feeling  with
its  poles  of  pleasure  and  pain,  for  it  is  clear
that  when  feeling  was  distinguished  from  moral
activity  and  set  at  variance  with  it,  we  had  in
view  nothing  but  the  pure  economic  activity.  And
in  truth,  of  all  the  tendencies  included  in  that  con
cept  as  sketched  out,  this  of  economicity  seems
on  the  whole  to  prevail  over  the  others,  so  much
so  that  we  shall  henceforth  be  disposed  to  give  to
the  word  "  feeling  "  the  name  of  economic  activity.
Thus  it  was  reasonably  maintained,  with  im
plied  reference  to  this  meaning,  that  pleasure  and
pain  are  proper  to  feeling  and  extraneous  to  the


358 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

other  spiritual  forms,  and  that  they  only  act  in
the  others  as  concomitants.  For  if  the  theoretical
forms  give  rise  to  the  dialectic  of  true  and  false,
in  so  far  as  the  practical  spirit  can  be  introduced
into  them,  it  is  clear  that  pleasure  and  pain  come
to  those  forms  from  the  practical  spirit,  with
which  the  theoretic  spirit  is  always  in  unity.  In
the  practical  spirit  too,  the  moral  activity  divides
into  pleasure  and  pain,  in  so  far  as  it  has  concrete
or  economic  form  ;  and  therefore  in  so  far  as  it  is
economic,  not  in  so  far  as  it  is  moral.  Pleasure
and  pain  belong  to  feeling  alone,  because  they
belong  to  the  economic  activity  alone,  which  is
the  practical  in  its  general  form,  involving  of
itself  all  the  other  forms,  practical  and  theoretic.
coincidence  of  When  this  has  been  established,  pleasure  or

duty  with

pleasure.  economic  feeling  or  economic  activity  as  positive
cannot  be  at  strife  with  duty  or  with  the  moral
activity  in  its  positivity,  for  the  two  terms  co
incide.  The  divergence  existed  only  when  they
were  conceived,  not  in  unity  and  distinction,  but
in  coordination.  When  we  speak  of  a  good
action  accompanied  with  pain,  we  make  an  inexact
statement,  or  better,  we  make  use  of  a  mode  of
expression  that  must  be  understood,  not  literally,
but  in  its  spirit.  The  good  action,  as  such,  always
brings  with  it  satisfaction  and  pleasure,  and  the


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  359

pain  said  to  accompany  it,  either  shows  that
the  action  is  not  yet  altogether  good,  because
it  has  not  been  willed  with  complete  internal
accord,  or  that  a  new  practical  problem,  still  un
solved  and  therefore  painful,  lies  beyond  the
pleasurable  moral  action.

The other  false idea, of  rigoristic  or  ascetic  critique  of

rigorism  or

Ethic,  which  makes  war  upon  pleasure  as  such,  asceticism.
derives  from  the  plan  of  coordination,  through
the  already  mentioned  casuistic  of  the  conflict
between  the  coordinated  terms.  Indeed,  if  it
be  legitimate  to  combat  this  or  that  pleasure,
which  enters  into  a  contest  with  the  moral  act,
it  is  not  possible  to  abolish  the  category  of
pleasure,  for  the  reason  already  given,  that  in
this  way  the  category  itself  of  morality,  which
has  its  reality  and  concreteness  in  pleasure  (in  eco-
nomicity),  would  be  abolished  :  the  concrete  and
real  moral  act  is  also  pleasurable.  The  attempt
to  abolish  pleasure  is  as  insane  as  would  be
the  wish  to  speak  without  words  or  any  other
form  of  expression,  preserving  thought  pure  of
such  sensual  contacts,  that  is  to  say,  producing
an  inexpressed  and  inexpressible  thought.  This
last  attempt  has  been  made  by  mysticism,  which
either  does  not  give  thoughts  at  all,  or,  con
tradicting  itself,  gives  them  expressed  and  logical,


360 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

like  those  of  all  other  doctrines.  Asceticism
provides  a  complete  counterpart  to  this  in  the
practical  field,  for  it  might  be  called  mysticism
of  the  practical  in  the  same  way  as  the  name  of
asceticism  of  the  theoretical  would  not  be  unsuit
able  to  mysticism.
Relation  of  What  has  been  said  of  the  relation  between

happiness  and

•virtue.  pleasure  and  morality,  is  to  be  repeated  of  the

other  between  happiness  and  virtue,  a  relation
that  is  identical  with  the  preceding,  from  which
it  differs  only  because  expressed  by  means  of
empirical  concepts  of  class.  Happiness  is  not
virtue,  as  pleasure  is  not  morality,  because  there
exist  the  pleasure  of  the  innocent  or  of  the
mentally  deficient,  and  the  happiness  of  the  child
or  the  brute,  who  are  without  moral  conscience.
But  virtue  is  always  happiness,  as  morality  is
always  pleasure.  It  will  be  said  that  a  virtuous
man  may  be  unhappy,  because  he  suffers  atrocious
physical  pain  or  is  in  financial  difficulties,  and,
therefore,  that  virtue  and  happiness  do  not
coincide.  But  this  is  a  vulgar  sophism,  because
the  virtuous  man,  who  should  be  also  happy,  must
be  truly  and  altogether  virtuous  ;  that  is  to  say,  he
must  cure  and  conquer  the  ills  of  the  body  and  of
fortune  with  his  energy,  if  he  can,  or,  if  it  be  im
possible  to  conquer  them,  he  must  resign  himself


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  361

and  take  them  into  account  and  develop  his  own
activity  within  the  limits  that  they  lay  down.
Every  individual,  not  only  the  unfortunate  in
dividual  of  the  example,  has  his  limits ;  and
everyone  can  transform  his  limits  into  pains  by
being  dissatisfied  with  them,  just  as  every  one
can,  with  resignation,  transform  his  pains  into
limits  and  conditions  of  activity.  It  will  be  said
that  sometimes  the  evils  that  assail  the  virtuous
man  are  not  only  incurable,  but  so  intolerable  as
to  render  all  resignation  impossible.  But  he
who  does  not  effectively  and  absolutely  resign
himself,  that  is,  does  not  accommodate  himself
to  life,  dies ;  and  the  occurrence  of  the  death
of  the  individual  is  neither  happiness  nor  un-
happiness  :  it  is  a  fact  or  event.

Finally,  the  theory  that  subordinates  pleasure  critique  of

.  the  subordina-

or happiness, utility or economy, to duty, to  tim  of  ple

to  morality.

virtue,  to  moral  activity,  is  to  be  rejected.  The
subordination  of  the  one  term  to  the  other  is
not  possible  on  this  side  of  morality,  because  only
one  of  the  two  terms  is  present ;  and  in  like
mariner  it  is  impossible  in  the  moral  circle,
because,  though  the  terms  are  certainly  two,  they
are  two  in  one,  not  one  above  and  the  other
below ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  distinct  terms  that
become  unified.  Morality  has  complete  empire


362 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

over  life,  and  there  is  not  an  act  of  life,  be  it  as
small  as  you  will,  that  morality  does  not  or  ought
not  to  regulate.  But  morality  has  no  absolute
empire  over  the  forms  or  categories  of  the  spirit,
and  as  it  cannot  destroy  or  modify  itself,  so  it
cannot  destroy  or  modify  the  other  spiritual
forms,  which  are  its  necessary  support  and  pre
supposition.
NO  empire  of  Hence  is  apparent  the  remarkable  fatuity  of

morality  over

the  forms  of  those  who  pretend  to  regulate  morally  the  function
of  art,  of  science,  or  of  economy  and  profess
moralistic  theories  of  art  and  philosophy  and  a
moralized  economic  science.  The  poet,  the  man
of  science,  the  business  man,  must  be  as  honest  as
others,  but  it  is  not  given  to  them  to  tear  in
pieces  the  nature  of  poetry,  of  science  and  of
industry,  in  the  madness  of  honesty.  Indeed,
were  this  done  or  attempted,  and  the  poet  were
to  introduce  extraneous  elements  into  his  work
of  art,  through  his  failure  to  understand  morality,
or  the  philosopher  to  veil  or  alter  the  purity  of
truth,  or  the  man  of  business  foolishly  to  bring
his  own  business  to  ruin,  then  and  only  then,
would  they  be  dishonest.  To  substitute  the
single  acts  of  life  that  appertain  to  morality,  for
the  universal  forms  of  the  spirit,  and  to  predicate
of  these  what  should  be  predicated  only  of  those,


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  363

is  so  evident  an  absurdity  that  it  could  not  be
committed  by  anyone  accustomed  to  philosophical
distinctions.  But  what  nonsense  is  so  evident
that  idle  babblers  and  elegant  men  of  letters  do
not  know  how  to  cover  with  their  ratiocinative
and  aesthetic  flowers  and  to  present  to  society  or
to  the  academic  world  as  truth,  or  at  least  as  a
theory  worthy  of  reflection  and  discussion  ?

Such,  then,  are  the  two  forms  of  the  practical  inexistence  of

.  .  other  practical

activity, and such their relation; and as it \S  forms  and  im
possibility  of

not  possible  to  reduce  them  to  one  alone,  so  it  subdivision  of

the  two  estab-

is  not  possible  to  multiply  them  beyond  the  two,  lished-
which  altogether  exhaust  the  nexus  of  finite
and  infinite.  Hence,  too,  we  perceive  that  the
economic  and  also  the  ethic-economic  activity  do
not  each  of  them  give  rise  to  new  subdivisions,
because  other  terms  of  subdivision  are  not  con
ceivable  beyond  the  duality  of  finite  and  infinite.
As  there  are  no  philosophical  and  ethical  classes,
nor  categories  of  expression  (rhetoric),  nor  cate
gories  of  concepts  (formalistic  logic),  so  there  are
no  economic  categories  and  ethical  categories
beyond  those  that  constitute  utility  (volition  of
the  individual)  and  morality  (volition  of  the
universal).


THE PHILOSOPHY  OF ECONOMY  AND  THE SO-CALLED
SCIENCE OF ECONOMY


Problem  of
the  relations
between
Philosophy
and  Science
of  Economy.


INTERNAL  observation,  confirming  at  all  points
rational  necessity,  has  rendered  clear  the  exist
ence  of  a  special  form  of  practical  activity,  the
utilitarian  or  economic,  and  of  a  correlative
Economic  or  Philosophy  of  economy.  But  how
ever  irrefutable  may  seem  the  demonstration  that
we  have  given,  yet  it  will  never  be  altogether
satisfactory,  while  a  very  important  point  is  left
obscure  :  the  relation  between  our  Philosophy  of
economy  and  the  Science  of  economy.

This  is  a  system  of  doctrine  that  takes  various
names  and  forms,  and  is  presented  in  turn  as
political,  national,  pure,  or  mathematical  Economy;
it  is  a  system  of  doctrines  which,  although
not  without  precedents  in  antiquity,  has  been
gradually  formed,  especially  in  recent  centuries,
and  is  now  in  fullest  flower.  A  saying  of  Hegel

is often recorded, not without satisfaction, for

364


PT.  ii  ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  365

even  in  his  time  he  praised  Economy  as  "  a
science  that  does  much  honour  to  thought,  because
it  extracts  the  laws  from  a  mass  of  accidentally."1

Has  it  the  same  object  as  our  Philosophy  of
economy?  If  the  reply  be  in  the  affirmative,
how  does  it  ever  arrive  at  concepts  altogether
different  ?  Or  is  it  an  empirical  science,  and
if  so,  from  what  source  does  it  derive  the
rigour  and  absoluteness  by  which  it  is  removed
from  all  empiricism  and  formulates  truths  of
universal  character?  Two  strict  sciences  with
the  same  object  are  inconceivable ;  and  yet  as
it  seems,  there  must  here  be  precisely  two :
hence  the  perplexity  and  disorientation  that  the
affirmation  of  a  Philosophy  of  economy  must  and
does  produce.

If  the  economic  actions  of  man  be  considered,  unreality  of
in  their  uncontaminated  and  undiminished  reality,  concepts  of
with  an  eye  free  from  all  prejudice,  it  is  never  pos
sible  to  establish  even  a  single  one  of  the  concepts
and  laws  of  economic  science. Every  individual
is  different  at  every  moment  of  his  life  :  he  wills
always  in  a  new  and  different  way,  not  comparable
with  the  other  modes  of  his  or  of  others'  willing.
If  A spent  seven soldi  to  buy  a  loaf  of  bread
yesterday,  and  to-day  he  spend  the  same  amount

1  Philos.  d.  Rechtes,  §  189. Zus.


economic
science.


366 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

in  making  the  same  purchase,  the  seven  soldi  of
to-day  are  not  for  this  reason  those  of  yesterday,
nor  is  the  bread  the  same  as  that  of  yesterday,
nor  the  want  that  A  satisfies  to-day  the  same  as
that  of  yesterday,  nor  is  the  effort  that  his  action
costs  him  identical  with  that  of  yesterday.  If  the
individual  B  also  spend  seven  soldi  for  a  loaf  of
bread,  the  action  of  B  is  different  from  that  of  A,
as  that  of  the  A  of  to-day  was  different  from  that
of  yesterday.  If  we  lead  the  economist  on  to  this
ground  of  reality  (or  rather  to  the  side  of  this
Heraclitean  river,  in  which  it  is  not  possible  to
dip  the  same  hands  twice  in  the  same  water),  he
will  feel  himself  impotent,  for  he  will  not  find  any
point  of  support  for  the  edification  of  any  of  his
theories. — The  value  of  a  piece  of  goods  (says  a
theorem  of  Economy)  depends  upon  the  quantity
of  it  and  of  all  the  other  goods  that  are  upon  the
market. — But  what  does  "  goods  "  mean  ?  Bread,
for  example,  or  wine?  In  reality,  abstract  bread
and  wine  do  not  exist,  but  a  given  piece  of  bread,
a  given  glass  of  wine,  with  a  given  individual  who
will  give  a  treasure  or  nothing  in  order  to  eat
the  one  or  to  drink  the  other,  according  to  the
conditions  in  which  he  finds  himself. — Any  sort
of  enjoyment,  when  protracted,  decreases  and
finally  becomes  extinguished. — That  is  the  law


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  367

of  Gossen,  one  of  the  foundation  -  stones  of
economic  theory.  But  what  are  these  enjoy
ments  that  are  protracted,  decrease,  and  end  by
becoming  extinguished?  In  reality  there  exist
only  actions,  which  assume  different  positions  at
every  moment,  owing  to  the  continual  changing
of  surrounding  reality,  in  which  the  volitional
individual  operates.  The  difference  is  qualitative,
not  quantitative  :  if  the  individual  A  eat  the  bread
that  he  has  bought  for  seven  soldi,  when  swallow
ing  the  second  or  the  tenth  or  the  last  mouthful,
he  has  a  pleasure,  not  inferior  to  that  which
he  had  when  swallowing  the  first,  but  different :
the  last  was  not  less  necessary  for  him,  in  its  way,
than  the  first ;  otherwise  he  would  have  remained
unsatisfied  in  his  normal  want,  in  his  habit,  or
in  his  caprice. — The  economic  man  seeks  the
maximum  of  satisfaction  with  the  least  effort—
That  is  the  very  principle  of  Economy,  but
neither  does  this  principle  correspond  with  reality,
most  simple  and  general  though  it  be.  The
individual  A  disputes  for  an  hour,  in  order  to
save  two  soldi  in  the  purchase  of  an  object,  for
which  he  has  been  asked  ten  lire,  thus  attaining
the  maximum  satisfaction  for  himself  with  the
least  means  that  is  naturally  at  his  disposal  on
that  occasion.  The  individual  B,  making  boast


368 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL «•.

of  his  magnificence,  lights  his  cigarette  with  a
banknote  of  a  hundred  lire,  thus  likewise  attaining
for  himself  the  greatest  satisfaction  to  which  he
aspired,  with  the  least  means  that  he  possessed,
namely,  by  burning  that  paper  money.  But  if
this  be  so,  we  have  here  a  question,  not  of  greatest
and  least,  but  of  individual  ends  and  of  relative
means  adopted,  or  (owing  to  the  unity  of  means
and  ends  already  noted),  of  actions  individually
different.
Economic  Certainly,  it  is  quite  possible  to  abstract  in  a

Science  founded  .  .

upon  empirical  greater  or  less  measure  from  the  infinite  variety

concepts,  but

not  empirical of  actions  and  to  construct  a  series  of  types  or

or  descriptive,

concepts  of  classes  and  of  empirical  laws,  thus
rendering  uniform  the  formless,  within  certain
limits.  Thus  is  obtained  the  concept  of  bread
and  of  the  consumption  of  bread,  and  of  the
various  portions  of  bread  and  of  other  objects,  for
which  a  portion  of  bread  can  be  exchanged,  and
so  on.  In  this  way  are  full  philosophico-historical
reality  and  the  method  of  logical  necessity  and  of
realistic  observation  of  facts  abandoned  for  a
feigned  reality  and  for  a  method  of  arbitrary
choice,  which,  as  we  know,  has  its  good  reasons
for  existing  in  the  human  spirit,  and  does  great
service  by  the  swift  recall  and  easy  control  of  the
requisite  knowledge,  And  if  Economy  consisted


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  369

in  the  establishment  of  a  series  of  laws  and
examples  in  the  above  sense  (or  when  under
stood  in  this  way),  it  would  join  the  number  of
the  descriptive  disciplines  ;  and  in  that  case  there
would  be  no  necessity  for  us  to  speak  of  it
further,  for  it  would  suffice  to  refer  back  to
what  has  already  been  said  of  the  relations  of
the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  with  practical
Description,  classes,  rules,  and  casuistic.  But
economic  Science  is  not  descriptive,  and  is  not
developed  according  to  the  following  formula :
goods  are  divided  into  the  classes  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  etc.,
and  the  class  a  is  exchanged  with  the  class  b  in
the  proportion  of  i  to  3,  the  class  b  with  the
class  c  in  the  proportion  of  i  to  5,  etc.  In
such  a  formula  is  always  understood  the  up  and
down,  the  for  the  most  part,  and  the  very  nearly.
the  classes  with  their  ups  and  downs  are  as
stated  ;  the  exchanges  take  place  for  the  most
part  in  the  proportions  stated ;  if  things  are
to-day  very  nearly  thus,  to-morrow  they  will  be
so  very  nearly,  in  a  different  way.

On the contrary, the propositions of the  Absoluteness

c .  f ^  .  ,  of  its  laws.

Science  of  hconomy  are  rigorous  and  necessary.
"  Granted  that  soils  of  different  degrees  of  fertility
are  cultivated,  their  possessors  will  all  obtain,

besides  the  absolute  rent,  a  differential  rent,  with

2  B


370 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

the  exception  of  the  possessor  of  the  least  fertile
soil"  (Ricardo's  law).  "  Bad  money  drives  out
good"  (Gresham's  law).  Now,  it  is  not  con
ceivable  in  any  case  that  soils  of  different
fertility,  all  of  them  cultivated,  should  not  give
a  differential  rent.  It  will  be  said  that  the
State  can  confiscate  the  differential  rent,  or  that
the  possessor,  owing  to  his  bad  cultivation  or  to
his  bad  administration,  may  lose  it ;  but  the
proposition  does  not  remain  less  sound  on  this
account.  Nor  is  it  possible  that,  when  an  un
changeable  paper  money  is  in  circulation,  gold
coins  should  also  circulate  indifferently  and  on  a
par  with  it,  when  the  total  of  the  money  in  circula
tion  lowers  the  value  of  the  monetary  unit  beneath
the  metallic  value  of  the  better  money.  A  mad
man  who  might  be  in  possession  of  a  hoard  of
gold  pieces  at  the  time  of  the  circulation  of  the
declining  paper  money  (which  causes  poverty)
would  perhaps  give  it  in  exchange  for  the  inferior
money ;  but  the  wise  man  will  keep  it  in  his  safe.
The  economic  proposition  expresses  the  rational
necessity,  not  the  madness,  which  is  irrational.
Those  propositions,  like  all  the  others  of  economic
science,  are  therefore  certainly  not  descriptions,
but  theorems.

The  denomination  "  theorems  "  makes  us  think


n ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  371

at  once  of  the  mathematical  disciplines, among  Their  mathe
matical  nature.
which  alone  can  economic  Science  find  a  place.

The  propositions  of  that  science  being  excluded
from  philosophical,  historical,  or  naturalistic
science,  there  remains  nothing  that  they  can  be,
save  mathematical.  Yes,  they  are  mathematical,
but  not  pure  mathematics,  for  in  that  case  they
would  be  nothing  but  arithmetic,  algebra,  or  the
calculus,  that  is,  they  would  belong  to  the  kind  of
mathematical  disciplines  called  applied,  because
they  introduce  into  the  paradigms  of  the  calculus
certain  data  taken  from  reality,  that  is  to  say,  taken
from  without  the  purely  numerical  conception.
Economic  Science,  then,  is  a  mathematic  applied
to  the  concept  of  human  action  and  to  its  sub
species.  It  does  not  inquire  what  human  action
is  ;  but  having  posited  certain  concepts  of  action,
it  creates  formulae  for  the  prompt  recognition  of
the  necessary  connections.

It is not surprising that such propositions  its  principles  /

_  .  .  their  character

examined in their  truth  appear in one  respect  of  arbitrary

postulates  and

arbitrary and in another tautological. But it  definitions.

Their  utility.

is  not  thus  that  they  are  examined,  and  it  is
not  thus  that  propositions  of  mathematics  are
ever  examined,  for  their  value  lies  solely  in  the
service  that  they  render.  Certainly  Ricardo's
law  relating  to  land  of  varying  fertility  is  nothing


372 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

but  the  definition  of  lands  of  various  fertility,
in  the  same  way  that  Gresham's  law  relating
to  bad  money  is  nothing  but  the  definition
of  bad  money.  The  same  may  be  said  of  any
other  economic  law,  as,  for  example,  that  every
protective  tariff  is  destruction  of  riches,  or  that
a  demand  for  commodities  is  not  a  demand  for
labour,  since  these,  like  the  preceding,  are  simply
definitions  of  the  protective  tariff,  of  the  demand
for  commodities,  and  of  the  demand  for  labour.
And  it  could  be  proved  of  all  of  them  that  they
are  arbitrary,  because  the  concepts  of  land,  tariffs,
commodities,  money,  and  so  on,  are  arbitrary,
and  because  they  become  necessary  only  when  that
arbitrariness  has  been  admitted  as  a  postulate.
But  the  same  demonstration  can  be  given  of  any
theorem  in  Geometry ;  since  it  is  not  less
arbitrary  and  tautological,  that  the  measure  of  a
quadrilateral  should  be  equal  to  the  base  multi
plied  by  the  height,  or  that  the  sum  of  the  squares
of  a  cathetic  should  be  equal  to  the  square  of  the
hypotenuse.  This  does  not  prevent  Geometry
from  being  Geometry,  or  negate  the  fact  that
without  it  we  should  not  have  been  able  to  build
the  house  in  which  we  dwell,  nor  to  measure  this
star  upon  which  we  live,  nor  the  others  that
revolve  around  it  or  around  which  we  revolve.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  373

Thus,  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  one's  way
in  empirical  reality  without  these  economic
formulae,  and  that  would  happen  which  happened
when  economic  science  was  still  in  its  infancy  ;
namely,  that  by  its  means  measures  of  govern
ment  were  adopted,  which  were  admirably
suited  to  produce  in  the  highest  degree  those
evils  which  it  was  thought  could  be  avoided  by
its  help,  a  misfortune  of  which  the  Spanish
government  in  Lombardy  or  in  the  Province  of
Naples  in  the  seventeenth  century,  with  its  cries
and  its  pragmatics  in  economic  and  financial
matters,  has  left  most  excellent  examples.  Or
what  happens  now,  when  ignorance,  or  deceitful
interest,  which  profits  by  ignorance,  proposes  or
causes  to  be  adopted  ruinous  measures  under
the  appearance  of  piiblica  salus,  arguing  that  they
are  good,  or  that  they  are  good  for  different
reasons  than  those  for  which  they  could  be
maintained.  Such,  for  instance,  would  be  the
proposal  for  fresh  expenditure  on  public  works
that  are  useless  or  of  little  use  during  a  period
of  economic  depression  in  a  country,  and  instead
of  relieving,  increase  the  general  depression  ;  or
the  increase  of  protective  tariffs,  when  industrial
progress  is  slow,  which  ought  to  encourage
industry,  but  on  the  contrary  produce  an  industry


374 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

that  is  unstable  and  artificial,  in  place  of  one  that
is  spontaneous  and  durable.
comparison  of The  special  form  of  application  of  mathematics,

Economic  "with

Mechanics,  and  which we find in economic Science, has been

reason  for  its

excision  from  compared  on several occasions  with that  which

ethical,

esthetic  and takes  piace  m  Mechanics. "The  economic  man  "

logical  facts.

of  the  first  has  seemed  to  be  altogether  like  the
"  material  point "  of  the  second,  and  Economy
has  been  called  "  a  sort  of  Mechanics,"  or  simply
"  Mechanics."  All  this  is  very  natural,  for
Mechanics  are  nothing  but  the  complex  of
formulae  of  calculation  constructed  on  reality,
which  is  Spirit  and  Becoming  in  Metaphysic,  and
may  be  abstracted  and  falsified  in  Science,  so  as
to  assume  the  aspect  of  Force  or  a  system
of  forces,  for  the  convenience  of  calculation.
Economy  does  the  same  thing,  when  it  cuts
off  from  the  volitional  acts  certain  groups,  which
it  simplifies  and  makes  rigid  with  the  definition
of  the  "economic  man,"  the  laws  of  "  least
means,"  and  the  like.  And  owing  precisely  to
this  mechanicizing  process  of  economic  Science,
it  is  ingenuous  to  ask  oneself  why  ethical,
logical,  or  aesthetic  facts  are  not  included  in
Economy,  and  in  what  way  they  can  be  included.
Economic  science  is  the  sum  of  abstractive
operations  effected  upon  the  concept  of  Will


n ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  375

or  Action,  which  is  thus  quantified.  Now  since
moral  facts  are  also  will  and  action,  and  since
economic  Science  is  not  occupied  with  qualitative
distinctions,  not  even  with  the  quality  itself  of
that  economic  fact  which  it  employs  as  its
material,  it  is  clear  that  Science  cannot  lay  any
stress  upon  moral  distinguished  from  economic
facts,  nor  can  it  receive  them  in  a  special  class,
because  its  assumption  is  the  indistinction  of  the
two  orders  of  facts,  and  they  are  included  in
that  indistinction.  As  to  aesthetic  or  scientific
facts,  these,  taken  by  themselves,  are  not  facts,
but  representations  and  thoughts  of  facts,  and
as  such  escape  economic  calculation  :  considered
in  the  unity  of  the  spirit,  they  are  certainly  facts,
that  is  to  say,  volitional  products,  but  as  such
are  already  found  included  with  these  in  the
indistinction  of  economic  Science.

As  a  mathematical  discipline,  economic  Science  Errors  of

philosophism

is  ultimately  quantitative^  and  it  remains  so,  even  and  historid

in  Economy.

when  it  makes  use  of  the  smallest  possible
number  of  numerical  and  algebraical  signs  (even
when  it  is  not  mathematical  Economy  in  the
strict  sense  of  the  word).  The  attempts,  both
of  philosophism  and  historicism,  which  claim  to
deny  Economy,  by  criticizing  its  abstractness  and
its  arbitrariness,  and  to  make  it  philosophical


376 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

(or  as  they  say  psychological]  and  historical  are
therefore  to  be  reproved.  If  Economy  do
not  give  the  universal  truth  of  Philosophy,  nor
the  particular  truth  of  History,  Philosophy  and
History  are  in  their  turn  incapable  of  making
the  smallest  calculation  :  if  Economy  have  not
eyes  for  the  true,  Philosophy  and  History  have
not  arms  to  break  and  to  dominate  the  waves
of  fact,  which  would  oppress  man  with  their
importunity  and  finally  prevent  him  from  seeing.
Hence  the  absurdity  of  philosophism  and  histori-
cism  ;  hence  too,  the  sound  tendency  of  Economy
to  constitute  itself  pure  Economy,  free  of  practical
questions,  which  are  also,  it  is  clear,  historical,
not  abstract  and  scientific  questions.
The  two  But  economy  has  in  itself  other  enemies

degenerations:  .

extreme  ab- besides  these  that are external,  in so  far  as it

stracticism  and

empiristicai is certainly a mathematical discipline, but an

disaggregation.

applied  mathematic,  that  is  to  say,  one  that
assumes  empirical  data.  These  empirical  data
can  be  infinitely  multiplied,  and  hence  result
infinite  economic  propositions,  each  distinct  from
the  other ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  they  can  be
regrouped,  simplified  and  unified,  so  as  finally  to
return  to  the  indistinct  x.  If  the  first  tendency
prevail,  we  have  what  is  called  economic  em
piricism,  a  cumbrous  mass  of  disaggregated


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  377

propositions  ;  if  the  second,  a  very  general  formula,
which  sometimes  does  not  even  preserve  the
smallest  vestige  of  that  concept  of  human  action
from  which  it  started,  and  becomes  altogether
confounded  with  the  formulae  of  arithmetic,  of
algebra  and  of  the  calculus.  Sound  economic
Science  must  be  at  once  abstract  and  empirical,
in  accordance  with  its  nature,  connecting  and
unifying  disaggregate  propositions ;  but  it  must
not  allow  distinction  to  be  lost  in  unity,  for
the  one  is  as  necessary  as  the  other.  Those
who  are  unacquainted  with  the  generalities  of
Economic  Science,  and  those  acquainted  only
with  its  details,  are  alike  incapable,  though  for
different  reasons,  of  calculating  the  economic
consequences  of  a  fact.  The  first  see  all  the
facts  as  one  single  fact,  the  second,  all  the  facts
as  different,  without  any  arrangement  by  similar
ities  and  hierarchies.  The  question  as  to  the
relative  proportion  of  generalities  and  particulars
to  be  given  in  treatises,  is  one  that  has  been
much  discussed,  but  since  this  has  only  a
didascalic  and  pedagogic  importance,  it  is  only
possible  to  answer  it,  case  for  case,  according  to
the  nature  of  the  various  scholastic  institutions  that
are  held  in  view.  To  maintain  that  Economy  must
stop  short  at  this  or  that  degree  of  abstraction,


PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.


Glance  at  the
History  of
the  various
tendencies  of
Economy.


and  for  example  be  limited  to  what  are  called
external  goods  or  riches,  excluding  services  ;
or  to  capital,  as  a  concept  distinct  from  land  and
human  labour,  without  striving  to  unify  these
three  concepts,  is  altogether  capricious.  Every
unification,  like  every  specification,  can  be  useful,
and  haters  of  abstracticism  are  also  abstracticists,
but  only  half  so.

All  those  acquainted  with  economic  studies
will  have  recognized  in  the  concepts  that  we
have  explained,  the  logical  motives  of  the  history
of  Economy,  the  divisions,  the  polemics,  the
defeats  and  the  victories  of  this  or  that  school
and  the  progress  of  that  branch  of  studies.
The  quantitative  character  of  economic  science
already  appears  in  its  classics  ;  in  the  inquiries
of  Aristotle  as  to  prices  and  value  (Politic  and
Nichomachean  Ethic)  ;  and  this  is  apparent  also
in  the  rare  mentions  by  Mediaeval  and  Renaissance
writers.  Economists  have  always  been  mathe
maticians,  even  when  they  have  not  spoken  of
mathematical  Economy.  Our  writers  of  the
nineteenth  century,  Galiani,  Genovesi  and  Verri,
were  mathematicians  in  their  methods  ;  Francesco
Ferrara,  the  greatest  Italian  economist  of  the
nineteenth  century,  was  a  mathematician.  The
economic  principle,  which  is  all  one  with  the


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  379

excogitation  of  the  economic  man,  was  formulated
by  the  head  of  the  physiocratic  school,  Quesnay  ;
and  if  the  title  of  political  Economy,  first  given  to
the  discipline  by  Montchre'tien  in  1615,  prevailed,
that  of  social  Arithmetic  also  sometimes  made
its  appearance.  Its  progress  has  consisted,  not
only  in  the  discovery  of  new  economic  theorems,
but  also  in  the  connection  and  unification  of
those  that  had  previously  been  posited  in
isolation,  of  material  and  immaterial  goods,  of
the  cost  of  production  and  of  rarity,  of  gross
and  net  produce,  of  agricultural  rents  and  of  all
the  others  that  are  not  agricultural,  of  the  pro
duction,  distribution  and  circulation  of  riches,
of  economic  and  financial  laws,  of  social  and
isolated  economy,  of  the  value  of  utility  and  of
the  value  of  exchange.  It  has  even  been
possible  to  unite  with  the  body  of  admitted
economic  doctrines  those  of  Marx,  which  seemed
revolutionary,  for  these  are  only  definitions  of  a
particular  casuistry  founded  upon  the  comparison
of  different  types  of  economic  constitution.

But  to  conquer  empiricism  was  not  enough  ;
economic  Science  was  menaced  in  its  existence
by  the  so-called  historical  School,  which  refused
to  recognize  abstract  definitions  and  set  up
against  them  the  infinite  variety  of  historical


380 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

facts ;  hence  the  strife  with  historicism  conducted
by  Menger  and  the  Austrian  school.  A  con
sequence  of  the  struggle  against  the  political
degeneration  of  economic  science  was  the
constitution  of  Economy  as  a  pure  science
(Cairnes).  This  was  all  the  more  necessary,
inasmuch  as  by  confounding  the  abstract  with
the  concrete,  and  in  the  concrete  itself,  Economy
with  Ethic,  there  was  a  desire  manifested  upon
several  occasions  among  German  economists
(ethical  school),  and  among  Catholics  of  all
countries,  for  an  economic  Science  that  should
have  as  its  base  Ethic.  The  conception  of
Economy  as  a  science  deduced  from  the  egoistic
hypothesis,  has  been  the  extreme  form  of  the
reaction  against  ethicism  (for  example  in  the
treatise  of  Pantaleoni).  The  dangers  arising
from  philosophism  have  been  less,  because
recent  times,  in  which  that  discipline  has  most
flourished,  have  not  sinned  through  excessive
philosophy.

Of  late,  owing  to  the  works  of  Jevons
and  of  other  Englishmen,  of  Gossen,  of  the
Italians  of  the  school  of  Ferrara,  and  of  the
Austrians,  Economy  has  become  at  once  more
and  more  complicated  and  more  simple,  owing  to
the  applications,  extensions,  and  reductions  that


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  381

it  has  effected.  But  if  with  its  progress  it  be
able  to  become  ever  more  exact  and  perspicuous,
yet  it  will  never  for  that  reason  become  organic ;
its  character  of  a  quantitative  discipline,  of  an
applied  mathematic,  in  which  the  atomism  of  the
postulates  and  of  the  definitions  is  insuperable,
does  not  allow  of  such  metamorphoses.

In  this  connection  and  as  the  seal  upon  what  signification

.  of  the  judgment

we  have  just  been  saying,  it  is  fitting  to  observe  o/Hegeiupon

the  Science  of

that  the  phrase  of  Hegel  referred  to  above  can  Economy.
only  have  been  interpreted  as  expressing  admira
tion  for  the  degree  of  truth  attained  by  Economy,
owing  to  the  ignorance  of  Hegelian  philosophy
that  has  become  usual  ;  as  though  Hegel
meant  that  Economic  science  did  much  honour
to  the  thought,  that  is,  to  the  speculative
reason.  Hegel  wished  to  say,  on  the  contrary,
that  Economy  does  much  honour  to  the  intellect,
that  is,  to  the  intellect  alone,  to  that  abstractive
and  arbitrary  intellect  which  he  hunted  down
in  all  his  philosophy  :  that  it  is  not  indeed
true  and  philosophical  science,  but  a  simple
descriptive  or  quantitative  discipline  treated
with  much  elegance.  This  praise  also  contained
the  demand  for  a  delimitation,  which,  however,
he  did  not  expressly  enunciate,  develop  and
execute.


VI


CRITIQUE OF THE CONFUSIONS BETWEEN ECONOMIC
SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF ECONOMY

Adoption  of THERE is no  disagreement,  then,  between the

the  method  and

of  definition  of  Philosophy of Economy described by us and

Economy  by

Philosophy.  economic  Science  or  Calculus,  of  which  we  have
just  defined  the  nature,  since  there  cannot  be
any  between  two  altogether  heterogeneous
forms,  the  one  moving  within  the  categories
of  truth,  the  other  outside  them,  with  objects  of
a  practical  order.  This  reciprocal  tolerance  can
be  disturbed  only  by  Philosophy,  when  it  compels
itself,  either  to  invade  the  field  of  economic
Science,  or  to  receive  within  itself,  to  a  greater
or  less  extent,  the  method  and  the  formulae
proper  to  the  latter.  We  have  already  referred
to  the  first,  when  we  noted  the  inadmissibility
of  the  economic  attempts  of  philosophism  and
historicism,  and  we  will  say  no  more  on  the
subject.  But  it  is  opportune  to  draw  attention

to the fact that we must distinguish among

382


PT.  ii  ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  383

these  attempts  those  that  we  are  accustomed  to
meet  with  in  many  treatises  on  economy,  pure  or
political,  and  in  the  Science  of  finance  (especially
in  the  prologues),  which  labour  to  discover  what
economic  action  may  be,  and  in  what  way  it
differs  from  morality,  what  are  pleasure  and  pain,
utility  and  value  ;  whether  the  State  be  rational
will  that  levies  a  portion  of  the  riches  of  the
citizens  for  the  ends  of  civilization,  or  a  simple
fact  resulting  from  general  economic  laws  and  the
like.  In  all  these  efforts  of  the  writers  of  treatises,
we  have  an  example  of  the  gradual  passage  from
empiria  to  philosophy,  which  is  to  be  observed  in
all  the  other  fields  of  knowledge,  and  if  it  be  only
possible  to  say  in  general  that  the  Philosophy  of
Economy  is  derived  from  economic  Science,  it  is
certain,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  finds  no  small
incentive  in  the  philosophical  doubts  and  dis
cussions  which  economic  Science  supports.  On
the  other  hand,  the  claim  to  resolve  philosophic
ally  and  historically  the  economic  Science  or
Calculus  is,  as  we  have  seen,  altogether  sterile,
or  contradicts  itself  in  development.

From  the  second  of  the  cases  stated  above,  Errors  that

derive  from  it.

that  is  to  say,  from  the  mixture  of  economic  with
philosophic  methods,  arises  a  series  of  errors
that  are  very  common  and  very  grave,  and  of


384 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

which it is opportune to take some notice
here.

These  errors  can  be  divided  into  three  groups,
according  as  they  consist  of  (a)  considering
economic  Science  or  Calculus  as  a  method  ex
clusive  of  every  other,  and  alone  capable  of
bestowing  upon  man  all  the  truth  that  can  ever
be  attained  in  the  field  of  human  actions  ;  (fr)  in
attributing  the  value  of  universal  thought  to  the
empirical  thoughts  upon  which  economic  calcula
tion  is  based ;  (c)  in  changing  into  reality  the
fictions  excogitated  for  the  establishment  of  the
Calculus.

ist,  Negation  Of  the  three  groups,  the  first,  which  represents
for  economy,  the  most  extended  and  radical  form  of  the  error,
is,  as  usual,  the  least  harmful,  for  the  reason
previously  given,  that  the  precise  and  loyal
positions  are  those  that  are  the  most  completely
surpassed.  Several  cultivators  of  economic
Science,  among  the  most  strict  and  mathemati
cal,  enter  upon  this  desperate  struggle  against
philosophy,  which  they  ridicule  as  empty
chatter  and  do  not  merely  wish  to  subdue  but
altogether  to  destroy,  substituting  for  it  the
methods  of  empirical  observation  and  of  mathe
matical  construction,  thus  favouring  a  particular
empirical  and  mathematical  philosophy  of  their


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  385

own,  however  much  they  may  protest  to  the
contrary.  That  the  pretension  is  unsustainable,
is  to  be  seen,  both  from  the  contradictions  in
which  they  become  entangled  and  from  the  very
fury  that  animates  them,  which  is,  at  bottom,
vexation  at  not  being  able  to  free  themselves
from  the  contradictions  in  which  they  have
become  involved.  For  our  part,  we  should  like
to  say  to  those  excellent  economists,  alike  pure
and  mathematical,  did  this  not  appear  to  be
pouring  oil  upon  the  flames  : — Spare  yourselves
the  trouble  of  philosophizing.  Calculate,  and  do
not  think !

The other group is represented by  a  par-  2nd,  universal

value  attri-

ticular case of  the empiristical error that we  fated  to

empirical

have  already  several  times  criticized,  and  many  concepts.

J Example :

propositions of the kind that one hears in  Protecti™ and

free  trade.

ordinary  conversation,  against  which  simple  good
sense  has  often  rebelled,  are  to  be  reduced  to
it.  Thus  the  empirical  consideration  of  certain
human  actions  as  constituting  richness  and  happi
ness,  causes  those  individuals  and  peoples  who
possess  property  of  that  sort  to  be  called  rich
and  happy ;  but  to  this  is  opposed,  with  evident
truth,  that  every  one  is  happy  in  his  own  way  and
that  external  conditions  are  not  proof  of  internal

satisfaction, which is alone real and effective.

2  c


386 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

The  great  dispute  on  free  trade  is  also  to
be  reduced  to  the  same  misunderstanding,  for
when  we  undertake  to  demonstrate  that  wealth  is
destroyed  by  protection,  the  demonstration  is
efficacious  only  if  the  wealth,  said  to  be  de
stroyed,  is  precisely  that  of  which  it  was  desired  to
assure  the  increase  by  protection ;  but  nothing
has  been  proved  if  it  be  a  different  quality  of
wealth  that  it  may  be  desirable  to  acquire,  even
with  the  loss  and  the  destruction  of  the  other.
For  example,  a  people  may  find  it  advantageous
from  a  political  and  military  point  of  view  to
maintain  in  its  territories  the  cultivation  of  grain
or  the  construction  of  ships,  even  if  that  were
to  cost  more  than  to  provide  itself  with  grain
and  ships  from  abroad ;  in  this  case,  we  should,
strictly  speaking,  talk,  not  of  the  destruction  of
wealth,  but  rather  of  the  acquisition  of  wealth
(presumed  national  security),  paid  for  with  dear
grain  and  dear  naval  construction.  When  the
empirical  ideas  of  free  trade  were  raised  to  the
dignity  of  laws  of  nature  (reason),  there  was  a
rebellion  against  the  economists,  by  which  it
was  made  clear  that  those  laws  of  nature  were
laws,  not  absolute,  but  empirical,  that  is  to  say,
historical  and  contingent  facts,  and  that  the
economists  who  propounded  them  as  absolute,


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  387

were  not  at  all  men  of  science,  but  politicians,
and  represented  (if  not  seriously,  at  least  by
unconscious  suggestion,  or,  if  it  be  preferred,  by
mere  chance)  the  interests  of  certain  definite
classes  or  of  certain  definite  peoples.  And  the
rebellion  was  right,  although  it  afterwards  degen
erated  into  the  inconclusiveness  of  historicism,
and  absolutely  denied  to  those  false  practical
applications  the  formulae  and  laws  of  Economy,
which  are  natural  in  quite  another  sense,  as
nominal  and  therefore  irrefutable  definitions.
Abstract  principles,  which  are  always  inadequate
to  grasp  the  richness  of  reality,  supply  with
a  simple  instrument  him  who  passes  from
them  to  historical  and  sociological  observation,
which  requires  altogether  different  methods.
Hence,  for  instance,  the  meaning  of  the  school
of  Le  Play,  which  in  studying  concrete  economic
conditions  took  note  of  religion,  of  family
and  political  feelings,  and  of  all  the  other  things
connected  with  the  first ;  hence  the  admitted
necessity  of  completing  the  analytic  method  (as
it  is  called)  with  the  synthetic,  or  (as  it  would  be
preferable  to  say)  of  neglecting  abstractions  when
dealing  with  the  problems  of  life  and  of  directly
intuiting  life  itself.

But what is particular  to a  philosophy that


388 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.
3rd,  Trans- enters  into  hybrid  wedlock  with  economic  Science,

formation  of

the  functions  of  is the transformation of those quantitative

the  calculus

into  reality.  principles,  of  which  we  have  seen  the  artificial
origin,  into  effective  reality.  As  a  result,  when
this  origin  has  not  been  observed,  or  has
been  forgotten,  we  may  chance  to  hear  the
theories  of  Gossen  on  the  decline  of  pleasures,
as  though  they  were  "  fundamental  laws  of  human
sensibility  "  ;  or  that  some  komo  economicus  has
appeared,  constructor  of  diagrams  and  calculator
of  degrees  of  utility  and  of  curves  of  satisfaction,
as  though  these  were  real  things.  Some  false  con
ceptions  derive  from  economic  principles  trans
ported  into  the  philosophy  of  the  practical,  which
we  have  already  had  occasion  to  refute,  such  as
that  of  a  scale  of  values,  which  the  volitional  man  is
supposed  to  have  before  him  whenever  he  de
liberates,  and  that  other  of  the  embarrassment
he  experiences  in  choosing  between  two  equal
goods ;  and  finally  the  belief  that  man  wills
things,  whereas  what  he  wills  in  reality  is  not
things  but  actions.

The  comparisons,  metaphors  and  symbols,  taken
from  Economy  and  used  in  ordinary  conversation,
lead  to  the  false  belief  that  mathematical  con
structions  and  those  of  the  economic  calculus  are
the  real  processes  of  the  psyche  or  of  the  Spirit.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  389

The quantification of volitional acts, taken  The  pretended

i r  i •  i  i •  1-1  i  calculus  of

as a real fact and introduced into philosophy,  pleasures  and

pains,  and  the

has given origin to the idea  of  a calculus of  marines  of

optimism  and

pleasures  and  pains  and  of  a  balance  of  life,  to  be  pessimism.
established  with  the  pleasures  on  the  profit  side
of  the  account  and  the  sorrows  on  the  side  of
loss.  And  there  have  even  been  ravings  about
a  double  mensuration  of  pleasures,  to  be  based
upon  their  intensity  and  duration.  But  the  real
man,  at  the  moment  he  enjoys,  has  before  him
only  his  own  enjoyment,  and  at  the  moment  that
he  suffers,  only  his  own  sorrow :  the  past  is  past
and  life  is  not  to  be  described  like  the  profit  and
loss  account  of  a  business.  The  true  economic
man  says  to  himself  what  Fra  Jacopone  sang  in
one  of  his  lauds  :

So  much  is  mine

As  enjoyed  and  bestowed  for  the  love  divine  !

The  sophisms  that  assume  consistency  owing  to
this  false  conception,  are  most  strange.  Let  the
little  dialogue  of  Leopardi  with  the  seller  of
almanacs  suffice  for  all.  No  one  would  wish
to  live  his  life  again,  not  because  the  sorrows
always  exceed  the  pleasures,  as  that  dialogue
suggests,  but  rather  because  man  is  not,  as  he
believes,  a  consumer  of  pleasures.  He  is  a
creator  of  life,  and  for  this  reason  the  idea  of  doing


390 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL  FT.  n

again  what  has  already  been  done,  of  retreading
the  same  path,  of  reliving  the  already  past,  is
repugnant  to  him,  even  were  it  all  made  up
of  pleasures  as  suggested,  because  he  aspires
only  and  always  to  the  future.  Optimism  and
pessimism,  being  each  of  them  respectively  unable
altogether  to  deny  pleasure  and  pain,  are  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  these  calculations  and  balances,
in  order  to  defend  their  preconceived  conclusions  :
but  in  so  doing  they  fall  from  Scylla  into
Charybdis  and  each  reveals  its  own  sophistical
nature.

Indeed,  a  philosophy  that  calculates  is  a
philosophy  that  toys  or  dotes,  and  if  we  have
certainly  advised  the  economists  and  mathe
maticians  to  calculate  and  not  to  think,  we  must,
on  the  contrary,  cry  to  the  philosopher : — Think,
and  do  not  calculate !  Qui  incipit  numerare,
incipit  errare  !


VII

HISTORICAL ANNOTATIONS

THE  concepts  of  the  useful  and  of  the  moral  and
the  various  attempts  either  to  absorb  the  one  in
the  other  or  to  distinguish  them,  while  recogniz
ing  their  relations,  are  the  problem  on  which  has
laboured  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  as  Ethic
and  Economic.  Has  this  problem  ever  been
fully  solved?  It  will  be  permissible  to  doubt  it,
when  we  observe  that  a  philosophical  concept  of
the  useful  has  been  wanting  until  our  own  days  ;
and  that  in  consequence  one  of  morality  must
also,  strictly  speaking,  have  been  wanting,  for  it
could  not  have  been  understood  in  its  fulness
and  purity,  owing  to  the  obscure  position  of  the
term  with  which  it  is  united.

I. The utilitarian character of Greek Ethic  Greek  E

and  its

has  been  affirmed  on  several  occasions  ; but  one  *•
experiences a certain repugnance in applying
so precise  a  term  to  the  documents  of  ancient
thought  that  remain  to  us. Socrates,  it  is  true,

391


392 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

posited  the  useful  as  the  supreme  concept  of
morality,  and  identified  the  good  life  with
eudaemonia  ;  but  for  him  that  useful  was  never
theless  distinct  from  the  merely  pleasing,  since  it
consisted  in  what  is  useful  to  man  as  man,  and
his  eudaemonia  bore  much  resemblance  to  the
tranquil  conscience  of  him  who  fulfils  his  proper
duties.  Plato  (for  example,  in  the  Protagoras]
expounds  the  doctrine  that  good  things  are  no
thing  but  pleasant  things,  and  bad  things  painful ;
but  this  doctrine  is  enunciated  in  order  to  place
in  relief  the  thesis  that  man  does  not  do  wrong,
save  through  ignorance,  and  because  the  bad
seems  to  him  to  be  the  good  ;  without  saying
that  in  other  dialogues  the  distinction  between
pleasure  and  the  good  is  recognized.  Nor  can
the  most  systematic  of  the  ancient  philosophers,
Aristotle,  be  called  without  reserve  a  hedonist,
a  eudaemonist,  or  a  utilitarian,  on  the  strength
of  his  doctrine  of  happiness.  Happiness  is  the
supreme  good,  it  is  an  end  for  itself;  but  virtue  is
already  included  for  Aristotle  in  happiness,  virtue
which  is  found  there,  not  as  an  adjunct,  but
intrinsic,  for  which  exterior  goods  are  indeed
necessary,  but  only  as  instruments.  The  virtuous
man  must  be  a  lover  of  himself  ((friXavros),  that  is
to  say,  just,  temperate,  liberal  of  his  possessions,


,i ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  393

ready  to  yield  honours  and  offices  to  his  friends  ;
lover  of  himself,  then,  in  the  lofty  signification  of
the  word  (lover,  not  of  the  empirical,  but  of  the
metempirical  ego),  as  opposed  to  the  wicked  man,
who  is  his  own  enemy.  Even  Epicurus  could
not  be  included  among  the  hedonists,  since  for
him  pleasure  is  not  an  end,  but  a  means  for  calm,
which  is  the  true  good,  and  calm  is  tranquillity  of
the  spirit,  which  only  the  virtuous  man  can  enjoy.
It  is  therefore  more  exact  to  consider  Greek
Ethic  in  its  general  character,  not  as  eudaemon-
istic  and  utilitarian,  but  here  also,  in  relation  to
the  new  problem  that  we  now  have  before  us  (in
the  same  way  as  was  done  above,  in  respect  to
practical  intellectualism),  as  ingenuous ;  for  in
truth  that  problem  did  not  constitute  the  centre
of  inquiries  and  discussions,  as  they  present
themselves  in  our  times,  nor  were  the  different
schools  divided  upon  it.  They  were  distinguished
from  one  another  (as  has  been  already  noted  in
respect  to  the  doctrine  of  the  passions),  rather  by
the  different  rules  of  life  respectively  laid  down  by
each  as  preferable.  The  antitheses  of  the  Cynics
and  Cyrenaics,  of  the  Epicureans  and  the  Stoics,
have  but  a  superficial  resemblance  to  those  of
the  ethical  rigorists  or  abstractionists,  hedonists  or
utilitarians,  which  have  appeared  as  the  result


394 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

of  the  antithesis  between  pleasure  and  pain
explicitly  stated  in  modern  times.  It  would  be
difficult  to  point  out  ethical  rigorists  and  utili
tarians  among  thinkers  truly  and  properly  so  called.
In  order  to  discover  the  utilitaristic  attitude  at
that  period  of  history,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have
recourse  to  some  rhetorician,  such  as  Carneades,
ready  to  maintain  indifferently  the  most  opposed
paradoxes,  or  to  Callicles  and  Thrasymachus,  so
magnificently  portrayed  in  the  Platonic  dialogues.
These  were  rather  men  of  the  world  than
philosophers,  giving  the  immediate  and  violent
impression  of  the  struggle  for  life,  and  for  this
reason  they  were  at  conflict  with  Socrates,  the
philosopher,  whom  they  sometimes  treated  as  a
clown  and  utterer  of  paradoxes,  sometimes  pitied
as  a  child,  a  "  suckling  "  child,  and  objected  to  him
that  philosophers  do  not  understand  one  iota
about  politics  (as  often  has  been  and  often  will  be
objected  by  politicians,  not  altogether  without
reason).  If  it  be  wished,  all  the  same,  to  find
a  reference  to  later  utilitarianism  among  the
sophists,  the  hedonists  and  the  Epicureans,  or
among  the  Stoics,  with  their  conception  of  life  as
a  war  against  the  passions,  something  of  future
rigorism  and  asceticism,  or  in  certain  discussions
among  the  Platonic  dialogues  as  to  the  relation


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  395

between  pleasure  and  pain,  a  first  trace  of  the
discussions  upon  the  same  argument  that  have
become  most  complicated  in  modern  times,  by  all
means  let  this  be  done,  provided  it  be  never
forgotten  that  it  is  an  affair  of  glimmers,  rather  than
of  vivid  light,  of  antitheses  hardly  accentuated,
not  of  those  that  are  well  defined  and  stand  out
clearly.

II. The precise  and  it  may  be  said  violent  importance  of

Christianity

affirmation  of  the  antithesis,  was  the  work  tf  for  Ethic.'
Christianity,  which,  conceiving  pleasure  and
duty,  nature  and  morality  to  be  heterogeneous
elements,  did  great  service,  both  to  the  progress
of  civilization  in  general  and  in  particular  to
Ethic.  It  is  necessary  to  insist  upon  this,  for
the  modern  world  was  bound  afterwards  to  react
against  this  antithesis,  and  necessarily  to  assume  an
Antichristian,  even  a  pagan  attitude,  and  modern
art  and  poetry  are  often  inspired  with  an  abhor
rence  of  the  tenebrous  Middle  Ages  and  of  sad
Christianity,  and  give  a  sigh  of  regret  for  Greece
as  for  a  lost  Paradise,  or  a  shout  of  jubila
tion  as  for  a  Paradise  regained.  But  reactions
are  reactions  and  poetry  is  poetry :  humanity
never  retraces  its  footsteps,  though  it  is  often
wont  to  adorn  the  future  with  memories  of  the
past.  The  Greece  of  our  hearts  is  a  new  Greece,


396 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

profoundly  modified  by  Christianity ;  the  Greece
of  Goethe  and  of  Hegel  is  no  longer  the  Greece
of  Sophocles  and  of  Aristotle,  but  a  Greece  far
richer  and  more  intense.  Thought,  like  life,
never  turns  back,  and  if  it  be  necessary  eventually
to  attain  to  a  theoretic  conciliation  between
pleasure  and  duty,  between  the  useful  and
morality,  such  a  conciliation  will  be  very  different
from  that  of  still  ingenuous  Greek  Ethic.
The  three  The  spectacle  afforded  by  modern  Ethic,  from

resulting

directions : the  Renaissance  to  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth

utilitarianism,

rigorism,  and century,  and  also  (with  few  exceptions)  in  the  later

psycnologism.  '

periods  is  still  altogether  dominated  by  that  anti
thesis,  and  therefore  two  currents  are  to  be  dis
cerned  in  it:  one  that  attaches  itself  to  the  first  term
of  the  antithesis,  the  useful,  and  denies  the  second,
or  resolves  it  in  the  first,  the  other,  which  denies
the  useful  and  retains  moral  duty  as  the  exclusive
form  of  the  practical  activity.  This  latter  is
rigoristic  Ethic,  child  of  Christianity  and  of
ascetic  oriental  sources,  which  flowed  into  it
together  by  direct  filiation  ;  the  other  is  utili
tarianism^  child  also,  though  illegitimate,  of  the
distinction  or  rending  asunder  of  the  ancient
unity  of  duty  and  pleasure,  virtue  and  happi
ness,  effected  by  Christianity.  The  antithesis
sometimes  seems  to  be  solved  and  a  Philosophy


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  397

of  the  practical  appears,  which,  without  clinging
exclusively  to  one  term  or  the  other,  receives
both  into  itself.  But  this  philosophy,  when  it
does  not  reveal  itself  at  bottom  (which  generally
happens),  as  masked  utilitarianism,  or  (a  less
frequent  case)  rigorism  attenuated  in  expres
sion,  has  the  defect  of  being,  not  philosophy,
but  an  empirical  description  of  the  so  -  called
principles  of  the  practical,  placed  one  beside  the
other,  without  a  profound  definition  or  deduction
of  either.  This  third  direction  may  be  called
intuitionism  or  psychologism.

Utilitarianism  is  principally  represented  by
English  thought,  to  which  belongs  Hobbes,  the
greatest  of  all  utilitarians,  who  proclaimed,  in
statu  naturae  (that  is  to  say,  in  genuine  reality)
mensur am  juris  esse  utilitatem?  Similar  doctrines
are  to  be  found  in  Spinoza,  who  has  also  been
looked  upon  and  criticized  as  a  pure  utilitarian.
But  the  matter  is  rather  more  complicated  as
regards  Spinoza.  Of  him  it  should  rather  be
said  that  he  would  have  been  the  most  resolute
of  ethical  rigorists,  had  he  ever  been  able  to
construct  an  Ethic.  His  determinism  was  an
insuperable  obstacle  to  this,  for  it  does  not  admit
distinctions  of  values,  but  considers  the  good,

1  De  cive,  c.  i.  §  10.


398 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

like  being,  in  its  abstractness,  and  therefore,  the
being  of  each  one  as  suum  essere  conservare ;
hence  the  appearance  of  utilitarianism,  assumed
by  the  Ethic  of  Spinoza.

English  Ethic,  From  Hobbes  descend  Locke,  Hartley,  Hume,
Adam  Smith,  Warburton,  Paley,  and  others
such ;  they  are  all  less  courageous  and  less
coherent  philosophers  than  he.  Indeed,  if
Hobbes  himself  could  not  but  be  incoherent  and
could  not  avoid  causing  a  desire  for  and  there
fore  a  state  of  peace  to  arise  from  a  state  of  nature
or  of  war,  whence  is  discovered  to  the  mind  a
source  of  the  practical,  altogether  different  from
that  of  the  useful  alone,  which  was  presupposed ;
with  the  mean  and  sophistical  efforts  of  his
successors,  the  incoherence  becomes  altogether
irritating.  The  aid  sought  from  associationism
is  among  these  efforts,  and  the  excogitation  of
the  example  of  the  miser  (found  for  the  first  time
in  1731,  in  a  discourse  of  the  Rev.  John  Gay),1
and  also  the  admission  of  the  principle  of  sympathy
beside  that  of  egoism,  a  principle  which  with  a
cast  of  the  dice  is  made  to  disappear  again,  and
to  become  absorbed  in  egoism  itself.  The  inanity
of  utilitarianism,  which  has  already  in  Hobbes  a

1  E.  ^Jbee,  A  History  of  English  Utilitarianism,  London,  1902,  pp.
.26-27,


IT ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  399

tendency  to  disavow  itself,  by  recognizing  as  true
laws  not  those  of  nature,  but  those  revealed  by
God  (in  Scripturis  sacris  latae)?  and  in  Locke  re
tained  the  divine  side  by  side  with  the  civil  laws
and  those  of  public  opinion,2  became  evident  in
the  theological  utilitarianism  of  Warburton  and
of  Paley.  As  for  intuitionists  and  psycho
logists,  such  as  Shaftesbury,  Hutcheson,  Butler,
these  either  left  an  unsolved  dualism  (as  was
above  all  the  case  with  the  last),  or,  although  pos
sessing  the  most  lively  consciousness  of  moral
force,  they  yet  strove  to  deduce  it  in  some  way
from  the  egoistical  and  utilitarian  principle.  The
French  materialists  of  the  eighteenth  century,
such  as  Helvetius  and  D'Holbach,  though  less
subtle,  are  more  consequent.

Rigoristic  Ethic  displayed  its  strength  against  idealistic

Philosophy.

anti-ethical  utilitarianism  and  anti-philosophical
psychologism,  not  only  in  traditional  scholastic,
but  also  in  the  explicit  polemic  undertaken  by
Cudworth,  Cumberland,  Clarke  and  Price,  against
Hobbes,  Locke,  and  the  other  utilitarians  who
followed  them.  The  makers  of  great  systems,
too,  attached  themselves  to  ethical  rigorism,
Descartes  (and  in  a  certain  sense  Spinoza),

1  De  cive,  c.  iii.  §  33.
2  Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  Book  II.  c.  28,  §  7  sqq.


400 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Malebranche,  Leibnitz,  and  the  philosophy  of
the  school  of  Leibnitz,  as  the  moral  consciousness
declared  itself  in  its  true  nature  in  Jean  Jacques
Rousseau  against  the  French  materialists.  But
rigorism  also  ended  by  contradicting  itself  in  the
same  way  as  utilitarianism,  owing  to  its  one-sided-
ness,  when  it  recognized  a  principle  that  was  not
merely  utilitarian  or  that  lost  itself  in  mystery,
either  by  reasoning  with  the  utilitarian  principle
in  the  course  of  its  development,  or  by  receiving
utilitarianism  into  itself,  without  any  mediation,  in
the  form  of  the  morally  indifferent.  This  is  an  old
evil,  which  had  already  appeared  in  the  aSidfopa
of  Stoicism,  and  in  all  those  exceptions  to  the
rigorous  moral  law,  which  ascetic  Christianity
had  been  obliged  to  allow,  in  order  to  exist
side  by  side  with  the  worldly  life.
Kant  and  his  HI.  The  strength  and  the  weakness  of

affirmation  of  111  1

the  ethical rigorism  are  to  be  clearly  seen  in the  greatest

principle.  .  .

ethical  system  to  which  it  led :  the  moral
doctrine  of  Emmanuel  Kant.  It  was  time  that
the  principle  of  Christian  Ethic  should  be  re
affirmed,  duty  as  clearly  distinguished  from
pleasure,  giving  to  it  that  relief  which  it  had
been  without  in  the  systems  of  Descartes  and  of
Leibnitz,  after  the  materialistic  and  utilitarian
orgy  that  had  lasted  for  more  than  a  century,


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  401

and  after  the  equivocal  attempts  at  an  approach
and  fusion  of  the  useful  and  the  moral.  Kant
did  not  indeed  in  this  respect  oppose  Wolffian
Leibnitzianism  ;  and  although  the  ethical  concept
of  perfectio  seemed  to  him  to  be1  empty  and  in
determinate,  yet  he  was  never  able  to  prove
that  it  was  a  eudaemonistic  and  utilitarian  concept.1
But  that  concept  certainly  had  not  the  energy  of
duty  and  of  the  Kantian  categoric  imperative,
which  are  true  declarations  of  war  against  every
heteronomous  morality.  This  is  the  merit  of
Kant,  after  whom  no  serious  philosopher  can
be  anything  but  a  Kantian  in  Ethic,  as,  after
Christianity,  to  no  one,  not  a  wind-bag  or  an
extravagant,  is  it  given  to  be  anything  but  a
Christian.  Moral  action  has  no  other  motive
than  morality  itself:  to  promote  one's  own
happiness  (said  Kant)  can  never  be  immediately
duty,  and  even  less  the  principle  of  all  duties.
But  the  mistake  of  Kant  lies  in  not  having

dictions  of

well  analyzed  the  concepts  of  pleasure,  of  happi-  Kant  concern
ing  the  concept

ness  and  of  the useful,  and in having thought  °fthe  useful<

& of  prudence,  of

that  he  could  free  himself  from  them,  by  placing  haPPiness< etc-
them  among  another  set  of  principles,  which  he
called hypothetical  imperatives and opposed to
the categoric. We know that the imperative

1 GrundL  d.  Metaphys.  d.  Sitten,  p.  70.

2  D


402 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

of  those  concepts  is  not  less  categoric  than  that
of  morality :  it  is  a  true  imperative,  not  to  be
confounded  with  the  knowledge  of  experience,
metaphorically  called  imperative,  because  it
assumes  the  appearance  of  a  technique  dealing
with  the  practical.  Kant  was  to  some  extent
aware  of  this,  for  he  subdistinguishes  the
hypothetical  imperatives  into  problematical  and
assertorial.  The  first  of  these  are  technical  and
give  rise  to  maxims  of  cleverness  (Geschicklichkeit]\
the  second  are  pragmatic  and  consist  of  maxims
of  prudence.  Observe  the  difficulties  in  which
he  becomes  involved,  through  not  wishing  to
recognize  the  autonomous  character  of  these
imperatives  compared  with  the  moral  imperatives,
that  is  to  say,  the  categoricity  of  both.  The
imperatives  of  prudence  and  of  happiness  are
concerned  (he  says)  "  with  an  end  which  can  be
assumed  as  real  among  all  rational  beings  (in
so  far  as  the  imperatives  can  be  applied  to  them
in  their  quality  of  dependent  beings)  ;  and,  there
fore,  an  intention,  which  not  only  they  may
possess,  but  which  it  is  assumed  with  certainty
that  they  do  possess,  according  to  a  necessity
of  nature,  which  is  the  intention  of  happiness."
We  should  therefore  conclude  that  they  are
concerned  with  an  end  not  less  serious  than


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  403

that  of  morality.  But  Kant  perceives  the  poison
in  the  argument  and  strives  to  turn  them  again
into  imperatives  concerning  means  :  "  ability  "
(he  continues)  "in  the  choice  of  the  means  of
one's  own  well-being,  may  be  called  prudence  ;
therefore  the  imperative  relating  to  the  choice
of  the  means  for  one's  own  happiness,  namely
the  precept  of  prudence,  is  always  hypothetical  ;
the  action  is  ordered,  not  absolutely,  but  only
as  means  for  another  purpose."  It  is  clear
that  to  be  able  to  call  that  knowledge  or  ability
"  prudence"  is  not  sufficient  to  change  the
imperative  of  happiness  into  mere  ability  and
knowledge.  Kant  perceives  this  also  :  "  If  it  were
easy  to  give  a  definite  concept  of  happiness,
the  imperatives  of  prudence  would  altogether
coincide  with  those  of  ability  and  would  also
be  analytic.  For  it  would  be  said  in  the  one
case  as  in  the  other,  that  he  who  wishes  the
end  also  wishes  (necessarily,  in  conformity  with
reason)  the  only  means  for  the  purpose  within
his  power.  The  concept  of  happiness  is  un
fortunately  so  indeterminate,  that  although  every
one  wishes  to  attain  to  it,  he  is  nevertheless
unable  ever  to  say  definitely  and  in  accordance
with  himself  exactly  what  he  desires  and  wishes.
The  reason  is  that  the  elements  which  belong


4o4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

to  the  concept  of  happiness  are  all  empirical  and
must  therefore  all  be  taken  from  experience ;
and  that  for  the  idea  of  happiness  is  also  re
quired  an  absolute  whole,  a  maximum  of  well-being
in  my  present  state  and  in  every  future  state."
In  what  shall  happiness  be  placed?  In  riches?
In  knowledge?  In  long  life?  In  good  health?
None  of  these  things  is  without  dangers.  In
short,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  with  full
certainty,  according  to  any  principle  whatever,
what  would  make  man  truly  happy ;  there
fore  it  is  not  possible  to  act  according  to  a
definite  principle,  but  only  according  to  empirical
concepts  ;  and  the  imperatives  of  prudence,  strictly
speaking,  command  nothing. — As  we  see,  the  only
effective  argument  of  Kant  against  the  admission
of  the  categoric  imperatives  of  well-being,  of
utility,  of  happiness,  is  that  he  does  not  know
exactly  what  they  are.  This  did  not  authorize
him  to  exclude  those  imperatives  and  reduce
them  to  pseudo  -  imperatives,  to  hypothetic
imperatives,  or  to  empirical  rules.  In  other
passages  of  his  works,  Kant  tends  to  the  other
solution  of  excluding  the  maxims  of  prudence
from  the  pure  practical  reason,  because  they
are  maxims  of  self-love  (Selbstliebe\  or  of  the
practical  reason  empirically  or  pathologically


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  405

conditioned,  since  for  him  every  pleasure  that
precedes  the  moral  law  and  is  independent  of
it,  is  pathological,  that  is  to  say,  it  belongs  to
the  senses,  to  the  inferior  appetitive  faculty,
not  to  that  which  is  superior  and  to  reason.
Kant  often  returns  to  this  point  and  always
experiences  the  same  embarrassments  and  con
tradictions,  as  is  proved  by  the  variety  of  the
arguments  to  which  he  has  recourse.1

But  the  unrecognized  autonomy  of  the  useful,  Errors  derived

c i  •  r 11  u •  11  from  itinhis

of  happiness,  of  well-being,  generally  revenges  Ethic.
itself;  because,  surreptitiously  introduced,  it
causes  itself  to  be  unduly  recognized  afterwards.
Thus  it  comes  about  that  Kant  creates,  on  the  one
hand,  the  monster  of  disinterested  actions,  and  on
the  other,  does  not  altogether  exclude  the  con
cept  of  actions  morally  indifferent  or  permissible.2
Thus,  too,  it  happens  that  owing  to  the  discord
that  he  preserves  between  virtue  and  happiness,
thinking  vain  the  pretence  of  the  Stoics  and
Epicureans  to  reconcile  them  in  this  life,  he  is
led  to  postulate  the  existence  of  God  and  of
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  to  make  of
virtue  a  means  of  rendering  oneself  worthy  of
happiness  in  another  life.  "The  cold  duty  of

1  GrundL p. 36  sq.  ; Kr.  d.  prakt. Vernft. pp. 15,  21-28,  43, 145  j
cf.  Metaph.  d.  Sitt.  pp.  208-209.

2  Metaph.  d.  Sitt.  pp.  22,  23,  246.


406 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Kant"  (wrote  Hegel)  "is  the  last  undigested
morsel  given  by  revelation  to  reason,  and  it
weighs  upon  its  stomach."1  Consequently,  the
Ethic  of  Kant,  although  so  different  in  tendencies
and  inspiration,  yet  joined  hands  with  theological
utilitarianism,  ending  at  length  by  also  declaring
that  moral  obligation  is  inconceivable,  without
the  idea  of  a  God,  who  rewards  and  punishes
in  another  life,  and  by  declaring  that  God  and
the  immortality  of  the  soul  cannot  be  otherwise
affirmed  than  by  means  of  moral  exigencies.
Moral  rigorism,  like  utilitarianism,  makes  ship
wreck  in  mystery.
occasions  for  IV.  Occasions  and  opportunities  for  a  philo-

a  philosophy

of  economy,  sophical  concept  of  the  useful  were  not,  to  tell
the  truth,  wanting  to  the  thought  anterior  to
Kant;  but  Kant  let  them  all  slip.  Without
attributing  too  much  suggestive  power  to  certain
classes  of  virtues,  such  as  fortitude  or  prudence
(virtues  that  are  generically  economic,  not  ex
clusively  moral),  which  had  passed  from  the
Greek  into  the  Christian  Ethic,  nor  to  certain
acute  aphorisms  of  psychologists  and  moralists
(for  instance :  //  y  a  des  hdros  en  mal  comme  en
bien ; — Ce  nest  pas  assez  d 'avoir  des  grandes
qualit^s,  il  en  faut  avoir  Zdconomie; — La  souve-

1 Gesch.  d.  Phil.  iii.  p.  535.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  407

raine  habilitt  consiste  a  bien  connaitre  le  prix  des
choses, etc.1}, a first opportunity was certainly
afforded by that inferior faculty of  appetition,
which  the  Wolffian  philosophy  had  inherited  from
the  Platonic,  Aristotelian,  and  scholastic  tradition.2
That faculty was parallel with the inferior
faculty  of  knowledge,  which  that  same  philosophy
had  with  Baumgarten  attempted  to  develop  into
an  independent  science,  Aesthetic^  a  development
that  should  have  led  to  the  thought  of  an  analogous
transformation of the corresponding practical
faculty,  which  might  have  become  an  Oeconomica
or  Ethica  inferior,  as  from  /Esthetic  had been
made a Gnoseologia inferior. But Kant also
rejected  Esthetic,  as  science  of  a  special  theoretic
form,  science  of intuition or fancy, conceiving
instead, on the one hand a transcendental
^Esthetic or  doctrine  of  space  and  time,  and  on
the  other,  a  Critique  of  judgment,  or  doctrine  of
finality  and  morality,  symbolized  in  nature  ; 3  thus
he  fell  into  other  difficulties,  when  he  wished  to
establish  an  analogy  between  the  other  forms  of
the  practical  reason  and  that  of  the  theoretical.4
Although  he  preserved  the  division  of  the  faculty

1  La  Rochefoucauld,  Maximes(t&.  Gamier),  nn.  159,  185,  224.

2  Wolf,  Psych.  emp.y  Frankfort  and  Leipzig,  1738,  §§  584,  880.

3  Croce,  Estetica,  pp.  324-328.

4  Kr.  d.  prakt. Vcrn.  pp.  79,  108.


4o8 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

of  appetition  into  inferior  and  superior  (untere  und
obere  Begehrungsvermogen),  he failed to realize,
as  we  have  seen,  the  true  philosophical  concept
of  the  inferior.
The  problem  A  second  opportunity  was presented  by  the

of  politics  and

series  of  treatises,  which,  from  Machiavelli  onward,
had  come  to  conceive  of  politics  as  a  fact  in
dependent  of  morality,  elaborating  in  particular
those  precepts  and  maxims  of  the  "  reason  of
state,"  of  which  we  have  already  had  occasion  to
expose  the  empirical  character.  But  however
empirical  they  were,  those  mental  products  gave
rise  to  the  problem  of  the  relations  between
morals  and  politics,  that  is  to  say,  as  to  whether
the  two  terms  could  be  considered  as  immedi
ately  identifiable.  The  thought  of  Machiavelli,
in  particular,  constituted  an  enigma  that  all
attempted  to  interpret  in  the  most  different  ways,
most  by  vituperating,  some  by  defending  it  with
strange  reasons  (Spinoza  was  among  the  de
fenders  *),  though  they  never  succeeded  in  freeing
themselves  from  its  difficulties,  for  to  that  end
would  have  been  necessary  the  understanding  of
the  spiritual  value  of  the  utilitarian  will,  even  if
amoral.  It  was  only  when  this  difficult  concept
was  to  some  extent  caught  sight  of  (by  De

1  Tract,  theol.  c.  iv.  §  7.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  409

Sanctis)  that  Machiavelli  appeared  at  once
justified  and  criticized ;  but  while  that  concept
remained  obscure,  the  point  of  view  of  Machiavelli
was  never  attained  and  the  work  was  condemned  •

for  reasons  of  a  moralistic  character  (Villari).1
Kant,  too,  in  his  work  on  Perpetual  Peace,
treated  the  problem  of  the  relations  between
morality  and  politics,  affirming  that  no  disagree
ment  is  possible  between  them,  unless  by  politics
is  meant  a  doctrine  of  prudence,  that  is,  "  a  theory
of  maxims  for  the  selection  of  the  means  best
adapted  for  the  objects  of  individual  advantage  ;
that  is,  when  the  existence  of  morality  is  not
altogether  denied."  Here  too,  he  was  right,
when  he  claimed  that  concrete  political  actions
should  be  submitted  to  morality ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  he  did  not  perceive  that  submission
and  identity  presuppose  a  previous  independence
and  distinction.

Finally,  a  third  opportunity  was  offered,  in  the  The  doctrine

of  the  passions.

rehabilitation  of  the  passions,  begun  by  the
philosophers  of  the  seventeenth  century  and
expressed,  as  has  been  said,  in  a  notable  manner
by  Vico.  Now  if  the  passions  in  general  be

1  Cf. Croce,  in De Sanctis,  Scritti  vart  (Napoli, 1898),  i.  pp.  xiv-
xvi,  pref.

2  Zumeivigen  Friede,  in  Werke  (ed.  Rosenkranz-Schubert ),  vol.  vii.  pt.
i.  p.  370.


4io PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

the volitional activity itself, considered in its
dialectic, they are  also the soul turned  to the
particular,  the  useful  in  respect  to  the  universal,
which  is  sought  by  morality. This  is  to  be  seen
especially in Vico and better still in Hegel,
very  similar  to  Vico  in  this  respect ;  he  admirably
developed this moment  of  particularity, which
is  passion,  necessary  for  the  concreteness  of  the
universal. As  the  passions  for  Vico  are  human
nature itself, which morality directs but does
not destroy,  and are neither  good  nor bad  in
themselves,  and  utilitates  ex  se  neque  turpes  neque
honestae, sed earum inaequalitas est titrpitudo,
aequalitas  autem  honestas? — so,  for  Hegel,  "  pas
sion is neither good nor bad in its formal
character and only expresses the fact that a
subject has placed all the living  interest  of  his
spirit, of  his  talent, of  his  character,  of  his  en
joyment,  in  a  single  content. Nothing  great  can
or  has  been  accomplished  without  passion. Only
a  morality  that  is  dead  and  too  often  hypocritical
can  inveigh  against  the  form  of  passion  as  such.
. .  . Ethicity concerns the content, which, as
such, is  universal, something inactive,  and  has
its  active  element  in  the  subject : the  fact  that
the  content  is  immanent  in  it  constitutes  interest,

1  De  uno  univ.  juris  principle >  §  46.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  411

and  in  so  far  as  it  dominates  all  the  efficient  sub
jectivity,  passion."

The same Hegel once observed: "  As for

concept  of  the

what  concerns  utility,  morality  must  not  play  the  useful.
disdainful towards it, for every good action is
actually  useful,  that  is  to  say,  possesses  reality
and  produces  something  good. A  good  action  that
were  not  useful  would  not  be an  action,  would
not  possess  reality. The  inutility  of  the  good  in
itself,  as its  unreality, is  its  abstractness. Not
only  is  it  possible  to  be  conscious  of  utility,  but
we  ought  to  be  conscious  of  it,  since  it  is  true
that  it  is  useful  to  know  the  good  :  utility  does
not  mean  anything  but  that  we  are  conscious  of
our  own  action. If  this  be  blameworthy,  it  will
also  be blameworthy  to know  the goodness  of
one's  own  action."

Hegel  thus  discovered  the  function  of  the  use
ful  when  rehabilitating  the  passions,  though  in  a
fugitive  manner.  But  Karit  had  not  attributed
importance  to  the  problem  of  the  passions  in
Ethic,  and  had  not  therefore  been  in  a  position  to
avail  himself  of  the  suggestion  contained  in  the
doctrine  of  the  passions.

Fichte, in re-elaborating  the Kantian  philo-

1  Encykl.  §  474,  and  cf.  other  passages  :  Phtin.  d.  Geisies,  pp.  484-486  ;
Encykl.  §  474  ;  Phil.  d.  Rechtes,  §  124;  Phil.  d.  Gesch.  pp.  39-41-

2  Gesch.  d.  Phil.  ii.  pp.  405-6.


the  elaboration

o)  the

Ethic.


4i2 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

sophy,  showed  the  relation  between  pleasure  and
Kantian  duty  in  a  manner  that  came  very  near  to the

J

truth. He  gave  precedence  to  what  he called
the  empirical  over  the moral  man, the former
corresponding entirely  to  the  merely  utilitarian
or economic. What, asks Fichte, will be his
maxim  of  action  at  this  stage? "  As  there  is  no
other impulse in his consciousness save the
natural, and as this is directed only toward
enjoyment  and  has  pleasure  for  its  motive,  that
maxim cannot but be to choose what pro
mises the maximum of  pleasure in intensity
and extension  ; that  is,  the maxim  of  his  own
happiness. This  may  likewise  be  sought  in  the
pleasure  of  others  by  means  of  the  sympathetic
impulses  ; but the ultimate scope  of  his  action
always  remains  the  satisfaction  of  those  impulses
and  pleasures  which  arise  from  it,  and  therefore,
his own happiness. Man at  this stage is an
intelligent animal." "But," he continues, "it
is  a  fault to  remain  here,  and  man must  raise
himself to  a  stage at  which  he  enjoys  an  alto
gether  different  liberty  ;  he  must  be  free,  not  only
formaliter,  but  also  materialiter,  that  is,  he  must
attain to  the  moral stage."1 That first  stage,
then,  is  formal  freedom,  and is no  longer  con-

1  System  der  Sittenlehre,  p.  180  sq.  ;  cf.  p.  15.


n ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  413

sidered  a  pathological  condition  of  the  spirit,  or
as  that  merely  technical  knowledge  of  which
Kant  speaks.  This  would  constitute  no  small
progress,  if  Fichte  had  been  conscious  of  all  the
richness  of  the  concept  of  which  he  had  caught  a
glimpse,  and  had  made  it  fructify.  But  it  seems
that  he  was  not  aware  of  this,  and  certainly  he
took  no  advantage  of  it  whatever.

V.  The  inventive  genius  of  modern  Ethic  is

1  I'll  1'1  -T-1 •  °ftke  ^f"1

exhausted  with  these  thinkers. 1  heir  successors  and  of  morality

in  the

have reproduced the old situations, one after  thinkers  of

the  nineteenth

the  other.  Some,  while  accepting  the  Kantian  centu*y-
morality,  wished  to  temper  and  correct  its
exaggerations,  which  was  not  possible,  save  by
a  more  profound  speculative  vision  of  the  relation
between  pleasure  and  good,  the  useful  and  the
moral ;  whereas  they  believed  that  they  could
attain  to  it  by  also  taking  account  of  pleasure
and  of  happiness,  and  by  conceiving  a  doctrine  of
happiness  or  eudaemonology  side  by  side  with
Ethic,  but  subordinate  to  it  (in  Italy:  Galluppi
and  Rosmini).  Schiller  had  already  recognized
in  Kant's  time  the  unilaterality  of  Kant,  and  had
made  it  the  object  of  criticism  and  of  epigram,
which,  however,  does  not  mean  that  he  had
truly  and  properly  corrected  its  errors.  Others
occupied  themselves  in  various  ways  with  the


4i4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

enumeration  and  juxtaposition  of  the  principles  :
thus,  for  instance,  Schopenhauer  makes  com
passion  arise  beside  egoism,  which  then  divides
into  benevolence  and  justice;  and  Herbart,
although  he  excludes  the  useful,  because,  accord
ing  to  him,  "  it  refers  to  a  point  external  to  itself,"1
enumerates  five  practical  ideas  that  are  not  all
truly  moral.  The  affinity  both  of  Herbart  and  of
Schopenhauer,  with  Shaftesbury,  Hutcheson  and
English  and  Scottish  psychologism,  is  clear.
The  study  of  the  practical  ideas  of  Herbart  is  not
without  interest  as  an  unconscious  affirmation  of
the  necessity  of  the  economic  principle.  The
first  of  these,  indeed,  internal  freedom,  consists  in
being  able  to  achieve  with  our  own  strength  the
model  that  we  propose  to  ourselves,  and  is
liberty,  but  not  yet  moral  liberty.  "  To  be  able
to  decide  according  to  motives"  (says  Herbart  on
one  occasion)  "  is  already  a  sign  of  psychical
health  :  to  decide  according  to  the  best  motives  is
the  condition  of  morality."  The  second  of  the
practical  ideas,  that  of  perfection,  is  concerned
precisely  with  the  strength  of  the  will,  taken  in
itself,  and  resembles  a  combination  of  the  Hellenic
virtues  of  fortitude  and  temperance.  Here  will-


1  Einleitung)  §  82  (Italian  transl.  p.  102).
2  Op.  cit.  §  128  (It.  tr.  p.  172).


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  415

ing  is  considered  in  itself,  independently  of  its
objects,  and  in  this  consideration  there  is  no
other  difference,  save  their  strength,  between  the
various  willings  :  the  greater  this  is,  the  more  it
is  admired  ;  weakness  displeases  and  strength
pleases  the  practical  judgment,  and  this  even
when  it  is  unjust,  iniquitous  and  wicked,  and
notwithstanding  such  vices.1  Lotze,  following
Herbart,  determines  as  requisites  of  actions,  that
they  must  be  possible,  energetic,  conscientious
on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other,  consequent,
habitual,  individual,  stating  that  these  two  series
of  predicates  apply  equally  to  moral  and  immoral
actions.2 — He  does  not  think  it  worth  while  to
take  count  of  the  English  utilitarians  and  post-
Kantian  intuitionists,  or  of  their  French,  Italian,
and  German  imitators ;  because,  just  as  the
appearance  of  a  Hobbes,  of  a  Hume,  or  of  a
Shaftesbury,  is  important  in  their  time,  so  the
appearance  of  a  Bentham  or  of  a  Spencer  out  of
their  time  is  insignificant,  for  these  latter  amuse
themselves  with  the  useful,  with  association  and
evolution  (which  according  to  them  should  become
the  socially  useful),  and  with  the  double  principle
of  egoism  and  of  altruism.  Stuart  Mill  alone


1  Allg.  prakt.  Phil.  p.  35.
2  Grundziige  der  Ethik,  §§  12,  14.


416 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

can  afford  some  interest,  when  he  says  (with  that
mental  inconclusiveness  which  has  seemed  to
many  to  be  acuteness  and  equilibrium)  that  moral
pleasures  differ  from  the  sensual,  not  only  in
degree,  but  also  in  genus  and  in  quality  (in  kind} ;
and  that  justice  is  a  class  of  socially  useful  actions
that  arouses  feelings  themselves  also  different,  not
only  in  degree,  but  also  in  genus  and  in  quality
(in  kind),  from  those  caused  by  useful  actions.
In  short,  the  philosophy  of  the  nineteenth
century  has  not  only  been  unable  to  progress,
but  has  not  even  been  able  to  maintain  itself  on
a  level  with  the  practical  doctrines  of  Fichte  and
of  Hegel,  in  which  a  glimpse  was  caught  of  the
relation  of  first  and  second  practical  degree,  and
there  was  a  tendency  to  reconcile  passion  and'
ethicity.
Extrinsic  VI.  Certainly  economic  science,  owing  to  its

union  of  Ethic

andof  economic  empirico  -  quantitative character, already noted,

Science,  from  J

antiquity  to was not mac}e to fi[\ t^e y^ an(J to furnisn a

the  nineteenth

more  positive  and  exact  concept  of  the  useful.
The  contact  between  Economy  and  Philosophy
remained  for  a  time  extrinsic,  since  economic
Science  appeared  in  treatises  upon  the  Philo
sophy  of  the  practical,  together  with  the  other
juridical  and  historical  matter,  which  it  was
customary  to  include  with  it.  The  precedent  for


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  417

such  a  union  could  be  found  even  in  Aristotle's
Nichomachean  Ethic,  which  supplies  certain
notions  as  to  the  concept  of  price  and  value.
Considerations  on  the  same  argument  abound  in
the  Scholastics,  especially  in  St.  Thomas,  whose
O economic  a  always  forms  part  of  his  Ethic,  as
the  doctrine  for  the  government  of  the  family.
Finally,  there  is  an  ample  discussion  of  the
subject  in  the  treatises  of  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  centuries,  which  took  the  name  of
natural  Rig  Jits.  It  happened  that  the  English
moralists  of  the  eighteenth  century  were  also  led
to  occupy  themselves  with  Economy  and  the
economists  with  Ethic,  owing  to  the  juxtaposition
of  the  two  concepts  for  didascalic  reasons  and
for  University  convenience.  Thus  Hutcheson
developed  Economy,  in  his  Short  Introduction  to
Moral  Philosophy  (1747);  and  the  Essays  of
Hume  are  occupied  with  moral  and  economic
questions  ;  and  Adam  Smith  is  the  author,  not
only  of  The  Wealth  of  Nations,  but  also  of  The
Theory  of  the  Moral  Feelings,  almost  two  parts
of  a  Philosophy  of  the  practical.  The  im
portance  of  economic  studies  had  become  so
palpable  at  that  time,  that  toward  the  end  of
the  century,  Buhle  was  led  to  include  them  in

the history  of  philosophy  (and  we  believe  that

2  E


418 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

he  was  the  first).  He  exposes  at  length  in  his
work  the  ideas  of  Hume,  of  Smith,  of  Stewart,
attributing  it  as  a  merit  to  the  English  writers
to  have  reduced  that  material  to  philosophy
by  a  method  of  treatment  without  example
(he  said)  in  previous  centuries.1  Finally,  Hegel
dedicated  certain  important  paragraphs  of  his
Philosophy  of  Law,  in  the  section  dealing  with
civil  society,2  to  the  "  system  of  wants,"  or
Economy.  The  cult  of  Economy  has  rather
increased  than  diminished  in  the  nineteenth
century  and  the  much -discussed  social  problem
(especially  capitalism  and  socialism)  has  not  been
without  a  certain  influence  upon  treatises  of
Ethic,  where,  if  we  rarely  find  statements  that
are  strictly  economic,  there  is  always  plenty  of
chatter  about  property  and  production  and  the
relations  between  the  working  and  capitalistic
class.
Philosophical  But  a  more  intimate  bond  could  not  take

questions

arising  from place, save when attempts to understand the

a  more  intimate

contact  between  material  of  science  and  to  place  it  in  the  system

the  two.  r  J

of  the  spirit  were  united  with  economic  Science,
properly  so  called.  For  since  that  science  is
occupied  with  human  actions  and  appears  to

1  Gesch.  d.  neueren  Philos.  (1796-1804),  sect.  iv.  cap.  18  (Fr.  tr.,  Paris,
1816,  v.  432-753).

2  Phil.  d.  Rechts,  §  189  sqq.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  419

give  advice  as  to  conduct,  in  what  relation
can  it  possibly  stand  to  Ethic,  which  is  also
occupied  with  actions  and  also  gives  advice  ?
—Such  a  question  was  in  a  certain  way  already
implied  in  the  mediaeval  idea  of  a  justum  pretium,
to  be  placed  beside  the  effective  price,  which  is
realized  according  to  the  knowledge  and  con
venience  of  each ;  it  forms  the  kernel  of  the
debate  between  the  subjective  and  the  objective
concept  of  value,  that  is,  between  the  purely
economic  consideration  and  another  resulting
from  moral  exigencies,  between  the  value  that
is,  and  that  which  in  a  certain  way  should  be.
It  began  to  wax  ardent,  with  the  accusation,
of  being  theoreticians  of  egoism,  hurled  at  the
great  English  economists,  Smith  and  Ricardo ;
this  accusation,  taken  up  and  modified  by  others,
became  accepted  as  the  true  and  proper  designa
tion  of  the  function  of  Economy,  which  should
accordingly  be  that  of  studying  human  actions
in  their  exclusively  abstract,  egoistic  aspect.  But,
since  abstraction  is  not  full  reality,  the  false  task
assigned  to  Economy  called  for  the  aid  of  the
doctors.  Such  were  the  French  economists,  seized
with  the  mania  of  teaching  generosity  to  the
cold  Britons  (Blanqui,  etc.);  such  too  were  the
Germans,  who  wished  to  induce  Economy  to


420 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

mend  its  ways  and  to  become  conscious  of  its
lofty  duties  towards  the  human  race  (Knies) ;
such,  finally,  were  the  Christians  and  Catholics,
who  thought  to  purify  or  to  exorcise  that  worldly
and  diabolical  science  by  mingling  with  it  ethical
and  economical  considerations.  It  was  rarely
suspected  that  economic  facts,  as  such,  are  neither
egoistic  nor  altruistic,  neither  moral  nor  immoral;
and  when  it  was  desired  to  philosophize  the
subject,  some  one  got  out  of  the  difficulty  by
enumerating  five  groups  of  human  actions,  four
egoistic  and  only  one  moral :  the  search  for  the
satisfaction  of  one's  own  conscience,  with  the
fear  of  blame  attached  (Wagner).  The  problem,
especially  in  Austria,  passed  from  the  hands  of  the
mathematicians  into  those  of  the  psychologists.
These  have  undertaken  to  seek  out  the  re
semblance  and  the  difference  between  economic
and  ethical  values.  But  on  the  psychological
ground  (as  we  have  already  remarked  when
discussing  intuitionistic  solutions),  far  from  solv
ing  the  antithesis,  philosophy  is  dissolved.  The
mathematicians  on  the  other  hand,  that  is  to
say  the  economists,  who  employ  the  quantitative
method,  fascinated  with  the  evidence  of  this  pro
cedure  and  failing  to  realize  that  it  is  empty
evidence,  instead  of  limiting  themselves  to  the


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  421

construction  of  their  most  useful  formulae,  increase
the  confusion  by  beginning  to  philosophize  in  the
strangest  manner ;  as  is  to  be  observed  in
the  case  of  Pareto,  one  of  the  most  acute  and
learned  of  contemporary  economists.  In  one  of
his  recent  writings  he  exposes  the  method  of
economic  science  with  a  string  of  propositions
such  as  these:  "  II  faut  faire  une  operation  de
separation.  .  .  .  Cette  premiere  operation  decompile,
.  .  .  il  est  ndcessaire  de  substituer par  abstraction,
des  conceptions  simples,  au  moins  relativement,  aux
objets  rdels  extremement  complexes.  .  .  .  Mais  la
science  nest  re'ellement  lite  a  une  abstraction  plutot
qiia  une  autre.  .  .  .  Pour  peu  quon  y  trouve  un
avantage.  .  .  .  Cela  ne  suffit  pas  encore :  il  faut
continuer  a  stparer  et  a  abstraire.  ..."

And  after  having  thus  advised  us  to  treat  facts
without  pity,  mutilating  them,  grinding  them
down,  substituting  for  them  names  or  abstractions,
Pareto  continues  undisturbed,  as  though  all  this
were  nothing :  these  theories,  "  telles,  au  moins
que  nous  les  conccvons,  se  sdparant  des  anciens  en
ce  que  lies  sattachent  aux  fails  et  non  aux  mots  "  ! *
If  such  be  the  facts,  what  will  be  the  words?

VII. It is all the  more  necessary  to  under-

1  "  L'Economie  et  la  sociologie  au  point  de  vue  scientifique"  in  Rivista
de  Scienza,  i.  (1907)  293,  312.


422 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL


PT.


The  theories  of  stand the diversity between economic Science

the  hedonistic


anc*  ^  Philosophy  of  economy,  between  the
quantitative  and  the  qualitative  processes,  owing
to  the  fact  that  since  economic  studies  first
flourished,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  absurd  ideas
were  introduced  into  the  books  of  philosophers,  as
to  the  calculus  of  pleasures  and  the  balance  of  life.
Maupertuis'  book,  Essai  de  philosophic  morale
(1749),  had  a  great  influence  in  this  direction.
Here,  a  balance  is  presented,  showing  a  deficit  on
the  side  of  pleasures  ;  and,  following  this  lead,
many  Italian  philosopher-economists  of  the  same
period  occupied  themselves  with  such  calculations
and  balances  (Ortes,  Verri,  Briganti,  etc.),  arriv
ing  at  results,  now  optimistic,  now  pessimistic.1
Galluppi,  too,  accepted  the  method  as  a  good
one,2  and  it  is  no  marvel  that  the  poet  Leopardi
made  it  his,  steeped  as  he  was  in  the  sensualistic
philosophy  of  the  preceding  century.  But  not
only  are  the  trivial  optimistic  sophisms  of  the
utilitarians  founded  upon  it,  but  likewise  many
of  the  pessimistic  arguments  of  Schopenhauer
and  especially  of  Hartmann,  the  latter  quite
unconscious  (being  in  other  respects  closely
connected  with  the  German  idealist  tradition)

1  See  M. Losacco,  Le  dottrine  edonistiche  italiane  del  secolo  XVIII
(Napoli,  1902).

2  Galluppi,  Elementi  difilosofia  (Napoli,  1846),  ii.  265-266,  406  sqq.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  423

that  he  was  accepting  an  element  of  an  altogether
anti-idealistic,  that  is,  of  a  mechanistic  origin.

For  all  these  reasons,  it  is  important  to
oppose  the  concept  of  the  useful  (which  is  not
indeed  a  concept,  but  an  abstraction),  given  by
economic  Science,  with  its  philosophic  concept.
This  we  have  attempted  to  do  in  the  preceding
theory  of  Economy,  as  at  once  distinct  from
and  united  with  Ethic.  In  that  theory,  we  have
especially  striven  to  collect  stray  threads  of
aphorisms  and  observations  of  good  sense  as  to
the  value  of  the  will,  even  when  amoral ;  as  to
the  doctrines  of  happiness  and  of  pleasure,  of
the  inferior  appetitive  faculty,  of  others  dealing
with  politics  and  the  arts  of  prudence,  of
the  new  conception  of  the  passions,  considered
as  the  spirit  in  its  individuality ; — we  have
striven  to  attach  to  these  that  which  is  as  it  were
the  philosophical  result  drawn  from  economic
Science,  that  is  to  say,  the  idea  of  a  form  of
value  that  would  be  neither  the  intellectual,
the  aesthetic,  nor  the  ethical,  and  cannot  by  any
means  be  resolved  into  an  ethical  anti-value
or  egoism; — and  finally,  we  have  attempted
to  unite  all  these  threads  into  one,  in  order  to
form  the  bond  that  ethical  rigorism  has  hitherto
been  unable  to  place  between  itself  and  reality,


424 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

between  the  universal  and  the  practical  individual,
at  the  same  time  justifying  utilitarian  activity
in  its  autonomy.  We  believe  that  this  historical
sketch  will  have  contributed  to  make  clear  the
necessity  of  our  attempt.


SECOND SECTION

THE ETHICAL PRINCIPLE

I

CRITIQUE  OF MATERIAL  AND OF  FORMALISTIC  ETHIC

IT is a much -disputed question whether the  various
Principle  of  Ethic  should  be  conceived  as  formal  "formal"  and

"  material."

or  material.  The  question,  already  difficult  in
itself,  has  become  yet  more  difficult,  so  as  almost
to  cause  despair  of  its  solution,  owing  to  the  fact
that  those  terms,  "  formal "  and  "  material,"  are
understood  (as  often  happens  in  philosophy)  in
a  double  sense.  Hence,  those  who  win  assent
to  their  thesis  as  to  the  formality  of  the  ethical
principle  are  afterwards  wont  to  avail  themselves
of  this  assent,  in  order  stealthily  to  introduce
another  thesis,  which,  although  it  be  also
beneath  the  banner  of  the  "  formal,"  yet  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  first  and  is  as  false  as
that  is  true.  And  since  those  who  maintain
the  material  principle  do  the  same  thing,  both

425


426 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

alike  come  to  expose  their  flanks  to  one
another's  blows.  In  the  process  of  unravelling
this  tangled  skein,  we  shall  begin  by  giving  to
those  two  words  the  meaning  that  they  usually
bear  in  philosophical  terminology,  meaning  by
"  formal "  the  universal  and  by  "  material "  the
contingent.  And  in  this  signification  we  affirm,
above  all,  that  the  principle  of  Ethic  is  formal
and  certainly  not  material.
The  ethical  Were  it  material,  it  would  express  itself  by

principle  as

formal  (uni- means  of  propositions  indicating  a  single  volition

versal)  and

not  material or  a  group  of  single  volitions  as  the  true  and

(contingent).

proper  essence  of  the  moral  volition ;  and  the
moral  activity  would  consist  of  a  determinate
action  or  of  a  determinate  group  of  actions.  But
the  moral  act  is  always  that  which  surpasses  the
single  or  the  groups  of  singles  :  to  will  and  to
effect  the  single  and  the  series  of  singles  as  such,
does  not  appertain  to  the  ethical,  but  to  the
merely  economic  form.  He  who  loves  things
for  things'  sake  (be  they  such,  and  as  many  as
you  will,  of  this  or  that  kind,  one,  many,  infinite)
does  not  yet  love  the  universal,  which  is  every
where,  and  is  not  exhausted  in  any  particular
thing,  nor  in  any  number  of  things,  however
immense.

If  we posit a material principle for Ethic,


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  427

we  relapse  as  a  consequence  into  utilitarianism.  Reduction  of

material  to

from  which  we  thought  we  had  escaped ;  because,  utilitarian

Ethic.

after  having  asserted  the  universal,  it  is  now
determined,  either  as  a  single  or  (which  amounts
to  the  same  thing)  as  a  feigned  universal,  a
simply  general  concept  of  group  or  series.  This
vicissitude,  however,  presents  itself  in  every
sphere  of  philosophy :  when  the  universal  and
formal  principle  of  that  sphere  is  materialized,
we  return  to  the  sphere  immediately  below  it.
For  example,  an  /Esthetic  that  posits  as  its
principle  certain  single  forms  of  art,  thus  sub
stituting  matter  for  form,  relapses  from  art  to
life  lived,  which  is  the  condition  that  precedes
art  and  upon  which  art  raises  itself  in  order
to  intuite  and  to  dominate  life.  Material  Ethic
has  therefore  been  with  reason  discredited  as
heteronomous  and  utilitarian.  Not  indeed  that
it  is  so  directly  and  admits  itself  so  to  be  :  on
the  contrary,  it  professes  to  be  anti-utilitarian  and
does  nothing  directly,  save  to  point  to  a  given
object  as  the  true  content  of  morality.  But  that
object,  being  single,  implies  a  merely  utilitarian
volition;  and  material  Ethic  is  utilitarian,  be
cause,  whatever  it  may  do  or  say,  it  is  logically
reducible  to  utilitarianism.

The  rejection of  all material character  from


428 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

\  the  ethical  principle  is  of  the  greatest  importance,
principles.  for  it  frees  Ethic  from  a  long  series  of  concepts,
each  one  of  which  has  been  proposed  in  turn
as  the  true  ethical  principle,  and  several
still  find  many  supporters,  both  in  ordinary
thought  and  in  treatises  called  scientific.  For
us,  those  concepts  should  not  be  examined
comparatively,  so  as  to  arrive  at  preferring  the
one  to  the  other,  or  a  new  one  of  the  same  type
to  all  the  concepts  previously  enunciated ;  but
they  are  all  false,  for  one  and  the  same  reason,
as  any  other  that  may  in  future  be  excogitated
will  be  false,  if  it  contain  in  it  anything  material.
Benevolence,  A  first  group  of  such  material  principles  is

love,  altruism,

etc.  •  and found  in  relation  to  the  general concept of  an

critique  of

them.  action,  directed  toward  the  welfare  of  individuals,

other  than  the  individual  acting.  Morality  (they
say)  is  sacrifice  of  self,  benevolence,  love,  altruism,
compassion,  humanitarianism,  or  simply  naturalism
of  the  Franciscan  sort,  which  commands  us  to  re
spect,  protect,  and  love  the  animals  also,  since  they
too  are  God's  creatures  (brother  Wolf,  sister  Fox).
Such  formulae,  especially  those  of  benevolence  and
altruism,  have  been  and  continue  to  be  successful ;
and  hardly  a  doubt  is  harboured  but  that
they  determine  in  the  most  complete  and  satis
factory  manner  the  proper  principle  of  morality.


ir ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  429

But  in  truth  others,  as  individuals,  have  no  rights
that  I  too  do  not  possess  as  an  individual :  I  am
another  for  the  other,  and  he  is  an  I  for  himself;
and  if  each  one  provided  for  the  good  of  others,
neglecting  and  trampling  upon  his  own  good,  the
result  would  be  perfectly  identical  to  what  would
happen,  were  each  one  to  provide  for  himself
without  concern  for  others.  Morality  demands
the  sacrifice  of  me  for  the  universal  end,  but  of
me  only  in  my  merely  individual  ends ;  and,
therefore,  in  this  case,  of  me  as  of  others.  It
has  no  particular  animosity  against  me,  so  as
to  wish  to  sacrifice  me  at  all  costs  to  others.
We  must  be  severe,  not  only  with  ourselves,  but
with  others  also ;  exigent,  not  only  with  our
selves,  but  with  others  also  ;  and  so,  on  the
contrary,  benevolent  not  only  toward  others,  but
also  toward  ourselves  ;  compassionate,  not  only
toward  others,  but  also  towards  this  instrument
of  labour  that  we  carry  about  with  us  and  of
which  we  sometimes  demand  too  much  ;  that
is,  our  empirical  individuality.  Reality  is
neither  democratic  nor  aristocratic,  but  both
together ;  it  abhors  the  privilege  of  some  over
others  as  much  as  that  equality,  according  to
which  each  one  must  have  the  same  value  as
the  other  at  every  moment.  All  are  in  turn


430 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

masters  and  servants ;  worthy  of  respect  as
bearers  and  representatives  of  good,  worthy  of
punishment  and  reprehension  as  clouding  and
impeding  the  good.  Morality  never  considers
individuals  in  themselves,  but  always  in  their
relation  to  the  universal ;  and  in  this  respect
there  is  no  one  who  does  not  deserve  to  be  saved
or  to  be  suppressed ;  there  is  no  animal  or
other  being  of  any  kind  that  should  not  now  be
favoured  in  its  existence,  now  annihilated.  No
individual  is  treated  as  an  end,  but  all  as  means
for  universal  morality ;  and  they  only  obtain  the
dignity  of  ends,  in  so  far  as  they  are  means  for
universal  morality.  The  rights  of  animals  have
been  written  for  and  against ;  but  in  truth,  a  lamb
has  now  the  duty  of  being  slaughtered,  now  the
right  of  being  left  in  peace,  according  to  circum
stances  ;  in  the  same  way  that  a  man  has  now
the  right  to  go  for  a  walk  with  his  friends  and
to  sing  serenades  beneath  the  windows  of  fair
ladies,  now  the  duty  of  putting  on  a  uniform  and
of  betaking  himself  beneath  the  walls  of  a  citadel,
where  he  will  be  blown  in  pieces  by  the  enemy's
grape-shot.  Altruism  is  as  insipid  as  egoism,
and  is  reducible  at  bottom  to  egoism  ;  in  much
the  same  way  as  sensual  love,  which  has  justly
been  called  '"egoism  for  two."  Indeed,  why


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  431

should  we  be  ready  to  sacrifice  ourselves  for
others,  and  to  promote  their  desire  in  every  case
and  in  spite  of  everything  ?  For  what  reason,
save  for  the  blind  and  irrational  attachment  to  them
which  makes  a  man  throw  away  his  life  or  descend
to  abjection  for  a  wicked  woman  furiously  loved,
surfer  every  shame  and  torment  for  an  unworthy
son,  or  yield  to  the  impulses  of  sympathy  inspired
by  an  individual  ?  This  blind  and  irrational
attachment  to  others  is  at  bottom  attachment
to  ourselves,  to  our  nerves,  to  our  fancies,  to
our  convenience,  to  our  habits.  It  is  utility,  not
morality  ;  for  morality  wills  us  to  be  ready  to
separate  ourselves  from  others  as  from  ourselves,
when  the  occasion  arises,  to  leave  wives  and  sons
and  brothers,  and  follow  duty  which  transcends
them  all.  "Thou  only,  O  ideal,  art  true,  .  .  ."
or  rather,  by  means  of  the  ideal  and  of  the
universal,  all  things  are  true  ;  without  the  ideal,
there  is  not  one  of  them  that  does  not  become
false,  as  there  is  not  an  organism  that  does  not
become  vile  clay,  when  abandoned  by  life.

There  is  another  group  of  material  principles  sod

r  ism,  State,

which seems  to  surpass individuals,  because it  interest  of  the

»  race,  etc.


makes morality to consist of  promoting either  ct^que  of
so-called  laws  of  nature  or  so-called  institutions.
Of  such  kind  are  those  that  place  morality  in  the


432 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

service  of  the  social  organism  and  of  the  State,
or  of  the  interest  of  the  Species  and  of  Life  (this
being  understood  as  animal  life  or  very  near  to
animality).  But  if  it  seem  that  contingent  facts  are
thus  escaped,  that  is  not  really  so.  For  none  of  these
concepts  expresses  the  universality  of  the  real,  but
this  or  that  group  of  its  particular  manifestations  :
the  life  called  social  or  political,  this  or  that
animal  species,  this  or  that  vital  manifestation.
And  none  of  these  facts  can  be  ethically  willed
without  exceptions.  The  moral  man  sacrifices
the  State  to  the  Church,  or  the  Church  to  the
State,  atrophies  certain  organs  and  suppresses
certain  vital  functions  for  universal  ends,  or  for
the  ends  of  what  is  called  civilization  ;  he  defends,
preserves  and  increases  certain  aptitudes  of
the  human  race,  but  lets  others  disappear  or
modifies  them,  always  adapting  the  interest  of
the  species  to  that  of  the  ideal.  Were  he  to  do
otherwise,  he  would  again  be  substituting  utility
for  morality,  his  immediate  affection  for  certain
things  or  for  certain  single  and  individual  facts,
to  the  affection  for  them  that  should  always
be  mediated,  that  is  to  say,  mediated  by  the
universal.
Material  re-  A  third  group  of  material  principles,  called

ligious  prin
ciples,  critique  religious, which make morality to consist of


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  433

conforming  to  the  will  of  God  and  of  the  gods,
is  not  intrinsically  different  from  these.  Where
the  idea  of  the  transcendental  and  of  religious
mystery  is  introduced,  there  is  darkness ;  and
anything  can  be  put  into  darkness.  In  the  first
place,  nothing  but  darkness  itself  can  be  put
there,  and  in  this  case  the  religious  solution  is
agnosticism,  confession  of  ignorance,  such  as  we
have  hitherto  treated,  in  criticizing  theological
utilitarianism  or  abstract  ethical  rigorism,  which,
by  means  of  its  insoluble  contradictions,  also  leads
to  the  idea  of  God  and  of  mystery.  But  one's
own  will,  caprice  and  individual  interests  can
also  be  put  there  ;  and  then  religion  becomes
attachment  to  a  being  or  to  an  order  of  beings,
which,  though  they  be  imaginary,  are  not  for
that  reason  less  individual ;  attachment  to  them
is  love  or  fear,  sympathy  or  fear  of  the  evil
they  can  do,  and  tendency  to  avoid  it  by  pro
pitiation  with  prayers,  adulation,  gifts,  services,
worship.  Religious  principles,  then,  understood
as  material  principles,  also  become  converted,
as  all  know,  and  we  may  add,  know  all  too
well,  into  utilitarian  principles  ;  because,  through
intently  fixing  the  gaze  upon  this  aspect  of
religion,  they  have  forgotten  to  look  at  others
more  important  and  certainly  more  noble.


2  F


434 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.
Formal  The ethical principle is not adequately ex-

principle  as

affirmation  of  a  pressed,  either by  the  altruistic  concept,  or  by

merely  logical

exigency.  that  of  natural  formations  and  of  institutions,  or  by
that  of  the  gods ;  because  all  of  these  are  general
concepts,  or  sometimes  merely  individual  repre
sentations  ;  they  are  certainly  not  universal
concepts.  And  by  the  necessity  of  the  universal
and  the  insufficiency  of  the  merely  general  and
individual,  the  ethical  principle  must  be  formal
and  not  material.  However  (and  here  we
enter  into  the  new  meaning  of  this  word  and
into  the  new  debate  announced),  the  formal
ethical  principle  has  likewise  been  understood
as  not  susceptible  of  extension  beyond  the
enunciation  of  the  character  of  universality,
which  the  principle  itself  should  possess.  Its
formula  has  seemed  to  be  nothing  but  that  of
a  universal  law,  to  which  all  men  can  conform
in  complete  harmony  among  themselves ;  of
respect  towards  all  beings,  in  the  degree  that
appertains  to  each,  of  that  which  satisfies  the
exigencies  of  reason  and  of  conscience,  and  so
on.  Now  the  formality  claimed  by  this  and
similar  formulae  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
formality  first  claimed ;  and  since  in  the  pre
ceding  debate  we  took  the  side  of  those  who
maintain  formal  as  against  material  Ethic,  so


n ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  435

here  we  must  defend  material  against  formal
Ethic;  or  better,  an  Ethic  that  is  not  material
against  an  Ethic  that  is  not  formal,  save  in  the
pretentions  of  those  who  thus  baptize  it.

What does the formality of Ethic mean in  critique  of  a

formal  ethic  in

the new  sense? Nothing  but this: that it is  this  sense:

tautologi  sm.

not  necessary  to  inquire  what  is  the  ethical
principle,  but  that  we  must  be  satisfied  with
saying  that  whatever  it  be,  it  must  be  universal.
But  that  it  must  be  universal  is  a  proposition
which  belongs,  not  to  Ethic,  but  to  Logic  ;  the
principles  of  all  philosophical  sciences  must
possess  the  character  of  universality,  the  logical
as  the  aesthetic,  the  principle  of  Ethic  as  that
of  Economic,  the  moral  categoric  imperative  as
the  utilitarian  categoric.  Thus  the  thesis  of
formality  in  the  new  meaning  is  reduced  to
placing  at  the  head  of  Ethic,  not  the  ethical
principle,  but  the  logical  exigency  of  the  ethical
principle,  in  the  same  way  that  a  similar
claim  in  /Esthetic  would  result  in  placing
at  the  head  of  that  science,  not  the  formal
aesthetic  principle,  as  for  example,  Intuition-
expression,  but  a  formal  aesthetic  principle,
the  claim  for  a  law,  so  made  that  no  form
of  beauty  could  ever  be  excluded  from  it.
Instead  of  constructing  the  science,  the  affirma-


436  PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL  PT.
tion  of  logical  necessity,  which  that  construction
must  obey,  is  infinitely  repeated  ;  but  the  thesis
of  formality  in  the  new  sense  would  be  better
called  the  thesis  of  tautologism.

Tautological  Besides  the  formulae  to  which  we  have  referred,
^fchief  namely  those  of  the  categoric  imperative,  of  the
gand  critique  of  universal  law,  of  the  respect  for  being,  of  the
rational  and  of  conscience,  the  formulae  of  the
chief  good,  of  duty  (or  of  law],  of  the  ideal,  of
true  pleasure,  of  constant  pleasiire,  of  spiritual
pleasure,  of  personal  dignity,  of  self-esteem,  of
the  just  mean,  of  harmony,  of  proportion,  of
justice,  of  perfection,  of  following  nature,  and  so
on,  also  belong  to  the  tautological  principles  of
Ethic ;  they  are  all  tautologies,  because  they
do  not  determine  to  what  object  those  logical
claims  are  applicable.  To  ask  what  is  the
form  of  will  that  produces  a  constant,  spiritual
and  true  pleasure,  which  makes  perfect,  gives  self-
esteem,  satisfies  our  conscience,  strikes  the  just
mean,  answers  to  what  ought  to  be  done,  attains
to  the  supreme  good,  and  so  on,  is  tantamount
to  asking,  What  is  the  ethical  form  ?  This  is
precisely  what  must  be  answered,  if  we  do  not
wish  to  fall  into  tautology,  and  the  reply  cannot
be  the  question  itself.

And  it  is  convenient  to  note  here  that  many


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  437

of  the  formulae  that  we  have  criticized  as  belong-  Tautological

meaning  of

ing  to  material  Ethic,  have  also  been  frequently  certain

formula;,

employed  as  tautological  formulae,  that  is  to  say,  material  in

appearance.

as  symbols  and  metaphors  of  the  ethical  truth
to  be  determined.  The  others,  of  which  altruism
speaks,  are  at  bottom  not  others  as  physically
distinct  from  us,  but  others  in  an  ideal  sense,
that  is,  as  duty  surpassing  the  empirical  ego ;
God,  of  which  religious  Ethic  speaks,  is  that  in
determinate  concept,  that  logical  exigency,  which
is  also  called  the  categoric  imperative ;  the  State
or  Life  that  one  pledges  oneself  to  serve  is
not  this  or  that  State,  this  or  that  particular
form  of  life,  but  the  symbol  of  the  ideal ;  the
nature  to  be  followed  is  that  nature,  or  ethical
principle  within  us,  which  the  speculative  reason
must  determine.  Thus  do  material  principles
often  progress,  ceasing  to  be  such,  in  order  to
become  tautological,  that  is,  abandoning  the
possession  of  undue  determination,  owing  to  the
consciousness  of  a  want,  of  a  lacuna  to  be  filled.

The  evil  is  that  tautologism  inevitably  returns  conversion  of

tautological

to that undue possession, because, imagining  Ethic  into

material  and

that  it  has  established  that  ethical  principle
which  it  has  not  established  at  all,  and  that  it  has
finally  constructed  Ethic,  of  which  it  has  not
even  laid  the  foundations,  it  sets  to  work  to


438 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PP.

explain  moral  and  concrete  facts  by  means  of
that  empty  form.  The  consequence  of  this
is  that  utilitarian  motives,  as  usual,  fill  the
empty  space.  Why  should  we  not  violate  a
deposit  that  has  been  entrusted  to  us  ?  Perhaps
because  (as  they  say)  the  moral  law  is  a  universal
law  ?  That  does  not  suffice.  Respect  for  the
deposit  cannot  be  deduced  from  this  principle,
for  a  universal  law  is  equally  thinkable,  according
to  which  is  deduced  in  certain  cases  a  respect
for  the  deposit  and  in  certain  other  cases  the
contrary.  This  then  is  the  fact :  that  to  restore
a  deposit  confided  to  us  may  sometimes  happen
to  be  a  bad  action,  as,  for  instance,  to  restore
the  weapon  entrusted  to  us,  when  he  who  claims
it  intends  to  commit  suicide  or  to  assassinate.
Thus  it  happens  that  not  knowing  how  to  put
an  end  to  the  controversy  in  virtue  of  the  true
ethical  principle,  and  wishing  nevertheless  in
some  way  to  use  that  empty  formula,  it  comes
to  be  filled  with  the  only  principle  possessed,
namely  the  utilitarian ;  and  the  reason  given
for  respecting  the  deposit  is  said  to  be  the  de
sirability  of  respecting  for  engagements,  for  the
ends  of  the  individual,  failing  which  (it  will  be
said)  no  business  would  thenceforth  be  effected
and  the  world  of  affairs  would  languish.


,. ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  439

Formal  Ethic,  in  the  new  sense,  or  as  it  would  in  what

Ethic  should

be better called, tautological Ethic, might be  be  formal  and

in  what  other

called  formalistic,  owing  to  its  thus  falling  back  sense  material.
into  material,  heteronomous  and  utilitarian  Ethic,
since  formalism  here  (as  in  /Esthetic  and  Logic)
is  the  caricature  of  formality,  and  almost  a  sort  of
materiality.  In  maintaining  formal  Ethic  we  do
not  wish  that  it  should  be  formalistic ;  that  is,
that  it  should  be  again  covertly  material.  And
we  wish  that  formal  Ethic  should  also  be  material,
always  understanding  by  this  that  it  must  give,
not  the  mere  logical  condition  of  the  ethical
principle,  but  this  ethical  principle  itself  in  its
concreteness,  determining  what  moral  volition  is
in  its  reality.


II


THE ETHICAL FORM AS ACTUATION OF THE
SPIRIT IN UNIVERSAL

Tautological IF  the  strange  idea  of  an  ethical  principle  that

Ethic  and  its  r  r

connection  -with  should  be  formal,  in  the  sense  of  its  not  being  known

Philosophy  t

exactlv  wnat  it:  is  and  how  it  is  justified,  has  ever
been  able  to  arise,  this  is  due  to  two  erroneous
philosophical  conceptions,  of  which  one  can  be
called  partial,  the  other  discontinuous  philosophy.
According  to  the  first  conception,  man  is  capable
of  knowing  something  of  reality,  certainly,  but
not  all :  he  perceives  and  arranges  the  data  of
experience  by  means  .of  the  categories,  but  he  is
aware  of  the  limitation  of  his  thought  and  of  the
impossibility  of  attaining  to  the  heart  of  the  real,
which  he  does,  it  is  true,  end  by  attaining  in  a
certain  way,  but  only  with  the  heart,  not  with
thought.  This  being  stated,  and  coming  to  the
case  of  Ethic,  man  hears  the  voice  of  conscience
in  himself,  the  command  of  the  moral  law ;  he

cannot  think  of  any  sophism  to  escape  it  : but

440


FT.  ii  ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  441

precisely  what  that  law  is,  he  is  unable  to  say  ;
the  idea  of  a  divine  ordinance  of  the  world  which
presents  itself  to  his  spirit,  may  also  be  affirmed
by  the  heart,  but  never  by  thought.  The  second
conception  is  confounded  by  some  thinkers  with
the  first  and  becomes  partial  philosophy  or
agnosticism ;  but  if  we  observe  closely,  it  is
Distinct  from  the  other.  For  here  it  is  not
actually  asserted  that  the  foundation  of  morality
is  unknowable,  but  it  is  said  to  be  unknowable  in
the  circle  of  Ethic,  or  that  such  knowledge  goes
beyond  that  circle.  Ethic  establishes  the  moral
law,  deduces  or  arranges  beneath  it  ethical
precepts  and  by  means  of  them  judges  single
actions.  Ethic  is  ignorant  as  to  whether  that
law  really  exists,  or  what  may  be  its  precise
universal  content.  It  hands  this  problem  over  to
Metaphysic,  or  to  general  Philosophy,  which  solves
it  in  its  own  way,  or  is  presumed  to  be  capable
of  solving  it.  In  this  conception,  then,  there
arises  a  question  as  to  competence  and  hierarchy
between  thought  and  thought,  between  particular
and  general  philosophy  ;  whereas,  in  the  former,
is  affirmed  the  absolute  incompetence  of  thought.

But  we  do  not  run  the  risk  of  colliding  with  Rejection  of

both  these

the  obstacle  placed  before  us  with  these philo-  co
sophical views, because we have constantly


442 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

rejected  them  both  throughout  the  whole  of  our
exposition  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  spirit  and
have  demonstrated  their  falsity.  Partial  Philo
sophy  is  a  contradictory  concept  :  thought  either
thinks  all  or  nothing ;  and  if  it  had  a  limit  it
would  have  it  as  thought  and  therefore  as  sur
passed.  Whoso  admits  something  unknowable,
declares  everything  unknowable,  and  inevitably
falls  into  total  scepticism.  Nor  is  the  idea  of
a  discontinuous  philosophy  divided  into  a  whole
and  its  parts,  with  the  whole  outside  the  parts
and  the  parts  outside  the  whole  less  incon
ceivable  ;  so  that,  while  Ethic  is  being  studied,
the  whole  (complete  Philosophy)  seems  problem
atical  ;  and  a  part  (Ethic)  can  be  known  to  some
extent  without  knowing  the  whole  (the  whole  of
Philosophy).  This  is  a  false  view,  ultimately
derived  from  the  empirical  sciences,  in  which  it  is
possible  to  apprehend  one  order  of  phenomena
independently  of  the  others ;  and  to  apprehend
phenomena  without  explicitly  posing  or  by  dismiss
ing  to  another  occasion  the  philosophical  problem
as  to  their  truth.  Philosophy  is  a  circle  and  a
unity  and  every  point  of  it  is  intelligible  only  in
relation  to  all  the  others.  The  didascalic  con
venience  of  exposing  a  group  of  philosophical
problems  separately  from  others — or  also  (if  it


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  443

please  others,  as  it  has  not  pleased  us)  of
dividing  the  exposition  into  particular  philo
sophical  sciences,  and  into  general  Philosophy
(also  called  Metaphysic) — should  not  lead  to  the
misconception  that  the  indivisible  is  really  being
divided.  The  whole  of  Philosophy  is  at  once
enunciated  with  the  first  philosophical  proposition;
and  the  others  that  come  after  will  all  be  nothing
but  explanations  of  the  first.

Therefore,  since  we have  never  denied  faith  The  ethical

form  as

to  thought, nor broken in pieces the unity of  volition  of

the  universal.

Philosophy,  we  have  no  secret  to  reveal  at
this  point ;  not  even  a  poor  secret,  like  the
exponents  of  discontinuous  Philosophy,  who
solemnly  make  known  at  the  end  what  they  have
assumed  from  the  beginning.  Our  formal  ethical
principle  is  never  empty  form  that  must  only
now  be  filled  with  a  content.  It  is  full  form,  form
in  the  philosophical  and  universal  sense,  which
is  also  content  and  therefore  universal  content.
We  have  not  restricted  ourselves  to  defining  the
ethical  form  as  universal  form,  which  would  have
resulted  in  tautologism  ;  but  we  have  defined  it
volition  of  the  universal,  thus  distinguishing  it
from  the  economic  form,  which  is  simply
volition  of  the  individual.  And  if  we  now  ask
ourselves  what  is  the  universal,  we  must  reply


444 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

that  the  answer  has  already  been  given,  and
that  whoever  has  not  yet  understood,  whoever
indeed  has  not  understood  it  for  some  time,  will
never  understand  it.  The  universal  has  been
the  object  of  all  our  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit,  and
we  have  always  had  to  keep  it  before  our  eyes,
in  studying,  not  only  the  practical  function,  but
any  other  function  of  the  spirit ;  just  as  we
cannot  have  the  idea  of  the  branch  of  a  tree
without  the  idea  of  the  trunk  from  which  it
springs  and  without  which  there  would  not  be
the  branch  of  a  tree.  That  concept,  then,  is  not
a  deus  ex  machina  to  appear  unexpectedly  at  the
end  of  the  play  and  hastily  bring  it  to  a  con
clusion,  but  the  force  that  has  animated  it  from
the  first  to  the  last  scene.
The  universal  What  is  the  universal  ?  It  is  the  Spirit,  it  is

as  the  Spirit

(Reality, Reality,  in  so  far  as  it  is  truly  real,  that  is,  in  so

Liberty,  etc. ).  J  '

far  as  it  is  unity  of  thought  and  willing ;  it  is
Life,  in  so  far  as  realized  in  its  profundity  as
this  unity  itself;  it  is  Freedom,  if  a  reality  so
conceived  be  perpetual  development,  creation,
progress.  Outside  the  Spirit  nothing  is  think
able  in  a  truly  universal  form.  ^Esthetic,  Logic,
Historic,  this  very  Philosophy  of  the  practical,
have  demonstrated  and  confirmed  this  truth  in
every  way.  Every  other  concept  brought  forward


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  445

reveals  itself  (and  has  revealed  itself  beneath  our
analysis),  either  as  a  feigned  universal,  or  as  some
thing  contingent  that  has  been  abstracted  and
generalized,  or  as  the  hypostasis  of  certain  of  our
particular  spiritual  products,  such  as  mathemati
cal  formulae,  or  as  the  negation  of  the  Spirit,
on  which  is  conferred  positive  value  (first  with
metaphor  and  then  with  metaphysic).

And  the  moral  individual  who  wills  the
universal,  or  that  which  transcends  him  as  an
individual,  turns  precisely  to  the  Spirit,  to  real
Reality,  to  true  Life,  to  Liberty.  The  universal
is  in  concrete  the  universal  individualized,  and  the
individual  is  real  in  so  far  as  he  is  also  universal.
He  is  not  able  to  assert  one  part  of  himself  with
out  asserting  the  other  (under  the  penalty  of
stopping  half-way,  dimidiatus  vir,  and  so  of  again
becoming  nothing).  But  in  order  to  assert  them
both,  he  must  first  posit  the  one  as  explicit  and
the  other  as  implicit,  and  then  make  the  other
also  explicit.  Man  as  economic  individual,  at
the  first  moment  (so  to  speak)  of  his  revealing
himself  to  life  and  to  existence,  cannot  will,  save
individually  :  will  his  own  individual  existence.
There  is  no  man,  however  moral  he  be,  who  does
not  begin  in  this  way.  How  could  he  ever
surpass  and  finally  deny  his  own  individual  life,  if


446 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

he  had  not  first  affirmed  it  and  did  not  reaffirm  it
at  every  instant  ?  But  he  who  should  stop  at
that  affirmation  of  the  individual,  regarding  the
first  stage  of  development  as  the  resting-place,
would  enter  into  profound  contradiction  with
himself.  He  should  will,  not  only  his  own  self
individualized,  but  also  that  self,  which,  being  in
all  selves,  is  their  common  Father.  Thus  he
promotes  the  realization  of  the  Real,  lives  a  full
life  and  makes  his  heart  beat  in  harmony  with
the  universe  :  cor  cordium.

The  moral  individual  has  this  consciousness  of
working  for  the  Whole.  Every  action,  however
diverse,  which  conforms  to  ethical  duty,  conforms
to  Life  ;  and  if,  instead  of  promoting  Life,  it
should  depress  and  mortify  it,  for  that  very  reason
it  would  be  immoral.  Where  facts  seem  to
demonstrate  the  contrary,  the  interpretation  of
facts  is  erroneous,  since  it  affirms  as  a  criterion  of
judgment  a  life  which  is  not  that  true  life,  which,
as  we  know,  we  serve  even  by  dying — dying  as
an  individual,  as  a  collectivity,  as  a  social  class,  or
as  a  people.  The  most  humble  moral  act  can
be  resolved  into  this  volition  of  the  Spirit  in
universal.  Thus  it  happens  that  the  soul  of  a
simple  and  ignorant  man,  altogether  devoted  to
his  rude  duty,  vibrates  in  unison  with  that  of


ii ACTIVITY IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  447

the  philosopher,  whose  mind  receives  into  it  the
universal  Spirit :  what  the  one  thinks  at  that
moment,  the  other  does,  thus  attaining  by  his
own  path  to  that  full  satisfaction,  that  act  of  life,
that  fruitful  conjunction  with  the  Real,  which  the
other  has  attained  to  by  a  different  path.  It
may  be  said  that  the  moral  man  is  a  practical
philosopher  and  the  philosopher  a  theoretic
actor.

This criterion of  the Spirit,  of  Progress,  Q{  M0rai<utsas

......  r  .  volitions  of

Reality,  is  the  intimate  measure  01  our  acts  in  the  the  spirit.
moral  conscience,  as  it  is  the  foundation,  more  or
less  clearly  expressed,  of  our  moral  judgments.
Why  do  we  exalt  Giordano  Bruno,  who  allowed
himself  to  be  condemned  to  the  stake  for  assert
ing  his  philosophy  ?  Perhaps  for  the  calmness
with  which  he  faced  the  torture  ?  But  many
fanatics,  even  malefactors,  are  capable  of  this,
and  it  may  sometimes  even  be  a  simple  sensual
desire,  of  which  we  have  seen  examples  in  history
and  of  which  a  modern  Italian  poet  has  lately
sung,  exalting  the  beauty  of  the  flame  and  the
voluptuousness  of  the  pyre.  By  facing  death
and  refusing  to  deny  his  philosophy,  Bruno  con
tributed  to  the  creation  of  a  larger  form  of
civilization,  and  for  this  reason  he  is  not  only  a
victim,  but  also  a  martyr,  in  the  etymological


448 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

sense  of  the  word :  witness  and  realizer  of  a
demand  of  the  Spirit  in  universal. — Why  do  we
praise  the  charitable  man  ?  Perhaps  because  he
yields  to  the  emotion  caused  by  the  spectacle  of
suffering.  But  emotion  in  itself  is  neither  moral
nor  immoral,  and  thus  to  yield  to  it  materially
is  weakness,  that  is,  immorality.  The  charitable
man,  when  he  removes  or  mitigates  suffering,
relights  a  life  and  reconquers  a  force  for  the
common  work,  which  both  he  and  the  person
whom  he  has  benefited,  must  serve.
critique  of  There  is  indeed  nothing  more  foolish  than  anti-

antimoralism.

moralism,  so  much  the  fashion  in  our  day  ;  it  is  an
ugly  echo  of  unhealthy  social  conditions,  of  one
sided  theories  ill  understood  (Marxism,  Nietzsche-
ianism).  Antimoralism  is  justified,  in  so  far  as  it
combats  moral  hypocrisy  in  favour  of  effective
morality  instead  of  that  of  mere  words,  but  it  loses
all  meaning  when  it  inflates  empty  phrases  or
combines  contradictory  propositions  and  preaches
against  morality  itself.  By  so  doing,  it  thinks  to
celebrate  strength,  health  and  freedom,  but  on  the
contrary  exalts  servitude  to  unbridled  passions,
the  apparent  health  of  the  invalid  and  the
apparent  strength  of  the  maniac.  Morality
(begging  pardon  of  literary  immoralists),  far
from  being  a  pedantic  fiction  or  the  consolation


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  449

of  the  impotent,  is  good  blood  against  bad
blood.

We  must  also  declare  that  this  truth  concern-  confused  ten.
ing the ethical principle understood as will  tautological,

material,  re-

that  has  for  its  end  the  universal  or  the  Spirit,  ugious/or-

mulce,  etc. ,

is  to  some  extent confirmed by  several  of  the  Coward  the

J  Ethic  of  the

formulae  that  we  have  criticized,  which  have  erred  stirit-

only  in  defining it, either confusing altogether

the  universal  and  the  contingent,  or  have  fallen

into  tautologism. Those  who  posit  Life,  or  the

interest  of  the  Species,  Society  or  the  State,  as

the  end  of  morality,  have  in  view  that  Life,  that

Species,  that  Society,  or  that  ideal  State,  which

is  the  Spirit  in  universal,  although  they  are  not

able to define it clearly. The same may be

said  of  other  formulae,  which  often  have  a  better

intention at starting than that realized in the

development of the relative doctrines, or, on

the contrary, a development superior to their

bad initial intention. This  function of  symbol  The  Ethic  of

the  Spirit  and

possessed  by  idealist  Ethic,  this  affirmation  that  religious

r  J  Ethic.

the  moral  act  is  love  and  volition  of  the  Spirit  in
universal,  is  to  be  found  above  all  in  religious  and
Christian  Ethic,  in  the  Ethic  of  love  and  of  the
anxious  search  for  the  divine  presence.  This  is
the  fundamental  characteristic  of  religious  Ethic,

which  remains  unknown  to  vulgar  rationalists  and

2  G


450 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

intellectualists,  to  so-called  free-thinkers,  and  to
frequenters  of  masonic  lodges,  owing  to  their
narrow  party  passion  or  lack  of  mental  subtlety.
There  is  hardly  an  ethical  truth  (and  we  have
already  had  occasion  to  refer  to  this  matter)  that
cannot  be  expressed  with  the  words  that  we  have
learned  as  children  from  traditional  religion,  and
which  rise  spontaneously  to  the  lips,  as  the  most
elevated,  the  most  appropriate  and  the  most
beautiful ;  words  which  are  certainly  impregnated
with  mythology,  but  are  also  weighty  with  pro
found  philosophical  content.  There  is  without
doubt  an  exceedingly  strong  antithesis  between
the  idealist  philosopher  and  the  religious  in
dividual,  but  it  is  not  greater  than  that  within
ourselves,  when,  in  the  imminence  of  a  crisis,  we
are  divided  in  soul  and  yet  very  near  to  unity
and  to  interior  conciliation.  If  the  religious  man
cannot  but  see  in  the  philosopher  his  adversary,
his  mortal  foe,  the  philosopher,  on  the  other  hand,
sees  in  him  his  younger  brother,  his  very  self  of
a  moment  past.  Hence  he  will  feel  himself  more
nearly  allied  to  an  austere,  emotional,  religious
Ethic,  troubled  with  phantoms,  than  to  an  Ethic
that  is  superficially  rationalistic  :  for  this  latter  is
only  in  appearance  more  philosophical  than  the
other,  since  if  it  possess  the  merit  of  recognizing


n ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  451

(verbally  only,  or  with  psittacism,  as  Leibnitz
would  have  said)  the  supreme  rights  of  reason,
yet  in  plucking  thought  from  the  soil  in  which
it  has  grown  and  depriving  it  of  vital  sap,  it
exercises  them  very  ill.


Ill

HISTORICAL NOTES

Merit  of  the I. IT  is  the  singular  merit  of  Kant  to  have  put

Kantian  Ethic.  . . .

an  end,  once  for  all,  to  every  material  bthic,  by
proving  its  utilitarian  character:  a  merit  that  is  not
cancelled  by  the  lacunae  that  exist  in  other  parts
of  his  thought,  entangling  him  unawares  in  the
materialism  and  in  the  utilitarianism  that  he  had
surpassed.  It  would  be  antihistorical  to  desire  to
judge  a  thinker  by  the  contradictions  into  which
he  falls  and  so  to  declare  his  work  to  be  a  failure
and  of  no  importance,  when  it  is  only  imperfect.
There  are  errors  in  all  the  works  of  man,  and
error  is  always  contradiction ;  but  he  who  has
the  eye  of  the  historian  discovers  where  lies
the  true  strength  of  a  thought  and  does  not
deny  the  light,  because  of  necessity  accompanied
with  shadow.  Before  Kant,  ethic  was  either
openly  utilitarian  or  such  that  although  presenting
itself  in  the  deceitful  form  of  Ethic  of  sympathy,

or religious Ethic,  was  yet reducible to  utili-

452


PT.  ii  ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  453

tarianism.  Kant  conducted  an  implacable  and
destructive  war,  not  only  against  admitted  utili
tarian  forms,  but  also  against  those  that  were
masked  and  spurious,  called  by  him  material
Ethic.

In  this  too,  his  predecessors  are  to  be  found

,. .  i I_M  i  r r\ ' •  • •  cessorsofKant.

in  traditional  philosophy  ot  Christian  origin,  or,
if  it  be  preferred,  Platonic  (opposition  of  material
to  formal  Ethic  can  already  be  observed  in  the
attitude  of  Aristotle  to  Plato).  If  the  fathers
and  the  scholastics  had  been  divided  as  to  the
question  of  the  relation  between  moral  laws  and
the  divine  will,  and  many  of  them,  especially  the
mystics,  had  made  that  law  to  depend  upon  the
divine  will  and  upon  nothing  else,  yet  views  had
not  been  wanting,  according  to  which  the  power
of  changing  at  will  the  moral  laws,  that  is  to  say,
of  changing  his  own  essence,  was  denied  to  God,
since  he  could  not  be  supra  se.  Religious  Ethic
was  cleansed  of  every  admixture  of  arbitrarism
and  utilitarianism  by  this  solution,  accepted  by
nearly  all  religious  thinkers  of  the  seven
teenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  (by  Cudworth,
by  Malebranche,  and  finally  by  Leibnitz).  On  the
other  hand,  we  cannot  but  recognize  that  many  other
material  formulae  used  to  be  understood  in  an  ideal,
or,  as  we  have  said,  in  a  symbolical  manner ;  and


454 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

certainly  that  very  eudaemonism  of  Aristotle,  to
ward  which  Kant  showed  himself  too  severe,  was
not  the  pleasure  and  happiness  of  the  hedonists
and  utilitarians,  and  the  mediety  (/^eo-oV???)  proposed
as  the  distinctive  character  of  virtue,  although  with
out  doubt  empty  and  often  incoherent,  was  already
almost  a  formal  principle.  The  same  is  to  be  said
of  the  Stoic  principle  of  following  nature ;  and
coming  to  the  immediate  predecessors  of  Kant,  of
that perfectio  already  mentioned,  which  Kant,  after
wavering  a  little,  reduced  to  happiness,  not,
however,  without  stating  that  it  is  a  more  indeter
minate  concept  than  any  other.  With  Kant,
however,  the  point  was  admitted,  that  the  moral
law  is  not  to  be  expressed  in  any  formula,  which
contains  representative  and  contingent  elements.
Defect  of  The  defect  of  the  Kantian  Ethic  is  the

that  Ethic  :

agnosticism,  defect  of  his  whole  philosophy :  agnosticism,
which  prevents  his  truly  surpassing  either  the
phenomenon  or  the  thing  in  itself,  leading  him,
on  the  one  hand,  toward  empiricism,  on  the  other
toward  that  transcendental  metaphysic,  which  no
one  had  done  more  to  discredit  than  himself.
He  combated  the  concept  of  the  good  or  supreme
good  as  the  principle  of  Ethic,  and  he  was  right
in  so  far  as  he  understood  it  as  object  of  any
sort,  of  "a  good,"  as  of  a  "  thing."  But  this  did


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  455

not  exempt  him  from  the  duty  of  defining  the
supreme  good  as  that  which  is  not  exhausted
in  any  particular  object,  or  of  determining  the
universal.  Now  his  philosophy  was  incapable
of  attaining  to  the  universal.

Hence  the  involuntary  return  to  utilitarianism,  critique  of
clearly  stated  by  Hegel  in  his  youthful  essay  upon
natural  Right.  The  practical  principle  of  Kant
(remarked  Hegel)  is  not  a  true  but  a  negative
absolute  ;  hence  with  him  the  principle  of  morality
becomes  converted  into  immorality  :  since  every
fact  can  be  thought  in  the  form  of  universality,  it
is  never  known  what  fact  should  be  received  into
the  law.  In  the  famous  example  of  the  deposit,
Kant  had  said  that  it  is  necessary  to  keep  faith
as  regards  the  deposit,  otherwise  there  would
no  longer  be  deposits.1  But  if  there  were
no  more  deposits,  how  would  this  constitute  a
contradiction  to  the  form  of  the  law  ?  There
would  perhaps  be  contradiction  and  absurdity
for  material  reasons,  but  it  is  already  agreed
that  this  is  not  to  be  brought  up  in  the  argument.
Kant  wishes  to  justify  property,  but  he  does  not
attain  to  more  than  the  tautology,  that  property,
if  it  be  property,  must  be  property,  opening  the
way  to  the  free  choice  of  conceiving  at  will  as

1  Krit.  d.  prakf.  Vern.  pp.  30-31.


456 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

duties  these  or  those  contingent  definitions  of
property.  The  moral  maxims  of  Kant,  owing
to  the  empirical  determinations  that  they  assume,
are  contradictory,  not  only  of  one  another,  but  of
themselves.  This  inevitable  degeneration  of  the
Kantian  Ethic  was  called  by  Hegel  tautology
and  formalism}  Other  thinkers  were  also
affected  by  the  utilitarianism  of  the  Kantian
Ethic :  Schopenhauer  even  declared  that  his
doctrine  has  no  other  foundation  than  egoism,
since  it  can  be  reduced  to  the  concept  of
reciprocity,  and  he  protested  against  the  Kantian
theory  that  we  should  be  compassionate  to
animals,  in  order  to  exercize  ourselves  in  the
virtue  of  compassion,  judging  it  to  be  the  effect
of  the  Judaeo-Christian  views  of  Kant.2  Schopen
hauer  was  in  some  respect  right  in  these  observa
tions,  although  as  regards  animals  we  must  note
that  the  same  attitude  is  found  in  Spinoza  and  in
other  thinkers  and  that  it  derives  from  material
and  utilitarian  Ethic ;  and  for  the  rest  that  it
would  be  very  unjust  to  see  nothing  but  egoism
in  the  categoric  imperative  of  Kant,  for  this,  we
repeat,  though  it  constitute  its  danger,  does  not
constitute  its  essential  character.

1 Ueb. d. wissensch.  Behandlungsarten  d. Naturrechts, in Werke, i.
353  ;  cf.  Gesch.  d.  Phil.  iii.  533  sqq.

*  Grundl.  d.  Moral,  in  Werke,  ed.  cit.,  iii.  538,  542-543.


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  457

Nevertheless,  in  Kant  himself,  in  this  thinker,  Kant  and

the  concept

so rich in contradictions and suggestions, was  of  freedom.
indicated  the  concept  which,  when  elaborated,  was
to  constitute  the  principle,  not  merely  of  tauto
logical  and  formalistic,  but  of  concrete  and  formal
Ethic,  the  concept  of  freedom. By  means  of  this
concept  Kant  enters  into  the  heart  of  the real
and  reaches  that  region  of  which  mysticism  and
religion  had  from  time  to  time  caught  a  glimpse
and  had  here  and  there  attained. As  the  origin
of  the rigid Kantian ethical  conception and  of
his abhorrence for the material and mundane
is  to  be  found  in  Christianity  (and  in  Paganism),
so  the  origin  of  the  concrete  moral  idea  is  to  be
sought in St. Augustine,  and  also in  St. Paul,
in  the  mystics  and  in  the  great  French  Christians
of  the seventeenth century ; in that virtue of
which Pascal  wrote  as  plus  haute  que  celle  des
pharisiens  et  des  plus  sages du  paganisme, and
it  operates  with  omnipotent  hand,  by  means  of
which  alone  is  it  possible  de'gager  fame  de  I  amour
du  monde,  la  retirer  de  ce  quelle  a  de  plus  cher,  la
faire  mourir  a  soi-meme, la  porter  et I  attacker
uniquement et invariablement a Dieii? The
successors  of  Kant,  especially  Fichte  and Hegel,
closed the circle which he had left open,

1  Lettres  prov.  1.  5.


458 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

and  altogether  excluding  transcendency,  they
made  of  God  freedom  and  of  freedom  reality.
Fichte,  who  expelled  the  phantom  of  the  thing  in
itself  from  theoretical  philosophy,  removed  from
the  categoric  imperative  the  appearance  of  qualitas
occulta,  which  it  had  borne  in  the  Philosophy  of
the  practical,  illuminating  that  tenebrous  region,
ready  to  receive  any  sort  of  phantasm  or  supersti
tion,  such  as  belief  in  a  moral  law  arbitrarily
imposed  by  the  divinity.1  Hegel  does  not
recognize  duty  and  the  categoric  imperative,
but  freedom  only,  and  as  he  says,  the  free  spirit
is  that  in  which  subject  and  object  coincide  and
freedom  is  freely  willed.
Ethic  in  the  II.  After  the  classical  epoch  of  modern  philo-

nineteenth

century.  sophy, in the  general regression of  Ethic, the

concept  of  the  concreteness  and  universality  of
the  practical  principle  was  also  lost.  Omitting
the  utilitarians,  who  no  longer  have  a  place
here,  it  must  suffice  to  record  how  there  was
a  return  either  to  the  formalistic  principles,
which  Hegel  criticized  in  Kant  (for  instance  the
principle  of  the  Ethic  of  Rosmini,  the  respect
for  being,  afterwards  combated  by  Gioberti),  or
directly  to  those  material  principles  which  Kant
had  already  excluded.  Such  are  the  compassion  of

1  System  d.  Sittenlehre,  pp.  49-51.


„ ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  459

Schopenhauer,  the  five  practical  ideas  of  Herbart,
the  love  of  Feuerbach,  benevolence  as  the  supreme
ethical  idea  of  Lotze,  the  theological  morality  of
Baader,  the  life  of  Nietzsche,  and  the  like.

The  principles  of  the  first  were  completed
with  a  religious  conception  (here  too  Rosmini
may  afford  an  example),  and  those  of  the  second,
when  they  did  not  reveal  themselves  as  utilitarian
or  tautological,  showed  an  obscure  tendency
toward  the  Ethic  of  Freedom.  This  must  not
be  overlooked  in  the  Ethic  of  Nietzsche,  which
despite  the  rocks  and  mud  that  the  thought  of
Nietzsche  drags  with  it,  is  yet  anti- hedonistic
and  anti -utilitarian  and  quite  full  of  the  sense
of  Life  as  activity  and  power.  Positivistic
evolutionism  is  also  often  unconscious  idealism  ;
and  the  moral  actions,  united  to  evolution,  can  be
interpreted  as  those  which  correspond  to  the  Spirit
in  universal.  The  concepts  of  the  pessimists  alone
are  altogether  incapable  of  idealistic  interpreta
tion  (for  example,  Schopenhauer),  and  those  of  the
semi-pessimist  and  semi-idealist  Hartrnann  are
strangely  contradictory.  He  makes  morality  to
consist  of  the  promotion  of  civilization,  whence
so  lofty  a  condition  of  the  spirit  can  be  attained
that  it  will  be  possible  to  decree  universal  suicide
by  means  of  the  vote  of  all  the  world.


460 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

The  question  asked  after  Kant,  whether
Ethic  should  be  formal  or  material,  is  one  that
we  have  made  more  precise  in  the  other  form,
whether  Ethic  should  be  abstract  or  concrete,
full  or  empty,  tautological  or  expressive — that
is  (with  even  greater  precision),  whether  Ethic
can  be  established  before  and  without  a  philo
sophical  system  and  even  be  reconciled  with
agnosticism,  has  no  longer  been  understood,  even
by  its  pretended  followers,  the  Neocriticists  or
Neokantians.  These  have  either  believed  they
had  solved  it  by  means  of  moderate  utilitarianism,
or  by  going  outside  it  and  denying  the  most  secure
result  of  the  Kantian  critique  of  Ethic ;  or  they
have  discussed  it  tiresomely,  without  making  a
step  in  advance.  Progress  indeed  was  possible
on  one  condition  alone :  that  a  philosophical
system  should  be  constructed  not  inferior  to
that  of  the  postkantian  idealists.  But  this  would
have  been  tantamount  to  demanding  the  death
of  neokantianism  or  neocriticism,  which  has
not  only  not  attempted  to  surpass  the  idealistic
systems,  but  has  even  maintained  that  we  should
philosophize  without  a  system,  declaring  that
a  system  is  altogether  inconceivable.  The
Neokantians  can  thus  be  recognized  as  the
descendants  of  Kant,  but  in  the  same  way  as


ii ACTIVITY  IN  SPECIAL  FORMS  461

the  last  descendant  of  the  Hapsburgs  in  Spain,
who  was  neither  emperor,  king,  soldier,  nor  man,
could  be  recognized  as  the  descendant  of  Charles
the  Fifth,  who  was  man,  soldier,  king,  and
emperor :  because,  like  his  great  predecessor,
he  possessed  the  deformed,  hanging  lip  of  the
Hapsburgs.


THIRD PART

LAWS


LAWS AS PRODUCTS OF THE INDIVIDUAL

LAW  is  a  volitional  act,  which  has  for  content  Definition  of

law.

a  series  or  class  of  actions.

This  definition excludes above  all  from the  philosophical

and  empirical

concept  of  law  a  determination  that  is  generally  concepts  of

society.

considered  essential  to  it,  the  determination  of
society ;  this  amounts  to  saying  that  it  also
extends  the  concept  of  law  to  the  case  of  the
isolated  individual.  But  in  order  that  there  may
be  no  misunderstanding  in  relation  to  a  point
like  this  of  the  highest  importance,  it  will  be
well  to  show  that  the  word  "  society "  has  a
double  meaning,  philosophical  and  empirical,  and
if  we  exclude  its  empirical  sense  from  the  concept
of  law,  it  would  neither  be  possible  nor  our  wish,
to  exclude  its  philosophical  sense.  Reality  is
unity  and  multiplicity  together,  and  an  individual
is  conceivable,  in  so  far  as  he  is  compared  with
other  individuals,  and  the  process  of  reality  is
effective,  in  so  far  as  individuals  enter  into

465  2  H


466 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

relations  with  one  another.  Without  multiplicity
there  would  not  be  knowledge,  action,  art  or
thought,  utility  or  morality ;  therefore  the
isolated  individual,  torn  from  the  reality  that
constitutes  him  and  that  he  constitutes,  is  some
thing  abstract  and  absurd.  But  he  is  no  longer
absurd,  when  understood  in  another  way,  with
polemical  intention  against  a  false  concept ;  as  an
individual  not  absolutely,  but  relatively  isolated,
in  respect  to  certain  contingent  conditions  which
had  wrongly  been  held  essential :  in  which  case
the  concept  of  society  is  conversely  itself  abstract
and  unreal.  "  Society,"  indeed,  is  also  used
to  mean  a  multiplicity  of  beings  of  the  same
species,  and  it  is  evident  that  here  an  arbitrary
element  enters  into  the  problem,  for  the  natural
istic  concept  of  sameness  of  species  is  arbitrary
and  approximative ;  hence  the  pretended  same
ness  might  fail  and  the  society  yet  exist  all
the  same.  A  man  may  not  be  able  to  find
those  who  resemble  him  among  a  multitude  of
men  and  conduct  himself  as  if  they  did  not
exist ;  but  this  does  not  prevent  his  living  in
the  society  of  beings  that  are  called  natural,
with  his  dog,  his  horse,  with  plants,  with  the
earth,  with  the  dead  and  with  God.  When
he  is  placed  in  solitude  or  isolated  from  the


in  LAWS  467

other  beings,  said  to  belong  to  the  same  species
as  himself,  that  other  society,  or  the  com
munion  with  what  remains  to  him  of  reality,
will  always  continue,  thus  enabling  him  to  con
tinue  his  life  of  contemplation,  of  thought,  of
action  and  of  morality.  In  order  to  understand
the  Spirit  in  its  universality,  we  must  separate
it  from  contingencies,  and  society  in  the  em
pirical  sense  is  contingency,  which  the  concept
of  the  isolated  individual  (isolated  from  it  and
not  from  reality,  from  the  societas  hominum,  not
from  the  societas  entium),  enables  us  to  surpass.
The  great  services  which  this  concept  has
rendered  to  Logic,  to  ^Esthetic  and  especially  to
Economy,  are  known,  for  the  latter  only  began  to
develop  the  philosophical  spirit  in  itself,  when
it  conceived  economic  facts  as  they  take  place
in  the  individual,  prior  to  what  is  called  society,
thus  positing  the  concept  of  an  isolated  economy.
Conversely,  Economic,  ^Esthetic,  Ethic  and  all
philosophical  problems  and  sciences  lost  their
true  nature  and  became  bastardized,  when  gross
sociologism  replaced  among  social  contingencies
those  universals,  which  philosophers  had  with
great  labour  removed  from  them  and  thought
in  their  purity.  Defining  laws,  then,  as  facts
that  occur,  not  only  in  society,  but  also  in  the


468 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

isolated  individual,  our  intention  is  simply  to
concentrate  attention  upon  the  concept  of  true
society,  which  is  all  reality,  and  not  allow  it  to
be  diverted  and  confused  with  accidental  deter
minations,  of  the  kind  that  may  and  may  not  be.
Laws  as  indi-  No  great  art  is  required  to  find  instances  of

vidual product  :

programmes  of  individuals  who  make  laws  for  themselves,  carry

individual  life.  J

them  out  and  change  them,  grant  rewards  to
themselves  and  inflict  upon  themselves  punish
ments  ;  nor  is  there  any  need  to  incommode
the  worthy  Robinson  of  the  economists  to  this
end.  Without  being  obliged  to  make  the  effort
of  imagining  ourselves  cast  upon  a  desert  island
and  provided  only  with  a  sack  of  corn  and  the
Bible,  it  suffices  to  have  eyes  and  to  observe
our  daily  life,  for  numbers  of  examples  of  internal
legislation  to  present  themselves.  Those  laws,
made  for  our  use  and  consumption,  are  called
programmes  of  life.  Who  can  live  without
programmes  ?  Who  does  not  decide  that  he
will  desire  certain  actions  and  avoid  certain
others  ?  From  youth  onward  we  begin  to
legislate  in  this  way  and  this  production  of
internal  laws  is  interrupted  only  by  death.  We
say,  for  instance  : — "  I  shall  devote  my  life  to
agriculture :  I  shall  live  in  the  country  every
year  from  June  to  November;  from  December


in  LAWS  469

to  February  I  shall  come  to  town,  that  I  may
not  lose  touch  with  political  or  social  life ;  from
March  to  May  I  shall  travel,  for  pleasure  and
instruction."  This  programme  is  subdivided
and  completed  with  other  programmes,  accord
ing  to  the  various  conditions  and  possibilities
taken  into  consideration ;  and  laws  are  estab
lished  as  to  the  way  one  should  conduct  oneself
in  respect  to  religion,  family,  friends,  the  State,
the  Church  and  also  in  respect  to  this  or  that
individual  ;  for  (as  is  observed  by  Logic)  the
individual  conceived  as  a  fixed  being,  also  becomes
a  concept,  abstraction,  group,  series,  or  class.  He
who  wished  it,  would  be  able  to  establish  a  parallel
between  programmes  or  individual  laws  and  laws
that  are  called  social :  in  the  individual  would  be
found  fundamental  statutes,  laws,  rules,  ordinances,
temporary  arrangements,  contracts,  single  laws
and  all  the  other  legal  forms  found  in  societies.
Now  in  what  conceivable  way  do  the  programmes
of  the  individual  differ  from  those  of  society  ?
Are  not  those  laws  programmes,  and  are  not
those  programmes  laws  ?

To  this  interrogation  of  ours,  which  does  not  Exclusion  of

the  character

express  a  doubt  within  us,  but  states  what  seems  of  compulsion

and  critique  of

to be an undeniable  fact, defying any sort of  '<
contradiction, may be objected (and it is a


470 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

common  objection)  that  there  is  a  great  difference
between  individual  laws  and  those  of  society  or
of  the  State :  these  are  compulsory,  those  are
not ;  and  for  this  reason  these  are  true  laws,
while  the  others  are  mere  programmes.  But  we
cannot  attach  any  importance  to  this  objection,
at  least  as  thus  formulated  ;  because,  having  now
traversed  the  .whole  of  the  Philosophy  of  the
practical,  general,  and  special,  we  have  never  met
with  what  is  called  compulsion  in  the  circle  of
willing  and  doing,  save  in  the  negative  sense  of
deficiency  of  will  and  action.  No  action  can  ever
be  compulsory ;  every  action  is  free,  because  the
Spirit  is  freedom  ;  there  may  not  be  action  in  a
certain  case,  but  a  compulsory  action  is  incon
ceivable,  since  it  is  a  question  of  terms  that
exclude  one  another.  Does  the  fact  give  the  lie
to  our  assertion  ?  Let  us  examine  the  fact  for  a
little,  face  to  face  and  without  preconceptions.
Let  us  for  this  purpose  take  an  extreme  case  :
for  instance,  that  of  the  law  of  a  most  powerful
despot,  who,  being  in  command  of  police,  should
order  a  group  of  men  to  bring  their  first-born  to
sacrifice  to  the  god  in  whom  he  believes,  but
they  do  not.  Are  the  men  who  hear  this  mani
festation  of  will  constrained  by  it?  What  menace
can  make  him  who  wishes  to  say  no,  say  yes  ?


in  LAWS  471

That  group  of  men  will  rebel,  will  take  up  arms,
will  rout  the  troops  of  the  despot,  will  put  him
to  death,  or  render  him  incapable  of  harming  ;
and  in  this  hypothesis  the  law  will  not  reveal
any  character  of  compulsion.  But  in  the  other
hypothesis  also,  where  they  do  not  rebel  and
in  the  meantime  bow  to  the  will  of  the
despot,  either  that  they  may  not  risk  their  own
lives,  or  because  they  defer  their  rebellion  to  a
more  propitious  moment  and  consign  their  sons
to  death  ;  they  will  not  have  suffered  any  com
pulsion,  but  will  have  freely  willed :  they  will
have  willed  to  preserve  their  own  lives  at  the
expense  of  their  sons';  or  to  sacrifice  some  of
them  in  order  to  have  the  time  to  put  themselves
into  such  a  position  that  they  may  be  able  to
rebel  with  the  hope  of  victory.  Thus  we  find
in  social  laws,  now  observance,  now  inobservance
of  the  law;  but  both  occur  in  freedom.  In
observance  may  be  followed  by  what  is  called
punishment  (that  is  to  say,  the  legislator  who
has  imposed  a  given  class  of  actions,  will  adopt
certain  definite  measures  against  those  who  do
not  obey  them ;  to  wit :  he  will  will  another
class  of  actions,  destined  to  render  possible
the  first,  because  the  punishment  is  a  new
condition  of  things  set  before  the  individual,


472 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

according  to  which  he  must  alter  his  previous
mode  of  action) ;  but  the  punishment  always
finds  itself  face  to  face  with  the  freedom  of  the
individual.  He  will  be  able  freely  to  observe
the  law  in  order  to  avoid  the  punishment  or  its
recurrence ;  but  he  will  also  be  able  freely  to
rebel  against  it,  as  in  the  instance  adduced.
identical  If  compulsion  be  wanting  to  individual  laws,

characteristics . . .  .  .  .

of  individual this  is  because  it  is  also  always  wanting  to  social

and  social

laws.  laws  :  while,  on  the  contrary,  what  is  really  present

in  social  laws  is  equally  present  in  the  observances
and  rebellions,  rewards  and  punishments  of  in
dividual  laws.

To  return  to  the  former  example  :  the  indi
vidual  who  has  decided  to  devote  himself  to
agriculture  as  programme  of  life,  may  be  seized
all  of  a  sudden  with  a  great  desire  to  devote
himself  to  painting  or  to  music ;  and  what  had
previously  pleased  may  henceforward  displease
him :  that  intimacy  with  mother  earth,  with
harvests  and  vintages,  which  seemed  to  be  the
very  life  for  him,  his  true  ideal,  may  come  to
seem  to  him  tiresome  and  repugnant.  But  if  he
be  a  serious  person,  if  he  do  not  will  and  not
will* at  every  moment,  if  he  do  not  present  in
his  own  individuality  a  complete  resemblance  to
those  peoples  who  change  in  mid- November


LAWS  473

the laws made in October and proceed from
revolution to revolution, he will examine his
situation and will recognize, for instance, that
the desire arisen in  his  soul  is  a  velleity that
does not  answer  to  his  true  vocation and  that
the  first  programme  must  remain  intact ;  hence
will  take  place  in  him  a  struggle  between  that
programme  and  the  new  rebellious  volition. It
may  happen  that  in  this  case  the  individual  will
sometimes neglect the programme traced, in
order  to  abandon  himself  to  the  temptations  of
his  pictorial  or  musical  dilettanteism ;  but  since  this
will  happen  against  his  individual  law,  and  since
force  must  remain  on  the  side  of  law,  this  breach
of  observance  will  be  followed  by  special  measures,
such  as  the  throwing  away  of  brushes  and  violin,
or  by  his  forbidding  to  himself  those  moments  of
recreation  in such  amusements,  which  he used
to allow  himself  and  which have now become
dangerous. In  other  words,  the  individual  inflicts
punishments on himself in case of the non-
observance  of  his law, and these punishments
must  be  held  to  be  such  in  the  strictest  sense  of
the  term. And  if  we  accept  the  other  hypothesis,
analogous  to  that  made  in  the  case  of  social  laws,
should  the  individual  find  himself  possessed  with
so  vehement a  desire  of  becoming  a  painter  or


474 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

a  musician,  as  to  be  compelled  to  believe  that
the  original  programme,  the  original  law  of  his
individuality,  did  not  correspond,  or  no  longer
corresponded  with  his  true  temperament,  he  will
rebel  against  the  law  and  destroy  it  in  himself,  in
the  same  manner  as  in  the  other  example  the
people  destroyed  the  law  of  the  despot,  by  fight
ing  with  him,  imprisoning,  or  slaying  him.
individual  Individual  programmes  or  laws  then  are  laws,

laws  as  in  .  • i i  i  • 1  i • i  • •  i i

ultimate and  this  concept  includes  the  isolated  individual

analysis  alone

r<ai'  as  well  as  society  ; and  therefore  the  character  of

sociality  is  not  essential  to  the  concept  of  law.
Thus,  to  be  more  precise,  the  only  laws  that  really
exist  are  individual  laws  and  it  is  not  possible  to
conceive  of  social  and  individual  laws  as  two
forms  of  the  general  concept  of  laws  ;  unless
individual  and  society  be  both  understood  in  the
empirical  sense,  thus  abandoning  philosophical
consideration.  If  the  individual  be  understood
in  the  philosophical  sense,  in  which  he  is  the
Spirit  concrete  and  individualized,  it  is  clear  that
what  are  called  social  laws  can  also  be  reduced  to
individual  laws ;  because,  in  order  to  observe  a
law,  we  must  make  it  our  own,  that  is  to  say,
individualize  it,  and  in  order  to  rebel  against  it,  we
must  expel  it  from  our  own  personality,  in  which
it  wished  unduly  to  remain  or  to  introduce  itself.


in


LAWS  475


The exclusion of  the character of sociality  critique  of  the

division  of

from  the concept of  law frees  philosophy from  taw  info

judicial  and

a  series  of  problems,  grafted  upon  that  pretended  social  and
character. The  principal  of  these  was  that  of c/asses-  .

1  r  Empiricity  of

the  distinction  of  social  laws  into  political  and
judicial,  on  the  one  hand  and  merely  social  on
the  other;  and  the  further  distinction  of  judicial
law  into  public  and  private,  civil  and  penal,
national  and  international,  into  laws  properly
so  called  and  regulations,  and  so  on.  If  the
concept  itself  of  social  law  be  empirical,  then  all
the  distinctions  and  sub-distinctions  of  it  proposed
must  also  be  empirical,  and  altogether  without
philosophical  value.  So  true  is  this  that  it  is
impossible  to  decide  for  one  distinction  or  defini
tion  against  another,  or  to  correct  those  hitherto
given  by  proposing  new  ones.  Whoever  under
takes  to  examine  any  one  of  these  distinctions,
at  once  realizes  the  aphilosophical  character
affirmed  of  them  a  priori.  Thus  judicial  or
political  laws  have  been  distinguished  from  the
merely  social,  with  the  affirmation  that  those  are
compulsory,  these  conventional ;  whereas  com
pulsion  is  impossible  in  both  cases,  for  the  reasons
given,  and  if  by  compulsion  be  meant  the  threat
of  a  penalty,  this  is  to  be  found  in  merely  social
laws,  not  less  than  in  judicial.  The  law  against


476 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

the  falsification  of  public  money  is  usually
described  as  judicial :  he  who  falsifies  it  runs
the  risk  of  undergoing  some  years'  imprisonment.
It  is  a  law  called  social  that  we  must  answer
a  salutation  with  a  salutation  :  he  who  does  not
do  this  runs  the  risk  of  being  held  ill-bred  and
excluded  from  the  society  of  the  well-bred.
What  essential  difference  is  there  between  the
two  laws  ?  An  attempt  has  been  made  to
differentiate  them  by  saying  that  the  former  has
emanated  from  and  is  sustained  by  a  supreme
power,  vigilant  as  to  its  observance,  the  second
from  particular  circles  of  individuals.  But  where
is  the  seat  of  this  supreme  power  ?  Certainly
not  in  a  superindividual,  who  dominates  in
dividuals,  but  in  individuals  themselves.  And  in
this  case  its  power  and  value  correspond  with  the
power  of  the  individuals  who  compose  it ;  that
is  to  say,  it  is  the  law  of  a  circle,  empirically
considered  to  be  larger  and  stronger,  but  whose
volitions  are  realized  in  so  far  as  the  individuals
composing  it  spontaneously  conform  to  them,
because  they  recognize  the  convenience  of  doing
so.  Monarchs  who  believed  themselves  to  be
most  powerful,  have  realized  at  certain  moments
that  the  power  did  not  at  all  reside  in  their
persons  or  title,  but  in  a  universal  consensus  of


in  LAWS  477

opinion,  failing  which  their  power  vanished,  or
was  reduced  to  a  gesture  of  solitary  command,
not  far  removed  from  the  ridiculous.  Laws  that
seem  to  be  excellent  remain  unapplied,  because
they  meet  with  tacit  general  resistance,  or  as  is
said,  do  not  accord  with  custom :  this  should
suffice  to  enlighten  the  mind  as  to  the  inseverable
unity  of  what  is  called  the  State  and  what  is
called  society.  The  State  is  not  a  being,  but
a  mobile  complex  of  varied  relations  between
individuals.  It  may  be  convenient  to  limit  this
complex  as  well  as  possible,  to  make  a  being  of
it  to  oppose  other  complexes :  of  this  there  can
be  no  doubt ;  and  let  us  leave  to  jurists  the
excogitation  of  these  and  other  similar  distinctions,
fictitious  but  opportune ;  nor  let  us  consider
that  their  work  should  be  declared  in  the  least
absurd.  We  only  say  that  it  must  not  be  for
gotten  that  the  fictitious  is  fictitious,  as  is  the
claim  made  to  reason  about  it  as  rational  and
philosophical,  and  to  fill  volumes  and  volumes
with  tiresome  disquisitions,  which  are  necessarily
vain,  though  the  distinctions  that  form  their
object  are  not  vain  in  their  circle.  We  who  are
not  jurists  but  philosophers,  and  to  whom  it  is
therefore  not  permitted  to  produce  and  adopt
practical  distinctions,  must  conceive  as  laws  and


478 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PI,

include  equally  in  the  same  category,  alike  the
English  Magna  Charta  and  the  statute  of  the
Sicilian  Mafia,  or  of  the  Neapolitan  Camorra ;
the  Regula  monachorum  of  Saint  Benedict  and
that  of  the  brigata  spendereccia  that  was  sung
in  sonnets  by  Folgore  di  San  Geminiano  and
Cene  della  Chitarra  and  is  recorded  by  Dante
in  the  Inferno ;  the  canon  law  and  the  military
code,  and  that  droit  parisien,  which  a  certain
personage  of  Balzac  had  studied  for  three  years
in  the  blue  boudoir  of  one  lady  and  in  the  rosy
drawing-room  of  another,  and  which,  although
no  one  ever  speaks  of  it,  yet  constitutes  (says
the  great  novelist)  une  haute  jurisprudence  sociale,
qui,  bien  apprise  et  bien  pratique'e,  mene  a  tout}-
What  more  can  be  said  ?  Even  those  literary
and  artistic  laws  are  laws  which  express  the  will  to
produce  works,  possessing  this  or  that  other  kind
of  argument  and  arrangement,  as  would  be  the
law  that  drama  should  be  divided  into  five  or
three  acts  or  days,  and  that  romances  must  not
exceed  four  or  five  hundred  pages,  i6mo,  and
that  a  monumental  statue  must  be  nude  or
heroically  clad.  It  is  evident  that  if  anybody
violate  these  laws,  he  may  be  excluded  (and  he
was  indeed  excluded)  from  the  academies  of

1  Balzac,  Le  Pere  Goriot(z&.  Paris,  Caiman  Levy,  1891),  p.  85.


LAWS  479

good  taste,  which  did  not  prevent  his  being
received  for  that  very  reason  into  the  anti-
academies  of  the  independents  :  in  just  the  same
way  as  to  have  incurred  punishments  announced
by  the  penal  code  is  a  title  of  admission  to
certain  criminal  societies.

These  examples  that  we  have  selected  among  Extension  of

the  concept  of

the most extraordinary and the most apt to  law.
scandalize,  help  to make  it  quite  clear  that  the
concept  of  law  must  be  taken  in  its  full  logical
extension,  when  we  wish  to  philosophize  about  it.
Among  the  many  obstacles  that  philosophy  meets
with  is  a  curious  sort  of  false  shame,  which  looks
upon  contact  with  certain  arguments  as  injurious
to  the  dignity  of  philosophy  :  a  contact  which  is
avoided by  arbitrarily  narrowing and therefore
falsifying philosophical  concepts. That of  law
especially  has  a  tradition  of  solemnity,  and  brings
with it associations that must be broken in
pieces. Otherwise  it  is  impossible  even  to  under
stand  what  are  those  firm  and  unwritten  laws  of
the  gods,  which  Antigone  opposed  to  the  decrees
of  men  and  how  they  exercise  their  efficiency  ;  or
the  sayings  of  Lace  daemon,  in  obedience  to  which
fell  the  three  hundred  at  Thermopylae; or  the
laws  of  the  fatherland,  which,  with  their  irresist
ible  authority,  caused  Socrates  to  remain  at  the


480 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL  FT.  m

moment  when  others  counselled  and  facilitated
his  flight.  Life  is  composed  of  big  and  little
actions,  of  least  and  greatest,  or  better,  of  a  very
dense  web  of  very  diverse  actions  ;  and  it  is  not
a  too  brilliant  idea  to  cut  that  web  in  pieces  and
to  throw  away  some  of  the  pieces  as  less  beautiful,
in  order  afterwards  to  contemplate  in  those  pieces
only  that  have  been  thus  selected,  cut  out  and
disconnected,  the  web  that  no  longer  exists.


II


THE CONSTITUTIVE ELEMENTS OF LAWS. CRITIQUE
OF PERMISSIVE LAWS AND OF NATURAL LAW

THE  undue restrictions  and empirical  divisions  The  volitional

r 1  r  1  i • i  i  IT  character  and

ot  the  concept  ot  laws  having  been  destroyed,  i\  the  character

of  class.

our  attention  be  now  directed  to  the  character
that  has  been  determined  as  properly  belonging
to  them,  we  have  the  means  of  distinguishing
them  from  the  other  spiritual  forms  with  which
they  are  often  confused,  partly  as  the  result  of
the  metaphors  and  homonyms  usual  in  ordinary
speech.  Laws,  as  has  been  said,  are  volitional
acts  concerning  classes  of  actions.  Therefore,
where  the  volitional  element  or  the  element  of
class  is  wanting,  there  cannot  be  law,  save  in
name  and  by  metaphor.

So-called laws  of  nature  or  naturalistic  laws  Distinction  of

laws  from  the

are  not  laws,  owing  to  the  absence  of  the  voli-  so-called  laws

of  nature.

tional  element :  they  consist  of  simple  enunciations
of  relations  between  empirical  concepts,  that  is,  of
rules.  This  is  an  instance  of  what  is  called  a

481  2 I


482 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

natural  law :  platinum  melts  at  a  temperature  of
1780  degrees  ;  or  this  other  of  a  grammatical
law :  that  in  the  Greek  language  masculine
nouns  of  the  second  declension  have  the  genitive
in  ov  (with  exceptions,  in  this  as  in  the  other
case).  But  they  are  laws  in  about  the  same  way
as  the  King  of  Cups  is  king  ;  and  indeed  it  is
known  historically  that  this  denomination  was
transported  by  the  Stoics  from  the  domain  of
politics,  where  it  had  first  appeared,  to  that  of
nature.  Empirical  concepts  and  rules  may,  as  we
know,  assume  an  imperative  literary  form  ;  hence
it  will  be  said  :  "  If  you  wish  to  melt  platinum,
heat  it  to  1780  degrees  "  ;  "  If  you  wish  to  speak
Greek,  decline  masculine  nouns  of  the  second
declension  with  an  ov  in  the  genitive."  But  the
literary  form  does  not  change  anything  of  their
true  nature :  those  imperatives  are  hypothetical  im
peratives,  that  is,  false  imperatives,  improper  laws.
Grammatical  and  chemical  laws  will  remain  mere
formulae,  instruments  of  knowledge,  and  not  at  all  of
action,  until  some  one  obliges  me  or  I  oblige  myself
to  talk  Greek,  or  to  open  a  chemical  laboratory
where  platinum  is  melted.  The  jurist  who  elabor
ates  cases  and  rules  is  not  the  legislator:  the  latter
alone  (with  a  sword  in  one  hand)  can  endow  the
excogitations  cf  the  other  with  the  character  of  law.


LAWS  483

Certainly  an  act  of  will  is  necessary  in  order  implication  of

the  second  in

to  construct  empirical  concepts,  formulae,  and  the  first.
rules  (as  indeed  we  know),  an  act  of  will  which
is  not  that  of  the  will  implied  in  every  act  of
thought,  but  is  a  special  and  explicit  act  which,
by  manipulating  representations  and  concepts,
makes  a  quid  medium,  which  is  neither  repre
sentation  nor  concept,  and  although  altogether
irrational  from  the  theoretical  point  of  view,  is  of
use  in  the  economy  of  the  spirit.  But  the  law
in  its  true  meaning  is  a  volitional  act,  which
assumes  that  primary  volitional  act  whence  are
formed  the  pseudo-concepts  or  concepts  of  class
as  already  completed',  precisely  because  it  is  the
will  which  has  for  its  object  a  class  of  objects.  It
is  not  possible  to  impose  speaking  according  to
the  rule  of  the  Greek  language,  or  to  melt  platinum
according  to  its  chemical  formula,  before  these
rules  have  been  laid  down.  And  here  appears
very  clearly  the  difference  between  those  two
kinds  of  spiritual  products,  which  the  imperative
literary  form,  given  to  classes  and  rules,  darkens
and  confuses.  This  difference  can  be  recognized
in  concrete  cases  by  means  of  a  most  simple
expedient :  if  the  rule  (as  we  have  already  had
occasion  to  prove)  can  be  converted  into  a
statement  of  class,  then  the  law  is  inconvertible.


484 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

"  If  you  wish  to  melt  platinum,  heat  it  to  1780
degrees"  is  a  proposition  that  is  exactly  equal
to  "platinum  melts  at  1780  degrees."  But  the
law,  "  Let  there  be  opened  in  every  city  a  chemical
laboratory  where  platinum  is  to  be  melted,"  is
not  to  be  converted  from  the  imperative  to  the
indicative,  whatever  efforts  we  make.
Distinction  of  If  the  volitional  element  be  wanting  to

laws  from  ....  .  . 1  •,

practical prin-  naturalistic  laws,  it  is  certainly  present  in  other

ciples.

spiritual  formations  also  denominated  and  con
sidered  as  laws  :  but  not  that  of  class,  therefore
neither  are  these  laws.  Such  is  the  case  with
economic  and  moral  law,  and  through  them,  with
logical  and  aesthetic  laws.  The  moral  law  says,
"  Will  the  universal "  ;  that  is  to  say,  "  Will  the
good,  the  useful,  the  true,  the  beautiful."  There
fore  (considered  in  reality  and  not  in  scientific
theory,  where  it  appears  as  the  concept  of  itself)
it  is  a  volitional  act.  But  this  volitional  act  has
the  spirit  itself  for  object,  which  is  and  exists,  in
so  far  as  it  wills  and  affirms  itself;  it  has  for  object
a  form  or  a  universal,  whereas  laws  have  for  object
something  material  and  at  the  same  time  not
instantaneous,  something  more  or  less  fixed,
something  general:  a  class,  not  an  idea.  Universal
laws  (that  would  better  be  called  principles]  are
the  Spirit  or  producer ;  true  and  proper  laws


in  LAWS  485

are  the  special  product  of  the  spirit  ;  therefore
the  first  can  certainly  be  called  laws,  but  for
an  altogether  different  reason  to  the  second.

Owing to the absence of the element of  Laws  and

single  acts.

generality  or  of  class,  no  one  would  describe
a  single  individuated  act  as  law.  The  resolution
and  action  by  which  I  do  not  rise  from  my
seat  at  this  moment  and  go  eagerly  to  meet
the  friend  whose  coming  at  the  wrong  moment
interrupts  me  at  my  work,  is  a  volitional  act,
not  a  law ;  such  as  on  the  other  hand  would
be  the  volitional  act  that  I  might  form  within
myself,  consisting  in  the  intention  or  the  pro
gramme  of  receiving  my  friends  seated  and  in
a  lukewarm  way,  whenever  they  should  come
to  visit  me  in  the  hours  before  noon,  in  order
to  make  them  understand  by  this  act  of  mine
that  they  disturb  me  at  my  work,  and  that  they
should  abstain  from  their  inopportune  visits,
unless  they  wish  to  submit  to  the  penalty  of
meeting  with  anything  but  a  cordial  reception
from  their  friend.

From  the  general  but  not  universal  character  identity  of

imperative,

that  we  must recognize  to  the  content  of  laws,  prohibitive,

&  and  permissive

we  have  the  solution  of  certain  controversies  of
the  greatest  importance  which  have  been  and  are
much  discussed,  hitherto  without  a  satisfactory


486 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

or  duly  demonstrated  conclusion.  In  the  first
place,  we  must  mention  the  dispute  as  to  whether
or  no  there  exist  permissive  laws,  and  whether
the  formula  that  the  law  aut  jubet  aut  vetat  aut
permittit  is  to  be  accepted.  It  has  generally  been
admitted  that  the  law  aut  jubet  aut  vetat,  and  that
the  permission  is  nothing  but  the  removal  of  a
previous  inhibition,  that  is,  the  partial  or  total
abrogation  of  a  law.  But  in  reality,  the  law,  since
it  is  a  volitional  act,  jubet  only ;  to  command  is
to  will :  to  command  that  a  chemical  laboratory
be  opened  in  every  city  means  to  will  that  one
should  be  opened.  And  since  every  willing  is  at
the  same  time  a  not-willing,  as  every  affirmation
is  at  the  same  time  a  negation,  every  command  is
at  the  same  time  an  inhibition,  and  every  jubeo
is  a  veto  (whether  the  will  be  expressed  in  the
literary  form  of  positive  or  negative,  of  command
or  of  inhibition,  is  here  without  importance).
Permissive  As  to  permissive  laws,  these  are  inconceivable

character  of  .  « i  .,  .,,.  .  ,.,..

every  iawt  and  side  by  side  with  the  imperative  or  prohibitive,

impcrmissive

character  of not indeed because no  law  ever permits, but

every  principle.

because  by  the  very  fact  that  those  are  imperative
or  prohibitive,  they  are  at  the  same  time  per
missive  :  every  jubeo  or  veto  is  at  the  same  time  a
permitto.  Principles,  as  universal  volitions,  never
permit,  because  nothing  escapes  their  command  ;


LAWS  487

but  a  single  volitional  act,  affirming  itself,  does
not  exclude  for  that  reason  the  possibility  that
other  volitional  acts,  indeed  infinite  acts,  should
be  affirmed  ;  for  the  singular  never  exhausts  its
universal.  And  laws  are  volitions  of  class,  they
impose  groups  of  single  acts — groups  that  are
more  or  less  rich,  but  always  contingent :  hence  a
law  always  leaves  all  the  other  actions  and  classes
of  action  that  can  be  the  object  of  will  unwilled
(that  is,  neither  commanded  nor  prohibited),  and,
therefore,  permitted.  And  even  if  we  take  all  the
laws  formulated  up  to  a  given  moment,  all  together
they  do  not  exhaust  the  universal ;  and  if  new
laws  be  accumulated,  one  upon  the  other,  be
divided  and  split  up  "with  panting  breath,"  to
obtain  complete  exhaustion,  a  progressus  in
infinitum  will  certainly  be  attained,  but  never
exhaustion,  which  is  unattainable.  This  amounts
to  saying  that  outside  law  or  laws,  there  is  always
the  permitted,  the  lawful,  the  indifferent,  the
privilege,  the  right,  or  whatever  be  termed  the
concept  correlative  to  that  of  command,  veto,  or
duty,  a  duality  of  terms  that  expresses  the  finitiide
of  law  ;  hence,  when  a  determined  privilege,  a
determined  legal  right,  a  determined  right,  has
been  annulled  by  a  new  law,  when  something
previously  indifferent  has  been  differentiated,


488 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

privilege, the  permitted, the indifferent, right,
always  arise  from  the  bosom  of  the  new  law.
Mutability  of Another  contingent  character  of  the  content  of

laws.

laws  is  their  mutability.  Laws  are  changeable,
whereas  principles,  or  laws  of  the  universal  con
tent,  are  unchangeable,  and  ready  to  give  form  to
all  the  most  various  historical  material.  Since
actual  conditions  are  constantly  changing,  it  is
necessary  to  add  new  laws  to  the  old,  to  retouch
and  correct  these,  or  to  abolish  them  altogether.
This  is  to  be  seen  equally  in  the  programmes  of
individual  lives,  as  in  the  programmes  of  social
and  political  laws.
Empirical  con-  The  question  as  to  the  number  of  modes  of

cepts  as  to  the

modes  of changing  that  laws  possess  does  not  concern  us,

change.

because,  philosophically  speaking,  there  is  never
but  one  mode  :  the  free  will  that  produces  the
new  law  in  new  conditions  of  fact.  Involuntary
changing  can  only  be  a  formula  for  indicating
certain  changes,  always  voluntary,  that  occur  in  a
less  solemn  way  than  others  ;  but  from  these  can
never  be  absent  the  solemnity  of  the  human  will
that  celebrates  itself.  Thus,  in  like  manner,  the
question  as  to  whether  we  should  recognize
conservation  or  revolution  as  the  fundamental
concept  of  practical  life,  does  not  concern  us  ;
for  every  conservative  is  at  the  same  time  a


LAWS  489

revolutionary,  since  he  is  always  obliged  to  adapt
the  law  that  he  wishes  to  preserve  to  the  new
facts ;  and  every  revolutionary  is  also  a  con
servative,  since  he  is  obliged  to  start  from  certain
laws  that  he  preserves,  at  any  rate  provisionally,
that  he  may  change  others  and  substitute  for
them  new  laws,  which  he  in  his  turn  intends  to
preserve.  Revolution  for  revolution's  sake,  the
cult  of  the  Goddess  Revolution,  is  an  insane
effort,  which  is  so  none  the  less  because  it  has
sometimes  appeared  in  History  and  like  all
insane  efforts  it  ends  with  suicide.  Revolution
revolutionizes  itself  and  turns  into  reaction.
Thus  when  revolutionaries  and  conservatives  are
distinguished  and  opposed  to  one  another,  an
empirical  distinction  is  made  there  also,  the
meaning  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  historical
circumstances  among  which  it  has  arisen.  Count
Cavour  was  a  conservative  in  respect  to  certain
problems  and  revolutionary  in  respect  to  certain
others,  to  such  a  degree  that  he  seemed  to
the  Mazzinians  to  be  a  conservative  and  to
the  clericals  and  legitimists  a  revolutionary.
Robespierre,  if  he  were  a  revolutionary  for
the  Girondins  and  at  last  even  for  the  neo-
moderate  Danton,  yet  to  the  eyes  of  Hebert
and  of  Chaumette  seemed  to  be  a  conservative,


490 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

enemy  of  the  free  development  of  the  rights  of
man.
critique  of  the We  should  on  the  other  hand  be  very  careful

eternal  Code  or

turai  Right,  as  to  the  demand  so  often  made  and  also  so  far


na


as  possible  put  into  execution,  for  an  eternal  code,
a  limit-legislation  or  model,  a  universal,  rational,
or  natural  justice,  as  it  has  been  variously  termed.
Natural  justice,  universal  legislation,  eternal  code,
claim  to  fix  the  transitory  and  are  therefore  a
contradictory  concept:  contradictory  precisely  to
the  principle  of  the  mutability  of  laws,  which  is
the  necessary  consequence  of  their  contingent
and  historical  character.  Were  natural  Right
permitted  to  do  what  it  announces,  were  God  to
permit  that  the  affairs  of  Reality  should  be  carried
on  according  to  the  ill-assorted  ideas  of  writers
and  professors,  we  should  witness  with  the  forma
tion  and  application  of  the  eternal  Code,  the
cessation  ipso  facto  of  Development,  the  end  of
History,  the  death  of  Life  and  the  dissolution  of
Reality.
Natural  justice  This  world-ending  does  not  take  place,  because,

as  the  new  .  in.  i» •

justice.  though  it  be  possible  to  dwell  m  contradiction,  it

is  impossible  to  make  it  concrete  and  actual :  God,
that  is  to  say  Reality,  does  not  permit  this.  Thus
it  happens  'that  under  the  name  of  natural  justice,
two  sorts  of  products  have  existed  in  turn,  or


in  LAWS  491

sometimes  a  mixture  of  those  two  different  pro
ducts,  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  pro
gramme  announced.  On  the  one  hand,  projects
of  new  laws  that  seemed  better  than  the  old
or  good  by  comparison  with  these  judged  more  or
less  bad,  have  been  proposed  as  natural  or  rational
justice,  and  precisely  for  this  reason  the  old  laws
were  called  unnatural  and  irrational  and  the  new
rational  and  natural.  Just  as  passionate  and
erotic  temperaments,  uninstructed  by  the  experi
ence  of  their  past,  swear  with  the  utmost  serious
ness  that  their  new  love  will  be  constant,  eternal
and  their  last,  so  man,  when  he  creates  new  laws,
is  often  seized  with  the  illusion  that  his  laws  will
not  change  as  did  the  old  ones,  forgetting  that
the  old  ones  were  once  young  and  that  they
"  satisfied  divers "  in  their  heyday,  to  express
oneself  in  the  words  of  the  old  carnavalesque  song.
Those  natural  laws  are  historical,  those  eternal
laws  are  transitory,  like  all  the  others.  All  know
how  in  certain  times  and  places,  religious  toler
ance,  freedom  of  trade,  private  property,  constitu
tional  monarchy,  have  been  proclaimed  eternal ;
and  in  others,  the  extirpation  of  unbelievers,
commercial  protection,  communism,  the  republic,
and  anarchy.

Universal  concepts, which  were  nothing but


492 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

Natural  justice  the  Principles  of  the  philosophy  of  the  practical

as  philosophy

of  the  practical,  themselves,  have  on  the  other  hand  had  a
tendency  to  be  classed  as  natural  justice  and  to
surpass  the  transitory  and  contingent.  They
are  certainly  eternal  and  unchangeable,  but  no
longer  laws,  for  they  are  formal  and  not  material.
Thus  treatises  of  natural  justice  have  sometimes
become  simply  treatises  (sometimes  very  valuable)
of  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  and  especially
of  Ethic. — When  (as  to  tell  the  truth  has  generally
been  the  case)  a  practical  description  has  accom
panied  a  general  treatment  of  Ethic,  leading  to
a  series  of  proposals  for  social,  judicial  or  political
reform,  there  has  then  occurred  a  mingling  of  two
different  productions,  which  we  have  mentioned,
philosophy  and  casuistic.  But  a  natural  justice
has  always  remained  unachieved,  because  un
achievable  and  contradictory.

critique  of  In our  times,  owing  to the increase  of  the

natural  justice.

historical  sense,  the  constructions  of  natural
justice  and  of  the  eternal  Code  have  almost
altogether  lost  the  attraction  they  once  exercized.
But  absurd  problems  having  their  origin  in
those  contradictory  concepts  still  persist  and
absurd  methods  of  treating  problems  of  similar
origin  legitimate  when  taken  in  their  true  terms.
An  example  of  the  first  of  these  two  kinds  of


in  LAWS  493

diseased  residues  is  the  treating  of  the  natural
rights  of  man  and  the  attempt  to  establish  what
rights  belong  to  man  by  nature  and  what  by
historical  contingencies.  Among  the  first  are
enumerated  the  right  to  life,  to  liberty,  to  work,
to  the  family  and  so  on  ;  and  among  the  second,
those  that  have  their  origin  in  the  Italian  State  or
in  special  contracts  that  have  been  concluded.
But  no  right  of  any  sort  belongs  to  man  outside
society  (which  in  this  case  means  outside  history),
that  is  to  say,  considered  as  spirit  in  universal,
save  that  of  existing  as  spirit,  which  indeed  is  not
a  right,  but  necessary  reality.  Catalogues  of
natural  rights  are  either  tautologies,  which  repeat
that  man  as  spirit  has  the  right  (and  therefore  at
the  same  time  the  duty)  of  developing  himself  as
spirit  (and  he  does  develop  in  this  manner,  if  he
be  man  and  be  alive) ;  or  they  are  arbitrary
rationalizations  of  historical  contingencies,  such  as
the  right  to  work,  which  is  nothing  but  the  formula
of  the  workpeople  of  the  ateliers  nationaux  in
forty-eight,  or  of  the  insurgents  of  Lyons  ;  or  the
right  to  private  property,  which  was  the  formula
of  the  burghers  against  the  bonds  of  feudalism
and  is  again  their  formula  against  the  modern
proletariat  movement.

We  must  recognize  examples  of  the  second


494 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.
kind  of  error  in  the  discussions  constantly  held

persisting  in  .......  ,

judgments  and  as to social or political institutions, when

juridical

problems.  instead  of  combating  them  as  irrational,  or  of
defending  them  as  rational  in  historical  circum
stances,  they  are  defended  and  combated  because
they  differ  from  or  conform  to  the  true  idea  of
right  or  to  the  true  idea  of  those  particular
institutions,  recourse  being  thus  had  to  abstract
reasons,  as  has  very  well  been  said.  A  re
former  will  maintain  the  recognition  of  the  right
of  women  to  the  administrative  or  political  vote,
because  women  also  form  part  of  the  State  and
have  general  and  particular  interests,  which  they
wish  to  guarantee  directly,  without  the  inter
position  of  men,  whose  interests  are  sometimes
at  variance  with  theirs :  an  argument  that
a  conservative  will  deny  altogether,  making
appeal  to  the  function  of  woman,  enclosed  by
eternal  law  in  the  circle  of  the  family.  A  re
former  will  propose  divorce  as  the  natural  com
plement  to  matrimony,  because,  where  spiritual
agreement  ends,  there  too  should  end  every
other  tie,  whereas  a  conservative  will  oppose  the
argument  as  contradictory  to  the  very  essence  of
matrimony,  comparing  such  a  proposal  with  con
cubinage,  or  with  what  is  called  free  love.  And
so  on. — When  such  arguments  are  heard,  it  is


in  LAWS  495

remarked  that  natural  rights  are  not  dead.
But  the  question  as  to  the  political  vote  for
women  may  be  serious  or  ridiculous,  according
to  place  and  time  ;  as  divorce  is  loftily  moral  or
profoundly  immoral,  according  to  time  and  place,
and  it  is  only  mental  narrowness  or  ignorance
that  can  place  outside  humanity,  or  believe  to  be
living  or  persisting  in  immorality,  peoples  that
practise  divorce  or  indissoluble  matrimony,  or
those  of  to-day,  who  refuse  the  vote  to  women  or
those  of  the  future  who  will  recognize  their  right
to  it,  if  they  do  recognize  it.  But  even  polygamy
or  free  love  is  not  immoral,  irrational  and  un
natural,  once  it  has  been  an  institution  con
sidered  legitimate  in  certain  times  and  places ;
nor  even,  we  insist  upon  saying  it  (however
repugnant  to  our  hearts  and  to  our  stomachs
of  civilized  Europeans),  anthropophagy,  for  even
among  the  anthropophagi  were  men  (we  hope  it
will  be  admitted),  who  felt  themselves  to  be  most
virtuous  in  their  clearest  consciousness  of  self,
and  who  nevertheless  ate  their  like  with  the  same
tranquillity  that  we  eat  a  roast  chicken,  without
hatred  of  the  chicken,  but  being  quite  well  aware,
for  the  moment  at  any  rate,  that  we  are  not  able
to  do  otherwise.  The  unconscious  reasoners
on  the  basis  of  natural  law  must  have  forgotten


496 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

that  page  of  Cornelius  Nepos,  which,  however,
they  must  certainly  have  translated  in  their
first  years  at  the  gymnasium  :  Expertes  litera-
rum  Graecarum  nihil  rectum  nisi  quod  ipsorum
moribus  conveniat  putabunt.  Hi,  si  didicerint  non
eadem  omnibus  esse  honesta  atque  turpia,  SED  OMNI  A
MAJOR 'UM  INSTITUTIS  jUDiCARi,  non  admirabuntur
nos  in  Graiorum  virtutibus  exponendis  mores  eorum
secutos.  Neque  enim  Cimoni  fuit  turpe  Athenien-
si^lm  summo  viro,  sororem  germanam  habere  in
matrimonium :  quippe  quum  ejus  cives  eodem
uterentur  instituto ;  at  id  quidem  nostris  moribus
nefas  habetur.  Laudi  in  Graecia  ducitur  adolescen-
tulis  quam  plurimos  habere  amatores.  Nulla
Lacedaemoni  tarn  est  nobilis  vidua  quae  non  ad
scenam  eat  mercede  conducta.  .  .  .  And  he  con
tinues  to  give  further  examples.1  So  ancient  are
the  unreasonable  tendency  to  be  scandalized  and
the  reasonable  defence  of  the  variety  of  customs
made  by  good  sense.

1 Vitae  excell.  imftr.,  pref.


Ill

UNREALITY  OF  THE  LAW  AND  REALITY  OF  ITS
EXECUTION.  FUNCTION  OF  LAW  IN  THE  PRAC
TICAL  SPIRIT

SINCE  law  is  the  volition  of  a  class  of  actions,  it  is  Law  as

,  ...  abstract  and

the  volition  of  an  abstract.  But  as  we  already  unreal  volition.
know,  to  will  an  abstract  is  tantamount  to  willing
abstractly.  And  to  will  abstractly  is  not  truly
to  will,  for  we  will  only  in  concrete,  that  is,  in
a  determined  situation  and  with  a  volitional
synthesis  corresponding  to  that  situation,  such
that  it  is  immediately  translated  into  action,  or
better,  is  at  the  same  time  effective  action.  Con
sequently  it  seems  that  we  should  declare  the
volition  that  is  law  to  be  a  pretended  volition  :
contradictory,  because  lacking  a  single,  unique
and  determined  situation ;  ineffectual,  because
springing  from  the  insecure  ground  of  an  abstract
concept ;  a  volition,  in  fact,  that  is  not  willed  ;  a
volitional  act,  not  real,  but  unreal.

Such  indeed  it  is. What  is  really  wanted  is

497  2 K


498 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

ineffectually not  the  law,  but  the  single  act,  done  under  the

of  laws  and

effectuality  of lawj  as  it  is  called,  that  is  to  say,  the  execution  of

practical  prin


ciples.  j-he jaw> The single volition is the only  one

that  is  carried  out  :  the  execution  of  the  law  is
the  only  thing  really  and  truly  willed  and
done.  When  the  law  has  been  formulated,  life
continues  ceaselessly  to  propound  its  problems,
and  these  either  do  not  enter  into  the  provisions
of  the  law  and  are  solved  simply  and  solely  with
universal  practical  principles  (economic  and  ethic),
or  they  do  enter  into  them  and  then  it  is
necessary  to  apply  the  law,  unless  it  be  held  to  be
more  convenient  to  change  it,  or  (this  would  be  a
pathological  case)  action  be  not  taken  against  it,
although  there  be  consciousness  that  this  is  ill
done.

But  even  when  we  are  in  the  situations  fore
seen  by  the  law  and  act  in  accordance  with  it,
or,  as  is  said,  apply  or  carry  out  the  law,  we  must
not  allow  ourselves  to  be  misled  by  all  these
metaphors  ;  for  we  must  consider  that  the  single
situations  in  which  we  will  and  act  can  never  be
foreseen  by  the  law,  nor  is  it  possible  to  act  in
accordance  with  it,  to  follow  it  out  and  to  apply
it.  Situations  are  not  foreseen,  because  nothing
is  foreseen,  and  the  real  fact  is  always  a  surprise,
something  that  happens  once  only  and  we  can


in  LAWS  499

only  know  it  as  it  is  after  it  has  happened.  For
the  new  fact  a  new  measure  is  necessary  ;  for  the
new  body  a  new  suit  of  clothes.  The  measure
of  the  law,  on  the  other  hand,  since  it  is  abstract,
hesitates  between  the  universal  and  the  individual
and  is  without  the  strength  of  either.  To  carry
out  the  law  ?  But  it  is  only  the  pedant  of  life
who  proposes  to  do  such  a  thing,  as  it  is  only  the
pedant  of  art  who  attempts  to  apply  the  rules
of  art.  The  true  artist  follows  the  impulse  of
his  aesthetic  conscience,  the  practical  man  the
initiative  of  his  practical  genius.  What  is  called
the  single  act,  observance  and  execution  of  the
law,  obeys,  not  the  law,  but  the  ethical  or  practical
principle,  and  obeys  it  individually.  The  man
who  has  his  head  full  of  laws  that  he  has  made
for  himself  or  has  accepted  from  others,  makes  a
deep  reverence  to  the  Ladies'  Law  when  the
time  comes  for  action,  and  proceeds  on  his  own
initiative.

It is  the law  that  at  the age  of  twenty  we

...  , catojy

must present ourselves in our district and do  clarifies

military  service  for  a  certain  time.  Let  us  for
the  moment  set  aside  the  case  in  which  those
called  upon  to  serve  rebel  and,  having  seized  the
power  of  the  government,  abolish  the  law  of
conscription,  and  re-establish  that  of  voluntary


500 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

enlistment.  And  let  us  likewise  set  aside  the
other  case,  in  which  the  conscripts  violate  the  law
by  deserting  and  going  abroad,  or  hide  in  a  cave,
like  a  hero  of  Padre  Bresciani,  or  (like  a  good
Tolstoi'an  who  applies  the  principle  of  non-resist
ance  to  evil)  allow  themselves  to  be  put  in  prison
rather  than  touch  arms.  Let  us  select  the  case
of  the  peaceful  burgess  who  becomes  a  warrior
that  he  may  not  go  to  prison  ;  or  of  the  good
citizen  who  recognizes  his  duty  of  serving  his
country  and  for  that  reason  obeys  the  law.  In
presenting  himself  in  his  district  and  in  the
regiment,  he  has  obeyed,  not  the  voice  of  the
law  (which  is  a  voice),  but  his  moral  conscience,
or  simply  his  economic  conscience.  This  has
already  been  demonstrated  and  we  need  not
insist  upon  it.  But  how  can  he  ever  obey  the
law,  which  directs  him  to  do  military  service  of
precisely  this  or  that  nature?  Each  individual
has  his  own  temperament,  his  own  talent,  his  own
particular  physical  strength,  and  each  one  will
lend  his  services  entirely  in  his  own  way,  different
from  that  of  another.  And  (be  it  noted)  he  will
not  do  so  only  more  or  less  well  or  observing
the  law  more  or  less,  but  really  in  a  different
way,  even  when  all  observe  the  law  with  equal
diligence  and  scrupulosity.  It  may  seem  as  if  all


LAWS  501

carry  out  a  military  exercise  at  the  same  moment,
but  the  fact  is  that  each  man  moves  in  a  different
way  to  the  others  ;  or  that  in  a  parade  march  all
walk  in  the  same  way,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  all
(even  in  the  Prussian  army)  walk  in  a  different
way.  If  we  look  at  it  as  a  whole  and  from  a
distance,  there  seems  to  be  uniformity  ;  if  we
look  at  it  from  near  at  hand  we  discover  the
difference.  If  we  could  make  the  experiment  of
comparing  a  regiment  of  fifty  years  before  with
one  of  fifty  years  after,  leaving  military  regula
tions,  arms,  accoutrements,  and  everything  else
unaltered  in  the  interval,  the  lack  of  uniformity  of
the  apparent  uniformity  would  leap  to  the  eyes,  a
lack  of  uniformity  that  would  have  been  rendered
possible  by  the  changes  that  had  taken  place  in
the  surrounding  life,  in  the  culture,  the  moral
education,  the  political  conscience,  the  mode  of
nourishment,  the  dwellings,  and  so  on.  But  the
experiment  is  possible,  if  not  in  time,  then  in
space,  that  is  to  say,  by  observing  the  applica
tion  of  the  same  military  regulations  upon  two
different  populations.  Thus  one  seems  to  have
in  hand  one  book  written  in  two  different
languages  ;  which  is  literally  no  longer  the  same
book,  but  two  different  books.  Giusti  trans
lated  into  Milanese  and  Porta  translated  into


502 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Florentine  are  no  longer  Porta  or  Giusti,  but  two
new  poets.
Doctrines  This  indubitable  truth,  as  to  the  impossibility

against  the

utility  of  laws,  of  applying the law  and  of  incorporating it in

Their unmain-  rr  / &  r

taxability.  facts,  and  as  to  the  necessity  of  acting  in  each
case,  according  to  historical  exigencies,  is  the
true  reason  for  the  turning  of  so  many  people's
heads  at  different  times  and  in  different  places,
causing  them  to  proclaim  nothing  less  than  the
inutility  of  laws  and  to  ask  for  their  abolition.
If  it  be  necessary  to  come  eventually  to  the  in
dividual  action,  and  if  deliberation  and  execution
must  be  remitted  to  the  action  of  the  individual,
what  is  the  object  of  binding  ourselves  with  bonds,
which  it  is  afterwards  necessary  to  tear  off  and
to  break,  that  we  may  act  ?  What  is  the  object
of  laboriously  constructing  instruments,  which  we
are  obliged  to  throw  away  when  we  come  to
practical  action,  that  we  may  use  our  naked  hands  ?
Owing  to  such  ingenuous  reasonings  as  these,
people  have  come  to  long  for  a  society  without
laws,  in  which  each  will  do  his  own  share  of  work,
on  account  of  its  attractiveness  alone,  as  we  find
among  the  Harmonicists  of  Fourier  and  in  many
other  anarchical  Utopias.  Or  they  have  sighed
for  the  absolute  paternal  government  of  the  good
old  days,  for  the  geniality  of  a  good -hearted


in  LAWS  503

tyrant,  untrammelled  with  laws,  who  will  be
able  to  follow  the  best  dictates  of  his  heart.
Or,  to  descend  to  less  strange  and  more  actual
examples,  it  has  been  proposed  that  the  judge
should  on  each  occasion  create  the  law,  according
to  the  case  before  him ;  that  is  to  say,  that
he  should  cease  to  be  a  judge  (not  having  a
law  to  apply,  and  properly  speaking  not  being
able  to  give  judgment)  and  be  a  free  decider  of
litigation  and  corrector  of  customs  ;  or  at  least
that  he  should  free  himself  from  legal  fictions  and
judge  according  to  the  individual  reality  of  each
individual  case.

These  theories  are  without  doubt  unsustain-

ability  of  such

able,  not  excluding  the  last,  which  has  the  confutations.
appearance  of  being  moderate  ;  because  the  so-
called  judicial  fiction  is  intrinsic  to  the  law  and
exists  even  when  we  think  that  it  is  not  present,
for  it  is  always  a  fiction  to  place  a  concrete  case
in  an  abstract  category.  But  defenders  of  the
utility  of  law  have  met  these  erroneous  doctrines
with  the  bad  argument  that  law  does  not  admit
of  individual  solutions,  and  demands  strict
obedience,  because  the  moment  of  individuality,
of  inobservance,  and  of  violation  that  may  be
called  legitimate,  does  actually  exist  in  the  law  and
is  intrinsic  to  its  very  nature.  Both  adversaries


Empirical
meanings  of
those  contro
versies.


Necessity  of
laws.


5o4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

and  defenders  of  law  are  therefore  philosophically
wrong,  those  who  assert  its  inutility  and  those
who  claim  for  it  an  impossible  utility.

And  we  say  "  philosophically,"  for  it  is  well
known  that  in  this  case,  as  in  so  many  other
disputes  of  philosophic  appearance,  are  often  con
cealed  disputes  of  a  practical  and  political  nature,
in  which  right  and  wrong  are  divided  and
connected  in  an  altogether  different  manner.
The  adversaries  of  laws  are  often  nothing  but
adversaries  of  too  many  laws,  or  legitimately
demand  a  less  pedantic  and  mechanical  office  for
the  judge  than  that  which  he  often  has  at  present  ;
whereas  the  maintainers  of  laws  are  opposed  to
revolutionaries,  who  would  wish  to  abrogate  the
definite  laws,  on  which  civil  progress  rests,  or  to
discredit  all  laws,  and  cause  society  to  enter  upon
a  terrible  crisis  that  would  not  promise  good
results.  But  all  this  is  extraneous  to  the  philo
sophic  problem.

If  the  defenders  of  the  utility  of  laws  had
wished  to  make  use  of  an  argument  of  good
sense  against  their  adversaries,  of  the  sort  that
imposes,  even  when  it  does  not  rigorously  demon
strate  their  contention,  they  might  have  simply
noted  the  demand  for  laws,  for  ordinances,  for
justice,  for  the  State,  which  appears  at  all  points


in  LAWS  505

of  human  history. —  Better  a  bad  government
than  no  government  at  all ;  better  laws  that  are
mediocre,  but  stable,  than  the  frantic  pursuit  for
better  and  better  laws,  with  the  instability  that  is
the  inevitable  consequence !  And  on  the  other
hand,  may  God  save  us  from  genial  despots,  from
inspired  judges,  from  tribunals  that  dive  into
treasures  of  equity ! — These  are  the  utterances
that  we  hear  in  history.  Battles  have  been
fought  for  legality,  and  rivers  of  blood  have  been
shed  for  it  ;  for  legality  are  faced  the  troubles
of  litigation,  and  energetic  action  is  displayed,
which  only  superficial  intellects  can  consider  a
waste  of  time  and  trouble ;  for  no  trouble  is
superfluous  when  we  are  protecting  our  own
rights,  and  none  is  more  sacred,  since  it  also
guards  the  offended  majesty  of  the  law,  the
rights  of  all.  Those  who  declaim  against  laws
can  well  do  so  with  a  light  heart,  for  the  law
surrounds,  protects,  and  preserves  their  life  for
them.  No  sooner  had  all  laws  disappeared  than
they  would  lose  the  wish  to  declaim  :

In  such  wise  as  when  sometimes  in  the  wood
The  shepherd  spies  the  wolf,  and  straight  has  lost
Spirit  and  sense,  and  words  die  on  his  tongue ;

and  he  would  be  obliged  to  have  speedy  recourse
to  the  remedy  and  make  laws  of  some  sort  again,


506 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

whatever  they  be,  that  he  may  again  resume  his
calm,  his  work  and  his  gossip.
Laws  as  pre- Passing from consideration ad  oculos  to  the

parationfor  .....  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

action.  philosophical,  it  is  to  be  said,  on  the  other  hand,

that  the  utility  of  law  does  not  at  all  reside  in  its
effectuality,  which  is  something  impossible,  since
the  single  act  of  the  individual  is  alone  effectual  ;
but  in  this,  that  in  order  to  will  and  to  carry  out
the  single  act,  it  is  usually  necessary  to  address
oneself  to  the  general,  of  which  that  individual  is
a  single  case  ;  that  is,  to  address  oneself  to  the
group,  of  which  the  individual  is  a  component
part,  just  as  in  aiming  we  generally  begin  by
aiming  at  the  region  where  is  the  point  upon  which
the  aim  will  be  fixed.  Law  is  not  a  real  and
effectual  volition  ;  it  is  without  doubt  an  imperfect
and  contradictory  volition,  but  for  that  very  reason
a  preparation  for  the  synthetic  and  perfect  voli
tion.  Law,  in  short,  since  it  is  the  volition  of  an
abstract,  is  not  a  real  volition,  but  an  aid  to  real
volition ;  as  (to  employ  the  usual  comparison)
wooden  bridges  and  scaffoldings  are  aids  to  the
construction  of  a  house  and  have  not  been  useless,
because  they  must  be  pulled  down  when  the
house  has  been  built.

Here  the  analogy  between  the  constitution  of
the  practical  and  of  the  theoretical  spirit  is  again


in


LAWS  507


shown  to  be  most  exact. We  meet  with  theoret-  Analogy
ical  forms  in  the  latter  also,  which  are  not  really  practical  and

the  theoretical

so  and  are  contradictory  in  themselves,  positing  spirit:  prac-

3 tical  laws  and

representations that function  as  universals  and  emPirical

concepts.

universals  that  are  representative :  arbitrary
forms,  in  which  the  will  undertakes  to  command
what  it  is  not  possible  to  command,  that  is  to
say,  representations  and  concepts,  things  which
precede  and  do  not  follow  the  volitional  and
practical  form.  But  we  know  that  those  fictitious
concepts,  those  formulae,  those  laws  that  are  not
laws,  those  admitted  falsities,  which,  therefore,
are  not  falsities,  serve  as  a  help  to  memory,  and
assist  thought  in  finding  its  way  amid  the
multiform  spectacle  of  the  world,  which  it
must  penetrate  for  itself.  We  do  not  think
them,  but  they  help  us  to  think ;  we  do  not
imagine  them,  but  they  help  us  to  imagine.  Thus
the  philosopher  generally  fixes  his  mind  upon
the  pseudo-concepts,  that  he  may  afterwards  rise
to  the  universals ;  and  the  artist  also  turns
his  attention  to  them  that  he  may  find  beneath
them  the  individual,  the  lively  and  ingenuous
intuition  that  he  seeks.  The  same  pseudo-con
cepts,  made  the  object  of  volition  and  changed
from  formulae  to  laws,  fulfil  an  analogous  office  in
the  practical  spirit,  making  it  possible  for  the


508 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

will  to  will  in  a  certain  direction,  where  it  after
wards  meets  the  useful  action,  which  is always
individuated.
The  promotion Another  aspect  of  the  analogy  is  not  less  im-

of  order  in

reality  and _ portant. The pseudo  -  concepts would not be

•representation.

possible,  if  reality  did  not  offer  the  like  side  by
side  with  the  unlike  ;  which  is  not  the  universal
and  necessary,  but  the  general,  a  contingent
(so  to  speak)  less  contingent  than  others,
a  relatively  constant  variable.  Pseudo-concepts
are  arbitrary,  not  because  they  posit  the  like
where  is  the  unlike,  but  because  they  make  that
variable  rigid,  which  is  only  relatively  constant,
making  of  it  something  absolutely  constant  and
changing  the  like  into  the  identical.  Now  the
practical  spirit,  which  creates  reality,  has  need  to
create  not  only  the  unlike,  but  also  the  like  ;  not
only  that  which  lasts  an  instant,  but  also  that
which  endures  almost  unchanged  for  a  year,  a
century,  a  millennium,  or  a  millennium  of  millen
niums  ;  not  only  the  individual,  but  also  the
species,  not  only  the  great  man,  but  also  the
people,  not  only  the  actions  that  do  not  occur
again,  but  also  those  that  return  periodically,
similar,  though  not  identical.  Laws  fulfil  this
function,  for  they  constitute  what  is  called
the  social,  or  cosmic  order.  This  order,  how-


LAWS


509


ever,  is  always  relative  and  includes  instability
in  itself;  it  is  a  rectilinear  figure,  which,  on
being  closely  examined,  reveals  itself  as  also
curvilinear.  For  this  reason  it  is  necessary  to
make  laws,  and  it  is  necessary  to  violate,  though
obeying  them  in  their  execution.

This function of  law  as an unreal volition,  Origin  of  the

.,.  , ,  .  ,  concept  of  plan

aiding  nevertheless  and  preparing  the  real,  throws  or  design.
light  upon  a  concept  that  we  have  had  to  reject
when  exposing  the  nature  and  method  of  function
ing  of  the  volitional  act ;  that  is  to  say,  on  the
concept  of  plan  or  design  or  model,  as  proper  to  the
practical  activity,  which  is  said  to  act  by  carrying
out  a  pre-established  design.  We  have  already
demonstrated  that  design  and  the  execution  of
the  design  are  in  reality  all  one,  and  that  man
acts  by  changing  his  design  at  every  instant,
because  reality,  which  is  the  basis  of  his  action,
changes.  And  as  in  the  Philosophy  of  the
practical  in  general,  so  in  particular  in  Ethic,  the
concept  of  pre-established  design  has  no  place  ;
because,  if  it  be  true  than  in  ethicity  the  universal
is  distinguished  from  the  merely  individual  action,
it  is  also  true  that  the  universal  does  not  exist
in  concrete,  save  incorporated  and  individualized
as  this  or  that  good  action.  The  universal  of
ethicity  is  not  a  design  and  cannot  be  willed  for


510 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL  PT.  m

itself  outside  all  individuation,  in  the  same  way
as  to  fall  in  love  is  to  fall  in  love  with  an  indi
vidual  and  not  with  love.  But  that  concept  of
design,  proposed  for  action  and  carried  out  by  its
means,  though  erroneously  adopted  in  Economy
and  in  Ethic,  must  nevertheless  have  its  legiti
mate  meaning  in  some  special  order  of  facts ;
otherwise  it  would  not  be  possible  to  make  even
erroneous  use  of  it.  This  meaning  is  to  be
found,  as  has  been  seen,  in  the  fact  of  laws.


IV


CONFUSION  BETWEEN  LAWS  AND  PRACTICAL  PRIN
CIPLES.  CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  LEGALISM  AND
OF  JESUITIC  MORALITY

NOTHING  perhaps  better  makes clear the true

c 1  ,  r ,  tion  ofprin-

nature  oi  laws  than  the  examination  of  the  very  apies  into

practical  laws .

grave  errors  introduced  by  their  means  into  ugaiism.
the  Philosophy  of  the  practical :  for,  owing  to
the  failure  to  perceive  the  character  of  mere  aid
proper  to  their  function,  laws  have  been  confused
with  practical  principles,  these  being  looked  upon
as  laws  and  those  as  principles.

We always live surrounded by  innumerable  Genesis  of  the

concept  of  the

laws,  although  these  are  always  finite  in  number,  practically

J  licit  and

The  Decalogue  also  admonishes  :  "  Take  not  the  ^different.
name  of  God  in  vain  "  ;  "  Honour  thy  father  and
thy  mother  "  ;  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal  "  ;  "  Thou
shalt  commit  no  murder";  "Thou  shalt  not
covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  nor  his  wife,  nor
his  man-servant,  nor  his  maid-servant,  nor  his
ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  anything  that  is  his "  ;  etc.

5"


512 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

The  decalogue  or  hectalogue  of  prudence  ad
monishes  us :  "  Raise  not  up  against  thee  too
many  enemies";  "  Mind  your  own  business";
"  Conciliate  him  who  is  more  powerful  than
thou " ;  "  Hurt  him  who  hurts  thee " ;  etc.
Those  laws  that  are  so  many  and  so  minute
easily  lead  to  the  false  belief  that  they  suffice
together  to  regulate  our  economic  action  and
our  moral  life,  and  that  practical  principles  can
be  substituted  for  and  be  fully  represented  by  a
Decalogue  or  code,  which  should  be  the  true  and
proper  regulator  of  human  life.

But  the  Decalogue,  the  code,  the  Corpus  juris,
ample  and  minute  though  they  be,  are  not,  as
we  know,  capable  of  exhausting  the  infinity  of
actions  conditioned  by  the  infinite  variety  of
facts.  Every  law  brings  with  it,  as  its  necessary
correlative,  as  the  shadow  of  its  light,  actions
that  are  indifferent  and  indifferentiable,  the  legally
indifferent,  the  licit,  the  permissible,  the  right,
the  faculty  of  doing  or  of  not  doing.  As  an
inevitable  consequence  of  this,  practical  principles
having  been  conceived  as  a  series  or  complex  of
laws,  the  concept  of  the  practically  indifferent
must  also  be  posited  and  the  licit  changed  from
legal  to  practical.

And  this  is  what  happens. At  every  moment


LAWS  513

of  life  we  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  actual  consequence  of

, . . .  .  this:  the

Situations, tO Which the laWS that We pOSSeSS  arbitrary.

either  do  not  apply  at  all,  or  apply  only  in  the
approximative  way  that  we  have  seen  ;  at  every
moment  of  life,  we  find  ourselves  without  the
guidance  of  the  law,  face  to  face  with  the
indifferent  and  the  indifferentiated.  The  practical
man  knows  well  that  the  laws  were  a  mere  help,
merely  a  preparatory  stage  to  action,  and  that
he  must  in  each  case  face  the  actual  situation  as
it  arises,  intuite  and  perceive  it  in  its  originality,
and  perform  his  own  action  with  originality.
But  he  who  has  accepted  the  legalitarian  concep
tion  of  the  practical  activity  and  has  abandoned
practical  principles  as  useless  or  looked  upon
them  as  non-existent,  now  that  he  finds  him
self  abandoned  also  by  the  laws,  in  which  he
had  put  too  much  trust,  has  no  other  guide  on
which  to  fall  back  save  his  own  will.

And  will  is  not  a  guide  but  the  lack  of  a
guide ;  it  is  not  action  but  inaction,  that  is  to  say,
contradictory  action  ;  not  activity,  but  passivity,
not  prudence  and  good,  but  imprudence  and  evil.

Thus  the  legalitarian  conception  of  practical
principles  produces  neither  more  nor  less  than
the  death  of  the  practical,  installing  passivity  in

the  place  of  activity,  evil  in  the  place  of  good.

2  L


5i4 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

The  legalitarian  theory,  which  proposes  to  fix  and
to  determine  with  precision  the  true  concept  of
freedom,  arrives  at  just  the  opposite  result :  the
will.
Ethical  legal- It is  opportune  to remark here that moral

ism  as  simply  ,  1  -11

a  particular legalism,  which  has  hitherto  alone  occupied  the

case  of  practical

.  attention  of  critics,  is  nothing  but  a  particular
case  of  general  practical  legalism,  and  if  the
particular  and  not  the  general  case  has  been
observed,  this  has  depended  upon  the  failure  to
recognize  the  economic  form  in  its  autonomy,
so  common  with  philosophers.  But  from  the
examples  that  we  have  given,  it  has  clearly
resulted  that  legalism  is  an  error  which  em
braces  alike  Economy  and  Ethic,  introducing  into
both  the  philosophic  absurdity  of  the  practically
indifferent.  Even  a  man  without  moral  con
science,  or  one  deprived  of  it  for  a  moment,
if  he  conceive  the  guidance  of  his  utilitarian
action  in  the  form  of  laws,  loses  the  compass
of  his  utilitarianism  and  falls  into  the  arbitrary,
which  is  the  ruin  of  his  own  individuality.
If  (to  resume  the  usual  example)  I  impose
upon  myself  the  not  drinking  of  wine  as  a
hygienic  law,  and  it  happen  to  me  to  find
myself  at  a  certain  moment  in  such  physiological
conditions  that  a  glass  of  wine  can  accelerate


LAWS  515

the  beating  of  the  heart  and  restore  to  me
the  strength  of  which  I  am  in  need ;  and  if,
through  faith  in  the  established  law,  I  forget  that
the  law  is  conditional  and  not  absolute  and  that
the  only  absolute  law  is  to  do  at  a  given  moment
what  is  useful  at  that  moment ;  it  is  evident
that  by  so  reasoning  and  acting,  I  am  substitut
ing  superstition  and  therefore  the  arbitrary  for
prudence  and  that  I  am  causing  injury  to  myself.

It  is  necessary  to  maintain  against  the  morally  critique  of

the  practically

and  practically  indifferent,  that  it  is  a  concept  indifferent.
altogether  external  to  Ethic  and  Economic  and
devastates  it  terribly  whenever  it  penetrates  into
it,  or  (what  is  worse)  subtly  corrupts  it.  In
Economic  as  in  Ethic,  in  the  true  and  proper
practical  field,  there  is  no  faculty  that  is  not  also
obligation  ;  there  is  no  right  that  is  not  at  the
same  time  a  duty ;  there  is  nothing  licit  that  is
not  forbidden ;  nor  permitted  that  is  not  turned
into  a  command.  nravTa  e^eanv,  a\V  ov  Travra
(rv/jL^epei,  said  St.  Paul,1  in  obscure  but  suggestive
language  that  has  been  much  discussed — all  is
allowed  to  us  but  we  do  not  allow  anything — we
should  say  in  explanation ;  everything  can  and
should  be  spiritually  elaborated  by  the  will  and
receive  the  form  of  freedom.  But  in  order  to

1 I  Cor.  x.  23.


error.


5i6 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

destroy  that paradoxical  concept  at the roots,

it is  necessary  to reach the  point  underground

where  the  concept  of  practical  legalism  is  to  be

found,  and  to  show,  as  we  have  done,  its  origin,

in  the  confusion  between  principles  and  laws.

contests  be-  In  vain  have  the  rigorists,  becoming  aware  of

andiatitudi- the ruin that menaced the theory of Ethic,

narians  and  .  . .

their  common  struggled  against  the  theoreticians  of  the  morally
indifferent,  or  latitudinarians.  So  long  as  neither
party  left  the  legalitarian  field,  one  side  was
right  against  the  other  and  both  were  equally
wrong,  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  Jansenists  and
Molinists.  The  rigorists  clung  desperately  to
the  law,  refusing  to  admit  that  it  could  be
doubtful  and  give  rise  to  the  morally  indifferent ;
the  law  was  certain.  But  the  law  is  never
really  either  doubtful  or  certain  :  revolving  upon
,  empirical  concepts,  it  never  limits  anything  with
precision  and  therefore  is  not  certain ;  having
for  its  object,  not  concrete  action,  but  only
preparation  for  it,  does  not  propose  to  limit
the  illimitable  and  so  is  neither  uncertain  nor
doubtful :  it  stands  on  this  side  or  the  other  of
such  categories.  Thus  the  rigorists  also  found
themselves  face  to  face  with  the  morally  in
different,  and  had  no  way  of  vanquishing  it.
They  could  advise  the  choice  of  the  most  painful


LAWS  517

and  repugnant  action,  self-denial,  self-tormenting;
but  this  too  was  a  kind  of  wilfulness  and  evil.
The  latitudinarians,  on  the  other  hand,  could
enlarge  the  field  of  the  morally  indifferent  at
their  pleasure,  placing  in  evidence  the  dubiety
of  law  and  its  consequent  impotence  as  a  practical
principle  ;  but  since  they  did  not  recognize  any
practical  principle  outside  the  form  of  law,  they
were  finally  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  it,
that  they  might  have  some  point  of  orientation
in  the  guidance  of  their  lives.  And  since
they  could  not  find  it  in  the  law  itself,  recog
nized  as  doubtful,  they  were  obliged  to  place
it  in  the  authority  of  its  interpreters ;  and
when  these  authorities  were  at  variance,  in  the
adding  up  of  authorities  (just  as  is  done  for  the
Roman  jurists  in  the  law  of  citation  made  by
Theodosius  II.);  and  since,  finally,  two  or  three
or  four  or  a  hundred  authorities,  when  they  are
uncertain,  are  not  of  greater  value  than  one  who
is  equally  uncertain,  any  sort  of  authority  finally
had  to  suffice  them  as  justification  for  an  action.
Probabilitism,  far  from  being  merely  an  illegitimate
degeneration  of  legalism,  is  its  logical  conse
quence.  Reduced  as  they  were  to  authority,
why  should  one  be  of  more  account  than  another,
when  all  are  estimable  people  worthy  of  credence  ?


5i8 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

Why  should  the  precedence  be  given  to  Papinian
over  Paul  or  over  Ulpian?  If  Villalobos  be
of  opinion  that  a  priest  who  has  committed  a
moral  sin  cannot  say  mass  the  same  day,  Sanchez,
on  the  other  hand,;opines  that  he  can  :  why,  then,
should  a  priest  who  finds  himself  in  that  case
follow  Villalobos  rather  than  Sanchez?  It  is
true  that  if  he  make  a  blind  choice  between
Villalobos  and  Sanchez,  he  becomes  the  prey
of  self-will;  but  self-will  and  legalism  are
indissoluble,  and  the  more  carefully  he  tries  to
free  himself  from  the  bond,  the  more  tightly  it
winds  itself  around  him.
Jesuitic  Practical  legalism  can  also  give  rise  to  a

morality  as

doctrine  of ~_ monstrously  absurd theory, which  we  shall  call

fraud  against

the  moral  law.  Jesuitic  morality ,  not  because  it  is  peculiar  to
the  Jesuits  or  to  Catholicism,  but  as  dutiful
homage  to  the  most  conspicuous  and  likewise
the  most  celebrated  in  literature  of  its  historical
incarnations.  The  theory  of  Jesuitic  morality
admits  that  we  can  rationally  defraud  ethical  law.

concept  of  That the law  is defrauded  or  eluded  every

legal  fraud.  i  • • ir •• ' •  i  i  •  i

day,  taken  in  itself,  is  neither  moral  nor  immoral,
since  it  is  an  expedient  of  social  strife  like
another,  and  in  certain  cases  may  be  a  legitimate
act  of  war  and  a  fraud  only  in  name.  A  law
held  to  be  iniquitous  should  be  combated  openly;


in  LAWS  519

but  if  the  imposer  of  the  iniquitous  law,  or  he
who  wishes  to  profit  by  it,  have  committed  a
mistake  in  drafting  it,  so  that  it  can  be  interpreted
in  such  a  way  as  to  become  good,  or  at  least
better,  it  is  very  natural  that  the  adversary
should  profit  by  the  mistake,  if  for  no  other
reason  than  that  he  may  discredit  the  law  as
equivocal  and  lacking  in  precision  and  compel
society  to  discuss  it  again.  Who  does  not
applaud  the  fraud  of  Portia,  when  it  is  a  question
of  saving  the  life  of  the  noble  Antonio  from  a
Shylock?  And  if  even  the  ferox  animus  of
Shylock  has  found  defenders,  as  symbol  of  the
tenacity  with  which  we  must  make  our  own
rights  respected,  yet  Portia  also  will  always  find
her  supporters,  as  symbol  of  ingenious  rebellion
against  an  unjust  law.

But what is altogether irrational and yet  Absurdity  of

the  fraud

seems  to be admitted by Jesuitic morality, is  against  ones

} J  '  self  and

the  fraud  against  oneself,  and  so  against  one's
own  moral  conscience.  To  defraud  one's  own
conscience,  to  rebel  against  it  with  violence  or
with  artifice,  is  contradiction,  wilfulness,  evil.
It  sometimes  happens  that  we  exert  ourselves
to  still  what  is  called  the  internal  voice  of  ad
monition,  the  Socratic  demon,  or  the  guardian
angel.  This  happens  in  the  utilitarian,  not  less


520 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

than  in  the  moral  field ;  when,  for  instance,  we
yield  to  a  pleasure  which  we  know  to  be  harmful
and  had  intended  to  avoid  for  that  reason,
and  when  by  dint  of  subtleties  we  try  to
persuade  ourselves  that  it  differs  from  that
which  we  had  recognized  as  harmful.  We
attempt,  but  we  never  really  succeed  ;  we  may
be  able  to  obscure  our  conscience  for  an  instant,
but  we  can  never  permanently  and  altogether
darken  it;  the  effort  itself  calls  for  the  light
that  we  would  avoid.
Jesuitic  But  that  pretension  of  Jesuitic  morality  cannot

morality  not

explainable  as On the other hand derive from mere ethical

mere  legahsm.

legalism,  because  legalism  produces  the  contra
dictions  that  we  have  already  placed  in  relief;
it  generates  the  morally  indifferent  and  at  the
same  time  suppresses  it ;  and  when  it  has  sup
pressed  again  generates,  in  order  again  to  sup
press  it ;  and  so  on  to  infinity,  an  anxious
and  sterile  doing  and  undoing.  But  it  never
authorizes  fraud.  Simple  legalism  will  never
justify  our  pretending  to  ourselves  when  a
definite  action  is  willed  or  when  we  have  a
definite  intention,  that  we  will  another  action
and  have  a  different  intention  ;  or,  as  they  say,
direction  of  the  intention  :  the  intention  is  that
which  it  is  and  it  does  not  allow  itself  to  be


LAWS  521

directed  at  will.  To  obey  the  letter  of  the  law
with  the  clear  intention  of  breaking  it  in  spirit
will  never  be  justified.

The  pretension  of  Jesuitic  morality  becomes  Jesuitic

morality  as

illuminated  and  transparent  to  the  intellect,  only  alliance  be
tween  legalism

when we make the hypothesis of  an alliance  and  theological

utilitarianism.

between  practical  legalism  and  theological  utili
tarianism  ;  that  is  to  say,  when  not  only  do
we  conceive  morality  as  a  series  or  complex  of
legislative  decisions,  but  when  we  likewise  con
sider  these  to  be  nothing  less  than  the  product
of  the  will  of  God.  They  are  not  in  themselves
moral  as  such,  and  to  observe  them  does
not  arise  of  intrinsic  necessity ;  but  they  are
obeyed  as  the  lesser  evil,  through  fear  of  worse
or  in  hope  of  future  advantage.  In  this  case
there  is  a  silent  struggle  between  God  the
legislator  and  man,  a  struggle  between  the  weak
and  the  overbearing,  in  which  the  strength  of
the  weak  lies  in  ingenuity,  their  tactic  in  fraud.
Hence  the  dominant  concept  of  Jesuit  morality:
to  get  the  better  of  the  divine  laws  as  far  as
possible,  to  do  the  least  possible  of  what  they
command ;  and  when  called  upon  to  give  an
account  of  one's  own  actions  before  the  tribunal
of  confession,  or  before  the  universal  judgment,
so  to  subtilize  upon  the  law,  that  from  the


522 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

interpretation  thus  put  upon  it,  what  has  been
done  seems  to  belong  to  the  licit  and  permissive.
God  forbids  man  to  kill  man ;  but  does  he
intend  to  forbid  this,  when  the  motive  for  this
killing  is  the  glory  of  God  himself?  When  the
slayer  acts  as  though  he  were  the  hand  of  God
himself  and  is  all  one  with  him  ?  Without
doubt,  no :  so  that  it  will  be  lawful  for  the
Jesuit  to  kill  or  cause  to  be  killed  his  Jansenist
adversary,  who  injures  divine  interests  by  dis
closing  the  defects  of  the  holy  Company,  which
is  the  image  of  God  upon  earth  :  that  killing,
then,  is  not  only  lawful,  but  ordained.  But  if
he  want  to  kill  his  adversary,  not  through  zeal
for  the  divine  glory,  but  because  of  the  injury
that  he  causes  to  the  personal  and  immoral  in
terests  of  the  Jesuit?  This  too  is  permitted,
provided  that  when  killing  him,  though  animated
with  personal  hate,  he  withdraw  his  regard  from
the  real  motive,  and  directing  his  intention  to
the  divine  glory,  thus  justify  the  means  by  the
end.
Distinction  Such  is  the  monstrous  logical  product,  born

between  the  .  77-  111

doctrine  and ot the union between legalism and the theory

the  practice  of

the  Jesuits.  of  theological  utilitarianism  ;  such  is  the  essence
of  Jesuitic  morality,  which  has  justly  aroused
horror  and  disgust.  And  we  call  it  logical  (or


LAWS  523

illogical)  product,  because  we  wish  to  make  it
clear  that  here  as  elsewhere  we  are  occupied
with  theories  only  and  are  criticizing  them  alone.
In  practical  action  Jesuitic  morality  was  often
better  than  the  theory  would  imply ;  even  the
Padre  Caramuel,  who  put  the  question  as  to
the  right  possessed  by  the  Jesuits  of  slaying
the  Jansenists,  must  have  been  at  bottom  a
good  man ;  because,  having  almost  arrived  at
an  affirmative  conclusion  to  his  inquiry  by  dint
of  perverting  the  moral  law,  he  was  seized  by
pity  and  defrauded  his  own  fraud,  concluding
negatively  that  the  Jansenists  occidi  non  possunt
quia  nocere  non  potuerunt,  because  (said  he)
they  are  poor  devils,  unable  to  obscure  the
glorious  brilliance  of  the  Company,  as  the  owl
does  not  conceal  the  light  of  the  sun.1  And
Saint  Alphonso  dei  Liguori,  who  is  usually
looked  upon  as  an  example  of  that  lurid  morality
in  our  day,  when  he  set  to  work  to  stir  up
afresh  the  ugliness  of  casuistic  in  connection
with  the  sixth  and  ninth  commandments,  ex
perienced  all  the  repugnance  of  the  gallant
gentleman  that  he  was,  at  such  a  task,  imposed
upon  him  by  the  traditional  mode  of  treating
Ethic,  as  is  to  be  seen  by  his  declarations,  excla-

1  Pascal,  Prov.  1.  7.


524 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

mations,  and  exhortations :  Nunc  aegre  materiam
illam  tractandam  aggredimur,  cujus  vel  solum
nomen  hominum  mentes  inficit.  Det  mihi  veniam,
quaeso,  castus  lector !  .  .  .  Ora  st^ld^osos  .  .  .  ut
.  .  .  eo  tempore  saepius  mentem  ad  Deum  elevent
et  Virgini  immaculatae  se  commendent,  ne  dum
alzorum  animos  Deo  student  acquirere,  ipsi  suarum
detmmentum  patiantur^  If  Jesuitism  were
also  moral  corruption,  this  was  not  due  to  its
abstract  theories,  but  to  the  education  that  it
practised,  which  was  depressing,  servile,  and
directed  to  mortify  the  strength  of  the  will  and
of  the  intelligence,  to  reduce  a  man  to  be  like
senis  bacillus,  a  docile  and  passive  instrument
in  the  hands  of  others ;  and  to  the  confusion
in  consciences  as  to  the  real  motives  of  actions,
which  it  not  only  preserved  but  increased,
lulling  souls  to  sleep  with  sophisms  and  allure
ments  of  devotion  aise'es  a  pratiquer,  by  means
of  which  the  gates  of  Paradise  could  be  unlocked,
and  with  ckemins  de  velours  on  which  one
could  mount  to  the  sky  with  every  indul
gence.  The  rigorists  and  latitudinarians  are
philosophically  equivalent ;  but  it  is  a  fact  that
in  practice  the  rigorists  were  generally  energetic
and  austere  souls ;  which  should  not  cause  us

1 Theol.  moralis1,  Bassano,  1773,  i.  168.


LAWS  525

to  forget  that  the  latitudinarians  also,  amid  their
distorted  theories,  sometimes  had  a  lucid  vision
of  the  complications  of  reality  and  felt  the
necessity  of  a  morality  less  abstract  and  less
disharmonic  in  relation  to  life,  however  incorrectly
they  may  nevertheless  have  developed  its  theory.


JUDICIAL  ACTIVITY  AS  AN  ACTIVITY  GENERICALLY
PRACTICAL  (ECONOMIC)

Legislative THE  will that  wills classes of  actions, or the

activity,  as  1111  1

genericaiiy activity  that  makes  laws  and  that  we  can  hence-

practical.

forward  term  legislative  activity  without  fear  of
misunderstanding,  is  either  moral  or  merely
economic ;  and  therefore,  when  dialecticized,  is
either  moral  or  immoral,  economic  or  anti-
economic.  It  is  true  that  this  will  is  abstract
and  indeterminate ;  but  that  does  not  prevent
it  from  being,  and  from  being  obliged  to  be,
either  moral  or  merely  economic  ;  and,  therefore,
abstractly  moral  and  abstractly  economic,  and
so  also  abstractly  immoral  and  anti-economic.
A  programme  of  action  will  be  conceived,  as
they  say,  wisely  or  foolishly,  to  a  good  or  to
a  bad  end,  for  mere  reasons  of  utility,  or  with
a  lively  desire  for  good.  The  legislator  is  a
volitional  man,  and  as  such  to  be  judged  both

utilitarianly and morally. The laws that are

526


PT.  in  LAWS  527

his volitional product are useful or injurious,
good or bad. This judgment is also without
doubt abstract, for it is necessary first to see
the legislator engaged in the practical act of
the  application  of  his  law,  in  order  to  recognize
what  he  can  do  and  who  he  is. We  know  many
(others or ourselves  ?)  who  make  plans  for  the
most beautiful lives, legislating admirably for
themselves  and  for  others  ;  yet  these  show  them
selves mean and bad in action  : and we not
infrequently  find  the  opposite  case  of  men  who
calumniate  themselves  and  who,  after  they  have
declared the most dishonest, or at least the
most  amoralistic,  of  intentions, when they  find
themselves face to face with the bad action,
ugly  with the ugliness of  sin, say,  as the old
man in the  fable  said  to Death  : "  I have not
called  thee  !  "

From these considerations, which seem to  vanity  of

disputes  as  to

be most obvious, a not obvious consequence  the  character

of  institutions,

is to be drawn  ; namely, that it is perfectly


vain  to  descant  upon  the  utilitarian  or  moral
character  of  laws,  or  of  these  or  those  laws  ;  5
to  ask  oneself,  for  instance,  whether  the  object
of  punishment  be  deterritio  or  emendatio  ;  if
matrimony  be  an  exchange  of  services  or  a
sacrament,  a  union  of  interests  or  a  society


528 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

with  moral  ends ;  if  the  State  be  the  result
of  a  contract  or  of  a  moral  idea,  and  so  on.
These  questions  have  an  immense  literature
devoted  to  them,  which  has  been  accumulated
for  centuries,  and  although  they  be  vain  for  us,
yet  they  cannot  be  so  for  one  who  has  not  yet
become  clear  as  to  the  special  forms  of  the
practical  activity  and  as  to  the  nature  of  law.
For  him  they  are  not  vain,  since  they  represent
as  it  were  in  a  concentrated  form,  the  complete
philosophical  problem  concerning  the  practical ;
although  they  must  of  necessity  turn  out  to
be  insoluble.  Punishment  can  be  conceived
and  willed  as  a  mere  utilitarian  menace,  to
prevent  others  from  performing  certain  classes
of  actions,  even  if  they  be  ethically  of  the
highest  value ;  or  as  moral  solicitude  for  the
amelioration  of  society  and  the  individual  him
self  who  has  erred,  by  obliging  him  to  re-enter
himself  and  change  his  mind.  Even  the  pain
of  death  can  be  directed  to  this  end  and  death
that  has  given  or  restored  to  the  guilty  a  day,
an  hour,  an  instant  of  that  human  life,  of  that
contact  with  the  infinite,  which  he  had  lost,
may  be  held  not  to  have  been  in  vain.  Matri
mony  may  be  instituted  for  the  more  regular
satisfaction  of  the  sexual  instinct  and  for  other


in  LAWS  529

similar  interests  of  utilitarian  life  ;  and  also  to
secure  that  interpenetration  of  souls,  which  is  the
great  mover  of  the  moral  life.  The  State  may
arise  from  a  mere  contract  which  draws  together
isolated  individuals  and  groups  and  unites  them
for  defence  and  offence ;  and  also  form  the
profound  moral  aspiration  of  the  individuals,
who  recognize  the  universal  in  themselves  and
are  attentive  to  realize  it  in  modes  ever  more
rich  and  more  lofty.  All  institutions,  all  laws
may  receive  this  double  form ;  and  although
there  be  laws  that  are  merely  utilitarian,  those
that  are  moral  are  also,  as  is  clear,  utilitarian
or  economic,  and  therefore  not  useless  but
useful.  An  amoral  man  will  make  for  himself
amoral  laws ;  and  between  an  amoral  man  and
an  amoral  woman  no  other  marriage  but  that
of  interest  is  possible  ;  and  between  a  hundred
amoral  individuals,  no  other  State  is  possible
but  that  established  by  contract ;  and  no  other
punishment  will  be  applicable  in  such  a  State
save  that  of  mere  deterritio.  It  will  be  objected
that  amoral  individuals  and  multitudes  do  not
exist,  and  it  may  be  true  that  they  do  not  exist
in  a  continuous  manner :  but  they  do  exist  at
certain  moments ;  and  this  as  we  know,  suffices

to  justify,  indeed  to  prove  necessary,  our  theory.

2  M


530 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Legislative Thus no other answer is possible to the

activity  as  ,  .....

economic.  question  asked  as  to  whether  the  legislative
activity  be  moral  or  merely  economic,  save  that
it  may  be  the  one  or  the  other,  and  therefore,
that  it  is  not  of  necessity  moral ;  thus,  de
fining  it  in  its  full  extension,  it  must  be  called
generically  practical,  or  taken  in  itself,  merely
economic.

juridical  Passing now  from the  legislative  activity  to

activity:  its

economic that  of  him  who  realizes  and executes the  law

character.

(an  activity  that  we  may  call  juridical,  in  order
not  to  confound  it  with  the  other),  and  asking
whether  juridical  activity  be  moral  or  distinct
from  morality  and  if  distinct,  what  is  its  distinctive
characteristic,  the  answer  cannot  but  be  most
simple  for  us  who  have  attained  to  our  present
position.  So  simple  indeed,  that  to  give  it
would  seem  to  be  almost  superfluous.  Not  only
must  the  activity  of  carrying  out  the  law  not  be
intrinsically  diverse  from  the  activity  of  legislat
ing,  but  as  has  been  seen,  it  obeys  exclusively
practical  principles,  economic  and  ethic.  Hence
the  juridical  activity  can  be  merely  economic  and
it  can  be  moral ;  and  seeing  that  economicity  is
the  general  form  that  of  itself  involves  the  other,
the  juridical  activity  is  generically  practical,  or
economic.  As  such  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  such,


LAWS  531

it  is  at  once  distinct  from  and  united  with  the
moral  form.

But  juridical  activity  does not merely  enter  its  consequent

.....  .  identity  -with

the  economic  activity  ;  it  is  exactly  identical  with  the  economic

activity.

it :  juridical  activity  and  economic  activity  are
synonyms.  Legislative  activity  enters  economy
and  nevertheless  distinguishes  itself  from  it,  as
volition  of  the  abstract,  indeterminate  volition.
The  juridical  activity  is  on  the  other  hand  con
crete  and  determined,  like  the  other,  nor  is  it
distinguished  from  it  by  any  secondary  character.
It  might  be  attempted  to  subdistinguish  the
economic  and  juridical  activity,  while  admitting
the  generic  identification,  and  to  look  upon
the  latter  as  such  that  although  obeying  the
economic  principle,  it  is  yet  developed  under  the
laws ;  whereas  the  former  would  exist  even
where  laws  were  wanting.  But  the  distinction
would  be  empirical,  of  undulating  boundaries.
Strictly  speaking,  man  is  surrounded  with  laws  in
all  his  actions,  and  he  always  acts  under  all  the
laws,  and  at  the  same  time  he  effectually  acts
under  none  of  them,  save  that  of  his  own
practical  conscience.

If  the  identity  and  synonymity  of  law,  under
stood  as  juridical  activity  with  economy,  has
not  been  discovered,  that  too  is  connected


532 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

with  the  lack  of  recognition  of  the  practical
utilitarian  category  on  the  part  of  philosophers
and  with  their  considering  it,  as  they  erroneously
did,  either  as  egotism  and  immorality,  or  as  an
altogether  empirical  division,  to  which  was  added
a  concept,  also  empirical,  of  the  juridical  activity
itself,  which  should  be  limited  to  what  are
called  laws  emanating  from  the  State,  sometimes
graciously  including  in  them  social  laws,  and
always  altogether  ignoring  the  fundamental  form,
individual  laws.
The  failure  to  But  this  failure  of  recognition  has  not  pre-

re -cognize  the  .

economic  form vented the appearance  and persistence of the

and  the  mean
ing  of  the  prob-  problem  of  the  combined  unity  and  distinction  of

lem  concerning

the  distinction  iaw  anci  morality,  which  has  been  the  most
morality  and  frequent  though  the  most  complicated  mode  of
affirming  the  claim  of  a  special  Philosophy  of
economy.  A  serious  beginning  of  meditation
upon  law  had  hardly  begun,  when  something
was  observed  in  it  that  it  was  impossible  to  resolve
into  the  concepts  of  Ethic.  Hence  the  generally
admitted  recognition  of  the  distinction  between
law  and  morality  and  the  many  attempts  at
determining  of  what  the  peculiar  character  of
the  former  exactly  consisted.

This character was placed most frequently
and  with greater insistence in the two deter-


between

mor>

law.


III


LAWS  533


minations  of  compulsion  and  of  exteriority. And  Theories  of

compulsion

it was said that law is distinguished from  and  exterior
ity,  as  distinct-

morality  because  it  is  possible  to  exercize  com-  ive  characters.-

L  critique.

pulsion  in  the  juridical,  but  not  in  the  moral
field  ;  or  that  law  deals  with  the  field  of  external
relations,  morality  with  the  internal ;  or  that  one
is  the  psychical,  the  other  the  physical  side  of
action.  But  as  to  the  first  determination,  we
have  already  shown  that  it  has  no  meaning  at
all  when  applied  to  the  forms  of  the  spiritual
activity,  where  nothing  is  compulsory  and  every
thing  is  at  once  free  and  necessary:  the  juridical
activity,  if  it  be  activity,  must  likewise  always  be
determined  by  free  agreement.  The  second,
which  is  the  determination  of  exteriority,  is  not
less  inconceivable ;  for  it  is  not  given  to  separate
the  external  from  the  internal,  since  they  are
both  one,  nor  the  word  from  its  meaning,  nor  the
body  from  its  spirit.  Compulsion  and  exteriority,
taken  strictly  as  concepts,  are  therefore,  in  this
case,  void  and  contradictory  formulae.  To  fill
them  somehow  with  a  thought,  it  would  be
necessary  to  understand  as  compulsion  certain
modes  of  action,  as  opposed  to  certain  other
modes ;  for  instance,  compulsion  would  be  the
action  by  which  an  accused  person  was  conducted
to  prison  by  two  policemen  and  non-compulsion


534 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

that  of  him  who  should  be  induced  to  go
and  constitute  himself  a  prisoner  through  the
persuasion  of  others  ;  and  as  exteriority,  certain
classes  of  actions  opposed  to  certain  others ;  so
that,  for  example,  the  deportment  of  an  individual
as  communal  or  provincial  councillor  would
belong  to  external  life,  his  relations  with  his
confessor  or  with  his  ^Esculapius  to  internal  life.
But  compulsion  and  exteriority,  reduced  to  these
meanings,  become  gross  and  empirical  concepts,
of  which  no  use  can  be  made  in  philosophy  and
which  therefore  cannot  be  of  the  least  value  as
qualifying  and  distinguishing  law  from  morality.

In  the  same  way,  no  value  is  to  be  attached
to  such  a  distinction,  when  determined  from
what  is  licit  to  what  is  commanded,  from  rights
to  duties,  from  what  is  permitted  to  what  is
obligatory ;  because  licit  and  commanded,  rights
and  duties,  from  what  is  permitted  to  what  is
obligatory,  are  correlative  concepts  constituting
an  indissoluble  nexus  and  it  is  not  possible  to
separate  and  to  oppose  them  to  one  another.

^^e  difficulty  of  conveniently  fixing  the  dis-
tinction  with  the  characters  indicated,  leads  one
to  think  of  a  different  sort  of  tentative,  according
to  which  rights  would  certainly  be  distinguished
from  ethicity,  not  placed  above  or  beside  it,


LAWS  535

but  rather  in  the  very  sphere  of  morality  itself,
as  the  species  in  respect  to  the  genus  or  the
part  in  respect  of  the  whole.  Juridical  action
would  be  moral,  but  it  would  belong  to  the  inferior
levels  of  morality  ;  it  would  be  occupied  with  the
execution  of  simple  justice,  with  the  establishment
of  order,  proportion,  equality  ;  whereas  morality
would  represent  more  than  justice,  and  would
upset  the  equilibrium  of  rights  with  benevolence,
generosity,  sacrifice,  heroism.  Rights  (it  is  also
said)  are  limited  to  the  ethical  minimum,  while
morality  strives  for  the  maximum ;  rights  are
concerned  with  strict  rights  or  perfect  duties,
morality  with  meritorious  and  supererogatory
actions,  imperfect  duties.  But  these  determina
tions  also  pretend  to  separate  the  inseparable,
by  drawing  an  arbitrary  line  of  division  between
small  and  great  actions,  between  least  and
greatest,  and  they  employ  concepts  that  are  alto
gether  empirical,  as,  for  instance,  that  of  justice
as  distinct  from  benevolence,  of  the  strictly
obligatory  from  the  meritorious  and  supereroga
tory ;  and  worse  still  than  this,  metaphors  and
symbols,  such  as  equality,  order,  regularity  ;  or
they  operate  directly  with  the  arithmetical  and
geometrical  proportion  of  actions.  And  con
sciously  or  unconsciously  a  return  is  made  to


536 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Ethic  pure  and  simple,  with  the  theories  that  make
juridical  activity  to  consist  of  the  recognition  of
others  as  persons,  or  with  the  search  for  general
utility  (superindividual).  When  we  act  in  view
of  the  person  in  other  individuals  (or  in  oneself),
or  of  the  useful,  which  is  not  the  useful  for
the  individual,  but  although  it  comprehends,  yet
transcends  it: — the  merely  juridical  conscience  has
already  been  surpassed,  it  has  been  filled  with
a  moral  content,  that  is  to  say,  an  ethical  form
has  been  given  to  the  practical  activity.  The
double  sense  of  the  terms  "rights"  and  "morality"
is  in  this  way  preserved  in  words  but  denied  in
fact.
Duality  of  The  dual  sense  of  the  terms  is  also  affirmed

positive  and

idcai,kistoricai  by  the  very  ancient  distinction  between  positive

and  natural

rights,  etc. ; and  ideal,  historical  and  natural  rights,  right  and

and  absurd

attempts  at justice,  or,  as  it  has  also  been  formulated,  between

unification  and  J

co-ordination.  ^^  /zw  different  justices,  realistic  and  idealistic,
fruitful  in  conjunction.  Natural  rights,  with  their
homonyms  just  stated,  besides  the  generically
practical  significations  that  we  have  already
examined,  have  also  had  the  narrower  one  of
ethical  ideal  or  morality ;  and  therefore  it  cannot
cause  astonishment  that  it  should  appear  now
conjoined  with,  now  detached  from  positive  rights.
But  how  joined  and  disjoined  ?  For  us  it  is


LAWS  537

a  question  of  degrees,  whence  the  positivity  of
both  forms  is  recognized  :  the  second  of  these  is
included  in  the  first :  the  ideal  right  or  morality  (if
it  be  right,  and  not  simply  abstract  excogitation
willed  by  no  one,  or  vague  desire)  is  both  positive
and  historical.  But  those  who  posited  the  dis
tinction  without  being  able  to  make  it  definite
and  so  to  dominate  it  were  led  to  conceive  one  or
the  other  term  as  negative  ;  and  therefore  both
as  negative  between  themselves  and  existing
only  in  a  third :  which  meant  to  reannul  the
distinction  by  reducing  it  to  abstract  contradiction.
If  one  of  the  two  were  conceived  as  negative,
either  the  ideal  justice  (that  is,  the  seriousness
of  moral  strength)  was  denied  and  turned  to
ridicule,  or  positive  justice,  that  is,  the  seriousness
of  volitional  strength,  was  presented  as  some
thing  turbid  and  impure  and  at  best  as  a  human
imperfection,  to  which  it  was  advisable  to  resign
oneself  since  it  would  disappear  in  a  society  of
perfect  men  or  in  a  future  life  of  perfection.
Juridical  activity  became  something  contingent
and  mortal.  Matters  were  even  worse,  if  it
were  found  impossible  to  eliminate  it  with
similar  religious,  apocalyptic,  or  millenary  fancies.
The  negative  was  then  conceived  as  positive  or
co-ordinated  with  the  positive  :  hence  incredible


Value  of  all
these  theories
as  confused
perception  of
the  amoral
character  of
justice.


538 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

logical  divisions  of  rights  into  forms  or  species  of
moral  and  immoral  rights,  ^i  just  and  unjust  rights,
in  which  the  species  has  the  function  of  negation
of  the  genus,  almost  as  though  the  race  of  horses
were  to  be  divided  into  two  kinds:  dead  and  living
horses  !  Unjust  or  immoral  rights  are  not  rights,
but  a  contradiction  of  them,  and  if  we  sometimes
describe  in  this  way  a  real  and  effective  juridical
act  (an  economic  act),  it  is  necessary  to  observe
that  the  denomination  is  given  from  the  point
of  view  of  a  superior  form  of  activity.  Rights
in  themselves  as  rights,  understood  positively,
are  never  immoral,  but  only  amoral.

All  these  errors,  all  these  sterile  tentatives
have  their  origin,  as  has  been  said,  in  the  lively
consciousness  of  a  distinction  existing  between
right  and  morality  and  at  the  same  time  of  the
impossibility  of  determining  this  correctly,  owing
to  lack  of  clarity  as  to  the  purely  economic  form
of  the  practical  activity.  When  the  juridical
activity  has  been  identified  with  the  economic
and  when  juridical  (economic)  activity  has  in
consequence  been  conceived  as  at  once  united
with  and  distinct  from  morality,  we  are  able  to
recognize  that  these  attempts  have  nevertheless
fulfilled  a  very  useful  function  ;  that  is  to  say,
they  have  more  or  less  energetically  asserted  and


LAWS  539

defended  the  position  that  there  existed  a  char
acteristic  distinction  between  right  and  morality
and  that  it  was  necessary  to  seek  for  it.  They
are  therefore  far  superior,  notwithstanding  their
errors,  to  that  confused  ethical  conception,  which
receives  rights  and  morality  indistinctly  into  its
bosom,  or  to  the  utilitaristic  conception,  which
arrives  by  a  different  route  at  the  same  in-
distinction.  This  merit  belongs  to  the  theories
of  the  moral  minimum,  of  justice,  of  the  two
justices  and  of  the  contest  between  positive  and
ideal  rights  ;  but  in  a  much  greater  degree  to  that
of  compulsion,  of  exteriority,  of  the  licit.  With
these  last  was  almost  unconsciously  set  in  relief
the  fact  that  right  obeys  a  law  different  from
that  of  Ethic,  and  may  be  called  compelled  and
not  free  by  comparison  with  it,  because  not
founded  upon  the  necessity  of  the  universal ;
that  in  respect  to  the  supreme  interiority  of
Ethic  it  can  be  considered  as  something  exterior  \
that  in  respect  to  the  ethical  imperative,  it
appears  as  something  indifferentiated  or  licit.
These  are  without  doubt  symbols,  tautologies,
vague  and  imprecise  phrases,  but  efficacious  in
keeping  the  attention  alert  and  in  promoting
doubt  and  research.

But  the  impossibility  of  absorbing  rights  into


540 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

Confirmations Ethic  altogether  and  without  leaving  residues  is

of  this  char
acter  in  the proclaimed  or  confessed,  not  only  in  the  theories

ingenuous  con-

of  philosophers,  but  by  simple  thought,  and
especially  by  the  consciousness  we  have  of  the  real
world  being  governed,  not  by  abstract  morality,
but,  as  is  said,  by  force,  or  by  the  will  in
action.  "  Disarmed  prophets  "  will  be  efficacious
in  poetry,  but  ridiculous  in  practical  reality  :  la
force  prime  le  droit,  precedes  it  and  is  always
of  greater  value  than  an  unreal  and  contra
dictory  ethical  right  and  aspiration,  afterwards
dissolved  in  the  empty  and  arbitrary.  We  will
not  recall  proverbs,  maxims,  historical  examples,
though  this  would  be  easy  ;  that  little  story  of
Franco  Sacchetti  which  preserves  "  a  fair  speech  "
of  Messer  Ridolfo  da  Camerino,  will  suffice  for  all.
One  of  his  nephews  had  been  at  Bologna  study
ing  law  for  a  good  twelve  years,  and  when,  having
become  an  excellent  lawyer,  he  returned  to
Camerino,  he  went  to  pay  a  visit  to  Messer  Ridolfo.
When  he  paid  the  visit,  Messer  Ridolfo  said,
"And  what  didst  thou  do  at  Bologna?"  He
replied,  "  My  Lord,  I  have  learned  reason"  Said
Messer  Ridolfo,  "  Thou  hast  spent  thy  time  ill."
The  young  man  replied  that  the  saying  seemed
to  him  to  be  very  strange.  "  Why  was  it  ill
spent,  my  Lord  ? "  And  Messer  Ridolfo  said,


LAWS  541

"Because  thou  shouldst  have  learned  force,  which
is  worth  two  of  the  other."  The  youth  began  to
smile,  and  thinking  it  over  again  and  again,  both
he  and  the  others  that  heard,  perceived  that  what
Messer  Ridolfo  had  said,  was  true.1

And  here  too  we  are  at  last  able  to  establish  comparison

I, « .  .  between  right

a parallel between the practical and theoretic  andianguase.

Grammars

activity,  between  the  problems  of  the  Philosophy
of  right  and  those  of  Logic  and  ^Esthetic.
The  comparison  of  right  and  language  has  been
several  times  attempted,  with  very  great  correc
tion  of  thought,  although  necessarily  defective
execution,  since  it  was  customary  to  conceive
both  language  and  right  in  an  abstract  and  em
pirical  manner.  Whoever  should  wish  to  take
up  the  inquiry  again  would  do  great  service,  were
he  to  insist  upon  the  fact  that  since  it  has
been  impossible  to  understand  what  language
really  is,  so  long  as  grammars  and  vocabularies
were  taken  as  its  reality,  so  it  is  impossible  to
understand  anything  of  rights,  so  long  as  the  eye
is  fixed  upon  laws  and  codes,  or  what  is  even
worse,  upon  the  commentaries  of  jurists,  or  upon
the  abstract  volitional  fact,  or  altogether  upon
what  is  not  a  true  and  proper  volitional  fact,  but
the  elaboration  of  formulae  and  of  general  concepts.

1  Novelle,  xl.


542 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL
Logic  and  Only  when  rights  appear  as  individual  and  con-

language  ;

morality  and tinuallv  new  work  of  individuals,  only  when  the

rights.

attention  is  directed  to  the  spectacle  of  real  life
and  not  to  the  abstractions  of  legislators  and
dispenses  with  the  dissertations  of  jurists,  is  it
possible  to  state  the  problem :  how  does  this
juridical  work  coincide  with,  and  how  does  it
differ  from  moral  work  ?  And  here  too  the  com
parison  with  language  is  fitting,  although  language
be  not  logicity,  yet  logical  thought  cannot  become
concrete,  save  in  speaking;  so  moral  activity  cannot
live,  save  by  translating  itself  into  laws  and  insti
tutes,  and  in  the  realization  of  laws  and  institutes,
that  is,  in  the  juridical  and  economic  activity.

Finally,  just  as  the  history  of  a  language  is
always  arbitrary  and  abstract,  so  long  as  it  is
considered  alone,  outside  the  works  in  which  the
language  is  incarnate  and  the  true  history  of  a
language  is  its  poetry  and  literature,  so  the
trite  history  of  the  rights  of  a  people  (of  the
rights  that  have  really  been  executed  and  not
merely  formulated  in  laws  and  codes,  be  often
proved  to  be  a  dead  letter)  cannot  but  be
altogether  one  with  the  social  and  political  history
of  that  people  :  an  altogether  juridical  or  economic
history  ;  a  history  of  wants  and  of  labour.


VI

HISTORICAL ANNOTATIONS

I.  THE  history  of  the  distinction  between  morality  Distinction

, . ,  .  between  moral-

and  rights  is  very  important,  precisely  because,  as  ty  and  rights,

and  its  im-

has  been  said,  it  is  the  manifestation  of  the  very  portance  for  the

J history  of  the

strongly  -  felt  desire  to  posit  in  some  way  a  gnomic prin-
philosophy  of  the  aethical  or  amoral  practical
form :  a  manifestation  which  is  the  most  con
spicuous  of  all  those  that  we  have  had  occasion
to  note  on  the  subject  (theory  of  politics,  theory
of  the  inferior  appetitive  faculty,  theory  of  the
passions,  etc.).1  And  owing  to  the  impossibility
of  satisfying  that  exigency  with  the  intellectual
data  possessed,  the  problem  of  the  relation
between  rights  and  morality  has  become  anything
but  an  amusing  puzzle,  a  theme  for  true  vain
eloquence.

Emmanuel  Kant  in  the  Critique  of  Pure
Reason,  wishing  to  give  a  characteristic  example
of  the  difficulty  of  definitions,  found  nothing

1  See  above,  pp.  286,  287.
543


544 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

better  to  record  than  that  jurists  were  always
seeking  a  definition  of  rights,  but  had  never
succeeded  in  finding  one.1  And  a  jurist  philo
sopher  of  our  times  (Jhering)  has  called  the
definition  of  rights,  in  their  difference  from
morality,  the  "  Cape  Horn,"  or  the  Cape  of
tempests  (or  shipwrecks  ?)  of  juridical  science.

The  problem  of  that  distinction  is  on  the
of  Thomas.  other  hand  relatively  recent  and  therefore  the
history  of  the  Philosophy  of  rights  has  rightly
been  placed  not  further  back  than  the  end  of
the  seventeenth  century,  or  not  much  beyond
Christian  Thomas.2  Up  to  that  time,  it  is  not
possible  to  speak  strictly  of  a  Philosophy  of  rights.
Treatises  of  jurisprudence,  of  rights  and  of  the
State,  in  regard  to  what  of  philosophical  they
contained,  were  nothing  but  treatises  of  Ethic ;
not  indeed  because  the  two  sciences  were  (as
they  were)  materially  united  in  the  same  books,
but  precisely  because  the  two  concepts  were
indistinct.  The  speculations  of  antiquity  for  this
part  also  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  have
the  character  of  ingenuousness  already  noted.
It  would  be  incorrect  to  reconstruct  a  moralistic
philosophy  from  the  rights  of  Plato,  founding  it,

1  Krit.  d.  rein.  Vern.  (ed.  Kirchmann),  p.  572.

2  Lasson,  System  der  Rechtsphilosophie  (Berlin,  1882),  p.  2.


in  LAWS  545

for  example, upon the  theory  developed  in  the
Gorgias  as  to  the  eagerness  to  purge  his  punish
ment  that  should  exist  in  the  criminal,  similar,  in
this  respect,  to  the  sick  man,  who  knows  that  the
medicine  will free  him  from  his  disease.1 The
researches  of  Aristotle  also  as  to  justice  (perhaps
the best  the classical  world  has  left us  on  the
subject),  look  upon  justice  in  a  narrow  sense,  as  a
virtue  among  virtues,2  which  should  not  intrinsic
ally  possess  any  greater  reason  for  distinguishing
itself from the other virtues than they for
distinguishing  among  themselves. The  pompous
definitions of  the Roman jurists,  still the joy
of schools of jurisprudence and of judges'
rhetoric,  have  no  philosophical  weight  and  would
in  any  case  confirm  the  identity  of  rights  with
Ethicity,  if  not  absolutely  with  the  entire  knowable
and  practical  universe. There  is  hardly  a  ray  ol
the  distinction  to  be  traced  in  the  discussions  as
to whether rights exist by nature or  by  con
vention and in the concept  of  a  a-rrXw?  SUaiov,
opposed to that of TTO\LTIKOV Siicaiov found in
Plato, and more explicitly in Aristotle,3 and
rendered  popular  by  Cicero  when  speaking  of  the
recta  ratio,  naturae  congruens,  diffusa  in  omnes,

1  Gorgias,  476'478.

2  Eth,  Nicom.  3,  v.  c.  1-2.

3  Ibid.  v.  c.  7,9;  Magna  Moralia,  i.  c.  34.

2  N


546 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

constant,  sempiterna ; of  rights  not drawn  from

the  Twelve  Tables  or  from  the  pretorian  Edict,

but  ex  intima  philosophia ;  and  of  rights  that  on

the  other  hand  are  varie  et  ad  tempus  descriptae

populis, whence they have the name of  laws

favore  magis  qiiam  re}

This  rough  distinction  between  natural  and
positive,  absolute  and  relative  rights  ;  this  con
cept  of  an  ideal  right  placed  face  to  face  with
real  rights,  or  of  which  the  real  should  be
an  imperfect  and  partial  translation,  also  re
appears  in  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  and  in  other
scholastics.  And  there  is  nothing  more  than
this  in  those  thinkers  who  founded  what  was
called  natural  rights  in  the  seventeenth  century,
such  as  Grotius  and  his  followers.  It  is  true  that
the  boast  of  having  distinguished  rights  from
morality  and  religion  has  usually  been  attributed  to
that  historical  period.  But  it  is  hardly  necessary
to  repeat  that  what  was  meant  by  these  formulae
were  the  great  social  and  political  questions  which
took  the  form  of  wars  of  religion  in  the  Europe
of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  ;  that
so-called  distinction,  therefore,  the  result  of  long
strife,  though  it  have  great  practical  value  as  a
sign  of  social  transformation,  has  no  doctrinal

1  De  republ.  iii.  c.  22  ;  De  legibus,  ii.  c.  5.


in  LAWS  547

value.  The  idea  of  autonomy,  proper  to  the
juridical  activity,  is  absent  even  in  the  profound
treatise  of  Vico  on  universal  rights,  for  this
contains  only  an  altogether  empirical  distinction
between  virtus  w\&  justitia  ;  of  these  the  first  cum
cupiditate  pugnat,  and  the  second  utilitates  dirigit
et  exaequat ;  and  both  derive  their  origin  from  the
vis  veri  or  ratio  humana  ;  and  as  all  the  virtues
are  connected  and  none  of  them  can  exist  alone
(nulla  virtus  solitaria),  so  virtus  zn&justitia  are  at
bottom  one.1  The  work  of  Vico,  which  gives  a
new  conception  of  the  relation  between  ideal  and
history  and  most  original  applications  of  Roman
history,  turns  out  to  be  nothing  but  Ethic,  when
considered  beneath  the  aspect  of  Philosophy  of
Rights.  Nor  on  the  other  hand  could  the  problem
of  the  nature  of  rights  truly  form  the  object  of
enquiry  on  the  part  of  utilitarians  (Hobbes  and
others) ;  with  whom/if  the  absorption  of  rights  in
morality  was  not  found,  this  did  not  arise  because
the  one  was  distinguished  from  the  other,  but
because  morality  itself  was  denied  in  what  was
proper  to  itself:  the  problem  of  the  distinction
disappeared,  because  its  terms  disappeared.

1 1 Thomas  provided  the  apple  of  discord,  or  Thomas  and

r  his  followers.

as  might  also  be  said,  cast  the  leaven  of  progress

1  Deimo  univ.  jur.  princ.  §§41.  43>  86-


548 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

into  the  treatment  of  rights,  when  he  distinguished
three  forms  of  the  rectiim  :  thejustum,  the  hones-
turn,  the  decorum,  placing  the  first  in  opposition
to  the  other  two,  the  forum  externum  to  the
internum,  and  attributing  to  rights  and  justice
the  character  of  coercibility.1  The  formula  had
a  rapid  and  unsuspected  fortune,  and  became
current  in  the  schools.  Gundling,  for  instance,
defined  right  as  the  "  ordering  of  external
relations."
Kant  and  It  was  completely  developed  and  reasoned  out,

Fichte.

with  all  the  strictness  that  its  erroneity  permitted,
in  the  doctrines  of  Kant  and  Fichte,  who  were
the  greatest  of  Thomas's  scholars  for  this  part  of
the  study.  Kant  opposed  legality  to  morality  ;
the  juridical  imperative  is  expressed  with  the
formula,  "  act  externally  "  (handle  ausserlich) ;
right  is  conjoined  with  the  faculty  of  compulsion
(zwingen).  Hence  his  doctrines  are  often  amoral-
istic  or  economic  as  regards  individual  juridical
institutions,  and  this  is  especially  the  case  when
he  deals  with  the  State,  with  matrimony,  and  with
punishment ;  these  were  followed  by  Fichte,  who
made  some  reservations  for  matrimony  alone,
considering  it  an  institution  not  only  juridical,  but

1  Fundament  a  juris  nat.  et  gentium  (1705).
2  Windelband,  Geschichte  d.  Phil?  p.  424.


in


LAWS  549

also  natural  and  moral.1  On  the  other  hand  rights
were  for  Kant  something  that  surpassed  the
individual  will  and  utility  ;  it  was  the  sum  of  the
conditions  by  means  of  which  the  will  of  the  one
can  be  united  with  the  will  of  another,  according
to  a  universal  law  of  liberty.2  Fichte  in  like
manner  conceived  of  rights  as  altogether  free  of
every  admixture  of  morality ;  as  an  objective
order,  arising  from  the  fact  of  the  individual  who
coherently  affirms  himself  and  his  own  liberty,  thus
also  affirming  other  individuals  and  their  liberty.8
Both  philosophers  thus  preserve  the  moralistic
concept  of  the  legal  and  the  justum  ;  rights,
although  armed  with  compelling  power,  are  never
force  alone,  but  the  external  ordering  of  freedom,
namely,  justice.  For  this  reason,  Kant  explicitly
excludes  force,  in  so  far  as  it  is  constitutive  of
rights  and  speaks  of  a  "  force  without  law"  ;  and
both  he  and  Fichte  make  coercibility  to  flow,  not
from  the  nature  of  the  volitional  force  itself,  but
from  the  violation  of  order.  It  is  just,  says  Kant,
to  repel  force  with  force,  when  it  would  interfere
with  liberty.  The  right  of  coercion  (repeats
Fichte)  is  founded  solely  upon  the  violation
of  the  original  right.  But  it  remains  obscure

1  Grttndl.  d.  Natitrr.  (1796),  append.,  sect.  I.

2  Metaphys.  d.  Sitten,  1797  (eel.  Kirchmann),  pp.  31-35-

3  GrundL  d.  haturr.  pt.  i.  sect.  I.


550 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

what  this  poor  legality,  justice,  coexistence,  and
harmony  of  wills  may  be ;  what  force  may  be  and
why  and  how  it  is  connected  with  the  preceding
definition  is  not  investigated.  The  distinction  of
the  juridical  from  the  moral  sphere  is  announced
and  proclaimed  more  loudly  than  perhaps  was
ever  done  before  or  since  ;  but  to  announce  and  to
proclaim  is  not  to  carry  out.  If  rights  be  changed
into  an  ordinance  more  or  less  rational,  to  be
identified  with  the  concept  of  justice,  one  does  not
see  how  they  can  exist  independently  of  morality.
Kant  and  Fichte  were  prevented  from  conceiving
the  juridical  function  free  from  every  element  of
morality  or  immorality,  by  the  function  which
they  assigned  to  compulsion  (symbol  of  law),
submitting  it  to  ethical  exigencies.  In  this
uncertainty,  there  cannot  be  wanting  and  there  is
not  wanting  the  thought  that  rights  are  not  indeed
an  eternal  category,  but  a  historical  and  transitory
fact ;  and  as  Spinoza  had  already  said,  si  cum
humana  natura  it  a  comparatum  esset  ut  homines  id
quod  maxime  utile  est  maxime  cuperent,  nulla  esset
opus  arte  ad  concordiam  et  fidem ;  Fichte  thus
looked  upon  the  juridical  State  simply  as  a  State  of
necessity  opposed  to  the  State  of  reason  :  and  when
perfection  has  been  attained  and  there  is  complete
accord  of  all  in  the  common  end,  "  the  State  "  (he


in  LAWS  551

said)  "  disappears  as  a  legislative  and  compulsive
force."1

In  the  ulterior  phase  of  his  thought,  Fichte
afterwards  took  further  steps  toward  a  closer
union  between  morality  and  rights.  But  the
complete  resolution  of  the  first  in  the  second
is  effected  in  the  system  of  Hegel,  though  it  is
customary  to  blame  this  philosopher  for  the
opposite  fault,  namely,  that  he^  resolves  morality
in  right.  Above  all,  Hegel  would  hear  nothing
of  the  concept  of  force  in  right :  facts  of  force  and
of  violence,  as,  for  instance,  the  relation  between
a  slave  and  his  master,  appertain,  according  to
him,  to  a  circle,  which  lies  on  this  side  of  right,
to  the  subjective  spirit,  to  a  world  in  which
wrong  can  still  be  right.  The  fact  that  violence
and  tyranny  are  met  with  in  positive  rights  is
an  accidental  thing  and  does  not  affect  its  real
nature.  For  Hegel,  as  for  his  predecessors,
co-operation  arises  only  as  reaction  from  the
violation  of  what  is  just,  and  is  violence  preserva
tive  of  liberty,  suppression  of  the  previous
violence.  "  To  define  abstract  and  rigorous  rights
as  law  which  we  can  be  compelled  to  obey,  means"
(writes  Hegel)  "  to  see  them  as  a  consequence  of

1  Spinoza, Tract.  poL  c.  6,  §  3  ;  Fichte,  System  d.  Sittenlehre,  §  18
in  fine.


552 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

what  takes  place  only  by  the  cross  road  of  wrong."
But  there  is  more  :  abstract  rights,  which  form
the  first  moment  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  practical
in  Hegel,  are  unreal ;  he  opposes  to  them  the
second  moment,  morality,  which  also  is  abstract
and  unreal,  consisting  of  the  good  intention,
which  has  not  yet  been  incorporated  in  action
and  life  :  thus  concrete  reality  is  realized  only  in
the  third  moment,  in  the  ethos,  which  synthetizes
the  abstract  rights  and  the  abstract  morality  of
the  intention  in  social  life.1  From  this  it  is  clear
that  the  purely  juridical  moment  does  not  possess
effective  spiritual  autonomy  for  Hegel ;  so  much
so,  that  it  is  placed  by  him  upon  the  same  plane
as  abstract  and  unreal  morality.  In  consequence
of  his  identification  of  rights  with  ethicity,  Hegel
is  opposed  to  Kant  and  Fichte  in  his  definitions
of  single  rights ;  he  rejects  the  compulsory  and
contractual  theory  of  the  State  and  (the  Kantian)
theory  of  matrimony  as  a  strict  contract  made
between  individuals  as  to  the  reciprocal  use  of
their  bodies.2  The  compulsory  theory  of  punish
ment  seemed  to  him  to  reduce  the  latter  to  a
mere  economic  fact,  by  means  of  which  "  the
State  as  judging  power,  opens  a  business  with

1  Phil.  d.  RechtS)  passim,  concerning  force  and  violence,  §§  3,  57,  94.
2  Op.  cit.  §  158,  sqq.  161,  258.


LAWS


553


goods  called  crimes  exchangeable  for  other  goods,
and  the  code  is  the  list  of 'prices"1

Herbart too denies the originality of the

u  r  i • • t_ -j  r • i  i  Sc/l°Penhauer-

character  ot  compulsion  in  the  idea  of  rights,  and
this  is  one  of  his  five  practical  ideas,  or,  "  the
agreement  of  many  wills,  thought  as  a  rule  that
eliminates  strife."  But  even  in  this  superficial
moralistic  reduction,  force  reappears  all  of  a
sudden,  one  knows  not  how  :  society  has  need  of
an  external  bond,  in  order  to  subsist ;  force  and
power  (Mackt}  are  added  to  society  and  the  State
arises.2  The  same  contradictions  are  to  be  found
in  Schopenhauer :  after  he  has  posited  the  two
virtues  of  justice  and  benevolence,  he  makes  a
chapter  of  morality  out  of  the  pure  doctrine  of
law.  The  science  of  rights  in  the  specific  sense
borrows  this  chapter  in  order  to  study  its  opposite:
all  the  limits  that  morality  looks  upon  as  not  to
be  passed  without  intention  of  wrong-doing,  on
the  contrary  are  considered  by  the  science  of
rights  as  limits,  of  which  violation  by  others  is  not
to  be  tolerated  and  from  which  one  has  the  right
to  expel  others.  Thus  the  distinction  between
internal  and  external  is  in  this  way  reproduced  in
all  its  unmaintainability  under  the  denomination  of
rights  and  their  opposite.  But  the  bridge  of  asses

1  Werke,  L,  p.  371.  2  Allg.  prakt.  Phil.  pp.  48,  126-128.


554 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

is  always  the  junction  of  rights  with  force,  that  is  to
say,  with  the  element  extraneous  to  Ethic  ;  and  in
this  connection  Schopenhauer  has  nothing  better
to  offer  than  a  comparison.  "  As  there  are  certain
chemical  substances  never  to  be  found  pure  and
isolated,  but  always  in  some  sort  of  combination
with  another  element,  which  gives  to  them  the
necessary  consistency  ;  so  rights,  when  they  must
set  foot  in  the  real  world  and  dominate  it,  have
need  of  a  small  adjunct  of  will  and  force,  in  order
to  be  able  (notwithstanding  its  nature,  which  is
really  ideal  and  therefore  ethereal)  to  operate  and
persist  in  this  real  and  material  world,  without
evaporating  and  flying  to  heaven,  as  was  the  case
with  Hesiod."1

Rosmini  presents  the  two  elements  not  well
harmonized,  as  the  eudaemonological  and  the
ethical.  Rights  for  him  are  not  mere  eudaemonism,
but  a  eudaemonistic  fact,  produced  by  moral  right
and  receiving  form  from  it ;  hence  the  science  of
rights  ''stands  between  Eudsemonology  and  Ethic,
so  that  one  of  its  ends  extends  to  the  one  and
the  other  to  the  other."  It  would  not  be  easy  to
explain  and  to  justify  what  he  calls  a  mediate
science,  composed  of  Eudsemonology  and  Ethic  ;
and  it  would  be  far  less  easy  to  explain  how  this

1 Werke>  i.  441-445  ;  cf.  v.  259-260.


LAWS  555

science  comes  to  be  "  completely  distinct "  as  re
gards  its  components.  I  f  rights  have  a  moral  form,
they  are  moral  and  not  eudaemonological.  Owing
to  this  difficulty  Rosmini  was  led  to  introduce  the
concept  of  the  licit  as  criterion  of  differentia
tion,  defining  right  as  "a  personal  faculty  and
power  of  enjoying,  acting  and  being  able  to  act,
a  lawful  good  that  must  not  be  impeded  by
others."1  Juridically  understood  this  constitutes
a  tautology,  ethically  something  worse.  Other
Catholic  authors  (Taparelli,  for  example)  deplore
the  separation  of  ethos  from  jus,  introduced  (they
say)  by  Protestant  doctrines  and  the  limitation
of  right  to  what  a  man  can  externally  exact  from
others  according  to  law;  ''whence  it  happens
that  in  the  enumeration  of  laws,  actions  are
sometimes  posited  that  are  real  moral  faults  in
the  agent " ;  maintaining  on  the  contrary  the
necessity  of  treating  morality  and  rights  together,
"  for  rights  are  part  of  morality  in  the  same  way
that  trigonometry  and  conic  sections  are  a  part
of  geometric  theories."

III. If  Catholic  doctrines  deserve  mention  for  stau,

Trendelenberg.

their  conservativism,  it  is  necessary  to  record  the
names  of  Stahl,  Ahrens,  and  Trendelenburg,  for

1  Fil.  d.  diritto  (Napoli,  1844),  i.  20-21,  88-89,  94-97-
2  Saggio  tear.  d.  dir.  nat.  (Palermo,  1857),  in  princ.


556 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

no  other  reason  than  the  great  popularity  that
they  enjoyed  in  the  schools.  Stahl  divides  the
ethical  action  of  man  into  two  domains,  differ
ing  in  content  and  character.  This  dualism  is
founded  upon  the  double  relation  of  human  exist
ence,  individual  and  social,  which  gives  rise  to  two
forms  of  imperatives  :  to  the  imperative  of  the
individual  will,  of  religion,  and  of  morality,  and  to
that  which  aims  at  moulding  social  life  and  is  the
imperative  of  rights.  This  theory,  which  has  a
varied  terminology,  can  be  reduced  to  the  theory
of  exteriority  (sociality,  rights),  and  interiority
(individuality,  morality).  In  a  very  similar  way
Ahrens  includes  law  in  the  science  of  the  good
or  Ethic — the  fundamental  science.  He  remarks
that  good  intention,  virtue,  are  not  sufficient  to
secure  to  man  that  complex  of  material  and
spiritual  goods  of  which  he  has  need,  and  there
fore  there  must  be  a  second  mode  of  effecting
in  the  good,  which  what  is  of  importance
would  be,  not  the  motives  of  the  will,  but  the
pursuit  of  the  good  and  its  real  existence  in  life.
Trendelenburg  (who  regrets  the  classical  concept
of  the  identity  of  Ethic  and  Law  and  looks  upon
the  time  when  they  began  to  be  distinguished
as  a  beginning  of  degeneration)  discovers  three
sides  to  rights  :  the  logical,  the  ethical,  and  the


LAWS  557

physical  (compulsion),1  of  which  none,  as  we  see,
is  truly  judicial.

For  the  reasons  already  indicated,  it  is  not  utilitarians.
necessary  to  pause  over  the  juridical  ideas  of
the  utilitarians  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth
centuries,  whose  last  celebrated  representatives
were,  in  England,  Bentham,  Austin  and  Spencer.
The  German  Kirchmann  is  to  be  identified  with
the  utilitarian  tendency.  He  reduces  morality
to  the  respect  inspired,  not  by  the  law,  but  by
the  person  of  the  legislator,  a  respect  afterwards
converted  into  respect  for  the  law  "owing  to
a  peculiarity  of  human  nature,  as  the  result
of  long  custom  and  exercise."  According  to
this  view,  rights  are  defined  as  "  a  union  of
pleasure  and  morality,  whether  the  first  calls
the  second  to  its  aid  or  the  second  the  first,  in
cases  when  the  isolated  efficacy  of  either  should
prove  insufficient."  Thus  rights  are  declared
to  be,  not  an  original  principle,  but  the  simple
union  of  two  different  elements.  Jhering  failed
to  surpass  utilitarianism,  notwithstanding  his  pro
found  juridical  knowledge  and  his  lively  intellect.
He  attempted  to  impart  an  original  character  to
his  utilitarian  theory,  by  declaring  that  it  was

1  Stahl,  Rechts-  u.  Staatslehre'2  (Heidelberg,  1845),  b-  »•  ch-  I  '•>  Ahrens,
Naturr.  (It.  tr.,  Napoli,  1860),  i.  219  sq.  ;  Trendelenburg,  Naturrecht
aufd.  Grunde  d.  Ethik  (Leipzig,  1860).


558 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

objective  in  respect  to  the  usual  utilitarian  theories,
but  he  always  remained  under  the  obligation  that
he  had  undertaken,  of  showing  how  the  purest
ideality  of  Ethic  could  be  fortified  with  such  a
conception.  The  distinctions  drawn  by  Jhering
between  recompense,  compulsion,  duty,  and  love,
since  they  lack  a  foundation,  vacillate  and  prove
but  little  convincing.1
Recent  writers  IV.  Running  rapidly  through  other  recent

of  treatises,

philosophers  of  Rights,  we  do  not  meet  with  original
thoughts  that  compare  with  those  of  Kant,  of
Fichte,  and  of  Hegel.  Lasson  conceives  of  the
philosophy  of  Rights  as  a  part  of  Ethic  and  co
ordinates  with  it  three  other  parts — the  philosophy
of  custom,  of  morality  or  doctrine  of  the  virtues
and  the  doctrine  of  the  ethos  or  of  the  ethical  per
sonality.  Rights  are  the  first  of  these  three  ethical
moments  and  is  concerned  with  the  willing  of
man  as  a  willing  still  essentially  natural ;  reason
joins  it  as  a  force  essentially  determining  and
limiting,  at  first  only  external ;  the  object  of
rights  is  to  guarantee  the  conditions  of  the
common  life,  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  condition  for
all  human  ends. — Steinthal  recognizes  that  rights
undoubtedly  "  possess  an  exteriority  altogether

1  Kirchmann,  Begr.  d.  Rechtes  u.  d.  Moral1*  (Berlin,  1873),  pp. 107-
114;  see  Jhering,  Der  Zweck  i.  Recht^,  1883;  ii.3,  1886).


LAWS  559

opposed  to  the  interiority  of  Ethic  ;  hence,  if  they
be  not  apprehended  in  their  profound  nature,  they
may  easily  be  repugnant  to  moral  feeling  "  :  they
are  "  the  system  of  modes  of  compulsion,  by  means
of  which  are  secured  social  ethical  ends."  But
(we  repeat)  since  the  external  cannot  be  separated
from  the  internal,  we  do  not  see  in  what  way
ethical  ends  can  be  distinguished  from  their  modes
of  realization.  Steinthal  also  says  that  "  Ethic  is
like  a  river  and  Rights  like  the  bed  of  the  river  "  :
a  comparison  that  can  be  variously  interpreted,
like  all  comparisons  and  which  for  our  part  we
should  be  disposed  to  find  excellent,  were  it
admitted  that  as  the  bed  of  the  river,  when  it
runs  dry,  yet  remains  always  the  bed  of  a  possible
river,  so  Rights  can  remain  without  Ethic  and  yet
be  always  Rights.  But  the  signification  in  which
Steinthal  employs  that  comparison  is  simply  the
same  as  the  diad  of  external  and  internal ;  that
is  to  say,  he  in  his  turn  wishes  to  distinguish
the  indistinguishable,  so  that  it  would  on  the
contrary  be  necessary  to  reply  that  the  bed  of
the  river  and  the  river  are  not  two  things  but
one,  because  a  river  without  a  bed  cannot  exist
and  a  bed  without  a  river  is  not  the  bed  of  a
river. — Schuppe  denies  that  Rights  and  the  State
can  claim  what  is  immoral,  but  affirms  that  all


560 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

the  same  they  are  inferior  to  the  exigencies  of
morality,  because  Rights  and  the  State  concern
individuals  in  their  spatial -temporal  concretion,
but  do  not  attain  to  the  profundity  afforded  by
conscience  in  universal.  The  ethical  concept  of
rights  preponderates  in  Wundt,  for  he  does  not
conceive  of  any  other  object  of  rights,  subjective
and  objective,  save  morality.  Cohen,  in  like
manner,  does  not  admit  other  independence  to  the
science  of  rights  save  that  of  writing  in  concepts,
and  of  organizing  as  a  system  of  concepts  the
rights  that  is  eternally  unwritten,  the  moral
law.1

As  we  see,  if  the  names  of  the  writers
and  sometimes  their  phraseology  change,  the
thoughts  that  alternate  or  combine  are  always
the  same.  Rumelin,  who  undertook  to  criticize
a  series  of  definitions  of  rights,  from  that  of  Kant
onwards,  reproved  Kant  for  having  drawn  too  great
a  distinction  between  rights  and  morality,  and
others  (Ahrens,  Stahl,  Trendelenburg)  for  having
drawn  too  little.  Finally,  he  gives  his  definition
in  a  provisional  and  tentative  manner:  " juridical
ordinance  has  the  task  of  assuring  to  a  people

1  Lasson,  op.  cit.  ;  Steinthal,  Allg.  Ethik  (Berlin,  1885),  pp.  135-8  ;
Schuppe,  Ethik  u.  Rcchtsphil.  (Breslau,  1881),  pp.  283-4  ;  Wundt,  Ethik*
(Stuttgart,  1892),  p.  565  sq.  ;  Cohen,  Ethik  d.  reinen  Willens  (Berlin,
1904),  p.  567.


in  LAWS  561

that  part  of  the  good  adapted  for  realization
by  a  social  force,  according  to  universal  norms."
Jellinek  distinguishes  the  norms  of  rights  from
those  of  religion,  of  ethicity  and  of  custom,
by  a  triple  character :  (a)  because  they  are
norms  for  the  external  conduct  of  men  among
themselves ;  (b)  because  they  derive  from  a
recognized  external  authority  ;  (c)  because  their
obligatoriness  is  guaranteed  by  external  powers.
— Stammler  attaches  secondary  importance  to
the  element  of  compulsion,  and  although  he  does
not  explicitly  identify  justice  and  morality,  assigns
to  them  the  same  territory,  where  they  should
act  with  different  methods,  since  the  perfection-
ment  of  the  soul,  the  character  and  the  thought
are  distinct  from  right  behaviour.  And  adopt
ing  the  turn  of  phrase  of  a  famous  proposition
of  the  Critiqite  of  Pure  Reason,  he  ends  by
formulating  the  following  statement:  ''Justice
without  love  is  empty ;  compassion  without  a
right  rule  is  blind."  The  Frenchman  Duguit
transports  with  greater  frankness  the  centre  of
rights  into  morality  :  he  conceives  of  rights  as
altogether  different  from  force  ;  not  as  political,
but  as  limit  of  force  ;  as  consciousness  of  human
solidarity,  beneath  whose  rule  we  are  all  placed,

State  and  individual,  strong  and  weak,  governors

2  o


562 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

and  governed.  French  philosophers  of  rights
generally  oppose  the  German  school,  in  which
the  character  of  force  is  prominent,  so  that
French  juridical  philosophy  sometimes  assumes
(for  example,  in  Fouillee)  an  attitude  analogous
to  that  assumed,  as  we  know,  by  the  " generous"
French  economic  school  toward  the  English
economists.  And  merely  that  some  Italian
name  should  not  be  absent  from  this  review
of  recent  writers,  we  will  record  Miraglia,  who
repeats  the  old  Kantian  division,  making  it
yet  more  empirical :  "  Morality  and  rights  are
part  of  Ethic,  because  the  good  can  be  chiefly
developed  in  the  intimate  relations  of  the  con
science,  or  on  the  contrary  can  be  developed
by  preference  in  the  external  relations  between
man  and  man  and  between  man  and  thing "  ;—
and  Vanni,  who  mixes  a  little  positivistic  evolu
tionism  with  this  empirical  reduction,  affirming
that  rights  are  not  originally  distinct  from  morality,
but  that  afterwards  they  were  gradually  differen
tiated,  and  rights  now  have  the  special  function
of  guardianship  and  guarantee:  "that  is  to  say,
the  ethical  minimum  alone  has  been  guaranteed,
that  much  of  the  ethical  field  as  is  most  directly
necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  life  in  common,
leaving  to  other  forces  the  task  of  regulating


LAWS  563

what is most individual in  life." And  so on,
though  it  seems  that  this  is  enough.1

Such are the contradictions in which the  strident  con-

y-v, . ,  ,  r • i  t  tradiciions.

rnilosopny  ot  rights  has  struggled  for  about  two
centuries.  Rights  do  not  seem  to  be  identical
with  Ethic,  but  they  also  do  not  seem  to  be
simply  different ;  they  seem  to  be  at  once  identical
and  different,  but  yet  it  has  been  found  im
possible  to  fix  the  element  of  difference  with
the  concepts  of  external,  of  compulsion  and
others  such.  The  thought  of  a  difference  between
the  two  forms  of  activity  has  not  been  further
eliminated  ;  but  neither  has  it  been  transformed
and  absorbed.  This  is  a  morbid  condition,  of
which  the  gravest  symptom  is  the  logical  ab
surdity  of  the  aforesaid  two  rights  and  two
justices.  Riimelin  talks  of  the  pure  ideal  justice,
which  selects  from  the  evidence  and  judges  on
the  basis  of  immediate  impressions  of  feeling  ;
and  of  a  realistic,  rational,  empirical,  disciplined
and  developed  justice  :  two  justices  that  must
however  act  together.2  Others,  seeking  relations
between  those  two  concepts  from  a  single  fact  and

1  Riimelin,  Reden  u.  Aufsiitze,  new  series  (Freiburg  i. B., iSSi), p.
342  ;  Jellinek,  Allgemeine  Staatslehre  (Berlin,  1900),  p.  302  sq. ;  Stammler,
Lehre  v.  richtig. Rechte  (Berlin,  1902)  ; Duguit,  D£tat>  le  droit  objectif
et  la  loi  positive  (Paris,  1901) ;  Fouillee,  L^Idt'e  moderns  du  droit  en  Allem.,
en  Angl.  et  en  France  (Paris,  1876) ;  Miraglia,  Fil.  d.  dir.  (Napoli,  1903),
p.  80;  Vanni,  Lez.d.fil.  d.  dir.  (Bologna,  1904),  pp.  113-114.

2  Rumelin,  op.  cit.  pp.  176-202. Cp.  Lasson,  p.  215  sq.


564 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL n.

failing  to  conquer  the  difficulty,  force  logic  by  dis
tinguishing  between  concept  and  ideal  of  rights,
or  (as  Vanni  said)  between  logical  concept  and
concept  of  the  rational  exigencies  of  rights :  as
though  a  concept  could  be  truly  logical,  if  it
do  not  derive  from  rational  exigencies,  and
as  if  these  can  be  valid,  if  they  be  not  the
concept  itself.  Worse  still,  Stammler  affirms
the  identity  of  rights  with  moral  rights,  and  of
rights  alone  with  immoral  rights,  arriving  at  the
already  criticized  division  of  effective  rights
(Gesetzes)  into  two  classes.  It  "  is  either  right
rights  (richtiges  Rechf)  or  not ;  and  right  rights
are  effective,  whose  content  of  will  possesses  the
property  of  being  right.  Hence,  right  rights
stand  to  effective  rights  as  species  to  genus."  To
meditate  upon  this  plan  of  division  is  more  than
sufficient  to  produce  the  conviction  of  the  failure
of  the  Philosophy  of  rights,  as  it  has  been  developed
and  as  it  could  be  developed  with  the  practical
presuppositions  hitherto  admitted.  As  the  result
of  the  direction  of  studies,  from  Thomas  to
the  most  recent,  there  remains  nothing  but  the
problem  itself,  as  originated  by  the  definitions  of
Thomas,  and  become  certainly  more  acute  and


1  Op.  cit.  p. 22. Cf. Bergbohm,  Jurisprudent u. Rechtsphilosophie
(Leipzig,  1892),  i.  141-147  n.


LAWS  565

difficult,  owing  to later disputes and inquiries,
but  never  solved.

V.  Less  attention  has  been  bestowed  upon
the  concept  of  law,  upon  which  it  was  impossible  °J
to  obtain  full  light,  on  the  one  hand  before  the
theory  of  abstract  concepts  had  been  developed
(representative  of  class)  in  their  difference  from
the  universal,  and  on  the  other  before  precon
ceptions  as  to  the  necessary  social  and  political
character  of  laws  had  been  discarded.

But  the  difficulties  contained  in  that  concept  ///  antiquity.
had several times been observed in antiquity.
In  a  dialogue  between  Alcibiades  and  Pericles,
preserved  in  the  Memorabilia,  it  is  asked  if  all
laws  be laws,  or  only  those  that  are  just ; and
it  is  shown  that it  does  not  suffice  that  a  law
should  be  a  law,  in  order  to  ensure  its  observ
ance.1 No  true  solution,  however,  was  reached
in this,  as  in many  questions  discussed at this
period  by  Greek  philosophy. The  Crito  is  rather
a  stupendous work  of  art  than a  philosophical
thesis,  for  it  shows  to  the  life  the  state  of  soul
of  Socrates,  and  the  importance  that  he  attributed
to  the  laws  and  to  the  social  order : the  reason
alleged  for  obedience  to  them,  being  placed  in
the  fact  that  we  have  tacitly  or  explicitly  agreed

1  Mem.  i.  2.  40  sq.


566 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

to  remain  within  the  boundaries  of  a  given  state,
has  in  it  something  of  the  sophistical.  Even  in
antiquity  was  seen  the  necessity  of  tempering
the  rigidity  of  laws  by  means  of  the  equable,
TO  eTTiei/ces,  which  Aristotle  defined  as  the  correc
tion  of  the  law  where  it  sins  through  its  character
of  generality  (eiravopOwfjLa  vopov  y  e'XAetW  Sia  TO
/ca06\ov).1  But  it  was  not  possible  to  escape  from
empiricism  by  means  of  the  concept  of  equity.
The  law  sins,  not  once,  but  always,  through
abstractness,  or  better,  it  never  sins  at  all,
because  its  function  resides  precisely  in  that
abstractness. — In  modern  times  Diderot  felt  and
expressed  all  the  gravity  of  the  conflicts  that
arise,  alike  from  the  observance  and  from  the
inobservance  of  the  law,  and  he  expresses  this
in  his  Entretien  dun  pere  avec  ses  enfants  sur
le  danger  de  se  mettre  au-dessus  des  lois.  "  Mon
pere  (remarks  one  of  the  sons  at  the  end  of  the
dialogue),  cest  qua  la  rigueur  il  riy  a  pas  de
lois  pour  le  sage.  .  .  .  Parlez  plus  has.  .  .  .
Toutes  giant  sujettes  a  des  exceptions,  cest  a  lui
quil  appartient  de  juger  des  cas  ou  il  faut  sy
soumettre  ou  sen  affranchir. — Je  ne  serais  pas
trop  fdche1  (concludes  the  father),  quil  y  eut
dans  la  ville  un  ou  deux  citoyens,  comme  toi;

1  Eth.  Nicom.  Bk.  v,  c.  n.


»'  LAWS  567

mats  je  riy  habiterais  pas,  sils  pensaient  tons  de


meme"1


The  attitude  of  rebellion  to  the  laws  showed  romanticism.
itself  in  German  thought  and  literature  in  the
preromanticism  of  the  Sturm  und  Drang  (for
instance  in  the  R'duber  of  Schiller),  and  in
Romanticism  properly  so  called,  when  among
others  appeared  the  theories  that  limited  the
State,  such  as  those  of  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,
and  theories  of  sexual  relations,  such  as  those
of  Frtedrich  Schlegel.  In  the  Lucinde  is  dis
played  great  horror  for  bourgeois  customs  and  for
every  sort  of  constraint,  sexual  relations  being
advocated  with  woman,  family,  love  and  fidelity,
but  without  matrimony.

Jacobi  represents  this  attitude  in  several  of
his  writings,  with  great  elevation  of  soul,  and
especially  in  the  Woldemar  (1779,  1794-96),  the
most  lively  protest  that  has  ever  been  made
against  law  in  the  name  of  the  individual.  Here
the  question  treated  is  precisely  whether  we
should  follow  the  inspirations  of  our  own  con
science  or  the  laws  of  our  own  people.  Sides
are  taken  against  "  the  compulsion  and  violence
exercised  by  usages,  customs,  habits,  and  against

1  (Ezivres,  edit. Assezat et  Tourneux,  v. (Paris,  Garnier, 1875),  pp.
307-8.


568 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

those  who  do  not  think,  save  by  means  of  those
laws,  holding  them  sacred,  with  resolute  soul  and
mind  inert "  ;  and  "  that  audacious  heroic  spirit
is  celebrated,  which  raises  itself  above  the  laws
and  common  morality  that  it  may  produce  a
new  order  of  things."  "His  heart  alone  tells  man
immediately  what  is  good  ;  his  heart  alone,  his
instincts  only,  can  tell  him  immediately  :  to  love
it  is  his  life.  Reflection  teaches  him  to  know
and  to  practise  what  leads  to  good.  Habit
assures  and  makes  his  the  wisdom  that  he  has
acquired."  "  But  this  individual  initiative,"  he
observes,  "may  be  the  cause  of  abuse  and  mis
understandings."  "Without  doubt," replied  Jacobi,
"but  what  cannot  be  misunderstood  has  little
meaning,  and  what  cannot  be  abused  has  but
little  force  in  use."  Men  may  be  divided  into
two  classes ;  the  one  exaggerates  fear,  the  other
hope  and  courage.  The  former  are  circumspect,
always  in  doubt,  they  fear  the  truth  because
it  may  be  misunderstood,  they  fear  great
qualities,  lofty  virtue,  because  of  the  aberrations
to  which  it  may  give  rise ;  and  they  have  evil
always  before  their  eyes.  The  latter  are  the
bold  (who  could  be  called  the  irreflective  in  the
Platonic  sense)  and  they  behave  with  less  exacti
tude  ;  they  are  not  so  perplexed,  they  trust


LAWS  569

rather  to  the  voice  of  their  heart  than  to  any
word  from  without ;  they  build  rather  upon
courage  than  upon  virtue,  which  generally  keeps
them  waiting  too  long.  They  sometimes  ask
themselves  with  Young :  Is  virtue  then  alone
baptized  and  are  the  passions  pagan?  "If,"  says
Jacobi,  "  I  must  keep  to  one  of  these  classes,  I
choose  the  second."  "Yes,"  he  exclaims  else
where,  opposing  the  abstractness  of  Kant, — "  yes,
I  am  atheist  and  impious,  yes,  I  will  to  lie,  in
opposition  to  the  will  that  wills  nothing,  as
Desdemona  lied  when  dying,  I  will  to  lie  and  to
deceive  like  Pylades,  when  he  slew  himself  for  the
sake  of  Orestes  ;  I  will  to  slay  like  Timoleon  ;  to
break  laws  and  oaths  like  Epaminondas  and
John  de  Witt ;  to  commit  suicide  like  Otho ;
to  despoil  the  temple  like  David ;  to  pluck
ears  of  corn  on  the  Sabbath  day,  if  only
because  I  am  hungry  and  the  law  is  made  for
man,  not  man  for  the  law.  By  the  sacrosanct
conscience  that  I  have  within  me,  I  know  that  the
privilegium  aggratiandi  for  such  crimes  against
the  pure  letter  of  the  law,  rational,  absolute  and
universal,  is  the  sovran  right  of  man  himself,
the  seal  of  his  dignity,  of  his  divine  nature."
But  it  must  be  remarked  upon  reading  these

1 Woldernar,  passim.


570 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

effusions  (most  sincere,  as  all  that  came  from
the  pen  of  Jacobi),  that  they  are  rather  mani
festations  of  states  of  the  soul  than  theories,  and
therefore,  strictly  speaking,  not  to  be  theoretically
censured,  as  is  the  case  with  all  affirmations  that
place  in  relief  one  side  of  reality,  without  denying
the  others  by  doing  so.

Hegel  discovered  this,  observing  in  relation
to  our  last  extract :  "  Neither  of  the  two  sides
can  be  wanting  to  moral  beauty,  neither  its
liveliness  as  individuality,  by  which  it  does  not
obey  the  dead  concept,  nor  the  form  of  concept
and  of  law,  universality  and  objectivity,  which
is  the  side  exclusively  considered  by  Kant,  by
means  of  the  absolute  abstraction  to  which  he
submitted  liveliness,  thereby  suffocating  it.  The
passage  cited  as  to  the  liveliness  and  freedom
of  the  moral  life  does  not  exclude  objectivity,
but  does  not  express  it  either."  Hence  the
danger  of  the  romantic  attitude,  which  had  no
need  of  exhortations  such  as  those  of  Jacobi,  for
it  already  too  much  preferred  magnanimous  to
honest,  noble  to  moral  action ;  and  was  much
inclined  to  free  itself  of  the  law  itself  under
the  pretext  of  freeing  itself  from  the  letter  of
the  law.  Meeting  empirical  with  empirical
observations,  Hegel  also  remarked  that  the


in  LAWS  57i

examples  of  the  violation  of  laws  due  to  the
divine  majesty  of  man,  adduced  by  Jacobi,  were
conditioned  by  the  natural  temperament,  by
actual  situations,  and  especially  by  circumstances
of  supreme  misfortune,  of  supreme  and  rare
necessity,  in  which  few  individuals  find  them
selves.  "  It  would  be  very  sad  for  liberty  if
it  could  only  prove  its  majesty  and  become
actual  in  extraordinary  cases  of  cruel  laceration
of  the  moral  and  natural  life  and  in  extraordinary
individuals.  The  ancients,  on  the  other  hand,
found  the  highest  morality  in  the  life  of  a  well-
ordered  State."  Hegel  admitted  that  the  affir
mation  of  Jacobi,  "  The  law  is  made  for  man,
not  man  for  the  law,"  contained  a  great  truth,
when  it  was  intended  to  allude  in  this  way  to
the  positive  or  statutory  law.  But  the  opposite
was  also  true,  when  the  allusion  was  to  the
moral  law,  taken  as  universal,  outside  of  which,
when  the  individual  was  separated  from  it,  there
was  nothing  but  appetites  and  sensible  impulses,
which  can  only  be  means  for  the  law.1

But  we  must  not  fail  to  recognize  that  Hegel
does  not  avail  himself  of  this  most  exact  distinc
tion  in  his  philosophy,  for  there  the  dominating
motive  is  respect  for  the  laws  and  the  tendency

1 Werke>  i.  52  sq.  ;  xvi.  21  sq.


572 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

to  attack  individual  initiative.  Hegel  repeats
many  times  with  complacency  the  saying  of  the
Pythagorean,  that  the  best  way  of  educating
a  young  man  is  to  make  him  citizen  of  a  State
ruled  by  good  laws ;  and  he  remarks  that
Herculeses  belong  to  primitive  and  barbarous
times,  and  that  individual  valour  has  but  a  small
field  in  times  of  culture.  He  was  most  averse
to  criticism  of  and  rebellion  against  the  authority
of  the  State  ;  for  these  did  not  seem  to  him  to
correspond  to  the  reality  of  the  spirit.  That
surface  is  not  the  reality ;  at  bottom  all  desire
order  ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  apparent
political  sentiment  from  that  which  men  really
will,  for  within  them  they  will  the  thing,  but
hesitate  as  to  particulars,  and  enjoy  the  vanity
of  censuring.1  Men  believe  that  the  State  exists
and  that  in  it  alone  are  particular  interests  realized;
but  habit  makes  invisible  to  them  that  upon
which  our  entire  existence  depends.  There  is
in  short  in  Hegel,  besides  the  philosopher,  a
politician  and  moralist  regretful  of  the  excesses
of  revolutionaries  and  of  unbridled  romanticism  ;
and  there  is  also  in  him  the  desire  for  an  exact
inquiry  into  the  function  and  limits  of  positive  law.2


1  Phil.  d.  RechtS)  sect.  II.  passim  ;  cf.  pp.  150,  153.
2  Op.  cit.  §  268,  Zus.


LAWS  573

In  recent  times  there  have  been  many  and  Recent
very  various  manifestations  connected  with  the  *
concept  of  this  function  and  of  its  limits,  and
it  would  occupy  much  space  to  enumerate  and
to  illustrate  them  all.  We  shall  mention  three,
very  distant  and  different.  The  first,  which
belongs  to  the  political  and  social  field,  is  the
doctrine  of  anarchy  and  is  opposed  to  laws
of  all  sorts ;  it  is  a  not  purely  philosophical
doctrine,  though  it  involves  philosophical  ques
tions.1  The  other  two,  which  more  properly
belong  to  the  juridical  field,  are  the  assertion
of  the  importance  of  laws  and  of  the  duty  of
defending  their  existence,  even  where  their
violation  by  others  does  not  interfere  with  our
individual  interests,  or  when  their  defence  costs
individual  sacrifices  (this  was  the  argument  of  a
vigorous  little  book  by  Jhering) ; 2 — and  by  way  of
contrast  the  demand  for  a  free  creation  of  the
law  by  the  judge  (die  freie  Rechtsfindung),  which
has  given  rise  to  discussions  that  are  yet  burning,
more  directly  provoked  by  a  little  book  of
Kantorowicz  (Gnaeus  Flavius).8

VI. If  then  there  has  not  been  a  great  gain

1  An  ample  exposition  of  such  doctrines  is  to  be  found  in  E.  Zoccoli,
Z'  Anarchia,  Turin,  1907.

2  La  Lotta  pel  diritto,  It.  tr.,  Milan,  1875.

3  La  Lotta  per  la  scienza  del  diritto  (It.  tr.,  Palermo,  1908) ;  c£  Critica,
vi.  pp.  199-201.


574 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

Natural  rights  in  clearness  of  fundamental  concepts,  as  regards

and  their  dis
solution. The  this  part  of  the subject, there  has  on  the  con-

historical  school

of  rights.  trary  been  an  indubitable  advance  in  conscious
ness  acquired  as  to  the  mutability  of  laws  and
as  to  the  consequent  contradictoriness  of  the  idea
of  natural  Rights.  This,  with  its  complement,
the  catalogue  of  innate  natural  and  inalienable
rights  of  man,  had  great  success  in  the  seventeenth
century  for  political  and  social  reasons,  attaining
its  highest  development  in  the  century  following.
But  it  may  be  said  that  the  doctrine  of  innate
rights  was  liquidated  by  Kant  in  the  Metapkysic
of  Custom,  when  he  wrote  the  proposition  that
liberty  is  the  only  original  and  innate  rights,  which
belong  to  man  through  his  very  humanity,1  at
the  very  moment  when  it  was  most  energetically
affirmed  in  a  practical  form  in  the  Declaration
of  the  Rights  of  Man.  In  the  system  of  Hegel
the  constructions  of  natural  rights  began  to  lose
their  rigidity ;  becoming  indeed  historical  cate
gories  of  Ethicity  or  Sittlichkeit,  determinations
of  the  spirits  of  various  peoples  (Volksgeister),
which  are  in  their  turn  determinations  of  the
Absolute  or  of  the  Idea.  Owing  to  this  view
(without  taking  into  account  his  error  of  wishing
to  philosophize  and  to  make  dialectical  what  is

1  Metaphys.  d.  Sitt.  p.  40.


LAWS  575

historical  and  empirical),  Hegel  connected  him
self  closely  with  the historical  school  of  rights
(Hugo, Savigny, etc.). This, notwithstanding
the  exaggeration  by  which he seemed to  deny
the  value  of  the  ideal  demands  made  of  rights,
had  the  merit  of  shaking  the  old  conception  of
natural  rights. This has retained its place in
treatises from that time  onward in a more or
less  worm-eaten and unstable condition by  the
force of inertia; or it  has been preserved by
Catholic  writers (by Rosmini not less  than by
the Padre Taparelli), whose conception is of
necessity but little historical ; or it has re
appeared in those curious Catholics and anti-
historians, the positivists (Spencer, Ardigo).
But that natural rights are nothing but new
historical  rights  in  the  struggle  of  their  becoming,
is  a  conviction  that has  penetrated  the  general
consciousness.

We also owe to the historical school the  The  compari
son  between

comparison  between  the  life  of  rights  and  the  life  rights  and

language.

of  language  ;  this  was  prepared  by  the  discoveries
of  comparative  linguistic,  which  although  sub
stantially  correct,  yet  had,  as  we  have  observed,
the  defect  of  limiting  itself  to  the  grammatical
form  of  both  facts,  not  to  their  genuine  and
direct  reality.  Jacobi,  in  the  already  quoted


576 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

effusions  of  Woldemar,  had  recourse  to  the  same
comparison,  for  other  reasons  and  with  a  more
exact  understanding  of  its  terms  ;  speaking  there
of  the  moral  infraction  of  laws,  he  wrote :
"  For  such  exceptions,  for  such  licences  of  lofty
poetry,  the  grammar  of  virtue  has  no  definite
rules  and  therefore  does  not  mention  them
No  grammar,  least  of  all  the  general  and  philo
sophical,  could  contain  in  itself  all  that  appertains
to  a  living  language,  and  teach  how,  in  every
epoch,  every  dialect  must  be  formed.  But  it
would  be  unwise  to  affirm  that  every  one  may
speak  as  they  feel  inclined."  And  again,  "Virtue
is  free  art ;  and  as  artistic  genius  gives  laws  to
art  by  its  creations,  so  moral  genius  gives
laws  to  human  conduct :  just,  good,  noble,
excellent,  is  what  the  just,  good,  noble,  and
excellent  man  practises,  achieves  and  produces
in  conformity  with  his  character ;  he  invents
virtue,  procures  and  generates  adequate  expres
sion  for  human  dignity."
The  concept  of  VII.  The  study  of  the  concept  of  law  is  also

law,  and  the  .  r i •  r <i

studies  of  com-  progressing,  and henceforth is  not connned to

parative Rights  L

and  of  the so-called juridical laws and to legislations and

general  Doc
trine  of  Rights.  Codes. Researches  into  primitive  rights  and  into

those  of  savage  and  barbarous  peoples,  known  as

ri  pp.  in,  416,  &&&  passim.


LAWS  577

juridical  Ethnography  or  comparative  rights,  have
greatly  contributed  to  destroy  many  prejudices  ;
as also the attention that has been directed
to facts called social, that is to say, not
strictly political. A school that has had in
dependent yet partly similar manifestations in
England (Austin, Sumner Maine,  etc.)  and in
Germany,  where  it  has  taken  the  name  of  school  of
the  general  Doctrine  of  Rights  (allgemeine  Reclits-
lehre,  according  to  the  denomination  given  to  it  by
Adolph  Merkel),  studies  in  particular  the  concept
of  law  in  its  various  classes  and  subclasses ;  and
from  it there cannot but issue a more correct
understanding of the concept of law, as from
the refinement of  political Economy into  pure
Economy  has  come,  first  Psychology  and  then  the
Philosophy  of  economy. Meanwhile  (and  as  far  as
we  know)  the  literature  of  the  school,  dominated
as  it  is  by  the  needs  of  jurisprudence,  maintains
an empirical or intellectualistic character; and
jurists,  rather  than  philosophers  themselves,  are
those that  most cultivate it. The distinctions
and subdistinctions of  the laws are conducted
with subtlety,  but  are  without  solid  foundation,
because  the  concept  posited  as basis of  law  is
uncertain and arbitrary. Limiting  ourselves  to
a single example, let us mention Bierling,


2  r


578 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

perhaps  the  most  philosophical  of  those  various
writers.  Bierling  first  of  all  excludes  from  the
concept  of  law  the  modes  of  man's  conduct
toward  God,  toward  himself,  and  toward  animals  ;
but  he  gives  no  serious  reason  for  this.  He  then
arrives,  by  a  mere  arbitrary  act,  at  the  limiting  of
the  concept  of  law  to  the  manner  of  men's  con
duct  among  themselves,  and  defines  rights  in  the
juridical  sense  (as  he  calls  it :  "  in  general,  all
that  men  living  together  in  any  sort  of  com
munity  reciprocally  recognize  as  a  norm  and  rule
of  this  living  together  ").  He  then  introduces  into
the  concept  thus  defined,  not  by  deduction,  but  as
the  result  of  a  second  arbitrary  act,  the  concept  of
exteriority,  adding  that,  "the  object  of  law  is  a
definite  external  procedure  of  man  toward  man."
In  all  this  is  evident  the  bad  influence  of  juris
prudence  and  of  its  empirical  preoccupations.
VIII.  Ethical  legalism  became  a  bitter  question

and  moral r _- ...  • i i  r i

casuistic,  for  Christianity,  precisely  because  of  the  contest
between  lofty  Christian  morality  and  its  legal-
itarian  form,  chiefly  inherited  from  Judaism.  In
the  ancient  world  there  is  almost  no  trace  of  the
question,  just  because  the  struggle  was  never
acute.2  Hence  the  difficulties  debated  among  the

1  Bierling,  Juristische  Prinzipienkhre  (Freiburg  i.  B.,  1894-98,  2  vols.).

2  Sidgwick,  History  of  Ethics,  London,  1892,  p.  ill  sq.


in  LAWS  579

patristics and the  scholastics as  to derogability
from  divine  laws  and  the  consequent  distinctions
between  a  perfect  and  an  imperfect  moral  life,
between  precepts  and  counsels ;  and  as  recourse
is  had  to  precedents  in  judicial  questions,  so  here
with  these  ethical  problems  concerning  exceptions
made  by  God  to  the  moral  law,  to  the  precepts
of the Bible  (where  some  were  not  beautiful).1
The  practical  needs  of  confession  give  origin  to
books on casuistic, of which collections exist
dating  from  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries.
The Reformation manifested aversion to  these
treatises  :  Luther  said  that  moral  theologians  had
first  extinguished  in  men  the  fear  of  God  and  had
then  placed  soft  cushions  beneath  their  hands  and
feet;  and  Melanchthon  lamented  that  the  Christian
Republic  was  honoured  theologastrorum  sententiis
de  conscientiae  casibus, inestricabilibus,  iibi  nun-
quam non ex quaestione quaestio  nascitur, and
called  them  conscientiarum  cauteria.2

The inconclusiveness of legalism was con-

and  Jesuitic

verted  into  a  most  powerful  poison  by  the  Jesuits,  »
with  their  probabilitism,  of  which  precursors  were
not  wanting  in  the  Middle  Ages,  but  it  received

1  A. Bonucci, La derogabilitcl  del  diritto nalurale nella Scolastica,
Perugia,  1906.

2  Hist,  remarks  in  dissert., De  casuisticae  theologiae  originibus,  U
atque  praestantia  (together  with  De  Ligorio, Thtol.  mor.t  ed.  cit.,  pp.
xxiv-lxxvi).


580 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL PT.

definite  form  from  the  Dominican  Bartolomeo
Medina  in  1577.  From  that  time  onward  pro-
babilitism  began  to  be  surrounded  with  a  copious
literature,  which  continually  increased  in  the
course  of  the  seventeenth  century,  to  decline  in
the  century  following.  The  opposition  originated
by  the  Jansenists,  whose  capital  literary  docu
ment,  the  Provinciales  of  Pascal  also  dates  from
the  seventeenth  century  (1656),  was  the  period
of  the  greatest  vigour  of  the  doctrine.  But  if
the  most  perfect  and  most  Christian  moral  con
science  dwelt  in  the  Jansenists  and  in  Pascal  and
if  the  absurd  consequences  to  which  probabilitism
led  became  clearly  evident  in  that  polemic,  yet  it
cannot  be  said  that  philosophically  the  error  was
finally  superseded.  Ere  this  could  have  happened,
it  would  have  been  necessary,  on  the  one  hand  to
destroy  all  possibility  of  theological  utilitarianism
(which  was  impossible  to  carry  out  in  a  religious
and  transcendental  Ethic,  owing  to  its  mystical
and  irrationalistic  character)  and  on  the  other  to
destroy  legalism.  Pascal  himself  (and  St.  Augus
tine,  to  whom  he  appeals)  was  always  confined  in
the  legislative  conception  of  morality  ;  hence  he
speaks  of  the  laws  of  "  not  slaying,"  which  it  was
necessary  to  obey  strictly,  save  in  the  cases
established  by  God  or  when  he  gives  particular


LAWS  58l

orders to put certain persons to death. The
Catholic Church, always astutely  political, con
demned  without  hesitation  the  extreme  rigorists,
who wish that the law should always be
followed and the extreme latitudinarians,  who
think that any sort of  reasons, however  slight
and improbable, suffice for not observing the
law; allowing intermediate sects to discuss
among  themselves  until  they  were  out  of  breath,
that  is  to  say,  the  moderate  rigorists,  the  proba-
biliorists  or  tutiorists,  the  equiprobabilitists  and  the
probabilitists. Sant  Alfonso  dei  Liguori  adhered
to these last, who were of opinion that it is
always  permissible  to  do  what  we  wish,  provided
always that there be probable reasons, though
less  probable  than  those  that  militate  in  favour
of  the  law. In  his  Dissertatio  de  usu  moderate
opinionis  probabilis?  he  thus  exposed  the  principal
argument of  his thesis  : Peto  ab  adversariis  lit
indicent (si possunt] ubinam legem hanc csse
scriptam  invenerint,  quod  teneamur  inter  opiniones
probabiles  probabiliores  scqui  ? Hacc  lex  quidcm,
prout universalis, debcret omnibus esse nota ct
certa : at  quomodo  ista  lex  certa  did  potcst,  cum
communis  sententia  doctorum,  saltern  longe  major
illorum pars, post tantum discrimen absolute

1 In  Theol.  wot:  i.  10-24.


582 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

asserant, hanc legem non adesse  ? Usque dum

igitur  de  tali  lege  dubitatum, opinio  quod  adsit

haec lex sequendi probabiliora, quamvis alicui

videatur  probabilior, nunquam tamen lex did

potest,  sed  appellanda  erit  mera  opinio,  utpote  ex

fallibili  motivo  deduct  a,  quae  vim  nequaquam  habet,

ut  lex,  obligandi. This doctrine still  retains in

our  day  very  firm  supporters  among  the  Jesuits

(Cathrein,1  Lehmkuhl,2  etc.).

critique  of  the But if the destruction of theological utili-

concept  of  the

licit.  tarianism  has  been  brought  about  by  the  criticism

of  the  transcendental  and  by  idealistic  Ethic,  that
of  legalism,  with  its  expression  as  the  licit,  the
permissible,  or  morally  indifferent,  appears  in
Fichte  and  in  Schleiermacher.  Kant  did  not
treat  the  question  explicitly  and,  as  observed,
we  can  deduce  from  -certain  of  his  utterances
that  he  did  not  altogether  abandon  the  concept
of  the  licit.3

But  Fichte,  in  a  note  to  his  Natitral  Rights,
wrote  :  "  A  right  is  evidently  something  of  which
a  man  can  avail  himself  or  not ;  and  is  therefore
the  result  of  a  law  that  is  merely  permissive.
.  .  .  The  permission  is  not  expressly  given  by
the  law  and  is  deduced  by  interpretation  from  its

1  Cathrein,  Moralphilosophief  i.  428-437.

2  Probabilismus  vindicatus  (Freiburg,  Bk.  i.,  1906).

3  See  above,  p.  405  ;  cf.  also  Krit.  d.  rein. Vcrn.  pp.  10-11  n.


LAWS  583

limitation.  And  the  limitation  of  a  law  is  shown
by  the  fact  of  its  being  something  conditioned.
It  is  not  absolutely  apparent,  therefore,  that  a
permissive  law  which  commands  in  an  uncon
ditioned  manner  and  therefore  extends  to  all,
can  be  deduced  from  the  moral  law."

What  was  a  mere  mention  in  Fichte  became

macher

an  ample  demonstration  in  the  celebrated  memoir
of  Schleiermacher,  On  the  Concept  of  the  Licit
(1826),  which  resolutely  drove  the  licit  out  of
the  field  of  Ethic,  by  demonstrating  its  altogether
juridical  nature:  "The  original  seat  of  this  con
cept  cannot  be  the  domain  of  Ethic,  in  which  it
is  not  admissible  :  it  appertains  to  the  domain  of
law  and  of  positive  law  ;  and  there  is  something
originally  licit  in  civil  life,  precisely  in  this  sense
that  there  is  something  half-way  between  what  is
commanded  and  what  is  forbidden,  the  proper
object  of  law."

Rosmini,  owing  to  having  ignored  this  origin
of  the  lawful,  proceeded  to  divide  human  actions
into  four  classes :  the  prohibited,  the  licit,  the
commanded,  and  the  superogatory ;  the  last
three  were  all  innocent,  but  the  licit  was  simply
innocent,  while  the  commanded  and  the  super-

1  GritndL  d.  Naturr,  introd.  §  iii.  n.

2  Werke,  sect,  iii.,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  418-445  ;  cf.  G.  Mayer,  Die  Lehre  vom
Erlaubten  in  der  Gesch.  d.  Ethik  seit  Schleiermacher,  Leipzig,  1899.


584 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL FT.

ogatory  were  also  furnished  with  moral  value.
Hence  arose  grave  errors  in  his  Ethic  and
in  his  Philosophy  of  law  and  definitions  that
it  is  impossible  to  grasp,  such  as  the  following
relating  to  superogatory  actions:  "  The  obligatory
consists  in  preserving  the  moral  order,  but
the  superogatory  consists  in  preserving  the
said  order  in  a  more  excellent  and  perfect
manner,  with  fuller,  more  frequent,  and  more
ardent  acts  of  the  will.  These  second  not  only
preserve  the  moral  order,  but  augment  it,  almost
creating  a  part  of  it  themselves  with  their  activity  ;
they  make  themselves  not  only  followers  of  the
good,  but  authors  of  the  good  itself."  Rosmini
also  considered  that  the  posing  of  the  question  of
probabilitism  represented  progress  in  Ethic  ;  that
is,  upon  "  what  man  should  do,  if  he  found  himself
in  doubt  as  to  performing  or  omitting  to  perform
an  action."  But  the  solution  of  the  question  that
he  gave  on  his  account  amounted  (be  it  said  to
his  honour)  to  the  annihilation  of  legalism,  since
for  him  a  doubtful  law  does  not  oblige  when
it  is  positive  Rights,  but  it  does  oblige  when  it  is
moral  law,  that  is,  when  there  is  a  fear  of  offend
ing  against  the  supreme  and  necessary  law,  which
wills  absolutely  to  be  always  fulfilled.1  In  other

1 Compendia  di  Etica,  pp.  48,  96,  284-285.


LAWS  585

terms,  the  true  practical  law  is  never  (even  when
it  appears  to  be  so)  positive  law ;  and  the  concept
of  law,  which  always  has  a  positive  meaning,  is
extraneous  to  Ethic  and  to  the  Philosophy  of  the
practical :  a  result  to  which  Rosmini  does  not
attain,  or  at  least  is  not  conscious  of  attaining.


CONCLUSION

the  Philosophy  of  the  practical  terminates

of  the  Spirit

as  the  whole  of  the  exposition  that  we  had  proposed  to  give  of

Philosophy.

jfc  the  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit ;  and  the  exposition
of  the  whole  of  Philosophy  also  terminates,
because  the  Spirit  is  the  whole  of  Reality.^)

Here  at  the  end,  this  proposition  has  no  need
of  such  proof  or  verification  as  is  customary  in
calculation.  Because  the  proof  of  Philosophy  is
intrinsic  to  it  and  consists  of  the  reciprocal  con
fronting  of  the  development  of  thought  and  its
demands,  between  the  System  and  Logic.  And
Logic,  as  we  know,  if  it  be  in  a  certain  sense  the
whole  of  Philosophy  (philosophy  in  brief  or  in
idea  or  in  potentiality),  is  also  a  part  among  the
parts  of  the  philosophical  system  ;  so  that  the  con
frontation  of  the  System  and  of  Logic,  of  thought
in  act  and  thought  in  idea,  between  thought  and
the  thought  of  thought,  has  been  continuously
present  and  active  in  the  course  of  the  exposition,

and  the coincidence of  the two  processes and

586


CONCLUSION  587

their confluence into one has been clearly
demonstrated.

Logic  affirms  the  thinkability  of  the  real  and  Correspond*

between  Log

the  inconceivability  of  any  limit  that  could  be  and  system,
put  to  thought,  of  every  excogitation  of  the
unknowable.  And  Philosophy,  examining  every
part  of  the  real,  has  not  found  any  place  in
which  to  lodge  the  unknowable  in  thought.
Logic  posits  as  the  ideal  of  the  concept,  that  it
should  be  universal  and  not  general,  concrete  and
not  abstract ;  that  it  should  be  pure  of  intuitions
such  as  those  of  mathematics  and  differ  from
them  in  being  necessary  and  not  conventional ;
fruitful  in  intuitions  like  those  of  the  empirical
sciences,  but  differing  from  them  by  its  infinite
fecundity  which  dominates  every  possible  mani
festation  of  the  real.  And  the  system  has
effectively  shown  that  this  desideratum  of  Logic  is
not  a  chimaera  and  that  the  Spirit  is  indeed  that
concept  which  corresponds  to  the  ideal  of  the
concept :  there  is  nothing  that  is  not  a  manifesta
tion  of  the  Spirit  (an  effectual  manifestation,
not  conventional  or  metaphorical).  Logic,  reject
ing  all  dualism  or  pluralism,  wills  that  the
philosophical  concept  shall  be  a  unique  concept
or  of  the  One,  and  does  not  suffer  heterogeneous
concepts  at  its  side.  And  the  system  has  con-


588 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

firmed  that  the  concept  of  the  Spirit  alone  fulfils
the  logical  condition  of  the  concept ;  and  that
the  concept  of  Nature,  far  from  being  a  concept
of  something  real,  is  the  hypostasis  of  a  manner  of
elaborating  reality,  not  philosophical  but  practical;
thus  the  concept  itself  of  Nature,  in  so  far  as  it  is
effectual,  is  nothing  but  the  product  of  a  function
of  the  Spirit.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Logic  of  the  idea  of
the  concept  deduces  that  it  must  be  a  synthesis
of  itself  and  of  its  opposite.  For  its  opposite,
far  from  being  heterogeneous  and  different,  is
flesh  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  blood  of  the
concept  itself,  as  negation  is  of  affirmation.  And
the  system  has  led  us  before  the  Spirit  or  Reality
as  development,  which  is  the  true  reality  of  the
real  and  synthesis  of  opposites.  Logic  deduces
that  the  concept  is  synthesis  of  itself  and  of  the
distinct  from  itself,  of  the  universal  and  of  the
individual,  and  that  therefore  Philosophy  must
flow  into  History,  and  mediate  its  comprehension.
And  the  system  shows  the  capacity  of  its  principles
for  interpreting  the  complex  reality  of  History,
and  above  all  the  history  of  philosophy  itself,  by
solving  its  problems.  Logic  does  not  admit
other  distinctions  of  the  concept  than  those  that
are  the  outcome  of  its  own  nature,  such  as  the


CONCLUSION  589

relations  of  subject  -  object  and  of  individual-
universal  ;  and  the  system  has  confirmed  these
distinctions,  duplicating  itself  as  Philosophy  of
knowledge  and  Philosophy  of  action,  of  theory
and  of  practice  ;  subdividing  itself  as  to  the  first,
into  ^Esthetic  and  Logic ;  as  to  the  second,  into
Economic  and  Ethic.  And  since  the  demand
of  the  concept  has  been  entirely  satisfied,  when
these  divisions  have  been  exhausted,  we  have  not
found  the  possibility  of  new  subdivisions,  for
example  into  various  aesthetic  or  into  various
ethical  categories  among  the  particular  sub-forms
of  the  Spirit.

Some are seized as with a sense of dis-

at  the  end  o)

satisfaction and delusion when they  arrive at  every  system

and  its  irra

the  end  of  the  philosophical  system  and  at  the
result  that  there  is  no  reality  save  the  Spirit
and  no  other  Philosophy  save  the  Philosophy  of
the  Spirit ;  and  they  do  not  wish  to  resign
themselves  to  accepting  that  and  nothing  else  as
Reality,  although  obliged  to  do  so  by  logical
necessity.  A  world  beyond  which  there  is  no
other  seems  to  them  poor  indeed ;  an  immanent
Spirit,  trammelled  and  far  inferior  by  comparison
with  a  transcendental  Spirit,  an  omnipotent  God
outside  the  world ;  a  Reality  penetrable  by
thought,  less  poetical  than  one  surrounded


590 PHILOSOPHY  OF  PRACTICAL

with  mystery ;  the  vague  and  indeterminate,
more  beautiful  than  the  precise  and  determined.
But  we  know  that  they  are  involved  in  a
psychological  illusion,  similar  to  his  who  should
dream  of  an  art  so  sublime  that  every  work  of
art  really  existing  would  by  comparison  appear
contemptible ;  and  the  dreamer  of  this  turbid
dream,  should  not  succeed  in  achieving  a  single
verse.  Impotent  are  those  poets  most  refined  ;
impotent  those  insatiable  philosophers.

But  precisely  because  we  know  the  genesis
'lawtiMiity  of  their  psychological  illusion,  we  know  that
Philosophy,  there  is  in  it  (and  there  could  not  fail  to  be)  an
element  of  truth.  The  infinite,  inexhaustible  by
the  thought  of  the  individual,  is  Reality  itself,
which  ever  creates  new  forms ;  Life  is  the
true  mystery,  not  because  impenetrable  by
thought,  but  because  thought  penetrates  it  to
the  infinite  with  power  equal  to  its  own.  And
since  every  moment,  however  beautiful,  would
become  ugly,  were  we  to  dwell  in  it,  so  would
life  become  ugly,  were  it  ever  to  linger  in  one  of
its  contingent  forms.  (  And  because  Philosophy,
not  less  than  Art,  is  conditioned  by  Life,  so  no
particular  philosophical  system  can  ever  contain
in  itself  all  the  philosophable  ;  no  philosophical
system  is  definite,  because  Life  itself  is  never


CONCLUSION  591

definite.  A  philosophical  system  solves  a  group
of  problems  historically  given  and  prepares  the
conditions  for  the  posing  of  other  problems,  that
is,  of  new  systems.  )  Thus  it  has  always  been
and  thus  it  will  always  be.

In  such  a  sense,  Truth  is  always  surrounded
with  mystery,  an  ascending  to  ever  higher  heights,
which  are  without  a  summit,  as  Life  is  without
a  summit.  At  the  end  of  one  of  his  researches
every  philosopher  just  perceives  the  uncertain
outlines  of  another,  which  he  himself,  or  he  who
comes  after  him,  will  achieve.  And  with  this
modesty,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  things  them
selves,  not  my  personal  sentiment ;  with  this
modesty,  which  is  also  confidence  that  I  have  not
thought  in  vain,  I  bring  my  work  to  a  conclusion,
offering  it  to  the  well  disposed  as  an  instrument
of  labour.


THE END


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  CLARK,  LIMITED,  Edinburgh.


^Esthetic  as  Science  of  Expression
and  General  Linguistic

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ITALIAN  OF
BENEDETTO  CROCE

BY

DOUGLAS  AINSLIE,  B.A.

Price  i  os.  net.
SOME  PRESS  OPINIONS

SPECTATOR,— "Mr.  Ainslie  translates  the  whole  of  the  Theory  of
Esthetic,  and  in  a  very  useful  '  Historical  Summary'  gives  a  synopsis  of  the
historical  portion  of  the  original.  The  translator  is  an  enthusiast  for  his
subject,  as  is  evident  from  the  introduction,  but  on  the  whole  we  do  not  think
he  makes  extravagant  claims  for  Croce.  This  Esthetic  is  really  a  most
remarkable  performance,  and  an  English  translation  is  a  real  boon."

HIBBERT  JOURNAL. — "  Every  recognition  is  due  to  Mr.  Ainslie  for
having  made  the  volume,  full,  when  all  is  said,  of  the  most  suggestive  and
original  views,  accessible  to  English  readers."

JOURNAL  OF  PHILOSOPHY  (AMERICA}.  —  "A  book  which  has
aroused  more  interest  than  any  other  recent  work  on  sesthetics.  .  .  .  Croce's
work  is  valuable  not  simply  for  the  theory  which  it  presents,  but  for  the  many
suggestive  views  which  the  author  puts  forward  on  most  of  the  subjects  related
to  aesthetics.  His  criticisms  of  other  aesthetic  doctrines  are  very  outspoken
and  usually  adverse,  nevertheless  they  are  stimulating  and  valuable."

MOKNING  POST.— "The  translation  is  most  felicitous  and  readable.
.  .  .  Our  gratitude  to  Mr.  Ainslie  for  having  made  Croce's  '^Esthetics'
accessible  to  English  readers  can  only  be  enhanced  if  we  realise  the  courage
required  to  undertake  the  translation  of  a  work  full  of  such  original  and
unwonted  theories."

TIMES. — "  Signer  Croce's  destructive  criticism  is  deadly.  No  one  after
reading  his  book  has  any  excuse  for  believing  any  kind  of  nonsense  about  art,
either  the  nonsense  that  pretends  to  be  mystical,  or  the  nonsense  that  pretends
to  be  scientific  ;  and  when  he  comes  to  construction,  his  main  ideas  are  usually
supported  by  reasoning  at  once  close  and  candid.  Those  ideas,  we  believe,
are  of  great  importance,  though  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  them  could
only  be  set  out  in  a  book  as  long  as  his  own.  The  translation  is  usually  very
clear,  and  Mr.  Ainslie  has  done  a  valuable  service  in  making  it."

ATHENALUM. — "  Signor  Croce's  work  will  appeal  to  many.  It  is  in
the  grand  manner,  simple,  severe,  spaceless  and  timeless  as  any  classic.  Italy
may  well  be  proud  of  him."

MACMILLAN  AND  CO., LTD., LONDON.


By  DOUGLAS  AINSLIE

JOHN  OF  DAMASCUS

Third  Edition. Price  6s.

SOME  PRESS  OPINIONS

MORNING  POST.—"  Mr.  Ainslie,  in  this  third"  edition  of  his
suggestive  poem,  has  given  to  the  world  in  swift  spontaneous  verse
the  mature  expression  of  the  conception  in  which  his  thoughts
have  long  been  centred.  With  a  singular  deftness  of  touch  he
has  contrived  to  weave  so  many  fresh  arguments  in  the  woof  of
the  old  material  as  to  produce  the  effect  of  a  work  almost  wholly
new.  Not  only  do  these  additions  help  to  knit  the  thread  of  the
narrative  more  harmoniously  together,  they  redound  as  well  to  the
reader's  ease  in  keeping  in  touch  with  it.  Nay,  they  do  some
thing  more  than  this  ;  they  go  far  both  to  enlighten  the  student
and  charm  the  partisan.  Pre-eminently  is  this  the  case  in  the
stirring  pages  which  deal  with  the  story  of  Muhammad's  life  and
the  conquests  of  the  doughty  warriors  who  fought  after  him.  .  .  .
Everybody  whom  the  advice  may  concern  would  be  wise  to  allow
Mr.  Ainslie's  revised  and  enlarged  version  to  take  the  place  of  its
forerunners  on  his  shelves.  ...  His  new  readers  will  be  many,
for  John  of  Damascus,  having  '  stretched  his  limbs,'  now  wears
a  resolute  air  to  extend  from  day  to  day  the  circle  of  his  influence
and  his  friends."

OUTLOOK. — "  Perhaps  no  more  authentic  expression  of  the
Oriental  spirit  has  appeared  in  English  poetry  since  FitzGerald
translated  the  quatrains  of  Omar  than  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.
Douglas  Ainslie's  John  of  Damascus.  ...  In  this  day  of
snippety  *  occasional  verse '  it  is  a  welcome  change  to  come  upon
a  solid  sustained  effort  on  a  great  theme  written  by  a  man  in  love
with  his  subject.  Long  as  the  poem  is,  it  is  neither  oppressive
nor  dull.  Mr.  Ainslie  writes  easily  and  naturally.  .  .  .  His  diction
is  musical  and  fluent,  and  lures  the  reader  along  by  constant
variety  and  happy  turns  of  expression.  .  .  .  The  fascination  of
the  East,  which  is  casting  its  spell  more  and  more  over  our  litera
ture,  has  taken  hold  of  the  author's  mind  and  communicates  itself
to  his  verse."

LIVERPOOL  POST.—"  One  cannot  but  be  glad  to  see  such
a  book  as  John  of  Damascus •,  by  Douglas  Ainslie,  in  its  fourth
edition.  This  fact  shows  that  there  are  readers  who  find  recrea
tion  in  a  high  class  of  literature."


CONSTABLE  AND  COMPANY  LTD.
10  ORANGE  STREET  LEICESTER  SQUARE  LONDON  W.C.


By  DOUGLAS  AINSLIE

THE  SONG  OF  THE  STEWARTS

PRELUDE

Price  75.  6d.  net

SOME  PRESS  OPINIONS

DAILY  TELEGRAPH. — "Mr.  Ainslie's  volume  will  without  doubt  afford  a  good
deal  of  pleasure  to  Stewart  devotees."

SCOTSMAN. — "  Every  lover  of  this  kind  of  poetry  should  read  it  with  both  interest
and  admiration.'

OBSERVER.— "The  author  has  a  distinct  sense  of  rhythm,  and  writes  with  a
cultured  fervour  and  distinction."

MORNING  LEADER. — "  His  poetry  has  tremendous  vigour,  and  its  force  alone  is
a  notable  quality  ...  it  never  lacks  point  and  definiteness."

BYSTANDER. — "  Mr.  Ainslie  is  obviously  in  love  with  his  subject,  and  the  verse  is
worthy  of  the  theme."

CA  THOLIC  FIELD.—"  Few  who  take  up  the  book  will  lay  it  down  without  reading
to  the  end,  and  none  but  will  be  stirred  and  stimulated  by  the  strong  human  strokes  that
on  every  page  strike  fire  from  the  bedrock  of  our  common  sympathies."


MOMENTS


Price  is.  net;  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.
SOME  PRESS  OPINIONS

T.P.'S  WEEKLY.— "Nearly  every  poem  has  thought  that  was  worth  expressing
and  the  expression  is  musical  and  distinguished."

TRUTH.—"  A  charming  little  booklet  of  verse.  .  .  .  The  Stewart  poems  seem  to  us
specially  stirring  and  raise  high  expectations."

DAILY  EXPRESS.—11  Mr.  Ainslie  is  another  real  poet.  ...  His  verse  is  musical
and  full  of  happy  phrases  and  imagery. "

MORNING  POST.—"  He  certainly  has  qualities  which  will  not  fail  to  find  apprecia
tion.  He  has  distinctly  original  ideas."

GLASGOW  HERALD.— "The  verse  runs  on  like  a  brook,  so  that  its  rippling
almost  makes  one  shut  the  ears  to  its  subtlety  or  depth  of  suggestion.  Delicate  in  texture,
it  is  often  packed  with  significance.  .  .  .  Betokens  a  writer  with  the  true  (lyric  gift  and
genuine  poetic  insight."


CONSTABLE  AND  COMPANY  LTD.
10  ORANGE  STREET  LEICESTER  SQUARE  LONDON  W.C.


By  DOUGLAS  AINSLIE

MIRAGE

Price  35.  6d.  net

SOME  PRESS  OPINIONS

EVENING  STANDARD.— "The  work  of  a  scholar,  these  poems
are  beautifully  made.  Form,  a  little  despised  by  some  of  our  young  in
dividual  poets,  is  treated  with  respect :  a  pretty  sight."

GLASGOW  HERALD.—  "Of  Mr.  Ainslie's  qualifications  as  a  poet
there  can  be  no  question  ;  as  little  can  there  be  of  the  high  quality  of  his
verse.  At  his  best  he  attains  a  singular  clearness,  the  clearness  of  primary
colour,  of  pure  water,  or  of  crystal,  the  clearness  of  sure  vision  which  is
the  condition  of  completed  imaginative  effort."

NATION. — "Mr.  Ainslie's  poetry  is  interesting.  .  .  .  we  do  feel  the
presence  in  it  of  a  determination  to  use  poetry  for  some  vital  purpose,  some
attempt,  not  to  escape  from  modern  life  into  cells  of  exquisite  beauty,  but
to  interpret  into  poetic  form  and  feeling  at  least  the  consciousness  of  human
destiny."

TIMES. — "  These  are  the  poems  of  a  man  of  taste  and  culture,  always
interesting."

MORNING  POST.—"  Mr.  Ainslie  is  '  the  perfect  Phyllistine.'  Phyllis
is  wooed  with  sapphics  at  Versailles,  Oenone  with  album-verses  in  Mayfair,
Violet  with  Neapolitan  quatrains,  and  Daphne  with  diamonds."

DAIL  Y  CHRONICLE.—1 '  Mr.  Ainslie  is  a  good  story-teller  ;  but  he
uses  the  ballad  as  his  vehicle,  instead  of  dramatic  blank  verse.  There  is  a
rhythm  and  a  swing  in  his  ballads  that  carries  us  along,  and  a  power  of
narration."

LONDON:  ELKIN MATHEWS,  VIGO  STREET,  W.


THE  SONG  OF  THE  STEWARTS

CANTO  I.

The  first  Canto  takes  up  the  narrative  where  the
Prelude  leaves  off,  and  deals  with  the  most  luminous
events  of  the  reigns  of  Robert  II.  and  of  David  II.,  the
„  ,* first  Stewart  Kings  of  Scots.

The  system  of  a  series  of  poems  in  different  metres,
such  as  was  carried  out  in  the  Prelude,  is  here  again
adopted,  and  the  first  Canto  will  be  issued  in  a  form
similar  to  that  of  the  Prelude.

[To  be  published  shortly.


. :  L>


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
