Aesthetic as Science of Expression and General Linguistic (Benedetto Croce (Douglas Ainslie, trans.), 1909)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/aestheticasscien00crocuoft). Croce's foundational aesthetic: art as intuitive expression — the first volume of the Philosophy of Spirit.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

HN


HM


eo)
pas
a
P=
x
oe
O


aii


|


209 3


00012


3


[/ \7
ESTHETIC


AS SCIENCE OF EXPRESSION
AND GENERAL LINGUISTIC


TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN
OF BENEDETTO CROCE
BY


DOUGLAS AINSLIE


B.A. (Oxon.)


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON


1909


Be, ea ;
X LinbRAr: i .
4 Z


THE
ZESTHETIC
IS DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR
TO THE MEMORY OF HIS PARENTS
PASQUALE anp LUISA SIPARI
AND OF HIS SISTER


MARIA


NOTE


I Give here a close translation of the complete
Theory of c&sthetic, and in the Historical
Summary, with the consent of the author, an
abbreviation of the historical portion of the


original work,


vil


— ee


CON TEN ES


INTRODUCTION


THEORY


INTUITION AND EXPRESSION


Intuitive knowledge—Its independence in respect to the intellect—
Intuition and perception—Intuition and the concepts of space
and time—lIntuition and sensation—Intuition and association—
Intuition and representation—Intuition and expression—Illu-
sions as to their difference—Identity of intuition and expression


Il


INTUITION AND ART


Corollaries and explanations—Identity of art and of intuitive know-
ledge—No specitic difference—No difference of intensity—Dif-
ference extensive and empirical—Artistic genius—Content and

| form in AEsthetic—Critique of the imitation of nature and of

the artistic illusion—Critique of art conceived as a sentimental,
not a theoretic fact—The origin of Aisthetic, and sentiment—
Critique of the theory of sesthetic senses—Unity and indivisi-
bility of the work of art—Art_as deliverer

1X


PAGE


XV


x


x THEORY OF: A251 HE IC


Ill
ART AND PHILOSOPHY


Indissolubility of intellective and of intuitive knowledge—Critique
of the negations of this thesis—Art and science—Content and
form: another meaning. Prose and poetry—The relation of
first and second degree—Inexistence of other cognoscitive forms
—Historicity—Identity and difference in respect of art—His-
torical criticism—Historical scepticism—Philosophy as perfect
science. The so-called natural sciences, and their limits—The
phenomenon and the noumenon


IV


HISTORICISM AND INTELLECTUALISM IN AESTHETIC


Critique of the verisimilar and of naturalism—Critique of ideas in art,
of art as thesis, and of the typical—Critique of the symbol and
of the allegory—Critique of the theory of artistic and literary
categories—Errors derived from this theory in judgments on
art—Empirical meaning of the divisions of the categories


Ne
ANALOGOUS ERRORS IN HISTORY AND IN LOGIC


Critique of the philosophy of History—Aisthetic invasions of Logic
—Logic in its essence—Distinction between logical and non-
logical judgments— The syllogism — False Logic and true
Esthetic—Logic reformed


VI


THEORETIC AND PRACTICAL ACTIVITY


The will—The will as ulterior grade in respect of knowledge—Ob-
jections and explanations—Critique of practical judgments or
judgments of value—Exclusion of the practical from the zsthetic
—Critique of the theory of the end of art and of the choice of
content—Practical innocence of art—Independence of art—
Critique of the saying: the style is the man—Critique of the
concept of sincerity in art


PAGE


53


65


77


CONTENES Xi


VII


ANALOGY BETWEEN THE THEORETIC AND THE PRACTICAL

The two forms of practical activity —The economically useful—Dis- ot
tinction between the useful and the technical — Distinction
between the useful and the egoistic—Economic and moral voli-
tion—Pure economicity—The economic side of morality—The
merely economical and the error of the morally indifferent—
— Critique of_utilitarianism and the reform of Ethic and of
Economic_-Phenomenon and noumenon in practical activity . 89


Vill
EXCLUSION OF OTHER SPIRITUAL FORMS


The system of the spirit—The forms of genius—Inexistence of a

fifth form of activity —Law ; sociality—Religiosity—Metaphysic
—Mental imagination and the intuitive intellect — Mystical
Esthetic—Mortality and immortality of art. : ; ; 99


IX


INDIVISIBILITY OF EXPRESSION INTO MODES OR GRADES
AND CRITIQUE OF RHETORIC


The characteristics of art—Inexistence of modes of expression—
Impossibility of translations—Critique of rhetorical categories
—Enmpirical meaning of rhetorical categories— Their use as
synonyms of the esthetic fact—Their use as indicating various
esthetic imperfections—Their use as transcending the zesthetic
fact, and in the service of science — Rhetoric in schools —
Similarities of expressions—Relative possibility of translations. 109


Xx


ESTHETIC SENTIMENTS AND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
THE BEAUTIFUL AND THE UGLY


~

Various meanings of the word sentiment—Sentiment as activity—
Identification of sentiment with economic activity—Critique of
hedonism—Sentiment as concomitant of every form of activity


oe


X11


dathORY OF AS TEE Ie


—Meaning of certain ordinary distinctions of sentiments—
Value and disvalue: the contraries and their union — The
beautiful as the value of expression, or expression without
adjunct—The ugly and the elements of beauty that constitute it
—Illusion that there exist expressions neither beautiful nor
ugly—Proper esthetic sentiments and concomitant and acci-
dental sentiments—Critique of apparent sentiments . A


XI


CRITIQUE OF ASTHETIC HEDONISM


= [eae of the beautiful as what pleases the superior senses —


Critique of the theory of play — Critique of the theory of
sexuality and of the triumph—Critique of the Aésthetic of the
sympathetic—Meaning in it of content and of form—Aisthetic
hedonism and moralism — The rigoristic negation, and the
pedagogic negation of art—Critique of pure beauty .


XII


PAGE


I2I


134


THE ASTHETIC OF THE SYMPATHETIC AND PSEUDO-ASTHETIC


CONCEPTS


Pseudo-zesthetic concepts, and the Aésthetic of the sympathetic—


Critique of the theory of the ugly in art and of its surmounting
—Pseudo-zsthetic concepts appertain to Psychology—Impossi-
bility of rigorous definitions of these—Examples : definitions of
the sublime, of the comic, of the humorous—Relation between
those concepts and zesthetic concepts


XIII


THE SO-CALLED PHYSICALLY BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE
AND IN ART


Esthetic activity and physical concepts—Expression in the esthetic


sense, and expression in the naturalistic sense—Intuitions and
memory—The production of aids to memory—The physically
beautiful— Content and form: another meaning — Natural
beauty and _ artificial beauty—Mixed beauty—Writings—The
beautiful that is free and that which is not free-—Critique of the
beautiful that is not free—Stimulants of production


142


153


CONTENTS


XIV


ERRORS ARISING FROM THE CONFUSION BETWEEN
PHYSIC AND ZSTHETIC


Critique of zsthetic associationism—Critique of cesthetic physic—
Critique of the theory of the beauty of the human body—
Critique of the beauty of geometrical figures — Critique of
another aspect of the imitation of nature — Critique of the
theory of the elementary forms of the beautiful—Critigue of the
search for_the objective conditions of the beautiful — The


astrology of Aésthetic


XV


THE ACTIVITY OF EXTERNALIZATION. TECHNIQUE
AND THE THEORY OF THE ARTS


The practical activity of externalization—The technique of external-
ization — Technical theories of single arts — Critique of the
classifications of the arts—Relation of the activity of external-
ization with utility and morality


XVI
TASTE AND THE REPRODUCTION OF ART


ZEsthetic judgment, Its identity with esthetic reproduction—
Impossibility of divergences—Identity of taste and genius—
Analogy with the other activities — Critique of absolutism
(intellectualism) and of cesthetic relativism—Critique of relative
relativism—Objections founded on the variation of the stimulus
and of the psychic disposition—Critique of the distinction of
signs as natural and conventional—The surmounting of variety
Restorations and historical interpretation


XVII


THE HISTORY OF LITERATURE AND OF ART
Historical criticism in literature and art. Its importance—Artistic
and literary history. Its distinction from historical criticism


and from the esthetic judgment—The method of artistic and


Xill


PAGE


170


182


194


XIV PRE ORY OF otis fie


literary history—Critique of the problem of the origin of art— oe
The criterion of progress and history—Inexistence of a single
line of progress in artistic and literary history—Errors in respect
of this law—Other meanings of the word ‘‘ progress” in relation
to “Esthetic . : ; ; : : : : : ape oul


XVIII


CONCLUSION : IDENTITY OF LINGUISTIC AND. ASTHEAIC


Summary of the inquiry—Identity of Linguistic with sthetic—
Aesthetic formulation of linguistic problems. Nature of
language—Origin of language and its development—Relation
between Grammatic and Logic—Grammatical categories or
parts of speech—Individuality of speech and the classification of.
languages—Impossibility of a normative Grammatic—Didactic
organisms — Elementary linguistic elements, or roots — The
esthetic judgment and the model language—Conclusion . 230


HISTORICAL SUMMARY


ZEsthetic ideas in Graeco-Roman antiquity—In the Middle Age and
at the Renaissance—Fermentation of thought in the seventeenth
century—Esthetic ideas in Cartesianism, Leibnitzianism, and
in the ‘‘ Hsthetic” of Baumgarten—G. B. Vico—Aésthetic
doctrines in the eighteenth century—Emmanuel Kant—The
‘Esthetic of Idealism with Schiller and Hegel—Schopenhauer
and Herbart —Friedrich Schleiermacher —The philosophy of
language with Humboldt and Steinthal—A#sthetic in France,
England, and Italy during the first half of the nineteenth
century—Francesco de Sanctis—The Aisthetic of the epigoni—
Positivism and esthetic naturalism — A®sthetic psychologism
and other recent tendencies—Glance at the history of certain
particular doctrines—Conclusion . : : : : reo


APPENDIX


Translation of the lecture on Pure Intuition and the lyrical nature of
art, delivered by Benedetto Croce before the International
Congress of Philosophy at Heidelberg. ; : : Rae y A


— SS. RSS Se


aH


a ea


Int RODUCEION


THERE are always Americas to be discovered: the
most interesting in Europe.

I can lay no claim to having discovered an
America, but I do claim to have discovered a Columbus.
His name is Benedetto Croce, and he dwells on the
shores of the Mediterranean, at Naples, city of the
antique Parthenope.

Croce’s America cannot be expressed in geographical
terms. It is more important than any space of
mountain and river, of forest and dale. It belongs to
the kingdom of the spirit, and has many provinces. That
province which most interests me, I have striven in
the following pages to annex to the possessions of the
Anglo-Saxon race; an act which cannot be blamed
as predatory, since it may be said of philosophy more
truly than of love, that “to divide is not to take away.”

The Historical Summary will show how many a
brave adventurer has navigated the perilous seas of
speculation upon Art, how _Aristotle’s\_aiaguellous
insight _gave him glimpses of its beauty, how* Plato
threw away its golden fruit, how Baumgarten sounded
the depth of its waters, Kant sailed along its coast
without landing, and Vico hoisted the Italian flag upon


its shore.


XV


XVI1 THEORY OF Alot ne ie


But Benedetto Croce has been the first thoroughly
to explore it, cutting his way inland ‘through the
tangled undergrowth of imperfect thought. He has
measured its length and breadth, marked out and
described its spiritual features with minute accuracy.
The country thus won to philosophy will always bear
his name, Estetica di Croce, a new America.

It-was at Naples, in the winter of 10607, that: |
first saw the Philosopher of /#sthetic. Benedetto
Croce, although born in the Abruzzi, Province of
Aquila (1866), is essentially a Neapolitan, and rarely
remains long absent from the city, on the shore of that
magical sea, where once Ulysses sailed, and where
sometimes yet (near Amalfi) we may hear the Syrens
sing their song. But more wonderful than the song
of any Syren seems to me the Theory of Aésthetic as ;
the Science of Expression, and that is why I have |
overcome the obstacles that stood between me and the
giving of this theory, which in my belief is the truth,
to the English-speaking world.

No one could have been further removed than my-
self, as I turned over at Naples the pages of La Critica,
from any idea that I was nearing the solution of the
problem of Art. All my youth it had haunted me.
As an undergraduate at Oxford I had caught the
exquisite cadence of Walter Pater’s speech, as it came
from his very lips, or rose like the perfume of some
exotic flower from the ribbed pages of the Renaissance.

Seeming to solve the riddle of the Sphinx, he
solved it not—only delighted with pure pleasure of
poetry and of subtle thought as he led one along the
pathways of his Enchanted Garden, where I shall
always love to tread.


Pe RODUCTION XVil


Oscar Wilde, too, I had often heard at his best,
the most brilliant talker of our time, his wit flashing in
the spring sunlight of Oxford luncheon-parties as now
in his beautiful writings, like the jewelled rapier of


Mercutio. But his works, too, will be searched in vain


by the seeker after definite esthetic truth.

With A. C. Swinburne I had sat and watched the,
lava that yet flowed from those lips that were kissed.
in youth by all the Muses. Neither from him nor from
Be WEEUGES “balllant aphorisms on art could be
gathered anything more than the exquisite pleasure
of the moment: the povoypoves 7dovn. Of the great
pedagogues, I had known, but never sat at the: fees
of Jowett, whom I found far less inspiring than any of
the great men above mentioned. Among the dead,
I had studied Herbert Spencer and Matthew Arnold,
Schopenhauer, Nietzsche and Guyau: I had conversed
with that living Neo-Latin, Anatole France, the
modern Rousseau, and had enjoyed the marvellous
irony and eloquence of his writings, which, while they
delight the society in which he lives, may well be one
of the causes that lead to its eventual destruction.

The solution of the problem of A®sthetic is not in
the gift of the Muses.

To return to Naples. As I looked over those pages
of the bound volumes of La Critica 1 soon became
aware that I was in the presence of a mind far above
the ordinary level of literary criticism. The profound
studies of Carducci, of d’Annunzio, and of Pascoli (to
name but three), in which those writers passed before
me in all their strength and in all their weakness, led
me to devote several days to the Crztica. At the end


of that time I was convinced that I had made a
b


iv!


XVill PoE ORY OF ADS iit hy le


discovery, and wrote to the philosopher, who owns and
edits that journal.

In response to his invitation, I made my way, on
a sunny day in November, past the little shops of the
coral-vendors that surround, like a necklace, the Rione
de la Bellezza, and wound zigzag along the over-crowded
Toledo. I knew that Signor Croce lived in the old
part of the town, but had hardly anticipated so
remarkable a change as I experienced on passing
beneath the great archway: and finding myself in old
Naples. This has already been described elsewhere,
and I will not here dilate upon this world within a
world, having so much of greater interest to tell ina
brief space. I will merely say that the costumes here
seemed more picturesque, the dark eyes flashed more
dangerously than elsewhere, there was a quaint life, an
animation about the streets, different from anything I
had known before. As I climbed the lofty stone steps
of the Palazzo to the floor where dwells the philosopher
of A‘sthetic I felt as though I had stumbled into the
eighteenth century and were calling on Giambattista
Vico, After a brief inspection by a young man with
the appearance of a secretary, I was told that I was
expected, and admitted into a small room opening
out of the hall. Thence, after a few moments’ waiting,
I was led into a much larger room. The walls.were
lined all round with bookcases, barred and numbered,
filled with volumes forming part of the philosopher’s
great library. I had not long to wait. A door opened
behind me on my left, and a rather short, thick-set man
advanced to greet me, and pronouncing my name at the
same time with a slight foreign accent, asked me to
be seated beside him. After the interchange of a few


INTRODUCEION ab


brief formule of politeness in French, our conversation
was carried on in Italian, and I had a better opportunity
of studying my host’s air and manner. His hands he
held clasped before him, but frequently released them,
to make those vivid gestures with which Neapolitans
frequently clinch their phrase. His most remarkable
feature was his eyes, of a greenish grey: extraordinary
eyes, not for beauty, but for their fathomless depth, and
for the sympathy which one felt welling up in them from
the soul beneath. This was especially noticeable as our
conversation fell upon the question of Art and upon
the many problems bound up with it. I do not know
how long that first interview lasted, but it seemed a
few minutes only, during which was displayed before
me a vast panorama of unknown height and head-
land, of league upon league of forest, with its bright-
winged birds of thought flying from tree to tree
down the long avenues into the dim blue vistas Gish
unknown.

I returned with my brain awhirl, as though I had
been in fairyland, and when I looked at the second
edition of the Esée¢zca, with his inscription, I was sure
of it.

These lines will suffice to show how the translation
of the Estetica originated from the acquaintance thus
formed, which has developed into friendship. I will
now make brief mention of Benedetto Croce’s other
work, especially in so far as it throws light upon the
4Esthetic. For this purpose, besides articles in Italian
and German reviews, I have made use of the excellent
monograph on the philosopher, by G. Prezzolini.’

First, then, it will be well to point out that the


1 Napoli, Riccardo Ricciardi, 1909.


aX THEORY OF 75 Tr eae


Ai sthetic forms part of a complete philosophical system,
to which the author gives the general title of
“Philosophy of the Spirit.’ The “sthetic is the first
of the three volumes. The second is the Logzc, the
third the Phzlosophy of the Practical.

In the Logzc, as elsewhere in the system, Croce
combats that false conception, by which natural science,
in the shape of psychology, makes claim to philosophy,
and formal logic to absolute value. The thesis of the
pure concept cannot be discussed here. It is connected
‘ with the logic of evolution as discovered by Hegel,’
and is the only logic which contains in itself the
‘interpretation and the continuity of reality. Bergson
in his L’Evolution Créatrice deals with logic in a some-
what similar manner. I recently heard him lecture
on the distinction between spirit and matter at the
College de France, and those.who read French and
Italian will find that both Croce’s Logic and the book
above mentioned by the French philosopher will amply
repay their labour. The conception of nature as
something lying outside the spirit which informs it,
as the non-being which aspires to being, underlies all
Croce’s thought, and we find constant reference to it
throughout his philosophical system.

With regard to the third volume, the Philosophy of
the Practical, it is impossible here to give more than a
hint of its treasures. I merely refer in passing to the
treatment of the will, which is posited as a unity
inseparable from the volitional act. For Croce there
is no difference between action and intention, means
and end: they are one thing, inseparable as the
intuition-expression of A®sthetic. The Philosophy of
the Practical is a logic and science of the will, not a


}
|
;
j
|


|
|


FR ODE CLION one


normative science. Just asin Atsthetic the individuality
of expression made models and rules impossible, so in
practical life the individuality of action removes the
possibility of catalogues of virtues, of the exact
application of laws, of the existence of practical judg-
ments and judgments of value prevzous to action.

The reader will probably ask here: But what, then,
becomes of morality? The question will be found
answered in the 7heory of Asthetic, and | will merely
say here that Croce’s thesis of the double degree of


‘the practical activity, economic and moral, is one


of the greatest contributions to modern thought. Just
as it is proved in the Theory of Esthetic that the‘
concept depends upon the zztuztion, which is the first .
degree, the primary and indispensable thing, so it is
proved in the Philosophy of the Practical that Morality »
or Ethic depends upon Lcononic, which is the first
degree of the practical activity. The volitional act is
always economic, but true freedom of the will exists
and consists in conforming not merely to economic,
but to moral conditions, to the human spirit, which is
greater than any individual. Here we are face to face
with the ethics of Christianity, to which Croce accords
all honour.

This Philosophy of the Spirit is symptomatic of the
happy reaction of the twentieth century against the
crude materialism of the second half of the nineteenth.
It isthe spirit which gives to the work of art its value,
not this or that method of arrangement, this or that
tint or cadence, which can always be copied by skilful
plagiarists: not so the sfzrz¢ of the creator. In
England we hear too much of (natural) science, which
has usurped the very name of Philosophy. The


XXil Ta BORY OF fio Te wic


natural sciences are very well in their place, but dis-
coveries such as aviation are of infinitely less importance
to the race than the smallest addition to the philosophy
of the spirit. Empirical science, with the collusion of
positivism, has stolen the cloak of philosophy and must
be made to give it back.

Among Croce’s other important contributions to
thought must be mentioned his definition of History
as being esthetic and differing from Art solely in that
history represents the vea/, art the posszble. In connec-
tion with this definition and its proof, the philosopher
recounts how he used to hold an opposite view. Doing
everything thoroughly, he had prepared and written out
a long disquisition on this thesis, which was already
in type, when suddenly, from the midst of his medita-
tions, the truth flashed upon him. He saw for the first
time clearly that history cannot be a science, since, like

_art, it always deals with the particular, Without a
moment’s hesitation he hastened to the printers and
bade them break up the type.

This incident is illustrative of the sincerity and good
faith of Benedetto Croce. One knows him to be severe
for the faults and weaknesses of others, merciless for
his own.

Yet though severe, the editor of La Critica is un-
compromisingly just, and would never allow personal
dislike or jealousy, or any extrinsic consideration, to
stand in the way of fair treatment to the writer con-
cerned, Many superficial English critics might benefit
considerably by attention to this quality in one who is
in other respects also so immeasurably their superior.
A good instance of this impartiality is his critique of
Schopenhauer, with whose system he is in complete


[Na R ODI LION no.abtl


disagreement, yet affords him full credit for what of
truth is contained in his voluminous writings.’

Croce’s education was largely completed in Germany,
and on account of their thoroughness he has always
been an upholder of German methods. One of his
complaints against the Italian Positivists is that they
only read second-rate works in French or at the most
“the dilettante booklets published in such profusion by
the Anglo-Saxon press.” This tendency towards
German thought, especially in philosophy, depends
upon the fact of the former undoubted supremacy of
Germany in that field, but Croce does not for a moment
admit the inferiority of the Neo-Latin races, and adds
with homely humour in reference to Germany, that we
“must not throw away the baby with the bath-water eae
Close, arduous study and clear thought are the only key
to scientific (philosophical) truth, and Croce never begins
an article for a newspaper without the complete collection
of the works of the author to be criticized, and his own
elaborate notes on the table before him. Schopenhauer
said there were three kinds of writers—those who write
without thinking, the great majority ; those who think
while they write, not very numerous , those who write
after they have thought, very rare. Croce certainly
belongs to the last division, and, as I have said, always
feeds his thought upon complete erudition. The
bibliography of the works consulted for the Fstetzca
alone, as printed at the end of the Italian edition,
extends to many pages and contains references to
works in any way dealing with the subject in all the
European languages. For instance, Croce has studied


1 The reader will find this critique summarized in the historical portion
of this volume.


XXIV ERMBORY OF 4s tire


Mr. B. Bosanquet’s eclectic works on Aésthetic, largely
based upon German sources and by no means without
value. But he takes exception to Mr. Bosanquet’s
statement that 4e has consulted all works of importance
on the subject of Aésthetic. As a matter of fact, Mr.
Bosanquet reveals his ignorance of the greater part
of the contribution to A%sthetic made by the Neo-Latin
races, which the reader of this book will recognize as of
first-rate importance.

This thoroughness it is which gives such importance
to the literary and philosophical criticisms of La Critica.
Croce’s method is always historical, and his object in
approaching any work of art is to classify the spirit of
its author, as expressed in that work. There are, he
maintains, but two things to be considered in criticizing
a book. These are, firstly, what is its peculiarity, in
what way is it singular, how is it differentiated from
other works? Secondly, what is its degree of purzty >—
That is, to what extent has its author kept himself free
from all considerations alien to the perfection of the
work as an expression, as a lyrical intuition? With
the answering of these questions Croce is satisfied,
He does not care to know if the author keep a motor-
car, like Maeterlinck; or prefer to walk on Putney
Heath, like Swinburne. This amounts to saying that
all works of art must be judged by their own standard.
How far has the author succeeded in doing what he
intended ? 7

Croce is far above any personal animus, although
the same cannot be said of those he criticizes. These,
like d’Annunzio, whose limitations he points out—his
egoism, his lack of human sympathy—are often very
bitter, and accuse the penetrating critic of want of


IVERODUCTION XXV


courtesy. This seriousness of purpose runs like a golden
thread through all Croce’s work. The flimsy super-
ficial remarks on poetry and fiction which too often
pass for criticism in England (Scotland is a good deal
more thorough) are put to shame by La Critica, the
study of which I commend to all readers who read or
wish to read Italian.’ They will find in its back
numbers a complete picture of a century of Italian
literature, besides a store-house of philosophical criticism.
The Quarterly and Edinburgh Reviews are our only
journals which can be compared to 7he Crztica, and they
are less exhaustive on the philosophical side. We
should have to add to these Mud and the Hzbbert
Journal to get even an approximation to the scope of
the Italian review.

As regards Croce’s general philosophical position,
it is important to understand that he is zo¢ a Hegelian,
in the sense of being a close follower of that philosopher.
One of his last works is that in which he deals in a
masterly manner with the philosophy of Hegel. The
title may be translated, “ What is living and what is
dead of the philosophy of Hegel.” Here he explains
to us the Hegelian system more clearly than that
wondrous edifice was ever before explained, and we
realize at the same time that Croce is quite as in-
dependent of Hegel as of Kant, of Vico as of Spinoza.
Of course he has made use of the best of Hegel, just
as every thinker makes use of his predecessors and is
in his turn made use of by those that follow him. But
it is incorrect to accuse of Hegelianism the author of
an anti-hegelian &sthetic, of a Logic where Hegel is
only half accepted, and of a Philosophy of the Practical,


1 La Critica is published every other month by Laterza of Bari.


XXV1 THEORY OF wo thE ie


which contains hardly a trace of Hegel. I give an
instance. If the great conquest of Hegel be the
dialectic of opposites, his great mistake lies in the
confusion of opposites with things which are distinct
but not opposite. If, says Croce, we take as an
example the application of the Hegelian triad that
formulates becoming (affirmation, negation and syn-
thesis), we find it applicable for those opposites which
are true and false, good and evil, being and not-being,
but zot applicable to things which are distinct but not
opposite, such as art and philosophy, beauty and truth,
the useful and the moral. These confusions led Hegel
to talk of the death of art, to conceive as possible a
Philosophy of History, and to the application of the ©
natural sciences to the absurd task of constructing a
Philosophy of Nature. Croce has cleared away these diffi-
culties by shewing that if from the meeting of opposites
must arise a superior synthesis, such a synthesis cannot
arise from things which are distinct but not opposzte,
since the former are connected together as superior
and inferior, and the inferior can exist without the
superior, but ot vice versa. Thus we see how philo-
sophy cannot exist without art, while art, occupying
the lower place, can and does exist without philosophy.
This brief example reveals Croce’s independence in
dealing with Hegelian problems.

I know of no philosopher more generous than
Croce in praise and elucidation of other workers in
the same field, past and present. For instance, and
apart from Hegel, Kant has to thank him for drawing
attention to the marvellous excellence of the Crzteque
of Judgment, generally neglected in favour of the
Critiques of Pure Reason and of Practical Judgment ;


2 TORee Be


INTRODUCTION XXVil


,

é Baumgarten for drawing the attention of the world to

his obscure name and for reprinting his Latin thesis

} in which the word sthetéc occurs for the first time ;

and Schleiermacher for the tributes paid to his neglected

genius in the History of A®sthetic. La Critica, too,

is full of generous appreciation of contemporaries by
Croce and by that profound thinker, Gentile.

But it is not only philosophers who have reason to


be grateful to Croce for his untiring zeal and diligence.
Historians, economists, poets, actors, and writers of
fiction have been rescued from their undeserved limbo
by this valiant Red Cross knight, and now shine with
due brilliance in the circle of their peers. It must
also be admitted that a large number of false lights,
popular will o’ the wisps, have been ruthlessly ex-
tinguished with the same breath. For instance, Karl
Marx, the socialist theorist and agitator, finds in


Croce an exponent of his views, in so far as they are
based upon the truth, but where he blunders, his critic
immediately reveals the origin and nature of his mistakes.
Croce’s studies in Economic are chiefly represented by
his work, the title of which may be translated “ Historical
Materialism and Marxist Economic.”

To indicate the breadth and variety of Croce’s work
I will mention the further monograph on the sixteenth
century Neapolitan Pulcinella (the original of our
Punch), and the personage of the Neapolitan in comedy,
a monument of erudition and of acute and of lively
dramatic criticism, that would alone have occupied an
ordinary man’s activity for half a lifetime. One must
remember, however, that Croce’s average working day
is of ten hours. His interest is concentrated on things
of the mind, and although he sits on several Royal Com-


Vite RORY OF Aoi bie


missions, such as those of the Archives of all Italy and
of the monument to King Victor Emmanuel, he has taken
no university degree, and much dislikes any affectation
of academic superiority. He is ready to meet any one
on equal terms and try with them to get at the truth
on any subject, be it historical, literary, or philosophical.
“Truth,” he says, “is democratic,” and I can testify that
the search for it, in his company, is very stimulating.
As is well said by Prezzolini, “He has a new word
for all

There can be no doubt of the great value of Croce’s
work as an educative influence,and if we are to judge of
a philosophical system by its action on others, then we
must place the Philosophy of the Spirit very high. It
may be said with perfect truth that since the death of
the poet Carducci there has been no influence in Italy
to compare with that of Benedetto Croce.

His dislike of Academies and of all forms of
prejudice runs parallel with his breadth and sympathy
with all forms of thought. His activity in the present
is only equalled by his reverence for the past. Naples
he loves with the blind love of the child for its parent,
and he has been of notable assistance to such Neapolitan
talent as is manifested in the works of Salvatore di
Giacomo, whose best poems are written in the dialect of
Naples, or rather in a dialect of his own, which Croce
had difficulty in persuading the author always to retain.
The original jet of inspiration having been in dialect,
it is clear that to amend this inspiration at the suggestion
of wiseacres at the Café would have been to ruin it
altogether.

Of the popularity that his system and teaching have
already attained we may judge by the fact that the


<=


INERODUCTION XX1X


Aisthetic; despite the difficulty of the subject, is
already in its third edition in Italy, where, owing
to its influence, philosophy sells better than fiction ;
while the French and Germans, not to mention the
Czechs, have long had translations of the earlier editions.
His Logic is on the point of appearing in its second
edition, and I have no doubt that the Phzlosophy of the
Practical will eventually equal these works in popularity.
The importance and value of Italian thought have been
too long neglected in Great Britain, Where, as in
Benedetto Croce, we get the clarity of vision of the
Latin, joined to the thoroughness and erudition of the
best German tradition, we have a combination of rare
power and effectiveness, which can by no means be
neglected.

The philosopher feels that he has a great mission,
which is nothing less than the leading back of thought
to belief in. the spirit, deserted by so many for crude
empiricism and positivism. His view of philosophy is
that it sums up all the higher human activities, includ-
ing religion, and that in proper hands it is able to solve
any problem. But there is no finality about problems:
the solution of one leads to the posing of another,
and so on. Man is the maker of life, and his spirit ever
proceeds from a lower to a higher perfection. Con-
nected with this view of life is Croce’s dislike of
“ Modernism.” When once a problem has been correctly
solved, it is absurd to return to the same problem.
Roman Catholicism cannot march with the times. It


1 This translation is made from the third Italian edition (Bari, 1909),
enlarged and corrected by the author. The Theory of sthetec first
appeared in 1900 in the form of a communication to the Accademia
Pontiana of Naples, vol. xxx. The first edition is dated 1902, the second
1904 (Palermo).


OS mir BORY- OF eat Ee


can only exist by being conservative—its only Logic
is to be illogical. Therefore, Croce is opposed to Loisy
and Neo-Catholicism, and supports the Encyclical
against Modernism. The Catholic religion, with its great
stores of myth and morality, which for many centuries
was the best thing in the world, is still there for those
who are unable to assimilate other food. Another
instance of his dislike for Modernism is his criticism of
Pascoli, whose attempts to reveal enigmas in the writings
of Dante he looks upon as useless. We do not, he
says, read Dante in the twentieth century for his
hidden meanings, but for his revealed poetry.

I believe that Croce will one day be recognized as
one of the very few great teachers of humanity. At
present he is not appreciated at nearly his full value.
One rises from a study of his philosophy with a sense
of having been all the time as it were in personal touch
with the truth, which is very far from the case after the
perusal of certain other philosophies.

Croce has been called the philosopher-poet, and if
we take philosophy as Novalis understood it, certainly
Croce does belong to the poets, though not to the
formal category of those who write in verse. Croce is
at any rate a born philosopher, and as every trade tends
to make its object prosaic, so does every vocation tend
to make it poetic. Vet no one has toiled more earnestly
than Croce. “Thorough” might well be his motto, and
if to-day he is admitted to be a classic without the
stiffness one connects with that term, be sure he has
well merited the designation. His name stands for
the best that Italy has to give the world of serious,
stimulating thought. I know nothing to equal it
elsewhere.


INTRODUCTION bo. 9


Secure in his strength, Croce will often introduce a
joke or some amusing illustration from contemporary
life, in the midst of a most profound and serious
argument. This spirit of mirth is a sign of superiority.
He who is not sure of himself can spare no energy for
the making of mirth. Croce loves to laugh at his
enemies and with his friends. So the philosopher of
Naples sits by the blue gulf and explains the universe
to those who have ears to hear. “ One can philosophize
anywhere,” he says—but he remains significantly at
Naples.

Thus I conclude these brief remarks upon the
author of the #sthetzc, confident that those who give
time and attention to its study will be grateful for
having placed in their hands this pearl of great price
from the diadem of the antique Parthenope.


DOUGLAS AINSLIE.


THE ATHENZUM, PALL MALL,
May 1909.


INTUITION AND EXPRESSION


Human knowledge has two forms: it is either
intuitive knowledge or logical knowledge; know-
ledge obtained through the imagination or know-
ledge obtained through the intellect ; knowledge
of the individual or knowledge of the universal ;
of individual things or of the relations between
them: it is, in fact, productive either of images
or of concepts. |

In ordinary life, constant appeal is made to
intuitive knowledge. It is said to be impossible
to give expression to certain truths; that they
are not demonstrable by syllogisms; that they
must be learnt intuitively. The politician finds
fault with the abstract reasoner, who is without
a lively knowledge of actual conditions; the
pedagogue insists upon the necessity of develop-
ing the intuitive faculty in the pupil before


everything else; the critic in judging a work of
B


Intuitive
knowledge.


Its independ-
ence in respect
to intellective
knowledge.


2 THEORY, OF As tik Tic I


art makes it a point of honour to set aside theory
and abstractions, and to judge it by direct
intuition; the practical man professes to live
rather by intuition than by reason.

But this ample acknowledgment, granted to
intuitive knowledge in ordinary life, does not
meet with an equal and adequate acknowledg-
ment in the field of theory and of philosophy.
There exists a very ancient science of intellective
knowledge, admitted by all without discussion,
namely, Logic; but a _ science of intuitive
knowledge is timidly and with difficulty admitted
by but a few. Logical knowledge has appropri-
ated the lion’s share; and if she does not quite
slay and devour her companion, yet yields to her
with difficulty the humble little place of maid-
servant or doorkeeper. What, it says, is intuitive
knowledge without the light of intellective
knowledge? It is a servant without a master ;
and though a master find a servant useful, the
master is a necessity to the servant, since he
enables him to gain his livelihood. Intuition
is blind ; intellect lends her eyes.

Now, the first point to be firmly fixed in the
mind is that intuitive knowledge has no need
of a master, nor to lean upon any one; she does
not need to borrow the eyes of others, for she


'


i


$
,


peoINEOLTION AND EXPRESSION = 3


has most excellent eyes of her own. Doubtless
it is possible to find concepts mingled with
intuitions. But in many other intuitions there
is no trace of such a mixture, which proves that
it is not necessary. The impression of a moon-
light scene by a painter; the outline of a country


drawn by a cartographer; a musical motive,


" tender or energetic; the words of a sighing lyric,


or those with which we ask, command and
ament in ordinary life, may well all be intuitive
facts without a shadow of intellective relation.
But, think what one may of these instances, and
admitting further that one may maintain that the
greater part of the intuitions of civilized man are
impregnated with concepts, there yet remains
to be observed something more important and
‘more conclusive. Those concepts which are
\found mingled and fused with the intuitions, are


no longer concepts, in so far as they are really


_ ningled and fused, for they have lost all


_~ independence and autonomy. They have been


concepts, but they have now become simple
elements of intuition. The philosophical maxims
placed in the mouth of a personage of tragedy
or of comedy, perform there the function, not
of concepts, but of characteristics of such person-


age; in the same way as the red in a painted


4 THEORY - OF Asi me tite I


figure does not there represent the red colour

of the physicists, but is a characteristic element

of the portrait. The whole it is that determines ./
the quality of the parts. A work of art may
be full of philosophical concepts ; it may contain
them in greater abundance and they may be
there even more profound than in a philosophical
dissertation, which in its turn may be rich to
overflowing with descriptions and_ intuitions.
But, notwithstanding all these concepts it may
contain, the result of the work of art is an
intuition; and notwithstanding all those in-
tuitions, the result of the philosophical disserta-
tion is a concept. The Promessz Spost contains
copious ethical observations and distinctions, but
it does not for that reason lose in its total
effect its character of simple story, of intuition.
In like manner the anecdotes and satirical
effusions which may be found in the works’
of a philosopher like Schopenhauer, do not
remove from those works their character of
intellective treatises. The difference between
a scientific work and a work of art, that is,
between an intellective fact and an intuitive fact

lies in the result, in the diverse effect aimed at
by their respective authors. This it is that deter-
mines and rules over the several parts of each.


7 INTUITION AND EXPRESSION. 5


But to admit the independence of intuition poscpiclae:
as regards concept does not suffice to give a
true and precise idea of intuition. Another
error arises among those who recognize this,
or who, at any rate, do not make intuition
explicitly dependent upon the intellect. This
_ error obscures and confounds the real nature of
. | intuition. By intuition is frequently understood
7 \the perception or knowledge of actual reality,


the apprehension of something as read.


Certainly perception is intuition: the per-
ception of the room in which I am writing,
of the ink-bottle and paper that are before me,
of the ‘pen I am using, of the objects that I
touch and make use of as instruments of my
person, which, if it write, therefore exists ;—
these are all intuitions. But the image that is
now passing through my brain of a me writing

in another room, in another town, with different
paper, pen and ink, is also an intuition. This
means that the distinction between reality and


non-reality is extraneous, secondary, to the true


nature of intuition. If we assume the existence
of a human mind which should have intuitions
for the first time, it would seem that it could
have intuitions of effective reality only, that is


to say, that it could have perceptions of nothing


6 THEORY OF Seu e Tie I


but the real. But if the knowledge of reality be
based upon the distinction between real images
and unreal images, and if this distinction does
not originally exist, these intuitions would in
truth not be intuitions either of the real or of
the unreal, but pure intuitions. Where all is
real, nothing is real. The child, with its difficulty
of distinguishing true from false, history from
fable, which are all one to childhood, can furnish
us with a sort of very vague and only remotely
approximate idea of this ingenuous _ state.
Intuition is the indifferentiated unity of the
‘perception of the real and of the simple image
lof the possible. In our intuitions we do not


oppose ourselves to external reality as empirical


beings, but we simply objectify our impressions,
whatever they be.


Intuition and Those, therefore, who look upon intuition
the concepts Zs i

ie as sensation formed and arranged simply accord-
and time,


ing to the categories of space and time, would
seem to approximate more nearly to the truth.
Space and time (they say) are the forms of
intuition ; to have intuitions is to place in space
and in temporal sequence. Intuitive activity
would then consist in this double and concurrent
function of spatiality and temporality. But for
these two categories must be repeated what »


—


Peo eri OnN: AND: EXPRESSION.” »


was said of intellectual distinctions, found mingled
with intuitions. We have intuitions without
space and without time: a tint of sky and a tint
of sentiment, an Ah! of pain and_.an effort of
will, objectified in consciousness. These are
intuitions, which we possess, and with their
making, space and time have nothing to do.
In some intuitions, spatiality may be found
without temporality, in others, this without that ;
and even where both are found, they are per-
ceived by posterior reflexion: they can be fused
with the intuition in like manner with all its
other elements : that is, they are in it aterzaliter
and not formatter, as ingredients and not as
essentials. Who, without a similar act of in-
terruptive reflexion, is conscious of temporal
sequence while listening to a story or a piece of
music? That which intuition reveals in a work of
art is not space and time, but character, individual |
physiognomy. Several attempts may be noted
in modern philosophy, which confirm the view
here exposed. Space and time, far from being
very simple and primitive functions, are shown
to be intellectual constructions of great com-
plexity. And further, even in some of those
who do not altogether deny to space and time
the quality of forming or of categories and


Intuttion and
ensation,


8 THEORY OF. AiS ware Fic 1


functions, one may observe the attempt to unify
and to understand them in a different manner
from that generally maintained in respect of
these categories. Some reduce intuition to the
unique category of spatiality, maintaining that
time also can only be conceived in terms of space.
Others abandon the three dimensions of space
as not philosophically necessary, and conceive the
function of spatiality as void of every particular
spatial determination. But what could such
a spatial function be, that should control even
time? May it not be a residuum of criticisms
and of negations from which arises merely the
necessity to posit a generic intuitive activity?
And is not this last truly determined, when one
unique function is attributed to it, not spatializing
nor temporalizing, but characterizing ? Or, better,
when this is conceived as itself a category or
function, which gives knowledge of things in
their concretion and individuality ?

Having thus freed intuitive knowledge from
any suggestion of intellectualism and from every
posterior and external adjunct, we must now
make clear and determine its limits from another
side and from a different kind of invasion and
confusion. On the other side, and_ before
the inferior boundary, is sensation, formless


Pe INTUITION AND EXPRESSION 9


matter, which the spirit can never apprehend in
itself, in so far as it is mere matter. This it
can only possess with form and in form, but
postulates its concept as, precisely, a limit. Matter,
in its abstraction, is mechanism, passivity; it is
what the spirit of man experiences, but does not
produce. Without it no human knowledge and
activity is possible; but mere matter produces
animality, whatever is brutal and impulsive
in man, not the spiritual dominion, which is
humanity. How often do we strive to under-
stand clearly what is passing within us? We do
catch a glimpse of something, but this does not
appear to the mind as objectified and formed.
In such moments it is, that we best perceive
the profound difference between matter and form.
These are not two acts of ours, face to face with
one another; but we assault and carry off the one
that is outside us, while that within us tends to
absorb and make its own that without. Matter, |
attacked and conquered by form, gives place,
to concrete form. It is the matter, the content,
that differentiates one of our intuitions from
another: form is constant : it is spiritual activity,
while matter is changeable. Without matter,
however, our spiritual activity would not leave


its abstraction to become concrete and real, this


ntuition and
ssoctation,


IO THEORY OF “/ESe ibe iie 1


or that spiritual content, this or that definite
intuition.

It is a curious fact, characteristic of our times,
that this very form, this very activity of the spirit,
which is essentially ourselves, is so easily ignored
or denied. Some confound the spiritual activity
of man with the metaphorical and mythological
activity of so-called nature, which is mechanism and
has no resemblance to human activity, save when
we imagine, with A%sop, that arbores loguuntur
non tantum ferae. Some even affirm that they
have never observed in themselves this “ miracu-
lous” activity, as though there were no difference,
or only one of quantity, between sweating and
thinking, feeling cold and the energy of the
will. Others, certainly with greater reason, desire
to unify activity and mechanism in a more general
concept, though admitting that they are specifi-
cally distinct. Let us, however, refrain for the


‘moment from examining if such a unification be


possible, and in what sense, but admitting that the
attempt may be made, it is clear that to unify two
concepts in a third implies a difference between
the two first. And here,it is this difference that
is of importance and we set it in relief.

Intuition has often been confounded with


simple sensation. But, since this confusion is too


a


, reani Y


ee


wee ae


we ULI IGN. AND EXPRESSION 11


shocking to good sense, it has more frequently


been attenuated or concealed with a phraseology


_which seems to wish to confuse and to distinguish


them at the same time. Thus, it has been
asserted that intuition is sensation, but not so
much simple sensation as assoczation of sensations.
The equivoque arises precisely from the word
“association.” Association is understood, either
as memory, mnemonic association, conscious
recollection, and in that case is evident the
absurdity of wishing to join together in memory
elements which are not intuified, distinguished,
possessed in some way by the spirit and pro-
duced by consciousness: or it is understood as
association of unconscious elements. In this
case we remain in the world of sensation and
of nature. Further, if with certain associationists
we speak of an association which is neither
memory nor flux of sensations, but is a fro-
ductive association (formative, constructive, dis-
tinguishing); then we admit the thing itself
and deny only its name. In truth, productive
association is no longer association in the
sense of the sensualists, but syzthests, that
is to say, spiritual activity. Synthesis may
be called association; but with the concept


of productivity is already posited the distinction


tuition and
wvesentation,


42 THEORY: OF ALS DEED Tie I


between passivity and activity, between sensation
and intuition.

Other psychologists are disposed to distinguish
from sensation something which is sensation no
longer, but is not yet intellective concept: che
representation or tmage. What is the difference
between their representation or image, and our
intuitive knowledge? The greatest, and none at
all. ‘‘ Representation,” too, is a very equivocal
word. If by representation be understood some-
thing detached and standing out from the psychic
base of the sensations, then representation is
intuition. If, on the other hand, it be conceived
as a complex sensation, a return is made to simple
sensation, which does not change its quality
according to its richness or poverty, operating
alike in a rudimentary or in a developed organism
full of traces of past sensations. Nor is the equi-
voque remedied by defining representation as a
psychic product of secondary order in relation to
sensation, which should occupy the first place.
What does secondary order mean here? Does it
mean a qualitative, a formal difference? If so,
we agree: representation is elaboration of
sensation, it is intuition. Or does it mean
greater complexity and complication, a quantita-
tive, material difference? In that case intuition


mm INTUITION AND EXPRESSION


would be again confused with simple sensa-
tion.
And yet there is a sure method of distinguish- aici

ing true intuition, true representation, from that

which is inferior to it: the spiritual fact from the
mechanical, passive, natural fact. Every true;
intuition or representation is, also, expression4

That which does not objectify itself in expression

is not intuition or representation, but sensation |


and naturality. The spirit does not obtain


intuitions, otherwise than by making, forming,


expressing. He who separates intuition from


expression never succeeds in reuniting them.
Intuitive activity possesses intuitions to the
extent that wt expresses them.—Should this expres- |
sion seem at first paradoxical, that is chiefly
because, as a general rule, a too restricted
meaning is given to the word “expression.” It
is generally thought of as restricted to verbal
expression. But there exist also non-verbal
expressions, such as those of line, colour, and
sound; to all of these must be extended our
affirmation. The intuition and expression together
of a painter are pictorial; those of a poet are
verbal. But be it pictorial, or verbal, or musical,
or whatever else it be called, to no intuition can


expression be wanting, because it is an inseparable


Lilusions
as to their
difference.


14 DH EORY OF STE Tie I


part of intuition. How can we possess a true
intuition of a geometrical figure, unless we possess
so accurate an image of it as to be able to trace
it immediately upon paper or on a slate? How
can we have an intuition of the contour of a
region, for example, of the island of Sicily, if we
are not able to draw it as it is in all its
meanderings? Every one can experience the
internal illumination which follows upon _ his
success in formulating to himself his impressions
and sentiments, but only so far as he is able to
formulate them. Sentiments or impressions, then,
pass by means of words from the obscure region
of the soul into the clarity of the contemplative
spirit. In this cognitive process it is impossible
to distinguish intuition from expression. The
one is produced with the other at the same
instant, because they are not two, but one.

The principal reason which makes our theme
appear paradoxical as we maintain it, is the
illusion or prejudice that we possess a more
complete intuition of reality than we really do.
One often hears people say that they have in
their minds many important thoughts, but that
they are not able to express them. In truth,
if they really had them, they would have coined
them into beautiful, ringing words, and thus


1 INTUITION AND EXPRESSION 1s


expressed them. If these thoughts seem to


vanish or to become scarce and poor in the act
of expressing them, either they did not exist
or they really were scarce and poor. People
think that all of us ordinary men imagine and
have intuitions of countries, figures and scenes,
like painters ; of bodies, like sculptors; save that
painters and sculptors know how to paint and
to sculpture those images, while we possess them
only within our souls. They believe that anyone
could have imagined a Madonna of Raphael; but
that Raphael was Raphael owing to his technical
ability in putting the Madonna upon the canvas.
Nothing can be more false than this view. The
world of which as a rule we have intuitions, is
a small thing. It consists of little expressions


which gradually become greater and more ample


with the increasing spiritual concentration of


certain moments. These are the sort of words
which we speak within ourselves, the judgments
that we tacitly express: “Here is a man, here
is a horse, this is heavy, this is hard, this pleases
ine. etc, lt. is a, medley of lisht and colour,
which could not pictorially attain to any more


sincere expression than a haphazard splash of


_ colours, from among which would with difficulty


stand out a few special, distinctive traits. This


16 2HBPORY OF ASTHEAIC 1


and nothing else is what we possess in our
ordinary life; this is the basis of our ordinary
action. It is the index of a book. The labels
tied to things take the place of the things
themselves. This index and labels (which are
themselves expressions) suffice for our small
needs and small actions. From time to time we
pass from the index to the book, from the label
to the thing, or from the slight to the greater
intuitions, and from these to the greatest and
most lofty. This passage is sometimes far from
being easy. It has been observed by those who
have best studied the psychology of artists, that
when, after having given a rapid glance at
anyone, they attempt to obtain a true intuition
of him, in order, for example, to paint his
portrait, then this ordinary vision, that seemed
so precise, so lively, reveals itself as little better
than nothing. What remains is found to be at
the most some superficial trait, which would not
even suffice for a caricature. The person to be
painted stands before the artist like a world to
discover. Michael Angelo said, ‘one paints, not
with one’s hands, but with one’s brain.” Leonardo
shocked the prior of the convent delle Grazie by
standing for days together opposite the ‘“ Last
Supper” without touching it with the brush. He


7 INTUITION AND EXPRESSION 7


remarked of this attitude “that men of the most
lofty genius, when they are doing the least work,
are then the most active, seeking invention with
their minds.” The painter is a painter, because
he sees what others only feel or catch a glimpse
of, but do not see. We think we see a smile,
but in reality we have only a vague impression
of it, we do not perceive all the characteristic
traits from which it results, as the painter
perceives them after his internal meditations,
which thus enable him to fix them on the canvas.
Even in the case of our intimate friend, who
is with us every day and at all hours, we do not
possess intuitively more than, at the most, certain
traits of his physiognomy, which enable us to
distinguish him from others. The illusion is less
easy as regards musical expression; because it
would seem strange to everyone to say that the
composer had added or attached notes to the
motive, which is already in the mind of him who
is not the composer. As if Beethoven’s Ninth
Symphony were not his own intuition and his
own intuition the Ninth Symphony. Thus, just
as he who is deceived as to his material wealth
is confuted by arithmetic, which states its exact
amount, so is he confuted who nourishes delusions


as to the wealth of his own thoughts and images.
e


Ldentity of
intuition and
expression,


18 THEORY OF Aotme tie I


He is brought back to reality, when he is obliged
to cross the Bridge of Asses of expression. We
say to the former, count; to the latter, speak,
here is a pencil, draw, express yourself.

We have each of us, as a matter of fact, a little
of the poet, of the sculptor, of the musician, of the
painter, of the prose writer: but how little, as
compared with those who are so called, precisely
because of the lofty degree in which they possess
the most universal dispositions and energies of
human nature! How little does a painter possess
of the intuitions of a poet! How little does one
painter possess those of another painter! Never-
theless, that little is all our actual patrimony of
intuitions or representations. Beyond these are
only impressions, sensations, feelings, impulses,
emotions, or whatever else one may term what is
outside the spirit, not assimilated by man,
postulated for the convenience of exposition, but
effectively inexistent, if existence be also a
spiritual fact.

We may then add this to the verbal variants
descriptive of intuition, noted at the beginning:
intuitive knowledge is expressive knowledge,
independent and autonomous in respect to
intellectual function; indifferent to discrimina-


tions, posterior and empirical, to reality and to


PRE,


: INTUITION AND EXPRESSION 19


unreality, to formations and perceptions of space
and time, even when posterior: intuition or
representation is distinguished as form from what
is felt and suffered, from the flux or wave of
sensation, or from psychic material ; and this form,
this taking possession of, is expression. To have
an intuition is to express. It is nothing else


(nothing more, but nothing less) than éo express.


I]


INTUITION AND ART


orollariesand BEFORE proceeding further, it seems opportune


xplanations.


dentity of art
md intuttive
nowledge.


No specitic
lifference.


to draw certain consequences from what has been
established and to add some explanation.

We have frankly identified intuitive or ex-
pressive knowledge with the esthetic or artistic
fact, taking works of art as examples of intuitive
knowledge and attributing to them the character-
istics of intuition, and wzce versa. But our
identification is combated by the view, held even
by many philosophers, who consider art to be an
intuition of an altogether special sort. ‘Let us
admit” (they say) “that art is intuition; but
intuition is not always art: artistic intuition is of a
distinct species differing from intuition in general
by something more.”

But no one has ever been able to indicate of
what this something more consists. It has some-
times been thought that art is not a simple


intuition, but an intuition of an intuition, in the
20


i


11 ENTOIVTION AND AKT oe


same way as the concept of science has been
defined, not as the ordinary concept, but as the
concept of a concept. Thus man should attain to
art, by objectifying, not his sensations, as happens
with ordinary intuition, but intuition itself. But
this process of raising to a second power does not
exist ; and the comparison of it with the ordinary
and scientific concept does not imply what is
wished, for the good reason that it is not true that
the scientific concept is the concept of a concept.
If this comparison imply anything, it implies
just the opposite. The ordinary concept, if it be
really a concept and not a simple representation,
is a perfect concept, however poor and limited.
Science substitutes concepts for representations ;
it adds and substitutes other concepts larger and
more comprehensive for those that are poor and
limited. It is ever discovering new relations.
But its method does not differ from that by which
is formed the smallest universal in the brain of the
humblest of men. What is generally called art, by
antonomasia, collects intuitions that are wider and
more complex than those which we generally
experience, but these intuitions are always of
sensations and impressions.

Art is the expression of impressions, not the


expression of expressions.


22 THEORY OF ASTOR TIC It


No difference For the same reason, it cannot be admitted
oes that intuition, which is generally called artistic,
differs from ordinary intuition as to intensity.
This would be the case if it were to operate
differently on the same matter. But since artistic
function is more widely distributed in different
fields, but yet does not differ in method from
ordinary intuition, the difference between the one
and the other is not intensive but extensive.
The intuition of the simplest popular love-song,
which says the same thing, or very nearly, as a
declaration of love such as issues at every moment
from the lips of thousands of ordinary men, may be
intensively perfect in its poor simplicity, although
it be extensively so much more limited than the
complex intuition of a love-song by Leopardi.
The difference The whole difference, then, is quantitative,
ind empirical, and as such, indifferent to philosophy, sczentza
gualitatum. Certain men have a greater apti-
/ tude, a more frequent inclination fully to express
certain complex states of the soul. These men
are known in ordinary language as artists. Some
very complicated and difficult expressions are
more rarely achieved and these are called works
of art. The limits of the expressions and in-
tuitions that are called art, as opposed to those
that are vulgarly called not-art, are empirical and


It MN EO1 TION AND ART aes


impossible to define. If an epigram be art, why
not a single word? If a story; why not the
occasional note of the journalist? If a landscape,
why not a topographical sketch? The teacher
of philosophy in Moliére’s comedy was right:
‘““whenever we speak we create prose.” But
there will always be scholars like Monsieur
Jourdain, astonished at having created prose
for forty years without knowing it, and who
will have difficulty in persuading themselves
that when they call their servant John to bring
their slippers, they have spoken nothing less
than—prose.

We must hold firmly to our identification,
because among the principal reasons which have
prevented AZsthetic, the science of art, from re-
vealing the true nature of art, its real roots in
human nature, has been its separation from the
general spiritual life, the having made of it a
sort of special function or aristocratic circle.
No one is astonished when he learns from physio-
logy that every cellule is an organism and every
organism a cellule or synthesis of cellules. No
one is astonished at finding in a lofty mountain
the same chemical elements that compose a small
stone or fragment. There is not one physiology


of small animals and one of large animals ; nor is


Artistic
genius.


24 PiibORY, Of. 7S Pit Tie It


there a special chemical theory of stones as distinct
from mountains. In the same way, there is not
a science of lesser intuition distinct from a
science of greater intuition, nor one of ordinary
intuition distinct from artistic intuition. There
is but one A%sthetic, the science of intuitive or
expressive knowledge, which is the esthetic or
artistic fact. And this A®sthetic is the true
analogy of Logic. Logic includes, as facts of
the same nature, the formation of the smallest
and most ordinary concept and the most com-
plicated scientific and philosophical system.

Nor can we admit that the word genzus or
artistic genius, as distinct from the non-genius
of the ordinary man, possesses more than a
quantitative signification. Great artists are said
to reveal us to ourselves. But how could this
be possible, unless there be identity of nature
between their imagination and ours, and unless
the difference be only one of quantity? It were
well to change foeta nascitur into homo nascitur
poeta: some men are born great poets, some small.
The cult and superstition of the genius has arisen
from this quantitative difference having been taken
as a difference of quality. It has been forgotten
that genius is not something that has fallen from
heaven, but humanity itself. The man of genius,


II INTUITION AND ART 25


who poses or is represented as distant from
humanity, finds his punishment in becoming or
appearing somewhat ridiculous. Examples of
this are the gexzus of the romantic period and
the superman of our time.

But it is well to note here, that those who
claim unconsciousness as the chief quality of an
artistic genius, hurl him from an eminence far
above humanity to a position far below it.
Intuitive or artistic genius, like every form of
human activity, is always conscious; otherwise
it would be blind mechanism. The only thing


that may be wanting to the artistic genius


is the reflective consciousness, the superadded
consciousness of the historian or critic, which
is not essential to artistic genius.
The relation between matter and form, or Content and
5 ; forn in
between content and form, as it is generally xschecic
called, is one of the most disputed questions


in A®sthetic. Does the esthetic fact consist


of content alone, or of form alone, or of both
together? This question has taken on various
meanings, which we shall mention, each in its
place. But when these words are taken as
signifying what we have above defined, and
matter is understood as emotivity not zsthetically «


elaborated, that is to say, impressions, and form


26 THEORY OF 75 Piretic It


elaboration, intellectual activity and expression,
then our meaning cannot be doubtful. We must,
therefore, reject the thesis that makes the
zesthetic fact to consist of the content alone (that
is, of the simple impressions), in like manner with
that other thesis, which makes it to consist of
a junction between form and content, that is, of
impressions plus expressions. In the esthetic
fact, the esthetic activity is not added to the
fact of the impressions, but these latter are
formed and elaborated by it. The impressions
reappear as it were in expression, like water
put into a filter, which reappears the same
and «yet different on the other side. ine
esthetic fact, therefore, is form, and nothing
but form. |

From this it results, not that the content is
something superfluous (it is, on the contrary, the
necessary point of departure for the expressive
fact); but that there zs no passage between the
quality of the content and that of the form. It
has sometimes been thought that the content,
in order to be esthetic, that is to say, trans-
formable into form, should possess some de-
terminate or determinable quality. But were
that so, then form and content, expression and
impression, would be the same thing. It is true


11 PNT UPEION AND. AY 27


that the content is that which is convertible into
form, but it has no determinable qualities until
this transformation takes place. We know
nothing of its nature. It does not become
zesthetic content at once, but only when it has
been effectively transformed. A‘sthetic content
has also been defined as what is zzteresting.
That is not an untrue statement; it is merely
void of meaning. What, then, is interesting?
Expressive activity ? Certainly the expressive
activity would not have raised the content to the
dignity of form, had it not been interested. The
fact of its having been interested is precisely the
fact of its raising the content to the dignity of
form. But the word “interesting” has also been
employed in another not illegitimate sense, which
we shall explain further on.

The proposition that art is zzztatzon of nature
has also several meanings. Now truth has been
maintained or at least shadowed with these words,
now error. More frequently, nothing definite has
been thought. One of the legitimate scientific
meanings occurs when imitation is understood
as representation or intuition of nature, a form
of knowledge. And when this meaning has been
understood, by placing in greater relief the
spiritual character of the process, the other


Critique of th
zmitation of
nature and of
the artistic
zlluston.


28 THEORY OF AST He Ere II


proposition becomes also legitimate: namely,
that art is the zdealization or tdealtzing imitation
of nature. But if by imitation of nature be
understood that art gives mechanical repro-
ductions, more or less perfect duplicates of
natural objects, before which the same tumult
of impressions caused by natural objects begins
over again, then the proposition is evidently
false. The painted wax figures that seem to
be alive, and before which we stand astonished
in the museums where such things are shown,
do not give esthetic intuitions. Illusion and
hallucination have nothing to do with the calm
domain of artistic intuition. If an artist paint
the interior of a wax-work museum, or if an actor
give a burlesque portrait of a man-statue on the
stage, we again have spiritual labour and artistic
intuition, Finally, if photography have anything
in it of artistic, it will be to the extent that it
transmits the intuition of the photographer, his
point of view, the pose and the grouping which
he has striven to attain. And if it be not
altogether art, that is precisely because the
element of nature in it remains more or less
insubordinate and ineradicable. Do we ever,
indeed, feel complete satisfaction before even
the best of photographs? Would not an artist


ie PNP ON AN) A Roe 29


vary and touch up much or little, remove or add
something to any of them ?
The statements repeated so often, with others Critique of an


conceived as a


similar, that art is not knowledge, that it does sewimentai


notatheoretica


not tell the truth, that it does not belong to the “seri

appearance
world of theory, but to the world of feeling, arise “’/!"*
from the failure to realize exactly the theoretic
character of the simple intuition. This simple
intuition is quite distinct from intellectual


knowledge, as it is distinct from the perception


of the real. The belief that only the intellective


is knowledge, or at the most also the perception


of the real, also arises from the failure to grasp


the theoretic character of the simple intuition.
We have seen that intuition is knowledge, free
of concepts and more simple than the so-called
perception of the real. Since art is knowledge
and form, it does not belong to the world of
feeling and of psychic material. The reason
why so many estheticians have so often insisted
that art is appearance (Schein), is_ precisely
because they have felt the necessity of dis-
tinguishing it from the more complex fact of
perception by maintaining its pure intuitivity.
For the same reason it has been claimed that
art is sentiment. In fact, if the concept as content


of art, and historical reality as such, be excluded,


‘vitique of the
ceory of
sthetic senses.


30 Pia eORY OF Aesth ric 11


there remains no other content than _ reality
apprehended in all its ingenuousness and im-
mediateness in the vital effort, in sextzment, that
is to Say, pure intuition.

The theory of the esthetzc senses has also
arisen from the failure to establish, or from having
lost to view the character of the expression as
distinct from the impression, of the form as
distinct from the matter.

As has just been pointed out, this reduces
itself to the error of wishing to seek a passage
from the quality of the content to that of
the form. To ask, in fact, what the esthetic
senses may be, implies asking, what sensible


impressions may be able to enter into esthetic


expressions, and what must of necessity do so.


To this we must at once reply, that all im-
pressions can enter into esthetic expressions or
formations, but that none are bound to do so.
Dante raised to the dignity of form not only the
‘“sweet colour of the oriental sapphire” (visual
impression), but also tactile or thermic impres-
sions, such as the ‘thick air” and the ‘fresh
rivulets” which “parch all the more” the
throat of the thirsty. The belief that a picture
yields only visual impressions is a curious illusion.
The bloom of a cheek, the warmth of a youthful


11 ENA OrEON AND ART a1


body, the sweetness and freshness of a fruit, the
cutting of a sharpened blade, are not these, also,
impressions that we have from a picture? Maybe
they are visual? What would a picture be for
a hypothetical man, deprived of all or many of
his senses, who should in an instant acquire the
sole organ of sight? The picture we are
standing opposite and believe we see only with
our eyes, would appear to his eyes as little more
than the paint-smeared palette of a painter.

Some who hold firmly to the esthetic
character of given groups of impressions (for
example, the visual, the auditive), and exclude
others, admit, however, that if visual and auditive
impressions enter dzrect/y into the esthetic fact,
those of the other senses also enter into it, but
only as associated. But this distinction is
altogether arbitrary. A¢sthetic expression is a
synthesis, in which it is impossible to distinguish
direct and indirect. All impressions are by it
Pred son a level, in so. far- as they are
zestheticised. He who takes into himself the
image of a picture or of a poem does not ex-
perience, as it were, a series of impressions as to
this image, some of which have a prerogative or
precedence over others. And nothing is known
of what happens prior to having received it, for


22 THEORY OF Moth 11


the distinctions made after reflexion have nothing
to do with art.

The theory of the esthetic senses has also
been presented in another way; that is to say,
as the attempt to establish what physiological
organs are necessary for the esthetic fact. The
physiological organ or apparatus is nothing but
a complex of cellules, thus and thus constituted,
thus and thus disposed; that is to say, it is
merely physical and natural fact or concept. But
expression does not recognize physiological facts.
Expression has its point of departure in the im-
pressions, and the physiological path by which
these have found their way to the mind is to
it altogether indifferent. One way or another
amounts to the same thing: it suffices that they
are impressions.

It is true that the want of given organs,
that is, of given complexes of cells, produces an
absence of given impressions (when these are not
obtained by another path by a kind of organic
compensation). The man born blind cannot
express or have the intuition of light. But the
impressions are not conditioned solely by the
organ, but also by the stimuli which operate upon
the organ. Thus, he who has never had the


impression of the sea will never be able to express


1 EN PUTELON AND: Ak ae


it, in the same way as he who has never had the
impression of the great world or of the political
conflict will never express the one or the other.
This, however, does not establish a depend-
ence of the expressive function on the stimulus
or on the organ. It is the repetition of what we
know already: expression presupposes impres-
sion. Therefore, given expressions imply given
impressions. Besides, every impression excludes
other impressions during the moment in which it
dominates ; and so does every expression.


Another corollary of the conception of expres-


Unity and
indivisibility


sion as activity is the zzdiveszbelzty of the work of oe wort y


art. Every expression is a unique expression.


Activity is a fusion of the impressions in an


organic whole. A desire to express this has


always prompted the affirmation that the work
of art should have wazty, or, what amounts to the
same thing, uaity im variety. Expression is a
synthesis of the various, the multiple, in the one.

@he fact that we divide a work of art into
parts, as a poem into scenes, episodes, similes,
sentences, or a picture into single figures and
objects, background, foreground, etc., may seem
to be an objection to this affirmation. But such
division annihilates the work, as dividing the


grganism into heart, brain, nerves, muscles and
D


art.


34 THEORY, OF 7AtST ire It


so on, turns the living being into a corpse. It
is true that there exist organisms in which the
division gives place to more living things, but
in such a case, and if we transfer the analogy to
the zsthetic fact, we must conclude for a multi-
plicity of germs of life, that is to say, for a speedy
re-elaboration of the single parts into new single
expressions.

It will be observed that expression is some-
times based on other expressions. There are
simple and there are compound expressions. One
must admit some difference between the eureka,
with which Archimedes expressed all his joy
after his discovery, and the expressive act (indeed
all the five acts) of a regular tragedy. Not in the
least: expression is always directly based on
impressions. He who conceives a tragedy puts
into a crucible a great quantity, so to say, of
impressions: the expressions themselves, con-
ceived on other occasions, are fused together
with the new in a single mass, in the samefiway
as we can cast into a smelting furnace formless
pieces of bronze and most precious statuettes.
Those most precious statuettes must be melted
in the same way as the formless bits of bronze,
before there can be a new statue. The old
expressions must descend again to the level of


m1 INTUITION AND ART 35


impressions, in order to be synthetized in a new
single expression.

By elaborating his impressions, man /vees
himself from them. By objectifying them, he
removes them from him and makes himself their
superior. The liberating and purifying function
of art is another aspect and another formula of
its character of activity. Activity is the deliverer,
just because it drives away passivity.

This also explains why it is customary to
attribute to artists alike the maximum of sensi-
bility or fasszon, and the maximum insensibility or
Olympic serenity. Both qualifications agree, for
they do not refer to the same object. The sensi-
bility or passion relates to the rich material which
the artist absorbs into his psychic organism ; the
insensibility or serenity to the form with which
he subjugates and dominates the tumult of the
feelings and of the passions.


Art as the
deliverer.


III


ART AND PHILOSOPHY


ndissolwbility "THE two forms of knowledge, esthetic and intel-


f intellective


rom intuitive lectual or conceptual, are indeed diverse, but this


nowledge.


does not amount altogether to separation and
disjunction, as we find with two forces going
each its own way. If we have shown that the
esthetic form is altogether independent of the
intellectual and suffices to itself without external
support, we have not said that the intellectual
can stand without the esthetic. This receprocity
would not be true.

What is knowledge by concepts? It is know-
ledge of relations of things, and those things are
intuitions. Concepts are not possible without
intuitions, just as intuition is itself impossible
without the material of impressions. Intuitions
are: this river, this lake, this brook, this rain,
this glass of water; the concept is: water, not
this or that appearance and particular example


of water, but water in general, in whatever time
36


11 Git AND PI e@sOriy a7


Se)
or place it be realized; the material of infinite
intuitions, but of one single and constant concept.

However, the concept, the universal, if it be
no longer intuition in one respect, is in another
respect intuition, and cannot fail of being intui-
tion. For the man who thinks has impressions
and emotions, in so far as he thinks. His impres-
sion and emotion will not be love or hate, but
the effort of his thought ztself, with the pain and
the joy, the love and the hate joined to it. This
effort cannot but become intuitive in form, in
becoming objective to the mind. To speak, is
not to think logically ; but to ¢hzxk logically is, at
the same time, to speak.


That thought cannot exist without speech,


Critique of t
negations of


is a truth generally admitted. The negations of ss sesis.


this thesis are all founded on equivoques and
errors.

The first of the equivoques is implied by those
who observe that one can likewise think with
geometrical figures, algebraical numbers, ideo-
graphic signs, without a single word, even
pronounced silently and almost insensibly within
one. They also affirm that there are languages
in which the word, the phonetic sign, expresses
nothing, unless the written sign also be looked


at. But when we said ‘‘speech,” we intended to


38 ih ORY OF. Zeon EEC HI


employ a synecdoche, and that “expression”
generically, should be understood, for expression
is not only so-called verbal expression, as we
have already noted. It may be admitted that
a concepts may be thought without phonetic _
manifestations. But the very examples adduced
to show this also prove that those concepts never
exist without expressions.

Others maintain that animals, or certain
animals, think or reason without speaking.
Now as to how, whether, and what animals think,
whether they be rudimentary, half-savage men
resisting civilization, rather than physiological
machines, as the old spiritualists would have it,
are questions that do not concern us _ here.
When the philosopher talks of animal, brutal,
impulsive, instinctive nature and the like, he does
not base himself on conjectures as to these
facts concerning dogs or cats, lions or ants; but
upon observations of what is called animal and
brutal in man: of the boundary or animal basis
of what we feel in ourselves. If individual
animals, dogs or cats, lions or ants, possess
something of the activity of man, so much the
better, or so much the worse for them. This
means that as regards them also we must talk,
not of their nature as a whole, but of its animal


ut wet een DOE TEE OSOPEY 39


basis, as being perhaps larger and more strong
tiene the animal basis: of man, And if we
suppose that animals think, and form concepts,
what is there in the line of conjecture to justify
the admission that they do so without corre-
sponding expressions? The analogy with man,
the knowledge of the spirit, human psychology,
which is the instrument of all our conjectures as
to animal psychology, would oblige us to suppose
that if they think in any way, they also have
some sort of speech.

It is from human psychology, that is, literary
psychology, that comes the other objection, to
the effect that the concept can exist without the
word, because it is true that we all know books
that are well thought and badly written: that is
to say, a thought which remains thought deyond
the expression, xofwithstanding the imperfect
expression. But when we talk of books well
thought and badly written, we cannot mean other
than that in those books are parts, pages, periods
or propositions well thought out and well written,
and other parts (perhaps the least important) ill
thought out and badly written, not truly thought


out and therefore not truly expressed. Where


_ Vico’s Scienza nuova is really ill written, it is also


ill thought out. If we pass from the considera-


40 GH HORRY, © bP] Alot Pee re


tion of big books to a short proposition, the error
or the imprecision of this statement will be
recognized at once. How could a proposition
be clearly thought and confusedly written out ?
All that can be admitted is that sometimes
we possess thoughts (concepts) in an intuitive
form, or in an abbreviated or, better, peculiar
expression, sufficient for us, but not sufficient to
communicate it with ease to another or other
definite individuals. Hence people say _in-
accurately, that we have the thought without the
expression ; whereas it should properly be said
that we have, indeed, the expression, but in a
form that is not easy of social communication.
This, however, is a very variable and altogether
relative fact. There are always people who
catch our thought on the wing, and prefer it in
this abbreviated form, and would be displeased
with the greater development of it, necessary
for other people. In other words, the thought
considered abstractly and logically will be the
same; but esthetically we are dealing with two
different intuition-expressions, into both of which
enter different psychological elements. The same
argument suffices to destroy, that is, to interpret
correctly, the altogether empirical distinction


between an zzternadl and an external language.


111 Ak AND PribOsOrry Al


The most lofty manifestations, the summits
of intellectual and of intuitive knowledge shining
from afar, are called, as we know, Art and
Science. Art and Science, then, are different
and yet linked together; they meet on one side,
which is the esthetic side. Every scientific
work is also a work of art. The esthetic side
may ‘remain little noticed, when our mind is
altogether taken up with the effort to understand
the thought of the man of science, and to examine
its truth. But it is no longer concealed, when
we pass from the activity of understanding to
that of contemplation, and behold that thought
either developed before us, limpid, exact, well-
shaped, without superfluous words, without lack
of words, with appropriate rhythm and intona-
tion; or confused, broken, embarrassed, tentative.
Great thinkers are sometimes termed great
writers, while other equally great thinkers remain
more or less fragmentary writers, if indeed their
fragments are scientifically to be compared with
harmonious, coherent, and perfect works.

We pardon thinkers and men of science their
literary mediocrity. The fragments console us
for the failure of the whole, for it is far more
easy to recover the well-arranged composition


from the fragmentary work of genius than to


Art and
science,


42 PAE ORY OF Als lle te 111


achieve the discovery of genius. But how can


we pardon mediocre expression in pure artists?


_ Mediocribus esse poetis non adi, non homines, non


ntent and
‘m.: another
aning.

ose and


try.


he relation
first and
‘ond degree.


concessere columnae. The poet or painter who
lacks form, lacks everything, because he lacks
himself. Poetical. material. permeates..the Soul
of all: the expression alone, that is to say, the
form, makes the poet. And _ here appears the
truth of the thesis which denies to art all content,
as content being understood just the _intel-
lectual concept. In this sense, when we take
“content” as equal to “concept” it is most true,
not only that art does not consist of content,
but also that z¢ has no content.

In the same way the distinction between poetry
and prose cannot be justified, save in that of art
and science. It was seen in antiquity that such
distinction could not be founded on external
elements, such as rhythm and metre, or on the
freedom or the limitation of the form; that it was,
on the contrary, altogether internal. Poetry is
the language of sentiment ; prose of the intellect ;
but since the intellect is also sentiment, in its con-


cretion and reality, so all prose has a poetical side.


The relation between intuitive knowledge


or expression, and intellectual knowledge or


ee ee


concept, between art and science, poetry and


mt ART AND PHILOSOPHY 43


prose, cannot be otherwise defined than by
saying that it is_one of double degree. The first
degree is the expression, the second the concept :
the first “can | exist without the second, but the
second cannot exist. without ie entet. 1 ere
exists poetry without prose, but not prose
without poetry. Expression, indeed, is the first
affirmation of human activity. Poetry is ‘the
: the first


men ‘‘were by nature sublime poets.’ We also


”


maternal language of the human race


admit this in another way, when we observe that
the passage from soul to mind, from animal to


human activity, is effected by means of language.


And this should be said of intuition or expression.


in general. But to us it appears somewhat
inaccurate to define language or expression as an
intermediate link between nature and humanity,
as though it were a mixture of the one and of the
other. Where humanity appears, the rest has
already disappeared; the man who expresses
himself, certainly emerges from the state of
nature, but he really does emerge: he does not
stand half within and half without, as the use
of the phrase “intermediate link” would imply.
The cognitive intellect has no form other than
these two. Expression and concept exhaust it
completely. The whole speculative life of man


Inexistence of
other forms of
knowledge.


Tistory. Its
dentity with
nd difference
rom art,


44 THEORY OR AWS E TiC 111


is spent in passing from one to the other and
back again.

fiistoricity is incorrectly held to be a third
theoretical form. History is not form, but
content: as form, it is nothing but intuition or
zesthetic fact. History does not seek for laws nor
form concepts; it employs neither induction nor
deduction ; it is directed ad narrvandum, non ad


demonstrandum ; it does not construct universals


and abstractions, but posits intuitions. ‘The this,
the that, the te omni modo determinatum,
is its kingdom, as it is the kingdom of art.
History, therefore, is included under the universal


concept of art.

Faced with this proposition and with the
impossibility of conceiving a third mode of
knowledge, objections have been brought forward
which would lead to the affiliation of history to
intellective or scientific knowledge. The greater
portion of these objections is dominated by the
prejudice that in refusing to history the character
of conceptual science, something of its value and
dignity has been taken from it. This really arises
from a false idea of art, conceived, not as an
essential theoretic function, but as an amusement,
a superfluity, a frivolity. Without reopening a


long debate, which so far as we are concerned, is


II Biv AN PritOsOPrH ¥ A5


finally closed, we will mention here one sophism
which has been and still is widely repeated. It is
intended to show the logical and scientific nature
of history. The sophism consists in admitting
that historical knowledge has for its object the
individual ; but not the representation, it is added,
so much as the concept of the individual. From
this it is argued that history is also a logical or
scientific form of knowledge. History, in fact,
should elaborate the concept of a personage such
as Charlemagne or Napoleon ; of an epoch, like
the Renaissance or the Reformation ; of an event,
such as the French Revolution and the Unifica-
tion of Italy. This it is held to do in the same
way as Geometry elaborates the concepts of
spatial form, or A*sthetic those of expression.
Butall this is untrue. History cannot do otherwise
than represent Napoleon and Charlemagne, the
Renaissance and the Reformation, the French
Revolution and the Unification of Italy as in-
dividual facts with their individual physiognomy :
that is, in the same way as logicians state, that
one cannot have a concept of an individual, but
only a representation. The so-called concept of
the individual is always a universal or general
concept, full of details, very rich, if you will, but


however rich it be, yet incapable of attaining to


46 PE ORY OF ALS tre Tie W1


that individuality, to which historical knowledge,
as esthetic knowledge, alone attains.
Let us rather show how the content of history


comes to be distingui tof art: Phe
distinction is secondary. Its origin will be found
in what has already been observed as to the ideal
character of the intuition or first perception, in
which all is real and therefore nothing is real.
The mind forms the concepts of external and
internal at a later stage, as it does those of what
has happened and of what is desired, of object
and subject, and the like. Thus it distinguishes


historical from non-historical intuition, the read


SOAP NR oa eretorcinge


PONY narra


from the zzreal, real fancy from pure fancy.
Even internal facts, what is desired and
imagined, castles in the air, and countries of
Cockagne, have their reality. The soul, too, has
its history. His illusions form part of the bio-
graphy of every individual. But the history of an
individual soul is history, because in it is always
active the distinction between the real and the
unreal, even when the real is the illusions them-
selves. But these distinctive concepts do not
appear in history as do scientific concepts, but
rather like those that we have seen dissolved and
melted in the esthetic intuitions, although they
stand out in history in an altogether new relief.


11 ART AND PHILOSOPHY 47


History does not construct the concepts of the
real and unreal, but makes use of them. History,
in fact, is not the theory of history. Mere con-
ceptual analysis is of no use in realizing whether
an event in our lives were real or imaginary. It
is necessary to reproduce the intuitions in the
mind in the most complete form, as they were at
the moment of production, in order to recognize
the content. Historicity is distinguished in the


concrete from pure imagination only as one intui-


tion is distinguished from another: in the memory.


ee


Where this is not possible, owing to the deli-
cate and fleeting shades between the real and
unreal intuitions, which confuse the one with the
other, we must either renounce, for the time at
least, the knowledge of what really happened
(and this we often do), or we must fall back
upon conjecture, verisimilitude, probability. The


principle of verisimilitude and of probability


| dominates in fact all historical criticism. Exam-


ination of the sources and of authority is directed
toward establishing the most credible evidence.
And what is the most credible evidence, save
that of the best observers, that is, of those who
best remember and (be it understood) have
not desired to falsify, nor had interest in falsi-
fying the truth of things? From this it follows


Flistorical
criticism.


Historical
scepticism.


48 THEORY. OR. AS TEE ae IT


that intellectual scepticism finds it easy to deny
the certainty of any history, for the certainty of
history is never that of science. Historical _cer-
tainty is. composed of memory and ‘of authority,
not of analyses and of demonstration. To speak
of historical induction or demonstration, is to
make a metaphorical use of these expressions,
which bear quite a different meaning in history
to that which they bear in science. The con-
viction of the historian is the undemonstrable
conviction of the juryman, who has heard the
witnesses, listened attentively to the case, and
prayed Heaven to inspire him. Sometimes,
without doubt, he is mistaken, but the mistakes
are in a negligible minority compared with the
occasions when he gets hold of the truth. That


is why good sense is right against the intel-


lectualists, in believing in history, which is not


a ‘fable agreed upon,” but that which the in-
dividual and humanity remember of their past.
We strive to enlarge and to render as precise
as possible this record, which in some places is
dim, in others very clear. We cannot do without
it, such as it is, and taken as a whole, it is rich
in truth. In a spirit of paradox only, can one
doubt if there ever were a Greece or a Rome,


an Alexander or a Cesar, a feudal Europe


ie ERT AND PHILOSOPHY 4,


_ overthrown by a series of revolutions, that on
| the 1st of November 1517 the theses of Luther
| were seen fixed to the door of the church of
| Wittenberg, or that the Bastile was taken by
the people of Paris on the 14th of July 1780.

“What proof givest thou of all this?” asks -
the sophist, ironically. Humanity replies “I re- ve
member.”

The world of what has happened, of the Philosophy as
concrete, of history, is the world that is called The so-called,
real, natural, “including in this definition the tienes and
reality that is called physical, as well as that
which is called spiritual and human. All this
world is intuition; historical intuition, if it be
realistically shown as it is, or imaginary intui-
tion, artistic in the strict sense, if shown under
the aspect of the possible, that is to say, of the
imaginable.

Science, true science, which is not intuition
but concept, not individuality but universality,
cannot be anything but a science of the spirit,
that is, of what is universal in reality : Philosophy.


If natural sczences be spoken of, apart from


philosophy, it is necessary to observe that these
are not perfect sciences: they are complexes of
knowledge, arbitrarily abstracted and fixed. The


so-called natural sciences themselves recognize,
E


50 THEORY On. ASHE rie 111


in fact, that they are surrounded by limitations.
These limitations are nothing more than historical
and intuitive data. They calculate, measure,
“establish equalities, regularity, create classes
and types, formulate laws, show in their own
way how one fact arises out of other facts ; but
in their progress they are always met with facts
which are known intuitively and_ historically.
Even geometry now states that it rests alto-
gether on hypotheses, since space is not three-
dimensional or Euclidean, but this assumption
is. Made! use. of by preference: because it. ic
more convenient. What there is of truth in the
natural sciences, is either philosophy or historical
fact. What they contain proper to themselves
is abstract and arbitrary. When the natural
sciences wish to form themselves into perfect
sciences, they must issue from their circle and
enter the philosophical circle. This they do
when they posit concepts which are anything
but natural, such as those of the atom without
extension in space, of ether or vibrating matter,
of vital force, of space beyond the reach of in-
tuition, and the like. These are true and proper
philosophical efforts, when they are not mere
words void of meaning. The concepts of


natural science are, without doubt, most useful ;


m1 Pict oaND, PHILOSOPHY 51


_ but one cannot obtain from them that system,
| which belongs only to the spirit.

| These historical and intuitive assumptions,
which cannot be separated from the natural
sciences, furthermore explain, not only how, in
the progress of knowledge, that which was once
considered to be truth descends gradually to the
grade of mythological beliefs and imaginary
illusions, but also how, among natural scientists,
there are'some who term all that serves as basis
of argument in their teaching mythical facts,
verbal expedtents, or conventions. The naturalists
and mathematicians who approach the study
of the energies of the spirit without preparation,
are apt to carry thither these mental habits and
to speak, in philosophy, of such and such con-
ventions ‘“‘as arranged by man.” They make
conventions of truth and morality, and their
supreme convention is the Spirit itself! How-
ever, if there are to be conventions, something
must exist about which there is no convention to
be made, but which is itself the agent of the


convention. This is the spiritual activity of man.


The limitation of the natural sciences postulates
the illimitation of philosophy.
These explications have firmly established that 2%e pienome-


non and the


the pure or fundamental forms of knowledge are xenon.


52 Wis ORY OF 7 Stiri PIG II


two: the intuition and the concept—Art, and
“Science or Philosophy. With these are to be
included History, which is, as it were, the product
of intuition placed in contact with the concept,
that is, of art receiving in itself philosophic
distinctions, while remaining concrete and _in-
dividual. All the other-forms (natural sciences
and mathematics) are impure, being mingled with
extraneous elements of practical origin. The
intuition gives the world, the phenomenon ; the


concept gives the noumenon, the Spirit.


IV
HISTORICISM AND INTELLECTUALISM IN ASTHETIC


THESE relations between intuitive or esthetic
knowledge and the other fundamental or deriva-
tive forms of knowledge having been definitely
established, we are now in a position to reveal
the errors of a series of theories which have been,
or are, presented, as theories of A‘sthetic.

From the confusion between the exigencies
of art in general and the particular exigencies
of history has arisen the theory (which has lost
ground to-day, but used to dominate in the past)
of verisimilitude as the object of art. As is
generally the case with erroneous propositions,
the intention of those who employed and employ
the concept of verisimilitude has no doubt often
been much more reasonable than the definition
given of the word. By verisimilitude used to be
meant the artistic coherence of the representation,


If “verisimilar” be translated by “coherent,” a most
5g


Critique of
verisimilitude
and of


naturalisn.


54 THEORY Ore veo lit ele Iv


exact meaning will. often be found in the dis-
cussions, examples, and judgments of the critics.
An improbable personage, an improbable ending
to a comedy, are really badly-drawn personages,
badly - arranged endings, happenings without
artistic motive. It has been said with reason
that even fairies and sprites must have veri-
similitude, that is to say, be really sprites and
fairies, coherent artistic intuitions. Sometimes
the word “possible” has been used instead of
‘“verisimilar.” As we have already remarked
in passing, this word possible is synonymous with
that which is imaginable or may be known
intuitively. Everything which is really, that
is to say, coherently, imagined, is possible. But
formerly, and especially by the theoreticians, by
verisimilar was understood historical credibility,
or that historical truth which is not demonstrable,
but conjecturable, not true, but verisimilar. It has
been sought to impose a like character upon art.
Who does not recall the great part played in
literary history by the criticism of the verisimilar ?
For example, the fault found with the /erusalem
Delivered, based upon the history of the Crusades,
or of the Homeric poems, upon that of the veri-
similitude of the costume of the emperors and kings?

At other times has been imposed upon art


7 CRITIQUE OF ERRORS 55


the duty of the esthetic reproduction of historical
Teac. s this’ 1s another of ‘the erroneous
significations assumed by the theory concerning
the imitation of nature. Verism and naturalism
have since afforded the spectacle of a confusion
of the zsthetic fact with the processes of the
natural sciences, by aiming at some sort of
experimental drama or romance.

The confusions between the methods of art
and those of the philosophical sciences have been
far more frequent. Thus it has often been held
to be within the competence of art to develop
concepts, to unite the intelligible with the
sensible, to represent zdeas or universals, putting
art in the place of science, that is, confusing the


artistic function in general with the particular


case in which it becomes esthetico-logical.


The theory of art as supporting theses can be
reduced to the same error, as can be the theory
of art considered as individual representation,
exemplifying scientific laws. The example, in
so far as it is an example, stands for the thing
exemplified, and is thus an exposition of the
universal, that is to say, a form of science, more
or less popular or vulgarized.

The same may be said of the esthetic theory


of the ¢ypzcal, when by type is understood, as it


Critique of
tdeas in art,
of theses tn art,
and of the
typical.


Critique of
the symbol and
of the allegory.


56 THEORY Ore 7S Rei Iv |


frequently is, just the abstraction or the concept,
and it is affirmed that art should make ¢he sfeczes
shine in the individual. If by typical be here
understood the individual, here, too, we have a
merely verbal variation. ‘To typify would signify,
in this case, to characterize ; that is, to determine
and to represent the individual. Don Quixote is
a type; but of whom is he a type, if not of_all
Don Ouixotes:? = A type, that. ts. to. say, 01,
himself. Certainly he is not a type of abstract
concepts, such as the loss of the sense of reality,
or of the love of glory. An infinite number of
personages can be thought of under these
concepts, who are not Don Quixote. In other
words, we find our own impressions fully
determined and verified in the expression of a
poet (for example in a poetical personage). We
call that expression typical, which we might call
simply esthetic. Poetical or artistic universals
have been spoken of in like manner, in order to
show that the artistic product is altogether
spiritual and ideal in itself.

Continuing to correct these errors, or to make
clear equivoques, we will note that the sydol
has sometimes been given as essence of art.
Now, if the symbol be given as inseparable from
the artistic intuition, it is theysynonym of the


Ww


. CRITIQUE OF ERRORS 57


intuition itself, which always has an_ ideal
character. There is no double-bottom to art,
but one only ; in art all is symbolical, because all
is ideal. But if the symbol be looked upon as
separable—if on the one side can be expressed
the symbol, and on the other the thing symbolized,
we fall back again into the intellectualist error:
that pretended symbol is the exposition of an
abstract concept, it is an allegory, it is science,
or art that apes science. But we must be just
toward the allegorical also. In some cases, it is
altogether harmless. Given the Gevusalemme
liberata, the allegory was imagined afterwards ;
given the Adone of Marino, the poet of the
lascivious insinuated afterwards that it was
written to show how “immoderate indulgence
ends in pain”; given a statue of a beautiful
woman, the sculptor can write on a card that the
statue represents Clemency or Goodness. This
allegory linked to a finished work fost festum
does not change the work of art. What is it,
then? It is an expression externally added to
another expression. A little page of prose is
added to the Gerusalemme, expressing another
thought of the poet; a verse or a strophe is


added to the Adone, expressing what the poet
would like to make a part of his public swallow ;


atigque of
2 theory of
tistic and


erary classes.


58 THEORY -OR 7S DEE tre IV


while to the statue nothing more than the single
word is added: Clemency or Goodness.

But the greatest triumph of the intellectualist
error lies in the theory of artistic and literary
classes, which still has vogue in literary treatises,
and disturbs the critics and the historians of art.
Let us observe its genesis.

The human mind can pass from the esthetic
to the logical, just because the former is a first
step, in respect to the latter. It can destroy the
expressions, that is, the thought of the individual
with the thought of the universal. It can reduce


-expressive facts to logical relations. We have


already shown that this operation in its turn
becomes concrete in an expression, but this does
not mean that the first expressions have not been
destroyed. They have yielded their place to the
new esthetico-logical expressions. When we are
on the second step, we have left the first.

He who enters a picture-gallery, or who reads
a series of poems, may, after he has looked and
read, go further: he may seek out the relations of
the things there expressed. Thus those pictures
and-compositions, each of which is an individual
inexpressible by logic, are resolved into “universals
and abstractions, such as costumes, landscapes,


portraits, domestic life, battles, animals, flowers,


Iv Chi lOUn OF PRROKS 59


fruit, seascapes, lakes, deserts, tragic, comic, piteous,
cruel, lyrical, epic, dramatic, knightly, rdyllic
facts, and the like. They are often also resolved
into merely quantitative categories, such as ttl
puture, picture, statuette, group, madrigal, song,
sonnel, garland of sonnets, poetry, poem, story,
vonance, and the like.

When we think the concept domestic life, or
knighthood, or zdyll, or cruelty, or any other
quantitative concept, the individual expressive
fact from which we started is abandoned. From
zsthetes that we were, we have been changed
into logicians ; from contemplators of expression,
into reasoners. Certainly no objection can be
made to such a process. In what other way could
science be born, which, if «esthetic expressions
be assumed in it, yet has for function to go
beyond them? The logical or scientific form,
as such, excludes the esthetic form. He who
begins to think scientifically has already ceased
to contemplate zsthetically ; although his thought
will assume of necessity in its turn an esthetic
form, as has already been said, and as it would
be superfluous to repeat.

| The error begins when we try to deduce the
, expression from the concept, and to find in the


| thing substituting the laws of the thing substi-


60 THBORVIOU Bote ie IV


tuted; when the difference between the second
and the first step has not been observed, and
when, in consequence, we declare that we
are standing on the first step, when we are
really standing on the second. This error is
known as the theory of artistic and literary
classes.

What is the esthetic form of domestic life, of
knighthood, of the idyll, of cruelty, and so forth?
How should these contents be vrepresented?
Such is the absurd problem implied in the
theory of artistic and literary classes. It is in
this that consists all search after laws or rules of
styles. Domestic life, knighthood, idyll, cruelty,
and the like, are not impressions, but concepts.
They are not contents, but logico-asthetic forms.
You cannot express the form, for it is already
itself expression. And what are the words
cruelty, idyll, knighthood, domestic life, and so on,
but the expression of those concepts?

Even the most refined of these distinctions,
those that have the most philosophic appearance,
do not resist criticism; as, for instance, when
works of art are divided into the subjective and
the objective styles, into lyric and epic, into works
of feeling and works of design. It is impossible
to separate in esthetic analysis, the subjective


IV CRIfliOuUt OF BPRROKS 61


from the objective side, the lyric from the epic,
the image of feeling from that of things.
From the theory of the artistic and literary 477s derive


: ; Jroue this theor
classes derive those erroneous modes of judgment «caring


es ; : zn judgments
and of criticism, thanks to which, instead of ”“”%
asking before a work of art if it be expressive,
and what it expresses, whether it speak or


stammer, or be silent altogether, it is asked


if it be obedient to the /aws of the epic poem,


or to those of tragedy, to those of historical
portraiture, or to those of landscape painting.
Artists, however, while making a verbal pretence
of agreeing, or yielding a feigned obedience
to them, have really always disregarded these
laws of styles. Every true work of art has
| violated some established class and upset the
| ideas of the critics, who have thus been obliged
to enlarge the number of classes, until finally
even this enlargement has proved too narrow,
owing to the appearance of new works of art,
which are naturally followed by new scandals,
new upsettings, and—new enlargements.

| From the same theory come the prejudices,
owing to which at one time (and is it really passed?)
people used to lament that Italy had no tragedy
(until a poet arose who gave to Italy that wreath


which was the only thing wanting to her glorious


62 Tor ORY OF AS the tie IV


hair), nor France the epic poem (until the Hlen7z-
ade, which slaked the thirsty throats of the
critics). Eulogies accorded to the inventors of
new styles are connected with these prejudices,
so much so, that in the seventeenth century the
invention of the mock-herotc poem seemed an
important event, and the honour of it was dis-
puted, as though it were the discovery of America.
But the works adorned with this name (the
Secchia vapita and the Scherno degli Det) were
still-born, because their authors (a slight draw-
~back) had nothing new or original tosay. Medi-
ocrities racked their brains to invent, artificially,
new styles. The zscatorial eclogue was added
to the pastoral, and then, finally, the mzltary
eclogue. The Amznta was bathed and became
the Akeo. Finally, there have been historians
of art and literature, so much fascinated with
these ideas of classes, that they claimed to write
the history, not of single and effective literary
and artistic works, but of their classes, those
empty phantoms. They have claimed to portray,
not the evolution of the artistzc spirit, but the
evolution of classes.

The philosophical condemnation of artistic
and literary classes is found in the formulation and


demonstration of what artistic activity has ever


IV CRT roOUr OP ERRORS 63


sought and good taste ever recognized. What
is to be done if good taste and the real fact,
put into formulas, sometimes assume the air of
paradoxes?
Now if we talk of tragedies, comedies, dramas, Zmpirica/


sense of the


romances, pictures of everyday life, battle-pieces, «ésiors of


classes.


landscapes, seascapes, poems, versicles, lyrics, and


the like, if it be only with a view to be under-
stood, and to draw attention in: general and
approximatively to certain groups of works, to
which, for one reason or another, it is desired to
draw attention, in that case, no scientific error
has been committed. We employ vocatles and
phrases; we do not establish laws and defint-


tions. The mistake arises when the weight of a


scientific definition is given to a word, when we
ingenuously let ourselves be caught in the meshes
of that phraseology. Pray permit me a com-
parison. It is necessary to arrange the books in


a library in one way or another. This used


generally to be done by means of a rough classi-
fication by subjects (among which the categories
of miscellaneous and eccentric were not wanting) ;
they are now generally arranged by sizes or by
publishers. Who can deny the necessity and
the utility of these groupings? But what should


we say if some one began seriously to seek out


64 THEORY OF SLE Ele Iv


the literary laws of miscellanies and of eccen-
tricities from the Aldine or Bodonian collection,
from size A or size B, that is to say, from these
altogether arbitrary groupings whose sole object
has been their practical use? Well, whoever
should undertake an “enterprise such as this,
would be doing neither more nor less than those
who seek out the esthetic laws of literary and


artistic classes.


V
ANALOGOUS ERRORS IN HISTORIC AND LOGIC


Tue better to confirm these criticisms, it will be
opportune to cast a rapid glance over analogous
and opposite errors, born of ignorance as to the
true nature of art, and of its relation to history
and to science. These errors have injured alike
the theory of history and of science, of Historic


(or Historiology) and of Logic.


Historical intellectualism has been the cause Critigue of


of the many researches which have been made,
especially during the last two centuries, re-
searches which continue to-day, for a phzlosophy
of history, for an zdeal history, for a sociology, for
a historical psychology, or however may be other-
wise entitled or described a science whose object
is to extract from history, universal laws and
concepts. Of what kind must be these laws,
these universals ? Historical laws and historical
concepts? In that case, an elementary criticism _


of knowledge suffices to make clear the absurdity
65 F


66 EE OR Ole At Ele Le v


of the attempt. When such expressions as a
historical law, a historical concept are not simply
metaphors colloquially employed, they are true
contradictions in terms: the adjective is as un-
suitable to the substantive as in the expressions
qualitative quantity or pluralistic monism. History
means concretion and individuality, law and con-
cept mean abstraction and universality. If, on
the other hand, the attempt to draw from history
historical laws and concepts be abandoned, and
it be merely desired to draw from it laws and
concepts, the attempt is certainly not frivolous ;
but the science thus obtained will be, not a
philosophy of history, but rather, according to
the case, either philosophy in its various specifica-
tions of Ethic, Logic, etc., or empirical science
in its infinite divisions and subdivisions. Thus
are sought out either those philosophical con-
cepts which are, as has already been observed,
at the bottom of every historical construction and
separate perception from intuition, historical intui-
tion from pure intuition, history from art; or
already formed historical intuitions are collected
and reduced to types and classes, which is exactly
the method of the natural sciences. Great thinkers
have sometimes donned the unsuitable cloak of


the philosophy of history, and notwithstanding »


v Mis lORIC- AND LOGIC 67


the covering, they have conquered philosophical
truths of the greatest magnitude. The cloak
has been dropped, the truth has remained.
Modern sociologists are rather to be blamed, not
so much for the illusion in which they are in-
volved when they talk of an impossible science
of sociology, as for the infecundity which almost
always accompanies their illusion. It is but a
small evil that A‘sthetic should be termed
sociological Esthetic, or Logic, social Logic.
The grave evil is that their A‘sthetic is an old-
fashioned expression of sensualism, their Logic
verbal and incoherent. The philosophical move-
ment, to which we have referred, has borne
two good fruits in relation to history. First of
all has been felt the desire to construct a theory
of historiography, that is, to understand the nature
and the limits of history, a theory which, in con-
formity with the analyses made above, cannot
obtain satisfaction, save in a general science of in-
tuition, in an Aésthetic, from which Historic would
be separated under a special head by means of
the intervention of the universals. Furthermore,
concrete truths relating to historical events have
often been expressed beneath the false and pre-
sumptuous cloak of a philosophy of history ;


canons and empirical advice have been formulated


AE sthetic
mvastons tnto
Logic.


68 EME ORY OF e405 CHE Tle v


by no means superfluous to students and critics.
It does not seem possible to deny this utility to
the most recent of philosophies of history, to so-
called historical materialism, which has thrown
a very vivid light upon many sides of social life,
formerly neglected or ill understood.

The principle of authority, of the se dex, is
an invasion of historicity into the domains of
science and philosophy which has raged in the
schools. This substitutes for introspection and
philosophical analyses, this or that evidence,
document, or authoritative statement, with which
history certainly cannot dispense. But Logic, the
science of thought and of intellectual knowledge,
has suffered the most grave and destructive
disturbances and errors of all, through the im-
perfect understanding of the zsthetic fact. How,
indeed, could it be otherwise, if logical activity
come after and contain in itself zsthetic activity?
An inexact A‘sthetic must of necessity drag after
it an inexact Logic.

Whoever opens logical treatises, from the
Organum of Aristotle to the moderns, must
admit that they all contain a haphazard mixture
of verbal facts and facts of thought, of gram-
matical forms and of conceptual forms, of
fEsthetic and of Logic. Not that attempts have


v PS rORTC AND LOGIC 69


been wanting to escape from verbal expres-
sion and to seize thought in its effective nature.
Aristotelian logic itself did not become mere
syllogistic and verbalism, without some stumbling
and oscillation. The especially logical problem
was often touched upon in the Middle Ages, by the
nominalists, realists, and conceptualists, in their dis-
putes. With Galileo and with Bacon, the natural
sciences gave an honourable place to induction.
Vico combated formalist and mathematical logic
in favour of inventive methods. Kant called
attention to a@ priort syntheses. The absolute
idealists despised the Aristotelian logic. The
followers of Herbart, bound to Aristotle, on the
other hand, set in relief those judgments which
they called narrative, which are of a character
altogether different from other logical judgments,
Finally, the linguists insisted upon the irration-
ality of the word, in relation to the concept. But
a conscious, sure, and radical movement of reform
can find no base or starting-point, save in the
science of Aésthetic.

In a Logic suitably reformed on this basis, it


will be fitting to proclaim before all things this
truth, and to draw from it all its consequences:


( the logical fact, the only logical fact, is the concept,


1 } the universal, the spirit that forms, and in so far


Logic in its
essence.


70 THEORY Oba Pit tLe v


as it forms, the universal. And if be understood
by induction, as has sometimes been understood,
the formation of universals, and by deduction
the verbal development of these, then it is clear
that true Logic can be nothing but inductive Logic.
But since by the word “deduction” has been more
frequently understood the special processes of
mathematics, and by the word “induction” those
of the natural sciences, it will be advisable to avoid
the one and the other denomination, and to say


that true Logic is the Logic of the concept. The


Logic of the concept, adopting a method which is


at once induction .and deduction, will adopt neither
the one nor.the.other.exclusively, that is, will adopt
the (speculative) method, which is intrinsic to it.
The concept, the universal, is in itself,
abstractly considered, znexpressible. No word
is proper to it. So true is this, that the logical
concept remains always the same, notwith-
standing the variation of verbal forms. In
respect to the concept, expression is a simple szgn _
or zudication. There must be an expression,
it cannot fail; but what it is to be, this or that,
is determined_by the historical and psychological
conditions of the individual who is speaking.
The_quality ofthe expression .is.not-.deducible
from the nature of the concept. There does not


v ls bORIC AN DoLOGIC visi


exist a true (logical) sense of words. He who
forms a concept bestows on each occasion their
true meaning on the words.

This being established, the only truly logical
(that is, asthetico-logical) propositions, the only
rigorously logical judgments, can be nothing but
those whose proper and exclusive content is the
determination of a concept. These propositions
or judgments are the definztions. Science itself
is nothing but a complex of definitions, unified
in a supreme definition; a system of concepts,
or chief concept.

It is therefore necessary to exclude. from
Logic all those propositions which do not affirm
universals. Narrative judgments, not less than
those termed non-enunciative by Aristotle, such
as the expression of desires, are not properly
logical judgments. They are either purely
esthetic propositions or historical propositions.
“Peter is passing; it is raining to-day; I am
sleepy; I want to read”: these and an infinity
of propositions of the same kind, are nothing but
either a mere enclosing in words the impression
of the fact that Peter is passing, of the falling
rain, of my organism inclining to sleep, and of
my will directed to reading, or they are exis-


tential affirmation concerning those facts. They


Distinction b
tween logical
and non-logic
judgments.


Syllogistic.


G2 PHERORY OFS Fae ae v


are expressions of the real or of the unreal, of
historical or of pure imagination; they are
certainly not definitions of universals.

This exclusion cannot meet with great diffi-
culties. It is already almost an accomplished
fact, and the only thing required is to render it
explicit, decisive, and coherent. But what is to
be done with all that part of human experience
which is called sy@/ogzstzc, consisting of judgments
and reasonings which are based on concepts.
What is syllogistic? Is it to be looked down
upon from above with contempt, as something
useless, as has so often been done in the reaction
of the humanists against scholasticism, in absolute
idealism, in the enthusiastic admiration of our
times for the methods of observation and
experiment of the natural sciences? Syllogistic,
reasoning 72 forma, is not a discovery of truth ;
it is the art of exposing, debating, disputing with
oneself and others. Proceeding from concepts
already formed, from facts already observed and
making appeal to the persistence of the true or
of thought (such is the awe of the principle
of identity and contradiction), it infers conse-
quences from these data, that is, it represents
what has already been discovered. ~ Therefore,
if it be an zdem per idem from the point of view


:|


v iis PORIC AND LOGIC 73


of invention, it is most efficacious as a teaching
and an exposition. To o reduce affirmations to the
syllogistic scheme is a way of controlling one’s
own thought and of criticizing that of others. It
is easy to laugh at syllogisers, but, if syllogistic
has been born and retains its place, it must have
good roots of its own. Satire applied to it can
concern only its abuses, such as the attempt to
prove syllogistically questions of fact, observation,
and intuition, or the neglect of profound medita-
tion and unprejudiced investigation of problems,
for syllogistic formality. And if so-called mathe-
matical Logic can sometimes aid us in our attempt
to remember with ease, to manipulate the results
of our own thought, let us welcome this form of
the syllogism also, long prophesied by Leibnitz
and essayed by many, even in our days.

But precisely because syllogistic is the art
of exposing and of debating, its theory cannot
hold the first place in a_ philosophical _ Logic,
usurping that belonging to the doctrine of the
concept, which is the central and dominating
doctrine, to which is reduced everything logical
in syllogistic, without leaving a residuum (rela-
tions of concepts, subordination, co-ordination,
identification, and so on). Nor must it ever be


forgotten that the concept, the (logical) judgment,


een


alse Logic
nd true
Esthetic.


74 THEORY OR AS. tre Lie v


and the syllogism do not occupy the same
position. The first alone is the logical fact, the
second and third are the forms in which the
first manifests itself. These, in so far as they
are forms, cannot be examined save esthetically
(grammatically) ; in so far as they possess logical
content, only by neglecting the forms themselves
and passing to the doctrine of the concept.

This shows the truth of the ordinary remark
to the effect that he who reasons ill, also speaks
and writes ill, that exact logical analysis is
the basis of good expression. This truth is a
tautology, for to reason well is in fact to express
oneself well, because the expression is the in-
tuitive possession of one’s own logical thought.
The principle of contradiction, itself, is at bottom
nothing but the esthetic principle of coherence.
It will be said that starting from erroneous con-
cepts it is possible to write and to speak exceed-
ingly well, as it is also possible to reason well ;
that some who are dull at research may yet be
most limpid writers. That is precisely because
to write well depends upon having a clear in-
tuition of one’s own thought, even if it be
erroneous; that is to say, not of its scientific,
but of its zsthetic truth, since it is this truth
itself. A philosopher like Schopenhauer can


5 HISTORIC AND LOGIC 75


iiiagime that are is a tepresentation of the
Platonic ideas. This doctrine is absolutely false
scientifically, yet he may develop this false know-
ledge in excellent prose, zsthetically most true.
But we have already replied to these objections,
when we observed that at that precise point where
a speaker or a writer enunciates an ill-thought
concept, he is at the same time speaking ill and
writing ill, He may, however, afterwards recover
himself in the many other parts of his thought,
which consist of true propositions, not connected
with the preceding errors, and lucid expressions
may with him follow upon turbid expressions.

All enquiries as to the forms of judgments and
of syllogisms, on their conversion and on their
various relations, which still encumber treatises on
Logic, are therefore destined to become less, to
be transformed, to be reduced to something else.

The doctrine of the concept and of the organ-
ism of the concepts, of definition, of system, of
philosophy, and of the various sciences, and the
like, will fill the place of these and will constitute
the only true and proper Logic.

Those who first had some suspicion of the
intimate connexion between Aésthetic and Logic
and conceived A‘sthetic as a Logic of sensible
knowledge, were strangely addicted to applying


Logic reforme


76 an EORY OR is Pn 11 v


logical categories to the new knowledge, talking
of esthetic concepts, esthetic zudgments, cesthetze
syllogisms, and so on. We are less superstitious
as regards the solidity of the traditional Logic
of the schools, and better informed as to the
nature of Esthetic. We do not recommend
the application of Logic to _ZEsthetic, but the.
liberation of Logic from zsthetic_forms. These
have given rise to non-existent forms or cate-
gories of Logic, due to the following of altogether
arbitrary and crude distinctions.

Logic thus reformed will always be formal
Logic ; it will study the true form or activity of
thought, the concept, excluding single and particu-
lar concepts. The old Logic is ill called formal ;
it were better to call it verbal or formalistic.
Formal. Logic will drive out formalistic Logic.
To attain this object, it will not be necessary


to have recourse, as some have done, to a real or


material Logic, which is not a science of thought,


but thought itself in the act ; not only a Logic, but
the complex of Philosophy, in which Logic also is
included. The science of thought (Logic) is that
of the concept, as that of fancy (Aésthetic) is the
science of expression. The well-being of both
sciences lies in exactly following in every particular
the distinction between the two domains.


VI
THEORETIC AND PRACTICAL ACTIVITY


THE ‘intuitive and intellective forms exhaust, as
we have said, all the theoretic form of the spirit.
But it is not possible to know them thoroughly,
nor to criticize another series of erroneous zesthetic
theories, without first establishing clearly their
relations with another form of the spirit, which is
the practical form.

This form or practical activity is the w7?,
We do not employ this word here in the sense of
any philosophical system, in which the will is the
foundation of the universe, the principle of things
and the true reality. Nor do we employ it in the
ample sense of other systems, which understand
by will the energy of the spirit, the spirit or
activity in general, making of every act of the
human spirit an act of will. Neither such meta-
physical nor such metaphorical meaning is ours.
For us, the will is, as generally accepted, that


activity of the spirit, which differs from the mere
77


The will,


[he wll as an
terior stage
nm respect to
nowled ge.


Dojections and
luctdations.


78 THEORY OF Aol rie vI


theoretical contemplation of things,’ and is pro-
ductive, not of knowledge, but of actions. Action
is really action, in so far as it is voluntary. It is
not necessary to remark that in the will to do, is
included, in the scientific sense, also what is
vulgarly called not-doing: the will to resist, to
reject, the prometheutic will, is also action.

Man understands things with the theoretical
form, with the practical form he changes them ;
with the one he appropriates the universe, with
the other he creates it. But the first form is the
basis of the second; and the relation of doudle
degree, which we have already found existing
between esthetic and logical activity, is repeated
between these two on a larger scale. Knowledge |
independent of the will is thinkable; will in-
dependent of knowledge is unthinkable. Blind
will is not will; true will has eyes.

aoe can we will, ese having Bees us
knowledge of Weeicaly Waltons Semmes
us as to the nature of those objects? How can
we really will, if we do not know the world which
surrounds us, and the manner of changing things
by acting upon them ?

It has been objected that men of action,


practical men in the eminent sense, are the


v1 PEC ORETIC ACTIVITY, ETC. 46


least disposed to contemplate and to theorize:
their energy is not delayed in contemplation, it
rushes at once into will. And conversely, that
contemplative men, philosophers, are often very
mediocre in practical matters, weak willed, and
therefore neglected and thrust aside in the tumult
of life. It is easy to see that these distinctions
are merely empirical and quantitative. Certainly,
the practical man has no need of a philosophical
system in order to act, but in the spheres where
he does act, he starts from intuitions and concepts
which are most clear to him. Otherwise he could
not will the most ordinary actions. It would not
be possible to will to feed oneself, for instance,
without knowledge of the food, and of the link of
cause and effect between certain movements and
certain organic sensations. Rising gradually to
the more complex forms of action, for example
to the political, how could we will anything politi-
cally good or bad, without knowing the real
conditions of society, and consequently the means
and expedients to be adopted? When the practical
man feels himself in the dark about one or more
of these points, or when he is seized with doubt,.
action either does not begin or stops. It is then
that the theoretical moment, which in the rapid


succession of human actions is hardly noticed and


‘yitigue of
ractical
udgments or
udgments of
alue.


80 LEhORY Or Ato era vI


rapidly forgotten, becomes important and occupies
consciousness for a longer time. And if this
moment be prolonged, then the practical man
may become Hamlet, divided between desire for
action and his small amount of theoretical clarity
as regards the situation and the means to be
employed. And if he develop a taste for con-
templation and discovery, and leave willing and
acting, to a more or less great extent, to others,
there is formed in him the calm disposition of the
artist, of the man of science, or of the philosopher,
who are sometimes unpractical or altogether
blameworthy. These observations are all obvious,
Their exactitude cannot be denied. Let us, how-
ever, repeat that they are founded on quantitative
distinctions and do not disprove, but confirm
the fact that an action, however slight it be,
cannot really be an action, that is, an action that
is willed, unless it be preceded by cognoscitive
activity.

Some psychologists, on the other hand, place
before practical action an altogether special
class of judgments, which they call pvactzcal
judgments or judgments of value. They say that
in order to resolve to perform an action, it is
necessary to have judged: “this action is useful,


this action is good.” And at first sight this


vI PeeORM ITC ACTIVITY, HEC. 8;


seems to have the testimony of consciousness
on its side. But he who observes better and
analyses with greater subtlety, discovers that
such judgments follow instead of preceding the
affirmation of the will; they are nothing but the
expression of the already exercised volition.
A good or useful action is an action that is
willed. It will always be impossible to distil
from the objective study of things a single drop
of usefulness or goodness. We do not desire
things because we know them to be good or
useful ; but we know them to be good and useful,
because we desire them. Here too, the rapidity
with which the facts of consciousness follow one
another has given rise to an illusion. Practical
action is preceded by knowledge, but not by
practical knowledge, or better by the practical :
to obtain this, it is first necessary to have
practical action. The third moment, therefore,
of practical judgments, or judgments of value, is
altogether imaginary. It does not come between
the two moments or degrees of theory and
practice. That is why there exist no normative
sciences in general, which regulate or command,
discover and indicate values to the practical
activity ; because there is none for any other


activity, assuming every science already realized
G


Exclusion of
the practical
from the
esthetic.


82 THEORY; Ob AS Tin Eli vie


and that activity developed, which it afterwards
takes as its object.

These distinctions established, we must con-
demn as erroneous every theory which confuses
esthetic with practical activity, or introduces
the laws of the second into the first. That
science is theory and art practice has been many
times affirmed. Those who make this statement,
and look upon the esthetic fact as a practical
fact, do not do so capriciously or because they
are groping in the void; but because they
have their eye on something which is really
practical. But the practical which they are
looking at is not A¢sthetic, nor within A¢sthetic ;
it is outside and beside it; and although they
are often found united, they are not necessarily
united, that is to say, by the bond of identity
of nature.

The esthetic fact is altogether completed in
the expressive elaboration of the impressions.
When we have conquered the word within us,
conceived definitely and vividly a figure or a
statue, or found a musical motive, expression is
born and is complete; there is no need for any-
thing else. If after this we should open our
mouths and wz/Z to open them, to speak, or our


throats to sing, and declare in a loud voice


Pee VOLE PIC ACIIWITY, BIC. 82


and with extended throat what we have com-
pletely said or sung to ourselves; or if we
should stretch out and wz// to stretch out our
hands to touch the notes of the piano, or to take
up the brushes and the chisel, making thus in
detail those movements which we have already
done rapidly, and doing so in such a way as to
leave more or less durable traces; this is all an
addition, a fact which obeys quite different laws
to the first, and with these laws we have not
to occupy ourselves for the moment. Let us,
however, here recognize that this second move-
ment is a production of things, a practical fact,
or a fact of weld, It is customary to distinguish
the internal from the external work of art: the
terminology seems here to be infelicitous, for the
work of art (the esthetic work) is always zudernad;
and that which is called external is no longer a
work of art. Others distinguish between esthetic
fact and artzstic fact, meaning by the second the
external or practical stage, which may and
generally does follow the first. But in this
case, it is simply a case of linguistic usage,
doubtless permissible, although perhaps not
opportune.

For the same reasons the search for the


end of art is ridiculous, when it is understood


84 Oe Ee ORO fe 7S EEL ee: vI


Critique of the Of art as art. And since to fix an end is
theory of the
end of art and to Choose, the theory that the content of art


of the choice of

the content. must be selected is another form of the same
error. A selection from among impressions
and sensations implies that these are already
expressions, otherwise, how can a selection be
made among what is continuous and indistinct ?
To choose is to will: to will this and not to
will that: and this and that must be before us,
they must be expressed. Practice follows, it
does not precede theory; expression is free_
inspiration.

The true artist, in fact, finds himself big with
his theme, he. knows not how; he feels the
moment of birth drawing near, but he cannot will
it or not wilit, If he were to wish to act in
opposition to his inspiration, to make an arbitrary
choice, if, born Anacreon, he were to wish to sing
of Atreus and of Alcides, his lyre would warn
him of his mistake, echoing only of Venus and of
Love, notwithstanding his efforts to the contrary.


Practical The theme or content cannot, therefore, be
innocence of : : :
art. practically or morally charged with epithets of


praise or of blame. When critics of art remark
that a theme is dadly selected, in cases where that
observation has a just foundation, it is a question


of blaming, not the selection of the theme (which


oe ORE ING ACPIVITY. ETC. S«


would be absurd), but the manner in which the
artist has treated it. The expression has failed,
owing to the contradictions which it contains. And
when the same critics rebel against the theme or the
content as being unworthy of art and blameworthy,
in respect to works which they proclaim to be
artistically perfect ; if these expressions really are
perfect, there is nothing to be done but to advise
the critics to leave the artists in peace, for they
cannot get inspiration, save from what has made
an impression upon them. The critics should !


think rather of how they can effect changes in |


|


nature and in society, in order that those im- |


pressions may not exist. If ugliness were to
vanish from the world, if universal virtue and
felicity were established there, perhaps artists
would no longer represent perverse or pessimistic


sentiments, but sentiments that are calm, innocent,


and joyous, like Arcadians of a real Arcady.


_ But so long as ugliness and turpitude exist in


nature and impose themselves on the artist, it is
not possible to prevent the expression of these
things also; and when it has arisen, factum
— infectum fiert neguit. We speak thus entirely
from the esthetic point of view, and from that
of pure esthetic criticism.

We do not delay to pass here in review the


The independ
ence of art.


86 THEORY, OF AtS CEC vi


damage which the criticism of choice does to
artistic production, with the prejudices which it
produces or maintains among the artists them-
selves, and with the contrast which it occasions
between artistic impulse and critical exigencies.
It is true that sometimes it seems to do some
good also, by assisting the artists to discover
themselves, that is, their own impressions and
their own inspiration, and to acquire consciousness
of the task which is, as it were, imposed upon
them by the historical moment in which they live,
and by their individual temperament. In these
cases, criticism of choice merely recognizes and
aids the expressions which are already being
formed. It believes itself to be the mother,
where, at most, it is only the midwife.

The impossibility of choice of content com-
pletes the theorem of the independence of ari,
and is also the only legitimate meaning of the
expression: art for art's sake. Art is thus in-
dependent of science, as it is of the useful and
the moral. Let it not be feared that thus may
be justified art that is frivolous or cold, since that
which is truly frivolous or cold is so because it
has not been raised to expression; or in other
words, frivolity and frigidity come always from
the form of the esthetic elaboration, from the


Woe One AC TIVIEY, EPCs. 37


lack of a content, not from the material qualities
of the content.

The saying: ¢he style ts the man, can also
not be completely criticized, save by starting
from the distinction between the theoretic and
the practical, and from the theoretic character
of the esthetic activity. Man is not simply
knowledge and contemplation: -he is also will,


which contains in it the cognoscitive moment.


' Now the saying is either altogether void, as when


it is understood that the man is the style, in so
far as he is style, that is to say, the man, but only
in so far as he is an expression of activity ; or it
is erroneous, when the attempt is made to deduce
from what a man has seen and expressed, that
which he has done and willed, inferring thereby
that there is a necessary link between knowing
and willing. Many legends in the biographies
of artists have sprung from this erroneous
identification, since it seemed impossible that
a man who gives expression to generous senti-
ments should not be a noble and generous man
in practical life; or that the dramatist who gives
a great many stabs in his plays, should not
himself have given a few at least in real life.
Vainly do the artists protest: J/asczva est nobis


pagina, vita proba. They are merely taxed in


Critique of
saying : the
style ts the n


88 PE ORY, OF od tre te vI
addition with lying and hypocrisy. O you poor


women of Verona, how far more subtle you were,
when you founded your belief that Dante had
really descended to hell, upon his dusky counte-


nance! Yours was at any rate a_ historical
conjecture.
tique of Finally, szzcervzty imposed upon the artist as


concept of : : : :
erityin a duty (this law of ethics which, they say, is also


a law of esthetic) arises from another equivoke.
For by sincerity is meant either the moral duty
not to deceive one’s neighbour; and in that case
is foreign to the artist. For he, in fact, deceives
no one, since he gives form to what is already
in his mind. He would deceive, only if he were
to betray his duty as an artist by a lesser devotion
to the intrinsic necessity of his task. If lies
and deceit are in his mind, then the form which
he gives to these things cannot be deceit or lies,
precisely because it ts csthetic. Ihe artist, if
he be a charlatan, a liar, or a miscreant, purifies
his other self by reflecting it in art, = Or by
sincerity is meant, fulness and truth of expres-
sion, and it is clear that this second sense has
nothing to do with the ethical concept. The
law, which is at once ethical and esthetic, reveals


itself in this case in a word employed alike by
Ethic and Aésthetic.


Vil


ANALOGY BETWEEN THE THEORETIC AND THE
PRACTICAL

| Tue twofold grade of the theoretical activity, 7% two form
esthetic and logical, has an important parallel in eS
the practical activity, which has not yet been
placed in due relief. The practical activity is
_ also divided into a first and second degree, the
; second implying the first. The first practical
degree is the simply wsefu/ or economical activity ;
the second the moral activity.

Economy is, as it were, the A‘sthetic of
practical life; Morality its Logic.
| If this has not been clearly seen by philo- phere:
sophers; if its suitable place in the system of
_ the mind has not been given to the economic
| activity, and it has been left to wander in the
_ prolegomena to treatises on political economy,
often uncertain and but slightly elaborated, this
is due, among other reasons, to the fact that


the useful or economic has been confused, now
89


90 an OR Ve OF A105 FEELS vil


with the concept of ¢echnigue, now with that of
the egozsézc.
stinction Technigue is certainly not a special activity of


‘ween the


Fae tate Oe the spirit. Technique is knowledge; or better,
it is knowledge itself, in general, that takes this
name, as we have seen, in so far as it serves as
basis for practical action. Knowledge which is
not followed, or is presumed to be not easily
followed by practical action, is called pure: the
same knowledge, if effectively followed by action,
is called applied; if it is presumed that it can
be easily followed by the same action, it is called
technical or applied. This word, then, indicates
a sttuation in which knowledge already is, or
easily can be found, not a special form of know-
ledge. So true is this, that it would be altogether
impossible to establish whether a given order of
knowledge were, intrinsically, pure or applied.
All knowledge, however abstract and philosophical
one may imagine it to be, can be a guide to
practical acts; a theoretical error in the ultimate
principles of morals can be reflected and always
is reflected in some way, in practical life. One can
only speak roughly and unscientifically of truths
that are pure and of others that are applied.

The same knowledge which is called technical,
can also be called wsefuZ. But the word “ useful,”


vil Pie OnY AND PRACTICE gI


in conformity with the criticism of judgments of
value made above, is to be understood as used
here in a linguistic or metaphorical sense. When
we say that water is useful for putting out fire,
the word “useful” is used in a non-scientific
sense. Water thrown on the fire is the cause of
its going out: this is the knowledge that serves
Por Pasis to the action, lét. us: say,-of firemen.
There is a link, not of nature, but of simple
succession, between the useful action of the
person who extinguishes the conflagration, and
this knowledge. The technique of the effects
of the water is the theoretical activity which
precedes; the action of him who extinguishes
the fire is alone useful.

Some economists identify utility with egozsm,
that is to say, with merely economical action or
desire, with that which is profitable to the in-
dividual, in so far as individual, without regard
to and indeed in complete opposition to the
moral law. The egoistic is the immoral. In
this case Economy would be a very strange
science, standing, not beside, but facing Eghie,
like the devil facing God, or at least like the
advocatus diaboli in the processes of canonization.
Such a conception of it is altogether inadmissible :


the science of immorality is implied in that of


Distinction
between the
useful and t
egotstic.


COMOMLC
vill and
noral will,


92 aH eORY, OF to thin tie vii


morality, as the science of the false is implied
in Logic, the science of the true, and a science of
ineffectual expression in A®sthetic, the science of
successful expression. If, then, Economy were
the scientific treatment of egoism, it would be
a chapter of Ethic, or Ethic itself; because every
moral determination implies, at the same time,
a negation of its contrary.

Further, conscience tells us that to conduct
oneself economically is not to conduct oneself
egoistically ; that even the most morally scrupulous
man must conduct himself usefully (economically),
if he does not wish to be inconclusive and,
therefore, not truly moral. If utility were egoism,
how could it be the duty of the altruist to behave
like an egoist ?

If we are not mistaken, the difficulty is solved
in a manner perfectly analogous to that in which
is solved the problem of the relations between
the expression and the concept, between A¢sthetic
and Logic.

To will economically is to wzll an end; to
will morally is to well the rational end. But
whoever wills and acts morally, cannot but will
and act usefully (economically). How could he
will the rational, unless he willed it also as hes


particular end?


vil THEORY AND PRACTICE 93


The reciprocal is not true; as it is not true
in zsthetic science that the expressive fact must
of necessity be linked with the logical fact. It
is possible to will economically without willing
morally; and it is possible to conduct oneself
with perfect economic coherence, while pursuing
an end which is objectively irrational (immoral),
or, better, an end which would be so judged in a
superior grade of consciousness,

Examples of the economic, without the moral
character, are the Prince of Machiavelli, Czsar
Borgia, or the Iago of Shakespeare. Who can
help admiring their strength of will, although
their activity is only economic, and is opposed
to what we hold moral? Who can help admiring
the ser Ciappelletto of Boccaccio, who, even on
his death-bed, pursues and realizes his ideal of
the perfect rascal, making the small and timid
little thieves who are present at his burlesque
confession exclaim: ‘‘What manner of man is
this, whose perversity, neither age, nor infirmity,
nor the fear of death, which he sees at hand, nor
the fear of God, before whose judgment-seat he


must stand in a little while, have been able to


remove, nor to cause that he should not wish to


die as he has lived ?”


The moral man unites with the pertinacity


Pure
economtictty.


he economic


le of
wrality,


94 THEORY OF AsolHib Tic vil


and fearlessness of a Caesar Borgia, of an Iago,
or of a ser Ciappelletto, the good will of the
saint or of the hero. Or, better, good will would
not be will, and consequently not good, if it did
not possess, in addition to the side which makes
it good, also that which makes it wz//, Thus a
logical thought, which does not succeed in ex-
pressing itself, is not thought, but at the most,
a confused presentiment of a thought yet to
come.

It is not correct, then, to conceive of the amoral
man as also the anti-economical man, or to make
of morality an element of coherence in the acts
of life, and therefore of economicity. Nothing
prevents us from conceiving (an hypothesis which
is verified at least during certain periods and
moments, if not during whole lifetimes) a man
altogether without moral conscience. In a man
thus organized, what for us is immorality is
not so for him, because it is not so felt. The
consciousness of the contradiction between what
is desired as a rational end and what is pursued
egoistically cannot be born in him. This con-
tradiction is anti-economicity. Immoral conduct
becomes also anti-economical only in the man who
possesses moral conscience. The moral remorse


which is the proof of this, is also economical


|
1


vil PEeOkRY AND PRaclhicr 95


remorse ; that is to say, pain at not having known
how to will completely and to attain to that
moral ideal which was willed at the first moment,
but was afterwards perverted by the passions.
Video melora proboqgue, detertora seguor. The
video and the frodo are here an initial will
immediately contradicted and passed over. In
the man deprived of moral sense, we must admit
a remorse which is merely economic ; like that of
a thief or of an assassin who should be attacked
when on the point of robbing or of assassinating,
and should abstain from doing so, not owing to
a conversion of his being, but owing to his
impressionability and bewilderment, or even owing
to a momentary awakening of the moral con-
sciousness. When he has come back to himself,
that thief or assassin will regret and be ashamed
of his inconsequence ; his remorse will not be due
to having done wrong, but to not having done it ;
his remorse is, therefore,economic, not moral, since
the latter is excluded by hypothesis. However,
a lively moral conscience is generally found
among the majority of men, and its total absence
is a rare and perhaps non-existent monstrosity.
i inay, therefore, be admitted, that morality
coincides with economicity in the conduct of life.


There need be no fear lest the parallelism


he merely
monic and
2 error of
2 morally
different.


96 THEORY, OF ot He Tic vit


affirmed by us should introduce afresh into
science the category of the morally indifferent,
of that which is in truth action and volition, but
is neither moral nor immoral; the category in
sum of the “Zczt and of the permzsszble, which
has always been the cause or mirror of ethical
corruption, as is the case with Jesuitical morality
in which it dominated. It remains quite certain
that indifferent moral actions do not exist,
because moral activity pervades and must per-
vade every least volitional movement of man.
But this, far from upsetting the parallelism,
confirms it. Do there exist intuitions which
science and the intellect do not pervade and
analyse, resolving them into universal concepts,


or changing them into historical affirmations?


\We have already seen that true science,


philosophy, knows no external limits which bar


its way, as happens with the so-called natural
sciences. Science and morality entirely dominate,
the one the esthetic intuitions, the other the
economic volitions of man, although neither of
them can appear in the concrete, save in the
intuitive form as regards the one, in the economic
as regards the other.

This combined identity and difference of the


useful and of the moral, of the economic and


ZETEC ERI RREOSIAEE GM 7 Sade z eter


vl Te PORY AND Pee Tick 97


of the ethic, explains the fortune enjoyed now
and formerly by the utilitarian theory of Ethic.
It is in fact easy to discover and to show
a utilitarian side in every moral action; as it is
easy to show an esthetic side of every logical
proposition. The criticism of ethical utilitarian-
ism cannot escape by denying this truth and
seeking out absurd and inexistent examples
of useless moral actions. It must admit the
utilitarian side and explain it as the concrete form
of morality, which consists of what is wzthzn this
form. Utilitarians do not see this within. This
is not the place for a more ample development
of such ideas. Ethic and Economic cannot but
be gainers, as we have said of Logic and
Esthetic, by a more exact determination of the
relations that exist between them. Economic
science is now rising to the animating concept
of the useful, as it strives to pass beyond the
mathematical phase, in which it is still entangled ;
a phase which, when it superseded historicism,
was in its turn a progress, destroying a series
of arbitrary distinctions and false theories of
Economic, implied in the confusion of the
theoretical with the historical. With this
conception, it will be easy on the one hand to


absorb and to verify the semi-philosophical
H


Critique of
utilitarianism
and the reform
of Ethic and of
Economic.


Phenomenon
and noumenon
tn practical
activity.


98 VHEORY OF 705 Lit Tie vil


theories of so-called pure economy, and on the
other, by the introduction of successive com-
plications and additions, and by passing from
the philosophical to the empirical or naturalistic
method, to include the particular theories of the
political or national economy of the schools.

As esthetic intuition knows the phenomenon
or nature, and philosophic intuition the noume-
non or spirit; so economic activity wills the
phenomenon or nature, and moral activity the
noumenon or spirit. Zhe spirit which desires
itself, its true self, the universal which is in the
empirical and finite spirit: that is the formula
which perhaps defines the essence of morality
with the least impropriety. This will for the
true self is absolute liberty.


VIII
EXCLUSION OF OTHER SPIRITUAL FORMS


In this summary sketch that we have given, of Pia Mics
the entire philosophy of the spirit in its funda-
mental moments, the spirit is conceived as
consisting of four moments or grades, disposed
in such a way that the theoretical activity is to
the practical as is the first theoretical grade to
the second theoretical, and the first practical
Bade to the second. practical: The four
moments imply one another regressively by
feew concretion......he concept’ cannot be
without expression, the useful without the one
and the other, and morality without the three
preceding grades. If the esthetic fact is alone
independent, and the others more or less
dependent, then the logical is the least so and
the moral will the most. Moral intention
Operates on given theoretic bases, which cannot
be dispensed with, save by that absurd practice,


the jesuitical erection of intention. Here people
99


The forms of


gentus.


Non-existence -
of a fifth form
of activity.
Law, sociality,


100 Pip ORY OF Wo Eri be vill


pretend to themselves not to know what at
bottom they know perfectly well.

If the forms of human activity are four, four
also are the forms of genius. Geniuses in art,
in science, in moral will or heroes, have certainly
always been recognized. But the genius of pure
Economic has met with opposition. It is not
altogether without reason that a category of bad
geniuses or of genzuses of evil has been created.
The practical, merely economic genius, which
is not directed to a rational end, cannot but
excite an admiration mingled with alarm. It
would be a mere question of words, were we to
discuss whether the word ‘‘genius” should be
applied only to creators of zsthetic expression,
or also to men of scientific research and of action.
To observe, on the other hand, that genius,
of whatever kind it be, is always a quantitative
conception and an empirical distinction, would
be to repeat what has already been explained as
regards artistic genius.

A fifth form of spiritual activity does not exist.
It would be easy to demonstrate how all the
other forms, either do not possess the character
of activity, or are verbal variants of the activities
already examined, or are complex and derived


facts, in which the various activities are mingled,


ae


vill Oriiwk SEIKI UAL FORMS | «101


or are filled with special contents and con-
tingent data.

The judiczal fact, for example, considered as
what is called objective law, is derived both from
the economic and from the logical activities.
Law is a rule, a formula (whether oral or written
matters little here) in which is contained an eco-
nomic relation willed by an individual or by a
collectivity. This economic side at once unites
it with and distinguishes it from moral activity.
Take another example. Sociology (among the
many meanings the word bears in our times)
is sometimes conceived as the study of an
original element, which is called soczahty. Now
what is it that distinguishes sociality, or the
relations which are developed in a meeting of
men, not of subhuman beings, if it be not just
the various spiritual activities which exist among
the former and which are supposed not to exist,
or to exist only in a rudimentary degree, among
the latter? Sociality, then, far from being an
original, simple, irreducible conception, is very
complex and complicated. This could be proved
by the impossibility, generally recognized, of
enunciating a single sociological law, properly
so-called. Those that are improperly called


by that name are revealed as either empirical


Religiosity.


102 THEORY OF ALSTHE Tic VIII


historical observations, or spiritual laws, that is
to say judgments, into which are translated the
conceptions of the spiritual activities; when they
are not simply empty and indeterminate general-
izations, like the so-called law of evolution.
Sometimes, too, nothing more is understood by
sociality than social rule, and so law; and thus
sociology is confounded with the science or
theory of law itself. Law, sociality, and like
terms, are to be dealt with in a mode analogous
to that employed by us in the consideration of
historicity and technique.

It may seem fitting to form a different judg-
ment as to veligzous activity. But religion is
nothing but knowledge, and doesnot differ from
its other forms and subforms. For it is in truth
and in turn either the expression of practical and
ideal aspirations (religious ideals), or historical
narrative (legend), or conceptual science (dogma).

It can therefore be maintained with equal
truth, both that religion is destroyed by the
progress of human knowledge, and that it is
always present there. Their religion was the
whole patrimony of knowledge of primitive
peoples: our patrimony of knowledge is our
religion. The content has been changed, bettered,
refined, and it will .change and become better


ON — _ ~


VIII GRAB SeIRITUAL FORNS 103


and more refined in the future also; but its
function is always the same. We do not know
what use could be made of religion by those
who wish to preserve it side by side with the
theoretic activity of man, with his art, with his
criticism, and with his philosophy. It is impos-
sible to preserve an imperfect and inferior kind of
knowledge, like religion, side by side with what
has surpassed and disproved it. Catholicism,
which is always coherent, will not tolerate a
Science, a History, an Ethic, in contradiction to
its views and doctrines. The rationalists are
less coherent. They are disposed to allow a
little space in their souls for a religion which
is in contradiction with their whole theoretic
Borie.

These affectations and religious susceptibilities
of the rationalists of our times have their origin
in the superstitious cult of the natural sciences.
These, as we know and as is confessed by the
mouth of their chief adepts, are all surrounded
by Zzmzts. Science having been wrongly identi-
fied with the so-called natural sciences, it
could be foreseen that the remainder would be
asked of religion; that remainder with which
the human spirit cannot dispense. We are


therefore indebted to materialism, to positivism,


Metaphysic.


104 THEORY OF AS Treille vill


to naturalism for this unhealthy and often dis-
ingenuous reflowering of religious exaltation.
Such things are the business of the hospital,
when they are not the business of the politician.

Philosophy withdraws from religion all reason
for existing, because. it..substitutes. itself for
religion. As the science.of the spirit, it looks
upon religion as a phenomenon, a transitory
historical fact, a psychic condition that can be
surpassed. Philosophy shares the domain of
knowledge with the natural disciplines, with
history and with art. it leaves: to the first:
narration, measurement and classification ; to the
second, the chronicling of what has individually
happened ; to the third, the individually possible.
There is nothing left to share with religion.
For the same reason, philosophy, as the science
of the spirit, cannot be philosophy of the intuitive
datum; nor, as has been seen, Phzlosophy of
FT[istory, nor Philosophy of Nature; and therefore
there cannot be a philosophic science of what is
not form and universal, but material and particular.
This amounts to affirming the impossibility of
metaphystc. }

‘The Method or Logic of history followed the
Philosophy of history; a gnoseology of the


conceptions which are employed in the natural


sciences succeeded natural philosophy. What
philosophy can study of the one is its mode of
construction (intuition, perception, document, prob-
ability, etc.); of the others she can study the
forms of the conceptions which appear in them
(space, time, motion, number, types, classes, etc.).
Philosophy, which should become metaphysical in
the sense above described, would, on the other
hand, claim to compete with narrative history, and
with the natural sciences, which in their field are
alone legitimate and effective. Such a competition
becomes in fact a labour spoiling labour. We
are antimetaphysical in this sense, while yet”
declaring ourselves wltrametaphysial, if by that
word it be desired to claim and to affirm the
function of philosophy as the autoconsciousness of
the spirit, as opposed to the merely empirical and
classificatory function of the natural sciences.
In order to maintain itself side by side with asenzaz


tmagination


the sciences of the spirit, metaphysic has been oe
obliged to assert the existence of a_ specific
spiritual activity, of which it would be the product.
This activity, which in antiquity was called menta/
or superior imagination, and in modern times
more often zztuztive intellect or wntellectual in-
tution, would unite in an altogether special form


the characters of imagination and of intellect.


Mystical
esthetic.


106 Tite ORY OP AS Pi balie vit
It would provide the method of passing, by


deduction or dialectically, from the infinite to
the finite, from form to matter, from the concept
to the intuition, from science to history, operating
by a method which should be at once unity and
compenetration of the universal and the particular,
of the abstract and the concrete, of intuition and
of intellect. A faculty marvellous indeed and
delightful to possess ; but we, who do not possess
it, have no means of proving its existence.

Intellectual intuition has sometimes been con-
sidered as the true esthetic activity. At others
a not less marvellous esthetic activity has been
placed beside, below, or above it, a faculty
altogether different from simple intuition. The
glories of this faculty have been sung, and to it
have been attributed the fact of art, or at the least
certain groups of artistic production, arbitrarily
chosen. Art, religion, and philosophy have
seemed in turn one only, or three distinct faculties
of the spirit, now one, now another of these being
superior in the dignity assigned to each.

It is impossible to enumerate all the various
attitudes assumed by this conception of A¢sthetic,
which we will call mystecal. We are here in the
kingdom, not of the science of imagination, but of


imagination itself, which creates its world with


VIII OCPD Sein ft UAL PORMS 107


the varying elements of the impressions and of
the feelings. Let it suffice to mention that this
mysterious faculty has been conceived, now as
practical, now as a mean between the theoretic
and the practical, at others again as a theoretic
grade together with philosophy and religion.

The immortality of art has sometimes been
deduced from this last conception as belonging
with its sisters to the sphere of absolute spirit.
At other times, on the other hand, when religion
has been looked upon as mortal and as dissolved
in philosophy, then the mortality, even the actual
death, or at least the agony of art has been
proclaimed. These questions have no meaning
for us, because, seeing that the function of art isa
necessary grade of the spirit, to ask if art can be
eliminated is the same thing as asking if sensation
or intelligence can be eliminated. But metaphysic,
in the above sense, since it transplants itself to an
arbitrary world, is not to be criticized in detail,
any more than one can criticize the botany of
the garden of Alcina or the navigation of the
voyage of Astolfo. Criticism can only be made
by refusing to join the game; that is to say, by
rejecting the very possibility of metaphysic, always
in the sense above indicated.


As we do not admit intellectual intuition in


Mortality and
zmmortality of
are.


108 PH EORY OFF 7s Die rte VuI


philosophy, we can also not admit its shadow or
equivalent, zsthetic intellectual intuition, or any
other mode by which this imaginary function may
be called and represented. We repeat again that
we do not know of a fifth grade beyond the four


grades of spirit which consciousness reveals to us.


rx


INDIVISIBILITY OF EXPRESSION INTO MODES OR
GRADES AND CRITIQUE OF RHETORIC
Ir is customary to give long enumerations of the Hess
characteristics of art. Having reached this point
of the treatise, having studied the artistic function
as spiritual activity, as theoretic activity, and
as special theoretic activity (intuitive), we are
able to discern that those various and copious
descriptions mean, when they mean anything at
all, nothing but a repetition of what may be called
the qualities of the esthetic function, generic,
specific, and characteristic. To the first of these
are referred, as we have already observed, the
characters, or better, the verbal variants of uxzty,
and of wzzty in variety, those also of szmplicety, of
originality, and so on; to the second of these, the
characteristics of truth, of s¢ucerzty, and the like ;
to the third, the characteristics of /z/e, of vzvaczty,
of animation, of concretion, of endividuality, of


characteristicaty. The words may vary yet
109


110 TUEORY OF Poth tie 1x


more, but they will not contribute anything
scientifically new. The results which we have
shown have altogether exhausted the analysis of
expression as such.

lone But at this point, the question as to whether

expression. there be various modes or grades of expression
is still perfectly legitimate. We have dis-
tinguished two grades of activity, each of which
is subdivided into two other grades, and there
is certainly, so far, no visible logical reason why
there should not exist two or more modes of
the zsthetic, that is of expression.—The only
objection is that these modes do not exist.

For the: present at least, it 1s a” question
of simple internal observation and of self
consciousness. One may scrutinize esthetic
facts as much as one will: no formal differences
will ever be found among them, nor will the
esthetic fact be divisible into a first and a
second degree.

This signifies that a philosophical classification
of expressions is not possible. Single expressive
facts are so many individuals, of which the
one cannot be compared with the other, save
generically, in so far as each is expression. To
use the language of the schools, expression is


a species which cannot in its turn perform the


oer oolON AND KEE PORIC. 114


functions of genus. Impressions, that is to say
contents, vary ; every content differs from every
other content, because nothing in life repeats
itself; and the continuous variation of contents
follows the irreducible variety of expressive facts,


the esthetic syntheses of the impressions.


A corollary of this is the impossibility of /mpossiaitity


translations, in so far as they pretend to effect
the transference of one expression into another,
like a liquid poured from a vase of a certain
shape into a vase of another shape. We can
elaborate logically what we have already elabor-
ated in zsthetic form only ; but we cannot reduce
that which has already possessed its ezsthetic
form to another form also esthetic. In truth,
every translation either diminishes and spoils;
or it creates a new expression, by putting the
former back into the crucible and mixing it with
other impressions belonging to the pretended
translator. In the former case, the expression
always remains one, that of the original, the
translation being more or less deficient, that is to
say, not properly expression: in the other case,
there would certainly be two expressions, but
with two different contents. “ Ugly faithful ones
or faithless beauties” is a proverb that well


expresses the dilemma with which every trans-


of translations.


Critique of
rhetorical
categories.


Viz THEORY OF Ao T Ee LIG Ix


lator is faced. Inzsthetic translations, such as
those which are word for word or interlinear,
or paraphrastic translations, are to be looked
upon as simple commentaries on the original.

The division of expressions into various
classes is known in literature by the name of
theory of ornament or of rhetorical categories.
But similar attempts at classification in the other
forms of art are not wanting: suffice it to
mention the vealzstic and symbolic forms, spoken
of in painting and sculpture.

The scientific value to be attached in A¢sthetic
and in zsthetic criticism to these distinctions of
realistic and symboltc, of style and absence of style,
of objective and subjective, of classic and romantic,
of semple and ornate, of proper and metaphort-
cal, of the fourteen forms of metaphor, of the
figures of word and of sentence, and further of
pleonasm, of ellipse, of inversion, of repetition, of
synonyms and homonyms, and so on; is xzf or
altogether negative. To none of these terms
and distinctions can be given a satisfactory
esthetic definition. Those that have been
attempted, when they are not obviously errone-
ous, are words devoid of sense. A typical
example of this is the very common definition


of metaphor as of another word used in place


me ee RE OSLON AND RHETORIC 113


of the word itself. Now why give oneself this
trouble? Why take the worse and longer road
when you know the shorter and better road?
Perhaps, as is generally said, because the correct
word is in certain cases not so expressive as the
so-called incorrect word or metaphor? But
in that case the metaphor becomes exactly
the right word, and the so-called right word,
if it were used, would be du¢t Little expressive and
therefore most improper. Similar observations
of elementary good sense can be made regard-
ing the other categories, as, for example, the
generic one of the ornate. One can ask oneself
how an ornament can be joined to expression.
Externally ? In that case it must always remain
separate. Internally? In that case, either it
does not assist expression and mars it; or it does
form part of it and is not ornament, but a con-
stituent element of expression, indistinguishable
from the whole.

It is not necessary to dwell upon the harm
done by these distinctions. Rhetoric has often
been declaimed against, but although there has
been rebellion against its consequences, its
principles have been carefully preserved, perhaps
in order to show proof of philosophic coherence.


Rhetoric has contributed, if not to make dominant
I


Empirical
sense of the
rhetorical
categories.


Use of these
categories as
synonyms of
the esthetic


fact.


114 THEORY OF ASTHETIC e


in literary production, at least to justify theoreti-
cally, that particular mode of writing ill which
is called fine writing or writing according to
rhetoric.

The terms above mentioned would never have
gone beyond the schools, where we all of us
learned them (certain of never finding .the oppor-
tunity of using them in strictly zesthetic discussions,
or even of doing so jocosely and with a comic
intention), save when occasionally employed in
one of the following significations: as verbal
variants of the zsthetic concept; as indications
of the antz-esthettc, or, finally (and this is their
most important use), in a sense which is no
longer esthetic and literary, but serely logical.

Expressions are not divisible into classes, but
some are successful, others half-successful, others
failures. There are perfect and imperfect,
complete and deficient expressions. The terms
already cited, then, sometimes indicate the
successful expression, sometimes the various
forms of the failures. But they are employed
in the most inconstant and capricious manner,
for it often happens that the same word serves,
now to proclaim the perfect, now to condemn the
imperfect.

An instance of this is found when someone,


Toe SPREE SSION AND RHETORIC irs


criticizing two pictures—the one without in-
spiration, in which the author has copied natural
objects without intelligence; the other inspired,
but without obvious likeness to existing objects
—calls the first realistic, the second symbolic.
Others, on the contrary, pronounce the word
realistic about a strongly felt picture representing
a scene of ordinary life, while they talk of symdolic
in reference to another picture representing but a
cold allegory. It is evident that in the first case
symbolic means artistic, and realistic inartistic,
while in the second, realistic is synonymous with
artistic and symbolic with inartistic. How, then,
can we be astonished when some hotly maintain
that the true art form is the symbolic, and that
the realistic is inartistic; others, that the realistic
is the artistic, and the symbolic the inartistic ?
We cannot but grant that both are right, since
each makes use of the same words in senses so
diverse.

The great disputes about the c/asszc and the
romantic are frequently based upon such equi-
vokes. Sometimes the former was understood as
the artistically perfect, and the second as lacking
balance and imperfect; at others, the classic was
cold and artificial, the romantic sincere, warm,


efficacious, and truly expressive. Thus it was


Their use toin-
dicate various
esthetic
zmperfections.


116 PHEORY OF 7S COEAIe Ix


always possible to take the side of the classic
against the romantic, or of the romantic against
the classic.

The same thing happens as regards the word
style. Sometimes it is affirmed that every writer
should have style. Here style is synonymous
with form or expression. Sometimes the form
of a code of laws or of a mathematical work is
said to be devoid of style. Here the error of
admitting diverse modes of expression is again
committed, of admitting an ornate and a naked
form of expression, because, since style is form,
the code and the mathematical treatise must also,
strictly speaking, have each its style. At other
times, one hears the critics blaming someone for
‘‘having too much style” or for “ writing a style.”
Here it is clear that style signifies, not the form,
nor a mode of it, but improper and pretentious
expression, which is one form of the inartistic.

Passing to the second, not altogether in-
significant, use of these words and distinctions,
we sometimes find in the examination of a literary
composition such remarks as follow: here is a
pleonasm, here an ellipse, there a metaphor,
here again a synonym or an equivoke. This
means that in one place is an error consisting of


using a larger number of words than is necessary


ro XP RE SSION AND RHE VORIC: 117


(pleonasm); that in another the error arises from
too few having been used (ellipse), elsewhere
from the use of an unsuitable word (metaphor),
or from the use of two words which seem to
express two different things, where they really
express the same thing (synonym); or that, on
the contrary, it arises from having employed one
which seems to express the same thing where it
expresses two different things (equivoke). This
pejorative and pathological use of the terms
is, however, more uncommon than the preceding.

Finally, when rhetorical terminology ‘possesses
no esthetic signification similar or analogous to
those passed in review, and yet one is aware that
it is not void of meaning and designates some-
thing that deserves to be noted, it is then used
in the service of logic and of science. If it be
granted that a concept used in a scientific sense
by a given writer is expressed with a definite
term, it is natural that other words formed by
that writer as used to signify the same concept,
or incidentally made use of by him, become, zz
respect to the vocabulary fixed upon by him as
true, metaphors, synecdoches, synonyms, elliptic
forms, and the like. We, too, in the course of
this treatise, have several times made use of, and


intend again to make use of such terms, in order


Their use

zm a Sense
transcending
aesthetic, in the
service of
science,


Rhetoric tn the
schools.


118 PAE ORY OF Ae od te Lic Ix


to make clear the sense of the words we employ, or
may find employed. But this proceeding, which
is of value in the disquisitions of scientific and
intellectual criticism, has none whatever in esthetic
criticism. For science there exist appropriate
words and metaphors. The same concept may
be psychologically formed in various circumstances
and therefore be expressed with various intuitions.
When the scientific terminology of a given writer
has been established, and one of these modes
has been fixed as correct, then all other uses
of it become improper or tropical. But in
the esthetic fact exist only appropriate words.
The same intuition can only be expressed in
one way, precisely because it is an intuition and
ROL a CONCeDT

Some, while they admit the esthetic in-
sufficiency of the rhetorical categories, yet make
a reserve as regards their utility and the service
they are supposed to render, especially in schools
of literature. We confess that we fail to under-
stand how error and confusion can educate the
mind to logical clearness, or aid the teaching of a
science which they disturb and obscure. Perhaps
it may be desired to say that they can aid memory
and learning as empirical classes, as was admitted


above for literary and artistic styles. But there


moe MPR SSION AND RHETORIC 119


is another purpose for which the rhetorical
categories should certainly continue to be
admitted to the schools: to be criticized there.
We cannot simply forget the errors of the past,
and truth cannot be kept alive, save by making
it fight against error. Unless a notion of the
rhetorical categories be given, accompanied by a
suitable criticism of these, there is a risk of their
springing up again. For they are already spring-
ing up with certain philologists, disguised as most
recent psychological discoveries.

It would seem as though we wished to deny
all bond of likeness among themselves between
expressions and works of art. The likenesses
exist, and owing to them, works of art can be
arranged in this or that group. But they are
likenesses such as are observed among’ in-
dividuals, and can never be rendered with
abstract definitions. That is to say, these like-
nesses have nothing to do with identification,
subordination, co-ordination, and the other
relations of concepts. They consist wholly in
what is called a famzly “ckeness, and are connected
with those historical conditions existing at the
birth of the various works, or in an affinity of
soul between the artists.


It is in these resemblances that lies the ve/azzve


The
resemblances
of expresston:


120 THEORY OF. AtotHe dic 1x


The velative possibility of translations. This does not consist
‘panslationt of the reproduction of the same original ex-
pressions (which it would be vain to attempt), but
in the measure that expressions are given, more
or less nearly resembling those. The translation
that passes for good is an approximation which
has original value as a work of art and can stand


by itself.


X


ESTHETIC FEELINGS AND THE DISTINCTION


Dit WEEN THE: UGLY AND THE BHAU TIPU


PassING on to the study of more complex concepts,
where the esthetic activity is found in conjunction
with other orders of facts, and showing the mode
of this union or complication, we find ourselves
at once face to face with the concept of feeling
and with the feelings which are called esthetzc.

The word “feeling” is one of the richest in Various sign

fications of th

meanings. We have already had occasion to #7 feeling.
meet with it once, among those used to designate
the spirit in its passivity, the matter or content
of art, and also as synonym of zmpresstons.
Once again (and then the meaning was altogether
different), we have met with it as designating the
non-logical and non-historical character of the
esthetic fact, that is to say pure intuition, a form
of truth which defines no concept and states no
fact.


But feeling is not here understood in either
I21


Feeling as
activity.


Identification
of feeling
with economic
activity.


122 TE PORY OFe 7 SiH Lie x


of these two senses, nor in the others in which
it has nevertheléss been used to designate other
cognoscitive forms of spirit. Its meaning here is
that ofa special activity, of non-cognoscitive nature,
but possessing its two poles, positive and negative,
in pleasure and farm. This activity has always
greatly embarrassed philosophers, who have
attempted either to deny it as an activity, or to
attribute it to xature and to exclude it from
spirit. Both solutions bristle with difficulties,
and these are of such a kind that the solutions
prove themselves finally unacceptable to anyone
who examines them with care. For of what
could a non-spiritual activity consist, an actzvety
of nature, when we have no other knowledge
of activity save as spiritual, and of spirituality
Save as activity? Nature is, in this case, by
definition, the merely passive, inert, mechanical
and material. On the other hand, the negation
of the character of activity to feeling is energeti-
cally disproved by those very poles of pleasure
and of pain which appear in it and manifest
activity in its concreteness, and, we will say, all
aquiver.

This critical conclusion ought to place us in
the greatest embarrassment, for in the sketch of
the system of the spirit given above, we have left


ox foo Pier eae ETN GS 123


no room for the new activity, of which we are
now obliged to recognize the existence. But


accivity. of feeling, i. it be \dctivity, is not


specially new. It has already had its place


assigned to it in the system which we have
sketched, where, however, it has been indicated
under another name, as economic activity. What
is called the activity of feeling is nothing but
that more elementary and fundamental practical
activity, which we have distinguished from ethical
activity, and made to consist of the appetite and
desire for some individual end, without any moral
determination,

If feeling has been sometimes considered as
organic or natural activity, this has happened
precisely because it does not coincide either with
logical, zesthetic, or ethical activity, Looked at
from the standpoint of these three (which were
the only ones admitted), it has seemed to lie
outsede the true and real spirit, the spirit in its
aristocracy, and to be almost a determination of
nature and of the soul, in so far as it is nature.
Thus the thesis, several times maintained, that
the esthetic activity, like the ethical and intel-
lectual activities, is not feeling, becomes at once
completely proved. This thesis was inexpugnable,


when sensation had already been reduced con-


Critique of
redonism.


Feeling as a
concomitant to


every form of
activity.


124 THEORY OF 7StTHEIIG x


fusedly and implicitly to economic volition. The
view which has been refuted is known by the
name of hedonism. For hedonism, all the various
forms of the spirit are reduced to one, which thus
itself also loses its own distinctive character and
becomes something turbid and mysterious, like
‘‘the shades in which all cows are black.” Having
effected this reduction and mutilation, the hedonists
naturally do not succeed in. seeing anything else
in any activity but pleasure and pain. They find
no substantial difference between the pleasure
of art and that of an easy digestion, between the
pleasure of a good action and that of breathing
the fresh air with wide-expanded lungs.

But if the activity of feeling in the sense here
defined must not be substituted for all the other
forms of spiritual activity, we have not said that
it cannot accompany them. Indeed it accompanies
them of necessity, because they are all in close
relation, both with one another and with the
elementary volitional form. Therefore each of
them has for concomitants individual volitions and
volitional pleasures and pains which are known
as feeling. But we must not confound what is
concomitant, with the principal fact, and take the
one for the other. The discovery of the truth, or
the satisfaction of a moral duty fulfilled, produces


x (otto Pie NGS 125


in us a joy which makes our whole being vibrate,
for, by attaining to those forms of spiritual
activity, it attains at the same time that to which
it was practically tending, as to its end, during
the effort. Nevertheless, economic or hedonistic
satisfaction, ethical satisfaction, zsthetic  satis-
faction, intellectual satisfaction, remain always
distinct, even when in union.

Thus is solved at the same time the much-
debated question, which has seemed, not wrongly,
a matter of life or death for zsthetic science,
namely, whether the feeling and the pleasure
precede or follow, are cause or effect of the
esthetic fact. We must enlarge this question,
to include the relation between the various
spiritual forms, and solve it in the sense that
in the unity of the spirit one cannot talk of cause
and effect and of what comes first and what
follows it in time.

And once the relation above exposed is
established, the statements, which it is customary
to make, as to the nature of esthetic, moral,
intellectual, and even, as is sometimes said,
economic feelings, must also fall. In this last
case, it is clear that it is a question, not of two
terms, but of one, and the quest of economic


feeling can be but that same one concerning the


Meaning of cer-
tain ordinary
distinctions of
feelings.


126 THEORY. OF ASTHETIC x


economic activity. But in the other cases also, the
search can never be directed to the substantive,
but to the adjective: esthetic, morality, logic,
explain the colouring of the feelings as esthetic,
moral, and intellectual, while feeling, studied alone,
will never explain those refractions.

A further consequence is, that we can free
ourselves from the distinction between values
or feelings of value, and feelings that are merely
hedonistic and wzthout value; also from other
similar distinctions, like those between ad‘s-
interested feelings and zuxterested feelings, between
ojjectzve feelings and the others that are not
objective but simply sudbzecteve, between feelings
of approval and others of mere pleasure (Gefallen
and Vergniigen of the Germans). Those dis-
tinctions strove hard to save the three spiritual
forms, which have been recognised as the triad
of the Zrue, the Good, and the Beautzful, from
confusion with the fourth form, still unknown,
yet insidious through its indeterminateness, and
mother of scandals. For us this triad has
finished its task, because we are capable of
reaching the distinction far more directly, by
welcoming even the selfish, subjective, merely
pleasurable feelings, among the respectable forms
of the spirit; and where formerly antitheses


ET


x root Hebe PER INGS 127


were conceived of by ourselves and_ others,
between value and feelings, as between spirituality
and naturality, henceforth we see nothing but
difference between value and value.

As has already been said, the economic feeling
or activity reveals itself as divided into two poles,
positive and negative, pleasure and pain, which
we can now translate into useful, and useless or
hurtful. This bipartition has already been noted
above, as a mark of the active character of feeling,
precisely because the same bipartition is found
in all forms of activity. If each of these is a
value, each has opposed to it antzvalue or adts-
value. Absence of value is not sufficient to cause
disvalue, but activity and passivity must be
struggling between themselves, without the one
getting the better. of the other; hence the con-


Value and
dtsvalue: the
contraries and
their union.


tradiction, and the disvalue of the activity that-


is embarrassed, contested, or interrupted. Value |


is activity that unfolds itself freely: disvalue is
its contrary.

We will content ourselves with this definition
of the two terms, without entering into the
problem of the relation between value and
disvalue, that is, between the problem of con-
traries. (Are these to be thought of dualistically,


as two beings or two orders of beings, like


The Beautiful
as the value of
expresston, or
expression and
nothing more.


128 THEORY OF AST E Te &


Ormuzd and Ahriman, angels and devils, enemies
to one another; or as a unity, which is also
contrariety?) This definition of the two terms
will be sufficient for our purpose, which is to
make clear esthetic activity in particular, and
one of the most obscure and disputed concepts
of Aésthetic which arises at this point: the
concept of the Leautzfut.

/Esthetic, intellectual, economic, and ethical
values and disvalues are variously denominated
in current speech: Jdeautzful, true, good, useful,
just, and so on—these words: designate the free
development of spiritual activity, action, scientific
research, artistic production, when they are suc-
cessful ; ugly, false, bad, useless, unbecoming, unjust,
wmexact designate embarrassed activity, the product
of which is a failure. In linguistic usage, these
denominations are being continually shifted from
one order of facts to another, and from this to
that. Leautzful, for instance, is said not only of
a successful expression, but also of a scientific
truth, of an action successfully achieved, and of a
moral action: thus we talk of an zxtellectual
beauty, of a beautiful action, of a moral beauty.
Many philosophers, especially zstheticians, have
lost their heads in their pursuit of these most


varied uses: they have entered an inextricable


® (ood nee re: BEE LINGS 129


and impervious verbal labyrinth. For this reason
it has hitherto seemed convenient studiously to
avoid the use of the word beautiful to indicate
successful expression. But after all the explana-
tions that have been given, and all danger of mis-
understanding being now dissipated, and since, on
the other hand, we cannot fail to recognize that
the prevailing tendency, alike in current speech
and in philosophy, is to limit the meaning of
the vocable deautiful altogether to the esthetic
value, we may define beauty as successful expres-
ston, or better, as expression and nothing more,
because expression, when it is not successful, is
not expression.

Consequently, the ugly is unsuccessful ex-
pression. The paradox is true, that, in works of
art that are failures, the beautiful is present as
unity and the ugly as multiplicity. Thus, with
regard to works of art that are more or less
failures, we talk of qualities, that is to say of those
parts of them that are beautiful. We do not talk
thus of perfect works. It is in fact impossible to
enumerate their qualities or to designate those
parts of them that are beautiful. In them there
is complete fusion: they have but one quality.
Life circulates in the whole organism: it is not


withdrawn into certain parts.
K


The ugly, and
the elements of
beauty which
compose tt.


Lllusions that
there exist
expressions
which are
neither beautt-
ful nor ugly.


130 THBORY OF oti Erie x


The qualities of works that are failures may be
of various degrees. They may even be very
great. The beautiful does not possess degrees,
for there is no conceiving a more beautiful, that is,
an expressive that is more expressive, an adequate
that is more than adequate. Ugliness, on the
other hand, does possess degrees, from the rather
ugly (or almost beautiful) to the extremely ugly.
But if the ugly were complete, that is to say, with-
out any element of beauty, it would for that very
reason cease to be ugly, because in it would be
absent the contradiction which is the reason of its
existence. The disvalue would become nonvalue;
activity would give place to passivity, with which
it is not at war, save when there effectively is war.

And because the distinctive consciousness of
the beautiful and of the ugly is based on the con-
trasts and contradictions in which esthetic activity
is developed, it is evident that this consciousness
becomes attenuated to the point of disappear-
ing altogether, as we descend from _ the
more complicated to the more simple and to
the simplest cases of expression. From this
arises the illusion that there are expressions
which are neither beautiful nor ugly, those which
are obtained without sensible effort and appear


easy and natural being so considered.


os “eo PHETIC PERLINGS 131


The whole mystery of the deautiful and the Flees
ugly is reduced to these henceforth most CAS nae
definitions. Should any one object that there slings:
exist perfect esthetic expressions before which
no pleasure is felt, and others, perhaps even
failures, which give him the greatest pleasure,
it is necessary to advise him to pay great atten-
tion, as regards the esthetic fact, to that only
which is truly esthetic pleasure. Esthetic
pleasure is sometimes reinforced by pleasures
arising from extraneous facts, which are only
casually found united with it. The poet or
any other artist affords an instance of purely
eesthetic pleasure, during the moment in which he
sees (or has the intuition of) his work for the
first time; that is to say, when his impressions
take form and his countenance is irradiated with
the divine joy of the creator. On the other
hand, a mixed pleasure is experienced by any
one who goes to the theatre, after a day’s work,
to witness a comedy: when the pleasure of rest
and amusement, and that of laughingly snatching
a nail from the gaping coffin, is accompanied
at a certain moment by real zsthetic pleasure,
obtained from the art of the dramatist and of
the actors. The same may be said of the artist


who looks upon his labour with pleasure, when


Critique of ap-
parent feelings.


132 TABOR OF 75th Lie x


it is finished, experiencing, in addition to the
esthetic pleasure, that very different one which
arises from the thought of self-love satisfied, or
of the economic gain which will come to him
from his work. Examples could be multiplied.

A category of apparent esthetic feelings has
been formed in modern Atsthetic. These have
nothing to do with the esthetic sensations of
pleasure arising from the form, that is to say
from the work of art. On the contrary, they
arise from the content of the work of art. It
has been observed that “artistic representations
arouse pleasure and pain in their infinite
variety and gradations. We tremble with
anxiety, we rejoice, we fear, we laugh, we weep,
we desire, with the personages of a drama or of
a romance, with the figures in a picture, or with
the melody of music. But these feelings are
not those that would give occasion to the real
fact outside art; that is to say, they are the
same in quality, but they are quantitively an
attenuation. A‘%sthetic and apparent pleasure
and pain are slight, of little depth, and change-
able.” We have no need to treat of these apparent
feelings, for the good reason that we have already
amply discussed them; indeed, we have treated
of them alone. What are ever feelings that


Bee ER:


: JESTHETI® FEELINGS 133


become apparent or manifest, but feelings
objectified, intensified, expressed? And it is
natural that they do not trouble and agitate us
passionately, as do those of real life, because
those were matter, these are form and activity ;
those true and proper feelings, these intuitions
and expressions. The formula, then, of apparent
feelings is nothing but a tautology. The best
that can be done is to run the pen through it.


Critique of the
beautiful as
that which
pleases the
higher senses.


XI
CRITIQUE OF STHETIC HEDONISM


As we are opposed to hedonism in_ general,
that is to say, to the theory which is based on
the pleasure and pain intrinsic to Economy
and accompanies every other form of activity,
confounding the content and that which con-
tains it, and fails to recognize any process but
the hedonistic; so we are opposed to esthetic
hedonism in particular, which looks upon the
esthetic at any rate, if not also upon all other
activities, as a simple fact of feeling, and con-
founds the pleasurable of expression, which is
the beautiful, with the pleasurable and nothing
more, and with the pleasurable of all sorts.

The esthetic-hedonistic point of view has
been presented in several forms. One of the
most ancient conceives the beautiful as that
which pleases the sight and hearing, that is to
say, the so-called superior senses. When analysis :


of zsthetic facts first began, it was, in fact,
134


XI Mot heii, TEDONTSHI 135


difficult to avoid the mistake of thinking that a
picture and a piece of music are impressions of
sight or of hearing: it was and is an indisputable
fact that the blind man does not enjoy the
picture, nor the deaf man the music. To show,
as we have shown, that the esthetic fact does
not depend upon the nature of the impressions,
but that all sensible impressions can be raised
to ewsthetic expression and that none need of
necessity be so raised, is an idea which presents
itself only when all the other ways out of the
difficulty have been tried. But whoso imagines
that the esthetic fact is something pleasing to
the eyes or to the hearing, has no line of defence
against him who proceeds logically to identify
the beautiful with the pleasurable in general, and
includes cooking in Aésthetic, or, as some positivist
has done, the viscerally beautiful.

The theory of A/ay is another form of zsthetic
hedonism. The conception of play has sometimes
helped towards the realization of the actifying
character of the expressive fact : man (it has been
said) is not really man, save when he begins to
play ; that is to say, when he frees himself from
natural and mechanical causality and operates
spiritually ; and his first game is art. But since


the word flay also means that pleasure which


Critique of the
theory of play.


136 ROE ORY OF 75 EE TIC XI


arises from the expenditure of the exuberant
energy of the organism (that is to say, from a
practical act), the consequence of this theory has
been, that every game has been called an esthetic
fact, and that the esthetic function has been
called a game, in so far as it is possible to play
with it, for, like science and every other thing,
Esthetic can be made part of a game. But
morality cannot be provoked at the intention of
playing, on the ground that it does not consent ;
on the contrary, it dominates and regulates the
act of playing itself.

Critique of Finally, there have been some who have tried


the theories of
sexualityandof tg deduce the pleasure of art from the reaction


the triumph,
of, the sexual organs There ‘are some very
modern estheticians who place the genesis of the
esthetic fact in the pleasure of conquering, of
triumphing, or, as others add, in the desire of the
male, who wishes to conquer the female. This
theory is seasoned with much anecdotal erudition,
Heaven knows of what degree of credibility! on
the customs of savage peoples. But in very truth
there was no necessity for such important aid, for
one often meets in ordinary life poets who adorn
themselves with their poetry, like cocks that raise
their crests, or turkeys that spread their tails.
But he who does such things, in so far as he does


XI foo neice DONIS KI 137


them, is not a poet, but a poor devil of a cock
or turkey. The conquest of woman does not
suffice to explain the art fact. It would be just
as correct to term poetry economzc, because there
have been aulic and stipendiary poets, and there
are poets the sale of whose verses helps them to
gain their livelihood, if it does not altogether
provide it. However, this definition has not failed
to win over some zealous neophytes of historical
materialism.

Another less vulgar current of thought con-
siders Afsthetic to be the science of the sympathetic,
of that with which we sympathize, which attracts,
rejoices, gives us pleasure and excites admiration.
But the sympathetic is nothing but the image or
representation of what pleases. And, as such,
it is a complex fact, resulting from a constant
element, the zsthetic element of representation,
and from a variable element, the pleasing in its
infinite forms, arising from all the various classes
of values.

In ordinary language, there is sometimes a
feeling of repugnance at calling an expression
beautiful, which is not an expression of the sym-
pathetic. Hence the continual contrast between
the point of view of the esthetician or of the art


critic and that of the ordinary person, who cannot


Critique of the
Esthetic of the
sympathetic,
Meaning in it
of content and


form.


Esthetic
hedonism and
meoraltsm.


138 PTHUPORY OR Ao LHe Pic x!


succeed in persuading himself that the image of
pain and of turpitude can be beautiful, or, at least,
can be beautiful with as much right as the pleasing
and the good.

The opposition could be solved by distinguish-
ing two different sciences, one of expression and
the other of the sympathetic, if the latter could
be the object of a special science; that is to
say, if it were not, as has been shown, a complex
fact. If predominance be given to the expressive
fact, it becomes a part of A¢%sthetic as science of
expression ; if to the pleasurable content, we fall
back to the study of facts which are essentially
hedonistic (utilitarian), however complicated they
may appear. The origin, also, of the connexion
between content and form is to be sought for in
the Aésthetic of the sympathetic, when this is
conceived as the sum of two values.

In all the doctrines just now discussed, the
art fact is posited as merely hedonistic. But this
view cannot be maintained, save by uniting it
with a philosophic hedonism that is complete and
not partial, that is to say, with a hedonism which
does not admit any other form of value. Hardly
has this hedonistic conception of art been received
by philosophers, who admit one or more spiritual
values, of truth or of morality, than the following


XI ZeotTHE TiC rie DONITS I 139


question must necessarily be asked: What should
be done with art? To what use should it be put?
Should a free course be allowed to its pleasures ?
And if so, to what extent? The question of the
end of art, which in the A‘sthetic of expression
would be a contradiction of terms, here appears
in place, and altogether logical.
Now it is evident that, admitting the Ze rigoristic


negation, and


premisses, but two solutions of such a question pels
can be given, the one altogether negative, the %”*
other restrictive. The first, which we shall call
rigoristic or ascetic, appears several times, although
not frequently, in the history of ideas. It looks
upon art as an inebriation of the senses, and
therefore, not only useless, but harmful. Accord-
ing to this theory, then, it is necessary to drive it
with all our strength from the human soul, which
it troubles. The other solution, which we shall
call pedagogic or moralistico-utilitarian, admits art,
but only in so far as it concurs with the end of
morality; in so far as it assists with innocent
pleasure the work of him who leads to the true
and the good ; in so far as it sprinkles with dulcet
balm the sides of the vase of wisdom and of
morality.

It is well to observe that it would be an error


to divide this second view into intellectualist and


‘yitique of
ure beauty,


140 THEORY OF 7257 HE 11 xI


moralistico-utilitarian, according to whether the
end of leading to the true or to what is practically
good, be assigned to art. The task of instructing,


which is imposed upon it, precisely because it is


_an end which is sought after and advised, is no


longer merely a theoretical fact, but a theoretical
fact become the material for practical action ; it
is not, therefore, intellectualism, but pedagogism
and practicism. Nor would it be more exact to
subdivide the pedagogic view into the pure
utilitarian and the moralistico-utilitarian ; because
those who admit only the individually useful (the
desire of the individual), precisely because they
are absolute hedonists, have no motive for
seeking an ulterior justification for art.

But to enunciate these theories at the point
to which we have attained is to confute them.
We therefore restrict ourselves to observing that
in the pedagogic theory of art is to be found
another of the reasons why it has been erroneously
claimed that the content of art should be chosen
with a view to certain practical effects.

The thesis, re-echoed by the artists, that art
consists of puve beauty, has often been brought
forward against hedonistic and _ pedagogic
“Esthetic: ‘‘ Heaven places All our joy in pure
beauty, and the Verse is everything.” If it is


XI AESTHETIC HEDONISM 14!


‘wished that this should be understood in the
sense that art is not to be confounded with sensual
pleasure, that is, in fact, with utilitarian practicism,
nor with moralism, then our A<sthetic also must be
permitted to adorn itself with the title of _ZAsthettc
of pure beauty. But if (as is often the case)
something mystical and transcendental be meant
by this, something that is unknown to our poor
human world, or something spiritual and beatific,
but not expressive, we must reply that while
applauding the conception of a beauty, free of all
that is not the spiritual form of expression, we
are yet unable to conceive a beauty altogether
purified of expression, that is to say, separated
from itself.


XII


THE ASTHETIC OF THE SYMPATHETIC AND
PSEUDO-AESTHETIC CONCEPTS


Pseudo-esthetic THE doctrine of the sympathetic (very often


‘oncepts, and
‘he esthetic
if the
ympathetic,


animated and seconded in this by the capricious
metaphysical and mystical A‘sthetic, and by that
blind tradition which assumes an intimate con-
nection between things by chance treated of
together by the same authors and in the same
books), has introduced and rendered familiar in
systems of Atsthetic, a series of concepts, of
which one example suffices to justify our resolute
expulsion of them from our own treatise.

Their catalogue is long, not to say intermin-
able: tragic, comic, sublime, pathetic, moving, sad,
ridiculous, melancholy, tragt-comic, humoristzc,
majestic, dignified, serious, grave, imposing, noble,
decorous, graceful, attractive, piquant, coguettish,
tdyllic, elegiac, cheerful, violent, ingenuous, cruel,
base, horrible, disgusting, dreadful, nauseating ;


the list can be increased at will. .
142


XII OF Tre SV NIPA TRE TIC 143


Since that doctrine took as its special object
the sympathetic, it was naturally unable to
neglect any of the varieties of this, or any of
the combinations or gradations which lead at last
from the sympathetic to the antipathetic. And
seeing that the sympathetic content was held to
be the deautzful and the antipathetic the xgdy,
the varieties (tragic, comic, sublime, pathetic, etc.)
constituted for it the shades and gradations
intervening between the beautiful and the ugly.

Having enumerated and defined, as well as
it could, the chief among these varieties, the
“Esthetic of the sympathetic set itself the problem
of the place to be assigned to the ugly tx art.
This problem is without meaning for us, who do
not recognize any ugliness save the anti-zsthetic
or inexpressive, which can never form part of the
esthetic fact, being, on the contrary, its antithesis.
But the question for the doctrine which we are
here criticizing was to reconcile in some way the
false and defective idea of art from which it
started, reduced to the representation of the
agreeable, with effective art, which occupies a far
wider field. Hence the artificial attempt to settle
what examples of the ugly (antipathetic) could
be admitted in artistic representation, and for


what reasons, and in what ways.


Critique of the
theory of the
ugly tn art and
of the ugly
surmounted.


Pseudo-esthetic
concepts belong
to Psychology.


144 THEORY OF ASTHETIC ai


The answer was: that the ugly is admissible,
only when it can be overcome, an unconquerable
ugliness, such as the dzsgusting or the nauseating,
being altogether excluded. Further, that the
duty of the ugly, when admitted in art, is to
contribute towards heightening the effect of the
beautiful (sympathetic), by producing a series of
contrasts, from which the pleasurable shall issue
more efficacious and pleasure-giving. It is, in
fact, a common observation that pleasure is more
vividly felt when it has been preceded by
abstinence or by suffering. Thus the ugly in
art was looked upon as the servant of the
beautiful, its stimulant and condiment.

That special theory of hedonistic refinement,
which used to be pompously called the susmounting
of the ugly, falls with the general theory of the
sympathetic; and with it the enumeration and
the definition of the concepts mentioned above
remain completely excluded from A¢sthetic. For
Esthetic does not recognize the sympathetic or
the antipathetic in their varieties, but only the
spiritual activity of the representation.

However, the large space which, as we have
said, those concepts have hitherto occupied in
esthetic treatises makes opportune a rather more


copious explanation of what they are. What


XII OF Tit oy MEA THE TiC 145


will be their lot? As they are excluded from
Aésthetic, in what other part of Philosophy will
they be received ?

Truly, in none. All those concepts are without
philosophical value. They are nothing but a
series of classes, which can be bent in the most
various ways and multiplied at pleasure, to which
it is sought to reduce the infinite complications
and shadings of the values and disvalues of life.
Of those classes, there are some that have an
especially positive significance, like the beautiful,
the sublime, the majestic, the solemn, the serious,
the weighty, the noble, the elevated; others have
a significance especially negative, like the ugly,
the horrible, the dreadful, the tremendous, the
monstrous, the foolish, the extravagant ; in others
prevails a mixed significance, as is the case
with the comic, the tender, the melancholy, the
humorous, the tragi-comic. The complications
are infinite, because the individuations are infinite :
hence it is not possible to construct the concepts,
save in the arbitrary and approximate manner of
the natural sciences, whose duty it is to make
as good a plan as possible of that reality which
they cannot exhaust by enumeration, nor under-
stand and surpass speculatively. And _ since


Psychology is the naturalistic discipline, which
0


Impossibility
of rigoristic
definitions
of them.


146 THEORY, OF STR EAIC x


undertakes to construct types and plans of the
spiritual processes of man (of which, in fact, it
is always accentuating in our day the merely
empirical and descriptive character), these con-
cepts do not appertain to Atsthetic, nor, in
general, to Philosophy. They must simply be
handed over to Psychology.

As is the case with all other psychological con-
structions, so is it with those concepts: no rigorous
definitions are possible; and consequently the
one cannot be deduced from the other and they
cannot be connected in a system, as has, never-
theless, often been attempted, at great waste of
time and without result. But it can be claimed
as possible to obtain, apart from philosophical
definitions recognised as impossible, empirical
definitions, universally acceptable as true. Since
there does not exist a unique definition of a
given fact, but innumerable definitions can be
given of it, according to the cases and the
objects for which they are made, so it is clear
that if there were only one, and that the true
one, this would no longer be an empirical,
but a rigorous and philosophical definition.
Speaking exactly, every time that one of the
terms to which we have referred has been


employed, or any other of the innumerable series,


x11 OF FTE SV Nien EH Iie 147


aedetmttion of it has at the same time been
given, expressed or understood. And each one
of these definitions has differed somewhat from
the others, in some particular, perhaps of very
small importance, such as tacit reference to some
individual fact or other, which thus became especi-
ally an object of attention and was raised to
the position of a general type. So it happens
that not one of such definitions satisfies him who
hears it, nor does it satisfy even him who con-
structs it. For, the moment after, this same
individual finds himself face to face with a new
case, for which he recognizes that his definition
is more or less insufficient, ill-adapted, and in
need of remodelling. It is necessary, therefore,
to leave writers and speakers free to define the
sublime or the comic, the tragic or the humoristic,
on every occasion, as they please and as may
seem suitable to their purpose. And if you
insist upon obtaining an empirical definition of
universal validity, we can but submit this one :—
The sublime (comic, tragic, humoristic, etc.)
is everything that is or will be so called by
those who have employed or shall employ this
word.

Niaet is the sublimer «lhe unexpected
affirmation of an ultra-powerful moral force: that


Lxaniples :
definitions of
the sublime,
the comic, and
the humoristic.


TAS RORY. OF 7s Tie Tie XII


is one definition. But that other definition is
equally good, which also recognizes the sublime,
where the force which declares itself is an ultra-
powerful, but immoral and destructive will.
Both remain vague and assume no precise form,
until they are applied to a concrete case, which
makes clear what is here meant by w/tra-powerful,
and what by unexpected. They are quantitative
concepts, but falsely quantitative, since there is
no way of measuring them; they are, at bottom,
metaphors, emphatic phrases, or logical tauto-
logies. The humorous will be laughter mingled
with tears, bitter laughter, the sudden passage
from the comic to the tragic, and from the tragic
to the comic, the comic romantic, the inverted
sublime, war declared against every attempt at
insincerity, compassion which is ashamed to
lament, the mockery not of the fact, but of the
ideal itself; and whatever else may better please,
according as it is desired to get a view of the
physiognomy of this or that poet, of this or that
poem, which is, in its uniqueness, its own defini-
tion, and though momentary and circumscribed,
yet the sole adequate. The comic has been.
defined as the displeasure arising from the
perception of a deformity immediately followed
by a greater pleasure arising from the relaxation


XII OF Tit oy MP Awe PIC 149


of our psychical forces, which were strained in
anticipation of a perception whose importance
was foreseen. While listening to a narrative,
which, for example, should describe the magnifi-
cent and heroic purpose of a definite person, we
anticipate in imagination the occurrence of an
action both heroic and magnificent, and we
prepare ourselves to receive it, by straining our
psychic forces. If, however, in a moment, instead
of the magnificent and heroic action, which the
premises and the tone of the narrative had led
us to expect, by an unexpected change there
occur a slight, mean, foolish action, unequal
to our expectation, we have been deceived,
and the recognition of the deceit brings with it
an instant of displeasure. But this instant is as
it were overcome by the one immediately follow-
ing, in which we are able to discard our strained
attention, to free ourselves from the provision of
psychic energy accumulated and,henceforth super-
fluous, to feel ourselves reasonable and relieved
of a burden. This is the pleasure of the comic,
with its physiological equivalent, laughter. If the
unpleasant fact that has occurred should painfully
affect our interests, pleasure would not arise,
laughter would be at once choked, the psychic
energy would be strained and overstrained by


PE a a IE NETTIE


150 TAR ORY OF “ESTER iiC XI


other more serious perceptions. If, on the other
hand, such more serious perceptions do not arise,
if the whole loss be limited to a slight deception of
our foresight, then the supervening feeling of our
psychic wealth affords ample compensation for
this very slight displeasure.—This, stated in a
few words, is one of the most accurate modern
definitions of the comic. It boasts of containing,
justified or corrected, the manifold attempts to
define the comic, from Hellenic antiquity to our
own day. It includes Plato's dictum in the
Philebus, and Aristotle’s, which is more explicit.
The latter looks upon the comic as an ugliness weth-
out pain. It contains the theory of Hobbes, who
placed it in the feeling of zxazvidual superiority ;
of Kant, who saw in it a relaxation of tension ;
and those of other thinkers, for whom it was ¢he
contrast between great and small, between the
finite and the infinite. But on close observation,
the analysis and definition above given, although
most elaborate and rigorous in appearance, yet
enunciates characteristics which are applicable,
not only to the comic, but to every spiritual
process; such as the succession of painful and
agreeable moments and the satisfaction arising
from the consciousness of force and of its free


development. The differentiation here given


XII OF Tie SYP ATHE TIC Est


is that of quantitative determinations, to which
limits cannot be assigned. They remain vague
phrases, attaining to some meaning from their
reference to this or that single comic fact. If
such definitions be taken too seriously, there
happens to them what Jean Paul Richter said
of all the definitions of the comic: namely, that
their sole merit is to be themselves comic and to
produce, in reality, the fact, which they vainly
try to define logically. And who will ever
determine logically the dividing line between the
comic and the non-comic, between smiles and
laughter, between smiling and gravity ; who will
cut into clearly divided parts that ever-varying
continuity into which life melts ?

The facts, classified as well as possible in the
above-quoted psychological concepts, bear no
relation to the artistic fact, beyond the generic
one, that all of them, in so far as they designate
the material of life, can be represented by art;
and the other accidental relation, that zsthetic
facts also may sometimes enter into the processes
described, as in the impression of the sublime that
the work of a Titanic artist such as Dante
or Shakespeare may produce, and that of the
comic produced by the effort of a dauber or of
a scribbler.


Relations
between those
concepts and
esthetic
concepts.


152 THEORY 2OF ASTHE Tic XII


The process is external to the zsthetic fact in
this case also; for the only feeling linked with
that is the feeling of esthetic value and disvalue,
of the beautiful and of the ugly. The Dantesque
Farinata is zsthetically beautiful, and nothing but
beautiful : if, in addition, the force of will of this
personage appear sublime, or the expression that
Dante gives him, by reason of his great genius,
seem sublime by comparison with that of a less
energetic poet, all this is not a matter for zsthetic
consideration. This consists always and only in


adequation to truth; that is, in beauty.


XITI


THE SO-CALLED PHYSICALLY BEAUTIFUL IN
NATURE: AND ARE


ESTHETIC activity is distinct from practical -Zseric


activity and


activity, but when it expresses itself is always pbs
accompanied by practical activity. Hence its
utilitarian or hedonistic side, and the pleasure

and pain, which are, as it were, the practical

echo of esthetic values and disvalues, of the
beautiful and of the ugly. But this practical

side of the esthetic activity has also, in its turn,

a physical or psychophysical accompaniment, which
consists of sounds, tones, movements, combinations

of lines and colours, and so on.

Does it veally possess this side, or does it only
seem to possess it, as the result of the construction ©
which we raise in physical science, and of the use-
ful and arbitrary methods, which we have shown
to be proper to the empirical and abstract sciences?
Our reply cannot be doubtful, that is, it cannot be


affirmative as to the first of the two hypotheses.
153


Expresston tn
the esthetic
Sense, and
expresston in
the naturalistic
SENSE.


154 THEORY OF 75 Pee 11 XIII


However, it will be better to leave it at this
point in suspense, for it is not at present necessary
to prosecute this line of inquiry any further.
The mention already made must suffice to prevent
our having spoken of the physical element as of
something objective and existing, for reasons of
simplicity and adhesion to ordinary language,
from leading to hasty conclusions as to the con-
cepts and the connexion between spirit and
nature. |

It is important to make clear that as the exist-
ence of the hedonistic side in every spiritual
activity has given rise to the confusion between
the esthetic activity and the useful or pleasurable,
so the existence, or, better, the possibility of
constructing this physical side, has generated the
confusion between esthetic expression and ex-
pression zz the naturalistic sense; between a
spiritual fact, that is to say, and a mechanical and
passive fact (not to say, between a concrete reality
and an abstraction or fiction). Incommon speech,
sometimes it is the words of the poet that are
called expresszons, the notes of the musician, or
the figures of the painter; sometimes the blush
which is wont to accompany the feeling of shame,
the pallor resulting from fear, the grinding of the
teeth proper to violent anger, the glittering of


af NATURE AND ART 155


the eyes, and certain movements of the muscles
of the mouth, which reveal cheerfulness. A
certain degree of heat is also said to be the
expression of fever, as the falling of the barometer
is of rain, and even that the height of the rate of
exchange expresses the discredit of the paper-
money of a State, or social discontent the
approach of a revolution. One can well imagine
what sort of scientific results would be attained
by allowing oneself to be governed by linguistic
usage and placing in one sheaf facts so widely
different. But there is, in fact, an abyss between
a man who is the prey of anger with all its natural
manifestations, and another man who expresses it
eesthetically ; between the aspect, the cries, and
the contortions of one who is tortured with sorrow
at the loss of a dear one, and the words or song
with which the same individual portrays his torture
at another moment; between the distortion of
emotion and the gesture of the actor. Darwin’s
book on the expression of the feelings in man
and animals does not belong to A¢sthetic ; because
there is nothing in common between the science
of spiritual expression and a Semzzotzc, whether it
be medical, meteorological, political, physiognomic,
or chiromantic.


| Expression in the naturalistic sense simply


i


Intuitions and
memory.


156 TOA EORY-OE fs hE Me XIII


jlacks expression in the spiritual sense, that is to
say, the characteristic itself of activity and of
‘spirituality, and therefore the bipartition into
‘poles of beauty and of ugliness. It is nothing
more than a relation between cause and effect,
fixed by the abstract intellect. The complete
process of esthetic production can be symbol-
ized in four steps, which are: a, impressions;
6, expression or spiritual esthetic synthesis ;
c, hedonistic accompaniment, or pleasure of the
beautiful (asthetic pleasure); d@, translation of
the esthetic fact into physical phenomena (sounds,
tones, movements, combinations of lines and
colours, etc.). Anyone can see that the capital
point, the only one that is properly speaking
esthetic and truly real, is in that 4, which is
lacking to the mere manifestation or natural-
istic construction, metaphorically also called
expression.

The expressive process is exhausted when
those four steps have been taken. It begins
again with new impressions, a new esthetic
synthesis, and relative accompaniments.

Expressions or representations follow and
expel one another. Certainly, this passing away,
this disassociation, is not perishing, it is not total


elimination: nothing of what is born dies with


XII Nea CCE oN) OAR 157


that complete death which would be identical
with never having been born. Though all things
pass away, yet none can die. The representations
which we have forgotten, also persist in some
way in our spirit, for without them we could not
explain acquired habits and capacities. Thus,
the strength of life lies in this apparent for-
getting: one forgets what has been absorbed
and what life has superseded.

But many other things, many other repre-
sentations, are still efficacious elements in the
actual processes of our spirit ; and it is incumbent
on us not to forget them, or to be capable of
recalling them when necessity demands them.
The will is always vigilant in this work of
preservation, for it aims at preserving (so to
say) the greater and more fundamental part
of all our riches. Certainly its vigilance is not
always sufficient. Memory, we know, leaves or
betrays us in various ways. For this very
reason, the vigilant will excogitates expedients,
which help memory in its weakness, and are
its azds.

We have already explained how these aids are
possible. Expressions or representations are, at
the same time, practical facts, which are also


called physical facts, in so far as to the physical


The production
of atds
fo memory.


158 APB ORY OP Aes pine are XIII


belongs the task of classifying them and reducing
them to types. Now it is clear, that if we can
succeed in making those facts in some way
permanent, it will always be possible (other
conditions remaining equal) to reproduce in us,
by perceiving it, the already produced expression
or intuition.

If that in which the practical concomitant
acts, or (to use physical terms) the movements
have been isolated and made in some sort
permanent, be called the object or physical
stimulus, and if it be designated by the letter e¢ ;
then the process of reproduction will take place
in the following order: e, the physical stimulus ;
ad-b, perceptions of physical facts (sounds, tones,
mimic, combinations of lines and colours, etc.),
which form together the esthetic synthesis,
already produced; ¢, the hedonistic accom-
paniment, which is also reproduced.

And what are those combinations of words
which are called poetry, prose, poems, novels,
romances, tragedies or comedies, but jphyszcal
stimulants of reproduction (the e stage); what
are those combinations of sound which are called
operas, symphonies, sonatas; and what those of
lines and of colours, which are called pictures,


statues, architecture? The spiritual energy of


XIII NATURE AND ART 159


memory, with the assistance of those physical
facts above mentioned, makes possible the pre-
servation and the reproduction of the intuitions
produced, often so laboriously, by ourselves and
by others. If the physiological organism, and with
it memory, become weakened ; if the monuments
of art be destroyed ; then all the esthetic wealth,
the fruit of the labours of many generations,
becomes lessened and rapidly disappears.

Monuments of art, which are the stimulants 71¢ paysicauly
of zsthetic reproduction, are called Jdcautzful pe
things or the physiwally beautiful. This com-
bination of words constitutes a verbal paradox,
because the beautiful is not a physical fact; it
does not belong to things, but to the activity _
of man, to spiritual energy. But henceforth it
is clear through what wanderings and what
abbreviations, physical things and facts, which
are simply aids to the reproduction of the
beautiful, end by being called,  elliptically,
beautiful things and physically beautiful. And
now that we have made the existence of this
ellipse clear, we shall ourselves make use of it
without hesitation.

The intervention of the physically beautiful content and
serves to explain another meaning of the words siete


content and forn, as employed by estheticians,


160 THeORY OF ESP r Fie XIII


Some call “content” the internal fact or ex-
pression (which is for us already form), and they
call “form” the marble, the colours, the rhythm,
the sounds (for us form no longer); thus they
look upon the physical fact as the form, which
may or may not be joined to the content. This
serves to explain another aspect of what is called
zesthetic ugliness. He who has nothing definite
to express may try to hide his internal emptiness
with a flood of words, with sounding verse, with
deafening polyphony, with painting that dazzles
the eye, or by collocating great architectonic
masses, which arrest and disturb, although, at
bottom, they convey nothing. Ugliness, then,
is the arbitrary, the charlatanesque; and, in
reality, if the practical will do not intervene in
the theoretic function, there may be absence of
beauty, but never effective presence of the ugly.


Natural and Physical beauty is wont to be divided into
artificial : :
beauty. natural and artificial beauty. Thus we reach


one of the facts, which has given great labour to
thinkers: the beautiful in nature. These words
often designate simply facts of practical pleasure.
He alludes to nothing esthetic who calls a land-
scape beautiful where the eye rests upon verdure,
where bodily motion is easy, and where the warm


sun-ray envelops and caresses the limbs. But


XIII WA bURE AND ART 161


it is nevertheless indubitable, that on other
occasions the adjective ‘“ beautiful,” applied to
objects and scenes existing in nature, has a com-
pletely aesthetic signification.

It has been observed, that in order to enjoy
natural objects esthetically, we should withdraw
them from their external and _ historical reality,
and separate their simple appearance or origin
‘from existence ; that if we contemplate a land-
scape with our head between our legs, in such
a way as to remove ourselves from our wonted
relations with it, the landscape appears as an
ideal spectacle ; that nature is beautiful only for
him who contemplates her wth the eye of the
artist; that zoologists and botanists do not
recognize beautiful animals and flowers; that
natural beauty is a@zscovered (and examples of
discovery are the points of view, pointed out by
men of taste and imagination, and to which more
or less zsthetic travellers and excursionists
afterwards have recourse in pilgrimage, whence
a more or less collective suggestion); that,
without the azd of the imagination, no part of
nature is beautiful, and that with such aid the
same natural object or fact is now expressive,
according to the disposition of the soul, now


insignificant, now expressive of one definite
M


162 TEE ORY OP (4.5 borate XII


thing, now of another, sad or glad, sublime or
ridiculous, sweet or laughable; finally, that
natural beauty, which an artist would not ¢o some
extent correct, does not exist.

All these observations are most just, and
confirm the fact that natural beauty is simply
a stzmulus to esthetic reproduction, which pre-
supposes previous production. Without pre-
ceding esthetic intuitions of the imagination,
nature cannot arouse any at all. As regards
natural beauty, man is like the mythical Nar-
cissus at the fountain. They show further that
since this stimulus is accidental, it is, for the most
part, imperfect or equivocal. Leopardi said that
natural beauty is “rare, scattered, and fugitive.”
Every one refers the natural fact to the expression
which is in his mind. One artist is, as it were,
carried away by a laughing landscape, another
by a rag-shop, another by the pretty face of a
young girl, another by the squalid countenance
of an old ruffian. Perhaps the first will say that
the rag-shop and the ugly face of the old ruffian
are disgusting; the second, that the laughing
landscape and the face of the young girl are
insipid. They may dispute for ever; but they
will never agree, save when they have supplied


themselves with a _ sufficient dose of zsthetic


XIII NATURE AND ART 163


knowledge, which will enable them to recognize
that they are both right. <Artzfczal beauty,
created by man, is a much more ductile and
efficacious aid to reproduction.

In addition to these two classes, zstheticians
also sometimes talk in their treatises of a mzxed
beauty. Of what is it a mixture? Just of natural
and artificial Whoso fixes and _ externalizes,
operates with natural materials, which he does not
create, but combines andtransforms. In this sense,
every artificial product is a mixture of nature and
artifice; and there would be no occasion to
speak of a mixed beauty, as of a special category.
But it happens that, in certain cases, combinations
already given in nature can be used a great deal
more than in others; as, for instance, when we
design a beautiful garden and include in our
design groups of trees or ponds which are
already there. On other occasions externalization
is limited by the impossibility of producing certain
effects artificially. Thus we may mix the
colouring matters, but we cannot create a power-
ful voice or a personage and an appearance
appropriate to this or that personage of a drama.
We must therefore seek for them among things
already existing, and make use of them when
we find them. When, therefore, we adopt a


Mixed beauty.


Writt 195.


164 PHEORY OF AS EEE lie XIII


great number of combinations already existing
in nature, such as we should not be able to
produce artificially if they did not exist, the
result is called mzxed beauty.

We must distinguish from artificial beauty
those instruments of reproduction called wrztzngs,
such as alphabets, musical notes, hieroglyphics, and
all pseudo-languages, from the language of flowers
and flags, to the language of patches (so much the
vogue in the society of the eighteenth century).
Writings are not physical facts which arouse
directly impressions answering to esthetic
expressions ; they are simple zxdzcatzons of what
must be done in order to produce such physical
facts. A Series of oraphic sions serves. to
remind us of the movements which we must
execute with our vocal apparatus in order to
emit certain definite sounds. If, through practice, |
we become able to hear the words without
opening our mouths and (what is much more.
difficult) to hear the sounds by running the eye
down the page of the music, all this does not
alter anything of the nature of the writings, which
are altogether different from direct physical
beauty. No one calls the book which contains
the Dzvine Comedy, or the portfolio which contains


Don Giovanni, beautiful in the same sense as the


X11 WATUKE AND ART 165


block of marble which contains Michael Angelo’s
Moses, or the piece of coloured wood which con-
tains the 7vanusfiguration are metaphorically called
beautiful. Both serve for the reproduction of the
beautiful, but the former by a far longer and far
more indirect route than the latter.

Another division of the beautiful, which is 7%e teautiful

as free and not

still found in treatises, is that into free and not sre.

ree. By beauties that are not free, are under-

stood those objects which have to serve a double

purpose, extra-zsthetic and esthetic (stimulants

of intuitions); and since it appears that the first

purpose limits and impedes the second, the

beautiful object resulting therefrom has been
considered as a beauty that is not free.

Architectural works are especially cited; and
precisely for this reason, has architecture often
been excluded from the number of the so-called
fine arts. A temple must be above all things
adapted to the use of a cult; a house must contain
all the rooms requisite for commodity of living, and
they must be arranged with a view to this com-
modity ; a fortress must be a construction capable
of resisting the attacks of certain armies and the
blows of certain instruments of war. It is there-
fore held that the architect’s field is limited: he


may be able to emdellish to some extent the


Critiygue of the
beautiful that
zs not free.


166 EHEORY OF 7STHE IG XIII


temple, the house, the fortress; but his hands
are bound by the oé7ect of these buildings, and he
can only manifest that part of his vision of beauty
in their construction which does not impair their
extrinsic, but fundamental, objects.

Other examples are taken from what is called
art applied to industry. Plates, glasses, knives,
guns, and combs can be made beautiful ; but it is
held that their beauty must not so far exceed as
to prevent our eating from the plate, drinking
from the glass, cutting with the knife, firing off
the gun, or combing one’s hair with the comb.
The same is said of the art of printing: a book
should be beautiful, but not to the extent of its
being difficult or impossible to read it.

In respect to all this, we must observe, in the
first place, that the external purpose, precisely
because it is such, does not of necessity limit or
trammel the other purpose of being a stimulus to
esthetic reproduction. Nothing, therefore, can be
more erroneous than the thesis that architecture, for
example, is by its nature not free and imperfect,
since it must also fulfil other practical objects.
Beautiful architectural works, however, themselves
undertake to deny this by their simple presence.

In the second place, not only are the two


objects not necessarily in opposition; but, we


XIII NATURE AND ART 167


must add, the artist always has the means of
preventing this contradiction from taking place.
In what way? By taking, as the material of his
intuition and esthetic externalization, precisely
the destination of the object, which serves a
practical end. He will not need to add anything


to the object, in order to make it the instrument


of esthetic intuitions: it will be so, if perfectly |


adapted to its practical purpose. Rustic dwellings


and palaces, churches and barracks, swords and !


sd


ploughs, are beautiful, not in so far as they are |


embellished and adorned, but in so far as they |


express the purpose for which they were made. |


A garment is only beautiful because it is quite
suitable to a given person in given conditions.
The sword bound to the side of the warrior
Rinaldo by the amorous Armida was not beautiful :
‘“so adorned that it seemed a useless ornament,
not the warlike instrument of a warrior.” It was
beautiful, if you will, in the eyes and imagination
of the sorceress, who loved her lover in this
effeminate way. The esthetic fact can always
accompany the practical fact, because expression
is truth.

It cannot, however, be denied that esthetic con-
templation sometimes hinders practical use. For


instance, it is a quite common experience to find


The stimulants
of production.


168 THEORY OF ASTHETC XII


certain new things so well adapted to their purpose,
and yet so beautiful, that people occasionally feel
scruples in maltreating them by using after con-
templating them, which amounts to consuming
them. It was for this reason that King Frederick
William of Prussia evinced repugnance to ordering
his magnificent grenadiers, so well suited for war,
to endure the strain of battle; but his less
zsthetic son, Frederick the Great, obtained from
them excellent services.

It might be objected to the explanation of the
physically beautiful as a simple adjunct for the
reproduction of the internally beautiful, that is
to say, of expressions, that the artist creates his
expressions by painting or by sculpturing, by
writing or by composing, and that therefore the
physically beautiful, instead of following, some-
times precedes the esthetically beautiful. This
would be a somewhat superficial mode of under-
standing the procedure of the artist, who never
makes a stroke with his brush without having
previously seen it with his imagination; and if
he has not yet seen it, he will make the stroke,
not in order to externalize his expression (which
does not yet exist), but as though to have a rally-
ing point for ulterior meditation and for internal


concentration. The physical point on which he


ee


Sen et nL ee ae ee


i NATURE AND ART 169


leans is not the physically beautiful, instrument of
_ reproduction, but what may be called a pedagogic
means, similar to retiring into solitude, or to the
many other expedients, frequently very strange,
adopted by artists and philosophers, who vary
in these according to their various idiosyncrasies.
The old esthetician Baumgarten advised poets
to ride on horseback, as a means of inspiration,
to drink wine in moderation, and (provided they


were chaste) to look at beautiful women.


Critique of
@sthetic -
associationism


XIV


MISTAKES ARISING FROM THE CONFUSION
BETWEEN PHYSIC AND ASTHETIC


Ir is necessary to mention a series of scientific
mistakes which have arisen from the failure to
understand the purely external relation between
the ‘zsthetic fact or artistic vision, and the
physical fact or instrument, which serves as an
aid to reproduce it. We must here indicate the
proper criticism, which derives from what has
already been said.

That form of associationism which identifies
the esthetic fact with the assoczation of two
images finds a place among these errors. By
what path has it been possible to arrive at
such a mistake, against which our esthetic con-
sciousness, which is a consciousness of perfect
unity, never of duality, rebels? Just because
the physical and the esthetic facts have been
considered separately, as two distinct images,


which enter the spirit, the one drawn forth from
170


inineamet
PURE OM ney Fs) Iya


XIV PEYoIGC AND 7S tik Pic 171


the other, the one first and the other afterwards.
A picture is divided into the image of the picture
and the image of the meaning of the picture;
a poem, into the image of the words and the
image of the meaning of the words. But this
dualism of images is non-existent: the physical
fact does not enter the spirit as an image, but
causes the reproduction of the image (the only
image, which is the esthetic fact), in so far as
it blindly stimulates the psychic organism and
produces an impression answering to the esthetic
expression already produced.

The efforts of the associationists (the usurpers
of to-day. in the field of A¢sthetic) to emerge
from the difficulty, and to reaffirm in some way
the unity which has been destroyed by their
principle of associationism, are highly instruc-
tive. Some maintain that the image called
back again is unconscious; others, leaving un-
consciousness alone, hold that, on the contrary,
it is vague, vaporous, confused, thus reducing the
force of the esthetic fact to the weakness of bad
memory. But the dilemma is inexorable: either
keep association and give up unity, or keep unity
and give up association. No third way out of
the difficulty exists.

From the failure to analyze so-called natural


172 THEORY OF AS Eire tie XIV


Critique of _ beauty thoroughly, and to recognize that it is

cepa simply an incident of zsthetic reproduction, and
from having, on the contrary, looked upon it as
given in nature, is derived all that portion of
treatises upon Aésthetic which is entitled Zhe
Beautiful in Nature or A:sthetic Physic; some-
times even subdivided, save the mark! into
“Esthetic Mineralogy, Botany, and Zoology. We
do not wish to deny that such treatises contain
many just remarks, and are sometimes them-
selves works of art, in so far as they represent
beautifully the imaginings and fantasies, that is
the impressions, of their authors. But we must
state that it is scientifically false to ask oneself
if the dog be beautiful, and the ornithorhynchus
ugly ; if the lily be beautiful, and the artichoke
ugly. Indeed, the error is here double. On one
hand, zsthetic Physic falls back inte the
equivoke of the theory of artistic and literary !
classes, by attempting to determine esthetically_
the abstractions of our intellect; on the other,
fails to recognize, as we said, the true formation
of so-called natural beauty; for which the
question as to whether some given individual
animal, flower, or man be beautiful or ugly, is
altogether excluded. What is not produced by


the esthetic spirit, or cannot be referred to it,


XIV bavole-AND 25 AE Vic EDS


is neither beautiful nor ugly. The esthetic
process arises from the ideal relations in which
natural objects are arranged.

The double error can be exemplified by the
question, upon which whole volumes have been
written, as to the Beauty of the human body.
Here it is necessary, above all things, to urge
those who discuss this subject from the abstract
toward the concrete, by asking: “What do you
mean by the human body, that of the male, of
the female, or of the androgyne?” Let us
assume that they reply by dividing the inquiry into
two distinct inquiries, as to the virile and feminine
beauty (there really are writers who seriously
discuss whether man or woman is the more
beautiful) ; and let us continue: “Masculine or
feminine beauty; but of what race of men—the
white, the yellow, or the black, and whatever others
there may be, according to the division of races ?”
Let us assume that they limit themselves to the
white race, and let us continue: “What sub-
species of the white race?”” And when we have
restricted them gradually to one section of the
white world, that is to say, to the Italian, Tuscan,
Siennese, or Porta Camollia section, we will
continue: ‘Very good; but at what age of the
human body, and in what condition and state of


Critique of the
theory of the
beauty of the
human body.


174 THEORY OF ASSTHETIC ie


development—that of the new-born babe, of the
child, of the boy, of the adolescent, of the man of
middle age, and so on? and is the man at rest
or at work, or is he occupied as is Paul Potter’s
cow, or the Ganymede of Rembrandt ?”

Having thus arrived, by successive reductions,
at the individual omnimode determinatum, or,
better, at the man pointed out with the finger, it
will be easy to expose the other error, by recalling
what has been said about the natural fact, which is
now beautiful, now ugly, according to the point
of view, according to what is passing in the mind
of the artist. Finally, if the Gulf of Naples have
its detractors, and if there be artists who declare
it inexpressive, preferring the “gloomy firs,”
the “clouds and perpetual north winds,” of the
northern seas ; let it be believed, if possible, that
such relativity does not exist for the human body,
source of the most various suggestions !

Critique of The question of the Jdeauty of geometrical


the beauty of ; : : ae
geometric figures is connected with esthetic Physic. But


ae if by geometrical figures be understood the
concepts of geometry, the concept of the triangle,
the square, the cone, these are neither beautiful
nor ugly: they are concepts. If, on the other
hand, by such figures be understood bodies which


possess definite geometrical forms, these will be


XIV Private yi io Line dt 175


ugly or beautiful, like every natural fact, according
to the ideal connexions in which they are placed.
Some hold that those geometrical figures are
beautiful which point upwards, since they give the
suggestion of firmness and of force. It is not
denied that such may be the case. But neither
must it be denied that those also which give the
impression of instability and of being crushed
down may possess their beauty, where they
represent just the ill-formed and the crushed;
and that in these last cases the firmness of the
straight line and the lightness of the cone or of
the equilateral triangle would, on the contrary,
seem elements of ugliness.

Certainly, such questions as to the beauty of
nature and the beauty of geometry, like the others
analogous of the historically beautiful and of
human beauty, seem less absurd in the A¢sthetic
of the sympathetic, which means, at bottom, by the
words “esthetic beauty” the representation of what
is pleasing. But the pretension to determine
scientifically what are the sympathetic contents,
and what are the irremediably antipathetic,
is none the less erroneous, even in the sphere
of that doctrine and after the laying down of those
premises. One can only answer such questions


by repeating with an infinitely long postscript the


176 PMB ORN OF AIST EAlc XIV


Sunt quos of the first ode of the first book of
Horace, and the Havuz cht of Leopardi’s letter
to Carlo Pepol. lo each man_his_ beautiful
(=sympathetic), as to each man his fair one.
Philography is not a science.

Critique of The artist sometimes has naturally existing


another aspect


yp A saleia facts before him, in producing the artificial instru-
ment, or physically beautiful. These are called
his zodels: bodies, stuffs, flowers, and so on.
Let us run over the sketches, the studies, and
the notes of the artists: Leonardo noted down
in his pocket-book, when he was working on the
Last Supper: ‘‘Giovannina, fantastic appearance,
is at St. Catherine’s, at the Hospital; Cristofano
di Castiglione is at the Pieta, he has a fine head ;
Christ, Giovan Conte, is of the suite of Cardinal
Mortaro.” And so on. From this comes the
illusion that the artist z7ztfates nature; when it


would perhaps be more exact to say that nature


i


imitates the artist, and obeys him. The theory
that art zmitates nature has sometimes been
grounded upon and found sustenance in this
illusion, as also its variant, more easily to be de-
fended, which makes art the zdealzer of nature.
This last theory presents the process in a dis-
orderly manner, indeed inversely to the true


order; for the artist does not proceed from


ee PHYSIC-ANIY SSTHETIC. 175


extrinsic reality, in order to modify it by ap-
proaching it to the ideal; but he proceeds from
the impression of external nature to expression,
that is to say, to his ideal, and from this he passes
to the natural fact, which he employs as the
instrument of reproduction of the ideal fact.

Another consequence of the confusion between Critijue of the

the zsthetic and the physical fact is the theory Sloe siry
of the elementary forms of the beautiful, Lf beantijul
expression, if the beautiful, be indivisible, the
physical fact, in which it externalizes itself, can
well be divided and subdivided: for example,
a painted surface, into lines and colours, groups
and curves of lines, kinds of colours, and so on;
a poem, into strophes, verses, feet, syllables; a
piece of prose, into chapters, paragraphs, headings,
periods, phrases, words, and so on. The parts
thus obtained are not esthetic facts, but smaller
physical facts, cut up in an arbitrary manner.
If this path were followed, and the confusion
persisted in, we should end by concluding that
the true forms of the beautiful are atoms.

The esthetic law, several times promulgated,
that beauty must have dz/k, could be invoked
against the atoms. It cannot be the impercepti-
bility of the too small, nor the unapprehensibility


of the too large. But a bigness which depends
N


178 THEORY OF 7S TEE bie XIV


upon perceptibility, not measurement, derives


Critique of the


search for the
objective con-
ditions of the
beautiful.


from a concept widely different from the mathe-
matical. For what is called imperceptible and
incomprehensible does not produce an impression,
because it is not a real fact, but a concept: the
requisite of bulk in the beautiful is thus reduced
to the effective reality of the physical fact, which
serves for the reproduction of the beautiful.
Continuing the search for the physical laws
or for the objective conditions of the beautiful,
it has been asked: To what physical facts does
the beautiful correspond? To what the ugly?
To what unions of tones, colours, sizes, mathe-
matically determinable? Such inquiries are as
if in Political Economy one were to seek for the
laws of exchange in the physical nature of the
objects exchanged. The constant infecundity of
the attempt should have at once given rise to some
suspicion as to its vanity. In our times, especially,
has the necessity for an zzductzve A‘sthetic been
often proclaimed, of an Atsthetic starting from
below, which should proceed like natural science
and not hasten its conclusions. Inductive? But
Esthetic has always been both inductive and
deductive, like every philosophical science; in-
duction and deduction cannot be separated, nor


can they separately avail to characterize a true


XIV Priv orCGeaN Dy Ato HE TiC 179


science. But the word “inductive” was not
here pronounced accidentally and without special
intention. It was wished to imply by its use
that the zsthetic fact is nothing, at bottom, but
a physical fact, which should be studied by
applying to it the methods proper to the physical
and natural sciences. With such a presupposition
and in such a faith did inductive A#sthetic
or fEsthetic of the inferior (what pride in this
modesty!) begin its labours. It has conscien-
tiously begun by making a collection of deazteful
things, for example of a great number of envelopes
of various shapes and sizes, and has asked which
of these give the impression of the beautiful and
which of the ugly. As was to be expected, the
inductive zstheticians speedily found themselves
in a difficulty, for the same objects that appeared
ugly in one aspect would appear beautiful in
another. A yellow, coarse envelope, which
would be extremely ugly for the purpose of
enclosing a love-letter, is, however, just what is
wanted for a writ served by process on stamped
paper. This in its turn would look very bad,
Or seei at any tate an irony, if enclosed in a
square English envelope. Such considerations
of simple common sense should have sufficed to


convince inductive zstheticians, that the beautiful


Astrology of
“Esthetic.


180 eo ORY OF Aso) HE Te XIV


has no physical existence, and cause them to
remit their vain and ridiculous quest. But no:
they have had recourse to an expedient, as to
which we would find it difficult to say how far
it belongs to natural science. They have sent
their envelopes round from one to the other and
opened a referendum, thus striving to decide by
the votes of the majority in what consists the
beautiful and the ugly.

We will not waste time over this argument,
because we should seem to be turning ourselves
into narrators of comic anecdotes rather than
expositors of aesthetic science and of its problems.
It is an actual fact, that the inductive zestheticians
have not yet discovered one single law.

He who dispenses with doctors is prone to
abandon himself to charlatans. Thus it has
befallen those who have believed in the natural
laws of the beautiful. Artists sometimes adopt
empirical canons, such as that of the proportions
of the human body, or of the golden section, that
is to say, of a line divided into two parts in such
a manner that the less is to the greater as is
the greater to the whole line (d¢:ac=ac: ad).
Such canons easily become their superstitions,
and they attribute to such the success of their
works. Thus Michael Angelo left as a precept


0 a ea


XIV Plt eo IN et el Ba 181


to his disciple Marco del Pino of Siena that “he
should always make a_ pyramidal serpentine
figure multiplied by one, two, three,” a precept
which did not enable Marco di Siena to emerge
from that mediocrity which we can yet observe
in his many works, here in Naples. Others
extracted from the sayings of Michael Angelo the
precept that serpentine undulating lines were the
true /zxes of beauty. Whole volumes have been
composed on these laws of beauty, on the golden
section and on the undulating and serpentine
lines. These should in our opinion be looked


upon as the astrology of £sthette.


The practical
activity of ex-
ternalization.


XV


THE ACTIVITY OF EXTERNALIZATION, TECHNIQUE
AND THE THEORY OF THE ARTS


Tue fact of the production of the physically
beautiful implies, as has already been remarked,
a vigilant will, which “persists in not allowing
certain visions, intuitions, or representations, to
be lost. Such a will must be able to act with the
utmost rapidity, and as it were instinctively, and
also be capable of long and laborious delibera-
tions. Thus and only thus does the practical
activity enter into relations with the esthetic,
that is to say, in effecting the production of
physical objects, which are aids to memory.
Here it is not merely a concomitant, but really
a distinct moment of the esthetic activity. We
[cannot will or not will our zsthetic vision: we
can, however, will or not will to externalize it,
lor better, to preserve and communicate, or not,
‘to others, the externalization produced.


This volitional fact of externalization is pre-
182


xv TECHNIQUE AND THE ARTS 183


ceded by a complex of various kinds of knowledge.
These are known as ¢echniques, like all knowledge
which precedes the practical activity. Thus we
talk of an artistic technique in the same meta-
phorical and elliptic manner that we talk of the
physically beautiful, that is to say (in more precise
language), Anowledge employed by the practical
{ activity engaged in producing stimuli to esthetw
reproduction. In place of employing so lengthy
a phrase, we shall here avail ourselves of the
vulgar terminology, since we are henceforward
aware of its true meaning.

The possibility of this technical knowledge,
at the service of artistic reproduction, has caused
people to imagine the existence of an esthetic
technique of internal expression, which is tanta-
mount to saying, a doctrine of the means of
internal expression, which is altogether incon-
ceivable. And we know well the reason why it
is inconceivable ; expression, considered in itself,
is primary theoretic activity, and, in so far as
it is this, it precedes the practical activity and
the intellectual knowledge which illumines the
practical activity, and is thus independent
alike of the one and of the other. It also
helps to illumine the ‘practical activity, but 1s


not illuminated by it. Expression does not


The technique
of externaliza-
tion.


184 PHEORY, OF Pot tale xv


employ means, because it has not an exd; it has
intuitions of things, but does not will them, and
is thus indivisible into means and end. Thus if
it be said, as sometimes is the case, that a certain
writer has invented a new technique of fiction
or of drama, or that a painter has discovered a
new mode of distribution of light, the word is
used in a false sense; because the so-called
new technique 1s really that romance ttself, or
that new picture itself. The distribution of light
belongs to the vision itself of the picture; as
the technique of a dramatist is his dramatic
conception itself. On other occasions, the word
“technique” is used to designate certain merits
or defects in a work which is a failure; and it
is said, euphemistically, that the conception is
bad, but the technique good, or that the concep-
tion is good, and the technique bad.

On the other hand, when the different ways
of painting in oils, or of etching, or of sculptur-
ing in alabaster, are discussed, then the word
“technique” is in its place; but in such a case
the adjective “artistic” is used metaphorically.
And if a dramatic technique in the artistic sense
be impossible, a theatrical technique is not
impossible, that is to say, processes of ex-


ternalization of certain given zsthetic works.


mo LECH INIOUE AND [HE ARTS 185


When, for instance, women were introduced
on the stage in Italy in the second half of
the sixteenth century, in place of men dressed
as women, this was a true and real discovery
in theatrical technique ; such too was the perfect-
ing in the following century by the impresarios
of Venice, of machines for the rapid changing
of the scenes.
The collection of technical knowledge at the 7%e tieoreric


. a ‘ Bae _ techniques of
service of artists desirous of externalizing their “e idividuad


expressions, can be divided into groups, which -
may be entitled ¢heortes of the arts. Thus is
born a theory of Architecture, comprising
mechanical laws, information relating to the
weight or to the resistance of the materials of
construction or of fortification, manuals relating
to the method of mixing chalk or stucco; a
theory of Sculpture, containing advice as to
the instruments to be used for sculpturing the
various sorts of stone, for obtaining a successful
fusion of bronze, for working with the chisel,
for the exact copying of the model in chalk or
plaster, for keeping chalk damp; a theory of
Painting, on the various techniques of tempera,
of oil-painting, of water-colour, of pastel, on
the proportions of the human body, on the
laws of perspective; a theory of Oratory, with


186 THEORY OF ASTHETIC a


precepts as to the method of producing, of
exercising and of strengthening the voice, of
mimic and gesture; a theory of Music, on the
combinations and fusions of tones and sounds;
and so on. Such collections of precepts abound
in all literatures. And since it soon becomes
impossible to say what is useful and what useless
to know, books of this sort become very often a
sort of encyclopedias or catalogues of desiderata.
Vitruvius, in his treatise on Architecture, claims
for the architect a knowledge of letters, of
drawing, of geometry, of arithmetic, of optic,
of history, of natural and moral philosophy,
of jurisprudence, of medicine, of astrology, of
music; and so on. Everyeune is. wor
knowing: learn the art and lay it aside.

It should be evident that such empirical
collections are not reducible to a science. They
are composed of notions, taken from various
sciences and teachings, and their philosophical
and scientific principles are to be found in them.
To undertake the construction of a scientific
theory of the different arts, would be to wish
to reduce to the single and homogeneous what
is by nature multiple and heterogeneous; to
wish to destroy the existence as a collection of


what was put together precisely to form a


x TECHNIQUE AND THE ARTS 187


collection. Were we to give a scientific form
to the manuals of the architect, the painter, or
the musician, it is clear that nothing would
remain in our hands but the general prin-
ciples of Mechanic, Optic, or Acoustic. Or if
the especially artistic observations disseminated
through it be extracted and isolated, and a
science be made of them, then the sphere of
the individual art is deserted and that of
“Esthetic entered upon, for A%sthetic is always
general A‘sthetic, or better, it cannot be divided
into general and special. This last case (that
is, the attempt to furnish a technique of
Esthetic) is found, when men possessing strong
scientific instincts and a natural tendency to
philosophy, set themselves to work to produce
such theories and technical manuals.
But the confusion between Physic and Atsthetic critique of


the esthetic
has attained to its highest degree, when xsthetic “eaves of te


individual


theories of the different arts are imagined, to 7”


7


answer such questions as: What are the /zmzts
of each art? What can be represented with
colours, and what with sounds? What with
simple monochromatic lines, and what with
touches of various colours? What with notes,
and what with metres and rhymes? What are


the limits between the figurative and the


Critique of the
classifications
of the arts.


188 Tih ORY OF 2S Tir pte xv


auditional arts, between painting and sculpture,
poetry and music?

This, translated into scientific language, is
tantamount to asking: What is the connexion
between Acoustic and esthetic expression?
What between the latter and Optic ?—and
the like. Now, if there zs no passage from the
physical fact to the esthetic, how could there
be from the esthetic to particular groups of
esthetic facts, such as the phenomena of Optic
or of Acoustic ? :

The things called Avts have no esthetic
limits, because, in order to have them, they
would need to have also esthetic existence ;
and we have demonstrated the altogether
empirical genesis of those divisions. Con-
sequently, any attempt at an esthetic classifica-
tion of the arts is absurd. If they be without
limits, they are not exactly determinable, and
consequently cannot be philosophically classified.
All the books dealing with classifications and
systems of the arts could be burned without
any loss whatever. (We say this with the
utmost respect to the writers who have expended
their labours upon them.)

The impossibility of such classifications finds,
as it were, its proof in the strange methods to which


oe eC NOU AND “Tri ARTS 139


recourse has been had to carry them out. The
first and most common classification is that into
arts of hearing, sight, and zmagination ; as if eyes,
ears, and imagination were on the same level, and
could be deduced from the same logical variable,
as foundation of the division. Others have
proposed the division into arts of space and tince,
and arts of vest and motion; as if the concepts
of space, time, rest, and motion could determine
special esthetic forms, or have anything in
common with art as such. Finally, others have
amused themselves by dividing them into classzc
and romantic, or into ortental, classic, and romantic,
thereby conferring the value of scientific concepts
on simple historical denominations, or adopting
those pretended partitions of expressive forms,
already criticized above; or by talking of arts
that can only be seen from one side, like painting,
and of arts that can be seen from all sides,
like sculpture—and similar extravagances, which
exist neither in heaven nor on the earth.

The theory of the limits of the arts was,
perhaps, at the time when it was put forward,
a beneficial critical reaction against those who
believed in the possibility of the flowing of
one expression into another, as of the /dad or


of Paradise Lost into a series of paintings, and


Critique of
the theory of
the unton of
the arts.


190 TEE ORV OPPs ite ee xv


thus held a poem to be of greater or lesser
value, according as it could or could not be
translated into pictures by a painter. But if
the rebellion were reasonable and _ victorious,
this does not mean that the arguments adopted
and the theories made as required were sound.
Another theory which is a corollary to that of
the limits of the arts, falls with them; that of
the wxzzon of the arts. Granted different arts,
distinct and limited, the questions were asked:
Which is the most powerful? Do we not obtain
more powerful effects by uniting several? We
know nothing of this: we know only, in each
individual case, that certain given artistic intuitions
have need of definite physical means for their
reproduction, and that other artistic intuitions
have need of other physical means. We can
obtain the effect of certain dramas by simply
reading them ; others need declamation and scenic
display : some artistic intuitions, for their full
extrinsication, need words, song, musical instru-
ments, colours, statuary, architecture, actors;
while others are beautiful and complete in a
single delicate sweep of the pen, or with a few
strokes of the pencil. But it is false to suppose
that declamation and scenic effects, and all the


other things we have mentioned together, are


xv TECHNIQUE AND DE Nie hs -1or


more powerful than simply reading, or than the
simple stroke with the pen and with the pencil ;
because each of these facts or groups of facts has,
so to say, a different object, and the power of the
different means employed cannot be compared
when the objects are different.
Finally, it is only from the point of view of a Connexion of


the activity of
clear and rigorous distinction between the true and ¢*rvelization


proper esthetic activity, and the practical activity and moray
of externalization, that we can solve the involved

and confused questions as to the relations between

art and utility, and art and morality.

That art as art is independent alike of utility
and of morality, as also of every volitional form,
we have above demonstrated. Without this inde-
pendence, it would not be possible to speak of
an intrinsic value of art, nor indeed to conceive
an zsthetic science, which demands the autonomy
of the zsthetic fact as a necessity of its existence.

But it would be erroneous to maintain that
this independence of the vision or intuition or
internal expression of the artist should be at
once extended to the practical activity of exter-
nalization and of communication, which may or
may not follow the zsthetic fact. If art be
understood as the externalization of art, then


utility and morality have a perfect right to deal


Y


192 POIRORY On AS nea re xv


with it; that is to say, the right one possesses to
deal with one’s own household.

We do not, as a matter of fact, externalize and
fix all of the many expressions and intuitions
which we form in our mind; we do not declare
our every thought in a loud voice, or write down,
Of ptint, or draw, or colour, or expose it to
the public gaze. We select from the crowd of
intuitions which are formed or at least sketched
within us; and the selection is governed by
selection of the economic conditions of life
and of its moral direction. Therefore, when we
have formed an intuition, it remains to decide
whether or no we should communicate it to
others, and to whom, and when, and how; all
of which considerations fall equally under the
utilitarian and ethical criterion.

Thus we find the concepts of sedectzon, of the
interesting, of morality, of an educational end, of
popularity, etc., to some extent justified, although
these can in no wise be justified as imposed upon
art as art, and we have ourselves denounced them
in pure Aésthetic. Error always contains an
element of truth. He who formulated those
erroneous esthetic propositions had his eye on
practical facts, which attach themselves externally


to the zsthetic fact in economic and moral life.


we Ee CHNIOUB AND THE ARTS 193


By all means, be partisans of a yet greater
liberty in the vulgarization of the means of
esthetic reproduction; we are of the same
opinion, and let us leave the proposals for
legislative measures, and for actions to be
instigated against immoral art, to hypocrites,
to the ingenuous, and to idlers. But the pro-
clamation of this liberty, and the fixation of its
limits, how wide soever they be, is always the
affair of morality. And it would in any case be
out of place to invoke that highest principle,
that fundamentum Aésthetices, which is the
independence of art, in order to deduce from
it the guiltlessness of the artist, who, in the
externalization of his imaginings, should calculate
upon the unhealthy tastes of his readers; or that
licenses should be granted to the hawkers who
sell obscene statuettes in the streets. This last
case is the affair of the police; the first must
be brought before the tribunal of the moral
conscience. The esthetic judgment on the work
of art has nothing to do with the morality of the
artist, in so far as he is a practical man, nor with
the precautions to be taken that art may not be
employed for evil purposes alien to its essence,


which is pure theoretic contemplation.


XVI
TASTE AND THE REPRODUCTION OF ART


Esthetic Wuen the entire esthetic and externalizing

ety ith process has been completed, when a _ beautiful

duction. expression has been produced and fixed in a
definite physical material, what is meant by
judging it? To reproduce it tn oneself, answer
the critics of art, almost with one voice. Very
good. Let us try thoroughly to understand this
fact, and with that object in view, let us
represent it schematically.

The individual A is seeking the expression of
an impression, which he feels or has a presenti-
ment of, but has not yet expressed. Behold him
trying various words and phrases, which may
give the sought-for expression, which must exist,
but which he does not know. He tries the
combination #, but rejects it as unsuitable,


inexpressive, incomplete, ugly: he tries the


combination z, with a like result. Ae does not


see anything, or he does not see clearly. The
194


i TASTE AND ART 195


expression still flies from him. After other vain
attempts, during which he sometimes approaches,
sometimes leaves the sign that offers itself, all of
a sudden (almost as though formed spontaneously
of itself) he creates the sought-for expression,
and lux facta est. He enjoys for an instant
zesthetic pleasure or the pleasure of the beautiful.
The ugly, with its correlative displeasure, was the
esthetic activity, which had not succeeded in con-
quering the obstacle; the beautiful is the expres-
sive activity, which now displays itself triumphant.

We have taken this example from the domain
of speech, as being nearer and more accessible,
and because we all talk, though we do not all draw
or paint. Now if another individual, whom we
shall term B, desire to judge this expression and
fecwme, whether. it’ be. beautiful or poly, he
must of necessity place himself at A’s point of
view, and go through the whole process again,
with the help of the physical sign, supplied to
him by A. If A has seen clearly, then B (who
has placed himself at A’s point of view) will
also see clearly and will find this expression
beautiful. If A has not seen clearly, then B also
will not see clearly, and will find the expression
more or less ugly, ust as A aid.


It may be observed that we have not taken


Impossibility of INtO Consideration two other cases: that of A


divergences.


having a clear and B an obscure vision ; and that
of A having an obscure and B a clear vision.
Philosophically speaking, these two cases are
zmpossible.

Spiritual activity, precisely because it is
activity, is not acaprice, but a spiritual necessity ;
and it cannot solve a definite esthetic problem,
save in one way, which is the right way.
Doubtless certain facts may be adduced, which
appear to contradict this deduction. Thus
works which seem beautiful to artists, are judged
to be ugly by the critics; while works with
which the artists were displeased and judged
imperfect or failures, are held to be beautiful
ana periect py the ctitics,.. but tals does
not mean anything, save that one of the two
is wrong: either the critics or the artists, or in
one case the artist and in another the critic. In
fact, the producer of an expression does not
always fully realize what has happened in his
soul. Haste, vanity, want of reflexion, theoretic
prejudices, make people say, and sometimes
others almost believe, that works of ours are
beautiful, which, if we were truly to turn inwards
upon ourselves, we should see ugly, as they


really are. Thus poor Don Quixote, when he


XVI Lael eh AND AR TL rea?


had mended his helmet as well as he could with
cardboard—the helmet that had showed itself to
possess but the feeblest force of resistance at
the first encounter,—took good care not to test
it again with a well-delivered sword-thrust, but
simply declared and maintained it to be (says
the author) por celada finisima de encaxe. And
in other cases, the same reasons, or opposite but
analogous ones, trouble the consciousness of the
artist, and cause him to disapprove of what he
has successfully produced, or to strive to undo
and do again worse, what he has done well, in
his artistic spontaneity. An example of this is
the Gerusalemme congutstata. In the same way,
haste, laziness, want of reflexion, theoretic
prejudices, personal sympathies, or animosities,
and other motives of a similar sort, sometimes
cause the critics to proclaim beautiful what is
ugly, and ugly what is beautiful. Were they to“
eliminate such disturbing elements, they would
feel the work of art as it really is, and would not
leave to posterity, that more diligent and more
dispassionate judge, to award the palm, or to do
that justice, which they have refused.
if 15 clear from ‘the preceding theorem, that Identity of taste

ite judicial activity, which criticizes .and 2"
recognizes the beautiful, is identical with that


198 THEORY OF ALS Piles le XVI


which produces it. The only difference lies in
the diversity of circumstances, since in the one
case it is a question of esthetic production, in
the other of reproduction. The judicial activity
is called ¢aste; the productive activity is called
genius: genius and taste are therefore sub-
stantially zdentzcal.

The common remark, that the critic should
possess some of the genius of the artist and that
the artist should possess taste, reveals a glimpse
of this identity; or that there exists an active
(productive) taste and a passive (reproductive)
taste. Buta denial of this is contained in other
equally common remarks, as when people speak
of taste without genius, or of genius without
taste. These last observations are meaningless,
unless they be taken as alluding to quantitative
differences. In this case, those would be called
geniuses without taste who produce works of
art, inspired in their culminating parts and
neglected and defective in their secondary parts,
and those, men of taste without genius, who
succeed in obtaining certain isolated or secondary
effects, but do not possess the power necessary for
a vast artistic synthesis. Analogous explanations
can easily be given of other similar propositions.


But to posit a substantial difference between


Oe ee a


xvi toot AND ARE 199


genius and taste, between artistic production
and reproduction, would render communication
and judgment alike inconceivable. How could
we judge what remained extraneous to us?
How could that which is produced by a given
activity be judged by a different activity? The
critic will be a small genius, the artist a great
genius; the one will have the strength of ten,
the other of a hundred; the former, in order to
raise himself to the altitude of the latter, will
have need of his assistance; but the nature of
both must be the same. In order to judge
Dante, we must raise ourselves to his level: let
it be well understood that empirically we are not
Dante, nor Dante we; but in that moment of
judgment and contemplation, our spirit is one
with that of the poet, and in that moment we
and he are one single thing. In this identity
alone resides the possibility that our little souls
can unite with the great souls, and become great
with them, in the universality of the spirit.

Let us remark in passing that what has been
said of the esthetic zudgment holds good equally
for every other activity and for every other judg-
ment; and that scientific, economic, and ethical
criticism is effected in a like manner. To limit our-


selves to this last, it is only if we place ourselves


Analogy with
the other
activities.


200 THEORY OF AS Tie Tie XVI


ideally in the same conditions in which he who
took a given resolution found himself, that we can
form a judgment as to whether his resolution were
moral or immoral. An action would otherwise
remain incomprehensible, and therefore impossible
to judge. A homicide may be a rascal or a hero:
if this be, within limits, indifferent as regards the
safety of society, which condemns both to the same
punishment, it is not indifferent to him who
wishes to distinguish and to judge from the moral
point of view, and we cannot dispense with
studying again the individual psychology of the
homicide, in order to determine the true nature of
his deed, not merely in its judicial, but also in its
moral aspect. In Ethic, a moral taste or tact is
sometimes referred to, which answers to what is
generally called moral conscience, that is to say,
to the activity itself of good-will.

Critique of The explanation above given of esthetic judg-


absolutism (in-


tellectualism) ment or reproduction at once affirms and denies |
and of esthetic oe ? i.

acer the: position of the absolutists and relativists, of

those, that is to say, who affirm and of those who

deny the existence of an absolute taste. |

The absolutists, who affirm that they can judge

of the beautiful, are right; but the theory on

which they found their affirmation is not


maintainable. They conceive of the beautiful,


XVI TASTE AND ART 201


that is, of zsthetic value, as of something placed
outside ‘the esthetic activity; as if it were a
model or a concept which an artist realizes in his
work, and of which the critic avails himself
afterwards in order to judge the work itself.
Concepts and models alike have no existence in
art, for by proclaiming that every art can be
judged only in itself, and has its own model in
itself, they have attained to the denial of the
existence of objective models of beauty, whether
they be intellectual concepts, or ideas suspended
in the metaphysical sky.

In proclaiming this, the adversaries, the
relativists, are perfectly right, and accomplish a
progress. However, the initial rationality of
their thesis becomes in its turn a false theory.
Repeating the old adage that there is no account-
ing for tastes, they believe that esthetic expression
is of the same nature as the pleasant and the
unpleasant, which every one feels in his own
way, and as to which there is no disputing.
But we know that the pleasant and the unpleasant
are utilitarian and practical facts: Thus the
relativists deny the peculiarity of the esthetic
fact, again confounding expression with impres-
sion, the theoretic with the practical.


The true solution lies in rejecting alike


Critique of
relative
relativism.


202 (HER ORY -OF ACS TELE TiC XVI


relativism or psychologism, and false absolutism ;
and in recognizing that the criterion of taste is
absolute, but absolute in a different way from
that of the intellect, which is developed by reason.
The criterion of taste is absolute, with the intuitive
absoluteness of the imagination. Thus every act
of expressive activity, which is so really, will be
recognized as beautiful, and every fact in which
expressive activity and passivity are found
engaged with one another in an_ unfinished
struggle, will be recognized as ugly.

There lies, between absolutists and relativists,
a third class, which may be called that of the
relative relativists. These affirm the existence
of absolute values in other fields, such as Logic
and Ethic, but deny their existence in the field
of A%sthetic. To them it appears natural and
justifiable to dispute about science and morality ;
because science rests on the universal, common to
all men, and morality on duty, which is also a law
of human nature; but how, they say, can one
dispute about art, which rests on imagination ?
Not only, however, is the imaginative activity
universal and belongs to human nature, like the
logical concept and practical duty; but we must
oppose a capital objection to this intermediary
thesis. If the absolute nature of the imagination


AE


XVI Pao EN 203


were denied, we should be obliged to deny also
that of intellectual or conceptual truth, and,
implicitly, of morality. Does not morality pre-
suppose logical distinctions ? How could these
be known, otherwise than by expressions and
words, that is to say, inimaginative form? If the
absoluteness of the imagination were removed,
spiritual life would tremble to its base. One
individual would no longer understand another,
nor indeed his own self of a moment before,
which, when considered a moment after, is already
another individual.
Nevertheless, variety of judgments is an in- Objection


: ? _ founded on the
disputable fact. Men are at variance in their veriation of the


stimulus and


logical, ethical, and economical appreciations ; and pire
they are equally, or even more at variance in
their zsthetic appreciations. If certain reasons
detailed by us, above, such as haste, prejudices,
passions, etc., may be held to lessen the importance
of this disagreement, they do not thereby annul
it. We have been cautious, when speaking of the
stimuli of reproduction, for we said that repro-
duction takes place, zf all the other conditions
remain equal. Do they remain equal? Does
the hypothesis correspond to reality ?

It would appear not. In order to reproduce


several times an impression by employing a


204 BHEORN OF 725TH Lite XVI


suitable physical stimulus, it is necessary that this
stimulus be not changed, and that the organism
remain in the same psychical conditions as those
in which was experienced the impression that
it is desired to reproduce. Now it is a fact,
that the physical stimulus is continually chang-
ing, and in like manner the psychological condi-
tions.

Oil paintings grow dark, frescoes pale, statues
lose noses, hands, and legs, architecture becomes
totally or partially a ruin, the tradition of the
execution of a piece of music is lost, the text of a
poem is corrupted by bad copyists or bad print-
ing. These are obvious instances of the changes,
which daily occur in objects or physical stimuli.
As regards psychological conditions, we will not
dwell upon the cases of deafness or blindness,
that is to say, upon the loss of entire orders of
psychical impressions ; these cases are secondary
and of less importance compared with the funda-
mental, daily, inevitable, and perpetual changes
of the society around us, and of the internal
conditions of our individual life. The phonic
manifestations, that is, the words and verses of
the Dantesque Commedia, must produce a very
different impression on a citizen engaged in the
politics of the third Rome, to that experienced by


a TASTE AND ART 205


a well-informed and intimate contemporary of the
poet. The Madonna of Cimabue is still in the
Church of Santa Maria Novella; but does she
speak to the visitor of to-day as she spoke to the
Florentines of the thirteenth century? Even
though she were not also darkened by time, would
not the impression be altogether different? And
finally, how can a poem composed in youth make
the same impression on the same individual poet
when he re-reads it in his old age, with his psychic
dispositions altogether changed ?

It is true, that certain zstheticians have
attempted a distinction between stimuli and
stimuli, between xatural and conventional signs.
They would grant to the former a constant effect
on all; to the latter, only on a limited circle. In
their belief, signs employed in painting are natural,
while the words of poetry are conventional. But
the difference between the one and the other is
only of degree. It has often been affirmed that
painting is a language which all understand, while
with poetry it is otherwise. Here, for example,
Leonardo placed one of the prerogatives of his
art, “which hath not need of interpreters of
different languages as have letters,” and in it
man and brute find satisfaction. He relates the
anecdote of that portrait of the father of a family,


Critique of the
division of
signs into
natural and
conventional.


The surmount
ing of variety,


206 THEORY (Ol 45 PAE ie XVI


“which the little grandchildren were wont to
caress while they were still in swaddling-clothes,
and the dogs and cats of the house in like manner.”
But other anecdotes, such as those of the savages
who took the portrait of a soldier for a boat, or
considered the portrait of a man on horseback as
furnished with only one leg, are apt to shake
one’s faith in the understanding of painting by
sucklings, dogs, and cats. Fortunately, no arduous
researches are necessary to convince oneself that
pictures, poetry, and every work of art, produce
no effects save on souls prepared to receive them.
Natural signs do not exist ; because they are all
conventional in a like manner, or, to speak
with greater exactitude, all are 4zstorically con-
aitioned.

This being so, how are we to succeed in
causing the expression to be reproduced by
means of the physical object? How obtain the
same effect, when the conditions are no longer
the same? Would it not, rather, seem necessary
to conclude that expressions cannot be reproduced,
despite the physical instruments made by man
for the purpose, and that what is called reproduc-
tion consists in ever new expressions? Such
would indeed be the conclusion, if the variety of


physical and psychic conditions were intrinsically


Se rT a ee ONT a?


XVI Paste ND ARP 207


unsurmountable. But since the insuperability
has none of the characteristics of necessity, we
must, on the contrary, conclude : that the repro-
duction always occurs, when we can replace our-
selves in the conditions in which the stimulus
(physical beauty) was produced.

Not only can we replace ourselves in these
conditions, as an abstract possibility, but as a
matter of fact we do so continually. Indi-
vidual life, which is communion with ourselves
(with our past), and social life, which is com-
munion with our like, would not otherwise be
possible.

As regards the physical object, paleographers
and philologists, who vestore to texts their original
physiognomy, vestorers of pictures and of statues,
and similar categories of workers, exert themselves
_ to preserve or to give back to the physical object
all its primitive energy. These efforts certainly
do not always succeed, or are not completely
_ successful, for never, or hardly ever, is it possible
to obtain a restoration complete in its smallest
details. But the unsurmountable is only ac-
cidentally present, and cannot cause us to fail
to recognize the favourable results which are
nevertheless obtained.


Ffrstorical interpretation likewise labours to


Restorations
and historical
interpretation.


208 THEORY: OF ste Te XVI


reintegrate in us historical conditions which have
been altered in the course of history. It revives
the dead, completes the fragmentary, and affords
us the opportunity of seeing a work of art (a
physical object) as its author saw it, at the
moment of production.

A condition of this historical labour is tradition,
with the help of which it is possible to collect the
scattered rays and cause them to converge on
one centre. With the help of memory, we
surround the physical stimulus with all the facts
among which it arose; and thus we make it
possible for it to react upon us, as it acted upon
him who produced it.


When the tradition is broken, interpretation is


arrested ; in this case, the products of the past
remain sz/ent for us. Thus the expressions
contained in the Etruscan or Messapian inscrip-
tions are unattainable; thus we still hear discus-
sions among ethnographers as to certain products
of the art of savages, whether they be pictures
or writings ; thus archeologists and prehistorians
are not always able to establish with certainty,
whether the figures found on the ceramic of a
certain region, and on other instruments employed,
be of a religious or of a profane nature. But the


arrest of interpretation, as that of restoration, is


—


XVI TNO be AND) Aik 209


never a definitely unsurmountable barrier; and
the daily discoveries of historical sources and of
new methods of better exploiting antiquity, which
we may hope to see ever improving, link up
broken tradition.

We do not wish to deny that erroneous historical
interpretation produces at times what we may
term Aalimpsests, new expressions imposed upon
the antique, artistic imaginings instead of historical
reproductions. The so-called fascination of the
past depends in part upon these expressions of
ours, which we weave into historical expressions.
Thus in hellenic plastic art has been discovered
the calm and serene intuition of life of those
peoples, who feel, nevertheless, so poignantly, the
universality of sorrow; thus has recently been
discerned on the faces of the Byzantine saints
“the terror of the millennium,” a terror which is
an equivoke, or an artificial legend invented
by modern scholars. But Aestorecal criticism
tends precisely to circumscribe vazz zmaginings
and to establish with exactitude the point of
view from which we must look.

Thus we live in communication with other men
of the present and of the past; and we must not
conclude, because sometimes, and indeed often,


we find ourselves face to face with the unknown
P


210 THEORY OF AASTHETIC XVI


or the badly known, that when we believe we
are engaged in a dialogue, we are always speaking
a monologue; nor that we are unable even to
repeat the monologue which, in the past, we


held with ourselves.


XVII
THE HISTORY OF LITERATURE AND ART


Tus brief exposition of the method by which
is obtained the reintegration of the original con-
ditions in which the work of art was produced,
and by which reproduction and judgment are
made possible, shows how important is the
function fulfilled by historical research con-
cerning artistic and literary works; that is to
say, by what is usually called zstortcal criticism,
or method, in literature and art.

Without tradition and historical criticism, the
enjoyment of all or nearly all works of art pro-
duced by humanity, would be irrevocably lost : we
should be little more than animals, immersed in
the present alone, or in the most recent past.
Only fools despise and laugh at him who recon-
stitutes an authentic text, explains the sense of
words and customs, investigates the conditions
in which an artist lived, and accomplishes all
those labours which revive the qualities and the


original colouring of works of art.


211


Historical
critictsm in
literature and
tts its
importance.


212 TABORY OF Alot hE re XVII


Sometimes the depreciatory or negative judg-
ment refers to the presumed or proved uselessness
of many researches, made to recover the correct
meaning of artistic works. But, it must be observed,
in the first place, that historical research does not
only fulfil the task of helping to reproduce and
judge artistic works: the biography of a writer
or of an artist, for example, and the study of
the costume of a period, also possess their own
interest, foreign to the history of art, but not
foreign to other forms of history. If allusion be
made to those researches which do not appear
to have interest of any kind, nor to fulfil any
purpose, it must be replied that the historical
student must often reconcile himself to the useful,
but little glorious, office of a cataloguer of facts.
These facts remain for the time being formless,
incoherent, and insignificant, but they are preserves,
or mines, for the historian of the future and for
whomsoever may afterwards want them for any
purpose. In the same way, books which nobody
asks for are placed on the shelves and are noted
in the catalogues, because they may be asked for
at some time or other. Certainly, in the same way
that an intelligent librarian gives the preference
to the acquisition and to the cataloguing of those
books which he foresees may be of more or better


XVII RITE RAPTURE ANE ART 203


service, so do intelligent students possess the
instinct as to what is or may more probably be
useful from among the mass of facts which they
are investigating. Others, on the other hand,
less well-endowed, less intelligent, or more hasty
in producing, accumulate useless selections, re-
jections and erasures, and lose themselves in
refinements and gossipy discussions. But this
appertains to the economy of research, and is not
our affair. At the most, it is the affair of the
master who selects the subjects, of the publisher
who pays for the printing, and of the critic
who is called upon to praise or to blame the
students for their researches.

On the other hand, it is evident, that historical
research, directed to illuminate a work of art
by placing us in a position to judge it, does not
alone suffice to bring it to birth in our spirit:
taste, and an imagination trained and awakened,
are likewise presupposed. The greatest historical
erudition may accompany a taste in part gross
or defective, a lumbering imagination, or, as it
is generally phrased, a cold, hard heart, closed to
art. Which is the lesser evil ?—great erudition
and defective taste, or natural good taste and
great ignorance? The question has often been
asked, and perhaps it will be best to deny its


Literary and
arttstic history.
Its distinction
Srom historical
criticism and
Srom esthetic
judgment,


214 THEORY OF ASTHERre XVII


possibility, because one cannot tell which of two
evils is the less, or what exactly that means.
The merely learned man never succeeds in enter-
ing into communication with the great spirits, and
keeps wandering for ever about the outer courts,
the staircases, and the antechambers of their
palaces; but the gifted ignoramus either passes
by masterpieces which are to him inaccessible,
or instead of understanding the works of art, as
they really are, he invents others, with his imagina-
tion. Now, the labour of the former may at least
serve to enlighten others; but the ingenuity of
the latter remains altogether sterile. How, then,
can we fail to prefer the conscientious learned
man to the inconclusive man of talent, who is not
really talented, if he resign himself, and in so far
as he resigns himself, to come to no conclusion ?

It is necessary to distinguish accurately the
history of art and literature from those historical
labours which make use of works of art, but
for extraneous purposes (such as_ biography,
civil, religious, and political history, etc.), and
also from historical erudition, whose object is
preparation for the esthetic synthesis of re-
production.

The difference between the first of these is


obvious. The history of art and literature has


XVII LITERATURE AND ART 24


the works of art themselves for principal subject ;
the other branches of study call upon and inter-
rogate works of art, but only as witnesses, from
which to discover the truth of facts which are
not esthetic. The second difference to which we
have referred may seem less profound. However,
it is very great. Erudition devoted to rendering
clear again the understanding of works of art,
aims simply at making appear a certain internal
fact, an esthetic reproduction. Artistic and
literary history, on the other hand, does not
appear until such reproduction has been obtained.
It demands, therefore, further labour. Like all
other history, its object is to record precisely
such facts as have really taken place, that is,
artistic and literary facts. A man who, after
having acquired the requisite historical erudition,
reproduces in himself and tastes a work of art,
may remain simply a man of taste, or express
at the most his own feeling, with an exclama-
tion of beautiful or ugly. This does not suffice
for the making of a historian of literature and
art. There is further need that the simple
act of reproduction be followed in him by a
second internal operation, What is this new
operation? It is, in its turn, an expression: the


expression of the reproduction; the historical


216 THEORY OF VESTHE TIC XVII


description, exposition, or representation. There
is this difference, then, between the man of taste
and the historian: the first merely reproduces
in his spirit the work of art; the second, after
having reproduced it, represents it historically,
thus applying to it those categories by which,
as we know, history is differentiated from pure
art. Artistic and literary history is, therefore,
a historical work of art founded upon one or more
works of art.

The denomination of artistic or literary critic


is used in various senses : sometimes it is applied.


to the student who devotes his services to
literature; sometimes to the historian who
reveals the works of art of the past in their
reality ; more often to both. By critic is some-
times understood, in a more restricted sense, he
who judges and describes contemporary literary
works; and by historian, he who is occupied
with less recent works. These are but linguistic
usages and empirical distinctions, which may
be neglected ; because the true difference lies
between the learned man, the man of taste, and
the historian of art. These words designate,
as it were, three successive stages of work,
of which each is relatively independent of the
one that follows, but not of that which precedes.


ealeeianeenereees


XVII PrreE RSA PURE AND ART 217


As we have seen, a man may be simply learned,
yet possess little capacity for understanding
works of art; he may indeed be both learned
and possess taste, yet be unable to write a
page of artistic and literary history. But the
true and complete historian, while containing
in himself, as necessary pre-requisites, both the
learned man and the man of taste, must add
to their qualities the gift of historical com-
prehension and representation.
The method of artistic and literary history he method


of artistic
presents problems and difficulties, some common 274 /iterary


to all historical method, others peculiar to it, oo
because they derive from the concept of art itself.

History is wont to be divided into the history Critique of the
of man, the history of nature, and the mixed Mobili E:
history of both the preceding. Without examin-
ing here the question of the solidity of this
division, it is clear that artistic and literary
history belongs in any case to the first, since
it concerns a spiritual activity, that is to say,
an activity proper to man. And since this
activity is its subject, the absurdity of pro-
pounding the historical problem of the origin of
art becomes at once evident. We should note
that by this formula many different things


have in turn been included on many different


218 PHERORY OF ALS hoe Lie XVII


occasions. Ovzgin has often meant xature or
aisposttion of the artistic fact, and here was a
real scientific or philosophic problem, the very
problem, in fact, which our treatise has tried to
solve. At other times, by origin has been under-
stood the ideal genesis, the search for the reason
of art, the deduction of the artistic fact from a
first principle containing in itself both spirit and
nature. This is also a philosophical problem,
and it is complementary to the preceding, indeed
it coincides with it, though it has sometimes been
strangely interpreted and solved by means of
an arbitrary and semi-fantastic metaphysic. But
when it has been sought to discover further
exactly in what way the artistic function was
historically formed, this has resulted in the
absurdity to which we have referred. If ex-
pression be the first form of consciousness, how
can the historical origin be sought of what is
presupposed not to be a product of nature and
of human history? How can we find the
historical genesis of that which is a category,
by means of which every historical genesis and
fact are understood? The absurdity has arisen
from the comparison with human _ institutions,
which have, in fact, been formed in the course


of history, and which have disappeared or may


XGVarE LITERATURE AND ART 219


disappear in its course. There exists between
the aesthetic fact and a human institution (such
as monogamic marriage or the fief) a difference
to some extent comparable with that between
simple and compound bodies in chemistry. It
is impossible to indicate the formation of the
former, otherwise they would not be simple,
and if this be discovered, they cease to be
simple and become compound.

The problem of the origin of art, historically
understood, is only justified when it is proposed
to seek, not for the formation of the function, but
where and when art has appeared for the first
time (appeared, that is to say, in a_ striking
manner), at what point or in what region of the
globe, and at what point or epoch of its history ;
when, that is to say, not the origin of art, but its
most antique or primitive history, is the object of
research. This problem forms one with that of
the appearance of human civilization on the earth.
Data for its solution are certainly wanting, but
there yet remains the abstract possibility, and
certainly attempts and hypotheses for its solution
abound.

Every form of human history has the concept
of progress for foundation. But by progress


must not be understood the imaginary and meta-


Aitstory and
the criterzon
of progress.


220 THEORY OF ESTHETIC XVII
physical aw of progress, which should lead the


generations of man with irresistible force to some
unknown destiny, according to a providential
plan which we can logically divine and under-
stand. A supposed law of this sort is the
negation of history itself, of that accidentality,
that empiricity, that contingency, which dis-
tinguish the concrete fact from the abstraction.
And for the same reason, progress has nothing
to do with the so-called Zaw of evolution. If
evolution mean the concrete fact of reality which
evolves (that is, which is reality), it is not a law.
If, on the other hand, it be a law, it becomes
confounded with the law of progress in the sense
just described. The progress of which we speak
here, is nothing but the concept of human activity
ztself, which, working upon the material supplied
to it by nature, conquers obstacles and bends
nature to its own ends.

Such conception of progress, that is to say, of
human activity applied to a given material, is the
point of view of the historian of humanity. No
one but a mere collector of stray facts,.a simple
seeker, or an incoherent chronicler, can put
together the smallest narrative of human deeds,
unless he have a definite point of view, that is


to say, an intimate personal conviction regarding


Pk Poet amet


XVII PIT eRATORE AND An ft 221


the conception of the facts which he has under-
taken to relate. The historical work of art
cannot be achieved among the confused and
discordant mass of crude facts, save by means
of this point of view, which makes it possible to
carve a definite figure from that rough and
incoherent mass. The historian of a practical
action should know what is economy and what
morality ; the historian of mathematics, what are
mathematics; the historian of botany, what is
botany; the historian of philosophy, what is
philosophy. But if he do not really know these
things, he must at least have the illusion of
knowing them; otherwise he will never be able
to delude himself that he is writing history.

We cannot delay here to demonstrate the
necessity and the inevitability of this subjective
criterion in every narrative of human affairs. We
will merely say that this criterion is compatible
with the utmost objectivity, impartiality, and
scrupulosity in dealing with data, and indeed forms
a constitutive element of such subjective criterion.
It suffices to read any book of history to discover
at once the point of view of the author, if he be a
historian worthy of the name and know his own
business. There exist liberal and reactionary,


rationalist and catholic historians, who deal with


222 THEORY OF ASTHETIC XVII


political or social history; for the history of
philosophy there are metaphysical, empirical,
sceptical, idealist, and spiritualist historians.
Absolutely historical historians do not and
cannot exist. Can it be said that Thucydides
and Polybius, Livy and Tacitus, Machiavelli and
Guicciardini, Giannone and _ Voltaire, were
without moral and political views; and, in our
time, Guizot or Thiers, Macaulay or Balbo,
Ranke or Mommsen? And in the history of
philosophy, from Hegel, who was the first to
raise it:to a great elevation, to Ritter, Zeller,
Cousin, Lewes, and our Spaventa, was there one
who did not possess his conception of progress
and criterion of judgment? Is there one single
work of any value in the history of Aésthetic,
which has not been written from this or that
point of view, with this or that bias (Hegelian or
Herbartian), from a sensualist or from an eclectic
point of view, and so on? If the historian is to
escape from the inevitable necessity of taking a
side, he must become a political and scientific
eunuch; and history is not the business of
eunuchs. They would at most be of use in
compiling those great tomes of not useless
erudition, elumbzs atgue fracta, which are called,


not without reason, monkish.


XVII LEPERALURE AND ARE a2


If, then, the concept of progress, the point of
view, the criterion, be inevitable, the best to be
done is not to try and escape from them, but to
obtain the best possible. Everyone strives for
this end, when he forms his own convictions,
seriously and laboriously. Historians who
profess to wish to interrogate the facts, without
adding anything of their own to them, are not
to be believed. This, at the most, is the result
of ingenuousness and illusion on their part: they
will always add what they have of personal, if
they be truly historians, though it be without
knowing it, or they will believe that they have
escaped doing so, only because they have referred
to it by innuendo, which is the most insinuating
and penetrative of methods.

Artistic and literary history cannot dispense
with the criterion of progress any more easily
than other history. We cannot show what a
given work of art is, save by proceeding from a
conception of art, in order to fix the artistic
problem which the author of such work of art
had to solve, and by determining whether or no
he have solved it, or by how much and in what
way he has failed to do so. But it is important
to note that the criterion of progress assumes a


different form in artistic and literary history to


Non-existence
of a unique
line of progress
tm artistic

and literary
history.


224 THEORY OF Acs Pirie 2 1C XVII


that which it assumes (or is believed to assume)
in the history of science.

The whole history of knowledge can be repre-
sented by one single line of progress and regress.
Science is the universal, and its problems are
arranged in one single vast system, or complex
problem. All thinkers weary themselves over
the same problem as to the nature of reality and
of knowledge: contemplative Indians and Greek
philosophers, Christians and Mohammedans, bare
heads and heads with turbans, wigged heads and
heads with the black berretta (as Heine said); and
future generations will weary themselves with it,
as ours has done. It would take too long to inquire
here if this be true or not of science. But it is
certainly not true of art; art is intuition, and
“intuition is individuality, and individuality is
never repeated. To conceive of the history of
the artistic production of the human race as
developed along a single line of progress and
regress, would therefore be altogether erroneous.

At the most, and working to some extent
with generalizations and abstractions, it may be
admitted that the history of esthetic products
shows progressive cycles, but each cycle has its
own problem, and is progressive only in respect to
that problem. When many are at work on the


XVII DIF ERATURE AND ART e2y


same subject, without succeeding in giving to it
the suitable form, yet drawing always more
nearly to it, there is said to be progress. When
he who gives to it definite form appears, the
Eycle is said to be complete, progress ended.
A typical example of this would be the progress
in the elaboration of the mode of using the
subject-matter of chivalry, during the Italian
Renaissance, from Pulci to Ariosto. (If this
instance be made use of, excessive simplification
of it must be excused.) Nothing but repetition
and imitation could be the result of employing
that same material after Ariosto. The result was
repetition or imitation, diminution or exaggeration,
a spoiling of what had already been achieved ;
in sum, decadence. The Ariostesque epigoni
prove this. Progress begins with the commence-
ment of a new cycle. Cervantes, with his more
open and conscious irony, is an instance of this.
In what did the general decadence of Italian
literature at the end of the sixteenth century
consist ? Simply in having nothing more to say,
and in repeating and exaggerating motives
already found. If the Italians of this period had
even been able to express their own decadence,
they would not have been altogether failures,


but have anticipated the literary movement of the
Q


Errors com-
mitted in
respect to this
law.


226 TIIHORY OF 7s lib Lye XVII


Renaissance. Where the subject-matter is not
the same, a progressive cycle does not exist.
Shakespeare does not represent a _ progress
as regards Dante, nor Goethe as_ regards
Shakespeare. Dante, however, represents a pro-
gress in respect to the visionaries of the Middle
Ages, Shakespeare to the Elizabethan dramatists,
Goethe, with Werther and the first part of Faust,
in respect to the writers of the Sturm und
Drang. This mode of presenting the history of
poetry and art contains, however, as we have
remarked, something of abstract, of merely
practical, and is without rigorous philosophical
value, Not only is the art of savages not
inferior, as art, to that of civilized peoples,
provided it be correlative to the impressions of
the savage; but every individual, indeed every
moment of the spiritual life of an individual, has
its artistic world; and all those worlds are,
artistically, incomparable with one another.

Many have sinned and continue to sin against
this special form of the criterion of progress
im; artistic and. literary history... come, for
instance, talk of the infancy of Italian art in
Giotto, and of its maturity in Raphael or in
Titian ; as though Giotto were not quite perfect


and complete, in respect to his psychic material.


j
;


—


XVII Pe RA TURE AND ART 227


He was certainly incapable of drawing a figure
like Raphael, or of colouring it like Titian; but
was Raphael or Titian by any chance capable of
creating the Matrimonio di San Francesco con la
Povertad, or the Morte dt San Francesco? The
spirit of Giotto had not felt the attraction of the
body beautiful, which the Renaissance studied and
raised to a place of honour; but the spirits of
Raphael and of Titian were no longer curious of
certain movements of ardour and of tenderness,
which attracted the man of the fourteenth
century. How, then, can a comparison be made,
where there is no comparative term?

The celebrated divisions of the history of art
Super trom, the “same defect, They are as
follows: an oriental period, representing a
disequilibrium between idea and form, with
prevalence of the second; a classical, represent-
ing an equilibrium between idea and form; a
romantic, representing a new disequilibrium
between idea and form, with prevalence of the
idea. There are also the divisions into oriental
art, representing imperfection of form ; classical,
perfection of form; romantic or modern, per-
fection of content and of form. Thus classic
and romantic have also received, among their


many other meanings, that of progressive or


Other meanings
of the word

‘* progress" in
respect to
Esthetic.


228 Mi HORY OF Ato LEA XVII


regressive periods, in respect to the realization of
some indefinite artistic ideal of humanity.

There is no such thing, then, as an esthetzc
progress of humanity. However, by esthetic
progress is sometimes meant, not what the two
words coupled together really signify, but the
ever-increasing accumulation of our historical
knowledge, which makes us able to sympathize
with all the artistic products of all peoples and of
all times, or, as is said, to make our taste more
catholic. The difference appears very great, if
the eighteenth century, so incapable of escaping
from itself, be compared with our own time,
which enjoys alike Hellenic and Roman art, now
better understood, Byzantine, medizval, Arabic,
and Renaissance art, the art of the Cinque Cento,
baroque art, and the art of the seventeenth
century. Egyptian, Babylonian, Etruscan, and
even prehistoric art, are more profoundly studied
every day. Certainly, the difference between
the savage and civilized man does not lie in
the human faculties. The savage has speech,
intellect, religion, and morality, in common with
civilized man, and he is a complete man. The
only difference lies in that civilized man pene-
trates and dominates a larger portion of the


universe with his theoretic and practical activity.


Peg ah


a ee ———


XVII PIL PRATURE AND -ARL 229


We cannot claim to be more spiritually alert
than, for example, the contemporaries of Pericles;
but no one can deny that we are richer than they
—rich with their riches and with those of how
many other peoples and generations besides our
own?

By esthetic progress is also meant, in an-
other sense, which is also improper, the greater
abundance of artistic intuitions and the smaller
number of imperfect or decadent works which
one epoch produces in respect to another. Thus
it may be said that there was esthetic progress,
an artistic awakening, at the end of the thirteenth
or of the fifteenth centuries.

Finally, asthetic progress is talked of, with
an eye to the refinement and to the psychical
complications exhibited in the works of art of the
most civilized peoples, as compared with those of
less civilized peoples, barbarians and _ savages.
Per in this. case, the progress is that of the
complex conditions of society, not of the artistic
activity, to which the material is indifferent.

These are the most important points concerning


the method of artistic and literary history.


XViTI


CONCLUSION :


IDENTITY OF LINGUISTIC AND ASTHETIC


Summary of A GLANCE over the path traversed will show that


the inquiry.


we have completed the entire programme of our
treatise. We have studied the nature of intuitive
or expressive knowledge, which is the esthetic
or artistic fact (I. and II.), and we have described
the other form of knowledge, namely, the intel-
lectual, with the secondary complications of its
forms (III.). Having done this, it became possible
to criticize all erroneous theories of art, which
arise from the confusion between the various
forms, and from the undue transference of the
characteristics of one form to those of another
(IV.), and in so doing to indicate the inverse
errors which are found in the theory of intellectual
knowledge and of historiography (V.). Passing
on to examine the relations between the esthetic
activity and the other spiritual activities, no longer


theoretic but practical, we have indicated the true
230


at:


_———


XVIII CONCEUSION 231


character of the practical activity and the place
wiien’ if occupies in respect to the . theoretic
activity, which it follows: hence the critique of
the invasion of esthetic theory by practical
concepts (VI.). We have also distinguished the
two forms of the practical activity, as economic
and ethic (VII.), adding to this the statement that
there are no other forms of the spirit beyond the
four which we have analyzed; hence (VIII.) the
critique of every metaphysical A¢sthetic. And,
seeing that there exist no other spiritual forms
of equal degree, therefore there are no original
subdivisions of the four established, and in
particular of Asthetic. From this arises the
impossibility of classes of expressions and the
critique of Rhetoric, that is, of the partition of
expressions into simple and ornate, and of their
subclasses (IX.). But, by the law of the unity of
the spirit, the zesthetic fact is also a practical fact,
and as such, occasions pleasure and pain. This
led us to study the feelings of value in general,
and those of esthetic value, or of the beautiful,
in particular (X.), to criticize esthetic hedonism
in all its various manifestations and complications
(XI.), and to expel from the system of A¢sthetic
the long series of pseudo-zsthetic concepts, which
had been introduced into it (XII.). Proceeding


222 EEE ORY OF 7S THETIC XVIII


from esthetic production to the facts of reproduc-
tion, we began by investigating the mode of
fixing externally the esthetic expression, with the
view of reproduction. This is the so-called
physically beautiful, whether it be natural or
artificial (XIII.). We then derived from this
distinction the critique of the errors which arise
from confounding the physical with the esthetic
side of things (XIV.). We indicated the meaning
of artistic technique, that which is the technique
serving for reproduction, thus criticizing the
divisions, limits, and classifications of the indi-
vidual arts, and establishing the connections
between art, economy, and morality (XV.). Be-
cause the existence of the physical objects does
not suffice to stimulate to the full zsthetic re-
production, and because, in order to obtain
this result, it is necessary to recall the con-
ditions in which the stimulus first operated, we
have also studied the function of historical
erudition, directed toward the end of re-estab-
lishing our communication with the works of
the past, and toward the creation of a base for
esthetic judgment (XVI.). We have closed
our treatise by showing how the reproduction
thus obtained is afterwards elaborated by the
intellectual categories, that is to say, by an


XVIII CONCLUSION 233


excursus on the method of literary and artistic
history (XVII.).

The esthetic fact has thus been considered
both in itself and in its relations with the other
spiritual activities, with the feelings of pleasure
and of pain, with the facts that are called physical,
with memory, and with historical elaboration. It
has passed from the position of szézect to that of
object, that is to say, from the moment of z¢s dzrth,
until gradually it becomes changed for the spirit
into hzstorical argument.

Our treatise may appear to be somewhat
meagre, when compared with the great volumes
usually consecrated to Afsthetic. But it will not
seem so, when it is observed that these volumes,
as regards nine-tenths of their contents, are full
of matter which does not appertain to A‘sthetic,
such as definitions, either psychical or metaphysical,
of pseudo-esthetic concepts (of the sublime, the
comic, the tragic, the humorous, etc.), or of the
exposition of the supposed Zoology, Botany, and
Mineralogy of Aésthetic, and of universal history
judged from the esthetic standpoint. The whole
history of concrete art and literature has also
been dragged into those A#sthetics and generally
mangled; they contain judgments upon Homer


and Dante, upon Ariosto and Shakespeare,


234 PAGORY OF STHE LIC XVIII


upon Beethoven and Rossini, Michelangelo and
Raphael. When all this has been deducted from
them, our treatise will no longer be held to be
too meagre, but, on the contrary, far more copious
than ordinary treatises, for these either omit
altogether, or hardly touch at all, the greater part
of the difficult problems proper to Aésthetic,
which we have felt it to be our duty to study.


Identity of fEsthetic, then, as the science of expression,
Linguistic and Z .
Aisthetic. has been here studied by us from every point


of view. But there yet remains to justify the
sub-title, which we have joined to the title of our
book, General Linguzstic, and to state and make
clear the thesis that the science of art is that
of language. Atsthetic and Linguistic, in so
far as they are true sciences, ate. nob two
different sciences, but one single science. Not
that there is. a ‘special Linewistic; but the
linguistic science sought for, general Linguistic,
in so far as what it contains 1s reducible to
philosophy, is nothing but Aésthetic. Whoever
studies general Linguistic, that is to say,
philosophical Linguistic, studies esthetic prob-
lems, and vice versa. Philosophy of language
and philosophy of art are the same thing.

Were Linguistic a azfferent science from


esthetic, it should not have expression, which is


(i ne ia ile


XVIII CONCEUSION 235


the essentially esthetic fact, for its object. This
amounts to saying that it must be denied that
language is expression. But an emission of
sounds, which expresses nothing, is not language.
Language is articulate, limited, organized sound,
employed in expression. If, on the other hand,
language were a sfeczal science in respect to
/Esthetic, it would necessarily have for its object
a speczal class of expressions. But the inexistence
of classes of expression is a point which we have
already demonstrated.
The problems which Linguistic serves to solve, #s/hetic


Jormulization


and the errors with which Linguistic strives and een
yoolems.


has striven, are the same that occupy and com- 4%” of
plicate A‘sthetic. If it be not always easy, it is, i
on the other hand, always possible, to reduce
the philosophic questions of Linguistic to their
esthetic formula.

The disputes as to the nature of the one find
their parallel in those as to the nature of the other.
Thus it has been disputed, whether Linguistic be a
scientific or a historical discipline, and the scientific
having been distinguished from the _ historical,
it has been asked whether it belong to the order
of the natural or of the psychological sciences, by
the latter being understood empirical Psychology,
as much as the science of the spirit. The same


236 TABOR Y OF Zoo LTE PIC XVIII


has happened with Aésthetic, which some have
looked upon as a natural science, confounding
esthetic expression with physical expression.
Others have looked upon it as a psychological
science, confounding expression in its universality,
with the empirical classification of expressions.
Others again, denying the very possibility of a
science of such a subject, have looked upon
it as a collection of historical facts. Finally,
it has been realized that it belongs to the sciences
of activity or of values, which are the spiritual
sciences.

Linguistic expression, or speech, has often
seemed to be a fact of zxterzectzon, which belongs
to the so-called physical expressions of the feelings,
common alike to men and animals. But it was
soon admitted that an abyss yawns between the
“Ah!” which is a physical reflex of pain, and
a word ; as also between that “Ah!” of pain and
the “Ah!” employed as a word. The theory
of the interjection being abandoned (jocosely
termed the “Ah! “Ahil”” theory -by German
linguists), the theory of assoctation or convention
appeared. This theory was refuted by the same
objection which destroyed esthetic associationism
in general: speech is unity, not multiplicity of


images, and multiplicity does not explain, but


oo ean


XVIII CONCLUSION 2 a7


presupposes the existence of the expression to
explain. A variant of linguistic associationism
is the imitative, that is to say, the theory of the
onomatopeeia, which the same philologists deride
under the name of the ‘“ bow-wow”’ theory, after
the imitation of the dog’s bark, which, according
to the onomatopeeists, gives its name to the dog.

The most usual theory of our times as regards
language (apart from mere crass naturalism)
consists of a sort of eclecticism or mixture of
the various theories to which we have referred.
It is assumed that language is in part the product
of interjections and in part of onomatopes and
conventions. This doctrine is altogether worthy
of the scientific and philosophic decadence of the
second half of the nineteenth century.

We must here note a mistake into which have Origin of
fallen those very philologists who have best pe Mele
penetrated the active nature of language. These,
although they admit that language was originally
a spiritual creation, yet maintain that it was
largely increased later by assoczation. But the
distinction does not prevail, for origin in this
case cannot mean anything but nature or essence.
If, therefore, language be a spiritual creation, it
will always be a creation; if it be association, it


will have been so from the beginning. The


Relation
between
Grammar and
Logic.


Grammatical
classes or parts
of speech.


238 THEORY OF A Soe ee XVIII


mistake has arisen from not having grasped the
general principle of A‘sthetic, which we have
noted: namely, that expressions already produced
must redescend to the rank of impressions before
they can give rise to new impressions. When
we utter new words, we generally transform the
old ones, varying or enlarging their meaning ;
but this process is not associative, it is creative,
although the creation has for material the im-
pressions, not of the hypothetical primitive man,
but of man who has lived long ages in society,
and who has, so to say, stored so many things
in his psychic organism, and among them so much
language.

The question of the distinction between the
esthetic and the intellectual fact has appeared
in Linguistic as that of the relations between
Grammar and Logic. This question has found two
solutions, which are partially true: that of the
indissolubility of Logic and Grammar, and that
of their dissolubility. The complete solution is
this : if the logical form be indissoluble from the
grammatical (esthetic), the grammatical is dis-
soluble from the logical.

If we look at a picture which, for example,
portrays a man walking on a country road, we can


say: “ This picture represents a fact of movement,


f XVIII CONCLUSION 239


which, if conceived as volitional, is called actzon.
And because every movement implies matter,
and every action a being that acts, this picture
also represents either matter or a being. But
_ this movement takes place in a definite place,
. which is a part of a given star (the Earth), and
| precisely in that part of it which is called ¢erra-
_ firma, and more properly in a part of it that is
- wooded and covered with grass, which is called
country, cut naturally or artificially, in a manner
which is called voad. Now, there is only one
example of that given star, which is called Earth :
Earth is an zzdzvidual. But terra-firma, country,
voad, are classes or universals, because there are
other terra-firmas, other countries, other roads.”
And it would be possible to continue for a while
with similar considerations. By substituting a
phrase for the picture that we have imagined,
for example, one to this effect, “ Peter is walking
on a country road,” and by making the same
remarks, we obtain the concepts of verd (motion
or action), of zou (matter or agent), of proper
noun, of common nouns ; and so on.

What have we done in both cases? Neither
more nor less than to submit to logical elaboration
what was first elaborated only esthetically ; that
is to say, we have destroyed the esthetical by the


240 fHEOKY OF stows XVIII


logical. But, as in general A¢sthetic, error begins
when it is wished to return from the logical to the


zesthetical, and it is asked what is the expression of


movement, action, matter, being, of the general, of »


the individual, etc. ; thus in like manner with lan-
guage, error begins when motion or action are
called verb, being, or matter, noun or substantive,
and when linguistic categories, or parts of speech,
are made of all these, noun and verb and so on.
The theory of parts of speech is at bottom alto-
gether the same as that of artistic and literary
classes, already criticized in the A¢sthetic.

It is false to say that the verb or the noun
is expressed in definite words, truly distin-
guishable from others. Expression is an
indivisible whole. Noun and verb do not
exist in themselves, but are abstractions made
by our destroying the sole linguistic reality,
which is the proposition. This last is to be
understood, not in the usual mode of gram-
marians, but as an organism expressive of a
complete meaning, from an exclamation to a
poem. This sounds paradoxical, but is never-
theless a most simple truth.

And as in Aésthetic, the artistic productions
of certain peoples have been looked upon as


imperfect, owing to the error above mentioned,


XVIII CONCLUSION 241


because the supposed kinds have seemed still
to be indiscriminate or absent with them; so,
in Linguistic, the theory of the parts of speech
has caused the analogous error of dividing
languages into formed and unformed, according
to whether there appear in them or not some
of those supposed parts of speech; for example,
the verb.

Linguistic also discovered the irreducible
individuality of the esthetic fact, when it
affirmed that the word is what is really spoken,
and that two truly identical words do not exist.
Thus were synonyms and homonyms destroyed,
and thus was shown the impossibility of really
translating one word into another, from so-called
dialect into so-called language, and from a so-
called mother-tongue into a so-called foreign
tongue.

But the attempt to classify languages agrees
ill with this correct view. Languages have no
reality beyond the propositions and complexes
of propositions really written and pronounced
by given peoples for definite periods. That
is to say, they have no existence outside the
works of art, in which they exist concretely.
What is the art of a given people but the


complex of all its artistic products? What is
R


The individu-
ality of speech
and the
classification
of languages.


Impossibility of


a normative
grammar.


242 THEORY OF 7S tHErtic XVIII


the character of an art (say, Hellenic art or
Provencal literature), but the complex physi-
ognomy of those products? And how can
such a question be answered, save by giving
the history of their art (of their literature, that
is to say, of their language in action) ?

It will seem that this argument, although
possessing value as against many of the wonted
classifications of languages, yet is without any
as regards that queen of classifications, the
historico-genealogical, that glory of comparative
philology. And this is certainly true. But why ?
Precisely because the _historico-genealogical
method is not a classification. He who writes
history does not classify, and the philologists
themselves have hastened to say that the
languages which can be arranged in a historical
series (those whose series have been traced) are,
not distinct and definite species, but a complex
of facts in the various phases of its development.

Language has sometimes been looked upon
as an act of volition or of choice. But others
have discovered the impossibility of creating
language artificially, by an act of will. Zw,
Caesar, civitatem dare potes homini, verbo non
potes ! was once said to the Roman Emperor.


The esthetic (and therefore theoretic) nature


XVII CONCLUSION 243


_ of expression supplies the method of correcting
_ the scientific error which lies in the conception
of a (normative) Grammar, containing the rules
of speaking well. Good sense has always
rebelled against this error. An example of
such rebellion is the “So much the worse for
| grammar” of Voltaire. But the impossibility
_of a normative grammar is also recognized by
those who teach it, when they confess that
to write well cannot be learned by rules, that
_ there are no rules without exceptions, and that
the study of Grammar should be conducted
practically, by reading and by examples, which
form the literary taste. The scientific reason
of this impossibility lies in what we have already
mroved: that a technique of the theoretical
amounts to a contradiction in terms. And
_what could a (normative) grammar be, but just
_a technique of linguistic expression, that is to say,
of a theoretic fact ?

The case in which Grammar is understood Didactic
merely as an empirical discipline, that is to say, ae
as a collection of groups useful for learning
languages, without any claim whatever to
philosophic truth, is quite different. Even the
abstractions of the parts of speech are in this
case both admissible and of assistance.


Elementary
linguistic facts,
or roots.


244 THEORY OF A5STHE TIC XVIII


Many books entitled treatises of Linguistic
have a merely didactic purpose ; they are simply
scholastic manuals. We find in them, in truth, a
little of everything, from the description of the
vocal apparatus and of the artificial machines
(phonographs) which can imitate it, to summaries
of the most important results obtained by Indo-
European, Semitic, Coptic, Chinese, or other
philologies ; from philosophic generalizations on
the origin or nature of language, to advice on
calligraphy, and the arrangement of schedules
for philological spoils. But this mass of
notions, which is here taught in a fragmentary
and incomplete manner as regards the language
in its essence, the language as expression,
resolves itself into notions of A¢sthetic. Nothing
exists outside .#sthetec, which gives knowledge
of the nature of language, and empirical
Grammar, which is a pedagogic expedient, save
the Hzstory of languages in their living reality,
that is, the history of concrete literary pro-
ductions, which is substantially identical with the
Flistory of literature.

The same mistake of confusing the physical
with the esthetic, from which the elementary
forms of the beautiful originate, is made by


those who seek for elementary zsthetic facts,


XVIII CONCEUSION 245


decorating with that name the divisions of the
longer series of physical sounds into shorter
series. Syllables, vowels, and consonants, and the
series of syllables called words, which give no
definite sense when taken alone, are not facts of
language, but simple physical concepts of sounds.

Another mistake of the same sort is that of
roots, to which the most able philologists now
accord but a very limited value. Having
confused physical with linguistic or expressive
facts, and observing that, in the order of
ideas, the simple precedes the complex, they
necessarily ended by thinking that ¢he smaller
physical facts were ¢he more simple. Hence
the imaginary necessity that the most antique,
primitive languages, had been monosyllabic, and
that the progress of historical research must lead
to the discovery of monosyllabic roots. But (to
follow up the imaginary hypothesis) the first
expression that the first man conceived may also
have had a mimetic, not a phonic reflex: it may
have been exteriorised, not in a sound but in a
gesture. And assuming that it was exteriorised
in a sound, there is no reason to suppose that
sound to have been monosyllabic rather than pluri-
syllabic. Philologists frequently blame their own


ignorance and impotence, if they do not always


Esthetic
Judgment and
the model
language.


246 TE ORY OF Og wiv ya Bal es ld 8 Be EG XVIII


succeed in reducing plurisyllabism to mono-
syllabism, and they trust in the future. But their
faith is without foundation, as their blame of
themselves is an act of humility arising from an
erroneous presumption.

Furthermore, the limits of syllables, as those
of words, are altogether arbitrary, and dis-
tinguished, as well as may be, by empirical use.
Primitive speech, or the speech of the uncultured
man, is contzmuous, unaccompanied by any reflex
consciousness of the divisions of the word and of
the syllables, which are taught at school. No
true law of Linguistic can be founded on such
divisions. Proof of this is to be found in the
confession of linguists, that there are no truly
phonetic laws of the hiatus, of cacophony, of
dizresis, of synzresis, but merely laws of taste
and convenience; that is to say, @sthetzc laws.
And what are the laws of words which are not at
the same time laws of sty/e ?

The search for a model language, or for a
method of reducing linguistic usage to umzty,
arises from the misconception of a rationalistic
measurement of the beautiful, from the concept
which we have termed that of false esthetic
absoluteness. In Italy, we call this question that
of the uuzty of the language.


XVIII CONCLUSION 247


Language is perpetual creation. What has
been linguistically expressed cannot be repeated,
save by the reproduction of what has already
been produced. The ever-new impressions give
rise to continuous changes of sounds and of
meanings, that is, to ever-new expressions. To
seek the model language, then, is to seek the
immobility of motion. Every one speaks, and
should speak, according to the echoes which
things arouse in his soul, that is, according to his
impressions. It is not without reason that the
most convinced supporter of any one of the
solutions of the problem of the unity of language
(be it by the use of Latin, of fourteenth-century
Italian, or of Florentine) feels a repugnance in
applying his theory, when he is speaking in order
to communicate his thoughts and to make himself
understood. The reason for this is that he feels
that were he to substitute Latin, fourteenth-
century Italian, or Florentine speech for that of
a different origin, but which answers to his im-
pressions, he would be falsifying the latter. He
would become a vain listener to himself, instead
of a speaker, a pedant in place of a serious
man, a histrion instead of a sincere person.
To write according to a theory is not really to


write: at the most, it is making literature.


248 THEORY OF “AS Pri re XVIII


The question of the unity of language is
always reappearing, because, put as it is, there
can be no solution to it, owing to its being based
upon a false conception of what language is.
Language is not an arsenal of ready-made arms,
and it is not vocabulary, which, in so far as it is
thought of as progressive and in living use, is
always a cemetery, containing corpses more or
less well embalmed, that is to say, a collection of
abstractions.

Our mode of settling the question of the
model language, or of the unity of the language,
may seem somewhat abrupt, and yet we would
not wish to appear otherwise than respectful
towards the long line of literary men who have
debated this question in Italy for centuries. But
those ardent debates were, at bottom, debates
upon estheticity, not upon esthetic science, upon
literature rather than upon literary theory, upon
effective speaking and writing, not upon linguistic
science. Their error consisted in transforming
the manifestation of a want into a scientific
thesis, the need of understanding one another
more easily among a people dialectically divided,
in the philosophic search for a language, which
should be one or ideal. Such a search was as
absurd as that other search for a unzversal


eT oe


XVIII CONCLUSION 249


language, with the immobility of the concept and
of the abstraction. The social need for a better
understanding of one another cannot be satisfied
save by universal culture, by the increase of
communications, and by the interchange of
thought among men.

These observations must suffice to show that
all the scientific problems of Linguistic are the
same as those of A®sthetic, and that the truths
and errors of the one are the truths and errors
of the other. If Linguistic and A¢sthetic appear
to be two different sciences, this arises from the
fact that people think of the former as grammar,
or as a mixture between philosophy and grammar,
that is, an arbitrary mnemonic scheme. They do
not think of it as a rational science and as a
pure philosophy of speech. Grammar, or some-
thing grammatical, also causes the prejudice in
people's minds, that the reality of language lies
in isolated and combinable words, not in living
discourse among expressive organisms, rationally
indivisible.

Those linguists, or glottologists with philo-
sophical endowments, who have best fathomed
questions of language, resemble (to employ a
worn but efficacious figure) workmen piercing a


tunnel: at a certain point they must hear the


Conclusion.


250 THEORY OF ASTaETIe XVIII


voices of their companions, the philosophers of
“Esthetic, who have been piercing it from the
other side. At a certain stage of scientific
elaboration; Linguistic, in so: far asi 18
philosophy, must be merged in A¢sthetic; and
indeed it is merged in it, without leaving a
residue.


Hib TORICAL SUNAIARY


AESTHETIC IDEAS IN GRAECO-ROMAN ANTIQUITY


THE question, as to whether Aésthetic should be looked
upon as ancient or modern, has often been discussed.
The answer will depend upon the view taken of the
nature of A‘sthetic.

Benedetto Croce has proved that A%sthetic is the
science of expressive activity, But this knowledge
cannot be reached, until has been defined the nature
of imagination, of representation, of expression, or
whatever we may term that faculty which is theoretic,
but not intellectual, which gives knowledge of the
individual, but not of the universal.

Now the deviations from this, the correct theory,
may arise in two ways: by defect or by excess. Negation
of the special zsthetic activity, or of its autonomy,
is an instance of the former. This amounts to a
mutilation of the reality of the spirit. Of the latter,
the substitution or superposition of another mysterious
and non-existent activity is an example.

These errors each take several forms. That which
errs by defect may be: (a) pure hedonism, which looks
upon art as merely sensual pleasure; (0) rigoristic
hedonism, agreeing with (a), but adding that art is
irreconcilable with the loftiest activities of man; (c)

251


252 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


moralistic or pedagogic hedonism, which admits, with
the two former, that art is mere sensuality, but
believes that it may not only be harmless, but of
some service to morals, if kept in proper subjection
and obedience.

The error by excess also assumes several forms,
but these are indeterminable a griorz. This view is
fully dealt with under the name of mystic, in the
Theory and in the Appendix.

Greco-Roman antiquity was occupied with the
problem in all these forms. In Greece, the problem
of art and of the artistic faculty arose for the first
time after the sophistic movement, as a result of
the Socratic polemic.

With the appearance of the word *mdmesizs or
mimetic, we have a first attempt at grouping the
arts, and the expression, allegoric, or its equivalent,
used in defence of Homer’s poetry, reminds us of
what Plato called “the old quarrel between philosophy
and poetry.”

But when internal facts were all looked upon as
mere phenomena of opinion or feeling, of pleasure or
of pain, of illusion or of arbitrary caprice, there could
be no question of beautiful or ugly, of difference
between the true and the beautiful, or between the
beautiful and the good.

The problem of the nature of art assumes as solved
those problems concerning the difference between
rational and irrational, material and spiritual, bare
fact and value, etc. This was first done in the Socratic
period, and therefore the zsthetic problem could only
arise after Socrates.

And in fact it does arise, with Plato, the author


a


Se


PLATO 253


of the only great negation of art which appears in the
history of tdeas.

Is art rational or irrational? Does it belong to
the noble region of the soul, where dwell philosophy
and virtue, or does it cohabit with sensuality and
with crude passion in the lower regions? This was
the question that Plato asked, and thus was the
zsthetic problem stated for the first time.

His Gorgias remarks with sceptical acumen, that
tragedy is a deception, which brings honour alike to
deceived and to deceiver, and therefore it is blame-
worthy not to know how to deceive and not to allow
oneself to be deceived. This suffices for Gorgias, but
Plato, the philosopher, must resolve the doubt. If it
be in fact deception, down with tragedy and the other
arts! If it be not deception, then what is the place
of tragedy in philosophy and in the righteous life? His
answer was that art or mimetic does not realize the
ideas, or the truth of things, but merely reproduces
natural or artificial things, which are themselves mere
shadows of the ideas. Art, then, is but a shadow
of a shadow, a thing of third-rate degree. The
artificer fashions the object which the painter paints.
The artificer copies the divine idea and the painter
copies him. Art therefore does not belong to the
rational, but to the irrational, sensual sphere of the
soul. It can serve but for sensual pleasure, which


disturbs and_ obscures. Therefore must mimetic,
poetry, and poets be excluded from the perfect
Republic.


Plato observed with truth, that imitation does not
rise to the logical or conceptual sphere, of which
poets and painters, as such, are, in fact, ignorant.


254 HISTORICAL SUMIMARY


But he fazled to realize that there could be any form
of knowledge other than the intellectual.

We now know that intuition lies on this side or
outside the intellect, from which it differs as much
as it does from passion and sensuality.

Plato, with his fine zsthetic sense, would have
been grateful to anyone who could have shown him
how to place art, which he loved and practised so
supremely himself, among the lofty activities of the
spirit. But in his day, no one could give him such
assistance. His conscience and his reason saw that
art makes the false seem the true, and therefore he
resolutely banished it to the lower regions of the
spirit.

The tendency among those who followed Plato
in time was to find some means of retaining art and
of depriving it of the baleful influence which it was.
believed to exercise. Life without art was to the
beauty-loving Greek an impossibility, although he
was equally conscious of the demands of reason and
of morality. Thus it happened that art, which, on
the purely hedonistic hypothesis, had been treated
as a beautiful courtezan, became in the hands of the
moralist, a pedagogue. Aristophanes and Strabo,
and above all Aristotle, dwell upon the didactic and
moralistic possibility of poetry. For Plutarch, poetry
seems to have been a sort of preparation for philosophy,
a twilight to which the eyes should grow accustomed,
before emerging into the full light of day.

Among the Romans, we find Lucretius comparing
the beauties of his great poem to the sweet yellow
honey, with which doctors are wont to anoint the
rim of the cup containing their bitter drugs. Horace,


SOCRATES <PLOTINUS 255


as so frequently, takes his inspiration from the Greek,
when he offers the double view of art: as courtezan
and as pedagogue. In his Ad Prsones occur the
passages, in which we find mingled with the poetic
function, that of the orator—the practical and the
zsthetic. “Was Virgil a poet or an orator?” The
triple duty of pleasing, moving, and teaching, was
imposed upon the poet. Then, with a thought for
the supposed meretricious nature of their art, the
ingenious Horace remarks that both must employ
the seductions of form.

The systic view of art appeared only in late
antiquity, with Plotinus. The curious error of looking
upon Plato as the head of this school and as the Father
of AEsthetic assumes that he who felt obliged to banish
art altogether from the domain of the higher functions
of the spirit, was yet ready to yield to it the highest
place there. The mystical view of Atsthetic accords
a lofty place indeed to A¢sthetic, placing it even above
philosophy. The enthusiastic praise of the beautiful,
to be found in the Gorgias, Philebus, Phedrus, and
Symposium is responsible for this misunderstanding,
but it is well to make perfectly clear that the beautiful,
of which Plato discourses in those dialogues, has nothing
to do with the artistzcally beautiful, nor with the
mysticism of the neo-Platonicians.

Yet the thinkers of antiquity were aware that a
problem lay in the direction of A‘sthetic, and Xenophon
records the sayings of Socrates that the beautiful is
“that which is fitting and answers to the end required.”
Elsewhere he says “it is that which is loved.” Plato
likewise vibrates between various views and offers
* several solutions. Sometimes he appears almost to


256 His CORICAE SUMMARY


confound the beautiful with the true, the good and the
divine ; at others he leans toward the utilitarian view
of Socrates; at others he distinguishes between what
is beautiful in itself and what possesses but a relative
beauty. At other times again, he is a hedonist, and
makes it to consist of pure pleasure, that is, of pleasure
with no shadow of pain; or he finds it in measure
and proportion, or in the very sound, the very colour
itself. The reason for all this vacillation of definition
lay in Plato’s exclusion of the artistic or mimetic fact
from the domain of the higher spiritual activities.
The Hzppzas major expresses this uncertainty more com-
pletely than any of the other dialogues. What is the
beautiful? that is the question asked at the beginning,
and left unanswered at the end. The Platonic Socrates
and Hippias propose the most various solutions, one after
another, but always come out by the gate by which
they entered in. Is the beautiful to be found in
ornament? No, for gold embellishes only where it is in
keeping. Is the beautiful that which seems ugly to no
man? But it is a question of being, not of seeming.
Is it their fitness which makes things seem beautiful ?
But in that case, the fitness which makes them appear
beautiful is one thing, the beautiful another. If the
beautiful be the useful or that which leads to an end,
then evil would also be beautiful, because the useful
may also end evilly. Is the beautiful the helpful, that
which leads to the good? No, for in that case the
good would not be beautiful, nor the beautiful good,
because cause and effect are different.

Thus they argued in the Platonic dialogues,
and when we turn to the pages of Aristotle, we
find him also uncertain and inclined to vary his


Phat O PLOTTING s 257


definitions." Sometimes for him the good and pleasurable
are the beautiful, sometimes it lies in actions, at others
in things motionless, or in bulk and order, or is alto-
gether undefinable. Antiquity also established canons
of the beautiful, and the famous canon of Polycleitus,
on the proportions of the human body, fitly compares
with that of later times on the golden line, and with
the Ciceronian phrase from the Tusculan Disputations.
But these are all of them mere empirical observations,
mere happy remarks and verbal substitutions, which
lead to unsurmountable difficulties when put to
philosophical test.


One important identification is absent in all those ox


early attempts at truth. The beautiful is never
identified with art, and the artistic fact is always
clearly distinguished from beauty, mimetic from its
content. Plotinus first identified the two, and with
him the beautiful and art are dissolved together in a
passion and mystic elevation of the spirit. The beauty
of natural objects is the archetype existing in the soul,
which is the fountain of all natural beauty. Thus was
Plato (he said) in error, when he despised the arts for
imitating nature, for nature herself imitates the idea,
and art also seeks her inspiration directly from those
ideas whence nature proceeds. We have here, with
Plotinus and with Neoplatonism, the first appearance
in the world of mystical A‘sthetic, destined to play so
important a part in later esthetic theory.

Aristotle was far more happy in his attempts at
defining Aésthetic as the science of representation and of
expression than in his definitions of the beautiful. He


1 In the Appendix will be found further striking quotations from and
references to Aristotle. —(D. A.)


Ss


258 HisTORICAL SUMMARY


felt that some element of the problem had been over-
looked, and in attempting in his turn a solution, he had
the advantage over Plato of looking upon the ideas as
simple concepts, not as hypostases of concepts or
of abstractions. Thus reality was more vivid for
Aristotle: it was the synthesis of matter and form. He
saw that art, or mimetic, was a theoretic fact, or a
mode of contemplation. “ But if Poetry be a theoretic
fact, in what way is it to be distinguished from science
and from historical knowledge?” Thus magnificently
does the great philosopher pose the problem at the
commencement of his Poetics, and thus alone can it
be posed successfully. We ask the same question in
the same words to-day. But the problem is difficult,
and the masterly statement of it was not equalled
by the method of solution then available. He made
an excellent start on his voyage of discovery, but
stopped half way, irresolute and perplexed. Poetry,
he says, differs from history, by portraying the
possible, while history deals with what has really
happened. Poetry, like philosophy, aims at the uni-
versal, but in a different way, which the philosopher
indicates as something more (waAXAov Ta KaboXov) which
differentiates poetry from history, occupied with the
particular (ua@\rov ta Kal’ Exacrov). What, then, is
the possible, the something more, and the particular of
poetry? Aristotle immediately falls into error and
confusion, when he attempts to define these words.
Since art has to deal with the absurd and with the
impossible, it cannot be anything rational, but a mere
imitation of reality, in accordance with the Platonic
theory—a fact of sensual pleasure. Aristotle does not,
however, attain to so precise a definition as Plato,


ARISTOLER sPEOIIN US 259


whose erroneous definition he does not succeed in
supplanting. The truth is that he failed of his self-
imposed task ; he failed to discern the true nature of
“Esthetic, although he restated and re-examined the
problem with such marvellous acumen.

After Aristotle, there comes a lull in the discussion,
until Plotinus. The /oetecs were generally little
studied, and the admirable statement of the problem
generally neglected by later writers. Antique psycho-
logy knew the fancy or imagination, as preserving
or reproducing sensuous impressions, or as an inter-
mediary between the concepts and feeling: its
autonomous productive activity was not yet under-
stood. In the Lzfe of Apollonius of Tyana, Philostratus
is said to have been the first to make clear the
difference between mimetic and creative imagination.
But this does not in reality differ from the Aristotelian
mimetic, which is concerned, not only with the real, but
also with the possible. Cicero too, before Philostratus,
speaks of a kind of exquisite beauty lying hidden in
the soul of the artist, which guides his hand and art.
Antiquity seems generally to have been entrammelled in
the meshes of the belief in mimetic, or the duplication
of natural objects by the artist. Philostratus and
the other protagonists of the imagination may have
meant to combat this error, but the shadows lie
heavy until we reach Plotinus.

We find already astir among the sophists the
question as to the nature of language. Admitting
that language is a sign, are we to take that as signify-
ing a spiritual necessity (¢v¥ows) or as a psychological
convention (vouos)? Aristotle made a valuable con-
tribution to this difficult question, when he spoke of


260 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


a kind of proposition other than those which predicate
truth or falsehood, that is, logic. With him edyy is
the term proper to designate desires and aspirations,
which are the vehicle of poetry and of oratory. (It must
be remembered that for Aristotle words, like poetry,
belonged to mimetic.) The profound remark about
the third mode of proposition would, one would have
thought, have led naturally to the separation of
linguistic from logic, and to its classification with
poetry and art. But the Aristotelian logic assumed
a verbal and formal character, which set back the
attainment of this position by many hundred years.
Yet the genius of Epicurus had an intuition of the
truth, when he remarked that the diversity of names
for the same things arose, not from arbitrary caprice,
but from the diverse impression derived from the same
object. The Stoics, too, seem to have had an inkling
of the non-logical nature of speech, but their use of
the word Xexrov leaves it doubtful whether they dis-
tinguished by it the linguistic representation from the
abstract concept, or rather, generically, the meaning
from the sound.


II


ESTHETIC IDEAS IN THE MIDDLE AGE AND
IN THE RENAISSANCE


WELL-NIGH all the theories of antique A¢sthetic
reappear in the Middle Ages, as it were by spontane-
ous generation. Duns Scotus Erigena translated the
Neoplatonic mysticism of the pseudo-Dionysus. The
Christian God took the place of the chief Good or
Idea: God, wisdom, goodness, supreme beauty are the


AQUINAS : DANTE 261


fountains of natural beauty, and these are steps in the
stair of contemplation of the Creator. In this manner
speculation began to be diverted from the art fact,
which had been so prominent with Plotinus. Thomas
Aquinas followed Aristotle in distinguishing the
beautiful from the good, and applied his doctrine of
imitation to the beauty of the second person of the
Trinity (2 quantum est tmago expressa Patris). With
the troubadours, we may find traces of the hedonistic
view of art, and the rigoristic hypothesis finds in
Tertullian and in certain Fathers of the Church staunch
upholders. The retrograde Savonarola occupied the
same position at a later period. But the narcotic,
moralistic, or pedagogic view mostly prevailed, for it best
suited an epoch of relative decadence in culture. It
suited admirably the Middle Age, offering at once an
excuse for the new-born Christian art, and for those
works of classical or pagan art which yet survived.
Specimens of this view abound all through the Middle
Age. We find it, for instance, in the criticism of
Virgil, to whose work were attributed four distinct
meanings : literal, allegorical, moral, and anagogic. For
Dante poetry was xzhzl aliud quam fictio rhetortca in
mustcaque postta. “If the vulgar be incapable of
appreciating my inner meaning, then they shall at
least incline their minds to the perfection of my
beauty. If from me ye cannot gather wisdom, at the
least shall ye enjoy me as a pleasant thing.” Thus
spoke the Muse of Dante, whose Cozvivzo is an attempt
to aid the understanding in its effort to grasp the
moral and pedagogic elements of verse. Poetry was
the gata scienza, “a fiction containing many useful
things covered or veiled.”


|


j


262 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


It would be inexact to identify art in the Middle
Age with philosophy and theology. Its pleasing falsity
could be adapted to useful ends, much in the same
way as matrimony excuses love and sexual union.
This, however, implies that for the Middle Age the
ideal state was celibacy; that is, pure knowledge,
divorced from art.

The only line of explanation that was altogether
neglected in the Middle Age was the right one.

The Poetics of Aristotle were badly rendered into
Latin, from the faulty paraphrase of Averroes, by one
Hermann (1256). The nominalist and realist dispute
brought again into the arena the relations between
thought and speech, and we find Duns Scotus occupied
with the problem in his De modis signtficandi seu
grammatica speculativa, Abelard had defined sensa-
tion as confusa conceptio, and with the importance given
to intuitive knowledge, to the perception of the
individual, of the speczes spectalisstma in Duns Scotus,
together with the denomination of the forms of
knowledge as confusae, indistinctae, and distznctae, we
enter upon a terminology, which we shall see appearing
again, big with results, at the commencement of
modern Aésthetic.

The doctrine of the Middle Age, in respect to art
and letters, may thus be regarded as of interest rather
to the history of culture than to that of general know-
ledge. A like remark holds good of the Renaissance.
Theories of antiquity are studied, countless treatises in
many forms are written upon them, but no really new
ideas as regards zsthetic science appear on the horizon.

We find among the spokesmen of mystical A¢sthetic
in the thirteenth century such names as Marsilio Ficino


ad


NCHA E LD ANGELO  EASSO 263


and Pico della Mirandola. Bembo and many others
wrote on the Beautiful and on Love in the century
that followed. The Dzaloge dt Amore, written in
Italian by a Spanish Jew named Leone and published
in 1535, had a European success, being translated
into many languages. He talks of the universality of
love and of its origin, of beauty that is grace, which
delights the soul and impels it to love. Knowledge
of lesser beauties leads to loftier spiritual beauties.
Leone called these remarks Phdlographia.

Petrarch’s followers versified similar intuitions, while
others wrote parodies and burlesques of this style;
Luca Paciolo, the friend of Leonardo, made the (false)
discovery of the golden section, basing his speculating
upon mathematics; Michael Angelo established an
empirical canon for painting, attempting to give rules
for imparting grace and movement to figures, by means
of certain arithmetical proportions; others found
special meanings in colours; while the Platonicians -


placed the seat of beauty in the soul, the Aristotelians — -


in physical qualities. Agostino Nifo, the Averroist,
after some inconclusive remarks, is at last fortunate
enough to discover where natural beauty really dwells :
its abode is the body of Giovanna d’Aragona, Princess
of Tagliacozzo, to whom he dedicates his book. Tasso
mingled the speculations of the Hzppzas major with
those of Plotinus.

Tommaso Campanella, in his Poeteca, looks upon
the beautiful as szenum bonz, the ugly as s7gnum malt.
By goodness, he means Power, Wisdom, and Love.
Campanella was still under the influence of the
erroneous Platonic conception of the beautiful, but
the use of the word szgz in this place represents


264 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


progress. It enabled him to see that things in them-
selves are neither beautiful nor ugly.

Nothing proves more clearly that the Renaissance
did not overstep the limits of zsthetic theory reached
in antiquity, than the fact that the pedagogic theory
of art continued to prevail, in the face of translations
of the Poetics of Aristotle and of the diffuse labours
expended upon that work. This theory was even
grafted upon the Poetics, where one is surprised to
find it. There are a few hedonists standing out from
the general trend of opinion. The restatement of the
pedagogic position, reinforced with examples taken
from antiquity, was disseminated throughout Europe
by the Italians of the Renaissance. France, Spain,
England, and Germany felt its influence, and we find
the writers of the period of Louis XIV. either frankly
didactic, like Le Bossu (1675), for whom the first
object of the poet is to instruct, or with La Ménardiere
(1640) speaking of poetry as “cette science agréable
qui méle la gravité des préceptes avec la douceur du
langage.” For the former of these critics, Homer was
the author of two didactic manuals relating to military
and political matters: the //zad and the Odyssey.

Didacticism has always been looked upon as
the Poetic of the Renaissance, although the didactic
is not mentioned among the kinds of poetry of that
period. The reason of this lies in the fact that for
the Renaissance all poetry was didactic, in addition
to any other qualities which it might possess. The
active discussion of poetic theory, the criticism of
Aristotle and of Plato’s exclusion of poetry, of the
possible and of the verisimilar, if it did not contribute
much original material to the theory of art, yet at


Vee eros VI CENTURIES 265


any rate sowed the seeds which afterwards germinated
and bore fruit. Why, they asked with Aristotle, at
the Renaissance, does poetry deal with the universal,
history with the particular? What is the reason for
poetry being obliged to seek verisimilitude? What
does Raphael mean by the “certain idea,’ which he
follows in his painting?

These themes and others cognate were dealt with
by Italian and by Spanish writers, who occasionally
reveal wonderful acumen, as when Francesco Patrizio,
criticizing Aristotle’s theory of imitation, remarks:
“All languages and all philosophic writings and all
other writings would be poetry, because they are made
of words, and words are imitations.” But as yet no
one dared follow such a clue to the labyrinth, and
the Renaissance closes with the sense of a mystery
yet to be revealed.


III
SEVENTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES


THE seventeenth century is remarkable for the
ferment of thought upon this difficult problem. Such
words as genius, taste, imagination or fancy, and
feeling, appear in this literature, and deserve a passing
notice. As regards the word “genius,” we find the
Italian “ ingegno” opposed to the intellect, and Dialectic
adorned with the attributes of the latter, while Rhetoric
has the advantage of “ingegno” in all its forms,
such as “concetti” and “acutezze.” With these the
English word ingenious has an obvious connection,
especially in its earlier use as applied to men of
letters. The French worked upon the word “ ingegno”


266 iS LORICAL. SU NNEARY,


and evolved from it in various associations the ex-
pressions “¢sprit,; “beaux Esprits’ Fhe manuas
of the Spanish Jesuit, Baltasar Gracian, became
celebrated throughout Europe, and here we find
“ingegno” described as the truly inventive faculty,
and from it the English word “genius,” the Italian
“genio,” the French “ génie,” first enter into general use.

The word “gusto” or taste, “good taste,” in its
modern sense, also sprang into use about this time.
Taste was held to be a judicial faculty, directed to
the beautiful, and thus to some extent distinct from
the intellectual judgment. It was further bisected into
active and passive; but the former ran into the
definition of “ingegno,” the latter described sterility.
The word “gusto,” or taste as judgment, was in use
in Italy at a very early period; and in Spain we
find Lope di Vega and his contemporaries declaring
that their object is to “delight the taste” of their
public. These uses of the word are not of significance
as regards the problem of art, and we must return
to Baltasar Gracian (1642) for a definition of taste
as a special faculty or attitude of the soul. Italian
writers of the period echo the praises of this laconic
moralist, who, when he spoke of “a man of taste,”
meant to describe what we call to-day “a man of
tact” in the conduct of life.

The first use of the word in a strictly zsthetic
sense occurs in France in the last quarter of
the seventeenth century. La Bruyeére writes in his
Caractéres (1688): “Il y a dans lart un point de
perfection, comme de bonté ou de maturité dans la
nature: “celui qui le sent et qui laime, a le gots
parfait; celui qui ne le sent pas, et qui aime au


SF ORZA-PALEAVIGING 267


deca ou au dela, a le goat défectueux. I! y a donc
un bon et un mauvais goitit, et lon dispute des gotits
avec fondement.” Delicacy and variability or variety
were appended as attributes of taste. This French
definition of the Italian word was speedily adopted
in England, where it became “good taste,” and we
find it used in this sense in Italian and German
writers of about this period.

The words “imagination” and “fancy” were also
passed through the crucible in this century. We find
the Cardinal Sforza-Pallavicino (1644) blaming those
who look for truth or falsehood, for the verisimilar or
for historical truth, in poetry. Poetry, he holds, has
to do with the primary apprehensions, which give
neither truth nor falsehood. Thus the fancy takes the
place of the verisimilar of certain students of Aristotle.
The Cardinal continues his eloquence with the clinch-
ing remark that if the intention of poetry were to be
believed true, then its real end would be falsehood,
which is absolutely condemned by the law of nature
and by God. The sole object of poetic fables is, he
says, to adorn our intellect with sumptuous, new,
marvellous, and splendid imaginings, and so great has
been the benefits accruing from this to the human race,
that poets have been rewarded with a glory superior
to any other, and their names have been crowned with
divine honours. This, he says in his treatise, Del Bene,
has been the just reward of poets, albeit they have not
been bearers of knowledge, nor have they manifested truth.

This throwing of the bridle on the neck of Pegasus
seemed to Muratori sixty years later to be altogether too
risky a proceeding—although advocated by a Prince
of the Church! He reinserts the bit of the verisimilar,


268 HISTORICAL SUNARY


though he talks with admiration of the fancy, that
“inferior apprehensive” faculty, which is content to
“represent” things, without seeking to know if they be
true or false, a task which it leaves to the “ superior
apprehensive” faculty of the intellect. The severe
Gravina, too, finds his heart touched by the beauty
of poetry, when he calls it “a witch, but wholesome.”

As early as 1578, Huarte had maintained that
eloquence is the work of the imagination, not of the
intellect ; in England, Bacon (1605) attributed know-
ledge to the intellect, history to memory, and poetry
to the imagination or fancy; Hobbes described the
manifestations of the latter; and Addison devoted
several numbers of the Spectator to the analysis of
“the pleasures of the imagination.”

During the same period, the division between those
who are accustomed “a juger par le sentiment” and
those who “raisonnent par les principes” became
marked in France. Du Bos (1719) is an interesting
example of the upholder of the feelings as regards the
production of art. Indeed, there is in his view no
other criterion, and the feeling for art is a sixth sense,
against which intellectual argument is useless. This
French school of thought found a reflex in England
with the position assigned there to emotion in artistic
work. But the confusion of such words as imagina-
tion, taste, feeling, wit, shows that at this time there
was a suspicion that these words were all applicable
to the same fact. Alexander Pope thus distinguished
wit and judgment :

For wit and judgment often are at strife,


Though meant each other’s aid like man and wife.


But there was a divergence of opinion as to whether


BACON -VOETAIRE 269


the latter should be looked upon as part of the intellect
or not.

There was the same divergence of opinion as to
taste and intellectual judgment. As regards the
former, the opposition to the intellectual principle was
reinforced in the eighteenth century by Kant in his
Krittk der Urtheilskraft. But Voltaire and writers
anterior to him frequently fell back into intellectualist
definitions of a word invented precisely to avoid them.
Dacier (1684) writes of taste as “Une harmonie, un
accord de l’esprit et de la raison.” The difficulties sur-
rounding a true definition led to the creation of the
expression mon so che, or je ne Sats quot, or no
se gué, which throws into clear relief the confusion
between taste and intellectual judgment.

As regards imagination and feeling, or sentiment,
there was a strong tendency to sensualism. The
Cardinal Sforza-Pallavicino talks of poetry as ignoring
alike truth or falsehood and yet delighting the senses.
He approves of the remark that poetry should make
us “raise our eyebrows,” but in later life this keen-eyed
prince seems to have fallen back from the brilliant
intuition of his earlier years into the pedagogic theory.
Muratori was convinced that fancy was entirely sensual,
and therefore he posted the intellect beside it, “to
refrain its wild courses, like a friend having authority.”
Gravina practically coincides in this view of poetic
fancy, as a subordinate faculty, incapable of knowledge,
fit only to be used by moral philosophy for the intro-
duction into the mind of the true, by means of novelty
and the marvellous.

In England, also, Bacon held poetry to belong to
the fancy, and assigned to it a place between history


270 HISTORICAL SUSINAR Y


and science. Epic poetry he awarded to the former,
“ parabolic” poetry to the latter. Elsewhere he talks
of poetry as a dream, and affirms that it is to be held
“rather as an amusement of the intelligence than as
a science.” For him music, painting, sculpture, and
the other arts are merely pleasure-giving. Addison
reduced the pleasures of the imagination to those
caused by visible objects, or by ideas taken from them.
These pleasures he held to be inferior to those of the
senses and less refined than those of the intellect. He
looked upon imaginative pleasure as consisting in
resemblances discovered between imitations and things
imitated, between copies and originals, an exercise
adapted to sharpen the spirit of observation.

The sensualism of the writers headed by Du Bos,
who looked upon art as a mere pastime, like a tourna-
ment or a bull-fight, shows that the truth about
Esthetic had not yet succeeded in emerging from the
other spiritual activities. Yet the new words and the
new views of the seventeenth century have great
importance for the origins of A‘sthetic; they were the
direct result of the restatement of the problem by the
writers of the Renaissance, who themselves took it up
where Antiquity had left it. These new words, and
the discussions which arose from them, were the
demands of Aésthetic for its theoretical justification.
But they were not able to provide this justification, and
it could not come from elsewhere.

With Descartes, we are not likely to find much
sympathy for such studies as relate to wit, taste, fancy,
or feelings. He ignored the famous non so che; he
abhorred the imagination, which he believed to result
from the agitation of the animal spirits. He did not


DESCARTES 7 LOCKE B71


altogether condemn poetry, but certainly looked upon
it as the folle du logis, which must be strictly supervised
by the reason. Boileau is the exsthetic equivalent of
Cartesian intellectualism, Boileau gue Ja raison a ses
vegles engage, Boileau the enthusiast for allegory.
France was infected with the mathematical spirit
of Cartesianism and all possibility of a serious con-
_ sideration of poetry and of art was thus removed.
Witness the diatribes of Malebranche against the
imagination, and listen to the Italian, Antonio Conti,
writing from France in 1756 on the theme of the
literary disputes that were raging at the time: “ They
have introduced the method of M. Descartes into
belles- lettres; they judge poetry and _ eloquence
independently of their sensible qualities. Thus they

also confound the progress of philosophy with that
of the arts, The Abbé Terrasson says that the
moderns are greater geometricians than the ancients ;
_ therefore they are greater orators and greater poets.”
La Motte, Fontenelle, Boileau, and Malebranche carried

on this battle, which was taken up by the Encyclopadists,
_ and when Du Bos published his daring book, Jean
Jacques le Bel published a reply to it (1726), in which
he denied to sentiment its claim to judge of art. Thus
Cartesianism could not possess an Aésthetic of the
imagination. The Cartesian J. P. de Crousaz Cr ga3
found the beautiful to consist in what is approved of,”
and thereby reduced it to ideas, ignoring the pleasing
and sentiment.

Locke was as intellectualist in the England of this
period as was Descartes in France. He speaks of
wit as combining ideas in an agreeable variety,
which strikes the imagination, while the intellect or


272 + HISTORICAL SUMMARY


judgment seeks for differences according to truth. The
wit, then, consists of something which is not at all in
accordance with truth and reason. For Shaftesbury,
taste is a sense or instinct of the beautiful, of order
and proportion, identical with the moral sense and
with its “preconceptions” anticipating the recognition
of reason. Body, spirit, and God are the three degrees
of beauty. Francis Hutcheson proceeded from
Shaftesbury and made popular “the internal sense
of beauty, which lies somewhere between sensuality
and rationality and is occupied with discussing unity
in variety, concord in multiplicity, and the true, the
good, and the beautiful in their substantial identity.”
Hutcheson allied the pleasure of art with this sense,
that is, with the pleasure of imitation and of the
likeness of the copy to the original. This he looked
upon as relative beauty, to be distinguished from
absolute beauty. The same view dominates the
English writers of the eighteenth century, among
whom may be mentioned Reid, the head of the
' Scottish school, and Adam Smith.

With far greater philosophical vigour, Leibnitz in
Germany opened the door to that crowd of psychic
facts which Cartesian intellectualism had rejected with
horror. His conception of reality as contznuous (natura
non facit saltus) left room for imagination, taste, and
their congeners. Leibnitz believed that the scale of
being ascended from the lowliest to God. What we
now term esthetic facts were then identified with
what Descartes and Leibnitz had called “confused”
knowledge, which might become “clear,” but not
distinct. It might seem that when he applied this
terminology to zsthetic facts, Leibnitz had recognized


cmc


;


;


3


LEIBNITZ 27%


their peculiar essence, as being neither sensual nor
intellectual. They are not sensual for him, because
they have their own “clarity,” differing from pleasure
and sensual emotion, and from intellectual “ distinctio.”
But the Leibnitzian law of continuity and intellectualism
did not permit of such an interpretation. Obscurity
and clarity are here to be understood as quantitative


- grades of a sengle form of knowledge, the distinct or
intellectual, toward which they both tend and reach
at a superior grade. Though artists judge with con-
fused perceptions, which are clear but not distinct,


these may yet be corrected and proved true by


| intellective knowledge. The intellect clearly and
distinctly knows the thing which the imagination
_knows confusedly but clearly. This view of Leibnitz
amounts to saying that the realization of a work of
art can be perfected by intellectually determining its


concept. Thus Leibnitz held that there was only one


true form of knowledge, and that all other forms could


only reach perfection in that. His “clarity” is not
a specific difference ; it is merely a partial anticipation


of his intellective “distinction”’ To have posited
this grade is an important achievement, but the view


of Leibnitz is not fundamentally different from that


of the creators of the words and intuitions already
studied. All contributed to attract attention to the
_ peculiarity of zesthetic facts.


Speculation on language at this period revealed an


equally determined intellectualist attitude. Grammar


was held to be an exact science, and grammatical

variations to be explainable by the ellipse, by abbrevia-

tion, and by failure to grasp the typical logical form.

In France, with Arnauld (1660), we have the rigorous
a


274 HIS FORICAL SU MIIARY


Cartesian intellectualism ; Leibnitz and Locke both
speculated upon this subject, and the former all his life
nourished the thought of a universal language. The
absurdity of this is proved in this volume.

A complete change of the Cartesian system, upon
which Leibnitz based his own, was necessary, if specu-
lation were ever to surpass the Leibnitzian esthetic,
But Wolff and the other German pupils of Leibnitz
were as unable to shake themselves free of the all-
pervading intellectualism as were the French pupils of
Descartes.

Meanwhile a young student of Berlin, named
Alexander Amedeus Baumgarten, was studying the
Wolffian philosophy, and at the same time lecturing in
poetry and Latin rhetoric. While so doing, he was led
to rethink and pose afresh the problem of how to
reduce the precepts of rhetoric to a rigorous philo-
sophical system. Thus it came about that Baumgarten
published in September 1735, at the age of twenty-one,
as the thesis for his degree of Doctor, an opuscule
entitled, Medztatzones philosophicae de nonnullis ad poéma
pertinentibus, and in it we find written for the first time
the word “ Aésthetic,” as the name of a special science.
Baumgarten ever afterwards attached great importance
to his juvenile discovery, and lectured upon it by request
in 1742, at Frankfort-on-the-Oder, and again in 1749.
It is interesting to know that in this way Emmanuel
Kant first became acquainted with the theory of
Esthetic, which he greatly altered when he came to
treat of it in his philosophy. In 1750, Baumgarten
published the first volume of a more ample treatise, and
a second part in 1762. But illness, and death in
1762, prevented his completing his work.


BAUMGARTEN 275


What is Atsthetic for Baumgarten? It is the
science of sensible knowledge. Its objects are the
sensible facts (aic@n7a), which the Greeks were always
careful to distinguish from the mental facts (vonTd).
It is therefore sctentza cognitionts sensitivae, theorta ltbe-
valium artium, gnoseologia inferior, ars pulcre cogitandt,
ars analogi rationis. Rhetoric and Poetic are for him
special cases of Aésthetic, which is a general science,
embracing both. Its laws are diffused among all the
arts, like the mariner’s ‘star (cynosura quaedam), and
they must be always referred to in all cases, for they
are universal, not empirical or merely inductive (/a/sa


regula pejor est quam nulla). Atsthetic must not be —


confounded with Psychology, which supplies only
suppositions. Aésthetic is an independent _ science,
which gives the rules for knowing sensibly, and is
occupied with the perfection of sensible knowledge,
which is beauty. Its contrary is ugliness. The beauty
‘of objects and of matter must be excluded from the
beauty of sensible knowledge, because beautiful objects
can be badly thought and ugly objects beautifully
thought. Poetic representations are those which are
confused or imaginative. Distinction and intellectuality
are not poetic. The greater the determination, the
greater the poctry ; individuals absolutely determined
(omnimodo determzinata) are very poetical, as are images
or fancies, and everything which refers to feeling. The
judgment of sensible and imaginative representations is
taste.

Such are, in brief, the truths which Baumgarten
stated in his Medztatzones, and further developed and
exemplified in his Aesthetzca. Close study of the two
works above-mentioned leads to the conviction that


276 HISTORICAL SUMMARY.


Baumgarten did not succeed in freeing himself from the
unity of the Leibnitzian monadology. He obtained
from Leibnitz his conception of the poetic as consisting
of the confused, but German critics are wrong in
believing that he attributed to it a positive, not a
negative quality. Had he really done this, he would
have broken at a blow the unity of the Leibnitzian
monad, and conquered the science of A¢sthetic.

This giant’s step he did not take: he failed to
banish the contradictions of Leibnitz and of the other
intellectualists. To posit a perfection did not suffice.
It was necessary to maintain it against the lex continut
of Leibnitz and to proclaim its independence of. all
intellectualism. A*sthetic truths for Baumgarten were
those which did not seem altogether false or altogether
true: in fact, the verisimilar. If it were objected to
Baumgarten that one should not occupy oneself with
what, like poetry, he defines as confused and obscure,
he would reply that confusion is a condition of finding
the truth, that we do not pass at once from night to
dawn. Thus he did not surpass the thought of Leibnitz
in this respect. Poor Baumgarten was always in
suspense lest he should be held to occupy himself with
things unworthy of a philosopher! ‘“ How can you, a
professor of philosophy, dare to praise lying and the
mixture of truth and falsehood?” He imagined that
some such reproach might be addressed to him on
account of his purely philosophical speculations, and
true enough he actually received a criticism of his
theory, in which it was argued, that if poetry consisted
of sensual perfection, then it was a bad thing for man-
kind. Baumgarten contemptuously replied that he had
not the time to argue with those capable of confounding


VICO eae |


his oratio perfecta sensttiva with an oratio perfecte
(omnino!) sensttzva.

The fact about Baumgarten is that apart from
baptizing the new science A¢sthetic, and apart from his
first definitions, he does not stray far from the old ruts
of scholastic thought. The excellent Baumgarten, with
all his ardour and all his convictions, is a sympathetic
and interesting figure in the history of A®sthetic not
yet formed, but in process of formation.

The revolutionary who set aside the old de-
finitions of A®sthetic, and for the first time revealed
the true nature of art and poetry, is the Italian,

_Giambattista Vico.

What were the ideas developed by Vico in his
Scienza nuova (1725)? They were neither more nor
less than the solution of the problem, posed by Plato,
attempted in vain by Aristotle, again posed and again
unsolved at the Renaissance.

Is poetry a rational or an irrational thing? Is
it spiritual or animal? If it be spiritual, what is
its true nature, and in what way does it differ from
art and science ?

Plato, we know, banished poetry to the inferior
region of the soul, among the animal spirits. Vico on
the contrary raises up poetry, and makes of it a period
in the history of humanity. And since Vico’s is an
ideal history, whose periods are not concerned with
contingent facts, but with spiritual forms, he makes
of it a moment of the ideal history of the spirit, a
form of knowledge. Poetry comes before the intellect,
but after feeling. Plato had confused it with feeling, and
for that reason banished it from his Republic. “Men
feel,” says Vico, “before observing, then they observe


278 HISTORICAL: SUMMARY.


with perturbation of the soul, finally they reflect
with the pure intellect.” He goes on to say, that
poetry being composed of passion and of feeling, the
nearer it approaches to the partzcular, the more ¢rue it
is, while exactly the reverse is true of philosophy.

Imagination is independent and autonomous as
regards the intellect. Not only does the intellect fail
of perfection, but all it can do is to destroy it. “The
studies of Poetry and Metaphysic are naturally opposed.
Poets are the feeling, philosophers the intellect of the
human race.” The weaker the reason, the stronger the
imagination. Philosophy, he says, deals with abstract
thought or universals, poetry with the particular.
Painters and poets differ only in their material. Homer
and the great poets appear in barbaric times. Dante,
for instance, appeared in “the renewed barbarism of
Italy.” The poetic ages preceded the philosophical,
and poetry is the father of prose, by “ necessity of
nature,” not by the “caprice of pleasure.” Fables or
“imaginary universals” were conceived before “ reasoned
or philosophical universals.” To Homer, says Vico,
belongs wisdom, but only poetic wisdom. “ His
beauties are not those of a spirit softened and civilized
by any philosophy.”

If any one make poetry in epochs of reflexion, he
becomes a child again; he does not reflect with his
intellect, but follows his fancy and dwells upon
particulars. Ifthe true poet make use of philosophic
ideas, he only does so that he may change logic into
imagination.

Here we have a profound statement of the line
of demarcation between science and art. They cannot
be confused again.


VICO 279


His statement of the difference between poetry and
history is a trifle less clear. He explains why to
Aristotle poetry seemed more philosophical than
history, and at the same time he refutes Aristotle’s
error that poetry deals with the universal, history
with the particular. Poetry equals science, not
because it is occupied with the intellectual concept, but
because, like science, it is ideal. A good poetical
fapie must be all. ideal: * With the idea the poet
gives their being to things which are without it.
Poetry is all fantastic, as being the art of painting the
idea, not icastic, like the art of painting portraits.
That is why poets, like painters, are called divine,
because in that respect they resemble God the Creator.”
Vico ends by identifying poetry and history. The
difference between them is posterior and accidental.
“But, as it is impossible to impart false ideas,
because the false consists of a vicious combination of
ideas, so it is impossible to impart a tradition, which,
though it be false, has not at first contained some
element of truth. Thus mythology appears for the
first time, not as the invention ofan individual, but as
the spontaneous vision of the truth as it appears to
primitive man.” ‘ye

Poetry and language are for Vico substantially
identical. He finds in the origins of poetry the origins
of languages and letters. He believed that the first
languages consisted in mute acts or acts accompanied
by bodies which had natural relations to the ideas
that it was desired to signify. With great cleverness
he compared these pictured languages to heraldic
arms and devices, and to hieroglyphs. He observed
that during the barbarism of the Middle Age, the mute


280 His FORICAE SU MIMARY:


language of signs must return, and we find it in the
heraldry and blazonry of that epoch. Hence come
three kinds of languages: divine silent languages,
heroic emblematic languages, and speech languages,

Formal logic could never satisfy a man with such
revolutionary ideas upon poetry and language. He
describes the Aristotelian syllogism as a method which
explains universals in their particulars, rather than
unites particulars to obtain universals, looks upon
Zeno and the sorites as a means of subtilizing rather
than sharpening the intelligence, and concludes that
_ Bacon is a great philosopher, when he advocates and
illustrates zaduction, “which has been followed by the
English to the great advantage of experimental
philosophy.” Hence he proceeds to criticize mathe-
matics, which had hitherto always been looked upon
as the type of the perfect science.

Vico is indeed a revolutionary, a pioneer. He
knows very well that he is in direct opposition to all
that has been thought before about poetry. “ My new
principles of poetry upset all that first Plato and then
Aristotle have said about the origin of poetry, all that
has been said by the Patrizzi, by the Scaligers, and by
the Castelvetri. I have discovered that it was through
lack of human reason that poetry was born so sublime
that neither the Arts, nor the Poetics, nor the Critiques
could cause another equal to it to be born, I say equal,
and not superior.” He goes as far as to express shame
at having to report the stupidities of great philosophers
upon the origin of song and verse. He shows his
dislike for the Cartesian philosophy and its tendency
to dry up the imagination “by denying all the faculties
of the soul which come to it from the body,” and


VICO 281


talks of his own time as of one “which freezes all the
generous quality of the best poetry and thus precludes
it from being understood.”

As regards grammatical forms, Vico may _ be
described as an adherent of the great reaction of the
Renaissance against scholastic verbalism and formalism.
This reaction brought back as a value the experience
of feeling, and afterwards with Romanticism gave its
right place to the imagination. Vico, in his Sczenza
nuova, may be said to have been the first to draw
attention to the imagination. Although he makes
many luminous remarks on history and the develop-
ment of poetry among the Greeks, his work is not
really a history, but a science of the spirit or of
the ideal. It is not the ethical, logical, or economic
moment of humanity which interests him, but the
tmaginative moment. He adrscovered the creative
imagination, and it may almost be said of the Scéenza
nuova of Vico that it is A%sthetic, the discovery of
a new world, of a new mode of knowledge.

This was the contribution of the genius of Vico
to the progress of humanity: he showed Atsthetic
to be an autonomous activity. It remained to dis-
tinguish the science of the spirit from history, the
modifications of the human spirit from the historic
vicissitudes of peoples, A¢sthetic from Homeric civil-
ization.

But although Goethe, Herder, and Wolf were
acquainted with the Sccenza nuova, the importance
of this wonderful book did not at first dawn upon
the world. Wolf, in his prolegomena to Homer,
thought that he was dealing merely with an ingenious
speculator on Homeric themes. He did not realize


282 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


that the intellectual stature of Vico far surpassed that
of the most able philologists.

The fortunes of Atsthetic after Vico were very
various, and the list of zstheticians who fell back
into the old pedagogic definition, or elaborated the
mistakes of Baumgarten, is very long. Yet with
C. H. MHeydenreich in Germany and Sulzer in
Switzerland we find that the truths contained in
Baumgarten have begun to bear fruit. J. J. Herder
(1769) was more important than these, and he
placed Baumgarten upon a pedestal, though criticizing
his pretension of creating an ars pulchre cogitandt
instead of a simple sczentia de pulchro et pulchris
philosophice cogitans. Herder admitted Baumgarten’s
definition of poetry as oratzo sensitiva perfecta, perfect
sensitived speech, and this is probably the best definition
of poetry that has ever been given. It touches the
real essence of poetry and opens to thought the whole
of the philosophy of the beautiful. Herder, although
he does not cite Vico upon esthetic questions, yet
praises him as a philosopher. His remarks about
poetry as “the maternal language of humanity, as
the garden is more ancient than the cultivated field,
painting than writing, song than declamation, exchange
than commerce,” are replete with the spirit of the
Italian philosopher.

But despite similar happy phrases, Herder is
philosophically the inferior of the great Italian. He
is a firm believer in the Leibnitzian law of continuity,
and does not surpass the conclusions of Baumgarten.

Herder and his friend Hamann did good service
as regards the philosophy of language. The French
encyclopedists, J. J. Rousseau, d’Alembert, and many


HERDER : HAMANN 283


others of this period, were none of them able to
get free of the idea that a word is either a natural,
mechanical fact, or a sign attached to a thought.
The only way out of this difficulty is to look upon the
imagination as itself active and expressive in verbal
imagination, and language as the language of zztuztzon,
not of the intelligence. Herder talks of language as
“an understanding of the soul with itself.” Thus
language begins to appear, not as an_ arbitrary
invention or a mechanical fact, but as a_ primitive
affirmation of human activity, as a creatzon.,

But all unconscious of the discoveries of Vico, the
great mass of eighteenth century writers try their hands
at every sort of solution. The Abbé Batteux published
in 1746 Les Beaux-arts réduits a un seul princtpe,
which is a perfect little bouquet of contradictions.
The Abbé finds himself confronted with difficulties
at every turn, but with “un peu d’esprit on se tire de
tout,” and when for instance he has to explain artistic
enjoyment of things displeasing, he remarks that the
imitation never being perfect like reality, the horror
caused by reality disappears.

But the French were equalled and indeed surpassed
by the English in their amateur A¢sthetics. The
painter Hogarth was one day reading in Italian a
speech about the beauty of certain figures, attributed
to Michael Angelo. This led him to imagine that
the figurative arts depend upon a principle which
consists of conforming to a given line. In 1745 he
produced a serpentine line as frontispiece of his collec-
tion of engravings, which he described as “the line of
beauty.” Thus he succeeded in exciting universal
curiosity, which he proceeded to satisfy with his


284 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


“Analysis of Beauty.” Here he begins by rightly
combating the error of judging paintings by their subject
and by the degree of their imitation, instead of by
their form, which is the essential in art. He gives
his definition of form, and afterwards proceeds to
describe the waving lines which are beautiful and those
which are not, and maintains that among them all
there is but one that is really worthy to be called “the
line of beauty,” and one definite serpentine line “the
line of grace.” The pig, the bear, the spider, and the
frog are ugly, because they do not possess serpentine
lines. E. Burke, with a like assurance in his examples,
was equally devoid of certainty in his general principles.
He declares that the natural properties of an object
cause pleasure or pain to the imagination, but that the
latter also procures pleasure from their resemblance
to the original. He does not speak further of the
second of these, but gives a long list of the natural
properties of the sensible, beautiful object. Having
concluded his list, he remarks that these are in his
opinion the qualities upon which beauty depends and
which are the least liable to caprice and confusion.
But “comparative smallness, delicate structure, colour-
ing vivid but not too much so,” are all mere empirical
observations of no more value than those of Hogarth,
with whom Burke must be classed as an esthetician.
Their works are spoken of as “classics.” Classics
indeed they are, but of the sort that arrive at no
conclusion.

Henry Home (Lord Kaimes) is on a level a trifle
above the two just mentioned. He seeks “the true
principles of the beaux-arts,’ in order to transform
criticism into “a rational science.” He selects facts


PLATNER 285


and experience for this purpose, but in his definition
of beauty, which he divides into two parts, relative and
intrinsic, he is unable to explain the latter, save by a
final cause, which he finds in the Almighty.

Such theories as the three above mentioned defy
classification, because they are not composed by any
scientific method. Their authors pass from physiological
sensualism to moralism, from imitation of nature to
finalism, and to transcendental mysticism, without
consciousness of the incongruity of their theses, at
variance each with itself.

The German, Ernest Platner, at any rate did not
suffer from a like confusion of thought. He developed
his researches on the lines of Hogarth, but was only
able to discover a prolongation of sexual pleasure in
zesthetic facts. “Where,” he exclaims, “is there any
beauty that does not come from the feminine figure,
the centre of all beauty? The undulating line is
beautiful, because it is found in the body of woman ;
essentially feminine movements are beautiful ; the notes
of music are beautiful, when they melt into one another ;
a poem is beautiful, when one thought embraces another
with lightness and facility.”

French sensualism shows itself quite incapable of
understanding esthetic production, and the associa-
tionism of David Hume is not more fortunate in this
respect.

The Dutchman Hemsterhuis (1769) developed an
ingenious theory, mingling mystical and_ sensualist
theory with some just remarks, which afterwards,
in the hands of Jacobi, became _ sentimentalism.
Hemsterhuis believed beauty to be a phenomenon
arising from the meeting by the sentimentalism, which


286 HISTORICAL SU ViN AY.


gives multiplicity, with the internal sense, which tends
to unity. Consequently the beautiful will be that
which presents the greatest number of ideas in the
shortest space of time. To man is denied supreme
unity, but here he finds approximative unity. Hence
the joy arising from the beautiful, which has some
analogy with the joy of love.

With Winckelmann (1764) Platonism or Neo-
platonism was vigorously renewed. The creator of the
history of the figurative arts saw in the divine
indifference and more than human elevation of the
works of Greek sculpture a beauty which had descended
from the seventh heaven and become incarnate in them.
Mendelssohn, the follower of Baumgarten, had denied
beauty to God: Winckelmann, the Neoplatonician,
gave it back to Him. He holds that perfect beauty
is to be found only in God. “The conception of
human beauty becomes the more perfect in proportion
as it can be thought as in agreement with the Supreme
Being, who is distinguished from matter by His unity
and indivisibility.” To the other characteristics of
supreme beauty, Winckelmann adds “the absence of
any sort of signification” (Unbezeichnung). Lines and
dots cannot explain beauty, for it is not they alone
which form it. Its form is not proper to any definite
person, it expresses no sentiment, no feeling of passion,
for these break up unity and diminish or obscure
beauty. According to Winckelmann, beauty must be
like a drop of pure water taken from the spring,
which is the more healthy the less it has of taste,
because it is purified of all foreign elements.

A special faculty is required to appreciate this
beauty, which Winckelmann is inclined to call in-


WINCKELMANN 287


telligence, or a delicate internal sense, free of all
instinctive passions, of pleasure, and of friendship.
Since it becomes a question of perceiving something
immaterial, Winckelmann banishes colour to a secondary
place. True beauty, he says, is that of form, a word
which describes lines and contours, as though lines and
contours could not also be perceived by the senses,
or could appear to the eye without any colour.

It is the destiny of error to be obliged to con-
tradict itself, when it does not decide to dwell in a
brief aphorism, in order to live as well as may be
with facts and concrete problems. The “ History” of
Winckelmann dealt with historic concrete facts, with
which it was necessary to reconcile the idea of a
supreme beauty. His admission of the contours of
lines and his secondary admission of colours is
a compromise. He makes another with regard to the
principle of expression. “Since there is no_inter-
mediary between pain and pleasure in human nature,
and since a human being without these feelings is
inconceivable, we must place the human figure in
a moment of action and of passion, which is what is
termed expression in art.” So Winckelmann studied
expression after beauty. He makes a third compromise
between his one, indivisible, supreme, and constant
beauty and individual beauties. Winckelmann_pre-
feted ‘the. tale to the. female body .as. the most
complete incarnation of supreme beauty, but he was
not able to shut his eyes to the indisputable fact that
there also exist beautiful bodies of women and even
of animals.

Raphael Mengs, the painter, was an intimate friend
of Winckelmann and associated himself with him in


288 HIS fLORICAL SUNIMARY


his search for a true definition of the beautiful. His
ideas were generally in accordance with those of
Winckelmann. He defines beauty as “the visible idea
of perfection, which is to perfection what the visible
is to the mathematical point.” He falls under the
influence of the argument from design. The Creator
has ordained the multiplicity of beauties. Things are
beautiful according to our ideas of them, and these
ideas come from the Creator. Thus each beautiful
thing has its own type, and a child would appear ugly
if it resembled a man. He adds to his remarks in
this sense: “As the diamond is alone perfect among
stones, gold among metals, and man among living
creatures, so there is distinction in each _ species,
ana. Dut little “is periect.. In “his “yeas, ae
Beauty, he looks upon beauty as “an intermediate
disposition,” which contains a part of perfection and
a part of the agreeable, and forms a ¢ertium quid, which
differs from the other two and deserves a special name.
He names four sources of the art of painting: beauty,
significant or expressive character, harmony, and
colouring. The first of these he finds among the
ancients, the second with Raphael, the third with
Correggio, the fourth with Titian. Mengs does not
succeed in rising above this empiricism of the studio,
save to declaim about the beauty of nature, virtue,
forms, and proportions, and indeed everything, including
the First Cause, which is the most beautiful of all.

The name of G. E. Lessing (1766) is well known
to all concerned with art problems. The ideas of
Winckelmann reappear in Lessing, with less of a
metaphysical tinge. For Lessing, the end of art is the
pleasing, and since this is “a superfluous thing,” he


Pe ooING 289


thought that the legislator should not allow to art
the liberty indispensable to science, which seeks
the truth, necessary to the soul. For the Greeks
painting was, as it should always be, “imitation of
beautiful bodies.” Everything disagreeable or  ill-
formed should be excluded from painting. “ Painting,
as clever imitation, may imitate deformity. Painting,
Las a fine art, does not permit this.”. He was more
inclined to admit deformity in poetry, as there it is less
_ shocking, and the poet can make use of it to produce in
us certain feelings, such as the ridiculous or the terrible.
In his Dvramaturgie (1767), Lessing followed the
Peripatetics, and believed that the rules of Aristotle
were as absolute as the theorems of Euclid. His polemic
against the French school is chiefly directed to
claiming a place in poetry for the verisimilar, as
against absolute historical exactitude. He held the
universal to be a sort of mean of what appears in the
individual, the catharsis was in his view a transforma-
tion of the passions into virtuous dispositions, and he
held the duty of poetry to be inspiration of the love
_ of virtue. He followed Winckeimann in believing that
the expression of physical beauty was the supreme
object of painting. This beauty exists only as an
ideal, which finds its highest expression in man.
Animals possess it to a slighter extent, vegetable and
inanimate nature not at all. Those mistaken enough
to occupy themselves with depicting the latter are
imitating beauties deprived of all ideal. They work
only with eye and hand; genius has little if any share
in their productions. Lessing found the physical ideal
to reside chiefly in form, but also in the ideal of colour,
and in permanent expression. Mere colouring and
U


290 HISTORICAL SUMMARY,


transitory expression were for him without ideal,
“because nature has not imposed upon herself anything
definite as regards them.” At bottom he does not
care for colouring, finding in the pen drawings of artists
“a life, a liberty, a delicacy, lacking to their pictures.”
He asks “whether even the most wonderful colouring
can make up for such a loss, and whether it be not
desirable that the art of oil-painting had never been
invented.”

This “ideal beauty,’ wonderfully constructed from
divine quintessence and subtle pen and brush strokes,
this academic mystery, had great success. In Italy
it was much discussed in the environment of Mengs
and of Winckelmann, who were working there.

The first counterblast to their esthetic Neo-
platonism came from an Italian named Spalletti, and
took the form ofa letter addressed to Mengs. He
represents the characteristzc as the true principle of art.
The pleasure obtained from beauty is intellectual, and
truth is its object. When the soul meets with what
is characteristic, and what really suits the object to be
represented, the work is held to be beautiful. A well-
made man with a woman’s face is ugly. Harmony,
order, variety, proportion, etc.—these are elements of
beauty, and man enjoys the widening of his knowledge
before disagreeable things characteristically represented.
Spalletti defines beauty as “that modification inherent
to the object observed, which presents it, as it should
appear, with an infallible characteristic.”

Thus the Aristotelian thesis found a supporter in
Italy, some years before any protestation was heard in
Germany. Louis Hirt, the historian of art (1797)
observed that ancient monuments represented all sorts


GCOBTHE. = KANT 291


of forms, from the most beautiful and sublime to the
most ugly and most common. He therefore denied
that ideal beauty was the principle of art, and for it
substituted the characteristic, applicable equally to
gods, heroes, and animals.

Wolfgang Goethe, in 1798, forgetting the juvenile
period, during which he had dared to raise a hymn
to Gothic architecture, now began seriously to seek a
middle term between beauty and expression. He
believed that he had found it, in certain characteristic
contents presenting to the artist beautiful shapes, which
the artist would then develop and reduce to perfect
beauty. Thus for Goethe at this period, the characteristic
was simply the startzng-point, or framework, from which
the beautiful arose, through the power of the artist.

But these writers mentioned after J. B. Vico are
not true philosophers. Winckelmann, Mengs, Hogarth,
Lessing, and Goethe are great in other ways. Meier
called himself a historian of art, but he was inferior both
fo, fierder and to Hamann, From J. 3B. Vico to
Emmanuel Kant, European thought is without a name
of great importance as regards this subject.

Kant took up the problem, where Vico had left
it, not in the historical, but in the ideal sense. He
resembled the Italian philosopher, in the gravity and
the tenacity of his studies in Aésthetic, but he was far
less happy in his solutions, which did not attain to
the truth, and to which he did not succeed in giving
the necessary unity and systematization. The reader
must bear in mind that Kant is here criticized solely
as an esthetician: his other conclusions do not enter
directly into the discussion.

What was Kant’s idea of art? The answer is: the


292 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


same in substance as Baumgarten’s. This may seem
strange to those who remember his sustained polemic
against Wolf and the conception of beauty as confused
perception. But Kant always thought highly of Baum-
garten. He calls him “that excellent analyst” in the.
Critique of Pure Reason, and he used Baumgarten’s text
for his University lectures on Metaphysic. Kant looked
upon Logic and JA#sthetic as cognate studies, and
in his scheme of studies for 1765, and in the Crztique
of Pure Reason, he proposes to cast a glance at the
Critique of Taste, that is to say, Aésthetic, “ since the study
of the one is useful for the other and they are mutually
illuminative.” He followed Meier in his distinctions
between logical and esthetic truth. He even quoted
the instance of the young girl, whose face when dis-
tinctly seen, z.e. with a microscope, is no longer beautiful.
It is true, zsthetically, he said, that when a man is
dead he cannot come to life, although this be opposed
both to logical and to moral truth. It is zsthetically
true that the sun plunges into the sea, although that
is not true logically or objectively.

No one, even among the greatest, can yet tell to
what extent logical truth should mingle with zsthetic
truth. Kant believed that logical truth must wear the
habit of A¢sthetic, in order to become accesszble. This
habit, he thought, was discarded only by the rational
sciences, which tend to depth. Aésthetic certainly
is subjective. It is satisfied with authority or with an
appeal to great men. We are so feeble that A¢sthetic
must eke out our thoughts. Aésthetic is a vehicle of
Logic. But there are logical truths which are not
zesthetic. We must exclude from philosophy exclama-.
tions and other emotions, which belong to esthetic


KANT 293


truth. For Kant, poetry is the harmonious play of
thought and = sensation, differing from eloquence,
because in poetry thoughts are fitted to suggestions, in
eloquence the reverse is true. Poetry should make
virtue and intellect visible, as was done by Pope in
his Essay on Man. Elsewhere, he says frankly that
logical perfection is the foundation of all the rest.

The confirmation of this is found in his Crztzgue of
Judgment, which Schelling looked upon as the most
important of the three Crztzgues, and which Hegel and
other metaphysical idealists always especially esteemed.

For Kant art was always “a sensible and imaged
covering for an intellectual concept.” He did not look
upon art as pure beauty without a concept. He
looked upon it as a beauty adherent and fixed
about a concept. The work of genius contains two
elements: imagination and intelligence. To these
must be added taste, which combines the two. Art
may even represent the ugly in nature, for artistic
beauty “is not a beautiful thing but a beautiful re-
presentation of a thing.” But this representation of
the ugly has its limits in the arts (here Kant remembers
Lessing and Winckelmann), and an absolute limit in
the disgusting and the repugnant, which kills the
representation itself. He believes that there may be
artistic productions without a concept, such as are
flowers in nature, and these would be ornaments to
frameworks, music without words, etc., etc., but since
they represent nothing reducible to a definite concept,
they must be classed, like flowers, with free beauties.
This would certainly seem to exclude them from
“Esthetic, which, according to Kant, should combine
imagination and intelligence.


294 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


Kant is shut in with intellectualist barriers. A
complete definition of the zmagination is wanting to
his system. He does not admit that the imagination
belongs to the powers of the mind. He relegates it
to the facts of sensation. He is aware of the repro-
ductive and combinative imagination, but he does
not. recognize fancy (fantasia), which is the true
productive imagination.

Yet Kant was aware that there exists an activity
other than the intellective. Intuition is referred to
by him as preceding intellective activity and differing
from sensation. He does not speak of it, however,
in his critique of art, but in the first section of the
Critique of Pure Reason. Sensations do not enter
the mind, until it has given.-them (jor. “This 410
neither sensation nor intelligence. It is pure zutuztzon,
the sum of the a prior principles of sensibility. He
speaks thus: “There must, then, exist a science that
forms the first part of the transcendental doctrine of
the elements, distinct from that which contains the prin-
ciples of pure thought and is called transcendental Logic.”

What does he call this new science? He calls it
Transcendental Aisthetic, and refuses to allow the term
to be used for the Critique of Taste, which could
never become a science.

But although he thus states so clearly the necessity
of a science of the form of the sensations, that is of
pure intuttion, Kant here appears to fall into grave
error. This arises from “zs zmexact ztdea of the essence
of the esthetic faculty or of art, which, as we now
know, is pure intuition. He conceives the form of
sensibility to be reducible to the two categories of
space and time.


KANT : CROCE 295


Benedetto Croce has shown that space and time
are far from being categories or functions: they
are complex posterior formations. Kant, however,
looked upon density, colour, etc., as material for
sensations; but the mind only observes colour or
hardness when it has already given a form to its
sensations. Sensations, in so far as they are crude
matter, are outside the mind: they are a “mit.
Colour, hardness, density, etc., are already intuitions.
They are the esthetic activity tn its rudimentary
mantfestation.

Characterizing or qualifying imagination, that is,
esthetic activity, should therefore take the place
occupied by the study of space and time in the Critique
of Pure Reason, and constitute the true Zranscendental
i sthetic, prologue to Logic.

Had Kant done this, he would have surpassed
Leibnitz and Baumgarten; he would have equalled
Vico.

Kant did not identify the Beautiful with art.
He established what he called “the four moments
of Beauty,’ amounting to a definition of it. The
two negative moments are, “That is beautiful which
pleases wzthout interest”; this thesis was directed
against the sensualist school of English writers, with
whom Kant had for a time agreed; and “ That is
beautiful which pleases without a concept,’ directed
against the intellectualists. Thus he affirmed the
existence of a spiritual domain, distinct from that of
organic pleasure, of the useful, the good, and the true.
The two other moments are, “That is beautiful which
has the form of finality without the representation
of an end,” and “That is beautiful which is the object


296 HISTORICAL SU MINAKY


of universal pleasure.” What is this disinterested
pleasure that we experience before pure colours,
pure sounds, and flowers? Benedetto Croce replies
that this mysterious domain has no existence; that
the instances cited represent, either instances of
organic pleasure, or are artistic facts of expression.

Kant was less severe with the Neoplatonicians
than with the two schools of thought above mentioned.
His Creteque of Judgment contains some curious
passages, in one of which he gives his distinction of
form from matter: “In music, the melody is the
matter, harmony the form: in a flower, the scent is
the matter, the shape or configuration the form.” In
the other arts, he found that the design was the
essential. “Not what pleases in sensation, but what
is approved for its form, is the foundation of taste.” -

In his pursuit of the phantom of a beauty, which
is neither that of art nor of sensual pleasure, exempt
alike from expression and from enjoyment, he became
enveloped in inextricable contradictions. Little dis-
posed as he was to let himself be carried away by
the imagination, he expressed his contempt for
philosopher-poets like Herder, and kept saying and
unsaying, affirming and then immediately criticizing
his own affirmations as to this mysterious beauty.
The truth is that ¢hzs mystery is simply his own
zndtvidual uncertainty before a problem which he could
not solve, owing to his having no clear idea of an
activity of sentiment. Such an activity represented
for him a logical contradiction. Such expressions
as “necessary universal pleasure,” “finality without
the idea of end,” are verbal proofs of his uncertainty.

How was he to emerge from this uncertainty, this


KAN PS CROCE 297


contradiction? He fell back upon the concept of
a base of subjective finality as the base of the judg-
ment of taste, that is of the subjective finality of
nature by the judgment. But nothing can be known
or disclosed to the object by means of this concept,
which is indeterminate in itself and not adapted for


knowledge. Its determining reason is perhaps situated


in “the suprasensible substratum of humanity.” Thus
beauty becomes a symbol of morality. ‘ The subjective
principle alone, that is, the indeterminate idea of the
suprasensible in us, can be indicated as the sole key
to reveal this faculty, which remains unknown to us
in its origin. Nothing but this principle can make
that hidden faculty comprehensible.”

Kant had a tendency to mysticism, which this
statement does not serve to conceal, but it was a
mysticism without enthusiasm, a mysticism almost
against the grain. His failure to penetrate thoroughly
the nature of the esthetic activity led him to see
double and even triple, on several occasions. Art
being unknown to him in its essential nature, he
invents the functions of space and ¢zme and terms this
transcendental esthetic; he develops the theory of
the imaginative beautifying of the intellectual concept
by genius; he is finally forced to admit a mysterious
power of feeling, intermediate between the theoretic
and the practical activity. This power is cognoscitive
and non-cognoscitive, moral and indifferent to morality,
agreeable and yet detached from the pleasure of the
senses, His successors hastened to make use of this
mysterious power, for they were glad to be able to
find some sort of justification for their bold speculations
in the severe philosopher of Konigsberg.


298 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


In addition to Schelling and Hegel, for whom, as
has been said, the Crztzque of Judgment seemed
the most important of the three Critiques, we must
now mention the name of a poet who showed himself
as great in philosophical as in zsthetic achievement.

Friedrich Schiller first elaborated that portion of
the Kantian thought contained in the Crétzgue
of Judgment. Before any professional philosopher,
Schiller studied that sphere of activity which unites
feeling with reason. Hegel talks with admiration of
this artistic genius, who was also so_ profoundly
philosophical and first announced the principle of
reconciliation between life as duty and reason on the
one hand, and the life of the senses and feeling on
the other.

To Schiller belongs the great merit of having
opposed the subjective idealism of Kant and of having
made the attempt to surpass it.

The exact relations between Kant and Schiller,
and the extent to which the latter may have been
influenced “py. Leibnitz, and’ Igetder. “ate “oO: 1¢ss
importance to the history of A®sthetic than the fact
| that Schiller wzzfied once for all art and beauty, which
| had been separated by Kant, with his distinctions
between adherent and pure beauty. Schiller’s artistic
sense must doubtless have stood him here in good
stead.

Schiller found a very unfortunate and misleading
term to apply to the esthetic sphere. He called it
the sphere of f/ay (Spiel). He strove to explain that
by this he did not mean ordinary games, nor material
amusement. For Schiller, this sphere of play lay
intermediate between thought and feeling. Necessity


FRIEDRICH SCHILLER 299


in art gives place to a free disposition of forces ; mind
and nature, matter and form are here reconciled. The
beautiful is life, but not physiological life. A beautiful
statue may have life, and a living man be without it.
Art conquers nature with form. The great artist
effaces matter with form. The less we are sensible
of the material in a work of art, the greater the
triumph of the artist. The soul of the spectator
should leave the magic sphere of art as pure and
as perfect as when it left the hands of the Creator.
The most frivolous theme should be so treated that
we can pass at once from it to the most rigorous, and
vice versa. Only when man has placed himself out-
side the world and contemplates it esthetically, can
he know the world. While he is merely the passive
receiver of sensations, he is one with the world, and
therefore cannot realize it. Art is indeterminism.
With the help of art, man delivers himself from the
yoke of the senses, and is at the same time free of
any rational or moral duty: he may enjoy for a
moment the luxury of serene contemplation.

Schiller was well aware that the moment art is
employed to teach morals directly, it ceases to be
art. All other teachings give to the soul a special
imprint. Art alone is favourabie to all without
prejudice. Owing to this indifference of art, it
possesses a great educative power, by opening the
path to morality without preaching or persuasion ;
without determining, it produces  determinability.
This was the main theme of the celebrated “ Letters
on the Aésthetic Education of Man,” which Schiller
wrote to his patron the Duke of Holstein- Augustenburg.
Here, and in his lectures at the University of Jena, it


300 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


is clear that Schiller addresses himself to a popular
audience. He began a work, on scientific Aé®sthetic,
which he intended to entitle “ Kallias,” but un-
fortunately died without completing it. We possess
only a few fragments, contained in his correspondence
with his friend Korner. Korner did not feel satisfied
with the formula of Schiller, and asks for some more
precise and objective mark of the beautiful. Schiller
tells him that he has found it, but what he had found
we shall never know, as there is no document to
inform us.

The fault of Schiller’s zsthetic theory was its lack
of precision. His artistic faculty enabled him to give
unsurpassable descriptions of the catharsis and of other
effects of art, but he fails to give a precise definition of
the zsthetic function. True, he disassociates it from
morality, yet admits that it may in a measure be
associated with it. The only formal activities that he
recognizes are the moral and the intellectual, and he
denies altogether (against the sensualists) that art can
have anything to do with passion or sensuality. His
intellectual world consisted only of the logical and the
intellectual, leaving out the imaginative activity.

What is art for Schiller? He admits four modes of
relation between man and external things. They are
the physical, the logical, the moral, and the esthetic.
He describes this latter as a mode by which things
affect the whole of our different forces, without being a
definite object for any one in particular. Thus a man
may be said to please zsthetically, “when he does so
without appealing to any one of the senses directly, and
without any law or end being thought of in connection
with him.” Schiller cannot be made to say anything


SCHILLER : FICHTE 301


more definite than this. His general position was
probably much like Kant’s (save in the case above
mentioned, where he made a happy correction), and he
probably looked upon Aésthetic as a mingling of several
faculties, as a play of sentiment.

Schiller was faithful to Kant’s teaching in its main
lines, and his uncertainty was largely due to this. The
existence of a third sphere uniting form and matter was
for Schiller rather an ideal conformable to reason than
a definite activity ; it was supposititious, rather than
effective.

But the Romantic movement in literature, which was
at that time gaining ground, with its belief in a super-
human faculty called imagination, in genius breaker of
rules, found no such need for restraint. Schiller’s
modest reserve was set aside, and with J. P. Richter we
approach a mythology of the imagination. Many of
his observations are, however, just, and his distinction
between productive and reproductive imagination is
excellent. How could humanity appreciate works of
genius, he asks, were it without some common measure ?
All men who can go as far as saying “this is beautiful ”
before a beautiful thing, are capable of the latter. He
then proceeds to establish to his own satisfaction
categories of the imagination, leading from simple
talent to the supreme form of male genius in which all
faculties flourish together: a faculty of faculties.

The Romantic conception of art is, in substance,
that of idealist German philosophy, where we find it
in a more coherent and systematic form. It is the
conception of Schelling, Solger, and Hegel.

Fichte, Kant’s first great pupil, cannot be included
with these, for his view of Atsthetic, largely influenced


302 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


by Schiller, is transformed in the Fichtian system to a
moral activity, to a representation of the ethical ideal.
The subjective idealism of Fichte, however, generated
an Atsthetic: that of irony as the base of art. The I
that has created the universe can also destroy it. The
universe is a vain appearance, smiled at by the Ego its
creator, who surveys it as an artist his work, from with-
out and from above. For Friedrich Schlegel, art was
a perpetual farce, a parody of itself; and Tieck defined
irony as a force which allows the poet to dominate his
material.

Novalis, that Romantic Fichtian, dreamed of a
magical idealism, an art of creating by an instantaneous
act of the Ego. But Schelling’s “system of tran-
scendental idealism” was the first great philosophical
affirmation of Romanticism and of conscious Neo-
platonism reborn in A¢sthetic.

Schelling has obviously studied Schiller, but he
brings to the problem a mind more purely philo-
sophical and a method more exactly scientific. He
even takes Kant to task for faultiness of method.
His remarks as to Plato’s position are curious, if not
conclusive. He says that Plato condemned the art
of his time, because it was realistic and naturalistic:
like all antique art, it exhibited a /imzte character.
Plato’s judgment would have been quite different
had he known Christian art, of which the character is
inpintty.

Schelling held firm to’the fusion of art and beauty
effected by Schiller, but he combated Winckelmann’s
theory of abstract beauty with its negative conception
of the characteristic, assigning to art the limits of the
individual. Art is characteristic beauty; it is not the


SCHELLING 303


individual, but the living conception of the individual.
When the artist recognizes the eternal idea in an
individual, and expresses it outwardly, he transforms
the individual into a world apart, into a species, into an
eternal idea. Characteristic beauty is the fulness of
form which slays form: it does not silence passion, but
restrains it as the banks of a river the waters that flow
between them, but do not overflow.

Schelling’s starting-point is the criticism of teleo-
logical judgment, as stated by Kant in his third
Critique. Teleology is the union of theoretic with
practical philosophy. But the system would not be
complete, unless we could show the identity of the two
worlds, theoretic and practical, in the subject itself. He
must demonstrate the existence of an activity, which is
at once unconscious as nature and conscious as spirit.
This activity we find in Aésthetic, which is therefore
“the general organ of philosophy, the keystone of the
whole building.”

Poetry and philosophy alone possess the world of
the ideal, in which the real world vanishes. True art
is not the impression of the moment, but the repre-
sentation of infinite life: it is transcendental intuition
objectified. The time will come when philosophy will
return to poetry, which was its source, and on the new
philosophy will arise a new mythology. Philosophy
does not depict real things, but their ideas; so too, art.
Those same ideas, of which real things are, as philosophy
shows, the imperfect copies, reappear in art objectified
as ideas, and therefore in their perfection. Art stands
nearest to philosophy, which itself stands nearest to the
Idea, and therefore nearest to perfection. Art differs
from philosophy only by its speczalzzatzon: in all other


304 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


ways it is the ideal world in its most complete
expression. The three Ideas of Truth, Goodness, and
Beauty correspond to the three powers of the ideal and
of the real world. Beauty is not the universal whole,
which is truth, nor is it the only reality, which is action:
it is the perfect mingling of the two. “ Beauty exists
where the real or particular is so adequate to its concept
that this infinite thing enters into the finite, and is
contemplated in the concrete.” Philosophy unites truth,
morality, and beauty, in what they possess in common,
and deduces them from their unique Source, which is
God. If philosophy assume the character of science
and of truth, although it be superior to truth, the reason
for this lies in the fact that science and truth are
simply the formal determination of philosophy.
Schelling looked upon mythology as a necessity
for every art. Ideas are Gods, considered from the
point of view of reality; for the essence of each is
equal to God in a particular form. The characteristics
of all Gods, including the Christian, are pure limitation
and absolute indivisibility. Minerva has wisdom and
strength, but lacks womanly tenderness; Juno has
power and wisdom, but is without amorous charm,
which she borrows with the girdle of Venus, who in her
turn is without the wisdom of Minerva. What would
these Gods become without their limitations? They
would cease to be the objects of Fancy. Fancy is a
faculty, apart from the pure intellect and from the
reason. Distinct from imagination, which develops the
products of art, Fancy has intuitions of them, grasps
them herself, and herself represents them, Fancy is
to imagination as intellectual intuition is to reason.
Fancy, then, is intellectual intuition in art. In the


SCUELEING -S0OLGER 305


thought of Schelling, fancy, the new or artistic intuition,
sister of intellectual intuition, came to dominate alike
the intellect and the old conception of the fancy and
the imagination, in a system for which reason alone
did not suffice.

C. G. Solger followed Schelling and agreed with
him in finding but little truth in the theories of Kant,
and especially of Fichte. He held that their dialectic
had failed to solve the difficulty of intellectual intuition.
He too conceived of fancy as distinct from imagina-
tion, and divided the former into three degrees.
Imagination he held to appertain to ordinary knowledge,
“which re-establishes the original intuition to infinity.”
Fancy “originates from the original antithesis in the
idea, and so operates that the opposing elements which
are separated from the idea become perfectly united
in reality. By means of fancy, we are able to under-
stand things more lofty than those of common know-
ledge, and in them we recognize the idea itself as real.
In art, fancy is the faculty of transforming the idea
into reality.”

For Solger as for Schelling, beauty belongs to the
region of Ideas, which are inaccessible to common
knowledge. Art is nearly allied to religion, for as
religion is the abyss of the idea, into which our
consciousness plunges, that it may become essential, so
Art and the Beautiful resolve, in their way, the world
of distinctions, the universal and the particular.
Artistic activity is more than theoretical: it is practical,
realized and perfect, and therefore belongs to practical,
not to theoretic philosophy, as Kant wrongly be-
lieved. Since art must touch infinity on one side,
it cannot have ordinary nature for its object. Art

Xx


306 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


therefore ceases in the portrait, and this explains why
the ancients generally chose Gods or Heroes as models
for sculpture. Every deity, even in a limited and
particular form, expresses a definite modification of the
Idea.

G. G. F. Hegel gives the same definition of art
as Solger and Schelling. All three were mystical
zstheticians, and the various shades of mystical
“Esthetic, presented by these three writers, are not of
great interest. Schelling forced upon art the abstract
Platonic ideas, while Hegel reduced it to the concrete
zdea. This concrete idea was for Hegel the first and
lowest of the three forms of the liberty of the spirit.
It represented immediate, sensible, objectified know-
ledge ; while Religion filled the second place, as repre-
sentative consciousness with adoration, which is an
element foreign to art alone. The third place was of
course occupied by Philosophy, the free thought of the
absolute spirit. Beauty and Truth are one for Hegel ;
they are united in the Idea. The beautiful he defined
as the sensible appearance of the Idea.

Some writers have erroneously believed that the
views of the three philosophers above mentioned lead
back to those of Baumgarten. But that is not correct.
They well understood that art cannot be made a
medium for the expression of philosophic concepts.
Not only are they opposed to the moralistic and
intellectualistic view, but they are its active opponents.
Schelling says that zsthetic production is in its essence
absolutely free, and Hegel that art does not contain
the universal as such.

Hegel accentuated the cognoscztzve character of art,
more than any of his predecessors. We have seen


HEGEL 307


that he placed it with Philosophy and Religion in the
sphere of the absolute Spirit. But he does not allow
either to Art or to Religion any difference of function
from that of Philosophy, which occupies the highest
place in his system. They are therefore inferior,
necessary, grades of the Spirit. Of what use are they ?
Of none whatever, or at best, they merely represent ~
transitory and historical phases of human life.

Thus we see that the tendency of Hegelianism is
antt-artistic, as it is rationalistic and anti-religious.

This result of thought was a strange and a sad
thing for one who loved art so fervently as Hegel.
Our memories conjure up Plato, who also loved art
well, and yet found himself logically obliged to banish
the poet from his ideal Republic, after crowning him
with roses. But the German philosopher was as
staunch to the (supposed) command of reason as the
Greek, and felt himself obliged to announce the death
of art. Art, he says, occupies a lofty place in the
human spirit, but not the most lofty, for it is limited
to a restricted content and only a certain grade of
truth can be expressed in art. Such are the Hellenic
Gods, who can be transfused in the sensible and
appear in it adequately. The Christian conception of
truth is among those which cannot be so expressed.
The spirit of the modern world, and more precisely the
spirit of our religion and rational development, seem to
have gone beyond the point at which art is the
chief way of apprehending the Absolute. The
peculiarity of artistic production no longer satisfies
our highest needs. Thought and reflexion have
surpassed art, the beautiful. He goes on to say that
the reason generally given for this is the prevalence of


308 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


material and political interests. But the true reason
is the inferiority in degree of art as compared with
pure thought. Art is dead, and Philosophy can
therefore supply its complete biography.

Hegel’s Vorlesungen tiber Atsthettk amounts there-
fore to a funeral oration upon Art.

Romanticism and metaphysical idealism had
placed art, sometimes above the clouds, sometimes
within them, and believing that it was no good there
to anyone, Hegel provided a decent burial.

Nothing perhaps better shows how well this
fantastic conception of art suited the spirit of the
time, than the fact that even the adversaries of
Schelling, Solger, and Hegel either admit agreement
with that conception, or find themselves involuntarily
in agreement with it, while believing themselves to
be very remote. They too are mystical xstheticians.

We all know with what virulence Arthur
Schopenhauer attacked and combated Schelling, Hegel,
and all the “charlatans” and “ professors” who had
divided among them the inheritance of Kant.

Well, Schopenhauer’s theory of art starts, just like
Hegel’s, from the difference between the abstract and
the concrete concept, which is the /dea. Schopenhauer’s
ideas are the Platonic ideas, although in the form
which he gives to them, they have a nearer resemblance
to the Ideas of Schelling than to the Idea of Hegel.

Schopenhauer takes much trouble to differentiate
his ideas from intellectual concepts. He calls the
idea “unity which has become plurality by means of
space and time. It is the form of our intuitive ap-
perception. The concept is, on the contrary, unity
extracted from plurality by means of abstraction,


SCrOLENHAUBR 309


mie Is an act Of our intellect, Ehe concept may
be called unztas post rem, the idea unztas ante rem.”

The origin of this psychological illusion of the
ideas or types of things is always to be found in the
changing of the empirical classifications created for
their own purposes by the natural sciences, into living
realities.

Thus each art has for its sphere a special category
of ideas. Architecture and its derivatives, gardening
(and strange to say landscape-painting is included with
it), sculpture and animal-painting, historical painting
and the higher forms of scuipture, etc., all possess their
special ideas. Poetry’s chief object is man as idea.
Music, on the contrary, does not belong to the
hierarchy of the other arts. Schelling had looked
upon music as expressing the rhythm of the universe
itself. For Schopenhauer, music does not express
ideas, but the Wed? ctself.

The analogies between music and the world,
between fundamental notes and crude matter, between
the scale and the scale of species, between melody
and conscious will, lead Schopenhauer to the conclusion
that music is not only an arithmetic, as it appeared
to Leibnitz, but indeed a metaphysic: “the occult
metaphysical exercise of a soul not knowing that it
philosophizes.”

For Schopenhauer, as for his idealist predecessors,
art is beatific. It is the flower of life; he who is
plunged in artistic contemplation ceases to be an
individual; he is the conscious subject, pure, freed
from will, from pain, and from time.

Yet in Schopenhauer’s system exist elements for a
better and a more profound treatment of the problem


310 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


of art. He could sometimes show himself to be a
lucid and acute analyst. For instance, he continually
remarks that the categories of space and time are
not applicable to art, but only the general form of
representation. He might have deduced from this
that art is the most immediate, not the most lofty
grade of consciousness, since it precedes even the
ordinary perceptions of space and time. Vico had
already observed that this freeing oneself from ordinary
perception, this dwelling in imagination, does not
really mean an ascent to the level of the Platonic
Ideas, but, on the contrary, a redescending to the
sphere of immediate intuition, a return to childhood.

On the other hand, Schopenhauer had begun to
submit the Kantian categories to impartial criticism,
and finding the two forms of intuition insufficient,
added a third, causality.

He also drew comparisons between art and history,
and was more successful here than the idealist ex-
cogitators of a philosophy of history. Schopenhauer
rightly saw that history was irreducible to concepts,
that it is the contemplation of the individual, and
therefore not a science. Having proceeded thus far,
he might have gone further, and realized that the
material of history is always the particular in its
particularity, that of art what is and always is
identical. But he preferred to execute a variation
on the general motive that was in fashion at this
time.

The fashion of the day! It rules in philosophy
as elsewhere, and we are now about to see the most
rigid and arid of analysts, the leader of the so-called
realist school, or school of exact science in Germany


ee


PERDAK TE 23 ii


in the nineteenth century, plunge headlong into
zsthetic mysticism.

oP) Merpart (1513) begins. his, Aisthetc by
freeing it from the discredit attaching to Metaphysic
and to Psychology. He declares that the only true
way of understanding art is to study particular
examples of the beautiful and to note what they
reveal as to its essence.

We shall now see what came of Herbart’s analysis
of these examples of beauty, and how far he succeeded
in remaining free of Metaphysic.

For Herbart, beauty consists of velatzons. The
science of Atsthetic consists of an enumeration of all
the fundamental relations between colours, lines, tones,
thoughts, and will. But for him these relations are
not empirical or physiological. They cannot therefore
be studied in a laboratory, because thought and the
will form part of them, and these belong as much to
Ethics as to the external world. But Herbart ex-
plicitly states that no true beauty is sensible, although
sensation may and does often precede and follow the
intuition of beauty. There is a profound distinction
between the beautiful and the agreeable or pleasant :
the latter does not require a representation, while
the former consists in representations of relations,
which are immediately followed by a judgment ex-
pressing unconditioned approval. Thus the merely
pleasurable becomes more and more indifferent, but
the beautiful appears always as of more and more
permanent value. The judgment of taste is universal,
eternal, immutable. The complete representation of
the same relations always carries with it the same
judgment. For Herbart, zsthetic judgments are the


Bie HISTORICAL: SUMMARY


general class containing the sub-class of ethical judg-
ments. The five ethical ideas, of internal liberty,
of perfection, of benevolence, of equity, and of justice,
are five zxsthetic ideas; or better, they are zsthetic
concepts applied to the will in its relations.

Herbart looked upon art as a complex fact, com-
posed of an external element possessing logical or
psychological value, the content, and of a true esthetic
element, which is the form. Entertainment, instruction,
and pleasure of all sorts are mingled with the beautiful,
in order to obtain favour for the work in question.
The esthetic judgment, calm and serene in _ itself,
may be accompanied by all sorts of psychic emotions,
foreign to it. But the content is always transitory,
relative, subject to moral laws, and judged by them.
The form alone is perennial, absolute, and free. The
true catharsis can only be effected by separating the
form from the content. Concrete art may be the sum
of two values, but the esthetic fact ts form alone.

For those capable of penetrating beneath appear-
ances, the esthetic doctrines of Herbart and of Kant will
appear very similar. Herbart is notable as insisting,
in the manner of Kant, on the distinction between
free and adherent beauty (or adornment as sensuous
stimulant), on the existence of pure beauty, object of
necessary and universal judgments, and on a certain
mingling of ethical with his esthetic theory. Herbart,
indeed, called himself “a Kantian, but of the year
1828.” Kant’s zsthetic theory, though it be full of
errors, yet is rich in fruitful suggestions. Kant
belongs to a period when philosophy is still young and
pliant. Herbart came later, and is dry and one-sided.
The romantics and the metaphysical idealists had


SCH LEIERMACTIER a4


unified the theory of the beautiful and of art. Herbart
restored the old duality and mechanism, and gave us
an absurd, unfruitful form of mysticism, void of all
artistic inspiration.

Herbart may be said to have taken all there was
of false in the thought of Kant and to have made it
into a system.

The beginning of the nineteenth century in Germany
is notable for the great number of philosophical
theories and of counter-theories, broached and rapidly
discussed, before being discarded. None of the most
prominent names in the period belong to philosophers
of first-rate importance, though they made so much
stir in their day.

The thought of Friedrich Schleiermacher was
obscured and misunderstood amid those crowding
mediocrities ; yet it is perhaps the most interesting
and the most noteworthy of the period.

Schleiermacher looked upon /Esthetic as an al-
together modern form of thought. He perceived a
profound difference between the “ Poetics” of Aristotle,
not yet freed from empirical precepts, and the tentative
of Baumgarten in the eighteenth century. He praised
Kant as having been the first to include A¢sthetic
among the philosophical disciplines. He admitted
that with Hegel it had attained to the highest pinnacle,
being connected with religion and with philosophy,
and almost placed upon their level.

But he was dissatisfied with the absurdity of the
attempt made by the followers of Baumgarten to con-
struct a science or theory of sensuous pleasure. He
disapproved of Kant’s view of taste as being the prin-
ciple of ‘Esthetic, of Fichte’s art as moral teaching,


314 MiIsSTORICAL SUMMARY


and of the vague conception of the beautiful as the
centre of A¢sthetic.

He approved of Schiller’s marking of the moment
of spontaneity in productive art, and he praised Schelling
for having drawn attention to the figurative arts, as
being less liable than poetry to be diverted to false
and illusory moralistic ends. Before he begins the
study of the place due to the artistic activity in Ethic,
he carefully excludes from the study of Aésthetic all
practical rules (which, being empirical, are incapable of
scientific demonstration).

For Schleiermacher, the sphere of Ethic included
the whole Philosophy of the Spirit, in addition to
morality. These are the two forms of human activity
—that which, like Logic, is the same in all men, and
is called activity of identity, and the activity of differ-
ence or individuality. There are activities which, like
art, are internal or immanent and individual, and others
which are external or practical. The true work of art
zs the internal picture. Measure is what differentiates
the artist’s portrayal of anger on the stage and the
anger of a really angry man. Truth is not sought
in poetry, or if it be sought there, it is truth of an
altogether different kind. The truth of poetry lies in
coherent presentation. Likeness to a model does not
compose the merit of a picture. Not the smallest
amount of knowledge comes from art, which expresses
only the truth of a particular consciousness. Art
has for its field the immediate consciousness of self,
which must be carefully distinguished from the thought
of the Ego. This last is the consciousness of identity
in the diversity of moments as they pass; the im-
mediate consciousness of self is the diversity itself of


=. all


——


SCH LEIFER MACHER a5


the moments, of which we should be aware, for life is
nothing but the development of consciousness. In
this field, art has sometimes been confused with two
facts which accompany it there: these are sentient
consciousness (that is, the feelings of pleasure and of
pain) and religion. Schleiermacher here alludes to the
sensualistic zstheticians of the eighteenth century, and
to Hegel, who had almost identified art and religion.
He refutes both points of view by pointing out that
sentient pleasure and religious sentiment, however
different they may be from other points of view, are
yet both determined by an objective fact; while art,
on the contrary, is free productivity.

Dream is the best parallel and proof of this free
productivity. All the essential elements of art are
found in dream, which is the result of free thoughts
and of sensible intuitions, consisting simply of images.
But dream, as compared with art, is chaotic: when
measure and order is established in dream, it becomes
art. Thoughts and images are alike essential to art,
and to both is necessary ponderation, reflexion,
measure, and unity, because otherwise every image
would be confused with every other image. Thus the
moments of inspiration and of ponderation are both
necessary to art.

Schleiermacher's thought, so firm and lucid up to this
point, begins to become less secure, with the discussion
of typicity and of the extent to which the artist should
follow Nature. He says that ideal figures, which
Nature would give, were she not impeded by external
obstacles, are the products of art. He notes that
when the artist represents something really given, such
as a portrait or a landscape, he renounces freedom of


316 HISTORICAL SUMIIARY


production and adheres to the real. In the artist is a
double tendency, toward the perfection of the type and
toward the representation of natural reality. He
should not fall into the abstraction of the type, nor
into the insignificance of empirical reality. Schleier-
macher feels all the difficulty of such a problem as
whether there be one or several ideals of the human
figure. This problem may be transferred to the
sphere of art, and we may ask whether the poet is to
represent only the ideal, or whether he should also
deal with those obstacles to it that impede Nature in
her efforts to attain. Both views contain half the truth,
To art belongs the representation of the ideal as of the
real, of the subjective and of the objective alike. The
representation of the comic, that is of the anti-ideal
and of the imperfect ideal, belongs to the domain of
art. For the human form, both morally and physically,
oscillates between the ideal and caricature.

He arrives at a most important definition as to the
independence of art in respect to morality. The
nature of art, as of philosophic speculation, excludes
moral and practical effects. Therefore, there zs no other
difference between works of art than their respective artistic
perfection (Vollkommenhert in der Kunst). If we
could correctly predicate volitional acts in respect of
works of art, then we should find ourselves admiring
only those works which stimulated the will, and there
would thus be established a difference of valuation,
independent of artistic perfection. The true work of
art depends upon the degree of perfection with which
the external in it agrees with the internal.

Schleiermacher rightly combats Schiller’s view that
art is in any sense a game. That, he says, is the view


SCHLEIERMACHER 317


held by mere men of business, to whom business alone
is serious. But artistic activity is universal, and a
man completely deprived of it unthinkable, although the
difference here between man and man, is gigantic,
ranging from the simple desire to taste of art to
the effective tasting of it, and from this, by infinite
gradations, to productive genius.

The regrettable fact that Schleiermacher’s thought
has reached us only in an imperfect form, may account
for certain of its defects, such as his failure to elimin-
ate zsthetic classes and types, his retention of a
certain residue of abstract formalism, his definition
of art as the activity of difference. Had he better
defined the moment of artistic reproduction, realized the
possibility of tasting the art of various times and
of other nations, and examined the true relation of
art to science, he would have seen that this difference
is merely empirical and to be surmounted. He failed
also to recognize the identity of the ewsthetic activity,
with language as the base of all other theoretic
activity.

But Schleiermacher’s merits far outweigh these
defects. He removed from Aésthetic its zperativistic
character ; he distinguished a form of thought different
from logical thought. Ue attributed to our science a
non-metaphysical, anthropological character. He dented
the concept of the beautiful, substituting for it artzstec
perfection, and maintaining the esthetic equality of a
small with a great work of art, he looked upon the
esthetic fact as an exclusively human productevity.

Thus Schleiermacher, the theologian, in this
period of metaphysical orgy, of rapidly constructed
and as rapidly destroyed systems, perceived, with the


318 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


greatest philosophical acumen, what is really char-
acteristic of art, and distinguished its properties and
relations. Even where he fails to see clearly his way,
he never abandons analysis for mere guess-work.

Schleiermacher, thus exploring the obscure region
of the zimmediate consciousness, or of the esthetic
fact, can almost be heard crying out to his straying
contemporaries: MHzce Rhodus, hic salta!

Speculation upon the origin and nature of language
was rife at this time in Germany. Many theories were
put forward, among the most curious being that of
Schelling, who held language and mythology to be
the product of a pre-human consciousness, allegorically
expressed as the diabolic suggestions which had
precipitated the Ego from the infinite to the finite.

Even Wilhelm von Humboldt was unable to free
himself altogether from the intellectualistic prejudice
of the substantial identity and the merely historical
and accidental diversity of logical thought and language.
He speaks of a perfect language, broken up and
diminished with the lesser capacities of lesser peoples.
He believed that language is something standing out-
side the individual, independent of him, and capable
of being revived by use. But there were two men in
Humboldt, an old man and a young one. The latter
was always suggesting that language should be looked
upon as a living, not as a dead thing, as an activity,
not as a word. This duality of thought sometimes
makes his writing difficult and obscure. Although he
speaks of an internal form of speech, he fails to identify
this with art as expression. The reason is that he
looks upon the word in too unilateral a manner, as a
means of developing logical thought, and his ideas of


VON TUNBOLD I 319


fEsthetic are too vague and too inexact to enable
him to discover their identity. Despite his perception
of the profound truth that poetry precedes prose,
Humboldt gives grounds for doubt as to whether
he had clearly recognized and firmly grasped the fact
that language is always poetry, and that prose
(science) is a distinction, not of esthetic form, but
of content, that is, of logical form.

Steinthal, the greatest follower of Humboldt, solved
his master’s contradictions, and in 1855 sustained
successfully against the Hegelian Becker the thesis
that words are necessary for thought. He pointed
to the deaf-mute with his signs, to the mathematician
with his formule, to the Chinese language, where the
figurative portion is an essential of speech, and declared
that Becker was wrong in believing that the Sanskrit
language was derived from twelve cardinal concepts.
He showed effectively that the concept and the word,
the logical judgment and the proposition, are not
comparable. The proposition is not a judgment, but
the representation of a judgment; and all propositions
do not represent logical judgments. Several judgments
can be expressed with one proposition. The logical
divisions of judgments (the relations of concepts) have no
correspondence in the grammatical division of proposi-
tions. “If we speak of a logical form of the proposition,
we fall into a contradiction in terms not less complete
than his who should speak of the angle of a circle,
or of the periphery of a triangle.” He who speaks,
in so far as he speaks, has not thoughts, but language.

When Steinthal had several times solemnly pro-
claimed the independence of language as regards Logic,
and that it produces its forms in complete autonomy, he


320 His TORICAL SU MIMMARY.


proceeded to seek the origin of language, recognizing
with Humboldt that the question of its origin is the
same as that of its nature. Language, he said, belongs
to the great class of reflex movements, but this only
shows one side of it, not its true nature. Animals, like
men, have reflex actions and sensations, though nature
enters the animal by force, takes it by assault, conquers
and enslaves it. With man is born language, because
he is resistance to nature, governance of his own body,
and liberty. “Language is liberation; even to-day
we feel that our soul becomes lighter, and frees itself
from a weight, when we speak.” Man, before he
attains to speech, must be conceived of as accompanying
all his sensations with bodily movements, mimetic
attitudes, gestures, and particularly with articulate
sounds. What is still lacking to him, that he may
attain to speech? The connexion between the reflex
movements of the body and the state of the soul. If
his sentient consciousness be already consciousness, then
he lacks the consciousness of consciousness ; if it be
already intuition, then he lacks the intuition of intuition.
In sum, he lacks the zzternal form of language. With
this comes speech, which forms the connexion. Man
does not choose the sound of his speech. This is given
to him and he adopts it instinctively.

When we have accorded to Steinthal the great merit
of having rendered coherent the ideas of Humboldt,
and of having clearly separated linguistic from logical.
thought, we must note that he too failed to perceive
the zdentzty of the internal form of language, or “ in-
tuition of the intuition,’ as he called it, with the
zsthetic zmagination. Herbart’s psychology, to which
Steinthal adhered, did not afford him any means for


MERBART SPRINT HAL 221


this identification. Herbart separated logic from
psychology, calling it a normative science ; he failed to
discern the exact limits between feeling and spiritual
formation, psyche or soul, and spirit, and to see that
one of these spiritual formations is logical thought or
activity, which is not a code of laws imposed from
without. For Herbart, Aésthetic, as we know, was
a code of beautiful formal relations. Thus Steinthal,
following Herbart in psychology, was bound to look
upon Art as a beautifying of thought, Linguistic as the
science of speech, Rhetoric and Aésthetic as the science
of beautiful speech.

Steinthal never realized that to speak is to speak
well or beautifully, under penalty of wot speaking, and
that the revolution which he and Humboldt had
effected in the conception of language must inevitably
react upon and transform Poetic, Rhetoric, and Aésthetic.

Thus, despite so many efforts of conscientious
analysis on the part of Humboldt and of Steinthal,
the unity of language and of poetry, and the identifica-
tion of the science of language and the science of
poetry still found its least imperfect expression in the
prophetic aphorisms of Vico.

The philosophical movement in Germany from the
last quarter of the eighteenth century to the first half
of the nineteenth, notwithstanding its many errors, is
yet so notable and so imposing with the philosophers
already considered, as to merit the first place in the
European thought of that period. This is even more
the case as regards “sthetic than as regards philosophy
in general.

France was the prey of Condillac’s sensualism, and
therefore incapable of duly appreciating the spiritual

Yv


322 HISTORICAL SU NNEAR Y


activity of art. We hardly get a glimpse of Winckel-
mann’s transcendental spiritualism in Quatremeére de
Quincy, and the frigid academics of Victor Cousin
were easily surpassed by Theodore Jouffroy, though
he too failed of isolating the esthetic fact. French
Romanticism defined literature as “the expression of
society,” admired under German influence the grotesque
and the characteristic, declared the independence of art
in the formula of “(art for arts. sake. but did nor
succeed in surpassing philosophically the old doctrine
of the “imitation of nature.’ F. Schlegel and Solger
indeed were largely responsible for the Romantic
movement in France—Schlegel with his belief in the
characteristic or zzteresting as the principle of modern
art, which led him to admire the cruel and the ugly;
Solger with his dialectic arrangement, whereby the
finite or terrestrial element is absorbed and annihilated
in the divine and thus becomes the tragic, or v7ce versa,
and the result is the comic. Rosenkranz published in
Konigsberg an Atsthetic of the Ugly, and the works
of Vischer and Zeising abound in subleties relating
to the Idea and to its expression in the beautiful and
sublime. These writers conceived of the Idea as the
Knight Purebeautiful, constrained to abandon his
tranquil ease through the machinations of the Ugly;
the Ugly leads him into all sorts of disagreeable
adventures, from all of which he eventually emerges
victorious. The Sublime, the Comic, the Humorous,
and so on, are his Marengo, Austerlitz, and Jena.
Another version of their knight’s adventures might be
described as his conquest by his enemies, but at the
moment of conquest he transforms and irradiates his
conquerors. To such a mediocre and artificial


SHELLEY:DE SANCTIS 323


mythology led the much-elaborated theory of the
Modifications of the Beautiful.

In England, the associationist psychology continued
to hold sway, and showed, with Dugald Stewart’s
miserable attempt at establishing two forms of
association, its incapacity to rise to the conception of
the imagination. With the poet Coleridge, England
also showed the influence of German thought, and
Coleridge elaborated with Wordsworth a more correct
conception of poetry and of its difference from science.
But the most notable contribution in English at that
period came from another poet, P. B. Shelley, whose
Defence of Poetry contains profound, though unsys-
tematic views, as to the distinction between reason
and imagination, prose and poetry, on primitive lan-
guage, and on the poetic power of objectification.

In Italy, Francesco de Sanctis gave magnificent
expression to the independence of art. He taught
literature in Naples from 1838 to 1848, in Turin and
Zurich from 1850 to 1860, and after 1870 he was
a professor in the University of Naples. His Storia
della letteratura ttaliana is a classic, and in it and
in monographs on individual writers he exposed his
doctrines.

Prompted by a natural love of speculation, he
began to examine the old grammarians and rhetoricians,
with a view to systematize them. But very soon he
proceeded to criticize and to surpass their theories.
The cold rules of reason did not find favour with him,
and he advised young men to go direct to the
original works.

The philosophy of Hegel began to penetrate Italy,
and the study of Vico was again taken up. De


324 HiSPORICAL SUMMARY


Sanctis translated the Logzc of Hegel in prison, where
the Bourbon Government had thrown him for his
liberalism. Bénard had begun his translation of the
Ai sthetic of Hegel, and so completely in harmony was
De Sanctis with the thought of this master, that he is
said to have guessed from a study of the first volume
what the unpublished volumes must contain, and to
have lectured upon them to his pupils. Traces of
mystical idealism and of Hegclianism persist even in
his later works, and the distinction, which he always
maintained, between imagination and fancy certainly
came to him from Hegel and Schelling. THe hel@
fancy alone to be the true poetic faculty.

De Sanctis absorbed all the juice of Hegel, but
rejected the husks of his pedantry, of his formalism,
of his apriority.

Fancy for De Sanctis was not the mystical trans-
cendental apperception of the German philosophers, but
simply the faculty of poetic synthesis and creation,
opposed to the imagination, which reunites details and
always has something mechanical about it. Faith and
poetry, he used to say, are not dead, but transformed.
His criticism of Hegel amounted in many places to
the correction of Hegel; and as regards Vico, he is
careful to point out, that when, in dealing with the
Homeric poems, Vico talks of generic types, he is no
longer the critic of art, but the historian of civilization.
De Sanctis saw that, artestecally, Achilles must always
be Achilles, never a force or an abstraction.

Thus De Sanctis succeeded in keeping himself
free from the Hegelian domination, at a moment
when Hegel was the acknowledged master of specula-
tion.


DE SANCTIS 325


But his criticism extended also to other German
zstheticians. By a curious accident, he found himself
at Zurich in the company of Theodore Vischer, that
ponderous Hegelian, who laughed disdainfully at the
mention of poetry, of music, and of the decadent Italian
race. De Sanctis laughed at Vischer’s laughter.
Wagner appeared to him a corrupter of music, and


“nothing in the world more unesthetic than the


eernetic of Theodore Vischer.” His lectures on
Ariosto and Petrarch, before an international public
at Zurich, were delivered with the desire of correcting
the errors of these and of other German philosophers
and learned men. He gave his celebrated definitions
of French and German critics. The French critic
does not indulge in theories: one feels warmth of
impression and sagacity of observation in his argu-
ment. He never leaves the concrete; he divines the
quality of the writer’s genius and the quality of his
work, and studies the man, in order to understand
the writer. His great fault is shown in substituting
for criticism of the actual art work a historical criticism
of the author and of his time. For the German, on
the other hand, there is nothing so simple that he
does not contrive to distort and to confuse it. He
collects shadows around him, from which shoot vivid
rays. He laboriously brings to birth that morsel of
truth which he has within him. He would seize and
define what is most fugitive and impalpable in a work
of art. Although nobody talks so much of life as he
does, yet no one so much delights in decomposing
and generalizing it. Having thus destroyed the
particular, he is able to show you as the result of
this process, final in appearance, but in reality pre-


326 HISLORICAL SU MMARY


conceived and apriorist, one measurement for all feet,
one garment for all bodies.

About this time he studied Schopenhauer, who
was then becoming the fashion. Schopenhauer said
ot this: criticism of De sanctis = oi hat italian dias
absorbed me zm succum et sanguinem.” What weight
did he attach to Schopenhauer’s much-vaunted writings
on art? Having exposed the theory of Ideas, he
barely refers to the third volume, “which contains
an exaggerated theory of A‘sthetic.”

In his criticism of Petrarch, De Sanctis finally
broke with metaphysical Aésthetic, saying of Hegel’s
school that it believed the beautiful to become art
when it surpassed form and revealed the concept
or pure idea. This theory and the subtleties derived
from it, far from characterizing art, represent its
contrary: the impotent velleity for art, which cannot
slay abstractions and come in contact with life.

De Sanctis held that outside the domain of art
all is shapeless. The ugly is of the domain of art,
if art give it form. Is there anything more beautiful
than lagor If he be looked upon merely. as 4
contrast to Othello, then we are in the position of
those who looked upon the stars as placed where they
are to serve as candles for the earth.

Form was for De Sanctis the word which should
be inscribed over the entrance to the Temple of Art.
In the work of art are form and content, but the
latter is no longer chaotic: the artist has given to it
a new value, has enriched it with the gift of his
own personality. But if the content has not been
assimilated and made his own by the aartist, then
the work lacks generative power: it is of no value


DE mac FIs 227


as art or literature, though as history or scientific
document its value may be great. The Gods of
Homer’s J/izad are dead, but the J/ézad remains.
Guelf and Ghibelline have disappeared from Italy:
not so the Dzvine Comedy, which is as vigorous
to-day as when Dante first took pen in hand. Thus
De Sanctis held firmly to the independence of art,
but he did not accept the formula of “art for art’s
sake,” in so far as it meant separation of the artist
from life, mutilation of the content, art reduced to
mere dexterity.

For De Sanctis, form was identical with imagina-
tion, with the artist’s power of expressing or representing
his artistic vision. This much must be admitted by
his critics. But he never attained to a clear definition
of art. His theory of A®sthetic always remained a
sketch: wonderful indeed, but not clearly developed
and deduced. The reason for this was De Sanctis’
love of the concrete. No sooner had he attained
from general ideas a sufficient clarity of vision for his
own purposes, than he plunged again into the concrete
and particular. He did not confine his activity to
literature, but was active also in politics and in the
prosecution and encouragement of historical studies.

As a critic of literature, De Sanctis is far superior
to Sainte-Beuve, Lessing, Macaulay, or Taine. Flaubert’s
genial intuition adumbrated what De Sanctis achieved.
In one of his letters to Georges Sand, Flaubert speaks
of the lack of an artistzc critic. “In Laharpe’s time,
criticism was grammatical ; in the time of Sainte-Beuve
and of Taine, it is historical They analyse with
great subtlety the historical environment in which the
work appeared and the causes which have produced


225 HISTORICAL, SUNMARY


it. But the wzconsccous element in poetry? Whence
does it come? Andcomposition? Andstyle? And
the point of view of the author? Of all that they
never speak. For such a critic, great imagination and
great goodness are necessary, I mean an ever-ready
faculty of enthusiasm, and then Zaste, a quality so rare,
even among the best, that it is never mentioned.”

De Sanctis alone fulfilled the conditions of Flaubert,
and Italy has in his writings a looking-glass for her
literature unequalled by any other country.

But with De Sanctis, the philosopher of art, the
esthetician, is not so great as the critic of literature.
The one 1s accessory to the. other and -his use OL
esthetic terminology is so inconstant that a lack of
clearness of thought might be found in his work by
anyone who had not studied it with care. But his
want of system is more than compensated by his vitality,
by his constant citation of actual works, and by his
intuition of the truth, which never abandoned him.
His writings bear the further charm of suggesting new
kingdoms to conquer, new mines of richness to explore.

While the cry of “Down with Metaphysic” was
resounding in Germany, and a furious reaction had set
in against the sort of Walpurgisnacht to which the
later Hegelians had reduced science and history, the
pupils of Herbart came forward and with an insinuating
air they seemed to say: “ What is this? Why, it isa
rebellion against Metaphysic, the very thing our master
wished for and tried to achieve, halfacentury ago! But
here we are, his heirs and successors, and we want to be
your allies! An understanding between us will be easy.
Our Metaphysic is in agreement with the atomic theory,
our Psychology with mechanicism, our Ethic and


a


ZIMMERMANN: VISCHER 329


/Esthetic with hedonism.” Herbart, who died in 1841,
would probably have disdained and rejected his followers,
who thus courted popularity and cheapened Metaphysic,
putting a literal interpretation on his realities, his ideas
and representations, and upon all his most lofty
excogitations.

The protagonist of these neo-Herbartians was
Robert Zimmermann. He constructed his system of
fEésthetic out of Herbart, whom he perverted to his own
uses, and even employed the much-abused Hegelian
dialectic in order to introduce modifications of the
beautiful into pure beauty. The beautiful, he said,
is a model which possesses greatness, fulness, order,
correction, and definite compensation. Beauty appears
to us in a characteristic form, as a copy of this model.

Vischer, against whom was directed this work of
Zimmermann, found it easy to reply. He ridiculed
Zimmermann’s meaning of the symbol as the object
around which are clustered beautiful forms. ‘“ Does
an artist paint a fox, simply that he may depict an
object of animal nature. No, no, my dear sir, far from
it. This fox is a symbol, because the painter here
employs lines and colours, in order. to express some-
thing different from lines and colours. ‘ You think
Pam. da fox, cries the painted animal. ‘You “ate
mightily mistaken; I am, on the contrary, a port-
manteau, an exhibition by the painter of red, white,
Vischer also made fun of


»>»)


grey, and yellow tints.
Zimmermann’s enthusiasm for the zsthetic value of
the sense of touch. “ What joy it must be to touch
the back of the bust of Hercules in repose! To stroke
the sinuous limbs of the Venus of Milo or of the Faun
of Barberini must give a pleasure to the hand equal


330 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


to that of the ear as it listens to the puissant fugues
of Bach or to the suave melodies of Mozart.” Vischer
defined the formal A®sthetic of Zimmermann as a
queer mixture of mysticism and mathematic.

Lotze, in common with the great majority of
thinkers, was dissatisfied with Zimmermann, but could
only oppose his formalism with a variety of the old
mystical A%sthetic. Who, he asked, could believe that
the human form pleases only by its external proportions,
regardless of the spirit within. Art, like beauty, should
‘enclose the world of values in the world of forms.”
This struggle between the Aésthetic of the content and
the Esthetic of the form attained its greatest height
in Germany between 1860 and 1870, with Zimmer-
mann, Vischer, and Lotze as protagonists.

These writers were followed by J. Schmidt, who
in 1875 ventured to say that both Lotze and Zimmer-
mann had failed to see that the problem of Aésthetic
concerned, not the beauty or ugliness of the content
or of the form as mathematical relations, but their
representation; Kostlin, who erected an immense
artificial structure with the materials of his predecessors
modified ; Schasler, who is interesting as having
converted the old Vischer to his thesis of the im-
portance of the Ugly, as introducing modifications into
the beautiful and being the principle of movement there.
Vischer confesses that at one time he had followed the
Hegelian method and believed that in the essence
of beauty is born a_ disquietude, a fermentation,
a struggle: the Idea conquers, hurls the image into
the unlimited, and the Sublime is born; but the image,
offended in its finitude, declares war upon the Idea,
and the Comic appears. Thus the fight is finished


VON HARTMANN Be


and the Beautiful returns to itself, as the result of these
struggles. But now, he says, Schasler has persuaded
him that the Ugly is the leaven which is necessary
to all the special forms of the Beautiful.

E, von Hartmann is in close relation with Schasler.
His Esthetic (1890) also makes great use of the
Ugly. Since he insists upon appearance as a necessary
characteristic of the beautiful, he considers himself
justified in calling his theory concrete idealism. Hart-
mann considers himself in opposition to the formalism
of Herbart, inasmuch as he insists upon the idea as
an indispensable and determining element of beauty.
Beauty, he says, is truth, but it is not historical truth,
nor scientific nor reflective truth: it is metaphysical
and ideal. “Beauty is the prophet of idealistic truth
in an age without faith, hating Metaphysic, and
acknowledging only realistic truth.” Aésthetic truth
is without method and without control: it leaps at
once from the subjective appearance to the essence of
the ideal. But in compensation for this, it possesses
the fascination of conviction, which immediate intuition
alone possesses. The higher Philosophy rises, the less
need has she of passing through the world of the senses
and of science: she approaches ever more nearly to
art. Thus Philosophy starts on the voyage to the
ideal, like Baedeker’s traveller, “without too much
baggage.” In the Beautiful is immanent logicity, the
microcosmic idea, the unconscious. By means of the
unconscious, the process of intellectual intuition takes
place in it. The Beautiful is a mystery, because its
root is in the Unconscious.

No philosopher has ever made so great a use of
the Ugly as Hartmann. He divides Beauty into


B32 HISTORICAL SURINMAR Y


grades, of which the one below is ugly as compared
with that above it. He begins with the mathematical,
superior to the sensibly agreeable, which is unconscious.
‘ahenee to. icrmd| beauty of the second order (tac
dynamically agreeable, to formal beauty of the third
order, the passive teleological; to this degree belong
utensils, and language, which in Hartmann’s view is a
dead thing, inspired with seeming life, only at the
moment of use. Such things did the philosopher of
the Unconscious dare to print in the country of a
Humboldt during the lifetime of a Steinthal! He
proceeds in his list of things beautiful, with formal
beauty of the fourth degree, which is the active or
living teleological, with the fifth, which is that of
species. Finally he reaches concrete beauty, or the
individual microcosm, the highest of all, because the
individual idea is superior to the specific, and is
beauty, no longer formal, but of content.

All these degrees of beauty are, as has been said,
connected with one another by means of the ugly, and
even in the highest degree, which has nothing superior
to it, the ugly continues its office of beneficent titillation.
The outcome of this ultimate phase is the famous
theory of the Modifications of the Beautiful. None of
these modifications can occur without a struggle, save the
sublime and the graceful, which appear without conflict
at the side of supreme beauty. Hartmann gives four
instances: the solution is either immanent, logical,
transcendental, or combined. The idyllic, the melan-
choly, the sad, the glad, the elegiac, are instances of
the immanent solution; the comic in all its forms is
the logical solution; the tragic is the transcendental
solution ; the combined form is found in the humorous,


WON HARTOEANN ; RUSKIN © = 333
the tragi-comic. When none of these solutions
is possible, we have the ugly; and when an ugli-
ness of content is expressed by a formal ugliness,
we have the maximum of ugliness, the true esthetic
devil.

Hartmann is the last noteworthy representative
of the German metaphysical school. His works are
gigantic in size and appear formidable. But if one be
not afraid of giants and venture to approach near, one
finds nothing but a big Morgante, full of the most
- commonplace prejudices, quite easily killed with the
bite of a crab!

During this period, A‘sthetic had few representatives
in other countries. The famous conference of the
Academy of Moral and Political Sciences, held in Paris
in 1857, gave to the world the “Science du Beau” of
Lévéque. No one is interested in it now, but it is
amusing to note that Lévéque announced himself to
be a disciple of Plato, and went on to attribute eight
characteristics to the beautiful. These he discovered
by closely examining the lily! No wonder he was
crowned with laurels! He proved his wonderful
theory by instancing a child playing with its mother, a
symphony of Beethoven, and the life of Socrates! One
of his colleagues, who could not resist making fun of
his learned friend, remarked that he would be glad to
know what part was played in the life of a philosopher
by the normal vivacity of colour!

Thus German theory made no way in France, and
England proved even more refractory.

J. Ruskin showed a poverty, an incoherence, and a
lack of system in respect to A‘sthetic, which puts
him almost out of court. His was the very reverse of


334 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


the philosophic temperament. His pages of brilliant
prose contain his own dreams and caprices. They are
the work of an artist and should be enjoyed as such,
being without any value for philosophy. His theoretic
faculty of the beautiful, which he held to be distinct
alike from the intelligence and from feeling, is connected
with his belief in beauty as a revelation of the divine
intentions, “the seal which God sets upon his works.”
Thus the natural beauty, which is perceived by the
pure heart, when contemplating some object untouched
by the hand of man, is far superior to the work of the
artist. Ruskin was too little capable of analysis to
understand the complicated psychologico-zsthetic
process taking place within him, as he contemplated
some streamlet, or the nest of some small bird.

At Naples flourished between 1861 and 1884
Antonio Tari, who kept himself in touch with the
movement of German thought, and followed the
German idealists in placing A¢sthetic in a sort of middle
kingdom, a temperate zone, between the glacial, inhabited
by the Esquimaux of thought, and the torrid, dwelt
in by the giants of action. He dethroned the
Beautiful, and put Aésthetic in its place, for the
Beautiful is but the first moment; the later ones are
the Comic, the Humorous, and the Dramatic... His
fertile imagination found metaphors and similes in
everything: for instance, he called the goat the
Devil, opposed to the lamb, Jesus. His remarks on
men and women are full of quaint fancies. He
granted to women grace, but not beauty, which resides
in equilibrium. This is proved by her falling down so
easily when she walks; by her bow legs, which have
to support her wide hips, made for gestation; by her


HERBERT SPENCER 335


narrow shoulders, and her opulent breast. She is
therefore a creature altogether devoid of equilibrium !

I wish that it were possible to record more of the
sayings of the excellent Tari, “the last joyous priest of
an arbitrary A‘sthetic, source of confusion.”

The ground lost to the German school of meta-
physicians was occupied during the second half of the
nineteenth century by the evolutionary and positivist
metaphysicians, of whom Herbert Spencer is the most
notable representative. The peculiarity of this school
lies in repeating at second or third hand certain
idealist views, deprived of the element of pure
philosophy, given to them by a Schelling or a Hegel,
and in substituting a quantity of minute facts and
anecdotes, with a view to providing the positivist
varnish. These theories are dear to vulgar minds,
because they correspond to inveterate religious beliefs,
and the lustre of the varnish explains the good for-
tune of Spencerian positivism in our time. Another
notable trait of this school is its barbaric contempt
for history, especially for the history of philosophy,
and its consequent lack of all link with the series
composed of the secular efforts of so many thinkers.
Without this link, there can be no fruitful labour and
no possibility of progress.

Spencer is colossal in his ignorance of all that has
been written or thought on the subject of A®sthetic (to
limit ourselves to this branch alone). He actually
begins his work on the Philosophy of Style with
these words: “No one, I believe, has ever produced
a complete theory of the art of writing.” This in
1852! He begins his chapter on esthetic feelings
in the Principles of Psychology by admitting that


336 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


he has heard of the observation made by a German
author, whose name he forgets (Schiller!), on the
connexion between art and play. Had Spencer’s
remarks on Aésthetic been written in the eighteenth
century, they might have occupied a humble place
among the first rude attempts at zsthetic speculation,
but appearing in the nineteeth century, they are
without value, as the little of value they contain had
been long said by others.

In his Principles of Psychology Spencer looks
upon esthetic feelings as arising from the discharge
of the exuberant energy of the organism. This he
divides into degrees, and believes that we attain
complete enjoyment when these degrees are all
working satisfactorily each on its own plane, and
when what is painful in excessive activity has been
avoided. His degrees are sensation, sensation accom-
panied by representative elements, perception accom-
panied by more complex elements of representation,
then emotion, and that state of consciousness which
surpasses sensations and perceptions. But Spencer
has no suspicion of what art really is. His views
oscillate between sensualism and moralism, and he
sees little in the whole art of antiquity, of the Middle
Ages, or of modern times, which can be looked upon
as otherwise than imperfect !

The Physiology of A®sthetics has also had its votaries
in Great Britain, among whom may be mentioned
J. Sully, A. Bain, and Allen. These at any rate show
some knowledge of the concrete fact of art. Allen
harks back to the old distinction between necessary
and vital activities and superfluous activities, and gives
a physiological definition, which may be read in his


HELMHOLTZ 337


Phystological Aisthetics. More recent writers also
look upon the physiological fact as the cause of the
pleasure of art; but for them it does not alone depend
upon the visual organ, and the muscular phenomena
associated with it, but also on the participation of
some of the most important bodily functions, such as
respiration, circulation, equilibrium, intimate muscular
accommodation. They believe that art owes its origin
to the pleasure that some prehistoric man must have
experienced in breathing regularly, without having to
re-adapt his organs, when he traced for the first time
on a bone or on clay regular lines separated by regular
intervals.

A similar order of physico-zsthetic researches
has been made in Germany, under the auspices of
Helmholtz, Briicke, and Stumpf. But these writers
have succeeded better than the above-mentioned, by
restricting themselves to the fields of optic and acoustic,
and have supplied information as to the physical
processes of artistic technique and as to the pleasure
of visual and auditive impressions, without attempting
to melt Aésthetic into Physic, or to deprive the former
of its spiritual character. They have even occasionally
indicated the difference between the two kinds of
research, Even the degenerate Herbartians, convert-
ing the metaphysical forms of their master into
physiological phenomena, made soft eyes at the new
sensualists and zsthetico-physiologists.

The Natural Sciences have become in our day a
sort of superstition, allied to a certain, perhaps un-
conscious, hypocrisy. Not only have chemical, physical,
and physiological laboratories become a sort of Sibylline


grots, where resound the most extraordinary questions
2


338 PIS tORTCAL SU MMARY


about everything that can interest the spirit of man,
but even those who really do prosecute their researches
with the old inevitable method of internal observation,
have been unable to free themselves from the illusion
that they are, on the contrary, employing ¢he method of
the natural sciences.

Hippolyte Taine’s Philosophy of Art represents
such an illusion. He declares that when we have
studied the diverse manifestations of art in all peoples
and at all epochs, we shall then possess a complete
fEsthetic. Such an JAtsthetic would be a sort of
Botany applied to the works of man. This mode
of study would provide moral science with a basis
equally as sure as that which the natural sciences
already possess. Taine then proceeds to define art
without regard to the natural sciences, by analysing,
like a simple mortal, what passes in the human soul
when brought face to face with a work of art. But
what analysis and what definitions !

Art, he Says, 1S. imitation,= but OF a sort enat
tries to express an essential characteristic. Thus
the principal characteristic of a lion is to be “a
great carnivore,” and we observe this characteristic in
all its limbs. Holland has for essential characteristic
that of being a land formed of alluvial soil.

Now without staying to consider these two remark-
able instances, let us ask, what is this essential
characteristic of Taine? It is the same as the ideas,
types, or concepts that the old esthetic teaching
assigned to art as its object. Taine himself removes
all doubt as to this, by saying that this characteristic
is what philosophers call the essence of things, and for
that reason they declare that the purpose of art is to


eA 339


manifest things. He declares that he will not employ
the word essence, which is technical. But he accepts
and employs the thought that the word expresses.
He believes that there are two routes by which man
can attain to the superior life: science and art. By
the first, he apprehends fundamental laws and
causes, and expresses them in abstract terms; by the
second, he expresses these same laws and causes in a
manner comprehensible to all, by appealing to the
heart and feeling, as well as to the reason of man.
Art is both superior and popular; it makes manifest
what is highest, and makes it manifest to all.

That Taine here falls into the old pedagogic theory
of Aésthetic is evident. Works of art are arranged
for him in a scale of values, as for the esthetic
metaphysicians. He began by declaring the absurdity
of all judgment of taste, “a chacun son godt,” but
he ends by declaring that personal taste is without
value, that we must establish a common measure
before proceeding to praise or blame. His scale of
values is double or triple. We must first fix the
degree of importance of the characteristic, that is,
the greater or less generality of the idea, and the
degree of good in it, that is to say, its greater or
lesser moral value. These, he says, are two degrees
of the same thing, strength, seen from different sides.
We must also establish the degree of convergence of
the effects, that is, the fulness of expression, the
harmony between the idea and the form.

This half-moral, half-metaphysical exposition is
accompanied with the usual protestations, that the
matter in hand is to be studied methodically, analytically,
as the naturalist would study it, that he will try to


340 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


reach “a law, not a hymn.” As if these protestations
could abolish the true nature of his thought! Taine
actually went so far as to attempt dialectic solutions
of works of art! “In the primitive period of Italian
art, we find the soul without the body: Giotto. At
the Renaissance, with Verrocchio and his school, we
find the body without the soul. With Raphael, in the
sixteenth century, we find expression and anatomy in
harmony : body and soul.” Thesis, antithesis, synthesis !

With G. T. Fechner we find the like protestations
and the like procedure. He will study Afsthetie
inductively, from beneath. He seeks clarity, not
loftiness. Proceeding thus inductively, he discovers
a long series of laws or principles of A®sthetic, such
as unity in variety, association and contrast, change
and persistence, the golden mean, etc. He exhibits
this chaos with delight at showing himself so much
of a physiologist, and so inconclusive. Then he
proceeds to describe his experiments in Aésthetics.
These consist of attempts to decide, for instance, by
methods of choice, which of certain rectangles of
cardboard is the most agreeable, and which the most
disagreeable, to a large number of people arbitrarily
chosen. Naturally, these results do not agree with
others obtained on other occasions, but Fechner knows
that errors correct themselves, and_ triumphantly
publishes long lists of these valuable experiments.
He also communicates to us the shapes and measure-
ments of a large number of pictures in museums, as
compared with their respective subjects! Such are
the experiments of physiological zstheticians.

But Fechner, when he comes to define what beauty
and what art really are, is, like everyone else, obliged


Cr PECR NER Ee OROSSE ©3471


to fall back upon introspection. But his definition is
trivial, and his comparison of his three degrees of
beauty to a family is simply grotesque in its xaiveteé.
He terms this theory the eudemonistic theory, and
we are left wondering why, when he had this theory
all cut and dried in his mind, he should all the same
give himself the immense trouble of compiling his
tables and of enumerating his laws and _ principles,
which do not agree with his theory. Perhaps it was
all a pastime for him, like playing at patience, or
collecting postage-stamps ?

Another example of superstition in respect to the
natural sciences is afforded by Ernest Grosse. Grosse
abounds in contempt for what he calls speculative
“Esthetic. Yet he desires a Science of Art (Kunst-
wissenschaft), which shall formulate its laws from those
historical facts which have hitherto been collected.

But Grosse wishes us to complete the collection
of historical evidence with ethnographical and _ pre-
historic materials, for we cannot obtain really general
laws of art from the exclusive study of cultivated
peoples, “just as a theory of reproduction exclusively
based upon the form it takes with mammifers, must
necessarily be imperfect ! ”

He is, however, aware that the results of experiences
among savages and prehistoric races do not alone
suffice to furnish us with an equipment for such
investigations as that concerning the nature of Art,
and, like any ordinary mortal, he feels obliged to
interrogate, before starting, the spirit of man. He
therefore proceeds to define A#sthetic on apriorist
principles, which, he remarks, can be discarded when
we shall have obtained the complete theory, in like


342 His TORICAE SU MV Ay,


manner with the scaffolding that has served for the
erection of a house.

Words! Words! Vain words! He proceeds to
define AEsthetic as the activity which in its development
and result has the immediate value of feeling, and
is, therefore, an end in itself. Art is the opposite of
practice; the activity of games stands intermediate
between the two, having also its end in its own
activity.

The Aésthetics of Taine and of Grosse have been
called sociological. Seeing that any true definition of
sociology as a science is impossible, for it is composed
of psychological elements, which are for ever varying,
we do not delay to criticize the futile attempts at
definition, but pass at once to the objective results
attained by the sociologists. This superstition, like
the naturalistic, takes various forms in practical life,
We have, for instance, Proudhon (1875), who would
hark back to Platonic A#sthetic, class the zsthetic
activity among the merely sensual, and command
the arts to further the cause of virtue, on pain of
judicial proceedings in case of contumacy.

But M. Guyau is the most important of sociological
zestheticians. His works, published in Paris toward
the end of last century, and his posthumous work,
entitled Les problémes de 0Esthétique contemporaine,
substitute for the theory of play, that of fe, and the
posthumous work above-mentioned makes it evident
that by life he means social life. Art is the develop-
ment of social sympathy, but the whole of art does
not enter into sociology. Art has two objects: the
production of agreeable sensations (colours, sounds,
etc.) and of phenomena of psychological induction,


Me GUYVAY  C LOMBROSO. - 343


which include ideas and feelings of a more complex
nature than the foregoing, such as sympathy for the
personages represented, interest, piety, indignation, etc.
Thus art becomes the expression of life. Hence
arise two tendencies: one for harmony, consonance,
for all that delights the ear and eye; the other
transforming life, under the dominion of art. True
genius is destined to balance these two tendencies ;
but the decadent and the unbalanced deprive art of
its sympathetic end, setting zsthetic sympathy against
human sympathy. If we translate this language into
that with which we are by this time quite familiar,
we shall see that Guyau admits an art that is merely
hedonistic, and places above it another art, also
hedonistic, but serving the ends of morality.

M. Nordau wages war against the decadent and
unbalanced, in much the same manner as Guyau.
He assigns to art the function of re-establishing the
integrity of life, so much broken up and _ specialized
in our industrial civilization. He remarks that there
is such a thing as art for art’s sake, the simple
expression of the internal states of the individual,
but it is the art of the cave-dweller.

C. Lombroso’s theory of genius as degeneration
may be grouped with the naturalistic theories. His
argument is in essence the following. Great mental
efforts, and total absorption in one dominant thought,
often produce physiological disorders or atrophy of
important vital functions. Now these disorders often
jead to madness; therefore, genius may be identified
with madness. This proof, from the particular to
the general, does not follow that of traditional Logic.
But with Lombroso, Biichner, Nordau, and the like


344 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


we have come to the boundary between specious
and vulgar error. They confuse scientific analysis
with historical research. Such inquiries may have
value for history, but they have none for Aésthetic.
Thus, too, A. Lang maintains that the doctrine of
the origin of art as disinterested expression of the
mimetic faculty is not confirmed in what we know
of primitive art, which is rather decorative than
expressive. But primitive art, which is a_ given
fact to be interpreted, cannot ever become its own
criterion of interpretation.

The naturalistic misunderstanding has had a bad
effect on linguistic researches, which have not been
carried out on the lofty plane to which Humboldt
and Steinthal had brought them.

Max Miiller is popular and exaggerated. He fails
clearly to distinguish thought from logical thought,
although in one place he remarks that the formation
of names has a more intimate connexion with wit
than with judgment. He holds that the science of
language is not historical, but natural, because language
is not the invention of man, altogether ignoring the
science of the spirit, philosophy, of which language
is a part. For Max Miiller, the natural sciences were
the only sciences. The consciousness of the science
of the spirit becomes ever more obscured, and we
find the philologist W. D. Whitney combating Max
Miiller’s “miracles” and maintaining the separability
of thought and speech.

With Hermann Paul (1880) we have an awakening
of Humboldt’s spirit. Paul maintains that the origin
of language is the speech of the individual man,
and that a language has its origin every time it is


a ae


W. WUNDT 345


spoken. Paul also showed the fallacies contained in
the Volkerpsychologie of Steinthal and _ Lazarus,
demonstrating that there is no such thing as a
collective soul, and that there is no language save
that of the individual.

W. Wundt (1886), on the other hand, commits the
error of connecting language with Ethnopsychology
and other non-existent sciences, and actually terms
the glorious doctrine of Herder and of Humboldt
Wundertheorte, or theory of miracle, accusing them
of mystical obscurity. Wundt confuses the question
of the historical appearance of language with that of
its internal nature and genesis. He looks upon the
theory of evolution as having attained to its complete
triumph, in its application to organic nature in general,
and especially to man. He has no suspicion whatever
of the function of fancy, and of the true relation
between thought and expression, between expression in
the naturalistic, and expression in the spiritual and
linguistic sense. He looks upon speech as a specially
developed form of psycho-physical vital manifesta-
tions, of expressive animal movements. Language is
developed continuously from such facts, and thus is
explained how, “beyond the general concept of ex-
pressive movement, there is no specific quality which
delimits language in a non-arbitrary manner.”

Thus the philosophy of Wundt reveals its weak
side, showing itself incapable of understanding the
spiritual nature of language and of art. In the
Ethic of the same author, esthetic facts are pre-
sented as a mixture of logical and ethical elements,
a special normative esthetic science is denied, and
“Esthetic is merged in Logic and Ethic.


346 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


The neo-critical and neo-Kantian movement in
thought was not able to maintain the concept of
the spirit against the hedonistic, moralistic, and
psychological views of AEsthetic, in vogue from about
the middle of last century. Neo-criticism inherited
from Kant his view as to the slight importance of
the creative imagination, and appears indeed to have
been ignorant of any form of knowledge, other than
the intellective.

Kirchmann (1868) was one of the early adherents
to psychological Aésthetic, defining the beautiful as
the idealized image of pleasure, the ugly as that of
pain. For him the esthetic fact is the idealized
image of the real. Failing to apprehend the true
nature of the esthetic fact, Kirchmann invented a
new psychological category of ideal or apparent
feelings, which he thought were attenuated images
from those of real life.

The aged Theodore Fischer describes A¢sthetic in
his auto-criticism as the union of mimetic and
harmony, and the beautiful as the harmony of the
universe, which is never realized in fact, because it is
infinite. When we think to grasp the beautiful, we
experience that exquisite illusion, which is the esthetic
fact. Robert Fischer, son of the foregoing, introduced
the word Eznfiihlung, to express the vitality which
he believed that man inspired into things with the
help of the zsthetic process.

E., Siebeck and M. Diez, the former writing in
1875, the latter in 1892, unite a certain amount of
idealistic influence, derived from Kant and Herbart,
with the merely empirical and psychological views
that have of late been the fashion. Diez, for instance,


a les nF


would explain the artistic function as the ideal of
feeling, placing it parallel to science; the ideal of
thought, morality; the ideal of will and religion, the
ideal of the personality. But this ideal of feeling
escapes definition, and we see that these writers have
not had the courage of their ideas: they have not
dared to push their thought to its logical conclusion.

The merely psychological and associationist view
finds in Theodore Lipps its chief exponent. He
criticizes and rejects a series of esthetic theories, such
as those of play, of pleasure, of art as recognition of
real life, even if disagreeable, of emotionality, of
syncretism, which attaches to art a number of other
ends, in addition to those of play and of pleasure.

The theory of Lipps does not differ very greatly
from that of Jouffroy, for he assumes that artistic
beauty is the sympathetic. “Our ego, transplanted,
objectified, and recognized in others, is the object of
sympathy. We feel ourselves in others, and others in
us.” Thus the esthetic pleasure is entirely composed
of sympathy. This extends even to the pleasure
derived from architecture, geometrical forms, ete.
Whenever we meet with the positive element of human
personality, we experience this feeling of beatitude,
which is the «esthetic emotion. But the value of the
personality is an ethical value: the whole sphere of
ethic is included in it. Therefore all artistic or
esthetic pleasure is the enjoyment of something
which has ethical value, but this value is not an
element of a compound, but the object of esthetic
intuition. Thus is esthetic activity deprived of all
autonomous existence and reduced to a mere retainer
of Ethic.


348 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


C. Groos (1895) shows some signs of recognizing
zsthetic activity as a theoretic value. Feeling and
intellect, he says, are the two poles of knowledge, and
he recognizes the esthetic fact as internal imitation.
Everything beautiful belongs to estheticity, but not
every esthetic fact is beautiful. The beautiful is the
representation of sensible pleasure, and the ugly of
sensible displeasure. The sublime is the representation
of something powerful, in a simple form. The comic
is the representation of an inferiority, which provokes
in us the pleasurable feeling of “superiority.” Groos
very wisely makes mock of the supposed function of
the Ugly, which Hartmann and Schasler had inherited
and developed from a long tradition. Lipps and
Groos agree in denying esthetic value to the comic,
but Lipps, although he gives an excellent analysis of
the comic, is nevertheless in the trammels of his
moralistic thesis, and ends by sketching out something
resembling the doctrine of the overcoming of the ugly,
by means of which may be attained a higher esthetic
and (sympathetic) value.

Labours such as those of Lipps have been of value,
since they have cleared away a number of errors that
blocked the way, and restrained speculation to the
field of the internal consciousness, Similar is the
merit of E. Véron’s treatise (1883) on the double form
of AEsthetic, in which he combats the academic view
of the absolute beauty, and shows that Taine confuses
Art and Science, A®‘sthetic and Logic. He acutely
remarks that if the object of art were to reveal the
essence of things, the greatest artists would be those
who best succeeded in doing this, and the greatest
works would all be zdentical; whereas we know that


spaces


E. VERON 349


the very opposite is the case. Véron was a precursor
of Guyau, and we seek for scientific system in vain in
his book. Véron looks upon art as two things: the one
decorative, pleasing eye and ear, the other expresszve,
“Pexpression émue de la personalité humaine.” He
thought that decorative art prevailed in antiquity,
expressive art in modern times.

We cannot here dwell upon the esthetic theories
of men of letters, such as that of E. Zola, developing
his thesis of natural science and history mixed, which
is known as that of the human document or as the
experimental theory, or of Ibsen and the moralization
of the art problem, as presented by him and by the
Scandinavian school. Perhaps no French writer has
written more profoundly upon art than Gustave
Flaubert. His views are contained in his Correspond-
ence, which has been published. L. Tolstoi wrote his
book on art while under the influence of Véron
and his hatred of the concept of the beautiful. Art,
he says, communicates the feelings, as the word
communicates the thoughts. But his way of under-
standing this may be judged from the comparison
which he institutes between Art and _ Science.
According to this, “Art has for its mission to make
assimilable and sensible what may not have been
assimilated in the form of argument. There is no
science for science’s sake, no art for art’s sake. Every
human effort should be directed toward increasing
morality and suppressing violence. This amounts to
saying that well-nigh all the art that the world has
hitherto seen is false. A®schylus, Sophocles, Euripides,
Aristophanes, Dante, Tasso, Milton, Shakespeare,
Raphael, Michael Angelo, Bach, Beethoven, are all,


350 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


according to Tolstoi, “false reputations, made by the
Critics.

We must also class F. Nietzsche with the artists,
rather than with the philosophers. We should do him
an injustice (as with J. Ruskin) were we to express
in intellectual terminology his esthetic affirmations.
The criticism which they provoke would be too facile.
Nowhere has Nietzsche given a complete theory of art,
not even in his first book, Deze Geburt der Tragidie
oder Griechentum und Pesstmismus. What seems
to be theory there, is really the confession of the
feelings and aspirations of the writer. Nietzsche was
the last, splendid representative of the romantic period.
He was, therefore, deeply preoccupied with the art
problem and with the relation of art to natural science
and to philosophy, though he never succeeded in
definitely fixing those relations. From Romanticism,
rather than from Schopenhauer, he gathered those
elements of thought out of which he wove his con-
ception of the two forms of art: the Apollonian, all
serene contemplation, as expressed in the epic and in
sculpture ; the Dionysaic, all tumult and agitation, as
expressed in music and the drama. These doctrines
are not rigorously proved, and their power of resistance
to criticism is therefore but slender, but they serve to
transport the mind to a more lofty spiritual level than
any others of the second half of the nineteenth century.

The most noteworthy thought on esthetic of this
period is perhaps to be found among the estheticians
of special branches of the arts, and since we know
that laws relating only to special branches are not
conceivable, this thought may be considered as bearing
upon the general theory of Aésthetic.


E PeNeeiCK 351


The Bohemian critic E. Hanslick (1854) is perhaps
the most important of these writers. His work Ox
Musical Beauty has been translated into several
languages. His polemic is chiefly directed against
Rk. Wagner and the pretension of finding in music
a determined content of ideas and feelings. He
expresses equal contempt for those sentimentalists
who derive from music merely pathological effects,
passionate excitement, or stimulus for practical activity,
in place of enjoying the musical works. “If a few
Phrygian notes sufficed to instil courage into the
soldier facing the enemy, or a Doric melody to assure
the fidelity of a wife whose husband was absent, then
the loss of Greek music may cause pain to generals
and to husbands, but estheticians and composers will
have no reason to deplore it.” “If every Requiem,
every lamenting Adagio, possessed the power to make
us sad, who would be able to support existence in such
conditions? But if a true musical work look upon us
with the clear and brilliant eyes of beauty, we feel
ourselves bound by its invincible fascination, though
its theme be all the sorrows of the century.”

For Hanslick, the only end of music was form,
or musical beauty. The followers of Herbart showed
themselves very tender towards this unexpected
and vigorous ally, and Hanslick, not to be behindhand
in politeness, returned their compliments, by referring
to Herbart and to RK. Zimmermann, in the later
editions of his work, as having “completely developed
the great zsthetic principle of form.’ Unfortunately
Hanslick meant something altogether different from
the Herbartians by his use of the word form.
Symmetry, merely acoustic relations, and the pleasure


352 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


of the ear, did not constitute the musically beautiful
for him. Mathematics were in his view useless in the
Esthetic of music. ‘“Sonorous forms are not empty,
but perfectly full; they cannot be compared to simple
lines enclosing a space; they are the spirit, which
takes form, making its own bodily configuration.
Music is more of a picture than is an arabesque; but
it is a picture of which the subject is inexpressible in
words, nor is it to be enclosed in a precise concept.
In music, there is a meaning and a connexion, but of
a specially musical nature: it is a language which we
speak and understand, but which it is impossible to
translate.” Hanslick admits that music, if it do not
render the quality of sentiments, renders their tone or
dynamic side; it renders adjectives, if it fail to render
substantives; if not “murmuring tenderness” or
“impetuous courage,” at any rate the “ murmuring”
and the “ impetuous.”

The essence of his book is contained in the nega-
tion that it is possible to separate form and content
in music. “Take any motive you will, and say where
form begins and content ends. Are we to call the
sounds content? Very good, but they have already
received form. What are we to call form? Sounds
again? But they are already form filled, that is to
say, possessing a content.” These observations testify
to an acute penetration of the nature of art. Hanslick’s
belief that they were characteristics peculiar to music,
not common to every form of art, alone prevented him
from seeing further.

C. Fiedler, published in German (in 1887) an
extremely luminous work on the origin of artistic
activity. He describes eloquently how the passive


mo ren BRAND: El BERGSON 453


spectator seems to himself to grasp all reality, as the
shows of life pass before him; but at the moment that
he tries to realize this artistically, all disappears, and
leaves him with the emptiness of his own thoughts.
Yet by concentration alone do we attain to expression ;
art is a language that we gradually learn to speak.
Artistic activity is only to be attained by limiting
ourselves; it must consist of “forms precisely
determined, tangible, sensibly demonstrable, precisely
because it is spiritual.” Art does not imitate nature,
for what is nature, but that vast confusion of percep-
tions and representations that were referred to above ?
Yet in a sense art does imitate nature; it uses nature
to produce values of a kind peculiar to itself. Those
values are true visibility.

Fiedler’s views correspond with those of his prede-
cessor, Hanslick, but are more rigorously and _ philo-
sophically developed. The sculptor A. Hildebrand
may be mentioned with these, as having drawn
attention to the nature of art as architectonic rather
than imitative, with special application to the art of
sculpture.

What we miss with these and with other specialists,
is a broad view of art and language, as one and the
same thing, the inheritance of all humanity, not of a
few persons, specially endowed. H. Bergson in his
book on laughter (1900) falls under the same criticism.
He develops his theory of art ina manner analogous
to Fiedler, and errs like him in looking upon it as
something different and exceptional in respect to the
language of every moment. He declares that in life
the individuality of things escapes us: we see only as
much as suffices for our practical ends. The influence

2A


354 hisStORICALE SUMMARY


of language aids this rude simplification: all but
proper names are abstractions. Artists arise from
time to time, who recover the riches hidden beneath
the labels of ordinary life.

Amid the ruin of idealist metaphysics, is to be
desired a healthy return to the doctrine of Baumgarten,
corrected and enriched with the discoveries that have
been made since his time, especially by romanticism
and psychology. C. Hermann (1876) announced this
return, but his book is a hopeless mixture of empirical
precepts and of metaphysical beliefs regarding Logic
and /#sthetic, both of which, he believes, deal not
with the empirical thought and experience of the soul,
but with the pure and absolute.

B. Bosanquet (1892) gives the following definition
of the beautiful, as “that which has a characteristic
or individual expressivity for the sensible perception,
or for the imagination, subject to the conditions of
general or abstract expressivity for the same means,”
The problem as posed by this writer by the antithesis
of the two German schools of form and _ content,
appears to us insoluble.

Though De Sanctis left no school in Italy, his
teaching has been cleared of the obscurities that had
gathered round it during the last ten years; and the
thesis of the true nature of history, and of its nature,
altogether different from natural science, has been also
dealt with in Germany, although its precise relation to
the zsthetic problem has not been made clear. Such
labours and such discussions constitute a more favour-
able ground for the scientific development of Aésthetic
than the stars of mystical metaphysic or the stables
of positivism and of sensualism.


+


SCHILLER Bas


We have now reached the end of the inquiry into
the history of «esthetic speculation, and we are struck
with the smallness of the number of those who have
seen clearly the nature of the problem. No doubt,
amid the crowd of artists, critics, and writers on
other subjects, many have incidentally made very just
remarks, and if all these were added to the few
philosophers, they would form a gallant company.
fur if, as Schiller truly observed, the rhythm of
philosophy consist in a withdrawal from public opinion,
in order to return to it with renewed vigour, it is
evident that this withdrawal is essential, and indeed
that in it lies the whole progress of philosophy.

During our long journey, we have witnessed grave
aberrations from the truth, which were at the same time
attempts to reach it; such were the hedonism of the
sophists and rhetoricians of antiquity, of the sensualists
of the eighteenth and second half of the nineteenth
centuries; the moralistic hedonism of Aristophanes
and the Stoics, of the Roman eclectics, of the writers
of the Middle Age and of the Renaissance ; the ascetic
and logical hedonism of Plato and the Fathers of the
Church ; the zsthetic mysticism of Plotinus, reborn to |
its greatest triumphs, during the classic period of |
German thought.

Through the midst of these variously erroneous
theories, that traverse the field of thought in all
directions, runs a tiny rivulet of golden truth. Starting
from the subtle empiricism of Aristotle, it flows in
the profound penetration of Vico to the nineteenth
century, where it appears again in the masterly
analyses of Schleiermacher, Humboldt, and De Sanctis.

This brief list shows that the science of Atsthetic is


356 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


no longer to be discovered, but it also shows ¢hat it zs
only at its beginning.

The birth of a science is like the birth of a human
being. In order to live, a science, like a man, has to
withstand a thousand attacks of all sorts. These
appear in the form of errors, which must be extirpated,
if the science is not to perish. And when one set
has been weeded, another crops up; when these have
been dealt with, the former errors often return. There-
fore sczentific criticism is always necessary. No science
can repose on its laurels, complete, unchallenged. Like
a human being, it must maintain its position by
constant efforts, constant victories over error. The
general errors which reveal a negation of the very concept
of art have already been dealt with in the Historical
Summary. The particular errors have been exposed
in the Theory. They may be divided under three
heads: (i.) Errors as to the characteristic quality of the
zsthetic fact, or (ii.) as to its specific quality, or (iii.)
as to its generic quality. | These are contradictions of
the characteristics of intuition, of theoretic contem-
plation, and of spiritual activity, which constitute the
zesthetic fact.

The principal bar to a proper understanding of the
true nature of language has been and still is Rhetoric,
with the modern form it has assumed, as style. The
rhetorical categories are still mentioned in treatises and
often referred to, as having definite existence among
the parts of speech. Side by side with such phrases
goes that of the double form, or metaphor, which
implies that there are two ways of saying the same
thing, the one simple, the other ornate.

Kant, Herbart, Hegel, and many minor personages,


“J


Pee See Lescol NG 357


have been shown to be victims of the rhetorical
categories, and in our own day we have writers in
Italy and in Germany who devote much attention
to them, such as R. Bonghi and G. Grober ; the latter
employs a phraseology which he borrows from the
modern schools of psychology, but this does not alter
the true nature of his argument. De Sanctis gave
perhaps the clearest and most stimulating advice
in his lectures on Rhetoric, which he termed Anti-
rhetoric.

But even he failed to systematize his thought,
and we may say that the true critique of Rhetoric can
only be made from the point of view of the esthetic
activity, which is, as we know, ove, and therefore does
not give rise to divisions, and cannot express the same
content now tn one form, now tn another. ‘Thus only can
we drive away the double monster of naked form
deprived of imagination, and of decorated form, which
would represent something more than imagination.
The same remarks apply to artistic and _ literary
styles, and to their various laws or rules. In modern
times they have generally been comprised with rhetoric,
and although now discredited, they cannot be said to
have altogether disappeared.

J. C. Scaliger may be entitled the protagonist of
the unities in comparatively modern times: he it was
who “laid the foundations of the classical Bastille,” and
supplied tyrants of literature, like Boileau, with some
of their best weapons. Lessing opposed the French
rules and restrictions with German rules and restrictions,
giving as his opinion that Corneille and others had
wrongly interpreted Aristotle, whose rules did not really
prevent Shakespeare from being included among


358 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


correct writers! Lessing undoubtedly believed in
intellectual rules for poetry. Aristotle was the tyrant,
father of tyrants, and we find Corneille saying “ qu’il est
aisé de s’accommoder avec Aristote,” much in the same
way as Tartuffe makes his “ accommodements avec le
ciel.” In the next century, several additions were made
to the admitted styles, as for instance the “ tragédie
bourgeoise.”

But these battles of the rules with one another are
less interesting than the rebellion against all the rules,
which began with Pietro Aretino in the sixteenth century,
who makes mock of them in the prologues to his
comedies. Giordano Bruno took sides against the
makers of rules, saying that the rules came from the
poetry, and “therefore there are as many genuses and
species of true rules as there are genuses and species
of true poets.” When asked how the true poets are
to be known, he replies, “by repeating their verses,
which either cause delight, or profit, or both.” Guarini,
too, said that “the world judges poetry, and _ its
sentence is without appeal.”

Strangely enough, it was priest-ridden Spain that
all through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
led the van of revolt against the rules and precepts
of the grammarians. While Torquato Tasso remained
the miserable slave of grammarians unworthy to lick
the dust from his feet, Lope de Vega slyly remarked
that when he wrote his comedies, he locked up the
givers of precepts with six keys, that they might not
reproach him. J.B. Marino declared that he knew the
rules better than all the pedants in the world; “but
the true rule is to know when to break the rules, in
accordance with the manners of the day and the taste


MOM SCHLEGEL 359


of the age.” Among the most acute writers of the
end of the seventeenth century is to be mentioned
Gravina, who well understood that a work of art must
be its own criterion, and said so clearly when praising
a contemporary for a work which did not enter any
one of the admitted categories. Unfortunately Gravina
did not clearly formulate his views.

France of the eighteenth century produced several
writers like Du Bos, who declared that men will always
prefer the poems that move them, to those composed
according to rule. La Motte combated the unities
of place and time, and Batteux showed himself liberal
in respect to rules. Voltaire, although he opposed
La Motte and described the three unities as the three
great laws of good sense, was also capable of declaring
that all styles but the tiresome are good, and that the
best style is that which is best used. In England we
find Home in his Elements of Critictsm deriding the
critics for asserting that there must be a precise criterion
for distinguishing epic poetry from all other forms of
composition. Literary compositions, he held, melt into
one another, just like colours.

The literary movement of the end of the eighteenth
and the beginning of the nineteenth centuries attacked
rules of all sorts. We will not dwell upon the many
encounters of these periods, nor record the names of those
that conquered gloriously, or their excesses. In France
the preface to the Cromwell of V. Hugo (1827), in Italy
the Lettera semiserta dt Grisostomo, were clarions
of rebellion. The principle first laid down by A. W.
Schlegel, that the form of compositions must be organic
and not mechanic, resulting from the nature of the
subject, from its internal development not from an


360 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


external stamp, was enunciated in Italy. Art is always
a whole, a synthesis.

But it would be altogether wrong to believe that
this empirical defeat of the styles and rules implied
their final defeat in philosophy. Even writers who
were capable of dispensing with prejudice when judging
works of art, once they spoke as philosophers, were
apt to reassume their belief in those categories which,
empirically, they had discarded. The spectacle of
these literary or rhetorical categories, raised by German
philosophers to the honours of philosophical deduction,
is even more amusing than that which afforded amuse-
ment to Home. The truth is that they were unable
to free their zesthetic systems of intellectualism, although
they proclaimed the empire of the mystic idea,
Schelling (1803) at the beginning, Hartmann (1890)
at the end of the century, furnish a good example
of this head and tail.

Schelling, in his Philosophy of Art, declares that,
historically speaking, the first place in the styles of poetry
is due to Epic, but, scientifically speaking, it falls to
Lyric. In truth, if poetry be the representation of the
infinite in the finite, then lyric poetry, in which prevails
the finite, must be its first moment. Lyric poetry
corresponds to the first of the ideal series, to reflection,
to knowledge; epic poetry corresponds to the second
power, to action. This philosopher finally proceeds
to the unification of epic and lyric poetry, and from
their union he deduces the dramatic form, which is
in his view “the supreme incarnation of the essence
and of the zw-se of every art.”

With Hartmann, poetry is divided into poetry of
declamation and poetry for reading. The first is sub-


ee


VON HARTMANN : BRUNETIERE 361


divided into Epic, Lyric, and Dramatic; the Epic is
divided into plastic epic, proper epic, pictorial epic,
and lyrical epic; Lyric is divided into epical lyric,
lyrical lyric, and dramatic lyric; Dramatic is divided
into lyrical dramatic, epical dramatic, and dramatical
dramatic. The second (readable poetry) is divided
into poetry which is chiefly epical, lyrical, and dramatic,
with the tertiary division of moving, comic, tragic, and
humoristic ; and poetry which can all be read at once,
like a short story, or that requires several sittings, like
a romance,

These brief extracts show of what dialectic pirouettes
and sublime trivialities even philosophers are capable,
when they begin to treat of the AEsthetic of the tragic,
comic, and humorous. Such false distinctions are still
taught in the schools of France and Germany, and we
find a French critic like Ferdinand Brunetiere devoting
a whole volume to the evolution of literary styles or
classes, which he really believes to constitute literary
history. This prejudice, less frankly stated, still infests
many histories of literature, even in Italy.

We believe that the falsity of these rules of classes
should be scientifically demonstrated. In our Theory
of Esthetic we have shown how we believe that it
should be demonstrated.

The proof of the theory of the limits of the arts
has been credited to Lessing, but his merit should
rather be limited to having been the first to draw
attention to the problem. His solution was false,
but his achievement nevertheless great, in having posed
the question clearly. No one before him, in antiquity,
in the Middle Age, or in modern times, had seriously
asked: What is the value of the distinctions between


362 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


the arts? Which of them comes first? Which
second? Leonardo da Vinci had declared his personal
predilection for painting, Michael Angelo for sculpture,
but the question had not been philosophically treated
before Lessing.

Lessing’s attention was drawn to the problem,
through his desire to disprove the assertions of Spence
and of the Comte de Caylus, the former in respect to
the close union between poetry and painting in
antiquity, the latter as believing that a poem was good
according to the number of subjects which it should
afford the painter. Lessing argued thus: Painting
manifests itself in space, poetry in time: the mode of
manifestation of painting is through objects which co-
exist, that of poetry through objects which are con-
secutive. The objects which coexist, or whose parts
are coexistent, are called bodies. Bodies, then, owing
to their visibility, are the true objects of painting.
Objects which are consecutive, or whose parts are con-
secutive, are called, in general, actions. Actions, then,
are the suitable object of poetry. He admitted that
painting might represent an action, but only by means
of bodies which make allusion to it; that poetry can
represent bodies, but only by means of actions. Return-
ing to this theme, he explained the action or movement
in painting as added by our imagination. Lessing
was greatly preoccupied with the naturalness and the
unnaturalness of signs, which is tantamount to saying
that he believed each art to be strictly limited to
certain modes of expression, which are only overstepped
at the cost of coherency. In the appendix to his
Laocoon, he quotes Plutarch as saying that one should
not chop wood with a key, or open the door with an


“P


LESSING : SCHLEIERMACHER 363


axe. He who should do so would not only be spoiling
both those utensils, but would also be depriving himself
of the utility of both. He believed that this applied
to the arts.

The number of philosophers and writers who have
attempted empirical classifications of the arts is
enormous: it ranges in comparatively recent times from
Lessing, by way of Schasler, Solger, and Hartmann, to
Richard Wagner, whose theory of the combination of
the arts was first mooted in the eighteenth century.

Lotze, while reflecting upon the futility of these
attempts, himself adopts a method, which he says is
the most “convenient,” and thereby incurs the censure
of Schasler. This method is in fact suitable for his
studies in botany and in zoology, but useless for the
philosophy of the spirit. Thus both these thinkers
maintained Lessing’s wrong principle as to the con-
stancy, the limits, and the peculiar nature of each art.

Who among estheticians has criticized this principle ?
Aristotle had a glimpse of the truth, when he refused
to admit that the distinction between prose and poetry
lay in an external fact, the metre. Schleiermacher
seems to have been the only one who was thoroughly
aware of the difficulty of the problem. In analysis,
indeed, he goes so far as to say that what the arts
have in common is not the external fact, which is an
element of diversity ; and connecting such an observation}
as this with his clear distinction between art and what.
is called technique, we might argue that Schleiermacher
looked upon the divisions between the arts as non-—
existent. But he dces not make this logical inference,
and his thought upon the problem continues to be
wavering and undecided. Nebulous, uncertain, and


364 HISTORICAL SUMMARY


contradictory as is this portion of Schleiermacher’s
theory, he has yet the great merit of having doubted
Lessing’s theory, and of having asked himself by
what right are special arts held to be distinct in art.
Schleiermacher absolutely denied the existence of a
beautiful in nature, and praised Hegel for having
sustained this negation. Hegel did not really deserve
this praise, as his negation was rather verbal than
effective ; but the importance of this thesis as stated by
Schleiermacher is very great, in so far as he denied
the existence of an objective natural beauty not pro-
duced by the spirit of man. Phis. theory. o1 the
beautiful in nature, when taken in a metaphysical
sense, does not constitute an error peculiar to zsthetic
science. It forms part of a fallacious general theory,
which can be criticized together with its metaphysic.
The theory of zsthetic senses, that is, of certain
superior senses, such as sight and hearing, being
the only ones for which esthetic impressions exist,
was debated as early as Plato. The Azppzas
major contains a discussion upon this theme, which
Socrates leads to the conclusion that there exist
beautiful things, which do not reach us through im-
pressions of eye or ear. But further than this, there
exist things which please the eye, but not the ear,
and wvzce versa; therefore the reason of beauty cannot
be visibility or audibility, but something different from,
yet common to both. Perhaps this question has never
been so acutely and so seriously dealt with as in this
Platonic dialogue. Home, Herder, Hegel, Diderot,
Rousseau, Berkeley, all dealt with the problem, but in
a more or less arbitrary manner. Herder, for instance,
includes touch with the higher zsthetic senses, but


SCHLEIERMACHER 365


Hegel removes it, as having immediate contact with
matter as such, and with its immediate sensible qualities.

Schleiermacher, with his wonted penetration, saw
that the problem was not to be solved so easily. He
refuted the distinction between clear and confused
senses. He held that the superiority of sight and
| hearing over the other senses lay in their free activity,
a in their capacity of an activity proceeding from within,
and able to create forms and sounds without receiving
external impressions. The eye and the ear are not
| merely means of perception, for in that case there
could be no visual and no auditive arts. They are also
functions of voluntary movements, which fill the domain
of the senses. Schleiermacher, however, considered
:| that the difference was rather one of quantity, and that
we should allow to the other senses a minimum of


wv


al independence.

The sensualists, as we know, maintain that all the
senses are esthetic. That is the hedonistic hypothesis,
which has been dealt with and disproved in this book.
We have shown the embarrassment in which the
hedonists find themselves, when they have dubbed all
the senses “zsthetic,” or have been obliged to differ-
entiate in an absurd manner some of the senses from
the others. The only way out of the difficulty lies in
abandoning the attempt to unite orders of facts so
diverse as the representative form of the spirit and
the conception of given physical organs or of a given
material of impressions.

The origin of classes of speech and of grammatical
forms is to be found in antiquity, and as regards the
latter, the disputes among the Alexandrian philosophers,
the analogists, and the anomalists, resulted in logic


s


Le I sce LI I Ee LE EE is SITS REN


366 MiIStTORICAL SUMMARY


being identified with grammar. Anything which did
not seem logical was excluded from grammar as a
deviation. The analogists, however, did not have it all
their own way, and grammar in the modern sense of
the word is a compromise between these extreme views,
that is, it contains something of the thought of Chry-
sippus, who composed a treatise to show that the same
thing can be expressed with different sounds, and of
Apollonius Discolus, who attempted to explain what
the rigorous analogists refused to admit into their
schemes and classifications. It is only of late years
that we have begun to emerge from the superstitious
reverence for grammar, inherited from the Middle Age.
Such writers as Pott, in his introduction to Humboldt,
and Paul in his Préncipien d. Sprachgeschichte, have
done good service in throwing doubt upon the absolute
validity of the parts of speech. If the old superstitions
still survive tenaciously, we must attribute this partly to
empirical and poetical grammar, partly to the venerable
antiquity of grammar itself, which has led the world
to forget its illegitimate and turbid origin.

The theory of the relativity of taste is likewise
ancient, and it would be interesting to know whether
the saying “there’s no accounting for tastes” could
be traced to a merely gustatory origin. In this
; sense, the saying would be quite correct, as it is guzte
| wrong when applied to esthetic facts. The eighteenth
century writers exhibit a piteous perplexity of thought
on this subject. Home, for instance, after much debate,
decides upon a common “standard of taste,’ which he
deduces from the necessity of social life and from what
he calls “a final cause.” Of course it will not be an
easy matter to fix this “standard of taste.” As regards


“uP


on Ae nase


perenne ae =


bi bis antes cach


SE are tr


Ye


Dek eer


HOME. DAVID FU NE 207


moral conduct, we do not seek our models among
savages, so with regard to taste, we must have recourse
to those few whose taste has not been corrupted nor
spoilt by pleasure, who have received good taste from
nature, and have perfected it by education and by the
practice of life. If after this has been done, there
should yet arise disputes, it will be necessary to refer
to the principles of criticism, as laid down in his book
by the said Home.

We find similar contradictions and vicious circles
in the Dzscourse on Taste of David Hume. We search
his writings in vain for the distinctive characteristics
of the man of taste, whose judgments should be final.
Although he asserts that the general principles of taste
are universal in human nature, and admits that no
notice should be accorded to perversions and ignorance,
yet there exist diversities of taste that are irreconcilable,
insuperable, and blameless.

But the criticism of the sensualist and relativist
positions cannot be made from the point of view of
those who proclaim the absolute nature of taste and
yet place it among the intellectual concepts. It has
been shown to be impossible to escape from sensualism
and relativity save by falling into the intellectualist
error. Muratori in the eighteenth century is an instance
of this. He was one of the first to maintain the
existence of a rule of taste and of universal beauty.
André also spoke of what appears beautiful in a work
of art as being not that which pleases at once, owing
to certain particular dispositions of the faculties of the
soul and of the organs of the body, but that which has
the right of pleasing the reason and reflection through
its own excellence. Voltaire admitted an “ universal


368 His TORI ICAL oUMINAKY


taste,” which was “intellectual,” as did manyothers. Kant
appeared, and condemned alike the intellectualist and
the sensualistic error; but placing the beautiful in a
symbol of morality, he failed to discover the imaginative
absoluteness of taste. Later speculative philosophy
did not attach importance to the question.

The correct solution was slow in making its way.
iit. lies, as we Know, in- the fact that. to judec- a
_ work of art we must place ourselves in the position of
the artist at the time of production, and that to judge
is to reproduce. Alexander Pope, in his Essay om
Criticism, was among the first to state this truth :


A perfect judge will read each work of wit
With the same spirit that its author writ.


Remarks equally luminous were made by Antonio
Conti, Terrasson, and Heydenreich in the eighteenth
century, the latter with considerable philosophical
development. De Sanctis gave in his adhesion to this
formula, but a true theory of esthetic criticism had not
yet been given, because for such was necessary, not
only an exact conception of nature in art, but also of
the relations between the esthetic fact and its historical
conditions. In more recent times has been denied the
possibility of zsthetic criticism; it has been looked
upon as merely individual and capricious, and historical
criticism has been set up in its place. This would be
better called a criticism of extrinsic erudition and of
bad philosophical inspiration—positivist and materialist.
The true history of literature will always require the
reconstruction and then the judgment of the work of
art. Those who have wished to react against such
emasculated erudition have often thrown themselves


“cin pintehs aaah


CONCLUSION 369


into the opposite extreme, that is, into a dogmatic,
abstract, intellectualistic, or moralistic form of criticism.

This mention of the history of certain doctrines
relating to Aésthetic suffices to show the range of error
possible in the theory, A%sthetic has need to be
surrounded by a vigilant and vigorous critical literature
which shall derive from it and be at once its safeguard
and its source of strength.


2


APPENDIX


I HERE add as an appendix, at the request of the
author, a translation of his lecture which he delivered
before the Third International Congress of Philosophy,
at Heidelberg, on 2nd September 1908.

The reader will find that it throws a vivid light
upon Benedetto Croce’s general theory of Aésthetic.


PURE INTUITION AND THE LYRICAL
CHARACTER OF ART.


A Lecture delivered at Heidelberg at the second general
session of the Third International Congress of
Philosophy.


THERE exists an empzrical ZEsthetic, which although it
admits the existence of facts, called xsthetic or artistic,
yet holds that they are irreducible to a single prin-
ciple, to a rigorous philosophical concept. It wishes
to limit itself to collecting as many of those facts
as possible, and in the greatest possible variety,
thence, at the most, proceeding to group them
together in classes and types. The logical ideal of
this school, as declared on many occcasions, is zoology
or botany. This A®sthetic, when asked what art is,


371


372 APPENDIX


replies by indicating successively single facts, and by
saying: “Art is this, and this, and this too is art,’ and
so on, indefinitely. Zoology and botany renew the
representatives of fauna and of flora in the same way.
They calculate that the species renewed amount to
some thousand, but believe that they might easily be
increased to twenty or a hundred thousand, or even
to a million, or to infinity.

There is another A‘sthetic, which has been called
hedonistic, utilitarian, moralistic, and so on, according
to its various manifestations. Its complex denomina-
tion should, however, be practicism, because that is
precisely what constitutes its essential character.
This Aésthetic differs from the preceding, in the belief
that zsthetic or artistic facts are not a merely empirical
or nominalistic grouping together, but that all of
\them possess a common foundation. Its foundation
‘is placed in the practical form of human activity.
Those facts are therefore considered, either generically,
as manifestations of pleasure and pain, and therefore
rather as economic facts; or, more particularly, as a
special class of those manifestations; or again, as
instruments and products of the ethical spirit, which
subdues and turns to its own ends individual hedonistic
and economic tendencies.

There is a third A‘sthetic, the zxztellectualist, which,
while also recognizing the reducibility of esthetic facts
to philosophical treatment, explains them as particular
‘cases of logical thought, identifying beauty with
intellectual truth ; art, now with the natural sciences, now
with philosophy. For this A¢sthetic, what is prized in
art is what is learned from it. The only distinction
that it admits between art and science, or art and


oT ee 2 -_


ee PGi


a


APPENDIX eave:


philosophy, is at the most that of more or less, or
of perfection and imperfection. According to this
esthetic, art would be the whole mass of easy and
popular truths; or it would be a transitory form of
science, a semi-science and a semi-philosophy, pre-
paratory to the superior and perfect form of science
and of philosophy.

A fourth A#sthetic there is, which may be called
agnostic. It springs from the criticism of the positions
just now indicated, and being guided by a powerful
consciousness of the truth, rejects them all, because it
finds them too evidently false, and because it is too
loth to admit that art is a simple fact of pleasure or
pain, an exercise of virtue, or a fragmentary sketch
of science and philosophy. And while rejecting them,
it discovers, at the same time, that art is not now this i
and now that of those things, or of other things, ;
indefinitely, but that it has its own principle and origin. i
However, it is not able to say what this principle
may be, and believes that it is impossible to do so.
This Esthetic knows that art cannot be resolved into -
an empirical concept; knows that pleasure and pain -
are united with the esthetic activity only in an.
indirect manner; that morality has nothing to do with
art ; that itis impossible to rationalize art, as is the case
with science and philosophy, and to prove it beautiful or
ugly with the aid of reason. Here this Atsthetic is j
content to stop, satisfied with a knowledge consisting.
entirely of negative terms.

Finally, there is an Aésthetic which I have else-
where proposed to call mystic. This A‘sthetic avails
itself of those negative terms, to define art as a
spiritual form without a practical character, because it


374 APPENDIX


is theoretic, and without a logical or intellective form,
because it is a theoretic form, differing alike from those
of science and of philosophy, and superior to both.
According to this view, art would be the highest
pinnacle of knowledge, whence what is seen from other
points seems narrow and partial; art would alone reveal
the whole horizon or all the abysses of Reality.

Now, the five A¢sthetics so far mentioned are not
referable to contingent facts and historical epochs, as
are, on the other hand, the denominations of Greek and
Medieval Aésthetic, of Renaissance and eighteenth-
century Aésthetic, the Atsthetic of Wolff and of
Herbart, of Vico and of Hegel. These five are, on the


contrary, mental attitudes, which are found in all |


periods, although they have not always conspicuous
representatives of the kind that are said to become
historical. Empirical A®sthetic is, for example, called
Burke in the eighteenth, Fechner in the nineteenth
century ; moralistic A‘sthetic is Horace or Plutarch in
antiquity, Campanella in modern times ; intellectualist
or logical Aésthetic is Cartesian in the seventeenth,
Leibnitzian in the eighteenth, and Hegelian in the
nineteenth century; agnostic A*sthetic is Francesco
Patrizio at the Renaissance, Kant in the eighteenth
century ; mystic A¢sthetic is called Neoplatonism at the
end of the antique world, Romanticism at the beginning
of the nineteenth century, and if it be adorned during the


| former period with the name of Plotinus, in the latter
| it will bear the name of Schelling or of Solger. And


not only are those attitudes and mental tendencies
common to all epochs, but they are also all found to
some extent developed or indicated in every thinker,
and even in every man. Thus it is somewhat difficult


ibs is sa


(J


uP


ao VP


APPENDIX 375


to classify philosophers of A®sthetic according to one
or the other category, because each philosopher also
enters more or less into some other, or into all the
other categories.

Nor can these five conceptions and points of
view be looked upon as increasable to ten or twenty,
or to as many as desired, or that I have placed them
in a certain order, but that they could be capriciously
placed in another order. If this were so, they would
be altogether heterogeneous and disconnected among
themselves, and the attempt to examine and criticize
them would seem altogether desperate, as also would
be that of comparing one with the other, or of stating
a new one, which should dominate them all. It is
precisely thus that ordinary sceptics look upon various
and contrasting scientific views. They group them all
in the same plane, and believing that they can increase
them at will, conclude that one is as good as another,
and that therefore every one is free to select that which
he prefers from a bundle of falsehoods. The con-
ceptions of which we speak are definite in number,
and appear in a necessary order, which is either that
here stated by me, or another which might be proposed,
better than mine. This would be the necessary order,
which I should have failed to realize effectively. They
are connected one with the other, and in such a way
that the view which follows includes in itself that
which precedes it.

Thus, if the last of the five doctrines indicated be
taken, which may be summed up as the proposition
that art is a form of the theoretic spirit, superior to
the scientific and philosophic form—and if it be
submitted to analysis, it will be seen that in it is


,


376 APPENDIX


included, in the first place, the proposition affirming
the existence of a group of facts, which are called
esthetic or artistic. If suchgfacts did not exist, it
is evident that no question would arise concerning
them, and that no systematization would be at-
tempted. And this is the truth of empirical Esthetic.
But there is also contained in it the proposition:
that the facts examined are reducible to a definite
principle or category of the spirit. This amounts to
saying, that they belong either to the practical spirit,
or to the theoretical, or to one of their subforms.
And this is the truth of practicist A¢sthetic, which is
occupied with the enquiry as to whether these ever
are practical facts, and affirms that in every case they
are a special category of the spirit. Thirdly, there is
contained in it the proposition: that they are not
practical facts, but facts which should rather be
placed near the facts of logic or of thought. This
is, the truth. of intellectualistic o7sthetic.. inven
fourth place, we find also the proposition; that
esthetic facts are neither practical, nor of that
theoretic form which is called logical and intellective.
They are something which cannot be identified with
the categories of pleasure, nor of the useful, nor with
those of ethic, nor with those of logical truth. They
are something of which it is necessary to find a
further definition. This is the truth of that A¢sthetic
which is termed agnostic or negative.

When these various propositions are severed from
their connection; when, that is to say, the first is
taken without the second, the second without the
third, and so on,—and when each, thus mutilated, is
confined in itself and the enquiry which awaits


i=


APPENDIX 377


prosecution is arbitrarily arrested, then each one
of these gives itself out as the whole of them, that
is, as the completion of the enquiry. In this way,
each becomes error, and the truths contained in
empiricism, in  practicism, in intellectualism, in
agnostic and in mystical A‘sthetic, become, respectively,
falsity, and these tendencies of speculation are
indicated with names of a definitely depreciative
colouring. Empiria becomes empiricism, the heuristic
comparison of the zsthetic activity with the practical
and logical, becomes a_ conclusion, and_ therefore
practicism and intellectualism. The criticism which
rejects false definitions, and is itself negative, affirms
itself as positive and definite, becoming agnosticism ;
and so on.

But the attempt to close a mental process in an
arbitrary manner is vain, and of necessity causes
remorse and self-criticism. Thus it comes about, that
each one of those unilateral and erroneous doctrines
continually tends to surpass itself and to enter the
stage which follows it. Thus empiricism, for example,
assumes that it can dispense with any philosophical
conception of art; but, since it severs art from non-art
—and, however empirical it be, it will not identify a pen-
and-ink sketch and a table of logarithms, as if they
were just the same thing, or a painting and milk or
blood (although milk and blood both possess colour)
—thus empiricism too must at last resort to some
kind of philosophical concept. Therefore, we see
the empiricists becoming, turn and turn about, hedon-
ists, moralists, intellectualists, agnostics, mystics, and
sometimes they are even better than mystics, uphold-
ing an excellent conception of art, which can only


270 APPENDIX


be found fault with because introduced surreptitiously
and without justification. If they do not make that
progress, it is impossible for them to speak in any
way of zsthetic facts. They must return, as regards
such facts, to that indifference and to that silence
from which they had emerged when they affirmed the
existence of these facts and began to consider them
in their variety. The same may be said of all other
unilateral doctrines. They are all reduced to the
alternative of advancing or of going back, and in so
far as they do not wish to do either, they live amid
contradictions and in anguish. But they do free
themselves from these, more or less slowly, and thus
are compelled to advance, more or less slowly. And
here we discover why it is so difficult, and indeed
impossible, exactly to identify thinkers, philosophers,
and writers with one or the other of the doctrines
which we have enunciated, because each one of them
rebels when he finds himself limited to one of those
categories, and it seems to him that he is shut up
in prison. It is precisely because those thinkers try
to shut themselves up in a unilateral doctrine, that
they do not succeed, and that they take a step, now
in one direction, now in another, and are conscious
of being now on this side, now on the other, of the
criticisms which are addressed to them. But the
critics fulfil their duty by putting them in prison,
thus throwing into relief the absurdity into which
they are led by their irresolution, or their resolution
not to resolve.

And from this necessary connection and progressive
order of the various propositions indicated arise also
the resolve, the counsel, the exhortation, to “ return,”


PE RAT TOE Sp


APPENDIX 379


as they say, to this or that thinker, to this or that
philosophical school of the past. Certainly, such
returns are impossible, understood literally ; they are
also a little ridiculous, like all impossible attempts.
We can never return to the past, precisely because
it is the past. No one is permitted to free himself
from the problems which are put by the present, and
which he must solve with all the means of the
present (which includes in it the means of the past).
Nevertheless, it is a fact that the history of philosophy
everywhere resounds with cries of return. Those
very people who in our day deride the “return to
Hume” or the “return to Kant,” proceed to advise
the “return to Schelling,” or the “return to Hegel.”
This means that we must not understand those
“returns” literally and in a material way. In truth,
they do not express anything but the necessity and
the ineliminability of the logical process explained
above, for which the affirmations contained in philo-
sophical problems appear connected with one another
in such a way that the one follows the other, surpasses
it, and includes it in itself. Empiricism, practicism,
intellectualism, agnosticism, mysticism, are eternal
stages of the search for truth. They are eternally
relived and rethought in the truth which each
contains. Thus it would be necessary for him who
had not yet turned his attention to esthetic facts,
to begin by passing them before his eyes, that is
to say, he must first traverse the empirical stage
(about equivalent to that occupied by mere men of
letters and mere amateurs of art); and while he is
at this stage, he must be aroused to feel the want
of a principle of explanation, by making him compare


380 APPENDIX


his present knowledge with the facts, and see if they
are explained by it, that is to say, if they be utilitarian
and moral, or logical and intellective. Then we
should drive him who has made this examination
to the conclusion, that the esthetic activity is some-
thing different from all known forms, a form of the
spirit, which it yet remains to characterize. For the
empiricists of Aésthetic, intellectualism and moralism
represent progress ; for the intellectualists, hedonistic
and moralistic alike, agnosticism is progress and may
be called Kant. But for Kantians, who are real
Kantians (and not neo-Kantians), progress is repre-
sented by the mystical and romantic point of view ;
not because this comes after the doctrine of Kant
chronologically, but because it surpasses it ideally.
In this sense, and in this sense alone, we should now
“return” to the romantic Asthetic. We should
return to it, because it is ideally superior to all the
researches in Atsthetic made in the studies of
psychologists, of physio-psychologists, and of psycho-
physiologists of the universities of Europe and of
America. It is ideally superior to the sociological,
comparative, prehistoric A‘sthetic, which studies
especially the art of savages, of children, of madmen,
and of idiots. It is ideally superior also to that other
fEsthetic, which has recourse to the conceptions of
the genetic pleasure, of games, of illusion, of self-
illusion, of association, of hereditary habit, of sympathy,
of social efficiency, and so on. It is ideally superior
to the attempts at logical explanation, which have
not altogether ceased, even to-day, although they are
somewhat rare, because, to tell the truth, fanaticism
for Logic cannot be called the failing of our times.


APPENDIX 351


Finally, it is ideally superior to that A®sthetic which
repeats with Kant, that the beautiful is finality without
the idea of end, disinterested pleasure, necessary and
universal, which is neither theoretical nor practical,
but participates in both forms, or combines them in
itself in an original and ineffable manner. But we
should return to it, bringing with us the experience
of a century of thought, the new facts collected, the
new problems that have arisen, the new ideas that
have matured. Thus we shall return again to the
stage of mystical and romantic Aisthetic, but not
to the personal and historical stage of its repre-
sentatives. For in this matter, at least, they are
certainly inferior to us: they lived a century ago and
therefore inherited so much the less of the problems
and of the results of thought which day by day
mankind laboriously accumulates.

They should return, but not to remain there;
because, if a return to the romantic fEesthetic be
advisable for the Kantians (while the idealists should
not be advised to “return to Kant,” that is to say, to a
lower stage, which represents a recession), so those
who come over, or already find themselves on the
ground of mystical A®sthetic, should, on the other hand
be advised to proceed yet further, in order to attain to
a doctrine which represents a stage above it. This
doctrine is that of the pure zntuztion (or, what amounts
to the same thing, of pure expression) ; a doctrine which
also numbers representatives in all times, and which
may be said to be immanent alike in all the discourses
that are held and in all the judgments that are passed
upon art, as in all the best criticism and artistic and
literary history.


Boe APPENDIX


This doctrine arises logically from the contradictions
of mystical /Esthetic; I say, Jogzcally, because it
contains in itself those contradictions and_ their
solution ; although Azstorically (and this point does not
at present concern us) that critical process be not
always comprehensible, explicit, and apparent.

Mystical A‘sthetic, which makes of art the supreme
function of the theoretic spirit, or, at least, a function
superior to that of philosophy, becomes involved in
inextricable difficulties. How could art ever be
superior to philosophy, if philosophy make of art its
object, that is to say, if it place art beneath itself, in
order to analyse and define it? And what could this
new knowledge be, supplied by art and by the esthetic
activity, appearing when the human spirit has come
full circle, after it has imagined, perceived, thought,
abstracted, calculated, and constructed the whole world
of thought and history ?

As the result of those difficulties and contradictions,
mystical A%sthetic itself also exhibits the tendency,
either to surpass its boundary, or to sink below its
proper level. The descent takes place when it falls
back into agnosticism, affirming that art is art, that
is, a spiritual form, altogether different from the others
and ineffable ; or worse, where it conceives art as a sort
of repose or as a game; as though diversion could ever
be a category and the spirit know repose! We find
an attempt at overpassing its proper limit, when art is
placed below philosophy, as inferior to it; but this
Overpassing remains a simple attempt, because the
conception of art as instrument of universal truth is
always firmly held; save that this instrument is
declared less perfect and less efficacious than the


A


ep See eee


APPENDIX 383


a


philosophical instrument. Thus they fall back again
into intellectualism from another side.

These mistakes of mystical /ésthetic were mani-
fested during the Romantic period in some celebrated
paradoxes, such as those of art as irony and of
the death of art. They seemed calculated to drive
philosophers to desperation as to the possibility of
solving the problem of the nature of art, since every
path of solution appeared closed. Indeed, whoever
reads the zstheticians of the romantic period, feels
strongly inclined to believe himself at the heart of the
enquiry and to nourish a confident hope of immediate
discovery of the truth. Above all, the affirmation of
the theoretic nature of art, and of the difference
between its cognitive method and that of science and
of logic, is felt as a definite conquest, which can
indeed be combined with other elements, but which
must not in any case be allowed to slip between
the fingers. And further, it is not true that all ways
of solution are closed, or that all have been attempted.
There is at least one still open that can be tried ; and
it is precisely that for which we resolutely declare
ourselves: the Atsthetic of the pure intuition.

This Esthetic reasons as follows :—Hitherto, in
all attempts to define the place of art, it has been
sought, either at the summit of the theoretic spirit,
above philosophy, or, at least, in the circle of
philosophy itself But is not the loftiness of the
search the reason why no satisfactory result has
hitherto been obtained? Why not invert the attempt,
and instead of forming the hypothesis that art is
one of the summits or the highest grade of the theoretic
spirit, form the very opposite hypothesis, namely,


384 APPENDIX


that it is oe of the lower grades, or the lowest of all ?
Perhaps such epithets as “lower” and “lowest” are
irreconcilable with the dignity and with the splendid
beauty of art? But in the philosophy of the spirit,
such words as lowest, weak, simple, elementary, possess
only the value of ascientific terminology. All the forms
of the spirit are necessary, and the higher is so only
because there is the lower, and the lower is as much
to be despised or less to be valued to the same extent
as the first step of a stair is despicable, or of less value
in respect to the topmost step.

Let us compare art with the various forms of the
theoretic spirit, and let us begin with the sciences
which are called natural or positive. The Aésthetic of
pure intuition makes it clear that the said sciences are
more complex than History, because they presuppose
historical material, that is, collections of things that have
happened (to men or animals, to the earth or to the
stars) They submit this material to a further
treatment, which consists in the abstraction and
systematization of the historical facts. Azstory, then,
is less complex than the natural sciences. History
further presupposes the world of the imagination and
the pure philosophical concepts or categories, and
produces its judgments or historical propositions, by
means of the synthesis of the imagination with the
concept. And Phzlosophy may be said to be even less
complex than History, in so far as it is distinguished
from the former as an activity whose special function
it is to make clear the categories or pure concepts,
neglecting, in a certain sense at any rate, the world of
phenomena. If we compare Ar? with the three forms
above mentioned, it must be declared inferior, that is


>,


APPENDIX 385


to say, less complex than the xatural Sctences,in so far
as it is altogether without abstractions. In so far as
it is without conceptual determinations and does
not distinguish between the real and the unreal, what
has really happened and what has been dreamed, it
must be declared inferior to A/zstory. In so far as
it fails altogether to surpass the phenomenal world,
and does not attain to the definitions of the pure
concepts, it is inferior to Phzlosophy itself. It is also
inferior to Aelzgion, assuming that religion is (as it is)
a form of speculative truth, standing between thought
and imagination. Art is governed entirely by
imagination; its only riches are images. Art does
not classify objects, nor pronounce them real or
imaginary, nor qualify them, nor define them. Art feels
and represents them. Nothing more. Art therefore
is zztuztion, in so far as it is a mode of knowledge, not
abstract, but concrete, and in so far as it uses the
real, without changing or falsifying it. In so far as it
apprehends it immediately, before it is modified and
made clear by the concept, it must be called pure
znturtion.

The strength of art lies in being thus simple,
nude, and poor. Its strength (as often happens in life)
arises from its very weakness. Hence its fascination.
If (to employ an image much used by philosophers for
various ends) we think of man, in the first moment
that he becomes aware of theoretical life, with mind
still clear of every abstraction and of every reflexion,
in that first purely intuitive instant he must be a poet.
He contemplates the world with ingenuous and
admiring eyes; he sinks and loses himself altogether


in that contemplation. By creating the first repre-
ZG


386 APPENDIX


sentations and by thus inaugurating the life of
knowledge, art continually renews within our spirit
-the aspects of things, which thought has submitted to
reflexion, and the intellect to abstraction. Thus art
perpetually makes us poets again. Without art,
thought would lack the stimulus, the very material,
for its hermeneutic and critical labour. Art is the root
of all our theoretic life. To be the root, not the
flower or the fruit, is the function of art. And
without a root, there can be no flower and no fruit.


it


Such is the theory of art as pure intuition, in its

\ fundamental conception. This theory, then, takes its |
origin from the criticism of the loftiest of all the !
other doctrines of Aésthetic, from the criticism of ;

mystical or romantic A®sthetic, and contains in itself

the criticism and the truth of all the other A¢sthetics.

‘It is not here possible to allow ourselves to illustrate
its other aspects, such as would be those of the identity,

which it lays down, between intuition and expression,


between art and language. Suffice it to say, as
regards the former, that he alone who divides the
unity of the spirit into soul and body can have faith |
in a pure act of the soul, and therefore in an intuition,
which should exist as an intuition, and yet be without
its body, expression. Expression is the actuality of
intuition, as action is of will; and in the same way
as will not exercised in action is not will, so an
intuition unexpressed is not an intuition. As regards
the second point, I will mention in passing that, in


eas


APPENDIX 387


order to recognize the identity of art and language, it
is needful to study language, not in its abstraction and
in grammatical detail, but in its immediate reality, and
in all its manifestations, spoken and sung, phonic and
graphic. And we should not take at hazard any
proposition, and declare it to be xsthetic; because, if
all propositions have an esthetic side (precisely because
intuition is the elementary form of knowledge and is,
as it were, the garment of the superior and more
complex forms), all are not purely zsthetic, but some
are philosophical, historical, scientific, or mathematical ;
some, in fact, of these are more than esthetic or
logical; they are zstheticological. Aristotle, in his
time, distinguished between semantic and apophantic
propositions, and noted, that if all propositions be
semantic, not allare apophantic. Language is art, not in
so far as it is apophantic, but in so far as it is, generically,
semantic. It is necessary to note in it the side by
which it is expressive, and nothing but expressive. It
is also well to observe (though this may seem
superfluous) that it is not necessary to reduce the
theory of pure intuition, as has been sometimes done,
to a historical fact or to a psychological concept.
Because we recognize in poetry, as it were, the
ingenuousness, the freshness, the barbarity of the spirit,
it is not therefore necessary to limit poetry to youth
and to barbarian peoples. Though we recognize
language as the first act of taking possession of the
world achieved by man, we must not imagine that
language is born ex zzhzlo, once only in the course of
the ages, and that later generations merely adopt the
ancient instrument, applying it to a new order of
things while lamenting its slight adaptability to


ee


388 APPENDIX


the usage of civilized times. Art, poetry, intuition,
and immediate expression are the moment of bar-


barity and of ingenuousness, which perpetually recur .


in the life of the spirit; they are youth, that is, not
chronological, but ideal. There exist very prosaic
barbarians and very prosaic youths, as there exist
poetical spirits of the utmost refinement and civil-
ization. The mythology of those proud, gigantic
Patagonians, of whom our Vico was wont to discourse,
or of those dons Hurons, who were lately a theme of
conversation, must be looked upon as for ever
superseded.

But there arises an apparently very serious ob-
jection to the Esthetic of pure intuition, giving
occasion to doubt whether this doctrine, if it
represent progress in respect to the doctrines which
have preceded it, yet is also a complete and definite
doctrine as regards the fundamental concept of art.
Should it be submitted to a dialectic, by means ot
which it must be surpassed and dissolved into a
imore lofty point of view? The doctrine of pure
ee makes the value of art to consist of its
) power of intuition; in such a manner that just in


so far as pure ane concrete intuitions are achieved


will art and beauty be achieved. But if attention
be paid to judgments of people of good taste and of
critics, and to what we all say when we are warmly
discussing works of art and manifesting our praise
or blame of them, it would seem that what we seek
in art is something quite different, or at least some-
thing more than simple force and intuitive and
expressive purity. What pleases and what is sought
in art, what makes beat the heart and enraptures


pee


ae


Sissies


=


Ena aaaEREEERNERO See


———


APPENDIX 389


the admiration, is life. movement, emotion, warmth,
the feeling of the artist. This alone affords the
supreme criterion for distinguishing true from false
works of art, those with insight from the failures.
Where there are emotion and feeling, much is forgiven ;
where they are wanting, nothing can make up for
them. Not only are the most profound thoughts
and the most exquisite culture incapable of saving
a work of art which is looked upon as cold, but
richness of imagery, ability and certainty in the
reproduction of the real, in description, characterization
and composition, and all other knowledge, only serve
to arouse the regret that so great a price has been
paid and such labours endured, in vain. We do
not ask of an artist instruction as to real facts and
thoughts, nor that he should astonish us with the
richness of his imagination, but that he should have
a personality, in contact with which the soul of the
hearer or spectator may be heated. A personality of
any sort is asked for in this case ; its moral significance
is excluded: let it be sad or glad, enthusiastic or dis-
trustful, sentimental or sarcastic, benignant or malign,
but it must be a soul. Art criticism would seem
}to consist altogether in determining if there be a
‘ personality in the work of art, and of what sort. A
work that is a failure is an incoherent work ; that is to
say, a work in which no single personality appears, but
a number of disaggregated and jostling personalities,
feat is, really, none. There is no further correct
significance than this in the researches that are made
as to the verisimilitude, the truth, the logic, the
necessity, of a work of art.

It is true that many protests have been made by


390 APPENDIX


artists, critics, and philosophers by profession, against
the characteristic of personality. It has been main-
tained that the bad artist leaves traces of his personality
in the work of art, whereas the great artist cancels
them all. It has been further maintained that the
artist should portray the reality of life, and that he
should not disturb it with the opinions, judgments, and
personal feelings of the author, and that the artist
should give the tears of things and not his own tears.
Hence zmpersonality, not personality, has been pro-
claimed to be the characteristic of art, that is to say,
the very opposite. However, it will not be difficult
to show that what is really meant by this opposing
formula is the same as in the first case. The theory
of impersonality really coincides with that of personality
in every point. The opposition of the artists, critics,
and philosophers above mentioned, was directed against
the invasion by the empirical and volitional personality
of the artist of the spontaneous and ideal personality
which constitutes the subject of the work of art. For
instance, artists who do not succeed in representing
the force of piety or of love of country, add to their
colourless imaginings declamation or theatrical effects,
thinking thus to arouse such feelings. In like manner
certain orators and actors introduce into a work of art
an emotion extraneous to the work of art itself. Within
these limits, the opposition of the upholders of the
theory of impersonality was most reasonable. On the
other hand, there has also been exhibited an altogether
irrational opposition to personality in the work of art
Such is the lack of comprehension and intolerance
evinced by certain souls for others differently con-
stituted (of calm for agitated souls, for example).


Per BND EX 391


Here we find at bottom the claim of one sort of
personality to deny that of another. Finally, it has
been possible to demonstrate from among the examples
given of impersonal art, in the romances and dramas
called naturalistic, that in so far and to the extent that
these are complete artistic works, they possess person-
ality. This holds good even when this personality
lies in a wandering or perplexity of thought regarding
the value to be given to life, or in blind faith in the
natural sciences and in modern sociology.

Where every trace of personality was really absent,
and its place taken by the pedantic quest for human
documents, the description of certain social classes and
the generic or individual process of certain maladies,
there the work of art was absent. A work of science of
more or less superficiality, and without the necessary
proofs and control, filled its place. There is no upholder
of impersonality but experiences a feeling of fatigue for
a work of the utmost exactitude in the reproduction of
reality in its empirical sequence, or of industrious and
apathetic combination of images. He asks himself
why such a work was executed, and recommends the
author to adopt some other profession, since that of
artist was not intended for him.

Thus it is without doubt that if pure intuition (and
pure expression, which is the same thing) are indis-
pensable in the work of art, the personality of the
artist is equally indispensable. If (to quote the
celebrated words in our own way) the classec moment
of perfect representation or expression be necessary for
the work of art, the romantic moment of feeling is not
less necessary. Poetry, or art in general, cannot be
exclusively zmgenuous or sentimental; it must be both


392 APPENDIX


ingenuous and sentimental. And if the first or repre-
sentative moment be termed efzc, and the second, which
is sentimental, passionate, and personal, be termed lyric,
then poetry and art must be at once epic and lyric, or,
if it please you better, dramatic. We use these words
here, not at all in their empirical and intellectualist
sense, as employed to designate special classes of
works of art, exclusive of other classes; but in that of
elements or moments, which must of necessity be found
united in every work of art, how diverse soever it may
be in other respects.

Now this irrefutable conclusion seems to constitute
exactly that above-mentioned apparently serious ob-
jection to the doctrine which defines art as pure intui-
tion. But if the essence of art be merely theoretic—
and it is zztucbeléty—can it, on the other hand, be prac-
tical, that is to say, feeling, personality, and passzon-
ality? Or, if it be practical, how can it be theoretic?
It will be answered that feeling is the conzenz, intuibility
the form; but form and content do not in philosophy
constitute a duality, like water and its recipient; in
philosophy content is form, and form is content. Here,
on the other hand, form and content appear to be
different from one another; the content is of one
quality, the form of another. Thus art appears to be
the sum of two qualities, or, as Herbart used to say in
his time, of ¢zvo values. Accordingly we have an alto-
gether unmaintainable ‘Esthetic, as is clear from recent
largely vulgarized doctrinesof A‘sthetic as operating with
the concept of the zz/used personality. Here we find, on
the one hand, things intuible lying dead and soulless ;
on the other, the artist’s feeling and personality. The
artist is then supposed to put himself into things, by


vr


Ne


Aen +


TaN ee ala) BAD. 393


an act of magic, to make them live and palpitate, love
and adore. But if we start with the dzstzuctzon, we can
never again reach wzity: the distinction requires an
intellectual act, and what the intellect has divided
intellect or reason alone, not art or imagination, can
reunite and synthetize. Thus the A‘sthetic of infusion
or transfusion—when it does not fall into the antiquated
hedonistic doctrines of agreeable illusion, of games, and
generally of what affords a pleasurable emotion ; or of
moral doctrines, where art is a symbol and an allegory
of the good and the true ;—is yet not able, despite its
airs of modernity and its psychology, to escape the fate
of the doctrine which makes of art a semi-imaginative
conception of the world, like religion. The process
that it describes is mythological, not «esthetic; it is a
making of gods or of idols. “To make one’s gods is
an unhappy art,” said an old Italian poet; but if it be
not unhappy, certainly it is not poetic and not esthetic.
The artist does not make the gods, because he has
other things to do. Another reason is that, to tell the
truth, he is so ingenuous and so absorbed in the image
that attracts him, that he cannot perform that act of
abstraction and conception, wherein the image must be
surpassed and made the allegory of a universal, though
it be of the crudest description.

This recent theory, then, is of no use. It leads
back to the difficulties arising from the admission of
two characteristics of art, zztuzbility and lyrictsim, not
unified. We must recognize, either that the duality
must be destroyed and proved illusory, or that we
must proceed to a more ample conception of art, in
which that of pure intuibility would remain merely
secondary or particular. And to destroy and prove


394 APPENDIX


it illusory must consist in showing that here too form
is content, and that pure intuition is ztse/f lyricism.
Now, the truth is precisely this: pure zntuztion
is essentially lyricism. All the difficulties concern-
ing this question arise from not having thoroughly
understood that concept, from having failed to penetrate
its true nature and to explore its multiple relations.
When we consider the one attentively, we see the
other bursting from its bosom, or better, the one and
the other reveal themselves as one and the same, and
we escape from the desperate trilemma, of either
denying the lyrical and personal character of art,
or of asserting that it is adjunctive, external and
accidental, or of excogitating a new doctrine of
“Esthetic, which we do not know where to find. In
fact, as has already been remarked, what can pure
intuition mean, but intuition pure of every abstraction,
of every conceptual element, and, for this reason, neither
science, history, nor philosophy? This means that the
content of the pure intuition cannot be either an
abstract concept, or a speculative concept or idea, or
a conceptualized, that is historicized, representation.
Nor can it be a so-called perception, which is a repre-
sentation intellectually, and so historically, discriminated.
But outside logic in its various forms and blendings, no
other psychic content remains, save that which is called
appetites, tendencies, feelings, and will. These things
are all the same and constitute the practical form of
the spirit, in its infinite gradations and in its dialectic
(pleasure and pain). Pure intuition, then, since it does
not produce concepts, must represent the will in its
manifestations, that is to say, it can represent nothing
but states of the soul, And states of the soul are


re Ae ae-neaeemerne ee - =


APPENDIX 305


passionality, feeling, personality, which are found in
every art and determine its lyrical character. Where
this is absent, art is absent, precisely because pure
intuttion ts absent, and we have at the most, in
exchange for it, that reflex, philosophical, historical,
or scientific. In the last of these, passion is repre-
sented, not immediately, but mediately, or, to speak
exactly, it is no longer represented, but thought.
Thus the origin of language, that is, its true nature,
has several times been placed in zzderjection. Thus,
too, Aristotle, when he wished to give an example
of those propositions which were not apophantic, but
generically semantic (we should say, not logical, but
purely Aésthetic), and did not predicate the logically
true and false, but nevertheless said something, gave
as example invocation or prayer, 7) evy7). He added
that these propositions do not appertain to Logic,
but to Rhetoric and Poetic. A landscape is a state
of the soul; a great poem may all be contained in
an exclamation of joy, of sorrow, of admiration, or
of lament. The more objective is a work of art, by
so much the more is it poetically suggestive.

If this deduction of lyricism from the intimate
essence of pure intuition do not appear easily accept-
able, the reason is to be sought in two very deep-
rooted prejudices, of which it is useful to indicate here
the genesis. The first concerns the nature of the
tmagination, and its likenesses to and differences from
fancy. magination and fancy have been clearly
distinguished thus by certain aestheticians (and among
them, De Sanctis), as also in discussions relating to
concrete art: they have held fancy, not imagination, to
be the special faculty of the poet and the artist. Not


396 APPENDIX


only does a new and bizarre combination of images,
which is vulgarly called zzvention, not constitute the
artist, but ze fact rien a Paffaire, as Alceste remarked
with reference to the length of time expended upon
writing a sonnet. Great artists have often preferred to
treat groups of images, which had already been many
times used as material for works of art. The novelty
of these new works has been solely that of art or form,
that is to say, of the new accent which they have known
how to give to the old material, of the new way in which
they have /e/¢ and therefore zutuzfied it, thus creating
new tmages upon the old ones. These remarks are all
obvious and universally recognized as true. But if
mere imagination as such has been excluded from
art, it has not therefore been excluded from the
theoretic spirit. Hence the disinclination to admit that
a pure intuition must of necessity express a_ state
of the soul, whereas it may also consist, as they
believe, of a pure image, without a content of feeling.
If we form an arbitrary image of any sort, staus pede
zm uno, say of a bullock’s head on a horse’s body, would
not this be an intuition, a pure intuition, certainly quite
without any content of reflexion? Would one not
attain to a work of art in this way, or at any rate to
an artistic motive? Certainly not. For the image
given as an instance, and every other image that may
be produced by the imagination, not only is not a
pure intuition, but it is not a theoretic product of any
sort. It is a product of choice, as was observed in
the formula used by our opponents; and choice is
external to the world of thought and contemplation.
It may be said that imagination is a practical artifice
or game, played upon that patrimony of images


APPENDIX 397


possessed by the soul; whereas the fancy, the trans-
lation of practical into theoretical values, of states of
the soul into images, is the creatéon of that patrimony
itself.

From this we learn that an image, which is not the
expression of a state of the soul, is not an image, since
it is without any theoretical value; and therefore it
cannot be an obstacle to the identification of lyricism
and intuition. But the other prejudice is more difficult
to eradicate, because it is bound up with the meta-
physical problem itself, on the various solutions of
which depend the various solutions of the aesthetic
problem, and vice versa. If art be intuition, would it
therefore be any intuition that one might have of a
physical object, appertaining to external nature? If 1
open my eyes and look at the first object that they fall
upon, a chair or a table, a mountain or a river, shall I
have performed by so doing an esthetic act? besos
what becomes of the lyrical character, of which we have
asserted the necessity? If not, what becomes of the
intuitive character, of which we have affirmed the equal
necessity and also its identity with the former?
Without doubt, the perception of a physical object, as
such, does not constitute an artistic fact ; but precisely
for the reason that it is not a pure intuition, but a
judgment of perception, and implies the application of
an abstract concept, which in this case is physical or
belonging to external nature. And with this reflexion
and perception, we find ourselves at once outside the
domain of pure intuition. We could have a pure
perception of a physical object in one way only ; that
is to say, if physical or external nature were a meta-
physical reality, a truly real reality, and not, as it isa


398 APPENDIX


construction or abstraction of the intellect. If such
were the case, man would have an immediate intuition,
in his first theoretical moment, both of himself and of
external nature, of the spiritual and of the physical, in
an equal degree. This represents the dualistic hypo-
thesis. But just as dualism is incapable of providing
a coherent system of philosophy, so is it incapable of
providing a coherent Atsthetic. If we admit dualism,
we must certainly abandon the doctrine of art as pure
intuition; but we must at the same time abandon all
philosophy. But art on its side tacitly protests against
metaphysical dualism. It does so, because, being the
most immediate form of knowledge, it is in contact with
activity, not with passivity; with interiority, not
exteriority ; with spirit, not with matter, and never with
a double order of reality. Those who affirm the
existence of two forms of intuition—the one external or
physical, the other subjective or zsthetic ; the one cold
and inanimate, the other warm and lively; the one
imposed from without, the other coming from the inner
soul—attain without doubt to the distinctions and
oppositions of the vulgar (or dualistic) consciousness,
but their A‘sthetic is vulgar.

The lyrical essence of pure intuition, and of art,
helps to make clear what we have already observed
concerning the persistence of the intuition and of the
fancy in the higher grades of the theoretical spirit, why
philosophy, history, and science have always an artistic
side, and why their expression is subject to ezsthetic
valuation. The man who ascends from art to thought
does not by so doing abandon his volitional and practical
base, and therefore he too finds himself in a particular
state of the soul, the representation of which is intuitive


!
.
i
i
i


ae


APPENDIX 399


and lyrical, and accompanies of necessity the develop-
ment of his ideas. Hence the various styles of thinkers,
solemn or jocose, troubled or gladsome, mysterious and
involved, or level and expansive. But it would not
be correct to divide intuition immediately into two
classes, the one of esthetic, the other of zztellectual or
logical intuitions, owing to the persistence of the
artistic element in logical thought, because the relation
of degrees is not the relation of classes, and copper is
copper, whether it be found alone, or in combination
as bronze.

Further, this close connection of feeling and intuition
in pure intuition throws much light on the reasons
which have so often caused art to be separated from
the theoretic and confounded with the practical
activity. The most celebrated of these confusions are
those formulated about the relativity of tastes and of
the impossibility of reproducing, tasting, and correctly
judging the art of the past, and in general the art of
others. A life lived, a feeling felt, a volition willed,
are certainly impossible to reproduce, because nothing
happens more than once, and my situation at the
present moment is not that of any other being, nor is it
mine of the moment before, nor will be of the moment
to follow. But art remakes ideally, and ideally expresses
my momentary situation. Its image, produced by art,
becomes separated from time and space, and can be
again made and again contemplated in its ideal-reality
from every point of time and space. It belongs not
to the world, but to the superworld; not to the flying
moment, but to eternity. Thus life passes, but art
endures.

Finally, we obtain from this relation between the


400 le BAN iOS


intuition and the state of the soul the criterion of exact
definition of the szuzcerity required of artists, which is
itself also an essential request. It is essential, precisely
because it means that the artist must have a state of
the soul to express, which really amounts to saying,
that he must be an artist. His must be a state of the
soul really experienced, not merely imagined, because
imagination, as we know, is not a work of truth. But,
on the other hand, the demand for sincerity does not
go beyond asking for a state of the soul, and that the
state of soul expressed in the work of art be a desire
or an action. It is altogether indifferent to A¢‘sthetic
whether the artist have had only an aspiration, or have
realized that aspiration in his empirical life. All that
is quite indifferent in the sphere of art. Here we also
find the confutation of that false conception of sincerity,
which maintains that the artist, in his volitional or
practical life, should be at one with his dream, or with
his incubus. Whether or no he have been so, is a
matter that interests his biographer, not his critic; it
belongs to history, which separates and qualifies that
which art does not discriminate, but represents.


III


This attitude of indiscrimination and indifference,
observed by art in respect to history and philosophy,
is also foreshadowed at that place of the De zuter-
pretatione (c. 4), to which we have already referred, to
obtain thence the confirmation of the thesis of the
identity of art and language, and another confirmation,


Aer ENDEX 401


that of the identity of lyric and pure intuition. It isa
really admirable passage, containing many profound
truths in a few short, simple words, although, as is
natural, without full consciousness of their richness.
Aristotle, then, is still discussing the said rhetorical and
poetical propositions, semantic and not apophantic, and
he remarks that in them there rules no distinction
between true and false: To adnOevew 7) WevderOar ove


_ tmapyet. Art, in fact, is in contact with palpitating
‘reality, but does not know that it is so in contact, and


therefore is not truly in contact. Art does not allow
itself to be troubled with the abstractions of the
intellect, and therefore does not make mistakes ; but it
does not know that it does not make mistakes. If
art, then (to return to what we said at the beginning),
be the first and most ingenuous form of knowledge, it
cannot give complete satisfaction to man’s need to
know, and therefore cannot be the ultimate end of
the theoretic spirit. Art is the dream of the life of
knowledge. Its complement is waking, lyricism no
longer, but the concept ; no longer the dream, but the
judgment. Thought could not be without fancy ; but
thought surpasses and contains in itself the fancy,
transforms the image into perception, and gives to
the world of dream the clear distinctions and the firm
contours of reality. Art cannot achieve this; and
however great be our love of art, that cannot raise it
in rank, any more than the love one may have for a
beautiful child can convert it into an adult. We must
accept the child as a child, the adult as an adult.
Therefore, the AEsthetic of pure intuition, while it
proclaims energetically the autonomy of art and of the


esthetic activity, is at the same time averse to all
2218)


402 APPENDIX


estheticism, that is, to every attempt at lowering the
life of thought, in order to elevate that of fancy. The
origin of cstheticism is the same as that of mysticism.
Both proceed from a rebellion against the predominance
of the abstract sciences and against the undue abuse of
the principle of causation in metaphysic. When we pass
from the stuffed animals of the zoological museums,
from anatomical reconstructions, from tables of figures,
from classes and sub-classes constituted by means of
abstract characters, or from the fixation and mechan-
ization of life for the ends of naturalistic science, to the
pages of the poets, to the pictures of the painters, to
the melodies of the composers, when in fact we look
upon life with the eye of the artist, we have the
impression that we are passing from death to life, from
the abstract to the concrete, from fiction to reality.
We are inclined to proclaim that only in art and in
esthetic contemplation is truth, and that science is
either charlatanesque pedantry, or a modest practical
expedient. And certainly art has the superiority of
its own truth ; simple, small, and elementary though it
be, over the abstract, which, as such, is altogether
without truth. But in violently rejecting science and
frantically embracing art, that very form of the theoretic
spirit is forgotten, by means of which we can criticize
science and recognize the nature of art. Now this
theoretic spirit, since it criticizes science, is not science,
and, as reflective consciousness of art, is not art.
Philosophy, the supreme fact of the theoretic world,
is forgotten. This error has been renewed in our day,
because the consciousness of the limits of the natural
sciences and of the value of the truth which belongs to
intuition and to art, have been renewed. But just as,a


APPENDIX 403


century ago, during the idealistic and romantic period,
there were some who reminded the fanatics for art, and
the artists who were transforming philosophy, that art
was not “the most lofty form of apprehending the
Absolute”; so, in our day, it is necessary to awaken
the consciousness of Thought. And one of the means
for attaining this end is an exact understanding of
the limits of art, that is, the construction of a solid
/tsthetic.


THE END


Printed by R. & R. Ciark, Limitep, Edinburgh.


BY THE SAME AUTHOR


JOHN OF DAMASCUS


Third Edition. Price 6s.


SOME PRESS OPINIONS


“Mr. Ainslie, in this third edition of his suggestive poem, has
given to the world in swift spontaneous verse the mature expres-
sion of the conception in which his thoughts have long been
centred. With a singular deftness of touch he has contrived to
weave so many fresh arguments in the woof of the old material
as to produce the effect of a work almost wholly new. Not only
do these additions help to knit the thread of the narrative more
harmoniously together, they redound as well to the reader’s ease
in keeping in touch with it. Nay, they do something more than
this ; they go far both to enlighten the student and charm the
partisan. Pre-eminently is this the case in the stirring pages
which deal with the story of Muhammad’s life and the conquests
of the doughty warriors who fought after him... . Everybody
whom the advice may concern would be wise to allow Mr. Ainslie’s
revised and enlarged version to take the place of its forerunners
on his shelves. . . . His new readers will be many, for ‘John of
Damascus, having ‘stretched his limbs, now wears a resolute air
to extend from day to day the circle of his influence and his
friends.” —Morning Post.


“Perhaps no more authentic expression of the Oriental spirit
has appeared in English poetry since FitzGerald translated the
quatrains of Omar than is to be found in Mr. Douglas Ainslie’s
‘John of Damascus.” ... In this day of snippety ‘occasional
verse’ it is a welcome change to come upon a solid sustained
effort on a great theme written by a man in love with his subject.
Long as the poem is, it is neither oppressive nor dull. Mr. Ainslie
writes easily and naturally. . . . His diction is musical and fluent,
and lures the reader along by constant variety and happy turns of
expression. . . . The fascination of the East, which is casting its
spell more and more over our literature, has taken hold of the
author’s mind and communicates itself to his verse.” —Ou/¢look.


“One cannot but be glad to see such a book as ‘John of
Damascus, by Douglas Ainslie, in its fourth edition. his fact
shows that there are readers who find recreation in a high class
of literature.” —Lzverpool Post.


ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO., Lrp.
10 ORANGE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.


BY THE SAME AUTHOR


THE SONG OF THE STEWARTS


Prelude


Price 7s. 6a. net.


SOME PRESS OPINIONS


“ Every lover of this kind of poetry should read it with both interest and admiration.”
—Scotsman.

‘The author has a distinct sense of rhythm, and writes with a cultured fervour and
distinction.” —Odserver.

‘His poetry has tremendous vigour, and its force alone is a notable Qualityc7,a.01t
never lacks point and definiteness.”—Morning Leader.

“Mr. Ainslie has the gift of fluent versification, and readers of culture will appreciate
the original ideas and happy imagery which occur in the ‘Prelude,’ a sustained effort
on a worthy theme.” — Bookseller.

“Mr. Ainslie is a Scot of Scots, and his verse often has an inspiring lilt.”—Dadly
Express.

“Mr. Ainslie has an adequate conception of his task, and he is well equipped for its
performance.” — Aberdeen Evening Express.

“Mr. Ainslie’s fluent verse has a swing that admirably suits the heroic incidents which
he sings.” —Dundee Advertiser.

“Mr. Ainslie is obviously in love with his subject, and the verse is worthy of the
theme.” —Bystander.

‘‘We are convinced that Mr. Ainslie has got a splendid theme, and possesses the
artistic power to make of it a splendid poem.” —A derdeen Daily Journal.

““Few who take up the book will lay it down without reading to the end, and none
but will be stirred and stimulated by the strong human strokes that on every page strike
fire from the bedrock of our common sympathies.”—Catholic Field.

“There is a sincerity and simplicity, mixed with a freshness and vigour of style, which
ought to endear his works to a Scottish audience. . . . It is for its vividness of descrip-
tion and dexterity of handling that we chiefly commend this volume to our readers.”—
Trish Times.

“‘He has brought to bear upon his subject all the enthusiasm that a man having the
power of poetic expression must feel under the influence.of such an appeal. . .. Inthe
“hid ie : aah
stirring themes of Wallace and Bruce, Falkirk and Bannockburn, the muse of Mr. Ainslie
shows herself at her best, and inspires him to emulate the songs of the ancient bards.”—

Daily Graphic.

“The verse is easy and graceful, monotony being avoided by frequent change of
metre. The battle pieces are marked with great spirit.”—AJderdeen Free Press.

‘Mr. Ainslie’s volume will without doubt afford a good deal of pleasure to Stewart
devotees.”— Daily Telegraph, London.

“It is a fascinating theme, and the author has treated it worthily. . . . Mr. Ainslie’s
work is one that may cordially be recommended to all lovers of romantic poetry, and we
hope the author will carry out his design and give us the rest of the story.”—Reynolds’s
Newspaper.

“¢ The Song of the Stewarts’ contains many beautiful sketches of patriotic and his-
torical writing. .. . Every chapter in the book is illuminated by graceful hints of
the imagination, and by references to events in history or literature that greatly increase
its charm. Appreciating to the full the high literary merits of the Prelude, readers will
await with assurance of interest the first part of Mr. Ainslie’s ‘ Song of the Stewarts.’ —
Banffshire Journal.

“It is to be hoped Mr. Ainslie will carry his scheme through further stages. He has
certainly got the enthusiasm and the fluency required to make such a work a success. ’”—
The Sunday Times and Sunday Special.

““* The Song of the Stewarts’ willfind thousands of readers, for the glamour of ‘ Bonnie
Prince Charlie’ is over us all when we think of that once royal race.”— Toronto Globe.


ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO., Lp.
10 ORANGE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.


BINDING SECT. FEB 1 (0


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


| BH Croce, Benederro


204 Aesthetic as science of


C7 expression and general
linguistic


elas

mart

Say, 8 i
Wie year
bs

eet


vs
ay 4)
sale Her
i ;
eat ah


Wis
foe aoe wy
Yt


es
a


Nica acea aay
fs! Dyna ata bery MOA TAN
Taubba vay eau) best
SIA UbAG red is i
ti ms hag
eS SESE
iu att Et
ee
ee I


cat


‘ bs
RRA ELIT S Tf
es aa
ee
Spee
ie enone
Aa Wiston sea
ety Bit eee 4f
Bg eras


Me

va
teen
Bat
Ch tdedde


ii ’
ata

CREAR Y AES TSED RE

I oF

yee bes


fits


eter oe if
pecan re TSA NE:
on nine acne
Ny Ny
a


arasnist
YEN
Mads
te Me aI


A


23.
“ah ae
my DL whats
a


ai ee EN
ee


ty
nih atest Ne A
{ice pes
