The True Masonic Chart (Jeremy L. Cross, 1826)
==========================================================
Cross's 1826 hieroglyphic monitor; the illustrated emblem-book of American Masonry. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/truemasonicchart00cros).

OR

HIEROGLYPHIC  MONITOR;

CONTAINING

ALL  THE  EMBLEMS  EXPLAINED

IN  THE  DEGREES  OF

ENTERED  APPRENTICE,  FELLOW  CRAFT,  MASTER
MASON,  MARK  MASTER,  PAST  MASTER,
MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER,  ROYAL
ARCH,  ROYAL  MASTER,  AND
SELECT  MASTER :

SESIGNED  AND  DULY  ARRANGED  AGREEABLY  TO  THE

LECTURES,

BY  R.  W.  JEREMY  L.  CROSS,  G.  L.

TO  WHICH  ARE  ADDED,

Illustrations,  Charges,  Songs,  &c.


FOURTH  EDITION:

With  Additions  and  Emendations  ; ar^d  the  Emblems  newly
designed  and  improved.


Sold,  wholesale  and  retail,  by  A.  H.  Maltby  & Co.  and  H.  Howe,
New-Haven  ; Johu  Grigg,  Philadelphia  ; Collins  & Co.
and  Collins  &.  Hannay,  New-York;  Richardson  h
Lord,  and  Harrison  Gray,  Boston

PUBLISHED  AND  SOLD  BY  THE  AUTHOR,

NEW-HAVEN,  CONN.


ft.  G.  WOODWARD  AND  CO.  PRINT.


1826.



12.0


DISTRICT  OP  CONNECTICUT,  to  wit:

BE  it  remembered,  That  on  the  fifth  day  of  August  jjy
the  fifty-first  year  of  the  Independence  of  the  United
States  of  America.  A D.  1826,  JUREMY  L.  CROSS,  of
the  said  District,  hath  deposited  in  this  Qffice  the  Title  of
a Book,  the  right  whereof  he  claims  as  author;  in  the  words
following— to  wit:

a The  True  Masonic  Chart,  or  Hieroglyphic  Monitor,  containing  all  the
Emblems  explained  in  the  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Ft  How  Craft.  Mas-
ter Mason,  Mark  Master,  Fast  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  Royal  Arch,
Royal  Master,  and  Select  Master  ; designed  and  duly  arranged  agreeably  to  the
Lectures  by  R.  W.  JEREMY  L.  CROSS,  G.  L.  To  which  are  added,  Illu^
trations.  Charges,  Songs.  Ike.  Fourth  Edition,  with  additions  and  emenda-
tions ; with  the  Emble  ms  new  ly  designed  and  improved” —

In  conformity  to  the  act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled  “ An
act  for  the  encouragement  of  learning,  b)  securing  the  copies  of  maps,  charts
and  books,  to  the  authors  and  proprietors  of  such  copies,  during  the  times
therein  mentioned”— and  also  to  the  act  entitled  **  An  act  supplementary  to
an  act  entitled  * An  act  for  the  encouragement  of  learning,  by  securing  the
copies  of  maps,  charts,  and  books,  to  the  authors  and  proprietors  of  such  copies,
during  the  times  therein  mentioned,’ and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the
arts  of  designing,  engraving,  and  etching  historical  and  other  prints.”

chas.  a.  ingf:rsoll,

Clerk  ©f  the  District  of  Connecticut


067270


TO  THE


OF  THE

Central  CranJr  (Simpler

OF  THE

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA,

THIS  LITTLE  VOLUME
is

RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED,

BV


The  Author


PREFACE


HAVING  been  honoured  by  the  approbation  of  the  Officers  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  and  of  most  of
the  Grand  Lodges,  and  Officers  of  Grand  Lodges,  in  the  individ-
ual States,  as  a Grand  Lecturer  ; — and  having,  by  virtue  of  their
sanction  and  authority,  officiated  in  that  capacity  for  several
years  ; the  Author  of  this  volume  has  had  an  opportunity  of
witnessing  the  mode  of  lecturing,  and  working,  in  many  differ-
ent Lodges.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  if,  in  the  course  of
his  experience,  some  errors  in  the  practice  of  these  branches
should  have  fallen  within  his  observation.  These  have  undoubt-
edly originated  from  a want  of  uniformity ; and  although  they
may  not  be  considered  as  radical  evils,  in  relation  to  the  hidden
mysteries  of  the  Fraternity,  yet  they  would  certainly  be  regard-
ed as  defects  in  that  system,  the  perfect  preservation  of  which,
is  at  once  the  pride  and  glory  of  every  enlightened  mason.

Among  these  errors  may  be  mentioned,* — the  improper  classi-
fication of  masonic  emblems ; and  a difference  in  the  mode  of
working.

To  obviate  these  inaccuracies,  is  the  object  of  this  work.  It
contains  a classification  of  the  emblems,  together  with  illustra-
tions, that  have  been  approved  and  adopted  by  a majority  of  the
Lodges  of  the  United  States.  So  far,  therefore,  as  they  are
connected  with  the  mode  of  working,  and  of  lecturing,  the  evils
which  have  been  suggested,  will  be  obviated  by  an  attention  to
this  treatise  : and  so  far  only  does  the  Author  claim  any  merit  in
having  contributed  towards  establishing  a standard,  which  he
flatters  himself  may  serve  as  a safe  and  sure  guide  to  his  Breth-
ren, in  some  parts  of  their  labours.

The  illustrations,  &.c.  are  selected  from  the  compilations  of
Preston,  Webb,  and  other  established  authorities,  accompanied
by  such  alterations  and  emendations,  as  were  deemed  necessary
to  a strict  conformity  with  the  Ancient  System.

With  a hope  that  his  exertions  to  benefit  them  may  not  prove
fruitless,  the  Author  respectfully  submits  his  work  TO  THE
FRATERNITY  OF  FREE  AND  ACCEPTED  MASONS

THROUGHOUT  THE  UNITED  STATES.

1*


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION


SINCE  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  the  Masonic
Chart,  it  lias  been  adopted  as  a Text-Book  by  most  of  the
Lodges  and  Chapters  in  this  country.

The  highest  expectations  of  the  author  have  been  more  than
realized  in  the  reception  of  the  first  and  second  editions  by  his
Masonic  Brethren.  Its  beneficial  effects  in  promoting  a unifor-
mity in  our  mode  of  working  and  lecturing,  have  induced  him
to  present  to  the  Fraternity  the  third  edition,  with  some  addi-
tions and  emendations.  If  his  labours  shall  in  any  degree  con-
tribute to  the  advancement  of  a Society,  in  which  he  feels  a
lively  interest,  he  will  be  abundantly  compensated.  It  has  been
his  constant  aim  to  place  the  Masonic  Institution  upon  its  proper
basis.  The  correct  Mason  will  ever  be  more  esteemed  than  the
over-zealous  or  coldly  indifferent  members  of  the  Society.  A
Mason  who  is  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  tenets  and  nature
of  this  Institution,  ranks  it  among  the  first  of  human  origin,  and
as  inculcating  the  purest  of  moral  principles,  and  as  having  a
powerful  tendency,  where  strict  discipline  is  judiciously  admin
istered  agreeably  to  the  tenets  of  the  Institution,  to  improve  the
morals  of  its  members,  and  to  open  and  expand  their  hearts  to
acts  of  charity  and  pure  benevolence.  Those  who  elevate  ma-
sonry to  a level  with  revealed  religion,  and  those  who  rank  it
below  the  standard  of  pure  morality,  are  equally  unacquainted
with  its  true  object.

That  every  Brother  and  Companion  may  possess  a correct'
knowledge  of  the  nature  and  principles  of  our  excellent  Institu
tion,  and  that  their  conduct  may  be  such  through  life  as  to  con-
vince all  with  whom  they  may  have  intercourse,  that  our  great
aim  is  to  inculcate  FRIENDSHIP,  MORALITY,  BROTHER
LY  LOVE,  and  CH  ARITY,  is  the  earnest  and  sincere  wish  of

THE  AUTHOR


ADVERTISEMENT.


IN  presenting'  the  fourth  edition  of  the  Masonic  Chart  to  the
Fraternity,  the  Author  is  happy  to  state  that  but  few  alterations
in  the  last  edition  are  necessary,  except  in  the  Emblems  and
H ieroglvphics,  which  are  much  improved  by  new  designs,  emen-
dations and  additions.  While  he  believes  the  work  has  been
much  improved  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  Institu-
tion, he  yet  feels  conscious  that  some  defects  may  be  discovered
by  the  scrutinizing  eye  of  his  more  experienced  Brethren  ; he
would  therefore  solicit  their  forbearance  and  candor.  In  taking
a retrospective  view  of  the  Institution,  it  is  truly  gratifying  to
every  upright  and  correct  Mason,  to  notice  the  great  improve-
ment which  has  been  made  within  a few  years  past. — In  an  in-
stitution like  ours,  however,  which  is  founded  on  the  Moral
Law  of  God,  and  requires  that  all  her  members  should  wralk  in
accordance  thereto,  we  can  easily  discern  that  much  remains
to  be  done — Especially  should  it  not  be  forgotten  that  the  very
nature  of  the  Institution  forbids  the  admission  of  any  to  mem-
bership, except  men  sustaining  the  straitest  moral  character,
and  that  no  Lodge  can  be  justified  in  receiving  candidates  solely
for  the  purpose  of  increasing  their  members  or  their  funds. —
Let  them  strictly  adhere  to  the  Masonic  rule,  and  let  the  “ in-
ternal and  not  the  external  qualifications  of  the  man”  be  the
standard  for  admission.  As  every  man,  on  entering  a Lodge,
first  puts  his  trust  in  God,  and  then  takes  the  “ Holy  Scrip-
tures to  be  the  rule  and  guide  of  his  faith  and  practice,”  so
none  should  be  suffered  to  remain  members  who  deviate  there-
from.

It  is  the  intention  of  the  Author  of  this  little  volume,  by  the
leave  of  Divine  Providence,  to  present  to  his  Masonic  Brethren,
as  soon  as  convenient,  a new  and  improved  edition  of  the
t:  Masonic  Book  of  Constitutions,”  a work  which  is  often
alluded  to,  but  seldom  seen,  except  in  a few  Lodges.  It  is  de-
signed to  give  a brief  History  of  Masonry  from  its  commence-
ment up  to  the  present  time,  comprising  also  observations  on
the  regulations  of  Lodges,  duties  of  Officers,  admission  of  Can-
didates, duty  of  Discipline,  forms  of  Petitions,  Warrants,  Char-
ters, &c.  &c.  with  a complete  list  of  all  the  Encampments,


8


PREFACE.


Councils,  Chapters  and  Lodges  in  the  United  States.  The  Au-
thor is  well  aware  that  in  many  parts  of  our  country,  which
have  been  highly  favoured  with  Masonic  light  and  knowledge,
a work  of  this  kind  would  be  of  minor  consequence,  but  there
are  many  sections  which  have  not  been  thus  highly  favoured',
and  where  it  would  tend  to  advance  the  true  interests  of  the  In-
stitution.

The  Author  would  improve  this  favourable  opportunity  in
calling  upon  all  Christian  Masons  to  lend  their  aid  in  elevating
the  Institution  to  its  proper  level,  by  influencing  every  Mason
by  example,  exhortation  and  persuasion,  to  live  up  to  the  moral
precepts  which  are  inculcated  in  it. — At  the  same  time  to  guard
them  against  relying  on  any  merit  in  their  own  works  as  a title
to  that  Rest  beyond  the  grave,  which  is  prepared  for  the  chil-
dren of  God, — and  to  point  them  to  Him,  who  is  the  Way,  the
Truth  and  the  Life — to  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  to  the
great  Watchman  of  Israel,  to  our  Divine  Redeemer,  whose
name  is  the  only  name  which  is  given  under  Heaven  whereby
men  can  be  saved — who  has  made  an  atonement  for  sin  by  the
shedding  of  his  own  blood,  and  who  has  promised  that  whosoever
believeth  on  Him  shall  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life.

That  all  his  Brethren  may  not  only  be  found  Worthy , Free
and  Accepted  Masons,  but  qualified  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God  for
a seat  in  that  House  not  made  with  hands,  Eternal  in  the  Heav-
ens, is  the  earnest  prayer  of


THE  AUTHOR.


INTRODUCTION.


Form  of  a PETITION  to  be  signed  by  a Candidate
for  Initiation.

TO  the  W.  Master,  Wardens,  and  Brethren  of
Lodge,  No.  , of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
sons.

The  subscriber,  residing  in , of  lawful  age,

and  by  occupation  a , begs  leave  to  state,  that,

unbiassed  by  friends,  and  uninfluenced  by  mercenary
motives,  he  freely  and  voluntarily  offers  himself  as  a
candidate  for  the  mysteries  of  masonry,  and  that  he  is
prompted  to  solicit  this  privilege  by  a favourable  opin-
ion conceived  of  the  Institution,  a desire  of  knowledge,
and  a sincere  wish  of  being  serviceable  to  his  fellow-
creatures.  Should  his  petition  be  granted,  he  will
cheerfully  conform  to  all  the  ancient  established  usa-
ges and  customs  of  the  Fraternity.

(Signed)  A.  B.

The  following  Recommendation  is  to  be  signed  by
two  members  of  the  Lodge  to  which  the  application  is
made  :

THIS  may  certify,  that  we  the  subscribers  are  per-
sonally acquainted  with  Mr.  A.  B. ; and  from  a confi-
dence in  his  integrity,  and  the  uprightness  of  his  in-
tention, do  cheerfully  recommend  and  propose  him  as
a proper  candidate  for  the  mysteries  of  Masonry.

Recommended  by  C.  D.

Avouched  for  by  E.  F.


INTRODUCTION.,


U


ON  OPENING  AND  CLOSING  LODGES.

THE  ceremony  of  opening  and  closing  a Lodge  with'
solemnity  and  decorum,  is  universally  admitted  among
Masons : and  though  the  mode  in  some  Lodges  may
vary,  and  in  every  degree  must,  in  some  particulars,
still  an  uniformity  prevails  in  every  Lodge;  and  the
variations,  if  any,  are  only  occasioned  by  want  of
method,  which  a little  application  might  easily  remove.
To  conduct  this  ceremony  with  propriety,  ought  to  be
the  study  of  every  Mason,  but  more  especially  those
who  are  called  to  officiate  as  officers  of  the  Lodge.
To  those  of  our  brethren  who  are  thus  honoured,  every
eye  is  naturally  directed  for  propriety  of  conduct  and
behaviour ; and  from  them,  our  brethren  who  are  less
informed  will  expect  an  example  worthy  of  imitation.
From  a share  in  this  ceremony,  no  mason  can  be  ex-
empted: it  is  a general  concern,  in  which  all  must  as-
sist ; the  first  notice  of  which  is  given  by  the  W.  M.
with  a request  of  the  attention  and  assistance  of  his
brethren.  No  sooner  has  it  been  signified,  than  every
officer  repairs  to  his  station,  and  the  brethren  rank  ac-
cording to  their  degrees.  The  next  object  is  to  detect
impostors  among  ourselves,  and  for  this  purpose  re-
course is  had  to  our  peculiar  rites  as  masons.'  This
object  being  accomplished,  our  next  care  is  directed  to
the  external  avenues  of  the  Lodge,  and  the  proper  of-
ficers, whose  province  it  is  to  discharge  that  duty,  exe-
cute their  trust  with  fidelity,  and  by  certain  mystic
forms,  of  no  recent  date,  intimate  that  we  may  safely
proceed.

At  opening  the  Lodge,  two  purposes  are  wisely  ef-
fected ; the  master  is  reminded  of  the  dignity  of  char-
acter which  he  is  to  maintain  from  the  elevation  of  his
office,  and  the  brethren  of  the  reverence  and  respect
due  from  them  in  their  sundry  stations.  These  are
not  the  only  advantages  resulting  from  a due  observ-
ance of  this  ceremony  ; — the  mind  is  drawn  with  reve-
rential awe  to  the  Supreme  Architect  of  the  Universe,
and  the  eye  fixed  on  Him  who  is  the  only  author  of


INTRODUCTION.


li


life  and  immortality.  Here  we  are  taught  to  worship
and  adore  the  supreme  Jehovah, and  to  supplicate  his
protection  and  assistance  in  all  our  well-meant  en-
deavours. After  the  customary  salutations,  the  master
pronounces  the  Lodge  to  be  opened  in  due  and  ancient
form,  and  assumes  the  government,  and  under  him  his
wardens:  the  brethren  with  one  accord  unite  in  duty
and  respect,  and  the  business  of  the  meeting  is  conduct-
ed with  order  and  harmony.

At  the  closing  of  a Lodge,  a similar  ceremony  takes
place  as  at  opening ; — the  avenues  of  the  Lodge  are
guarded;  a recapitulation  of  the  duties  of  the  officers
is  rehearsed  ; a proper  tribute  of  gratitude  is  offered
up  to  the  Great  Author  of  our  existence,  and  his  bless-
ing invoked  and  extended  to  the  whole  fraternity.

If  it  should  be  deemed  necessary  that  the  Lodge  be
opened  in  the  several  degrees,  for  dispatch  of  business,
when  that  in  the  first  degree  shall  have  been  finished,
the  W.  Master,  after  due  enquiry  of  the  wardens  and
brethren,  will  proclaim  it  to  be  his  will  and  pleasure
that  the  Entered  Apprentices  degree  be  dispensed
with  for  the  purpose  of  opening  on  the  Fellow  Craft’s
degree,  and  all  who  are  not  Fellow  Crafts  are  requested
to  retire.  When  the  necessary  precautions  are  taken
that  none  remain  but  those  who  are  entitled  to  this
privilege,  the  sentinel  is  again  reminded  of  his  duty,
and  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree  opened  in  due  form.
When  the  business  in  this  degree  shall  have  been  fin-
ished, the  Lodge  is  dispensed  with,  as  in  the  first  de-
gree, and  a Master’s  Lodge  opened  in  due  form.  Af-
ter the  business  in  the  Master’s  Degree  is  finished,  the
Lodge  is  closed  and  the  labours  of  the  Fellow  Craft’s
resumed : if  nothing  should  offer  in  this  degree,  the
Lodge  is  closed  and  the  labours  of  the  Entered  Ap-
prentices’ resumed.  Should  nothing  further  offer  in
this  degree,  the  records  of  the  evening  having  been
read  and  approved,  the  Lodge  is  closed  in  due  and  an-
cient form.

These  arc  but  faint  outlines  of  the  ceremonies  which
prevail  among  masons,  in  every  country,  and  distin-
guish  all  their  meetings.


INTRODUCTION',


12


FORMS  OF  PRAYERS,  CHARGES,  &c.

A Prayer  used  on  opening  a Lodge.

Most  holy  and  glorious  Lord  God,  the  great  Archi-
tect of  the  universe,  the  giver  of  all  good  gifts  and  gra-
ces : Thou  hast  promised,  that  “ where  two  or  three
are  gathered  together  in  thy  name,  thou  wilt  be  in  the
midst  of  them,  and  bless  them.”  In  thy  name  we  as-
semble, most  humbly  beseeching  thee  to  bless  us  in  all
our  undertakings,  that  we  may  know  and  serve  thee
aright,  and  that  all  our  actions  may  tend  to  thy  glory,
and  to  our  advancement  in  knowledge  and  virtue.
And  we  beseech  thee,  O Lord  God,  to  bless  our  pres-
ent assembling,  and  to  illuminate  our  minds,  through
the  intercession  of  the  Son  of  Righteousness,  that  we
may  walk  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance  ; and  when
the  trials  of  our  probationary  state  are  over,  be  admit-
ted into  THE  TEMPLE  “not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens.”

So  mote  it  be.  Amen.

A Prayer  at  Closing .

Supreme  Architect  of  the  universe,  accept  our  hum-
ble praises  for  the  many  mercies  and  blessings  which
thy  bounty  has  conferred  on  us,  and  especially  for  this
friendly  and  social  intercourse.  Pardon,  we  beseech
thee,  whatever  thou  hast  seen  amiss  in  us  since  we
have  been  together;  and  continue  to  us  thy  presence,
protection,  and  blessing.  Make  us  sensible  of  the
renewed  obligations  we  are  under  to  love  thee  su-
premely, and  to  be  friendly  to  each  other.  May  all
our  irregular  passions  be  subdued,  and  may  we  daily
increase  in  Faith , Hope , and  Charity  ; but  more  es-
pecially in  that  Charity , which  is  the  bond  of  peace,
and  the  perfection  of  every  virtue.  May  we  so  prac-
tice thy  precepts,  that,  through  the  merits  of  the  Re-
deemer, we  may  finally  obtain  thy  promises,  and  find
an  entrance  through  the  gates  into  the  temple  and  city
erf  our  God.  So  mote  it  be.  Amen.


INTRODUCTION.


13


Benediction  at  Closing.

May  the  blessing  of  Heaven  rest  upon  us  and  all
regular  masons ! May  brotherly  love  prevail,  and  ev-
ery moral  and  social  virtue  cement  us  !

So  mote  it  be.  Amen.

Charge  at  Closing.

Brethren,

We  are  now  about  to  quit  this  sacred  retreat  of
friendship  and  virtue,  to  mix  again  with  the  world.
Amidst  its  concerns  and  employments,  forget  not  the
duties  which  you  have  heard  so  frequently  inculcated,
and  so  forcibly  recommended  in  this  Lodge.  Be  dili-
gent, prudent,  temperate,  discreet.  Remember,  that
around  this  altar,  you  have  promised  to  befriend  and
relieve  every  brother,  who  shall  need  your  assistance.
You  have  promised,  in  the  most  friendly  manner  to  re-
mind him  of  his  errors,  and  aid  a reformation.  These
generous  principles  are  to  extend  further.  Every  hu-
man being  has  a claim  upon  your  kind  offices.  D<
good  unto  all.  Recommend  it  more  especially  “ to  the
household  of  the  faithful.”  Finally,  brethren,  be  ye
all  of  one  mind ; live  in  peace ; and  may  the  God  of
love  and  peace  delight  to  dwell  with  and  bless  you.


RECOMMENDATIONS.


[For  the  information  of  those  of  the  Fraternity,  with  whom  the
Author  of  this  little  volume  has  not  had  the  pleasure  of  an  ac-
quaintance, he  would  submit  the  following,  from  a large  num-
ber of  Certificates,  in  testimony  of  his  masonic  qualifications.]

TO  THE  FRATERNITY  OF  FREE  AND  ACCEPTED  ,
MASONS  THROUGHOUT  THE  UNITED  STATES

OF  NORTH-AMERICA Greeting.

KNOW  YE,  That  we,  the  undersigned,  having  duly  examined
our  worthy  Companion,  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  do  find  him  well
skilled  and  correct  in  the  Lectures  and  mode  of  working  in  the
three  first  Degrees  of  Ancient  Free  Masonry , as  received,  sanc-
tioned, and  directed  to  be  taught,  by  the  several  Grand  Lodges
of  New-Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Rhode-Island,  Connecticut,
Vermont,  New-York,  and  New-Jersey.  Also,  with  the  Lectures
and  mode  of  working  in  the  several  Degrees  of  Mark  Master,
Past  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch  Masonry,
as  sanctioned  and  directed  to  be  taught  by  the  Officers  of  the
General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  United  States  of  N.
America.  We  do  therefore  cheerfully  recommend  him  as  fully
competent  to  teach  the  same.

Duly  appreciating  the  utility  that  would  arise  from  a greater
uniformity  in  our  mode  of  working  and  Lecturing ; and  as  the
good  of  the  INSTITUTION  demands  it;  we  do  therefore  earn-
estly recommend  to  the  whole  Fraternity,  to  receive,  sanction,
and  adopt  the  same.

Witness  our  Hands.

M.  E.  and  Hon.  DEWITT  CLINTON,  Gen.  Grand  High  Priest
of  the  Gen.  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  U.  States  of  A-
merica  ; also  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  N.  York.

M.  E.  HENRY  FOWLE,  Esq.  D G.  G.  H.  Priest  of  the  G.  G.
R.  A.  C.  of  the  U.  S.  A.  ; also  Deputy  Grand  High  Priest  of
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Massachusetts.

M.  E.  THOMAS  SMITH  WEBB,  Esq.  P.  D.  G.  G.  H.  Priest  of
the  G.  G.  R A.  C.  of  the  U.  S A.;  also  Past  Grand  Master
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode-Island.

M.  E.  JOHN  SNOW,  Esq.  G.  G.  King  of  the  G.  G.  R.  A.  C.  of
theU.  S.  A. ; also  G.  H.  Priest  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio .
M.  E.  JOHN  HART  LYNDE,  Esq.  P.  G.  G.  King  of  the  G.  G.
R.  A.  C.  of  the  U.  S.  A. ; also  Past  Senior  G.  Warden  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut


RECQA1MENBATIONS.


15


M.  E.  PHTLTP  P.  ECKEL,  Esq.  G.  G.  Scribe  of  the  G.  G.  R.
A.  C.  of  the  U.  S.  A. ; also  Past  G.  High  Priest  of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Maryland  and' District  of  Columbia.

M.  E.  PETER  GRINNELL,  Esq.  G.  G.  Treasurer  of  the  G.  G.
R.  A.  C.  of  the  U.  S.  A.


M.  E.  OTIS  AMI  DON,  P.  G.  G.  Secretary  of  the  G.  G.  R.  A.  C
of  the  U.  S.  A.


M.  W.  JOHN  H ARRIS,  Grand  Master,

R.  VV.  ALBE  CADYr,  Senior  G.  Warden,
R.  W.  STEPHEN  BLANCHARD,  Junior
G.  Warden,

R.  W.  HORACE  CHASE,  G.  Lecturer,

M W.  FRANCIS  J.  OLIVER,  G.  Master,
R.  W.  JOHN  D1XWELL,  Deputy  G.  M.
R.  W.  AUGUSTUS  PEABODY,  Senior  G.
Warden,


1

j of  the  Grand
Lodge  of
j New-Hampshire.


of  the  Grand
Lodge  of
Massachusetts.


M.  W.  JOHN  CARLILE,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Rhode-Island.


R.  YV.  LYMAN  LAW,  Deputy  G.  Master,  ) of  the  Grand
R.  W.  THOMAS  H.  CUSHING,  Senior  G.  V Lodge  of
Warden,  ) Connecticut.

M.  W.  LEMUEL  WHITNEY,  G.  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Vermont,

M.  W JAMES  GILES,  G.  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New-
Jersey.


YVE,  the  undersigned,  Officers  in  the  General  Grand  Royal
Arch  Chapter  of  the  United  States  of  America,  no  approve  and
recommend  “ The  True  Masonic  Chart,  or  Hieroglyphic  Moni-
tor,” designed  and  arranged  by  our  worthy  Companion,  Jeremy
L.  Cross,  as  entitled  to  the  attention  and  use  of  the  Craft  ; be-
ing a valuable  assistant  in  elucidating  the  various  Masonic  Em-
blems, and  enabling  the  diligent  Craftsman  to  acquire  the  Lec-
tures in  the  several  degrees  of  jhicienl  Free  Masonry.

M.  E.  DEWITT  CLINTON,  General  Grand  High  Priest.

HENRY  FOWLE,  Deputy  Gen.  Grand  High  Priest.

JOHN  SNOW,  General  Grand  King.

PHILIP  P.  ECKEL,  General  Grand  Scribe.

PETER  GRINNELL,  General  Grand  Treasurer.

JOHN  ABBOT,  General  Grand  Secretary.

DAVID  G.  COWAN,  General  Grand  Marshal.

JOHN  H ARRIS,  Past  Gen.  Grand  Marshal , also  M.  W.

G.  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New-Hampshire.


16


RECOMMENDATIONS.


WE,  the  Subscribers,  Officers  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chap-
ter of  Connecticut,  having  examined  “ The  Masonic  Chart,  or
Hieroglyphic  Monitor,”  designed  by  our  worthy  Companion,  R.
W.  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  for  the  use  and  instruction  of  the  Craft,
with  pleasure  recommend  the  same  as  a necessary  and  useful
Manual  for  all  Free  Masons;  containing  an  elegant  and  com-
prehensive view'  of  all  the  Symbols  used  in  Lecturing  upon  the
several  Degrees  of  Ancient  Masonry.

M.  E.  LYMAN  LAW,  G.  H.  Priest.

M.  E.  LABAN  SMITH,  D.  G.  H.  Priest.

E.  DAVID  DEMING,  G.  King.

E.  THOMAS  H.  CUSHING,  G.  Scribe.

Comp.  HENRY  CHAMPION,  G.  Treasurer.

HORATIO  G.  HALE,  G.  Secretary.

MENZIES  RAYNER,  G.  Chaplain.

SAMUEL  GREEN,  G.  Marshal.


Extract  from  the  proceedings  of  the  Most  Worshipful  Grand
Lodge  of  Connecticut,  May,  A.  L.  5820.
RESOLVED,  That  this  Grand  Lodge  approve  of  the  Masonic
Chart,  published  by  Brother  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  and  recommend
it  to  be  used  as  a Masonic  Text-Book  in  all  the  Lodges  working
under  this  jurisdiction.

A true  copy  from  the  minutes.

Attest— WM.  H.  JONES,  G.  Secretary.


Extract  from  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch

Chapter  of  Connecticut,  May,  A.  D.  1820,  and  of  R.  A.

M.  2350.

RESOLVED,  That  this  Grand  Chapter  approve  of  the  Ma-
sonic Chart,  published  by  Companion  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  and
recommend  it  to  be  used  as  a Text-Book  in  the  several  Chapters
under  their  jurisdiction.

A true  copy  from  the  minutes.

Attest — E.  GOODRICH,  jun.  Grand  Secretary.


Ssamu


1026


ENTERED  APPRENTICE  DEGREE.


Section  First.


4


Section  Ttiird.


A


6


• -


■


*


(


10


• /
>


V


FELDQW  CRAFTS  DEGREE.


Section  First


Section  Second.


15


II


♦


V


15


16


l


vt


17

MASTER  MASONS  DEGREE

Section  First.


Section  Second.


u>


Section  Third.


1,453.  Columns.
%,9  0 6'.  Pilasters.


20


% 3 . Grand  Ma  sters .

3,30(1.  Overseers.

SO, 000.  Fellow  Crafts.
70,000.  Entered  apprentices.


Y


/


♦


9


%


I


\


s


MARK  MASTERS  DEGREE


20


Section  First.


£ ( 'hroiiicle  #


PAS  T


28


29


MOST  EXCEELEJNTT  MASTERS

DE  GHEE.


H


ROAAL  ARCH  DEGREE.

Section  First.


30


r ■


Til


o2


Section  Second.


i .*

J.  , <


Exodus  ¥.  1.-6.


*


34


Destruction  o»y  JERUSALEM  bt  Webuceuvdnkzzab  ,


4


□□□□□□□ □□□□□□
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a


□□□□□□□□□□is.  .-i
□□□□□□□□□□!§ LO
□□□□□□□□□□□□
□□□□□□□□□□□
□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□□
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a


□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□
□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a
□□□□□□□□□□□□a


»


I


5T


#


%


1


58


59


Kzra  V.  3. if


40


t


41


4 2 -


.*


45

ROYAL  MASTERS  DEGREE  .


44


A


45


SELECT  MASTERS  DEGREE.


X,


46


«


*1


9


48


• /


■


.


*


■


; , v ..  I


ENTERED  APPRENTICE’S
DEGREE.


SECTION  FIRST.

The  first  section  consists  of  general  heads;
which,  though  short  and  simple,  carry  weight  with
them,  and  qualify  us  to  try  and  examine  the  rights  of
others  to  our  privileges,  while  they  prove  ourselves.
It  also  accurately  elucidates  the  mode  of  initiating  a
candidate  into  our  ancient  order.

A Prayer  used  at  the  Initiation  of  a Candidate.

Vouchsafe  thine  aid,  Almighty  Father  of  the  uni-
verse, to  this  our  present  convention  ; and  gran  j hat
this  candidate  for  masonry  may  dedicate  and  devote
his  life  to  thy  service,  and  become  a true  and  faithful
brother  among  us!  Endue  him  with  a competency  of
thy  divine  Wisdom,  that  by  the  secrets  of  ourart  he  may
be  better  enabled  to  display  the  Beauties  of  Holiness,
to  the  honour  of  thy  holy  name ! So  mote  it  be.  Amen.

The  following  passage  of  scripture  is  rehearsed  dur-
ing the  ceremony.

Behold  ! how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  breth-
ren to  dwell  together  in  unity  :

It  is  like  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  head,  d at
ran  down  upon  the  beard,  even  Aaron’s  beard,  that
went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garment:

2


16


MASONie  CHART.


The  greatest  of  these  is  Charity  ; for  our  Faith  may
be  lost  in  sight  ; Hope  ends  in  fruition  ; but  Charity
extends  beyond  the  grave,  through  the  boundless  realms
of  eternity.

Every  well -governed  Lodge  is  furnished  with  the
Holy  Bible , the  Square,  and  the  Compasses.

The  Holy  Bible  is  dedicated  to  God  ; the  Square,
to  the  Master  ; and  the  Compasses,  to  the  Craft.

The  Bible  is  dedicated  to  God,  because  it  is  the  in-
estimable gift  of  God  to  man  ; ***  the  square  to  the
master,  because  it  is  the  proper  masonic  emblem  of  his
office ; and  the  compasses  to  the  craft,  because,  by  a due
attention  to  their  use,  they  are  taught  to  circumscribe
their  desires,  and  keep  their  passions  within  due  bounds.

The  Ornaments  of  a Lodge,  are  the  Mosaic  pave-
ment, the  indented  tessel,  and  the  blazing  star.  The
Mosaic  pavement  is  a representation  of  the  ground
floor  of  King  Solomon’s  temple;  the  indented  tessel ,
that  beautiful  tesselated  border,  or  skirting,  which  sur-
rounded it ; and  the  blazing  star  in  the  centre,  is  com-
memorative of  the  Star  which  appeared,  to  guide  the
wise  men  of  the  East  to  the  place  of  our  Saviour’s
nativity.

The  Mosaic  pavement  is  emblematical  of  human  life,
chequered  with  good  and  evil ; the  beautiful  border
which  surrounds  it,  those  manifold  blessings  and  com-
forts which  surround  us,  and  which  we  hope  to  enjoy
by  a faithful  reliance  on  Divine  Providence,  which  is
hieroglyphically  represented  by  the  blazing  star  in  the
centre.

The  moveable  and  immoveable  Jewels  also  claim  our
attention  in  this  section.

The  rough  ashler  is  a stone  as  taken  from  the  quar-
ry in  its  rude  and  natural  state.

The  perfect* ashler  is  a stone  made  ready  by  the
hands  of  the  workmen,  to  be  adjusted  by  the  working
tools  of  the  Fellow  Craft.  The  trestle-board  is  for  the
master  workman  to  draw  his  designs  upon.


ENTERED  APPRENTICE.


17


By  the  rough  ashler , we  are  reminded  of  our  rude
and  imperfect  state  by  nature  ; by  the  perfect  ashler ,
that  state  of  perfection  at  which  we  hope  to  arrive  by
a virtuous  education,  our  own  endeavours,  and  the
blessing  of  God  ; and  by  the  trestle-board , we  are  also
reminded,  that  as  the  operative  workman  erects  his
temporal  building  agreeably  to  the  rules  and  designs
laid  down  by  the  master,  on  his  trestle-board,  so
should  we,  both  operative  and  speculative,  endeavour
to  erect  our  spiritual  building  agreeably  to  the  rules
and  designs  laid  down  by  the  Supreme  Architect  of
the  universe,  in  the  great  Books  of  nature  and  revela-
tion, which  is  our  spiritual,  moral,  and  masonic  tres-
tle-board.

Lodges  were  anciently  dedicated  to  King  Solomon,
as  it  is  said  he  was  the  first  Most  Excellent  Grand
Master  : Yet  masons  professing  Christianity  dedicate
theirs  to  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  St.  John  the  Evan-
gelist, who  were  two  eminent  Christian  patrons  of  ma-
sonry; and  since  their  time,  there  is  represented,  in
every  regular  and  well -governed  Lodge,  a certain  point
within  a circle* embordered by  two  perpendicular^par-
allel  lines,  representing  St.  John  the  Baptist  and  St.
John  the  Evangelist;  and  upon  the  top  rests  the  Holy
Scriptures.  In  going  round  this  circle,  we  necessarily
touch  upon  these  two  lines,  as  well  as  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures ; and  while  a mason  keeps  himself  circumscribed
within  their  precepts,  it  is  impossible  that  he  should
materially  err.

Of  Brotherly  Love.

By  the  exercise  of  brotherly  love,  we  are  taught  to
regard  the  whole  human  species  as  one  family;  the
high  and  low,  the  rich  and  poor ; who,  as  created  by
one  Almighty  Parent,  and  inhabitants  of  the  same
planet,  are  to  aid,  support,  and  protect  each  other.
On  this  principle,  masonry  unites  men  of  every  coun-
try, sect  and  opinion,  and  conciliates  true  friendship

* The  point  represents  an  individual  brother  ; the  circle  the
boundary  line,  beyond  which  he  is  never  to  suffer  his  prejudices
or  passions  to  betray  him.


is


MASONIC  CHART


among  those  who  might  otherwise  have  remained  at  a
perpetual  distance.

Of  Relief

To  relieve  the  distressed,  is  a duty  incumbent  on  all
men ; but  particularly  on  masons,  who  are  linked  to-
gether by  an  indissoluble  chain  of  sincere  affection.
To  soothe  the  unhappy  ; to  sympathize  with  their
misfortunes ; to  compassionate  their  miseries*  and  to
restore  peace  to  their  troubled  minds,  is  the  great  aim
we  have  in  view.  On  this  basis,  we  form  our  friend-
ships and  establish  our  connections.

Of  Truth .

Truth  is  a divine  attribute,  and  the  foundation  of  ev-
ery virtue.  To  be  good  and  true,  is  the  first  lesson  we
are  taught  in  masonry.  On  this  theme  we  contemplate,
and  by  its  dictates  endeavour  to  regulate  our  conduct :
hence,  while  influenced  by  this  principle,  hypocrisy
and  deceit  are  unknown  among  us;  sincerity  and
plain  dealing  distinguish  us ; and  the  heart  and
tongue  join  in  promoting  each  other’s  welfare,  and  re-
joicing in  each  other’s  prosperity.

An  Explanation  of  the  four  Cardinal  Virtues;
which  are.  Temperance,  Fortitude,  Prudence,
and  Justice.

Of  Temperance .

Temperance  is  that  due  restraint  upon  our  affec-
tions and  passions,  which  renders  the  body  tame  and
governable,  and  frees  the  mind  from  the  allurements  of
vice.  This  virtue  should  be  the  constant  practice  of
every  mason  ; as  he  is  thereby  taught  to  avoid  excess,
or  contracting  any  licentious  or  vicious  habit,  the  in-
dulgence of  which  might  lead  him  to  disclose  some  of
those  valuable  secrets,  which  he  has  promised  to  con-
ceal and  never  reveal,  and  which  would  consequently
subject  him  to  the  contempt  and  detestation  of  all  good
masons.  *****


ENTERED  APPRENTICE.


19


Of  Fortitude .

Fortitude  is  that  noble  and  steady  purpose  of  the
mind,  whereby  we  are  enabled  to  undergo  any  pain,
peril,  or  danger,  when  prudentially  deemed  expedient.
This  virtue  is  equally  distant  from  rashness  and  cow-
ardice ; and,  like  the  former,  should  be  deeply  impres-
sed upon  the  mind  of  every  mason,  as  a safe  guard  or
security  against  any  illegal  attack  that  may  be  made,
by  force  or  otherwise,  to  extort  from  him  any  of  those
valuable  secrets  with  which  he  has  been  so  solemnly  in-
trusted, and  which  were  emblematically  represented
upon  his  first  admission  into  the  Lodge.  * * * * *

Of  Prudence.

Prudence  teaches  us  to  regulate  our  lives  and  ac-
tions agreeably  to  the  dictates  of  reason,  and  is  that
habit  by  which  we  wisely  judge,  and  prudentially  de-
termine, on  all  tilings  relative  to  our  present  as  well  as
to  our  future  happiness.  This  virtue  should  be  the  pe-
culiar characteristic  of  every  mason,  not  only  for  the
government  of  his  conduct  while  in  the  Lodge,  but
also  when  abroad  in  the  world.  It  should  be  particu-
larly attended  to,  in  all  strange  and  mixed  companies,
never  to  let  fall  the  least  sign,  token,  or  word,  whereby
the  secrets  of  masonry  might  be  unlawfully  obtained.
*****


Of  Justice .

Justice  is  that  standard,  or  boundary  of  right,  which
enables  us  to  render  to  every  man  his  just  due,  with-
out distinction.  This  virtue  is  not  only  consistent  with
divine  and  human  laws,  but  is  the  very  cement  and
support  of  civil  society ; and  as  justice  in  a great  meas-
ure constitutes  the  real  good  man,  so  should  it  be  the
invariable  practice  of  every  mason,  never  to  deviate
from  the  minutest  principles  thereof.  * * * * *

The  illustration  of  these  virtues  is  accompanied
with  some  general  observations  peculiar  to  masons.
Due  veneration  is  also  paid  to  our  ancient  patrons.


20


MASONIC  CHART.


CHARGE  at  Initiation  into  the  First  Degree .
Brother,

As  you  are  now  introduced  into  the  first  princi-
ples of  masonry,  I congratulate  you  on  being  ac-
cepted into  this  ancient  and  honourable  order : —
ancient,  as  having  subsisted  from  time  immemorial,
and  honourable,  as  tending,  in  every  particular,
so  to  render  all  men  who  will  be  conformable  to
its  precepts.  No  institution  was  ever  raised  on  a
better  principle,  or  more  solid  foundation  ; nor
were  ever  more  excellent  rules  and  useful  max-
ims laid  down,  than  are  inculcated  in  the  several
masonic  lectures.  The  greatest  and  best  of  men,
in  all  ages,  have  been  encouragers  and  promoters
of  the  art ; and  have  never  deemed  it  derogatory
to  their  dignity,  to  level  themselves  with  the  fra-
ternity, extend  their  privileges,  and  patronize  their
assemblies.  There  are  three  great  duties,  which,
as  a mason,  you  are  charged  to  inculcate — to  God,
your  neighbour,  and  yourself.  To  God,  in  nev-
er mentioning  his  name,  but  with  that  reverential
awe  which  is  due  from  a creature  to  his  Creator ;
to  implore  his  aid  in  all  your  laudable  under-
takings, and  to  esteem  him  as  the  chief  good : —
to  your  neighbour,  in  acting  upon  the  square,  and
doing  unto  him  as  you  wish  he  should  do  unto
you  : — and  to  yourself,  in  avoiding  all  irregularity
and  intemperance,  which  may  impair  your  facul-
ties, or  debase  the  dignity  of  your  profession.  A
zealous  attachment  to  these  duties,  will  insure  pub-
lic and  private  esteem.


ENTERED  APPRENTICE.


21


In  the  State,  you  are  to  be  a quiet  and  peace-
ful subject,  true  to  your  government,  and  just  to
your  country;  you  are  not  to  countenance  dis-
loyalty or  rebellion,  but  patiently  submit  to  legal
authority,  and  conform  with  cheerfulness  to  the
government  of  the  country  in  which  you  live.
In  your  outward  demeanour,  be  particularly  careful
to  avoid  censure  or  reproach.

Although  your  frequent  appearance  at  our  reg-
ular meetings  is  earnestly  solicited,  yet  it  is  not
meant  that  masonry  should  interfere  with  your  ne-
cessary vocations ; for  these  are  on  no  account  to
be  neglected  ; — neither  are  you  to  suffer  your  zeal
for  the  institution  to  lead  you  into  argument  with
those  who,  through  ignorance,  may  ridicule  it.

At  your  leisure  hours,  that  you  may  improve  in
masonic  knowledge,  you  are  to  converse  with  well
informed  brethren,  who  will  be  always  as  ready  to
give,  as  you  will  be  ready  to  receive,  instruction.

Finally,  keep  sacred  and  inviolable  the  myste-
ries of  the  order;  as  these  are  to  distinguish  you
from  the  rest  of  the  community,  and  mark  your
consequence  among  masons.  If,  in  the  circle  of
your  acquaintance,  you  find  a person  desirous  of
being  initiated  into  masonry,  be  particularly  at-
tentive not  to  recommend  him,  unless  you  are  con-
vinced he  will  conform  to  our  rules  ; that  the  hon-
our, glory,  and  reputation  of  the  institution,  may
be  firmly  established,  and  the  world  at  large  con-
vinced of  its  good  effects.


FELLOW-CRAFT  S DEGREE.


SECTION  FIRST.

THE  first  section  recapitulates  the  ceremony  of
initiation  into  this  class;  and  instructs  the  diligent
craftsman  how  to  proceed  in  the  proper  arrangement
of  the  ceremonies  used  on  the  occasion.  It  should
therefore  be  well  understood  by  every  officer  and
member  of  the  Lodge.

Amos  vii.  7,  8.

“ Thus  he  shewed  me  ; and  behold  the  Lord  stood
upon  a wail  made  by  a plumb-line,  with  a plumb-line
in  his  hand.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Amos,  what
seest  thou  ? And  I said,  A plumb-line.  Then  said  the
Lord,  Behold,  I will  set  a plumb-line  in  the  midst  of  my
people  Israel : I will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more.’*

The  working  tools  of  a fellow-craft  are  here  introdu-
ced and  explained  ; which  are  the  plumb,  square , and
level .

The  plumb  is  an  instrument  made  use  of  bv  opera-
tive masons,  to  raise  perpendiculars ; the  square , to
square  the  work  ; and  the  level,  to  lay  horizontals ;
but  we,  as  free  and  accepted  masons,  are  taught  to  make
use  of  them  for  more  noble  and  glorious  purposes  :
I he  plumb  admonishes  us  to  walk  uprightly  in  our
several  stations  before  God  and  man,  squaring  our  ac  •


FELLOW  CRAFT.


25


tions  by  the  square  of  virtue,  and  remembering  that  we
are  travelling  upon  the  level  of  time,  to  “ that  undis-
covered country,  from  whose  bourne  no  traveller  re-
turns.”


SECTION  SECOND.

The  second  section  of  this  degree  refers  to  the  origin
of  the  institution  ; and  views  masonry  under  two  de-
nominations, operative  and  speculative,  fhe  period
stipulated  for  rewarding  merit,  is  here  fixed  ; and  the
inimitable  moral  to  which  that  circumstance  alludes,  is
explained.  The  celestial  and  terrestrial  globes  are
considered  ; and  here  the  accomplished  mason  may
display  his  talents  to  advantage,  in  elucidating  the
Orders  of  Architecture,  the  Senses  of  human  nature,
and  the  liberal  Arts  and  Sciences,  which  are  severally
classed  in  a regular  arrangement.

Masonry  is  considered  under  two  denominations  ;
operative  and  speculative.

Operative  Masonry.

By  operative  masonry,  we  allude  to  a proper  applica-
tion of  the  useful  rules  of  architecture,  whence  a struc-
ture will  derive  figure,  strength,  and  beauty,  and  whence
will  result  a due  proportion  and  a just  correspondence
in  all  its  parts.  It  furnishes  us  with  dwellings,  and
convenient  shelters  from  the  vicissitudes  and  inclem-
encies of  seasons:  and  while  it  displays  the  effects  of
human  wisdom,  as  well  in  the  choice,  as  in  the  ar-
rangement, of  the  sundiy  materials  of  which  an  edifice
is  composed,  it  demonstrates  that  a fund  of  science
and  industry  is  implanted  in  man,  for  the  best,  most
salutary,  and  beneficent  purposes.

Speculative  Masonry.

By  speculative  masonry,  we  learn  to  subdue  the  pas-
sions, act  upon  the  square,  keep  a tongue  of  good  re-
port, maintain  secrecy,  and  practice  charity.  It  is


24


MASONIC  CHART.


so  far  interwoven  with  religion,  as  to  lay  us  under  obli -
gation  to  pay  that  rational  homage  to  the  Deity,  which
at  once  constitutes  our  duty  and  our  happiness.  It
leads  the  contemplative  to  view,  with  reverence  and
admiration,  the  glorious  works  of  creation,  and  inspires
him  with  the  most  exalted  ideas  of  the  perfections  of
his  divine  Creator.

In  six  days,  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
and  rested  upon  the  seventh  day  ; — the  seventh,  there-
fore, our  ancient  brethren  consecrated  as  a day  of  rest
from  their  labors  ; thereby  enjoying  frecjuent  opportu-
nities to  contemplate  the  glorious  works  of  creation,
and  to  adore  their  great  Creator.

Peace,  Unity,  and  Plenty,  are  here  introduced  and
explained.

The  next  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Spheres  in  the
science  of  Astronomy,  introduced  and  considered.

Of  the  Globes.

The  Globes  are  two  artificial  and  spherical  bodies  ;
on  the  convex  surface  of  which  are  represented , the
countries , seas,  and  various  parts  of  the  earth,  the  face
of  the  heavens,  the  planetary  revolutions , and  other  par-
ticulars.


The  Use  of  the  Globes.

Their  principal  use,  beside  serving  as  maps  to  dis-
tinguish the  outward  parts  of  the  earth,  and  the  situa-
tion of  the  fixed  stars,  is  to  illustrate  and  explain  the
phenomena  arising  from  the  annual  revolution,  and
the  diurnal  rotation,  of  the  earth  round  its  own  axis.
They  are  the  noblest  instruments  for  improving  the
mind , and  giving  it  the  most  distinct  idea  of  any  pro-
blem or  proposition , as  well  as  enabling  it  to  solve  the
same.  Contemplating  these  bodies,  we  are  inspired
with  a due  reverence  for  the  Deity  and  his  works,  and
are  induced  to  encourage  the  studies  of  astronomy ,
geography,  and  navigation,  and  the  arts  dependent  on
them , by  which  society  has  been  so  much  benefited.


FELLOW  CRAFT.


25


As  the  five  Orders  of  Architecture  are  considered  in
this  section,  a brief  description  of  them  may  not  be
improper.

Of  Order  in  Architecture.

By  order  in  architecture,  is  meant  a system  of  all
the  members,  proportions,  and  ornaments  of  columns
and  pilasters  ; — or,  it  is  a regular  arrangement  of  the
projecting  parts  of  a building,  which,  united  with  those
of  a column,  form  a beautiful,  perfect,  and  complete
whole.

Of  its  Antiquity.

From  the  first  formation  of  society,  order  in  archi-
tecture may  be  traced.  When  the  rigour  of  seasons
obliged  men  to  contrive  shelter  from  the  inclemency
of  the  weather,  we  learn  that  they  first  planted  trees
on  end,  and  then  laid  others  across,  to  support  a
covering.  The  bands  which  connected  those  trees  at
top  and  bottom,  are  said  to  have  given  rise  to  the  idea
of  the  base  and  capital  of  pillars ; and  from  this  sim-
ple hint  originally  proceeded  the  more  improved  art  of
architecture.

The  five  Orders  are  thus  classed; — the  Tuscan ,
Boric,  Ionic , Corinthian , and  Composite.

The  Tuscan

Is  the  most  simple  and  solid  of  the  Jive  orders.  It
was  invented  in  Tuscany,  whence  it  derives  its  name.
The  simplicity  of  the  construction  of  this  column  ren-
ders it  eligible  where  ornament  would  be  superfluous.

The  Doric,

Which  is  plain  and  natural,  is  the  most  ancient,  and
was  invented  by  the  Greeks.  Its  column  is  eight
diameters  high,  and  has  seldom  any  ornaments  on  base
or  capital , except  mouldings  ; though  the  frieze  is  dis-
tinguished by  triglyphs  and  metopes  ; and  triglyphs
compose  the  ornaments  of  the  frieze.

3


26


MASONIC  CHART.


The  Doric  is  the  best  proportioned  of  all  the  orders.
The  several  parts  of  which  it  is  composed ',  are  founded
on  the  natural  position  of  solid  bodies.  In  its  first  in-
vention, it  was  more  simple  than  in  its  present  state.  In.
after  times,  when  it  began  to  be  adorned,  it  gained  the
name  of  Doric  ; for  when  it  was  constructed  in  its  pri-
mitive and  simple  form,  the  name  of  Tuscan  was  con-
ferred onlit.  Hence  the  Tuscan  precedes  the  Doric  in
rank , on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  that  pillar  in  its
original  state.

The  Ionic

Bears  a kind  of  mean  proportion  between  the  more
solid  and  delicate  orders.  Its  column  is  nine  diameters
high  ; its  capital  is  adorned  with  volutes,  and  its  cor-
nice has  dentals.  There  is  both  delicacy  and  in-
genuity displayed  in  this  pillar ; the  invention  of
which  is  attributed  to  the  Ionians,  as  the  famous  tem-
ple of  Diana  at  Ephesus  was  of  this  order.  It  is  said
to  have  been  formed  after  the  model  of  an  agreeable
young  woman,  of  an  elegant  shape,  dressed  in  her
hair  ; as  a contrast  to  the  Doric  order,  which  was  for-
med after  that  of  a strong,  robust  man.

The  Corinthian,

The  richest  of  the  five  orders,  is  deemed  a master-
piece of  art.  Its  column  is  ten  diameters  high,  and  its
capital  is  adorned  with  two  rows  of  leaves,  and  eight
volutes,  which  sustain  the  abacus.  The  frieze  is  or-
namented with  curious  devices,  the  cornice  with  dentals
and  modillions.  This  order  is  used  in  stately  and
superb  structures.

Of  the  Invention  of  this  Order.

It  was  invented  at  Corinth,  by  Callimachus,  who  is
said  to  have  taken  the  hint  of  the  capital  of  this  pillar
from  the  following  remarkable  circumstance.  Accident-
ally passing  by  the  tomb  of  a young  lady,  he  perceived
a basket  of  toys  covered  with  tile,  placed  over  an  acan-
thus root,  having  been  left  there  by  her  nurse.  As  the


FELLOW  GRAFT.


27


branches  grew  up,  they  encompassed  the  basket,  till,
arriving  at  the  tile,  they  met  with  an  obstruction,  and
bent  downwards.  Callimachus,  struck  with  the  object ,
set  about  imitating  the  figure : the  vase  of  the  capital  he
made  to  represent  the  basket ; the  abacus  the  tile  ; and
the  volutes  the  bending  leaves .

. The  Composite

Is  compounded  of  the  other  orders,  and  was  con-
trived by  the  Romans.  Its  capital  has  the  two  roivs
of  leaves  of  the  Corinthian,  andthe  volutes  of  the  loviic.
hs  column  has  quarter -rounds,  as  the  Tuscan  and
Doric  order ; is  ten  diameters  high ; and  its  cornice
has  dentals , or  simple  modillions.  This  pillar  is  gen-
erally found  in  buildings  where  strength,  elegance  and
beauty  are  displayed.

Of  the  Invention  of  Order  in  Architecture.

The  ancient  and  original  orders  of  architecture  re-
vered by  masons,  are  no  more  than  three  ; the  Doric,
Ionic,  and  Corinthian,  which  were  invented  by  the
Greeks.  To  these  the  Romans  have  added  two ;
the  Tuscan,  which  they  made  plainer  than  the  Doric  ;
and  the  Composite,  ivhich  was  more  ornamental , if  not
more  beautiful,  than  the  Corinthian.  The  first  three  or-
ders alone,  however,  show  invention  and  particular
character,  and  essentially  differ  from  each  other : the
two  others  have  nothing  but  what  is  borrowed,  and
differ  only  accidentally : the  Tuscan  is  the  Doric  in
its  earliest  state : and  the  Composite  is  the  Corinthian
enriched  with  the  Ionic.  To  the  Greeks,  therefore,
aud  not  to  the  Romans,  are  we  indebted  for  what  is
great,  judicious  and  distinct,  in  architecture.

Of  the  Five  Senses  of  Human  Nature,  which  are.
Hearing,  Seeing,  Feeling,  Smelling,  and
Tasting.

Hearing

Is  that  sense  by  which  we  distinguish  sounds , and
are  capable  of  enjoying  all  the  agreeable  charms  of


38


MASONIC  CHART.


music.  By  it  we  are  enabled  to  enjoy  the  pleasures
of  society , and  reciprocally  to  communicate  to  each
other  our  thoughts  and  intentions , our  purposes  and
desires  ; while  thus  our  reason  is  capable  of  exerting
its  utmost  power  and  energy.

The  wise  and  beneficent  Author  of  Nature  intend -
ed,  by  the  formation  of  this  sense,  that  we  should  be
social  creatures,  and  receive  the  greatest  and  most  im-
portant part  of  our  knowledge  by  the  information  of
others.  For  these  purposes,  we  are  endowed  with
hearing,  that  by  a proper  exertion  of  our  rational  pow-
ers, our  happiness  may  be  complete.

Seeing

Is  that  sense  by  which  toe  distinguish  objects,  and
in  an  instant  of  time , without  change  of  place  or  situa-
tion, view  armies  in  battle  array,  figures  of  the  most
stately  structures,  and  all  the  agreeable  variety  display-
ed in  the  landscape  of  nature.  By  this  sense,  toe  find
our  way  on  the  pathless  ocean,  traverse  the  globe  of  the
earth , determine  its  figure  and  dimensions , and  delin-
eate any  region  or  quarter  of  it.  By  it  we  measure  the
planetary  orbs,  and  make  new  discoveries  in  the  sphere
of  the  fixed  stars.  Nay,  more  : by  it  we  perceive  the
tempers  and  dispositions,  the  passions  and  affections,  of
our  felloiv-creatures,  when  they  wish  most  to  conceal
them  : so  that  though  the  tongue  may  be  taught  to  lie
and  dissemble,  the  countenance  woidd  display  the  hy-
pocrisy to  the  discerning  eye.  In  fine,  the  rays  of
light,  which  administer  to  this  sense,  are  the  most  as-
tonishing part  of  the  animated  creation , and  render
the  eye  a peculiar  object  of  admiration.

Of  all  the  faculties,  sight  is  the  noblest.  The  struc-
ture of  the  eye,  and  its  appurtenances,  evince  the  ad-
mirable contrivance  of  nature  for  performing  all  its
various  external  and  internal  motions  ; while  the  va-
riety displayed  in  the  eyes  of  different  animals,  suited
to  their  several  ways  of  life,  clearly  demonstrates  this
organ  to  be  the  master-piece  of  Nature’s  work.


FELLOW  CBAFT.


29


Feeling

Is  that  sense  by  which  we  distinguish  the  different
qualities  of  bodies  : such  as  heat  and  cold,  hardness ,
and  softness,  roughness,  and  smoothness,  figure,  so-
lidity, motion,  and  extension.

These  three  senses,  Hearing,  Seeing,  and  Feeling,
are  most  revered  among  masons.

Smelling

Is  that  sense , by  which  we  distinguish  odours , the
various  kinds  of  which  convey  different  impressions  to
the  mind.  Animal  and  vegetable  bodies , and  indeed
most  other  bodies , while  exposed  to  the  air , continually
send  forth  effluvia  of  vast  subtilty,  as  well  in  the  state
of  life  and  growth , as  in  the  state  of  fermentation  and
putrefaction.  These  effluvia  being  drawn  into  the
nostrils  along  with  the  air,  are  the  means  by  which  all
bodies  are  smelled.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  there  is  a
manifest  appearance  of  design  in  the  great  Creator’s
having  planted  the  organ  of  smell  in  the  inside  of  that
canal,  through  which  the  air  continually  passes  in  res-
piration.


Tasting

Enables  us  to  make  a proper  distinction  in  the  choice
of  our  food.  The  organ  of  this  sense  guards  the  en-
trance of  the  alimentary  canal,  as  that  of  smelling
guards  the  entrance  of  the  canal for  respiration.  From
the  situation  of  both  these  organs , it  is  plain  that  they
were  intended  by  nature  to  distinguish  wholesome  food
from  that  which  is  nauseous.  Every  thing  that  enters
into  the  stomach,  must  undergo  the  scrutiny  of  tasting  ;
and  by  it  we  are  capable  of  discerning  the  changes
which  the  same  body  undergoes  in  the  different  compo-
sitions of  art,  cookery,  chemistry,  pharmacy,  fyc.

Smelling  and  tasting  are  inseparably  connected ;
and  it  is  by  the  unnatural  kind  of  life  men  commonly
lead  in  society,  that  these  senses  are  rendered  less  fit  to
perform  their  natural  offices.


50


MASONIC  CHAR'?.,


Of  the  Seven  Liberal  Arts  and  Sciences ; — which  arc.
Grammar,  Rhetoric,  Logic,  Arithmetic,  Ge-
ometry, Music,  and  Astronomy.

Grammar

Teaches  the  proper  arrangement  of  words , according
to  the  idiom  or  dialect  of  any  particular  people  ; and
that  excellency  of  pronunciation,  which  enables  us  to
speak  or  write  a language  with  accuracy , agreeably  to
reason  and  correct  usage.

Rhetoric

Teaches  us  to  speak  copiously  and  fluently  on  any
subject , not  merely  with  propriety  alone , but  with  all  the
advantages  of  force  and.  elegance , wisely  contriving  to
captivate  the  hearer  by  strength  of  argument  and
beauty  of  expression , whether  it  be  to  entreat  or  exhort,
to  admonish  or  applaud.


Logic

Teaches  us  to  guide  our  reason  discretionally  in  the
general  knowledge  of  things , and  directs  our  inquiries
after  truth.  It  consists  of  a regular  train  of  argu-
ment, whence  we  infer,  deduce  and  conclude,  according
to  certain  premises  laid  down,  admitted,  or  granted ;
and  in  it  are  employed  the  faculties  of  conceiving ,
judging,  reasoning  and  disposing  $ all  of  which  are
naturally  led  on  from  one  gradation  to  another,  till  the
point  in  question  is  finally  determined.

Arithmetic

Teaches  the  powers  and  properties  of  numbers,  which
is  variously  effected,  by  Letters,  tables , figures,  and
instruments.  By  this  art,  reasons  and  demonstrations
are  given , for  finding  out  any  certain  number,  whose
relation  or  affinity  to  another  is  already  known  or  dis-
covered.


FELLOW  CRAFT.


31


Geometry.

Geometry  treats  of  the  powers  and  properties  of
magnitudes  in  general,  where  length,  breadth,  and
thickness,  are  considered,  from  a point  to  a line,
from  a line  to  a superficies,  and  from  a superficies  to
a solid.

A point  is  a dimentionless  figure  ; or  an  indivisible
part  of  a space.

A line  is  a point  continued,  and  a figure  of  one  ca-
pacity, namely,  length.

A superficies  is  a figure  of  two  dimensions,  namely,
length,  and  breadth.

A solid  is  a figure  of  three  dimensions,  namely,
length,  breadth,  and  thickness.

Of  the  Advantages  of  Geometry.

By  this  science,  the  architect  is  enabled  to  cohstruct
his  plans,  and  execute  his  designs  ; the  general  to  ar-
range his  soldiers  ; the  geographer  to  give  us  the  di-
mensions of  the  world,  and  all  things  therein  contain-
ed ; to  delineate  the  extent  of  seas,  and  specify  the
divisions  of  empires,  kingdoms  and  provinces.  By  it,
also,  the  astronomer  is  enabled  to  make  his  observa-
tions, and  to  fix  the  duration  of  time  and  seasons,
years  and  cycles.

In  fine,  geometry  is  the  foundation  of  architecture,
and  the  root  of  the  mathematics.

Music

Teaches  the  art  of  forming  concords , so  as  to  com-
pose deiightful  harmony , by  a mathematical  and  pro-
portional arrangement  of  acute , grave , and  mixed
sounds.  This  art , by  a series  of  experiments , is  redu-
ced to  a demonstrative  science,  with  respect  to  tones  and
the  intervals  of  sound.  It  inquires  into  the  nature  of
concords  and  discords , and  enables  us  to  find  out  the
proportion  between  them  by  numbers.


MASONIC  CHART.


ft  ft


Astronomy

Is  that  divine  art , by  which  we  are  taught  to  read  the
wisdom , strength  and  beauty , of  the  Almighty  Creator ,
in  those  sacred  pages,  the  celestial  hemisphere.

Assisted  by  astronomy , we  can  observe  the  magni-
tudes, and  calculate  the  periods  and  eclipses  of  the
heavenly  bodies.  By  it,  we  learn  the  use  of  globes,  the
system  of  the  world,  and  the  preliminary  law  of  nature.
While  we  are  employed  in  the  study  of  this  science,  we
must  perceive  unparalleled  instances  of  "wisdom  and
goodness  ; and,  through  the  whole  creation , trace  the
glorious  Author  by  his  works.

[Here  an  emblem  of  Plenty  is  introduced  and  ex-
plained.]

Of  the  Moral  Advantages  of  Geometry.

Geometry,  the  first  and  noblest  of  sciences,  is  the
basis  on  which  the  superstructure  of  masonry  is  erect-
ed. By  geometry,  we  may  curiously  trace  Nature
through  her  various  windings,  to  her  most  concealed
recesses.  By  it,  we  may  discover  the  power,  the  wis-
dom and  the  goodness  of  the  Grand  Artificer  of  the
universe,  and  view  with  delight  the  proportions  which
connect  this  vast  machine.

By  it,  we  may  discover  how  the  planets  move  in
their  different  orbits,  and  demonstrate  their  various
revolutions.  By  it  we  account  for  the  return  of  sea-
sons, and  the  variety  of  scenes  which  each  season  dis-
plays to  the  discerning  eye.  Numberless  worlds  are
around  us,  all  framed  by  the  same  Divine  Artist,
which  roll  through  the  vast  expanse,  and  are  all  con-
ducted by  the  same  unerring  law  of  nature.

A survey  of  Nature,  and  the  observations  of  her
beautiful  proportions,  first  determined  man  to  imitate
the  divine  plan,  and  study  symmetry  and  order.  This
gave  rise  to  societies,  and  birth  to  every  useful  art.
The  architect  began  to  design  ; and  the  plans  which  he
laid  down,  being  improved  by  experience  and  time,  have
produced  works  which  are  the  admiration  of  every  age.


FELLOW  CRAFT.


33

The  lapse  of  time,  the  ruthless  hand  of  ignorance,
and  the  devastations  of  war,  have  laid  waste  and  de-
stroyed many  valuable  monuments  of  antiquity  ; on
which  the  utmost  exertions  of  human  genius  have  been
employed.  Even  the  temple  of  Solomon,  so  spacious
and  magnificent,  and  constructed  by  so  many  celebra-
ted artists,  escaped  not  the  unsparing  ravages  of  bar-
barous force.  Free-Masonry,  notwithstanding,  has
still  survived.  The  attentive  Ear  receives  the  sound
from  the  instructive  Tongue  : and  the  mysteries  of
free -masonry  are  safely  lodged  in  the  repository  of
faithful  Breasts.  Tools  and  instruments  of  architect-
ure, and  symbolic  emblems,  most  expressive,  are  se-
lected by  the  fraternity,  to  imprint  on  the  mind  wise
and  serious  truths  ; and  thus,  through  a succession  of
ages,  are  transmitted,  unimpaired,  the  most  excellent
tenets  ©f  our  institution.

CHARGE  at  passing  to  the  Degree  of  Fellow
Craft.

Brother — >

Being  passed  to  the  second  degree  of  masonry,
we  congratulate  you  on  your  preferment.  The  in-
ternal, and  not  the  external  qualifications  of  a man,
are  what  masonry  regards.  As  you  increase  in
knowledge,  you  will  improve  in  social  intercourse.

It  is  unnecessary  to  recapitulate  the  duties
which,  as  a mason,  you  are  bound  to  discharge,  or
to  enlarge  on  the  necessity  of  a strict  adherence  to
them,  as  your  own  experience  must  have  estab-
lished their  value.  Our  laws  and  regulations  you
are  strenuously  to  support ; and  be  always  ready
to  assist  in  seeing  them  duly  executed.  You  are
not  to  palliate,  or  aggravate,  the  offences  of  your
brethren  ; but  in  the  decision  of  every  trespass


34


MASONIC  CHART.


against  our  rules,  you  are  to  judge  with  candour,
admonish  with  friendship,  and  reprehend  with  jus-
tice.

The  study  of  the  liberal  arts,  that  valuable
branch  of  education,  which  tends  so  effectually  to
polish  and  adorn  the  mind,  is  earnestly  recommen-
ded to  your  consideration  ; especially  the  science
of  geometry,  which  is  established  as  the  basis  of
our  art.  Geometry,  or  masonry,  orignally  synony-
mous terms,  being  of  a divine  and  moral  nature,
is  enriched  with  the  most  useful  knowledge  : while
it  proves  the  wonderful  properties  of  nature,  it
demonstrates  the  more  important  truths  of  morality^.

Your  past  behaviour  and  regular  deportment
have  merited  the  honour  which  we  have  now  con-
ferred ; and  in  your  new  character,  it  is  expected
that  you  will  conform  to  the  principles  of  the  or-
der, by  steadily  persevering  in  the  practice  of  ev-
ery commendable  virtue.  Such  is  the  nature  of
your  engagement  as  a fellow  craft,  and  to  these
duties  you  are  bound  by  the  most  sacred  ties.


MASTER  MASON’S  DEGREE.


—


SECTION  FIRST.

The  ceremony  of  raising  to  the  sublime  degree
of  Master  Mason,  is  particularly  specified,  and  other
useful  instructions  are  given  in  this  branch  of  the
lecture.

The  following  passage  of  scripture  is  introduced
during  the  ceremonies :

Eccl.  xii.  1 — 7.

“ Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy
youth,  while  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  years
draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt  say,  I have  no  pleasure  in
them  ; while  the  sun,  or  the  light,  or  the  moon,  or  the
stars,  be  not  darkened,  nor  the  clouds  return  after  the
rain;  in  the  day  when  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall
tremble,  and  the  strong  men  shall  bow  themselves,  and
the  grinders  cease  because  they  are  few,  and  those
that  look  out  of  the  windows  be  darkened ; and  the
doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets,  when  the  sound  of
the  grinding  is  low ; and  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice
of  the  bird,  and  all  the  daughters  of  music  shall  be
brought  low.  Also,  when  they  shall  be  afraid  of  that
which  is  high,  and  fears  shall  be  in  the  way,  and  the


S6


MASONIC  CHART.


almond- tree  shall  flourish,  and  the  grasshopper  shall
be  a burden,  and  desire  shall  fail ; because  man  goeth
to  his  long  home,  and  the  mourners  go  about  the
streets  : or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  loosed,  or  the  golden
bowl  be  broken  at  the  fountain,  or  the  wheel  broken  at
the  cistern.  Then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  earth
as  it  was ; and  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who
gave  it”

The  working  tools  of  a master  mason  are  all  the
implements  of  masonry  indiscriminately,  but  more
especially  the  trowel.

The  trowel  is  an  instrument  made  use  of  by
operative  masons,  to  spread  the  cement  which  unites  a
building  into  one  common  mass : but  we,  as  free  and
accepted  masons,  are  taught  to  make  use  of  it  for  the
more  noble  and  glorious  purpose  of  spreading  the
cement  of  brotherly  love  and  affection  ; that  cement
which  unites  us  into  one  sacred  band,  or  society  of
friends  and  brothers,  among  whom  no  contention
should  ever  exist,  but  that  noble  contention,  or  rather
emulation,  of  who  can  best  work,  or  best  agree.

SECTION  SECOND.

This  section  recites  the  historical  traditions  of  the
order,  and  presents  to  view  a finished  picture,  of  the
utmost  consequence  to  the  fraternity.  It  exemplifies
an  instance  of  virtue,  fortitude,  and  integrity,  unpar-
alleled in  the  history  of  man.

Prayer  at  raising  a Brother  to  the  sublime  Degree  of
Master  Mason .

■ j

Thou,  0 God ! knowest  our  down-sitting  and  our
up-rising,  and  understandest  our  thoughts  afar  oft'.
Shield  and  defend  us  from  the  evil  intentions  of  our
enemies,  and  support  us  under  the  trials  and  afflictions


MASTER  MASON.


37


we  are  destined  to  endure,  while  travelling  through
this  vale  of  tears.  Man  that  is  born  of  a woman,  is  of
few  days,  and  full  of  trouble.  He  cometh  forth  as  a
flower,  and  is  cut  down  ; he  fleeth  also  as  a shadow,
and  continueth  not.  Seeing  his  days  are  determined,
the  number  of  his  months  are  with  thee,  thou  hast  ap-
pointed his  bounds  that  he  cannot  pass : turn  from
him  that  he  may  rest,  till  he  shall  accomplish  his  day
Tor  there  is  hope  of  a tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it
will  sprout  again,  and  that  the  tender  branch  thereof
will  not  cease.  But  man  dieth  and  wasteth  away;
yea,  man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he  P As
the  waters  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the  flood  decayeth
and  drieth  up,  so  man  lieth  down,  and  riseth  not  up
till  the  heavens  shall  be  no  more.  Yet,  O Lord  ! have
compassion  on  the  children  of  thy  creation;  adminis-
ter them  comfort  in  time  of  trouble,  and  save  them
with  an  everlasting  salvation.

So  mote  it  be.  Amen.

SECTION  THIRD.

The  third  section  illustrates  certain  hieroglyph ical
emblems,  and  inculcates  many  useful  lessons,  to  extend
knowledge,  and  promote  virtue.  In  this  branch  of  the
lecture,  many  particulars  relative  to  king  Solomon’s
Temple  are  noticed.

This  famous  fabric  was  supported  by  fourteen
hundred  and  fifty-three  columns,  and  two  thousand
nine  hundred  and  six  pilasters ; all  hewn  from  the
finest  Parian  marble.  There  were  employed  in  its
building,  three  Grand  Masters  ; three  thousand  three
hundred  overseers  of  the  work;  eighty  thousand  Fel-
low Crafts,  or  hewers  on  the  mountains  and  in  the
quarries ; and  seventy  thousand  Entered  Apprentices,
or  bearers  of  burdens.


4


38


MASONIC  CHART*


The  Three  Steps ,

Usually  delineated  upon  the  master’s  carpet,  are
emblematical  of  the  three  principal  stages  of  human
life,  viz.  youth , manhood,  and  age.  In  youth , as  en-
tered apprentices,  we  ought  industriously  to  occupy
our  minds  in  the  attainment  of  useful  knowledge:  in
manhood,  as  fellow  crafts,  we  should  apply  our  knowl-
edge to  the  discharge  of  our  respective  duties  to  God,
our  neighbors,  and  ourselves ; that  so,  in  age , as  master
masons,  we  may  enjoy  the  happy  reflections  consequent
on  a well-spent  life,  and  die  in  the  hope  of  a glorious
immortality.


The  Pot  of  Incense

Is  an  emblem  of  a pure  heart,  which  is  always  an
acceptable  sacrifice  to  the  Deity ; and,  as  this  glows
with  fervent  heat,  so  should  our  hearts  continually
glow  with  gratitude  to  the  great  beneficent  Author  of
our  existence,  for  the  manifold  blessings  and  comforts
we  enjoy.


The  Bee  Hive

Is  an  emblem  of  industry,  and  recommends  the
practice  of  that  virtue  to  all  created  beings,  from  the
highest  seraph  in  heaven,  to  the  lowest  reptile  of  the
dust.  It  teaches  us,  that  as  we  came  into  the  world
rational  and  intelligent  beings,  so  we  should  ever  be
industrious  ones ; never  sitting  down  contented  while
our  fellow-creatures  around  us  are  in  want,  when  it  is
in  our  power  to  relieve  them,  without  inconvenience
to  ourselves.

When  we  take  a survey  of  nature,  we  view  man,  in
his  infancy,  more  helpless  and  indigent  than  the  brutal
creation:  he  lies  languishing  for  days,  months,  and
years,  totally  incapable  of  providing  sustenance  for
himself,  of  guarding  against  the  attack  of  the  wild
beasts  of  the  field,  or  sheltering  himself  from  the  in-
clemencies of  the  weather.  It  might  have  pleased  the
Great  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  to  have  made  man


MASTER  MASON.


39


independent  of  all  other  beings  ; but,  as  dependence  is
one  of  the  strongest  bonds  of  society,  mankind  were
made  dependent  on  each  other  for  protection  and  secu-
rity, as  they  thereby  enjoy  better  opportunities  of  ful-
filling the  duties  of  reciprocal  love  and  friendship.
Thus  was  man  formed  for  social  and  active  life,  the
noblest  part  of  the  work  of  God ; and  he  that  will  so
demean  himself,  as  not  to  be  endeavouring  to  add  to
the  common  stock  of  knowledge  and  understanding,
may  be  deemed  a drone  in  the  hive  of  nature,  a useless
member  of  society,  and  unworthy  of  our  protection  as
masons.

The  Book  of  Constitutions , guarded  by  the  Tyler's
Sword ,

Reminds  us  that  we  should  be  ever  watchful  and
guarded  in  our  words  and  actions,  particularly  when
before  the  enemies  of  masonry ; ever  bearing  in  re-
membrance those  truly  masonic  virtues,  silence  and
circumspection.

The  Sword , pointing  to  a Naked  Heart ,

Demonstrates  that  justice  will  sooner  or  later  over-
take us  ; and  although  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,
may  be  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  men,  yet  that

All-seeing  Eye,

whom  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars  obey,  and  under
whose  watchful  care  even  Comets  perform  their
stupendous  revolutions,  pervades  the  inmost  recesses
of  the  human  Heart,  and  will  reward  us  according
to  our  merits.


The  Anchor  and  Ark

Are  emblems  of  a well-grounded  hope , and  a well-
spent  life.  They  are  emblematical  of  that  divine  Ark,
which  safely  wafts  us  over  this  tempestuous  sea  of
troubles,  and  that  Anchor  which  shall  safely  moor  us


40


MASONIC  CHART.


in  a peaceful  harbor,  where  the  wicked  cease  from
troubling,  and  the  weary  shall  find  rest.

The  Forty- Seventh  Problem  of  Euclid.

This  was  an  invention  of  our  ancient  friend  and
brother,  the  great  Pythagoras,  who,  in  his  travels
through  Asia,  Africa,  and  Europe,  was  initiated  into
several  orders  of  priesthood,  and  raised  to  the  sublime
degree  of  a master  mason.  This  wise  philosopher  en-
riched his  mind  abundantly  in  a general  knowledge  of
things,  and  more  especially  in  geometry,  or  masonry.
On  this  subject,  he  drew  out  many  problems  and  theo-
rems ; and  among  the  most  distinguished,  he  erected
this,  which,  in  the  joy  of  his  heart,  he  called  Et^a,
(Eureka,)  in  the  Grecian  language,  signifying  1 have
found  it ; and  upon  the  discovery  of  which,  he  is  said
to  have  sacrificed  a hecatomb.  It  teaches  masons  to
be  general  lovers  of  the  arts  and  sciences.

The  Hour-Glass

Is  an  emblem  of  human  life.  Behold!  how  swiftly
the  sands  run,  and  how  rapidly  our  lives  are  drawing
to  a close  ! We  cannot  without  astonishment  behold
the  little  particles  which  are  contained  in  this  ma-
chine ; — how  they  pass  away  almost  imperceptibly !
and  yet,  to  our  surprise,  in  the  short  space  of  an  hour,
they  are  all  exhausted.  Thus  wastes  man ! To-day,
he  puts  forth  the  tender  leaves  of  hope ; to-morrow,
blossoms,  and  bears  his  blushing  honours  thick  upon
him ; the  next  day  comes  a frost,  which  nips  the  shoot;
and  when  he  thinks  his  greatness  is  still  aspiring,  he
fails,  like  autumn  leaves,  to  enrich  our  mother  earth.

The  Scythe

Is  an  emblem  of  time,  which  cuts  the  brittle  thread
of  life,  and  launches  us  into  eternity. — Behold  ! what
havock  the  scythe  of  time  makes  among  the  human
race  ! If  by  chance  we  should  escape  the  numerous
evils  incident  to  childhood  and  youth,  and  with  health


MASTER  MASON.


41


and  vigour  arrive  to  the  years  of  manhood  ; yet,  with-
al, we  must  soon  be  cut  down  by  the  all-devouring
scythe  of  time,  and  be  gathered  into  the  land  where
our  fathers  have  gone  before  us.

Thus  we  close  the  explanation  of  the  emblems  upon
the  solemn  thought  of  death,  which,  without  revelation,
is  dark  and  gloomy  ; but  the  Christian  is  suddenly  re-
vived by  the  ever  green  and  ever  living  sprig  of  Faith
in  the  merits  of  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  ; which
strengthens  him,  with  confidence  and  composure,  to
look  forward  to  a blessed  immortality  ; and  doubts  not,
but  in  the  glorious  morn  of  the  resurrection,  his  body
will  rise,  and  become  as  incorruptible  as  his  soul.

Then  let  us  imitate  the  Christian  in  his  virtuous  and
amiable  conduct  5 in  his  unfeigned  piety  to  God ; in
his  inflexible  fidelity  to  his  trust;  that  we  may  wel-
come the  grim  tyrant  Death,  and  receive  him  as  a kind
messenger  sent  from  our  Supreme  Grand  Master,  to
translate  us  from  this  imperfect  to  that  all -perfect,
glorious,  and  celestial  Lodge  above,  where  the  Su-
preme Architect  of  the  universe  presides.

CHARGE  at  raising  to  the  sublime  degree  of
Master  Mason.

Brother,

Your  zeal  for  the  institution  of  masonry  ; the
progress  you  have  made  in  the  mystery ; and
your  conformity  to  our  regulations,  have  pointed
you  out  as  a proper  object  of  our  favor  and  esteem.
You  are  now  bound  by  duty,  honour  and  gratitude,
to  be  faithful  to  your  trust ; to  support  the  dignity
of  your  character  on  every  occasion  ; and  to  en-
force, by  precept  and  example,  obedience  to  the
tenets  of  the  order.

In  the  character  of  a master  mason,  you  are
4*


42


MASONIC  CHAiVf.


authorized  to  correct  the  errors  and  irregularities
of  your  uninformed  brethren,  and  to  guard  them
against  a breach  of  fidelity.  To  preserve  the  re-
putation of  the  fraternity  unsullied,  must  be  your
constant  care  ; and  for  this  purpose,  it  is  your
province  to  recommend  to  your  inferiors,  obedi-
dience  and  submission ; to  your  equals,  courtesy
and  affability ; to  your  superiors,  kindness  and
condescension.  Universal  benevolence  you  are
always  to  inculcate;  and,  by  the  regularity  of
your  own  behaviour,  afford  the  best  example  for
the  conduct  of  others  less  informed.  The  ancient
land-marks  of  the  order,  entrusted  to  your  care,
you  are  carefully  to  preserve  ; and  never  suffer
them  to  be  infringed,  or  countenance  a deviation
from  the  established  usages  and  customs  of  the
fraternity.

Your  virtue,  honour  and  reputation,  are  con-
cerned in  supporting  with  dignity  the  character
you  now  bear.  Let  no  motive,  therefore,  make
you  swerve  from  your  duty,  violate  your  vows,  or
betray  your  trust ; but  be  true  and  faithful,  and
imitate  the  example  of  that  celebrated  artist,
whom  you  this  evening  represent.  Thus  you  will
render  yourself  deserving  of  the  honour  which  we
have  conferred,  and  merit  the  confidence  that  we
have  reposed.


MARK  MASTER’S  DEGREE.


-90*5-

By  the  influence  of  this  degree,  each  operative
mason,  at  the  erection  of  King  Solomon’s  temple,  was
known  and  distinguished,  by  the  Senior  Grand  War-
den. If  defects  were  found,  the  overseers  were  enalj
bled,  without  difficulty,  to  ascertain  who  was  the  faulty
workman:  so  that  deficiencies  might  be  remedied,
without  injuring  the  credit  or  diminishing  the  reward
of  the  industrious  and  faithful  of  the  craft.

CHARGE  to  be  read  at  Opening .

“ Wherefore,  brethren,  lay  aside  all  malice,  and
guile,  and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil
speakings.  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord
is  gracious;  to  whoip  coming,  as  unto  a living
stone,  disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of
God,  and  precious ; ye  also,  as  living  stones,  be
ye  built  up  a spiritual  house,  an  holy  priesthood,
to  offer  up  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God.

“ Brethren,  this  is  the  will  of  God,  that  with
w ell-doing,  ye  put  to  silence  the  ignoranae  of  fool-
ish men.  As  free,  and  not  as  using  your  liberty
for  a cloak  of  maliciousness ; but  as  the  servants
of  God.  Honour  all  men  ; love  the  brotherhood ;
fear  God.”


44


MASONIC  CHART.


SECTION  FIRST.

The  first  section  explains  the  manner  of  opening  a
Mark  Master’s  Lodge;  and  recapitulates  the  mystic
ceremony  of  the  preparatory  circumstance  of  intro-
ducing a candidate.  The  number  of  artists  employed  in
building  the  Temple  is  specified ; and  the  progress
they  made  in  architecture,  is  remarked  ; and  it  ends
with  a beautiful  display  of  the  manner  in  which  one  of
the  principal  events  originated,  which  characterizes
this  degree.

SECTION  SECOND.

In  the  second  section  is  recited  the  mode  of  advanc-
ing a candidate  to  this  degree — By  which  the  mark
master  is  instructed  in  the  origin  and  history  of  the
Degree,  and  in  the  indispensable  obligations  he  is  un-
der to  stretch  forth  his  assisting  hand  for  the  relief  of
an  indigent  and  worthy  brother,  to  a certain  specified
extent.  We  are  here  taught  to  ascribe  praise  to  the
meritorious,  and  to  dispense  rewards  to  the  diligent
and  industrious.

The  following  texts  of  scripture  are  introduced  and
explained.


Psalm  cxviii.  22.

“ The  stone  which  the  builders  refused,  is  become

the  head  stone  of  the  corner.” Matt.  xxi.  42.

“ Did  ye  never  read  in  the  scriptures.  The  stone  which
the  builders  rejected,  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor-
ner?”  Mark  xii.  10.  “And  have  you  not  read

this  scripture,  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,

is  become  the  head  of  the  corner?” Luke  xx.  17.

“ W hat  is  this,  then,  that  is  written.  The  stone  which
the  builders  rejected,  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor-
ner.”


MARK  MASTER.


45


Acts  iv.  11.

“ This  is  the  stone  which  was  set  at  nought  of  you,
builders,  which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner.”

Rev.  of  St.  John  ii.  IT.

“To  him  that  overcometh,  will  I give  to  eat  of  the
hidden  manna ; and  I will  give  him  a white  stone , and
in  the  stone  a new  name  written,  which  no  man  know-
eth,  saving  him  that  receiveth  it.”

Rsv.  iii.  13.

“ He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear.”

2 Chron.  ii.  16.

“ And  we  will  cut  wood  out  of  Lebanon,  as  much
as  thou  shait  need  ; and  we  will  bring  it  to  thee  in
floats  by  sea  to  Joppa,  and  thou  shait  carry  it  up  to
Jerusalem.”

Ezekiel  xliv.  1 and  5.

“ Then  he  brought  me  back  the  way  of  the  gate  of
the  outward  sanctuary,  which  looketh  towards  the
east,  and  it  was  shut.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me.
Son  of  man,  mark  well,  and  behold  with  thine  eyes,
and  hear  with  thine  ears,  all  that  1 say  unto  thee,  con-
cerning all  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,
and  all  the  laws  thereof ; and  mark  well  the  entering
in  of  the  house,  with  every  going  forth  of  the  sanctua-
ry.”

The  working  tools  of  a mark  master,  are  the  chisel
and  mallet.


46


MASONIC  CHART.


The  Chisel

Morally  demonstrates  the  advantages  of  discipline
and  education.  The  mind,  like  the  diamond  in  its  ori-
ginal state,  is  rude  and  unpolished ; but  as  the  effect
of  the  chisel  on  the  external  coat  soon  presents  to  view
the  latent  beauties  of  the  diamond  ; so  education  dis-
covers the  latent  virtues  of  the  mind,  and  draws  them
forth  to  range  the  large  field  of  matter  and  space,  to
display  the  summit  of  human  knowledge,  our  duty  to
God  and  to  man.

The  Mallet

Morally  teaches  to  correct  irregularities,  and  to  re-
duce man  to  a proper  level ; so  that,  by  quiet  deport-
ment, he  may,  in  the  school  of  discipline,  learn  to  be
content. — What  the  mallet  is  to  the  workman,  enlight-
ened reason  is  to  the  passions ; it  curbs  ambition,  it
depresses  envy,  it  moderates  anger,  and  it  encourage
good  dispositions ; whence  arises  among  good  masons
that  comely  order,

**  Which  nothing  earthly  gives,  or  can  destroy,

« The  soul’s  calm  sunshine,  and  the  heart-felt  joy.”


CHARGE  to  he  delivered  when  a candidate  is  ad-
vanced to  the  degree  of  Marie  Master ,
Brother,

I congratulate  you  on  having  been  thought
worthy  of  being  advanced  to  this  honourable  de-
gree of  masonry.  Permit  me  to  impress  it  01*
your  mind,  that  your  assiduity  should  ever  be
commensurate  with  your  duties,  which  become
more  and  more  extensive,  as  you  advance  in  ma-


MARK  MASTER.


47


senry.  In  the  honorable  character  of  mark  mas-
ter mason,  it  is  more  particularly  your  duty  to  en-
deavour to  let  your  conduct  in  the  lodge,  and
among  your  brethren,  be  such  as  may  stand  the
test  of  the  Grand  Overseer’s  square  ; that  you
may  not,  like  the  unfinished  and  imperfect  work
of  the  negligent  and  unfaithful  of  former  times,
be  rejected  and  thrown  aside,  as  unfit  for  that
spiritual  building,  that  house  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens.

While  such  is  your  conduct,  should  misfortunes
assail  you,  should  friends  forsake  you,  should  envy
traduce  your  good  name,  and  malice  persecute
you ; yet  may  you  have  confidence,  that  among
mark  master  masons  you  will  find  friends  who  will
administer  relief  to  your  distresses,  and  comfort
your  afflictions ; ever  bearing  in  mind,  as  a conso-
lation under  all  the  frowns  of  fortune,  and  as  an
encouragement  to  hope  for  better  prospects,  that
the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected , [possessing
merits  to  them  unknown,]  became  the  chief  stone
of  the  corner.

The  following  Song  is  sung  previous  to  closing.


48


MASONIC  CHART.


MARK  MASTER’S  SONG.


work  in-spect,  For  the  Chief  Ar-chi-tect ; If  there  be

:fe:


SZMZZW


o

work  in-spect,  For  the  Chief  Ar-chi-tect ; If  there  be


m


E


:£


#-i*


MARK  MASTER.


49


fkr

|~

m—

•-

r

jL

? P

J

■

1

n * • I

I

m J


P • 1

F

<37  r

1 - f

A

no  d

e-fect,  He  will  ap  - prove.

3

}

m -

•J

r

eH

9—

-m  * -

m

i •

© # • J

T

w

* GT

• A

a

r

• 1

r

no  d

e-fect.  He

will  ap  - prove.

iv  ;

• J

LZi_

7 '

- ¥

■

1 *4

r

r

rj*  *-]

p

7 '

. -P=?t

i

L

You  who  have  pass’d  the  square,
For  jour  rewards  prepare,

Join  heart  and  hand;
Each  with  his  mark  in  view ,
March  with  the  just  and  true ;
Wages  to  you  are  due.

At  your  command.

Hiram,  the  widow’s  son,

Sent  unto  Solomon

Our  great  key-stone ;
On  it  appears  the  name
Which  raises  high  the  fame
Of  all  to  whom  the  same
Is  truly  known.

Now  to  the  westward  move,
Where,  full  of  strength  and  love,
Hiram  doth  stand ;

But  if  impostors  are
Mix’d  with  the  worthy  there,
Caution  them  to  beware

Of  the  right  hand.

Now  to  the  praise  of  those
Who  triumph’d  o’er  the  foes
Of  mason’s  art ;


50


MASONIC  CHART.


To  the  praiseworthy  three,

Who  founded  this  degree ;

May  all  their  virtues  be

Deep  in  our  hearts.

Previous  to  closing,  the  following  Parable  is  re-
cited.

Matthew  xx.  1 — 16.

“ For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a man  that
is  an  householder,  which  went  out  early  in  the  morn-
ing to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard.  And  when  he
had  agreed  with  the  labourers  for  a penny  a day,  he
sent  them  into  his  vineyard.  And  he  went  out  about
the  third  hour,  and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the
market  place,  and  said  unto  them.  Go  ye  also  into  the
vineyard,  and  whatsoever  is  right,  I will  give  you. —
And  they  went  their  way.  And  again  he  went  out
about  the  sixth  and  ninth  hour,  and  did  likewise.  And
about  the  eleventh  hour,  he  went  out  and  found  others
standing  idle,  and  saith  unto  them,  Why  stand  ye
here  all  the  day  idle  ? They  say  unto  him,  Because
no  man  hath  hired  us.  He  saith  unto  them,  Go  ye
also  into  the  vineyard,  and  whatsoever  is  right,  that
shall  ye  receive.  So,  when  even  was  come,  the  lord
of  the  vineyard  saith  unto  his  steward,  Call  the  la-
bourers, and  give  them  their  hire,  beginning  from  the
last  unto  the  first.  And  when  they  came,  that  were
hired  about  the  eleventh  hour,  they  received  every
man  a penny.  But  when  the  first  came,  they  sup-
posed that  they  should  have  received  more,  and  they
likewise  received  every  man  a penny.  And  when
they  received  it,  they  murmured  against  the  good  man
of  the  house,  saying,  These  last  have  wrought  but  one


MARK  MASTER.


51


hour,  and  thou  hast  made  them  equal  unto  us,  which
have  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day.  But  he
answered  one  of  them,  and  said,  Friend,  I do  thee  no
wrong ; didst  thou  not  agree  with  me  for  a penny  ?
Take  that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way  ; I will  give  unto
this  last  even  as  unto  thee.  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to
do  what  I will  with  my  own  ? Is  thine  eye  evil,  be-
cause I am  good  P So  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the
first  last:  for  many  be  called,  but  few  chosen.”


PRESENT,  or  PAST  MASTER’S
DEGREE.


THIS  degree  treats  of  the  government  of  our
society ; the  disposition  of  our  rulers  ; and  illustrates
their  requisite  qualifications.  It  includes  the  ceremo-
ny of  opening  and  closing  lodges  in  the  several  pre-
ceding degrees  : it  comprehends  the  ceremonies  and
forms  of  installations,  consecrations,  laying  the  foun-
dation stones  of  public  buildings,  and  also  at  dedica-
tions and  at  funerals,  by  a variety  of  particulars  ex-
planatory of  those  ceremonies.

SECTION  FIRST.

This  section  contains  the  form  of  a petition  for  let-
ters of  dispensation,  or  a warrant  of  constitution  for  a
lodge,  empowering  them  to  work.  The  ceremonies  of
Constitution  and  Consecration  are  considered,  with
the  form  of  a Grand  Procession.

Form  of  Petition  for  a Charter  or  Warrant  to  estab-
lish anew  Lodge.

To  the  Most  Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State

of  — the  petitioners  hereof  humbly  shew,  that

they  are  ancient , free , and  accepted  Master  Masons.
Having  the  prosperity  of  the  Fraternity  at  heart,  they
are  willing  to  exert  their  best  endeavors  to  promote
and  diffuse  the  genuine  principles  of  Masonry.


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


53


For  the  convenience  of  their  respective  dwellings,
and  for  other  good  reasons,  they  are  desirous  of  form-
ing a new  Lodge  in  the  town  of , to  be  named

. In  consequence  of  this  desire,  and  for  the  good

of  the  craft,  they  pray  for  a Charter , or  Warranty  to
empower  them  to  assemble  as  a legal  Lodge,  to  dis-
charge the  duties  of  masonry,  in  the  several  degrees
of  Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow-Craft,  and  Master  Ma-
son, in  a regular  and  constitutional  manner,  according
to  the  ancient  form  of  the  fraternity,  and  the  laws
and  regulations  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  That  they  have
nominated  and  do  recommend  A.  B.  to  be  the  first
master,  C.  D.  to  be  the  first  senior  warden,  and  E.  F.
to  be  the  first  junior  warden  of  said  Lodge:  that,  if
the  prayer  of  the  petition  should  be  granted,  they
promise  a strict  conformity  to  all  the  constitutional
laws,  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

This  petition  must  be  signed  by  at  least  seven  reg-
ular masons,  and  recommended  by  some  lodge  contig-
uous to  the  place  where  the  new  lodge  is  to  be  held.
It  must  be  delivered  to  the  Grand  Secretary,  whose
duty  it  is  to  lay  it  before  the  Grand  Lodge.

After  a charter  is  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  the
Grand  Master  appoints  a day  and  hour  for  constitu-
ting and  consecrating  the  new  lodge,  and  for  install-
ing the  master,  wardens,  and  other  officers.  The
Grand  Master  has  power  to  appoint  some  worthy  Past
Master , with  full  power  to  consecrate,  constitute,  and
instal  the  petitioners.

Ceremony  of  Constitution  and  Consecration.

On  the  day  and  hour  appointed,  the  Grand  Master
and  his  officers  meet  in  a convenient  room  near  to  the
Lodge  to  be  constituted,  and  open  in  the  third  degree.

5*


54


MASONIC  CHART.


After  the  officers  in  the  new  lodge  are  examined,  the)'
send  a messenger  to  the  Grand  Master,  with  the  fol-
lowing message  : viz.

Most  Worshipful,

The  officers  and  brethren  of Lodge,  who  are

now  assembled  at  — — — , have  instructed  me  to  in-
form you,  that  the  Most  Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  was
pleased  to  grant  them  a Charter,  authorizing  them  to
form  and  open  a lodge  of  free  and  accepted  masons  in

the  town  of : They  are  now  desirous  that

their  lodge  should  be  consecrated,  and  their  officers
installed  in  due  and  ancient  form ; for  which  purpose
they  are  now  met,  and  await  the  pleasure  of  the  Most
Worshipful  Grand  Master.

When  notice  is  given,  the  Grand  Lodge  walk  in
procession  to  the  hall  of  the  new  Lodge.  When  the
Grand  Master  enters,  the  grand  honours  are  given  by
the  new  lodge  ; the  officers  of  which  resign  their  seats
to  the  grand  officers,  and  take  their  several  stations  on
the  left.

The  necessary  cautions  are  given ; and  all,  except-
ing Present  or  Past  Masters  of  lodges,  are  re-
quested to  retire  until,  the  Master  of  the  new  lodge
is  inducted  into  the  Oriental  Chair  of  Solomon.  He
is  then  bound  to  the  faithful  performance  of  his
trust,  and  invested  with  the  characteristics  of  the
chair.

Upon  due  notice,  the  Grand  Marshal  re-conducts
the  brethren  into  the  hall  \ and  all  take  their  places,
except  the  members  of  the  new  lodge,  who  form  a
procession  on  one  side  of  the  hall.  As  they  advance,
the  Grand  Master  addresses  them.

“ Brethren , behold  your  Master .”

They  make  the  proper  salutations  as  they  pass.


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


55


A grand  procession  is  then  formed,  in  the  following
order ; viz.

Tyler  with  a drawn  Sword  ;

Two  Stewards  with  white  Rods  ;

Entered  Apprentices ;

Fellow- Crafts  ;

Master  Masons ;

Stewards ;

& Junior  Deacons ;

3 Senior  Deacons ;

SI  Secretaries ;

Treasurers ;

Past  Wardens ;

Junior  Wardens ;

Senior  Wardens ;

Past  Masters ;

Mark  Masters ;

Royal  Arch  Masons ;

Select  Masters ;

Knights  Templars  ;

Masters  of  Lodges.

The  New  Lodge .

Tyler  with  a drawn  Sword  ;

Stewards  with  white  Rods  ;

Entered  Apprentices ;

Fellow-Crafts ;

Master  Masons ;

Junior  and  Senior  Deacons  ;

Secretary  and  Treasurer ;

Two  Brethren,  carrying  the  Flooring  * or  Lodge  y


Carpet,


56


MASONIC  CHART.


Junior  and  Senior  Wardens  ;

The  Holy  Writings,  carried  by  the  oldest  or  some
[ suitable  member,  not  in  office  ;

The  W.  Master :

Music.

The  Grand  Lodge.

Grand  Tyler  with  drawn  Sword  ;

Grand  Stewards  with  white  Rods ;

A Brother  carrying  a Golden  Vessel  of  Corn  ;*
Two  Brethren,  carrying  the  Silver  Vessels,  one  of
| Wine,  the  other  of  Oil ;

Grand  Secretaries  ;

Grand  Treasurers  ;

A burning  Taper,  borne  by  a Past  Master ;

A Past  Master  bearing  the  Holy  Writings,  Square  and
Compasses,  supported  by  two  Stewards
with  white  Rods  ; of

Two  burning  Tapers,  borne  by  two  Past  Masters  ;
The  Tuscan,  and  Composite  Orders  ;

The  Doric,  Ionic,  and  Corinthian  Orders  ;

Past  Grand  Wardens ;

Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters  ;

2 Past  Grand  Masters  ;

E The  Globes  ;

Clergy  and  Orator  ;

II.  W.  Junior  and  Senior  Grand  Wardens  ;

R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master  ;

The  Master  of  the  oldest  Lodge,  carrying  the  Book  of
Constitutions  ;

'The  M.  W.  Grand  Master  :

* Wheat


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


57


The  Grand  Deacons,  on  a line  seven  feet  apart,  on  the
right  and  left  of  the  Grand  Master,  with  black  rods  ;

Grand  Sword  Bearer,  with  a drawn  Sword ;

Two  Stewards,  with  white  rods.

The  Marshals  conduct  the  procession  to  the  church,
or  house,  where  the  services  are  to  be  performed.
When  the  front  of  the  procession  arrives  at  the  door,
they  halt,  open  to  the  right  and  left,  and  face  inward  ;
while  the  Grand  Master  and  others,  in  succession,
pass  through  and  enter  the  house.

A platform  is  erected  in  front  of  the  pulpit,  and
provided  with  seats  for  the  accommodation  of  the
Grand  Officers.

The  Holy  Bible,  Square  and  Compasses,  and  Book
of  Constitutions,  are  placed  upon  a table  in  front  of
the  Grand  Master : the  flooring  is  then  spread  in  the
centre,  upon  the  platform,  covered  with  white  satin  or
linen,  and  encompassed  by  the  three  tapers,  and  the
vessels  of  corn , winey  and  oil.

SERVICES.

1.  A piece  of  Music.

2.  Prayer.

3.  An  Oration.

4.  A piece  of  Music.

5.  The  Grand  Marshal  forms  the  officers  and  mem
bers  of  the  new  Lodge  in  front  of  the  Grand  Master.
The  Deputy  Grand  Master  addresses  the  Grand  Mas-
ter as  follows :

Most  W^orshipful,

A number  of  brethren,  duly  instructed  in  the  mys-
teries of  Masonry,  having  assembled  together  at  stated
periods,  by  virtue  of  a dispensation  granted  them  for
that  purpose,  do  now  desire  to  be  constituted  into  a
regular  lodge , agreeably  to  the  ancient  usages  and  cus-
toms of  the  fraternity.


58


MASONIC  CHART.


The  dispensation  and  records  are’presented  to  the
Grand  Master,  who  examines  the  records,  and,  if  found
correct,  proclaims  :

The  records  appear  to  be  correct,  and  are  approved.
Upon  due  deliberation,  the  Grand  Lodge  have  granted
the  brethren  of  this  new  Lodge  a charter,  establishing
and  confirming  them  in  the  rights  and  privileges  of  a
regular  constituted  Lodge  ; which  the  Grand  Secreta-
ry will  now  read.

After  the  charter  is  read,  the  Grand  Master  then
says.

We  shall  now  proceed,  according  to  ancient  usage,
to  constitute  these  brethren  into  a regular  Lodge.

Whereupon  the  several  officers  of  the  new  Lodge
deliver  up  their  jewels  and  badges  to  their  Master,
who  presents  them,  with  his  own,  to  the  Deputy  Grand
Master ; and  he  to  the  Grand  Master.

The  Deputy  Grand  Master  presents  the  Master
Elect  to  the  Grand  Master,  saying.

Most  Worshipful,

I present  you  Brother , whom  the  members

of  the  Lodge,  now  to  be  constituted,  have  chosen  for
their  Master.

The  Grand  Master  asks  them  if  they  remain  satis-
fied with  their  choice.  [ They  bow  in  token  of  as  sent.  ]

The  Master  elect  then  presents,  severally,  his  war-
dens and  other  officers,  naming  them  and  their  respec-
tive offices.  The  Grand  Master  asks  the  brethren  if
they  remain  satisfied  with  each  and  all  of  them.  [ They,
bow  as  before.]

The  officers  and  members  of  the  new  Lodge  form  in
front  of  the  Grand  Master  ; and  the  business  of  Con-
secration commences  with  solemn  music.


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER,


59


6.  Ceremony  of  Consecration.

The  Grand  Master,  attended  bj  the  Grand  Officers
and  the  Grand  Chaplain,  form  themselves  in  order
round  the  lodge — all  devoutly  kneeling.

7.  A piece  of  solemn  music  is  performed  while  the
Lodge  is  uncovered.

After  which,  the  first  clause  of  the  Consecration
Prayer  is  rehearsed,  which  is  follows  :

“ Great  Architect  of  the  universe  ! Maker  and
Ruler  of  all  worlds  ! deign,  from  thy  celestial  tem-
ple, from  realms  of  light  and  glory,  to  bless  us  in
all  the  purposes  of  our  present  assembly  ! We
humbly  invoke  thee  to  give  us  at  this,  and  at  all
times,  wisdom,  in  all  our  doings,  strength  of  mind
in  all  our  difficulties,  and  the  beauty  of  harmony
in  all  our  communications  ! Permit  us,  O thou
Author  of  light  and  life,  great  Source  of  love  and
happiness,  to  erect  this  Lodge,  and  now  solemnly
to  consecrate  it  to  the  honour  of  thy  glory  !

“ Glory  be  to  God  on  high.”

[Response  by  the  brethren.]

44  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever
shall  be  ; world  without  end.  Amen.”

The  Deputy  Grand  Master  takes  the  Golden  Vessel
of  Corn,  and  the  Senior  and  Junior  Grand  Wardens
take  the  Silver  Vessels  of  Wine  and  Oil,  and  sprinkle
the  elements  of  consecration  upon  the  Lodge.

[The  Grand  Chaplain  then  continues :]

44  Grant,  O Lord  our  God,  that  those  who  are
now  about  to  be  invested  with  the  government  of
this  Lodge,  may  be  endued  with  wisdom  to  in-


60


MASONIC  CHART.


struct  their  brethren  in  all  their  duties.  May  bro
iherly  love , relief,  and  truth , always  prevail  among
the  members  of  this  Lodge  ; and  may  this  bond  of
anion  continue  to  strengthen  the  Lodges  through-
out the  world !

“ Bless  all  our  brethren,  wherever  dispersed  ;
and  grant  speedy  relief  to  all  who  are  either  op-
pressed or  distressed.

“ We  affectionately  commend  to  thee,  all  the
members  of  thy  whole  family.  May  they  increase
in  grace,  in  the  knowledge  of  thee,  and  in  the  love
of  each  other.

“ Finally  : may  we  finish  all  our  work  here  be-
low, with  thy  approbation  ; and  then  have  our
transition  from  this  earthly  abode  to  thy  heavenly
temple  above,  there  to  enjoy  light,  glory  and  bliss,
ineffable  and  eternal !

“ Glory  be  to  God  on  high.’*

[Response  by  the  brethren.]

“ As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever
shall  be.  So  mote  it  be.  Amen.”

8.  A piece  of  solemn  music  is  performed  while  the
Lodge  is  covered.

9.  The  Grand  Chaplain  then  dedicates  the  Lodge
in  the  following  terms  :

“To  the  memory  of  the  HOLY  ST.  JOHNS,
we  dedicate  this  Lodge.  May  every  brother  re-
vere their  character,  and  imitate  their  virtues.

“ Glory  be  to  God  on  high.”


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


61


[Response.]

“ As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever
shall  be,  world  without  end.

“ So  mote  it  be.  Amen.”

10.  A piece  of  music  is  performed,  while  the  breth-
ren of  the  new  Lodge  advance  in  procession  to  salute
the  Grand  Lodge,  with  their  hands  crossed  upon  their
breasts,  and  bowing  as  they  pass.  They  then  take
their  places  as  they  were.

11.  The  Grand  Master  then  rises,  and  constitutes

the  new  Lodge  in  the  form  following : •

“ In  the  name  of  the  Most  Worshipful  Grand
Lodge,  I now  constitute  and  form  you,  my  belov-
ed brethren,  into  a regular  Lodge  of  free  and  ac-
cepted Masons.  From  henceforth  I empower  you
to  meet  as  a regular  lodge,  constituted  in  conform-
ity to  the  rites  of  our  order,  and  the  charges  of  our
ancient  and  honourable  fraternity  ; — and  may  the
Supreme  Architect  of  the  universe  prosper,  direct
and  counsel  you,  in  all  your  doings.

[Response.]

u So  mote  it  be.  Amen.”

SECTION  SECOND.

Ceremony  of  Installation .

The  Grand  Master,  or  presiding  officer,  addresses
the  Master  Elect  in  the  words  following,  viz.

Brother,

Previous  to  your  investiture,  it  is  necessary  that
you  should  signify  your  assent  to  those  ancient


62


MASONIC  OH  ART.


charges  and  regulations,  which  point  out  the  duty
of  a Master  of  a Lodge.

I.  You  agree  to  be  a good  man  and  true,  and
strictly  to  obey  the  moral  law.

II.  You  agree  to  be  a peaceable  subject,  and
cheerfully  to  conform  to  the  laws  of  the  country
in  which  yOu  reside.

III.  You  promise  not  to  be  concerned  in  plots
and  conspiracies  against  government ; but  patient-
ly to  submit  to  the  decisions  of  the  supreme  legis-
lature.

IV.  You  agree  to  pay  a proper  respect  to  the
civil  magistrates,  to  work  diligently,  live  credita-
bly, and  act  honorably  by  all  men.

V.  You  agree  to  hold  in  veneration,  the  origin-
al rules  and  patrons  of  the  order  of  masonry,  and
their  regular  successors,  supreme  and  subordinate,
according  to  their  stations ; and  to  submit  to  the
awards  and  resolutions  of  your  brethren,  when
convened,  in  every  case  consistent  with  the  con-
stitutions of  the  order.

VI.  You  agree  to  avoid  private  piques  and
quarrels,  and  to  guard  against  intemperance  and
excess.

VII.  You  agree  to  be  cautious  in  carriage  and
behaviour,  courteous  to  your  brethren,  and  faithful
td  your  lodge.

VIII.  You  promise  to  respect  genuine  brethren,
and  to  discountenance  impostors,  and  all  dissenters
from  the  original  plan  of  masonry.


SHE  SENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.  Co

IX.  You  agree  to  promote  the  general  good  of
society,  to  cultivate  the  social  virtges,  and  to  prop-
agate the  knowledge  of  the  art.

X.  You  promise  to  pay  homage  to  the  Grand
Master  for  the  time  being,  and  to  his  officers  when
duly  installed  ; and  strictly  to  conform  to  every
edict  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  or  general  assembly  of
masons,  that  is  not  subversive  of  the  principles  and
groundwork  of  masonry.

XL  You  admit,  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of
any  men,  or  body  of  men,  to  make  innovations  in
the  body  of  masonry.

XII.  You  promise  a regular  attendance  on  the
committees  and  communications  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  on  receiving  proper  notice,  and  to  pay
attention  to  all  the  duties  of  masonry,  on  conven-
ient occasions.

XIII.  You  admit,  that  no  new  lodge  shall  be
formed  without  permission  of  the  Grand  Lodge  :
and  that  no  countenance  be  given  to  an  irregular
lodge,  or  to  any  person  clandestinely  initiated
therein,  being  contrary  to  the  ancient  charges  of
the  order.

XIV.  You  admit,  that  no  person  can  be  regu-
larly made  a mason  in,  or  admitted  a member  of,
any  regular  lodge,  without  previous  notice,  and
due  inquiry  into  his  character.

XV.  You  agree  that  no  visiters  shall  be  re-
ceived into  your  lodge,  without  due  examination,


64


MASONIC  CHART.


and  producing  proper  vouchers  of  their  having
been  initiated  into  a regular  lodge.

These  are  the  regulations  of  free  and  accepted  ma-
sons.

The  presiding  officer  then  addresses  the  Master  as
follows  :

Do  you  submit  to  these  charges,  and  promise
to  support  these  regulations,  as  masters  have  done
in  all  ages  before  you  ?

The  Master  is  to  answer,  1 do.

The  presiding  officer  then  addresses  him  :

Brother  A.  B.

In  consequence  of  your  cheerful  conformity  to
the  charges  and  regulations  of  the  order,  you  are
now  to  be  installed  Master  of  this  # lodge,  in  full
confidence  of  your  care,  skill,  and  capacity  to
govern  the  same.

[The  new  master  is  then  regularly  invested  with
the  insignia  of  his  office,  and  the  furniture  and  imple-
ments of  his  lodge.]

The  vai-ipus  implements  of  the  profession  are
emblematical  of  our  conduct  in  life,  and  upon  this
occasion  are  carefully  enumerated.

The  Holy  Writings , that  great  light  in  masonry,
will  guide  you  to  all  truth : it  will  direct  your  paths
to  the  temple  of  happiness,  and  point  out  to  you
the  whole  duty  of  man.

* It  this  lodge  is  installed  for  the  first  time,  it  is  called. 11  Tfni
neic  lodge  "


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


65


The  Square  teaches  us  to  regulate  our  actions
by  rule  and  line,  and  harmonize  our  conduct  by
the  principles  of  morality  and  virtue.

The  Compasses  teach  us  to  limit  our  desires  in
every  station  ; that,  rising  to  eminence  by  merit,
we  may  live  respected,  and  die  regretted.

The  Rule  directs  that  we  should  punctually  ob-
serve  our  duty ; press  forward  in  the  path  of  vir-
tue, and,  neither  inclining  to  the  right  nor  to  the
left,  in  all  our  actions  have  (eternity)  in  view.

The  Line  teaches  the  criterion  of  moral  recti-
tude, to  avoid  dissimulation  in  conversation  and
action,  and  to  direct  our  steps  to  the  path  which
leads  to  a glorious  immortality.

The  Book  of  Constitutions , you  are  to  search  at
all  times . Cause  it  to  be  read  in  your  lodge,  that
none  may  pretend  ignorance  of  the  excellent  pre-
cepts it  enjoins.

You  will  also  receive  in  charge  the  By-Laws
of  your  lodge,  which  you  are  to  see  carefully  and
punctually  executed.

CHARGE  upon  the  Installation  of  the  Master  of
a Lodge.

Worshipful  Master  :

Being  appointed  Master  of  this  lodge,  you  can-
not be  insensible  of  the  obligations  which  devolve
on  you,  as  their  head  ; nor  of  your  responsibility
for  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  important  duties
annexed  to  your  appointment,

6*


$6


MASONIC  CHART.


The  honour,  reputation,  and  usefulness  of  your
lodge,  will  materially  depend  on  the  skill  and  as-
siduity with  which  you  manage  its  concerns ;
while  the  happiness  of  its  members  will  be  gene-
rally promoted,  in  proportion  to  the  zeal  and  abil-
ity with  which  you  propagate  the  genuine  princi-
ples of  our  institution.

For  a pattern  of  imitation,  consider  the  great
luminary  of  nature,  which,  rising  in  the  East,  reg-
ularly diffuses  light  and  lustre  to  all  within  its
circle.  In  like  manner,  it  is  your  province  to
spread  and  communicate  light  and  instruction  to
the  brethren  of  your  lodge.  Forcibly  impress  up-
on them  the  dignity  and  high  importance  of  ma-
sonry, and  seriously  admonish  them  never  to  dis-
grace it.  Charge  them  to  practice  out  of  the  lodge,
those  duties  which  are  taught  in  it ; and  by  amia1*
ble,  discreet,  and  virtuous  conduct,  to  convince
mankind  of  the  goodness  of  the  institutition  ; so
that,  when  any  one  is  said  to  be  a member  of  it,
the  world  may  know  that  he  is  one  to  whom  the
burthened  heart  may  pour  out  its  sorrows  ; to
whom  distress  may  prefer  its  suit ; whose  hand  is
guided  by  justice,  and  his  heart  expanded  by  be-
nevolence. In  short,  by  a diligent  observance  of
the  by-laws  of  your  lodge,  the  constitutions  of  ma-
sonry, and,  above  all,  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which
are  given  as  a rule  and  guide  to  your  faith,  you
will  be  enabled  to  acquit  yourself  with  honour  and


present  or  past  master.


67


reputation,  and  lay  up  a crown  of  rejoicing , which
shall  continue  when  time  shall  be  no  more.

The  subordinate  officers  are  then  severally  invested
by  the  presiding  officer,  who  delivers  each  of  them  a
short  Charge,  as  follows  ; viz.

The  Senior  Warden .

Brother  C.  D.

You  are  appointed  Senior  Warden  of  this  lodge,
and  are  now  invested  with  the  ensign  of  your  office.

The  Level  demonstrates  that  we  are  descended
from  the  same  stock,  partake  of  the  same  nature,
and  share  the  same  hope  ; and  though  distinctions
among  men  are  necessary  to  preserve  subordina-
tion, yet  no  eminence  of  station  should  make  us
forget  that  we  are  brethren  : for  he  who  is  placed
on  the  lowest  spoke  of  fortune’s  wheel,  may  be
entitled  to  our  regard  ; because  a time  will  come,
and  the  wisest  knows  not  how  soon,  when  all  dis-
tinction, but  that  of  goodness,  shall  cease  ; and
death,  the  grand  leveller  of  human  greatness,  re-
duce us  to  the  same  state.

Your  regular  attendance  on  our  stated  meetings,
is  essentially  necessary.  In  the  absence  of  the
master,  you  are  to  govern  this  lodge  ; in  his  pres-
ence, you  are  to  assist  him  in  the  government  of
it.  I firmly  rely  on  your  knowledge  of  masonry,
and  attachment  to  the  lodge,  for  the  faithful  dis-
charge of  the  duties  of  this  important  trust. —
Look  well  to  the  W est !


S8


MASONIC  CHART.


The  Junior  Warden.

Brother  E.  F.

You  are  appointed  Junior  Warden  of  this  lodge,
and  are  now  invested  with  the  badge  of  your  office.

The  Plumb  admonishes  us  to  walk  uprightly  in
our  several  stations ; to  hold  the  scales  of  justice
in  equal  poise ; to  observe  the  just  medium  be-
tween intemperance  and  pleasure ; and  to  make
our  passions  and  prejudices  coincide  with  the  line
of  our  duty.

To  you  is  committed  the  superintendance  of
the  craft,  during  the  hours  of  refreshment : — it  is
therefore  indispensably  necessary,  that  you  should
not  only  be  temperate  and  discreet,  in  the  indul-
gence of  your  own  inclinations,  but  carefully  ob-
serve that  none  of  the  craft  be  suffered  to  convert
the  purposes  of  refreshment  into  intemperance
and  excess.

Your  regular  and  punctual  attendance  is  partic-
ularly requested  ; and  I have  no  doubt  that  you
will  faithfully  execute  the  duty  which  you  owe  to

your  present  appointment. Look  well  to  the

South !

The  Treasurer .

Brother  G.  H.

You  are  appointed  Treasurer  of  this  lodge.  It
is  your  duty  to  receive  all  monies  from  the  hands
of  the  Secretary,  make  due  entries  of  the  same,


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


69


and  pay  them  out  by  order  of  the  Worshipful
Master  and  the  consent  of  the  lodge.

I trust  your  regard  for  the  fraternity  will  prompt
you  to  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  duties  of  your
office.

The  Secretary.

Brother  J.  K.

You  are  appointed  Secretary  of  this  lodge.  It
is  your  duty  to  observe  all  the  proceedings  of  the
lodge  ; make  a fair  record  of  all  things  proper  to
be  written  ; to  receive  all  monies  due  the  lodge,
and  pay  them  over  to  the  Treasurer,  and  take  his
receipt  for  the  same.

Your  good  inclination  to  masonry  and  this  lodge,
I hope,  will  induce  you  to  discharge  your  office
with  fidelity  ; and  by  so  doing,  you  will  merit  the
esteem  and  applause  of  your  brethren.

Senior  and  Junior  Deacons .

Brothers  L.  M.  and  N.  O.

You  are  appointed  Deacons  of  this  lodge.  To
you,  with  such  assistance  as  may  be  necessary,  is
entrusted  the  examination  of  visitors. — It  is  also
your  province  to  attend  on  the  master  and  war-
dens, and  to  act  as  their  proxies  in  the  active  du-
ties of  the  lodge  ; such  as  in  the  reception  of  can-
didates into  the  different  degrees  of  masonry,  and
in  the  immediate  practice  of  our  rites.  The  Square
$nd  Compasses,  as  badges  of  your  office,  I trust  to


MASONIC  CHAliX*


:q

your  care,  not  doubting  your  vigilance  and  atten-
tion.

The  Stewards .

Brothers  P.  Q.  and  R.  S.

You  are  appointed  Stewards  of  this  lodge.  The
duties  of  your  office  are,  to  assist  in  the  collection
of  dues  and  subscriptions ; to  keep  an  account  of
the  lodge  expenses  ; to  see  that  the  tables  are  pro-
perly furnished  at  refreshment,  and  that  every
brother  is  suitably  provided  for  ; and  generally  to
assist  the  deacons  and  other  officers  in  performing
their  duties.

Your  regular  and  early  attendance  will  afford
the  best  proof  of  your  zeal  and  attachment  to  the
lodge.

The  Tyler.

Brother :

You  are  appointed  Tyler  of  this  lodge  ; and  I
invest  you  with  the  implement  of  your  office.  As
the  sword  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Tyler,  to
enable  him  effectually  to  guard  against  the  ap-
proach of  cowans  and  evesdroppers,  and  suffer
none  to  pass  or  repass  but  such  as  are  duly  quali-
fied ; so  it  should  morally  serve  as  a constant  ad-
monition to  us,  to  set  a guard  at  the  entrance  of
our  thoughts  ; to  place  a watch  at  the  door  of  our
lips ; to  post  a centinel  at  the  avenue  of  our  ac-
tions : thereby  excluding  every  unqualified  amd


RUE  SENT  OK  PAST  I^ASTEH.  7f

run  worthy  thought,  word  and  deed  ; and  preserving
consciences  void  of  offence  towards  God  and  to-
wards man.

Your  early  and  punctual  attendance  will  afford
the  best  proof  of  your  zeal  for  the  institution.

CHARGE  to  the  Brethren  of  the  Lodge.

Such  is  the  nature  of  our  constitution,  that  as
some  must  of  necessity  rule  and  teach,  so  others
must  of  course  learn  to  submit  and  obey.  Humil-
ity in  both  is  an  essential  duty.  The  officers  who
are  appointed  to  govern  your  lodge,  are  sufficient-
ly conversant  with  the  rules  of  propriety,  and  the
laws  of  the  institution,  to  avoid  exceeding  the
powers  with  which  they  are  entrusted  ; and  you
are  of  too  generous  dispositions  to  envy  their  pre-
ferment. I therefore  trust  that  you  will  have  but
one  aim,  to  please  each  other,  and  unite  in  the
grand  design  of  being  happy,  and  communicating
happiness.

Finally,  my  brethren,  as  this  association  has
been  formed  and  perfected  with  so  much  unanimity
and  concord,  in  w hich  we  greatly  rejoice,  so  may
it  long  continue.  May  you  long  enjoy  every  sat-
isfaction and  delight  which  disinterested  friendship
can  afford.  May  kindness  and  brotherly  affection
distinguish  your  conduct,  as  men,  and  as  masons.
Within  your  peaceful  walls,  may  your  children’s
children  celebrate  with  joy  and  gratitude,  the


72


MASONIC  CHART.


transactions  of  this  auspicious  solemnity.  And
may  the  tenets  of  our  profession  be  transmitted
through  your  lodge,  pure  and  unimpaired,  from
generation  to  generation.

12.  The  Grand  Marshal  then  proclaims  the  new
Lodge  in  the  following  manner,  viz  :

In  the  name  of  the  Most  Worshipful  Grand

Lodge  of  the  State  of , I proclaim  this  new

Lodge  by  the  name  of Lodge,  No  — , to  be

legally  constituted,  consecrated,  and  the  officers
thereof  duly  installed.

13.  A piece  of  Music  is  then  performed.

14.  Benediction.

The  procession  is  then  formed,  and  returns  in  due
form  to  the  hall  whence  it  set  out.

The  W.  Master  having  been  previously  inducted
into  the  Oriental  Chair  of  Solomon,  all  but  master
masons  are  caused  to  retire.

A procession  is  then  formed,  and  passes  three  times
round  the  hall  ; and  upon  passing  the  master,  pays
him  due  homage  by  the  usual  honours,  in  the  different
degrees.

During  the  procession  passing  round,  the  following
song  is  sung.

HAIL  MASONRY  divine!

Glory  of  ages  shine  ;

Long  may’st  thou  reign  ;

Where’er  thy  lodges  stand,

May  they  have  great;  command
And  always  grace  the  land.

Thou  Art  divine;


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.  75

Great  fabrics  still  arise,

And  grace  the  azure  skies;

Great  are  thy  schemes :

Matchless,  beyond  compare;

No  art  with  thee  can  share,

Thou  Art  divine.

Hiram,  the  architect.

Did  all  the  craft  direct
How  they  should  build  :

Soi’mon,  great  Israel’s  king,

Did  mighty  blessings  bring,

And  left  us  room  to  sing,

Hail,  royal  Art !

The  G-and  Master  then  directs  the  Grand  Marshal
to  form  the  procession ; when  the  Grand  Lodge  walk
to  their  own  hall,  and  both  Lodges  are  closed  in  due
form.


SECTION  THIRD.

This  section  contains  the  ceremony  observed  on
laying  the  Foundation  Stones  of  Public  Structures.

This  ceremony  is  conducted  by  the  M.  W.  Grand
Master  and  his  officers,  assisted  by  such  officers  and
members  of  subordinate  Lodges,  as  can  conveniently
attend.  The  chief  magistrate,  and  other  civil  officers
of  the  place  where  the  building  is  to  be  erected,  also
generally  attend  on  the  occasion.

At  the  time  appointed,  the  Grand  Lodge  is  con*
vened  in  some  suitable  place.  A band  of  martial  music
is  provided,  and  the  brethren  appear  in  the  insignia  of
the  order.

The  Lodge  is  then  opened  by  the  Grand  Master,
and  the  rules  for  regulating  the  procession  are  read
by  the  Grand  Secretary.  The  Lodge  is  then  adjourn-
ed ; after  which,  the  procession  sets  out  in  due  form ,
in  the  following  order:


74


MASONIC  CHART.


Procession  at  laying  Foundation  Stones,

Two  Tylers  with  drawn  Swords;

Tyler  of  the  older  Lodge  with  do. ;

Two  Stewards  of  the  older  Lodge  ;

Entered  Apprentices ;

Fellow  Crafts  ;

Master  Masons ;

Past  Secretaries  ;

-2  Past  Treasurers;

•gi  Past  Junior  Wardens  ;

^ Past  Senior  W ardens  ;

Mark  Masters;

Past  Masters;

Royal  Arch  Masons ;

Select  Masters;

Knights  Templars  ;

Masters ;

Music ;

Grand  Tyler  with  a drawn  Sword ;

Grand  Stewards  with  white  Rods ;

A Past  Master  with  a Golden  Vessel  containing  Corn ;
Principal  Architect,  with  Square,  Level  and  Plumb;
Two  Past  Masters  with  Silver  Vessels,  one  containing
Wine,  and  the  other  Oil ;

Grand  Secretary  and  Treasurer;

The  Five  Orders ;

One  large  Light  borne  by  a Past  Master ;

The  Holy  Bible,  Square  and  Compasses,  borne  by  a
Master  of  a Lodge,  supported  by  two  Stewards"
on  the  right  and  left ;

Two  large  Lights,  borne  by  two  Past  Masters ;
Grand  Chaplain ;

Clergy  and  Orator;


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


75


Grand  Wardens;

Deputy  Grand  Master ;

The  Master  of  the  oldest  Lodge,  carrying  the  Book
of  Constitutions  on  a velvet  cushion  ;

Grand  Deacons  with  black  Rods,  on  a line  seven
feet  apart ;

Grand  Master;

Two  Stewards  with  white  Rods ;

Grand  Sword-Bearer  with  drawn  Sword.

A Triumphal  Arch  is  usually  erected  at  the  place
where  the  ceremony  is  to  be  performed.  The  proces-
sion passes  through  the  arch  ; and  the  brethren  repair-
ing to  their  stands,  the  Grand  Master  and  his  officers
take  their  places  on  a temporary  platform,  covered
with  carpet.  The  Grand  Master  commands  silence.
An  Ode  on  Masonry  is  sung;  after  which,  the  neces-
sary preparations  are  made  for  laying  the  stone,  on
whicn  is  engraved  the  year  of  masonry,  the  name  of
the  Grand  Master,  &c.  &c.

The  stone  is  raised  up,  by  means  of  an  engine  erect-
ed for  that  purpose,  and  the  Grand  Chaplain  or  Orator
repeats  a short  prayer.

The  Grand  Treasurer  then,  by  the  Grand  Master’s
command,  places  under  the  stone  various  sorts  of  coin
and  medals  of  the  present  age.  Solemn  music  is  in-
troduced, and  the  stone  is  let  down  into  its  place.

The  principal  Architect  then  presents  the  working
tools  to  the  Grand  Master,  who  applies  the  plumb ,
square , and  level , to  the  stone,  in  their  proper  posi-
tions, and  pronounces  it  to  be  well  formed,  true,
and  trusty.

The  Golden  and  Silver  Vessels  are  next  brought  to
the  table,  and  delivered ; the  former  to  the  Deputy
Grand  Master,  and  the  latter  to  the  Grand  Wardens,
who  successively  present  them  to  the  Grand  Master ;
and  he,  according  to  ancient  ceremony,  pours  the  corn,
the  wine,  and  the  oil,  which  they  contain,  on  the  stone,;
saying,


76


MASONIC  CHART.


“ May  the  all-bounteous  Author  of  Nature  bless
the  inhabitants  of  this  place  with  all  the  necessa-
ries, conveniences  and  comforts  of  life  ; assist  in
the  erection  and  completion  of  this  building  ; pro-
tect the  workmen  against  every  accident,  and  long
preserve  this  structure  from  decay  : and  grant  to
us  all,  a supply  of  the  CORN  of  nourishment , the
WINE  of  refreshment , and  the  oil  of  joy  !

“ So  mote  it  be.  Amen.”

He  then  strikes  the  stone  thrice  with  the  mallet ;
and  the  public  grand  honours  of  Masonry  are  given .
The  Grand  Master  then  delivers  over  to  the  Architect
the  various  implements  of  architecture,  entrusting  him
with  the  superintendance  and  direction  of  the  work  ;
after  which,  he  re-ascends  the  platform,  and  an  Ora-
tion suitable  to  the  occasion  is  delivered.

A voluntary  Collection  is  made  for  the  needy  work-
men ; and  the  sum  collected  is  placed  upon  the  stone
by  the  Grand  Treasurer.

A suitable  Song  in  honour  of  masonry  concludes  the
ceremony  ; after  which,  the  procession  returns  to  the
place  whence  it  set  out,  and  the  Lodge  is  closed  in
due  form.

SECTION  FOURTH.

The  fourth  section  contains  the  ceremony  observed
at  the  Dedication  of  the  Free-Masons’  Halls.

On  the  day  appointed,  the  Grand  Master  and  his
officers,  accompanied  by  the  members  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  meet  in  a convenient  room  near  the  place
where  the  ceremony  is  to  be  performed,  and  open  in
due  and  ample  form , in  the  third  degree  of  masonry.

The  Master  of  the  Lodge  to  which  the  Hall  to  be
dedicated  belongs,  being  present,  addresses  the  Grand
Master,  as  follows  r


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


V


Most  Worshipful,

The  brethren  of  Lodge,  being  animated

with  a desire  of  promoting  the  honour  and  inter-
est of  the  craft,  have,  at  great  pains  and  expense,
erected  a Masonic  Hall,  for  their  convenience  and
accommodation.  They  are  desirous  that  the  same
should  be  examined  by  the  M.  W.  Grand  Lodge  ;
and  if  it  should  meet  their  approbation,  that  it
should  be  solemnly  dedicated  to  masonic  purposes,
agreeably  to  ancient  form.

The  Grand  Master  then  directs  the  Grand  Marshal
to  form  the  procession,  when  they  move  forward  to
the  Hall  to  be  dedicated.  On  entering,  the  music
will  continue  while  the  procession  marches  three  times
round  the  hall.

The  lodge,  or  flooring,  is  then  placed  in  the  centre ;
and  the  Grand  Master  having  taken  the  chair,  under
a canopy  of  state,  the  Grand  Officers,  and  the  Mas-
ters and  Wardens  of  the  Lodges,  repair  to  the  places
previously  prepared  for  their  reception.  The  three
Lights,  and  the  Gold  and  Silver  Pitchers,  with  the
corn,  wine  and  oil,  are  placed  round  the  Lodge,  at  the
head  of  which  stands  the  Altar,  with  the  Holy  Bible
open,  and  the  Square  and  Compasses  laid  thereon,
with  the  Charter,  Book  of  Constitutions,  and  By-
Laws.

An  Anthem  is  sung,  and  an  Exordium  on  Masonry
given  ; after  which,  the  Architect  addresses  the  Grand
Master  as  follows:

Most  Worshipful,

Having  been  entrusted  with  the  superintend-
ence and  management  of  the  workmen  employed

in  the  construction  of  this  edifice;  and  having,
7*


78


MASONIC  CHART.


according  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  accomplished
the  task  assigned  me  ; I now  return  my  thanks
for  the  honour  of  this  appointment,  and  beg  leave
to  surrender  up  the  implements  which  were  com-
mitted to  my  care,  when  the  foundation  of  this
fabric  was  laid  ; humbly  hoping,  that  the  exertions
which  have  been  made  on  this  occacion,  will  be
crowned  with  your  approbation,  and  that  of  the
Most  W orshipful  Grand  Lodge.

To  which  the  Grand  Master  makes  the  following
reply :

Brother  Architect,

The  skill  and  fidelity  displayed  in  the  execur
tion  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you,  at  the  commence-
ment of  this  undertaking,  have  secured  the  entire
approbation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  ; and  they  sin-
cerely pray,  that  this  edifice  may  continue  a last-
ing monument  of  the  taste,  spirit,  and  liberality  of
its  founders.

An  Ode  in  honour  of  masonry  is  sung,  accompanied
with  instrumental  music.

The  Deputy  Grand  Master  then  rises,  and  says :

Most  Worshipful,

The  hall  in  which  we  are  now  assembled,  and
the  plan  upon  which  it  has  been  constructed,  hav-
ing met  with  your  approbation,  it  is  the  desire  of
the  fraternity  that  it  should  now  be  dedicated*  ac-
cording to  ancient  form  and  usage.


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


79


Whereupon  the  Grand  Master  requests  all  to  retire,
but  such  as  are  Master  Masons.  A procession  is  then
formed  in  the  following  order,  viz.

Grand  Sword-Bearer ;

A Past  Master,  with  a Light;

A Past  Master,  with  Bible,  Square,  and  Compasses,
on  a velvet  cushion  ;

Two  Past  Masters,  each  with  a Light;

Grand  Secretary  and  Treasurer,  with  Emblems;

Grand  Junior  Warden,  with  Pitcher  of  Corn;

Grand  Senior  Warden,  with  Pitcher  of  Wine ;

Deputy  Grand  Master,  with  Pitcher  of  Oil ;

Grand  Master;

Two  Stewards  with  Rods.

All  the  other  brethren  keep  their  places,  and  assist
in  performing  an  Ode,  which  continues  during  the  pro-
cession, excepting  only  at  the  intervals  of  dedication.
The  Lodge  being  uncovered,  the  first  time  passing
round  it,  the  Junior  Grand  Warden  presents  the  pitch-
er of  Corn  to  the  Grand  Master,  who  pours  it  out  upon,
the  Lodge,  at  the  same  time  pronouncing,

“ In  the  name  of  the  Great  Jehovah,  to  whom
be  all  honour  and  glory,  I do  solemnly  dedicate
this  Hall  to  MASONRY.”

The  grand  honours  are  given .

The  second  time  passing  round  the  Lodge,  the
Grand  Senior  Warden  presents  the  pitcher  of  Wine
to  the  Grand  Master,  who  sprinkles  it  upon  the  Lodge,^
at  the  same  time  saying,  *

“ In  the  name  of  the  Holy  Saint  Johns,  I do
solemnly  dedicate  this  Hall  to  VIRTUE.”

The  grand  honours  are  twice  given .


MASONIC  CHART.


80

The  third  time  passing  round  the  Lodge,  the  Depu-
ty Grand  Master  presents  the  Grand  Master  with  the
pitcher  of  Oil,  who  sprinkles  it  upon  the  Lodge,  say-
ing*

“ In  the  name  of  the  whole  Fraternity,  I do  so-
lemnly dedicate  this  Hall  to  UNIVERSAL  BE-
NEVOLENCE.”

The  grand  honours  are  thrice  given ,

A solemn  Invocation  is  made  to  the  Throne  of
Grace,  by  the  Grand  Chaplain,  and  an  Anthem  sung;
after  which,  the  Lodge  is  covered,  and  the  Grand  Mas-
ter retires  to  his  Chair.

An  Oration  is  then  delivered,  and  the  ceremonies
conclude  with  music.

The  Grand  Lodge  is  then  closed  in  due  and  ample
form.


SECTION  FIFTH.

This  section  contains  the  ceremony  observed  at
Funerals,  according  to  ancient  custom  ; together  with
the  Service  used  on  such  occasions.

No  mason  can  be  interred  with  the  formalities  of  the
order,  unless  he  has  been  raised  to  the  sublime  degree
of  Master  Mason ; as  no  Fellow  Craft  or  Entered  Ap-
prentices are  entitled  to  funeral  obsequies,  nor  to  at-
tend the  masonic  procession,  on  such  occasions.

All  the  brethren,  who  walk  in  procession,  should
observe,  as  much  as  possible,  an  uniformity  in  their
dress.  Decent  mourning  around  the  left  arm,  with
white  stockings,  gloves  and  aprons,  are  most  suitable.

The  Funeral  Service .

The  brethren  being  assembled  at  the  lodge  room,  (or
some  other  convenient  place,)  the  presiding  officer
opens  the  Lodge  in  the  third  degree,  with  the  usual
forms ; and  haying  stated  the  purpose  of  the  meeting*
the  service  begins :


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


81


Master.  “ What  man  is  he  that  liveth,  and  shall
uot  see  death  ? Shall  he  deliver  his  soul  from  the
hand  of  the  grave  ?”

Response.  “ Man  walketh  in  a vain  shadow  ; he
heapeth  up  riches,  and  cannot  tell  who  shall  gather
them.”

Master.  “ When  he  dieth  he  shall  carry  nothing
away  ; his  glory  shall  not  descend  after  him.”

Response.  “ Naked  he  came  into  the  world,  and
naked  he  must  return.”

Master.  “ The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken
away  : blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  !”

The  Master  then  taking  the  roll  in  his  hand,  says,
“Let  us  live  and  die  like  the  righteous,  that  our  last
end  may  be  like  his  !”

The  Brethren  answer,  “ God  is  our  God  for  ever
and  ever;  he  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death  !”

The  Master  then  records  the  name  and  age  of  the
deceased  upon  the  roll,  and  says,

“ Almighty  Father  ! in  thy  hands  we  leave  w ith
humble  submission  the  soul  of  our  deceased  Bro-
ther.”

The  Brethren  answer  three  times,  (giving  the  grand
honours  each  time,)

“ The  will  of  God  is  accomplished  ! So  mote  it
be.  Amen.”

The  Master  then  deposits  the  roll  in  the  archieves .
and  repeats  the  following  Prayer  :

“ Most  glorious  God  ! author  of  all  good,  and
giver  of  all  mercy  ! pour  down  thy  blessings  upoi.


82


MASONIC  CHAR'S.


us,  and  strengthen  our  solemn  engagements  with
the  ties  of  sincere  affection  ! May  the  present  in-
stance of  mortality  remind  us  of  our  approaching
fate,  and  draw  our  attention  toward  thee,  the  only
refuge  in  time  of  need  ! that,  when  the  awful  mo-
ment shall  arrive,  that  we  are  about  to  quit  this
transitory  scene,  the  enlivening  prospect  of  thy
mercy,  through  the  Redeemer,  may  dispel  the
gloom  of  death  ; and  after  our  departure  hence  in
peace,  and  in  thy  favour,  may  we  be  received  into
thine  everlasting  kingdom,  to  enjoy,  in  union  with
the  souls  of  our  departed  friends,  the  just  reward  of
a pious  and  virtuous  life.  Amen.”

A procession  is  then  formed,  which  moves  to  the
house  of  the  deceased,  and  from  thence  to  the  place  of
interment.


Order  of  Procession  at  a Funeral.

Tyler  with  a drawn  Sword  ;

Stewards  with  white  Rods  ;

Musicians,  (if  they  are  masons,)  otherwise  they  follow
the  Tyler.

Master  Masons.

.IT  Senior  and  Junior  Deacons  ;

-g  Secretary  and  Treasurer ;

Senior  and  Junior  Wardens  ;

Mark  Masters  ;

Past  Masters ;

Royal  Arch  Masons  ;

Select  Masters  ;

Knights  Templars ;


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


83


The  Holy  Writings,  on  a cushion,  covered  with  black
cloth,  carried  by  the  oldest  (or  some  suitable)
Member  of  the  Lodge  ;

The  Master;

Clergy ;


The  Body,  with  the
Pall  Bearers.


insignia  placed  thereon.
Pall  Bearers.


When  the  procession  arrives  at  the  church  yard,
the  members  of  the  lodge  form  a circle  round  the
grave ; and  the  clergymen  and  officers  of  the  lodge
take  their  station  at  the  head  of  the  grave,  and  the
mourners  at  the  foot.  The  service  is  resumed,  and
the  following  Exhortation  is  given  :

“ Here  we  view  a striking  instance  of  the  un-
certainty of  life,  and  the  vanity  of  all  human  pur-
suits. The  last  offices  paid  to  the  dead,  are  only
useful  as  lectures  to  the  living : — from  them  we
are  to  derive  instruction,  and  to  consider  every  so-
lemnity of  this  kind  as  a summons  to  prepare  for
our  approaching  dissolution.

“ Notwithstanding  the  various  mementos  of
mortality,  with  which  we  daily  meet ; notwith-
standing Death  has  established  his  empire  over
all  the  works  of  nature  ; yet,  through  some  un-
accountable infatuation,  we  forget  that  we  are
born  to  die  ; we  go  on  from  one  design  to  another,
add  hope  to  hope,  and  lay  out  plans  for  the  em-


84


MASONIC  CHART.


plo37ment  of  many  years,  till  we  are  suddenly
alarmed  with  the  approach  of  Death,  when  we
least  expect  him,  and  at  an  hour  which  we  proba-
bly conclude  to  be  the  meridian  of  our  existence.

“ What  are  all  the  externals  of  majesty,  the
pride  of  wealth,  or  charms  of  beauty,  when  Na-
ture has  paid  her  just  debt  ? — Fix  your  eyes  on
the  last  scene,  and  view  life  stript  of  her  orna-
ments, and  exposed  in  her  natural  meanness  ; you
will  then  be  convinced  of  the  futility  of  those  emp-
ty delusions.  In  the  grave,  all  fallacies  are  de-
tected, all  ranks  are  levelled,  and  all  distinctions
are  done  away.

“ While  we  drop  the  sympathetic  tear  over  the
grave  of  our  deceased  friend,  let  charity  incline
us  to  throw  a veil  over  his  foibles,  whatever  they
may  have  been,  and  not  withhold  from  his  memo-
ry the  praise  that  his  virtues  may  have  claimed.
Suffer  the  apologies  of  human  nature  to  plead  in
his  behalf.  Perfection  on  earth  has  never  been
attained  ; — the  w isest,  as  w ell  as  the  best  of  men,
have  erred.

“ Let  the  present  example  excite  our  most  seri-
ous thoughts,  and  strengthen  our  resolutions  of
amendment.  As  life  is  uncertain,  and  all  earthly
pursuits  are  vain,  let  us  no  longer  postpone  the
all-important  concern  of  preparing  for  eternity  ;
but  embrace  the  happy  moment,  while  time  and
opportunity  offer,  to  provide  against  the  great
change,  when  all  the  pleasures  of  this  world  shall


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


*5

cease  to  delight,  ana  the  reflections  of  a virtuous
and  holy  life  yield  the  only  comfort  and  consola-
tion. Thus  our  expectations  will  not  be  frustrated,
nor  we  hurried  unprepared  into  the  presence  of  an
all- wise  and  powerful  Judge,  to  whom  the  secrets
©f  all  hearts  are  known.

“ Let  us,  while  in  this  state  of  ex  stence,  sup-
port with  propriety  the  character  of  our  profession,
advert  to  the  nature  of  our  solemn  ties,  and  pursue
with  assiduity  the  sacred  tenets  of  our  order#
Then,  with  becoming  reverence,  let  us  seek  the  fa-
vour of  the  Eternal  God,  through  the  merits  of
his  Son  our  Saviour,  so  that  when  the  awful  mo-
ment of  Death  arrives,  be  it  soon  or  late,  we  may
be  enabled  to  prosecute  our  journey  without  dread
or  apprehension,  to  that  far  distant  country,  whence
no  traveller  returns.”

The  following  invocations  are  then  made  by  the
Master :

Master.  “ xMay  we  be  true  and  faithful ; and  may
we  live  and  die  in  love  !”

Answer.  “ So  mote  it  be.”

Master.  “May  we  profess  what  is  good,  and  al-
ways act  agreeably  to  our  profession  !”

Answer.  “ So  mote  it  be.”

Master.  “May  the  Lord  bless  us  and  prosper  us
and  may  all  our  good  intentions  be  crowned  with  suc-
cess!”

Answer.  “ So  mote  it  be.”

S


16


MASONIC  CHART*


Master.  “ Glory  to  be  to  God  in  the  highest ; on
earth  peace ! good  will  towards  men !”

Answer.  “ So  mote  it  be,  now,  from  henceforth,  and
ffir  ever  more.  Amen.”

The  apron  is  taken  off  from  the  coffin  and  handed
to  the  Master — the  coffin  is  deposited  in  the  grave —
and  the  Master  says :

This  Lamb  Skin,  or  white  leather  Apron,  is  an  em-
blem of  Innocence,  and  the  badge  of  a Mason,  more  an-
cient than  the  golden  fleece  or  Roman  eagle;  more
honourable  than  the  star  and  garter,  when  worthily
worn.  [The  Master  then  deposits  it  in  the  grave. J
This  emblem  I now  deposit  in  the  grave  of  our  de-
ceased Brother.  By  this  we  are  reminded  of  the  uni-
versal dominion  of  Death.  The  arm  of  Friendship
oannot  oppose  the  King  of  Terrors,  nor  the  charms  of
imocence  elude  his  grasp.  This  grave,  that  coffin,
this  circle  of  mourning  friends,  remind  us  that  we
too  are  mortal : soon  shall  our  bodies  moulder  to  dust.
Then  how  important  for  us  that  we  should  know  that
our  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the
latter  day  upon  the  Earth.  [ The  Master , holding  the
evergreen  in  his  handy  continues ,]  This  evergreen  is
an  emblem  of  our  faith  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.
By  this  we  are  reminded  that  we  have  an  immortal
part  within  us,  which  shall  survive  the  grave,  and
which  shall  never,  never,  never  die.  Though  like
•ur  Brother  whose  remains  now  lie  before  us,  we
shall  soon  be  clothed  in  the  habiliments  of  Death  and
deposited  in  the  silent  tomb,  yet  through  the  media-
tion of  a divine  and  ascended  Saviour,  we  may  coi-


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


87

tfdently  hope  that  our  souls  will  bloom  in  Eternal
Spring.

The  brethren  then  move  in  procession  round  the
place  of  interment,  and  severally  drop  the  sprig  of  ev-
ergreen into  the  grave ; after  which,  the  public  grand
honours  are  given .

The  Master  then  continues  the  ceremony  at  the
f} rave,  in  the  following  words  :

" From  time  immemorial,  it  has  been  the  custom
among  the  fraternity  of  free  and  accepted  masons,  at
the  request  of  a brother,  to  accompany  his  corpse  t»
the  place  of  interment,  and  there  to  deposit  his  re-
mains with  the  usual  formalities.

“ In  conformity  to  this  usage,  and  at  the  request  of
®ur  deceased  brother,  whose  memory  we  revere,  and
whose  loss  we  now  deplore,  we  have  assembled  in  the
character  of  masons,  and  to  offer  up  to  his  memory,
before  the  world,  the  last  tribute  of  our  affection ;
thereby  demonstrating  the  sincerity  of  our  past  esteem,
and  our  steady  attachment  to  the  principles  of  the  or-
der.

i(  The  great  Creator  having  been  pleased,  out  of  his
mercy,  to  remove  our  brother  from  the  cares  and  trou-
bles of  a transitory  existence,  to  a state  of  eternal  du-
ration, and  thereby  to  weaken  the  chain,  by  which  we
are  united  man  to  man ; may  we,  who  survive  him
anticipate  our  approaching  fate,  and  be  more  strongly
cemented  in  the  ties  of  union  and  friendship;  that,
during  the  short  space  allotted  to  our  present  exist-
ence, we  may  wisely  and  usefully  employ  our  time ;
and,  in  the  reciprocal  of  intercourse  of  kind  and  friendly


MASONIC  CHART.


8.8

acts,  mutually  promote  the  welfare  and  happiness  of
*ach  other.

“ Unto  the  grave  we  have  resigned  the  body  of  our
deceased  friend,  earth  to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  ashes  to
ashes,  there  to  remain  until  the  trump  shall  sound  on
the  resurrection  morn.  We  can  cheerfully  leave  him
in  the  hands  of  a Being  who  has  done  all  things  well ;
who  is  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing
wonders.  Then  let  us  all  so  improve  this  solemn  warn-
ing, that  on  the  great  day  of  account  we  may  receive
from  the  compassionate  Judge,  the  welcome  invitation,
“ Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.”

“ So  mote  it  be.  Amen.”

u Almighty  and  eternal  God,  in  whom  we  live,  and
move,  and  have  our  being — and  before  whom  all  men
must  appear  in  the  judgment  day  to  give  an  account  of
their  deeds  in  life  ; we,  who  are  daily  exposed  to  the
dying  shafts  of  death,  and  now  surround  the  grave  of
•ur  fallen  brother ; most  earnestly  beseech  thee  to  im-
press deeply  on  our  minds  the  solemnities  of  this  day,
as  well  as  the  lamentable  occurrence  that  has  occasion-
ed them.  Here  may  we  be  forcibly  reminded,  that  in
the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death,  and  that  whatever
elevation  of  character  we  may  have  attained  ; however
upright  and  square  the  course  we  have  pursued  ; yet
-shortly  must  we  all  submit  as  victims  of  its  destroying
power,  and  endure  the  humbling  level  of  the  tomb,  un-
til the  last  loud  trump  shall  sound  the  summons  of  ©Ur
fmirrcciion  from  mortality  and  corruption


PRESENT  OR  PAST  MASTER.


89


“ May  we  have  thy  divine  assistance,  0 merciful
God,  to  redeem  our  mis-spent  time ; and  in  the  dis-
charge of  the  important  duties  thou  hast  assigned  us  in
the  erection  of  our  moral  edifice,  may  we  have  ivisdom
from  on  high  to  direct  us,  strength  commensurate
with  our  task  to  support  us,  and  the  beauty  of  holiness
to  adorn  and  render  all  our  performances  acceptable
in  thy  sight : and  when  our  work  is  done,  and  our
bodies  mingle  with  the  mother  earth , may  our  souls,
disengaged  from  their  cumbrous  dust,  flourish  and
bloom  in  eternal  day ; and  enjoy  that  rest  which  thou
hast  prepared  for  all  good  and  faithful  servants,  in  that
spiritual  house,  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the
heavens,  through  the  great  Redeemer.  Amen.”

“ So  mote  it  be.  Amen.”

The  procession  then  returns  in  form  to  the  place
whence  it  set  out,  where  the  necessary  duties  are  com-
plied with,  and  the  Lodge  is  closed  in  the  third  degree.

Note.  If  the  Grand  Master  attends,  and  presides
at  any  ceremony , it  is  said  to  be  performed  in  ample
form ; — if  a subordinate  officer  of  the  Grand  Lodge ,
in  due  form ; — if  vested  in  the  master  of  a subordi-
nate Lodge , in  form.


MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER  S
DEGREE.


NONE  but  those  who  have  been  inducted  into
the  Oriental  Chair  of  Solomon,  by  the  unanimous  suf-
frages of  their  brethren,  can  be  admitted  to  this  degree
of  masonry.

When  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  was  finished,  and
the  cap-stone  celebrated,  with  great  joy,  King  Solo-
mon admitted  to  this  degree,  only  those  who  had  prov-
ed themselves  worthy,  by  their  virtue,  skill,  and  in-
flexible fidelity  to  the  craft.  The  duties  incumbent
on  a Most  Excellent  Master  are  such,  that  he  should
have  a perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  preceding  degrees.

The  following  Psalm  is  read  at  opening.

Psalm  xxiv.

“The  earth  is  the  Lord’s  and  the  fulness  thereof;
the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein.  For  he  hath
founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and  established  it  upon  the
floods. — Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?
or  who  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place?  He  that  hath
clean  hands,  and  a pure  heart;  who  hath  not  lifted  up
his  soul  unto  vanity,  nor  sworn  deceitfully.  He  shall
receive  the  blessing  from  the  Lord,  and  righteousness
from  the  God  of  his  salvation.  This  is  the  generation


MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER,


91


of  them  that  seek  him,  that  seek  thy  face,  0 Jacob :
Selah.  Lift  up  your  heads,  O ye  gates  ; and  be  ye  lift-
ed up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King  of  Glory
shall  come  in.  Who  is  this  King  of  Glory  ? The  Lord,
strong  and  mighty;  the  Lord,  mighty  in  battle.  Lift
up  your  heads,  0 ye  gates  ; even  lift  them  up,  ye  ever-
lasting doors,  and  the  King  of  Glory  shall  come  in.
Who  is  this  King  of  Glory  ? The  Lord  of  Hosts,  he  is
the  King  of  Glory.  Selah.”

The  following  Psalm  is  read  during  the  ceremony  of
receiving  a candidate  in  this  degree.

Psalm  cxxii.

“ I was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into
the  house  of  the  Lord.  Our  feet  shall  stand  within
thy  gates,  0 Jerusalem.  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a
city  that  is  compact  together : whither  the  tribes  go  up,
the  tribes  of  the  Lord,  unto  the  testimony  of  Israel,  to
give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord.  For  there  are
set  thrones  of  judgment,  the  thrones  of  the  house  of
David.

“ Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  : they  shall  pros-
per that  love  thee.  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  and
prosperity  within  thy  palaces.  For  my  brethren  and
companions’  sakes,  I will  now  say.  Peace  be  within
thee.  Because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  our  God,  I
will  seek  thy  good.”

The  following  Song  is  sung  with  solemn  ceremony.


92


MASONIC  CHART.


MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER’S  SONG.


The  tem-ple’s  com-ple-ted,  Ex-alt  high  each  voice :


The  tem-ple’s  com-ple-ted,  Ex-alt  high  each  voice :


^•ST  EXCELLENT  MASTER^  SON©.  93


is*


m


The  sound  of  the  ga-vel  shall  hail  us  no  more.


IS*


gfsip


The  sound  of  the  ga-vel  shall  hail  us  no  m»re.


±=L&


■#

if


&


m


FOR.  • •


'I*


e


ex


i — r


£


I T IV 1


EHe


To  the  Pow-er  Al-migb-ty,  who  ev-er  has  gui-ded


ft#—. —

/ ■st  • M ^

1

1 Ob-

• V

:js  »

•

1

1

-FP-ff

— •—

S-

To  the  Pow-er  Al-migh-ty,  who  ev-er  has  gui-ded


94


MASONIC  CHART


rftgrrji

“T

rr

►»-

J*

*-

List

V*

_ ft  in

1 F

▼

^ I

J l

___l

i ~

_£[

XL

f n

fcX  iti  1

It

— 4

xJ

XL

L-f

kV

2tLJ  JLl

j T_

in

1

tzc

r The

tribes  of  old  1

• •

Is  - rael,  ex  -

• •

• — i

alt  - ing  their

far

ne;

[-

3P

£=fl

—

^ _ j

—

- —

i

*

JS

red

J "

X.!

r 0 |

ESLrxr

rr  r

Jri

1

lXj

ir  j

re  • ■

I The  tribes  of  old  Is  - rael,  c

!x  - all

A

- ir

ig  their  fame  ;

• • ^

r

1

i

V 1

[ J

I

; L

j

r

[

czz

[ (

X-

1 ft  [

A j *

nr

-j

i

{

1

1 ' |

L_x  1 —

t • ®T

i »

i

1 1

r

MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTEfU


$5


Companions  assemble
On  this  joyful  day ;

(The  occasion  is  glorious,)

The  key-stone  to  lay:

Fulfill’d  is  the  promise.

By  the  ANCIENT  OF  DAYS,

To  bring  forth  the  cap-stone
With  shouting  and  praise.

[ Ceremonies.']

There  is  no  more  occasion  for  level  or  plumb-line.

For  trowel  or  gavel,  for  compass  or  square :

Our  works  are  completed,  the  ark  safely  seated.

And  we  shall  be  greeted  as  workmen  most  rare.

Now  those  that  are  worthy.

Our  toils  who  have  shar’d,

And  prov’d  themselves  faithful,

Shall  meet  their  reward.

Their  virtue  and  knowledge.

Industry  and  skill.

Have  our  approbation,

Have  gain’d  our  good  will.

We  accept  and  receive  them,  Most  Excellent  Masters,
Invested  with  honours,  and  power  to  preside ;

Among  worthy  crafts-men,  wherever  assembled,

The  knowledge  of  masons  to  spread  far  and  wide.

ALMIGHTY  JEHOVAH!

Descend  now  and  fill
This  Lodge  with  thy  glory,

Our  hearts  with  good  will,!

Preside  at  our  meetings.

Assist  us  to  find
True  pleasure  in  teaching
Good  will  to  mankind.

Thy  wisdom  inspired  the  great  institutio*,

Thy  strength  shall  support  it  till  nature  expire;

And  when  the  creation  shall  fall  into  ruin,

Its  beauty  shall  rise  through  the  midst  of  the  fire  i


96


MASONI#  CHART.


The  ceremony  closes  with  the  following  passage:

2 Chron.  vii.  1 — 4.

Now  when  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  praying,
the  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consumed  the
burnt  offering  and  sacrifices ; and  the  glory  of  the  Lord
filled  the  house.  And  the  priest  could  not  enter  into
the  house  of  the  Lord,  because  the  glory  of  the  Lord
had  filled  the  Lord’s  house.

And  when  all  the  children  of  Israel  saw  how  the  fire
came  down,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  upon  the  house,
they  bowed  themselves  with  their  faces  to  the  ground
upon  the  pavement,  and  worshipped,  and  praised  the
Lord,  saying,  For  he  is  good;  for  his  mercy  en-

DUKETH  FOR  EVER.

| The  following  Psalm  is  read  at  closing.

Psalm  xxiii.

“ The  Lord  is  my  shepherd ; I shall  not  want.  He
maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures  : he  leadeth
me  beside  the  still  waters.  He  restoreth  my  soul:  he
leadeth  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for  his  name’s
sake.  Yea,  though  I walk  through  the  valley  of  the
shadow  of  death,  I will  fear  no  evil : for  thou  art  with
me ; thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me.  Thou
preparest  a table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine
enemies;  thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil;  my  cup
runneth  over.  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  fol-
low me  all  the  days  of  my  life ; and  I will  dwell  in  the
hoase  of  the  Lord  for  ever.”


MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER.  ^ $7

CHARGE  to  a Brother  who  is  received  and  ae-
knowledged  as  a most  excellent  master.

“ Brother,

“ Your  admittance  to  this  degree  of  masonry,
is  a proof  of  the  good  opinion  the  brethren  of
this  lodge  entertain  of  your  masonic  abilities.
Let  this  consideration  induce  you  to  be  careful  of
forfeiting,  by  misconduct,  and  inattention  to  our
rules,  that  esteem  which  has  raised  you  to  the  rank
you  now  possess.

“ It  is  one  of  your  great  duties  as  a most  excel-
lent master,  to  dispense  light  and  truth  to  the  unin-
formed mason  ; and  I need  not  remind  you  of  the
impossibility  of  complying  with  this  obligation,
without  possessing  an  accurate  acquaintance  with
the  lectures  of  each  degree.

“ If  you  are  not  already  completely  conversant
in  all  the  degrees  heretofore  conferred  on  you,  re-
member, that  an  indulgence,  prompted  by  a belief
that  you  will  apply  yourself  with  double  diligence
to  make  yourself  so,  has  induced  the  brethren  to
accept  you.

“ Let  it  therefore  be  your  unremitting  study,  t®
acquire  such  a degree  of  knowledge  and  informa-
tion, as  shall  enable  you  to  discharge  with  propria
ety,  the  various  duties  incumbent  on  you,  and  to
preserve  unsullied,  the  title  now  conferred  upon
you,  of  a MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER”
0


MASONIC  J5HART.


9&  f

A Description  of  Solomon’s  Temple.

This  structure,  for  beauty,  magnificence,  and  ex-
pense, exceeded  any  building  which  was  ever  erected.
It  was  built  of  large  stones  of  white  marble,  curiously
hewn,  and  so  artfully  joined  together,  that  they  ap-
peared like  \one  entire  stone.  Its  inner  Walts , Beams ,
Posts , Doors , Floors , and  Ceilings,  wene  made  of  ce-
dar and  olive  wood,  and  planks  of  fir  ; which  were  en-
tirely covered  with  plates  of  gold,  with  various  beauti-
ful engravings,  and  adorned  with  precious  jewels  of
many  splendid  colours.  The  nails  which  fastened
those  plates  wrere  also  of  gold,  with  heads  of  curious
workmanship.  The  roof  was  of  olive  wood,  covered
with  gold  ; and  when  the  sun  shone  thereon,  the  reflec-
tion from  it  was  of  such  a refulgent  splendour , that  it
dazzled  the  eyes  of  all  who  beheld  it.  The  court  in
which  the  temple  stood,  and  the  courts  without,  were
adorned  on  all  sides  with  stately  buildings,  and  clois-
ters ; and  the  gates  entering  therein,  were  exquisitely
beautiful  and  elegant.  The  vessels  consecrated  to  the
perpetual  use  of  the  temple,  were  suited  to  the  mag-
nificence of  the  edifice  in  which  they  w ere  deposited
and  used.

Josephus  states,  that  there  were  one  hundred  and
forty  thousand  of  those  vessels,  which  were  made  of
gold,  and  one  million  three  hundred  and  fortv  thou-
sand of  silver ; ten  thousand  vestments  for  the" priests,
made  of  silk,  with  purple  girdles ; and  two  millions  of
purple  vestments  for  the  singers.  There  were  also
two  hundred  thousand  trumpets,  and  forty  thousand
other  musical  instruments,  made  use  of  in  the  temple,
and  in  worshipping  God.

According  to  the  most  accurate  computation  of  the
number  of  talents  of  gold,  silver,  and  brass,  laid  out
upon  the  temple,  the  sum  amounts  to  six  thousand
nine  hundred  and  four  millions,  eight  hundred  and
twenty-two  thousand  and  five  hundred  pounds  ster-
ling; and  the  jewels  are  reckoned  to  exceed  this  sum.
The  gold  vessels  are  estimated  at  five  hundred  and


forty -five  millions,  two  hundred  and  ninety-six  thou-
sand, two  hundred  and  three  pounds,  and  four  shil-
lings, sterling ; and  the  silver  ones,  at  four  hundred  and
thirty-nine  millions,  three  hundred  and  forty-four
thousand  pounds  sterling;  amounting  in  all,  to  nine
hundred  and  eighty-four  millions,  six  hundred  and
thirty  thousand,  two  hundred  and  thirty  pounds,  four
shillings.  In  addition  to  this,  there  were  expenses  for
workmen,  and  for  materials  brought  from  Mount  Li-
banus,  and  the  quarries  of  Zeradatha.  There  were
ten  thousand  men  per  month  in  Lebanon,  employed  in
falling  and  preparing  the  timbers  for  the  craftsmen  to
hew  them ; seventy  thousand  to  carry  burdens ; eighty
thousand  to  hew  the  stones  and  timber;  and  three  thou-
sand three  hundred  overseers  of  the  work ; who  were
all  employed  for  seven  years  ; to  whom,  besides  their
wages  and  diet,  King  Solomon  gave,  as  a free  gift,  six
millions,  seven  hundred  and  thirty-three  thousand,  nine
hundred  and  seventy-seven  pounds.

The  treasure  left  by  David,  towards  carrying  on  this
noble  and  glorious  work,  is  reckoned  to  be  nine  hun-
dred and  eleven  millions,  four  hundred  and  sixteen
thousand,  two  hundred  and  seven  pounds;  to  which,  if
we  add  King  Solomon’s  annual  revenue,  his  trading  to
Ophir  for  gold,  and  the  present^  made  him  by  all  the
earth,  as  mentioned  1 Kings  x.  24,  25,  we  shall  not
wonder  at  his  being  able  to  carry  on  so  expensive  a
work;  nor  can  we,  without  impiety,  question  its  sur-
passing all  other  structures,  since  we  are  assured  that
It  was  built  by  the  immediate  direction  of  HEAVEN.


MO


EXCE


\ '
ENT  MASTER.


ROYAL  ARCH  DEGREE.


THIS  degree  is  more  august,  sublime,  and  im-
portant, than  all  which  precede  it.  It  impresses  on
our  minds  a belief  of  the  being  and  existence  of  the
Supreme  Grand  High  Priest  of  our  Salvation  ; who  is»
without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years;  and  for-
cibly reminds  us  of  the  reverence  due  to  his  Holy
Name.

In  this  degree  is  brought  to  light  many  essentials
which  are  of  importance  to  the  craft,  that  were  con-
cealed in  darkness  for  the  space  of  four  hundred  and
seventy  years ; and  without  a knowledge  of  which  the
masonic  character  cannot  be  complete.

SECTION  FIRST.

This  section  explains  the  mode  of  government  in
this  degree ; it  designates  the  appellation,  number  and
situation  of  the  several  officers,  and  points  out  the  pur^
pose  and  duty  of  their  respective  stations.  The  vari-
ous colours  of  their  banners  are  designated ; and  the
morals  to  which  they  allude  are  introduced  and  ex-
plained.

The  following  passage  of  scripture  is  read  at  open-
ing:


2 Thess.  iii.  6 — 18.

Now  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from
every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after
the  tradition  which  ye  received  of  ns.  For  your-


K01AL  ARCH.


161

selves  know  how  ye  ought  to  follow  us  : for  we  behav-
ed not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you;  neither  did
we  eat  any  man’s  bread  for  nought ; but  wrought  with
labour  and  travail  night  and  day,  that  we  might  not  be
chargeable  to  any  of  you  ; not  because  we  have  not
power,  but  to  make  ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you  to
follow  us.  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we
commanded  you,  that  if  any  would  not  work,  neither
should  he  eat.  For  we  hear  that  there  are  some  which
walk  among  you  disorderly,  working  not  at  all,  but  are
busybodies.  Now  them  that  are  such  we  command
and  exhort,  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quiet-
ness they  work,  and  eat  their  own  bread.  But  yq,
brethren,  be  not  weary  in  well  doing.  And  if  any
man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  epistle,  note  that  man,
and  have  no  company  with  him,  that  he  may  be  asham-
ed. Yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish
him  as  a brother.  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself
give  you  peace  always  by  all  means.  The  Lord  be
with  you  all.

The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which
is  the  token  in  every  epistle  : so  I write.  The  grace
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all.  Amen.

SECTION  SECOND.

This  section  contains  much  valuable  historical  in-
formation, and  exhibits  to  our  view,  in  striking  colours,
that  prosperity  and  happiness  are  ever  the  ultimate
consequences  of  virtue  and  justice;  while  disgrace
and  ruin  invariably  follow  the  practices  of  vice  and
immorality.

The  following  charges  and  passages  of  scripture  are
introduced  during  the  ceremony  of  Exaltation

9*


MASONIC  CJHAItfl.


w

Isaiah  xliii.  16.

“ I will  bring  the  blind  by  a way  that  they  knew
not ; I will  lead  them  in  paths  that  they  have  not
known;  I will  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and
•rooked  things  straight.  These  things  will  I do  unto
them,  and  will  not  forsake  them.”

Prayer  used  at  the  Exaltation  of  a Royal  Arcli
Mason.

O thou  eternal  and  omnipotent  JEHOVAH,  the
glorious  and  everlasting  I AM,  permit  us,  thy  frail,
dependent  and  needy  creatures,  in  the  name  of  our
Most  Excellent  and  Supreme  High  Priest , to  approach
thy  divine  majesty.  And  do  thou,  who  sittest  between
the  Cherubim , incline  thine  ear  to  the  voice  of  our
praises,  and  of  our  supplication  ; and  vouchsafe  to
commune  with  us  from  off  the  mercy  seat.  We  hum-
bly adore  and  worship  thy  unspeakable  perfections,
and  thy  unbounded  goodness  and  benevolence.  We
bless  thee,  that  when  man  had  sinned,  and  fallen  from
his  innocence  and  happiness,  thou  didst  still  leave  un-
to him  the  powers  of  reasoning,  and  the  capacity  of
improvement  and  of  pleasure.  We  adore  thee,  that
amidst  the  pains  and  calamities  of  our  present  state,
so  many  means  of  refreshment  and  satisfaction  are
afforded  us,  while  travelling  the  rugged  path  of  life .
And  0,  thou  who  didst  aforetime  appear  unto  thy  ser-
vant Moses  in  a flame  of  fire , out  of  the  midst  of  a
hush,  enkindle,  we  beseech  thee,  in  each  of  our  hearts
a fl  mie  of  devotion  to  thee,  of  love  to  each  other,  and
»f  benevolence  and  charity  to  all  mankind.  May  the
veils  of  ignorance  and  blindness  be  removed  from  tk?


ROYA1  ARCH.


ms

eyes  of  our  understandings,  that  we  may  behold  and
adore  thy  mighty  and  wondrous  works.  May  the  rod
and  staff  of  thy  grace  and  power  continually  support
us,  and  defend  us  from  the  rage  of  all  our  enemies,  and
especially  from  the  subtilty  and  malice  of  that  old
serpent , who  with  cruel  vigilance  seeketh  our  ruin.
May  the  leprosy  of  sin  be  eradicated  from  our  bosoms  ;
and  may  Holiness  to  the  Lord  be  engraven  upon  all
our  thoughts,  words  and  actions.  May  the  incense  of
piety  ascend  continually  unto  thee,  from  off  the  altar
of  our  hearts,  and  burn  day  and  night , as  a sweet-
smelling savour  unto  thee.  May  we  daily  search  the
records  of  truth , that  we  may  be  more  and  more  in-
structed in  our  duty  ; and  may  we  share  the  blessed-
ness of  those  who  hear  the  sacred  word , and  keep  it.
And  finally,  O merciful  Father,  when  we  shall  have
passed  through  the  outward  veils  of  these  earthly
oourts,  when  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  shall
be  dissolved,  may  we  be  admitted  into  the  Holy  of
Holies  above,  into  the  presence  of  the  Grand  Council
of  heaven,  where  the  Supreme  High  Priest  for  eVer
presides,  for  ever  reigns.  Amen.  So  mote  it  be.

Exodus  iii.  1 — 6.

“ Now  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  Jethro  his  father-in-
law,  the  priest  of  Midian ; and  he  led  the  flock  to  the
back  side  of  the  desert,  and  came  to  the  mountain  of
God,  even  to  Horeb.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  ap-
peared unto  him  in  a flame  of  fire,  out  of  the  midst  of
a bush;  and  he  looked,  and  behold  the  bush  burned
with  fire,  and  the  bush  was  not  consumed.


i©4


MASONIC  CHART.


“ And  when  the  Lord  saw  that  he  turned  aside  to
see,  God  called  to  him  out  of  the  bush,  and  said,  Mo-
ses, Moses!  And  he  said,  Here  am  I.  And  he  said.
Draw  not  nigh  hither:  put  off’  thy  shoes  from  off  thy
feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy
ground.  Moreover  he  said,  I am  the  God  of  thy  fa-
ther, the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the
God  of  Jacob.  And  Moses  hid  his  face:  for  he  wafs
afraid  to  look  upon  God.”

2 Chron.  xxxvi.  11 — 20.

Zedekiah  was  one  and  twenty  years  old,  when  he
began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusa-
lem. And  he  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of
the  Lord  his  God,  and  humbled  not  himself  before  Je-
remiah the  prophet,  speaking  from  the  mouth  of  the
Lord.  And  he  also  rebelled  against  king  Nebuchad-
nezzar, and  stiffened  his  neck,  and  hardened  his  heart*
from  turning  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  Moreover
all  the  chief  of  the  priests  and  the  people  transgressed
very  much,  after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen
and  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  he  had  hal-
lowed in  Jerusalem.  And  the  Lord  God  of  their  fa-
thers sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  because  he  had
compassion  on  his  people,  and  on  his  dwelling  place*
But  they  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised
his  word,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of
the  Lord  arose  against  his  people,  till  there  was  no
remedy.

Therefore  he  brought  upon  them  the  king  of  the
Chaldees,  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword,
in  the  house  of  their  sanctuary,  and  had  no  compassion


ROYAL  ARCH.


ie5>

•upon  young  men  or  maidens,  old  men,  or  him  that
stooped  for  age ; he  gave  them  all  into  his  hand.  And
all  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  great  and  small,
and  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the
treasures  of  the  King,  and  his  princes : all  these  he
brought  to  Babylon.

And  they  burnt  the  house  of  God,  and  brake  down
the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and  burnt  all  the  palaces  thereof
with  lire,  and  destroyed  all  the  goodly  vessels  thereof.
And  them  that  had  escaped  from  the  sword,  carried  he
away  to  Babylon  ; — where  they  were  servants  to  him
and  his  sons,  until  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia.

Ezra  i.  1 — 3.

Now,  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,  the
Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,
that  he  made  a proclamation  throughout  all  his  king-
dom, and  put  it  also  in  writing,  saying,  Thus  saith
Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,  The  Lord  God  of  Heaven  hath
given  me  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  he  hath
charged  me  to  build  him  an  house  at  Jerusalem,  which
is  in  Judah. — Who  is  there  among  you  of  all  his  peo-
ple ? His  God  be  with  him,  and  let  him  go  up  to  Je-
rusalem, which  is  in  Judah,  and  build  the  house  of  the
Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  is  in  Jerusalem.

Exodus  iii.  13,  14.

And  Moses  said  unto  God,  Behold,  when  I come
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  shall  say  unto  them.
The  God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me  unto  you  ; and
they  shall  say  to  me,  What  is  his  name  ? what  shall  I
sav  unto  them  ?


MASONIC  CHART.


And  God  said  unto  Moses,  I AM  THAT  I AM-;
And  thus  thou  shalt  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel-,
I AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you.

Psalm  cxli.

Lord,  I cry  unto  thee : make  haste  unto  me  ; give
ear  unto  my  voice.  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before
thee  as  incense,  and  the  lifting  up  of  hands  as  the  eve-
ning sacrifice.  Set  a watch,  0 Lord,  before  my  mouth ;
keep  the  door  of  my  lips.  Incline  not  my  heart  to  any
evil  thing,  to  practice  wicked  works  with  men  that
work  iniquity.  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be
a kindness ; let  him  reprove  me,  it  shall  be  an  excel-
lent oil.  Mine  eyes  are  unto  thee,  0 God  the  Lord  ;
in  thee  is  my  trust;  leave  not  my  soul  destitute.
Keep  me  from  the  snares  which  they  have  laid  for  me,,
and  the  gins  of  the  workers  of  iniquity.  Let  the  wick-
ed fall  into  their  own  nets,  while  that  I withal  escape.

Psalm  cxlii.

I cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice  ; with  my  voice
unto  the  Lord  did  I make  my  supplication.  I poured
out  my  complaint  before  him : I shewed  before  him  my
trouble.  When  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed  within
me,  then  thou  knewest  my  path ; in  the  way  wherein
I walked,  have  they  privily  laid  a snare  for  me.  I
looked  on  my  right  hand,  and  beheld,  but  there  was  no
man  that  would  know  me  : refuge  failed  me  : no  man
cared  for  my  soul.  I cried  unto  thee,  0 Lord  : 1 said,
Thou  art  my  refuge,  and  my  portion  in  the  land  of  the
living.  Attend  unto  my  cry;  for  I am  brought  very
low;  deliver  me  from  my  persecutors;  for  they  are


lid YAL  AH0H.


ler

stronger  than  I.  Bring  my  soul  out  of  darkness,  that
I may  may  praise  thy  name.

Psalm  cxliii.

Hear  my  prayer,  0 Lord  ; give  ear  to  my  supplica-
tion. In  thy  faithfulness  answer  me,  and  in  thy  right-
eousness. And  enter  not  inxo  judgment  with  thy  ser-
vant: for  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified.
For  the  enemy  hath  persecuted  my  soul ; he  hath  made
me  to  dwell  in  darkness.  Therefore  is  my  spirit  over-
whelmed within  me;  my  heart  within  me  is  desolate.
Hear  me  speedily,  0 Lord;  my  spirit  faileth;  hide
not  thy  face  from  me,  lest  I be  like  them  that  go  down
into  the  pit.  Cause  me  to  hear  thy  loving  kindness  in
the  morning ; for  in  thee  do  I trust : cause  me  to  know
the  way  wherein  I should  walk  ; for  I lift  up  my  soul
unto  thee.  Teach  me  to  do  thy  will ; for  thou  art  my
God : bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble,  and  of  thy  mercy
cut  off  mine  enemies,  for  I am  thy  servant.

Exodus  iv.  1 — 10.

“ And  Moses  answered  and  said,  But  behold,  they
will  not  believe  me,  nor  hearken  unto  my  voice:  for
they  will  say.  The  Lord  hath  not  appeared  unto  thee.
And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  What  is  that  in  thine
hand  ? And  he  said,  A rod.  And  he  said,  Cast  it  on
the  ground : and  he  cast  it  on  the  ground,  and  it  became
a serpent ; and  Moses  fled  from  before  it.  And  the
Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Put  forth  thine  hand,  and  take
it  by  the  tail.  And  he  put  forth  his  hand  and  caught
it,  and  it  became  a rod  in  his  hand.  That  they  may
^believe  that  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of


108


MASONIC  CHART.


Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,
hath  appeared  unto  thee.

“ And  the  Lord  said  furthermore  unto  him,  Put  now
thine  hand  into  thy  bosom  ; and  he  put  his  hand  into
his  bosom;  and  when  he  took  it  out,  behold,  his  hand
was  leprous  as  snow.  And  he  said.  Put  thine  hand
into  thy  bosom  again  ; and  he  put  his  hand  into  his  bo-
som again  ; and  he  plucked  it  out  of  his  bosom,  and,
behold,  it  was  turned  again  as  his  other  flesh.  And  it
shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  not  believe  thee,  neither
hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  first  sign,  that  they  will  be-
lieve the  voice  of  the  latter  sign.

“ And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  not  believe
also  these  two  signs,  neither  hearken  unto  thy  voice.,
that  thou  shalt  take  of  the  w ater  of  the  river,  and  pour
it  upon  the  dry  land  : and  the  water  which  thou  takest
out  of  the  river,  shall  become  blood  upon  the  dry  land.”

Haggai  ii.  2 — 4, 23.

Speak  now  to  Zerubbabel,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  gov-
ernor of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedec,  the
high  priest,  and  to  the  residue  of  the  people,  saying*
Who  is  left  among  you,  that  saw  this  house  in  her  first
glory  ? and  how  do  you  see  it  now  ? is  it  not,  in  your
eyes,  in  comparison  of  it,  as  nothing?  Yet  now  be
strong,  0 Zerubbabel ; and  be  strong,  0 Joshua,  son  of
Josedec  the  high  priest ; and  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of
the  land,  saith  the  Lord,  and  work:  for  1 am  with  you,
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.

“ In  that  day,  will  I take  thee,  0 Zerubbabel,  my
servant,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  saith  the  Lord,  and  will
make  thee,  as  a signet : for  I have  chosen  thee.”


R»YAL  ARCH.


m

Zechariah  iv.  9,  10.

The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundatioa
♦f  this  house;  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it;  and  thou
shaft  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto
you.  For  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things?
for  they  shall  rejoice,  and  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the
hand  of  Zerubbabel,  with  those  seven.

Amos  ix.  11.

“ In  that  day  will  I raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  Da-
vid that  is  fallen,  and  close  up  the  breaches  thereof,
and  1 will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I will  build  it  as  in
the  days  of  old.”

The  following  passages  of  scripture  are  read  by  the
High  Priest.


Genesis  i.  1 — 3.

In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the
earth.  And  the  earth  was  without  form  and  void;
and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep;  and  the
Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  Waters. — -
And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light : and  there  was

light. Deut.  xxxi.  24 — 26.  And  it  came  to  pass^

when  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  writing  the  words  of
this  law  in  a book,  until  they  were  finished,  that  Moses
commanded  the  Levites  which  bare  the  ark  of  the
covenant  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Take  this  book  of  the
law,  and  put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant
of  the  Lord  your  God,  that  it  may  be  there  for  a wit-
ness against  thee. Exodus  xx.  21.  And  thou  shalt

put  the  mercy  seat  above,  upon  the  ark ; and  in  the
ark  thou  shalt  put  the  testimony  that  I shall  give  thee.
—Exodus  xvi.  32 — 34.  And  Moses  said,  This  is
10


110


MASONIC  CHART.


the  thing  which  the  Lord  commandeth,  Fill  an  omer
of  the  manna,  to  be  kept  for  your  generations;  that
they  may  see  the  bread  wherewith  I have  fed  you  in
the  w ilderness,  when  I brought  you  forth  from  the  land
of  Egypt.  And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  Take  a pot,
and  put  an  omer  full  of  manna  therein,  and  lay  it  up
before  the  Lord,  to  be  kept  for  your  generations.  As
the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  Aaron  laid  it  up  be-
fore the  testimony  to  be  kept. Numbers  xvii.  10.

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Bring  Aaron’s  rod

again  before  the  testimony,  to  be  kept  for  a token.

Hebrews  ix.  2 — 5.  For  there  w as  a tabernacle  made ;
the  first,  w herein  was  the  candlestick,  and  the  table,
and  the  shew -bread,  which  is  called  the  Sanctuary.
And  after  the  veils,  the  tabernacle,  which  is  called  the
Holiest  of  all ; which  had  the  golden  censer,  and  the
ark  of  the  covenant,  overlaid  round  about  with  gold,
wherein  was  the  golden  pot  that  had  manna,  and  Aa-
ron’s rod  that  budded,  and  the  tables  of  the  covenant;
and  over  it,  the  cherubims  of  glory,  shadowing  the
mercy  seat;  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particu
larly.

Exodus  vi.  2,  3.

“ And  God  spake  unto  Moses,  and  said  unto  him,
I am  the  Lord  : and  I appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto
Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob,  by  the  name  of  God  Almighty;
but  by  my  name  JEHOVAH  was  I not  known  t®
them.”

The  High  Priest  will  then  recite  the  following  pas-
sage, previous  to  investing  the  candidate  with  an  im-
portant secret  of  the  degree.


ROYAL  ARCH  *


111


John  i.  1 — 5.

“In  the  beginning  was  the  Word:  and  the  Word
was  with  God,  and  the  word  was  God.  The  same
was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  All  things  were  made
by  him  : and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made
that  was  made.  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the
light  of  men.  And  the  light  shineth  in  darkness,  and
the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.”

The  following  remarks  relative  to  King  Solomon’s
Temple,  cannot  be  uninteresting  to  a Royal  Arch  Ma-
son.

This  famous  fabric  was  situated  on  Mount  Moriah,
near  the  place  where  Abraham  w as  about  to  offer  up
his  son  Isaac,  and  where  David  met  and  appeased  the
destroying  angel,  who  was  visible  over  the  threshing
floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusile.  It  was  begun  in  the  fourth
year  of  the  reign  of  Solomon ; the  third  after  the  death
of  David;  four  hundred  and  eighty  years  after  the
passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  on  the  second  day  of  the
month  Zif,  being  the  second  month  of  the  sacred  year,
which  answers  to  the  21st  of  April,  in  the  year  of  the
wrorld  two  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninety-two;
and  was  carried  on  with  such  prodigious  speed,  that  it
was  finished,  in  all  its  parts,  in  little  more  than  seven
years.

By  the  masonic  art,  and  the  wise  regulations  of  Solo-
mon, this  famous  edifice  was  erected  without  the
sound  of  the  axe,  hammer,  or  any  tool  of  iron;  for  the
stones  were  all  hewed,  squared  and  numbered,  in  the
quarries  of  Zeradathah,  where  they  were  raised;  the
timbers  were  fitted  and  prepared  in  the  forest  of  Leba-
non, and  conveyed  by  sea  in  floats  to  Joppa,  and  from
thence  by  land  to  Jerusalem;  where  the  fabric  was
erected  by  the  assistance  of  wooden  instruments  pre-
pared for  that  purpose.  And  when  the  building  was
finished?  its  several  parts  fitted  with  that  exact  nicety.


MAS#NIC  ©HART.


m

that  it  had  more  the  appearance  of  being  the  handy
work  of  the  Supreme  Architect  of  the  Universe,  than
of  human  hands.

In  the  year  of  the  world  3029,  King  Solomon  died,
and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Rehoboam.  Soon  after
this,  instigated  and  led  on  by  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Ne-
bat,  ten  of  the  tribes  revolted  from  Rehoboam,  and  set
up  a separate  kingdom,  with  Jeroboam  at  their  head.
In  this  manner  were  the  tribes  of  Israel  divided,  and
under  two  distinct  governments,  for  two  hundred  and
fifty-four  years.  The  ten  revolted  tribes  became  weak
and  degenerated;  their  country  was  laid  waste,  and
their  government  overthrown  and  extirpated  by  Sai-
manezer.  King  of  Assyria.  After  a series  of  changes
and  events,  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,  having
besieged  Jerusalem,  and  raised  towers  all  round  the
city,  so  that,  after  defending  it  for  the  space  of  a year
and  a half,  it  was,  in  the  eleventh  year  of  the  reign  of
Zedekiah,  King  of  Judah,  surrendered  and  delivered
at  midnight  to  the  officers  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  who
sacked  and  destroyed  the  temple,  and  took  away  all  the
holy  vessels,  together  with  those  two  famous  brazen
pillars ; and  the  remnant  of  the  people  that  escaped  the
sword,  carried  he  away  captives  to  Babylon,  where
they  remained  servants  to  him  and  his  successors,  un-
til the  reign  of  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia.  Cyrus,  in  the
first  year  of  his  reign,  being  directed  by  that  divine
power  which  invisibly  led  him  to  the  throne  of  Persia,
issued  his  famous  edict  for  the  liberation  of  the  He-
brew captives,  with  permission  that  they  should  return
to  their  native  country,  and  rebuild  the  city  and  house
of  the  Lord.  Accordingly,  the  principal  people  of  the
tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  with  the  Priests  and
Levites,  immediately  departed  for  Jerusalem,  and  com  *
menced  the  great  and  glorious  work.


ROYAL  ARCH.


113


CHARGE  to  a newly  Exalted  Companion .
Worthy  Companion,

By  the  consent  and  assistance  of  the  members
of  this  Chapter,  you  are  now  exalted  to  the  sub-
lime and  honourable  degree  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
son. The  rites  and  mysteries  developed  in  this
degree,  have  been  handed  down  through  a chosen
few,  unchanged  by  time,  and  uncontrolled  by  pre-
judice; and  we  expect  and  trust,  they  will  here-
graded  by  you  with  the  same  veneration,  and
transmitted  with  the  same  scrupulous  purity,  to
your  successors.

No  one  can  reflect  on  the  ceremonies  of  gaining
admission  into  this  place,  without  being  forcibly
struck  with  the  important  lessons  which  they
teach,  tfere  we  are  necessarily  led  to  contem-
plate, with  gratitude  and  admiration,  the  sacred
Source  from  whence  all  earthly  comforts  flow. —
Here  we  find  additional  inducements  to  continue
stedfast  and  immoveable  in  the  discharge  of  our
respective  duties ; and  here  we  are  bound  by  the
most  solemn  ties,  to  promote  each  other’s  welfare,
and  correct  each  other’s  failings,  by  advice,  admo.
nition,  and  reproof  As  it  is  our  earnest  desire,
and  a duty  we  owe  to  our  companions  of  this
order,  that  the  admission  of  every  candidate  into
this  chapter,  should  be  attended  by  the  approba-
tion of  the  most  scrutinizing  eye,  we  hope  always
to  possess  the  satisfaction  of  finding  none  among
10*


n 4


MASONIC  CHART.


us,  but  such  as  will  promote,  to  the  utmost  of
their  power,  the  great  end  of  our  institution.  By
paying  due  attention  to  this  determination,  we  ex-
pect you  will  never  recommend  any  candidate  to
this  Chapter,  whose  abilities,  and  knowledge  of
the  preceding  degrees,  you  cannot  freely  vouch
for,  and  whom  you  do  not  firmly  and  confidently
believe,  will  fully  conform  to  the  principles  of  our
order,  and  fulfil  the  obligations  of  a Royal  Arch
Mason.  While  such  are  our  members,  we  may  ex-
pect to  be  united  in  one  object,  without  lukewarm-
ness, inattention  or  neglect;  but  zeal,  fidelity  and
affection,  will  be  the  distinguishing  characteristics
of  our  society  ; and  that  satisfaction,  harmony  and
peace,  may  be  enjoyed  at  our  meetings,  which  no
other  society  can  afford.

Closing  Prayer.

By  the  wisdom  of  the  Supreme  High  Priest,  may  we
be  directed ; by  his  strength,  may  we  be  enabled  ; and
by  the  beauty  of  virtue,  may  we  be  incited,  to  perform
the  obligations  here  enjoined  on  us;  to  keep  inviolably
the  mysteries  here  unfolded  to  us;  and  invariably  to
practice  all  those  duties  out  of  the  Chapter,  which  are
inculcated  in  it.

[Response.]  So  mote  it  be.  Amen.


ROYAL  MASTER’S  DEGREE.


— &&&—


THIS  degree  cannot  legally  be  conferred  on  any
but  Royal  Arch  Masons,  who  have  taken  all  the  pre-
ceding degrees ; and  it  is  preparatory  to  that  of  the
Select  Master.  Although  it  is  short,  yet  it  contains
some  valuable  information,  and  is  intimately  connected
with  the  degree  of  Select  Master.  It  also  enables  us
with  ease  and  facility  to  examine  the  privileges  of  oth-
ers to  this  degree;  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  proves
ourselves.

The  following  passages  of  scripture,  &c.  are  con-
sidered to  be  appropriate  to  this  degree.

1 Kings  vii.  48 — 50,  and  40.

And  Solomon  made  all  the  vessels  that  pertained
unto  the  house  of  the  Lord  : the  altar  of  gold,  and  the
table  of  gold,  whereupon  the  shew-bread  was;  and
the  candlesticks  of  pure  gold  ; five  on  the  right  side,
and  five  on  the  left,  before  the  oracle ; with  the  flow-
ers, and  the  lamps,  and  the  tongs  of  gold;  and  the
bowls,  and  the  snuffers,  and  the  basons,  and  the  spoons,
and  the  censers,  of  pure  gold  ; and  the  hinges  of  gold,
both  for  the  doors  of  the  inner  house,  the  most  holy
place,  and  for  the  doors  of  the  house,  to  wit,  of  the
Temple.  So  Hiram  made  an  end  of  doing  all  the


116


MASONIC  CHART.


work,  that  he  had1  made  King  Solomon,  for  the  house
of  the  Lord.


Rev.  xxii.  12 — 14.

And;  behold  1 come  quickly ; and  my  reward  is  with
me,  to  give  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be.
I am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end.
the  first  and  the  last.  Blessed  are  they  that  do  his
commandments,  that  they  may  have  a right  to  the  tree
of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the
city.


1 Kings  vi.  27.

And  he  set  the  cherubims  within  the  inner  house;
and  they  stretched  forth  the  wings  of  the  cherubims,  so
that  the  wing  of  the  one  touched  the  one  wall ; and  the
wing  of  the  other  cherub  touched  the  other  wall  : and
their  wings  touched  one  another  in  the  midst  of  the
house.

The  Ark,  called  the  glory  of  Israel,  which  was  seat-
ed in  the  middle  of  the  holy  place,  under  the  wings  of
the  cherubim,  was  a small  chest,  or  coffer,  three  feet
nine  inches  long,  two  feet  three  inches  wide,  and  three
feet  three  inches  high.  It  was  made  of  wood,  except-
ing only  the  mercy  seat,  but  overlaid  with  gold,  both
inside  and  out.  I t had  a ledge  of  gold  surrounding  it
at  the  top,  into  which  the  cover,  called  the  mercy  seat,
was  let  in.  The  mercy  seat  was  of  solid  gold,  the
thickness  of  a hand’s  breadth : at  the  two  ends  of  it
were  two  cherubims,  looking  inwards  towards  each
other,  with  their  wings  expanded ; which  embracing
the  whole  circumference  of  the  mercy  seat,  they  met
on  each  side,  in  the  middle ; all  of  which,  the  Rabbins
say,  was  made  out  of  the  same  mass,  without  any  sol-
dering of  parts.


ROYAL  MASTER.


117


Here  the  Shekinah,  or  Divine  Presence,  rested,  and
was  visible  in  the  appearance  of  a cloud  over  it.  From
hence  the  Bathkoll  issued,  and  gave  answers  when
God  was  consulted.  And  hence  it  is  that  God  is  said,
in  the  scripture,  to  dwell  between  the  cherubim;  that
is,  between  the  cherubim  on  the  mercy  seat,  because
there  was  the  seat  or  throne  of  the  visible1  appearance
of  his  glory  among  them.


SELECT  MASTER’S  DEGREE.

Juc'4.';  ^')L’K  HfejMifc


— &Q& —


THIS  degree  is  the  summit  and  perfection  of
ancient  masonry  ; and  without  which  the  history  of
the  Royal  Arch  Degree  cannot  be  complete.  It  ra-
tionally accounts  for  the  concealment  and  preservation
of  those  essentials  of  the  craft,  which  were  brought  to
light  at  the  erection  of  the  second  Temple,  and  which
lay  concealed  from  the  masonic  eye  four  hundred  and
seventy  years.

Many  particulars  relative  to  those  few  who,  for  their
superior  skill,  were  selected  to  complete  an  important
part  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple,  are  explained.

And  here  too  is  exemplified  an  instance  of  justice
and  mercy,  by  our  ancient  patron,  towards  one  of  the
craft,  who  was  led  to  disobey  his  commands,  by  an
over  zealous  attachment  for  the  institution.  It  ends
with  a description  of  a particular  circumstance,  which
characterizes  the  degree.

The  following  Pslalm  is  read  at  opening:

Psalm  Ixxxvii.

“ His  foundation  is  in  the  holy  mountains.  The  Lord
loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings
of  Jacob.  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O city
of  God.  Selah.  I will  make  mention  of  Rahab  and
Babylon,  to  them  that  know  me.  Behold  Philistia,  and
Tyre,  with  Ethiopia;  this  man  was  born  there.  And


SELECT  MASTER.


119


ef  Zion  it  shall  be  said,  This  and  that  man  was  born  in
her;  and  the  highest  himself  shall  establish  her.  The
Lord  shall  count,  when  he  writeth  up  the  people,  that
this  man  was  born  there.  Selah.  As  well  the  sins;-
ers,  as  the  players  on  instruments,  shall  be  there : all
mv  springs  are  in  thee.”

The  following  passages  of  scripture  are  introduced
and  explained :

1 Kings  iv.  1,  5 and  6.

So  King  Solomon  was  king  over  all  Israel.  Aza-
riah,  the  son  of  Nathan,  was  over  the  officers;  and
Zabud,  the  son  of  Nathan,  was  principal  officer,  and
the  king’s  friend ; and  Ahishar  was  over  the  house-
hold ; and  Adoniram,  the  -son  of  Abda,  was  over  the
tribute.


1 Kings  v.  17,  18.

And  the  king  commanded,  and  they  brought  great
stones,  costly  stones,  and  hewed  stones,  to  lay  the
foundation  of  the  house.  And  Solomon’s  builders  and
iHiram’s  builders  did  hew  them,  and  the  stone-squarers:
so  they  prepared  timber  and  stones  to  build  the  house.

1 Kings  viii.  13,  14.

And  King  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  Hiram  out  of
Tyre.  He  was  a widow’s  son,  of  the  tribe  of  Naph-
tali ; and  his  father  was  a man  of  Tyre,  a worker  of
brass ; and  he  was  filled  with  wisdom  and  understand-
ing, and  cunning,  to  work  all  works  in  brass.

Ezekiel  xxvii.  9.

The  ancien's  of  Gebal,  and  the  wise  men  thereof
faere  in  thee  thy  calkers  : all  the  ships  of  the  sea,  with


1£0


MASONIC  CHART.


their  mariners,  were  in  thee,  to  occupy  thy  merchan-
dize.


Deut.  xxxi.  £4 — £6.

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Moses  had  made  an  end
of  writing  the  words  of  this  law  in  a book,  until  they
were  finished,  that  Moses  commanded  the  Levites,
which  bore  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  saying.
Take  this  book  of  the  law,  and  put  it  in  the  side  of  the
ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God,  that  it  may
be  there  for  a witness  against  thee.

Exodus  xvi.  33,  34.

And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  Take  a pot,  and  put  an
omer  full  of  manna  therein,  and  lay  it  up  before  the
Lord,  to  be  kept  for  your  generations.  As  the  Lord
commanded  Moses,  so  Aaron  laid  it  up  before  the  tes-
timony to  be  kept.

Numbers  xvii.  10.

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Bring  Aaron’s  rod
again  before  the  testimony,  to  be  kept  for  a token.

Numbers  vii.  89.

And  when  Moses  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle  of
the  congregation,  to  speak  with  him,  then  he  heard  the
voice  of  one  speaking  unto  him  from  oft*  the  mercy  seat,
that  was  upon  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  from  between
the  two  cherubims : and  he  spa!  e unto  him.

Exodus  xxv.  40.

And  look  that  thou  make  them  after  their  pattern
Which  was  shewed  thee  in  the  mount.


5ELECT  MASTER.


121


CHARGE  io  a Select  Master .
Companion,

Having  attained  to  this  degree,  you  have  passed
the  circle  of  perfection  in  ancient  masonry.  In  the
capacity  of  Select  Master,  you  must  be  sensible  that
your  obligations  are  increased  in  proportion  to  your
privileges.  Let  it  be  your  constant  care  to  prove
yourself  worthy  of  the  confidence  reposed  in  you,
and  of  the  high  honour  conferred  on  you,  in  admit-
ting you  to  this  select  degree.  Let  uprightness  and
integrity  attend  your  steps ; let  justice  and  mercy
mark  your  conduct ; let  fervency  and  zeal  stimulate
you  in  the  discharge  of  the  various  duties  incumbent
on  you ; but  suffer  not  an  idle  or  impertinent  curiosi-
ty to  lead  you  astray,  or  betray  you  into  danger.  Be
deaf  to  every  insinuation  which  would  have  a ten-
dency to  weaken  your  resolution,  or  tempt  you  to
an  act  of  disobedience.  Be  voluntarily  dumb  and
blind , when  the  exercise  of  those  faculties  would  en-
danger the  peace  of  your  mind  or  the  probity  of
your  conduct;  and  let  silence  and  secrecy , those
cardinal  virtues  of  a Select  Master,  on  all  necessary
occasions,  be  scrupulously  observed.  By  a steady
adherance  to  the  important  instructions  contained
in  this  degree,  you  will  merit  the  approbation  of  the
select  number  with  whom  you  are  associated,  and
will  enjoy  the  high  satisfaction  of  having  acted  well
your  part  in  the  important  enterprize  in  which  you
are  engaged  ; and  after  having  wrought  your  regu-
lar hours , may  you  be  admitted  to  participate  in  all
the  privileges  of  a Select  Master .


ORDER  OF  HIGH  PRIESTHOOD


— 9!©^ —


rFHIS  order  appertains  to  the  office  of  High
Priest  of  a Royal  Arch  Chapter:  and  no  one  can  be
legally  entitled  to  receive  it,  until  he  has  been  duly
elected  to  preside  as  High  Priest  in  a regular  Chapter
of  Royal  Arch  Masons.  This  order  should  not  be
conferred  when  a less  number  than  three  duly  quali-
fied High  Priests  are  present.  Whenever  the  ceremo-
ny is  performed  in  due  and  ample  form,  the  assistance
of  at  least  nine  High  Priests,  who  have  received  it,  is
requisite.

Though  the  High  Priest  of  every  regular  Royal
Arch  Chapter,  having  himself  been  duly  qualified,  can
confer  the  order,  under  the  preceding  limitation  as  to
number;  yet  it  is  desirable,  when  circumstances  wilt
permit,  that  it  should  be  conferred  by  the  Grand  High
Priest  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  or  such  Pre-
sent. or  Past  High  Priest  as  he  may  designate  for  that
purpose.  A convention,  notified  to  meet  at  the  time  of
any  convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  will  afford  the
best  opportunity  of  conferring  this  important  and  ex-
alted degree  of  masonry,  with  appropriate  solemnity.
Whenever  it  is  conferred,  the  following  directions  are
to  be  observed.

A candidate  desirous  of  receiving  the  order  of  High
Priesthood,  makes  a w ritten  request  to  his  predecessor
in  office,  or,  when  it  can  be  done,  to  the  Grand  High
Priest,  respectfully  requesting  that  a convention  of
High  Priests  may  be  called,  for  the  purpose  of  confer-
ring on  him  the  order.  When  the  convention  meets.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


123


and  is  duly  organized,  a certificate  of  the  due  election
of  the  candidate  to  the  office  of  High  Priest,  must  be
produced.  This  certificate  is  signed  by  his  predeces-
sor in  office,  attested  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Chapter.
On  examination  of  this  certificate,  the  qualifications  of
the  candidate  are  ascertained.  The  solemn  ceremo-
nies of  conferring  the  order  upon  him,  then  ensue.
"W  hen  ended,  the  presiding  officer  directs  the  Secreta-
ry of  the  convention  to  make  a record  of  the  proceed-
ings, and  return  it  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Chap-
ter, to  be  by  him  laid  before  the  Grand  High  Priest,  for
the  information  of  all  whom  it  may  concern.  The  con-
vention of  High  Priests  is  then  dissolved  in  due  form.

It  is  the  duty  of  every  Companion,  as  soon  after  his
election  to  the  office  of  High  Priest,  as  is  consistent
with  his  personal  convenience,  to  apply  for  admission
to  the  order  of  High  Priesthood,  that  he  may  be  fully
qualified  properly  to  govern  his  Chapter.

The  following  passages  of  scripture  are  made  use  of
during  the  ceremonies  appertaining  to  this  order.

Genesis  xiv.  12 — 24.

And  they  took  Lot,  Abram’s  brother’s  son,  (who
dwelt  in  Sodom,)  and  his  goods,  and  departed.  And
there  came  one  that  had  escaped,  and  told  Abram,  the
Hebrew  ; for  he  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mature  the  Aino-
rite,  brother  of  Eshcol,  and  brother  of  Aner ; and  these
were  confederate  with  Abram.  And  when  Abram
heard  that  his  brother  was  taken  captive,  he  armed  his
trained  servants,  born  in  his  own  house,  three  hundred
and  eighteen,  and  pursued  them  unto  Dan.  And  he
divided  himself  against  them,  he  and  his  servants,  by
night,  and  smote  them,  and  pursued  them  unto  Hobah,
which  is  on  the  left  hand  of  Damascus.  And  he  brought
back  all  the  goods,  and  also  brought  again  his  brother
Lot,  and  his  goods,  and  the  women  also,  and  the  pee-


MASONIG  CHART.


124

pie.  And  the  king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  meet  him;,
(after  his  return  from  the  slaughter  of  Chedorlaomer,
and  of  the  kings  that  were  with  him,)  at  the  valley  oi
Shevah,  which  is  the  king’s  dale.  And  Melchisedek,
king  of  Salem,  brought  forth  bread  and  wine : and  he
was  the  priest  of  the  Most  High  God.  And  he  blessed
him*  and  said,  Blessed  be  Abram  of  the  Most  High
God,  who  hath  delivered  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand.
And  he  gave  him  tithes  of  all.  And  the  king  of  Sodom
said  to  Abram,  Give  me  the  persons,  and  take  the
goods  to  thyself.  And  Abram  said  to  the  king  of
Sodom,  I have  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  the  Lord,  the
Most  High  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth,
that  I will  not  take  from  a thread  even  to  a shoe-latch-
et ; and  that  I will  not  take  any  thing  that  is  thine,  lest
thou  shouldest  say,  I have  made  Abram  rich:  save
only  that  which  the  young  men  have  eaten,  and  the
portion  of  the  men  which  went  with  me,  Aner*  Eshcol
and  Mature,  let  them  take  their  portion.

Numbers  vi.  22 — 26.

And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  Speak  un-
to Aaron,  and  unto  his  sons,  saying,  On  this  wise  ye
shall  bless  the  children  of  Israel,  saying  unto  them.
The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee ; the  Lord  make
his  face  to  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee;
the  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give
thee  peace.

Heb.  vii.  1 — 6.

For  this  Melchisedek,  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  the
Most  High  God,  (who  met  Abram  returning  from  the


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


125


Slaughter  of  the  kings,  and  blessed  him  ; to  whom  also
Abraham  gave  a tenth  part  of  all ; first  being,  by  in-
terpretation, King  of  Righteousness,  and  after  that  al-
so, King  of  Salem,  which  is.  King  of  Peace  ; without
father,  without  mother,  without  descent;  having  neither
beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life  ; but  made  like  unto
the  Son  of  God,)  abideth  a priest  continually.  Now
consider  how  great  this  man  was,  unto  whom  even  the
patriarch  Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of  the  spoils.  And
verily,  they  that  are  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  who  receive
the  office  of  the  priesthood,  have  a commandment  to
take  tithes  of  the  people,  according  to  the  law,  that  is,
of  their  brethren,  though  they  come  out  of  the  loins  of
Abraham.

“ For  he  testifieth.  Thou  art  a priest  for  ever,  after
the  order  of  Melchisedek.

“ And  inasmuch  as  not  without  an  oath,  he  was  made
priest.

“For  those  priests  (under  the  Levitical  law)  were
made  without  an  oath ; but  this  with  an  oath,  by  him
that  said  unto  him,  The  Lord  sware,  and  will  not  re-
pent, Thou  art  a priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chisedek.”

Ceremonies  and  Charges  upon  the  Installation
of  the  Officers  of  a Royal  Arch  Chapter.

1.  The  Grand  Officers  will  meet  at  a convenient
place , and  open.

2.  The  subordinate  Chaper  will  meet  in  the  outer
courts  of  their  Hall , and  form  an  avenue  for  the  re  -
ception of  the  Grand  Officers.

11*


126


MASONIC  CHART.


3.  When  formed , they  will  dispatch  a committee  io
the  place  ivhere  the  Grand  Officers  are  assembled,  to  in-
form  the  Grand  Marshal  that  the  Chapter  is  prepared
to  receive  them  ; — the  Grand  Marshal  will  announce
the  committee,  and  introduce  them  to  the  Grand  Offi-
cers.

4.  The  Grand  Officers  will  move  in  procession,  con-
ducted by  the  committee,  to  the  Hall  of  the  Chapter,  in
the  following  order  :

Grand  Tyler ;

Two  Grand  Stewards;

Representatives  of  subordinate  Chapters,  according  -
to  seniority,  by  threes  triangular ;

Three  Great  Lights ;

Orator,  Chaplain,  and  other  Clergy  ;

Grand  Secretary,  Grand  Treasurer,  and  Grand  Royal
Arch  Captain ;

Grand  P.  Sojourner,  Grand  Captain  of  the  Host,  and
Deputy  Grand  High  Priest ;

Grand  Scribe,  Grand  King,  and  Grand  High  Priest ;

(Grand  Marshal,  on  the  left  of  the  Procession.)

N.  B.  The  Grand  P.  Sojourner,  Grand  Captain  of
the  Host,  and  Grand  Royal  Arch  Captain,  are  appoint-
ed pro  tempore.

When  the  Grand  High  Priest  enters,  the  grand  hon-
ours are  given.

5.  The  Grand  Secretary  will  then  call  over  the
names  of  the  officers  elect ; and  the  Grand  High  Priest
will  ask  whether  they  accept  their  respective  offic  es.  Jf
they  answer  in  the  affirmative,  he  then  asks  the  mem-
bers whether  they  remain  satisfied  with  their  choice.
If  they  answer  in  the  affirmative,  he  directs  their  offi-
cers to  approach  the  sacred  volume,  and  become  quafi-


HIGH  FRIESTHQOt).


W


tied  for  Installation,  agreeably  to  the  4th  section  of  the
4th  article  of  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Consti-
tution.

6.  The  Grand  Marshal  will  then  form  the  whole  in
procession,  and  they  will  march  through  the  veils  into
the  inner  apartment,  where  they  will  surround  the  al-
tar, which  is  previously  prepared  in  ample  form  for
the  occasion.

7 All  present  will  kneel,  and  the  following  prayer
will  be  recited.


Prayer .

Almighty  and  Supreme  High  Priest  of  heaven  and
Earth!  Who  is  there  in  heaven  but  thee!  and  who
upon  earth  can  stand  in  competition  with  thee ! Thy
OMNISCIENT  Mind  brings  all  things  in  review,
past,  present  and  to  come  ; thine  OMNIPOTENT
Arm  directs  the  movements  of  the  vast  creation  ; thine
OMNIPRESENT  Eye  pervades  the  secret  recesses
of  every  heart;  thy  boundless  beneficence  supplies  us
with  every  comfort  and  enjoyment;  and  thine  un-
speakable perfections  and  glory  surpass  the  under-
standing of  the  children  of  men ! Our  Father,  who
art  in  heaven,  we  invoke  thy  benediction  upon  the  pur-
poses of  our  present  assembly.  Let  this  Chapter  be
established  to  thine  honour : let  its  officers  be  endowed
with  wisdom  to  discern,  and  fidelity  to  pursue,  its  true
interests;  let  its  members  be  ever  mindful  of  the  duty
they  owe  to  their  God,  the  obedience  they  owe  to  their
superiors,  the  love  they  owe  to  their  equals,  and  the
good  will  they  owe  to  all  mankind.  Let  this  Chapter
be  consecrated  to  thy  glory,  and  its  members  ever


MASONIC  CHART.


128

exemplify  their  love  to  God  by  their  beneficence  t*
man.

“ Glory  be  to  God  on  high.”

Response.  “Amen  ! So  mote  it  be.”

They  are  then  qualified  in  due  form.

All  the  Companions,  except  High  Priests  and  Past
High  Priests,  are  then  desired  to  withdraw,  while  the
new  High  Priest  is  solemnly  bound  to  the  performance
of  his  duties;  and  after  the  performance  of  other  ne-
cessary ceremonies,  not  proper  to  be  written,  they  are
permitted  to  return.


8.  The  whole  then  repair  to  their  appropriate  sta-
tions ; when  the  Grand  Marshal  will  form  a general
procession , in  the  following  order  :


Three  Royal  Arch  Stewards,  with  Rods ;
Tyler  of  a Blue  Lodge;

Entered  Apprentices;

Fellow  Crafts ;

Master  Masons ;

Stewards  of  Lodges,  living  Jew’els;
Deacons  having  Jewels;
Secretaries  having  Jewels;
Treasurers  having  Jewels ;
Wardens  having  Jewels ;

M ark  Master  Masons ;

M.  E.  Masters;

Royal  Arch  Masons  by  three;
Royal  Masters  by  three;

Select  Masters  by  three;

Orders  of  Knighthood ;

Tyler  of  the  new  Chapter;


BI«H  PRIESTHOOB.


129


Members  of  the  new  Chapter,  by  three ;

Three  Masters  of  Veils;

Secretary,  Treasurer,  R.  A.  Captain,  and
P.  Sojourner  carrying  the  Ark  ;

A Companion  carrying  the  Pot  of  Incense ;

Two  Companions  carrying  Lights  ;

Scribe,  High  Priest  and  King ;

Grand  Chapter,  as  before  prescribed.

On  arriving  at  the  church,  or  house  where  the  ser
vices  are  to  be  performed,  they  halt,  open  to  the  right
and  left,  and  face  inward,  while  the  Grand  Officers
and  others  in  succession,  pass  through  and  enter  the
house.

9.  The  officers  and  members  of  the  new  Chapter,  and
also  of  the  Grand  Chapter , being  seated , the  Grand
Marshal  proclaims  silence , and  the  ceremonies  com *
mence .

10.  An  Anthem  or  Ode  is  to  be  performed.

1 1 . An  Oration  or  Address  is  to  be  delivered.

1 2.  An  Ode  or  Piece  of  Music.

*[13.  The  Deputy  *Grand  High  Priest  then  rises
and  informs  the  Grand  High  Priest , that  “ a number
of  Companions,  duly  instructed  in  the  sublime  myste-
ries, being  desirous  of  promoting  the  honour , and
propagating  the  principles  of  the  Art , have  applied  to
the  Grand  Chapter  for  a warrant  to  constitute  a new
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  which  having  been
obtained,  they  are  now  assembled  for  the  purpose  of
being  constituted , and  having  their  officers  installed  in
due  and  ancient  form.~\

* Note.  Those  paragraphs  which  are  inclosed  within  brack-
ets, apply  exclusively  to  cases  when  new  Chapters  are  constitu-
ted. and  their  officers  instilled- for  the  first  time.  The  rest  ap-
ply equally  to  such  cases,  as  well  as  to  annual  Installations.


130


MASONIC  CHART.


[14.  The  Grand  Marshal  will  then  form  the  officers
and  members  of  the  new  Chapter  in  front  of  the  Grand
Officers  ; after  which , the  Grand  High  Priest  directs
the  Grand  Secretary  to  read  the  warrant .]

[15.  The  Grand  High  Priest  then  rises  and  says ,
“ By  virtue  of  the  high  powers  in  me  vested , 1 do  form
you,  my  respected  Companions,  into  a regular  Chapter
of  Royal  Arch  Masons.  From  henceforth  you  are  au-
thorized and  empowered  to  open  and  hold  a Lodge  of
Mark  Masters,  Past  Masters , and  Most  Excellent
Masters,  and  a Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  ; and
to  do  and  perform  all  such  things  as  thereunto  may
appertain  ; conforming,  in  all  your  doings,  to  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Royal  Arch  Constitution,  and  the  general
regulations  of  the  State  Grand  Chapter.  And  may
the  God  of  your  fathers  be  with  you,  guide  and  direct
you  in  cdl  your  doings.”' ]

16.  The  furniture,  clothing,  jewels,  implements ,
utensils,  fyc.  belonging  to  the  Chapter,  ( having  been
previously  placed  in  the  centre,  in  front  of  the  Grand
Officers,  covered,)  are  now  uncovered,  and  the  new
Chapter  is  dedicated  in  due  and  ancient  form.

17.  The  Dedication  then  follows:  the  Grand  Chap-
lain saying,

“ To  our  Most  Excellent  Patron  ZERUBRABEL,
we  solemnly  dedicate  this  Chapter.  May  the  blessing
of  our  Heavenly  High  Priest  descend  and  rest  upon
its  members,  and  may  their  felicity  be  immortal.

“ Glory  be  to  God  on  high.”

[Response  by  the  Companions.]

“ As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall
he,  world  without  end ! Amen.

“ So  mote  it  be.”


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


131


18.  The  Grand  Marshal  then  says , “ lam  directed

to  proclaim,  and  1 do  hereby  proclaim  this  Chapter , by
the  name  of Chapter , duly  consecrated , consti-

tuted and  dedicated . This ,”  4*c.  <§*c.

19.  ^7?  Ode.  a

20.  The  Deputy  Grand  High  Priest  will  then  pre-
sent the  first  officer  of  the  new  Chapter  to  the  Grand
High  Priest , saying ,

Most  Excellent  Grand  High  Priest,

I present  you  my  worthy  Companion ,

nominated  in  the  warrant,  to  be  installed  High  Priest
of  this  [new]  Chapter,  I find  him  to  be  skilful  in  the
royal  art,  and  attentive  to  the  moral  precepts  of  our
forefathers,  and  have  therefore  no  doubt  but  he  will
discharge  the  duties  of  his  office  with  fidelity.

The  Grand  High  Priest  then  addresses  him  as  fol-
lows :

Most  Excellent,

I feel  much  satisfaction  in  performing  my  duty
on  the  present  occasion,  by  installing  you  into  the
office  of  High  Priest  of  this  [new]  Chapter.  It  is
an  office  highly  honourable  to  all  those  who  dili-
gently perform  the  important  duties  annexed  to  it.
Your  reputed  masonic  knowledge,  however,  pre-
cludes the  necessity  of  a particular  enumeration
of  those  duties.  I shall  therefore  only  observe,
that  by  a frequent  recurrence  to  the  constitution,
and  general  regulations,  and  constant  practice  of
the  several  sublime  lectures  and  charges,  you  will


132


MASONIC  CHART.


be  best  able  to  fulfil  them  ; and  I am  confident  that
the  Companions  who  are  chosen  to  preside  with
you,  will  give  strength  to  your  endeavours,  and

support  to  your  exertions. 1 shall  now  pro-

pose  certain  questions  to  you,  relative  to  the  du-
ties of  your  office,  and  to  which  I must  request
your  unequivocal  answer.

1.  Do  you  solemnly  promise  that  you  will  re-
double your  endeavours  to  correct  the  vices,  pu-
rify the  morals,  and  promote  the  happiness  of  those
®f  your  Companions,  who  have  attained  this  sub-
lime degree  ?

2.  That  you  will  never  suffer  your  Chapter  to
be  opened,  unless  there  be  present  nine  regular
Royal  Arch  Masons?

3.  That  you  will  never  suffer  either  more  or  less
than  three  brethren  to  be  exalted  in  your  Chap-
ter at  one  and  the  same  time  ?

4.  That  you  will  not  exalt  any  one  to  this  de-
gree, who  has  not  shown  a charitable  and  humane
disposition ; or  who  has  not  made  a considerable
proficiency  in  the  foregoing  degrees  ?

5.  That  you  will  promote  the  general  good  of
©ur  order,  and,  on  all  proper  occasions,  be  ready
to  give  and  receive  instructions,  and  particularly
from  the  General  and  State  Grand  Officers  ?

6.  That,  to  the  utmost  of  your  power,  you  will
preserve  the  solemnities  of  our  ceremonies,  and
behave,  in  open  Chapter,  with  the  most  profound


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


133


respect  and  reverence,  as  an  example  to  your
Companions  ?

7.  That  you  will  not  acknowledge  or  have  in-
tercourse with  any  Chapter  that  does  not  work  un-
der a constitutional  warrant  or  dispensation  ?

8.  That  you  will  not  admit  any  visitor  into  your
Chapter,  who  lias  not  been  exalted  in  a Chapter
legally  constituted,  without  his  being  first  formally
healed  ?

9.  That  you  will  observe  and  support  such  bye-
laws as  may  be  made  by  your  Chapter,  in  con-
formity to  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Con-
stitution, and  the  general  regulations  of  the  Grand
Chapter  ?

10.  That  you  will  pay  respect  and  due  obedi-
ence to  the  instructions  of  the  General  and  State
Grand  Officers,  particularly  relating  to  the  seve-
ral Lectures  and  Charges,  and  will  resign  the
chair  to  them,  severally,  when  they  may  visit  your
Chapter  ?

1 ] . That  you  will  support  and  observe  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Royal  Arch  Constitution,  and  the  Gen-
eral Regulations  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chap-
ter, under  whose  authority  you  act .?

Do  you  submit  to  all  these  things,  and  do  you
promise  to  observe  and  practice  them  faithfully  ?

These  questions  being  answered  in  the  affirmative
the  Companions  all  kneel  in  due  form,  and  the  Grand
High  Priest  or  Grand  Chaplain  repeats  the  following,
or  some  other  suitable  prayer.

12


134


MASONIC  CHART.


fe  Most  holy  and  glorious  Lord  God,  the  Great  High
Priest  of  Heaven  and  Earth,

“ We  approach  thee  with  reverence,  and  implore  thy
blessing  on  the  Companion  appointed  to  preside  over
this  new  assembly,  and  now  prostrate  before  thee
fill  his  heart  with  thy  fear,  that  his  tongue  and  actions
may  pronounce  thy  glory.  Make  him  stedfast  in  thy
service;  grant  him  firmness  of  mind;  animate  his
heart,  and  strengthen  his  endeavours  ; may  he  teach
thy  judgments  and  thy  laws  ; and  may  the  incense  he
shall  put  before  thee,  upon  thine  altar,  prove  an  ac-
ceptable sacrifice  unto  thee.  Bless  him,  0 Lord,  and
bless  the  work  of  his  hands. — Accept  us  in  mercy ;
hear  thou  from  Heaven  thy  dwelling-place,  and  forgive
our  transgressions.

“ Glory  be  to  God  the  Father ; as  it  was  in  the  be
ginning,”  &c.

[Response.]  “ So  mote  it  be.”

21.  The  Grand  High  Priest  will  then  cause  the  High
Priest  elect  to  he  invested  with  his  clothing,  badges ,
Sfc. ; after  which  he  will  address  him  as  follows , viz.

Most  Excellent,

In  consequence  of  your  cheerful  acquiescence
with  the  charges,  which  you  have  heard  recited,
you  are  qualified  for  installation  as  the  High  Priest
of  this  Royal  Arch  Chapter ; and  it  is  incumbent
upon  me,  on  this  occasion,  to  point  out  some  of
the  particulars  appertaining  to*  your  office,  duty,
and  dignity.

All  legally  constituted  bodies  of  Royal  Arch
Masons,  are  called  Chapters ; as  regular  bodies
of  masons  of  the  preceding  degrees,  are  called


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


135


Lodges.  Every  Chapter  ought  to  assemble  for
work,  at  least  once  in  three  months ; and  must
consist  of  a High  Priest,  King,  Scribe,  Captain  of
the  Host,  Principal  Sojourner,  Royal  Arch  Cap-
tain, three  Grand  Masters  of  the  Veils,  Treasurer,
Secretary,  and  as  many  members  as  may  be  found
convenient  for  working  to  advantage.

The  officers  of  the  chapter  officiate  in  the
lodges,  holden  for  conferring  the  preparatory  de-
grees, according  to  rank,  as  follows  : viz.

The  High  Priest,  as  Master.

The  King,  as  Senior  Warden.

The  Scribe,  as  Junior  Warden.

The  Captain  of  the  Host,  as  Marshal  or  Master
of  Ceremonies.

The  Principal  Sojourner,  as  Senior  Deacon.

The  Royal  Arch  Captain,  as  Junior  Deacon.

The  Master  of  the  first  Veil,  as  Junior  Overseer.

The  Master  of  the  second  Veil,  as  Senior  Over-
seer.

The  Master  of  the  third  Veil,  as  Master  Overseer.

The  Treasurer,  Secretary,  Chaplain,  Stewards,
and  Tyler,  as  officers  of  corresponding  rank.

The  High  Priest  of  every  Chapter  has  it  in
special  charge,  to  see  that  the  bye-laws  of  his
Chapter,  as  well  as  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch
Constitution,  and  all  the  regulations  of  the  Grand
Chapter,  are  duly  observed  : — that  all  the  officers
of  his  Chapter  perform  the  duties  of  their  respec-
tive offices  faithfully,  and  are  examples  of  diligence


156


MASONIC  CHART.


and  industry  to  their  companions  ; — that  true  and
accurate  records  of  all  the  proceedings  of  the
chapter  are  kept  by  the  secretary  ; — that  the  trea-
surer keeps  and  renders  exact  and  just  accounts
of  all  the  monies  and  other  property  belonging  to
the  Chapter ; — that  the  regular  returns  be  made
annually  to  the  Grand  Chapter  ; — and  that  the  an-
nual dues  to  the  Grand  Chapter  be  regularly  and
punctually  paid.  He  has  the  right  and  authority
pf  calling  his  Chapter  together  at  pleasure,  upon
any  emergency  or  occurrence,  which  in  his  judg-
ment may  require  their  meeting.  It  is  his  privi-
lege and  duty,  together  with  the  king  and  scribe,
to  attend  the  meetings  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  either
in  person  or  by  proxy ; and  the  well-being  of  the
institution  requires  that  his  duty  should  on  no  oc-
casion be  omitted.

The  office  of  High  Priest  is  a station  highly
honourable  to  all  those,  who  diligently  perform
the  important  duties  annexed  to  it.  By  a frequent
recurrence  to  the  constitution  and  general  regu-
lations, and  a constant  practice  of  the  several  sub-
lime lectures  and  charges,  you  will  be  best  enabled
to  fulfil  those  duties  ; and  I am  confident  that  the
companions,  who  are  chosen  to  preside  with  you,
will  give  strength  to  your  endeavours,  and  support
to  your  exertions.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOB.


137


Let  the  Mitre  with  which  you  are  invested,  re-
mind you  of  the  dignity  of  the  office  you  sustain,
and  its  inscription  impress  upon  your  mind  a
sense  of  your  dependence  upon  God  ; — that  per-
fection is  not  given  unto  man  upon  earth,  and
that  perfect  holiness  belongeth  alone  unto  the
Lord.

The  Breast-Plate , with  which  you  are  deco-
rated, in  imitation  of  that  upon  which  were  en-
graven the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes,  and  worn
by  the  High  Priest  of  Israel,  is  to  teach  you  that
you  are  always  to  bear  in  mind  your  responsibility
to  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the  institution,  and
that  the  honour  and  interests  of  your  Chapter  and
its  members,  should  be  always  near  your  heart.

The  various  colours  of  the  Robes  you  wear,  are
emblematical  of  every  grace  and  virtue  which  can
adorn  and  beautify  the  human  mind ; each  of
which  will  be  briefly  illustrated  in  the  course  of
the  charges  to  be  delivered  to  your  subordinate
officers.

You  will  now  take  charge  of  your  officers,
standing  upon  their  right,  and  present  them  seve-
rally in  succession  to  the  Deputy  Grand  High
Priest,  by  whom  they  will  be  presented  to  me  for
installation.

22.  The  High  Priest  of  the  Chapter  will  then  pre-
sent his  second  officer  to  the  Deputy  Grand  High  Priest ,
who  will  present  him  to  the  Grand  High  Priest  in  the
words  of  the  Constitution.  The  Grand  High  Priest ,
12*


138


MASONIC  CHARf.


will  then  ask  him  whether  he  has  attended  to  the  ancient
charges  and  regulations  before  recited  to  his  superior
officer:  if  he  answers  in  the  affirmative , he  is  asked
whether  he  fully  and  freely  assents  to  the  same : if  he
answers  in  the  affirmative , the  Grand  High  Priest  di-
rects his  deputy  to  invest  him  with  his  clothing , £,'C.  and
then  addresses  him  as  follows , viz.

CHARGE  to  the  Second  Officer , or  King.
Excellent  Companion,

The  important  station  to  which  you  are  elected
in  this  Chapter,  requires  from  you  exemplary  con-
duct; its  duties  demand  your  most  assiduous  at-
tention ; you  are  to  second  and  support  your  chief
in  all  the  requirements  of  his  office  ; and  should
casualties  at  any  time  prevent  his  attendance,  3^011
are  to  succeed  him  in  the  performance  of  his  du-
ties.

Your  badge  (the  Level  surmounted  by  a crown)
should  remind  you,  that  although  you  are  the  rep-
resentative of  a King,  and  exalted  by  office  above
your  Companions,  yet  that  you  remain  upon  a
level  with  them,  as  respects  your  duty  to  God,  to
your  neighbour,  and  to  yourself ; that  you  are
equally  bound  with  them,  to  be  obedient  to  the
laws  and  ordinances  of  the  institution,  to  be  chari-
table, humane  and  just,  and  to  seek  every  occa-
sion of  doing  good.

Your  office  teaches  a striking  lesson  of  humility.
The! institutions  of  political  society  teach  us  to
consider  the  king  as  the  chief  of  created  beings.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


139


and  that  the  first  duty  of  his  subjects,  is  to  obey
his  mandates : — but  the  institutions  of  our  sub-
lime degrees,  by  placing  the  King  in  a situation
subordinate  to  the  High  Priest,  teaches  us  that
our  duty  to  God  is  paramount  to  all  other  duties,
and  should  ever  claim  the  priority  of  our  obedi-
ence to  man ; and  that  however  strongly  we  may
be  bound  to  obey  the  laws  of  civil  society,  yet
that  those  laws,  to  be  just,  should  never  intermed-
dle with  matters  of  conscience,  nor  dictate  articles
of  faith.

The  Scarlet  Robe , an  emblem  of  imperial  dig-
nity, should  remind  you  of  the  paternal  concern
you  should  ever  feel  for  the  welfare  of  your  Chap-
ter, and  the  fervency  and  zeal  with  which  you
should  endeavour  to  promote  its  prosperity.

In  presenting  to  you  the  Crown,  which  is  an
emblem  of  royalty,  I would  remind  you,  that  to
reign  sovereign  in  the  hearts  and  affections  of  men,
must  be  far  more  grateful  to  a generous  and  be-
nevolent mind,  than  to  rule  over  their  lives  and
fortunes ; and  that  to  enable  you  to  enjoy  this  pre-
eminence with  honour  and  satisfaction,  you  must
subject  your  own  passions  and  prejudices  to  the  do-
minion of  reason  and  charity.

You  are  entitled  to  the  second  seat  in  the  coun-
cil of  your  Companions.  Let  the  bright  example
of  your  illustrious  predecessor  in  the  Grand  Coun-
cil at  Jerusalem,  stimulate  you  to  the  faithful  dis-


140


MASONIC  CHART


charge  of  your  duties ; and  when  the  King  of
kings  shall  summon  you  into  his  immediate  pre-
sence, from  his  hand  may  you  receive  a crown  of
glory , which  shall  never  fade  away.

23.  The  King  will  then  retire  to  the  line  of  officers ,
and  the  Scribe  will  be  presented  in  the  manner  before
mentioned.  After  his  investiture,  the  Grand  High
Priest  will  address  him  as  follows,  viz .

CHARGE  to  the  Third  Officer , or  Scribe.
Excellent  Companion,

The  office  of  Scribe,  to  which  you  are  elected,
is  very  important  and  respectable.  In  the  absence
of  your  superior  officers,  you  are  bound  to  suc-
ceed them,  and  to  perform  their  duties.  The  pur-
poses of  the  institution  ought  never  to  suffer  for
want  of  intelligence  in  its  proper  officers ; you
will  therefore  perceive  the  necessity  there  is  of
your  possessing  such  qualifications  as  will  enable
you  to  accomplish  those  duties  which  are  incum-
bent upon  you,  in  your  appropriate  station,  as  well
as  those  which  may  occasionally  devolve  on  you,
by  the  absence  of  your  superiors.

The  Purple  Robe , with  which  you  are  invested,
is  an  emblem  of  union , and  is  calculated  to  re-
mind you  that  the  harmony  and  unanimity  of  the
Chapter  should  be  y^our  constant  aim  ; and  to  this
end  you  are  studiously  to  avoid  all  occasions  of
giving  offence,  or  countenancing  any  thing  that
may  create  divisions  or  dissentions.  You  are,  by


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


141


all  means  iii  your  power,  to  endeavour  to  establish
a permanent  union  and  good  understanding  among
all  orders  and  degrees  of  masonry;  and,  as  the
glorious  sun,  at  its  meridian  height,  dispels  the  mist
and  clouds  which  obscure  the  horizon,  so  may*
your  exertions  tend  to  dissipate  the  gloom  of  jeal-
ousy and  discord,  whenever  they  may  appear.

Your  badge  (a  Plumb-rule  surmounted  by  the
Turban ,)  is  an  emblem  of  rectitude  and  vigilance;
and  while  you  stand  as  a watchman  upon  the
tower,  to  guard  y our  Companions  against  the  ap-
proach of  those  enemies  of  human  felicity,  intem-
perance and  excess , let  this  faithful  monitor  ever
remind  you  to  walk  uprightly  in  your  station ; ad-
monishing and  animating  your  Companions  to
fidelity  and  industry  while  at  labour,  and  to  tem-
perance and  moderation  while  at  refreshment. —
And,  when  the  Great  Watchman  of  Israel,  whose
eye  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps,  shall  relieve  you
from  your  post  on  earth,  may  he  permit  you  in
heaven  to  participate  in  that  food  and  refreshment
which  is

“ Such  as  the  saints  in  glory  love,

“ And  such  as  angels  eat.”

£4.  The  Scribe  will  then  retire  to  the  line  of  officeis>
mul  the  next  officer  be  presented  as  before .


142  MASONIC  CHART.

CHARGE  to  the  Fourth  Officer , or  Captain  of
the  Host *

Companion,

The  office  with  which  you  are  entrusted,  is  of
high  importance,  and  demands  your  most  zealous
consideration.  The  preservation  of  the  most  essen-
tial traits  of  our  ancient  customs,  usages  and  land-
marks, are  within  your  province ; and  it  is  indis-
pensably necessary,  that  the  part  assigned  to  you,
in  the  immediate  practice  of  our  rites  and  ceremo-
nies, should  be  perfectly  understood,  and  correctly
administered.

Your  office  corresponds  with  that  of  marshal,  or
master  of  ceremonies.  You  are  to  superintend  all
processions  of  your  Chapter,  when  moving  as  a
distinct  body,  either  in  public  or  private;  and  as
the  world  can  only  judge  of  our  private  discipline
by  our  public  deportment,  you  will  be  careful  that
the  utmost  order  and  decorum  be  observed  on  all
such  occasions.  You  will  ever  be  attentive  to  the
commands  of  your  chief,  and  always  near  at  hand
to  see  them  duly  executed.  I invest  you  with  the
badge  of  your  office,  and  presume  that  you  will
give  to  your  duties  all  that  study  and  attention
which  their  importance  demands.

25.  He  will  then  retire  to  the  line  of  officers , and  the
next  officer  unit  be  presented.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


145


CHARGE  to  the  Fifth  Officer , or  Principal
Sojourner .

Companion,

The  office  confided  to  you,  though  subordinate
in  degree,  is  equal  in  importance  to  any  in  the
. Chapter,  that  of  your  chief  alone  excepted.  Your
office  corresponds  with  that  of  senior  deacon , in
the  preparatory  degrees.  Among  the  duties  re-
quired of  you,  the  preparation  and  introduction
of  candidates  are  not  the  least.  As  in  our  inter-
course with  the  wrorld,  experience  teaches  that
first  impressions  are  often  the  most  durable,  and
the  most  difficult  to  eradicate ; so  it  is  of  great
importance,  in  all  cases,  that  those  impressions
should  be  correct  and  just : hence  it  is  essential
that  the  officer,  who  brings  the  blind  by  a way
that  they  knew  not,  and  leads  them  in  paths  that
they  have  not  known,  should  always  be  well  qual-
ified to  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and
crooked  things  strait.

Your  Robe  of  Office  is  an  emblem  of  humility $
and  teaches  that  in  the  prosecution  of  a laudable
undertaking,  we  should  never  decline  taking  any
part  that  may  be  assigned  us,  although  it  may  be
the  most  difficult  or  dangerous.

The  rose-coloured  tesselated  Border , adorning
the  robe,  is  an  emblem  of  ardour  and  persever-
ance, and  signifies,  that  when  we  have  engaged  in
a virtuous  course,  notwithstanding  all  the  impedi-
ments, hardships,  and  trials,  we  may  be  destined


144


MASONIC  CHARI*.


to  encounter,  vve  should  endure  them  all  with  for-
titude, and  ardently  persevere  unto  the  end  ; rest-
ing assured  of  receiving,  at  the  termination  of  our
labours,  a noble  and  glorious  reward.  Your  past
exertions  will  be  considered  as  a pledge  of  your
future  assiduity  in  the  faithful  discharge  of  your
duties.

26.  He  will  then  retire  to  the  line  of  officers , and
the  next  officer  is  presented.

CHARGE  to  the  Sixth  Officer , or  Royal  Arch
Captain .

Companion,

The  well-known  duties  of  your  station  require
but  little  elucidation.  Your  office  in  the  prepara-
tory degrees  corresponds  with  that  of  junior  dea-
con. It  is  your  province,  conjointly  with  the
Captain  of  the  Host,  to  attend  the  examination  of
all  visitors,  and  to  take  care  that  none  are  per-
mitted to  enter  the  Chapter,  but  such  as  have
travelled  the  rugged  path  of  trial,  and  evinced
their  title  to  our  favour  and  friendship.  You  will
be  attentive  to  obey  the  commands  of  the  Cap-
tain of  the  Host,  during  the  introduction  of  stran-
gers among  the  workmen  ; and  should  they  be
permitted  to  pass  your  post,  may  they  by  him
be  introduced  into  the  presence  of  the  Grand
Council.

The  White  Banner , entrusted  to  your  care,  is
emblematical  of  that  purity  of  heart  and  recti-


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


145


tade  of  conduct,  which  ought  to  actuate  all  those
who  pass  the  white  veil  of  the  sanctuary.  I give
it  to  you  strongly  in  charge,  never  to  suffer  any
one  to  pass  your  post,  without  the  signet  of  truth .

I present  you  the  badge  of  your  office,  in*  ex-
pectation of  your  performing  your  duties  with  in-
telligence, assiduity  and  propriety.

27.  He  then  retires , and  the  Three  Grand  Masters  of
the  Veils  are  presented  together .

CHARGE  to  the  Master  of  the  Third  Veil .
Companion,

I present  you  with  the  Scarlet  Banner , which  is
the  ensign  of  your  office,  and  with  a sword  to  pro-
tect and  defend  the  same.  The  rich  and  beautiful
colour  of  your  banner  is  emblematical  of  ferv  ency
and  zeal ; it  is  the  appropriate  colour  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree ; it  admonishes  us,  that  we  should  be
fervent  in  the  exercise  of  our  devotions  to  God,
and  zealous  in  our  endeavours  to  promote  the  hap-
piness of  man.

CHARGE  to  the  Master  of  the  Second  Veil .
Companion,

I invest  you  with  the  Purple  Banner , which  is
the  ensign  of  your  office,  and  arm  you  with  a
sword,  to  enable  you  to  maintain  its  honour.

The  colour  of  your  banner  is  produced  by  a
due  mixture  of  blue  and  scarlet;  the  former  of
which  is  the  characteristic  colour  of  the  symbolic
13


146


MASONIC  CHART,


or  first  three  degrees  of  masonry , and  the  latter*
that  of  the  royal  arch  degree . It  is  an  emblem  of
union , and  is  the  characteristic  colour  of  the  inter-
mediate degrees.  It  admonishes  us  to  cultivate
and  improve  that  spirit  of  union  and  harmony,  be-
tween the  brethren  of  the  symbolic  degrees  and  the
companions  of  the  sublime  degrees,  which  should
ever  distinguish  the  members  of  a society  founded
upon  the  principles  of  everlasting  truth  and  univer-
sal philanthropy.

CHARGE  to  the  Master  of  the  First  Veil .
Companion,

I invest  you  with  the  Blue  Banner , which  is  the
ensign  of  your  office,  and  a sword  for  its  defence
and  protection.  The  colour  of  your  banner  is
one  of  the  most  durable  and  beautiful  in  nature.
It  is  the  appropriate  colour  adopted  and  worn  by
our  ancient  brethren  of  the  three  symbolic  degrees,
and  is  the  'peculiar  characteristic  of  an  institution
which  has  stood  the  test  of  ages,  and  which  is  as
much  distinguished  by  the  durability  of  its  mate-
rials or  principles,  as  by  the  beauty  of  its  super-
structure. It  is  an  emblem  of  universal  friendship
and  benevolence  ; and  instructs  us,  that  in  the  mind
of  a mason  those  virtues  should  be  as  expansive  as
the  blue  arch  of  heaven  itself.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


147


CHARGE  to  the  three  Masters  of  the  Veils , as
Overseers .

Companions,

Those  who  are  placed  as  overseers  of  any  work,
should  be  well  qualified  to  judge  of  its  beauties
and  deformities,  its  excellencies  and  defects ; they
should  be  capable  of  estimating  the  former,  and
amending  the  latter.  This  consideration  should
induce  you  to  cultivate  and  improve  all  those  quali-
fications with  which  you  are  already  endowed,  as
well  as  to  persevere  in  your  endeavours  to  acquire
those  in  which  you  are  deficient.  Let  the  various
colours  of  the  banners  committed  to  your  charge,
admonish  you  to  the  exercise  of  the  several  virtues
of  which  they  are  emblematic  ; and  you  are  to  en-
join the  practice  of  those  virtues  upon  all  who  shall
present  themselves,  or  the  work  of  their  hands,  for
your  inspection . Let  no  work  receive  your  appro-
bation, but  such  as  is  calculated  to  adorn  and
strengthen  the  masonic  edifice.  Be  industrious
and  faithful  in  practising  and  disseminating  a
knowledge  of  the  true  and  perfect  work , which
alone  can  stand  the  test  of  the  Grand  Overseer’s
Square , in  the  great  day  of  trial  and  retribution.
Then,  although  every  rod  should  become  a ser-
pent, and  every  serpent  an  enemy  to  this  institu-
tion, yet  shall  their  utmost  exertions  to  destroy  its
reputation,  or  sap  its  foundation,  become  as  impo-
tent as  the  leprous  hand , or  as  water  spilled  upon
the  ground,  which  cannot  be  gathered  up  agaim


143


JT  A SONIC  CHART.


28.  They  then  retire , and  the  Treasurer  is  pre-
sented,

CHARGE  to  the  Treasurer.
Companion,

You  are  elected  Treasurer  of  this  Chapter,  and
I have  the  pleasure  of  investing  you  with  the
badge  of  your  office.  The  qualities  which  should
recommend  a Treasurer,  are  accuracy  and  fidelity;
accuracy,  in  keeping  a fair  and  minute  account  of
all  receipts  and  disbursements ; fidelity,  in  care-
fully preserving  all  the  property  and  funds  of  the
Chapter,  that  may  be  placed  in  his  hands,  and  ren-
dering a just  account  of  the  same,  whenever  he  is
called  upon  for  that  purpose.  I presume  that  your
respect  for  the  institution,  your  attachment  to  the
interests  of  your  Chapter,  and  your  regard  for  a
good  name,  which  is  better  than  precious  ointment,
will  prompt  you  to  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  du-
ties of  your  office.

29.  He  then  retires , and  the  Secretary  is  presented.

CHARGE  to  the  Secretary.
Companion,

I with  pleasure  invest  you  with  your  badge  as
Secretary  of  this  Chapter.  The  qualities  which
should  recommend  a Secretary,  are,  promptitude
in  issuing  the  notifications  and  orders  of  his  supe-
rior officers ; punctuality  in  attending  the  convoca-
tions of  the  Chapter ; correctness  in  recording  their


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


149


proceedings ; judgment  in  discriminating  between
what  is  proper  and  what  is  improper  to  be  commit-
ted to  writing ; regularity  in  making  his  annual  re-
turns to  -he  Grand  Chapter  ; integrity,  in  account-
ing for  all  monies  that  may  pass  through  his  hands  ;
and  fidelity  in  paying  the  same  over  into  the  hands
of  the  treasurer.  The  possession  of  these  good
qualities,  I presume,  has  designated  you  a suitable
candidate  for  this  important  office  ; and  I cannot
entertain  a doubt  that  you  will  discharge  its  duties
beneficially  to  the  Chapter,  and  honourably  to
yourself.  And  when  you  shall  have  completed  the
record  of  your  transactions  here  below,  and  finished
the  term  of  your  probation,  may  you  be  admitted
into  the  celestial  Grand  Chapter  of  saints  and  an-
gels, and  find  your  name  recorded  in  the  book  of  life
eternal .

30.  He  then  retires , and  the  Chaplain  is  presented .
CHARGE  to  the  Chaplain .

“E.  and  Rev.  Companion,

“You  are  appointed  Chaplain  of  this  Chapter;
and  I now  invest  you  with  this  circular  jewel,  the
badge  of  your  office.  It  is  emblematical  of  eter-
nity, and  reminds  us  that  here  is  not  our  abiding
place.  Your  inclination  will  undoubtedly  con-
spire with  your  duty,  when  you  perform  in  the
Chapter  those  solemn  services  which  created  be-
ings should  constantly  render  to  their  infinite  Cre-
13*


150


MASONIC  CHAIffV


ator  ; and  which,  when  offered  by  one  whose  holy
profession  is,  “to  point  to  heaven  and  lead  the
way,”  may,  by  refining  our  morals,  strengthening
our  virtues,  and  purifying  our  minds,  prepare  us
for  admission  into  the  society  of  those  above,
whose  happiness  will  be  as  endless  as  it  is  perfect.”

31.  He  then  retires,  and  the  Stewards  are  presented*
CHARGE  to  the  Stewards,
Companions,

You  being  elected  Stewards  of  this  Chapter,  I
with  pleasure  invest  you  with  the  badges  of  your
office.  It  is  your  province  to  see  that  every  ne-
cessary preparation  is  made  for  the  convenience
and  accommodation  of  the  Chapter,  previous  to
the  time  appointed  for  meeting.  You  are  to  see
that  the  clothing,  implements  and  furniture  of
each  degree  respectively,  are  properly  disposed,
and  in  suitable  array  for  use,  whenever  they  may
be  required,  and  that  they  are  secured,  and  proper
care  taken  of  them,  when  the  business  of  the
Chapter  is  over.  You  are  to  see  that  necessary
refreshments  are  provided,  and  that  all  your  com-
panions, and  particularly  visitors,  are  suitably  ac-
commodated and  supplied.  You  are  to  be  frugal
and  prudent  in  your  disbursements,  and  to  be  care-
ful that  no  extravagance  or  waste  is  committed  in
your  department;  and  when  you  have  faithfully
fulfilled  your  stewardship  here  below,  may  you  re-*

%


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD,


151


seive  from  heaven  the  happy  greeting  of  “ Well
done,  good  and  faithful  servants.”

32.  They  then  retire , and  the  Tyler  is  presented ,

CHARGE  to  the  Tyler.

Companion,"

You  are  appointed  Tyler  of  this  Chapter,  and  I
invest  you  with  the  badge,  and  this  implement  of
your  office.  As  the  sword  is  placed  in  the  hands
of  the  Tyler,  to  enable  him  effectually  to  guard
against  the  approach  of  all  cowans  and  evesdrop -
j pers,  and  suffer  none  to  pass  or  repass  but  such  as
are  duly  qualified;  so  it  should  morally  serve  as
a constant  admonition  to  us  to  set  a guard  at  the
entrance  of  our  thoughts ; to  place  a watch  at  the
door  of  our  lips ; to  post  a centinel  at  the  avenue
of  our  actions ; thereby  excluding  every  unquali-
fied and  unworthy  thought,  word  and  deed ; and
preserving  consciences  void  of  offence  towards  God
and  towards  man.

As  the  first  application  from  visitors  for  admis-*
sion  into  the  Chapter  is  generally  made  to  the  Ty-
ler at  the  door,  your  station  will  often  present  you
to  the  observation  of  strangers : it  is  therefore  es-
sentially necessary  that  he  who  sustains  the  office
with  which  you  are  entrusted,  should  be  a man  of
good  morals,  steady  habits,  strict  discipline,  tem-
perate, affable,  and  discreet.  I trust  that  a just
regard  for  the  honour  and  reputation  of  the  insla-


1 52


MASONIC  CHART o


tution  will  ever  induce  you  to  perform  with  fidelity
the  trust  reposed  in  you ; and  when  the  door  of
this  earthly  tabernacle  shall  be  closed,  may  you
find  an  abundant  entrance  through  the  gates  into
the  temple  and  city  of  our  God*

S3.  He  will  then  retire , and  then  follows  an
ADDRESS  to  the  High  Priest .

M-  £•  Companion,

Having  been  honoured  with  the  free  suffrages  of
the  members  of  this  Chapter,  you  are  elected  to
the  most  important  office  which  is  within  their
power  to  bestow.  This  expression  of  their  esteem
and  respect  should  draw  from  you  corresponding
sensations;  and  your  demeanor  should  be  such  as
to  repay  the  honour  they  have  so  conspicuously
conferred  upon  you,  by  an  honourable  ^nd  faithful
discharge  of  the  duties  of  your  office.  The  sta-
tion you  are  called  to  fill,  is  important,  not  only  as
it  respects  the  correct  practice  of  our  rites  and
ceremonies,  and  the  internal  economy  of  the  Chap-
ter over  which  you  preside ; but  the  public  repu-
tation of  the  institution  will  be  generally  found  to
rise  or  fall  according  to  the  skill,  fidelity  and  dis-
cretion, w ith  which  its  concerns  are  managed,  and
in  proportion  as  the  characters  and  conduct  of  its
principal  officers  are  estimable  or  censurable.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD.


15,3


You  have  accepted  a trust,  to  which  is  attached  a
weight  of  responsibility  that  will  require  all  your
efforts  to  discharge  honourably  to  yourself,  and
satisfactorily  to  the  Chapter.  You  are  to  see  that
your  officers  are  capable  and  faithful  in  the  exercise
of  their  offices.  Should  they  lack  ability,  you  are
expected  to  supply  their  defects ; you  are  to  watch
carefully  the  progress  of  their  performances,  and
to  see  that  the  long  established  customs  of  the  in-
stitution suffer  no  derangement  in  their  hands.
You  are  to  have  a careful  eye  over  the  general
conduct  of  the  Chapter;  see  that  due  order  and
subordination  is  observed  on  all  occasions ; that  the
members  are  properly  instructed;  that  due  solem-
nity be  observed  in  the  practice  of  our  rites ; that
no  improper  levity  be  permitted  at  any  time,  but
more  especially  at  the  introduction  of  strangers
among  the  workmen .

In  fine,  you  are  to  be  an  example  to  your  offi-
cers and  members,  which  they  need  not  hesitate
to  follow ; thus  securing  to  yourself  the  favour  of
Heaven,  and  the  applause  of  your  brethren  and;
companions.


154


MASONIC  CHART.


ADDRESS  to  the  Officers  generally.

Companions  in  Office,

Precept  and  example  should  ever  advance  with
equal  pace.  Those  moral  duties  which  you  are
required  to  teach  unto  others,  you  should  never
neglect  to  practice  yourselves.

Do  you  desire  that  the  demeanor  of  your  equals
and  inferiors  towards  you,  should  be  marked  with
deference  and  respect?  Be  sure  that  you  omit  no
opportunity  of  furnishing  them  with  examples  in
your  own  conduct  towards  your  superiors.  Do
you  desire  to  obtain  instruction  from  those  who  are
more  wise  or  better  informed  than  yourselves  ? Be .
sure  that  you  are  always  ready  to  impart  of  your
knowledge  to  those  within  your  sphere,  who  stand
in  need  of,  and  are  entitled  to  receive  it.  Do
you  desire  distinction  among  your  companions  ?
Be  sure  that  your  claims  to  preferment  are  found-
ed upon  superior  attainments  ; let  no  ambitious
passion  be  suffered  to  induce  you  to  envy  or  sup-
plant a companion  who  may  be  considered  as  bet-
ter qualified  for  promotion  than  yourselves ; but
rather  let  a laudable  emulation  induce  you  to  strive
to  excel  each  other  in  improvement  and  discipline  ;
ever  remembering,  that  he,  who  faithfully  performs
his  duty,  even  in  a subordinate  or  private  station,,
is  as  justly  entitled  to  esteem  and  respect,  as  he
who  is  invested  with  supreme  authority.


HIGH  PRIESTHOOD,


155


ADDRESS  to  the  Chapter  at  large .
Companions,

The  exercise  and  management  of  the  sublime
degrees  of  masonry  in  your  Chapter  hitherto,  are
so  highly  appreciated,  and  the  good  reputation  of
the  Chapter  so  well  established,  that  1 must  pre-
sume these  considerations  alone,  were  there  no
others  of  greater  magnitude,  would  be  sufficient
to  induce  you  to  preserve  and  perpetuate  this  valu-
able and  honourable  character.  But  when  to  these
is  added  the  pleasure  which  every  philanthropic
heart  must  feel  in  doing  good,  in  promoting  good
order,  in  diffusing  light  and  knowledge,  in  culti-
vating Masonic  and  Christian  charity,  which  are
the  great  objects  of  this  sublime  institution,  I can-
not doubt  that  your  future  conduct,  and  that  of
your  successors,  will  be  calculated  still  to  increase
the  lustre  of  your  justly  esteemed  reputation.

May  your  chapter  become  beautiful  as  the  tem-
ple, peaceful  as  the  ark,  and  sacred  as  its  most  holy
place . May  your  oblations  of  piety  and  praise  be
grateful  as  the  incense  ; your  love  warm  as  its
flame,  and  your  charity  diffusive  as  its  fragrance,
tylay  your  hearts  be  pure  as  the  altar,  and  your
conduct  acceptable  as  the  offering . May  the  ex-
ercises of  your  charity  be  as  constant  as  the  return-
ing wants  of  the  distressed  widow  and  helpless  or-
phan. May  the  approbation  of  Heaven  be  your
encouragement,  and  the  testimony  of  a good  con-
science your  support : may  you  be  endowed  with


156


MASONIC  CHART.


©very  good  and  perfect  gift,  while  travelling  the
rigged  path  of  life,  and  finally  be  admitted  within
tiie  veil  of  heaven,  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  life
eternal.  So  mote  it  be.  Amen.

34.  The  officers  and  members  of  the  Chapter  will
then  pass  in  review  in  front  of  the  Grand  Officers ,
with  their  hands  crossed  on  their  breasts , bowing  as
they  pass.

35.  The  Grand  Marshal  will  then  proclaim  the

Chapter , by  the  name  of , to  be  regularly

constituted , and  its  officers  duly  installed . '

36.  The  ceremonies  conclude  with  an  Ode,  or  appro-
priate piece  of  music.

37.  The  procession  is  then  formed,  when  they  return
to  the  place  from  whence  they  set  out.

38.  When  the  Grand  Officers  retire,  the  Chapter  will
form  an  avenue  for  them  to  pass  through,  and  salute
them  with  the  grand  honours.  The  two  bodies  then
separately  dose  their  respective  Chapters.


CONSTITUTION


OF  THE

General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter

OF  THE

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA.


ARTICLE  I.

OF  THE  GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER.

Sect.  1.  THERE  shall  be  a General  Grand
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  for  the  United  States
of  America,  which  shall  be  holden  as  is  hereinafter  di-
rected, and  shall  consist  of  a General  Grand  High
Priest,  Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priest,  General
Grand  King,  General  Grand  Scribe,  Secretary,  Trea-
surer, Chaplain,  and  Marshal;  and  likewise  of  the
several  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  High  Priests,  Kings,
and  Scribes,  for  the  time  being,  of  the  several  State
Grand  Chapters,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Gene-
ral Grand  Chapter;  and  of  the  Past  General  Grand
High  Priests,  Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priests,
Kings,  and  Scribes,  of  the  said  General  Grand  Chap-
ter; and  the  Aforesaid  officers,  or  their  proxies,  shall
be  the  only  members  and  voters  in  said  General
Grand  Chapter.  And  no  person  shall  be  constituted
14


158


CONSTITUTION


a proxy,  unless  he  be  a present  or  past  officer  of  thi>
or  a State  Grand  Chapter.

Sect.  2.  The  General  Grand  Chapter  shall  meet
septennially,  on  the  second  Thursday  in  September,
for  the  choice  of  officers,  and  other  business:  dating
from  the  second  Thursday  in  September,  A.  D.  18G5,
at  such  place  as  may,  from  time  to  time,  be  appointed.

Sect.  S.  A special  meeting  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  shall  be  called  whenever  the  General  Grand
High  Priest,  Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priest,
General  Grand  King,  and  General  Grand  Scribe,  or
any  two  of  them,  may  deem  it  necessary ; and  also
whenever  it  may  be  required  by  a majoi'i ty  of  the
Grand  Chapters  of  the  States  aforesaid,  provided  such
requisition  be  made  known  in  writing,  by  the  said
Grand  Chapters  respectively,  to  the  General  Grand
High  Priest,  Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priest,
King  or  Scribe. — And  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  said
General  Officers,  and  they  are  each  of  them  severally
authorized,  empowered  and  directed,  upon  receiving
official  notice  of  such  requisition  from  a majority  of
the  General  Grand  Chapters  aforesaid,  to  appoint  a
time  and  place  of  meeting,  and  notify  each  of  the  State.
Grand  Chapters  thereof  accordingly.

Sect.  4.  It  shall  be  incumbent  on  the  General  Grand
High  Priest,  Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priest,
General  Grand  King,  and  General  Grand  Scribe,  seve
rally,  to  improve  and  perfect  themselves  in  the  sub
lime  Arts,  and  work  of  Mark  Masters,  Past  Masters,
Most  Excellent  Masters,  and  Royal  Arch  Masons ; to
make  themselves  Masters  of  the  several  Masonic  Lee-


CONSTITUTION.


159


tares  and  Ancient  Charges ; — to  consult  with  each
mother,  and  with  the  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  High
Priests,  Kings  and  Scribes  of  the  several  States  afore-
said, for  the  purpose  of  adopting  measures  suitable  and
proper  for  diffusing  a knowledge  of  the  said  Lectures
and  Charges,  and  an  uniform  mode  of  working , in  the
several  Chapters  and  Lodges  throughout  this  jurisdic-
tion ; and  the  better  to  effect  this  laudable  purpose,  the
aforesaid  General  Grand  Officers  are  severally  hereby
authorized,  and  empowered,  to  visit  and  preside  in
any  and  every  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and
Lodge  of  Most  Excellent,  Past,  or  Mark  Master  Ma-
sons, throughout  the  said  States,  and  to  give  such  in-
structions and  directions  as  the  good  of  the  Fraternity
may  require;  always  adhering  to  the  ancient  land-
marks of  the  order.

Sect.  5.  In  all  cases  of  the  absence  of  any  Officer
from  any  body  of  masons,  instituted  or  holden  by  vir-
tue of  this  Constitution,  the  Officer  next  in  rank  shall
succeed  his  superior ; unless  through  courtesy  said  Of-
ficer should  decline  in  favour  of  a past  superior  Officer
present. — And  in  case  of  the  absence  of  all  the  Officers
from  any  legal  meeting  of  either  of  the  bodies  afore-
said, the  Members  present,  according  to  seniority  and
abilities,  shall  fill  the  several  Offices.

Sect.  6.  In  every  Chapter  or  Lodge  of  Masons,  in-
stituted or  holden  by  virtue  of  this  Constitution,  all
questions  (except  upon  the  admission  of  members  or
candidates)  shall  be  determined  by  a majority  of  votes;
the  presiding  Officer  for  the  time  being,  being  entitled
to  vote,  if  a Member ; and  in  case  the  votes  should  at


160


CONSTITUTION.


any  time  be  equally  divided,  the  presiding  Officer  as
aforesaid,  shall  give  the  casting  vote.

'Sect.  7.  The  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter
shall  be  competent  (on  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  its
members  present)  at  any  time  hereafter,  to  revise,
amend  and  alter  this  Constitution.

Sect.  8.  In  case  any  casualty  should,  at  any  time
hereafter,  prevent  the  septennial  election  of  Officers,
the  several  General  Grand  Officers  shall  sustain  their
respective  Offices  until  successors  are  duly  elected  and
qualified.

Sect.  9.  The  General  Grand  High  Priest,  Deputy
General  Grand  High  Priest,  General  Grand  King,  and
General  Grand  Scribe,  shall  severally  have  power  and
authority  to  institute  new  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  and
Lodges  of  the  subordinate  degrees,  in  any  State  in
which  there  is  not  a Grand  Chapter  regularly  estab-
lished. But  no  new  Chapter  shall  be  instituted  in  any
State  wherein  there  is  a Chapter  or  Chapters  holden
under  the  authority  of  this  Constitution,  without  a re-
commendation from  the  Chapter  nearest  the  residence
of  the  petitioners. — The  fees  for  instituting  a new  Roy-
al Arch  Chapter,  with  the  subordinate  degrees,  shall
be  ninety  dollars;  and  for  a new  Mark  Master’s
Lodge,  twenty  dollars ; exclusive  of  such  compensa-
tion to  the  Grand  Secretary,  as  the  Grand  Officers
aforesaid  may  deem  reasonable.


CONSTITUTION.


161


ARTICLE  II.

OF  THE  STATE  GRAND  ROYAL  ARCH  CHAPTERS.

Sect.  1.  The  state  grand  chapters  shall  seve  -
rally consist  of  a Grand  High  Priest,  Deputy  Grand
High  Priest,  Grand  King,  Grand  Scribe,  Grand  Secre-
tary, Grand  Treasurer,  Grand  Chaplain,  and  Grand
Marshal,  and  likewise  of  the  High  Priests,  Kings  and
Scribes,  for  the  time  being,  of  the  several  Chapters
over  which  they  shall  respectively  preside,  and  of  the
Past  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  High  Priests,  Kings
and  Scribes  of  the  said  Grand  Chapters  ; and  the  said
enumerated  Officers  (or  their  proxies)  shall  be  the
only  members  and  voters  in  the  said  Grand  Chapters
respectively.

Sect.  2.  The  State  Grand  Chapters  shall  severally
be  holden  at  least  once  in  every  year,  at  such  times  and
places  as  they  shall  respectively  direct;  and  the
Grand  or  Deputy  Grand  High  Priests  respectively,
for  the  time  being,  may  at  any  time  call  a special
meeting,  to  be  holden  at  such  place  as  they  shall  seve-
rally think  proper  to  appoint.

Sect.  3.  The  Officers  of  the  State  Grand  Chapters
shall  be  chosen  annually,  by  ballot,  at  such  time  and
place  as  the  said  Grand  Chapters  shall  respectively  di-
rect.

Sect.  4.  The  several  State  Grand  Chapters  (sub-
ject to  the  provisions  of  this  Constitution)  shall  have
the  sole  government  and  superintendence  of  the  seve-
ral Royal  Arch  Chapters,  and  Lodges  of  Most  Excel-
lent, Past  and  Mark  Master  Masons,  within  their  re-
nt 14*


m


CONSTITUTION.


spective  jurisdictions  ; to  assign  their  limits,  and  settle
controversies  that  may  happen  between  them ; — and
shall  have  power,  under  their  respective  seals,  and  the
sign  manual  of  their  respective  Grand  or  Deputy
Grand  High  Priests,  Kings  and  Scribes,  (or  their  legal
proxies,)  attested  by  their  respective  Secretaries,  to
constitute  new  Chapters  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and
Lodges  of  Most  Excellent,  Past,  and  Mark  Master
Masons,  within  their  respective  jurisdictions.

Sect.  5.  The  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  High
Priests  severally,  shall  have  the  power  and  authority,
whenever  they  shall  deem  it  inexpedient,  (during  the
recess  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  which  they  are  offi-
cers,) to  grant  Letters  of  Dispensation,  under  their
respective  hands,  and  private  seals,  to  a competent
number  of  petitioners  (possessing  the  qualifications  re-
quired by  the  9th  Section  of  the  2d  Article,)  empow-
ering them  to  open  a Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,
and  Lodge  of  Most  Excellent,  Past  and  Mark  Master
Masons,  for  a certain  specified  term  of  time  : provided,
that  the  said  term  of  time  shall  not  extend  beyond  the
next  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  in
which  such  Dispensation  shall  be  granted  ; and  pro-
vided further,  that  the  same  fees  as  are  required  by
this  Constitution  for  Warrants,  shall  be  first  deposited
in  the  hands  of  the  Grand  Treasurer. — And  in  all  ca-
ses of  such  Dispensations,  the  Grand  or  Deputy  Grand
High  Priests  respectively,  who  may  grant  the  same,
shall  make  report  thereof,  at  the  next  stated  meeting  of
the  Grand  Chapter  of  their  respective  jurisdictions,
when  the  said  Grand  Chapters,  respectively,  may  el*


CONSTITUTION.


165


ther  continue  or  recall  the  said  Dispensations,  or  may
grant  the  petitioners  a warrant  of  Constitution  : And
in  case  such  warrant  shall  be  granted,  the  fees  first
deposited,  shall  be  credited  in  payment  for  the  same  ;
but  if  a warrant  should  not  be  granted,  nor  the  dis-
pensation continued,  the  said  fees  shall  be  refunded  to
the  petitioners,  excepting  only  such  part  thereof  as
shall  have  been  actually  expended  by  means  of  their
application.

Sect.  6.  The  several  State  Grand  Chapters  shall
possess  authority,  upon  the  institution  of  new  Royal
Arch  Chapters,  or  Lodges  of  Mark  Masters,  within
their  respective  jurisdictions,  to  require  the  payment
of  such  fees  as  they  may  deem  expedient  and  proper ;
which  said  fees  shall  be  advanced  and  paid  into  the
Treasury  before  a warrant  or  charter  shall  be  issued.

Sect.  7.  No  warrant  shall  be  granted,  for  institu-
ting Lodges  of  Most  Excellent  or  Past  Masters,  inde-
pendent of  a Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.

Sect.  8.  The  Grand  Chapters  severally,  shall  have
power  to  require  from  the  several  Chapters  and  Lodg-
es under  their  respective  jurisdictions,  such  reasonable
proportion  of  sums,  received  by  them  for  the  exaltation
or  advancement  of  candidates,  and  such  certain  annu-
al sums  from  their  respective  members,  as  by  their  or-
dinances or  regulations  shall  hereafter  be  appointed;
all  which  said  sums  or  dues  shall  be  made  good,  and
paid  annually,  by  the  said  Chapters  and  Lodges  re-
spectively, into  the  Grand  Treasury  of  the  Grand
Chapter  under  which  they  hold  their  authority,  on  Or


164


CONSTITUTION.


before  the  first  day  of  the  respective  annual  meeting?
of  the  said  Grand  Chapters.

Sect.  9.  No  warrant  for  the  institution  of  a new
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  shall  be  granted,  ex-
cept upon  the  petition  of  nine  regular  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sons; which  petition  shall  be  accompanied  by  a certifi-
cate from  the  Chapter  nearest  to  the  place  where  the
new  Chapter  is  intended  to  be  opened,  vouching  for
the  moral  characters,  and  masonic  abilities,  of  the  peti-
tioners, and  recommending  to  the  Grand  Chapter  un-
der whose  authority  they  act,  to  grant  their  prayer.
And  no  warrrant  for  the  institution  of  a Lodge  of  Mark
Master  Masons  shall  be  granted,  except  upon  the  pe-
tition of  (at  least)  five  regular  Mark  Master  Masons,
accompanied  by  vouchers  from  the  nearest  Lodge  of
that  degree,  similar  to  those  required  upon  the  institu-
tion of  a Chapter.

Sect.  10.  The  Grand  Secretaries  of  the  State  Grand
Chapters,  shall  severally  make  an  annual  communica-
tion to  each  other,  and  also  to  the  General  Grand  Sec-
retary, containing  a list  of  Grand  Officers,  and  all  such
other  matters  as  may  be  deemed  necessary  for  the  mu-
tual information  of  the  said  Grand  Chapters.  And  the
said  Grand  Secretaries  shall  also  regularly  transmit  to
the  General  Grand  Secretary,  a copy  of  all  their  by-
laws and  regulations.

Sect.  11.  Whenever  there  shall  have  been  three,  or
more,  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  instituted  in  any  State,
by  virtue  of  authority  derived  from  this  Constitution,
a Grand  Chapter  may  be  formed  in  such  State,  (with
the  approbation  of  one  or  more  of  the  General  Grand


CONSTITUTION.


165


Officers,)  by  the  High  Priests,  Kings  and  Scribes  of
the  said  Chapters,  who  shall  be  authorized  to  elect  the
Grand  Officers.  Provided  always,  that  no  new  State
Grand  Chapter  shall  be  formed  until  after  the  expira-
tion of  one  year  from  the  establishment  of  the  junior
Chapter  in  such  State.

Sect.  12.  The  several  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand
High  Priests,  Kings  and  Scribes,  for  the  time  being,  of
the  several  State  Grand  Chapters,  are  bound  to  the
performance  of  the  same  duties,  and  are  invested  with
the  same  powers  and  prerogatives,  throughout  their
respective  jurisdictions,  as  are  prescribed  to  the  Gene-
ral Grand  Officers,  in  the  4th  Section,  1st  Article,  of
this  Constitution.

Sect.  13.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  several  State
Grand  Chapters,  shall  not  extend  beyond  the  limits  of
the  State  in  which  they  shall  respectively  be  holden.

ARTICLE  III.

OF  THE  SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS  AND  LODGES.

Sect.  1.  All  legally  constituted  assemblies  of  Roy-
al Arch  Masons  are  called  Chapters;  as  regular  bo-
dies of  Mark  Masters,  Past  Masters,  and  Most  Ex-
cellent Masters,  are  called  Lodges.  Every  Chapter
ought  to  assemble  for  work  at  least  once  in  every  three
months;  and  must  consist  of  an  High  Priest,  King,
Scribe,  Captain  of  the  Host,  Principal  Sojourner,  Roy-
al Arch  Captain,  three  Grand  Masters,  Secretary,
Treasurer,  and  as  many  Members  as  may  be  found
convenient  for  working  to  advantage.


166


CONSTITUTION.


Sect.  2.  Every  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and
Lodge  of  Mark  Master  Masons,  throughout  this  juris-
diction, shall  have  a Warrant  of  Constitution  from  the
Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  in  which  they  may  respec-
tively be  holden,  or  a Warrant  from  one  of  the  Gene-
ral Grant!  Officers.  And  no  Chapter  or  Lodge  shall
be  deemed  legal  without  such  warrant;  and  Masonic
communication  (either  public  or  private)  is  hereby  in-
terdicted and  forbidden,  between  any  Chapter  or
Lodge  under  this  jurisdiction,  or  any  member  of  either
of  them,  and  any  Chapter,  Lodge  or  Assembly,  that
may  be  so  illegally  formed,  opened  or  holden,  without
such  warrant,  or  any  or  either  of  their  members,  or
any  person  exalted  or  advanced  in  such  illegal  Chap-
ter or  Lodge.  But  nothing  in  this  Section  shall  be  con-
strued to  affect  any  Chapter  or  Lodge  which  was  es-
tablished before  the  adoption  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch
Constitution  at  Hartford,  (on  the  27th  day  of  January,
A.  D.  1798.)

Sect.  3.  Whenever  a Warrant  is  issued  for  insti-
tuting a Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  with  a power
in  said  Warrant  to  open  and  hold  a Lodge  of  Most  Ex-
cellent, Past,  and  Mark  Master  Masons,  the  High
Priest,  King  and  Scribe,  for  the  time  being,  of  such
Chapter,  shall  be  the  Master  and  Wardens  in  said
Lodges,  according  to  seniority.

Sect.  4.  All  applications  for  the  exaltation  or  ad-
vancement of  Candidates,  in  any  Chapter  or  Lodge,
under  this  jurisdiction,  shall  lie  over,  at  least  one
meeting,  for  the  consideration  of  the  members.

Sect.  5.  No  mason  shall  be  a member  of  two  sepa-


CONSTITUTION.


167


Bate  and  distinct  bodies,  of  the  same  denomination,  at
one  and  the  same  time.

Sest.  6.  No  Chapter  shall  be  removed,  without  the
knowledge  of  the  High  Priest,  nor  any  motion  made
for  that  purpose  in  his  absence ; but  if  the  High  Priest
be  present,  and  a motion  is  made  and  seconded,  for  re-
moving the  Chapter  to  some  more  convenient  place,
(within  the  limits  prescribed  in  their  Warrant,)  the
High  Priest  shall  forthwith  cause  notifications  to  be
issued  to  all  the  members,  informing  them  of  the  mo-
tion for  removal,  and  of  the  time  and  place  when  the
question  is  to  be  determined ; which  notice  shall  be
issued  at  least  ten  days  previous  to  the  appointed
meeting.  But  if  the  High  Priest  (after  motion  duly
made  and  seconded  as  aforesaid)  should  refuse  or  neg-
lect to  cause  the  notices  to  be  issued  as  aforesaid,  the
officer  next  in  rank,  who  may  be  present  at  the  next
regular  meeting  following,  (upon  motion  made  and  se-
conded for  that  purpose,)  may  in  like  manner  issue  the
said  notices.

Sect.  7.  All  Mark  Master  Masons’  Lodges  shall
be  regulated,  in  cases  of  removal,  by  the  same  rules  as
are  prescribed  in  the  foregoing  Section  for  the  removal
of  Chapters.

Sect.  8.  The  High  Priest,  and  other  Officers,  of  ev-
«ry  Chapter,  and  the  Officers  of  every  Lodge  of  Mark
Master  Masons,  shall  be  chosen  annually,  by  ballot.

Sect.  9.  The  High  Priest  of  every  Chapter  has  it  in
special  charge,  as  appertaining  to  his  office,  duty  and
dignity,  to  see  that  the  by-laws  of  his  Chapter,  as  well
as  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Constitution,  and
the  General  Regulations  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  be  duly


168


CONSTITUTION".


observed  ; that  all  the  other  Officers  of  his  Chapter
perform  the  duties  of  their  respective  offices  faithfully*
and  are  examples  of  diligence  and  industry  to  their
companions  ; — that  true  and  exact  records  be  kept  of
all  the  proceedings  of  the  Chapter  by  the  Secretary ;
that  the  Treasurer  keep  and  render  exact  and  just  ac-
counts of  all  the  monies  belonging  to  the  Chapter ; that
regular  returns  be  made  by  the  Secretary,  annually^
to  the  Grand  Chapter,  of  all  admissions  of  candidates
or  members ; and  that  the  annual  dues  to  the  Grand
Chapter  be  regularly  and  punctually  paid. — He  has
the  special  care  and  charge  of  the  Warrant  of  his  Chap-
ter— He  has  the  right  and  authority  of  calling  his  Chap-
ter at  pleasure,  upon  any  emergency  or  occurrence
which  in  his  judgment  may  require  their  meeting ; and
he  is  to  fill  the  chair  when  present.  It  is  likewise  his
duty,  together  with  his  King  and  Scribe,  to  attend
the  meetings  of  the  Grand  Chapter  (when  duly  sum-
moned by  the  Grand  Secretary)  either  in  person,  or  by
proxy.

Sect.  10.  For  the  preservation  of  secrecy  and  good
harmony,  and  in  order  that  due  decorum  may  be  ob-
served while  the  Chapter  is  engaged  in  business,  a wor-
thy Royal  Arch  Mason  is  to  be  appointed  from  time  to
time  for  tyling  the  Chapter.  His  duty  is  fixed  by  cus-
tom, and  known  in  all  regular  Chapters. — He  may  be
elected  annually,  but  is  to  continue  in  office  only  dur-
ing good  behaviour,  and  is  to  be  paid  for  his  services.

Sect.  It.  AH  Lodges  of  Mark  Master  Masons  are
bound  to  observe  the  two  preceding  articles,  as  far  as
they  can  be  applied  to  the  government  of  a Lodge,


CONSTITUTION.


169


Sect.  12.  No  Chapter  shall  confer  the  degrees  of
Mark  Master  Mason,  Past  Master,  Most  Excellent
Master,  and  Royal  Arch  Mason,  upon  any  Brother,
for  a less  sum  than  Twenty  Dollars. — And  no  Lodge
of  Mark  Master  Masons  shall  advance  a Brother  to
that  degree,  for  a less  sum  than  Four  Dollars.

Sect.  13.  When  either  of  the  Officers  or  Members  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter,  or  any  of  the  State  Grand
Chapters,  cannot  personally  attend  their  respective
meetings,  they  shall  severally  have  the  authority  to
constitute  a proxy,  which  proxy  shall  have  the  same
right  to  a seat  and  vote  as  his  constituent.

ARTICLE  IV.

OF  CONSTITUTING  NEW  CHAPTERS.

Sect.  1.  [See  Order  of  High  Priesthood,  from  page
1 25  to  156.]

Sect.  2.  At  the  institution  of  all  Lodges  of  Mark
Master  Masons,  under  this  jurisdiction,  the  same  cere-
monies as  are  prescribed  in  the  foregoing  section,  are
to  be  observed,  as  far  as  they  will  apply  to  that  de-
gree.

Sect.  3.  Whenever  it  shall  be  inconvenient  for  the
General  Grand  Officers,  or  the  Grand  or  Deputy  Grand
High  Priests,  respectively,  to  attend  in  person,  to  con-
stitute a new  Chapter  or  Lodge,  and  install  the  Offi-
cers, they  shall  severally  have  power  and  authority  to
appoint  some  worthy  High  Priest,  or  Past  High  Priest,
to  perform  the  necessary  ceremonies.

Sect.  4.  The  Officers  of  every  Chapter  and  Lodge
under  this  jurisdiction,  before  they  enter  upon  the  ex
15


170


CONSTITUTION.


ercise  of  their  respective  Offices,  and  also  the  members
of  all  such  Chapters  and  Lodges,  and  every  candidate
upon  his  admission  into  the  same,  shall  take  the  follow-
ing obligation,  viz.  “ I,  A.  B.  do  promise  and  swear,
that  I will  support  and  maintain  the  General  Grand
Royal  Arch  Constitution.”

I HEREBY  certify  that  the  foregoing  is  a true  co-
py of  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Constitution  for
the  United  States  of  America,  as  altered,  amended  and
ratified,  at  a meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,
begun  and  holden  at  New-York,  in  the  State  of  New-
York,  on  the  6th  day  of  June,  A.  D.  181 6.

Witness ,


JOHN  ABBOT,  G.  G.  Secretary .


OFFICERS


OF  THE

General  Grand  lloyal  Arch  Chapter

OF  THE

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA,

As  elected  at  their  last  Septennial  Assembly,  in  the
City  of  New- York,  and  State  of  New- York,  on  Fri-
day, September  10 th,  A.  D.  1819,  and  of  Royal'
Arch  Masonry  2349.

—

M.  E.  and  Hon.  DEWITT  CLINTON,  of  Albany,
New- York,  General  Grand  High  Priest.

M.  E.  HENRY  FOWLE,  Esq.  of  Boston,  Massa-
chusetts, Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priest.

M.  E.  JOHN  SNOW,  Esq.  of  Worthington,  Ohio,
General  Grand  King.

M.  E.  PHILIP  P.  ECKEL,  Esq.  of  Baltimore,
Maryland,  General  Grand  Scribe.

M.  E.  PETER  GRINNEL,  Esq.  of  Providence,
Rhode-Island,  General  Grand  Treasurer.

M.  E.  JOHN  ABBOT,  Esq.  of  Westford,  Massa-
chusetts, General  Grand  Secretary.

M.  E.  and  Rev.  JONATHAN  NYE,  of  Newfane,
Vermont,  General  Grand  Chaplain.

M.  E.  DAVID  G.  COWAN,  Esq.  of  Danville;
Kentucky,.  General  Grand  Marshal,


A LIST  OF  GRAND  CHAPTERS,

Under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Royai
Arch  Chapter  of  the  United  States  of  America.

ALSO,

A List  of  Subordinate  Chapters,

Holding  their  Charter  or  Warrant  from  under  the
same  authority.

— —

MAINE.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Maine,  and  all  subordinate
Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocation  is  held  at  Port-
land, annually.

NEW -HAMPSHIRE.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  New-Hampshire,  and  all
subordinate  Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocation  is
held  at  Concord,  on  the  second  Wednesday  of  July,
annually.

MASSACHUSETTS.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Massachusetts,  and  all  sub-
ordinate Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocations  are
held  alternately  at  Boston  and  Newburyport,  on  the
first  Tuesday  of  February,  and  second  Tuesday  of
September,  annually.

RHODE  ISLAND.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Rhode-Island,  and  all  subor
dinate  Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocation  is  held  at
Providence,  annually


LIST  OF  GRAND  CHAPTERS,  &C.


173


CONNECTICUT.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Connecticut,  and  all  subor-
dinate Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocation  is  held
annually,  on  the  second  Thursday  following  the  first
Wednesday  of  May,  at  Hartford  and  New-Haven  al-
ternately, beginning  at  New-Haven,  1820.

VERMONT.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Vermont,  and  all  subordir
nate  Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocations  are  held
at  Rutland,  on  the  third  Wednesday  of  June,  annually.

NEW-YORK.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  New-York,  and  all  subordi-
nate Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocation  is  held  at
Albany,  on  the  first  Tuesday  of  February,  annually.

NEW-JERSEY.

Washington  Chapter,  No.  1 , Newark.  New-Bruns-
wick  Chapter,  No.  2,  New-Brunswick.  Brearly
Chapter,  No.  3,  Bridgetown,  under  the  Grand  Chapter
of  Pennsylvania.

MARYLAND  and  D.  C.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  District  of
Columbia,  and  all  subordinate  Chapters.  Their  Grand
Convocation  is  held  at  Baltimore,  annually.

NORTH  CAROLINA.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  North -Carolina,  and  all  sub-
ordinate Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocations  are
held  alternately  at  Fayetteville  and  Tarborough,  on
the  first  Monday  of  December,  annually.

SOUTH  CAROLINA.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  South-Carolina,  and  all  sub,-
ordinate  Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocations  arfe

15*


174


LIST  OP  GRAND  CHAPTERS,  &C .


held  at  Charleston,  on  the  last  Wednesday  of  Febru-
ary annually.

GEORGIA.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Georgia,  and  all  subordinate
Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocations  are  held  at
Louisville,  on  the  first  Monday  of  May,  annually.

KENTUCKY.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky,  and  all  subordi-
nate Chapters.  Their  Grand  Convocations  are  held  at
Frankfort,  on  the  first  Monday  of  December,  annually.

OHIO.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio,  and  all  subordinate
Chapters.  The  Grand  Convocations  are  held  at  Co-
lumbus, on  Wednesday,  succeeding  the  second  Mon-
day of  December,  annually.

MICHIGAN  TERRITORY.

Monroe  Chapter,  No.  1,  Detroit.

TENNESSEE.

Cumberland  Chapter,  No.  1,  Nashvilje.

MISSISSIPPI.

Natchez  Chapter,  No.  1,  Natchez.

INDIANA.

Madison  Chapter,  No.  1,  Madison.

Brockville  Chapter,  No.  2,  Brockville.

MISSOURI.

Missouri  Chapter,  No.  1,  St.  Louis.

ALABAMA.

Chapter,  No.  1,  Tuscaloosa.


MASONIC  SONGS.


ENTERED  APPRENTICES’  SONG,


176


MASONIC  SONGS.


MASONIC  SONGS.


1 77

His  eyes  cannot  search
Out  the  way  of  his  march,

Nor  yet  where  his  steps  he  must  place  on:

When  him  we  receive,

He  cannot  perceive

How  he  came  to  be  made  a Free  Mason

Then  he’ll  danger  defy,

And  on  Heaven  rely
For  strength  to  support  the  occasion,

With  the  blessing  of  pray’r
He  banishes  fear,

And  undaunted  is  made  a Free  Mason.

When  he  makes  his  demand,

By  the  master’s  command,

To  know  if  he’s  fit  for  the  station,

Around  he  is  brought,

Ere  he  get  what  he  sought
From  a free  and  an  accepted  Mason.

When  girded  with  care,

By  the  help  of  the  square,

The  emblem  of  truth  and  of  reason,

In  form  he  is  plac’d,

While  to  him  are  rehears’d
The  mysteries  of  a Free  Mason  ;

Then  full  in  his  sight
Doth  shine  the  grand  light,

To  illumine  the  works  which  we  trade  oh  ;

And  now,  as  his  due,

He’s  cloth’d  in  full  view
With  the  badge  of  an  accepted  Mason.

Now  hark  ! we  enlarge
On  the  duties  and  charge,

Where  his  conduct  and  walk  he  must  place  ong:
Then  our  rites  we’ll  fulfil,

And  show  our  good  will
To  a free  and  an  accepted  Mason


MASONIC  SONGS.


17  8


FELLOW  CRAFT  S SONG'.


^ 5s!

EPF


£


P


h±ft


’Twas  then  our  per-fect,  our  per-fect  laws  were  made,


MASONIC  SONGS.


179


180


MASONIC  SONGS.


In  vain  mankind  for  shelter  sought,

In  vain  from  place  to  place  did  roam,

Until  from  Heaven,  from  Heaven  he  was  taught
To  plan,  to  build,  to  fix  his  home.


Illustri  p hence  we  date  our  Art,

And  now  in  beauteous  piles  appear,

We  shall  to  endless,  to  endless  time  impart,
How  worthy  and  how  great  we  are.


Nor  we  less  fam’d  for  every  tie,

By  which  the  human  thought  is  bound ;

Love , truth , and  friendship , and  friendship  socially,
Join  all  our  hearts  and  hands  around.


Our  actions  still  by  Virtue  blest,

And  to  our  precepts  ever  true,

The  world  admiring,  admiring  shall  request
To  learn,  and  our  bright  paths  pursue.


MASTER’S  SONG.


BY  A BROTHER.


£


andante.


IN  har-mo-ny  the  so  - cia!  aid


v***

Are  met  a - round  the  fount  of  t7‘;h/L,


MASONIC  SONGS.


181


1 1# — rr]

j •

1 1

- -j 1 ( ^ -

! 1

#7^ W

vJJ

^ J 1 _

Id

And

on

his  heart  in

si  - lence  write

The


sa  - cred  Word.  that  binds  us


Beneath  the  blue  and  starry  zone,

Whose  arch  high  swelling  girds  the  pole,
The  Master  on  his  orient  throne
Unfolds  to  view  rbe  mystic  roll ;

At  once  the  pure  fraternal  soul
Bends  to  the  sign  with  sacred  awe,

And  reads  upon  the  letter’d  scroll
In  words  oflight,  the  unutter’d  law .

16


182


MASONIC  SONGS.


t


Let  us  our  hearts  and  hands  entwine
And  form  one  perfect  wreath  of  love  ;
Then  kneeling  at  the  voice  divine
That  spake  to  mortals  from  above,

Put  on  the  meekness  of  the  dove
And  the  white  robes  of  charity ,

And  in  unerring  wisdom  prove
Our  brethren  with  the  single  eye.


Be  there  no  darkling  scowl  of  hate
Upon  the  calm  unruffled  brow.

But  each  in  innocence  elate
To  Virtue’s  brightness  only  bow  :

Blest  guardian  of  all  pleasures  ! Thou
Be  ever  at  our  Master’s  side,

And  mark  with  radiant  finger  how
Thy  words  can  be  our  only  guide.


By  thee  conducted  we  ascend
The  steps  that  lead  alone  to  Heaven
And  where  the  mounting  arches  end
To  each  the  sign  of  worth  is  given  ;

Then  mantled  by  the  shades  of  even
We  meet  beneath  the  unclouded,  sky,
And  bind  the  links  no  power  hath  riven.,
In  which  we  swear  to  live  and  die.

Let  us  these  favoured  hours  employ,
These  moments  of  the  social  night
To  sing  the  silver  song  of  joy,

And  make  the  chain  of  union  bright ;

So  may  we  even  here  unite
To  spend  the  hours  in  mercy  given,

Led  by  the  tokens  which  invite
Alone  to  happiness  and  Heaven.


MASONIC  SONGS


18S


MASTER’S  SONG.


BY  BROTHER  T.  S.  WEBB.


SOLO.

MODERATO.


SING  the  Ma  - sons’s  glo  - - ry,


. ] —

■*:  —


Whose


pry  - - ing  mind  doth


burn,


TTtt  -

i

$

a i ®

w

*’  *

i

W j

^ — s

L_>  — > — —

-mmmL

Un


- to  com  - plete  per


fee  - - tion
*


184


MASONIC  SONGS.


1

&

m *

~Q

V

m

*

w

* —

. \

U —

Not  those  who  at  our  ' meet-ings


DUET.


tpf.  z : ...”

r ^ — *r

- ^rr

A—  r _ J

1 ? 1 -

m •21

«.  g ..

ibbiH-

lec  - tures,  In  glo-rious  Ma  - son  - ry.


/


MASONIC  SONGS.


185


TRIO.  CHORUS.


T’im-prove  them-selves  by  lec-tures,  In  glo-rious  Ma-son-ry.


T’im-prove  them-selves  by  lec-tures,  In  glo*rious  Ma-son-ry.


The  faithful,  worthy  brother,
Whose  heart  can  fee!  for  grief,
Whose  bosom  with  compassion
Steps  forth  to  its  relief,

16*


186


MASONIC  SONGS,


Whose  soul  is  ever  ready,

Around  him  to  diffuse
The  principles  of  Masons,

And  guard  them  from  abuse  ;
Qhorus.  These  are  thy  sons,  whose  pleasure,
At  every  lodge,  will  be,

T’improve  themselves  by  lectures
In  glorious  Masonry.

Hail ! glorious  Masonry.


King  Solomon,  our  patron,

Transmitted  this  command —

“ The  faithful  and  praise-worthy

0-.  • .

True  light  must  understand  j

And  my  descendants,  also,

Who  ’re  seated  in  the  Eastt

Have  not  fulfill’d  their  duty,

Till  light  has  reach’d  the  West

6horus.

Therefore,  our  highest  pleasure,

At  every  lodge,,  should  be,
T’improve  ourselves  by  lectures

In  glorious  Masonry.

Hail ! glorious  Masonry

The  duty  and  the  station,

Of  master  in  the  chair,

Obliges  him  to  summon

Each  brother  to  prepare ;

That  all  may  be  enabled,

By  slow,  though  sure  degrees,

To  answer  in  rotation,

W ith  honour  and  with  ease.

Ghorus.

Such  are  thy  sons,  whose  pleasure,
At  every  lodge,  will  be,

T’improve  themselves  by  lectures

In  glorious  Masonry.

Hail ! glorious  Masonry,

V


MASONIC  SONGS


U7


THE  MASON’S  ADIEU.


WORDS  BY  BURNS.


*3—

~Tm7T~™

- ^ r~

i

wa

r“i  -“H3

i '

.

~ ^-^1 J-J

Ye  bro  - thers  of  our  mys  - tic  tie;


188


MASONIC  SONGS.


Com  - pan  - ions  of  my  so  - - - cial  joy  ;


Though  1 to  for  - - eign  lands  must  hie,


ft

~ n

L A _«  J J

■»  H

r i .£_*•_  J

r

w «J

. i U ® .

. i


ft  *4  '

A ^ ^

_ ff.

*

i

- r A 1 r

• a j

ccJ

i r :j  i P ^

r-“[  w f “f

.

t=feJ=

Pur  - - - su  - - ing  for  - - tune's  slipp’  - ry  ba’;


MASONIC  SONGS,


189


Oft  have  I met  your  social  band,

To  spend  a cheerful,  festive  night,

Oft,  honour’d  with  supreme  command,
Presiding  o’er  the  sons  of  light :

And  by  that  hieroglyphic  bright,

Which  none  but  craftsmen  ever  saw,
Strong  mem’ry  on  my  heart  shall  write.
Those  happy  scenes  when  far  awa’.

May  freedom,  harmony,  and  love,
Cement  you  in  the  grand  design,
Beneath  th’  Omniscient  Eye  above,

The. glorious  Architect  divine  :

That  you  may  keep  th’  unerring  line.
Still  guided  by  the  plummet’s  law,

’Till  order  bright  completely  shine,

Shall  be  my  pray’r  when  far  awa’.


And  you,  farewell,  whose  merits  claim
Justly  that  highest  badge  to  wear,
May  Heaven  bless  your  noble  name,
To  Masonry  and  friendship  dear:

My  last  request  permit  me  then,

"When  yearly  you’re  assembled  a’,

One  round,  I ask  it  with  a tear,

To  him,  your  friend,  that’s  far  awa’.


190


MASONIC  SONGS,


And  you,  kind-hearted  sisters,  fair,

J I sing-  farewell  to  all  your  charms,

Th’  impression  of  your  pleasing  air
With  rapture  oft  my  bosom  warms.
Alas  ! the  social  winter’s  night
No  more  returns  while  breath  I draw,
Till  sisters,  brothers,  all  unite,

In  that  Grand  Lodge  that’s  far  awa’.


ODE  FOR  GRAND  VISITATION.

WORDS  BY  R.  T.  PAINE,  ESQ,.


MASONIC  SONGS.


191


192


MASONIC  SONGS


Pt


i)


heav’n  pre-vail.  With  na-titre's  birth  thy  laws  he  - gan

5 S-— j-i-

pj\r  Yi~^

E i Hi —


I


SUL


With  na-ture’s  birth  thy  laws  be  - gan

rr/»—


WTlStpZpr  fT-  T"


1ST


8L


t b

ET.1l


heav’n  pre-vail.  Will)  na-ture’s  birth  thv  laws  be-gan

M

-(% — r— — r


g~8~f


^p=FF»


T ~ T ,

.Eli!


n


1


MASONIC  SONGS.


193


y — 5?

*•

JT-

ft a

Jit  i

ft r_

W

J?  \CJ

w~

ft  a

i

« ' ' 1

i


T"  1

gj  W'

To  rule  on  earth  fra  - t

^ ~P~  1*"  -P-  ~P~  ~P~

er  -

• “

nal  man.

l

And

1

1 1

i i

1

JL

L 1

«-  u

*-

_

r

To  rule  on  earth  fra  - ter  - nal  man,

iT7  r

ft  m

A

#n

« ;

jt  r

I®  _

ft*

ft

9

i

i

©

r

J

ft

1 l

L

L

r

j

ro  r

i_  _

ule  on  earth  fra  - ter  - 1

P~  ft

nal  man,

And

^ ■

i

r*

r

iT-

adl

r

i . 1®

ft  ^

r

i i

. .

L*

^ i

i ...

■ft"

•a

zzi

z

7T

wr

i rrr

f

fk\

i

rrr  r r

ft

_ J

m

32

O

J

still  ia  heav’n  pre  - vail.


(i

ft

© ^

C

r

I r

•

3

1

ms  >

IZf

1 L .

_ . 1

ft

SB

E

L=q

1

And  still  in  heav’n  pre  - vail.


rr  - wr~

L

zr

rftR»

« H -

\L

wfl\

ffi

P ft.  J .

- -

ft

-f*

ft

still

A

* ^ o

in  heav’n  pre  - vail

i -

.

7\i

r

ft  *

ft

1

L.

t /•  M

1”  "

ft-

© !

ft

U _

=— C

-._P  -1

ft

_ -L. J

c

17


MASONIC  SONGS.


O’er  matter’s  modes  thy  mystic  sway
Can  fashion  Chaos’  devious  way,

To  order’s  lucid  maze  ;

Can  rear  the  cloud-assaulting  tow’r,

And  bid  the  worm,  that  breathes  its  hour,
Its  humble  palace  raise.


From  nascent  life  to  being’s  pride,
The  surest  boon  thy  laws  provide,
When  wayward  fate  beguiles  j
The  tears  thou  shedst  for  human  wo,
Ih  falling  shine  like  Iris’  bow,

And  beam  an  arch  of  smiles.


Come,  Priest  of  Science,  truth  array’d,
And  with  thee  bring  each  tuneful  maid,
Thou  lov’st  on  Shinar’s  plains ;
Revive  Creation’s  primal  plan,

Subdue  this  wilderness  of  man,

Bid  social  virtue  reign.


MASONIC  SONGS.


1 95


HYMN  FOR  CONSECRATION.


ft — am-

1*~

ft*  .

r

if  .4

zJ  1

•ft  ^

. — I .

F 1 * 3 F4T  - I

“U  1 F ^ ! 2 1 1

XT  t*

Heav’n  a

ind  earth

a - dor’d,

A.  A

All  h
O

ail,  great  God !

Ti

A

ft  "

r.»  r

i r

■ I

JL  -

P

i i

-

H —

r ’

- 1

(ft—

h

*

>'  '

1 !

k-

H

hd—  1

i 0

:4

_r

— I

A.

a

p,  I

i ■

'ft

n -1

p.

r*  i

ft

r

F _ '

1

~ I

W i

1

N

_ L

Hoav’n  and  earth  !

aT-  dor’d,

All  hail,  gr

eat  <

God!

ft  ~

8 ....

-1-

rI~

“ 9

_ L

i — ri — r • ft  - .1  r — r c_i.

JfH

■-  |

196


MASONIC  SONGS.


tr — T ■"

— , •

■

£=»

if  s

9 9

r m

w

w

r

I :

j

i u_

'

•7

Be  -

r\  /-*

fore  thy  throne  we  bt

:nd,

...

To

i.

&

J

^ r

9 J9

r . r

®J

in

r

f

_ j.

1

1

r*

□

u

Li

i

u

S J

J

i

r : ' ■ s s

it#  r

-\

r i

r/ .

r ^ 1

I&k  . ..

3|

9 9

H

H

^ .


r~

Q

1

Be  - fore

thy  t

m

hrone  we  bend,

D

To

m*—

w

- m

r

rj7i

r

I t )•  m J

w

Hr.

^

L

J

1 r ^

""j

j

.IalLZ

L

Hi

1

"Ij

1 I

— L.

r

L H

. . 1 . L 1

MASONIC  SONGS,


197


Heaven,  thy  dread  dwelling  place,
Cannot  contain  thy  Grace,
Remember  now  our  race,

0 Lord  our  God  !

g


God  of  our  fathers,  hear,

And  to  our  cry  be  near,
Jehovah,  God !

The  Heavens  eternal  bow,
Forgive  in  mercy  now
Thy  suppliants  here,  0 Thou,
Jehovah,  God !


17 *


196  MASONIC  SONGS.

To  Thee  our  hearts  do  draw,
On  them  0 write  thy  law,

Our  Saviour,  God!

When  in  this  Lodge  we’re  met,
And  at  thine  Altar  set,

O,  do  not  us  forget,

Our  Saviohr,  God  !


44*«-


ODE  FOR  DEDICATION.


BV  J.  H.


m <

4=

f-ry

cred

e - -

j —

ter  - sal

King  of

fc*  —

— RF

-K$Z

-P-P

Hi

MASONIC  SONGS.


;i99


/


tr

t-H*— f

•®»®

A— i®#  A

_ • •

i

r

Eb # -rii

r.  *

i

;*r

1 •

■i

1

courts

a *

- bove,  Send  beams

of

1®-

r V m

r m


1 (®

l(flJ £Z_

*

t

L Jt tf-

J u J-J-

i

200


MASONIC  SONGS.


MASONIC  SONGS.


20.1


Lentando.


Cres.  ud  lib.


bend-ing  at  this  sa  - - - cred  shrine,


_ VT*

iV  -

B

1

f

> 1

1

*

*

1

I

1

*

* tempo.


2Q2


MASONIC  SONGS.


Faith  ! with  divine  and  heav’nward  eye,
Pointing  to  radiant  realms  of  bliss,
Shed  here  thy  sweet  benignity,

And  crown  our  works  with  happiness  ;
Hope  ! too,  with  bosom  void  of  fear,

Still  on  thy  steadfast  anchor  lean,

0 ! shed  thy  balmy  influence  here,

And  fill  our  breasts  with  joy  serene.


And  thou,  fair  Charity  ! whose  smile
Can  bid  the  heart  forget  its  woe,
Whose  hand  can  misery’s  care  beguile,
And  kindness’  sweetest  boon  bestow,
Here  shed  thy  sweet  soul-soothing  ray  ;

Soften  our  hearts,  thou  Power  divine !
Bid  the  warm  gem  of  pity  play,

With  sparkling  lustre,  on  our  shrine.


Thou,  who  art  thron’d  midst  dazzling  light,
And  wrapp’d  in  brilliant  robes  of  gold,
Whose  flowing  locks  of  silv’ry  white
Thy  age  and  honour  both  unfold,

Genius  of  Masonry  ! descend,

And  guide  our  steps  by  thy  strict  law  ;

O ! swiftly  to  our  temple  bend,

And  fill  our  breasts  with  solemn  awe.


MASONIC  SONGS.


203


GLEE.


allegro  ma  non  presto.


HAIL ! mys-te-rious,  glo-rious  sci-ence,


i


zi


CRES.


r


H


Wd&


Hail ! mys  - te  - rious,  glo  - rious  sci-ence,


£


*


i r-  T-p


a


Hail ! nays  - te  - rious,  glo  - rious  sci-ence.


SB


tfa


%


204


MASONIC  SONGS.


I


/-\  IJ.

TT  fL

r wrv*

£ — CL  SZ“

£

-I*  « — * —

xl:  » i r

r i n

•

FiTi  ft  ' T . _

i i

"

i i i

! _L

! !

1

Hail ! mys  - te  - rious,  glo  - rious  sci  - ence,


i


— 8= 3

a

5 # ...  .

•

•

*

v *

* A

r

. r

£■  i

i

Hail ! mys  - te  - rious,  glo  - rious  sci  - ence,


f—

|

*

A ■

8 i 1

1

Har  - mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here,


SL  _ - ^

z „

* -

ft

<

Har  - m

^ •

o - ny

a -

lone  reigns  here,

V-  tt

9 ■■  ■

O'

m

* _

a

^ - r

r


1 j

MASONIC  SONGS.


205


t*

Fa


t.


WIZM.


II


-#


±


t


m


Har  - mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here.


w.


IPZIJ


i


Har  - mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here.


£


&


■t


MEZZO  FOR.


6-7

s

P

• 1

\MJ  • 1

Come  let’s  sing  -

» i

ff.,  •

m

# •

ft

ft

(u'R  . -*

$ •

Come  h

.

>t’s  si

• 1

^ *

o Hir

A.

n that

<?

«or

<T

<J  /•  *T . , •

l 3 • nan

- ‘

L ^ •

rais’d  us  From  the  rug-ged  path  that  maz’d  us,


18


206


MASONIC  SONGS.


PIA.


5


5


To  the  light  that


To  the  light  that


P

r — £ — s —

r:  r~~f —


we  re  - vere.


gfK

£5

o

i

r

vve  re  - vere

e-


m


*


S~M


E


FOR.


a


t


£


.Q


I


To  the  light  that  we  re  - vere.


5


9


¥


*


BE§


t


'Jo  the  light  that  we  re  - vere.


1=5


¥=*


i


PIA.  _

* ?


*


"7T


Hail,  mys  - ter’  - ous,


Hail,  mys  - ter’  - ous,  glor’  - ous,  sci  - ence,


MASONIC  SONGS.


207


8=r


Tff-


FOR.


Hail,  mys-ter’-ous,


-8


Hail,  mys-ter’-ous,


sz*rez*ii


§


Hail,  inys-ter’-ous,  glor’-ous  sci-ence,  Hail,  mys-ter’-ous,

TST.TZ T ”Ti (*~l*Tl*


8:


EEE


-|fr— jO-


:izzf


■#


£

51


8=EP


E


PIA.  _ ^

~'g~jg — p — l»~


-|  r

o


-m


E


it7


fi-ance,  Har  - mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here.


-1


-a


&


=-f


• —


5=


1*


T


fi-ance,  Har  - mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here.


£§f


• »


■8'


8:


s — ©


r


208


MASONIC  SONGS.


P


FOR.

g (» j»-


I


*


Har  - mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here.


*z=s


1 i • J

Har  -

” 1

mo  - ny  a - lone  reigns  here;

r-

Q*  a

‘ • 1

i

i

9

• |

1

8

1

r r

• !

t

3A"  1

i 1

|

Q • J

ODE  TO  CHARITY.

Music,  see  page  178.

OFFSPRING  of  Heav’n,  mankind’s  best  friend,
Bright  Charity,  inspire  the  lay  ;

On  these  celestial  shores  descend,

And  quit  the  realms  of  cloudless  day  :

Chorus.  To  Thee  our  constant  vows  are  paid,

Thy  praise  we  hymn,  Angelic  Maid.


When  Vulcan  rages  unconfin’d,

And  Neptune  mourns  his  baffled  pow'r,
When  flames  aspiring  with  the  wind,

To  Heaven’s  high  arch  resistless  tow’r  :
Chorus.  ’Tis  thou  our  hearts  with  pity’s  glow.
Inspir’st  to  feel  for  human  w©


I


MASONIC  SONGS.  209

The  house  a dismal  ruin  lies,

Where  mirth  late  tun’d  her  lyre  of  joy  ;

And  tears  of  anguish  fill  your  eyes,

Poor  orphan  girl,  and  houseless  boy  : —

Chorus.  But  thou,  sweet  maid,  with  pity’s  glow,

Inspir’st  each  heart  to  soothe  their  wo


Come  then,  all-bounteous  as  thou  art,

And  hide  thee  from  our  sight  no  more ;
Touch  ev’ry  soul,  expand  each  heart,
That  breathes  on  freedom’s  chosen  shore  :
Chorus.  Columbia’s  sons  with  pity’s  glow
Inspire  to  feel  for  human  wo.


CHARITY.

A HYMN.


210


MASONIC  SONGS


All  ten  - der,  soft,  and  kind  ; A friend


to  all  the  hu  - man  race,


IT  -

b

V

A

% • ft

& ft

ft  ^

V

W

r .

i

*

, — —

i

i

to  all  the  hu  - man  race,


•

~ft. *

ft  ‘

- ft

1

i

ft  •

1

__i !

1

1

l !

U —

1 -

To  all  that’s  good  and  kind.


To  all  that’s  good  and  kind.


MASONIC  SONGS


211


\ i l)

—

I

dr_  U

8 *

© 1 ^

!

0 ® j

v-

w t

0*

r tt

tends  To  all  his  lib’  - ral  hand ;

7

r-

m

US

_

J

tends  To  all  his  lib'  - ral  hand ;

"r“

r \.  . i r*

..  9 1

1

(§

1l7*

7 1 !

r i

1 *

, i . U

I |

. r ....

i r

__i

1

—

FOR.


His  kin-dred,  neigh-bors,  foes,  and  friends,


V


His  kin-dred,  neigh-bors,  foes,  and  friends,


a

hh

t %-<  r

•

9 w

jl

i

1

r

* 6^

1 ^

1

/


212  MASONIC  SONGS.


He  aids  the  poor  in  their  distress —

He  hears  when  they  complain  ;

With  tender  heart  delights  to  bless
And  lessen  all  their  pain  :

The  sick,  the  prisoner,  poor,  and  blind.
And  all  the  sons  of  grief,

In  him  a benefactor  find,

He  loves  to  give  relief.


Tis  love,  that  makes  religion  sweet,
’Tis  love,  that  makes  us  rise,

With  willing  mind  and  ardent  feet,
To  yonder  happy  skies  :

Then  let  us  all  in  love  abound,

And  Charity  pursue  !

Thus  shall  we  be  with  glory  crown’d,
And  love  as  angels  do,


MASONIC  SONGS'*


21-3


MASONIC  HYMN.


First  Voicf..


Whose  wis  - doni  plann'd  tlie  grand  de  - sign,


=fc=z


3EE


5


Whose  wis  - dom  plann’d  the  grand  de  - sign,


214


MASONIC  SONGS


(j  ^ 1

n — ff

r

n

x # i -

. |

J81

1

fcA  ul  4J  _

• *

j

toMt  ®

w

And  gave  to  na  - ture  birth !


s -

— 3T" |

r=__q

— Z

ji’’  ^ — (1

r

1

. ^1

- ®

# - ,...,  - J

IS

1 — ■ j

V

l r

/


MASONIC  SONGS.


215


FOR.


-g-


l=S


:g


~**<r

the
^ i ^


r±


And  bless’d  the  new  - born  earth  ;


I


i r

=*=¥


s


a— -<


-3-#-


And  bless’d  the


E


Hi::


new  - born  earth  ;

A


-«1“


It


-fr

CHORUS.

ifrif:


$EB


i^gza:


V


ifiE£


i


’Till  love  shall  cease,  ’till  or  - der  dies,


m


’Till  love  shall  cease,  ’till  or  - der  dies,


1


f-i*


jfcfiiCFr


5


I


t


*'S*


tec


1


!#


1 i r


5


:P=


To  Thee  ma  - son  - ic  praise  shall  rise.


To  Thee  ma  - son  - ic  praise  shall  rise.

• — m — 0


-#


Ugli


Repeat  the  last  Chorus.


£16


MASONIC  SONGS.


O,  bless  this  love-cemented  band,

Form’d  and  supported  by  thy  hand,

For  Charity’s  employ  ;

To  shield  the  wretched  from  despair,

To  spread  through  scenes  of  grief  and  care.
Reviving  rays  of  joy.

Chorus.  ’Till  love,  he.


The  lib’ral  Arts,  by  Thee  design’d,

To  polish,  comfort,  aid  mankind,

We  labour  to  improve  ;

While  we  adore  Jehovah’s  name,

Pour  on  our  hearts  the  melting  flame,
And  mould  our  souls  to  love.
€horns.  ’Till  love,  &.c.


FUNFRAL  HYMN

MUSIC  BT  IIAUDEL.


ADAGIO.


w

. TTH  —

■*  —

M r

1 1

J L .

; ® , i

Un  - veil  thy  bo  - som  faith  - ful

r N

\ / i

1 .

i

— T~

n

li  f 1 1 A

i -

i

ivA*  . c

1 !

i '

J

i J...  i

*

O Cf

“C75  19

* ~

JS^  is

Un  - veil  thy  bo  - som  faith  - ful


^ 7.U  A

W i

3 (8-

r,  n1/  . r _

1

c —

— --is  [

Z—

1

—

MASONIC  SONGS,


tir


Jr-

< £

"U

r»

O

3

C«  -i

tr

3 - < -

J

thy  tr

i " t i --  m

ust  And  give  these  sa  - ci

m

red

)

- 4> —

hT

□ r

a

r

i

L_ :

thy  trust  J

Lnd  gi

i 1 ■

ve  these  sa  - ci

*ed

v

A

£=S

<=»•  ^

■"  r-

f)  ^

l

1

* p J

—

i—

19


MASONIC  SONGS


tfl8


rel  - ics  room  To  slum-ber


" Tr

»-

*r  A

— 11


! l Lr

p ~~r  p :i

\

f. -

Jwj_  „

Xi

— 4 — — - —

masonic  Songs.


219


Nor  pain,  nor  grief,  nor  anxious  fear,
Invade  thy  bounds  ; no  mortal  woes
Gan  reach  the  silent  sleepers  here,
And  Angels  watch  their  soft  repose.


So  Jesus  slept;  God’s  dying  Son,

Past  through  the  grave,  and  blest  the  bed.;
Rest  here,  dear  Saint,  ’till  from  His  throne
The  morning  break,  and  pierce  the  shade


Break  from  his  throne,  illustrious  Morn  !
Attend,  O Earth,  his  sov’reign  Word  !
Restore  thy  trust,  a glorious  form,

He  must  ascend  to  meet  his  Lord.


220  MASONIC  SONGS*


MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER’S  ODE.


31USIC  BY  A.  BROWN.


MAS  ONI  8 SONGS.


221


2!


£


a


1


•ftZftLJI


i


m


m


T


Fe


T


And  on  the  fcey  stone  blaz’d  E - ter  - nal  Love.


EF


ima


I


M4


I


P^P~P


5


19*


MASONIt)  SONGff,


22$

Heaven’s  favourite,  man  was  made
In  beauty  fair,

Crime  chang’d  blest  Eden’s  shade
To  black  despair ;

Love  from  the  sacred  Arch  came  gently  down.
Rais’d  man  from  death,  to  an  immortal  crown.


Love,  then,  in  chorus  sing ;

Hail  Love  divine  !

Masons  your  Cassia  bring
To  deck  his  shrine  ;

Christians  unite  while  Angels  join  in  song,

All  Earth  and  Heaven  the  glorious  strain  prolong.


ROYAL  ARCH  SONG.


BY  A COMPANION.


MUSIC  BY  J.  WHITAKER.


' r

! > 1

r~m j®

i ~ t n i ir-

13> —

round,  Where  the  Pon-tiff  holds  his  seat.  Now  he


MASONIC  SONGS.


spreads  the  vol-ume  wide,  Ope-ning  forth  its  leaves


to  day,  And  the  Mon  - arch  by  his


side,  Ga  - zes  on  the  bright  dis  - play.


Joy  ! the  secret  vault  is  found  ;

Full  the  sunbeam  falls  within,
Pointing  darkly  under  ground,

To  the  treasure  we  would  win.

They  have  brought  it  forth  to  lightj.
And  again  it  cheers  the  earth  ;

All  its  leaves  are  purely  bright,
Shining  in  their  newest  worth.


This  shall  be  the  sacred  mark
Which  shall  guide  us  to  the  skies,
Bearing,  like  a holy  ark,

All  the  hearts  who  love  to  rise  3
This  shall  be  the  corner  stone
Which  the  builders  threw  away,.
But  was  found  the  only  one
Fitted  for  the  arch's  stay.


sm


MASONIC  S0&6S,


This  shall  be  the  gavel  true,

At  whose  sound  the  crowd  shall  ben<£.
Giving  to  the  law  its  due  ;

This  shall  be  the  faithful  friend ;

This  the  token,  which  shall  bring
Kindness  to  the  sick  and  poor,
Hastening  on,  on  Angel’s  wing,

To  the  lone  and  darksome  door.


This  shall  crown  the  mighty  archt
When  the  temple  springs  on  high,
And  the  brethren  bend  their  march
Wafting  incense  to  the  sky.

Then  the  solemn  strain  shall  swell
From  the  bosom  and  the  tongue,
And  the  Master’s  glory  tell
In  the  harmony  of  song.


Here  the  exile,  o’er  the  waste
Trudging  homeward,  shall  repose }
All  his  toils  and  dangers  past,
Here  his  long  sojourning  close.
Entering  through  the  sacred  veils
To  the  holy  cell  he  bends  ;

Then  as  sinking  Nature  fails,

Hope  in  glad  fruition  ends.


MASONIC  SONGS,


225


ROYAL  ARCH  SONG.


Andante  Pomposo.


A . 1

s

• r

m •

1

r c_.  i

vm7  !

!


And  pil-lar’d  Strength  o.

rose  ;

f\9

a*  m,

{ft.  r

r»

r

r i

i

i U_J —

\ J

* O A

A

F A

W

.»

A.

UAl  4A.

1 _ _

-Ml.

vM/  ®

L

i

W

hen  beau  -

• 1**  1

ty  ting’d  the  glow  - ing  scene,

m-

7-TV

f

•

ft_

rt.  -

i

■

• r

1

226


MASONIC  SONGS.


ffr


life


£


t-


bauds


the


fa-bric  view’d,  Mys  - ter’  - ous


w

F


kJ*

*i  |

k

m

1

r

U — L

■ "•—

XL  ,A.  _ - .

” 1

•

i *r

.

E5_.

1 — ^

-2  _

J

1

■ i

4/

Un-ioi

1 stood,  Ai

ad  hi

gh  t:

p — ^

he  Trip  - pie

t V 1

e

a* J

1

P

_ __ r

r

1

i ■ *

• J.

U-j

* —

1

U—l

c — fcd

MASONIC  SONGS.


m


e


rr


*«r


•rf) — &


+


T


w •

Un-ioa  stood,  That  gave  the  mys-tic  word.


228


MASONIC  SONGS.


Pale  Envy  wither’d  at  the  sight,

And,  frowning  o’er  the  pile,

Call’d  Murder  up  from  realms  of  night-
To  blast  the  glorious  toil.

With  rufHan  outrage  join’d,  in  wo
They  form’d  the  league  ahhorr’d ;

And  wounded  Science  felt  the  blow,
That  crush'd  the  Mystic  Word.


Concealment,  from  sequester’d  cave,
.On  sable  pinions  flew ; —

And  o’er  the  sacrilegious  grave,

Her  veil  impervious  threw,

The  associate  band,  in  solemn  state,
The  awful  loss  deplor’d  ;

And  Wisdom  mourn’d  the  ruthless  fate,
That  whelm’d  the  Mystic  Word.


At  length,  through  Time’s  expanded  sphere,
Fair  Science  speeds  her  way  ;

And  warm'd  by  Truth's  refulgence,  clear
Reflects  the  kindred  ray.

A second  fabric's  towering  height,

Proclaims  the  sign  restor’d  ;

From  whose  foundation,  brought  to  light*

Is  drawn  the  Mystic  Word.


To  depths  obscure,  the  favour’d  Trine,
A dreary  course  engage  ;

’Till,  through  the  Arch,  the  ray  divine
Illumes  the  sacred  page.

From  the  wide  wonders  of  this  blaze.
Our  ancient  sign’s  restor’d  ; —

The  Royal  Arch  alone  display«

The  long  lost  Mystic-  Word.


MASONIC  SONGS.


£29


ROYAL  ARCH  SONG.


AKDANTE  MODERAT'D.


^ —


ALMIGHTY  SIRE!  our  heaven-ly


eEe?

King!


. 1 m ^Jr

E — 2 - ?

n

1

1

i

— J

-±r~

r

Be  - fore  whose  sa-cred  Name  we  bend,  Ac-


cept  the  prais  - es  which  we  sing,


And  to  our


«r r

!

1 —

a "

wi  ;

<X

* — r & j ...  ^

i*

hum  - ble  prayer  at  - tend  ; Thou,  who  didst


EZ~

m.

r.  t -

:zza=3

p

• —

-•u-W-J

Per  - sia’s  kiDg  com-tnand  A pro  - cla  - ma  - tion


£


E


¥


t#  ex  - te*dj  That  Is  - raei’s  sons  might  quit


230


MASONIC  SONGS.


r • i

-s  ft  -

M? Ti

& -

# rr

I

cri

*«_ — y —

Ml  ...

J

r n

* ^

L U

_u

the  land,  Their  ho  - ly  Tem  - pie  to  at  - tend  ;

CHORUS.  For.


rr  v ^

i.

s a

/jr  •

ft  _ iS—  J

A.

1*

i.J

:3Ee|

v\y  • ft

1

!

r

All  hail

! grei

A #

at  Ar-chi-tect  di-vine  J This  u-

• ^ A

ni-v

er-sal

•

. • (ft

r -

« _ft

r

7T  •

T_  .

r

-*1

1

r

\ j »

n

1 1

I

•

i

All  hail

} grej

at  Ar-chi-teet  di-vine  ! T

his  u-ni-ver-sal

ft

f v . . •

.A.

ft

] i

A _

*yqrs  .

ft  •

J

! U

r

V

r

ti  * ft.

|

i #

l

*4

I u_

£

(

m: :

_pq

PL,

Ml  •

?Tm  <

• S3  !

i j


i

i_.

rfo . i

1

1 1

i i

L#

i

= h-

J

1

1

i

Z 1

¥T

frame

is  thine,  1

ft

[*his  u-ni

iLj

— 4— ■

- ver-sal  frame  is  thine,

• ft  .

ft  T

A

ft_

ft

r

54_

_J 2

r j —

1

1

1 i —

^

L 1

fra

me

ft.

is  thine,  1

tt i

[ his  u-ni  - ver-sal  frame  is

thine,

-V

1 1

_ •

ft  1

ft.

« ‘

<7*

! M_l

L

ft

1

i

T

1

ft

U J

MASONIC  SONGS.


231


Slow.


That  sacred  place,  where  Three  in  One
Compris’d  thy  comprehensive  name)
And  when  the  bright  meridian  Sun
Was  seen  thy  glory  to  proclaim.

Thy  watchful  eye,  a length  of  time,
The  wond’rous  circle  did  attend  ;

The  glory  and  the  power  be  thine,
Which  shall- from  age  to  age  descend.
Chorus.  AH  hail,  &c.


On  thy  Omnipotence  we  rest,

Secure  of  thy  protection  here  ;

And  hope  hereafter  to  be  blest,

When  we  have  left  this  world  of  care.

Grant  us,  great  God,  thy  powerful  aid
To  Guide  us  through  this  vale  of  tears ;

For  where  thy  goodness  is  display’d,

Peace  soothes  the  mind,  and  pleasure  cheers/
Chorus.  All  hail,  &c.


MASONIC  SONGS*


2S®


Inspire  us  with  thy  grace  divine ;

Thy  sacred  law  our  guide  shall  be  ;

To  every  good  our  hearts  incline,
From  every  evil  keep  us  free.

Our  glad  hosannas,  Sovereign  King  !
Thy  welcome  here  shall  e’er  proclaim.
And  heaven’s  eternal  arches  ring
With  thy  revealed,  holy  Name  :

Chorus.  All  hail ! great  Architect  divine  t
This  universal  frame  is  thine


SELECT  MASTER’S  SONG.

BY  A COMPANION.


HUNGARIAN  AIR.


THE  vault  arch-es  o’er  us  and  night  broods  a - round,


di


t-


1^3

Not


&


1


ot  a whis-per  is  heard  thro’  the  depth  of  the  cave ;


— — 1

—

* r

— r

r£=l*-

-• —

*

4

—

mk

r

All  hearts,  in  the  si-lence  of  se  - ere  - cy  bound,


■;=r-

•

■ “»■

m

=^m

■ 1 — i

•

■ —m-

— — *

_fc

Are  read-ing  the  words,  the  great  A^hi-tect  gave  :


MASONIC  SONGS.


233


—

a

1

17

ft

—a

1

r p.

U - ni  -

w w

ted  they  lis-ten  the  voice  of

.a

the

Law ,

A-

M ~ ~

- # _

w

m

P |

- - 17

* u

(fr

. 1

r S*

1

_ 1

The  guide  to  our  rea-son,  the  spur  of  the  soul,


. .

-1  "

A

w

4

47

J

n

*

— E-S

• '

i

L — m-

And  they  feel  in  the  sounds  a sweet  mys-te-ry  draw


r—

L_3_ '

^ (•

_ # ■

P

I s

P— ft

r U*

4

A 1

J

ft

E-s

m

rr"

Their  hearts  to  the  Spir-it  who  ut-ter'd  the  whole.


Now  the  work  is  completed  and  all  are  combin’d,
To  close  in  the  secret  and  deep-hidden  cell
The  words  which  are  treasur’d  as  light  to  the  mind,
Like  the  waters  of  truth  in  their  close-cover’d  well.
Here  safely  secured  they  shall  live  in  the  rock,
When  the  storm  rages  o’er  it  and  levels  the  Wall,
And  still  in  the  rage  of  the  conqueror's  shock,

The  arches  shall  neither  be  shaken  nor  fall.

We  have  laid  in  its  secret  and  silent  retreat
The  treasures  that  Kings  shall  exult  to  behold  ;

And  the  pilgrim  shall  hasten  with  ardour  to  meet
This  gift,  valued  higher  than  jewels  or  gold  :

Ages  roll  on  their  way  and  no  foot  shall  be  heard
In  search  of  this  roll  to  enlighten  the  world  ;

But  a hand  shall  be  found  to  recover  the  Word, ,

And  then  shall  the  standard  o {truth  be  unfurled.

20*


234


MASONIC  SONGS,


We  are  seated  in  silence,  and  nothing  can  find
Its  way  to  our  distant  and  mystical  cave  ;

And  the  watchman  who  guards  not,  our  mandate  shall  bintl
In  the  deeper  concealment  of  death  and  the  grave  ;

Be  faithful  and  true,  ever  firm  to  your  trust,

In  the  lesson  we  give  in  the  council  of  light,

And  the  herald  shall  summon  you  forth  from  the  dust.
Above  in  the  meeting  of  souls  to  unite.


SELECT  MASTER’S  ANTHEM.
[See  Music,  page  213.]

“LET  there  be  light,”  th’  Almighty  spoke;
Refulgent  streams  from  chaos  broke,

To  illume  the  rising  earth  !

Well  pleas’d  the  Great  Jehovah  stood  ;

The  Power  Supreme  pronounc’d  it  good,
And  gave  the  planets  birth  !

Chorus.  In  choral  numbers  masons  join,

To  bless  and  praise  this  light  divine.


Parent  of  light  ! accept  our  praise  !
Who  shedd’st  on  us  thy  brightest  rays,
The  light  that  fills  the  mind  :

By  choice  selected , lo  ! we  stand,

By  friendship  join’d,  a social  band  '
That  love,  that  aid  mankind  !

Vhorus.  In  choral  numbers,  fee.


MASONIC  songs.


£35


The  widow's  tear,  the  orphan's  cry,

All  wants  our  ready  hands  supply,

As  far  as  power  is  given  ;

The  naked  clothe,  the  pris'ner  free,
These  are  thy  works,  sweet  Charity  !
Reveal’d  to  us  from  Heaven.

Qhorus.  In  choral  numbers  masons  join,

To  bless  and  praise  this  light  divine


SONG.


WRITTEN  BY  N.  H.  WRIGHT.


Allegretto.  Mezza  Voce.


— i *

3 ^

i~

JUa  4

T*  i

*

**

r a

' W~T~  i —

V \

Aj  1

J

j

r

P

F

i

w m

&

1 4

i «

• k


® • k

AH  ! why  should  the  heart  be  dt

m.

p

» _

i


press’d,

n

- m - -

a.  •

h

p

J

9

li

1 7

i

r

L

P .

r

-jft  '

1

A P

1

r

When  its  i

fond  - ness  i

is  treat-e

:d

with  scorn  ?

— 1> —

5P

—

i

. n . ft ...

i

_ & r-*  r<*

u

^ _ a a

r-|  r

■

The  couch  that  with  ro  - ses  is  dress’d,


|j  • f7

■ 2 :

h 1

ns ” * ft*  .

%

^ <-  t 1

f _ *•_  r r*  a J _

_L  U— £-4.  £-*L

In  its  soft  - ness  con  - ceals  a rude  thorn.


236


MASONIG  SONGS.


In  its  soft-ness  con-ceals  a rude  thorn,


The  couch  that  with  ro  - ses  is  dress’d


-£r.


m


1


si


tZM


m


±£i


In  its  soft-ness  con-ceals  a rude  thorn.


The  bright  eye  of  beauty  may  beam
With  a light  like  the  meteor  glare  ;

But  her  victim  may  wake  from  his  drearu,
And  hope  may  be  chang’d  to  despair.


Like  the  rainbow,  which  shines  from  the  cloud-,
Her  allurements  awhile  may  deceive  ;

Till  Joy  is  enwrapp’d  in  a shroud,

And  the  mourner  is  left  but  to  grieve.


MASONIC  SONGS.


But  Friendship  has  charms,  which  endure,
Its  birth  was  in  regions  above ;

Tis  a passion,  like  heaven,  most  pure,

For  it  sprang  from  the  fountain  of  love.


Then  let  not  the  heart  be  depress’d
If  one  treat  its  fondness  with  scorn ;

It  may  find  in  a Brother’s  warm  breast
The  rose  that  conceals  not  a thorn';


MASONIC  ODE.


EMPIRES  and  kings  have  pass'd  away
Into  oblivion’s  mine  ;

And  tow’ring  domes  have  felt  decay,
Since  auld  lang  syne.


But  Masonry,  the  glorious  art,
With  wisdom’s  ray  divine ;
Twas  ever  so,  the  Hebrew  cries,
In  auld  lang  syne.


Behold  the  occidental  chair
Proclaims  the  day’s  decliiffe —
Hiram  of  Tyre  was  seated  there,
In  auld  lang  syne.


238


MASONIC  SONGS-


The  South  proclaims  refreshment  nigb,
High  twelve's  the  time  to  dine  ;

And  beauty  deck’d  the  southern  sky,

In  auld  lang  syne.


Yes,  Masonry,  whose  temple  here
Was  built  by  hands  divine,

Shall  ever  shine  as  bright  and  clear,,
As  auld  lang  syne.


Then  brethren,  for  the  worthy  three 4
Let  us  a wreath  entwine,

The  three  great  heads  of  Masonfy
In  auld  lang  syne.


Remembering  oft  that  worthy  one,
With  gratitude  divine,

The  Tyrian  youth — the  widow’s. setij
©f  auld  lang  syne.


■MASONIC  SONGS.


339


EPILOGUE,

AS  lately,  brethren,  from  the  Lodge  I came,

Warm’d  with  our  royal  order’s  purest  flame;

Absorb’d  in  thought ; — before  my  ravish’d  eyes,

I saw  the  Genius,  Masonry,  arise :

A curious  hieroglyphic  robe  he  wore,

And  in  his  hand  the  sacred  volume  bore :

On  one  side  was  divine  Astraea  plac’d,

And  soft-eyed  Charity  the  other  grac’d  ;

Humanity,  the  gen’ral  friend  was  there,

And  Pity,  dropping  the  pathetic  tear;

There  too  was  Order  ; — there,  with  rosy  mien,

Blithe  Temp’rance  shone,  and  white  rob'd  Truth  was  seen.
There,  with  a key  suspended  to  his  breast,

Silence  appear’d;  his  lips  his  finger  prest;

With  these,  soft  warbling  an  instructive  song,

Sweet  Music,  gaily  smiling,  tripp’d  along.

Wild  laughter,  clam’rous  noise,  and  mirth  ill  bred,

The  brood  of  folly,  at  his  presence  fled.

The  Genius  spoke, — “ My  son,  observe  my  train,

Which,  of  my  order  diff’reot  parts  explain.

Look  up — behold  the  bright  Astr^a  there,

She  will  direct  thee  how  to  use  the  Square.

Pity  will  bid  thee  grieve,  with  those  who  grieve,

Whilst  Charity  will  prompt  thee  to  relieve;

Will  prompt  thee  every  comfort  to  bestow,

And  draw  the  arrow  from  the  breast  of  woe ;

Humanity  will  lead  to  honour’s  goal,

Give  the  large  thought,  and  form  the  gen’rous  soul.

Will  bid  thee  thy  fraternal  love  expand,

To  virtue  of  all  faiths, — aud  ev’ry  land.

Order  will  kindly  teach  her  laws  of  peace,

Which  discard  stop,  and  social  joys  increase;


240


MASONIC  SONCiS.


Temp’rancr  instruct  thee  all  excess  t’  avoid,

By  which  fair  fame  is  lost,  and  health  destroy’d
Truth  warn  thee  ne’er  to  use  perfidious  art,

And  bid  thy  tongue  be  rooted  in  thy  heart  3
Silence  direct  thee  never  to  disclose,

Whate’er  thy  brethren  in  thy  breast  repose;

For  thee  shall  Music  strike  the  harmonious  lyre.
And  whilst  she  charms  the  ear,  morality  inspire.
These  all  observe  ; — and  let  thy  conduct  show,
What  real  blessings  1 on  man  bestow.5’

He  said,  and  disappear’d; — and  Oh ! may  wer
Who  wear  this  honour’d  badge,  accepted,  free,
To  ev’ry  grace  and  virtue  temples  raise,

And  by  our  useful  works  our  Order  praise.


. t


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS


0 019  850  601  1


warn
