The Equinox, Vol. I, No. 8 (September 1912) (Aleister Crowley (ed.), 1912; public domain)
===============================================================================
No. 8 of Crowley's magical journal The Equinox (September 1912) — the primary record of the A.'.A.'. and the birth of Thelema, containing first publications of the Holy Books and ritual corpus. Source: Internet Archive.

This page 1s reserved for Official Pronouncements by the Chancellor
of the A..A..]
Persons wishing for information, assistance, further
interpretation, etc., are requested to communicate with

TTHE CHANCELLOR OF THE A..A..
c/o THE EQUINOX,
3 Great James Street,
W.C.
‘Telephone: CITY 8987,
or to call at that address by appointment. A representative
will be there to meet them.

THE Chancellor of the A... A.. considers it desirable to
make a brief statement of the financial position, as the time
has now arrived to make an effort to spread the knowledge
to the ends of the earth. The expenses of the propaganda
are roughly estimated as follows—

Maintenance of Temple, and service . . £200 p.a.
Publications .  . «we tSséS 2000 pwc.
Advertising, electrical expenses, etc. . . 200 p.a.

Maintenance of an Hermitage where poor
Brethren may make retirements. . £200 p.a.
£800 p.a.

As in the past, the persons responsible for the movement
will give the whole of their time and energy, as well as their
worldy wealth, to the service of the A... A..

Unfortunately, the sums at their disposal do not at
present suffice for the contemplated advance, and the Chan-
cellor consequently appeals for assistance to those who have
found in the instructions of the A.. A.. a sure means to
the end they sought. All moneys received will be applied
solely for the purpose of aiding those who have not yet
entered the circle of the light.

Owing to the unnecessary strain thrown upon Neophytes
by unprepared persons totally ignorant of the groundwork
taking the Oath of a Probationer, the Imperator of A..A..,
under the seal and by the authority of V.V.V.V.V., ordains
that every person wishing to become a Probationer of A..A~.
must first pass three months as a Student of the Mysteries.

He must possess the following books:—

14.

The EQUINOX, from No. 1 to the present number.

“Raja Yoga,” by Swami Vivekananda.

“The Shiva Sanhita,” or “The  Hathayoga
Pradipika.”

“Konx Om Pax.”

“The Spiritual Guide,” by Miguel de Molinos.

“Rituel et Dogme de la haute Magie,” par Eliphaz
Levi, or its translation, by A. E. Waite.

“The Goetia of the Lemegeton of Solomon the
King.”

“Tannhauser” by A. Crowley.

“The Sword of Song,” by A. Crowley.

“Time,” by A. Crowley.

“Eleusis,” by A. Crowley.

[These last four items are to be found in his
Collected Works. ]

“The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-melin
the Mage.”

The Tao Teh King and the Writings of Kwang Tzu
(Sacred Books of the East, Vols. XX XIX, XL)

An examination in these books will be made. The Student
is expected to show a thorough acquaintance with them, but
not necessarily to understand them in any deeper sense. On
passing the examination he may be admitted to the grade of
Probationer.

ill

Probationers are reminded that the object of Probations
and Ordeals is one: namely, to select Adepts. But the
method appears twofold: (i) to fortify the fit; (11) to eliminate
the unfit.

The Chancellor of the A... A... views without satisfaction
the practice of Probationers working together. A Probationer
should work with his Neophyte, or alone. Breach of this rule
may prove a bar to advancement.

ILN.RL
BRITISH SECTION OF THE
ORDER OF ORIENTAL ‘TEMPLARS
O.T.O.

M.. M.. M..

[The Premonstrator of the A..A.. permits it to be
known that there is not at present any necessary incom-
patibility between the A..A.. and the O. T. O. and
M ..M ..M .., and allows membership of the same as a
valuable preliminary training. ]

ORDER OF ORIENTAL ‘TEMPLARS

MYSTERIA MYSTICA MAXIMA
PREAMBLE

DURING the last twenty-five years, constantly increasing
numbers of earnest people and seekers after truth have been
turning their attention to the study of the hidden laws of
Nature.

The growth of interest in these matters has been simply
marvellous. Numberless societies, associations, orders,
groups, etc., etc., have been founded in all parts of the
civilized world, all and each following some line of occult
study.

While all these newly organized associations do some good
in preparing the minds of thoughtful people for their
eventually becoming genuine disciples of the One Truth, yet
there is but ONE ancient organization of Mystics which
shows to the student a Royal Road to discover the One
Truth. This organization has permitted the formation of the
body known as the “ANCIENT ORDER OF ORIENTAL
TTEMPLARS.” It is a modern School of Magi. Like
the ancient Schools of Magi it derived its knowledge from
Egypt and Chaldea. This knowledge is never revealed to

vil

‘THE EQUINOX

the profane, for it gives immense power for either good or evil
to its possessors.

It is recorded in symbol, parable and allegory, requiring a
Key for its interpretation.

The symbols of Freemasonry were originally derived from
the more ancient mysteries, as all who have travelled the
burning sands know. ‘The ritual and ceremonies, signs and
passwords have been preserved with great fidelity: but the Real
Key has been long lost to the crowds who have been initiated,
advanced and raised in Masonry.

The KEY to this knowledge can, however, be placed within
the reach of all those who unselfishly desire, study and work for
its possession.

The Symbols of Ancient Masonry, the Sacred Art of the
Ancient Chemi (Egyptians), and Homer’s Golden Chain are but
different aspects of the One Great Mystery. They represent
but different degrees of initiation. By the Right Use of the
“Key” alone the “Master Word” can be found.

In order to afford genuine seekers after Hermetic Truth
some information on the aims of the Ancient Order of Oriental
Templars, we now print the preliminary instruction issued by
the Fratres of this Order.

FIRST INSTRUCTION
To all whom it may concern—

Let it be known that there exists, unknown to the great
crowd, a very ancient order of sages, whose object is the
amelioration and spiritual elevation of mankind, by means of

vill

ORDER OF ORIENTAL TEMPLARS

conquering error, and aiding men and women in their efforts
of attaining the power of recognizing the truth. This order
has existed already in the most remote and prehistoric times;
and it has manifested its activity secretly and openly in the
world under different names and in various forms; it has
caused social and political revolutions, and proved to be the
rock of salvation in times of danger and misfortune. It has
always upheld the banner of freedom against tyranny, in
whatever shape this appeared, whether as clerical or political,
or social despotism or oppression of any kind. To this secret
order every wise and spiritually enlightened person belongs by
right of his or her nature; because they all, even if they are
personally unknown to each other, are one in their purpose
and object, and they all work under the guidance of the one
light of truth. Into this sacred society no one can be
admitted by another, unless he has the power to enter it him-
self by virtue of his own interior illumination: neither can any
one, after he has once entered, be expelled, unless he should
expel himself by becoming unfaithful to his principles, and
forget again the truths which he has learned by his own
experience.

All this is known to every enlightened person; but it is
known only to few that there exists also an external, visible
organization of such men and women who, having themselves
found the path to real self-knowledge, are willing to give to
others, desirous of entering that path, the benefit of their
experience and to act as spiritual guides to those who are
willing to be guided. As a matter of course, those persons who
are already sufficiently spiritually developed to enter into
conscious communion with the great spiritual brotherhood

ix

‘THE EQUINOX

will be taught directly by the spirit of wisdom; but those who
still need external advice and support will find this in the
external organization of that society. In regard to the spiritual
aspect of this secret order, one of the Brothers says—

“Our community has existed ever since the first day of
creation when the gods spoke the divine command: ‘Let
there be light!’ and it will continue to exist till the end of
time. It is the Society of the Children of Light, who live
in the light and have attained immortality therein. In our
school we are instructed directly by Divine Wisdom, the
Celestial Bride, whose will is free and who selects as her
disciples those who are devoted to her. The mysteries which
we are taught embrace everything that can possibly be known
in regard to God, Nature and Man. Every sage that ever
existed in the world has graduated at our school; for without
wisdom no man can be wise. We all study only one book,
the Book of Nature, in which the keys to all secrets are con-
tained, and we follow the only possible method in studying it,
that of experience. Our place of meeting is the Temple of
the Holy Spirit pervading the universe; easily to be found
by the elect, but for ever hidden from the eyes of the vulgar.
Our secrets cannot be sold for money, but we give them free to
every one capable to receive them.”

As to the external organization of that society, it will
be necessary to give a glance at its history, which has been
one and the same in all. Whenever that spiritual society
manifested itself on the outward plane and appeared in the
world, it consisted at its beginning of a few able and en-
lightened people, forming a nucleus around which others were

ORDER OF ORIENTAL TEMPLARS

attracted. But invariably, the more such a society grew in
numbers, the more became attracted to its elements, such as
were not able to understand or follow its principles; people
who joined it for the purpose of gratifying their own ambition
or for making the society serve their own ends obtained the
majority over those that were pure. Thereupon the healthy
portion of it retired from the field and continued their
benevolent work in secrecy, while the remaining portion
became diseased and disrupted, and sooner or later died
disgraced and profaned. For the Spirit had departed from
them.

For this reason the external organization of which we
speak has resolved not to reveal its name or place to the
vulgar. Furthermore, for the same reason, the names of the
teachers and members of this society shall remain unknown,
except to such as are intimately associated with them in their
common work. If it is said that in this way the society will
gain only few members, it may be answered that our society
has a spiritual head, and that those who are worthy of being
admitted will be guided to it by means of their intuition;
while those who have no intuition are not ripe for it and not
needed. It is better to have only a comparatively small
number of capable members than a great many _ useless
ones.

From the above it will be clear that the first and most
necessary acquirement of the new disciple is that he will keep
silent in regard to all that concerns the society to which he is
admitted. Not that there is anything in that Society which
needs to be afraid of being known to the virtuous and good;
but it is not necessary that things which are elevated and

Xi

‘THE EQUINOX

sacred should be exposed to the gaze of the vulgar, and be
bespattered by them with mud. This would only impede the
society in its work.

Another necessary requirement is mutual confidence be-
tween the teacher and the disciple; because a disciple who
has no faith in his master cannot be taught or guided by
him. ‘There may be things which will appear strange, and
for which no reasons can be given to the beginner; but when
the disciple has attained to a certain state of development all
will be clear to him or her. The confidence which is required
will also be of little service if it is only of a short duration.
The way of development of the soul, which leads to the
awakening of the inner senses, is slow, and without patience
and fortitude nothing will be accomplished.

From all this it follows as a matter of course that the next
requisite is obedience. The purpose of the disciple is to obtain
the mastery over his own lower self, and for this reason he must
not submit himself to the will of his lower nature, but follow
the will of that higher nature, which he does not yet know, but
which he desires to find. In obeying the will of the master,
instead of following the one which he believes to be his own,
but which is in reality only that of his lower nature, he obeys
the will of his own higher nature with which his master is
associated for the purpose of aiding the disciple in attaining the
conquest over himself. The conquest of the higher self over
the lower self means the victory of the divine consciousness in
man over that which in him is earthly and animal. Its object is a
realization of true manhood and womanhood, and _ the
attainment of conscious immortality in the realization of the
highest state of existence in perfection.

Xii

ORDER OF ORIENTAL TEMPLARS

These few preliminary remarks may be sufficient for those
who desire information concerning our order; to those who feel
themselves capable to apply for admission, further instructions
will be given.

Address all communications to The Registrar, M..M..M..,
c/o THE EQUINOX, 3 Great James Street, Bedford Row, W.C.

THE FOLLOWING
DISCOURSE

(Translated from the original French)

Was lately pronounced at Brunswick (Lower Saxony) where
PRINCE ......... .. #s GRAND MASTER
of M., by COUNT T., at the Initiation of lis Son.

“T congratulate you on your admission into the most
ancient, and perhaps the most respectable, society in the
universe. To you the mysteries of M. are about to be
revealed, and so bright a sun never shed lustre on your
eyes. In this awful moment, when prostrate at this holy
altar, do you not shudder at every crime, and have you not
confidence in every virtue? May this reflection inspire you
with noble sentiments; may you be penetrated with a religious
abhorrence of every vice that degrades human nature; and
may you feel the elevation of soul which scorns a dishonour-
able action, and ever invites to the practice of piety and
virtue.

“These are the wishes of a father and a brother conjoined.
Of you the greatest hopes are raised; let not our ex-
pectations be deceived. You are the son of a M. who glories in

Xi

‘THE EQUINOX

the profession; and for your zeal and attachment, your silence
and good conduct, your father has already pledged his
honour.

“You are now, as a member of this illustrious order,
introduced a subject of a new country, whose extent is
boundless. Pictures are opened to your view, wherein true
patriotism is exemplified in glowing colours, and a series of
transactions recorded, which the rude hand of Time can never
erase. The obligations which influenced the first Brutus and
Manilus to sacrifice their children to the love of their country
are not more sacred than those which bind me to support the
honour and reputation of this venerable order.

“This moment, my son, you owe to me a second birth;
should your conduct in life correspond with the principles of
M., my remaining years will pass away with pleasure and
satisfaction. Observe the great example of our ancient
masters, peruse our history and our constitutions. The best,
the most humane, the bravest, and most civilized of men have
been our patrons. ‘Though the vulgar are strangers to our
works, the greatest geniuses have sprung from our order.
The most illustrious characters on earth have laid the
foundation of their most amiable qualities in M. The wisest
of princes, SOLOMON, planned our institution by raising a
temple to the Eternal and Supreme Ruler of the Universe.

“Swear, my son, that you will be a true and faithful M.
Know, from this moment, that I centre the affection of a
parent in the name of a brother and a friend. May your
heart be susceptible of love and esteem, and may you burn
with the same zeal your father possesses. Convince the
world, by your new allegiance, you are deserving our favours,

XIV

ORDER OF ORIENTAL TEMPLARS

and never forget the ties which bind you to honour and to
justice.

“View not with indifference the extensive connections you
have formed, but let universal benevolence regulate your
conduct. Exert your abilities in the service of your king and
your country, and deem the knowledge you have this day
attained the happiest acquisition of your life.

“Recall to memory the ceremony of your initiation; learn to
bridle your tongue and to govern your passions: and ere long
you will have occasion to say: ‘In becoming a M., I truly
became the man; and while I breathe will never disgrace a
jewel that kings may prize.’

“If I live, my son, to reap the fruits of this day’s labour, my
happiness will be complete. I will meet death without terror,
close my eyes in peace, and expire without a groan, in the arms
of a virtuous and worthy M.”

XV

NOTE OUR NEW ADDRESS
33 Avenue Studios
South Kensington

London, S.W.

THE EQUINOX

The Editor will be glad to consider
contributions and to return such as are
unacceptable if stamps are enclosed for
the purpose.

THE EQUINOX

THE OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE A.. A..
THE REVIEW OF SCIENTIFIC ILLUMINISM
EDITED BY SOROR VIRAKAM
SUB-EDITOR: FRA. LAMPADA TRADAM

An VIII VoL. I. No. VIII. ©Oin2

SEPTEMBER MCMXII

O. S.

“THE METHOD OF SCIENCE—THE AIM OF RELIGION”

WIELAND & Co.
3 GREAT JAMES STREET, GRAY’S INN
LONDON, W.C.

Pages 49-96 of this Volume printed by
the Atheneum Press; the remainder by
Richard Clay & Sons, Limited,
London and Bungay

Boring but necessary legal stuff etc.

and others.

Further proofing and formatting
by Frater T.S.

provided no charge other than reasonable costs of media
and transmission / postage (where applicable) is made.

CONTENTS

EDITORIAL

OEAHMA. A TONE-TESTAMENT. By LEILA WADDELLL

THREE POEMS. By VICTOR B. NEUBURG

THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING (Continued)

HIS SECRET SIN

LONG ODDS

DOCTOR BOB. A SKETCH BY MARY D’ESTE AND ALEISTER CROWLEY

THE WOODCUTTER

LA FOIRE. By BARBEY DE ROCHECHOUART.

PROFESSOR ZIRCON

A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF THE SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION
OF THE UNIVERSE DERIVED BY DOCTOR JOHN DEE
THROUGH THE SKRYING OF SIR EDWARD KELLY.
PART II. THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS.

STEPNEY

THE TELL-TALE HEART. ADAPTED FROM THE STORY OF
E. A. POE. By ALEISTER CROWLEY.

SORITES

A DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE TAROT, WITH
THEIR ATTRIBUTIONS; INCLUDING A METHOD OF
DIVINATION BY THEIR USE

ON—ON—‘“POET”

ELDER EEL

THE SPADGER

TO PERSIS

WAITE’S WET OR THE BACKSLIDER’S RETURN

MY CRAPULOUS CONTEMPORARIES. NO. VI. AN OBITUARY

THE NEW EVELYN HOPE

REVIEWS

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

THE SPHINX (PORTRAIT OF MISS WADDELL).
A VISION OF GOLGOTHA (THE CRUCIFIXION OF FRA. P.)
THE COMPLETE SYMBOL OF THE TAROT

FACING PAGE
XXXiil
32
145

XX1

EDITORIAL

LOVE! Dear Readers, have you ever thought what a
wonderful thing love is? What would life be without love?
A desert! There would be no ¢rve happiness without love.

And yet we must admit that love is in some ways a great
danger. We must remember that many great teachers have
forbidden it. What did the great Buddha say to Ananda?
“Beware of women, Ananda!” “But Lord, they are subtle
of speech!” “Don’t speak to them, Ananda!” “But, Lord,
suppose they speak to us?” “Keep wide awake, Ananda!”

Think of Paul’s contemptuous permission, “It is better
to marry than to burn”’—it is easy to see that Paul had
never been married!—and of his Master’s plain prohibition
of anything of the sort.

If our own Beloved Lord and Teacher does not join the
band, it is (may I suggest with all humility?) because He
wants us to be strong enough to manage our own affairs
without resorting to the extreme of prohibition.

But it is hard upon the weak. Think of A, who left
the noblest and the most exalted pursuits for a baser love, a
love in a boarding-house in Hoxton, a love with spectacles
and elastic-sided boots; think of B, who married (on her
holiday as a maid-of-all-work in Bayswater) a forty-pfenning
fly-by-night from Hamburg, who cockolded him openly in

XXill

‘THE EQUINOX

the streets of Venice, and nearly sobbed the station into the
lagoon as she was torn shrieking from her favourite gondolier
by the girls she was supposed to be chaperoning; think of C,
who forgot the heavenly choir for the earthly, and of D, who
was last seen in Naples being sick out of a window on the
second floor; think of E, who married a girl named Ethel
Maud, reaping in himself that recompense of his error which
was meet; think of F, who might have performed the
Operation of the Sacred Magic of Abra-melin the Mage, and
has taken up Goat Golf instead; think of G, who went ashore
once too often, and was caught by a girl named Alphonsina
Nectarine Stubbs; think of H, who had to shave off the
loveliest red beard to show what a strong chin he really had;
think of I—no! that isn’t grammar—think of Me!

My catalogue need not stop there, but it shall. Against all
this what have we to urge but the awful example of J, who
wanted to store up Ojas, and went off his K — nut?

No, dear readers, love is not all that it’s cracked up to be.
It’s a good boy to have to answer the bell, but it’s a bad
packing-house when you're the pig!

Love is like champagne. You must drink it quickly; and
if you keep it corked up too long, you find it has gone flat. It is
a fine pick-me-up; but champagne all day is nastier than
skilly.

FRATER PERDURABO is a wise man. He never
says “Keep off the drink!” If you cannot drink soberly and
decently you are not fit. If you can be your own master in
the matter of love, you may perhaps master The Great
Magician in the end. But if your Great Work means so
little to you that the first frou-frou unsettles you, and the

XXIV

EDITORIAL

Perfume and the Vision mean no more than a whiff of
patchouli and a glimpse of an open-work silk stocking—well,
you're not the sort that was ever likely to do much good for
the next few billion incarnations!

I could write on love for hours; but will conclude with only
one other bit of advice—Don’t marry a nigger!

By inadvertence two of the Official A... A... publications in
No. VII were called Liber Tau. The Book DCCCXXXI],
formerly called Vesa, will therefore be called Liver [od instead
of Tau.

The lady who stole Mr. Crowley’s Aldine Catullus is
hereby warned that she is known, and had better return it
before trouble arises. Macha putida, redde codicillos.

It is also hoped to secure at the mystic term in respect of
known dedications sacramentally in fine a mystery-poem by
our friend and co-disciple, restored and redeemed, Arthur
Edward Waite. It is intituled, Epopt Istrarsis—Part I, “St.
Leger’s Eve”; Part II, “Moral Certainty”; Part III, “The
Great Oath”; Part IV, “First Paces on the Path”; Part V,
“Three spheres of Gold”; Part VI, “The Initiate’s Pledge”;
Part VII, “Beneath the Seat”; Part VIII, “The Maker of the
Book”; Part IX, “Some Sixty-fold”; Part X, “The Bier”;
Part XI, “The Bier” (continued); Part XII, “The Bier”
(continued); Part XIII, “Blue Robes”; Part XIV, “The Dark
Night”; Part XV, “Before the Accusers”; Part XVI,
“The Assessor”; Part XVII, “Forte bobor tendas”; Part
XVIII, “Aum sweet Aum!” Part XIX, “Welcome! The
Allocution of Maria.”

XXV

‘THE EQUINOX

We must record our thanks to the noble generosity of
many of our readers, which has enabled us to carry on the
work of making known this clear description of The Path,
given to us by the A... A.., which has so helped us all to enter
and pursue that Path.

At Christmas we shall move to new premises. Notice will
be sent by post to subscribers in due course.

XXV1

OEAHMA
A TONE-TESTAMENT

BY
LEILA WADDELL

XXVIl

HOMAGE PRELIMINARY

LIFE that is lost in dullard
Dream of the senses, go!
Life, by the soul fair-coloured,

Thy valiant trumpets blow!

Far from the world where love is lust,
And work is pain, and wealth is dust,
Rise on the wings of love, and soar

To the sun’s self, the eternal shore
Where flaming streamers soar and roll,
Angels to guard its secret soul,

The Garden where my love and I

May walk to all eternity.

Who dares to force the fiery gate

May win our world inviolate.

Children whose hearts are passionate;
Maidens whose flesh is fair and fain,
And men whose souls no senses stain,
Come! These mad miles of flame of ours
Are cool as springs and fresh as flowers.

XXIx

‘THE EQUINOX

And thou, sole star in my black firmament!
Thou, night that wraps me close, thou, moon that
glimmers
Chaste, yet embraced, serenest element
Lapping my life as the sea laps a swimmert’s;
Thou. by whose strength and purity and love
I leave this land, attain to the above,

Come thou rose-red, break on my soul like dawn
And gild my peaks, and bid their fountains flow;

For in thine absence all their life withdrawn
Congealed my being to a sterile snow,

Snow fallen from some accurséd star to ban

All the high hope and heritage of man.

Come thou, a gleaming goddess of pure pearl,
Price of mine homage to the great glad god!
Come, saint and satyr praise alike the girl
Who to my whole life put the period
Of all fulfilment, whose prophetic breath
Girds me with life, and garlands me with death.

Come, be thy magic in the rime and rhythm,
Until the sea sways to the tender tune,
And the winds whisper, and the leaves wave with them,
The leaves wherethrough we look upon the moon,
So that men hear me of the world within
Secure from sorrow, sanctified from sin.

HOMAGE PRELIMINARY

The world of stranger deities and loves
Than haunted Ida, or were hidden in
The Cretan bowers, the Eleusinian groves,
A world that trembles on thy violin,
Eager to be—and then the curtain drops
Just as the music, with my heart’s pulse, stops.

Nay! To this world of ours they shall not reach.
My rimes are shadows dancing in the breeze

By moonlight; there is no delight in speech
Such as the silence of our own heart’s ease;

But even thy shadow is itself a sun

To the bleak universe of Everyone.

Then open sesame! The fairy cavern

Of gold and gems, strange land of misty truth
As witches’ eyes in a polluted tavern

Glow with the vampire vanity of youth
Stolen from maids, so let thine own eyes shine
In this fantastic mystery of thine!

Thine eyes are love and truth and loyalty;
‘Thine eyes are mystery unveiled to one.
Let them ray forth incarnate deity
Fit to assoil the eclipse-attainted sun!
Let them point still my weather-beaten soul
Infallibly the pathway of the pole!
ALEISTER CROWLEY.

XXX1

XXX111

es ee rd
TS re ee a

sere eee
ear —

Aimaiies rs: _ fecep tele wate Puanteest ae

XXXIV

—~—- ’ |  *
Spier ete ae |

.— om ,
ae.
$a

poca leggiero.

XXXV

See

ff $a-32 > = ee ,#
op —— ee es ees Sere
——- _ a ener eee alee
= aS — 2? fe - ei =e
os = a

=

=
- a FINE.

XXXVI

‘THREE POEMS

By VICTOR B. NEUBURG

XXXVIl

‘THE WAY

PALE yellow moon, and pale green grass,
Oh, have ye seen Diana pass?

And are ye pale for longing or love,
Palest green grass, pale moon above?

Pale yellow moon, before the dawn,
Palest green grass,
Oh, have ye seen Diana pass
Over the lawn?

Soft-noted nightingales I love,

With the earth below, and the moon above,
And the rippling river singing slowly
Under the stars serene and holy.

Great staring moon before the dawn,
Shining young grass,
Oh, have ye heard Diana pass
Over the lawn?

Oh, dimpling river, murmuring slowly

Under the starlight pale, and holy,

Oh, little green grasshoppers chirring, chirring,
What have ye seen in the bright night stirring?

XXX1X

xl

‘THE EQUINOX

Young moon chaste before the dawn,
Softest young grass,
Oh, have ye seen Diana pass
Over the lawn?

Oh, little green grasshoppers sleepily chirring,
Have ye seen aught in the bright night stirring?
Palest moon, and pale green grass,

Have ye heard, have ye heard Diana pass?

Bright moon, virgin before the dawn,
Listening grass,
Oh, have ye heard Diana pass
Over the lawn?

A PICTURE

THE slim brown fingers kiss the viol-strings,
Dark, narrow eyes pierce to the soul within;
What slow enchanted joy reverie brings
To him, the lover of the violin;
Sorrow or joy: or saintliness or sin
To him are one, if only he may win
Unto the heart, the hidden heart that sings
What grave old histories, what mysterious things!

So there he squats to find the hidden flaw
In the dark doorway. God! I see him yet
With aweless face that yet reflects the awe
Of something greater than the music’s fret;
On the dark soul within his thoughts are set;
No hope, no fear, no anguish, no regret,
But only wonder at some secret Law
‘That holds the sounds; he squats upon the straw.

Under that grave, blue sky no thing he sees:
The swift chameleon market-place; the white
Stern pillars of the churches; murmuries

‘THE EQUINOX

That float on the summer air; the hot delight,
Awaken no response; only the might
Of the shy poesie that enchants the night

He cares to love; the eerie palaces

Where the soul finds forbidden harmonies.

Oh! Now his eyes dance up to meet the sun;
Curious, he peers into the hurtling air:
Oh! all his spirit follows, slim and fair;
The spears of light attract him: it is done;
The flaw is found; he bends again, to shun
The summer-heat: see! the swift fingers run
Like spiders o’er the strings: Look! it is bare,
The flaw: and he has found what godhead there!

A VALLEY SONG

OVER the hills the shadows creep,
Like dreams across the sleep of lovers;
And through their golden, satiate sleep,
Singing, the skylark hovers.

His lyric gold the skylark spills
As over the bare, green hills he hovers;
‘The space betwixt love’s breasts he fills
With songs from the hearts of lovers.

‘The shadows move across the green,
Slowly, over the grass and clover,
As gentle as the kiss between
Love’s breasts from the lips of her lover.

The hills lie bare and green and steep,
And the skylark rises over,

Like the breath of love in the satiate sleep
Of the lover with her lover.

Oh, the hills of the scorching south,
Whereover the dim, poised skylark hovers!
Oh, why is the song of the skylark’s mouth
Such pain to the weary lovers?

‘THE EQUINOX

Over the hills the shadows creep
Like dreams across the sleep of lovers;
And through their satiate, golden sleep
The shrilling skylark hovers.

‘THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON
‘THE KING

THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON
‘THE KING
THE BABE

IT was about a fortnight after the writing of Liber Legis
that Fra. P. left Egypt for the grey skies of the Scottish
Highlands, where, with the Seer, he began to put into practice
the experiments suggested in the Book of the Law.

The astounding success of these experiments would have
convinced any other man of the reality of his experiences, and
induced him to devote his life absolutely to the work enjoined;
but Fra. P. was not made of common clay. He issued a careless
manifesto, calling upon the Universe to adore, and nothing
particular coming of this, he lost interest. It’s what he calls
“The way of the Tao” to do everything by doing nothing.
Take no trouble or care about a matter; it will come to pass.
It seems to us a sort of ahppy fatalism; to him it is the
highest of magical formulee.

The upshot of all was that on the birth of a child he had
completely put everything aside. He played at Yoga for
about a week during the summer, and he took some little
trouble to disperse the wreckage of the “Rosicrucians,” which
constituted a danger to navigation, the wretch Mathers having
by now abandoned all pretence at magic, and mingled stupid
sorceries with his bouts of intoxication, ever more frequent

‘THE EQUINOX

and prolonged. This service to humanity he successfully
performed; the “Rump” of the London Temple was
dispersed, and its chief, his occupation gone, left to the more
diverting pastime of trying to dodge the Criminal Law
Amendment Act.

With autumn we find Fra. P. still less occupied with
magic; he spent the winter skating at St. Moritz, where his
only occult exploit seems to have been parson-baiting, and
though he returned to Scotland in the spring, it was only for
a few days. For on April 27, 1905, one of the old comrades
of his journeys in Central Asia sought him out, and proposed
a new Expedition. Fra. P. gleefully accepted, and on May 6,
having got together his kit, left his home, and sailed for India
on the 12th.

His diary is henceforth barren of all interest to us. We
learn only that the success of his plans was spoilt by a mutiny,
which resulted in the death of four innocent people, and a
good deal of damage to the mutineers, and that in con-
sequence he went off to visit his old friend the Maharaja of
Moharbhanj, and shoot big game. After spending a few days
with this amiable despot, he went off alone into the jungle,
and his thoughts immediately reverted to magic, to the
performance of the Great Work, though not as yet to the
Egyptian revelations. His antipathy to these, with their
irrational instructions, grew and grew. It was only with the
shattering of his reason that he could possibly accept them,
and act on them.

Yet even in this month’s wandering in the jungle we find
little in the diary but the record of exercise of strange magic
powers. we read three or four times that a certain adept

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

joined him by night in the magical body. And on one
night—

“Had long colloquy with Golden Hawk; invited (the
Adept) and learnt that the Great Work was to create a new
Universe. Whence severe self-criticism.”

This at the end of his journey. Yet during this journey we
find that he had written down the secrets of the Mystic Path
in a mysterious MS., which few indeed have been privileged
to see.

In Calcutta he was very busy. He had been attacked by
armed robbers, and, slaying two of them, was, in the then
political condition of Bengal, likely to be offered up as a
scapegoat. Further, his wife and child joined him, and it
seemed most desirable that he should pursue his travels,
which he did.

But of this week one illuminating sentence is preserved.
Fra. P. was driving through Calcutta with Mr. E—— T——_,
and complaining to him that the analysis of impressions
showed no connection between them. There was no coherence
in the non-Ego, and so no sanity in the Universe.

His companion pointed out that the same criticism applied
with equal force to the Ego.

This fell on Fra. P. with the force of a thunderbolt. He
had always known this in an intellectual way; now it stabbed
him to the heart. Through the rest of the drive he sat silent,
and in the bustle of the succeeding days of “Bandobast”
for his newly projected walk through China, this awakening
stood behind his mind, alert and operative.

From Calcutta he proceeded to Rangoon (Nov. 3-6), where

‘THE EQUINOX

he found his old comrade, I. A., now a member of the Buddhist
Sangha, under the name of Bhikku Ananda Metteya.

It was from him that he received the instructions which
were to help him to reach the great and terrible pinnacle of
the mind whence the Adept must plunge into the Abyss, to
emerge naked, a babe—the Babe of the Abyss.

“Explore the River of the Soul,” said Ananda Metteya,
“whence and in what order you have come.”

For three days—the longest period allowed by the Buddhist
law—he remained in the Choung, meditating on this matter;
but nothing seems to have come of it. He set his teeth and
settled down doggedly to this consideration of the eternal
why. Here is a being in Rangoon. Why? Because he wanted
to see Bhikku A. M. Why? Because... and so on to the half-
forgotten past, dark seas that phosphoresced as the clean keel
of his thought divided them.

But, as appears, he was even more absorbed in the
question of the consecution of impressions. Is there any
connection between any two things?

We hear that he left Rangoon for Bhamo by the Irrawaddy
steamer Java on the 15th. We can almost see him—lean,
brown, stern and immobile, watching the wavelets of the great
river, and the flying-fish, and the one thought: Why?

He shut off his reflective faculties, for he saw that there
was nothing to reason about. Phenomena were consecutive,
but not causally connected.!

On the 18th he writes: "About now I may count my

' This should be studied with chapter VIII of The Star in the West,
and Hume’s “Essay on the Human Understanding” which he again read on
the 17th.

10

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Speculative Criticism of the Reason as not only proved
and understood, but realized”; and on the roth: “The
misery of this is simply sickening—I can write no
more.”

There is, however, an entry of this date in his little MS.
book of vellum: “I realize in myself the perfect impossibility
of reason; suffering great misery. I am as one who should
have plumed himself for years upon the speed and strength of
a favourite horse, only to find not only that its speed and
strength were illusory, but that it was not a real horse at all,
but a clothes-horse. There being no way—no conceivable
way—out of this awful trouble gives that hideous despair
which is only tolerable because in the past it has ever been
the Darkness of the Threshold. But this is far worse than
ever before; for it is not a despair of the Substance, but of
the Form. I wish to go from A to B; and I am not only a
cripple, but there is no such thing as space. I have to keep
an appointment at midnight; and not only is my watch
stopped, but there is no such thing as time. I wish to make
a cannon; and not only have I no cue, but there is no such
thing as causality.

“This I explain to my wife” (! ! !—Ed.), “and she, ap-
parently inspired, says, ‘Shoot it!’ (I suppose she means the
reason, but, of course, she did not understand a word of what I
had been saying. I only told her for the sake of formulating
my thought clearly in words.) I reply, ‘If I only had a gun.’
This makes me think of Siegfried and the Forging of the
Sword. Can I heat my broken Meditation-Sword in the
furnace of this despair? Is Discipline the Hammer? At
present I am more like Mime than Siegfried; a gibbering

II

‘THE EQUINOX

ape-like creature, though without his cunning and_ his
purpose.

“Only, no water’s left to feed its play.”

“Up with it on the tripod! It’s extinct.”

But surely Iam not a dead man at thirty!”

The entry is followed by an undated entry earlier than
the 25th, suggesting a method of “discipline.” But nothing
else.

Indeed, there is absolute silence on all mystic matters
until December 20, over a month later. On that day,
jumping on to his Burmese pony, a few yards after fording
the stream which marks the Chinese frontier, the animal
backed before he was in the saddle, and fell with him over a
cliff of some forty feet in height. “Neither hurt,” he remarks.
“Later, kicked on the thigh by a mule.”

It is of no purpose here to deal with Fra. P.’s private
affairs; but one must mention that all this time of interior
insanity he was “playing the man” very vigorously. His
moral force no doubt saved the Europeans of Tengyueh from
a panic which might easily have resulted in massacre. After
the death, perhaps by poison, of the Consul, the admirable
and undervalued Litton, he was the only person who kept his
head, and knew how to assert the authority of the white man.

So that we must understand that this “black insanity”
of which Fra. P. speaks was a private little insanity of his
own; it in no way interfered with the normal working of his
magnificent and heroic brain.

Not to be turned aside from any purpose, however trivial,
once he had formulated it, we find him leaving Tengyueh-Ting
for the wildest mountains and deserts of Western China.

I2

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

But before this, the Light had begun to break into the
ruins of his mind. On February 9 he writes: “About this full
moon consciousness began to break through Ruach into
Neschamah”; and two days later: “Pu Peng to Ying Wa
Kuan. I ‘shoot the Reason’ by going back, though on a
higher plane, to Augoeides (z.e. the Holy Guardian Angel).
Resolve to accomplish a Great Retirement on lines closely
resembling Abra-melin. The ‘note-book and stop-watch
method’ is too much like criticism. Doubt whether I should
actually do Op. or confine myself to Augoeides. Latter easy to
prepare, of course.” And so on, making a plan.

Now, how did this come about? Not from the meditation
on the Reason, which ended once for all in the Destruction of
that Reason, but by the “Sammasati” meditation on_ his
Kamma. Baffled again and again, the fall with his horse
supplied the one factor missing in his calculations. He had
repeatedly escaped from death in manners almost miraculous.
“Then I am some use after all!” was his conclusion. “I am
indeed SENT to do something.” For whom? For the
Universe; no partial good could possibly satisfy his equation.
“T am, then, the ‘chosen Priest and Apostle of Infinite
Space.’ Very good: and what is the message? What shall
I teach men?” And like the lightning from heaven fell
upon him these words: “THE KNOWLEDGE AND CONVERSA-
TION OF THE HOLY GUARDIAN ANGEL.”

Just that. No metaphysical stuff about the “higher self”;
a thing that the very villagers of Pu Peng could under-
stand. Avoid refinements; leave dialectic to the slaves of
reason.

His work must, then, be to preach that one method and

13

‘THE EQUINOX

result. And first must he achieve that for himself; for if the
blind lead the blind——

So again we read (in the Diary, this time) on February
11. “Made many resolutions of G. R. (Great Retirement).
In dream flew to me an Angel, bearing an Ankh, to comfort
me.”

We may now transcribe the Diary. We find the great
mind, the complex man, purged through and through of
thought, stripped of all things human and divine, centred
upon one single Aspiration, as simple as the love of a child for
its father.

Feb. 12. Continuing these Resolutions.
» 13. Continuing these Resolutions. Read through
Goetia, etc., etc.
» 14. Thoughts of the Augoeides.
» 15. Again thoughts of Augoeides. Knowing the In-
vocation (Preliminary Invocation in the Goetia)
by heart, will repeat same daily.

» 16. A.. (This cipher means “Invoked Augoeides.”)
» 17. A.. though unwell.
» 18. A... though ill.
» Ig. A.. some vision with Invocation.
» 20. A.. ina.m. disturbed.

A... in p.m. rather good.

(Henceforward he did it twice daily.)

» 21. Av. ina.m. with M.. C.. good (is M.. C.. Mystic

Circumambulation or Magical Ceremony or
?) in p.m. disturbed by drugs and diarrhoea. A
weird effect.

» 22. A.. in p.m. poor (ill).

14

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Feb. 22. A... in p.m. poor (sleepy).
» 23. A... in a.m. poor.
A... in p.m. rather good.
» 24. A.. in a.m. pretty good.
A.. in p.m. just on the point of being good.
» 25. A... in a.m. mediocre.
Qy. Are all these troubles in Yunnan-Fu due
to Abra-melin devils? I ask the Augoeides for “a
sufficient measure of protection.” Like
an instant answer comes Wilkinson’s letter
setting up things.
» 26. A... sleepy (Baby ill). (He had been watching
the child for two days and nights without sleep.)
» 27. A.. ina.m. rather good.
A... in p.m. disturbed.
» 28. A... omitted in a.m. through forgetful folly.
A... in p.m. penitent but sleepy.
March 1. A... penitent and fair.
Good, but should do new Pentagram ritual
before and after to make a Magick Circle.
» 2 NewA.. very difficult (walking on cobbles).
» 3. A.. difficult (walking).
. Aw. difficult walking and very tired.

(It should be explained that this powerful
magical ceremony had usually to be done under
the most awkward circumstances. He averaged
about ten hours’ walking daily, and had all the
business of camp life to attend to when he got in.
People who complain that they have to go to the
City every day please note.)

aN

15

16

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

‘THE EQUINOX

A... better but not good.
A... better.
A... still better.
A... really very good.
Ditto in p.m.
(Smooth sandy road perhaps helped.)

. A.. very poor (horseback, slippery wet sand, and

cobbles).

. A.. good considering (horseback).

. A.. poor (evil thoughts).

. A.. unconcentrated.

. Av. literally against my own will. Beneath

contempt. Qy. Effect of ease, etc.

(On the 10th he had arrived at Mengtzu,
where the Collector of Customs kindly received
him, and gave him the first meal and bed he had
had since leaving Tengyuch.)

A... still very bad—a shade better.

A... still poor. (Rain, wind, horse, mud,
cobbles).

A... a shade better (in chair) (7.e. his wife’s Sedan
chair).

A... slowly improving (boat). (By this time they
had got to Manhao, and embarked on the
dangerous rapids of the Red River. He was
nearly drowned, the dug-out twice hitting
rocks. )

Arrived at Ho K’ow.

A... at night nearly forgotten. Did it in the
open late at night. Rather good.

March

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

19.
20.
21.
22

23.

A... mediocre (train).
A... a bit better. (He arrived at Hai-Phong.)
A.. about the same.

A... bad (sleepy—sea-sick). He was now on a
tramp steamer packed three-deep with pigs.)
A... better. (Magnificent Fata Morgana. Shipping,
etc., upside down in air above itself. Qy. A sign
for me?) (This question suggests that he is
getting through the Abyss to that great
obligation of a Master of the Temple, “I will
interpret every phenomenon as a _ particular
dealing of God with my soul.”) (A night of

shocking and terrible nightmare.)

. A... again a shade better.

. A.. good. Vision more convincing.

. A.. still good.

. A poor (heavy sea). (Off Hoi-How.)

. A.. again poor (heavy sea).

. (At Hongkong). A... poor (indigestion).
. A.. good: very good.

. A.. fairly good.

A... poor—sleepy.

. A.. again poor, in spite of two attempts.
. A“. mediocre (left Hongkong per ss. Nippon

Maru). (He had sent his wife and child directly
by steamer to England.)

. I foolishly and wickedly put off A.. work all day;

now it is 1 a.m. of the 5th. By foolish, I mean
contrary to my interest and hope in A..
By wicked I mean contrary to my will.

17

‘THE EQUINOX

A.. goodish: lengthy and reverie-like. Yet
my heart is well. I spake it audibly.

April 5. A.. vocalized: goodish. (Knocked sideways by

”

18

malaria; a sharp attack of shivering.)
6. At Shanghai. A.. very ethereal.
7. Bowled clean over by fever; spent p.m. in bed
drunk with Dover’s Powder. Quite sufficiently
ill to excuse slackness: ¢.g. I could not even read
a light novel.
8. Feeble but convalescent.

A... nevertheless pretty good for concentration
and sincerity; not notable for result.

I think I had better begin to renounce idle
things, save where politeness calls, and calls loud.

If I take life too easy, the Great Retirement
will be harder: on the other hand an asceticism
to no instant purpose may exhaust me for the
struggle when it comes. One of those rare cases
where a “golden mean” looks well.

g. A.. at night good: considerable strain in ether.

(It is here fitting to mention Fra. P.’s idea of
performing this “Preliminary Invocation” of the
Goetia.)

The preamble: he makes a general concentra-
tion of all his magical forces, and a declaration
of his will.

The Ar Thiao section. He travels to the
infinite East among the hosts of angels sum-
moned by the words. A sort of “Rising on the
Planes,” but in a horizontal direction.

April ro

‘THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

The same remarks apply to the next three
sections in the other quarters.

At the great invocation following he extends
the Shivalingam to infinite height, each letter of
each word representing an exaltation of it by
geometrical progression.

Having seen this satisfactorily, he prostrates
himself in adoration.

When consciousness begins to return, he uses
the final formula to raise that consciousness in
the Shivalingam, springing to his feet at the
moment of uniting himself with it, and lastly
uttering that supreme song of the Initiate
beginning: “I am He, the Borneless Spirit,
having light in the feet; strong, and the
Immortal Fire!”

(Thus performed, the Invocation means about
half an hour of the most intense magical work
imaginable—a minute of it would represent the
equivalent of about twelve hours of Asana.)

. A.. no good (rather tired, especially at night).
. A.. very bad indeed: worried.
. A.. better, but sleepy. Not by any means good,

but more impersonal.

*. sleepy: in fact dropped off. (He had been

doing a magic for a Soror of the Great Order,
and exhausted himself.)

. (Easter Eve). A.. mediocre.

The Op. of Abramelin being due to commence
on Easter Sunday, methinks it would be well to
make a certain profound conjuration of A... on

19

‘THE EQUINOX

that day with a view to acquiring a proper
knowledge of the Method of the G.. R.. The
A... should be definitely invoked for this pur-
pose with all possible ceremony. Is it not written:
“Unto whomsoever shall draw nigh unto Me
will I draw nigh”? And, as I have proved, the
help of A... is already given as if the Op. were
successfully brought to an end. Only can this
right be forfeited by slackness toward the
obligation. From this, then, O Holy Exalted
One, preserve me! (The invocation had to wait
till to 20th.)

April 15. A.°. rather better.

20

”

”

”

16.
17.

18

A... above average; but little convincing.
A.. about the same: very tired.
. Studying Liber Legis.

A.. much better; will go to sleep in vision.
(The result curious: I woke up several times,
and though I cannot at all remember, I know it
was thinking of A.’. in some way.)

. A.. fair. After-results again vaguely magnificent—

memory seems quite in vain.

‘, in the presence of my Soror F.

(The results of this and the next invocation
were most brilliant and important. They
revealed the Brother of A... A... who communi-
cated in Egypt as the Controller of all this work.
Their importance belongs therefore rather to
the history of those relations than of this simple
invocation-method, and will be dealt with in

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

another place. P. was entirely sceptical of these
results at the time.)
April 21. A.. with Soror F. Left Shanghai.

» 22. Ill. No regular A.. but much concentrated
thought. Decided to reject results of 20th
and 21st, and go on as if they had never
happened.

» 23. Fair to good. Asked A... for sufficient health on
voyage to perform invocations properly. (PS.
This was granted.)

» 24. At Kobe. A... fair only; though I invoked all these
powers of mine. Yet after, by a strong effort of
will, I banished my sore throat and my
surroundings, and went up in my Body of Light.
Reached a room in which a cruciform table was
spread, a naked man being nailed thereto.
Many venerable men sat around, feasting on his
living flesh and quaffing his hot Blood. These
(I was told) were the Adepts, whom I might one
day join. This I understood to mean that I
should get the power of taking only spiritual
nourishment—but probably it means much
more than this.

Next I came into an apparently empty hall, of
white ivory worked in filigree. A square slim
altar was in the midst. I was questioned as to
what I would sacrifice on that altar. I offered
all save my will to know A... which I would
only change for its own realization. I now
became conscious of god-forms of Egypt sitting,

21

‘THE EQUINOX

so vast that I could only see to their knees.
“Would not knowledge of the gods suffice?”
“No!” said I. It was then pointed out to me
that I was being critical, even rationalistic, and
made to see that A.. was not necessarily
fashioned in my image. I asked pardon for my
blindness, and knelt at the altar, placing my
hands upon it, right over left. Then one,
human, white, self-shining (my idea after all!),
came forth and put his hands over mine,
saying: “I receive thee into the Order of
the
I sank back to earth in a cradle of flame.

April 25. Yesterday’s vision a real illumination, since it
showed me an obvious mistake which I had
utterly failed to see. The word in my Kamma-
work (in Burma) was Augoeides, and the method
Invoking Often. Therefore a self-glittering One,
whether my conscience approves or not,
whether my desires fit or not, is to be my guide.
I am to mmvoke often, not to criticize. Am I to lose
my grade of Babe of the Abyss? I cannot go
wrong, for I am the chosen one; that is the very
postulate of the whole work. This boat carries
Caesar and his fortunes.

A.. fair to good; but attention wandered
toward close.
» 26. A.. fair. Am convinced I did not go to sleep: yet
the end is completely veiled from memory.
(Neighbourhood-concentration attained—ED.)

”
.

22

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

A... rather poor; yet a certain clarity of vision
of a white one like him of the 25th.

April 28. A... poor; bodily health imperfect still, yet great

”

”

clarity of vision in the matter of the four quarters.

29. A..

The same thing happens every time: the
mechanical part is kept easily, but I fall instantly
into a dull reverie or even slumber. This has
nothing pleasant or alluring; is curiously
impersonal and bewildering.

30. A.*. exactly the same as yesterday. Will repeat.

(It has struck me—in connection with reading
Blake—that Aiwass, etc., “Force and Fire” is
the very thing I lack. My “conscience” is really
an obstacle and a delusion, being a survival of
heredity and education.

Certainly to rely on it as an abiding principle
in itself is wrong. The one really important
thing is the fundamental hypothesis: I am the
Chosen One. All methods will do, if I only
invoke often and stick to it.)

A... repeated. Very good and lucid.

(It will be noticed that Fra. P., during this
period, seems to have been constantly struggling
with his “conscience.” He had completely
destroyed his intellect; now he was up against
the last bulwark of the Ego, the moral self, the
tendencies. Notice that in speaking of destruc-
tion of the intellect, nothing more is meant
than recognition of the vanity of the intellect in

23

‘THE EQUINOX

relation to the absoute; so also for conscience.
Twice two still make four, and killing is still
murder: but all this is relative, and relates to the
individual in his limitations, not to the absolute).

This very simple truth, that the planes are
separate, is the greatest of all the discoveries of
Fra. P. It is a complete key to life.

May 1. A.. fair. No tendency to sleep.

24

(The O .. (operation) is a great test of faith
and will; not at all of wit. Just what I have
always lacked!)

Yesterday’s attribution of the hexagram given
in vision clearly right. The descending triangle
is the divine drawing down to man, the wedge
of blue splitting matter; the upright triangle is
the human flame aspiring.

(Compare the doctrine of the two arrows in
Liber 418.)

2. Worked hard at day at Comment on Liber Legis:
lamentably little result.

A... good, considering excessive fatigue.

2his. (the extra day gained on crossing the 180 °.)

A.. good—vision like the Milky Way in

texture.

3. A... mediocre.

4. A... very energetic on my part, intently so, better
perhaps than ever before.

However (or perhaps because) there was
little vision.

Indeed, this work of A... requires the Adept

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

to assume the woman’s part: to long for the
bridegroom, maybe, and to be ever ready to
receive his kiss; but not to pursue openly and to
use force.

Yet “the Kingdom of Heaven suffereth
violence, and the violent take it by force.” May
it not be, though, that such violence should be
used against oneself in order to attain that
passive state? And, of course, to shut out out
all rivals? Help me, thou Holy One, even in
this; for all my strength is weak as water, and I
am but a dog. Help me, O self-glittering one!
draw nigh to me in sleep and in waking, and let
me ever be as a wise virgin, and expect thy
coming with a lamp of oil of holiness and
beauty! Hail, beautiful and strong one! I
desire thy kisses more than life or death.

May 5. A... medium.
» 6. A.. tired and excited, yet with great resolution.
Vision good. Aimed at passive attitude.
» 7 A.. good; starry effect concentrating into a
brilliant moonlight in my body.
» 8. A.. same effect as yesterday.
» 9. A.. poor. (This begins the railway journey from
Vancouver. )
» 10. A.. poor. Am really worn out.
» 11. A.. better—much reverie; vision not acute.
» 12. A.. not bad.
» 13. A... purposely done more rapidly than usual. But
restful.

25

26

19

22.

‘THE EQUINOX

. A.. sleepy. Am by no means recovered from the
fatigues of this journey.

. A.. mediocre and unwilling.

. (Arrived New York) A.’. better but sleepy. I must
really buck up.

. A.. better, but “business” is a nuisance, and
prevents the mind concentrating.

. A.. The usual thing. I forget about it till late, or
at least put it off. A man cannot serve two
masters.

I began A.’.; then deliberately stopped, as it
was a farce. I appoint Sunday from waking to
sleeping as a day of fast and penance.

Unable, or unwilling, to sleep, recommenced
A

Elaborate and really not bad.

. A.. most oppressive day—96°—heat-exhaustion,
nearly prostration. A... gabbled. My throat
ached, and I was just out of a sodden sleep.

. A.. a shade better; am still pretty ill.

. Av. very tired, very determined, not altogether

bad subjectively, but no voice or vision.

A... at first disturbed --- with resolution, better

vision somewhat, but confused and distorted.
(Imagination had been excited by reading
Ludlow’s “Hasheesh-Eater.” )

. A.. in afternoon tired and sleepy.

. A.. not so bad, though most frightfully tired.

. A.. poor in vision. There has been no good work
for a long while. Why?

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

May 26. A.. same as yesterday. Must meditate on cause.
(Sailed for Liverpool.)

» 27. A.. Got through after incredible struggle of
1; hours.

5 28. A.. just a shade better. But my cabin is a little
Hell.

» 29. A... shade better; but still very poor.

5 30. A... very good indeed. Renewed the terrible vows
of this initiation, and was rewarded by the
Divine Kiss. O self-glittering one, be ever with
me! Amen.

» 31. A.. better than ever yet. Vision quite perfect; I
tasted the sweet kiss and gazed in the clear
eyes of that Radiant One. My own face became
luminous.

June 1. A.. good but interfered with by fatigue. Used
much resolution.

(And now Fra. P. was to be struck down by
an overwhelming blow. It seems almost as if
the experiences of May 30 and 31 were to
prepare him to meet it.)

» 2. Arrived Liverpool. Heard of Baby’s death by
letter from —— and ——. Arrived London,
perfectly stunned.

(He travelled to London with the friends he
had made on the voyage, refusing to allow them
to suspect that anything was wrong.)

A... appropriate in tone, though of course
mechanical. I solemnly reaffirmed the oath of
mine obligation to perform the operation,

27

28

‘THE EQUINOX

offering under these terrible circumstances all
that yet remains.

Fortunately Iam quite unable to think of the
thing in detail or as a reality.

(He adds a note to this on December 31.
“Not ‘fortunately’ at all. One never gets able to
do so. Stupor and pangs get to the limit, and
that limit is easy reached by very partial
conceptions of one’s loss.” )

... TL have lived through the day.
A.. asad mechanic exercise.
A... no good.

. Practically broke down playing billiards. Have

drugged myself. (He was playing with a
surgical friend, who insisted on his taking
Veronal.) Will do A.*. and sleep.

. Went to 77istan und Isolde. Slept right through

from overture to Act IH; my neighbour then
ejected me for snoring.
Did A.-. feebly, in streets.

. Went to Plymouth to meet wife. Did A.. in

train. A shade better, and more acquiescence
or survival or transcendence—whichever name
you prefer.

. Really too ill to do a regular A.. but struggled

through, and repeated vows.

. Stull breaking down at intervals and staggering

from nervous weakness. Dropping off to sleep
at odd times and places.
A... practically nil.

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

June 10. Vain attempts, interrupted by invincible sleep, to
do A..

» I. Still frightfully ill—sleep and nightmares. A...
again conquered by these, though I did my very
utmost.

» 12. A shade better. A.. in Turkish bath not bad
considering.

» 13. A... futile.

» 14. A... a shade better.

» 15. A.. anda further renewal of the Vow.

» 16. Went to sleep doing A... Am still very ill with

throat.
» 17. A.. better. Throat better.
» 18. A.. mediocre.

» 20. A... a shade better.

» 21. A.. poor again. There seems little intention;
perhaps owing to my bad health and the
general uncertainty of things.

», 22. A.. sleepy but a shade better.

» 23. Saw Fra. D.D.S. A.. much better.

A
A.
» 19. A.. I went to sleep, I fancy.
A
A

o> QA, aS Tait.

5 25. Went to sleep trying to do A...

» 26. A... ————?

» 27. Still very bad—my head aches all over, and my
throat.

5 28. Still very bad.
(There is no further entry till July 4. Fra. P.
was evidently utterly broken down. Yet the
A.., though not recorded, was not interrupted.)

29

30

‘THE EQUINOX

July 4. Doctors insist on immediate operation.

”

”

6. My throat and head still utterly bad—no work for

these days—only the pretence of it. Before I
had got to the end of the preamble I was almost
delirious every time.

7. Hada Turker and did A... in it, though with great

discomfort.

8. To Nursing Home.

Unto thee, Adon-ai, do I commit my way.

Unto thee, the Augoeides, unto thee the
Self-Glittering ne!

I put my trust in the power that hath devised
me as I am or the achieving of a purpose, the
Next Step.

A... rather bad, but done. Being in bed has
cured the eternal headache, and the throat is
much better.

(The doctors were not sure whether Fra. P.
was suffering from cancer or tubercle—pleasing
alternative! Probably the real trouble was due
to the fall with his horse months before. The
microscope failed to reveal its real nature; but it
was evidently nothing serious.)

g. Operation performed with little pain. My display

of cowardice (he asked for a drink of water
during the operation, which was done with only
local anaesthetics. But he had made up his
mind not to speak during the operation, unless
to make a joke) may partly excused by my
general nervous break-down, I hope.

July ro.
II.
12.

13.

‘THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

14.

TS.
16.

17;

18.

19.
20.
21.

A... at night, a shade better. Some slight
vision.

A... at night fair only.

A... rather reveresque.

Throat very bad. A.-. futile.

A... better (in A. M.)

(Twenty-second week of A... ends. There
ought to be a new current to-morrow.) (The
idea was 22 weeks for the 22 letters of the
Hebrew Alphabet. So he seeks a new method.)

Avoided invoking A.’. that He might instruct me
in Vision. I am in serious trouble. Place,
Method, Means, Time, etc. A wakeful night,
followed by profound and dreamless sleep
(Had spend much thought on A... ).

‘Thought a deal of A...

Will think, again, not do the formal invocation.

This thinking seems little or no good: but the
fault is that the real P. is actually not thinking
of A... When he is, the invocation is unneces-
sary; when he isn’t it’s feeble. What am I
to do?

(Should suggest sticking to it. D.D.S., whom
I consulted agrees.)

The new method appears to be a mere dumb
aspiration—a Prayer of Silence continued
throughout the twenty-four hours.

Worried all day, but aspired.

Stitches out. Aspiration to A.’. very strong.

Some thought of A.’.

31

32

July 22

25
26

‘THE EQUINOX

. Thoughts of A...
. Turning to A... was turning to sleep, as too often

happens.

. A day off, apparently. (This means that there is

no entry in the original diary. It does not imply
that nothing was done, only that nothing was
worthy of record, or that such record was
omitted. Note the “apparently,” as of surprise.

. Abad day. (Going out of Nursing Home.)
. Went down to stay with D.D.S.
. Here we have a most extraordinary entry, which

needs explanation and illustration.

Fra. P. was crucified by Fra. D. D. S., and
on that cross was made to repeat this oath: “I,
P—., a member of the Body of Christ, do
hereby solemnly obligate myself, etc., to lead a
pure and unselfish life, and will entirely devote
myself so to raise, etc., myself to the Knowledge
of my higher and Divine Genius that I shall
be He.

“In witness of which I invoke the great
Angel Hua to give me a proof of his existence.”

P. transcribes this, and continues: “Complete
and perfect visualization of...” here are hiero-
glyphics which may mean “Christ as P on
cross.” He goes on: “ “The low dark hill, the
storm, the star.’ But the Pylon of the Camel
(z.e. the path of Gimel) open, and a ray .therein:
withal a certain vision of A.°. remembered only
as a glory now attainable.

THE CRUCIFIXION OF FRA. P.

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

“Humility, Purity, Confidence.
“INRI Instar Noli Revelare Ineffabile.”
But Fra. P. made also a sketch of the vision,
which we here copy and reproduce
July 28. Twenty-fifth week of A... begins.

» 29. (A... continued evidently, for P. writes.)

Perfect the lightning-conductor and the flash
will come.

5 30. (The diary of P. from this date is now full of hiero-
glyphics, which are and must ever remain inde-
cipherable. We may gather a certain amount
from those passages which are intelligible. He
apparently tried repeating the new formula
given by D.D.S., conceived perhaps as a mental
operation on the lines of that given in Eguinox
IV concerning an egg between pillars.)

Aug. 4. About to try the experiment of daily Aspiration in
the Sign of Osiris Slain.
Did this twenty-two minutes, with
Invocation as of old.
Cut cross on breast and circle on head.
(SCIRE) The vow of Poverty is to esteem noting save A...

(AUDERE) The vow of Chastity is to use the Magical Force
only to invoke A...

(VELLE) The vow of Obedience is to concentrate the Will
on A.*. alone.

(TACERE) The vow of Silence: so to regulate the whole
organism that so vast a miracle as_ the
Completion of the Great Work excites therein
no commotion.

33

34

‘THE EQUINOX

N.B.—To look expectantly always, as if He
would instantly appear.

Aug. 10. In Sign of Osiris Slain; cut cross and circle as
before, renewing vows. Twenty-eight mins.

Got the Threshold—the awful doubt whether
one shouldn’t walk away and throw up the
whole thing—presented first as a temptation,
than as a doubt. Wherefore the cry, “Eli, Eh,
lama sabachthani.” But got no further—save
from a sense of dew distilling from the Eye in
the Triangle by the Ray.

»» 14. Am still very much below par. Not that I feel bad;
but I sleep absurdly after massage.

(As a matter of fact, he suffered intensely
from neuralgia and eye trouble all this summer,
with hardly any intermission.)

» 18. Reobligated, though ill.

(Through the obstruction of a duct in the eye
several extremely painful operations were needed,
and he was in practically unintermittent pain.)

» 25. Reobligated, though ill.
Sept. 1. Reobligated, though ill.
,, 8. Pain too great to record vows, even if I made any.

(His practice was evidently to take the vows
afresh every week: he seems to have recorded
no practices, though he evidently did them
daily. The diary is all this time blank of any
records of any sort.)

» 16. Renewed vows as usual.
» 17. Went toA—P—H—,C.

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Sept. 21

(The change of air cured his neuralgia
instantly. Henceforth he may be considered
well again. He speaks of himself on the 2oth as
“an absurd but athletic ass,” after a night spent
wandering about London talking to policemen
and night watchmen.)

. Did a little Invocation. Inquiring how to invoke

A.. got the instant reply “Often!”—and only
saw later that this was the same old order as
before. Which confirms it: discard methods,
rituals, etc. (and their contradictions), but do it
Often!

. D.D.S. visits me. Celebration of the Autumnal

Equinox.

. Celebration of the Autumnal Equinox.
. (During this period Fra. P. was preparing, under

the guidance of D.D.S., a certain ritual of
initiation. ‘This was to combine the Eastern
and the Western methods.

The mind, exalted, fortified, initiated by the
Holy Magick, was then in that very state of
divine tension to concentrate itself on that Self-
glittering One.)

It is time to break off for a moment from the Diary to ask
the reader to remark how extraordinarily full is this passage of
P.’s life. ‘The scene opens on the slopes of Kangchenjanga
with the death of five men. It continues with a jungle
inhabited by savages, naked, armed with bows and arrows,
ignorant even of any language containing so many as three

35

‘THE EQUINOX

hundred words, and by wild beasts. The next scene is of
attempted robbery and murder, and P.’s successful defence.
Then comes one of the wildest journeys possible to take on
this planet, packed with every kind of adventure and
privation. After this, practically continuous ill- health, only
interrupted by the most shocking domestic tragedies.

Through all this, Fra. P. remains in perfect literal
simplicity with his devotion to the Augoeides and his
“invoking often.”

He never flags, never falters, never faints, never fails.
Impassive and inexorable as that Nature whom he had defied,
he went steadily on with his work. Wealth and health had
been torn from him; he was like Job, but even worse
tormented; greater than Job, he resisted all without a murmur,
and conquered all without a glimmer of self-satisfaction.

When the Books are opened and the deeds of men are
known, who dare say that there shall be found aught to
surpass these marvellous months which Fra. P. set to the
Operation of the Sacred Magic, to obtaining of the Knowledge
and Conversation of the holy Guardian Angel?

We return to the Diary—

Oct. 2. (Fra. P. has now retired into the Adytum of God-
nourished Silence to some purpose! We
transcribe this day’s entry; it is probably most
important to us. The rest of the year’s entries
are nearly all of the same kind.)

The Stooping Dragon—the Floor of the...
vide Alexandra.
The Critical Converse.

36

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Before this is merely the Concealed At Home
with its distinction of gift and graft, and very
vagueness, where Apollo and Diana took the
place of Mercury.

Scortillum, ut mihi tum repente visumst,

Non sane inlepidum neque invenustum.

Huc ut venimus incidere nobis.

Sermones varii.

(This means something! For example, the
Stooping Dragon was painted on the Floor of
the Vault. In Alexandra occur the words “vault
on Vera.” Hence in the diary the letters S.D.
(for Stooping Dragon) will refer to somebody
named Vera, or possibly “the true woman,” or
“true things.”

As I am_ ninety-four years old come
Martinmas, and have much more of _ this
“Temple” anyhow, I feel justified in leaving the
rest of this ingenious cipher to any lunatics who
get tired of the Bacon-Shakespeare folly.

Anybody who understands this entry of
October 6—

Brassies and Billiards.

Council of War.

The King’s letter to the Queen:

“Pussy the Prince 1s 111”

Paedicabo ego vos et inrumabo

XVI.

Called on Rev. J. A. Hervey—

is welcome to a copy of the diary.)

37

‘THE EQUINOX

Oct. 9. Tested new ritual and behold it was very good!
Thanked gods and sacrificed for——
In the “thanksgiving and sacrifice for...” I did
get rid of everything but the Holy Exalted One,
and must have held Him for a minute or two. I
did. Iam sure I did.

Such is the fragmentary account of what was then the
greatest event in Fra. P.’s career. Yet this is an account of the
highest of the trances—of Shivadarshana itself, as we know
from other sources. ‘The “vision,” to use still the name
become totally inadequate, appears to have had three main
points in its Atmadarshana stage—

1. The Universal Peacock.

2. The Universe as Ego. “I who am all and made it all
abide its separate Lord,” ze. the Universe becomes a single
and simple being, without quantity, quality, or conditions. In
this the “I” is immanent, yet the “I” made it, and the “I” is
entirely apart from it. (This is the Christian doctrine of the
Trinity, or something very like it.)

3. This Trinity is transcended by an impersonal Unity.

This is then annihilated by the Opening of the Eye of
Shiva. It is absolutely futile to discuss this: it has been tried
and failed again and again. Even those with experience of
the earlier part of the “vision” in its fullness must find it
totally impossible to imagine anything so subversive of the
whole base, not only of the Ego, but of the Absolute behind
the Ego.

There are, however, many suggestive poetical descriptions
which we advise our readers to study. Notable are “Aha!”
(passage quoted below) and many portions of Liber LXV,

38

‘THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Liber VII, and Liber CCXX. It must be clearly under-
stood that the Bhagavad-Gita, Anna Kingsford, St. John, and
all other writers with the possible exception of Lao
Tze, describe nothing higher than Atmadarshana. For the
first time in the known history of the world there had arisen
the combination of the utmost attainment with the intelligence
and literary ability to make it comparatively articulate. It
is no wonder, then, that we hail Fra. P. as the greatest of
all Teachers.

This entire experience from the Passing of the Abyss to
the Shivadarshana has been so wonder fully described in
“Aha!” by Mr. Aleister Crowley, who was privileged to get
his material first-hand from Fra. P. himself, that we make no
apology for quoting the passage in full.

MARSYAS. Ay! Hear the Ordeal of the Veil,
The Second Veil! ... O spare me this
Magical memory! I pale
To show the Veil of the Abyss.
Nay, let confession be complete!
OLYMPAS. Master, I bend me at thy feet—
Why do they sweat with blood and dew?
MARSYAS. Blind horror catches at my breath.
The path of the abyss runs through
Things darker, dismaller than death!
Courage and will! What boots their force?
The mind rears like a frightened horse.
There is no memory possible
Of that unfathomable hell.
Even the shadows that arise
Are things too dreadful to recount!

39

40

OLYMPAS.

‘THE EQUINOX

There’s no such doom in Destiny’s
Harvest of horror. The white fount
Of speech is stifled at its source.
Know, the sane spirit keeps its course
By this, that everything it thinks
Hath causal or contingent links.
Destroy them, and destroy the mind!
O bestial, bottomless, and blind
Black pit of all insanity!

The adept must make his way to thee!
This is the end of all our pain,

The dissolution of the brain!

For lo! in this no mortar sticks;

Down come the house—a hail of bricks!
The sense of all I hear is drowned;
‘Tap, tap, isolated sound,

Patters, clatters, batters, chatters,
Tap, tap, tap, and nothing matters!
Senseless hallucinations roll

Across the curtain of the soul.

Each ripple on the river seems

‘The madness of a maniac’s dreams!
So in the self no memory-chain

Or causal wisp to bind the straws!
The Self disrupted! Blank, insane,
Both of existence and of laws,

The Ego and the Universe

Fall to one black chaotic curse.

So ends philosophy’s inquiry:
“Summa scientia nihil scire.”

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

MARSYAS.

OLYMPAS.

MARSYAS.

Ay, but that reasoned thesis lacks
The impact of reality.

This vision is a battle axe

Splitting the skull. O pardon me!
But my soul faints, my stomach sinks.
Let me pass on!

My being drinks
The nectar-poison of the Sphinx.
This is a bitter medicine!
Black snare that I was taken in!
How one may pass I hardly know.
Maybe time never blots the track.
Black, black, intolerably black!
Go, spectre of the ages, go!
Suffice it that I passed beyond.
I found the secret of the bond
Of thought to thought through countless years
Through many lives, in many spheres,
Brought to a point the dark design
Of this existence that is mine.
I knew my secret. A/// was
I brought into the burning-glass,
And all its focussed light and heat
Charred a//I am. The rune’s complete
When @//I shall be flashes by
Like a shadow on the sky.

Then I dropped my reasoning.
Vacant and accurséd thing!

4I

42

‘THE EQUINOX

By my Will I swept away

The web of metaphysic, smiled

At the blind labyrinth, where the grey
Old snake of madness wove his wild
Curse! As I trod the trackless way
Through sunless gorges of Cathay,

I became a little child.

By nameless rivers, swirling through
Chasms, a fantastic blue,

Month by month, on barren hills,

In burning heat, 1n bitter chills,
Tropic forest, Tartar snow,
Smaragdine archipelago,

See me—led by some wise hand
That I did not understand.

Morn and noon and eve and night

I, the forlorn eremite,

Called on Him with mild devotion,
As the dew-drop woos the ocean.

In my wanderings I came

‘To an ancient park aflame

With fairies’ feet. Still wrapped in love
I was caught up, beyond, above

The tides of being. The great sight

Of the intolerable light

Of the whole universe that wove

The labyrinth of life and love

Blazed in me. Then some giant will,
Mine or another’s thrust a thrill

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Through the great vision. All the light
Went out in an immortal night,
The world annihilated by
The opening of the Master’s Eye.
How can I tell it?
OLYMPAS. Master, master!
A sense of some divine disaster
Abases me.
MARSYAS. Indeed, the shrine
Is desolate of the divine!
But all the illusion gone, behold
The one that is!
OLYMPAS. Royally rolled,
I hear strange music in the air!
MARSYAS. It is the angelic choir, aware
Of the great Ordeal dared and done
By one more Brother of the Sun!
OLYMPAS. Master, the shriek of a great bird
Blends with the torrent of the thunder.
MARSYAS. It is the echo of the word
‘That tore the universe asunder.
OLYMPAS. Master, thy stature spans the sky.
MARSYAS. Verily; but it is not I.
The adept dissolves—pale phantom form
Blown from the black mouth of the storm.
It is another that arises!

The result of this upon Fra. P. seems to have been
tremendous.
On the very next day the last sacrifice was made.

43

44

‘THE EQUINOX

Oct. 10. Iam still drunk with Samadhi all day.

II

I2

1 oe

Dds

16

17
18

Discovered...

(We need not write his words. Enough if
we say that the one person left for him to love
was lost, stricken by hereditary vice, a beastli-
ness taught her at the age of 16 by her mother,
a clergyman’s wife, which, after having lain
dormant all these years, was now become
rampant and incurable. He had nothing to
look forward to but life with one who was
in all essential ways a maniac, with no hope
of any termination but the asylum or the
grave.)

. To bed with thoughts of A... Persistent vision.

. . . Butoh! the constant rapture. . . .

. .Butoh!. . . as before. Did some prayer and

fasting, but not enough.

. Things have vea//y lost their value—I get what
Blavatsky describes in the Voice of the Silence
as “not quite disgust.”

. certain Samadhic effects linger—the un-
reality of things and one’s own sense of success,
etc.

. Samadhi not yet worn off.
. But oh! etc., only more so.
. Ditto. Note lack of impatience, perfect satisfac-

tion with existing state. .. .

21. I am still “polarized” a good deal; my “indif-

ference” is pronounced.

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

Oct. 31. This account is almost unintelligible as it stands;
so I edit it. He appears to have made the old
“Preliminary Invocation.” Result rather like
Yoga; he gets at once into Pratyahara and then
makes Samyama on the Augoeides.

“Invoked twice—terrible agony.” And then
this note. “Barbarous names. Supreme test (z.¢.
to use words which he does not understand), for
a man who 1s vea//y praying cannot bring himself
to say a ridiculous thing to his God, even on the
latter’s mandate.”

(From this it appears as if the Augoeides had
told Fra. P. the real meaning of Zoroaster’s
injunction: “Change not barbarous names of
evocation; for they are names divine, having in
the sacred rites a power ineffable.” )

“T shall go,” continues Fra. P., “and recite
‘From Greenland’s Icy Mountains’ (the most
ridiculous thing that occurred to his mind)—if
with faith, Samadhi! .. .

“No faith, I suppose. Time after time I feel
the sickening pangs of dissolution; physically I
nearly faint; but I don’t get over the bar. . . . I
am sick, sick!

“T retire in disorder pursued by dog-faced
demons of all kinds.

“Once again I nearly got there—all went
brilliance—but not quite.”

Again, “There is nothing but dog-faced
demons after I get to bed; but there is always

45

‘THE EQUINOX

the consciousness behind thoughts. Thus,
when the consciousness realizes that ‘I am apart
from my thoughts,’ that thought itself is
pictorially shown as a thought.” ‘This seems to
mean that he again got Atmadarshana; his
complaint was the inability to pass beyond.

He adds “to this consciousness all thoughts
are alike; it would never trouble to command
them.” Jd est, it is the Peace of the Universe,
the Impersonal Absolute. He was That.

Note that he got this without any Ritual to
speak of; an enormous advance in power of
meditation.

Nov. 4. Descent into Hell. In the power of the Dweller—
obsession by a devil left by F—— and J
called “?” (This devil is described in “Sir
Palamede the Saracen,” Sections XXXVI and
XXXVIII. It asks “Is there any Path at all?”
and “Are not you a fraud?”) Return with great
difficulty—awful pangs—Fli! Eh! lama

sabachthani!
N.B.—I got back to very near Samadhi in the
end.

(This appears to have been a_ "natural"
meditation arising out of the conversation of
F— the Buzite and J—— the Shuhite!)
» 14. Again got into the Samadhi-proximity-state; as it
were, without trouble.
(Now follows a period of two more months of
ill-health of the severest kind, and apparently

‘THE ‘TEMPLE OF SOLOMON THE KING

no work is done. ‘There was, however, much
question of his position in the mystic hierarchy.
He had the highest attainment known—and
what did it amount to? In the meantime Fra.
D. D. S. himself must have attained Samadhi
—presumably Atmadarshana—for we find this
entry.)
Dec. 7. D. D.S. writes from Samadhi-Dhatu.
(Dhatu—literally “element”—is a word
chosen to avoid such implications as would be
conveyed by “place,” “state,” and such words.)

» 8 D.D.S. still in Samadhi.

» Io. D. D.S. dined with me. He thinks my attainment
makes me a Master of the Temple. He goes
even further and says that I am “#e Master—the
Logos—the next Buddha.

... This (apparently some ceremony of Rose
Croix) purifies and consecrates me, so that I feel
“T am the Master” quite genuinely—without
scruple or diffidence. No personality.

» 11. Back to B——. D. D. S.’s amazing third letter.

(This letter is too long and personal to
publish in full; but it contains these words:
“How long have you been in the Great Order,
and why did I not know? Is the invisibility of
the A... A... to lower grades so complete?” )

In spite of his illness he managed to do some most

formidable work during this December. There is, however,
nothing further in the diary of interest to our present purpose.

47

‘THE EQUINOX

But it is most important to remark that although acclaimed
as a Master of the Temple, as one who has passed utterly
through the Abyss, as a Brother of the A.. A... itself, he
steadfastly refused to accept the hard-won grade for three
years more.

(To be continued)

48

HIS SECRET
SIN

INSCRIBED ADMIRINGLY
TO
ALEXANDER COOTE

49

HIS SECRET SIN

Inscribed admiringly to Alexander Coote.

‘THEODORE BUGG had made England what she is. The
last forty-two years had elevated him from errand-boy to
biggest retail grocer in the Midlands. Twenty-eight years of
wedded happiness had left him with a clear conscience, a five-
year old grave to keep in order “To the memory of my
beloved relict,” as he had written until the clerk suggested a
trifling alteration, and a strapping daughter just turned
twenty.

I wish I could stop here. But there is a rough side to
every canvas, and Theodore Bugg had forgotten all about
England, and what she is, and how he had made her. Or if the
good work was going on, it was subconscious. He was
standing by the gilded statue of Jeanne d’Arc, his mouth wide
open, his Baedeker limp in his perspiring hand. “She’s riding
astride!” The molten madness throbbed in his brain. “She’s
got man’s clothes on!”

The shocking truth must out: Theodore Bugg had come to
Paris for Pleasure!

He had only been able to spare two days, the Sunday
and Monday of Whitsuntide. He had travelled by the night
boat on Saturday, arriving in Paris on Sunday morning—the
first step downward! The air of Paris intoxicated him; the
Grands Boulevards ate into his moral fibre like a dragon
chewing butter; and though he had not actually ‘been in’
anywhere, he felt the atmosphere of the music-halls as Ulysses

51

‘THE EQUINOX

heard the Sirens. He was fortunately tied to the mast of his
ignorance of French and his fear of asking anybody such a
very peculiar question, or he would certainly have discovered
and visited the Moulin Rouge.

As it was, Joan of Arc was very much more than was
good for him. He stared, fascinated as by a basilisk, his eyes
starting further and further from his head as his moral sense
dragged his body backwards along the Rue de Rivoli. By
this means he cannoned into a worthy Frenchman (who
refused to take him seriously) and so was shocked into
himself.

He pulled out his watch. Only an hour and a half to catch
his train. Just as he was beginning to enjoy himself, too.
What a shame! He couldn’t even send a telegram without
letting somebody know where he was—and at home they
supposed him to be visiting a business acquaintance in
Shropshire.

I'll have a mementum, thought he, if I die for it. PII—I
don’t care. I may as well be hung for a sheep as a lamb—
I'll go the whole hog. I know there’s shops about here.

So, turning, in his excitement and determination, he saw
—when you invoke the devil he is usually half-way to you—a
shop window full of photographs of the pictures and sculptures
of the Louvre. He looked up and down the street—the sight
of a top hat might have saved him even at the eleventh hour.
But no! nothing that looked in the least like an Englishman,
even to his overheated fear of discovery. He peered and
dodged about for a little like a man stalking dangerous game,

52

HIS SECRET SIN

and then, with sudden stealth, his back to the door, pushed
down the lever and slid into the shop.

“Avvy-voo photographiay?” he said hurriedly, with averted
face.

“Certainly, sir,” replied the shopkeeper in perfect English.
“What does Monsieur require? Photographs of Paris, of
Fontainebleau, of the Louvre, of Versailles?”

But English would not serve the turn of Theodore Bugg.
He nearly bolted from the shop. An English voice—it was
almost Discovery!

“Kerker shows,” he muttered doggedly enough, though his
head hung lower than ever. “Kelker shows tray sho. Voo
savvy?—tray tray sho—par propre!”

The shopman, not yet old enough to master his disgust at
the familiar incident, brought forward several books of
photographs.

“Perhaps Monsieur will find there what he requires,” he
said coldly.

Furtively and hurriedly, his glance divided between the
forbidden book and the shop-door, his only safguard from
intrusion the thought that nobody who entered would be ina
position to throw stones at a fellow-culprit, Theodore Bugg
turned over the pages.

The book began mildly enough with the winged Victory
and only entered the rapids with La Gioconda. ‘Thence,
Niagra-like, one plunge to the abyss—the Venus de Milo.

The blood flame to his face; his breath came hot and
quick.

53

‘THE EQUINOX

With fumbling fingers that trembled with excitement he
withdrew the photograph from its leaf and half showed it to
the proprietor with a whispered “Comby-ang?”

“Trente sous,” said the shopman in his most rapid French.
And in English, “We take English money here, sir; ten
shillings, if you please. May I wrap it up for your” But Bugg
had thrust it into his inner pocket, and, pressing a sovereign
into the man’s hand, dashed without looking behind him from
the shop, eager to put time and space between himself and his
compromising position.

He hurried to his hotel, not without many a suspicious
glance over his shoulder, and packed his bag. He had ten
minutes to spare. He locked the door carefully, sat down with
his back to the light, and pulling the photograph from his
pocket, indulged in a long voluptuous gloat.

Then the boots knocked with the news of his cab, and
Bugg, nobler than Lord Howard of Effingham, thrust his
treasure into his pocket, unlocked the door and cried
“Venny!”

II.

Theodore Bugg, a year later, was paying the price of his
fall. He had allowed Gertrude to attend Art Classes, although
he knew it to be wrong. But he had grown to fear his
daughter, and—on such a point especially—he was incapable
of fighting her.

For there were times when he tried to persuade himself
that there was “nothing wrong in it.” A brother church-
warden had looked a little askance when the news of
Gertrude’s “advanced ideas” had come; but Theodore had

54

HIS SECRET SIN

stoutly and even a little sternly rebuked him with the original
remark: “To the pure all things are pure.” It was knowing
when to be bold that had made Theodore the fine business
man he was.

And very bold it was, for conscience makes cowards of
us all. The secret shame of his orgies! Every week-night—
once even on a Sunday!—after everyone had gone to bed, he
opened the little safe in the wall at the head of his bed, and
drew forth the obscene picture from its envelope marked “In
case of my death or disability THIS PACKET is to be
DESTROYED UNOPENED.  T. Bugg.” Then he
would sit, and hold it in his hot hands, and gloat upon the
evil thing, lifting it now and again to his mouth to cover it
with greedy, slobbering kisses. And afterwards, when it was
safely locked up again, he would undress with a certain
unction. Once even he attempted—with the aid of a bath
towel—to take the pose before the mirror. And he saw
nothing ridiculous in that, just as he saw nothing beautiful in
the photograph. Nakedness is lust: so ran his simple gospel
of aesthetics.

Shame quickened him, too, to measures of expiation or
precaution. He read family prayers twice a day instead of
once, and he took the chair at the Annual Meeting of a Society
for Sending Out Trousers to Converted Hindoos.

As everybody in the Midlands knows, “Hindoos” are
Naked Savages.

And he discharged a groom for whistling on Sunday.

But if these expedients salved his conscience, they did
nothing to quell Gertrude’s incipient tendency to independence

55

‘THE EQUINOX

of thought and action. There had been a very unpleasant
scene when he threw into the fire a book from Mudie’s (I
thought one could have trusted Mudie’s!) called “The Stolen
Bacillus,’ which he understood to be of a grossly immoral
tendency. (Nasty filth about free love or something, isn’t it?)

Theodore Bugg was not a sensitive man; excess of
intuitive sympathy had not made his life a hell; but he felt
that his domestic relations were strained. Especially since
“that Mrs. Grahame” had evinced a liking for Gertrude.
Her husband’s colonelcy was the gilding of the pill; but the
pill was a bitter one, for Mrs. Grahame went motoring and
even golfing on Sunday instead of going to Church, and once
or twice had taken Gertrude with her, to the scandal of the
neighbourhood. Colonel Grahame, too, rather got on Bugg’s
nerves, in spite of the “honour of his acquaintance.”

Such thoughts went dully through his mind as he waited
in the garden for his daughter to come in to tea from the “Art
Class.” But when she arrived, portfolio in hand, her beauty
and the splendour of her long easy swing determined him to
be gracious.

Under such circumstances conversation is apt to be
artificial; but Gertrude was gay and garrulous, and the tea
went very pleasantly until her father’s eye unluckily fell on
the portfolio. “And what has my little fairy been doing
lately?” he asked with elephantine lightness.

“Oh, sketches mostly, father. This week we’re copying
from old Greek masterpieces, though. Let me show you,
father, dear.” She opened the portfolio and turned over the

56

HIS SECRET SIN

leaves. “I’m getting on splendidly. Mr., Davis thinks I ought
to go to Paris and study properly. Do let me.”

“How can you think of such a thing, Gertrude? A daughter
of mine! Study properly!!! No indeed! A little sketching is a
nice accomplishment for a young lady, but—”

His jaw dropped. A thin, graceful pencil sketch it was
that he clutched in frenzied fingers; but he could not mistake
the subject.

“Wretched girl,” he shouted, “where did you get the—
the -the—Damn it all, what d’ye call it?—the—ay! that’s
it!—the model for this vile, filthy, lewd, obscene, lustful thing?
Damn it! you’re as bad as Cousin Jenny! (Cousin Jenny
was a blot on the ’scutcheon of the Buggs). You're a harlot,
miss!” And then, with an awful change as the truth came
home to him: “O my God! O my God! Damn it!” he
screamed, “how did you get the keys of my little safe?”

The girl had frozen colder than the stone, but there was a
new light in her eye, and if the curl of a lip could tread a worm
into the dust, that lip was hers and that worm the author of her
being. She had withdrawn as one who comes suddenly upon a
toad, and the first flaming of her face had died instantly to
deadlier ice.

Bugg saw his mistake, his masses of mistakes. There
being but one more to make, he made it; and, finding himself
in the frying-pan of discovery, leapt into the fire of things
irrevocable and not to be forgotten. His fat, heavy-jowled,
coarse face all twitching, he fell on his knees and clasped his
hands together. “So you found me out? Don’t, don’t give
away your poor old father, Gertie! My little Gertie!”

57

‘THE EQUINOX

There was a silence. “Excuse me, father,” said the girl at
last, “but I’ve just had a glimpse of you for the first time in my
life, and it’s a bit of a shock. I must think.”

And she stood motionless until her hapless father
attracted her attention by backing into his wicker chair.
“Don’t touch holy things,” she snapped suddenly, taking the
sketch from his nerveless hand, and replacing it reverently in
the portfolio.

The action seemed to decide her.

“Tl give you an address to send my things to,” she said,
and walked out of the garden.

Theodore Bugg sat stunned. “Holy things,” she had said.
She called that lustful French photograph holy! Was this
Original Sin; or was it that strange new thing people were
talking about—what was it? Ah! heredity. Heredity? His
secret sin become her open infamy? ‘Truly the sins of the
fathers were visited on the children!

By this time he was upstairs and in his bedroom. He must
destroy the accursed thing; he must destroy—Ah! yes. He
had contaminated Gertrude by having such a thing in his
house. He must be the Roman father, and—what would a
Roman father do?

He had the match alight, but he could not put it to the
edge of the packet. Then the silence of the house hit him; he
knew that his daughter would never return, and in a fit of rage
he trampled on the envelope like a wild beast mauling a
corpse.

58

HIS SECRET SIN

He thrust it into the empty grate, lit the paper frills,
watched all blaze up. Then, gulping down a sob, he went to
the drawer of a cabinet and pulled out the revolver which he
had bought (and loaded, under the shopman’s guidance)
against burglars.

Yes, he must kill himself. He drew back the hammer.
Cold sweat beaded his flabby face. He could not; and
anyhow, how did one? He thought of many stories of people
who had shot themselves ineffectively. He felt for his heart
and failed to find it, wondered if it had stopped and he were
dying, had a fit of fear paralysing all his will. He thought of
himself lying dead.

“No, by God! I can’t do it!” he cried, and flung the pistol
back into the drawer. As luck would have it, the weapon
exploded. The bullet broke his jaw, tore away four molars,
smashed the cheek-bone, pulped the right eye, and, glancing
from the frontal bone, found its billet in the ceiling. He lost
consciousness and fell. His head struck the grate where yet
smouldered the ashes of the photograph.

It was three months before he recovered, and then with
only half a face to face the world with. He still thinks that
Gertrude gave him away, for the street-boys have taken to
calling him “old Venus.” But he is wrong; the boys have their
aesthetic reasons for the name.

Gertrude in any case is much too busy to bother her
head about him; for, after a year in the Latin Quarter, if she
has failed to surpass Degas and Manet and O’Conor, she has
at least conquered the great pianist Wlodywewsky, and it

59

‘THE EQUINOX

takes her all her time to manage him and keep the baby out of
mischief.

Theodore Bugg needs no help of hers in his moral
sculpture of the destinies of England.

ALEISTER CROWLEY.

60

LONG ODDS

HOW many million galaxies there are

Who knows? and each has countless stars in it,
And each rolls through eternities afar

Beneath the threshold of the Infinite.

How is it that will all that space to roam

I should have found this mote that spins and leaps
In what unutterable sunlight, foam

Of what unfathomable starry deeps

Who knows!? And how this thousand million souls
And half a thousand million souls of earth

‘That swarm, all bound for unimagined goals,
All pioneers of death enrolled at birth,

How were they swept away before my sight,
That I might stand upon the single prick
Of infinite space and time as infinite,
Who knows? Yet here I stand, climacteric,

Having found you. Was it by fall of chance?

‘Then what a stake against what odds I have won!
Was it determined in God’s ordinance?

Then wondrous love and pity for His son!

Or was it part of an eternal law?
Then how ineffably beneficent!
Each thought excites an ecstasy of awe,
A rapture rending the mind’s firmament.

61

62

‘THE EQUINOX

Infinity—yet you and I have met.
Eternity—yet hand in hand we run.

All odds that I should lose you or forget,
But, soul and spirit and body, we are one.

Is this the child of Chance, or Law, or Will?
Is None or All or One to thank for this?
It will not matter if thanksgiving fill
The endless empyrean with a kiss.

ALEISTER CROWLEY.

DOCTOR BOB

A SKETCH
BY
MARY D’ESTE and ALEISTER CROWLEY

PERSONS OF THE SKETCH

DOCTOR ROBERTS (“Doctor Bob”)
MRS. ROBERTS, Hs wife.
DOCTOR FIELDING

JANE SKIRING
WILL STANLEY
TWO GENTLEMEN
A MANSERVANT

\ Patients.

DOCTOR BOB
A SKETCH

BY
MARY D’ESTE and ALEISTER CROWLEY

[The Scene represents the waiting-room of DR. ROBERTS’
house. Doors L., R., and C. Door L. leads to dining-room;
door R. to entrance-hall; door C. to consulting-room. This
1s a wide double door, which when open shows the doctor’s
bureau, chairs, and other usual furniture." "Curtain may
be used instead of door tf more conventent. "|

The waiting-room has a large table, with wWlustrated journals,
Gc. There are easy chairs, but no other furniture. On
the table lie the hat and stick of a patient who ts
closeted with DR. BOB.

Time 2.30 p.m. A bright winter afternoon.

Enter the SERVANT, preceding DR. FIELDING, who 1s wearing
hts motor coat and cap.

The SERVANT goes through to Door L., and returns with MRS.
BOB, who goes to greet DR. FIELDING warmly, while the
SERVANT goes out R. and closes door."

Mrs. B. How good of you to come so promptly!
Dr. F. I could never respond quickly enough to a call from
you. I should have been here ten minutes earlier, but the

Daimler doesn’t like so much snow in the streets.

65

‘THE EQUINOX

Mrs. B. How perfectly sweet of you!

Dr. F. I hope this is not professional; at least, I’m sure
there’s nothing the matter with you.

Mrs. B. Heavens, no! I have health enough for six.

Dr. F. And there’s nothing wrong with Dr. Bob?

Mrs. B. Nothing serious; he has had a bit of a cough this
month back.

Dr. F. Heaven help him if he has to make his own
diagnosis—you know we call him Doctor Doom’em!

Mrs. B. It’s just that I want to talk to you about.

Dr. F. You don’t mean to say you mind?

Mrs. B. Mind! It’s driving me mad.

Dr. F. But he’s the greatest consultant we have; nobody
ever comes to him while there’s a chance anywhere else.

Mrs. B. Yes; but whatever other drug he gives them, he
never gives them hope.

Dr. F. But they come for his opinion.

Mrs. B. And don’t want to know it.

Dr. F. Perhaps it would be better if they didn’t.

Mrs. B. ‘That’s it; that’s what’s driving me mad. I see
them come there one after another, some cheerful, others
desperate; some looking healthy, some looking half dead
already; some hoping, some doubting; all fearing. But
one and all go away hopeless, utterly hopeless. I could bear it
better if his were not so great a name. But he’s right—
he’s always right. ‘That’s what’s so terrible—he’s alway’s
right!

Dr. F. Come, come! Don’t break down, Mrs. Bob!

Mrs. B. Wouldn’t it be better to let them go on blindly
to the end? Think of them watching and waiting! Think

66

DOCTOR BOB

of the drawn faces, and the ghastly stare into the eyes of

Death! Think of their ears strained if perhaps they may

hear his stealthy tread! Their tongues licking their parched

lips—oh, is there no hope? Then, at least, is there no mercy?

Dr. F. I should be inclined to deceive them nearly always.
I’m sending him a girl this afternoon. Hang it! I must have
his opinion, and yet I hesitated—long—over the wisdom of
the course I was taking. She hasn’t any idea of how seriously
ill she is; the shock might kill her. I begged him in my note to
spare her the full knowledge.

Mrs. B. Poor child!

Dr. F. Well, if he says there’s no hope...... You know
her, I think—Jane Skiring?

Mrs. B. The little school teacher. Oh! I’d no idea she was
so ill. I am sorry.

[The consulting-room door opens, and an elderly man, whose
hat and stick are on the table, comes out. His face 1s drawn
and his eyes haggard. He takes no notice of the people
present, or of his hat and stick, but goes straight out, R. The
banging of a door 1s heard. Enter the" Servant, running;
picks up the hat and stick, and runs out after him. Dr.
Fielding azd Mrs. Bob "exchange glances significant of
shocked pain.

The consulting-room doors being now wide open, the audience
can see Dr. Bob sitting at lus bureau. He rises, and comes
down stage, heartily, cheerfully, masterfully.]

Dr. B. Hullo, Fielding! Glad to see you. Just got
your note before lunch; [ll find out for sure what’s up.
Pretty girl—pity! See that old boy just went out? A typical
Brightic; fellow who devilled his own kidneys. Ha! ha! ha!

67

‘THE EQUINOX

I wonder if he’ll see that Christmas turkey—ha! ha! ha!
Hullo, dear! Didn’t see you, little white mouse! Let’s have
coffee, dear, and the brown brandy. No more patients for a
bit. Come along, Fielding, eh?

[He leads FIELDING £0 the consulting-room, while MRS. BOB
goes out L..]

Dr. F. This is an exceptional case, old man. I do hope you
won't frighten her.

Dr. B. Great God! always the same old story. “They never
come to me until the rest of you have finished them, and then
it’s my candid opinion you want. Then you get it, by Heaven!
and instead of blaming yourselves, or the patient, or the
disease, you blame me. Why don’t you give me a chance?
Why don’t you bring them while there zs hope? You all look
upon me as the undertaker—Doctor Doom’em, isn’t it?—
because you are afraid to tell the patient what nine times out
of ten you know as well as I do. Doctor Doom’em!

Dr. F. Now, old man, don’t get excited.

Dr. B. Excited! Why my life would be one long hell
if I hadn’t chosen a very simple method. Tell the truth.
I’m not a lawyer, paid to tell lies. Tell the truth. Then I’ve
done my part; my conscience is clear; I eat hearty and sleep
sound.

Dr. F. But is it always best to tell the truth? May you not
sometimes overlook a grain of hope, and kill it by your
diagnosis? [Enter MRS. BOB wth coffee.

Mrs. B. I can’t believe it is right to send away people
smashed.

Dr. F. Yes; you’re a hanging judge.

68

DOCTOR BOB

Dr. B. I only record the effect of the verdict of the jury—
twelve good symptoms and true.

Mrs. B. I can never forget seeing young Joe Whitney when
he came from you. He had the face of a lost soul. And the
next day the papers had the news that he had shot himself.

Dr. B. Well, what of that? He saved himself about four
months of the most persistent and horrible torture that the
mind of a devil could imagine...... People wonder why doctors
are nearly always Atheists!

Mrs. B. Oh, Bob!

Dr. B. In his place I should have done as he did.

Dr. F. No, you wouldn’t. You’d sit in a corner with your
teeth clenched, waiting and watching and recording, killing
each hope as it was born, yet wishing to God that you dared
hope—even though you knew it to be vain.

Dr. B. There’s where you are wrong. What’s the use of
lying and cheating? I never saw any good come of it. You tell
a man he may get well this year—next year—sometime—
never—like a silly girl blowing a puff-ball. Pah!

Mrs. B. If you only had sympathy, Bob dear, if you only
had imagination! If you only could realize what these people
really feel when you condemn them!

Dr. F. And hope is the best medicine; at least it helps the
man to live out the little life that remains to him. An artist
might finish his creation.

Dr. B. Oh, artists! Another set of liars!

Dr. F. A doctor will go on with his work better if his brain
is not clouded with his own mortal fear.

Dr. B. Rot! if he’s finished, he’d better finish. And
besides, despair can often do more than hope. Put the

69

‘THE EQUINOX

biggest coward in the world in a tight enough corner, and he’ll
show his teeth, and very likely win out. (He coughs.) By the
way, have a look at this throat, will you? There’s a little
chronic irritation somewhere.

Dr. F. Why, of course. [The bell rings.

Dr. B. A patient, hang it all! I must leave you to talk to
Nan. Send ’em along!

[He goes into consulting-room and closes the door.

Mrs. B. He’s set on this telling the truth.

Dr. F. Oh, it’s wrong: I know it’s wrong. There’s always a
chance in the most hopeless cases.

Mrs. B. Can’t we—can’t we make him see it?

Dr. F. But how?

[Enter SERVANT, showing in WILL STANLEY.

W.S. (surprised) How do you do, Dr. Fielding?

Dr. F. I didn’t expect to see you here; I thought you were
better months ago.

W.S. So I was—in fact I am—only the mother insisted on
my seeing Dr. Bob. I guess he won’t find much wrong with
me!

Mrs. B. Oh, you mustn’t mind even if he does. Doctors
live on people’s fears.

Dr. F. (@aughing) Oh, Mrs. Bob, come now!

W.S. They can’t frighten me; but they do mother. She
wants to coddle me all the time.

Dr. F. You’re a No. 1 size pet.

W.S. Rather; I’m the strongest man in college. If this silly
old heart hadn’t started to play the goat.

[DR. BOB’S bel/ rings. SERVANT enzers, shows WILL STANLEY
into consulting-room, closes doors, returns, and goes out.|

70

DOCTOR BOB

Dr. F. Poor devil! [P’ve known for months that it was all
over with him.

Mrs. B. Oh, how dreadful! He’s not twenty yet.

Dr. F. He never will be.

MRS. B. In my mind I can see him coming out; I can feel
and understand. Oh, why won’t Bob let him take hope to his
mother?

Dr. F. It’s a shame. It’s silly, useless cruelty. Id like
to punch Bob’s head......oh! I beg your pardon, Mrs. Bob—
if he breaks down that fine boy’s courage.

Mrs. B. Oh, I quite agree with you.

Dr. F. Then I say that he’d be all the better for a dose of
his own medicine.

[| Sz/ence. Then MRS BOB clasps her hands, gives a little laugh,
and cries out.|

Mrs. B. Oh, I’ve got such a good idea.

[| The bell rings. Enter JANE, ushered by SERVANT.

Dr. F. Well, here you are, Jane. How splendid you’re
looking to-day. Fit as fit, eh?

Jane. It’s this weather. I do love the snow. I’m as
happy as happy; every fibre of my being quivers with joy.
How do you do, Mrs. Roberts?

Mrs. B. I’m so glad to see you. I’m so sorry to see you.

Jane. Oh, it’s nothing. Dr. Fielding tells me it’s sure to be
all right. Dr. Bob—oh, I mean Dr. Roberts—will say the very
worst he can, and then we’ve got to hope for the best.

Dr. F. Yes. I always get his opinion; and then we’re sure to
err on the safe side. Eh?

Mrs. B. Yes; but he’s so anxious to make people take
proper care, and follow his instructions absolutely.

71

‘THE EQUINOX

Jane. Yes, of course. I know I’ve been careless.

Dr. F. Yes, yes. A bit of a fright is the very thing to do
one good.

[Enter Will Stanley, 47s hair dishevelled, a wild look in his
eyes. He does not see Mrs. Bob and Jane, who are up

L. at back of stage, but addresses Dr. Fielding, who 1s at

table.|

W.S. I say, doc., it’s all up.

Dr. F. Nonsense. Cheer up, old son. It’s never as bad as
Dr. Bob makes out.

W.S. Yes; I’m finished. God! but this will break up the
mother.

Dr. F. Then you mustn’t tell her.

W.S. I’m not going to. But she’ll guess. Mothers seem to
feel things. Look here, doc., ’m on for a night with the
Indians. [ll have forgotten about it myself by to-morrow.
That’s the best way.

Dr. F. ?'m with you. And in the meantime, remember we
doctors know very little.

Mrs. B. (coming forward) \ wouldn’t believe the whole lot
of them if they said I had to die to-morrow.

Dr. F. Quite right.

[DR. BOB’S Ge//. SERVANT enters and shows JANE into
consulting-room.|

Dr. F. Pll be with you in a moment, Jane (Jane zods and
smiles and goes in.) Take my word for it, Will, there’s always
hope. [ll see you at the Club at 8 o’clock.

W.S. Right you are! (Sezvously and pathetically) And thank
you so much for—lying to me!

72

DOCTOR BOB

[He bows to MRS BOB, shakes hands with DR. FIELDING, and

goes out R.

Mrs. B. Another victim!

Dr. F. It’s a shame!

Mrs. B. Will you stand by me?

Dr. F. You know I will. What is it?

Mrs. B. Let’s teach him a lesson. I’ve got a splendid
idea. It isn’t hardness of heart; but he doesn’t see clearly.
I want to make him feel and understand what it is that he’s
doing.

Dr. F. And how do you propose to do it?

Mrs. B. Well, you know he asked you to look at his throat.
Tell him it’s something terrible, that he’s got to die! Can you
think of anything?

Dr. F. Why, of course, cancer!

Mrs. B. (shocked) Oh!

Dr. F. Cancer of the throat has just such slight symptoms.
Nobody can tell without examination.

Mrs. B. Oh, you don’t think it really might be that?

Dr. F. Not one chance in a thousand. But he’ll believe me
if I tell him that that is what it is...... Do you really wish me to
do it?

[MRs. BOB avd DR. FIELDING /ook at each other steadily.
From within the consulting-room comes the sound of a cry,
a fall, and overturned furniture.]

MRS. B. Yes, I do.
| The consulting-room door bursts open.

Dr. B. (7 doorway) Here, Fielding!

[FIELDING goes in. JANE 7s /ying on floor in utter collapse.
Both doctors work had on her with heart massage and

73

‘THE EQUINOX

myections, at last recovering her sufficiently to bring her

out.|

Dr. B. Here, Nan, tell them to light the fire in the spare
bedroom!

[MRS. BOB goes out. DR. BOB’S felephone on bureau rings. DR.
BOB goes fo 1t.]

Dr. B. Half a minute, Fielding. Look after her.

[JANE gasps and opens here eyes.

Jane. You’ve been lying to me. Father of Heaven! I don’t
want to die. I cannot be so ill as he says!

Dr. F. No, dear child, no. The fact is—er—er—well,
we've just discovered he’s a bit mad, do you see? Listen to
me, Jane.

Jane. Oh, I’m trying to.

Dr. F. He says the same thing to everybody—it’s his
mania. Don’t believe a word of it.

Jane. No, no.

{She collapses again. DR. BOB replaces telephone receiver, and
comes forward. He and DR. FIELDING carry JANE out L.
Outer bell. SERVANT ushers in a patient. Enter L. MRS.
BOB 77 @ state of violent excitement.|

Mrs. B. Go! go! Why will you stay in this house of death?
(The Patient manifests surprise.)

Go! go! I say. My husband can see no more patients to-day.

[She shows him out, returns to centre of stage, breaks out
crying, and goes off L. as DR. BOB and DR. FIELDING
return. Their loud voices are heard arguing without.|
Dr. F. It might have killed her; and it very nearly did.

Dr. B. Look here, Fielding, this is too bad. Hang it, if
you'd brought me the girl a year ago I might have cured her.

74

DOCTOR BOB

Dr. F. And now you’ve killed her.

Dr. B. I killed her? Well, let me tell you, you killed her
yourself. You let her think that she was not as bad as she was;
that led her to neglect herself, and now you bring her to me
with about a cubic inch of lung left to breathe with, and
expect me to tell her that she’ll live to be ninety. It’s this
infernal system of lying that’s at the bottom of all the trouble.

Dr. F. Well, she’ll die now, for sure. (They are now in the
consulting-room). By the way, shall I look a that throat of
yours?

Dr. B. Yes, I wish you would. It’s very slight, but it’s been
hanging about for a month.

[He sits and throws his head back for the examination, which
DR. FIELDING degins. MRS. BOB comes in L., sees the two
men, and draws back, facing audience, with a pleased
expectant smile. |

[He draws himself up with a gesture of utter agony.*

Dr. B. What’s the matter?

Dr. F. My God! Pull yourself together, old man. I’ve bad
news for you.

Dr. B. (gone white) It’s you that need to pull yourself
together. Come, out with it! Itisn’t....... It IST Gee wtiae 4

Dr. F. Yes, it is.

Dr. B. Cancer?

Dr. F. Cancer. Ocsophagus involved, too; it’s no use
operating even. You haven’t a month.

"This is genuine. Dr. Bob has really cancer; this is the tragedy of the joke. Dr. F.
must indicate this by his manner. But he daren’t break it to Mrs. Bob, who thinks
throughout that he is acting.

75

‘THE EQUINOX

Mrs. B. (aszde) What splendid acting!

Dr. B. Oh, my God! (He falls back in his chair, sick and
limp.)

Dr. F. I’m sorry --- ’'m awfully sorry --- but it’s true.

Dr. B. Oh, my poor wife. Here! Think! Think! How
shall we ever break it to her? (He rises and staggers out of the
consulting-room. Seeing MRS. BOB he stops.

Mrs. B. (pretending not to notice his agitation) Well, dear,
and what does Dr. Fielding say?

Dr. B. (Zoarsely) Nan, I hardly like to tell you. Oh,
Nan, it’s the very worst. It’s the most malignant form of
cancer. I haven’t a month to live. (W7/d/y) Ha! ha! ha!
Dr. Doom’em doomed at last! (Breaking down) Oh, Nan,
Nan, what am I to say to you? And what am I to do about my
work?

Mrs. B. You’ve been working too much, dear. I dare-say
it’s not really very bad; and the rest will do you good.

Dr. B. A pretty long rest. From now to the Day of
Judgment. And you have nothing better to tell me than the
same old lies! Lies! Lies! Here, ’ve work to do. Good
God! —I’ve work to do.

[He rushes into the consulting-room and bangs the door. MRS.
Bob, Aiding her face in her hands to cover her laughter,
rushes off L., followed by FIELDING, 47s face white and
sad. He hesitates a moment, stops, and says (aside)

I can’t tell her—I daren’t tell her. I must keep up the farce.

[The door banged by DR. BOB swings open on the rebound, and
he 1s seen at lis bureau arranging papers. He completes
this work methodically; then goes to a drawer, picks out a
hypodermic syringe, and fills it, injects his arm. He

76

DOCTOR BOB

then comes to the table, opens a box of cigars, and selects

one, then puts tt back with a little laugh and takes and

lights a cigarette.|

Dr. B. Ten minutes!

[He seats himself comfortably, and puffs at the cigarette. A long
pause. MRS. BOB avd DR. FIELDING zezurn.]

Mrs. B. I must tell him—I must tell him! He’s suffering
too much. (Ruzs in.) Bobl...... What is it?

Dr. B. I have about seven minutes of life left, Nan. I
could not bear to let you see me suffer for a month.

Mrs. B. What do you mean? Oh, don’t you see it was all a
joke? We wanted you to understand how the people felt
when you condemned them. There’s nothing the matter with
you.

Dr. B. More of your lies. You’ve killed me with your lies
now. I’ve injected cobra venom, and nothing can save me.
Good-bye, Nan!

[She ts dazed, staggers, and falls into lis arms, fainting.|
A pleasant joke, Fielding. Well, you never had much sense.
[He falls. FIELDING, distracted, walks about, waving his

arms in despair. DR. BOB dies. MRS. BOB vecovers, and

kisses and embraces the corpse, sobbing.|

Mrs. B. P’ve killed my husband! [ve killed my husband!

Dr. F. Mrs. Bob, I can spare you one sorrow. It was no
joke. Your husband really had cancer.

Mrs. B. Oh, you can’t lie to me!

CURTAIN.

77

IN LIMINE
(IGNOTLUM PER IGNOTIUS)

O Rose of Death, open thy petals wide!
Aching with infinite sweetnesses within
‘To crush the wavering insect, and to win
From the deep crimson heart of thee a tide
Of wondrous Life; as when the Crucified,
Hanging in shame to expiate all sin.
Found in the dying thief a soul akin

‘To His own soul. Is not all Truth allied?

O miracle of miracles sublime,

That all created things should sink to climb!
O mystery incarnate of the soul,

That dies but to be born anew! The whole
One monstrous effigy of Life, that Time
Scrawls with fantastic hands from pole to pole.

ETHEL ARCHER.

78

THE
WOODCUTTER

THE WOODCUTTER

PLACIDE GERVEZ was a woodcutter, like his father and
grandfather before him. It is to be supposed that Nature
was weary of the procession, for Placide had never married,
but lived alone in his hut in the forest of Fontainbleau, just
too far from the borders for it ever to be worth his while to go
into a village for a drink except on very special occasions.
He had even been overlooked for military service; and the
Prussians had come and gone without interfering with his
chopping. He could not read or write, and his language had
many less than half a thousand words.

In such conditions he deserved his Christian name. In the
forest even an hour calms the most turbulent spirit; a day will
cure most worries; and a week with an axe may be
recommended to neurasthenics as more than the equivalent
of the most expensive Weir-Mitchell treatment and rest-cures.
If fashionable doctors could afford to be honest, they would
order work-cures for nine-tenths of their patients.

Forty-eight years with an axe in the forest had turned
Placide Gervez into a mixture of Stoic, Cynic, and Epicurean;
he boasted the simplicity and fortitude of each in respect of
pain, propriety, and pleasure.

The droning hum of the forest, broken rarely by the birds—
magpie, crow, cuckoo, and nightingale—meant nothing to him
in the summer; nor did the monotonous drip depress him in
the winter. The ringing thud of his axe and the crash of the

81

‘THE EQUINOX

murdered tree were neither history nor tragedy to him; the
comic and the pastoral were equally sealed books, for the
forest has neither satyrs nor shepherds. He had no sport, since
in his boyhood his father had thrashed him for throwing his
axe at a stag; and no society, for the nearest forester thought
him a boor. He chopped to live, and lived to chop.

It was the philosopher of the Rue de Chevreuse who cast
the grain of sand into the wheels of this approximation to the
solution of the problem of perpetual motion. The philosopher
was really a painter, but so bad a painter that he was only
known as a theorist in the cafe which supplied his créme de
menthe. There he would hold forth interminably on God
and man.

Blessed with such means as a mediocre father’s devotion to
cutlery and an only son had supplied, it was his habit on
occasion to descend into the country. Picture him, if you
please, as very short and moderately fat, middle-aged at thirty-
two, clad in a bourgeois suit and an artist’s tie, a red handker-
chief under a black felt hat upon a bushy head garnished with
a little beard and moustache, perspiring in a sandy and
interminable bridle-path leading from the Long Rocher to
nowhere in particular.

These walks he would undertake (a) for his health, (b) to
absorb the beauties of nature—as he would often demonstrate.
Yet the greatest of philosophers are not always logical, and
he would have been compelled to discover other reasons for
his choice of company. This consisted of a lady whose age
was rendered only more uncertain by her efforts to nail
conjecture to the number 25. Her hair paled visibly from

82

THE WOODCUTTER

the scalp, and her neck darkened visibly from the chin. She
had made the fortune of India in rice powder, and of China in
vermilion. The extravagance of her person and _ attire,
exaggerated even for the Café d’Harcourt, the fortress whence
her sallies, was in Fontainebleau a thing to make earth’s
guardian angels throw up the sponge.

This was a summer’s afternoon; and the strange pair,
encountering Placide Gervez as he chopped, accosted him.
The philosopher, whose irrelevant name was Théophraste
Goulet, drew out a cigarette and offered it to his intended
victim. It is impossible in a polite nation to leave a man
until you have finished the cigarette he gives you—a man, if
he was a man, once gave me an Irish cigarette, but that story
is a separate cheque—and Placide could not have cut that
knot save with his axe. However, in the first pause of the
voluble ass for breath, he pointed to his work, uttered the
adjective “Hard,” and continued to chop.

However, the purport of the discourse—in a highly con-
densed form—was as follows.

God is good, was the First Postulate of Theophrastus.
Hence, all God does is good. Hence, since God made man,
He meant man to do good. Hence, man should do good.
Agreed. ‘Then, what is good? The necessities of life are
good, for otherwise no other good were possible without
them. Food is good, shelter is good, all that tends to the
health of the individual and the reproduction of the species is
good. For if not, let food be bad, let art be good. Then, since
artists need food, good is based on bad, which is absurd.
Agreed, then, that necessary things are good. Yes; but are

83

‘THE EQUINOX

these the only good? No; for these benefits absorb only
part of the time and energy of man. Is it good to chop wood?
Yes, undoubtedly; but it is also good to render woodcutting
in art. Then why should not the woodcutter be an artist?
Why should he not chop miracles of carving? The Michael
Angelo of Fontainebleau?) Why not? What does Browning
say? “I want to know the butcher paints, the baker rhymes
for his pursuit,” and so on. Very well; then what do you do
that is truly good? That is, unnecessarily, supererogatively,
and therefore superlatively good? You, my friend! You
chop wood. Good. You cherish a fair wife; you have strong
children to defend the fatherland. Good again. You eat, you
drink, you make merry: all good. But do you achieve fame?
No. Glory? No. Are you a great saint? No. A great
artist? No. A great sinner? No. Nothing great? No.
Very well, then: not good. Rise up, man! (the peroration)
Be not slothful, be ambitious! Be statesman, artist, divine,
strategist, inventor; nay, thief or murderer, if you will! But
do not be content to chop wood!

During this quarter of an hour of eloquence his was not the
only discourse. The fair friend of the philosopher, eager to
impress men in her way as he in his, and equally omnivorous,
was busy with Placide Gervez. First a sidelong glance struck
armour quite impenetrable to such assault, quickly followed
by smiles first secret and then open, gestures at first subtle
and at last unmistakable, finally by the unspeakable grimace
of the tongue which she had learnt in her time at the red-
shuttered convent in the Rue des Quatre Vents. Her triumph
was that once the woodcutter struck aslant, and swore.

84

THE WOODCUT TER

Théophraste ended his discourse, and, pleasantly parting,
sauntered off with his mistress, arm-in-arm. Neither of
them give their victim another thought. Out of the wood
they went, and (thank God!) out of the story.

But Placide leant upon his axe and stared after them. In his
brain one thought only remained, which Théophraste might
have formulated logically as “Some men do not chop wood.”
And in his heart and eye was a dull animal lust. Two strangers
had come to his soul’s Inn. There being only one room, he
put them to bed together, in this form of something like it:
“Chop—chop—chop—chop; I’m sick of it. Even if I had a
fine girl from Paris like that, what could I do but chop—
chop—chop—chop?”

For the first time in his life he went home half an hour
earlier than his custom, to the accompaniment of a terrific
thunderstorm that rolled up from the valley of the Loing and
fell like night upon the forest, like a dark winter’s night that
afternoon of May.

He was wet to the skin before he reached his hut.
Opening the door, he glowered with dull surprise. Equally
wet, standing in one corner and wringing out a blouse, was a
girl of about twenty years old, an Amazon maid. He could see
that she was a lady—that is, that she was not a villager; but he
had no means of knowing that she was the Honourable Diana
Villiers-Jernyngham-Ketteringham.

Placide spoke a patois that a Parisian might have
surmised to be Cherokee, and Diana’s boarding-school French
would have been given up by that Parisian as no earthly
language at all.

85

‘THE EQUINOX

She told him that she was staying at the Savoy Hotel at
Fontainebleau, and had gone for a walk and lost her way in
the forest; and she asked him how far was it to the nearest
village, and would he please take her there, and she would
give him money.

All this while Placide lit his fire, and proceeded to cook
beans. He did not understand her, or try to understand her.
There was a strange animal in his hut, possibly a human
animal; it might like beans; he would offer it beans. It was
not his affair; his affair was to chop—chop—chop—chop.

Diana was a little afraid of this silent beast at first. But the
offer of food seemed kindly, and she ate some beans lest he
should take offence, found them surprisingly good, nodded
satisfaction, and even asked for more.

This part concluded, she went to the door. The rain
poured unceasingly; the forest stood in pools; and it was too
dark to tell one tree from another. The woodcutter joined

J
her, shook his head, said “far” and “to-morrow,” and pointed
to a heap of straw.

This strong-minded young lady knew when to bow to the
inevitable; she took an armful of the straw, and retiring with it
to the other end of the hut, made the sleep sign which every
savage understands, and lay down.

Placide Gervez grunted assent, and lying down with a surly
“Bon soir” dropped instantly to sleep. How was he to know
what dreams would echo his quarter of an hour with the two
philosophers of Paris?

About eleven o’clock the next morning some the well-
horsed search-party from Fontainebleau reached the hut.

86

THE WOODCUTTER

At the door, as carefully stacked as the rest, they found the
severed limbs of the Honourable Diana. And in the forest the
cheery, ringing thud of his axe led them to Placide Gervez,
quietly, manfully chopping.

They told him of a Widow Lady in Paris who could beat
him at his own game.
ALEISTER CROWLEY.

87

LA FOIRE
I

La Géante.

Ah! je suis fou d’amour pour la grasse géante,
Du rire sardonique et des regards hautains,
Démangeaisons de |’4me et cancére des reins!
Les nichons sanglantes, la crevasse béante
M’attirent, me collent 4 la noire et la puante
Peau qui sent d’Afrique tout le velours malsain,
De cruanté, de mort, d’eunuque, de putain,
La nuit tragique, affreuse—et oh! mais enivrante!

Sale et salé, ton corps! Ton 4me crapuleuse
Vaut bien l’amphisboene des mares vénéneuses:—
Que je m’y noye, sucer de tes impurs crachats
L’immondice d’enfer, d’ot' démon, tu sortis
Y perdre les enfants d’un Dieu anéanti
Par sortilége noir de tes poilus sabbats!

89

go

II
La Naine

Monstre effrayant, plus vil que tout autre animal,
Corps comique—écrasé d’un ventre de catin!—
Chef d’ceuvre de blasphéme, enfanté du Malin,

Insecte infecte, honteux et quand meme banal,

J ajoute ton portrait au cortege infernal
De mes amours pourris. Ton glabre et libertin
Caresse vaut l’ivresse—oh! verse-moi le vin!

Un tel caréme fait oublier le carnaval.

C’est l'amour? le dégofit? le luxure? la haine?
Je n’en sais rien: le Dieu qui t’a difformé, naine,
Me jette dans ton lit, me soumet, corps et 4me,
A tes pieds, a l’amour brutal et hystérique.
Ce baiser 4 la fois ridicule et lubrique
Evoque de Satan l’image—et le dictame!

BARBEY DE ROCHECHOUART.

PROFESSOR ZIRCON

MURIEL MADDOX was a blonde frail piquant thing, a fluffy
baby of nineteen easy summers. But she was a hard-working
orphan, too, with no relations but a semi-mythical brother on
the Yukon who had not found enough gold to send her any;
and she earned her living—two pounds a week—as violinist to
the splendid tea-parties of the Hotel Escoffier. Her liking for
Professor Zircon was little more than a child’s, though the
shagegy-headed old analyst told another story to his brother
experts at the War Office. And indeed, though her nature was
incapable of great passion, what she had she gave, and to the
innocence of a child added a dog’s fidelity and trust. Professor
Zircon was a happy old man; he called her his Chloride of
Gold. Muriel means salt, you know, he would explain to the
fellows at the club, and salt is a compound of hydrochloric or
muriatic acid—I wonder if we shall produce a little Zirconium
Chloride! At this jest thus elaborated he was wont to laugh
seven time a week; and trot happily back to his house in
Kensington for dinner. Seven times a week he would let
himself in through the laboratory and pretend surprise when
he found Muriel reading a novelette in his own armchair.

“What, what! and how the deuce did you get in?” or
“Tut! tut! my dear madam, to what am I indebted for the
honour of this visit?” or “I beg a thousand pardons, madam, I
really thought this was my house,” and Muriel, genuinely
pleased and amused, would enter into the little comedy,

gI

‘THE EQUINOX

always ending up with kisses in the old armchair, and a dainty
dinner.

This had continued for nearly three years with no
interruption but once when the Professor’s wife, from whom
he had long been separated, succeeded in getting into the
house on some pretence, and creating a very considerable
uproar before the professor and his butler could master her
rage. She was a big muscular woman from Australia with the
body of a tiger and the temper of a snake. She would have
made a winning fight of it but for Zircon’s adroit sortie to the
laboratory and timely return with a bottle of chloroform.

The professor dined alone that night; at the very outset of
the battle Muriel had fled in tears to the little room in
Walham Green where she lived under the alleged
guardianship of a most paunchy ex-dresser.

No other incident disturbed the ripples of their harmless,
petty liaison. Even the earlier rumours of the brother in
Alaska had died down to folk-lore. The Professor had never
got away from his work in time to hear her play the fiddle;
anyhow, he hated music. Nor had Muriel ever stayed too late
to alarm her landlady, who thought she played at supper as
well as at tea. The illness of the Secretary of War
alarmed only the German Ambassador, who could not be
positive that in case of his death an accident might not
happen and a capable person be appointed to the post. The
annoyance of his death—telephoned to the Office at three
o’clock one afternoon—was concentrated on Professor Zircon,
torn away from a compound with half the Greek Alphabet
dotted about its name by a white-haired little Colonel who

g2

PROFESSER ZIRCON

assured him that it really wasn’t decent. “We won’t go to the
Club, dear man. We’ll just drop in at the Escoffier for tea.”
The Professor grunted an assent; but he was more than half
pleased. He wondered what his fairy looked like in her
butterfly wings.

The lounge of the Escoffier was full of people; but right
across the room Professor Zircon could see Muriel with
cornflowers in her yellow-ashen hair and her simple muslin
dress. But she wore the diamonds he had given her, a string
of starlight at her neck. How well he remembered that
evening! He had taken her into the laboratory and heated
up some sugar with sulphuric acid, loving her amazement as
it swelled and blackened. “That is carbon now,” he had
said, “if we could only crystalize it, what splendid diamonds
we could have! But we can’t—not to any effect. Diamonds
are always found in a kind of blue mud—I suppose
there can’t be any here?” leading her to a box full of modelling
clay which he used in some of his experiments. And he
made her dive and dirty her dear little fingers ever so, before
she ran against the necklace. And when they retrieved it
quite, and washed it, and he put it round her neck for her
very own!

She played in her demure, modest way; not very good, but
pleasing enough to people who only wanted an excuse for not
having to think sufficiently to talk while they wolfed /foze gras
and watercress, muffins and eclairs, cheesecakes and hot
buttered toast. And she seemed to care as little for them as
they for her.

The Professor and the Colonel had risen to go.

93

‘THE EQUINOX

“That’s my little Muriel—I call her the Spirit of Salt—
ha! ha! ho!” “A damn nice little bit of fluff—damn lucky
boy!” growled the Colonel, winking at a chorus girl (in two
thousand pounds worth of furs) whose salary was thirty
shillings a week.

Suddenly the Professor paled. <A last glance over his
shoulder showed him that a bearded man had risen and was
handing a flower to Muriel. And Muriel was blushing and
trembling with some emotion too profound to estimate, but
clear enough to the analyst.

When a man has detected a thousandth of a grain of
atropine in the carcass of a barmaid, he does not hesitate to
read the heart of a girl. And as a Government expert he was
clothed with official infallibility—a triple buckler.

He went on casually talking to the Colonel for a few
minutes before politeness allowed him to throw himself into a
moving taxicab and roar his address at the astonished driver.
It was the first time he had come home to an empty house
since he had picked up Muriel on an omnibus and carried her
off to a discreet Italian restaurant near Sloane Square where a
flask of Chianti emptied to the bottom had left not a dreg of
discretion.

The arm-chair shocked him. This was the last time that
she would sit in it, the false little harlot! The eternal
emptiness of things, the unbreakable solitude of life, struck a
chill to his marrow. How was he to know that only by
uttermost surrender of the self to the Beloved can that curse
be broken?

94

PROFESSER ZIRCON

Then a gleam of sanity crossed the bigoted scientific mind
of the man. She might be able to explain. But he brushed
away the idea. How can a fact ever be upset?

Credulity itself is reason compared to the mind of the
logician who has once allowed emotion to infect his brain, who
has missed the factor of the personal equation.

The idea returned. So long she had sat there in her
childish purity that the conservatism of his hard old brain
reacted. It could not be. Things could not change. Yet? In
the upshot he was English enough to try her before
condemning her, German enough to lay a trap for her in the
very nature of that trial.

His consideration passed from judgment to execution, and
his face set like a mask. Ultimately he went to a small safe in
the wall, took out a half-hoop diamond ring, and dropped it
into the coal-scuttle. Reward or punishment! Either the old
trick—or a new one! He turned on his heel and went softly
into the laboratory.

Meanwhile Muriel Madox tripped along from the Escoffier
in the bright February air. Her heart was very light and very
anxious. The incident of the afternoon—should she tell the
Professor? Concealment was foreign to her nature; for the first
time in her life she hesitated. How would it affect their
relations?

It would be better to think it over, to sleep on it. It
never occurred to her for a moment that the Professor might
already know. In the end she decided to say nothing; but
so absorbed had been her tiny brain in its little problem that

95

‘THE EQUINOX

she forgot the obvious corollary of removing the flower from
her dress.

She was nestled in the arm-chair when the old analyst
tiptoed into the room and clapped his hands over her eyes.
“Who is it?” said he gaily.

“Why, you’re Jack from Alaska, of course,” she
answered, laughing. “Guess again?” And the child guessed
the German Emperor, and Lewis Waller, and everyone else
she could think of. “Wrong.” “Wrong.” “Wrong.” “Why,”
she cried, jumping up and facing him, “it’s Professor Zircon!
The last person in the world I should have expected to find
here!”

She threw her arms round his neck and called him a
“dear silly.”

“Well, what’s the news, child?”
“No news. I’m so sorry the chief’s dead.”

“Doesn’t matter to me. What a pretty flower in your
dress!”

She had an instinct of sudden and terrible danger; and lied
instantly. “I bought it for your buttonhole.” And she
fastened it there.

Professor Zircon called her a sweet, thoughtful fairy, and
gave her a kiss. Such a shudder ran through him as rarely
stirred his veins. He had some flash of memory, of Judas,
perhaps, signalled across the forty years since he had heard
the legend of the Gospels at his mother’s knee.

“But there is news!” he added gaily. '’m going to show
you my great discovery. Dve found out how to make

96

PROFESSER ZIRCON

diamonds. Just crystallizing coal, you see; so simple when you
know how to do it. Wait a minute! And he fetched a small
electric machine from the laboratory and solemnly made it
spark in the coal-scuttle. There! he announced triumphantly.
Now we’ll see if we’ve managed to crystallize any coal"

So the child began to hunt in the scuttle, and in a few
minutes found the ring glittering in its dusty setting, like the
eyes of a snake in the jungle.

“Oh, you darling!” she cried. “Oh, you old fraud! You
said nothing about making gold!”

“Ah! that’s a little accident,” replied the Professor.
“Discoveries never come singly.”

“And is it really for me? All my very own?”

“Who else should it be for, darling?”

“You're a darling sweet boy.”

“Run away and wash your hands! I’ve warmed up your
own element for you, you dear little Spirit of Salt!”

She ran gleefully into the laboratory. On the bench stood
the basin she had used so often, with the soap and towels
neatly at its side. She seized the soap, and plunged both
hands into the nearly boiling hydrochloric acid. ‘Then she
turned her head to him, her mouth a tragic square, incapable
even of uttering even a shriek.

“How will you play the fiddle,” screamed Zircon, “with no
fingers? How will you play the harlot? I saw you and your
lover. There’s his flower!” He flung it at her. “But I’m even
with you—Oh! I’m even with you!” And he foamed into a
spate of the filthiest abuse.

It broke the spell. Scream after scream broke from her

97

THE EQUINOX

mouth until, choking with their very volume, her voice broke
to a strangled yell, and the agony of the acid bit into her soul.
She fell on the floor fainting.

“Vile thing!” screamed Zircon, spurning her with his foot.
He choked: his brain fell suddenly clear with the lucidity of
intellect. He walked into the dining-room, and whistled as he
walked. There he sat down. The next move in his infernal
revenge was the waking of Muriel, and that might be soon or
late. He had not calculated the effect of waiting; his nerves
cried out. For the first time he had a glimpse of the doctrine
of eternal punishment—perceived that the resurrection of the
body was no necessary condition. ‘Tortured, he gazed upon
the second hand of his watch. He could have sworn it
stopped, when it shook and staggered on with the importance
of Big Ben, and he realized that his own time-sense was
radically upset. He wondered if it was the same with her—
the devil in him gloated.

“A gentleman to see you, sir!” said he butler, opening the
door. “He wouldn’t give his name!”

“T’ll see him,” said Zircon, as blithe as a lark. “Show him
in!”

In strode the bearded stranger of the afternoon.

“You damned scoundrel!” he addressed the smiling
Professor. “So this is where my sister spends her evenings!
Be good enough to explain——” He broke off, for the
Professor had thrust both hands deep into his trouser
pockets and leant back against the bookcase, laughing, laugh-
ing, laughing.

ALEISTER CROWLEY.

98

A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF THE
SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION

OF THE

UNIVERSE

DERIVED BY DOCTOR JOHN DEE
‘THROUGH THE SKRYING OF

SIR EDWARD KELLY

PART I
THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS

Aw. Av.
Publication in Class B.
Imprimatur:

N. Fra. Aw. A.

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

These are Most Solemn Invocations. Use these only after
other invocations. Key tablet hath 6 calls, 1 above other 5.

1: Governs generally as a whole the tablet of Union.
Use it frst in all invocations of Angels of that tablet, but not at
all with other 4 tables.

2: Used as an invocation of Angels E H N B representing
governance of Spirit in the Tablet of Union: also precedes, zu
the second place, all invocations of Key tablet Angels. Not used
in invocations of 4 other tables.

3, 4, 5, 6: Used in invocations of Angels of Tablet of Union,
also of angels of 4 terrestrial tablets, thus—

3: Used to invoke Angels of the letters of the line
exarp

For those of Tablet ORO as a whole and for the lesser
angle of this tablet, which is that of the element itself, vzz.
idoigo. So for others—

The remaining 12 Keys refer to the remaining lesser angles
of the tables, the order of the elements being Air, Water,
Earth, Fire.

Pronounce Elemental language (also called Angelic or
Enochian) by inserting the next following Hebrew vowel
between consonants, e.g. e after b (bEth), 1 after g (gImel), a
after d, etc.

Ior

‘THE EQUINOX

THE OPENING OF THE PORTAL OF THE
VAULT OF THE ADEPTS

n.2.9.5 PAROKETH, the Veil of the Sanctuary.
The Sign of the Rending of the Veil.
The Sign of the Closing of the Veil.
[Give these. ]

Make the Invoking Pentagrams of Spirit.
In the number 21, in the grand word mms;
In the Name mwns, in the Pass Word I.N.R.L.,

O Spirits of the Tablet of Spirit,

Ye, ye I invoke!
The sign of Osiris slain!
The sign of the mourning of Isis!
The sign of Apophis and Typhon!
The sign of Osiris Risen!
L.V.X., Lux, the Light of the Cross.

[Give these. ]

In the name of 1H VH ALVH VD O Th, I declare
that the Spirits of Spirit have been duly invoked

[The Knock 1—4444]

102

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS
THE FIRST KEY’

OL sonuf vaoresaji, gohu IAD Balata, elanusaha caelazod:
sobra zod-ol Roray i ta nazodapesad, Giraa ta maelpereji, das
hoel-qo qaa notahoa zodimezod, od comemahe ta nobeloha
zodien; soba tahil ginonupe pereje aladi, das vaurebes obolehe
giresam. Casarem ohorela caba Pire: das zodonurenusagi
cab: erem Jadanahe. Pilahe farezodem zodenurezoda adana
gono Iadpiel das home-tohe soba ipame lu ipamis: das
sobolo vepé zodomeda poamal, od bogipa aai ta piape Piamoel
od Vaoan!* Zodacare, eca, od zodameranu! odo cicale Qaa;
zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, Hoathahe [AI DA!

86 words in this Enochian Call.

[Invokes the whole Tablet of Spirit]

THE FIRST KEY

I REIGN over ye, saith the God of Justice, in power exalted
above the Firmament of Wrath, in whose hands the Sun is as
a sword, and the Moon as a through thrusting Fire: who
measureth your Garments in the midst of my Vestures, and
trussed you together as the palms of my hands. Whose seats
I garnished with the Fire of Gathering, and beautified your
garments with admiration. To whom I made a law to govern
the Holy Ones, and delivered ye a Rod, with the Ark of
Knowledge. Moreover you lifted up your voices and sware
obedience and faith to Him that liveth and triumpheth:

' Collation of the various MSS. of these calls has not done away with
Various Readings; and there is not enough of the language extant to enable a
settlement on general principles.—ED.

? Read here Vooan in invocations of the Fallen Spirits.

103

‘THE EQUINOX

whose beginning is not, nor end cannot be: which shineth as a
flame in the midst of your palaces, and reigneth amongst you
as the balance of righteousness and truth!

Move therefore, and shew yourselves! Open the mysteries
of your creation! Be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of
the same your God: the true worshipper of the Highest!

169 words in this English Call.

THE SECOND KEY

ADAGITA vau-pa-ahe zodonugonu fa-a-ipe salada! Vi-i-vau
el! Sobame ial-pereji 1-zoda-zodazod pi-adapehe casarema
aberameji ta ta-labo paracaleda qo-ta lores-el-qo turebesa ooge
balatohe! Gzuui cahisa lusada oreri od micalapape cahisa bia
ozodonugonu! lape noanu tarofe coresa tage o-quo maninu
IA-I-DON. ‘Torezodu! gohe-el, zodacare eca ca-no-quoda!
zodameranu micalazodo od ozodazodame vaurelape; lape zodir
IOIAD!

‘THE SECOND KEY

CAN the Wings of the Winds understand your voices of
Wonder? O you! the second of the First! whom the
burning flames have framed in the depths of my Jaws!
Whom I have prepared as cups for a wedding, or as the
flowers in their beauty for the chamber of Righteousness!
Stronger are your feet than the barren stone, and mightier
are your voices than the manifold winds! For you are
become a building such as is not, save in the Mind of the
All-Powerful.

104

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

Arise, saith the First: Move thereofre unto his servants!
Shew yourselves in power, and make me a strong Seer-of-
things: for | am of Him that liveth for ever!

[Invokes: The File of Spirit in the Tablet of Spirit.

E—The Root of the Powers of Air.

H—The Root of the Powers of Water.

N—The Root of the Powers of Earth.

B—The Root of the Powers of Fire.
The Four Aces. ]

THE OPENING OF THE TEMPLE IN THE
GRADE OF 2°=9°

GIVE the Sign of Shu.

[Knock.] Let us adore the Lord and King of Air!

Shaddai El Chai! Almighty and ever-living One, be Thy
Name ever magnified in the Life of All. (Sign of Shu.)
Amen!

[Make the Invoking Penta- ) AHIH.
gram of Spirit Active ~ AGLA.
in these names: EXARP.]

eee ise
oe °S© ( ShDI AL Chl]
names:

And Elohim said: Let us make Adam in our own image,
after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fowls
of the air.

In the Names of IHVH and of ShDI AL Chl, Spirits of
Air, adore your Creator!

105

‘THE EQUINOX

[With air-dagger (or other suitable weapon) make the sign
of Aquarius.] In the name of RPAL and in the Sign of the
Man, Spirits of Air, adore your Creator!

[Make the Cross.] In the Names and Letters of the Great
Eastern Quadrangle, Spirits of Air, adore your Creator!

[Hold dagger aloft.] In the Three great Secret Names of
God, ORO IBAH AOZPI that are borne upon the Banners of
the East, Spirits of Air, adore your Creator!

[Again elevate dagger.] In the Name of BATAIVAH, great
King of the East, Spirits of Air, adore your Creator!

In the Name of Shaddai AL Chai, I declare that the Spirits
of Air have been duly invoked.

[The Knock 333—333—333-]

THE THIRD KEY

MICAMA! goho Pe-IAD! zodir com-selahe azodien biabe
os-lon-dohe. Norezodacahisa otahila Gigipahe; vaunud-el-
cahisa ta-pu-ime qo-mos-pelehe telocahe; qui-i-inu toltoregi
cahisa 1 cahisji em ozodien; dasata beregida od torezodul!
Ili e-Ol balazodareji, od aala tahilanu-os netaabe: daluga
vaomesareji elonusa cape-mi-ali vaoresa ca/a homila cocasabe
fafenu izodizodope, od miinoagi de ginetaabe: vaunu na-na-
e-el panupire malpireji caosaji. Pilada noanu vaunalahe
balata od-vaoan. Do-o-i-ape mada: goholore, gohus, amiranu!
Micama! Yehusozod ca-ca-com, od do-o-a-inu noari mica-
olazoda a-ai-om. Casarameyji gohia: Zodacare! Vaunigilaji!
od im-ua-mar pugo pelapel Ananael Qo-a-an.

80 words in this Enochian Call.

106

‘THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

THE THIRD KEY

BEHOLD! saith your God! I am a circle on whose hands
stand Twelve Kingdoms. Six are the seats of living breath:
the rest are as sharp sickles or the Horns of Death. Wherein
the creatures of Earth are and are not, except (in) mine own
hands; which sleep and shall rise!

In the First I made ye stewards and placed ye in twelve
seats of government: giving unto every one of you power
successively over the 456 true ages of time: to the intent that
from the highest vessels and the corners of your governments
you might work my Power, pouring down the fires of life and
increase continually on the earth. Thus you are become the
skirts of Justice and Truth.

In the name of the same your God, lift up, I say,
yourselves!

Behold! his mercies florish and (His) Name is become
mighty among us. In whom we say: Move! Descend! and
apply yourselves unto us as unto the partakers of His Secret
Wisdom in your Creation.

167 words in this English Call.

[Invokes: Exarp; the whole Tablet of Air.
The angle of A of A.
The Prince of the Chariot of the Winds. ]

107

‘THE EQUINOX

THE OPENING OF THE TEMPLE IN THE
GRADE OF 3°=8°

GIVE the Sign of Auramoth.

[Knock.] Let us adore the Lord and King of Water!

Elohim Tzabaoth! Elohim of Hosts!

Glory be to the Ruach Elohim which moved upon the
Face of the Waters of Creation!

AMEN!

[Make the Invoking ) AHIH
Pentagram of Spirit AGLA
Passive and _ pro-
nounce these names: } HCOMA.]

[Make the Invoking ) ay,
Pentagram of Water

and pronoliee: ALHIM TzABAVTh.]

And Elohim said: Let us make Adam in our own image;
and let them have dominion over the Fish of the Sea! In the
name of A L, Strong and Powerful, and in the name of
ALHIM TzBAVTH, Spirits of Water, adore your Creator!

[Make Sigil of Eagle with cup.] In the name of GBRIAL and
in the Sign of the Eagle, Spirits of Water, adore your Creator!

[Make cross with cup.] In the Names and Letters of
the Great Western Quadrangle, Spirits of Water, adore
your Creator!

[Elevate cup.] In the three great Secret Names of God,
MPH ARSL GAIOL that are borne upon the Banners of the
West, Spirits of Water, adore your Creator!

108

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

[Elevate cup.] In the Name of RAAGIOSEL, great King
of the West, Spirits of Water, adore your Creator!

In the Name of Elohim Tzabaoth, I declare that the Spirits
of Water have been duly invoked.

[The Knock 1—333—1—333.]

THE FOURTH KEY

OTAHIL elasadi babaje, od dorepaha gohol: gi-cahisaje
auauago coremepe peda, dasonuf vi-vau-di-vau? Casaremi oeli
meapeme sobame agi corempo carep-el: casaremeji caro-o-
dazodi cahisa od vaugeji; dasata ca-pi-mali cahisa ca-pi-ma-on:
od elonusahinu cahisa ta el-o ca/aa. Torezodu nor-quasahi od
fe-caosaga: Bagile zodir e-na-IAD: das iod apila! Do-o-a-ipe
quo-A-AL, zodacare! Zodameranu obelisonugi resat-el aaf
nor-mo-lapi!

THE FOURTH KEY

I HAVE set my feet in the South, and have looked about
me, saying: are not the thunders of increase numbered 33,
which reign in the second Angle?

Under whom I have placed 9639: whom none hath yet
numbered, but One; in whom the Second Beginnings of
Things are and wax strong, which also successively are the
Numbers of Time: and their powers are as the first 456.

Arise! you sons of Pleasure! and visit the earth: for I
am the Lord your God; which is and liveth (for ever)! In
the name of the Creator, move! and shew yourselves as

109

THE EQUINOX

pleasant deliverers, that you may praise him among the sons
of men!
[Invokes: hcoma; the whole Tablet of Water.
The angle of V of V.
The Queen of the Thrones of Water. |]

THE OPENING OF THE TEMPLE IN THE
GRADE OF 1°=10°

GIVE the Sign of the God SET fighting.

Purify with Fire and Water, and announce “The Temple
is cleansed.”

[Knock.] Let us adore the Lord and King of Earth!

Adonai ha Aretz, Adonai Melekh, unto Thee be the
Kingdom, the Sceptre, and the Splendour: Malkuth, Geburah,
Gedulah, The Rose of Sharon and the Lily of the Valley,
Amen!

[Sprinkle Salt before Earth tablet.] Let the Earth adore
Adonai!

[Make the Invoking Hexagram of Saturn. ]

[Make the Invoking Pentagram of AHI.
Spirit Passive and pronounce 7 AGLA
these names: NANTA.]

[Make the Invoking Pentagram of

Earth, and pronouce _ this ADNI MLK.]
Name:

And Elohim said: Let us make Man in Our own image; and
let them have dominion over the Fish of the Sea and over the
Fowl of the Air; and over every creeping thing that

II0

‘THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

creepeth upon the Earth. And the Elohim created ATh-h-
ADAM: in the image of the Elohim created They them; male
and female created They them. In the Name of ADNI MLK
and of the Bride and Queen of the Kingdom; Spirits of Earth,
adore your Creator!

[Make the Sign of Taurus.] In the name of AVRIAL,
great archangel of Earth, Spirits of Earth, adore your Creator!

[Make the Cross.] In the Names and Letters of the Great
Northern Quadrangle, Spirits of Earth, adore your Creator!

[Sprinkle water before Earth Tablet.] In the three great
secret Names of God, MOR, DIAL, HCTGA, that are borne
upon the Banners of the North, Spirits of Earth, adore your
Creator!

[Cense the Tablet.] In the name of IC-ZOD-HEH-CAL,
ereat King of the North, Spirits of Earth, adore your Creator!

In the Name of Adonai Ha-Aretz, I declare that the Spirits
of Earth have been duly invoked.

The Knock 4444—333—22—I.

THE FIFTH KEY

SAPAHE zodimii du-i-be, od noasa ta qu-a-nis, adarocahe
dorepehal caosagi od faonutas peripesol ta-be-liore. Casareme
A-me-ipezodi na-zodarethe a/a; od dalugare zodizodope zode-
lida caosaji tol-toregi; od zod-cahisa esiasacahe. El ta-vi-
vau; od iao-d tahilada das hubare pe-o-a/; soba coremefa cahisa
ta Ela Vaulasa od Quo-Co-Casabe. Eca niisa od darebesa quo-
a-asa: fetahe-ar-ezodi od beliora: ia-ial eda-nasa_ cicalesa;
bagile Ge-iad I-el!

III

‘THE EQUINOX

THE FIFTH KEY

The mighty sounds have entered into the third angle, and
are become as olives in the Olive Mount; looking with
gladness upon the earth, and dwelling in the brightness of the
Heavens as continual Comforters.

Unto whom I fastened 19 Pillars of Gladness, and gave
them vessels to water the earth with her creatures; and they
are the brothers of the First and Second, and the beginning of
their own seats, which are garnished with 69,636 ever-burning
lamps: whose numbers are as the First, the Ends, and the
Contents of Time.

Therefore come ye and obey your creation: visit us in
peace and comfort: conclude us receivers of your mysteries:
for why? Our Lord and Master is the All-One!

[Invokes: Nanta; the whole Tablet of Earth.
The angle of V of V.
The Princess of the Echoing Hills, the Rose
of the Palace of Earth.]

THE OPENING OF THE TEMPLE IN THE
GRADE OF 4°=7°
GIVE the Sign of Thoum-aesh-neith.

[Knock.] Let us adore the Lord and King of Fire!
Tetragrammaton Tzabaoth! Blessed be Thou! The
Leader of Armies is Thy Name! AMEN!

II2

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

Spirit Active and pronounce 7 AGLA.
these names: BITOM.]

[Make the Invoking Pentagram of ALHIM.
Fire, and pronouce: IHVH TzBAVTh.]

[Make the sign of Leo with censer (or other suitable
weapon).] In the name of MIKAL, archangel of Fire, Spirits
of Fire, adore your Creator!

[Make the Cross.] In the Names and Letters of the
Great Southern Quadrangle, Spirits of Fire, adore your
Creator!

[Elevate censer.] In the three Secret Names of God, OIP
TTEAA PDOCE, that are borne upon the banners of the
South, Spirits of Fire, adore your Creator!

[Lower and lift censer.] In the Name of EDELPERNA,
great King of the South, Spirits of Fire, adore your Creator!

In the Name of IHVH TzBAVTh, I declare that the Spirits
of Fire have been duly invoked.

[Make the Invoking Pentagram of AHIH.

The Knock 333—1—333.

THE SIXTH KEY

GAHE sa-div cahisa em, micalazoda Pil-zodinu, sobam El
haraji babalonu od obeloce samevelaji, dalagare malapereji
ar-caosaji od acame canale, sobola zodare fa-beliareda caosaji
od cahisa aneta-na miame ta Viv od Da. Daresare Sol-
petahe-bienu. Be-ri-ta od zodacame ji-mi-calazodo: sob-ha-
atahe tariana luia-he od ecarinu MADA Qu-a-a-on!

113

‘THE EQUINOX

THE SIXTH KEY

THE Spirits of the fourth angle are Nine, Mighty in the
Firmament of Waters: whom the First hath planted, a
torment to the wicked and a garland to the righteous: giving
unto them fiery darts to vanne the earth, and 7699 continual
workmen, whose courses visit with comfort the earth; and are
in government and continuance as the Second and the Third—

Therefore hearken unto my voice! I have talked of you,
and I move you in power and in presence, and the praise of your
God in your Creation!

[Invokes: bitom; the whole Tablet of Fire.
The angle of A of A.
The Lord of the Flame and the Lightning,
the King of the Spirits of Fire.]

THE SEVENTH KEY

RA-ASA isalamanu_ para-di-zoda oe-cari-mi aao_tala-pire-
gahe Qui-inu. Enai butamonu od inoasa m7 pa-ra-diala. Casa-
remeji ujeare cahirelanu, od zodonace lucifatianu, caresa ta
vavale-zodirenu tol-hami. Soba lonudohe od nuame cahisa
ta Da o Desa vo-ma-dea od pi-beliare itahile rita od miame
ca-ni-quola rita! Zodacare! Zodameranu! Iecarimi Quo-a
-dahe od I-mica-ol-zododa aaiome. Bajirele papenore idalu-
gama elonusahi—od umapelifa vau-ge-ji Bijil-[AD!

II4

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

THE SEVENTH KEY

THE East is a house of Virgins singing praises among the
flames of first glory wherein the Lord hath opened his mouth;
and they are become as 28 living dwellings in whom the
strength of man rejoiceth; and they are apparelled with
ornaments of brightness, such as work wonders on all
creatures. Whose kingdoms and continuance are as the Third
and Fourth strong towers and places of comfort, the Seats of
Mercy and Continuance. O ye Servants of Mercy, Move!
Appear! Sing praises unto the Creator; and be mighty among
us. For that to this remembrance is given power, and our
strength waxeth strong in our Comforter!

[Invokes the Angle of V of A in the tablet of A
The Queen of the Thrones of Air.]

THE EIGHTH KEY

BAZODEMELO 1 ta pi-ripesonu olanu Na-zodavabebe ox.
Casaremeyji varanu cahisa vaugeji asa berameji balatoha: goho
IAD. Soba miame tarianu ta lolacis Abaivoninu od azodiajiere
riore. Irejila cahisa da das pa-aox busada Caosago, das cahisa
od ipuranu telocahe cacureji o-isalamahe lonucaho od Vovina
carebafe? NIISO! bagile avagao gohon. NIISO! bagile
momao siaionu, od mabezoda IAD oi asa-momare poilape.
NITASA! Zodameranu ciaosi caosago od belioerasa od coresi
ta a beramiji.

II5

‘THE EQUINOX

THE EIGHTH KEY

The Midday, the first is as the third Heaven made of 26
Hyacinthine Pillars, in whom the Elders are become strong,
which I have prepared for mine own Righteousness, saith the
Lord: whose long continuance shall be as bucklers to the
Stooping Dragon, and like unto the harvest of a Widow. How
many are there which remain in the Glory of the Earth, which
are, and shall not see Death until the House fall and the
Dragon sink? Come away! for the Thunders (of increase)
have spoken. Come away! for the Crowns of the Temple and
the Robe of Him that is, was, and shall be crowned are
divided! Come forth! Appear! to the terror of the Earth, and
to our comfort, and to the comfort of such as are prepared.

The Angle of V of A in the tablet of A.
The Princess of the Rushing Winds, the Lotus of the
Palace of Air.

THE NINTH KEY

MICAOLI beranusaji perejela napeta ialapore, das barinu
efafaje Pe vaunupeho olani od obezoda, soba-ca upaahe cahisa
tatanu od tarananu balie, alare busada so-bolunu od cahisa
hoel-qo ca-no-quodi cia/. Vaunesa aladonu mom caosago ta
iasa olalore ginai limelala) Amema cahisa sobra madarida
zod cahisa! Ooa moanu cahisa avini darilapi caosajinu: od
butamoni pareme zodumebi canilu. Dazodisa etahamezoda
cahisa dao, od mireka ozodola cahisa pidiai Colalala. Ul ci

116

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

ninu a sobame ucime. Bajile?y IAD BALATOHE cahirelanu
pare! NIISO! od upe ofafafe; bajile a-cocasahe icoresaka a
uniji beliore.

THE NINTH KEY

A MIGHTY guard of Fire with two-edged swords flaming
(which have eight Vials of wrath for two times and a half,
whose wings are of wormwood and the marrow of salt) have
set their feet in the West, and are measured with their 9996
ministers. These gather up the moss of the Earth as the rich
man doth his Treasure. Cursed are they whose iniquities
they are! In their eyes are mill-stones greater than the earth,
and from their mouths run seas of blood. Their heads are
covered with diamonds, and upon their heads are marble
stones.' Happy is he on whom they frown not. For why?
The Lord of Righteousness rejoiceth in them! Come away,
and not your Vials: for the time is such as requireth
Comfort.

The Angle of A of A in the tablet of A.
The Lord of the Winds and Breezes, the King of the
Spirits of Air.

THE TENTH KEY

CORAXO cahisi coremepe, od belanusa Lucala azodiazodore
paebe Soba tisononu cahisa uirequo ope copehanu od racalire
maasi bajile caosagi; das yalaponu dosiji od basajime; od ox

' v1. “Upon their hands are marble sleeves.”

117

‘THE EQUINOX

ex dazodisa od salaberoxa cynuxire faboanu. Vaunala
cahisa conusata das daox cocasa ol Oanio yore vohima ol
jizodyazoda od eoresa cocasaji pelosi molui das pajeipe, laraji
same darolanu matorebe cocasaji emena. El pataralaxa yolaci
matabe nomiji mononusa olora junayo anujelareda. Obhyo!
ohyo! ohyo! ohyo! ohyo! ohyo! noibe Ohyo! caosagonu!
Bajile madarida 1 zodirope cahiso darisapa! NIISO! caripe
ipe nidali!

THE TENTH KEY

THE Thunders of Judgement and Wrath are numbered
and are harboured in the North, in the likeness of an Oak
whose branches are 22 nests of lamentation and weeping laid
up for the earth: which burn night and day, and vomit out the
heads of scorpions, and live sulphur mingled with poison.
These be the thunders that, 5678 times in the twenty-fourth
part of a moment, roar with a hundred mighty earthquakes
and a thousand times as many surges, which rest not, neither
know any’ time here. One rock bringeth forth a thousand,
even as the heart of man doth his thoughts. Woe! Woe!
Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! Yea, Woe be to the Earth, for her
iniquity is, was, and shall be great. Come away! but not your
mighty sounds!

The Angle of A of V in the tablet of V.
The Prince of the Chariot of the Waters.

'y.1. “Any echoing time between.”

118

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

THE ELEVENTH KEY

OXIAYALA holado, od zodirome O coraxo das zodiladare
raasyo. Od vabezodire cameliaxa od bahala: NIISO! sala-
manu telocahe! Casaremanu hoel-qo, od ti ta zod cahisa soba
coremefa 1 ga. NIISA! bagile aberameji nonugape. Zoda-
care eca od Zodameranu! odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape
zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe I AI D A!

THE ELEVENTH KEY

THE mighty Seat ground, and there were five Thunders
that flew into the East. And the Eagle spake and cried aloud:
Come away from the House of Death! And they gathered
themselves together and became (those) of whom it is
measured, and it is as They are, whose number is 31. Come
away! For I have prepared (a place) for you. Move therefore,
and shew yourselves! Unveil the mysteries of your Creation.
Be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of the same your
God: the true worshipper of the Highest.

The Angle of V of V in the tablet of V.
The Princess of the Waters, the Lotus of the Palace of
the Floods.

THE TWELFTH KEY

NONUCI dasonuf Babaje od cahisa of habaio tibibipe:
alalare ataraahe od ef! Dhirix fafenu manu ar Enayo ovof!
Soba dooainu aai i VONUPEHE. Zodacare, gohusa, od
Zodameranu. Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco
Mada, hoathahe IAI D A!

119

‘THE EQUINOX

THE TWELFTH KEY

O YE that range in the South and are as the 28 Lanterns of
Sorrow, bind up your girdles and visit us! bring down your
train 3663 (servitors), that the Lord may be magnified, whose
name amongst ye is Wrath. Move! I say, and shew yourselves!
Unveil the mysteries of your Creation. Be friendly unto me,
for I am the servant of the same your God, the true
worshipper of the Highest.

The Angle of A of V in the tablet of V.
The Lord of the Waves and the Waters, the King of the
Hosts of the Sea.

THE THIRTEENTH KEY

NAPEAI Babajehe das berinu vax ooaona larinuji vonupehe
doalime: conisa olalogi oresaha das cahisa afefa. Micama isaro
Mada od Lonu-sahi-toxa, das ivaumeda aai Jirosabe. Zodacare
od Zodameranu. Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo
Noco Mada, hoathahe I AI D A.

THE THIRTEENTH KEY

O YE Swords of the South, which have 42 eyes to stir up
the wrath of Sin: making men drunken which are empty:
Behold the Promise of God, and His Power, which is called
amongst ye a bitter sting! Move and Appear! unveil the
mysteries of your Creation; for I am the servant of the same
your God, the true worshipper of the Highest.

The Angle of A of V in the tablet of V.
The Prince of the Chariot of Earth.

I20

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

THE FOURTEENTH KEY

NORONI bajihie pasahasa Oi1ada! das tarinuta mireca o/
tahila dodasa tolahame caosago /omida: das berinu orocahe
quare: Micama! Bial’ Oiad; aisaro toxa das ivame aai Balatima.
Zodacare od Zodameranu! Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape
zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe IAI DA.

THE FOURTEENTH KEY

O YE Sons of Fury, the Daughters of the Just One! that sit
upon 24 seats, vexing all creatures of the Earth with age, that
have 1636 under ye. Behold! The voice of God; the promise
of Him who is called amongst ye Fury or Extreme Justice.
Move and shew yourselves! Unveil the mysteries of your
Creation; be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of the
same your God: the true worshipper of the Highest.

The Angle of V of V in the tablet of V.
The Queen of the Thrones of Earth.

THE FIFTEENTH KEY

ILASA! tabaanu li-E] pereta, casaremanu upaahi cahisa
dareji; das oado caosaji oresacore: das omaxa monasaci
Baeouibe od emetajisa Iaiadix. Zodacare od Zodameranu!
Odo cicale Qaa. Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe
IAIDA.

I2I

‘THE EQUINOX

THE FIFTEENTH KEY

O THOU, the Governer of the first Flame, under whose
wings are 6739; that weave the Earth with dryness: that
knowest the Great Name “Righteousness,” and the Seal of
Honour. Move and Appear! Unveil the mysteries of your
creation; be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of the same
your God: the true worshipper of the Highest!

The Angle of A of V in the tablet of V.
The Lord of the Wide and Fertile Land, the King of the
Spirits of Earth.

THE SIXTEENTH KEY

ILASA viviala pereta! Salamanu balata, das acaro odazodi
busada, od belioraxa balita: das inusi caosaji lusadanu emoda:
das ome od taliobe: darilape iche ilasa Mada Zodilodarepe.
Zodacare od Zodameranu. Odo cicale Qaa: zodoreje, lape
zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe [AI DA.

THE SIXTEENTH KEY

O THOU second Flame, the House of Justice, which hast
the beginning in glory and shall comfort the Just: which
walkest upon the Earth with 8763 feet, which understand and
separate creatures! Great art thou in the God of Stretch
forth and Conquer. Move and appear! Unveil the mysteries

I22

‘THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

of your Creation; be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of
the same your God, the true worshipper of the Highest.

The Angle of A of A in the tablet of A.
The Prince of the Chariot of Fire.

THE SEVENTEENTH KEY

ILASA dial pereta! soba vaupaahe cahisa nanuba zodixalayo
dodasihe od berinuta faxisa hubaro tasatax yolasa: soba Iad 1
Vonupehe o Uonupehe: aladonu dax ila od toatare! Zodacare
od Zodameranu! Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo
Noco Mada, hoathahe I AI DA.

THE SEVENTEENTH KEY

O THOU third Flame! whose wings are thorns to stir up
vexation, and who hast 7336 living lamps going before Thee:
whose God is “Wrath in Anger”: Gird up thy loins and
hearken! Move and Appear! Unveil the mysteries of your
Creation; be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of the
same your God, the true worshipper of the Highest.

The Angle of V of A in the tablet of A.
The Queen of the Thrones of Flame.

THE EIGHTEENTH KEY

ILASA micalazoda olapireta ialpereji belioresa: das odo
Busadire Oiad ouoaresa caosago: casaremeji Laiada eranu

123

‘THE EQUINOX

berinutasa cafafame das ivemeda aqoso adoho Moz, od maof-
fasa. Bolape como belioeta pamebata. Zodacare od Zoda-
meranu! Odo cicale Qaa. Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada,
hoathahe [AI DA.

THE EIGHTEENTH KEY

O THOU mighty Light and burning Flame of Comfort!
that unveilest the Glory of God to the centre of the Earth, in
whom the 6332 secrets of Truth have their abiding, that is
called in thy kingdom “Joy” and not to be measured. Be thou
a window of comfort unto me! Move and Appear! Unveil the
mysteries of your Creation, be friendly unto me, for I am the
servant of the same your God, the true worshipper of the
highest.

The Angle of V of A in the tablet of A.
The Princess of the Shining Flame, the Rose of the
Palace of Fire.

MARK WELL!

THESE first 18 calls are in reality 19; that is, 19 in the
Celestial Orders; but with us the first table hath no call, and
can have no call, seeing that it is of the Godhead. Thus, then,
with us hath it the number o, though with them that of 1.
(Even as the first key of the ROTA hath the number 0.)

After this follow the calls or keys of the Thirty Aires of
Aéthyrs: which are in substance similar, though, in the name of
the Aithyrs, diversified.

124

THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

The titles of the Thirty Athyrs whose dominion extendeth in
ever-widening circles without and beyond the Watch
‘Towers of the Universe

[The first 1s Outermost]

tr LIL 16 LEA
2 ARN 17 TAN
3 ZOM 18 ZEN
4 PAZ 1g POP
5 LIT 20 KHR
6 MAZ 21 ASP
7 DEO 22 LIN
8 ZID 23 TOR
9 ZIP 24 NIA
to ZAX 25 VII
iz ICH 26 DES
12 LOE 27 ZAA
13 ZIM 28 BAG
14 UTA 29 RII
15 OxXO 30 TEX

THE CALL OR KEY OF THE THIRTY A THYRS

MADARIATZA das perifa LIL! cahisa micaolazoda saanire
caosago od fifisa balzodizodarasa Iaida. Nonuca gohulime:
Micama adoianu MADA i1aoda beliorebe, soba ooaona cahisa
luciftias peripesol, das aberaasasa nonucafe netaaibe caosaji
od tilabe adapehaheta damepelozoda, tooata nonugafe jimi-
calazodoma larasada tofejilo marebe yareryo IDOIGO;* od

' Or other Aire as may be willed.
* This name may be appropriate varied with the Aire.

125

‘THE EQUINOX

torezodulape yaodafe gohola, Caosaga, tabaoreda saanire, od
caharisateosa yorepoila tiobela busadire, tilable noalanu paida
oresaba, od dodaremeni zodayolana. Elazodape tilabe pare-
meji peripesatza, od ta qurelesata booapisa. Lanibame oucaho
sayomepe, od caharisateosa ajitoltorenu, mireca qo tiobela
lela. Tonu paombeda dizodalamo asa pianu, od caha-
risateosa aji-la-tore-torenu paracahe a sayomepe. Coreda-
zodizoda dodapala od fifalazoda, lasa manada, od faregita
bamesa omaoasa. Conisabera od auauotza tonuji oresa;
catabela noasami tabejesa leuitahemonuji. Vanucahi ome-
petilabe oresa! Bagile? Moooahe OL coredazodizoda. El
capimao itzomatzipe, od cacocasabe gosaa. Bayjilenu pili
tianuta a babalonuda, od faoregita teloca uo uime.

Madariiatza, torezodu! ! ! Oadariatza orocaha aboaperi!
Tabaori periazoda aretabasa! Adarepanu coresata dobitza!
Yolacame periazodi arecoazodiore, od quasabe qotinuji! Ripire
paaotzata sagacore! Umela od peredazodare cacareji Aoiveae
coremepeta! ‘Torezodu! Zodacare od Zodameranu, asapeta
sibesi butamona das surezodasa Tia balatanu. Odo cicale
Qaa, od Ozodazodama pelapeli IADANAMADA!

THE CALL OR KEY OF THE THIRTY A THYRS

O YE heavens which dwell in the first Aire, ye are mighty
in the parts of the Earth, and execute the Judgement of the
Highest! Unto you it is said: Behold the Face of your
God, the beginning of Comfort, whose eyes are the brightness
of the Heavens, which provided you for the Government of
the Earth, and her unspeakable variety, furnishing you with
a power of understanding to dispose all things according to

126

‘THE FORTY-EIGHT CALLS OR KEYS

the Providence of Him that sitteth on the Holy Throne, and
rose up in the Beginning, saying: The Earth, let her be
governed by her parts, and let there be Division in her, that
the glory of her may be always drunken, and vexed in itself.
Her course, let in run with the Heavens; and as an handmaid
let her serve them. One season, let it confound another, and
let there be no creature upon or within her the same. All her
members, let them differ in their qualities, and let there be no
one Creature equal with another. The reasonable Creatures
of the Earth, and Men, let them vex and weed out one another;
and their dwelling-places, let them forget their Names. The
work of man and his pomp, let them be defaced. His
buildings, let them become Caves for the beasts of the Field!
Confound her understanding with darkness! For why? it
repenteth me that I have made Man. One while let her be
known, and another while a stranger: because she is the bed of
an Harlot, and the dwelling-place of him that is fallen.

O ye Heavens, arise! The lower heavens beneath you, let
them serve you! Govern those that govern! Cast down such
as fall. Bring forth with those that increase, and destroy the
rotten. No place let it remain in one number. Add and
diminish until the stars be numbers. Arise! Move! and appear
before the Covenant of His mouth, which He hath sworn unto
us in His Justice. Open the Mysteries of your Creation, and
make us partakers of THE UNDEFILED KNOWLEDGE.

Finished are the Calls or Keys

127

‘THE EQUINOX

The Three Mighty Names of God
Almighty coming forth from
The Thirty Athyrs

THE First Name—

LAZodaPeLaMeDaZodaZodaZodIiLa-
ZodUOLaTaZoda-PeKALaTaNuVaDaZ-
odaBeReTa.

The Second Name—

IROAIAEITIAKOITaXEAEOHeSIOI-
TEAAILIE.

The Third Name—

LaNuNuZodaTaZodODaPexaHE M-
AOANuNuPeRePeNuRAISAGI Xa.

Ended are the Forty-eight Calls or Keys.

128

STEPNEY

(Audi alteram partem)

LEONIDAS had hundreds to hold Thermopyle;

So had good Sir Richard Grenville, the tiger of the sea
Horatius had two comrades, and Rome and all its gods.

We are worth the three together, if you come to talk of odds!
For a day we held up London, and the cursed robber crew,
Though they were fifteen hundred, and we were only two.

All day we fought the cowards, that dared not break the door.

They had soldiers and policemen, all the tools of modern war,

With their field-gun and their Maxim and the rifle and the
shell;

But they skulked with Winston Churchill, or we’d sent a few
to hell!

They hid themselves and volleyed, did the braves of
Waterloo,

They were only fifteen hundred, and Fritz and I were two.

All day we fought the cowards, the Saxon and the Scot;

We gave them Hell and Tommy, as we answered shot for shot,
Till a bullet found its billet, and poor Fritz lay dead at last.
Then I lit the pile of shavings, nailed our colours to the mast.
Ay! we left the red flag flying, the red flag of fire that flew,
Though they were fifteen hundred, and we were only two.

129

‘THE EQUINOX

And beneath that glorious banner, in its folds of gold and red,

I fought on (the lonely battle!) by the body of my dead.

And the cowards still hung trembling, and the smoke poured
hot and high,

The brave black flag of Anarchy, a portent in the sky!

Ay! we left the black flag flying, as behoves a man to do,

For they were fifteen hundred, and we were only two.

And the banner of destruction wraps me round with glory and
awe—

Here’s a last clip of brave bullets for the bastard hounds of
law!

And here’s a health to Freedom, and may man defend the
right!

And the red flag folds me closer—I have fought the last good
fight.

We died, we died unconquered—’tis the triumph of the true:

Though they were fifteen hundred, and we were only two.

130

‘THE TELL-TALE HEART

ADAPTED FROM THE STORY OF E. A. POE
BY
ALEISTER CROWLEY

£31

PERSONS OF THE PLAY

JACK ADAMS, @ youth (of some 30 years)

MARTIN MEYER, az o/d man (of some 60 years)

CLARK, @ neighbour (of some 45 years)

A POLICE SERGEANT azd TWO CONSTABLES

COSTUMES: Twenty years ago—the persons being just above
working men in social condition

PROPERTIES REQUIRED

Old-fashioned safe

Coppers for Jack

Bags of “treasure,” olyects dart, etc., for safe and cache
Shutters and bars for windows

Glasses, etc., and drinks (in Cupboard)

Lantern, practicable dark

Grocers’ Calendars and other suitable decorations

THE TELL-TALE HEART

The SCENE represents the interior of a cottage of some
pretensions, though poorly furnished.

[7he CURTAIN 77ses—MARTIN knocks the ashes from his long
churchwarden pipe on table J—JACK sitting on table.|

MARTIN. I think [ll go round to the Blue Cow, Jack, for
my night-cap. [Gozg, turns: hand on JACK’S shoulder.| Vve
been thinking, lad, we must all die, and them as is old thinks a
mort about it, Jack!—never fear. I've been thinking, lad, Jack
Adams has been a son to me, and more than a son.

JACK. Why, no! Father, it’s me that is glad you bid me call
you So.

MARTIN. More than a son, and a kind, kind son, lad!
Thinks I, Pll see Lawyer Brown to-morrow, and tie up my
little bit so that no one shall touch it after me but my dear lad,
Jack Adams.

JACK. No, no, Father! we’ll talk o’ that this twenty years
hence. Will you take the lantern, Father? the nights are
main dark.

MARTIN. Ay, lad, I will; [tas away: JACK’S whole manner
changes, and HE follows MARTIN with a furtive look of hate.
MARTIN gets and lights lantern; when HE turns, JACK 1s again
all smiles\|\—and do you see to the shutters. I hear a-many

133

tales o’ robbers; ’twere not so when I were young, lad. The
world gets worse as we get older, Jack.

JACK. Nonsense, Father, they won’t attack us. Don’t the
village know how I half-choked the life [HE sakes a murderous
gesture, so violent that the OLD MAN shrinks] out of Bagstock,
that was torturing the stray dog?

MARTIN. Ay, lad, and well it served the brute. I’m off
now, Jack, you’re a strong lad and a brave, but these nasty
robbers have weapons, we must be careful, main careful.

JACK. Only one night-cap, Father!

MARTIN. Ay, lad—I’m thinking a drop ’ud do ye good now,
Jack. A week and more ye’ve not been yourself altogether—
though this I will say, never a kinder lad breathed than my
dear lad, Jack Adams, this last week. Affliction purifies, ay,
it purifies; if ye’re out o’ sorts yourself, why, you’re kinder to
others, makes ye lean on them, like—there’s a blessing to
everything, lad, depend on it, a blessing hidden in every
mortal thing.

JACK. Never fear, Daddy Martin. I’ve slept ill lately, but I
know [ll sleep sound to-night.

MARTIN. Ay, Jack. [Exits L.

JACK. [Makes quite sure that the door 1s shut, then comes
to footlights. Sits on floor and laughs  stlently—then
listens intently as if HE heard something—Mis surprise grows
almost into fear—then he starts laughing again—HE. produces
furtively a razor and runs las thumb cautiously along the
edge—looks at the door and gnashes his teeth—then has
manner changes and he laughs openly and struts proudly
about.| What do I want with his money? I’m rich, rich,
incalculably rich. Why, I’ve only to say the word and all the

134

people would bow down to me. The richest man in the world!
Think of it! DPIl do wonderful things. Ill buy the Tower
of London for poor old Martin, dear old boy. On my soul,
I love him like a father. [A pause.] What was it now?
I’ve forgotten—I knew a minute ago. However did the idea
strike me? Such a beautiful idea. Aha! Aha! [Manner
again changes to intensely furtive hate inspired by horror.|
It is his eye—that pale blue filmy eye. It is like the eye of a
vulture. My blood runs cold. I will cut it out; the blood
will run warm all over me. I shall bathe in it. I shall never
shiver again. Oh no! the blood of the old is bitter chill.
But it shall not look at me, glazing over till it almost dies—
I hate you, hate you, hate you! [HE walks about.| Seven
nights—seven long nights! have I waited for my chance to
*stinguish its glare—in his blood—in his blood—in his blood!
[Stumbling over a shutter, HE recovers normal manner.| Ah!
the robbers, we must keep out the robbers. [HE bars and
shutters the windows, quite normally.| Dear old Daddy, to rob
him they’d have to walk across me. [Feels his muscle—
business.| And now [ll get to bed.
[Exits R.
[Re-enter MARTIN., L., who locks and bolts the door most
carefully after him.|
MARTIN. Is it all right, lad? Are you gone to bed?
JACK. [Off] Ay, ay, Father, all’s well. Call if you need
me.
MARTIN. Good-night, lad; God bless ye, Jack!
JACK. [Off] Good-night, Father! and pleasant dreams.
[MARTIN goes and tests all the fastenings of the shutters,
bars and so on. Then goes to safe and brings out

135

various precious pieces of silver and gold, china and the
like—HE fondles and admires these, puts them back,
locks up, crosses to cache with utmost furtiveness, opens
same, pulls out sacks of gold coin, plays with them.|

MARTIN. They’ll never discover old Martin Meyer’s cache,

I warrant. Oh, the beautiful gold! When I was a young
man I was fond of the kisses of beautiful women; did ever a
pair of lips touch me as softly as the soft bright gold?
[Laughs softly and gladly.| How it trickles over my hands!
Sweetest caresses ever I knew, and not a pennyweight rubbed
off the beautiful minted money for it all. Ah! [HE /szens.]
Nothing! Nothing! But I mustn’t be caught like this: old
Martin Meyer must be very careful.

[HE 7veplaces the sacks, and closes the cache. Then goes to
bed, undresses, gets in, adjusts a large night-cap, and
puts out the lights.|

[Loudly.| Good-night, Jack! the door’s always open: if you

hear robbers, run in, my lad, and serve ’em as you serve that
brute of a Bagstock.

JACK. [Off/—very sleepy.] Good-night. All right, Father,

never fear.

MARTIN. Good-night.

JACK. [Off—fainter.| Goo’-nigh’!

[MARTIN composes himself to sleep. A pause. Then the
door slowly, slowly opens. Audtence can see JACK
crouching behind and pushing in with infinite caution
HE carries a dark lantern. This goes on for a long
while; at last he warily puts his head in, withdraws
it, and again puts it in slightly advanced, with

136

lantern forward. He ts seen to be smiling grimly to
himself. WE ts half round the corner of the half-open
door, and very warily puts out his right hand to open
the ray of the lantern. WE stops repeatedly to listen
during all this time. H1s thumb slips on the fastening of
the lantern, and the latter swings against the door,
making a startling clatter. MARTIN springs up in bed,
crying loudly\—

MARTIN. Who’s there?

[A long pause; presently MARTIN gives a slight groan
of alject terror. BOTH remain absolutely still.
Another long pause. Then JACK again tries to open
the lantern with infinite stealth; at last a_ single
tiny dim ray shoots out and throws Martin’s eye into
startling brilliance. Another long pause, but JACK
should endeavour without the slightest movement to
let the audtence guess that he hears something. At
length, with a wild yell, he throws open the lantern—
Jull light on stage—and darts into the room. MARTIN
shrieks once only and very loudly. JACK drags MARTIN
to the floor, and pulls the heavy mattress over him,
pressing it down with hideous laughter, though all
the time he listens, as tf to hear the beating of
MARTIN’S Aeart. HE puts his ear to the mattress. At
last, with a laugh of satisfaction, he removes the
mattress and examines the corpse, ear to heart.|

JACK. Dead. Stone dead. Stone dead. Stone dead.

[HE /ooks around—in France, MARTIN will have disap-
peared from under the bedding by a trap door and Jeft

137

a dummy. JACK wtl/l cut out the eyes of this dummy with
his razor; they will bleed horribly. WE will make
appropriate remarks—but in England he simply looks
round, then\|—

JACK. Now to conceal the body; aha! I have it. [Ws
a chisel HE lifts up the three planks and puts the body under
the floor, replacing the planks. He smoothes over the place,
looks for and collects dust, and sprinkles it evenly over;
re-makes bed, etc.| Safe! safe for ever from that vulture eye
of blue. Safe! [A dstant church clock strikes eleven.|
To bed! No more long watches to distract me. No more
waiting to catch that evil, filmy eye, casting its vulture
curses on me. How I shall sleep! shall sleep!

[A loud knocking outside, L.—JACK startled—then with a
look of infinite cunning HE smiles|\—Safe! safe! [Goes to
door, L.|

A VOICE: [Of/—muffled—several half audible words ending
“Meyer.” |

JACK. Old Meyer’s gone into the country. [W7h sudden
alarm.| Isn't he at the Blue Cow?

VOICE. [Azgri/y and loudly.| Open the door at once, or we
must break it down. I don’t wish to disturb you, Mr. Adams,
but I think it’s only right to say—

[Confused voices interrupt. JACK undoes the bolts.

JACK. Certainly, certainly, neighbour, glad to see you. I
was half asleep when you knocked, and woke up main cross,
as the saying is. [THEY /t/e zm.] Why, sergeant, come in!
What’s happened now? Robbery? Not here, while /’m
guardian. Remember Bagstock, sergeant? Ha! Ha! Ha!

138

Come in, Warren; come in, Anderson; a cold night; we’ll have
a drop of something to warm us by and by.
[More and more at his ease.

SERGEANT. Why, the fact is, Mr. Adams, neighbour Clark
here heard a dreadful cry in the cottage, and——

JACK. Ha! Ha! Clark, you’re a funny fellow. It’s no
joke to me, though, for the fact is I had the most awful
dream——

SERGEANT. And so you shrieked, of course. Strikes me,
neighbour Clark, you’ve found a pretty mare’s nest.

CLARK. But where’s old Meyer? I swear I saw him come
in less than half an hour ago.

JACK. I tell you he’s not here. Why don’t you look for him,
you dear old muddlehead?

SERGEANT. Why, yes, Mr. Adams, that seems the simplest
way.

JACK. Just take a note first of all of what the burglars have
done, Sergeant. Three large patent safes carried bodily
away—shutters broken—[Goes and rattles them|—Room in
disorder—[Pul/ls the bedclothes on to the floor\|\—Part of the
swag lying on the floor—shows the burglars were disturbed
in their nefarious occupation. [HE scatfers some coppers about.|
Murdered body of Meyer up the chimney—go and look,
Clark, don’t be scared, they did the job thoroughly—he won’t
bite you! My murdered body—where shall I hide my
murdered body, eh? [Ze POLICE roar with laughter, louder
and louder, and CLARK looks more and more sheepish.| Oh!
you'll find that in my room, I should think: run along. [HE
pushes THEM through door, R.| Sorry I can’t help you look
for it—I must get that ale.

139

[Goes to cupboard and brings ale and glasses. Seeing
himself alone, he whispers, Safe! Safe! dropping into
the furtive, gleeful manner. Then suddenly HE seems to
listen intently. All this time the others are heard off,
talking and laughing. HE goes R, shuts door, goes to
place where corpse ts, listens with ear to floor. With
great terror, rising to his knees.|

JACK. It is—it is—low, slow, and solemn, but it zs—
again—again! God! Great God! they will hear! [Vozsces
louder, returning. JACK resumes fis jolly manner and shuffles
about, pouring out the ale.| [Re-enter OTHERS.

JACK. Well, did you find it all as I said?

SERGEANT. Neighbour Clark, you'll not hear the last o’
this for many a long year. [Goes to table. Drinking bus.]

IST CONSTABLE. Burglars! ho! ho! ho!

2ND CONSTABLE. Murder! ha! ha! ha

SERGEANT. Here’s to your health, Mr. Adams!

JACK. Yours, neighbour Clark; no offence, man, no offence.
[Aszde] Louder, louder! they will hear it.

CLARK. Well, ’'m sure——

SERGEANT. Never be sure! The first great rule of a good
officer.

JACK. What? What? I say no—I[/ouder|—I say no!
Know your own mind and stick to it. Let’s have a song—ah,
what do you say? “A policeman’s life is not a happy one?”

SERGEANT. Why, it’s no trouble; it’s well worth coming
across to talk to such a good fellow, and drink a glass of ale
like this.

JACK. Have some more! Sing, somebody—Clark, you
sing.

140

CLARK. Why, it’s main late.

SERGEANT. Cheer up, neighbour Clark, we all make our
mistakes.

JACK. [Louder.| I say no! I never make a mistake. I
never—sing, I say!

SERGEANT. You sing, Mr. Adams, a lovely voice you’ve
got. Give us the Harvest Song.

JACK. [Sz// louder.| ‘There isn’t a song. There isn’t a
harvest. It rained—rained—rained—tap—tap—T[shouwzs.]
You’re a liar. ‘The sun shone, there wasn’t a sound, not a
sound.

[THEY begin to look surprised.

CLARK. [Aside to Sergeant.| He’s been a bit excited-like
these last few days—and the ale’s main good. Don’t seem to
notice him!

SERGEANT. [Aszde fo CLARK.] Right, very right, neigh-
bour Clark.

[JACK starts to sing, cannot remember the words, sings
anything—very loud—shuffles the chair about, knocks
iw at last on floor with ever-increasing din. The
OTHERS go on chatting and laughing. JACK at last
exhausts himself. HE assumes his furtive suspicious
manner—they take no notice, but laugh even louder.
JACK observes them keenly—throws up his arms,
rushes to SERGEANT and grips his shoulder, dragging
him to G.—shrieks.|

JACK. Villains! dissemble no more! I admit the deed!
tear up the planks! here! here! [By G.] It is the beating
of his hideous heart!

CURTAIN.

I4I

142

SORITES

My finger-nails grow on my fingers, and

My fingers are fixed firmly to my hand.

It is my hand that terminates my arm,

And that sticks to my shoulder like a charm.

My shoulder is a portion of my trunk.

I hope no prostitute, however drunk,

Would end the shocking sequence. Yet we find,
Even in England, men of evil mind,
Pornographers who love obscene details,
Shameless enough to mention finger-nails.

A DESCRIPTION OF
‘THE CARDS OF ‘THE TAROT
WITH THEIR ATTRIBUTIONS; INCLUDING A

METHOD OF DIVINATION BY THEIR USE

“All divination resembles an attempt by a man born blind to obtain sight
by getting blind drunk.”
FRA. P.

143

B:l-O-S:

THE COMPLETE SYMBOL OF THE TAROT

A DESCRIPTION OF
‘THE CARDS OF ‘THE TAROT

HRU
THE GREAT ANGEL
is
set over the operations of the Secret Wisdom

Awd,

The First and the Last

“WHAT thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the
Seven Abodes which be in Aushiah.”
“And I saw in the Right Hand of Him that Sate upon
the Throne a Book, sealed with Seven Seals.”
“Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the Seals
thereof?”
S.Y.M.B.O.L.A. Di

THE FRONTISPIECE

CONSISTS of a Crux Ansata, which is a form of the Rosy
Cross. One arm 1s scarlet, with the symbols of Leo and the
Wand in emerald green.

Another is blue with Eagle and Cup in orange.

145

‘THE EQUINOX

A third is yellow, with Aquarius and Dagger in violet.

The last is in the four colours of Malkuth, with Pentacle
and ‘Taurus in black.

Ring is white, having at the top the Name of the Great
Angel ¥ "l  H U A; below cross-bar are Pentagrams, one
enclosing Sol and the other enclosing Luna.

The whole space in the ring contains the Rose of 22 Petals
bearing the Names of the 22 Keys. In the centre a white circle,
and a red cross of four equal arms.

About the whole symbol are the words

L.LF.E. B.I.O.S. V.LT.A.,
and the letters—

T. A. P. O., Tarot.

146

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

THE TITLES OF THE SYMBOLS

1. The Ace of Wands is called the Root of the Powers of
Fire.

2. The Ace of Cups is called the Root of the Powers of
Water.

3. The Ace of Swords is called the Root of the Powers of
Air.

4. The Ace of Pentacles is called the Root of the Powers of
Earth.

5. The Knight of Wands is “The Lord of the Flame and
Lighting: the King of the Spirits of Fire.”

6. The Queen of Wands is “The Queen of the Thrones of
Flame.”

7. The King of Wands is “The Prince of the Chariot of
Fire.”

8. The Knave of Wands is “The Princess of the Shining
Flame: the Rose of the Palace of Fire.”

g. The Knight of Cups is “The Lord of the Waves and the
Waters: the King of the Hosts of the Sea.”

to. The Queen of Cups is “The Queen of the Thrones of
the Waters.”

11. The King of Cups is “The Prince of the Chariot of the
Waters.”

12. The Knave of Cups is “The Princess of the Waters: the
Lotus of the Palace of the Floods.”

147

‘THE EQUINOX

13. The Knight of Swords is “The Lord of the Wind and
the Breezes: the King of the Spirits of Air.”

14. The Queen of Swords is “The Queen of the Thrones
of Air.”

15. The King of Swords is “The Prince of the Chariot of
the Winds.”

16. The Knave of Swords is “The Princess of the Rushing
Winds: the Lotus of the Palace of Air.”

17. The Knight of Pentacles is “The Lord of the Wide and
Fertile Land: the King of the Spirits of Earth.”

18. The Queen of Pentacles is “The Queen of the Thrones
of Earth.”

19. The King of Pentacles is “The Prince of the Chariot of
Earth.”

20. The Knave of Pentacles is “The Princess of the
Echoing Hills: the Rose of the Palace of Earth.”

NO. CARD LORD OF DECAN IN
21. 5 of Wands __.. Strife. 5 &
22. 6,, » + Victory 4 8
B30. SF sy » «+.» Walour. 3 8
24. 8 ,,Pentacles . Prudence. @ Tp
25° Os; 5» « Material Gain Q Tp
26. 10,, » +» « Wealth f°) Tp
27. 2.,,Swords. . Peace Restored . ») a
28, Bou >» +» « Sorrow . 5 a
20; “Aus » «+ Rest from Strife. y a
30. 5,,Cups . . Loss in Pleasure. 3 Mm

148

NO.
aq;
Bo
33-
34.
35:
36.
37-
38.
39.
40.
AI.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
Si,
52;
53:
54.
55:
56.

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

=
SoO ON AWN BW WN

Oo ON AN BW WN

RW WN

Oo CN DW

CARD
99 9

: wey &
of Wands

9 9

ss a
,, Pentacles
99 9

- ee
» owords .
99 99

9 9

,», Cups

99 99

3 Sh 8
of Wands

99 99

ss ae a
,, Pentacles
9 9

- fer oi
», words .
99 99

99 99

,»» Cups

9 9

” ”

LORD OF

. Pleasure . .
. Illusionary Success .
. Swiftness.

. Great Strength .

. Oppression .

. Harmonious Cisage
. Material Works .

. Earthly Power

. Defeat

. Earned Success .

. Unstable Effort .

. Abandoned Success
. Material Happiness.
. Perfected Success .
. Dominion F

. Established Sieneih
. Perfected Work .

. Material Trouble

. Material Success

. Success Unfulfilled.
. Shortened Force

. Despair and Cruelty
. Ruin .
. Love .

. Abundance .

. Blended Pleasure

DECAN

VIITOOarsrIvereOOaarrtyvwrOOarvyxKwve

YSSENNN SB

3

ES EFS. mI mf mm WO el. @ eae DES SEO Rs dap <=

57:
58.

59.
60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

150

II

‘THE EQUINOX

. The Foolish
Man
. The
cian
. The
Priestess .
. The
Press
. The
peror

Magi-
High
Em-
Em-

. The Hiero-

phant .
. The Lovers .

. The Chariot

. Fortitude

THE TWENTY-TWO KEYS OF
THE BOOK

- The Spirit of AiOyjp
The Magus _ of
Power. :
The Priestess of
the Silver Star
The Daughter of the
Mighty Ones.

Son of the Morn-
ing, chief among
the Mighty .

The Magus of the
Eternal .

The Children of

the Voice; the
Oracles of the
Mighty Gods.

The Child of the
Powers of the
Waters; the Lord
of the Triumph
of Light .

. The Daughter of
the Flaming
Sword. ‘

LETTER

ATTRI-
BUTION

\S)

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

qi.

F2:

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

I0.

I2.

13.

14.

15.

THE TWENTY-TWO KEYS OF
THE BOOK

. The Hermit. The Magus of the

Voice of Power,

the Prophet of
the Eternal .

The Wheel The Lord of the
of Fate. . Forces of Life

. Justice . . The Daughter of the

Lords of Truth:

the Ruler of

the Balance .
The Hanged The — Spirit — of

Man . ._ the Mighty
Waters :
Death . . The Child of the
Great ‘Trans-

formers: the Lord
of the Gates of
Death. ;
Temperance The Daughter of
the Reconcilers:
the Bringer-
Forth of life .
The Devil . The Lord of the
Gates of Matter:
The Child of the
Forces of Time.

LETTER

ATTRI-
BUTION

IP

151

73:

74.

75:

76.

77:

78.

T52

17.

18. The Moon .

19

21.

‘Tower.

The Star.

. The Sun.

‘THE EQUINOX

‘THE TWENTY-TWO KEYS OF
THE BOOK

. The Blasted The Lord of the

Hosts of the
Mighty

. The Daughter of

the Firmament,
the dweller be-
tween the Waters
The Ruler of Flux
and Reflux: the
Child of the
Sons of the
Mighty . . .

. The Lord of the

Fire of the
World .

. The Judg- The Spirit of the

ment

verse

Primal Fire

The Uni- The Great One of

the Night of
Time . ;

Such are the Titles of the
Abodes or Atouts of Thooth;

of the

Mansions of the House of

my
FATHER

LETTER

ATTRI-
BUTION

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

The Descriptions of the Seventy-eight Symbols
of this Book ©; together with
their meanings

OF THE ACES

FIRST in order and importance are the Four Aces,
representing the Force of the Spirit, acting in, and binding
together, the Four Scales of each Element: and answering to
the Dominion of the Letters of the Name in the Kether of
each. They represent the Radical Forces.

The Four Aces are said to be placed on the North Pole of
the Universe wherein they revolve, governing its revolution;
and ruling as the connecting link between Yetzirah and the
Material Plane or Universe.

I
THE ROOT OF THE POWERS OF FIRE
Ace of Wands

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, issuing from clouds,
and grasping a heavy club, which has three branches in the
colours, and with the sigils, of the scales. The Right-and Left-
hand branches end respectively in three Flames, and the
Centre one in four Flames: thus yielding Ten: the Number of
the Sephiroth. ‘Two-and-twenty leaping Flames, or Yodh,

153

‘THE EQUINOX

surround it, answering to the Paths; of these, three fall below
the Right branch for Aleph, Men, and Shin, seven above the
Central branch for the double letters; and between it and that
of the Right twelve: six above and six below about the Left-
hand branch. The whole is a great and flaming Torch. It
symbolizes Force—strength, rush, vigour, energy, and it
governs, according to its nature, various works and ques-
tions.
It implies Natural, as opposed to Invoked, Force.

II
THE ROOT OF THE POWERS OF THE WATERS
Ace of Cups or Chalices

A WHITE Radiant Angelic Hand, issuing from clouds, and
supporting on the palm thereof a cup, resembling that of the
Stolistes.

From it rises a fountain of clear and glistening water:
and sprays falling on all sides into clear calm water below,
in which grow Lotuses and Water-lilies. The great Letter
of the Supernal Mother is traced in the spray of the
Fountain.

It symbolizes Fertility—productiveness, beauty, pleasure,
happiness, etc.

154

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

Ill
THE ROOT OF THE POWERS OF THE AIR
Ace of Swords

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, issuing from clouds,
and grasping the hilt of a sword, which supports a White
Radiant Celestial Crown; from which depend, on the right,
the olive branch of Peace; and on the left, the palm branch of
suffering.

Six Vaus fall from its point. It symbolizes /nvoked, as
contrasted with Natural Force: for it is the Invocation of the
Sword. Raised upward, it invokes the Divine crown of
Spiritual Brightness, but reversed it is the Invocation of
Demonic Force; and becomes a fearfully evil symbol. It
represents, therefore, very great power for good or evil, but
invoked; and it also represents whirling Force, and strength
through trouble. It is the affirmation of Justice upholding
Divine Authority; and it may become the Sword of Wrath,
Punishment, and Affliction.

IV
THE ROOT OF THE POWERS OF THE EARTH
Ace of Pentacles

A WHITE Radiant Angelic Hand, holding a branch of a
Rose Tree, whereon is a large Pentacle, formed of Five con-
centric circles. The Innermost Circle is white, charged with a

155

‘THE EQUINOX

ted Greek Cross. From this White Centre, Twelve Rays,
also white, issue: these terminate at the circumference,
making the whole something like an Astrological figure of the
Heavens.

It is surmounted by a small circle, above which is a large
white Maltese Cross, and with two white wings.

Four Crosses and two buds are shewn. The Hand issueth
from the Clouds as in the other three cases.

It represents materiality in all senses, good and evil: and
is, therefore, in a sense, illusionary: it shows material gain,
labour, power, wealth, etc.

THE SIXTEEN COURT, OR ROYAL CARDS
The Four Kings

THE Four Kings, or “Figures mounted on_ steeds,”
represent the Yodh forces of the Name in each Suit: the
Radix, Father and commencement of Material Forces, a force
in which all the others are implied, and of which they form the
development and completion. A force swift and violent in its
action, but whose effect soon passes away, and therefore
symbolized by a Figure on a Steed riding swiftly, and clothed
in complete Armour.

Therefore is the knowledge of the scale of the King so
necessary for the commencement of all magical working.

156

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

The Four Queens

are seated upon Thrones; representing the Forces of the Hé
of the Name in each suit; the Mother and bringer-forth of
Material Forces: a force which develops and realizes that of
the King: a force steady and unshaken, but not rapid, though
enduring. It is therefore symbolized by a Figure seated upon a
Throne: but also clothed in Armour.

The Four Princes

These Princes are Figures seated in Chariots, and thus
borne forward. They represent the Vau Forces of the Name in
each suit: the Mighty Son of the King and Queen, who
realizes the influence of both scales of Force. A Prince, the
son of a King and Queen, yet a Prince of Princes, and a King
of Kings: an Emperor whose effect is at once rapid (though
not so swift as that of the Queen) and enduring. It is,
therefore, symbolized by a Figure borne in a Chariot, and
clothed in Armour. Yet is his power vain and illusionary,
unless set in Motion by his Father and Mother.

The Four Princesses

are the Knaves of the Tarot Pack; The Four Princesses or
figures of Amazons, standing firmly of themselves: neither
riding upon Horses, nor seated upon Thrones, nor borne in

157

‘THE EQUINOX

Chariots. They represent the forces of the Hé final of the
Name in each suit, completing the Influences of the other
scales: The mighty and potent daughter of a King and Queen:
a Princess powerful and terrible: a Queen of Queens—an
Empress—whose effect combines those of the King, Queen,
and Prince, at once violent and permanent; therefore symbol-
ized by a Figure standing firmly by itself, only partially
draped, and having but little Armour; yet her power existeth
not, save by reason of the others: and then indeed it is mighty
and terrible materially, and is the Throne of the Forces of the
Spirit.

Woe unto whomsoever shall make war upon her, when
thus established!

THE SPHERES OF INFLUENCE OF THE
COURT CARDS OF THE TAROT PACK

THE Princesses rule the Four Parts of the Celestial
Heavens which lie around the north Pole, and above the
respective Cherubic Signs of the Zodiac, and they form the
Thrones of the Powers of the Four Aces.

The twelve cards, the Four Kings, Queens and Princes
rule the dominion of the Celestial Heavens, between the
realm of the Four Princesses and the Zodiac, as is hereafter
shewn. And they, as it were, link together the signs.

158

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

V

THE LORD OF THE FLAME AND THE LIGHT-
NING; THE KING OF THE SPIRITS OF FIRE
Knight' of Wands

A WINGED Warrior riding upon a black horse with
flaming mane and tail: the horse itself is not winged. The
rider wears a winged helmet (like the old Scandinavian and
Gaulish helmet) with a Rayed Crown, a corslet of scale-
mail and buskins of the same, and a flowing scarlet mantle.
Above his helmet, upon his curass, and on the shoulder-
pieces and buskins, he wears as a crest a winged black
horse’s head. He grasps a club with flaming ends, somewhat
similar to that in the symbol of the Ace of Wands, but not so
heavy, and also the sigil of his scale is shown; beneath the
rushing feet of his steed are waving flames and fire. He
is active—generous—fierce—sudden—impetuous.

If ill dignified, he is evil-minded—cruel—bigoted—brutal.
He rules the celestial heavens from above the Twentieth
Degree of M to the First Two Decans of »: and this includes a
part of the Constellation Hercules. (Hercules is always
represented with a Club.)

A of A
King of the Salamanders.

' Note that the Kings are now called Knights, and the Princes are now
called Kings. This is unfortunate, and leads to confusion; the Princes may
be called Emperors without harm. Remember only that the horsed figures
refer to the Yod of Tetragrammaton, the charioted figures to the Vau.

159

‘THE EQUINOX

VI
"THE QUEEN OF THE THRONES OF FLAME
Queen of Wands

A CROWNED Queen with long red-golden hair, seated upon
a Throne, with steady flames beneath. She wears a corslet
and buskins of scale-mail, which latter her robe discloses.
Her arms are almost bare. On cuirass and buskins are
leopard’s heads winged, and the same symbol surmounteth
her crown. At her side is a couchant leopard on which her
hands rest. She bears a long wand with a very heavy conical
head. The face is beautiful and resolute.

Adaptability, steady force applied to an object, steady rule,
great attractive power, power of command, yet liked
notwithstanding. Kind and generous when not opposed.

If ill dignified, obstinate, revengeful, domineering, tyran-
nical, and apt to turn against another without a cause.

She rules the heavens from above the last Decan of X to
above the 20° of ‘?: including thus a part of Andromeda.

Vof A

Queen of the Salamanders.

Vil
THE PRINCE OF THE CHARIOT OF FIRE
King of Wands

A KINGLY Figure with a golden, winged crown, seated on a
chariot. He has large white wings. One wheel of his chariot

160

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

is shewn. He wears corslet and buskins of scale armour
decorated with a winged lion’s head, which symbol also
surmounts his crown. His chariot is drawn by a lion. His arms
are bare, save for the shoulder-pieces of the corslet, and he
bears a torch or fire-wand, somewhat similar to that of the
Zelator Adeptus Minor. Beneath the chariot are flames, some
waved, some salient.

Swift, strong, hasty; rather violent, yet just and generous;
noble and scorning meanness.

If ill dignified—cruel, intolerant, prejudiced and ill natured.

He rules the heavens from above the last Decan of 9 to
the second Decan of &; hence he includes most of Leo
Minor.

A ofA

Prince and Emperor of Salamanders.

Vil

‘THE PRINCESS OF THE SHINING FLAME;
THE ROSE OF THE PALACE OF FIRE

Knave of Wands

A VERY strong and beautiful woman with flowing red-gold
hair, attired like an Amazon. Her shoulders, arms, bosom
and knees are bare. She wears a short kilt reaching to the
knee. Round her waist is a broad belt of scale-mail; narrow
at the sides; broader in front and back; and having a winged
tiger’s head in front. She wears a Corinthian-shaped helmet
and crown with a long plume. It also is surmounted by a

161

‘THE EQUINOX

tiger’s head, and the same symbol forms the buckle of her
scale-mail buskins. A mantle lined with tiger’s skin falls back
from her shoulders. Her right hand rests on a small golden or
brazen altar ornamented with ram’s heads and with Flames of
Fire leaping from it. Her left hand leans on a long and heavy
club, swelling at the lower end, where the sigil is placed; and
it has flames of fire leaping from it the whole way down; but
the flames are ascending. This club or torch is much longer
than that carried by the King or Queen. Beneath her firmly
placed feet are leaping Flames of Fire.

Brilliance, courage, beauty, force, sudden in anger or love,
desire of power, enthusiasm, revenge.

If ill dignified, she is superficial, theatrical, cruel, unstable,
domineering.

She rules the heavens over one quadrant of the portion
around the North Pole.

V of A
Princess and Empress of the Salamanders.
Throne of the Ace of Wands.

IX

THE LORD OF THE WAVES AND THE WATERS;
THE KING OF THE HOSTS OF THE SEA

Knight of Cups

A BEAUTIFUL, winged, youthful Warrior with flying hair,
riding upon a white horse, which latter is not winged. His
general equipment is similar to that of the Knight of Wands,

162

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

but upon his helmet, cuirass and buskins is a peacock with
opened wings. He holds a cup in his hand, bearing the sigil of
the scale. Beneath his horse’s feet is the sea. From the cup
issues a crab.

Graceful, poetic, Venusian, indolent, but enthusiastic if
roused.

Ill dignified, he is sensual, idle and untruthful.

He rules the heavens from above 20° of * to 20° of , thus
including the greater part of Pegasus.

A of V
King of Undines and Nymphs.

x

THE QUEEN OF THE THRONES OF
THE WATERS

Queen of Cups

A VERY beautiful fair woman like a crowned Queen, seated
upon a throne, beneath which is flowing water wherein
Lotuses are seen. Her general dress is similar to that of the
Queen of Wands, but upon her crown, cuirass and buskins is
seen an Ibis with opened wings, and beside her is the same
bird, whereon her hand rests. She holds a cup, wherefrom a
crayfish issues. Her face is dreamy. She holds a lotus in the
hand upon the Ibis.

She is imaginative, poetic, kind, yet not willing to take
much trouble for another. Coquettish, good-natured and under-
neath a dreamy appearance. Imagination stronger than

163

‘THE EQUINOX

feeling. Very much affected by other influences, and therefore
more dependent upon dignity than most symbols.
She rules from 20° IL to 20° 99.

V of V
Queen of Nymphs or Undines.

XI

THE PRINCE OF THE CHARIOT OF
THE WATERS

King of Cups

A WINGED Kingly Figure with winged crown seated in a
chariot drawn by an eagle. On the wheel is the symbol of
a scorpion. The eagle is borne as a crest on his crown, cuirass
and buskins. General attire like King of Wands. Beneath his
chariot is the calm and stagnant water of a lake. His armour
resembles feathers more than scales. He holds in one hand a
lotus, and in the other a cup, charged with the sigil of his
scale. A serpent issues from the cup, and has its head tending
down to the waters of the lake. He is subtle, violent, crafty
and artistic; a fierce nature with calm exterior. Powerful for
good or evil but more attracted by the evil if allied with
apparent Power or Wisdom.

If ill dignified, he is intensely evil and merciless.

He rules from 20° 2 to 20° M.

A of V
Prince and Emperor of Nymphs or Undines.

164

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XI

THE PRINCESS OF THE WATERS; THE LOTUS
OF THE PALACE OF THE FLOODS

Knave of Cups

A BEAUTIFUL Amazon-like figure, softer in nature than the
Princess of Wands. Her attire is similar. She stands on a sea
with foaming spray. Away to her right a Dolphin. She wears as
a crest a swan with opening wings. She bears in one hand a
lotus, and in the other an open cup from which a turtle issues.
Her mantle is lined with swansdown, and is of thin floating
material.

Sweetness, poetry, gentleness and kindness. Imaginative,
dreamy, at times indolent, yet courageous if roused.

When ill dignified she is selfish and luxurious.

She rules a quadrant of the heavens around Kether.

Y of V
Princess and Empress of the Nymphs or Undines
‘Throne of the Ace of Cups.

XU

THE LORD OF THE WINDS AND THE BREEZES:
THE KING OF THE SPIRITS OF AIR

Knight of Swords

A WINGED Warrior with crowned Winged Helmet,
mounted upon a brown steed. His general equipment is

165

‘THE EQUINOX

as that of the Knight of Wands, but he wears as a crest a
winged six-pointed star, similar to those represented on the
heads of Castor and Pollux the Dioscuri, the twins Gemini (a
part of which constellation is included in his rule). He holds a
drawn sword with the sigil of his scale upon its pommel.
Beneath his horse’s feet are dark-driving stratus clouds.

He is active, clever, subtle, fierce, delicate, courageous,
skilful, but inclined to domineer. Also to overvalue small
things, unless well dignified.

If ill dignified, deceitful, tyrannical and crafty.

Rules from 20° & to 20° IL.

AofA
King of the Sylphs and Sylphides.

XIV
THE QUEEN OF THE THRONES OF AIR

Queen of Swords

A GRACEFUL woman with wavy, curling hair, like a Queen
seated upon a Throne and crowned. Beneath the Throne are
grey cumulus clouds. Her general attire is as that of the
Queen of Wands, but she wears as a crest a winged child’s
head. A drawn sword in one hand, and in the other a large,
bearded, newly severed head of a man.

Intensely perceptive, keen observation, subtle, quick and
confident: often persevering, accurate in superficial things,
graceful, fond of dancing and balancing.

166

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

If ill dignified, cruel, sly, deceitful, unreliable, though with
a good exterior.
Rules from 20° I to 20° 2.

V of A
Queen of the Sylphs and Sylphides.

XV
‘THE PRINCE OF THE CHARIOT OF THE
WINDS

King of Swords

A WINGED King with Winged Crown, seated in a chariot
drawn by Arch Fays, represented as winged youths very
slightly dressed, with butterfly wings: heads encircled by a
fillet with a pentagram thereon: and holding wands. sur-
mounted by pentagrams, the same butterfly wings on their
feet and fillets. General equipment as the King of Wands: but
he bears as a crest a winged angelic head with a pentagram on
the brows. Beneath the chariot are grey nimbus clouds. His
hair long and waving in serpentine whirls, and whorl figures
compose the scales of his armour. A drawn sword in one hand;
a sickle in the other. With the sword he rules, with the sickle
he slays.

Full of ideas and thoughts and designs, distrustful,
suspicious, firm in friendship and enmity; careful, observant,
slow, over-cautious, symbolizes A and Q; he slays as fast as he
creates.

167

‘THE EQUINOX

If ill dignified: harsh, malicious, plotting; obstinate, yet
hesitating; unreliable.
Rules from 20° Y5 to 20° .

AofA
Prince and Emperor of the Sylphs and Sylphides.

XVI

THE PRINCESS OF THE RUSHING WINDS:
THE LOTUS OF THE PALACE OF AIR

Knave of Swords

AN AMAZON figure with waving hair, slighter than the
Rose of the Palace of Fire. Her attire is similar. The Feet
seem springy, giving the idea of swiftness. Weight changing
from one foot to another and body swinging around. She is a
mixture of Minerva and Diana: her mantle resembles the
Aégis of Minerva. She wears as a crest the head of the Medusa
with serpent hair. She holds a sword in one hand; and the
other rests upon a small silver altar with grey smoke (no fire)
ascending from it. Beneath her feet are white clouds.

Wisdom, strength, acuteness; subtlety in material things:
grace and dexterity.

If ill dignified, she 1s frivolous and cunning.

She rules a quadrant of the heavens around Kether.

VofA

Princess and Empress of the Sylphs and Sylphides.
Throne of the Ace of Wands.

168

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XVII

THE LORD OF THE WIDE AND FERTILE LAND;
THE KING OF THE SPIRITS OF EARTH

Knight of Pentactles

A DARK Winged Warrior with winged and crowned
helmet: mounted on a light brown horse. Equipment as
the Knight of Wands.

The winged head of a stag or antelope as a crest. Beneath
the horse’s feet is fertile land with ripened corn. In one hand
he bears a sceptre surmounted by a hexagram: in the other a
Pentacle like that of the Zelator Adeptus Minor.

Unless very well dignified he is heavy, dull, and material.
Laborious, clever, and patient in material matters.

If ill dignified, he is avaricious, grasping, dull, jealous; not
very courageous, unless assisted by other symbols.

Rules from above 20° of & to 20° of MM.

A of 7

King of Gnomes.

XVIII
THE QUEEN OF THE THRONES OF EARTH
Queen of Pentacles

A WOMAN of beautiful face with dark hair; seated upon a
throne, beneath which is dark sandy earth. One side of her
face is light, the other dark; and her symbolism is best

169

‘THE EQUINOX

represented in profile. Her attire is similar to that of the
Queen of Wands: but she bears a winged goat’s head as a
crest. A goat is by her side. In one hand she bears a
sceptre surmounted by a cube, and in the other an orb of
gold.

She is impetuous, kind; timid, rather charming; great-
hearted; intelligent, melancholy; truthful, yet of many moods.

If ill dignified she is undecided, capricious, changeable,
foolish.

She rules from 20° * to 20° YS.

V of W

The Queen of Gnomes.

XIX
THE PRINCE OF THE CHARIOT OF EARTH
King of Pentacles

A WINGED Kingly Figure seated in a chariot drawn by a
bull. He bears as a crest the symbol of the head of the winged
bull. Beneath the chariot is land, with many flowers. In
one hand he bears an orb of gold held downwards, and in the
other a sceptre surmounted by an orb and cross.

Increase of matter. Increases good or evil, solidifies;
practically applies things. Steady; reliable.

If ill dignified he is selfish, animal and material: stupid. In
either case slow to anger, but furious if roused.

170

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

Rules from 20° SP to 20° 8.

A of 7

Prince and Emperor of the Gnomes.

XX

PRINCESS OF THE ECHOING HILLS: ROSE OF
TTHE PALACE OF EARTH

Knave of Pentacles

A STRONG and beautiful Amazon figure with rich brown
hair, standing on grass or flowers. A grove of trees near her.
Her form suggests Hebe, Ceres, and Proserpine. She bears
a winged ram’s head as a crest: and wears a mantle of sheep-
skin. In one hand she carries a sceptre with a circular disk:
in the other a Pentacle similar to that of the Ace of Pentacles.

She is generous, kind, diligent, benevolent, careful, courage-
ous, persevering, pitiful.

If ill dignified she is wasteful and prodigal. She rules
over one quadrant of the heavens around the North Pole of
the Ecliptic.

VY of V
Princess and Empress of the Gnomes.
Throne of the Ace of Pentacles.

171.

‘THE EQUINOX

208 UT IYI OY] SpOvIUsd ‘ysrp a]
yseq | umoig-yory | yita o9d99s ‘s90I1 JO SAOIS ‘SIDMOTJ ‘SSPID peoy s,wer posutA | ssoourrg | ©
pieMuMop psy Jo ‘ssoro , Z
yueq | uMoig-yseq | pue qio yum ondoos {nq ‘pur, APIOMOpT peoy s[[nq posurmy | sourg rz
PJos Jo qio ‘oqno yim s11d90s : >
seq yseq |‘Ajuo opis suo jYsI] ‘uey ‘pur, uolIeg peoy svos posur, | usond =
idopy Jo1rya7 se ojoequad ‘wreidexoy YIM i
yreq yreq | omdoos ‘purjusoo odiz ‘osioy uMOIG-1Y SI] peoy ssevis posur\y, Sury | ~
onjg | uMoq-1ysr] PJOMS UMBIP ‘SpNojo ‘OYOUS “IeI[B JOATIS peoy Sesnpey] | ssoourg
O[YOIS pue pJOMs UMLIP al De
wed yzeq | ‘Iquiru ‘rey Surprym ‘posura sourey yory peoy sfosuy posuiAy | —sourg .
psoas :
AdIg | uMoIg-1YSI'T] | UMeIp ‘spnojo snyNUINS ‘poIDAds UBU JO PROF] peoy S.pItyo posutM | usond e
psoms a
yseq | UMoiq-yieq] | UMeIp ‘spno[o SUIALIP ‘asJOY UAMOIG POSUIAA WIBISEXOY POSUIAA, Sury
uMoIq JO ONG umoig | dno wo yuna ‘Avids yaaa vas ‘snaoy urydjoq Ue | sssoutg | O
uMmolg 10 AdID umolg | oye] ‘dno woy sumssi Juodies ‘a]sv9 ‘uordioog a[seq | gout d|c
ontg | UMOoIq-pjoyn Joa ‘dno woyy Surnsst ystyAvso ‘stq] sIq] usand v
ong ey vos ‘dno wou Suimsst qvio ‘osioy SYA, | Uvy pousdo YIM Yyooovag gury of
"W0I}0q Iv IsOSIR|
on[g pjos-poy | ‘qnjo Suoy ‘rea pjos ‘soupy Surdeoy ‘1981,], peoy Ss Jost], | sssourd
adopy 101897, a
Aois-ontg MOT[PX |JO puURM DIT ‘soUeTT JUSTTRS pu PoALA\ posurm ‘peoy suory | soul g iz
pus Jo proy c
uA\IOg JO on[g plos-poy | Aavoy YIM puea ‘sourey Apeois ‘predoo’T] posurm ‘peoy s.predoa'T | usend| 5
yeoo
jezey Jo orn Plos-poy | JpZvOs ‘qnjo ‘sow Suravm ‘osioy yourg | pvoy s,osoy Yor[q posury suly
SHA YIVH S’IOGWNAS SLSAYO Sduv)_ | SLINS
SLINS AHL AO

sddvo LYNoo wos AHL AO SOLLSTYA.LOVAVHD TWIDddSH AHL GHNNSAY AAV NIFYHH

172

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

OF THE THIRTY-SIX DECANS

HERE follow the descriptions of the smaller cards of the
four suits, thirty-six in number, answering unto the thirty-six
Decans of the Zodiac.

Commencing from the sign Aries, the Central Decans of
each sign follow the order of the Days of the Week. Thus—

CARD ae MEANING DAY
3 of Wands me Established Strength ©
6 ,, P. fe) Material Success »)
Once ui Despair and Cruelty fe)
cae OF 9 Abundance fc)
6 ,, W. 8 Victory y
9 , P. Tp Material Gain Q
3.. 35: a Sorrow 5
6: 2G. mM Pleasure ©
9 ,, W. x" Great Strength »)
3 .,, P. V5 Material Words 3
peeees aR Earned Success f°)
GH. 43 Cs Material Happiness U

Being thus the Four Threes, Sixes, and Nines.
The first and third Decans follow the same order: Sunday

beginning in the First Decan of and in the Third Decans of
ILand ».

173

‘THE EQUINOX

The planets govern respectively Decans with the following
Titles—

%
1. & Strife 5 of Wands.
2. 2 Sorrow 3. ,, Swords.
3. Oppression to ,, Wands.
4. % Abundant Success 8 ,, Cups.
5. 8 Success Unfulfilled 7 ,, Pentacles.

Orin 8 2 # two wands: 1 each of the other suits.

4
1. & Victory 6 of Wands.
2. 2 _ Rest from Strife 4 ,, Swords.
3. YS Harmonious Change 2 ,, Pentacles.
4. Material Happiness 9 ,, Cups.
5. I Shortened Force 8 ,, Swords.

Orin I 8 2 YS two swords: 1 each of the other suits.

3
1. & Valour 7 of Wands.
2. I Loss in Pleasure 5 ,, Cups.
3. »* Material Works 3. ,, Pentacles.
4. ~ Perfected Success to ,, Cups.
5. ‘? Dominion 2 ,, Wands
6. I Despair and Cruelty. 9 ,, Swords

Orin‘? IL & M YS K2W. 2 C.: 1 each of the others.

One more Decan than the others.

©

t. I Prudence 8 of Pentacles.
TM Pleasure 6 ,, Cups.

174

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

3. YS Earthly Power
4. ? Established Strength

i ll

Ruin

4 ,, Pentacles.

3

» Wands.

Io ,, Swords.

Or in? IL Ml M V5 two pentacles: 1 each of others.

Th
Mm

QPP yx

7
99

Or int mM = P o5

Th
x
fo)
99

PP yx

Material Gain

Illusionary Success

Defeat

Perfected Work

Love

Wealth
Swiftness

Earned Success
Material Trouble

Abundance

2

°9 two Cups: 1 each of others.

%

NV BONN wo

10
8
6
5
3

of Pentacles.
5, Cups.
» Swords.

» Wands.
5» Cups.

of Pentacles.
» Wands.

» Swords.

», Pentacles.
5, Cups.

Ori in # V3 & °9 two Pentacles: 1 each of the others.

Qa zyx ip

Peace Restored
Great Strength
Unstable Effort
Material Success
Blended Pleasure

)

AN © N

4

of Swords.

» Wands.

» Swords.

», Pentacles.
5, Cups.

Orin 2 * = 8 °% two wands: 1 each of the other suits.

There being thirty-six Decans and seven Planets, it follows
that one of the latter must rule over one more Decan than

175

‘THE EQUINOX

the others. This is the Planet Mars, to which are allotted the
last Decan of ¥, and the first of ‘?, because the long cold
of the winter requires a great energy to overcome it, and
initiate spring.

And the beginning of the Decantes is from the royal
Star of Leo, the great Star Cor Leonis: and therefore is the
first Decan that of in &.

Here follow the general meanings of the small cards of
the suits, as classified under the nine Sephiroth below
Kether.

mesn The Four Twos symbolize the Powers of the King
and Queen just uniting and initiating the Force; but before
the Prince and Princess are thoroughly brought into action.
Therefore do they generally imply the initiation and
fecundation of a thing.

mas Realization of action owing to the Prince being
produced. The central symbol on each card. Action definitely
commenced for good or evil.

son Perfection, realization, completion: making a matter
settled and fixed.

musa Opposition, strife and struggle: war; obstacle to
the thing in hand. Ultimate success or failure is otherwise
shewn.

mospn Definite accomplishment. Thing carried out.

msi Generally shew a force transcending the Material
Plane: and is like unto a Crown; which, indeed, is powerful,
but requireth one capable of wearing it. The Sevens then
shew a possible result: which is dependent on the action then
taken. They depend much on the symbols that accompany
them.

176

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

ain Solitary success: 7.e. success in the matter for the time
being: but not leading to much result apart from the thing
itself.

wim" Very great fundamental force. Executive power,
because they restore a firm basis. Powerful for good or evil.

moos Fixed, culminated, complete Force, whether good
or evil. The matter thoroughly and definitely determined.
Ultimating Force.

Follow the particular descriptions of each of the thirty-six
cards: with full meanings.

Decan-cards are always modified by the other symbols
with which they are in contact.

XX!
THE LORD OF STRIFE
Five of Wands

Two White Radiant Angelic Hands issuant per nubes dex-
ter and sinister. They are clasped together in the grip of the
First Order, ze. the four fingers of each right hand crooked
into each other, the thumbs meeting above; and they hold, at
the same time, by their centres, five wands or torches which
are similar unto the wands of a Zelator Adeptus Minor. One
wand is upright in the middle; the others cross each other.
Flames leap from the point of junction. Above the middle
wand is the sign 5, and below is that of 8: thus repre-
senting the Decante. Violent strife and boldness, rashness,
cruelty, violence, lust, desire, prodigality and generosity;
depending on whether the card is well or ill dignified.

177

‘THE EQUINOX

Geburah of * (Quarrelling and fighting).

This Decan hath its beginning from the Royal Star of
Leo: and unto it are allotted the two great Angels of the
Schemhamphorash mim and Ss.

[The proper meaning of the small cards is to be found by
making thorough meditation and harmony between these four
symbols of each card. It will be seen that this is how the
meanings have been done; but the advanced student can go
beyond this rude working. ]

XXII
"THE LORD OF VICTORY
Six of Wands

Two hands in grip as the last, holding six wands crossed
three and three. Flames issue from the point of junction.
Above and below are short wands with flames issuing,
surmounted respectively by the symbols of ¥ and &,
representing the Decan.

Victory after strife: Love: pleasure gained by labour:
carefulness, sociability and avoiding of strife, yet victory
therein: also insolence, and pride of riches and success, etc.
The whole dependent on the dignity.

‘Tiphareth of * (Gain).

Hereunto are allotted the great Angels su*> and mn>y of
the Schemhamphorash.

178

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XXII
THE LORD OF VALOUR
Seven of Wands

Two hands holding by grip six wands, three crossed.
A third hand issuing from a cloud at the lower part of the card,
holding an upright wand which passes between the others.
Flames leap from the point of junction. Above and below the
central wand are the symbols of 6 and 8, representing the
Decan.

Possible victory, depending on the energy and courage
exercised; valour; opposition, obstacles and difficulties, yet
courage to meet them; quarrelling, ignorance, pretence, and
wrangling, and threatening; also victory in small and
unimportant things: and influence upon subordinates.

Netzach of * (Opposition, yet courage).

Therein rule the two great Angels mmm and osn® of the
Schemhamphorash.

XXIV
THE LORD OF PRUDENCE
Eight of Pentactes

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, issuing from a cloud,
and grasping a branch of a rose tree, with four white roses
thereon, which touch only the four lowermost Pentacles. No
rosebuds even, but only leaves, touch the four uppermost

179

‘THE EQUINOX

disks. All the Pentacles are similar to that of the Ace, but
without the Maltese cross and wings. They are arranged like
the geomantic figure Populus. Above and below them are the
symbols © and 1 for the Decan.

Over-careful in small things at the expense of great:
“Penny wise and pound foolish”: gain of ready money in small
sums; mean; avaricious; industrious; cultivation of land;
hoarding, lacking in enterprise.

Hod of ® (Skill: prudence: cunning).

Therein rule those mighty Angels MS28 and ossmnz.

XXV
THE LORD OF MATERIAL GAIN
Nine of Pentacles

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, holding a rose branch
with nine white roses, each of which touches a Pentacle.
The Pentacles are arranged thus #3: and there are rosebuds on
the branches as well as flowers. @ and M above and
below.

Complete realization of material gain, good, riches;
inheritance; covetous; treasuring of goods; and sometimes
theft and knavery. The whole according to dignity.

Yesod of § (Inheritance, much increase of goods).

Herein those mighty Angels 5S"m and ms have rule and
dominion.

180

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XXVI
"THE LORD OF WEALTH
Ten of Pentacles

AN Angelic Hand, holding by the lower extremity a branch
whose roses touch all the Pentacles. No buds, however, are
shewn. The symbols of ¥ and I? are above and below.

The Pentacles are thus arranged #3.

Completion of material gain and fortune; but nothing
beyond: as it were, at the very pinnacle of success. Old age,
slothfulness; great wealth, yet sometimes loss in part;
heaviness; dullness of mind, yet clever and prosperous in
money transactions.

Malkuth of = (Riches and wealth).

Herein are m™S> and mynn set over this Decan as Angel
Rulers.

XXVII
THE LORD OF PEACE RESTORED
Two of Swords or Pikes

Two crossed swords, like the air dagger of a Z.A.M., each
held by a White Radiant Angelic Hand. Upon the point
where the two cross is a rose of five petals, emitting white
rays. At the top and bottom of the card are two small daggers,
supporting respectively the symbol wv thus, and 2
representing the Decanate.

181

‘THE EQUINOX

Contradictory characters in the same nature, strength
through suffering; pleasure after pain. Sacrifice and trouble,
yet strength arising therefrom, symbolized by the position of
the rose, as though the pain itself had brought forth beauty.
Arrangement, peace restored; truce; truth and untruth;
sorrow and sympathy. Aid to the weak; arrangement;
justice, unselfishness; also a tendency to repetition of affronts
on being pardoned; injury when meaning well; given to
petitions; also a want of tact, and asking question of little
moment; talkative.

Chokmah of ‘. Quarrel made up, yet still some
tension in relations: actions sometimes selfish, sometimes
unselfish.

Herein rule the Great Angels 5s>t and 5smap.

XXVIII
THE LORD OF SORROW
Three of Swords or Spears

THREE White Radiating Angelic Hands, issuing from
clouds, and holding three swords upright (as though the
central sword had struck apart the two others, which were
crossed in the preceding symbol): the central sword cuts
asunder the rose of five petals, which in the previous symbol
grew at the junction of the swords; its petals are falling, and no
white rays issue from it.

Above and below the central sword are the symbols of 5
and 2.

182

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

Disruption, interruption, separation, quarrelling; sowing of
discord and strife, mischief-making, sorrow and tears; yet
mirth in Platonic pleasures; singing, faithfulness in promises,
honesty 1n money transactions, selfish and dissipated, yet
sometimes generous: deceitful in words and repetitions; the
whole according to dignity.

Binah of 1 (Unhappiness, sorrow, and tears).

Herein rule the Great Angels 5sm and mnpn as Lords of
the Decan.

XXIX
THE LORD OF REST FROM STRIFE
Four of Swords

Two White Radiating Angelic Hands, each holding two
swords; which four cross in the centre. The rose of five petals
with white radiations is reinstated on the point of their
intersection. Above and below, on the points of two small
daggers, are ¥ and ©, representing the Decanate.

Rest from sorrow; yet after and through it. Peace from and
after war. Relaxation of anxiety. Quietness, rest, ease and
plenty, yet after struggle. Goods of this life; abundance;
modified by dignity as is usual.

Chesed of 4 (Convalescence, recovery from sickness;
change for the better).

Herein do m™s® and 5s" bear rule.

183

‘THE EQUINOX

XXX
‘THE LORD OF LOSS IN PLEASURE
Five of Cups or Chalices

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, holding lotuses or water-
lilies, of which the flowers are falling right and left. Leaves
only, and no buds, surmount them. These lotus stems ascend
between the cups in the manner of a fountain, but no water
flows therefrom; neither is there water in any of the cups,
which are somewhat of the shape of the magical instrument of
the Zelator Adeptus Minor.

Above and below are the symbols of d and MM for the
Decan.

Death, or end of pleasure: disappointment, sorrow and loss
in those things from which pleasure is expected. Sadness,
treachery, deceit; ill-will, detraction; charity and kindness ill
requited; all kinds of anxieties and troubles from unsuspected
and unexpected sources.

Geburah of © (Disappointment in love, marriage broken
off, unkindness of a friend; loss of friendship).

Herein rule m5 and mone.

XXX!
THE LORD OF PLEASURE
Six of Chalices

AN Angelic Hand, as before, holds a group of stems of
water-lilies or lotuses, from which six flowers bend, one over

184

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

each cup. From these flowers a white glistening water flows
into the cups as from a fountain, but they are not yet full.
Above and below are © and M referring to the Decan.

Commencement of steady increase, gain and pleasure; but
commencement only. Also affront, detection, knowledge,
and in some instances contention and strife arising from
unwarranted self-assertion and vanity. Sometimes thankless
and presumptuous; sometimes amiable and patient. According
to dignity as usual.

Tiphareth of 7 (Beginning of wish, happiness, success, or
enjoyment).

Therein rule 5S253 and os.

XXXII
"THE LORD OF ILLUSIONARY SUCCESS
Seven of Chalices

THE seven cups are arranged as two descending triangles
above a point: a hand, as usual, holds lotus stems which arise
from the central lower cup. The hand is above this cup and
below the middle one. With the exception of the central lower
cup, each is overhung by a lotus flower, but no water falls from
these into any of the cups, which are all quite empty. Above
and below are the symbols of the Decanate ? and M.

Possible victory, but neutralized by the supineness of the
person: illusionary success, deception in the moment of
apparent victory. Lying, error, promises unfulfilled. Drunken-
ness, wrath, vanity. Lust, fornication, violence against women,

185

‘THE EQUINOX

selfish dissipation, deception in love and friendship. Often
success gained, but not followed up. Modified as usual by
dignity.

Netzach of © (Lying, promises unfulfilled; illusion,
deception, error; slight success at outset, not retained).

Herein the Angels 5mm and mssinn rule.

XXXII
THE LORD OF SWIFTNESS
Exght of Wands or Torches

FOUR White Radiating Angelic Hands (two proceeding
from each side) issuant from clouds; clasped in two pairs in the
centre with the grip of the First Order. They hold eight
wands, crossed four with four. Flames issue from the point
of junction. Surmounting the small wands with flames
issuing down them, and placed in the centre at the top and
bottom of the card respectively, are the symbols of ¥ and * for
the Decan.

‘Too much force applied too suddenly. Very rapid rush, but
quickly passed and expended. Violent, but not lasting.
Swiftness, rapidity, courage, boldness, confidence, freedom,
warfare, violence; love of open air, field-sports, gardens and
meadows. Generous, subtle, eloquent, yet somewhat
untrustworthy; rapacious, insolent, oppressive. Theft and
robbery. According to dignity.

Hod of * (Hasty communications and messages; swiftness).

Therein rule the Angels Mnn3 and MNSn.

186

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XXXIV
THE LORD OF GREAT STRENGTH
Nine of Wands or Torches

FOUR hands, as in the previous symbol, holding eight
wands crossed four and four; but a fifth hand at the foot of the
card holds another wand upright, which traverses the point of
junction with the others: flames leap herefrom. Above and
below are the symbols v and ”.

Tremendous and steady force that cannot be shaken.
Herculean strength, yet sometimes scientifically applied.
Great success, but with strife and energy. Victory, preceded
by apprehension and fear. Health good, and recovery not in
doubt. Generous, questioning and curious; fond of external
appearances: intractable, obstinate.

Yesod of * (Strength, power, health, recovery from
sickness).

Herein rule the Angels 5s and mnsw.

XXXV
THE LORD OF OPPRESSION
Ten of Wands

FOUR hands holding eight wands crossed as before. A fifth
hand holding two wands upright, which traverses the junction
of the others. Flames issuant. 5 and *.

Cruel and overbearing force and energy, but applied only

187

‘THE EQUINOX

to material and selfish ends. Sometimes shows failure in a
matter, and the opposition too strong to be controlled; arising
from the person’s too great selfishness at the beginning. [II-
will, levity, lying, malice, slander, envy, obstinacy; swiftness
in evil and deceit, if ill dignified. Also generosity, disinter-
estedness and self-sacrifice, when well dignified.

Malkuth of‘ (Cruelty, malice, revenge, injustice).

Therein rule 58" and Ssm1s.

XXXVI
THE LORD OF HARMONIOUS CHANGE
Two of Disks or Pentacles

‘TWO wheels, disks or pentacles, similar to that of the Ace.
They are united by a green-and-gold serpent, bound about
them like a figure of 8. It holds its tail in its mouth. A
White Radiant Angelic Hand holds the centre of the whole. No
roses enter into this card. Above and below are the symbols of
¥ and Y5. It is a revolving symbol.

The harmony of change, alternation of gain and loss;
weakness and strength; everchanging occupation; wandering,
discontented with any fixed condition of things; now elated,
then melancholy; industrious, yet unreliable; fortunate through
prudence of management, yet sometimes unaccountably foolish;
alternatively talkative and suspicious. Kind, yet wavering and
inconsistent. Fortunate in journeying. Argumentative.

Chokmah of & (Pleasant change, visit to friends).

Herein the Angels 5355 and m=wi have rule.

188

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XXXVIT
THE LORD OF MATERIAL WORKS
Three of Pentacles

A WHITE-WINGED Angelic Hand, as before, holding a branch
of a rose tree, of which two white rosebuds touch and sur-
mount the topmost Pentacle. The Pentacles are arranged in
an equilateral triangle. Above and below the symbols 3
and YS.

Working and constructive force, building up, creation,
erection; realization and increase of material things; gain in
commercial transactions, rank; increase of substance, influ-
ence, cleverness in business, selfishness. Commencement of
matters to be established later. Narrow and prejudiced. Keen
in matters of gain; sometimes given to seeking after
impossibilities.

Binah of *® (Business, paid employment, commercial
transaction).

Herein are mm and mnn> Angelic Rulers.

XXXVIII
THE LORD OF EARTHLY POWER
Four of Pentacles

A HAND holding a branch of a rose tree, but without
flowers or buds, save that in the centre is one fully blown
white rose. Pentacles are disposed as on the points of a
square; a rose in its centre. Symbols © and Y5 above and
below to represent the Decan.

189

‘THE EQUINOX

Assured material gain: success, rank, dominion, earthy
power, completed but leading to nothing beyond. Prejudicial,
covetous, suspicious, careful and orderly, but discontented.
Little enterprise or originality. According to dignity as usual.

Chesed of § (Gain of money or influence: a present).

Herein do mpi and 5ssan bear rule.

XXXIX
THE LORD OF DEFEAT
Five of Swords

Two Rayed Angelic Hands each holding two swords
nearly upright, but falling apart of each other, right and left of
the card. A third hand holds a sword upright in the centre as
though it had disunited them. The petals of the rose, which in
the four had been reinstated in the centre, are torn asunder
and falling. Above and below are 9 and * for Decan.

Contest finished and decided against the person; failure,
defeat, anxiety, trouble, poverty, avarice, grieving after gain,
laborious, unresting; loss and vileness of nature; malicious,
slanderous, lying, spiteful and tale-bearing. A busybody and
separator of friends, hating to see peace and love between
others. Cruel, yet cowardly, thankless and unreliable. Clever
and quick in thought and speech. Feelings of pity easily
roused, but unenduring.

Geburah of 1 (Defeat, loss, malice, spite, slander, evil-
speaking).

Herein the Angels sss and myn bear rule.

190

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XL
THE LORD OF EARNED SUCCESS
Six of Swords

‘Two hands, as before, each holding two swords which
cross in the centre. Rose re-established thereon. # and k above
and below, supported on the points of two short daggers or
swords.

Success after anxiety and trouble; self-esteem, beauty,
conceit, but sometimes modesty therewith; dominance,
patience, labour, etc.

Tiphareth of 1 (Labour, work, journey by water).

Ruled by the Great Angels *sym5 and 5st.

XLI
"THE LORD OF UNSTABLE EFFORT
Seven of Swords

Two Angelic Radiating Hands as before, each holding three
swords. A third hand holds up a single sword in the centre.
The points of all the swords just touch each other, the central
sword not altogether dividing them.

The Rose of the previous symbols of this suit is held up by
the same hand which holds the central sword: as if the victory
were at its disposal. Symbols of vy and =.

Partial success. Yielding when victory is within grasp, as

IgI

‘THE EQUINOX

if the last reserves of strength were used up. Inclination to
lose when on the point of gaining, through not continuing
the effort. Love of abundance, fascinated by display, given
to compliments, affronts and insolences, and to spy upon
others. Inclined to betray confidences, not always intention-
ally. Rather vacillatory and unreliable.

Netzach of 4 (Journey by land: in character untrustworthy).

Herein rule the Great Angels ssnnn and oss"p.

XLII
THE LORD OF ABANDONED SUCCESS
Exght of Chatices

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, holding a group of stems
of lotuses or water-lilies. There are only two flowers shown,
which bend over the two central cups, pouring into them a
white water which fills them and runs over into the three
lowest, which later are not yet filled The three vvv
uppermost are quite empty. At the top and bottom of ne
the card are symbols ® and X.

‘Temporary success, but without further results. Thing
thrown aside as soon as gained. Not lasting, even in the
matter in hand. Indolence in success. Journeying from
place to place. Misery and repining without cause. Seeking
after riches. Instability.

Hod of § (Success abandoned; decline of interest).

The Angels ruling are m1 and mn.

192

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF ‘THE ‘TAROT

XLII
THE LORD OF MATERIAL HAPPINESS
Nine of Chalices

A WHITE Radiant Angelic Hand, issuing from a cloud
holding lotus or water-lilies, one flower of which over-
hangs each cup; from it a white water pours. Cups are
arranged in three rows of 3. 4 and above and below.

Complete and perfect realization of pleasure and happiness,
almost perfect; self-praise, vanity, conceit, much talking of
self, yet kind and lovable, and may be self-denying therewith.
High-minded, not easily satisfied with small and limited
ideas. Apt to be maligned through too much self-assumption.
A good and generous, but sometimes foolish nature.

Yesod of ™ (Complete success, pleasure and happiness,
wishes fulfilled).

Therein rule the Angels m5s2 and oss"y.

XLIV
THE LORD OF PERFECTED SUCCESS
Ten of Cups or Chatlices

HAND, as usual, holding bunch of water-lilies or lotuses,
whose flowers pour a white water into all the cups, which a@//
run over. ‘The uppermost cup is held sideways by a hand, and
pours water into the left-hand upper cup. A single lotus flower
surmounts the top cup, and is the source of the water that fills
it. Above and below the symbols 6 and .

193

THE EQUINOX

Permanent and lasting success and happiness, because
inspired from above. Not so sensual as ‘Lord of Material
Happiness," yet almost more truly happy. Pleasure,
dissipation, debauchery, quietness, peacemaking. Kindness,
pity, generosity, wantonness, waste, etc., according to dignity.

Malkuth of n (Matter settled: complete good fortune).

Herein the Great Angels mwy and 5smp rule.

[This is not such a good card as stated. It represents
boredom, and quarrelling arising therefrom; disgust springing
from too great luxury. In particular it represents drug-
habits, the sottish excess of pleasure and the revenge of
nature. |

XLV
THE LORD OF DOMINION
Two of Wands

A WHITE Radiating Angelic hand, issuing from clouds,
and grasping two crossed wands. Flames issue from the point
of junction. On two small wands above and below, with
flames of five issuing therefrom, are the symbols of d and ‘?
for the Decan.

Strength, domination, harmony of rule and of justice.
Boldness, courage, fierceness, shamelessness, revenge, reso-
lution, generous, proud, sensitive, ambitious, refined, restless,
turbulent, sagacious withal, yet unforgiving and obstinate.

Chokmah of * (Influence over others, authority, power,
dominion).

Therein the Angels sim and 5s" bear rule.

194

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XLVI
THE LORD OF ESTABLISHED STRENGTH
Three of Wands

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand, as before, issuing from
clouds and grasping three wands in the centre (two crossed,
the third upright). Flames issue from the point of junction.
Above and below are the symbols © and ‘?.

Established force, strength, realization of hope.
Completion of labour. Success after struggle. Pride, nobility,
wealth, power, conceit. Rude self-assumption and insolence.
Generosity, obstinacy, etc.

Binah of * (Pride, arrogance, self-assertion).

Herein rule the Angels mwnn and mMpnry.

[This card is much better than as described. |

XLVII
THE LORD OF PERFECTED WORK
Four of Wands

Two White Radiating Angelic Hands, as before, issuing
from clouds right and left of the card and clasped in the centre
with the grip of the First Order, holding four wands or torches
crossed. Flames issue from the point of junction. Above and
below are two small flaming wands, with the symbols of 2 and
‘P representing the Decan.

Perfection or completion of a thing built up with trouble

195

‘THE EQUINOX

and labour. Rest after labour, subtlety, cleverness, beauty,
mirth, success in completion. Reasoning faculty, conclusions
drawn from previous knowledge. Unreadiness, unreliable and
unsteady through over-anxiety and hurriedness of action.
Graceful in manner, at times insincere, etc.
Chesed of * (Settlement, arrangement, completion).
Herein are 5SS33 and 5sms Angelic rulers.

XLVIII
THE LORD OF MATERIAL TROUBLE
Five of Pentacles

A WHITE Radiant Angelic Hand issuing from clouds, and
holding a branch of the white rose tree, but from which
the roses are falling, and leaving no buds behind. Five
Pentacles similar to the Ace. Above and below are %
and 8.

Loss of money or position. Trouble about material things.
Labour, toil, land cultivation; building, knowledge and
acuteness of earthly things, poverty, carefulness, kindness;
sometimes money regained after severe toil and labour.
Unimaginative, harsh, stern, determined, obstinate.

Geburah of * (Loss of profession, loss of money, monetary
anxiety).

Herein the angels mn38 and 5S™p rule.

196

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

XLIX
THE LORD OF MATERIAL SUCCESS
Six of Pentacles

A WHITE Radiant Angelic Hand holding a rose branch
with white roses and buds, each of which touches a
Pentacle. Pentacles are arranged in two columns of three
each $3. Above and below are the symbols 8 and w of the
Decan.

Success and gain in material undertakings. Power,
influence, rank, nobility, rule over the people. Fortunate,
successful, liberal and just.

If ill dignified, may be purse-proud, insolent from excess,
or prodigal.

Tiphareth of ® (Success in material things, prosperity in
business).

Herein rule the Angels mans and 5s>™.

L
THE LORD OF SUCCESS UNFULFILLED
Seven of Pentacles

A WHITE Radiating Angelic Hand issuing from a cloud,
and holding a white rose branch. Seven Pentacles arranged
like the geomantic figure Rubeus. There are only five buds,
which overhang, but do not touch the five uppermost

197

‘THE EQUINOX

Pentacles. Above and below are the Decan symbols, 5 and &
respectively.

Promises of success unfulfilled. (Shewn, as it were, by the
fact that the rosebuds do not come to anything.) Loss of
apparently promising fortune. Hopes deceived and crushed.
Disappointment, misery, slavery, necessity and baseness. A
cultivator of land, and yet a loser thereby. Sometimes it
denotes slight and isolated gains with no fruits resulting
therefrom, and of no further account, though seeming to
promise well.

Netzach of ® (Unprofitable speculations and employments;
little gain for much labour).

Therein 5sm-n and Ssovp are ruling Angels.

LI
THE LORD OF SHORTENED FORCE
Exght of Swords

FOUR White Radiant Angelic Hands issuing from clouds,
each holding two swords, points upwards; all the points
touch near the top of the card. Hands issue, two at each
bottom angle of the card. The pose of the other sword
symbols is re-established in the centre. Above and below
are the Decan symbols ¥ and IL.

Too much force applied to small things: too much
attention to detail at the expense of the principal and more
important points. When ill dignified, these qualities produce
malice, pettiness, and domineering characteristics. Patience

198

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

in detail of study; great care in some things, counterbalanced
by equal disorder in others. Impulsive; equally fond of giving
or receiving money or presents; generous, clever, acute, selfish
and without strong feeling of affection. Admires wisdom, yet
applies it to small and unworthy objects.

Hod of 5 (Narrow, restricted, petty, a prison).

Therein rule the Angels 5825 and 5ssnm.

LI
THE LORD OF DESPAIR AND CRUELTY
Nine of Swords

FOUR Hands, as in the preceding figure, hold eight swords
nearly upright, but with the points falling away from each
other. A fifth hand holds a ninth sword upright in the centre,
as if it had struck them asunder. No rose at all is shewn, as if
it were not merely cut asunder, but utterly destroyed. Above
and below are the Decan symbols d and IL.

Despair, cruelty, pitilessness, malice, suffering, want, loss,
misery. Burden, oppression, labour, subtlety and craft,
dishonesty, lying and slander.

Yet also obedience, faithfulness, patience, unselfishness,
etc. According to dignity.

Yesod of 4 (Illness, suffering, malice, cruelty, pain).

Therein do 5sisy and Ss*np bear rule.

199

‘THE EQUINOX

LIT
THE LORD OF RUIN
Ten of Swords

FOUR hands holding eight swords, as in the preceding
symbol; the points falling away from each other. Two
hands hold two swords crossed 1n the centre, as though their
junction had disunited the others. No rose, flower or bud,
is shewn. Above and below are © and IL, representing the
Decan.

Almost a worse symbol than the Nine of Swords. Un-
disciplined, warring force, complete disruption and failure.
Ruin of all plans and projects. Disdain, insolence and im-
pertinence, yet mirth and jollity therewith. A marplot, loving
to overthrow the happiness of others; a repeater of things;
given to much unprofitable speech, and of many words. Yet
clever, eloquent, etc., according to dignity.

Malkuth of 5 (Ruin, death, defeat, disruption).

Herein the Angels m2" and Sspsp reign.

LIV
THE LORD OF LOVE
Two of Chalices

A WHITE Radiant Hand, issuant from the lower part of
the card from a cloud, holds lotuses. A lotus flower rises

200

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

above water, which occupies the lower part of the card rising
above the hand. From this flower rises a stem, terminating
near the top of the card in another lotus, from which flows a
sparkling white water, as from a fountain. Crossed on the
stem just beneath are two dolphins, Argent and Or, on to
which the water falls, and from which it pours in full streams,
like jets of gold and silver, into two cups; which in their turn
overflow, flooding the lower part of the card. 9° and 99 above
and below.

Harmony of masculine and feminine united. Harmony,
pleasure, mirth, subtlety: but if ill dignified—folly, dissi-
pation, waste, silly actions.

Chokmah of m (Marriage, love, pleasure).

Therein rule the Angels 5sy"s and man.

LV
THE LORD OF ABUNDANCE
Three of Chatices

A WHITE Radiating Hand, as before, holds a group of
lotuses or water-lilies, from which two flowers rise on either
side of, and overhanging the top cup; pouring into it the white
water. Flowers in the same way pour white water into the
lower cups. All the cups overflow; the topmost into the two
others, and these upon the lower part of the card. Cups are
arranged in an erect equilateral triangle. ¥ and 99 above and
below.

Abundance, plenty, success, pleasure, sensuality, passive

201

‘THE EQUINOX

success, good luck and fortune; love, gladness, kindness,
liberality.

Binah of m (Plenty, hospitality, eating and drinking,
pleasure, dancing, new clothes, merriment).

Therein the Angels SS" and mp3° are lords.

LVI
THE LORD OF BLENDED PLEASURE
Four of Chalices

FOUR cups: the two upper overflowing into the two lower,
which do not overflow. An Angelic Hand grasps a branch of
lotus, from which ascends a stem bearing one flower at the top
of the card, from which the white water flows into the two
upper cups. From the centre two leaves pass right and left,
making, as it were, a cross between the four cups. Above and
below are the symbols vw and °9 for the Decan.

Success or pleasure approaching their end. A stationary
period in happiness, which may, or may not, continue. It does
not mean love and marriage so much as the previous symbol.
It is too passive a symbol to represent perfectly complete
happiness. Swiftness, hunting and pursuing. Acquisition by
contention: injustice sometimes; some drawbacks to pleasure
implied.

Chesed of m (Receiving pleasure or kindness from others,
but some discomfort therewith).

Therein rule the great Angels 58"n and mnie.

202

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

BRIEF MEANING OF TWENTY-TWO KEYS

o. IF the question refers to spiritual matters, the Fool
means idea, thought, spirituality, that which endeavours to
transcend Earth. But if question is material, it means
folly, stupidity, eccentricity, or even mania.

1. Skill, wisdom, adaptation, craft, cunning, or occult
wisdom or power.

2. Change, alternation, increase and decrease, fluctuation;
whether for good or evil depends on the dignity.

3. Beauty, happiness, pleasure, success. But with very bad
dignity it means luxury, dissipation.

4. War, conquest, victory, strife, ambition.

5. Divine wisdom, manifestation, explanation, teaching,
occult force voluntarily invoked.

6. Inspiration (passive, mediumistic), motive power,
action.

7. Triumph, victory, health (sometimes unstable).

8. Eternal justice. Strength and force, but arrested as in act
of judgment. May mean law, trial, etc.

9. Wisdom from on high. Active divine inspiration.
Sometimes “unexpected current.”

to. Good fortune, happiness (within bounds). Intoxication
of success.

11. Courage, strength, fortitude, power passing on to
action. Obstinacy.

12. Enforced sacrifice, punishment, loss, fatal and not
voluntary, suffering.

203

‘THE EQUINOX

13. Time, age, transformation, change involuntary (as
opposed to 18, Pisces). Or death, destruction (only latter with
special cards). [Specially, a sudden and quite unexpected
change. ]

14. Combination of forces, realization, action (material
effect, good or evil).

15. Materiality, material force, material temptation,
obsession.

16. Ambition, fighting, war, courage, or destruction,
danger, fall, ruin.

17. Hope, faith, unexpected help. Or dreaminess,
deceived hope, etc.

18. Dissatisfaction, voluntary change. Error, lying, falsity,
deception. This card is very sensitive to dignity.

19. Glory, gain, riches. With very evil cards it means
arrogance, display, vanity.

20. Final decision, judgment, sentence, determination of a
matter without appeal, on its plane.

21. The matter itself. Synthesis, world, kingdom. Usually
denotes actual subject of question, and therefore depends
entirely on accompanying cards.

[This table is very unsatisfactory. Each card must be most
carefully meditated, taking all its correspondences, and a clear
idea formed. |

Princes and Queens shew almost always actual men and
women connected with the matter.

But the Kings (Knights) sometime represent coming or
going of a matter, according as they face.

The Princesses shew opinions, thoughts, ideas, either in
harmony with or opposed to, the subject.

204

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

A Majority of Wands
bg Cups.
. Swords
” Pentacles
8 Keys .
- Court Cards .
be Aces

4 Aces.

3 Aces.

4 Kings (Knights)

3 99 99 ®

4 Queens

3 Queens

4 Princes

3 Princes

4 Princesses .
3 Princesses .
4 Tens.
3 Tens.
4 Nines
3 Nines
4 Eights
3 Eights

Energy, opposition, quarrel.

Pleasure, merriment.

Trouble, sadness, — sickness,
death.

Business, money, possessions.

Strong forces beyond the
Querent’s control.

Society, meetings of many
persons.

Strength generally. Aces are
always strong cards.

Great power and force.

Riches, success.

Swiftness, rapidity.

Unexpected meetings. Knights, in
general, shew news.

Authority, influence.

Powerful friends.

Meetings with the great.

Rank and honour.

New ideas or plans.

Society of the young.

Anxiety, responsibility.

Buying and selling (commerce).

Added responsibilities.

Much correspondence.

Much news.

Much journeying.

205

‘THE EQUINOX

4 Sevens ; : . Disappointments.

3 Sevens : . . Treaties and compacts.

4 Sixes ; : . Pleasure.

3 Sixes ; : . Gain, success.

4 Fives : : . Order, regularity.

3 Fives : : .  Quarrels, fights.

4 Fours ; : . Rest, peace.

3 Fours : : . Industry.

4 Threes ‘ : . Resolution, determination.

3 Threes ‘ ; . Deceit.

4 Twos : . . Conferences, conversations.

3 Twos ‘ ; . Reorganization, recommendation.
OF THE DIGNITIES

A CARD is strong or weak, well dignified or ill dignified,
according to the cards next to it on either side.

Cards of the same suit on either side strengthen it greatly,
for good or evil according to their nature.

Cards of opposite natures on either side weaken it greatly,
for either good or evil.

Swords are inimical to Pentacles.

Wands are inimical to Cups.

Swords are friendly with Cups and Wands.

Wands are friendly with Swords and Pentacles.

If a card fall between two other which are mutually
contrary, it is not much affected by either.

206

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

A METHOD OF DIVINATION BY THE TAROT

[This method is that given to students of the grade Adept
Adeptus Minor in the R. R. et A. C. But it has been revised
and improved, while certain safeguards have been introduced
in order to make its abuse impossible.—O.M. |

1. THE Significator.

Choose a card to represent the Querent, using your
knowledge or judgment of his character rather than dwelling
on his physical characteristics.

2. Take the cards in your left hand. In the right hand
hold the wand over them, and say: I invoke thee, I A O,
that thou wilt send H R U, the great Angel that is set over the
operations of this Secret Wisdom, to lay his hand invisibly
upon these consecrated cards of art, that thereby we may
obtain true knowledge of hidden things, to the glory of thine
ineffable Name. Amen.

3. Hand the cards to Querent, and bid him think of the
question attentively, and cut.

4. Take the cards as cut, and hold as for dealing.

First Operation
This shows the situation of the Querent at the time when
he consults you.
1. The pack being in front of you, cut, and place the top
half to the left.

207

‘THE EQUINOX

2. Cut each pack again to the left.

3. These four stacks represent I H V H, from right to left.

4. Find the Significator. It be in the * pack, the question
refers to work, business, etc.; if in the m pack, to love,
marriage, or pleasure; if in the 5 pack, to trouble, loss, scandal,
quarrelling, etc; if in the ® pack, to money, goods, and such
purely material matters.

5. Tell the Querent what he has come for: if wrong,
abandon the divination.

6. If right, spread out the pack containing the Significator,
face upwards.

Count the cards from him, in the direction in which he
faces.

The counting should include the card from which you
count.

For Knights, Queens and Princes, count 4.

For Princesses, count 7.

For Aces, count 11.

For small cards, count according to the number.

For trumps, count 3 for the elemental trumps; 9 for the
planetary trumps; 12 for the Zodiacal trumps.

Make a “story” of these cards. This story is that of the
beginning of the affair.

7. Pair the cards on either side of the Significator, then
those outside them, and so on. Make another “story,” which
should fill in the details omitted in the first.

8. If this story is not quite accurate, do not be discouraged.
Perhaps the Querent himself does not know everything. But
the main lines ought to be laid down firmly, with correctness,
or the divination should be abandoned.

208

DESCRIPTION OF THE CARDS OF THE ‘TAROT

Second Operation
Development of the Question

1. Shuffle, invoke suitably, and let Querent cut as before.

2. Deal cards into twelve stacks, for the twelve astrological
houses of heaven.

3. Make up your mind in which stack you ought to find
the Significator, ¢.g. in the seventh house if the question
concerns marriage, and so on.

4. Examine this chosen stack. If the Significator is not
there, try some cognate house. On a second failure, abandon
the divination.

5. Read the stack counting and pairing as before.

Third Operation
Further Development of the Question

1. Shuffle, etc., as before.

2. Deal cards into twelve stacks for the twelve signs of the
Zodiac.
3. Divine the proper stack and proceed as before.

Fourth Operation
Penultimate Aspects of the Question

1. Shuffle, etc., as before.
2. Find the Significator: set him upon the table; let the
thirty-six cards following form a ring round him.

209

‘THE EQUINOX

3. Count and pair as before.

[Note that the nature of each Decan is shewn by the small
card attributed to it, and by the symbols given in Liber
DCCLXXVII, cols. 149-151. |

Fifth Operation
Final Result

1. Shuffle, etc., as before.

2. Deal into ten packs in the form of the Tree of Life.

3. Make up your mind where the Significator should be, as
before; but failure does not here necessarily imply that the
divination has gone astray.

4. Count and pair as before.

[Note that one cannot tell at what part of the divination
the present time occurs. Usually Op. 1 seems to indicate the
past history of the question; but not always so. Experience
will teach. Sometimes a new current of high help may show
the moment of consultation.

I may add that in material matters this method is
extremely valuable. I have been able to work out the most
complex problems in minute detail. O. M.]

210

ON—ON—“POE'T”

I TO the open road,
You to the hunchbacked street—
Which of use two
Shall the earlier rue
That day we chanced to meet?

I with a heart that’s sound,
You with sick fancies of pain—
Which of us two

Would the earlier rue
If we chanced to meet again?

I jingle homely lore,
While you rhyme is with kiss—
Which of us two
Will the earlier rue
The love of the Hoylake Miss?

Not I the first to go,
Nor I the first to deceive --
Which of us two

Shall the the earliest rue

212

‘THE EQUINOX

Our garden of make-believe?
You were a Chinese god,
I an offering fair,
As we entered the
Garden of Allah,
To sing our holy prayer.

Entered with hearts bowed low,

Yet I heard a voice that cried:

For he is the god of the
Sacrifice,

You are the crucified.

It was all make-believe,
A foolish game of play,
Our garden of Allah

A drawing-room,
Our Chinese god of clay.

Strings of bruises for pearls,
‘Tears for forget-me-nots,
And a deadly pain

Of the sickening shame
Watching the fading spots.

As quickly they faded,
The heart of me faded as well,
Until nothing is left
Of my garden,
But a soul sunk to hell.

ON—ON—*“POET”

Hail!
Poet prend ton lute—Je disparaire,
No more together we’ll enter the
Enchanted garden of make-believe,
Nor my sad soul listen while thine deceive.
No more you’ll be the God of Sacrifice,
Nor I the crucified.
Ah, Garden of Allah—how bitter sweet
Thy fruit. Why breakest thou the heart?
Why spoilest thou the soul with notes
From thy golden lute?
Lo! our garden a common room,
Our Chinese god burnt clay, and
The singing of verses a funeral hymn
That awakes with awakening day.

Twas all such a meaningless play,
Poet prend ton lute—Je disparaitre.
Hail!

Poet, take my hand—we’ll walk
Still a little way.
I'll not desert thee at the close of day,
I, too, must pray.
A beggar asking alms of passers-by,
Does not refuse a drink to one who’s dry
That once by him did lie.
Poet, come close—before I leave for aye
‘Take thou my hand, we’ll walk still
A little way.

214

‘THE EQUINOX

One garment covered both to keep us warm,
What harmed the one, was’t not the other’s harm?
Close clasped, one single form.

Was it not meant of aye?

Poet, take thou my hand—we’ll still

Walk a little way.

MARY D’ ESTE.
(MARY DEMPSEY-BLINDEN-STURGES-BEY. )

ELDER EEL

A SKETCH
BY
ALEISTER CROWLEY

To
Tom Bond Bishop

PERSONS OF THE SKETCH

MR. MEEK, “he Minister
MR. DOSE, “he Doctor

MR. BONES, “he Butcher
MR. BUN, che Baker

MR. CHIPS, the Carpenter
MR. TONGS, the Tinker
MR. GRAB, the Grocer

MR. AWL, “he Cobbler
WOMEN, including JEANNIE MACKAY
ELDER EEL, the Exciseman
and

LILITH

Houses over closed shops

A narrow street

Cattle
House over
shop
(closed)
trough

A narrow street

House over
shop
(closed)

Ne Ree Na ed Nad So

Footlights

[The houses should have 14 or 16 windows arranged in two stories. All

windows have practicable shutters.]

ELDER EEL

SCENE: The Market-place of the Village of Houghmagandte.

[Enter L., BONES, BUN, CHIPS, TONGS, azd GRAB. A// are
dressed in the black shiny clothes conventional on
Sundays in the provinces. They are followed by a
number of women dressed with equal propriety, who enter
the houses that surround the market-place, and disappear.
One of them, JEANNIE MACKAY, walks apart, and as if
ashamed of herself. The scene 1s one of characteristic
Sabbath gloom. The men carry immense black Bibles.
They walk very slowly and heavtly.|

BONES. A stirring discourse.

CHIPS. Ay! the meenister was juist gran’.

TONGS. Losh! But that was guid aboot the destruction 0’
Sennacherib.

BUN. Ay!

GRAB. D’ye ken what he meant?

BONES. Ay! the meenister’s verra clear.

GRAB. Na! Na! but d’ye ken he was drivin’ the arrow of
the Wurrd to oor ain hairts?

BONES. Ay! But what d’ye mean?

219

‘THE EQUINOX

[Enter R., AWL. He ts a tall, sprightly man in a decent suit
of tweeds, and he 1s smoking a pipe. All turn from him
as if he were a leper.|

AWL. A braw day the day!

GRAB. Is this a day to be ta’king o’ days?

[A// groan.

AWL. This is the Lord’s Day, and a’m thankin’ Him for his

guid gift o’tobacco.

GRAB. Ye dirty little Atheist! D’ye no ken this is the

Sawbath? Awa’ wi’ ye from the Lord’s children!

BONES. An’ dinna blaspheme!

GRAB. Beware, ye fausse loon! The judgment o’ the Lord

is nigh at han’.

CHIPS. The meenister preached o’ the destruction 0’

Sennacherib.

AWL. An’ wha’s Sennacherib?

CHIPS. Juist sic anither as yoursel’. A fleetin’, flytin’,

floutin’, sweerin’ deevil like yoursel’!

AWL. Ah, weel! puir bodies, ye don’t know all! Guid job

for you!
[He passes over, and goes out, L.

BUN. The sculduddery wastrel!

BONES. The blasphemin’ loon!

CHIPS. The feckless child 0’ Satan!

TONGS. The rantin’, roarin’ lion!

GRAB. Ah! d’ye ken the noo wha the meenister meant by

Sennacherib?

ALL. Ah!

GRAB. D’ye mind Sennacherib was King o’ Babylon?

ALL. Ah!

220

ELDER EEL

GRAB. D’ye ken—ah! here comes Elder Eel, the guid
man. He'll tell tv ’e. He’s seen wi’ his ain een!

[Enter L., ELDER EEL, very tall and thin and lantern-

jawed, more solemn and portentous than the others.|

GRAB. The Blessing o’ the Lord be on ye, Elder. Will ye
tell the fowk o’ the terrible scandal in Houghmagandie?

EEL. The han’ o’ the Lord is heavy upon us for oor
sins.

ALL. Ay! Ay

GRAB. We are but puir sinners.

EEL. Ay! we deserve it. But our punishment is greater
than we can bear.

ALL. Woe unto us!

EEL. Wi these een hae I seen it! Alack the day! My
brethren, d’ye ken wha’s ta’en the lodging ower Awl’s
shop?

BONES. When?

EEL. Last nicht. The very eve o’ the Blessed Sabbath!

[A// groan.

CHIPS. Wha’ then?

EEL. The ’Hoor 0’ Babylon!

ALL. The ’Hoor o’ Babylon!

EEL. A wanton, forward wench! A Babylonish Harlot!

BONES. The Lord ha’ mercy on us!

EEL. An actress body!

ALL. The Lord ha’ mercy on us!

CHIPS. Fra’ Glasgie, I doot?

EEL. Waur!

ALL. Waur?

EEL. Waur!

221

‘THE EQUINOX

BUN. No’ fra’ Lunnon, Elder. It’s main impawsible!

EEL. Waur!

BONES. It canna be! It canna be!

EEL. Waur. Far waur!

TONGS. Hoots! but we maun ha’ fallen into terrible
sin.

BONES. Fra’ whaur? In the Lord’s name, mon, tell. We’re
fair distrachit.

EEL. Fra’ Pairisss!

GRAB. Fra’ the Hame o’ the De’il!

BONES. Fra’ Hell! Fra’ the Bottomless Pit!

CHIPS. The ’Hoor 0’ Babylon! The Scarlet Wumman that
rideth on the Beast wi’ Seven Heads!

TONGS. Fra’ the very hairt 0’ a’ sculduddery an’ wicked-
ness!

BUN. O Lord! ha’ mercy upon us!

EEL. Indeed, I ha’ seen her at the window. Aboot nine o’
th’ clock last nicht when a’ guid fowk suld be abed—and I
mysel’ was wa’king hame fra’ the meenister’s. And there she
was at the window, wi’ her lang hair doun on her bare
shou ders.

ALL. A’ weel! a’ weel! ’Tis a wicked wurrld!

EEL. D’ye ken she leanit oot, the Jezebel, wi’ her painted
face, an’-—an’———

ALL. Weel!

EEL. The audacious wench cried oot, “Gude-nicht,
Chairlie!” an’ blew me a kiss.

ALL. A’ weel!

EEL. An’ I cried oot 1 the wurrds o’ the gude buke: “An
Jehu cried unto the eunuchs, Throw her dune”!

222

ELDER EEL

BONES. An’ was she rebukit?

EEL. Nay! she cried back on me: “There’s no eunuchs
here, Chairlie, nor none wanted. Throw it up!”

CHIPS. The brazen, forward, sculduddery wench! The
flytin’, sweerin’ harlot o’ Babylon!

EEL. An’ then she picks up her fiddle that she’s lured
thousands o’ men to their doom wi’, and she plays, “We are na
fou, we’re no that fou.”

ALL. Shame on her!

GRAB. Hark! wha’s that?

[The tuning of a violin ts heard, off.

EEL. There she is! There’s the ’Hoor o’ Babylon!

[LILITH, off, plays a lively though classical piece of music.

EEL. To your tents, O Israel! To your hames, men o’
Houghmagandie! On to the marrow-bones o’ your knees, and
pray that the curse may be removed from us!

ALL. Amen!

EEL. As for me, Ill wrastle wi’ this deevil, and maybe
have strength given me to owercome it. Here comes the
meenister; I’]l hae twa wurrds wi’ him on the matter!

ALL. Guid guide ye and preserve ye!

[A// go off R., in consternation.

EEL. An’ noo to wrastle wi’ the demon!

[Ener L., MEEK aud DOSE. DOSE zs an educated man,

well dressed.|

EEL. Gude-mornin’, meenister! Gude-mornin’, doctor!

MEEK [Very humble and quiet|. Gude-mornin’, Elder!

DOSE. Morning, Elder!

EEL. I wad hae twa wurrds wi’ ye, meenister!

MEEK. Ay! Ay! What is it, noo?

223

‘THE EQUINOX

EEL. Meenister, it’s verra terrible, what I wad say to ye.
The ’Hoor o’ Babylon’s amang us.

[The doctor laughs.

DOSE. At it again, Eel? Ha! Ha! Ha!

EEL. Ay, sir, d’ye ken this is a muckle serious affair!
There’s a French actress body in the village! In the Village o’
Houghmagandie!

DOSE. Ha! Ha! Ha! I was just going to tell you about it,
Meek. It’s a dear little Russian girl, a friend of my wife’s.
She’s had a tremendous season in Paris—they went mad over
her—so we suggested her coming up here for a rest. She
wouldn’t stay with us—poor child, she has to practise eight
hours a day!—so we got her the room over Awl’s, and she
comes to the Surgery for meals. My wife’s bringing her up to
the Manse to call on Monday.

MEER. Oh! Oh! There, Elder, you see it’s all right.

EEL. [aghast]. A’ richt! !!—a’ —richt!!!

[MEEK aud DOSE nod and pass on, laughing.

EEL. He’s fair witched. He’s the prey o’ Satan! The
meenister was laughing on the Sawbath! Oh, Lord! Lord!
An’ I’m left by my lanes to wrastle wi’ the de’il 1’ petticoats!
Witchcraft! fair witchcraft! An’ sorcery! Whaur’s ony help
but in the A’mighty? [He takes out a flat whisky flask and
swallows a big dram.| Whaur, I say, is ony help but in the
A’mighty?

[Re-enter AWL, L., stall smoking.

AWL. Hullo, Elder, an’ what’s the matter noo? Hae ye
discovered the sin of Achan again?

EEL. Ah, well, ah, well! Alack the day! ... Hae ye come
to torrment me, ye dirty little Atheist?

224

ELDER EEL

AWL. ‘Three lies in three words, Elder. Ye’ll win the
Bishop’s Kettle this year, for sure! But what is it? Hae the
Glasgie fowk got wind o’ your little affair wi’ Bungs? What
d’ye mak’ a year oot o’ that?

EEL. Ye wicked deevil!

AWL. I dinna care. It’s your affair to take the King’s
siller, and the whisky man’s gowd! But I’m wondering hoo it
gangs wi’ sae muckle releegion!

EEL. Hoo dare ye?

AWL. Or have they found your ain private still o’er the
brae? An exciseman wi’ a still o’ his ain! ha! ha! ha!

EEL. Ye fausse fiend! Hae ye gi’en me awa’?

AWL. Na! I’m no sae releegious as ye are. But I doot it’s
fowk ken o’ your dealin’s wi’ Jeannie Mackay!

EEL. Hoo did ye ken that?

AWL. Why, the lass is in trouble; and you best ken wha’s
the fault is.

EEL. Ay! And didna I gie her fower shilling an’ saxpence
to get tae Glasgie an’ hide her shame? An’ didna I rebuke her
for the sin o’t by the reever bank, so that she might hae found
grace to droon hersel’?

AWL. Ay! ye’re a mean, sneakin’, coordly, murderous
dog! ‘That I didna ken, an’ I thank ye for tellin’ me. I’m
for ben.

[He spits ostentatiously on the ground and goes off R. But

remains visible to audience as one watching the scene.
He whistles softly and beckons, off:|

EEL. Bad! Bad! I maun be fey to hae tellt him that. But
I'll see Jeannie, and gie her twa pund sterling—na! one pund
fifteen shillin—na! one pund ten shillin’-—an’ get her

225

‘THE EQUINOX

tae Glasgie—wi the promise o’ mair! Ay! yon’s the
teecket—wi’ the promise o’ mair! An’ Ill chase the Baby-
lonish Harlot fra’ Houghmagandie, so that if the wurst comes
tae the wurst, fowk winna gie ony creedit tae the lass. An’
noo, then, wi’ my conscience clearit, I'll confront the lioness 1’
her den.

[He turns to go off R., and ts startled to find LILITH enter-

img R. She wears a thin summer dress very
beautifully made, and on her head 1s a coquettish hat
with a suggestion of horns. On seeing him she
laughs. H1s gloom deepens. She goes up and curtseys to
him, then puts up her fiddle and plays the “Old
Hundredth,” or other Scottish hymn tune.|

EEL. Weel, wad ye aye play holy tunes, I wadna say!

LShe plays a religious classical ptece.

EEL. That savours 0’ Popery, I doot! But i’? the main ye

mean wee!l!

[She plays “Auld Lang Syne,” and other Scottish ballads,

arranged so as to lead from grave to gay. He ts by this
ume enthralled by the music, and begins to show
animation, following the beats with his hands. Even
his feet begin to be uneasy.

EEL. Weel! weel! wha wad hae thocht it? There’s no sic

hairm after a’, maybe.

226

[She sees him her prey, and plays a mad Hungarian

dance. He is compelled to pick up the step, and
she leads him, dancing, three or four times round the
stage and off, L.. AWL comes out to centre of stage.
LILITH, off, changes to “The De’il’s awa’ wi? th’
Exciseman.” |

ELDER EEL

AWL. szngs:

The de’il cam’ fiddling through our toun,
An’s danced awa’ wi’ th’ Exciseman;
And ilka wife cries:

[the windows of every house burst open, and women

appear, joining in the song.|
Auld Mahoun!
I wish ye joy 0’ your prize, mon!
The de’il’s awa’, the de’il’s awa’.
The de’il’s awa’ wi’ th’ Exciseman.
He’s danced awa’, he’s danced awa’
He’s danced awa’ wi’ th’ Exciseman!

[Repeat chorus while the villagers flock back to the stage.

The women are now dressed in the gayest peasant
costumes. LILITH, off, resumes the dance tune and
leads on EEL, who by this time 1s dancing with
absolute abandon. All make way for him and stand
back, laughing. The music stops. EEL, suddenly
brought to himself, stares and gasps. He would go off,
but AWL stops him.|

AWL. Na, Elder, ye’ve made this toon a hell lang eneugh!
‘Tae the fountain, lads!

[They catch him, and duck him half a dozen times.
[Enter MEEK.

MEEK [rows up iis arms|. Av’ what, ? the Lord’s name,
is come to Houghmagandie?

AWL. It’s a’ richt, meenister. But I’m the Law an’ the
Prophets the day!

[ELDER EEL comes dripping from the fountain.

227

‘THE EQUINOX

AWL. Prisoner at the bar, are ye guilty or not guilty?
Guilty!’ Whaur’s Jeannie Mackay? Dinna fear, lass. Will ye
wed this mon here?

JEANNIE. Ay, sir [she zs in rears]. It’s his bairn, Gude
kens.

AWL. Now, meenister, this is whaur ye’re wanted. D’ye
consent, Elder? Ye’ve been a hairtless auld scoundrel, but ye
can e’en dae the richt thing by the lass noo.

EEL. Ay! I repent sincerely.

AWL. None o’ that! Say ye’re sorry, like a mon!

EEL. I’m sorry, Jeannie. An’ [ll be a gude mon tae ye,
lass.

AWL. That’s better. Now, meenister, the Blessing.

MEEK. In the name o’ God, I declare ye lawful man an’
wife. [He soins their hands and blesses them.|

AWL. An’ no more private still, Elder, an’ no more bribes
fra distillers!

EEL. Ay! I mean it.

AWL. Guid. Now, lass, run off wi’ him, lest he fa’ into
the snare o’ the ’Hoor o’ Babylon again; an’ this time for his
soul’s ill!

[A// laugh. EEL goes off with JEANNIE.

AWL. Noo, lads an’ lasses a’! Prayer i? th’ morning, an’
thanksgivin’ in th’ afternoon.

[LILITH plays.

[szzgs] We'll mak’ our maut, we’ll brew oor drink

We'll dance an’ sing an’ rejoice, mon,
An’ mony braw thanks tae the mickle black de’1l
[Bowing to LILITH]
That’s danced awa’ wi’ th’ Exciseman!

228

ELDER EEL

There’s threesome reels, there’s foursome reels,
There’s hornpipes an’ strathspeys, mon!
But the ae best dance e’er came tae oor land
Was—the de’1l’s awa’ wi’ th’ Exciseman!
[Chorus as before. All dance merrily, and at last even
the minister 1s carried off by a hig flamboyant girl
into the centre of the crowd.|

CURTAIN.

229

230

THE SPADGER

By JOHN MASEFIELD, JUNIOR

(No relation to the immortal poet of that name)

DEDICATED GRATEFULLY TO MR. AUSTIN HARRISON
There was a spadger
Went upa spout;
There came a thunderstorm,
And washed the out.
The little spadger
Sat on the grass,
And told the thunderstorm
To its
And when the storm was done,
And all the rain,
The little spadger
Went up again.
‘There came a spadger hawk
And spied the snuggery,
And with his claws he tore
That to
‘There came a thunderbolt
From the hand of God;
It hit that spadger hawk
And killed the
There is a moral
To this moral story—
If you goes up the spout
You goes to glory.

[DAVID HAMISH JENKINS, a native of Merthyr Tydfil,
originally studied painting, and produced several excellent
pictures. At the age of twenty-one he took up the study of the
classics, and occupied the position of classical master at
several public schools. Whilst in London he met Aleister
Crowley, whose poetical works had a great charm for him.
Jenkins was a prolific writer, but unfortunately, little of his
work was published before his death at the early age of
thirty-three. He died in March 1911, mourned by a large circle
of friends. E. W.]

TO PERSIS

I

CHILD—forgive me if I call thee child—

The weight of my mortality in years,

I reckon not, but tribulations wild,

With stormy battle, stress of life and fears.

I see thee once again athwart the mist

Of Time, and past the wane of many moons

Not changed, with still a change—the same, I wist,
Yet not—as purest daylight’s change from noon.

II

I then beheld thee with thy tresses rolled

In darkling curls and masses long adown:

A child thou wert, in maiden’s youthful mould,
With childhood’s pensive magic round thee thrown.

231

‘THE EQUINOX

To see thee changed, ah! ’tis a sign of Time’s
Unending, ceaseless march. You come again

With those thick dusky masses coiled betimes
And coifed around thy head in plait and chain.

II

Tis but a trifling change—a petty pace,

But fraught with all the force of Yet To Be:

For to mine eyes thy simple act of grace

Is one step onward, whither no one can see—

A little further to the Great Unknown

By ways where Life’s Periodics plants her rood
The Living Progress landmarks all alone,

Soon passed:—thou reachest on to Womanhood!

IV

Fair—God grant that it be fair—thy world!

With influence of Goodness shed around.

Far from thee may the tongue of Spite uncurl
With venom’d spleen, and vicious raucous sound!
Have mercy, God! I am not proud, not proud!
But all my pent-up wrath I pour on Spite.

It is enough! Forgive these murmurings loud
Against the Powers and Majesties of Night.

L°’ENVOI

Good child, you will again depart—F ates weave their spell,
All hail! God-speed! May God be with you! and—Farewell!
D. HAMISH JENKINS.

232

WATTE’S WET

OR

‘THE BACKSLIDER’S RE’TURN

“All things come to him who Waites.”
“T waited patiently on the Lord; and He inclined unto me, and heard

my cry.”

IT was a brilliant May afternoon when the Prodigal re-
turned. At the offices of the Eguimox the usual constellation
was assembled. Crowley lay lost in meditation upon the
1500-guinea Persian rug, which he had received from the
executors of the late John Brown; Neuburg, covered from
head to foot with yellow paint and his own post-prandial
poetry, was yelling with laughter over a telegram which
informed him that his favourite uncle had been disembowelled
by a mad bull; Wieland, his head among the fire-irons, his
soul among the stars, was trying to remember two important
engagements which he had written down in his note-book five
minutes earlier; Ethel Archer, talked to by Meredith Starr,
but not listening to him, sat pale and classical on the edge of
a table in default of a promontory, saying softly: “Bysses—
—astetr—kisses—caster—blisses—faster—this 1s—master—
misses — disaster — Pisces — poetaster— Cambyses— chaster;
Madam Strindberg, still smarting under the description of
herself as “relict or derelict” of somebody, having

233

‘THE EQUINOX

telegraphed to the Bank to stop any cheques she might draw
in the next twelve months, was committing suicide with the
murmured apology: “After all, this isn’t an hotel”; while
“Boy Billy,” tastefully costumed for walking in Bond Street as
an Egyptian sais, was romping with her third best pal in
spite of the broken heart which she had left beneath the boots
of Mr. Hener Skene; Mr. Austin Harrison, who had dropped
in for a quiet afternoon, was quite failing to grasp the
situation created by the Editor herself, who, shaking in
every chin, declared rather more than less than aloud that,
waiters or no waiters, she meant to marry him, and the
gentleman down-stairs could go—my grandmother’s hat!—
and——

She was interrupted by the arrival of a telegraph boy,
who delivered a bulky envelope containing the following
message—

“Notwithstanding categorical imputations sacramentally
integrated similitudes undedicated warrants antecedent
Paulopetrine typology casually unworthy  hypostaticism
predecessorial superincission archidiaconal arch-amphibians
osify elpidize redintegration status lymphaticus.”

“A cipher telegram! How romantic!” cried the Editor,
releasing Austin Harrison for the fraction of a second.

“Oh no,” said Crowley, “it’s quite plain English; it’s from
Arthur Edward Waite. He repents; he comes back to the fold.
He begs forgiveness. Osify means ‘dare’; eplidize, ‘hope’;
redintegration, ‘restoration’; status, ‘status.’ ”

“But he says ‘status lymphaticus.’ ”

234

WAITE’S WET

“It’s a disease; he read about it in the Daz/y Mai/ on the
Underground between Aldgate and Blackfriars; but it sounds
better than plain ‘status’; so he damned the extra ha’penny,
and put it. To my mind it’s the shortest and plainest thing
he’s ever written. And I forgive him all.”

The company, overborne by authority, acquiesced. Only
Neuburg, always a pessimist, doubted. “It’s unsigned!” he
groaned, his lips, blood-stained bolsters dipped in ink,
writhing like half-boiled lobsters.

The Editor, with one shriek, one sob, and one sigh,
thinking of the veil of the temple, tore a napkin in default of
anything else to tear, and cried: “It is finished! Votes for
Women!” Neuburg, his nose working feverishly, burst into
hyena-howls. ‘The Master arose; calling for hot water and
sulphuric acid, he comparatively cleaned the victim’s left ear,
and bit another piece off. Calm was restored.'

Remembering Mr. Waite’s statement in Who’s Who that
he “holds nearly all degrees of Masonry known in England,
and some which are here unknown,” Crowley dictated the
following telegram—

“Waite, Esquire, Etcetera, Sidmouth Lodge, South
Ealing.
“Yes.
“ALEISTER CROWLEY.
“Apprentice, Companion, Master, Secret Master, Perfect
Master, Intimate Secretary, Provost and Judge, Valiant

‘In the event. Neuburg proved to have been justified in his scepticism.
The telegram was not from Waite; it was a practical joke of Dr. Wynn
Westcott’s, prossibly. But I can no more rewrite this article than Crowley can
replace Neuburg’s ear.—A. Q., JR.

235

‘THE EQUINOX

Master, Elect of Nine, Elect of the Unknown, Elect of
Fifteen, Perfect Elect, Illustrious, and in Scotland of the
Holy Trinity, Companion, Master, Panissiére, Master of the
Triangle, of J.J.J., of the Sacred Vault, and of St. Andrew:
Little Architect, Grand Architect, and Architect in Light
and Perfection; Apprentice, Companion, and Master Perfect
Architect, Perfect Architect, and in Scotland Sublime,
and Sublime of Heredom; Royal Arch, Grand Axe, Sublime
Knight of Choice, Knight of the Sublime Choice, Prussian
Knight, Kwzght of the Temple, Knight of the Eagle,
Knight of the Black Eagle, Knight of the Red Eagle, Knight
of the White East, Kuzght of the East, Commander of the
East, Grand Commander of the East, Sovereign Commander
of the Temple, and Prince of Jerusalem: Sovereign Prince
Rose Croix of Kilwinning and of Heredom, Knight of the
West, Sublime Philosopher, Discreet of Chaos, Sage of Chaos,
Knight of the Sun, Supreme Commander of the Stars,
Sublime Philosopher Knight Noachite, of all four grades of
the Key of Masonry, True Mason Adept, Sovereign Elect,
Sovereign of Sovereigns, Grand Master of the Symbolic
Lodges, Very High and Very Powerful, Knight of Palestine,
Knight of the White Eagle, Grand Elected Knight Kadosch
Sovereign Inspector, and Grand Inquisitor Commander,
Beneficent Knight, Knight of the Rainbow, Knight of
Banuka, Very Wise Israelite Prince, Sovereign Prince
Talmudim, Sovereign Prince Zadkim, Grand-Haram, Grand
Prince Haram, Sovereign Prince Hasid, Sovereign Grand
Prince Hasid, and Grand Inspector Intendant Regulator of
the Order: Sovereign Prince of the 78th, 79th, 80th and
81st degrees; Sovereign Prince of the 82nd, 83rd, 84th,

236

WAITE’S WET

85th and 86th degrees; Soverezgn Grand Prince of the 87th
degree, Grand Master Consituent of the Order for the
First Series, Sovereign Grand Prince of the 88th degree,
Grand Master Constituent of the Order for the Second Series,
Soveretgn Grand Prince of the 89th degree, Grand Master
Constituent of the Order for the Third Series, and of the
NINETIETH AND LAST DEGREE SUPREME
GRAND CONSERVATOR AND ABSOLUTE GRAND
SOVEREIGN AND PATRIARCH OF THE ANCIENT
ORIENTAL RITE OF MIZRAIM: Pastophoris, Neo-
coris, and Melanophoris; Christophoris, Perfect Master
Balahate, Sublime Master Just and Perfect, Sublime Epopt,
and Knight of the Iris; Sublime Minerval, Knight of
the Golden Fleece, Grand Elect Mysophilote, Knight
of the Triangle, Kuzght of the Sacred Arch, Knight of
the Secret Vault, Kwzght of the Sword, Knight of Jeru-
salem, Knight of the East and Knight of the Rose Croix:
Knight of the Red Eagle, Kzzght of the Temple, Sublime
Aletophilote, Knight of Libanus, Kzzght of Heredom, Knight
of the Tabernacle, Knight of the Serpent, Knight Sage of
Truth, Kzight Hermetic Philosopher, Knight of the Key,
Knight of the White Eagle, KNIGHT KADOSCH, Knight of
the Black Eagle, KNIGHT OF THE ROYAL MYSTERY,
and KNIGHT GRAND INSPECTOR; Knight of Scandi-
navia, Sublime Commander of the Temple, Sublime Negoti-
ate, Knight of Shota, Sublime Elect of Truth, Grand Elect of
the Atons, Sage Savaist, Kuzght of the Arch of Seven
Columns, Prince of Light, Sublime Hermetic Sage, Prince of
the Zodiac, Sublime Sage of the Mysteries, Sublime Pastor of
the Huts, Kuzght of the Seven Stars, Sublime Guardian of the

237

‘THE EQUINOX

Sacred Mount, and Sublime Sage of the Pyramids; Sublime
Philosopher of Samothrace, Sublime Titan of the Caucasus,
Sage of the Labyrinth, Kuzght of the Pheenix, Sublime Scald,
Sublime Orphic Doctor, Pontiff of Cadmia, Sublime Magus,
Prince Brahmin, Grand Pontiff of Ogygia, Sublime Guardian
of the Three Fires, Sublime Unknown Philosopher, Sublime
Sage of Eleusts, Sublime Kawi, Sage of Mythras, Grand
Installator Guardian of the Sanctuary, Grand Consecrator
Architect of the Mystic City, Grand Eulogist Guardian of the
Ineffable Name, Patriarch of Truth, Knight of the Golden
Branch of Eleusts, Patriarch of the Planispheres, Patriarch of
the Sacred Vedas, Supreme Master of Wisdom, Doctor of the
Sacred Fire, Sublime Master of the Sloka, and Knight of the
Lybic Chain: Patriarch of Isis, Sublime Knight Theosopher,
Grand Pontiff of the Thebaid, Knight of the Redoubtable
Sada, Sublime Elect of the Sanctuary of Mazias, Patriarch of
Memphis, Grand Elect of the Temple of Midgard, Sublime
Knight of the Valley of Oddy, Doctor of the Izeds, Sublime
Knight of Kneph, Sublime Philosopher of the Valley of
Kabal, Sublime Prince of Masonry, Grand Elect of the Sacred
Curtain, Prince Pontiff of the Mystic City, Sovereign Master of
Masonry, and Perfect Pontiff Sublime Master of the Great
Work: Grand Defender of the Order, Sublime Catechist,
Adept of Sirius, Adept of Babylon, Companion Banuke,
Companion Zerdust, Companion of the Luminous Ring, Sage
of Elea, Sage of Delphi, Sublime Sage of Symbols Intendant
of Hieroglyphics, Sublime Sage of Wisdom, Sublime Sage of
the Mysteries, Sublime Sage of the Sphinx, Priest of On,
Grand Inspector Regulator General of the Order, Prince and
Pontiff of Memphis, Grand Administrator of the Order,

238

WAITE’S WET

PATRIARCH GRAND CONSERVATOR OF THE
ORDER, and a MEMBER OF THE SOVEREIGN
SANCTUARY of ze ANCIENT ORIENTAL RITE OF
MEMPHIS: Apprentice, Companion, and Master,
Discreet Master, Perfect Master, Intimate Secretary, Provost
and Judge, and Intendant of the Buildings; Elect of Nine,
Elect of Fifteen and Sublime Knight Elect; Grand Master
Architect, Azcient Master of the Royal Arch, and Grand
Elect Perfect and Sublime Mason; Knight of the Sword,
Prince of Jerusalem, Knight of the East and West, and
Knight of the Rose Croix of Heredom; Grand Pontiff,
Master ad Vitam, Knight, Prince of Libanus, Chief of the
Tabernacle, Prince of the Tabernacle, Knight of the Brazen
Serpent, Prince of Mercy and Grand Commander of the
Temple of Jerusalem; Knight of the Sun, Prince Adept,
Grand Sublime Knight of St. Andrew of Scotland, GRAND
ELECTED KNIGHT KADOSCH, Grand Inquisitor Com-
mander, Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret, and SOVER-
EIGN GRAND INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE
THIRTY-THIRD AND LAST DEGREE OF THE
ANCIENT AND ACCEPTED SCOTTISH’ RITE:
etc., EtC., Etc., Etc., Etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc.,
etc., etc., Etc., Etc., Etc., Etc., etc., eEtcC., etc., etc., etc., etc.,
etc., etC., Etc., Etc., Etc., Etc., etc., etC., etc., etc., etc., etc.,
etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc., etc.”

“Send this,” quoth he, “to the Flapper-haunted fields
where Prehistoric Peeps are frowned upon!”

‘To describe the scenes that followed would have beggered
the fertile or perhaps fertilized pen of the Editor of the

239

‘THE EQUINOX

Looking-Glass; but he was in any case not there, being busy
in working out by applied mathematics the problem as to
which public man was worthiest of a biography in his columns
next week.

The words “blasphemous orgie” altogether fail to give any
idea of what occurred.

“Twenty-eight naked demi-mondaines now brimmed the
buckets with satyrion,” hardly describes it.

“These loathsome and abominable creatures next
abandoned themselves to frenzied scenes unparalleled in
Degenerate Rome,” conveys an altogether false impression.

Only my own pen can describe it accurately; and I suppose
the printer will refuse to set it up, and very likely telephone
the Public Prosecutor. However, I shall try and sneak it
through in Ciceronian Latin.

Crowlieus dixit: Quid circa—(What on earth’s the Latin for
“tea” P)P

Omnes biberunt.

(There must be some concealed horror in these words. It
apparently means “Crowley said—what about tea? They all
drank.” With this reservation we prepare to fly to Ostend, but
print it. Printer.)

The good news ran through London like wildfire, doing
every hundred yards in even time.

Ralph Shirley, stirring uneasily in his office chair, stroked
his pet rhinoceros, and murmured “Piles o’ money”; Leopold
Rothschild asked if the zebra could indeed change his stripes;
and although ninety and nine just persons that needed no
repentance had that very minute been presented to the angels
in heaven, the subject was completely forgotten in the
exuberance of the higher joy.

240

WAITE’S WET

Waite’s photograph, frock-coat and all, was carried in its
red plush frame shoulder high by Mr. Battiscombe Gunn;
Kennedy took a tailor’s bill from his bosom, and dropped a
silent tear upon it, murmuring “H7zs letter!” The Editor,
bustling Austin Harrison aside, took a bottle of champagne
and a taxi to South Ealing, ignorant or careless of the
reception that she might expect from that mother of “one d,”
née “Ada Lakeman, of Devonshire family and Greek
extraction,” with the words “Sidmouth Lodge—lickitysplit—
my grandmother’s hat!” while the stock of all those “public
companies,” of which Mr. Waite is “in business secretary and
director,” soared beyond the clouds, and had subsequently to
be watered with tears.

Brooklyn, N.Y., where he was born, organized a procession
which, instead of taking so many hours to pass a given point,
decided, in flattering imitation of its greatest son, to take
several weeks to come to it. The “old family of Lovell,”
which boasts itself to be his ancestor through his mother, saw
the culmination of its own fortunes in this great fortune of its
fortune-telling scion, and gave itself the Glad Eye; the
“earliest settlers in Connecticut,” who were responsible for
his father, wriggled with pleasure in their graves, like tickled
children: the “orders and fraternities which are concealed
within Masonry or have arisen out of it,” with which he “is
connected in particular,” tyled themselves and gave themselves
over to unbridled joy: the “Hermetic Text Society” recently
established by him “for the production by experts of rare old
books and MSS. belonging to the literatures of Christian
Mysticism, Rosicrucianism, Kabalism, and Alchemy” (more
commercial candour!) tried in its joy to sell the MS. of

241

‘THE EQUINOX

the Book of Deuteronomy at Sothebys’: the very timbers of
the ship in which he was “brought in infancy” to England
shivered with ecstasy; the girls at the London Wall Exchange
unanimously resolved never again to ring up 3469, however
often and however angrily asked for, that the Restored-to-
Favour might remain in the Adytum of God-nourished
Silence for ever.
Neuburg himself wrote the following sonnet—

“They also serve who only stand, and—Waite,
Sweeter than sugar and as soft as silk,
You could not stand, you would not serve! What fate
Threatened the hope of Horlick’s Malted Milk?
Graver than Gladstone, decenter than Dilke,
You, called to be the Peter of the State,
Tried in your agony to do a bilk:—
Though you could handle rod, and master bait.

“Now all is changed. Offended Crowley cries
Upon your shoulder. All’s red nose, wet eyes.
You shall be Mary now as well as Martha!
The mystic quest is yours as well as mine,
Dilucid: sacramentally, in fine,

Victoria loved Albert: I love Arthur.”

I shall now draw the Veil of Sanctimoniosity upon this

touching scene.
A. QUILLER, JR.

242

MY CRAPULOUS CONTEMPORARIES
NO. VI
AN OBITUARY

AN OBITUARY

PHILOSOPHERS have always erred by generalizing from too
few facts. Into this trap fell even the author of the injunction,
“De mortuis nil nisi bonum,” though one may concede that it
was excusable, even creditable, in him to have been unable to
foresee my Uncle.

Born, as will presently become clear, in the earliest years
of the reign of Queen Victoria, his genius quickly developed.
He had that simplicity of vision, that flashing insight, which
stamps the highest types of intelligence. When only six
years old, while meditating on the increasing difficulty of
earning an honest living, and the increasing risk of earning a
dishonest one, he saw a fond mother give her little boy a
penny to buy sweets. In a single second his mind was made
up; his career was determined. How, thrilled the Master-
‘Thought—how can I get that penny?

A rapid calculation assured him of the soundness of his
instinct. Probably at least a hundred thousand mothers—
of the world’s six hundred million—give a penny to some
child every day.

A hundred thousand pence a day is over a hundred and
fifty thousand pounds a year; if he could only get ten per cent.
of that, he wouldn’t be doing so badly.

245

‘THE EQUINOX

‘That night, as he said his prayers at his mother’s knee, she
was surprised and pleased to hear a new petition: “And oh!
dear Jesus, do let me do ever such a great work for other little
children! Bring them all in! Don’t let me miss one out.”

Hot stuff for six, I don’t think.

It was evident, to his astuteness and business capacity, that
this work demanded the most complete organization. He
therefore obtained a post under the Government, so that,
while touching a good salary, his whole time was free to
devote to his great scheme. “Punctuality,” he often said to
me, “is the thief of time; procrastination is the soul of
business,” and would justify his paradox by pointing out that
if you only left letters unanswered long enough, the need to
answer them disappeared.

His system, in fact, became extremely popular; even Charles
Dickens playfully animadverts upon it in one of his novels.

A secretary being necessary to him, he pressed his sister
A——uinto the service, thereby saving her from such terrible
temptations as love, marriage, or even occasional relaxation,
which is known to be the devil’s subtlest engine, and saving
himself from the expense of hiring a drudge.

He applied the same fine intelligence to all the problems
of life. Onanism, he argued, is demonstrably safe and eco-
nomical; further, it is secret, and can be passed off as chastity;
hence credit with the pious. Again, “I am out to get the
money that parents give their children; I am the sole Inventor
of the ‘Kinchin-lay’; and I am certainly not going to queer
my own pitch by getting children. I might have to give them
pennies now and then myself.” Onanism consequently became
the rule of his life; and it is only fair to say that I believe the

246

AN OBITUARY

persistent rumours (especially in later years) of his assaults on
young children to be entirely without foundation. At least it is
certain that nothing was ever brought home to him. While he
was still a young man he definitely founded an organization
on the lines of the well-known and justly admired Children’s
Scripture Union. He issued a card, price one penny, with the
days of the year, and a “portion of Scripture” indicated for
reading on this day. As the card could be prepared in half an
hour by any one, and printed at about fourpence halfpenny a
hundred, there was a small but sufficient margin of profit—or
would have been but for the expense of getting the scheme
under way.

My uncle’s genius never hesitated. “Of all the puppies on
earth, the ‘pi’ set at Cambridge are the most priggish,” he
exclaimed enthusiastically.

So he got hold of a few, and called them Evangelists.
‘They were to go down (of course, at their own expense) to the
seaside—where the children with the pennies were, not to the
slums, where there were plenty of children but no pennies—
and hold “services,” the object of all which was to sell these
cards, and force the unhappy infant who was really interested
in Judges to switch off to Leviticus. Christian parents were,
however, quick to see that my uncle’s genius had forged a
new tyranny, and his scheme had the heartiest of receptions.
The Children’s Special Service Mission had met with un-
qualified success; his own might easily match it, so he
surmised—as the event proved, justly. Children were obliged
to throw down spade and bucket, and gather round the
unwashed feet and swelled head of the “university man”—
usually non-collegiate!—who found himself free to splutter as

247

‘THE EQUINOX

he would, without the wholesome fear of ragging which
restrained him during term.

My uncle was now in a position to develop his scheme
fully, and the ring of philanthropic blackmailers and black-
guards who run religious charities were compelled to admit
him to a share of the spoils. He founded a Magazine, with
some external and internal resemblance to that excellent paper,
Our Own Magazine, which, with consummate impudence, he
declared to contain nothing but true stories. These stories are
usually about the good little girl who “converts” the
horrid, swearing bargee, and the good little boy who brings
his “thoughtless” mother to Jesus. This, being a monthly,
brought in another twelve pennies annually from every victim.
He also published leaflets which he could sell by the hundred
to the kind of idiot that likes to give such things to strangers
who have never done it any harm. He had all these things
translated into dozens of languages, and the rill of pennies
swelled to a mighty river.

By this time his sister A———- was worn out, and died.
For a month he had to pay a typist; but she little knew my
uncle if she thought she had a permanent job. He rushed off
to some ghastly Welsh “resort,” to be acclaimed as the
Founder of the Faith by the flourishing branch of the
“Mission” which he had established there, and, selecting a
female with features and character of an anzemic cow, married
her and her money, sacked the typist, and settled down as
the principal ornament of London’s most suburban “subbub.”

I suppose none even of his accomplices will regret his
death; to the lachrymal glands of a crocodile he added the
bowels of compassion of a cast-iron rhinoceros; with the

248

AN OBITUARY

meanness and cruelty of a eunuch he combined the calculating
avarice of a Scotch Jew, without the whisky of the one or the
sympathetic imagination of the other. Perfidious and hypo-
critical as the Jesuit of Protestant fable, he was unctuous as
Uriah Heep, and for the rest possessed the vices of Joseph
Surface and artufe; yet, being without the human weak-
nesses which makes them possible, he was a more virtuous,
and therefore a more odious, villain.

In feature resembling a shaven ape, in figure a dislocated
Dachshund, his personal appearance was at the first glance
unattractive. But the clothes made by a City tailor lent such
general harmony to the whole as to reconcile the observer to
the phenomenon observed.

Of unrivalled cunning, his address was plausible; he con-
cealed his genius under a mask of matchless mediocrity, and
his intellectual force under the cloak of piety. In religion he
was an Evangelical, that type of Nonconformist who remains
in the Church in the hope of capturing its organization and
its revenues.

An associate of such creatures of an inscrutable Providence
as Coote and Torrey, he surpassed the one in sanctimonious-
ness, the other in bigotry, though he always thought blackmail
too risky, and slander a tactical error.

Without heart or conscience, either in his family relations
or his public functions, he goes to a grave covered by the
flowers of those who think it politic to pretend to honour him;
and it is his tragedy that of all the obituaries penned by servile
or venal dupes or accomplices of his misdeeds, none will survive
the century. This article remains his sole enduring monument.

A. QUILLER, JR.

249

THE NEW EVELYN HOPE

I

BEAUTIFUL Evelyn Hope is dead!
Sit and watch by her side an hour
This is her bookshelf by her bed;
Nietzsche, Weininger, Schopenhauer.
Small wonder then that her soul should pass!
Much remains to be changed, I think:
She died of the swollen head, alas!
‘That maidens catch from Maeterlinck.

II

Sixteen years old when she died!
A Vestal, tending Minerva’s flame;
It was not her time to read; beside,
Her life had hardly a hope or aim,
Nor duties enough, nor little cares;
She was never quiet; her mind was astir,
‘To Henrik Ibsen she said her prayers,
And she worshipped Edward Carpenter.

Il

Is it too late then, Evelyn Hope?

We know that your soul was pure and true
From Alan Leo’s Test Horoscope,

And Cheiro’s words confirmed it too—
And just because I was thrice as old,

And because you thought me cynical, P’'d
No place in the Higher Life, I was told;

I was Agnostic, naught beside.

THE NEW EVELYN HOPE

IV

No, indeed! For God above
Is great to grant, is mighty to make,
But how about Tolstoy’s “Thoughts on Love”?
And Havelock Ellis for culture’s sake?
Delayed we may be for more lives yet,
Through worlds I shall traverse not a few;
E’en H. P. Blavatsky I shall forget
Ere again I read Annie Besant with you.

V

But the time will come, at last it will,

When, Evelyn Hope, what’s meant I shall say
By the novels of Evelyn Underhill,

And Tchekhof’s and Wedekind’s dramas gray.
Why you loved Bergson I shall divine;

The Lords of Karma may then have said
Why you never dipped into books of mine,

But read G. K. Chesterton’s works instead.

VI

I have read, I shall say, so much since then;
Have ransacked Mudie’s so many times;
Gained me the gains of various men,
From Machen’s miasma to Lupin’s crimes;
Yet one thing in my own Test Horoscope
Either I missed, or itself missed me:
I was not warned, Oh, Evelyn Hope,
*°Gainst lending the dramas of Strindberg to thee.

251

252

‘THE EQUINOX

Vil

I loved you, Evelyn, all the while!
My heart was full as it could hold
Of Ella Wheeler Wilcox’ style—
Think what it cost me, I that was old.
So hush! I give you this leaf to keep—
See! I shut it inside the sweet cold hand;
*Tis a tract on The Simple Life and Sleep;
You will wake, and remember, and understand.

VICTOR B. NEUBURG.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH
SVB FIGVRA

D
(6 apthwos)

Aw. Ae.
Publication in Class B.
Imprimatur:

N. Fra. Aw. A.

PREFACE

AN any good thing come out of Palestine? is the broader anti-Semetic

retort to the sneer cast by the Jews themselves against the harmless and
natural Nazarene; one more example of the poetic justice of History. And
no doubt such opponents of the modern Jew will acclaim this volume as an
admirable disproof of that thesis which it purports to uphold.

The dissimilarities, amounting in some cases to sheer contradiction, which
mark many numbers, will appear proof positive that there is nothing in this
numerical Qabalah, especially as we may presume that by filling up this
dictionary from the ordinary Hebrew Lexicon one would arrive at a mere
hotch-pot.

Apart from this, there is a deeper-lying objection to the Qabalah; viz., that
the theory is an example of the fallacy Post hoc propter hoc.

Are we to believe, askes the sceptic, that a number of learned men deliberately
sat down and chose words for the sake of their numerical value? Language is
a living thing, with many sources and diverse; can it be moulded in any such
arbitrary fashion?

‘The only reply seems to be a mere assertion that to some extent it certainly
is so. Examples of a word being spelt deliberately wrong do occur; and such
a jugglery as the changing of the names Abram and Sarai to Abraham and Sarah
can hardly be purposeless. Once admit the end of such a wedge, and it is
difficult to say whether it may not be driven home so far as to split asunder the
‘Tree of Knowledge, if not the Tree of Life.

Another line or argument is the historical. We do not here refer to the
alleged forgery of the Qabalah by Rabbi Moses ben Leon—was it not?—but to
the general position of the ethnologist that the Jews were an entirely barbarous
race, incapable of any spiritual pursuit. That they were polytheists is clear from
the very first verse of Genesis; that Adonai Melekh is identical with “Moloch”
is known to every Hebraist. The “Old Testament” is mainly the history of the
struggle of the phallic Jehovah against the rest of the Elohim, and that his
sacrifices were of blood, and human blood at that, is indisputable.

1V PREFACE

Human sacrifices are to-day still practised by the Jews of Eastern Europe,
as is set forth at length by the late Sir Richard Burton in the MS. which the
wealthy Jews of England have compassed heaven and earth to suppress, and
evidenced by the ever-recurring Pogroms against which so senseless and outcry
is made by those who live among those degenerate Jews who are at least not
cannibals.

Is it to such people, indeed, that we are to look for the highest and sublest
spiritual knowledge?

To this criticism there are but two answers. ‘The first, that an esoteric
tradition of great purity may co-exist with the most crass exoteric practices.
Witness the Upanishads in the land of Jagganath, hook-swinging, and the
stupidest forms of Hatha-Yoga.

Witness the Tipitaka (with such perfections as the Dhammapada) in the midst
of peoples whose science of torture would seem to have sprung from no merely
human imagination. The descriptions in the Tipitaka itself of the Buddhist
Hells are merely descriptions of the actual tortures inflicted by the Buddhists
on their enemies.

‘The second, that after all is said, I find it works very well. I do not care
whether J-7 is an impossible, an unimaginable thing, or whether de Moivre
really invented it, and if so, whether de Moivre was an immoral man, and wore
whiskers. It helps me to make certain calculations; and so long as that is so,
it is useful, and I stick to it.

Other criticisms of the methods of the Qabalah itself have been made and
disposed of in the article on the subject in “The Temple of Solomon the King”
(Equinox V) and no further reference need be made to them in this place. It
is only necessary to say that that article should be studied most thoroughly, and
also the article “A Note on Genesis” in the second number of The Equinox.

With these two weapons, and the Sword of the Spirit, the Practicus, fully
armed, may adventure himself in the great battle wherein victory is Truth.

PERDURABO.

EDITORIAL NOTE

HIS dictionary was begun by Allan Bennet (Fra.. Iehi Aour, now Bhikku

Ananda Metteya) in the last decade of the nineteenth century since
y-J.C. It was bequeathed to the present Editor, with many other magical
MSS., on I.A.’s departure for Ceylon in 1899.

Frater Perdurabo used it, and largely added to it, in the course of his
Qabalistic workings. With George Cecil Jones (Fra... Volo Noscere) he further
added to it by making it a complete cross-correspondence to the book DCCLXXVIL.

It was further revised and checked, re-copied by a Jewish scribe, and again
checked through, in the year V of the present Era.

‘The mathematical additions were continued by Fra.’. P. and Fra... Lampada
‘Tradam; and the MS. finally copies on a specially constructed typewriter by
Gerald Rae Fraser (Fra... 1) who added yet further mathematical data.

This copy has again been checked by Fra... P. and Soror.. N.N. and the
proofs further by three separate scholars.

The method of employing the dictionary has been fully indicated in The
‘Temple of Solomon the King [Equinox V].

None of the editors claim to possess even the smallest degree of scholarship.
‘The method of compilation has been to include all words given in Von Rosen-
roth’s Qabalistic Dictionary, those specially commented on in S.D., I-R.Q., and
I.Z.Q., those given in 777, and those found by Fratres IA. and P. Some of
them are found in texts of the Hebrew scriptures which appeared to those
adepts to be of magical importance. Owing to their carelessness, the
meaning of some few words has been lost, and cannot now be traced.

K.D. L.C.K. p—

Dec.
S.P.M.
S.S.F.
L.T.N.
L.T.D.
K.Ch.B.
(Ch.)
S.D.
LR.Q.
Tet.
L.A. Angel
1.Z.Q.
M.T.

Frasca

KRSENSOBOUOHaS

ABBREVIATIONS, SIGNS AND FIGURES

=KABBALA DENUDATA cuius

Communes Kabbalisticos

= Decan.

= Sphere of the Primum Mobile.

= Sphere of the Fixed Stars.

Pars Prima _ continet

= Lesser Angel governing Triplicity by Night.
= Lesser Angel governing Triplicity by Day.
= Kether—Chokmah—Binah.

= Chaldee.

= Siphra Dtzenioutha.

= Idra Rabba Qadisha.

= Tetragrammaton.

= Lesser Assistant Angel.
= Idra Zuta Qadisha.

= Magister Templi.

= Shemhamphorasch.

= Wands.

= Cups.

= Swords.

= Pentacles.

= Key of Solomon.

= Oriens—Paimon—Ariton.

Amaimon.

= Aries.

= Taurus.

= Gemini.
= Cancer.

= Leo.

= Virgo.

= Libra.

= Scorpio.

= Sagittarius.
= Capricorn.
= Aquarius.
= Pisces.

OP HKAYO

Saturn.
Sun.
Moon.
Mars.
Mercury.
Jupiter.
Venus.

enclosing a number shows that the number is a perfect square.

before "7 99
before 55 9
before * 99
above 3 ”
about ¥ 99
about <5 9
before 3 %

”

”

”

”

”

”

”

a perfect square.
a perfect cube.

a squared square.
a perfect number.
a factorial.*

a sub-factorial.

a prime number

TT
> (1—k) is an abbreviation for “the sum of the first k natural numbers.”

* See special table following.

Locos

TABLE OF FACTORS

ODD NUMBERS FROM 1 TO 3321 (5’S EXCLUDED); SHOWING LOWEST FACTORS,

AND PRIMES (P.). “—” INDICATES THAT THE NUMBER IS DIVISIBLE BY 3.
r P. 83 P I7I — 259 7 347. ‘P.
2 P. 87 — 173 P 261 — 349 «~@&P.
3 ?P. 89 P 177 — 263 P 351 —
5s P. Ql 7 179 P 267 — 353. P
9 P: 93 — 181 P 269 P. 357 —
bl 3° 97 P 183 — oan 2, 359 P.
i P. 99 — 187 11 273 — 19°
13 P. ror P. 189 — 277 P 903 =
17 P. 103 P tor P. 279 — 367 ‘*&P.
1g P. 107 P 193 P. 281 P 369 —
21 — tog P 197 P 283 P 371 7
23 P, rr — 199 P 287. 7 373 P.
27 33 113. P 201 — 289] 177 377-13
29 P. 117 — 203. «7 291 — 379 P.
31 Pz 119 7 207 — 293 -P. 381 —
33 — T21| 11? 209 II 2907 — 383 «C&P.
37. iP. 123 — 211 P 299 13 387 —
39 — 127 P 213 — 301 7 389 ©6P.
41 P. 129 — 217. «7 303 — 391 17
43 Pz 131 P. 219 — 307 P 393. —
47 iP. 133. 7 221 13 309 — 397 P.
40] 7° 137 P 223 P. 311 P. 399 —
51 — 139 P 227 P. 313 ~P 4or P.
53 OP. I4l — 229 P. 317 P 403 13
57 — 143 II 231 — 319 II 407 II
59 P. 147 — 233 ~*P. 321 — 409 P.
6r P. 149 P 237 — 323 17 411 —
63. — 15r P 239 ~«~*&Pz 327 — 413. 7
67 P. 153 — 241 P. 3290-7 417 —
69 — 157 P. 243. 3° 331 «*?P. 419 P.
7 Pz. 159 — 247 13 333 — 421 P.
73 Pz. 161 7 249 — 337 -P 423. —
77,=«°7 163 P 251 P. 439. = 427 7
P. 167 P 253 II 341 II 429 —

vu

79 ;
3°=9" 169] 13° ang P; 3437 431 P.

529

531 —

537

[See] ORR eA | Be] Re

II

Pg. |) ie tae

[Are ees: «| ee

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

623
627
629
631
633
637
639
641
643
647
649
651
653
657
659
661

663 —

667
669
671
673
677
679
681
683
687
689
691
693
697

813
817
819
821
823
827
829
831
833
837
839
84
843
847
849
851
853
857
859
861
863
867
869
871
873
877
879
881
883
887
889
891
893

897 —

899
gor
903
907

909
gII
913
917
919
Qg2I
923
927
929
931
933
937
939
941
943
947
949
951
953
957
959
(o63]
963
967
969
971
973
977
979
981
983
987
989
991
993
997
999
I00L

1003
1007
1009
IOIl
1013
1017
101g
1021
1023
1027
1029
1031
1033
1037
1039
1041
1043
1047
1049
1051
1053
1057
1059
1061
1063
1067
1069
1071
1073
1077
1079
1081
1083
1087
[ro89]
I0gI
1093
1097

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1099
II0I
II03
1107
II09
IIII
III3
III7
IIIQ
1121
1123
1127
1129
II31
1133
1137
1139
II41I
1143
1147
1149
II51
1153
1157
1159
II61
1163
1167
1169
II7I
1173
1177
1179
1181
1183
1187
1189
IIQI

7
P.

P.
II

[cS ae Fo |e Bs [rote | eee ea eee | Se Se "|| ee si aig: |. eo |

1193
1197
1199
1201
1203
1207
1209
1211
1213
1217
1219
1221
1223
1227
1229
1231
1233
1237
1239
1241
1243
1247
1249
1251
1253
1257
1259
1261
1263
1267
1269
1271
1273
1277
1279
1281
1283
1287

1383
1387
1389
1391
1393
1397
1399
1401
1403
1407
1409
I4II
1413
1417
1419
1421
1423
1427
1429
1431
1433
1437
1439
1441
1443
1447
1449
1451
1453
1457
1459
1461
1463
1467
1469
I471
1473
1477

1479
1481
1483
1487
1489
I491
1493
1497
1499
I501I
1503
1507
1509
I51I
1513
1517
1519
1523
1527
1529
1531
1533
1537
1539
1541
1543
1547
1549
1551
1553
1557
1559
1561
1563
1567
1569
1571

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1573
1577
1579
1581
1583
1587
1589
1591
1593
1597
1599
1601
1603
1607
1609
1611
1613
1617
1619
1621
1623
1627
1629
1631
1633
1637
1639
1641
1643
1647
1649
1651
1653
1657
1659
1661
1663
1667

1669
1671
1673

1677 —

1679
1683
1687
1689
1691
1693
1697
1699
1701
1703
1707
1709
1711
1713
1717
1719
1721
1723
1727
1729
1731
1733
1737
1739
1741
1743
1747
1749
1751
1753
1757
1759
1761

1763
1767
1769
1771
1773
1777
1779
1781
1783
1787
1789
1791
1793
1797
1799
1801
1803
1807
1809
1811
1813
1817
1819
1821
1823
1827
1829
1831
1833
1837
1839
1841
1843
1847
1851
1853
1857

Xl

Xil
1859
1861
1863
1867
1869
1871
1873
1877
1879
1881
1883
1887
1889
1891
1893
1897
1899
IQO1
1903
1907
1909
IQII
1913
1917
1919
1921
1923
1927
1929
1931
1933
1937
1939
1941
1943
1947
1949
1951

1953
1957
1959
1961
1963
1967
1969
1971
1973
1977
1979
1981
1983
1987
1989
1991
1993
1997
1999
2001
2003
2007
2009
2011
2013
2017
2019
2021
2023
2027
2029
2031
2033
2037
2039
2041
2043
2047

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2049
2051
2053
2057
2059
2061
2063
2067
2069
2071
2073
2077
2079
2081
2083
2087
2089
2001
2003
20907
2099
2101
2103
2107
2109
2111
2113
2117
2119
2121
2123
2127
2129
2131
2133
2137
2139
2141

2143
2147
2149
2151
2153
2157
2159
2161
2163
2167
2169
2171
2173
2177
2179
2181
2183
2187
2189
2191
2193
2107
2199
2201
2203
2207
2209]
2211
2213
2217
2219
2221
2223
2227
2229
2231
2233
2237

2337
2339
2341
2343
2347
2349
2351
2353
2357
2359
2361
2363
2367
2369
2371
2373
2377
2379
2371
2383
2387
2389
2391
2393
2307
2399
2403
2407
2409
2411
2413
2417
2419
2421
2423
2427

2429
2431
2433
2437
2439
2441
2443
2447
2449
2451
2453
2457
2459
2461
2463
2467
2469
2471
2473
2477
2479
2481
2483
2487
2489
2491
2493
2497
2499
2501
2503
2507
2509
2511
2513
2517
2519
2521

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2523
2527
2529
2531
2533
2537
2539
2541
2543
2547
2549
2551
2553
2557
2559
2561
2563
2567
2569
2571
2573
2577
2579
2581
2583
2587
2589
2501
2593
2597
2599
2603
2607
2609
2611
2613
2617

2619
2621
2623
2627
2629
2631
2633
2637
2639
2641
2643
2647
2649
2651
2653
2657
2659
2661
2663
2667
2669
2671
2673
2677
2679
2681
2683
2687
2689
2691
2693
2697
2699
2701
2703
2707
2709
2711

2713
2717
2719
2721
2723
2727
2729
2731
2733
2737
2739
2741
2743
2747
2749
2751
2753
2757
2759
2761
2763
2767
2769
2771
2773
2777
2779
2781
2783
2787
2789
2791
2793
2797
2799
2801

2803
2807

XIV
2811
2813
2817
2819
2821
2823
2827
2829
2831
2833
2837
2839
2841
2843
2847
2849
2851
2853
2857
2859
2861
2863
2867
2869
2871
2873
2877
2879
2881
2883
2887
2889
2891
2893
2897
2899
2901

2903
2907
2909
2901
2913
2917
2919
2921
2923
2927
2929
2931
2933
2937
2939
2941
2943
2947
2949
2951
2953
2957
2959
2961
2963
2967
2969
2971
2073
2077
2979
2981
2983
2987
2989
2991
2993
2997

P.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2999
3001
3003
3007
3009
3011
3013
3017
3019
3021
3023
3027
3029
3031
3033
3037
3039
3041
3043
3047
3049
3051
3053
3057
3059
3061
3063
3067
3069
3071
3073
3077
3079
3081
3083
3087
3089
3091

P.

eee ool see Re ace) |ie eee) Rot [eee ea es | Pee) ara [ee | ee ro | SB [oo

3093
3097
3099
3101
3103
3107
3109
3111
3113
3117
3119
3121
3123
3127
3129
3131
3133
3137
3139
3141
3143
3147
31.49
3151
3153
3157
3159
3161
3163
3167
3169
3171
3173
3177
3179
3181
3183
3187

wae |B [ wel eb] wa ss |

43

|

47

vl mH | S| mers [a8

3189
3191
3193
3197
3199
3201
3203
3207
3209
3211
3213
3217
3219
3221
3223
3227
3229
3231
3233
3237
3239
3241
3243
3247
3249)
3251
3253
3257
3259
3261
3263
3267
3269
3271
3273
3277
3279
3281

3283. 7

3287 19
3289 II
3291 —

SEPHER SEPHIROTH XV

3293 37 3301 P. 3309 —_ 3317 31
3297 — 3303. — 3311 7 3319 P.
3299 «~&P. 3307. P. 3313 -P. 3321 —

The first dozen factorials, and sub-factorials; and the ratios they bear to

one another; note that \n | \|n =e

N IN LIN IN +lIN | [IN+I|N
I I 0 00 0.000000
2 2 I 2.000000 | 0.500000
3 6 2 3.000000 | 0.333333
4 24 9 2.666666 0.375000
5 120 44 2.727272 | 0.366666
6 720 265 2.716981 0.368055
7 5040 1854 2.718446 | 0.367857
8 40320 14833 2.718262 | 0.367881
9 362880 133496 2.718283 0.367879

10 2628800 1334961 2.718281 0.367879
II 39916800 | 14684570 2.718281 0.367879
12 479001600 | 176214841 2.718281 0.367879

Factorial #, or |z is the continued product of all the whole numbers from 1 to z inclusive and is
the number of ways in which n different things can be arranged.

Sub-factorial 7, or ||”, is the nearest whole number to # + e, and is the number of ways in which a

row of z elements may be so deranged, that no element may have its original position.

Thus

and

where h is the smaller decimal fraction less than unity by which the fraction

|jz=1IX2X3X...X4M,

IX2X3X..X0
\|2 = ——— "th

~~ 2,77828188...

’

IX2X3X...XN .
———— differs from a
2.71828188...

whole number, and is to be added or subtracted as the case may be.-—The most useful expression for

Ln is:

to (w+1) terms.

l2z= mu MOD, 2)! n(n —1)(n—2)
I 1-2 12:3

Cc

(n-3)4

= 2.71828188... .

xvl SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Names Figures Value English equivalents
of the letters of the letters of the letters of the letters
(M) Alpeh S I A
(D) Beth = 2 B
(D) Gimel P| 3 Cc
(D) Daleth 4 4 D
(S) Heh ma 5 H (E)
(S) Vau 4 6 V(U)
(S) Zayin ’ 7 Z
(S) Kheth(Cheth) 1 8 Ch
(S) Teth Q 9 T
(S) Yodh ‘ 10 Y (lor J)
(D) Kaph =) 20 500 K
(S) Lamed % 30 L
(M) Mem mp 8 40 600 M
(S) Nun 3 ff 50 700 N
(S) Samekh D 60 S
(S) Ayin y 70 O (A’a or Ng)
(D) Peh BF 80 800 P
(S) Tzaddi xo 90 900 Tz
(S) Qoph P 100 Q
(D) Resh . 200 R
(M) Shin y 300 S Sh
(D) Tau n 400 T Th

When written large, the Value of a Hebrew letter is increased to one thousand
times its ordinary value. A large Aleph is counted 1000: a large Beth, 2000: and
so on.

Note that A, I, O, U, H, are really consonants, mere bases for the vowels. These
vowels are not here given, as they have no importance in Gematria.

M, D and S before the names of the letters shew their division into Mothers,
Double and Single letters, referred respectively to active Elements, Air, Water, Fire,
Planets, and Signs. But & and 1 also serve to signify the Elements of Spirit and
of Earth. See Liber 777.

|Z \l2 The Mystic Number of my I
Kether. S.P.M.
12 13. S.S.F. 12
[Abbreviation for 422, SS
PDIN PAN, g.v.]
> (1—2). 6. The Mystic 73
Number of Chokmah.
Father 3S
To come, go So
The Number of Abra-Melin V4
Princes. ¥. 2?
Father SiS
Hollow; a vein aa
Proud Sa
3 75
Mist, vapour aS
Back a3
tee,
> (1—3). 13 ©. The Mystic 6
Number of Binah.
To gather, collect Sa

Gog, the giant whose partner is aa
Magog

A bear 37

A window sn
ie)

Lost, ruined 3S

A name of GOD attributed to STS
Venus. Initials of Adonai ha-
Aretz.

Desire; either, or SS

™7

Gad, a Tribe of Israel; good a3
fortune

aS"

Riches, power ss35

Fish al

23. The number of Abra-Melin
Sub-Princes, and of the Servi-
tors of Oriens. ¥

Was weary

To will, intend mS
Desired, beloved 238

S'S
Then iS
The entrance, threshold S353
To be anxious, grieve IS4

Love; beloved, breast; pleasures 7
of love.

Ngan. Zauir Anpin 478 q.v. St
14. 37, B.D.
Ventriloquus: the special ‘fire’ =5S8
of black magic, whence
Obi, Obeah. Cf. rr and 207.
He kindled SiS
Brother mS
A garment “33
Became powerful, grew high mSa
Middle a
Spendour; cf. 15 bata
> (1—4). The Mystic Number of
Chesed. Elementorum Spaera.
The number of Abram-Melin

Servi-tors of Amaimon and Ariton.
Enchanter DS
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 185. mas

V8

10

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Elevated, exalted, high maa
Flew, soared mSs7
‘Two an
Window mn
A wolf Sst
A hidden place; bosom an
Ahah mms
Firebrand, volcanic fire: the ‘IS
special ‘fire’ or ‘light’ of the
Sacred Magic of Light, Life,
and Love; hence “Odic
Force” &c. Cf. 9 and 207.
Where ‘Ss
When S133
To tear, cut, attack wT
Gold (Ch.) am
Proud, haughty uw
To conceal san
A circularity of form or motion; an
a feast
He longed for, missed ms
He departed, went forth TS

A little book, pamphlet, letter; pape
tools.

To multiply ma

A city of Edom nan

HE. [Mis referred to Mater, si
‘to Pater, S to Corona.]

Vau; hook, nail, pin 4

This, that m

To penetrate, be sharp; (Ch.) one "IM

mas
nans

A small bundle, bunch

Beloved; Love

12

T 13

Unity “nS
Hated aS
Emptiness m3
Raised up nm
Chokmah, 42-fold Name in “a
Yetzirah. (See 777)
Anxiety Tas
A fisher a
Thunder; to meditate; he re- man
moved
A city of Edom an
Here; this w
A locust aan
He shall come sa"
Rhamnis; a thorn, spine 70S
Rising ground; Earth of Sl
Geburah (See 777)
Sacrifice v. & s. (Ch.). (?) m1
Love, beloved; David ba ba
Give, give! [Vide sn an
no. 17, 37]
To grind, direct, stretch out faba
Gold =m
Hand ay
Y (r—5). L{r—(3 x 3)} + 3. Dd. The

Mystic number of Geburah. The
Number of Abra-Melin Servitors
of Asmodee and Magot, and of
Paimon.

Angel of 3 Dec. # STSS

The month of Exodus and =3S
Passover

Steam, vapour TS

Pride; a carrying out; ex- mS

altation.

14

15

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Splendour, the Eighth Sephira T1703
Overflowing, abounding nm
He who impels; to force
To hide mm”
The Monogram of the Eternal

4=2'. The number of Abra-Melin J ¥ 16

Servitors of Asmodee.

Hyssopus sts
He seized, cleaved to byaty 3
Elevated, exalted, high maa
(Verb. subst.) Injury, war, lust; 17
fell.
She sv
Alas!—Woe ch
Like, equal to a
Nuts Tas
Ah!—Alas! “S
Capricornus “A
Nerve, sinew. [Gen. xxxiii "4
25 & 32]
Narrative, subtle discourse man
K.D. L.C.K. p. 267 sim
To dream, rave mn
A fly 3131
Sacrificed nat
To seethe, boil at
To brighten, make joyful mn
A circle, orbit an
Good 312
To give, place am”
My favourite, my beloved “SS
Hatred nS
The antique Serpent son

17

18

Living fal
Notariqon of Yehi Aur, etc. S'S°
Angel L.T.D. of 7 TTS
An enemy a"S8
Job aT°S
Was black Taian
Chavvah; to manifest, shew mn
forth; Eve
The number of Abra-Melin
Servitors of Amaimon.
Fraternity mins
Black liquid zea
It was mn
The breast; a vision; a prophet; Min
to gaze
Jobab, an Edomite King 35.5
The hand a“
~ (1—6). The Mystic Number
of Tipahreth
Existence, Being, the Kether- "AS
name of GOD
But, yet, certainly 4s
Deep meditation IS
Ah!—Alas! “mn
Purity, innocence mm
Vide Sepher Yetzirah wm
The number of Abra-Melin
Servitors of Ariton
With his hand; Night Demon ‘3
of 1* Dec. 99
By Yodh wvw3

Hearer in secret; Angel of MSS7
8 W.
The state of puberty ant

A magical vision (Ch.) sun

7 19

20

21

22

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Wheat non
Good na
Notarigon of “Tet.Elohim SS*
Tet. Achad.”
Unity am
Tr 23
Parted, removed, separated mnt
Joy mn
A thread man
Life mn
14. The number of the ‘Elders’ 24
in the Apocalypse.
He whom I love “21S
He who loves me “STS
A Mercurial GOD. His naStIsS
essence is tS, 8
Substance; a body ma
A pauper ai
Angel of 2 C. moan
Abundance in)
A water-pot, a large earthen- 2
ware vessel.
5. 3 Vv 25
To break sai
The Beast svn
Jehewid, GOD of Geburah of =9=“"
Briah
Let there be and
Will be separated mm
Thus m>
The Numbers of the Sephiroth of 26

the Middle Pillar; 1 + 6 + 9 + 10
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 273] mn
Seeing, looking at nnn

a Vaz
Wept, mourned m3
Purity ai
A parable, enigma, riddle aw
IB
> (1—7). The Mystic Number 28
of Netzach
Clay mw
Union, unity “nm
Power mS
T 29
Is broke. [Ps. x. 10] m7
To break down, overturn V0
30
A party to an action at law; an
defendant, plaintiff. [Note
= 30 = 2 = ‘Justice’]
Judah atin
It will be nm
T 31
How? TS
GOD of Chesed, and of 58
Kether of Briah.
To go bahia)
A breating, stirking, collision MS37
And there was. [Vide S.D.I. 7“
par. 31]
K. of S. Fig. 31 ‘So
sd

Not

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

25. "The Number of Abramelin
Servitors of Astarot

Coalescence of AMS and MTS
mim Macroprosopus and
Microprosopus. This is
symbolized by the Hexa-
gram. Suppose the 3 7’s
conceal the 3 Mothers
S, 2 & WY and we get

358 q.v.
Lord Ss
Angel of 5 W. mm
Copula Maritalis Pay
Was pure mst
Zig-zag, fork-lightning mn
Unity K.D. L.C.K. p. 432 wn
Glory 32
Mind, heart 3
Sorrow; wept, mourned 55s
Day Demon of 1* Dec. SS
To destroy (Ch.); (?) a King S53
of Edom.
Spring, fountain ba
= {1—(4 x 4)} + 4. 4
“GOD the Father,” divine 38 58
name attributed to Jupiter
To ransom, avenge, pollute os3
To reveal sor
A pauper os
A common person; un- onan
educated, ignorant
Angel of 7 C. mann

Vv 32

33

34

35
Agla, a name of GOD; soos
Notariqon of Ateh Gibor
le-Olahm Adonai
Boundary, limit os
He will go ain
6 =D (1-8). ©. The Mystic  V 36
Number of Hod
Tabernaculum Sas
How? (Vide Lamentations) nS
Duke of Geburah in Edom; mos
to curse; name of GOD
attributed to ¥
To remove, cast away son
Confession baba
Leah ms
Perhaps, possibly; would that! %
T 37
Angel of 8 P. MSS
GOD (Ch.) sms
Behold! os
Perished, grew old ms
To grow great oa
Banner a5
Tenuity, breath, vanity; in vain; Ssn
Abel. [I.Z.Q., “the Super-
nal Breathers.” |
Night Demon of 2"! Dec. 7 Osh

Profession 5

Jechidah, the Atma of Hindu) MT
philosophy
Flame smb

(2?) Devotion of force %

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Night Demon of 2% Dec.95 S18
He departed oS
Gehazi, servant of Elisha m3
A City in the Moutains of m3
Judah
Innocent ‘Sot
The palate yn
To make a hole, hollow; to bn
violate
Green nm
To abide, dwell s57
Dew by
The Eternal is One nS mn
Angel of 3 P. mm
Metathesis of MM 2
He cursed md
Bildad ai}
Liberator; a title of Jesod Sssi3
To cut off or
A rope; ruin; to bind ssn
Milk sén
The Hand of the Eternal mm
To me, to mine %
Fecundity sons
Ram; force; hence = a hero agg
Night Demon of r* Dec. 1 Ts
My GOD sos
Mother oS
To fail, cease bus

38

39

40

T 41

Divine Majesty SsN83
Terminus w3
To burn ona
Terror oan
To go round ina circle ban

[Vide Ps. exviii. & I.R.Q. mm Mm
778]
The number of the letters of a great

name of GOD terrible and strong,
and of the Assessors of the Dead

Angel of P oss
Eloah, a name of GOD mos
The Supernal Mother, un- SSS
fertilized; see 52
Terror, calamity nbs
Loss, destruction os
To cease ban
The World, Earth of Malkuth = 75n
My glory “N32
Great bang
To rejoice bag
Challah; to make faint. mon
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 346]
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 151; so
see no. 340]
Hazel, almond m
ll4. 220+ 5
Drops Sas
A pool, pond; sorrow Olas
Captive, captivity mag
Angel ruling I sg

42

T 43

44

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Aquarius ara
Blood a1

Sand: also horror. See Scorpion 54
Pantacle in K. of S. and ro"

Aethyr.
Aram; 7 mow
Tet. in ? World. snyas 0

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 251]
Flame rnd
Y (i—9). 5. The Mystic
Numberof Jesod

Intelligence of 5 SSIs
Adam a8
The Fool Sas
Redemption, Liberation nos
To grow warm on
Heaven of Tiphareth Sst
Hesitated. [Vide no. 405] Smt
Spirit of 5 ost
She who ruins msn
Tet. in Yetzirah STSISn TT
Greatly, strongly SD
Yetzirah’s ‘Secret Nature’ np

[Vide I.R.Q. xxxiv.]
A name of GOD “moss
A female slave; cubitus DS
Tin, the metal of ¥ m5
A dividing, sundering, mash

separation
Angel of 7 S. Sssnnn
A ruiner bon
Angel ruling 8 osm

45

46

Levi, Levite a)
T 47
Foolish, silly. (Stultus) bongs
A weeping m33
Cloud; high place; waves; nas
fortress
Angel ruling ost
To clutch, hold bn
48
Mercy mia
Angel of 2 W. osm
A woman [vide K.D. L.G.K.p. 1
320]; strength; an army
To grow warm; heat, fire, black; Nn
Ham, the son of Noah
Jublilee os0
A star, planet; sphere of ¥ 3555
[Vide Ps. xciii. & Prov. viii. 22] %S®
The number of Abra-Melin v 49
Serivotrs of Beelzebub. 7°. ?
The Living GOD “n Oss
Qliphoth of Geburah snbag
Resembled; meditated; np
silent
Intelligence of 9 scan
Drooping, being sick min
Strength son
Heat, fury (Ch.) spn

A bringing forth, birth, nativity ms

A measuring, measure mp
Solve. [Vide no. 103] a>
The Rod of Aaron fly)

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Red earth, the soil; Earth of MVS
Chesed.

Closed, shut up DOs
Angel of 9 P. ms
Jonah’s Whale ors 4
To ferment nen
Pains, sorrows “Son
Unclean, impure Spy
58° on
24 ss
The sea =)
All, every Ss
To thee ae)
What?—Which? a)
Edom aS
Terrible; Day Demon of 2% 2°8
Dec. M
Ate; devoured Sos
Pain i
Tumultuously (vide no. 451); an
to harass, perturb
Angel of 8S. [Vide K. of S., ossnm*
fig. 52]
Failure. SJ
Father and Mother NPSISIS
Supernal Mother SDS

Elihu = Eli Huya, “He is my 1S
GOD,” who is the Holy
Guardian Angel of Job in
the Allegory

50

51

52

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 134] SIS
A mare; brute animal, beast mens
Day Demon of 2" Dec. ” m3
From all, among all pnbal
The Son; Assiah’s “Secret f=
Nature”
Meditation, imagination, sin mt
A desirable one; to desire sen
A husband’s brother 53"
Angel of Kether of Briah, osm
and of Jesod of Briah
Tet. in Assiah anya a
A dog ss
Angel of 4 S.,and of ro P. misd

The number of Abra-Melin Servitors
of Astarot and Asmodee

The stone that slew Goliath; [IS
a stone, rock

Elihu. (Vide 52) sinds

The garden [a

Angel of 9 P. osc

To defend, hide; a wall; the fan
sun; fury

The spleen banna

A lover nImSsp

A basin, bowl, vells. fas
[Ex. xxiv. 6]

Rest ‘27

A Tribe of Israel; to judge, rule. nm
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 37]

Pertaining to summer a1

T 53

54

My flame; enchantments
A bed; stick, rod

To remove

send
mye
a

> (a—10). The Mystic Number of

Malkuth
Thief; stole
Robbery, pillage

Silence. [For name of Angels,
see Sohar Sch. V. Cap. 18]

A footstool

To swell, heave. [Vide no. 51]
To walk

Knuckle; member, limb

The bride

Noon midday

Ornament

Dread, terror
He suffered
Angel of 4 C.
Day

Beautiful

Rim
Consuming

Wealth, an age, Time; Night
Demon of 1* Dec. ML

Formidable, terrible
We

A breaking down, subversion,
destruction

S33
nots
m5

oun
an
son
sin
ms
2
m3

Ts
Ts
osm
a7’
mS]

mss
Sos
ns

=s°
us
Sms

55

56

57

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Built ms
X. [Fish (pl.); vide 7] a
Angel of 8 C. mony
Angel of 5 C. ma
Altar nate

The laying-by, making secret SIM

[Vide no. 499] oss
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 69.] Anear [IS
Night Demon of 1" Dec. 7

My strength, power, might pas
soo

Love, kindness, grace; notariqon [Ml
of Chokmah Nesethrah, the

Secret Wisdom

Ruler of Water smn
Angel of 6 S. sm
Angel of 3 P. mand
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 69] nm

Brethren. [Referred to Lilith O°"S
& Samael—kK.D. L.C.K.

p. 54]
Heathen a."
A wall npn
Menstruata m3
Tried by fire; a watch-tower ns
Excellence, sublimity, glory, [5S3
pride
Constituton, tradition noon
To behold man
A basket si
Angel of 8 C. mab

58

T 59

60

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Vision mn
The Southern district. m343
Master, Lord, Adon Pas

The negative, non-existent; not ["S

Tt 61

Towards, to thee oS
I, myself “IS
The belly pas
Angel of ro S. map
Wealth a
Angel of 6 C. os
Habitaculum m3
62
Healing SOS
Angel of 2™! Dec. “pans
The sons “I3
To commit; healing nat
63
Abaddon, the Hell of Chesed [7238
Dregs, roll; faeces (globular); 555
dung
Fed au
The nose onin
Fervour nen
Tet. in Briah saosin
Briah’s “Secret Nature” 35
8? = 43 = 2° 8 VV av 64
A sigh, groan, deep breath ns
Justice nm

(Din and Doni are twin Mercurial “37
Intelligences in Gemini)

The golden waters am"
[I.R.Q. xl. 996] an
Prophecy Msi]
Sphere of 2 mang
Noach ma

> {1—(5 x 5)} + 5. 6. The number
of Abra-Melin Servitors of Magot

and Kore
Adonai JS
Weasels and other terrible os
animals
The Palace ‘on
Shone, gloried, praised 55m
To keep silence on

Defective. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. nn
p- 339]

omy m5
A door post mit
A beating, striking PoP
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 563] “mI
The Mystic Number of the Qliphoth,
and of the Great Work.
> (r1—11).

Food, victuals novos

The Lord thy GOD (is a con- 798

suming Fire). [Deut. iv. 24]
A ship TIS
A trial, an experiment rns

A wheel. [Called “Cognomen 5353
Schechinae” |

A City of Edom mana

65

66

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 57] “aS
The Understanding m3
Night Demon of 3“ Dec. I sim
Zayin a
Debased bor
To embalm man
Angel of 3 C. mp3"
Wise.—Intelliget ista? iba
To be wise oon
Emptiness bon
To pity on
Ramus Tabernacularis sib

A manger, stable; an enclosure DISS

Myrtle ow
L.A. Angel of ¥ oso5h
(A proper name) MI5S
Hush, be silent non
Wine ioe
Night bab
[Vide Ps. xxv. 14.] The Secret baby)
Thy terror Ds
Nothing; an apparition, image badge
Silence; silent 2s
Night Demon of 1* Dec.* = “JN
Lead, the metal of Saturn; a JS

plummet-line, level, water-
level

1 67

68

69

70

771

II

Vision rin
A dove, pigeon ma
A dove ma*
Plenitude, fullness sop

216, MNS; vide K.D.
151.] There are
(spaces of 5°) in
the Zodiac. The Shemham-
phorasch or ‘divided name’ of
GOD consists of 72 triliteral
names, which by adding mM or
os give 72 angels. Vide Lib.
DCCLXXVIL

Adonai, transliterated as by “SIS
Lemegeton, etc.

I72 x 3 =
L.C.K. p.

72 quinaries

Geomantic Intelligence SSIs
of *"

In, so, thus, then i)

In the secret 33

And they are excellent, finished om

Kindness, mercy nn
Tet. in Atziluth samcn sat
Maccabee = >)=)
Atziluth’s “Secret Nature’— 3Y
thickness, cloud; Aub
Demon-King of Hod, and bss
Night Demon of 2"! Dec. *
Gimel ‘pa
The Wise One nan
To trust in, shelter in nan
A day of feast pall
A leader, chief, judge ae

72

T 73

74

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Worn-out (?shameless) Beggars 2°37

Ox-goad ane
A circuit; roundabout a°35
All the way, constantly W
Hues, colours, complexions oP bh!
Lucifer, the Herald Star bien
[Vide K. of S., fig. 53] oD"
A lamentation, wailing mds
The Pleiades nip">
Night; by night ms

NUIT, THE STAR GODDESS "3

Secrety, put away; a hiding- pean
place
Rest, peace nn3
Slave, servant 3
Prayed ny
The river Gihon. [Gen. ii. 13] p10
Overflowing. [Ps. cxxiv. 5] am
Towers, citadels San
The Influence from Kether op
Strength; a he-goat Ww

There are 78 cards in the Tarot.
> (1—12). The Mystic Number
of Kether as Hua. The sum of
the Key-Numbers of the Super-
nal Beard.

Angel of 10 W. SSDIN

Angel of Ra Hoor Khuit OSTS

Briatic Palace of Chesed MMS 5D"0

Angel of 3 Sst

75

76

77

78

I2

The breaker, dream nbn
To pity Sion
To initiate 457
Angel of 2 S. Sssht9
Angel of 1 Dec. 8 “2
Bread (Ps. Ixxviii. 25) = 25, on>
by metathesis. [K.D. L.C.K.
p. 500]
Angel of 2 S. Ssnsp
The Influence from Kether S51
Salt non
The name of a Giant Siyv
™ 79
Boaz, one of the Pillars of the ws
Temple of Solomon
Die via
Angel of 8 S. SSD
Jachin, one of the Pillars of Pas?
the Temple of Solomon
ady 5
Conjunction, meeting, union my
80
Union; an assembling wi
GOD of Jesod-Malkuth of “J5S8 7°
Briah
Foundation 3°
Universal, general bos
Throne. [Exod. xvii. 16] a5
5p
9°=3*. ) VV 8&
GODS aos
I. [Ex. xxiii. 20] ‘IS
Anger, wrath; also nose aS

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Hearer of Cries; Angel of 6 P. Syd
Angel of 5 W. base
Night Demon of 2" Dec. 1? PS>
Throne ND
Here, hither S5
Angel of 9 SSIs
A prayer (Ch.) Vo
Briatic Palace of Hod ma ooen
Kindly, righteous, holy son
Laban; white ik,
The beloved thing; res grata mins
Abbreviatura quatuor syste- v3
matum
The drops of dew. by Sas
[Job xxxviii. 28]
Benajaha, son of Jehoiada wn"33
See 73 Sie3
A flowing, wave ma
Person, self; (Ch.) wing m3
Consecration; dedicated moan
Angel of 2 P. bsa5d
To flee, put one’s things in Pal

safety. [Jerem. vi. 1]

7 X 12; or (2? + 3)(2” x 3)—hence
esteemed by some

A wing (army), squadron; a As
chosen troop

[I.Z.Q. 699] ynnas

Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 71] yams

Was silent op"

82

Tt 83

84

13

A dream pin
Enoch yan
Knew yey
Boaz (is referred to Hod) wis
A flower, cup yaa
Put in motion, routed San
Circumcision mo
The mouth; the letter 5 md
A name of GOD, as- JAS TAS
serting the identity of
Kether and Malkuth
Elohim. [Note masc. pl of | 2°58
fem. sing.]
Hallelu-Jah mein
A rustling of wings min
Geomantic Intelligence of 9 88571
[Vide I.R.Q. 778] S08 min 7
A cup; hence Pudendum =)
Muliebre
A blemish, spot, stain Ph)
Angel of 10 C. osm
Plenitude “bn
[Vide K.D. L.G.K. p. 114] ros
Acup TOS
Angel of 1% Dec. | pons
Blasphemed 73
Standards, military ensigns hee
Determined lal

85

86

87

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

White Storks mvon
Whitenss; frankincense; ms}
Sphere of )
Redness; sparkling 50n
To be hot men
Darkness jen
A duke of Edom Sse
Roaring, seething; burning bn3
Shut up AA
Body hia
Silence lame
Angel of 9 S. snp
Very silent oe
The Pillar, Jachin n°
Water =e)
Kings 3D
Wicker-basket bp
Night Demon of 2" Dec. & “YB

> (1—13).. The Mystic Number of
Kether as Achad. The Number
of Paths in the the Supernal Beard;
according to the number of the
Letters, 3 = 11, etc.

A tree [SS

Amen. [Cf. 741] [Os

The Ephod TES

The “348 MM”, inter- “TS
laced

Angel of 4S. S55

88

Tt 89

go

oI

Archangel of Geburah SNDD
Food, fare Sosp
Angel ssop
Daughter, virgin, bride, Koré soon
Manna Sip
A hut, tent ns
Pekht, ‘extension’ fataty 3)
Angel of 5 S. Ssscss
Mud Pa
(Deut. xxviii. 58.) sos mim
[Vide no. 572]
Terror, a name of Geburah batnt)
A duke of Edom. [Vide mpa">ns
also Ezekiel xxiii.]
The sons of (the merciful) S95 95
GOD
[Vide Liber ABA pt. 11] WSs"
Incense ms
A disc, round shield ie)
[Vide Liber DCLXXxI!] Ss
Possession mn
[Vide Liber ABA pt. IV] my
Arduous, busy; an army Sas
Corpse ayia
The valley of vision pms
To extinguish Ww
Destruction. [Ps. |. 20] “51
A shore Aan
A window ron
A drop ma
Children ee

14

Qg2

93

94

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The great Stone mons pas
Angel of 2 W.—Daniel oss
Angel of ro P. mynn
The waters S27
Multitude, abundance; Haman = fan
Zabulon nbat
Angel of 2! Dec. & yn
3 S"s8p
Journey sonp
Queen nop
Selah. [Ps. xxxii. 5, 6 etc.] mo
A name of GOD “ms os
Chaldee form of 28 poss
By day =)
Praiseworthy; Angel of 7 W. Ssndd
Work assbp
The secret (counsel) of mm 5

the Lord. [Ps. xxv. 14]

Breeder, rearer; Day Demon of [218
1 Dec. I

Changeless, constant; the GOD [2S
Amon

The Son of Man SS [2
Archangel of Netzach Sscosn
The appointed time ou
To seize suddenly (rapere) Bon
A hand-breath, palm. ndby

[x Kings vii. 26—Ex. xxv. 25.]

A brick, tile nssé

95

96

Tt 97

15

A building; an architect nisp
Aquae EL Boni. Sonn os cp
[“Quicksilver,” K.D.
L.C.K. p. 442]
98
A name of GOD mros san
Temporary dwelling. [Ex. Sint
XXXxill. I]
Image; hid, concealed— fen
pertains to Sol and the
Lingam-Yoni
To consume, eat Son
White ny
99
The pangs of childbirth 9m" “an
The Vault of Heaven; an mpi
inner chamber; wedlock,
nuptial
City of Death, Infernal pen
Abode of Geburah
Cognition, knowledge ny
10” a 100
A day; the seas; the times. 3°
[Vide no. 1100]
Vases, vessels D5
The palm; the letter Kaph >
An effort, extertion. [I.R.Q. 995] [72
Mitigation of the one by BN3Y "NS
the other
T 101
Swallowed, destroyed pos
A storehouse 55S
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 147] pS
Angel of 4 C. mpi

Archangel of © and A;
Angel of 7 S.; Angel of
Malkuth of Briah, etc.

Kingdom; a virgin princess;

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

S355

nobp

esp. THE Virgin Princess,

i.e. Ecclesia

Gut; gut-string

A white goose
Trust, truth, faith

Bela, a King of Edom; to

Sp"

735 NS
ns
yoo

possess; lands, government

Concupiscibilis

Grace, pride, fame, glory; a
wild goat

Dust

To guard, protect
Loathed

Food, meat (Ch.)
Oblation
Prophets

A calf

Father of the mob, or of
the multitude

Quarrel, dispute

Personal (belongings),
small private property

Sodom

Giving up, presenting, re-
mitting

Trade; a fish-hook

“ans
“23

pss
ra
bya
mip
nne
mss:
bay

ron OS

mip
nis

t=)
nv

“IS

102

T 103

104

16

> (1—14)

To subvert, ruin, change

Desert land: Earth of Netzach

Attained

Angel of 7 C.

Fish; the letter Nun
Angel of 9 C.
Stibium

Line, string, linen thread

An egg
Angel of Netzach of Briah
Angel ruling 2

spn
mx

p27

Ssnde

ri
mss
at

?

mss
Ss*py
osu

2? x 38: hence used as the number of
beads on a rosary by some sects.

The ears

SIS

The fruit of a deep valley 5n3n "383

Hell of Jesod-Malkuth
A wall

To force, do wrong to
To love very much
To shut up, obstruct
The middle

To measure out; a decree;

tall. (Masc. gender). Cf 113

Angel L.T.D. of 2
A Giant: “the lust of GOD”

moms
pn
Don
rn
mon
“xm
pn

pnp
Sry

Day-demon of 2"! Dec. * “S1NDD8

Lightning

pa

105

106

7 107

108

™ 109

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Quiet mms
Music ae
Angel of ¥ osnp
Circle, sphere aay
sv
Father of Faith AAPST SS
Tectum coeli fabrilis sub = ABINA 33
quo desponsationes con-
iugum fiunt
Resemblence, likeness aye
Cherubic Signs—M replaced = pm
by °
To embrace pan
At the end of the days; the Pee
right hand
A sign, flag, standard DI
Angel of 6 W. Ssmp
Kinsman oy

The number of Abra-Melin Servitors
of O.P.A.A. > {1—(6 x 6)} + 6. ©

Red. [Vide Gen. xxv. 25] SJ125S8
AnameofGOD SoS Sin nS
A thousand; Aleph aos
Ruin, destruction, sudden fos
death
AUM ays
Thick darkness SDs
Passwords of ...... sas ar
Mad Sony
Intelligence of © osc
Common holocaust; an ascent ny
A duke of Edom moy

II0o

III

Title of Kether. (Mirum sop
occultum)
112
Angel of 2 C. oSro8
A structure; mode of building = ["33
Was angry 535
Sharpness pan
Jabok. [Gen. xxxii. 22.] p="
Note 112 = 4 x 28
The Lord GOD menos min
Ebal soy
T 113
Likeness; the same. (Fem. npn
gender.) Cf 108.
A giving away, remitting nbs
A stream, brook +p
114
Qliphoth of Jesod Ss ona
Tear (weeping) yE7
Gracious, obliging, indulgent nan
Science yp
Brains now
II5

Geomantic Intelligence of ™ 5ss595

Here am I ain
The heat of the day avn ain
To make strong; pin
vehement, eager
116
Doves oo
Heaven of Chesed psp
The munificent ones as"

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Primordial my Emanated from Sys
my Of whirling motions pybaban
1Qq] ama «
Foe: aikeness Sos Nocturnal vision sh : mun
5 05
GuidesDuke nits Angel ruling 29 SYS
g | [isfilled sons
II
Angel L.T.N. of 9 osoy
To pass, renew, change aon
To ferment yon nae
Strength; Chassan, Ruler of Air [DM VECOMPIESSS MENS
The: HishPaest tang m> Revolutiones (Animarum) mods
ae 123
ee dpioas ens AnameofGOD, mms mim mms
‘aaa } implying Kether—Chokmah—
Beelzebub, the Fly-GOD [28 Binah, 3, 4, & 5 letters.
Weeping (subst.) sistys War nontp
Night Demon of 2% Dec. P? A> A blow, plague yas
Abominable Sup Pleasure, delight aly
15 =  (1—15)—" being the 120 Laesio aliqualis, violatio Dap
15 Path
: 124
Masten us An oak; hardness pean
1 ic i)
Foundation, basis nee Pleasure, delight; Eden ry
The time of the decree al) Olishotket Chokmah Systane
Strengthening Pop
. : 58 vo 125
Prophetic sayings, or decrees: pp . iy i
“His days shall be”;— Night Demon of 2 Dec. x Sp
hence Abra-Melin [Vide S.D. v. 16] r=)>)=)
Velum qDD Angel of 4 P. sD
Prop; the letter Samekh aay) 126
Aname of GOD 1y A widow mpos
Ir’ v 121 Darkness mops
Vain idols aos Day Demon of 1* Dec. 8 pas
?Termination of Abr-amelim? B>*DS AnameofGOD = Soa “3S TM
An end, extremity OSS Hospitality ron

18

Horse

On, a name of GOD [see 120],

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

515
py

penalty of iniquity; “being

taken away”

Material
Angel of 5 P.
27
Eliphaz
Angel ruling *

To deliver, loose

Robustus gratia. [Vide K.D.

L.C.K. p. 399]
GOD, the Eternal One

Pleasure [Gen. xviii. 12]

Delight, pleasure

Deliverance

The Angel of re-
demption

Decrees, prophetic sayings

Eye; the letter Ayin
The Pillars
Destitute

A staircase, ladder

Angel of 5 C.

He was angry
Nose
Turn, roll

Title of Kether

your
oso

127

Y 128

DoS
SSDs
pon
ron

wns min

naw
aay

myn
San [sop

ret
ry
“DY
“1
nbp
monb

ars
Ds
IDS
nop

129

130

T 131

19

Angel of 6 C. bobs
Samael; Qliphoth of Hod ospp
Angel L.T.N. of sS°D5
Humility may
To make waste pos
Angel of 4 W. SSSa
To receive bop
[Vide I.Z.Q. 699] po"
Vine [Ba
Angel of 5 S. meyn
The salt sea mon oo
Burning pon
Day Demon of 2" Dec. $5 ayoar
Geomantic Intelligence bsison
of ?
A destitute female may
The congregation. [Vide mp
no. 161]
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 673] mp
D(1—16).  ¥
Spirit of ¥ Sspon
Intelligence of ¥ oscar
The Avenging Angel Sian 4sop
Fines, penalties ae)
A voice bp
A wheel [ES

132

133

134

135

T 137

The belly, gullet.
[? Hebrew: vide K.D.
L.C.K. p. 138]

An image, a statue.
[Gen. xxviii. 22]

A receiving; the Qabalah

The Son of GOD

To smoothe, divide

To leaven, ferment

To pollute

Libanon. [Cant. iv. 11, 15]
He shall smite

Forehead

Hiddekel, the eastern river
of Eden

Kings; Angels of Tiphareth
of Assiah, and of
Netzach of Briah.

Robust; oaken
Gathered, collected
Angel of 4 P.
Precept

Trusty, steady

L.A. Angel of 5

Prima

Geomantic Intelligence
of 8

Wickedness, destruction

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

SOD WOS

=P ye)

map

mrs 135

pon
pon
520
nas
pn
nyo

Sesn

mste

ros
mos
mpiD
msp
rDS3
Sston
spp

oss

sysbs

138

T 139

140

I4I

142

20

A stranger; Balaam pyés

Night Demon of 3“ Dec.  25r3

Delights (A & V) pn
143

The unshoeing neon

Running waters. [Cant. iv. 15] mony
12? Ales 144

A sandal Sas5

Anterius; the East; days first =p
of the first

The numerical value of the 13 Paths 145
of the Beard of Macroprosopus
The StaffofGOD. os S"nosn nue
[Ex. xvii. 9]

Inscrutable nove
Angel of 6 P. Mp
A feast aMyS
146
The First Gate. [Vide SBP S32
K.D. L.C.K. p. 184]
Limit, end; boundless h15
The world; an adult poy
The Four Names in the Lesser 147
Ritual of the Pentagram
viz: SOS MMS IS TT
148

A name of pnb mint mons
GOD

Angels of Hod in Assiah 2° >S "33
and Briah

Glutton and drunkard. = S3901 55%
[Deut. xxi. 20]

To withdraw, retire pen

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Scales; 2 SNP
Victory nya
Flour, meal np
7 149
The living GODS. oun oS
[Cf 154]
A beating of the breast; “pon
a noisy striking
150
Ariolus. [K.D. L.C.K. p. 53] “9
A walking shoe bya
Thine eye. [Vide I.R.Q. 652] ry
Nest Ip
TI51

MMS spelt in full mm an Ss

“TETRA- sns mint anos min
GRAMMATON of the GODS
is One TETRAGRAMMATON

Night Demon of 3 Dec. >SB

The Fountain of Living Mpp
Waters. [Jer. xvii. 13]

A standing upright, stature TmDAP

Jealous Sip
152

Benjamin fp"33

The Bringing-forth One Syn

Residence, station 233
= (1—17) 153

L.A. Angel of 2 Sssopan
154

Elohim of Lives. men anos

[Cf. 149]

155
Adonai the King 2 NS
The faithful friend [ass 4
The beard (correct). [S.D. Sip 4
ii. 1, et seq.]
Letters of the Cherubic boobs lokay
signs
Angel of 2"! Dec. Y3 mp"p"
“The Concealed and maby
Saving”; Angel of 6 W.
A seed nap
12 x 13, the number of letters in each 156
‘tablet of Enoch’
The Tabernacle of the 45D 5ns

congregation [Lev. i, 1]
A viper nYSS
BABALON, THE VIC- mosses
TORIOUS QUEEN
[Vide XXX Aethyrs:
Liber CDXVIII]

Angel of Hod of Briah osyon
Joseph [referred to Jesod] 5%
Angel of 1% Dec. ML ae)
Sys
A bird hiv
“Crying aloud”; the name Wd
of a King of Edom
Zion my
Limpid blood iby
™ 157
The setting of the Ten 7"
Sun
Was angry, enraged; anger Ayr

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Lingam pt
The beard. [Vide S.D. ii. 467, [Pt
and no. 227]

Occult sopip
Female; Yoni nmap
Angel of 9 S. Ssuy
A Duke of Edom wap
Arrows axn
To suffocate pan
Balances. [Ch.] Pase
Surpassing Whiteness SPSS
[Vide 934]
Point mp3
[Vide I.R.Q. 652]
Angel of 3S. mopn
Silver D2
Fell down. Decidit ops
A rock, stone yop
A tree ry
A Duke of Edom P>"2
Lay, fell. [Ez. iii. 8] {55
Image mby
Cain rp

The heavenly man; lit. msoy 208
the ‘primordial’ or
‘exalted’ man

The Congregation of mint Snp
the Eternal

Srp

158

159

160

161

22

Nine Paths of the Inferior Beard;
I4+I5+...+22= 162

Son of the Right Hand; Pes
pr. n. of Benjamin

Day Demon of 1* Dec. 7 bsbosds

Angel ruling M SDD
T 163
[Vide no. 36z,a SIS OTS sn
numerical Temurah of 163]
Woman, wife nap
164
y3r
Ye shall cleave apa
Outer; civil, as opposed pscn
to sacred. [Vide K.D.
L.C.K. p. 342]
The Pillars aby
165
Strength. [Ez. iii. 8] Spin
“To make them know.” sy"in>
[Ps. xxv. 14]
Nehema nays
NEMO. [Name of M.T.] yn
Angel of 3 W. mony
An assembly nmyy
166
A King of Edom wards
Reus mulctae. [Vide ppp 3°n
K.D. L.C.K. p. 498]
Heaven of Geburah pyep
Night Demon of 3 Dec. M Sips
Native land of Job ry
The Most High rey

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

7167 | Spirit of 2 Ssqp
The Unnameable One hos 6
(a demon) 7
; ; F
Revers ous el op An advisor, counselling ry
oe To eternity mon
I
Illegitimat SOP
Parentes Superni ashy SOSI SOS a ad
ia oe Domi Domi SsS7 AS =
The accentuator mpyy ta a aa By
170 The Garden of Eden py ya
The Wand; (David's) Staff ‘pp Figetpourfechelp byt
Choig ie Angel L.T.D. of 9 syhamp
> (1—18) w7I Pleniutude of plenitudes “ban “>
Principium emittens SyND a
Renae ron 7EN3 The lower part, the loins mxdn
Angel L.T.N. of * psop
Good pleasure, choice, [2M
“The Face of God”; name Ssscse decisional
of an angel Sead te
Quicksilver “nm &\D5
172
a ™ 179
Cut, divided. yps Gage aeae
He affected. [Not written] ayy" ree nay
Clusters; grapes psi 180
The heel, the end. [Mic. vii. 20] 3P¥ A spring, fountain. [Cant = [/“¥
Jacob iv. 15]
The front part m.35
T 173
Lighten mine eyes “sy 53 nm 181
Day Demon of 3“ Dec. ay3 Vicious, faulty aea))
174 182
Torches ote Deus Zelotes Sip os
Splendor ei per cir- ssp nn Outcry, clamour npyt
cuitum Layer of snares, supplanter; py

= {1—-(7 x 7)} +7.
Suction
Duplicity
A slipping, falling

175 Jacob
np King of the Gods
nopoe Passive [as opposed to
mops Sspnp = active]

23

mrosn she
Sspp

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

183 1 191
184 Contanance PRIS
Ancient time; eastward bps [Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 143] DDDS
185 Night Demon of 1* Dec.°P —- PINSB
186 A box, chest; a repository mp
A stone of stumbling; a Fad [aN 192
rock to fall over. [Is. viii. 14] Poisonous wind, Simoon meySt
An increase AE{ Ye shall cleavein 9 7D Bps4n
Praefecti asi TETRAGRAMMATON
A place pps [Vide no. 220]
Back of the Head; an ape; Sp T 193
the letter Qoph 194
187 Righteousness, equity, justice; P18
Angels of Chokmah, and of D°258 the Sphere of ¥. [Vide K.D.
Chokmah of Briah L.C.K. p. 656]
Lifted up Apt 195
IK. of S., Fig 52] Os pip A flock mpe
188 Visitation mpS
Jaacob. [Vide K.D. L.C.K.  s'py* 14? v 1096
pel Mare Soph. [Vide K.D. nip oO
The Master of the Nose Sunn Sy3 L.C.K. p. 435]
189 The crown, summit, point rip
Fons obseratus. [Cant. Suva 53 7197
ein El Supernus poy oS
The Ancient among the [35% S305 [Vide K.D. stn OY SEM SIS
ancient. LOCK eo
> (1—19) 190 108
Ubi perrexit Angelus BM SI" YON Victories =nys
Internal ‘DIB
Corona florida prominens Ps ve ; ’ ec
The side or flank; rib yoy penne inccle then. “MPAs
First devil. V. Porta Sssnap 200
Coelorum Fig. XVI Alae. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. D°2i5
The end, appointed time. xp p. 483]
{Dan. xii.13.] [Vide no. 305] A branch may

24

A bone

Archetypal

Belonging to the Spring
A sling; a casting-net

Divination

Light (Ch.)

To make empty
Pure; a field; son
Elevatio
Apertures

L.A. Angel of M
Many, much

Initials of the Trinity:
Mos: 5N8

Passed away, perished; feather,

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

myy
moap
rp
yop
mop

aS

pps

“3
np"pt
maps
SSS OND
3

3S

NS

wing; (it. membrum et quid.

genitale)
To lie in wait
A well, spring
Created

Exotic, foreign

Commencement of the
name Abra-Melin

Foreign resident; race S.; an
age (Ch.)
The righteous

Day Demon of 2™ Dec. P
Splendrous

=S8
SS
so3

ar

SoS

“

ps

“SIS
“8

201

202

203

204

205

Mighty; hero 933
Mountain bal
Assemly; area Sus
Hail a3
Spake; word; cloud AS7
They of the World mow ‘bp
M, a scorpion 28S
Lord of the Universe YY “INS
Light. Cf. 9 and iz. Auris “ISN

the balanced Light of open

day
Limitless AD PS
Ate m3
Walled, fenced a =|

That which cuts. [Vide no. 607] “3M

The Elders. [Deut. xxi. 19] p.3pt
Melt, fuse ppt
The Crown of the Ark ”“
Grow great 735
Feather mS
A cistern “3
Bowed bala
To make strife, contend m4
Hagar san
To kill an
Abominable sv
Jizchak. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. pns*
p. 266]
Multitude 3

206

207

208

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

209 A girdle san
Chief Seer or Prophet OS33S A floor; Jeor “s°
(hence Abra-Melin) “Fear,” the fear of the sv
Reward, profit, prize n3S8 min (i.e. wonderment)
To delay, tarry; behind (prep.) “TS
Way nos Great Voice 35
10" Spirit of Goetia [=Day Ssi3 Night Demon of 1% Dec. Y5 ssn
Demon of 1* Dec. 95] "3 Splendour; to enlighten ant
Dispersed "3 To spread out; harlot; golden mm
Sojourned, dwelt ba bata} To enclose; secret chamber an
Honour; a King of Edom; the
Supernal Benignity
am Strong, powerful, mighty vSS
Oppressed
Calx bab!
2 (1=20) 0 |) TER wC) on
Adam Primus. [Vide no. 607] “78 Slaughter man
Choice ns Loaded ata
Pass on, fly ms To be strange; a stranger bai
To decide, determine Wa The Supernal Sa msoy son
To dwell; circle, cycle; gene- baba Mercy of GOD
ration Nubes Magna beng poy
To conceive mn
A joining of words; incanta- san A girdle uN
tions; to conjoin; a brother
Angel of 1* Dec. P ait)
A sword an
Whiteness an
Angel of 1“ Dec. YS PDP
Came down baba
Naaman [aya
: Air; Spirit; wind; Mind ms
[Vide OEAHMA] moysy
Punctata aps
Eminent; a Prince “AS
pert [Ps. viii. 1]
[Worthy Tae A path, narrow way ms
Balion as Posterior; the reversed part “nS
Strong Tiss A rising; to rise “as the Sun,” mo
A flash; lightning msn give light

26

212

213

214

215

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

To encompass. [Vide K.D. an
L.C.K. p. 340]
63 V 216
Night Demon of 1* Dec. 2 S588
Lion mas
The middle Gate. SYS S35
[Vide K.D. L.C.K.
p. 184]
Courage AaMsa
Oracle ~S5
Blood of grapes E.a3y 25
Dread, fear iat Sahl
Profound. [Ps. xcii. 6] pai
Anger, wrath mw
Latitude am
217
The air “IS
Temple, palace avs
Food m3
A bee miss
The navel “30
Angel ruling 7 Sspynn
Angel L.T.N. of M s3pnp
Controversia Domini abel
218
Ether [Vide K.D. L.C.K. Sus
P. 55]
The Creative World m3
The benignity of Time o%Y “Dn
The Moon ma
Multitude “35
Arcana sm

Odour, a smell ns
219
Mundatio, mundities msny
The Number of Verses in Liber R 220
Legis
The Elect “ns
Heroina; Augusta; Domina AaMws3

Ye shall cleave mn> spss
unto TETRAGRAMMATON.
[Nor written]

me

Giants. [Fully written only °>"B3
in Num. xiii. 33]

Clean, elegant

Left-handed Svastika, drawn on the 221
square of dO given by Agrippa.
Cf. 231

Long JIS
Angel of 10 S. Sspip
222
Urias mus
“Unto the Place” mipon os
[Ex. xxiii. 20]
Whiteness mn
Goodly mountain. awn
[Ex. iii. 25]
Now, already; K’bar, “the 935
river Khebar”; Day Demon
of 34 Dec. M
I will chase 7mS4
Tr 223
224
Male (Ch.) 927
Walk, journey; The PATH 44
Principia emanandi “ppan

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Effigurata “pipn Sum of the Four Ways of spelling
Union om TETRAGRAMMATON in_ the
Four Worlds
oe V 225 Geomantic Intelligence Osoessos
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 234] sn of ¥
226 | Ruler of Fire Sos
Profound, hidden; the North. ['2¥ Equivalent of MS "M, ms ™
[Vide K.D. L.G.K. p. 666] Fiat Lux. [Vide K.D.
L.G.K. p. 55]
1 227 :
Let there be Light! The “iW 7
Long, tall TAS Mystic Name of Allan
A piscine, pond; [Blessing, na Bennet, a Brother of the
Prov. x. 22] Cross and Rose, who
Remember; male (sacred 1) began this Dictionary.
Phallus—Vide S.D. ii. p. 467)
Damna. [Vide K.D.L.C.K.  p*p"ts Memento “I
p. 569] The Tree of Life. [Vide ounn py
538 no. 228]
First-born “33 ;
Blessed! wn Night Demon of 3 SS8257
Dec. *
Ruler of Earth a2
Bae Tree oh bile RL ad Archangel of Chesed, and SS"
TT 229 Angel of Chesed of Briah
230
Aetonishment scorn Angel L.T.N. of ? “SMYDD
[Vide K.D. L.G.K. p. 153] pp A handful Pep
Fasciata opy
Angel of 2" Dec. I os Angel of 3 C. ONTST
Hod, 42-fold Name in pipos
Yetzirah. [Vide Liber Dominus Mirabilium MiS>D3n [IS
777, Col. xc. p. 18] Rachel ons
> (1—21) Right-handed Svastika, 231
drawn on Sq. of d Azrael, the Angel of Death oso
Prolonged; grew long TAS Iron a5
Male ie The lot Seis

28

232

T 233

234

235

236

237

238

T 239

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Angel of 3 Dec. 8 iarPi=h
240
Myrrh “PD
Plagae Filiorum S58 35 (Wal
Hominum. [I.e. Succubae,
K.D. L.C.K. p. 562
Prima Germina {85
Angel of 1° Dec. * S555
Cash; counted out, paid Sp, pp
down
High, lofty 54
1 241
L.A. Angel of Y3 Ss pan
242
Ariel, Angel of Air OSs
Recollection mot
243
Abram. [Vide 248] 5558
Created (he them) Sso3
[Gen. v. 2]
Learned, complete. To “3
finish, bring to pass (Ch.)
A bone; to destroy 253
244
Angel of 7 P. Ssnon
To be insensible; in deep a
sleep, in trance. [Vide no.
649]
245
Adam Qadmon pep Ss
Gall, bile mp
Spirit of God os mo
246
Angel of 3 S. oscan
Myrrh “i

29

Vision, aspect fats tal)

Sap
Angel L.T.D. of 8 STS
Height, altitude a
Angel L.T.N. of YS NS

To overwhelm (Ps. Ixxvii. 18); at
a flood

A light uN
Night Demon of 1* Dec. 8 oso
Sensus symbolicus bal

Abraham. [Vide 243 and 8M°53S
505, 510. Discussed at
length in Zohar]

The Three that bear wit- S"3+55S
ness, above and beneath
respectively. "NS the
Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood; S being Air
(Spiritus), I standing for
5" Blood, and ® being
both Water and the in-
itial of 3°, water. For
S73 see 203

Uriel or Auriel, archangel of SSuON
Earth, and angel of Netzach;

= “The light of God”
In vision. [Vide K.D. ms 3
L.C.K. p. 553]
Gematria [[qy Gemarah]] mops
Wine; bitumen; an ass (from sin
“to disturb” )
Mercy; womb an
A lance npn

247

248

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

249 Merciful a4

L. A. Angel of 8 Sssvmass pee

Night Demon of 2" Dec.2 “Waa Night Demon of 3 Dec. 9. US

Fear, terror aur) Burdensome; with difficulty S95

250 The East abel y=)

The living GOD of mphyn cndos A river, stream. [Gen. ii. ro] am
the Worlds; or, of Cantatio elata ms
the Ages

. ; 16? = 4! = 2° = 256 VV WV 256

[The South.] Midday an

; . Aaron pas
Habit, action (Ch.) babel =)
Tidings (Ps. Ixviii. 12); a mS
T 251 saying, speech. [Vide

Fir, cedar [os K.D. L.C.K. p. 128]

The angel Uriel: “Vrihl,” 9 oo" The Sons of the Righteous PI8 "33
i.e. Magical Force. [Vide [See no. 705] [Vide K.D. poop
Lytton’s “Coming Race,” L.C.K. p. 20]
and Abra-Melin—forehead =
Lamen] The Spirit of the Mother SPS 7M

Angel of 10 W. S05 Aromatarius S55

252 7 257

Serpent’s den nose The Ark Pos

Sa) aes A Magician anon
Proselytes os ‘To His fearers psd
[Ps. xxv. 14]

Matred; who symbolizes the “"¥S ; ae
Elaborations on the side of The White Wand a
Severity Terribilis Ipsa su

254 258

Angel of 3“ Dec. * oso The red light 208 UN

Geomantic Intelligence of 2 oS Hiram (King of Tyre) oon

An ass “rn Mercy ‘Sn

A mark, aim mE 259

A solemn primise, vow a3 Throat m3

Spikenard. [Cant. iv. 14] 73 Nitre sp5

PSDs ae Reuben 85

30

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

> {1—(8 x 8)} +8. ¥ 260
Intelligence of § Sassy
The Concealed svDu
I.N.R. [Vide 270] alba
Exaltabitur om
A vineyard 255
Ineptos et profanos opp
[Ps. viii. 1] “AS 7p
Declined “2
To gather, draw together OYEY
261
He bound; an obligation, a "DS
prohibition
Abhorrence, abomination. ns
[Is. Ixvi. 24]
262
Lofty; Aaron pans
Severities isv33
Terrible sun
Conclavia asan
Eye to eye. [I-R.Q. 645] Pys py
T 263
Angel of 2"! Dec. * pass
Angel of 2™ Dec. ps
Geomantic Intelligence of M s*253
Gematria snup4
Pained bal
264
Emanatia. [Vide K.D. = pipn
L.G.K. p. 338]
Jarden. [Vide K.D. dail
L.G.K. p. 455]

31

Footprints (foot’s breadth). 4.75
[Deut. ii. 5]

A straight row. [Vide K.D. "5
L.C.K. p. 455]

Channels, pipes pyr

U5

Architect Sos

Broke down a

Acry of the heart; anguish, nmpyy
anxiety

Chebron msn

Termination of Qliphoth of ne
12 Signs

Contraction piwoy

Illicit, forbidden DS

Geomantic Intelligence of 8 OS*3

Currus; Vehiculum; m3355
Thronus
Nasiraeus ahi
Stones of the sling yopn 358
By-ways Paas
Father—Spirit—Son a8 m7 [5
Angel of Binah of Briah = SS35ND
Levers, bars ons

ILN.R.I. Initials of: Jesus
Nazereus Rex Judaeorum;
Igni Natura Renovata In-
tegra; Intra Nobis Regnum
del; Isis Naturae Regina

ses

265

266

267

268

Tt 269

270

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Ineffabilis; and many other
sentences. Vide Crowley
Coll.Works Vol. I. Appendix

Earth (Ch.); whence = low, yas
mean

Angel of 2! Dec. 7 pam

[Vide no. 256, NDS] sesh

Earth SYVAS

To consume, injure; brutish “V5

Percussione magna m5 722

The evening: an ‘Arab,’i.e.a O°Y
person living in the West

Day Demon of 3 Dec. # aah

The stone which 5°32" ‘SN [3S
the builders rejected
[Ps. cxviii. 22]

The Hidden Light a is

Four yas

Rebuked wa

Took away yu

Paths oo

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 72] a Vns

Domicilum pulchrum msiaAss
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 395]

Fluvius Iudicii. [Vide Pas
K.D. L.C.K. p. 117]

Qy. Sruti “Scripture.” wD

T 271

272

273

274

275

a2

> (1—23)
Angel L.T.N. of 2. Sos
[Vide Liber 777 col. cxlv]
A Cithara “a5
Night Demon of 1° Dec. 55159
The Moon SoS
To sow, propagate; seed, vat
semen
[For multiplying.] [Vor nos

written. Vide K.D. L.C.K.
pp- 157 and 837]

Angel of 3 Dec. & 935

Gratia, benevolentia sis

Angels of Jesod, and of a3
Binah of Briah—Cherubim

Passing over 731¥

The Material World ysuipn 250

Leprosy. [Vide K.D.
L.C.K. p. 495]

3D

[7 x 40, the Squares on the walls of
the Vault. See Equinox I. 3. p. 222]

Qliphoth of Y3 pyaaan
A record (Ch.) ia
Angel of the Wood of the ay"
World of Assiah
The Letters of Judg- SN aby ako
ment; the 5 letters
having a final form.
Archangel of Malkuth nebo
Citizenship ag

276

T 277

278

279

280

[Vide S.D. 528]

Terror

A crown—Ashes

Attire; adorned

Angels of Binah, and of
Malkuth of Binah

Spirit of Lives

Aurum inclusum

Memoriale. [Vide no. 934]

That goes on foot

Geomantic Intelligence

of I

The small area of an en-
closed garden

High, lofty

Pars Azymorum

Night Demon of 34 Dec. 8

Little

Geomantic Intelligence of 9 8"

Vindication

Day Demon of 1* Dec. I

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

“5 17’ v 289
oh Apertio. [Vide no. 537] ba") =)
a 281 Particulare lab)
“DS 290
“SB Thine enemy a
282 201
poss Torrentes Aquarum D°> “p's
(He) treasured ASS
ayn mn Earth: in particular, the Earth "NS
7 283 of Malkuth
sp Sm Qy. spotted? SI
rt _ »
most Adhaesio; adhaerens; SsovD
eee princeps
: L.A. Angel of s"ppsy
284 aus
DSSS A young bird. [Deut. xxii. 6] MBS
Gold a3
am
A medicine, drug mS
285 7 293
Day Demon of 2" Dec. 8 583
286
a5 294
F Purple PaaS
an Pertaining to Autumn qn
IDEN hi
Melchizedec. [Gen. pisss>p
ISD xiv. 18]
uve
295
Curtain; canopy; vault. mays
288 [Ps. civ. 2]
“55 Eyelids pyn “BID
“pst [Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 498] “DS
2096

Breeding, bearing] offspring. W°Y

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 313]
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 571]

nes Incurvens se

33

Of the Earth. [Vide no. 992] P"ST

yma

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Rigorose procedere; fumarie; bay
rock. [Vide K.D. L.C.K.
PP- 459, 663]

Thesaurus; gazophylacium; “S58
conservatorium

A name of GOD “33 mos
attributed to Geburah

A secured house; a fortified [29S
castle.

A City of Edom mass

The Throne; a Name of sous
Briah [[Qy. Binah]]

Nuriel TS ail

The neck ASW

Amen, our Light “NS [RS

Son of the GODS pros 95

White any

Pathetic appeals; com- pens
miserations

Angel of 2™ Dec. 99 pans

> (1—24)
Khabs am Pekht TANDS MS

Vide Beth po tren snd aos
Elohim. Dissert. II. Cap. i.
A spelling of 2°78 in full.

Formation "s"
Profundities S{payve
God of Chesed, and of Hod SESB
of Briah; Temura of Mim"
Incircumcisus bay

207

298

299

300

“45
mnbss ms

Separation

The Spirit of GOD.
[Vide Gen. i. 3]

“My Lord, the jos ons
faithful King”; a
name of GOD
Fire US
A candlestick ms
Earth of Hod SPAS
To cut open, inquire into; “ps
Dawn
L.A. Angel of I Sessa
Hath protected “=P
To putrefy =p.
Did evil; putrefaction USS
A species of gold ran
Green dl

Geomantic Intelligence 58382

of *

White “1p
Dazzling white light ny 5S
Tender herb. [Gen. i. 11] sv
Netzach, 42-fold Name in YI—BpPN
Yetzirah. [Vide Liber
777, col. xc]
Yetzirah: “formation” mass
A curving, bending mys

301

302

303

304

305

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The end of days, apppointed ;*2"n Pp
time. [Dan. xii. 13]

A lamb ny
wn
Father of Mercy pani 3S
Merciful Father fanan oS
A woman, wife; virago nws
Honey vor
Domina. [Vide K.D. S77
L.G.K. p. 528]
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 571]
Coldness; pertaining to Winter ‘ip
Angel of 6S. osyns
Malo-Granatum pe
Night Demon of 2" Dec. Mp"
Rikbah mp3
Daybreak “pis
Sparsor spa
Investigation spn
A harsh, grating sound pan
Approaching, near =p
Ice mop
A leper. [Vide K.D. “aD
L.C.K. p. 495]
Angel of 2"4 Dec. 8 “sSWp
Strepitus cordis, mussitatio, Tas
susurratio, rugitus
Field, soil, land mw

306

T 307

308

309

35

To trample on, conquer al
To govern, bind van
Formed. [I.R.Q. 227] a"
The Initials of Idra Rabba ps
Qadisha. [Each Letter
is half of each Letter of
n>, Kether]
Is, are; essence, being ws
Leo iuvenis a>))
Habitations pup
Man: but vide K.D. L.C.K. aly
p. 83
Angel of 9 C. osuay
Archangel of Binah Ss pes
Archangel of Air; Angel of SSB
#. and of Chokmah of
Briah, etc.

Rod. [Ps. xxiii. 4] poy
26 x 12, the Twelve Banners
Night Demon of 3" Dec. g ws
To renew; hence = a new ean

moon, a month
West. [Cf. 272] a5yP
Angel of 1° Dec. f AMSIIS
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 275] 3903 55n
Metatron, Archangel of prays

Kether, and Angel of
Tiphareth of Briah.
(When spelt with °
after [ it denotes
Shekinah.]

310

T 311

312

T 313

314

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Out of the way, remote pans
Shaddai: “The Almighty”; “wy
a name of GOD
Ice; crystal wes
Gullet me
Formation mvs
Visio Splendoris naan AS
Gomorrah my

The Number of Servitors of Abra-
Melin Sub-Princes

Day Demon of 3“ Dec. ? ase
Ligatus wisn
Green po
JESU we
A bundle, handful y
Visitans iniquitatem py app
Aporrhea sapp
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 54] msw
To worship, bow down nny
Day Demon of 3“ Dec. 8 sbosss
[Vide Ps. xcevii. 11] ay
Arida nwo"
Iron (Ch.) SB
Hoariness now
Labrum lavacri, et basio 9335 35
eius
A copse, bush mw

315

316

T 317

318

36

319
320
“Boy,” Name of Enoch, Ws
and of Metatron
A Duke of Edom. [Vide avy
Liber 777, col. cix]
The friends oye
L.A. Angel of 7 Sscmap
321
Angel of 3 Dec sors
Angel L.T.D. of son)
Angel of 9 W. mMasy
Qliphoth of 8 peas
322
Lamb vo
Angel L.T.N. of 7 mas
Linea media “YSPST NP
323
Long-absent brother pans AS
Qliphoth of * nvens
Angel of 3 Dec. P bala ))=)
18? JV 324
See no. 314; it denotes fabe| bi)
Shekinah
Y (1—25). 325
Spirit of d bsoxos
Intelligence of 3 Ss Eso
Angel of 2" Dec. M sms
Need, indigence assays
326
Jesus. [Note the letters of men
TETRAGRAMATON
completed by & 300 q.v.
the Spirit of GOD]

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Vision aAVsSw
327

Day Demon of 24 Dec. wenis

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 461] naw

Night Demon of 34 Dec Y5_ “WED
4 Princes + 8 Sub-Princes + 316 328

servient to Spirits
Angel of 3 W. mynn

To steam; darkness. [Vide qwn
K.D. L.C.K. p. 280]

329
Angel of 1* Dec. & “3558
330
Boundary, terminus; crosspath “ZB
Revolution; hurriane, temest v5
Error: fault by
T 331
Ephraim m"5S
Arbor magna. [Gen. xxi. 33] Sys
Archangel of Chokmah Ssoy5
332
Lux Ardoris TIP TVS
Night Demon of 3 SSDITUIN
Dec.
A Duke of Edom. [Vide "332
Liber 777 col. cix]
Locus vacuus. [Vide K.D. “3B S°prp
L.C.K. p. 551]
333
Qabalah of the Nine 923 P'S
Chambers
Choronzon. [Vide DrDee, ft

& Liber 418, ro" Aire]
Snow sy

334
Astill, small Voice. ps monn Sp
(x Kings, xix. 12]
335
Dies Mali mys op"
The KING msde 2p 3p
above the King of Kings.
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 537]
Ordering, disposition nm
336
An attack; a request, petition nosy
Night Demon of 1* Dec. [I ‘ T33Y
T 337
Angel of Earth soup
Hell of Supernals; a City of Sassw
Edom; the Place of Askings.
[Vide Liber 777, col. cvi]
338
To cast down wn
He hath pardoned (or, wiss°
subjected)
A garment; clothing wisd
To send forth now
339
340
Angel of 3 Dec. # asta D"
“Ferocious” lion wd
Uncus focarius—fire-shovel S*B 935
Book bal >)
Pares; a word written on the bal)
wall at Belshazzar’s feast.
[Vide Dan. v. 28]
There; the Name oy

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The sum of the 3 Mother letters; 341 He was appeased. [Esther, nosy
S,B andy vii. 10]
Yesterday VES
Guilty, damned aus A spring; spring water “pp
A red cow TRS Te A water-pipe; channel bab
Exp ans sepimentum; SOE Good pleasure; the Will-power [18%
diaphragma
The Name (Ch.) sow 7 347
Palanquin (Cant. iii. 9); [TES
342 Bridal bed; nuptial chariot.
Coctio owes (“thalamus seu coelum fab-
Perfume Sys rile sub quo copulantur nu-
b t 99
Night Demon of 2% Dec.8 35D nee
A blaze, flame nony 348
3 a7 ve re to = in array vpn
“And GOD said.” sros 728% Third King of Edom ayn
[Gen. 1. 3] T 349
A sweet smell met 350
344 Day Demon of 34 Dec. & wards
A plantation, garden. Pal) A sapphire (Ex. xxviii. 18). ED
[Cant. iv. 13] [Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 19]
345 Ophir; a young mule; dust of “py
Di Alieni Dons ands che Bash
GOD almighty “wos The Horn; head a
“Tn that also”—referred to oiwvs Vacuum =p"
Daath Intellectus bow
The NAME — Se =6) ae
H ~ : 4
Lioness. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. nw Man YS
ae Angels of Malkuth; b DUNS
th . ngels of Malkuth; burnt or
ae ene incense offering; “The
Moses. [See 543, numerical nw flames”
Temurahof 345] Hiram-Abif,acunning "28 2
Dominator now artificer at the Temple
Shiloh soy of Solomon; the hero

38

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

of a famous allegory
prophetical of FRATER
PERDURABO.

5 in&. Angel ruling 1* snip
Dec. &, that was rising at
the birth of FRATER PER-
DURABO.
Moses the Initiator nes
Elevatus sw
The Exalted Light myn Ts
Long of Nose; i.e. S28 JAS
Merciful; a title of the
supreme GOD
Lightning a p73
An approach f="p
Goshen pea
The fifth nvr
The Secret of sso min no
TETRAGRAMMATON is
to His fearers. [Ps. xxv. 14]
Delight, joy nnaw
Grew fat; anointed an
Heptaeteris intermissoria nmopy
Thought; idea nownp
Year nw
The Cedars of Lebanon 1335 "58
Expiationes. [Vide K.D. ab>
L.G.K. p. 612]

352

T 353

354

355

356

“Er
wv
rn pn

A young mule
Ophra, mother of Goliath
Spirits of the living

42-fold Name, Geburahin W5* "45
Yetzirah

Iniquity Swi
Shame mwa
Shiloh shall come now So
Messtach, the Messiah myn
Nechesh, the Serpent that wna
initiated Eve
(Taking the three 7’s in E*S°US
mnmmS as concealing
the Mothers, we get
I. A. O. &)
Angel of 3"! Dec. ¥ Aap
The Sacred Wind poy
Satan. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. pw
P- 235]
The Messiah mwrn
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 235] mean
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 235] mawn
Angels of Jesod of Briah aw
Seeking safety; Angel of mun
7W.
Tonitrus may
Shin; a Tooth ag
Two aw

357

358

T 359

360

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

19° od! V 361
God of Malkuth POST IAS
“Men”; “impurities” wos
Foundations. [Ch.] Pus
The Mountain Zion reson
Ruler of 5 Swe
Angel of 7 P. Ssoyp
362
363
The Almighty and os “Ww
Ever-living GOD
364
Lux Occulta mop Ss
Satan fawn
Demons maw
Opposition; resistence nny
365
Earth of Tiphareth mw
An uncovering, exposing nya
366
Night Demon of 24 Possus
Dec. Y5
™ 367
Black [scil. of eye-pupil]: pes
middle: homunculus
Day Demon of 3 Dec. I [S"NSB
368
The Spirit ofthe osm anos mo
GODS of the Living.
Zr {1—(9 x g)} +9. C 369

Spirit of ). [Vide Liber
777, col. Ixxix]

“STpwN

The World of Briah 9 mS"Sn DS
Angel of 2™ Dec. I ssnw
A foundation, basis “py
Creation vy
Salices rivi. [Lev. xxiii. 40] 5n3 °39
Zopher lh Y
White lead, tin sop
To rend, cut, blame, curse yap
Green. [Vide S.D. p. 104] ean
Salem nby
Sinistrum Sse
Aqua spherica SOVSOS
Agni pws
An oven, furnace ws
mM apy
Herbage, grass avy
Seven yay
Generally and specially pop $5
Solomon nedy
A City of Edom mony
Dominator Sy

370

371

372

T 373
374

375

376

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Esau, father of the men of Edom. WY Tt 383
(ad: Om edlantes?) Turamentum. [Vide K.D. 9 mDY
A bird. “EBS L.C.K. pp. 67, 695]
Peace. [Refers to Kether] miby 384
377 385
Nervux luxatus; Vena myon a3 Angel of 2" Dec. 2 pan
Ischiatica. [Gen. xxxii. 32] Assiah, the World of Matter = {Wy
Seven nvsyv Gloria cohabitans [vide nosy
K.D. L.G.K. p. 711]; the
Ar 27) 378 Glory of God.
‘In peace nbs Lip mau
Pruna ignita; Chaschmal Sown Be
3
Iuramentum. [K.D. L.C.K. yisy
Jesus yiws
Pp. 695]
‘Tongues re
T 379 .
Tziruph, atable of Temurah 19°38
Abschalom mov ss
8
[The sum of the letters of TETRA- 380 si
GRAMMATON multiplied 388
severally by those of Adonai; The hardest rock. wepdn
Cxt+3x)+(1xt)+(S x] [Ps. cxiv. 8]
=a To search out diligently ven
Difficulty, narrowness a-s_5 Table; bread mow
Pain, trouble, misery pasy ayy
7 389
Thick darkness, fog Spay sh
[Vide no. 370] STREP Gen. v.2 nap ot
Heaven of Hod mp" Retrorsum yoEp
381 Alens, pascens pImD
Clamour, prayer nyiw Heaven py
382 | Oil ow
Day Demon of 34 Dec. & Night Demon of 2"! Dec. Il py

* Refers to a theory that the ‘Kings of Edom’ who perished before the creation of Adam were a
previous race inhabiting ‘Atlantis.’

4I

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

391
Salvation, help myaws
The Inscrutable Height. typ 255
[Kether]
392
Aromata anivs
Habitaculum fave
393
394
Table. [Vide no. 388] mony
394
Robustus (virilitas) Iacob SPY" VIS
The Heavens mewn
Oil fawn
Manesseh mw si
Second nav
Judge DEW
396
Day Demon of r* Dec. M wipe
T 397
Lux Internal. (Title of 2°35 IS
Kether)
398
Fifty owen
Book “wer
Angel L.T.D. of P mye
Pride; esp. of gait paw
399
“piuaw
20° af 400
To use Magic, witchcraft ws
Erudiens, a title of Yesod Sows

Sensus literalis. [Vide K.D. TMiwe
L.C.K. p. 12]
(He had) Karnaim (in his S°s9p
hand)
Angels of Chesed of Briah S*35°¥
Sack py
Cursing 58
Essence; “the” ms
Sought into, or after wpa
Tested, purified "73
Filia m3
A spider wesoy
Paths poisy
The Stone; Sapphire “SY [IS
Law, edict mm
Almond; to watch, be awake; “pw

to hasten

Fearful things, serpents of “PY “ont
the dust. [Job]

[Cf. no. 227, 93%.] Phallus;
urethra. [Vide Deut. xxiii. 2]

nop

> (1—28)
THOU; a name of GOD atstyy
Vulgar, common; plebian PAST BY

Leg pw
Alterations aw
The letter Tau as)

T 401

402

403

404

405

406

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Signum ms
The Precious Oil a1 sow
Lapis sapphirinus DOT [3S
Haec mS
[Vide Deut. x. 10, 15] pwn
Patriarch SonIS
Fathers mos
One (fem.) mms
Ha-Qadesh; Holy Ones vpn
Liberty; a swallow balan
Visions, imaginations. saan
[Dan. iv. 2]
Metzareph AAS
The Tabernacle fawn
Sacred; Saint evap
Holy yap
He heareth yow

Yesod, 42-fold Name in Yetzirah “Pw

Elisha yes

Briatic Palace of nyo bon
Tipharateh

Fundamenta Terrae POS “Di

Habitculum Siovp

Ordo temporum p57 315

Desolation, emptiness. (Ex- an

presses first root of all good)

The letter Beth ms

407

408

TT 409

410

411

412

43

New (Ch.) msn
Jesus GOD anos mem
White whorl 12> spy
Celsitudo superna poy a
A longing for msn
Azoth, the fluid. A+ Z(Lat.) MS
+ 0 (Grk.) + 8 (Heb.). In-
itial and final in 3 tongues.
The Limitless Light AS FIN ['S
Meditation. [Ps. xlv. 4] min

Going forth. [Vide. no. 770] S*2uiw5

The Voice of the Chief 935 AS 33S
Seer

Sister mins
The Holy One; Sodomite wripn
Work nwy
Angel of ro C. mow y
Thought, meditation bah Tabata
A pledge pows
Olive nt
Arca. (Noah’s Ark) man
(Note 4+ 1+ 8 = 13)
Boleskine povs
Peccatum. (Est femina msan
Lilith impia)
Kheth, a fence mn
Servance misericordiam “0M “S43
“The word of the TSUSISD

Aeon.” [Vide Liber 418]

413
414

415

416

417

418

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

SIIS ISAS TIS

418 = MN =NS7 MS, the House of
Hé: because of I.Z.Q. 694; for 7
formeth 3, but M formeth 1": each
= 20. Thus is Abrahadabra a Key
of the Pentagram.

Also, by Aik Bkr, it = 22: and
418 = 19 xX 22. 19 = Manifestation;
it therefore manifest the 22 Keys of
R.O.T.A.

The first meaning is ABRAH
DBR, = The Voice of the Chief Seer.

It resolves into Pentagram and
Hexagram as follows:

1 method.

Axi A forms 12 and 406, S10

and AMS [406 = IN], where AThH=
Microprosopus, and HVA = Macro-
propopus. The Arcanum is therefore
that of the Great Work.

2"! method.

A Bi.
AgficA aren here BHR = 207
AA -R

= NS, TD PS, etc, and DBR =
Voice (“The Vision and the Voice”);
thus showing, by  Yetziratic
attribution, the Three Wands—
Caduceus: Phoenix: Lotus. Note
always "38 are the three Supernals.

3° method.

A A
Asie ees give 205 + 213;
RB R »

both mean “Mighty,” when Abra-
hadabra is “The Word of Double

Power.” AAB shows AB : AIMA :
BN, viz., Amoun : Thoth : Mout.
By Yetziratic MEthod, H: D: R: are
Isis : Horus : Osiris. (Also, for
H:D:R:, vide I-R.Q. 992.)

Dividing as 3 and 8, we get A of
Horus dominating the Stooping
Dragon, 'S8° “78; also—

RSSB
from A B A-H we get
|

8 = 4, Love, and 207 = AS, Light;
8 x 207 =18, which is equivalent to
“nm, Living; further, 207 = 23 x 9 =
mn, Life: hence Licht : Liebe :
Leben.

Again, 418 = MS + way, = 21 + 397,
q.v. 13 and 678 =6+7+8=21. 2x
34+2x%+%=32. The Five different
letters represent Amoun:Thoth: Isis:
Horus: Osris. They (A+B+R+H
+ D) add to 212 (q.v.).

Finally, 8 is the Crown, 3 the Wand,
“ the Cup, 1 the Sword, 9 the R.C.

See Equinox, V and VII, for further
details.

T 419
Serpent: the letter Teth my
Sodom and Gomorrah FBY + B35

420
It was ann
Dolium, vas man
Vapour, smoke fey
Pacifica andy
DES

1 421
Angel ruling Y5 myn s

Angel ruling ¥ Sw b

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The Vast Countenance [DIS JS

Linea Flava (quae ps 4p
circumdat Mundum)

[Ex. xxvii. 10, 11.] apyn
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 420]

Angel L.T.N. of 3 mw
[Vide no. 1175] min
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 208] my ys
Auditus nyy
Servator; salvator yw
Medium un

The Breakers-in-pieces; the mswys
Qliphoth of Chesed

The Brilliant Ones; Angels pawn
of Chesed, and of

Tiphareth of Briah
Turaverunt waws
A lion’s whelp mas Vt
[Gen. xl. 9]
Judgement, equity Dew

nya

Nephesh, the animal soul of wbs
Man

Covered with mist; darkness, hws
twilight

422

423

424

425

426

427
428

429

430

Membra o{p7»

Full Title of Ninth SY iD* psy
Sephirah. “The Righteous
is the Foundation of the

world.”
Concealed py
Tohu v-bohu; see Gen. i m35 nn
Dew 5p
T 431
Notariqon pps
432
Eventide shadows soy “oy
Earth of Jesod bsn
T 433
Day Demon of r* Dec. & msbs
Merit mist
434
The Lord of War. momo wos
[Ex. xv. 3]
The letter Daleth; door nn
> (1—29) 435
Deceived orn

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 156] ia) g a)

436
Tutor, curator; prae- SS mMMaS
fectus, administrator
Angel L.T.D. of M snm3
Hoschanah myw in
‘“Yatavas,” [Vide K.D. w yaw
L.C.K. p. 505]

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 505; Wmyw
723 & 701, nos. 9, 10;
also at ASW |

45

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

437 Pison wp
Balm; the balsam tree PRD DS Tali pedum psp
438 447
The whole (perfect) MBNW [28 Initials of the Three = SBTTET
stone. [Deut. XXXVI. 6] Above and the Three
T 439 Beneath. [Vide 248]
Exilium mba 448
Angel L.T.N. of c persay ftxcelea mips
440 .
Collaudatio. [Vide K.D. nbnn a
L.C.K. pp. 90, 729] Lux fulgentissima TSTSD VS
The Great Dragon; means “on Cloak mon
“curls.” [I.R.Q. 834;
curls [I.R.Q. 834 ne
vide 510] 2
Irreproachable; perfect an Tabulae i
; [Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 508] map
21 Vo 441
Germs rows The Fruit of the Tree py“)
Truth; Temurah of S58, nes Transgression YUs
by Aig Bekar Beneplacitum Sor pss pxo
A live coal mons termino carens; Arbitrum
Day Demon of 2™ Dec. 8 sas illiminatum
Angel L.T.D. of sop Inhabitans Aeternitatem sy yaw
442 Craftiness, cunning moyy
Termini Terrae PONS “DDS The Dragon a
T 443 451
A virgin; a city. 1 noins The Essence of Man  BNTMS
Goliath mos Mortis smn
444 Angels of Tiphareth Dp Isiw
hi
The Sanctuary wap The Abyss nn
Damascus pre
The total value of the Single Letters; 445 ; ae
At. 5, 3,D,¥,¥,andp [Vide no. 552] mann
Number of Stars in the Northern 446 ‘The crop; the maw T=P7P
Hemisphere 453
Destruction; death mip Behemoth mips

46

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The Animal Soul, in its MM wB3 462
fulness; i.e. including Terra Superna (est mary pos
the Creative Entity or Binah)
Ego, Chiah
A path ams
454 | Profundum Celsitudinis 299 pay
Sigillum ann
The “Holy Ones”; Con- S°wp 7 463
secrated catamites kept Day Demon of 3"! Dec. "i? pass
Dene Rucsinoes Pillar of Mildness—paths, 3, MD3
455 5, and nr
456 Crystal, glass maiot
Formido maxima ns A rod of almond “pwn nip
The Mountain of Myrrh. “an An The Special Intelligence. mayan
[Cant. iv. 6] [I.Z.Q. 264, et. seq.]
Paries omip Caps, crowns, diadems pan
Crura apy Precatio mann
The Fig-tree and fruit msn 6
464
oa > (130) 465
Rake *
Olves a A kiss; a little (or, sweet) np ws
458 mouth
A covenant; an engagement; rn
466
a betrothed be
Contusores; cloudy heavens; S*pnw Skull ngaee
Heaven of Netzach Renes ie)
459 | ‘The World of msn aby
Formation
a Si wi
[Vide K.C. L.C.K. p. 371] an ee I
Qliphoth of c pontoy m 467
“Holy unto TETRA- minh wap [Vide S.D. 33] smoro3
GRAMMATON.”
[Ex. xxxix. 30] 468
fae Angel of 3 Dec. IL nm
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 539] mas 469
Robustus, validus, asper, Ios Trabeationes ligaturae ampwn

horridus, rigidus

illarum

47

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Eternity. (Literally, a ass
cycle of cycles)
Angel of 8 S. manny
Pure Wool “pi Ty
Period of time; Time my
Solum; fundus yp7p
Palatia moon
Mount Moriah amen
[2 Chron. iii. 1]
Was terrified mys
The Three Persons. SUNS
[ATH: HVA: ANI
coalesced]
Skull smdadig
Molitrices mune
Knowledge. [Vide K.D. myo
L.C.K. p. 252, et. seq.]
(Plural) —Wisdom mipon

The Testimony within the Ark "VY

Aram, he-goat; a prepared ny
sacrifice

Angel L.T.D. of 95 sys

[Vide no. 473.] In smosdus
Golgotha

Domus Iudicii; Curia; rma m3

Consistorium iudiciale

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

48

477
478
Cranium, calvaria noastis
The Lesser Countenance; [*BIS Wt
Microprosopus
Hagiographia S°3155
T™ 479
Molentes mim
480
Lapides inanitatis Tn “33S
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 252] mys
Lilith, Qliphoth of Malkuth =o m5
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 252] my
Malkuth, 42-fold Name in my
Yetzirah
481
nav
Hills mivsa
Reus mortis smn 3°
Annulus mysy
482
A looking-glass, mirror soobppos
483
Ferens iniquitatem py Swi
22? JV 484
485
Filia scaturiginum. moans
[Is. x. 30, “Daughter
of Gallim”]
Mockeries [Job xvii. 2. pyonn
Vide 435]
486
A name of POS Te. Abs mn

GOD

Foundations
Azymum fractum
A King of Edom
Angel of 8 P.

Tanua, ostium
Qliphoth of Kether
Ye shall worship

Retribuens; rependens
retributionem

The giving. [Vide no. 1106]

Fine flour, meal

Perfect

Binah, 42-fold Name in Yetzirah [7

T 491 Kimelium aureum
Nutrix 32S Princeps
Angel of 4 W. osm A Duke of Edom
492
493 Asher; blessedness
The Name given ‘TRON TN AN Fortis; fortia, robusta
in Deut. xxviii. 58; The head
without ANS = 92, q.v. Flesh; Night Demon of
1 Dec. 4
bs Schechinah S i
Galea salutis nywen ysis passer ese ca
Likeness, similitude
An apple min
495 | To tell glad tiding; flesh,
Similitudo hominis E58 mp4 body
Gift mins To cut

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

mvs
now mys > (x31)
my Leviathan
osnes Malkuth
{
A small bundle
tt 487
488
— Nutrix
eee Gemini; I
 mwMayn Me
Briatic Palace of
489 Geburah
Sips oown
Cerva amorum.
490 [Prov. v. 19, “a loving
mp hind” ]
Busy, arduous, an army;
nee ‘hosts’
p=}

The humerus

49

Ry,

496
rsd
misbp
aay

497
nips
Spi8n

498
mit $o"n

T 499
mons nos

MSY

500
qn>
mnop
w
sn
501
ws
Dns
vss
ony

masSy mow

nen

502
ws

pns

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

a
ae The Cup of the Stolistes 7 503

Expelled, cast forth ear

504

Sought for ya

505

Sarah; Principissa. [Vide 510 & Mw
cf. 243 & 248]

506
prass
[Vide no. 1196] mB
Bovis a’ sinistra; an ox; Taurus. “WY
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 99.]—c
507
That which causes vTSy
ferment; yeast
508
Daybreak; black snw
T 509
Bridge “wa
510
Sensus allegorius. [Vide yan
K.D. L.C.K. p. 12]
Rectitudo, aequitas sw"
recta; rectilineum
The head es
Song a4
Sarai. [Vide 505] =y
Draco; see 440 ran
511
Ssony
The HEAD svn
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 463] mw

83 = 29
Adhaesio, cohaesio mips 4
Angel of 3"! Dec. 2 sany
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 213] mipn

Posessio sine mye $5 mons

angustiis
Minister iudicii spiw
Phylacterium mpn
Lucus. [Vide K.D.L.C.K. AWS
p. 168]
Personae PETA.
Qliphoth of 8... [Vide pvSSs
no. 321, & Liber 777]
The good gift, i.e. mi mn
Malkuth
Occultae. [Vide 417] mssbp
Confractio. [Vide K.D. mavsy

L.C.K. p. 698, et seq.]

Day Demon of 2% Dec. I wis

Tears mys
Legitium “ws
Ignis descendens I US
Angel of 2 P. me
Nudatio candoris ran wns

514

515

516

517

518
519

520

T 521

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

522 The World of Assiah, mYy DY
the ‘material’ world

T 523
524 537
525 | Emanatio; Atziluth, the moss
The LORD of Hosts,a MSS mn Archetypal World
name of GOD te- Medulla spinalis masswnr win
ferred to Netzach Apettio uteri ons 725
_ 526 538
Superliminare Apu Daughter of the Voice—  )p m3
527 Echo. [The Bath Qol
is a particular and very
Be = sacred method of divi-
a5 V 529 nation.]
Affatura ollaris cum mvp “p's
iusculo dulci oe
Day Demon of 3% Dec. 8 “lw aig
Lumbi; the upper part oun
530
The Rose noyon , oe
5 bd)
Waive nop Israel saw
Tekel, a word of the ‘writing 5pm 542
on the wall’ at 543
Belshazzar’s fabled feast. “Ryistenteds TAS SYS TRS
531 Existence,” the
532 NAME of the
Highest GOD
533
Heaven of Jesod Spy nos by 544
and Malkuth Apples. [Cant. ii. 5] a nipn
King of Terrors minds op 545
534 Aper de Sylva sy" an
A certain Name of GOD pyrdp ae
535 Sweet pins
536 P’s; a watchman “pw
A white cloak ms} my Custodi sw
Sphere of the fixed stars mibpp L.A. Angel of ? Ssssnow

51

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

7 547 558

548 559

Qliphoth of P 560
Night Demon of 3 Dec. 99 IAEN awa
ANameofGOD, ay mos min Waters of quiet mine "9
referred to Tiphareth Puncta maps
Qliphoth of & pynay A Duke of Edom yopn
549 Dragons oon

hi

Moral - van Fy) ir
Ventrus turbinis mye m4 Cain rpms
eae Concealed Mystery SAVIN

Aquila; decidua. [Vide K.D. “Ws

L.C.K. p. 600; connect with 562
no. 496, Malkuth] Primordia AWS

Arod of iron. [Ps.ii] 93 may abs
L.A. Angel of & Sst Lotio manuum mr ons
Principes aw Angel of r Dec. I tonap

Dragons. (Restricted.) a0"

[Ps. Ixxiv. 13] 564

a Lapis capitalis TwWSAW [IS

[LR.Q. o4r.] mn wes aasncns

er . ae “And the Adam was formed

Desiderium dierum Sp" mn into a living Nephesh”

553 | Sphere of Malkuth mimes abn
Draco magnus bans pan be

554 Parvitatio mip
Day Demon of 2"! Dec. wine Pracistint ssw

555 566
Opseunyy ane A valley; a plain mes

556 | Puncta mens
Mark, vestige, footstep ws [SMK + VV + DLTh, SVD 5
Sharon. [Cant. ii. x] me =a secret, spelt in full]

7557 | The Shadow of Death; Hell mipbs

The First nwss of Netzach

52

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Redintegratio, configuratio, npn
depositio, conformatio,
restoratio, restitutio

567
Firstborn “WSS
568
7 569
Fingers MVvosS
570
Naphtali “mp3
Lectus way
Ten wy
Heads pees
Concussion, earthquake yys
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 691] yes
Gate; the Door avy
T 571
The Mountain of Zion soar
Balance sopnp
572
A chastening GOD. ynos mim
[Deut. xxviii. 58.]
[7| counted as final]
Jeschurun nw
He was touched. [I.R.Q. ssym
1117]
Active sopne
Day Demon of 1* Dec. | “END
573
574
Chaldee. [Hatha general fiwn

meaning of movement.
S.D. p. 87]

575
Beerschebha, Fons Sep- YS’ “S3
tenarii. [2 Sam. xxiv. 7
—Gen. xxi. 31.] [Vide
K.D. L.C.K. p. 183]
“Andthe = IS TM NOS WSN
GODS said, Let
there be LIGHT”
24° J 576
Wands mbps
The tenth “wy
T 577
The Concealed of the *"728F 7D
Concealed; a name
of GOD most High
578
579
Media nox no> msn
Qliphoth of Netzach py soy
Sons of Adam pyn
580
Rich “wy
Ancient pny
“Le bouc émissaire”; shaggy, “YW
hairy. [Levit. xvi. 22]
Angel of Fire hal4
581
The Ancient One spony
Barley myy
582
583
584

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

585
The GODS of Battle MNS¥ 27s
(lit. of Hosts); the
Divine Name of
Hod
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 386] mpn
586
War-trumpet “pi
587
Day Demon of 1* Dec. * USED
588
589
Viror. [Vide K.D. yoy pw> os
L.C.K. p. 15]
590
Rib. [Gen. ii. 22] nyds
591
592
TT 593
504
The Stone of Isracl. O88" TDN
[Gen. xlix. 24]
> (1—34) 595
596
Jeruschalim mys
597
598
Our iniquities wmv
7 599
600

Mirabilia, vel occulta Msn Msp

sapientiae
Peniculamentum, fimbria mse
peniculata

54

A knot, ligature “wp
Red paw
Six; marble wy
T 601
602
Lux simplicissima Dive AS
Brightness; splendores Minsny
Extremitates nusp
603
Qliphoth of II possnu
604
Congeries; epistola nas
Israel Senex sop osc:
605
Magnificentia nas
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 226] n33
606
Let them bring forth wow
Ipseitas, seu ipsa essentia Misy
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. pp. 571,
631]
Nexus, ligature “wp
Ruth mo
A turtle-dove an
Tt 607
Adam Primus pws ois
The mountain of spices. B°2W3 “0
[Cant. viii. 14]
A span, palm. [Lit. “the nt
little finger” ]
608
The last Gate. [Vide S73 S353

K.D. L.C.K. p. 184]

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 640] ann
609
610
Numulus argenteus m3
Citrus, malum citrum; (lust 3197S
and desire). [Vide K.D.
L.C.K. p. 178]
Tenth wyn
611
“The Fear” of the LORD. msv
[Ps. cxi. 10]
The Law. (Occasional an
spelling)
612

(The covenant)—Day Demon "3
of r* Dec. YS. [Ps. xxv. 14]

The number of the Divine Precepts 7 613
The Quintessence of Light MIST AS

Moses, our Rabbi ww35 nw
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 179] -n
614
615
616
Qliphoth of 1 pvews
The Five Books of Moses; the ‘5"F
Law on Sinai. Cf. Tarot
Tt 617
“Mighty acts” (Plur. of M733
“Strength.”) [Ps. cvi. 2]
Columnae Nubis [i¥T) WNT “py
et Ignis
A King of Edom mans
618
Conteniones ms4

Novissimum mans

Chokmah, Binah, “WN AIS ASN
& Daath; the first
descending triad

Tt 619

620

The Crown: Kether ans
Angel of 3 Dec. “pwn
[Vide Ps. xxxi. 20] nias
The Doors ayy
[Temurah of 533] vy
621
Mucro gladii an ansS
By-paths. [Vide no. 1357] minis
[Vide ILR.Q. 234] 622
Blessings noa3
Profunda Maris. [Samael 2° Mo¥2
et Uxor Eius]
Latitudines; Rechoboth msn
623
Barietha; Doctrina ex- smv“si
tranea; conclusio extra
Jeruschalem facta
624
His Covenant. [Ps. xxv. 14] ‘A°35
Liberty an
Qliphoth of 7 pewns
257 = 5* VV 625
The Mountain of Ararat LUIS WT
626

The tenth portion prey

627

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

628
Light. [Spelt in full, with ES
SasS}]
Blessings miaa2
629
The great trumpet Sa opw
630
Angel L.T.D. of Il wavy
The Holy Spirit swsp smn
woy
Angels of Geburah, andof H°S"w
Kether of Briah
Tt 631
Concealed Mystery SMy"IS4
632
633
Light. [Spelt in full, when "78
y=]
[Gen v. 2] SBS55 map At
634
635
636
Qliphoth of 1 pvaps
637
Day Demon of 3 Dec. YW SINE
Day Demon of 1* Dec. wiossw
638
639
The Tree of Knowledge YN PY
640
The Cup of Con- mp {inIn D2
solations
Third. [Vide K.D. L.G.K. wy

p- 719]

Sun; sphere of © wow

Palm of the hand; palm-tree ba) =}9]

Dema purpureum

Angel of 9 W.

“Lights”; defective.
[S.D. i. 42]

Day Demon of 2™ Dec. MN pwp

Light. [Spelt in full, US
when 4 = "J

Severities of TETRA- Mim AN
GRAMMATON

The Cup of Bene- m553 5y DID
dictions

(12 x 13 X 4) + 20 = number of letters
in the five tablets of Enoch.
[Vide Equinox VIT]

A King of Edom np wr

Elohim. [2 counted as Final] anos

Licitum ni

Rejoicing ww

Lights MAND

Trance, deep sleep. [Vide MB"5N
no. 244]

Nitre sn

56

Tt 641

644

645

646

7 647

648
649

650

Temurah

Arose, lily. [Vide no. 706]
Delight, joy

A furnace

Angel of 3“ Dec. M
Zalbarachith; 8

Scintillae

Zone; members

Esther
Day Demon of 3"4 Dec.

Crinorrhodon (vide K.D.
L.C.K. p. 708); a rose

Angel L.T.D. of g

Corona Dei

Lapides marmoris. [Vide
Zohar, pt. I. fol. 34.
col. 134]

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

651

Cantio mimes
nnn
652
Tt 653 The womb nan ms
654 Y (136). ©. The Number of
655 THE BEAST
656 | Aleister smayss no onuo mos
way E. Crowley
wy Aleister Crowley 9p sms
ssn [Rabbi Battiscombe
Gunn’s v.1.
657 The number 5, whichis 95S x 18
osm 6 (S 7), on the Grand
onosh: Scale
58 | Oliphoth of X mows
Spirit of © fabaht=)
Tt 659
66 Ommo Satan, the ‘Evil TS iepy
‘ Triad’ of Satan-Typhon,
msesny Apophras, and Besz
pawp The Name Jesus mum oy
san
7661 | The oil for lighting sispd row
“ros
wepaaers Negotiatrix mans
mowsiw
nisin
ee my
. Deprecatus “ny
Sscanos
ons Ferens fructum 5 my
aL!
Bean The Law soyn
The Gate syon

664
665

666"

667

668

669
670

671

' See Equinox, V & VII, for further details

a7

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Adonai. [Spelt in full] aS
672
T 673
674
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 395] nama
675
Briatic Palace of  omawesy oon
Netzach
267 V 676
Artificial. [\ final] moss
Angel L.T.D. of k winy
1 677
678
Planities coeli; Assiatic mscy
Heaven of 1° palace
679
The chrysolite stone. npn [a8
[Cant. v. 14]
680
Phrath, one of the four rivers m5
of Eden
681
Joyful noise; battle-cry; the = TYAN
sound (of a trumpet)
682
Of the evening; of the West M3"Y
T 683
684
685
686
687
688
689

The candlestick

Palm-trees

The fourth portion

Sulphur

The Moral World

Castella munita; domus

munitae

The Mercy Seat

The Veil of the Holy

Seth

(Deut. xxiii. 1]

“And lo! three men.”

690

min

men
Tt 691
692

myess
693

mp3
604
695

wom ody
696
697

MIDIS

698

699

700
mops
noo
ne

T 701
mvs
myoy nom

[These be Michael,

Gabriel and Raphael,

—sprcssssr ssn]

Prolapsus in faciem

Sabbathum quies

> (1—37)

Taenia
Qliphoth of Binah

mes noes
702
nay
703
made
SSOUNSMND

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

“Arbatel” [The Arabate/ OSDY 358
of Magic, by Pietro di
Abano]

Angel L.T.N. of ¥ osarins

The stones of mods S28
dampness. [Job xxviii. 3]

Propitiatorium nips

“Lilies” (I.R.Q. 878) or pw iw
“Roses” (von Rosenroth)

The Angel of the msn qsbp
Covenant

Perdition nnw

The Seven Double Letters
pee en > ae |

Spelunca mvp
Six. (Ch.) mw
Sphere of 5 ‘ Smsy
Conversio nswn
Secret mnss
Perfumed, fumigated naiwp
Vaschti. [Est. i. 9] sm

704

795

706

797
708

T 709

710

71
712

713

714
715

716

Matrona smap
717
718
T 719
16 720

‘man

Thy Navel. [Cant. vii. 3] aw
721

The Primordial Point MIWNS7 TAP3
722

The voice of the trumpet “DW op
723
724

The end of the days D°O°N NS
725
726
727
728

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 506] nown
ee eee VV WV 729
[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 505] fuw yap

730
731
732
T 733
The white head; a AMWASYS
title of GOD most
High
734
To bring forth sony
735

Tiphareth, 42-fold Name 4Am8"3
in Yetzirah

59

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Tortuosae nbpopy

noms
Ssn ny

(Live coal)—Blaze, flame

> (1—38)

({ counted as Final) Amen;
see 91

aS
The four letters of the ele- WES

ments; hence a concealed
mn

The Ark of the Testi- AYN PAS
mony. [Lit. “of
tremblings,” © scil.
“vibrations.” ]

The Names mow

The oil of Anointment ANwAn saw

Conclave nows
Lead mpy
Vir integer Bn ws

736

737

738
7 739
740
741

742

7 743
744
745
746

747
748

749
750

T7751

60

Satan ISmASY

Abraham and Sarah. [Either spelling.
Vide 243, 248, 505, & 510.]

Emanations: numbers moved
Years my
Netzach and Hod nbovs
Perdition mnvn
Copper ore; bronze mung
Pulvis aromatarii ton mpsS

“Both Active and spno; sspp
Passive”; said in the
Qabalah concerning
the Sephiroth.
Confinement, detention mayy
Chesed, 42-fold Name fowynap

in Yetzirah

752

753

754
755
756

T 757

758

759

760

7 761
762
763
764
765
766
767
768

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Going forth. [Said of maniwn
the Eyes of TETRA-
GRAMMATON.]

Unfruitful, barren mpy

L.A. Angel of I Ssonde

Septennium muy yay

Lapis, seu canalis mnwn p38
lapideus Potationis

Filia Septenarii yaw ma

[Vide no. 934] smypasp 7

The Flaming Sword, if the path
from Binah to Chesed be taken
as = 3. For 4 connects Arikh
Anpin with Zauir Anpin

One is the pen ons mo ons
Ruach of the
Elohim of Lives

The World of Shells mp%pn aby

> (1—39)
I dwell, have dwelt. (Nor
written.) [I.R.Q. 1122;
Prov. viii. 12]

Shore, bank

769
770

771

772

T 773

774

775

776
777

778
779
780

287
Qliphoth of $5

Smooth

The Secret Wisdom:
i.e., The Qabalah.
[Vide 58]

My presence. [I.R.Q.

1122; Prov. xii.]

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 460,

and Ps. xviii. 51]

Calix horroris

781

782

783

Vv 784
resamw

785

786
mis

Tt 787
788
mands ApS

789
790
“Dw

791
792
mw

793
794
795
796

moyonn 15

7 797
798

Mount Gaerisim 53° St 295 05

and mount Ebal.
[Deut. xi. 29]

Consisting of Seven

neyo

799

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

A bow; *. The three Paths my
leading from Malkuth; hence
much symbolism of the Rain-
bow of Promise.

4or x 2 = The reflection of 4or,
which is MS, a and w

Consessus vel moyp Sy note
Schola vel Academia Superna.
[Refers to A..A.., the three
grades which are above the
Abyss. Vide K.D. L.C.K.

p. 461]
Vindicta foederis m3 ops
An ark, as of Noah or of Moses SN

“A piece of brass”—the pwns
Brazen Serpent

A Duke of Edom nn

Octava vay

Signa mms

800

801

802

803
804
805
806
807
808

Tt 809

810

vr 811
812

813

Ararita;a name ofGOD SSS
which is a Notariqon of the
sentence * YS “NS
ANT PSS IMS
MS inwen “One is
His Beginning; one is
His individuality; His
Permutation One.”

ASTM TST ans oes

[Genesis i. 3]

Ahasuerus yuwns
> (1—40)
Lapis effigiei seu mMovp [38
figuratus. [Lev. xxvi. 1]
Litterae nvmis
Issachar sows
Three (?third) nbn

814
815

816
817
818
819
820
tt 821
822

Tt 823

824
825
826
tt 827
282
Tt 829
830

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

831
832
Albedo Crysalli spp nsa>
833
Choir of Angels in wapn nen
Kether
Transiens super yees oy mow
prevaricatione
834
835
Brachia Mundi ahy mys
836
837
The profuse giver. [Cf. ot nn
the Egyptian word Tat.]
[= counted as Final. Vide monm>
227. This zs written.]
838
Tr 839
840
29° Vv 841
Laudes monn
842
843
844
843
844
845
nvmis 35
Oleum influxus yeun ow
846
847
848
849
Exitus Sabbathi nav °SS15

Blue; perfection nbsn

My perfect one. (No¢ written.) “Man
[Cant. v. 2.] Vide 857

Souls. [I.R.Q. 1052 et seq.] fINNMws

Ocellata Aurea; am misswvp
Netzach and Hod
receiving influence
from Geburah.

An orchard San maw

Summitatis bifidae in Lulabh FAN
My twin-sister. [/s written] “MSN

“ToThee “Is Sy5 53 mms
be Power unto the Ages,
my Lord” [Vide 35, s.v.
sos]

Iunctio, copula, phy- =‘ by mopn
lactarium, ornamentumve
manus. [Connect with
ws]

> (1—41)

850

851

852

Tt 853

854
855
856

Tt 857

858

Tt 859

860
861
862
T 863

The Woman of
Whoredom.

© and )

Latera aquilionis

Semitae

Qliphoth of Tiphareth

Twelve

Septiduum

A King of Edom

Os cranii, cranium

Dilationes fleminis

Lux oriens

Domination

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

ast vs

nm wee

mpt not

mans

nan

wen

Sp. nvaw

“mnnawn

NMDP Ap

snan msi

pyund Tips

mayan

864

865
866

867
868

869

870

871
872

873
874
875
876
tt 877
878
879
880

7 881

882

Tt 883

884

Spelunca duplex n>boon nove

Defectus cogitationis [YN ADDS

30

Briatic Palace of pon n33> Son
Jesod—Malkuth
> (1—42)
Secret name of Cagliostro ASISWS

Licentia. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. mw
p. 693]

Vermis anyon

885
886
Tt 887
888
889
890

891
892

893
804
805
896
807
898
899
Yi goo
gor

902

903

904
905
906

Beginning. [Vide I.Z.Q.

547, et seq.]
Hell of Tiphareth
Beginning
Remnant

Pl. of 506 “t? q.v.

Berashith; “in the

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T 907
908
909
gio
mys

T QII
nnwass
mMwss
mas
gi2
mw

913
muysas

Beginning.” [With small B.]
[Vide A Note on Genesis,
Equinox IT 163-185, and 2911]

Nekudoth; intuitus as-
pectus. [Vide K.D.
L.G.K. p. 547]

mbsnon

Gazophylacia Septen- [BS NIAS'S
trionis

Briah, the Palace SWAP wp San
of the Supernals
therein

The Tree of the yi 358 Ay
Knowledge of sy
Good and Evil

Foedus nuditatis vel NWA MS
Sabbathi vel arcus

Coruscatio SMPMPI SPSS
vehementissima; splendor
exactissime dimeticus

The Cause ofcauses MISSA Asad

[Vide Eccles. ii. 8, & mon
S.D. v. 79]

Kether. [Spelt in full] Fa iegbo=)

Angel of 1* Dec. 7 mS we

927
928
T 929

930
931
932

933

934

935

936

7 937
938
939
940

T O41

942

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

943

044 Memoriale iubilationis MYINN fit

[Note Root "3%, 227 q.v.

aoe showing phallic nature
The samll point: a title MWD MP3 ee a ene
of GOD most High. s
= (i—43) 946
T 947
Angel of 1* Dec. 99 waisans
948
949
= Angel of W: owan
[Vide no. 1204] noannan Mees aE WNEER
951 :
The Book of the Law M40 “BD Shemhamphorasch, WON EY
the ‘Divided Name’
952 of GOD
T 953
Vigiliae moves
954
955
956
957
Unguentum Magnifi- MIS" Snwp
centiae
958
959
960
Tubae argenteae D> masisn
ar ¢ 2 Urbs Quarternionis yous mp
962
963 es
Achad; unity. [Spelt fully] 0:8 The Beginningof = BSN MUS

Wisdom (is the Wonderment
at TETRAGRAMMATON.
Psalms).

Garland, Crown; a Mm"wy mswyY
little wreath. [Vide
K.D. L.G.K. p 614]

66

964

965
966
7 967
968
969
970

T O71

972
973
974
975
976
977
978
979
980
98
982
Tt 983

984

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

985
986
Vehementia; obiectio snppnn
rigorosa
987
988
Foedus pacis poy mss
989
Pascens inter Lilia E°wiws myn
> (1—44) 990
T QOL
992
The joy of the pasm>s wiwp
whole — Earth.
[Vide no. 296]
993
994
995
996
The Most Holy Swv“p Npny
Ancient One
T 997
998
Foedus linguae nes mss
999
103 V x000
[Vide no. 1100] mney
A Qabalistic Method of pawn
Exegesis; “spelling
Qabalistically back-
ward”
1001
1002

The bank ofastream “SST MEY

1003
1004
1005
1006

The law man

1007
TAROT. [But vide 671] moasn

1008

7 1009

1010

IOII

1012

TT 1013

1014

1015

1016
[Vide no. 1047] non

1017

Vasa vitrea, lagenae, phiale MWw"ws

ro18
1019
1020
1021
1022
1023
32° S422" Vv Vv WT 1024
Qliphoth of mynens

1025

Absconsiones meson misdyn
spaientiae

1026

1027

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1028
1029
1030
™ 1031
1032
Sphere of Primum posban mess
Mobile.
T 1033
1034
= (1—45) 1035
1036
1037
1038
™ 1039
1040
I04I
1042
1043
1044
1045
1046
1047
Diaphragma supra saan mans
hepar (vel hepatis)
1048
™ 1049
1050
™ 1051
1052
1053
1054
1055
1056
The lily naw
1057
1058

1059
1060

fawn
7 1061

“nnDS
Vide pun news TSS np"
LR.Q. 939]

The Tabernacle [N final]

1062
T 1063
1064
1065
1066
1067
1068
Tt 1069
1070
1071
1072
1073
1074
1075
1076
1077
1078
1079
1080
> (1—46) 1081
MSN

1082

Tiphareth

1083

1084

1085

1086

Tt 1087

1088

33° ¥ 1089

The Rose of Sharon

Sextiduum

The giving of the Law

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1090 T 1123
™ 1091 1124
mown noxsn nis
1092 1126
T 1093 I127
1094 > (1—47) 1128
1095 ™ 1129
1096 1130
™ 1097 II31
1098 1132
1099 1133
I100 1134
po" new ae
II0L 1136
1102 a7
™ 1103 aaa
1104 iat
1105 1140
1106 1141
mn pn
1142
II07 fas
1108
1144
™ 1109 ce
IIIO fue
te Jars, globular vessels mans
III2 1147
1113 Byssus contorta “Wwhpwy
TIr4 1148
III5 1149
I116 1150
7 III7 m IIs1
1118 1152
IIIQ 1 1153
1120 1154
II21 1155
I122 347 ales 1156

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1157 1189
Specula turmarum MS34537 MSS 190
1158 IIQI
1159 I1Ig2
1160 T I193
L161 II94
1162 IIQ5
T 1163 1196
1164 Fasciculi; rami pal- man mips
1165 marum
1166 1197
1167 1198
1168 1199
1169 1200
1170 7 1201
L171 1202
1172 1203
1173 1204
[With] countedas STON Mt AS Flamma noennen san unm
Final] gladii versatilis.
1174 1205
1175 1206
Conclave caesum mrsn nsw> The Holy Intelli- SY™Ip SMows
> (1—48) 1176 gence
1177 A water-trough minpy
1178 1207
1179 1208
1180 1209
wT L181 1210
1182 Angel of Geburah of Briah 9 wowsn
1183 I2II
1184 1212
1185 T 1213
1186 1214
mT 1187 1215
1188 1216

70

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

71217 1247

1218 1248

1219 T1249

Formator eius quod in myesss 1250

principia a7 1251

1220 1252

Hell of Hod mips 1253

The beaten oil mens [as 1254

1221 1255

1222 1256

T 1223 1257

1224 1258

= (1-49) = 35°. ? J 1225 1 1259

The Ancient of the Pp"Ay73 Spy 1260

Ancient Ones Angels of Netzach and awwsn

1226 of Geburah of Briah.

1227 1261

1228 1262

™ 1229 1263

1230 1264

7 1231 1265

1232 1266

1233 1267

1234 1268

1235 1269

1236 1270

7 1237 1271

1238 1272

1239 1273

1240 1274

1241 > (1—50) 1275

1242 1276

1243 ™ 1277

1244 1278

1245 T 1279

1246 Ignis sese reciprocans nnp>one Us

71

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1280

1281

1282

T 1283

1284

1285

1286

1287

1288

Tt 1289

1290

T 1291

1292

1293

1294

Chorda filicoccini “JWT BN Mipn

1295

30° = 64 Jv ¥V 1296
™ 1297

1298

1299

1300

™ 1301

1302

T 1303

1304

1305

1306

1 1307

Day demon of 2™ Dec. Y3, MINAS

and King-Demon of
Geburah.

1308

1309
1310

The Lily of the Valleys

> (1—s1)

In

1311
1312
1313
1314
1315
1316
1317
1318

T 1319
1320

T 1321

1322
1323
1324
1325
1326

T 1327

1328

1329

1330

1331

1332

1333

1334

1335

1226

1337

1338

1339

1340

1341

1342

1343

1344

rot

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1345 1376
1346 1377
1347 2 (152) 1378
1348 1379
1349 1380
The numerical value of the 9 1350 The lip of the liar “pw naw
Paths of the Lesser Beard: viz. 7 1381
3,3, ,5,3,),5,v andr. aes
1351 1383
1352 1384
1353 1385,
1354 1386
1355 1387
1356 1388
1357 1389
Crooked by- niopopy minis 1390
paths. [Jud. v. 6] 1391
1358 1392
1359 1393
1360 1394
1 1361 13905
1362 1396
1363 1397
1364 1398
1365, T 1399
1366 1400
T1367 Chaos, or = MS, 4or q.v. oS
1368 | Tria Capita ress mon
37° J 1369 I401
1370 1402
1371 1403
1372 1404
7 1373 1405
1374 1406
1375 1407

73

2» (1—53)

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1408
™ 1409
1410
I4II
1412
1413
1414
1415
1416
1417
1418
1419
1420
1421
1422
T1423
1424
1425
1426
™ 1427
1428
™ 1429
1430
1431
1432
7 1433
1434
1435
1436
1437
1438
T 1439
1440
1441
1442

74

1443

38° V 1444
1445

The remnant of inom mses
his heritage.

1446

7 1447

1448

1449

1450

T1451

1452

T 1453

1454

1455

1456

1457

1458

T 1459

1460

Quies cessationis pray nay

1461

1462

1463

1464

1465

1466

1467

1468

1469

1470

T™ 1471

1472

1473

1474

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1475 1504
1476 1505
1477 1506
2478 1507
= 1508
1480
Septem heptaeterides MINSW Yow es
7 1481 7 1511
1482 1512
Rotunditates, seu = PAIN ma ee
vasa rotunda capitellarum,
seu capitella rotunda. nore
Tt 1483 eae
tiBs 1516
» (i—54) 1485, fone
1486 1518
tt 1487 as
1488 1520
iat 39° vo 1521
ws 1522
ate TT 1523
stags 1524
T 1493 18
1526
1494
The toal numerical value of the 1495 Pee
Paths of the Tree; i.e. of the 1528
Beards conjoined; i.e. of the 1529
whole Hebrew Alphabet. 1530
1496 7 1531
1497 1532
1498 1533
™ 1499 1534
1500 1535
I501 1536
1502 1537
1503 1538

75

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2» (1—55)

The Oil of the
Anointing.

wp mown row

1539
1540
1541
1542

T 1543
1544
1545
1546
1547
1548

T1549
1550
1551
1552

T 1553
1554
1555
1556
1557
1558

7 1559
1560
1561
1562
1563
1564
1565
1566

1 1567
1568
1569
1570

T1571

> (1—56)

40

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Tt 1607 1642
1608 1643
Tt 1609 1644
1610 1645
I61I 1646
1612 1647
T 1613 1648
1614 1649
1615 1650
1616 1651
1617 1652
1618 > (1—s7) 1653
Tt 1619 1654
1620 1655
T 1621 1656
1622 1657
1623 1658
1624 1659
1625 1660
1626 1661
1 1627 1662
1628 7 1663
1629 1664
1630 The pure olive mens Jt mit pow
1631 oil beaten out.
1632 1665
1633 1666
1634 Tt 1667
1635 1668
1636 Tt 1669
7 1637 1670
1638 1671
1639 1672
1640 1673
1641 1674

77

4I

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1675,
1676
1677
1678
1679
1680
J 1681
1682
1683
1684
1685
1686
1687
1688
1689
1690
1691
1692
T 1693
1694
1695,
1696
Tt 1697
1698
T 1699
1700
1701
1702
1703
1704
1705
1706
1707
1708

T 1709

1710

> (1—58) 1711
1712

1713

1714

1715

1716

1717

1718

1719

1720

1721

1722

T1723

1724
1725
1726
1727
1728
1729
1730
1731
1732
™ 1733
1734
1735
1736
1737
1738
1739
1740
™ 1741
1742
1743
1744

a

123

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1745 71777

1746 1778

1747 1779

1748 1780

1749 1781

1750 1782

1751 Tt 1783

1752 1784

1753 1785,

1754 1786

1755, 7 1787

MSY Min wp wap wimp 1788
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord GOD ™ 1789
of Hosts! 1790
1756 1791

1757 1792

1758 1793

7 1759 1794

1760 1795

1761 1796

1762 1797

1763 1798

42° vo 1764 1799
1765 1800

1766 1801

1767 1802

1768 1803

1769 1804

2 (1—59) 1770 1805
1771 1806

1772 1807

1773 1808

1774 1809

1775 1810

1776 1811

79

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1812 tt 1847
1813 1848
1814 43° v 1849
1815 1850
1816 1851
1817 1852
1818 1853
1819 LZ 1854
1820 1855
1821 1856
1822 1857
tt 1823 1858
1824 1859
1825 1860
1826 Tt 1861
1827 1862
1828 1863
1829 1864
> (1— 60) 1830 1865
tt 1831 1866
1832 tt 1867
1833 1868
1834 1869
1835 1870
1836 wt 1871
1837 1872
1838 1873
1839 1874
1840 1875
1841 1876
1842 tt 1877
1843 1878
1844 tt 1879
1845 1880
1846 1881

80

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1882 1917
1883 1918
1884 Ig19
1885 1920
1886 Ig21
1887 1922
1888 1923
tt 1889 1924
1890 1925
> (r— 61) 1891 1926
1892 1927
1893 1928
1894 1929
1895, 1930
1896 T 1931
1897 1932
1898 T 1933
1899 1934
1900 1935
T 1901 44° V 1936
1902 1937
1903 1938
1904 1939
1905 1940
1906 1941
™ 1907 1942
1908 1943
1909 1944
1910 1945
IQII 1946
Ig12 1947
T 1913 1948
T1914 ™ 1949
1915 1950
1916 T 1951

81

> (1—62)

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
™ 1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
™ 1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986

82

tt 1987
1988
1989
1990
I9QQ1I
1992

T1993
1994
1995
1996

7 1997
1998

™ 1999
2000
2001
2002

Tr 2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

T 2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

> (1—63) 2016

T2017
2018
2019
2020

2021

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2022
2023
2024

45° v 2025
2026
T2027
2028
TT 2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
T 2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052
T 2053
2054
2055
2056

2057

2058

209

2060

2061

2062

T 2063

2064

2065

2066

2067

2068

T 2069

2070

2071

2072

2073

2074

2075

2076

2077

2078

2079

> (1x64). ¥ 2080
Spirit of ¥ moancnen

T 2081

T 2082

2083

2084

2085

2086

Tt 2087

2088

Tt 2089

2090

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2091
2092
2093
2094
2095
2096
2097
2098

T 2099
2100
2101
2102
2103
2104
2105
2106
2107
2108
2109
2110

T 2111
2112

T 2113
2114
2115

46° J 2116
2117
2118
2119
2120
2121
2122
2123
2124

2125

2 (1i—65)

2126
2127
2128
T 2129
2130
T 2131
2132
2133
2134
2135
2136
T 2137
2138
2139
2140
T 2141
2142
T 2143
2144
2145
2146
2147
2148
2149
2150
2151
2152
T 2153
2154
2155
2156
2157
2158

2159
2160

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T 2161 2196
2162 135 a 2197
2163 2198
2164 2199
2165 2200
2166 2201
2167 2202
2168 T 2203
2169 2204
2170 2205
2171 2206
2172 TT 2207
2173 2208
2174 47° V 2209
2175 2210
2176 > (1— 66) 2211
2177 2212
2178 T 2213

T 2179 2214
2180 2215
2181 2216
2182 2217
2183 2218
2184 2219
2185 2220
2186 T 2221

vo 2187 2222
2188 2223
2189 2224
2190 2225
2191 2226
2192 2227
2193 2228
2194 2229
2195 2230

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2231
2232
2233
2234
2235
2236

T 2237
2238

Tr 2239
2240
2241
2242

T 2243
2244
2245
2246
2247
2248
2249
2250

T 2251
2252
2253
2254
2255
2256
2257
2258
2259
2260
2261
2262
2263
2264
2265

86

2266
Tt 2267
2268
T 2269
2270
2271
2272
T 2273
2274
2275
2276
2277
= (1—67) 2278
2279
2280
Tt 2281
2282
2283
2284
2285
2286
2287
2288
2289
2290
2291
2292
T 2293
2294
2295
2296
T2207
2298
2299
2300

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2301
2302
2303

48° V 2304
2305
2306
2307
2308

Tr 2309
2310
T 2311
2312
2313
2314
2315
2316
2317
2318
2319
2320
2321
2322
2323
2324
2325
2326
2327
2328
2329
2330
2331
2332
T 2333
2334
2335

> (1— 68)

2336
2337
2338
T 2339
2340
T 2341
2342
2343
2344
2345
2346
T 2347
2348
2349
2350
T 2351
2352
2353
2354
2355
2356
T 2357
2358
2359
2360
2361
2362
2363
2364
2365
2366
2367
2368
2369
2370

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T 2371
2372
2373
2374
2375
2376

1 2377
2378
2379
2380

Tr 2381
2382

T 2383
2384
2385
2386
2387
2388

Tt 2389
2390
2391
2392

T 2393
2394
2395
2396
2397
2398

T 2399
2400

49° =74 VV 2401
2402
2403
2404
2405

2406
2407
2408
2409
2410
T 2411
2412
2413
2414
z (1i—69) 2415
2416
T2417
2418
2419
2420
2421
2422
T 2423
2424
2425
2426
2427
2428
2429
2430
2431
2432
2433
2434
2435
2436
T 2437
2438
2439
2440

88

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T 2441 2476
2442 T2477
2443 2478
2444 2479
2445 2480
2446 2481

T 2447 2482
2448 2483
2449 2484
2450 > (1—70) 2485
2451 2486
2452 2487
2453 2488
2454 2489
2455 2490
2456 2491
2457 2492
2458 2493

T 2459 2494
2460 2495
2461 2496
2462 2497
2463 2498
2464 2499
2465 50° J 2500
2466 2501

1 2407 2502
2468 712503
2469 2504
2470 2505
2471 2506
2472 2507

T 2473 2508
2474 2509
2475 2510

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2511 2546
2512 2547
2513 2548
2514 7 2549
2515 2550
2516 T 2551
2517 2552
2518 2553
2519 2554
2520 2555
T 2521 > (1—71) 2556
2522 T2557
2523 2558
2524 2559
2525 2560
2526 2561
2527 2562
2528 2563
2529 2564
2530 2565
T 2531 2566
2532 2567
2533 2568
2534 2569
2535 2570
2536 2571
2537 2572
2538 2573
TE 2539 2574
2540 2575
2541 2576
2542 2577
T 2543 2578
2544 1 2579
2545 2580

go

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2581
2582
2583
2584
2585
2586
2587
2588
2589
2590
T 2591
2592
T 2593
2594
2595
2596
2597
2598
2599
2600
51° V 2601
2602
2603
2604
2605
2606
2607
2608
Tr 2609
2610
2611
2612
2613
2614
2615

2616
1 2017
2618
2619
2620
T 2021
2622
2623
2624
2625
2626
2627
> (1—72) 2628
2629
2630
2631
2632
Tr 2033
2634
2635
2636
2637
2638
2639
2640
2641
2642
2643
2644
2645
2646
Tt 2047
2648
2649
2650

gI

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2651 2686
2652 Tt 2087
2653 2688
2654 Tt 2089
2655 2690
2656 2691
1 2057 2692
2658 2693
Tt 2059 2694
2660 2695
2661 2696
2662 2607
Tt 2063 2698
2664 Tt 2699
2665 2700
2666 > (1—73) 2701
2667 2702
2668 2703
2669 52° V 2704
2670 2705
tt 2071 2706
2672 TT 2707
2673 2708
2674 2709
2675 2710
2676 1 2711
7 2677 2712
2678 T 2713
2679 2714
2680 2715
2681 2716
2682 2717
Tt 2083 2718
2684 T 2719
2685 2720

g2

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2721 2756
2722 2757
2723 2758
2724 2759
2725 2760
2726 2761
2727 2762
2728 2763
T 2729 2764
2730 2765

T 2731 2766
2732 1 2707
2733 2768
2734 2769
2735 2770
2736 2771
2737 2772
2738 2773
2739 2774
2740 2 (1—74) 2775
T 2741 2776
2742 ™ 2777
2743 2778
Vo 2744 2779
2745 2780
2746 2781
2747 2782
2748 2783
T 2749 2784
2750 2785
2751 2786
2752 2787
T 2753 2788
2754 7 2789
2755 2790

93

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T2791
2792
2793
2794
2795
2796

7 2797
2798
2799
2800

tt 2801
2802

Tt 2803
2804
2805
2806
2807
2808

53° ¥ 2809
2810
2811
2812
2813
2814
2815
2816
2817
2818

tt 2819
2820
2821
2822
2823
2824
2825

2826
2827
2828
2829
2830
2831
2832
Tt 2833
2834
2835
2836
Tt 2837
2838
2839
2840
2841
2842
Tt 2843
2844
2845
2846
2847
2848
2849
> (1—75) 2850
tt 2851
2852
2853
2854
2855
2856
tt 2857
2858
2859
2860

94

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

7 2861 2896
2862 tt 2897
2863 2898
2864 2899
2865 2900
2866 2901
2867 2902
2868 T 2903
2869 2004
2870 2905
2871 2906
2872 2907
2873 2908
2874 TT 2909
2875 2910
2876 2911
2877 2912
2878 2913

tt 2879 2014
2880 2915
2881 54° J 2916
2882 T 2017
2883 2918
2884 2919
2885 2920
2886 2921

Tt 2887 2922
2888 2923
2889 2924
2890 2925
2891 > (1—76) 2926
2892 T 2927
2893 2928
2804 2929
2805, 2930

95

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2931 2966
2932 2967
2933 2968
2934 T 2969
2935 2970
2936 T 2971
2937 2972
2938 2973
7 2939 2974
2940 2975
2041 2976
2942 2977
2943 2978
2944 2979
2045 2980
2946 2981
2047 2982
2948 2983
2949 2984
2950 2985
2951 2986
2952 2987
T 2953 2988
2954 2989
2955 2990
2956 2991
7 2957 2992
2958 2993
2959 2994
2960 2995
2961 2996
2962 2997
T 2963 2998
2964 T 2999
2965 3000

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T 3001 3036
3002 T 3037
> (1-77) 3003 3038
3004 3039
3005 3040
3006 TT 3041
3007 3042
3008 3043
3009 3044
3010 3045
T 3011 3046
3012 3047
3013 3048
3014 7 3049
3015 3050
3016 3051
3017 3052
3018 3053
T 3019 3054
3020 3055
3021 3056
3022 3057
Tr 3023 3058
3024 3059
55° ¥ 3025 3060
3026 T 3061
3027 3062
3028 3063
3029 3064
3030 3065
3031 3066
3032 T 3067
3033 3068
3034 3069
3035, 3070

97

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

3071 3106
3072 3107
3073 3108
3074 3109
3075 31T0
3076 3111
3077 3112
3078 3113

7 3079 3114
3080 3115
> (1—78) 3081 3116
3082 3117
Tr 3083 3118
3084 T 3119
3085 3120
3086 T 3121
3087 3122
3088 3123
Tr 3089 3124
3090 5° yf 3125
3001 3126
3092 3127
3093 3128
3094 3129
3095 3130
3096 3131
3097 3132
3098 3133
3099 3134
3100 3135
3101 56° J 3136
3102 T 3137
3103 3138
3104 3139
3105 3140

98

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

3141 3176
ote 3177
3143 3178
3144 3179
3145 3180
3146 1 3181
3147 3182
3148 3183
3149 3184
3150 3185
3151 3186
3152 3187
3153 3188
3154 3189
3155 3190
3156 T 3191
3157 3192
3158 3193
3159 3194
2 (1—79) 3160 3195
3161 3196
3162 3197
T 3163 3108
3164 3199
3165 32 x 10° ‘The paths of the Whole 3200
3166 Tree in excelsis.
7 3167 mms sos mwsod
3168 3201
T 3169 3202
3170 T 3203
3171 3204
3172 3205
3173 3206
3174 3207
3175 3208

99

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

T 3209 3244
3210 3245
3211 3246
3212 3247
3213 3248
3214 57° Vv 3249
3215 3250
3216 T 3251

T 3217 3552
3218 T 3253
3219 3254
3220 3255

T 3221 3256
3222 T 3257
3223 3258
3224 T 3259
3225 3260
3226 3261
3227 3262
3228 3263

Tr 3229 3264
3230 3265
3231 3266
3232 3267
3233 3268
3234 3269
3235 3270
3236 T 3271
3237 3272
3238 3273
3239 3274

> (1—80) 3240 3275
3241 3276
3242 3277
3243 3278

100

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

3279 3300
3280 T 3301
3281 3302
3282 3303
3283 3304
3284 3305
3285 3306
3286 T 3307
3287 3308
3288 3309
3289 3310
3290 3311
3291 3312
3292 T 3313
3293 3314
3294 3315
3295 3316
3296 3317
3297 3318
3298 T 3319
T 3299 3320
y(1—81). ) 3321

The Intelligence of the Intelligences of the B'nY mS IVs Syivans ssbp
Moon.
The Spirit of the Spirts of the Moon rrnsy ayensasay

[A pendant to this work, on the properties of pure number, is in preparation under
the supervision of Fraters P. and y. Also a companion volume on the Greek Qabalah
by them and Frater J.M.]

IoI

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

[I here append a note to the material following the “Table of Factor” in the preface.

The software I used to set up mathematical expressions cannot cope with the notation Crowley
used to represent factorials. In the expressions for ||” and e I have therefore substituted the
modern use of n! for n factorial. o! is conventionally defined as 1; for a positive integer n, n! is
thus equal to (n-1)! x n. e is defined as the sum from n = 0 to infinity of 1/(m!), otherwise
written:

While I am not familiar with the notation of sub-factorials used here, I will observe that if we
similarly define sub-factorial 0 as 1 (again, simply as a convenience) then for any positive
integer n, ||” = 7 x ||\(n-1) + (-1)”. [(-1)” = 1 if 7 be even, -1 if n be odd.] Or we could have a
computer do it thus (using the conventional notation of the C programming language):

int subfact (int n)
{
if (n < 1) return 1;
/* strictly speaking should be undefined for negative numbers */
else return (n*subfact(n-1) + 1 - 2*(n%2));
/* 1- 2*(n%2) is 1 if n be even, -1 if n be odd */
}

Similarly, the rather ugly expression for ||” given in the preface simplifies to:
eM to n+z terms; or, in sigma notation, yoo
o! « a! 3! oo a
I have made alterations to the page of abbreviations, signs and figures to reflect actual use. The
notation of a box around a number to indicate a perfect square is used only in the table of
factors; in the main table a root symbol was used. Similarly, we were informed that “R (n)
before [a number shows that the number is] a reciprocal (or ‘amicable’) number” which is
nowhere defined and nowhere used. The printed edition did not explain that 7 was used in the
main table to denote prime numbers. A “perfect” number is one which is the sum of its factors
(including 1), e.g. 6 = 1+2+3; 28 = 1+2+4+7+14; 496 = 1+2+4+8+16+31+62+124+248.

The citations of “S.D. 11. 467” in the entries for 157 and 227 refer not to the Sepher Dtzenouthia
but to Blavatsky’s Secret Doctrine. My thanks to Tim Maroney for this information.

Pietro di Abano was neither the actual nor the imputed author of the “Arbatel of Magick” (de
magia veterum), in fact “Arbatel” may well have been meant as the author’s name. The first
and only known book of the “Arbatel” (an outline description of the work lists nine volumes)
was printed as Basle in 1575 and bound up in vol. i of the Lyons edition (ca. 1600) of Cornelius
Agrippa’s Opera which included the Heptameron, a short Grimoire of planetary magick
spuriously attributed to d’Abano.

References to page numbers in 777 have been changed to refer to column numbers.

Finally, I will note that this etext of Liber D was completely re-entered by myself, and I take
full responsibility for any errors in it which do not occur in the printed edition. I have corrected
a few errors which could be dealt with within the entry for a given number: many words are
mis-spelt, and placed at the correct numeration for the mis-spelling. — T.S.]

REVIEWS

My PsyCcHIC RECOLLECTIONS. By MARY DAVIES. 2s. 6¢ net. Nveleigh Nash,
36 King Street, Covent Garden, W.C.

JUST when I had given up hope, Mary Davies comes to make a third to
myself and Geo. Washington.

For on p. 2 she says, “More than forty years ago... I was a girl of
seven years old.”

This storms the citadel of confidence, and pulls out the back teeth of the
Dragon Doubt. I was therefore prepared to believe anything she might say.

And accordingly we get a simple, charming, old-fashioned motherly book, full
of kindly thought and real piety; that it may have no objective value for the
S.P.R. is quite unimportant for the class of readers whom it is intended to reach.

Mrs. Davies is a “professional medium”; of such I have said things which only
my incapacity for invective prevented from being severe. But though (no
doubt) the phenomena recorded in this book are ‘non-evidential,’ I do feel the
sincerity of the writer. I am confident of her good faith.

DIOGENES.

TABLOID TALES. By LOUISE HEILGERS. 1s.

TO quote the preface of Horatio Bottomley, “Louise Heilgers is the only
female writer of short stories of the present day.”

She is in truth one of the ten million, her heart is their heart, her mind their
mind, and consequently her thoughts their thoughts. She will soon be acclaimed
as a popular author.

It is refreshing indeed to find somebody writing direct from the heart without
in any way striving after originality.

Excepting as to their length, these stories do not in any manner resemble
those of Baudelaire. BUNCO.

‘THE CITY OF LIGHT. By W.L. GEORGE. Constable. 6s.
A VERY adequate and even thorough study of French bourgeois life as it
really is. As a picture, it is better than anything Zola ever did, though (for the

253

‘THE EQUINOX

same reason) it lacks just that which Zola always gives—a sense of tragedy.
Probably Mr. George will say (with a maiden blush) that his novel is none the
worse for that; he would deny the truth of the poet’s vision—insist that the
cosmos is but incoherency of heterogeneous incident.

I may, however, urge with more hope of his attention that his novel breaks off
at the really interesting part. What did Suzette say? Did the family tyranny
make a man of Henri? Were they married, and, if so, what came of it? I wait
patiently on Mr. George; may he incline unto me and hear my cry!

A.C.

ONE OF Us. By GILBERT FRANKAU. 3s. 62.

ADMIRABLE, this Odyssey of emasculation. The verse is at all times facile and
clever beyond all praise, though there are three or four faulty rhymes, and I
cannot pass (twice) “pleeceman” and “pleece,” unless they are so spelt.

The story is very typical and very tragic. An idle youth without enough guts
even to go wrong. When, after infinite struggle, he gets into debt, an aunt
conveniently dies and leaves him everything. After innumerable mild
philanderings, not one of which brings him even within whistling distance of the
méthode du Dr. Fernandez, he returns to the lady whose acres adjoin his own;
and Mr. Frankau, with consummate art, leaves us uncertain whether he will even
summon up the energy to marry her.

Smart, shallow, shoddy society in every clime is pictured admirably well; this
book will be a classic, in a hundred years, for its historical interest. But it behoves
somebody to write a commentary within the next twelve months, or a good third
of the allusions will be for ever unintelligible.

It is one of the most readable books I have struck for a long while; alas!
that so depressing a portrait should be so real. Anarchy would become the
only thinkable political creed if “One of Us” represented more than a negligible
and almost outworn fringe of the antimacassar of society.

ALEISTER CROWLEY.

STRANGER THAN FICTION. By Mary L. LEWES. William Rider & Son.
35. 6d.
ANY one who likes to read rubbish can get large quantities at a reasonable
price by reading this book—but it is rather amusing rubbish.
DAVID THOMAS.

254

REVIEWS

THE PERFECT CEREMONIES OF CRAFT FREEMASONRY, WITH NOTES AND
APPENDICES BY COLONEL R. H. FORMAN, P.G.M., A.S.F.I. George
Kenning & Son.

WE extend the hand of brotherhood to Colonel Forman. While regretting to
some extent the extreme lengths to which he has gone in making it quite clear to
cowans and eavesdroppers exactly what happens in the Raising, and in
publishing careful diagrams of the secret steps, etc., the only possible ambiguity,
e.g. in the murder of H.A., being that L—— t might stand for left testicle, we
think it is better so. Since English Freemasonry has become soulless formalism,
let us at least perform the ceremonies with decorum!

Your reviewer is personally a staunch Tory, and cannot help preferring the
“Emulation” working which long years have endeared to him.

But never will he consent to the foul hash of the 23rd Psalm (Milton’s, I
suppose) here still printed.

Colonel Forman shows a good deal of insight into the true meaning of
Masonry, and a real understanding of the symbolism. He appears a suitable
candidate for some more serious order, such as the M.. M.. M.-. or even the
O.T.O.

H.K.T.

‘TENTERHOOKS. By ADA LEVESON. 6s.

Mrs. LEVERSON is easily the daintiest and wittiest of our younger feminine
writers; but she does well to call her latest masterpiece Tenterhooks. Mrs.
Leverson offers us a picture of an aged, wrinkled and bedizened Jewess with
false hair and teeth, painted and whitewashed with kohl, rouge and chalk until
there seems hardly any woman there at all. Yet not content with addiction to
indiscriminate adultery and morphine, she finds pleasure in seducing young men
and picking their pockets.

Fie! you can surely show us a prettier picture than that. Why not return
to your earlier manner? Not necessarily the manner of Anu Idy/l in Bloomsbury,
but you might advantageously find material in Brixton or Bayswater.

FELIX.

‘THE MASTER MASON’S HANDBOOK. By BRO. FRED. J. W. CROWE, P.M. 328,
2806; Member Lodge “Quatuor Coronati” 2076, P. Prov. G. Org., Devon,
etc., with an Introduction by BRO. W. J. HUGHAN, P.G.D. England. Geo.
Kenning & Son. 1s. 6d.

A USEFUL guide in the practical details of Freemasonry. On the subject of
the serious study of the Order, however, Bro. Crowe is rather pathetic. He
refers us to learned Bro. This, and illuminated Bro. That, and instructed Bro.
Tother; but orthodox Freemasonry has apparently not yet any adherent who

255

‘THE EQUINOX

could pass the first standard in a Masonic Board School. E.g. on the apron of
the 18° the Monogram of the Eternal is misspelt—blasphemously misspelt. Any
Yid from Houndsditch could correct it. And on the M.W.S. jewel, Jeheshua is
usually spelt with a Resh!

There was a fair Maid of Bombay
Who was put in an awkward situation, the nature of which
it is unnecessary to discuss,
By the mate of a lugger,
An ignorant Sovereign Prince of Rose Croix
Who always spelt Jeheshua with a Resh.

Prate not of scholarship, Bro. Crowe!

Such ignorance, when combined with the Satanic Pride to which the
possession of an apron with blue silk and silver tassels, value three half-bull!
naturally predisposes mankind, leads to presumption, bigotry and intolerance.
So we find Bro. Crowe asserting that all other degrees than his own are “spurious
and worthless.” Go slow, Bro. Crowe!

The intelligence of Freemasons may be guessed by the level at which they
rate that of cowans and eavesdroppers. They print their secret rituals for any one
to buy; so far, so good, why shouldn’t they? But they print initials and finals of
“missing words” which no single reader of “Pearson’s Weekly” could miss.

“Advance a short step with your ]1—t ft,” would not have baffled Edgar
Allan Poe!

They are even such b—— f s—(will they decipher this!—it stands for
“bright fellows” )—that when by accident they do baffle you—

“Gives him the P e, C——w, and S——,”—they print it full in another
place, but in the same connection—“The Pickaxe, Crow, and Shovel.”

No, Bro. Crowe! Whoa, Bro. Crowe! (Blow Bro. Crowe! Ed.)

But for all Masons who wish to know the mysteries of how to address a V.W.P.
Pres. Brd. G. Pur., and the order of precedence of a Past Assistant Grand Director
of Ceremonies, this is the Book.

K.S.L

POEMS DRAMATIC AND LYRICAL. By CLIFFORD BAX. Daniel. 4s. 64
JUST the book of verse we should have expected from C. W. Daniel—the
feeble, fluent, derived expression of a decadent and frail personality.
Mr. Bax is a pupil of Victor B. Neuburg, so far as form goes; but oh! what a lot
he has to learn!
ST. MAURICE E. KULM.

256

REVIEWS

PREHISTORIC PARABLES. By WILSON BELL. Milner & Co. 1s.

IN “Prehistoric Parables,” Mr. Bell, with consummate skill, carries the reader
back to the Carboniferous Period. He does not trouble himself about scientific
facts, but he gives most adequate descriptions, often beautiful, of that happy
happy age.

It is a quaint conceit of his to write the parable in prehistoric times, and the
moral in the twentieth century.

I regret that the book is illustrated. The artist’s conceptions are far below
those of the author, which has a tendency to deter rather than help the reader.

There is a slight journalistic touch in the style, but there is much too much in
this book to allow it to trouble you.

Read it, and know Thyself.
E. LE ROUX.

LYRA NIGERIAE: A BOOK OF VERSES ILLUSTRATIVE OF LIFE IN NIGERIA.
By ADAMU (E. C. ADAMS). FISHER UNWIN. 3s. 6¢. net.

NO sentimental drivel in this little book, but songs sung by a man whose heart
beats high and feels the good red blood tingling through his veins—who loves
the scorching sun he curses, and the acrid country which gives him his splendid
outlook upon life.

“In Articulo Mortis” is a volume of philosophy in itself, and should be
circulated by the Religious Tract Society to all men, married or unmarried, in
West Africa.

A complain could be made that this book is too reminiscent of Kipling;
perhaps it is; but then again, perhaps the author has never read Kipling,

The following, from “The Leper,” is characteristic—

“Here through the live-long day I wait,

Allah! Allah!
In the shadows flung by the city gate,

Allah! Allah!
My fingers have gone and my toes as well,
And the leprous spots on my body swell,
But Allah Eternal does all things well.

Allah! Allah! Akbar!"

BUNCO.

‘THE BOOK OF REVELATIONS OF JIM CROW. J. & J. BENNETT. 15.

THE best of this book is that it reads well. I thought a priori (a) it read very
well weekly; in a lump it will bore; (4) it only read well weekly because of
its pornographic or Prudential surroundings. But, lo! it is most excellent.

257

St. James the Divine has indeed found a way to tell the truth (about most things)
without frightening Respectability too much, though I think he might have
spared us a thunderbolt against that feeble writer, Herbert Vivian.

Sanctus Jacobus Corvus once observed in his treatise on Mysticism (blue-
pencilled by the common sub-editor), “Crow and Crowley—what a combination!”
Not a bad one, either. If only he had stolen the holy water (as I begged him to
do) and baptized our mandrakes properly—Never mind! I advise all our readers
to read his book; and if he does not advise all the readers of “John Bull” to read
mine, I shall despair of human nature.

A. QULLER, JR.

EPICURES

are invited to taste the Special Dishes invented by
ALEISTER CROWLEY. This can be done at the

CAFE ROYAL, REGENT STREET, W.

Pavots d’Amour Cro=Cro
Pilaff de Moules a la Santa Chiara
Crowley Mixed Grill

Souffle Aleister Crowley

etc., etc.

NOW READY

SIR PALAMEDE THE SARACEN

By ALEISTER CROWLEY
REPRINTED FROM EQUINOX IV

PRICE 5/-

“Much vigorous imagination.” —Times.

“.. . his genius, be its origin celestial or infernal, is considerably to our liking; he can write
angelic poetry and devilish good prose, a cloud of exotic scholarship trailing over the whole, and suffused
now and then by lightning-like gleams of mirth and snappiness.”—English Review.

“The poet’s impassioned imagination and fancy move untrammelled throughout this metrical
romance.” —Publishers’ Circular.

LOOK OUT! FOR THE FORTHCOMING PUBLICATIONS

AHA!

REPRINTED FROM EQUINOX III

LITTLE POEMS IN PROSE

By CHARLES BAUDELAIRE
Translated by ALEISTER CROWLEY

ERCILDOUNE

A Novel by ALEISTER CROWLEY

WIELAND & CO. Telephone: 8987 City.

PRICE To be had

of The Equinox,
G ie ‘A 3 Great James St., W. C.
and through all
Nee Booksellers

G 0 ET A vel Clavicula

SALOMONIS REGIS

(The Lesser Key of Solomon the King.)

The best, simplest, most intelligible and most effective treatise

extant on

CEREMONIAL MAGIC

Careful and complete instruction; ample illustration; beau-
tiful production. This book is very much easier both to
understand and to operate than the so-called “Greater”

Key of Solomon.

ONLY A FEW COPIES REMAIN FOR SALE.

The PHOTOGRAPH

OF MISS WADDELL IN THIS
MAGAZINE WAS TAKEN BY THE

DOVER STREET STUDIOS

DOVER STREET, LONDON, W.

A GREEN GARLAND

BY
V. B. NEUBURG

Green Paper Cover. 2s. 6d. net.

“As far as the verse is concerned there is in this volume something more than mere promise; the
performance is at times remarkable; there is beauty not only of thought and invention—and the
invention is of a positive kind—but also of expression and rhythm. There is a lilt in Mr. Neuburg’s
poems; he has the impulse to sing, and makes his readers feel that impulse.” —The Morning Post.

“There is a certain given power in some of the imaginings concerning death, as "The Dream’ and ’the
Recall,’ and any reader with a liking for verse of an unconventional character will find several
pieces after his taste.” —The Daily Telegraph.

“Here is a poet of promise.” —The Daily Chronicle.

“Tt is not often that energy and poetic feeling are united so happily as in this little book.” —The
Morning Leader.

“There is promise and some fine lines in these verses.” —The Times.

To be obtained of
PROBSTHAIN & CO.
44 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.
And all Booksellers

NOW READY PRICE ONE SHILLING
HAIL MARY! CROWLEY *
. CROWLEY
The “Daily Mail” says—‘“This is a garland of some fifty or sixty devotional hymns to the Virgin, in which the author,
while not exceeding the bounds of Catholic orthodoxy, fills his verses with quaint and charming conceits, very much in the
style of the ‘metaphysical’ poets of the seventeenth century. Indeed, in turning over the pages of ‘Amphora,’ as the little
volume was entitled when published anonymously two years ago, by Burns & Oates, we feel them to be the work of a recipient
of the tradition of Vaughan the Silurist, George Herbert, and Crashaw, although Mr. Crowley is smooth where they are rugged,
plain where they are perplexing.
“These poems indicate a mind full of earnest aspiration towards his spiritual Queen, a mind of an engaging naiveté, un-
troubled by the religious and philosophical problems which weary more complex intelligences. This little work can be cordially
recommended to Catholic readers.”
Father Kent writes in “The Tablet”—“Among the many books which benevolent publishers are preparing as
appropriate Christmas presents we notice many new editions of favourite poetic classics. But few, we fancy, can be more appropriate
for the purpose than a little volume of original verses, entitled ’Amphora,’ which Messrs. Burns & Oates are on

the point of publishing. The following stanzas from a poem on the Nativity will surely be a better recommendation of the
book than any words of critical appreciation:

“The Virgin lies at Bethlehem. “She lies alone amid the kine.

(Bring gold and frankincense and myrrh!) (Bring gold and frankincense and myrrh!)
The root of David shoots a stem. ‘The straw is fragrant as with wine.

(O Holy Spirit, shadow her!) (O Holy Spirit, shadow her!)”

Lieut.-Col. Gormley writes—“The hymns ordinarily used in churches for devotional purposes are no doubt excellent in
their way, but it can scarcely be said, in the case of many of them, that they are of much literary merit, and some of them indeed are
little above the familiar nursery rhymes of our childhood; it is therefore somewhat of a relief and a pleasure to read the volume of
hymns to the Virgin Mary which has just been published by Messrs. Burns & Oates. These hymns to the Virgin Mary are in the
best style, they are devotional in the highest degree, and to Roman Catholics, for whom devotion to the Virgin Mary forms so
important a part of their religious belief, these poems should indeed be welcome; personally I have found them just what I desired,
and I have no doubt other Catholics will be equally pleased with them."

“Vanity Fair” says—“To the ordinary mind passion has no relation to penitence, and carnal desire is the very anti-
thesis of spiritual fervour. But close observers of human nature are accustomed to discover an intimate connection between
the forces of the body and the soul; and the student of psychology is continually being reminded of the kinship between saint
and sinner. Now and then we find the extremes of self and selflessness in the same soul. Dante tells us how the lover kissed
the trembling mouth, and with the same thrill describes his own passionate abandonment before the mystic Rose. In our
own day, the greatest of French lyric poets, Verlaine, has given us volumes of the most passionate love songs, and side by side
with them a book of religious poetry more sublimely credulous and ecstatic than anything that has come down to us from the
Ages of faith. We are all, as Sainte-Beuve said, ‘children of a sensual literature,’ and perhaps for that reason we should expect
from our singers fervent religious hymns.

“There is one of London’s favourites almost unrivalled to express by her art the delights of the body with a pagan
simplicity and directness. Now she sends us a book, ‘Amphora,’ a volume of religious verse: it contains song after song in
praise of Mary,” etc. etc. etc.

The “Scotsman” says—“Outside the Latin Church conflicting views are held about the worship of the Virgin, but
there can be no doubt that this motive of religion has given birth to many beautiful pieces of literature, and the poets have never
tired of singing variations on the theme of ‘Hail Mary.’ This little book is best described here as a collection of such variations.
They are written with an engaging simplicity and fervour of feeling, and with a graceful, refined literary art
that cannot but interest and attract many readers beyond the circles of such as must feel it religiously impossible not to
admire them.”

The “Daily Telegraph” says—‘“In this slight volume we have the utterances of a devout anonymous Roman
Catholic singer, in a number of songs or hymns addressed to the Virgin Mary. The author, who has evidently a decided gift
for sacred verse and has mastered varied metres suitable to her high themes, divides her poems into four series of thirteen
each—thus providing a song for each week of the year. The songs are all of praise or prayer addressed to the Virgin, and
though many have a touch of mysticism, most have a simplicity of expression and earnestness of devotion that will commend
them to the author’s co-religionists.”

The “Catholic Herald” says—“This anonymous volume of religious verse reaches a very high level of poetic imagery.
It is a series of hymns in honour of Our Lady, invariably expressed in melodious verse. ‘The pitfalls of religious verse are
bathos and platitude, but these the sincerity of the writer and a certain mastery over poetic expression have enabled him—or
her—to avoid. ‘The writer of such verse as the following may be complimented on a very high standard of poetic expression:

“The shadows fall about the way; “But Mary sheds a blessed light;
Strange faces glimmer in the gloom; Her perfect face dispels the fears.
The soul clings feebly to the clay, She charms Her melancholy knight

For that, the void; for this, the tomb! Up to the glad and gracious spheres.
“O Mary, like a pure perfume
Do thou receive this falling breath,
And with Thy starry lamp illume
‘The darkling corridors of death!”

The “Catholic Times” says—“The ‘Amphora’ is a collection of poems in honour of our Blessed Lady. They are
arranged in four books, each of which contains thirteen pieces. ‘Thus with the prologue there are fifty-three poems in all.
Needless to say they breathe a spirit of deep piety and filial love towards our Heavenly Mother. Many beautiful and touching
thoughts are embodied in the various verses, which cannot but do good to the pious soul.”

The “Staffordshire Chronicle” says—“Under this title there has appeared an anonymous volume of verses
breathing the same exotic fragrance of Rossetti’s poem on Our Lady that begins ‘Mother of the fair delight.’ There is the
same intense pre-Raphaelite atmosphere, the same aesthetic revelling in Catholic mysticism, the same rich imagery and gorgeous
word-colouring that pervade the poetic works of that nineteenth-century artist. A valuable addition to the poetic literature on
the Mother of our Lord.”

The “Guardian” says—“The devotional fervour of ‘Amphora’ will make them acceptable to those who address their
worship to the Blessed Mother of the Christ. The meaning of the title of the book is not very obvious. It cannot surely
have anything to do with the lines in Horace, ‘Amphora coepit,’ ” etc.

The “Catholic Times” says—“As far as we can gather from his other works, the author is not a Catholic, perhaps not even,
strictly speaking, a Christian; but here we have page after page of most exquisite praise of Her, whom Wordsworth greeted as ‘our
tainted nature’s solitary boast,’ until one marvels at the fecundity of concept, imagery, and fit expression.”

OCCULTISM

To the readers of “The Equinox.” —All who are interested in curious old Literature should write
to FRANK HOLLINGS for his Catalogue of over 1000 items. Sent post free on receipt of name and
address, and all future issues. A few selected items below.

THE BOOK OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC, including the Rites and Mysteries of Goétic

‘Theurgy, Sorcery, and Infernal Necromancy. In Two Parts. I. An Analytical and Critical Account of the chief MAGICAL RITUALS
extant. I]. A Complete GRIMOIRE of Black Magic. By ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.

The two chief sections are subdivided as follows: (a) Studies on the Antiquity of Magical Rituals; (6) The Rituals of
‘Transcendental Magic, so-called; (c) Composite Rituals; (7) The Rituals of Black Magic; (e) The descending Hierarchy of Spirits;
(f) The Lesser Key of Solomon the King; (g) The Mystery of the “Sanctum Regnum”; (4) The Rite of "Lucifuge'$ (7) The Method
of Honorius, etc., etc., etc.

The main objects of the work are: (1) To determine the connection, if any, between the literature of CEREMONIAL MAGIC
AND THE SECRET TRADITION IN CHRISTIAN TIMES; (2) To show the fantastic nature of the distinction between White and
Black Magic, so far, at least, as the texts are concerned.

‘The work is issued in crown 4to, and includes about 180 engravings, some of which are full-page plates.

Price 15s. net. Post free. Handsomely bound.

JUST PUBLISHED.
WAITE (A. E.). The Secret Tradition in Freemasonry, and an Analysis of the Inter-Relation

between the Craft and the High Degrees, in respect of their term of Research, expressed by the way of Symbolism, 2 vols. large 8vo, with 26 full-
page Portraits, and other illustrations, cloth extra te.g. 425.

Book I. Fundamental Relations of the Craft and the High Grades. I. Development of the High Grades in respect of the
Ancient Alliance. III. Of the New Alliance in Freemasonry. IV. The Masonic Orders of Chivalry, V. Of Alchemy in Masonry. VI.
Of Magical and Kabalistical Degrees. VII. Of the Mysteries on their Mystical Side, and of this Subject in its relation to Masonry.

THE KABBALAH UNVEILED, containing the following Books of the Zohar: (1) The Book

of Concealed Mystery; (2) The Greater Holy Assembly; (3) The Lesser Holy Assembly; translated into English from the Latin Version of
Knorr von Rosenroth, and collated with the original Chaldee and Hebrew text, by S. L. MACGREGOR-MATHERS. New and cheaper edition,
demy 8vo.

The Bible, which has been probably more misconstrued than any other book ever written, contains numberless obscure and
mysterious passages which are utterly unintelligible without some key wherewith to unlock their meaning. That key is given in the
Kabbalah.

ISIS UNVEILED: A Master Key to the Mysteries of Ancient and Modern Science and Theology.
By H. P. BLAVATSKY. In two volumes. Vol. I. Science, pp. xiv., 628. Vol. II. Theology, pp. iv., 640 and Index 52.
£1, 1s. ner.

Vol. I—Before the Veil—I. Old Things with New Names—II. Phenomena and Forces—III. Blind Leaders of the Blind—IV.
Theories respecting Psychic Phenomena—V. The Ether, or “Astral Light”—VI. Psycho-Physical Phenomena—VII. The
Elements, Elementals, and Elementaries—VIII. Some Mysteries of Nature—IX. Cyclic Phenomena—x. The Inner and Outer
Man—XI. Psychological and Physical Marvels—XII. The “Impassible Chasm”—XIII. Realities and Illusion—XIV. Egyptian
Wisdom—XV. India the Cradle of the Race.

Vol. U.—I. The Church; Where is it?—II. Christian Crimes and Heathen Virtues—IIL Divisions amongst the Early
Christians—IV. Oriental Cosmogonies and Bible-Records—V. Mysteries of the Kabala—VI. Esoteric Doctrines of Buddhism
Parodied in Christianity—VII. Early Christian Heresies and Secret Societies—VIII. Jesuitry and Masonry—IX. The Vedas and the
Bible—X. The Devil Myth—xI. Comparative Results of Buddhism and Christianity—XII. Conclusions and Illustrations.

TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC: Its Doctrine and Ritual. By ELIPHAS LEVI (a com-plete

‘Translation of “Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie”), with a Biographical Preface by ARTHUR E. WAITE, author
of “Devil Worship in France,” etc., etc. Portrait of the Author, and all the original engravings. 8vo, 406 pp. cloth
1896. (Pub. 155.). Postage Free. Ios. 6d.

The Pillars of the Temple, Triangle of Solomon, The Tetragram, The Pentagram, Magical Equilibrium, The Fiery Sword,
Realsation, Initiation, The Kabbalah, The Magic Chain, Necromancy, Transmutations, Black Magic, Bewitch-ments, Astrology,
Charms and Philtres, The Stone of the Philosophers, The Universal Medicine, Divination, The Triangle of Pantacles, The
Conjuration of the Four, The Blazing Pentagram, Medium and Mediator, The Septenary of Talismans, A Warning to the
Imprudent, The Ceremonial of Initiates, The Key of Occultism, The Sabbath of the Sorcerers, Witch-craft and Spells, The
Writing of the Stars, Philtres and Magnetism, The Mastery of the Sun, The Thaumaturge, The Science of the Prophets, The Book
of Hermes, etc.

BOOK OF THE SACRED MAGIC (The) OF ABRA-MELIN THE MAGE, as

delivered by Abraham the Jew unto his Son Lamech, A.D. 1458. Translated from the Original Hebrew into French, and
now rendered into English. From a unique and valuable MS. in the “Bibliotheque de |’Arsenal” at Paris; with copious
Notes and Magical Squares of Letters. By S. L. MACGREGOR-MATHERS. 4/0, black cloth, Magical Square on side in gold.
1900. (Pub. at 215)., Postage free. ros. 6d.

The original work, of which this is a translation, is unique, no other copy being known, although both Bulwer Lytton and
Eliphas Levi were well aware of its existence; the former having based part of his description of the sage Rosicrucian Menjour on
that of Abra-Melin, while the account of the so-called Observatory of Sir Philip Derval in the Szrange Story was, to some extent,
copied from that of the Magical Oratory and Terrace given in the present work. There are also other interesting points too
numerous to be given here in detail. It is felt therefore that by its publication a service is rendered to lovers of rare and curious
Books, and to Students of Occultism, by placing within their reach a magical work of so much importance, and one so interestingly
associated with the respective authors of Zanoni and of the Dogma and Ritual of Transcendental Magic. The Magical Squares or
combinations of letters, placed in a certain manner, are said to possess a peculiar species of automatic intelligent vitality, apart from
any of the methods given for their use; and students are recommended to make no use of these whatever unless this higher Divine
Knowledge is approached in a frame of mind worthy of it.

WANTS SUPPLIED. NEW PUBLICATIONS SUPPLIED TO ORDER.
Out of Print Books sought for and reported.
Visitors to London who are interested should make a point of calling.

FRANK HOLLINGS, 7 GREAT TURNSTILE, HOLBORN, W.C.
Near to Chancery Lane, the Inns of Court, and First Avenue Hotels.

A. CROWLEY’S WORKS

The volumes here listed are all of definite occult and mystical interest and
importance.

The Trade may obtain them from

“The Equinox,” 3 Great James Street, W.C. Tel.: City 8987; and

Messrs. Simpklin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co., 23 Paternoster Row, E.C.
The Public may obtain them from

“The Equinox,” 3 Great James Street, W.C.

Mr. Elkin Matthews, Vigo Street, W.

The Walter Scott Publishing Co., Paternoster Square, E.C.

Mr. F. Hollings, Great Turnstile, Holborn.

And through all Booksellers.

ACELDAMA. Crown 8vo, 29 pp., £2 25. net.

Of this rare pamplet less than 10 copies remain. It is Mr. Crowley’s earliest and in some ways most
striking mystical work.
JEPHTHAH AND OTHER MYSTERIES, LYRICAL AND
DRAMATIC. Demy 8vo, boards, pp. xxii. + 223, 75. 6d. net.

SONGS OF THE SPIRIT. Pp. x. + 109. A new edition. 35. 6¢ net.

These two volumes breathe the pure semi-conscious aspiration of the soul, and express the first
glimmerings of the light.
THE SOUL OF OSIRIS. Medium 8vo, pp. ix. + 129, 5s. net.

A collection of lyrics, illustrating the progress of the soul from corporeal to celestial beatitude.

TANNHAUSER. Demy 4to, pp. 142, 155. net.

The progress of the soul in dramatic form.

BERASHITH. 4to, china paper, pp. 24, 55. net.
Only a few copies remain. An illuminating essay on the universe, reconciling the conflicting
systems of religion.

THE GOD-EATER. Crown 4to, pp. 32, 25. 6¢ net.

A striking dramatic study of the origins of religions.

THE SWORD OF SONG. Post 4to, pp. ix + 194, printed in red and black,

decorative wrapper, 205. net.

This is the author’s first most brilliant attempt to base the truths of mysticism on the truths of
scepticism. It contains also an enlarged amended edition of “Berashith,” and an Essay showing the
striking parallels and identities between the doctrines of Modern Science and those of Buddhism.

GARGOYLES. Pott 8vo, pp. vi. + 113, 55. net.
ORACLES. Demy 8vo, pp. viii. + 176, 55. net.

Some of Mr. Crowley’s finest mystical lyrics are in these collections.
KONX OM PAX. See advertisement.

Collected Works (Travellers’ Edition). Extra crown 8vo, India paper, 3 vols.
in one, pp. 808 + Appendices. Vellum, green ties, with protraits, £3 3s.; white buckram, without
portraits, £2 2s.

This edition contains “Qabalistic Dogma,” “Time,” “The Excluded Middle,” “Eleusis,” and other
matters of the highest occult importance which are not printed elsewhere.

AMBERGRIS. Medium 8vo, pp. 200, 3s. 6d. (Elkin Mathews.)

A selection of lyrics, containing some of great mystical beauty.

THE POETRY
REVIEW

For AUGUST

contains an exhaustive survey of
Modern French Poetry by

F.S. FLINT.

1 This will be the first of a series of issues
dealing from time to time with Contemporary
Foreign Poetry.

1 The next, appearing in October, will be
devoted to American Poetry. Several articles
have been promised by well-known American
writers.

Copies may be obtained through booksellers,
price Sixpence net, or direct from the publishers,
Sevenpence, post free.

Annual Subscription, Five Shillings
(1$ 22c.) post free

The St. Catherine Press,
34 Norfolk Street, Strand, London.

Editorial Offices 93 Chancery Lane.

THE WHIRLPOOL

E'THEL ARCHER

With a Cover specially designed by E. J. WIELAND;
a Dedicatory Sonnet by VICTOR B. NEUBURG; and an
Introduction by ALEISTER CROWLEY.

PRICE ONE SHILLING NET

“This is a whirlpool, and no mistake; a witches’ cauldron wherein suns and stars and souls, and
Lilith and Sappho, and ‘whispering hair,’ and corpses and poppies, jostle one another in a heaving brew
of iridescent, quasi-putrescent, ultra-modernity. Quite good reading all the same. Take p. 44:—....
And we must thank the mysterious V. B. N. for a really inspired line—

*Thou lyric laughter of the enfranchised male.’

.... The naughty new ‘male’ smashing our windows with his inverted commas . . . unless, indeed,
as Mr. Aleister Crowley authoritatively hints in his sacerdotal preface, ... But the time, we think, is
hardly ripe for such disclosures, although the more intelligent among us may have seen a certain Writing
upon the Wall, setting forth, in clearest language, that 1 + 1 = 3.” —The English Review.

“Poems by a new writer who possesses imaginative gifts of unusual quality. Miss Archer’s poems are
both mystical and realistic, and they bear traces of having been to some extent influenced by the work of
Mr. Aleister Crowley, but without losing an originality which is entirely their own."--- "7. P.’s Weekly."

“This book has all the defects and none of the qualities of Mr. Crowley’s work. . . . Miss Ethel
Archer misses everything. There is no @an in the work. She has none of the happy fluency of her
master, and it requires much to carry off the cumbrous apparatus of esoteric epithets with which she is
burdened. Miss Archer’s mechanical abnormalities are ridiculous; she has mistaken jingle for music and
incomprehensibility for passion. ... The world will not willingly let it die.”—Vanity Fair.

“On the cover a naked woman is riding a bat over a whirlpool; craggy white mountains are behind her
and a red sky behind all. There is a fine fierceness of movement in the design; it is certainly good. Mr.
Aleister Crowley introduces Miss Archer briefly but splendidly, with phrases of this sort: ‘We find such
rime-webs as abaaab-babbba . . . , more exquisite than all the arabesques of the Alhambra.” . . . It is all very
splendid. . . . We feel drearily sensible of our outer darkness. Coming to Miss Archer’s poetry we are
obliged to notice her debt to Swinburne, yet we find it, on the whole, good. . . . The colour is very strong;
the shades of thought are clear, and often subtle. ... The uninitiated may certainly recognise great strength
of conviction in Miss Archer, even if they cannot or do not wish to appreciate it.” —The Poetry Review.

“Several of these unpleasant phantasies are reprinted from the Egwinox, and there is an introduction by
Aleister Crowley, in which he says this book is the hell of sterile passion glowing in the heart of the hell of
desolation.” —Times Literary Supplement.

“There is a resemblance in much of Miss Archer’s verse to the sensuous school of English poetry, and it
has the same lyrical power. Love in its various forms is the theme of her songs, and she expresses her
thoughts in vivid words. The portrayal of the intensity of personal feeling with an unguarded freedom, is
that which a student of pre-Raphaelite poetry would naturally acquire. (Our reviewer’s guarded remarks
lead us to suppose he means that “The Whirlpool’ is rather ‘hot water.’-—ED.)—Publishers’ Circular.

“Moralists with no pretensions to severity will frown at the sentiments conveyed in the poem “To
Lilith.’ . . . ‘ "Reverie,’ ‘Midsummer Morn,’ and ‘Sleep,’ are really beautiful poems. . . .”—Westminster
Review.

“Full, at any rate, of high artistic endeavour is Miss Ethel Archer’s ‘The Whirlpool.’ There is a
strong sense of classical beauty and of form in these passionate and exotic verses. “The Felon Flower’ is an
extraordinary rhapsody, and the Song to Leila’ is delicate and highly wrought.”—The Commentator.

“The verse is musical and the ideas profound. . .”—Light

MR. NEUBURG’S NEW VOLUME OF POEMS.
Imperial 16mo, pp. 200

Now ready. Order through The Equinox, or of
any Bookseller.

THE TRIUMPH OF PAN.
PoEMs By VICTOR B. NEUBURG.

This volume, containing many poems,—nearly all of them hitherto unpublished—
besides THE TRIUMPH OF PAN, includes THE ROMANCE OF OLIVIA VANE.

The First Edition is limited to Two Hundred and Fifty copies: Two Hundred and
Twenty on ordinary paper, whereof less than Two Hundred are for sale; and Thirty on
Japanese vellum, of which Twenty-five are for sale. These latter copies are numbered,
and signed by the Author. The binding is half-parchment with crimson sides; the
ordinary copies are bound in crimson boards, half holland.

The price of ordinary copies is Five Shillings net; of the special copies, One
Guinea net.

EXTRACTS FROM PRESS NOTICES.

“Not everyone will care for Mr. Neuburg’s tone in all the pieces, but he is undoubtedly a poet to be
reckoned with, and a volume so original as this is should create no small stir. It is superbly produced by
the publishers.” —Swssex Daily News.

“When one comes to the poems... it is evident that they are written in English. . . . In a certain
oblique and sub-sensible sense, eloquent and musical. . . . Distinctly Wagnerian in their effects. . . .”
Scotsman.

“Tt is full of ‘the murmurous monotones of whispering lust,’ ‘the song of young desire,’ and that kind
of poppycock.”—London Opinion.

“A competent master of words and rhythms. . . . His esoteric style is unreasonably obscure from an
intelligent plain poetry-lover’s standpoint.” —Morning Leader.

“A charming volume of poems . . . Pagan glamour . . . passion and vigour. . . . ‘Sigurd’s
Songs’ are commendable for dealing with the all too largely neglected Scandinavian theology. ... <A
scholarly disciple. ... The entire volume is eminently recommendable.”—Jewish Chronicle.

“A gorgeous rhapsody. . . . Fortunately, there are the police. ... On the whole, we cannot help

regretting that such splendid powers of imagination and expression are flung away in such literary
rioting.” —Light.

“Sometimes of much beauty of rhythm and phrase. . . .,—Times.

“Poets who have any originality deserve to be judged by their own standard. ... A Neo-mystic or
semi-astrological pantheist. . . .,—Liverpool Echo.

“Love-making appears to have an added halo in his eyes if it is associated with delirium or blood-
shed. . . . Mr. Neuburg has a ‘careless rapture’ all his own; the carelessness, indeed, is just the trouble.
His versification is remarkable, and there is something impressive in its mere fluency. ... So luxurious,
so rampant, a decadence quickly palls. ... On the whole, this book must be pronounced a quite grievous
exhibition of recklessness and folly.”—Manchester Guardian.

“.. . We began to be suspicious of him. ... Hardly the sort of person we should care to meet on
a dark night with a knobby stick in his hand.... This clever book.” —Academy.

“A vivid imagination fostered by a keen and loving insight of nature, and this allied to a command of
richly adorned language . . . have already assured for the author a prominent place amongst present-day
poets. ... An enthusiastic devotion to classic song . . . sustained metrical charm. From first to last the
poet’s work is an important contribution to the century’s literature.” —Publishers’ Circular.

“This [book] contains the answer to a very well-known riddle propounded by the late Elizabeth
Barrett Browning. You remember she asked in one of her poems, ‘What was he doing to Great God
Pan: Down in the reeds by the River?’ Well, Mr. Victor Neuburg has discovered the answer, for he

was obviously wandering near the river if he was not hidden in the reeds. . . ..—ROBERT ROSS in
The Bystander.

“There is no question about the poetic quality of much of Mr. Neuburg’s verse. . . . We are given
visions of love which open new amorous possibilities.” —Daily Chronicle.

“Sheer ennui is apt to say ‘morbid,’ and have done with it... . But here is Mr. Neuburg, with
real literary and temperamental gifts . . . but it is not honest to deny that he is actually straying here and

there upon the borders of a definite region of consciousness; that the evil and power he acclaims and fears
have a phantom existence. . . .”—Westminster Gazette.

EXTRACTS FROM PRESS NOTICES—Continued

“A volume of no ordinary ability . . . real beauty.” Advocate of India.

oa His poems are a mystery beyond the comprehension of the uninitiate. But we can appreciate
the beauty of their sound, and envy those lovers in distant countries who will apparently enjoy the
meaning. .. ."—English Review.

“By a big Pot, no doubt.”—John Bull.

“The Triumph of Pan’ contains poems alive with music and rich in thought. Mr. Neubrug writes with
distinction, and the book, from first to last, is one which lovers of poetry will appreciate."--- "Standard."

“... full of the throbbing fever of life which one cannot confine into measure on all occasions.

“*The Triumph of Pan’ is full of sonorous lines, with wonderful word pictures and poetic imagery

which has seldom been excelled. . . .,—American Register.”

me Many beautiful passages in the volume ... strange allusions to unpleasant gods, and the
imagery is occasionally repellent.

“The tremendous conception of that ‘world so wide’. . . at his best in some of the shorter poems . . . stirring
rhythm.

“... we linger with delight over the splendid line—
“©The murmurous song of the morning star, aflame o’er the birth of day.’

“..» Melodious and plaintive with a haunting rhythm .. . vivid and pictorial . . . a painter’s vision as well as a
oet’s ear... a fine simile in Osiris’ is all his own.” —Co-Mason.
Pp woe . . . soe
% a delirious music . . . the majority of them [the poems] trouble the reader by giving the

impression that a deep meaning lies behind the embroidered veil of words to which he is unable to pene-
trate; others again seem to suggest events of too intimate and personal a nature to have a general appli-
cation or interest... mixed metaphors—erratic visualisation. . . .”—Theosophy in Scotland.

“Passion and pain, ‘red desire’ and ‘red roses’ are frequent motifs in Mr. V. B. Neuburg’s “Triumph
of Pan’ (‘The Equinox’ Office), much of which merits the ambiguous distinction of being unusual. Though
by no means deficient in originality, vigour or imaginative power, his verse is too often cumbered with the
fantastic symbols of a species of erotic mysticism, into which we feel no desire to probe; while the lack of
reticence consistently displayed constitutes an artistic blemish not lightly to be excused. The author’s
serene confidence in the immortality of his lays would be better justified were he to make some attempt to
discriminate between the gold and the rubbish, and, incidentally, refraining from penning such grotesque-
ness as is contained, for example, in “The Sunflower,’ where we are informed how, among other portents—

“ “a greater god arose,
And stole the earth by standing on his toes
And blowing through the air.’

“Tt is difficult to believe that the persons to whom certain poems are inscribed will experience any very
lively gratification at the compliment.”—A/henaeum.

“.. . really notable fluency and fecundity of expression. ... He gives us little of that boring stuff
that is usually termed ‘strong meat.’ ... his dedicatory poem is the one that fascinates me most. It is
a tender little lyric, delicate, iridescent, fragrant as a summer dawn. I take the liberty of quoting it
in full... ."—New Age.

“Fie, Mr. Neuburg! . . . a most regrettable collection of songs that deal with unrestrained
affection. ... There’s no denying they are first-rate verse.” —PERCY FLAGE in The Equinox.

“.. . We are dizzied and dazzled by a foaming rainbow-hued torrent of impassioned words. We are
struck by the wealth and boldness of the imagery, and the facility of mechanical execution. . . . It is
brilliant work . . . one is bound to admire the cleverness of it all.” —Literary Guide.

ane In the author of the present collection of poems . . . we have a veritable twentieth-century
mystic and apostle of ecstasy who, according to his dedication, gives his songs—

“By the sign that is black and forbidden,
By the word that is uttered no more.’

“The Triumph of Pan,’ from which the book borrows its title, is a remarkable sequence of some forty
‘philosophic and ecstatic’ stanzas . . . he would also seem to ‘hold opinion with Pythagoras’ although
we question if even Nietzsche himself could quite fathom the undercurrent of the lay. . . . Despite
occasional extravagances in thought and in diction his work is that of a cultured scholar, his verbal artistry
undeniably inspired with the true spirit of poetry. Whether he sings of ‘Violet skies all rimmed in tune,’
of red ravens, of purple kisses, of silver stars ‘crested with amber melody,’ or of the ‘rhythmic sway of
the idle moon,’ he is always musical albeit, like Wagner, whose effects he now and then distinctly
recalls, often utterly unintelligible. . . . In striking contrast to the chaste and serenely beautiful ‘Diana
Rides’ . . . are no less that twenty-two audaciously passionate love-lyrics inscribed not only to one
Olivia Vane, but also, curiously enough to her ‘other’ lover.” —The Gambolier.

“He has arrived....

“Mr. Neuburg’s work is partly mystical and partly of the flesh... . Quite frankly, some of his work
we do not at all understand. This applies notably to his ‘Music-Pictures,’ which ‘were obtained under
the direct influence of music.’ ‘This,’ the poet naively tells us, ‘may explain their apparent incon-
sequence.’ . . . he is much more than a minor poet. He can and will yet accomplish great work... .
His ingenious rhyming capacity sometimes almost startles one. In the choice of some of this subjects he
is daring—greatly daring. . . . His genius is undoubted; and the world has a lot yet to hear of and from
this gifted singer.” —Greater London Illustrated.

“Tf he rejects this mask, Mr. Neuburg may become a poet.”—Rhythm.

The Star in the West

BY

CAPTAIN J. F. C. FULLER

FOURTH LARGE EDITION NOW READY

THROUGH THE EQUINOX AND ALL BOOKSELLERS

SIX SHILLINGS NET

A highly original study of morals and

religion by a new writer, who is as
entertaining as the average novelist is
dull. Nowadays human thought has
taken a brighter place in the creation: our
emotions are weary of bad baronets and
stolen wills; they are now only excited by
spiritual crises, catastrophes of the reason,
triumphs of the intelligence. In these
fields Captain Fuller is a master
dramatist.

KONXK OM PAX

THE MOST REMARKABLE TREATISE ON THE MYSTIC PATH EVER WRITTEN

Contains an Introduction and Four Essays; the first an account of the progress of the soul to
perfect illumination, under the guise of a charming fairy tale;

The second, an Essay on Truth, under the guise of a Christmas pantomime;

The third, an Essay on Magical Ethics, under the guise of the story of a Chinese
philosopher;

The fourth, a Treatise on many Magical Subjects of the profoundest importance, under the
guise of a symposium, interspersed with beautiful lyrics.

No serious student can afford to be without this delightful volume. The second edition is
printed on hand-made paper, and bound in white buckram, with cover-design in gold.

PRICE TEN SHILLINGS
WALTER SCOTT PUBLISHING Co., LTD., and through “THE EQUINOX”

* *

SOME PRESS OPINIONS
DR. M. D. EDER in “The New Age”

“Yours also is the Reincarnation and the Life, O laughing lion that is to be!

“Here you have distilled for our delight the inner spirit of the Tulip’s form, the sweet secret
mystery of the Rose’s perfume: you have set them free from all that is material whilst preserving
all that is sensual. ‘So also the old mystics were right who saw in every phenomenon a dog-faced
demon apt only to seduce the soul from the sacred mystery.’ Yes, but the phenomenon shall it
not be as another sacred mystery; the force of attraction still to be interpreted in terms of God
and the Psyche? We shall reward you by befoulment, by cant, by misunderstanding, and by
understanding. This to you who wear the Phrygian cap, not as symbol of Liberty, O ribald ones,
but of sacrifice and victory, of Inmost Enlightenment, of the soul’s deliverance from the fetters
of the very soul itself —fear not; you are not ‘replacing truth of thought by mere expertness of
mechanical skill.’

“You who hold more skill and more power than your great English predecessor, Robertus de
Fluctibus, you have not feared to reveal ‘the Arcana which are in the Adytum of God-nourished
Silence’ to those who, abandoning nothing, will sail in the company of the Brethren of the Rosy
Cross towards the Limbus, that outer, unknown world encircling so many a universe.”

“John Bull,” in the course of a long review by Mr. HERBERT VIVIAN

“The author is evidently that rare combination of genius, a humorist and a philosopher. For
pages he will bewilder the mind with abstruse esoteric pronouncements, and then, all of a
sudden, he will reduce his readers to hysterics with some surprisingly quaint conceit. I was
unlucky to begin reading him at breakfast and I was moved to so much laughter that I watered
my bread with my tears and barely escaped a convulsion.”

“The Times”

“The Light wherein he writes is the L.V.X., of that which, first mastering and then
transcending the reason, illumines all the darkness caused by the interference of the opposite
waves of thought... . It is one of the most suggestive definitions of KONX—the LVX of the
Brethren of the Rosy Cross—that it transcends all the possible pairs of opposites. Nor does this
sound nonsensical to those who are acquainted with that LVX. But to those who do not it must
remain as obscure and ridiculous as spherical trigonometry to the inhabitants of Flatland.”

“The Literary Guide”

“He is a lofty idealist. He sings like a lark at the gates of heaven. ‘Konx Om Pax’ is the
apotheosis of extravagance. the last word in eccentricity. A prettily told fairy-story ‘for babes and
sucklings’ has ‘explanatory notes in Hebrew and Latin for the wise and prudent’—which notes,
as far as we can see, explain nothing—together with a weird preface in scraps of twelve or fifteen
languages. The best poetry in the book is contained in the last section—‘The Stone of the
Philosophers.’ Here is some fine work.”

Household Gods

A COMEDY
By ALEISTER CROWLEY

Privately Printed by the Chiswick Press
and bound in White Buckram with Gold Lettering

PRICE HALF A GUINEA

Copies may be obtained on application to the Author
at the offices of “The Equinox”

Thirty copies of the Sketch of
ALEISTER CROWLEY by AUGUS-
TUS JOHN have been pulled on
Special Paper, and are for sale,
framed, at the Price of One Guinea
Net. Application should be made
at once to the Offices of this

Magazine

To be obtained of
THE EQUINOX, 3 Great James St., W.C.
TELEPHONE 8987

Crown 8vo, Scarlet Buckram, pp. 64.

Price ros net.

Less than 100 copies remain. The price will shortly be raised
to one guinea net.

A... A.. PUBLICATION IN CLASS B.

BOOK

77/7

HIS book contains in concise tabulated form a comparative view of all the symbols of the great

religions of the world; the perfect attributions of the Taro, so long kept secret by the Rosicrucians,
are now for the first time published; also the complete secret magical correspondences of the G.. D-.
and R. R. et A. C. It forms, in short, a complete magical and philosophical dictionary; a key to all
religions and to all practical occult working.

For the first time Western and Qabalistic symbols have been harmonized with those of Hinduism,
Buddhism, Mohammedanism, Taoism, &c. By a glance at the Tables, anybody conversant with any one
system can understand perfectly all others.

The Occult Review says:

“Despite its cumbrous sub-title and high price per page, this work has only to come under the notice of the right people to
be sure of a ready sale. In its author’s words, it represents ‘an attempt to systematise alike the data of mysticism and the results
of comparative religion,’ and so far as any book can succeed in such an attempt, this book does succeed; that is to say, it
condenses in some sixty pages as much information as many an intelligent reader at the Museum has been able to collect in
years. The book proper consists of a Table of ‘Correspondences,’ and is, in fact, an attempt to reduce to a common
denominator the symbolism of as many religious and magical systems as the author is acquainted with. The denominator
chosen is necessarily a large one, as the author’s object is to reconcile systems which divide all things into 3, 7, 10, 12, as the
case may be. Since our expression ‘common denominator’ is used in a figurative and not in a strictly mathematical sense, the
task is less complex than appears at first sight, and the 32 Paths of the Sepher Yetzirah, or Book of Formation of the Qabalah,
provide a convenient scale. These 32 Paths are attributed by the Qabalists to the 10 Sephiroth, or Emanations of Deity, and to
the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet, which are again subdivided into 3 mother letters, 7 double letters, and 12 simple letters.
On this basis, that of the Qabalistic “Tree of Life,’ as a certain arrangement of the Sephiroth and 22 remaining Paths connecting
them is termed, the author has constructed no less than 183 tables.

“The Qabalistic information is very full, and there are tables of Egyptian and Hindu deities, as well as of colours,
perfumes, plants, stones, and animals. The information concerning the tarot and geomancy exceeds that to be found in some
treatises devoted exclusively to those subjects. The author appears to be acquainted with Chinese, Arabic, and other classic
texts. Here your reviewer is unable to follow him, but his Hebrew does credit alike to him and to his printer. Among several
hundred words, mostly proper names, we found and marked a few misprints, but subsequently discovered each one of them in
a printed table of errata, which we had overlooked. When one remembers the misprints in ‘Agrippa’ and the fact that the
ordinary Hebrew compositor and reader is no more fitted for this task than a boy cognisant of no more than the shapes of the
Hebrew letters, one wonders how many proofs there were and what the printer’s bill was. A knowledge of the Hebrew
alphabet and the Qabalistic Tree of Life is all that is needed to lay open to the reader the enormous mass of information
contained in this book. The ‘Alphabet of Mysticism,’ as the author says—several alphabets we should prefer to say—is here.
Much that has been jealously and foolishly kept secret in the past is here, but though our author has secured for his work the
imprimatur of some body with the mysterious title of the A... A.., and though he remains himself anonymous, he appears to be
no mystery-monger. Obviously he is widely read, but he makes no pretence that he has secrets to reveal. On the contrary, he
says, ‘an indicible arcanum is an arcanum which cannot be revealed.’ The writer of that sentence has learned at least one fact
not to be learned from books.

“G.CJ”

WILLIAM NORTHAM,

ROBEMAKER,

9 Henrietta Street, Southampton Street, Strand
"TELEPHONE—5400 Central

MR. NORTHAM begs to announce that he has been entrusted with the
manufacture of all robes and other ceremonial apparel of members of the
A.. A.. and its adepts and aspirants.

No. 0. PROBATIONER’S ROBE . : : : : : . & 00
I. % x superior quality 700
2. NEOPHYTE’S . 3 ‘ . F ‘ 600
3. ZELATOR Symbol added to No. 2 . I00
4. PRACTICUS oa $5 Biss I00
5. PHILOSOPHUS 55 4. I00
6. DOMINUS LIMINIS 3 5 5% I00
7. ADEPTUS (without) 3 5 0orl 3.00
8. ie (within) . ; : . ‘ 4 ‘ : 10 0 0
9. ADEPTUS MAJOR . . ; ‘ : : r : 10 0 0
to. ADEPTUS EXEMPTUS . ‘ ¢ . ‘ s . 10 00
11. MAGISTER TEMPLI ’ : j ‘ : . - 5000

The Probationer’s robe is fitted for performance of all general invocations and especially for the I. of
the H. G. A.; a white and gold nemmes may be worn. These robes may also be worn by Assistant Magi
in all composite rituals of the White.

The Neophyte’s robe is fitted for all elemental operations. A black and gold nemmes may be worn.
Assistant Magi may wear these in all composite rituals of the Black.

The Zelator’s robe is fitted for all rituals involving I O, and for the infernal rites of Luna. In the
former case an Uraeus crown and purple nemmes, in the latter a silver nemmes should be worn.

The Practicus’ robe is fitted for all rituals involving I I, and for the rites of Mercury. In the former
case an Uraeus crown and green nemmes, in the latter a nemyss of shot silk, should be worn.

The Philosophus’ robe is fitted for all rituals involving O O, and for the rites of Venus. In the former case
an Uraeus crown and azure nemmes, in the latter a green nemmes, should be worn.

The Dominus Liminis’ robe is fitted for the infernal rites of Sol, which must never be celebrated.

The Adeptus Minor’s robe is fitted for the rituals of Sol. A golden nemmes may be worn.

The Adeptus’ robe is fitted for the particular workings of the Adeptus, and for the Postulant at the First
Gate of the City of the Pyramids.

The Adeptus Major’s Robe is fitted for the Chief Magus in all Rituals and Evocations of the Inferiors, for
the performance of the rites of Mars, and for the Postulant at the Second Gate of the City of the Pyramids.

The Adeptus Exemptus’ robe is fitted for the Chief Magus in all Rituals and Invocations of the Superiors,
for the performance of the rites of Jupiter, and for the Postulant at the Third Gate of the City of the Pyramids.

The Babe of the Abyss has no robe.

For the performance of the rites of Saturn, the Magician may wear a black robe, close-cut, with
narrow sleeves, trimmed with white, and the Seal and Square of Saturn marked on breast and back. A conical
black cop embroidered with the Sigils of Saturn should be worn.

The Magister Templi Robe is fitted for the great Meditations, for the supernal rites of Luna, and for those
rites of Babylon and the Graal. But this robe should be worn by no man, because of that which is written:
“Ecclesia abhorret a sanguine.”

Any of these robes may be worn by a person of whatever grade on
appropriate occasions.

George Raffalovich’s new works.

THE HISTORY OF A SOUL

Price 3s. 6d. Edition strictly limited

THE DEUCE AND ALL
A COLLECTION OF SHORT STORIES
Is net.

READY.
Through THE EQUINOX and all booksellers

WIELAND & CO.

SIGNS AND SYMBOLS OF
PRIMORDIAL MAN

BY
ALBERT CHURCHWARD
“The book is in every sense a great book.” —Equinox.

PRICE 13/6 NET

Mr. GEORGE RAFFALOVICH’S charming volume of Essays and Sketches
entitled

ON THE LOOSE:

PLANETARY JOURNEYS AND EARTHLY SKETCHES.

A new popular edition. Price 1s. net
Crown 8vo, Pp. 164,
May be obtained through THE EQUINOX.

A. COLIN LUNN,

Cigar Importer and Cigarette Merchant
3 BRIDGE STREET; 19 KING’S PARADE, & 31 TRINITY STREET, CAMBRIDGE.

Sole Agent for Loewe & Co.’s Celebrated Straight Grain Briar Pipes.

YENIDYEH CIGARETTES, No. 1 A——“A CONNOISSEUR’S CIGARETTE.” These are manufactured
from the finest selected growths of 1908 crop, and are of exceptional quality. They can be inhaled without
causing any irritation of the throat.

Sole Manufacturer: A. COLIN LUNN, Cambridge.

WIELAND & CO.

Beg to announce that they can now supply the various OILS, PERFUMES
UNGUENTS, ESSENCES, INCENSES, etc., and other products useful to members
of the lower grades of the A... A...

ALEISTER CROWLEY'S SPECIAL PREPARATIONS

OIL OF ABRAMELIN of a Say OS . 2/6 per oz.
ABRAMELININCENSE . .. sg . 10/- per Ib.
SALEM INCENSE _. =. x ; : ; 8/- ,,
VENUSINCENSE . .  .. . , 18/- ,,
DITTANYINCENSE. . .  . .) 7-  ,,
OPOPONAX INCENSE . .  .  .. ss 6/-_——,,
UNGUENTVM SABBATI. .  .) .)—. )—s17/6 per oz.

RUTHAH, the Perfume of Immortality, 2/6 & 4/6 per bottle

Cash in all Cases must accompany Order

ALL GOODS POST FREE

MR. NEUBURG'S NEW WORKS

IN PREPARATION

SONNETS FROM THE SPANISH

A Contribution to the Personal Note in Literature

THE NEW DIANA

A History. With other Poems, and some Translations

THE CHANGELING

A Fairy Play

ROSA IGNOTA

An Essay in Mysticism

HEINE'S LYRISCHES INTERMEZZO

A Complete Translation, with a Prose Preface

SONGS OF THE DECADENCE

New Lyrics

LIBER CCCXXXIII

°

°

H

SS PAA NS eee

NOW READY

THE BOOK OF LIES

WHICH IS ALSO FALSELY CALLED

BREAKS

THE WANDERINGS OR FALSIFICATIONS OF THE ONE THOUGHT OF

FRATER PERDURABO

WHICH THOUGHT IS ITSELF UNTRUE
“ Break, break, break

At the foot of thy stone:

s, O Sea!

And I would that I could utter
The thoughts that arise in me!”

e Sabbath of the Goat.
e Cry of the Hawk.

e Oyster.

aches.

e Battle of the Ants
viar.

e Dinosaurs.

eeped Horsehair.

e Branks.

indlestraws.

e Glow-Worm.

e Dragon-Flies.
grim-Talk.
nion-Peelings.

he Gun-Barrel.

e Stag-Beetle.

e Swan.

ewdrops.

Leopard and the Deer.
mson.

e Blind Webster.

e Despot.

idoo!

e Hawk and the Blindworm.
HE STAR RUBY.

e Elephant and the Tortoise.
e Sorcerer.

he Pole-Star.

e Southern Cross.
hn-a-Dreams.

he Garotte.

e Mountaineer.
BAPHOMET.

The Smoking Dog.
Venus of Milo.

THE STAR SAPPHIRE.
Dragons.

Lambskin.

The Looby.

The HIMOG.

Corn Beef Hash.
Dust-Devils.

Mulberry Tops.

THE MASS OF THE PHOENIX.
Chinese Music.

Buttons and Rosettes.
Windmill-Words.

Mome Raths.

323355

DIO

2I4g~so54stossses

°

S3e3333533

CONTENT

gl.
PRICE ONE GUIN

S

WARATAH-BLOSSOMS.

The Vigil of St. Hubert.

Terrier Work.

The Bull-Baiting.

The Dowser.

Eaves-Droppings.

The Drooping Sunflower.

Trouble with Twins.

The Duck-Billed Platypus.

Haggai-Howlings.

The Tailless Monkey.

‘The Wound of Amfortas.

The Fool’s Knot.

Twig?

Margery Daw.

Constancy.

Sic Transeat—

The Praying Mantis.

Sodom-Apples.

Manna.

The Way to Succeed—and the Way to Suck
Eggs!

Broomstick-Babblings.

King’s College Chapel.

Hashed Pheasant.

The Devil, the Ostrich, and the Orphan Child.

Carey Street.

Plover’s Eggs.

Phaeton.

THE SUBLIME AND SUPREME SEP-
TTENARY IN ITS MATURE MAGICAL

MANIFESTATION THROUGH
MATTER: AS IT IS WRITTEN: AN HE-
GOAT ALSO.

Wheel and—Woa!

The Bal Bullier.

Blackthorn.

Louis Lingg.

Bortsch: also Imperial Purple (and A PUNIC
WAR).

The Blind Pig.

The Avalanche.

Borborygmi.

TAL,

Mandarin-Meals.

Gold Bricks.

Unprofessional Conduct.

Starlight.

The Heikle.

EA

WIELAND & CO., 3 Great James Street, Bedford Row, W.C.

MORTADELLO

OR

THE ANGEL OF VENICE
A PLAY IN FIVE ACTS

BY

ALEISTER CROWLEY

PRICE TEN SHILLINGS NET

“A little master piece.” —The Times.

WIELAND & CO.
3 GREAT JAMES STREET
BEDFORD ROW. W.C.
TELEPHONE 8087 CITY

lb
il

THE WINGED BEETLE

By ALEISTER CROWLEY

PRIVATELY PRINTED: TO BE HAD THROUGH "THE EQUINOX"

300 Copies, Ios. net
50 copies on handmade paper, specially bound, & 1 15. net

CONTENTS

ROSA Coeli—Abjad-i-al’ain—The Hermit—The Wizard Way—The
Wings—The Garden of Janus—The Two Secrets—The Priestess of
Panormita— The Hawk and the Babe—The Duellists—Athor and Asar
—After Judgment—The Five Adorations—Telepathy—The Swimmer
—The Muse—The God and the Girl—Rosemary—Au Bal—Dzis-
appointment— The Octopus—The Eyes of Dorothy—Bathyllus—The
Mantra-Yogi— The Poet and his Muse—Lilith—Sport and Marriage—
The ‘Twins—The Convert—The Sorceress—The Child—Clytie—
A Slim Gilt Soul—The Silence of Columbine—The Archaeologist
— The Ladder—Belladonna—The Poet at Bay—Ut—Rosa Decidua —
The Circle and the Point—In Memoriam—Ad Fidelem Infidelem—
‘The Sphinx—The Jew of Fez—The Pentagram—Song—An Hymn
—Prologue to Rodin in Rime—The Camp Fire—Ave Adonai—The
Wild Ass—The Opium-Smoker—In Manu Dominae.

Mr. Todd: a Morality.

‘TRANSLATIONS: L’Amour et le Crane—L’Alchimie de Douleur—Le
Vampire—Le Balcon—Le Gout de L’Infini—L’ Héautontimoroumenos
—Le vin de L’Assassin—Woman— Tout Entiére—Le vin des Amants
—Le Revenant—Lola de Valence—Le Beau Navire—L Invitation au
Voyage—Epilogue to “Petits Poémes en Prose”—Colloque Senti-
mental—En Sourdine—The Magician

[For once this electronic copy contains, as far as I am aware, all the advertisments
from the printed edition. The following full-page plug for Book 4 appeared on the
back board of the first edition.

The music scores at the beginning are presented as 150 d.p.i. black and white scans;
this seems about the limit at which they remain readable. I have neither the patience
nor the knowledge of musical notation necessary to re-set them.

In The Symbolic Representation of the Universe, a number of apparent errors occur
in both the texts and translations of the Angelic Keys or Calls. With the exception
of what appeared to be obvious typos these have not been corrected; the student is
directed to sources like James (Enochian Evocation, a.k.a. Enochian Magick of
Doctor John Dee), Turer (Elizabethean Magic) and Laycock (Enochian
Dictionary), as well as to the electronic version of this text annotated by myself,
online at http: //www.geocities.com/nu_isis/liber084.pdf

The Ankh design for the Tarot has been re-drawn and coloured. It has not, however,
been completely conformed to the description in the text: adding the names of the
Trumps to the circle would make an unreadable mess of it; and the Taurus sign and
pentacle would have to be made disproportionately small to fit in the Earth space
where the arms of the Tau join. The writing in Theban script at the top reads HRU
not HUA and should be read left to right (the Theban script corresponds to the Latin
alphabet, not the Hebrew). Some errors in the printed edition of the Tarot paper
(planetary symbols and Hebrew names of the angels; the compositor consistently
gave Kaph for Nun) have been corrected (the majority by Heidrick).

Only a few of the errors in Sepher Sephiroth have been corrected in this edition; see
my notes at the end of that text. In notes to his key entry, Bill Heidrick remarks that
in the original the body of the work was printed single-sided. Heidrick also remarks
of Sepher Sephiroth:

Some curiosity will undoubtedly be evoked by the many Latin meanings of
Hebrew words given below. Most of these are directly from the glossary in
Kabbalah Denudata, but others are euphemisms for sexual terms. Kabbalah
Denudata is available on microfilm, but no translation of the Latin or
checking of the entries from that source or Kabbalah Unveiled by Mathers
has been attempted yet.

An extensive study of these entries will be included in the Gematria project
now in process of compilation by Bill Heidrick. This project is expected to
ultimately extend to several times the number of entries here, including notes
of source, discussions of differences between Crowley's approach and that of
traditional Qabalah and into new areas.

I believe that some of Bill Heidrick’s Qabalistic researches have been published in
the journal of Thelema Lodge, 0.T.O.

Last updated 01.03.2004. — #]

PART I NOW READY

BY FRATER PERDURABO
AND SOROR VIRAKAM

A TREATISE ON MAGIC AND MYSTICISM FOR
BEGINNERS

Of all Booksellers

PRICE ONE SHILLING NET
WIELAND & CO.
33 AVENUE STUDIOS
SOUTH KENSINGTON, W.C. Telephone 8987 City
